Area HES 


a aes Saar toaies 


Bott 


is vn 


—a 


Sessa 


1 1421025 aS 7 3 = = 
iaiatoniat comments pete stn teeroyeecsee Piwer ewes eee 


aRoRe on 


TRteses eee 


Gove eae 


raid 


A Sepsp pees we: 
eeauteee set 
Morgen : 
RAE 


SOs 
Saran 


Return es 


pyeyete 


Peretti 


ne 
Rete tet GSES. 


_ eee ee Se fle Oe ae > 


ARCHZOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA. 


——— 


(NEW IMPERIAL SERIES. ) 


VOLUME XIV. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


VOLUME ITI. 


a 


— 


2 


7 


i* 
my 


ARCHAOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA: 


A QOLLECTION OF INSCRIPTIONS 


SUPPLEMENTARY TO 


THE CORPUS INSCRIPTIONUM INDICARUM 


OF THE 


ARCHAOLOGICAL SURVEY, 


TRANSLATED BY ORIENTAL SCHOLARS. 


EDITED BY 


JAS. BURGESS, C.LE., LL.D., F.R.S.E. 


HON. A-R.I.B.A.; F.R.G.8.; M.R.A.S.; M. SOC. AS. PARIS; 
HON..COB MEM. BERLIN 80C. OF ANTHROPOLOGY. ETC.; AND OF BATAVIAN SOC. OF ARTS AND SCIENCES; FELLOW OF UNIVERSITY OF BOMBAY, BTC., 
LATE DIBECTOR-GENBRAL OF THE ARCHMHOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA}; 


ASSISTED BY 
A. FUHRER, Pu.D., 


ARCHZOLOGICAL SURVEYOR, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AMD OUDH, 


VOLUME IL. 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 
DELHI :: PATNA :: VARANASI 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 


BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHAR NAGAR, DELHI-7 
CHOWK, VARANASI-1, (U.P.) 
ASHOK RAJPATH, BANKIPORE, PATNA-4, (BiHAR) 


By arrangement with Director-General, Archaeological 
Survey of India, Govt. of India 
First Reprint 1970 
Price Rs. 100.00 


PRINTED IN INDIA BY SHANTILAL JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS, BUNGALOW 
ROAD, JAWAHARNAGAR, DELIiit-7 AND PUBLISHED BY SUNDARLAL JAIN, 
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS, BUNGALOW ROAD, JAWAHAR NAGAR, DELHI-7. 


ARCH ZOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA: 


A COLLECTION OF INSCRIPTIONS 


SUPPLEMENTARY TO 


THE CORPUS INSCRIPTIONUM INDICARUM 


OF THE 


ARCHAOLOGICAL SURVEY, 


TRANSLATED BY ORIENTAL SCHOLARS. 


EDITED BY 


JAS. BURGESS, C.LE., LL.D., F-R.S.E. 


HON. A.R.I.B.A.; F.R.G.8.; M.R.A.S.; M. SOC, AS. PARIS; 
HON. COR MEM. BERLIN 80C, OF ANTHROPOLOGY, ETC.; AND OF BATAVIAN SOC. OF ARTS AND SCIENCES; FELLOW OF UNIVERSITY OF BOMBAY, ETC., 
LATE DIRECTOR-GENERAL OF THE ARCHEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA$ 


ASSISTED BY 
A. FUHRER, Pu.D., 


ARCHZOLOGICAL SURVEYOR, NORTH-WESTERN PROVINCES AND OUDH,. 


VOLUME IL. 


CALCUTTA: 
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY THE SUPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING INDIA. 


1894, 


Digitized by the Internet Archive 
in 2024 


https://archive.org/details/epigraphiaindica0002jasb 


OT of WwW 


32, 


33, 


. Bhera-Ghat stone inscription of queen Aha the Chedi year 907; by the same 
. Tewar stone inscription of the reign of Jayasimhadeva, the Chedi year 928; by the same 
. Three land-grants from Sankheda (with facsimiles) ; by H. H. Dhruva, B.A. LL.B. 
. Inscriptions from Northern Gujarat; by J. Kirste, Ph.L 

. The Jaina inscriptions of Satrurnjaya ; by Prof. G. Bihler, Ph.D., LL. D, Cc i E., Visite 
. Votive inscriptions from the Stipas at Saiichi (1); by the same . 
. Harsha stone inseription of the Chaihamina Vigraharaja, the valcrauian year "1030 (with 


. Nagpur stone inscription of the rulers of Malava, Sam. 1161; by the same 
. Further Jaina inscriptions from Mathurd (with facsimiles) ; by Prof. G. Bithler, Ph.D., LL.D., 


. The Battiprolu Buddhist tection (with Pain and alphabet) ; by the same . 
. Goyindpur stone inscription of the Poet pele the Saka year 1059; by Prof. ¥F. 


CONTENTS 


Preface : . 


° . « ° 


- Jabalpur copper-plate Ee of Vucheetmdeen [AD. 1122); by Prof. F, Kieihorn, 


Ph.D., C.1.E., Gottingen 


° ° ° ° . ° ry ) 
. e 
° 
° e 
e e 
° 
° ° 


facsimile); by Prof. F. Kielhorn, Ph.D., C.ILE. . 


. Muhammadan inscriptions from the Sfiba of Dihli, No. I, (with fasten be Paul Horn, 


Ph.D., Strassburg . . - 


e ° e . ° e 


. Badal Pillar inscription of the time of Nariyanapala (with Facsimile) by Prof, 7 Kicthorn, 


Ph.D., C.LE. : 


. Atakor inscription of the ae of Krishna III, nace cece Sath. 872; a J. F, Fleet, PhD. 


CALE CS.) : . c 


. Karitalai stone inscription of the reign of the Chedi Tavehnnees aja ; ea Prof. F, Kielhorn, 


Ph.D., C.1.E., Gottingen . ; . 


. e ° . ° . ° 


C.1.E. ° . . 


e 2 . » 


. Sarngamner copper-plate Peniaen of the Yadava Bhillama II, the Sain year 992, by 


Prof. F. Kielhorn, Ph.D., C.1.E. 


. . ° ° 


. Stone inscription at Vaghliin Khandeé, the Sark year 7 991; by the same 

. Khalari stone inscription of the reign of Haribrahmudeva, the Vikrama year 1478 ; Ne the same 
. Dubkund stone inscription of the Kachchhapaghita Vikramasimha, Sam. 1145; by the same 
. Pabhosa inscriptions (with facsimiles) by A. Fiihrer, Ph.D. 

. The Pillar Edicts of Asoka; by Prof. G. Buhler, Ph.D., LL.D., C.1.E. 
. The Mahaban Prasgasti of Sam. 1207 (with facsimile) ; by the same 

. Muhammadan inscriptions from Bengal (with facstmiles) ; by Paul Horn, Ph.D... 
. Benares copper-plate inscription of Karnadeva, the Chedi-year 793 (with facsimile) ; by Prof. 


e ° . ° ° 
° . ° e 
o ° . 


F. Kielhorn, Ph.D., C.1.E. ; 


. Specimens of Jaina sculptures from Mathura (with Seats ney by ‘Prof, G. Bibler, Ph, D,, 


LL.D., C.LE. . - = 


Kielhorn, Ph.D., C.I.E. 5 é co ‘ i A 
Dudhpani rock shactipeion of Udayamina; by the same . 


. Copper-plate inscription of Vaidyadeva of Kamartipa ne vats). by Prof. A. cor 


M.A., Benares . ; . 


. Benares copper-plate grant of Govindachandra; by ne same . 
. Copper-plate grant of Mahirija Lakshmana, (Gupta) Sah. 158 (with dacainisiaays te i 


Fuhrer, Ph.D. 4 : 


. Further votive inscriptions from ie fitoas at Sanchi (ID, (oith Jasin) by Prof, G. 


Buhler, Ph.D., LL.D.,C.1.EH.  . 6 : ° 


Chitorgadh stone inscription of Mokala of MewAd, ie een yer 1485; by Prof, F- Kiel- 
horn, Ph.D., C.1.E. Me 3 


Chitorgadh stone inscription of the Crouates apis Sarh, 1207; by the same . 


Page. 


130 


vi 


34, 


35. 


36. 


37. 
38. 
39. 
40, 


CONTENTS 


Persian and Arabic Muhammadan inscriptions from the Siba of Dihli, No. II.; by Paul Horn, 

Ph.D. 3 . 
Sridhara’s Devapatana Pragasti of Sati. 1273; ie Prof. G. Bihler, Ph. D, ae De C. LE. : 
Agoka’s Rock edicts, according to the Girnir, Shihbizgarhi, Kalsi and Mansehra Versions 

(with facsimiles) ; by the same . . : : : . : : ° 2 
A Collection of Sanads of Moghul Emperors; by Paul noe Ph.D., Strassburg . 
Further Pabhosa inscriptions; by Prof. G. Bithler, Ph.D., LL.D., C.L.E. Bs oe 
An Additional note on the Baijnath Pragastis; by G. Bihler, Ph.D., LL.D., C.LE. , / 
Notes on the Prakrit grant of the Pallava King Sivaskandavarma (Vol. I, pp. 2-10) by Profs, 

Ernst Leumann, Ph.D., Strassburg, and G. Bithler, Ph.D., LU.D., C.LE. A ; : 
Tables for calculating Hindu dates in true local time; by Hermann Jacobi, Ph.D., Sanskrit 


* 


Professor, Bonn ; é . . . . e . . ° ‘ . . 
INDEX ° e ° . ° e e e e ° ° ‘ e ° ° 
Corrigenda r 2 ° e ° e ° e e ° ° ry ° . e 

— = 


PAPERS ARRANGED UNDER AUTHORS’ NAMES. 


BY PROFESSOR G. BUHLER, Pu.D., LL.D., C.1.E., VIENNA: 


Votive inscriptions from the Stupas at Sanchi ; ‘ i A : ; : ‘ ‘ 
Further votive inscriptions from the Sanchi Stapas : . A : . ° 5 : 
Further Jaina inscriptions from Mathura : . : ° : . ° . A A 
Specimens of Jaina sculptures from Mathura ° . A . . . : ° 
The Bhattiprolu Sttipa Buddhist casket inscriptions ° : . 2 - ; 
The Pillar edicts of Asoka : : ; : . . . ° : 

Asoka’s Rock edicts, according to the Girnar, Shi Ahbizgarhi, Kalst, a Mansehra versions . 
The Jaina inscriptions of Satruthjaya F . . . : ‘ - c . 


The Mahaban Pragasti of Sam. 1207 . 
Sridhara’s Devapattana Pragasti of Sain. 1273 . : 
Further Pabhosa Inscriptions. . 
Additional note on the Baijnith Pragastis  . 
Note on the Prakrit grant of the Pallava King Sivaskandavarma 


. e e ° . . ° e 
e e ® ° e e 
. ° ° e ° ° . 


e ® ° ° . ° ° 


BY H. H. DHRUVA, B.A., LL.B. :— 


Three land-grants from Saakheda in Gujarat 


BY J. F. FLEET, Pu.D., C.1.E., Bo. 0.8. :— 


Ataktw inscription of the time of Krishna III, dated Saka-Sarhvat 872 


BY A. FUHRER, Pu.D., ARCH HOLOGICAL SURVEY, NORT H-WESTERN PROVINCES ;— 


Pabhosa inscriptions . ° ° A ‘ = . * ° ° A 
Copper-plate grant of Maharija Lakshmana, (Gupta) Sar. 150 ° . ‘ - 7 
LY PAUL HORN, Pu.D., STRASSBURG :— 
Muhammadan inscriptions from the Stba of Dihli(No. I). . . : : ; 
Ditto ditto (NODS oe e: : 
A Collection of Sanads of Moghul Emperors : ; : A a . F : ; 
BY PROFESSOR HERMANN JACOBI, Pu.D., BONN :— 
Tables for calculating Hindu dates in true local time . . P : : é : x 
BY- PROFESSOR F. KIELHORN, Pu.D., OLE, GOTTINGEN :— 
Harsha stone inscription of the Chihamina Vigrahardja [Sam. 1030}. . ; . : 
Badal pillar inscription of the time of Nariyanapala . ° ° . ° : . ° 
Sazngamner inscription of the Yadaya Bhillama TI, Sake, 922 p A 1 : , : 


Pace 


424 
437 


447 
472 
480 
482 


483 


487 
499 
518 


87 
366 
195 
311 
323 
245 
447 

34. 
275 
437 
480 
482 
485 


19 


167 


240 
363 


130 
424, 
472 


487 
116 


160 
212, 


CONTENTS. vii 


PacE. 
BY PROFESSOR F. KIELHORN, Pu.D., C.LE., GOTTINGEN—conéd. 
Benares copper-plate inscription of Karnadeva, the Chedi year 793 « a ee ee ° e 297 
Jabalpur copper-plate inscriptions of Yasabkarnadeva [A. D. 1122]. , ° : ° os Rk 
Bheraghat stone inscription of the queen Alhanadevi, the Chedi year 907 . . ° . ee) 
Tewar stone inscription of the reign of J ayasimhadeya, the Chedi year 928 . . ’ ay aly 
Stone inscription of Vaghli in Khandeé, Sake 991 At hs pet eh pak eae eT 
Khalari stone inscription of the reign of Haribrahmadeva . : » . - 228 
Dubkund stone inscription of the Kachchhapaghita Vikramasitaha, Sati, 1145 > : » 232 
Karitalat stone inscription of the reign of Lakshmanarija ° = ‘ : . > > 174 
Nagpur stone inscription of the rulers of Malava, Sazn 1161 . ° : * > . - 180 


Govindpur stone inscription of the Poet Gaigidhara,§.1059.  . «. . + «  « 830 

Dudhpani rock inscription of Udayamana . : . e e . ° . . - 344 

Chitorgadh inscription of Mokala of Mewdd . : é e . : » 408 

Chitorgadh inscription of the Chaulukya Kumirapila, Sam. 1207 . . : <n « 421 
BY PROFESSOR J. KIRSTE, Pu.D., GRAZ:— 

Inscriptions from Northern Gujarit, . . ° ° ° : . ¢ ° ° « 24 
BY PROFESSOR ERNST LEUMANN, Pu.D., STRASSBURG :— 

Note on the Prakrit grant of the Pallava Kirig Sivaskandavarman (in vol. I, pp. 2-10) . - 483 
BY PROFESSOR A. VENIS, M.A., BENARES :-— 

Copper-plate inscription of Vaidyadeva of Kamarhpa. . : “ . ° . ° . 348 

Benares copper-plate grant of Govindachandra ., . ° e ° rs ° ° - 358 


WACSIMILES, ere. 
1. Sankheda copper-plate grant of Dadda III, Ch. Samm. 346; by H. H. Dhruva, B.A., LL.B. 


facing p. 20 
2. Ditto ‘ditto of Dadda IV, Ch. Sam, 391; ss 3 5 es ay Pal 
5}. Ditto ditto of Baladhikrita Santilla ; 5 53 Ss 43 5 OR 
4. Harsha inseription of Chahamina Vigrahardja, Sarm.°1030, from impression by Lala 
Ram Bakhsh, Jaypur ° . . . ¢ 3 - 120 
5, Three Muhammadan inscriptions ee the Saba of Dihii . : 4 - > a 138 
6, 7. Inscription of Humayun, of A.H. 937 ; and Inscription of Akbar Foes Khoktakot, Za hey 


impressions by Ghulam Husain 
8. BadAl Pillar inscription ; impressed by H. B, W. Garnck sm. : 3 5 3 - 160 
9. Mathura inscriptions (New Series) Nos. I—XV; by Dr. A. Fuhrer . i . 202 


10. Ditto ditto Nos. XVI—XXVI; ,, re Re ee a 1) 
}1. - Ditto ditto KXVII--XLI; 3 é ; C » 208 
12. Pabhosa inscriptions: (1) outside, and (2) inside the cave; by A. Fuhrer, PhD. - 242—248 
13. Ditto (3) at the modern Dharmagali; by the same « x 5 ~  . 244 
14, 15. Aéoka Pillar inscription of Radhid; impressed by H. B. W. Garrick, Esq. . 4 » 248—249 
16, 17. — Ditto ditto at Mathiad; by thesame . 5 . 4 e . - 250251 
18. Ditto ditto at Rampurwa (fragment) ; by the same “ ° : 252 


19. Bhagalpur Muhammadan inscription of A.H. 850, and Mahdipur Afahatn state inscription of 


A.H. 891; impressed by J. D. Beglar, Esq. : ° - 280 

“90. Bihar Muhammadan inscription of A.H. 732; impressed S Ab Bucges LL. D, 6. LE. . . . 292 

21, 22. Benares copper-plate grant of Karnadeva : . . c : C ; - 306—307 
23. Mathura Jaina sculptures, Plate I. (from photograph), . . . . ° 5 aul! 
24. Ditto ditto, lator tis oo ar ie lanine? Gage tt) tae tee ee Sok Bl4 

25. Ditto ditto, PlateII].. z a : . : 5 “ ae 
26., Ditto ditto, PlateIV. . * ° . ° ° - 321 


27, 28. Bhattiprola Buddhist inscriptions, impressed by, A. Rea, M. R.A. a. 4 ni ks 324—325 


Vill 


29, 
31, 
33, 
35, 


38, 


48, 49. Kalsi Asoka inscription, Edicts XIII (2nd part), and XIV, and Elephant; from the same 


51, 52. Pabhosa inscriptions from the Hermit’s Cave; by A. Fiibrer, Ph.D. 


CONTENTS, 


30. Bhattiprolu Buddhist inscriptions, by A. Rea, Esq.; and Alphabet, by J. Burgess, LL.D. 


32. Copper-plate grant of Vaidyadeva of Kaémartipa— (1) Seal and (2) Plate I. . 
34. Ditto ditto (3) Plate 11A; (4) Plate IIB. . 
36. Ditto ditto (5) Plate IIIA; (6) Plate IIIB. 


37. Copper-plate grant of Mahirija Lakshmana, (Gupta) Sam. 158,— two sides with seal . 
39. Saiichi inscriptions—two pages ; by J. Burgess, LL.D., and A. Fihrer, Ph.D. 


40. Girnir Agoka edicts, No. 1; from impressions by J. Burgess, LL.D. . 


41, Ditto ditto, Nos. IJ and III; from the same ' 
42. K&lsi Asoka mscription: Edicts I~V1I; from the same 

48. Girnir Agoka edicts, Nos. 1V and V; from the same ' 
44, Ditto ditto, No. VI; from the same is A 
45, Kalsi Asoka inscription, Edicts VII to XIII; from the same 
46. Girnér Agoka edicts, Nos. VIJ, VIII and IX; from the same 
47. Ditto ditto, Nos. X, XI and XII; from the same 


50. Girnér Aéoka inscription, Nos. XIII and XIV; from the same . 


e < 


° 


Pace. 


324—325 
352—353 
354—355 
356—357 


364 


368—369 


460—461 


448 
450 
450 
452 
454 
456 
456 
458 


463 


480—48 1 


PREFACE. 


S remarked in the Preface to the former volume, this is properly to be 

regarded as one of the series of the Corpus Inscriptionum Indicarum, 

and practically may stand as the fifth volume of that publication : indeed, but 

that I had hoped the series of the Corpus would be resumed at an early date, 

these two “supplementary” volumes would also have borne the title chosen 
by the late General Sir A. Cunningham. 

This volume completes what I had undertaken and closes my work in 
connexion with Indian Epigraphy. Among other papers, it contains a new 
and corrected edition of the Harsha inscription, first published by the Rev. 
Dr. Mill nearly sixty years ago, now edited by Professor Kielhorn from excellent 
impressions obtained for me by Colonel 8. §. Jacob, C.L.E. The Badal pillar. 
inscription first published by Sir Charles Wilkins in 1788 has also been anew 
translated by the same scholar, from Mr. H. B. W. Garrick’s fresh impressions. 
The Pillar and Rock Kdicts of Asoka have been finally revised by Professor 
Biihler, who has also continued the very important series of short epigraphs 
discovered by Dr. Fiihrer at Mathura, along with the extensive collection of 
votive inscriptions made by the same scholar at Sanchi. 

The very early Bauddha inscriptions discovered by Alex. Rea, Esq., of 
the Madras Archeological Survey, in the brick remains of a Stapa at Bhatti- 
prolu in the Krishna district, have also been edited by the same able scholar. 
This important discovery was reported to the Madras Government by Mr. Rea 
on 22nd February, 1892, and his letter was printed in G. O. of 22nd April, 
1892, No. 270. It will be interesting in connexion with the epigraphs to give 
some details of the discovery here. Mr. R. Sewell (Lists of Antiquarian 
Remains in Madras Presidency, p. 77) states that this StQpa “was greatly 
demolished a few years ago” (i.e. before 1882) for the “ purpose of making 
a road; and some of the marble sculptures were utilized in building a sluice 
on the Krishna canal close by, where the road to Vellattiiru crosses the canal. 
I have it direct from the officer chiefly concerned in the demolition that the 
mound was between 30 and 40 feet high, of a circular shape like a dome, 
but ruined at the top ; that there was a marble pillar standing erect, and 
sculpture here and there in marble . . . He found inside the dome a 
casket made of six small slabs of stone dove-tailed into one another measuring 
about 24 féet by 14 feet by 1 foot. Inside this was a common clay chédétz, and 
inside the chdtti a neat casket made of ‘soap-stone, which contained a crystal 
phial. In the phial was a pearl, a few bits of gold-leaf and some ashes. 
Wishing to remove his discoveries, the stone casket was accidentally broken 
and the remains were left at Bhattiprolu. The chdtti was also broken, The 


x PREFACE, 


‘soap-stone’ casket was smashed during a voyage to England and the 
fragments thrownaway. The crystal phial was presented to Dr. Burnell.” 

“The villagers of Bhattiprolu told me that they remember some 
railing or wall, which they described as about four feet high, surrounding 
the tope.”* 

Mr. Rea found that the building had been of solid brick work through- 
out, and that a portion of the base of the dome and the wall of the procession- 
path at the south-east quadrant, were intact From these he made out that 
the dome must have had a diameter of 132 feet and the base of 148 feet,— 
being thus about ten feet larger than the Amaravati stfipa. Outside the 
basement, and 8 feet below the present surface, he found a brick floor 
about 12 feet broad, at the outer edge of which were fragments of 
marble,—probably of the great enclosing rail. 

Tlearned,” he says, in his very instructive report,“ that the casket had 
been found just above the summit of the remaining portion of the brick 
dome. I ascertained this point to be 15 feet above the level of the floor 
of the. procession-path which surrounds the building. Although this casket 
had been found, I considered that, as the principal deposit is usually 
placed down in the centre near the foundation, or at the level of the 
procession-path, there was a great probability of there being another. After 
having found the centre of the circular brick-work, which, through the 
demolition, is not now in the middle of the mound but considerably towards 
the north, I saw that the bricks there had not been vouched. In the 
centre was a narrow well, 94 inches in diameter, filled with earth. This 
hole, it appears, was open when the top of the stfipa was removed, and 
was then sounded with a rope to a depth of about 15 feet from the 
present surface, Around it were courses of eight bricks radiating from the 
centre to a diameter of 3. feet. These bricks I removed to a depth of 
14 feet 6 inches. 

“At that depth I came on a large, irregular, triangular slab of 
black stone laid on the outside of the excavated shaft. The two inner 
sides of the stone radiated from the centre, its outer side was curved 
concentric with the brick-work, and extended a foot into the wall of the 
shaft. It would have lain clear, had another ring of brick-work been 
removed, making the shaft 5 feet in diameter, but I did not expect to find 
more than one casket, in the centre On removing it, I found a rectangular 
cutting on the under surface of the stone measuring 11 inches by 8 inches 
and 4 inch deep: the length was placed east and west. Below it was 
another similar but thicker stone with a raised rectangular rim on its upper 
surface cut to fit into the hollow in the upper stone. The inner sides 
of this rectangle slope down into a circular cavity 5 inches deep. The 


* Couf. Ind. Ant. vol. I, pp. 153,374; vol. II], p. 124; Madras G@. O. 1st Nov. 1878, No. 1620, pp. 38, 34. 


PREFACE, x 


upper surface of the lower stone is:smooth, and cut on it, round the four 
sides of the casket chamber, are two lines of. an inscription in characters 
similar to those of the Asoka inscriptions ” (see Nos. i and ii, Pp. 326, 327) 

In the cavity, was a small globular black stone relic-casket, “Around the 
casket, and mixed with some earth which filled the cavity, were the 
following objects:—2 small hemispherical hollow copper or bell-metal (?) cups, 
ly; inches in diameter :. they fit into each other, and one bears traces of 
some sort of resin having been inside ; on the apex of one is a gold bead, 
#; inch in diameter; the other has had_a gold bead also, which was 
found in the earth alongside; 1 copper finger ring and several bits of 
copper ; 1 small bead; 2 double pearls ; and the. following. articles in gold, 
weighing collectively 3 tola and 13 grains (7.2, 148 grains) wz., 1 single and ] 
double gold bead ; 7 small triangular pieces ; 4 lotus flowers in thin sheets with 
eight bent petals, each 1,3 inches across; 2 trisfilas in thin plates each 
13; inches by 1 inch; 1. hexagonal crystal with slightly convex sides, 
2%, inches by ; inch, pierced with a hole through its. axis. On each 
of the sides of the prism is lightly traced an inscription in the same character 
as that on the stone (see No. x, p. 329), 

“The -two_hemispherical vessels lay on the west side of. the casket; 
the crystal prism, gold flowers and other articles on the east. The relic- 
gasket is 44 inches.in diameter by 4} inches in height. The lid fits by a 
groove into the lower portion. Inside was a cylindrical crystal phial 23 
inches in diameter by 1} inches in height.. It-is moulded on the sides, flat on 
the top and bottom, and has its lid fitted in the same manner as the 
stone receptacle. Inside is a flat piece of bone, balf an inch across, smooth 
on the one side and celled on the other: it seems to be a piece of a 
skull bor. 

“In the stone casket, below the phial were,—9 small lotus -flowers in 
gold-leaf ; 6 gold beads over an eighth of an inch in diameter, and 8 smaller ; 
4 small lotus flowers in thin copper ; 19 small pierced pearls; 1 slightly blue 
coloured amethyst bead ; and: 24 small coins or tokens of a light coloured 
metal, somewhat eatin bell-metal. They are plain on the reverse: 
and on the obverse have lotus flowers, trisdlas, feet with a snake coiled round, 
and other emblems more or less legible’ They were laid on the bottom 
of the casket—with the smooth sides down—in the form of a svastika, and 
had become fixed to the stone by oxidation. In the svastika, nine of 
the coins were in the central rectangle; three on each of the four arms, 
and the other three over the centre. The flowers and beads seem also to 
have been originally arranged symmetrically. An example of this symbo- 
lical use of the svastika was found in the centre of the stpa at Pedda 
Ganjam., 


xii PREFACE, 


“ Ata depth of 17 feet, was another black stone, on the north side of 
the well, and, like the first, sunk a foot into the wall It is roughly trian- 
gular in form, with rounded corners, and measures about 2 feet across, by 
10 inches thick. On the top isa circle, 74 inches in diameter, raised half an 
inch. The under-side is smooth with a circular hollow 12 inches in diameter 
and half an inch deep. The circle is filled in with an inscription in 18 lines 
(No. iii, p. 327), while around it, are two others in two lines (Nos. iv and v, p. 
328), All had the letters filled in with white. Below it was a stone, roughly 
rectangular, with rounded corners. Init is a circular cavity 6¢ inches deep, 

4 inches in diameter at the top and 4 at the bottom. Round the top is a 
raised rim 13 inches broad ; and on the upper. surface, round the hole, are 
inscriptions in two lines (Nos. vi and vii, p 328). The characters are the 
same as those of the inscription first described. The letters were filled with 
chunam, evidently that they might show distinctly in the black stone. The 
cavity was nearly filled with earth and had no inner stone casket. In it 
was a crystal phial 13 inches in diameter by 2? inches high. Its lid is mould- 
ed like a ddgaba. The top and bottom were lying separate and filled with 
earth. There was no sign of a relic inside. Mixed with the earth in the 
stone cavity were,—164 lotus leaves and buds, 2 circular flowers, a ¢ristla, 
and a three-armed figure like a svastika,—all in gold leaf; 2 gold stems for 
the lotus flowers—one of them attached ; 6 gold beads ; and 1 small coiled 
gold ring. The lotus leaves (or petals) are of different sizes, having been 
fitted inside each other asin the flower itself. The beads represent the 
opening buds. These articles weigh collectively close on 1? tolas (315 grs.), 
Also, two pearls ; 1 garnet ; six coral beads and one bit of the same mate- 
rial ; 1 slightly blue, flat, oval, crystal bead ; one pointed, oval, white crystal 
bead ; and two green tinged, flat, hexagonal beryl drops: one is , and the 
other 3 inch in length ; a number of bits of corroded copper leaf, including 
lotus flowers, stems, a miniature umbrella, and oneor more thin sheets 
of silver folded flat into about eight thicknesses. The metal of the latter 
is much corroded and extremely brittle: it will be impossible to unfold the 
sheets. One side is broken but the fragments remain. The largest piece 
measures 2 inches by 1% inches, and shows some letters or symbols pricked 
on with a metal point. 


“ At a depth of 18 feet another black stone lay sunk a foot into the wall 
on the east side of the shaft. It isan irregular circular stone measuring 
about 2 feet 3 inches across, by 10 inches thick. On its under-surface js a, 
circular space sunk half an inch with an inscription in eight lines (No. viii, p- 
328). The letters were whitened. This stone lay on the top of another, 
roughly square in shape, and measuring 2 feet 5 inches by 2 feet 3 inches by 
11 inches thick, On the upper side is a circular cavity 52 inches deep 


PREFACE. i 


7% inches broad at the top and 5 inches at the bottom. On the top is a rim 
2} inches broad which fits into the hollow in the upper stone. On the upper 
surface of the stone, round the rim, is an inscription in one line, with letters 
whitened (No. ix, p. 329). 

“The cavity was nearly filled with earth. In it were: 1 crystal phial of 
the shape of that found inside the second stone receptacle but slightly larger. 
It measures 2{inches in diameter by 3 inches high. The two pieces were 
fillea with earth and lay apart. 

“Close to the phial, was found the actual relic casket with the relics. 
inside. It is made of a large beryl measuring 7, inch in length, by 4 inch, 
by. 2 inch. A cylindrical hole, 4 inch in diameter, is drilled in its axis, in 
which are the relics,—three small pieces of bone. The hole is closed by a 
small white crystal stopper with hexagonal bulbous top. The necking is 
covered with gold léaf, and another sheet of the same material is fixed 
outside on the bottom. This unique casket had been originally placed inside 
the crystal phial, but had been displaced probably by shaking of the stone 
when it was laid. There was also: in the cavity :—1 amethyst bead 2 inch 
long; another smaller ; and 1 yellow coloured crystal bead ; 1 small hexa- 
gonal crystal drop of a slightly yellowish colour, and another flat one of white 
crystal; 1 bone bead ; 6 pearls, and 32 seed pearls, all pierced ; 30 lotus flowers, 
a bent two-armed figure, and a quatre-foil in gold leaf; a piece of seemingly 
decomposed quartz having the appearance of salt but insoluble in water ; 
a few bits of copper, and an iron (?) cinder. 

“The inscriptions are of importance, as, being found in connection with 
the relics, they must be contemporaneous with the foundation of the stipa, 
and shew it to have been an early one.” 

This report by Mr. Rea is a model of accurate and careful detail such as is 
seldom met with in such papers, and throws all the light possible in the 
circumstances on the discovery of these early Bauddha inscriptions. The whole 
of the objects found have been delivered by Mr. Rea to the Central Museum 
at Madras. 

The volume concludes with a paper supplementary to that given in the 
previous one by Professor H. Jacobi of Bonn University, completing his 
ingenious method of computing accurately Hindu dates found in ancient 
documents. The table of contents will show the list of other papers and the 
names of the respective contributors: to all of them my best thanks are 
tendered. To Dr. A. Fiihrer, Ph.D., as assistant editor, Iam deeply indebted 
for much valuable assistance in many ways, ever readily rendered. 


JAS. BURGESS. 
92, Seron Puace, Epinpurcu : 
August, 1894. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


I.—_JABALPUR COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION OF YASAHKARNADEVA. 
[A. D. 1122.] 


By Prorgssorn F. Krennorn, Pa.D., C.1.E., Gorrineen. 


This inscription, of which I am unable to say where! or by whom it was discovered, 
was engraved on two plates. Both plates were deposited in the Nagpur Museum, where 
a Devanagari transcript of the whole inscription was made which seems to exist still 
and which will be referred to below. Subsequently the second of the two plates was 
either lost or stolen. But the first plate is still in the Museum; and, since the inscrip- 
tion even in its fragmentary state is of some importance, being the only one of the 
Chedi king Yasahkarnadeva hitherto discovered, I edit it now from five rubbings and 
impressions which during the last two or three years have been kindly supplied to me 
by Dr. Burgess, Mr. Fleet, and Colonel J. A. Temple.’ 

The plate is inscribed on one side only, and measures about 1’ 63” broad by 1’ high. 
At the bottom it has a round hole, about 2” in diameter, for a ring which has probably 
disappeared together with the missing plate. The writing has suffered a good deal from 
corrosion, and there are in consequence several aksharas which cannot be read with 
absolute certainty. But, fortunately, everything of historical importance is clear and 
distinct, and there is no doubt about the purport of any part of the inscription. The size of 
the letters is between $” and 4”. The characters are Nagart, and the language is Sanskrit. 
Excepting the introductory om om namo Vrahmane and a few words at the end, the in- 
scription is in verse. The total number of verses is 24, of which 16 occur also in the 
Kumbhi copper-plate inscription of Gosaladevi.® As regards orthography, the letter 6 


1 T call the plate the Jabalpur plate, because it is so called by Sir A. Cunningham. The district of ‘ JAvalipattana or 
Jauli-patan’ was apparently mentioned in the lost portion of the inscription. Sev the references in note 2, below. 

2 See Grant’s Gazetteer of the Central Provinces, 2nd edition, Introduction, pp. li and lii; aud Sir A. Cunning- 
ham’s Archaeological Survey of India, vol. IX, pp. 87 and 88. Several of the statements which have been made regarding his 
inscription, on the basis of the Nagpur Museum transcript, are very incorrect. ‘Thus, according to one accouut, the inscrip- 
tion is one of Karnadeva, according to another it belongs to Gayakarna, and the transcript is said to read Sit-maheSa-Karna; 
but there can be no doubt that the inscription belongs to Yasahkarna and that, what the copyist had before him in the now 
lost plate, was Sirtémad- Yasahkarna, Karnadeva is said to have built a fort named Karna Meru from which flowed the river 
Karnavati; in reality Karna built a ‘emple at Banaras, which the poet describes as Karna’s Me:u, and he founded the town of 
Karndvati. The same Karna is said to have conquered Bhimeévara, king of Andhra, who is identified with Bhi-oa II, one of 
the eastern Chalukyas. What the inscription really says is, that Yasahkarna defeated the king of Andhra, and that he subse- 
quently presented the holy Bhimesvara (or Siva) with many ornaments. [See page 7, note 48.—5. H.} 

3 Edited and translated in the Journal Asiatic Society of Bengal, vol. VIII, pp. 483—495 ; ; and re-edited by 
Dr. F. E. Hall, ¢5., vol. XXXI, pp. 116—123, It will be seen that the present inscription, in verses 3, 5, 8, 12, 14, and 20, 
furnishes desitedly better readings than those given by Dr. Hall, and that in verse 21 it supplies certain words which have 


been either omitted or given quite wrongly in the published versions of the Kumbbi inscription. 
B 


. EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


is throughout denoted by the sign for v, and the dental sibilant is frequently employed 
instead of the palatal; besides, ¢ is used for s in the word sdrddhavn, in line 21, andj 
for y in trijdmd, in line 15. 

The metrical portion of the inscription, after mentioning, like the Kumbhi and 
other Chedi inscriptions, a number of divine and semi-divine beings, gives the usual 
genealogy of the Kalachuri (or Chedi) kings of Tripuri, from Yuvarajadeva down 
to the reigning king Yasahkarnadeva (Yuvardjadeva; Kokalla; Gangeyadeva, 
also called Vikramaditya; Karnadeva, who married the Hina princess Avalladevi; 
and Yagahkarnadeva). And, inaddition to the well-known facts that Gangeyadeva 
with his hundred wives obtained final salvation at Pray4ga, and that Karnadeva 
founded the town of KarnAvati, it only records (in.verse 13) that Karna also built 
a magnificent temple at K4si or Benares, where evidently verse 13 was composed ; 
and (in verse 23) that YaSahkarna defeated the ruler of Andhra, in the vicinity of 
the river Godavari. 


Of the prose portion of the inscription only a few words remain. But from these 
words—‘and this... Paramabhattéraka, Mahaérdjédhiraja, and Paramesvara, who [medi- 
tates on] the feet of the illustrious Vamadeva,*—it is clear that the inscription 
must have recorded a grant made by, or during the reign of, the king who in the 
metrical portion is mentioned last, t.e., YaSahkarnadeva. And it is fortunate that 
the Nagpur Museum transcript, inaccurate as it is in other respects, enables us to ascer- 
tain the timie when this grant was made, in my opinion, with certainty, We know that 
Yasahkarna was succeeded by his son Gayakarnadeva, and we possess an inscrip- 
tion of this Gayakarna’® which must have been put up towards the end of his reign 
and which bears a date corresponding to the 17th June, A. D.1151. Yasahkarna 
would therefore have ceased to reign some time before, and probably at such a distance 
from, A. D. 1151, as would suit the relation to each other of father and son. Now 
according to the Nagpur Museum transcript of the present inscription® the grant 
recorded in it was made ‘at the time of the Makara-samkranti, on Monday, the 10th of 
the waning moon of Magha.’ And during the sixty years preceding A. D. 1151, the only 
year which fulfils these conditions is A. D. 1122. For in that year’ the 10th of the 
dark half of Magha fell by the piérnimdnta scheme on Monday, the 25th December, 
when the 10th ¢ithi of the dark half ended 8 h. 39 m. after mean sunrise ; and in the same 
year the Makara-samkranti ‘took place 15 minutes before mean sunrise of, or for reli- 
gious purposes on, thesame Monday. And I have no doubt that Monday, the 
25th December A.D. 1122, corresponding, with my epoch of the Chedi era, to Magha- 
- badi 10 of Chedi-sarnvat 874, is the true date of the grant, and that this is a reliable 
dats for Yasahkarnadeva, whose reign probably ended shortly afterwards. 


4 Compare Indian Antiquary, vol. XVII, p. 225. 

5 See i6., vol. XVIII, p. 210. 

5 See Sir A. Cunningham's Archeological Survey of India, vol. IX, p. 88. 

7 See Indian Antiquary, vol. XVII, p. 218. After I had made the necessary calculations regarding the above date 
for my paper on the epoch of the Chedi era and found the above result, I learnt from Mr, Fleet that, according to Mr. Sh. B. 
Dikshit’s calculations, in the century Saka-sarnvat 1000 to 1100 (A. D, 1078—1178) the only year in which the Makara- 


samkrAnti occurred on a Monday, which was the 10th lunar or solar day-of the month Macha, was Sak 
E) ? So 4, 
expired (A. D. 1122—23), Boe iran 


~ 


JABALPUR COPPER-PLATE OF YASAHKARNADEVA. 3 


Trxt.§ 
bel: at (u*] at aa ala) ae 
safe Tasriniee annads safa safe aarsataaraa(a)ata: (i) 
wy sata a alae Safa wa UTAAT- 
2. afer: u—[1]. 
ay al(alwaarfeqsya VeaTATATHSATAA” | 
aaa Aaata (Ss) ya TAT AAA TAsTATAa: °—[2]. 
Ya Tetaunicaany G- 

3. qeqre aaaaaia(fa)wiaae | . 
aa eaaANTAMA Taal TIAA (MN) Carafes w y—[3]. 
slated faa watfaaafarrataeTagat- ; 

3 afafamatta: (i) 

wattar (far) cava (a) anrcarhacratae (a) alt] a(a) Aca Wea aaa vy —| 4], 
Palas ayaqaAVATa( Dal Ma weatwnaes ws araata: u(t) 

q- 

aq Seasuraaqaufe usta ara a(n) wate waa a: y —[5]. 

a fearaa oa aagiida(a)aga waraat war [i”] 
qaiafufafcaraaan: yt asta | 
6. fafa: w°—[6]. 
aaa ANIA VAT ATE: Teedifaa ge faga gars: 1(1) 
areataeraaoraasanty as |fraraanategat gaasiea; w—[7]. 


Ea 
2 


cr 


fara Zu- 

7. fafieagy aqarequaatarataraga:n: (1) 
HRaaTMaaqeua asad aceruqupaqat y —[8]. 
wenat feta eas Gace | 

8. deaarfauent [1] 


qa wat gtat ware faatfrtta aferarfa ate: w”—[9]. 
ataaatraiiearan: faa” ancofcad ar (ed) aaalet]eaa 1 


(fux]fa 
e ~ * Ne 9 
9. gfaa(a)uridt afeui traratufaaraera we aFAVeT: —[10]. 
: > . : 
watt eeaaifar( a] a famatfee sfa uta: | 
Q 
alae )arareu[ aa 2 ]- 

. 8 Fyrom impressions supplied to me by the Editor and by 8 Metre, Arya. 

y. Fleet. 16 Metre of verses 7 and 8, Vasantatilaka. As the noun 
9 Expressed by a symbol, nirmdtha does not seem to occur anywhere else, I suspect it 
0 Read “afer aay. to have been put wrongly for nirmdthé (nirmdathin). 

1 Metre, MAlini. Y Metre, Upajati. 
Y Read “HaaTeael, 18 This word is quite clear in the rubbings. 
3 Metre, Aupachchhandasika. 19 Metre, Malini. 


4 Metre of verses 3—5, Vasantatilaka, 
B2 


Le 10. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


freeng[)et: Jl a wafer? lat a(a)are '(u)”—[11). 


Wt waraeqafata(a)a(ajan are waa ufeutfacga afai | 
dice wyefalarttlacreqrgaree: 


aaata (fa) eaiwenaananlcatuan| aaaacaqtamMa[e]: (1) 
fanucfay arei(sai) ale] qurfar(faariae[aa(a)?)}- 


it. 


12, 


wm agnitata aedeg: [12]. 


ealate:] Arad HUH: y —[13]. 


aig aa @(S)aat acfaaraatac: araaran: fade [1*] 


13. 


aa) weal a4 avutanfa walstfa] wraeaa(a) wena] 


wA—[14]. 


waft aaqid afan aa suraasafafeerant Maersaeat 1(1) 
WMT TTAT (M) ET a (a) era fay (faa) FaTaeareaae (a): Alaa (aT) aeTA- 


14. 


ga: w—[15]. 


[Saraatulafa waacrsnqetgerraar fata eer] fax (fa) aaa] 
wa Gofeage| er lfaqalaat] watariisa fe fata werfeta i —[16). 


a 


15. wey alnem|sieaoraeg wa "a ay Ra AASTe |zTawa?] (1) 
acuta afenraaea afearanaraate safes wea etocaneta: 1—[17]. 


fean- 


16. afalaa? |a(a)fagialats arate arsaged [1*] 
ea(a)a giles aq: aea(e) [alaaratrere | (u)"—[18]. 
A, AHARATA AMAA (F) WATCCA: 

17. [arat(an)aly waarqecivagaa: n”—[19]. 
a a@)arat ufay daarfe erat fran wae: safer [1%] 
ata queasy ¢ a caratha vara at v]"—[20). 

18. AEhral AgTeragqarygenrtety: [1] 
afeeur (Alecara waraata arf: 1 (0)"—[21]. 
eases Mencafra (a) ees) aha I 


ar(at)f¢- 


19. (aur }afwacgantifa wataat cafe we Tata) w—[22]. 
wardte Maradifaatad qeacategeat 
aanaara yfchr: @ wraraitiva (sa) a 


»® Metre, UpajAti. 


* This word is quite clear in the rubbings. 


22 Metre, Vasantatilaka, 
33 Metre, Malini, 
4 Metre, Salini. 
3% Metre, Malinf. 
36 Metre, Vasantatilaka, 


” This sign of punctuation is superfluous. 


33 Metre, Malint. 


°° Metre, Bhadraviraj. The third Pada wants one short 
syllable, between driSos and tasya. I would suggest reading 
taddsya. 

% Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 

*1 This is quite clear in the rubbings. 

32 Metre, Indravajra. 

%3 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 

4 Metre, Svigata. 


JABALPUR COPPER-PLATE OF YASAHKARNADEVA. 5 


L. 20. cae nC) 
arena eaeralsaarcg 
[Tare aeraarenye: Maae; wats 1(0)*—[23]. 
Haast at (at) wrrar- 
21. efcaafra(a)eu: [i*] 
U(r) es UTE(a)aaT a: aetafaciefa w"— [24]. 
@ 4 Wade aaersn faust (sa) eHaTASaTT- 


° e e e ° e . ° . e e ° e e 


TRANSLATION. 
Om ! . 
Om! Adoration to Brahman! 

(Verse 1.) Glorious is (the god) whose navel is a lotus, glorious is the lotus which is 
his navel, (and) glorious is (the god) born from that lotus! Glorious also is his offspring 
Atri, and glorious is the friend of the ocean who took his birth from Atri’s eye!” 

(2.) Now the king® who is the swan in the lake of the expanse of heaven begat as 
his offspring Bodhana, the son of (that) primeval king (and) son-in-law in the house 
of the friend of lotuses. 

(3.) This son of the god® who is the elixir produced from the seven seas obtained, 
as the son of his own body, Purdravas, who had both Urvasi and the earth here for 
his faithful wives, to be enjoyed by him with their hundreds of: unrivalled blessings. 

(4.) In this family forsooth was born Bharata, whose pure fame is proclaimed 
by the Yamuna, hemmed in by more than hundred posts of horse-sacrifices (offered 
by him),—Bharata, who delighted in the welfare of the earth, made lovely, as by a 
pearl-ornament, by the girdle of the seven seas. 

(5.) Highly glorious is in his fanily that Kartavirya who, though he had no need 
of them, wielded with ease every weapon, (and) who allowed the title of king” only to 
the Moon, the ancestor of the family of these Haihaya princes, 

(6.) Resembling the Himalaya, the lord of mountains, that lord of princes begat the 
Kalachuri race which is purified by rulers of spotless conduct, as with pure round pearls. 

(7.) In this family was a prince, foremost of the prudent, who purified the town of 
Tripuri so that it was like Indra’s city,—Yuvardjadeva, who destroyed the lords of 
princes blinded by passion, as a young lion does powerful infuriated elephants. 

(8.) The chief ministers of that ruler of the earth placed on the throne his son 
Kokalla, a lion-like prince, the progress of whose armies, comprising elephants, chari- 
ots, horsemen and soldiers on foot,“ was checked (only) by their encountering the masses 
of waves of the four oceans. 

% Metre, Sardtilavikridita. 

36 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh), 

37 This first verse glorifies the god Vishnu, his navel, the god Brahman, Atri, and the Moon. Further on we are told 
that the Mcon’s son Bodhana (or Budha, z.e., Mercury) married (I]4 or Id4) a daughter of the Sun (or Mitra-Varuna), and 
that their son was Purtravas, ‘The friend of the ocean’ is the moon; ‘the friend of lotuses,’ the sun. 

38 7.¢., the moon. 

'39 7.e,, again the moon, under the name of Soma confounded with the Soma plant. 

40 For the same idea, compare ante, vol. I, p. 313, verse 16. Dr. F. E. Hall’s reading chakrame in the Kumbbi 


copper-plate (instead of chakshame) yields no sense, 
41 The original bas only the word chaturanga. 


6 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(V. 9.) That lord having gone far away, his fame shows like a forsaken woman ; 
deriding white sandal, it reproves the lustre of the moon, aud is a reproach to a string of 
pearls. 

(10.) His son was GAngeyadeva, a thunderbolt falling on the heads of enemies 
(and) the lord of the fortune of heroes, with a chest broad like an emerald tablet, (and) 
with smiling eyes, (and) with his two arms surpassing the length of a city bar. 

(11.) The crest-jewel of crowned heads,-he has become famous under the name of 
Vikramaditya; for, striving after final beatitude (and) free from wicked deceit, he 
ruled the earth which he had himself conquered all of a sudden. 

(12.) When, fond of residing at the foot of the holy fig tree of Prayaga, he had 
found salvation there together with his hundred wives, his son Karnadeva honoured 
the quarters with the pearls from the frontal globes of the majestic elephants of his 
enemies, cleft by his sword. 

(13.) Of him whose great fame is like the circle of waves of the milky ocean, need 
we say more than that here, at Kasi, there is a temple (erected by him), Karna’s Meru," 
(so lofty) that the wind of the flags which wave from its golden spires lessens the fatigue 
of the damsels of heaven, when playing in the sky? 

(14.) He set up the pillar of piety, called Karnavati, the foremost abode of bliss, 
the root of the creeping plant—knowledge of the Vedas, the diadem of the stream of 
heaven, the world of Brahman on the surface of the earth, 

(15.) That lord of the Kalachuris begat oa the illustrious Avalladevi, (another) 
goldess of fortune produced from the ocean of the Hina family, the illustrious Yagah- 
karnadeva, the glory of whose fame is co-extensive with the billows of the milky 
o¢ean which rose (when he arose), mistaking him to be the rising moon, 

(16.) Of this law-abiding (sc) the father, whose acts were purified by the respect 
which he paid to the family priests, performed himself the great inauguration ceremony 
in the midst of the four great oceans, made resplendent, as by a full jar, by the king of 
mountains, and illumined by the moon and the sun.” 

(173) Glorious is that jewel-lamp® of Jambadvipa which sends forth its rays in 
the darkness of night of the Kali age, never filied with partiality for the assemblies 
of the arrogant, and never displaying the lampblack—base conduct. 

(18.) If the milk of the cow of plenty were (put) within the two black shells of 
the gem whic. grants every desire, then there would be seen a likeness with the eyes of 
that bountiful (Zing) whose eyes are both white and red.* 

(19.) He erected high pillars of victory near the confines of the regions, as com- 
panions of the posts to which the elephants of the quarters are fastened. 

(20.) This bountiful (lord) puts five or six drops of water into the hands of the 


7 4 Merw denotes a particular kind of temple (hexagonal, with twelve stories, variegated windows, and four entrances; 
Brthatsamhité, lvi, 20), and the word is chosen here because it is also the name of the well-known fabulous mountain of 
enormous height, the summit of which is the residence of Brahman. A similar temple is said to have been built b 
Gangeyadeva ; se v. 9 of the next inscription. 

43 At an ordinary alAisheka water from all the oceans, golden j 
: , golden jars, etc., should be used. To show the magnifi 
i co ee the poet says that the ceremony here was performed in the midst of the four oceans od je 
Himalaya took the place of the ordinary golden jars, etc. ; and he implies that as inaugurated i sre 
deere cn ces spies jars, mplies that Y. was inaugurated in the sovereignty of 
“ ¢.¢.,a lamp in which jewels give out light. Jambridvipa is the central division of the world, including India 


% The general meaning of this verse is that the king possesses i ; 
g g 8 e g the propert z 
Rae Stata ia. P properties of both the fabulous cow of plenty 


BHERA-GHAT INSCRIPTION OF ALHANADEVI. 7 


Bréhmans*; and they with these already quench their thirst, and afterwards show their 
contempt even for the ocean.” 

(VY. 21.) In weight (like the mountain) Meru, this ruler of the earth exceedingly 
gratifies suppliants by bestowing on them (gold) equal to his own weight and by other 
great gifts. 

(22.) Bright like the tusks of the elephant of the king of heaven, pure like the 
shells of the ocean of milk, (and) lustrous like the snake’s skin in which Vishnu is clad, 
his fame has become superabundant. 

(23.) Extirpating with ease the ruler of Andhra (even though) the play of (that 
king’s) arms disclosed no fiaw, he reverenced the holy Bhimesgvara* with many orna- 
ments. The Godavari, with her waves, trees and creeping plants dancing, has sung his 
deeds of valour with the seven notes of her stream, sweet like the cries of the intoxicated 
flamingo. 

(24.) Crushing the power of his enemies and making over the earth to the Brabmans, 
he engages in a course of rivalry with Parasurdmia. 

Andthis . . . the Paramabhattéraka, Mahdréjddhirdja, and Paramesvara, 
who {meditates on| the feet of the illustrious Vamadeva . . . . .» . « 


Il.—BHERA-GHAT STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE QUEEN ALHANADEVI. 
THe [CuEpr] YEAR 907. 
By Proressor F. Kisnyorn, Pu.v., C.1.E., GOrrincen. 


The stone which bears this inscription was procured by Dr. F, E. Hall, in 1857, at 
Bhera-Ghat on the Narmada, in the Jabalpur district of the Central Provinces, and 
subsequently presented by him to the American Oriental Society in whose Cabinet, at 
New Haven, it is now deposited. It is a plain block of greenstone, of a soft texture and 
easily cut, 2’ 94” broad by 1° 103” high.’ The inscription was first edited, with an 
English translation and notes, by Dr, Hall in the Journal Am. Or. Soc., vol. VI, pp. 
499-532; and Dr. Hall’s text was afterwards reprinted in Roman characters, with a 
photozincograph of the inscription, in Dr. Burgess’ Memoranda, Archeol. Survey of 
Western India, No: 10, pp. 107-9; and his translation in Sir A, Cunningham’s Archeol. 
Survey of India, vol. IX, pp. 91-94. I now re-edit the inscription from two excellent 
impressions and a rubbing kindly prepared for me, at Professor Lanmans request, by 
Mr. Herbert C. Tohwan, of Yale University, New Haven.’ 

The inscription contains 29 lines of writing which cover a space of about 2° 73” broad 
by 1’ 9” high. With the exception of two aksharas each at the end of liaes 11 and 12, 
which are almost entirely broken away, and about half a dozen other damaged aksharas, 


46 yviz., at the time when he is making donations to them. 

47 The word translated by ‘ocean’ means originally ‘a mine of precious stones.’ 

48 j.¢., the god Jiva. [I take this to refer to the Bhimesvara temple at Drakshardma in the Godavari district.—E. H. ] 

1 See the Journal Am. Or. Soc., vol. VI, pp. 499 and 584; and C. Grant's Gazetteer of the Central Proviaces, 2nd 
ed., p. 73. 
2 It is hardly necessary to say that Dr. Hall’s text and translation were prepared witi: his usual care and scholarsnip, 
Nevertheless, a few slight errors of his were pointed out already by the Committee of Publication of the American Oriental 
Society while his paper was passing through the press ; and I have had occasion to differ still further from Dr. Hall, as regards 
both the text and the translation. 


8 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


the writing is well preserved and may be read with certainty throughout. The size of 
the letters is between 4%; and 14’, The characters are Nagari, carefully drawn and 
engraved ; and they include the sign of the jihvémdliya in mahipdlah=Karnnah, in line 9, 
and that of the wpadhmdniya in Hinah=praharsham, in line 10. The language is San- 
skrit, and excepting the introductory on om namah Siviya and the date at the end, the 
inscription is in verse.’ The language is not quite free from mistakes.’ For, in line 10, 
we find the perfect form chakape, ivstead of chakampe (which would not have suited the 
metre), and, in line 25, the imperative vyadhattadm, possibly an error of the writer or en- 
eraver, instead of vidhattém which would suit the metre equally well. Besides we have, 
in line 9, the wrong abstract noun chandimatd, and, in line 2, the adjective valgu, used 
in the sense of the participle valgat. And the rules of samdhi have not been observed in 
kim=vd, line 2, and in yushman=Sariraih, iine3. As regards orthography, the consonant 
b is seven times denoted by its own proper sign, but just as often by the sign for o. 
Thus, in lines 7 and 10 we read bibhrat, but in line 6 cibhrat; in line 16 buddher, but in 
line 1 vuddhim, &c. The sibilants are generally employed each in its proper place ; but 
in line 14 we have éa¢dla, instead of satdla as the word is correctly written in line 27. 
Instead of the sign of anusvdra the dental nm has been wrongly employed im the word 
sinha (in the proper names Vairisinka, Vijayasinha, &c., in lines 16, 17, 21-23, and 29), 
in vansa, line 20, and in sudhdnéuh, line 18 (properly written sudhdmésu in line 4); and 
even at the end of a word before an initial sibilant, in sansatsu, line 5, and etdn=sirih, 
line 28. And, generally, it may be noted that out of about 60 cases where the use 
of the anusvdra would have been optional, at the end of a word before a following 
initial consonant, and where it would now be usually employed throughout, it has been 
actually employed only about 26 times, while in the rest of the cases the nasal of 
the class to which the following consonant belongs has been used instead; and that 
the sign of anusvdra never occurs, instead of the sign for m, at the end of a verse or 
half-yerse. 

The inscription was composed by Sasidhara, » younger son of Dharanidhara’ 
and grandson of Mahesvara, of the Mauna gotra ; written on the stone by his elder 
brother Prithvidhara; and engraved by Mahidhara, ason of the artizan Balasimha 
(verses 32-35 and 37). And its object is, to record that the queen Alhanadevi, the wife 
(or rather, widow) of the king Gayakarnadeva, and mother of the reigning king Nara- 
sirmhadeva and his younger brother Jayasimhadeva, founded a Siva temple, with a 
mathe or cloister, a hall of study, and gardens attached to it; that, probably for the 
maintenance of these buildings and their occupants, she assigned the income from the 
two villages of Namaitindi, in the Jauli pattald, and of Makarap&taka, on the right 
bank of the Narmada in the land adjoining the hills; and thav the management of the 
whole establishment, thus founded by the queen, was entrusted in the first instance to a 
Pasupata ascetic, named Rudrardsi, of Lata lineage (vv. 27-31). The inscription alse 
records (in verse 36) that all the buildings, etc., aforesaid, at one of which the inscri-- 
tion may be supposed to have been put up, were designed or executed by the architect 
Pithe. 


® The second half of vers> 2 grossly offends against a well-known metrical rule. 

* Similar mistakes are found in other Chedi inscriptions of the same period. 

* Dharantdhara, Prithvidhara and Mabidhara are mentioned also in the Tewar stone inscription of GayAkarnadeva, of 
the Chedi year 902. Compare Indian Antiquary, vol. XVIII, p. 210, note 2 i 


BHERA-GHAT INSCRIPTION OF ALHANADEVI. 9 


By way of introduction the inscription, after the words “ orh or, adoration to Siva !”, 
and six verses invoking the blessings of Siva, Ganefga, and Sarasvati, furnishes the follow- 
iug meagre account of the royal family into which Alhanadevi had married, and of her 
own descent :— 

From a prince of the lunar family, named Arjuna (or Sahasrarjuna, v. 7), was 
descended the king Kokalladeva (v. 8). From him sprang GAngeyadeva (vv. 9-10) ; 
and his son was king Karna who is represented as having held in check the Pandyas, 
Muralas, Kungas, Vangas, Kalingas, Kiras, and Hinas (vv. 11-13). Karna’s son 
was Yasahkarna, said to have become famous by devastating ChampAranya (v. 14); 
and his son again was Gayakarna (vv. 15-16). Gayakarna married Alhanadevi, a 
daughter of the king Vijayasimha (a son of Vairisimha who was a son of the prince 
HathsapAla, a descendant of the son of Gobhila or Gobhilaputra,) and his wife. 
SyAmaladevt, a daughter of the king Udayaditya of MAlava (vv. 17-23). And 
Alhanadevi bore to Gayakarna two sons, Narasimbhadeva, who in the inscription 
is represented as the reigning king, and his younger brother Jayasimhadeva (vv. 24- 
26). Nearly all this is stated also in the Karanbel stone inscription of Jayasimhadeva, 
and I may therefore, for the present, refer the reader to my remarks on that inscrip- 
tion, in the Indian Antiquary, vol. XVIII, p. 215. 

Our inscription is dated, at the end of the last line, in the year 907, on Sunday, the 
llth of the bright half of M4rgasirsha,—a date which must of course be referred to the 
Kalachuri or Chedi era. When writing on the epoch of that era, in the Indian Antiqu- 
ary, vol. XVII, p. 216, I felt inclined to accept Mr. Fleet’s suggestion, based on an 
examination of the photozincograph of this inscription in No. 10 of the Archeéol, Survey of 
- Western India which alone was then available, that the figures for the day of this date 
were intended to be 10 (and not 11). But now my excellent impressions have shown me 
that the figures after all are 11, and that they are quite distinct and cannot be read in any 
other way. And accordingly the probabilities regarding the corresponding European 
date are as follows, With my epoch of the Kalachuri era, as to the general correctness 
of which there can now be hardly any doubt, and according to the way in which the 
other Kalachuri dates yield satisfactory results, our date should fallin A.D. 1155. But 
in A.D. 1155 the 11th ¢ithi of the bright half of Margasirsha commenced 2 h. 12 m. after 
mean sunrise of Sunday, the 6th November,-and ended 0 h. 43 m. after mean sunrise of 
Monday, the 7th November, apparently cansing sudi 11 to correspond, civilly, to the 
Monday. In the following year, A.D. 1156, on the other hand, the same llth ¢éthi of 
the bright half of Margasirsha ended 1 h. 46 m. after mean sunrise of Sunday, the 25th 
November, and consequently, in that year, sudi 11 was, civilly, really a Sunday. Now, 
that the day intended by the original date is either Sunday, the 6th November A.D. 
1155, or Sunday, the 25th November A.D. 1156, appears to me certain; but I am 
not at present prepared to say confidently which of these two Sundays is the true date. 
Supposing all the other Kalachuri dates to cite current years, the present date might be 
taken to quote, exception’ ly, an expired year, and in that case its equivalent would be 
Sunday, the 25th November A.D. 1156. But a more careful examination of the practice 
of other eras has shown that it is rather the current years which are quoted exception- 
ally. And assuming that, what is true of other eras, must hold good also of the Kala- 
churi era, one would rather be inclined to look upon Sunday, the 6th November A.D. 


1155, as the proper equivalent of the date, and to assume that the ¢éth¢, in this instance, 
o 


10 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


was joined with the weekday on which it commenced, and which was almost entirely 
filled by it. 

The two villages Namaindi and MakarapAtaka, mentioned in the inscription, I 
am unable to identify. The Juli pattalé, which apparently was mentioned also in the 
lost portion of Yasahkarna’s copper-plate,’ must have been the country around Jabalpur. 


Text,’ 


L.1 st [u"] at aa: fara 
aanfunafanat waat atta ara wearfafraar nialete (i) 
waa aT mAeaTarat fecttarg(g)femetafaceta atria freq v’—[1). 
2 faarar: gaze fai afar: faarraraiiqan:.” 
fran agiaagqan: fare aqrat areat | 
saarfafaataenr: frafaceenforareat- 
fiyraapafyaaa: FaT- 
3. Ur org a: W?—(2]. 
wa afey afearfa yaad afeaarasm- 
AAACAL WTA TTS TS Aq | 
aRAEcTaTa Fe asad Wd wearTea: 
ae Wea faa ATEN (SAT: 
4. ; faa: y —(3]. 
ufatfaronfatqaeaataa: | 
areatea(a)t: quiateaaee; frarfe a: y—[4]. 
faqraeaaadecary wa aa Hea wae Tui | 
Helaeraateafagreur- 
5. e @ Aa: atheng a: aea feare: w'—[5], 
QA HATSATAATAAA UG ATaat | 
aauetitadatey wreae cansfear ata [uw P'Se —[6], 
Te tfaaca wafa- 
6. wife (fe)aeea aT 
saatqradifaaaed Ufated arta: 
aA frsirdanahoArn aaraT: Hea 
iv ~ ° 
aVrenatanae TE Taata @ ara i -[7]. 
awa- 
te aa wanaafaa: siren ara: wargaaaria gat a Tey 
araaer aft frag ejecaa fattagedaaaaure i*—[8]. 
fi fi Q 7 fi Q q Q i vata 7) 
* See Sir A. Cunningham’s Archaeol. Survey of India, ® Metre of verses 2 and 3, Sarddlavikridita. 
vol. IX, p. 88. : : 13 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh) 
7 From the impressions. 4 Metre, Vasantatilaka. 
8 Expressed by a symbol, 
5 Metre, Vasantatilaka, A oe a peia 
° The sign of anusvdra in the last word is very faint, WY Metre, Sarddlavikridita. 


but. it is there. cs i 
" Read fa at. Metre, Vasantatilaka, 


BHERA-GHAT INSCRIPTION OF ALHANADEVI Il 


L, 8, — 
water nya aufaaigaeaan 
wet aa frara Seaqe weagialrf leat 
amiggaafearty fagurant [arjararfeat u—[9]. 
yeraaa dfeat weeranafy- 
9. \ fa]: 
wen faaafa: wa ary a(a) wrwHBETA(A) °°—[10]. 
dasha asioreat, wala Haat | 
yquretarafaeasiafaaatraar vy —[11}. 
urerafenargas qa waa] S" 
10. [alg aafeatsora aatag: afae: ae | 
ait: HASTE TALIS STCMET HT 
afaqrats Tafa feragena 0 —([12]. 
TATA THAT: 
i, ara [qa] areaet 
araarearararas agqacrnrerfaata faa: 
waa ysaaARaras, TATRA: 
wraaaaw fate: gata a ae Lara]. 
12. fat y —[13]. 
STC ASTL MATA VIPAT ATAI- 
AM SHATHTATCSA: ATITAASTALT, | 
carer wares fand AaramATT =. 
wverarelfarat]-” 
13. wart faquren: ta warafa y —[14]. 
AAT STAYULAA TAT SATH: AHAAKAA TULA: 
qe vaTanuaiagelert Marenaieafareraas wee y’”—[15]. 
14 afafareftare: earaears: TIACYTATS: TATAARTS: 
faafaacuara: areaaer weer: faracacate: ahragfaara: 3k —i[ 16]. 
afta 


% Metre, SArdilavikridita. The akshara put in brackets | 2 This reading is absolutely certain. THY is gramma- 
in the last line of this verse is almost entirely broken away. tically incorrect, for TH. 


20 Metre of verses 10 and 11, Sloka (Anushtu>h). 4 Metre of verses 12-14, Sardilavikridita. 

21 Of the akshara in brackets only the consonaxt 7 is % The word @ of this line is quite certain. Of the 
absolutely certain, What the author meant to say, was prob-| aZsharas in brackets only the first is partly visible. 
ably Ta1ae. 26 Of the aksharas in these brackets only the vowel i of 


2 The akshara in brackets is so much damaged that only| the first remains; the rest had been already supplied by 
part of the letter & remains, Compare Indian Antiquary,| Dr. Hall. 
yol. xviii, p, 217, line 10, 4 27 Metre, Vasantatilaka, 
23 Metre, Malini, 


12 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Leis. ufasfas mifraqantiaaamstas sofa: frat aor: | 
Halaatmamadadaadanteafaafegamare: uv” —[17]. 
ATHATATNA: W- | 

16. waMAMaaaTacaaArUTraagrs:” | 
wMftfasagafuataancae tated wcafaaare ata: 1 —[18). 
a aftfadteaatagat gearfa warteperes- 
a7 wifu | 
ary durafare aa gfe goafaaraatfa w—[19]. 
AMISH VARIA TTA aM aR AST: 
galufatanatee sfa 
18. WAS ATA: Wet sata wea aMgureq:* v’—[ 20]. 
AINA AAA waa A eaeagal Fear | 
ayiiemt wradeqenafafaaatacteaat: %—[21). 
19. watatfaa dacnufamt arerhaTataar- 
: aifearfaa waurqatarat carseat Sa: | 
TH SRUCUMAA AISA AAI. 
wanrfaa- 
20. "Saaeufaneha@maratata: u°—[ 22]. 
faarefataarera Ta TIA TAT: | 
wa wifrocaet frararfae dat: n°—[23]. 
APTANA KAU HATA AATUATAT F- 
21. woRRyfa: | 
TEA YaRaMUTMyTSa Ataatfaeeay” —[24]. 
ae Arcfaeeagad: “area 
fefardtfaqurg a(a)qCqUTaAeTsat 4 
TTTH- 
22. ara aagfad wife urge: 
waera aay Harafa weTateheat wafer i—[ 25]. 
wars faraat qafeeda:" aifafararAssTETaa: | 


ay Raarea(a)s- 
A . 
23. aranertanaad feorminaae(e] wee: n° —(26]. 
a n 
wartatettagiittenstampaar | 
39 Metre of verses 17 and 18, Vasantatilaka, 7 Read etaast’. 
» Originally fy: or f¥:, but altered "to °%:. At the 38 Metre, Sardilavikridita. 
commencement of the next line read #lafefye’. 39 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 

3 Read afcfiet. Read “feeeaq. 

32 Metre, Upendravajra. ° 41 Metre, Upajati. 

® Read fax. - 4 Read aacfey. 

4 Read “quia. 43. Metre, Sarddlavikridita. 

3% Metre, Vasantatilaka. ~ 4 Read wate’. 


%% Metre, Upajati. 45 Metre, Vasantatilaka, 


BHERA-GHAT INSCRIPTION OF ALHANADEVI. 13 


TeTgat afrrcfaezanqraraeeusaerer” ”—[27]. 


STITT 
L. 24. WHAM AATATAARATATA(A) | 
waaaa waynrarereteatast: ue—[28]. 


-~ a 


Zatarat aeravarhrara wTeteat aTeettowaray | 
Waaral aTasesifa waters: “aT- 

25.  arewaiafaer n°—[29]. 
aietefad Ra TAA TATA | 
aarataera ara aacaTeay wv —[ 30]. 

MISTARA: UTHIAAT AWregfafeafurenraray” | 
wrare Tatfa- 

26. fare araarafarnta yaarfa sre n° Ri—[31]. 
Brat (a) aa aaa ae aTaAafanacaara | 
Aearenectrytngaral afcemt area frat a u°—[82]. 
alae 

27. AT PAASTA ATS A STAAL TAT I 
araatinena fayraretarfad ta [33]. 

TRUS FA: TARMAC ATUGT LST | 
wufaaarafaaaelafe- 

28. eae frertfafra °—(34]. 
TAATATH AR AUT RTATT:” | 
yufeaactearate *afaretthre: W"—[35). 
sgqutes wa fraatfaurfag | 
ataaatay: aa- 

29. wt: Tataqaar i —[36]. 
qaurerattar (an afarrpneere” | 
faatereratrecttararefadt zat wu --[37]. 

daq coo ararafe eect u BS n BE a 


® Read Wachee’. 55 Metre, Upajati. 

47 Metre, Upendravajra. 58 Metre, Arya. 

48 Motre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 57 Metre, Upajati. 

49 This sign of visarga is superfluous. 58 Of the akshara Gl the superscript line which turns 4 
50 Metre, Salini. into o is rather faint, but it undoubtedly is there. 

51 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 59 Read Cet aft:. 

52 ‘The correct form would of course be fawaTq. 6 Metre of verses 35-37, Sloka (Anushtubh). 

3 Metre, Indravajra. 8 Originally STA, altered to WH: 


4 The correction may have been made already in the ® Read Carafes’. 
oviginal, 3 There is no doubt whatever about these figures, 


14 EPIGRAPHTA INDICA. 


TRANSLATION, 
Om! 
Om! Adoration to Siva! 


(Verse 1.) May the moon’s digit on the forehead of the Moon-crested (god) provide 
for you unstinted bliss,—-(that digit) which, only one (and the first), ever makes the 
troop of Siva’s attendants, even in the absence of the evening-twilight, think it to be 
(joined by) the second (digit) !™ in 

(2.) May those founts of holiness, the lines of the creeping and leaping” tortuous 
waves of the river of heaven, meandering on Siva’s head, guard you,—(those waves) 
about which the celestials are doubting whether they be lotus-garlands, or lunar digits, 
or sprouts of righteous deeds, or serpents’ skins, or (the god’s) majesty bursting into 
view ! 

(8.) (Lhat body) which, being a gross element, is all-pervading; (that) by whose 
revolution the world comes to light; (that) which gladdens the eyes of the creatures; and 
(that) which causes the diversity of savour and other (qualdéies) residing in earth; 
(that) which is the vast substratum of odour; (chat) which sacrifices; (that) which is 
eharacterized by cold; (avd that) which, colourless, is sensible to the feel ;—may Siva 
. with these (eight) bodies (of his) protect you! 

(4.) May Nilakantha, who fills with delight men eager to wield spear and missile, 
_ when decorated with the young moon he exults in his dance, grant whatever is dear to 
you !” 

(5.}) May the Elephant-faced (god) in his mercy bestow on you supreme felicity,— 
who, under the guise of a tusk whiter than jasmine, bears the piece of the moon which 
is freed from the dark digit, able to dispel the profound darkness of crowds of obstacles ! 

(6.) May Sarasvati guard you,—who by manifold forms (of speech) brings about 
all intercourse (of men, and) by partaking of even a small portion of whose elegance in 
trifles (even), men may secure greater weight in assemblies !— 


(7.) In the Moon’s family was a prince with thousand hands, day and night watch- 
ing to guide one by one the minds of (the dwellers im) the three worlds, (and) by his 
splendour eclipsing the rulers of the world,—(a prince) named Arjuna, by the (mere) 


remembrance of whom® is recovered even now what has been lost and carried off by 
thieves long ago. 


(8.). In his lineage was born a renowned ruler of the earth of whom even the most 
marvellous tale is not untrue, bearing the name Kokalladeva, an illustrious name, 
eminently fit to give pleasure to the three worlds. 


(9.) From him sprang the prince GAngeyadeva who, by vanquishing hostile rulers 


* Viz., because the first lunar digit, by itself, is altogether invisible. The noun halydnitd is not given by the 
dictionaries. 

6 Valgu, ordinarily ‘handsome, beautiful’, is here used in the sense of the participle valgat, opposed to ringat. 

BG These eight bodies of Siva are the ether, the sun, the moon; fire, the earth, the sacrificing priest, water, and air. 
It will be sufficient to refer the reader to the opening verse of Kaliddsa’s Sakuntald. 

7 The two compounds of the first half of the verse would be applicable also to the dancing peacock (n#lakantha) which 
causes great delight to him whose weapon is a spear (#.¢., to the god Karttikeya or Skanda, also called Saktidhara ‘the spear- 
bearer , to whom the peacock is sacred), and the tail of which is covered with spots similar to the moon. Compare the very 
similar verse No. 1737 of Vallabhadeva’s Subhdshitdvali, which will show that the translation of the word ehandraka by 
» the young (or small) moon’ is correct, 

%® Dr. Hall quotes a verse found by him in an extract from the Brahmdndapurdna, which expresses the same idea, 


BHERA-GHAT INSCRIPTION OF ALHANADEVI. 15 


supporting huge mountains of pride, secured endless fame; a tree of paradise to sup- 
pliants, who made the earth, though resting below, rise beyond the heavens up to the 
abode of the gods, by raising (on it) a Meru® without equal. 

(7. 10.) The creeping-plant of his fame, sprinkled with the nectar of his religious 
merit and made to grow by his stainless character, overspread the whole bower of the 
universe. 

{11.) He who, seeking good renown, so behaved to the crowds of suppliants that the 
ocean of their desires became replenished with gold, begat the prince Karna. 

(12.) While this king, of unprecedented lustre, gave full play to his heroism, the 
Pandya relinquished violence,” the Murala gave up his arrogant bearing,” the Kunga 
entered the path of the good, the Vanga trembled with the Kalinga, the Kira staid at: 
home like a parrot in the cage, (and) the Hina left off being merry. 

(13.) When the wives of hostilc princes enlarged the seas with the tears streaming 
from their eyes, intending as it were to reduce the size of the earth, because he had it all 
subjected to his rule by the defeat of their husbands, those same seas again did homage 
to him with large waves of precious stones. 

(14.) From him took his spotless birth the illustrious Yasahkarna, a crest-jewel 
of rulers, with a heart free from guile, who illuminated the circle of the regions with 
the moon of his fame which had risen from the devastation of Champ4&ranya, (and) 
whe in his generosity enriched all the learned without exception, as soon as he set eyes 
on them. 

(15.) From him, an unfathomable ocean of all excellencies, was born the favourite 
of the earth, Gayakarnadeva, In his case even the sun,—the sun of his prowess,— 
took upon itself the function” of causing the rising of the sea,—the sea of sorrow of the 
wives of his adversaries. 

(16.) That prince surpassed by his lustre yellow orpiment,” was a tree of paradise 
for the creeping-plant fortune, wore a broad garland of noble qualities, was the one god 
of death to the host of the enemies, adorned the van of battle, abounded in pleasing 
renown, (avd) wielded indeed a sharp sword.— 

(17.) Well known on the earth is the family of the son of Gobhila. Therein was 
born forsooth the prince HamsapAla, who with the host of his valorous irresistible troops 
humbled the circle of all his foes combined. 

(18.) He, whose feet were irradiated by the crest-jewels of the diadems of all the 
tributary chiefs prostrating themselves (before him), had a son, the lord of the earth, the 
illustrious Vairisimha, a treasure-house not merely of purified understanding, but also, 
eminently, (one) for suppliants. 

(19.) That Vairisimha, too, drove the clans of his foes to seek the shelter of deep 
caverns, while he himself, occupying their towns, made these far surpass the residence 
of Kuvera.” 


59 See note 42 of the preceding inscription. 

70 The abstract noun chandimatd of the Ue sya is incorrect ; the correct: form of the word is chandiman. 

71 Properly ‘his inclination to arrogance.’ 

72 This function belongs properly to the moon, 

73 This is described as the seed or seminal energy of Vishnu, Haror-viryam, (see M. Williams’ Dictionary); and 
the poet, who immediately afterwards has the word Sr?, undoubtedly was thinking of the god Hari or Vishnu. A proper 
rendering of this verse in which everything depends on the sound of the words employed is impossible, at least, to myself. 

* Literally ‘ Alaka’ (the residence of Kuvera, the god of riches) 


16 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(VY. 20.) From him was born the lord of the earth Vijayasimha, whose beauty 
was justly celebrated by all men, who by the vigour of his heroism made his adversaries’ 
fortunes totter, (and) the moon of whose fame (accordingly) was always waxing in the 
world. 

(21.) His loving wife was the handsome daughter of Uday&ditya, the ruler of the 
realm of Malava,—SyAmaladevi, a gem granting the desires of the nobly-conducted, 
(and herself) a votary of Fortune. 

(22.) As Mena bore to the chief of mountains the beloved-of Sarmkara, (and) 
Virini to Daksha, the creator of beings, the wife of the Moon, so she bore to that prince, 
able to protect the world, Alhanadevi, in appearance the unsullied fluttering pennon of 
her long pedigree.” 

(23.) Having wedded her with due rites, the king Gayakarna bestowed on her the 
most ardent affection, as Sarhkara did on Siva. 

(24.) And she, a mansion of amorous passion, a beaker (brimful) of accomplish- 
ments, a garland of the graces, a store-house of excellent qualities, bore to king 
Gayakarna a son, the prince Narasimhadeva. 

(25.) May the rising moon of the fame of this illustrious king Narasimhadeva 
richly saturate as it were the walls of the quarters with a pleasing whitewash; and may 
the earth, having secured in him a suitable lord, experience such delight as never to 
think, however little, of its former great rulers ! 

(26.) May victory attend his younger brother Jayasimhadeva, who in marvellous 
ways serves the first-born as Sumitra’s son” (did Rama); who, behold !, when he lifts 
his hand, overpowers the enemies’ most gigantic host, though it roars like thunder- 
clouds” and practises many wiles !— 

(27.) That noble Alhanadevi, the mother of the illustrious Narasimhadeva, 
ordered this temple of the Moon-crested (god) to be built, together with that cloister 
with wonderful floors. 

(28.) She too made her people construct that hall of study, (and) lay out that long 
line of gardens, in two ranges (adjoining) Sambhu’s temple. 

(29.) To make known her good report, the queen gave to thie god, styled Vaidya- 
natha, the village named Namaindi together with every income (thereuf ), in the 
Jauli pattald. 

(30.) And on the right bank of the Narmada, in the land adjoining the hills, she 
gave to him another village, named Makarapataka. ; 

(31.) May the Pasupata ascetic, the holy Rudragiva of Lata lineage, arrange 
conformably to rule for the management of this place, so long as Siva pervades” the 
worlds !— 

(32.) In the Mauna lineage, possessed of the triple pravara Bhargava, Vaitahavya, 
and Savetasa,” there was born from one named Maheégvara Dharanidhara, (a OA Sees 
tain)” by name, by weight, by fame, and by fortune. 

75 Or, ‘of a lofty flag-staff (vamSa)’. 

7 Te., Lakshmana. 

ze abate and Atikdya are also the names of two sons of the demon Ravana; and Prahkasta was 
Sacoe ie ‘is coextensive with’. - 


? Compare the Asvaldyana-Srautasitra, Calcutta ed., p. 872. 
® The word dharanidhara bas this meaning. 


one of 


TEWAR INSCRIPTION OF JAYASIMHADEVA, 17 


(Y. 33.) Who, shedding a pleasing lustre, filled to. overflowing with kindness, long 
enjoying a gratifying position, avted the part of a lamp" to the three worlds. 

(84.) His son Prithvidhara, who has seen the further shores of all the deep oceans 
of learning, (and) by whose crowds of disciples the circle of the regions has been 
conquered, wrote this eulogy. 

(35.) Of him the younger. brother, the sage named Sagidhara, well versed in logie 
and wondrously clever; composed this eulogy. 

(86.) The architéct named Pithe, who knows the rules of Visvakarman, ® planned 
all this, as Prithu did the earth, 

(37.) Mahidhara, a son-of the chief of artizans Galasimha, so wrought this stone 
with letters that it is like the star- covered sky. 

The year 907, on Sunday the 11th of the bright half of Margasirsha. 


Ill.—TEWAR STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE REIGN OF JAYASIMHADEVA. 
THE (CuEpr] YEAR 928. 


BY. Prereenn B KIELHORN, Pua.D., C.L.E., GOrrrncen. 


The stone which ‘bears this short inscription. was procured by Dr. F. . ‘Hall at 
Tewar, a village about six miles to the west of Jabalpur, i in the Central Provinces, an” 
presented’ by him to the American Oriental Society in whose Cabinet, at New Haven, it 
“is now deposited.’ It is said to he of like character with that of Alhanadevi’s inscrip-. 
_ tion.” Dr. Hall also first edited the inscription, with a translation, in the Journal 
Am. Or. Soc., vol. VI, pp. 512-13 ; and his text was subsequently reprinted in Roman 
characters, with a photozincograph of the inscription, in Dr. Burgess’ Memoranda, 
Archeol. Survey of Western India, No. 10, p. 110, and his translation in Sir A. Cunning- 
ham’s Archeol. Survey of India, vol. TX, pp. 95-96: - I now re-edit® the inscription 
from an impression.and a rubbing, kindly prepared for me by Mr. Herbert C. Tohwan,. 
of Yale University, New Haven. 

The inscription contains 9 lines of writing, the last of which is engraved along the 
proper left margia, and which together cover a space of 11” broad by 7” high. The 
writing is on the whole well preserved, but it is somewhat roughly and irregularly cut, 
and there are several aksharas in line 5 and one at the end of line 8, she true reading of - 
which cannot be made out with absolute certainty. The size of the letters is between 
4 and 3". The characters are Nagari, and the language is Sanskrit. Excepting the 
symbol for’ or at the commencement of line 1, lines 1-6 are in verse ; the rest of the 
inscription is in prose. As regards orthography, 0 is denoted by the sign for v in vrahma 
FINE -(the only words in which 6 would occur), in line 1; and the dental. Si ibilant is 


81 The adjectives of this verse would of course be also applicable to a lamp; sneha also means oil’, and das ‘ ‘the 
wick of a lamp’. 

3 The architect of the gods. The adjective would also mean ‘who knows how to execute every Kind of work’. 

'See Journal Am, Or. Svc., vol. VI, pp. 499 and 536; and C. Grant's Gazetteer of the Central Provinces, 2nd ed., 


p. 487. 
3 Ante, No. II. 
byt nierely have had to verify Dr, Hall’s text, which, so far as one may speak with confidence, is ‘substantially correct. . 
D 


18 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


used instead of the palatal in naresvarah, linc 3, Kesavah and aisvaram, line 6, and 
Kesavasya, line 8; and m instead of anusvdra in Jayasinha-, line 4, (but not in Nara- 
simha-, line 8). Besides, the text twice offends against the rules of samdhi. 

The inscription, which opens with «a verse in honour of Mahadeva (Siva), records 
the erection of a Siva temple by the ndyaka K eSava (the son of the Brohman Aladeva, 
named Astaka (?) ), a member of the KAtydyana gotra and resident of the village 
Sikha in M&[la]vaka; during the reign of the king Jayasimhadeva, a younger 
brother of the king Narasimhadeva whom he had succeeded, and son of the king 
GayAkarna. And it is dated in the year 928, on Sunday the 6th of the bright half 
of Sravana, while the moon was in the nakshatra Hasta. Referring this date again, to 
the Kalachuri or Chedi era, the corresponding European date would be expected to fall 
in A.D. 1177. In that year, the month Sravana was intercalary, for the solar Sravana 
lasted from the 26th June, 12 h. 3:2 m., to the 27th July, 23 h. 20 m. after mean sunrise, 
and there were new moons on the 27th June, 18 %. 30 m., and on the 27th July, 2 h. 
8 m. aiter mean sunrise. Now, the 6th of the bright half of the first lunar Sravana cor- 
responded to Sunday the 3rd July, when the 6th ¢ithi ended 7h. 35 m. and the moon 
was in the zakshatra Hasta up to 16 A. 25 m. after mean sunrise; and the 6th of the 
bright half of the second Sravana corresponded to Monday the 1st August, when the 6th 
titht ended 18 h. 12 m., after mean sunrise and the moon entered the nakshatra Svati 
about sunrise. And, accordingly, there can be no. doubt that the true equivalent of the 
date is Sunday the 8rd July, A.D. 1177, and that the bright half of Sravana, put down 
in the date, belonged to the first (or intercalated) Srivana.* 

The village Sikha which, if the adopted reading is correct, was situated in Mala. 
vaka or Malava, I am unable to identify. j 


Per 
L. 1. st [v] svnde’ ut a(a)e a(a) arfeetafad 1 dda 

2, fe weréd aed qHRER 1 AasaTa- 

3. wigue qaate(sa)t Sacfisedn’ 1 fa aft 

4, ataqerea ware” starfat taafesea. 4 

5. “aint ara]“aatlang lerataaetast: | 

6. FAM): ALATA UTaTTAARA(a)TA 

7. wag’ exc qrawefe ¢ tal FS 

8. ATaAAa Wag wea arearad wre arla?]-* 

9. qa atarara: w° 
Mu For two similar dates compare the Indian Antiquary, 18 The reading of the aksharas in these and the following 
XVIII, p. 21%, and vol. XIX, p. 36, No. 62, brackets is not quite certain, because some of them look as if 


* #rom the impressions. they had been partly erased and recut. The intended reading 


* Expressed by a symbol. may possibly be fareTreaaara rer. 
7 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 1f Read wag. 


és : See. 
Metre, Upajati. % The akshara iu these brackets is so peculiarly shaped 


= 


vol. 


9 °. . ep) mane & 

. Read Sai. that it is impossible to say what it is meant to represent, [ 
Read aang. adopt Dr. Hall’s reading of it, but am not certain of its 

1 Read “faeea:, being correct. 


“ Metre, Slcka (Anushtubh). | © This Jine is on the proper left margin. 


THREE LAND-GRANTS FROM SANKHEDA, 19 


TRANSLATION, 
Om! 

(Line 1.) Let us adore (him™ who is) knowledge and bliss, the supreme Brahma, 
waited upon by Brahma and the other gods,—Mahddeva, the god of gods, the parent 
of the world ! 

The son of the illustrious king Gaydkarna, the illustrious lord of men Narasime 
hadeva, conquered the earth: may his younger brother, the sovereign lord, the illus- 
trious Jayasimhadeva, long be victorious } 

(5.) KeSava, the son of the late Brahman Aladeva, named Astaka (?)", caused 
that temple of Ivara to be built. 

The year 928, on Sunday the 6th of the bright half of Sravana, (the moon being) in 
(the nakshatra) Hasta. 

(8.) The xdyaka KeSava’s gotra is that of Katyayana, his place of residence the 
village of Sikha in MAjia ?]vaka. 


IV.—THREE LAND-GRANTS FROM SANKHEDA. 


By H. H. Durvuva, B.A., LL.B. 


The Suba of the Baroda or Central Division of the Gaikavad’s State has sent me for 
decipherment three detached copper-plates, two of which belong te the Gurjaras of 
’ Bharoch, and one to an unknown line of kings. The two former are only second plates 
of the grants, and therefore do not contain genealogical and other personal details, 
while the last is a first plate and contains no information as to the date, donee, object 
of the grant, officers, &c. 


No. 1.—A Gurjara grant of Samvat 346. 


This document is written on a plate, measuring about 8 inches by 33, and is well 
preserved. It contains ten lines giving the usual injunctions and quotations from 
the Smriti regarding the inviolability of grants. The plate does not contain the name 
of the king or of the donee, nor a description of the object granted. But we have sufti- 
cient materials to identify the donor. The writer is the séyndhivigrahikaA ditya- 
Bhogika. Bhogika, Dr. Bihler informs me, is “a small man not more than a Thakur of 
one or a few villages; for bhogika occurs frequently in the list of the persons to whom 
commands are addressed, ¢. g. in the Kavi grant ef Jayabhata (Ind. Ant., vol. V, p. 
110). In the Desékosha its Prakrit equivalent bhoio is explained by grdma-pradhkdana.' 


17 T.e., MabAdeva or Siva to whom all these epithets are applied. 
18 Or possibly: ‘The Brahman, named Astaka, had (a son) Aladeva ; his son Kegava.’ See note 13, above. 


1 Dr. Bihler’s Pdiyalacichhindmamalé, v. 104 (gdmani bhoio ya gamavai, p. 32). Dr. Buhler translates it in the 
glossary as “ headman or lord of a village,’? and quotes bhogika from inscriptions. The Gujarati for bhogika or bhoic is 
bhiyo, and grémapati or gdmavai is gdmetd. The word bhoga, from which bhogika is derived, means pdlana or “ pro- 
tection,” —see Amara, Il], 23, and MaheSvara’s commentary on it, also ViSvakosha, v. 268; Medinikosha, v. 15 of words 
ending in ga; and Trikdndaseshakosha, 11, 120 (qTaa Saaelt F frat GeRifwat t ar: Ye wa ae: WOH 8 
Thus af according to these authorities would be ap equivalent of Waa or “ protector ;” as an official term it may have sub- 
Sequently acquired a technical meaning. 


D2 


20 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Of course such a man cannot be a great ruler.” If there were nothing else to connect 
this grant with the Gurjaras, the title bhogika of the minister for war and peace Aditya 
would be sufficient ; for this appellaticn of an officer is not known to have been employed 
by any other line of kings, Again, the characters of this grant so closely resemble those 
of No. II, an admitted Gurjara grant, and other published grants of the family, that there 


can be no doubt about it. 
The date is given in words as well as figures. It is “three hundred years exceeded 
_by forty-six” and 346, The figures are not written in the usual manner, with the 
symbols for three hundred, forty, and six, but as they would be now, 4.e. with the 
symbols for three, four and six. As the later Gurjara kings used the Chedi era, Samvat 
346 probably corresponds with A.D. 595-96. This date exactly agrees with that of Dadda 
TII.. circiter 580 A.D., as given by Dr. Biihler.* Hitherto we hod no copper-plate grant 
or any other inscription of that monarch, which renders this plate an interesting find. 


TRANSORIPT. 
. arararaiwatata Safranarentt qaararaantsarycart Aaa 
ufaurfed ararfasttiarra yeatfraea ade gweaferen “fara x afz- 
aaa! at a afeerae afdaeanntarsicarertay araral fa 
TTARAAAA AA AETA TATA: WTA ATA a A WTTAT SAT- 
aa 0 aefragar ya cafe: ‘armncfeh: ge ae aer afrare ae 
. al we | UfeaneTarte qa dicta alas: AIST WaT F ata 
aaa aa’ y faaarzatadiary weactiz«arfen: awe firsra 
. FaeaTScaT(:] alates surla GU ates wateawenate faai- 
. wareantaarta atfa at ara arg x gaueela u fafed ara arfafaateaar- 
feats damumeaaa’ yom heemtaTH” age 


OMAHA oT PF Ww 


—_ 
se 


No. Il.—A grant of Ranagraha, daied Sam. 391. 


fhe plate measures 93 inches by 43 and contains ten lines of well preserved 
Gurjara characters, resembling those of the Umeta, [l40 and Bagumra grants. There 
are two holes at the top, showing where the rings originally were. The language of the 
grant is faulty Sanskrit. 

The donee of the grant (1. 1) is the Brdhmana Adityasarma (sic), the détaka 
(1.9) the bhogika Palakatujiana, and the writer (1. 10) the sasmdhivigrahddhikrita 
Matribhata. According to ll. 9-10 the donor appears to be a son of Vitardga, called 
Ranagraha, who is characterised as a worshipper of the sun (Dinakarakirandbhyar- 
chanarata) and as ‘‘the close relative of the illustrious Dadda” (&ré-Dadda-pédantar- 
Jnélt) ; for it is his sign-manual which was attached to the grant. The date is (1. 8) 
Sam..391, Vaisékha bahula 15, z. e. the new moon of Vaisakha. 


4 Ind. Ant. vol. XVII, p. 191. * Read 4&q. 

3 Read Oe. 8 Read fe aTaaI. 
4 Correctly @aqat. ® Read “3a, 

5 Read saqataf. Read “fequta, 


9 Read aaaifefa: . 


UIUC HH AG Pu eeBsdasls UOA 


| on Ea Qg © an. ee oe 


© 


OO e. 


Se 3 gxO ae? 
eran. 2 he eS We serene 

LEE ES LE BXBY 3752) 

@ §2R tour 


-(ayetd puz) ‘gbf “ures ° : : 
| 1 \-9 S‘UD ‘Ill VOdVd AO LNVUD ALVIddaddOD VOAHUNVS ‘I ‘ON 


“4pujBy40 f0 8719 


a — ~~ | ogy oe ea, 
cates Tote ae ce eeaae eae 


An fi 


fe ‘apaee ieee or = Ore Ook 
Ey Je levine Ty ae fl Get Ge mi EE ip 2 ps 5 gagty wef ere 

eS PLAT: eei.. = eae | rotate (Covsee Ory ieee 

oe She 2B MWR BR BRIT D llePS) re. 
SxSES VE BY pet h vee, So ae 


bee fee 28 ky 3 2 we) or ; | 

of aed Fe. Rs SE apa ek h | pie | 

ve FrQureveey, oR oiuregvee RuGrae vi zig fe Le 

Sige Claes CPR aoa leg Fg? BRT he, R 
R 


megres re sr sukey” ay 


ew OSES 2A Rae eD 


‘(ayetd puz) 16£ ‘wes YD “Al VOGVd dO LNVYD 3LVIdYaddOO VOTHHNVS °% ‘ON 


a 


THREE LAND-GRANTS FROM SANKHEDA. | 21 


Though the details about the family of the donor haye been lost, the last two state- 
ments permit us to recognise that the document was issued during the reign’ of Dadda 
IV. —_Pragantaraga TI." and that the donor was the brother of the latter; for, as the 
two Kheda grants of Dadda IV. were issued in Sar. 380 and 3885,” it follows from the 
new date, Sam. 391, that the same person must be meant here by the expression “ the 
illustrious Dadda.” Further, as Ranagraha is called both a-son of Vitaraga anda 
relative of Dadda, and as the latter was a son of Jayabhata I].—_Vitardga II., Rana- 
graha must have been. Dadda’ s brother or cousin. Our grant shows, therefore, that the 
reign of Dadda IV. lasted at least until Sath, 391, or, as the Gurjaras used the Chedi era® 
of A.D. 249, until A.D. 640. 

TRANSCRIPT. 


L. L.araufearaia” seafaatried acter mnfarataht wa" 
2. Sarena” ureafyaaa a arstafafacacen “faa fenarerferrareay” ar- 
3. qaléa a vefrrsrareal:] egal] a” waaay waa azarae aaa feats. 
4. aparfe! eat mefa yfaer area aTqaaat a area ach aa” faezats- 
aay WeR- 
5. aevarfaa[:] “faurent fe saad afacrarcercan[:] arte earfa ger 
qvecata 
6. Sadeauecte fanfanrenfaarta arfa at wa” aryl:] garcreatfa® aear” | 
Uteui aT 
7. wares afafex® ae afeaat” 48 eraTqesataaraatata” 
8. HaaWwMIAaG Vata” Furaqyaugewt H 240 FMT TRY 
9. gaata difraareaae wa.) feracarasars EMT Aatarcrrawt 
10. wayse eeneraatta® fafeatad afafarerfataa asa 


No. Ill.—A grant of Sdntilia, general of Nirihullaka. 

The plate measures 82 inches by 32 inches, and contains 12 lines in characters closely 
resembling those of the early Chalukya plates and of the Mahakuta pillar inscription 
edited by Mr. Fleet, Indian Antiquary, vol. XIX, pp. 7 ff. The plate is slightly 
damaged at the top and on both sides at the bottom. Two holes on the lower side show 
where the rings were originally placed. The language of the grant is slightly incorrect 
Sanskrit. 

Ind. Ant. vol. XVI, p. 191. ™ Read Hfaz: . 


2 Jour. Beng. As. Soc. vol. VII, pp. 908 ff.; Jour. Roy. % Read aaq. 
As. Soc. N. 8. vol. J, pp. 947 ff.; Ind. Ant. vol. XIII,| ™ Read @wr’. 


pp. 81 ff. % Read 41H. 
13 Read °aHe. 25 Read °etla. 
14’ Read Ourae:. 37 Read Seat. 
5 Read “ufafaca’. 38 Read afafsc. 
% Read amend’. ® Read avi. 
7 "Read °HaTeT:. *® Read welaat. 
18 Read aaafanr’. 1 Read eTaTeat’. 
19 Read CerPererara. ® Road Renae. 
® Read arte’. | 3 Read “las: 


W Read fe qu°. 4 Read faaeifaaa 


22 EPIGRAPHIA INDIA. 


Its contents are as follows. Writing from the victorious camp (vijayakataka), 
located at Nirgundipadraka (1. 1), Santilla, the general (balddhikrita, 1. 5) of the 
bhogikapdla and mahdépalupati (mahépallapati) Nirihullaka (1.4), who meditated on the 
feet of the illustrious Samkarana (Samnkaragana, 1. 8), son of the illustrious Krishna- 
rija (whose feet were worshipped by the whole circle of the earth, ll. 1-2), grants to 
Bhajikanantasvami (Bhajika® Anantasvdmin, }.7), an inhabitant of PAshanihrada 
(1, 6), a member of the Kautsa gotra and a student of the Vdjasdneya (Samhita), a field 
requiring for seed-corn one pituka of rice (I. 10), and situated in the western stm of Sri- 
Parndka, which belonged to (the district of) Tandulapadraka (ll. 8-9). The purpose 
for which the grant was made is the usual one, the provision for the expenses of the 
five mahdyajias. It is added that the donation was made on the occasion of an eclipse 
of the sun “for the increase of the spiritual merit and fame of the Puramabhattadraka’s 
feet, i.e, probably of Sashkara{ga|na. 

As regards the persons named in the document, Santilla’s position is sufficiently 
clear. His master Nirihu]laka must have been a Bhil chieftain; for the title mah4- 
pallapati means “ the great lord of a settlement or of settlements of an aboriginal tribe.” * 
It agrees with this that his name is not Sanskrit, but a barbarous Desi word. The 
phrase “ who meditates on the feet of the illustrious Samkara[ga]na” means, there- 
fore, here merely that he was a vassal or servant of the latter, not that he was his suc- 
cessor. Pdddnudhydta is frequently used in the former sense.” With respect to the 
question to which dynasty the two kings Krishnaraja and Samkara[g a]na belonged, 
it is possible only to offer a conjecture, Dr. Buhler has suggested to me that, assuming 
the correction Samnkaragana for Samkarana to be certain, the two kings may be Haihayas 
or Kalachuris of Chedi. Iam inclined to accept this, as the Chedi era was used by the 
Gurjaras, which is a certain sign of their power having extended to the province. 
Moreover, the Chalukya inscriptions® mention a Kalachuri king, Buddhar4ja, the son 
of Samkaragana, from whom Mangalisa took his wealth. And it is not at all im- 
probable that the Sarhkaragana of the Chalukya inscriptions is identical with that of our 
plate; for, as has been pointed out already, its characters closely agree with those of 
the earlier Chalukya inscriptions, and show also some affinity with those of Dadda’s 
Kheda plates. They may well belong to the period | of Mangaliga’s reign, which, as the 
latest researches of Mr. Fleet show, fell between Saka Samvat 519 and 531, or A.D. 
597-98 and 610-11. There is also another detail in our grant which, I think, may be 
adduced in favour of this view. 

Professor R. G. Bhandarkar, in his Report on the Search for Sanskrit Manuscripts 
in the Bombay Presidency, 1883-84, remarks (pp. 31-32) that “it is a remarkable 
circumstance that the names of most of the famous writers on the sacrificial rites 
should have the title Svdmin attached to them. No writer later than the thirteenth 
century seems to have it. We have Bhattas, Acharyas, Yajvans, Dikshitas and Yajiikas 
during the last six centuries, but no Svamin, The title appears to have been in use at a 


* Bhajika might be bhajaka, “a worshipper, votary, devotee ;” V.S. Apte’s Sanskrit. -English Dictiona 807. 
Compare a similar use of the word dhatta in Bhatta KumArila,Bhattotpala, Bhattodbhata, ete. ee 
36 See Dr. Bohtlingk’s Abridged Sanskrit Dictionary, s. v. Palle, Mr. V.S. Apte (Sanskrit-English Dictio 
p. 687) assigns to the same word the meaning “a large granary.” On a local enqniry I find that the eae abo Sta. 
kbeda goes by the name of Palla (Gujarati Pda). Thus, mahdpallapati would mean “ the lord of the great Palla TPA ] ze 
7 See e. g. |. 33 of Mr. Fleet’s No. 1, Corp. Inser. Ind. vol. 111, pp. 10 and 17, note 2 S aes 
#8 See Ind. Ant. vol. XIX, p. 16. 


(1 oyed) ‘VITILNYS VLISHIHGYIVd JO LNVYD VOFIHANVS ‘€ ‘ON 


THREE LAND-GRANTS FROM SANKHEDA. 23 


certain period and been given to Mimarisakas or men conversant with the sacrificial lore.” 
Then he cites the instances of SabarasvAmin, the author of the Bhdshya on Jaimini’s 
Uiméinsd Siétra; of Agnisvamin, the commentator on LAtyAyana’s Srauta Sitra: of 
Bhavasvamin, the author of a Bhdshya on Baudhayana; of KesavasvAmin, the writer of an 
introduction to the Baudhdyana-prayoga-Sdstra; Devasvamin, quoted in the Trikénda- 
mandana and author of a comprehensive Bhéshya on Agvalayana; Dhdrtasvamin, Kapar- 
disvamin and others. Kuméarila is both a Svémin and a Bhatta. The title Svdmin was 
used in some of the early Chalukya inscriptions and one of the Valabhi inscriptions, up to 
the seventh century. An undated grant of VikramAditya I., who ceased to reign before 
A.D. 680, gives as donees Nandisvamin, Lohasvamin, and Bhallasvamin (Ind. Ant., 
vol. VI, p. 771). Another grant, dated 700 A.D., gives DasasvAmin, son of JanasvAmin 
and grandson of Revasvamin Dikshita, and one of 705 A.D. gives Devasvamin, Karka- 
svamin, Yajfiasvimin, Rudrasvamin and others (Ind. Ant., vol. VII, pp. 128 and 136), 
while a Valabhi grant, dated Sarnvat 326 (A.D. 645), has got Mankasvamin (Ind. Ant., 
vol. I, p. 16). Dr. Bhandarkar assigns the seventh century to Agnisvamin, Devasvamin 
and BhavasvAmin, and places SabarasvAmin two or three centuries earlier (vide p. 32 of his 
Report). The general inclination is towards the seventh century for the age of names 
bearing such titles. The records above noted were of rulers or families that were perhaps 
close neighbours of the recorders of the present grant. The grant mentions Bhajika- 
nantasvamin, and with the conclusion arrived at by Dr. Bhandarkar, it cannot be later 
than the seventh century. 

With respect to the geographical names occurring in our grant, it may be noted 
that Nirgundipadraka, the place from which it is dated, would be in modern Gujaratt 
Nagaravada or something like it. And the Dehezdda of Gaikavddi Villages (published 
at the Hitechchhu Press, Ahmadabad) does givea NAgaravada, 6 kos from Dabhol. 
Further, the native place or home of the donee is PashAnihruda, which would be 
Saniddari, 14 kos from Dabhoi (given in the Dehezdda, p. 5). Hrada would be 
masculine dharo and feminine dhari, changeable to dard in Gujariti, and Pdshdni 
would drop its initial Pd, as Bagumra has done with its Ba in having Gumra, and give 
Sania, and thus we get Sai-iadari. From the same Pashanibrada we would get SAnkhe- 
da if hrada were replaced by khedd for khetaka, meaning ‘town,’ and Pd were dropt as 
in the other case. Tandulapadraka is obviously Tandalaja, also 14 kos from Dabhoi 
(as given in the Dehezdda); and Sri-Parndkaé is Paniu, now desolate (as noted in the 
same authority), 5 kos from Dabhoi. The map of the Baroda territory does give Tan- 
dalja and Saniadari quite close to each other. 


TRANSORIPT. 
dl. at afer fanfcugarafeatanaazary a — — (fafa| —- -— —” 
2. faaacaare: Stharwes: * ceractaela tiaras — — —* 
3. farfeaauaerageatfrat: Shiace: Wenregareana 
4, TERRA aaa aT HOTA ET Tgufatafega* 


+ fo} 
2 Restore THAfAAAwaT. 2 Read ATTA ; “gare : 
Read “HWE. - @ Read “afdadffra®; avramafa. 


4t Restore “qarat’. 


24 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. 5. aearfatacarieaa waiaa wcandiaeaiadeata” 

6. zat urerfege “aa rettaafsraaaaa eae” 
7. abrarrerattat ceqarerasearaaterarara”® oceEt- 
8. Taare Geaifafaea® cag raga oe 
9. a ufaaeiaia sarcuemat “wadlaramiisi arfe-” 

10. — winraraqearfaaan atfefucaaaad arerte-” 

Ll. — — afefalfelfraaareta ufaatfees aqe —* 

12. — — woraaira wafaafaten:® 


V.—INSCRIPTIONS FROM NORTHERN GUJARAT. 


By J. Kirsts, Ph.D., VIENNA. 


The subjoined inscriptions collected by Mr. H. Cousens, in Gujarat, were entrusted 
_to me for decipherment by Professor Biibler, who assisted me with his advice. They 
were found in the following places :— 


1. Bhilri (Nos. i—iii), 6. Roho (xii—xvi), 
2. Dilmal (iv—vii), 7. Sarotra (xvii—xxvi), 
3. Mandal (viii), 8, Sonak (xxvii, xxviii), 
4. Munjpur (ix), 9, Taranga (xxix). 


5. Palanpur (x, x1), 

All are written in Devanagari characters, with the exception of No. vili, where the first 
‘six lines are in Arabic and the last in Gujarati. They are mostly injured and de- 
faced. The language is a crude mixture of Sanskrit and Gujarati. Hence the read- 
ings are not always certain, and 1am not sure that I have succeeded in fully making 
out the sense of all. 

The generally interesting information-which they furnish may be arranged under 
the following heads : — 

1.—They yield some notice of the political history of Gujarat. No. viii furnishes 
a date from the reign of Sultan Ahmad and the names of his father Sultan Mu- 
hammad, and. of his grandfather Sultan Muzaffar Shah. It also mentions a Malik 
KAmachanda, who seems to have been the Musalman governor or minister in charge 
of Mamdali (the modern Mandal) in the Viramagam Taluka, and that of a local 
chief called Ranaka(?). No. xi records the death of a Rajput, possibly a local chief 
Vanaraja, of the Gedia family, in Sarnvat 1282.” Nos. xvii—xix speak of two local 


44 Read “faaamifam:. : 51 Read Ya. 

4 Read “aregi°. ® Restore “tae. 

48 Read a 33 Restore °STMETHTUS’. 

7 Read “arsraafa’ ; Carfea. * Read ufautfed. The remaining words I am unable to 
“® Read MU UTy. restore. 

49 Read “faasd. | ° * This line too is unintelligible. (Restore wftehfeaar- 


© Can Cmuaa’ be for ifm wetter azayfafa: —E, H.] 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM NORTHERN GUJARAT. 25 


chiefs of Sarotra—(1) Arajunaji, who ruled in Sarnvat 1678, and (2) his son Harada- 
aji, who ruled in Sarhvat 1685 and 1689. No. xxvii makes us acquainted with a 
Maharana Khetala(?) who held the village of Stinaka, the modern Sonak, in Sarnvat 
1356. 

2.—We obtain the following information regarding the spiritual heads of the Tap4ga- 
chchha:—No. xxix tells us that Hiravijaya was Bhattdraka in Sarnvat 1642. This 
inscription mentions also Vijayasena, who succeeded him (see Klatt, Ind. Ant., vol: 
XI, p. 256). Vijayadeva, the successor of the latter, is alluded to six times in the 
inscriptions Nos. xx—xxiii, xxv, and xxvi, which are all dated in the year Sarhvat 
1689; while his appointed successor Vijayasimha is mentioned once (inscription xx). 
Inscription No. ii makes us acquainted with a Guru of the MahideSvariya Matha 
called Jiraja, i.e. probably Jeraja or Jayaraja. 


NOs 
L.1. dala e(a)y [5] ae [ar faa af le] cy aa 
2. | ulnalremata ahs] — — [wlea 
3. waaaa ata arefalal’ ... 


TRANSLATION. 
In the year Sarh. 1358, on the 15th (day) of the dark half of ASvina, a Monday, a 
figure was caused to be made by the Sreshthin Samayaka, son of .. . of the 
Pragvata gotra. 


No; LE. 
L. 1. [i] afeeatraaerfuc- 
2. facsrye[sheara ararara- 
3. & il 
TRANSLATION. 


( The image ) of the venerable Dhyanaganacharya, the guru Jiraja, the lord of 
the Mahidesvariya monastery. 


No. III.’ 
L. 1. 4 u araw afe cy way wae af 
cara | wre [ar] 
2. of v2 feaat 1 urge afe (2 ard | 
wae afe « qaat aria 


TRANSLATION. 


Hail! The conception (chyavana) on the 15th (day) of the bright half of Sravana ; 
birth on the 8th (day) of the dark half of Jyeshtha; consecration (dikshd) on the 12th 


1 At Bhilri: on the base of an image in the Jaina temple. 

2 Read afar: arTafaar. 

3 At Bhilri: on the base of an image in Mahadeva's temple. 
4 At Bhilri: in an old well outside the village. 


26 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(day) of the bright half of Phalguna ; enlightenment (j#dq) on the 18th (day) of the dark 
half of PhAlguna; liberation (moksha) on the 9th (day) of the dark half of Jyeshtha .. 


The stone bearing this must have been taken from a Jaina temple, and the inscrip- 
tion refers to the career of one of the Tirthamkaras. 


Now Vs" 
L. 1. daq e[ajey aa we afe o Fa mTMATATe Stafaa- 
2. dndiat orearatia’ arafaqafos arte 3: 
3. AesqaKawe’ 
TRANSLATION. 

In the year Sar. 1295 (?) on th: 8th (day) of the dark half of Pausha, a Thursday, 
an image of the venerable PArsvandtha and a figure of his parents were made by the 
Sreshthin Kumarabhadra (?), son of Sohada, in the village of GAbbala, in the 
district (?) of Dilavika. 

No. V 
L. 1. [=i] fafe: | — — | asa — aa- 
2. at | ava [a] — — [alfe[ayy a[a:] 
ae ae 


3 
4. 
5. fea [Hag gu eriaa a- 
6. ary fe go STTHAT 
7. \ sa etlatleaa area fe 
8. Haan: wifaa: naa [aa] 
9. afaa — [alae aa afa g- 
10. wa Fat AZ [Had] Hea <- 
11. ue wfaaa arm wa [Z]aH Bee 
12. axa[ste| ait ana 
Nothing can be made out of this with certainty except the words :—‘ on the 10th 
(day) of the bright half of VaigAkha . . . . was caused tobe made .....” 


No. VI.’ 
L. 1. daa (yar dare afe ry 
2. tat WH BaTgaear- 
3. Ha wrfaat aera: | 
TRANSLATION, 


In (the year) Sam. 1532, on the 11th (day) of the dark half of Vaisakha, a Sunday, 
(an image) of Narayana was placed by Ke. Devaka, son of Lakha. 


5 At Dilmal: on the base of an image of Parévanatha. 

6 Read faq. 

7 May also be “Hea. 

* At Dilmal: ona pillar of the Kirtistambha to the west of the large temple of Limbu Mata. 

® At Dilmal: on the seat of an image in a small temple on the west of the large temple of Limbu Mata, 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM NORTHERN GUJARAT, Py 


Now VIL." 

1. wfea dae (uae aH tare ate ez 

2. wat & alalraa ar arennter 

8. [aujaat arn a acfaa- 

4. AAI ITS BUTS AT’ areal s] 

5. AQT at Wararaaar ars ais 

6. at wizes sefaia atheet- 

7. Aaa waa:  ufa- 

8. at fast [aa]: arcrfiar faxa- 

9. Ae HATTA YH wag 
TRANSLATION. 


Hail! In the year Sam. 1532, on the 11th (day) of the dark half of Vaisdkha, a 
Sunday, Bai Ripai, daughter of Tha(kura) Narasing (Narasimha), wife of M4 (nda- 
lika) SAdajhamtd, son of Ke. Ragha(?) (and) ‘aother of Saddsaha (?)—likewise 
Bai MAmi, daughter of Tha(kura) GopAla and mother of Jhamtasaha, bow day and 
night to Lakshmi and Narayana. An image (and) then a base (for zt) was caused to 
be made. 

No: Vaibt 


Boiled 4 wits Siw sdeD]Ecd slo fy pL evs 


AS jae (3 dos* Gy) deal pblle i labe dpe yo 
Be GS al @fenje aes dis*b Use oEaen 6 « teh up ylele op yale) 


oe 


Par CUE Tee 


[a] fea daq esos ay Ute afe 

_— &° gas asat afaa at [aT]- 
adenfaudt we aleal a} 
fase waaistafalat]- 

. Patletafaaara ateat [ee] aa 
. falfare abt & gaalett] “at 

. afeae]farecfeg(e) tarfesiot 

14. vaderafaarfaara [ed aa] 


10 At Dilmal : on the base of the image of Lakshmi Narayana in a small shrine. 

1 At Mandal: on a stone in the Chauki. 

12 The transcription of the Persian text I owe to the kindness of Prof. Karabacek at Vienna. Lines 4 to 6 are illegible. 
13 T,,8, Probably mM is to be read. 

4 Corrected below the line to ya (we]—*?¥. The third letter may be @ and the fifth seems to have been intentionally 


effaced. 


po oa 


= 
oS 


Hb 
o bo 


E2 


28 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


TRANSLATION. 

Persian Text.—At the date on the 15th day of the month Dhu-l-Qa’de, in the 
year eight hundred and twenty (of the Hijra, i.e. the 24th December of 1417 A.D.), 
during the reign of the Sultén of Sultans Ahmad, son of the Sultan Muhammad, son 
of the Sultin Muzaffar Shah . . . business(?) of Kamajand . . . . this writing 


Sanskrit Text.—Hail! In the year Sam. 1474, in the dark half of Pausha, on 
a Friday (Friday, 24th December 1417 A. D.), to-day, here in Mamdali, during 
the administration of Malik, the illustrious KAmachanda, in the victorious reign 
of Rana the illustrious Ranaka (?),—the business of the limits of the custom-house 
was settled in the presence of all the inhabitantsof Mamdali . . 


Nos Lx,” 
L.1. ) daq (ree ae ane aie y at— 
2. eet [araujat — aur ara — — [afcjet [ala 
3. HaTa at — — wa — 3ifalge] wea ararfod ... 


Much defaced and probably mutilated on the right side. Nothing can be made out 
except the date Samvat 1211, Vaisdkha Sudi 5. 


Nov xX. 
L. 1. daq cree aa arfda Ue ge 
2. RY qlaraTETay AEA 
3. a aver tfearat [alfa a 
4, [a] t esata arefad [alfa 
This inscription seems to refer to a donation in the temple of Mahavira at Khim- 


vana, made in Samvat 1217, on the tenth day of the bright half of Karttika, a Friday. 
Hence this stone, too, must have been removed from its original site. 


No; X17" 
L. 1.) daq excy av dre ufe 8 Uw Tet 
2. asa [Alat [ga] aact 1 [arjerata afer: 


ABSTRACT. 
In the year Sarh. 1282, on the fourth (day) of the bright half of Pausha, a Friday, 
fell the Gedia Rautta (Rdjaputra) Vanaram (Vanardja), the son of Megham. 
The stone must be a so-called Palia. 


No. XII.” 
L. 1. Waq gaye 
ae e 
2. a athe afe 2 
~ 

3. Ua | (a lwerga 
15 At Munjpur: in the Jami Masjid, on a beam. Read a, 
16 At Palanpur: on the side of a well. At Palanpur: on a loose stone lying near the railway. 
% Read Wm. 


7 At Roho: on a pillar of the Chhyitri of Parévanatha ; 
much defaced. 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM NORTHERN GUJARAT. 29 


L. 4. [at]st a — — — 4 
eS ie al 
6. — — arerfaat i 
TRANSLATION. 
. . caused to be made by . . . . son of Jasadeva in Samvat 1259, Kariti- 


ka sudi I, a Friday. 
f No. XIII 
L. 1. daq gxa(a] — at 


2.— ——=—— qe ve 
3. — — — 2a a fa 
4, tet — —a— at 
5. — WET I 


NO ds Vere 
L. 1. daq eee aa dara gfe eg Ha Honea faafaree Aefagd| a TAT] 
a arafafad afaarafed araltad)] aa wag i 
TRANSLATION, 


In the year Sam. 1299, on the 18th (day) of the bright half of Vaisakha, a 
Monday, an image of Nemindtha was caused to be made, for his mother’s sake, by VAlAka 
(?), son of Gauradevi of the Nirvriti-Gotra in the temple of Rishabhadevt (°). 


No. XV." 
1. u at un Aha aa: i dag calos] 
2. a0 | Taare) awud | daar fa- 
3. at | qearat 1 [sritjad 1 azact [—]" 
4. area + tte whatewstt | ara are 
5. stator aut aarfaar 1 u[tlare et afe- 
6. at ufaet aatfoat | ars gat hast. 
7. ave ateaat UIs Yvooe THTAA 
8. AANA HAT | A deth ATA 
9. ard (¢ ara at Were = Ufeat AAT | 
10. ast faeatararg | arg ge ae” 
11. an) argfagaat arg | ae at-” 
12. fost wat no — [etaaT] ere ae 
13.u°-—-—---- WU | HATTA 1 


% At Roho: ona pillar in the third storey of an old well,—much defaced. 
22 At Roho: on the arch over the old well,—first storey. 

23 At Roho: ona pillar in the third storey of the old well. 

4 [, 3: Probably [sf]. 

% T.10. Read °qxar® | HRT, 

% E11. Read Pig? | ear. 


30 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


TRANSLATION. 


In the year Sam. 1674 (?), on the 5th lunar day of the dark half of Pausha, a 
Thursday, a well was caused to be made by Ramta Mamdanaji, (whose) wife (was) 
Champ§, and together with two temples it was consecrated. He, together with his 
daughter Sajja Bai, spent 51,000 Pérojt (Rupees) ( for this purpose). May it rejoice as 
long as sun and moon endure! In 11 months the work (i.e. the well), together with 
the two temples, was completed. May the race extend ! May great merit and fame come 
(to him)! May the life of him be lengthened who built this well ! The Dhala was 


made by Pam(dita) .... 
No. XVI.” 
L. 1. at daa eve ae ure afe 8 ca [aTUTe AT)” 
2. — aaa Ua WAST wT WaT ars Gal aaAH — Y — [Ta 
3. aa ua) ¢- ——--— — amit a — — — — 
4. a araTra[at] — ——- — — - 


The same persons seem to be mentioned as in the preceding inscription. 


No. XVIE® 
. Mag Qt FE BTTUATA YU Aaa cal afsaat T [e]-” 
i Waraa | CAT AAAS aATUT ag Ararg wiaMt 
\ dar arett afaatya TiaAAAgaAT | WaT SAT wa 
ufawaiq” Ha TaATaaATT wall Stal AheraaAT tia 
u aret watfa noe ua wtaeyast: | avs Stoeat are | ars” 
Water u ga ateterastt asracrea” 1 wat arerfaat 


re 


ABSTRACT, 


In the year Sam. 1678, on the 9th lunar day of the bright half of Phalguna, a Satur- 
day, under the Rohini Nakshatra, during the reign of Arajunaji, whose wives were 
Padamam and Amari, and whose son was Haradasaji, a Chhatri was caused to be 
erected. 

No. XVIII.* 


L. 1. & 9acy ay maw afe ee ea [Scere aaaT]® 


27 At Roho: on the base of an image in a ruined shrine near the old well. 

28 Perhaps 4Tqqa. 

29 At Sarotra: in the Bhavan Dhvaja temple. 

% ZL. 1, Read xm) 1 faat 1 dfs. 

3 Bhavan is meant for bhagavan. 

*° The metre of the verse in ll. 2—5 seems to be MandAkrantaé. It may be restored as follows:— 
Dhanyoyodhyddasarathanripah sdpi métdpi dhanyd, 
Dhanyéd vant kavivaramukhe rdmandmapracritta, 
Dhanyo defo raghupatibhavan yatra rdmdvatéro, 
Dhanyo loko nijatamagundm rdmavdcham Srinoti. 

3 L.6. Read fasacrse. 

“4 At Sarotra: in the Bhavan Dhvaja temple. 

%L. 1. Read 41aw. 


ee ae re ee 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM NORTHERN GUJARAT. ot 


TRANSLATION. 
Yn the year Samvat 1685, Sravana Sudi 11, Haradasa 


No. XIX.® 
1. daa va[se] ae ararear( a] [a] eaalaluaretat ee aal i)” tfaarat — — 
2. UTA RATAN SATTAT AT ATATT YTIT Ura aie afsatye 
3. UWaATaReAT: | wa eat [ea lufarare faa Carseat war 
4. [at] ar ataaag Taare waa Woe Ta Aheterastt | aT 
5. 3 atfraat u ats TT Ra | ATA ATA daw | Ya Atata[at] a- 
6. \ HATH v wat werfae:* v2 


ABSTRACT. 

In the year Sam. 1689, on the 11th lunar day of the dark half of Ashidha, a 
Sunday, during the reign of Haradasaji whose wives were Jivanti and Raja and 
whose son was ‘ogabi (?), a Chhatri was caused to be erected. (Regarding the verse 
see inscription No. xvii.) 

No. XX.” 
L.1. y ai u werarifaraeaatiaiqeal aa: arate atfasafae- 
2. aitatqet” wa: i to 7ec9 ae Aram gore fea Setiaiusag a [aa] 
3. MTSU UTA ATAL Ba Ho SteTH | do aint | wo aw | Ho ZamTMsE RUG 
[— —]" 1 aren a [0] 
ABSTRACT. 


In the year Sar. 1689, on the 11th day of the dark half of SravanaSam . . . 
Ladana, whose wife was Nathi and his son Sam. Haraddsa,Sam. Sampa, Sam. Teja, 
Sam. Devakaranai, gave silver Thapas (?) on the completion of the temple, while 
Bhattaraka Vijayadevasiri and Vijayasimhasdri were [living]. 


INO: eee 
L. 1. v St u werarnfasracaathatqet aa: 1 daa eece ae [ate] 
2. [at] do aISw wat atlalea do eteTe Ho Bint de Got do [ZaatT] 


3. - —— — [sa ara] — a — — — aufalgar] — felaaut) aat- 
4. 4) Whrerarurare — agent — war: [arfear] 1: 
ABSTRACT. 


In the year Sam. 1689, in the dark half of . . . Sam. Ladana, whose wife 
was Natha (?), and his son Sarh. Haradasa, Sam. Sdmpa, Sam. Teja, Sam. Dev4. 
karana, erected a chapel in connection with the temple of Mahavira. 


36 At Sarotra: in an old chhattri. | 2 Looks like yy. 

7, 1, Read watextfaet. ® At Sarotra: in the Bhavan Dhvaja temple. Preserva- 
% 1,6. Read faaaqerey 1 arerfqar. tion bad and most letters indistinct. 

33 At Sarotra: in the Bhavan Dhvaja temple. 43 Read Jaxit. 

0 Read °qaxit. 


! 
| 
| 
| 


32 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


No. XXII.* 
L. 1. a at 0 Swerannifasradaathatqenat am 1 
2. dogece ao F TSH [To ato] “arat [w@ ya] Ho FT 
8. ara te torfeqes AUTASSU ATCTAT | 


ABSTRACT. “ 
In the year Sarh. 1689, in the dark half of . . . a temple of Parsva was 
caused to be made by Sam. LAadana, whose wife was Nathi, and his son (?) Sam. Hara- 
dasa, and by the family of Sam. Teja. 


No. XXIII.” 
L. 1. 0 at u aunrenrfacrsnearn fasaeaafaqentt 2° 
2. He gece aa wry’ ute 2 fea U Setialusas g: ETeTa— 
3. g[alatg ATSt aa ats — Vas eau [ — — J* areas 


ABSTRACT. 

In the year, Sam. 1689, on the 18th day of the bright half of Phdlguna, on the com- 
pletion of this temple, silver Thapas (?) were given by Haradasa, whose father (?) was 
Madana (Ladana ?) 

No. XXIV.* 
L.1. u att u Wo cece at urge afe eo fea glu] — acug u Seat [atosaz] 
2. erst [— —] aren wen sfa daraq vat at a 


ABSTRACT. 
In the year Sam. 1689, on the 10th day of the bright half of Phalguna, on the com- 
pletion of this temple, silver were given by Karana (?). 
Now Xess 
L. 1. 0 at u wiftsrreaataqe(thean aa: nv a gece ae ATT 7 
2. fe co fea quur[aerletat ueedatiosas wus — — sTaTse— — — —: 
Does edie 
ABSTRACT, 


In the year Sarn. 1689, on the 10th day of the bright half of Phalguna, on the com- 
pletion of this temple, silver . . were given by the sonof . 


“ At Sarotra: in the Bhavan Dhvaja temple. 

4 Read wzta?, aa. 

 Poxsibly for Wat ark. 

‘’ At Sarotra : over a shrine door in the Bhavan Dhvaja temple. 
% Looks like Wat. 

* At Sarotva: over a shrine door in the Bhavan Dhvaja temple. 
© Looks like 44. 

*! At Sarotra: over a shrine door in the Bhavan Dhvaja temple. 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM NORTHERN GUJARAT. 33 


No. XXVI.” 


L. 1. 0 Wt 1 aeanfanaeaafaye- 
2. wit Wa: do gate aa wr ate ey feat 
3. feds g atta] avr [as urfa ea [a aa] 


4, STAT BF 
ABSTRACT. 


In the year Sam. 1689, on the 11th day of the dark half of Pha(lguna), on the 
completion of this temple, silver Thapas (?) weregiven by . . . , 


No. XXVIL.® 

L. 1.) Way (ave TH TAT LR 

2. TT | Wale QUHAa a- 

8. Stare 2h Vlaanfarat 
. Ste ° afearaa 2arn- 
5. faasitararat are (ysra] 
6. wea wz] ¢ fela] gfa— 
7. [aja — — at arat [faar]— 
8. urea [augt] afea [war] 
9. sata uta] vat a 


ee 


ABSTRACT. 


The inscription refers to some gift made by one Lisha (?) Mahipika in Sam. 1356, 
on the 11th day of the dark half of Chaitra, during the administration of the Mabardna, 
the illustrious Khetala (?) in the village of Sfinaka, on the occasion of the Yatra 


of Devi Srigivalt. 
No. XXVIII." 
L. 1. 1 dag quce a 
2. mTaw afe (a aa — — — 


TRANSLATION. 
In the year Sam. 1596, Sravana vadi13,a Monday . ... s 


7 No. XXIX.* 
L. 1. vn dag (ase ae UTES He go 
2, ea uraat aramart ate 
(8. mete’ wee Tet BAT 
4. wit a mae wit zea 


53 At Sarotra: over a shrine door in the Bhavan Dhvaja Tempie. 
53 At Sonak: on a pillar in an old temple. 

4 At Sonak : on the base of an image in the same temple. 

% At Taranga: on the side of the great temple. 


34 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. 5. atag ureat ststerare- 
6. w aigrearrare u 
7. arererae 1 wrefe i 
8. Swat wot arar otat 
9. eteaanfe afuegte 
10. aret’ autafa aTet 
Ll. wet Geer sTHsTaT : 
12. wee araifa wrareg 
13. aat arare ater fe: 4 
14, GY? weet Hera 
15. sufe Tet HATS WT | 
16. Ga Wars Tant 
17. qa? yor Taare 
18. Marsa |W aw [at] 
19. Tra” ATSAUTALST 
Seems to refer to the restoration of the temple in Samhvat 1642. 


VIiL.—THE JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 
By G. Bianer, Pu.D., LL.D., C.1.E. 


The subjoined editions and abstracts of 118 inscriptions, found in the Jaina temples 
on the hill of Satrumjaya near P&litind, have been prepared according to the impres- 
sions, taken by Mr. Cousens during the working season of 1888-89, and made over to 
me by the Editor. They consist of two great series, the first comprising Nos. i-xxxii which 
range between Samnvat 1687 and 1710, and the second, Nos, xxxili-cxv, which run from 
Samvat 1788 to 1943 or 1887 A.D. As the latter series of course possesses in general 
little historical interest, I have thought it inadvisable to publish them in extenso, and 
I believe the abstracts given below will satisfy all requirements. I have, however, made 
an exception with No. ev, because it contains a tolerably complete account of the heads 
of the Aichala gachkchha, regarding which hitherto very little has become known. More. 
over, it furnishes a good sample of the Sanskrit, written by the Yatis of our days, and it 
may be useful for settling the controversy regarding the origin of the ‘ mixed” dialects 
found in older books and inscriptions, as well as that regarding the advisability of bringing, 
by conjectural emendations, the language of somewhat older Jaina authors such as 
Merutunga, Rajasekhara and Jinamandana, into harmony with the rules of Sans- 
krit grammar. The transcript of this document as well as those of Nos. i-xxxiii and 
No. exviii have been prepared by Dy. J. Kirste, Privat-Docent in the Vienna University, 
and to vim belong also the footnotes appended to the same. 

As regards the historical information contained in the 118 inscriptions, it falls 
under the following heads :—(1) notes regarding the political history of Western India; 


1 Phe dates of Nos. exviecxvii are not certain, No. cxviii ought properly to stand after No, xii, 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA, 35 


(2) notes regarding the schools of the Jaina monks; (8) notes regarding the subdivisions 
of the Jaina laymen. 

As regards the first point, No. I is the most important document; for it names 
(1. 1) three Sultans of Gujarat: (1) Mahimida, (2) Mad&phara, and (3) Bahadara, 
and states that the latter was alive in Vikrama Samvat 1587, and (1. 2) that his minister 
was Shana (Khan) Majhadashana or Majhadaka (1. 26). It further enumerates 
(ll. 8-10) four rulers of Chitrakata—(1) Kumbhar&ja, (2) Rajamalla, (3) Samegra- 
masimha, (4) Ratnasimha, which latter ruled in Samvat 1587, and adds (1. 23) that 
Karmasimha or Karmaraja, who made (J. 27) the seventh restoration (saptama 
uddhdra) and re-built the temple of Pundarika, was his prime minister. We are further 
told (1..26) that he did so with the express permission of Sultan Baliadara, and obtained 
from him 2 sphuranmdna, i.e. a fermdn, for this purpose. The negotiations were 
conducted by a mantri Rava (ravdkhya) Narasimbaka, probably also a Jaina, who 
was in the employ of Sultan Bahadara’s prime minister. 

With respect to the list of the sovereigns of GujarAt, it deserves to be noticed that 
Sultans Sikandar and Mahmad, the two brothers of Sultan Bah&dur, who reigned 
each for a short period after Sultan Muzaffar IT., have been left out. Iam unable to 
identify Khan Majhad or Majhadaka, who, according to our inscription, was Bahddur’s 
vazir in Samvat 1587. According to the Mirdt-i-Sikandari,? that dignity was bestowed 
on T4j Khan in A.D. 1526; nor is Karmaraja or Karmasimha mentioned in Tod’s 
account of the history of Mevad. But there is no reason for doubting the veracity of 
the document. The list of the four Rands agrees with Tod’s. The statements of the 
Mirdt-i-Sikandart (op. cit., p. 850) prove that Ratnasimha really ruled in Samvat 
1587, and that his relations with the Sultan of Gujarat were of a friendly nature. 

Next come the dates from the reigns of the third and fourth Mughal Emperors— 

1. Jahangir is mentioned as N Gradina J. Savai in Nos. xv, xvii—xx, xxiii, xxiv, 
which are all dated in Samvat 1675, as well as in No. xxvii of Samvat 1683. Nos. xvii- 
xx mention also prince Khosrti (Shahijdddé Suraténa Stosadi) and the governor (soba) 
of Ahmad&bad (Rdjanagara), Sultan Khurme (Sahiydna suratina Shurame). 

2. Shah Jihan (Séhajydhar) occurs once in No. xxx, which is dated in Vikrama 
Sarnvat 1686 and Saka Sarvat 1551. The two dates agree perfectly with the facts. 
And it is also correct that Suratana Khurme, #.e. Sultan Khurram or Shah Jihdn, 
was viceroy of Gujarat in Samvat 1675. For the Muhammadan historians. inform us 
that the latter province was added to the other governments held by him in A.D. 1617. 
Of interest, too, is the mention of Shahijada Suratina Shosad4, ¢.e. prince K hosra, 
(Nos. xvii—xx), who no doubt was alive in Vikrama Sarhvat 1675, but had been a pri- 
soner ever since the second year of his father’s reign. 

Among the local chiefs of Kathiavad, the inscriptions mention— 

(1) Jam (Yama) Satrusalya and his son, Jasavanta, which iatter, according to 
No. xxi (1. 4) ruled at Navinapura, ¢.e. Navanagar, in HAllara, é.e. the Haldr Prant, in 
Vikrama Samvat 1675, | 

(2) Some of the Gohel chieftains of Palitana, viz.,— 
(a) Kharndhuji and his son, Sivaji, in No. xxvii, ll. 38-9, of Vikrama Saxvat 
1688 ; 


The Local Muhammadan Dynasties of Gujarat, by Sir B.C. Bayley, p. 334. 


36 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(6) Unadaji in No. li, of V. 8. 1861; 

(c) Kharndhaji; his son, Noghanaji, and his grandson, Pratapasimghajt, in 
Nos. lxviii and lxtx, dated V.S. 1891 and 1892; 

(d) Noghanajt and his son, Pratdpasirmghaji, in No. xcvi, of V.S. 1910; and 

(e) Prataépasingaji, V.S. 1916 (No. ciii). 

(f) Strasimghaji, in No. cxi, of V.S. 1940. 

The information of the inscriptions agrees perfectly with the notes on the history of 
NavAnagar and Palitana, given in the Bombay Gazetteer (vol. viii, p, 559), According 
to the latter work, Jam Jasoji, the son of Jam Sat4ji, ruled from A.D. 1608 to 
1624, It is not difficult to recognise Jasavantain Jasoji. Satdjiis a very consider- 
able abbreviation of Satrs4l, the more usual form for the Sanskrit Satrugalya, ‘an arrow 
for his enemies.” As regards the Gohels, we read (op. cit. pp. 604f.) that K handoji II, 
was succeeded by Shavaji II. This is no doubt the pair of the inscription, as Shavaji 
is placed five generations before A.D. 1766. ‘The other chiefs mentioned in the inscrip- 
tions are called in the Gazetteer, Unadji, A.D. 1766—1820, KhandojilV., 1820—1840, 
NoghanajilIV., A.D. 1840—1860, Pratapsinghji, 1860, Sirsinghji, since 1860. It 
is amusing to note that in No. xcvi, Noghanaji receives the proud titles rdjardjeévara and 
mahdrdjadhirdja, though the PAélitand State pays tribute to several masters and ranks 
among the second class states of Kathiavad. Besides, Thakur Noghanaji was, according 
to the Bombay Gazetteer, by no means as well off as his successors, who have a gross 
revenue of five lakhs of rupees; for his state was held under Government, guaran. 
tee in farm by Vakhatchand, the Nagarsheth of Ahmadabad, from A.D. 1821—1881, 
when prince Pratapsinghji managed to get it out of the hands of the banker. None of 
the numerous donors from Ahmadabad, Bombay, and other towns in the British territory, 
has thought it necessary to mention the British Government. But Harashachamda, i.e. 
Harakhchand of Damana-bandira or Daman, gratefully mentions, in No. xlv of V.S. 
1860, that he was honoured by the Phirangijati Puratakdla pdtasdéhi, i.e. by the king of 
Portugal. Compared with this, the forgetfulness of the family of the Nagarsheth of Ah- 
madabAd is, to say the least, remarkable. 

The next point which claims attention is the copious information which the 
inscriptions furnish regarding several schools of Jaina monks, the Kharatara, Tapa, 
Afichala, and Sagara gachchhas. Lists of the spiritual heads of the former two sects 
have been published by Dr. Klatt in the Indian <Antiquary, vol. XI, p. 245 ff, and a 
Kharatara pattdvali from the Pragasti of the temple of Vadipura Pargvanatha has been 
given, ante, vol. I, p. 319. The other two pattdvalis have not, as far as I know, been 
made known before :— 

L.—Pattivalt of the Kharatara gachchha. 


The following list is given in No, xvii— 


1, Ud(d)yctanas tri, Navéngi vritti,and discoverer of the PAaréva- 
2. Vardhamanasiri, vasatimdrgapra-| natha of Stambhana, 

kdSaka, 6. Jinavallabhastri, 
3. JineSvarasovri I., 7. Jinadattastri, to whom a devaté 
4, Jinachandrasiri L, gave the title yugapradhdana,® 
5, Abhayadevastri, composer of the 8. Jinachandrastri If., 


3 The first seven Saris are mentioned also in No. xviii. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 37 


9, Jinapattistri,* 16. Jinachandrasuri IV., 
10. Jinesvarastri Il, 17. Jinodayastri, 

11. Jinaprabodhastri, 18. -Jinardjastri, 

12. Jinachandrasari ITI, 19, Jina bhadrasiri,® 

13. JinakuSalastri, 20. Jinachandrasiri V., 
14. Jinapadmasiri, 21, Jinasamudrastri, 


15. Jinalabdhistri, 22. Jinahamsasitri, 
23. Jinam4anikyastri, 

24. Jinachandrastri VI,° who awakene d the PAtisahi of Delhi, Akabara, received 
from him the title yugapradhdna, and obtained an edict not to kill during 8 days in all 
countries, who appeased the angry Jahamgira and protected the Sadhus banished by him. 

25. Jinasimhastri, who caused the mantrin Karamachandra to institute’ a rdpa- 
nandt festival at an expense of 12,600,000 (sapddakoti), wandered through Kathina, 
Kasmir and other countries, pleased Akabara-Sahi, stopped for a year the slaying of 
aquatic animals, caused an edict of not killing to be proclaimed in Sripura,® Gola- 
kumda (Golkonda), Gajjan& (Ghazni), and other countries, and received the title of 
yugapradhana from Jahamgira-N tradi-Mahammada. 

26. Jinardja,’? whose parents were S4 Dharmast and Dharalade, whe belonged 
to the Bohittha race, received a boon from the goddess Ambika, and in consequence 
deciphered the pragasti on an ancient image at Ghamgh4nipura. In No. xxvi there 
is a second date, Sarmvat 1682 for him. 

The later. inscriptions mention : ~ 

Jinachandrasitri, Samvat 1794,” (No. xxxix); Jinaharshastri," Samvat 1887 
(No. lx), Sarhvat 1888, Sarhvat 1891 (No. ixviii), Samvat 1892 (No. lxix); J inamahen- 
drastiri, successor of the preceding, Sarhvat 1898 (No. Ixxx), stated to belong to 
the Pippaliya branch (Nos. ]xxxii-v),” Sarnvat 1903 (No. lxxxviii). 

Jinasaubhagyastri, successor of Jinaharsha, Sarhvat 1910 (No. xvi). 

Tinamuktistri, Samvat 1922 (No. cvi). The statements of the latest inscriptions 
show that there were several heads cf the Kharatara gachvhha, which fact is known to 
everybody personally acquainted with the sect. I met Jinamuktisiri at Jesalmtr in 
1874, and at Bik4nir another head of the Kharataras called Hemasiri. The pupils of a 
third Yugapradbana of the same community visited me in 1876 at Surat, when he 


passed through the town. 


IT.—Pattévali of the Tapé gachchha. 
No. xii mentions first Vardhamana (verse 2), Sudharma (verse 8), Susthita 
and Supratibuddha, the founders of the Kotikagana (verse 4), Vajra, the founder 


4 Thisform, which is found also in the Patan Prasasti, ante, vol. I, p. 319, seems to be preferable to Dr. Klatt’s 


Jinapati, Ind. Ant., vol. XI, pp. 246ff. 
5 Mentioned also in No. xviii. 
6 Mentioned also in Nos. xviiimxx, xxiii, xxxiv. 
7 Nos. xvili—xx, xxiili—xxiv, add “before Akabarasahi.” e 
8 According to No. xviii SrikAstipura, according to No. xix S:tkAra-Sripura, according to No. xxiii Sripura. 
® Mentioned in the same way in Nos. xiv—xx, xxiii-xxiv, xxvi. 
10 Klatt has.a Jinachandra (No. 69) in S. 1834. 
4 This is the last on Klatt’s list, Zxd. Ant., vol. xi, pp. 245ff. 
1 Nos. Ixxxii—lxxxv have a note speaking of a Jinacharadasdri, successor of Jinadeva, being alive. Regarding the 


Pippaliya Kharatara gachchha, see Klatt, ut sup., under No. 66. 


38 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


of the Vajr4 sAkhA (verse 5), Vajrasena and his pupils Naga, Indra, Chandra, 
Nirvriti and Vidhy4dhara, the third of whom founded the Chandra kula (verses 
6-7), Jagachchandra, who obtained in Samvat 1225 the Tepdbiruda (verse 9), and 
then begins the enumeration with— 

(1) Anandavimala (Klatt No. 66). who reformed the conduct of the Yatis in 
Sarhvat 1582 (verses 10-11). 

(2) Vijayad4na (Klatt No. 57), verses 12-13.” 

(3) Hiravijaya (Klatt No. 58), verses 14—24, who was called by SAhi Akabbara to 
Mevata, and persuaded the emperor in Samvat 1639 to issue an edict forbidding the 
slaughter of animais for six months, to abolish the confiscation of the property of 
deceased persons, the Sujijia-tax, and a sulka,” to set free many captives, snared birds and 
animals, to present Satrurjaya to the Jainas, to establish a Jaina library (paustakam 
bharnddgdram), and to become a saiut-like king Srenika, who converted the head of the 
Lumpakas. Meghaji," made many people adherents of the Tap’ gachchha, caused 
many temples to be built in Gujardt and other countries, and made many natives of that 
country, of Malava and so forth, undertake pilgrimages to Satrumjaya. No. exviii com- 
memorates one of these pilgrimages, which was undertaken by Vimalaharsha and 200 
others. The same inscription states that Hiravijaya belonged to the Sdpha race. He 
died, according to No. xiii, by starvation, at Unnatadurga, in Samvat 1652; Bhddra- 
pada éukla 10, and his pédukds were erected in the same year, on Marga vadi 9, Mon- 
day, by Udayakarana of Stambhatirtha (Cambay) and consecrated by Vijayasena. 

(4) Vijayasena (Klatt No. 59), (verses 25—34), who was called by Akabbara to 
Labhapura (Lahor), received from him great honours, and a phuramdna, forbidding 
the slaughter of cows, bulls and buffalo-cows, to confiscate the property of deceased 
persons and to make captives in war, who, honoured by the king, the son of Choli-be- 
gam (Oholt Vegama), adorned Gujarat. Latest date Samvat 1650. 

(8) Vijayadeva (Klatt No. 60) is mentioned in No. xxv, Samvat 1676, No. xxxi of 
Samvat 1696, Nos. xxxii and xxxiii of Sarmvat 1710. According to the same he 
received from Patisahi Jihamgira the title mahéidpo. His appointed successor, Vijaya. 
simbhasfri, who, according to Klatt (op. cit.) died. before him (Samvat 1709), occurs 
in No. xxxii, which is dated Sarhvat 1710. It is stated there that the Sahasra kata 
tértha had been dedicated at his request. 

(6) Vijayaprabha (Klatt No. 61) is mentioned in No. xxxiii, dated Sarvat 1710. 
He receives the titles dchérya and séri, and seems, therefore, not yet to have been the. 
actual head. Wijayadeva, on the other hand, is there called bhatidraka. This goes 
against Klatt’s Pattévali, which places Vijayadeva’s death in Sarhvat 1709. 

In the later inscriptions are named— 

Vijayakshamasiri, No. xxxvilii. 

Vijayaday4astri, No. xxxvii, bhattéraka, in Samvat 1788 (Sumatisdgara, idid., 

also bhattdraka), and in No. xxxviii, Samvat 1791. 
Vijayajinendras fri, No, xliv, Samvat 1848, Nos. xlvi—xlix, Samvat 1860. 
Vijayadhanesvarasuri, No. lxxviii, Sarvat 1893. 


%3 Mentioned as head of the gachchha in Nos. iv, vi—x, all dated in Saravat 1620. 

4 Possibly a tax on Jaina pilgrims, visiting their holy places, may be meant,—see also Elphinstone’s History of 
India, p. 339 (6th edition). The Sujtjia tax is, of course, the j2zya, or capitation tax on infidels, ; 

® Regarding the Lumpakas see Bhandarkar, Report on Sanskrit MSS. for 1863-94, p. 153. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 39 


Vijayadevendrasizi,” No. lxxxvi, Sathvat 1897, No. lxxxix, Sarmvat 1905, 
No, xlii, Sarhvat 1908, No. xevii, Sarmvat 1911, No. civ, Sarvat 1916, No. cvii, 
Samvat 1924, 


Vidy4nandas tri, successor of Dhaneévara, No. ciii, Sarhvat 1916. 
A Samvijiayamargiya Tapa gachchha, belonging to the lineof Vijayasihastri, 
is mentioned in No. lxxvi of Samvat 1898 and in No. oxiii of Sarnvat 1940. 


ITt.— Pajfdvais of the Afichala or Vidhipaksha gachohha.” 


The first seventeen teachers are named in Nos, xxi of Sarnvat 1675 and xxvii of 
Sarhvat 1683, the remainder mostly in No. cv of Sarhvat 1921 : 


(1) Aryarakshita,” (16) Dharmamiarti, 
(2) Jayasimha, (17) KalyAnasSgara or Kalydnasa- 
(3) Dharmaghosha, mudra, Sarmvat 1676 and 1683, 
(4) Mahendrasimha, (18) Amarodadhi, 
(5) Sirhhaprabha, {| (19) Vidy&stri (Vidyabdhi),” 
(6) Devendra or Devendrasimha, (20) Udayarnava, or Udayasd- 
(7) Dharmaprabha, gara,” 
(8) Simhatilaka, (21) Kirtisindhu or Kirtisdgara, No. 
(9) Mahendra, li, Samvat 1861, 
(i0) Merutunga, (22) Punyodadhi or Punyas&gara, 
(11) Jayakirti, (No. li, of 8. 1861), 
(12) Jayakedari, (23) Muktisagara, Samvat 1905,” 
(18) Siddhantasamudra or Siddhan-| (24) Ratnodadhi, Samvat 1921; 
tlasagara, (25) Vivekas&gara, Samvat 1940, 
(14) Bhavasigara, No. exi 
(15) Gunanidhana or Sugunaége- 
vadhi, 


IV .—Patiéivals of the Sdgara-gachchha. 
This list is given chiefly in No. xci, where the latest date is Sarnvat 1906 : 


(1) Rajasagara, (7) Anandasdgara, 

(2) Vriddhisagara, (8) SantisAgara, Samvat 1886, No. 

(3) Lakshmisagara, lv, No. lix; Samvat 1889, No. 
(4) Kalyanasagara, lxii, No. lxv; Samvat 1898, 
(5) Puny aségara, No. Ixx, No. lxxi, No. Ixxii, No. 
(6) Udayasagara, lxxix. 


Teachers of two other gachchhas are named :— 


(1) Rajasdmaséri of the Laghuposa&la gackchhe in No. xlii, dated Samvat 
1815. 


(2) Pandit AnandakuSala of the Payachanda gachchha in No. xev, dated 
Sarhvat 1908. One is tempted to conjecture that Pdyachanda is a 


16 Spelt also Vijayadevimdra dad Vijayadevidra, Aficharaegachenna, and in thefmain agrees with the earlier 
7 The name Vidhipaksha gachchha occurs in No, xxvii, | part of the above text. 
verse 6, and in No. ev, 19 This form is required according to the metre. 
® Regarding this Aryuraksbita, see Bhandarkar, Report 40 No. li. 
on Sanskrit MSS. of 1883-84, p. 152. The Patfdvais described 2 No, xc. Before him appears Rajendrasagara, Sam- 
by Dr. Bhandarkar (op. cté., pp. 14, and 319ff.) is that of the | vat 1886 in No, lvi. 


40 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


mistake for Pésachanda or Pééachanda, regarding which sect see Bhan- 
darkar’s “ Report on Sanskrit MSS. for 1883-84, p. 135”. 


V.—Digambara Patfavali. 

No. xxx, dated Sarnvat 1686, gives (Il. 2 e¢ seg.) the list of the spiritual heads in the 
line of Kumdakunda (read Kundakunda) Acharya in the Balatkéragana, the Saras- 
vati, gachchha and the Malasamgha, ée, the community of the Digambaras, as 
follows : 


(1) Sakalakirti, (7) Gunakirti, 

(2) Bhuvanakirti, (8) Vadibhishana, 

(3) Jidnabhdshana, (9) Ramakirti, 

(4) Vijayakirti, (10) Padmanandi, the actual head of 
(5) Subhachandra, the sect in Samvat 1686. 


(6) Sumatikirti, 

The list is, of course, a mere fragment of the Paffdvali of the Kundakund4n- 
vaya, which dates from much earlier times. 

Next to the subdivisions of the Jaina monks, those of the laymen deserve notice, 
and it is interesting that our inscriptions furnish a good deal of valuable information on 
this point, regarding which hitherto little has become known. Among the various tribal 
names of the laymen which are mentioned in the great majority of the documents, that 
of the Osvals occurs most frequently, as might be expected from the. fact that this 
section of the Jaina community is not only generally considered the most noble, but 
possesses also the greatest wealth, The name appears in various forms, (1) Upakega 
jnati, No. xxi; vamsa, No. xxvi; (2) Ukega or Ukega, Nos. xxxiii and lx; (3) Oiga 
vansa, No. xxxix; (4) Oga or Osa, mostly with the addition of the termination vdla in 
a great many inscriptions; and (5) Usa, Nos, i—iii, or Usa, No. cii. 

It is not in the least doubtful that Upakego is the original Sanskrit word from 
which the other forms have been derived.” The processes by which the forms Ukeéa, 
Ukesa, Usa and Usa were obtained, will be clear to everybody. With respect to Oiéa, 
Oga and Osa, it may be noted that, according to the rules of the Jaina and Maharashtri 
Prakrits, the preposition wpa may be represented by o (see Hemachandra, Prdkrita 
vydkarana, i, 178). ; 

In addition to the correct form of the name of this famous tribe, the PAlitdnA in- 
scriptions furnish also a traditional account of its origin. We read in No. i~ 


(Verse 8). “ Further—on the hill called Gopa, there was born a most worshipful 
(ruier) called the illustrious Amaraja, whom glorious Bappabhatti awakened. His 
wife was some daughter of a trader.” 

(Verse 9), ‘In her womb were born the following men belonging to the RAja- 
koshthagara family, the sole vessel of piety, and the pure illustrious Usa race.” 

The meaning seems to be that both the Usa tribe and the R&jakoshthAg4ra family, 
which latter is evidently a subdivision of the former, owe their origin to the king Ama 
and his consort of the Vaisya caste. According to the Patfdvalis and the Prubandhas 
Ama, whose existence is not proved by really historical documents, is said to have et 
about Vikrama Sarvat 800.” I may add that the genealogy of Karmaraja, which is. 


% See Ind, Ant., vol. KIX, pp. 233f. ] * See S. P. Pandit, Gaugaveho, pp. cxzxviiff, 


JAINA INSCRIPPIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. +1 


given in verses 10—20, cannot be complete. It names only ten ancestors who cannot 
possibly fill the seven centuries and a half which intervene between the traditional 
date of king Ama and that of the inscription, Vikrama Samhvat 1587. 

The inscriptions mention also a good many other subdivisions of the Osval tribe, 
viZ.— 

I—A Vriddhasakha, »vhich is subdivided into the followi ing gotras or families, 
—(1) Uhada, No. xxxiii; (2) Chajeda, No. evi; (8) N dddla, Nos. xxxvili, xxxix; 
(4) Nahata, No. Ixxx; (5) MummiyaA, No. xevi; (6) Rajakoshthagara, Nos. i, ii, 
iil; (7) Yadugada, No. Ixviii; (8) Lalana, No. xxi; (9) Luntyd, No. lx; (10) 
Lodh4a, No. xvi. 

IL—A Laghusaikha, to which belongs (1) the Nagada gotra, No. xc; (2) the 
Shota gotra, No. xi. 

TII.—An Addaisakha, to which belongs the Kumkumalola gotra, Nos. xci, 
xeviii-xcix. The members of this sékhd and gotra, as represented by the family of the 
Nagarsheth of Ahmadabad, besides claim kinship with the Sisodia Rajputs of Mevéd, 
—see No. xci. Visd Osavalas are mentioned i in No. exv. 


The tribe next in importance is that of the Srimalis, called after the town of 
Srimala or Bhillamala, the modern Bhinm4l in the extreme south of Marvad. It 
includes— 

I.—A Vriddhasakha, Nos. xxxvii, exii, of which no subdivisions are given ; 

IL.—A Laghusdkha, Nos. xxix, xxxiv, lxxvi, to which belongs, according to 

No. xliv, the Kasyapa gotra, the members of which claim kinship with the 
Paramara Rajputs. 

A Visi Srim4li occurs in No. xev. 

About the same importance belongs to the Pragvata tribe, called also Praga. 
vasa, Nos. iv, vi and viii, or by its modern name Poravada or Poravala, (pro- 
nounce Porvid and Porval). It seems, too, to have an elder and a junior branch, as 
Nos. xv, Xvii, xxv, and xli mention its Laghué4kha. Visa Poravadas or Poravalas 
are named in Nos.1 and xcvii; Dasa-Porvadas in evii. A few other tribes oceur each 
in single inscriptions, v7z. Girjara jidti, No.x; Disdvala jiéti, No. vii; Digada 
gotra, No. liv; Nisnma jndti, No. ciii; Mohota gotra, No. cv; Samghavala gotra, 
and Kachara santana, No. xiv. 

The native places of the donors are :— 

(1) Ajamera, #e. Ajmir in Rajputana, 
(2) Anahillapura, alsocalled Pattana, 
(3) Antarapura in Vagvaradesa or Dungarpur, 
(4) Ahmadabad, called eleven times by its Sanskrit name, Rajanagara, ‘the 
capital,’ 
(5) Ugrasenapura, 
(6) Kapadavanaja in the Kheda Collectorate, 
(7) Kasi, or Benares, 
(8) Kothara in Kachh, 
(9) Khambanayara, i.e. probably Cambay, 
(10) Ghandhara in the Bharoch Collectorate, 
(11) Chitraktta, or Chitor in Mevad. 


42 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(12) Cheula, probably Chaul, near Bombay, 

(18) Jesalamera, i.e. Jesalmir in Marvad, 

(14) Damana bandira, é.e. Daman in Gujara;. 

(15) Divabamdira or Diu in KAthiavad, 

(16) Devagiri or Daulatabad in the Dekban, 

(17) Dhanapura, 

(18) Nabhinpura, in Kachh, 

(19) Nalinapura, in Kachh, 

(20) Navanagara, in Kathiavad, 

(21) Palanapura, in Northern Gujarat, 

(22) Baluchara, 

(23) Bhavanagara, in Kathiavad, 

(24) Makasudavada—Baluchara or Maksudavada, 
(25) Mumbai, or Bombay, 

(26) Mesd&na, in Gujarat, 

(27) Radhanapura, in Northern Gujarat, 

(28) Vikanera, or Bikaner, in Northern Rajputina, 
(29) Visalanagara, in Northern Gujarat, 

(80) Sirohi, in Southern Rajputana, 

(31) Surata bamdira, in Gujarat. 

The name of Ahmadabad or Rijanagara occurs most frequently. 

For those who care to verify Hindu dates the Palitana inscriptions wil! be a perfect 
mine; for every single date can be calculated, as the weekdays are invariably men 
tioned. 

NOs" 
Cel: u Mt aha whysicaieart Waa e AH eA eI EMTALA aI SATE TS 
uglenaaita | 
2, OARS A MANA MATSSTAT SSAA WBA Cyso ae TsMTAMNOITYyTaTETA- 


SAW ZITAayT 
8. ut ainqaaian wfaaKeTAS | Ce aaTAAtaaA sem Unfair 5 
af atte 
A. at wlara gurfefaaaraa: | 
araniatanal famaraaasa: ne” 
alazate uacuara [1] 
ulaa U- 


ON 


ar yaantag | 
wifaaKz qaztaarar [1] 
facaarafie aaa: 1 2” 
* In the porch of the east or main entrance of the great temple of Adigvara Bhagavan ; —s 


Remains in the Burhay Presidency, &¢. (Bombay, 1885) p- 188.—J. b. 


: - ta - verse 1, Anushtubh. Read “stata. A good me ty of my corrections have been given between vrackets in 
the text.—J. K. 2 


% Metre of verses 2—4, Upajati, Read Sanz, 


ee Lists of the Antiquarian 


AINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA, 


waeat erqatgaa [1] 
ae 

L. 6. a aaatfa feercare: | 
feaarsufasafa: [1] 
MfaaHz: AtiaAqeM: Wz 
farraarafafa- 

7. aaarar [i] 

TN aut araafaaarat [1] 
fafaaaetl fafefaanet [1] 
Mag warfeagcam: vs 
aa ata- 

8. AUT Sq HAtsahN st 
fam: wagt fe aa ata: warq feat ny” 
[a] ast UsaaahyeTat a- 

9. W ates: | 
aa. aarafadl sm durafasat aa 4 €é 
amzanaaly, fdseamumAt | 
wafaert 5” 

10, Vat Ws Usa farrs7 vo 
sag moretaa afc: [1] 
auufenfaaifurs | 
sarin sata ve 

11. Tat [1] 
atfaaya aaetfcgat a” 
aafaatatl lima usater [i] 

MUsMiNa CHAHITs | 
aisway fare 

12. fama [i] 
aaraa sat gaat ufaet: ve” 
aamsaarat aaqal TaeTATA | 
aaitae: gala jaa- 

13. Sl YaAUTATST: i Qe” 
ahissagal — —” cfaere wa age: | 
aaa atfas: aqe- 


@ Metre of verses 5—7, Anushtubh. } ® Metre. Indravajré. Read ier) san’ qu. 
% Read Sts 3 Metre of verses LU—19, Arya. 
2° Metre: Upajati. Read aftz:. 3 Looks like 3% 


G2 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


ll. [—-— —]* nv ee 
aaa: vat vara | MIAHAATAT | 
ATS UTaTeT aT YRMUTTTT Wy eR 
acafaaqear: ale] 

16. qat aHaoreurarar: [1] 
[watlasraan: laa: haat AUT neg 
Waal Talleaga: WIAA AHITH: ATA | 

16. =2hr~wamnzant urate: [arftalaa a cs 
aeat sf aaa UTeaata” faserarer 1" 
wat tHAaAeat Falah ATAT- 

ily ATaT W 24 
wTaT seq; Tiare: ufawar arava | 
TMIZASA TAT Arfraqslarsy he 
ahyarreg- 

18. aaarar yaarfateearar [1] 
Weal Fal Satan Fa: av eo 
qat ewaarar | arat aera Sa 

19. aya | 
cara elas Ya: Haft Fa wes 
wTAT salt WaT wT aarha waaqTyzRT 3 

20, ATaMTUHSAT YA: WAST Sarg uve 
wet werantfaatarearquag ret: waa: 
aaa 

or ufaent a tat strareet avfaaraag[ar] no 
Rarenat waar age [I]- 
eat ya: araad featar 1 
=r 

22. wergencatig-” 
wan: araaefaga: n 22 
satwararterfaayqsr- 
ueufaetfenaayan: | 
qursaetaa U- 

23; fazart: 
waATMT: WAHT: UfTET: W 22” 

ACA SUISy TSAO TT: 


Lo at 
wanfisedt zeit 
33 Read Cat ATA: - 37 Read Saya}. 
** Read Fam:. 38 Metre: Upajati. 
% Read Hawa. Above GT there is a mark. ® Metre: Indravajra. Read °sita:. 


% Read fawet wer. Metre: Upajati. Read “feet: #4? stands for 4 2°, 
< 


LL. 24. 


25. 


Ai. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


31. 


33. 


* Metre: Arya. 4 Metre: Sardilavikridita. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 


MITSHCIT WT 22" 
rasaarsteed Zlatlagedfadt | 
AREA ATS: HATISTY — eT Wee” 
ST - 

Wrst SH fasta acai | 
safe faqar erat: GeaaTaT TaTS FAT! RY 
varher atari asta 5 5 § 
areett aa: | 

AAI WIG CATATA USTIH AATAAT i RE 
WSSU ATTA: UT: ATTA HATS: 
ae Ts a- 

Blast Tate arfawaH: 1 29 
aa waraqara aefaaeaa a 
Sat Hae WH WAST fart 

Woe 

alorefanaaare agen 
qeraaaaaaeraiaatle:] | 
aarsrefaar sear! fa ara 
aH AETE- 

FAC: HTSUSNTA W RL” 
qadnee Tora awa ear- 
atur(an fausarafanararate [ara] 

Fi 
qareafalen lanqeratat a al jee 
aa fagaa faxat faanfaera 20" 
fanreanarata fa- 
fafaadaats wagaTT 1 Qyezo | 
ma aafaart y2 ars wwe wn ae 
fafaar: ama: dar ATTTR- 
fauman: | 
award waeea Uferet atfcat ae: wv aR™ 
wrawanaras ufsta ASTHAT | 
al alararcaat 
a unfer: WaSTAAT W RR 

saetlset|faninaaarernra was [1] 
urate facura aa a — 1 — feaar- 


Metre of verses 24—28, Anushtubh. text is not clear. 


43 Metre: Vasantatilaka. 


Tead fafto, eBte The con 


4 Metre: AryA. Read e&Ti- 


46 Metre of verses 32, 33, Anushtubb. Read eer | 4aT 


a 


49 


% 


oo. 


36, 


37. 


39. 


4.0, 


41, 


4.2, 


Metre: SArdiilavikridita, | 
© Metre: Indravajra. 

Perbaps aaaararfa. 

Metre: Indravajra. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Ua a | 
sur: faa aaa: afaqa aKa at — — — 
Frarey weindmayge: stantrafat wae” 


q- 

AUUTAA GA BAT- 
naa aarto ad fe aval t 
aa atsa| fo aut |waat- 
SIU Ha: AAA UG Gan ay” 
a — — —"“atht azfa da 
gata wart: uals] ats 
auThrataaaeifougy- 
ert: wa: Al fa- 

aaifgat 1 3e” 
aaaH ea aT 
RATAIRTAMNAAT Gag | 
nasa faafasttana- 
[aat- 


alana waifa fad 20" 
saeure faug faatfaa: 
sadness 3 atfaalsrar] 
eiaaaaty [daca]- 
a 
waeaa dey adtlasifem y ec” 
ea at YO va Fy Gary aaa 
ara aa [az]- 
wy daufaat wae aTfcat 1 
araat aaa at a fafeat aa ofaer sem- 
fae tag faa. 
eel HATA | ge” 
ate wrafa at afer: wos | 
araeral farcafaat e- 
Aaa TH | 
amare vacfafaa ataaranfaer wean 
wa fayaras wacanfaer 30% 
aaa- 
5) Metre: Indravajré. 


® Metre: Indravamsé. 
8 Metre: Sardtilavikridita, Read “gy. 


5¢ Metre: Mandékranta. Read “at, aa, “Et, 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. A7 


43 a famafufeaafaaanaia a 
amram weafafsarataerasa: | 
WaT BrefaTta- 
AA, fuuzfamaerafagifaa: 
URTARAT PiAsAg: WARTS: BI we” 
aarga: gaalat] 
45, fran 
aaaghaafetiaaTaee: | 
watactrataent qfaanarai 
ageaiaagat 
AG. — — GATT Wt Be” 
Ra AAI TAU Aa faa | 
aut wari watfe Gee: gaara un 82” 
47, saya: asta wee [ajaufeua 1” 
MCUAAUTIT GUAM Haat i vs i 
MAUATAMASTT 
48. Hasta] AAA A TAT AT BTS Wig YA AAT ATT ataT W AFATST- 
TEMA URAC RAT 
49. ga aaat faelorje® dm 2 dar os aetu Biraanztema x aT a 
QT @ iat eC MAT AL STAT 
50. @a° Sat i Ga arat a ares @ Alide w fawn w tat a aE a 
ATU Be aT st] Wa 
51. gaera @ Ztat a sat — --W arat ato fawian af aA ar Fh & 
ZUST Ale FAUT Go Ala 
52. yaad areca dag feaaraa | dag “anddawadad Gan 71 T° 
faaaaizafuar fafa 
53. [at ulate ger @ caarafas wv wamenafada Wenfeere qwaalfa 
We at: 
54. — Cetafa 1 at eters > Barat Har ar al St] at ST HK aT TL AF at 
aga 
Now ri 
L. 1. 4 1 aaala]euce at aH esye nadaTa (Amrle afe ec) Tn alfea [ae] 
2. aTeersraalaraa” sane a aces ga AP [Alar arar ars ata 
qa at 
5 Metre: Sardilavikridita, Read Cera’. 61 On the base of the image of Adinatha in the great 


38 Metre: Vasantatilaka. 
87 Metre of verses 43-44, Anushtubh, 


59 Read aaa’. 


temple.—J. B. 
62 Looks like Ue°. 


6$ Read wreTat. 


| 
53 Read ae. | 63 Read°aTa. 
| 


Read fe; . 


48 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. 3. carat canad ya atta SY at ar ware fe’ uzaré ga arfeaete eam 
at’ que [fa]? meee cat 
4. & qua wr aa’ fe cee ya vat Zo tat wT araete@ fa [@] vale g! 
— — — ufamt [ee] fad [— 4] wa Stagrranninrcarert a qaaeaa ere 
5. ee eV aTAT wr age fe araae ga atastt gat ars ata ar ata ar 
aa a wal WANEAAeaaaa” wasaqemrarat [at] t aharfearafsa uta. 
stfu” | ao <at a° acfameifrara | ufafed” arafefa: i at: 0 


NOL 
L. 1. at u daa [aq] cure ad aura fe 
2. Wsude aenrarat | ata aT ars att aa a Tat et arat 
3. a mar et meg a dist a acat ut ager | areas F utes afe- 
aa atastiafad arte =n: 1 
No. IV.° 
an at va un dag (eelee ae arate we 2 wat 
awararerear ) uTalawjeiat 1 ahs ea st 
ajaureg wiat as" [islet ga SA 1 TAT | 
arg at waa 1 aa a 1 casa | 
. [algae ga: 1 ahrevaheaafaar | 
. ararfaar wae | aunmefagtuafe “s- 
fasmerrafonet fase foreret[a] 
a wag wah aha aha 


No. V.”% 
Wt n Rag (eRe ate ada Oe 2 Te 
Taare Weatarasaata at i zt [arelar] 1 
ara arg (gloat wat ar | tender arat arg 
qAAS WATS Va Bt 1 Bhat ars ar” 1 A- 
west at alas at i wast wATEa- 
. Fr ga: Waaaataft aheifaaraurar- 
. = aaa anfad 1 atranrefagaendt [fra-] 
. afeatetfasreraforarera qi w- 
- aq(n] 


aowtwoawnrr Ow 


ota oP wo th 


co 


Read qa’. 7” At the beginning of each line stands a symbol looking 

% Read °gT?. like &. 

87 Read f°. : 7 Read ata. 

$8 On the base of the image of Pundarika in the temple 7 Read “aafatrafa, 
facing Auisvara Bhagavin’s temple: Lists, wu. s. p- 196, 7 In the Gandharia Chaumukh temple, in the north-east 
No. 88.—J. L. of the enclosure of the great Adisvara ten:ple. Listy 

In a temple on the south of the enclosure round the p. 195, No. 73.—J. B, : 
temple of Adisvava; conf. Lists, p. 194, Nos. 38—43.—J. B, 74 Looks like Ue. 
© The middle bar of the @ is wanting, 


L. 1. 
a 
3 
tu fac [gareat ga a1) fata ara | a) aTS- 


Cr 


oe Oo hoe 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 


No. VI.” 
ut Sava un Maq ere aa aay ate y 


lat ) Whratardaurrawardta | wa 
nat aterast we a? =atfatar] wrat are 


uot #1 alelst 1 wealalgeaa ga: 0 


i. W Mtorearaeaataar t arerfaar i 


n Staurres | atfasservafe[:] a- 


8. 0 etefraforarera [aq] 0 mi wag wr 


INOw Vile” 


Ut u Maq cere ae aura af y 7a 


. Wh Bare TareaT era PAT aT ATT - 


ata ae slauten aa ae | Alwar 


Wl arat ars” Aas Ga | AE 1 ateera 
_W @eeaa Ga: | wtaasratafe at- 

3. arfeatacagtaat arctfaar 1 at- 
JW aon fasmerrafanteicta- 


8. » seraftrarera u WH WaT 


bo 


No. VIII.* 


ut u Mag CeRo ae ANTE Ais 


\ ated tarcareemrraraaiaant | at 
N Utada qa an ata @ a 1 al—] 

l aT @Heaa Fa: WaaTat- 

u ufe caqfaat arerfuat 1 ata- 

u unresfagufatafentfasa- 

n erreaherarera uo Ah a 


NO; iA. 
lat Saw un Mag cere ay aut y- 


uw fey fea woreareemaaiema | 


N Sto WACAT ATaT ars | ALY Yat ar- 
N= ata | avs 1 HATS ara F- 


um 1 atutfaarataateat eare- 
0 faa | tear fageatiaia® 


7 In acell against the wall of the Adisvara temple, at the north-east corner. 
7 Inacell tothe right of that containing the preceding.—J. B. 

78 In a small shrine, or cell, to the left of the north entrance to. and egainst the wall of. the Adisvara temple. —J. B, 
7 In the cell to the right, or west, of the north door of the Adisvara temple. —J. B. 


” Read farchafer 


50 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


L. 7.» atfsraerrate 1 ateicfasa | 


8. a afurarera a wa Hag un at 
Now 


LD La atu Sara u Wad ere ae AmT- 
2.0 4 afe y qefed AhreTTaTaT- 
3. 0 WeUtaretaarata att 1 Zar ar 
4. WUT are? HAAS Ba Ut 1 AAT AAT 
5.0 Iprcardta eet 1 atart ar at 
6. \ AAC Ba | Stat | PACTS SAAT | 
7. \ ated wWaasatafe atarfeat- 
8. 0 weagfaar ararfaar atau: 
9. y atfasaerrafeaarera [alu 


No. XI.” 
L. 1. Waq ese aa ara afe ea za* 
2. SRT BCAA ATH ATS. att STAT 
3. TAT BIS ATS ASt STAHL ATS STI- 
4. HC HE SHC OA SHC TAT AT- 
5. HT ATS Tale slat UTSa Aa a- 
6, SUTe ATA als THAS Haat 
7. Ta Ba ass Ware” aar- 
8. fad qu waq™ u et aTaT As aTaTA 
9. og i ASl arate | 
: No. XII.” 
L. 1. atu S aa 0 
area waa: wy: ufsnart AyeaTAAT I 
aq afaat qatfsraat a — — 


bo 


aa: aa: 
Ugiaraat: aif catia waRTeP i 
aradafeararataya way WAHT 
3. mw nen 
atfasraatwaracatsranfaataet: 


*! In the left end of the verandah to some small chapels or cells on the west of the preceding, and against the north wall 
of the great temple. -—J. B, 


® On the Simbdsana of the image in a temple to the south-east of the great Adiévara temple.—J. B, 

3 Read WATT. 

| Read feet. 

8 Read s1aT°. 

36 Read WH wag. 

7 In the porch of the east, or front, entrance of the Adisvara temple, on the south or left hand, facing No. 1. A 
transcript is given in the Lists, pp. 188. After this inscription No. cxviij should follow.—J. B. 

* Metre of verses 1—3: Sardiilavikridita, Read wrfeea; 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA, 


UTaTS: Uae AGATA: WT I 
safafatala- | 

bars wfarafaart ae arses | 
aaa aerafarmayarane Taatfaat 2 
arate ade feauese- 

5. Ug ae | 
auzighdear wret: sary Bears: 
aeteaya wee sata faeaat vi 
wa 

6. dafaeafa aarant atonitatica y 2” 

atefed: gufagqs vat | 

Gl MIA ATAMAT | 

AAT TAT § ye 

few arfeare t- 
agramatiag auarm isi 

aangefant da: | asfaaarirm: 1 

Het SaaTETAT | W- 

8. ara feeratfaa 1 4” 
augiatfeaufa | afea: thastaqarrata | 
atigdgfaata | faaracdsara afer: 


9, ee 
qaaranararta | aeraarfe afat | 


gata araady ga ute q feast uo [n]” 
arena =a fafat 1 eta: erfa- 

10. aaa 
Wea: aaa | RAT Saat War: 1 
aya: Hada ASAT: | 
awarfaad ai \ arufasr sm 

11. Qo THT We 
maria at sa | faaat: ahaa | 
ame aang | atdefanerfrar: eo [un] 
areararefaty: u- 

a, a; fafoaa: aa Prat ara @ t- 
aed wafafearangurafafad cuce Fafa 1 
staat asics ard 


=~] 


8° Read #a; We Byct. ” Metre : Giti. 
® Metre: Indravajri.—Read Waal. ara. ” Metre of verses-7—10: Anushtubh,—Read afxz, 
*) Metre: Anushtubh, 


52 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


a sel te CLIO FET 


L.~18. sifxaa | 
aig faca wat ufaad: <r cater fa: nae 
ugrataaaiaad aa | | 
arrarat- 

14. fa ana aaa | 
ug. ware va fasicfaanfcar: | 
qurafafaraertayntaed: teal 
arrersfowd[a)- 

15. qu” ed a carafa I 
ag qauafaaaTai alt WATT FA: | 
aut dra warad ayfegeatiaaaieat | 
STAT! 

16. RIAATAUTHLA MUTATE: Rw” 

_ ware: wae) Naat Teal a) 
wazat [ajus- 

17. Acaarasfaatrae 
Sarai aeai HIT ATATHATGaTAAT | 
fare: a aaTahre BEM ATAU- 

18. AleTaS 1 28 
Qure qaeas afcawat wraticat: ae e] 
aqaifenaata fara Fares TAA | 
WT- 

19. ——— auMfaaad wa stat wat | 
ae: afaafaafaanacttaraanitat za uy 
aR HAGTA- 

20. ——— — [aaa | 
all TAMAGAATATS CIA: | 
azananauntaa gene Bmfy | 
aiar- 

a, = TATA get” 
ereatfaenquaEy faslarat Get VCASH | 
aary mnfgaacat are Ste] 

De Taaqta | 
UMA ATMATAYTUT HSA AT ATA: | 
ara arcafa BM ETESA TaTaaefsra: 1” 

4 Metre : SArdtlavikridita. —Read “fea. %® Read faua. 
% Metre: Vasantatilaka.—Read OFAC: Metre: Vasantatilaka 
96 Read BTaTR. 1% Metre Sarddlavikridita.—Read Cafe: 1 A fara 


9% Metre of verses 13—15: SArdiilavikridita. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


3l. 


32. 


30. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 53 


neo [nu] 
aquenata qe cufafennwaatad fas | 
aad a at 4 galfrarinaOufacaag 
"ee Lu] 
aera mama faafaratargge: wT I- 
get: arfechierttfaatrarat (Stearate | 
we & [a] 
[a] wast aaa | 
ASTATSHUAT RTT STAG ASAT: We wv 
werat’ fraguaracgarar [2] 
[<] de: wart i 
wte: Wlacaat fafaufa: dqfeqerua: | 
wal TaN Ta AMAT | 
Seea- ‘ 
Weel a Hafeaa Teotatet wv 201] 
eT LATA ACTS AAT: THA | 
Hisrncqaarcareaa- 
aa asia aread | 
qadanatu afaaata: wits: ga: wars | 
Garant ay Heard wast TEMA eT ReLU] 
wera acfufata afadiard aa: cast 
farstfeaaare saratorattoen azar: | 
we Werinifada qaa- 
aay eat | 
mrateaniantaaata: wearfwararaaq 1 22 
amarfaananaaqer frat qaarag | 
agqas- 
tuggiaafed yar satattorat | 
sare afar actress acreage | 
Sat; wand frera seat StarearasTa- . 
nRaln 
aaaatrsonfeqaaaay frat | 
Ya WSAAT PACITY its sa | 
arat yaturearfenareremi- 
saurfete: 
ae arabe faefat waaad & fre wv 28] 


1 Read qeye°. Metre : Drutavilambita. | * Read fazaq’. 
? Metre of vv. 19—24; Sardulavikridita. 5 Read “ye, 
3 Read Garrat. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


augatafaa waa Baie: | 
waa waadaans eta: [1] 
[=]- 

L. 34. Tatareaaaanra sata [1] 
een frrataqatedar: 1 24) 
aaa Arete TWA faa: wt | 
seuratat Fa stta[at]- 

35. fa fe aries: 1) 2a [nl 
ania fararqueafanatars tsifaar i 
ana fafeorad: gafedttatataararteaat | 
ATETAT 

36. WMATA Waa ATT I 
ueraigeny my: ufaet aafiaaaat 1 o[u] 
@ a Mlaeneqta fararerarfear: 

ai aret | 
BAAS YLSTL Ba HUSA: | 
watfudfateae: ufcadt (ames atat 1 
Aas US BUAeIs STAATAT 

38. wq 1} xc(uj 
aed wiaataatad dary fara | 
arararfenanata wefa MaAraAra: | 
a: dalfaantaar’ faehat 

39. zeae: Pra 
aerareum fearfaaaay wer famret san re[ul 
arate vefa mefohafch [1] 


arteatfe- 
40. aa fafa anertastetertaa | 
waragfesqura fears wT | 
a: aaa saisaen fase 
41, frag wetTq 1 20”(u) 
SHAS aMCS aaa NAAT FAT | 
apinifesacia yea quad | 
aqaalaaqanaraa- 
42, fat qersrrarhaa [1] 
aaa Eada aeaT fer ara y zen] 
6 Vasantatilaké. ® Read “ferere?. 
7 Anushtubh, w . 


Perhaps meant for yara?. 


Metre of vv. 27—31, Sarddlavikridita. 0 Read ed, ad 


4A. 


45. 


46. 


47. 


48. 


49, 


50. 


51. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 


fai a Wawnraracaiar i- 
RTT Bars a Te Faw: | 
are 

awa wateaane [1] 
afeatta fe aay weatat: wae UW? 
FRAC ATA SAAT AMA TAT AU TATE | 
aad qannacarararta- 

AT MHAAASUTS WW Bz 

wealaradeda aqaraiia warfrar | 
yal qenafettaafed aatafaoriaat | 

ASAT AAT ACT FUT ae FTafaay | 
& Be sa asaqueni Ha fa Mara uae i’ 
ae il 
arqarqa |g |- 

Qaqaaal SARUM |- 
eel hres cohrsrar data: Gea: | 
aaiafa aay aaa: 
[a ]- 

Tataiata aaa aqsrererfa ararfira: 1 gull 
qanefesihasy age: rat TASHA 
wan getfant [fa] 

wfeut uga Teas: 
seimtquiaatita AI: YAMAHA I- 
asura sfa weeqaat: fostaautfaad 1 2a(u] 
[=r ]- 
aaa cfasifta cr Maa Aa 1 

watasnae efa foacat aarafa: [| —— — J 
Tea We wala waTaTea | 
Han- 

aifaediatfaa ye at cual As: W 21 
durarariifafagetaarancray 
aut a eifasaafafayera | 
anime [at]- 

OTT fATgAT UT | 

aut yafanataqaaum vas 1! 
atfararacteartrectaaan: | 
ATS: A WRTAAAT ws- 


" Metre of vv. 32 and 33, Svagata. | 4 Read Sapst. 


% Metre of vv. 34—36, Sardiilavikvidita. 


* Metre of vv. 38, 39: Vasautatilaka. 


56. 


(eb) | 
ae | 


60. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


fa @ ara [1] 
atal salfaaacrtaacaar[i] 
eriteaary un gafafaag vag? 
fanaa 
ae: ante Bora A- 
[xJaenraa wat ufast | 
Bl s WaTeTSAMIT Vase aT I 
eau arafaanasrare: 1 seo [n}” 
areraratara atafaaae wa[s]- 
as atat 
@ai® teat ema forraarfefnrat | 
aareta aarfsrat weaadtas: esa: faa 
[wt]- 

MACATTMAU ASIATALAT Ay: n 8 2[nj 
ata argacathant unt fafefafsfafa qycc de 
qaalat]- 

atgatracfanagiaaat 3a? 
a ara aret anafeers | 
a anu: weetfa Tei | 
aTat HAT A SIA: 

TO avara | 
aat c= aa afar aata no gs 
TUT, GYRUSUATST ATA THAR | 
wiatant: a afta a[z] g- 
Tat Was Taq | 
ma stata aanafaaa Wasa eget [1]- 
at HAA WaTITaAt areas Pra: 1 salu)” 
Wz UITq Bed aa aqaat Aa: Prat are | ; 
Had fasagaaaaAETaeuaterag | 
aa alfaaaraafafana [i] 
Wasa Afex. 

MAHA Fart ANAT ATA Wve i 
sie Arana | 
ga warfe fa- 


1 Read faag?, wat. ” Metre: Arya.—-Read “ae. 

17 Metre: Upajati. 1 Metre: Upajati. 

18 Read Satataa, 22 Metre of vv. 45, 46; Sarditlavikrid ita. 
wv Sirdalavikridita. The figure 89 is missing : Read Wraté 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 


L. 61. atfeasaay | 
Say x2 weafaaquaifa aa + 


wat fasiqfaa araawanat 1 soln}? 


marecata frararcaya- 


62, fqn: | 
aun farifa axdeate (284 Fe | 
fa Sfad wyag: wgcrarT i- 
yifsar ferent: aaaaeur: 1 clu] 

63. safannaeyfaeErTanars | 
fray favafort qaufada | 
war: & saahrargfaaigaan 22 1 
fast fautan- 


64. vat faaatfa qq wv seu 


atfran wa wid aaa faadsata | 


faafaafaaratar: waTacrrat fem 1 xe[u]® 


asa a fe- 

65. atarat[ —t] wars wera 1 
afada x farrrarat wren fare 
ataata: Paanafa fariedz i- 

66. aE A ATAAY | 
atena: Frasarfaaarararat | 


1 wet] 


fi Fen ahenaaad wa 1 ye 


usd a4 ard warar farra- 

67. wafa 1 
faiafca aarfa fasrararewead i ue 
aa aa facsid | Warey AUNT: 1 
stat wat; faarat- 


27 


68. aT: | UTR AYA: Ws 


datean: Prraafa fargurfea | 
arfan ecawAszeUT: | 
area wath 

69. = fra faq waren t- 


aati fray frafisiafrreatter: way 0 


aifiugaqcaatta a ature i 
asifa a- 
23 Metre of vs. 47—49: Vasantatilaka. 


% a: visible on the reverse. 
a Metre of vs. 60: 51: Anusktubh. 


% Metre: Vasantatilaka. 


27 Metre of vs. 
33 Metre of vs. 


53, 54: Anushtubh. 


55, 56; Vasantatilaka. 


57 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. 70. 4 firerafa aatteata | 

fa TaMeeTATA PAT AUTAT 
aeraatta arent qataarfat vows 
aWaTsad- 

ah fanfac s feqar | 
faxitfa wear forrarfa aa | 
Zaraqfanfactmrad | 
faarrat: FACTSTATST: Wo wo a” 
“- 

72. wragqenfac 5 feast - 
am fauiate faagia | 
feura 5 Wht ae we Sat 
x faannrad agifaate: i = 

73, Hus i 
wi aematfingafa vase fad ae qaaacad | 
UTSTATS AYALA GRATTAAIU ATA: 


arat (1)- 

74, é afeargda ofuat wand arfed 1 
Zul § eueMaaaafad Fat a fra tha: wove 
qa aquifaa wr- 

75. afeat i- 
ait ze atfwafaafreny 1 


waaaatata afe aeAT 1 
§ fra wat aang aifgarfa a: go 
teed 

76. a umucfafafeatara | 
aa § A afex 5 wae faaarat a: | 
ate aefa wast sfa tsate 
- 

77. wagAaaAda waa | ee a” 
WAG wTAT THAT cayo fasts zy 
arat FAIL FaRATA B AST 1- 

78. cA 
dare va afer gata: fast i 
wa a etefasrar sferrafcraz: vee n 

© ° fi iqeet 
* Metre of vs. 57,68: Upajati. | 


1 i sage sen 2 
a0 Meira’ Sardilavikridita, * Metre: Upajati of IndravarnéA and Vaméastha. 


* Metre of vs. 61,63: Vasantatilaka, 


L. 79. 


80. 


81. 


$3. 


84. 


86. 


87. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA, 


Uae: A 
trauchataa attefae: ware: 
afaasn: afaaaretaars faa | 
aa fata qeafa oa: 

WaT 1 €2 UB 
de ae WqUe Hage Aheraanfed | 
Traat wesaty fated dai feata ws | 
Ti AA 

wilfafafirers 61 qaet ata yA I. 
aeifead frarmgun Ga aqa wat ues (” 
ufafaratrarte tered ferree- 

MIAME 
aint fea s fearg fasrufa: acttianratia | 
aasmieitfaqge tag hiy- 

au 
ararat 5 fraratfa u ttenaaraa fad aeq ney nt 
annie acqace frat 


farsraferanfa  weraferatte fag t- 
ara fafeuce wfad wfee: vee 1” 
aera aAafast- 

ararvaraar t 
Tedettinaaag al Sasa: | 
adattient faafaa mat at fafeaara 
unfea: aL<-] 

ot safa faceted fasaat i eo i 
sfa Hafuaaretasorets afar 
[ug] atereterarenafea: [la-” 
qrasaarrnt | farsa 5 ferret: | 

fafenarqenren | araaaiarireramat gs 0” 


No. XIII.* 


59 


L.1. natu afer Weaq (eur ad at afe 2 aaaret yarns faufaad 


2. faygattequifads afeatatcttee ufaad wretfeaenasiqarar: 


33 Metre of vs. 64, 65: Sardilavikridita. Read oats. 
4 Metre: Vasantatilaka. 
35 Metre: Sikharini- 


© Read Wa- No. 119.—J. B. 


37 Metre: Ary& beginning with 48°. 
38 Round a pir of PAdukas in a small temple to the west 
of Adisvara Bhagavana temple :—Lists of Ant. Rem., p. 198, 


1 


tn) 


wo 


anaay- 


60 


Poe w 


et 


(eee es ey ee ee 
TIO TR WDD HO 


* On the shrine door of the temple of Pundarika in front} 
of the Chaumukha temple in the Kharataravas} Tunk ; Lists, 


OM WS Te ow wp 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Hae TMT Tara aaa eae Paras far ean aA SAT- 

. fromanathriqaatirsradtaaacurfeget wenay 2 aTATA ATATE- 
Wadaagqeaa aE Anas Kasra safeearanfeaarara WH 2euR a- 
Gwe fadaeat saat wawagaa agteda afudhwararat aura 


faarsraet 
atest urea: ari’ <ercttenta a seagate WH” 
sasaarach: 1 agra aarefasaney: 0° wafasra- 


. — feat afelouafa uv cara afar] 
-[-— a] wearriat 
~Catd]qgu aan 


No. XLY 


. 204 ANTE Efe c2 UH TaaTeNiT- 


T° aracdarst ar’ Geet Ga ar’ Tar 


Y acta y° Hae g° TeET HAT Aa- 
» OHS F FLATT BTaT HETe Ga hes 


adaararfaarcanrad ante fae 
aaaaieatad ar Fae ar Marae 

G° Ueaat wat Faae y° ees arar [aT] 
° atcad fadiaga dat wagga ar 
fraaat aat afeaz ya trad feaia 


. arat fawere ga gored Thee ara 
- FICS Ws fa’ Sarat MAagaTaT- 

: Gene aquefasreyar- 

. fageers — — — — eaufear gea- 
. Rata anfear Mascecacmarfras- 
. Sorara a frafirafousraarcal’| 

. Tapareatercn farsa fas 
. afcaftlearscrsrfa last: “[y] 


No. XV.# 


Na 204 dura ee ea feet quart qurwacetasrenncaars feathered at: 
. FeUeATAaIINY taraaquranmetaa a Brea arat ArH Ts Be AT wat 


weare 


Fa warqaaaneaacufafeasa a Wat adr wae? ga daufa 


SUHAA UAT 
43 Read “arsnfa’. 


p. 206, No. 312.—J. B “ Round pddukas in a small temple in the north-west 


© Read °at. of the Kharataravasi Tunk; Lines 1,2 and 3, are on the south, 
“ Read “qs1a°. 
@ Read Gz4q°. 


west and north sides respectively, and 4—6 on the east. Lists, 
p. 206, No. 320.—J. B. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA., 61 


L. 4. Sot ya f° seaaa ars Afeaafnqaarohanefssa aaarfiarararen- 
5. famaraetaft adtercaraquafergaenigmfetanfesrat aerfeare 
Urga UCaWateTa 
6. arfta ufafea «a wlascacamaerfossnfasafafcinchaers: v auata 
yaaatfarta: 1 
No. XVI.* 

. Haq ceoy aurea ate ca aH I WaaTAMAaMi™niy a’ WaRe AAT 
UU Ya a Tada WaT Bada yA fafauquadanaaTaaTaT 
faurrduradaufafaaa @ Uses’ WIaT adUNT qine Yo TAAUTT ATaT wE- 
ware? 

UY WAIT Sarg x woe Hat Fars y° Aesae ar? [Saas @agar- 
ae dure at ware wqurfanefeda wearferanes artes ufatea 
quraraa faa] 

7. fevahuenaafarcsratefa: aewasaterfasalt) areata 

art [i] 


See ees 


N Gio Le 

LL @ (acy fat qrarenatrentivaarsfaafaeredt arfeorergrarrta[s] nat 
alas 
. ant Hasarfearacarugea sure faa ¢g WH Ate KMATaTUTaMaz- 
wreateatata a Saas wren 
3. [e]st ga a aare UTat Us UT F Us ya a ASAT UlaT ATR Ga ST va 
arat waATe gata Waqsadwararfauradnrestdautafaaaad ahaa 

qafaanfasraraftiaaraeaticua aa 


bo 


4, wefan @ Vast wat Tsay gfara UsHAATIMT 8 [Slositaa faaar a fray 
aaeearg tast ys aerate] ase waar Haat ys cast qurar Hat yx sea- 
da fora arg a arat ga aw aust aqeareafarafyay 
5. Buaqetfeaanrarcatfanataaate aeeETaqy afasraianenstatfen- 
ufaa atfea ufafea a Blasraltequeauetfafmeauiuuaramselarat 
wagaraafe aafaarmuarmaifaaatelt frag 
6. [a] fc aainafaarateuaauretanaza a anaeaale Bi faaaawalt a 
arazaqumaraue sn faarewete iadcat wafrantraht wWhehyraacaft 
aifaandiwat Diradcae aoaaqawat frags a- 
. faaafaratt faardcafe Diateseh horse stargate Rr. 
dgaft Marae Raduah =wfhaaafusele featofanaate- 
HY AHATH AT AAA SAAN AA TATATAAHT CATT SAT- 


© Round a second pair of fect in the same temple; Line 1 on the south, 2 on the west, 3 and 4 on the south, and 


5—7 on the east. 2 Sates ; Be 
4 Jn the Gaumukha shrine, at the entrance of the great temple in the Kharataravasi Tuak,—Zists, p. 205, No, 310. 


—J. B 


~ 


62 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. 8. arfuanaaafaa” aenttenfetaaradeaate ara farts 
aft afaandcarftaanreatfefanaaeudfeadimanana fora cen aera aa a 
SC OCC ORCC ICC CE ICIE TC i 

9, Besiqaraarataa aa” yaa SHAT SSM AT fra A TTT ETAT TT 
Ta Taeacufaafeneagratre a frre ea Terence a fara aT aera aa 
datfuygumafeafataqutanate [a —]- 

10. awaifeadata ar THAT TART CAAT rites 
uaa frafefaa(aae:] u area Wherrencafe eredia astorare Ahyrfaaorara 
aaa feraratareara a araicatfe @erqawted ar® [Hz] 

ll. [aatfeaarfra: 0] 


No. XVIII.” 
L. 1. n Haq geoy afat qraTracetretticwarstasfacrsa 

2. arfesrergrarenitale] nat cant daxerfearrgcaregea vara faa 2am | at 

3. qwemerateareurareatata @ sacs rat [elst ga & aoa ar” way a 

TST | BAT AT ATH YS AVN WAT AIATS Fara Ahrisadtdararfaarriureday- 
fafaa- 

4. waataraafaanfasrarfaaaanferraairafad a aast wrt casaz 
qfaxa daufa (elastaa fuga @° frat Gaeta Cast Ya Uetera wHT aT That 
aa fash faarmreatg 8 Aa YA G- 

5. om aya seada uqeufteda adaqraemarentaaaraeiuft AaaTCATT- 
aquaarrmacaferatad atfct ufafed 4 Sarera arta erator 
aaefe TasATTae Tafa araaT- 

6. afe atfarracafe waite Prenat ea HOT AAT HASTE a frre fe 
qmaraatfaacrafeatlotje afore ftar[ oe ahaa fadteandnengamaraaeuie- 
HARASUTST SAAT CAT AR AT UAT faeara- 

7. sracraaguarara arrizere a anda fea Hace fea aanemaa aaa: 
eudfensiaata (em) fafeaaferaratfeenfarnaygranfanfaaaaaraqaifaara* 

8. yuh STATI Reena faniaaara fare fasasiqaraaa fraaraHacar- 
qataiarinierfenengamarafaaenamaatiaatieeale cemacequasrn a faaracaife- 
waa” ar waa ear” 

9. aHafrnateaanfaausaakud: wteweacorefaast: » ara 
afiraancate w areata eer a wetaricrerfcat: [0] 


47 Probably °afaa. UM Read tfrar’. 
8 Read °stafar. 2 Read aura’, 
49 Read faa’. 33 Dele am’. 


50 In the shrine of the great Chaumukha temple (No. 310) 
on the south image.—J. B, 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 63 


No. XIX." 
La. Ba reoy fad qearmancirenticaansfanfast arfeareracarraas]s- 
at TsTAAzt eee es ama faa 92 Gm AlTeaeTa ear AT- 
ve a faust 
3. [s]st ya & wore urat Us ga csr ya e areat wat arg ga we sit 
arat waare y° ahead ara rfaaraduradaafa fara farvraafiaararfirmare- 

4. wafaa a atast aral asae yara aauta [glusttta [aa] faqer frararerstt 
aawarata tact ¥ [etera] @epata Trasit ga cfast fuarawarg a ata ya aT 
aya seuad waauhanefsat aaaqutfca- 

5. eoTaT Ca area ane Aaa H a fase METH Terra athe aft. 
fet a ahreratearfafeaniarmatascetawranrfatreraaaatarfentaaaanaae- 
PUTT a faRS ATCA AT MAT AATAA- 

6. STACTIRAAAS UIC SATA Ua HAA aA a aqerRadgarfcaa- 
THITA faa AAT eT aa fare eae ease afeanierarmafeenfaeraAy- 
tof fraaararqan farara- 

7. afegaqcann frost car eae gaa STAT eaTa fea aaa 
Fasrea Ferme sig MTA feta TAA ATAT UALS TST CAAT SS AYALA ATS TATA TTT 
aaa faratiwae vem” 

8. =teifanrauarfaadarntgmatearataanfaamafeanaatealalta ar wa- 
auneeaerea aren ararsreacahgiet: 1 arava tfrrenreahe Terra et- 
ange wywaaaarara Waa frararanara T° sarae- 

9. alfa agar a’ aged @ Tot w° yarustfzafcae: [01] 


No. XX.” 
L. 1. daq cacy fad u qrartactarsintcaarsfasfacrse arfesre4n- 

2. Exrarrata |e] vat Ahrsraant Hesarfearrguarwgea Gare faa (2 WH AbTe- 

3. Wetateaiwaaientata a Zaursa wrat [s]st ya @ & aura wat ws ga a- 
TTT | A ATA ATT ATH 

4. gad att wat sane ga atadsadarifaarrdmedaafracatarata- 
farnraafaanfasraraftareenfereunaica a das ural Uaawe gata waufa 
[slastaa wrat Sst ya : 

5. sada faqe a frat wemarq watt yA qetere HUT Sagarq wast qa 
tfast furrawata a ara ga [ae] arnt nqeuftacateda aaaritaenrarcafaa- 


0 ° 
araeturt qalerercagqy fase arcana arte: 
54 In the same on the west image.—J. B, | 56 Read CRTAX 
55 Read fac®, 37 In the same, on the north image.—J. B. 


64 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


6. arafaad atfed ufafea = atakdtanfafeqaiucareatarqacacranrtag- 
straaca fen faa aa ayaa aa TCHS ATCT ATA aT aT OT TT oT 
agate alana. 

7. arfwisrafafaustazarenrate agar rats tetas AIM A TATA CATT- 
warastafivak ugayrateadataar waidharatdeanernragsra fie farts 


afcafcferafata: 1 a- 
8. ara alfrrarcate oo arealfe aaradies at atarfeaaicae: 1 


No. XXI.” 

Ten at aia Maar a fawaquas: | 
a Te at aaah a ae: @ fort: Pea ne 0” 
daa 

2. QEO¥ FU MTR Luse UTUATA | 
WaMTSTLIMTL | STarcfaaataay | 
AMAT | AATAYTT- 

3. WAU I 
snafasfaerera | ariaaEaTaTy | 
euadafiara | aquataafsay 1 2 | aay 
aa UST 

4, [a] arf stsradarherat au: | 
GATT wHT ACTA AT: 1 8 
aaarartaaaraadan <4 au- 

5 mT | 
frirfa saat fraqasafraet 14 1 qa i 
TG: WasraharaRATAaT: | 
aarsreaqaqU- 

6. ara Brat PaTaa: | et 
audantican: afeisatazan: | 
aaa atetasaa:” 

We 19 
atfaemractar: aa sfarafiizar: | 
avian: Wem: | <1 
alfeefawarara ata- 

8. [S]amathrar: 1 
Maat HAAS TG: GLAKTT: We ti 

58 Read Satta. 6° Metre: Anushtubh. 


59 On the north wall of a temple near the Hathipola, in 9 Probably H¥afd?. 
the Vimalavasi Tuk : Lists, p- 201.’ No. 934.—-J."B. 


a th 


10. 


11. 


12. 


13. 


14, 


15. 


16. 


17. 


18. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 


aaaguagan, afeitsaataa: 
quer Tanya: 

WARTS: | 20 | 
alfasiaaqgieraan afcataa: 
waTIagraat aay aarfaat: vee [ui] 
o- 

ARUPTUTATAT RT Sa 
qaauran: aaa: afer: | 2 1 
AANA ATA apa hua 

far: | 
safe afecrs: At 1 At: WTTATAT: 1 2 | 
TIAA ATE | TaWaTfyaT: | 
ma: he- 

TUTTE ATAATATTN AR: | V8 | 
sare 7 aqa: faearat aca: | 
Seay ATA: WaAATHeT- 

at aq 1 ey | 
THATAT SY ARTA AETEASTAT | 
AAPAATAR SATA SAT SHLAA: | Ve | 
feit- 

Zatfa acrat aeeerreaayt FAT: 
safe wlawaraaiuaiugfaea4: | eo | 
aa: ut faatua: atfearara- 
afeugtieaaTay | 
Taira HAN saa TrSTTAy | 
margyuegelt atte feat: 

uat 1 °c | 


HAART TAT ATELY 
afpararanae fast BATT 1 ce | 
aga aE- 

arava | tareatfa fagar | 
aASTSgGa Wray | atcrerfasaTaat 1 Re | 
afeant cafiee | Tats 

FATTY | 

MUTAATTATSCTARTAS AAT: | RL | 
Ua QAAQaANAT | AAA IGAyAAA | 
arte at TATE 


66 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


UMARAT WATSTTG | RR 
UTyRAaT TA | ATHATSATT AA | 
tfemhigqatarat qaaracag ist 

VRQ) 
ainifaaragerat | fararat aqeat | 
fauct ufaat gat | atfrara ufafear: 1 28 | 
ray | 


21. gafasaycal | aaa | 
TaaraNe sae | UTS: Mer fay: 1 BI 
eranfafart- 
22. afr 1 afecre aye: | 
Sermadareite | erie: arf sft: 1 Ra 
qq i 
arfesn- 
23. uafagar sate wasratate | 
SHUMATT: Ary | ATATe: fratrat: 1 29 1 
a cer ufaan: a 
24, aq fiaafa aaate | 
saya: faritte | cae wife aa 1 2s 1 
aa Weaasa Tess aT- 
25. qAaH: | 
ofaar: wrfaarerst MAA UTT|T SSAA 1 REN 
aa 41 Wag cave aa Tea faa fe- 
26. alarat feat ceanqearat tadiaaa Aad ara area Has MATA TA- 
27. afafafaadaage Hered Heart Welaere hace cagis (yaa gSaTTs- 
28, Ty Marana: UTE Ahanaiafatsat wea adarfatesaa- 
| faftfx- 
29, wuTare waved Waatanqefsaarat dfa faarfa arfaarfa 1 
af: geraratia 
30, fat aeq | 
ara fentantfrranqareancaratyaatr: faa ATHATE | 
RareratararK eras a- 
3]. 


qacatanfaatatriararaa [a] ie 1” 
qaaifaradgatiat frag es arate fafear wafer: [1] 


% Metre: Vasantatilaka. 


‘JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 67 


No. XXII.® 
L. 1. 0 Wagq caoy ae aura gfe 
2. 99 fart qmart ahaewan- 


7. MUOACASTATSATRA A UTE 

8. WaTA UA WHAS FA ATS | 

9. wast qast eraaat Se I 
10. & arcfam faaaraa wque [1] 


No. x X11? 
L. 1. fe]? eaux dare far ce gk BtaTeatelayiniqaarsfanfacies u ATA 


ATSAAUVATSAT- 
2. ata & sacra rat [S]St ga SF aare wat TH FA TST FAS ATA HTT AT 


Ga A Aa ATA AT- 
8. fine gata @ aeataa ara quad garfaa teat feta thiftarinas arfed 


ufafed @ atageacac([a]- 
4 wer arco rarer eer Ter Rarer ae TTA acUTCRTaT- 


No. XXIv.* 
L. 1. daq qeoy aurea faa a TH SATUS He LT CTS ea eTe ATTA TA 
2. unareatata a argent wat arg aw SN ATA AaaTS FA fafaugeatar- 


aH A Teast | 
3. arat asae ya? Taare Hat GATS FA 2 Patera frosniear tats 


arafad afta ufafed a - 
4. SEPTATE GUNNA farts ale Tear fene agra TEACH AAT 


atfefantaaantera[t ]- 
5. [x]arrfetufaercarcagararatarata wale Terereanrcnea fears PITCHER 


; EN 
aera frrcsratcatortrs: [1] 
63 In a cell or chapel attached to the north-east corner of the great Aadtsvara temple, close to. that in which are Nos. vi 


and vii.—J.B. 
6 In the Khartaravast Tuak, immediately to the north-east of the great Chaumukha temple, on the base of the image ; 


Lists, p. 206, No. 333.—J. B. 


6 Probably Catfe°. 
6 In the Khartaravast Tuak in a temple fronting that containing No. xxiii, to the south-east of the great Chaumukha 


on the base of the image; Lists, p. 206, No. 316.—J. B. 
K 2 


68 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. XXV.” 

L. 1. u Wu aq gece aa a aTarfad ¢ WH TAMTGIAA |- 
2. Marfa afastat wrat ars tars Ga Hfaa[a]r- 
3. [alararaa arat ars wars wgegzagqaa [Be] 

4. [alwaretfxastoarera eanfasritaantfaaerar- 
5. weage arfed 0 thao Tenrtiarenraa fra |- 
6. [at] waerarttfasraareactacae Tea | 
7. (aN) fasrataacsacfastfaarse ii 
araeafafartta 
8. N aTaq WaASATIe: 
araeage Sard | larerasa 
9. atfed neu ats 


No. XXVI.® 
wat yaa: Saregarfeauartiadiaacrat wystarenttaa- 
etfraana WERT: MIS: TAIT: Aaateag aad | 
gece was afe ¢o Um MwaAqrreruaMaM anion faa 
PAIRHAATAUA TIT A? TAT AA aaae ys utes fea 
AeATAA AT aS ae ae aS Ta aaa fea Oa TTT Ta 
ufastiauraan fas Tenare qaeea lf ararneraane aaa 
. taqaarafaaricrafaarararfeafearaanfanfara[ sia] aafate- 
arsed aera ar fara fara a are [saraat]facarrgacaqez- 
Wa (842 fear aystarfetiaararti UISHTATAA STATS - 
10. Par agaeTTsTaasafea: TrATATeeara wfafed = wy: 
ll. qari racsrataftas: qearart fat agarq i 


No. XXVII.” 
L. 1. aq pesca aay orfaarefaeineneanareynearasafaraa[ ss] 1 
2.) Tewet sa: uw at aor « aeaafaafrageelt va na i 
3.0 Stu Sam 
afe a: fraiatfa weary eateric: [1] 
wa: yuihacy walat]- 
4, a atta auiait as: | 
aaTaTafacaarataata: fas: wat sfaeqar [1] 
aal a a ut fara a 


Oo DMD op o to 


8’ In a temple in the Vimalavasi Tuak, ‘near Adiévara’ 8.—J. B. \ 


°° Round the margin of pddwkas or footepri ints, No. 3, north side, in a temple i in the west of the Khartaravasi Tank 
Lists, p. 205, No. 317.—J. B. 


® In a niche in a temple in the Vimalavasi Tukk, on the left hand between the Vaghana-pola and Hathi-pola ; Lists, 
p. 204, No. 138.—J. B. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 


Ds: fora: atarhingeg Ae 0” 
Sanias: aaathen: daraeter saw: [1] 
are: areal U)- 

6. a sSfacara: Batsiatsaa: | 
TTaTATaT ATA HATTA: aThAeatt 
dz: [ae] 

7. wareret farufa: asaafrarery | 2 
wat Ustad a: afafeagearaaaanr: w - 

8. at! 
fafrat afccarafa ay aaastacatauts: | 
ata areata wcefanalara] 

9. aware arat [1] 
a wafafaadt ferq fare areat atfrara: 2 7 
aqanrt agar [eU]” 

10. zaaaifafaeres: [i]- 
tadrafrtacdt faratura wae gat 
aaa qadaeny(a]- 

UNF qa TarqHarters: | 
a atorataafiarg aad faqfeee araat | 8 1” 
ae Rare a] 

12. fafaaa ardstaaraa [1] 
qered vafeyarcufady arava Sheet | 
agara [#7] 

13. fanradacetst aarrpareradt |” 
Wrharatgientar: Ug faa water nx [0] 

14. 9 wea Weta I 
MACHA STATS SMAT | 
aA AAA ATTA: | 
fa- 

15. 9 aqraarerawat fafaroarss t- 
wearaant afar weet TA: | ew? 
aareqeaaran| at] - 

16. AUTAPAT |- 
arfrangqaaarsauradan: [1] 
wearfaat qua safaweale |- 
ata] 

7 Metre of verses 1-2 : Sardilavikridita. 73 Metre of verses 4-5: SArdiilavikridits. 


7 Metre: Sragdhara. 74 Read data’. 
72 Read “SEITE UESTAA. 78 Metre of verses 6-7; Vasantatilakaé. Read gta. 


70 


L. 17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 


21. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


“Ss lqeaeleayaraa4ran: | 9 
arerdrarayrat acatfaarsr: [1] 
Bara eg YUAE 

afaent: | 
maa: aaaateactadan: [1] | 
faemnitagaryyanfaen: oc 4” 
wT: H- 
aa qeat faafarate i” 
WAT VATA Goat wet: [1] 
eagfaeqeaisfaaatt- 
aareart [1] 
winnn afaac fafaaaaran: ve 
qeara feefadaraes mya [']- 
wrear 
aggfaual gear” waza: [1] 
qamchimadtfafeanaren; [1] 


Wireqreaed aceaa[a]- 

Tole tenk 
antag TI gaatfaate [I]- 
qFaraaya saaafraars: | 
fastaam- 


wrurfayaeraisg [1] 


RATTRAY RAT AT MTA ULL A 


aeugentfaurag “ar- 
24. gear.” 
weber: ayo( tava ayg: | wzuet o 
a ° 
are leay ay aATAT: 
25. arated: are [1] 
* Q e 4 
AAT AAA LAT AAT ATA TS ETAT: A 
ahaiat fafroasrel =e ]- 
26. forwat arated araat | 
fa] ‘, Cy e e ‘ 4 87 
aay wigan hagas: attzdarea: ez 
a- 
76 = stands above the line, % Read “af<tIH:. H stands above the line. 
1 Metre of verses 8—11: Vasantatilaka. 3 Read °aRe’. 
78 Read Ota t Fae?. 34 Read °aTEa’. 
79 Read ACal. % Read “SUT. 
8 Read Wm’. 8 Read “aaaary’. 
* Read &, 7 Metre of verses | 12-13; Sarddlavikridita. Read °yzas. 


JAINA INSCRIPLIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 71 


L. 7. Mesa wafa ATU eATTNAT TAT! | 


aaariagzafayra: ward — 


28. HRITTNT: | 
waniisfaaaaataca: aearaarafaa: | 
aida saifa afcfa- 

29. afer ° Bam: maraterat: | 22 0 
APART aa ACS Aaya AS TA 

30. ALE YA AY BACT ATT AT 
AYIA AAS ATE AlalUT AATA aT? Alaa a- 


31. erat Swagerdeerfant as Tite aeafTATTATT ATE aT 
32. axfrnt suagearizerfatt worfaar Sars ga ote sa” 

33. wafaufcacgaanr | daq gece ad | ara afe wale fat ataarat (t]- 
34. damreatfatsarafersttatare: afta: | Threrarcaraa” ae AST W- 


35. ate wUfas eq tease ast Bt [¥] ars AAT ae SE Ae — — — oe 
arfas u 
waafed 33 aT- 


36. taTat ahah aguas ofa hiqera wat ars ate Ga afta Alaa Tat 
as HAAe- 

37. areata ofceatatsiorfeerntcetarhrarett | atfca atest arat arg 
wie yaw 


“8. aaricearen Aeneas arfed ufaed sn Surdhacenoaaaat- 
atta feg-” 

39. MAST — —- —- —-—— — argent aaa usa =atfeatst — — — — arfear 
are ars gat ars ats ar- 


40. = ware} arar otfea east aqa urfea qeteragda un aq ces at are afe 
qareat [wt] ataa- 

41. Tat Arisuvatfanfacarftat i werarttaearrarreatefa: ufaed” 1 araa- 
aqrerarean[t] - 

42. [wt}at afefta 0 dfsritfanaatartimate ua atfaratecrttat freq" 
aefaieartar fa- | 

43. fafatea y Taiqea aa: araq dare fat aearq AlaaSTAMATeTY uv TTI 


88 Rend °UTHWa:. % Read ufafed. 

8 Read °xfa:. %% Probably for sfaqa’. 
. % Read “nfast. 

ai gee % Read “nfafed. 

at Read aaa. 


“JI 
Ww 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. XXVIII.” 
L.1. ou de (e] cs ara afe x qa Maratea s° seaTaUT aT fa- 
2.9 8 ce args wt (gaa a] o urna ahrfearafad waaafed artca u 
No. XXIX.” 
J uat yn daq cece aa aa Ole ey fea caUeN Salta 
| arearitardtardiaaganita aret qactt arat ar? ase 
. OA A STSa UTA ATS ETA S MAATAT BT’ Test aT” aac 
ural avs ware Saret are Saad y [Y] a at ware wall fala aT 
gure vquanages wtfanaraeant ara ath 
. abaeae at — — — [at] areal deat at 2 aela G- 


o me op po oe 


. Aaa [Ht] —---—-—-—--—---—--— [aj-----— [aa] 0 
. Ufsdtaa ate — — — — quenrg qa Hag 1h 


Benes 
: 
4 
| 
| 
| 
| 
: 
a 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
| 
a 
i 


No. XXX.” 
L.1. daq pace Fa dare afe 4 Fa TA Cue WATATA Aaa UTA 
2. gel eaTlert Masaerarataa Hela AaHalaVaTeAaE Ho Ayaan Pasar 
Wee W Bharayuaeay- 
3. wut wo Whasraalfaearerue w Ahyadgearers SE aaneete area 
a atguatfidaraaé «° starferntearend? a ahraalfiearerae & =hogafeqe- 
TANT UTATATST AT ET- 
4, Tease WISH Werwerarearagas waa wHTSaaTaCeMeT AT 
AAMC AAS MAST STS W° tS UT Wwe @ dae wT’ w care al: 
5. @a amaaaanfanaaa ufataatasinenaaifuraaniafad 8° aan ar a 
aaae Aah Ba fasgaanafanwngaansy eagqia safaaaiaaa: zhaafsanfa- 
6. wIdtwarfertanactiaatardata ata a d° eare fedtn’ a 
Meng gaat @ a[aline factaga dad Aterast a? a? Anes aah: Ta daat 
7. SAM ural a° steae fadtaga waht [craalsit wr a° waaTe[ua wa] aerfa- 
wa ata qaaattea] ft atforrorere awifraafad arcfaenr frat wate | mi wag [0] 
No. XXXI” 


L. 1. 1 Sty wercangtenienaatett- 
2. | fare aay aat Aa aq- 
3. | TemaTataean fasaaa- 


* On the base of a Chaumukha image in a sinall temple, west of the great Adisvara Bhagavan; Lists, p. 198, 
No. 114—J. B. 

97 In the shrine of “ Bhimadeva,”—the great rock-cut i image,—on the wall beside the doorway.—J. B. 

* In the Digambara temple, in a small court to the north-east of the great Adisvara temple; Lists, p. 202, 
No. 237.—J. B. 


” Beside the doorway of the Seshakota temple, facing the south door of the great Adiévara temple. ; Lists, p. 137, 
No. 97.—J, B. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 73 


4. | afeqeat aa: daa [aq] (age ae a- 
5. re afe 4 Tt Wieteaferareaa a- 
6. | wat Wat Ural ars AH ATE Aa” Ts 
7. wu aaat wifes arat ars age ats 
8. \uAeazagda’ eaae shrya 

9. 1a saa’ ureare [:] arerfta [:] stordare- 
10. | fad wrifad ufafed' = =taanreata- 

ll. | areranfasraerafcha: aqu- 

12. | erargausrnfasafarate fat sta 


No, XX XII—(610).* 
lait ae 


1 
2. wafafeufe-¢ wy ae | 
4, cafes se agate: [1] 
6. mraatfest-aeaqe: a- 
8. eraaa fa-aarfesta-7 we 

af: asafiva-fe | a cag aarenatf watfoay | 
15. safe ag | uearg | a eaqerft- satay 2 i 
19. feanfas-afafate wore faa y—eri Sivaria’ atafarq 1 
24, sefeaae-a 1 wifaca-etat a2 1 2 
27. arasafa ae | Wra-saraaAe-ahara: 1° 

St wisaqe-fa | awa-qe: fardt-ztaq i gu 


No. XXXTIT." 


Ll. 384 9. TUT 1 aeeTe J 1 a 
2. situ wtea ate- 10. arafawaratie- 
3. aq Vore ay wae” 11. urate fiz he 
4. yen WEY" Fara a 12. sqa@aazouera: 
5. aart BsTaAy- 13. aT | smrqtaectat- 
6. TATAARRTA- 14. qramqaufeare- 
Aa 
PRC CLENECIDE D 15. ya: afaqaaara- 
0 Ae 
8. ETStla a | TwAT- Le aes 5 
100 Bead wit. 7 Metre: Svagata. The penultima of the second pada 
: f°, ought to be long. 2 
; aah fies 8 Metre of verses 2—4: Arya. 
ea y = 
Ried. ° Read sae aIte. 
ees 10 Read Hast. : 
: ES fed. 1 On a column in the Seshakota temple, inthe Vimalavasi 
Read STaTq- Tonk.—J. B. 
6 In the temple of Seshakota, on the left hand column. | * Saou 
— Lists, p- 147, No. 97.—J- B. = : 
% Read Wet. 


74 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


30. =terfasrrafe- 


27. = © aifasraerta- ra a | Hafasa a | aT 
28, DacaraTs aaa | 41, grare: faafaeq 
29. amrafefae ara | 42, q@rare wart: 
No. CV." 
Ll. i at 
2 watam i 


RE Waa weraanpa: [1] 


spraearrureian: safefacraca:” [i] 2 in] 
3. aadastfeen afensafisan: [1] 
awn | afsefsrara” [i] 2 fi 


at 


| F 
4. . faeemrathn:” ant faafeear: [1] 


saedcacian: arramraea: [i] 2 
fie taaarars 


(ij 


B. sagem: [1] 
wad Fadearen:” sug: aaa: [i] 8 [1] 


waaqudqay: afersrrat- 
6. wa: [1] 


amex garnaaancara: [i] x fi] 
Afasraanere: aa” afearaa: [1] 


WaanIts- 


i aear aahyaq warfear: [1] ¢ [i] 


waaufrarare; qrrernenaq [1] 
Bara =wzha: afen- 


M4 Read ufawifad. 

16 In the Khartaravasi Tunk, on the south wall in the hall 
outside ‘the shrine door of Narsi Kegavji’s temple.-—Lists, 
p. 206, No. 342.—J. B, 


Read “tar; ) Wate’, 


7 Read L. 3: fear: 1 sta?) HER”. 

18 Read Sa: . 

® Read L. 6: Peta? agi. 

2 Read L.6: “Ut CaM: aeat. 

™ Read L, 7; Cotare? | Cea? fam | eats. 


9. 


10. 


i. 


12, 


13. 


14. 


15. 


16. 


eat. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA., 75 


wiraaa [i] © [1] 
aaa: Maaciwafean” [1] 
WATS AS: RATT TAT: 
hs fi 
ataacefractar aat faaraca: [1] 
seuraatey atfatayataate: [i] e [0] 
aat g- 
alefratcusigmaaa: [1] 
aaarcadtar aygq: quatfea: [ll] eo [1] 
aa” Tait- 
efrafctifa fracete [i] 
aiaeiqaarga wary” wataesaa: [i] ee [i] 
afa u- 
zrafa i 
WT HITS FT ASAT Fe [1] 
ayy TaNTETaTATa-” 
fa quisaa [nv } 22 [0] 
Aa Aaa TH Sars w afar [1] 
Gal” aaast aa 
yaaa] ¢2 Li] 
argaa ad addet faaaraa’® [1] 
WATT AA 
aye aquifad [i] es Li] 
Zanfagqenn” wasretfaa fart: [1] 
Stat WaT AT: | 
aft eat fradt vg [i] ex [i] 
uafa aa vat a acfiveaaia” [1] 
TaaTS a- 
w@ urat ufaafaaattaarg [i] a [1] 
ayastiae ura fefaa” ataars = [1] 


13. areal alas we gata” eastata: [i] ve [i] 
2 Read L. 8.: Oa) CaTsHT°. | *® Read L. 14: euaTegwe 1 Ha? 4 Cae) 
; : iN 
23 Read ZIM | Aa; . 2 Read “a 1 °F. 
4 Read L. 10: °@t? 1 °XVar t adit. % Read L. 16: faryedt Perhaps fee:. 
% Read L. 11: °xafa faacafa atagta® 1 yal Waa. 1 Read fedtar 1%. 
% Read fa: 1 °wg®. ® Read Ht ATS. 


™ Read “ste; | ya:. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


azcrmta [1] 
fatsa wat afa afaiag” wut [ii] ¢& (i): 
afa aurafe: 1 


aie aaa a Feast fronystarfsafssa wararfa Fad a 
wan fasatcacgat daare faecal ater aaa eas: A- 
. qaaaregguifzentrernan: agauaian: fafear: sstatrarar- 


ufastfeanea faraded anata w awe aatafaafaar- 


. at eae ayavadeti TARA Ges Usafs Ta~” 
. a ae fafrat aaracue”® shaancafcataaeraaacre- 

. Wa: afasteaaentuat am fea tauaars: ae wreratcanr” 

. Temlat Haq Wealefamaraa: Haq eae at ae afar” zhe- 

- MAT EMT ARASH QOTE MATA ATATAA" arsara Ta- 

. ue fafa waRM: Gearat ard Sieadara gas Ges GUfT-" 

. wraat fargeret ahpefta ayfrisafraraed a: weet” 

. gaara eee Matiaaiaga wae faargeatte-” 

. alfefaararaatterticarareentenfarerraa oa: waa 

. wat aretaafatd aracmntefrart wee Fat ya: fafe- 
. faadut aafieafsrre famed fet ae ofeer’ ara faa a- 
. eat quarat walatafra frat war” waanncafca4rga- 

. ia: weaufa fasaftartea as afedeatefaafaa® |- 

. fart aa: qarfadaufacaramite aa: Theaanfayqu-” 

. STRICT sa Tiefaaye” aeateqay Weare ue 

. Faral:] ware we wagql:] 0 


afuntiqayeaqaaty:” | 


40. afersaramacfaaaraa [1] 
war whe AaUMTAG aaa” 
ay 
41. qe uaraqafannefag:® ou 
arTanadaarata wsfe- 
3} Read L. 19: afar Ha: 1 Cafe’ “ Read L. 31: “84°. feaqaa 1 gam. 
4 Read eat? % Read L. 32: °@H° | ya. 
% Read L. 21: °atfe? 1 aa 46 Read st. ; 
8 Read fast’. 47 Read L. 35: Care? | WaT. 
7 Read L. 24: °ma? | Ra. © Read L. 36: °2wa: 1 fad. 
3 Read faa’. Read L. 37: fad Cnrqar’i na: 1) CHa’, 
% Read L. 26: @faot Sax?) Cte. 0 Read ge. 
Read L. 27: °farat: | afar. S| Read °Ry. 
" Read L. 28: CHa? i Carat | wa. 3 Read L. 40: fet: 1 eat. 
Read L.29: faut waar i Rt (° qar®, 53 Read @Te° | araata. 
Read L. 30: {mats a dy. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. rue 


L. 42. faf@ar: i 
araq WE Afeae avaq aafeataa™ [1] 
43. arvana fararat[:] avaq agg afets” ven 
aieq [0] 


ABSTRACTS. 


No. xxxiv.” Sarnvat 1783, Maha sudi 5; Siddhachakra, dedicated by AnandabAl, 
wife of Sheta (Kheta)’ of the Srimali laghusékhd, inhabitant of Dhanapura; con- 
secrated by panditavara Devachandra, pupil of wupddhyéya Dipachandra, papil 
of mahopadhyaya Jidnadharmaji, pupil of mahopddhydya Rajasarajt in the sékhé 
of Jinachandra Siri, yugapradhdna of the Brihat-Kharatara gachchha, who awak- 
ened Patisahi Akabbara. 

No. xxxv.” Samvat 1788, Magha sudi 6, Friday; an image of Bhimamuni dedi- 
cated by Dulichand, son of Sa(hu) Kika of the Kharatara gachchha; consecrated 
by apddhydya Dipachandragani. 

No. xxxvi.® (Date as above) ; an image of Sri-Yudhishtira [shthira] muni (remain- 
der as above). 

No. xxxvii.” Vikrama Samvat 1788, SAka 1653, Magha sudi 6, Friday ; an image 
of Chandraprabha, dedicated by Premaji (surnamed Cheuli, from his residence in 
Cheula), of the SrimAli vriddhasékhd, at the request of bhattdraka Vijaya-Daydsitri, 
and of the Tapa gachchha; BOSE EES by bhattéraka Sumatisagara of the same 
— gachehha. 

No: xxxviii.© Samvat 1791, Vaisdkha sudi 8, pushyarke; an image of Pargvanatha, 
dedicated by bhanddr? Ratnasimha, a mahdmantri, who caused an edict of amari 
to be proclaimed in Gujarat, son of Udayakarana (and Udayavantadevi), son of 
Shetasihaji, son of bhanddért Dipaji, of the Osav4la vriddhasikha and the Nadula- 
gotra ; consecrated in the victorious reign of Nia y a Dayasitri, successor of na) jai- 
Kshamaéstri, of the Tapa gachchha. 

No. xxxix.” Samvat 1794, Saka 1659, Asidha sudi 10, Sunday; an image of 
Pargvanitha, dedicated, and restoration of a temple made by bhandari Ha rashachanda 
son of bhanddri Sivachanda, son of bhanddri Ripachanda, son of bhandda7?¢ Tarachanda, son 
of bhanddéré Narayanaji, son of bhanddri Bhanaji of the Oisavaméa vriddhagakha, 
NAddla-gotra, dedicated in the victorious reign of J inachandrastri of the Brihat-K ha- 
ratara gachchha, by pandita Devachandra, pupil of upddhydya Dipachandaji, pupil 
of upddhydya Jidnadharmaji, pupil of mahopddhydya. Rajasaraji. 


6 Read L. 42: °figat 1 Cee 1 4°, 

5 Read CMa | aag fe. 

56 On 1 Siddhachakra slab in the south corridor of the Kharataravas! Tunk.—Lists, p. 206, No. 337.—-J. B, 

57 On the base of the image, on the right side of principal one in the Paficha Pandava temple.—Lists, p. 207, 

No. 350.—J. B. 

58 In Paficha PAndava temple, on the base of the principal image.—Lists, ib. 

59 Outside the door of a square temple opposite the south-west corner of the great Adigvara.—Lists, p, 197, perh: aps 
No. 100. 

In the Vimalavas? Tunak, on right hand when going towards the Hathipola, about half-way up.— Lists, p. 202, 


No, 247. 
61 In the south wall outside the shrine door of a temple in the ChhipAvasi Tunk.—Lists, p, 207, No. 357, 


78 : EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. xl.” Sarnvat 1810, Maha sudi 18, Tuesday; an image of Sumatinatha, dedi- 
cated by the whole Sangha, Samghavi Kachara Kika and the rest; dedicated by Sar- 
vasuri. 

No. xi. Samvat 1814, Magha vadi 5, Monday; a temple with a sikhara, dedi- 
cated by Yo. Kasarisangha, son of Vo. Ladha, (and Pranakumara,) son of Yo, Dipa- 
chand, son of Vo. Sakalachanda of the Pragvata-vamwysa, laghusakid, inhabitant of Raja- 
nagara; consecrated by Udayasiiri. 

No. xii. Samvat 1815, Vaisdkha sudi 6, Wednesday; an image of Parsvanatha 
dedicated by masa Kuyaraji Ladh& of Bhavanugara; consecrated by RAjasamastri, 
of the Laghuposala gachchha. 

No. xliii.” Samvat 1822, Phdlguna sudi 5, Thursday; two images in the Visa, 
Deshavala-Tapa gachchha’s deré, dedicated by gandhi Parasottama Sddaraji and by 
his nephew Amdidasa and his brothers Nath4 and Kumbera, all of Megan4. The 
inscription was incised by Kubera, in Sarhvat 1868, Chaitra sudi 2, Friday. 

No. xliv.” Samvat 1843, Saka 1708, Magha sudi 11, Monday; an image of Adi- 
natha, dedicated by Premachanda, of Rajanagara, a SrimaAli of the laghusékha of 
the KAsyapa gotra and Paramara race, consecrated by Vijaya-Jinendrasitri 
cf the Tap gachchha. 

No. xlv.” Vikrama Sarvat 1860, Saka 1726, Vaisakha sudi 5, Monday; an image 
of SAntinAtha, dedicated by Harashachamda, son of Hirdchanda (and Kumarabai)> 
son of SA Rayakarana, a Srimali of the vriddha sakhaé, a native of Damana-bandira 
(Daman), honoured by the Phiramgijati Puratakala patasdhi (the king of Portugal). 

No. xlvi.® (Date as in the preceding) ; a new image in the new temple of Vijjakara- 
Parsvanatha, dedicated by Savaichanda, son of Premachanda Jhaverachamda and 
Joyati, a Jhaveri ( jeweller) of the Usavala race in Surat, in the name of Premachanda 
and others, duriug the victorious reign of Vijaya-Daivachandrasiri, of the gachchha 
Vijaya-Anandastri, consecrated by Vijaya-Jinendrastri of the Tapa gachchha. 

No. xivii.” (Date as in No. xlv); a new image in the new temple of Asrahura 
(Vijjahara?) Parsvanath, dedicated by Jhaveri Premachanda,..... an Usavala of 
Surat, belonging to the gachchha of Vijaya-Anandastri, in the victorious reign of 
Vijaya-Devachandrastri, consecrated by Vijaya-Jinendrastri, bhattdraka of 
the Tapa gachchha. 

No. xlviii.” (Date as in No. xlv) ; an image of Sahasakutaji (Sahasrakdta), dedicated 
by Dahabhai, son of $4 Lalabhai, grandson of S4 Bhaisaji, a SrimAli, at the request of 
Punyasagarastri of the A mchala gachchha, consecrated by Vijaya-Jinendra- 
stiri of the Tapa gachchha. 

No. xlix.” Date and contents as of the preceding, 


6 In a temple on the south of the way to the Hathipola, in Vimalavasi Tuak.— Lists, p. 204, No, 285.—J. B. 

3 On south side corner of a temple in the outer compound of the Adiévara temple. 

64 On the base of an image in a temple on the south side of the way to the Hathipola.— Lists, p. 204, No. 291. 

65 In Modi Premachand’s temple No. 84 P 

% In Vimalavasi Tunk, in a small temple on the south of the Vachaiw pola.—Lists, p. 204, No. 304.—J. B. 

87 In Modi Premachand’s Tunk, on an image in the principal temple.—Lists, p. 207, No. 362. 

6° On the base of an image in the temple on the right upon entering the Tuk of Modi Premachand.—Lists, p. 208, 
No. 367.—J. B. 

In Modi Premachand’s Tunk, on the base of the image in the temple facing the preceding.— Lis¢s, p. 208, No, 364. 

7? On a column in the Seshakota in the Paficha Pandava’s temple.—Lisfs, p. 207, No. 351, 

1 To the same temple.—J. B. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 79 


No. 1.” Sarhvat 1860, Maha sudya 13; a temple was begin and finished Samvat 
1861, Phaguna vadi 5, Wednesday, by Virachanda, son of Pitamara, grandson of 
Harashacharhda, a Parekh of Ahmadabad, of the Vis4-Poravala gachchha, and of the 
gachchha of Vijaya-Anandasitri. 

No. li. Vikrama Sarhvat 1861 and SAlivahana Saka 1726, Dhata sarhvatsara 
Margasirsha sudi 8, Wednesday, PdrvAshAdha nakshatra, Vriddha Yoga, Gira Karana, 
in the victorious reign of Punyasdgarasiri, successor of KirtisAgarastri, successor 
of Udayasdgarastriof the Amchala gachchha, a kumda, called IchhAkumda, was 
dedicated by Ichchhabh4i, son of Nihdlachandabhai, a SrimAli of Surat; while the 
Gohil chief Unnadaji ruled over Palitana. 

No. li.“ Samvat 1867, Chaitra sida 15; an agreement in Gujarati not to allon 
anybody to build temples in the Hatht Pola. 

No. liii.® Sathvat 1875, Magha vadi 4, Sunday; an image of Suvadhinatha(?), 
dedicated by Sosaji, son of Malaji and Mamnakumara, of Radhanapura; an’ image 
of Chandraprabha, dedicated by Sedugarasi, son of Miilaji and (?); am image of 
Mallinatha, anda little temple (dehari) dedicated by Kamtiy& Hemaji, son of 
Tokardsi. 

No. liv.” Saravat 1885, Vaisdkha sukla akshayatritiy4, Thursday; a temple of 
Chandraprabha, built, at the request of the Sravika Gulavabeni, by Babu Harsha- 
chamdaji and Visanacharndaji, sons of Jethamallaji, Bhranacharidajt and Kesava- 
dasajt, sons of Saha Bohitthaji, of the Digada gotra, inhabitant of Balichara; conse- 
crated by Jinaharshastri of the Kharatara gachchha. 

No. lv.” Sarhvat 1886, Saka: 1751, Magha, suklapaksha 5, Friday ; ; an image of 
Pundarika ganadhara, dedicated for the welfare of his father by Lallubh&i, son of 
Seth Panabhai and his wife Mughivahu, daughter of Seth Vakhatachamda KhusyAlacham- 
da of the Vriddhasakha of the Osa race, inhabitant of Rajanagara; consecrated during 
the reign of SantisAgarastri of the Sagara gachchha. 

No. lvi.” (Date as above); a temple built and‘an image of PArgvAndtha, dedicated 
for the welfare of Bai RamAkumyara, wife of Saha Harakhacharhda, son of SAha 
Milachamda, of the Vriddhasakh& of the Oa race, inhabitant of Rajanagara, and 
for the welfare of her daughter Jhaverabai, wife of Dost Kusalachamda, in the reign of 
bhattéraka Rajendrasigarastri of the Amchala gachchha, 

No. Ivii:” (Date as above) ; a chaturviméatitirthakarapatta with hrimkdra, dedicated 
by Moticharmda, son of SAha Malukacharnda, and Kusalabat, of the Vriddhasdkha of 
the Oga race, inhabitant of Rajanagara; consecrated by the bhatidraka of the Khara- 
tara gachchha. 

No. lviii. (Date as ahove) ; a parameshti( shthi]pada, with n Ombara, dedicated by the 
donor of No. lvii; consecrated as above. 


7 In Vimalavasi Tunk, to the south-east of the Chanmukh of a handred pillars. —Lists, p 202, No. 245.—J, B. 

'B Qn a tank by the roadside part of the way down the bill. 

74 On the wall, beside the HAthipola, or the gateway separating the enclosure of the Adigvara Bhagavan and the 
eastern section of the Vimalavasi Tunk.—J, B. 

76 In Modi Premachand’s Tunk, in a cell or chapel in the north corridor. 

76 In a small temple to the south of Pundartka’s.—Lists, p. 207, No. 345. 

77 In Hemabbai'’s Tunak, at the entrance.— Lists, p. 209, No. 408. 

78 On the seat of an image south of Pundarika’s in the entrance to Hemabhai Vakhatchand’s Took. 

7 In Hemabhai’s Tuak, on the north wall of the Mandapa of the principal temple.-— Lists, p. 209, No. 407. 

* In the same temple, on the south wall.—J. B. 


80 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. lix." (Date as above) ;a temple and an image of Chandrapr abha, dedicated for her 
husband's welfare by Ichhavahu, wife of Naginadasa, son of Seth Himabhai, son of 
Seth Vakhatachamda KhugyAlachamda, of the Vriddhasikha, of the Osa race, inhabit- 
ant of Rajanagara; consecrated in the reign of Santisdgarastri of the Sagara 
gachchha. 

No. Ix.™ Samvat 1887,. Vaisdkha sudi 18, jnavdsara, in the reign of Gchel 
K amdh&ji, karnvara Noghanaji, of Padaliptanagara, a temple (vihdra) built, and 
an image of Kurthanatha by Gajamalaji Parakh, son of Himatarama, son of Saha 
Tilokachamda of the Luniy4é gotra, Ukega jnAtiya Vriddhasakha, inhabitant of Ajam- 
eranagara; consecrated by Devachamda, in the reiga of bhatt. Jinaharshasiri, of 
the Brihat-Kharatara gachchha, 

No. lxi®® Samvat 1888, Vaisakha vadi — — Sorivdsare (!), three images of © 
Chandraprabha, eic., dedicated by Khemakuvarabai, wife of Nihalacharnda, son of 
SAha Pamndcharmda, OSavdla of Ahmadabad; consecrated by Devachamdra, in the reign 
of Jinharshasdri of the Kharatara gachchha. 

No. lxii.* Sarhvat 1889, Saka 1755, Vaisdsha gukla 18, Wednesday ; an image of 
Dharmanatba, dedicated by UjamabAi, daughter of Vakhatachamda, an OsavAla of 
the Vriddhasikha, inhabitant of Rajanagara ; consecrated i in the reign of SAmtisdga- 
rastiri of the Sagara gacichha. A small temple in the Moti tunk near Punchabhai’s 
temple by the same. 

No. lxiii.” (Date as above); an image of Rishabhadeva, dedicated by Para- 
dhamnavau, wife of Sdryamala, son of Sreshti Vakhatacharhda, of the Vriddhasikha 
of the Ukesa race, inhabitant of RAjanagara; consecrated in the Sagara gachchha (?). 

No. lxiv.% (Date as above); an image of Chandraprabha, dedicated by Kapu- 
rachamdaji,: inhabitant of. Sirohi, son of Pubachamda Jasarupaji, younger brother of 
Jasarupaji, son. of Pat&ji Parakh; consecrated in the Tapa gachchha. 

No. lxv.” (Date as above), chaturmukha bimba, dedicated for the welfare of 
Hemabhai by his whole family, viz. Naginadasa, his wife Ichhavahu, his younger 
brother Premabhai, his wife SAmkalivahu and his sisters Rukhamani, Prasana, Motiku- 
rhara—Hemabhai’s wife Karnkuvahu, parents Seth Vakhatacharnda and J adavabai, 
grandfather. Khusalacharnda, Ogavalas of the V.S., inhabitants of Ahmad4bad; conse- 
crated by SarhtisAgara of the Sagara-gachchha. 

No. lxvi.* Date as above, but. sukra 12, Wednesday (?); a patichaparameshti- 
[shthi]-patta, containing an Omkdra, dedicated by Ujamabai (see No. Ixii) ; consecrated 
in the Tapa gachchha (°). 

No. Ixvii. Sarhvat 1889, Saka 1754 Vaisdsha, Suklapaksha 12, Wednesday, a 
chaturvinsatitirthamkarapatta, containing a Hrimkdra, dedicated by Ujamabai (see 
No. lxvi), consecrated in the Tap& gachchha (?). 


81 In a shrine in Hemabhat’s Tunk,— Lists, p. 209, No. 413.—J. B. 
- 8 Outside Kharataravasi Tunak, in a temple atthe north-east corner.— Lists, p. 207, No. 347.—J. B. 
83 In one of the shrines round the court of Hemabhai’s Tunak, on the north side. 
5+ In a small shrine on the south corridor of the same. 
~- 8 In Hemabhai’s Tunk in a shrine in the south corridor room No. 4. 
86 In Hemabhai’s Tunak, north corridor, room No. 2. — 
87’ In the shrine of the temple in the north-east of the court.—Zists, p. 209, No. 412. 
*8 In the principal temple in Hemabhai’s Tunak, on the south wall, see No. lviii. 
**. In Hemabhai’s temple, in the Mandapa north wall, east corner, see No. lvii.—J..B, 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 81 


No. lxviii.” Samvat 1891, Magha, sita5, Monday, during the reign of Gohel 
Khamdh4ji, his son being Noghanaji and his son Pratapasinghji, of Palitand, an image 
of Rishabha, dedicated by Imdraji, son of Nihdlacharda, of the Yadugada-gotra, 
OSavala race, Brihat-sakha, inhabitant of Makasud4vdd-Baluchara ; consecrated by Pam. 
Devachandra, pupil of Pam. Jayavamtaji, in the reign of J inaharsha of the Brilat- 
Kharatara gachchha. 

No. Ixix.” Sarnvat 1892, Vaisdkha, dita 3, Friday, in the reign of Gohal 
Khamdaji (etc., see No. lxviii), images of Sambhavandtha, Parévandtha and Si- 
talanatha, dedicated by Mahetabakumara, wife of Babu Pratapasimghaji, brother of 
Babu Bahadarasimhghaji, son of Babu Radhasimghaji, of the Yadugada-gotra, Ukesa 
race), Brihat-Sakha, of MaksudAvAd-Baluchara; consecrated in the reign of Jinaharsha 
of the Brihat-Kharatara gackchha by P. Devachamdra, pupil of P. Jayabhadra, pupil 
of P. Kanaka Sekharaji. 

No. lxx.” Samvat 1893, Saka 1758, Magha vadi 2, Wednesday ; a temple built and 
image of Adindtha dedicated by Phdlakurmyara, daughter of Anopabhai and Mana- 
chhi, Anopabhai being son of Vakhatacharida (see above, No. xlv); consecrated by 
Samtisdgara of the SAgara gachchha. 

No. Ixxi.* (Date as above), temple built and image of Samtindtha dedicated by 
Ujalivahu, wife of Phatebhai, son of Moticharnda , Vriddha-Sakha, OSayvala, inhabitant 
of Rajanagara, consecrated by Samtisagara of the Sag. ga. c 

No. Ixxii.” (Date as above), temple built and image of SArmtindtha dedicated by 
Bhagubh§i, son of Phatebhai (wife Acharatavahu), son of Motichanda (see No, Ixxi) ; 
consecrated by SAmtisAgara of the SAgara-gotra. 

No. Ixxiii.” (Date as above), a temple built in HemAbhai’s tunk and image of 
Ajitanatha dedicated by SA Lashamichamda, (wife Paravati),son of S84 Jesamgha, 
son of 84 Hirdcharhda, of the Vriddha-Sakhd, Usavala, inhabitant of Khambha- 
nayara. 

No. lxxiv.” Samvat 1893, Jyeshtha sudi 3, Wednesday; an image of Gomukha 
Yaksha, dedicated by B&Aphand Gumamnachamdaji Bahddaramallaji of Jesala- 
meru, consecrated by Jinamahemdrasiari of the Kharatara gachchha. 

No. lxxv.” Sarmvat 1893, Saka 1758, Magha sukla 10; an image of Pargvanatha 
dedicated by Premachanda, etc. (see next inscription), consecrated by Padmavijaya, 
etc. (see next inscription), 

No. lxxvi.” Sarhvat 1893, Sika 1758, Magha sukla 10, Wednesday; an image of 
Pargvanatha dedicated by Ajab and Manakumara, the first and second mothers of 
Sa Pitamara, son of S4 Sakalachamda, son of SA Premachamda, son of SA Damodaradasa 
of the Laghu Sakh4 of the Srimala race, inhabitants of Ahammad4vaAd, consecrated by 

% In temple outside the gate of Pundarika temple of the Kharataravasi Tunk and next to that containing inscription 


No. lx.—Lists, p. 206, No. 341.—J. B. 

% Outside the enclosure of the great Chaumukha on the east, next to preceding on the base of an image.— Liste, p. 206, 
No. 339. 

% In HemabbAt Tunk, west corridor, room No. 1. 

% In the same Tonk in a shrine in the west corridor. 

% Jn Hemabhdi’s Tunak, west corridor, room No. 5. 

% In the Hemabhaéi Tuak, north corridor, first room. 

% In the shrine of Gaumukha, at the entrance to the Chaumukha ‘angle. —Lists, p. 205 No. 811. 

7 §&kalachand Premachand’s Tuak, on the seat below the image (Chint&émani Parévanatha), in a cell in tho west corridor 


of the principal temple.— Lists, p. 212, No. 494. 
98 In SAkalchand Premachand’s Tunak, on the seat of Pundarika, facing the principal temple.—J. B. 


os) 
tT 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


Rapsvijayagani, pupil of Padmavijayagani, a Samvijfamargi, of the line of Vija- 
yasihasdri, in the Samvijiayamargiya—Tapa gachchha. 

No. Ixxvii.” (Date as above), an image of Padmanatha, dedicated by 84 Milacham- 
da, son of SA Karmachamda, son of S& Premachamda (ete., see above) consecrated by 
Ripavijayagani (ete., see No. Ixxvi). 4 | 

No. lxxviii.” (Date as above), an image of Dharmmanatha, dedicated by Amara- 
charida (and family), son of Ratnakhimacharnda and Devaktara Bai, son of Prema- 
chamda and Ichhabai of the Oga race, Laghu Sa Sakha, inhabitant of Mumbai, consecrated 
in the reign of Vijaya-Dhanesvarasiri of the gachebha of Vijaya-Anatidastiri, called 
the Tapa gachchha. a 

No, lxxix’ (Date as Maes an image of Dharmanatha, dedicated by 84 Sahavi- 
sinigha, son of 84 Kesirisimgha, son of S4 KhugAlacharhda, son of Sa N&halacharhda, 
an OgayAla of the Vriddhasakha, inhabitant of Ahamad4v4d, consecrated by Sarmti- 
sigarasir: of the Sagara gachchha. 

No. Ixxx.’? (Date as above), an image of Adinatha, dedicated by Khemachamda 
(and family), son of Seth Moticharhda and Divali Bai, son of Seth Amichaihda and 
Rup& Bai; an Osavala of the Vriddhasdkha and N&hata gotra, inhabitant of Mumbai- 
pindara (Bombay), consecrated by Jinamahemdrasiri, successor of Jinaharshastri 
of the Brihat-Kharatara gachehha (Kharatara Pippaliya), during the reign of Gohel 
Pratapasimghayi. 

No. lxxxi.6 (Date as above), image of Seth Mol[tichamjda and his wife Ichhavali 
set up by Seth Khemacharhda, in the Kharatara-Ghinaliya (Pippaliya?) gachehha. 

No. Ixxxii (Date as above), image of SaitinAtha, dedicated by Seth Amichamda 
(etc., see No. Ixxx); consecrated by Jinamahemdra, (Kharatara-Pippaltya-gachche 
Lha-ja-yu sri-Jinadevasiiri tatpatie bha-sri-Jinachandasurt vidyamdne saparikarasame 

yute). 
. No. ixxxiii.” (Date as above), an image of Suparsvanatha, dedicated by Ripa Bal, 
wife of Seth Amichamda (ete., see No. ixxx) ; consecrated by Jinamahimdrastri, 
etc., (see the preceding No, Ixxxit). 

No. lxxxiv.’ (Date as above), an image in the temple of srivat-Kesaridevi (Amb4), 
dedicated by Murhgivahu, wife of Khemacharnda (etc., see No. Ixxx); consecrated by 
Jinamahemdrasiri, eic., (see No. lxxxii). 

No. lxxxv.’ (Date as above), an image of Pundarika, dedioatea by Khema- 
chamda (and family, ete., see No. Ixxx); consecrated by Jinamaherhdrasuri, ete. (see 
No. Ixxxil). 


No. Ixxxvi.? Samvat 1897, SAka 1738, Vaisaka, Sukla 18, Monday; an image 


% In the temple in the north-east corner of Sakalachand Premachand’s Tunk.— Lists, p. 213, No. 498.—J. B. 

©” In Motisdh’s Tunk, in the temple on the south side of the principal one.—Lists, p. 210, No. 420, 
' In Motiséh’s Tuak, on the base of image in a temple on the north of the principal one.—Lists, p. 210, No. 433. 
2 In Motisah’s Tuk, on the base of the principal image in the temple next to the preceding. 


< * Near the door below the image of the Seth and his wife, in the principal temple in Motisah’s Tunk. —Lists, p. 209, 
o, 417, 


4 On the base of an image to the right of the principal i image in temple No. 420.—Zists, p. 220. 


* On the base cf an image to the left of the principal image in a temple to the north-east of its central one. 


Bae * On the base of image of Amba Maté (Chakregvarf) to the right of the principal temple in Mczié&h Amichand’s 
Tun 


* On the base of Pundartka, in the temple at the entrance of Motisah’s Tunk ; the temple ef Pundarika always faces 
the principal shrine of Adinatha. —Lists, p. 209, No. 418.—J. B, 


On the base of image in a temple behind the principal one in Motiéah’s Tunk.—Lists, p. 210, No. 421. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. §3 


of Adinatha, dedicated by Phulachamda, son of Kapuracharnda and Kasali, son of 
Parekh Jibogha (?) and Lasham}, Srimali of the-Vriddha SAkha, inhabitant of Mumbai- 
bidar (Bombay), consecrated in the reign of Vijaya Devidr astri of the PPE 
gachchha, 

No, Ixxxvii.® Samvat 1900, Sika 1765, Magha gakla7 7, Friday ; a temple built by 
Kshemachamda. 

No. Ixxxviii.” Sarhvat 1903, Saka 1768, Magha, krishna 5, Friday; an image of 
Ripabai (ete, see No, Ixxxiii), dedicated by Kshemachamda; in the reign of 
Jinamahimdrasitri of the Brihat-Kharatara Pipaliya gachchha. ; 

No. Ixxxix.” Sarmvat 1905, Vaisdsha, Sukla 1, Monday; an image of Adinatha, 
dedicated by meheté Moticharhda, son of m. Khetasi, OSavéla of the Vriddha-Sakha, 
inhabitant of PAlanaptira; two other images of Adinatha, dedicated by his wives RAma- 
kuyara and Imdara, two more images of Adinatha, . dedicated by Marngali, son of meta 
igvara and Jidnavahu, son of Ramakuyar and Moticharhda, as well as by Dilubdi, wife 
of Khetasi, son of Milacharhda, in the reign of Devimdraguri of the Tapa gachchha. 

No. xe.” Sarmvat 1905, Saka 1770, Magha, sukla 5, Monday ; a temple built, thirty- 
two images of Charhdraprabhu and other Jinas dedicated, a dharmasald 120 gaja long 
and 40 gaja broad, built in Palitana, south side, an updsar in Palitana forthe Amchala 
gachchha restored, (ail) by S84 Hirajiand 84 Viraji with their wives Purabdi and 
Lila Bat, they being sons of $4 Narasi and Kuarabai, son of BhAramalla, and Marnka Bai 
Osavalas of the Laghu-sasha, and Nigada-gotra, members of the Amchala guchehha, 
inhabitants of Nabhinpura in Kachha, the pious works being made by the advice 
(«padesdt) of Muktisagarasdri of the Amchala gachchha. 

No. xci.3 Pedigree and record of the kenefactions of Seth Vakhatachanda, his 
son HemAbhAéi and his grandson, the late Nagargeth Premabhai of Ahmadabad. He 
belonged to the OsavAlajfati, the Addai Sakha, the Sigodia-vamsa, the Kumkumalola- 
gotra, worshipped the gotra-devi Asapuri, the Kshetrapila Barad&é. The pedigree 
includes (1) [K Julautapatirdj4 Samarhtasarhgha ramno, (2) his son Kuarapala, converted 
to Jainism by Acharaja Dharmagoshasiri, (3) his son 84 Harapati, (4) his son SA 
VachchbaA, (5) hisson SA Sehasakarana, (6) his son Seth [Sa]mtidasa of Rajanagara, a 
courtier (rdéjasabhdsragdéra) in the time (pravartte) of Dalipatipatassha—Sahajameaji, 
hisson Seth Lakhamichamda; (8) his son ShusAlachamda (Khushalchand), wife 
Jhamaku ; (9) their son Seth Vashatachamda (Vakhatchand). Then follow the names 
of the latter’s wives, children and grand-children, an enumeration of his, and his family’s 
benefactions with dates, from V. S. 1864 to 1905 and a pattdvali of the Sagara- 
gachchha ; (1) Rajasigarasiri; (2) Vriddhisagarasuri; (3) Lakshmisagarastri; (4) Kaly- 
Anasdgarasuri; (5) Punyasdgarasiri; (6) Udayasagarasuri; (7) Anandagdgarasari ; (8) 
Samtisagaragiri, V. S. 1905. 

No. xcii.* Samvat 1908, Chaitra vada 10, Wednesday ; a temple built in the Muhata 


9 In SAkalachand Premachand’s funk, on the left side wall, near the shrine door of the temple on the south-cast.— Z is¢s. 
p. 213, No. 499. 

® On the base of a female image near the door of the principal temple in Motisan’s Tunak. 

1 Tn Motisdh’s Tunk, south corridor, first room. 

® In the Kharataravasi Tuk in a temple outside the Chaumukh enclosure and behind that of Narsi Kesavji. 

13 In Hemabhai Vakhatachand’s Tunk, on the front wall, at the south corner, outside the principal temple of Aj ‘anath 
built by Premabhai.— Lists, p. 209, No. 407.—J. B. 

‘4 In Motisah’s Tuhk, in a room in the south corridor. 


84 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Mott-vasi (Motigndh’s Tunk), by Vriddhishamdaji, son of Mubaté Parhchina and 
Punyakuara, of the O Sa race, inhabitants of VikAnera: consecrated by Pam. Devem- 
drakuSala, brother of Anarndakusala of the Tapa gachchha. 

No. xciii.= Sarmvat 1908, Vaisisha krishna 7, Monday ; an image of Dharmanathaji, 
dedicated by Khusaélabhai, son of Dipachamda, a Srim4li, inhabitant of Rajanagara 

No. xciv.° (Date as above), an image of Sumatinitha, dedicated by Jethabhai, 
another son of Dipachamda (see No. xciii). 

No. xcy.” (Date as above), an imageof Rishabha, dedicated in thereign of Harkha- 
chamdastri by Jethabhai (&c., see No. xciv) of the Payachamda(?) gachchha, 
consecrated by Parn. Anamdakuéala. 

No. xcvi.’® Sarnvat 1910, Chetra, Sukla 15, Thursday ; in the reign of Rajarajes- 
vara Mahdrajadhiraja (!!) Gohil Sri Noghana, his son being PratApasimghaji, of 
Palitana, a new temple built and eight images of Adijina, Suvrata, Adindtha, Nami- 
nitha, AdinAtha, Sruvrata, Santindtha and Parsvan4tha, dedicated by Seth Vaghamal- 
aji, son of AgarakuvarabAt and Dhanarfipamalla, Osavala of the Vriddha Sakha and Sri- 
Murmiyaé gotra, inhabitants of Ajamera, consecrated in the reign of Jinasaubhagya- 
stiri, successor of Jina harsha of the Khar. ga. by Hemachamdra, younger pupil 
(laghusikshya) of Mamnasurmdaraji, of Harshakirtti, pupil of Dayavilasaji, pupil of 
Jayabhadraji, pupil of Pam. Kanakasesharaji. 

No. xcvii.® Samvat 1911, Phdlguna, krishna 2 Monday,” an image of Abhinam. 
danasvamimilanayaka, dedicated in the Motivasitunka by Sa K 4Alid4sa, son of Bai-Deva 
and Bhagavana, son of SA Harashachamda, a Visé Poravada, inhabitant of Rajanagara ; 
consecrated by Pam. Anardakusala in the reign of Devimdrasdri of the Tapa 
gachchha. 

No. xcviii.” Sarhvat 1913, Magasara, sudi 6; NWavdsare, an image of Sarntinatha, 
dedicated by Seth Phattebhai, son of $4 Motibhai and Rupakurhvarabai, of the Sisodia- 
sasha and Kumkamalola-gotra, inhabitant of Ammadavad. 

No. xcix.” (Date as above), an image of Dharmanatha, dedicated by Seth Chagana- 
bhi, son of Siradérakumvarabéi and Sa. Manasgushabhai, of the Sisodia sdsha and 
the Kumkamalola-gotra, inhabitant of Ahamadavad. 

No. ¢.% (Date as above), an image of Abhinarmdana, dedicated by Samarathakua- 
rabai, daughter of Pradhdnakumvarabai and Seth Surajamalabhai, OSavAla of the 
Sisodié sAsha and the Kumkamalola gotra, inhabitant of Ahammadavad. 

No. ci.* Sarhvat 1914 (written 19014), Margasirsha, sidi 7, Monday ; an image of 
Dattajina, dedicated by Bai Aimdra, wife of Saha Velachamda MAnyekachamda of 
Rajanagara, 

No. cii.* Sarnvat 1914 (written 19014), Margasirsha, vadi aikame,” Wednesday 
(vdrabuddhe); an image of Sfvrattajina, dedicated by BAt Harakuia yyara, wife of 
Manikachamda Khimachamda, an Usa of Rajanagara. 


% To Motiéah’s Tunk, in a room in the south corridor, 20 Date on the image 903, 
next the preceding.—J. B. 21 In Hemabhai’s Tunak, south wing, room No. 33.—-J. B. 
16 In the same room as the preceding, 33 Hemabhai’s Tunak, south wing, No. 32. 
¥ Tn the same place as in No, xciii. 33 Tn the same corridor, No. 31. 
8 In the Chaumukh enclosure, on the east wall of a marble 34 In Motisah’s Tunak, south corridor, No. 28; see No. evi. 
temple behind the great one.— Lists, p. 206, No. 326. % In Motiésh’s Tunk, south corridor, No. 22.—J. B. 
© In Motiéih’s Tunk, in a room in the south corridor.— %© Date on the image Samvat 1693. 


J. B, 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM SATRUMJAYA. 85 


No. ciii.” Samvat 1916, Vaisakha, krigsna 6, Thursday, (ultards)ddhanakshatra 
samkrdrnti mesha, stirjo udaydt ghati 1, pala 45); a temple (Srivdsupéjyaprasdda) built, 
ydtré and various benefactions made by an inhabitant of Kapadavanaja, a Nemma by 
race, of the Vriddha-sdsha and Maniy4na-gotra, called SA Hirdlji, his son Guldba- 
chamda and wife Manakuvara, their son Parekha Mithubhai and wife Benakum- 
vara, their son Karamacharhda and wives (1) Bai Jadava, (2) Bai Siven, consecrated in the 
reign of Vidyanamdasitri, successor of Dhanesarastri of the Anandastri gachchha 
by Gani Ramgavijaya, pupil of Pam. Viravijaya, pupil of Parn. Dhiravijaya, a samvega- 
pakshi, pupil of Pam. Khemavijaya of the Tapa gachchha, during the reign of rajda- 
dhiréja Pratapasimghaji. 

No. civ.* Sarnvat 1916, Saka 1781, Phalguna, krishna 2, Friday ; ; an image of 
Ajitandtha, dedicated in the new temple in the Vakhatachamdavast, by Seth Ano- 
pachamda, son of Vakhatachamda (etc., see No. xci), and by his wife Adhira and 
daughter Bai Ddhirya (Dhiraj), in the reign of Vijaya-Devemdrastri of the 
Tapa gachehha. 

No. evi.” Samvat 1922, Margasara, vadi 7, Thursday; an, irhage of Aranatha, 
dedicated by Sivaprasada, son of Modi Namidasa, OSava4la of the Vriddha Sakha and 
the ChhaAjeda gotra, inhabitant of Kasi, consecrated by Hirachardra, pupil of Pain. 
Devacharhda, by command of (?) Jinamuktisdri of the Brihat-Kharatara gachchha. 

No. evii.” Samvat 1924, Magha sukla 10, Monday”; an image of Sitalanathaji, 
dedicated by SA Amolakakasala, a Dasa-Poravada of the Laghu-Sakha, inhabitant of 
Visdlanagara (Visalnagar ?) in Gujara-desa; his sons were Milachamda, MayAchamda, 
Ravichamda, their sons Gokala, Dipachamda and Shimachamda; consecrated in the 
reign of Vijaya-Devendrasitri of the Tapé gachchha by Pam. Ratnavijaya. 

No. cviii.’ Sarvat 1928, Magha sukla 13, Thursday; an image of PArgvajina, 
in their own temple (deharZ) in the Tunk of Seth Motisa, dedicated by Pragajt and 
his father Galdlachamnda, the latter being the son of Bai Iratana, and Khimaji, son of 
Jhaveri Veliji of Navanagara. 

No, cix.* Sarvat 1930, Chaitra vada 2; an image of Dharmanitha, dedicated by 
Sa Mamnakachamda Motichamda, of Amadavad. 

No. ex.* Vikrama-Samvat 1939, Mahamasa, krisna 12, Tuesday; an image of SAm- 
tindtha, dedicated by NanApuja Sa Pitambaraddsa, a Poravida of the Laghu Sakha 
inhabitant of Amadavad. 

No. exi. Samvat 1940, Saka 1805, Vaisakha Sukla 3, Monday (ishta ghati 3 pala 
10 suryodaydt) ; during the reign of Goyala Sdrasimghaji of Palitana, in the time of 
Vivekasdgarasiri of the Amchala gachchha, an image of Adinatha dedicated 
in $4 Kegava Nayaka’s Tunk in the temple of Pumdarika, by Saha Trikama, who lives 
in Nalinapura, in Kachchha and in Mu[m] baibimdar (Bombay), an OSavala of the 
Laghu sakh4 and Shota-gotra ; consecrated by Muni Shetasi. 

27 In the Balabhat Tunk, near the shrine door of the temple in the south-east.— Lists, p. 212, No. 493—J. B. 

28 In Hemabhai’s Tudk, in another room, No. 27 of the same Bhdmti, with No. c. 

29 Tp Motéah’s Tunak, in a room in the south corridor, No, 28; in the same room as No. ci. 


30 In Motis&h’s Tunk, in the south corridor room No. 23.—J. B. 

31 Date on the image—Samvat 1903. 

32 In Motiéah’s Tunk, in the south corridor room No. 30—J.B. 

33 In Motisah’s Tuak, south corridor No. 38. 

4 In Sakalchand Premachand’s Tunk, west side corridor, small shrine No. 18, under an image. 
35In the shrine of Pundarika at Keéavji Navak’s temple in Vimalavasi Funk.—J. B. 


86 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. exii.* Samvat 1940, Magha éukla 6, Saturday; an image of _Parsvanatha, 
dedicated by Parasatimidhaya (?), son of Jayasimha Himacharnda, a SrimAlt of the 
Vriddua Sakha, inhabitant of Amatav4 4ma (?), consecrated by Parnnydsa GulAbavijaya- 
gani, pupil of Pamanyasa Manivijaya. 

No. cxiii.” Sayhvat 1940, Phaleuna sukla 3, Friday; an image of Dharmanatha, 
dedicated by Ramachamda Phulachamda, a Vriddha Srimali, inhabitant of Anahil- 
lapura; consecrated by Parnnydsa Guldbavijaya gani, pupil of Pamnydsa Manivijaya- 
gani of the Samvijna-paksha of the Tapa gachchha. 

No. exiv.® Samvat 1943, Pausa, krisna astami, Monday ; a Vasupdjyajina, dedicated 
by Sa Kevala Lakhamicha(m)da, a Dasa-Saramili (Srimili) of AmadavaAd, 
his wife Kesarabai, his son ChunilAla, with his wife Parasanabai, and their daughter 
Bena Sadmkuna. 

No. cxv.* Saznvat 1943, Maga sukala 10, Thursday; an image of Sa(m)tindth, dedi- 
cated by 8&4 Lalu Vakhatachamd(a),-a Visd-Osavala of Amadavad, his wife Bai 
Adhir, his daughter Dhiraja, and his sons Vadilala and Bholabhai. 

No. exvi.” No date; an image of Sreyarhsa, dedicated at the request (upadeéga) of 
Kalydnasagarastri® of the Amchala gachchha, consecrated on Vaisdkha sudi 8, 
Wednesday. 

No. exvii.” Samvat 15..(? ?)...sudi 5; buddhe, an Ashtapada, dedicated by 
Jhaverachamda (?), mentions also the name of Udayasagarastri. 


No. exviii.* 


L. 1. 1 af 0 @ gaye [a] B° gfe. 12. wagerrent |g | faat- 

2. arat ofafecarasiz- 13. at waasatyferarat (a-] 
3. ararurterastaurerat li. feeanadtsaatte-” 

4. frraartfaaarfean- 15. alcieaatfeay é =tfa- 
5. Rerun fasw- | 16. aaeuafufa” | a a° Bq- 
6. erat weraetfasre- 17. eu W° Swear” 
7. wafrawafatea- 18. 7° wafasra a° 0° safa- 
8. ufanraearareaaret- | 19. saw watewawafa-” 

9. tfaerai = ge Aheikefa- 20. wa a° afa [S ]werfeahe- 
10. Bae, Corerat BreTam- 21. wasarfiafra fata- 
ll. fueslfefatiaaaa-” | 22. ° barat aren afar aeg [1] 


Samvat 1650, Chaitra full moon day; Vimalaharsha, pupil of bhattaraka Hira- 
vijaya, of the Sapha gotra, which latter was honoured by SAhi Akabbara and received 


from him the Siddhasaila (Satrunjaya), made a pilgrimage, together with 200 other 
monks, 


3% Ta a cell of Keéayji Nayak’s temple in the Vimalavast * Ona brass plate ia Modi P 
7 h % 
Pe eT et Beate remachand’s temple, see No. 
7 In some place as the preceding 43 On the south wall of the tem 
, ple of Adigvara Bhage 
38 In Sakalachand Premachand’s Tunk, on the seat below | temple. —J. B. ees 
the image in the temple to the right of the principal one. 4 Read WETTH® 
* In Saékalachand Premachand, under an image, west sidc, % Read “arte: 
corridor 17. 4 Read Capea? 
# On thé base of an image in a temple outside the HAthi. 7 Read “fafa: 
pela, pe th side.— List, p. 201, No, 234, 4 Boag a ° 3 
‘| Tiflis naroe shows that the inscription belongs to Samvat 49 ae ean 
1675 ov 1683,—1678 is the date of the temple cy B. Rae 
: 50 Read “ey? 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS, 87 


VIL—VOT"VE INSCLIPTIONS FROM THE SANCHI STUPAS. 
By G. Binur, Pa.D., LU.D., C.1.E. 


The subjoined transcripts of a large namber of the votive inscriptions, found on the 
Sanchi, or more correctly KAkandda,'Stdpas Nos. I and 11, have been prepared accord- 
ing to impressions by Drs. Burgess and Fiihrer. The former took impressions of about 
twenty inscriptions in the beginning of 1889, and Dr. Fihrer, who visited SAnchi during 
the cold season of 1839-90, made copies of thu wiole collection. Compared with Sir 
A. Cunningham’s collection,? Bhilsa Topes, plates xvi—xix and xxi, the present 
ones show a huudred and ten inscriptions less for Stipa I, and twenty-seven less for Stipa 
TI. On the other hand, there are, counting the duplicates, forty-one inscriptions from 
Stipa I and five from Stipa IT which I cannot trace in Sir A. Cunningham’s work. The 
missing inscriptions are probably incised on stones, which may have been lost in the repairs 
executed some years ago, or during the forty years which have elapsed since the preparation 
of Sir A.Cunningham’s book. The most serious loss is that of Sir A. Cunningham’s No, 
177 (Bhilsa Topes, plate xix), see also Corpus Inser. Ind., vol. I, Plate xx’, which, as I 
have already pointed out in the Indian Antiguery, vol. XIX, p. 124, seems to contain a 
second version of ASoka’s so-called Kosambi edict on the AllahabAd Pillar. This much 
appears highly probable from «4 comparison of the middle portions of the two inscrip- 
tions :— 


Allahébéd. Sdnche, 
oe oe ee eo « Samngharh [ .] HPA co ees tone. ear bly to) 
[Bho] khati bhikhu-va Luikhuni-va, [pi] Bhokhati bhikhu {v*] 4 bhikhuni [v4] 
cha [ .J-(2) da[t@jni:j(d}usint. . nam [ .] data (4) ni dufca]ni s[4*]nam. 
dbapayitu dnapesa .v.s. yey. [ »] [dh* a]pfa*jyit [u*] an&fp*le (5) sasi 


visapetaviye [ .] ichhd hi me sf (6) ti 
samghasa * mage chilathitike siya ti ( 7). 


Assuming a new sentence to begin with bhokhatt L. 5, the remainder of the Sdnchi 
version may be translated as follows :— 


‘“‘ Monks and nuns will dine,® (and) causing white cloths to be put down f.x them, 
(you) will order it to be spread. For my wish is this, that the path of the Commenity 
(of Buddhist monks) may endure for a long time.” 

The order is evidently addressed to an official, probably to the mahdmdira in charge 
of MAlv4, just as the edict on the Allahdbid Pillar gives directions to the governor of 


1 See J. F. Fleet: Corp. Inser. ind. vol. II, p. 31. 

Inscriptions found only in Sir A. Cunningham’s collection will be referred to in the sequel, according to his numbers 
to which C is prefixed. 

3 During the repairs under Major Keith, many loose stones were built into the dome, some of which may have 
borne short votive inscriptions. The Aéoka edict was on a fragment of a large pillar, whic. stiil lies at the great stipa. This 
and others may possibly have been overlooked by Dr. Fiihrer in his hurried visit.—J. B. 

4 Sir A. Cunningham’s two facsimiles (A, Bii?sa Topes, Plate xix; B, Corp. inser. Ind., vol. I Plate xx) have the 
following readings, which I have corrected :— 

L. 4, ta bhikhu . .% omddto (A) ché bhikhuni yt khuddtd (B.) ; 

L. 5, dupdni (A), du [sa] pir (B) ; sanam (A, B); chhavam andte (A); pdyita and (B); 

L. 6, vidhavetaviye (A). 

L. 7, tish sarhghamsa (A), tim (B) ; miluthitikem (A). 

I do not dare to propose a restoration of the first thr-> lines of the Sanchi version. Mr. Prinsep’s and Sir A. Cunnirg- 
ham’s attempts (Bailsa Topes, p. 260 f.) do not seem to me succe:.ful, ; 

5 Or perhaps “ (if) a monk or a nun will dine, (hen) etc.” 


88 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Kosambi. According to Childers, Pali Dictionary (sub voce dussa), it was customary 
with the Buddhists to spread white cloths on the seats prepared for the reception of 
distinguished monks. It is this mark of honour which both versions order to be shown 
to the monks and nuns visiting the sacred places. The concluding sentence of the Sanchi 
version, which probably was omitted on the Allahabad Pillar, may mean either that the 
king wishes the tenets (mage) of the Buddhist monks to exist for a long time, or that he 
desires the visits of the faithful to the sacred places to continue for a long time. The 
wording of this inscription shows the peculiar breadth which the Beloved of the Gods 
affects in his edicts, and we have the phrases, familiar to every reader of the latter, ‘‘ for 
it is my wish” and “that . . . may endure for a long time.” Finally, it must be 
pointed out that chilathitika, instead of which the dialect of Malva would have required 
chirathitika, as well as the final e of the masculine nominative singular mage, is a Maga- 
dhism, and that (as already stated by Sir A. Cunningham) the letters of the Sanchi version 
show the type of Agoka’s Rock and Pillar edicts. This inscription furnishes, therefore, 
the proof that the pillar at the South Gate, on which it has been found, dates from Asoka’s 
times. It, further, permits us to infer that those inscriptions on the railings of the Stapa, 
which show the same characters, belong to an equally early period. The latter inference 
agrees with Sir A. Cunningham’s views, who, besides, has assigned the inscriptions on the 
gateway to much later times.’ According to his opinion all the latter documents belong 
to the first century A.D., because their characters are of the same type as his No. 190, 
which records a donation of V 4sithiputa Anarmda, dvesani or foreman of the artisans 
of king Siri-SAtakani. Identifying this Satakani with the third king of the Andhra 
dynasty, Sir A. Cunningham assigns to him, in accordance with Professor H. H. 
Wilson’s calculations, the years 19-37 A.D., and thus places the date of Anamda’s 
inscription in the beginning of the first century of our era. Though I fully agree with 
Sir A. Cunningham in considering the Satakani of his No. 190 to be the third Andhra 
king of the Pauranik lists, I must differ from him regarding the date. The characters 
of his inscription No. 190, as well of the others on the Sanchi gateway, are in my 
opinion much earlier than the first century of our era. They are almost identical with 
those of the NAandghat inscriptions, and differ only slightly from the type of the 
characters of Asoka’s times. It deserves also to be noted that among the inscriptions of 
the Seth Nagapiya two, our Nos. 85 (=C. 182) and C. 192, are in the later characters, 
while one, our No. 7 (= C. 13) on Stipa No. II, shows the same characters as Asoka’s 
inscriptions. Such a vacillation is easily explicable, if NAagapiya lived in the second 
century B.C. But it is difficult to understand on the supposition that his donations 
were made two centuries later. Further, there is another important argument, which 
makes it probable that the first Siri-Satakani of the Andhra dynasty ruled, not after 
the beginning of our era, but about the middle of the second century B.C. I can only 
agree with Dr. Bhagvanlal’ in identifying the first Andhra SAtakani with the Satakani, 
whom Kharavela, king of Kalinga, protected in the second year of his reign. The 


6 Bhilsa Topes, pp. 271 ff. Sir A. Cunningham’s assertion that the occurrence of the name Gotiputra (in our No. 49) 
possesses & great value for determining the age of the railing, is of course no longer tenable. Correctly interpreted, Gotiputra, 
in Sanskrit Gauptiputra, means only that the royal scribe Subdhita was the son of a lady of the Gota or Gaupta race. It 
by bn means follows that she was the same person as the Goti or Gaupti who bore the famous Buddhist teacher of Agoka’s 

mes, 

7 Actes du siwidme Congres int. des Orient., vol. III, 2, p. 146. Dr. Bhagva- lal, who assumes that the Maurya era 
began with Aéoka’s conquest of Kalinga, fixes the beginning of Satakari’s reign in 95 B.C. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 89 


thirteenth year of Kharavela corresponds with the year 165 of the Maurya era (Bhagvaunlal, 
op, cit. p. 149). Assuming, as I believe must be done, that the Maurya era begins with 
the coronation of Chandragupta, which fell between 322—312 B.C., Kharavela’s second 
year lay between 169 and 159 B.C., and Siri-Satakani was on the throne about that 
time. For these reasons I must assign our Nos. 88—88 and Sir A. Cunningham’s 
Nos. 178, 179, 188, 184, 186—192, 194—196 to the first half of the second century B.C. 
To the same, and partly even to a later, period belong also our Nos. 18 (C. 25), 21 (C. 89), 
31 (C. 112), 96, 108, 111 and 123. Among these, Nos. 18, 51 and 96 particularly 
show the characteristics noticeable in the inscriptions of the first century A.D., viz. 
the inverted da, the square sa, the angular ma, and the anusvdra above the line. All 
these inscriptions, with the exception of No. 21, are very badly engraved and not much 
better than mere scrawls. Their occurrence on the railings among much older docu- 
ments may possibly be explained by the supposition that they record repairs of older — 
broken vedikds. 

With respect to the age of the inscriptions on Stipa II, it is important to note 
that one person, who contributed to the gateways of Stipa I, appears as donor of a 
piece of the railing. This is Seth NAagapiya, whose case has already been noticed.? It is 
further remarkable that Balaka, the pupil of Arahaguta-Sdasadaka, occurs in No. 19 
(C.) of Stipa II, while his teacher is named as donor in No. 18 (C. 35) of Stipa I. 
These two facts point to the conclusion that portions of, or perhaps the whole, railing 
were erected somewhat later than Asoka’s times. But the interval cannot be very great, . 
because, as Sir A. Cunningham has pointed out (Bhilsa Lopes, p. 291), the letters of 
the inscriptions on Stdpa II fully resemble those of Agoka’s edicts. And it agrees with 
this estimate, as Sir A. Cunningham has likewise stated (loc. cit.),’ that the Stdpa IT 
contained the relics of contemporaries or Asoka, of Moggaliputa, who, according to the 
Buddhist works, presided at the thid Council of Pataliputra, and of Majhima who was 
sent as missionary to the districts in the Himalaya and is called in the inscription on the 
relic box savahemavatdchariya “the teacher of the whole Haimavata (district).” 

The language of the inscriptions likewise agrees with the assumption that they 
belong to the third century B.C., and to the first half of the second. It differs very little 
from the literary Pali and still less from the dialects of Asoka’s edicts, and it shares all 
the peculiarities of that of the Bharhut inscriptions,” which latter, with the exception 
of the inscription over the gateway, on the evidence of their characters belong to the 
time of the Maurya dynasty. 

The inflected forms show, like the Bharhut inscriptions, a mixture of the case ter- 
minations used in the eastern and western versions of Asoka’s edicts. This is particularly 
noticeable in the genitives of the feminine stems in ¢ and d, which sometimes end in ya 
or yd, and sometimes in ye. Not traceable in Pali and Asoka’s edicts is the ablative in 
dto, which occurs three times in I, 51, 59, and 64, It is found once in the Bharhut 
inscription No. 116. It is very common in the Jaina Mathura inscriptions,” and the 

8 It is also possible that Nagila, the pupil of Aya, mentioned in No. 1 of Stdpa I, may be identical with the venerable 
Nagila, whose relatives according to No, 84 (C. 181) made a portion of the gateway of Stipa L 

® I cannot agree with Sir A. Cunningham that there were relics of ten contemporaries of Asoka. There are only two 
pames which agree with those mentioned in the Dipavansa and the Mahdvansa. 

© See Dr. E. Hultzsch’s excellent edition of these documents in the Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen 


Gesellschaft, vol. KL, p. 58 ff. The references in the sequei give his numbers and readings. 
N See ante, vol. I, p. 372. 


90 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


original from which the Sauraseni termination ddo and the Mahashtri do have been derived. 
Peculiar is also the nominative, instead of the crude form, at the end of the first part of a 
compound. It occurs once in I. 3, where kekateyakasa jamata-vijitasa is a negligent 
spelling for kekateyakasajdmdté-vijitasa, and takes the place of the grammatically correct 
jamatu or jamati-vijitasa. The some anomaly is repeatedly observable ix the Bharhut 
inscriptions, see e.g. No. 10, isimigo-jdtaka, and it is very common in the Jaina Mathura 
inscriptions.” Further, the use of the feminine affix 4 at the end of female names in 
devd, e.g. Sonado [de]vd, I, 8; Dhamadeva II, 3; which agrees with that of the Bharhut 
inscriptions e.g. in Chdpadevd, No. 22, differs from the Pali. But it would be correct 
even in Sanskrit, if the compounds are taken as Bahuvrihis and in the sense of ‘‘ she whose 
god is Sona, Dhama, or Chapa.” 

The word-forms are in general of the type of the Pali and of Asoka’s Girnar edicts. 
Even the ra, which is never changed to ia, is occasionally preserved in groups of conson- 
ants. And it is worthy of note that in the name Prdlithanasa, I. 12, even the spelling 
of the initial syllable agrees exactly with that used in the Girnar inscriptions for words 
like préza, priya and soforth. ‘The 4 stroke is attached to ra, and both are placed above 
the pa, which thus shows at the top the well-known wavy line. Some of the words, which 
differ from those used in Pali and Asoka’s edicts, are at least- formed according to prin- 
ciples -prevalent or traceable in the most ancient Prakrits. Bhichhu, which appears far 
more frequently than bhikhu, shows the change of ksha to chchha or chha observable in 
Pali achchhi, a variant for akkhi, and ASoka’s chhudaka for khudaka and other. words.4 
The only remarkable point is that the form with chha doés not occur in this parti- 
cular case in Pali, nor in Asoka’s edicts, but that it is found repeatedly in the Bhar- 
hut inscriptions” see, e.g., Nos. 27, 31, 65, 120. Nhusé, I. 22, which clearly stands 
for Sanskrit snushd.‘ daughter-in-law” has been formed according to the principle applied 
in Pali to medial sv. It is interesting, because neither the Pali ‘nor Aégoka’s dialects ad- 
mit the group nh in the beginning of this or any other word. The Pali forms for snushd 
are sunisd, sunkd and husd." Nusd, a further corruption of xhusd, appears in our inscrip- 
tion, I. 73. The proper name Patithiya, 1.22, 23, no doubt represents the Sanskrit 
pratishthita, and thus shows an elision of a medial ta. Such elisions are rare in the most 
ancient Prakrits. Nevertheless, a number of similar forms has been collected in Professor 
Kuhn’s Beitrage zur Pali Grammatik, p. 56. 

A large number of other peculiarities which the Sdnchi and Bharhut inscriptions 
exhibit are, I think, merely graphic and -partly due to negligent spelling. Among these 
I would reckon :— 


(1) The frequent omission of a medial long 4, e.g. in danam for ddnam, I. 6, 49, 82, 
jamata for jamdté, I. 8, Achalaya for Achaldya, I. 6, Sonado[de]vaya for 
Sonadevaya, |. 8, upasikdye for updsikdye, 1. 20, Asvadevaye for A svadeviye, 
I. 80, Yasilaya for Yasildya, 1. 33, pajavatiyd for pajdvatiyd, 1. 48, bhatu 
for bhdtu, 1. 63, Samidatasa for Sdmidatasa, 1, 65, Avisinaye for Avisindye, 


12 See ante, vol. I, p. 375. < 

Such compounds would fall under the general rule of Panini, IV, 1, 4, which teaches that nouns in a take din the 
feminine. 

4 See E. Miller: Palt Grammar, p. 55 ;—Kuhn: Beitrdge zur Pali-Grammatik, p. 62. 

1 Another abnormal chha occurs in sechha, Sanskrit Saiksha and Pali sekha, Bharhut.inscriptions, No. 15. 

6 The latter probably stood in I, C, 58, where Sir A. Cunningham gives a meaningless pusa ; see below, note 27, 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRITIONS. 9] 


I. 79, Arapdna for Ardpdné (ablative), 1. 89 Jitamitaye for Jitdémitaye, I. 
101, Vedisakaya for Vedisakdya, 1. 117, Dhamasenaya for Dhamasendya, 
II. 9, and Ndgapalitaya for Négapdalitéya, II. 10.” 

(2) The occasional omission of short i, e.g., in Dhamarakhatdye for Dhamarakhitaye, 
I. 76, and bhichhunayd for bhichhuniyd, I. 119. 

(3) The almost invariable omission of medial anusvdras, e.g. in Udubaraghara 
and its derivatives (see Appendix, List V), in Nadinagara and its derivatives 
(see ibidem), Tubavana (ibidem), Upidadata (see Appendix, List III), in the 
proper names beginning with Dhama® (see Appendix, Lists I-V), and in 
atevdsi for amtevdsi I. 12, 66, 88, 112. 

It seems to me that the omission of the long 4 is due everywhere to carelessness, 
and has for its ultimate cause the custom, common even in late times'among clerks and 
tradesmen, of omitting the vowel-marks altogether; for, the real existence of forms 
like jamata, jataka and jitamita, in the spoken language, has little probability. As 
regards the omission of 7-strokes and of the Anusvaras, it is possible to conceive also of 
other explanations. The syllables in which the 7 is omitted stand, one and all, én thesi, 
i.e. immediately before or after the syllable which bears the stress-accent. A vowel 
which is placed in such a position is very indistinct, and it is not impossible that na and. 
kha were sometimes actually pronounced instead of né and khé in words like bhichhdnayd 
and Dhamarakhatdye. A good many vowel-changes in the literary Prakrits are due to 
this principle, and a still greater number in the modern vernaculars of India. It must 
also be noted that in Asoka’s inscriptions aya appears occasionally instead of cya,’ and 
for the same reason. - 

With respect to the omission of the Anusvara it must be borne in mind that the 
spelling dhama’ instead of dhasma® is perfectly admissible, because in these inscrip- 
tions a single consonant does duty for a double one, and hence dhama may be read 
dhamma, as the word is invariably spelt in Pali. Further, Upidadata and Tubavana 
may stand for Upidadata and Tibavana, because long 4 and @.are marked very rarely 
in these, as in other old inscriptions. But forms like Upidadatta and Titbavana are 
again admissible in Pali and other ancient Prakrits, where ¢ and @ may be put for 7m and 
um as in stha, visati and so forth. And it must be noted that the form Ida for Indra 
occurs repeatedly, e.g.in L.1 of the large Nandghat inscription, Archeological Rep. 
West Ind., Vol. V, p. 60. A form like Nadinagara may be a negligent spelling 
for Nddinagara, which actually occurs in our inscription I. 7; for the Pali and the 
other Prakrits show in a number of cases d for am, e.g., in ddthé for damshtrd, sandésa 
for samdamsa and so forth. It is no matter of surprise that the dialect of the inscrip- 
tions should show these changes more frequently than the literary language of the 
Buddhist canon. These explanations of the omission of the Anusvara seen to me more 
probable than the assumption that'it is simply in every case due to negligence. 

Turning to the contents of the inscriptions, the latter offer, in spite of their extreme 
brevity, a good many points of interest. Among the two hundred and eighty-five in- 

7 Analogous cases are extremely common in the Bharhut inscriptions, and it will suffice to quote one sentence, 


No. 155, yam brédhmano avayesi jatakam, which, as- Dr. Hultzsch has pointed out, is a quotation from Jétakas, vol. I., 
p- 293, verse 61 (Fausboll), where the text. has yam bréhmano avddesi. * 

18 See M. Senart’s collection of such forms in the Indian Antiquary, vol. XVII, p. 304; and my additions in der 
Zeitschrift der Deutsehen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, vol. XLV, p. 154, to whica instances chetaya for Sanskrit chaé 
tya, Pali chetiya, has to be added from the Bharhut inscription No, 11. S95 


92 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


scriptions, contained in Sir A. Cunningham’s and the present collections, there are ten, 
recording donations by corporate bodies or families. The remainder give the names 
of individual donors. If a certain number of mutilated, or according to the facsimiles 
inexplicable, inscriptions are left out, and if the homonymous donors are considered 
to be the same persons,” we find among them fifty-four monks and thirty-seven nuns, 
as well as ninety-one males and forty-five or forty-seven females, who probably were 
lay members of the Buddhist sect.” 

On-the other hand, it is not improbable that two persons, bearing slightly different 

names, may be identical. Thus the monk Jonaka, I,C. 152, may be the same as the 
monk Jonhaka, I, 75. 
_ Among the corporate bodies making donations, there are, according to the explana- 
tions given below, two villages, Vejaja I, 17, and Padukulika II, 1. Sir A. Cun- 
ningham (Bhilsa Topes, p. 240 and p. 280) takes in both cases grdma as a personal 
name or as a part of such. But grdma is not used in such a manner, and the translation 
of Vejajasa gémasa ddnam by “ Gift of Vejajjagrama,” is grammatically inadmissible, 
as that could only be Vejajagdmasa dénam. On the other hand, the form of the two 
names agrees well with the suggestion that they denote villages, for, Padukulika 
corresponds to Pandukulika, ‘the little dwelling,’ or the little sanctuary of PAndu, i.e. 
the Naga Pandu, and the word Vejaja closely agrees in its ending with the termina- 
tions aj, ej, and ij, which occur in hundreds of Indian village names as corruptions of 
the affixes aya, eya and zya™. Its first part corresponds to Sanskrit vaidya, which 
possibly may be an abbreviation of Vaidyandtha.” Pious donations, made by villages or 
towns, do not occur frequently in the inscriptions”, and those recorded on the Sanchi 
Stdpas possess a particular interest for, though, perhaps, they do not prove that all 
the inhabitants of Vejaja and Padukulikaé were Upasakas of the Buddhist Samgha, they 
yet indicate that their most influential men, the members of the village Panch, belonged 
to the Bauddha sect, and that Buddhism had gained a footing among the agricultural 
population of Malva. Of equal interest is the mention of a Bodhagothi, in I, 25, 26. 
The compound corresponds to Bauddhagosthi. A goshthiis a committee of trustees in 
charge of a temple or of a charitable foundation. The inscriptions teach us, therefore, 
that the village of Dharmavardhana possessed a Bauddha shrine, or perhaps a Vihara, 
which was managed by such a committee. The fact that Goshthis existed in the third 
century B.C. is of some importance. The term gotht occurs also in I, 51, where it is 
preceded by the word Barulamisdya or Barulamiséna, I am unable to explain the latter 
term. The collective gift of the Vedisaka ddimtakdrd, or workers in ivory of Vedisa, 
I, C. 189, probably indicates that these artisans formed a guild, or érent, such as the 
Nasik inscriptions mention repeatedly. 

Among the remaining inscriptions of this class, which mention the Vakiliyas of 
Ujjain, I, 27, C. 21, all the relatives of the venerable N Agila, I, 84, and the Upasikas 

1° This is, of course, by no means certain, because in some cases persons bearing the same names are clearly distinet. 


Thus Asvadeva, the mother of Bahadata (I, 30), is certainly not the same person as Asvadeva, the mother of Samika (I, C. 83), 
nor the nun'Isidaté of Madhuvana (I, C. 132), the same as the nun Isidata of Kurara. 
* The number of the Upasikds is uncertain, because possibly the Odi, mentioned I, 82, may be identical with the nun 
Odi, IT, 11, and because the interpretation of I, 21 is uncertain. 
* The map of Gujarat furnishes ¢. g., Adalaj, Arnej, Kamlej, Kamrej, Pariyaj, Palej, Prantij, Sarkhej. Among these 
Kamrej (also Kamle}), east of Surat, was called in Sanskrit Karmaneya or Kanantya (Indian Antiquary, vol. XVII, p. 193) 
* Vaidya occurs as the name of a village in the Nepal inscriptions ; Ind. Ant. vol. 1X, p- 175. , 
* The Bharhut inscription No. 16 mentions a gift of the town of Karahakata (Karahakata-nigamasa), 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 93 


or female lay worshippers of Navagama, I, C. 53, the first two are the most interesting. 
If, as I believe to be the case, the Vakala devi, the mother of Ahimita, mentioned 
in I, C. 8, belonged to this family, it must have been a royal, or at least a noble race. 
With this supposition, Vakiliya, further, must be considered to stand for Vékaliya. 
It would then correspond to Sanskrit Varkaliya and Vakalé to Varkalé. Both forms 
might be somewhat irregular patronymics from Vrikala, which name is found in the 
mythological lists of the Purdnas (see the Petersburg Dictionary, sub voce). 

Proceeding to the inscriptions which mention donations made by monks and 
nuns, the first point, which must strike every reader, is their great number, which 
is proportionally greater than that found on any other Stfipa except at Bharhut or 
in the caves. As the Buddhist ascetics could not possess any property, they must have 
obtained by begging the money required for making the rails and pillars. This was no 
doubt permissible, as the purpose was a pious one. But it is interesting to note the 
different proceedings of the Jaina ascetics, who, according to the Mathura and other 
inscriptions, as a rule, were content to exhort the laymen to make donations and 
to take care that this fact was mentioned in the votive inscriptions. Another in- 
teresting point in which these inscriptions again agree with those of the Bharhut 
Stipa is the entire absence of all mention of the Buddhist sects, which are fre- 
quently named in the Nasik, Karlé, Amardvati and other inscriptions. There are, 
on the other hand, a few specifications or titles given to certain monks and nuns, 
which are not without importance. Two terms of this kind, Sutdtikiné or Sdtdti- 
kint, I, 79, 80, “a female reciter of the Suttanta or the Siitras” and dhamakathika, 
I, C.191, “a reciter of the Dhamma,” have been recognised by the earlier decipher- 
ers. But, a third very interesting one, pachanekayika, I. 66, has escaped detection. 
Pachanekayika is a negligent spelling for pdchanekdyika or pamchanekdyika, which 
former occurs in the Bharhut inscription No. 144, in Sanskrit pdtichanaikdyika, and 
means, as Dr. Hultzsch has translated it, loc. cié., “one who knows the five Nikayas.” 
The five Nikayas are (see Childers, Pali Dictionary, sub voce) the five divisions of the 
Sutta Pitaka, the Dighanikayo, Majjhimanikayo, Samyuttanikayo, Anguttaranikayo and © 
Khuddakanikdyo. The title furnishes, therefore, a clear proof of the existence of these 
divisions of the Sutta Pitaka at the time when the inscription was incised. And this 
time must be the third century B.C., as the letters of the inscription fully agree with 
those of Asoka’s edicts.* The discovery that the five great subdivisions of the 
Sutta Pitaka existed at so early a period lends some support to the view of those scholars 
who, like Professor Oldenberg, identify the titles of some of the treatises mentioned in 
Agoka’s longer Bairdt edict with portions of the Majjhimanikayo and Anguttaranikayo. 
Yugapajaka, I, 74, which I translate tentatively by “the path-(finder) of the age,” 
seems to be a new title. 

Among the individual monks named in the inscriptions, there are none who. can 
be identified with any of the great men in the Buddhist scriptures. But the names of 
some, e.g. Bhamduka and Tiisaka, agree with such as are found in Dr. Wenzel’s Indez. 
Aya-Pasanaka, I, 5, must, however, have been a man of some importance, as two 
pupils of his are mentioned on a pillar of the Sonari Tope No. 1. Monks and nuns, who 


24 See also Dr. Hultzsch’s remarks on this and other clerical titles in the Bharhut inscriptions, op. cit., p. 58, and on 
the quotation from the Jétaka, ibidem, p. 76. 


94 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


had one pupil, there are several.. Peculiar and noteworthy are the names of monks 
and nuns, which like Kaboja, Pratithdna, Chirdti, and perhaps also Odi, consist of 
adjectives derived from the names of countries, towns and races. In these cases it 
would seem that the real name of the donors has been left out. Some similar names 
occur among the laymen—thus the name of Kekateyaka, I. 1. 3, the father of Dhama- 
and father-in-law of Vijita, apparently stands for Sanskrit Kaikateyaka, and means 
‘he of the Kikata country or Magadha.’ . 4 

As regards the persons who are not marked as monks, and presumably were laymen, 
the specifications of their social position, which are sometimes added, possess some 
interest. To the highest rank belongs the Vakaladevi, I, C. 8. Descending lower 
in the social scale, we have a gahapati, or village landholder,” I, 22, 23. Next we find 
numerous persons bearing the title sethi, sheth, or alderman, II, 11, 35, 57, 85, 99, 
115; C. 45, C. 46, C. 94, II, C. 8. Simple traders vdnija or vdnika are mentioned 
I, 47, 81, 91, C.119. Aroyal scribe rdéjalipikara occurs I, 49, a professional writer, 
lekhaka, I, C. 48, a (royal) foreman. of artisans, dvesani, I, C. 190, a trooper, asa- 
varika, I, 117, and a humble workman, kamika, 1,10. The prevalence of merchants 
and traders seems to indicate, what indeed may be gathered also from the sacred books of 
the Buddhists, that this class was the chief stronghold of Buddhism. The mention of 
professional writers is of some importance on account of the great age of the inscriptions. 
Among the ep.thets given to females the repeated occurrence of the old Pali title 
pajavaté, literally ‘a mother of children,’ I, 8, 48, 95,117; C. 45, C. 46, C. 62, is not without 
intérest, and the fact that some females are named merely ‘the mother of N. N.,” and, 
that others proudly associate the names of their sons with their own,” is worthy of note. 
Very peculiar is the phrase I. 78, Tapasiydnatn nusdya Mitdya ‘of Mita, the daughter- 
in-law of the Tapasiyas’. The inscriptions I. O. 58, C. 59 and C. 67, of which unfortunate- 
ly no impressions are accessible, indicate that the Tapasiyas were a family or tribe 
residing in Ujjain.* If Mita is called the daughter-in-law of this community, that 
looks very much like a confirmation or practical illustration of a view regarding the legal 
position of married women mentioned as existing, but combated as objectionable by Apas- 
_tamba, Dharmasitra, II, 10, 27,3. He says, “For, they declare that a bride is given to 
the family (of her husband, and not to the husband alone).” 1 must content myself for 
the present with pointing out the possibility of a connexion between the wording of 
our inscription and the passage of Apastamba. In order to prove it, more inscriptions 
containing the same or similar statements, and further information regarding the 
‘TApasiyas, are required. 


25 See Prof, Rhys Davids: Sacred Books of the East, vol. XI, p. 257, note. 

6 See I, 2, 59, 72, 108; I. C.-37; C. 66; C. 166. 

7 See e.g. I, 30; C. 83. Similar cases occur frequently in other Buddhist, and also in the Jaina inscriptions. 

* According to Sir A. Cunningham’s copies the three inscriptions run as follows :—No. 58, Ujeniya Tapasaydna 
Pusanajaya ddénam; No. 59, Ujeya, Tdpasdyand Isimdtasa dénam ; No. 67, Ujeniyéd Tapasiyend Sihadataya dévarn 
None of the texts can be quite correct. I suspect that the real readings are: (1) Ujeniya Tapasiyéna husé- Nadéya dinom. 
‘*The gift of Nad& (Wandé), daughter-in-law of the Tapasiyas, from Ujjain ;” (2) Ujeniya Tapasiydnd Teinitdentin 
“The gift of Isimita (Rishmitra) of the Tapasiyas, from Ujjain; (3) Ujeniya Tépésiyand Sthadataya dénamr “The 
gift of Sihadataé (Simhudattd) of the Tapasiyas from Ujjain.” If we combine the information conveyed by these insori - 
tions with the statement of our No. 73, it is evident that the TApasiyas were a family or tribe, settled in Ujjain. I ie 
not think it necessary to assume, with Sir A. Cunningham (Bhilsa Topes, p- 365), that they were ascetics. We have 
also Parivrajaka Rajis, Corp. Inser. Ind., vol. III, pp. 97ff. I may add that Sir A. Cunningham identifies, Jvc. cif., 
the Tapasiyas with the “ Tabasi Magorum” and the “ Tabasa gens” of the classical authors. : all 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 95 


The names of various lay donors and, I may add, of a few monks furnish also some 
valuable information regarding the existence of the Pauranik worship during the third and 
second centuries B.C. A very large proportion of the names, eg. Araha, Arah aka, 
Arahadata, Arahadina, Arahaddsa, ArahadAst, Avrahatapalita, Arahaguta, 
Dhamadata, Dhamaguta, Dhamarakhita, DhamapAlita, Budhila, Budha- 
palita, Bodhi, Sagha, Samghila, Saghadind, Saghadeva, Saghamita and Sam- 
gharakhita, is decidedly Buddhist. Another considerable group of proper names, 
eg. Asada, Mula (.e. Mdéld), Muladati, Phaguna, Pothaka, Pusa, Pusaka, 
Pusini, Pusagiri, Pusarakhita, Pothaka, PothAdeva, Rohini (Rohini), Satilas 
Svatiguta, has been derived from the names of Nakshatras, and points to the conclusion 
that the rule of some Grihyasitr as,° which recommends the use of nakshatra~ 
ndmdnt, was practically obeyed. The same inference may be drawn from almost.all 
other collections of ancient inscriptions and from various ancient Brahmanical, Buddhist 
and Jaina works. There are further some names, such as Agisima (Agnigarmda), Agido- 
[de]va, Bahadata (Brahmadatta), Mahida, Mit&é, Vesamanadata, Visvadeva, 
Yamarakhita, which are closely connected with the ancient Vedic worship; and some, 
Naga, Nagila, Na gadatta, and so forth, bear witness for the existence of the snake-~ 
worship, which was common to the Brahmanists and the heterodox sects. Finally, the 
names Vinhuk4, an abbreviation for Vishnudatta or Vishnurakshité, Upidadata or 
Opedadata ( Upendradatta), Balaka and Balamitra (connected with one of the heroes 
of the legend of Krishna, Baladeva or Balarama, who is also called Bala), furni sh 
evidence for the development of Vaishnavism, while Nadiguta (Nandigupta), Nam di- 
giri,” Samidata (Svdmi-, i.e. Kuméra-datta), Samika and Samik4 (Svdmika, Svd- 
miké), Sivanadi (Sivanandi) do the same service to Saivism. It is also possibie that 
Isadata and Himadata are likewise Saiva names. If the former has been correctly 
read,” it corresponds to Sanskrit Igadatta. The other two may be connected wth Hima, 
a name of Durgi. They may, however, be also derived from Hima, “the moon.” 

The occurrence among the Buddhists of names connected with the ancient Vedic 
religion, as well as of such as are connected with Vaishnavism and Saivism, in these 
early inscriptions, has no doubt to be explained by the assumption that their bearers ° 
or their ancestors adhered to these creeds before their conversion, and that they 
received their names in accordance with the established custom of their families. The 
rules regarding the giving of names were probably then as lax among the Buddhists as 
they arein the present day among the heterodox sects of India, which by no means re- 
strict themselves to the lists of their particular saints or deities. Their historical value 
consists therein that they form a link in the chain of evidence which enables us to trace 
the existence, nay the prevalence of Vaishriavism and Saivism, not only during the third 
century B.C., but during much earlier times, and to give a firm support to the 
view now held by a number of Orientalists, according to which Vaishnavism and 
Saivism are older than Buddhism and Jainism. By exactly the same method of 
analysis which has been here applied to the names on the Sanchi Stipa, it is possible 


2 See, e.g., Hir. Gri, Sé. II, 4, 13. 

30 [ would explain Nandigirz by “he whose mountain (i e. protection) is is or may be Nandin,” on the analogy of Danti- 
durga, for which name Dantivarman appears: Devagiri, Himagiri, Dhamagirika, Sihagiri may be explained similarly, 
though Devagiri and Himagiri may also be considered as personal names derived from mountain names. Vijha, te. Vindhya, 
furnishes a certain instance of the latter kind, 

31 Possibly the correct form may be Isidata, i.e. Rishidatta, (compare Isiguta). 


96 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


to extract from those occurring in the canonical works of the Buddhists, the proof that 
the PAaurAnik religions flourished at the time when those works were composed. I, eg., 
we learn from the Bhikkhupdchittiya, Il, 1, that the ox of a Brahman in Takshasila 
was called Nandivisalo “as big as Nandi,” -it is not doubtful that the animal had 
received its name in honour of Siva’s vehicle, and that Saivism was popular at the time 
when the Suttavidhaiga was composed and probably earlier. 

The last point which calls for remark is the identification of the numerous geo- 
eraphical names which the inscriptions offer. A small proportion of the latter causes no 
great difficulty. Hrakina, as must be read instead Dharakina, is without doubt the 
modern Eran in the Sagar district of the Central Provinces, which on the ancient copper 
coins is called Erakana or Erakana, and in Sanskrit Airikina.* Mahisati is the ancient 
town of MAhishmati, identified with the modern Mandal,® Pokhara, the ancient Push- 
kara and the modern Pokhar near Ajmir, Pratithana (the base of the male proper name 
Pratithdna) either AllahAbid® or Paithin on the Godavari, Ujeni, the modern Ujjain, 
and Vedisa the modern Besnagar. 

Further Kuraghara, which appears five times, I would identify with the village 
of Kuraraghara, which according to the Buddhist scriptures lay in Avanti or Eastern 
Malva, and was the residence of Mahikachchayana.* Kuraraghara is, of course, 
the etymologically correct form of the name, and Kuraghara, a corruption by a kind 
of heplophory, which occurs more frequently in geographical and other names. The 
Indian Atlas, Quarter Sheet, No. 53 N.E., shows in 23° 88’ N. Lat., and 77° 5’ E. Long., 
an apparently not inconsiderable place, called ‘ Kurawar,’ which may be the modern 
representative of Kuraghara. 

With respect to the remaining towns and villages it is difficult to offer more than 
more or less uncertain conjectures, because there is no indication to which part of 
India they belonged, and because many of the names occur scores of times on the map of 
India, and more than once even in the immediate neighbourhood of SAanchi-KAkanAda. 
Thus it is possible to suggest that Tubavana may be identical with the southern 
district of Tumbavana mentioned in the Brikat-Samhitd, XIV, 15, or with its chief 
town; that Sonara, the etymon of the adjective Sonaraka, is the modern Sonart 
close to Sanchi where some stipas exist; that the name of Padana, the etymon of the 
adjective Padadniya, is preserved in the modern Parana, Lat. 23° 36’ N. and 76° 38’ 
E. Long. (Ind. Atl. Q.Sh. No. 53 N. W.); and that Na(m)dinagara and Kapasigama 
correspond with the modern ‘ Nandner ’, Lat. 23° 4’ N. and Long. 76° 6’ E. (Ind. Adi. Q. 
Sh. No. 53 N.W.) and Kapasi Lat. 23° 28’ N. and Long. 77° 54’ E. But it must 
not be forgotten that there were, and are, several ‘ Nandinagaras’ and Nandners, and that 
another ‘ Kapasi’ is found at no great distance in Lat. 23° 53’ N. and Long. 77° E, 
The same remarks apply with still greater force to such places as Madhuvana 
Udubaraghara, the etymon of the adjective Udubaraghariya, and Aba, é.e. aa Be’ 
the etymon of Abeyaka; for the corresponding modern Madhuban, Mahu, Umra 
or Umrer and Ambagam are found over and over again in the neighbourhood of 
SAnchi and in more distant districts. For the present it is not advisable to do more 


2 Fleet: Corpus Inscr. Ind., vol. III, p. 18, note 2. 
3% Cunningham: Ancient Geography, p. 488. 


* Jhisi, opposite to AllahAbad,—see Fiihrer: Monumental Antiquities and Inscriptions i 
2 . ] th Ni "bits 
Provinces and Oudh, p. 138.—Hd. #. I. ie 3 a lis ead were 


34 See Dr. Wenzel’s Index: Jour. Pali Text Soc., 1888, 


INSCRIPTIONS OF SANCHI STUPA, NO. I. 97 


than to note the names and to point out some of the possibilities which they suggest, 
All of them may, hereafter, become important. Hence they have been given in alpha- 
betical order, just as well as the personal names, in the Appendix to this paper. 
Tope I. 
Noo4 = C,-1; 
Hacaagaa wafaae era [1*] * 
“The gift of Dhamasiva (Dharmasiva), son of Kekateyaka (Katkateyaka). 


No. i On 4, 
watafaa arg era [ 1*] 


“The gift of Dhamagirika’s (Dharmagirika’s) mother,” 


INGy 3 == O52 9. 
waerae aaa fatsraa era [1*] * 
The gift of Vijita, son-in-law” of Kekateyaka (Kaikateyaka). 
No. 4= C. 6. 
aren fagat era [1*] 
“The gift of the monk Kada (Hénda).” 


No. 5 = ©. 18. 
aaueaae feat era [1*] * 
«The gift of the monk Aya-Pasanaka (the venerable Prasannaka).” 


No. 6 = C, 14. 


afeara saea fraiaar ea [1*] * 


“The gift of the nun Achala, from Nadinagara (Nandinagara).” 


Now, ="C2-15. 
atfeaaar arate firgat era [1*] 


‘The gift of the monk Kaboja (Kamboja) from Nadinagara (Nandinagara). 


No. 8 = C. 16. 
fasctfada usrafaa aruetas era [1*]° 


“The gift of Sonadeya (Suvarnadevd or Sonadevd), wife of Siharakhita (Simha- 
rakshita).” 


'% Possibly HHeTR, but see No. 3. Below this is a modern Devanagari inscription : {T at araea woata fret [\*) <The 
king (P), the illustrious Savadeva, adores constantly,’ 
35 An apparent e-stroke above the last @ is an accidental scratch. 


3%7 SHA seems to stand for STHTAT, the nominative being used instead of the stem. a 
38 There are three impressions showing these words, and the differences in the shape of the letters seem to indicate that 


they have been derived from three different inscriptions. 
waqg stands for AAAS and Sa for S14. 
«0 Srustag is meant for Tera. 


/ 


18 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


NO. 0 S3 Oy 19; 
wacfaaa reat era [1*] 
“The gift of the monk Dhamarakhita (Dharmarakshita).’ 


No. 10 = C. 20. 
aoe afane ea [1*] * 
“The gift of Atha (Artha), the labourer (?). 


No. 11 = ©. 28, 
L. 1. araate 
2. AaITAe 
3. Sfeat era [i*] 
* The gift of Samanera,® the Abeyaka Sheth (i.e. the Sheth of a town or village 
called Aba or Amba, in Sanskrit Amra-graéma). 


No. 12 =C. 24. 
utfasrae firgat etfeaa wearfaett ee [1*] 
“The gift of the Pratith4na monk (i.e. the monk from Pratishthadna), pupil of 
Hatiya.” 
INOS 13 -==-05220. 
seacufcaa aretha era [1*] 
The gift of Stharakhita (St#nharakshita), inhabitant of Udubaraghara (Udum- 
baragriha).” 
No. 15 = C. 30. 
yatfeara ayafaara era [1*] 
“The gift of Dhamarakhit&é (Dharmarakshita), inhabitant of Madhuvana.” 


No. 16 = C. 33. 
L. 1. [ant|fagee 
L, 2. Weae 
L. 3. faagat era [1*] 
“The gift of the monk Bhamduka, son of Goti (i.e. of a mother of the Gaupta 
race). 
No. 17 = C. 34. 
L.1. aaa aaa a 
L, 2. # [i*]* 
“The gift of the Vejaja village.” “ 


“\ The i-stroke is expressed by a prolongation of the upper right limb of @. 

* With the proper name Simanera (Srdmanera), literally “a novice,” compare the name Samané; Bharhut Inscrs., 
ed. Hultzsch, No, 29, and Samana ; I, C. 179. 

‘S The @ is faint and blurred, the Anusvara distinct. Both stand above the line. 

“" Regarding the correctness of Prinsep’s interpretation, which the above translation follows, see the Introduction. 


INSCRIPTIONS OF SANCHI STUPA, No. L 99 


No. 18 = C. 35. 
Wega ararena frgat ea [1*] 
“The gift of Arahaguta (Arhadgupta), inhabitant of Sasada.” 


No. 19 = C. 36. 
L.1. qavra 


L. 2. arcaca et [1] 
“The gift of Subhaga, inhabitant of Kuraghara (Kuraragriha).” * 


No. 20 = C. 88. 
gfeara sufaata erat [1*]"° 
“The gift of Vudin&d (Vyudérnd), a female lay-disciple. 


No. 21 = C. 39. 
atl aut |e araat carves [1* |” 


«The measuring-staff of the Divine one (Buddha, the gift) of Kakana*® (i.e. pro- 
bably kakin@, ‘ the little crow’). 


No. 22 = C. 40. 
qaant weafatt [alfatsasara taaa[ealta era [1*]" 


“The gift of Vesamanadata (Vaisravanadattd), daughter-in-law of Patithiya 
(Pratishthita), a gahapati from Tubavana (Tumbavana).™ 


No. 23 = C. 41. 
qaaat aeutamn afafsaa era [1*] 
The gift of the gahapatt Patithiya (Pratishthita) from Tubavana (Tumbavana), 


No. 24 = C. 43. 
aerqn a arfefantea a era [1*] 
“The gift both of Nadavu (Nanddyu ?) and of Nadivirohi (Nandivirohin).” 


No. 25 = C. 73. 
armtifea waacaat eta [1*] 


“ The gift of the Bauddha’Committee of Trustees from Dhamavadhanana (Dharma- 
vardhanana.’”” 


4 Regarding this name see the Introduction. 

© The vowels of the first two syllables of the first word, and of the last two syllables of the second word, are not quite 
distinct. 

47 Possibly ATEUTA is to be read. i 

48 Dr. Bhagvanlal Indraji according to Mr. Fleet, Corp. Inse. Ind. vol. II], p. 31, took @rHatg to stand for araure- 

49 The fourth and fifth consonants of the last word but one are not certain. At first sight they look like @@t. 

50 Regarding the precise meaning of aqeufa, see the Introduction. 3 

8 Regarding the explanation of Bodhagothi, see the Introduction. Though theterm Dkamavadhanana occurs twice, 
it is probably a mistake for Dhamavadhana. Only the latter gives a sense, and its Sanskrit equivalent is mentioned as a village- 
name in the Ramdyana, I, 74, 10, see the Petersb, Dict.; s. v. 


02 


100 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 26. 
arantifeat waaeaat era [1*]” 


No-27 =. C, 76." 
sataa atfafaarat eta [1*] 
“The gift of the Vakiliyas, from Ujjain.” 
Noncot= C.7 75s 
faafaa frefrar ea [1*] 
“The gift of the nun Chirati (Kirati)” 
No. 29 = C. 79. 
aaa firgeat eta [1*] 
* The gift of the monk Sadhana (i.e. Sa-dhana or Sad-dhana’”’), 
No. 30 = C, 80. 
weeag aeeaarg aa [i*| 
“The gift of Asvadeva (Aévadevd), mother of Bahadata (Brahkmadatta)”. 
INGrrol OO be 
sfatgaa afageaa erat [1*]* 
“The gift of Svatiguta (Svdtigupta), an inhabitant of Ugira. 
NO? 82 ==. 82; 
wcegaa eta [1*] 
“The gift of Arahaguta (Arhadgupta)”’. 
No. 88 = C. 84. 
afaaa adafafa dacfeara era [\*]. 
“The gift of Samgharakhita (Samgharakshitd), pupil of Yasila ( Yasild)”, 
No. 34 = C. 86. 
afaera era [1*)* 
“The gift of Yasila ( Yasi/d)”, 


No. 85 =C. 87. 
afen ufcaaarfcarat era [1*] 


“The gift of the Sheth, the great executor of repairs”.* 


*! This is apparently a second inscription of the same import as No. 25, not a second impression of No, 25, 
of most letters does not agree in the least and the termination of the first word ends in Uy instead of in gq. 
53 See also I, C. 11. 


5 The subscribed q of @faqag is not quite distinct. 
% Possibly fafaqrty to be read. 


56 T take uicanaricara as pluralis majestatis, agreeing with the singular @fzai, see above, vol. I, p. 573, 


For the size 


INSCRIPTIONS OF SANCHI STUPA, NO. I 101 


No. 86 = C. 90. 
stugeae aa [1*] 
“The gift of Upidadata (Upendradatta).” 


No. 37 = C; 92. 
aTaHaT aufeara firefaay era [1*]” 
“The gift of the nun Saghadind (Sariughadattd) from Vaghumata.” 


No. 38 = C. 98. 
afey fagfaa fear era [1*] 
“The gift of the nun Yakhi ( Yakshi) from Vedisa (Vidiéd).” 


No. 39 = C, 95. 
qefeg arafean arg ara [1*] 
“The gift of Kurari, the mother of Tapasi.”® 


No. 40 = C. 99. 
RTOTAATAT ACSA era [1*]” 
“The gift of Araha (Arhat) from Kapasigdma (Karpasigréma)”’. 


NO. T4 =="C. 108. 
RCRTT ASH eta [1*]% 
“The gift of Bhadaka (Bhadraka) from Katakafiu.” 


: No. 42 = ©. 102. 
soyHe era (1*] 
“The gift of Apathaka (Apdrthaka)”.® 


No. 43 = C. 108. 
Waracarana afafaraa [i*] 
“(The gift) of Ajitiguta (Ajétigupta?), inhabitant of Bhogavadhana (Bhoga- 


vardhana).” a Meee aie 
0. = U. . 


afafeafe acefera ea [1*] 
“The gift of Arahadina (Arhaddatta) in Morasihikata (Maytrasimhikata). 


No. 45 = C. 105. 


wars wathada faarafett arg [1*)” 
“(The gift) of Dhamarakhité (Dharmarakshitd), mother of Sivanadi (Sivanan- 
din) from Bhogavadhana (Bhogavardhana).” 


37 Perhaps arena. 

‘Ss Tdpast may be either a proper or a family name, as there was a Tapasiya family (see the Introduction). 

*® There are two impressions with these words. The differences of the characters show that they have been derived 
from two different inscriptions. 

6 The letters are much blurred. 

* I take the name to be formed from apértha, “who has renounced (the acquisition of) wealth.” It may, of conrse, also 
correspond with Sanskrit alpdrthaka, ‘ poor.’ 

6 There are two impressions bearing these words. The differences of the characters show that they have been derived 
from two different inscriptions, 


102 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 46 = C. 107. 
waraaafanta sofas ret erat [1*] 
“The gift of Samikd (Svdmikd), inhabitant of Navagama (Navagrdma) from 
the district of Ujjain.” 


L. 1. fafoqaa 
L. 2. arfasra era [1*] 


“The gift of the merchant Siriguta (Srigupta).” 


No. 47 = C,, 108. 


No. 48 = C. 109. 
gatfeaa ustafaar afinatar era [1*]” 
“The gift of Majhima (Madhyama), wife of Subahita. 


No.4 = CA10, 
L. 1. gqatfeca mfaga- 
L. 2. a csifafuace 
L. 8, et [1*] 


“The gift of the scribe SubAhita, son of a Goti (i. e. of a mother of the Gaupta 
.-race).” 


No. 50 = C. 111. 
fafceuet arma surfaara — —” 


“(The gift) of the female lay disciple Naga, from Tiridapada (Tiridapadra ?).” 


INO: eh ie OR 2. 
qaafalara| atfear era (A lfearat [1*]° 


“The gift of the Barulamisa Committee from Vedisa (Vidisd).” 


Nosb2= O07 113, 
L. 1. wacfeara fuefra argae 
L. 2. era [1*]” . 
“The gift of the nun Dhamarakhita (Dharmarakshitd) in Kachupatha.” 


No. 53 = C. 114, 
wartfada arguara falg lat era [1*] 


“The gift of the monk Dhamarakhita (Dharmarakshita), inhabitant of KAachu- 
patha.” 


3 Ujjenthdrd\may stand for Ujjeni-dhard (see E. Miller: Puli Grammar, pp. 40-41). Ahéra is the well-known ancient 
revenue term, corresponding to the modera Collectorate. It follows that Wavagdma was situated in the neighbourhood of 
Ujjain. 

* There is a second copy, which bears only gatfeaea Wala] --- The letters show that it has been taken from another 
inscription. 


6 The last two syllables @1# and half the preceding g are wanting in the impression. 
6 Possibly Faufqara. 


7 Possibly fuafaa 3 According to Sir A. Cunningham’s copy the letter @ has been lost after @rqg@. I am, however 
uvable to make any sense out of such a reading, 


INSCRIPTIONS OF SANCHI STUPA, NO, I. 103 


No; 54= ©. 115. 
aurea fre erat [1*]” 
“The gift of the monk Samdhana.” 
No. 55 = C. 116. 


gata aranraraa ert [1*] 


“The gift of Pusagiri (Pushyagiri), inhabitant of Navagdma (Navayrdma).” 


No. 66 -==:0, 117, 
| frgara uretfaae era [1*] 
“The gift of Bhichhuka (Bhikshuka), inhabitant of Padana.” 
: No. 57 = C. 124. 
L. 1. araata aaq- 
L, 2. wa @feat eta [1*] 
“The gift of Simanera, the Abeyaka Sheth.’ 


No. 58:= C. 125. 
afegaa erat fagat [1*]” 
“The gift of Nadiguta (Nandigupta), the monk.” 


No. 59 = C, 127. 
aalutlatat acefet — — — — [1*]? 
** (The gift) of Arahadina (’s mother) from ArApdna.” 


No. 60 = C. 128. 
aqaAast Ha — ate [1*]” 
“The gift of Kuja—(?) from Tambalamada.”(?) 


No. 61 = C. 129. 
— yaar wagaa feat era [1*]” 
“The gift of the monk Dhamaguta (Dharmagupta) from Madhuvana.” 


NO; 62-==" 0.7131, 
aerfaton fargat era [1%] 
“The gift of the monk Mahagiri.” 


No. 638 = C. 135. 
sufamne aaypae ug fasat [1*] 


8 Read fawat. 

59 See above, No. ll. 

The apparent d-stroke at the end of @T4T may possibly be an anusvdra, run together with the < 

1 Sir A. Cunningham completes @ ATg <T4- ; 

™ Last sign of @3{—is not decipherable. I suspect that qAL, @- ¢. FHC, is meant (see Bharhut Inscr).. No. 104, 
* Restore Yaa. 


104 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


“The gift of the monk Upasijha (Upasidhya), brother of Phaguna (Phdai- 
guna).” 
No. 64 = C: 136. 
weracaral sfacfaara [1*] 
“(The gift) of Isirakhita (Rishirakshitad) from Bhogavadhana (Bhogavar- 
dhana).” 
No. 65 = C. 189. 
afacaa fagat er [i*| 
‘ The gift of the monk Samidata (Svdmidatia).” 


No. 66 = C. 140—141. 

L. 1. gafafeat wasafaae 

L, 2. fag a adata — — ut [o*} ” 
“(The gift) of the monk Devagiri, who knows the five Nikayas,” and of his 

pupil.” 
No. 67 = C, 142. 
gaara fagat era [1*] 

bi The gift of Pusaka (Pushyake) the monk.” 


No. 68 = QC. 143. 
qea uy daciqaa g faga era [1*] 
«The gift both of Chuda (Kshudra) and Dhamarakhita (Dharmarakshita).” 


No. 69 = C. 144. 
safag afafeag erat [1*] 


“The gift of Agisima (Agzisarma) in Ujjain. 


33 76 


No. 70 =C. 146. 
L. 1. [at|fasrere fagat ete 
L. 2. alafaalaa siaarfeat [1*] ” 
“The gift of the monk Pritithiana’, pupil of Aya-Tisaka (the venerable 
Tishyaka).” 
Noi l= Cy 146: 
quifaae fagal era woraae (1*] 


“The gift of the monk Budharakhita (Buddharakshita), the Ejavata.” ” 


74 Though the last sign looks like 4, I suspect that the writer meant to give Sa-alevdsino ddnam: 

*% See the Introduction, 

‘© Possibly afTaA is to be read. 

7 Possibly afaarte or Wfaarre.—The other three bracketed syllables are very faint. 

78 See nbove, No. 12. 

#9 The efymological meaning of UTAA would be “endowed with desire.” This, of coursé, does not suit here, I take 
the word to be an adjective, derived from the name of a town. 


INSCRIPTIONS OF SANCHI STOPA, NO. I. 105 


No. 72 = C. 148. 
BUOTAT AATSA ATG eta [1*] ” 
“The gift of Asada’s (Ashddha’s) mother, from ArApAna. ” 


No. 73 = C. 149. 
L. 1. safaat ata- 
Tins2s fears qar- 
L. 3. faata 
L. 4. era [i*] 
“The gift of Mita (JMtré), daughter-in-law of the Tapasiyas, from Ujjain. ” 


No. 74 = C. 150. 


[wlcfeae agfeera qarosae era (1*) ® 
“ The gift of the Bharadiya, the holy man, the path-( finder) of the age.” * 


No. 75 = OC. 153. 
sreae frgat ea [1*] 
“The gift of the monk Jonhaka (Jyotsnaka).” 


No, 76 = C. 154, 
wataata ayaarara ea [1* ] % 
“The gift of Dhamarakhata (Dharmarakshité), inhabitant of Madhuvana.” 


NO. 277-10. 155, 


arearcfarat fasfateat erat [1*]* 
“The gift of Sihagiri (Sémhagirz) from Ta teptiae 


No. 78 = C. 160. 
L.1. walfalfeat fagfaa asafeateara 
U2. era (1*]" 
“The gift of the nun Dhamasiri (Dharmasrt), een of Madalachhi- 
kata (Mandalékshikata ?).” 
No. 79 = C. 161. 


L.1. sfafeaa qarfatatara 

L.2. asafeafeata era [\*] 

“The gift of Avisina (Avishannd),® who is versed in the Sutta-Pitaka, an 
inhabitant of Madalachhikata.” 


8 Possibly HATSS is to be read. But the wavy line below the S is probably accidental. 

4 The left side of the initial ¥ has been almost cut away in the impression. 

82 Or, perhaps, the gift of the holy man of Bharada, etc. 

88 Meant for watfeata ayafaara. 

* Possibly argatcfa®. Though there is a second inscription of this:individual, I, C. 28, I suspect that we should 


read Mahdmoragirimhd, from the great Maydragiri. Compare Bharhut Inscr. Nos, 81, 94, 95, where Moragirimhd occur sa 


% The third sign of wafafcat has been originally fa, which afterwards was altered to fa. 
% Compare Pali nisinna for nishanna, and the male name Avisana; Bhar. Insc. Nos. 141, 142. 


106 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 80. 
L.1. afafeara gnfatata— 


L.2. asafeafeara era [1*)” 
NoOwSL = C. 162, 
L.1. wagaa aieaca 
L. 2. arfasra era [i*] 
“The gift of Saghadeva (Samghadeva), a trader, inhabitant of Virohakata.” 


No. 82 = C. 167. 
L.1. =wafea 


L. 2. afean- 
L.8. fra ea [1*] 


“The gift of Odi, inhabitant of Nadinagara (Nandinagara),” 


No. 83 = C. 180. 
acefera firgal arataaa ea [1*] 
“The gift of the monk Arahadina (Arhkaddatta), inhabitant of Pokhara 
(Pushkara).” 


Ll. wazaariaaa 


L.2.  wata aTata- 
L. 3. era art [1*|* 
“ A pillar, the gift of all the relatives of the venerable Nagila.” 


No,-84 = ¢C. 181, 


No. 85 = C. 182. 
area anifage weras afsa era ait [1*] 
“A pillar, the gift of Nagapiya (Nagapriya), inhabitant of Kurara,“ a 
Sheth in Achhdvada.’” - 
; No. 86 = C. 184. 
quoretarar fegalar] era [1*]” 
“The gift of the nun Budhapalita.” 


No. 87 = C. 185. 
Wena firgat era [1* |” ; 
«The gift of the monk Pothaka (Proshthaka).” 


No. 88 = C. 193. 
waged adafan aafaaa erat mat [1*]. 
“A pillar, the gift of Balamitra, the pupil of the venerable Chuda (Kshudra).” 


7 Restore qatfafatear. 

* There are two impressions. One shows in 1. 2 ware and the other ofad, as Sir A. Cunningham reads. The 
latter reading gives, however, no sense. 

% ‘Tbe proper form of the name is Kurdra; see No, 98. 

9° This means probably that Nagupiya had his shop in Achhavada, 

Meant for fargfaar. , 

" The apparent d-stroke after qt is in my opinion accidental. 


INSCRIPTIONS OF SANCHI STUPA, NO. I. 107 


. : No. 89. 
aaa eaHe eta [1*] 
“The gift of Devaka from Arapdna (Ardpdna).” 


No. £0. 


aefera era weal felafs — —* 
“The gift of Arahadina (Arhaddatta) in Ramorajakadi (?). 


No. 91. 
seafan sfaqaa afusra eta [1*] 
“The gift of the merchant Isiguta (Rishigupta) from Asvavati ( 4évavati).” 
No. 92. 
afeana fg eta [1*] 
“The gift of the monk Isika (Rishika).” 
No. 98, 
L. 3. sfaaa treat — 
Deo: fuufeau zt —" 
L.1. @ [i*j 


“The gift of Isika (Rishika), inhabitant of Rohinipada.” 


No. 94. 
sfacfaaa era [1*] 
* The gift of Isirakhita (Jtishirakshita).” 


No. 95. 
L. 1. ssifaat faae- 


L. 2. aa usrafear 
L. 3. qara era [1*] 
“The gift of Muld (Mild), wife of Visvadeva (Visvadeva), from Ujjain.” 


No. 96. 


[s]gacafta [a)afalera] er[a i*)" 
“The gift of Sachamita (Satyamitra), inhabitant of Udubaraghara (Udum- 
baragriha). 
No. 97, 
L. 1. a[zja(sajaa waugsa” 
L. 2. fargat eral") 
“The gift of the monk, the venerable Patuda (?), inhabitant of Katakafiu.” 


% The impression seems to be incomplete. The last word probably ended in q@and designated Arahadina as inhabit- 
ant of Ramorajahikada (?). 

%3 The inscription has to be read from below. Read Of¢fa°. 

94 This is a mere scrawl, and the bracketed letters are mostly uncertain. 

9% Most of the letters of 1, 1 are very faint, and the first bracketed one is not certain, 


108 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


, No. 98. 
Hue wafara era[i*] 
“The gift of Samvalita from Kurara.” 
No. 99. 
L. 1. atcaca afeat 
L. 2. atea era[i*] 
“The gift of the Sheth Siha (Sima), inhabitant of Kuraghara,” 


; No. 100. 
fafogara fagfrat era[i*] 
‘The gift of the nun Giriguta (Giriguptd).” 
No, 101. 
faafaad fuafaa afsasfrara era[i* | 
“The gift of the nun Jitamité (Jitdmitrd), inhabitant of Vadivahana.” 
No. 102. 
waara ea goraeferara [1*]” 


“The gift of Dhamata (Dharmadatd), inhabitant of Purana (Punyaour- 


dhana).” 
No. 103. 


wneaa fargat ea alalrefaale i*)” 
“The gift of the monk Dhamadata (Dharmadatia), pupil of Aya-Bhaduka (Ary«- 
Bhanduka, No. 16).” 
No.. 104. 
L. 1. [faalaara 


L. 2. atfaa a 
L. 3. aivafta 
L. 4. firgfadt erat [I] 
“The gift of Piyadhama (Priyadharmé) and Bodhi, the nuns of Kuraghara.” 
No. 105. 
gad fugiaa afeaafcana era [1*] 
“The gift of the nun Pusa (Pushyé), inhabitant of Nadinagara (Nandinagara).” 


No. 106. 
L. i. trea fea- 
L, 2. fafet era [1*] 


“The gift of Himagiri from Pokhara (Pushkura).” 


No, 107. 
| unfafean dafeaa ara [i*] 
“The gift of Dhammasiva (Dharmasiva), inhabitant of Puravikh a(?).” 


% Probably yHearz is to be read. 
7 squsfaae looks almost lik : 22 ) i i is plai 
S almost like yausfaae ; but sce No. 122, where the reading, given above, is plain. 


INSCRIPTIONS OF SANCHI STUPA, NO. I. 109 


No. 108. 


agen afefa[farg <[r}a [i*] 
“The gift of Namdigiri’s mother from Bedakara.” 


No. 109. 
[atta jrae Hfs[z] — — —" 
“ (The gift) of Mahida (Mahendra), inhabitant of Bhogavadhana (Bhogavar- 
anand). 
No. 110. 
L. 1. agafaara pafead fgita 
L. 2. era \* 
“The gift of the nun Budharakhita (Buddkarakshitd), inhabitant of Madhu- 


vana.” 
No. 111. 


afeafaa gaa [ata [1*] 
“The gift of Devabhaga (Devabhdga 7) from Mahisati (Mdhishmatt).” 


No. 112. 
L. 1. afaae firgat qatafafoit a- 
L, 2. arfaet era [1*] 
“The gift of the monk Yakhila ( Yakshila), pupil of the venerable De vagiri.” 
No. 113. 
L. 1. trefwafea- 
L. 2. 4 fanfsa e- 
L. 3. # [h*] 
“The gift of Nigadi, inhabitant of Rohanipada (Rohinipada).” 
No. 114. 
L. 1. trefaafea- 
L. 2. a afaaa 
L. 3. era [1*] 


“The gift of Bulika,” inbabitant of Rohanipada.” 
No. 115. 


L. 1. Qefwufeafa 
L. 2. afe-ai arafe- 


L. 3. va era [1*]? 
“The gift of Sheth Nagadina (Nédgadatta), inhabitant of Rohanipada.” 


% Restore afeza eta. 
99 Compare the Buli tribe (Wenzel : Index, sub voce) of Allakappa. 


1 Read qfegqa; the fa stands above the line, and is a correction. 


110 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 116. 
atfsaeent afeana fireat erat [1*] 
“The gift of the monk Chhadika (Chhardika ?) from Vadivahana.” 
No. 117. 
L. 1. afeaaa [elacfaara waaTeana 
L. 2. usvafa — arreat(a] era [\*) 
“The gift of Nagadatd (Ndgadattd), wife of the cavallerist Hamsarakhita (7 
(Hamsarakshita), an inhabitant of Vedisa (Vidis¢). 


No. 118. 
afaara afafaara ert [1*] 
“The gift of Samikd (Svdmikd) and of her daughter.” 
No. 119. 


fafcfeara frgaan arfgarafcata erat [1] 
“The gift of the nun SiridinA (Sridattd), inhabitant of Nadinagara (Nondina- 
gara),” 
No. 120. 


aaa era wreatafere [1*] 
“The gift of Soyasa (Sawyasasa), inhabitant of Bhadanakata.” 
No. 121. 
[lara safrara safeara erat [1*] 
“The gift of the female lay disciple Revd, inhabitant of Ujjain.” 
No. 122, 
——— 4 fag aad weighaae [1*) 
“The gift of the monk .... , pupil of the venerable Bhamduka.” + 


No. 123. 


L. 2, [at] era 
L3.—-—f{al—--a-agd 
Ge 4, en fi ae ea 
Tore II. 
No. 1 = C. 3; 
usafaata aaa era [1*] 
“The gift of the village of Padukulika (Pdndukulikd),” 
2 The letters are mostly faint, and the bracketed one is very doubtful. 


* Possibly another @ may have stood in the beginning. 
4 See above, Nos. 16 and 103 


INSCRIPTIONS OF SANCHI STUPA, NO. II. lll 


No. 2=C, 4. 
gtaae wialaleaae era [I*] 
“The gift of Budhila (Buddhila), an inhabitant of Bhogavadhana (Bhogavur- 


dhana),” 
No. 3 = 0. 5. 


waeag ea faafafia saarfafalal [i*]} 
“The gift of Dhamadeva (Dharmadeva), (who ts) a pupil of Mitasiri (Mitragrt).” 
No. 4 = C. 6. 
sfaae firgat erat [i*] 
“The gift of the monk Isila (Rishila).” 
No. 5 = C.11. 
fara firget eva [1*] 
_ “The gift of the monk Vijha (Vindhya).” 
No. 6 = ©, 12. 
afeaa fargat era [i*] 
“The gift of the monk Yakhila ( Yakshila).” 


No. 7 = C, 18. 
L.1 arfare wara[s] 
L. 2 a afea erat [1*] 
“The gift of Nagapiya (Ndgapriya), a Sheth of Achhavada.”® 
No.8 =:C. 14; 
L. 1. woara atcha ea 
L. 2. frgfra [1*] 


* The gift of the nun Sapakd (Sarpekd 7), an inhabitant of Kurara,’’’ 


Nos9:= C516. 
L. 1, wadaa arita aa firgta 
L. 2. a [i*] 
“The gift of Dhamasena (Dharmasend), an inhabitant of Kurara, a nun.” 
No. 10 = C. 17. 
arrartacda erat wat [1*] 
“A pillar, the gift of Nagapalita.” 
No. 11 = C. 25. 


[aijfea firgfra wait era [1*]* 
‘ A pillar, the gift of the nun Odi.” 


-5 Read et; the third letter of faafafea was originally an fa, which was afterwards corrected to fq. 
6 This inscription can be restored in accordance with No, 85, and C. 192 of Tope I. 
7 Properly #<T<; see I, 98 


112 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 12 = C. 30. 
aafaaa aracna era [1*] 


“The gift of Saghamita (Samghamitra), an inhabitant of Sonara (Sondrt).” 


No. 138 = C. 32. 
a(falea erat sraticae [i*] . 
“The gift of Agila (Agnila), inhabitant of Adhapura (Ardhapura).” 


No. 14 = C. 38. 
warfanfernt erat firget [1*] 
“The gift of Yasogiri (YaSogiri), a monk.” 


No. 15 = C. 36. 
aera atfeatatcara (1*] 
“(The gift) of Gada, inhabitant of Nadinagara (Nandinagara).” 


No. 16 = C. 38. 
wangae frgat aa [1*] 
“The gift of Aya-Naduka (the venerable Nanduka), a monk.” 
No.21 7, 
gatfara era [alae adarfeat [1*] 


“The gift of Pusarakhita (Pushyarakshita), the pupil of Aya (Arya, te. the 
venerable one). 


No. 18, 
feera era [1*] 
“The gift of Sihd (Simhd). 
No. 19. 
L. 1. qaaa firgeat 
L, 2. era [\*] 


“The gift of the monk Sumana (Sumanas).” 


No. 20. 
wagaa gfafaar a eat [1*] 
“The gift of Dhamaguta (Dharmagupta) and Pusiniya (Pushyanikd).” 
. No. 21. 
faaraa uret — ae [\*} 
“The gift of Visikha (Visékha), an inhabitant of Pad4[na]. 


> Restore arerfaae, according to J, 56. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. OB; 


APPENDIX.—LISTS OF NAMES. 


L.—Donks. 
Arahadina I, 83, 90, Naduka (aya—) II, 16, 
Arahaguta I, 18 ; II, C. 19. Nagarakhita II, C, 39. 
Arahaka II, C. 34. Nagila (bhadata—) I, 84; II, C. 1. 
Balaka II, C. 19. Pasanaka (aya) I, 5,10 
Balamitra I, 88. Patuda (?) I, 97. 
Bhamduka (Gotiputa) I, 16; “kiya, 103, 122. Pothaka I, 87, 
Bharadiya I, 74. Pratithana I, 12, 70. 
Budharakhita I, 71. Pusa I, C. 29, C, 158, 
Chhadika I, 116, Pusagiri I, C, 21. 
Chuda I, 68; (aya—) I, 88. Pusaka I, 67. 
Devagiri I, 66, (aya—) 112, Pusarakhita IT, 17, 
Dhamadata I, 103, Rahila (aya—) I, C. 37. 
Dhamagiri its Calis: Sadhana I, 29. 
Dhamaguta I, 61. Saghamita II, C. 7. 
Dhamarakhita I, 9, 53, 68, Sagharakhita IT, C. 40. 
Dhana I, C, 31, Sarndhana I, 54. 
Dhanaka (aya—) I, C. 151, Samidata I, 65. 
Gotiputa—see Bharnduka, Sumana II, 19. 
Hatiya I, 12. Tisaka (aya—) I, 70. 
Isika I, 92 (93), Upasijha I, 63. 
Isila I], 4. Vajuka (bhadata—) I, C, 122, 
Jonaka I, C, 152, Vejha IT, 5. 
Jonhaka I, 75. Visdkha I, C..123, 
Kaboja I, 7. Vira I, C. 186, 
KAda I, 4. Yakhada(dijna I, C. 50. 
Mahfaeiri I, 62. Yakhila I, 112; II. 6, 
Nadiguta I, 58. Yasogiri II, 14. 
Nagadina I, C, 10, 

II,— Nuns. 
Achala I, 6. Jitamita I, 101, 
Arahadasi I, C. 175. Kadi I, C. 65. 
Avisina I, 79, 80. Mitasiri IT, 3. 
Balika 1, C. 159. Mula II, C. 21. 
Bodhi I, 104. Odatika I, C. 26,24 
Budbapalita I, 86. Odi (I, 82°); II, 11. 
Budharakhita I, 110. Phagula IT, C. 18. 
Chirati I, 28. Piyadhamé I, 104. 
Dhamadeva IT, 3. Pusa I, 105. 
Dhamarakhita I, 52, Saghadiné I, 37. 
Dhamasena II, 9. Sapaka IT, 8. 
Dhama{sjJiri I, 78. Samgharakhité I, 33. 
Dipasa (?) I, C. 170. Sedi II, C, 43. 
Gada (II, 15 2), C. 21, 36. Siridina I, 119. 
Giriguta I, 100. Vala II, C. 15. 
Hana (?) I, C. 2. Yakhi I, 38 ; (Yakha) C. 187. 
Isiddst I, C. 169; IT, C. 22. Yamarakhita II, C, 20. 
Isidata I, C. 182, 133, Yasila I, 33 (34 ?). 


Isidina I, C. 147. 


10 Pasanaka occurs as teacher of Dhamaguta and Sagharakhita in the inscription on a pillar of the Sonari Tope 


No. I, Cunningham, Bhilsa Topes, plate xxiii. 
it This cotresponds to Sanskrit avadddiké, literally ‘the puro one.’ 


114 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


III.— Male names, not marked as clerical. 


Agila II, 13. Kujara I. C. 94. 

Ahimita I, C. 8. Mahida I. 109. 

Ajitiguta I, 43. Mulagiri (lekhaka) I. C, 48. 
Apathaka I, 42. Nadava I. 24, 

Araha I, 40. NAadivirohi I. 24. 

Arahaka I, C, 165 (see also List 1). Nagadina I. C. 74. 

Arahadasa I, C. 100. Nazndigiri I. 108. 

Arahadina I, 44, 90, Nagadina I, 115. 

Arahatapalita I, C. 164. Nagapiya (sethi) I, 85; C. 192; II. 7. 
Asada I, 72. Nigadi I, 113. 

Atha (kamika) I, 10. Opedadata I, C. 62-64. 
Bahadata I, 80. Patithiya (gahapati) I, 22, 23. 
Bahula II, C. 35, Phaguna I, 63. 

Bhadaka I, 41, Pusagirf I, 55, 

Bhichhuka I, 56. [Sa]chami(ta} I, 96. 
Budhapalita (sethi) II, C. 8. Sadatha(?) I, C. 168. 
Budharakhita II, C. 10, 28. Sagha I, C, 192. 

Budhila I, C. 32; II, 2. Saghadeva I, 81. 

Bulika I, 114. Saghamita IT, 12. 

Chadaguta I, C. 97, Samana I, C. 179. 

Chheta I, C. 66. Samghila I, C. 163. 

Dadata (?) 1,C. 89. Samanera I, 11, 57. 

Damaka (?) I, C. 174. Samika (vanika) I, C. $3, C. 119. 
Devaka I, 89. Sasnvalita, I 98. 

Devabhaga I, 111. Satila I, C. 98. 

Dhamadata I, C ; 178. Sihagiri I, 77; C. 28 (?) (facsimile, Sapagarans). 
Dhamagiri I, C. 56. Siharakhita I, 13. 

Dhamagirika I, 2 ; C, 166. Siriguta (vanija) I, 47. 
Dhamaguta II, 20. Siripala I, C, 120, 

Dhamap§la I, C. 134. Sivanad: I, 45. 

Dhamarakhita II, C. 2.17. siha (sethi) I, 99. 

Dhamasiva I, 1, 107. Siharakhita J, 13. 

Dhanagiri I, C. 157. Sona I, C. 57. 

Disarakhita (?) I, C. 42,38 Soyasa I, 120. 

Gohila I, C. 77. Subahita, Gotiputa (rajalipikara) I, 43, 49. 
Gopala I, C. 12, Subhaga I, 19. 

Gotiputa,—see Subahita. Svatiguta I, 31. 

[Ham] sarakhita I, 117. Upidadata 1, 36. 

Himagini I, 106. Vada (?} I, C. 172. 

Isadata (?) I, C. 52. Vadha I, C, 47. 

Isiguta (vanija) I, 91. Vajaguta I, C. 3, 

Isika I, 93 (?) (compare also List No. II). Vijita I, 3. 

Isipalita I, C. 179. Vimala I, C, 138. 

Isimita I, C. 59, Visa I, C. 77, 

Isirakhita I, 94, Visdkha IT, 21 (see also List I), 
Kekateyaka I, 1, 3. Visvadeva I, 95. 

Koja (?) J, 60. Yasopala I, C. 27, 156. 


"Tf the following seyhasa stands for Sa ikshasya, this person was an ascetis, 
8 The name is probably wrong. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 115 


IV.— Females, not marked as nuns. 


Agido[de] va I, C. 17. 
Agis[{i]ma I, 69. 

Arahaguta I, 32, 

Asvadeva I, 30 ; C. 88, 

Balaké I, C. 61. 

Budha I, C. 64. 

Dasa I, C. 46. 

Dhamata (data) I, 102. 
Dhamarakhité I, 15, 45, 76. 
Gada II, 15 (compare also List II). 
Himadata I, C. 53. 

Isimita I, C. 54, 69, 

IsirakhitA I, 64. 

Ka[ka]}na I, 21. 

Kani I, C. 85. 

Kurari I, 39. 

Majhimé I, 48. 

Mayadata I, C. 62. 

Mita (Tapasiyanarn uusé) I, 73. 


Mula I, 95. 
Muladata I, C. 60. 
Nagadata I, 117. 
Nagamita I, C. 72, 
Nagdpalita II, 10. 
Niga 1, 50; C. 45. 


Odi I, 82 (compare also List I1). 
Padona (?) I, C. 51. 
Patola (?) II, C, 28. 
Pothadeva, I, C. 44. 
Pusini II, 20. 

Reva, I, 121. 

Rohuni (?) I, C. 55. 
Sagharakhita II, C, 22. 
Sagha I, C. 106. 

Simidaré [ta] I, C. 176. 
Samika I, 46, 118, 

Semaké (?) I, C. 91. 

Sihé IT, 18. 

Sihadataé I, C. 67, 
Sonado[de]va I, 8; C, 17. 
Subhaga I, C. 18, 

Tapasi I, 39. 

Vakala devi I, C, 8. 
Vasula I, C. 88. 
Vesamanadata I, 22. 
Vinhuka IT, C. 24. 

Vipula I, C. 70. 

Vudina I, 20. 

Yakhadasi I, C, 171. 
Yasila I, 35 (see also List No. II). 


Geographical names. 


Abeyaka (adj.) I, 11, 57. 

Achhavada I, 85; (adj.) I, C. 192; II, 7. 

Adhaporika (adj.) IT, 13. 

Anaynmitaka (? adj.) II, C. 10. 

Arap&na I, 59, 72, 89. 

Asvavati I, 91. 

Bedakara I, 108. 

Bhasikada 1, C. 156. 

Bhadanakatiya (adj.) I, 120. 

Bhogavadhana® I, 45 ; °vadhana, I, 64; C. 1387; 
°vadhanaka, (adj.) I, 43, 109 ; II, 2. 

Chahatiya (adj.) I, C. 158. 

Dhamavadhanana (read °vadhana) I, 25, 26. 

Ejavata (adj.) I, 71. 

Erakina!® I, C. 98. 

KaAboja (proper name) I, 7. 

Kachupatha (adj.) 1, 52, 58. 

Karndadigama I, C. 47; °gdmiya (adj.) I, C. 
45, 46. 

Kapésigama I, 40. 

Katakafiu I, 41 ; °saftuka (adj.) I, $7. 

Katakareyaka (adj.) I, C. 100. 

Kekateyaka (proper name) I ,1, 3. 


Kuraghara I, C. 69 ; C. 71-72 ; Koraghara (adj.) 
I, 19, 99, 104, 

Kurara I, 98; kurariya (adj.) 1, C. 188; C. 
192 317 kuraré (adj.) I, C. 138; sorara (adj.) 
Ty Sh1i 8.9 Ce lb: 

Madalachhikatika (adj.) I, 78, 79, 80; C. 159, 

MadhuvanaI, 61; C. 132 ; °vancha (adj.) I, 15, 
16,22 110; 

Méhamoragi, I, 77; Mahémo’ I, C. 28. 

Mahisati I, 111. 

Morasihikata I, 44, 

Nadinagara I, 6; C, 170; Nddi° I, 7; Nadina- 
garika (adj.) [, 82, 105; C. 147, 169; 
Nddinagarika (adj.) I, 119; II, 15. 

Navagamaka (adj.) I, 46; °gémaka, I, 55; °gé- 
mika, 1, C. 63. 

PAdaniya (adj.) I, 56; II, 21.22 

Padukuliké II, 1; Padukulini{hki]ya (adj.) 
Liss: 

Pokhara I, 106 ; °reyaka I, 83;** C. 28, 39. 

Poravikhika (adj.) I, 107, 

Prathithdnua (proper name) I, 12, 70. 

Pufiavadhaniya (adj.) I, 102. 


Ramorajahikadi (?) I, 90. 


2 See also Bharhut Inscriptions, No, 13. 
21 Third syllable obliterated. 
22 Pokhamreyakada [sa], on copy. 


Q 2 


% Karardya, on facsimile. 
8 First syllable obliterated. 
19 Spelt °vandka. 


4 Achhavada, on facsimile. 
WS See also Bharhut Inscriptions, No. 95. 
16 Dharakina, on facsimile. 


116 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Rohanipadiya (adj.) I, 118, 114, 115; Rokdni® Ugireyaka (adj.) I, 31. 


I, 93. Ujent I, 27, 69, 73, 95; C. 11, 12, 49, 55-68, 
Sahakagamiya (adj.) I, C. 97. 70, 77; °ka (adj.) I, 121. 
Sasddaka (adj.) I, 18; II, C. 19. Vadivahana I, 116; Vadivahanika (adj.) I, 
Sonaraka (adj.) II, 12. 101; Vddya° (adj. )II, C. 24. 
Tambalamada I, 60. Vaghumata I, 37; C. 118. 
Tiridapada I, 50. Vedisa® 1, 38 ; Vedisaka (adj.) I, 117; C. 189; 
Tubayvana I, 22, 23. °stha I, C, 26. 
Udubaraghariya (adj.) I, 13; II, C. 41; Vejaja I, 17. . 

C. 42; Udumbara® I, 96. Verohakata (adj.) I, 81. 


VIII—HARSHA STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE CHAHAMANA 
VIGRAHARAJA. 


THE [ VIKRAMA | YEAR 1030. 


By Proressor F. KievHorn, Pu.D., C.I.E,; Gorrineen. 


The stone which bears this inscription lies among the ruins of an ancient temple 
on the top of a hill, called Harsha or “ Unchdpahar,” which is near the village of 
‘“ Harasnath” in the Shaikhawati province of the Jaypur state of Rajputana, about 
7 miles south of Sikar and 60 miles north-west of Jaypur, Long. 75°15, Lat. 27° 31’, Indian 
Atlas, quarter-sheet No. 38, N. E. There it was discovered, in 1834, by Dr. G. E. 
Rankin and Sergeant E. Dean, who both sent facsimiles of the inscription which it bears 
to the Asiatic Society of Bengal early in 1835. And, Dr. Rankin’s copy having on the 
way become so much injured as to be totally illegible, the inscription was edited shortly 
afterwards from Mr. Dean’s facsimile by the Rev. Dr. Mill, with a lithograph prepared by 
Lieutenant Kittoe, and an account of the ruins on the hill Harsha by Mr. Dean, in the 
Journal As. Soc. Beng., vol. IV, pp. 361-400." In the course of last year Mr. Fleet 
kindly presented me with a pencil rubbing of the inscription, found among Sir A. 
Cunningham’s papers, which, though it helped me to amend Dr. Mill’s readings in many 
places, was yet not sufficiently clear to furnish a trustworthy text throughout. I there- 
fore applied for assistance to Dr. Burgess, and owing to his interest and exertions in the 
matter I am now able to re-edit the inscription from two excellent impressions, obtained 
by Colonel 8. 8S. Jacob for Dr. Burgess; they were prepared by Mr. Lala Rim Bakhsh 
of Jaypur. 

According to Mr. Dean’s account the inscription is on a slab of black stone, about 
33” thick and 3’ square. It consists of 40 lines of writing which cover a space of about 
2’ 11” broad by 2’ 10” high. Small portions of the inscribed surface are broken away 
at the four corners, and the right and left margins are slightly damaged; besides, about 
a dozen aksharas have become illegible in the body of the inscription by the peeling off 
of the surface of the stone. The rest of the writing is well preserved, and may be ad 
with certainty almost throughout. The size of the letters is between ,%,” and 3”; it is 
largest at the top and becomes gradually smaller towards the bottom. The characters 


3 See also Bharhut Inscriptions, Nos. 22, 82, 8, etc. 
* See also Lassen’s Indische Alterthumskunde, vol. III, pp. 9832—937. 


HARSHA STONE INSCRIPTION, 117 


are the ordinary northern alphabet of the period to which the inscription belongs, and 
they are skilfully formed and well engraved. The names of the writer and the engraver 
are not given. The language is Sanskrit, and by far the greater portion of the inserip- 
tion, to nearly the end of line 83, is in verse. This poetical part is called a praéasti, 
and was composed by Dhiranaga, the son of the karanika Thiruka (verse 45).—In 
respect of orthography the text calls for few remarks. The letter b is throughout denoted 
by the sign for v ; before 7, ¢ is always doubled after a vowel, e.g., in vichéttra, line 4, and 
stittradhéro and dagdha-ttripura, line 6; anda single 7 is written instead of jj in wjvalah, 
line 16, and visphurajidna, line 22. The dental is employed instead of antsevdra in 
dhvansa, line 22; the dental sibilant instead of the palatal in awttaresvarah, line 22, and 
in Chamdasiva, line 29 (in a verse which offends against the metre) ; and the dental nasal 
has been incorrectly changed to the lingual in prasaynah, live 15, and wrongly retained 
in nirnndsitd, line 17.—Both the verses and the prose part of the inscription contain 
some words which are not given by the dictionaries or are employed in an unusual seuse. 
To such words attention will be drawn in the notes on the translation.” 

The proper object of the poetical part of the inscription, which censists of 48 verses, 
is to record the erection of a temple of Siva, worshipped under the name of Harsha, 
on the hill Harsha, by the Saiva ascetic Allata, and the completion of other works of 
piety by Allata’s disciple Bhavadyota. But more interesting is the account which is 
furnished, by way of introduction, of the princes to whose kingdom the hill Harsha 
belonged and by whom the ascetics were patronised, and of their wars with other princes 
who have not yet become known from other sources, And the value of the inscription 
is enhanced by the fact that it yields a considerable number of names of districts and 
places, and contains several dates, for one of which the corresponding European date may 
be given with absolute certainty. . 

The first twelve verses of the inscription are mainly devoted to the glorification of 
the god Siva or, as he is more particularly styled here, Harshadeva, of his place of 
residence, the mountain Harsha, and of the temple erected to the god on that hill. 
After that the poet, in verses 13-27, celebrates a line of princes belonging to the Chaha- 
mana family, who are said to have become illustrious through their devotion to the god 
Harsha, The first prince mentioned is— 

1, Givaka I., said to have been famous «s a hero in the assemblies of the 
Nagas and other princes (v.13). His son was— 

2. Chandraraja (v. 14); his son— 

3. Gadvaka II. (v. 14); and his son— 

4, Chandana, who defeated or slew in batile the Tomara prince Rudrena® 
(v. 14). This prince was succeeded by his son— 

5, Vakpatiraja, who put to flight Tantrap4la, a neighbouring chief, by 
whom he had been attacked (vv. 15-16). And lie again was succeeded by 
his son— 

6. Simharaja. This prince, though he is said to have subdued, anongst 
others, a Tomara leader, who appears to have been allied with a certain 
Lavana, was evidently defeated by his opponents and probably slain in 
battle (vv. 17-19). He was succeeded by his son— 


* See notes 64, 66, 68, 69, 70. 77, 78. 82 & S5. 
31 take this name to be equivalent to Rudrapala. 


118 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


7. Vigraharaja, ruling at the time when the inscription was composed, who 
restored the fortune of his family; but nothing specific that need be 
repeated here is mentioned regarding him, except that he had a younger 
brother, named Durlabharaja (vv. 20-26). It will appear below that, 
besides Vigraharaja, Sishharija lad two other sons, Chandraraja and 
Govindar4ja, and that he also had a brother, named Vatsaraja. 


These seven princes are apparently mentioned in the same order in the inscription 
from Bijholi of which a rough reading is published in the Journal As. Soc. Beng., vol. 
LY, part I, p. 40. From verse 16 of the present inscription it appears that the country 
over which they held sway, and in which Harsha was situated, was called Ananta, a 
name which is repeated in verse 28, The princes with whom they are represented to 
have been at war Lhave not hitherto met with in any other inscription, but the fact that 
two of them are described as Tomaras leads me to suspect that at any rate some of 
them were ruling the country around Delhi, which we know to have passed from the 
Tomaras to the Chahaménas in later times. 

The contents of the remaining verses of our inscription may be given in very few 
words. In the country Ananta there lived a sage Visvartipa, a devotee of Siva, 
who followed the Pafichdrthala doctrine (v. 28). He had a disciple named Prasgasta 
(v. 29); and his disciple again was Bhavarakta, also called Allata, who was born in 
a family of Brahmans of the Vargatika tribe, and had come to Harsha from the neigh- 
bouring Ranapallika, a village where the Sdmsdrika doctrine was practised. Allata 
built the magnificent temple of Harshadeva at which the inscription was afterwards 
put up, but died before he could accomplish all he had intended to do (vv. 30-84). 
And the works begun by him were therefore completed at his request by his disciple 
Bhavadyota (vv. 35-42). The temple erected by Allata was built by the architect 
Chandasiva, a son of Virabhadra (v, 48), and completed on the 18th of the bright 
half of Ashadha of the year 10138 (line 82). And the sage Allata is (in v. 48) reported 
to have died in the expired year 1027, when the sun had entered the sign of the 
Lion, on the third bright lunar day joined with the yoga Subba and the nakshatra Hasta, 
ona Monday. Referring this date to the Vikrama era, I find that the corresponding 
European date is Monday the 8th August, A.D. 970; for in northern Vikrama 1027 
expired the Sinrha-sainkrdnti took place on the 26th July, A.D. 970, which was the 6th 
of the dark half of the purnimdnta Bhadrapada, and the third of the following bright 
half (of the same Bhadrapada) was Monday the Sth August, when the third ¢ithi of the 
bright half ended 4 h. 15 m. and the nakshatra was Hasta up to 12 h. 29 m. and 
the yoga Subha up to 13 h. 25 m. after niean sunrise. The date is interesting, because it 
is the carliest Vikrama date known to me in which the writer has quoted a solar 
saikrdnti, instead of giving us the name of the lunar month.* 

‘Yo the poetical part of the inscription is appended, in lines 33-40, the following list 
of endowments of the temple of Harshadeva, which were received up to Ashadha-gudi 15 


of the (Vikrama) year 1030, the date on which I take the inscription to have been com- 
posed :— 


The king Simharaja, after having bathed at Pushkaratirtha, had given. the 
villages Simhagoshtha in the Tanakttpaka group of twelve, ‘I'raikalakaka and 


* The practice is common enough in modern dates of Sanskrit MSS. written in the Bengali character) 


HARSHA STONE INSCRIPTION 119 


[éanakipa® in the Pattabaddhaka vishaya, and Kanhapallika in the Sarah- 
kotta vishaya; his brother Vatsar4ja the village KardamakhAata in the Jayapura 
vishaya; the king Vigraharaja the viilages Chhattradhara and SamkarAnaka (verse 
25); Simharaja’s other sons Chandraraja and Govindaraja two hamlets in the Pat- 
tabaddhaka and Darbvhakaksha vishayas; Dhandhuka, an oficial of Simharaja’s 
the village Maytrapadra in the Khattakapa vishaya ; and a certain Jayanaraja the 
village Koliktiipaka. Besides, fields had been given by various pious people, at Madra« 
purika, Nimbadika, Marupallik4, Harsha,and, . . [kajlAvanapadra. And 
taxes on salt and on horses had been assigned for the benefit of the temple by the 
traders (?) of SAkambhari and by the horse-dealers from the north. 

Of the localities in this list, to which may be added the village of Ranapallika 
near Harsha, mentioned above, few have as yet been identified. Jayapura, SAkam- 
bhari and Pushkaratirtha near Ajmere are well known. Of the rest, Ranapallika 
must be the village “ Ranoli,’”’ about 7 miles east of ‘‘ Harasnath”’ and one mile west of 
*Shishu ;” and Nimbadik§, the village “ Nimara,” 4% miles south of “ Harasnath,” 
near a salt-lake which may have given its name to... . [ka]lavanapadra. 

The inscription ends with the usual appeal to future kings io respect these endow- 
ments. 


digo qk 
jae B Seemed cs [a]’ u 
wafaguala qufad)’ gata frea[at}erreae | 
ufaafaocafafed dwarf aie] VU — UW [1] 
Dy .. . . (atlanta: | 
aA Ves: Ug afeaqeiaa: w"—[2.] 
Ureararadar aaa Tgaat awilTa TAT 
far(an eee; ae] — CG ee 
3. — — Rae! 
faarae aad wafa fe yas ae at vat 
a ateuthrarn safa unofacafararqay: w’—[3.] 
war yet fafraaat afew [tHlaralote 
qw——UuvT 
4, [alsa aifsat aa | 
agaufaaraa var arty get fafaa 


> See note 79, 8 The aksharas in these brackets are slightly damaged at 
° From impressions obtained, at the Editor’s request, from | the top, but the reading is certain. 
Col. S. 8. Jacob, C. I. E., and made by Lala Ram Bakhsh of 9 The word broken away here was probably qaTq4q. 
Jaypur. 10 Metre: Rathoddhata, 
7 The words broken away at the beginning were probably 2 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). 
at at va: tua. : 2 Metre ; Sragdhara, 


120 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


zai atat wefaaet: afera: org Fara wu? —[4.] 
anigaaarferenrarats SqaTAT TAT 
aKa [Allert | 
waa farsa tarearasa: | 
zareatad a WTI Gea Seat a- 
Hiatt atat seat waz fan raztal sara atiwatar: y b j 
dadgiaat yarraeter| ofa gy |- 
6. [alaa 
fad carqufenaaagfaatiaaa: wary | 
qTeearafarareaate eae Tad aaa a 
Ware Buea yaafacaqaraaureiaay: 1 —[6.] 
aa avurfaefagrgetty- 


in 
iy | 


. [atlaeu: wey 
figratade: acafaafafs: gorarata 2a | 
aatarfa sat fat fracyaacarsaera 
ai’ watat feared’ feafuauaasaatfa: fara n —[7.1 
faaaat, ze ]- 


(v2) 


[ar* |wragesaafe Taaataad(a) 
WATS ATA SZ AA (F) SARE THATAT TATA | 
diunaniaaannanies fe wearnaih 
eu ed: (aled” fafaala lang defaat(at)yaani—[8.] 
9. Sa: Grae TANS | | 
suenfa: a sure fafeta” garg a: S—[9.| 
Cas ala" 
awit at farsa cia]: waefa a mat deataraeeat: 
acaaminnaafafawen aq — —” 
10. [wa? Jaret 
wat wa ata Peafaatattae tatfettat 
araranyaera aefa fe ua area Teatan: y "—[10.] 
seqfaanare faarenfay: way | 
afar yutare uw: aife — Uo” y B—[11.] 


13 Metre : Mandakranta. Read Uta aya. 

4 Metre of verses 5-8 : Sragdhara, * The two aksharas here pee away were perhaps 
1s Read atat. 
‘6 Originally qaq was engraved, but the initial q seems 21 Metre : Sragdhara. 


tu have been altered to @, 2 The word here broken away was perhaps faaq@. 


7 Origivally “LT, altered to “Tq. 3 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). 
18 Metre ; Sloka (Anushtubb), | 


LEO INSCRIPTION OF ee eepai VIGR 


a Mace 
Gr ANGI AACR: 
ae MeN Beas aayy 
= RU TEITEG 
Be Tea BIR HAS 
ARR: ia : 


BK — aeaagae ai we J 
Races WATER NTA 
Bae hater HAA EAI 
~ sae RUC OAT 
PT HAATa GHG F ARG 


FLAS HUATAARP ATOMS 
‘ a es el Haig earersea 
ARE GT enon ashacrmnd SATA HON GTSTG 


ee 


eon 


an SCE ARITAIND URE 
4 ests ETUC Be 


= 


e rts BS a ol He aioe a As a Sect Sey 


JA, THE ers ) YEAR oe 


ca cteearn eae he 
HHT OUAT TTI 


seta ates rer ane 
fF eaiaanip gouge SESH PORATION 


eT TGA a 
He Rett TOR 
Heser er se 


OR ae 
EAC US sia 


: een 
oe ec en e eae : ee a ee ae 


ae eno e Cra ww PNAS IT die AAMAS HARA 
z a cece I GTA IIRL SING x A 


renee arta ee ETT ome 


Ca Sat cs 
a rt = i 


TAREE ca Sane 


“TAA COLE UN B Nh 
eS “een 
ASANTE Wien QQarzin 
FRU Z ALG MAGS 1seeNGaue 


GU nH 
ARIAT HM saci caee racer 


ae Ge 


- Wea 


ey is 5 =n 
rancaedagreqare sc an 
Caren tete< packs aale 
ge leorIenas 


HARSHA STONE INSCRIPTION, 121 


L.11. (ua*qriresart fanacaaarerares ane 
WiauTatearatfathaafaacraeTEyaaTAR | 
ao: smuara qafzaaaadicuseeri 
araTaRga Safa wad woeae [e*]- 


12. 


[waa] v *—[12.] 


wel; Ahyaarem faa fara” 
“ara a? areanacauaareray(a)ateafas: | 
Te Weued aaa wast Afaara- 


ataatfa feior gaufa ua: — 


13. 


Sp SR (at?) i —[13.] 


Ge: Wedetirsilwacaaanreey atagar: 
PARANA YU: WAH La GAMA: TATU | 
aqarnldenagfearfaufanaeaiat wu 


eal tend” Gaz yta] 


14. [a*jaraa aear™ | sath y —[14.] 


aa: Wada Fat aUTaAe | 


MATa aaa AETUSATET: [15] 
area waa agaty cam afaaen qaqa 
uraa atfad: acta afc) eefefsats U 


—(a7] 


aerate wAzafala)” warraiaaaTs- 
moraauren fefa fefx afaat Stir: aea(a): 1 —[16.] 


WAT | 


miaat fe asta aq efeaaiaal maa 


arina(a aay atl fa*]- 


16. (caer wary Tensa(Saye | 
aarerfa wire afeqad waar Wad 7a 
areas: afisastaag w °—[17.) 


Saarcfad ta fucea aaaiate | 


qerdgiud ata ae ala] ov [farlsala uw] *—[18.] 
17, ——" 1 alataraa aaad dan fuaaied 
ae aa avan: ufafed farat(eun)fxat fara | 


24 Metre of verses 12-14: Sragdhbard. 
| 25 Read ae. The akshara , preceding Yq, may 
possibly have been altered to FZ. 

%6 Originally undoubtedly =taarqtTa was engraved, but 
the akshara q appears to have been altered subsequently, and 
the only akshara which would suit the context appears to me 
to be e ; I am not certain, however, that the adopted reading 
ig correct. 

7 This word, for which Dr. Mill has read a¢4 Yq}, 
is quite clear and distinct-in the original. 


23 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). 

2 This akshara might possibly be read fa. 

30 The lower portion of this akshara is not quite 
distinct. 

31 Metre: Sragdhara. = 

® Metre: Sarddlavikridita. 

3° Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh)." 

34 The word, here broken away, was probably either farq7 


or Eel. 


129 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


arramaia away favareaafa aay? 
arqaAIAI Aa Taga yaMITt waq wv °—[19.] 
aTaAT- 
L. 18, [fa* aetisingae at araaiaa; 
areas gaa faytrga un “—[20.] 
aifasuscfeat faa fiadat waa dufa fayagq at aafa | 
qaraar(anyara facafaara aanfeafa ezar fas 
19. (ar jarrah: nv 7 —[21.] 
aa eveuaa wan: afuataaaet aar(anetu: | 
araaa anafrat wat facia fasureaiera  *—[22.] 
ae ae afta wat wat aaa af a faa ota: | 
gfesiaaataa- 
20, U —" Tad aaret AeA: 1 —[23.] 
HATS: Yale: VATA |AIay Wea: 
RUC: YA AAACAL PATRI: | 
Sues: WAlaaaHatatefaefaat: Wete- 


faarst urfat — — 
21, v wu fafefa wa: ara: faaa y °—[24.] 
waarawara feata: caarwag; [1*] 
aaat eoat(ara] [alae eat axa uv "—[25.] 


Raearaaa stasis fagfae: [1%] 
amd araeent fayaa vagy: i —[26.] 

22, [wet rsraet arat ayufagqaiear | 
wea: geedteanaanfer: Gan: 1 —[27.] 
aaaTat Vary afer TATA ()T | 
daraaTgarata” faretrrage: u —[28.] 
Darsataneeaa fae" 

93. [afa* aver: | 
WTS EY urges: Hat 1 —[29.] 
atla]*cal wane frst fearadiaz: | 
anifearaatgcafengereaa: 1(u) —[80.] 
eaereaa ane: ufaws cecafea | 
arartagaraad we fatale: v*] —[31.] 

* Metre: Sardilavikridita. “ Metre of verses 25—32: Sloka (Anushtubh). 


* Metre: Sloka (Anusht: bh). One would expect to read here Yarquqararai, and 


% Metre : Vasantatilaka. I believe that the aksh h 1 
been altered to @ al 
* Metre of verses 22 and 23: Rathoddhata, the original. Bare sal ol ata oa 


% The two aksharas h»:e broken away, were probably ® Read hafaacear® 


zar. PM a : 
Metre : Sragdhard, riginally fq, but apparently altered to q, 


L. 24. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


ho 
iw) 


HARSHA STONE INSCRIPTION. 1 


wqacsega vet fuareafeafama: | 
MSM Tt BA AUAATATT n —[32.] 
aera a(a) Bara fenaaaaa: daarat avait 

ASOT HUAALAA AAA ATLA: | 
Sala Ma (a) sa waat(ahalat — VU 

— [wt?] ga(a@)ay- 

wad ufafad: qafzafane anfed eaeeRA y “—[33.] 

SR Wevaranfaaagua: wears a]ATAA | 
Sel aulga a(a) yaaa arfta aa 

arene fafache azfafa aca frmerat adtara uw —[84.] 
aratafenenl at Saargaaaa: | 
ala ananisarageargwaaraa: 1 “—[ 35. 
aal MAMATA CAAA: | 
waainivafars: detfaaq- 

(am* Ja: uv —[36.] 
qiaraa org ufasrar: Rraraay | 
manta (a) aTarTrattaAaAT Ta i —[37. | 
qaiaaaarafaag Fa arfcaz | 
went atfeat fear amar afedtae: v —[38.] 
uea aealaa HIaA rearfeat | 
atfzataa- 
oe ee BUTUTUATAT a —[39.] 
aaa walt: UaTaTa Tarafy | 
ameafad a efad guatfaara 1 —[40.] 
feaa(a)t wet ven” aed a faga ast 
frat afa: at: ura adarfa afere, y —[41.] 
faanaag— 
—— vu [a ]< aertinefaaguera: gefrar miiq | 

aanaagqena ving ta aid BaUAciuaife: arfed a(e)ufaai  *—[42.] 


| ateale laa: era: aaurdra dsfaa” | 


fanaa vast aveq fren a]- 
Sr elle oe or 
(ala fafaatad acted date wat TaSTA | 


° Metre of verses 33 and 34: Sragdhara. | 9 This word is perfectly clear in the impressions and can — 


4 Metre of verses 35-41 . Sloka (Anushtubh), 
“' Originally wa, altered to ara. 


not possibly be read in any other way. It offends against both 


the metre and grammar. 


48 Metre: Malini | 30 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). 


R 2 


124 


dl. 


32. 


33. 


Bra 


38. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(ajaezanaaradint aardefar ayat qaq y "—[41.] 
HATATATAT a RG THAMCHGITA UAT | 
afmaaa erat unfafce wearin” — | 45, ] 
aaa VU 
—Uv aatactdgaarnfaa 
mamas farafa aad ary 
Maal aaletlea AaaAIAAaT Haat a(a) wee . 
Rararataamaag vad waeTeE araq uu —[46.] 
Sas 
. (ela: ay: Her are TAT: 
earfratrareag wares faaa)yaa nv '—[47.] 
waa g°2[ 2] squrenfe 93 Wt: BULA BL URS nu 
srder(anat ava faquarga fesirt ate 
Dat arate at* ]- 
[at] Beacafeat ataaTea aay | 
aries: dgara [yajanaudg feqat geaa(ad) 
aaa franaarahr fer wacter 1 RS (un) *—[48.] 
wf i dad goze aimaute cy frag aaraar(a)araat[at] . . 
aa fread | aerrarfarsrnfesas: wnt qaranetens feemie 1” 
aat uza (a) eafang aaananrargar 1° acatefaag awafaniad aataqz- 
aeiatuanuf .. . [a]. 


waa Neate yasia Daas ara auasafasuttEreucaa- 


qalaagAaT wataararna fesalassraaqaa yey | agagIAT Blas: 
_ auraratasa|g || cfara*]- 


. 2 RET MIATIANETRTAAT | aM WaT WTAATaTHEaAquicfated- 


Alea | AIT Whe scraast AastIasT Maes Eaararaaga (a) eafaug |” 
quaafaa(a] . . 


. (aire aeatfianradt [2°]... (e]a ozaea afamatat waa faaca: | 


atfaisasnag: TTT Ya wequiTaa ayuaaaata( gaa eTaqua: 
WENA i... 

fearas: Seraats:* eyAraa aKuaa Waal SaaS TIAA SAAT 1(W 
aat AAAS Ss aT Wana wawgzal ufa fawtonaa ed 1 ata 
aiagerfaatat [a]... 


5 Metre: Rathoddhata, 5° Metre: Sragdhara. 


32 Metre: 
33 Metre: 


Arya, 
: Sragdhara. 
** Metre: Sloka (Anusitubh), 


°° These signs of punctuation are superfluous, 
% The sign of anusudra of the last akshara is doubtful, 
8 Originally Wayraaiqra:, altered to 3hayqzacrs. 


HARSHA STONE INSCRIPTION. 125 


L. 39. [aliea ofa ga wat ea (i) gearafeatfa eaysaatatarfa gar 1 aletl- 
gfarat falujearfanad fale) fsat(arla cufcaraad aaufaarat (ea]- 
zala| (elu aiead. ew. 

40... .[wlarauue Qaanata auraa fesfaaralfe lata eae \ 
aaraaearfant yaaa wat aaa trawE: | 
aaa HAGA areas ATA UTATATAT was [su] °—[49. 


TRANSLATION. 
[Om !] 
[Orm! Adoration to Siva !] 

(Verse 1.) I adore him who removes all obstacles, the first-born of Siva and his 
spouse, who is worshipped by the gods, [Gaj4anana,] the granter of boons, who gives 
enjoyment, salvation, and true perfection. 

(2.) May the destroyer of Tripura guard you, who is” 
with bewildered minds, but praised by the true gods ! 

(8.) Victorious is that Pasupati®', the bestower of compassion on all, who is named 
Harsha, the holy, at whose dancing the whole world verily changes its position ; [for] 
the earth, resting on Sesha’s hoods, bends low beneath the tread of his feet, [while the 
sky] with the sun and moon [rises high] with the lifting up of his arms, 

(4.) “ A three-pointed spear is in thy left hand, in the other an alms-dish; the or- 
nament : 5 a “ ° ; a serpent serves as necklace for thy 
blue throat; nowhere ‘tae I seen, O three-eyed one, such wondrous vesture ;”—may 
Hara, smiling when thus jestingly addressed by Gauri, g guard you! 

(5.) May the river of heaven, who with her masses of water pervades the sky where 
the sun and the planets are shaken by her velocity, and who with the thousands of lines 
of her waves puts to shame the oceans with their decreasing water; who, white like the 
moon, appears like a graceful veil on the crest of the moon-crested (god), fast bound 
with huge uncouth tresses of hair;—may she grant your petitions ! 

(6.) May the god Harsha, that unfathomable architect for the construction of the 
world, preserve you,—he by whose will and power all that was not is produced and 
vanishes again, the universe with its moving moon and sun and stars, with its expanse 
of worlds, mountains, rivers, islands and oceans, and together with the gods, demons, 
serpents, his own attendants, excellent sages, Yakshas and mortals ! ; 

(7.) May the moon-crested (god), who in the form of the Linga has (here) a twofold 
dwelling, promote your happiness; he who—full of joy at having burnt Tripura, the 
enemy of the gods, with the fire of his arrow, (avd) worshipped on this hill by the joy- 
ful divine hosts, Indra and the rest, who praised him and bowed down to him,—verily 
under the name of Harsha ® stayed on (¢hese) two mountain peaks for the welfare of 
Bharata™ ! 

( 8, ) When the gods saw how his own nature broke forth, like a mighty fire issuing 
from the hollow of his eye, frightening the creatures with its scorching rays, darkening 

59 Metre: Salini. 1 i.e, Siva. 


6 The missing portion of the verse probably expressed the Oo ¥.es.* JOYs. 
idea that Siva is dreaded-by the demons. 683 te, Bhdratavarsha, or Ludia. 


126 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


the quarters with thick volumes of smoke of the trees which were consumed by its 
“flames all round, roaring terribly in its impetuous progress, (awd) annihilating 
the god of love, they became afraid lest the destruction of the world had come, out 
of season. 

(7. 9.) May this mountain Harsha, which grazes the clouds on high (and) on 
which the god Harsha, the destroyer of Pura, resides, purify you ! 

A hero speaks the following verse :— 


(10.) The water of the torrents which flows here is indeed not that of the Ganges; 
here there is not the charming beauty of the garden of paradise; nor are there [palaces] 
here which glitter brightly all around with their jewelled and gilded pinnacles. Yet this 
hill possesses another, superior, unrivalled beauty ; for that Sambhu dwells here in person 
is surely a paramount cause of loveliness. 

(11.) Since the eight-formed (¢2d), the lord of the eight perfections, himself dwells 
here, this mountain possesses supreme grandeur which baffles description. 

(12.) Glorious is this mansion of the holy Harshadeva which is charming with the 
expanse of its spacious chapels, embellished with eggs of gold, (wnd) pleasing like the 
sons of Pandu by reason of the court-yards “ which are formed by the flights of buildings 
along its sides. Surpassing in height the peak of Meru, it is beautified by an excellent 
porch at which a bull is skilfully carved, and is endowed with manifold objects of 
enjoyment. 

(18.) First came the lord of men known as the illustrious Givaka, of the 
Chahamana family, who attained pre-eminence as a hero in the assemblies of the fore- 
most princes of the world, the illustrious Nagas and the rest”; whose fame, remaining on 
earth in visible form, as an excellent dwelling for the holy Harshadeva, even now 
endures here and illumines with great . . . 1... 4 5 

(14.) His son was the illustrious Chandraraja, of spotless fame and fierce valour ; 
and his son was the valorous prince who again, like the first, was named Givaka. 
From him sprang, inspiring kings with fear, the illustrious Chandana, who, when he 
had slain on the battle-field the proud Tomara lord, prince Rudrena, by force secured 
the fortune of victory. 


(15.) After him came his son, the Maharaja named Vakpatirdja, the illustrious, 
endowed with supreme splendour, ever victorious in battle ; 


(16.) Who, managing to sustain the spirit of his army, eager to loosen the reins of 
their chargers, forced Tantrap4la,—the ruler of the country adjacent to Ananta, who 
had come arrogantly defying (?) the command of the prince whom he should have 
honoured,—to wander, quieted, overwhelmed with shame, in every direction, after his 
clephants had before already been frightened . . . by drums ..... . (?).# 


4 The reading of the second line of this verse is quite clear in the impressions, but owing to the word vikaté its mean- 
ing is not olear to me, Vikafd is apparently used here as a feminine substantive, and should, judging from the context, 
denote both a hall or court-yard and a female, related somehow to the Pandavas. In the former sense the word is evidently 
used also in verse 33, below; and ax regards the other meaning, it may at any rate be noted that Vikata is the name of one 
of the hundred sons of Dhritaréshtra. ; 


® See note 26, above. Iam doubtful about the correctness of my translation, but see no other way of explaining the 
original text. 

% I do not properly understand the second line of this verse, which is damaged in the original. Tr4sitebha might of 
course also mean ‘who had frightened the elephants.’ The word abhivahan (supposing the reading to be correct) of the 
third line appears to be used in an altogether unusual sense. Dr. Mill’s translation uf the second line is: ‘even he, having 
his elephant terrified and driven into a lake by the sounding cymbals of the hostile war-elephauts.’ 


HARSHA STONE INSCRIPTION. 127 


A hero speaks :— 

(7. 17.) Vakpatiraja’s peerless son was the illustrious Simharaéja, who verily all the 
earth over is sung of by people as the equal of Harischandra, of spotless fame for his 
liberality, majesty, and victories, and of resplendent virtue. He piously gave abundant 
wealth to Hara for a temple. 

(18.) And on Siva’s dwelling he set a golden dome (?), his own fame in bodily form, 
resembling the full moon. 

(19.) [After having defeated] the Tomara leader, proud of the command of armies, 
together with Lavana, the victorious one annihilated in war rulers of men in every 
direction. To him, who kept as many (princes) in his prison as he did in his house, the 
universal sovereign of the earth in Raghu’s race came of his own accord to bring him 
final liberation.” 

(20.) His son was the illustrious Vigraharaja, resembling Indra, who rescued 
both the fortune of his family and the Fortune of victory from the distress which had 
thus befallen them. 

(21.) By him the Fortune of his realm, deprived of the illustrious Sirnhardja and as 
it were frightened at the idea who might now be her lord, was re-assured by offering 
her a lasting home in his two arms, 

(22.) Having subdued with his arms the whole earth by overpowering the wicked 
on all sides, he easily made it obedient to his commands, so that it was like a servant 
bowing down at his feet. 

(23.) When good men hear his noble conduct constantly celebrated by mankind 
throughout the world, their bodies again and again are closely covered all over with 

hairs erect through delight. 

(24.) He has been served with many presents, offered without guile and exceedingly 
pleasing,—with strings of pure pearls, gay steeds, fine garments and weapons; with 
camphor, quantities of betel, first-rate sandal-wood and endless quantities of gold; and 
with spirited rutting elephants, huge like moving mountains, together with their mates. 

(25.) Piously he has assigned by deeds two villages to the lord Harsha, the 
excellent village of Chhattradh4ra and Samkaranaka. 

(26.) He is adorned by his younger brother, the illustrious Durlabharaja, as 
Rama was by Lakshmana, and as Halayudha is by Vishnu. 

(27.) This row of great kings had the origin.of their virtues in devotion to Sambhu. 
The holy Harsha is their family-deity; through him has the family become illustriotis,—- 

(28.) In the land of Ananta dwelt the blessed preceptor ViSvardpa, learned and 
a devout worshipper of Uttaresvara, whose hereditary doctrine was that of the Paichdr- 
thalas. 

(29.) His disciple was Pragasta, a true worshipper of (Siva) Pasupati, purified 
by knowledge which shone brightly because the rite of initiation had removed all stains 
from it. 


7 The following verse shows more clearly that SimmharAja had been unfortunate in war and was probably killed in battle. 
The universal sovereign in Raghu’s race, spoken of in this verse, I understand to be the divine Rama (or Vishnu). 

68 This verse contains the two words auttareSvaru and paichdrthala, which I have not met with elsewhere. The 
former is derived from uttare§vara which we have in UttareSvara-tirtha, the name of a Tirtha, and UttareSvardsrama, the 
name of a Linga, and which apparently isa name of Siva. Panchdrthala is evidently equivalent to pdichdrthika, which 
occurs in line 6 of the Tewar stone inscription of GayAkarnadeva (Indian Antiquary, vol. XVIII, p. 211), and the meaning 
of which js apparent from the SarvadarSana-samgraha, translation by Cowell and Gough, p. 103, 


128 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(v.30 and 81.) His disciple was Bhavarakta, also called” Allata, sprung from a 
family of holy Brihmans belonging to the Vargatika tribe, who had migrated from 
the well-known village of Ranapallik4, near Harsha, where the hereditary doctrine 
is that of the Sdmsdrikas.” 

(32.) In Allata surely Nandin” himself, whose place is ever near Siva, had de- 
scended to the state of mortality, to worship the holy Harsha. 

(33.) He who from his birth was a religious student, with mere space for his pure 
covering, with the soul completely controlled, and practising austerities ; whose excellent 
mind was solely bent on worshipping the holy Harsha, and who had forsaken the in- 
fatuation of the outer world; who as soon as he was born was a dear friend ....., of those 
eager to cross (the sea of) life,—he caused to be built this mansion of Harsha with its 
well-constructed halls (?), with the wealth received from pious people. 

(34.) When one sees how on this hill of the moon-decorated (god) which with its 
lofty peaks kisses the path of heaven he built this incomparable mansion of the holy 
Pasupati, celebrated under the name of Harsha,—this mansion which surpasses the 
palaces of the immortals and is a home for many gods, endowed with excellent objects of 
enjoyment,—it becomes evident to one that there is nothing which the penance of sages 
who have renounced all desires would not accomplish. 

(35 and 86.) Of him, resplendent like [Svara, the disciple was Bhavadyota, always 
like Siva himself in appearance, who shed light on the (spiritual) lineage of his precep- 
tor. A perpetual religious student and fervently practising the vows of a Pasupata ascetic, 
he by fierce austerities acquired holiness and got rid of the defilement of unholy deeds. 

(37.) Having received the command of his preceptor about to depart for Siva’s 
home, he took upon himself to complete the works as they had been commenced. 

(38.) To the east of the mountain, at the foot of it, he had three works executed, 
an excellent well, a beautiful garden, and a cistern for watering cattle, built of stone. 

(39.) Watering the garden by means of a well of sweet water which never dries up 

..e.e and filling the cistern. 

(40.) To worship Sambhu with beautiful flowers and to give water to cattle to 
drink, these two things have been declared to be the best for people desirous of religious 
merit to accomplish. 

(41.) Raiment consisting of mere space, matted hair, ashes, a broad couch formed 
by the earth, food received as alms, and the hand used as a drinking-cup,—these repre- 
sented all his wants. : 

(42.) Having filled up with masses of stone all that immense .... which was [in 
front] of Siva’s temple, he caused to be made a beautiful court which, laid out with very 
smooth stones, is level and pleasant for walking. 

(43.) The architect in this (work) was Chandasiva, the famed son of Virabha- 
dra, omniscient like Visvakarman, in the art of building houses ....... 

(44.) He built this delightful house of Sankara with its chapels, the beautiful porch 

which contains all the gods, like a portion of heaven made by the creator himself.” 
6 This apparently is the meaning of dvindmatak, which does not occur elsewhere. 

7° What the doctrines of this sect were I have not been able to find out. 

7 An attendant of Siva, commonly the bull on which he rides. 


7? Tn his account of the ruins of the temple, Mr. Dean speaks of a doorway relieved by an architrave of most elaborate 
sculpture, divided into twelve compartments, in each of which a group from the Hindu Pantheon occupies a place. 


HARSHA STONE INSCRIPTION. 129 


(V. 45.) Dhirandga, the pious son of the karanika® Thiruka, has composed this 
lucid eulogy here, at the excellent dwelling of GangAdhara. 

(46.) As long as Sambhu owns......the river of the gods and the moon’s crescent, 
as long as Lakshmi sports and the Kaustubha glitters on the bosom of Mura’s foe,” as 
long as Gayatri abides near Brahman as his ever-devoted spouse, so long may this Kai- 
lasa-like dwelling of the god Harsha shine forth ! 

(47.) . . « « . « how should Sambhu come within the range of time? But the 
time when this mansion was built is recorded here, as we have learnt it. 

In the year 1018, on the 13th of the bright half of Ashadha, was the temple of 
Sambhu completed. 

(48.) When a thousand and three times nine years had gone,” and when the sun 
had entered the sign of the Lion, on the third bright lunar day joined with (the yoga) 
Subha and (the nakshatra) Hasta, on a Monday,”—then that Allata, commanded by 
Sambhu who desired to give him an eternal, undefiled, essentially bright home, departed 
for the abode of Siva, about to obtain freedom from bodily existence.”— 


May it be well! 


The following is a record of the endowmerts as they were severally received up to” 
the 15th of the bright half of Ashadha of the year 1030 :— 

The Mahdérdjddhirdja, the illustrious Simhardja, having on an auspicious day 
bathed at the sacred Pushkaratirtha, made over by deed of gift to the holy Harsha- 
deva on the hill of the moon-decorated (god Harsha), to be his as long as the moon, the 
sun and the sea endure, four villages in his possession, viz. Simhagoshtha in the 
Tanakipaka group of twelve, Traikalakaka and [Sanaktipa” in the Pattabad- 
dhaka vishaya, and Kanhapallika io the Sarahkotta vishaya, for the purpose of 
bathing, worshipping and anointing (the god), for oblations, incense and lamps, and for 
the celebration of processions on festive days. 

Similarly his brother, the illustrious Vatsaraja, gave by deed the village of Kar- | 
damakhAta in the Jayapura vishaya which he had become possessed of. 

Similarly two villages, already mentioned above,” were given by deed by the illus- 
trious Vigraharaja. 

Similarly the sons of the illustrious Simhardja, the illustrious Chandraraja and the 
illustrious Govindardja, piously presented by deeds bearing their signatures . . . . 
two hamlets* . . . .in the Pattabaddhaka vishaya (and) the Darbhakaksha vi- 
shaya which they had become possessed of. 


73 i.e, a writer of legal documents. 

7 4,e, Vishnu. 

® i.e, in the expired (Vikrama) year 1027. 

78 The name of the week-day is similarly put in the instrumental case in other dates, where we should have expected the 
locative. : 

7 T take vaideha as an abstract noun, derived from videha ‘bodiless.’ 

7 The word of the original, so translated, is niruddham, which I have not met with in this sense elsewhere. 

” The names of these two villages form in the original a Dvandva compound, which I cannot be sure of having re- 
solved correctly. 

8 Bee above, verse 25. 

8! Owing to the mutilated state of the text I am unable to translate this sentence properly. In particular I do not see 
how the meaning of the word pdtaka here differs from that of pallikd. On pdétaka see the Indian Antiguary, vol, XVIII, 
p. 136. 

8 


130 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


The illustrious SimharAja’s duhsddhya,” the illustrious Dhandhuka, with the per- 
mission of his master, gave the village of Mayfirapadra which he possessed in the 
Khattakipa vishaya. 

The illustrious Jayanardja, the sonof .... . . hila, piously gave by a deed 
to Harshadeva the village of Kolikipaka, possessed by him. 

Likewise one virnSopaka on every kétaka of salt was assigned by the most illus- 
trious . ...... « Sat SAkambhari. 

And one dramma on every horse was assigned by the . . . . . of horse-dealers™ 
from the northern country. 

The fields given by pious-minded people and now possessed by the god are as 
follows: at MadrapurikA a pippalavdliké® field, at the village of Nimbadika a dar- 
bhatiké field, at Marupallika a jhdta field, at Harsha a /dtafield,at . .. . [ka]- 
lAvanapadra a sekyuka field; likewise hereat . . .. .. © abig plough of land. 

(Verse 49.) RAamabhadra again and again entreats all the kings to come: this 
common causeway of religion to princes must at all times be guarded by you! 


IX. MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM THE SUBA OF DIHLIi. 


By Pavut Horn, Pa.D., StRAssBurRG. 


The papers relative to Muhammadan inscriptions already published by scholars in 
India, especially those of the late Professor Blochmann, are so valuable that they have 
laid a solid foundation for further advances; but the number of inscriptions still un- 
edited must be very large, and their collection and publication may be looked to with 
confidence for many additions to, and corrections of, our information. 

The following inscriptions are from impressions taken by the Archeeological Survey 
officers of the Panjab circle at diverse places in the former S#ba of Dibli. 


L.—JHAJHAR (ps1>; in inser. No. 5 y=). 

Jhajhar is now the head-quarters of the faisil of the same name in the Rohtak 
District. It is situated in the plain 35 miles west of Dihli. The town is said to have 
been founded at the time of the first Muhammadan conquest of Dihli, and is not seldom 
mentioned by the chroniclers. Many ruins testify its later importance. In 657 A.H. it is 
named among other cities which were conferred upon Nusrat Khan (ad. Nas, p. 274) ; 
in 756 Firéz Shah dug a large canal from the river Satlaj and prolonged it to Jhajhar, a 
distance of 48 kréh (Firishta, lithographed edition, vol. I, p. 262). In the Ain-t-Akbari 
it is registered with 128,417 bighas, 1,422,451 ddms, Saydrghdl 806,461 ddme, 60 cavalry 
and. 1,000 infantry ; the castes were Afghansand Jats, In A. H. 967, when Akbar made 
his encampment at Jhajhar, Abu’l Ma’Ali, who was set free from his confinement at 


% This word apparently denotes an office, In other inscriptions we find duhsddhyasddhanika, 

* The word here left untranslated is bhammaha-desy4 about the reading of which there is no doubt, Dest apparently 
is used in the same sense which it ought to convey here in the Peheva inscription, ante, vol. I, p. 187, ]. 8, and probably 
denotes ‘a guild;’ and in that case bhammaha should denote a class of traders. For vimrSopaka see vithsopaka, ante, vol. I, 
p- 166. Kétaka probably denotes a certain weight or measure (of salt). 

** The original has heddvika instead of heddvuka, which occurs in the Mitdkshard on Yajiiavalkya il, 30. 

* The terms here left untranslated probably denote various kinds of grain. 

* The words here omitted I do not understand, 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT, 131 


Bayana by Khan Khanan, dared to present himself before the emperor; but the latter 
was so greatly offended by this that he ordered the rebel again into imprisonment. 

The town was almost ruined by the great famine of 1783 A.D., but has since regained 
its prosperity. The following twelve inscriptions belong to seven mosques in it, and date 
from the tenth and eleventh centuries of the Hijrat. 

1. A loose stone (204” by 18") from the destroyed K4li Masjid, now in the house 
of Mardan ’Ali Shih Bhattian in the town of Jhajhar, bears the following inscription of 
four lines’ :— 


Bis 3 alhe wd aU) by aU Joe” Uiy ye pladlaabe UI JG 


ee es a ee eae en os 
LS} glee Le ally all stle GAN Le pyape wide oy LE oslo 


wtend y gad bin yay re ciptall, ele) Gbaiicth ald p yb obec WUanbe 
Blasi 4 


“The Prophet—may he be blessed !—says,—‘ He who builds a mosque for Allah, 
will have built for him a house like it by Allah in Paradise,’ 

“This mosque has been built by the high Majlis, the great Khan, the chosen of the 
Merciful, the educator of the world,— 

“Dadid Khan, the pardoned deceased son of the Malik Ashsharq Seay 
Waddin Malik Miyan, the Afghan;— 

‘** May God preserve him from bad accidents and crown his reward with the crown of 
Paradise !—on the twenty-fifth Ramazin 799 [22nd June 1397].” 


The date falls in the reign of Mahmud Shah; an inscription of the same year has 
also been published by Blochmann in the Journal As. Soc, Beng., vol. XLII, p. 304. 
2. Over the mzhrab of the Bazirwalli mosque in the middle of the town, a 


we 


sandstone slab, measuring 28” by 153”, bears the following five lines :— 


WL) Syary Qos UI I TY erst rors AU) ng 

cpl a wendly 5 Joel] Luly tse) fase Bile} os 

bebe dale ds? sty aillaly y ale Usd pie sliol pv) as” 

IS gly& jEpm oiled Letty cols ela) ay dine” 

RAVe ieee AcE tee ee gs Ua VY teh eel en all 


* Tn the name of the mersiful and compassionate God. There is no God, ete. 
In the time of the pillar of the Kalifat, spreading justice and clemency, Jalaladdin 
Muh ammad Akbar Badishdh-i-Ghdzi—may God perpetuate his kingdom and his 


1 Here, at Strassburg, I am unable to refer to the Zdrikh-i Badaont, the Jaunpdrndma, the Miftdh attavdrikh, 
Stewart’s History of Bengal and other works, I have retained in the transcriptions of the inscriptions the spelling of the 
originals, adding no wanting dots, Aamzas or tashdids, the poetry excepted ; but I have omitted the signs of the short vowels 
and the jazmas which often occur arbitrarily. For the short accounts of the places where the inscriptions have been found, 
J have consulted Hunter’s Imperial Gazetteer of India. To Dr. S, Landauer I am obliged for his kind assistance in the 
elucidation of some difficulties, 


s2 


132 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


reign! the erection of the honoured 

“ And beautiful mosque’, the lady over natures (2), has been made by the Nawdb 
Rimi Khan, governor of the sarkdr Khwaj Kator’ (?), 

On the 27th of the month Rajab—may its honour increase !—of the year 970 
[22nd March 1563].” 


This inscription is interesting because it gives new information about Rami Khan, 
who is not often mentioned in the histories. LBlochmann has noted two services of his 
in his translation of the dim (No. 111, p. 424), the one from A.H. 971—one year later 
than the present inscription—the other of A. H. 983 (No. 146, p. 441). His full name 
is not certain. Blochmann styles him Rimi Khan Ustad Jalabi.* 


8. Over the northern outside arch of the mosque of Shah Bura in the north of 
the town, is a sandstone, measuring 22” by 19”, bearing the six lines :— 


ol} ppe J) oe" ay) WY WO yy G8) day Ge ap 
Sy ye gl Sy pl) A a eee ree 
ob} oj ye Kind bIA of GB vel) & cau! prod ob bh 
olin) ol og bs? weed pw bile) GALS L SU) Gares? 


ob ylele J, | 7 Glas ti 2d) ewila Opae yo 


oly of Ii) of ylae, yt G7 y erat Gpjop dead af 
dos” ite Uo 3 
Old 3 asd sds gla pls ew cles} polyps waila} 
qv4 
Metre: [Hazaj. 

“When God the only one, put away (my) misfortune, the building of this mosque 
was designed. 

In the time of the king JalAl addin Akbar—may his days be equal to his desire !-— 

‘Everybody who comes to that mighty one, becomes a new one; Muhammad 
Ibrahim (also) is happy through him, 

‘* He is true and a companion of the followers of God, he exhilarates the afflicted. 

“To him especially the pole and time devote their service, the masters. 

‘As the design of the world is for ten kings, so, O God! may his glory be eternal ! 

‘** When nine hundred was increased by sixty and ten and five, it was in the month 
Ramazan that he laid the foundation. May the friendship of God be over Muhammad ! 

> Litibd’ has been distinctly engraved, but perhaps atbd’ is to be read and Béga-ya (i.e. Bég-2) athd’ synonymous 
with daryd khanlary—Babar’s Memoirs, p. 480. 

3 The reading Katér is somewhat doubtful; the word may be Ganaur or Kanaum, but even if read thus, we get none 
of the well-known sarkdrs of the Moghul empire. The same strange use of farmay2§ occurs in Nos. 4 and 44. 

4 More famous was the homonymous mér dtash of Humayin (died 942), who effected in 942 the conquest of the fort 
of Chanar by the practice of old Zopyrus’ stratagem, after having quitted the service of his former master Sultan Bahadur of 
Gujarat, which treachery has given matter for the anecdote of Sultan Babadur’s parrot in Khafi Khan’s Muniakhad allubdb, 
The Turks of Europe were celebtated in Asia for their knowledge of artillery, which was always the most remarkable 


weapon of the Turks in their ware with the Persian Shihs, a fact that Shih Tahmasp I, in vain attempts to deny in his 
Memoirs (see ny German translation of them, p. 129. Strassburg, Triibner). 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. 133 


* From the heavenly speaker I asked the date of completion, a voice gave me ‘/é (-y?) 
sijda fayz da’ (Bestow a place of adoration). 976.’ [Ramazin 976 began on the 17th 
February 1569].” 

The words of the ¢drékh give only 975. The poetry is very poor and difficult to 
understand. Edo not pretend that my readings are absolutely correct. 

4. Over the central arch of the ruined mosque of Miyan Raib to the south of the 
Bazarwalli Masjid is a rectangular sandstone, measuring 19” by 15”, bearing the 
following five lines. This mosque is in the last stage of ruin, the yard being filled 
with filth and sweepings; it is no more used for religious purposes. 

hy Vadey aU) I I y) dpe 
DG eee Syeeskhess 
eo hed (sic) 3 ye phe GS 
glo ye Cle 4Aq dian 
*T testify that there is no God but God alone, who has no companion; 


* And I testify that Muhammad is His servant and His apostle. 
“The edifice of this mosque has been built by Miyan Raib, son of Piy4ra,' on the 


tenth of the month Zi-1-Hajj, 

“In the year 989 [5th January 1582]. His commander (was) Miy4n Datd.” 

5. The graveyard of Miydn Rib is situated half a mile east of Jhajhar, near 
the Buawalla tank. A red sandstone over the eastern gateway (27” by 18”) bears the 
following inscription of four lines; the lettering is very poor :— 

b gre gl ae ete Sf AD AS oy 

aly eh rh vee othe Ut? ww? [9] Ui 
jin [] aS eee yee yh Bah 
aeeeee £3] ey) nltyo aos” Lae) ale (sic) sii} 4) thw 


* In the time of Shah Akbar, by whose justice came blessing upon the crown of 


the world 
° - “ Miyan Raib, son of Piyara. 


“The town full of light, Jajar, is the repose of all nobles ; 

‘In the year 1002, in the month of Ramazan [ began the 21st May 15914] .....” 

The marble gravestone itself measures 3’ 8” by 103”. It contains the Kalima 
and the words gabr-i-Miydn Rdaib ; round the open middle space runs the Fatiha. At 
the foot of the stone the Persian sentence has been engraved 3, u-/ ss, ‘ Whatso- 
ever came has gone’. 

6. Over the outside central arch of the mosque attached to the tomb of ’Abd as- 
Samad, half a mile east of the town near the Buawalla tank, is a red sandstone slab (21” 


by 17”), containing the following six lines :— 
eo yg SRA Babe] 90 gelled tO wamtanlyy yd 
wie sipiul ila) » Yue sia Jl oly oll 


Of the ford of Bava Piyéra on the river Narmada, Igbaln. Jah., p. 301, 


134 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


ene eel Gewy! 6F Ce!) ay] sro! sty da” of 
we 5 ght place, | ple eel ote ile 
welsh OF he yl daallare pid hadi autiy Sf 
wip SA bay Yhloupe ust vox” isthe 5) 
Metre : Kha/fif. 
** Ina good career is the faith of Islam in the time of the king Ndraddin (Jahangir) 
O God! may his justice and equity stand firm and solid a thousand years ! 
“This masjid has been built by Ism’ail Jrah Raib, who is a student of the faith, 


“‘T asked the mind the date-year, the guiding mind (said) to me ‘1020’ [began 16th 
March 1611]. 


(I), a hermit, the poor ’Abd as-Samad, the son of Makan, who belongs to the 
family of the ’Abbassides, 


“To the companions of Muhammad the Arabian, the pious ones in the high Para- 
dise.”’ 


In No. 11 ’Abd as-Samad’s father is named Mankan. 


7. Over the gateway of Rustam Khién in the south of the town, on a sandstone, 
measuring 4 feet by 122”, are two lines, and flower arabesques :— 


yay 1 WS dos? YI dpil, I SNyd I sday QUI Wado) aps) 
bot q dh iy fd dos cpl ld play Slo prt 
I testify that there is no God but God alone, who has no companion; and I testify 
that Muhammad is His servant and His apostle. 


“The date of the gateway of Rustam Khan, son of Muhammad Khan Sarbani 
(is) 1029’ [began 8th December 1619]. 


* Jahangir elevated the builder from a commander of 60 to a chief of 5,000 foot and 
4,000 horse and named him Rustam Khan; besides he bestowed on him the governe 
ment of Gujarat. He put much confidence in him and placed him in 1032 as general 
under the command of Prince Parwéz, after he had abandoned the service of the rebel 
PrinceShahjahan. qbdln. Jah. 209, Wagi’at.é Jah, in Elliot’s History, vol. VI, p. 388.” 


8. Over the central arch of the same mosque as No. 6, on a red sandstone measuring 
4’ 72” by 9”, is an inscription of twc lines; (not in situ):— 
2 5) 


Shed ye gx) yh Mey gl OS ye Sle yet 
Se eS ae ee) een 
Metre: Mutagarib. 


“In the time of Jahangir, the king of the world, this light tomb of Hasan 
Shahid has been made. 


“The date of it fora tomb has been brought by somebody (?) in We year 1035” 
[began 38rd October 1625]. 


9. Over the central outside arch of the Shaikh4nwalla masjid, a soft sand- 
stone slab, measuring 4’ 11” by 83”, contained originally four lines, but the first, in 
Arabic, has almost vanished. Also the other lines are much injured, and some words are 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. ; 135 


missing, so that it is not possible to decipher fully the eighteen Persian hemistichs. I 
give only the beginning and the date :— 
oe SP Cosh Hl 0 0 (IS per 0 OF Whdos? 
wile lola; ight af She Atty te or) 
wemwilBs 9 Upliey re} pa of yd dos? GG cy oF csliy 
ee ER SH ne rnny the jl pe rly (Clee ad oS) 
Metre: Hazaj, : 
“In the time of Shah Niraddin JahAngir, who is more exalted than the kings of 


the world, Rustam Khan,® son of Muhammad Kh4n, has built it, who has not his 
like on the earth.” 


In the verses that follow the beauty of the mosque is described. The building was 
completed on the 10th of the month Rajab in the year 1935 [the 7th April 1626]. 


10. Over the north-west arch of a small bu77 on the west side of the tank of Shah 
Ghazi KamAl, a short distance north of the town, is a red sandstone, measuring 4’ 11” 
by 8”, and containing eight hemistichs, arranged in two lines :— 

ee ee te a NS 
whe GE seal ne Ase eh bh eh 
wie ge ye EAS py pine OA GT Gy JL 
icone = 
Metre: Khafif. 

“In the time of the king Ntraddin the tank, which has scarcely its like, became a 
sign 

“Of Rai Rayan Rai Darghal, for the benefit of the happiness of the people of the 
world, 

“TI asked the mind the date-year ; the mind spoke to me ‘ Know it in ghuléw.’ 

(I) the poor hermit "Abd as-Samad, the son of Mankan, who is a master of 


knowledge. 
“The year was 1036” [began the 22nd September 1626]. 


The name of the builder is not certain. 


11. Over the central outer arch of Kal&l Khan’s masjid, half a mile outside 
Jhajbar towards the east near the Buawalla tank, on a red sandstone measuring 
2/9” by 74”, sculptured at the ends, is an inscription of three lines :— 


he ily onl Opnge 9 crys tdi lee Jyh cobibe 6S ) rill) 
bras — aly GAT dye yt dF LA JIS le dem”? oly 
er ae ee eS i oe 


§ Concerning Rustam Khan, see above No. 7. 7 Corrected from sUy GS 


136 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Metre: Mujlass. 

* By the grace and favour of the aids of the settler of the world, this high place has 
been arranged and constructed. 

“ Kalal Khan has built this high mosque in the time of Shahjah4n, the refuge of 
men. 

«Tt was in the year 1039 [began the 21st August 1629]. God—may he be honoured 
and exalted !—keeps it in safety and security.” 


II.—PAnipar. 

Panipat lies to the north of Dihli, as the Akbarnéma (II, 35) says 30, according 
the Munt. allub. (I, 50) 40, kréhs distant. It dates back to the wars between the Pandavas 
and the Kauravas. The modern town stands upon a high mound composed of the débris 
of earlier buildings. Because of its importance in the Muhammadan period it was fre- 
quented by the kings, especially by the Mughal emperors, so that its name occurs very 
often inthe chroniclers. Babar, in his Memoirs, names it asa considerable city. Besides, 
it has at several times witnessed decisive battles which were fought on its plains and 
sealed the fate of the whole of Upper India. Timir found it a place of consequence where 
were stored large provisions of wheat. In 933 A. H. Babar met Ibrahim Lédi near 
Panipat and defeated him, his adversary himself being killed in the fight. The emperor 
considered the place of his victory a fortunate one and bestowed as a special favour the 
government of Panipat, together with the gift of the revenues due on one harvest, upon 
Sultan Muhammad Anghuli, who had bravely assisted him in that battle (Tdarikh-7- 
salatin-i-Afaghina ; Blliot’s History, vol. V, p. 34). Sixty years later, Akbar, or speaking 
more exactly Khan Zaman, conquered Hémt on the same field. On account of these 
victories Jahangir, in his Tuzaq, speaks of Panipat as of a place ‘ which has always been a 
fortunate one for my ancestors’ (Transl. of Lowe, p. 47). In 980 it was plundered, 
together with Sonpat and Karnal, by the rebel Ibrahim Husain Mirzi. When Nadir 
Shah entered India, battles were again fought in the vicinity of Panipat. In A.D. 1761 
Ahmad Shah Durrani gained there his great victory over the Marathas. 

The Ain states the area of the district to have been 568,444 béghas, its revenues 
were 10,756,647 ddms, 3,540, 632 say dams, and its contingent amounted to 100 horse 
and 2,000 foot. It had a castle built of brick. The principal tribes were Afghans, Gdjars 
and Ranghars. ‘Two learned men born at Panipat in Akbar’s reign were Shaikh Zaman, 
author of a commentary on the Lawdih and other excellent works (Badduni, II, 258), 
and of the renowned surgeon Shaikh Hasan (Aén). 


12. Over the central arch in the western wall of the tomb enclosure of HAfiz JamAl, 
half a mile north of the town, is now fixed the sandstone (3’ 8” by 183”) which bears the 
following inscription. It has been transported thither from Munk, where (from its con- 
tents) it seems origiually to have belonged to a mosque. The middle of the second line 


has been completely destroyed by the weather, which has injured also other words and has 
taken away all dots :— 


siballysl polly Walle planed] Label aye 9 alan) add Lu a 

Cul] ely abel jus Me yyare jaro Gye aS ve ale ale 5 bly atl oem 

Sly rt Smeaaall gp meses Meh oe libel: (C2) pa auc nee eRe eine ela acke 
Sthodee 5 ty! 7 Reel de 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. 137 


“This edifice was ordered to be built in the time of the honoured king ’Aladdunya 
waddin Abu-l-Muzaffar Mas’Qd Shah, the king—may God perpetuate his reign 
. of Pargana Munk, Mudzaffar Manstr 


>AlA Badr addaula waddin, 

(son) of the chief of the Amirs, Pahlawdn ashsharg . . ., the defunct, the royal— 
may God increase his . .. . .!—in the middle of Shawwal 643” [began the 19th Feb- 
ruary 1246]. 

This is the first inscription of Mas’id Shah, who reigned from 639 till 644 A.H, 
He was the son of Firéz Shih and succeeded Bahram Shab on the throne. The name 
of the father of the grandee is not quite certain; the latter bore the title Badr addin, 
which Malik Badr addin Sunqar-i-Rimi (put to death in 639) had before him (Tab. Nas 
255). Afterwards the title was bestowed on Malik Nusrat Khan Sungqar-i-Safi. As two 
persons could not have the same title at the same time—which is specially stated, e.g. in 
the Riydz assaldtin, p. 284—Malik Sunqar-i Safi must have been named Badr addin, but 
in the reign of Mahmid Shah, under which king he was more of a persona grata than 
under Mas’fid, who permitted the Nizam al Mulk Khwaja Mubazzab addin to take all 
functions out of the hands of the Turkish Amirs. It is not surprising that the name of 
the Malik of our inscription does not cecur in the Tabaqdat-é. Nasiri among the Shamsi 
Maliks, for Minh&j addin gives also a defective list of the Maliks of Mahmid Shah’s 
reign, from which Major Raverty concludes that the author intended to continue his 
work to the period falling within his own lifetime. 

Pargana Munk has been identified by General Cunningham (Archeol. Survey of 
India, vol. II, p. 186) with the old Nicwa of Alexander the Great. It is not men- 
tioned in the Ain, but it occurs once in the Akbarndma, vol. III, p. 604, where it is said 
that Akbar gave it to Ziy4 al Mulk.® 

13. Over the south door of the tomb of Shaikh Jalal addin in the east of Panipat 
is a sandstone slab (2’ 84" by 19”) bearing four, lines; the inscription is not visible from 
the enclosure owing to a high verandah which has been attached :— 


pdbiind) lebw dye 0 ss* wt ys} Mieab) dos? jy 43 loco) oe 
ert Soy gabe sis G eSb GBF ST Gol) 7 ylabe ld Sola ali jain 
Sym UI oS ull g ply Ge Jia aad Wy I, ans) 


‘The builder of this edifice is Firéz Muhammad Lutfallih, the Afghin. The 
builder of this religious edifice, during the time of the king of kings Sikandar Shah, 
son of Buhlfil Shah, the king, by the kindness of God Almighty, found grace to 
erect the vault of the tomb of the revered Shaikh of Shaikhs and saints, Shaikh 
Jalal alhaq washshar’ waddin—may God sanctify his dear secret! Dated 2nd 
Shawwal, 904” (13th May 1499). 


8 Because Blochmann has overlooked the fact that Ziya al Mulk is mentioned several times in the Akbarndma, I add 
here briefly what is there said about him, as a supplement to the Aém Translation, p. 497, No. 276. In 994, he served under 
Shaikh Farid Bakhsbi; in 1000 A.H., he became Governor of Munk. Afterwards he and Abii Nasir were sent as ambassa- 
dors to Shah "Abbas of Persia. In 1011 he became bakhshigar of the army sent against Bir Singh Dév Bundéla, the mur- 
derer of Abu-l Fazl. In 1012 he was elevated to the rank of a commander of 700 foot and 300 horse, The Adm names him 


only as @ chief of 350. 
T 


138 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


The words Bdni-yé in khair in the first line are doubtful, but, as I cannot make out 
the correct reading, I have recurred to that of Blochmann, who has published the inscrip- 
tion in the Proceedings of the As. Soc. Beng. for 1878, July, p. 141. (Perhaps 
PAnipati should be read, written (4) (34). In the same place is given an account of 
Shaikh JalAl addin. The inscription falls in the 11th year of Sikandar Shah Lédi’s 
reign. 

III.—SrwAg. = 

14. In Sewdh, 4 miles south of PAnipat, is the tomb of Sayyid Bayazid. A 
sandstone, measuring 18” by 9", over the doorway of the dome, bears the following in- 
scription of three lines :— 

Da AL hw DHS sdge05 Uy 
alo! Qatigie ig Shu es Wi), ht 
Ea ite 

“The dome of Sayyid BAyazid, the martyr, has been built by Balu, son of 

Nayat, an inhabitant of the village of Sewah, in the fourth year of Farrukh Siyar.” 


Farrukh Siyar really became emperor in 1124 A.H., but he gave orders that 
Jahandar Shah’s reign should be considered as rebellion, and that his own reign should 
date from the 1st Rabi’al awwal 1123 [19th March 1711], Munt. allud. II, 737. 


IV.—Sonpat (esp aed si * dni ). 


Sonpat is also a town of great antiquity which is said to have been founded by 
the earliest Aryan settlers. In the Ain it is registered with 283,299 bighas, 7,727,323 
dims, 775,105 say. déms, 70 horse, ard 1,000 foot. It had a brick fort. The principal 
tribes were Afghans and Jats. The following inscriptions are from three mosques and 
several tombs there. A celebrity buried at Sonpat is Sayyid Nasir “Abidallah ibn 
Ahmad, whose tom? is still extant, but no inscription relative to himself has been dis- 
covered. Khizr Khan, son of ’Al4 addin Muhammad Khilji, is said to have made 


a pilgrimage to the tombs of certain martyrs buried here (Ibn Batita, French edition, 
vol. III, p. 187). 


15. Over the central outside arch of a mosque attached to the tomb of Imam Nasir, 
just outside Sonpat to the south on the Dihli road, is a sandstone slab (7 6” by 17) 
which bears an inscription’ of two lines, the letters being thick and clumsy :— 


Ep}, Lal] le I gs SUI be gbed} Wale) dys 63 dyatel) Sr} ds) aloe) saa ods? 
Habel ab yaballys! jaa} doly patel 

eye eile Shay Col Gy Shy pre Cereal) ars) alley atle aisha priesell pre) poli 
Bisley pdt Baw Bey iU) be sy) Sle ale prvyle ewe 
“The building of this blessed august mosque was renewed during the reign of the 


great king, the shadow of God on earth, Ghiydth addunyd waddin, who stands by the 
assistance of the merciful, Abu-1 Muzaffar Balban, the king, the aider of the 
9 See the facsimile No. i on the accompanying plate. The fact that the late Mr. Blochmann. the acknowledged authority 


for these inscriptions, has several times given faulty readings in the Proceedings of the As, Suc. Beng. for 1873, May, p. 94, 
where he has publisbed this inscription, may show how easily errors may be committed in deciphering, 


‘ssautuer Nerosny Usapryy 


eyIE-E 2/298 


: As r of hp ices ENGI SG 
ade yr awe Z GAy Ig Nr SOsk 7 DENA z 
Ke uate RAT Me eI 


ae 
TIO 7y cs 6 
ae zs 7 0 +, SHAG iY = 
OL” pb (> i hs md, i‘ ¥ 
. use NETS 
DS a) 


LT) PUES Yee. 
< Prac et Ie 

Se a A Sok Sos 
= ay, FASOY 


FEU 


* 
Rts 


= Sess *s 
q 

S ‘ 

« 


SETS I NE oe rrr I COT NOS, PUR Aas Ske 
s Sees e ie s 2 3 waa é Sea #4 LRN 3 
: AORN SUBS TG DN OY SEE Ne St Siar AGNI ASS 


*SY200L-ZL + 2/228 


ya1vd NIG GV SYAIHD 4O NOILdINOSNI LvdNOS —'I 


‘oL9 ‘H'V ‘N 


‘pon wompur wnplosbady 


+ hao 
7 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. 139 


Commander of the Faithful—may God perpetuate his kingdom and his reign !—by 
the weak slave Mir Beg, son of Ai Beg, the mugti of Sonpat. Dated the 12th of 
the blessed month Rajab—may God increase its honour !—670” [18th February 1271]. 

Three other inscriptions of Balban’s time are extant: the first from Barwdla, 680 
A.H. (see No. 51); the second from Garhmukhtésar in the Mirat District, 682 A.H. 
(E. Thomas, Chronicles of the Pathin Kings of Dihlé, p. 186); and the third from 
Sakit in sarkar Qanauj, 684 A.H. (Proceedings of the As. Soc. Beng. for 1874, May, 
p. 104). 


16. In a part of the graveyard of Im4im Nasira square pillar, of coarse black sand- 
stone, is standing, which has been inscribed on each side with Persian verses and some 
Arabic religious sentences. Its dimensions are 6’ 23” by 1’ 33” by 103”. It is beautifully 
sculptured and copiously ornamented with flower arabesques and scrolls. The verses 
in the middle of each side have been written in a large handsome Tu’aléq ; round these 
middle pieces run also verses in smaller letters. As there is no information about the 
builder or the name of the holy man buried in these, the historiographer loses nothing 
if I omit the marginal hemistichs—18 each on the top and on both sides, and 6 each on 
the two ends. That it is the tomb of some saint follows from the poetry, which through- 
out points to a pious man. The date of the erecticn has been inscribed on the left 
side of the stone, viz. the third Rajab 884 [20th September 1479], which falls in the 
reign of Buhldl Lédi. 

It has been.said that the stone was put up in the time of Aurangzéb, and that 
it is the tomb of some Pir Yfisuf, but such local tradition is of no value compared with 
the statement of the stone itself. The stone is broken about 2 feet from the head; it 
is exposed to the weather, and the margin has thus been ruined in many parts. Besides 
being broken, the sides near the basement are crumbling and the stones forming the 
base are very rotten. This beautiful object should be protected. 

At the head and foot of the stone the following verses are inscribed (Metre: 
Ramal) :— 

op Aaetd yew peste — op HI yy oF jo tog bw of 

‘‘ Even if the curtain of thy power were near the heavens, in'the end under thy head 

and armpit will be the dust.” 


ely 95 WK Op) sos oy AT ye OS long) Coyne jy ytl OB 6 Sem) 
‘© Make ready thy work to-day when thou art in full life, so that thy work may be 


ready when thy life is finished.” 
Both sides contain two Rubd’is each":— 


PS eh dye dass solu Dye 5) vol ely oF yt Jyh 
AS eels ui FG )BK yoga SS oS gat ls CI 


* For what length dost thou bid defiance to the fundamentals of the faith, request- 
ing a smooth melody from the musician ? 


10 Besides those mentioned there exist the following two inscriptions of Balban; viz, at Koh, or ‘Aligarh, A.H. 652. 
and at Manglaur in tabsil Rurki, A. H. 683; see A. Fiihrer, Monumental Antiquities and Inscriptions in the North- 
Western Provinces and Oudh, pages 2 and 17.—Hd. H. I. 

See the facsimile No. ii of the right side of this stone on the plate. 

T 2 


140 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


“Qeye! resign to thy new purpose, for death scarcely allows the soul to become 
ready.” . 
eS ee ei ee Teun es ry yh 
AP SO I ee 
“Tf thou wilt do thy works as a man of judgment, thou must listen to the words 


of the wise. - 
Do evil to no one and nobody will do evil to thee, or whatever evil they do thee 


forget it.” 
wtrge J Usp J} dey al) yg ery yo uit bges 
AY Nye? Udyt 4 ee uslad oe Sted 9S Gs ji) 


‘Happy is one by whose generous practice the heart of the poor receives quiet. 
‘“‘ He belongs to the good people, who does well to the creatures of God and gets 


reward from them.” 


j ain, Wy he Pye B he? jl ahd 


ig Blea 
wi RG hess oe ied ge Ks0y5 9 Sd whew uly 
* If thou wilt pass from the plain of perishableness to the kingdom of eternity and 


become satisfied, 
“Thou must preserve thy words and be like a silent one and always have silence in 


thy mind.” 
On the top are inscribed the Kalima,Qordn, Shira II, 256, and some other short 


sentences. 
Respecting the Imim Nasir, near whose tomb the inscription has been found, 


Mr. F. G. Delmerick gives some information in the Proceedings, As. Soc. Beng. 1873, 
May, p. 95. 

17. Over the eastern doorway of the enclosure of Khwaja Khizr’s tomb, a 
quarter of a mile north of Sonpat, is a red sandstone, measuring 7’ 1” by 1’, containing 
two lines :— 


ASM py loshe al) dea, cst td Ye yi Gd Geld ylte athe jalao eylec ad oJ, 
wis uted dha Spit pelb eye pine pels) 

LE iCal op al aaalysd abel] 3) loa] aulis Gill) JOtI: ola Mal} aye (3 Kiteemi y 
MOU AA aithle y tale Jobe oy) 
“The portico of the tomb of Miyan Khwaja Khizr, sonof Darya Khan ShirwAni 


—may God have mercy upon both!—was erected on Monday the 15th Shawwal, 928 
[7th September 1522]. 

“In the time of the just and liberal king, who relies on the assistance of the Merciful, 
Abu-! Muzaffar Ibrahim Shah, son of Iskandar Shah, son of Buhlal, the king— 
may his kingdom be perpetuated until the resurrection ! ” 


2 The second last words are uncertain, 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT, 14] 


18. Over the southern doorway of the same tomb is found another inscrivtion of 
two lines; the stone measures 9 53” by 11°. It runs— 


2S taba Ste cre» pine tee 6 gain yi oa wee LAS y lady Sal aye 
ly Aye Sle oH bpd he uy daal gad guldell ert 2 IE Ue un spite yam 
; pity bag ale 

crelall cb WISE pull pla Selys yar abel] ale Spda oye 9 Wie nad gla 
2 pad ale 5 le A fale A bey gp A yin gp AS pace SBA [ ol ] eat als Gy 
byloswsy yp dha 355 nn) Seray ale prop 2% YER pW silo as 


“With the help of God, who is blessed and exalted, and by His grace, the building 
of the vault of this tomb of the great and noble saint, Miyan Khw4ja Khizr, the 
deceased, the pardoned, son of Dary& Khan, son of the Shaikh of Shaikis, Shaikh 
Ahmad, son of the king of Shaikhs, Shaikh Mandaiki Darwésh of Shirwan--may 
God have mercy and pardon upon them !— 

- “The mugtt’ of the town of Sonpath, was completed in the time of his Majesty the 
king of kings, who confirms the laws of Islim and the faith, the shadow of God in both 
worlds, who trusts to the aid of the Merciful, Abu-1 Muzaffar Ibrahim Shah, son of 
Sikandar Shah, son of Buhltl Shah, the king—may God perpetuate his kingdom 
and his reign !—by order of Langar Khan Khizr, on the 15th Rajab—may its honour 
increase !—930”’ [19th May 1524]." 

19. Over the central outer arch of a small masjid in the sardé near the dispensary, 
on a brown sandstone slab (21” by 18”), are two lines. The stone belonged originally to 
a tomb whith is now used as a police rest-house :— 

AU L (sic) Cpipij pel le G aL) Spay dos QU) I) al) Y aU L 


ale ayo aliol ply dye 0 WUT wl) dig dad abie les) LA oyos* jo], gaits sha I 
oe ret ene he 

“OQ God! There is no God, etc. O forgiving! forgive me my sins, O God! 

This tomy has been built by *Ali Kha&n, brother of Mahmid Khan, the 
Afghan, mugt? of the town of Sonpath, in the time of Babar Padishah, on the 
second of the month Safar 937’ [25th September 1530]. 

? Ali Khan belonged to the Farmuli tribe and is mentioned in Babar’s Memoirs as 
*Umdat al A’ydn Ali Khan Shaikhzada-ya Farmuli, in the battle against Rana Sanka 
(933) ; in 985 A.H., he was sent against the rebel Baban (pp. 416, 435, 452). Abu-l-Fazl 
has inserted the same statements in his dkbarndma. 


20. Over the outside of a doorway, leading to the west from the enclosure of Imam 
Nasir, is a sandstone slab (3’ 5” by 1’ 8”) containing 16 hemistichs in four lines :— 
ee 5) sky Go sys sty gly) Kt? ley 
email Leder lone yo af allay | ali 8 yy 


18 Both inscriptions have been published by Blochmann in the Proceedings of As. Soc. Beng. 1873, May, p. 94, eiseq, 
Mr. Delmerick there identities the Khwaja Khizr with the homonymous Khan, whd is several times mentioned by Firishta, 


4 Cory. from Wie) 


142 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Kew Koly see yin SI af JS} pS) dos® sll Be 
tee pyaiye BySle ye pad y GBA aye AF syle 
Kemybyd I eyo gyre af I ty cal od LAS Copel 
tembitined ope (jy jy) SF cemye Che eSyit yytl pal 
tate ppt ene ae ye 8 pS Gl Cpe Ebyeos 


Metre: Hazaj. 


“In the world nobody has seen such a building since the beginning of time; 

‘Tt suits to the time of a king who is « sovereign on the battle-field of manliness,— 

“ Jalaladdin Muhammad Akbar, the rose, which is a reminder of the spiritual 
flower garden ; 

“A conqueror of the world, who makes (men), as the emperor of China and the 
Czesar, his accustomed servants and slaves. 

“ An Amir was the builder of this building, of whose power the foundation is solid, — 

“The chief of the kingdom of the majesty, ’Ali Ddst, who is like Ispandyar on 
the day of battle. 

‘“‘T never saw a practiser of justice like him who is sovereign in the reign of justice. 

‘When I asked the mind the year of its erection, he said ‘It is 964°” [began the 
4th November 1556]. 


"Ali Dést Khan Barbégt (master of the ceremonies), son of Hasan ’Alli, is men- 
tioned in the Akbarndma (II, 69), 963 A.H. as one of Tardi Beg’s officers in the war 
against Hémai. A.H. 951 he is named among other nobles who accompanied Humaytin 
to Persia (I, 228). In 984 he was attached tc Shihabaddin Ahmad Khén; and in 991 he 
was intrusted with the care of the army ‘nd the pay of the soldiers (III, 404). For the 
last time he is mentioned A.H. 1006 (III, 644). He had a son, Fath Dost, who died in 
989 (III, 354). 


21. Over the south outer arch of the masjid of the QAzizddas, in the Mahalla of the 
Qazizadas, in the fort of Sonpat, is a rectangular soft sandstone slab, measuring 2’ 6” by 


10”, which contains three lines :— 
AU) Syn dos? aU 3} alld 


TBE Ep Se oe re tlhe SILT 3) ae” pron Ud 
PV MG dos? pall le ple gla Cgaly at ile) 
yo e» Lb deal iss yh pws )) sly (sic) sre PAW 


Metre: Hazu/. x ge sete ara ce er 

‘There is no God, ete. 

‘Well! the repairing of the mosque—the clearness of its roof under the heavens is 
like fragrant ambergris— 

“Was in the time of the kingdom of the soul of the world, JalAlajidin Muhammad 
Akbar Shah. 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. 143 


“The date of the erection has been intrusted to the command of Qazi Ahmad 
and five others (?). 

“In the month of Rajab—may God increase its honour !—A. 969” [began the 7th 
March 1562]. 

The Qazizddas mentioned in the Akbarndma were all rebels, or bad-andésh (mali- 
cious men); one being a partisan of Ma’sim Khan; another who had the surname 
khabitha-ya Mdwarannahr (the impure from ‘lransoxania) obeying Abu-l Ma’Alt’s 
command and attempting to murder Mah Chochuk Begum, Prince Muhammad Hakim’s 
mother; a third being united with a pretended son of Mirz’ Shahrukh to murder Qdsim 
Khan. 

22. Over the northern outer arch of the same mosque is a second inscription sculp- 
turcd on a sandstone (measuring 2’ 8” by 18”) in five lines :— 

AU) Syngas abl) I alld 


HOSES placer) Bai getall AE ec foot ae a 
obs Ws” Cgw oyf GA al Lt EAL de in 
lds lA slp os of RK pine ie i StU ya 


cyte y din y CR) din J Meaty ped doi pyWl§ Uyopel] KG lel) deme) ada wyloe ad Cpe 
( Metre: Mutagarib.) 
‘There is no God, etc. ; 

“In the time of the king of kings, Shahjahan, who gave ornament and beauty to 
Isl4m, QAzi Nasr has repaired the mosque that people might bow the forehead in 
adoration. When I asked the mind its date, he said ‘ He has newly built the mosque 
for God’s sake’. The edifice of this blessed and august mosque has been prepared on 
the 11th of Rabi’al awwal A. 1066” [8th January 1656]. 


23. In the southern wall, outside Im4im Nasir’s tomb, is a stone whick has been 
whitewashed so much that the letters of the inscription have been partly ruined. Nor 
has Im4m Nasir’s tomb a right to the stone, which originally belonged to a mosque; 
the dimensions of the inscription, which is in one line, are 3’ 8” by 43”. Above the 
letters there are ornaments in the form of Cufic characters :— 


Lely Aut clot  Jyaail msl Gp dos”? (9) 0 cal drul} sts} ala) Cy dsl] Joo alec 
gules Cally play Cte! daw pst} os 
“The edifice of this mosque has been built by the leader, the guardian, the Sayyid 
Abd Bakr (?) Muhammad, son of Hasan, the Fuztli—may God perpetuate their 
reward !—in the Mubkarram of 1181.” 


The first name of the builder and the two lcst words are very doubtful; instead of 
1100, it may also be 700 or 900. 


_V.—Rourak AnD MaAnIM. 
The cities of Rohtak and Mahim have suffered in general the s.me fate during 
the Muhammadan period. In the environs of both are to be found many remains of 
antiquities, also of Hindu origin; in the vicinity of Rohtak have been excavated coins of 


144 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


Raja Samanta Deva from about 920 A.D. These districts had the misfortune to be 
plundered by every invader who came to the Panjab, from Mahmud of Ghazni till 
the present century, so that there are everywhere remains of destroyed villages; they 
were laid waste by Mahmid the Ghaznavide, by Timur, by Shihab addin Ghéri, by 
Babar, by Nadir Shah, by the Marathas, a:.d by the Exglish under General Lake. Now 
Mahim belongs to the district of Rohtak lying 19 miles north-west of the town of Rohtak ; 
also in former times, before Akbar, both appertained to one sarkdr, the older name of the 
tract of country being Hariana. *Abbds Khan states in his Tartkh-t Shérshahé (Elliot- 
Dowson’s History, vol. IV, p. 416) that Shér Shah ‘ gave the sarkdr of Sirhind to masnad 
« Alt Khawds Khan as jdgir, who kept in that sarkar his slave Malik Bhagvant at the 
capital Dihlt. Mi4n Ahmad Kh4n Sarvani was amér, and ’Adil Khan and Hatim Khan 
shigddr and faujdér.’ If Dihli was the capital of Malik Bhagvant’s sarkdr, it is to be 
cupposed that Rohtak and Mahim were also allotted to his province. Under Akbar they 
were separated: Rohtak fell to the Dihli sarkér, and Mahim to sarkdr Hisdr Firdéza. 
The Ain-4 Akbart has the following details concerning them: ‘Mahim has a fort of 
burnt brick; 188,080 béghas, 4,958,613 dams nugdi, 84,202 ddms sayurghdl. The in- 
habitants were Tunver RAjpits and Jats, 700 horse, 2,000 foot *(I, 527). ‘Roktak 
has a fort of burnt brick; 636,835 bighas, 8,599,270 ddms naqdt, 428,000 dims 
sayurghdél. Jats; 100 horse, 2,000 foot.’ (I, 519). At Rohtak Kai Khosrau, grandson 
of Balban and designated heir of his throne, was murdered by Kai QobAd’s emissaries. 

Both towns, especially Mahim, bear traces of great importance in past times. 
The following inscriptions refer to five mosques at Mahim and four at Rohtak.” The 
most important and interesting of the nineteen Rohtak and Mahim inscriptions is No. 33. 
below. 

24. Over the central outer arch of the new mosque in Rohtak, the tomb-stone of 
Firéz Khan is now placed. It measures 3° 8” by 8”, and contains two lines, The 
letters are partly illegible :— 
tilly » ale wld Cpjlé aliol pb opaa[ 9 ] G5 dye yo [2 Jeg pat aed a) as ples 

[P] Me dine [ P] by as, 


Cyl she pAdleny he bo pyle onyaye glean vee wt yd deal He die on GIA jy 
 Bilesad 5 SU , 


“This tomb ..... has been finished in the prosperous time of his Majesty Babar 
Badish&h-i-Ghazi—may God perpetuate his kingdom and his rule !—The tomb of 
the high Masned 

“ Firdz Kban, son of the high Masnad Ahmad Khan, son of ...... Jamal Khan, 
both defunct, on the 10th Rabi’al awwal 934” [4th December 1527]. 

Fir6z Khan is mentioned in Bakar’s Memoirs and in the Akbarndma, 932 A.T., as 
a renowned officer who was generously rewarded along with other men of merit by Babar 
after the victory over {brahim Lédi, Besides one krdr of tankas—(according to Babar’s 
Memoirs,—1 krér 46 lakhs and 5,000 tankas, p. 384) from Jaunpdr, he received some 
jagir (chizi jdgir). The emperor sent him afterwards against ItAwah. 


“Cunningham’s Reports Archeological Survey of India, vol. XVI, p. 136. 
16 It may be remarked incidentally that theimention of Rohtak in the text of the Tubagat-t Nasiri, p. 217, is not 
correct, as Caplain Raverty states in his trauslation oi that work, p. 693, uote 7. 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. 145 


25. Over the central outside arch of the mosque in the gavhé, or fort, of the Pathans 
at Rohtak the following inscription of three lines is engraved on a rectangular sand- 
stone—size 163 by 123 inches. The garhé of the Pathans is in the north-west of the 
town, where the road comes in from HAnst : — 


Ld iad Z 
wr 9 biel pte ali dimer she ye ata) qprszll QU) end 

° 4 @ e- 
Pal) abe JF AUG I dissgs Ley Live I} Cepet We REL sla 
Geb ba cc.in QMO KS yaad ob WWI Ms chy ye 


“In the name of God the merciful and the compassionate! He who brings a good 
work shall have ten like it; but he 

“‘ Who brings a bad work shall be recompensed only with the like thereof.” My grace 
does not come through any one but God.** He (the Prophet), upon whom may God’s 
blessing be, has said :— 

He who builds a mosque in the world will have a castle in Paradise.’ 96,251 
Stik * A. 945’ ” [began the 30th May 1538], 

26. On a rectangular sandstone over the central outside arch of the masjid in the 
Khiaban Mahalla, west of the town Rohtak, is a stone, which measures 18 by 12 inches: 
the inscription is in three lines, and is worn :— 


. aud 
sié BEL piled os? sereee peal Wo dye oO d=” V3) Cylasy Bay y Clad AU yes 
o e & 
endl Bs) Yay lal Gol GasyT alle y ale aU) ala 


* « " * A Ge bs 


*¢ With the aid of God almighty and His apostle for the erection of this mosque in 
the time of the reign of Nasir ....... Muhammad Humayitn Badishah-i Ghazi— 
‘“* May God perpetuate his kingdom and his reign!—found grace the poor, chief of 


the Paradise and the faith, 
“Muhammad Jam4l of Nagér, the Chishti. In the year 945” [began the 


30th May 1538]. 

The inscription being much defaced some words are doubtful. Humiayin’s common 
title nasir addin does not certainly occur here, though the word after zasir is not clear. 

The Chishtis are a well-known family of Muhammadan saints. There exist shrines 
of divers members of it in several places. Chishti saints—hkhwdjagdn-i chisht in the in- 
scription on the tombstone of Princess Jahanara at Dihli (Proceedings of the Asiatic 
Society, Bengal, for November 1872, p. 170)—are mentioned in the following published 
inscriptions :—Qutb addin Khan Chishti, commonly known as Shaikh Khabd (Bloch- 
mann, Afn-Translation, p. 496), the foster brother of Shah Jahangir, in Proceedings, 
A.S. B., for December 1873, p. 199; Shaikh Faiz Allah Chishti, 2d., p. 200; Shaikh 
Muhammad ibn Shaikh Mahmid Chishti, Proceedings, A. S. B., for April 1877, p. 94. 

“At Nagor, the birth-place of Muhammad Jamal of our inscription, was a Chishti 
shrine. A contemporary and fellow-countryman of his was Shaikh Mubarak, the 


7 Qordn, Sur. vi, 161 (E. H. Palmer’s translation). 

8 Qordn, Siar. xi, 90. 

19 There follows a group like a rupee-sign turned upside down. 

” See Cunningham’s Archeological Survey of India, Reports, vol. KIIf, p. 51. 


146 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


father of the poet Shaikh Faizi and of Abu’l Fazl, but in the year 945 Shaikh 
Mubarak had already left Nagér. 


27. Over the central outer arch of a mosque at Gaokar4n, about half a mile west 
of Rohtak, a red sandstone (3’ 2” by 2’ 5”) contains three lines with one line going 
round the stone as a border. ‘Ihe stone is getting worn partly by the weather and partly 
by copies being taken from it, but the inscription is quite legible. In the midst of 
the stone the period of the erection has been engraved ina square 5) d=” cpa Sle 959 2 
(in the time of Jalal addin Muhammad Akbar )":— 


. 


Ga bed Fy gle j) GES eveshee pete Cinta) ule Geant 
Gof AB, les, yf jl os yillad bely le jl 19,8 
Ga gh (9) Gath = Ge ab aly WS J pte” J oy 
CFE yet Shaw 5S) INS, CEE Bas ER poet 
Metre: Ramal. 
“The Darwésh Mastjan, the heaven of benignity, has gone out of life a slave of 
the order of God ; ; 
“ He has made his soul a temple of good works, he became happy by it, and a 
receiver of the time of God (of eternity). 
‘Every man who has come to this mosque shall get a drop of the ocean of the kind- 
ness of God’s banquet. (?) 
“ Zahidi (or ‘a hermit’) wrote the date of this mosque; he said, ‘Say ‘A temple 
of God’s favourites”. ” 
The letters of the térikh give 966 [began 14th October 1558]. 


28. A loose stone standing ona grave in the graveyard near the Dak Bangla of 
Rohtak, on the west side of the Dihli road, bears an inscription of three lines ; its di- 
mensions are 17” by 16’. On the left side the last letters of each line and the border 


have been lost : 
ois AU) abs} yd pita ell 


ke Jo eee el: 
[oJ pe? ead le tate ned Blamed 

* Shamshér Khan has made with the favour of God the vault over the tomb of 
Pir Safi-Dil ’A...975 H. is the year” [began 8th July 1567]. 

Shamshér Khan was shigqddr of pargana Rohtak, A. H. 978, as we learn from 
inscription No. 43. His name occu.'s several times in the Akbarndma. In 987 he was 
Khwéjasordé and was sent to Bihar to quell the disturbances which had broken out there ; 
and to Bengal, together with Rai Purukhdt, Maulana Tayyib, and Shaikh Najm addin 
(III, 284). When a rebellion arose in the same year at Patna, Shamshér Khan was de- 
spatched to Banaras (1IT, 286). In 991 he was one of the four judges who were named 
for the four “meadows ” of the empire, the others being Raja Bir Bar, QAsim’ Alt Khan, 
and Hakim Humadm (III, 405). Later he seems to have revolted, for it is related that in 
1008 the besiegers of Ahmadnagar received ‘ the joyful tidings’ of his death.” 


* The border contains the passage from the Qordn, Stra-ii, 256. 


* According to a notice on the inscription, a Shamshér Kh§n lies buried at Batdla ; I know nothing about bin, 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. 147 


29. In the wall of the Dogawalli masjid in the north-east of the town on a soft 
ved sandstone (19” by 16”) is an inscription of four lines which has been so much 
eaten away by the weather that the decipherment is almost an impossibility. But the 
year of erection and the name of the king are legible. All I can read runs :— 


ate LN Sing ose QUI HIE Tig I] pa 


uss staal ps) dos” ps Jin Sle Hye 0 &J) rss) P F , a) 
® ° ° ° ° e b5Le 6} Wa 
v3 bh e ° ° ° . e ° ° ° e e e 


“The builder... by the grace of God in the time of the reign of Jalal addin Muham- 
mad Akbar Pddishéh-t-Ghdzi,—may God perpetuate his kingdom !...anno 979 ” | began 
26th May 1571]. 

The year is perhaps 972, instead of 979. 

30. A sandstone partly cylindrical and partly octagonal, each face measuring 19 by 
22”, in a graveyard on the west of the fort of Rohtak, near the western gate of the fort, 
bears an inscription of nine lines. The rubbing does not permit the decipherment of the 
fourteen engraved hemistichs; the first and last lines are the same, they contain the date— 
sana 998 (began 10th November 1589). On a brown sandstone (2’ by 6”) over the 
gateway of the same graveyard has been engraved, Svra xlviii, 1. 

31, In the south of Rohtak, near the Government school, is a tomb the pillars of 
which are connected by eight lintels of red sandstone, each measuring 4’ 23” by 9”.. The 
single lintels have been inscribed with the following sentences from the Qordn: Bis- 
millah, Stra ii, 256-59 incl., Kalima, Stra cxii. No details of the date or of the 
builder are found. 

32. Over the Dhdbi Gate in the Makalla of Wazir Khan, is a sandstone (18” by 
17”) containing an inscription of four lines : — 

Soo dye jo obec 3} sly Sym) y Sed Ul ges 


i IB Gale dest Gull giillyy! ma 
wg Ayal) Pat plano ache al ald Gj alot ye alt 


dee Er rsp eS MS ree he 


“With the favour of God Almighty and His apostle, the erection of this building in 
the time of the reign 

“And the Khalifat of Abu-] Fath Shihab addin Muhammad, the second Sdhib- 
girdn® (Timur) 

“Shahjahan Badishah-i-Ghazi—may God perpetuate his kingdom!—by the 
endeavour of the slave of the... 

«Pty Khan, son of Sarkhdn, the Sarwd[né ?] has been finished. In the beginning 
of the month Muharram A. 1044” [began 27th January 1634]. 

33. About half a mile from the Khana, on the Rohtak road to Mahim, is the tomb of 
Jam4l Khan. The door hag fallen in, but the walls are well built, and will stand many 


*® Elsewhere Shabjahan is named wily C~ale iU a phrase which is to be interpreted Thdnt-yi Sdhidgirdn, see Rit- 


ckert-Pertsch, Grammatik, Poetik und Rhetorik der Perser, p.240, note 1, and Teufel, Z. D. M. G., vol. XXXVIII (188), 
p. 253, note. Titles such as Thdni-yi Iskandar-t-daurdn or Thani-yi Iskandar-i Zél garnain and others occur very often. 
v2 


148 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


years yet. A red sand-stone (size 14 by 10} inches) fixed over the south arch of the 
tomb, bears the following important inscription :— 


- 4 we * es 4 
Bi) Syuny das? ALI TH aD ptagld yaay alll jg 
Go aldoly pT dee Gta) he Gabi) ylale Gyo dye 79 


AS lpi duel | YB Sloe NUS een!) ESL Gal Moy gyal op yl Sloe era] Se 
Kibo y Ww) bw (2)sdeBl_oo ee oy? HL 


In the name, etc, There is no god, etc. 

“In the timo of the reign of the king of thekings, Jalal-addin Muhammad 
Akbar Padishah-i-Ghazi, 

«The friend of the Merciful, Jam4l Khan, son of Manstr, found grace to build 
this tomb. Jamal Kh4n has hope that he will obtain reward. In the Zi’lga’da A. 
1100” [ began the 17th August 1689]. 

This inscription is unique, as no other mention of Muhammad Akbar, son of 
Aurangzéb, has till now been found. Prince Akbar proclaimed himself emperor, 
assisted by the Rajpits, in 1089, and attempted to maintain the assumed title until 1100, 
when he fled to Persia. There exist no coins of his. The foregoing inscription shows 
that he adopted the judis name of his great predecessor, whose name he bore. It is highly 
interesting to find a document of the rebel king’s son in a place lying so far north as 
Mahim, because Prince Akbar fled to the Marathas in the beginning of his insurrection 
and always lived in the Dekhan.* 


34. In the north wall of the enclosure of the mosque of the Pirzadas is a red 
sandstone, measuring 19” by 16”, which bears an inscription of five lines :— 


pb dos” py nb aly pte alii (ste) 50 pas Ae 0 
Genet tbo say wthbe 5 athe UO slot) Cojts 


Lleol lan Sle y gin paid uyll LEI gins gail, pata Sal 
5 Ga OSS ay pee ad 9 ee Hl G3 A all Gate 
Bilorws Cee Baw Sol aay she Ast gy ly shad y diay Hla Glst* ) ole 
“In the time of the reign of his Majesty the king of kings, the refuge of the world 


Zahiraddin Muhammad Babar 

“ Ghdet Badishéh—may God perpetuate his kingdom and his reign!—the slave of 
the court of the sun, 

The poor, base Janyu Sunu Agha, son of Shaikh Sunu, an inhabitant of the 
town of the joy, _ 

“Through the grace of God Almighty found grace to build® the mosque of the town 
of Mahim—May God Almighty 

“Make him accepted and favoured through His kindness and His wisdom !—On the 
fitth Rab?al awwal 935” [7th November 1529] 


“4 Tt is not impossible, as I now see that the last word is samdn and that the ‘inseription belongs to Akbar himself 
» Ras or rast kundnidan with the meaning ‘ to build,’ occurs several times in the inscriptions. In 19 and 33 rdyt has 
distinctly been engraved, 


Epig, Ind. vot 


IV.—-INSCRIPTION OF HUMAYUN FROM MAHIM, ROHTAK DISTRICT, OF A.H. 937 


Lpig Ind. vol IT 
V.—INSCRIPTION OF AKBAR FROM KHOKRAKOT, NEAR ROHTAK, OF A.H. 973 


Seale: 1-3rd. 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. 149 


35. On an arch over the pulpit of the Jami’ Masjid in the centre of the town, 
is an inscription. It is inside the arch on the east side, so that no one can see it without 
entering the arch and crouching. The stone is a red sandstone; it measures 3 1’ by 
2’ 23” and consists of five lines”:—- 


Blab) ssyelT ye tolled) 63 AUIS sbi) tal oo dye yo 
Spite pte tile 5 spel hel, dtlale » atle sbilula Cole slusl piled dos” Gras wills), 


colle 6J) eeoee) slab Gols pro) sb yo 5d LPs) SOU paw yao eos 1x4) pylol 
wl" 5 Wls* ad WU) Bil al pr? bras avla ds? Losls (gry) 


**In the time of the reign of the king of the kings, the shadow of God in both 
worlds, the adorned of the throne of kingdom 

“And Khalifat, his Majesty Muhammad Humaytin Pédishéh-t-Ghdzt—may 
God perpetuate his kingdom and his reign and exalt his condition and dignity!—his high- 
ness the admitted 

“fo the palace of Baga Bégum Sultan,” the worthy of the faith, the chosen of 
the court Amir Yadgar Taghai, by the grace of God Almighty 

‘Found grace to build the mosque of the town of Mahim—may God Almighty 
make him accepted and favoured 

** Through His kindness and His wisdom and His perfect liberality !—On the 7th 
Rajab 937 [24th February 1531].’ 

Respecting Yadgar Taghai the Akbarndma furnishes the following information : 
One of his girls (according to IT, 248 a grand-daughter) gave birth to Prince Alam4n, son 
of Humay tin, anno 934 (I, 113)*; and she most probably is the Baga Bégum Sultan of our 
inscription. She made a pilgrimage to Makka and Madina in 972 (II, 244), whence she 
returned in 975 (II, 329). This joueney may probably have been why she was styled 
HajiBégum. Afterwards she lived at Dihli, and was in 981 welcomed with great honours 
by Akbar, who loved her much because she had cured him asa child of six years of 
vehement tooth-ache by a potent drug (III, 77). Akbar visited her, anno 989, at Dihli 
(III, 373). She died in the same year (III, 375). The Haji Bégum, who with other 
Bégums made the pilgrimage in 988, was probably not Prince Alaman’s mother, who 
then was too old for such a toilsome journey. Blochmann mentions Haji Bégum in 
his Ain-translation, but he is in error about her descent. In the Akbarndma, IT, 243 the 
words dukhtar-t-Taghdi are to be understood ‘a daughter of (Yadgar) Taghai.’ 

Over the mihrdb in the western wall of the mosque a sandstone (8'5” by 103”) is 
fixed which contains in two lines Qordn, Stra lxii, 1—8. Round the inside of an arch 
over the mihrdéé runs the Kalima and Qordn, Stra, iii, 16-17 (to al islému). 

The J imi’ mosque was repaired according to inscription No. 39 in A.H. 1078, 
by Aurangzéb’s order. 

36. On a rectangular sandstone—size 21 by 13 inches—originally belonging to the 
old mosque of the butchers, now fixed over the central outer arch of the new masjid at 


%6 See the facsimile reproduction No. iv on the accompanying plate. 

7 The words magbil adddérin Baga Béguin Sultén saz [4] yida addin are perhaps uncertain. 

23 Babar mentions in his Memoirs the chronog gram for the birth of the prince invented by Shaikh Abu-! Wahid, 
359. According to the Memoirs, Alaman’s mother was a daughter of Yadgdr Taghai, For Babar’s not agreeing with oe 


name of Alamwau see p. 451 (Pavet de Courteille, tome II, p, 363). 


150 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Mahim (finished in 1887 A.D.), is the following inscription of three lines, which 
is considerably worn by exposure to the weather :— 


siob yyles Beat pam aly ps sds wos dys 30 
ween eee ly tig deel] sda erylac adle al] WA 


“In the time of the reign of the king of kings, the refuge of the world, His 
Majesty Muhammad Humdayin Badishah— 

“May God perpetuate his kingdom !—..,............ found grace to build the edifice 
of this mosque of the butchers of the city of Mahim. During the month of Sha’ban 
of the year 942” [began the 25th January 1536]. 

As some of the letters appear to be broken, it is not possible to decipher the whole 
inscription. A butcher’s mosque is also mentioned at Nagér.” The mosque was rebuilt 
in Aurangzéb’s time, see inscription No. 40. 


37. The rectangular sandstone that bears the following inscription is no longer in 
situ. It is now fixed over the outer doorway of the court of the ruincd mosque of the 
Qassiyan” at Mahim. The inhabitants know that it is not in its original place; they 
say it belonged to a mosque in a quarter of the town called Daulatptir, the Daulatabad 
of the inscription. The size of the stone which is yet entire is 4’ by 114:— 


Low e ous Le. r) » J 
BU) WI dal pe abo 3) added polity ob clas tine SU Us* U) apa) ypoay) au) on 
ase ol iy edly Gays Glebe sy Gane ald pad ill cpasS a eto oe ye 


lst yo le dhe yaw me yi! hays oUW,0 Le 
LB) Ys BS Ipod WH MS aU Gy las? ye Got Gede Ol} aye 


edit oe ie oe LAs 

gtnatly Joell gle Red ol) iby WAS let 

piles pads OF Op i Aya da dn Glas pl Soll Slo! ph ye yiptall, (oles 
jee) peril al 


“In the name of the merciful and compassionate God! Verily, we have given thee 
an obvious victory.” May this liberal door always be opened with joy! I testify that 
there is no god but God. 

“In the time of the reign of the king, powerful as Salomo, Shér Sh4h, the son of 
Hasan Str, Yusuf ibn Hasan Sar, the high Sayyid (surnamed) Daulatkhan, found 
grace to erect this mosque and the place of Daulatabad, 

“In the hope of the reward of the prophet’s saying ‘He who builds a mosque will 
have a castle built for him by God Almighty in Paradise, and as for the merciful, God 
Almighty gives to him long life in the world and protects him for his justice and bene- 
ficence.’ 

It was on the 21st of the blessed and venerable month, month Ramazan of the 


year 949 [29th December 1542], when it became ready. God is the generous and the 
omniscient.’ 


* Cunningham’s Reports of Archeological Survey of India, vol. XXIII, p. 51. ; 
* See facsimile No. iii, on the plate at p. 138. Quassdé and qassdb occur in Hindtistani (Shakespeare); see No. 40. 
1 Qorda Sidr. xlviii, 1, 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. 151 


It is known that Shér Shah built numerous mosques and kdrawdusardts, but only 
very small remains of them have come down to our day. Besides his stately mausoleum 
at Sahsaram there exist some ruins of his time at Dihlt.” If I am right, the above in- 
scription is the second of Shér Shah’s reign that is known, the first being published 
by Blochmann in the Proceedings of the Asiatic Society, Bengal, for May 1874, p. 105 
(947 A.H.) 

Yusuf, the builder of the mosque at Mahim, was one of the seven brothers of 
Shér Shah (Larikh-¢ Shérshahi, in Elliot-Dowson’s History, vol. IV, p. 310). He may be 
the same who built in 958 H. a door to the shrine of Khwaja Qutb addin (Journal 
Asiatique, Véeme Série, tome XVI, 426), 


38. In the south wall of the enclosure of the masjid of the Pirzadas (No. 34) is a 
sandstone, measuring 17” by 6”, which bears three lines :— 
yibl. iy esa Sas Sam woo De 0 
REN site slits gla sl IU IS rales dos” Alot 
daly teed 7 CU) te oats clog gad onl pol gad est Gaby) Moy) alia 
‘In the time of the reign of his Majesty the slave (af God), the asylum of the 
Khalifat, the king 
*Shihabaddin Muhammad, the second lord of the conjunction, ShAhjahdn, 
Badishah-t-Ghazi—may (God) perpetuate 
“His Khalifat for ever !—Shaikh Nasir, son of Shaikh IlAhdad of Mahim, found 
grace. A. 1051” [began 12th April 1641]. 
-_Khafit Khan, in his Muntakhab aliubdd (I, 550) and ’Abd al Hamid in the Bédshdh. 
ndma (1, 2,387) have each inserted an account of Shaikh Nasir, whom they mention 
among other saints and learned men of Shahjahan’s time.* Both authors evidently 
made use of the same sources, Khafi Khan citing the Shahjahdnndma.* I extract the 
following :—His original name was Nasir Muhammad; he was born at Ajmir, and lived 
afterwards in Gujarat. He made many voyages, and at different times attended the 
emperor. Always, night and day, he was clothed in mail and with a garment of cotton; 
and he perpetually bore arms. Besides his daily alms, he gave, if urged, all his property 
to poor men, even the horses and elephants which he had received from the king, 
and was content if he could get a fire of straw and wood in the open air to care for re 
own body, eating roots and leaves. Many wonders were effected by him. He wasa 
disciple of Sayyid Ahmad, son of Sayyid Raft’addin, son of Sayyid Ja’far, from 
Shiraz. 
39. On the south outer arch of the facade of the Jami’ masjid isa red sandstone 
(3 x 1’ 114”), bearing nine lines :— 
et) Oy da dye Dolew dye 50 
bl. uy ) wit? pss vw) 9 
YS y) doe” jpolledl <3 aU) Ne sbi 


3 See Garcin de Tassy : ‘ Déscription des monuments de Delhi en 1852 d'apres le texte hindoustuni de Satyid Ahmad 
Khén;’ Journal Asiatique, Véme Série, tome XVI, passim, e.g. pages 192 (No, xvii), 426 (No. lvii), aud 428 (No. Iviii), 

33 The printed text of “Abd al Hamid has Shaikh Nazir. 

4 Many histories of ShAhjahan’s reign are so entitled. 


152 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 
aie all) Sd ile altioly ile poly 


p88) ane ae dead gala de® pron Sillabe 5 
dio plod Wires dalgd abo say ploiay 
Bhd’ 5 sey dUloS ols ole Sted abil 
subs he reel cpa yr pra gulls 
Slee rhe ple dw 5 Core™ OI) 5 artete 

“In the happiness-spreading reign, extended over all the earth 

And the time of the master of authority and dignity, the king 

“Of kings, the shadow of God in both worlds, Muhammad Aurangzéb 

Bahadur ’Alamgir Badishah-i-Ghazi—may God perpetuate his kingdom 

“And his reign!—the repairing of the Jami’ masjid of the town of Mahim, 
according to the holy order, 

‘“‘ Was finished through the endeavour of the slave of the court, Khwaja Rahmat 
Allah— 

“May God Almighty make him accepted and favoured through His kindness and 
wisdom !— 

“On the 17th of the month Muharram, the holy, A.H. 1078 [9th July 1667], in the 
tenth year after the blessed accession to the throne.” 

Sarbuland Khan Khwaja Rahmat Allah was a man of great consequence 
under Shahjahan and Aurangzéb, and died in 1090. But, as Sarbuland Khan received 
this title, which is omitted in the inscription, in the 30th year of Shahjahan (Maésir al 
Umard, II, 478), 7. e. 1066, and as he was in 1078 in the Dakkan with Prince Mu’azzam, 
whence he came back in 1080, it does not seem probable that both were the same person. 
A homonymous person is named as a commander of 800 soldiers and 200 horsemen 
under ShAhjahan (Bddshdhndma, II, 741). 

40. The following inscription is engraved on a red sandstone (size: 11 by 7 inches), 
now lying on a heap of bricks in the ruins of the former mosque of the QassAy4n at 
Mahim; the whole is in a bad condition and the stone will probably get lost in a short 
time. The inscription contains eight lines, and is poorly cut :— 


psy) way) al foe 
(7) wd 9 woo dye 59 
eb) yl iis Jb 


bles pose otal 
eeecee eovercces (?) pate 
I y ypdted dw lars) py 59 OS aus 


“In the name of the merciful and compassionate God. In the time of the reign and 
the life of the divine shadow Abu’l Zafar, Muhyiddin Muhammad Aurangzéb 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. 153 


BaAdishah-!-G hazi—May God perpetuate his kingdom and his reign !— the mosque of 
the butchers ....was rebuilt. Inthe month of Ramazan 1090” [ that month began the 
6th October 1679]. 


The two last lines being hopelessly worn, the name of the restorer is not legible; the 
year may perhaps have been sad’in. It is interesting to learn from this inscription that 
the butchers’ masjid erected in 942 H. (Inscription No. 36) was repaired a century and a 
half afterwards. 


4]. An inscription of five lines is engraved on a rectangular red sandstone 
(size 174 by 14 inches) over the northern outer arch of the mosque of Daula Khan in the 
garht of the Pathans in Mahim. The building being in a critical condition, the inscrip- 
tion, till lately safe, is now in danger of getting lost :— 


4 - te 4 

AU) Spo) dos” aU) 3 ld prs] geal AU) pany 
2 . ; t 

WY sat b cB bw 
oe cee poh Syd 5 Saber url 
yd bye sKiwoen ase coy Sh a ene) 
oat ee pg ae) ol 


“Tn the name of the merciful and compassionate God. There is no god but God, and 
Muhammad is the apostle of God. 


**Q God! O opener ! *OQ Muhammad ! O apostle of God! 
‘This edifice for the merciful God® “Its builder (was) Daula Khan of ele- 
‘His father (was) a celebrated Bakh- vated rank; 
tiyar, “Darya Khan whose sins are forgiven, 
The year of the completion—name with “ Masjid [ti] migbara zi Khan ‘mosque 
wisdom and discernment : and tomb (are built) by the Khan.’ ” 


The letters of the ¢dérikh give 1108 'began 31st July 1696) ]. 


42, Daula Khan, the builder of the mosque of the preceding inscription, erected a 
tomb for himself in the same year as the masjid. It is now a ruin, and the inscription 
on its wall being engraved on sandstone (size 2’ 8” by 1’) will be destroyed when it falls. 
It runs in four lines— 


d Lad Lad cd ° 4 
clea abo bly AL) Spey das AU Hall I aS!) foal A) 
SL GH i doo Lo Gal Gap sb sla af cintlo IAS aye Lotas® yd Wyo 
3) S3))) Hf 0 est) web) ji) Val. phot pre ee! ee bia 
‘In the name, etc. There is no god, etc. The slave of the court of the Merciful 
Daula Khan Muhammadi Murid of Gilan— 
‘“‘T knew that the four friends (the Khalifs) are over this wholly perishable world 


—found grace _ 
% Metre—Khafif. 


154 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


“Tn his lifetime to erect this burial-place with the favour of the Lord, during the 
reign of Aurangzéb 

“ Badishah, the shadow of God. Onthe 14th of the month Ramazan, the blessed 
A.H. 1114 [1st February 1703]. Through the effort of the architect Ustéd Abt Valad 
Tayyib.” 

The inserted Sunné dogma in the first person seems to be an allusion to the formula 
ashhadu an 1é iléha illallah, ete. 


VI.—Ku6Karax0r (255 3555 ) 

43. Khokarakdt is a village in ruins situated to the north of Rohtak. Over a 
gateway of the village, built by Shamshér Khan, a stone was placed, which has been dug 
up out of the ruins and is now in the Museum at Lahore.* Its dimensions are 2’ 2” by 
1’ 72” and it bears a bilingual inscription, three lines in Persian and five lines in Hindi.” 
The Persian text runs— 

jE Whol pT ase* Gyo] Je Spd yboly eile ell jo 
coles Elin, ai) Jad fA ated L) eotia (25 aed, Joy) ale al) ald 
Siwy tlosly OWRD 4 dw 9 days din ylae, bol) po 69 old oly gino QI 


“In the days of the empire of the slave (af God), his Majesty Jalal addin 
Muhammad Akbar Badishaéh-i-Ghazi— 

** May God perpetuate his kingdom for ever (vd) his highness in Paradise !—Ab& 
Shamshér Khan, the shiqgqdar of pargana Rohtak, 

“Has laid the foundation of this gateway. In the blessed month Ramazan anno 
973 it has been finished” [began 22ad March 1566}. 

The words rof’atahu fi janndt Abd are not certain. There is no doubt that the 
Shamshér Khan of this inscription and of No. 28 are the same persons. 


VII.— Boum. 


44, The village of Bohm (a) ) is 4 miles east of Rohtak on the road to Dihli. In 
the east wall of the tomb of one Mahmiid of Bohm, a stone (3’ 93” by 9”) has been ~ 
recently fixed which contains an inscription of. three lines not relative to its present 
place. The passage from the Qordn, Stra ii, 256, is followed by these words :— 


eae ots che tales cilalulye Wipe pel! Ways 
“The writer (was) Ibrahim, known as Muwds4kh4ni, by the order of ’Ali Qazi 
Bahaikhan.” 


VIII.—Hisdr Firéza.*® 


45, From a mosque outside the Dihli gate, situate in the Sardi NathdA BhatyArA 
(a baker). Four lines on a stone 2’ 5” by Y’ 8”. 


% See the facsimile No. v, at p. 149. 
37 The Hindi inscription, as Professor G. Bithler informs me, is not quite intelligible. But it is of the same year, 
A.D. 1566. The date is Samvat 1623, Vaisdkha vadi 15, which corresponds according to Dr. Schram’s approximate tables 
to the 20th April 1566, if the year is taken as an ended northeru (pirnimdnta) Vikrama-year ; the 20th April was the last of 
Ramazin. Akbar, Shamshér Kben and the gate are all mentioned in the Hindi version. 
** For a short historical account of the town of Hisar Firéza, see Blochmann, Proceedings of As. Soc. Beng. 1877, 
April, p. 92, ff., where some of the following inscriptions have been published. 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT, 155 


Biel 3 Gy Wd Ibs AUT pip ald Jase chy yr ald ante Ai J etal cyesyll AUD 
po She) pam oS) ) ees) BUI F553 de 


Cy tes) sid stale Lop Jole he pol GBI ySil pul Gee y Gyete aye ye 
tLe ab] MA Cole altos Uyilan dos” giles] » clasts) ob), 

whan Gd elses yee ds? VI dplo,f AH? 7 OSU GS] de tolled) be ou}, ANA , 
SEE AG lB BI clans! oyiI aly prianall 05552 Genny dtl aly Opiew nde 

Wy) [oan]? Rea? athe Le SH athy y athe! Le Med aUlaly Glass pila pulleld iy peal 
deal cing Mure iy =P gg di lel), ,abIty all} sai yess ri ye ail oye sls, 
PI oS uv 
‘In the name of the merciful and compassionate God! The prophet—upon whom 


be peace !—says, ‘He who builds a mosque for God, will have a house built for him by 
God Almighty in Paradise.’ By the grace of God, the omniscient king, and the blessing 


of the Lord of prophetship—on whom be peace !— 

‘In the auspicious time, and the day-increasing reign of the sovereign, the helper of 
the world, the just one of the age, the king of India and Khorasan, who raises the stan- 
dard of holy strife and war, Muhammad Humay din, Pddishéh-i-Ghdzi—may God perpe- 
tuate his reign 

“And his khalifat and extend over both worlds his justice and his compassion ! 
this fine mosque was built and adorned, in beautiful structure, in order to please the 
Lord, who is adored by the slave who hopes in the mercy of the Ali-nourisher, who seeks 
help from God, the strength of the merciful, Nazar Quli, son of Shah Quli Khan, 

** Who is knownas Nizim addin Janym, the Turkman—may God increase what 
He has given him, and bring him to what he desires for the honour of the chief of the 
pious and the saints !—Dated 4th Sha’b4n—may God allow the month to end in victory 
and security !—anno 989 [Ist March 1533]. The writer of these letters is "Abdallah 
Ydsuf Ahmad, son of Ruknaddin.” 

46. The inscription from the J4mi’ mosque of His4r consists of nine lines, and 
measures 1’ 11” by 1’ 5”. The last line is written very closely, and is almost undeci- 
pherable on the rubbing, so that I can only accept Mr. Blochmann’s readings, whose 
translation I have also adopted, so far as I approve of it, 


yok: yey alse (ELI as] 5 Wal Wee Les I A salen) gt 5 bay! qo! AU) pay 
side Kis al AL) is aU) bay chin Wem? AU iy ur llntlanle Jt Ja asbe pips 
Silly didlye Ad) Rabe UB; Me pea} Sls}, Bed) aligd eyo ply) 0 dem op) Aad pla 
dill] ny cod) cell dell Jol BA, Sp! Sy) Let} Jatt) al eels opel y 
oily Bite Lie ved Syl y Spurl Igaabl y alll Iyepbl fs? aba, y all) Kelbb 

JET Wald gilE shots ypilea das” Cpjlill, olialee] Ob gil) lobe pol 


3% By no means wel) J |. # Added by Blochmann. 
: x2 


156 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


clas!) slo) SAO 6d} Mas Huy} clairolew Glia Cg 


sun) 5 ga} Ldhb) le? 3 atle 


LEH yytall patel) Glia yp See Shey opallelas die doe obisslel liste 


[ ? ] Lite 05"? ase ove wl» er wha w 
By oe yh ge el pull, gf gles pill” Me hy Coden ety oe 


wing dem atl cy by) osl ayo af a oll aig y ered alyaS 9 yeh Mle aS pug 


gern, 5g pb ah, ak 


“ In the name of the merciful and compassionate God! [Qordn, Sira lxxii, 18, 19] 
~ *the mosques are God’s.’ You should not call on any one with God, and ‘when God’s 
servant stood up to pray they (the jinns) called out to him and well-nigh crowded upon 
him.’ The prophet—upon whom be peace !—says, ‘He who builds a mosque for God 
desiring thereby God’s honour, will have one like it built for him by God in Paradise. 

“This mosque was finished in the days of the reign of the great king of kings, the 
exalted prince, the master of the necks of crowds of nations among the Indians, Turks, 
Arabs, and Persians, the accomplished Sultan, the perfect, the chief, the ruler, the just 
prince, the high, the exalted, whom to obey is as necessary as to obey God and the 
Prophet, according to (Qordn, Sira iv, 62) ‘Obey God, and obey the Apostle and those 
~ in authority amongst you,’ the guardian of God’s countries, the helper of God’s servants, 
who raises the standard of holy strife and war, Muhammad Humayin, Bddishah-i- 
Ghézi—may God Almighty perpetuate his kingdom and guide his ship in the seas of 
His favour !—through the exertion of the auspicious dignitary, the cream of the accom- 
plished among men, the issue of great Amirs, Amir Muhammad, son of the distin- 
guished noble, the meritorious NizAmaddin Beg Mirak, son of the pardoned and 
purified Khushgeldi,...., son of his highness, whose sins are forgiven. ....... 

(Metre: Ramal), ‘ A mosque has been built in Hisar for the sake of God, which is 
as high in dignity as the seventh heaven. . 

“ Because it is high in dignity, and has the aspect of the seventh heaven, and has 
turned out well-adjusted, every one who saw it has approved of the style of this mosque. 
Because all people of sense approved of it, its chronogrammis.......... 

** Its writer and composer is Nizam......... A. 942” [began 2nd July 1535). 


The father of the builder was already, in Babar’s time, an officer of Prince Hum4yin 
(Babar’s Memoirs, p. 402), who afterwards employed him during his own reign in several 
situations. In 942, the year of the above inscription, he appointed him commander of the 
fort of Chanar, then just conquered (Akbarndéma, 1,151). In the report of the victory 
gained over Rana Sanka (Babar’s Memoirs, pp. 410 ff.) ten grandees bear the title 
Nizdmaddin, but that was probably not their proper title, and is only a declamatory 
addition of the learned composer of the letter. 


” T do not think that these words are correct, 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. 157 


47. The ruins of Ulugh Beg’s mosque are near the Commissariat in the town of 
Hisdr. The inscription consists of five lines; it measures 1’ 4” by 2’:— 


Js a hs ay lll age JU tay!) cyan AUD pans 
Hye 0 tis 3 ihiie tig J aU) a3 calls a) Bay eae 
Qo GALI Maly cyte oy] Edge y wyene 


al wEwA Wa Ale iol piles das* giles! 5 Haale) oly!) ail) oto! 


921 o> yb) yyAl pe dos! Chays nel ol] Eas GI wel pbae rel deal) ali Fairs 

“In the name of the merciful and compassionate God! He upon whom may be 
peace ! says, ‘ He who builds a mosque for God 

{Desiring thereby God Almighty’s honour, will have a house like it built for him 
by God in Paradise.’ In the anspicious time 

** And the increasing reign of his Majesty the kinz of kings, the helper of the world 

“And the faith, who raises the standard of holy strife and war, Muhammad 
Humaytn Badishah-t-Ghdzi—may God perpetuate his khalifat!—its builder, 

_ “By the grace of God the eternal (was) the great Amir, Amir Ulugh Beg, son of 

Amir Yusuf Ahmad, the master of the horse. Dated in 951” [began 25th March 1544]. 


48. Ona dome outside Hisdr, about a mile to the east, inside the commissariat 
godowns, on a slab, measuring 1’5” by 1'10”, are four lines of very bad poetry— 
iw ie y Gre 5} ead, IS ee ye SUS KS, Ub A 
ee ee ee 
eat wo) ST eve 6S gl oS pp aias Ss po 
qV9 dw ; ; 
ee ie eis ee a UN ie be 
pps Se 
(Metre: Mutagarib). ‘ How beautiful is the dome of the paradise-like mausoleum ; 
its mortar and bricks are like musk and ambergris. 
“From the scent of its garden the brain is perfumed; and a salsabi/ (a spring in 
paradise) flows from its trees. 
“The secretary of heaven (Wercury) turned round it, when the date was written on 


the dome: A. H. 975 [began 8th July 1567]. 
A thousand praises are due to BAyazid, by whose order the bricks were placed on 


the foundation. The writer was Kabir.” 


49, On a mosque in the yard of ‘Shér Buhltil’s mausoleum’ outside Hisar, one 
mile to the south, is an inscription, 2’ 5” square, in six lines of well-formed Nasia’lég : — 


Ka Io SiuT sao (SJoyo a5) 
cob AG) lt Sole doy Ye? LAN 
les Jal Gre ath of dhe sds 


158 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


rtd & ae yf BL oj dle CG 2 
3 LGU SESS Cees Ou 
Metre: Ramal. 
“The follower of the law of the Prophet, the chosen one,’ Abd-annabi, 
“ Whose sight gives brightness to the mirror of the heart, 
* Erected, before the courtyard of Shah Buhldl’s mausoleum, 
** A grand mosque, which is to be the dwelling of worshippers. 
“ A heavenly’speaker said without hesitation, ‘ write the hemistich 
‘This building was completed in 1106’” [began 22nd August 1694]. 
An inscription from a tomb near the Commissariat godowns, 6’ 23”.by 103 inches, 
is of no value, as it consists only of Qordn, Stira V. 98. 


IX.—BARWALA. 


Barwala is now the head-quarters of a tahsil, distant 18 miles north-east of 
Ilisiy. In the Aln-t-Akbari, Pargana Barwila is mentioned as belonging to Sarkar 
Hisir. Its area was 186,799 bighas; the revenues were 1,097,807 dams (109,052 Say, 
dams.) ; the tribes were Sayyids, Malikzidas, Baqqils; the military contingent consisted 
of 100 horse, 1,500 footmen. 

50. An inscription from an old mosque, measuring 2’ 5” by 8” is in very bad pre- 
servation :— : 

she dla GW}, Law) jr0 pes!) Gleb) dye og ase] sr sly pel 
c , Lr}, Wy) rae }22J), W,)) as? _lbb.J) Olas jobees)ys) 


Bilatw 5 ile, Glo dw Jol ey Ue [2] a2) ce Shel plo — Slab) F n : 

“‘ This mosque was ordered to be built in the time of the noble king Mu’izzaddunya 
waddin—may (God) perpetuate his reign !— 

Abu-l-Muzaffar Kaiqobad, the king, by the glory of the saints and the poor, 
TAjaddaula waddin .. the royal—may his prosperity be perpetual!—at the begin- 
ning of the Rabi’ al awwal 688” | began 25th March 1289]. 

The inscription is important, as it is the first known of Kaiqobad,” son of Bughra 
Khan, viceroy of Bengal, the last emperor of the Balbani Turks, after whom the king- 
dom was transferred to the Khiljis. 


51. A second Barwadla inscription is of Balban’s reign; it consists of two lines. 
It has also been much injured by the weather. The dimensions are 3’ 3” by 11 inches :— 


dillale y ale UIA propo!) pel old GLaLAI ly yabio!l yi] probeally piled [2] 599 
Dlaiw 4 Gres dw drelve Loc Lae, Sheol) pw Ur? pest oe dhl alo 


“The light of Islam and of the Muslims Abul-Muzaffar Balban, the king, the 
helper of the Lord of the Muslims—may God perpetuate his kingdom and his reign !— 

- «+ 6 «+ « . + may his prosperity be perpetual !—on the 20th of the blessed 
month Ramazan—may its blessing be general !—680” [2nd January 1282]. 

The extant Balban inscriptions have been mentioned above under No. 15. 


# Another inscription of Kaiqobad, dated A.H. 686, exists in the Saddo masjid a! Amrohd, Muradabad district, 
North-Western Provinces, (see A. Fihrer; /. c., page 35),— Ed, EF. I, 


INSCRIPTIONS FROM DELHI DISTRICT. 159 


X.—FatHABan. 

52, In the town of Fathabad is a round sandstone pillar, 10’ 2” high and 6 
1}" in circumference. It is a pity that it is not possible to decipher this evidently most 
important document, which consists of thirty-six lines going round the pillar. The 
letters have been much injured and many patches of the stone have fallen off. Only 
single words are here and there legible on the rubbings (in five pieces). The inscrip- 
tion belongs to a king of the Tughluq dynasty, and contains long historical accounts. 
Tughluq Shah himself is mentioned. An occurring date, the reference of which is 
not clear, is the first Sha’bdn 725 [13th July 1325], which falis in the first year of 
Muhammad, son of Tughluq Shah.* 


XI.— HAnsi.# 


53. On the Dini mosque, near the Saraogyin mandir, is an inscription in three 
lines, measuring 2’ 9” by 1’4”— 


pled Soo 4 yore dye 0 pllline _2lae Shy phe slda Cpreyit 
bbe UIA laud} alu rors cd cel) Mul slots aluctle Kolo 
OS Ly ase? ys) Bslorsw 9 im 9 tun dw sda] Usd ye prly vlhly jolw abo sv wll. 


‘Through the grace of God the omniscient and the blessing of thechosen Prophet— 
upon whom be peace !—in the auspicious time and the august reign 

“Of the lord, the refuge of the world, the king of Islim, the shepherd of the 
people, Firéz Shah, the king—may God perpetuate his kingdom 

“ And his reign !—this mosque was erected by the slave of the court, S4h(i)n, the 
royal, on the beginning of Zilqa’da, 767” [10th July 1366}. 

54. From the middle arch of Ja’far Beg’s mosque. Two lines, l’ 3” by 1’, 
evidently a fragmentary piece, containing the words— 


poll peel pot [ LI ] Kal ye 


** .,,..and who manifests the word of God,* the helper of the Lord of the faithful.” 

There is also a defective inscription found on the middle arch of the Jod Goh (?). 
It consists of two lines (2’ 18” by 80”) and belongs to the reign of Iltimish (Altamsh), 
whose name it contains. 

Finally; a third inscription, which is found on the back corner of the mosque ot 
Makhdtim Ashraf, measuring 1’ 22” by 12”, contains some words from Qordn, Sara 
1x29: 


43I capnot let this opportunity pass of recommending this interesting document to traveliers visiting Fathabad. From 
rubbings alone it cannot be deciphered. An examination of the original may perhaps be more successful. It would be neces. 
sary to make a transcript directly from the original which would assist in the reading of the rubbing. Ghulam Husain, one 
of Mr. C. J. Rodger’s staff, who prepared the copies of all the Panjab inscriptions in this paper, says in a note that Zin ud 
Din, Extra Assistant Commissioner, spent more than a month at Fathabad trying to decipher the inscription, but he had not 
been able to see what he did : 

44 Fo. the history of the town of Hansi, see Proceedings of the As. Soc. Beng. for 1877, 147, ffg. 

45 These words occur as an epithet of Husain Shia in an inscription from A.H. 906 (see Journal .4s. Soc. Berg. 
vol. XLIII (1874), p. 304, note). 


160 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


X.—BADAL PILLAR INSCRIPTION OF THE TIME OF NARAYANAPALA. 
By Prorrssorn F. Krenuorn, Pu.D., C.1.E.; G6rriIncEn. 


In November 1780 Charles Wilkins discovered in the vicinity of the town of Badal,' 
in the Dinajpur District of the Province of Bengal, a stone pillar, about 12 feet high, 
which was found to contain, at a few feet above the ground, an inscription engraved in 
the stone. Some years afterwards he succeeded in deciphering and translating this 
inscription; and his translation was published in 1788, in the Astatie Researches, 
yol. I, pages 131-144, with a drawing of the pillar and a specimen of the characters, 
and accompanied by some valuable remarks of Sir William Jones. In 1874 Mr. 
E. V. Westmacott obtained a careless and mutilated transcript of the original text from 
Pandit Harachandra Chakravarti, which, with a translation by Mr. Pratapachandra 
Ghosha, will be found in the Journal, Asiatic, Society, Bengal, vol. XLIIT, parti, pages 
356-63. I now edit the inscription, of which a complete and trustworthy text has not 
yet been published, from impressions which at Dr. Burgess’ request the Government of 
India has had prepared by Mr. H. B. W. Garrick. 

The inscription contains 29 lines of writing—28 full lines and one line only 5” 
long,--which cover a space of from 1’ 8}” to 1’ 10” broad by 1’ 72” high. With the ex- 
ception of two aksharas each at the commencement of lines 1 and 2, and altogether six- 
teen aksharas at the commencement of lines 25-2&, which have become illegible by the 
peeling off of the surface of the stone, and a few slightly damaged aksharas in the body 
of the inscription, the writing is well preserved and may be read with certainty through- 
out. The size of the letters is between 7” and 3.” The characters are of the same type 
as, but decidedly more modern than, those of the Ghosrawa inscription, of which a photo- 
lithograph is published in the Indian Antiquary, vol. XVII, page 310, and may be 
assigned to about the end of the 9th or commencement of the 10th century A.D. They 
are skilfully formed and well engraved. The language is Sanskrit, and, excepting the 
short line 29, which merely records the name of the engraver, Vishnubhadra, the in- 
scription is in verse. In respect of orthography the text calls for few remarks. The 
letter 4 is throughout denoted by the sign for v. Before » the consonant m has been 
retained, instead of being changed to anusvdra, in sumvrita, line 6, bhraéntam = vikatain, 
line 8, samvalgitds, line 9, satdm = vismayah, line 10, vachdém = vaibhavam, line 20, and ¢4- 
drigam = vyadhita, line 24; and instead of anusvdra the guttural uasal has been used in 
vanse, lines 1 and 26, and vansasya, line 21; and the dental nasal in pdnsuh, line 7. We 
also have -sansé for -Samsé, line 17, and -sanghuter for -samhater, line 4. Besides, it may 
be noted that the rules of samdhi have not been observed in vidhivat Rallé-, line 11, and 
-pitdn chatur-, line13; and that the sign of avagraha has been exceptionally employed in 
*bhidhé *bhavat, line 17, and °téro ’vadat, line 21. As regards grammar I need draw 
attention only to the first compound in verse 11, which is formed incorrectly. 

The proper object of the inscription is, to record (in verses 27 and 28) the erection 
of a pillar, bearing on its top a figure of the mythical bird Garuda,—the pillar on which 
the inscription still is, but the upper part of which is now missing,—by a Brahman, 

1 See Montgomery Martin’s (Buchanan Hamilton’s) Eastern India, vol. II, page 672. [Badal Kacheri is in the south 
of the Dindjpur district, 3 miles eouth-west from the village of Mangaibari, whieh is on the borders of the Sagun& pargana of 


the Bagurd (Bogra) district and 7 miles south-west from Damdamé station on the Northern Bengal State Railway. Badal 


i8 in Long, 88° 58’ E., Lat. 25° 5! N. (Indian Atlas, sheet 119), and the pillar is about a mile north from it. (Conf. Hunter's 
Stut. Acc. Bengal, vol. vii, p. 451, and vol, viii, p, 198)—7. B.] 


ol. II. p. 160. 


Epigraphi« Indica, v 


“pounrbus0 fo syie-£ +2105 5 young “Md H ha uopevesdust soma 
Rages Fo» Be eee 2 
- _Tyomemsshoone : | te 
: k NAA E sameeren PO on 
= ~obk LS ae ate ee Ores | 


oe 2 je 


ee ses 
ee we 
PEPEED FEDER syOE 


A eee GeSDTBR ER ME 3S 
Ore eeuPpls Wr eh pe 
= BRNOEOPR kak Pl SEORIERS UAE DE 


= 


ER eheee) RRL Ueliagerisoteent ci 
es 7) BELPEMOEVERMS Uae See el 
 MPUBDPONAPRE. USIP DELS SLBE spre ESSZQaRb sles “ 
DREMEL ABLEETE PREBLE PEM T ANE ae ae 
DOMME “DLLME LEL A) LAAT TAS YORE PED 01 
e enon a POPES ER YE ERES ah ue 
testa OREO SDE MMEIE DIE EWE BY) ieee ese 
erp le| se WEEE ORDEREEER AES 
ae WE PRE EWERR ERE ee raee ex 
-Suaiacmesanare N94) nee 


SOc pve pa 
By seine Epos sel 


Sa 


MATT ITMOCN, YWITTId TVAVd 


BADAL PILLAR INSCRIPTION, 161 


named Rama Guravamisra., But the inscription is really a pragasti, or laudatory ac- 
count, of Guravamisra and his ancestors, and it is of some value mainly because it 
furnishes the names of four of the so-called Pala kings of Bengal, of whom some of 
the said Brahmans were counsellors or ministers. 

In the race of SAndilya there was one [Vishnu?]; in his lineage was Viradeva ; 
in his family Pafichala; and his son was Garga, the adviser of Dharma (or Dharma- 
pala), ‘the regent of the east’ (vv. 1-2). Garga married Ichchha, and their son was 
Darbhap4ni, who became minister of the king Devapala (vv. 3-7). He, again, 
married SarkarAdevi, who bore to him Somesvara (vv. 8-9). SomeSvara married 
Ralladevi (v. 10); and their son was Kedaramisra, by whose counsel the lord of . 
Gauda (whom I understand to be Devapala)’ is represented to have defeated or held in 
check the Utkalas, Hinas, Dravidas and Gurjaras(v. 13), and who is intimated to 
have consecrated the king Sirap4la (v.15). And, finally, Ked4ramigra married Vavva, 
a lady born at Devagrama, (v. 16), and she bore to him RAma, called Guravamisra 
(v. 18), who was held in high esteem by the king NArAyanapAla (v.19). There can 
be no doubt that this last-named Brihman is the Bhatta Gurava who is mentioned as 
ditaka in the Bhagalpur copper-plate inscription of Narayanapala.° 

Of the four kings mentioned in this inscription three, Dharma[p4la], Devapala 
and Narayanapala, are well known to us from copper-plate inscriptions. As to Sira- 
pala, I readily adopt Dr. Hérnle’s suggestion‘ that he is identical with the Vigrahapala 
of the Bhagalpur copper-plate, the immediate predecessor of Narayanapala. But 
regarding the Pala kings in general my views differ from those of Dr. Hornle, and I 
hope to prove before long that the successors of Nardyanapala were: his son Rajyapala; 
his son Gopala IT.; his son Vigrahapala II.; his son Mahipala; his son Nayapala; 
and his son Vigrahapala ITI. 


Pexp,? 
L. 1. . .S urfwwagyeieaeag | 

urge ata asia wieearestad wv — [1] 
wa gifefa ufaa feraty aatta @autafatsia va 

2 —o: [i] 
wi aaataratearg feg arat aafa fasrera a(s)eafa a: wv — (2.] 
UGi SET ATA Tearatfewarataataar 
fawafatraterat arfeaae- 

3. wat war w? — [3.] 
fraraquaqang @)qeTaaan Aafaarnarerstcafaas: [1*] 
aaa: aaraathrica fea: edarfafcfa ara fasreat- 


See Indian Antiquary, vol. XV, page 308, v. 6. | 6 The word which has almost éntirely disappeared here 
8 See ib., page 307. was probably fay: ; and it may have been preceded by the 
4 See the Centenary Review of the Asiatic Society symbol for 1. 
Bengal, Part 11, Appendix IL; and Indian Antiquary, vol. 7 Read Cast?. 
XIV, pages 162—165. 8 Metre : Sloka (Anushtubh). 
® From impressions prepared by Mr. H. RB. W, Garrick, 9 Metre: Vasantatilaka. 


and supplied to me by the editor. 10 Metre ; Sloka (Anushtubh). 


162 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


poe Ty — [4] 
aT tarsrararaagane aafaaragd—” 
a Wofaqaoatetact: gafafaet fat: | 
ATAWTAAeaTaTHAATSNT at feat- 


5. fargat- 
alan we ya Wat ATet Wreaarant ga: wv’ — [5.] 
ATTA ASA AAS AATA eT ASAT ES T- 
aeainfrafana(a)a- 
6. ACs: WAATHTAATH 
feqararmpsaftactancerfeatgiadte- 
wat eau gufacaaadaar efx 
7. we wv — [6] 


HIATUS TEfanisad Garad Aaa: TATHAAT: | 
aaa teggerigaureurag: fasted” aa- 
8. faa: waareare w” — [7] 
ae wwatreanraa: da sa fea: [i*] 
MWA: Wary waa: w — [8.] 


aqiat ayTay” wufsa: wal fajara f- 
10. ar 2 
qd aqdanteagiat wattaaa:” x — [9.] 
faa ca at frarar efefea want werszaiice: [1”] 
aagearar fata- 


11. aq career: a sare uw — [10] 
wiaaThratras (@) eafate frag fea (fa) feat 
eaicenrinta: acaufewarayfren- 
12. ufas: | 
ana aH Wee facusaadires: afaarty: 
ary Fernfen ge va fraasraeomera: uy — (11.] 
1 Metre: Vasantatilaka. 


1 Read “Sea. ® These signs of punctuation are superfluous. 


8 Metre: Sardflavikridita, 11 Read yt TE Wufsm da°. 
™ Read “dqar®. Originally frarst was engraved, but the| 2 Read wat faa. 

aign for ¢ is struck out. % Metre: Sardiilavikridita. 
8 Metre: Sragdhara, 


: “ Read fafaaemr. 
6 Read “ary; faerest. % Metre: Arya, 

7 Metre: Vasantatilaka, °° Metre; Sragdhaia. 
® Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). 


19 Read ara faa. 


BADAL PILLAR INSCRIPTION. 163 


L. 13. waetaentary” wafsarenfnta [1*] 
SeTaTTerTeT eye (FUT Ue A: y — [12.] 
AgfaSrecaTaST | 
atisata (fa) ormrena( aie Aeachacqura fet aetat vw” — [13] 
wanagataarafaat at- 
sa gaa feufa gefe anifafaaat aera | 
wasatatrard we sity aor a1” afcarfecna(ar)an” a: at unfit TH 0 —[14.] 
qa- 
16. ware a(g) wafanfaaa: aya a: 
araries va watihaa(a)en mela qa: aa | 
araranfaheaaeres wr: 
if. wereag faz 
WEA TaaTATa AAA HATS aeqT: w* — [15.] 
Samra” ee wat TarfiraTag uv [1"] 
agar Taay a- 
18. wt want aralamatjar® uw” — [16.] 
al gaala aarerMtear atacertas aa: | 
Torefhaaranaa yearns wy — [17.] 
19. saefagetaa: auardafara: [1] 
a: Syafaaren wal wa earaw 0° — [18.] 
quet gufata fafantgqaqa- 
20. a a(a) ea | 
ararraeore: warfare at ae nu” — [19.] 
anraaamaatanad Tet: vafasat 1” 
aeratqrareat- 
21. Hara aye® watarai | 
arafagealday agarfauraat satfaet 
qerraadtagara wataaa sreq u* — [20.] 
22. ufataa: ahafa anenae fea safe frat | 
sa fad wafrarfe (feared waite ataat Fou” — [21.] 
wrearqure- 
7 Read °atatag® 37 Metre : Sloka (Anushtubb). 


%8 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). 38 Metre: Arya. 
°9 Metre: Vasantatilaka. ® Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). 


% This sign of punctuation is superfluous, 40 Metre: Arya. 


3 Originally “aadt, altered to “Hara. ‘4 Read arat aaa°. 
32 Metre: MAlini. ® This sign of punctuation is superfluous. 
% Read weqruteyt. ® Read ayy aa. 


“4 Metre: Sardilavikridita. 


* Metre: Sardilavikridita. - 4 Metre: Upaiati. | 
etre: Upajati. 


% Onginally °w4, altered to “war. 
% The lower portion of the aksharas iv brackets is 
damaged. : 


164 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. 23. amiaytaaititacearg uarfeneraaa: [1*] 
setfaa: aufe aa afy feare faatafamaaaa [alerfirara: nt — [22.] 
24, [arfad(say a ada wa are Teremarfua” anges fafaq | 
qa eraufanfasranraata aataerrata we a ATA 
25. —- oun — ([23.] 
afadtiaeaty® (a*) afagqraretfasratagig | 
wHaTEIAyY Gara a: qararaarg wu? — [24.] 
sfeagrgar wet aE 
26. ~yv-vu lati 
arnt wearer faaifa a gatfa a un” — (25.] 
faqa waarera yaaa [i*] 
a(a) wife qeorg we ag”? ay nafet vn — [26.] 
wri- 
27, —VU— aalaage aaauartefa 
atfanta satqeiafanfa anaa(a)arfact | 
ae we sarfua afaste aaa @- 
28. [a]uUuSo 
— — — wfaai et frawaerettaarafaa: 11)” — [27.] 
area ferrmrafad Tat UATaAAaTHTA | 
aq t[e]° aetna watferesearena a i] ~ [28.] 
29. gqaunfaquew’ nafe afaa® [1*] 


TRANSLATION, 
{ Orn !] 

(Verse 1.) In Sandilya’s racewas .., .”, in his lineage Viradeva, in his family 
Pafchaéla; from him was Garga born. 

(2.) As he made Dharma®, the regent of the east, sovereign over all the regions, 
while Indra ruled no other than the eastern quarter, and was even there defeated . . 
by the Daitya chiefs, he laughed Brihaspati to scorn. 

(3.) His wife was Ichchha®, like love dwelling in his heart. By nature pure and 
tender, she was like the beauty of the moon. 

(4.) Their son was the illustrious chief of the twice-born, named Darbhap&ni, 
who, by his innate high rank rising above the three worlds and distinguished by his 


“ Metre of verses 22 and 23 ; Vasantatilaka. 8 The akshara in brackets looks like 4, altered to ¥. 
47 Read eat afza. & Metre: Arya. 


4 
® The akshara 4 was orginaliy omitted, and is engraved 56 The akshara ¥ was originally omitted, and is engraved 
below the line. The following 4, which I have added, is not| below the line. 


in the original. kK 55 One would have expected wafearauy. 
49 Metre: Arya. fn 57 The name, here missing, probably is Vishnu, 
6 Metre of verses 26 and 26; Sloka (Anushtubh), 88 i.e, the king Dharmapfla, whose adviser Garga is 
D Read 4a. represented to have been, 


* Metre: Sarddlavikridita. 89 i,¢, ‘ desire, love.’ 


BADAL PILLAR INSCRIPTION. 165 


knowledge of the four Vedas, was like the lotus-born Brahman, the possessor of four 
lotus-like faces.” ; 

(7.5:) By his policy the illustrious prince DevapAla made tributary the earth as far 
as Reva’s parent” whose piles of rocks are moist with the rutting-juice of elephants, as 
far as Gauri’s father,” the mountain which is whitened by the rays of iévara’s moon, 
and as far as the two oceans whose waters are red with the rising and setting of the sun. 

(6.) At his gate stood, awaiting his leisure, the illustrious prince Devapala, scarce 
visible among the vast armies attending on princes who had come from all quarters, 
(in such numbers) that the prospect of the regions was hidden by thick clouds of dust 
rising from the earth, (though) swept by the constant and abundant streams of rutting. 
juice, flowing down from lustful elephants of. various breeds. 

(7.) Though the prince, who resembled the king of the gods, and the dust of whose 
feet was marked with the diadems of sundry kings, first offered to him a chair of state 
with a seat bright as the moon, he ascended his own throne with trembling. 

(8.) To him was born, of the illustrious Sarkarddevi, the twice-born Somesvara, 
the illustrious, a favourite of the supreme lord, as the moon had sprung from Atri. 

(9.) Never exulting, though like Dhanafijaya® he displayed unlimited prowess; 
never listening proudly to words of praise, though he showered riches upon suppliants ; 
and never addressing friends with many honeyed words, though he made them leap with 
joy by his bounties,—he roused the wonder of good men by such qualities of his, not 
common in the world. 

(10.) Desirous of attaining the state of a householder, he in due form took the 
hand of Ralladevi, a suitable spouse, even as Siva had done of Siva, and Hari of 
Lakshmi. 

(11.) From them took his birth the illustrious Kedaramiéra. Filling the circle 
of the quarters with the flames of abundant (sacrdficia/) fires, radiant with the presence 
of the gods, of irresistible great: might, of a pre-eminence in every branch of knowledge 
matured from within, and brilliant as glowing gold, he, like unto Guha, delighted the 
minds of gods and men by his deeds.“ 

(12.) Pouring forth, even as a boy, the oceans of the four Vedas which he had 
drunk at a single draught, he laughed at Agastya’s proficiency.” 

(18.) Attending to his wise counsel the lord of Gauda long ruled the sea-girt earth, 
having eradicated the race of the Utkalas, humbled the pride of the Hanas, and 
scattered the conceit of the rulers of Dravida and Gurjara. 

(14.) He allowed suppliants to take freely away his riches; his mind made no 


69 Darbhapani was chaturvidya (or chaturvedin), as Brahman is chaturmukha; and the epithet dvijesa, applied to 
him, besides suggests that he was like the moon. 

6 i.e. the Vindhya mountains, 

6 ¢,¢, the Himalaya. 

# i.e, Arjuna, 

64 The general meaning of this verse, in which Kedaramiéra is compared to the god of war, Guha or Karttikeys, is 
clear enough; but two difficulties are presented by the compound which forms the first line. Since that compound is a Bahu- 
vrihi, we should have expected a past passive participle, conveying the sense of ‘touched’ or ‘ filled,’ in the place of chumbin, 
‘kissing,’ which is the reading of the original. Besides, when the compound is referred to Kedaramiéra, none of the ordi- 
nary meanings of ajékma (‘not crooked, straightforward, a frog, a fish’) appears very appropriate. I therefore incline to 
think that the writer has confounded the word with animisha (‘a fish, a god’), and I have translated accordingly. Applied 
to Guha, the first two compounds of the verse would mean : ‘ who fills the circle of the quarters with the big crest of his pea- 
‘cock which shines brightly when frogs are near, and who wields an irresistible, large spear’. 

6 Agastya is fabled tc have swallowed the ocean, 


166 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


distinction between friend and foe; he was both afraid and ashamed to fall into the 
ocean of worldly existence ; and having crushed the attachment to the pleasures of wns 
life, he took delight in the supreme abode. 

(V. 15.) At the sacrifices of him, the image of Brihaspati, the illustrious prince 
Strapala, having destroyed the forces of his enemies, often attended of his own accord, 
like Indra himself, the destroyer of the demon Vala; and ever desirous of the welfare of 

the earth, girt by the several oceans, he there with bent head received the pure water,” 
his soul being bathed in the water of faith. 

(16.) His wife was Vavva, born at Devagrama, unlike the fickle Lakshmi and the 
childless Sati. 

(17.) As Devaki gave birth to Purushottama”, the adopted son of Yasod4, Laksh- 
mi’s husband, who delighted the cow-herds, so she bore to him a son, famous and com- 
passionate, who was a lord of fortune, and who -caused pleasure to the king, being the 
most excellent of men, 

(18.) He, Rama,® called Guravamisra, the illustrious, born in Jamadagni’s race, 
and conversant with the constellations which bode good fortune, was like another Rama 
JAmadagnya, to whom the thriving Kshatriya order caused anxious thought. 

(19.) Since the illustrious prince Narayanapéla, desirous of victory, skilful in 
discerning excellent qualities, held him in high esteem, what need is there of further 
eulogy ? 

(20.) The spread of holiness told that he, of no mean intelligence and of im- 
measurable fame, possessed great power of speech, knowledge of traditional lore, and 
profound skill in politics; that he belonged to a family which had acquired boundless 
lustre by searching after the meaning of the Vedas; that he was eager to celebrate the 
virtues of great men, and was well versed in astronomy. 

(21.) In him, who was possessed of fortune, as well as a master of speech, Lakshmi 
and Sarasvati resided both together, having forsaken, as it were, their natural airy and 
joining in friendship. 

(22.) In the assemblies of the learned he at once confounded the pride of self- 
conceit of opponents by his speeches to which the constant study of the Sastras im- 
parted deep meaning, just as, possessed of boundless wealth of valour, he did in battle 
the conceit of bravery of enemies. 

(23.) He never uttered words gratifying to the ear of which the fruit became not 
at once apparent, nor did he ever bestow a gift which the suppliant having received 
went to another more bountiful donor.” 

(24.) This pious-minded man expounded the Vedas in books of moral tales, which 
excited a thrill of joy and showed that he was born a Valmiki of the Kali age. 

. (25.) Being a river of heaven which does not proceed to the ocean 
peliucid and profound language both delights and purifies. 

-(26.) To his ancestors and to him people were wont to resort, considering that (én 
them) Brahman himself had first become a father, and that the same Brahman (in him) 
had again become their offspring. 


cite orate TS 


es t.e. the pehibe, he aie rs eh was as it were conse- ® In other words, he never made a promise which he did 

crated as sovereign of the earth, not at once fulfil, nor did he moek i ith y 

Ag Geis Adan zh ulfil, nor did he moek suppliants with valueless 
68 Or perhaps,‘ this pleasing person, called Guravamiéra.’ 


ATAKUR INSCRIPTION OF THE TIME OF KRISHNA III, 167 


(7. 27.) He has placed Tarkshya,” [the foe] of serpents and dear friend of Hari, 
here on the top of this pillar, the . . . . beauty of which, like that of his own person, 
attracts the eyes of people, which like his own aspiration rises to an unparalleled height 
and is firm like his affection, and which clearly is as it were a stake planted in the 
breast of the Kali age. 

(28.) Having roamed to the furthest ends of the world, atid hence descended even 
to the bottom of the lower regions, his spotless fame has risen here in the guise of this 
Garuda with a serpent in his mouth. 

This eulogy was incised by the artisan Vishnubhadra. 


XI.—ATAKUR INSCRIPTION OF THE TIME OF KRISHNA III. ; 
DATED SAKA-SAMVAT 872. 


By J. F. Freer, 1.C.8., M.R.AS., C.LE. 


This inscription was first brought te notice by Mr. Rice, in 1889, in his Znseriptions 
at Sravana-Belgola, pp. 19, 21 (see note 6 below). It is now published in full for, 
I believe, the first time. I edit it from inked estampages, for which I am indebted 
to the kindness of Dr. Hultzsch. 

Ataktr is a village about fifteen miles to the north-east of Mandya, which is the 
head-quarters town of the Mandya Taluka of the Maisdir District in Maisir. It is 
shown in the Indian Atlas, Sheet No. 60, as ‘ Atcoor,’ in Lat. 12° 40’ N., Long. 77° 8’ E.; 
and it is entered, as ‘ Atagur,’ in the map given in Mr. Rice’s Gazetteer of Mysore and 
Coorg, Vol. II, pp. 190-91. In the inscription the name occurs in the slightly different 
form of Atukir. The inscription is on a stone slab, set up in front of a temple 
known as that of the god ChalléSalinga, about a quarter of a mile to the north of the 
village. The temple is mentioned in the inscription, by the name of Challésvara. 

Towards the top of the stone there are, in connection with part of the record, the 
sculptures of a dog and a boar fighting with each other; the dog is on the proper 
right, and the boar on the proper left; they occupy a space of about 3’ 2” broad by 
1’ 6” high.— Below this lies the inscription proper, lines 1 to 19, covering a space of 
about 4’ 11” broad by 4’ 0” high. At each side, however, of the bear and the dog, and 
along the top of the stone, there were left blank spaces, which were subsequently utilised 
for a slightly later additional record, consisting of four lines, which I. have numbered 
20 to 23. Lines 20 and 21 run up the proper right margin of the stone, curve round 
at the corner, run right along the top, and then curve down into the proper left margin. 
Line 22 breaks off on the proper right margin with the ppa of ppanneradum, and 
continues on the proper left margin, below the ends of lines 20 and 21. Line 23 is a 
short line,-lying below the ends of lines 20, 21, and 22, on the proper left margin. The 
writing is in a state of fairly good preservation throughout ; and, with the exception 
of two aksharas in line 4, the whole record can be made out with perfect certainty. The 


4. e, the bird Garuda, the vehicle of Vishnu. wit 
1 The name seems to be not an uncommon one, The maps show an ‘ Atagur,’ forty-nine miles north-east of Maisur, 
and an ‘ Adagur,’ eleven miles north by west of Hassan, 


168 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


estampages, however, are not suitable for lithography; and, the surface of the stone 
being apparently rather rough, it would probably be very difficult to obtain impressions 
which would serve that purpose.— The characters belong to the so-called Old-Kanarese 
alphabet, and are of the regular type of the period to which the record refers itself. 
The average size of the letters, both in the original inscription and in the addition, 

is about 14”.— The language is Old-Kanarese ; and, except for two verses in lines 15 to 
19, the whole record is in prose.— In respect of orthography the only points that call 
for special notice are (1) the use of vi for ri in mripa, line 1, prithuv?, line 2, and 
krishna, line 3; (2) the use of 6 for v in the word béra, lines 16, 18; (3) the occasional 
use of 8 for , e.g. in saka, line 1, and saktiy-dge, line 16; and (4) the doubling of s 
after r, in dr=ssagara, line 17. 

The inscription refers itself to the time of a king named Krishnaraja, whom, 
partly from the date that is given, and partly from the mention of a predecessor, 
we know to be Krishna III., a son of Améghavarsha III., of the Rashtrakita dynasty 
of Malkhéd: in the body of the inscription, he is also called Kannaradéva; and in 
the addition at the top of the stone, this form only of his name is used. We are 
told that he was making a display of triumph, after fighting against and killing a 
Chéla king or chief named Rajaditya, at a place called Takkdla.? The inscription 
then introduces a Ganga feudatory of his,’ called in the body of the record 
Permanadi, and in the addition Bituga,’ who, as we learn from the addition, had 
killed a certain Rachamalla,’ the son of Hreyapa, and (as the result) was ruling 
over a Ninety-six-thousand district, which is evidently the well-known Gangavadi 
Ninety-six-thousand. From the addition we also learn that it was Bituga himself 
who slew Rajaditya; treacherously, and while they were out taking the air together : 
and that, in approbation of the deed, Krishna III. gave to Baituga the districts known 
as the Banavase Twelve-thousand, the Belvola Three-hundred, the Purigere Three- 
hundred, the Kisukad Seventy, and the Bagendd Seventy.° The record then introduces 
a follower of Bituga, named Manalarata, of the Sagara lineage, with the hereditary 
title of “lord of Valabhi.” And it proceeds to state that, in recognition of his valour 
in battle, Permanadi-Batuga granted some land to a temple of the god Challésvara (a 
form of Siva) at the village of Atukar; a stone,— evidently the one bearing this 


* The fact that Rajaditya died in battle with Krishna TUL, is mentioned also in the large Leyden copper-plate grant 
(see Dr. Hultzsch’s Report No. 79, dated the 6th April 1891); the passage speaks of the “lordly elephant,” on which 
Rajaditya was riding. 

§ The use of the paramount title in dharma-mahérdjddhirdja must be taken, with the use of the name Satyavakya- 
Kongunivarman, to b. only an hereditary custom. The construction of the whole record, and the subject-matter of it, show 
clearly the natare of the relations between PermAnedi-Batuga and Krishna III. 

‘ This name occurs also in the body of the inscription, among the titles of Manalarata. That passage (1, 9) is pro. 
bably enough to show that Permauadi and Bituga were one and the same person. But the point is rendered quite certain . 
by the other reference to Béituga and Manalarata in ll. 21-23.— When I wrote the preceding remarks, I overlooked the faet 
that Bituga is distinctly called Permanadi-Batayya in the Hebbal inscription (see Ind. Ant. Vol. XII, p. 270). 

5 One might perhaps expect the name of Rajamalla, rather than RAchamalla, But the original very distinctly has- 
cha in the second syllable, 

§ Mr. Rice (Joc. cit., p. 21) summarised this part of the vecord thus :— “ Moreover, froma subsequent addition 
“engraved at the top of the same inscription, we learn that this Ganga king” [viz . the Satyavakya-Koagunivarman or more 
specifically the Permanadi-Bituga, of lines 5, 6,8 ] “was R&chamalla, the son of Ereyappa; also, that he delatel a riva} 
‘named Bituga, who then proposed to RAjAditya, the Chéla prince mentioned in the previous part, of the inscription; to join 
‘him in attacking Kannara Déva. His treachery becoming thus known, he was defeated and slain, and the provinces of which 
“he was governor absorbed into the Ganga territories,” Mr. Rice’s extract from the text (doe. cit.; p. 21, note 6) showed that 
this summary could not be correct, but did not suffice to indicate the real meaning with any sompletenses and certainty. 


ATAKUR INSCRIPTION OF THE TIME OF KRISHNA III. 169 


7 


inscription,— being set up, to commemorate the grant, on the spot where, a dog 
having been loosed against a boar, the boar and the dog killed each other. The 
inscription proper ends with two verses descriptive of the prowess of Manalarata. And 
from the addition. we learn that Bituga also granted, to Manalarata himself, the 
group of villages known as the Atuktr Twelve, and the village of Kéteydr of the 
Belvola country. 

In the date the only details given are the Saumya samnvatsara, scaled with 
Saka-Sarivat 872 (current) (A.D. 949-50), expressed in words. This falls within the 
limits of the dates already obtained for Krishna IIT. And all else that can be said is 
that, as, by the southern luni-solar system of the cycle, which is the only one that can 
be made applicable in this case, the Saumya samnvatsara coincided with Saka-Sarhvat 
871 as an expired year, we have in this record another clear instance of the use of 
a current Saka year. 

This record refers toa variety of places. Atakir itself is mentioned, as Atukar, 
in the inscription proper (1. 12), and in the addition at the tcp of the stone (1. 22); and 
the latter passage shows that it was the chief town of a group of twelve villages. The 
inscription also mentions (1. 10) a neighbouring village named Belatur, in the Kelale 
néd; but for these names I cannot find any representatives in the map. It gives 
Takkéla (1. 4) as the name of the place where Rajaditya was slain; this, again, I cannot 
identify. In the titles of Permanadi-Bituga it mentions the town of Koldla and the 
Nandagiri mountain (1.5). Mr. Rice (e.g. Mysore Inscriptions, p. xxviii) has taken 
Koldla to be the same with the Kélahalapura of the Eastern Ganga records, and 
has identified it with “ K6lar, in the east of Maisir.” The identity of the two names, 
Kolala and Kélahala, is probably established by the statement, in the eastern grants, that 
K6lahala was in the Gangavadi vishaya (Ind. Ant., vol. XVIII., p. 170). The identi- 
fication cf the place with K6élar may be correct; but Ido not know of any conclusive. 
proof of this point: and I notice, in the map, a small village named ‘Kolala’ close 
to Dévardyadurg in the Kortegiri Taluka of the Tumkdr District, Maisir ; this seems to 
me to suggest that Kolala may possibly be the ancient name of Dévarayadurg itself. 
Nandagiri has been identified by Mr. Rice (Mysore Inscriptions, p. xlv) with Nandidurg, 
a fortified hill in the ChikballApur Taluka of the Kélar District, Maisdr, And finally, 
in the titles of Manalarata, the inscription mentions the town of Valabhi (1. 7-8), which 
is, of course, the well-known Valabhi in KAthidwdd. The reference is of interest, as 
being the only one from Southern India that is known to me; but, whether it may be 
taken as implying that, like Manalarata, the rulers of Valabhi themselves claimed 
to belong to the lineage of Sagara, seems not very clear. The addition at the top of 
the stone first mentions a province called the Ninety-six-thousand: this is undoubtedly 
the well-known Gangavadi Ninety-six-thousand, which probably included the whole 
of Maisdr, and is known, from many other inscriptions, to have been the hereditary 
territory of the Western Gangas ; towards the north it extended as far as Lakkundi, 
near Gadag, in Dharwad (Inscriptions at Sravana-Belgola, No. 53). It then mertions 
a province and four districts which were given by Krishna III. to Bituga; .e. the 
feudatory government of which was entrusted to Batuga. The province is the well- 
known Banavase Twelve-thousand, which took its appellation from one of the ancient 


forms of the name of the modern Banaw4si in North Kanara. Of the districts the 
: Zz 


170 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


‘ first ig the Belvola Three-hundred. This district is equally well-known; and its name, 
being derived from the Kanarese dele, ‘ growing corn, a crop,’ and pola, hola, ‘a field,’ 
means ‘the country of luxuriant crops,’ with reference to the fertility of the rich black- 
soil which constitutes one of its chief features. It included Gadag in the Dhdrwad 
- ‘District (Ind. Ant., Vol. II, p. 297), Annigere in Dharwid (Ind. Ant., Vol. XII, p. 220; 
apparently Annigere was then, A.D. 866, the capital of the district), Kurtakéti 
in Dhdrwid (Ind. Ant., Vol. VII, p. 218), Nargund in Dharwad and Hiliin Belgaum 
(Ind. Ant., Vol. XII, p. 47; here the name is written Belvala, and the district is 
said to be a part of the Kuntala vishaya), and Kukkantir in the Nizam’s Dominions 
(Ind, Ant., Vol. IV, p. 275; here the name is written Beluvala, in Nagari characters). 
From the wording. of the passage in line 22 of the present inscription it seems not to 
have included Atakir. The second is the Purigere Three-hundred. This, again, is a 
very well-known district, taking its appellation from the ancient Kanarese name of 
Lakshméshwar in the Miraj State, within the limits of the Dh4rwad District. The third 
is the Kisukéd Seventy. This was in later times one of the divisions of the hereditary 
territory of the Sindas of Erambarage; and the chief town of it (Jour. Bo. Br. RB. 
Ag. Soe., Vol. XII, p. 272) was Kisuvolal or Pattada-Kisuvolal, which is the modern 
_ Pattadakal in the Bijapur District, near Badimi. ‘To the south it included (éd., p. 257) 
Kiru-Narayangal, which is to be identified with Kodikop, a hamlet of Naregal in 
the Rén Taluk4é, Dharwad. And the fourth is the Bagenad Seventy. This is plainly 
identical with the Bagadage Seventy, or, Bagadige ndd, which was another of the 
divisions of the Sinda territory. I have only recently obtained the means of localising 
precisely the position of this district, and of determining the town from which it took 
‘its name. ‘That town is Bagalkét in the Bijapur District. It has long been known 
to me that the rustics call this place ‘ BAngadikéte ;’ the popular explanation of which 
is that some Nawdb assigned it to his wife for pin-money (Jit. for bangles, béigadé), 
And I had a suspicion, but no more, that it might be the ancient Bagadage or Bagadige. 
- All doubt has now been removed by my examination of an inscription on a stone which 
stands in the courtyard of the Taluka Kachéri at Bagalkét, and was brought, I under. 
stand, from the neighbouring village of Hérkal, and which mentions “the famous 
capital, Bagadageya-kéte,” (srimo[d-r)djadhani Bagadag{elya-kéteya Sri-miila|-[sthén- 
d|dhi[pati|] Nilakantha-panditadévaru; lines 9-10). Taken with the rustic appel- 
lation, this is quite sufficient to establish the identity of the two names, Bagadage 
and Bagalkét. And finally, in line 22, the addition mentions the village of Kéteydr 
of the Belvola country. This place I cannot identify with any certainty ; but it may 
possibly be either Kurtakdéti in Dharwad, or the small village of ‘ Kotoor,’ 3 miles west 
of Koppal in the Nizam’s Dominions (Lat. 15° 20’ N., Long. 76° 10’ E.). 

There can be, I think, no doubt that the Ereyapa of this inscription is the Ganga 
king Ereyapa or Ereyapparasa, ruler of the Gangavadi Ninety-six-thousand, of the 
Bégir inscription (edited by me, ante, Vol. I, p. 346 ff). This record, therefore, fixes 
the period of the events recorded in the Bégir stone, and adds another interesting link 
in the history of the Western Gangas. It shows internal dissensions among them; for 
Permanadi-Bituga, himself a Ganga (see lines 5, 6), acquired the province by killing 
RAchamalla, the son of Ereyapa; and Ereyapa, though he has been stamped by Mr. Rice 
as an “usurper” (e.g, Mysore Inscriptions, pp. xliv, xlv), was most distinctly of the 


ATAKUR INSCRIPTION OF THE TIME OF KRISHNA III. a 


Ganga lineage (see ante, Vol. I, p. 349). Also, the construction of the record, and the 
grant of districts to Batuga by Krishna IIL., distinctly prove that at this period the 
Gangas were feudatories of the Rashtrakitas. 

Incidentally it may be noted that, as the period of Ereyapparasa is now known to 
be about A.D, 949, it follows that there is some real probability of the Ayyapadéva of 
the Bégir record being identical with the Western Chalukya Ayyana I., whose period 
was two generations before A.D, 973-97. 

Among the territory given by Krishna III. to Batuga was the Banavase Twelve- 
thousand. This point is of interest, because this province was the principal component 
of the territory of the Kadambas of Banawdsi and Hangal; and the present record 
shows that they had not the ancient, or at least the uninterrupted, enjoyment of their 
possessions, which their inscriptions seem to imply. 


TEXT.’ 


1 Svas[t]i Sa(sa)ka-nri(nri)pa-kal-atita-samvatsara-sa (sa) tangal-entu-nur-elpatt-erada- 
neya Sau(sau)myam-emba 

2 samvatsarazh pravarttise [I1*] Svasti Améghavarisha*déva-sriprithuvi*vallabha- 
paramésvara-parama- 

3 bhatt[a]jraka-padapankaja-bhramara[m]  ujfri]pa-Tri[né]tran-ane-vedengam yana- 
gaja-mallam kachchegarh Kri(kri)shnardjam srimat 

4 Kan{n jaradéva[ x | . . 4(?)vajam Chéla-Rajadityana méle — [ba]ndu 
Takkéladol=kadi kondu bijayam-geyyutt-ildu [1*] 

5 Sva{st]i [SJatyavakya-Kongunivarmma-dharm[m jamaharajadhirdjam Koldla-pura- 
var-éSvaram Nandagiri-ndtham 

6 Srimat Permmaénadigal mnanneya-Ganga jaya(d-ulttaranga Ganga-G[angélya 
Ganga-Narayana tan=alu 

7 Svasti Sakala-léka-paritap-dvi(?)hata-[pra]bhiv-avatari[ta]-Ganga"-pravah-édara- 
Sagara-vamsa Va- 

8 labhi-puravar-ésvaran-udara-B hagirathan=iriva-bedengam Sa[gara]-Trinétram 
senase-migarivom 

9 kadan-aika-Su($d)drakam Biatugan-ankakiram ‘srimat Manalarata[ng-a]nuvaradol 
mechchi bédi-koll=endo- 

10 de dayeya mere-vol(?ll)=emba KaAliyarhn daye-geyy-endu kondand naya[m] 
Kelale-nada Belattra padu- 

11 vana deseya moradiyo] piri[dum pajndige vittode pandiyum ndyum-oda- 
sattuvadarkke- 

12 y=Atuktirol Challésvarada munde kallan-nadisi piriya kereya kelage Malti- 
kdlangadol=-ir-kka(kkha)nduga- 

18 manna[m] kottar-A  mannan-okkal nAdan=4lvornn”-dran-=Alvor-1 mannan= 
alidon=4 niya geyda pA&pama{ih] kondom- 


. 7 From the inked est::mpages. potice that Sanderson’s Kanarese Dictionary gives nana as a 
8 Read °varsha®. variant of nanna. 
9 Read °prithivi® or °prithvi°. 1 Read gangé or gdnga. 


"© We should expect tann(a), with the double mm. But I 2 Bead °Alvon®. 


172 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


14 n%=4 sthanaman=4lva goravan=4 kallarh pajisad= -undar-appode* naya geyda 
papamarh konda[n} [(I*] Om [II*] 

15 Urad"=idir-Anta Chdla-chaturanga-balangalan=atti mutti talt-iriv-edeg-Orvvar= 
appodam=idirchchuva 

16 gandaran-4mpev-endu pottalisuva’ bi(vi)raram mnereye kéne(na)me Chélane” 
sa(sa)ktiy-age talt-iridudan-4ve(? me) ka- 

17 ndev-ene mechchador-4r=-Ssagara-Trinétranam {| Narapati benno] =i|don=idir- 
antudu vairi-samdham-illi 

18 machcharisuvar-ellarum  seraguv-Aldapor-int-ire nendu singad-ant-ire Hari 
bi(vi)ra-Lakshmi nerav-Ag-ire Ché- 

19 la{na]-kétey-emba sindhurada ir-Agramazn biriye pdyidam kadan-aika- 
Su(sd)drakam [1l*] Om [I*] 


Tue ADDITION AT THE TOP OF THE STONE. 


20 Svasti Sri-Ereyapana magath RAchamallanam Baitugam kadi kondu tombhatt- 
aru-sisiramumam” Alutt-ire [1* ] Kannaradéva[m] Chélanam kaduvandu 
Bitugam Rajadityanam bisugeye kallan-agi gurig=-ridu 

21 kadi kondu  Banavase-pannirchchd(? rchchha)siramuz Be] voia-maintrum 
Purigere-mimnt um” Kisukad-elpattum Bagendéd-elpattuva(ma)m Bitugange 
Kannaradévam raechchu-gottam [Ii*] Batuganurmh” Manalarata- 

22 na munde_ nind=-iridudarkke mechchi Atuk[tJ]r-ppanneradur belvolada 

_ Kéteydrumam  balga|m] 
23 [me]*chchu-gottam [l!*] Mangala-maha-éri [11*] 


TRANSLATION. 


Hail! The sasnvatsara named Saumya, {which is) the eight hundred and seventy- 
second (iz) the centuries of years that have gone by from the time of the Saka king, 
being current :— 

(Line 2).— Hail! When Krishnaraja (III.), the glorious Kannaradéva,— a very 
bee at the water-lilies which (were) the feet of Amdghavarshadéva (III.), the favourite 
of fortune and of the earth, the Paraméévara, the Paramabhattdraka ; a very Trinétra 
(Siva) among kings; a marvel in giving support (or, in resistance) ; a hero against wild 
elephants; a (real) fighter (or, disputant),— having . ..... . . . come upon 
the Chéla, Rajaditya, and having fought and killed (Aim) at Takkéla, was going in 
triumph :— 


(L.5).— Hail! (He who has the hereditary titles of ) the pious Mahdrajadhiraja 
Satyavakya-Kongunivarman ; the lord of Kolala, the best of towns; (and) the lord 


3 Read kondon’, 

M4 This seems to be the reading ; but °appod=é would be better. 

Metre: Champakaméala; and in the following verse. 

16 The prdésa is wrong here ; in the third syllable of this word, there ought properly to be ri, instead of Zé. 
V This ne was omitted, and then was inserted below the line. 

8 Read pdyidan=4. 

Read °sdsiramam ; the copulative ending is uot required here, 

© Read °miiniirum. 

1 Read bitugam ; here, again, the copulative ending is not required. iS 


* I cannot find the place where this syllable, me, stands in the original; perhaps the akshara was omitted 
altogether. 


ATAKUR INSCRIPTION OF THE TIME OF KRISHNA III. 173 


of the mountain Nandagiri,— (véz.) the illustrious’ Permanadi, the truthful Ganga, 
the aroh of victory, a very Gangéya among the Gangas, a very Narayana among the 
Gangas,— 

(L. 7).— Hail !,—- being pleased in battle with his follower, the illustrious Manala- 
rata,— who is of the lineage of Sagara, which brought down the stream of the (river) 
Ganga through (és) prowess that was unimpeded in causing the affliction of all mankind; 
(ho has the hereditary title of) the lord of Valabhi, the best of towns; who is as noble as 
Bhagiratha; who is a marvel among men who pierce ; who is a very Trinétra among the 
Sagaras; who cuts off noses when he is angry ; who is a very Sidraka (devoted) only to 
war ; (avd) who is the arithmetician of Bituga,— said “ Prefer a request!” Thereupon, 
Kaliya, who is called “ the shining river (?) of kindness,” said, * Do (this) favour !” Then 
they loosed his dog at a [great] boar, on the hill in the western quarter of (the village of) 
Belatir of (the district called) Kelale ndd. And then, having set up a stone in front 
of the temple of (the god) Challésvara at Atukir, at (the place where) the boar and 
the dog killed each other,” he (Perm4nadi) gave™ land yielding two khandugas (of grain), 
at the site called Maltikalanga below the large tank. 

(L. 13).— Any cultivator (who destroys) that land, (or) the ruler of the district (if 
he does so), (or) any governors of the village who destroy * this land,— he incurs (the 
guilt of) the sin committed by that dog! If the Gorava, who presides over that locality, 
eats without doing worship to that stone, he incurs (the guilt of) the sin committed by 
(that) dog! Om! 

(L. 15).— Saying ‘“ We ourselves saw how powerfully the Chéla, like a male 
buffalo in cottu, approached and pierced the heroes who were vaunting (their) prowess * 
in saying ‘ Pursuing and besetting the forces of the army of the Chéla which, blazing 
(with wrath), have opposed (us), we will resist the valiant men who confront (we), if 
(indeed) there be any (to make a stand) at the place of meeting and piercing,’ ””— what 
people have failed to express approbation of him who is a very Trinétra among the 
Sagaras? The king was at (his) back; a multitude of enemies opposed (Aim) in front ; 
all the people here, emulously rivalling each other, are bathed (in perspiratiun) to the 
(very) edges of (their) garments ;— under these circumstances he, a very Stdraka 
(devoted) only to war, dripping (with sweat), with the assistance of (the god) Hari (and) 
the brave Lakshmi, passed on like a lion, cleaving open the forehead of the elephant 
that was called “ the fortress of the Chéla.” ” Om! 


THE ADDITION AT THE Top oF THE STONE. 


(L. 20).— Hail! When Batuga, having fought and killed Rachamalla, the son 
of the glorious Ereyapa, was governing the Ninety-six-thousand :— At the time when 
Kannaradéva was warring against the Chéla, Batuga treacherously,” while (they) were 
taking the air (together), aimed at and pierced, and thus fought against and killed, 


%3 Vit. “ died together.” 

34 Jit. “they gave ” (kottar) ; the word is in apposition with permmdnadiga] (I. 6). 

% Lit. “ who destroys” (alidon); this sentence illustrates well the change of construction from the singular to the 
plural, and back again (compare Ind. Ant., Vol. XIX, p. 146, note 15). The words “this land” are rather unnecessary after 
the ‘that land’ which stands at the beginning of the sentence. 

* pottalisuva seems to be some derivative from pétari, ‘a brave man ;’ see note 16 above, regarding the prdsa. 

% See note 2 above. 

2 lit. “ as a thief,” 


174 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


RaAjaditya; and then Kannaradéva yave to Butuga, in token of approbation, the Banavase 
'welve-thousand, the Be}vola Three-hundred, the Purigere Three-hundred, the Kisukad 
Seventy, and the Bagenad Seventy. 

(L, 21).— Being pleased with the manner in which Manalarata stood out in front 
and pierced (his foes), Bituga gave (/o him), in token of approbation, for subsistence, 
the Atukdr Twelve, and the village of Kéteytir of (the) Belvola (country). (May there ° 
be) auspicious and great good fortune ! 


XIIIL—KARITALAI STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE REIGN OF THE CHEDI 
LAKSHMANARAJA. 


By Proressor F. Kretnorn, Pa.D., C.I.E.; GOrrincen. 


The stone which bears this inscription’ was found at Kaéritalai, a village in the 
Mudwara Subdivision of the Jabalpur District of the Central Provinces (Indian Allas, 
sheet No. 89, Latitude 24° 3’ North, Longitude 80° 46’ East), whence it has been re- 
moved to the Jabalpur Museum. And an account of the contents’ of the inscription has 
been given in Sir A. Cunningham’s Archeological Survey of India Reports, vol. 1X, 
page 81. I now edit the text from a rubbing, supplied to me by Dr. Burgess. 

The inscription is only the concluding portion of an apparently much longer in- 
scription the upper part of which is missing. The writing of what remains covers a 
space of 3’ 8” broad by 4 33” high; but of this, again, a large piece, about 1’ broad by 
1’ 8” high, is broken away at the lower proper right corner, and a small piece at the 
upper left corner. Besides, the stone is broken in several pieces, and some aksharas 
have thereby become damaged or illegible in the body of the inseription. The average 
size of the letters is 1". The characters, well formed and skilfully engraved, are Nagari 
of about the end of the 10th century A.D. The language is Sanskrit; and, excepting 
the words yaé=cha, in line 5, and kit vahund, in line 26, the inscription isin verse. In 
respect of orthography it will be sufficient to state that d is throughout written by the 
sign for v, and that the sign of the jihvdémdléya once occurs in line 9, and"the sign of the 
upadhmdaniya once in line 30. 

The missing introductory portion of the inscription in all probability contained a 
number of verses eulogising the earlier Chedi (or Kalachuri) rulers of Tripuri, espe- 
cially Yuvarajadeva and Lakshmanaraja, who are actually mentioned in the sequel. 
In verses 2-6 of the extant text we are told that in the family of the sage BharadvAja 
there was a Brahman, named Bhakamisra, who was chief minister of the king Yuvara- 
jadeva; and in verses 7-17 that he had a son, Somesvara (in verse 9 described as 
bhatta-Somesvara-dikshita), who became minister of the Chedi lord, the illusirious © 
Lakshmanaraja. And the proper object of the inscription is to record that this 
Someévara built a temple of Vishnu, at which the inscription evidently was put up, and 
which is glorified in verses 18-29. Beyond this, verses 1-29 contain nothing of interest. 


1 See Sir A. Cunniogham’s Archeological Survey of India Reports, vol. IX, p.8; also Dr. Fleet’s Gupta Inscrip- 
tions, p. 117. 

2 This account, which no doubt was furnished by some native assistant, is very incorrect. Here it will be sufficient to 
say that the word, which was interpreted to denote a place called Pdtangir is really a name of the planet Saturn; see line 
24 of the text. 


KARITALAI STONE INSCRIPTION. 175 


From verse 30 it appears that near the temple there was a pura (or brahmapura, as 
it is more commonly called) for eight learned Brahmars; and the rest of the inscription 
enumerates various donations; made for their maintenance and in favour of the temple 
generally. Tothe Brahmans mentioned the king, apparently Lakshmanar4ja, gave the 
village of Dirghasakhika (verse 80). To the temple he assigned, on the occasion of a 
solar eclipse, another village, the name of which has not been preserved (verse 31) ; while 
his queen, Rahada, gave the village of Chakrahradi (verse 32). Another donation 
was made, on the occasion of a lunar eclipse, by the illustrious Sanka[ra gana, the king’s 
son(?)], a devout worshipper of Vishnu (verse 33); and at a solar eclipse were given (it 
is not certain by whom) the village Chhallipataka in the district of Dhavalahara 
and the village Antarapata (verse 34). Several fields, and the village Vatagartikaé in 
the M4la ‘group of twelve,’ are besides mentioned among the donations to Vishnu, 
after the founder of the temple called ‘the holy Somasvadmideva, in the mutilated 
verses 35-37°, And finally verses 38-42 enumerate various taxes and tolls* which had to 
be paid in favour of the temple. 

The kings Yuvardjadeva and Lakshmanardja, mentioned in this inscription, 
undoubtedly are Keydravarsha-Yuvardjadeva and his son Lakshmanar4ja, the 
father of Samkaragana, of the Bilhari inscription (ante, vol. I, page 253) ; and accord- 
ingly the present inscription is older than the Bilhbari inscription, and must have been 
composed some time between the middle and end of the 10th century A.D. 

Of the localities mentioned in the inscription, none have been identified with cer- 
tainty; but I suspect Dirghasakhika to be the village Dighee of the maps, about 6 
miles south-east of Karitalai (or Kareetullae). 


Text.’ 


2. "sxenfe verfa areraetorara wanted | 
ule atadera ve a wa: orereaerfardt 
qrareat(-qr)wusrad a(a)elacha lerercflar}] Oo — [a*}?—[1). 


3. aMTEeTTAACTATe UTA wT FATT A 
arafers: fafa: weaeqareterareeya: uw —[2]. 
efewafrrnt firofet] . 7 


3 The mutilated state of verse 37 makes it impossible to say whether the word kAdrivdpa, which occurs in it, should 
be explained to mean ‘a field sown with a khdré of grain’, or taken asa proper name. If it were a proper name, we should 
probably have here the older name of Karitalai. 

4 I am unable to explain fully all the particulars stated in the mutilated verses 38-42, : Verse 40 again contains the. 
word dest, mentioned ante, p. 130, note 83. 

5 From Sir A. Cunningham’s rubbing, supplied to me by the editor. 

6 Of this line only the lower part of about half the number of aksharas, which it contained, is i het but what 
remains is sufficient to show that this was not the first line of the inscription. 

7 The last akshara of the preceding line must have bee n¥. The poet is speaking of the Daitya Bali, with whom 
he evidently compares a king (probably the Chedi Lakshmanar4ja), who must have been spoken of in the lost portion of 
the inscription. 

8 Metre: Sarddlavikridita. 

* [should have expected to read here 4H WTATHAACAA TUTAaT. 

10 Metre: Uprjati. 

1 The aksharas, here broken away, probably were Be, i. TA. 


176 


L. 4. 


10. 


11. 


12. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


array a(a) at a Aaya | 
sata: afacta werefaueiaanaefad uw? —[3}. 
aenafafqaramaqaanratzeaaracetararaatra wfc | 
fefrenygs[a]- 


creraaga: age afaacariisraeaa: aafaq uw —[4]. 
aa ti 
walatea a tata aera A aT as 
afrarreqa’ + quaT[ ay ]- 
cequaraautta ga w® —[5]. 
sara a wyatiaeal Wrst UTAaai Tare | 
waatd areareetat afar gettaare uw” —[6). 
a afer 4- 
2 acafun(a)at vefatumaaraaaataratay | 


a arent tered arcafagu: ararect:” a aaretaa: ofa te staat sfa n’ —[7]. 
a 
aureafaufaaatea drafas faafa a: eae a(a)aa | 
TRIUTATNT aH aaa ye Maat av” —[S]. 
wat HAT ale wT]: 
waaiee: wat: ween user: | 
aheMaattare wea: Hargrafad wat a: wv” —[9). 
ae; afeaarearatraa: gerqariient- 
aan [et |ar- 
gy ua feaaratel fate: earfea 1 
afiunaaaeafaay: Fad (ayataty: 
aenagquniad arfaa arsagergar wv”? —[10]. 
aula] aa @- 
aq qaaiaaaa | 
agnufact of afxfreat™ fe far 1° —[11). 
aoreanfaya[iaeqeiaerent [w?]alerlearen: 1 
sett fa [aaa] [far lwarea [ar j- 
feat wearte Fa wa: uv —[12). 
saenfaet fafaceta Pataqar- 


aaat wt qaafa a QTAITT BIT | 


aa tft wag eS Q U- 

2 Metre: Udgiti. 1 Metre: Sikharini. 

13 Metre: Malini. ‘20 Metre: Vasantatilaka. 

44 Originally @Wracatega was engraved, but the first 4 Originally Heq:, altered to HIT. 
aksharas @ are struck out, 22 Metre: Indravajra. 

¥ Originally sfafera’, but altered to faaty°, 2 Metre: Sardilavikridita. 

1° Metre : Upendravajri. 4 Read away and emt. 

7 Metre: Upajati. 25 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubb) 

* It is somewhat doubtful whether qa: or °aufa: %® Metre: Upajati. 


Was engraved. 


KARITALAI STONE INSCRIPTION. 177 


iets at- 
ad DyMeTATTT Asaat Ge walt” —[13]. 
waatun Taafetast Walled: aaa 
ateaiaa efe unacfrar[ janet (sa) eq (|) 


@ - 
14, ify trate wanted ute auareat 
ag ar sfa ar(arjimatferayara [alearget® wv —[14)]. 
fafa fanfaaifeanaaaaaa: | 
(a*|[ale@ eeawe atage=[al- 
To: fer, w —[15]. 


[wet] aarmagat tufncfa aet vifad saa 
wid usarfenetiaayeiatiatatamtaans | 
waa; (aura: watfa a att eaafa- 

16. aee- 

Be MueMaaqIaTs F aad qevara: nu” —[16]. 
ata” antares falafa eta ufasatfafaa | 

17. Wawa muaerge etarat wv? —[17]. 
arretanartt aa afaat cae Tage: 

as ferteafafaaaareatieantga: | 
aaa: [ua jateat wuz: Gefaaatfaat(a:) 
aati (ar): 

18, Bet atiafatd asradifaya uv’ —(18]. 
ayia a(a)fetaicura: afeqataawaararata: | 
[fa] U wv sa aaeat fautia vacfaafeanaatta vol: 1%} —[19]. 

19. waemaifa g(t] carat faagfaatefa(fi)afawen: un 
[alaramfeua eraattigigaria)] UV vo [atlaaa vw” —(20]. 
qaUAAAaoTa aaa Hi saa lea [z |- 

20. Oiaifwaa wala) | 
aaa a laa waAMaTeTAaiee Wa Agataa faa vw? —[21]. 
[slaatat uftagt qua awa aa: | 
afa geval aTquaa- 


27 Metre, Mandakranta. 34 This correction appears to have been made already in 


28 Tho «’shara in brackets was originally omitted, and is | the original. , 
engraved below the line. 39 Metre, Sarddlavikridita, 


22 Metre, Sardilavikridita. 36 Metre, Pushpitagra. 
x Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). : 37 Metre, Upajati. 
31 Metre, Sragdhara. 38 The dkshara in brackets was originally omitted, and is 


2 The exact meaning of this line I do not understand. engraved below the line, 
33 Metre, Arya. 39 Metre, Malini. 
ad 


178 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


L, 21: a yew(aja uw” —[22]. 
wuuztracreatfarauannt faacaraftanaauaiaay | 
atiaqud aragarfana fasacaquirat aaa." 

22, ; fet]fa uw —[23]. 
SaTaR alae aacanaa le feMezay: 
ura: utafeani ucafa ane amataladel® | 
US Reatreayefagatat- 
Pad GY Kas 
ara ara aarTat" aaafa faatraaam was —[24]. 
aafa aquefaamat aca fe feaaat gqantaatta | 
a- 
4% SUV —lendaitm yanafafaday org ateaad 1° —[25 | 
aapiinerafuagaraaane | 
uratate (fe arafacaaraay 
25. u — [n*]” —[26]. 
—-——vv — (aktiearratergeyfat 
ue & aa aca(wty lafaanr frcaata: | 
at wagfadiary fagd anrataewa 
qararta [al 
26. SO FS aS 279 
fa a(a)eaT 0 
axa aratjeusna faad ufaarfa a: | 
azey aqewraaarwar (aad fay: uw? —[28]. 
MUreAAAAa- 


bo 
| 


aa areraragat (sacra fraaehaaren: 
amaatata wrarhynet qraeaqarent- 
aaaiast 
28. Sy YY ——U— — fied 0? —[29). 
aatfan(qt] afaasl weraataa | 
gamfanaramtal waaay: i —[30]. 
WAAR WA ZaT- 


” Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh),- 46 Metre, Malini. 

“ Read Swat and ataafere?, 7 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh), 
® Metre, Malini, Metre, Sarddlavikridita. 

“ This may have beer altered 1v “at in the original, * Metre, Sloka (Anushtabh), 
* Possibly this has been altered to aarat. ° Metre, Sragdhara. 


46 Netre, Sragdhara, 51 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubb), 


KARITALAI STONE INSCRIPTION. 179 


L. 29. cee aS 
wee eee . TSH AS UTA: UW —[31]. 
BUTFAAT WAIT A GlqaT A WET | 
wae aMeatae wETeat afaerTa n° —[32]. 
as . 

30. Eel aKote. Stat on ssa Al 
CATT STAM UST Tiare amacogra: yy! —(33]. 
Waawaga(a)s yTasesEfaureg ara | 
UTNCALATS Tee Sat- 

31, ~ «+ (v*]* —[84]. 

Si hee ere ede ea 
AMA TEA Ba eremafusy °° —[35]. 
ATATSTSUA Ua Ura azafaat 
aala waa Arara[a] 

82. oe ee ss [n] —[86]. 
St, are ee pera es Ch a 
araaearfazara ariarafaera: » —|37]. 
Guaaaal: Ura” Waraarent sey | 
ereqiafy araran: at- 

33. pickete a hare AN jor ieods 


fauaat act wrat stevifead aa un [39]. 
aaraaga Sfaerraa wseaq | 
areetfanay F aT(at) ei UTe- 

34, » ss. [v"] —[40]. 
eo en ete ete eeu sits en er eure isa 
[arafaararra cearerad et 1 (it) —[41]. 
GUAT TAT UAT hire | 
aafraraaea Awe wae eet 1 — [42]. 


2 Arya 55 Metre, Arys. 3 
5 aa Se (Anushtubh). 56 Metre, from here to the end, Sloka (Anushtubh), 
5 Metre, Udgiti. §7 All this is quite clear in the rubbing, re 


180 EPIGRAPIITA INDICA. 


XIII.—NAGPUR STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE RULERS OF MALAVA. 


Tur [Vixrama] YEAR 1161. 
By Prorgessorn F. Kietnory, Pu.D., C.1.B., Gorrmncen. 


This inscription, which is on a slab of stone in the Ndgpur Museum, was first 
edited and translated into English, in 1843, by BAl GangAdhar Sastri, from a copy sent 
to him by Dr. Stevenson, who had received it from Mr. L. R. Reid.’ And a few years 
later it was re-edited, with a German translation, by Professor Lassen.” In addition to 
the previously published text Lasscn was enabled to use a copy of the text sent to him by 
Sir W. Erskine, which was reported to have been taken from a copper-piate at Sattara.* 
On the value of the two published editions it is unnecessary to express an opinion, 
but I may say that Professor Lassen once or twice has unjustly censured the Hindu 
translator for having misunderstood the original, in passages where tle English transla- 
tion, if not altogether correct, shows its author to have had a fairly accurate idea of what 
the writer of the original meant to say. And I must add that, for the proper under- 
standing of some really difficult verses, more help may be derived from the English than 
from the German translation. I now re-edit this inscription from excellent estampages, 
prepared and supplied to me some time ago by Dr, Fleet and Dr. Burgess. 

The main body of the inscription contains 40 lines of writing which cover a space 
of 4’ 53” broad by 2’ 8}" high; and beneath it, and separated from it by a narrow empty 
space, is an additional line about 4’ 114” long. No part of the writing is entirely lost, but 
the lower half of the stone has suffered greatly, apparently from exposure to the weather, 
and in consequence many single aksharas and whole groups of words are either badly 
damaged or only faintly visible. I nevertheless hope that, with the exception of about 
a dozen syllables (in lines 21, 33, and 87) which I have been unable to restore, and a 
few others which have been marked as doubtful, my transcript may be taken to be an 
accurate and trustworthy copy of the original text. The size of the letters in lines 1-40 is 
about %”, in the separate line 41 about {”. The characters are Nagari of the beginning 
of the 12th century A. D.; they include the sign of the jihvdmiliyas in vashpambhalikana, 
in line 12. The language is Sanskrit; and, excepting the introductory or om namo 
Bhdratyai and the date sas 1161 at the end of line 40, the inscription is throughout in 
verse. The whole has been written and engraved with such care and accuracy that the 
orthography is almost perfect and calls for very few remarks. Except in the word 
nirbbhara, in line 16,’ the letter 6 is throughout denoted by the sign for v. Besides, 
attention need only be drawn to the wrong spellings °shanna for °shanna, in lines 6 
and 10, nistrimésa for nistrimga, in line 16, chakshuhkarnnam for chakshushkarnnem, in 

1 See Journal, Bombay Asiatic Society, vol. I, p. 259. 

2 See Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde des Morgenlandes, vol. VII, p. 194. 

% According to Lassen his copy was marked on the title page ‘Sanscrit No. 57,’ and he believed it to have beloneed to 
a collection of transeripts of inscriptions at Bombay. Having studied Lassen’s text as well as his notes, and compares his 
various readings with my estampuages, I feel certain that, what Lassen was told about the origin of the copy sent to him, was 
incorrect, and that there never has existed such a copper-plate as is mentioned by him. Inmy opinion, what he received from 
Sir W. Erskine was simply another transcript of the stone inscription, made by a Pandit and brought to Bombay. To prove 
this in detail would be a waste of time. It will be sufficient to say that Lassen’s copy furnishes no help wherever the stone is 
damaged, and that its readings in these places are just such as might be suggested by an intelligent Pandit. 


4 = S . oe Aya : . . ee . 
This sign of the jihvdméliya is hardly to be distinguished here from the sign for sh: 
* But not in line.41, where we read nirvhharau. 


NAGPUR STONE INSCRIPTION. ieesul 


line 24, tajiair for tajjiacr, in line 85, and vidhadhvan for vidhaddhvam, in line 41. The 
language is correct.’ It contains several uncommon words; but the only word which is 
used in a sense for which I can find no aathority is brahmdndakhanda, apparently denot- 
ing ‘the vault of heaven’ or ‘the firmament,’ in lines 5, 7,11, and18. As regards 
versification, the author has twice offended against an elementary rule of metrics, in 
line 3 of verse 28 and line 1 of verse 31. The style of the whole poem is highly bom- 
bastic and artificial, and the author has not without reason (in verse 57) exhorted his 
readers to exert themselves well and to make their intellect sharp as the point of kuga 
grass. 

The inscription is a Prasasti or laudatory account of the Paramara rulers of 
Malava, from Vairisimha (II.) to Lakshmadeva, the son of Udayaditya and 
(probably elder) brother of Naravarmadeva; but, compared with its great length, the 
actual facts reported in it are few indeed. Beginning with seven benedictory verses, the 
poet (in verses 8-15) tells the well-known fabie how on mount Arbuda (or Abti) the 
sage Vasishtha, when his wonderful cow Nandini was being carried off by Visvamitra, 
produced from the sacred fire the hero Paramara, who defeated Visvamitra and became 
afterwards the founder of the royal family here eulogized. The first king of this family, 
mentioned by the poet, is Vairisimha (vv. 16-1), He was succeeded by his son 
Siyaka (vv. 20-22); and after him came his son Mufijardja (vv. 23-25), Muijardja’s 
younger brother Sindhuraja (vv. 26-28), and Sindhurdja’s son Bhojadeva (vv. 29-81), 
The description of these five kings is purely conventional and for the historian worthless. 
In verse 32 the poet intimates that Bhojadeva’s end was unfortunate; and he relates 
that, during the troubles which then had befallen the realm, Bhojadeva’s relative 
Udayadditya became king, whose great achievement was that he freed the land from 
the dominion of (the Chedi) Karna who, joined by the Karnatas,’ had swept over the 
earth like a mighty ocean (vv. 32-34). Udayaditya was succecded by hisson Lakshma- 
deva, the glorification. of whom takes up no less than twenty verses (vv. 35-54). Accord- 
ing to the poet’s account Lakshmadeva subjugated the earth in all directions; but the 
only tangible and probably true facts mentioned arc an expedition undertaken against 
Tripuri (v. 39), the well-known capital of the Chedi kingdom, and perhaps some fights 
with the Turushkas or Muhammadan invaders alluded to in verse 54, which speaks of 
the king’s encampment on the banks of the river Vankshu, and contains a well-known 
play on the word kira,’ ' 

To the above laudatory account verses 55 and 56 add, that Lakshmadeva, at. the 
time of a solar eclipse, had granted, it is not clear to whom, two villages in the Vyapura 
mandala, and that his brother, the king Naravarmadeva, afterwards assigned the vil- 
lage of Mokhalapataka instead. Naravarmadeva, moreover, ordered (the architect) 
Lakshmidhara to build the temple at which this inscription was put up, and which is 
said to have been adorned with many eulogies and hymns composed by (the king) him- 
self, From this last remark I feel strongly inclined to belicve that this pragasti, the 
author of which is not mentioned, was likewise composed by no less a personage than 


the king Naravarmadeva. 


6 The use of udbhavat in the first compound of verse 20, for udbhava, I ascribe to an error of the writer. 

7 As Karna is joined here with the Karn&tas, so the lord of Chedi apparently is joined with the Karnatas iv the 
Uday pur Pragasti, ante, vol. I, p. 235, line 20, 

8 See, e.g., above, p. 15, verse 12; 


182 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


This main part of the inscription closes with the date, the (Vikrama) year 1161 = 
A.D. 1104-5. The additional line 41 (vv. 57 and 58)-appeals to the reader to study 
carefully and with impartiality and to appreciate properly the poem, here set before 
err history of the earlier Paramaras of Malava, down to Udayaditya, has been fully 
treated of by Distovsar Buhler, ante, vol. I, pp. 223-233. The names of the later rulers of 
the same dynasty I have given from their copper-plate grants in Indian Antiquary, 
vol. XIX, pp. 346-347. All these later records make Naravarman the immediate 
successor of Udayaditya, and so does the inscription from Madhukargadh, the sub- 
stance of which is given in the Transactions Roy. As, Soc., vol. I, p. 226. But from the 
present inscription it is clear that Udayaditya was succeeded by his son Lakshmadeva, 
and he by his brother Naravarman; and the dates available show that Lakshma- 
deva’s reign falls between the years A. D. 1080 and 1104. 


Tessa? 
1 Via st [0] att vat areal 4 

qareieaaryauarfeaaatea: | 
gaa zu: af anean afa wag a v’—[1]. 
ua Ud yanaata a wufadag at fawad | 
aa waauefadiaal urancnsagaarafa w’—[2]. 
atfa aaa fafrarat]” q- 

2. TAHA: | 
arary wale GAA: Bay a y'—[3]. 
weufiqupien wfafaafaalaagrr]" 
(ulstsacefena: faarefstwaen: fara: fre 0° —[4]. 
AAT ASTRA AA a(H) MIAH ATs | 
aea[arfa]- 

3. at yar Saeeraitaaay: wW’—[5]. 
area F Waa F Biatiarat a arenta a 

MIMAHIA @ aaa qrety errs F | 
aafa a faaued a und wma a aa a a- 
fearguquianaediafa 3 ata a au —[6]. 

amen wa[e]- 

4, w@ aararafaaaar | 
alfrafafharaiafaat fay: garg a: —[7]. 


° From impressions supplied to me by Dr. Fleet and 4 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubb). 


Dr. Burgess. * The aksharas in these brackets are almost entirely 
” Expressed by a symbol. : Tene 
” Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). "6 Metre, Rathoddhata. 
% Metre, Rathoddhata, 7 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 


3 Read faarat. The aksharas in brackets are much 8 Metre, Sarddlavikridita. 
damaged, but I believe the reading to be correct, There is © Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 
no doubt about the words atfa aay, 


NAGPUR STONE INSCRIPTION. 183 


afe wafrchreranicar atereaarrara- 
aatfaatafastea (fea) ara (ea) tara: aarairata (a Jen 
ae aaaaligate tract ararcag aAt- 
VEaqaTaaa- 
L. 5. aa (a) areata a’ —[s]. 
eatadnaawafad AWA Wawa 
RAT WAGAAATAaGA ARIAA WY F | 
ara araedqfa=nfa fafa: fa nefaaaai- 
BE aTAeMIzaufnefaaranaws y —[9]. 
aa fafea aafun- 

6. fuufaamararnamata aa feraafa | 
danaafa aerfana faga(an)ymiadadcfaaaraaet: u'—[10]. 
afaaefaci at: F ANATATAT AAT AT:- 

yatfadarterataaacfasetast afar: | 
aaaraayHafaay- 

7. at uted faqa(a) arett 

asTayatasd auaae(e) wwe ufa y°—[11]. 
faaraetafcgorafaafaadaneanaisaanaanda | 
ae fatincaquadnangqanatea vatiaaengan v—[12]. 
arate aeraa fafaudufaea: aifra- 

atfa- 

b, aifaarquiasaaterttednt afeeat | 

fastar afuta ta efaort defaare(=) fem 

att: quart sarqua: warfirarataay ?'—[13]. 
Usmasafanrarhaaagquratfaartaa: | 
qyaaafeainaaa dafanfaafaaeaa- 

9. > W—[14]. 
ATAU AT HAAAAT: BATA: | 
qeeaeala asaraaaasaa: uv $B —[15]. 
tifaafifis: fataafacuas farina. 

WaMaleraMaragaaanisraasatare: | 
AAA OT AAT Aas fara gana 
10. aicarfe- 
aratuaamayfeaafraarenisrraw: ’—[16]. 
wainifasanarTaad waaleana- 


2” Metre of verses 8 and 9, Sirddlavikridita. 24 Metre, Sardtilavikridita. 
21 Metre, Vasantatilakd, 25 Metre, Rathoddhata. 
22 Metre, Sardilavikvidita, 2° Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 


3 Metre, Vasantatilaka. 27 Metre, Sragdhara. 


184 


ae 


12, 


13. 


14. 


16. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Hracraaaree: HHT vera fea: | 
HOT ARU SAR ACURA TS TUT ITT- 
tylgafara (wu)arafay- 
waTaTaeer sa —[17]. 
UTaTa asaTqaraafaaraqatag FT BAT 
wampaaqgaateata a a(s) Meares | 
[alaatgaamnaraaaaatara feawa 
aerarfa wqaaafayataa: wataraa; wv —(18]. 
aaiay a fafeufeafag a aaaATy a 
aus a fgasi a qefaaratfatrst a a: | 
taau 4 fama 4 UINTaaea 7 
ARAYA vUAay wAfamtay cataurg | Se —[19]. 
aare fesotadraaaeaaag:aTEa- 
STAT) UTA COMTNTAHATEA, MANIA: | 
arfantfaasaafafaca a(q) awa seaT- 
geray fatiaad faale)utaa:” vararaa: 1 —[20]. 
AGMMAGS: BAgalsar F acfacfaaquafaqaasn: | 
aaaafa waaeia aaa gal syaataataa4- 
SUIT AAT 1” 
wareaaeeagafad at TATITAS 
al aaafarad a aeta wad aga | 
syarfa cautaag at war(at)fa aant a a: 
FAA IAARN: TAaaraTa sHusaT vn SS vu —[22]. 
aaTe- 
frre fartta (a) efaanrear (a) [gq] erat: 
nadafoaraurfasta ways BT | 
aia: ulacatfeuqurafagar aw yaruTaat 
Maa aas as AIA aA y —[23]. 
afaaufa staat afad: Hal: aA. 
fara 
aeavfaaftutauzaarquigawe: | 
mags latte [ag laacistaateea- 
Weswaarefaswaa (q) wwe: | — [24]. 
afar (fea) niaceaeraaat Fay (at) eat TH 
eae waa (Target SET We- 


28 Metre of verses 17-20, Sar dtilavikridita. 3° Metre, Malini. 


® Originally f¥azaT? was engraved, but it has been al- 
tered to faaeui®. 


31 Metre of verses 22-26, Sardilavikrtdita. 


NAGPUR STONE INSCRIPTION, 185 


hae afed | 
ayaradl faarafaacrerfarsr Has ¥2T- 


stale erie eafat daa feetrar: 1 S&B n —[25]. 
aareiee ufsa: waa: haayesitas: 
MMe TSTMTTRaS Ale Mjaatsa: | 
a: aarag- 
18, area fase aA AA- 
watataawaray(zaarAsaETa: nv —[ 26). 
asta afata aarfaasids at atau teat aTEs: 
faazatfenrmaeyuecagted sa waarearatenterra: 1° aa: 
TTA Wet- 
19. ATMA FT a(a)e RaTAaAS F 
wart aastuqa [qalat [a(a)arew lures 4 
am: ATAPAIAS 7 weld qawes a 
aaa fafatad oafeg: werfs gatas: u SB v°—[28]. 
FERED CACC CRIS ICILG 
20. wETarsaa(wa)cafa(fa)aifeane: ahnsed aa: | 
rera(fa; afaraafea atl wareat[ ear] faa: 
wela(a)afarafasctacenieteatiefan: 1 —[29]. 
TUS SUSAN ATA TH AT ATS ASA) Vesa isheriestaT | 
&- 
21. 4 zeteqenueduaaamaagaa|a laa fa] weaq(eala: 0 —[80). 
AHS: HAMA AAUIAaA Bay Ya: 
ered Stra wathy ysis Yara F | 
aarattfy eqyaraase eearaay- 
araty Wea- 
22,  aarerafadt alentfalgentaarg u &B u—[81]. 
afararaga (a)arquad Usd T HaHa 
waerfata ce a(a)qacatieanrasuta: | 
arise verti afaaeraiznetn|y]- 
qalareaetaat yataat wtaecretfad 1 —[32]. 
a- 
(23, eaTguacmara[uatt|arecgemat- 
aguietfararetige: mate a: Tear | 


% Metre, Malini. 35 Metre, Prithvi. 
33 Metre of verses 28 and 29, Sardtlavikridita, The 36 Metre of verses 31-37, Sardilavikridita. Here, again, 
third line of verse 28 has no cesure after the 12th syllable. | the first liue of verse 31 has no cesure after the 12th syllable. 


4 The akshara in brackets looks as if originally @t had 
been engraved. ie 


186 


25. 


26. 


28, 


29; 


7 Read wear. 
%3 Metre, Upendravajra. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


aw datafa vatfafaaarannaae 4 ‘ 
falar] aracawwe frequen, ura: uct faafa wu —[83). 


vai afaat teeter fasta a- 
wat |ya- 
[sate] — — [aaejat aazata efrraTazaea | 


faarrefaaifadaaaat ara: weatya- 

Tee RIIARWAG sata, Ga arate n 6B v —[34]. > 
GaUMs TAraIHAy; WIasaTAA- 

aqrarea- 

qu: qarufafia arermeatraq | 

aret a4 aqearafaed aval a Saaa: 

uaatty wermaea aa aifaaaa aa: vn —(35]. 
daa faact qe a) ere: acrorea: 

wal aaa [at gla AHA aT WaT 

forays: 1 

way fediaarafafaenr: ute: gu qta- 

aa arecfa vaaazel ae Gaeegar y —[86]. 
aferral fa] arn)aaifa faye: ga: ufeersaa 

nara aarfy aracaat ated efera: | 
aaa fata- 

tre, Faaquagufatueuraatarad uv —[37]. 
vata aferenad fed vifedaaaaaraeterat | 
aatfanaisua: gt etary awa grec; y°—[33]. 
sarerataafafaaata- 

AT HAVA a- 

wae fag wacfeartal ale faetie: | 
aarerad freafrnmeqearcareaa- 

aaaaaarfaamaedt tiuawlala 1°—[39]. 
waist TeaAATEaTiA chor sacar 
azraw- 

qreaqaetrayn tarwarerfaatuaran: 1° —[40]. 

a arlaancafaacac: Hauraaraa- 

ACTA: ASHTATATAATACTATAATATAT; | 
arate facifufaagefear aarfetarca’: 

Talaaigi fa (faa) fafet fran 
| 39 Metre, Sarddlavikridita, 

® Metre, Upajati 


32. 


30. 


34. 


36. 


“ Metre, Sardilavikridita. 
42 Metre, Sragdharé. A 
‘3 Metre of verses 43-45, Sardilavikridita. 


NAGPUR STONE INSCRIPTION. 


Uretaan: 1(1)"—[41}. 
wart aan carcafnaqeacigzaeiazE- 
mrateequraca ita [el fcaqaaal errr: 
Farag Sarah accaT eae ares (I) Ay- 
afasrrrarafeagaceramen fearon: i°—[42]. 
a fefaarca(a)- 
ara; BaaeMarfead| at laa: 
ATSTARSHZ a (ea) anf terqaa (a) era: | 
amare a fayaaa alas iaa- 
TA AEH S TGA] a(a)elafe: 1°—[48]. 
Sarat yautaa: a anaratiafas a: Prat 
aad a(a) faa fta(a)aatafeat fad aaneatfed | 
aaa aqua caa: arareAT AAT 
re mreaanfady aa) worming: waar wy —| 44]. 
& weraTAAITe fer, are fea (fa) atfafen: 
daatatraT aay yeaa- 
. fawer(er)arar: | 


[a] — — Gu [area ra? orfatarretera- 
deTaaRAPa TU feareeng (ae) TENA: —[45]. 
HATAUNAH TA AATATAAUT_ =] fea | 
Sarda alaiar] faerar(anarzared wt —[46]. 
atlarangaa adlaraareraa- 
etatet- 
sr fea] fel fash area(s) argan: wafer a ar: 
atfu: dufa cooq efadt aarauediug: 
wararfy ada aersaa(en larvae [alae] w—!47]. 
alfaay a aqrauadt cae MT arefa- 
aratarea- 
daqgefsat afe[wyfaeaaa | 
cerlele gqean ated aa(ee) cea a: 
aarerfrnaqaa faced Horvat v —[48]. 
TIAMAT TAIN wenlaa] wuts Garagez 
aycaalat RAW VaTaTEl- 
utfad urmzenara: —[49], 


aarangeal sata Qetararftare afa- 
afea ata faites: garia de eft 1 
44 Metre, Sloka ( Anvshtubh). 
Metre of verses 47 and 48, SdrdAlavikridita, 
46 Metre, Upajati. 
232 


187 


188 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Uaefa a athe aa seat [aleralae] was] 
[wat] aenfchr: adaqqade- 
L, 37. crerrfara ’—[50]. 
a, aya fafaframetaty: daforra[aa 2 
Graratraa(a)agqat frafery Farag aft | 
wT Sa (B*Uie efut® aereawera(*) vt 
Tears wa aT — — U eRe: 1 —[51]. 
warfateratica wst- 

38. Usa aera ats Ta ATG: | 
feurfa aafsmafrnantyd: adtifaata(m)za v°—[52]. 
SUA: BAT atrafy aer Garargarfea- 

qeAIAaA aa faa ITEUT: | 
TaTaayaews| fe laaaalarfaaataa- 
aruareara- 

39. TAA TATA ATH STHAT: 1" —[53]. 
Setearaquacufaraereraataaa- 

AARTARAT AST TATATAS | 
qararal awactrafawararfaararaarza- 
acqenc(ulfaracra: atofeararerd 1 —[54]. 
aa VIYTws Vata- 
40, Al Tat TeRTS 
aaTaeaataay fatrar faarfed wea | 
ARIAT Ataeagata: TaTacae a- 
qa ahaauizaranienenaaa ean y Be u (55). 
aa Gana fafafad | 
aaaaataearnaataa v’—[56]. 
Weear 

41, att 
Sel F(a)aT: ATY WaEes Guraaeai =F faa far | 
WAM FT TATA YS F a: Ufagargqaread y*—[57]. 
qeatlargur afarrtarer at faafact 
May FU: aaa) v Bu °—[58]. 


Metre of verses 50 and 51, Sarddlavikridita. 52 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 
# Originally fafat seems to have been engraved. 53 Read fauy. 

4 Metre, Upajati. 7 5 Metre, U pajati. 

Metre of verses 53-55, Sardilavikridita, 8 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 


St Originally °@%aa° was engraved. 


NAGPUR STONE INSCRIPTION, 189 


TRANSLATION. 
Om ! 
Om! Adoration to Bharati !* 

(Verse 1). O goddess of speech and divine Durga! Let simplicity,” force, sweetness, 
depth, harmony, and whatever other qualities you possess, let them all be shared by us ! 

(2). May Lakshmi’s husband, that sole lord of fortune in all the three worlds, grant 
you prosperity,—he from whose middle stride even® the sun and the other luminaries 
yonder shine forth ! 

(3). May good utterances, clad in ja¢é and vritta metres,” pleasing by their style and 
by figures of speech, and expressive of poetical sentiment, be gracious to us! And may 
sages be so, men of taste, of noble birth and good conduct, who charm with the qualities 
that adorn them ! 

(4). May Siva grant whatever is auspicious,—he who, terrific when he destroys the 
irresistible foe Pura, singularly embellished with copious ashes, and revered by the lord® 
of the Yakshas, resembles this fire-born race,“ which is terrible when it breaks the 
strongholds of irresistible foes, is exquisitely adorned with abundant good fortune, and 
paid homage to by the kings of kings! 

(5). Glory be to the lotus-born Brahman who, engendered in the mundane ege 
which was produced in the great ocean, and, when set free, an object of reverence for 
Siva, is like the pearls which grow in the oyster-shells of the sea, and are Wee by great 


lords! 
(6). May that form® of the husbands of Uma and Lakshmi grant you’ both enjoy- 


ment and salvation, which, both passionless and passionate, wearing both a wreath 
of human skulls and flower-garlands, clad both in tiger and elephant skins and in 
costly garments, adorned both with serpents and with pearl-strings and other orna- 
ments, and both smeared with ashes and anointed with perfumes, is fearful as well as 
auspicious ! 

(7). May Vishnu purify you, who, in the guise of a fish and other creatures having 
assumed one after another all forms, made the whole universe not differing from 
himself ! 

(8). Well-known is the glorious mount Arbuda, which utterly humbles the pride 
of the noblest of mountains, and rivals the firmament with the rich splendour radiating 
from its sapphire crest. The circle of the pollen of the lotuses that swing to and fro in 
the pools on its broad sky-piercing top looks as if it were indeed another vault of 
heaven. 

(9). I fancy, it was when the creator, wishing to know whether the gods or the 
mortals were purer, attached the round of heaven, filled with the former, and this orb of 

56 T.e., the goddess of speech or eloquence. 

57 For the exact definitions of prasdda, auddrya, madhurya, samddhi and. samaté, denoting certain qualities of style, 


see, e.g., Kévyddarsa I, 45, 76, 51, 93, and 47, But these terms should be understood here, not only in their technical, but 
also in their ordinary senses, ‘ serenity of disposition,’ etc. ; 

8 The madhyamam Vaishnavam padam, ‘Vishnu’s middle stride,’ is the air. The idea which the poet intends to 
convey apparently is, that, if Vishnu’s madhyama-pada already is so high, his wttama-pada must be infinitely higher still, 

59 See Indische Studien, vol. VILI, pp. 180 and 192. 

6 Te., the god Kuvera. ; 

61 Je, the Paramara family which will be eulogised in the following. 

® TJ-e,, the form of Hari-Hara or Vishnu-Siva ; see ante, vol. I, p. 311, note 47. 


190 EPIGRAPUIA INDICA. 


the earth, filled with the latter, to the two extremities of this mountain, using it as a 
balance of virtue, that the round of heaven rose higher even than the top of mount 
Meru !° 

(V. 10). Piercing with one end the ocean-surrounded orb of the earth, and with 
the other the horizon-encircled round of the sky, this mountain has assumed the glori- 
ous appearance of an axle of the chariot of the universe, one side of which lies down, 
broken on the rugged road of this world, while the other is lifted upwards. 

(11). On this mountain, whose slopes, bathed by the streams of water of the 
heavenly Ganges, are pleasant and soft, dwelt that chief of those versed in the Vedas, ~ 
the venerable sage Vasishtha, who, to delight his father Brahman, led the Yamuna, 
enveloped in the smoke of the three sacred fires, up to the vault of heaven, to effect her 
junction with the Ganges. 

(12). His hundreds of precepts, like horses, extricate the chariot of the three worlds, 
so that it may proceed without hindrance, when, turned into a wrong road, it has stuck 
fast in the terrible quicksand of worldly affairs, bordering on the great stream of know- 
ledge. 

(18). Once upon a time, when the royal descendant of Kusika visited him and took 
by force the cow Nandini, which caused delight by yielding all things suitable for hos- 
pitable entertainment, Vasishtha, enraged, pleased the fire by an oblation, and from that 
fire sprang, to conquer Visvamitra, the unparalelled hero, the illustrious Paramara, 
rightly so named.” 

(14). Ever prosperous is his family here, which, made up of rulers illustrious for 
having increased the realm, who were supporters of the law, whose banner was truth 
and whose fame is widely spread, is an image of the solar and lunar lines, in whicly there 
were the princes Rajyavardhana, Visdla, Dharmabhrit, Satyaketu, and Prithukirti. 

(15). This family, unsurpassed by the blessed never-aging immortals, sprung from 
fire, and taking delight in the assemblies of the learned, has been propagated like those 
of the Sun and the Moon, which are adorned by the eminent Aja and Rama, gave birth 
to Nala, and include the descendants of Bharata. 

(16). In this race there was the king Vairisimha, whose rule was supremely pros- 
perous, because he was abundantly endowed with good fortune, might, resoluteness, 
generosity and bravery; while the ground around his jewel-inlaid foot-stool was made 
uneven by the mass of rubies, broken from the edges of the tremulous handsome dia- 
dems which fell from the foreheads of kings who bowed down before him. 

(17). When he set out to conquer all the quarters, the regions of space; with- 
drawn from view, were beautified by his umbrellas of peacocks’ feathers, shining like 
sapphires, so that they seemed enveloped in the poisonous breath of the distressed serpent 
Sesha, rising up through the fissures of the earth, rent as it was by the massive feet of 
the arrays of his marching rutty elephants. 

(18). Not to be interfered with, the fire of his prowess shines forth even now, in the 
lower regions under the guise of the fire proceeding from the mare’s mouth, on the earth 
under that of the glittering golden mountain, in the sky as the starry firmament, and 
near the confines of space as a range of mountains of quivering gold. 

°3 Literally, ‘higher than the pillay-like mountain of the 4 Le, Viévamitra. 


immortals.’ What the poct wishes to convey is, the mount 5 Viz., ‘the slayer of enemies.’ See ante, vol. J, p. 236, 
Arbuda ia higher even than the fabulous mountain Meru. verse 6, 


NAGPUR STONE INSCRIPTION. 191 


(V. 19). He ruled the earth, humbling Indra in heaven by his majesty, defeating 
host of enemies in hostile lands by his valour, and surpassing Vishnu’s lord of serpents 
in his serpent-home by his ability to uphold the earth. 

(20). From him sprang the illustrious king Siyaka, the fire of whose wrath was 
extinguished by the tears, caused by the pangs of widowhood, of the royal ladies of 
hostile princes; while the fire of his prowess even now is perceived here, in the guise of 
the starry firmament, presenting a novel appearance inasmuch as the smoke, in the guise 
of the atmosphere, is beneath it. 

(21). The clusters of big pearls, which flew up into the air from the frontal globes 
of furious elephants cleft by his sword, though constantly falling down, have, disguised 
as they are as large sparkling stars, not even now reached the earth. 

(22). To whom shall we tell this great unseen and unheard-of wonder? Or who 
will understand it? Yet for curiosity’s sake we report it: Although he delivered the 
earth, although he wedded the unique goddess of fortune, although again and again he 
did the work of the gods, he never was Vaikuntha.® 

(23). From him was born the illustrious king M uijjardja, who alone, with the bow 
in his hand, put an end to many a fight commenced by hostile armies, as Siva-did to 
(Daksha’s) sacrifice ;” and the fire of whose prowess, to protect the orb of the earth, 
used to envelop it under the guise of the belt of the lofty Lokaloka mountains. 

(24). Even when he was marching for mere pleasure, his frolicsome soldiers turned 
out in such numbers that the horizon was obscured by the clouds of dust, raised by the 
squadrons of his cavalry, and that the cavity of the universe was completely filled with 
the excessive noise of the trembling chains, swung to and fro by the feet of the arrays of 
his huge elephants, taller than the hugest mountains. 

(25). When, having their heads struck off by his sword, heroes had obtained the rare 
fortune of being transformed into divine beings, and when, proudly viewing their bodies 
below surrounded by champions, eager for the fray, they were throwing themselves from 
the aerial cars, they were joyfully embraced and forcibly held back by the Siddha 
women, clustering round them. 

(26). After him his younger brother, the far-famed illustrious Sindhur&ja, became 
king, the fire of whose bravery bore the brilliant beautiful lustre of the roaring sub- 
marine fire. As the mass of waves, raised by the fierce blast which springs up at the 
destruction of the world, submerges the mountains, so the broad scimitar, brandished by 
his arm, when it was lifted in war, dealt out destruction to princes. 

(27). When this prince marched forth victoriously, the cloud of dust raised by the 
onset of his fleet horses appeared to the host of his enemies like the smoke of the all- 
devouring fire rising ail round from the fissures of the surface of the earth, broken by 
the weight of his formidable elephants. 

(28). In every battle princes found out that the creator had as it were combined in 
him the depth of the ocean and the might of the wind, as they are at the destruction of 
the world, the firmness of the lord of tortoises, the weight of the whole universe, the 
splendour of the all-destroying fire, and the magnitude of the celestial vault. 

6 Vaikuntha, ée., Vishnu, uplifted the earth, obtained Lakshmi, and did the work of the gods; the king freed the 


earth from troubles, secured fortune, acted for the benefit of well-minded people, and never indeed showed dullness or 


indolence (4gdn na vai kunthatim). ie 
67 See the first verse of the first act of Kalidisa’s Sdtuntala, and Sir M. Monier- Williams’ note on it 


192 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(V. 29). His son was the unique ornament of the world, the illustrious king Bhoja- 
deva, whose lotus-feet were richly adorned with the lustre of the crest-jewels of kings, 
and on whose feet rests even now, while he is occupying Indra’s throne, the vivid 
splendour of the edges of the diadems of the immortals, bowed down with envy. 

(30). His army, distinguished by the sharp sound of roaring kettle-drums, by the 
thunder of loud jharjharas,® by a multitude of shrill damarus, and by tabors heard 
above the tumult, roamed, filling the world with its noise, over the whole earth, thrown 
into confusion under the footsteps of his rutty elephants. x 

(31). Even now, when they recite his fame in the assembly of the gods, Vaikuntha 
is ever jealous of the four-mouthed Brahman, Svayambht again of the five-mouthed 
Hara, Sambhu too of his six-mouthed son Karttikeya, and this leader of the divine 
hosts of the lord of serpents with his thousand mouths. 

(32). When he had become Indra’s companion, and when the realm was overrun by 
floods® in which its sovereign was submerged, his relation Udayaditya became king. 
Delivering the earth, which was troubled by kings and taken possession of by Karna, who, 
joined by the Karndtas, was like the mighty ocean, this prince did indeed act like the 
holy Boar.” 

(83). The hostile champions who met their death facing this king, similar to thesun 
and confounded with it because the terrible fire of his valour made him difficult to look 
at, I fancy that they became supremely happy, when, their fury heightened by the 
belief that the luminary was their opponent, they split the orb of the sun.” 

(34). The lord of serpents, having in battle witnessed his victory and eulogizing it 
in an assembly, . . . . . Shu ws that his thousands of eyes and tongues indeed serve 
a purpose; but, cheated of the pleasure of listening when he has closed his eyes with 
delight, he scorns his body because, b ereft of ears, it must use the eyes in their stead. 

(35). A son of that sun of the three worlds was the illustrious Lakshmadeva, 
resembling the lord of creatures in his eage rness properly to rule his subjects ; who verily 
in his conduct so allowed himself to be guided by that son of Vivasvat, Manu, that 
every where and at all times new fame grew up for him of its own accord. 

(36). This is what his marching-drum proclaim s, under the pretence of resounding : 
‘Join together, you king of tortoises and ye others, in upholding the earth, heavy with 
the load of this army! Hither perish at once or bow down speedily, ye opposing princes ! 
Quickly shut your eyes, O gods, before the dust fills them !’ 

(37). When he marches, the princes of the east, bewildered, forsake even their rela- 
tives ; those of the south in their perplexity take no note even of g ood news ; the princes 
of the west find out to their sorrow that the creeping-plant of hope bears no good fruit 
to them ; while those of the north throw themselves on their swords, and thus court death 
as the best and only fate left to them.” 

(38). When, desirous of capturing matchless elephants, he first proceed ed to Hari’s 


6 Jharjhara and domaru are names of certain kinds of drums. 

6 Kulyékula would also mean ‘ crowded with nobles.’ 

70 F.e., Vishnu in his boar-incarnation, in which he raised the earth from the bottom of the sea with bis tusks. 

” See the PardSara-smriti, Caleutta ed., p, 626: Dvdv imau purushau loke stirya-mandala-bhedinau, pariordd 
yogayuktas cha rane chébhimukho hatah. : 

% I take the words dvedhdpy ayodhydsyate to mean, that the princes of the north did what is expressed by 
ayodhydsyate, in the two senses which these words are capable of conveying. Ayo, 2.c. ayak, may be taken as the nominati ve 
of either the neuter ayas, ‘iron, steel,’ or the masculine aya, ‘favourable fortune.’ Compare below, verses 49 and 52. 


NAGPUR STONE INSCRIPTION. 193 


quarter,”* then, just as dread entered the town of the lord of Gauda, so Puranaara even 
was of a sudden filled with apprehension. 

(V. 39). When in the course of an unchecked expedition, undertaken in the height 
of power and under favourable auspices, he had attacked Tripuri and 1nnihilated his 
warlike spirited adversaries, he encamped on the banks of the Reva, where his tent 
were shaded by the creeping-plants of pleasure-gardens, gently set in motion by the 
breeze from the torrents of the Vindhya mountains. 

(40). The bathing of his elephants, which allayed the fatigue of battle, produced in 
the stream of the Reva a succession of waves, bent upon undermining the steep river- 
banks. 

(41). Often and often the elephants of his army, thickly covered with streams of 
rutting-juice, demolished even the hills at the foot of the Vindhya mountains, taking 
them for the elephants of the enemy because their tremulous broad torrents appeared 
like trunks, their projecting peaks like frontal globes, and the water flowing from their 
ridges like rutting-juice. 

(42). He traversed the hills at the foot of the Vindhya mountains, which were fre- 
quently trodden by the squadrons of his fleet horses the quick sharp hoofs of which 
acted like chisels in cutting up the extensive, bamboo-clad, massive table-land, and which 
were black with herds of countless wild elephants, excited by the odour of the rutting- 
juice which thickly covered the broad cheeks of the elephants of his army. 

(43). Even the troops of elephants of Anga and Kalinga, kindred to the elephants 
of the quarters and bulky like mountains set in motion by the storm at the destruction 
of the universe, and rivalling rain-clouds, dark like herds of hogs kept for pastime,—even 
they had to sue for mercy, when they were bewildered” by the union of the storm-wind 
with the powerful elephants belonging to the princes of his army. 

(44). Near the eastern ocean clever men thus artfully proclaimed his praise, while 
he, pleased, looked on bashfully: ‘O lord, it was the holy Purushottama to whom 
Fortune resorted, who relieved this universe by subduing the enemy Bali, and who sup- 
ported the earth’.” 

. (45). The elephants of his feudatories, eager to plunge into the water to... . 
get rid of the fatigue of battle, worsted even those ocean-waves which resemble the 
circle of smoke of the all-consuming fire, and rival a bank of clouds, and are befriended 
with the darkness that spreads at the universal dissolution, when they harbour the down- 
breaking sky. 

(46). When, like the pitcher-born Agastya, he directed his steps towards the south, 
the Cholas and other tribes, bowing low before him, acted the part of the Vindhya 
mountains.” 

(47). The water of the Tamraparni which is famed all the earth over for the pearls 
which the wives of the feudatories in his army, while they mirthfully bathed in the 
stream, dropped into it from the breaking girdles on their hips, behold, even to this day 
that water affords a livelihood to the Pandya chief.” 


% Te., the east. and ‘the enemy Bali’ would also mean ‘glorious is that 


74 The word of the original would also mean ‘ deprived of | chief of men’ and ‘ powerful enemies.’ 
their trunks.’ 78 See Mr. S. P. Pandit’s note on Kalidasa’s Raghuvanta 


75 The words translated by ‘it was the holy Purushottama’| VI, 61. 
% 77 See ib., notes on verses IV, 49 and 50. 


220 


194 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(V. 48). Respectfully informed by the people, that the dam before him, which looked 
like the growing Vindhya range, was the bridge of the holy Rama, constructed of many 
mountain-peaks which were fetched by Maruti, he listened attentively, but scornfully 
crossed over to the opposite island simpiy on the elephants of his army. 

(49). When his army afterwards, having reduced both the quarter and the expecta- 
tions ‘of Yama, continued its march unscathed, the noose-bearing Varuna despaired of 
guarding his own quarter from destruction.” 

(50). It is surely in some ocean or other that the Mainika and the other mountains 
rest, that the all-devouring fire dwells, that the Timingilas and other monsters live, aud 
that Hari sleeps; but where this is, nobody has discovered at any of the oceans at which 
his elephants, in swallowing all the water at a single draught, have severally acted the 
part of Agastya.” 

(51). By those same Timingilas and other monsters of the sea, floating about in 
company with which the Maindka and other mountains appeared like shoals of young 
fish, by them, unchecked . . . . in the whole ocean, the massive trunks of the 
lordly elephants of his army were made to assume the marvellous appearance of 
revolving Mandara mountains. 

(52). Afterwards when, impatient that there shculd be another king of kings, he 
was marching towards the quarter of the lord of Yakshas, the princes opposed to him got 
rid of fear when, terror-stricken, they abandoned not merely their wealth of riches, but 
also the quarter of Kuvera.” 

(53). And all the time even in the wilderness his wars were pleasure-gardens 
the trees of which were his fame, reared in the midst of multitudes of distinguished 
warriors as among Punndga and betel-nut creepers, and attended by the Fortune of 
victory who acted as a forest-deity in the thicket of his troops; gardens which were 
irrigated by the streams of blood flowing down from many skulls of princes, aimed at 
by the flashing sword which was fiercely wielded by his strong arm. 

(54). Being encamped on the banks of the Vankshu,” which were even softer than 
nature made them because the saffron-filaments on them were withering under the 
rolling of the teams of frisky horses, presented by the Turushka whom he had eradi- 
cated with ease, he taught the Kira chief to utter most flattering speeches, who on 
account of the proximity of the Sarasvati was eloquent beyond measure, and who was 
like a parrot shut up in a big cage. 

(55). This blessed (king), on the occasion of a solar eclipse, piously gave” with due 
rites two villages in the Vyapura mandala. Afterwards his brother, the king Naravar- 
madeva, has instead assigned the village of Mokhalapataka, at the request of the 
three places. 

(56). And he has ordered the illustrious Lakshmidhara to construct this temple, 
which is adorned with many eulogies and hymns, composed by himself. 


7 Yama, tle ruler of the dead, is the regent of the south, and Varuna the regent of the west, 
7 Agastya is fabled to have swallowed the ocean. 


*° Kuvera, the chief of the Yakshas, is the regent cf the northern quarter. 
™ According to Sir M. Monier-Williams’ dictionary, a small arm or branch of the Ganges. 


™ The original does not say in whose favour the donation was made, but contains only the relative yasmai, in reference 
to which the demonstrative ¢asmai would Lave to be supplied in the second half of the verse. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM MATHURA. 195 


The year 1161. 
On! 

(V.57). O ye learned! Exert yourselves well, and make your intellect sharp as 
the point of kusa grass! Try to judge with be Se rae and with pleasure do homage 
to the nectar of our poetry ! 

(58). Blessed are both those wise men, the poet and who listens to him, who com- 
pletely overcome with delight shed plentiful tears of joy. 


XIV.— FURTHER JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM MATHURA. 
G. Biuuer, Pu.D., LL.D., C.1.E. 


The impressions of the subjoined inscriptions have all been furnished to me by 
Dr. A. Fiihrer. Nos. i—vili, x—xxi, xxili—xxxvii and xxxix—xli belong to the 
splendid discoveries which Dr,,Fihrer made in the Kankali Tila at Mathura during 
the period from November 1890 to March 1891." No. ix comes from the same site, 
but was discovered during the working season of 1889-90. No. xxii is identical with 
Sir A. Cunningham’s No. 19 (Arch. Surv. Rep., vol. ILI, plate xv), and No. xxxviii with 
Mr. Growse’s No. 5 (Indian Antiquary, vol. VI, p. 218). No. xlii is a Buddhist inscrip- 
tion, brought by Dr. Fuhrer from Kaman or Kadambavana. I have added it, because 
it helps to interpret more correctly a sign used in one of the Jaina inscriptions, and 
possesses some interest in other respects, 

The earliest among these inscriptions, which probably cover more than 1,200 
years, is without doubt No. i, which shows exceedingly archaic characters. Its 
letters do not differ very much from those of Asoka’s edicts, and they lock somewhat 
older than those in Dhanabhiti’s inscription on the gateway of the Bharhut Stipa which 
is dated in the reign of the Sun gas (Indian Antiquary, vol. XIV, p. 188). It may, 
therefore, be assigned to the middle of the second century B.C, Its language is pure 
Prakrit of the Pali type, which shows a few peculiarities, partly traceable in other 
ancient documents. The genitive in dsa from a-stems, instead of assa, occurs in one of 
the older votive inscriptions at Bharhut. It may be explained by the substitution of 
the long vowel and a single consonant for the short vowel and a double consonant. The 
lengthening of the initial a of dmtevdsi, which is also found in dmtevdsini, No. iv, finds 
an analogy in the curious parydntam, which occurs twice in Apastamba’s Dharmasitra, 
I. 3, 9, 28 and I. 3, 11, 33, and has been explained in the Introduction to the second 
edition of that work (p. v, note 4). The use of the nominative at the end of the first 
part of the compound pasddotoranam is well known from the inscriptions of the Indo- 
Skythic period, see anée, vol. I, p. 375 and below. Possibly it is found also in one of 
the votive inscriptions from the Sanchi Stipa, No. i, see ante, p. 90. 

_ Next in age comes No. ii, the inscription from the reign of the Mahakshatrapa 
Soddsa. The existence of this ruler was first made known by Sir A. Cunningham, who 
found another inscription with his name in the Kankali Tila, (see Arch. Surv. Rep., 

Dr. Fiihrer has sent me during the period mentioned altogether 74 inscriptions, among which 64 are new Jaina 


inscriptions from the Kankali Tila. Those not given in this paper are either very small fragments of no particular interest 


or not readable with any certainty. 
2 See Dr. E. Hultzsch’s article Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, Bd. XL, p. 60ff., No. 145, 


202 


196 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


vol. ILI, p. 30, and plate xiii, No.1). On the evidence of his coins, which resemble 
those of Azes, Sir A. Cunningham placed Sodasa about. 80—70 B.C., and conjectured 
that he was a son of Rajubula, another Satrap of Mathurd. The latter conjecture is 
confirmed, as he has stated of late, by a passage on Dr. BhagvAnlal’s lion-pillar, where 
Sodasa is called the son of Rajula.’ Though the precise date assigned to Sodasa 
may be doubted, still he must have ruled at Mathura in the first century B.C., before 
the time of Kanishka and his successors. I do not dare to offer for the present any 
conjecture regarding the era which Sodisa uses. Sir A. Cunningham (loc. cit.) is 
inclined to identify it with that used by the Maharaja Moga and other foreign rulers 
of Northern India. The inscription No. ii is also in pure Prakrit of the Pali type. The 
next inscription, No. iii, mentions also a Mahakshatrapa, whose name sees to have 
begun with Ma. It is to this circumstance that it owes its place. Its appearance in- 
dicates that it is much later than No. ii, and as it is incised on a sculpture cut out of the 
back of that on which No. x is found, it must be later thau the latter. Still its date 
will fall before the time of Kanishka, as the Mahakshatrapas of Mathura must have 
passed away before the Kushanas reigned there. The mangala of the inscription, 
the only portion fully preserved, is in pure Sanskrit. 

The next seven inscriptions, Nos. iv—x, which have been grouped under the name 
“archaic,” all belong in my opinion to the period before Kanishka. But I am not able 
to say anything regarding their relative position towards each other or towards Nos. ii 
and iii. ‘The chief differences which separate them from the documents of the Kushana- 
period are the use of the tripartite subscribed ya, the want of the loop on the left side of 
the ordinary ya, the da, slightly open to the left (which occurs in Nos. iv and ix), and 
the well developed vertical stroke and symmetrical shape of the ta. The va has a very 
curious shape in the word Sivayasd, No. v, 1. 2a, as it consists of two triangles with the 
apexes joined. The language of most of them is pure Prakrit of the Pali type, but 
No. iv shows one Sanskrit form and No. vii is apparently in pure Sanskrit. With 
respect to No. ix I must add that I am inclined to identify the Gotiputra IdrapAla 
or idrapalita with Gotiputra, “the black cobra for the Sakas and the Pothayas” 
mentioned in No. xxxiii of the collection, published ante, vol. J, p. 396. If that is 
correct, the document must go back to the times before the consolidation of the foreign 
rule at Mathura. 

The next group, Nos. xi—xxiv, consists of the dated inscriptions which in my 
opinion all belong to the time of Kanishka, Huvishka and Vasudeva. Not one shows 
the name of aking. Nevertheless, I believe that nobody, who carefully compares them 
with the dated documents, mentioning the three kings, will come to-a different con- 
clusion. The dates range within the well-known limits from Sarvat 4 to Samvat 98. 
The characters and the language are of the same mixed types described in the intro- 
duction to my first paper, ante, vol. I, p. 871ff. I have nothing to add to the remarks 
made there on the alphabet and the spelling. As regards the language, I will only call 
attention to a few points. The few verbal forms, bhavatu, No. xiii, astu, No. xviii, and 
nirvartayati, No. xx, are pure Sanskrit. No. xxiii, where we have Sishyasya ganisya 

3 Academy of April 25th, 1891, p. 397. On an impression of the inscriptions on the lion-pillar, which I owe to the 


kindness of Dr. Burgess, I, too, read Rajulasa putra Sudase chhatrava. But I do not feel quite certain that Rajula and 


Rajubula ave the same person, nor that the words given above, which stand in two constcutive lines with other signs in 
between, are really connected. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM MATHURA. 197 


Nandiye, furnishes an exact analogy to the curious form Haganarndia in No. ix of the 
collection in vol. I, and shows that masculine 7-stems really take the terminations of 
the feminine. Possibly No. xxix, which shows ganisya uggahiniya, furnishes a third 
instance. Very interesting, too, are the numerous cases where the nominative takes 
the place of the crude form, both in this and in the next group. Among the remarkable 
words I note asma or asmi kshune, “ at that moment,” in Nos. xv, xxiv and xlii, pana 
“ fifty’? in No. xvii and dvdpand “fifty-two’’ in No. xviii, among which the latter 
possesses some interest on account of the Mahardshtri baévanna and the bévan or bdvan 
of various modern vernaculars. 

After this group have been placed thirteen inscriptions, Nos, xxv—xxxvii, which 
in my opinion, likewise belong to the period of Kanishka and his successors, though 
it is impossible to exactly fix their dates. With respect to Nos. xxv—xxvii, which 
show the names of Devaputra Huvishka and Devaputra Huksha, as well as the 
titles mahdrdja réjdtiraja, the correctness of my view is evident. It can also be proved 
or made probable for some others, e.g., No. xxxiv, which mentions the venerable 
Balatréta and his pupil Sandhi. Both names occur in No, v of the earlier collection 
(ante, vol. I, p. 384), which is dated in the year 25. Again, No, xxxvi certainly did 
bear a date, which may have been Sarnvat 50, and the teacher Jeshtahasti, mentioned in 
No. xxxvVii, is known from No. xiv of the earlier collection, where the name of his pupil, 
looking like Mahalo, has to be read Mihilo, on the evidence of the new inscription. 
With respect to these two inscriptions, as well as to Nos. xxviii, xxix and xxxiii, the 
close resemblance of the letters to those of the inscriptions, showing the names of the 
three kings, must be allowed its due weight. I must, however, admit that Nos. xxx 
and xxxi are somewhat doubtful, and that they may possibly have to be transferred to 
the archaic group, belonging to the time before Kanishka. The characters of some of 
these thirteen inscriptions show a few peculiarities worthy of note. In pratimd No. xxix, 
the d-stroke has been undoubtedly placed below the consonant to which it belongs. ‘This 
is quite in keeping with the “ anyhow-style” of the Indian writers and masons. In 
No. xxix of the earlier collection (ante, vol. I, p. 395, fourth plate), the same vowel has 
been attached to the lower right limb of ¢a in the word arahamntdna, and similar instances 
occur in later inscriptions. In No. xxxiv, 1. 2, the looped ¢a of Navahastisya is 
remarkable, especially as the same sign is used for na in bhrdtrinam (1. 3). The looped 
form of ¢a is common enough in the southern inscriptions, where it first appears in those 
of Siriyafia Satakani.* But I have not observed it on any document which comes from 
the northern half of India. Another curious sign is the va which looks, owing to a 
continuation of the two side-strokes beyond the apex, almost exactly like ma. It is 
quite distinct in the word vadhuye, No. xxxii, 1. 1, likewise in vihdre, No. xlii, and in 
Huwwishkasya, No.xxv. As regards the spelling, I would call attention to the tachygraphic 
abbreviation of the word, stddha, discussed in the remark on No. xxvii, in note 2 on 
No. xxxvi, and note 2 on No. xlii. Among the linguistic pecaliarities, I would point out 
the phrase bahavo[to] vachaka cha ganino cha, “of the great preacher and gain,” 
No. xxxvi, which affords another illustration of the principle discussed in the introduc- 
tion to.the earlier collection, ante; vol. I, p. 375. Another amusing instance of the 


4 Arch. Rep.. Wést. Ind., vol. 1V, plate lv, No. 22 ; compare also No. 20. 


198 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


utter absence of all feeling for grammatical forms is furnished by the description of the 
donatrix in No. xxxiv, Navahastisya dhitd, grahasenasya vadhu .., Sivasenasya...... 
bhratrinamn matu jaydye, where two nominatives are co-ordinated with two genitives. 

The next three inscriptions, Nos. xxxvili—xl, belong, in my opinion, to the Gupta 
period. ‘This is, of course, indisputable with No. xxxix, which is dated in the reign of 
Kumaragupta. The shape of the letters, and especially the peculiar method of mark- 
ing the long and short ¢, by turning the former to the right of the consonant and the 
latter to the left, makes it, I think, impossible to assign No. xxxviii to.an earlier period. 
If my conjecture is accepted, its date, the year 57, is the earliest Gupta date yet found. 
No. xl may perhaps be a little later than the Gupta period. With respect to the remain- 
ing two documents it will suffice to say that No. xli clearly belongs to the eleventh 
century A.D., and that No. xlii, the Appendix, dates from the Indo-Skythic period. 

Short discussions of the historical results, obtainable from these inscriptions, have 
been given already in the Vienna Oriental Journal, vol. V, p. 59ff, and p. 175ff, and 
afuller one will appear in this publication. Here I content myself with giving a 
brief resumé of the chief points. First, as regards the political history, we have now, 
through No. ii, actual proof that the Kshatrapas of Mathura used a particular era, 
different from that of Kanishka and his successors. The importance of this fact will pro- 
bably become still greater when Dr. Bhagvanlal’s paper on his Lion-pillar will appear. 
For the history of the Kushana kings, we gain through No. xxvi the certainty that the 
name Hushka, which the Rdjataranginé has preserved and which still survives in the 
name of the Kashmirian village Ushkar-Hushkapura, was actually used in ancient 
times for Huvishka. Secondly, with respect to the history of the Jaina sect, we learn 
through No. i that the Jainas were settled in Mathura in the sccond century B.C., and 
through No. xx that an ancient Jaina Stipa existed in Mathura, which in A.D. 167 
was considered to have been built by the gods, 7. ¢., was so ancient that its real origin 
had been completely forgotten. The inscriptions further furnish the new names of the 
Vachchhaliya kula (No. xiii) and of the VidyAadhari Sakhd (No. xxxix) for the 
Kottiya or Kotika gana, as wellas those of the Natika, or perhaps Nadika kula 
(No. xxviii) of the Aryyabhyista or perhaps Aryyanyista hula and of the Safmka- 
siya] Sakha (No. xxxvi) for the Varana gana. he schools connected with the Kot- 
tiya gana offer no difficulty, as they agree with the corresponding names of the Kal- 
pasitra, The Natika or Nadika kula may be considered to correspond to the Malijja 
kula of the Sthavirdvali, and there is just a possibility that the last name may be an 
abbreviated spelling for Aryya-Aniyasa(to) and correspond to a Prakrit corruption of 
Arya-Kantyasa, another equivalent for which, 4ryya-Kaniyasika, occurs in the inscrip- 
tion No. xxiii of the earlier collection (see note 1 to No. xxxvi). 


No. I.5 
aaae arethaara widarfea aalgae aaa sateraa[T la wraretarea [11*]° 
‘'RANSLATION. 
‘An ornamental arch for the temple’ (the gift) of the lay-hearer Utaraddsaka 


5 Tncised on a large ornamented rectangular slab, measuring 4! 2”—9”. 


6 According to the impression the reading #141 is perbaps possible. Possibly SACETTH 1s to be read. 
7 Regarding the irregular compound, see above the introductory remarks. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM MATHURA, 199 


( Uttaraddsaka),’ son of the Vachhi (Vatst mother and) disciple® of the ascetic MAha- 
rakhita (Mdgharakshita).” 


Nowe: 
L. 1. va areal avaraa 


2. alt|faa aeaaTE Vistas Wawat go (°)2 SaaaTa 2 feaa « efcfayaa uaa 
ward waarfanta” 
3. alfea waifefad wet yates Waa Deda wadtea araadt ufaafoa 


ara—[a]— 
4. Barat ATsagara [1] 


TRANSLATION, 


“Adoration to the Arhat Vardhamana! In the year 42 (?) of the Lord, the 
Mahakshatrapa Sod4sa, in the second month of winter, on the 9th day, an Ayavati 
(Aryavaté), was sct up by Amohini (Amohiné), the Kochhi (Kautsé), a female lay- 
disciple of the ascetics (and) wife of Pala, son of a Hariti (Harité or Haritéi mother), 
together with her sons Palaghosba, Pothaghosha (Proshthaghosha and) Dhana- 
ghosha...the Aryavati (és) for the worship of the Arhat.” 


Nowtlr: 
L.1. fasq aaleaeet:! 


2. AetiIsHsTaAaqa — —” 


TRANSLATION. 


Success! Adoration be to the-Arhats! .... Maharaja, Mahdkshatrapa- 
Ma... 


No. IV*. 
L. 1. aeasatare sidarfana 
2. wrTAtaTs etal Uratet (0*] 


TRANSLATION. 


“A temple, the gift of Dhamaghosh& (Dharmaghoshd), the female disciple” of 
the venerable Jayasena.” 


8 Compare the Buddhist name Uttarasena. Uttara probably stands bhimavat for Uttarapkalgunior Uttarabhadra- 
pada. 


® Regarding the form #t@tatf@ see above the Introduction. The term means here no doubt that Mabarakhita 
was the spiritual director of Uttaradasaka; for the latter was, as the description shows, a layman, not an ascetic. 


10 Incised on a slab measuring 3! 2” by 3' 8” and bearing the representation of a royal lady, surrounded by attendants 
ono of whom is holding up a parasol. 


1 Possibly at, as the ends of the upper strokes of ma are somewhat thickened. 

12 The first figure of the date may, possibly be 70. The Anusvara of @a#a° is not certain. Read qaaarfaara. 

8 Incised on the top of a small statue cut out of the back of the panel, which bears the inscription No. X. 

4 The second vowel of qa} is expressed by two abnormally short strokes.. An accidental scratch gives to °Sxq; the 
appearance of °Sxq; ‘— 

The last syllable may have been # ‘ — 

6 Incised on the back of a broken sculptured Torana, measuring 1' 2” by 8”. : 

7 J suppose =f@atfaat means here, like qtaatfa in No, 1, that Jayasena was Dhamaghosha’s spiritual director, not 
that she was an ascetic. 


200 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


; No. V*. 

L. la. wal aCeaTa HATA” 

2a. aaHe Vata fraaat- 
8a, — —f— -—T-———-T— aa 
1d. arataaet arfcat 
2b. aceagana [1* ] 
TRANSLATION. 

“ Adoration to the Arhats! By Sivayas4 (Sivayasas), wife of the dancer Phagu- 
yasa (Phalguyasas),......a tablet of homage (dydgapata)” was caused to be made for 
the worship of the Arhats.” 

No, VI 
wat AAA WAT — — 


TRANSLATION. 
“The divine Nemesa (Naigamesha), divine. ... 


No: VEL” 
L1.aq-8 


2. —t[nale a at at 
3. —Tadad WAS ABA: 
4, — — [alae [a] far 


The fragment admits of no centinuous translation. It would seem that we have 
in line 2 the beginning of a verse in the Sarddlavikridita metre, and in line 3 the mid dle 


portion of another. The whole was no doubt a metrical Pragasti written entirely in 
Sanskrit. 


No. VIII. 
aa ACSA HETfaca | ATATH — — area [ar] — 
wara — — a — —tara [array] [00*] 


[RANSLATION. 


* Adoration to the Arhat Mahavira (Mahdvira). A tablet of homage (dgdgapata 
the gift) of . . . ita, wife of . . lavada(?P), an inhabitant of Mathuré.” 


» ancised on the base of a mutilated tablet measuring 2! 4” by 1’ 9”, and bearing the representation of a stdpa wiki 
rails and gate, as well as of two naked dancing women in the same posture as those on Dr. Bhagvanlal’s slab pee d 
sivieme Congres, Int. Or., pt. III, sect. ii, p. 142. ae Lu? 

19 Possibly waafae, but I believe the apparent i-stroke to be accidental. 

2 Regarding the meaning of WraTayet, see ante, vol. I, p. 396. 

2 Incised on a small sculptured frieze measuring 2’ by 10°, and bearing the representation of a lar 
with a goat’s head, of a small naked male and several large female figures, one of whom holds a child in her | 

* The inscription seems to be intended to explain the meaning of the sculpture, 
article on sculptures from Mathura. 


*3 Incised on a fragment Of a large slab, measuring 1’ by 8”. 

*4 The bracketed letter looks almost like 4i, but the lower part of the vertical is faint, and the top ‘so damaged, that 
he apparent i-stroke may have been only a serif. The Anusvara of fa is doubtful. Thy 

* Incised on the base of a beautifully-soulptured square panel (an éydyapata), measuring 2! 10” by 2/10". 


ge seated figu., 
ap. 
regarding which see a subseqnent 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM MATHURA. 201 


NOE XES 
L. 1. at aceager [a]” 


2. maygaa seme] — —* 
TRANSLATION, 


An image of ...... for the worship of the Arhats....of Idrapdla (Zdra- 
pdala),” the son of the Goti (Gaupti mother). 


No. X.” 
— 3 waATeTa — 
TRANSLATION. 
“Of Jivanada (Jévananda).” .... 


No. XI.” 
A. fag as fae fe 20 area THAT BaRTefaaTa Fam aawaftaly at] ——” 
B. gafaae fafafa afafeea fataufa faefaae aeafe — — —* 
C. atfa wet aea2a UECTaa — —* 


TRANSLATION. 


“Success! In the year 4, the first (sonth of) summer, the day 20, oe OL 
. . .. the female convert® (sadhachari) of Sihamitra (Simhamitra), the female 
pupil of Sathisiha (Shashtisimhd), the female pupil of Pusyamitra .. . out of 
the Varana gana, out of the Arya-Hattakiya (Arya-Hattakiya) kula. out of the 
Vajanagari (Vérjanagart) Sékhad .... the gift... ., together with Graha- 
cheta (and) Grahad&dsa” 
No. XII.* 


—=—— aati cs fi fifa = 
alt] arara [1] araare wat — — 


TRANSLATION. 


“In the year 5 of ...., in the fourth (month of) summer, on ihe fifth day,— 
. » . « « Of the preacher (véchaka) Aryya.....(Arya....) outof the Kottiya 
C9GHE) Ware aue ceol » ,OUb OF the: 96.0 a SURhE 8 st 


26 This inscription belongs to Dr. Fihrer’s collection of 1889-90. It is incised on the pedestal of a emall squatted Jina 
measuring l' 6” by 1! 2”. 

27 Restore pratima. 

38 As the right half of the Ja has been lost, the name is not certain. It may have been Jdrapdlita. 

29 Regarding the person meant, see above the Introduction. 

% Tncised on lower border of a sculptured panel, see inscription No. III. 

31 Incised on the base of a squatted Jina, 1’ 1” by 1’ 7’. 

| 3 The t-stroke of siddham has been lost; the Anusvdra is not certain. The t-stroke of uryahdttakiydto is faintly 

visible on the impression. Below the ja of vajanagarito a letter, probably another 7a, has been lost. Restore Sikhdto, but 
more syllables have probably been lost. 

33 At the end of the line, the name of the nun bas been lost, and probably also the word nireartand 

34 The line is mutilated both in the teginning and at the end, the name of the donor or donatrix and the description of 
the gift being certainly lost. 

% This translation is, of course, merely tentative ; the Sanskrit equivalent is Srddd. achari. 

% Incised on base of a squatted figure of Jina, measuring 2 by 1’ 0” 


2 
gy 


202 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No kee 
A.ayocws fe 2 [wary] — [al — — fara aaa] — -— -— — 
B. awarat aexfaarat qatat afa — — — — — — Bo 
D.1. — — — arfa aae — 4 arfafag (%) era eal Wale] — — — — 


33 


40 


2. — [areata] gata wag 1" 


TRANSLATION, 


“The year 18, the fourth (month of) summer, the third day,—on that (dale specified 
as) above a fourfold [image], the gift of Masigi(?), (mother of) Jaya.......- 
[at the request] of .....a gani out of the [Kotti]yagaya ...., outof the 
. eo « . samnbhoga, out of Vachchhaliya (Vdtsaliya) kula. May it be for the wel- 
fare of all beings!” 


No. XIV.* 


A. —-—--gqy Qo [=] a 2 fe go 8 
B. fag falafaliea anant aftetfae [Fad]? — —* 


TRANSLATION. 


“The year 18, the second (month of) the rainy season, the day 11 : ; : 
° : : . [the gift] of Mita-Siri (? Mitraégré), the daughter of . Se 
a... of divine Arishtanemi (Arishtanemi) . : . 


No, XV.* 
A. Wee ae fe co wa qe 
B.1. — — grat wet [a]eafen arent [aifearht qerdit seat] 1 aefa- 
fra [ale* 
2. —— — — [sai] — aree faader afee fag fa we 1 fated ere 1” 


57 Incised on the base of a quadruple image of four standing naked Jinas, 1’ by 8”. The section ©, has been cut away. 

3 Read asyd. The restoration kottiydto is highly probable. At the end of the line the name of the Sarmbhoga has 
been lost. 

%* Indistinct remnants of sya are visible after gani. The lost piece C must have contained the name of the Ganin and 
the greater portion of the description of the donatrix which is very imperfect. 

* The impressions point to mdtu. For mdsigiye it is possible to read mdsiniye or maseniye, but none of these forms, 
adinits of an explanation. May it be Mosiniye for Moshiniye ? See below No. xxxvii. Restore survutobhadriké pratimd. 

4l Read sarvasatvdnam. 

® Jncised on base of small standing Jina, measuring 2! by 10”. 

43 Perhaps varshu is to be restored. 

“ The third syllable of the proper name is not certain. 

* Incised on base of small squatted Jina, 2! by 1’ 1”. 

“° Restore kottiydto gan4to; vahato(=brihato). Before kutumbiniye the impression shows a faint vertical stroke, which 
apparently indicates that in reality the line is at an end, and that one must read on from the beginning of B2. the last 
words, which would give no sense, must be read at the end of the second line. 

‘7 Probably ganisya is to be restored in the beginning. As only one syllable has been lost between arya and ddsasya 
the restoration goddsasya seems certain, The name occurs in the Kulpasitra (p.79 ed. Jacobi). After devilasya stands again 
a faint vertical stroke, exactly corresponding to that in the upper line. The proper order of the words is therefore : — 


aia (alata) waisted mrad (orfaardt sardit ae[at] (2) (wfwe] wd (atlewa fardar afew fag eee 
azfafay aefafca ere 1 


s9aLbUrG ‘Ud ‘40L4N4 ¥ 


“pag-| 121298 


“YIP-L 2/098 


“SyYIOE-E + 4D9S 
“pourb140 34) {my $4998 


-edvljpeys ys} peweuun JO Hara 8) 


a fe RE ee 
‘oN .SUORMISUT MEIN 


yy 


‘einyae yy fo sedeaqyegsyy 943 JO suoid osu] 


Mees. 1 


Ac] SON O(SHIMAS MIN) SNOLLAIUIOSNI WNivi 


VUNHLVN 


“PYE-L J apoag 


SS.LFLuL Yf “Lanyng 


18 “weg pareg : 


“Purby4a ayy fry : ayDag 


OAS, 


3 


P4g-p : BDI 


parysis3 “QE ‘wes pezeg a OW =i 


“jourb rua 842 JiMH : sjpog 


“AX 


IIIA “SON :(SH1UHS MAN) SNOILdIMYOSNI WNIVE VunH.LYW 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM MATHURA. 203 


TRANSLATION. 
“The year 31, the first (month of the) rainy season, the tenth day,—at this moment 
a gift (was made) by Grahasiri (Grahasr/), daughter of Buddhi (and) wife of Devila 
at the request of the great (?) [G@ayin] Aryya [-Go-Jdasa, out of the [Kotti]ya 
(gana), the Aryya-Veri (Arya-Vajré) sékhd, the Thaniya (Sthdniya) hula.” 


No. XVI.* 
A. 1. fasq 1 aafe@lt g¢1 2 Baraaa 8 feaa 2 area aa — — — 
; availa] 
B. 1. — fu aaafeae faa faarfaaa [fiqlafea atq afen acfataa 
7 oe 


51 
| 


bo 


. fea — tt — f-— a arg afaae acenutaa vadiufeat 


TRANSLATION, 

“Success! In the year 32, in the fourth month of winter, on the second day, a 
fourfold image of the Arhat (was dedicated) by Jitamitra, daughter of Ritunandi 
(Ritunand:), wife of Buddhi (avd) mother of the perfumer. . . . . ., at the request 
of garni Aya-Nandika (drya-Nandika), .... .. outof the Varana gana, the 

oe 9a hula. xb 


No. xX VIL™ 
L. 1. wqye Seana a — — — 


3. a qufera 
4. faa 
5 =a jean eer 


No continuous translation of the fragment is possible. The date is “the year 50 
and the first or fifth (?) month of winter.” 


No. XVIII™. 


L. 1. fase daw eToAT yo 2 Sarmalatla wa—feaa Wadia 2° y wa BA aT] 
fearat warel tj 


2. Sarat weadt wifarfaarat Fatal t | Aheea Wilarat TaMaraagEae* 
3. fan afearaagefes seat aaa wafeface faadat TE aa” 
4. Ware were sifeaaaes ea ara feagarare | 


4 Incised on base of a quadruple image of four standing naked Jinas, measuring 8’ by 11’. 
#9 Possibly gandto kattidyto is to be restored. 

50 Restore gant; ritu is uncertain. 

31 Perhaps prdtdrikasya to be restored, which might mean ‘a ferryman.’ 
52 Incised on base of large squatted Jina, measuring 1’ 5” by 1! 10." 

8% Perhaps Aryya kharasya. 

54 Incised on the base of a broken image, measuring 8” by 1’ 6”. 

5 The Anusvara of samvatsara is doubtful. 

© Read skhdto. 

5 Shadhacharo standa no doubt for sadhacharo; possibly devefasya or divetasya. 


See below. No, XXXIX. 


2p 2 


204 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


TRANSLATION. 


“Success! the year fifty-two, 52, the first month ‘of winter, the twenty-fifth day, 
25—at that moment (was dedicated) the gift of the worker in metal*G ot tika, the Sara,” 
the son of Sramanaka, at the request of the preacher Aryya-Divita, (who is) the 
convert of the gani Aryya-Maaguhasti (and) the pupil of the preacher Ary ya-Ghastu- 
hasti out of the Kottiya gana, the Verda (Vajrd) sékhd, the Sthanikiya kula (and) 
the Srigriha sambhoya. May it be for the welfare and happiness of all creatures ! 


NO: EX s 


Ll. fawaeo ar fex wie gaa aa waaaTela)” 
2. arunfure fant weaet arafoat aa faacat 


“Success! the year 62, the second (month of the) rainy season, the day 5, on that 
(date, specified as) above, the pupil of the preacher Aya-Karkuhastha (Arya-Karkasa- 
gharshita)” of the Varana gana, was the dfapika Grahabala, at his request ...... 


No. XX.*% 
A.l.doceads fe 20 Wael yar alfed AT aeurai aTaTat — — 
2. al qaaaete atedt ufe(stacae ufad faacata 1” 
B. — — — waa arfaara [fea] era afar aie aa @afafad a — —— —” 


TRANSLATION, 


“ The year 79, the fourth (month of the) rainy season, the twentieth day—on that 
(date, specified as) above, Aya-Vridhahasti (Arya-Vriddhahastin), a preacher in the 
Kottiya gana (and) in the Vaird (Vajra) sdkhd, gave the advice to make an image of 
the Arhat Nandiavarta (Ndndydvarta)” ..... . the image, the gift of the 


female lay-disciple Dina (Datta), wife of . . ., was set upat the Vodva Stupa, built by 
the gods.” 
No. XXI®. 


L. 1. aco cae fee wre garg [a faarstara aa- 
2. atfafafaa zara faaaars [alefafa — — — 


58 Compare ante, vol. I, p. 391, No. xxi. 

59 T take Sidra, as the name of the family or the clan. 

® Incised on the upper part of the base of a sitting Jina 2! 8” by 1' 8” ; the lower part has been destroyed. 

* On further consideration, I read the numeral sign, which I formerly believed to possibly stand for 40, always as 60. 

® The persons named here are probably the same as those in Sir A. Cunningham’s inscription, re-edited in the Vienna 
Or, Jour., vol. 1, p. 172. 

® Tncised on the left portion of the base of a large standing figure of Jina, measuring 2’ 3” by 1’ 8’; the right portion 
is missing. 

% T now recognise that the second figure is 9, not 8, as I read it formerly. Possibly the apparent ra-stroke above 
va may be accidental. Possibly kojiye to be read. At the end of the line the two syllables vdcha have certainly been lost, 
because the syllable Xo in 1. 2 stands exactly under sazm and |, 2 is, therefore, complete. 

§ The na is abnormal, and so is the marking of the length of 4 by a stroke going upwards. 

66 Tt is possible to read also vofve, which, however, is as unsatisfactory as vodve. Perhaps voddhe, i.e. vriddhe “ ancient,” 
igmeant. Professor E. Leumano proposes to divide pratimdvo dve and to take this in the sense of pratime dve (two images )? 
Thisexceedingly ingenious explanation becomes difficult, because in A only one statue is mentioned. Restore pratishthapitd. 
Atthe beginning of the live stood the name of Dind’s husband, as a small remnant of a sya is still visible on the impression. 

ve TheArhat Nandyavarta, #.¢., he whose mark is the Nandydvarta symbol, is Ara, the eighteenth Tirthamkara, 
8in cisedon the upper part of the base of a seated figure, 2’ 5” by 1/ 10”, lower part destroyed. 


MATHURA JAINA INSCRIPTIONS (NEW SERIES): Nos. XVI-X1 
No. 16: Dated Sam. eas - 


: Dated Sam. 50. 


=f A a, +5 z ¥ 
: a4 
; m6 ET, Scale: 1-3rd. 
o> 


‘Sealer Half the original. 


No. 18: Dated Sam. 52. 


Aght 44% 
Map ANS ia ee oh ee Ae 


& 


2 thus ap peta i 


ch, > bas as ‘ 3: 


A Fuhrer, Ph. D,impress Scale: 3-10ths. 


SSILPUI'G Yd LALYNY ¥ 


wn 


> URC payeR 
ajpog gO “ueg pairq 


06 Weg paieq wos. ON 


“1016140 342 {my + ajnag 


ee: a 
PAYS = 9 


z ON 


SyJOL-E + ajvog 


Pag~{ * /D98 


. “exysiany :$z ‘on 


‘OL “WRS palep UONdiosuL - oz ‘ON 
“TAXX-XX°SON : (SATIAS MAN) SNOLLGIUOSNE VNIVE WanHIWW 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM MATHURA. 205 


TRANSLATION. 
“The year 81, the first (month of the) rainy season, the sixth day—on that (date as 
specified) above at the request of Datd, the female pupil® of Ayika-Jiva (Aryikd-Jéivd) 
—Grahasiri (Grahasri) ,. 2... 


No. XXII. 
L.1. wafeo a] -—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—-—~— gata fers aya 
2. at——atatalet oa— ale) — [alat gerd werarat wrer[at] — — 
afraa afasare—fata 


This inscription is Sir A. Cunningham’s No. 19 (Archeological Survey Reports, 
vol. III, pl. xv). It seems to have suffered since the time when the first facsimile was 
prepared. The date, which I have given according to Sir A. Cunningham, has dis- 
appeared, and several letters at the end of line 2 have become indistinct. Its chief 
value consists in the mention of the Majhamé sékhé and the Pa-vaha-ka kula, which 
latter I have formerly identified with the Pragnavéhanaka or Panhavdéhanaya kula of 
the Jainy tradition. Dr. Fihrer’s impression shows pretty clearly that the first letter is pa, 
which is not equally certain according to Sir A. Cunningham’s facsimile. It also makes 
it probable that the third letter of the name is not hu, but ha. The name of the gana 
was without a doubt Kottiya, as the first syllable ko is tolerably distinct. 


No. XXIII.” 
A. aal Teal AeTfacea Teo 2 [a] —— — 
B.1. free a[fule [alfea (falacer tre oume fq ——- —-— — 
2. —— — f— [a] — at aearanfan ufa — — — — = —gon [8] [n]” 


TRANSLATION. 

** Adoration to the Arhat Mahavira (Mahdvira) ! The year 93, the .... (month 
of) the rainy season ..... at the request of the gant Nandi (Nandi) pupil of...... 
an image of divine Varddhamana was set up by....... , the daughter of the gold- 
smith Deva, for the worship [of the Arhat]}.” 


No. XXIV.” 
weoc Se fey wage aft lfare [1] wos saan — — —" 


TRANSLATION. 


The year 98, the first (month of) winter, the fifth day, at that moment,-- out of 
the Kottiya gana, the Uchanagarti (Uchchdnagari) [sakhd]....... 


6 Amtevdsikini, as well as ayikd, are properly diminutives. Compare pavajitikd, which is common in the Buddhist 
inscriptions. 

79 Incised on the base of a sitting Jina, 1’ 8” by 2’ 2”. 

7 Regarding the form nandiye, which is indisputable, see above, the Introduction 

7 Restore bhagavato and further on pratichthapité arhato or arhata, 

73 Incised on the base of a squatted Jina 1' 10” by 2’ 4”. 

7% Restore uchanagarito Sakhdto. 


206 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. XXV,” 
-—-—-—-—— [alyae yfaae a — — —” 


TRANSLATION. 


“In the-year ..+... Of 2. Devapitiral uvieneas.ca5. 


No. XXVI.” 
A.1. wget [a] B. 1. a[<]e]at] GO.1.—-3— 
2. atT— — 2. — [elaa 2. ufaa — — 


Dl wa—t—@ ealyjaa(zlae — — —” 
2. [at|fala] aneae faut fala al— —ta-— — 


I am not able to give a certain connected translation of this fragment. It is only 
evident that D. 1—2 gives us the names of the Mahardija Devaputra Huksha, 
(Hushka oy Huvishka), and of a monk named Nagadata (Ndgadatta). It may 
also be suggested that the inscription begins with D. 1, because that line contains the 
group sdha, an abbreviation of sidham, and the name of the king. The continuation may 
possibly be looked for in A 1, where the word ekunatiga, the twenty-ninth, seems to be- 
long to the date. The year 29 would fall in the reign of Tuvishka. 


No. XX VIL.” 


L.1. fasq aetose asia — — - — — 
2. teafew frame —a-— ——-—-—— f—” 


TRANSLATION. 


“Success! Of the great king, the supreme king of kings . . . . . by Sena, the 
pupil of Ohanandi (Oghanandin”) . . . . 


No. XXVIII.” 


A. — —amadl sau area ae arisa Ga —- — — — — — wrt [a] — -—* 
B. gaa aaa fatafara arfeare fa — — —* 
TRANSLATION. 


[Adoration] to divine Usabha [Rishabha]! At the request of SAaditd, female 


75 Incised on the base of a standing Jina, measuring 3! 6” by 2! 6’. 

7 Restore devaputrasya and samnwvatsare. 

7 Incised on the base of a broken standing Jina, measuring 1! 8” by 1’ 1’. 

#8 The bracketed letters are all more or less uncertain : hukshasya looks, because the first letter is blurred, like puksha- 
sya. But two impressions show a small curve at the extremity of the top of the right-hand vertical stroke, 

7 Tncised on the base of a sitting Jina, 1’ 6” by 2' 1’. 

® Restore senena according to C. No. 10 (republished ante, vol. I, p. 396, No. xxx), where Sena, pupil of Ohanandi, is 
mentioned. The last za is faintly visible on the impression, It is important to note that in this inscription the initial letter 
of Onanandi’'s name is unmistakable and that the reading Deha® is impossible. 

8 As the other inscription is dated Sam. 47, the king, whose name has been lost, must be Huvishka. 

* Incised on the base of a squatted Jina, measuring 2! by L8G 


% Restore namo before bhagavato. Possibly ndfike or nddike to be read. Restore Sékdyam 
* Restore S4rvartand, 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM MATHURA. 207 


pupil of . . .dhuka, a preacher® in the Varana gana, Nadika kula and 
SEKI we ce) tye 


e ° . ° 


No. XXIX." 
altfafaa ae afta safefag faa aaa Peat area” ote faa — — 


"TRANSLATION. 


.. “The preacher Ghoshaka, pupil of the Uggahini,* a gani (ganin) in the 
Sthanikiya (ky) hula; an image of the Arhat Parsva (Pdrégva).” ... 


NOs kkk 
L. 1. wat aerara faraa ofan yaw aifufagan” 
2. fas areata sraraaral ufaarfadt areeagena [0] 


TRANSLATION. 


“Adoration to the Arhats! A tablet of homage (dydgapdta) was set up by 
Sihanadika (Simhanddika ? °nandika?), son of the Vanika™ Sihaka (Simhaka) and 
son of a Kosiki (Kausiki mother), for the worship of the Arhats.” 


No. XXXI.” 
vat acearet fran loale aft[at] — -—— -at———-—at— — 


TBANSLATION. 
“ Adoration to the Arhats! . . . . the wife of Sivaghoshaka ... .” 


No. XXXII.” 
L. 1. wat aceaTa [wa] — wa fag acawe aya ugafea vata” 
2. alaat]a afarjaaet ufaarfodt acwagera [0%] 


TRANSLATION. 


* Adoration to the Arhats! A tablet of homage (dydgapata) was set up by 
Achala (?), daughter of Mala-na (?), daughter in-law of Bhadrayasa (Bhadrayasas), 
and wife of Bhadranadi (Bhkadranandin), for the worship of the Arhats.” 


% Védyaka is the Jaina-Prakrit form for vdchaka. . 

8 Incised on the left side of the upper part of the base of a squatted Jina, 1’ 2” by 1’ 9”, the right side being broken off. 

% Read arhato. . ; 

88 The word looks like a female name, and might correspond with Sanskrit wdgrahini. But the difficulty is that it is 
joined with the title ganz, which is given to males alone. See 

® Incised on the base of a beautifully sculptured square panel measuring 2! 1 by 1/ 11”, the central figure of which is a 
seated Jina. : 

%” Arahamta® is a mistake for arahanta and dydgay dto may be a mistake for pato, but, as the Sanskrit has pata and 
patta, the form pdta is not impossible. : ae 

1 This might be a corruption or misspelling for vdnijaka or vdniyaka. But, as Sihanadika receives the epithet koSike- 
putra, I suspect that he was a Kshatriya, not the son of a merchant, and that Vdnika is the name of his clan. 

% Incised on the base of a sculptured square slab, measuring 2 10” by 3! 1”. 

% Incised on the base of a sculptured square slab, measuring 2! 7” by 2! 4”. 

%* The bracketed letters are uncertain. The first may be aT- 

The second and third letters of this line ave uncertain. 


208 EPIGBAPHIA INDICA. 


No. X XXIII.® 
A. ayaraafzat ancaere frat arfufte — — — — 


Bl. — f— =u — aetfafa” feara arte afealfal §-— — — — 
Ds alia Ti eee ieee 


"TRANSLATION. 


“An image of Vardhamana, the gift of Dina (Dattd), daughter of Vajaranadya 
(Vajranandin), [daughter-in-law]® of Vadhisiva (Vriddhisiva?) house-wifeof ... . 
‘> Badimasr se?) wr 

No. XXXIV” 


L. 1. saanfeadt wedt weaeere fifafe waa —' 
2. waaaare fast waafare ufta? arefies fart waaay Ty — —— — 


1 


3. fratae fataa fraere 4 arfad arg waa waa a - 
4, [atjre waver feagea 0 


TRANSLATION. 


“For the acceptance’ of Ary ya-Sandhi (Arya-Sandhi), pupil of Aryya-Balattrata 
(Arya-Balatrdta) [aud of ?] Aryya-Bahma, . .(Arya-Brahma . .), the temaie pupil 
of Aryya-Balattrata (Arya-Balatréta) out of the Uchenagari ( Uchchdnagarz) sakhd, 
Jaya, daughter of Navahasti (“hastin), daughter-in-law of Grahasena ... ., mother 
of the brothers Sivasena, Devasena and Sivadeva, has set up an image of [Var- 
dha ]mana for the welfare and happiness of all creatures.” 


No. XXXV.4 
A. faa faa 
B. 1. at wear faftaat sattaat wer 
2. f—aara faaaat fasel[a] —° 
3. — — wae ag etl] — — — 


Remark, 


If the two fragments, which admit of no connected translation, belong to one in- 
scription, the occurrence of the words nirvartand and nivatand is very remarkable. 
There is no other instance of the kind. 


%6 Incised on the base of a squatted Jina, measuring 1! 11” by 1’ 6”. 

7 The ba of kutibins is abnormal, being made round and not perfectly closed. 

98 The restoration proposed may be safely made according to the analogy of the other inscriptions. 

8 Incised on the base of a large slab, measuring 2’ 10” by 2! 1”. 

100 Read HTSrTal. Restore Waawetfas or faara. 

1 The apparent d-stroke after the Ja of Balatirata is an accidental scratch, not visible on the reverse. The same re- 
mark applies to the apparent ra-stroke above the va of Navahastisya. According to the reverse of the impression the real 
reading is parigrahe, not parigraho, as the obverse seems to show. At the eud of the line, five or six letters have been lost, 
probably bhayd or bharyd, preceded by a male name in the genitive. 

2 Read Sivasenasya. Restore pratishthdpitd vardha. 

+ Parigrahe ‘for the acceptance ’ is common on the Buddhist inscriptions of the first and the following centuries of 
our era. Here it indicates that the ascetics named exhorted Jdyd to make the donation and that the spiritual merit is made 
over to them ; for, the image itself could, of course, be of no use to them. 

* Incised on the base of a quadruple image of four standing maked Jinas, measuring 2’ by 8”; sections C and D being 
cut away. 


* Av the beginning qufauarg tec. wafautran: has probably to be restored ; compare below No, XXXVI. 


Scale; 1-3r 


Aw 


ae ae 
pe < 
e200 

oy : ts. 


A Fuhrer, PhO ,unpress. 


ri : 
= 
_— 
2 
. 5 ie 
- 


Scale: Half the original. 


Scale Half the original 
Seale : 1-3rd. 


No. 42: Buddhist Inscription from Kaman, Sam. 74. 


, 


TTY Usdin ulhaxau pr 
oes) Avaxatn ad 


Scale: 1-3rd. 


w 


ae «gt Sey. er Ya ips 
Nal CI ee 


A Fuhrer. Ph. D., empress. 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM MATHURA. 209 


No. XXXVI* 
L.1. —— yo (?) 2 fe 9 we yaa atm we wahaag_aat [a] —- —’ 
2. — wat fafefarat adiaal azat aaa a afuat a wafela]— 
3. — ay feare fafafa safsaettaufaufiag fafufaa — — 
4, waraoufarcaaiuafafa gaa fud waagaua — —” 
5. [elfawe aq faylalas fueafen fanafatia ea ay — —" 
6 


TRANSLATION. 


LE 


° ; 50, (P?) second month of winter, first day, on that (date, specified 
as) mio: [an mage of | Vadha[ mana] (Vardhaména), the gift of Vijayasiri (Vija- 
yasri), daughter of Bubu, first wife of Rajyavasu (Rdjyavasu), mother of Devila 
and) paternal grandmother of Vishnubhava, who fasted for a month” (and) obeys 
the command” of Afyya] . ~. ghakaraba (?) (who is) the female pupil, obeying 
the command" of Ayya-Jinadasi (Arya-Jinaddsi), (who was) the female prpil of Sa- 
madi... ya Dinara, the great (?) preacher and ganz out of the Varana (Vérana) 
gana, the Tap hy ists (?) kuda, the Sa[ikasiyd] séhid. and the Sirigriha (Srégriha) 
SAMDROGEG “2s 6 ee 8 


No, XX XVII" 


Al. fae ai[felan weit saa- 

2. aftal wadt aeterfasrar® 

3. Haat feieaeat daa 

4, wasaeetes fren a[lafalfe (a) 
Bl. we fra(Y] waa” 

2. [atlaraat ver faaa- 

3. a ax(ujefala]® 


6 Incised on the base of a broken image, measuring 10” by 1! 4”, 

7 The first figure may possibly have been 7. In the transcript, I have given the apparently plain, but inexplicable, read- 
ing ayyabhyistakulato. It is, however, possible that the third syllable may be intended for zyi. If this were the case, and 
if we might assume that we had to deal with a combination of the consonants and a partial omission of the vowels, as in sdha 
for sidha (see No. xxvi), the first four syllables might be akind of tachygraphic representation of ayydniyasato and cor 
respond to dryakaniyasatah. This kula of the Varana gana is mentioned in No. 23, ante, vol. I, p. 392. The Sakha 
was probably Samkdsiyd, see Kalpasiitra, p. 80 (ed. Jacobi} 

8 Restore Sakhato ie. Sdkhdto ; read sambhogato and bahato’;; the last bracketed letter is very doubtful. 

9 Restore ayya°. 

© Restore dharmapatni 

M Read devilasya. Restore vadhamanapratimé or perhaps patima, as the inscription does not mark the d-stroke. 
The last three syllables no doubt stood in line 6, which bas been completely destroyed with the exception of the tops of 
a few letters. 

12 A pious queen, who fasted for a month, is mentioned in the large Naragh&t inscription, Arch, Sur. Rep. W. I. 
vol. v., p- 60. 

138 Panatidhdrita corresponds with Sanskrit dhdritaprajna pti. 

4 Panatihara ie. in Sanskrit prajiaptidhard. 

18 Incised on base of a large quadruple image, consisting of four standing naked Jinas, measuring 1! 7” by 9”. 

16 Read bahma. ; 

Read tasya. 

18 Nirvatana is, no doubt, meant for nirvartand, 


210 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


C1. [=] efaa a faa aa- 
2, tae ay aifafaa 
3. TY FSS AYIA 

D 1. wau[ fale face’ 
2. ea waelafan” 

3. aawaa feagea” 


TRANSLATION, 


“Success! The pupil of Ayya-Jeshtahasti (Jyeshthahastin) out of the Kottiya 
gana, the Uchenagari (Uchcehdnagart) Sdkhd, (and) the Bamhadasia ( Brahmadédsika- 
kula) (was) Aryya-Mihila (Arya-Mihira); his pupil (was) the preacher (vdch- ka) Arya- 
Ksheraka (Arya-Kshairaka?); at his request a fourfold (image was dedicated as) the 
gift of Sthirdé, daughter both of Varanahasti (“hastim) and of Devi, daughter-in-law 
of Jayadeva (avd) daughter-in-law of Moshini (and) first wife of Kutha Kasutha 
for the welfare and happiness of all creatures.” 


No. XXXVIII.” 
drat TATATH Yo © Paatan —* 
—r1a [fe]aa adtet a—yatai —” 


TRANSLATION, 


In the fifty-seventh, 57, year, in the third month of winter, on the thirteenth day, 
on that (date specified as) above»... . 


No, XX XIX.” 
L.1. fawy | WHWETTRNTETCTfeTgaTgAS farted [goo go] 
ga——— — war — — [fe]— a 2° wai ylatailatteer ae” 
2. fearad(at) arene efaararanafveara wrareia afeure eq asfaeur- 
falalmlatifcaa aefeana afear ufeertoar 1” 


TRANSLATION, 

‘Success ! In the year 113, in the victorious reign of the supreme lord and supreme 
king of great kings, the illustrious Kumaragupta, on the twentieth day [of the 
winter-month] K arttika]—on that (date, specified as) above an image was set up by 
Samadhya (Syémadhyd), daughter of Bhattibhava (and) house-wife of the ferry- 


” Dhamrapatiha seems to be a misspelling of dharmapatiye with dhamra for dharma, Compare the forms of th 
Girndr version of Afoka's rock-edicts drabhipid for drabhitpd, titsamti for tistamti, and so forth, ee age 

% Meant for ddnah sarvatobhadriké viz. pratimd, 

21 Meant for sarvasaténa hitasukhdye. The spelling servra for earva is not uncommon in bad MSS, 

%2 This is Mr. Growse’s No. 5 (Indiun Antiquary, vol. VI, p. 219). It is incised on tl@ base of a small statue 
preserved io the Mathur&é Museum, a ROW 

23 Read hemanta ; restore trittya or tritiye. 

% Restore mdse and asydm. 

26 Incised on the base of a large sitting Jina, measuring 3! 8 by 2! 7°, 

% Read -mahdrdja-; restore karttikahemantamdsasya divase. 

% Read datildch dryya.—Possibly prabhdrikasya is to be read, 


JAINA INSCRIPTIONS FROM MATHURA. 211 


man (?) GrahamittrapAlita,” who had received the command (to make the dedication 
from. Datilachayya (Dattildchdrya) out of the Kottiya gana (and) the Vidy4- 
dhari Sakha.” 
No, XL.” 
L.1. —falta a)” 

2. aaraetat Hag 

3. anfaat: uv afar 

4. tasicat fafa — 

5. waatlata qaaag 

This fragment, of which no continuous translation is possible, belongs to a 

longer metrical Prasasti, which apparently recorded the building or restoration of a 
temple. For the remnant of line 5 says :—‘‘ By him this ... of the sage, which touches 
the sky.” It is evident.that a word like weq or araaaq has been lost. The verses 
to which the pieces in, lines 2, 3 and 5 belong, seem to have been in the Sarddlavikridita 


metre. 
No. XLI.® 


L. 1. at atfarrea: AVATAR ATA | 
aratafasratag- 
2, whareta a ita: t [Que] 
qaraaaamaarifee watena: | 
3. quataragras: arfeata afar: 1 [ran] 
WAL Qoto RyHT- 
4. wanat afea: ust 


TRANSLATION. 


“Om! The illustrious Jinadeva (was) a Siri; after him was he who is named 
the illustrious Bhavadeva. His pupil (is) the Achdrya Vijayasin ga (Vijaya- 
sinha). Exhorted by him the virtuous laymen, who reside in Navagrdma, Sthana 
and other (towns), caused to be made, full of devotion, (and) in accordance with their 
means, this fourfold Vardhamana; it was fashioned in the [Vikrama] year® 1080 
by Thambhakaand Pappaka, Om!” 


38 The translation of prdtdrika by “ferryman” seems to be justified by the use of pratri, which frequently means 
“ to carry over in a ship or boat.” 

2° Incised on the back of a large broken slab, the surface of which is beautifully carved. 

30 Only the lower portions of the bracketed syllables are visible. 

2 Jncised on the base of a quadruple image of four sitting Jinas, measuring 2 6” by 1' 3”. 

32 Read #i- Both here and at the end of the inscription, the word is expressed by the symbol resembling the 
figure 9. Read -vijayasimha- . 

33 Read susrdvakair ; sthath, svaSaktitah. 

u 

% =i = obha from the characters, which show the common Nagart of the eleventh century A.D., that the era must 
be the Vikrama Sarhvat, and that the date corresponds to A. D. 1022—24, accordingly as the year was expired or current and 
a northern: or a southern one. This donation was, therefore, made within five years after Mahmud 8 expedition against 
Mathura (A.H. 409) during which the temples of the town are said to have been burnt (Elliot, History of India, vol. 
II, p. 4562.). Probably the Jaina temples of the KankAlf Tila escaped destruction; for, it seems hardly likely that 


they could have been gebuilt so quickly. aan 


212 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. XLII.” 
L. 1. fagidocs ze fere yx ata at fuga afene era araat narafarart 
ufaat fafecfaett a[arat}ui wafearetat afters arafaret a7 
2. aalalur a feagaral 1 
''RANSLATION. 


“ Success! The year 74, the first (month of) summer, the fifteenth day,—at that 
moment, a statue of divine Sakyam uni (Sakuamuni, was set up as) the gift of the 
monk Nandika in the Mihiravihara, for the acceptance of the Sarvastivadi, 
(Sarvdstivddin) teachers, for the welfare and happiness of (¢he donor’s) parents and of 


all creatures.” 


XV.—SAMGAMNER COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION OF THE YADAVA 
BHILLAMA II. 


Tue Saka year 922. 
By Proressor F. Kietnorn, Pa.D., C.1.E.; GOrrineen. 


I edit this inscription from excellent impressions prepared by Mr. H. Cousens, 
Superintendent of the Archeological Survey of Western India, The original plates 
belong to an inhabitant of Samgamner, in the Samgamner Sub-Division of the 
Ahmadnagar District of the Bombay Presidency. 

The inscription is on three plates, the first and last of which are inscribed on one 
side only, and which are held together by a ring, bearing a Garuda as seal.' Each plate 
measures about 83” broad by 132” high. The first plate contains 28, and the last 22 
lines of writing; on the front of the second plate are 37, and on the back 29 lines, 
Below the writing on the third plate, in the proper right corner, the figure of a conch. 
shell is engraved; and the same plate, in line 110, contains an ornamental device, 
shaped like an open fiower. The plates are on the whole well preserved, but in the upper 
part of the second plate the writing on both sides has suffered slightly from corrosion, 
and in consequence a few aksharas, of no great importance, have become illegible. As 
may be inferred from the numbers of lines on the several plates, the writing, though 
done by one and the same writer, is wanting in uniformity. The size of the letters is 
about ,5,” on the first and last plates and on the lower part of the back of the second 
plate, but only between ,%” and }” on the front and at the top of the back of the second 
plate. The characters are those of the ordinary Nagari alphabet of the period to which 
the inscription belongs, The language is Samskrit, but the names of the Brahmans, men- 

36 Incised on the base of a large seated Bnddha, found in the town of Kaman. 

37 The curve open to the left with a small horizontal bar in the centre is, as-now appears, a peculiar form of the 
full-stop. It occurs also in No. ix of the collection, published ante, vol. I, p. 387. There I failed to recognise its value 
(see note 5), because I misread the preceding sign as st. The latter is, as I now recognise, sda, the abbreviation for 
sidha, which occurs also in No. xxiv of the earlier collection as sdhi.and as'sdha in No. xxvi of the present one. The 
first numeral sign may also be read as 40. The vowels of the bracketed syllables are not certain. Possibly the stone has 
métd-, which has to be restored in any case. The long ré-vowel in pitrindm is plainly expressed on the impression by a 
curved stroke slanting to the left, to which a second stroke is attached. 

% The third sign of sarvvasatvand is so badly injured that it is impossible to say if it was not fud. The vowel of 


the last sign is perfectly plain on the impression. 
I owe this inforination to Mr. Cousens » 


SAMGAMNER COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION. 213 


tioned in lines 66-77, and the name of the writer in line 114 are given in their verna- 
cular forms (Kesavainpddhydyena for Kesavopddhydyena, in line 114, Néranaiupddh yaya 
for Ndérdyandépddhydya, in line 66, Vidyddharaidya for Vidydédharéya, and Sridha- 
raiupadhydya for Srdharopidiyaye. in line 67, etc.). Besides, attention may be drawn 
to the term shaSrevddha, in line 88, which is equivalent to the expression khaSrdvddhd 
of the Siyadéni inscription, ante, vol. I, p. 165; and to the title or biruda sellavidega, 
which does not look like Samskrit and which I am unable to explain, in line 51. Ex- 
cepting the words om namah Sivdya and a date in lines 1-2, the first part of the inscrip- 
tion which treats of the genealogy of the grantor, up to line 45, or perhaps 47, is in 
verse. ‘The formal part of the grant, beginning with line 48, is in prose, but quotes a 
large number of benedictive and imprecatory verses,’ in lines 55-61, 89-98, 102-106, 
and 108-110; and another verse, asking the reader’s indulgence for any clerical 
mistakes which the writing may be found to contain, is given in lines 114-116. As 
regards orthography, the letter d is throughout denoted by the sign for v; the dental 
sibilant is often used for the palatal,.e.g., in Sivdya, 1.1, ésah, 1. 6, visdlah, 1. 26; and 
the palatal occurs instead of the dental in samsdra, 1. 60, and Sakala, |. 82. Besides, 
the vowel zi is employed instead of ri in Atri, 1, 10, and trigrdmi, 1. 84, and ri in the 
place of 77 in the word rishayah, 1, 95. Altogether the inscription has not been written 
carefully, and, though corrected in several places, it is by no means free from serious 
mistakes. The rules of samdhi are frequently disregarded ; the verses of the genealo- 
gical portion are only partially numbered or have wrong numbers appended to them; 
single aksharas and whole words or groups of words are either given quite wrongly 
or left out ; and I hope to prove below that even one or more whole lines have been 
omitted by the writer. 

The inscription is one of the Mahdsémanta Bhillama II., and it is the earliest 
record, hitherto discovered, of the YAdava dynasty (of Devagiri). After the words 
‘om, adoration to Siva’, it gives (in lines 1-2), both in words and in figures, the date— 
the Saka year 922. It then has (in lines 2-7) two verses, one of which glorifies Siva 
(Chandramauli), while the other invokes the god’s blessing on Bhillama, the donor 
of this grant. The genealogy of Bhillama forms the subject of lines-7-47. Of these, 
lines 7-22 are of no importance because, beginning with the god Sambhu, they merely 
contain an account of the descent of the mythical prince Yadu, the reputed founder 
of the Yadava family,—the intermediate beings mentioned being Brahman, Marichi, 
Atri, Indu, Purtravas, Ayus, Naghusha, and Yayati. Nor do the following lines, 
from 23 to 34, record anything that was not known before.’ The first historical prince 
spoken of is Seunachandra (lines 22-26), who here as elsewhere is reported to have 
called his dominion (mandala) and the people of it after himself. His son was the 
prince Dhadifyappa]* (lines 26-28). After him came, evidently his son, the prince 
Bhillama I. (lines 28-33).° And he again was succeeded by his son, the prince RAjan 


or RAja, called elsewhere Srirdja or RAjagi, 


2 The inscription resembles in this the Kalas-Budrdkh grant of Bhillama III., Indian Antiquary, vol. XVII, p. 121, 

3 Compare, in addition to the Kalas-Budrikh plates of Bhillama III. the Passein grant of Seunachandra 1I., Indian 
Antiquary, vol. X11, p. 119, and Professor Bhandarkar’s Early History of the Dekkan, pp. 75-77. 

+ See note 40, below. 

6 Bhillama provided the god Somanatha (or Siva), at the place where this inscription was composed, with a valuablo 


head-dress or turban. 


214 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


From the end of line 34 our inscription becomes more interesting, but also presents 
some serious difficulties. According to the Kalas-Budrikh plates of Bhillama ITI. 
and the Bassein grant of Seunachandra II., Srirdja was succeeded by his son Vaddiga, 
and he again by Bhillama II., who married Lakshmi or Lachchhiavva, a lady born 
in the RAshtrakdta family. The present grant first tells us (in lines 34-40) that from 
Rajan or Raja sprang the prince Vandiga (the Vaddiga of the other plates), a great 
warrior, who was a follower or feudatory of the illustrious king Krishna or Krishna- 
rAja, and that this Vandiga married the lady Voddiyavva,’ a daughter of the great prince 
(mahdnripa), the illustrious Dhorappa. It then has to be referred, as the text stands, to 
the same Vandiga, two verses (in lines 40-45), the first of which glorifies (as it seems) 
Vandiga for having in battle destroyed the fortune of the great. prince Mufija,® and 
for having thereby made the goddess of fortune observe the vow of a chaste woman in 
the house of the illustrious king Ranarangabhima; while the second verse, among 
the advantages or blessings which he enjoyed, besides recording that Sindinagara was 
his residence, somewhat pointedly enumerates the fact that Lakshmi incarnate, or in 
visible shape, always dwelt in his house, full of joy. After these verses, what may be 
called the poetical part of our inscription contains three more lines (45-47), which read’ 
like fragments of verses or like verses turned somehow into prose, in praise of a new 
Siva-temple, called Vijaydbharanandtha; but there is no indication as to who erected’ 
this temple or why it is mentioned here at‘all, an omission which must appear the more 
remarkable because this temple is poetically described us the collected fame, or the fame 
in bodily form, clearly of its founder who is not named. 

The grant recorded in this inscription was made by Bhillama II., and there can 
be no doubt that the genealogy given in the introductory pragasti should have been 
continued to, and that:the author who composed it did bring it down to, that Bhillama. 
Moreover, I consider it to be perfectly certain that the Lakshm}, spoken of in line 43, 
is the Lakshmi or Lachchhiavva of the other grants, the wife of Bhillama, the donor 
of this grant; and I feel almost as sure that the temple, spoken of in lines 45-47, 
which, or the god worshipped in which, was named Vijaydbharanandtha,. was founded 
either by Bhillama himself one of whose titles or dérudas, as we learn from line 51, was 
Vijaydébharana, or by his wife. Iam thus driven to the conclusion that the writer, who 
copied this inscription, has omitted at least two verses, one verse, before the words svend- 
rdti in line 40, recording that Voddiyavva bore to Vandiga a son, named Bhillama, 
and another, after the word -mahasah in line 45, stating that Bhillama or his wife 
Lakshmi erected the temple eulogised in lines 45-47. And accordingly, what is stated 
in the verse in lines 40-42, must in my opinion really be referred, not to Vandi ga, but 
to his son, and it was Bhillama II. who defeated the great prince Muiija, and who 
thereby secured uninterrupted fortune for his sovereign lord, the illustrious king Rana- 
rangabhima. The question then arises, who-were these kings Mufija and Ranaranga- 
bhima, and who was the king Krishna or KrishnarAdja, to whom Bhillama’s 
father Vandiga owed allegiance ? 

Our grant being dated in Saka 922—A. D. 1000, it is clear that Bhillama II. 

* According tothe Bassein grant Lachchhiayva was the daughter of Jhafijhardja. 


7 This lady built a Siva-temple, the exact name of which 1 am unable to make ont. 
® See note 32, below. ; 


SAMGAMNER COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION. 215 


lived during the last quarter of the 10th century A. D. The only great prince Muiija 
known to us, who could have been his contemporary, was Vakpatiraja-Muija of 
MAlava,’ and it is undoubtedly this Mufija whose defeat by Bhillama is recorded in 
line 41 of this inscription. From this it follows that the king named Ranaranga- 
bhima in our grant, as whose general or feudatory Bhillama was acting, was an 
adversary of Vakpatirdja-Mufja; and I believe that he was really no other than 
the Western Chalukya Tailapa,” by whom Muiija was utterly defeated and taken 
prisoner, and at whose orders he was finally beheaded. Tailapa ruled from A. D. 
978-997; we know him to have also been called Ahavamalla; and Ranaranga- 
bhima is little less than a synonym of Ahavamalla.—Bhillama’s father Vandiga or 
Vaddiga may reasonably be supposed to have lived during the third quarter of the 10th 
century A.D., and, such being the case, the king Krishna or Krishnar4ja, whose follower 
he is represented to have been in this inscription, can only have been the Rashtrakita 
Krishna,” for whom we have the dates Saka 867 and 878'= A.D. 945 and 956, the son 
of Amoghavarsha-Vaddiga. Evidently, down to Vandiga, the Yadavas were feudatories 
of the Rashtrakdtas; after the overthrow of this dynasty by the Chalukyas, which took 
place in A.D. 978, their allegiance was transferred to the Chalukyas.—As the father- 
jn-law of Vandiga our inscription mentions another great. prince, the illustrious Dho- 
rappa. About this prince I am unable to speak with confidence, but I will not suppress 
a conjecture on the probability of which I leave others to judge. Dhorappa is only a 
Prakrit. equivalent of the Samskrit Dhruva, and we know that one of the earlier Rash- 
trakita kings was named Dhruva or Dhora, or Nirupama. Now Krishnardja, the 
sovereign lord of Vandiga, had a younger brother likewise named Nirupama, the 
father of Krishna’s successor Kakkala, and it-seems to me not at all improbable that 
this Nirupama, like his ancestor Nirupama, may too have been called Dhruva or Dhora, 
and that it is he whose daughter was given in marriage to Vandiga.” The description 
of Dhorappa as mahdnripa would thus, I believe, be well accounted for.—I will only 
add here that, if, as we apparently are obliged to do, we place Vandiga in the. third 
quarter of the 10th century A.D., the rise of the Yadava family and the date of Seuna- 
chandra (or his predecessor Dridhaprahara) can hardly be put earlier than A.D. 850. 

The proper object of our inscription is, to record that Bhillama, the king (as he is 
called), granted certain lands, described in lines 78-84, to twenty-one Brahmans who are 
enumerated in lines 64-77. The general meaning of the passage (in lines 48-86) which 
contains this information is clear enough; but the construction, changing as it does 
from the active to the passive, and again to the active construction, is altogether ungram- 
matical. 

Omitting what is of no importance, the illustrious Bhillamar&ja is described in 
lines 48-52 as a mahdsdmanta or great feudatory who had obtained the five mahdéabda, 
the supreme lord of the city of Dvaravati, . . . born in Vishnu’s family, eager to 
worship Siva, . . . and rendered illustrious by such royal‘ titles as Ardti-nishddana, 
‘the destroyer of enemies,’ Samgrdma-Rdma, Kandukdchérya, Sellavidega, and 


9 See ante, vol. I, pp. 226-227. 

10 See Professor Bhandarkar, loc. cit., p. 59, and Dr. Fleet's Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts, p. 41. 

1 See Professor Bhandarkar, tb. pp. 64-57, and Dr. Fleet, ib., pp. 37-38. 

13 It may be noted that Bhiilama III. married ‘Hamma, the daughter of Jayasimha and sister of Ahavamalla, the 


Chilukya emperor.’ See Professor Bhandarkar, 74., p. 78. 


216 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Vijaydbharana, Professor Bhandarkar has already pointed out that,” since Vishnu 
Krishna is represented in the Purdyas to have belonged to the Yadava family, even 
the later princes of Devagiri called themselves Vishnuvamgodbhava, and that, as 
Krishna and his immediate descendants reigned at Dvarakad, they assumed the title of 
Dodravatipuravarddhisvara, ‘the supreme lords of Dvaravati, the best of cities.’ As 
regards the titles or dirudas of Bhillama, the term Sarngrdma- Rdma is applied to 
him also in line 8 of the Kalas-Budrdkh plates. Kandukdchdrya apparently means 
‘a master in playing at ball’, and Sellavidega seems to be a@ Prakrit expression, the 
meaning of which I do not understand. The title Vijaydbhorana has already been 
referred to above. 

The names of the twenty-one donees, given in umes 64-77, it is unnecessary to repeat 
here. From line 64 it would seem™ that they lived at Sindinagara, which according te 
line 43 was the place of residence of Bhillama, aud which has been identified’ with the 
modern Sinnar, the chief town of the Sinnar Sub-Division of the Nasik District. All 
were Brahmans, some students of the Rigveda or Sémaveda, and others members of 
the Kanva or MAdbyandina sdkhds of the Vajasaneyin branch of the Yajurveda, or of 
the Maitrayaniya sakhd of the black Yajurveda. Some belonged to the Gautama, 
Kaundinya, Bharadv4ja, or Kausika gotras. And one (in line 72) is described as rdja- 
dauvarika, ‘the king’s doorkeeper.’ 

To these Brahmans Bhillama gave’ (lines 78-80) the village of Arjunondhika, 
situated on the banks of the river MAtulingi, and some land between the two villages 
Laghu-arjunondhi and Laghu-vavvulavedra. The boundaries of the village were 
(lines 83-64), to the east, Samgamanagara, to the south, the village of Chikhali, to 
the west, the villagesof Jamvalenimva, and to the north, the group of three villages 
named Vavvulavedra. On the maps at my disposal I find no name similar to Arjunon- 
dhika, but Dr. Burgess has suggested to me that the village granted may be the modern 
Rajapur, on the Malungi river of the Samgamner Sub-Division of the Ahmadnagar 
District, which perhaps may have received this name in consequence of this grant. And 
judging irom the position, this identification would suit very well indeed. The Sam- 
gamanagara of the grant would of course be the town of Samgamner of the Ahmad- 
nagar District, which is about three miles east of Rajapur. Chikhaligrama would be 
the village of Chikhali on the river Ardala, about two miles south of RAjapur, and 
Jamvalenimvagrama the village of Javlekardak, which is about 24 miles west of 
Rajapur. And the group of three villages named Vavvulavedra would be represented 
by the village Velhdle (not marked on the G. T. 8. Map, sheet 38) on the MAlungi 
river, about two miles north of Rajapur, and two deserted “ wAdis ” not far from it. 

Lines 86-110 in the usual terms admonish future rulers to protect the donees and 
their descendants in the possession of this grant and warn them not to resume it. Lines 
110-113 add that the illustrious Bhillamardja made the donation here recorded on the 
new-moon /ithi of the month Bhadrapada of the year Sarvarin, on the occasion of a solar 

18 See 1b., p. 85; compare also Indian Antiquary, vol. XII, p. 121; and this inscription, lines 21-22. 

4 T am not sure about this, for after the word S*é-Sindinagar-dntakpdti one would certainly expect the name or 
names of one or more villages, situated in the district of Sindinagara. 

% See Indian Antiquary, vol. XVII, p. 118. 

© Jn the formal part of the grant the only unusual term is sdshtédaSaprakrityopetam in line 80. I can only compare 


with it sdshtddasaprakriti in line 14 of the inscription published in the Proceedings, Beng, As. Suc. 1877, p. 73, but am 
not able to explain the term properly. 


SAMGAMNER COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION. 217 


eclipse, at the holy bathing-place of the confluence of the ArunA” (and Godavari) at 
Nasik. And line 114 gives the name of the writer of this Sdsana-patta, KeSava- 
upAdhyaya, who (in lines 114-116) asks the indulgence of the reader for any mistakes, 
and winds up with the remark that no verbal deficiencies of this document will affect its 
validity. 

The date of this inscription does not work’ out satisfactorily. The Jovian year 
Sarvarin, mentioned in line 110, correctly corresponds, by the southern luni-solar system, 
to the expired Saka year 922, given in lines 1-2; but there was no solar eclipse on the 
new-moon tithe of either the piirnimdnta or amdnta Bhadrapada of that year,—the 2nd 
and 31st August, A.D. 1000. There was a solar eclipse a month later, on the 30th 
September, A.D. 1000, but it was not visible in India, 


Text.” 

First plate. 
at [aa:] fa(fa)ara 1 afer wavelet jatadaeady vag ethan 
. (al faasacdtfa drat: 22 1 aaafa” yaararataga- 
(ajaratentafa wane afatoreafa [1*] afanfa- 
aaa afianana: a oe wag ca” aTeT- 
[arelatfa: u et yale luaaeg: genarantfuag: fafeaa-’ 
SAAT: UTA AT TATA: (1) frennactia(a): utq faa- 
aa, ALAARATe: AAT eae: uv Barat” 
. aly arawaaai tae qufcafafiamraa: w() 
. fal fia: daa: aaeaeat aifacaat actfaat (a) ani- 
. (falaafa yaa qrefaret i 21 aay ( fot) ATT TT ATT T a 
. AUITAT: | amafiogerendt smrerreafern (a) rea 
. “aarafaiaaadast famrereanquead fe 
. a: [Y Jgecar qafatarad ver gtce a(a)are ater 
ih Pe "TITAS TAL TACT SSTATATTET- 
. fanuaracuratiargra: [1*] aett aret atfarerana-* 
_ fade )afrorfaaes aearlent 7] ayaa wemTs 1 ot 
. wate” avanyurefacral aatfatacaafeaat- 
_ fasifcaaitfatara:” [) fafaa” qardrat a[uea® a- 
. &@ weareamerafafra arearat wafa: ws ne 


7 See the Bombay Gazetteer, vol. XVI (Nasik), p. 524: ) their general sense is apparent, do not admit of a Og! 
‘ Apuna tirth is where the Aruna joins the Godavari near |construction. 


ODA RD OB & bo 


ee oo 
OMNI Dtre WON HH ©& 


Ram’s Pool’. % Metre, Sloka {Anushtubh). 
18 From an ink-impression, prepared by Mr. H. Cousens, | . * Metre, Varnéastha. 
18 Metre, Malini; and of the next verse. _ 8 Fyrom here the numbers of the verses are wrong. 


% Here and in other places below which it is unnecessary %7 Metre, Sikharini. 
to point out separately the rules of sasmdhi have not been 3 Read gata, 


observed. 2 The two aksharas en[eri?] were originally or 24, 
" Theakshara @ was originally omitted, and is engraved land are engraved above the line. 
above the line between fq and fz. 39 Metre, Malini; and of the next verse. 
32 This sign of punctuation is-superflous. In the preced- 31 T believe the reading intended to be “alfadtcaatfa- 
ing the metre is incorrect. are:, although this would offend against the metre. 


23 Metre, Sikharini. In the first half of the verse five 82 Here I would propose reading fafae qawtet Tea 
syllables have been omitted, and the words given, though | qq qara’, 
% The akshara in brackets, as engraved, is 3. 
2 F 


218 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L, 20. wafee gard: asraTaarct agaufacaara- 
Ql. aera(aneam: [I] waafag(a)uaeatedtat quits 
92. neaafatad ae at wae: we nu “ueraTerga- 
23. wa” aaTARMATSTAfyATs, °° aifaantal- 
24, aealo” Jadataifadt Yaa | Ela: AswaE wa a- 
25. war ara fasarea” a ata faarawa qT aaer- 
26. TahTAGITa: | ge | Werder” aqeat farar(a)et 
27. aaTaIEEATeT ATT: | VTA TAT TATE 
28. ara: ag (:*] aararfset® gare: nee u “aed faq(a)ua- 


Second plate; first side. 
29. [era] euRreatal aaeaea — — [arfalttarrare: [1] waAH UU — 
30. — atftataradhyaa ee Uv [tat ae frmAT|: 22 I 
31. [aa] fafas aaa we aed fe a ereqaefaa(aeat ee 
32. (aalarfa we | afacaaauraiatfadtataaar” afa- 
33. feafere 2a: feat (Alaa: uo eau “ate: gat [ST] T- 
34, aT astadtaa: [\"] Usa ad ala wR: TET ues ll aa” 
35. efenquta: wavagurearastare: a: dTaATiefa- 
36. yNeat weUgutea: 1 Ue eteyseal:”] TAHETE- 
37. @ dat 1 mUfMAtuedces: TaTTsgT: [0 ey 1] 
38. ahh(<luaerare gfear aatfealar|firar” mit: F(R )a- 
39. gaa azul wanfea® Haat [1] zartageraleraase: raat] zat 
40. [atlaraecinaa® fated HATTA AEH" [a] “arerfaacreraraz[s}a- 


_ wer fal- 
41. ea T val qaaeramnufadl” darataine [\* wath (ea) fetaeraa- 


42. faalanlafattarsrencatmitaad arareqereattaray (il) aha" 

43. ert falalaautamatee” wer qal wanlaafanad ae afeat | 

44. Fa: Ua: Tengqasqne wrafaad ated qorafanaa® ale 2]- 
45. awe: \(y) “feafatefa (fayawenias usta qeqraadfad” wage a)- 


4 Metre, Sardilavikridita. *° The consonant of the first akshara of this line is 
36 Originally Csr}, but altered to sta. slightly damaged, and it may possibly be q - the following 
% Originally Safa: 4°, but altered to Cafe’. aksharas are quite clear. ‘ 
7 Read °ggeiy ; this correction may have deen made °° Originally °g¢ was engraved. 

already in the peal: 


5! Of this akshara, again, only the superscript 
% Metre, Salini. \y pt vowel is 


quite certain, and the whole akshara might possibly be read 


» Read aaa’. q- 

#” The intended reading most probably is ytfeaqcqt, 52 Read qa’. 

41 Metre, Malini; and of the next verse. 53 Metre, Sikharini. 

® Read °aqay. 4 Read faectaracaace’. 
The akshara in brackets is at rather than yj. 55 Read Swqar’. 


“ Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). *° This passage, from here to the end of line 47, looks as 


4% Metre, Sarddlavikridita ; and of the next two verses, |if it were intended to be in verse or contained fragments of 
This sign of punctuation is superfluous. verses, but I cannot recognize in it any of the known ne 0 
@ The akshara in brackets !-~’ —--v much like gy. 57 Read Safa. eg 


® Read FUT. 


SAMGAMNER COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION, 219 


L. 46. qafaaaaarafafieea(s aoa” uv ofan <teqre[er)- 
47. fa qaafaaaget fasanrrararhrrataraat[ ware 
48. qafunqicaaerTe (—) AeA Ee Ca yatta fara (q)- 
49. fufcafenatrafasaqanadartaaiaa fgeae fawgats- 
50, aHTaTUTCTaA Ra TH fat AA aH ATTA 
51. faucadamunagaraaaafasatanantenrtearea-” 
52. sTaatfafaatafeaatian” | Waar: Azeatniacae: 
53. Ware: | arfasracaararcd Woe | Wa(a)eoaaafaaata-” 
54, MEATAGICALTa -F aarTgat Alaa FT 1 AIT A | AAaaaeaT- 
55. Qin Waa” erate | Het aa ga” cafa | a® aa amen fae 
56. a amt aH wa [1"] Fat g Aaa: UTeertaa Bel FT 1() waAcTa” 
57. Waa Fawt yarwMal Bagara wma: | Aa lag da waaed al] 
58. ataa ata wet a cara(q) i arenizafer” fads: cae(en) fea frara- 
59. et: [*] afacreaie ora: @ a: wearefaate (i) afaert quTag g- 
60. alay quate | wararared(a)areaTacraren”®™ waa (q) uv waeTATAT- 
61. (atte) eferafa(a) adizat: | afaerre qurie wa aa Got” y =. 
62. [fa] warmtaegat (at) feeertianaqaraenrg aaa at] 
63. [a] wat [zleacfacaget” aratfadierara aatfeat fe war” [ar(en))- 
64. [erat ejat atlat] oa: 1 atferctancrecarfa 1 arfsranreear(ar) fea” atra- 


65. alata — — 


Second plate ; second side. 
66. — Porena® acisurarayg (aa) aat attsraranrara atfwanttara [fae 2]- 
67. [(ajtara wraisuraragara aar q(a) eaters UtEIsitay al eat F]- 
68. [aaa fal = ejaagara aot arfsarsifernrara aifeanitar (ana [ase 2]- 
69. Gara seuagaa aa aa) yaMTa Satara waugara cat [w 7]- 
70. [et ?poracetiaara cen fraratteraeta:” cert sara: 
71. [ajar arafea(qifeata: aa mere.” diiaga: aa are- 
72. feaaeada: cat a(a)gausgraritaaneaa: aa a(a) gad a] 
73. cal atetearue: aa arfsranatraa: aan a(a)eatraa: aa 
74, a(a) gaaret(a* jatiaattara fata ahatgara war 


* Read “HTHTEHAy. 
89 The akshara ay of asarara was originally omitted, 
and is engraved above the line, 


% Metre, Indravajra. 
6 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh) ; and of the two next verses. 
8 The akshara & was originally omitted, and is engraved 


Read “ctat:, ‘Some of the following signs of punctua- { above the line. 


tion are superfluous, 

The akshara g of qaq was originally omitted, and is 
engraved above the line. 

Read saya. 

6 This sign of punctuation is superfluous, and may have 
been struck out already in the original. 

54 Instead of ya; one would have expected gay; . 

6 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 


® Read qa: qURt, 

70 Read a SIT. 

7 This word is unnecessarily repeated here. 

@ Originally afafa was engraved; see below, line 75. 
73 One would expect “sTarTa. 

7 Read Fatama’. 

7 The writing is quite distinct here, but must be faulty, 


2¥2 


220 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. 75. (Welwara aifrattera a(a)gaarfafa” | ara 4a) eaNrar- 

76. 4 AUTAaTE Ta aa) RAM cea ATS ATATTATA 

77. wat dada: wadgaTa | vawatat fearat faqd- 

78. avavinisd” argfartacaarartad asaatfee- 

79, aTaTe AAT MTA ATA AAA aA ATA 

80. (glandat BauHTaTge at(a)qataraaet ATT 

81. euuMAltd autquasiaraated aqrat(e]- 

82. UIE aa arAMad [1%] ararer:” faeret [1%] 

83. yaa: daaant cfaud: fata, ufaa- 

84. a: Tatra: sata: TaqeAagg (fa) arat [1] wt a(a)- 

85. quuicfany waraatfeer” ganlarfedaana- 

86. avai ware qraafaoretta | vanaat dapaiate 

87. [qararat W)saat" aaa aulaaarar” aae ufa.cwar ufa- 
88. auat i aarfa qaarat a actlar | saa afafr: [1] 
89. arate” carfa gu avegarta whraarecte [1*] 

90. fatrerarannfaatfa arfa . al ata aTy: Jaere- 

91. ala iu) -a(a)ehragur” yar trerfa: arate 

92. ft: |. ae ae vet afaae ae aet 

93. Wat 1(n) Wen eta fread ward ave aTa- 

94. mA N(I) 


ee 


Third piate. 

95 ua fe fia.” rg: eraTeeatquraay uv gar’ alfa] arta: 
96. aTfaarar: at yal Arad Was: | AT- 

97. waited whagqaare ae aes Treat 

98. ay wate: i(u) sefeanta a: afaarera(at)aen- 

99. fat a” yaerrauefeata a daa 

100. eraraaeuaraKadt Cearfey Atay 
101. werarat gajqagqufaata” | cara i” arene 

102, @ UTE | Mea” Wea” Al Sta TRaTIA(a) [17] 


% Read “Ifa aur. ° Metre, Upajati. Read 42°. 
7 Read “aStar’. % This sign of punctuation is superfluous 
78 Read °aret. ‘ 87 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh) ; and of ‘the next verse 
Read Ywaacfestr. ® Read aug: urgel’. 
89 Read Sarat waaay. 8 Metre, Salini. Read zal, “aera, and qraq. 
*! Originally only qqqat was engraved; but. three sr ® This word is superfluous. 
four’ aksharas were afterwards engraved above the line, * These signs of punctuation are superfiuous. 
which, together with the former, appear to. me to yield’ the} ™ The akshara q was originally omitted, and is engraved 


reading given in the text. 
® ‘Read Cat at. 
® This sign of purctuation is superfluous, _ 
* The second akshara might also be read %, but compare}. 
Wayraray, ante, vol. I, p. 165. 5 


above the line. 
% Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh) ; and of the two next verses, 
* Read “gui 41. 


STONE INSCRIPTIONS AT VAGHLI IN KHANDES. 221 


L. 103. ¥ fasrai afenjar afafa: ae cae (1) fraarzat- 
104, qalare geanlecarfar: | wereat fe aaa 
105. afaeraraertan: 1(u) astrat aan arfaaanda a [1] 
106. nat aifeweraa(a) afasal a gerfa (i) ofa asfeaqar- 
107. aaata (" arntrsfs: waa ufaureaatay [1*] 
108. a¥a(a) at” ctretafadaa at qiuretaaaat yfa arfayar: [1*] 
109. 4 uraafa aa wafad aad aut aa facfadiafa- 
110. ta fa” u Bu ar(at) adtdaactaatguerararan- 
111. aq” tarfaataareurda (@)eetale 1 uTa- 
112. aat(Nuarafaaagaa a(t) feaacsa wast ar- 
113. ald uew: nu faa(fa)afad mraaué wrafaaaa 
114, cafaatea a ou” wat anasareargafa uv ae-” 
115. at afaad arareta @ asaa(q) | ai(d) que fagia: a- 
116. |] 4 wad aa: 1 AeMlaTatatuae” aaa varufata 


XVI.—STONE INSCRIPTIONS AT VAGHLI IN KHANDES. 
THe Saka Year 991. 
By Proressor F. KievuHorn, Pa.D., C.LE.; Gorrincen, 

According to the Bombay Gazetteer, vol. XII, p. 478, Vaghli,' a village six miles 
east (or rather north-east) of Chalisgaon in the Khandes District, has three temples, an 
old temple of Madhaidevi, a small ruined temple to its right, and a temple of the Man- 
bhava? sect. ‘The Manbhava temple, built in Hemadpanti style, 33 feet long by 22 
broad and 18 high, with ornamented pillars and doorway, formerly contained a linga, 
and has still the sacred bull outside. Three large stones (within) bear illegible Sanskrit 
inscriptions, Near the temple is a well, inside and on each side of which is a small cell. 
The temple is undoubtedly very old, and has for the last seven generations been in the 
possession of the Manbhava sect.’ Good impressions of the three inscriptions thus 
referred to, taken by Mr. H. Cousens, have been supplied to me by Dr. Burgess. They 
show that the three inscriptions are indeed damaged, especially one of them, but that 
they are by no means so illegible as they have been reported to be. And their contents 
appear to me sufficiently interesting to justify my furnishing a short account of them. 
I shall denote the inscriptions by the letters A, B, iss C, but shall show that all three 
really form part of a single inscription. 

A.—This inscription contains 14 lines of writing which cover a space of about 3’ & 
broad by 1’ 134” high. On the proper right side the writing is much damaged and 


oF 


% Metre, Vasantatilaka. the Postal Directory “ Waghli,” in Long. 75° 10’ E., Lat: 
% Really qd? is engraved, 20° 31' N. 

7 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh), 2 See Bombay Gazetteer, vol. XII, p. 122; Indian Anti- 
% Read “acafaai at. quary, vol. LV, p. 335; and Dr. Burgess’ List of Antiquariau 


1 in the Indian Atlas, sheet 38, spelt “ Baugley,” in| Remains in the Bombay Presidency, pp. 122, 320. 


920. EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


partly altogether illegible, but, as will be seen from: my transcript. of the text, the 
greater portion of the inscription is fairly well preserved, and everything of importance 
may be read with certainty. The size of the letters-is between 3” and 3”. The charac- 
ters are Nagari of about the 11th century A.D. The language is Sarhskrit, and the 
inscription i is in verse. As regards orthography, the letter 6 is throughout denoted by 
the sign for v; the dental sibilant is several times used instead. of - the palatal ; and the 
vowel 7 is employed instead of ri in ¢rifaya, line 5. 

The inscription opens with a verse invoking the: blessing of Ganapati ; ; after that it 
has twelve verses, numbered 1-12; and it breaks off, at the. end of line 14, in the third 
Pada of another verse which would have been verse 13. Verse 1 describes the origin 
of the solar race, and tells that from MAndhatri; a prince of that race, sprang the 
Maurya family. Verse 2 then relates how Soma, i.e., the god Siva, left his home on 
the mountain Kailasa.and came for the welfare of the people to settle in the country of 
Surdshtra; and verse 3 states that here, in Sur Ashtray, there i is the city of Valabhi. 
the capital of the Mauryas, the Brahman citizens of which enjoy all the blessings of 
life through the favour of the Maur yas. Verses 4—13: then record the names of a 
series of princes or chiefs, the first of whom is stated to have been born in the Maurya 
family, and each of whom has a verse, eulogizing his valour, allotted to him. This list, 
for it is nothing more, is as follows:— 

. The illustrious Kikata, born in the Maurya family (v.-4). 
. After him came the illustrious Takshaka. (v. 5). 

. After him, Bhima (v. 6). 

. Sarvasira (v. 7). 

. After him came the prince GovindarAja (v. &!. 

After him, the prince Sadhvasika (v. 9) 

. The prince Jhaiijha (v. 10). 

. From him was born the prince Devanastin (v. 11). 

. From him, the prince Mafija (v. 12). 

. From him, the prince Padmakara (v. 18). 


© CO aI OTe Co bo 


1 
Oo 


B.—This inscription contains fragments of 16 lines of writing, found on a stone 
which apparently measures about 8° 8” broad by 1’ 8” high; and the jasoeihed surface of . 
which is greatly damaged. | The size of the letters is ‘between 2” and 1” The characters 
are the same as those of the inscription A. The language is Sarhsky it, and the inscription 
is throughout in verse. 

Though, owing to the damaged state of the stone, I am unable to furnish a text of 
this inscription, I feel no hesitation, in saying that we have: here the continuation of the 
preceding inscription A, Here, too, the verses have numbers appended to. them, 
and the first number which is ‘preserved i is 14, and occurs towards the end of line 2. 
This verse 14, in the Mandakranté metre, must have commenced about 18” from the 
commencement of line 1, where verse 13 would have ended, on a-part of the stone which » 
is broken away.. Comparing the end of the inscription A, we see that. that. inscription. 
ends in the third Pada of a- Vasantatilak4 verse which would have been verse 18, and. 
that 19 syllables are wanted to- complete. that verse. Now 19 syllables would in the. 
present inscription have taken up a space of exactly 13", and, moreover, the aksharas 
preserved at the commencement of line 1 of B. undoubtedly do belong to. a. ‘Vasantati- 


STONE INSCRIPTIONS AT VAGHLI IN KHANDES. 223 


-lak& verse, and their sense suits well the incomplete verse at the end of A. For what 
we can read at. the commencement of line 1 of B, is" es 

. . . prayachchhaml= Lakshmyds=chatatoa- vadaniyam= a 

which, with the end of A, would give ‘us the following verse :— 


uganda acuta: wa(a) aa eae: wet Princo frcbhae ' 
eratta apqgawalea:? | VAS RAT ZAAITANAAUTTAT 2] 


As stated befor e, verse 14 ends in line 2; verse 15 ends in line 3, verse 16% in line 4, 
verse 17 in line 6, and verse 18 in line: 7; verse 19 probably ended towards the end of 
line 8; versé 20 ends in line 10, verse 21 in line 11,.and verse 22 in liné 12; verse 23 
must-have ended in line 133 verse 24 ends in line 14, and verse 25 in line 1b; and the 
end of verse 26 must have coincided. with the end of line 16, the last line of this 
inscription. I believe, I cannot go wrong in saying that, exactly like the verses 4-13 of 
the inséription A, each of the verses 14-24 gave the name of one ‘prince, and that the 
eleven verses together therefore recorded ‘the names of eleven princes, who one after 

another succeeded the prince PadmAkara, spoken of in verse 13. The names of the 
two immediate successors of Padmakara (the llth and 12th members of the family), 
which must have. been contained in verses 14 and 15, are broken away or at any rate no 
longer legible. Further on the following are mentioned :— 


13. Vappaiya. (Voppatya-ndmé sa naresa-asit, in verse 16)¢ 
14. Vappaiya’s son, whose name has not pons ‘preserved (Vappuiyasya sutas= 
tato=vanitale, in verse 17), 
15. Valapardja: (tasmdd+Valapardja itg-abhihito bhipdla-chidémanih satnjajite,. 
in verse 18). 
el, ‘SAdhvasika. (raja Sédhvasikas=tatah param=abhat, in verse 1b). 
17. S/antiraja (srt. Sdutiraja iti bhadmipatir=cvabhdva, in verse £0). 
18. Pravarasikara(? SGnty-dtmajah sokcleel Abad apa upetah srimdn= abit : 
_ Prdvirasi(kalra-ndmadheyah, in verse 21). 
19. Bhaileka (tasmad= abhit=prachuraasatru- -guna-prandt¥ ért- Badileka-nripatine 
jagatt prasiddhah, in verse 22). a 
90. BhimarAja (8rl-Bhimardja-nripatis=tu Siva-prasédat, 3 in verse 28). 
21. Govinda ( Govinda-bhdpatir=iti, in verse 24). 
~No.further names seem to occur in the short passages. which remain of the verses . 
25 ‘and 26. 


C: —This inscription contains 18 lines of writing’ which cover a space of 4° 24” broaa » 
by 1’ 102” high. With the exception of a few aksharas, lines 1-16 are well preserved ; 
put the middle of line 17 is greatly damaged, and the writing of line 18 is almost entirely 
effaced. The size of the letiersis between’ 2” and 1”. The characters are the same 
as in the inscriptions*A and B. The Baeuaee is Samskrit, and the inscription is 
throughout in verse. As regards orthography, b is everywhere denoted by the sign for 
v; the vowel 7¢ is used instead of 77 in vimisrita, line 3, and tridiva, line 8; and the — 
jihvémiliya and upadhmdaniya, both denoted by the ordinary sign for sh, are employed 
in anvitah kirtti-, line 8, sevadhih padma-, line 5, and tanuh punya-, line 7. . 
From the text, which will be given below, it will be seen that the inscription com- 
mences with a verse which is numbered 27, and which thus at once shows it to be the 


924 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


continuation of the inscription B, which ends with verse 26, The inscription clearly 
divides itself into two portions, the first of which, extending to nearly the end of line 9, 
comprises the nine verses 27-35. All that it is necessary to say about this part, is, that it 
eulogizes the piety of a prince (narapati, nripati, bhimipdla) Govinda or Govinda- 
raja, who in verse 27 is styled Mawryakula-pradipa, ‘ the light of the Maurya family,’ 
and who evidently is the Govinda spoken of in verse 24 of the inscription B; and that 
in particular it records the foundation by this prince of a sattra, or hall of charity for 
travellers and for the learned and indigent, and the erection of a temple of Siva, under 
the name of SiddheganAtha or Siddhesvara, with a tank or well attached to it. In 
all probability, the temple is the same at which the inscription is still preserved. 

The second part of the inscription, the verses of which are numbered separately, 
opens, towards the end of line 9, with a date, and records up to line 15 various donations 
in favour of the temple and the charitable institute mentioned before, made both by 
GovindarAja himself and by (his sovereign lord) the mahdmandala-ndtha, the illustri- 
ous king Seuna. 

According to verses 1-3 (lines 9-11), the king Seuna, on the occasion of a solar 
eclipse in the month of Ashddha of the Jupiter year Saumya which was the (expired) 
Saka year 991, granted to the temple of Siddhesvara the two villages of Samgami and 
Madhuvatika, together with the income due from them to the king himself—The 
date corresponds, by the amdnta scheme, to Tuesday, the 21st July, A.D. 1069, when 
about half an hour after mean sunrise there was a solar eclipse which was visible in some 
parts of India; and the king Seuna is the Devagiri Yadava Seunachandra IL., of 
whom we possess a copper-plate grant which is dated only a fortnight later than the 
present inscription, on Guradina or Thursday, the 14th of the bright half of Sravana of 
the year Saumya, corresponding to Saka-sarnvat 991°.—The villages of Samgami and 
Madhuvatika I am unable to identify on the maps at my disposal. 

Govindardja’s donations are enumerated in the verses 4-13 (lines 11-15). Some 
of the particulars of this passage I do not fully understand ; but it is clear that Govinda 
provided for the worship of the god in the temple founded by him (verses 4-5) ; that, for 
the support of the learned men and their pupils who resorted to his satira, he gave four 
fields which are described as Vagaliikammatabhimi, Vakhulikshetra, Vanakitakabhimi 
and Vatayakshinivdta, and the exact boundaries of which are recorded in the text (verses 
6-12) ; and that he besides granted sixteen nivartanas of land to certain secular and 
religious teachers (verse 13). 

The concluding lines of the inscription once more state that the temple, referred to 
in the preceding, was founded by the prince Govinda and his wife, the réjai Nayak} 
(verse 14), and contain the usual admonitions to future rulers to watch over. and not to 
resume, the donations here recorded. 

Taken as a whole, what is contained on the three stones is a single inscription, 
dated in Saka 991 or A.D. 1069, of a chief Govindaraja of the Maurya clan, a feuda- 
tory of the Devagiri Yadava king Seunachandra II. Its proper object is, to’ record 
that Govindar4ja built the temple at which the inscription was put up, and made various 


® See Andian Antiquary, vol. XII, p. 120. It should be stated, however, that the date of the copper-plate is incorrect ; 


toasts 14 of Saka 991 expired (= Saumya) corresponds to the 4th August, A.D. 1069, which was a Tuesday, not a 
ay. 


STONE INSCRIPTIONS AT VAGHLI IN KHANDES. 225 


donations in favour of it; and by way of introduction the inscription furnishes a list of 
the names of the ancestors of Govindaraja for no less than twenty generations, and 
records that the original home of the Maurya clan was the city of Valabhi in Surash- 
tra, which was their capital. As Govindaraja himself is indirectly described as a feuda- 
tory of a Yadava king, it may be assumed that his ancestors or at least some of them 
owed allegiance to the same family, and that these Mauryas came from Kathiavad to 
Khandes together with the Yadavas, ‘ the lords of Dvaravati.’* As regards the individual 
chiefs mentioned in this inscription, I have not met with any of them in other inscrip- 
tions.° 


; Trext OF tHE Inscriprion A.° 
iDeals Tati] VU’ Ca yvu-vUU—uU— afalalefaladte U — u [ar]: \ Fcq- 

PRAIA Taadfasary wag 4: uO | Mreaeamaratded® Havas? |- 

2. wa: why — ——— Vv — — [aelaaguaqareaan: | free: waetas- 
waaay ima atfauaniarquiacrare sagas aa [a | 

3. a(a)qan cu malmeareat efaclufa(faguraaaiané fearaiuaiarg- 
watfaatigearameana 1 da: Mareye: aaaertaa: [ar ?]- 

4. ai faandt? |e: waut aifaararaguiaeag aadiea: qaeq ue vata” safe 
wear fag(s)wataTalwieaTaarant Alatat asus Tahafcfa V - 

5. — ales] awarai | aerfaiufrargfafaca(alay at(ar)ere a(s) wer: 
De walang fa\ranays: afar” AIVTTT | 2 A rag uercgeutte(a?]: 

6. [afaawg?)” ala lanacarciaat feate | afd ware afa[ei] afacgara: atat- 
HZ; VATA HAVES: Wg i Marwaaeq" aw wamarfeacew[are]- 

oovwv-vv vu [alen i amsaafwedfa aq aor garfarfad <a 
feuat aaer: uu ataT? MlanTRAwN|T al cer a(a)e@ fafeui" welt aft U- 

8. — VT -VUVUL — a4] fala) =F | | aTayaat frgasfaa mraT- 
fan: afale [alert aad cacera( axa wrial(a] wan [ate lag” a 
farrsra[ fa] VU —- 


SO |: lia © eed © 2 O20 oie oZ Vv — Vee | wa afta waaticy ve ay (st)- 
q wafafa uafes: a fe aaa(Qe we nu Whieus sfa a ufsa: efaarat- 
arau- 


4 See Professor Bhandarkar’s Karly History of the ® The akshara in brackets was originally <. 
Dekkan, Pp 76. : 5 to Read atare®, 
‘I know that the Yadava Bhillama IT. married the " Originally Gf was engraved. 
daughter of a Raja Jhaijha (see +4. P 77); but that Jbafijha 12 Metre, Vasantatilaka ; and of the next verse. 
could not possibly have been the Jhafijha of the present 4s 13 The aksharas in these brackets are almost entirely 
scription; for, not to mention other reasons, Bhillama lived Seed. 
about A.D. 1000 (see ante, p. 212), and the Jhafijba of this M Originally °a: Eq was engraved. 
inscription lived fourteen generations before Govindaraja ™ Metso, Sard Alavikridi a 


(A.D. 1069). F 16 Originally a sign of punctuation was engraved here; 
6 From impressions taken by Mr. Cousens. patie is sirick onb aglia: 


7 Metre, Drutavilambita. y é 2 £ the pext veren. 
8 Metre, Sragdhard ; and of the two next verses. Metre, Vasantatilaké ; and of the n : 9 
G 


226 


11. 


12. 


18. 


14. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


.@eqqwau — vu — — i fdzaante fafaaar(alfaaraafa ara a edt afc 


aTaqa: teu cen anafaa:” aa: acenger: ars] a quae figefa— TU 

Ue ee HU HH U1 ay: aye aarfarat: eufefa ar(arfaa 
qaarafaa: atifa afe ar aafaarat au: ui < wmarlfauragufa: “ata 
uftart — — - 

Vr UVV HU UH UH) aomefagel cranes a oma sfa 
ara a(a)art as ten MeaeMifa” aa: faa as werdisasttacise: | 
walt] — - | 

RO FO a dO) eee J, © er © ete | Oe || alarasra tat: 
aanaTaTquaana: Taraguafafast [eloraatialac 1 [gaia 
aetfaat Worn 

SP RS ee ie NP ee NN Aas NRG Nr — — qealalaq 
V Va Ter acuta: va(a)ya career: ver[falrrarfcaaa: : eats 
ayeawn- 


TRXT OF THE INSCRIPTION C.” 


. [termafatraler] fecetmararecarcurenarte wea | 


agse a: wach nenig” maEgITAaAagaTNl: Re 0” 
afaeunrate al et] 

| aealaatet deagttfaaan a wat a(a)aqg: | 
MARAT Tata walRRMfErece isan nec” a 
a: Perenraiagaareancara [at] 

ayietufafaarer: | 
daquefeoqery (fruqiifagersificasaufa: & Gat Tet ATT W Rey 
Se LEGUEKEL CL and feast fa fare (Fs) [a] - 
azaq | 

aiel fafa faafauqeqerc: warfeauafatd qantas nao 
a: vimewafefanyfataad earaasfanee @ gfreat: 1 


aa” [=l- 
B. AIX pal sa ech orn bleeds stichas ufcdifaget weet 
fauna ae —s WACAAUA: aaa: \ 

wal] 
8 Metre, Sardilavikridita. 2 This sign of vesar'ga was originally | omitted. 
1 Read Cama. %6 From-an impression faken by- Mr, Consens. 
> Read erat’. 7 Read Cwpen®, 
. Metre, Vasantatilaké. 8 Metre, . Vasantatilaka ; and of the hae next Veyses. 
2 Metre, Indravajra. Read Rc. 
% Metre, Sardilavikridita, 3° Read wa, 


34 Metre, VasantatilakA,. 


10. 


11. 


12. 


STONE INSCRIPTIONS AT VAGHLI IN KHANDES, 


fealy a qtagaan fet data: 
ara mMfsearacafaet AatA WATT Wee 
a (a) wararaciafaaaacadise aan” 
wsaatareantatefaaa(a] 
JoyWsTS” Fa 
wal welaaar safes acafa: aeqataearal 
iograrfaaaganadiafantaes uae ti 
[a] aataraarrafanacafafaapedad- 
a 
am faduararaauafaneaadinuaa | 
aani urfaatat a(fa) feanfaquitefasttingad 
Wiest qanreaaaaguquefaafaata: ves ti 
aray a- 
at Yfanaivaniea(a)ealaray[_efa grwmfafaeeat | 
nasal faa (a) [gaa] sanaredarfaarhaaataaTUeaTA Way” 
BugtAGs J Cee 
mearee waar [1"] 
wadaataretfaueumata ye i 
aedsatag warasayufa: | 
fagmua wed araeageret: 2 
fasta crsnitia daar)” 
alylatfcara u eu 
mMfeusita eet alata ata 
aaa Zagara wrea ctofees ve a 
uiza masare faarfafraafaa” 
qeara®? eaters wearai a ata — [ny 0] 
faurat disrarata wa(a)afera ara | 
faanaracarat @° srat(ar)at wisrara Tu et 
aarhu atfa yuret eet arta frat: | 


ameaana(: |" Gaatat g afar — 


227 


31 Metre, Sragdhara; and of the two next verses. 

3 The akshara € was originally omitted, and is engraved 
above the line. 

3% The akshara @ was originally omitted, and is engraved 
below the line. 


3% Jam doubtful about this akshara, and the intended | 


reading may possibly be i@ #1”. 
‘ 35 Metre, Vasantatilaka. 
3 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh) ; and of the following twelve 
verses, 


37 Of this akshara only the sign of anusvdra is doubtful. 

38 The reading here and up to the end-of the:line is quite 
clear in the original. Read faatfamn® (?). 

39 I do uo. understand this, nor the following TeaTAT 5 
yaTe may have been put for faare. 

40 This FY was originally omitted, and is engraved below 
the line. 

4 Originally “HMM was engraved, but the akshara Fy 
has been struck out. 


262 


2298 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


L. 18. fn] on 
efat (Zlaeaa ufae [sift jrerar | 
Sat HraHaTHararer” wy [At] wat: us 
aqaltamanry yaefeaufyar: | 
anignafeemaaaT ae: w (2 1") 
14, qagzagia al yatacaty: | 
efat 4 ay: tat ufaa arayefy uv go 
a(zjafafen? gq gat arifeqer ay: | 
efaa tanta ufaa aiadiata: u [ee 0%] 
Sat ACH- 
15. a a araret[:* Jafeatfaan: w [ex 0%] 
aieia zat cen faamenrarice | 
facdarfa aig gearenraarfce [n e230] 
walafaaarauetaataearar [z]- 
16. 7 
giant faa ataat AINATSAT Wet UT FT | 
anat dacafet qafat faute faerfia® 
atfarnan ga a fane naifad ater: u%[es u*] 


a UTaa- . 
17. fa efadiufacraaad mya AMAT | 
asad @ [ase CR at RIE NG CB as (eferlqarreda (a) a atar: 1 * 
Ley n*] 
_ & arate auer- 
18. [aja — v ates orgafer]®. ee 


XVII—KHALARI STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE REIGN OF 
HARIBRAHMADEVA. 


Tue [VixRama] YEaR 1470’. 
By Proresson F. Kretnorn, Pu.D., C,1.E.; Gorrineen. 


This inscription 1s on a polished stone, which is fitted into the wall of a small 
temple at Khalari, a village about 45 miles® east of the town of Raypur in the Central 
Provinces. It contains sixteen lines of writing, which cover a space of about 1'11}" 
broad by 114” high. The writing is well preserved throughout, and the reading is no. 


® Read °aTa WTaTet:. connected sense, are at all legible. Theiv can be no doubt that 
* The akshara ®t was originally omitted, and is en- | this was the concluding line of this inscription. 

graved above the line. 1 Wronely for 1471. 
44 Metre, Sardilavikridita, 2 See Sir A. Cunningham’s Archeol. Survey of India, 
45 Metre, Vasantatilakd ; and of the next verse. vol. VII, p. 156; according to the Gazetteer of the Central 


46 From here, up to the end of the line, the writing is so| Provinces, p. 243, Khalari is only about thirteen miles from 
seriously damaged that only a few aksharas, which yield no! Raypur. 


KHALARI STONE INSCRIPTION OF HARIBRAHMADEVA. 229 


where in the least doubtful, The size of the letters is about 3°. The characters are 
Nagari of the périod to which’ the inscription belongs, the 15th century A.D. The 
language is Sarhskrit, employed by a person of little knowledge; and, excepting the in- 
troductory om srieGanapataye namah, and a date and the name of the engraver at the 
end, the inscription is in verse. ‘The letter 4 is, as usually, written by the sign for 0; 
otherwise the orthography calls for no remarks. 

The inscription, called by the author a pragasti, was composed by Misra Damo- 
dara (verse 11), written on the stone by R&madasa of the VAstavya? family (v. 13), 
and engraved by the artisan Ratnadeva (line 16). And its proper object is to record 
the foundation of a temple of Nardyana (or Vishnu) by the shoemaker (mochi) 
Devapala, ason of Sivadd4sa and grandson of Jasau (vv. 9, 10, and 12), at the 
town of Khalvatika (v. 7), 4. e. the modern Khalari. By way of introduction the 
inscription—after the words ‘om, adoration to Ganapati’ and three verses in honour of 
that deity and of Bharati, the goddess of eloquence, and Nardyana,—gives us (in verses 
4-6) the following genealogy of the prince, the illustrious Haribrahmadeva, whose 
capital (rdjadhdni) Khalvatika is represented to have been when the inscription was 
composed :— 

In the Kalachuri (or Kalachuti) branch of the Haihaya (here called Ahi- 
haya) family was the prince Simhana, a worshipper of Sambhu (or Siva), who con- 
quered eighteen strongholds of adversaries. His son was the prince, Rdmadeva, who 
slew in battle Bhoningadeva (apparently a prince, whom I am unable to identify), 
And his son again was the illustrious prince, Haribrahmadeva. 

The inscription is dated (in lines 15 and 16) in the (Vikrama) year 1470, the -Saka 
year 1334, and the year Plava of the sixty-years’ cycle of Jupiter, on the 9th of the 
bright half of Magha, a Saturday, while the moon was in the nakshatra Rohini. Had 
the years been given correctly in this date, the Vikrama year 1470 would have to be 
taken as 4 current year, and the Saka year 1334 as an expired year. But the date 
works out satisfactorily neither for Vikrama 1470 current = Saka 1334 expired, nor for 
Vikrama 1470 expired, and its proper year undoubtedly is Vikrama 1471 expired = 
Saka 1336 expired, as will be seen from the following equivalents :— 

For Vikrama 1470 current = Saka 1834 expired Magha-sudi 9 corresponds to 

Wednesday, the 11th January, A.D. 1413; 

for Vikrama 1470 expired = Saka 1835 expired, to Tuesday, the 30th January, 
A.D, 1414, 

for Vikrama 1471 expired = Saka 1836 expired, to Saturday, the 19th 

_ January, A.D. 1416, when the 9th ¢ithi of the bright half ended 16h. 

18 m, after mean sunrise, and when the moon was in the nakshatra 
Rohini from 13 h. 8: m., or, by the Garga-siddhdnta, from 1h. 19 m. 
after mean sunrise, or, by the Brahma-siddhdnta, from about sunrise, 
This Saturday, the 19th January, A.D. 1415, also, as required, fell i in 
the Jovian year Plava, which by the Stiroa-siddhdnta rule without 
bija lasted from the 24th April, A.D. 1414, to the 20th April, A.D. 
1415. 


3 See ante, Index of vol. J, under Vdstavya. 


230 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Of the reign of the prince Haribrahmadeva we possess another; (carelessly written) 
inscription of the Vikrama year 1458, which was found at Raypur and is now in the 
Nagpur Museum‘, and the full date of which I have given in Indian Antiquary, vol. 
XIX, p. 26, No. 20. In that inscription, which records the foundation of a temple of 
Hatakesvara (Siva) by the Ndyaka HAjirajadeva, the prince is described as Mahdrdj4, 
dhirdja, and called Rayabrahmadeva, Harirdyabrahma, and simply Brahma. 
deva. The inscription also mentions his predecessors, who are there called Simgha and 
Ramachandra, instead of Simhana and Rimadeva. 


I may mention, besides, that the names of these princes Simhana and Rdma- 


chandra also occur in a large mutilated inscription at Ramtek® in the Central Provinces 
of which I owe a faint rubbing to Dr. Fleet. 


PTaxT,* 
Th. att [w*] aherqaaa aa: 1(0) 
qaaeftaguionzfatenant faamaquaa: teawaana: | 
afaaaygacrata- 

2 faa’ teuretazufa wars: org at fagers: ne ut 

Feral Fur: usfa unadt ataaraeafan: 
Rasenta aewecta aa: 

3. uradt facia: | 

BIT aTTaTANtfes Tels THAT ARH: | 
ag: werafagr Meg AfaQawAresy weal at wn zw’ 
a(a) wITe- 

4. a <(fe)fave: gfaarergen wrafa a geuarafaciaga | 
uraifa arma faa vaifa aeraw: weg Fafa ear gs 1) gw” 
aiee-" ; 

5. aaudd daypraisrdte: wergfatcfa wat wry Atay a)aaTT: | 

- fasrgaqueuiatstegataqsimguyia ex eel fawreitfuarer: 4 


aura Uae: aacincfe MO aa aifeaea: | 
ufufea iva weasea: Sea TATA MAST UCIT: wy 
7. aya: wae sais fared deqee wa, 
waa: ATAU aafe wrguTAacrat Kate: | 
aan aaa BCeutaTeiaufa: dfear- 


4 See Sir A. Cunningham's 4rchwol, Survey of India, 


" T give this verse exactly as I find it in +he original. 

vol, ane sa VII, p. 112. Its meaning is clear enough, In the Kalaeburibranch of 

: From sathlags supplied (eine Ry Drs Lacan: the Haihaya family there was the prince Sicnhana, who con- 

7 Road “faa? S quered eighteen fortvesses of adversaries. But the Haibayas 

8 Metre, Malini. are called by the writer Ahihayas, and the Kalachuris Kala. 

t Metre, ‘Stagdhard, Tn the -aecestd dina “oF thie verre mat - mention the grammatical mistakes which the 
relative pronoun has been omitted, = 


1s ; 5 -J= Mai 
W Metre, Vatantatilakd. * Metre of verses 4 ard 5, Malini. 


KHALARI STONE INSCRIPTION OF HARIBRAHMADEVA. 231 


8, AT 
masta feat aca va au: refta(a)ywza: ve We 
agra ara afer werizar usta arfearfa: | 
quam aa fearaann favifa 
9. aacfampada: yo yt 
Wea va FeTaaaray tat: afeaiat aif 
Waa; Mraaawcafad was TAT: | 
atta: aad fagrec- 


10. Sut eraqulay a: 
treataaaien farayeine aaaea(a)er ys 1 
are aagtefacacam: aifrateca: 
drstaar- 
i SUAUSTAL TF MM ATAGAS Ula: | 
arareaitara qefafatuaerastrarme” ya: 
aaa ayant TH 
12. Saqure: We N 


ARTINAAAT AURA WaT HEAT AT ASIA | 


featfad a4 aca ata aa eftaeng aifen(fe)aTea i gen” 


whraqwedisnar- 

13. Waafeyuaceaqqsearearaqaicaa | 
acuantasara fathad unfedate cafeuret farertete u ee 

14, afearqan wcia faafa arriearsasaa® | 
acfuracayeEnat aaNet SAG Gag Aaeaareare” Atha: vez 
slarerearagarat , 

15. wafaaaraat | 


fafear caciaa ofeardtate | wee wu” 
afer Weaq (yoo TA UTR CRAY TUT” Yaaadsert aragie e 
16. ufsarat Ufeataraa [0] wag was: w Gaaaedar [0%] 


© Metre, Sragdhars. © The word déhandala is perhaps (wrongly) used here in 
M Metre, Upajati. the sense of ‘ rain-bow’. 

8 Metre of verses 8 and 9, Sragdhar&. E 19 Metre, Sloka ( (Anushtubh). 

6 Metre, Indravajz. % Read Fae] ‘ in the sixty-years’ cycle. 


Y Metre of verses 11 and 12, MAlinj. 


932 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


XVIIIL.—DUBKUND STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE KACHCHHAPAGHATA 
VIKRAMASIMHA. 


Tue [Vikrama] year 1145, 
By Proressox F, Kirxtgorn, Pu.D., O.1.E.; Gorrincen. 


This inscription was discovered, in 1866, by Captain W. R. Melville,’ in the ruins 
of a temple at ‘Dubkund,’ Indian Atlas, Quarter-sheet 51, 8. E., Long. 77° 62 E., 
Lat. 25° 432’ N. The place is in a dense forest on the left bank ofthe Kunu river, 
76 miles to the south-west of Gwalior; and the temple is situated in the middle of an 
enclosure on a peninsula, the neck of which is defended by a fortified wall, and all 
around it are a mass of ruined houses and the remains of several smaller temples, 
Captain Melville sent two copies of the inscription to the Asiatic Society of Bengal, but 
they were probably too imperfect to be used for editing the inscription. The ruins of’ 
Dubkund were examined again, in 1882-83, by Sir A. Cunningham’s native draughts- 
man, and from his account a description of them is given in Archeol. Survey of 
India, vol. XX, p. 99, and Preface, p. v, together with a small photo-lithograph 
of the inscription, 74., plates xxi and xxii. I now edit the inscription from one of 
his rubbings, apparently the same from which the photo-lithograph was prepared. _ 

The inscription contains 61 lines of writing which cover a space of 1’ 33” broad by 
3’ 2” high. With the exception of about twenty aksharas in lines 1 and 2 which have 
become damaged by the peeling off of the surface of the stone, and perhaps a few other 
aksharas which are illegible in the rubbing, the writing is well preserved, and every- 
thing of importance may be read with certainty. The size of the letters is between ;%,” 
and 3”, The characters are Nagari of the period to which the inscription belongs, the 
11th century A.D. The language is Samskrit, and, excepting the introductory om om 
namo vitardgdya and the greater portion of lines 54-61, the inscription is in verse. It is 
called a pragasti (lines 47 and 60), and was composed by the Jaina Vijayakirti (line 46), 
written on the stone by Udayaraja (line 60), and engraved by the stone-mason 
Tilhana (line 61). Both the writer and the engraver have done their work with great 
care, and in respect of orthography I have only to note that the letter & is throughout 
written by the sign for o, and that the dental sibilant is occasionally employed instead 
of the palatal.” . 

The object of the inscription is, to record the foundation of a Jaina temple—clearly 
the temple at which the inscription was discovered—by some private persons {lines 52-53), 
and certain donations made in favour of it by the Mahérdéjaédhirdja Vikramasimha 
(lines 54-58) who ruled the country around Dubkund when the inscription was composed, 
in the Vikrama year 1145 (line 61), And the inscription clearly divides itself into two 
parts, the first of which (lines 10-32) gives an account of the prince Vikramasimha and 
his ancestors, while the other (lines 32-51) treats of the founders of the temple and 
certain Jaina sages connected with them. In six introductory verses (lines 1-10) the 
poet invokes the blessings of, or glorifies, the Jaina Tirthakaras RishabhasvAmin, 
Santinatha, Chandraprabha and the Jina (Mahavira), the sage Gotama, and the goddess 
of eloquence (Sruta-devatd) ‘famous in the world under the name of Pankajavasini.’ 


1 See Journal, As. Soc. Bengal, vol. XXXV, part I, p. 168. 
2 In the rubbing before me it is sometinies very difficult to distinguish between the palatal and dental sibilants. 


DUBKUND STONE INSCRIPTION OF VIKRAMASIMHA. Zao 


The poet’s account of the Muhdrdjddhirdja Vikramasisnha (lines 10-32) is as 
follows :— 


“There was, an ornament of the Kachchhapaghata family, and a son of the 
illustrious Yuvardja who was white with fame that spread abroad in the three worlds 
the illustrious prince Arjuna, a leader of a formidable army of unparalleled splendour, 4 
prince whom even the ocean did not equal in depth, and a bowman who by his skill in 
archery had completely vanquished the earth.’ 

Having, anxious to serve the illustrious Vidyadharadeva, fiercely slain in a great 
battle the illustrious Rajyapala, with many showers of arrows that pierced his neck- 
bones, he unceasingly filled all the three worlds with his imperishable fame, brilliant 
like pearl-strings and like the orb of the moon and the foam of the sea. 

The notes of his musical instruments which rose, when he marched out, resembling 
the roaring of the sea, and the sounds of the bells of his countless troops of mountain- 
like elephants, eagerly marching forth, vied with each other in spreading on all sides, 
and never left off filling the hollow of heaven and earth, joined by the loud echo which 
rose from mountain caves. 

From him was born Abhimanyu, who, always possessed of many unblemished 
qualities which supported crowds of suppliants who (but for him) would have wandered 
round the circuit of the quarters,* and which in splendour rivalled the moon’s crescent, 
ASS ree baving powerfully vanquished in battle even the victorious, valued other princes 
as lightly as a straw. 

Since the highly intelligent king, the illustrious Bhoja, has widely celebrated the 
skill which he showed in his marvellous management of horses and chariots, and in the 
use of powerful weapons, what sage in the three worlds would. be able to describe the 
qualities of this prince, who put to flight haughty adversaries by the fear inspired by the 
mere sight of his umbrella ? 

When he marched forth, the thick clouds of dust which rose from the earth, 
pounded by the sharp hoofs of his chargers, covering the sun’s orb, predicted as it were 
with certainty that soon indeed would be dimmed the lustre of all other illustrious 
beings. 

From that illustrious prince was born the prince VijayapAéla, who filled the circuit 
of the quarters with his boundless glory which spread about, bright like the quivering 
rays of the autumnal moon, and who allayed ali suffering whatever on the whole orb of 
the earth. 

Moreover, this prince in a high degree roused the feeling of wonder in the minds of 
the learned, because in the battles which were viewed by the damsels of heaven he 
imparted fear to all his enemies one after another, although he had not got it himself, 
while he never gave to them a portion of the earth, which he did possess. 

From him was born the illustrious prince Vikramasimha, ‘the lion of valour,’ 
rightly so named, because in the display of his mighty valour, which performed valorous 
deeds, he cleft asunder the projecting fleshy frontal globes of the arrayed elephants of 


3 Arjuna being the name of one of the Pandava princes, the poet manages to bring into the verse the words Pdndu. 
Bhimasena (the second son of Pandu and elder brother of Arjuna), and Dhanvin (an epithet of Arjuna). 
4 The words of the original would also mean ‘ possessed of many uncut bow-strings which supported crowds of arrows 
able to conquer the circuit of the quarters’. 
24 


234 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


all his enemies, and because his brilliant fame, as if it were his big shining mane, spread 


at once in all quarters. 
Having perceived that his club-like right arm, even while he was a child, was taken 


possession of by the Fortune of heroism, who had given up all idea of occupying any 
other resting-place, the Fortune of royalty, proudly desirous of asserting her superiority, 
when he was older, determined on embracing his whole body, turning away with disdain 
from all other men. 

Useless indeed is yonder sun, so long as this sun of a king disperses the thick 
darkness of exceedingly haughty adversaries, and eclipses the stars of the badly- 
conducted, and illumines all round the wide expanse of this whole earth, and uninter- 
ruptedly touches with his fierce rays of supremacy, which spread to the confines of the 
regions, mountain-like princes. 

At his conquest of the quarters, the dust which rose from the orb of the earth, 
crumbling to pieces under the sharp hoofs of his choice chargers, spread over the chief 
towns of his adversaries, and, enveloping all things, foretold as it were the time of the 
universal destruction. 

To this noble prince belongs the town named Chadobha, the lustre of which spreads 
on all sides, the excellent markets and the thriving trade of which are celebrated by the 
people that come to it from all quarters to traffic in things which they have got or wish 
to acquire.” 

The historical information contained in these verses is this :— 

In the Kachchhapaghata family there was— 

1. Yuvaraja. His son was— 

2. Arjuna, who, asan ally or feudatory of Vidyddharadeva, slew in battle 
Rajyapala. His son was— 

3. Abhimanyu, whose valorous bearing was eulogized by the king Bhoja. 
His son was— 

4. Vijayapala; and his son again— 

5. Vikramasimha, for whom the inscription (in line 61) furnishes the date 
Monday, the third of the bright half of the month Bhadrapada of the year 
1145, corresponding, as I have shewn in Indian Antiquary, vol. XIX, 
p. 861(No. 170), tothe Northern Vikrama year 1145 expired, or to Monday, 
the 21st August, A. D. 1088.° 


a 


Of the Kachchhapaghata family we possess two other inscriptions of about the 
same time and from the same part of India. One is the large Gwalior Sdsbaht temple 
inscription’ of the Vikrama year 1150, which gives us the line of princes Lakshmana, 
Vajraddman, Mangalardja, Kirtiraja, Miladeva, Devapala, Padmapdéla, and 
Mahipala. And the other is the Narwar copper-plate inscription’ of Viras imhadeva 
of the Vikrama year 1177, which mentions, as the immediate predecessor of Virasirnha« 
deva, Saradasimhadeva, and as his predecessor, Gaganasimhadeva. As these two 
inscriptions contain totally different names, and as none of the names occurring in either 
agree with the names furnished by the present inscription, it is clear that the three 


> The date is one of those in which the ¢ithi is joined with the week-day on which it commenced. 
6 See Indiun Antiquary, vol. XV, p. 35. 
7 See Journal, Am, Or. Soc., vol. VI, p. 543, and Sir A. Cunningham's Arch@ol. Survey of India, vol. U, p- 313, 


DUBKUND STONE INSCRIPTION OF VIKRAMASIMHA. 235 


inscriptions belong to three different branches of the Kachchhapaghata family, which 
must have been in possession of the country around Gwalior in the 11th century A. D- 
We know that the prince Vajradiman of the Gwalior inscription, for whom we have 
the date Vikrama 1034,° defeated a ruler of Kanauj and conquered the fort of Gwalior 
which before belonged to Kanauj. And I shall try to show that one of the princes men- 
tioned in the present inscription, too, had some share, perhaps an important one, in the 
wars which must have been waged against the rulers of Kanauj during the first quarter 
of the 11th century A. D. 

About Vikramasimha and his predecessor Vijayapéla the author of our inscrip- 
tion has nothing of importance to report. I myself believe Vijayapala to be identical} 
with the mripatt Vijayadhiraja, who is mentioned as aruling prince in an inscription 
of the Vikrama year 1100 at By4na, which is about 80 miles north of Dubkund, and 
‘ whose name is preserved in the local traditions as Vijayap4la”; and I may mention 
that, like the inscription of Vikramasimha, here published, the Byand inscription of 
VijayAdhiraja also is a Jaina inscription. Of Vijayapala’s father Abhimanyu our 
inscription merely says that his valour and skill were highly eulogized by the intelligent 
king Bhoja. Considering that for Vikramasimha we have the date Vikrama 1145, 
and for Vijayapala (Vijayddhiraja) the date Vikrama 1100, Abhimanyu must have ruled 
shortly before Vikrama 1100, and there can therefore be no doubt that the king Bhoja, 
here spoken of, is the Paramara Bhojadeva of Malava, for whom we possess the two 
dates Vikrama 1078 and Saka 964—Vikrama 1099.” 

Abhimanyu’s father Arjuna, whose rule may be piaced some time between Vikrama 
1060 and 1090, is said to have slain, in the cause of the illustrious Vidyadharadeva, 
the illustrious Rajyapala; and this, in my opinion, is really a valuable piece of inform- 
ation. As regards Vidyadharadeva, he can be no other than the Chandella king of 
that name, the successor of Gandadeva and predecessor of Vijayapaladeva." Gandadeva 
was preceded by Dhangadeva, who ruled from about Vikrama 1011 to about 1055," and 
Vijayapaladeva was succedeed by Devavarmadeva, for whom we have the date Vikrama 
1107.8 Gandadeva therefore must be placed approximately about Vikrama 1060-1080," 
which shows that his successor Vidy4dharadeva may well indeed have been a contem- 
porary of the Kachchhapaghita Arjuna As to Rajyapala, I think it highly probable 
that. he is the RAjyapAla who is mentioned as the immediate predecessor of Trilochana. 
pala in the Jhisi (or Allahabad) copper-plate of this king of the Vikrama year 1084, pub- 
lished by me in Indian Antiquary, vol. XVIII, p. 34; and I now believe that the three 
kings Vijayapdladeva, Rajyapaladeva and Trilochanapaladeva of that inscription, 
about whom I could say nothing at the time, were really rulers of Kanauj. For we 
know that the Chandella Vidyadhara brought about the destruction of a ruler of 
KanyAkubja (or Kanauj)'*, and it appears very probable that he allied himself for 
that purpose with his neighbours, the Kachchhapaghata chiefs, and that the prince of 


8 See Journal, As. Soc. Bengal, vol. XXXI, p. 393. 10 See ante, vol. I, p. 232. 
9 See Dr. Fleet in Indian Antiquary, vol. XIV, p. 8. 1 10.; p: 196. 
i ini i Tangalaraj 2 Jb., pp. 124 and 139. 
There can, in my opinion, be little doubt that the Mangalaraj a, pCoEDD s f 
mentioned inanother fragmentary inscription at ByAna (id. 13 See Indian Antiquary, vol. XVI, p. 201. 
p. 9), is the Kachchhapaghita Mangalaraja of the Gwalior in- 4 See also ante, vol. I, p. 219. 


scription, the successor of Vajradiman, : a 


236 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Kanauj destroyed by him was the very Rajyapala, mentioned in the present inscription 
and in the Jhdsi copper-plate. As indicated by Dr. Hultasch, ane, vol. I, p. 219, we 
have hitherto known nothing certain of the kings of Kanauj between A. D. 948 and 
1097. If my suggestions are approved of, we have now at least the names of three 
kings of Kanauj, who together must have ruled approximately from about A. D. 980 to 
about A. D. 1040.—About Arjuna’s father Yuvaraja the author of our inscription has 
nothing to say. 

Of the second part of the inscription it will, I think, be sufficient-to give an abstract 
of the contents, The last verse translated above told us that to Vikramasimha belonged 
the town of Chadobha, evidently the place now called Dubkund which at the time 
must have been noted for its trade; and in continuation of it the verses in lines 32-39 
give the genealogy of the two Jaina traders Rishi and Dahada, on whom Vikrama- 
simha had ccnferred the rank of Sreshthins” in that town, and one of whom is mentioned 
afterwards among the founders of the temple. Both were sons of Jayadeva and his 
wife YaSomati, and grandsons of the sreshthin Jasika, who is described as the head 
of a family or guild of merchants which had come from Jdyasapur, a town which I am 
unable to identify 

Lines 89-48 then contain an account of some Jaina sages, the last of whom, Vijaya- 
kirti, not only composed this inscription, but also by his religious teaching incited the 
people to build the temple at which the inscription was afterwards engraved. The first 
sage spoken of, an ornament of the Latavagata gana, is the Guru Devasena. His 
son was Kulabhidshana; and his son again was Durlabhasenastri. From him 
sprang the Guru Santishena who, in a sabhé held before the king Bhojadeva, 
defeated hundreds of disputants who had assailed Ambarasena and other learned men. 
And his son was Vijayakirti. 

Of the founders of the temple lines 48-51 mention by name the Sidhu Dahada 
whose genealogy has already been given, Kikeka, Sirpata, Devadhara, Mahi- 
chandra, and Lakshmana; but others also, who are not named, are said to have ren- 
dered assistance. : 

The prose passage, commencing in line 54, records that the Mahdrdjddhiraja Vi- 
kramasimha, for the building of the temple and for keeping it in good repair, as well 
as for purposes of worship, assigned (a tax of) one vtimsopaka on each goué (of grain P), 
and gave a piece of land in the village of Mahachakra, capable of being sown with 
four gonis of wheat, and a garden with a well to the east of Rajakadraha; and that 
he moreover provided a certain amount of oil’ for lamps and for anointing the bodies of 
holy men.—I can find no names like MahAchakra and Rajakadraha anywhere near 
Dubkund on the maps at my disposal. 

After the usual appeal to future rulers to keep the above donations intact, lines 
ai ay the aoe os ee writer and of the engraver, already mentioned; and 

he inscription clos : : } 
ees p oses witha date, the European eyuivalent of which I have given 


18 See Jacobi’s edition of Bhadrabahu’ itr ; : A ; 
itedutt rabahu’s Kalpasttra, p. 107: Sreshthinah $) idevatddhydsita-sauvarnapatta-bhishi- 


16 ‘Ihe original has the compound kara-ghotiké-dvayam, the first word of which J am unable to exp'ain properly 


Dr. 


= 


DUBKUND STONE INSCRIPTION OF VIKRAMASIMHA. 037. 


TExt.”” 
L. 1. St? wv [ett] aly] Araceae? — “ef — ec — UU emer enis yor- 
[etltana[e)ts[z]fala|fasraaicrfaeay | [a]- 
2 far] — Vv aaa): Uwq——— (at ¢ Uf — Rial faaatie waver 
faa <areat[a] 0 fa(fa)eat- 
3. (tr) quale fa] vacant fasratfaer (alaratfa svifa darasalal|ae aar- 
. arfe a: | Sarera- 


4, athalitfrrrsmrataeaaa darneateaeg ae aa atei(ni)faarey far: ov 
oles] wacdfsa-” 

5. waafa dturfedioe(a] araretfaaafaficueta We ada aa | fasarere- 
uaa wad [sta ]- 

6. [anlicads: ware ug fauedamiled a un A hartavdge cfaqe- 
afar ymalga- 

7. — — [fetleaqarcasifeareatrafa 1 at omfestioaranadhararterar 
WATS TAT- 

8. aa fara saarena far: wate: u Umerfrarenperardarstreanc [at ]enc: | street 
wet ate a- 


9. att afrana: u “ahafsrarfeafragencieqrecmacal (waaay | 
Tare at ofa dasrat fact. 

LO. fa en[fa] ora waq a(a)aeaat at n “arte mnaraanfaaaatiaafa- 
ll. qaastasaran: 1 ahnlaseafa: ufecarara ageat at awhitaqita 
fatsasa slat wa- 

12. faa v Whaareaarafaca: Wesaard esreisthafecataarafaaseat 
UPaTSS | 

13. *[festolafadgusalfalararaardisg (aa )aadia waa anthicgeatsrera- 
qead un ae 

14, pear faaratacararcatiza rer (er) Aarfanisecfeufransgeratfedere- 
ata | Wa- 

15. da: wdarewaefana wad fatqat Geto fafcfaacqeaafrarataa: i 
i feaeq- 

16. AIRMAN AAT Aa TUAfeearafas See eseae 
[ala- 


17 From Sir A. Cunningham’s rubbing, supplied to me by % Metre, Sarddlavikridita; and of the next verse, 
Burgess, 4 The akshara in brackets was originally omitted, and is 
18 Expressed by a symbol. engraved below the line. 

19 Metre, Sarddlavikridita ; and of the next three verses. 35 The aksharas im these brackets have been partly 
© Read Wie’. painted over in the rubbing. 


* Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh) 26 Metre, Sragdhara. 
3 Metre, Vasantatilaka, 37 Metre, Sardilavikridita ; and of the next verse. 


238 


L. 17. 


18. 


19. 


20. 
2 


fal 


22. 


23. 


25. 


26. 


27. 


28. 


29. 


30. 


31. 


32. 


33. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[felaaqun” fanfadterst fafaen([farld orditare tread aaa 
arm wera Fa) 
aqreareansineanaimiey wate ufaafad wafeihitsrrentyo | are” 
aaa sa 
wadt cafVATeaTE wraawis fayala] At waa)aet: my: uM TTTATTT 
: areata [arat]- 

aqa wuacienra (sade aaa | wqTaTTietafadatefanfaca 


. vatiilumaraany 1 wenyeiequarmnaefaaatfiarafeaamare: | 


asta fasa- 

Wea: MARAT: LATHAM ASTANA T): wwe Tarai faenTETt- 

atfaactt 

RATALITU BAteaquiata Wet | aAlanareiea| ta lzagerfanaat ¥(a)ur- 
& 


aig gfe a oan “aarfes(alarfifaanncnufadfeantamfeaafrarcaat- 


aat(aa- 

waa: | WarlamafssyafAape aaa Ba Taal (NT) WaT eATATAM: AA TTRRT- 
HAT: H 

at(anaatty fadian ae uftaranrt ys cfat aiedwosafefataar aefaar 
dfaraq | weatira- 

ACAATACRI USS Taal” Usa aT ara faqar warren: seid 
eufafecfafa- 

wacfafe sarfearai[falaruam fananard aaasnederaata cura | fauata® 
fearematge- 

quater? afansig(s)afaaee afa sadaatatigarat 0 ated 
atwqingiaa- 

TeMTasaTIasaUsH aug | fatfant ywaty fatifearaaent waaarafa- 
atfee- 

Qi ae farina gt vafe faieininafudift atredag 1 uri fteana- 
anafemaaifa- 

arawmarafaufamasiwarg 1 © i “ardisaagts faaafiania(a)tis- 
ara”? area: WH _ZTaAT]- 

afaac: Ast” oarfafea: | wafeunesdals|cuderaa at eat uratara [aql- 
fara (fal fag(g)- 


28 The above appears to be what was originally engraved, 4 Read “faxa. 
but the akshara & may have been altered. 8° Metre, Sragdhara. 
” Read @ar’. % Read fasrata. 
» Metre, Malini; and of the next verse. 7 Metre, Vasantatilaka; and of the next vorse, 
4 Metre, Sikharini. % Metre, Sardilavikridita. 
= Metre, Sarddlavikridita ; and of the next verse. %® Road CATSTH. - 
* Originally °gfrat was engraved, 4 Perhaps altered to fear’, 


DUBKUND STONE INSCRIPTION OF VIKRAMASIMHA. 239 


L, 34. Wt ata qa: eat u tahaa[atlueig(@g)esfetm faenrcatfaly lactate fia- 


35. 


36. 


37. 


38. 


39. 


4.0. 


4), 


42. 


am: | Gara ava- 

ud BaSaaTaT Baaaraafiaiata asaaAaTA | VStu M(M)aa Faq waar 
yay: 

face 1 ug quTaTE a(a) ya wat amtaafa wfaat efaerta u CaeTasttsrareat- 
afuerestren yar ufa- 

aaqufisaaaant | urenfaaraa(a inal waa: qaudaaaraTaaaeTe- 
[a] u “atarereae- 

frasrfadifaeietiaeniiqanifanrarey faarataramat aa: 1 dterfema- 
fasya- 

facfanial aanat qras: afeue gia ute” urarcararaw 1 © 0 “aretfene- 
acat (at) wattag- 

fefanay(a)Racaaauhtlats: 1 Renzamertiaatieafearfuangas- 
frat qaeaa- 

au “fasiat fefaaimarfuataar aa varnalfalaay nwa: Praraanat eere- 
Bataa: | 

we wanetfeafasetiawaat: aaetageal (a) wacmdarcTat 
aa: uv “caaat[a|ea- 


43, ACUTTAMAMA TMA T TANATAT | wa Gd wafers asa waMaKE- 
ufatatwafer- 
44. (thi: u Ssreratfaudt qa)ulefalge anaes at mada (a) waaufeafaa- 
tatfeuerae4rs | ale- 
45. ara? mae Bae uzaniviam afer: weaitfafroronaaa: staifaret 
FU Aa. 
46, wadisntraaraTagwnnacaag (sg) fe: vecaaarend | sata fasaaifa: qacara- 
47, aie alafalyafaaat a: wa(s) fet ara 0 PNTeaTa UTATTAATaATa watde- 
wafaatfara- 
48. Wat(anun: | wana a(a)ygEei 4 VaTMAE nargea ayaa faasacea i Cure: 
at (aqt) WaRATL AST S: 
49, aryeres: | ufeaas [Raa WUZ: Was US n aaT SaaT WE UNAAYTET: | 
a( at |fafe- 
50. aaTas aetag: MaTsATE 0 Ofer: wearers: | warfa saa: 
p aifag- 
s Metre, Vasantatilaka. 49 Metre, Sardilavikridita. 
4 Metre, Upajati. 50 Read ATSUANT. 
4 Metre, Vasantatilaka. 51 Metre, Malini. 
4 Metre, Sirddlavikridita. 52 Metre, Vasantatilaka. 
4% Read GCHATHTN. 63 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh); and of the next three 
% Metre, Vasantatilaka. verses, 
7 Metre, Sarddlavikridita. 4 Read Het. 


4 Metre, Vasantatilaka. 


7 


240 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L.61. aa(aaluraar: 0 faa wards —eeae age: | feat faewaa wana: 
52. farae: u “sinritfafeata(a)t acquratzcaratet ara zifaadfet farsmera- 
que d- 
53. eH | ayaeHaaAqehMTa aaa (a) Maas ag faetatrarfen[aa- | 
64. aN On aaa farafers fares aTaracefeagiza- 
.. qatat- 
55. wa ao aeTosnfaasenfamatds: ayua(i)afaearat carro wafa 
(fajara 

b6, ate ofa fastlaa Muattttequraadiada @ vets laa TIARET- 
67. afzannarieat aateafaat  uglogfasanticndsaa acafcared Fea 
ara | aaTa- 
58. er aRerfucerenfamafisaada nv “a(alefagu” yar cefa: ar- 
fet: | waa- 
59. a wer ufawe aa aet wafafa afaraatfasafa Ba: wats Waa: 


ree 


anata 
60. wifafenifaaret: ufanraatufafa 1 © 0 “faadrequst at wa(a) fet weutfe- 

Ala | Seateatar- 
61. a fraraceerueat AeA Haq ee gy argucete 2 diated i dad wera: tl 


X1X.—PABHOSA INSCRIPTIONS. 


By A. FUarer, Pu.D. 


The small modern village of Pabhosa stands on a cliff about 30 feet high, over- 
looking the northerr bank of the Jamna, in tahsil Manjhanpur, 32 miles south-west of 
Allahabad, and represents the ancient site of the once famous Prabhasa.’ The classical 
hill of Prabhasa, whichis the only rock in the Antarvedi, or Doab between the Ganges 
and Jamna rivers, is & miles to the north-west of the great fort of Kosam Khiraj, 
the ancient Kausambi, and not more than 2 miles from the present villages of 
Kosam Inam and Pali,’ which formed the old city outside the walls of the fort. High 
up, in the face of this hill, there is a typical rock-hewn cave, in an inaccessible position. 
This lofty stone cavern is, no doubt, the stone dwelling of the venomous Naga described 
thus by Hiuven Tsiang* in his account of Kaugs4mbi:—* To the south-west of the city, 
8 or 9 lé (about 13 miles), is a stone dwelling of a venomous Ndga. Having subdued 

5 Metre, Sardilavikridita. . 
5 These signs of punctuation are superfluous 
S* Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh), 


© Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh), 
59 Read °atfsarar® 
? The Prabhasa, mentioned in the Mau Chandella inscription of Madanavarman, ante, vol. I, p. 197 & 204, most 
probably is the modern Pabhosé on the Jamnd, and not the distant place of pilgrimage in Sorath. 


? A copperplate grant, measuring 7 inches by 6 inches, of Maharaja Laskshmana, dated (Gupta)-Samvat 158, 
was found in this village in May 1891. 


3 Beal, St-yu-ki, vol. I, p. 287. 


PABHOSA INSCRIPTIONS. Q41 


this dragon, Tathagata left here his shadow ; but, though this is a tradition of the people 
there is no vestige of the shadow visible.”* Hiuen Tsiang’s statement that the cave is 8 
or 91 to the south-west of Kausambi, is erroneous, as the hill bears north-west from the 
fort of Kosam. According to the popular belief of the villagers there is a Naga inside the 
cave, of which everybody has heard, but which no one has seen. The serpent is believed 
to have his head in the Jamna while his tail remains in the cave, which is more than a 
quarter of a mile from the river. he Naga is said to be scen once a year at the time 
of the Divali festival.© Not a little surprised were the people, therefore, to find that 
no Naga was encountered when I entered and examined the cave during the night of 
the 25th March 1887, | 

At the back of the village a flight of about one hundred and ten steps leads up to a 
platform, formed of a mere mass of débris, the refuse of former quarries, on which stands 
a small modern Jaina temple. Close by are three small standing figures of naked Jinas 
cut in the rock. About 150 feet from the north-east corner of the temple rises the 
rock perpendicularly about 47 fect in height, in the highest scarp of which the cave is 
situated. Above the solid rock, in which the cavern is hewn, several large boulders of hard 
grey quartzite are lying, one upon another, in a sloping position. No doubt, the access to 
this cave from below was removed by the quarrymen, as it would seem, shortly after the 
eighth century A.D. In order to effect an entrance into the cave and to copy its in- 
scription outside (Facsimile No. I), which is visible to the naked eye from below, I 
intended first to erect a staging from the temple below up to the cave and inscrip. 
tion; but finding this to be extremely dangerous on account of the locality and 
its surroundings, I had a wooden crib made to let down by means of strong ropes 
from above the cave. As, however, the neighbourhood of the cavern was infested by 
numerous swarms of wild bees, the cave had to be entered by night and the inscrip- 
tions to be copied by the light of a lantern, which added much to the difficulty of 
the undertaking. 

The cave is entirely hewn in the solid rock, the marks of the chisel being apparent 
throughout ; the left side is occupied by a stone couch and pillow, or se7, for the hermit’s 
use. The roof is of very curious formation, being cut into vaulted shelves or cup- 
boards, on each side of the centre; these shelves occupy about half of the roof, and the 
remainder is plain. The main entrance, a door measuring 2’ 2” by 1’ 9”, has a stone 
lintel and plain pilaster of red-coloured sandstone on each side, with square holes above and 
below, seemingly t> bar up the entrance. The lintel of the door is 10 feet from the 
upper edge of the precipice. To the left of the door, at a distance of 2’ 3” are two 
small windows of irregular shape, one with a diameter of 1’ 5” and the other of 
1’ 7”. The thickness of this wall is only 9 inches. About 1’ 3” above the left toy 
corner of the entrance door, there is an inscription (Facsimile I) of eight lines, in char- 
acters of the second or first century B.C., carved on the rough surface of the natural 
rock. Inside, the cave measures 9 feet on the left and 8’ 6” on the right in length, by 
i’ 4” in width and 3’ 8” in height. The stone bed, or se/, is 9 feet in length, 1’ 8” in 


4 Compare, however, Sung-Yun’s account of Buddha's Shadow Cave, or the Cave of Gopala, Beal, 2.c., vol. I, 
page cvii. 

$ Cunningham, Arch@ological Survey Reports, vol..&XI, p. 2. Sir A. Cunningham, althorgh speaking of the cave, 
does not mention its rock-cut inscription. 


21 


242 EPIGRAPIIIA INDICA. 


breadth, and 1’ 2” in height. On it are ten short pilgrims’ records: five of the early 
Gupta period, four of the fifth or sixth, and one of the eighth century A. D. On 
the west wall of the cave, opposite to the entrance door, there are three inscriptions : 
one of the second or first century B. C. (Facsimile II) and two short records of visitors in 
early Gupta characters, 
Nort, 
On the rock outside the cave 


The inscribed surface of the rock measures 14” by 103”. Each letter is on an 
average 1'3” long and 3°6 inches deep. With the exception of four aksharas in the 
sixth and nearly the whole of the eighth line, the record is in surprisingly perfect 
preservation, considering its great age and its long exposure to the vicissitudes of the 
weather. This inscription was first brought to notice by Mr. 8. J. Cockburn’ of the 
Opium Department who made a (not very accurate) eye-copy of it by means of an astro- 
nomical telescope, a tentative reading of which was given by Dr. Hoérnle in the Proceed- 
ings, Asiatic Society of Bengal, for March 1887, page 105. In January 1887, during a 
short visit to Kausimbi, the inscription was independently discovered by me, and I now 
edit it according to impressions taken from the rock. 


fA pe 

L. 1. ttt ations 

2. agafafawa 

3. arqea WMoreatta4r 

4. afeecgan [srer | 

5. arated Ga 

6. atfed [Seraa]"” ca- 

7. & wawt quanta ace. 

8. far]Ja — — -¥—f-— — — = [0] 


TRANSLATION. 

«By Asddhasena, the son of Gopali Vaihidari (i.e. the V aihidara-princess), and 
maternal uncle of king Bahasatimittra (Byihaspatimitra), son of Gopali, a cave was 
caused to be made in the tenth year of . . . . . of the KasSapiya Arhats (i.e. either 
the Buddhists of the Kdsyapiya school, or the pupils of Vardhamdna who eas a Kasyapa 


39 


by gotra’) . . . 
No. IT, 
Inside the cave. 
The inscription is incised on the rough surface of the west wali of the cave and 
measures 382” by 12”, On an average each letter is 1:6" long and 3°6 inches deep; 
the record is in perfect preservation. 


* See Journal As. Soc. of Bengal, vol. LVI, part I, pages| of a genitive, compare, e.g. fUTeseH AIVVTA tpaxtnbe 
S , 


31 to 35. sige a aa: sifagfearare (Panini). 
7 See Facsimile No. I. Ob Crerseardeiennceds 
§ Possibly atutfaat. The genitive ATaTetat is con- " All letters doubtful. 
strued with the crude form af¢zet which stands in the sense 4 JT am indebted to Dr. Biihler for the interpretation of 


this passage. 


Epa tnd. vol. 
PABHOSA INSCRIPTION No, 1.—ON THE ROCK OUTSIDE THE CAVE. 


Sie 


i 
% 
2 


A hiithrer. Ph D.impress. Scale: S-4ths. 


PABHOSA INSCRIPTION No. II,-INSIDE THE CAVE, ON WEST WALL. 


Scale: 1-3rd 


A. Fuhrer, Pn Dump ress. 


PABHOSA INSCRIPTIONS, 245 


Vext.” 
L. 1. afaearat cet Wrerataarae aa’ areas 
2. Fae Us" datiygaes aaa Far 
3. Sfeeciaay araeaaa arfed [ul 


TRANSLATION. 


“Caused to be made by Ashddhasena, son of the Vaihidart (i.e. Vaihidara— 
princess, and) son of king Bhagavata, son of the Tevani (te. Traivarna-princess, and) 
son of king VamgapAla, son of Sonakayana (Saunakiyana) of Adhichhatra.” 

On account of the resemblance to the letters of the Sunga times, thetwo inscriptions 
may be assigned with confidence to the second or first century B.C. Of special historical 
value is the pedigree of the early kings of Adhichhatra,” the capital of the once mighty 
kingdom of Northern Panchala, here furnished to us :— 


Sonakayana 


Varngapala married to Tevani (the T'raivarna-princess)"” 
(King of Adhichhatra), | 


| 
King Bhagavata md. to Gopali, the Vaihidar? (Vaihidara-princess), 
| 


Gopali Ashadhasena 
King Bahasatimitra. 


Where king Bahasatimitra ruled, and who his father was, is not stated; but we 
may safely conclude that he was king of Kausambi, as the latter place is close to 
Prabhdsa, and as many of his coins ® have been found at Kausdmbi. 


No. III. 
In the modern Dharmééla. 


This inscription is incised on a tablet of red sandstone and is now fixed into the 
wall of the modern Dharméalé in the village of Pabhosa. It records the consecration 


12 See Facsimile No, Il. 

18 Possibly @q° or ata 

M4 Possibly <siy, 

16 The modern RAmnagar in Rohilkhand, see Cunningham, Archeological Survey Reports, vol. 1, pp. 255—266, 
fuhver, Monumental Antiquitics and Inscriptions in the North-Western Provinces and Oudh, p.p., 26—29, The same 
form Adhichhatr&, and not the usual Ahikshetra, Ahikshattra,or Ahichchhattra of the Mahdbhardta 
Harivamsa, and Pdnini, occurs also in several inscriptions of the first century B.C., lately excavated by me at Ramnagar, 

16 Compare the "Adicadpa of Ptolemy, Geog. vii, 1, 53. 

7 The epithets Traivarna and Vaihidart { are no doubt derivatives from the names of nations or coantries 
although not found in the Paurdnik lists. Compare e. g. &&ast “the queen of the Kekaya-race,” ateeqr “the queen of the 
Kosala-family.” Compare also the epithet Tevanika, or Traivarnika occurring in one of the Mathura inscriptions, ante, vol. I, 


p, 394 and 397. 
See Sir A. Cunninghain, Ovins of Ancient India, Pt. I, p. 73, whero the king's name is wrongly read Bahasa- 


tamitra., The Lucknow Museum Coin cabinet possesses fifteen coins of iGaeatmire, nine of which were oxcavated by 


me at Kauédmbi in 1887, and six at Adhichhatvd (Rimnagar) in 1891, te: 
915 


244 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


of an image of the glorious Jina (Parsvanatha) on Friday, the 6th day of the dark fort: 
night of the month Margasirsha, in Sarhvat 1881, by Sadhu” Sri Hiralal of Allahabad 
on the top of the hill of Pra bhasa, outside the city of Kausambi. The document is also 
interesting in another respect, as it clearly shows that the modern villages of Kosam and 
Pabhosa were identified already in A,D. 1824-25 by the people of the country with Kau 
gambi and Prabhasa. 


Text 
L. 1. daq (cee fad anntomaredt waaTE- 

2. % aTeTae ATURE GATT eT ATT 
Reese PAS HET: 
fafararerara wailaaraa Maes TaTTA- 
TTA TATY AAAS AAAS T TRA: 

HRY TAT AEC ARIAT AaAT- 
WeqATy Aa faa TRY TATYANA 
Taraa alatareare maraua aafe at- 
UgMufsactarerameanraaa afore 

10. faanfeet aritar aatsrreretared a[ a ]a [1] 


aes ory era Sere 


TRANSLATION. 

(This) image of the glorious Jina (Parsvanatha) has been consecrated under the 
rule of the noble English, on a site made auspicious by the consecration and invocation 
of the glorious Jina Padmaprabha, on the upper side of the hill of Prabh4sa, outside 
the town of Kaugambi, by Sidhu Sri Hira Lal, son of SAdhu Sri MAnikya Chand, 
younger brother of Sumeru Chand, brother of Sadhu Sri Mehar (é.e., Mihir) Chand, 
son of Pheru Mall, younger brother of Sadhu Sri Rayaji Mall, inhabitant of the 
town of Prayaga (Allahabad), belouging to the Goyala gotra, the Agrotaka” family, 
and being (spiritual) client of bhattdraka the illustrious Lalitakirttijit, in the line 
of bhattdraka the illustrious Jagatkirtti, the descendant of Lohacharya, in the 
Pushkara gana, the Mathura gachehha, and the Kashthasamgha, on Friday, the 
6th day of the dark fortnight of the month Margasirsha, in Samvat 1881. May it be 
propitious !” 

‘he modern Jaina temple possesses & small white marble image of Neminatha, 
dated Sarhvat 1881, and a large undated copper statue of Parsvanatha, the setting up of 


which in this temple our inscription undoubtedly records. 
19 4,e, banker and merchant. 
© See facsimile No. ILI. 
™ The modern Ayarwald Baniyds, see ante, vol. I, p, 94. 


Ind, vol. 4H. 


peg 


F, 
Be 


, 


IN THE WALL OF THE MODERN DHARMASALA 


PABHOSA INSCRIPTION — 


eR 2 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 945 


XX.—THE PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 
By G. Biuuzr, Pu.D., LL.D., 0.1.5. 


For the subjoined edition of the Pillar edicts of Asoka the following materials have 
been used :— 

I, Dehli-Sivalik,—(1) Dr. Fleet’s facsimiles, published in the Indian Antiquary, 
vol, XIII, p. 306ff. (2) A paper-rubbing of the second half of edict vii (the so-called 
circular edict), kindly supplied by Sir A. Cunninghan.. 

II. Dehli-Mirat,—Dr. Fleet’s facsimiles, published in the Indian Antiquary, 
vol. XIX, p. 122ff., and the paper-impressions, according to which the excellent facsimiles 
have been prepared.’ 

Ill. Allahabad,—Dr. Fleet’s facsimile, published in the Indian Antiquary, 
vol. XIIT, p. 306. 

IV. Radhia (Lawria-Arardj), Mathia (Lauria-Navandgarh) and Rampirvd,— 
Mr. Garrick’s facsimiles, published with this paper. 

None of the older reproductions have been consulted, because they are of no value 
whatever. They have been made either according to eye-copies or according to rub- 
bings,—not impressions—where the outlines of the letters have bean afterwards marked 
in with pencil. The preservation of the Pillar edicts is in general so excellent that, except 
in the Dehli-Mirat and Allahabad versions, hardly a vowel-stroke is doubtful. For 
these two versions, especially for the first, a comparison of the original impressions is 
highly desirable. Unfortunately the originals of the Allahabad version were not acces- 
sible to me, and it is therefore not impossible that on a comparison of the squeezes some 
small corrections may become necessary. Such corrections will not, however, affect the 
interpretation in any way. Compared with the readings of other scholars, the present 
ones show very few differences in the Dehli-Sivalik and Allahabad versions, for which 
accurate facsimiles have been accessible during the last eight yea 

The changes in the Radhia and Mathia texts are more numerous and, thanks to 
the new materials, decidedly for the better. The fragments of the Rampfrva version 
have been printed once before with my German papers on the Pillar edicts in the 
Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenldndischen Gesellschaft, vol. XLV, pp. 144ff, and 
vol. XLVI, pp. 54ff. According to the account? of Mr. Garrick, the R&mpdrva 
Pillar lies half buried in the ground. Hence only a portion of the inscription is acces- 
sible. As the Rampdrva version agrees exactly with those of Radhia and Mathia, it is 
of no great importance for the interpretation of these documents. These three eastern 
versions have either been engraved according to the same MS,, or, at least, according to 
three MSS. written out by the same Karkun. ‘Their verbal discrepancies are so ex- 
ceedingly slight that they cannot possibly be ascribed to different draughtsmen. The 
two Dehli versions are also closely allied to each other. This agreement extends in both 
cases also to the grouping of the words, which the present edition indicates by hyphens 
put between those written continuously. I believe that it is advisable to attend to this 
point, because evidently only those words have been placed close together, which may 

* These impressions, which Dr. Fleet kindly presented to me, have been made over to the Oriental Institute of the 


Vienna University. 
3 See Cunningham’s Arch. Survey Reports, vol. XVI, p. 1106. 


246: EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


be joined according to the construction. There is not a single instance in which words 
written continuously belong to different sentences. It would seem that the clerks con- 
nected those words, which in reading the documents they pronounced together. Hence 
the breaks are equivalent to signs of interpunction, commas, semi-colons and full stops, 
and they, as well as the combined groups, must be taken into account in the inter- 
pretation. And it follows, eg., that in the second edict the division of the group 
chakhuddaepi into cha khu dane pi is impossible, and again that the attempt to 
combine the separated words isyd kdlanena, in the third edict, cannot be upheld. 

As regards the translation and interpretation of the Pillar edicts, the majority of 
the numerous problems, which Lassen and Burnouf left behind, have been solved by 
Professor Kern in his Jaartelling der zuidelijke Buddhisten, and in his Buddhismus 
und seine Geschichle in Indien, or by M, Senart in his Inscriptions de Piyadasi, tome ii, 
and in his articles in the Indian Antiquary, vols. XVILand XVIII, which Mr. Grierson 
has translated in excellent style. Hence there was not very much remaining for me, 
especially as M. Senart in his latest publication has adopted my suggestion (Indian 
Antiquary, vol. XIII, p. 306) that the so-called eighth circular edict on the Dehli-Sivalik 
pillar is only the end of the seventh. Nevertheless, I hope that my translation and 
notes will not be superfluous, 

I differ from my predecessors, especially from M. Senart, in several essential 
points. First, as I hold on principle all conjectural emendations, which alter the 
texts of several versions, to be inadmissible, I have tried to show that in all cases, 
where. such changes have heen proposed in the Pillar edicts, the original readings 
admit of explanation. Secondly, I have attempted to further substantiate my view 
that a full explanation of ASsoka’s edicts can only be given with the help of the 
Brahmanical literature and by a careful utilisation of the actualities of Hindu life, I 
have called attention to this point in the introductory remarks to my German articies on 
the Rock edicts, and in explaining. the latter, I have shown how a certain proportion of 
the institutions in Asoka’s empire agrees with those prescribed by the Brahmanical 
Rajaniti, as well as, that certain other details become easily intelligible, when one 
consults other Sdstras or pays attention to still existing Indian customs. This principle 
of interpretation is, it seems to me, particularly important for the fourth and fifth Pillar 
edicts, and hence the remarks on these two pieces have become rather extensive. 

Thirdly, I believe it to be certain that Piyadasi-ASoka had not yet joined the 
Buddhists, when the Pillar edicts were completed. His conversion to Buddhism fell, as 
I shall show in a new discussion of the Sahasrdm and Riipnath edicts, in the twenty- 
ninth year of his reign. Up to the end of his twenty-seventh year the king continued to 
preach and otherwise to work for the spread of that general morality which all Indian 
religions, based on the Jidnamdrga or Path of Knowledge, prescribe for the people at 
large and which is common to the Brahmans, Jainas and Buddhists, This conviction, of 
course, has forced me to demur against a specially Buddhistic interpretation of various 
words and terms. 

Finally, there are some passages, ¢.g., in the second, third, fourth and seventh edicts 
where I have tried, by new divisions of the coutinuous!y written syllables or new trans 


In justice to Professor Kern T must point out that he has recognised this very obvious fact quite independently 
Dor Buddhismug, vol. U1, p. 384. 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA, 247 


literations of the Prakrit words into Sanskrit, to elicit a more satisfactory sense than that 
obtained through the older interpretations. Most philologists will have felt that the 
hitherto current explanations of chakhuddne-pi-me bahuvidhe dimnne, kaélanena-va-hakan 
ma palibhasayisarmti, ndtikd-va-kini nijhapayisamti, etc., do not carry conviction, and 
could only be regarded as make-shifts which might be excused as long as notbing more 
plausible offered. 

Tn the fifth edict I have left many names of animals unexplained. Every one of 
them will probably be traceable, if the medical Samhitds and Nighantus are thoroughly 
examined, of which for the moment only a small proportion is accessible to me. A 
special examination of the older Buddhist and Jaina literature, which I have begun, but 
been unable to complete, will probably furnish the means for the further explanation 
of some other words, which have still to be translated conjecturally or stand in need of 
further elucidation. In his contributions to the Academy of 1891, Dr. Morris has shown 
that something may still be done in this way, and some of my notes will show 
that the Jaina literature also furnishes contributions for the Asoka inscriptions, Even- 
tually, and, I believe, in a not very distant future, every word and form of these precious 
documents will admit of as certain an interpretation as those of the ordinarv classical 
texts. 


Eprer I. 
Dehli-Sivalik. Dehli-Mirat. Aliahabad. 

Devanam-piye Piyadasi laja- . . . . » 6 « « « Devanam piye Piyadast 14ja 
hevamn-aha [:] saduvisati* (1) se 6 ew el heheheh ~~ Cevarn A [:] saduvisativasAbhi- 
vasa abhisitena-me iyam-dham- + ee ew el he he SC ~SOSitena, me iyarh dharhmalipi likha- 
wmalipi likhapita[:](2] hidatapa- 2 . . . . . . ) .). ~ Cpita[:} hidatapalate dusasapatipad- 
late dusarnpatipadaye arbnata- soe ee ew ww we) (a) y(e) [1] atnnatea agaya dhar- 
agdy4-dharnmakamatayA(3] agd- © + 6 © « «© « « « Mmakamatiya agaya palikhAya 
ya-palikhaya agdya-sustsdya age- ss eo ee ee) 6.) Cagdya susisiya agena bhayena 
na-bhayena(4] agena-usabena/.] poeta sah Ar {age]na usfhena[.] Esachu kho 
Bsa-chu-kho-mama anusathiy4 [5] Me ge (lina Crater worth. Mae. mama anusathiyA [2] dhamméa- 
dhasnmapekha dhariamakamata- ee nce in en] Ce a 2, pekha dharnmakdmata cha suve 
cha suve-suve-vadhita vadhisati- ap ee Agere Fee ee suve vadhita vadhisati chevA[.j 
cheva-[6] Pulis&-pi-cha-me ukasi- ie It ane ae acer ec Pulist pi me ukasd cha gevaya 
cha gevaya-ché majhima-cha anu- teas eg et oe oe cha majhim4 cha anuvidhiyamti 
vidhiyarnti [7] sarnpatipadayar- - «+ ©. 6 « ws ‘© «  sasapatipadayamti cha [3] alam 
ti-cha alasn-chapalaih-samadapay- . oe 8 ew ew eh heh) ~—CChapalaynsamadapayitave[; ] heme- 
itave [;] hemevi-arnta [8] mabd- oleh ee 4s es eee 4 | Va arhtamahimatapi[.] — Jesh: hi 
mata-pi(.] Esa-pib-vidhi ya- , 2. . . . . . «~~ vidhi y&iyarn dharnmena pilana 
iyarh - dharnmena - piland dharh- sare nazh dhammena  dharnmena vichave dhasbmen|{a] 
mena-vidhine [9] dharhmena- [1] vidhdne dha[zyn]Jm...... sukhiyanddharhmena guti ti chus 
sukbiyana dharnmena-goti-ti [.]  khifya]..... ...(2] [J [4)0] 


4 The sign, read here dw, appears exactly in the same shape in the Sanchi inscriptions, ¢.g.,in Pddukulikd, i.e., Pamdu 
kuliké. With the form saduvésati compare dure, duvdla, kudumala, 

5 Possibly the stone may have hi instead of pi, which former appears to be the correct reading. 

6 I give the words ti-chw on the strength of Dr. Fleet’s note, Ind. Ant., vol. XIII,p. 310. The vowel sign of ¢i stands 
irregularly to the left of the consonant, just as in the Kalsi version of the Rock Ed. XIII, 2 1. 12, in the last evilables of 
anuvidhiyamti and anuvidhiyisamti 


245 


Radhia. 

Devanath-piye _Piyadasi-laja 
lhevarn-Sha [:] saduvisativasabhi- 
sitena-me iyarh-dharbmalipi [1] 
likhapita [:] hidatap4late” dusarn- 
patipadaye arnnata-agaya-dham- 
makfmatay(a] agaya-palikhaya 
[2] agAya-susisAya agena-bhaye- 
na agena-usdhena [.] Esa-chu- 
kho-mama - anusathiya dharnma- 
pekha [3] dharnmakamata-chs 
suve-suve-vadhita vadhisati cheva 
[.] Pulisd-pi-me ukas4- cha geva- 
y4-cha majhima-cha anuvidhi- 
yamnti [4] sarnpatipadayarnti-cha 
alarn-chapalarn samadapayitave 
hemeva-amtamahamaté-pi[.] Esa- 
hi-vidhi y4-iyarn dhaynmena-pala- 
na({5] dharamena-vidhine dharn- 
mena-suktiyana dharnmena gott. 


ti (6}(.] 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


Epicr I. 
Mathia. 


Devanamn = piye Piyadasi - laja 
hevarh-dha[:] saduvisativasabhisi- 
lena-‘me iyam [1] dhasimalipt 
rikhapita [:] bidataplate dusam- 
patipadaye aranata-agdya dharh- 
makamataya[2] agdya-palikhaya 
agdya-sustisdya  agena-bhayena 
agena-usthena[.] Esa-chu- kho- 
mama [8] anusathiya dharnma- 
pekha dharnmakématé-cha suve- 
suve-vadhita vadhisati-cheva [.] 
Pulis4-pi-me[4] ukas4-cha geva- 
y’-cha majhim4-cha anuvidhiyar- 
ti sarhpatipadayamti-cha alarb- 
chapalarh-samAdapayitave [5] he- 
meva-amtamahamata-pi[.] Hsa- 
hi-vidhi y4 iyarn dharnmena-pala- 
nadharnmena-vidhane dharnmena- 
sukhiyana [6] dharnmena-goti-ti 


(7.] 


Ramptrva. 
Devandm in-piye Piyadasi-lajaja . 
hevayn-4ha[:] sa[du] ae, cee We 

. [1] dusaynpatipadave 
arbnata-agiya dharhmakdmuataéya 
. « [2] Esa-chu- 


kho-mama anusathiya dharnma- 


. . e e e . 


pekhadhamnmma . . . . 
. . « [8] gevaya-cha majhi- 
m4-cha anuvidhiyariti sarnpati- 
FEE WME Wh Go 6 OG ao 


° - ° . . . 


[4] ya iyasn dhammena 


palana dharhmena vidhane dharn- 
MenaSL AT |Vensie ele) lee lee 


TRANSLATION. 


King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus:—‘* After I had been anointed 
twenty-six years, I ordered this religious edict to be written. Happiness in this world 
and in the next is difficult to gain except by the greatest love of the sacred law, the greatest 
circumspection, the greatest obedience, the greatest fear, the greatest energy.® But, 
through my instructions, these have, indeed, increased day by day, and will increase still 
more (viz.) the longing for the sacred law and the love of the sacred law. And my 
servants, the great ones, the lowly ones’ and those of middle rank, being able to lead 
sinners” back to their duty, obey and carry out (my orders), likewise also the wardens of 
the marches." Now the order (for them ) is to protect according to the sacred law,” to 
govern according to the sacred law, to give happiness in accordance with the sacred law, 
to guard according to the sacred law.” 


7 Burnouf’s explanation of hedata and pdélata, which are found also below IV, (1. 7 (D. S.), 1.18 (L. 8.), VII, 2, 1.10 
as inflected forms of the adverbs in ¢ra, is no doubt correct, In popular Sanskrit, too, paratram is used in the sense of 
paralokah or pdralaukikam, see Panchatantra, iii, p. 54, 1. 17 (Bo. edition). 

8 Circumspection, i.c., a careful examination, whether one’s actions are lawful or not; obedience, 7.e., towards Piya 
daxi’s sacred law; fear, 7.¢., of sin. 

2 Gevayd, ‘the lowly ones’ or ‘subalterns’ is derived from the Sanskrit root gep or glep, which the Dhkdtupdtha 
explains hy dainye. The corresponding Sanskrit word was, no doubt, *gepya-*glepya, literally ‘ the poor ’ or ‘ wretched.’ 

10 Chapala, literally ‘ fickle’, means both in Pali and in Sanskrit durvinita, ‘ ill-behaved ’, ‘a sinner.’ 

1 The amntamahdmdadd, ‘the wardens of the marches,’ are the antapdldh of the Sanskrit writers, sce,e.g, Malavikd- 
gnimttra, p. 16, 1.7 (Bo. 8. Ser, 2nd ed.). 

12 Tt will be best to take 47 heve aradhdrane, é.e., in the sense of ‘indeed’, ‘even’, which it has not rarely in Sanskrit 


prose. 


oh a 


ava ApRats TORT YG 33477 Bi pto-Ap 
: Saw CP i renege, PV pdae | aad 


ee Ne: 


her 


a a ts ne ThA a8 TPH tad Pat Uae sega. 


Ly : 


i eee 1G ve ALY ing 109 ree 
; rf STR OPer 994 v9 4 YRAAY. ape 2 Ya : PAP pyned ins 
Q YIPPTAPAAA Pron. potteauM 9p y: | ar yPeteee PYR at 
aE UML A TOP TKRRY ode qd 14. 77 TH, SBP ALTAR InP Ryny uP 
yapyry 8 FYAGAUTY BYTE TEISA petY A caved yous | 
AERUT! ROP RAP ATAAR LAPIS DD TI TIE 


: Siw age ais 
‘ : iors ee Soe) 
ae 2S & 2 we sank x ; 
Se s 4 a i dt Fey Wiad 2 anes * 


“agIS HLNOS—‘VIHGVY LV NOILdIYOSNI UVTIHd YHOSV 


“YIG-t ¢ RIE GlI9S "APIO D ff of 


a o ; aX eee ae TS ATP TpPAG ae yPvpara : 
eens gy wr anges en 


ee (he ' 


try Tynyg9 yormitadrdys wgVtAz9 4g 


: i 


ie 


vou iH Ba tide cad YeDvPaT A +18 i? ByA POPk 
= : : : : 12: » fa v aay n p Y 2 vip yao 3 Yea 


Toore. 0 YPRRPIY 98 PYAR td | paprege Oey 


aly site sea Yoke! PaEtHeR ag” 


pysa ¥ ¢ 5173: 73 ¥: Ys 7: Te Prva. a! ea K, P14 TST Ody 
myra oe she, we +41 OF: ata TYNE 


ee EPS eo 


Dehli-Sivalik. 


Devanam-piye — Piyadasi-1&j4 
{10} hevarh-aba [:] dharhme- 
sidbi [.] Kiyarn-chu-dhamme- 
ti[?] Apdsinave bahu-kaydne 
(11] day4-dine sache-sochaye (.] 
Chakhudane-pi-me — bahuvidhe- 
dirnne dupada-(12) chatupadesu 
pakhivalichalesu vividhe-me-anu- 
gahe-kate 4-pana-[13] diékhinaye 
armmnAni-pi-cha-me-bahini kayan- 
ani-katani [.] Etaye-me [14] 
athfye iyarn-dharnmalipi-likha- 
pita [:] hevarn-anupatipajamtu 
chilam-[15]  thitika-cha-hoté-ti- 
ti [.] Ye-cha-hevayh-samputipa- 
jisati se-sukatarn-kachhati-ti[.16] 


Radhia. 

Devanarmm piye Piyadasi laja 
hevam-dha[:} dharnme-sddhu[ ] 
Kiyarm-chu-dharnme-ti[?] Apa- 
sinave bahu-kayadne daya dane 
sache[7] socheye-ti[.] Chakhu- 
dane-pi-me-bahuvidhe-dirnne du- 
padachatupadesu pakhivalichalesu 
vividhe-me-anugahe-kate[%] 4-pa- 
nadakhinaye arnnfni-pi-cha-me 
bahdn:-kay&nani-katani([.] Etaye- 
me-athaye iyar-dhamalipi likha- 
pita[:] hevarn(9) anupatipajamtu 
chilarnthittkA-cha-hotd-ti[,] Ye- 
cha-hevath-sarhpatipnjisati se-su- 
katarh-kachhati-ti[. 10] 


King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus: 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 


Epict II. 


Dehli-Nirat. 


Devanath-piye Piyadasi-lajA- 
hev. . .{ :] dharnme-sidb[u] ¥ [.] 
Kiyam «, - (?3) Apasinave 
bahu- Gayhus daya dane sache [so]- 
chaye [.] ([Chakhud4]nam- 
pi-me [4] bahuvidhe-dirhne dupa- 
dachatupadesu pakhivalichale. [vi- 
vidhe-me-anu] (5]¢ahe-kate 4-p4- 
nadikhinaye athnani-pi-cha-me 
bahi(ni . yanani) [6] katani[.] 
Etaye-me-athdye iyam-dharmnma- 
lipi-li{khApita] . . [7] anupatipa- 
jamtd —chila[rnthi] tiké 14 - cha- 
hot&-[ti][.] Ye-cha-he',..... 
[8] sati se-sukatath-ka[chha]ti- 


[iJ .9) 


Epict II. 


Mathia. 


Devanarh-piye  Piyadasi-laja 
hevam-aha[:] dharnme-sidhu[.} 
Kiyazn-chu-dhamme-ti[.] Apdsi- 
nave bahu-kaydne[8] daya dane 
sache socheye-ti[.] Chakhudane- 
pi-me bahuvidhe-dimne dupada- 
chatupadesu pakhi- [9] valichalesu 
vividhe-me-anugahe-kate  A-pf- 
nadakhinfye arandni-pi-cha-me 
bahdni-kayanani[{10] — katani[.] 
Etaéye-m[e]-athaye iyarh-dharh- 
malipi likbdpita{:] hevarh-anu- 
patipajamtu —_chilarhthitfka-cha. 
hotd-ti[.J1] Ye-cha-hevarh-samh= 
patipajisati se-sukatarn-kachhati 


[.12] 


TRANSLATION, 


249 


Allahabad. 
Devanam piye Piyadast 1Aj& 
hevarn Aha[:] dharhme edhu[: ] 
Kiyarh chu dharmme ti[?] Apfsin- 
ave bahu kayfne day& dane 
sache sochaye[.] Chakhudane pi 
me[5] bahuvidhe dirnne dupada- 
chatupadesu 4° pakhivalichalesu 
vividhe me anugahe kate 4 pf- 
nadakhinaye!’ arnnfni pi.cha me 
bahuni kayan4ni katini[.6] Etaye 
me athaye iyarn dhammalipi 
likhapita[:] bevarh anupatipa- 
jathtu chilathitika cha hotd ti[.] 
Ye cha hevam sampatipajisati se 

sukatam kachbatiti[.7] 


Rémpirvéa. 

Devanam-piye _ Piyadasi-lAja 
hevarh-Aha[:] dharnme-s&dhu[.] 
Kiyainior asmsnemlerel scetoneiccn 
..«.. [6] bahuvidhe-dimmne 
dupadachatupadesu pakhivalicha- 
TSB VAVEN Sc reitsifere. vce rs aaieneie 
Btaye- -me-athfye Or Ongtaa 
lipi-likh@pita[:] hevaha. ... 


‘ 
@eeeteveeeseeeeeeeee 


Siete ececemb Vine 0 oie leh etiO) 


— "(To fulfill) the law is merit- 


orious, But what does (the fulfilment of) the law include? (Jt includes) sinless. 
ness’, many good works, compassion, liberality, truthfulness, purity. The gift of spirit. 
ual insight’ I have given (to men) in various ways; on two-footed and four-footed 
beings, on birds and aquatic animals I have conferred benefits of many kinds, even the 
boon of life, and in other ways have I done much good. It is for this purpose that I 


3 The quantity of the second vowel of sddhu is not certain. 
4 Chilam® looks like child° ; possibly fhitekd to be read. 
But the dot after da is probably accidental. 

% Pénadakhind is the Sanskrit prdnedakshind, a‘ less commonly used variant for abhayadakshind ‘the boon 


Possibly dupadamchatupadesu. 


of safety.’ 


The smaller Petersburg Dictionary, however, gives it in this sense. 


2k 


250 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


have caused this religious edict to be written, (viz.) that men may thus act accordingly, 
and that it may endure fora long time. And he who will act thus will perform a deed 
of merit. 

REMARKS. 


a. I explain apdsinave by apdsravam, used in the sense of apdsravatvam. It may 
be noted that the Jainas possess a term azhaya, which exactly corresponds to dsinava, 
and is derived, like the latter, from dsnu (see Weber: Indische Studien, vol. XVI, p. 
326, note 7). Piyadasi’s theory of the ésinava, which is more fully developed in the next 
edict, does not agree with the Buddhist doctrine of the threefold or fourfold dsava, but 
comes closer to that of the Jaina anhaya, which includes injury to living beings, lying, 
stealing, unchastity, and attachment to worldly possessions. 

b. The usual interpretation of chakhuddne by cha khu déne cannot stand, because 
the enclitic words cha and khu cannot begin a sentence, and because the continuousness 
of the syllables in the text does not permit their being taken as parts of two sentences. 
The metaphorical use of chakhu, in Sanskrit chakshus, ‘eye,’ for ‘spiritual insight or 
knowledge,’ is common with all Hindu sects. Piyadasi alludes here to the dhatwmasd- 
vandni and dhammdnusathini, ‘sermons on, and instruction in, the sacred law,’ of which 
he speaks more fully below (VII, 2,1. 1); compare also dhammaddne ae Edicts XI 


and the note to the latter passage). 


Dehli-Sivalik, 


Devanat-piye _ Piyadasi-lAja- 
hevarn-aha[:] kayAnarnm-eva-de- 
khati(:] iyarn-me[17] kay&ne-ka- 
te-ti{.] No-mina-pApam-dekhati 
[:] syarh-me-p&pe-kate-ti iyarh- 
va-Asinave[1§] ndm4.ti{.] Dupa- 
tivekhe-chu-kho-es4(.] Hevam- 
cehu-kho-esa-dekhiye[:] imAni[19] 
asinavagamini-néma atha-charn- 
diye nithtliye kodhe mane isy4 
{20] kAlanena-va-hakarn m4-pali- 
bhasayisarh[.] Esa-badha-de- 
khiye[:] iyarn-me[21] hidatikaye 
iyath-mana-me palatikaye [.21] 


Radhia. 


Devénarh-piye —_ Piyadasi-laja 
hevath-dha[:] kay&neynm-eva-de- 
_kharnti[:] iyath-me-kayane-kate-ti 
(-] No-mina-pAparhn-dekhamti[:] 
iyam-me-pApe-kate-ti[1]] iyarn- 
vasAsinave-nama-ti [:] Dupative- 
khe-chu-kho-esa[.] Hevarn-chu- 
kho-esa-dekhiye[:] im4ni-Asinava- 


1 Possibly ndma-ti is to be read. 


18 The apparent vowel-stroke to the 


9 Possible vd is tc be read, 


Enpricr III. 
Dehli-Mirat. 


Devanam-piye 
hevam-aha[:] 


Piyadasi-laja- 
kayanamm = va- 
d{ekha].(:) .. m.{10] kayane- 
kate-ti[.] No mind-pdparn-de- 
khati[:] [i] yarh-me-papath-ka[te- 
tilyarh v.J[11] dsinave-na[m4]-ti 


{-J'7 Dupativekhe-chu-kho-esa 
[.} Hevam-chu . . [sé d]ekhiye 
312] [i] mani-dsinavag[Amioi]- 


nama atha'’® chamdiye nifhd- 
liye-kodhe[ 13] mAne isy4 kalane- 
na-v[a]!° hakath-ma-palibha(sa]- 
yisa[.J. . badham[14] dekhiye[:] 
iyam . e [hidati]kaye iyam-me- 
palatikaye [15] 


Mathia. 


Devanath-piye Piyadasi-laja he- 
vam-aha[:] kayénarnm-eva-dekh- 
arti[:]iyarh-me-kayAne-kate-ti[.] 
No-mina-pAparh [13]d [e]khamti- 
[:] iyatin-me- , dpe-kate-ti iyam-va- 
Asinave-némé-ti[.] Dupativekhe. 
chu-kho-esa[.] Hevarn-chu-kho- 
esa-dekhiye[:14] imAni-asinave- 


Allahabad. 
Devanam piye Piyadas?t 14j4 
hevarh aba[:] kay&nam-eva de- 
khati(:) iyarh me kayane kate ti 
[.] Nomina papakam dekhati[:] 
iyath me papake kate ti iyarn va 
asinave nama tif8] . . . 


Rémpitrva. 
DevAnath-piye  Piyadasi-laja 
hevarn-Aha{:] kayanarhm-e . « 


Gs we Pe nee ea an Occ 8 Oe OO ae 


mA-ti[.] | Dupativekhe-chu-kho- 
esa{.]. He-[v.} . + 2 + « « 


ae * e ry ° ° . ° 6 a e 


.(9] iyah-va-Asinave-nf- 


left of atka is probably an accidental sersteh, 


PALMOWT AO NOLLdINOSNI AP Vd VAOSV 


A ‘Pa) VIHLVW YO HUVOGNVAY 


ENYA 


ye 
Ee 

; 

_— 


2 


. Seale 1-5 


Radhia. 
gimini-nam4-ti atha-chamdiye 
(12] nithiliye kodhe-mdne isya 
kalanena-va-hakarm mA-palibha- 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 


Epicr. [l1I1—contd. 
Mathia 


gamini®-nadma-ti atha-cha[sh]- 
diye nithiliye kodhe mane isya 
kalanena-va-hakarn[15] m4-pali- 


251 


Rampirvda. 
» » « [10] kodhe mane isya 
kAlanena-va-hakath ma-palibhasa- 


Viera, Seen Set ee 


. e ° e e ° . ° e 


° rity 


sayisamn-tif.]  Esa-baédharn-de- 
khiye {:] iyam-me-hidatikaye 
iyath-mana-me palatikaye-ti[13] 


bhasayisam-ti[,] Esa badhar- 
dekhiye (:]} iyarn-me - hidatikaye 
iyam-mana-me-palatikaye-ti[.15] +--+ 


TRANSLATION, 


King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :—‘ Man only sees his good deeds, 
(and says unto himself) ‘This good deed I have done.’ But he sees in no wise” his evil 
deeds (and does not say unto himself) ‘Thisevil deed I have done ; this is what is called 
sin.’ But difficult indeed is this self-examination. Nevertheless man ought to pay 
regard to the following (and say unto himself) : ‘Such (passions) as rage, cruelty, anger, 
pride, jealousy (are those) called sinful; even through these I shall bring about my 
fall.’ But man ought to mark most the following (and say unto himself) : ‘This conduces. 
to my welfare in this world, that at least to my welfare in the next world.” 


Epicr IV. 
Dehli-Sivalik. Dehli-Mirat. Allahabad. 
evans 1VOM Cay OGasirlNihe eis ee.) Ves yt ee eae ee 


evade cnsencuecauvarse| 1) Mtr es ek a ee ee ee ee 
Sbistoname rani anaminalipia see) |, Gr eo ew 6 ee ee a ee ee 
eel beens iea wie) 2) OUR 0. ae ce Nee) 8 ee ee Se ek we es 
hfisu-panasatasahasesu-- jamasi- «=... 3 

INGE RST CEN SUN OSS TC ee Ye ee 
Gustin VOM Cea Ce Verte cure [iin iat Gels rhe Vil <5. te oo tgs Seep a8 y Le eee ele WY ee GS 
Eimecte rae ayn caenevatiio BORN Ae ol) ato Fe ae 8, ee ee We 
Pa iebommini-pavaliyevGJAQASAe. 29 tee ne oh ng yg ee ee Bal ele 


Raican aki es Mase aU PAGAN 8S ye ee ieee bel eee eee ee 
Oa cmaermimenuechy ater SU 6h croiee ie Ce ue ge an ee ae a WS ie Se ee 
khiyana dukhiyanam-janisamti , . . 2. 2 4 ws we Cars Setar En 
AU rmIAV Rona erin O lent AY Ovaneg eet 205 yo) ge iie ye yt. gee Sa Wee eee ges 


disarmti janam-janapadam([;] kim- 2 . . . 
ti-[?] hidatarn-cha p&latarn-cha . . . Tye Rone aR tare SE ri aa ee ae ce 


[7] aladhayevd-ti[.]  Lajika-pi- . . . . ; eae eee ane Rotts : : 
faerie pavicbuliteye-Mmann ls |) oo We) lig os Sen ele Sah. ce el) eS ce eee 
pulisdni-pi-me[8]chhamdamnnani- . 2. . 6. 1. Pid non mregeh tal os og eae 


apes eS lee BO oo Soe = ea ere ar Tee ie er 
ka] chaghamti-[a]lé[dhayi- . «© «© «© «© © «© + 

PEVO Lee lente Opler ists ty sh one. J ne 
LOasv ab besnOiiesweniats deren te to Rlera tel ely ter ty 


patichalisarhti te-pi-cha-kani-vi- 
yovadisamti § yenaemarh-lajika 
[9]  chagharnti-aladhayitave[. ] 
Atha-hi-pajam viyatdye-dhatiye ., . . 

2 The e-stroke of dsinavegdmini is too distinct in the new facsimile to be considered as accidental. But it is probably 
only due to a mistake of the mason, 

1) Mina, mind (D. M.) and mana represent in my opinion the Sanskrit mandéh, Pali mand. Na mandk or no manék 
‘not in the least, in no wise,’ which fits here excellently, is very common in Sanskrit. 

24 Or ‘may I not cause my fall through them.’ The Sanskrit translation of the phrase is [teshdm] hdranenaivdham 
mé partbhramSayishydmi, and m4 may be taken in this case to stand for mdz, or as the negative particle. M.Senart’s attempt 


to connect isy4-kdlanena is barred by the fact that all. versions have breaks between the two words. 
2x2 


252 


Dehli-Sivalik. 
nisijitu[10] asvathe-hoti[:] Vi- 
yata-dhati chaghati-me-pajam su- 
kharh-palihatave([,11] hevarh- 
mamé-lajiké-kataé  janapadasa- 
hitasukhdye[;]  yena-ete-abbita 
[12] asvatha-sarhtarh , avimand- 
karnmAni-pavatayevi-1i[.] Ete- 
na-melajikanam(13] abhihale- 
va-darnde-va = atapatiye-kate[.] 
Ichhitaviye-bi-es4-[;]kira-ti [?14] 
viyobélasamata-cha-siya darthda- 
samata-cha[,.] Ava-ite-pi-cha-me- 
Avuti(:15] barndhavabadhanarh- 
munisanam tilftadarndfinam pa- 
tavadhdnam __ timni-divasdni-me 
{16] yote-dirhne[.] Natikd-va- 
kani nijhapayisamti jivitAye.ta- 
nam[17] ndsarntarh-va-nijhapa- 
yita d4nam-dahamti-palatikam 
upavasam-va-kachhamti.18] 
Ichh&-hi-me{!:] hevarh-niludhasi- 
pi-kalasi palatarn-dladhayeva-ti 
javasa-cha[19] vadhati-viv‘dhe- 
dharhmachalane sammyame dA&nasa- 
vibhage-ti[.20] 


Radhia. 


Devanarn-piye _Piyadasi-laja 
hevarn-fha[:] saduvisazivasabni- 
sitena-me —_iyarh-dharhmalipi-li- 
khapita[.]  Lajaka-me-bahisu- 
panasatasahasesu[14] janasi-fya- 
ta tesarh-ye-abhibfle-va-darhde-va 
atapatiye-me-kate[;] kirn-ti-[.?] 
lajika-asvatha abhita karamani 
pavatayevi-ti janasa-janapadasa 
[15] hitasukvarn-upadahevu 
auugahinevu-cha[.] Sukhiyana- 
dukhiyanam janisarnti dharnma- 
yutena-cha-viyovadisamti janarn- 
janapadam([;] kirn-ti-[?] hida- 
tatn-cha[16] palatam-cha dlidha- 
yevu[.] Lajka-pi-lagharnti-pa- 
tichalitave-marn[;] _puliedni-pi 
me-chharhndamnani patichalissm.- 
ti[;] te-pi-cha-kani viyovadisarm- 
ti yena-mam[17] _ lajaka-cha- 
gharbti-aladhayitave[.] Atha- 
hi-pajam-viyataye—dhatiye—nisiji- 


% Possibly chd-siyd is to be read, 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Epict IV-- contd. 
Dehli-Nirat. 


ti [:3]) [viya]. . . 
eke oh pba’ Gan 
h PI watecnaane [4] lajok [a] 
. yells] 
vans: -ete-abbita [5} ‘evathaana ° 


real ryatayerd> tif. n Etena-me 
(6] . [jJakfnuam. , 
ean atapatiye- [kate] Ly 
Ichhitavi . . . - 
prea bats sata tee fae 
on * [8] darndasa[ma} . 
caine Ena)-arati(al 
bothdhanaba[dba]naxi(9] mu- 
nistna{m] . - eet, 
. .» vadb&nam Giin-divasial 
[mJe[10] yote dimane[.]. . . 
payisarh [t]i jivitdye-tanar (11) 
nasamtam-vi-ni .  . 

Seay palatikarn( 12] ofp] 
vasarn-va-ka- .  . 
hevarn-niludbasi-pi- [k]élusif13] 
[p] dlatarh- -Alidhay . . © 
vadhati vividhe-dharhmachalane 
surnyame dafna]..... . [1d] 


Mathia, 
Devanam-piye 
hevarn-dha[:] saduvisativas[4]- 
bhisitena-me iyarn-dharhmalipi- 
likbApita[.] Lajaka-me[17] ba- 
hisu-pAnasatasahasesu —janasi- 
Syata tesath-ye-abhihdle-va-darne 
de-va atapatiye-me-kate[;] kimn- 
ti-[?] lajaka-asvatha [13] abbita- 
karnmAni-pavatayevd-ti janasa- 
janapadasa-hitasukbarha — upadah- 
evi anugahinevu-cha[.] Sukhi- 
yavadukhiyanam[19] janisarnti 
dharomay utena-cha-viyovadisarh- 
ti janarm-jainapadam[;]  kim-ti- 
[?] hidatarn-cha  palatarh-cha 
aladhayevd-tif.]  Lajdka-pi-la- 
ghamti(20] patichalitave-marh 
[;] pulisani-pi-me chharndarmvani 
patichalisamti([;] te-pi-cha-kani- 
viyovadisamnti-yena-mam-lajika 
chaghazhti Aladhayitave[.21] 
Atha-hi-pajazh viyatdye-dhatiye- 


Piyadasi-laja 


Allahabad. 


Meo. De hflasamata cbf 
siya darndasamata cha[.] Ava * 
ite pi cha me 4vuti[:] barhdhana- 
badbAnarh munisdnarm tilitadarm- 
dinam patavadhanam tithni di- 
vasini yote dirnne(:17] ... va 
kAni nijhapayisarhti jivildye ta- 
pam nfsarhtarn va nijhapayité 
danarh daharhti pAlatikarh upava- 
sarn va kachhamti[.18] . . . 
me[:] hevarn niludhasi pi kalasi 
palatarh dladhayevu janasa cha 
vadhati. vividhe dharamachalane 
sayame dinasavibhage [.19] 


Rdmpitroa, 
Devanam-piye = Piyadasi-laja” 
hevarh-Aha([:] saduvisati 
[12] janasi-Ayata tesarh- 
ye-abhihale-va daritle-va atapati. 


[13] 
hitasukharh-upadahevu anugahi- 
nevu-cha[.] Sukhiyanadu 


e ° e € . ° 


 * (14) aladhayeva-ti[.] 


Lajaka-pi-lagharti patichal- 
itaveemam =, i, oe ees 
.(15] chagharhti aladhayitave(.] 
Atha-hi-pajarn viyataéye-dhatiye. 


% Possibly dva-ite is to be read 


PORTION OF ASOKA PILLAR INSCRIPTION AT RAMPURWA. 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 


Radhia. 


tu asvatheshoti[;] viyata-dhati- 
chaghati-me-pajarn—sukharh-pali- 
hatave-ti[,18] hevarh-mama-la- 
jaka-kuta* —jAnapadasa-hitasu- 
khaye[;] yena-ete-abhTta-asvatha- 
samtamh-avimana-karhmAni—pava- 
tayeva-ti[.]  Etena-me lajiké- 
nam abhih&le-va[19] darnde-va- 
atapatiye-kate[.] Ichhitaviye-hi- 
esu[;] kith-ti[?] viyohdlasamata- 
vha-siya darndasamata-cha[.] 
Ava ite-pi-cha-me avuti[:] barh- 
dhanabadhanarn[20] munisa- 
narh-tilitadarndénarn = patavadha- 
narh tirnni-divasini-me-yote- 
dimane!.] Natika-va-kani-nijha- 
payisarhti jivitaye-tdnam nfsam- 
tarh-va[21] nijhapayitave danarh- 
cabamti-palatikamn § upavasarh- 
va-kachhamti[.] Ichh4-hi-me[:] 
hevarh-niludhasi-pi-kAlasi palat- 
ath-Alddbayevd-ti[22] janasa-cha- 


Epicor 1V—-contd. 
Mathia. 


nisijitu asvathe-hoti[;] viyata- 
dhati-chaghati-me-pajam su- 
kharn-palihatave-ti[,22] hevarh- 
mama-lajika-kata  janapadasa- 
hitasukhaye(;] y [e]na-cte-abhita- 
asvatha-samntam = avimana-karh- 
mAni-pavatayevi-ti[.23] Etena- 
me-lajikauara—abhihale-va-darh- 
de-va atapatiye-kate[.] | Ichhita- 
viye-hi-esa[;] kirn-ti[?]-viyohala- 
samataé-cha-siya  darndasamata- 


cba[.24] Ava-ite-pi-cha-me-4vu- 


tif:}]  barndhanabadhanarh-mu- 
nisdna[ m ]ttlitadarndanam patava- 
dhanam timnni-divaséni-me yote- 
dimne[.] Natika-va-k4ni[25] ni- 
jbapayisamti jivitaye-tanam 
nisamtam-va-nijhapayitave dén- 
arn-ddharnti-palatikarn upavdsam- 
va-kachhamti[.] Ichha-hi-me[:] 
hevarn[ 26} niludhasi-pi-kalasi pa- 
latamn-Alddhayevd-ti janasa-cha 


253 


Ramphurvd. 
ni ‘ e . . ° e . Car 


. e ° . ° ° . ° ° 


aT (16) 
janapadasa-hitasukhAye yena-ete- 
abhita-asvathd. . . . 


e . ° . ® 


ney epee Te ard ares Tene 8 
Ichhitaviye-hi-esa[;] ki-ti[?] vi- 
yohdlasamata-cha-siya . . , 


° ’ ° . . [18] timni- 
divasAni-me y[o]te-dirnne[.] Na- 
tika-va-kéni nijha- . . . . 
» « [19] Ichha-hi-me-hevariy 
niludhasi-pi-kdlasi palatam . . 


vadhati vividhe-dharhmachalune vadhati vividhe-dhatnmachalane . . . . 6 . eos ee 
sayame daAnasamvibhage-ti(23] sayame dduasavibhage-ti[27] _ ae re gna eee ag [80] 
TRANSLATION. 


King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus:—* After I had been anointed 
twenty-six years, I ordered this religious edict to be written. My Lajtkas* are estab- 
lished (as rulers) among the people, among many hundred thousand souls; I have made 
them independent in (awarding) both honours and punishments’\—Why? In order 
that the Zajdkas may do their work tranquilly and fearlessly, that they may give wel- 
fare and happiness to the people of the provinces and may confer benefits (on them). They 
will know what gives happiness and what inflicts pain, and they will exhort the provin- 
cials in accordance with the principles of the sacred law,’—How ?—That they may gain 
for themselves happiness in this world and in the next. But the Lajdkas are eager to 
serve me’. My (other) servants also, who know my will, will serve (me), and they, too 
will exhort some (men), in order that the Lajdkas may strive to gain my favour. 
For, as (a man) feels tranquil after making over his child to a clever nurse,—saying unto 
himself, ‘'The clever nurse strives to bring up my child well,’—even so I have acted with 
my Lajikas for the welfare and happiness of the provincials, intending that, being fearless 
and feeling tranquil, they may do their work without perplexity. For this reason 
I have made the ZLajékas independent in (awarding) both honours and punishments. 
For the following is desirable :—What ? That there may be equity in official business® and 


25 It is possible to read lajdka-kate. But the ser “=: e-sttoke is much shorter than the real ones, and, hence, is probe 


ably due to an accidental flaw in the stone. ees ; ; 
% Though viyohdla, in Sanskrit vyavahdra, frequently means ‘legal businese,’ ‘ judicial proceedings,’ there is no 
objection to taking it here in the not less common wider sense ‘business,’ ‘ offieial business,’ as the translation of abhihdra bw 


“awarding honours” makes advisable. 


254 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


equity in the award of punishments.’ And even so far goes my order, “I have granted 
a respite of three days to prisoners on whom judgment has been passed and who 
have been condemned to death.” ‘Their relatives will make some (of them) meditate 
deeply (and) in order to save the lives of those (mem) or in order to make (the condemned) 
who is to be executed, meditate deeply, they will give gifts with a view to the next 
world or will perform fasts’. For my wish is that they (the condemned) even during 
their imprisonment® may thus gain bliss in the next world; and various religious prac- 
tices, self-restraint and liberality will grow among the people.” 


REMARKS ON THE TRANSLATION. 


a, In note 1 to my German translation of Rock Edict T1I,I have pointed out that 
Professor Jacobi has found the Jaina Prakrit representative of lajidka or rdajika (Gir- 
nar) in the Kalpasdtra, where rajjé means “a writer, a clerk.” Ihave added that lajika, 
i.e, lajjtika, was an old name of the writer caste, which is later called Divira (Dabir) or 
Kdyastha, and that Asoka calls his great administrative officials simply ‘the writers,” 
because they were chiefly taken from that caste. Though I do not see any reason 
to change this view, I now leave the word untranslated, because the rendering “ writers” 
might mislead. Regarding my explanation of dyatd, which I take to be equivalent to 
pratishthilah, note 2, on Sep. Ed. I, in the Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenldndischen 
Gesellschaft, vol. XLI. 

b. Professor Kern has without doubt correctly explained the general meaning of 
this sentence. Piyadasi declares that he has made his Zajékas independent in the 
discharge of their duties and has abolished the appeals to higher authorities. This 
follows from the further statement (see below) that he has confided his subjects to them, 
just as a man confides his child to an intelligent nurse. I may add that there is a 
weighty objection to M. Senart’s view, according to which Piyadasi says that he will 
keep legal proceedings against, and punishments of, the Lajdkas in hisown hands. For, 
in all Native States of India a high official, who is “ placed over many hundred thousand. 
souls,” is solely answerable to the king for his actions, and it is a matter of course that 
the same was the case in ancient India, as indeed in all despotic countries. An order 
enjoining that such men were to be punished by the king alone would have been quite 
superfluous. As regards the construction, I explain the sentence in Sanskrit as fol- 
lows :—tesharin yo bhihdro vd dando vd [tatra] maya [teshdm) svatantraté kritd, and 1 
take dimapatyam (soatantratdé| as a substantive, formed according to the analogy of 
ddhipatyam and so forth. The term abhihéra occurs in Pali in the sense of “ honour, 
honorarium,” see Jdtakas, vol. V, p. 58, verse 148, and ibid. p. 59,1. 28f. In the former 
passage the commentary explains abhihdram by pijam. It is obvious that this meanine 
fits here excellently. i 

ce. I interpret dhammayutena with Professor Kern by dharmayuklena, i. e. dhar- 
mayuktyd. M. Senart’s attempt to translate it by ‘together with the Faithful,’ 2.e. 


7 In the interpretation of ava ite (Dh. A.) and dvd ite (M. R.) I follow Professor Kern and M. Senart, who explain it 
by ydvad ctah, and | take dvuti with M. Senart as equivalent to dywktth. Tiltéa or télita has here the same seuse as térita 
Mann, IX, 233. 


28 Niludhast pt kélasi, literally xirudahe pi kdle, may be taken in the sense of nirodhakéle pi. Similar phrases oceur in 
Pali, ¢.g., mithyéchdram and andchdram chinnadivase for andchéracharanadivase, Jat. i, p. 300, 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 955 


the Buddhists, is not tenable. The passage, Pillar Edict VII, 2, 2, which he connects 
with this, has nothing to do with it. For, dhammayutash janam means there ‘the loyal 
people,’ and denotes Piyadasi’s subjects, as distinguished from the amtd, ‘the free 
borderers.’ 

(d) M. Senart’s conjectural emendation chagharmti for laghamti is barred by the fact 
that the four complete versions all offer daghazti, and that the supposed varia lectio 
‘chaghanti’ does not exist. Lagharnti seems to be the representative of Sanskrit ranghamte 
‘they hasten’, #.e. ‘are eager.’ I fully agree with the same scholar’s remark that 
patichal must be taken in the sense of Sanskrit parichar, because in Pali the preposition 
pati is frequently used for pari. Its correctness is demonstrated by the fact that in 
the Jaina Maharashtri, padiyar, i.e. literally pratichar, means ‘to serve,’ see Jacobi, 
Ausgewéhlie Erzéhlungern in Mahdrdshtri, glossary sub voce ‘ padiyariya.’ 

(e) As there are no other instances in which the neuter terminations are added io 
feminines in a, I cannot explain chhathdamndni with M. Senart as a Dvandva compound, 
formed of chhanda and djid. I take it with Burnouf, as a Tatpurusha compound, equiva- 
lent to chhandam janantiti chhandajiéh, * knowing the will,’ and construe it with puli- 
sdni, ‘theservants.’ This explanation seems also advisable, because one naturally expects 
that man must be understood and is the object of patichalisamtt, as of the preceding 
patichalitave. The ‘servants’, whom Piyadasi mentions here, are most probably the 
pativedakas, the spies, whom the great Maurya employed according to Rock Edict 
VI, in order to watch the actions of his great officials, of the Patichs and other bodies 
in accordance with the precepts of the Indian Rdjaniti. The further statement that 
these servants will exhort Adni, “some” (as must be read with M. Senart), in order 
that the Lajikas may strive to gain the favour of the king, probably means that these 
“servants” will exhort remiss Lajikas, and that they will also, by exhorting or spreading 
the Dharma among the provincials at large, rouse the zeal of the Lajikas. Kéni thus 
refers both to the Lajtikas and the provincials. With the phrase mam-dlddhayitave com- 
pare ldjdladhi,—Sep. Ed. I, 15 (Dhauli), ‘To Professor Kern’s excellent explanation of the 
verb chagh by the Hindi chah-nd, I would'add that chah occurs in all Indian vernaculars 
and without doubt belongs to the ancient stock of Aryan speech. 

‘Regarding this passage I can only agree with one of my predecessors in a single 
point. I believe that M. Senart is right in deriving nijhapayisanti and nijhapayitd trom 
the Prakrit causative of nidhydi and not from nikshapayati. This derivation is perfectly 
justified by the word nijhati, below, VII, 2, 8, which in its general sense is certainly 
equivalent to Sanskrit #ididhydsand ‘ profound meditation.’ . In all other respects I differ. 
T am unable to accept the assertion of Professor Lassen, approved of by Professor Kern and 
M. Senart, that ndtikdvakdné is a compound, meaning ‘neither more nor less,’ The six 
syllables certainly must be separated into the three words ndtihd-va-hdni, i.e. jhdtaya eva 
kdméchit. That isthe only explanation which is grammatically possible, and gives, as will 
be shown presently, an excellent sense. I am further unable to disregard the well 
authenticated reading nijhapayitave, which R. and M. offer, instead of mijhapayitd. 
Nijhapayitave is clearly an infinitive in fave, such as occurs frequently in Piyadasi’s 
inscriptions. This form must in my opinion be used in order to explain the more difficult 
nijhapayitd. The latter may be, too, an infinitive, on the supposition that it stands for 
nijhapayitdéya, And the contraction of the syllable dya does occur in Pali, 6. g., in 


256 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


esand for esandya (B. Miller, Simplified Pali Grammar, p. 67), just as it is found in the 
older Vedic Sanskrit and in the later Prakrit inscriptions. Finally, I cannot agree to the 
transliteration of ndsanlamn by ndsdntam, because the latter word can never mean the 
term, i. ¢. ‘the period of the execution,’ but only either, ‘the end of the execution’ or 
‘that which has the execution for its end.’ Neither translation gives any sense in our 
passage. I take ndsarmlam as equivalent to ndsyamdnam ‘him who is going to be shortly 
executed.’ It is thus the present participle of the passive of ndsayati with the sense of 
the immediate future. And this explanation is formally unobjectionable, because even 
in the ancient Prakrits the passive may take the terminations of the active. 

With these new interpretations the passage may be translated into Sanskrit as 
follows :—jhdtaya eva kdngchit [prdptavadhdn] nididhydsayishyanti [tatha] teshdm 
jivandya négyamdénam va nididhydsayitun pdrutrikan ddnam ddsyanty updrdsam vd 
karishyanti. The general sense is: ‘ During the respite of three days the relatives will 
exhort the condemned criminals to turn their thoughts to higher things, and they will 
give religious gifts (not bribes to the Lajikas) or undergo fasts, hoping that either the 
lives of the condemned may be spared, or that at least the hearts of those who must die, 
will besoftened and turn heavenwards.” This sense is a perfectly natural one and agrees 
with the further remark in the next sentence, that the king wishes them, 7. e. the 
criminals, to gain heaven, while they lie in prison, and that among the people at large 
the performance of religious practices, self-restraint and liberality will grow in consequence 
of the king’s measures, Against the earlier interpretation, which ascribes the gifts and 
fasts not to the anxious relatives, but to the condemned criminals themselves, it must be 
objected that a Hindu crimin:1 sentenced to death has nothing to give away, His 
property is confiscated just as that of an English felon was formerly taken by the Crown. 
The written Hindu law does not always state that capita] punishment entails confiscation 
of property. But, numerous stories from ancient and modern times leave no doubt that 
the practice prevailed universally under Native Governments. 


Epict V. 
Dehli- Sivalik, Dehli- Mirat, Allahabad. 

Devanarh-piye Piyndasi-lAja- soe ee 6 ew 8 we eee piye Piyadast Aja hevam 
hevash-ala (:] suduvivativasa [1] ee ee oe «he 6} GRAD!) saduvigativasAbhisitena me 
abhisitena-me iméni-jatAni avas yee © 6 + © e+) imani jAthni avadbiyani kagani 
dhiyAni-katani Ls] se-yatha [2] ee ren Ver res ve ary ss [5] sé yatha suke edliké alune 
suke eAlikfalune chakavike harne =» 1 4 «6 + © « + » Chakavike., (20).,mukhe ges 
se narhdimukhe gelite [3] juts + 6 «6 + © « «© «© « lite jattke! ambakipilika daqi 
ké ambAkapilika dad? anathika- © + 4 © + «© « «  snathikamachhe vedaveyake garh. 
machhe vedaveyake [4] gurhgd- ters + + «© » « «  g&pu putake sarhkujamachhe ka- 
so «6 « « « phnta..ke parhnasase simale 


tasayake®! parhnasase simale [5] a soe + «6 6 « Gath . [21] .......... kapote 
sarndake okapirnde palasate seta- Siege 6 + 6 « «  gamakapote save chatupade ye 
kapete gimakapote[6] save-cha- W'S" Neda ty Ser ne Se) See ge pabibhog amit ee: 
tupade ye-patibhogarh-no-eti na- ; 
cha khAdiyati.....i{7] eda. nae 


39 Possibly jitdke, or jatuhd. 

% The strokes which make wadé look like dudhi are, according to Dr. Fleet, Zoc. cit., due to flaws in the stone, 

* The apparent @ -stroke above the last syllable of kaphata is, as Dr. Fleet states (Indian Antiquary, vol.X UL, p. 310) 
the lower part of the visarga of Mahddevak in the intervening line of later writing just above hapiata, 


puputuke sarnkujamachhe kapha- alent 


Oe, CA O18 6 


Dehli-Sivalik, 


ka-cha sikali-chaé gabhini-va-pa- 
yamina-va avadh[i]y. p. take™ [8] 
pi-cha-kini Asamméasike[.] Vadhi- 
kukute no-kataviye[j) tuse-saji- 
ve[9] no-jhApetaviye(;]  dave- 
anathaye-va vihisdye-va no-jha- 
petaviye(;10] jivena-jive no-pu. 
sitaviye [.] Tisu-chAturnmasisu 
tisdyarn-purnnamasiyar[11] tirh- 
ni-divasdni ch&avudasarh parhna- 
dasath_ patipadaye dhuvaye-cha 
[12] anuposatharn-machhe-ava- 
dhiye no-pi-viketaviye[.]  Eta- 
ni-yeva-divasini(13] nagava- 
nasi kevatabhogasi yAni-arnnani- 
pi jivanikéydu1(14} no-hamtaviy. 
Ani[.}] Athamipakhdye  chavu- 
dasdye parnnadasaye 

tistye [15] pundvasune  ttisu- 
chaturhmasisu sudivasdye gone- 
no-nilakhitaviye [,16]  ajake 
edake stikale e-vd-pi-amne nila- 


khiyati no-nilakhitaviye  [.17] 
Tisdye punavasune chaturmmé- 


siye chatummAasipakhaye asvasd 
- gonasi[ 18] lakhaneno-kataviye[.] 
YAva-saduvisativasa  abhisitena- 
me etdye[19] a[rn}talikdye parh- 
navisati barndhanamokhani kata- 
ni [.20] 


Radhia, North Side. 


Devinam-piye Piyadasi-lAja- 
hevamh-dha [:] saduvisativasdbhi- 
sitasa-me imani-pi-jatani avadhy- 
dni [1] katani [,] se-yatha suke 
silika alune chakavake harhse 
namdimukhe gelate jatika [2] 
ambakapilika dudi anathikama- 
chhe vedaveyake garngdpuputake 
sarnkujamachhe _ kaphataseyake 
[3] parnnasase simale sarhdake 
okapizhde palasate setakapote gA- 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 


Epict V—contd. 
Dehli-NMirat. 


{a] v. dh. y, p. t, k. pi cha-kA- 
nijl]....ke{.]  [Vadhilku- 
kute no-kataviye[.] Tuse-sa[ji- 
ve] [2]... [taviye] [;] dave 
ana!th]aye-v4" vihisdye-v4 no[3] 
[jhapetaviye] [;] jivena jive no- 
pusitaviye[.] isu chAtarnmasi- 
su*4 [4] tisdya[th] purhnama[si] 
yam tirhni-divasdni chavudasarm 
pamnadasamh 5) patipada. dhu- 
vaye-cha anuposatharn mach- 
he-avadhiye no-pi [6]  viket- 
aviye [.] Etani-yeva-divasadni nd- 
gavanasi kevatabhogasi [7] [ya]. 
{a}. (ui]-pi-jivanikayani® no- [ha] 
mtaviydni® [.8] Atham (i). . ye 
chavudas4ye parnnadasdye 
tisdye [9] pundvasune tisu 
chaturmmasisu sudivasdye g[o]ne 
[10] [no-ni] la{khi]taviye ajake 
edake stkale —_e-v4-pi(11)am{[ne 
nilakhijyati [no]-nilakhitaviye 
[.j Tisdye pundvasune[12] cha- 
tummasiye chdtu(rama] sipakhé- 
ye asvasa gonasa lakhane! 13] no-. 
- viye(.) YdAva-saduvisati[va]sa 
abhisitena-me etdye[14] arntalika. 
ye pamnavi [sa] ti tharndbanamokh- 
Ani katani{.15] 


Mathia. 


Devanath-piye Piyadasi-laja- 
hevam-aha[:] saduvisativasdbhi- 
sitasa-me imani-pi [1] jatani ava- 
dhyani-katani [,] se-yatha** [16] 
suke salika alune chakavake hath- 
se [2]namndimukhe gelate jatika 
ambakapilika dudi anathikama- 
chhe vedaveyake [3] gatngdpu- 
putake sarnkujamachhe kaphata- 
seyake pazhnasase simale sarndake 
okapishde [4] palasate setaka- 


257 


Allahabad. 


° . e 


{sam] . 


. . 


° . . 


l[a]khane no 


[YAva]-sa 
. [27] 


[tani] ; 


’ . . ° . 

WI ° . . . 
*A 

sajive 


° . . ° 


. no jha 
e e e ’ 


.cha[vuda] sama parnchada- 


° ° . 


. . e e . 


ae eye J 


% It is, of course, possible to read avadhdy. But the right side of the vowel is mutilated, and the real reading was 
no doubt avadhiy, as the seuse and the variants of the other versions require. 


%3 Possibly anathdye. 
34 Read chdtummdsisu. 


3 This might be read° nikdydni, but the double stroke above na is probably due to a flaw. 
36 This looks like hamtaviydni, but the double stroke above za is probably due to a flaw in the stone. 
37 The quantity of the third vowel of athami is not certain. 
38 The d-stroke of yathé is not certain. 


7 
- 


258 


makapote save chatupade[4] ye- 
patipogarn-no-eti®® na-cha-khadi- 
yati [.] Ajaké-nani edak4-cha 
stikali-cha gabhini-va p&yamina- 
va[5] avadhya potake-cha-kéni 
Asarnmasike [.] Vadhikukute no 
kataviye [;] tuse-sajive no jha- 
payitaviye[;] dive [6] anathaye- 
va vihisdye-va no jhapayitaviye 
[;] jivena jive no-pusitaviye [.] 
Tisu-chatummasisu tisyarh [7] 
purnnamasiyam timni divasdni 
chAavudasarh. parnnadasazh patipa- 
dam dhuvaye-cha anuposatharn 
machhe avadhye no pi [8] viketa- 
viye[.] Etani-yeva-divasdni na- 
gavanasi kevatabhogasi y4ni-arh- 
nani-pi-jivanikayani[9] no-harn- 
taviyani(.| Athamipakhfye cha- 
vudasdye pamnnadasaye 

tislye pundvasune  tisu-cha- 
tummasisu[10] sudivasdye gone. 
no-nilakhitaviye ajake edake si- 
kale e-va-pi-ammne nilakhiyati no- 
nilakhitaviye[.12] Tisaye pund- 
vasune chaturnmasiye chaturnm4- 
sipakhaye asvasa gonasa lakhane- 
no-kataviye(.12) YAava-saduvisa- 
tivasdbhisitasa-me etdye arntali- 
kaye pamnavisati barhdhana- 
mokhani katdni[.13] 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA 


pote gamakapote save-chatupade 
ye-patibhogarh-no-eti na-cha kha- 
diyati[ 5] Ajaka-ndni edak4-cha 
sikali-cha gabhini-va payaminé- 
va avadhya potake-cha-kani [6] 
Asarnmasike[.] Vadhikukute no. 
kataviye[,]  tuse-sajive-no-jha- 
payitaviye[.] DAve-anathaye-va 
[7] vihisye-va uo-jhapayitavi- 
ye [;] jivena-jive-no-pusitaviye[.] 
Tisu-chaturmmasisu  tisiyarh [8] 
purnnamisiyar —tirnni—divasdni 
chavudasarh-pamanadasarn _pati- 
padarn dhuvaye-cha-anuposathara 
machhe avadhye [9] no-pi-vike- 
taviye [.]  Etani-yeva-divasani 
nagavanasi kevatabhogasi yani- 
arnnani-pi[10] jivanikayani no- 
harntaviyani[.] Athamipakhaye 
chavudasaye parnnadasaye 

tishye pundvasune[11}  tisu-cha- 
turnmasisu sudivasaye gone- 
no-nilakhitaviye ajake edake si- 
kale e-v4-pi-arnne[2 ]nilakhiyati 
no-nilakhitaviye([.| Tisdye-pu- 
navasune chatummAasiye chatum- 
mAsipakhaye asvasa gonasa[ 13] 
lakhane-no-kataviye[.} Y4va-sa- 
duvisativasabhisitena-me — etaye 
avntalikéye . pathnavisati[14] 
barndhanamokhani katanif.15 J 


Epicr V. 


King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus:—* After I had been -anointed 
twenty-six years, I forbade the slaughter of the following creatures,’ viz. parrots 
e U 2 
starlings,’ alunas, Brihmani ducks, swans,’ nandimukhas,” geldtas, jatukas;" ambaéka- 
e ° a dad hd . : 
pilikds,* terrapins,’ boneless fish, vedaveyakas, gamgdpuputakas, sankuja-fish,? tortoises, 
porcupines,” pamnasasas,' srimaras, bulls set free,(?) okapindas,* rhinoceros,’ grey doves,” 
village-pigeons,*” and all quadrupeds, which are not used* nor are eaten. She-goats, ewes 
e ° e . . 2 
and sows, (7.¢.) those which are with young or in milk, must not be slaughtered, nor their 
young ones, (¢.¢,) some (of them) which are less than six months old’. Caponing cocks is 
forbidden ; husks, containing living animals, must not be burned ;? forests must not be 
burnt out of mischief or in order to injure (living beings) ;2 living creatures must not be fed 
with living creatures’, At the (fwll moon of each) of the three seasons and at the full 
3 Read patibhagam. 
ie According to the smaller Petersburg Dictionary the Nandimukha is mentioned as an aquatic bird in the Bhdva- 
“ Jatuka, no doubt, means ‘a bat’. But I must confess that I do not understand, how bats come on this list, as i 
general they are neither eaten nor used in any way. Possibly the flying foxes which otherwise have the se arate Db : 
manthdla or vdgvada, may be meant. These are eaten at least by low-caste people, like the Katkaris, Their flesh is teiice 


in some of the law-books, ¢.9., Gautama, xvii, 34, : 
*? Gdmakanote is, of course, the blue rock pigeon, found in most villages and towns, especially in the wells 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 259 


moon of Taisha fish shall neither be killed nor be sold during three days, (véz.) the four. 
teenth, the fifteenth (and) the first (of the following fortnight), nor constantly, on each 
fast day.* On the same days no other animals, found in the elephant-preserves and in the 
preserves of the fishermen, must be killed.’ On the eighth of (each) fortnight,” on the 
fourteenth, the fifteenth, on the Tishya and Punarvasu days,’ on the full-moon days of 
_ the three seasons, and on festivals* bulls shall not be castrated,” nor he-goats, rams, and 
boars; nor shallany other animal be castrated which is (commonly) castrated. On the 
Tishya and Punarvasu days, on the full-moon days of the seasons, and during the fortnights 
connected with the full-moons of the seasons,” the marking of horses and oxen is forbid- 
den.” Up to the twenty-sixth (anniversary) of my coronation I have decreed twenty-five 
(éimes) the liberation of (al/) prisoners’, 


REMARKS ON THE TRANSLATION. 


(a) According to the general maxim, prevalent in Sanskrit and the Prakrits, which 
permits the neuter of the perfect ‘participle past to be used in the sense of the noun of 
action in ¢i, jdéam might be interpreted with M, Senart by jai and be translated by 
“animals of the following kinds.” But, as the neuter /d¢a@ means also “creature,” I 
prefer this simpler interpretation. The eastern versions offer: ‘Of even the following 
creatures.” 

(b) M. Senart’s latest translation gives correctly the modern Indian expression 
“maina.” I prefer to put the English word. All the European dictionaries trauslate 
sdrikaé wrongly or omit the translation. Molesworth gives the right meaning in the 
Maréthi Dictionary. The scientific name of the bird is Acridotheres tristis, Linn., 
Murray, Avifauna of British India, No. 912. 

(c) This term probably includes wild geese and large ducks, see Molesworth, 
Marathi Dictionary sub voce. The birds, which were pointed out to me as hamsas in the 
palace at Kolhapur and elsewhere, looked very much like Turkish ducks. 

(d) M. Senart connects the first part of ambdkapiliké or anmbdkapilika with ambu, 
‘water,’ and translates “ water-ants(?)”. As far as I am aware, no such animal is 
known in natural history, The explanation ‘mother-ant,’ or ‘queen-ant,’ is at least 
possible. For the queens of the white-ants are eagerly sought after and eaten, because 
they are considered to act as a strung aphrodisiac. The only time when I obtained a 
queen-ant, it was ut once stolen by my servants. But, as three versions read °kapilikd, 
it may be doubted if the word is the Pali representative of pipélikd. 

(e) As dudé is said to be a small tortoise, it is no doubt the terrapin, which is found 
in many Indian gardens. Tortoises belong to the five-toed animals that may be eaten, 
—see remark (/). 

(f) M. Senart’s conjecture that prawns are meant by the expression ‘ boneless 
fish’ is not improbable. 

(g) M. Senart’s suggestion that samuja is identical with Sanskrit samkuché 


‘a skate,’ seems very probable. 


3 The translation of sudivasa by ‘festival’ is merely conjectural, but may be defended by its etymological meaning 
Sobhana divasa, which would suit a festival. I think that popular festivals, like the modern Divali, Dasara, and the like 


may be meant, 
ie 


260 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(h) Sayaka and seyaka (R.M.), of course, represent Sanskrit sal yaka. The salyaka 
is one of the five-toed animals that may be eaten by Aryans, see—e.g., Apastamba, Dh. S#, 
i, 17, 87, Baudhayana, Dh. Sé.i, 12,5, Gautama, Dh, Sd. xvii, 27, Vasishtha, Dh. Sa, 
xiv, 39. It is associated with the kaphata, i.c., according to M. Senart’s excellent con- 
jecture, kamatha, ‘the tortoise,’ because in the law-books galyaka and kachchhapa are 
always closely put together among the eatable five-toed animals, 

(é) According to the analogy of parnampiga, ‘an animal living in the leaves of 
trees,’ parnnasase i.e. parnasasah may mean ‘a hare, i.e.a hare-like animal living in the 
leaves of trees,’ and denote the large white-bellied, red squirrel, which is found in the 
forests of the Western Ghats. Itis quite as large as a hare, and its skinned body looks 
exactly like that of a hare. Ihave shot it near Yellapur in Kanara. Its meat tasted 
very much like that of a hare. 

(j) Simale corresponds exactly to the Sanskrit srimara. Vagbhata, Ashtdngahri- 
daya Sé.1, 49, names this animal, among the ten muhdémriga or large wild animals, 
next to the chamara or yak-ox and the rhinoceros. It stands also next to the yak in 
the enumeration of wild animals, which occurs in the Jétakamdala xXxvi, 7, see the 
smaller Petersburg Dictionary, sub voce srimara). Perhaps it may be the large 
Barasing stag. 

(k) M. Senart has called attention to the passage of the Mahdvagga, vi, 17, where 
the whkkapinda are said to eat the provisions of the monks, According to the note to the 
translation, Sacred Books of the East, vol. XVII, p. (0, Buddhaghosha explains the term 
by bildlamisikagodhimungusd, ‘cats, mice, iguanas and mungooses’, He takes it evidently 
in its etymological sense, wkke z.e. oke pindo yeshdm te ‘animals which find their food 
in the houses,’ #.e. ‘vermin,’ This general explanation does not suit here, because cats, 
mice and mungooses are not eaten, and because a particular kind of animal must be 
meant. I would suggest that Piyadasi forbids the slaughter of one of the animals named 
by Buddhaghosha, viz. of the godhd, the large lizard, which, according to the law-books, 
quoted in note (4) belongs to the eatable five-toed animals. 

(4) M.Senart’s correction palapate for palasate is inadmissible, because all the three 
versions agree, and because the turtle-dove is denoted by the next term. Mr. Trenckner’s 
explanation of the corresponding Pali parasato by ‘rhinoceros’ (Pélé Miscellany, I, 50) 
fits excellently. For the rhinoceros is also one of the five-toed animals which “may be 
eaten,—see the passages from the law-books, quoted in note(h). Moreover, the rules re- 
garding the Sraddhas show clearly that the meat of the rhinoceros was highly esteemed 
According to Manu, iii, 272, and the parallel passages, quoted in the Synopsis, rhino- 
ceros meat satisfies the manes “for an endless time. ” 

(m) Setakapote, no doubt, denotes the whitish-grey doves, which are found in large 
numbers in many parts of India, and which are usually included in the general term hollo 
or halla. White pigeons, as indeed all tame pigeons, are only kept by Musalmans, not 
by Hindus. 

n) M. Senart has stated that patid 
ieee to nourishment. I should a eee oe act eee see a 
areeaten” it must mean “other use than for food” Neuen tee pag 

ood” and that Piyadasi means to forbid the 


slaughter of all animals whose skins, fur, feathers, ete., are not required, as well as 
of those which are not eaten. 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. | 261 


(0) Ajakdndni must be separated into ajaké néni. Néni is the neuter plural of the 
pronoun na, which is associated with a feminine in utter disregard of the rules of con- 
cord, as happens more frequently in these inscriptions. The proper form of the sen- 
tence would be in Sanskrit ajd edikdscha siéikaryagcha té garbhinyo dhayantyo vd ava- 
dhydh. M. Senart’s conjectural emendation piyamdnd for pdyamind is inadmissible, be- 
cause all the versions agree in giving the latter word and because piyamdnd is against 
the Pali idiom, Pédyati, not piyati, means in Pali ‘to suckle’, see Childers Dictionary, 
sub voce pibati. Nor is it necessary to change the vowel of the affix. The affix mina- 
mina occurs more frequently for mdna in the inscriptions, and it is evidently an interest- 
ing rélic of ancient times, as the Zend mana-mna, the Greek menos and the Latin mini- 
mina show. The additional clause may be translated and éxplained thus :— 

Potakdas cha [api cha, D.8., D. M.] kechit [te cha kathambhdtah] dshanmasikéh 
{avadhya iti seshah]. The plural kdni is joined with the singular potake, because the latter 
is taken in a collective sense. M. Senart’s derivation of dsammdsika from dshanmdsam 
‘up to six months,’ may be defended by the analogy of dkdlika, the adjective belonging 
to ékalam, ‘up to the same hour on the next day’. Piyadasi’s prohibition agrees with 
the sentiments of the Brahmanical teachers, who all forbid to sacrifice animals which 
have not changed their teeth, and who sometimes forbid their flesh to be eaten, see, e.9., 
Gautama, Dh. Sé., xviii, 31. 

(p) This prohibition probably refers to the practice, which here and there still sur- 
vives, of burning the last remnants of the husks remaining on the threshiug-floor of 
the village, in order to destroy the vermin. 

(q) Vihisaye, ‘to injure living beings” very probably refers, as M. Senart suggests, 
to the custom of setting the jungles on fire in order to drive out the game and of thus 
destroying it. 

(r) I here again follow M. Senart, whose explanation appears to me the most 
natural. The prohibition probably refers to cases where sacred crocodiles or snakes, 
tame tigers and other carnivorous animals were fed with living fowls, sheep or goats. 

(s) Chétummds?, which corresponds to the Sanskrit chdturmdsi, is the full moon of 
each term or season of four months, which according to one reckoning is considered the 
last day of that period, and according to another as falling in its beginning. The forma- 
tion of the Sanskrit chdturmasé is taught in Varttika 7 on Panini, v. 1, 94 :—samjitdyam 
an. “Vo chaturmdsa,“ ‘a period of four months’, (is added) the affix a, which causes 
Vriddhi of the first syllable, in a (word of) technical import.” Patafijaliadds : “ chatur- 
shu maseshu bhavd chéturmdst paurramdsi, ‘ the full-moon day which falls after a period 
of four months is called chdturmds?,” andthe Kasikd, which repeats Pataiijali’s explana- 
tion, says further that the three full-moon days of Ashadha, Karttika and Phalguna are 
meant.” More explicit are the statements, which the Sumangala Vildsiné makes on 
Digha Nikdya, ii, 1 (p. 189), while explaining the words Komudiyé chdtwmdsiniya 

“on the full-moon (night or titht) of Karttika (which is) chdtwmasini.” It says :—chdtu- 
masiniyd ti chatumdsiyéd sé hi chatunnatm masénam pariyosdnabhité chatumast idha pana 
chétumdsintts vuchchati.  Chdtumdsiniyd is equivalent to chdtwmdsiyd. For that ( full- 

44 This must be understood from Varttika 6: chaturmdsdn nyo yajne tatra bhave. Seo the Uahdbhdshya, Vol. II, 


361 (ed. Kielhorn). ° 
‘8 Compare also Waradatta on Apastamba. Dharma Sitra, I, 10, 1. 


262 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA 


moon ot Karttika) is the end of four months (and is) hence (called) chdtumdst, but here 
chatumdsiné.” It thus appears that the real meaning of chdtumdsi-chatumasiné is “ that 
which falls at the end of a period of four months.” And this explanation presupposes 
a division of the year into three periods of four months each, the months ending, ac- 
cording to what is called the pérnimdnta scheme of Northern India, with the full-moon 
days. 

The division of the year into three seasons of four months certainly was in India 
the most popular in the prehistorical period and in the earlier part of the historical 
period.” Each of them was called a Chaturmdsam vr Chaturmdsyam.” Both the 
Bréhmanas and the Brahmanical Sitras, as weil as the canonical books of the Buddhists, 
frequently refer to the division of the year into three seasons, which is at the bottom of 
various religious institutions. With the Brahmans it was the cause of the celebration of 
the Chaturmasya® sacrifices which were offered according to some ‘at the end,’ according 
to others ‘at the beginning’ of each season.” With the Buddhist monks it was the 
reason for extenuing the retreat during the rainy season, the vasso, over four months, 
see Uahdvagga, iii, 2, 2 and iii, 14, 11 The same period was kept by the Jaina Nir- 
granthas and the ancient Brahmanical ascetics. It further was used in official docu- 
ments, and influenced the manner of dating them in most parts of India. The second 
Separate Edict prescribes the reading of the document ‘on the Tishya day at each Cid- 
turnmdsa.’ The large majority of the ancient dated inscriptions, those from Mathurd 
incised during the rule of the Indo-Scythic kings Kanishka, Huvishka and Vasudeva 
(Epigraphia Indica, vol. I, p. 871, ff, and vol. II, p. 195 ff.; Cunningham, Arch, Surv. 
Rep. vol. III, plates xiii-xv), two Gupta inscriptions from the same town (LEpigraphia 
Indica, vol. II, p. 210), the early dated inscription of the Mathura Satrap Soddsa, 
the edicts of the Andhras and Abhiras (Burgess, Rep, Arch. Surv. W. I., vol. 
IV, p. 103ff.-and vol. V, p. 78ff.), the old Pallava land grant (Epigraphia Indica, 
vol. I, p. 1ff.) and the Sanskrit Kadamba inscription (Indian <Antiquary, vol. VII; 
p. 87), invariably mention the season in which the documents were issued. And only 
three seasons occur, viz. grishmah-gimha, ‘ suramer,’ varshdh-vasd, ‘the rains,’ hemantah- 
hemanté ‘ winter,’ the names of which are frequently abbreviated to gr or gri, va and 
he. In the inscriptions from Mathura and the neighbourhood each season is divided 
into four months, and we actually find, Mathura inscriptions, 2nd series (Epigraphia 
Indica, vol. 11, No. 4; Cunningham, Arch. Rep., vol. IIT, No. 12) g7i, (é.e. grishmamdase) 

46 The Sanskrit equivalent chdturmdsin likewise exists, but has a different meaning, see Varttika 5 on Panini, v. 1, 94. 

47 Other divisions, especially that into six seasons, are no doubt equally ancient, see Prof, Weber, Die Nachrichten von 
den vedischen Nakshatra, ii, p. 327f. But they do not seem to have been used in popular life to an equal extent. 

48 Chdturmdsyam is formed aceording to the analogy of trailokyam, traimdsyam, chdturvarnyam, chdturdsramyam. 
and so forth, see Varttika 1 on Panini, v. 1, 124, and the explanation of the passage in the K4sikd. 1 point this out in order 
to meet the doubt which M. Senart, see Indian Antiquary, vol. XVIII, p. 76, feels regarding my explanation of the compound 
anuchdétummdsam in the second Separate Edict. He thinks that, if anuchdtusmmdsam meant ‘at the commencement of every 
term or season of four months,’ it must be anuchatummdsam with a short a in the third syllable. In stating this he has over- 
looked that chdturmdsyam, in Pali chdtummdsam, is a perfectly correct synonym of chaturmdsam. 

% The word ehdturmdsya is according to Varttika 6 on Panini v. 1, 95, derived from chaturmdsam by the affix ya, 
eausing Vriddhi, and meaning ¢atra bhava, falling into that. 

50 See Manu, iv, 26, and the parallel passages in the synopsis to my translation Manu says that they are to be offered 
ritvante, and thus reckons the three full-moon days as the last of the season. Similarly he uses 1V, 11997itvantdsu ratrishu 
for chaturmdsishu, Bandhayana has ritumukhe, and other passages from the Srauta Sitras and Brahmanas arequoted by 


Professor Weber in his Nachrichten v.d. Nakshatra, ii, 3294. The discrepancy has no doubt been caused by a difference in 
the reckoning of the commencement of the seasons. 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA., 263 


4; Mathura inscriptions, 1st series, No. 3, and second series, No. 20, va, (i.e., carshamdse) 
4, Cunningham, No. 20, varshumdse 4; Mathura inscription, 1st series, No. 21, hemanta- 
mdse chaturtthe 4, ibidem No, 8, hemantamdse 4, and Cunningham, No. 20, ke 4. In the 
inscriptions from Southern India each season is divided into eight fortnights, and the latest, 
actually mentioned, are the fifth (Nasik inscriptions Nos. 16 and 17, Kanheri inscriptions 
Nos. 4.and 16), the sixth (Pallava land grant of Sivaskandavarman) and the eighth (Kadam- 
ba inscription of MrigeSavarman). The period during which this method of dating was 
in general use, embraces the first century B.C. and the first two centuries A.D. But,in 
Mathur it survived until the fifth century A.D., as No. 39 of the second series was 
incised during the reign of Kuméragupta and in the Gupta year 113 or A.D. 431—2 
Ka[rttikahema ]ntamas[e] divase 20, “on the 20th day of the winter month of Karttika. 
In Southern India it presumably lasted at least until the same period, to which the 
Kadamba land grants probably belong. 

Finally, it may be noted that the old division into three seasons is the only one 
used by the common people in the districts known to me. The Gujarati villagers and 
all persons not affected by the learning of the Sastras speak only of the unhélo (ushna- 
kala) varséd né dehddd or chomésum and shiydlo. The Mardthas know only wnhdld, 
pavasdlad ( prévrish and kéla) and himvdld (himakéla.) Further north and east I have 
frequently heard the terms mentioned in the Ain-i-Akbari, dhipkdl, barkhakdl and 
sitkal or equivalents thereof. With respect to the beginning of each season the author- 
ities differ. The oldest, the Bréhmanas, as well as some Srauta Stitras, begin the hot 
season with the month of PhAlguna, other Srawta Sitras with the month of Chaitra.” 
The two schemes of the seasons, therefore, are :— 


Il 
( ae Chaitra, 
ae Chaitra, Vaisakha, 
ee ya etba Jyaishtha. 
Jyaishtha. Ashddha. 
Ashadha. Savana, 
; SrAvana. Bhadrapada or Praushthapada. 
saree Bhadrapada or Praushthapada. Aégvina. 
Aévina or Agvayuja. Karttika. 
Karttika. MargaSirsha, 
H tah Margaégirsha Pausha. 
Figo, Pausha or Taisha. Macha. 
Magha. Phalguna. 


The statements of the Buddhists show the same discrepancies. Hiuen Tsiang, Si 
yuki, vol. I, p. 72 (Beal), alleges that “‘ according to the holy doctrine of Tathagata the 
year is divided into three seasons,” the hot, the wet and the cold, the scheme of which 
agrees with the second given above. But the canonical books of the southern Buddhists 
show clearly that their authors knew also the scheme according to which the hot season 
began with Phalguna. For they prescribe for the vasso, the retreat during the rainy 
season, an “earlier” period, beginning with “ the day after the full moon in Ashadha,” 


$1 Gladwin ed., vol. I, p. 266; see Sir A, Cunningham, Book of Indian Eras, p. 3; donee: Bihar Peasant Life, 
§ 1083 ; and Hillebrandt, Die Sonnenwend feste, p. 26f. 
53 See A. Weber: op. cit., p. 3291. 


264 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


and a later one, commencing “a month later than the full-moon of Ashidha,” ¢.e. with 
the day after the full-moon of Sravana. And it is further stated that the “later ” term 
closed with Komudé chétumdsiné “the full moon of KArttika with which the season of 
four months ends”.® - Both these passages presuppose, just like that from the Dighu 
Nikéya (above, p. 261). the use of the parnimdnta reckoning for the months. 

In the inscriptions of the Indo-Scythic period there is no indication showing when 
the seasons began. But, if the restoration of the Gupta inscription No. 39 is correct, it 
follows that in the fifth century A.D. the winter began with Karttika, and that the 
scheme of the seasons was the older one, given under No. I. 

Under these circumstances it is not possible to decide with certainty which full 
moons are meant by “the three Chatummasis.” They may be either those of Phalguna, 
AshAdha and KArttika, or those of Chaitra, Sravana and Margasirsha. It is further 
not certain if these full-moon days were considered respectively as the last days of 
winter, summer and the rains, or as falling in the beginning of summer, the rains and 
winter. But the consensus of the three passages from the Buddhist scriptures and of 
Manu’s passages induces me to assume that the former view was that held in Piyadasi’s 
times, as these works were probably composed not very long before and after Piyadasi. 

The fourth full moon, which our passage mentions, is that of Taisha or Pausha, 
December—January. ‘The forms ¢ésyar (R) and ¢isiyarn (M) are derived from the 

feminine adjective ¢is/, which has been formed from ¢éshya without Vriddhiin the first 
syllable. With the form éisdyam (D. 8., D. M.), the locative of tzsd, i.e. tissd (tishyd), 
compare the first part of the Vedic tishyd-piirnamdsa (see Prof. Weber, op, cit., II, p. 
326). The word dhuodye which stands before anuposatham must no doubt be taken in 
the sense of the Sanskrit dhruvdya, ‘‘ constantly” (see the Petersburg Dict., sub voce) ie. 
“in all months”. Anuposatham consists of anu and posatha, and it is worthy of note 
that the form posatha, with which Piyadasi denotes the fast days or Parvan days, stands 
midway between the Pali uposath. and the Jaina Prakrit posaha. 

The total number of days on which Piyadasi prohibited the killing and sale of fish, 
amounts to fifty-six in the year, viz. :— 

(1) Six in each of the months in which a new season began and in Taisha or Pausha, 
the eighth of each fortnight, the full-moon days witl those immediately preceding and 
following them and the new-moon day, or 24 in all; (2) four in the remaining eight 
months, the full and new-mvon days, and the eighth of each fortnight, or 32 in all. 

As regards the reasons which induced Piyadasi to apply his prohibition to the 
particular days mentioned, the selection of the Posatha days as well as of those at the 
end and beginning of the seasons is easily intelligible. The four days of the changes of 
the moon, which the Brahmans designate by the astronomical term Parvan, were the 
ancient Sabbath days of the orthodox Hindus. The Brahmanical Sitras prescribe on 
the two chief Parvans, the full and new-moon days, for every householder, the perform- 
ance of sacr.fices, which are preceded by fasting. Moreover, there are in the Dharma- 
sitras and Dharmasdstras* a number of rules which make the Parvan days times of 


58 See Sacred Books of the East, vol. XIII. p. 299 f. and p. 324. The note on the second passage explains the word 
Chatumésiné erroneously. I translate it according to the explanation given in the Sumangala Vildsini, see above, p. 261. 
** See Manu iii, 45, and iv, 128, as well as iv, 150 aud 163, and the passages quoted in the Synopsis to my Trans- 
lation. 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 265 


continence, wership, prayer, and abstention from doing injury even to plants.* Accord- 
ing to the commentaries most of these rules refer to the two chief Parvans alone. But 
the texts, one and all, state explicitly that the injunction of continence applies also to 
the eighth days of each fortnight, and it is not improbable that the other rules in reality 
were meant to apply likewise to these two days. All the four Parvan days were 
kept as holidays in the Brahmanical schools. The Dharmasiitras and metrical Smritis 
prescribe that the Veda-study is to be interrupted on these occasions for a whole day and 
night® and a verse is adduced which describes the bad results of a breach of this rule. 
It would thus appear that the Buddhists and the Jainas, in giving their rules for the 
Uposatha or Posaha days, did not much more than take over and perpetuate the ancient 
rules of the orthodox Hindus, and it would further appear that,. by ordering a partial 
amdri,” Piyadasi acted in accordance with the sentiments not only of the heterodox sects, 
but also of his orthodox subjects. It is equaliy easy to understand why Piyadasi’s rule 
applies to the end and the beginning of each season. The three Chéturmdsé full-moons 
were also great holidays. ‘The orthodox Brahmans, who kept three sacred fires, performed 
on these occasions the Chaturmasya sacrifices, those who kept a single fire celebrated corre- 
sponding rites, and the Brahmanical schools kept them as holidays® on which studying 
was forbidden. According to the Buddhistic Sumangala Vildsiné, p. 140 (explanation 
of the words upariprdsddavaragata) at least one of these days, the full moon of KArttika 
was kept as a popular festival. The Nakshatra, i.e. the conjunction, was publicly 
proclaimed, the houses were gaily decorated, and the citizens gave themselves up to 
celebrating the Nakshatra by amusements of various kinds. From the Déipavansa, 
XV, 19, it appears that the Buddhists worshipped the sacred relics on that day. Similar 
popular and sectarian festivals were probably held on the other two days, and it is very 
likely that the modern Sivite festival on Karttika sudi 15, the Holi on PhAlguna sudi 15, 
and the practice of making presents to Brahmans on KArttika and Ashddha sudi 15, may 
go back to the earliest times or be connected with the more ancient popular holidays at 
the end and the beginning of the three seasons. 

More difficult is the answer to the question why Piyadasi included in his prohibition 
the three days at full moon of Taisha or Pausha. But it may be suggested that the day 
may have been regarded as the conventional beginning of the Uttarayana, the sun’s 
progress towards the north. This is- still a great festival, now called Makarasankranti, 
and celebrated not on the actual day of the entrance of the sun into the zodiacal sign, 
but later in January. 

(t) The term.ndgavana, “ elephant-preserve,” is found both in Pali and in Sanskrit. 
It occurs repeatedly in the Chiélahatthipadopamasutta of theMaijhima Nikdya. Thus 
we read, p. 178 (ed. Trenckner) :—Seyyuthé pi braéhmana nagavaniko nagavanan pavi- 
seyya, 80 passeya ndygavane mahantam hatthipadam dighato cha dyatain tiriyai cha 
vitthatam, etc. “ Just.as.when, O Brdhmana, the keeper of an elephant-preserve, enters 


5 Vishnu, I<xi,-87, says: “ Let him not:cut even a biade of grass.” 

26 Manu, iv, 113—114, and the.parallel passages, quoted in the Synopsis. : 

87 Partial and temporary. prohibitions to kill were issued occasionally even in much later times. Thus tne Satrufijaya in. 
scriptions, Zpigraphia Indica, -vol..II, p. 37, state that the empevor Akbar stopped for a year the killing of aquatic animals 
at the instance of Jiiahatinsy Suri, and. that-the same prince forbade the slaughter of al! animals during six mouths in accord- 
ance with the prayer of Hiravijaya Sari 

#8 Manu, iv, 119, and the parallel passages in the Synopsis, 


Pry 
5 


266 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


the elephant-preserve, he may see in the elephant-preserve large footmarks of elephants, 
both long in length and broad in breadth, etc.” In Sanskrit it occurs in Bana’s Harsha- 
charita.” The taming of elephants was in India a royal prerogative and the sale of 
elephants a royal monopoly, see Medhatithi on Manu, viii, 399. Particular forests, be- 
longing to the Crown, were no doubt reserved in Piyadasi’s days, as at present, for the 
breeding of elephants, and these are meant here. 

The word kevatabhoga has not been traced in literary works. But its meaning is not 
doubtful both on account of its co-ordination with ndgavana and on account of its 
etymological meaning, ‘that which is enjoyed or used by fishermen,’ Probably particular 
lakes or portions of the rivers are meant, which were set apart for the fishermen of the 
various towns and villages, and were consequently their bhog, as the modern phyase is. 

(w) M. Senart’s explanation of athamipakhdye by “pakshasydshtamydm on the 
eighth of (each) fortnight” is no doubt correct. In the Jaina Achdérdiuga, ii, 15, 17, 
p. 125, Jaccbi we have an exactly analogous compound dasamipakkhena “on the tenth 
of the fortnight.” The position of the parts of the compounds is inverted in accordance 
with a license or slovenliness, frequently observable in all Prakrits, compare, e. g. the 
Desi valayabéhu ‘armlet’ (Hemachandra, Desikosha, VII, 52) for béhuvalaya. Some 
formations of this kind like vdérabdna, ‘a protection against arrows, 7. é. ‘a coat-of-mail,’ 
have even crept into Sanskrit in addition to those words where the grammar or classical 
usage sanctions the irregular position of the parts of the compound. 

(v) The days of the month were commonly named according to the Nakshatras, 
with which the moon was supposed to be in conjunction, see my note 11 on the Sep. Ed. 
I, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenldndischen Ges. vol. XLI. As no specification is 
' added, Piyadasi’s prohibition probably applies to the Tishya and Punarvasu days of each 
month. Bothare among the pu.iya nakshatra and Tishya or Pushya is occasionally cited 
as an example of an auspicious constellation. Itis probable that, as the holier one, it has 
been placed before Punarvasu, which in the list of the Nakshatras stands earlier, being 
the fifth, while Tishya is the sixth. Brihaspati is the guardian deity of the latter; Aditi 
of the former. 

(w) M.Senart has no doubt correctly explained nilakhiyati by nirlakshyate, and 
correctly assigned to it the meaning ‘is castrated.’ I may add that the Desi word® nelach- 
chho or nelachchho, ‘a eunuch,’ furnishes the proof for his assertion. . 

‘g) According to the analogies, found in the Srauta Sdtras, chatummdsipakha, the 
fortnight connected with the full moons of the seasons, may mean either the dark fort- 
night following the Chaturmdsi pirnimd, as Mr. Senart assumes, or the bright fortnight 
preceding it. For Katyayana uses mdghipaksha for the dark half of Magha, and Latyayana 
phalgunipaksha for the bright half of Phalguna.” If, however, as I believe, Piyadasi 
used the pérnimdnth reckoning, the second explanation is the more natural one. 

(y) According to a passage, quoted by Professor Weber (Die vedischen Nachrichten 
von den Nakshatra, II, p. 880, Note 2), the Brahmans considered the new-moon day of 
Phalguna to be the proper time for marking cows (see also Sdnkhdyana Grihya Sitra, 
III, 10.) 


59 See also passage quoted in the smaller Petersburg Dictionary. 
See Hemachandra Desibosha, iv, 44, and Pdiyalackohhé, verse 235, as well as the note in the glossary to the latter 


" See the Petersburg Dictionaries under the two words, and the comm i 
y 8 entaries on the passages quoted th 
in Professor Weber's Nachrichten von den Nakshatra, Bd. 11, p. 327. Eo ss ae 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 267 


(2) It is not necessary to depart with M. Senart from the natural sense of the 
passage and to assume that Piyadasi restricted his order to certain classes of criminals. 
For, it must not be forgotten that long terms of imprisohment» were not in favour with 
the authors of the ancient criminal codes of India. For serious crimes they mostly 
prescribe capital punishment, mutilation and banishment; for lighter offences fines and 
whipping. In Piyadasi’s times the prisons, therefore, did probably not contain many 
prisoners condemned to long terms for serious crimes. I may add that the lib... ution 
of all prisoners, as an act of royal clemency, seems quite natural to Hindus. Only a 
few years ago I remember reading a rather sarcastic paragraph in the Bombay Gazette 
Summary on a princeling in Bengal, I think, who on the birth of a son decreed a 
general jail delivery in his fortunately not very extensive dominions; compare also 
Jatakas, vol.,V, p. 285, 1. 25. 


sitena-me dhammalipi likhdpita 
lokasa[14] hitasukh4ye{:]  se- 
tarh-apahata tarn-tam dharhma- 
vadhi-pApova[.]® Hevarh-lokasa- 
hitasukhe-ti pativekhami[15] 
athé-iyath-nitisu  _ hevayn-paty4. 
Saronesu hevam-apakathesa[ , ] 
kwnmam-k&ni -sukham-Avahami 
ti tatha-cha-vidahami(.16] Hem- 
eva-savanikAyesu-pativekhami [ . 
Savapasamhd4 pi-me-pdjita —vivi 
dhaya-pijaya[.} E-chu-iyam- 
atana-pachipagamane 17 se-me 
mukhyamute[.] Saduvisati va- 
sdbhisitena-me iyatn-dhammalipi 
khapita[.18) 


sitena-me dhammalipi-likbapita 
lokasa [16(1)] hitasukhaye[:] 
se-tarn-apahata —_ tarh-tarh-dharh- 
mavadhi-pdpova[.] , Hevarh lo- 
kasa[17(2)] hitasukhe-ti pative- 
khémi ath4-iyaria-ndtisu hevarh- 
patyasamnnesu hevarh-apakathesu 
[,18(3)]  kirnmarh-kAni-sukham 
Avahami-ti  tatha-cha-vidahAmi 
[] Hem-eva savanikdyesu pa- 
tivekb4mi [.19(4)]  Savapasarh- 
da-pi-me-piijita vividhdya-pujay a 
[.] E-chu-iyarn atana pachi- 


pagamane ([20(5)] se-me-mo- 
khyamute[.] Saduvisati-vasa- 
bhisitena-m  —iyarm-dhammmalipi 


likbApita [.21(6) 


Epicr VI. 
Dehli- Sivalik. Dehli-Nirat. Allahabad. 

Devanam-piye Piyadasi-laja-he- Missing. SU GTR sary . Piyadasi 14- 
vam-aha[;] duvddasa[1] vasa- oF Aten ke svete 
abhisitena-me dhammalipi-likhé- 8h eee ne eel 6 

pita lokas4[2] hitasukhaye[:] se- aie Sees dei te get ae 
tath-apahataé  tarh-tarh-dharnma- Pia cet oe aie Se 
vadhi-papova[.3] Hevarh-lokasd ; at Hevai . . « [28] 
hitasukhe-ti-pativekhdmi —_atha-- hitasukhe-ti-pativekhami atha . 
iyam[4] ndtisu hevarh-patiydsara- ° ATU Se ker Gaenmeor ata. 
nesu hevarn-apakathesu[ ;5| ki- - « Asarhne[su] hevarh apaka- 
mamm-k4ni-sukham avahawmi-ti [3] kimam . . ws 
tatha-cha-vidahdami[.] © Hemeva da[hajmi(.] fe aren pee 
- (6] savanikayesu pativekhdmi[, ] . .yesu pativekhami[.29] Sa- 
Savapdsamda-pi-me-pijita[7] vi vapasarhda pi-me-pijité vividb4- 
vidhaya-ptjaya[,]  -chu-iyam- ya pudjaya[.] Echuiyamatan& 
atuna pachiipagamane[$]_ se-me- pachupagamane se me mukhya- 
mokhyamate[.]  Saduvisativasa mute[.] ee age) os 
abhisitena-me[9] iyam-dharnma- Sk Gels Une re Aaa 
lipi likbApitd .10] : * Tipi likbapita-ti(.30} 

Radhia. Matha. 
Devanam-piye _—_— Piyadasi-laja DevAnam-piye  Piyadasi-lja 
hevarmn-Sha[:] duvddasavasdbhi- hevarn-Aba[:] duvAdasavasAbhi- 


® The stroke which makes pdpova look like pipova is clearly due to an accidental scratch. 


268 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


TRANSLATION. 


King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :— After I had been anointed twelve 
years,’ I ordered religious edicts to be written for the welfare and happiness of the 
people, (én order that the people), giving up that (unrighteousness which they practised), 
might obtain a growth of the sacred law (én) this or that (respect).’ (Saying unto my. 
self) “the welfare and happiness of the people (is concerned),” I thus direct my atten- 
tion not only to my relatives, but also to those who are near and far ;°—why so? “In 
order that I may lead some of them’ to happiness.” \In like manner I direct my at- 
tention to all bodies corporate.’ I have also honoured men of all creeds with various 
honours.” But I consider that to be most essential, what (I call) ‘the approach through 
one’s own free will’ After I had been anointed twenty-six years, I ordered this religious: 
edict to be written. 


REMARKS ON THE TRANSLATION. 


(a) Dhanmalipi, being a generic term, may refer to more than one edict. The edicts 
referred to are the third and fourth Rock Edicts. The former says, “ when I had been 
anointed twelve years, I issued the following order,” and the latter states with equal 
clearness at the end, “ king Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, ordered this to be written, 
when he had been anointed twelve years.” The earlier part of Piyadasi’s spiritual course 
is fixed by his own statements, as foliows :-— 


(1) After the conquest of Kalinga in his ninth year he repented of his cruelty, and 
resolved to make no further conquests by the sword.(Rock Edict: XIII). 

(2) In his eleventh year he began to hold an annual progress through his dominions 
in search of religious truth (Rock Edict VIII). 

(3) In his thirteenth year he solemnly adopted the Dhamma or Sacred Law, i.e. 
those principles of morality which he enumerates so frequently (Rock Edict 
IV), and ordered it to be spread by his officials and his vassals on their annual 
tours through their districts (Rock Edict ITI). 

(4) In his fourteenth year he appointed the Dharamamahamatas or Superintendents 
of the Sacred Law. All this long precedes his conversion to Buddhism, which 
happened in or immediately after the twenty-ninth year of his reign. 


(6) Apahata (D. 8.) or apahata is undoubtedly, as M. Senart suggests, equivalent 
to apahritya or apahritvd. In my opinion it corresponds to the second form, just as 
patiladdha™ (Jdtaka, iv, 46, 23) stands for pratilabdhvd, With respect to the meaning 
I differ from M. Senart, as I take apahri in the sense of ‘ to avoid, to give up,’ which 
it has not rarely in Sanskrit. Tam, the object of apalata, stands for tad, and denotes 
‘that which the people.used to do, before they were taught better.’ The whole sentence 
down to pdpovd gives briefly the contents of Rock Edict 1V, and it would have been 
clearer if ¢¢ had been added at the end. I transliterate and explain the passage in Sans- 


® Compare with this sentence the statements in the twelfth Rock Kdicte 
BT ie verse runs as follows :—Sarkappam etarr patiladdha papam achchahitam kamma karosi luddam, 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 269 


krit as follows :—Sah[loka ityarthah] tad [kriyamdénam adharmam ityarthah] apahritya 
[parihrityetyarthah] tdi tdi dharmavriddhim prapnuy at. 

(c) The explanation of the statement that the king directs his attention to his re- 
latives is given by the remarks in the fourth Rock Edict and the seventh Pillar Edict, 
acccrding to which the gifts of his children, brothers and sisters were supervised by the 
Dhammamahamatas. By “those who are near,” Piyadasi probably means his La- 
jakas and other officials, who are supervised and taught their duties by him, see the 
fourth Pillar Edict and the Separate Edicts. ‘‘Those who are far,” apakatha, may be 
the wardens of the marches or perhaps the free borderers and the subjects of his friend 
the Yavana king Antiyoka, on whom Piyadasi conferred benefits according to the second 
Rock Edict, and whom he tried to convert to the Dhamma by ambassadors, as the 
thirteenth Rock Edict (Part ii) alleges. 

- (d) M. Senart has recognised that kimaz is equivalent to the very common phrase 
kimtt. As R. M. read plainly kizzmam, I would suggest that kimam too stands for 
kimmam, and is a contraction of kimva, i.e. kimiva, with the not uncommon nasalisation 
of the last vowel. 

(e) Nikdya, ‘body corporate,’ refers probably not only, as M. Senart suggests, to 
the classes of officials which are called nikdyd in the twelfih Rock Edict, but also to the 
castes and sects called nikdyd in the thirteenth Rock Edict. 

(f) Pachchiipaganana, in Sanscrit pratyupagamana, might mean ‘the return to, 
but may also be taken as ‘ the approach towards.’ The latter sense suits here best, and 
what is meant is the voluntary approach which one sect is to make towards the other in 
accordance with Piyadasi’s recommendation in the twelfth Rock Edict :—‘“ They shall 
hear each other’s law and love to hear it. For it is the desire of the Beloved of the 
eods—what ?—‘that men of all creeds shall have heard much and possess holy 
doctrines.’ ” 


Dehli-Sivalik Pillar 


Epict VII, 1. 


DevAnam-piye Piyadasi lajd hevarm aha[: |ye-atikarhtam [11] 
amtalam lijine husu[,]hevam ichhisu{:]katham-jane[12] 
dhammavadhiyaé vadheya[?] No-chu-jane anulupayd dhammavadhiya[13 | 
vadhitha[.] Etam devanam-piye Piyadasi 14j4 hevam-dha[:] esa-me[14] 
hutha(,] atikarhtam-cha amtalari hevaim ichhisu 14jane katharn-jane[15 | 
anulupdy’ dharmavadhiyé vadheyé-ti[; | no-cha-jane anulupdya[16] 
dharmmavadhiya vadhith[;] se-kina-su jane anupatipajeya®[,17] 
kina-su jane anulupayaé dharhmavadhiyé vadhey4-ti[; }kina-su-kdni [18] 
abhyurimamayeham dharhmavadhiy4-ti[?] Etath-devanam-piye Piyadasi 14ja hevar [19] 
AhA[:Jesa-me hutha{,] dharnmasavanani savapayami dhammanusathini| 20] 
anus[4|simi®[;J etarh-jane sutu anupatipajisati abhyurnnamisati[,21] 

6 The second pa of anupatipajeya stands above the line. 


6 This might be read anusisdmi, but I believe the blotched line above the d-stroke to be accidental. Anusdsdmi is also 
used by Asoka elsewhere, e.g. Sep. Ed., II, 6, (8), etc.| 


270 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Epict VII, 2. 
dharhmavadhiy4-cha badharn vadhisati[.}] Etaye-me athaye dhammasavanani savapita ai 
dharamanusathini vividhani dnapitani yath[4 me pul]isd-pi” bahune® janasi 4yata ete 
paliyovadisarti-pi pavithalisamti-pi[.] Laj[ajka-pi® bahukesu panasatasahasesu ayata 
tepi-me Anapita[:] hevarn-cha hevarn-cha paliyovadatha [1] 
jana dharmmayu[ta}m”[.] [DJe[v]anaz-piye Piyadasi hevam-dha[:] etam-eva-me anu- 
vekhamane dharmathambhani-katani[,] dharnmanahamaté-kata[, \dharnma(s)4{ van Je”- 
kate[.]Devinarn-piye Piyadasi 14j4-hevarh 4hd[:] magesu-pi-me nigohdni lopapitani[:] 
chhayopagini hosarnti pasumunisdnam[;] ambdvadikyd lopapita |;]adhak[o]s[i]kydni- 
pi-me-udupanéni[ 2] 
khan4papitani [;] nimsidhiya-cha” kdlApita[; ]4pandni-me bahukani tata-tata kalapiténi 
patibhog’ye pasumunisinam[.] La{huke chu] esa patibhoge nama” [.} Vividhaya- 
hi sukhayan4y4 pulimehi-pi lajihi mamaya-cha sukhayite loke[.] Tmarh-chu dhammé- 
nupatipati anupatipajamtu-ti[; | etadathd-me[3] 
esa-kate[.] Devdnarn-piye Piyadasi hevarn 4ha[:] dharhmamahamata-pi-me t[e]-bahuvi- 
dhesu® athesu Anugahikesu viydpatd-se pavajitanarmn-cheva gihithanam-cha[; |sava- 
[pasarn]desu-pi-cha” viyApatd-se[.{ Sarmghathasi-pi-me kate ime viydpata hohamti-ti 
[;] hemeva babhanesu Ajivikesu-pi-me kate[4] 
ime viyapatd hohamti-ti[.] Nigarnthesu-pi-me kate ime viyapata hohamti ([;] ndna- 
pasamdesu-pi-me kate ime viydpat& hohamti-ti [.] Pativisitharn pativisitharn tesu-tesu 
te-[t]e [ma]Jhamata[.; Dhammamahdmatd-chu-me etesu-cheva viya[pa]ta savesu-cha 
arhnesu pisarndesul.} Devadnam-piye Piyadasi 14j4-hevam aha[:5 | 
ete-cha arbne-cha bahuk&i mukhé danayisagasi viyApata-se mama-cheva devinarm-cha|; ] 
savasi-cha-me olodhanasi te-bahuvidhena 4[kaJ]lena” tani tani ‘uthayatan[4]ni pati- 
[padayarnti] hida-cheva disisu-cha|.] D4lakAnam-pi-cha-me kate arindnam-cha devikue 
mélanarm ime danavisagesu viyapaté hohamti-ti| 6} 
dharmmapadanathaye dhammanupatipatiye[.] Esa-hi dharnmapadane dhammapatipati-cha 
ya-iyarn day& dane sache sochave madave sadha[ve]-cha lokasa hevam vadhisati-ti[*] 


7 Faintly visible are, both en Dr. Fleet’s facsimile and on Sir A. Cunningham’s rabbing, the following letters—ya tha 
. -¢ «¢and the left-hand curve of 4, while the right half of sé is quite plain. The restoration is not doubtful, because there 
is exactly room for three lost consonants and because the phrase pulisd-pi-me “ my servants” occurs above Pillar Edict, I, |. 7 
(D.§.), 1. 3 (A), and elsewhere. From Professor Kern’s analysis of this edict, Der Buddhismus, vol. II, p. 385, I infer that he: 
would restore the passage in the same manner. 

6 Bohune is possibly # clerical mistake for bahuke, But it may be defended by the locative pundvasune above,—v. 16; 
18 (D. §.). 

6 The quantity of the second vowél of lajékd is not certain, 

eB 7 The last, syllable of dhammayutamh has been placed more than an inch from the rest, because there is a flaw in the: 
stone. * . 

7 The restoration has been made currectly by M. Senart. The rubbing shows the 4-stroke distinctly, and the facsimile: 
has the final e. 

#2 The continuation of the same flaw in the stone, which caused the separation of the syllables dhammmayw and tam in 
I. 2, has here made necessary the division nisi dhiyd ( not dhayd). Of course, nothing has been lost. 

7 The initial Za (not ga) is perfectly plain, both on the facsimile and on the rubbing. Between Za and esa, three, or 
possibly four, syllables have been lost. The phrase was, therefore, either Jahuke chu esa or lahuke chu kho esa, compare: 
Rock Edict, XIII, 2, 1. 14 (Kalst), Zahukd vu kho sd piti, and below, 1. 9, tata chu lahu-se dhammaniyame. 

74 The nd of ndma stands above the line, and has been added afterwards as a correction. 

% Though the ta is damaged at the top, it seems probable, both according to the rubbing and the facsimiles, that the: 
reading was te. The se after viydpatd is, of course, not required. Compare also the first clause in 1. 5, where another redundant 
ze occurs. 

7 The restoration has been given correctly by M. Senart. 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 271 


Devanam-piye [ Piyada]s[i] 14j4 hevarn-4haj:]| yani-hi-kani-chi mamiy4 sAdhavani katani 
tarn-loke andpatiparnne tarh-cha anuvidhiyamti[; ]tena vadhita-cha(7 |} 
vadhisamti-cha matapitisu sususayd gulusu sususdy& vayomahalakanam anupatipatiy 4 
bAbhanasamanesu kapanavalakesu dva désabhatakesu sarpatipatiyd[.] Devanam-piy[e 
Pilyadasi 1aji hevam-dha(:] munisdnarh-chu yd-iyam dhammavadhi vadhité duvehi- 
yeva akalehi dharnmaniyamena-cha nijhatiya-cha[.8] 
Tata-chu lahu-se dharnmaniyame[,] nijhatiy4-va bhuye[.] Dhammaniyame-chu-kho 
esa ye-me iyam-kate imani-cha imdni” jatdni avadhiyani[,] arnnAni-pi-chu bahu[kani] 
dharnmaniyamani yani-me katdni[.] Nijhatiya-va-chu bhuye munisanam dharnmavadhi 
vadhita avihimsaye bhutanam[9] 

analambhaye pananar [. ] Se-etaye athaye iyam kate [ , ] putapapotike chamda- 
masuliyike hotu-ti [, ] tathd-cha anupatipajartu-ti [.] Hevarh-hi anupatipajamtam 
hidata[pdla]te aladhe hoti [.] SatavisativasAbhisitena me iyarn dhammalibi likhapd- 
pita-ti [ . ] Etarh devanarn-piye aha : ] iyam [10] 

dharhmalibi ate athi silathambhani-va sildphalakdni-va tata kataviyd ena esa chila- 
thitike siya [11]. 

TRANSLATION. 
King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :-— 


‘Those kings who lived during the past ages conceived this wish, ‘Might mankind 
in some way grow the growth of the sacred law,"! But mankind did not grow a 
befitting growth of the sacred law.” 

Concerning this’ (matter) king Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :— 

“This (thought) came to me, ‘On the one hand kings conceived during the past ages 
this wish, Might mankind in some way grow a befitting growth of the sacred law !’ On the 
other hand mankind did not grow a befitting growth of the sacred law. By what means 
then would mankind (be moved) to obey ? By what means would mankind grow a befitting 
growth of the sacred law? By what means may I raise up* some among them to (grow) 
the growth of the sacred law ?” 

Concerning this (matter) king Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :- 

“This (thought) came to me “ Sermons on the sacred law I will order to be preached ; 
instruction in the sacred law I will order to be given. When men hear it, they will obey, 
they will raise themselves,’ and mightily they will grow the growth of the sacred law.” 
For this purpose I have ordered sermons on the sacred law to be preached, and have 
directed various instructions on the sacred law to be given, so that [even my servants] who 
dwell (as rulers) among many men, shall give instruction and expand it. Even the 
lajakas who dwell (as rulers) among many hundred thousands of souls, even they have 
been ordered by me,’ ‘ Instruct (my) loyal people’ in this way and in that.” 

Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :— 

“Having regard to this same matter,” I have erected pillars of the sacred law, I 
have appointed superintendents of the sacred law, I have ordered to be preached [sermons 
on] the sacred law.” 

7 Read imdni cha, as the sense requires. 

78 Etam-eva-me anuvekhamdne (i.¢., anvavekshyamdnam) may be explained as a nominative absolute, analogous to 


avijitam hi vijinamane, Rock Edict XIII (1. 36, k.), But it is not impossible that anwvekhamdnena (i.e. anvavekshaménena) 
was what Asoka really wrote. 


272 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus : — 

“T have also planted banian-trees on the high-roads, (intending that) they shall give 
shade to men and beasts. I have planted mango-gardens.” I have also ordered wells to 
be dug at every half kos’ and I have ordered rest-houses* to be built; and I have 
ordered many watering stations’ to be made here and there for the enjoyment of men 
and beasts. [But something small indeed is} this so-called enjoyment. Both former 
kings and myself have blessed the world with various blessings. But I have done (all) 
this (in order) that men may render their obedience to the sacred law.” 

Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :— 


“ My superintendents o. the sacred law are also occupied with the various matters 
of grace, affecting both ascetics and householders ; and they are likewise occupied with 
men of all creeds. I have arranged it that they will be occupied with the affairs of the 
Sarhgha’; likewise I have arranged it that they will be occupied with the Brahmanical 
Ajivikas; I have arranged it that they will be occupied with the Nigamthas; I have 
arranged it that they will be occupied with (all) the manifold creeds. Various officials 
(have been appointed) for various (classes of men and purposes) in accordance with the 
several requirements. But my superintendents of the sacred law are occupied both with. 
those (mentioned) and with the men of all creeds.” 

King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :— 


Both these and many other chief officials ® are occupied with the distribution of gifts 
both my own and those of the queens; and in my whole harem they [point out] vari- 
ous ways the manifold sources of contentment’ both here (in Pdataliputra) and in the © 
distance. And I have arranged it that they will be occupied with the distribution of the 
gifts both of my sons and of tke other princes’ in order (¢o promote) noble deeds in 
accordance with the sacred law and obedience to the sacred law. For, these are noble 
deeds in accordance with the sacred law and this is action in accordance with the sacred 
law, whereby compassion, liberality, truthfulness, purity, gentleness and holiness will thus® 
grow among men.” 

King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :— 


‘* Whatever works of holiness I have worked, these men have followed, and these they 
will imitate in future; and thereby they have grown and will grow in future in obedience 
towards parents, in obedience towards venerable men, in reverence towards the aged, in 
proper conduct towards Brahmans and ascetics, towards the poor and the wretched, even 
towards slaves and servants.” 

King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :— 


66 ; 7 ] > 1 
But men lave grown this growth of the sacred law in two ways, (viz.) through 
restrictive religious rules and through deep meditation”. But, among these two 
the restrictive religious rules are something small, more (és worked) by deep meditation 


; 79 Lica the short a of °vadikyd see note 17 on the Queen's Edict, Indian Antiquary, vol. XIX, p. 123, where it 
has been pointed out that the corresponding ambdvadihd may stand for ambd } i ASR 
a ( ay stand for ambdvaddikd. Reg: g 
fate : da egarding the long 4 of ambd, see 
8 Mukhé has either been used in the sense of mukha, m, a | / i 
sed 3 s ‘ha, m, a leader (see the smaller Pet. Dict. i 
mukkhé und corresponds to mukhydh ‘chicts,’ i.e. ‘ollicials of high rank, ’ gern eee 
Thus, t.¢.in the manner desired by the king. 


® Tala, te. tatra, has here, as often in Sanskrit, a distributive sense, and fata-chu is equivalent to ¢ayostu 


PILLAR EDICTS OF ASOKA. 273 


But the restrictive religious rules, indeed, are these, that I have ordered various kinds 
of creatures to be exempt from slaughter ;* but there are also numerous other restric- 
tive religious rules which I have imposed. But by deep meditation the growth of the 
sacred law has been increased more among men, so that they do not injure created beings, 
so that they do not slaughter living creatures.” 

For the following purpose these (orders) have been issued, (viz.) that they may last 
as long as my sons and great-grandsons reign’, as long as moon and sun endure, and 
that men may act accordingly. If man obeys them in this manner, happiness has been 
gained both in this world and the next. I have caused this religious edict to be written 
after I had been anointed twenty-seven years. 

Concerning this the Beloved of the gods speaks (thus) :— 

“This religious edict must be incised there, where either stone pillars or stone tablets 
are found, in order that it may endure for a long time,” 


REMARKS ON THE TRANSLATIO* 


(a) As the preceding clause states that the kings “conceived a wish,” it is not 
possible to take katham as an interrogative adverb. It must have the sense of an indefi- 
nite pronoun, just as kdni has more frequently. 

(b) Though it is perhaps not absolutely impossible to take e¢tam with M. Senart as 
equivalent to ¢tra or atra, I prefer to explain it by efad, and to assume that we have here 
the “accusative of relation,” which, as Professor Delbriick has shown (Altindische, 
Syntax, p. 165f.), appears not rarely with verbs of speaking, wishing, considering and the 
like, 

(c) Abhyumndmayeham is the future with the meaning of the subjunctive (see 
Speijer, Sanskrit Syntax, p. 266f., and especially the quotation from the Rémdyana 
under 4), # for « appears similarly in puridahessati, etc. (see E. Miller: Simplified 
Grammar of the Pali Language, p. 118). 

(d) Abhyumnamisati may be either the future of the active abhywnnamati, or, equi- 
valent to abhyurnnammissaili, the future of the passive of the causative abhyunnamayati, 
The use of the active unnamati, abhyunnamati, pronnamati, and so forth, in the sense of 
‘to rise up,’ is the usual one both in Sanskrit and in the Prakrits, 

(e) Lajtika means literally ‘a writer, clerk,’ and denotes here probably a high 
official, taken from the writer caste (see note 1 to my German translation of Rock 
Edict III). Regarding the meaning of dyatd note 2 to my German translation of the Sep. 
Ed. I, Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenlindischen Gesellschaft, vol. XLI. 

(f) Paliyovaddtha is one of the few instances of the Vedic subjunctive, preserved 
in the old Prakrits of India (see Professor Pischel in Kuhn’s Zetfscirift, vol. XXIII, 
p. 424, and Professor E. Miller, Simplified Grammar of the Pali Language, p. 1C8). 

(g) Adhakosikydni corresponds to a Sanskrit drdhakrosikiydnt. The kroSa or kos 
meant here, must be that equal to 8,000 Hastas, or half a gavyiiéi, which thus corre- 
‘sponds to the so-called Sultana kos of 3 English miles. The ordinary kos, equal to one 
and a half or one and three-quarter miles, cannot be meant, as the wells would come to 


close to each other. 
83 See above, Pillar Edict V. 


274 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(h) Ninsidhiyd no doubt stands for nisidhiyd, just like the Pali mahinsa for mahisa, 
and is an equivalent of nishidiyd, ‘ dwelling,’ which occurs in the Nagarjuni Hill Cave 
inscriptions, Indian Antiquary, vol. XX, p. 364f., in the compound vdshanishidiy dye. 
Both ninsidhiyd and nishidiyd are Pali representatives of the Sanskrit nishadyd, ‘a 
couch, a market-hall.” They have, however, been derived not from the root nishad, but 
from the stem of the present tense nishéd, The lingual dha of nimsidhiyd is due to the 
influence of the original sha of nishidyd. The Jainas use closely alied words nisidhi, 
nishidhi and nisidhé for the last resting-place, the ornamental tombs, of their saints, see 
Indian Antiquary, vol. XII, p.99. Nimsidhiyad denotes here, of course, the public rest- 
houses or serais, which are found at certain distances on most Indian high-roads and 
which are frequently built dharmértham by benevolent and rich men. Ushavadata, 
the pious son-in-law of the Satrap and king Nahapana boasts in the Nasik inscriptions, 
Rep. Arch. Surv. West Ind. vol. IV, p. 99, that he erected many such buildings. 

(i) Apdna cannot have here its usual meaning “ tavern, liquor-shop.”” As Professor 
Kern, Der Buddhismus, vol. II, p. 885, assumes, it must denote a watering station. 
Probably the huts on the roads are meant, where water is distributed to travellers and 
their beasts gratis or against payment. ‘Lhe usual Sanskrit name is prapd. 

(j) Samgha, of course, denotes the order of Buddhist monks. The Ajivikas are 
probably, as Professor Kern assumes, orthodox Vaishnava ascetics, see my discussion of the 
question in the Indian Antiquary, vol. XX, p. 362. The Nigarhthas are the Jaina 
ascetics or Nirgranthas. I take pafivisitham pafivisitham, ‘‘ according to the several 
requirements” in the sense of prativisesham, (see the smaller Petersburg Dict, sub voce). 
Tesu-tesu, literally “for these and those,” probably refers not only to various classes cf 
men, but also to various purposes, for which the unnamed officials were appointed. 
Compare the end of Rock Edict XII, where the Superintendents of women, the Vacha- 
bhamikas and other bodies of officials are mentioned. 

(k) I here follow Professor Kern, Der Buddhismus, vol. II, p. 386, who takes 
tuthdyatandnt, i.e. tushtydyatandni, “ sources of contentment,” ia the sense of “ oppor- 
tunities for charity.” Such opportunities are to be pointed out to all the inmates of the 
_king’s harem. With this interpretation the necessity of the restoration pati [pddayamti] 
‘is self-evident. 

(1) Devikumdla ‘prince’ means literally ‘son of a queen,’ i.e. of such a lady who 
has the title devé. As the sons of the king have been mentioned separately, it follows 
that ‘the princes’ are the sons of the wives of Piyadasi’s predecessors, i.e. his brothers 
and possibly his paterral uncles. In the parallel passage, Rock Edict V, Piyadasi names 
‘his brethers, sisters and other relatives.’ 

(m) M. Senart has no doubt correctly explained nijhali as a derivative from the 
causative of nidhydi and appropriately translated it by “ reflexion.” It is equivalent to 
Sanskrit nididhy dsar.d “reflexion, deep meditation,” which is derived by other affixes 
from the same verb. 

(2) In puldpapotike the nominative of the plural pu/d takes the place of the stem just 
as in ambd-cadikyd, above 1. 2. Similarly the nominative singular frequently takes the 
place of the stem in the inscriptions from Mathura, anfe, vol. I, p. 371 tf. Rare instances 
occur also in Pali. Thus we have, Jat. iv, 184, 18, sakhdbhariyan, * the wife of a friend.’ 


sree a taqpay Morea sd ihr # UMDYOUUUND PF tig Ua wotaz 


4 : Pee et 
ree \ rio) - : i ‘ j me : 1 Thee 1? ki! } helielg fe 
Way Paid np& ee estar Bass Cel i jp | 
pale EB Del ribs He es 
Ste vit 9 \rdies O Bah 


: ee bev ae _ i bbl 


XU 


hele LB) 


wpe ge bth 


alae @t)t 
velh) Supt Ss 


phuese eb}le 
2b IBBb Ph) ee pire by bee 
“pbinbie Sosy So)leblaea 
bb Byblip ade bg EES Dbtule bb tela lel bp 
Jb BR) einai : 
x S =F a Dbl pel BLD briele 
: » DELL fp b[>e J Ne ame 
eines 2 I ath peo SiR CNS bv A1/5 


o 


p i 


~~ 


es, LVAWWS JO 1LSWSVUd NVEVHVW 


‘TI ‘oa ‘voipuy viygvsaedy 


MAHABAN PRASASTI 275 


XXI.—THE MAHABAN PRASASTI OF SAMVAT 1207. 
By G. Biauer, Pa.D., LL.D., C.I.E. 


The subjoined inscription is identical with that which I have published, ante, vol. 
Y, p. 287, under the title Mathurd Pragasti of the Reign of Vijayapdla, according to 
an impression, furnished to me by Dr. A. Fiihrer and described as an ‘Inscription on 
black basalt recovered from Kesava mound at Mathura, 10th February 1889.’ 

Shortly after the publication of my article Dr. Fihrer wrote to me that he did not 
agree with my restoration of the king’s name as Vijayapala, because he had obtained 
lately from Mahdban another small inscription of the same period, which showed a dif- 
ferent reading. His remarks induced me to look over Sir A. Cunningham’s notices of 
Mahaban in the Archeological Survey Reports, where I found the facsimile! of a much 
more complete version of this supposed Muthurd Praégasti, and the statement that the 
document had been obtained at Mah4ban in 1882-83; my friend, Professor Kielhorn, 
likewise pointed it out tome. For some time I thought that Dr. Fihrer’s inscription, 
in which the central portion has been rubbed out by the stone being used for grinding 
spices or ¢dél and a large piece at the right-hand corner has been broken off, might be 
a duplicate of Sir A. Cunningham’s. But this theory became doubtful, when in 
answer to my enquiries Dr. Fiihrer stated that Sir A. Cunningham’s stone was not 
traceable at Mahaban. And it became absolutely untenable, when some time ago 
Dr. J. Burgess found Sir A. Cunningham’s impression from which his lithograph was 
prepared. A comparison with Dr. Fihrer’s impression shows that the latter has, in 
the portions preserved, all the minor abrasions which are found on Sir A. Cunning- 
ham’s slab, whereby the identity of the two originals is established. It would now seem 
that,-after Sir A. Cunningham’s impression was taken in 1882-83, the stone was taken 
away from Mahdban, used as a grinding-stone by somebody, and finally brought as 
a find from the Kesava mound to Dr. Fiihrer, who in 1889 received quite a number of 
fragments’ from the railway-workmen at Mathura. 

I now re-edit the inscription according to Sir A. Cunningham’s impression, which 
is reproduced in the accompanying plate and permits me to give a much better ver- 
sion. 

As regards the contents of the inscription, it is now plain that it refers to the erec- 
tion of a temple at Mahdban. The paramount king, mentioned in the colophon, is 
probably, as Sir A. Cunningham has stated, op. c#é., vol. XX, p. 42, Ajayapala, not 
Vijayapala. And he may belong to the Yaduvaméi dynasty of Baydna-Sripathé 
(see the pedigree op. cit., p. 7). This view, which Sir A. Cunningham has put for- 
ward, is confirmed by the fact that Dr, Fihrer’s above mentioned new inscription from 


2 Cunningham’s Archeological Survey Reports, vol. XX, pl. 3. 

2 The use of the slab for grinding condiments upon is perfectly evident from the impression, where a round piece in the 
centre is blank, and at the sides the deeper strokes of the letters are visible, while the shallower ones have disappeared. Dr. 
Fiihrer has also sent me squeezes of several other fragments, which bear in pencil the dates when they came into his hands. 
One which is wafortunately very small shows the name of parameSvara-Sri-Silddityadeva and may belong to thé seventh 


century. 
2 2n2 


276 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


MahiAban shows the name of Ajayapala’s successor Haripala and the date Samvat 
1227. ‘The pedigree of the Rajput who built the temple now stands as follows :— 


Snoharaja, 
Tejaraja. 


Asika, married to daughter of Harikantha. 


Jajja, married to Dharma, Pajja, married to daughter 
danghter of Rissika. of king of Avanta. 
Four sons. One or several sons (verse 17). 
TRANSCRIPT. 


L.1. att vu ott [a)woaa’ aa: 1 
feure 4: aivag — — — 
— aifa’ eat fecetare [1] 
fafa fratfta —Y — ca (?) 
Ae aararqqurfedt a: [ne] 
L, 2. (St: aseatfaceafean wa f— — —! aa- 
ealfigla WENA WHE aT aEAAEAT 
Talla lSeaATARA RAAT fewwiefaw- 
L. 3. Wa: 
antataanat aafattfasemoraa’ wv (2) 
a alag A — — —: Rae weutes: 
aerad|a |ae| a] wadicdae- 
L, 4. a: [1] 
WAMYIATARC, HAATTRYHT AT: 
warataErat: g[wlageaearas: un [2]’ 
afa yaaaa i 
wren a jeafaafaaee- 


L. 5. HATA eA: 
arar: ura laarray fesrae: dteararaifaa | 


% Read qayagd. On Dr. Fiihrer’s im 
4 Restore ATAHTATA: Ayife. 
* Restore Fat 4:. 


* Read famendarad |. 
7 Read ‘eq eet ,-— yA -— “AWTHCE ;—Restore HATER: . 


pression the e-stroke above the ¢a has almost disappearcd. 


MAHABAN PRASASTI. 277 


aUaAWwaAws FATT aMTa |TAHA: 
staf ag- 

L. 6. aa: fafaae cereal very u [8] 
SrararaaareRrreqTaranarara ta: 
stararafatraaatgegenaaanty: [1] 

L. 7. aaneateareraenaaginareaa aan: 
ara: afaaaaatfaferern: ahiecraea: uv [a]? 
aaa waifaaaa fran 
ara a 

L. 8. fa: waar a afar: [1] 
waa afa — — aa afa- 
canara afer a aa [nen]? 

AINA wataaafa: Weasersrea: 
weaireta: 

L, 9. afareqearet faaarac | 
afad qeutaatta fafeat wa a faresar- 
HIYA A ACA AT aTaAify we nv [o}! 

L. 10. caraqurrad sara aa eae 
ahararfen sqenafea gafearaica: [1] 
fassifeeangiaaeafaent aradafers: ut 4 

Lu.—--—--—- dafufanaile: wat daa: w" [| 
dy: teeafas frafaa =starptarfe: wy: 
aren latfaa] caeratafes tafe sreat 
wraiy: fare 

Tc 12: Ofeatfaa qfaatenfaareaat 
a alareftawargeaeeatad — — atu [el 
aet ta Fat TH Te: TTT | 
tat TM- 

1:13, waa aia lerargercat: u [eo] 
quia: aafaque a[f]a: ae ofa: 

| ait at aprgfectamaren: wfteeaate: [1] 


aaal- 


3 According to Cunningham’s rabbing one might read APA’, but Fiihres’s gives plainly °azaj 

» Restore afa: Gada qf’. 

‘0 The second @at° and the second @ of fadHT~At: stand below the line. 

" The last Pada stands in the margin, and there is a mark after Y% in order to indicate the lxcuns, Restore 
ataiarafacrafae. 

® Read AUIS ItT; — Restore TafaAelAat 


978 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. 14. at fefa wufad anger: aay: 
ay Mild THA A|A AT FH: waar: FATS [ee | 
de: wifaaaara ate 


TSH, GayTaata — — 
eraa wat faaet fara uv [22]” 
ay: aryfata arowaa ufara wat afe: 
ataaretafa: o- 

L. 16. tromaa ara qeui alfa: 1] 
— — Ryailanifsyns set wa dfsa: 
amearfaadary qua: fa far a areatat v [ea]" 
ail- 

L. 17. a atiomtahr: waa UL 
— farufcacwarcita Fa: [1] 
watfa vafaaifeeagcis 
aaa arate a Ga Hat HaT- 

L. 18. arn [es]? 

atatfafearaaatatedl wsraatea: 

aararquataareteat watfirarat wat | 

Maratea wy wes - 

at Waa 
aut [ga l\aqed wauasatond aa: nv [e4/ 
aaa qutafurfrat afew: 

ara: afenqetaufaga: [1] 

ahata- 

L, 20. waaaera| faa jagte: 
arfeaawafadausrarar ix (eel 
aaaUaAAAat Walqeawaar | 
aeat e WaMTATA X KX XK U- Uw I x [ee] 
dart efufmacated fama meta: 
are wayti fac: 

L. 21, a aga saa faatfad | 
fariemanafracaaa faarard ae- 


L. 19. 


® The reading of the stone seems to have been QIsa z:. 
4 Restore Hfa: ya’. 


3 Restore Gat aaa afeq’, 


46 Verse 17 stands in the margin, and is preceded by the figure 20, which refers to the line where it is to be inserted, 


L. 


bo 
Or 


MAHABAN PRASASTI. 


aanfaaatinaasae marmfad y [¢5] 
aiaaar- 

THATRTAAALTASTS AAS 
aileTgefactatafacat aractfad wa: [1] 
awlal qfat athaqauitaigaat fa- 

f-- 
—— -vfewrg afecfad vata: arad 0 [re] 
aq aelaaraarfa 
qraanrasaats aay Aza: | 
tefana- 

—--—vV x x Wafaaras: un [2°] 
aagal at2y sifaal ASAT: 
saaqadag Hawa: 1 (22) 
area aetare: 

Xen ee GEN om Neat! of 
Bat asdaa: Satt araatast: nv [22] 
Weal TAA Seat wfsatss: | 
ua ayet aataRl yautarfe- 
— [fram u (a2! 
(aarlat feet afacacae afaa: | 
aueat ava qrarfasala a] [as] 
& we qlee: uz atfeat azazy | 
aratt- 
ulefarae arararacatfet nu fay] 
aa da vet [aren] alae) gaarfecara 1 
aaaTs Vqaial a: a fama waa [ize 
a; ataq e- 
wd afa a cerfa a aaa: | 
a wear | Vt araetaradaa: un [ao]! 
sear: (W]e: HUT GUT UTAHRAST | 
(deat edfaqdaared faare 
a ec] 


Haq (Ree HI — Weare sensi — — 


BANA ATAU SRA Araaegalarst |e u 


@ Restore fafaataurafee. 
!8 “qTqa can, of course, not be correct, Read ager w- 
” The last word is probably meant for A4aeTqAGTa. 


279 


280 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


XXIIL—MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENGAL. 


By Pavun Horn, Pa. D., SrRasspure. 


As in my previous paper on Muhammadan inscriptions from the supa of Dihli, I 
have reproduced the texts of the inscriptions as they are found on the stone, adding no 
wanting dots, ¢askdéds, etc., except in the first six inscriptions. 


1.—Buicarrtr. 


The history of Bhagalpir during the first four centuries of Muhammadan rule 
offers nothing very remarkable, ‘The first inscription below of the time of Mahmtd 
Shah ibn Ibrahim Shah of Jaunpiy, is of value, because it shows that Bhagal- 
pur in the ninth Hijrat century belonged to the Sharqi kingdom, as did also Bihar 
(vide below). In A. H. 982 it came into the possession of Akbar (Akbarndma, ITT, 
108). Further information regarding the place has been collected by C, J. O’Donnell 
in W. W. Hunter’s Statistical Account of Bengal, vol. XIV, p. 82. 

The inscriptions Nos. 2,3 and 4 are of little historical value; they bear the dates 
of the years 1032 (reign cf Jahangir), 1180 (reign of Farrukh Siyar) and 1793 A.D. 
The last falls in the period of English rule. 

The first inscription’ is engraved on a black basalt slab, fixed on a tomb in a 
garden belonging to Rant Bibi in Manda Roga Mahalla, Bhagalpur; it is no longer én 
situ; the stone measures 36 inches by 18 inches; the size of the inscribed part is 30 by 
13 inches. 


gos” Jota Le apt} Ud Bed Ipod Wall) by WAS Ne iy Ge PIT ule (aU) 
din Solon! ype pila d Ula jab ety) pw yb dete pBeoila de® Gul raf Wy Stall) abs 


TRANSLATION, 

‘The Prophet—may God’s piessing be upon him !— says ‘He who builds a mosque 
in this world, God will build for him a castle in Paradise’. During the time of the just 
king Mahmdd Shah the honoured Khan Khurshéd Khan, head of the guardians 
outside the palace, has built this mosque on the tenth of Jumadi’l awwal, year 850 H. 
(8rd August 1446).’ 

The arrangement of the words on the stone is not quite regular, and the deciphering 
is therefore more difficult than it seems at first sight. I have found no information 
relative to Khurshéd Khan, whose title sar-¢ naubat-¢ ghair-mahallidn I have translated 
according to Blochmann (Journal Asiatic Society, Bengal, vol. XLI, p. 106, vol. XLII, 
p-. 273, note). 

2. The second inscription has already been published by Blochmann in the Proceed- 
ings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, December 1873, p. 200. It is ona Dargéh called 
the Maskan-i Bardri or Makhdim Sh4h’s Dargdh in Champanagar near Bhagal- 


' See facsimile No. 1. 
? The same form occurs, e.g., in the inscriptions, Juurnal Asiatic Society, Bengal, vol. XLI, p. 109, Proceedings for 
March 1874, p. 72. 


“qourbrso $0 UG-T 529098 “suorssosd ur ¢ smpbag “(Tf MOLg 


QO) 


¥ 
>» 
f 
I 


Temata 


peisdaadad badass 4lodsdaredaaage | 


he mecca Bt SPA 


\ 


"168 ‘H'V JO NOILdINOSNI UNdIGHVN “% ‘ON 


OS ee. 
DSS 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENGAL. 281 


par; the name of the saint buried there is not known. ‘he basalt slab measures 27 by 
16 inches, the inscribed part 20 by 13 inches; it contains four lines.— 
QUI Syuny Sos? ali) SH all 3 
Re Gy! 
a sige 


Cyl sae 
dibe WI 53) 


4 < “ 
ca Is Noha 


by gle aU] 


4 
Say) ME glyole fo}jald GUI pas Gls el ame Cptidjaw deal dal d lobe ceed! yo 


Ip? Leth dw eal Gady) aywe Koy) on ylac sly 4) oy sre] ie bw csyldays eds? Gla 
eed 
TRANSLATION. 

‘There is no god but God and Muhammad is the Apostle of God. 

Abd Bakr, the veracious—may God be pleased with him! ’Omar, the distinguisher 
between right and wrong—may God be pleased with him! ’Osm4n—may God be 
pleased with him! ’Ali—may God dignify his face |’. 

When the humblest of the slaves of God, Khwaja Ahmad of Samarqand, according 
to the order of the Nawdb, bearing holy titles, the prince of the people of the world, 
Shah Parwéz, son of Jahangir, had entered the service as Faujdar of Sarkar Mungir, 
he found grace to build this splendid tomb in the year 1082 H. [began the 5th Novem- 
ber 1622].’ 

Shah Parwéz was the second son of the emperor Shah Jahangir. He died of deli- 
rium tremens on the 6th Safar 1035 (7th November 1625). In the year 1032 H. he 
gave Bengal‘ in jdgir to Mahabat Khan, after having defeated in battle Shah Jahan 
(Iqbdlnéma-t Jahangirt, p. 239), whereas Bihar, to which sarkar Mungir belonged 
(Ain-i-Akbari, vol. I, p. 419), remained his own tiydl. 

In the Statistical Account of Bengal, vol. XV, p. 63, is a long account of the town 
of Mungir, compiled by Blochmann 

3. This inscription was found near Cleveland’s public garden; the rectangular 
black basalt stone on which it is engraved measures about 36 by 13 inches, the inscrip- 
tion covers 16 by 10 inches. 

ay hha Oe edt a jl 
CST gilB) ny paw ny 
ys lw 4G 5] ye J! 
ul 5) bead poe” cy 

Metre,—Saré’: 

With much sorrow he tied up the dress of journey from the perishable house towards 
the country of eternity. From the head of (the word) grief say the year of the death, 
‘‘ The soul clothed with a body went from the world, alas!” 

The last line gives, according to abjad reckoning, 1129, As the poet seems to 
mean that the head of anddh, i.e. the letter ali/, is to be added to the tarikh, we get 
1129+-1=1130 H. [which began the 5th December 1717]. 


4 The four caliphs. 
« In Elliot-Dowson’s History, vol. VI, p. 417, |. 4, for Bihar read Bengal. 
2c 


282 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


The person referred to is not named. ; 
4. The following inscription is from tne same place as No. 3; the engraved area 
on the pillar is 12 by 6 inches. 


why pte gb Cree jl ad 9 ual Go pp ek ps Sd CW yp) Ce ye jl 
ys fypead lu jh a ot pop GF yhy pibe (sie.) Lorne ( a es phelys 
oy? pide & poe ysl syo ba) a) oy) faa) oe Sy) wile yh Ss 
wre ste othe pol be I pf me ene oy 0 hla pty 50 Yb 


TRANSLATION. 
Metre,—Ramal : 


By (order of) Ziy4-i-Mulk this fsir tank has been dug, on the bank of it this place 
of worship has also been erected by his exertion. I wanted to render manifest the’ date 
of the Christian era, so that there may exist a sign of the year of its erection on the 
face of the stone. Suddenly an invisible speaker by way of pleasure-increased the word 
*‘ Bdd’ after the word ‘ Didah’ in-the eighth hemistich ; then in the ear of the mind he 
uttered a mysterious sound, indeed, strange: ‘Man has scarcely seen in the world 
such a rare place.” 

The letters of the ¢dértkk which runs therefore ‘ Didah bad kam’ etc., give 1793 
A.D.—the last hemistich=1781 + 12 (6d%d¢)—i.e.—1208-9H. 

Ziy&-i-Mulk must have been the title of some English officer whose European 
name I am not able to make out here. 


On a hill to the west of Bhagalpdr Station is a Muhammadan shrine, the tomb of 
Shahjangi (Shahbaz), to which belongs a tank. That tank which had gone out of use 
was cleaned and fitted with stone steps by order of Mr. Edward Latore, M agistrate, 
Zila’ Bhagalptr, in 1843 A.D., corresponding with 1250 Fasli. Asa memoriai of that fact 
a Hinddstani inscription has been engraved in a circle on the side wal! of the ght, and 
the names of the personages who furthered the work with money have been inscribed in 
the margin. The total sum amounts to R2,677, if I have added rightly.° 


II.—Hazrat Panpvuag. 


_ The following inscriptions from Panduah belong to the Adina (i.e. Friday) Mosque 
of which large ruins still remain. These have been described at length by the late 
J. H. Ravenshaw in his Gaur, its Ruins and Inscriptions, pp. 60 ff., where also a ground 
plan of the masjid is given. 

The mosque was built by Abu’l Mujahid Sikandar Sh4h, son of Shams-addin 
Abu’l Muzaffar Ily4s Shah, king of Bengal, who adorned his capital Panduah with 
that magnificent edifice. Except one, the inscriptions inside and. outside the mosque are 
of no historical value, containing only verses from the Qordn. ‘I'he rubbings transmitted 
to the Asiatic Society of Bengal by General Cunningham and Mr. W. L. Heeley are very 
fine and worthy of the beautiful penmanship which can hardly be surpassed in other 
Indian Muhammadan inscriptions. ~ 


* There is another rubbing of a HinddstAni inscription of the month of August of 1845 which has been engraved 
on a large basalt pillar near the public garden on the bank of a tank opposite Cleveland’s house, but the inscription seems 
to be much defaced, so that it is not possible te deciphor it from the rubbing. It relates aleo to a ¢d/dv and a sav di tayyGr. 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENGAL. 283 


5. On the outer wall of the central nave near the doorway, which is very small in 
proportion to the size of the edifice, the inscription has been cut, which mentions the 
builder of the mosque and the year of its erection. The size of the stone is 58 by 11 
inches, that of the inscribed part is 57 by 9 inches; it runs— 


cepted) Las) p51 Sorel phel bbe’ UL) Ua) [ @ 1G) CF ete) tem) Nhe lead} stingy] 
cA) GaN ALA te LE lll ot gtlbe aL jai wale) asp!) antiy GIy) ast, yall 
Bylostany ted [ 5) ] caw Siw Garey yw BS deere] rys 


TRANSLATION. 


‘The edifice of this JAmi’ Masjid was ordered to be built during the days of the 
reign of the great king, the wisest, the justest, the most liberal, the most perfect of the 
kings of Arabia and Persia, who trusts in the assistance of the Merciful, Abu’l Mujahid 
Sikandar Shah, the king, son of Lly4s Shah, the king—May his reign be perpetuated 
till the day of promise! He wrote it during Rajab of the year 776 (began the 6th 
December 1374). 

There are some mistakes in Blochmann’s readings of this inscription (Journal Asiatic 
Society of Bengal, vol. XLII, p. 257, and repeated in Ravenshaw’s Gaur, p. 62). 
Regarding the accuracy of my conjecture that the eighth word is to be read ayydm, there: 
can hardly be any doubt. The statement of the date at the end of the inseription is 
quite ungrammatical, if, with Blochmann, we read rajab sitt; besides, the succession of 
_ the words should be siét rajab. Grammatical mistakes are very numerous in Bengal 
inscriptions, but the construction rajad si¢t instead of sédis would be too faulty even for 
them. I therefore prefer to supply a va (and) before sab’én or to read the va standing 
before sab’miat twice, a case that occurs not at all unfrequently. 

We do not know the year’ in which the Adina mosque was finished; the Riyds 
mentions only that the beginning fell in the year 766 H. It is very probable that the 
building required a space of ten years, e.g. the Jami’ Masjid at Kotila in Eastern Rajpu- 
tana was erected within eight years, and ten are therefore not too much to allow for the 
erection of that ‘gigantic barn,’ as General Cunningham calls the Adina mosque 
(Archeological Survey of India, vol. XV, p. 90).° 

6. Over the doorway of the king’s platform (Ravenshaw calls it Béashéh ka takht) 
we find the words of the Kalima. The size of the inscription is 8 by 7 inches. 

Over the central prayer niche (mthrdb) are inscribed on two stones the verses of 
Qordn, Str. xxxiii, 56, and Sir. xxii, 76, the latter being quoted with the omission of 
some words in Major W. Francklin’s Journal of a Route from Rajmahdl to Gaur, 
A. D. 1810, see Ravenshaw, p. 64. 

Round the three other prayer niches are also engraved passages from the Qordn, 
on the northern, the combined verses’ Sir.. ii, 63, iii, $1, ii, 121 and Sar. ix, 20, 21. 


6 see, however, that nothing can be too faulty for the Indian M uhammadan inscriptions, for I have found once again 
at least the above construction, with the number si¢t (inser. of the rauza of Muhammad Sharifof Balkh in Dihli,—Proceed- 


ings of As. Soc. Beng., for 1875, p. 212. 
7 The exordial phrase is— « pie wy” dons BS 0 Ste wl JG («God has said, who is raised above another 


speaker and more glorious than another orator)”, 
202 


284 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Round the middle prayer niche runs Str. xviii, 27.28, 29 (size: 153 inches by 12 
inches, the measure of the whole stone is 160 by 15 inches); round the southern 
(Ravenshaw, photograph, plate xliv) Sir. ii, 256, 257 has been inscribed. The intervals 
between the single letters and words are always copiously ornamented with flower 
arabesques. 

The inscription over the prayer niche in the transept (Ravenshaw, photograph 


plate xli) has been mentioned by Blochmann in the Journal Asiatic Scciety Bengal, vol. 
XLII, p. 256. A facsimile is given in Ravenshaw’s work, plate xlv; it contains Qordn, 
Str. ix 18, 19. The top line is in Kufik, a character of writing the artist was evidently 
not very conversant with, and contains the Fdtiha. 

A stone (20 by 14 inches) once fixed in the wall of the nave, now lost, bore round 
a square which contains arabesques and the name of Muhammad twice, besides the 
Kalima, the text of Sura cxii. 


III.—Gavr. 


For the city of Gaur, the reader may be referred to Ravenshaw’s work already 
cited, the photographs of which give a picture of the former grandeur and magnificence 
of the town. It also gives a historical sketch of Gaur trom the Muhammadan conquest 
to the end of its independence (pp. 95ff). Some of the following inscriptions have been 
already published either in this work or by Blochmann. 

7, Over the entrance to the court of the Qadam-Rasil mosque ( Ravenshaw, 
photograph, plate 18, and facsimile, plate 48, No. 6) is an inscription, 2’ 1” by 1’ 2” in 
two lines— 


vse} da Gy Bie Sled Gurte J aS aU by al las” hy Ue pHa ante ail) J 
prbrcdIy ad uy2ly WGA) pron GUlabedl 9 gtaladd oa Ulu ye 

pbeaitite 5 pbel [dds] do by Mab} alt ope yy llall LCL cal salad] Ls Ciangs 
dalited 5 gypiled  Garod dw ulaey lye ale pdopa® pr ly tel Id SLU) UA olaye 


TRANSLATION. 


‘The Prophet (on whom be peace!) has said : ‘ He who builds a mosque for God, 
will have seventy castles built for him by God in Paradise.’ This mosque was built in 
the time of the king, the son of a king, who was the son of a king,» Shamsaddunya 
waddin Abu’l Muzaffar Ydsuf Sh&h, the king, son of Barbak Shah, the king, 
son of Mahmid Shah, the king. This mosque was built by the great Khan, the 
exalted Khagin Marjad KhAn, the atabeg of the high person. On the 18th day of 
the blessed month Ramazan 885 (17th November 1480).’ 

In Ravenshaw’s book the mistakes of Mr. Blochmann are reproduced. Blochmann 
has also published three other inscriptions of Yaisuf Sh4h, of the years 882 (Journal 
As. Soc. Beng. vol. XLII, p. 275), 584 (#5. p. 276), and 885 (id. vol. XLIV, p- 293); 


they are from Pandush or the neighbourhood of Dhaka. The information about Yusuf 
Shah which the histories furnish is very meagre. 


5 i.e, cPose. 


® This reiteration occurs also on coins. 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENGAL. 285 


: 8. Over the central door of the small golden mosque in Gaur (Ravenshaw, plate 
XXii) is an inscription. One corner of the stone which contained the date has been 
broken away in three lines (dimensions 9 feet by 1’ 8”)— 


Byheall lily SAM eyed, UY gyal yyw SUI delve sony LO) ted WI JE aa? wcll al pas 

Ae et le 5 tale BU cleo pi IB5 Gita oye IG gy) CI) canes UIT Go hy GN SI, 
7 els} ds~)} Jbo ilec 5 albe Beh 3 tin wt ab) we eee 

Ga) AAS pla lolly tole! gay) cole) ete lola!) die Gable stbbe aye 3 


sprobenells (Vaud Coe lap) oe GUE Goat ane Qo dale) Gall syth dye!) Clas), 
wy Gi) sthe 


Lala” Latta ante ase) ba (cy aitlatan » athe QUA tm!) ULI} abo phen yBbbod 9 
AES A spai yyaie obs Goll) ater othe? ble) he yp dos” Syl) aU che Hsin 
sek] ber pS Cty ray Slee Wed ye Be el Gd yoda] AYU 5 HAM, WAI 


TRANSLATION. 


‘In the name, ete. God Almighty has said: “ He only shall repair,” etc. (Qordn, 
Sar. ix, 18). And the Prophet (may God’s blessing rest upon him!) has said “ He 
who builds,” etc. 

The erection of this Jami’ masjid took place in the time of the king of kings, the 
Sayyid of the Sayyids, the fountain of auspiciousness, the most merciful of the faithful 
men and women, who exalts the words of truth and good deeds, who is assisted by the 
assistance of the Supreme Judge, who strives on the road of the merciful, the viceregent 
of God, with proof and testimony, the defender of Isl4m and the Muslims, ’Al& adduny& 
waddin Abu’l Muzaffar Husain Sh4h, the king, the descendant of H usain—may God 
perpetuate his kingdom and his rule! This Jimi’ masjid was built, from pure and sincere 
motives, and from trust in God, by the Wali Muhammad, son of ’Ali, who has the 
title of majlis al majdlis majlis-é mansiéir—may God render him victorious in this world 
and the next! Its auspicious date is the 14th of God’s blessed month of Rajab—may 
its value increase! of the year... - - .’ 

Husain Shah reigned from 899 till 929 A. H., we possess many inscriptions of his 
reign, I have noted 29. This one has been published in Ravenshaw’s work, p, 38. 

9. From Shah N’imat Allah’s dsiténa near the Jami’ masjid in the Firézpar 
suburb of Gaur. Two lines (dimensions 3 feet by 1’ 4°)— 


Uo gpm yiballyl G2] Lyall he pyball piel) lhl oye od ae!) GU ldo 
Bilan y pce glad dhe 3 Gilbey athe UIQ | tne!) Spal dhe a? ytlabal 


TRANSLATION. 


‘This gate of the fort was built in the time of the exalted and liberal king, *Ala- 
adduny& waddin Abu’l Muzaffar Husain Shah the king, son of Sayyid Ashraf, 


286 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


the descendant of Husain—may God perpetuate his kingdom and his rule! In the 
year 918 (began the 19th March 1512). 

10. At the same place two other inscriptions have been found containing only 
passages from the Qordn. Both are richly ornamented with varied patterns of flowers 
and arabesques. The first measures 6’ 5” by Jin. 3 on four lines, Qordn, Sur. vi, 59; viii, 
19; xxxv, 2; xlvili, 1, 2,3, ete., and in three circles the words Ya ¢ahmdn, y4 Allah, 
yd rahkim are inscribed; the second measures 2’ 4” by 8 in., and contains Qordn, Bor. 
Ixii, 9, 10, 11. . 

11. Over the centre arch of the Qadam-Rastl masjid outside, in three lines 
(dimensions 2’ 8” by 1’ 6”.)— 


Spy 08 3D as pee Cad SU) span!) sdall ade iy (Ute! phe a Tina she yy tad aul JG 
flat pany syle al pe 
Rebel als phan gy) gitlalul alttped aBellsa) lly WMT oth yLabill yp lala pphol} baal 
Kanan y Ahly gim thar 5 ALS y aye lel, aitlle 5 athe AULA ite!) Spi) ter op 


TRANSLATION, 


‘God Almighty has said: “He who brings a good work shall have ten like it” 
(Qordn, Sar. vi, 161). This pure dais on which is a stone with the foot-print of the 
Prophet—may God's blessing be upon him !—was erected by the great, generous king, 
the king, the son of a king, Nasiradduny& waddin Abu’! Muzaffar Nusrat Shah, 
the king, son of. Husain Shah, the king, son of Sayyid Ashraf, the descendant of 
Husain—may God perpetuate his kingdom and his rule and elevate his condition and 
his dignity! In the year 937 (began the 26th August 1530).’ 

Mr. Blochmann has remarked that these inscriptions rectify the Réydz and Stewart, 
who give as the date of the completion of the Qadam-Rasz! mosque A.H. 939, 

12. FromShah Ni’mat AllAh’s dsttdna, not in sttu, in.one line (dimensions 2’ 1” 


Gahan y phair di 22S oye HE pas oF beta tw 1d (il Udall gt led al Jb 


TRANSLATION. 


_ ‘God Almighty has said “ surely the mosques belong to God” (Qordn, Sar. xxii, 
18), The builder of this gateway is Khanjahan. In the beginning of Zu’l Hijja, 970’ 
(22nd July 1563)? 

The inscripticn falls in the reign of Ghiy4s addin Abu’! Muzaffar Jalal Shah 
of Bengal, 14 years before the conquest of Bengal by Akbar. KhAnjaltan was in 282 
governor of Ortsé (Akbarndma, vol. I, p. 161 var.); he was therefore the successor of Lédi 
Khan, amir al umaré of Sulaiman, king of Bengal, who was put to death by his sovereign 
the year before (Badauné, vol. II, p. 174). In the Moghul empire the title of Khanja- 
han was the next to that of Khankh4nan (Ua asir, I, 649). 


3 This was published in Jour. As, Soc, Beng., vol. XLII, p. 295, and repeated in Ravenshaw’s Gaur, p. 88, No. 19. 
There is no reason for Blochmann’s sic, who has read faultily. 


% Pub. shed in Ravenshaw’s Gaur, p.36. The number tis’ is not legible on my rubbing. 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENGAL. 287 


18. From the Jami’ masjid in the Firdzpir suburb, evidently a fragmentary in- 
seription (size 1’ 4” by 2 in.), which contains Qordn, Str. lxii, 5 (it begins in the middle 
of the verse with the words [kamis|ii’ himdri). 


IV.— Manpiptr (vintage). 


14. The ‘following inscription is now fixed in the modern mosque at Mahdipir, 
it is arranged in four squares and measures 4’ 4” by 10 in.— 


AU) HW fSE iy HSI ily Eplaall etsy AI yall» aULy rel aye AW) dalane yams Lod) Sted alll Jb 
write or Ny yl SL) cana 


HE yt pl tale aU che cal JG 5 Iba! ee Heat Bs a aloo! oly tad Ul Jb , 
Bells Uy J Sei a) (dy led WU lugs 


gpl glalal} ali? abot pall Gil file Gleb) gl Glabt ae 3 dame de oy 
ytabud) ali dyes” 


TRANSLATION. 

‘God Almighty has said “ He only shall repair,” ete. (Qordn Sir ix, 18). 

God Almighty has also said “verily, the mosques,” ete. (Qordm, Sir. Ixxii, 18). 
The Prophet—on whom may rest God’s biessing! has said “ He who builds a mosque ”’ 
éic. 

This mosque was built in the time of the king, son of a king, Jalal addunya wad- 
din Abu’l Muzaffar Path Sh4h, the king, son of Mahmid Shah, the king. Its 
builder was the exalted Sayyid, Sayyid Dastir, son of Sayyid Rahat—through good 
deeds he has collected fruits for himself—at the head of the vault of Maulana Barkhur- 
dar, son of the exalted Khan T4j Khan. In the blessed month of Ramazan of the year 
891’ (began the 31st August 1486). | 

The letters being very closely writien it is not easy to decipher the names, This 
is the sixth inscription of Fath Shah, who reigned from 886 till 898; the others fall in 
the years 886 from Bandar near Dhaka, (Jour. ds. Soc. Beng., vol. XLII, p. 282), 887 
from Dhamrai, north of Dhak§, (2b., vol. XLI, p. 109); 888 from Bikrampar, Dhaké Dis- 
trict (¢b., vol. XLII, p. 284), 889 from Sundrgdon, (4b., vol. XLII, p. 285), and 892 from 
Satgauw, (¢b., vol. XX XIX, p. 293). 

15. The following inscription of the same king has lost the date; it isfrom the 
~Challa masjid (size 5’ 7” by 4 in‘), one line 
ayel  glely aitlale y athe MIWA tal} slo oes” ul tlle alin ibolla opal (iol) Me 
dive AU) Lui SAI 334 lero pbacit& Gall EUoIL Zid plead YA psd) Yd em alt, 

eee eee ey! Bhs 3 


8 See facsimile No 2. 


288 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


TRANSLATION. 


‘Jalal addunyé waddin Abu’! Muzaffar Fath Shah, the king, son of Mah- 
mid Shah, the king—may God perpetuate his kingdom and his rule and elevate his condi- 
tion and his rule! ‘Through the exertion of the exalted Khan and the high Khaqdn, who 
trusts upon the beneficient Lord, the exalted Khan Daulat Khan, the wazir of the 
army—may God accept from him (his prayers)!" Inthe year... . : 

16. From the modern mosque, as No. 14. One line (size 1’ 5% by Ti in.), a frag- 
ment— 


+ Ebb yy gle sab paae dys Elbe asl] Whe oy stale sl tne yaad) pi) ) Wisi 
re ree daw po [P] pad) ey pie 9 vee vee Gey? pee te 


TRANSLATION. 


[Ald-Jaddunya4 waddin Abu’l Muzaffar Husain Shah. This mosque was 
built by Malik Yazid Mu’azzam Zafar Khan, son of Malik ... . . head of 
the guardians . . . . . in the month of Rabi’ ai akhir, inthe year... .. .’ 

As the upper part of the left side is broken away, it is not possible to read cor- 
rectly the name of the builder. Nothing is known about the original place of the stone 


which bears the inscription. 


V.—KuHanpKartoLa (SHfrpir). 


17, In the jungal in the midst of the deserted village of Khandkartola, about two 
miles south of the Shérpdr municipality, are the ruins of the Khema masjid. Two 
slabs of equal size (4 7” by 2’ 4” by 3”) bear the inscriptions, the middle portions of the 
stone being carved in a vase pattern in one and in a square in the other. The right slab 
is cracked in two or three places; the cracks seem to be very old. As Mr. H. 
Lee has remarked on the inscription form, these slabs were Hindu gods originally, but the 
gods have been turned round and the inscriptions cut on their backs. The holes were 
prebably made to destroy the sanctity of the gods. About 500 yards distant are the 
remains of the Badishahi masjid ; both are in bad repair and will soon go to ruins. 

The inscription on the left side rans— 

mats 2} yee b 
GAG dw eal ale pe Baku 9, dle 
DO oe cee) Ue Sie orl pon Le 
pps Sasad cae pes whe Jon” ay Jie ye PY Bw bw 
wert usobS lve )) Buy S305 Maw 7 won) O57 9d) ly pdm 
py be wls~)., be sly pyle asy py (LU aS lve ake 9} fF woS 
ds" le} & ha W2f ans Opty Nala es bli) dor? 
BO 6S; ES day) Loe gre le poe yj) lolve oy 


4 Tn the Qoran, gabala occurs in the same manner without the addition of an object. 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENGAL. 289 


Ww)! sols, Aimy dha dulwy alpen brunt} 5 


(iw opel 00S (pro Wlstied] al, 5! 
oleare] ob L jse uly dd 1,2 a) oS 
pps ais by 46S eye plat} rs" alas} 5] des 


a | : > 
2 

2 
é ahi 
. % 

Seas io 2 

: ; J 

5 eis a) 

4 
3 = 
TRANSLATION. 


‘O (Thou) who manifestest spiritual wonders! On Monday, the 24th of month 
Zu’l Hijja A. 989, (19th January 1582), the Nawab Mirzi Murad Khan with sacred 
observances made the beginning of this mosque. The second day—, on Tuesday the 
26th (séc.), the fagir’ Abdassamad comes for the sake of the mosque, Two milk- 
white pigeons came down from the air and saluted him, and after the benediction” they 

‘said ‘we are from the blessed Makka; will you command for us and our friends a place 
of rest in this mosque ? The fagér said,‘ Why not ? But the mosque... . . lest 
oppression . . . should come from the men of the world.’ They said ‘every one who 
purposely—brings it on him it will come. More than that will be known from the bes- 
tower of bounties.’ They saluted and disappeared in the air ... ... After the com- 
pletion of the mosque the petition which the pigeons ... . 

This mosque has been built by the noble exalted Murid Khan, son of Jauhar 
‘Ali Khan Qaqshal.’ 

Murid Qaqshail in 988 became commander of 1,000 and received the title of Khan 
(Akbarndma, vol. III, pp. 304, 305). In 991 he fought against Ma’stim Khan Kabuli 
(p. 417). 

It is well known that the mosque at Makka abounds in flocks of wild pigeons which 
are considered as inviolable and are called kabitar (hamdm)-¢ haram, ‘pigeons of the 
sacred boundary.’ Such were those Makka pigeons which begged an asylum in Murad 
Khan’s mosque. Besides the impossibility of uniting the numbers 24 and 26 to each 
other without altering, a chronological difficulty seems to occur in this inscription. The 
24th Zu’l Hijja A.H. 989 namely was not Monday but a Friday, and the 26th of the 
same month was not Tuesday, but a Sunday. I cannot make out these contradictions. 
In A.H. 988 the 24th Zu’l Hijja fell on a Monday, but the number 989 is quite elear on 
the rubbing. 


15 ‘This form is not so rare as Riickert indicates, Grammatik, Poetik and Rhetori« der Perser, 2nd edition, by 
Pertsch, p. 249, note 1. Confer also‘ bimubdrakbad ishtighdlddsht’,—Ma'dsir al Umar, vol. I, p. 121. 


aes 
& P 


290 EP{GRAPHIA INDICA. 


The inscription on the right side seems to be of no historical value, and as I could 
not decipher the whole from the rubbing, I have omitted it. 
18. From the BadishAhi masjid, 18 lines (size 2’ 3” by 1’ 5”,)-- 


pene es AS Bs > pay uray al Pa 
blo gt ge Re se 
pp} aU) be JS) eles gee Age de 
gtd yey) 9 eh SH Bw ye She be SO ad 
wre ho gk aU} phe IS i wr > lsd abl JU 
ee bse Jy (sie) Cie 3 Sead ey 6) oy Brann xe 
Wes od LU te 
wt Bg Rai lt ge phe g tale AU he Ul 5 
cpteee (llad al ly Wall UF las 


crake SS dU aa A a ah geal os 


TRANSLATION. 


‘In tle name of the merciful and compassionate God! ... .. . 

Sadr Jahan, son of Miy4n Jay4, son of Yazid, son of Datd, says— 

The mosque in the town of Shérptr has been built through the benefit of con- 
fidence in the forgiving God in the time of Shahjahan, the famous conqueror of the 
world, in the year 1042 (began the 19th July 1632). God Almighty has said “ And 
whosoever relies on Gad,” ete. (Qordn, Sir. Ixv, 3, 4). The Prophet (on whom may rest 
God’s blessing ! ) has said “ He who builds a mosque in the world,” ete. A. 1042. 

This mosque has been built in the age of Shihjahdn in the Séa of Bengal by 
Muwazzam Khan in the year 1042, Alldh is a sufficiency for all the faithful’ 

Sadr JahAn’s poetry is not of the best. He was not Chief Sadr (Sadr-¢ Jahdn) as 
Sadr Jahan was who filled that office under Akbar and under JahAngir and whose name 
coine’ded with the title of his dignity. T£ we may be allowed to judge of his poetical 
abilities from the verses of the above inscription—which to be sure are not worse than 
thousands of others—it is to be hoped that he imitated the example of his name-sake 
above mentioned who also composed poems at first, but later gave up petry (ma’dsir al 
Umara, vol. IT], pp. 350, 351). 

Mu’azzam Khan or, as his name properly was, ’Azam Khan Mir Muhammad 
Baqir Iradat Khan became Governor of Bengal after QAsim Khan in 1041. In the 
Riyde (pp. 207, 208) it is related that he could not keep the province in order as it ought 
tobe. The inhabitants of Assam (Ashém), neighbours of Bengal, plundered the frontiers 
unpunished (ef. also Munt. allubab, vol. II, p. 132); they defeated ’Abd al Isl4m with a 
great army of infantry and thousands of horse and made him prisoner with a large booty. 
After that, A.H. 1044,’Azam Khan was dismissed and his post bestowed upon Islam 
Khan, who undertook successful campaigns against the Rajaof Assam. ’Azam Khan was 
appointed Governor of Allahabdd. Shérptr which is mentioned in the last inscription 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENGAL, 291 


is the so-called Saérpdr Mtircha (in Elliot-Dowson: Shérptr Miraja). Vhe din.é 
Akbaré, vol. I, p. 405, identifies it with Mihmansh4hi, stating its revenues at 2,207,715 
dams. Its fort Salimnagar was built by Raja Mdn Singh, Governor of Bengal, in 
the 40th year of Akbar’s reign <Akbarndma, vol. III, p. 697; it was so named in 
honour of Prince Salim, afterwards the emperor Jahangir. Shérpdr was always an 
important place and a base of operations for the imperial troops, 


VI.—BinAr. 

The following six Bih4r inscriptions belong to four different portions of the history 
of that province. If we follow Blochmann’s division (Journal of As. Soc. Beng., vol. 
XLII, p. 245), the two first inscriptions fall into the ‘Initial period,’ or the reigns of the 
Governors of Lak’hnauti appointed by the Dihli sovereigns, from the conquest of 
Bengal by Muhammad Bakhtyaér Khilji, ozz., from A. HU. 600 to 739, when Fakhr addin 
Abul Muzaffar Mubarak Shah, armour-bearer to Bahram Khan, the Dihii Governor of 
Sunargdon, on his master’s death, proclaimed himself ruler and established an independent 
dynasty in Bengal. But Bihar was detached from Bengal and remained to the Dihli 
empire till the foundation of the Jaunptir kingdom, A. H. 796. This is the second 
period of the history of Bibaér. The third under the Shargqi rulers lasted till 881, when 
Jaunpir again became subject to Dihli. To this fourth period belongs one inscription 
(No. 22) while Nos. 21 and 24 are of the second, and No. 23 of the third period. In- 
scription Nos. 19, 20, 21, and 23 have been published by Blochmann. 

19. On a fine slab of basalt leaning against the wail of the Chota Dargah, measur- 
ing 3 feet by 8 in.; it contains two lines— 
sbel pbily Gabel ala yy yas yalaal oo} pill, Wl) mow pel Molt) ays S dsmel) ue iy 

srt bts} Sled bla 
wiy dhe al) OL gale up plo CRs) yaat cabs) dey, ally Carly) dad! Llib al plo} 
FeO SU Bynl y Cpnoce dhe ony Lp? sys] 69 Ha}! 
TRANSLATION. 

‘This mosque was built in the veign of the great Sultan Shams addunyé waddin 
Abu’l Muzaffar Firdz Shah, the king, and during the governorship of the Kbaqan of 
the age, known as Hatim Khan—may God cause their shadows to last !—by the slave, 
who trusts in God and hopes for His mercy, the meanest of crcatures, Bahram, son 
of Haji—may God forgive him and may He pardon his parents !—In the beginaing 
of the month of Rajab of the year 715’ (1st October 1315). 

Iatim Khan was a son of Firéz Shah, 2s we see from the inscription published by 
Blochmann (w sup.). He must have been governor of Bihar during the years 709--715, 

20. Over the gateway of the Swkéinat or residency of the Imperial governor in 
Bihar, was a beautiful inscription’ (now in the Bayley Sarai) of three lines, measuring 4 


feet by 1” 10’—, 
ras posi ALD ns 
Gypblw Eada low) hula dale Gated ¢lslyo 


16 See facsimile No. 3. 
Phere Vi 


292, EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


cp dost Salselis stanly EhLe Cyly I) Sad) GLI, Id ybralle sles uted Gla 
blariny 0h y ul [orm yy Jae, Slrollerl) oye aU) 3 dollaluy aida Cole abil sbasitel 


TRANSLATION, 

‘In the name of the merciful and compassionate God. 

This high and world-adorning gate, and this lofty, heaven-touching portico were 
renewed in the reign of the Khalifa, the asylum of the world, whose court is the heaven, 
the lord of the kings of the universe, the ruler of mankind, who gives security and safety 
to the people of the Faith, the heir of the kingdom of Salomon, Abu’] Mujahid Muham- 
mad, son of Tughluq Sh&h, the king—May his kingdom and rule be perpetuated! In 
the beginning of the blessed month of Ramazin, 782’ (27th May, 1332). 

Muhammad Shah’s inscriptions, which have been published up till now, are of the 
years 726 (Proc. of the As. Soc. Beng. for 1873, p. 199), 7382 (Proceedings for 1874, 
p. 72), and 737 (Journal of the As. Soc. Beng., vol. XLII, p. 299),—the last also being 
from Bihar. 

21. On the Dargah of Ibrahim Abti Bakr Malik Bayyt’s shrine, which lies on 
a hill to the north-west of the town, dimensions 5’ 1” by 1’ 2” two lines— 


Joy ents ot lal 3 er tan yy ybya  iyd 
Joho pel pe ope BS ttlyy py Ele wryw Eh 
Ay pO ric J) BO yphm ype ey dj AG b= I(55 ale 


dy) wy! Ghee Sheed ee sy p Uys Saas IS JOS 


‘TRANSLATION. 
Metre: Hazaj— 


‘In the time of the reign of the world-conquering Shah (may the power of the new- 
year’s day be in Bihar!), the king of the world, Firéz, the king who was victorious 
over the kings of the universe. The king of virtue Malik Bayyti Ibrahim, who in 
the faith was as zealous as Abraham, in the month of Zi’l Hijja, on a Sunday, of the 
time when thirteen sun-burnt (days were passed) (?), in the year 753 A. H. (20th 
January 1358), travelled on that day to Paradise. O Lord, in Thy kindness, make the 
account of the last day light for him !’ 

Respecting Malik Bayya, who is, par excellence, the saint of Bihar, see Journal 
As, Soc. Beng., vol. XLII, p. 300. 

22. From the Bayley Sarai at Bihar. Two lines (size 1’ 5” by 8 in.)— 


[7] Js*y0 Gla} ale sed Bdyat UNG Blomus yaw dha 5 Cro a) Gray ale proj evs 
9 UPS atts Gist : 
es [mW lo Ww es ls baa Cir uw yd O86) OAS ow ce ts] sls Cae) eb] CARs plas wie 


‘ This archaic spelling, instead of kik, occurs several times in the inscriptions, 


“qpuihire fo WIG-T 27098 "FsaLdUbe ‘skahung aa 


‘c€L ‘HW JO NOILdIYOSN!] YVHIG “f -ON 
‘Ty 70a wrrpuy viygvssi GT 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENGAL. 293 


TRANSLATION. 


‘On the date of the 11th of month Rajab—may its honour increase!—of the year 
960 (the 28rd January 1553) Naran Shahid, son of Hajilshaq .. 

On thismplaceiia0' 7. 

23. From a mosque which stood opposite to the Choté Takya on the other bank of 
the Adyanadi, in Bihar. The mosque has disappeared; only a large square stone 
platform is left, where the slab was found. The inscription is in two parts, each measur: 
ing 3’ 5” by 1’ 2” and bearing two lines— 


tas) 9 Ls 6) abl) Us a Je 5 pe pla) aahe JB ene!) apna! AU) gan 


Ws sy pupe dS dyed deem deer” 
qu olin Glatt 4} ys 
Lays) Go lls GAL wld 
Le) 4} 0 Jy yoy ry ede y Eh 
Cee ane hae et 910 ee 
We jyore Le Gin) urrebe reas 


NSS) di 


WA uly ae Grele) ase wr 


oer duib 5) oll Gay 
Sb} Jole ali erly! pl oes ali 
7 nd 8) pit Shane yy) de? ps) il 
at aS Soa} dtu Gl glee 98 9 9p 
we wytJ) the nd sy silos 30,5 
Hej SE IS olan Ga 
Jew Ready Sem 3 dann dy Cray the fe 


TRANSLATION. 

Metre: Ramal— 
‘In the name, e/e. 
By divine grace and for the sake of Mustafa (Muhammad), the Jum’a mosque was 
built in the reign of the faith-nourishing king Shah Mahmiad, son of Ibrahim, the 
just king who takes realms from kings, (and) gives beggars crowns. The builder of 
this mosque is the throne of law, who is pure in nature, the beloved of the Prophet 
and of Murtaz& (’.A/é), the chief and the lord of the world, the perfect Sayyid, with 
whom realm and faith, religion and empire, takerefuge. The muqgtz’, the David” in this 
district, Nasir, son of Baha, ordered this building (to be erected), the best in the 
Eastern kingdom (Jaunpér). This building in Bihar is stronger than the portico of 
Kisra; it is a Ka’ba in grandeur, and in loftiness the edifice of sublimity. It was in 
the beginning of Rajab, of the year 847" (2th October 1445), when, with the 

assistance of God, the (first) igdma took place in this mosque.’ 

The metrical Bibar inscriptions are all remarkabie for their very bad poetry. This 
is the fourth known inscription of Mahmid Shah of Jaunpur, the others being dated 
in the years A. H. 847 (from Bihar), 850 (above No. 1), and 859 (also from Bibar, 


published by Blochmann).” 


18 T have not succeeded in making out the meaning of the second line. 

19 In this inscription the letters re and @4/ often cannot be separated. Blochmann has read d dwar. 

20 The fori hésad, instead of hashtsad, is not at all, seldom in Indian inscriptions. 

2 The Mahmdd Shah inscription on a stone in the Hindu temple at Bediban is very dubious, see General Sir A. Cun- 


ningham’s Archeological Survey Reports, vol. XVI, Pp. 26, Plate 1V. 


He upon whom be peace (the Prophet) says ‘He who builds 
etc 


294 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 
24, Also from the Bayley Sarii. Two lines (size 3 feet by 1’ 3”); the right side 
is partly broken— 


rel ers F stun Bo) la Ly las Pete 


8,5 CEM ae Ree TE erent Ben atl Cin ies at Peat er) [?] sel i<* sy Rw Jal jis 
het fe dee anne oe = slo 3) jh wkd yee Ly dade Sys” 110 5} 30 
TRANSLATION. 


Metre: Ramal— 

©, 60 + « « w © © In the time of the Khanzada. Bier auc pere ee anis 

Who is the glory of the men of the world and an esteemed satirist (7) . . . . 

The account of the Hijra-date is 767 (de7an the 18th September 1365) ; factiwants 
from the month of Muharram reckon . . ....” 


VII.—Moweér. 


Munér, MAner or Munair, is a very old place on the right bank of the Son af its 
confluence with the Ganges, Elliot-Dowson erroneously confounds it sometimes with 
Mungir. Firishta ascribes its foundation to the mythical times of Firdéz Rai, son of Késhtt 
Raj, a contemporary of the hero Rustam (lithogr. ed., vol. I, p. 18, mugaddima). 
General Cunningham, in his Archeolugical Survey Reports, vol. VIII, pp. 22, 23, offers 
a thedry of his own about the establishment of Munér immediately after the Muham- 
madah conquest. He supposes that the Son through some unknown cause at that time 
had abandoned its original bed and taken its present course, thus forming new waste 
lands which had no name before, not having been in existence. ‘he town was almost 
half a krdh distant from the river. Babar in his Memoirs (p. 478) describes its situation 
in the following words: ‘Down the stream from the place where I was I saw a large 
number of trees; they said to me that it was Munév.’ 

In the AZn (vol. I, p. 419) Munér is registered with 89,039 bighas, 15. biswas, 
7,049,179 ddms, (say) 325,880 déms. Babar and Sikandar Shah Lédi are related to have 
made pilgrimages to the shrine of Shaikh Yahy4, father of Shaikh Sharaf addin 
(Taérikh-t Ddaidi in Elliot-Dowson’s History, vol. IV, p. 462, Babar’s Memoirs, p. 478), 
from whom the pargana occasionally is named Munér-t Shaikh Yahyd. Shaikh Sharat 
addin was also a renowned saint; in his honour his disciple Ibrahim Qiwam Fartiqi 
has called his dictionary Sharafndma (Journal of As, Soc. Beng., vol. XXXVII, ps 7). 
Munér now belongs to the district of Patna, subdivision Danaptr.” 

25. Two lines (dimensions 1’ 9” by 8 in.)— 


Woy ible — oyos”? bu eh ks Hye 0 WU) dos? 
Spe les) Gel ile J3! isl yw os ott 
yew SI SU oS ele a gl tbs olen Go 
3) slp proly lo enmaey 05) Oy) etd 5 add ops) 
‘” The first and the third hemistich have been almost ruined; besides the letters of the inscription are very rude, so 


that I could decipher it only fragmentarily. 


* No information is given about the places where the following three Munér inscriptions have been found, 


{UHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM BENGAL. 295 


TRANSLATION. 
Metre: Hazaj--: 

‘ By God’s grace (it was) in the time of the most noble king Mahmad, the sincere 
nonarch, when this fine mosque, whose first builder was Jalil al Haqq, one of the 
onfidential chiefs, was rebuilt and newly adorned by Hammad Khatir........ 

It was in 798 A. H. (began the 16th October 1395). Preserve its foundation in 
security, O God.’ 

This and the Mahméad Shah inscription of A. H. 799 (Journ. of As. Soc. Beng. 
vol. XLIT, p. 304), are valuable, because they show that Nusrat Khan, the opposing 
king, who was advanced as a claimant to the throne by Sa’Adat Khan A.H. 797, was not 
acknowledged in Bihar. It is not easy to form a correct picture of the complicated 
conditions then existing inthe empire. Khwaja-i Jahan (Malik ashsharq Khwéja-i 
Sardé), the founder of the Jaunpur kingdom, had got into his possession the provinces of 
Qanauj, Karah, Audh, Sandéla, Dalamau, Bahraich, Bihar,and Jaunpdir; the emperor 
Mahmiad was confined for some years only to old Dihli, the fortress of Siri, and the 
JAahanpandh, while the districts of the Doab, of Sambhal, Panipat, Jhajhar and Rohtak 
were occupied by Nusrat Khan, viz., Sultan Nastraddin, who had his residence at Firéz- 
Abad. Other provinces perpetually changed their masters, ambitious amérs and maliks, 
who combatted each other angrily. The harvest was fully ripe for the bloody reaper 
Timar. 

26. Three lines (size 5’ 9” by V 4’”)— 

WU) Syary hase” QU) I AY pede! pol) LU) and 
isl pSphe (lle URES jd SB, balyal wie 5 lala 13 phe bye BEY Indy il adil Gawy 
ents Laylacots 
Gt. abet (ol Ye oll Nan Ge a 
bol Ge as Ge SF pall Guyh te EE Jb 


[ pdl pp ] ols 8) O59) sis pdiive boy) > ye 


pile dined pl pe pod plane Od jl pele’) Sle 
[iele ol w]lss eyo GAS y foyhS lew 


TRANSLATION. 

‘There is no God, efe. But those who fear their Lord, ete. (Qordn, Str. xxxix, 
73). 

Metre: Ramal— 

I was thinking to make out the chronogram of this gate, my heart was quiet by His 
(Gud’s) power. My mind said by way of command “say, who entered it was safe.” 
Metre: Khafif— | 

When-the giaté*of the holy sepulchre of the king raised its face towards completion, 
I asked the mind the year of its finishing. For this auspicious place the mind opened 
the lip of blessing, and said, ‘‘ may the door of power remain open for ever.” 


296 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


~ Both ¢drikhs give the year 1022 (began the 21st February 1613). 
27. Three lines (10' 9” by 1’ 8”.)— 


Sly y dos Sl gle dest le pho mpl aU) Syn dos? SUI I aD par) yosyll AUT jeant 
gy) td UI JU aya) 5 wre Sle gy) pth» I Edy dV aseny GU) I aI yl yl he 


ww HE0 Gye y wsdl! ple lis DUI asd Gptolle) sang Bytve BG eA WU ed) ee J) 


cella) ye de alll JE ao ye y Mane ag!) ellen ope Gag po oll che ay tres 
wyS Laid) geled old ile Gass a tela le He onl 2 


woS Uy SU) ey patel) pa Gar od 4} sty Je oA j] Game Cod (pole Jo 


TRANSLATION. 


‘Tn the name, efe. There is no God, efc. O God, have mercy on Muhammad and 
on the descendants of Muhammad. I testify that there is no God, but God who is 
alone and has no partner. I testify also that Muhammad is His slave and His Apostle. 
God Almighty has said, “ Verily, the first house, etc.” (Qordn, Sar. iii, 90-91). 

(Metre: Hazaj)— 

When this high, Ka’ba-like, world-adorning edifice, througn the benevolence of the 
powerful Creator, was completely erected, the heart of ’Asi was consulting the mind 
for the year of its erection. The mind said, ‘‘ just as Abraham has built the house 
of God.’” 

According to the abjad reckoning the ¢drikh gives 1028 A.H. (began the 19th, 
December 1618). 

The édrikh betrays the name of the builder, viz. Ibrahim Khdn Fath Jang, son 
of Ghiyaés Beg of Tahran. This combination relies upon the very similar ¢érékh in 
the ‘ Haft Qulzum’ (Rickert-Pertsch, p. 228) : band-yi Ka’ba-ya sdné nihdd Ibrahim, ‘ the 
erection of the second Ka’ba has been made by Ibrahim,’ where Ibrahim Khan Fath 
Jang is expressly named as builder. He became governor of Bihdr A.TH. 1024, and 
afterwards of Bengal A.H. 1028, and stayed there till 1032, when he was killed in the 
battle with Prince Shahjahan he ¢érikh of the Haft Quilzum gives the date 1040, 
but as Ibrahim Khan had already died in 1082, this date cannot be correct. Perhaps 
the izdfat after band should not be reckoned, so that the year would be 1030. 


BENARES COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION OF KARNADEVA. 297 


XXIII. --BENARES COPPER-PLATE INSCKIPTION OF KARNADEVA. 
Toe [Cuepr] year 793. 


By Proresson F. Krz~norn, Pa.D., 0.1.E.; Gorrincen. 


This inscription was first brought to public notice, about eighty-five years. ago, - by 
Captain Wilford, who, in the Aséatie Researches, vol. 1X, page 108, gave the following 
account of it :— 


“A few years ago (in 1801) this grant was found, at the bottom of an old well 
filled with rubbish, in the old fort of Benares. It is engraven upon two brass plates, 
Joined by a ring, to which is affixed the Imperial seal. It is of the same size nearly, and 
in the same shape, with that found at Mongir. ‘The writing is also the same, or at least 
without any material deviation. The Imperial seal is about 3 inches broad: on it, in 
bas-relievo, is Parvati with four arms, sitting, with her legs crossed : two elephants are 
represented, one on each side of her, with their trunks uplifted. Below is the bull, 
Nandi, in a reclining posture, and before him is a basket. Between Parvati, and the 
bull, is written Sri- Karnna-deva.! The grant is dated the second year of his new Era, 
and also of his reigu, answering to the Christian year 192 . : : onobire 
ancestors of Sri- Karnna-deva, mentioned in the grant, were, first, his father Gangeya- 
deva, with the title of Vijaya-kantaka : he died in a loathsome dungeon. He was the 
son of Kokalla-deva, whose father was Lakshmana-raja-deva.” 

The plates, thus described by Captain Wilford, were lost for a long time; but they 
were rediscovered about 1862, when, through the kindness of Mr. Griffith, then Principal 
of the Benares College, Sir A. Cunningham received an impression of the inscription, to- 
gether with a transcript which had been prepared by one of the students of the College.’ 
Both were made over to Dr. F. E. Hall, who now at my request has placed them at my 
disposal,* and has thus enabled me to publish the text of this inscription the original of 
which has again been lost sight of. Fortunately the impression, which has thus come 
into my hands, has been prepared with great care, so that the loss of the original plates 
will be less felt than would have been the case otherwise. 

‘The inscription is on two plates which appear to measure about 1’ 4” broad by 114” 
high each, and each of which is inscribed on one side only. Each plate contains a round 
hole, about &” in diameter, for a ring to which was affixed the seal, described by Wilford. 
The plates probably are thick and substantial, for, to judge from the impression, the 
letters must have been deeply engraved. The first plate contains twenty-eight lines of 
very close writing, the second only twenty lines. The writing is well preserved almost 
throughout, so that, with the exception of about half a dozen aksharas, the actual read- 
ing of the text is hardly at all doubtful. The size of the letters is between 5,” and 2”. 
he characters are Nagari of the period to which the inscription belongs, the 11th 
century A.D. The language is Samskrit, excepting a verse in line 13, which is in 

1] give the names which occur in this extract as we should spell them now. 

2 See Sir A. Cunningham’s Archeological Survey of India, vol. IX, page 82. In justice to myself I must say here 


that the transcript, peationed above, has not been of any use to me. 
3] have to thank my friend Professor Lauman ter having personally communicated to Dr. Hall my request, whieb 


has been granted most readily, 
9° 
~Q 


298 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Maharashtri Prakrit. Excepting the introductory om om namah Sivdya and the words 
kim=vdparena in line 13, lines 1-32, which mainly contain the genealogy of the grantor, 
are in verse,; the rest of the inscription, being the formal part of the grant, is in prose, 
but includes six of the usual benedictive and imprecatory verses, in lines 44-48.—As 
regards orthography, 6 is throughout denoted by the sign for v; the dental sibilant is 
used instead of the palatal everywhere, except in the word éré which ordinarily is spelt 
correctly ; 48h is employed instead of khy in sauksha, line 7, and kshdiam, line 27, and ky 
instead of ksh in kaukyeyako, line 26; 7 and y are confounded, e.g., m parjjanaisict (tor 
paryyauaishit), line 10, dur jjasah (for duryyagah), line 27, and anuya (for anuja), in 
lines 16 and:225 and the dental nasal is employed instead of the lingual in dnrinya, line 8, 
and kdrunya, line 20, and instead of anusedra in vansa, in lines 6 and 45. In addition 
to these, the inscription contains many other errors, due to the carelessness of the writer 
or engraver. Thus, the signs of anuscéra and visarga and whole aksharas (or even 
groups of aksharas) are often omitted, short vowels are used instead of long ones, and 
medial ¢ and o are employed instead of a# and au. Such and other mistakes, too numer- 
ous to enumerate here, occur especially frequently in the bottom lines of the first plate . 
and they have sometimes rendered it impossible for me to restore the correct wording of 
the original text. Nevertheless, there is no doubt whatever as to what historical facts 
are intended to be recorded in the poetical part of the inscription; and I am particularly 
glad to be able to state that the date of this document is so clearly written and engraved 
as to remove any doubts which may have been entertained in this regard. 
The inscription is one of the Paramabhattéraka Mahdrdjadhirdja and Paramesvara, 
‘the devout worshipper of Mahesvara (Siva), the lord over Trikalinga, the illustrious 
Karnadeva, who meditated on the feet of the Paramabhattaraka Mahdrajddhiraja and 
Paramesvara, the illustrious Vamadeva (lines 33-34). The epithets which are here 
officially applied to Karnadeva are the same which are used with reference to Narasim- 
hadeva in the Lal-Pahad rock inscription * of the Chedi year 209, to his younger brother 
Jayasithhadeva in the Rewah copper-plate grant ® of the Mahdrduoka Kirtivarman of 
the Chedi year 926, and to Jayasirihadeva’s son Vijayasitnhadeva in the Kumbhi copper- 
plate grant ° of the Chedi year 9382, and which apparently were applied also to Karna- 
deva’s immediate successor Yasahkarnadeva in the Jabalpur copper-plate grant ’ [of the 
Chedi year 874]. As regards the meaning of these epithets, I have already had occasion 
to state ® that I agree with Sir A. Cunningham in considering the term Trikalinga to 
denote, or to be an older name of, the province of Telingana; but that Iam unable to 
explain the exact significance of the phrase ‘who meditated on the feet of the Parama- 
bhattéraka Mahdradjddhirdja and Paramesvara, the illustrious Vamadeva,’ which we 
thus find employed with reference to five different kings. In accordance with ordinary 
usage, that phrase ought to mean that Vamadeva was one of the ancestors of the princes 
who are said to have meditated on his feet; but none of the inscriptions of the Chedi 
See Indian Antiquary, vol. XVIII, page 212. The inscriptions of Narasimhadeva, Jayasimhadeva and Vijayasimha- 
deva add nijabhujopdrjit-dsvapati-gajapati-narapati-rdjatrayddhipati, after Trikalingddhipatr. 
5 See 7b., vol. XVII, page 226, 
§ See Journal As. Soc. Bengal, vol. XXXI, page 119. 
7 See above, page 5; 7b., page 7, line 16, the translation should have been: ‘Andthis . . . .« who [meditates 


on] the feet of the Paramabhattéraka, Mahdrdjddhirdja, and Paramesvara, the illustrious Vamadeva 
®See Indian Antiquary, vol. XVII, page 226. 


BENARES COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION OF KARNADEVA. 299 


rulers of Tripuri or Ratnapur mention a prince Vamadeva in the genealogical lists which 
they contain. . 

To proceed first with the prose part of the inscription, the king Karnadeva from 
his camp of victory,’ located at a place the name of which looks like Svasiga in the 
rubbing, (in lines 34-41) informs his queen, his son” (or sons), his chief officials 
(among whom may be specially pointed out the mahdpramétéra") and others, that, 
having bathed in the river Vent, worshipped the god Trilochana (Siva), and performed 
the proper rites at the annual funeral ceremony in honour of his father GAngeyadeva, 
on Saturday, the second lunar day of the dark half of Phalguna,’he has granted the 
village of Susi (or Susi) to the learned Visvardipa,—a Sop of Narayana, grandson 
of Vamana, and great-grandson of Maha,—a student of the Vajasaneya 4ékhd, who be- 
longed to the Kausika gotra, and whose three pravaras were Audala, Devarata and 
Vaisvamitra, and who or whose ancestors had come from the village of Vesdla. 
Karnadeva further (in lines 41-48) directs the inhabitants of Sust to make over to 
the donee all taxes and whatever else may be due to him by this..donation; and 
he also, in six of the customary benedictive and imprecatory verses (in lines 44-48), ap- 
peals to future rulers to keep the grant intact, and warns them not to resume it. The 
date of the deed with which the inscription ends is Monday, the 9th of the dark 
half of Phdélguna of the year 798. 

As regards the localities mentioned in the preceding paragraph, the only thing 
certain is, that the river Veni, near which Karnadeva was encamped when making the 
grant, and on the banks of which Svas4ga (?) should be looked “for, is the Wen-Ganga 
of the Central Provinces, which rises about 40 miles south of Jabalpur and flows ina 
southern direction, about 30 miles east of N&gpur.* The villages of Susi and VesAla™ 
IT am unable to identify. : 

The date,—Monday, the 9th of the dark half of Phalguna of the year 7938— 
must of course be referred to the Chedi or Kalachuri era, and I feel confident that its 
European equivalent is Monday, the 18th January” A.D..1042, as I have given it 
in Indian Antiquary, vol. XVII, p. 216, and ante, vol. I, p. 33. Since I wrote my 
paper on the epoch of the Chedi era four years ago, I have ascertained from the best 
materials the exact reading of eleven out of the twelve Chedi dates which contain 
sufficient data for verification; ‘and there can be no doubt that all these dates, without 
exception, work out satisfactorily, as dates in current years with the 26th August 
(= Afgvina-udi 1) A.D. 249, or as dates in expired years with the 5th September 
(also = Aésvina-Sudi 1) A.D. 248 as the initial day of the era, and with the pérnimdnta 

_9 The Samskrit for ‘camp of victory’ is vijaya-hataka, for which Captain Wilford put vijaya-kantaka, and which he 
took to be a title of the king GAageyadeva. Wilford’s vijaya-kantaka has found its way even into the St. Petersburg 
apie ea the Kumbhi copper-plate, where, instead of mahddevtm mahdrdjaputram, we have mahdrdjnisri(?)-makd- 
Lumédrasri-Ajayasimhadeva. ; : 

1 See ante, vol. I, page 73, and Indian Antigquary, vol. XXI, page 264. 


12 The original also gives the name of the district in which this village was situated, but I am not able to make ont its 
proper reading, ; ‘ 

13 See Plate iin Sir A. Cunningham's Archaeol. Survey of India, vol. XVII. 

4 J hardly think that Vesdla could be the ancient Vaisali, the position of which is shown by Sir A. Cunningham in his 
Ancient Geography of India, vol. I, page 443, and Plate xi. 

15 On this day the 9th ¢ithi of the dark half of the pirnimdnta PhAlguna ended 17h. 9m. after mean sunrise. 

6 Writing at Nagpur (which once must have belonged to the Chedi kings), on the 30th October 1798, Colebrooke, 
whose words may certainly be relied upon, says: ‘Zhe new year begins here with the light fortnight of Asvina ; but, Opening 
in the midst of Durga’s festival, New Year's Day is only celebrated on the 10th lunar day.’ See Life of H. T. Colebrooke, 
page 163. 

2Q2 


300 EPIGRAPIIIA INDICA. 


scheme of the lunar months. The complete agreement of all the twelve dates proves 
that the date given in the last line of this inscription,—samvat 793 Phdlguna-vadi 9 Some, 
—is correct; but it also shows that the statement in line 40, according to which 
Karnadeva performed the funeral rites in honour of his father on Saturday, the second 
lunar day of the dark half of Phalguna, is incorrect. For the second ¢ithi of the same 
lunar fortnight in which the inscription is dated commenced on Sunday, the i0th 
January A.D. 1042, 4 4. 15 m. after mean sunrise, and ended 5 h. 49 m, after mean 
sunrise of Monday, the 11th January, and cannot therefore in any way be connected © 
with a Saturday.” I suspect that the day on which the funeral ceremonies were really 
‘performed was Saturday, the 12th December A.D. 1041, when the second ¢ithi of the 
dark half of the pdrnimdnta Magha ended about 11 hours after mean sunrise, and that 
the writer of the grant, who cannot be absolved of carelessness in other respects, 
wrongly put down in line 40 the month in which he was writing the grant. However 
this may be, there can be no doubt that Monday, the 18th January A.D. 1042, is really 
the date of this inscription, and that this is as trustworthy a date for the reign of the 
king Karnadeva as we could wish to have. 

Having thus disposed of the formal part of the grant, I have still to give an account 
of the thirty-one verses with which the inscription opens. As is the case with most 
copper-plate inscriptions, these introductory verses contain little more than the genealogy 
of the grantor, but they furnish some names which have not become known yet from 
other inscriptions of the same dynasty. 

After the words ‘om om, adoration to Siva,’ the inscription opens with a verse in 
honour of the god Siva, who is identified here with the supreme Brahma.” It then 
records, in verses 2-4, the origin of the powerful prince Kartavirya, the vanquisher 
of the demon Ravana; and further relates, in verses 5 and 6, that, sprung from Karta- 
virya’s family, there were the famous Haihaya princes, the clan of whom was rendered 
illustrious by the valorous and pious prince Kokkalla.” 

According to verse 7, the hand of this prince Kokkalla granted freedom from fear’ 
to Bhoja, Vallabharaja, the illustrious Harsha who is described as the sovereign of 
Chitrakita, and to the king Samkaragana. It does not seem difficult to identify 
these four contemporaries of Kokkalla. From verse 17 of the Bilhari inscription we - 
know that Kokkalla, having conquered the whole earth, ‘set up two unprecedented 
columns of his fame,’—in the south the well-known Krishnaraja, and in the north 
Bhojadeva; and, in commenting on that passage,” I have already adopted Sir A. 
Cunningham’s suggestion that the former of these sovereigns can only have been the 
Rashtrakdta Krishna II., who married a daughter of Kokkalla, the king of Chedi, and 
who reigned from about A.D. 875 to about A.D. 911, and the latter Bhojadeva of 
Kanauj, for whom we have the dates A.D. 862, 876, and 882. Now Krishna IT. also 
bore the name Krishna-vallabha,” and it is therefore clear that the Bhoja and 

thy caus ter goer rhe occur va eae N ied Spee em 

'* Th vers cemen é Rewah copper-plate grant of the Mahérdénaka Sal - 
ie : ae eae vol. XVII, page 228. Compare also the first verse of the Tewar inscription of rasan eas 

19 See verse 9 of the Bilhari inscription, ante, vol. I, page 263. 


20 This name is spelt both Kokkalla and Kokalla. 
21 See ante, vol. I, page 253. 
22. See Fleet, Dynasties of the Kanarese Districts, page 36. Since the above was written, Prof. Bhandarkar hag 
published an inscription in which Krishnaraja’s father Amoghavarsha is named Sri-vallabha; and it is just possible that he 
may be the Vallabharaja of this copper-p'ate inscription. 


BENARES COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION OF KARNADEVA. 301 


Vallabharaja of the present inscription are the Bhojadeva and Krishnar&dja of the 
Bilhari inscription. The proper identification of the illustrious Harsha is suggested both 
by the circum$tance that he is called the sovereign of Chitraktita, and by the fact,- 
to be mentioned below, that Kokkalla’s wife was a Chandella princess; for, as Chitra- 
ktita is a well-known locality of Bandelkhand* which was ruled over by the Chandellas, 
Harsha must be the Chandella Harshadeva, the successor of Rahila and predecessor 
of Yasovarman. It is true, we have no absolutely certain date for the reign of Harsha- 
deva, but, since he apparently had dealings with Kshitipéladeva of Kanauj* for whom 
we have the date A.D. 917, and as his grandson Dhangadeva” was on the throne in 
A.D. 954, he undoubtedly must have ruled about A.D. 900, and must certainly have 
been a contemporary of Krishna-vallabha. Lastly, the Sarnkaragana of our inscrip- 
tion I believe to be Kokkalla’s own son (also called Ranavigraha), whose daughter 
Lakshmi was married * by Krishna-vallabha’s son Jagattunga. One of the. Ratnapur 
inscriptions tells us” that the Chedi ruler Kokkalla had eighteen sons, of whom the 
first-born was ruler of ‘Tripurf, while the others became lords of mandalas; and it does 
not seem at all improbable that Kokkalla already during his life-time may have assigned 
part of his dominions to Sarkaragana, one of his younger sons, to be governed by him 
independently.—-With all these coincidences, I can only endorse the conclusion, arrived 
at by Sir A. Cunningham,” that the reign of Kokkalla, who, as we shall.see: below, was 
Kokkalla I., ‘may be fixed with certainty to the period between 860 and 900 A.D.’ 

Our inscription further tells us that Kokkalla married a lady, named Natta or 
Nattadevi, who was born in the Chandella family (verse 8), and who bore to him a 
son, named Prasiddhadhavala (verse 10); and that this prince had two sons, who 
reigned one after another, Balaharsha (verse 13), and his younger brother -Yuvaraja- 
deva (verse 15), 

According to the Bilhari inscription,” Kokkalla was succeeded by his son Mug- 
dhatunga, and his son again was Keytiravarsha-Yuvarajadeva, who married Nohala, 
a daughter of the Chaulukya Avanivarman. 7 

Comparing these two accounts with each other, it is clear that Prasiddhadhavala 
and Mugdhatunga are names of one and the same prince, and that the Yuvarajadeva 
of the copper-plate is the Keydravarsha-¥Yuvarajadeva of the Bilhari inscription, 
‘which omits to mention his elder brother Balaharsha. In the copper-plate grant all 
these princes are eulogized in general terms which mean very little. In the Bilhari inscrip- 
tion the only thing definite recorded of them is, that Mugdhatunga (Prasiddhadhavala) 
conquered the lines of country by the shore of the eastern sea and took Pali from the 
lord of Kosala. Of Keytiravarsha-Yuvarajadeva it is intimated in the same inscription 
that he was engaged in many successful wars with different nations; but, on the other 
hand, an inscription of the Chandella Yasovarman, who probably was a contemporary 
of Yuvarajadeva, informs us® that that Chandella king defeated the Chedi king, and 
‘brought distress on the shameful Chedis.’ 


3 See Sir A. Cunningham's Archeot. Survey of India, 37 See ante, vol. I, page 33. 
ol. XXI page 10. % Archaeol. Survey of India, vol. 1X, page 103, 
vol. , page 10. 
24 See ante, vol. J, page 171. 29 See ante, vol. [, pages 264—266. 
25 See ab pom 124. 30 See ante, vol. I, page 132. 


36 See Fleet, Dynasties, page 36. 


302 _. EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


The next three princes mentioned in the copper-plate, again without any remark of 
the slightest value, are Yuvardjadeva’s son Lakshmanarajadeva (verse 17), and his two 
sons Samkaraganadeva (verse 19) and his younger brother Yuvarajadeva II. (verse 
21), who are all described as ruling sovereigns. The Karitalai inscription * has preserved 
the name of Lakshmanaraja’s wife, Rahad4; and the Bilhari inscription records » that 
Lakshmanaraja defeated the lord of Kosala, and undertook, difficult to be obstructed in 
his progress, an expedition to ‘the very pleasant western region,’ in the course of which 
he bathed in the sea and worshipped the god Somesvara in Gujarat. Almost the same 
story is told of Yuvardjadeva II. in the Karanbel inscription of Jayasimhadeva.” As 
regards the times of these kings, it may be mentioned that Lakshmanaraja’s daughter 
Bonthidevi was the mother of Tailapa** who restored the Western Chalukya dynasty 
and ascended the throne in A.D. 973-74, and that, according to the Udaypur pragasti,* 
Yuvaraja was defeated and his capital Tripuri conquered by Vakpati-Muija of Malava, 
for whom we have the dates A.D. 974, 979, and 993.” 

According to the copper-plate grant, Yuvarajadeva II. was succeeded by his son 
Kokkalladeva II. (verse 23), he by his son GAngeyadeva (verse 25), and he again by 
his son Karna (verse 28) who issued the grant ; and this agrees with the information fur- 
nished by other Chedi inscriptions. Of Kokkalladeva II. we know nothing beyond 
his name. Gangeyadeva, according to the Jabalpur copper-plate of Yasahkarnadeva,” 
also bore the name Vikramaditya; and the same inscription records that, ‘fond of 
residing at the foot of the holy fig-tree of Prayaga, he found salvation there together 
with his hundred wives.’* Other Chedi inscriptions also eulogize both his valour and 
piety, and even in a Chandella inscription” he is styled the conqueror of the universe. 
Gangeya is mentioned as the ruler of Dahala (or Chedi) by Alberdini,® in A.D. 1030. 
We also possess a short inscription of his reign which, according to Sir A. Cunningham,” 
is dated in the (Chedi) year 789 = A.D. 1037-38 ; and we know him to have heen a con- 
temporary of the Chandella Vijayap4la,® who had ceased to rule * before A.D, 1051. In 
all probability Gangeyadeva’s reign ended about A.D. 1040, not more thana year or two 
before the date of Karna’s copper-plate. 

Of Karnadeva, ‘the lord of the Kalachuris, the Jabalpur copper-plate,* besides 
eulogizing his valour, records that he founded the town of Karnavati, and that at Kasi 
or Benares he built a splendid temple, called Karna’s Meru. The Bhera-Ghat inscription 
of Alhanadevi “ represents him as having subdued or held in check the ‘Pandyas, Mura- 
las, Kungas, Vangas, Kalingas, Kiras and Hinas ; and similarly the Karanbel inscription 
of Jayasirnhadeva* makes him be waited upon by the Choda, Kunga, Hina, Gauda 
Gurjara and Kira princes, As we possess an inscription of his son which is ate 


2 See above. p. 175. * See ante, vol. I, page 219, and page 222, 1. 14. ~ 
% See ante, vol. 1, page 268. “See Sachau’s Translation of Alberdni’s Zndia, vol. I 
* See Indian Antiquary, vol. XVIII, page 215. page 202. tee 
: ee Fleet’s Dynasties, page Al. *\ See Archaeol. Survey of India, vol. XXI, page 133. 
# — a hia ee 237, verse 15. © The copper-plate of Vijayapdla’s successor Devavarmas 
aia n MEATS, vol. XX, page 403. deva is dated in Vikrama 1107; see Zidian Antiquary, vol 
ee above, page 6. XIX, page 364, No. 178. te 
= I believe, Captain Wilford got, the ‘loathsome dungeon, % See above, page 6 
in which he lets Gangeyadeva die, out of the words [Svasd}. “4 See cee pe 16. 


ga-samédvdsita (of |. 33 of the copper-plate). “ See Indian Antiquary, vol. XVIII, page 2165. 


BENARES COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION OF KARNADEVA. 303 


eighty-one years later than his own copper-plate,* it is clear that Karna’s reign was a 
long one; and it is certain that he was engaged in many wars and that his power, for a 
time, was severely felt by his neighbours. According to the Nagpur praégasti* Udaya- 
ditya of Malava, whom we know to have ruled in A.D. 1080, freed the land from the 
dominion of Karna, who, joined by the Karnatas, had swept over the earth like a mighty 
ocean ; and the great achievement which the Chandella inscriptions® report of Kirtivar- 
man, and which has even been recorded in a well-known Samskrit play, is, that that 
prinee defeated Karna, the favourite of Fortune, and by doing so restored the independ - 
ence of the Chandellakingdom. The grammarian Hemachandra® eulogizes Bhimadeva 
I. of Anhilvad (A.D. 1021-63) for having conquered Karna in battle ; and, similarly, the 
poet Bilhana,” who elsewhere describes Karna as the god of death to the lord of the 
Kalanjara mountain, meaning to the Chandella king, records his defeat by the Western 
Chalukya Somesvara I. (about A.D. 1042-68). 

Here I might well close my account of Karnadeva’s copper-plate grant ; but, having 
given the genealogy of the rulers of Chedi so far, I may perhaps be permitted to give 
also the names of the remaining known members of the same dynasty, together with the 
few facts recorded of them in their inscriptions. 

Karna married the Htina princess Avalladevi®' and was succeeded by the son 
whom she bore to him, Yasahkarnadeva, whose Jabalpur copper-plate grant must 
have been issued in A. D. 1122, shortly before the close of his reign. Yasahkarnadeva’s 
name also occurs” in a copper-plate inscription of Govindachandradeva of Kanauj of the 
Vikrama year 1177 = A.D. 1120, by which the latter sanctions the transfer of some land 
which had been originally granted by the former, and which apparently proves that 
during the reign of Yasahkarna part of the Chedi dominions had passed into the posses- 
sion of the kings of Kanauj. A successful expedition against Tripuri by Lakshmadeva 
of Malava, the son and successor of Udayaditya, which probably took place during Yasah- 
karna’s reign, is mentioned in the Nagpur pragasti.” The only exploit which Yasahkarna’s 
own inscription has to record of him, is, that he ‘ extirpated with ease’ the ruler of 
Andhra near the river Godavari ;* and the same feat is probably alluded to in the Bhera- 
Ghat inscription of Alhanadevi, where that inscription speaks cf the devastation by 
Yasahkarna cf Champaranya.” 

Yasahkarnadeva was succeeded by hisson GayAkarnadeva, of whose reign we pos- 
sess an inscription™ dated in the Chedi year 902 = A.D. 1151, when his son Narasimha had 
already been appointed. Yueardja. Gaydkarna (or Gayakarna) married” Alhanadevi, 


46 See above, page 2. 

4 o 

ca ea ee 220 and 326. The Deogadh rock inscription of Kirtivarman is dated in Vikrama 1154-A.D.. 
1098; see Indian Antiquary, vol. XiX, page 36, No. 61. 

4 See Buhler. Ueber das Leben des Jaina Ménchs Hemachandra, page 69. 

0 See Vikramdnkadevacharita, I, 102-103, and XVIII, 93. 

51 See above, page 2. 

8 See Journal As. Soc. Bengal, vol. XX XI, page 124. 

63 See above, page 193, verse 39. 

54 See above, page 7, verse 23. 

55 See above, page 15, verse 14, If the above is correct, Champaranya ought to denote a tract of country near the 
God vari river. 

56 See Indian Antiquary, vol. XVIII, page 210. 

57 See above, page 9, and Indian Antiquary, vol. XVIII, page 215, and vol. XVI, page 34. 


304 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


a daughter of the king Vijayasimha,—a son of Vairisimha, who was a son of Hamsapéla 
of the Guhila family of Mewéd,—and his wife Syamaladevi, a daughter of Udayéditya 
of MAlava. And Alhanadevi bore to him two sons, Narasimmhadeva and Jayasim- 
hadeva, who succeeded their father one after the other. Of Narasimhadeva’s reign we 
possess three inscriptions,® dated in the Chedi years 907 and 909 = A.D. 1155 and 1158, 
and in the Vikrama year 1216 = A.D. 1159; and of Jayasimhadeva’s reign three inscrip- 
tions ® have been edited, two of which are dated in the Chedi years 926 and 928 = A.D. 
1175 and 1177. Jayasimbadeva married® Gosaladevi, and was succeeded by their son 
Vijayasimhadeva, of whose reign we have two copper-plate inscriptions,” of the Chedi 
year 932 = A.D. 1180, and the Vikrama year 1258 = A.D. 1196, the first of which gives 
us the name of Vijayasimha’s‘son, the prince Ajayasimhadeva. Of all these princes 
the inscriptions mention not a single fact which would be worth noticing here. 

According to the preceding account the list of succession of the Kalachuri rulers 
of Chedi or Dah4la, beginning with KokkalladevaI., would be as follows :— 


1. Kokkalladeva I.; contemporary of Bhojadeva of Kanauj (A.D. 862, 876, 882), 
of the Rashtrakita Krishna I. (Krishna-vallabha, about A.D. 875-911) who 
married a daughter of his; of the Chandella Harshadeva; and of (his own 
son) Sarnkaragana. He married the Chandella princess Natta. 

2. His son Mugdhatunga-Prasiddhadhavala. 

. His son Balaharsha. 

4, His younger brother Keytravarsha-Yuvarajadeva I.; married Nohala, a 
daughter of the Chaulukya Avanivarman. , 

5. His son Lakshmanarajadeva; married Rahada. His daughter Bonthadevi 
was the mother of the Western Chalukya Tailapa (A.D. 973-74). 

6. His son Samkaraganadeva. 

7. His younger brother Yuvarajadeva II.; contemporary of Vakpati-Mufja .of 
Malava (A.D. 974, 979, 993). 

8. His son Kokkalladeva II. 

9. His son GAngeyadeva-Vikramaditya, An inscription of his is dated in A.J). 
1037-38(?). Contemporary of Alberini (A.D. 1080), and of the Chandella 
Vijayapala. 

10, Hisson Karnadeva. His copper-plate grant is dated in A.D, 1042. Contem- 
porary of Bhimadeva I. of Anhilvad (A.D. 1021-63), of the Western Chalukya 
Somesvara I. (A.D. 1042-68), of Udayaditya of Malava (A.D. 1080), and of the 
Chandella Kirtivarman (A.D, 1098). He married the Hina princess Avalladevi. 

11. His son Yasgahkarnadeva. . A copper-plate grant of his is dated in A.D. 1122. 

12. His son Gayakarnadeva. An inscription of his is dated in A.D. 1151. He 
married Alhanadevi, a daughter of Vijayasimmha of MewAd and grand-daughter of 
Udayaditya of Malava. 


13. His son Narasimhadeva. Inscriptions of his are dated in A.D. 1155, 1158 
and 1159. 


58 See above, page 10, and Indian Antiguary, vol. XVIII, pages 212 and 214, 
* See above, page 18, and Indian Antequary, vol. XVII, page 226, and vol. XVIII, page 216. 
© See Indian. Antiquary, vol. XVIII, page 219. 


® See Journal As. Soc. Bengal, vol. XXX1, page 120, and Indian Antiquary, vol. XVII, page 228, and vol. XIX, 
page 171, No. 104. . 


oo 


BENARES COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPIION OF KARNADEVA. 305 


14. His younger brother Jayasimhadeva. Inscriptions of his are dated in A.D. 
1175 and 1177. His wife’s name was Gosaladevi. 

15. His son Vijayasimhadeva. Inscriptions of his are dated in A.D. 1180 and 
1196; one of them mentions his son, the prince Ajayasimhadeva. 


These fifteen princes, who may be taken to have ruled from about A.D. 875 to 
about A.D. 1200, represent twelve successive gencrations, which gives to each generation 
an average of about twenty-seven years. 


Text.” 
First Plate. 
Te 1: ai” [uv] att aa: fa(faara i 
fart auc fast fa(fa)s cerarea (a) | 
wrrare ut Safer TE (E) Me AA: y—[1]. 
aedtaaqaal| a] a- 
wafa oi (sat) fate (Fa)eq (a) oH ig 
qatar @ [tear ae aera: [1*] 
aaa] aaa waa 
qarafeazie[a] [a)- 
3. waat atyfaferar aa: 1(u)® —[2]. 
a: Harada: fafrafauragen(a) yrurart 
Fatferariaha (fa) arqteataicgarea (a) weatitadta (aa, [1*] 
SET | 
4. arWwaquiattaaqaeryetamare- 
aradarayganyentaaad tat at aaa” (1) —[3}, 
wey ae" jatar eefa aaaa: fal e]- 
5. ara ufad” 
aT (a ara (aNaee ETMTAAaTAy (A) TATA: | 
ata” We: AAA CALGTAAFATTA AT - 
arantaeferare [aq]- 
6. ceqana: eqataeaars: 1(0) —[4]. 
aeamal” atguaa: wrar[:*] faat Sear- 
euraag (aga) figanararare: | 


wareaTary- 


2 


From an impression, received in 1862 by Sir A. Cun- , hot sure that the reading is correct. Perhaps the right read- 
ningham from Mr. Griffith, then Principal of the Benares | ing may be agut feta’. 


College, and now given to me by Dr. F. E. Hall. 6° This sign of punctuation is superfluous. 
ws Expressed by a symbol. % The akshara in brackets looks in the impression like SY. 
“4 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). ‘Lhe verse also occurs at 6 Metre: Sardilavikridita. 


the commencement of the Rewah copper-plate grant of the 
Mahérénaka Salakhanavarmadeva; Indian Antiquary, vol. 
XVII, page 223. 

% This is what is offered by the rubbing, but, as I do 
not quite understand the first two lines of the verse, I am 


6 Read 4a*4,—Compare ante, vol. I, page 263, verse 9. 
70 Metre of verses 3 and 4: Sragdhara, 

71 Read eufa zqaa: faeart ufasry (») 

7 Read 4. 

73 Read dex’. 


2R 


306 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


7: ava (a)efaaqea: wae [at |” dae) a- 
Stare (aaehperfgermyeTA stargate: 1(u) —[5}- 
aaa (aatataareer ufafela] ware attra a 
<UI- 
8. qaacaananad Tearraat(at) Afar: (1) 
ara (en) faaara erafacta: wea (a) geet 
aranaraqaragquuenaa” Fa: wraaTs (1) —[6}. 
ws a- 
9. [aajara”® =steu(a) fragey(a)are | 
a(n) erat a Ula" fa aearatenae: atte: 1()” —[7]. 
afafare(:*]° aaargial atrcaarfaa weatta: | 
aemranya” 

10. afaan aereeat a q Usiafaq® uv” —[8]. 
SeMAU fea saad aa) euarfa (Ul) aaa 
aime faa wre cat weTa(n) faut] F- 

sx aT 1(n) [9] 
arat afaet qu(a)aaata ufsaged (at) wae: & Urs | 
ae et Hl Teereat Aisaaeeralet |e Tare y —[10]. 
waa (a) SEAT YHA 

12, a(x) @(@) atfaa (a) caer 

wara(a) wesTa araafaat sare sartfaa: 
atftata e2i(@t) wei quofawieeale*leraat 
qaqrat(at) yaAadaaay [e1]- 

13. Frama: ve uv —[11]. 
fararaty , 
wifetat we a(a)& afcet uezantcaaevar [1*] 
=a arias St crate ufta(a)e atest uv” —[12]. 
ae (e)a: Sra- 


74 Read spyarai, © Read °eat @ gq vadatg, 

7 Read 3raraaeat?,.—The word ataa: offends against 83 Metre of verses 8-10: Upajati. 
the metre; but the first line of verse 23 shows that the “I give this line exactly as it is in the impression. 
spelling with double Z is correct. ae probably should be az, and the fourth Pada may be 


76 Metre of verses 5 and 6: Sarddlavikridita. The hiatus Asa TEATATATT ; but the proper reading of the whole 
between lines 1 and 2 of verse 6 offends against the metre. line I am unable to restore. 


7 Read “aurmaguedt’, % Metre: Sardilavikridita. 
% Originally @rs{ was engraved ai the commencement 86 Read fa arquy. 
of line 9; but afterwards a letter seems to have been inserted 87 Metre: Aryd. ‘In this family there will be men highly 


between the aksharas @ and UT. precious on account of their great dignity ; thes considering, 


7 Metre: Arya. he took possession of the regions.’ Professor Pischel informs 
8 Read watfaden:. me that yr@t is given as a synonym of fesyin Hemachandra’s 
" Read “dumwat qatar. | Desindmamalé, VI, 37. 


a 


ae 


- PebRPER PI 
PENS AI see 


dete Wp 
Bus 


a 


‘J 02 ‘vaipuy viydvssidy ‘T ALVId—"VAUCVNUVA JO INVES ALVId-Yadd09 SAUVNAG 


‘qourbrso fo spg-g : 2709: 
J Oe ee ‘wnyburuuny “apy 02 RAW ‘ying ‘AL He ho poyddns suorssasdes moss © 


~ 


‘ 


Se er em 


0 <4 


Tl ALVId—"VAUCVNUVY AO LNVYD ALVId-Yadd0d SauVNag 


BENARES COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION OF KARNADEVA, 307 


(1k svat fefmracfararaat (a) sista 
wana a@)ya wafeqaufaar(afaes: gla lar 
ae agargqemaqaadaaa(|aanara(fa)a wa- 
&J- 
15. aTaaiuae facaafacararfeanfa(fa)aer: 1(0)* -~[18]. 
wana era(a)cfata feqear(ar)at aanrafenat watheara | 


aE la rena feat 

16. farararartareatarieta a: qara® °° —[14)]. 
wandatare gfafsce cerqa(a): ufacaar(at) ea (ae a(a)aza 
gatuarica(a)afa (ah) eras 

17. ant uratas: afaaat gauze: (i) —[15]. 


y(q)arcaacan (4g) frau] farts (va) TTA (A) 
Fare, aAthe ara(a)aaararreeat fafela’ |: 01) 
frar- 
18. at ufa aftarnaargqaeueiteat 
a: araratHea(sa)t[:* | aanaaafea(fen)sterrara y" —[16]. 
AMI SYTAUUTASA: YR (G) sarat (Ai) 
19. wrraaTer: | 
a(aara at anfaa faate(si) facra a8 sar qurfa 4h 17). 
a; were fafa: fa(Pajat @ stfu: avert a arart [a*] at 
at at @ earg- 
20. tag ug atea(a) waa(s) a 
aerate graRT:” | ATV) TEaTara: 
maturatadadt 4 aeyedaeaeraaty y—[18]. 
Ala (a RUTTea- 
21, waraeanayaaaataan, | 
a(anata vat afacuertaa(a) arta afearta av —[19]. 
wal faeuarva ama ofaaraa [1*] 
wramay arte” 
22. | a@ aaa] waeearfcar [0] —[20]. 
aaa (saa )aqacsies: ofa: fat: alalgarg(a) fa: 
area ferarersrera ary () Te (Fa)e fer fa (et) ae) rent afar [u*]?—[21]. 


afer. 
$8 Metre : Sragdhara. % Read fafaywar. 
89 Read Wald. 3 % Aritva, derived from either arin ‘a wheel,’ or ari 
* Metre of verses 14 and 15: Vasantatilaké. ‘an enemy.’ 
. Metre: SArdilavikridita, °7 Metre : Sloka, (Anushtubh). 
2 Metre: Upajati. %% Read Wait. 
% Metre : SArdilavikridita. 9 Metre: Upajati. 


* Metre: Arya. 
2R 


308 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. 23. aot lata: tt acrara fa” , 
Ta(a)ar(at) WTA) aa) avatar awa: 1(u) —[22]. 
araradiaraa’ saad: ara vata: | 
(a )aw- 
24. arnt fogruwanrfa gat curettfer genera (a) (a): 1()* —[ 23], 
aa’ araaad ad frafara quizzed: | 
arse wuatal ¥ lafafea: [at lacrereasaq [1*] 
25. wat atlalufcaed thea waalt] arfaa 
wamAae Ha acafal faa] Farfaaq 1(1)’—[24]. 
aTRaa Urea aaa [at] Ma jae" 
at- 
26. TarhaasreM (TM) TMM TISaTA’ | 
AAA A Ala TWAS Hiaa(A)aaaac: 1° 
waa ufafafala] gaagerera[<] alare?] [u*]’—[25}. 
27. agamanafa’ ard afes eae: 
want aeyat Wa] ferarera aeg: uu" —[26]. 
wral:” | waaar a wiaaa:” ania fa(a)aa- 
28. fa: 
waa a qacaacala] aear[alafa i 
vafafaad at! wafra mites at 
[ele fefaalfala ax." 


10 Read wrt wesarata. 
1 Metro Sloka (Anushtubh), 
2 Read laiadiarsa Aaala: VawesH aqaaara:. 
3 Metre: Upajati. 
“Tam not, perhaps, able to restore the exact reading of this verse, but would suggest the following :— 
g: 
aa ara aacad frafad qdicanga: 
< 
ACY VUAaselafeanal F Azwaq | 
wea ary uftaea tied aat efad 
naurafad ge aUfeAea Garfeaq v 
5 Metre: Sardulavikridita. 
6 For the commencement of this line I. would suggest Hames ) 
aateifage’ ; : 
unable to restore. x ¢ 3 the end of the line I an: 

7 Read “atgugatad. 

8 Read ata ufafaferd yauae® ; for the end of the verse I cannot suggest a suitable readin 

9 Metre: Sardilavikridita. 8: 

Read weafudtadiafa ward afew gaia 1. 

1 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). 


2 Read Gaaearaa. 

ENaued a s 2 
BI would suggest here Wate 4 dacuaaa ad Nefa:, but am not sure about the last word of the lina 
4 Read wet Taraai. 


© I would suggest reading this line get fafaaaa axufaaa ya adtat 741. I take the meaning of the verse to be 
that, while formerly people did not believe in the truthfulness of Yudhishthira, etc., they now no longer entertain aby such 
‘doubts, since they have seen that, even in this Kali age, Gahgeyadeva possesses al] the virtues ascribed to thoseancient kings 
in a higher degree even than they did : 


30. 


dl. 


32. 


33. 


34. 


36. 


37. 


38. 


39. 


16 Metre : SArddlavikridita. 


7 Metre: Indravajra. 
18 Metre of verses 29 and 30: Sloka (Anushtubbh). 


Metre: Vasantatilaka. 


BENARES COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTION OF KARNADEVA. 


Second Plute. 
faaet get aera war; w°—[27]. 
AATAT: HU LaTAA eT; Hee: ofra(ai) va (fa)aa(war | 
werhag () area (a) ar fe] s- 


fare vee fenfraaet: ”—[28]. 


aentfracan gx water feat fet 11(1) 
AG) MwAwINT:, Gaatquatad —[29]. 
aa agq- 
ara tareaatataterans | 
ala (aye yau(a) yaseA: AeA(e)aTeT: 1) —[30]. 
a(a) fara (a) aa (fears gery waa: 


309 


wifaud tafererfes fan(f) faa 
arer(awa uta afahe: we(e)a Tact agact waa (Aa yarq W—[31] 


aa(2)a quararedana- 


ama [aa aararfeanatesraay ames rar fararsmate- 


(xq) Taras |aurerqeara (a) acAAET- 


THATS UCIT (sa) THATS (sa) (faa) en fete (a1) fra fare 


dal aaa aereal avrg [a] were- 


fant a(H)Staatetal WeTaraatl 


. fal] aera asrafafantear aeranifenctuar asrauzfaat werac 


AETUATATA ais) aaa wet wr™ |eetarfeat aera waTarata (a) 


aattearant ferare aare ataata a(at)aata wararoata fatea- 


ala] nat war [ware] ear falar] alalala | fears: ara (a)aaR: 


ATAMAAAMIT: waacal fr* [faagqar. 


fautaa(a)qra(aedtana: Psaremafatraars afeatara se 


aeauataatfaata-” 


Was aaa (Mara |” aeTAR Talat aaa ufwasifra- 


(xa)eura \” =a faq: a 


word. 


20 Of the word preceding waratfaa only the third ak- % Read °alfaata. 


shara (a) is quite clear; the first akshara wight perhaps 
be read @, and the second GT. 
2 Read farqHearata 


2 The akshara in brackets may have been altered to % Read atfurar? 


ary 


‘s What was meant to.be engraved here and in the fol- ” Read Wteaeauratarfaata’. 


lowing, was perhaps @¥Tare | avrarafaufea 1, etc. Com- 


pare, ¢.g. the Mungir copper-plate grant of Devapdladeva, 
Indian Antiquary, vol. XXI, page 256, line 31. 
4 suspect that one or more aksharas are omittedin this 


26 The aksharas in these two brackets are very indistinct 
and doubtful, and I cannot suggest the exact name of the 
district in which the village of Susi was situated. 

27 These signs of punctuation are superfluous. 


310 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. 40. wargadae dacat'ard wreqaa(a)garafadtarat a(x) Aa (a)carat Fat 


ee ONL 


~ 


41, qa(a)aa(a)areataadalaa (atta aaa ataT WaT AaaTaaa (A)- 
E(s)art ar(ar)e farang” area aa: | AA: Waa 

42, azaurer|:* | qatarafaarfan, waaararaeraarea(a) fa fafeana waat- 
(at) aat arate aria: ar (ar)aaaa ven sfa Far 


43. wrnitracfeceewereraaratea fat oe fea AMATSTA (AT) HATA Sher 
acufaatuar wea alaatfu a 

44, aeafata waa 1” 
wataarar (an) fart Usgany (Day yar avast TAA: 
ararana (a) weaagqa (a) ar (et) ATT aAT- 

a: @ ureaatat wats: 1(0)”—[32]. 
a(ayefaa(aaar yar uate: ancfefa: 1 
qe AS Feat afaee ae aat wae (0) —[ 33]. 
afar fe[aat?] 


46. fa aar(anjan qufarag 

aay saaets ar(m)ad a afamad v —[S4]. 

arene catfa yar atectarfa waaaa (mechs 
qaraarantaarts arta at a(at)a arg: vatteeta 1 —[35]. 
we (a) aa (aaa usE (a)rasda’s [1*] 

mat ara) feretaa afae- 


48, at at a(a) aa 1(u)'—[36}]. 
qawaa(a) Talat] wauaRAEA (a) | 
eta[caaratfa araeteaaga —[37]. 
daq ecg wrearafe « ae [n*] 


AT 


0 Read WIGS: 2 Read 2424. 


3 This is what was originally engraved; but some of the aksharas, especially % and 4, seem to have been altered, and 
I believe the intended reading to be °Stemaary. 


8 Read Hraqaa UueT:. % Read °aaar fa. 

% T would suggest reading °etaTaciata’. 36 Read Saat. 

* Compare the Kumbbi copper-plate, Jour. As. Soc. Beng., vol. XXXI, page 120,—wWa arrest erquafa gar, 
3S Metre : Salini. % Metre of verses 33 and 34: Sloka (Anushtubh). © Read afaas faatat (7). 

” Read farateq. ® Metre: Indravajra. 4 Read anda. 


“ Metre of verses 36 and 37: Sloka (Anushtubh). Read °Raewaq. 


Epigraphia [ndica, vol. We 


MATHURA SCULPTURES, Plate I. 


AN AYAGAPATA (b) AND CENTRAL FIGURE OF ANOTHER (a), 


SPECIMENS OF JAINA SCULPTURES FROM MATHURA. 311 


XXIV.—SPECIMENS OF JAINA SCULPTURES FROM MATHURA. 
By G. Binier, Pu.D., LL.D., C.1.E. 


In the several articles on Dr. Fithrer’s discoveries in the Kankali Tila at Mathurd 
(ante, vol. I, pp. 3711., 393ff. ; vol. II, pp. 193ff.) it has been stated repeatedly that large 
numbers of statues, relievos, and other sculptures have been found. As the inscriptions 
incontestably prove the great age of the temples which are buried under the mound, 
and as hitherto very little has become known regarding the earlier Indian art except 
what the Buddhist Stupas furnish, it scemed to me desirable that some specimens of 
the sculptures found should be published at once without waiting for the compre- 
hensive work which Dr. Fithrer eventually intends to give us. On my application 
Dr. Fithrer in 1890 kindly forwarded to me ten photographs, taken from the most 
remarkable and best preserved pieces, a selection from which is given in the four 
accompanying plates. 

The first. plate gives under figure B a specimen of the most common form of an 
Aydgapata, and under figure 4 the central portion of another sculpture of the same 
class. The addition of A was made advisable by the mutilation of the central figure 
of B. The slab, from which 4 has been taken, is apparently in a state of perfect 
preservation, and it, moreover, bears an easily legible inscription (No. xxx of the 
second Series of Mathura inscriptions, published, ante, vol. II, pp. 195ff.), in which it 
is clearly stated that the object dedicated is an Aydgapatu. But the photograph is 
pitted all over with small white spots,’ which in parts make it difficult to recognise the 
details. 

The slab, represented under B, is oblong and measures 3 feet by 2’ 8”. At the 
lower end a space (some inches in breadth) has been cut off, the middle of which 
was intended for a dedicatory inscription, faint traces of which are still visible. On both 
sides there are sacred symbols, among which a Svastika and one or two Trisilas are 
recognisable. The remaining nearly square portion of the slab is divided by four con- 
centric circles into (1) a central disc, (2) three bands of unequal breadth, and (8) four 
triangles at the corners, each with a circular basis. The central disc is occupied by 
a cross-lezged seated J ina, with the hands in his lap. The posture is the usual one, in 
which all seated Jinas are represented even in the present day. Above his head there 
is a canopy, from which on either side very thick garlands hang down. Their shape 
is very peculiar and differs somewhat from that used on Buddhist sculptures (see, e.g., 
Fergusson, Tree and Serpent iWorship, plates xxiv, 2; xxvi,1—2). It is found on all 
the Jaina sculptures from Mathura (see, e.g., Dr. Bhagvanlal’s ancient slab,’ where 
these sausage-like garlands are visible at the top of the Stipa), and it may possibly be 
a characteristic mark of the early Jaina customs. On the side of the Jina appear 
three or four marks which at first sight look like representations of leaves. On examin- 
ing the photograph with a magnifying glass, it seems to me that they are intended for 
snakeheads with expanded hoods. If my interpretation is correct, the Jina is PAarégva, 
whose mark is Sesha. Inan article in the Vienna Or. Jour., vol. IV, p. 327, I have 


1 This is due to the nature of the slab, which is of speckled sandstone.—A. F. 
_ 2 Actes du sivi?me Congres int. des Orientalistes, tome III, 2. p. 142. 


312 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


pointed out that on another slab Sesha’s hoods appear behind the head of a Jina. Here 
the addition of the canopy prevented their being placed in the proper position. 

The first circular band is rather narrow and bears representations of four highly 
ornamental Tri siélas, which, no doubt, with the ancient Jainas, just as with the Bauddhas, 
were Considered as emblems of “the three Jewels” which with the Jainas are right 
faith, righi cognition, and right conduct. 

They differ somewhat from those found on the Buddhist buildings (see, e.g., Cun- 
ningham’s Bharhut Stdpa, plates vi and vii), as the lotuu, which the Bauddhas usually * 
place below them, is missing and the central point is longer and feathery at the top, being 
formed by the ends of two semicircles, held together by a band. The latter peculiarity 
re-appears in a Triséla on a pillar in the Indrasabha at Elura, (Burgess, Arch. Reports 
West. Ind., vol. V, plate xxxviii, 3). The Trisdéla was, no doubt, in ancient India a 
symbol, used by all sects for various purposes and with various interpretations. It was 
also commonly used for,personal ornaments and appears in earrings (Cunningham’s 
Bharhut, plate xlix), in necklaces (op. cit., plate I), and in women’s girdles (Cunning- 
ham’s Arch. Surv. Rep., vol. III, plate xi, A). In such ornaments it has frequently 
the very same shape as on our slab. 

The second much broader band of the slab is occupied by four curvilinear ornaments, 
ending each on the left side in two horns and enclosing in the centre a sacred symbol. 
ust below the spot where the two horns separate are four bands or garlands, to which 
rosettes or small lotuses are tied, and from the interstices between the horns issue the 
stalks of half-opened larger lotuses, which rest with their open faces on the second circle. 
A comparison of the four large ornaments with the Zrisdélas in the first circular band 
leaves no doubt that they represent halves of these sacred symbols. Thesmaller emblems 
enclosed by the larger ones are,—(1) at the top, a Svastika, which is commonly used as 
a lucky or sacred mark by all Indian sects, (2) below, two fish, which are likewise con- 
sidered very generally as marks of good omen; and are found as such over the doors of 
the great Jaina caves at J unagadh, called Bawa Pyara’s Math (Burgess, Arch. Surv, Rep. 
West.-Ind., vol. II, plate xviii,3), and on Brahmanical temples, e.g., on those of the ruined 
city. of Ghumli‘ (Burgess, op. cit., plate xliii), (8) on the left, another variety of the 
frisila, common on Buddhist monuments, and (4) on the right, a mark which looks 
like a monogram, formed of the syllables na and vo, and is not uncommon on Buddhist 
sculptures, and is also used for ornaments (Fergusson, op. cif., plate iii, fig.-4). 

The third circular band, which is again very narrow, shows,—(1) below a: seated 
Jina; (2) above a Stipa, resting with its base on the fourth or outermost circle, and 
hence looking as if it were turned topsy-turvy; (3) on the right and on the left two 
sacred trees, rising out of a square enclosure. ‘The interstices between these four 
emblems are filled up by pairs of half recumbent: male and female figures, probably 
worshipping deities (Védyddharas). Each compartment contains two pairs, one facing 
one way, and the other turning in the opposite direction. 


° An exception is found in Cunningham’s Bhilsa Topes, plate xxxu1, Fig. 4. 

* Compare also Dr. Bhagvanlal, Actes du siai@me Congrés int. des Or. tome 111, part 2, p- 137. The Vishnu Smriti 
xL111, 33 (Jolly’s edition) enumerates the fish among the Mangalas, to which Brahmans must pay reverence. In his notes to 
the passage Nandapandita most absurdly adds that the rule refers to ‘boiled or fried’ (pakva) fish. On Buddhist sculptures 
the two fish appoar as parts of personal ornaments; (see Fergusson Tiree and Serpent Worship, plate iii, fig. 4). 


SPECIMENS OF JAINA SCULPTURES FROM MATHURA. 313 


With respect to the Stipa, which we shall meet again more than once on the other 
plates, I repeat that it is a form of the funeral monuments, once used and worshipped 
by all Indian sects that followed the Jidna and Bhakli Margas, and I refer for some of 
the reasons for this theory to my article Vienna Or. Jour., vol. lV, pp. 328f. I may 
add, however, that Brahmanical Chaityas are occasionally mentioned in the Mahdbhd- 
rata. Thus we read Mah. I, 109, 183—14. 


WAI ywadt Usraaa: ufeefaala] 
mya TAY SaAUAATTA: i 
Wet. re Slee es 


“That country, O king, protected on all sides by Bhishma in accordance with the 
sacred law, became lovely, being adorned with hundreds of Chaityas and sacrificial 
posts.” 

The juxtaposition of the Chaityas and Yapas shows that Brahmanical sacred build- 
ings, probably Stipas, are meant. 

The worship of sacred trees by the Jainas has been discussed by Dr. Bhagvanlal 
(op. cit., p. 142), and he has given the names of the Bodhi-trees of three Tirthamkaras.’ 
The worship of trees in India is older than Jainism and Buddhism. Quite irrespective 
of its traces, found in the Vedic ritual, all the Brahmanical Sitras bear witness to its 
existence, as they mention Chaitya trees, which Brahmans and all Aryans must treat with 
reverence, and it is common to all the sects following the Bhakti Médrga, which assign a 
sacred tree to each deity. Like a great many other practices, it has heen taken over by 
the Jainas aud Bauddhas from the Brahmans, when their prophets became deities, a new 
meaning being given to the ancient rite. 

The four triangles in the corners are each occupied by a female figure holding up 
her arms and supporting the part of the outer fourth circle.just.aboveit. On both sides 
of the heads of these figures there are small projections, which look like rudimentary 
horns, but appear to be the ears with ornaments hanging down from them. The lower 
extremities of the four figures have been turned into spirally rolled snake-tails with split 
or fin-like ends, which fill the right and left corners of the triangles. Figures, support- 
ing sculptures or statues, are so common in ancient Indian art, that it is unnecessary 
to cite particular examples. 

Among the other Aydgapatas, of which Dr. Fihrer has torwarded photographs, 
there are two more with Jinas in the central medallion or disc, véz., that a portion of 
which has been given in fig. 4 of plate i, and another bearing the inscription No. Xxxi 
of my second Series. <A third, which bears the archaic inscription No. viii of the same 
Series, has in the centre a wheel with sixteen spokes, apparently a Dharmachakra, regard- 
ing the worship of which more will be said in connection with plate iv, and a fourth, 
which was dedicated by the wife of a dancer (see Inscr. No. v of the second Series) offers 
the representation of a Stipa, in front of which two naked’»omen dance on the lower 


5 The fact that each Tirthamkara has his Chaityavriksha is also stated by Hemachandra, Abhidhdnachintdmani, 
verse 62 (Bélitlingk and Rieu). The commentary to the passage is, however, mutilated or corrupt. A complete list-of the 
sacred ‘treés is given in the Ratnaséva, vol. Ip. 708. 

Ante, pp. 195f. 

28 


314 EPJGRAPHIA INDICA. 


rail, exactly in the same indecent posture as those on Dr. Bhagvanlal’s Mathura slab. 
The latter seems therefore to belong likewise to the class of the Aydgapatas.’ 

From all these specimens it appears that an Aydgapata is an crnamental slab, bear- 
ing the representation of a: Jina-or of some other object of worship, and the term may 
be appropriately rendered by “tablet: of homage or of worship,” since such slabs were 
put up in temples, ‘as the numerous inscriptions on them say, “for the worship of the 
Arhats.” The Aydgapatas seem to be a distinctive feature of the ancient Jaina art, as 
neither the Buddhists * nor the orthodox sects mention them. The Bauddhas have, how- 
ever, the. term wdhapata, i.e, irdivapata, (See, €.9e, Burgess, Arch. Rep. South. Ind., 
vol. I, pp. 90f). Even: among. the Jainas they probably went out of fashion.at an early 
period, as the inscriptions on them invariably: show archaic characters, and are in no case 
known to me dated. In the more modern Jaina temples we find instead of them slabs, 
called panchaparameshthipatta (Satruiijaya inscriptions, Nos. 58, 66, ante, pp. 34f.), 
chaturvimsatitirthankarapatta (ibidem, Nos. 57,67), and so forth. 

The sculptures. of the second plate are the most interesting of the whole collection. 
Figure 4 bears an inscription, legible even on the photo-lithograph, which I read origi 
nally as bhagavd. Nemiso, the “ divine lord Nenii,” as I believed that the sculpture re- 

presented some scene fronx the life of Neminatha. But a careful investigation of vari- 
ous lives of Neminatha, i Le. which Professors Jacobi and Leumann have kindly assisted 
me, failed to. bring to light any. legend that could be turned to use. Finally, Professoi 
Jacobi suggested to me that it might be possible to read bhagavad Nemeso “divine Ne- 
mesa, to refer these words to the figure with a goat’s head just above them, and to 
identify. the goat- headed Nemesa with Indra’s divine commander of the foot troops 
Harinegamesi, who is represented in medizeval pictures as a man with the head of an 
antelope.’ . ‘Fhe reading: Nemeso is no doubt as good as Nemiso. The vowel-stroke of the 
second. ‘consonant lies in the proper position of an e, though the ¢ frequently looks ex- 
actly. alike on these inscriptions. . More difficult was the identification of the two names ; 
but, on looking through the Nemindthacharita I found a passage, where Naigameshin 
appears instead of the longer word. 

Tt stands in the beginning of the seventh Sarga, where it is narrated how Krishna 
tried to obtain for Satyabhama a son equal to Pradyumna in luck and good qualities. 
The text * runs as follows :-— 


WAU ASAE ATMA ATA | 3 
wa ATs wat fA AKA ws 
AMAT RATAN AST THAT | 


7 Possibly the word dyaga, which occurs in ]. 4 of the inscription, may be meant for dyéga. Regarding the perform- 
ances of dancing girls at Jaina festivals, see below the remarks on plate iii. 

* A Buddhist dydgapata was excavated by me -in January 1862 at the ancient site of Adhichhattré (RAmnagar in 
Rohilkhand) from the ruins of a Buddhist Vihara. The slab shows » full-blown lotus in the middle surrounded by four 
highly ornamented Trigilas. An inseriptian in archaic characters records its dedication and object.— A.F. 

9 See Sacred Books of the ‘East, vol. XXII, page. 227, note. “Professor Jacobi has kindly furnished me with a sketch 
of Harinegamesi, which is inserted in his ancient illustrated copy of the Kalpasitra, 

The MS., from which the subjoined verses have been taken, is No. 250 of the Vienna University Library collection, 
which was perched in. 1882 from Mr. Bhagvdnlal Kevaldas’ store of MSS., rejected as useless by the Bombay officials in 
charge of the Search for Sanskrit MSS. (see my paper: Ueber eine kiirzlich fiir die Wiener Universitat erworbene Summ- 

lung von Sunskrit und Prakrit Handschriyten, Sitzungsherichte der kais, Akademie der Wissenschaften, vol. XC1X, 
p- 568ff), 


MATHURA SCULPTURES. 


c) Reverse of doorstep. 


w 


Epigraphia Indica, vol. 


WM, 


= Heber E, Ae 


Tl 321d 


SPECIMENS OF JAINA SCULPTURES FROM MATHURA. 315 


araafaate & aaa] wel arate we 
wras areal a jarat H fag weperafer: | 

a aa ufaat qanicenfa aet ylylaa un ee a 
awa wea lee war fatele|s aaafoaq | 
sfexureaa|y laa rod WaT ke 
aad aaa alas fai acifa & 
wuts UAT Vfe reparEAy u ez Pd 
anaes a lat GAsEl F UTS ATA | 

AAA SATA Tal Tat fera: Fa: LP 
sofa ulyld ert Anat fated | 

ada argeaifa ware Afalfelay sav u eet 


(8) “Annoyed at the great luck of Pradyumna and his fame, Bhama went into her 
boudoir and lay down ona broken cot: 

(9) The foe of Karhsa visited her there and spoke agitatedly : ‘ Who has shown 
disrespect to thee, whereby, O fair-browed one, thou art thus afflicted ? ’ 

(10) Bhami answered: ‘No disrespect has been shown to me; but, if I do not 
obtain a son equal to Prady umna, I shall certainly die.’ 

(11) Knowing her tenacity of purpose, Krishna undertook a fast in honour of the 
god Nai gameshin, par taking only of every eighth meal. 

(12) Naigameshin appeared and spoke to him: ‘What can'I do for thee? 
Krishna answered : ‘Give to Bhama ason who resembles Pradyumna.’ 

(13) Naigameshin replied: ‘Make lier, whom thou desirest to have a son, 
put on this necklace, and then have intercourse’ with her; thereby she will obtain the 
desired son.’ 

(14) Handing over the necklace, which he wore, Naigameshin disappeared. But 
Vasudeva joyfully gave the precious ornament to Satya.” 

The legend shows that the Jainas worshipped a divine being, called Naigameshin, 
and considered him to preside over the procreation of children. And Professor Leumann 
informs me that there are passages in older Jaina works from which the same conclusion 
may be drawn. Now, Harinegamesi, the deer-headed general of Indra, is, according to 
the Kalpasitra, likewise closely connected with the same delicate matter, since at 
his master’s command he transferred the embryo of Mahavira from the body of the 
Brabmani Devanandaé to the womb of the KshatriyAnt Trisala. ‘The last four syllables 
of his name exactly correspond with the Sanskrit Naigameshin, and the whole com- 
pound Harinegamesi means in all probability, as the note to the Kalpasiitra suggests, 
“the Negamesi of Hari,” é.¢., “ Negamesi, the servant of Indra.” 

The close resemblance of the name Negamesi-Naigameshi and of Nemeso, and the 
fact that both deities are represented with the heads of similar animals, again tempt one 
to assume that both the names and the personages are identical. The difficulty, caused 
by the slight difference in the terminations of the names, may be removed by assuming 
that; the word had originally, like many others, two forms, one ending in a and one 

282 


aL6, . EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


ending in im. And the correctness of this view is proved by the occurrence of the 
Sanskrit words Naigamesha and Nejamesha," which in the Grihya Sétras and the medical 
Sarnhités are the names of a deity with a ram’s head,” particularly dangerous to children. 
Our word Nemeso corresponds exactly with Naigamesha according to the analogy of 
the Pali emeva for evameva, ajjhena for adhyayana, lena for layana, and so forth (see E- 
Miiller’s Simplified Grammar, pp. 41, 43), the intermediate form being Neyameso. 

‘There can be no doubt that the Naigamesha or Nejamesha of the Brahmans, who 
seizes children and sorely afflicts them with disease * and the son-granting and embryo- 
exchanging Naigamesha-Naigameshin of the Jainas are in reality identical. They 
represent two different aspects of the same deity, which was conceived both as beneticent 
and as hurtful or destructive. heir identity comes out still more fully, if one takes into 
account another Brahmanical deity, Naigameya, whose name, as the larger Petersburg 
Dictionary points out sub voce, is certainly only a variant of Naigamesha. ‘This Naiga- 
meyais declared to be another form, or a son and companion, of the war-god Skanda, 
which latter likewise is represented as dangerous to children. A passage of the Maka- 
bhdrata, quoted in the Dictionary, sub voce naigamesha, asserts that he is chhdgavaktra 
or ‘ goat-faced,’ just like the Nemeso of our sculpture. The goat’s head excellently 
suits a deity, who has to do with the procreation of children, as the strong sexual in- 
stincts of the goat did not escape the notice of the ancient Hindus." Hence, it may be 
inferred that the goat’s head was the original attribute of Naigamesha-Naigameshin, the 
Brahmans substituting later a ram’s head on account of the seeming connection of the 
name with mesha, ‘a ram,’ and the Jainas a deer’s héad on account of the cecompound 
Harinegamesi, seemingly connected with harina, ‘a gazelle. I may add that Naiga- 
meshin’s position as Indra’s general offers another point of contact with Naigameya, 
who is either considered as identical or as closely connected with Skanda, the field 
marshal of the gods 

If we now return to our sculpture, Nemesa-Naigameshin’s divine rank is 
indicated—(1) by his ornaments, bracelets on the upper arm and a very broad necklace 
(see above the story of Krishna), (2) by the elaborately carved throne on which he sits, 
(3) by the female attendant to his proper left, who apparently fans him with a Chauri, 
and (4) by the fragment of a canopy or chkattra, which, I think, is visible above his 
head. Nemesa’s face is turned to the right, and he lifts his hand apparently addressing 
somebody who was represented on the lost right half of the slab. At his left knee stands 
a small naked male, characterised by the cloth in his left hand as an ascetic,’ and with 
uplifted right hand. Below this figure is a fragment of an inscription, showing on Dr. 
Fiihrer’s rubbings very plainly the syllables bhaga. ‘The first word was therefore bhaga- 


™ See the two Petersburg Dictionaries under these words. The identity of Harinegamesi with Naigamesha has 
already been hinted by Béhtlingk, sub voce Harinaigumeshin. The latter word is a faulty form, given by Mr. Colebrooke in 
his Essay on the Jainas, probably in accordance with a bad MS. of one of the commentaries of the Kalpastitra. 

" For a representation of Naigamesha, as represented in the Elura sculptures, see Trans. RB.’ As. Soc., vol. II, p. 326, 
lst plate —J. B, ‘ 


3 See, in addition to the passages quoted in the Dictionaries from the SwSruta Samhita, and the Ashtdngahridaya, 
Uitarasthdna, ii, 63, and iii, 12-14, 

™ Apastamba, Dh. Sé. II, 14, 13, quotes a Vedic passage to this effect: “Therefore, a he-goat and a learned Brahmans 
evince the strongest sexual desires.” 

16 T am not able to offer any etymology for naigamesha and naigameya. 

* Compare the figures of monks on Dr. Bhagvanlal’s slab from Mathura. 


SPECIMENS OF JAINA SCULPTURES FROM MATHURA. 51 ¥6 


vd “divine,” and a proper name no doubt followed. This epithet makes it probable that 
the ascetic is meant for a Tirtharmkara, because, as far as my observation goes, bhagava 
is not applied in the inscriptions to ordinary monks. Next, on the left. comes the 
female fan-bearer already mentioned. To the left of her stands another female, who 
raises her right arm in astonishment and looks apparently at the ascetic. She wears ear- 
rings, a necklace, armlets, anklets and the usual dress of married ladies, while a scarf, 
or sdré, hangs over her shoulders. At some little distance further to the left, apparently 
in a separate section of the slab, which is indicated by remnants of architectural 
ornaments, is found the upper half of a mutilated female figure, who wears tbe usual 
ornaments, She likewise raises her right arm and supports with her left on a dish or 
cushion the body of a motionless infant with the hands folded on its breast. 

A Jaina sculpture representing Naigamesha, a small Tirthamkara and a female 
with a small infant can only be taken to refer to the most famous legend, in which the 
deity plays a part, viz., the exchange of the embryos of Devananda and Trigala. And it 
seems to me that the various figures on our slab may be explained on this supposition. 
The story, as related in the Kalpasitra,” is briefly this,—‘‘ When Indra became aware 
that Mahavira had taken the form of an embryo in the Brahmanit Devananda’s body, he 
paid his reverence to the Arhat that was to be born. It then occurred to him that an 
Arhat ought not to be born in a low Brahmanical family, but only in a noble royal. race, 
and that it was and always had been the duty of the reigning Indra to transfer the embryo, 
in case through the influence of his Karman an Arhat had descended into the body 
of a female of the Brahman caste. In order to fulfil this duty, Indra directed 
Harinegamesti, the divine commander of infantry, to transfer Mahavira from the body 
of Devananda to Trigala, a lady of the Jiatri family of Kshatriyas who was also with 
child. Harinegamesi then repaired first to the Brahmanical quarter of Kundagrama, 
took Mahavira from Devananda, cleansing him from all impurity, and carried him 
carefully in his folded hands to the Kshatriya quarter of the same town. There he took 
Trisala’s embryo from her, likewise duly cleansing it, and put Mahavira in its place. 
Next, he returned to Devananda and placed Trisala’s child in her body. During these 
operations the two ladies and their attendants lay in a deep magic sleep. Finally, the deity 
returned to Indra’s abode and reported to him that his orders had been carried out.” 

As our slab represents Naigameshi-Nemeso, seated in state on his throne, the 
scene must be laid in Indra’s heaven, and it can only refer either to the moment when 
Indra gave his orders, or to the period when Nemeso had returned from his journey and 
made his report. The position of the deity, who'is apparently speaking to somebody,— 
probably Indra,— who was represented on the lost right half of the slab, speaks in 
favour of the second alternative. ‘The small ascetic at Nemesa’s left knee, called in the 
inscription “ divine ” ,.., is no doubt meant for Mahavira, who is introluced ty the 
artist with the attributes of a monk, in order to show the subject to which the conversa- 
tion refers, and he is represented so small, because in reality he is not yet born and has 
not yet reached the position of an Arhat. The female, with the small motionless infant 
in the separate section, is probably Triéal4, represented in an apartment of her palace, 
having just received her new precious burden. 


17 Sacred Hooks of the East, vol. XXII, p. 223 ff. 


318 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


In confirmation of this interpretation, I may point to four mutilated statues now in 
the Museum at MathurA, lithographed by Sir A. Cunningham in the Arch. Surv. Reports, 
vol. XX, plate iv, 2-5. Two ofthem represent seated females. ‘Hach of them has,” 
as Sir A, Cunningham says, op. cit., p. 36, ‘a small child lying in a dish on her lap. 
The left hand supports the dish, but the right is raised up to the shoulder. Both fe- 
males appear to be naked.” The other two figures are males with the heads of animals. 
“ Both,” to use Sir A. Cunningham’s words, ‘are represented in the same action. The 
larger figure carries a pair of children, maie and female, in his left hand, each being 
grasped by one arm at full siretch. The right hand of the figure is raised to the shoul- 
der in the same position as the right hands of the females. On each shoulder a small 
child is seated facing the head of the figure. The smaller figure is exactly the same as 
the larger one, excepting that it carries only one child by its outstretched arm.” Sir 
‘A. Cunningham then goes on to say that he has been unable to find a clue to these 
curious ‘ ox-headed’ figures, and that he abandoned his first idea that they might be. 
Yakshas and Yakshinis of gigantic size preparing to eat the children, because the small 
figures, seated on the shoulders of the two males, seemed to point to a more friendly 
connection between the two parties. 

With respect to Sir A. Cunningham’s description I must state that I differ from 
him in one important particular. In my opinion the two males are not ‘ ox-headed,’ but 
‘goat-headed ;’ for, between the much mutilated bodies of the children and the like- 
wise somewhat disfigured heads, pendent goats’ ears are recognisable, especially in the 
smaller figure. This granted, it is evident that both males are representations of 
Naigamesha. With this identification the other details admit of explanation. The 
motionless infants, represented in connection with the males, are the two embryos, which 
Naigamesha had to exchange. If the artist represented the larger Naigamesha with 
two children on his shoulders and two in his hands, and the smaller one with two 
on his shoulders and one in his hand, he probably meant to indicate two different steps 
in the transaction, viz., that the deity first took the children out of their mother’s bodies 
and ‘cleansed them of all impurity,’ as the Kalpasdira says, and later conveyed them to 
their new destination on his shoulders, The two female figures are, of course, No. 2 
Trigalé and No. 3 Devananda, who are represented, the former with a male ehila on 
her lap and the other with a female one, in order to show what each received. And it 
must be noted that the higher rank of Trisala seems to be indicated by the more costly 
necklace which she wears. The story, which the sculptures teli according to this 
explanation, may have differed in one detail from that of the Kalnasitra, where: 
Negamesti is said to have taken Mahavira in his joined palms, not on his shoulder. But 
it is also possible that the change is an invention of the sculptor, who wished to represent 
the. deity as carrying the two infants, for both of which there would not have been any 
room in his hands. 

If one compares these figures X vith our slab, the very close resemblance of the 
position of the infant, and af the attitude of the female holding it, is at once apparent. 
And this point, taken together with the unmistakable figure of Naigamesha-Nemeso, 
irresistibly leads to the conclusion that the legend referred to must be the same in 
both sculptures. 

The other two relievos on plate 1, B aid CO, are found on a fragment of the doorstep 


SPECIMENS OF JAINA SCULPTURES FROM MATHURA, 319 


from one of the two temples, buried under the Kankali mound. Though they bear no 
inscription, they cannot be later than the first century B.C.; for one of the two 
tempies existed on the evidence of the very ancient’ No. 1 of my second Series of 
Mathura inscriptions already in the middle of the second century B.C., while the 
likewise archaic inscription No. rv of the same Series which records the erection of the 
second temple, cannot be later than about the middle of the first century. The obverse, 
A, represents the worship of a Stipa by two Suparnas, half birds and half men, and by 
five centaurs or Kitnoaras. One of the former offers a garland and the other, as 
well as three of the centaurs, two on the right and one on the left, bring jars or boxes 
filled with flower-bunches (?). The last two centaurs on the left seem to carry brooms 
_or fans, made of branches. On both sides of the Stipa stand trees, and the two Supar- 
nas seem to be seated on, or hovering above, the bending branches of those uearest 
to the Stipa. All the five figures wear turbans, such as. many of the males of rank 
represented on Buddhist sculptures wear. 

A somewhat similar scene, where Suparnas worship a Stipa, occurs on a relievo 
at Sanchi (Fergusson, “ree and Serpent Worship, plate xxvu, fig. 1).° But it must 
be noted that the Sanchi figures are much more like Greek harpies, while those on our 
slab are done in a more conventional manner like the winged figures on the Assyrian 
and Persian sculptures. Among Brahmanical representations, those of Garuda, the king 
of the Suparnas, on the Gupta seals’ are worthy of comparison. Centaurs have been 
discovered on the Buddhist monuments in Gay& and elsewhere, and, if all probability, 
they go back to Greek models. What is particularly remarkable in those on our slab 
is the branch which hides the place where the human body is united with the rump of 
the horse. As far as I have been able to ascertain from my colleagues, versed in classical 
archeology, there are no Greek sculptures showing this particular. 

The reverse of our doorstep contains a fragment of a procession, apparently about 
to visit some sacred place. On the extreme right we have two horsemen, each preceded 
by a‘ syce,’ or groom. Next follows a covered cart, drawn by two enormous bullocks, 
as big as those of the Palanpur breed, and filled with males and females. The cart closely 
resembles a modern shighram, and the driver, who lifts his goad, is seated, as is still 
the custom, on the pole. The tails of the animals are tied to strings connected with 
the yoke, just as is the case with those of the horses on the Sanchi relievos.” Behind 
the cart comes again a horseman and finally an elephant with two riders. The ele- 
phant is very badly done. The trappings of the several animals are exactly like those 
represented on the Sanchi sculptures. ‘But similar carts are not traceable on the latter, 
where very Greek-looking chariots drawn by horses appear instead. 

The two sculptures on plate 111 are found on the two sides of a fragment of a Torana, 
and the scenes represented on them correspond to each other very closely. On both we 
have triangular pieces in the upper corners and three rows with figures, separated’ 
| by semi-circular rails, or Vedikds, with flowers, each row of figures ending with an 


18 Compare also ibidem, plates xxiv, 2; xxv, 1; xxvi, 1; xxvii, 1, where Suparnas are represented as worshipping 
the Budhi tree. 

9 See Fleet, Corpus. Jnser. Ind., yol. II], plate xxxvii, and Dr. Hernle’s new Gupta Seal in the Journ, ds. Soc. 
Beng., vol. LVUI, Pt. 1, p. 85ff. 

4 Fergusson, 7p, ctt., Plate xxxiv, Fig. 1, ete. 


320 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


open-mouthed Makara, which—in five cases-—a man teazes by taking hold of its tongue 
and upper jaw. The Makara, filling the corner of a row of figures, is common also on all 
Buddhist monuments.” In the cornerpiece on the obverse (4) the chief group is placed 
on the left side and consists of a male with a peaked ornament on his head (a. crest-jewel P), 
holding a garland and four females in the attitude of worship ; just below them appears 
a portion of an empty covered carriage. Further to the right stand five other smaller 
males (?), four in the attitude of worship, and carrying a large tray with offerings, 
the nature of which is not distinguishable. The extreme left is filled by five vessels 
of various shapes and sizes, from one of which rise the leaves of a plant. In the 
corresponding portion of the reverse (B) there is again in the back-ground a group 
consisting of one male with the peaked head-ornament and three or four females, one 
of whom holds a garland, further in front also a servant with offerings and a small male 
figure in the attitude of worship. Below the group appears likewise a portion of a 
carriage. The place, which on the other side is occupied by jars, is here filled up by a 
Stipa and by two platforms of stone (péthikd), which in the centre scem to have borne 
representations of sacred marks (Padukds ?), and at the upper ends are decorated, each 
with two lotuses. Two of the semi-circular rows of figures on the obverse, the first and 
the third, contain each two covered carts (shighram) véry similar to that on plate IZ, C., 
which are apparently each occupied by several passengers and attended by servants. 
In front of the cart in the first row walk three dancing girls, who may be easily 
recognised by the manner in which they expose their persons. It is possible, but not 
certain, that two of them support with their left hands trays or dishes with offerings. 
In the third row we have in the place of the dancing girls portions of a clothed male 
figure seated on a throne and attended by a female fan-bearer. The second row of the 
obverse shows running male figures with flying upper garments, holding bunches of 
flowers (lotuses ?) in their hands. 

On the reverse only the second, or central, row contains the representation of an 
uncovered bullock or horse-cart, preceded by dancing girls. Behind this cart comes a 
male figure riding on a marine monster, and in front there is a mutilated male figure on 
a throne. The riders on sea-lions and Makaras reappear in the two other rows. In the 
first there is also a mutilated male figure on a throne, attended by a female fan-bearer, 
at whose dress a Hansa nibbles. The back-ground behind the Hashsa is occupied by a 
monument, possibly a temple, enclosed by a wall. In the third row ,two male figures 
with upturned faces and uplifted hands are visible in front of the riders, as well as a 
piece of the garment of a third. 

The general character of the scenes represented is, of course, not doubtful. They 
refer to the worship of one or several Jaina sanctuaries and to processions or pilgrimages 
undertaken for this purpose. Many of the details must be likewise familiar to every 
student of Indian archeology, and they agree in part at least with the descriptions of 
such scenes occurring in Jaina works. The jars of various shapes, even ‘those with 
plants, appear frequently on the Buddhist Sttipas, and the Jaina descriptions of the 
pilgrimage of the deity Suriyabha to the Ambasalavana Chaitya mention them 


® On the Amardvati Stipa, Burgess, Arch. Rep. South India, vol. I, plate xxviii, 6, there is a similar scene in which 
a female takes hold of a Makara’s tongue. 


Plate I1I. 


MATHURA SCULPTURES. 


Epigraphia Indica, vol. ll, 


a. 


a) Obverse of Toran 


b) Reverse of Torana. 


Plate 1V. 


ATHURA JAINA SCULPTURES. 


i! 


SPECIMENS OF JAINA SCULPTURES FROM MATHURA. 321 


distinctly as requisites of worship.* Again, the stone platforms, with lotuses and other 
sacred marks, occur on the Bharhut sculptures.* Norare the riders on monsters and the 
running figures with flying garments unknown on the Buddhist Stipas,” where the latter 
are easily recognisable as Vidyadharas, moving through the air. Similarly, the dancing 
girls, who, even in modern times, are’ engaged to perform in honour of the Tirthamkaras, 
are frequently represented on the Buddhist monuments as exhibiting their art at festivals. 
But other points, like the introduction of the half visible clothed males, seated on thrones, 
and the representations of carts along with the riders on marine monsters and Vidy4- 
dharas, are puzzling, and it is difficult to decide whether the artist intended to lay his 
scene in heaven or on earth, and whether all the figures on each of the two sides of the 
Torana must be taken as a whole or if each row represents a scene complete in itself. 
The most probable view is perhaps that the artist did not intend to give two compositions 
only, based on particular texts or illustrating particular legends, but merely wished to 
show how gods and men are eager to pay homage to the Tirthamkaras, to their Stipas 
and temples. 

Plate Iv reproduces the mutilated slab, which bears No. xxi of my second Series of 
Mathura inscriptions :*— 

“The year 79, fourth month of the rainy season, day 20,—on that (date, specified as 
above, Aya-Vridhahasti, a preacher in the Kottiya gana and the Vaira Sakhd gave 
the advice to make an image of the Arhat Nandiavarta (dra) . .. . . the 
image, the gift of the female lay disciple Dina (Dald), wife of . . . . . was set 
up at the Vodva Stipa, built by the gods.” 

The central piece on the slab is a Dharmachakra aa by a Trigéla, whicl 
itself rests on a lotus. 

It belongs to the class of the Chakras, made conventionally and with a grcat number 
of spokes, which are not uncommon on the Amaravati Stipa (sce Burgess, op. cit., 
plates xxvi, 6, xxxiii, 2), and may be a later development of the carcfully done wheels. 

_ It differs from those on the Buddhist and other Jaina sculptures by the two ear-like 
projections at the top, as well as by the addition of two Sankhas,* which lean agains¢ 
the basis. On the right of the Dharmachakra theve is the mutilated figure of a naked 
ascetic, who, as usual, has a piece of cloth hanging over his right arm. This is probably 
the Arhat mentioned in the inscription. To the left of the Chakra stand four clothed 
females, wearing the usual ornaments of married women and holding garlands in their 
hands with which they evidently intend to worship the sacred symbol. The faces of 
these females look like portraits. Three of them scem to be matrons of mature years; 
the fourth is smaller and apparently much younger. The last two are half hidden by 
the figure of a large crouching lion, facing the left. 

The most noticeable point is the Dhdrmachakra, which, as the Mathura sculp- 
tures prove, was used and worshipped as much by the Jainas as by the Bauddhas. The 

fact is not very astonishing, as the wheel is the emblem of rule and government with all 


23 See Professor E. Leumann’s translations from the Rdyapasenijja Sutta, Acte du Vieme Cong, Int. Orientalistes, 
tome III, 2, p. 500 and passim. — 

% See Cunningham, Bharhut, plates xxxi, 2-4, xxx, 3, etc. 

% Arch. Reports South India, vol. I, plates xxxiii, 2, xxxiv, 1, xxxvi,2, and Cave Temples, plate’, Fig. 1-2, 

% Ante, vol. II, pp. 195f. 

27 ‘The Sankhas have ones been added marigaldrtham. 


322 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


Hindus, and the Sanskrit Koshas give rdshtra as one of the meanings of chakra. The 
epithet apratihatachakra, ‘he whose wheel, i.e., rule, is unopposed,’ is commonly given to 
kings in the inscriptions, and there are hundreds of passages in epic and classical poetry 
in which the chakra of kings is mentioned. Nor are the compound dharmachakra, ‘the 
rule of the sacred law,’ and the familiar phrase dharmachakram pravartayati, ‘he sets in 
motion the wheel of the law,’ z.e., ‘ he causes the rule of the law to spread,’ wanting in 
Brahmanical literature. The larger St. Petersburg Dictionary quotes several passages 
from the Mahdbhdrata where they occur. It is said of Bhishma, Mah. I., 109, 14:— 
www fated UF wHAMAAAT | 

“The rule of the law continued, which Bhishma had established in the kingdom ;” 

and Mah. XII, 356, 2:— 


aa yarfrat & waa wafer 
afaat Maat aa Aaa FTA 


«A town, called Naga, lies on the bank of the Gomati in the Naimisha forest, 
where in a former creation the rule of the law was caused to spread.” 

Considering that the metaphorical meaning of chakra is very common with the 
Brahmanical poets and easily intelligible as an outgrowth of the idea that the unopposed 
progress. of a king’s chariot shows the wide extent of his power, it may be safely 
assumed that the application of the expression to the triumphant progress of the sacred 
law is likewise of Brahmanical origin, as the passages from the Dahdbhdrata indicate. 
And it naturally follows that the Jainas and Buddhists, who both worship the Dharma- 
chakra as the emblem of the rule of their respective creeds, borrowed it from the 
Brahmans, and that the commonly prevalent’idea is erroneous, according to which thé 
Dharmachakra is a distinctive mark of the Buddhists and their particular invention. 

These new sculptures from the Kankali Tila teach the same lesson as Dr. Bhagvanlal’s 
Mathura slab published in the Zvransactions of the Leyden Congress, and prove that 
the ancient art of the Jainas did not differ materially from that of the Buddhists. Both 
sects used the same ornaments, the same artistic motives and the same sacred symbols, 
differences occurring chiefly in minor points only. The cause of this agreement is in all 
probability, not that the adherents of one sect imitated those of the other, but that both 
drew on the national art of India and employed the same artists. Full proof of this 
assumption, which modifies the statements in some standard works on Indian archzeo- 
logy regarding the development of ancient Indian art, can only be obtained by the 
excavation of really old Brahmanical temples. And it is to this task that the Archzo- 
logical Survey in India ought to direct its attention, as a thorough exploration even of 
afew Saiva and Vaishnava temples, which date from the second or first century before 
our era, will do more for our knowledge of the history of the Indian religions than 
the excavation of a hundred Stipas or Viharas. 

But even at present various pieces of collateral evidence are available which 
support the view that all the several Indian sectarians took their sacred symbols and the 
ornaments of their temples from one common storehouse. Chief among these is the 
now generally acknowledged fact that the Brahmanists, the Jainas and the Buddhists, 
all and at the same time, contributed to the development of the cave temple architecture 


THE BHATTIPROLU INSCRIPTIONS. 323 


which formerly was considered to be a speciality of the Buddhists. It is now conceded 
that the oldest known caves at Barabar and N&g4rjuni belonged to the Vaishnava 
Ajivikas, and those near Katak to the Jaina worshippers of the Arhats. The 
undoubtedly Buddhist Lenas date from somewhat later times. It is, therefore, not in 
the least doubtful that all the old Indian sects used rock-excavations for sheltering 
their ascetics who wished to live in retirement, and sometimes also their idols, and it 
is highly probable that this usage goes back to times antecedent to the rise of Buddhism 
and Jainism. In the face of such facts one can only say that it would be surprising 
if the worship of Stipas, of sacred trees, of the Wheel of the Law, and so forth, more 
or less distinct traces of which are found with all sects, as well as their representation 
in sculptures, were due to one sect alone instead of being heirlooms handed down from 
remote times before the beginning of the historical period of India. 


XXV.—THE BHATTIPROLU INSCRIPTIONS. 


By G. Btuuer, Pa.D., LL.D., C.1.E. 


The subjoined ten inscriptions, which were discovered by Mr. A. Rea in the Bhatti- 
prolu Stapa, are published here in full according to impressions, and in the case of 
No. X, also according to a photograph furnished to the editor by Mr. Rea.’ : 

Nos. I—IX are incised on three relic caskets, partly on the circular tops and partly 
on the rims of the lower stones.. Their preservation is good except in parts of No. IIT 
and in No. IV, which latter is effaced. No. X is scratched on a small hexagonal piece 
of crystal and difficult to read on account of the shallowness of the strokes. The great 
interest and value of the first nine documents lie in their characters, which mostly 
resemble those of Asoka’s inscriptions, bat show also peculiarities met with nowhere 
else. The details are as follows :— 

(1) Twenty-three letters, viz., the initial vowels d, d, u, o and the consonants, &, kh, 
chh, tt, t, th, n, t, th, dh, n, p, ph, b, y, 7, v, 8 and h agree exactly with those of the 
Southern Maurya alphabet. 

(2) The letter g has both the usual angular Maurya form and that with the 
sounded top, which occurs occasionally in Agoka’s Hdicts, eg., in magesu Pillar 
Edicts, VII. 2, 2, and is used invariably in the later inscriptions. The first palacal, ch, 
has a tail caused by a prolongation of the vertical. The third lingual, ¢, shows slanting 
strokes instead of straight ones, which peculiarity is also repeatedly observable in the 
word pdsarnda (KAlsi version of the Rock Edict XII., 1, ll. 383—34) and in. ambivadikd, 
Allahabad, Queen’s Edict, 1, 8. The dental media, d, exactly resembles the Maurya 
letter, but is turned round like the Andhra da and that of the modern Devanagari. The 
same remarks apply to the fourth labial, bh. 

(8) Five letters are entirely abnormal, viz. :-— 

(a) gh, which is expressed by the sign for g with a curve to the right denoting 
the aspiration (compare the Maurya chha, dha and pha, which have been formed in a 

» See the plates. Preliminary notices, treating chiofly of the paleographic peculiarities of the first nine, have been 
printed in the Academy, 1892, p. 621, and in the Vienna Oriental Journal, vol. VI. p. 148. - ‘ 

wea /27T2 


324 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


similar manner out of thesigns for cha, da and pa). It occurs in the names Vaghavd, i.e., 
Vydghrapad (II. 2), Satugho, i.e, Satrughna (II. 8), Chaghaita, ie., Jaghanya (VII), 
Chagho, ie., Changa (? VIII. 2), Akhagho, ie., Akshaghna or Rikshaghna (VIII. 5). 

(0) j has the angular form, which is rare in Asoka’s inscriptions, (but see, e.g., raja, 
Girnar Rock Edict, IX. 1) and the usual one in later documents, minus the central 
horizontal bar. It occurs repeatedly (e.g., I, A, B) in the word majusa or majésa, i.e. 
manjishd. ’ 

(c) m is turned topsy-turvy. It is found in the last-mentioned word and frequently 
in well-known names like Samana (III. 5), i.e., Sramana, Maho (VIII. 5), ie., Magha, 


C. 

(d) l shows instead of the short horizontal bar on the left a long slanting line 
attached at an acute angle to the right of the vertical stroke. It occurs only in names, 
eg., Pigalako (III. 9), ie., Pingalaka, Odalo (III. 11), ic, Oddla or Audéra, Gildno 
(VII. 18), ie. @ldna, Gosdélakénam (III. 16), ie., Gosdlakéndm, and so forth. 

(e) The lingual sibilant looks almost.exactly like the Ara of the later inscriptions, 
and seems to be developed from the sha of the Kalsi version of the Rock Edicts by 
turning the latter sign completely round and converting its upper curve into a crossbar. 
It occurs regularly for sa in the termination of the genitive of vowel-stems, €.8.5 Kurasha 
(I, A, B,), in the genitive plural tesham (V1), i.e., ceshdm, in the word shamuga (I, A), 
i.e., samudga and in many proper names. 

(4) There is further the lingual 7, which does not occur in Agoka’s Edicts. It looks 
like a pa with a short horizontal bar, attached to the right of the vertical stroke; it is 
more archaic than the corresponding Andhra letter and very similar to the Ja of a Sancht 
inscription. It occurs in the word phdliga® (I, A,), ie., sphdtcka and in various proper 
names. 

(5) The notation of the medial and final vowels shows two very remarkable 
peculiarities :—~ 


(a) The short a is invariably marked by the horizontal stroke to the right of the 
consonant, which denotes long @ in the Maurya alphabet, except when an Anusvdra 
follows. ‘The latter limitation is probably due to the circumstance tht the Anusvara 
was considered equivalent: to am, in which form it is invariably given in the native lists 
of matrikas, or the alphabets. 

(0) The long @ is usually marked by a horizontal stroke and a vertical hanging 
down from its end. In negamé, VIII, 1, a cursive form, consisting of a long notched 
horizontal stroke, appears instead. 


(6) In other respects the notation of the medial vowels mainly agrees with that 
used in. Agoka’s inscriptions. The diphthong o is however more commonly expressed 
by a bar projecting to the right and to the left of the consonant than by two separate 
strokes. The former 0, though rare in the Edicts, does occur occasionally see, € 
nigohdnt, Pillar Edict, VII, 2, 2, Finally, in the syllables 2? and nf the tee 
attached to the middle of the vertical stroke of 2, according to the analogy of wa and i. 

(7) The initial vowels 7, 7, #, e and the consonants gh and dh do not ee 
and there are at least no certain traces of the palatal sibilant 6, though fliere isa sis 
somewhat like it in a difficult name towards the end of IIT, 10. ep 


“sy7QI-§ * 2129S) 


-giaaf ‘nag 


“LAaNSVO GNOITS AHL 10 AIT GHL NO 
‘LHHSVO GNOOIS FHL 1O XOe QHL A0 ANdT FHL NO 


‘SNOLLEIMDSNI LaAASVO ATONdILLVHE 


Epigyaphia Indien, vol. Li, 


‘quel wey y 
“OSE QIRE 
ROY 


tyr RAL FELL 
bywerAav 
ARTY 

\ Par VW Aad YA 


“LEMSVO LIs¥ld THL AO ANOAS UIMOT AHL XO 


“IVISAD FHL NO 


‘SNOLLGINOSNI LAXSVO NI0Ud LIVE 


BHATTIPROLU CASKET INSCRIPTIONS. 


ON THE LIp OF THE THIRD CASKET, 


ON THE EDGE OF THE BOX 
OF THE LOWER OR THIRD CASKET. 


A, Rea, fecit. 


ALPHABET OF THE BHATTIPROLU INSCRIPTIONS. 


M OD eee Z 
£¢Ptedt tt a 
NOVA A Thea a 


dqd¢q | b i 
CoE bet ot F 
€ Oo O- o-O- 

iE Pp eee 

h De eA Ae oto: © 
eo C22 “Gere tp. ae 
a 6 0 hu GE g 


Be eh, ft hh 2. 
ba > bl ee 1 
Vk So bb ee ee 
SEF EF Leite Ce 


<tr e  e 
eee ee Ne et 


J. Burgess, fecit. 


THE BHATTIPROLU INSCRIPTIONS. 325 


The inscription, No. X, which is incised on the piece of crystal, shares only two of 
the peculiarities, just described. Its cha (1. 2) has a tail and its da in “desdnam (1. 3) and 
in ddnam (1. 6) opens towards the left. In otlier respects its letters, as well as its vowel 
notation, fully agree with those of Agoka’s Edicts. It may be noted that it twice offers 
in Samanudesdnam (1. 2) with the palatal sibilant exactly in the places where it would 
stand in Sanskrit. This agreement of its characters with those of the Maurya inscriptions 
leads to the supposition that it belongs to the same time as the latter. 

But the first nine inscriptions are also probably only a few decades later than ASoka’s 
Edicts. They unfortunately contain no historical statements which might be used to 
absolutely prove the correctness of this estimate. They mention, it is true, the names 
of a king Kubirako or Khubirako, i.e., Kuberaka, of various families, of gothis or 
committees and Buddhist saints. But none of them is traceable in any other historical 
source. Under these circumstances, all that remains is to fall back on arguments deduced 
from a comparison of other datable inscriptions, which, of course, may be deceptive. 
If one does this and places on the one side the alphabet of the Asoka Edicts and on 
the other those of the Nanaghat, Iathigumph4 and Bharahut-Torana inscriptions, which. 
belong to about the middle of the 2nd century B.C., one can only come to the con- 
clusion that the Bhattiprolu inscriptions hold an intermediate position between the two 
sets, but are much more closely allied to the first than to the second. On this evidence, 
which, I repeat, may mislead, they cannot be placed later than 200 B.C., but may be 
somewhat earlier. 

If this estimate is correct, their characters prove (what, indeed, is also made pro- 
bable by facts connected with Asoka’s Edicts) that during the 3rd century B.C. several 
well-marked varieties of the Southern Maurya alphabet existed; for they contain a 
system which cannot have sprung up in a short time, but must have hada longer history. 
The importance of this result lies therein, that it removes one of the arguments of those 
scholars who believe the introduction of writing to have happened during the rule of 
the Maurya dynasty. It has been stated repeatedly that one of the facts proving the 
Agoka Edicts to belong to the first attempts of the Hindus in the art of writing, is the 
absence of local varieties among the letters of versions, incised at places which lie at distances 
from each other of more than a thousand miles. This argument is based, as I have pointed 
out more than once, on imperfect observation, and it may be met also by the obvious 
objection, that Asoka’s Edicts were all issued from the same office, and that the importance 
naturally attributed to the writing of the royal clerks at Pataliputra might be expected 
to influence the copyists in the provinces and to induce them to imitate as much as 
possible the shape of the letters used at head-quarters. Nevertheless, if the Bhattiprolu 
inscriptions now show a system of writing, which in some respects is radically different 
and which may be reasonably supposed to have.arisen in Asoka’s times or even earlier, 
they furnish a very great help to those who, like myself, believe the art of writing to have 
been practised in India for many centuries before the accession of Chandragupta to the 
throne of Pataliputra. 

This is, as far as I can judge at present, the chief value of the new alphabet. I do 
rot think that it teaches us: much regarding the history of the Southern Maurya 
characters and regarding the manner in which they were derived from their Semitic 
prototypes. There is only one form among them which, I think, may be considered for 


326 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


good reasons as more ancient than the vorresponding Maurya character. This is the m, 
whose shape comes so close to the full form of the Northern m that I should not wonder 
if the two little strokes below the circle had really stood originally below the circle or 
semicircle and the letter had been turned topsy-turvy only later. Further, it is possible 
that the gh of the Bhattiprolu alphabet, which, as stated already, has been formed by 
the extension of a principle underlying the formation of chha, dha and pha, proves the 
Semitic prototype of the Southern Maurya characters to have been destitute of a sign for 
the guttural. media aspirata. Though the common Southern gha looks like an inde- 
pendent character, it may have been formed out of a ga with a round top by the addition 
of a curve to the upper right corner and by then turning the whole letter round. If 
this view is correct, the Bhattiprolu gh probably dates from very ancient times and is 
quite as old'as the sign of ASoka’s Edicts. On the other hand, two other letters, the 7 
with two bars and the lingual sibilant sh are in all probability younger than the corre- 
sponding Maurya characters. With respect to sh this is self-evident. As regards the 7, 
the central bar probably has to be regarded as an essential part of the letter on account 
of the shape of jha, which has been fashioned out of a ja, consisting of a vertical and a 
short horizontal stroke by the addition of a small upward stroke on the right. Nor is it 
possible to assume that the more elaborate system of vowel-notation in the Bhattiprolu 
inscriptions is more ancient than the simpler one, found in all other Indian alphabets ; 
for the Semitic original of the Southern alphabet in all probability had no vowel-marks. 
Hence, a system of notation, requiring eight instead of seven signs for the purpose must 
be regarded a priori as the later one. With respect to the remaining anomalies, I am 
not able to say anything definite. But I would point out that, with the exception of 
the position of the letter da, not one of the peculiarities of the Bhattiprolu alphabet has 
left any trace in the later Indian alphabets. 

The language of the Bhattiprolu inscriptions is of the type of the Pali, from which it 
differs only by the occurrence of the lingual sibilant in Nos. I—IX, and of the palatal one 
in No, X. Though the two signs differ, I believe that the sound for which they served 
was the same. There is, as far as I am aware, neither any modern nor ancient Prakrit 
dialect, which has or had more than two sibilants, the dental one and that which comes 
near to, but is a little thicker than, the Sanskrit palatal sa. 

With regard to the contents of the inscriptions, I may confine myself to the remark 
that two of the caskets are said (see Nos. I and V) to be intended for relics of Buddha. 
This point, I think, speaks too in favour of the antiquity of the inscriptions, 


TRANSCRIPTS AND TRANSLATIONS. 
I? 


(A.) Kurapituno cha Kurama{t]u cha Kurasha Siva[sha]® majusarh-panati 
phaligashamugam* cha Budhasariranam nikhetu [l!]. 
(B.) Banavaputasha Kurasha shapitukasha majusa [II]. 
” Nos. I and II are incised on the rim of the lower stone of the first casket. 


* Looks like Sivaka as the lower curve of the sha has not been formed properly. 
* Possibly padligam snamugam. 


THE BHATTIPROLU INSCRIPTIONS. Spar 


TRANSLATION. 

By the father of Kura, the mother of Kura, Kura (himself ) and Siva (Siva), 
(has been ordered) the preparation of a casket and (has been given) a box of crystal in 
order to deposit some relics of Budha (Buddha‘) 

“ By Kura, the son of Banava, associated with his father (has been given), the 


casket. 
i LE 


Utaro Pigahaputo kanitho® [1] 
TRANSLATION. 
“Utara (Uttara), the youngesé son of Pigaha (Vigraha’). 


III. 
L. Gothi 
Hirahavaghava 
V[ujgalako K[A]laho 
Visako Thorasisi 
Samano Odalo 
Apaka . Shamudo 
Anuga[h]o Kuro 
Satugho Potako [P]oto Alinaka 
V{ajruno Piga[la]ko Koshako 
Suto Papo Kabherakh[o] [Gale|ko 
Samana[d]asho Bharado 
Odalo Thoratiso ‘'Tiso 
13 Gilano Jambho 
14 Pudara (?} [B]dbo 
15 Galavata . + . (?) Janako 
16 Gosalakanam Kuro 
17 Uposhathaputo Utaro 
18 Karahaputo [i] 


= 


— 
DH OO MIO OB 99 019 


pa 


TRANSLATION. 
«The Committee (consists of ) :— ) 

Hirafavaghava (Hiranyavydghrapdd) Vugalaka (Udgdraka), Kalaha, Visaka 
(Visvaka), Thorasisi (Sthaulasirshi), Samana (Sramana), Odala, Apaka, Sha- 
muda (Samudra), Anugaha (Anugraha), Kura, Satugha (Satrughna), Potaka, 
Pota, Alinaka (Alénaka?), Varuna, Pigalaka (Pingalaka), Koshaka (Kaus- 
ika?), Suta, Papa, (Kabherakha ?) (Kuleraka ?), Galeka (?), Samama[d ]asha 
(Sramanaddsa), Bharada (Bharata) (L. 12), Odala (Auddra?) Thoratisa (Sthau- 
latishya), Tisa (Tishya), Gilana (Gidna),Jambha, . . . .Buba .. . 
Janaka, of the Gosdlakas (Gosdlaka), Ktira, the son of Uposhatha, (Uposa- 
tha), Utara (Uétara), the son of Karaha. 


* The genitive sarirdnam has to be taken as genitivus partitivus. 


6 This seems to be meant for kantttho. 
1 For the change of va to pa, compare words like Pali pajdpati, Sanskrit prajdvati and the inscriptional Lhagapato 


for bhagavate, pijite for visite, and the like. Probably Uttara was the stone-cutter who made the casket. 
3 Nos. ILI-V are incised on the top stone of the second casket, and No. III in a central disc, lines 1-11 running 


lengthwise, lines 12-13 breadthwise on the left, and lines 14-18 breadthwise on the right. 


328 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Iv. 
Sama[nad4]sha[to hita] .a . . Budhasha sariranimahiyanukamma4 ... . 


Remark. 


Nothing can be said regarding the contents of this inscription, except that it 
mentions relics of Buddha. 
vy. 
L.1 Gothisamano Kubo [1] 
2 Hiranakdrag4maniputo Bibo [1] 


TRANSLATION. 


“Kuba (Kumbha), the ascetic of the Committee (?).” 
“Biba, the son of the village-headman Hiranakara (Hiranyakdra).” 


VI" 

Shaga[th]inigamaputanam rajapamukha’[1] Sha . ifsha] puto Khubirako raja 
Shihagothiy4 pamukho [I] tesham amnam maj [d-|s[am] phdligashamugo cha 
pasanashamugo cha [1]. 

: TRANSLATION. 

“By the sons of the Shagathi nigama (guild or town), chief among whom is the 
king—king K hubiraka (Kuberaka), theson of Sha.-i, isthe chief of the Shiha (Sinha) 
Committee—by these (has been given) another casket, a box of crystal and a box of stone.”’ 


VII. 
Samano Chagha[fa]puto Utaro Arimutara . . [ll 
TRANSLATION. 
Samana (Sramana), the son of Chaghaiia (? Jaghanya ?). Utara (Uttara) 


] e e e 


VIII 
Negama. 
Vachho Chagho 
Jeto Jambho Tiso 
Reto Achino Shabhiko 
Akhagho Kelo Keso Maho 
Seto Chhadiko Okhabdlo 
Sonutaro Samano 
Samanadasho S4mako 
9 Kimuko Chitako [1] 


» Incised on the rim.to the left and below the inscription on the central disc, 

” Tacised on the outer rim, to the right of the inscripton on the central disc. Possibly Kibo is co be read. 
11 Incised on the rim of the lower stone of the second casket, 
2 Read "pdmukhdnam. 


® Incised on the rim of the lower stoue of the second casket, outside the No. VI, the letters being turned the other 


aN oan ke Wh eS 


way: 
4 Ineised on the uppér stone of the third casket, 


THE BHATTIPROLU INSCRIPTIONS. 329 


TRANSLATION. 

«The members of the guild (ave) :— 

~ Vachha (Vatsa), Chagha (Changa ?), Jeta (Jayanta), Jambha, Tisa (Tishya), 
Reta (Raivata) Achina (Achirna ?), Shabhika (Sabhika), Akhagha 
(Akshaghna), Kela, Kesa (Kega), MAha (Mdgha), Seta (Svaitra ?), Chhadika 
(Chhandika ?), Okhabila, Sonutara (Suvarnottara), Samana (Sramana), 
Samanadasha (Sramanaddsa), SAmaka (Sydmaka), Kamuka, Chitaka 
(Chitraka). 


Ix. 
Arahadininam gothiya majisa cha sha[m]ugo cha [I] tena kama yena 
Kubirako raja am[k |i [11] 
TRANSLATION. 
“ By the Committee of the venerable Arahadina (Arhaddatta, was given) a casket 
and a box. ‘The work (és) by him, by whom King Kubiraka (Kuberaka) caused the 
carving to be done.” 


Be 
L. 1 Matugamasa [Nam ]dapurahi” 
2 Suvanamaha 
3 Samanudeganarn cha” 
4 Gilanakerasa” ayasaka 
5 ([Sa]thiya” 
6 gohiya a-ga danarh™ [1] 


TRANSLATION. 


‘An A-ga,—gift by the women from Nandapura (?) and by the Sramaneras from 
Suvanamaha, in the Ayasakasathi gohi of Gildnakera (?).” 

The arrangement of the lines of this inscription seems to be fixed, first by the cha 
after Samanudesdnam and secondly by dénam. _ The latter word in all probability con- 
cludes the inscription and the former shows, that line 3 is preceded by something 
else. Nevertheless the exact meaning remains obscure, as the word immediately preced- 
ing dénam is mutilated and those from gildnakerasa down to gohiyd, though plain 
enough, are for me at least, inexplicable with any certainty. 


5 Incised on the rim of the lower stone of the third easket. 

16 Incised on the sides of a hexagonal piece of crystal, found inside one of the boxes. 

7 The first syllable is abnormal and the reading uncertain. The last syllable is visible only on the tracings, not on 
the photograph, 

18 The cha has a tail, like in the other nine inscriptions. 

1” There is also a short stroke to the left of the top of ra, and it is possible to read °keresa, which however would be 
perfectly inexplicable. 

20 The left limb of sa is abnormal. 

1 There is on the photograph a letter between a and ga, which I am not able to make out. Possibly the word may have 
been dydga. The da of ddnazh opens to the right, just as in the other nine inscriptions. 


330 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


XXVI.—GOVINDPUR S!YONE INSCRIPTION OF THE POET GANGADHARA. 
Tur SAKA YEAR 1059. 


By Proressor F, Kretuorn, Pu.D., C.1.E.; GOrrinesn. 


About five years ago Dr. Fleet sent mea rubbing, received by him from Sir A. 
Cunningham in October 1883, of an inscription, described as being on a slab of stone in 
Narsingh Mali’s house at Govindpur, in the Nawada sub-division of the Gaya dis- 
trict of the Province of Bengal. And some time afterwards I received another rubbing 
of the same inscription from Dr. Burgess, to whom it had been made over by Mr. Beglar.! 
Both rubbings are very faint, and I know that, with a good impression, the wording of 
the text of this inscription which I now publish may be improved upon; but I feel 
confident that everything of importance has been made out correctly, and that a renewed 
examination of the original inscription will not add materially to what I now have to 
report regarding the contents of it. 

The inscription contains thirty-five lines of writing which cover a space of about 1’ 82” 
broad by 1’ 33” high. At the upper proper Icft corner a small piece of the inscribed 
surface is broken away, causing the complete loss of altogether a dozen aksharas at the 
end of lines 1-6. Of the rest of the inscription nothing is actually lost, but, to judge from 
the rubbings, the proper right half of the writing, from about line 11 to 24, has suffered 
either from exposure to the weather or from careless treatment; and a few aksharas are 
more or less illegible on the left side, The size of the letters is between +°,” and 5". 
The characters are the peculiar kind of Nagari which was used in parts of Eastern India 
during the 11th and 12th centuries A.D., and the most characteristic feature of which 
is, that 7, preceding another consonant, is written by a short line, sideways attached to 
the right side of the akshara of which r forms part, not by the ordinary superscript sign. 
Essentially the same alphabet is used, eg., in the Dinajpur plate of Mahipala and in the 
Amgachhi plate of Vigrahapala III., and the closest possible resemblance to the writing 
of the present inscription is shown by the writing of the Cambridge palm-leaf MS. Add., 
1698,” which was written in A.D. 1165, and by that of the Hodgson’ palm-leaf MS. 1 of 
the Royal Asiatic Society, written in the fourth year of the reign of Govindapala.t’ In 
the inscription here edited the sign for 7, described above, is so small and so shallow 
that often it can hardly be recognized in the rubbings; and this, as well as the fact that 
the sign of anusvdra and the superscript strokes which turn e and o into aé and ay are 
equally faint, and the close resemblance of the signs for p and y, ¢ and bh, m and s, 


1 I saw at once that the inscription, of which these tworubbings had thus been sent to me, was of some value, but 
have long hesitated to attempt a full decipherment of the text, because the imperfect state of my rubbings suggested the 
advisability of waiting for a proper impression. To secure one, I applied in April 1892 to Mr. Grierson, and he arin having 
then left the Gayd District, kindly communicated my request to My. D. J. Macpherson, of the Bengal Civil Service. Mr 
Macpherson most readily at once sent two of his men to Narsingh Mali’s house at Govindpur, but they were told there that 
two or three years ago a Sahib bad come and examined the stone which contains the inscription, and that next day the sare 
Sabib bad returned on a camel, and taken the stone away. If this story is really true, I need! hardly say that even now I 
should be grateful to the present owner of the stone for an impression. 

3 See Bendall’s Catalogue, plate ii, 2. 

9 See Cowell and Eggeling’s Catalogue in the Journal Royal As. Sor., N.S. vol. VIII, plate i, 2. 

* For Govindapala we have the date Vikrama 1232 = A.D. 11765; see Indian Antiquary, vol. X1X, p. 358 


GOVINDPUR STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE POET GANGADHARA. aoe 


» and dh, and of the subscript « and 7, have caused me no slight difficulty. The inscrip- 
tion never employs the signs of the jihvdmiliya and upadhméniya, and the sign of the 
avagraha is used only once, in Gangddharo ’bhit in line 24, 

The language of the inscription is Samskrit, and, with the exception of the introduc- 
tory orm on namah Sarasvatyai and the date Sdka 1059 at the end, the whole is in verse. 
The writer and engraver have done their work with great care, so that, in respect of 
orthography, my remarks may be brief. As was to be expected, the letter d is through- 
out written by the sign for v. The dental sibilant is used instead of the palatal in 
Kasyapdd, line 6, and prasrayaih, line 7; and the palatal instead of the dental in 
sitribhir, line 29. Instead of anusvdra we find the guttural nasal in the word vavsa, in 
lines 2 and 5 (but not in line 4), and the dental nasal in avatansa, line 4. Before 7, ¢ 
has been doubled in mittra, lines 7 and 24, amittra, line 21, mazttré, line 27, and dtapat- 
tra, line 31; and bh is similarly doubled in avbhriyam (for abbhriyam), line 80. As 
regards the rules of euphony, ¢ is left unchanged before § in srimatsankara, line 17 ; and 
m before y and v in samyattau, line 18, samvdsdya, line 9, and sarvasvam=vitatdra, line 
11; and the dental sibilant is wrongly employed instead of the lingual in misprabhdrdham 
(assuming this to be the right reading) in line 18, and duskare (for dushkaro) in line 30. 
Of words which according to von Béhtlingk’s Dictionary have been hitherto found only 
in lexicographical works our inscription offers gird ‘speech, song,’ in line 5, mahallaka 
‘eunuch,’ in line 10, and dtman in the sense of ‘the sun,’ in line 18. Besides we find 
Siviré for the neuter sivira, in line 9, and the word rama (‘husband and wife’) apparently 
employed in the sense of.‘ parents,’ in line 19. To a few other points, having reference 
to the grammar and to the construction of some of the verses, attention will be drawn 
below. 

The inscription is dated, in lines 34-35, both in words and in figures, in the Saka 
year 1059, corresponding to A.D. 1137-38. It was engraved by the artisan Stlapani, 
the son of Rudra and grandson of Uddharana (verse 89). And its immediate object 
is, to record that a man named Gangadhara, who has himself composed this poem, for 
the spiritual benefit of his parents, built a tank near which the inscription must have 
been put up (verses 3438). But what is of more importance is, that the author has 
furnished a pragasti,’ or eulogistic account, of himself and his family which enables us to 
fix the time of no less than six men who were known to.us as poets from other sources, 
and some of whose verses have been preserved; and that he has given us the names of 
the rulers of Magadha, hitherto unkriown, under whom he and some of his relatives 
lived and whose patronage they enjoyed. It may also be a matter of some interest to 
learn that the author’s family belonged to the clan of the Maga or Sakadvipiya 
Brahmans. 

Opening with a verse which invokes the blessing of Visvambhara (Vishnu), the 
inscription, in verse 2, glorifies both Aruna (i.e. the dawn personified as the charioteer 
of the sun) ‘ whose presence sanctifies the milk-ocean-encircled SAkadvipa where the 
Brahmans are named Magas,’ and the Magas themselves who here, as elsewhere,* are 
said to have sprung from the sun’s own body and to have been brought to India by 


5 According to verse 37 of the text Gangadhara composed two praSastis which doth must have been engraved and 


put up close to each other. 
6 See Professor Weber’s most interesting essay on the Magavyakti of Krisknadtsa. 
202 


332 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Simba (the son of Krishna and Jambavati). According to our author the first of these 
Maga Brdhmans was Bharadvaja (verse 3), whose family had a hundred branches 
(verse 4), In one of these was born, as a son of a certain Damodara, Chakrapini, 
who, compared as he is to Valmiki, must have been considered a poet of some eminence 
(verse 5). He.had two sons, Manoratha and Dasaratha (verse 7), who were induced 
to come to the court of the ruler of Magadha (verse 15), the prince Varnamana of the 
Mana family (verse 10), where one of them was appointed to the office of pratihdra, 
while the other was made superintendent of the eunuchs (verse 11). ~Dasaratha again 
had two sons, Harihara and Purushottama (verse 22). Of Manoratha, to the praise 
of whose liberality,’ piety, shrewdness, learning, etc., our author has devoted no Jess than 
six verses (12-17) and who is spoken of as a modern Kalidasa (verse 15), we learn that he 
married a daughter of Devasarman, a counsellor of the prince of the [Ghaudi*] country 
(verse 18) ; and that she bore to him also two sons, Gangadhara, the author of the in- 
scription, and Mahidhara (verses 21-22), All these six men, Manoratha and Dasaratha 
and their four sons, are especially eulogized for their learning and proficiency in vedic 
studies (verse 28). The rest of the inscription treats of Gangddhara himself. Here 
it will be sufficient to say that he represents himself to have been a counsellor and friend 
of the Mana prince, the king Rudramana (verse 24); that he married PAsaladevi, a 
daughter of Jayap4ni, an official of the king of Gauda, and his wife Subhaga (verse 29), 
and finally, that, according to his own account, he was the author of a poem entitled 
Advaitesata and had shown his skill as a poet also in the composition of other poems 
(verse 33) 

The princes of the M4na family, mentioned in the above, have not, so farasI am 
aware, become known yet from other inscriptions, and it may therefore suffice here to 
state that Varnamana and Rudramaéna must have ruled over Magadha (or part of 
it) towards the end of the 11th and at the beginning of the 12th century A.D, 

As regards Gangadhara and his relatives, the inscription tells us distinctly that, 
like Gangadhara himself, Chakrap4ni and Manoratha were poets, andit may reason- 
ably be assumed that some of the other members of the family, learned men as they 
were, also were in the habit of writing poetry. Now it happens that the Saduktikarnd- 
myita, an anthology compiled by Sridharadasa in A.D. 1205, contains verses of six poets 
bearing the same names as six of the Maga Brahmans mentioned in this inscription, and, 
considering that these Brahmans lived in Eastern India and that the Saduktikarndmrita’ 
also was compiled there,” I have little doubt indeed as to the identity of the six poets 
mentioned by Sridharadasa with Gangadhara, the author of this inscription, and five of 
his relatives, viz. his great-grandfather Damodara, his grandfather ChakrapAéni, his 
father’s brother Dagaratha, his own brother Mahidhara, and his cousin Purushot- 
tama. 

Of Gangadhara himself the Saduktikarndmrita has two verses which were first pub- 
lished by Professor Aufrecht in Zeitschrift d. Deutschen Morg. Ges., vol. xxxvi, p- 511, 


See verse 12, according to which Manoratha on the occasion of a lunar eclipse went to the sacred place Purushottq- 
ma, which was situated near the sea. 


8 The reading of this name is doubtf; ul ; see below. 
* See Dr. Rajendralal Mitra’s Notices, vol. III, p. 134. 


_ ™ Professor Aufrecht states the Saduktikarndmrita to be an’ anthol culled chiefly fi Bengal 
compiler’s father, Batudaea, lived under Lakshmanasena. bai go sees a i aes 


GOVINDPUR STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE POET GANGADHARA. 333 


and have afterwards been reprinted by Professor Peterson in his edition of Vallabhadeva’s 
Subhdshitdvali, Introduction, p. 32. Of Damodara the Saduktikarnémrita contains 
two verses," of Chakrapdni four, of Dagaratha also four, and of Mahidhara one verse: 
As regards Gangadhara’s cousin, the author of the anthology assigns six verses to Srimat- 
Purushottamadeva, one verse to Purushottamapadah, and one to Purushottama and it 
seems probable that only the last is the Purushottama of our inscription. All these 
verses have been kindly copied out for me by Professor Aufrecht and will be published 
elsewhere. ‘The inscription being dated in Saka 1089, the six poets may be assumed to 
have composed their verses— 

Damodara between about A.D. 1050 and 1075; 

Chakrapani between about A.D, 1075 and 1100; 

DaSaratha between about A.D. 1100 and 1125; 

Gangadhara, Mahidhara and Purushottama between about A.D. 1125 and 1159, 


A Wb Gs 
} Pro a(n] At ra: aaa 11 
UHAAAATAMITAATY ATH AAT AAAT- 
aaa faagqerafard GF UAE | 
TA ATAU YAA AAS AHA US 
ferratiat] U-" 
2 eat] earg efamatfag faa: —[1]. 
eat shnfatiatafacaaen afaaraa ye: 
waste garg) fafaaratadt aa fat ane | 
agea fearat atafafaqatteut (aad aig — —” 
3. anal attra aafas afeara aaa wafer 11°—[2)]. 
aut a Waa: WAR faaaataTataaas 
q(a)att area va fawasararorararat | 
artarsaafaa(a)ya Yaatererfaara an: 
4, ae qa aafesaetantaaataa:” 4) [3]. 
TAY AA WAM SMSAGAAT AAT YAALAT A: 
aarat ul tjaaataciaaafaaraeranaa: vaat fesrat —[4)]. 
area NI NAS 
" The first words of these verses and of those mentioned below are: Kaildsa re pasupati; Sélamb Sdtayati; 


Tasyd ndma mayd; Yat kindam gaganadrumasya ; Aridhdntarayauvanasya 3 Agre vitatya charanau ; Achchhidya 
Lakshmim:; Iyam sé Kélindi; Naikam janmatavaiva ; Vandyosau vidhir eva; Lilottdnasayopi; and Kdntdreshu 


kardvalambi. ; 
2 From Sir A. Cunningham’s pencil-rubbings. | 9 Metre: Sragdhara. 
13 Expressed by a symbol. *” This is what was originally engraved; but the vowel of 
14 The akshara, here broken away, was probably 4, the akshara fa is clearly struck out, and I believe the intended 
's Metre: Sardilavikridita. reading to be °CTagTat. 
6 Read axa. 2! Read “aaTaa:. 
17 The aksharas, here broken away, were probably qa. 3 Metre: Sardilavikridita. 


8 Read MI for UTA. 33 Metre: Vasantatilaka, 


334 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


are faqaufaaafearat afar 
ahora aft aaaTicaraerecearast: | 
a aeatfafaraatafrrae a farafala]- 
‘aT UU — Aaa sa erat afwaraatt: —L[5). 
afafertt vr... 
6. ai faate[arer|e | 
femai afe arect agaaarn aa 1” —[6}. 
arat araranarfay al TATATATACT 
arctarfes we(a)argutaat aa Hea fest 
waa AAT eTTTTargsat [TAT] 
fan[a)ufsantataraatear ufad sarq 1° —f7] 
qaaa vat wifacfadiata: sarge: 
afaaianaa acfasniticaara[it:] 1 
waa qiavetafed: wat, wa(a)a- 


N 


wratfa feaeraatia fact maiaeet qT 1 —[8]. 
at aratrafaaat aesitfeda Fear uwataal scarey | 
releearaay aaa araifa a wafacara afar: werfaq 1° —[9]. 
arid fasasagaaafad ware alae 
warara away fafa aawaraa ay | 
qaraaea (a )aaatad anaraty ofa 
attaq alfeaqa quya: atifsadefa y°—[10]. 
= 
10. falatajuahniicagiaaa [@)ataii- 
wafaarauddetata ze ofa caterear | 
ware gare aay ata faericar- 
ait waaaa(s)yaqhtes wsataatfaat 1 —[11]. 
Tear =t- 
11. waging [wa jaatsa: ufasrac 
Utrantad ulate qeqeaetaiete | 
waa fara atuatugea: actarfad- 
waa: fufecre vate fad: ereterata we 1) —[12], 
ata[at|- 


co 


* Read re. The next three aksharas are quite 30 Read Garera. 


blurred in the rubbings. and it is impossible to say confidently *! One would have expected the neuter fafaz. 
what they were. 33 Metre of verses 1O—12: Sardtilavikridita. 


% Motre: Sardilavikridita. 8 The akshara in brackets is doubtful, and looks rather 
* The aksharas, here broken away, were probably qt a- | like @. 

77 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). ' & This is clearly engraved, but I believe the intended read- 
%8 Metre of verses 7 and 8: Sarddlavikridita. ing to be “yxTaTafe. . 


29 Metre: Vasantatilaka. % Read wae faa. 


GOVINDPUR STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE POET GANGADHARA. 


froaen(s fafacafadt wate fears 


L. 12. 


335 


TAMAS LaraaherasTHATATATS | 
wat: artes fasafa fafeaterrn|arjaetar- 


fer wHEatRaafactactaSd H- 


13, 


Hats: 1% —[13]. 


raaTe ot ate [forge jerrerett [fare (maar ]” 
waranfa[facfalat afaqaaaaT | 

aaa waafa fait: afters 
wife aafafay wat yaad fa: w—[14]. 


ae {laaT- 
14, 


aaa [aaan |atfararart [za je- 


want jquacgha(@)aafearariraat ear | 
THT EaTAa ae fafa Gt Te SAT 
Tet aaaarfaerea sha a: arety FatfaaH: v"—[15], 


a: wateay aT- 


15. 


qiufi(slaatwata: weaa- 


qaeafaiqeaaft(a ofa faanrata: | 
aaTanaal matinee Ua laatarfaat” 
arere UfawMy: afanareceaT:” —[16]. 


MUU AT” 
16 


quate: Gala AT- 


MS RSAAAT ACT AATATYS AAS; | 
dita: efuai warfafanarata: aererea- 
wa sea fast frara ara: GTA Uta a: Wy —[17]. 


Val aa AAT A- 
17. 


favaricarg| at |ue 


(W]Geuatuaafaancamarasn® | 
ala] alalaearata saat] eat aatat gic 
atrerec (ar? |faltlae[fale wepeaten [apr —[18]. 
[arlaet facaraqugfad aaa at <- 


35 Metre: Sragdhara. 

7 This whole line and part of the following line are ex- 
tremely indistinct in the rubbing. ~ 

88 Metre: Mandakranta. 

% Metre of verses 15—19: Sardilavikridita. 

The akshara in brackets, in the original, is @ rather 
than %. 

4 Read eaters? 

"The readivg is clear here, but I would alter it to 


aaa? 


The first akshara of this line, according to the rubbing, 
can only be either HT or Ht. Originally @qq was engraved, 
but it bas been altered to afaa. 

“Tam not satisfied with the text of this line and of 
the next, which are quite blurred in the rubbings; but, with the 
exception of the bracketed letters the above seems to me to be the 
reading offered by the rubbings, In the place of the akshara 
“1 another letter was originally engraved, but it has been 
altered subsequently. 

4 Read Stray’, 


336 


.” Read dauarata, 


“ Metre: Vasantatilaka, 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


TiS; wat 


RAAT AMAA AAT: | 
ararraaaaacfattat gata at 
Tafa aaarfeen fates: ag arto aa: 1 —[19]. 
a(aa qaATaaAy Ja- 

ie aataaten (8H aaa AA ATA qa ao 
SUfAATHCSTATAT TEU VUTAAAAAARAT AA HAS 11"”—[ 20) 
TET: a act fave a: inatfearttart 1 
faasara: Ualatent erat aaATaat- 

20. av W’—[21]. 
saat alae sfa gat wtaatcareteadt | 
arnafaarat efeecgentaat enwargq u°—[22]. 
amanaur: sfarufa( aj faerfeattean: 

asitfanaat fareatauerererta- 
91. at area: | 
[erlat aracumie fagaral aa )iatte[ar]-” 
aawufaar: wea yaa & fa(faeafa arac: n"—[23]. 
aeat Aaa aT: FT Agaratisata Jar Aas * 
aafettwaarfeaiade(s) are firar- 


29, ae) fre: wag 1°—( 24). 
arfaletrau: mitalee[o] cag oer aa 


waterferfrara Va aatat TaTATT AT: | 


23, f aN NW —[25 |. 
aa feaftenatfeafedg arlatt 2] falta alg] 
ard ate wyfeartas feta ate afa artery | 
ate] qarfeynuafa alibi sos 
faatertea adalat eaypitcarga aera 
24, 


ae aa) elaahtguesfal fag]: aera 

a(a)ag: wet faufe faacenrafaateatar | 
Far we: eta fanz farafararaara 

wg fad ecafracae agTAa SIT 1°"—[27]. 
STATTT- 


hae CATE 


59 Metre: Varnéastha, 


53 Read Wat. 
“* Metre: Upajati. °4 Metre of verses 25 and 26: Sardiilavikridita, 
*® Metre: Giti. 5 Read @terafy?, 


*° Originally Ff was engraved, instead of WY. 
“| Metre: Sard dlavikridita. 


55 Read qguy °(P), 
57 Metre: Mandakranté, 


GOVINDPUR STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE POET GANGADHARA. 337 


L. 25. wT; aaferse: Talfacaray: 
UATRNCAU; WATT: ATTA: 
a: aorafafy: faaraaatfa: wera gent fafa- 
diaaatufauatraranfafeat tafe: u*—[28]. 
26. at- 
SUITES Tara hrarcaTStaTs 
MAATAISSAMTA: teat we faa araaeaty vw —[ 29]. 
arated 7 ge: eerie waa afara etaTaT 
Gal arfzae fates afearet 
27. WrahTeTean: | 
waar fraraatyag mits ay fe (fas) yAt- 
ware: fraatenterraaanrgay i°—[30]. 
Wa aaT CTA SAT IM IAAT faeraAT- 
aateaeataaaaa- 
28. Sl aaa: 
TAs e aN EMAAAATATRAATATAT- 
Vuefaqera afed Gara art sa: yv —[31]. 
dara GUaAMA WeaAG: Ha GUTAfadaaT ara | 
29. sTat(an[@)atealaglafaota aaayatae date waqafactaaa u"—(32] 
[alersandaafafad fatyafaaaa: 
a a(a)mufraearatana: wel faragtaar | 
aren, Wa) fofata*taaatfa- 
30. ATaTR HN TERT” 
ate: Faduafasyaumreraatt Kt gH 1° —[33] 
ullat Janaufeeataanrarcagiten-” 
VATA (A) (eG SaleTatas (fsa) | 
feet acauat faaaagecut(sat)ar- 
31. wqae qa 
aaa fasta aa afaa: weinrater: 1 —[84] 
quiafafafanaa fas: foat: afrararar 
area ta cafes Tama MYT STATE | 
ATATCAAATL UTLeT- 
* Metre : SArddlavikridita. -© Originally qX° was-engraved, but the sign for i has 
39 Metre: SvAgaté. ee been added afterwards. 
60 Metre of verses 30 and 31: Sard iavikridita. At the $+ Read-guyet, 
beginning of verse 30 I would suggest reading. Tamir ay 6 Metre of verses 33-35: Sardilavikridita. 
| Metre: Vasantatilaka. 6 The second akshara of this line originally was clearly 


® Originally aR? was engraved, but the initial @ may | at, but it seems to have been altered to ay, 
have been altered to q I 


Rex 


338 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L, 32. PRAIA aT 
afaathfararacad arated v —[35}. 


aaral wade ufaeraaared | 
wyatt oeraata arfta u”—[36). 
STATH: Uae: ANTAaea uTatfa aa- 

33. ayt- 

AU ala) el faataraaaed arafefaare faa | 
AaMaAauaeaes Alaq AATATST- 

efadt qzaraty gaat afore’ e 0°— (37) 
a ufacqufaafaacfatiata Far: 

wat- 

34. at uarrater Tq FTAA: | 
aga aafaq quasniaaiaaregy: 

Tred) ured facia a apracfaera a v°—[38]. 
we feariegat ware (<) WETATA ECT AM | 
zat fx- 

35. atinfaat: maf a qaurfe: eaqzara 07—[39). 
mim goue [0*] 


‘TRANSLATION. 
Om |! 
Om ! Adoration to Sarasvati! 

(Verse 1.) May the supporter” of the universe bestow [on us] his compassion !-- 
who, embracing his beloved and thrilled with delight by the close contact of his breast 
with her bosom, is sleeping on the lord of serpents, on one side bent low by the weight of 
the god’s lofty body, while on the other he remains upright under the very light burden 
of the goddess of fortune ! 

(2.) Hail to that gem of the three worlds, the divine Aruna,” whose presence 
sanctifies the milk-ocean-encircled $4 k ad vipa where the Brahmansare named Magas! 
There a race of twice-born [sprang] from the sun’s own body, grazed by the lathe,” whom 
Samba himself brought hither. Glorious are they, honoured in the world ! 

(8.) The first of them was an abode of all vedic lore and of the knowledge of the 
supreme soul, and wholly occupied in thoughts” familiar with every sacrificial rite, that 


* Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). 2 Metre ; Sikharint. 
68 Read “awmty. | Metre: Upajati. 
Metre ; Sarddlavikridita. 2 4, Vishnu. 


78 i,¢., the dawn, personified as the charioteer of the sun. } 

“4 The story told in the Purdnas is, that, to diminish the sun’s intensity, Viévakarman placed the luminary on his 
lathe, to grind off some of: his effulgence ( Vishut-purdna II, 2); and the above verse appears to intimate that the Magas 
were produced from some of the particles of the sun’s body, which were taken away by this process of grinding it. 

7 In connection with rydprita one would have expeoted the Loc., not the Iustr. case. 


GOVINDPUR STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE POET GANGADHARA. 339 


sage Bh&radvaéja whose penance could both deliver and destroy the world, and in 
whose face there was . . .  .likea garland of the great race of the Maga twice-born. 
(VY. 4.) His family had a hundred branches, distinguished for unprecedented penances 
and endowed with far-spreading fame ; and in it there were other lords of the twice-born, 
conversant with the highest truth, whose minds were purified by faultless knowledge. 
(5.) In the course of time the heroes who lift their bows to conquer the brilliant 


treasure of knowledge, robbed by . . . ., were headed by Chakrapani, the sor 
of Damodara. Like Valmiki in having made the streams of song to descend; he, a 
leader of the virtuous, became famous. . . . of his family, as Brahman is of the 


continuance of the universe. 

(6.) Ifhis everlasting, widely spread and weighty renown had not mounted the wheel 
of the quarters,”” how would that wheel turn round now ? 

(7.) As Indra and Vishnu have sprung from Kagyapa, the descendant of Marichi 
so to Chakrapani were born, to sustain the homage heaped upon their family, two sons 
favoured by the immortals, an elder son named Manoratha and his younger brother 
DaSaratha, the bright renown of whose learning, purity of conduct and good dispo 
sition has purified the world. 

(8.) Because these two brothers were the foremost of the good and had their fame 
sung by all people within their hearing, and by the facts that they made excellent 
friends and that plentiful enjoyment came to them unsought, and because princes 
treated them with loving kindness, their abundant bright excellence (which caused aii 
this) rendered their enemies’ faces dark (with envy). 

(9.) These brothers gave extreme delight by captivating one another’s hearts with 
their innate love; and even this capricious Kali age never saw anything to blame in 
their dealings (with une another) that were pleasing on account of their affection. 

(1v.) In order that. they might render his reign illustrious, the wise prince Varna- 
m4na besought them doth-to come to his royal residence, to dwell with him; and they, 
abiding by his commands, raised this family of his to the highest pitch of excellence 
and renown and prosperity. 

(11.) In that magnificent home of the M4na lord, which they then served, one of 
them, whose respectability was an object of esteem as far as the sea, received the office 
of pratihdra,” while the other was appointed superintendent of the eunuchs; and in 
these positions these learned. and intelligent men became widely known for both their 
goodness and good management. 

(12.) Pleasing with his good fortune and youth, and a person of good renown, 
Manoratha”™ went to the sacred Purushottama, and on the noisy shore of the sea 
gave away his wealth in charity at the time of an eclipse of the bright moon; (aad) 
gladdening his ancestors with the water thrown from his hands, he for 2 moment 
obtained the fellowship of the moon,” eclipsed at full-moon time. 

(15.) The sacrificial fire of this man whose mind was purified by the most sacred 
texts of the Saiva doctrine, in consequence of the oblations duly thrown into it three 


76 The meaning of the verse is simply, that Chakrapfni’s fame filled all the quarters of the compass, 
7 Literally. ‘door-keeper.’ 
78 The verses'12-17 refer to Manoratha; see verse 18. 
79 The exact meaning of this is rot clear to me. Altogether the construction is objectionable, decause the two verbs 
vetatdra and dpa ave in no way connected with each other, 
2x2 


340 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


times a day at the worship of the moon-crested god, perpetually threw up of its own 
accord, under the guise of smoke, the sin kindled from the blindness of the organs 
which is the bane of the three worlds; but quickly hid it again with its bright lustre. 

(V.14.) In the bright fortnight the lustreless half of the sun resorts to him from 
fear of the manes. He, without doubt, possessed of infinite true knowledge, has un- 
measured power. The fame of his piety, wonderfully glorious because it proclaims the 
might of the omnipresent creator, spreads far and wide in the abodes of men.” 

(15.) To him the illustrious ruler of Magadha gave the name of Vydsa, because 
in consequence of his prudent management his own mind had not to attend to any 
matters whatever relating to the proper conduct of affairs. He also, even in the pre- 
sence of princes, was at the appointed seasons freely sung of by the bards as the lotus in 
the lake of the king’s audience hall, and as a modern Kalidasa. 

16.) He was a Vachaspati among good ministers on account of his familiarity with 
shrewd schemes, a very Brahman in creating due knowledge for whatever was propounded, 
in consequence of his noble conduct a-gem fulfilling all desires in regard to propriety, a 
source of goodness, and a home of depth. He possessed the true knowledge of the jewel- 
triad,” was quick in languages, and. a master by birth of all the arts of poetry. 

(17.) With a smiling face intent on doing endless good to others, most proficient in 
winning the affection of mankind by loving and civil speeches, and a leader of the wise, 
this excellent man witha mind free from passion always spent his life in worshipping 
and meditating on the god whose crest is the digit of the moon. 

(18.) This fortunate Manoratha married the daughter of Devasarman, the stainless 
counsellor of the prince of the [Ghaudi] country, a lady on whom propriety of conduct 
had set its seal. Considering that she verily was Arundhati in mortal frame, to be 
revered by the worlds asthe foremost of good wives, the holy Sarnkara manifested himself 
to cause the seeds of piety to sprout. 

(19.) As for a long time they did not obtain the desired-for offspring, both husband 
and wife, though not to blame, were naturally distressed in mind. Then Siva himself 
came to them in a dream, and told them that their anxiety was groundless; they should 
worship him, and then they would have a son. 

(20.) ‘To them, well pleased by this and by the god’s further command that they should 
give his own name to their son, a son was born who was like his parents who had well 
worshipped the destroyer” of Smara, and whose good conduct was proportionate to his 
beauty. 

(21.) Him then they called Gangadhara; and he, self-subdued, from childhood 
pleased every one by his behaviour, and growing up he always, from fear of the world to 
come, gave ample proof of his wisdom. 


® Here again, assuming my reading of the text to be correct, the construction is unsatisfactory. In the first line of 
the verse we should have expected yar instead of tam, and in the second line we miss the relative yah. The meaning of the 
first line of the verse, the reading of which is more or less conjectural, appears to me to be this that, when the moon is wax- 
ing, the sun at night resorts to Manoratha to share in his lustre, because it is afraid of being invaded by the manes whom it 
supposes to be anxious to get away from the bright moon. 

IT am not certain what ratnatrayé the author is referring to. With Buddhists the term would denote buddha, 
dharma and sangha, with Jainas samyagdarsana, samyagjndna and samyakech4ritra. 

82 The original has ama, which should mean ‘husband and wife,’ not ‘ parents. ’ 

53 1.¢. Siva, the destroyer of the god of love. 


GOVINDPUR STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE POET GANGADHARA. 34] 


(V. 22.) Atter him came another son, named Mahidhara. These were the two sons 
of Manoratha. To Dasaratha, on the other hand, were born Harihara and Puru- 
shottama, blessing and fulfilment of desire. 

(28.) Fond of the Vedas, devoted to the proper ceremonial, illustrious for their know- 
ledge of the Sikshds, well acquainted with the Jyotisha, accurately understanding the 
Nirukta, proficient in the rules of metrics, famous for theiy progress in grammar, these 
six brothers, deeply engaged in the lofty course of study of the learned, well represent 
the Veddngas in the world. 

(24.) Meanwhile there was born that moon of the MAna princes, the king 
hudramana, who, like the primeval boar, powerfully recovered his realm from the sea of 
adversaries. 

(25.) As his hand is famed for its liberality and his face a wave of the flood of light, 
and since he keeps himself within the bounds of propriety, and provides means of sub- 
sistence for the people,“ of what account are the creeping-plant of paradise, the great 
serpent and the tortoise, those two bright luminaries yonder, and the lord of elephants 
and the seas ? Fie on such cumbrous insignia of high rank of the Creator ! 

(26.) Marvellous indeed is his fame, because it shares the properties of the supreme 
lord. So subtle as to pervade the edges of the teeth of the elephants of the quarters, 
so light as to reach the heavens in its ascent of the mountains, it extends everywhere 
here in the broad regions and roams freely about at will; it predominates in the sea of 
milk as-well as in the white splendour of the moon, and it goes out of the mundane egg, 
and stays in it as it pleases. 

(27.) Of this (king) Gangadhara was (as it were) a second heart to protect friends, 
(Gangddhara), who always was in battle a magician (én scattering) the lines of exulting 
hostile warriors, in misfortune an honest friend, a check when affairs were getting beyond 
control, an excellent associate in a spotless assembly, and worthy to be trusted in every- 
thing. 

(28.) (Gartgddhara), who was embellished by good behaviaur, famed for his cleverness 
of speech, a market of the gems of prudent counsel, a lover of resoluteness, tranquil-minded, 
full of compassion, a store-house of benevolence, fraudless in obligations, a prime pro- 
moter of friendship, boundless in steadfastness, free from the failing of untruth, and a 
treasure of intelligence. 

(29.) He married the charming Pasaladevi, a daughter of Jayapani who bore the 
title of ddhikarika,® a friend of the king of Gauda, and of (his wife) Subhaga. 

(30.) And their matrimonial union was universally esteemed even as that of Siva and 
his consort, who are prevented from seeing the charm of each other’s faces, because they 
bave only one body; a union where the wife is never left behind when (¢he husband ) 
mounts the bull to go abroad, and where (the wife) never notices the (usband’s) fearful 
form, nor minds being addressed with the name of a rival. 

(31.) The people here have witnessed the conduct of (Ga#gddhara) whose mind is 
brimful of contentment, honesty, firmness, forbearance, self-restraint, tenderness, calm- 
ness, patience, friendship, truth and contemplation, whose only thought is Narayana, 


% Here, again, the two first lines of the original verse do not admit of a proper construction. 
% j.¢,, ‘a superintendent of affairs.’ 


342 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


and who destroys deceit, malice, folly, covetousness, selfishness, envy, fraud, infatuation, 
hatred, jealousy and other evil qualities. 

(V.82.) Having accomplished here a thousand times, ever since he was a boy and a 
youth, and even to the endangerment of his life, most difficult deeds without end for the 
due advancement of his master, he has indeed filled the minds of his kinsmen with 
wonder. 

(33.) A man who in his Advaitasata has striven to prove that he has some poetic 
gift, whose knowledge, be it faultless or perhaps otherwise, of the treatises on the su- 
preme soul is well known, and whose attempts in the way of artificial poetry, hard even 
for the goddess of eloquence and to be ventured on by scholars only, have met with 
applause; need he say more in praise of his merits ? 

(34,) The revolution of elementary matter gives rise to the diffused mass of trees, 
palaces, houses, and the rest of visible objects; the rain-cloud forms in the sky of its own 
accord; all this'stays for a moment only and yanishes again, never to return.” Con- 
sidering such too to be the case with the three worlds, (Gazgddhara) has devoted him- 
self to. virtuous and pious deeds. 

(35.) To secure for his parents religious merit, that pure-minded man has founded 
here,—covering the world for ever with their fame as with a radiant umbrella,—this tank 
of water shining like quick-silver, in which their spotless renown in the guise of the 
waves dances about in visible form. 

(86.) And at the festive inauguration of this lake he has made his own fame here 
envelop the world like a radiant garment. 

(37.) As long as the supreme spirit in the shape of the three worlds, as ether, air, 
fire, water and earth, passing through a succession of existences, pursues its varied course, 
so long may these two eulogies of fame, pleasing the eyes and ears and the mind, vigo- 
rously cause lively joy in the hearts of the good ! 

(88.) How can the ways of poets be easily found in the absence of innate ability as 
well as of culture? And, accordingly, is it likely that tie author of thisshould have dis- 
covered them? Yet, as this treats of himself, the favour shown. to him by good men will 
find in this eulogy also something to applaud in Gangddhara’s words.” 

(39.) In the Saka year equal to the Nandas (9), the organs of sense (5), the sky (0) 


and the moon (1), the excellent stone-mason Sdlap4ni, the son of Rudra and grandson 
of Uddharana, himself engraved this eulogy. | 


Tae SAKA YEAR 1059. 


*€ Instead of the Abl. case apunarbdhdvdt I should have expected the Dat. case. 
4 Literally ‘ will bestow on this eulogy also the excellence of Gaigadhara's words,’ 


DUDHPANI ROCK INSCRIPTION OF UDAYAMANA. 343 


XXVII.—DUDHPANI ROCK INSCRIPTION OF UDAYAMANA. 


By Proressor F. KieLHorn, Pu.v., C.1.E.; Gorrmneen. 


The preceding Eee aen induces me to publish here, also from a rubbing of Sir 
A. Cunningham’s, vie text of another inscription which on the back of the rubbing is 
described as ‘ Rock inscription from Dudhpani Ghat near Dumduma,’ with the note that 
‘Dudhpani’ is ‘in the Hazaribagh district’ (of Chuti& Nagpur in the Lieutenant- 
Governorship of Bengal, south of the districts of Gayé and Monghyr). 

This inscription contains thirteen lines of writing which cover a space of about 6’ broad 
by L’ 23” high. With the exception of about half a dozen aksharas wheh are broken away, 
but can be easily supplied, the writing is well preserved and may be read with certainty 
throughout. The size of the letters is about 3”. The characters are essentially the same 
as, but somewhat more modern than, those of the Aphsad inscription of Adityasena,! 
and may be assigned to about the 8th century A.D. In describing the writing of the 
Aphsad inscription,® Dr. Fleet nas stated that in that inscription r, in combination wit 
a following consonant, is formed throughout on the line of writing, instead of above it, 
and that ‘in the ry of sawrya, in line 7, we have an exact reproduction of the same 
letter as it was written nearly two centuries bef>re’ (the seventh century). In the 
present inscription the conjunct 7y occurs three times (in pardkkramair=yah, line 1, 
uparyantam, line 3, and sauryena, line 4), and is each time written exactly asin the 
Aphsad inscription. In combination with other (following) consonants r occurs thirty-five 
times and is 21 times written on, and 14 times above the line. The sign of the wpadhmdéniya 
(which however is really like the sign for sh) is employed seven times, but is not used in 
four cases where it might also have been employed; and the sign of the jihvdmiliya 
seems to be used once, before the word khandita in line 11. At the end of the writing 
there is a good engraving of a flower; and altogether the letters throughout have been 
drawn and engraved very well indeed, and it is much to be regretted that the rubbing is 
not suitable for photographing. 

The language of the inscription is Samskrit, and the whole is in verse. As regards 
orthography, the letter J is written by the sign for 0; instead of anusvdra the guttural 
nasal is used in sizha, lines 1, 6 and 8, avsuka, line 5, and nistrizésa, line 6, and the 
dental nasal in kasmingcnit, line 2, °bhdnsi and yasansi, line 5, and even in °pritin=surendra’, 
line 10; and the consonants & and ¢ are everywhere doubled before 7 (e.9., in °pardk- 
kramakkramapadékkréntattriloki, in line 5), Besides, attention may be drawn to the 
hiatus in ér¢ Adisizha, in lines 1 and 8, and to the fact that a final m before a word 
beginning with a consonant. is generally changed, not to anusvdra, but to the nasal of 
the class to which the following consonant belongs.—Wrong grammatical forms which 
the inscription contains are dadata for datta, in line 7, and chakhanuh for chakhnuh, in 
line 12; and the causal is improperly employed instead of the primitive verb in achikarat, 
in line 11. Wrong constructions we find in verses 15, 16 and 24; and the rules of 
metrics are violated in verses 1,.14, 21 and 23. Words not found in the dictionaries, or 
employed in unusual significations, are prdrabdni, in line 6, avalagaka and avalagana, in 


1 See Fleet’s Gupta Inscriptions, plate XXVIII 
2 See 1b., p, 202 


344 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


line 7, vyutthdnika (derived from vyutthdna as vijtdnika is from vijidna), in line 12, and 
rechaka (unless this is an error for mechaka) in the same line. 

The inscription is net dated, but, as intimated above, it may, on palzeographical 
grounds, be assigned to about the 8th century A.D. Opening with a verse which invokes 
the blessing of the goddess of fortune, it tells us (in verses 2 and 8) that in former days 
there was a king of Magadha, named Adisimha, to whose dominions belonged the 
three villages ( pall) of which the inscription treats and near one of which it must have 
been engraved,—Bhramarasalmali, Chhingala, and Nabhatisha ndaka.? Now, 
once upon a’time three brothers—Udayamana, Sridhauta mana, and Ajjtam4na'— 
merchants, went on business from Ayodhya to Tamalipti; and having nsade plenty of 
money and being on their way home, they for some reason or other tarried at one of the 
three villages, apparently BhramarasAlmali (verses 4—5). While’ they wére there, the 
king Adisimha came to the forest near the villages on a hunting expedition,’ and 
ordered the inhabitants to give him an avalagnka (or avalagana). The villagers, on 
receipt of the king’s orders, went to the eldest brother, Udayaména, and entreated him 
to do the king’s behest. He thereupon did send an avalagana and quickly became a 
favourite of the king, who not only bestowed a diadem (éripatta’) on him, but also, at 
Udayamana’s solicitation, assured the people of Bhramarasalmali of his royal 
favour (verses 12—16). When Udayamana returned to the village, the inhabitants in 
their delight, and with the king’s approval, requested him to become their raja, and he 
complied with the request and long ruled the village happily and vigorously (verses 17- 
19). He also, at the request of the inhabitants of the two other villages, sent his 
brothers Sridhautam4na and Ajitamana to rule, subordinately to himself, over 
Nabhiatishandaka and Chhingal&d (verses 20—23). Verse 24 (if I understand it 
rightly) adds that people of former days had this eulogy engraved* to record that the family 
(ruling at Bhramarasalmali) hed been founded and owed its greatness to Udayamana, 
and to warn (the chiefs of) the two other villages not to act\ in opposition to, or to 
separate themselves from, the (main branch of the) family ; and the inscription ends with a 
prayer for the uninterrupted continuance of the family of the prince Udayamanadeva. 

I am not at present able to state whether any or what historical importance should 
be attached to this inscription ;° nor can I identify the three villages of which the inscrip- 
tion treats. The place Tamalipti (Tamralipti), to which the three brothers are said to 
have gone from Ayodhya, is the modern Tamlfik, the head-quarters of the sub-division 

3 So the name iy given in verse 3. In verses 21 and 23 originally Bhitishandaka was engraved, but both times this 
appears to have been altered to Wabhitishandaka. 

4 These names are given below. 

5 The verses 6-11 only glorify the wealth, liberality, valour, etc., of the three brothers in the customary manner. 

6 This appears to be the general sense of the original text, but I am unable to give the exact meaning of, the word 
prérabdhi-khelana, and of the following words avalagaka and avalagana. ‘According to the dictionaries prérabdhé is 
‘the post to which an elephant is fastened,’ whiok-would suggest that the king was out elephant-hunting. For avalaganu 
(as @ neuter noun) von Bohtlingk’s Dictionary only gives the meaning ‘the winning of somebody ;’ and avalagaka I find in 
Professor Jacobi’s edition of Bhadrabahu’s Kalpaeiiea, p. 107, note 61, employed in the explanation of the word kauftumbika 
where also its meaning seems to be uncertain 

7 See Vardhamihira’s Brihatsamhité, Chapter XLIX. In the note om the Kalpasiira, quoted above, the word. 
éreshthin is explained by Sridevatddhydstia-sauvarnapatta-bhashitottamdngak ; what the king gave to UdayamAna was 


apparently such a Srépatta. 
_* Accordingly, the present inscription is recording events which had happened generations before this inscription wus 
engraved. 


® The names of Udayaména and his brothers will of course-remind the reader of théocourrence of the names 
Varnaména and Rudramdna in the preceding inscription. 


DUDHPANI ROCK INSCRIPTION OF UDAYAMANA, 345 


‘of the same name of the Midnapur district of Bengal, on the Ripnarayan river, a town 
which is well known from Buddhist records, and is even now one of the principal seats of 
commerce in the district.” 


L. 


i: 


Trxt.!! 

[at] 
sraecentaararaareanrar wht [at refer” | 
s[arq at aclaala etoouer[<lqatlaalant vag (fala a: w'—[1). 
a(a)ya yaarrarfatrs: aarfefes fora fae 
UtiHAUCoMfAa eM: 

atasat(tralaa sa fecta: w—L2]. 
aera a” |tareaethagara[ Ta |ea a 
ayaa ws |e aria a(a)yatfuafaeogar w’—[3]. 
aa afafea(e laa’ afastt aracaa: | 
atafafalalararat ay: gaafusqar” y —[4). 
ya: ufafaqared @arare faarea: (1) 


. wasaa aaa facqates faft uv —[5]. 


gautafuaruagamuta fea | 
faaoasaaraicuaagquifsid « —[6]. 
aayqasamacarerfaunitas: | 
aBr(Vt va alas aa: fafaqaraar: uv —[7]. 
HAUT: HSA: HAR- 
Hara Te: 

raMtuamenfaan fagaaa fe 
aeary watfaat qwaat era sfa urawt 

quraa a(a)aa fraaqa, were aaiaat i—(8]. 
eiqaa wal a(a)ya a ye awe Gorse 

wai safearrtygerag” 
qaqa 
q Wau Ha AUST H Tafa lataat 

ahrareayeg wa(a) fancourtaatfafey: 0 —[9]. 
feara (fa)ataafacaraeatts [csafaa waactfractgarha” 
wate Seatetqaaifa® wat feat waaater auf] at w—[10}. 
faaraquaqa 


© Seethe Imperial Gazetteer of India, vole XIII, p.171. © Metre: Upajati. 


4 From Sir A. Cunningham’s rubbing. 7 Metre of verses 3-7 : Sloka (Anushtubh). 
12 Expressed by 2 symbol. 8 Read @fefa?. 
'3 The two aksharas in brackets are almost entirely Read ei x, 


broken away. 


4 Metre: Indravajra; but the third Pada of the 
verse is as if the metre were Vasantatilaka.—Compare 
Vallabhadeva’s Subhdshitdvali, verse 41. 


2 Metre of verses 8 and 9 : Sardilavikridita. 
3 Read Caaaare’. 


3 Read “faactratta. 


16 Observe the hiatus in =raTfe°; and read Fasi 3 Read Caife and anife. 


and °fae:. 


24 Metre of verses 1O and 11: Vasantatilaki. 


ae 


346 


10. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


afta a [arareat] ar: Bees Aafia" 

fafagfrgcan:.” [aloargera @ afeaaaca: faasttfora: 0 —[11]. 
a saratfefasia” aetfaecatiaat | 
meat (aN) Gerttameoufaamrattsac:’ y"—[12]. 
aifeex 

wares 4 ualfacarars | 
qanaraaaneed” ecarfiafa u —[13]. 
waar” (qe (ea) aatere:” (1) 
afust arat sisgqeaaraqurraq » —[14]. 
TMA AMAT VITA: | 
Twarara aaa” amingaeiad: v —[15]. 


. weceiirena wormed stoga(a)arafara aa: wae 


sarfefagaafaatea (a) a" (a ]a [alan faat saacreaterafasttan[ 16). 
qed aacrenfaararas YaRAMAgAa Fateoray | 
wet wa afae urea ufatatiaar- 
fe aucfuatfueyerqa: 1 —[17]. 
waala wafata ufaaaaaraarary & 
aa wssueee: fafasarararfulatleacna | 
trsafafarara ofan learn qa: av —[18]. 
ae araraaraarafayeararhraa risa 
aiasentsergarenty tetas: | 
erat racy arora far cerry” 
aranifaanaurecuae arate fosfea: 1 —[19]. 
wManeaarag atanafaaae4r z \ 
uateate trees aradt faaaer a: u°—(20]. 


aaresetierararen” wera [ahafa-” 
% Read aaa’. 3% Observe again the hiatus in 3fparfe°; and read 
2 Read fafein®. SNL egies 
7 Read fade. * Read darfaat. 
28 Metre of verses 12-15; Sloka (Anushtubh). 35 Metre of verses 16 and 17: Vasantatilaka. 


» Originally Capit was engraved, but it has been % Metre of verses 18 and 19: Sardilavikridita, 


altered to Cay. 7 Read “Hifa qz°. . 
% Read °warat’, a Metre of veres 20-23: Sloka (Anushtubh). 


= Of the aksharas in braokets the upper portion is 


broken away. 


4 The ashore in brackets was originally omitted, and 


= Read d difg o waitfy. is engraved above the line- 


COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF VAIDYADEVA, KING OF KAMARUPA, 347 


Tid aw | 
quateaaiae fat tsardtacq n —[21]. 
WaWwyNe eu xfwarfaaawTa: | 
ayefaaarnte Fayarat agate:  —[22]. 
UAH aan a? haat 
aa a(a)yaq: yaaaaat aaa uv —[23]. 
sUaieaarrareqgay wWa- 

12. Wa aaTST- 
warafagarTafetarate F Yas: | 
wuRranateetacargratra” arfed 
amauta Taqeoutmmawtfrary [24]. 
araarerad fataaqaae fata ea" 
ae aad fa(a)ata fafon aragartiafa: | 


13. qramlafaeaargafaatsaraearany- 
alasieraraeaquderateataeaa i —[25]. 


XXVIII.—COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF VAIDYADEVA, KING OF KAMARUPA. 
By ArtTHUR VENIS, M.A., PRINCIPAL, SANSKRIT COLLEGE, BENARES. 


Twenty-five copper-plate inscriptions were found in October 1892 in the village of 
Kamauli, near the confluence of the Barna and the Ganges at Benares, The story at the 
time was that a villager while ploughing a field had turned up one of the plates with his 
plough and so discovered the others; but I do not know whether this simple and (in 
India) not unusual story has been subsequenity confirmed by official inquiry into the 
locality and circumstances of the find. Mr. R. H. Brereton, Magistrate of Benares; 
sent me the plates, which are the subject of this and the next paper, viz. the grant of 
Vaidyadeva and two grants of Govindachandra of Kanauj, for immediate examination 
and report. On receiving from me a few rough notes as to their general contents and 
approximate dates, he kindly permitted a more careful and leisurely revision of these 
grants.’ 

The Vaidyadeva grant is engraved on three plates. A spoon-like arrangement 
loosely holds the plates together, its narrower, hooked end being passed through a hole 
in the middle of their right-hand margins. The broader, hollow end of the spoon con- 
tains a figure of Ganega. The plates measure 93” broad by 7” high, and weigh together 


4 Here again the akshara in brackets seems to be 43 Metre of verses 24 and 25, Sardtlavikridita. 
engraved above the line. 447 am not sure whether the word tey@ of this 
This was originally engraved, but appears to have | Jine should be altered to Aqa.° 
been altered to “Pye a; and I believe the intended 1 All the plates were deposited in the Provincial Museum 
reading tobe “fuefa a a. at Lucknow in July 1893. 
e Xie 


348 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Ibs. 1802.; their margins are slightly thickened outwards. ‘he first plate is inscribed 
on the inner side only. Each side contains sixteen lines, except the outer side of the third 
plate, on which there are nine lines only. The height of the letters is about a quarter 
inch. On the whole, the writing is well preserved, being nowhere completely obliterated. 
The characters resemble those of the Deopara inscription of Vijayasena (ante, vol. I, 
p. 805), but approach more closely to the modern Bengali character. They may also be 
compared, in some respects, with the character of the Krishnadvarika Temple inscrip- 
tion at Gaya (Arch. Survey Reports, vol. ITI, plate xxxvii), which Dr. Kielhorn describes 
as “a kind of Devanagari which appears to have been current in the 12th century 
A.D.” (Ind. Antiq., vol. XVI, p. 63.) 

Peculiarities, epigraphical and orthographical, are always better seen than described ; 
but the purpose of this notice will have been sufficiently served, it is hoped, by the 
corrigenda in the foot-notes to the printed text. Lines 6-13 of plate ili, a, have not 
been corrected, because they are mostly fillea with names of villages, tanks, their exact 
boundaries, ete., in Prakrit forms. It may be remarked in passing that the engraver 
of the plates (or his prompter) has fallen an easy victim to the shibboleth of 4, ¥, @. 
The language is Sanskrit, prose and verse. 

The inscription records the grant of two villages named Santipitakaand Mandara 
situated in the vishaya of Bada, in the bhukti of Pragjyotisha, in the mandala of 
Kamardipa. The donee is a Brahman named Sridhara, the son of Yudhishthira and 
Pai his wife, and the grandson of Bharata, who was born of the gotra of Visvamitra, in 
the village of Bhavain Varendri. Vaidyadeva, the donor, is the son of Bodhideva 
and Pratapadevi his wife, and the grandson of Yogadeva. His caste is not men- 
tioned; but there can be little doubt that he was a Brahman. He was a devotee 
of both Siva and Vishnu. His father and grandfather, in their time, had been the 
ministers of Ramapala and Vigrahapala, who were the father and grandfather 
respectively of Kumarapala. The royal and the ministerial lines stand thus :— 


Stiryavans Pédlas. Mantrins. 

I. Vigrahapala. 1, Yogadeva. 
II. Ramapala (son of I), 2. Bodhideva (son of 1), 
Ill. Kumérapala (son of ITI). 3. Vaidyadeva (son of 2). 


From the inscription we directly learn but little more about the Paias than is given 
in the above table. Vigrahapéla is dismissed in a single verse as “perfect in every 
accomplishment ’’—a brief but appropriate intimation, perhaps, that his reign was brief. 
Ramapala, a warrior, is compared to his great namesake. If the dark conceit of verse 
4, has not escaped me, it means in bald prose that Ramap4la conquered (or regained ?) 
Mithila, and killed a certain raja Bhima, whom I am unable to identify. Kuméara- 
pala is styled Lord of Gauda. He loved Vaidyadeva “dearer even than lite,” to whose 
generalship he entrusted the fortunes of the empire. Vaidyadeva was a stern minister 
and a victorious general. If verse 11 and verses 18—17 do not refer to the same event, 
he won two glorious victories for his master; the one in the southern part of Vanga (but 
see note 81); the other “in the East,” when he killed a rebellious vassal whose name I 
read hesitatingly as Timgyadeva. 


COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF VAIDYADEVA, KING OF KAMARUPA. 349 


In the kingdom “in the East” was included Kamardpa; for it was here that 

the two villages conveyed by Vaidyadeva as Maharajadhiraja, etc., were situated. He 
dates the charter from his victorious camp at HamsAkofichi, which again I cannot 
identify. lis younger brother (? nephew), Budhadeva, is introduced without any 
apparent reason, unless indeed it be to mark him as the heir. The prasasti was written 
by Manoratha, the son of the rdjaguru Murari and Padma his wife. The Sdsana was 
delivered by Gonandana, Vaidyadeva’s dharmddhikdérin. It was engraved by Karna- 
bhadra. 
The date of the Vaidyadeva grant remains tobe discussed. I have failed to work 
it out directly from the text. . The statement in plate iii, a, 1. 5, appears to be only a 
prose repetition of the statement in verse 28, with the addition of the word Sam and 
the numerical sign 4, The syllable 7, with which it concludes, I take as a contrac- 
tion of nibaddham (to qualify sdésanam). Verse 28 will be considered below. The 
other statement in ll. 3, 4 of plate iii, a, baffles me. The last word Guggulé is very 
doubtful. Read thus, it may be explained as an wpandman of Sridhara, the donee, 
in reference to the story of the Guggulu in verse 26. But the forms of conjunct ggu 
are entirely different in the two words. I am still inclined to think that the letters 
read Guggulé are somehow connected with the date indication. } 

Failing to fix Vaidyadeva’s date from the inscription itself, I have been forced to 
enter on the much debated chronology of the Pala and Sena dynasties. Now, in regard 
to the Pala dynasty, the reign of Mahipala from 1006 to 1060 A.D., and the accession 
of Govindapala in 1161 A.D., are practically the only dates unanimously accepted by 
the latest. modern authorities. The intervening names, the order of their succession, 
and their dates are still disputed. Dr. Kielhorn’s list of Pala kings from Gopala I. 
to VigrahapAla III., kased on the Amgachhi plate (Ind. Ant. vol. XXI, p. -99), is, in 
part at least, confirmed and extended by the,statements of the Vaidyadeva plates: for, 
assuming the historical accuracy of the Amgachhi and Vaidyadeva grants (which 
indeed there seems to be no reason for doubting), we see from the latter grant that 
the kings Vigrahapala, Ramapala and Kumarapala must be placed together in this 
unbroken order; and from the former grant that no place in the Pala line can be found 
for this trio previous to Mahipala. Further, the dates discussed in the next paragraph 
make it almost certain that Vigrahapdla of the Vaidyadeva grant is identical with 
Vigrahapéla III. of Dr. Kielhorn’s list. Nayap§la’s position is not so easy to decide, 
Dr. Hoernle identifies him with Devapadla, 956—991 A.D., (Ind. Ant. vol. XIV, p. 164). 
Of course there may have been two or more of his name in the Pala dynasty. But I 
may observe that the exact position of Nayapala is not material to the present inquiry. 

I return to verse 28, and premising the succession given by Dr. Kielhorn, I would thus 
state the problem widely :—Between the years 1060 and 1161 A.D., to find the year in 
which the Meshasankrdauti fell (1) on ekddas and (2) on dvddasi in Vaisakha (krishna- 
paksha)? ‘The following years result:—(1) on ekddasi 1077, 1096, 1128, 1142, 1161 
A.D.; (2) on dvdda& 1115, 11384 A.D. Now, the years 1077, 1096, 1116 and 
1123 may at once be rejected as altogether too early for Kumarapala, by whom Vaidya- 
deva was made aking. ‘The year 1134 may also be rejected; for, since we do not know 


? Dr. Kielhorn confines himself to proving thet the AmgAchhi plate of Vigrahapala ILI. was issued after 1053 A.D, 


350 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


whether Kumarapala was the immediate predecessor of Govindapala or not, we are not a 
liberty to count the years of Kumarapala backwards directly from 1161 A.D. Then, 
turning to the other end of the line, even if Nayapala’s name be omitted from that part 
of the royal succession which is now under review, it is safer to place Kumarapala 
nearer the end than the beginning of the period 1060—1161 A.D. Thus 1142 and 1161 
remain. And of the two 1142 A.D. seems the more probable date for the grant of 
Vaidyadeva. The 4th year mentioned in Plate III, A., li. 3, 4, 5 may be the regnal year 
of Vaidyadeva, whose rule in Assam would then date from 1138 A.D. 

Next, as to the history of the Sena dynasty, it is generally acknowledged that 
some time during the second half of the 11th century A.D. the Palas lost Eastern and 
Northern Bengal (including Assam) to the Senas under Vijayasena. “ Vijayasena’s 
reign (Dr. Kielhorn writes, ante, vol. I, 307) may therefore be reasonably supposed to 
have begun about the beginning of the last quarter of the 11th century.” I have 
no wish to indulge in further speculation. Briefly, this is what I suppose the drift of 
events to wave been. At first, é.e. roughly from 1060—1130 A.D. the Palas were 
driven westwards by the Senas. Then the Senas begau to lose ground rapidly and were 
driven back by the Palas into a small corner of Bengal, where they were finally demo- 
lished by the Muhamadans at the beginning of the 18th century A.D. Thus, the 
conquest of Janakabhimi (Mithila) by Ramapala, recounted in verse 4 of the 
Vaidyadeva grant, may have been an historical fact, marking the return of power to the 
Pala line. And thus, too, the Pala culmination under Kumérapéla about 1142 A.D. 
would synchronise with the Sena decadence under KeSavasena or his successor. 

To recapitulate: Vaidyadeva’s grant furnishes -some new historical material, viz. a 
trio of the royal line of Palas arranged in order of descent; it throws some more light 
on the relations existing between the rival Pala and Sena dynasties in Bengal during the 
12th century A.D. ; and its data, as confirmed by the history of the period, seem to point 
to 1142 A.D. as its probable date. 


TEXT. 
Plate I. (Inner side only.) 
Line [ 1:] @ vat wrad aregara uv afer i aE Fan Pareatscaran: 1 -s- 

frerac- 

[ 2.] facta: aiteratat wfterafa’ ut (Verse 1) ure cfawem at fafece 
sraara yet | fareut- 

[2] a auf: warartfedfae: i (2) aa auatungafaa wreafara: 1 ar- 
2a sfa aia: 

[ 4.] qretewiama: 1 (3). cMimaatiene’ qua: RATATAT: oTAgeT- 

[ 5.) afacu: warafrenfara | at aa area waa: dRa- 
aanita- | 

? Read °qfa: and efcarafe 6 Read gaqiaratee 


; Metre of verses 1 and 2: Pathyarya, 7 Metre: Sloka. (PathyAvaktra. ) 
Read srarary Yara. 8 Read aetaaa? 


COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF VAIDYADEVA, KING OF KAMARUPA. 351 


L. [ 6.) cwawrargerendteaarg’ v° (4) aa qwefes: geadtfues sf aedren 


fasta fa- 

[ 7.] fedtsgémitefonaraaem: feraraa” y? (5). ae waved wat walfeatt fafa 
aa fear: 

[ 8.) feenfe® | arttedinanfe: weitwerafa: oa: v4 (6). syeqeranaice 


faga: =a- 
[ 9.] saeaqea:" ucart fear aa | ageaentfanaatie” carga: frenzadt- 
(10.] waq nu” (7). aay a aasy a cafe fefeqaraaraiaifratade- 
[11.] @ dafed | fagafamaaqenqisaratate:, oeaqEtaaeeAaTy 
fefa- 
[12.] tod? w° (8). Med Taatene afaa: waTeagE: wence q_aa- 
aud- 
[18.] faurqediswaq | cerofafadtescanantereawitaarearaancuata 
[14.] fattferareent” am: (9). afaaaarantafamara:” warani sea fate Fa- 


Za: | a- 

[15.] esaeraada waam: UTI Ryey Wacha:” 1 (10). warqutapagTa 
alatz- 

[16] eiaacifeafchra" aa afad Sarfea ageng 1 fastenqaafaoraca- 
autefaa: 


Piate II, A. 
[17.] wtatcard fear aa afe wdaatfaenee: wet 1” (11). ewer garcara- 


aua- 

[18.] Gelade.” amaieufapare caaaraud: | wapfafaufice- 
afaa: 

[19.] dfeeerqrat: wrtwitafrayce afaa, Maratea: 0 (12). waren” eft 
vftgfa a- 

(20.] eae asada guatateta fama, Weatu yfa aay ated Aaaea 
seat fa. 

(21.] <i faga: 0° (3). asafea frcererarat mierda: | afroafeaear” fara: 
VATU 


» Read Ura. MSA 19 Metre of verses 8 and 9: Sardilavikridita. 


1© Metre: Sardilavik ridita. 

” Read wae faaiia CaTaay 

1 Metre: Rathoddhata. 

8 Read wafeatfafaata:. 

“ Metre: Pathyarya. 

© Read sRaaga; 

8 Read “adjatiet. The @ is supplied from a truti, 


whick is found at the bottom of the plate and is prefixed 
by the numeral sign fox 9. 


Metre: Upajati of Vaméastha and Indravaméa. 


. * Read agfere, ic. “ of the birth time (of Vaidyadeva). 


aqreaq fratray 


0 Read fawifaear® 
21 Read “aaa? 

™ Read wtatfan: 
23 Metre: P 


* Read °aafe° 
® Metre of verses 11 and 12: Sardélavikridita. 
°© Read °auacfadvel® 
7 Read Targa. 
3 This might be read fawy. 
29 Metre: Vasantatilaka. 
% Read feaewt and aq. One would expect yaya 
HaT 


352 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. (22.] ga 1 anafaufa frat ge aya aviofafasysutcre” aratfeaatafa- 


ma: u(14).” g 

[23.] ae naTnaTTaAg vient: wiwanra ataae Hafan. 

(24.] waitsfearrra: | faenfeeatoda aaicafmarada: Gaal Aa- 

(25.] arfaataaad a aa farefer 0” (15) rewrefas efi aearaartttua 

(26.] daranatafad feyfacatteaiwe: | wat diafafi ufafay- 

[27.] or care” geet aaiteaaal” agen Ma aeat ay 1 (16). ageaat- 
ward” WRaral- 

(28.] wafs: ucguefadfuana ale fade | ufefa faaccreaetifaaee: @- 

(29.] waata wife: disse” & Gata un” (17). weRisayA Swat aaqnETaTaa: 
ur: 

(30.] zhafean: megane: Te MIT ut | Tarai fae: faa: genes arerfeaa- 

(31.] stufa: ered agwingtafe searartisaat aifaa:’ (18). wrevttafretaa- 


feaafa: 
[32.] waned: tufeacaqufasseaufaers:® a aurofa: i fagata fatroara- 
fawan: 


Plate II, B. 

(38.] ura: ufetaterg qu fag vei aa age: waar aa: Ou (19) ae aY- 
[34.] SermueaMURdetiafaqigdtedtafey:” | era: whracedfes”- 
[35.] qeutfanericfa | ara: aaneenfeafaetataganaar:” 1 (20). sem 
(36.] ac atfuaasual gfaqaizgel® fasitages: | wissaeearaTaTa 
(37.] aerecag we fac fed? uw (21). wade aefa aca: orgadtafsarta- 

Ck IC a 
(38.] nfaeaal: WET ait TEAR WITATSTAaTeaararerareats- 
[39.] fa wazfa fafea: fafwiorai nog.” 0° (22). we fanfaaat afufee: ga <- 
[40.] anaquban” | aradeuftaediey afaaafaaaasitfafe: 1 (23). urg- 
[41.] fa whoa dhacare feafearfe: | seteatarte: steterenat® 


» Read aviufafaa. “© The var. lect. yenequma; (with the numerical sign 2 
2 Metre: Harini. affixed) is given ‘in the upper margin of the plate; and 
33 Metre of verses 15 and 16: Sardfilavikridita. whrTa° is cut out in the text. 
™ Read deer’. 7 Read qeaaelaentanfae aia qm: | Far? is cut 
35 Read oaasitna: out in the body of the plate, and wqeq (with ‘the sign 3 
% Read cela affixed) is supplied in the lower margin, 
7 Read qaftgwaail. “ Read “xaq atfara’ “gfaa? 
8 Read “Hag 9 Read © ATA and feaq. 
»® Read ‘fatifaata “Ssaaq 50 Metre : Vaméastha. 

© Metre: Malini. S Read wae . . meus . tt. Urereaar: 
0 Read AE MECG Ga Gefad: . . + TURN Wea’. fafeare. 
® Metre of verses 18, 19, and 20: Sarddlavikridits. °? Metre: Mandakranta, _- 
8 Road “afatatean® aafag a a uqufada gaafaea:. 53 Cvacaitac: is faulty metre. 
Read aa; and wai®. “ Metre: Rathoddhata. 


“ Read queda’ Cuufeutafs? Read write? .. . weterfrat. 


GRANT OF VAIDYADEVA OF KAMARUPA. 


THE SEAL, 


i}| i 


Scale: 3-4ths of original. 


Epigraphia Indica, vol. IT. 


+ ee 


Fc KAWIREC Rice BREliE ee FREGEINCS CIBERBUIONBSIEEDOL ae 


ORI RBERRBEBNBtell? aie Rig ets Bese meeRBelbleeise ; 
BBS SREBRBsstehee? BIBKISIRESISUERBRILIZIS1eIeF RAs NOR) 
- SBRAISRRERIERBERERRERE ROPE RIGIEVEGIER 2 BBRIEIS © 
Pameeicy IR BE [Bp REIRLBielReP RRIE Bs BBRIRIRSEB3 oS 
a aleleee 2ABIE (SRE G IE selsz caIS.ens BEKIE GRIER IE 
- VRE SSRIRUINERER Re SALMA RiSRk BEGRBIse gGRe 

RRSP LY = SIBREBPRISEIDRE EI: PERIAMZDIR Pel Is. 


BUSS GRSDIRv ace SIBREBICIFRB Cpl! ECKIRIRIPSICEESD) 
I Re/PRIPRRSRICRIE EMGUSTSRICRCISBR IQBAL Wel 


— 


SRRPEEISP AR), SIRE: BRIRSISIFALSI G llefes BID tara IRBORIE 
“tele oe PISZISERIVIBISIL2 PEBBESSES GI RISE SSI A 
po oeelers SER2 SIRIRIEDI Res, GIRS WEBRG S262) 31SBIE 
* GIIRGIESRaISURIS LERIB! PR EIR SM WAR ISRIRGUSEA BAAR: Gye joi: 
IBSSBISBRWREIS EARLS: 33 LUIS RD WSR EE ICreEN Alas Pea a: 
pace Sala STAR Pel) ts RREIEE euiseieesy. 


"VaNUVHVH JO VAZAVAGIVA 40 INVUD ieee 


COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF VAIDYADEVA, KING OF KAMARUPA. 353 


L. [42.] awafa: v° (21). qaqanqeraadoracyEaadica fearitegen.” aente- 

[43.] toe wu (25). ate wag Zarqaadl eraraanarearaarar® aU Ea 
RACUT Tal- 

(44.] ae: wifaa: 0 oraamnarfadaaiaia aa gaerantete: aaa fe ae 
wt- 

(45.] arava” way: uw” (26). wisefaet qe: watarcautfata: aera” 
anny =a fa- 

[46.] ga: u® (27). unet ured urereaeaatahas: 1 aura fagere” enta eft 
aTat on (28). 

(47.] af Yaratetenrarfeastiasaaaranira® | waATesat: aTAaa: AET- 
urstfa- 

[48.] Urn 1 aaat: oeaNeTee: | haa” Gaeaea: quet | Aarrsifamyay 
ATHE- 

Plate III, A. 
(49.] vawa | avetfaad wengracyaa | wifearererecraraia | aereremfa-. 


atfa | awzwefaa- 

[50.] fawarfesraera quar anert arafai atwafa warfenfa a: wang 
waat | Uda wa 

[51.] agqaterafee dt 1 uftaraney seraentd anew | afecy afafyaac- 
are” | aqure 

[52.] ¢ amenearfer qaet Showa” aguiaa wredtaa cearearfe: 
agafara” 

[53.] fagar uadfa | ds aera aurefet ¢ fa non afaaeraecaraait- 
aya weutar- 

(54.] fanaa: u yafemaraa fererfesucarera aaa ufsagqestar n te- 
afex:, fafeare- 


(55.] weTapaeria ame cou sacfem: atwarsigitesiatraewesatar a 
(56.] freaetinagfana fafeefana saufaiter stuterfararera ara- 
(57.] afee faurqer waetar masTatata | afentfafiqeucgerarats 3- 

(58.] vaagueninfe ufsararan ofaafemsien fafeeciat FeafeMt y- 


36 Metre: Pathyarra. 6° Read r 
57 Read TAS ATA AAAI UCYA: \ feardtargsa: 67 Read thus, omitting the unnecessary pauses in the 


58 Metre: Pathyavaktra. plate :-—arstfaaa HEARTY AAMT TAT STATA 
* Read aurea asrat muanfearfestrafaeatestrey atate gered 
Read waituc: fae: . wae? |. TATE | araafa dteafa warfeafa a Aaay WIA Vacey 
| Metre: Sardilavikridita. aqatarafan wfttaqed ward weed yey 
® Read fafa: 1 atherara’. afafacatare. 
SS Metre of verses 27, 28, 29, 30: Pathy&vaktra, 6 Read =fitqc® With the yfcdre of the text (. 3) 
“ Read °fadt® fasaqare. compare the Pali form qrfaatq = hindrance. 
a z 

Read °attreraerararue. ® Read qeafaq. 


22% 


354 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. [59.] arfaateta aug faarewaataryarera awa sifedaarctaaaate- 


amaK: What 4- 

(60.] wattezraqua | efanfen: aaaraiaate; what arwteTerqudtaarad 
PATTUTANSAT- 

(61.] era feaarfearaa 1 afafen: Mari va avatar uu fettauzae Tqex- 
qewt: u afeare- 

(62.] aaweg weTaTadya | aetfaageayg afeegufe fraara wv” (29). wearatara- 
aga acT- 

(63.] eacafert 1 aracreadiat arafeantimamdt | camafe@arcwaic- 
mMaayqa”’ wv (30). are a- 

(64.] 3 aftefa aafad a: anfawadt gafeaamaete fara aearat urea | 
a: arar, afrar— 

Plate III, B. 

(65.] wfa wafad: « afeat ama oftyse atafa faofenirate den” (31). 
aaa eR SAAT: 

(66.] arngecufarequran: 1 atafeang que: alfa” aera” n (82). eat 
asa: Ta: Ateaife- 

[67.] waa: vgrritsaaa cafe aatee.” u (33). Sate foganfamaaarmerter 


aifarara: wafea- 

(68.] ufaraaaadiataan: Tati cad gfedt featfauad wirfrarcfaden- 
Tran fa- 

(69.] daaaet uretfed arya” n (84). wege vga fafeataeafeat 1 ate 
faaaaan fafa 


(70.] arya” y (85). uated afraaafa wafer | aeat WATE at eta ag- 
aati 1 & fasrat afar 

[71.] aaa foqfiras v maa aMaaT YaUEARS ETaTHUTarA aaere- 

(72.] added u agfucger car csi: ancfef: ae ae aat afte ae aet &- 


(73.] a” a 
TRANSLATION. 


Om! Salutation to the holy Vasudeva! Hail! 
Verse. (1.) Glorious is Hari; the pillar for measuring the sky ; the receptacle in 


which are preserved the germs of the transmigratory world; the boar whose form, assumed 
by him in sport, terminates with space, (i.e. is all-pervading). 


(2.) In the race of the Sun, who is the right eye of Hari, was born of yore the King 


Vigrahapala, perfect in every accomplishment. 


1 Read® goa? “daaq “faga® frzatq. ™ Metre: Pathyarya. 

1 Read qata afar ay aaa Ray HAAS day S Read yafe. Metre: Pathyavaktra. 

7 Read 8 afcafa anfwefa vfcarefsafa * Read °Sife? “aaa; wraaq. Metre: Sarddlavikridita, 
aifa® sfgaa adie geq y Metre: Sardilavikridita. 7 Metre: Pathyavaktra. 

™ Read “yeqadifa® wag afe: ® Read qeqnt 4 aqaUy Waa BTA aT "ATAH! 


Gry HSH | 


-ppurhiso fo az1g 


+ ra ae ie en Nee oe ae bo:!, a = Pee es a, nee ere agit ie 2 = 


savIEVEINI IEEE igen Ae reeesacianelee 

(RRIESS BLEECKER DME MIRRWEIER Re sls Se PSR CIES , 

BSE: 2upeRaeaek.| eee Lele se es 
IB BSISRBRE MEER AReeSIBeR UE Depot 

EBaleaie eR eiebekl ua CBee PL 2820 ele 

HEISE! Rieke beri EUS EISBI Tee leek 
EGE PIRES RUM Se vlooce SIG 
6K ee Ree elolblals 


ESPOIS: fs ZBI eels ies eo 
BEKICIBREER ARP GIRRR CERES 
Fel abi: ae fac: SPEDE seielBRe BISEIGSEIIIoBR 
| a: ores ee BiSaIPHEME WI RRSGERS Meee 
ae 3 a. COB RDRREIERLE! MIBREBRERE « 


% 


| ee saree se SBE uELOI BEEN else Sas 


a 


Epigraphia Indica, vol. If. 


= 
Fu} 


aah Bie 
apne a > se oe mas oo Ue ee ge: j : ee 


VII ALV1d ‘VdfNuVWVA JO VAAGVAGIVA dO LNVYD ALVId¥addoo 


o obs DiSIRRE SPGIE CIS: 


Die on ‘ sap lobe pepals ABUbIGR ORE 


I BEIRB| 22RIB Es 


=, 
ose 


+ bere : BOR DHABI 
. "Hie ean BIREBIEIRIZ DIEBRE RBERIRIRELBIRIRGEIE 2 
IMBZISIPRER SER sas 


IP RIBS REISE blk ck - 
RINE PIRIREIRsieel lePhee eX IbBE-PABIEIE, 


Peeeree< -PSBOIPIWE BsRESBRSRRIKRIRBEREIR IC RkS 


eH BEES I UB Belisle alta 
(SSB Berl 


gy is : 


“all FLV Id 


We Seo 5 ae ; 


pees 


Biches se ifucelsas 


ibe ai sees 


“VdNUVNVA AO VAMCVACIVA JO INVES ALVIdYaddO9 


AIDE ARI SEWIESE! 
AG Robe eAvRRURE nen 


Bx DIED | 
“Ble : 


aRE 


Ot 


Gl 


COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF VAIDYADEVA, KING OF KAMARUPA. 355 


(3.) His minister was Yogadeva, who was versed in the SAstras and the FED 
of whose arm was manifest. 

(4.) Of this king of mighty power the son was Ramapéla, who was the moon 
(produced) from the ocean-like Pala family and who wielded the glory of empire. As 
befitted one of his name (yathdvat), Ramapala (yena) spread glory through the three 
worlds, by gaining the country of Janaka,” (as Rama gained Janakabhiy, the child of 
Janaka, t.e. Sita); and by killing king Bhima,” as Rama killed Ravana; and by 
crossing the ocean of war, as Rama crossed the ocean. 

(5.) Bodhideva was Ramapala’s faultless minister, the abode of truth. By his 
wondrous qualities he was known throughout the world as one without an equal. 

(6.) His wife was Pratapadevi, the resting-place of virtue, good fortune and good. 
report, whose beauty was boundless, and who was the embodiment of her husband’s 

oy. 

= (7.) To him was born of her ‘the renowned Vaidyadeva, who was endowed with- 
the highest happiness, and in whose lake of leaping glory the mountain of Siva (i.e. 
Kaildsa) appeared as it were but a lotus-sprout. 

(8.) Hearing from astrologers and mendicants of the auspicious juncture of 
Vaidyadeva’s birth-time, his enemies’ soldiers forthwith gave up food and sleep and 
courage, and were stupefied. And, further, by the waters of joy that sprang from the 
eyes of his gathered friends was extinguished the fire-like splendour of the hostile mul- 
titude. 

(9.) This Vaidyadeva was the minister after his own heart of the famous king 
KumAarapala, who was the son of the king Rama, and who delighted in the glory of 
empire. The deer which is formed in the orb of the moon will run away through fear 
- of being swallowed by the lions represented on the palace, which is made of gold from 
diadems of the enemies of this (Vaidyadeva). 

(10.) This Vaidyadeva was the sun in the lotus-like Sealy of ministers; the 
ocean of spreading fame; by reason of his natural generosity he was the Lord of Cham- 
paka (é.e. Karna); he was the moon among the lily-like minds of good men. 

(11.) And on the occasion of Vaidyadeva’s (yasya) victory at the battle in Southern 
Vanga,” if the elephants of the eight quarters did not run away terrified by the shouts 
from the enclosure of boats, it was because they had no place to run to (é.e, the shouts 
of the rowers pervaded all space!) Moreover, if the spray, thrown up by the downward 
strokes of the upraised rudder-oars, had remained fixed in the sky, then the moon would, 
have become spotless (being washed clean by the spray). 

(12.) He (Vaidyadeva) chief among the virtuous, sternly keeping in mind the 
kingdom in all its parts, was minister, dearer even than life, to king Kumarapala the, 
Lord of Gauda, who was like the sun in the might of his arm, with his great glory, 
filling the three worlds, and like Vrihaspati in his wisdom. 

(18.) The aforesaid renowned Vaidyadeva was appointed ruler by the Lord of, 
Gauda in the room of Timgyadeva, who had been treated with honour in the East,, 
and of whose disaffection the Lord of Gauda had heard. 


79 ge, Mithilé. To take janaka = “ father” would spoil the play upon the word. 
89 [ cannot identify the name. 
8 Anuttara = “complete” may qualify “victory.” For Nauvéta see Dr Hultzsch,—Ind. Antig. vol. XV, p. . 809, 


222 


356 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(14.) This victorious Vaidyadeva having placed upon his head, garland-wise, the 
command of his glorious master, marched speedily in a few days, and having defeated 
that king (viz. Timgyadeva) by the energy of his own arm, became king and appeared 
like the valiant Indra himself. 

(15.) When during the glorious march of this Vaidyadeva the sky became like the 
surface of the earth on account of the heaps of dust, the horses of the sun found it 
difficult to move their feet. ~ Further, Indra, while closing both his eyes (against the dust), 
is unable to use his hands for any other action, (and ther ores reviles his fate,” to which 
is due the never-closing condition of his eyes. 

(16.) This Vaidyadeva performed the Homa in the fire of his. own splendour, which, 
produced from his arm as fire from the arani, was fed like fire by the fuel of his enemies’ 
hosts, and was worshipped at the fight, as fire at the sacrifice, (and he used as material for 
his sacrifice) many heads of his enemies in the place of bright oilva fruits; next, he 
offered the pérndhuti oblation with the (body of the) hostile king, and having acquired 
vast glory as the result (of his sacrifice) he shone resplendent. 

(17.) The sun, beholding the sky covered with the enemies’ heads, as at the stroke 
of the sword they fly upwards from the great fight of Vaidyadeva (yad), suddenly 
became alarmed at the thought of these heads being so many Rabus and protected 
himself by smearing out his own lustre with dust. 

(18.) This Vaidyadeva might be exactly compared with the ocean, if he were (but 
he is not) a jalddhara, i.e. protector of fools (jala = jada), as the ocean is a jalddhara, 
i.e. receptacle of water; or if he were conquerable (lavghita) as the ocean was crossed 
(by Réma)—(for in other points the comparison holds, thus—) the ocean is the birth- 
place of the moon, and he is the source of delight (chandra) ; the ocean is the refuge of 
mountains (e.g. Mainéka) and he is the refuge of kings (mahidhra); the ocean is the 
home of living things, and he is the home of a disposition in which the sattva element 
of goodness predominates; the ocean is adorned by the beauty of its bed, and he is 
adorned by the beauty of his ministers (pdira); the ocean is filled with sparkling 
water, and he is filled with rasa (love, efc.) ; the ocean is very deep, he is profound; the 
ocean is the abode of gems, and he the abode of what is most precious; the ocean is the 
chief home of Lakshmi, and he of wealth (ér7); Vishnu dwells within the ocean and 
within his heart. 

(19.) He was Vrihaspati as regards his knowledge, and the Snn as regaras us energies, 
and Vishnu as regards his good actions, and Varuna as regards his stability, and Kuvera 
as regards his wealth, and the king of Champa (ara) as regards his liberality. 
Further, even these names (sc. Vrihaspati ete.) are here employed because of their 
notoriety as the common objects of comparison in poetry (gird); but we for our part 
declare that in respect to all his numerous qualities Vaidyadeva was like himself alone. 

(20.) His younger brother “was Budhadeva, who, resembling the younger brother 
of Rama (viz, Lakshmana) in possessing his well-known (tatéat) boundless and spotless 
qualities, (and himself) the abode of perfect dharmma and perfect character, with glory 
leaping in the might of his arm, was famed to be like the Kalpataru in his gifts ed 
also in his donations to Brahmans, which are the good fruits and fresh sprouts. 


8 Tt is his karman = (prdrabdha) that makes him Indra with never-closing eyes. 
*§ Anwjubhih is ambiguous. I explain thus:—anujd bhih (utpatliz) yasya so anujabhak. 


—o rama SPRY Seat: HORE Hattie Firat aaa Caengtiat: OMG Re Ea oe ate Rema 


3 ‘gp ar ana eke vel UeeeumREbeeERER rip inte eran 
BE NER ERIGLBIOBRNIRERE! PRIRGNE ILI IGEIBRRIARERIRES | 
‘BRE: BEBE! IB BURIED: BRREBB he ah ae bieIbibelgkbee 
VIRSPIMIBRSSER RR BRANT Nt VigleBReRP lala: ah: PIERIRAIMeA Ble 
‘weVIgIW Blo Ae RieW IRA DUIBIE IS: RISB IRE “sia BIEL 
: 2iHUSHRIRCR Dip R IMIR REBIEREWBhaNR NQaPILCbARBIBRE DEES — 
JRiSeRR SIG pee se ieihs- NGPSIERIGIZEIRBINRRORERRE © 
_ Ne Tae IMBIBE Bis ele RIDE PpelpieleRigae 
BRB eNIAR Peeecg PGE ietee SIODISYELSRRES 
We 212 HS oP RNBEIS a PES | O@RREW TPIS EP BRIEISE ) 
« RIRGEuISSei lb Pen: BRIBEBIEREERRO aaiceIebaleTel| pipe 
- VIREBRE ee IBE aeispecisrgel uc gelSSgiw PPBE BRIBE eRe 
- BB BeG SIE REeRISRISREIS: Cerise sholesCikal IREDISRE 
BPE al Beeb ieee SBMA PRRE SBR ROA RIZE IRS! Rate eRe 


va veg reemntonyte shy Rad he 


‘ Fr: 


ry 
Se 
iS 
aes 
a 
4 
fe 
a 


ao {a rays 


ne" 


BASRCrRIGRSBR CR PEISRIREC RRR DEUAIBIURABRelaRlseI RFE 
elt se gouges eTewRRRCE BIS RELERL ibe eerie, ARR 


- “Sage 


‘VI FLV Td “VdNdVNVA AO VAHVACIVA JO LNVYD ALVIdddddoo 


wy 
N 
~ 
i=} 
2 
8 
3 
Sy 
S 
eS 
5 
& 
> 
g 
gy 


a Yo bolketeb wi | RaCRBER ANB HEIN GaImebarSRIneE 


‘al ALV Id 


“pourbiso fo azry 


v 


lee peel ee ESBS 
PIIBLEREBIS| Le a Bike JIRRLIRS A IebI PER Rtg 
Risteles Wes ene SPRLRELOIE naa 


ty 


= ar iy e : - o Ree Gisele, AEIBEP BRIS SRIE Rise 


hs | BLEDEL BP ail: rBleglselehGeeSiee ispemae 


G 


Spbiase a - ‘ re sUBRalk 2S BICEP PRARICRUSRERRIER a 
~ RYlezeP le Bebe PebGalerklibtee a) EIRRGeARRSS Beet 


aie tee lis meee 


‘VdNdYNVY JO VAZOVAGIVA JO LNVYD ALV1d¥addO) 


COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF VAIDYADEVA, KING OF KAMARUPA, 357 


(21.) Now (turning to the receiver of this grant), there was that chief of munis, 
named Kausika, the first of his go¢ra, in whose mouth Sarasvati rested after her fatigue 
in wandering through the (four) mouths of Brahma. 

(22.) In his great vaméa, in the strictly-disciplined village of Bhava,®*in Varendri 
appeared Bharata, a Brahmana, glorious, by the bare mention of whose name,—to 
say nothing of his many other good qualities—are destroyed all sins. 

(23.) His son was Yudhishthira, chief of Brahmanas and intelligent men, the 
repository of knowledge purified by (study of) the Vedas and Sastras, the abode of glory 
showing itself through his mastery of the sacred learning. 

(24.) The wife of this learned man was Pai of boundless beauty, the repose of her 
husband’s heart, and the dwelling-place of virtue, nobleness and prosperity. 

(25.) As the result of his merit, acquired in many previous states of existence, there 
was born to him of her that great son Sridhara, honoured among Brahmanas. 

(26.) By reason of his pilgrimages to ¢ér/has, and study of Veda, and generosity, as well 
as by his teaching and by his performance of sacrifices and strict observance of vows, 
Sridhara was chief among learned Brahmanas. Through Sridhara’s penances of eating 
once only either by day or by night, and living on alms without begging, and fastings, the 
Lord Siva was propitiated here, in the Kaliyuga, by being drawn out of a Gug gulu tree. 

(27.) Foremost among those who know karman and brahman (i.e. the Karma- kénda 
and the Jidna-kdnda of the Veda), Sridhara, the store-house of every kind of religious 
observances, was famed to be like Vrihaspati in (his mastery of) the hidden things of 
Sruti and Smriti. 

(28.) To this Sridhara, at the Vishuvatt (samkrénti) in Vaisdkha on EkAdasi, the 
king Vaidyadeva gave this charter, to gain heaven. 

[‘lo follow line 14 of the second Plate ].* 

(29.) As determined by the bicéimichchhidra rule, the village Santipataka® is joined 
to the village Mandara and belongs to the Bada-vishaya. ~ 

(80.) The villages conveyed are provided with all sources of revenue, and are exempt 
from royal charges and paymentsin kind. They areto be enjoyed as long as the sun and 
moon shall endure, and the profits (phala) of cultivation (kriyd) shall be arranged for 
as (the owner may) wish, They are provided with water and dry land, forest tracts, 
gardens and enclosures for cows, 

(81.) Whoever may himself appropriate this or cause it to be appropriated, shall 
see his sons and property perish before him and shall remain in Naraka for the pefiod 
of a Kalpa. But the honourable man who respects it shall be blessed with sons and 
wealth ; and having long enjoyed Svarga he shall go to the supreme abode of Vishnu. 

(82.) May the glory of king Vaidyadeva continue to shine as long as sun, moon, 
stars, mountains, sea and earth endure ! 

4 Sdsnogre I take equal to UgraSasane, the commoner bahuvrthi. 

‘8 The sign of omission is found in the second plate (side B) after harivasare, the last word of 1.14, The trans- 


Jation is therefore made to follow the order intended by the words dvitiyapatakasya chaturddasapanktydk, to which 
1 supply “ agre” to complete the construction. 

86 Translation doubtful. Dr. Kielhorn explains pétaka by “ outlying hamlet ” (Ind. Antig. vol. XVIII, p. 135), 
which I follow above. Santi would thus be the name of the pdtaka adjoining the village Mandara and falling within the 
vishaya Badd; and the correcter form of the name would appear to be Santi ; (ct. III, A, line 1, where, however, the final 
syllable of Santi is read only doubtfully owing to the bad state of the plate.] The grammar of verse 29 seems to make 
santipitakasamjnam an adjective to Sasanam in verse 28 : (observe also idazh in verse 31), 


358 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(33.) Manoratha, son of the brahmana rujaguru Murari, and Padma, his wife, 
composed this prasasti. 

(34.) This is that king whose active arm destroyed the famed prowess of his many 
foes. And this is that Sridhara, whose glory ever spreading through the world extends 
anew. (Zhe king] being pleased delivered this sasana to that brahmana through the 
words of his dharmddhikarin, the very learned Gonandana. 

{Plate II, B,1.15.] Hail! From the victorious camp at Hamsakoiichi, his Majesty 
Vaidyadeva, a most devout worshipper of Siva and of Vishnu, the Muhdrdjddhirdja, the 
Parameégvara, the Paremabhattéraka, being in good health [Plate III, A, 1. 1.] greets, 
informs and commands the people of the villages of Santi-Bada and Mandara pos- 
sessed by Gangadhara Bhatta, in the vishaya of Bada, in the mandala of Kamaripa io 
ihe bhukti of Pragjyotisha, beginning with the principal residents . . . . (?) and 
peasants. Be it known unto you that these two villages, having their boundaries fixed 
and subject to no reduction, with their water and dry land, not to be entered by regular 
or irregular troops, and their uncultivated land free of taxes, with a revenue of 400, we 
have given by charter to Sridhara Sarm4 (surnamed) Gugguli in ? ? ° , 
Therefore be obedient to this charter. Written in the fourth year on the first day of 
Vaisakha by the movement of the sun.” 


88 
s 


[Plate III, B,1.5.] (35) This copper was engraved by the artist Karnabhadra, 
an intelligent, courteous and accurate workman. ' 
To such a plate are added the words of the Munis® :— 


XXIX.—BENARES COPPER-PLATE GRANTS OF GOVINDACHANDRA 
OF KANAUS 


By ARTHUR VENIS, M.A., Principal, Sanskrit CoLLEGE, BENARuS. 


No. I.!—-Dated Samvat 1162. 

This grant is on a single plate, and closely resembles the Basahi grant of Samvat 
1161, both in its outward form and text.2 The plate is 1’ 6’ long by 11” broad, and 
weighs 8lbs.120z. Like the Basahi plate (see Dr. Fleet’s description in loco), it has a 
fSamkha engraved on its left margin with a barbed arrow below it. At its top end is 
rivetted a turned over copper band, through which the ring of a seal was evidently 
intended to run; but the seal is missing, 

The inscription is in Nagari characters anu 1s weil preserved, but the technical 
execution is on the whole imperfect. As regards orthography, @ and v are denoted by 
the same sign, cxcept once in line 1, where 6 (babhdva) is represented by the sign used 
in seven inscriptions of Jayachchhandra (Ind. Antiq., vol. XVIII, pp. 129 et seq.) The 
sibilants are used promiscuously. The letters 7 and é have two forms. In line 22 I 

87 See above, p. 349, 1 As to the finding of these plates see ante, p. 347, 


8° Hore follow the boundaries of the villages, ® Seo Rajendralala Mitra, Journal As, Soc. Beng., vol. XLII | 


® The usual imprceations which follow are left un-| (1873), and Fleet, / ; i 
ecrrcen | ae ect, Jud. Antig., vol. KV (1885) for the Basahi 


BENARES COPPER-PLATE GRANTS OF GOVINDACHANDRA OF KANAUJ. 359 


have failed to read the two letters immediately preceding the word purandara. In line 
23, initial e appears in the old form of a triangle, with the apex downwards. 

Thé opening verses, 1—38, correspond with those of the Basdhi plate. Line 2 reads 
Mahiyalasutah :—cont. Mahiala-sutah or Mahidla-sutah of the Bas. pl. according to. 
Drs. Fleet and Mitra. Verse 4 of the Bas. pl. is not found in our text: verse 6 of our 
text is not found in the Basahi plate: but these omissions are unimportant. Line 6 
records the date in words and figures? wiz. Tuesday, full moon (bright half) of 
Karttika, 1162 Samvat, date corresponding to 24th October, 1105 A.D. 

Line 7. Govindachandra, the donor, was then encamped in Vishnupura and 
made the grant after having bathed in the Ganges, etc. This, and the succeeding names 
of places, I cannot identify. 

Dine 8. Ue gives the village of Usitha (?), in the Jiavati-pattala in the 
Panchala country, with the usual appurtenances. 

Li, 12—13. The donee, Vilhakaya Dikshita, who came originally from Savithadesa 
(?), was the son of Puravasa and grandson of Nagananda (?). ‘These belonged to the 
Vandhula gotra with the three pravaras of Vandhula, Aghamarshana and Visvamitra, 
and were followers of the Yajurveda. 

Ll. 15—16 contain the well-known crux wat aelzatTa . . . ama (q) 

ufanfasarat qamewauta . 
' Ll, 23—24, The composer of the inscription was Vijayadasa, who also composed 
the Baséhi document. The following consented to the grant :—the pratihara Gautama, 
the purohita Jaghka, the mahattaka Valhana (all three of whom are mentioned in the 
Basahi plate) and the Queen-mother Ralhadevi. 


Text. 
Front, 
Line [1.] @ al waad argzara u data wasarat caleTqaTae | ace we asta 
alsterei afaaat u (1). 4@ aresareret aya fast au: 0° 
(2.] awlaaege: Araraeanraatenr: u (2).° art ahitsaye faquacauataeharhe- 
fad’ lat aha aaafa a at area areas | 
(3.] wart daft fafeafaufad mfaarrgiar arat fawe yet aanafer a 
wrufadezea? (8). 1 aareufeuftarafacfatds: aiettafa- 
[4.] Heaure fa nfes: 1 darfxaea Ty THMaAM: HafaansANzHaaTaAM:” 4 
(4). qaestad Atatdedauretfiegaett sa- 
‘(5.] faanara aretudrefaaat fegoniatt afaedg” sf fagaaraatte: (5) 
fasdt we Ceara aalaaciat: | waTUfTta Z- 


3 Dr. Kielhorn kindly provides the following note:— 7 Read faqu. 
‘For V. 1162 expired :—Tuesday, the 24th October, A.D. 1108 ; $ Read Weea: 
the full moon éthi commenced 2h. 29m. after mean sunrise ° Metre: Sragdhard. 
and ended Ob, 9m. after mean sunrise of the following day. ” © Read TEM. CWTAT . HaAraay: 
4 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). 1 Metre: Vasantatilaka. 
>Readq@t . . a 4 Read “aeamrenttae? fuyteast afacae? 


® Metre ; Sloka (Anushtubh). % Metre: Vasantatilaka, 


360 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. [6.] costa wad u (6). daawaa feragracnanafaa arfaaiware wa 
fea sefu daq (cer ale y Wa” wae slafeqycarfaast- 
(7.] fasaaza aaaaenunaarai aaa erat i autfautd aaeawfaage- 
yatadeufaar | aa Hetta dost | Waa AEH 
[8.] ¢ wre | farararé aTaed wUTET | Hao YAaE Far | WaTeed atar- 
qantas stars wafaqaaraafaane 
[9.] wenanaueraaivafa aararaafa wv gat arate war adtaramafattrac- 
UIA HATA, AANA: VATATTTITATT, A 
(10.] aalanealeaaTat: Beye ATATMTTATA: ~SatAraqerare fawered: 
uacdeaarerrataa: | africana | 
[1l.] waataat atfrar sifaa” fasta afaavantafaafeaarai wat fatter | 
waqgerart aaa ufcaa 1 aeaigua- 
[12.] qdaraandt” aware n afasenfatare aareaaaratama dyattara 
qaqa wanuufaatfaafanatra” 
[13.] Afeaatmacdar dfacquragaa aqaefaarafattfanranarneE- 
qa” aifaadiverata | etfagearar 
(14.] werrpenaaaedaeaa quygaedicaa atfuat fafaad wana 
grammar ararfadiraay aa-geata- : 
(15.] asa daatfefufafeoaaacrfa aaq wetter get" NAAT aelaata- 
ararargcnenaafanfasaarar qe 
[16.] mewnufanaiciam aq wana fatedta” u @ areata adtudt aa aa 
fa at urfariae aarsfafactaat atéa- 
[17.] aq faaq gataranta auafatar ea wet urea arqatefa avafa wad 
Jaq qatar aa: uv (7)! spare arerfear: 
(18.] atat: uv afa’ a: ufeecerfa aa aft caesfa 1 sit al geranit faad 
aaattaat u (8).” adifad ufawerfa cerafa- 
(19.] ata ar 1 argut waea: aa acai g fanaa u (9). agfeaqur yar shir ai 
ufefa: | we wa get yfawa we Get 
[20.] we” n (10). arate carfa gor ateetarhs waar | frehreaaata 
arfa® arfa at ava arg: Gatedta nv (11). spacaet ux- 


4 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). araufa oo.) . arate. 

15 Read °GtWaTet and v4 instead of 4. 22 Read MATSTAT BOCCOIDE! 

6 Read wert wazawfraganaadedfaa sus 3 Read ae faregcerTay warafafacfadt aT aH TA 
weak . Haye FATE TST ATE Carat ery aety; faaq i . awe Cet . wea avefa . yar gta 
remove the unnecessary signs of punctuation. 24 Metre: Sarddlavikridita. - 

17 Strike out the unnecessary punctuation after aq ; and % Read ufa 

read UIfaat stfaet. 6 Metre; Sloka (Anushtubb i i 

18 Read FExt CETCAR. ie ues (Anushtubb), and in the two following 

19 Read MISHA THRTTTT 7 Read agfad? . aa ae ger ufawe ae aer 

20 Read CaTHTAR’ TYAS? FOX U as 

Read Waeifreag esa . UeaTR? © Read fratearanfaart af 


wreurarg ws OTR ww HTT fafefaa- 2° Metre: Indravajra. 


BENARES COPPER-PLATE GRANTS OF GOVINDACHANDRA OF KANAUJ. 361 


L. (21.] qerqeretfatta erafacna 1 qatettd 1 waretsafaaqeqedaarat 
art Ge acamuftarad wa” (12).4 derteradt 
[22.] aa aqreat acarem: | ufaerre fastia wa * * giee?n (13). @eat w- 
aut at at eta aduci 1 a fatal afacer® fafa: a. 
(23.] © werfa 0 (14). meaterattraia” sae qaifen: | Oral Treeeay w are: 
we awAH: uw (15). odrat awe ura mente esa 


Reverse. 
(84.] arfaeq 1 aren faxaerara: arad wrardaay (16). 


No. Li.—Dated Samvat 1196. 


This inscription is engraved on a single plate, which measures 1’ 83” in length by 
1’ 2” in breadth, and weighs 5lbs. l5oz. ‘The plate is perforated at the top margin to 
take the ring of a seal; and it is likely that one of the loose seals now in the Provincial 
Museum, Lucknow, belongs to this plate. The orthograplry calls for no special remark. 
Verses 1-7 correspond with the opening verses of the Chandradeva and Madanapd4la 
grant (see Ind. Antig., vol. XVIII, p. 11): verses 8 and 9 are found again in a grant of 
Jayachchhandra (ibid., p. 130). 

I. 13.—Govindachandra while at Benares conveys the village of Janakadevi- 
pura in the Rana pattala (the latter name I read doubtfully owing to the plate being 
injured). 

Lil, 16, 17.—Contain the date, and mention a lunar eclipse on that date, viz. 
Monday, the 15th day in the bright half of Asvina, 1196 Samvat, corresponding to 
9th October 1139 A.D.” 

19, 20. The donee was the purohita Jagd Sarman, the son of the donee in the 
preceding grant. 


TEXT. 


L. [1.] ef HGH UI FEATUNSIEAT, | acy” gam «a fa 
aut 4: i (1). aretedtrafedasrarearrorsarean 
[4] 9” feaware 1 ararferertaa” ‘afcaret aret asifrae cert: w (2)." 
want wasteceaafaafas | TaTaTTH- 
(3.] qurear arorfed am: 0 (3)° cent adacfes: arafermee 
faadtieaaicarafafac: heeeat aa: u aA 


%® Read OMzTet eta erafazaaqmMentay i SaTG- northern expired year ; the lunar eclipse occurred 13 bh. 21 m. 


after mean sunrise.” 
feufeqasezaaaray - °afxaras a 
an Metre: Vasantatilaka 37 Read WHGY UM: 


% Metre: Sloka (Anushtubb) 
2 Ea Aa ACTS: |e au: 
ng wed rach »R aestta Ode’. 


= Sea Sloka (Annshtubh), and in the three follawing ® Read qrearte” ‘ 
varaee “ Metre: Indravajra. 


® Read “gt 
es ate sya | a ftarai Efrat. © Metre: Sloka (Anushtcbh). 


% Dr. Kielhern again kindly notea,— “The year is the 


362 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L, [4] eracmaraefaaritenstiagd staarfagefacramaafamrarfare 0 (4).° 
aera arf transac ease 
(5.] aatfa ufecreanfars 1 Saraquafaace fesrat aatfgat agaat 
aamegqarfa:” u (5).” aera aerate sfa factea- 
[6.] svafafasat fataws: | carfiaannaatatad: wath, catfad afar: 
uza afcet: i (6) aearatfesanarra- 
[7.] aa Ae AR STAM AH MIAMI AAS | asttatahraarg- 
afaa;, wraregafaa:® we; toaa- 
(8.] fea” waaat ate faretterrea: 0 (7).° aanearaa fasracargafararaeeaa- 
Tans AVE: | AreTeagaqareal A- 
(9.] at at arfreae sfa awe careqcra:” u (8).” 4 aA Tra fee 
feq asia ofa: 1 aga eagqeaqaaanta- 
(10.] wer? wa ae aera: u (9)* Ma wamusamdafaaraca; FF UTANETCa- 
Aero facrsaTaaTUTAAT Sahay 
(11.) onfrasttarrqen farerr areca aera aaa TET PUTTS AAT 
ULAATSRT BAeAaTaAeay TST ATA- 
[12.] aqadercan eter fatrarataatataars atria fans faacafacrsaaatfay- 
fafafaufaenfaararaataataat- 
[13.] faxaeed fast 0 cacaarai” | saaefagrrafaarfant fafeasacer- 
quaarafa a cmngqausafagete- 
[14.] amtteraarafranenn fara fata fa taarea-yhagaa equa aara- 
Taratigattaaregesrsy AaT- 
[15.] sraafa steaarfenfa a sat fafeanag wai amiufifafaaaa: aaa: 
AA SAITAL TARTAT: ATATT- 
16.) at | wayaraaaaricarfacuquafeaitaaa: dereagquaziage: wul- 
aug: «dad (ee BTfarafe ey aT 
(17.] afea® aera agate agai erat fafurnatagiaaaaaa- 
fugrtiaufaar fafarazanzaucare- 
[18.] qerdtfanqrerdiafiunfanraaay aay fayraargqargere garfequra” 
wqwaaa efaut faust gat atat- 
[19.] faatraay yeas faq sacar frat aeat gaara yTa TAA eT AH TAT ATT 
qaqa | waar | faarfaafanaca dfaay- 


4 Real AW: | gatamfaat amfaguficsmqaa® Cay | dra: see Kielhorn, Ind. Antig., vol. XVII. p.129; and read 


Oo °. co] 


Metre: Sarddlavikridita. “are aT | MATTE OTT ORTH; 
Read qemafay 6. Mam > Metre: Nasentasilaka, 
47 Metre: Vasantatilaka, and in the next verse. 23 tead wary fa° aay 
4 Read °afqawa’ Metre: Drutavilambita. 
“0 a © <1 doubtful. 
Read according to Kiolhorn fy; dyaquifeq and see nes ub 
Ind. Antig., vol. XV., p. 12, note 97. 5° Read atera° fase; srPra? 
Metre: Sarddlavikridita. 7 Read “Het. . Yt fray 


*) This verse is foundin Ben, Coll. grant of Jayachchhan- 


PALI COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF MAHARAJA LAKSHMANA. 363 


L, [20.] waters dfaadtiergaa Afaaqi eras aay WRT ATA 

Waiter wed war waretaarnnnit- 

[21,] macafrarqaacwnufaanareana arafaiahyae eradfa #1 
wafer ara 1 ata: | afd a: oferta aa afa | 

[22.] wasefa 1 wt a geahrat frat aaiarfett u (10).* de agreed wea 
ara” aarcut: | yfaerra fastfa watacutes u (11). aataan- 

(28.) 4 afer: arfetarq wat yet arad caus: | arated wh agar” are 
ATS UTaatat wate: uv (12).° agfagur yar tra 

(24.) fi: ererfefa: re oe get afar ae cet we (13). gauhal wat 

[25.] a® 0 (14) asrmrat awa wanundt Ti wat atfengrta ufieat a 
wafa® y (15). agaracearean at vta Tea” 1 a frerat afer 
faq- 

[26.] fi; we asafer u (16). 


XXX.—PALI COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF MAHARAJA LAKSHMANA, 


Daten SamvaT 158. 


By A. Fiurer, Ps.D. 


The original plate containing the inscription now published was found, in May 1891, 
buried underground in the house of a goldsmith at the village of Pali,’ close to 
Kosim, the ancient Kausambi, the chief town of the Karari pargana in the 
Manjhanpur tahsil of the Allahabad district. It was obtained by me from the 
Magistrate of Allahabad, and is now in the Lucknow Provincial Museum. 

The plate, which is inscribed on both sides, measures about 7}”’ by 64’. It is quite 
smooth, the edges having been neither fashioned thicker nor raised into rims to 
protect the writing. The average size of the letters is about }”; they are cut neatly 
and deeply, and the inscription is in a state of perfect preservation throughout. 
The characters belong to the northern class of alphabets, and are of the peculiar 
“‘ nail-headed”” type current in the 5th and 6th centuries A.D. The language is 
Samskrit, and with the exception of the benediction and imprecatory verses in lines 9 

8 Read “AREA ee °yxaradtara:( © Metre: Salini. 
a ae aTacte =. «Wet! . and remove unnecessary Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh), and in the three following 


signs of punctuation. vereen: 
9 Read °ZTaTarat’—The asterisk is represented in the 6 Read STE H ) Cdyaq 
plate by a character like &. (cf. Ind. Antiq., vol. XVIIL., p. 12). Read WH? . 6 
6 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh), and in the following verse. 7 Read But Wut TH i : 
S Eee AES 3 =) EW ASNT! 1 See ante, vol. II, page 240 
@ Read “qurat 


364 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


to 14, the inscription itself is ia prose throughout. In respect of orthography we have 
to notice: (1) the doubling of dh in conjunction with a following y in mdddhyandindya, 
line 6 ;' (2) the doubling of ¢ in conjunction with a following r in pittror, line 4, and in 
gottrdéya, line 6; (8) the doubling of x, g, th, bh, v, and sh in conjunction with a 
preceding r in paurnnamdeydm, line 15; in evargge, line 13; in artthe, line 8; in 
vidheyair bhbhavitavyam, line 7, and krimir bhbhutvd, line 10; in parvvatika, line 2, 
and bahubhir vvasudhd, line 11; in varsheha’, line 12; (4) the doubling of o after the 
anusvdra in samovatsara, line 15; (5) the use of o for 6 in kutumvinah, line 3. 

‘Towards the proper right side of the plate, about the centre, a circular copper ring 
is fastened through a hole to an oval brass seal, about 23” by 2”. In the upper part 
it bears a rather good figure of a lion, squatting on its haunches and brandishing its 
tail, facing to the right; below it, separated by two lines, is in relief the legend &r7- 
mahdrdja-lakehmanasya, “of the illustrious Maharaja Lakshmana.” The seal itself 
resis on two low leg-fashioned supports. The weight of the plate is 372 ¢olas, and of the 
ring and seal 273 ¢olae; total 65 folas. 

The inscription is one of the Maharaja Lakshmana, and the charter recorded 
in it is issued from the city Jayapura. The date of the writing of the charter is 
given in words as the year one hundred and fifty-eight, and the full-moon day of the 
month Jyaishtha. ‘There is no indication as to the era; but in all probability it refers 
to the Gupta era. The corresponding European date can, however, not be calculated 
as the week-day, nakshatra, or other astronomical details are not given, which could 
be utilized in checking the calculation, The object of the charter is to record the 
grant, by the Maharaja Lakshmana, of an agrdhdra in the village Phela- 
parvvatik4,—undoubtedly the ancient name of the modern village P&li,—to the 
Brahmana Revatisvimin of the Kautsagotra. The détaka is the Mahardja Nara- 
vahanadatta. Neither the capital Jayapura nor the names of the two feudatory 
princes are known to us from earlier or contemporaneous inscriptions. 


Text.’ 
Obverse. 
L. {(1.] wtenfe sagoamartat: aaees- 
[2.] were: que Rerosfaarara area: 
(3.] wfaafegefes: warmuata fated arg a- 
[4.] ae anit war arnfetcnrs gurfaacd 
[5.] atenttere areata warfa artes 
[6] areatafrarfaaaerotrereg afar 
(7.] wrersaafaaauifaral’ agfrara wera: 
[8.] aafecenreat car(uafa arf araaat: 
(9.] Wear wafalilaeat uceat ar at eta aaact [1] 
[10.] @ faerat afawier faghe: we aenfa [0] 


? From the original plate. * Metres Anushtubh, and the following two verres. 
® Read *rbbhaviluvyam, ® Read °rbbadtnd. 


GRANT OF MAHARAJA LAKSHMANA. 


e rah eavek oe = 


PALI COPPER-PLATE GRANT OF MAHARAJA LAKSHMANA. 365 


Reverse. 
L. (11.] agfastger gat crerfirerrafefa: [)] te we 
(12.] wer afar ae aer wer [0] wfe aaae- 
(13.] arfe qut drefa afafe[iaree aaa wo aeia 
[14.] axa aaq[u]) gravee Ahrercaacareaen: 
[15.] damentedarmeet siware drel- 
[16.] arent fafed aaetafa cus [t] 


TRANSLATION, 


Om! Hail from Jayapura! A most devout worshipper of the god Maheévara, 
the illustrious Mah4rAja Lakshmana, being in good health, issues a command to the 
residents, beginning with the Brihmanas, and to the cultivators, at the village of 
Phela-parvvatik4 :—“ Be it known to you that, for the purpose of increasing the 
religious merit of my parents and of myself, this village is granted by me as an 
agréhéra to the Brahmana RevatisvAmin, of the Kautsagotra, a student of. the 
VAjasaneya-MAddhyandina (éékha). You shall'be obedient to his commands, and 
you shall render to him the customary taxes. that which is to be measured out, 
gold, etc.” And on the same subject there are also the following verses by Vyasa :— 
‘‘He who confiscates land that has been given, whether by himself or by another, 
becomes a worm in ordure, and sinks into hell together with his ancestors. ‘The 
earth has been enjoyed by many kings, commencing with Sagara; whosoever at any 
time possesses the earth, to him belongs, at that time, the reward (of this grant that is 
now made, if he continue it)! The giver of land enjoys happiness in heaven for sixty 
thousand years; (but) the confiscator (of @ grant) and he who assents (to an act of 
confiscation), shall dwell for the same number of years in hell!’’ The ditaka (is) the 
illustrious Mahar4ja NaravAhanadatta. This charter has been written by Baladeva 
in a century of years, increased by fifty-eight, on the full-moon day of the month 
Jyaishtha, 158. 


366 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


XXXI.—FURTHER INSCRIPTIONS FROM SANCHI.' 


By G. Biuer, Pa.D., LL.D., C.LE. 


In the course of a tour through Eastern Rajputana and the Central India Agency 
in March 1893, Dr. A. Fuhrer again visited the famous Stapas of «SAnchi, recté in San- 
skrit KAkanaéda or in Prakrit KAkan4va (see I, No. 378) and took impressions of 
those inscriptions which had not been found on his former visit. He also used the 
opportunity to clear away the rubbish round the two Stipas and to make a few 
excavations. Asin all former cases, his operations have yielded highly satisfactory results. 
The fragment of the Asoka inscription has been recovered ;? the number of the small 
donative inscriptions has risen, if all the fragments and almost effaced pieces are counted, 
to nearly 500, against Sir A. Cunningham’s 240. Finally, a valuable Indo-Skythian 
inscription has turned up on the base of a statue of Buddha, and in a similar position 
have been found two inscriptions in later characters,’ the latest of which shows the 
Nagart of the 9th or 10th century A.D. These new finds prove that the Stapas 
were visited by Buddhist pilgrims both during the interval between the times of the early 
Andhras and of the Guptas, and long after the latter had passed away. Moreover, the 
late Nagart inscription may also be considered to furnish additional evidence for the fact 
that Buddhism survived in India until very late times, long after the period when the 
stupid legends allege it to have been drowned in a deluge of blood. The recovery of the 
fragment of the Asoka edict does not quite fulfil the expectations which I thought 
might be reasonably entertained. Iam not able to decipher the whole or even to sug- 
gest a complete plausible restoration of the portion with which I declined to meddle in 
my former article. But Iam able to settle two points. First, the two signs indis- 
tinctly visible in the beginning cannot have formed part of the word devdnam, nor can 
the word piya have followed. The first sign of the line, which, counting from below, I 
number as line 7, has been lost, the second is illegible, and the third is either yam or 
yam. The ya is plain and certain, and so is the Anusvara, but the vowel is doubtful. 
The next consonant is certainly bha, and the syllable probably was bhe. This is suffi- 
cient to prove that line 7 does not contain the beginning of the edict, but thata probably 
not inconsiderable piece has been lost at the top. 

Secondly, at the end of line 7 stand not only, ‘as Sir A. Cunningham has stated 
(Bhilsa Topes, p. 260), the letters mag, but mage, and after it quite distinctly kate. This 
new reading removes the possibility that the Samgha of Magadha can be mentioned 
or addressed. The words mean, without a doubt, “a road has been made.” The next 
line 6 tells us for whom this road was intended. The first sign has again been lost, 
Next follows a fairly distinct khu, and after two indistinct signs the syllable bh. The 
two following consonants have been lost in a large abrasion, to the right of which the 
vowel ¢ appears and immediately after it nam. Then comes an indistinct sign and next 
ti. Thus, we obtain—.khu . . bhi . . tmam . ti. It is almost certain that 
the reading was bhikhunamn vd bhikhuninan vé ti, and that the road was prepared for 
the monks and the nuns of the Buddhist order. A comparison of the phrase at the end 


1 Continued from ante, p. 87. .| Some museum in order to keep it safe. See place of facsimiles. 
2 In nis letter Dr. Fibrer states that it is now lying in 3 About thirty very small fragments and illegible insorip- 
tne jungle. It ison a frustum of a stambha or pillar which | tions have not been transcribed. 
probably stood near the Southern gate, and might be placed in | . 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 367 


of the edict (Ul. 2-8) “for my wish is,—what ?—that the road of the Samgha may last a 
long time” removes even the possibility of a doubt regarding the correctness of the 
reading adopted, with which the shape of the remnants of the third, fourth and ninth 
signs of the line agrees. Though at the end of line 6 the letters ta pa are quite plain 
and again in line 5 towards the end the letters kaor ke, ye, as well as the word samngham, 
I do not dare to propose a restoration. I must content myself with putting down the 
few signs I believe to recognise. The better preserved remainder of the inscription, 
as I have stated formerly, indeed corresponds in part with the middle of the Kosambi 
edict on the Allahabad Pillar, and there is very little to alter in the readings which I 
have given in my former article. 
TRANSCRIPT. 


Allahabad. Sdncht. 
. 3 : : , : salbgham . .  yfatn) bh{e?] . . mage kate [7] 
bhokhati bhikhu-va — bhikhu-ni va A khu[narh va] bhi ..inarn [va] ti [.] . ta pa (6] 
[pi chiJo—(2) datd—ni [d]-usini . nam dhapa > E & itkhi(? tah) -<. tae 2rt(?), ce [ke 7] ye 
yitu anape- sathgbarh [5] bhokhati bhiku va bhikhuni v4 odaté- 
ren ET eet a GY Hs nidu[s.] .isanam . . yitu and . [8] 


sasi v(ijs. petaviy. [.] Ichha hi me kim- [2] 
ti sarhnghasa mage . chilathitike siya ti [1] 


TRANSLATION. 


. . ‘A road was made both for the monks and the nuns‘ . . . . .the 
community ° will dine, both monk and nun, (and), causing white cloth to be put down (for 
them), you will order it to be spread; for my wish is,—what ?—that the road of the 
community (of the Buddhist monks) may endure for a long time.” 

It is now evident that the road (mage) is something material. Possibly the expres- 
sion refers to the procession path or ‘‘ terrace for circumambulation ”* which surrounds 
the Stipa (see Bhilsa Topes, p. 184). But the road may also be one which made the 
Stiipas more conveniently accessible. 

The characters of the small donative inscriptions offer various points of interest. 
Among those the alphabet of which in general agrees with that of Asoka’s Edicts we 
find— 

(1) Some like I, Nos. 172, 174, 185, 203, the letters of which are very small, with 
short vertical strokes, giving one the impression of an attempt at reproducing the Maurya 
characters, used for literary purposes ; 

(2) Two,—II, No. 61 and another,—illegible with the exception of the word dénam, 
in which throughout thin double lines are employed instead of single oues ; 

(3) Many, which present cursive forms for one or two consonants, or even only for 
some medial vowel marks, Thus, da has frequently (see, eg., I, Nos. 129, 177, 186 and 
188) a very shallow curve upen to the left and otherwise abnormally bent strokes. Here 
and there ja, too, is irregular. In Ujeniyé (No. 159) it has the angular shape, which is 
the usual one in the Andhra inscriptions, but occurs once in the Girnar version of Asoka’s 
Rock-Edicts. In Réjuka (1, No. 177), and sometimes in the word pajdvati, ja looks 


* The word ¢i indicates that the sentence is at an end. has not been restored completely, this is, of course, merely 
5 Tam inclined to take sashgham as a neuter nominative | tentative. 
with the lingavyatya-ya, so common in the Agoka inscrip- ® Usually called Pradakshind by the Brahmans and 
tions, and as the subject of the sentence, As long ns the text | Bhiwti (Bhramanti) by the Jainas. 


368 SPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


almost like 4é. In Yakhaddsiyd (1, No. 194) the letter sa has been made with a single 
stroke, the left-hand limb being formed by drawing from the right hand upstroke a 
continuous line across the letter. Among the vowels @ and e often slant upwards, as 
in the Kalsi version of the Rock-Edicts and in the later inscriptions. The vowel 7 very 
commonly consists, as in the Girnar version, of a small semi-circle and occasionally (see, 
e.g., 1, Nos. 141, 285) of a long stroke, rising straight upwards. I may add that the 
vowel d is attached against the usual practice to the inner side of the left prong of ma 
in the word Mdhisatiya, I, Nos. 313-14, and that the vowel <4 occupies a similar posi- 
tion in Sirimitdya (1, No. 355). 

The unusual cha, with a little tail, known from Mr. Rea’s Bhattiprolu Stdpa in- 
scriptions, appears in I, Nos. 269 aud 284, A Ja, intermediate between the form of the 
Bhattiprolu Stdpa and that of the Andhra cave inscriptions, is used in the name Valé- 
cahana, a vicarious form for Védivahana in I, No. 199. This.is one of the few certain 
instances of the occurrence of /a north of the Narmada before the times of the Guptas. 

There are also, just as in Sir A. Cunningham’s collection, a certain number of in- 
scriptions, showing later characters than those of the Asoka Edicts. To these belong— 

(1) the long imprecatory document, I, No. 377, which shows the dagger-like ka, the 
angular gha and a peculiar short da, witha shallow curve, but has no serif or nail-heads ; 

(2) a few inscriptions with short vertical strokes and nail-heads, but otherwise 
with archaic forms, like I, Nos. 288, 334, 377; 

(3) likewise a small rumber of inscriptions with still more advanced forms, like I, 
No. 237; II, Nos. 25, 59, 66, among which the first shows curves to the left attached to 
ka and ra, while the third offers an almost circular da and the looped ¢¢, common in the 
southern inscriptions of the second century A.D. and of later times. It seems to me that 
these facts confirm the remarks made in my former article regarding the age of the 
Stipas, and show that the bulk of the work belougs to the 3rd century B.C. and to the 
beginning of the 2nd, as well as that some additions and repairs were made in later times. 

With respect to the language I have not to add anything to the notes given in my 
former article. The type is that of the Pali of the Asoka inscriptions and of the 
Buddhist scriptures. Anomalous forms of the kinds noticed before are also numerous. 
If my reading of the second word of.I, No. 263, is right, there is one instance of the use 
of a double consonant. 

As regards the contents I may state that the new inscriptions mention also a 
number of the collective donations, 

Thus, I, No. 214 registers a gift of the village of Asvavati; No. 124 one by the 
nuns of Vadivahana ; Nos. 147 and 231 those of the female lay worshippers of Nava- 
gama and of Ejavati; No. 276 one by the family of Dhamu [tara] and No. 366 one 
by the family of Ajitiguta. The number of single monks makisg donations now 
amounts to more than eighty. Among them there is (JI, No. 59) another sutétika or 
teacher of the Satras, a thera (I, No. 266), and; it would seem, a tépaga or ascetic (I, 
No. 260). This designation is usually not adopted by Buddhists, who despise the 
performance of austerities. Possibly this person may have belonged to some other sect. 
One of the most prominent personages among the monks apparently was Gotiputa 
Bhamduka, who occurs twice (I, Nos. 16, 256) and had four pupils . . . ka, 
Budharakhita, Aya-Kanaand Dhamadata, The names of nuns making donations 


SANCHI INSCRIPTIONS. 


On MgpI&zvAL Imaqgs. p. 369. 


a tak 


Scale: 2-5ths, 


inal eee 
nee MERA 
ey Ee 
= (eee 


Scale: 1-3rd. 


Scale; 1-4th. 


NS 
By "iS ae ee 
Scale: 1-6th. 


A. Fuhver imp. 


Epigraphia Indica, vot, IT, 


SANCHI. INSCRIPTIONS, 


Taney impre: Scale; 1-5th, 


Sr. I, 256.—p. 384. 


EAR oR PE AP Hp 


Sm 


Scale: 1-5th. 


pees 


Sr. I, 288, 


ares, OG 


A Fuhrer impress. 


Seale: 1-4th, Scale: 1-5th 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS, 369 


now rise from thirty-seven to nearly seventy. One or two among them mention their 
children, and must have been married before they entered the Sarhgha, see, ¢.g., I, 
No. 284 and I], No. 29. 

Among the lay donors the Sheths and their relatives now take a still more promi- 
nent position than in the smaller ecllection formerly accessible, and it may be pointed 
out that in severa! instances the Sheth of a village is mentioned without the addition of 
his proper name. Thus, I, No. 140, records the gift of “ Naga, wife of the Sheth of Kamda- 
digama,” and No. 167 that “‘of the mother of the Sheth.” Aimong the other professions 
of the donors there are some new ones. Thus, we have a sotika, ie., sastrika, “ weaver,” 
in I, No. 195; vadaki, i.e., probably vardhakin, “carpenter” in No. 311, and a rajuka 
in No. 229, The term rajuka or raéjuka is known from the Asoka edicts and from the 
Kailpasitra of the Jainas, where, as Professor Jacobi has shown, it occurs in the form 
rajjuya, and is explained to mean ‘a clerk or accountant,’ what is now called in India 
a karkun.’ The word is an abbreviation of rajj/ugdhaka, literally, a ropeholder and is 
an ancient name for a Revenue Settlement officer. Rdjalipikara “a royal scribe” 
(I, Nos. 48, 49), apparently differs in meaning from lekhaka (I, No. 142), which latter 
means “a writer who copies manuscripts or copyist.” Among the proper names there 
are various new ones, pointing to the worship of the Noukshatras, and a few like 
Ajarant, 4e., Ajira or Durga, indicating the existence of Pauranik worship. 

‘There are fifteen new nanies of towns or villages mentioned as the homes of doners, 
but none of them occurs more than a few times. It would seem that the inhabitants 
of Arapana, Bhogavadhana, Kuraghara, Kurara, Madhuvana, Nandinagara 
Navagéama, Pokhara, Tumbavana, Ujjain and Vedisa defrayed nearly the whole 
expense of the ornaments of the two Stipas, the lion’s share falling to Ujjain, which is 
mentioned thirty-five times. 

If we now turn to the three later inscriptions incised on the bases of statues which 
Dr. Fithrer has discovered, the first records the dedication of a statuc of Buddha by 
Madhurika, daughter of Khara or Vera in the Vihara of Dharmadeva during the 
reign of the [makdrdéja| rdjdtirdja [devalputra Shahi Vasushka. The name 
Vasushka is new. But it looks asif it were formed of the first part of Vasudeva and 
the last syllable of the names Kanishka and Huvishka, and one feels tempted to 
consider it as another name of the third Kushana king. If the first sign of the date is 
read, as Sir A. Cunningham, I think, correctly proposes, as 70, the identification of 
VAsushka with Vasudeva becomes quite unobjectionable; for the year 78 certainly 
falls within VAsudeva’s reign and the characters of the document fully agree with those 
of the inscriptions which bear his name. The inscription is unfortunately mutilated in 
the beginning of each line and the third line has almost entirely disappeared. What 
remains may be read as follows :— 

Ll... 2 « « /8yd® rajatirajasya . . putrasya® Shah{i] Vasushkasya ” 

sam [70]" 8 he 1 [di 5] [e]tasy[4m] [pJu[rv]v[4yarh] bhagava— 
30 T read this sign first as 2C; Sir A. Cunningham, 
whom I consulted, suggested that it is a looped sign for 
70. I agree to this, as the Mathura Inser. No. XX (Hpigr. 


Ind., vol. II, p. 214), which belongs to the same period, 
has a very similar sign. (See facsimile on the plate.) 


7 See my notes on the Pillar Edict IV, and the Rock | 
Edict 11], infra, and my article in the Deutschen Morgenlén- 
dischen Zeitschrift, vol. XLVI, p. 466. 

8 Restore, as Sir A. Cunningham suggests, Mahdrdja, 
px perhaps Siddham mahérdjasya, 


9 Restore devaputrasya. 
3B 


370 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


U2. . « « « « sya” jambuchhayasailagra . sya Dharmadevavihare 
pratishtapita® Kharasya” dhitare Madhurika. 
nt a ee ee nee leyadhermnar sty ciety ee 


The second novelty, which shows letters of the 8th or 9th century need not be 
transcribed, as it contains nothing but the Buddhist creed. The third inscription, which, 
as already stated, is in N&gari characters of the 9th or 10th century, originally 
consisted of a Sragdharé verse, of which only two Padas are at present completely 
legible :— 


L.1..Om Pra—.ayushyyu —- ~ Uuvuvuuvy Oe i 
—- vu — — [Ta]syakhyayah kilante Sugatagunavritah samsthito 
DHACRA eg eh cel ee) ee ee eas es 
L. 2, savdah [1] 
o ra o Fe NI NT oN NI NT re a coe ear NE 


sam— — dedharmoyam ” k[riltasya pravarasukhakarajilanasam— 
L. 3. praptaye sah [1] ] 


DONATIVE INSCRIPTIONS FROM SANCHI. 


Tore I, 
No. 124 = C. 2. 
fatfe* lager firefarat era [1n*]* 


The gift of the nuns from [V4di]vahana. 


Nor 125-06; 
afagea era [0%] 
The gift of Vajiguta (Vajrigupta). 
No. 126 = C. 7. 
gaara [alyataralt a] firgfra erat [0*] 
The gift of the nun Devabhaga, inhabitant of Madhuvana, 
No. 127 = C. 8. 
aaeara efaa afefaaala* u*]” 
(The gift) of the Vakalad queen, the mother of Ahimita (Ahimitra), 


" Probably to sékyamunisya to be restored. Fiihrer’s impression shows a faint va before hand. The res- 

‘2 Read pratishthapitd. toration is not doubtful, as Védivakana is mentioned in 

3 Or Verasya. Nos. 101, 116, and so forth. 

14 Read dhitard. 7 The letters are, beautifully carved ‘and about half a 

1’ This seems to be a contraction of deyadharmo, made foot high. Vajrin may be,—Indra, a Buddha, or one of the 
for the sake of the metre. Visve Devas. 


6 Sir A. Cunningham has only Hand bhichhuniya. Dr. 8 Possibly atfaata . 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS, 371 


Nosd28;= 0, «10: 
antera fagat eta [u*] 
The gift of Nagadina (Nagadatta or Nagadatta), the monk. 
No. 129 = C. 17. 
arueaa [ulfisra afazala a ala [u*] ) 
The gift of Sonadeva (Suvarnadevd),” Parijd (?) and Agideva (Aynidevd). 
No1307-=. C18. 
wa aafatrara aa [u*] 
The gift of Subhagaé and her sister, 
No. 131 = C. $1-(?). 
gafafen aralatjaane ea [u*] 
The gift of Pusagiri (Pushyagiri), inhabitant of Navagama (Navagrdéma), 
No. 182 = C. 26. 
eltifaaa frefa afefaaar ea [n*] 
The gift of Odatika (Avaddtikd), a nun of Vedisa. 
No. 183 = ©. 27. 


aarareae eta velalafs[a a] (2) [n*] 
(The gift) of Yasopala (Yasohpdla), pupil of the venerable Kada (?). 


No. 1384 = C. 28. 


aren(y jefteat atefafen za [i*] 
The gift of Sihagiri (Simhagiri) from Mahamoragi.” 


No. 185 = C. 29. 


gaa wefeae fag era [1*] 
The gift of Pusa (Pushya) the Chahatiya” monk. 


No. 186 = C. 32. 
[aleufet gfrae arla* u*] 
The gift of the gahapati Budhila (Buddhila). 


No. 187 = O. 37. 
_ wale)feere arfataaa” arg era [u*] 
The gift of the mother of the venerable Rahila (?), the Saphineyaka. 


19 Suvarna, i.e. the Gandharva of that name. 

20 Compare the note to II, No, 33, 

22 See ante, No. 77. 

2 Possibly ‘‘inbabitant of Chahata.” 

73 This might be rea gTeaaqay, but below (in No. 161), the f@ is distinct. 


3B 2 


3/2 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 188 = OC. 42. 
L. 1. aaaraat featcte- 
L. 2. aa era [u*] 
The gift of DisArakhita™ (Désdrakshita) from Navagamaka (Navagraéma). 


No. 189 = C. 44. 
wreeara erat [u*] 
The gift of Pothadeva (Proshthadevd). 
No. 140 = C. 45 (?)* 
L.1. agfeartaae afar 
L. 2, wsrafear arara ea [u*] 
The gift of N4gA, the wife of the Sheth of Kamdadigama (“yrdma). 


No. 141 = C. 46. 
L.1. aefemtaae afar 
L. 2. werataa gara era [ul] 
The gift of Pus& (Pushy), wife of the Sheth of Kamdadigama. 
No. 142 = C. 47. 
aefearant dea era [1*] 
The gift of Vadha (Vriddha) from Kamdadigrama. 
No. 148 = C. 48. 


quiaten ea Gane [i*] 


The giit of Mulagiri (Milagirt), the copyist. 


No. 144 = C. 49. 
sata —-——— 


From Ujjain... 


No. 145 = C. 50. 
 wefera frgat era [u*] 
The gift of Yakhbadina (Yakshadatia), the monk. 
No. 146 = C. 51. 
safaar sarfeara ett [u*] 
The gift of a female lay worshipper from Ujjain. 
No, 147 = C. 538. 
arantfaarar surfaarat era [0*] 
The gift of the female lay worshippers of Navagama (°grdma). 


4 The deities meant here are the diSa%, the nymphs of the quarters of the horizon. 
% Sir A. Cunningham’s identical inscription is in one line. Hence this may be a different one. 


-SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 373 


No. 148 = C. 55. 
safrar Ol elfwa erat [u*]” 
The gift of Rohani (Rohini) from Ujjain. 
No. 1498 = C. 56. 
safrat wataton eat [u*] 
The gift of Dhamagiri (Dharma’) from Ujjain. 
No. 150 = C. 57. 
satrat atere eta [u*] 
The gift of Sona (Suvarna) from Ujjain. 
No. 151 = C. 58. 
saifan aratears [glatrsna” ara [0] 
The gift of Naj4, the daughter-in-law of the Tapasiyas, from Ujjain. 
No. 152 = C. 59. 
saat aatesa sfeface era [u*]” 


The gift of Isimita (Rishimiira) of the Tapasiyas from Ujjain. 


No. 153 = C. 60. 
satan qeaeaa ea [*] 
The gift of Muladaté (Méladattaé) from Ujjain. 


No. 154 = C. 61. 
sata aaa aa [1*] 
The gift of Balaka from Ujjain. 


No. 155 = C. 62. 
[salfaar aiteena ustafaa aqeaa era [1] 
The gift of Vayudata (Vdyudatta), wife of Opedadata ( Upendradaita), from 
Ujjain. 
No. 156 = C. 62. 
safaa steeaa ufataa feaeara ea [u*] 
The gift of Himadat& (Himadattd), sister of Upedadata ( Upendradatta), from 
Ujjain. 
No. 157 = C. 64. 
[salfrar steeaa aftfra gerd eva [u*]” 
The giftof Budha (Buddha), sister of Upedadata (Upendradatta), from Ujjain. 


36 The roverse shows clearly that the apparent w-stroke under ¢ is due to an accidental scratch. 

27 The little horizontal stroke, denoting the ¢ is placed rather high up and detached from the vertical line, 
Read saifaat- 
Possibly afwa to be read. 


374 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 158 = OC. 65. 
ssfam atfsa faefa era [u*] 
The gift of the nun KAdi (Kandi), from Ujjain. 
No. 159 = C. 66, 
sata eaarg era [u*] 
The gift of the mother of Chheta (Kshetra), from Ujjain. 
No. 160 = C, 67. 
safrn acta feseaa erat [u*] 
The gift of Simhadata® (dattd) of the Tapasiyas from Ujjain. 
No. 161 = 68. 
safra afaraarat sfaaa era [N*] 
The gift of Isika (Rishika) of the Saphineyakas from Ujjain. 
No. 162 = C. 69. 
aca sfafaaa ea [n*] 
The gift of Isimita (Rishimitrad) from Kuraghara, 
No, 163 = C. 70. 
saifaanr ate larat era [u*]” 
The gift of Vasula (?), from Ujjain. 
: No. 164 = 0. 71. 
aca ae era [1*] 
The gift of Nara*® from Kuraghara, 
No. 165 = C. 72. 


aca anfaaar era [1*] 
The gift of Nagamita (Naga° or Ndgamitra), from Kuraghara. 


No. 166 = C. 83. 
waeara afaaa arg era [n*] 
The gift of ASvadeva” (Asvadevd), mother of Samika (Svdmika). 


No. 167 = C. 85. 
afan aq afaalfaja— — 
(The gift) of Kaniyasi (Kanéyasé), the mother of the Sheth. 


5° Jn this and similar compounds Sizrhka may possibly stand for aafeyE, shortened bhdmdvat, 
3 Possibly fagerg to be read. 

2 4.e, probably Naradattd. 

8 In this and similar compounds aq probably stands bhimavat for qaaa- 

14 The vowel of fg is indistinct, . 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 375 


No. 168 = C. 88, 
agar eta [u*] 
The gift of Vasula. 
No. 169 = C. 89. 
seca urfasae ere [u*] 
The gift of Idadata (Indradatta), inhabitant of Pavida. 


No. 170 = C. 94. 


Hara afaarq era [1*] 
The gift of Kujara (Kuzjara), the brother of the Sheth. 


No. 171 = C. 96. 
L. 1. —[faleara aafer oata— 
L. 2. —gy era [i*]* 
The gift of Isidata (Rishidattd), wife of Sakadina (Sakradatta). 


No. 172 = C. 97. 
Heqas aqatrataa era [n*] 


The gift of Bhadaguta (Bhadragupta), inhabitant of Sanukagama (°grdma). 


Now 3 = 0.798; 


acfaat atfaaa era [1* °°] 
The gift of SAtila (Sautila or Svdtila)*™ from Dharakina (Erakina ur Erén). 


No.2 L74s== C...106. 
alata era [n*] 
The gift of Sagha (Sangha). 


Ninel jos C,, 118.° 


aTqaat Arat— — 
(The gift of) Kachi. . . . «from Vaghumatu. 


No. 176 = C. 119—21. 
L. 1. afaaa arfraa 
L. 2. gaa wa fafcoraa 
L. 3. era a [1] 


Three (rails), the gift of Samik a (Svdmika), the trader, and of his son Siripala 
(Sripdla). 


3% Restore sfacara and ysirafaa. 

38 Probably uxfarat to be read. 

37 Diminutive from Santideva, SGntivarman, or Svitidatta. 

38 As the inscription is mutilated, its identity with C. 118 is not absolutely certain. 

99 As Sir A. Cunningham (Zhe Bhilsa Topes, p. 262) states, the three lines are carved on three different rails, which. 


probably'were given by the two persons named. 


6 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 177 = C122. 


wreaergara [erjat [n*] 
The gift of _BhAadata-RAjuka (the venerable Rdjuka 


No. 178 = C. 128. 
faarea faa ere [1*] 
The gift of the mork Visakha (Visdkha). 


No. 179 = C. 180. 
aee qeTat— — 
(The gift) of Narmda from Kurara, 
No. 180 = C. 1382. 
wyalat] e[falead firefaa erat [1*] 


The gift of the nna Isidat’ (Rishidattd) from Madhuvana 


No. 18) =*@2 1338: 
(alfeena frgtra ache erat [n*] 
The gift of the nun Isidata (Rishidatta), inhabitant of Kurara. 
No. 182 = ©. 184, 
waurea atqaafery erat [a*] 
The gift of Dhamapala (Dharmapdila), inhabitant of Kuthuka pada. 
No. 183 = C. 147. 
afeannrfiaa sfafeara frgfara [1*]“ 
(The gift) of the nun Isidina (Rishidatid), inhabitant of Namdinagara. 
No. 184 = C. 151. 
aaurag fargetr erat [n*] 
The gift of the monk, the venerable Dhanaka. 


No. 185 = C. 157. 
wafafan ea fa] 
The gift of Dhanagiri. 
No.-186:-= C.-159. 
L. 1. afaara fasten avarfea- 
L. 2. feare era [i*] 
The gift of the nun Balika, inhabitant of Madalachhikata. 


% Or Kothukapada, i.e, either Kunthuka ov Kroshtukapada or padra, 
\ Read dfxmaice® 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 


Nos 87 =-C.. 163 
L. 1. ufefaae 
afaaa era [1*] 
The giftof Samghila, a pupil of Bhadika.” 


No. 188 = C. 164. 


aceauttaaa fu— — — — [1*] 
(The gift) of the monk Arahatapalita (Arhatpdlita). 


No. 189: = C. 165.“ 
L. 1. sewae afz- 
L. 2. wane eta [0*] 
The gift of Arahaka (Arhaka), the Paripanaka.* 


No. 190 = C. 166. 
wafaftaratg era [i*] 


The gift of the mother of Dhamagiri (Dharmagiri). 


No. 191 = ©, 168. 
feara fa— — — 
. .of Sidhatha (Siddhartha) ..... 


No. 192 = C. 169. 
sfaerfaa atfearaftara faefaa era [1*] 


The gift of the nun Isidasi (Rishiddsi), inhabitant of Namdinagara. 


No. 1938 = C. 170. 


afeame quaetugha era [u*] 


The gift of the nun Dupasaha (Dushprasahd ?) from Namdinagara. 


ING. 104 =O ak 7 


aaeram era [frgfrar) [u*] 
The gift of Yakhadast ( Yakshaddsz), the nun. 


; No; -195'=-@. 172: 
zanfaaaa era [*]* 
The gift of Datakalivata (?) 


42 Sir A. Cunningham’s identical inscription has only one line and may be different. 
43 Compare No. 306. 

“ Sir A. Cunningham’s identical inscription is given in one line and may be different. 
45 This possibly means an inhabitant of Paripana, i.e., Pariparna or Paripdna ? 

“6 The inscription may be mutilated in the beginning. ; 


0 


77 


378 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 196 = ©. 174." 
L. 1. ewan aifa- 
L. 2. wa qeatag 
L. 3. era [i*] 
The gift of the weaver Damaka, father of Kusuka. 


No. 197 = C. 179.* 
L. 1. efaurataa 4 


L. 2. waa a ea [1*] 
The gift of IsipAlita (Rishipdlita) and of Samana (Sramana). 


No, 1958 = C. 186. 
5 ate firgat era [u*] 
The gift of the monk Vira. 


No. 199 = C. 187=88. 
L. 1. afea fargfaart atata = 
L. 2. 5 efaaran eae 
The gift of the nun Yakhi (YakshZ), inhabitant of Valivahana, 


No. 200 = C. 189. 
afeuate canrths wana aa [u*] 
The workers in ivory of Vedisa have done the carving. 
No 201; =O; 1192: 
FU arrarag waras Gira yaa a dae [et]#] [u*]* 


The gift of Nagapiya (priya) in Kurara, Sheth in Achh&vada, and of (his) son 
Samgha. 


No. 202. 
aaratet faafaarg era [u*] 
The gift of Chirati (Airdt) from Achhavata (? Ma’). 
No. 208. 
salar fara era [u*] 
The gift of Ajaradni (Ajird). 


No. 204. 
[alone milelaa frgat era [n*] 
The gift of Gagarmdata (Gangadatta), the monk, inhabitant of Athak anagara, 


: There are four impressions bearing these letters. Though perfectly identical, they may yet belong to two different 
inscriptions. 


“* Sir A. Cunningham’s identical inscription is given in one line and may be different. 


Read axfta atafaaw. 


5° As there are four impressions with these letters, it is possible that they refer to two separate inscriptioas. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 379 


No. 205." 
wy — ae ea [u*] 
The gift of Apa-yaha (?) 
No. 206, 
sorLat far era [u*] 
The gift of Apakant. 
No. 207. 


wane frett erat wenisfaae [1*] 
The gift of the venerable Kana, pupil of the venerable Bhamduka.” 


No. 208. 


wasale fret ara [u*] 
The gift of the monk, the venerable Jeta (Jayanta). 


| . No. 209. 
L. 1. wauqaa arfafeerfont 


L. 2. aaa fagat era [u*] 
The gift of the monk Khemaka (Kshemaka), the fellow-wanderer of the venerable 


Phaguna (Phalguna). 
No. 210. 


aoa Aarsa at[a |a— — 
The gift of Asdida (Ashddha) . . . from Arapana. 


No. 211. 
saat Tet— — — 
From Arapana..... 
No. 212. 
[a]eorfrar fawa eta [n*] 
The gift of Sihd (Sinha), inhabitant of Arapana. 
No. 218. 
wenag ea [un | 
The gift of Asaguta (Aévagupta). 
No. 214. 
wang satay frgfaa ea [n*] 
The gift of Asabh4,a nun of Ujjain. 
No. 215. 
[aleatea ara — — 
(The gift) of the village of Asvavati (Aésvavati). 


51 [ncised on the procession path. 
53 See ante, p. 98, No. 16, and below No, 256. 


380 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 216. 
L. 1. efaefaa arfeartfcara fir faa] 
L. 2. era [n*]” 
The gift of Isidasi (Réshidds?), a nun of Nandinagara. 
No. 217. 
L. 1. sfaaeaa erat [n*] 
L. 2. [ylsraefaae [11*] 


The gift of Isinadana (Rishinandana), inhabitant of Puavadhana ( Punyavar- 
dhana). 


No. 218. 
sfacfaaa era [1*] 
The gift of Isirakhita (Rishirakshita). 
No. 219. 
sara seacheara ert [1*] 
The gift of Asvarakhita (Asvarakshitd) in Ujjain. 
No, 220. 
sara sufaara fatcara erat [i*)™ 
The gift of the lay worshipper Sirika (Sréké) from Ujjain. 
No. 221,° 
sofia aieeaa usrafaa atlaleara ara [u*] 
The gift of Vayudata, wife of Opedadata (Upendradatta) from Ujjain. 


No. 222, 
L. 1. [*s)sfaa agqu- 
L. 2. aa qaqa ata [n*] 
The gift of Bumu, son of Kalura, from Ujjain. * 


L. 1. esifaat avafaar- 
L. 2. #—— — uA 
L. 3. [zatja erat [*] 


The gift of Dhamadatd (Dharmadattd) . . . of the TApasiyas from Ujjain, 


No. 224. 
[s*|sfarar waaarat aa frgfarat et[a* 0*] 
The gift of the mother of the nun Dhamayasaé (Dharmayasas) from Ujjain. 


53 This is identical in words with No. 192 (C. 169), which however is in one line. 
54 Read wsifaar. 


% This is identical in words, but not in spelling, with No. 155 (C. 62). 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS, 


No. 225. 
L. 1. safer afaarat 
L. 2. arg era [n*] 
The gift of the mother of Balika from Ujjain. 


No. 226. 
safaa faad fg — — — — 
(The gift) of the nun Mita (Mitrd) in Ujjain. 
No. 227. 
safrat ceaa eva [1*] 
The gift of Vasula from Ujjain. 
No. 228. 
safaar waeae era [n*] 
The gift of Samghadata (°datfa) from Ujjain. 
No. 229. 
satrat gataa era [1*] 
The gift of Sulasa from Ujjain. 
No. 280. 
sare tena eta [u*]” 
The gift of Utara (Uttara), the Rajuka. 
No. 281. 
ustafaa slat |fararat — — 


(Lhe gift) of the female lay worshippers from Ejavati. 


No. 282. 
ustafaat atfeera erat [u*] 
The gift of Vahila from Hjavati. 
No. 238. 
acanlalaa [S*leera era [0%] 


The gift of Tdadeva (Indradeva), inhabitant of Katakafiu. 


No. 234. 
ACHAT ACSA ea [1] 
The gift of Araha (4rhat) from Katakaiiu. 


No, 235. 
acne w— — — 


From Katakahu. ..... . 3:9 
56 See facsimile on the plate. 


381 


382 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 236. 
acfemar af — — 
From Karndadigd4ma (‘grdma), of the Sheth... . 
No. 237. 
L. 1. aeferfaaa afar 
L, 2. usrafaar gaara era [u*] | 
The gift of DevabhAga, wife of the Sheth of Kamdadigama (Cgrdma). 
No. 238. 
L. 1. arwe faxatt 
L. 2. era [ire] 
The gift of the monk Kana. 
No. 239.” 


aca wraae era [n*] 
The gift of Ghosaka (Ghoshaka) from Kuraghara. 


No. 240. 


aca anfaara era [u*] 
The gift of Nagamita (Naga or Négamitrd) from Kuraghara. 


No. 241. 
L. 1. [ax afta aft falfatia 
L. 2. —efa — — — —* 
(The gift) of the nun SAtisiri (Sdntisré or Svdtisré), inhabitant of Kuraghara. 
No. 242. 
L.1. qaurat wee 
L. 2. ga [n*] 
The gift of Arahaguta (Arhadgupta) from Kurara. 


No. 243." 
L. 1. aera axela laa 
L. 2. era [n*] 


| No. 244, 
L.1. qqra warafaa 
L. 2. fargfira eat [ut] 
The gift of the nun Achhavati (Rikshavatf) in Kurara. 
37 There are two illegible lines above that given here. 


58 Restore fargfag at. 


°° The inscription is identical in words with the preceding, but: the last three letters of line 1 are almost destroyed and 
the spelling differs. 


* It is not impossible that the q@cxTa in this inscription and in Nos. 241 and 244 is meant for axfra, 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS, 


No. 2465. 
qecra wrarieara era [u*]” 
The gift of Nagddiné (Ndgadattd) in Kurara. 
No. 246. 
Herg waa era [1*] 
The gift of Dhamaka (Dharmake) in Kurara. 


No. 247. 
qua a — — — — 
No. 248. 
L. 1. qara waref@arar” 
L. 2. firgfaa era [n*] 


The gift of the nun Sagharakhit& (Samgharakshitd) in Kurara, 


qa aeegat [a et]— 
The gift of Arahaguta (Arhadguptd), inhabitant of Kurara. 
No. 250. 


qc fija [axefeara erat [u*] 
The gift of Arahadin& (Arhaddatid), inhabitant of Kurara. 


No. 251. 
ikki a= 
No. 252 
L. 1. wera frea- 
L. 2. a era [u*] 
The gift of the nun Gada (Gandd?). 
No. 253. 


we[tlat frefaar afefearar etfa* 1*] 
The gift of the nun Gad& (Gandé ?), inhabitant of Vedisa. 
No. 254. 


.» fatcaa orafaa—feen erat [1i*] 
The gift of . . ti, wifeof Girika. 


wrafaa sfatrat — — — —* 
(The gift) of Isinik& (Rishtké), the Gotami (Gautam?). 
® Read UTq, 


® Read way.? 
6° There are four impressions, which seem to refer to the same inscription. 


383 


384 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 256. 


infagas aga freer eta [0* 
The gift of the monk Bhaduka, son of the Goti (Gaupti mother). 


No. 257. 
farafaraa ei [1] y 
The gift of Jitamita (Jitdémitra). 


No. 258. . 


stisae fret era [1*] 
The gift of the monk Jonhaka (Jyotsnakd). 


No, 289. 
arartuer aathada erat [1*] 
The gift of Samgharakhita (rakshita) from Takdrapada. 
No. 260. 
are tacaa erat [1*] 
The gift of the ascetic Gonamdaka, 
No. 261. 
fafcecet arma satfeara [elt a [n*] 
The gift of the female lay worshipper Naga from Tiridapada. 
; No. 262. 
fawa eva [1*] 
The gift of Tisa (Tishya). 
No. 263. 
asa qaraa| fare ert [0*]” 
The gift of Tuda (Tunda), inhabitant of Phujakapaili (?). 


No. 264.* 
a[aljaat weufaat afafere era [n*] 
The gift of Gahapati Patithiya (Pratishthita) from Tumbavana.? 


No. 265. 
daaat weufadt ufateae arg [stjara asta era [0%] 


The gift of Dhafiaé (Dhanyd), wife of the brother of the gahapati Patithiya 
(Pratishthita) from Tumbavana.” 


4 This is identical in words with the pagal No. 16 (ante, p. 98), which however has three lines, see facsimile. 
6 See facsimile. 

% Jdentical in words (but not in the size of the letters) with No. 75, ante, p. 105. 

°? The consonant of the bracketed syllable is very doubtful. 

6 Ydentical in words with No. 23, ante, p. 99. 


® Tumbavana occurs in Hemachandra’s Parisishta Parvan, (see Professor Jacobi’s Introduction, p. 71). 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 385 


No. 266. 


area waar fagat ssifaae era [1*] 
The gift of the Thera, the venerable Naga, a monk of Ujjain. 


No. 267. 
L. 1. cava fagfaat a — — feafeara” 
L. 2. erat [wv] 
The gift of the nun Data (Datéd), inhabitant of [Madalachh likata. 
No. 268. 
eachada aireafeaa faeat era [0*] 
The gift of the monk Devarakhita (‘rakshita), inhabitant of Morajahakata. 
No. 269. 


wafafon [afelfare” a feed era [n*] 
The gift of the monks Dhanagiri and Chadipiya (Chandipriya?). 


No. 270. 
L. 1. waae tasta- 
L. 2. a ea [n*] 
The gift of Dhamaka (Dharmaka), inhabitant of Vejaja. 
No. 271. 


watafen a waeare a ala] [u*] 
The gift both of Dhamagiri (Dharma®*) and of Dhamasena (Dharma’). 


No. 272. 
wafeata erat [u*] 
The gift of Dhamadina (Dharmadatté). 
No. 273. 
L. 1. wauraa 


L. 2. alfeloreaa” erat [n*] 
The gift of DhammapAla (Dharma? and) of Mahipala. 
No. 274. 
L. 1. wacfaaa 
L. 2. — cara era [u*] 
The Dhamarakhita (Dharmarakshita), inhabitant of —rakara(?). 
No. 275. 
wartfaara avafrara ert [u*] 
The gift of Dhamarakhité (Dharmarakshitd), inhabitant of Madhuvana. 
7 Restore asafaafenra 


This may also be intended for afefarre or afe 
7 The second vowel has been obiiterated. 


386 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 
No. 276. 


L. 2. qera ef n*]” 
The gift of the family of Dhamu[tara] (Dharmottara). 
No. 277. 
L. 1. afeant waa— 


L. 2. fagfra ala u*] 
The gift of the nun Achala from Nadinagara (Nandi). 


~ 


No. 278. 
L. 1. afeana wala a] 
L. 2. era [0%] 
The gift of Amaga (Amaté, ie., Ampitd ?) from Narhdinagara. 
No. 279. 


L. 1. afeane[t] saczaa 
L. 2. eye [n*]” 
The gift of Utaradata ( Uttaradatid) from Nardinagara. 
No. 280. 
afeane (sat|faaa eta [n*] 


The gift of Utaramita (Uttaramitrd) from Naradinagara. 


L. 1. [a|fgaae sora- 
L. 2. [wa] awea cat [u*]” 
The gift of the lay worshipper Yamada[ta] (dafte) from Namdinagara, 


No. 282. 
L. 1. afeanx Teaea- 


L. 2. a [erl# [n*] 
The gift of Rohanadeva (Rohinideva) from Nadinagara (Nandinagara). 


No. 288. 
alg laa <a a[felfana fugfaar 
The eift of Namdutard (? Nandottard), a nun of Vedisa. 
No, 284. 
L. 1. armeaa warfare a aITatra 


L. 2. era [u*]” 


The gift of Nagadata (datta) and Sagharakhita (Sasmgharakshita), inhabitants 
of Kuraghara. 


7 Probably wqace to be restored. 

™ Above the first syllable stands another 4. 

Read FHZTH 

76 This inscription has to be read from below, see ante, p. 107, No. 93. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 387 


No. 285.7 
ai[frala afar era [n*] 
The gift of Sheth Nagila. 
No. 286. 
area frgfaa [at leafra ela y*] 


The gift of thenun Nati, inhabitant of Kuraghara, 


No. 287 
— atfgaae aTaTS - 
a fagat era [u*] 
The gift of the monk Kaboja (Kamboja) from Nadinagara (Nandi). 
No. 288.” 
L. 1. dana fuga s[ajaant — — 
L. 2. qauretaa frgat eta [1] 
The gift of the monk Pamthaka (Panthaka) . . «. « (aud) of the monk 
Bidhapalita (Suddhapdliia), 
No. 289. 
fat|fasrre era fy*] 
The gift of Patithana. 
No. 290, 
gafast fearfafegara emf u*] 
The gift of the sons of Disdgiri” (Disdégiri) from Puruvida. 
No. 291. 
gaaa ca [n*] 
The gift of Pusaka (Pushyaka). 
No. 292. 
queda aanatarea ea [1] 


The gift of Pusadata (Pushyadatta), inhabitant of Navagama (grdma). 
No, 293. 
wafaara quer faefad era [1*] 
The gift of the nun Supathdama (Suprasthdmd °), inhabitant of Pemuta. 
No. 294. 
[ar* haxrat afacara sae worafaar era [0*] 
The gift of Isidata (Rishidatia), the wife of Leva from Pokhara (Pushkara). 


7 See facsimile. 78 Given among the facsimiles, ™ See above, note 24 to No. 138. 


ie) 


D2 


388 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 295. 
area sacar aa —- — —- - — — _ 
The gift of Isidat&é from Pokhara... .«-. 
No. 296. 
[Wheat Feta Fea FTA FH — — —- — — 
The gift of Tud& and Tuda (Lunda) . . .from Pokhara. 
No, 297. 
trea dal fala’ era [i*] 
The gift of Samgha[ra]khi[ta] from Pokhara, 
No. 298. 
trefanae sfafera era [1*] 
The gift of Isidina (Rishidatta), inhabitant of Podavijha.” 
No. 299. 
quae fagat alfelfaana — — 
(The gift) of the monk Badhaka (Laddhaka),” inhabitant of Kodijila. 


No. 300. 
L. 1. qazatat FSH] 


L. 2. afafcara era [n*] 
The gift of Baladat& (dattd), inhabitant of Chudaphalagiri (Kshudra°). 


No. 3801, 
[ate qataq™ <i [0] 
The gift of Bohu (Bhoddhyi ?), the father of Mula (Mila). 
No. 302. 
qathaaa [era] [i*] 


The gift of Budharakhita (Buddharakshita). 


No. 303. 
qucteca [frgat ala asters art [u*] 
The gift of the monk Budharakhita (pupil) of the venerable Bhamduka. 


No. 304. 
L. 1. qacaata fig — 
L. 2. qara [u*] 
The gift of the nun Budharakhat& (Buddharakshita). 


Read waxfaag. 

*! Professor Jacobi suggests that this may be derived from a Sanskrit compound yxrefal, 
“ This may be a misspelling for qtwa or aya, 

83 Perhaps meant for warqafya. See the facsimile. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS, 389 


fe No. 305. 
arfwar era [1*] 
The gift of Bodhi. 
No. 306. 
L. 1. afeare firgatt 
L. 2. acactr- 


L. 3. @ ata Jie] 
The gift of the monk Bhadika, inhabitant of Kuraghara. 


No. 307. 
we — — — qat arcaca ea [1*]® 
The gift of [the monk] Bhad[ika], inhabitant of Kuraghara. 
No. 308. 
agar usrafaa eta [0*] 
The gift of the wife of Bhadu (Bhandu). 


No. 309, 
[wae ufsara — — 
(The gift) of Dhathik& (Dhanyakd) from Bhogavadhana (vardhana), 


No. 310. 
eae atfefran ara [1*] 
The gift of Nadini (Nandini) from Machhavata (Matsyavarta). 
No. 311. 


wha aefatt A — — — — 
(The gift) of the carpenter® Manorama...... 


No, 312. 
AeTTAT 


Of MahAndaman. 


No. 318. 


areafaa afcecara era [n*]” 
The gift of Arihadata (Arhaddatid) from Mahasati (Méhishmatt). 


No. 314. 
arteataa fa — — — aware [N*] 
The giftof Ji... .from Mahishmati (Méahishmati). 


8 Probably acaftae to be read. 


% Restore afena frgat. 
% T take vadakino to stand for vaddhakimo, just as wo have in No. 210 Asddasa for Asddha. 
87 Meaut for arfgataa ; the blurred letters of the inscription might be taken to represent aTgafag. 


390 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 315. 
faafafrar ert fargfaan arefeat [u*] 


The gift of Mitasiri (Mitrasr/), a nun of Kurara. 


No. 316. 
ataa fugfaa afea era [i*] 


The gift of the nun Yakhi (Yassh?) from Vedisa. 


No. 317. 
tfaaa® atfeafaa era [1%] 
The gift of Ratina from Mahisati (Mahishmati). 


L. 1. tfawa aferareaa” 
L. 2. era [n*] 
The gift of Rebila,” inhabitant of Namdinagara. 


No. 319. 
L. 1. tafafaara aaa- 
L. 2. aasrafalat eta [\\*] 
The gift of Revatimita (Acvatimitrd), wife of Balaka. 


No. 320. 
L. 1. afsfaa fagfaar 
L. 2. eta [n*] 
The gift of the nun Vajint (Vajriné). 


Nos. 321-22, 
L. 1. aweaa ara 
L. 2. afafaat aceena 
L. 3. ata 


The gift of Varadata (datta) ; the gift of (his) sister Varasena. 


No. 328. 
L. 1. aveau usrafaa 
L. 2. gaaqq” era [u*] 
The gift of Isald (Réshiia), wife of Varadata (Varadatta). 
8 Meant for <fafaa, diminutive from <fa or ta. 


® Probably meant for afearqcne: 


* This probably stands for Rebhila, like Asdda (No, 210) for Asddia. 
” Meant for fea. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 39] 


No. 324. 
L. 1. ateae GsTTeaT 
L. 2. Treva ara [ll*] 
The gift of Roha, wife of Varadata (“datia). 


No. 325. 
Teg ea [1*) 
The gift of Varuna. 
No. 326. 
L. 1. [alefaara fa- 
L. 2. efaa [era] 
L. 3. safaaa 


The gift of Vasumita (mitra), a nun of Ujjain. 


No. 327. 


agara ca [u*] 
The gift of Vasula. 


No. 328. 


astazarat arene era [u*] 
The gift of Odaka (Ardraka) from Vadivahana. 


No. 3829. 


qraaa afeantr faefad erat [1*] 


The gift of Vasava, anun from Namdinagara. 


L. 1. [fa]fatcorea ya- 
L. 2. tfeaa ea [1*] 
The gift of Bhutarakhita (Bhdtdrakshita) from Vitiriiaha(?). 


No. 331. 
L. 1. fafaftafea afe- 
L. 2. tfaaa ea [u*] 
The gift of Mahirakhita (Mahirakshita) from Vitirinaht (?). 


No. 332. 
L. 1. fagara arnrfam— 


L. 2. aq firgfeat ert [1*] 


The gift of Vipula,a nun fiom KaAapasigama (*grdma). 


392 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 333, 
fatreac afciaa [false ert [u*] 
The gift of SijhA (Sackhsd), a house-wife from Virohakata. 
No. 3384, 
faaratfaaa ea [u*] 
The gift of Visdkharakhita (Visdékharakshita), 
No. 335. 
faracface firgat era [1I*] 
The gift of the monk Visakharakhita (Visdkharakshita). 
No. 336. 
aAcaara era [i*] 
The gift of Virasena, 
No. 337. 


ata] freien aaa ert 
The gift of Vira(?),anunof Tumbavana. 


No. 338. 
Steer aceactted — ara [i*] 
The gift of Arahatarakhita (Arhadrakshita) from Vedisa. 
No. 38389. 
qeu” eae Haase eat [u*] 
No. 340. 
afea cae aeasa era [i*] 
The gift of Data (Daita) Kalavada from Vedisa. 


No. 341. 
afeen afeana fre faa era [i*] 
The gift of the nun Mohika from Vedisa. 
No. 342. 
wacker et [u*] 
The gift of Sakarakhita (Sakrarakshita). 
No. 343. 
aarfeara arcfaara firgferar [ea] [u*] 


The gift of Samgharakhita (rakshitd), a nun of Kurama, 


Meant for fear, 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS 393 


No. 344. 
aang ——---—- 


Of Samgha. 
No. 3465. 
darreraaarad ea [1*] 
The gift of Samgha, mother of Dasaka. 
No. 346. 
afageaa erat [i*] 
The gift of Satiguta (Saktigupta or Svdtiqupta). 
No. 347. 
L. 1. wave fuga agaca adafaat 
L. 2. ert [n*] 
The gift of the monk Samana (Sramana), pupil of the venerable Utara (Uttara). 
No. 348. 
afaaa waar adafaat eta [u*] 
The gift of Samika (Svdémika), pupil of the venerable Naga (Néaa). 
No. 349. 
L. 1. afaaa afalala 
L. 2. yaa 4 Mi eela- 
L. 3. @ (eta [u*] 
The gift of the trader Samika (Svdmika) and of (his) son Sihadeva (Simha°). 
No. 350. 
ufaaat firgfa- 
L. 2. a ara [u*] 
The gift of the nun Samika (Svdmika). 
No. 351. 
arfaara fasta ert 
The gift of the nun Samika (Svdmika) 
No. 352. 
[ar*]frece frgar era [u*] 
The gift of the monk [S4]midata (Svdmidatta). 
No. 358. 
fafcfeara faeaan arfearnitara era [u*] 


The gift of the nun Siridind (Sridattd) of Nandinagara. 


394 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 354. 
fafa ag — — — 
Of Siribhiga (Sribhdga) . .... 
No. 355. 
fafcfaarant arfeat[a fara faafaa era [1*] 


The gift of the nun Sirimita (Srimitrd) of Nandinagara. 


No. 356. 
fafiar frafan eta [1*] 
The gift of the nun Siri (S77). 
No. 357. 
faafaa 
Of Sivati. 
No. 358. 
fara” 
Of SihA (Simhd). 
No, 359. 


L. 1. faera tagata 
L, 2. 3 ara [a]eacr fag- 
L. 3. fara [u*] 


The gift of Sihd (Sénh@) and Devadata (datia), nuns from -Kuraghara. 


‘No. 360. 


fasta aarfana afafaaa era [1*] 
The gift of Siha (Sinha), Samatika’* (Samaptika ?) (and) Vajiniké (Vajrinika). 


No. 361. 
watfeaa usiral faa] — — — 
Of the wifeof Subadhita..... 


No, 362. 
L. 1. oftaa queag tateaa- 
5 a ara [u*] 
The gift of Suriya (Séryd and) Budhadeva (Buddha‘) of Pemata. 
* Incised on the procession path and surrounded by four sacred symbols, among which that on the right hand looks 
like a large 4. Sce facsiinile on the plate. 
4 Possibly samdtikaya may stand for samdtrikdya and be intended to indicate that Vajiniha was the mother of Sthé. 


Ifso, the construction is of course ungrammatical. 
%§ Compare No. 48, anle, p. 102. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS, 


No. 363. 
L. 1. gfcara firg- 
L. 2. frat eva [n*] 
The gift of the nun Suriya (Sry). 


No. 364. 
L. 1. @aufaaa 
L. 2. ava erat [u*] 
The gift of Yona (Yavana), inhabitant of Setapatha (Sveta’). 


No. 365. 
L. 1. wrarva efaarfa- 


L. 2. qeata [u*] 
The gift of Hala, the Southern (?).” 


No. 366 
———— aa afafaqagere — —” 

No. 367. 
[alana weae[ata*] — — 

No. 368. 
aaa (fa 2] —— — 

No. 3869. 
= — — — fafa] [2] acca ere [1*] 

No. 370. 


— — — — arfaaa era [1*] 


No. 371. 
L.1. ———-- aa usrafa[a] 
L2 9-4 
No. 372. 
~— — SA ata aumatana [*] 
No. 373. 
-- —— a gyuena [era]? [u*] 
No. 374. 


Lil —-———T aanrfalaa*] 
L. 2. frgfaa ala] [u*] 


% The explanation of ef@atatt by <tfaarar is, of course, merely tentative. 
7 On the analogy of Gujarati Vikamdjit for Vikramaditya, Ajitiguta may stand for Aditigupta. 


3 hae 


395 


396 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 375. 
L. 2. ——— | aaa ara arreda aacfaaa aca [Tar ][Ai2] 
L. 1. era [n*]* 
The gift of . . . .Subhaga, Pus& (Pushyd) Nagadata (datta) Sagharakhita 
(Sangharakshita), inhabitants of Kuraghara. 


No. 376. 
— ——— salt] =e — — - 
No. 377.” 
L. 1. [at] sat ara — at teu at afea at 
L. 2. suréat suret — — at ar a at (va) arafiag — 
L. 3. daraa at a — — — fea fof — 4 
L. 4. weaafaa ——— ——— — [a at] 
L. 5. [awa] samara — — — — — [a urar] 


L. 6. [at] 1 aa — —— — —— 


He who takes away or causes to be taken away from this K&kana[va] an 
ornamental arch or rail, or causes it to be transferred’ to another temple of the teacher 
[shall incur the guilt] of murderers of mothers, of murderers of fathers, of murderers of 
Arhats?., Ss) «me (scoters, «1 

No. 378.? 
mi 4 UL atlattaarcara [tla wea at eat araurarat @[alaa sure ja* | 
=e , [sat leTaa at 
wa aT arahtaga daraat aa a urea wag [1] 

A pillar (the gift) of the workmen, inhabitants of Pamchanagara (?).... .onhim 
who takes away or causes to be taken away from this Kakan4ava the stonework or causes 
it to be transferred to another temple of the teacher, shall fall (the guilt) of those mortal 
sins. 

Tors II. 
No. 22 =O]. 
atitaa era Bae daarfaat [1*] 
The gift of Nagila, the pupil of Aya (Arya). 


No. 23 = C, 3 
qatiaaa Sar F— — 
. . .of Dhamarakhita (Dharmarakshita), the pupil. 


% The inscriptions must be read from below. 

% Identical with Sir A. Cunningham’s No. 183. There is a large abrasion in the centre, and the right sides of lines 
1-4 \have been somewhat defaced by a large diagram which has been carved over them. Restore 1, 1] ATHATaTa ; 
12. syerata wsrafcaae, |. 3 arararfan fafaurfaa. All the bracketed signs are indistinct and their senile 
doubtful. See facsimile on the plate. 

* This explanation, which requires WaTHT to be taken in the sense of WaTHAAT, has been suggested to me by Lo 
fessor Jacobi. With srafczaer in the sense of ‘temple of the teacher,’ compare aaa, 

? This inscription, which may be identical with Sir A. Cunningham’s No; 195, is incised on a long band. See facsimile. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 397 


No, 24°, O2°%. 
wafaaa frgat era [1*] 


The gift of themonk Saghamita (Saighamitra) 


No 25 == (C28. 
quartace afeat ugafataae ea [1*] 
The gift of Sheth Budhapalita (Buddha*), inhabitant of Padukulika (Pandu- 
kulika).” 


L. 1. aera atciea firg- 
L. 2. fara era [u*] 
The gift of the nun Vala, inhabitant of Kurara. 


Nos 27 = C19. 
L. 1. qaae Waa Aeqae arar- 
waa aaatfadt era [1*] 
The gift of Balaka, the pupil of the venerable Arahagu.ta (Arhadgupta), inhabi- 


tant of Sasada. 
No. 28 = C. 21. 


BAA era At Asta Adarfataar [u*] 
A pillar, the gift of Mula (M74), the pupil of Gada. 


No. 29 = C. 22. 


L. 1. watfearat arg — — afsarar’ 
L. 2. sfeerfaar fuefrar era [n*] © 


The gift of the nun Isidasi (Rishiddsz), inhabitant of — — kada, mother of 


Sagharakhita (Sangharakshita). 
No, 30 = C. 28. 


ware gutfeaa wataaa era [1*] 
The gift of the venerable Budharakhita ( Buddharakshita), inhabitant of Pokhara 


( Pushkara) 
No. 31 = C. 26. 


feat fefaraa era [ n* ]° 
The gift of Tikisa (?) from Sidakada. 


No. 32 = C. 27. 


— a faeatfgat era [1*] 
The giftof . . . 1, inhabitant of Sidakada, 
) 


3 See ante, p. 110, No. 1. 
* The syllable yé stands in 1, 2 after eT@. 


5 The letters da and ka look rather modern, the da is of the Andhra type. 


398 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


No. 33 = C. 28. 
qautfaat facafsara ert [u*}" 
The gift of Budhapalita (Buddhe’), inhabitant of Sidakada. 
No. 84 = CO. 29 
aeanteara arara era [u*] 
The gift of Gola (Godavaré), inhabitant of Sadakada (Sidakada). 
Nos80.=0..0L, 


qugara teatea era [u*] 
The gift of Budhaguta (Buddhag: ptd), inhabitant of Sidakada. 


No. 86 = C. 34. 


aceae frgat arta aa [17] 
The gift of the monk Arahaka (Arhat), a preacher. 


INGO 1== O.oue 


wea aa [u*] 
The gift of Bahula. 
No. 38 = C, 39. 


arnfaaa fags uratane era [1*] 
The gift of the monk Nagarakhita (rakshita), inhabitant of Pokhara (Pushkara). 


No. 39 = C. 40. 
L. 1. wacare fret ert ate 
L. 2. & [n*] 
The gift of themonk Sagharakhita (Samgharakshita),aninhabitant of Kurara. 


No. 40 = C. 48. 


aifea firgfaa mit era [u*] 
A pillar, the gift of the nun Odi, 


No. 41. 
wae Urataaad ert [n*] 
The gift of Aya (Arya), inhabitant of Pokhara (Pushkara). 
No. 42, 
waeara firgira e[t}a [u*] 
The gift of the nun Asadeva (Aésvadevd). 


° This seems to be one of the cases where only one of two words standing in the same case is inflected—see also above 
I, No. 132. 


SANCIII STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 399 


No. 43, 
L. 1. arsrarat ararfa- 
L. 2 wae [u*] 
The gift of Avasika from Ajanava. 


No. 44. 


sfacaa frgfra ea [1] 
The gift of the nun Isidatéa (Rishidatta). 


No. 45. 
seeae waHe ea [u*]’ 
The gift of the layman idadata (Indradatta). 


No. 46. 
marca fagat era [u*} 
The gift of the monk Gamdhara. 
No. 47. 
wafaat fagfaat eat [*]° 
The gift of the nun Gotami (Gautamé). 


No, 48. 


facfoa fagfra ea [n*}° 
The gift of the nun Chirati (Kiréti). 


No. 49. 
dala ara efits [is } 


The gift of the village of Chumvamoragiri (?) 


No. 50. 
eat mieafeantzaa [u*] 
The gift of the inhabitant of Morayahikata, 


No. 51. 
L. 1. watfatta safea- 
L. 2. aca [u*] 
Lhe gift of Dhamarasiri (Dharmaégri ?),” a iay worshipper. 


7 The letters are somewhat blurred, 

8 The letters are blurred and only just recognisable. 

° The w-stroke of “hw is very faint, and there is also an d-stroke at the top, which seems to have been afterwards 
obliterated. ; 

© Read eT4 

* The second sign is abnormal. I suspect that BsAlcfat<rt is intended. 

™ This is probably intended for qafafcy ; compare ¥4ufq in the Mathura inscriptions,—ante, p. 210, No. 37. 


400 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No. 52. 


[alaere firgat ca [1*]? 
The gift of the monk Dhamasena (Dharma’) 


No. 53. 


L. 1. afer 


L. 2. weaeaa frga ea [*" 
The gift of the nun Asadava (Asvadevd), from Nadinagara (Nundinagara). 


No. 54. 


L. 1. afer 
L. 2. — ffaca frgaa ei [u*]* 
The gift of the nun . .imit&from Nadinagara (Nandinagara). 


No. 55. 


alglaa faget ca [u*]" 
The gift of the monk Namduka. 


No. 56. 


wea firgat ea [u*]” 
The gift of the monk Pala (Péala). 


No. 57. 


Lol. alajae gee firg— 
L. 2. ea [n*]'® 
The gift of the Badhaka(?) (Baddhaka), a monk of Kurara. 


No. 58. 


qlulalaja sgacatcra [erie [u*] 
The gift of Budhaguta (Buddhagupta), inhabitant of Udubaraghara (Udum. 
baragriha). . ; 
No. 59. 
qutfaana gaan ae[arlaaa era [u*, 
The gift of Budharakhitaka (Buddharakshitaka), the Sutatika (Sautréntika) 
inhabitant of Arapdna. 


8 All the letters are much blurred, and the first is not certain. 

14 Meant for sadara fagtaq 

** Restore sfafaag. 

16 Possibly teqHa, but compare above, No. 16, 

17 All the letters are much blurred, and the first may have been ¥. 

% The second letter is not closed at the top and not certain, The name may be intended for Balaka,—see above, 


No, 26. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS, 40] 


No. 60. 
qucfaa [e]——” 


No, 61. 
L. 1, quifeag fagfa[a] 
L. 2. ea [n*] 
The gift of the nun Budharakhité (Buddharakshitd), 
No. 62. 
qutfara firgat et [1*] 
The gift of the monk Budharakhita (Buddharakshitd). 


No. 68. 
afar a — 
(Pieqgly of Bodhie os Ass 
No. 64. 
alzjwafet frgeat erat [u*] 
The gift of the monk Bharanabhtati (?) (Bharanibhutt), 


No. 65. 


farefaara era [u*]” 


The gift of Bhichhunika (the little nun ?) 


No. 66. 


defuse seacafiaa za [1*] 
The gift of Rohanika, inhabitant of Udubaraghara (Udumbaragriha). 
No. 67. 
faqgee fale [etla [i*] 
The gift of the monk Vipula. 
No. 68. 


L. 1. faana trefeufera 
L: 2. emt {[n*] 
The gift of Visaka (Visvaka), inhabitant of Rohanipada. 


No. 69. 
wag arg atfmafaarau* | 
(The gift) of the Saphineyika, mother of Sagha (Sarnghd). 


19 The q is wade circular, the @ has the Jooped form of some Andhra and Matbura inscriptions. The last letter is 


uncertain. 
20 All the lines of the letters are double. 
3F 


402 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


No. 70. 
arufafra frgfaa era [*] 


The gift of the nun Sonasiri (Suvarnasré, 


No. 71. 
— — — a afatizara wa — — [wala era [1*} 


No, 72. 
L.1. ——— — wa fegat arg asa 
L. 2. ————at ara [n*[* 
The gift of Kodu, mother of themonk . +. . . ra, 


L1. — fale[felara” — — — — — 
L, 2. ala] arifaata [aalefeferar [1] 
The gift of Dhamarakhita (?), pupil of Koramiké. 


No. 74. 

———— we feet aa [i] 

The gift of the monk> .... ~ «= na. 
No. 75. 


No. 76. 
Ll. ——— a2 fuefaa 
L. 2. — — (ale fe [n*] 
(The gift) of thenun . . . inhabitant of Kurara. 


No. 77. 
— — — — feet ert [n*] 


No. 78 
— — — amt waeag em [n*] 
The giftof . . . . ta, Dhavadeva (Dharmadevd). 


1 Restore qaifaqary. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS 403 


INDEX OF NAMES.22 
L.— Monks. 


Arahadina I, 88, 90. Mahagiri I, 62. 
Arahaguta I, 18; (Aya) Lf, 27, Nadiguta I, 58. 
Arahaka IT, 36. Naduka (Aya-) II, 16, 
Arahatapalita [, 188; (Aya) II, 22, 41. Naga (Aya) 1, 343, 
Badhaka (?) I, 299 ; IT, 57. Naga (Aya-, thera) I, 266. 
Balaka If, 27. Nagadina I, 128. 
Balamitra I, 88. Nagarakhita II, 38. 
Bhadika I, 306, 307. Nagila (bhadata-) I, 84; IT, 23. 
Bhadikiya I, 187. Nanduka IT, 55. 
Bharmduka I, 16, 256. Pala II, 56. . 
Bharndukiya I, 1038, 122, 207, 303. Pamthaka I, 288, 
Bharadiya I, 74. Pasanaka (Aya-) I, 5. 
Bharanabhati (?) IL, 64. Patuda (?) I, 97. 
Budhapalita I, 288. Phaguna (Aya-) I, 209. 
Budharakhita I, 71; (Aya) I, 303 ; IT, 31, 59, 62. Pothaka I, 87. 
Chadika I, 116. Pratithana I, 12, 70. 
Chadipiya (?) I, 269. Pusa I, 185, 
Chahatiya I, 135. Pusagiri I, 131. 
Chuda I, 68; (Aya) I, 88. Pusaka I, 67. 
Devagiri I, 66; (Aya) I, 112. Pusarakhita IT, 17. 
Devarakhita I, 268. Rahila (Aya-) I, 137. 
Dhamadata I, 103. Rajuka (bhadata-) T, 177. 
Dbamagiri I, 149, I, C. 178. Sadhana I, 29. 
Dhamarakhita I, 9, 53, 68; IT, 23. Saghamita IT, 24. 
Dhamasena II, 52. Sagharakhita II, 3b 
Dhana, I, C. 31. Samana I, 347. 
Dhanagiri I, 269. Samdhana I, 54. 
Dhanaka (Aya) I, 18+. Samghila I, 187. 
Gagarhdata I, 204. Samika I, 348. 
Garndhfra IT, 46. [Sa]midata I, 352. 
Gotiputa,—see Bharnduka. Sumana II, 19. 
Hatiya, I, 12. Tisaka (Aya-) I, 70. 
Isika I, 92, 93, : Upasijha I, 63, 
Isila IT, 4. Utara (ayntara) 1, 347, 
Jeta (Aya) I, 208. Vijha II, 5. 
Jonaka I, C. 152. | Vipula IT, 67. 
Jonhaka I, 75, 258, Visikha I, 178. 
Kaboja I, 7, 287. Visakharakhita I, 335, 
Kada I, 4. Vira I, 198. 
Kadiya (bhadata-) I, 133. Yakhadina I, 145. 
Kana (Aya) I, 207. Yakhila I, 112; II, 6. 
KAna I, 238. Yasogini II, 14, 
Khema I, 209. Yasopala I, 133. 
IT— Nuns. 
Achala I, 6, 2/7. Asabha I, 214, 
Achhavati I, 244. Asadeva II, 42, 53. 
Arahadasi, I, C. 175. Avisina I, 79, 80. 


2 This index includes also the names given on that appended to the former paper. The new impressions made it 
necessary to alter a number of words and to exclude some. 


oF 2 


404 


Balika I, 186. 

Bodhi J, 104; Ii, 63. 
Budhapalita I, 86. 
Budharakhita 1, 110, 304; 71, 61, 
Chiratt I, 28. 

Chirati IT, 48. 

Data I, 267, 

Devadata I, 559. 

Devabhiga I, 126. 

Dhamadeva IT, 3. 
Dhamarakhita I, 52; II, 73. 
Dhamasenf IT, 9. 

Dhamasiri I, 78. 

Dhamayasa I, 224. 

Dupasaha I, 193. 

Gada I, 252, 253; 11, 15 (7), 28. 
Giriguta I, 100. 

Gotami II, 47. 

Isidasi I, 192 216; II, 29. 
Isidata I, 181; II, 44. 

Tsidiné I, 183. 
Tsimita (?) II, 54. 
Jitamité I, 101, 

Kadi I, 158. 

Koramika I, 343; II, 78. 

Mitasiri I, 315; II, 3. 

Mit I, 226. 

Mohika I, 341. 

Mul IY, 28. 

Nasndutara I, 283, 

Nati I, 286, 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


Od [aAjtika I, 132. 

Odi (I, 822); II, 11, 40. 
Phagula, II, C. 18. 
Piyadhamé I, 104. 
Pusd I, 105. 
Saghadina I, 37. 
Sagbarakhita I, 248. 
Sathghapalita [, 374. 
Samgharakhita I, 33, 645, 
Samiké I, 350, 
Sapaki** IT, 8. 
Sdmikaé L, 357. 

Satisin J, 241. 

Siha J, 359. 

Siri I, 356, 

Siridina I, 119, 353. 
Sirimité I, 355. 
Sonasiri IT, 70. 
Supathama I, 293. 
Suriya I, 363, 

Vajini I, 320. 

Vala IT, 26. 

Vasava I, 329. 
Vasumita I, 326, 
Vipula I, 332, 

Vira I, 337. 

Yakhadasi [, 194. 
Yakhi I, 38,199, 316. 
Yamarakhita, II, C. 20 
Yasila I, 33. 


I1I.— Males rol marked as clerical. 


Agila IT, 13, 
Abimita I, 127. 
Ajitiguta I, 43, 366. 
Apa-yaha (?) I, 205. 
Apathaka I, 42. 
Araha I, 40, 234. 
Arahadina I, 44, 90. 
Arahaguta I, 242-43. 
Arahaka, (paripanaka) J, 189. 
Arahadasa I, C. 100. 
Arahbarakhita I, 338. 
Asada I, 72, 210. 
Asaguta I, 213. 
Atha (kamika) I, 10. 
Avasika II, 43. 
Bahadata I, 30. 
Bahula il, 37. 
Balaka I, 319. 
Bhadaguta I, 172, 


Bhadaka I, 41, 

Bhadu I, 308. 

Bhichhuka I, 56. 
Bbutarakhita I, 330. 

Bohu (2) 1,301, | 
Budhaguta IT, 58. 
Budhapalita (sethi) I1, 25. 
Budharakhita I, 302 ; II, 60. 
Budhila IT, 2; (gahapati) J, 136. 
Bulika I, 114. 

Bumu I, 222. 

Chheta I, 159. 

Damaka (sotika) I, 196. 


’ Dasaka I, 845, 


Data(-kalivata I, 195) ; (kalavada 339-40). 
Devabhaga I, 111, 

Devaka I, 89. 

Dhamadata I, C. 173. | 

Dhamagiri I, 149, 271. 


8 This is the distinct reading of Dr. Fihrer’s new impression. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS, 405 


Dhamagirika I, 2, 190. Narhdigiri I, 108. 
Dhamaka I, 246, 270. Nigadi I, 113. 
Dhamaguta IT, 20. Odaka I, 328. 
Dhamapila I, 182, 273. Opedadata I, 155, 221. 
Dhamarakhita I, 274. Patithiya (gahapati) I, 22, 23, 264-65. 
Dhamasena I, 271. Patithana I, 289,—see L. I, Pra). 
Dhamasiva I, 1, 107. Phaguna I, 63. 
Dhanagiri I, 185. Pusadata I, 292. 
Dhamu[tara] I, 276. Pusagiri I, 55, 131. 
Disdigini I, 290. Pusaka I, 291. 
Disdrakhita I, 138. Pusarakhita”® I, 117. 
Ghosaka I, 239. Rebila I, 318. 

Girika I, 254, Rohanika IT, 66. 

Gohila I, C. 77. Sachamita I, 96. 
Gonarhdaka (tapasa) I, 260. Saghadeva I, 81. 

Gopala I, C. 12. Saghamita IT, 12. 
Gotiputa, see Subahita. Sacharakhita I, 284, 375. 
Himagiri ile 108. Sakadina I, Wil 
tasdatat dens 11,45: Sakarakhita I, 342. 
Idadeva (?) I, 239. Berianael 6 

Isidata (?) I, C. 52. by Ssoamgha E201; 

Isidina I, 298. Sarnghadata I, 228. 


Sameharakhita I, 259, 297. 
Samika I, 166; (vanika) I, 176, 349. 
Sarhvalita I, 98. 


Tsiguta (vanija) I, 91. 
Isika I, 92, 93, 161. 
Isipalita I, 197. 


Tctatitack, 862, 3 Saphineyaka,—see Sa®. 

Isinadana I, 217. Saco ee > 

Isirakhita I, 14, 218. Oe es on ‘ 
Kalavada I, 339-40. Saphineyaka (race) I, 137, 161; II, 69. 


Satila I, 173. 
Sidatha I, 191. 
Sihagir I, 77. 
Sinibhaga I, 354, 
Siriguta (vanija) J, 47. 
Siripala I, 176. 
Sivanadi I, 45. 
Siha (sethi) I, 99. 
Mab {i]péla I, 273, he 
Mahirakhita I, 3931. Stharakhita I, 13 
Manorama (vadaki) I, 311, Sona I, 150. ea 
Mula I, 301. Soyasa’ I, 120. 
ae ea 3 I, 148. Subahita (-Gotiputa-rajalipikara) I, 48, 49, 361, 
secre Subhaga I, 19. 
Nadivirohi I, 24, Suldsa I, 229. 
Nagadata I, 284, 375, Syipeer al: 


Kalivata I, 195. 
Kalura I, 222. 
Kekateyaka I, 1, 3. 
Kujara I, 60,7* 170. 
Kusuka J, 196. 
Leva I, 294, 368, 
Mahanama I, 312. 
Mahida I, 109. 


Nagadina (sethi) I, 115. TAapasiya (race) I, 73, 151-52, 160, 223, 
Nagapiya,—see °piya. Tikisa (?) II, 31. 

Nagapiya (sethi) I, 85, 201; II, 7. Tisa I, 262. 

Nagila I, 390; (sethi) I, 285, Tuda I, 263, 296. 

Nagadina I, C, 74. Upedadata I, 156-57. 

Narhda I, 179, Upidadata I, 36. 

* This is the reading of Dr. Fiihrer’s new impression, 36 According to Dr. Fihrer’s new impression it is possible 


“compare ante (Note). 


* This is the reading of Dr. Fiihrer’s : t 
instead of Harasa° (?), : ee ee 


to read Seyasa. 


406 


Utara (rajuka) I, 230. 
Vadha I, 142. 

Vahila J, 232. 

Vakiliya (race) I, 271. 
Vajiguta I, 125. 
Varadata J, 821, 528-24. 
Varuna I, 325, 

Vijita I, 3. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


Vimala, I, C. 138, 
Visa I, C. 77. 

Visaka IT, 68. 
Visékha II, 21, 
Visdkharakhita [, 334. 
Visvadeva I, 95. 
Yamada(ta] 1, 281, 
Yona [, 364. 


IV.—Females not marked as nuns. 


Agideva I, 129. 
Agis(i]ma I, 69. 
Aja[ra]ni IT, 203. 
Ama([ga] (?) I, 278. 
Apa[k4]ni I, 206. 
Arahadina I, 250. 
Arahaguta I, 32, 249, 
Avibadata I, 313, 
Asvadevé I, 30, 166, 36 
Asvarakhita I, 219 
Baladata I, 800 
Balaka I, 154. 

Balika I, 225. 
Bhichhunika IT, 65. 
Bodhi I, 305. 
Budhadeva I, 362. 
Budhaguta II, 35. 
Budhbapilita IT, 33. 
Budha I, 157. 

Chirati 1, 202. 
Devabhaga 1, 237. 
Dhamadata I, 223. 
Dhamadina I, 272. 
Dhawarakhita I, 15, 45, 76, 275, 
Dhamarasiri II, 56. 
Dbamata[data] I, 102. 
Dhal fia} 1, 265. 
Dhanika I, 309. 
Dhavadeva IT, 7o. 
Gada IT, 15. 

Gola I, 34. 

Gotami I, 255. 

Hala I, 365. 
Himadata I, 156. 
Isalé I, 323. 

Tsidata I, 171, 294-95. 
Isimita I, 162. 
Tsinika I, 255. 
Isirakhita I, 64 
Jitamita 1, 257. 
Ka[ka]na (?) I, 21. 
Kaniyasi I, 167, 
Koti II, 72. 

Kurari I, 39. 


Majhima I, 48. 
Mita I, 78. 

Muladata I, 153. 
Mula I, 95. 
Nadini I, 310. 

Naga I, 50, 140, 261, 
Nagadata I, 117. 
Nagamita I, 165, 240, 
Nagapalita II, 10. 
Naja 1,{151. 

Nara I, 164. 
Nagadina [°ga°] 1, 245, 
Odi I, 82. 

Parija (2) I, 129. 
Patola (2) II, C. 28. 
Pothadeva I, 139. 
Pusé I, 141, 375. 
Pusini II, 20. 
Ratina[°nt] I, 317. 
Revatimita I, 319. 
Revi I, 121, 

Roha I, 324. 
Rohanadeva I, 282. 
Robani I, 148. 
Sagha.I, 174; II, 69, 
Sagharakhita II, 29. 
Samatika (?) I, 360. 
Sarhgha I, 344, 
Samidara[ta] I, C. 176. 
Samika I, 46, 118. 
Semaka (?) I, C, 
Siha I, 212, 358, 360; II, 18, 
Sijha I, 333, 
Simhadata I, 160. 
Sirika I, 220. 

Sivati I, 357, 
Sonadeva I, 8, 129. 
Subhaga I, 130, 375, 
Suriya I, 362 

Tapasi I, 39. 

Tuda I, 296.. 

Utara I, 376. 
Utaradata I, 279. 
Utaramita I, 280. 


SANCHI STUPA INSCRIPTIONS. 407 


Vayudata I, 155,—see Vayu. 
Vajinika I, 360. 

Vakaladevi I, 127. 

Varaseni I, 322, 

Vasula I, 168, 227, 327. 
Vasula I, 168. 


Vayudata I, 226,—see Vayu.° 
Vesamanadata I, 22. 
Vinhuka II, C. 24, 

Virasena I, 336. 

Vudina I, 20. 

Yasila I, 34, 


V.— Geographical Names. 


Abheyaka (adj.) I, 11, 57 
Achhavada (adj.) II, 7. 
Achhavada I, $5, 201. 

Achhavata (?) I, 202. 

Adhapoiika (adj.) II, 13. 

Ajanava ITI, 43. 

Anammitaka (? adj.) II, C. 10. 
Arapana 1, 210-11. 

Arapana I, 59, 72, 89. 

Arapanaka (adj ) II, 59. 
Avapaniya (adj.) I, 212. 

Asvavati I, 91, 215. 
Athakanagara I, 204. 

Bedakara, I, 108. 

Bhadanakatiya (adj.) I, 120. 
Bhasikada I, C. 156, 
Bhogavadhana I, 45. 
Bhogavadhana, I 64, 309. 
Bhogavadhanaka (adj.) I, 48, 109; II, 2. 
Chahatiya (adj.) ? I, 185 (see 1. I.) 
Chudapbalagiriya (adj.) I, 300. 
Churnvamoragiri (?) 1, 49. 
Dhamavadhanana (vadhana) I, 25-26. 
Dharakina I, 178. 

Hjavata (adj.) I, 71. 

Ejavati I, 231-32. 

¥rakina,—see Dharakina. 
Garndhara (n. pr.) IT, 46, 

K aboja (n. pr.) I, 7, 287. 
Kachupatha (adj.) I, 52, 53. 
Kakanava, I, 377 (?), 378. 
Karhdadigama I, 236. 

gAmiya (adj.) I, 140-41, 237. 
Kapasigdama I, 40, 332. 

Koramika (adj., n. pr.) I, 348; 11, 73. 
Katakafuyaka (adj.) I, 97, 233. 
Katakanu I, 41, 234-35, 
Katakareyaka I, C. 100, 
Kekateyaka (n. pr.) I, 1, 3. 
Kodijilaka (adj.) I, 299. 


Koraghara (adj.) I, 19, 99, 104, 284, 286, 307. 


Korara . f . 1% (adj.); I, 85, 315; II, 8, 9, 
26, 39 76. 


Kothukapadiya (adj.) I, 182. 


Kuragbara I, 162, 164-65, 239-40, 359 

Kuraghariya (adj.) 1, 241. 

Kuragharaka I, 375, 

Kurara, or Kurara I, 98, 179, 242-48. 

Kurara, . f-2 . (adj.) 1, 39, 181, 249-50, 369 ; 
II, 37. 

Kurariya (adj.) I, 201, 2 6. 

Kuthupadaka I, 373. 

Machhavata I, 310, 

Madalachhikatika or “lachhi° (adj.) I, 78, 793, 
80, 186, 267 (?). 

Madhuvana I, 61, 180. 

Madhuvanaka .f .ika I, 15, 76, 110, 126, 
275. 

Mahbamoragi I, 77, 134. 

Mahisat? I, 111,—see Mahi.° 

Mabisati I, 313-14, 317. 

Morajah*atiya I, 268, and compare below 
Ramorajahikati . . « 

Morasihikata I, 44, 

Morayahikatiya (adj.) 11, 50. 

Nadinagara I, 7, 287. 

Nadinagara I, 6, 277, 282, II, 53-54. 

Nadinagaraka, Narndi°, Nadi®. 

Nadinagarika f.-ika, (adj.) I, 82, 105, 119, 
183, 192, 216, 318, 353, 355; IT, 15. 

Narndi® I, 143, 278-81, 329. 

Navagamaka I, 138. 

Navagamaka, °oamaka, or Navagamaka, °gama- 
ka f.-ika (adj.) I, 46, 55, 131, 147. 

Navagamakiya I, 292, 

Padaniya (adj.) I, 56; II, 21. 

Padukulika II, 1. 

Padukulikiya (adj.) II, 26. 

[Pa] tithana (adj.) I, 289. 

Pavidaka I, 169. 

Pematika (adj.) I, 362. 

Pemutika (adj.) I, 293. 

Phujakapalliya, I, 263. 

Podavijhaka I, 298. 

Pokhara I, 106, 294-97. 

Pokhareyaka I, 83; II, 30, 38, 41. 

Poravijhaka” I, 107,—see Podavijhaka. 

Pratithana (n, pr.) I, 12, 70. 


27 This is the distinct reading of Dr. Fiihrer’s new impression, instead of Poravikkika. At is cenfirmed by the form 


Podavijhaka in No. 298. 


A408 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Punavadhaniya (adj.) I, 102, 217. Tuba- or Turnbavana I, 22, 23, 264-65. 
Puruvida I, 290. Udubara- or Udurnbaraghariya (adj.) I, 13, 
Ramorajahikadi . . . (?) I, 90,—see above 96.511, 58, 66: 
Morajahikada. Ugireyaka (adj.) I, 31. 
Robani nadiya (adj.) I, 93. Ujeni I, 27, 69, 73, 95, 144,.146, 148-61, 
NRohanipadiya (adj.) I, 113-15; II, 68. 163, 219-29. 
Sadakadaya (adj.) IL, 34,—see Sida®, Ujenika (adj.) I, 121, 214, 266, 326. 
Sagireyika (adj.) 11, 71. Vadi-Vadivabana I, 116, 124, 328. 
Sakakacbha (?) I, 367, VAdivahanika (adj.) I, 101. 
“anukagamina (adj.) I, 172. Vadya® (adj.) II, C. 24. 
Sasadaka (adj.) I, 18; II, 27. Vaghumata 1, 37, 175. 
Sedakada .f . -?. (adj.) 11, 35. Valivahanika (adj.) I, 197. 
Setapathiya (adj.) I, 364. Vedisa I, 38, 316, 338-41, 
Sidakada, IT, 31. Vedisaka, f. ika (adj.) 1, 117, 132, 200, 258, 
‘Sidakadiya (adj.), II, 33. 283. 
Sidakade (adj.) II, 32. Vejaja I, 17. 
Sonaraka (adj.) II, 12. Vejaja (adj.) I, 270. 
Takarapada I, 259. Verohahata (adj.) I, $1. 
Tarhbalamada I, 60. Virohakata I, 323. 
Tiridapada I, 50, 261, Vitirifaha I, 330. 
Tobavanika I, 337. i Vitirinahi, I, 331. 


XXXII.—CHITORGADH STONE INSCRIPTION OF MOKALA OF MEWAD. 
Tou VIKRAMA YEAR 1485. 


By Proressor F. Kretuorn, Pu.D., C.1.E.; Gorrrincen. 


Dr. Burgess has furnished me with good impressions, by Dr. A. Fiihrer, of three 
inscriptions of the Guhila princes of Mewa4d, which are at Chitorgadh in the 
Udaypur state of Rajputana. Of the earliest’ of them—it is dated in the Vikrama year 
1331—I have already given an account’ in Indian Antiquary, vol. XXII, p. 80, from a 
rubbing of Mr. Garrick’s that had been sent to me by the late Sir A. Cunningham. I 
here publish the text of the second inscription, the only one of the three that is complete, 
of the Vikrama year 1485. 

This inscription is on a slab of black marble, inside a large carved stone temple 
which according to local information was built by Mokalji” It contains fifty-three lines 
of writing, which cover a space of about 4’ 2” broad by 2’8” high. In the midst of the 
writing, causing a break in the lines 21-29, is an ornamental device, 53” square, 
enclosing a circle which is about 37” in diameter; and inside this circle again is an open 
flower with eight leaves. Near the periphery of the circle is a verse in the Anushtubh 
metre, which apparently invokes the blessing of the God Hara (Siva), but the letters of 
which are too faint in the impression to be read with confidence. And in the centre, 
and on the leaves of the flower and around them, seventeen other aksharas are engraved, 
three of which clearly give the name Mokala. The writing of the inscription is generally 


1 A photo-lithograph of it is given in Sir A..Cunning- { and I do not think that it would be worth while re-publish- 
ham’s Archaol. Survey of India, vol. XXII, plate xxv. | ing the text of it. 

27, In Dr. Fihrer’s impressions the name of the 14th ° See Archeol. Survey of India, vol. XXIII, p. 106 
prince, Amrapraséda, is quite distinct. Otherwise, I have} and plate xxxiii, : 
nothing to add to my previous account of the inscription, 


CHITORGADH INSCRIPTION OF MOKALA OF MEWAD. ~ 409 


well preserved, so that, with the exception of about a dozen aksharas, the actual word- 
ing of the text may be made out with certainty. The average size of the letters is 
between $" and 35". The characters are Nagari of the period to which the inscription 
belongs. ¥ The language is Sarhskrit, and, excepting the introductory words Om Orn 
namah Stvdya and a date at the end, the whole is in verse. Considering the great length 
of the inscription, the historical information conveyed by it is very meagre indeed; and 
the author has tried to make up for the want of substance by Jengthy and exaggerated 
descriptions of the valour, fame, piety and munificence of the princes of whom he is 
treating. His language is sometimes obscure, and not free from actual mistakes. 
The orthography does not differ from that of an ordinary Sarnskrit manuscript. 

The object of the inscription is, to record the erection, at Chitrakita (the modern 
Chitorgadh), of a temple of the god Siva (Samiddhega or Samddhiga*) by the prince 
Mokala of Medap&ta (or Mew4d). After the words “Orn, Orn, adoration to Siva,” 
the inscription has four verses invoking the blessings of Gajasya (GaneSa), Ekalinga (Siva), 
the daughter of the mountain (é.e, Siva’s consort Parvati) who dwells on the Vindhya, 
and Achyuta (Vishnu). The poet then (in verses 5-6) glorifies the pious and famous 
family of the prince Guhila.’ Inthat family was born the lord of Medapéta Arisimha 
(vv. 7-12). His son was the prince Hammira (Hammira-vira, Hammira-deva ; vv. 13-23). 
From him sprang the prince Kshetra (Kshetra-mahipati, Kshetra-kshitéa; vv. 24-88). 
His son was the prince Lak shasimha (Laks hasitnha-nripati, Laksha-kshitésa ; vv. 34-43)» 
who according to verses 38 and 41 freed the holy place Gaya from the distress brought 
upon it by the ruler of the Sakas (i.e. the Muhammadans). And Lakshasimha’s son 
was Mokala (Mokala-kshmépati, Mokalendra; vv. 44-60), whom his father appointed 
his successor, anu of whom in verse 51 it is intimated that he defeated Peroja, the 
king of the Yavanas® (meaning, again, the Muhammadans). Mokala, according to 
vv. 61-64, had already before built a splendid temple of ‘the lord of Dvarak&’ (¢.e the 
god Vishnu-Krishna), near which he also had a tank excavated. And it is now recorded 
by this inscription (vv. 65-73) that on the Mount Chitrakdata, situated in the prince’s 
dominion, Mokala also built a temple of the god Siva (Samiddhesa or SamAdhiga) and 
provided for its proper maintenance. Verse 74 gives the date on which this temple was 
inaugurated ; and the Praéasti closes (in verse 75) with a prayer for the continuance of 
Mokalse’s rule. Five additional verses record that the preceding Praégasti was written’ 
(i.e. composed) by Ekanatha, a son of Bhatta Vishnu, of the Dagapura clan ;° that the 
temple was constructed by Mana, the son of Vijala; and that the inscription was written 
on the stone by Visala, a son of Mana, and engraved by Visa, who also is described as a 
son of Mana, and is perhaps identical with Visala. And the inscription ends with a 
date which differs from the date given in verse 74. 


4 The text, in verse 72, actually has Samidvaisah, which 
must be altered to either SamtddheSah or Samédhisah. 
SamédhiSa occurs, as a name of Siva, in Jine 63 of this 
inscription and in other inscriptions at Chitorgadh and 
Mount Abi; and Samiddhesvara I find in another Chitor- 


gadh inscription of the Vikrama year 1207. See below, p. 422. 


5 See Indian Antiquary, vol. XVI, p. 346. 

6 Verse 46 states in a generak way that Mokala subdued 
the Angas, Kimarfipas, Vangas, Nishdidas, Chinas, and 
Turushkas ; but there’can be no doubt that that verse has been 


put in solely for the sake of poetical ornamentation. 

7 The original has alikhat, which must here mean 
‘composed,’ because the writer’s name is given afterwards, 
and because the name of thecomposer would hardly have 
been omitted. 

5 DaSapurayndti occurs again in the Nagart inscription 
of Mokala’s grandson Rajamalla; Journal Beng. As. Soc. 
vol. LVI, part I, p. 82, v.26. On the town Daéapura see 
Fleet’s Gupta Inscriptions, p. 79, note 2. 


38a 


410 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Neither the date in verse 74 nor the one at the end of the inscription works out 
satisfactorily. According to verse 74 the temple built by Mokala was inaugurated on 
the day of the preceptor of the gods, é.e. on a Thursday, the third lunar day of the dark 
half of the month Tapasya, 7.e. Phalguna, of the Vikrama year made up of the arrows 
(5), eight (8), the Vedas (4) and the earth (1), ¢.e. 1485, under the nakshatra of Arya- 
man, i.e. Pirva-phalguni, while the sun was in the sign Makara and Jupiter in the sign 
Ghata, i.e. Kumbha. Here the statements that thesun (on Phalguna-vadi 3): was in the 
sien Makara, and that Jupiter was in the sign Kumbha, show that the scheme of the 
lunar month was the pérnimdnta scheme, and that the date must fall between the 25th 
February A.D. 1428 and the 20th February A.D. 1429 (7.e. in the Jovian year Rakshasa, 
as determined by the northern mean-sign system) ; and accordingly the true equivalent 
for Phalguna-vadi 3 of Vikrama 1485 can only be the 28rd January A.D. 1429. On 
that day the third ¢ithi of the dark half ended 18h. 29m. after mean sunrise, the 
nakshatra at sunrise was Pirva-phalguni, and the sun was in Makara and Jupiter in 
Kumbha, all as required; but the day was a Sunday, not a Thursday, as stated errone- 
ously by the inscription.— The date at the end of the inscription is Thursday, the 8rd of 
the bright half of Magha of the year 1485. In the impression the figures for the day is 
not as clear as one could wish it to be. But, under any circumstances, this date, on 
which the inscription is said to have been engraved, would precede the date recorded 
in the body of the inscription; and assuming my reading to be right, the possible 
equivalents of the date would be Monday, the 19th January A.D. 1428, and Saturday, 
the 8th January A.D. 1429, which shows that this date too cannot be correct. 

Notwithstanding these errors, there appears to be no reason to doubt that the temple 
which was built by Mokala, was finished by him in AD. 1428-1429, and that this 
inscription furnishes a true date for the reign of that prince. Mokala, therefore, could 
not have been succeeded by his son Kumbhakarna (Koombho) as early as Vikrama 
1475 = A.D. 1419, as was. stated by Tod in his Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan 
vol. I, p. 286. And if there be any truth in the statement of our inscription that Mokala 
defeated the Yavana King Peroja, who could only have been the Sultan Firdiz Shah 
(A.D. 1851—1888), the commencement of his reign, too, must be placed at least ten 
years before the time assigned to it by Tod. As regards Mokala’s predecessors, I can 
only say that the list furnished of them by this inscription agrees with the one given 
in the Aunals and Antiquities of Rdjasthén” and in Prinsep’s Useful. Tables, p. 257. 


Pexre 
bey at? no tt aa: fara 
faaratardetiacaafeigcarered- 


WisMAaS A QIaATesigTyL sa (Sa) A: (1) 
Hana eH aaa af aaa aaa aET: 

auijatufed vasnq fad Sat asretars |g 1 
aat arfafa fagatquadl a; aaruatfa- 


° fhe earliest certain date of KumbLakarna’s reign | Lakha Rana, and Mokul. Annals, vol. I, pp. 267-277, 
known to me is of the Vikrama year 1492; see Peierson’s ” Fyom an impression, prepared by Dr. Fihrer. 
Third Report, Appendix, p. 203. ¥ Expressed by a symbol. 

% The nawes given by aod are Ursi, Hamir, Khaitsi, 4 Metre of verses 1—4: Sardilavikridita, 


CHITORGADH INSCRIPTION OF MOKALA OF MEWAD. All 


ine. at 
areal acnfay: gaata afaarrdasa: | 
sraayg faraty ane erat fafaa: wa 
za: afar ut: © aad wieafearfire: 12 0 
walweaaa falafefata qat aa duat 
foanrenraftant + afad: wrercazerararg | 
HU AVA APaatayt- 
a faaaaattaat 
ararataacaara fafear faetaar areata 2 n 
atfictazasaeaata: da frat afaat 
waa Aq Taal a want ¥ ateetfaafa | 
ga atl fa] aaract efafed q aaraaaart 
aaralta fafreatagfeaaasee: ag Tus ut 
mITaaaral afsearacTat- 

4. fea aTaeunfer- 
aaa wafats qi water | 
maaan (7) facfaaafad afar, 

wataai fers aufe wawet” aa dae wa Hy 
aTaaaaatateta fefa wencaritafa- 

faafaaaatentategal ATaTaTaTAT: | 
saafafataret afraariarfentafeata- 

faa 4- 

B. uvauat facade aetogataa: fu] @ w° 

an aarfefas: fafaufanfa aataaaait- 

Rares aaa aa as aUTaRAL TT: | 
fara uementcaaafraatarata- 

wae iz fata (a) aaaaeMUT eas! © 1 
aufarfifas: wereataeer faacue- 


c, 

6, wart fafamraren ni (1) 
CAAT: PUTA Aara aafarafaaataradenan: Tw s ue 
faafsacregqy watt ai wate aat 

aisit Wa(a) efawareatya” aaa Weate | 
aaaR aetad earrMlaaer 
BTR, 4 

4 Read HaaY- ” aTete ‘cloud’ is apparently used here in the sense of 

15 J should have expected VENTA. qratfa ‘ocean.’ Originally era? was engraved, 

16 The reading of this line is perfectly clear in the impres- 2 Metre: Sragdhara. 
sion, but the end of it yields no suitable sense. 22 Metre: Malini. 

7 Read WaHet. 3 Originally “Matas? was engraved. 

18 Metre: Sragdharé. 4 Read @Uag. 


9 Metre: Sarddlavikridita. , 
3G 


412 


10. 


nA B 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


ae areaNrTateaaa: Tara We w 
alfa: ata fat featcrenrarcag- 
TACT sa (Sa) aT 
Bad fasrarfeanaananrarfefia fears: | 
anitfafanea g fafeat aarecgfaar 
awmreltaMaquagrara wren fed vee ii 
fafucaadan aneaaea” aaaatfraat aattienta aisnzatafa: | 
wa qane-aa: afahread aeerfenufatrarae” fafauaweirarafa” een 
faatet a aeR- 
ta afent araaatafad 
araraeaTa tat: UFZSY At ATTA THAT I 
earns fareafacat aasrat at wat 
area: afafare: were: gat: @ wat fea nee 


“ae Gacarrarfaa(at] daracte: ya- 


Qa aPAcaargafcar CaAtcaray aA | 


Saat agurraratayer weaRa fey Nes tt 
auietafany fesrafrarates feaiea- 

SS FLATTS AaAaHetay aa efaat | 
TTA 

wag: afar |@ daaritaa- 

BE A aaa wo Aaa afeaarel wrafa neu a 
ATATSATATANTAARARA TUEAA TALE; | 
TSA ACHAT AATEC ATE eg A” 
damananh wfecafieaar dat daura 

Tas Mat aaa fefewa4rc | 
fad ad faa agqa- 

afaagantana fea 
— Utleatlearen fraid carafe fara areaitt aan go 


36 Metre of verses 9 and 10: Sardilavikridita. ®* Perhaps the original h : 

d ginal has fea;. Read waf feq: (? 
2 This may have been altered to °@wW. ™ Metre of verses 12—15: Sardilavikridita. mn 
7 Perhaps altered to @eafe° ; read yteerte? (?). ™ Metre: Upajati. 
%8 The meaning of this is not lene to me. ® Read @vat (P) and qadt. 
3° Metre: Prithvi * Metre: Sragdhara, 


13. 


14. 


16. 


CHITORGADH INSCRIPTION OF MOKALA OF MEWAD. 


SMA TTT arargcdatsaafaare (1) 
wT aareyaT ueeln*] 
Taearal Harel feqequaarercard TarTat 
araTATUTs Macha waft athaar wasg: 1) 
al- 
w: ara wefsenfa agaat at feta farra- 
cat ard alata faacta waa a fafarea faa tige[u*]” 


urd wa quart] wazafat aaehnisrar 


GE are: Hala aafagaucr alfacersa(sa) are (1) 
uaarata aa eeeitataaradtasraer 
ararqefada wgysa (a) era seqiicre i 


ze [n*] 
saelenauraaagraanertaana frrar- 
SURI SETHA  eeECAACTS: Me feraa ha (1) 
Wa euiat @ aMata @ aguewlat TreaM- 
We want gta atquerant dewey u zz [n*] 
qaug aa: a fafufefa fafrergeeerafedt 
al ua Sea Ste arerraeqa ae tTaaTS (1) 
Wal €- 
areatafaufaawea: qexarataaat 
art yeaa fete fefa qfat aematart Tey un zz ([n*] 
art Wohwerarefa afacafadearsaay ar 
arat avicaiatedcenaal|qearaaar gaan (1) 
Tras LeAATT TAM saa” 
atfiadgae: fara wife emrirafrticarat wu 23 [u*] 
AaAICa - 
aneiufa: qanacenat quinitafa: 
Waleaara(a)qa(aatent”® wat agarfra (1) 
URSA It AAR Taracraara- 
ayant faagecsrtferoranararfeaat nas [te] 


ute fafafeacntt aratrarfircat aeragaafataafreraatter | 


wateatara staat cual arafsra- 


413 


aus: uimarearediet: wu aa [n*]}” 


wigan atasaafrairanretacre (i) 


% Metre: Upajati. % Read wafer, 
3 Metre of verses 19-23: Sragdhara. Metre: Sardtilavikridita. 


7 Read °f 


4 Metre; Malini. 


414 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


faan ett wad acafanfed aryqaree TAI- 

add ararefrarrafiaananrafaedeneran 24 [0*]” 
simian aaunta freraarer aqfy: 32: 

wea aATaT haar 


L. 17. ATATUTAAHA TAT Ui!) 
mrieracifaata TEM TATA AM: 
qt atfacay wera aferaret area u 29 0° 
atfaatiegt +g frafaeentaretfarare 2. 
AW: TIT VE: YaRaaat Qaarareal Wat: | 
qua caer fefa fe a act arate atta 
18. at: 
area fara: aefa + aaetafraratearctat u Rs” 
warfa: arate: acfa faa vais sfe— —* 
— — [Wilatfeds vaaefeua wacrstteare (1) 
Ugrend a sat vata faaca amat[n] fratm- 
afoaiafe atfa: uafa farsa 


19. afeaa: TRUTH W RE A 
we: HATA tears wWraeATas Aaa 
ad aaaeiufa: saad eratfa gure: | 


aqa(e walat wetruyfa aara faa: 
mteta afe [at] cerfa fe aet aa HSE TT: Re UW” 
sai errant fant fasrad faarafiwearat- 
qar- 
20. ATA erareafaaea aay Wit: | 
SA ARELS F(T) HAT ETAT aTRT- 
mituraafaasfcafeaciafeaeca: uae tl 
wagdisdisafautfanaeltcamieaa 
quieted suudieqqawaaaaaa | 
wal Uta quafa a awd fafeai y- 
21. wf 
war: Gafertte: ufecufearacrantegte:n az a” 
wale 9 Shap faa da fadaad 
aad @ qgiy: fatafad aid a[atlaferd u() 


1 Read °a@®, and weld. 45 Here four aksharas are broken away. 

© Metre : Sragdharé, 45 Metre of verses 30 and 31: Sarddlavikridita. 
® Metre: Sarddlavikridita. 47 Perhaps altered to “aes fe:. 

“4 Metre of verses 28 and 29: Sragdhara. 48 Metre: Sragdhara. 


L. 22. 


23. 


24, 


26. 


“9 The word ag before ¢e7° appears rather superfluous. 


CHITORGADH INSCRIPTION OF MOKALA OF MEWAD. 


erfcatiaed fratuafa aeerfeee® wer 
— at n 2a uw 

acag: faa wafieaate:” art graraut-” 

TTA AMAT aaa: 1 
aas:faten [fa jrwaafratatqarag: 

arstamay [waiiaqet angtearrag uw 23 i 
ua: fa fragau: qutdt cWara- 

TUTTS 

way: fag wartcat: gate sa: | 
Aaa SAAT TAT AATTAT [at eat 

a Targquaraaaadat ze faarat aa: vay tl 
STATSETHATAT WLUTAT AAT UOTE UR AT 

WManitaaawra waraygen fafear a- 

aaTat | 

WAATNIACTAT AAHaaaTA ASAT 

aamagciar utfugraaaes: @ Margy uae 0” 
afeatitguafeteacaar” faea: Geate- 

alergulaantacacgery| wife frettae: 
ara ara aurea aufa 

aeta [at] arqaret ware 

anreafadiarerafa a fe ut eraafa: alylfa: u a0 u 
atfantfousnfsiarta [east cath warea 

ala STANATaaT Baga AMAA Wat | 
Mata acre fafeararara ga” y- 

a 

Hewafaaeaaacaisarraywa was: as u®” 
warag aarmrarta faelalasdt uta feat 

zat(at) waafa a[a a] aga dataasiae: 
gare: faa arratata gai acdefiaaear- 

[ale at aqaranifefa aut aaa: 

BTA” Wael 


“ae sagqeaat wayfa agur gfearafelar* at 
areas TST AT Ha taraaceataanr WAT (I) 


50 Metre of verses 33—35: Sardiilavikridita. 56 Read “qe. 


3 Originally q=q° was engraved. 
5% One would expect afr. 


8 Originally °% ase was engraved. 59 Read TAA. 
°4 Read aaa. 


55 Metre of verses 36 and 37: Sragdhard. 


5 The sign of anusvdra of qi is Very faint. 
58 Metre of verses 38 and 39: Sardilavikridita. 


415 


416 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 
dara] afarat wfaqaareat Tet fara 
far dy aad fay wqura: ary Satfaare4: sen 
aat- 
L. 28. Qauet warfaracaras teat 
Paaqaeyqaifaa wai wratfaqaraa: | 
ware wraniaated: [arlet arena 
fala rlacuacsaad: wareaareaa: is eu” 
agen [ag arafena ger gafa 1a qer- 
qa 
29, Sfuatyd aaaat waraheUt: GT | 
@ arietuatfuataatafraat faratearl 82 
wend aaaine afasrat eratia avatar 
WAACMAUSAgat aay Frat: | 
30. wat aifesd attoarareen(at) a aentaa- 
ara Her qerfaeUgai” art TaTeuaq use ti 
ag waa aaa aaa: Ua oaTa[ aa: 
[a]ayqa: aTaed Gera: ga: Gala: | 
Teal qata ered faag[a] sacHATT: YT: 
Radia TAMA AAYal ATA- 
3] eq fuat wa: i 88 on 
Uae KET: VAaage: Vrahyst area: 
QEIASH UAAARAATTTA ALAA: | 
arigt | face eremaerarlatla eracqaray 
ard arafaatfoat Haye UlawaTaTeeaT: ti gy it 
amr, dona: aaaafacur: araear freur 
aa 
32. wigam wafaeener araarer faaren: | 
aia; daraclat: wawefargar wifayenrqeat 
qaige ahs aca afeafs mrodatawe ove 1” 
ae.” fagrteqmanauae tsatat mit 
Had: Wes teafaaven: fara war: | 
HaTaTAaTAT tz- 


6 Metre: Sragdhara. : * Here agzin the exact construction of the line is not 
Metre of verses 41-45: SArdilavikridita. clear. 
® Y should have expected here wares, but am uoubtful 6 Road °euqut. 

about the exact sevse of the second half of this verse. ® Metre of verses 46-51: Sragdhara 
© This is quite clear in the impression, but the sense 7 Read qt. : 

of the word is not apparent. 


CHITORGADH INSCRIPTION OF MOKALA OF MEWAD. 417 


L. 33. Gatcrarer® crea aTaTaT 
aagaratuanr: wg afucre gfe” safa war: 1 ge 1 
wea Menarrancat a aera TAT A-” 
Mea a a RATATAT TATE AATE 
at[at Helet favarfafa g farang wetanara: 
araraawiate ufefaaa aca ured awa: 
34. use it 
aa ATTY HTacarafareanifaaray sq 
unrantiatareta a fe aaa graTeHaATA | 
aarzaraaaraca agad eu fad facia 
[alarateivarfe ufafaacedt yoda ge 
qemarframnfaagea (a) aRrTAT aT 
ae a (a) a 
35. suisierafafage aha ety ger | 
qraiad ene aaafa aaarherautainct ha 
"eaTerafegaeeETUayeal atatargarhy: i vo 


aa UTATAIN aaaacata afeaaiaaa 
aos atfiaaiqqaqeataatadiaace: | 
ualatattaarat” 
36. aaafa Haat atfaat zea Sat” 


UATAAT ATAIRATAARAA ATT THAT: 4.2 
ares: ufaat gat aaafa aelaat waar 
gt qaufast agear fadiaaewat | 
Wie wyua g fafrat ora ares 
aatfufaadaat fafayat araaarafa: i(1) yeu” 
87. alrataaat Harney aatcaraatfarat 
at svatfa fasnaraga fast gar fama | 
aa wrarencfafaaa war qerareaar- 
eaarety aintag qeaaaty atlat|fa fa uve ui 
war: Wifsal qa ldnaaa: dud atfeear: | 
HUT fea- 
38. Sue geaa fa fa g faaratt 
Sarat waelad fag game dafaa: nus tl 
6 Read °ste@eti. is not clear. Perhaps the intended reading may be 
® Read afc. arerate®. 
7 Read “Suara. 73 This is not quite clear in the original. 
7” Read waaat? 4 Perhaps altered to aT. 


™ Here. again, the reading is quite certain, but the sense 78 Metre of verses 52-64: Sarddlavikridita, 
, 3H 


418 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


aA Ta MAT ATATAT ATTA aA” 
MAAC M AT AAATALAT AMAA: STAT: | 
aed aasarera sa afaat afeui afearat 
aararafa”’ etarafaaataae wats TUT way” 
al at at 
L, 39. ae fastataqaaaraaaied wa: 
daraviada: faa aig at utas saferq | 
aa anaes aferafecal qeartiaTa 
mie shaaag uianfa faget deat ofsarat uyen 
aa caterer ysTaty: TA Te 
Tea afar aaa AhetHerarafe: 1(1) 
ae- 


40. wn ala*laaenafaae Saraat” cat 
aut erafaaragqye a aTateraeafa afaq won” 
qSTaSly afacaraaaa YAUATAATA™ 
gai—alfarlidt aaquged went wart: | 
qwaraa sia feaafurat aeacra ava 
fracaarade: wuafa fafea araa- 


41. wi wee wc” 
AAMAAHSTMAA Fat J Yataraa 
Tet: a aa aa wad welt a Asafa ui (1) 
facar® acatfaat aqaat aeraser AAT 
a(S) UT RAM AR ges Vea TRTA TH AAT WHEN” 
wate Aaracfaacag uraLearfyarar 
wasnt waar fa- 
42, aafa wad atetiat frac | 
aa atareatar afe wafa aer arfaarsitgera- 
qararafaur waafa wae oTaTaTa TST Ng on” 


arerentaarra fast areata 
ware thadioraaatrantatadtara: (1) 
eaaiquaivaa afad a alfaa: daar 
2 owen 
fawatefa- 
7 The word aq is apparently used here in the sense 81 Read “afHa(?), 
of Aaa. 8 Metre: Sragdhara. 
7 Read aTaTat’. % Read faa. 
“8 Metre of verses 55 and 56: Sragdhard, 8 Metre : Sarddlavikridita. 
™ Read Saray. 8 Metre: Sragdhara. 


Metre: Sarddlavikridita, 


L. 43. 


44, 


46. 


47. 


CHITORGADH INSCRIPTION OF MOKALA OF MEWAD. 


fanaa faa” gare araaterarg ne ei” 

ae vegas fas erage 

Wramrarnyrefeafraqaaraarar® wats: | 
arae wefad yanaaya areas fares | 

a ahr: acarafa” waufaaingce aha” wan” 
we am: warhy: away fa- 

Te MHA (HA 

FEU UTA PIQUA TAS THAT | 
Dea Huaacfaraaaraatiayegy 

wrote” % feewreufafa faaarfee™ waTaaey wean 
faatadufisfadferad aria tay- 

aentsert UAH AACS AM TAT: | 
aquntasiqfefawara-” 

elaaatrada:” 

waqauaee aacfa seuatfafesa: aaa nes 

qaqa walyat fragawadl weredgaagear [fa Jaageiaea: | 


419 


aletlet saat: waataaian” ufaanantaat sata fraqerae: ean” 


oraat are are Herat haya, aa aTIaAT 
afaan faane qafa- 
quad arenes 
at wafanfcan” acfeanan araararastis: 
at a: Miarnifafeafeaauqadaisara wee 
SEraarafaasanaTa ara ta” 
Farermarerrarermnre eT TAM TAT | 
PATHETIC EY elaaIa eTaas fers 
fama? af wauafard F- 
eva facia neon 
wifeanfteia frase tet fararoisar- 
TRAPATT A TI: WHIT: | 


MiSTeaATaAYIEM ASM TIAA BT 
aarita faatfoasraniad waif Mme ast 


36 Read frad. % Read dqu’ 
! Metre: Sarddlavikridita. % Originally °dtifadg: was engraved. 
88 Originally Wefa° was engraved. 7 Read qtaara’(?). 
© Read (afea? and Cara. * Metre: Prithvi. 
%” Read Yt. % Read Wafa. 
2 Read ala: 100 This sign of punctuation is superfluous. 
92 Metre of Ss aiek 62-64: Sragdhara. 1 Metre of verses 66 and 67: Sragdhara. 

c) . LJ a ° 
%3 Read wuid. : Read lhe : 
* Read feet. Read faaets eee 

4 Metre: Sarddlavikridita, 


3H 2 


420 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


ant fai ara emt Seafafacfaa’ aa at area)” 
[at]gzan(@] faaseta afaaaeat fafa ar- 


L. 48. att 
a wa anatifatagqah ot caeeore- 
wea faaget safe aquatics aforfa’ nee i 
animaanaeraratadt afaraarat aa 


arife fraafaaraaata: anata 7a 11(1) 
aa: aia waMaTatahaaeraas- 
TanaaatefagethTretyeaiay, || oe 1 
aart- 
49. SATHCTCMASTA CaM AaRTTaT- 
WET AACA AA HCA SAA AAT ST 
aerfe orfaarat seta areal AsrataTASTa 
Ufara aaarenfuagunargaata waq 1 eg i? 
fate: fare aengqeysntarentcaanaeara waate a ara faafed (1) 
50. menue a* |facama acyat afaen:” strarfae gata actawat: oz’ 
VA RMTAATACA Aad eT aa TATA 
RAT WAeaMgGagqgwmfagnaMaaas | 
FIATLATT SCA Tagfearat-" 
Oe Aaraag waygcafad araaratfantay i og wv” 
we arureaetatautatad 
51. fama: 
Ga wma ave afaatt ant afa ma are 1i(1) 
Ue wantfargquyefesa waa qatar- 
faut canfastaaaaaati ata afaure: og | 
TAR ACATATA AA ACA AT aaa ATA ATAT 
Talat arate faemacutiorataeatfa: | 
Taraarmnygi wacfa eat TeyEt a ara- 
52. BTAWMAT aa” Taal WHAT AE Oy 
araenguafeefraierra: | 
ATARI AAA aa Alagaa (saat gu 


5 Read °tfaat. _ * Read afaga: or @aTHN:, which are both names of 
° The aksharas in these brackets are damaged, Siva. 

7 Read ufaafa:(2). 44 Metre: Sikharini. 

8 Metre: Sragdhara, © Six aksharas of this line are omitted ; the last word of 
9 Metre: Sarddlavikridita. the line must have been Baretq. 

Read @argatfa’ ; originally Zarq@° was engraved. *6 Metre of verses 73-75: Sragdhara. 

" Read Haga’, bs 7 Read ara’. 


% Metre: Sragdhara, 8 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh). 


CHITORGADH INSCRIPTION OF THE CHAULUKYA KUMARAPALA. 421 


saamrare: Ufeqeafaninaad fdas aTITTACTRR: 11(1) 
waTen fra: eaaguan ssrage: oa: fret art qua Tae 
afar wan? 
afanneifera- 
L. 53. quanta” qaqa afeaaa| 
SPAT TASATE vaTedtar facsitatre’' 2(a)u” 
ai saa] oa: frat Aare: GaTTa: | 
aqarasa aaa wnfeaftagqenat i a(s) 
tfacracqentat cafaftagqea(=s)er | 
faau” ahaa: fret wanderers 8(4) un 
wag (sty au aragfe (gj qefed” 2... 


XXXIII.—CHITORGADH STONE INSCRIPTION OF THE CHAULUKYA 
KUMARAPATLA. 


THE [VikRAMA] YEAR 1207. 


By Proressor F. Kietnorn, Pu.D., C.I.E.; Gorrincen. 


This inscription is on a slab of black marble which is preserved in the temple 
of Mokalji’ at Chitorgadh, in the Udaypur state of Rajputana. I edit it from 
Dr. Fihrer’s impressions, 

The inscription contains twenty-eight lines of writing which cover a space of 
about 1’ 8” broad by 1’ 8” high. Lines 1-14 are generally well preserved ; but in the 
subsequent lines part of the writing is entirely gone, in consequence of the peeling off of 
the surface of the stone, on the proper right side; and from the same cause a number of 
aksharas has also disappeared on the left side, in lines 24-28. In the midst of the writing 
causing a break in lines 17-23, is an ornamental drawing, about 32” square, which encloses 
a circle about 3}” in diameter. Near the periphery of this circlé and across the square, 
both vertically and horizontally, there is some writing (apparently a verse) the greater 
part of which is too faint to be made out. ‘The size of the letters is between ,%” and 4”. 
The characters are Nagari. The language is Samskrit ; and nearly the whole inscription 
is in verse. It is carefully written and engraved, and in respect of orthography it is only © 
necessary to state that b is denoted by the sign for v, and that the dental sibilant is 


19 Metre: Sikharini. appears to have been followed by three or four other aksharas, 
20 Read maf. which are illegible. 

” Read ates. 1 See above, p. 408. [I took impressions of the 
2 Or cinally Osfacite was engraved. inscriptions at Chitorgadh in January 1873; Mr. H. B. W. 
3 Metre: Upajati. ‘ Garrick copied several of them in 1884 (Arch. Sur. Reports, 
4 Metre of verses 4and 5: Sloka (Anushtubh). vol. XXIII, pls. xx, xxi); and again Dr. Fuhrer ona tour in 
Read faaq. RAjputéna took fresh impressions, one of which is used for 
% Read @ardy’. this paper.—d. B.) 


7 This word is engraved beneath the preceding aq and 


422 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


several times used instead of the palatal and the palatal once instead of the dental 
sibilant. 

The inscription is dated (in line 28) in the year 1207, corresponding, asa year of the 
Vikrama era, to A.D. 1149-50 or 1150-51; and its object is, to record a visit of the 
Chaulukya king Kum4rapala to Mount Chitrakdta, the modern Chitorgadh, and 
some donations which on that occasion were made by the king in favour of a temple of 
the god Samidd hesvara (Siva) on the hill.— After the words “Orn! Adoration to the 
Omniscient,” the inscription has five verses, three of which glorify the god Siva under 
the names of Sarva, Mrida, and SamiddheSvara, while the others invoke the assist- 
ance of the goddess of eloquence, Sarasvati, and celebrate the compositions of poets. 
The author then (in line 5) eulogizes the family of the Chaulukyas. In that family 
the king Malara4ja was born (line 6), and when he and many other kings of the same 
lineage had gone to heaven, there came the king Siddharaja (line 7), who again was 
succeeded by Kumarapaladeva (line 9), When this king had defeated the ruler of 
S4kambhart (line 10) and devastated the Sapadalaksha country (line 11), he went 
to a place named SAlipura (line 12), and having pitched his great camp there, he came 
to view the glorious beauty of the Chitraktita mountain; the temples, palaces, lakes or 
tanks, slopes and woods are extolled in lines 13-19. Kumarapala was delighted with 
what he saw there, and having come to a temple of the god Samiddhesvara (line 22) 
which was on the northern slope of the mountain, he worshipped the god and his consort, 
and gave to the temple a village the name of which has not been preserved (line 26). 
Other donations (a ghdnaka or ‘oil-mill’ for lights, etc.) are spoken of in line 27; and 
line 28 tells us that this Pragasti was composed by the chief of the Digambaras 
Ramakirtti, a pupil of Jayakirtti, and records the date, already given above. 

Tt will be seen from this abstract of the contents that this inscription is not of a 
very great importance; but it shows at any rate that Kumirapala’s well-known victory? 
over (Arnoraja), the ruler of the Sapadalaksha country, whose capital was SAkambhart 
(SAmbhar) in Rajputana, must have. taken place ia the Vikrama year 1207, or very 
shortly before it.— The place Sélipura at which Kumarapala is said to have been en- 
camped, and which must have been near Chitrakita, I am unable to identify. 


Text. 
Lei. ath am aafsias ua’... falafea)daeeea | wale ue 
wifalg weaerat wT ee: target. . 
2, FARAH | Ta awa TH BA)araaa awl 1 aclafrecfeadtwaca- 
afar wisuaw saaty felg] 
3. Ta waa | Waawedtad wafaata od gd Wud wewasadett: afar 
RC | Varaaeg aatitara: wae fat Fa] 
4. afagut wet aq arcad sitfacaaviafaensiat 8 WASTSSha il TeATS 
aia) Maufa gfareifedttrer: 20°) atari [aa 


* See ante, vol. I. p. 295. 7 The missing aksharas ave “14. 

* From impressions prepared by Dr. A, Fiihrer. 8 Metre: Prithvi. 

+ Expressed by a symbol. 2 Metre: Upajati. 

> Read % wa. © Metre: Sloka (Anushtubb) ; and of the next three verses 


® Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh) and of the next verse 


CHITGRGADH INSCRIPTION OF THE CHAULUKYA KUMARAPALA. 423 


Lb. ataiiat ataarea aver ua acetates start seartt? wars: | 
waueyetife dryness: x adt- 
6. quad waragedeaet fate 1) qaam(s)adiart qarafeteaiea(aa)- 
@ u facta at va dad) waa waar 1 us Teaat gaa) oT 
7. FH farareaa 1 cearaa” aefa qufag aau mag afey quaudfsare | 
Twa Tua agai qarfa waea- 
8. saute: ufaat a(a)aa 1 cafrart warfad a factiar aaaa: | aiat. ofa 
| qatfas(s)m(Slawfera uv afaaracarar 
9, Sit(va) dare faudeaarq” | Garniaeayqaimtaqiagy i MiwaTAET 
aq ut 94 wag: | ue yufeecas: arfz- 
10. at a(a)ycad are ae aviaeaqea(a)fuaet: 1 fase asfada(a)- 
cana waaa » Uetafag(a)ay” wae 
ll. w frargaata a wate: | afo crManateinae: fedt wer anaatfa- 
waa.” y ToTeAAATAa” Wate. 
12. aware: | fajalajurastaret ara wifagaiad vo afaae” fa(fa)fat va 
aa atfaaraeaquicany | frag 
13. cfafcyleaedtint geare aufa: qqaa un aeaategaluferauaaer” 

w agae We de dmatefa: 0 a- 
14. Mufaarecaraaiqeafadl | aanral faararal wast BMAAt v UGRT- 
uslaatieuaat fapaursiafrataata- 
1. — 7 CO — aldlaafedausal winadawsataa: | ofaneadate- 
ear: afar etieruraar(ar) ear: | a(a) efadatanaaarte 
16. — VU —" ag aai Ga Wer BET: 0 a(@)claqeaturacaarfaartatfatea- 
ayia wa atfeaarat | watacacirars: wa- 

WW —-—-V——vv afaofs wearfaa: arfanie: 1 wa asa afenrata 
ura foo: wisat afaatar faara 1 aa (a]- 
8. V-—-U—-— vu — [ai] [aletreares: aaa) ata nota mettle A at 
weg ot alqaa waat Fea 1 aTAae ga? ]- 
19 Vor HH UL mH UU [UAT I vantfeqa” gal at at yfa [e]- 
fea aan far; vata datfaaata- 

1 Divide, also, ate feifa:. ° Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh) ; and of the next verse. , 


2 j.¢., also, TST: 
18 Metre: Vasantatilaka. 


2 Metre: Varrsastha ; and of the next verse. 
2 The aksharas, here broken away, are probably 4T; | WH. 


M4 Metre: Sluka (Anusbtubh); and of the next three 3 The aksharas, here broken away, are probably trqat. 


verses. 


24 Metre: Malin? 


1s Read °AaMIq, ; | 35 Metre: Bhujahgaprayata. 
* Metre: BhujangaprayAta- 
7 Originally HAA? was evgraved. 


26 Metre: Dodhaka. 
7 Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh) ; and of all the following 


18 Metre: Sloka (Anvshtvbb). | Verses, 
19 Metre: Svagata. 


424 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L.20. ai fa.........fanjaadgeaq | coupes afaa ara- 
aq frre afadt aa fa- 

21. fetulfaJ-—U-i....... 8% atau |faq i faqa ata 
uraracer aa faaraiat | atant- 

22. aylatfa].......40-U—u (aeitatddartiaaracaafad | are 
28. arat U — 1 6. [et "ave, signi iemkeMohre LU Ud ang eater at a (fa) 
friaafad u alee? aarfarererent H- 

24. ztfearafati] .. . [at] zonafaite] . 2... v-U — 9 ae: fares 
gaaaragfaar | wezatfa falet]. . . [ate jatteraru a[aate] . . 

25. daar [ato] ..afaafaati emife .. 2... 2... UU - Ulan 
aay: uaa ate ufadiadestd aaa qaafa 2... UU UI 


| faa ager a[a] 
26... [alrarey:) awe [argat?] ama fa(f@eetT U-U- ..... 
(aeila: yore eeuredt: | Gaede M.-H... at 
fewareTa . 
27. . at efaugatafaaa: vcore amiga... oT... StOTe aT 
HAR AANA ESAT 2.2 ee ee ee ee WaeTanH . 
28. nslalatfafaee” feaa(@)ntinat | oufatient aa... araatfaar a 
HAG C200 GAM. x. eae erieta es we ee ae si 


XXXIV—MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM THE SEBA OF DIHLI. 
No. II. 


By Paut Horn, Pu.D., Strasspure. 


The following inscriptions are in continuation of, and in addition to, those contained 
in a previous paper, ante, pp. 1380 seq. I begin with FathAbAd, which was there 
represented by the inscription from Firédz Shah’s famous pillay.' 


FatHABAD. 


1. To the left of the mihrab of what is now an ‘Idgéh in the fort of FathabAd, is a 
light-coloured rectangular sandstone, with an inscription of ten lines, measuring 2’ 8” hy 


% In the prose passage, from here up to the end of line Mr. H. B. W. Garrick, in General Cunningham’s 
27, it is impossible to say exactly how many aksharas are | Archeological Survey Reports, vol. XXIII, p. 11, remarks 
broken away in each place. that Maulawi ZiyA uddin Khan has been successful in 

% Metre: Sloka (Anushtubh), deciphering the long inscription on the above-mentioned 

% Below this line some more akeharas have been roughly | monolith (see plate II there); but, so far as I know, the 
engraved ; but they are quite illegible in the impression. translation has not yet been published. 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM THE SUBA OF DIHLI. A25 


1’ 23", of which Mr. Garrick gives a good copy (Arch. Sur. India Rep. vol. XXIII 
plate iii) — 


[sic] Vyeay 5 [AU] satel ly mAar!l grasp!) AD) 

wr [I]o8 Ube hare ob Ua lead all) 

ue a e ai bay & sin Jas” | sic] At] ck a (Mand) syle fl jou) bile 

lel, pbs! al = Jo st os" yi) di pled alle Ke} 

vate LI aly pel Gell, Sul, abel pe pall irish UI Shite, 

[sic'] CRI ted 5 adhe ted ably lk (i slicks Guiles ater gjliall 

wr SR plny pre) clas] stall Bt) ALM sad fy} plajsiolew Gla [sic] ay adh 

dey he SUIS oe let MS AU he toe ted Gale) yell yb lin 


se 19S gtd [4] tye Ele csly w8yo nl sheyd)6 ae wt Ly] Grad 


“Tn the name,” efe. (Qordn, Shira lxxii, 18, 19). “Lhe prophet,—upon whom be _ 
peace,—says, ‘Ile who builds, e/c.’ This mosque was finished in the days of the reign 
of the great king, the exalted prince, the master of the necks of crowds of nations among 
the Indians, Turks, Arabs, dad Persians, who raisés the standard of holy strife and war, 
Muhammad tlumay dn, - bdadishah-i-Ghdzi,—May God Almighty perpetuate his 
kingdom [aud guide] his ship in the seas of His favour!—through the exertion of the 
auspicious dignitary, the cream of the accomplished among men, the issue of great 
Amirs, Amir Rustam Beg, son of his highness the pardoned and purified chosen Amir 
Muhammad ’Ali,—God Almighty. .......% Sel 6). ie ok ws Ae COREE 
2nd of the month Ramazan A. 945 (the 22nd January, 1539). The superintendent 
of the work (eas) the poor ’Abdul-Karim.” 

The verse at the end of the inscription cannot be fully deciphered. The whole has 
a striking resemblance to the inscription of Amir Muhammad’s mosque at Hisar 
(ante, p. 155). 

2, Into the outer wall of the mosque enclosure in the fort of Fathabad a 
rectangular sandstone is let containing a well-known invocation of ’Ali in Arabic, in 
four lines, size 1’ 22” by 62”— 


° : ° » 4 
pele Wee 0b atl] Goss! all pas 
SS St 3 Mie de’ its") 
Ii daa” y Gay eM 0 ta 
AEE geht Jel 


“In the name, efe. Invoke ’Ali, the manifestor of miracles; thou wilt find him 
31 


426 “wPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


for thy help in adversities. Every care and every sorrow will surely vanish through thy 
prophetship, O Muhammad, through thy saintliness, O Ali, O’Ali, O’Ali, O Ali!” 


HrsAr.? 


3. Near the Nagér-Gate, outside the town, is asandstone (measuring 5’ by 4”), on 
four sides covered with inscriptions. It belonged to the tomb of Shaikh Muhammad 
Chishti, but it isnow on a wrong grave, where it was placed a short time ago, on being 
dug up. The inscription, in one line, on the west upper side, runs— 

GI daw Gled yor aut § Gide oyas* gid op des”? prt LM Gilde ylabe oa) is 
iylaled, asa 

“The departure of this king of tho Shaikhs and the Saints, Shaikh Muhammad, 
son of Mahm{d, the Chishti,* (¢ook place) on the 9th Sha’ban, 892 (31st July, 1487).” 

Since the tomb of so highly revered a man as Shaikh Muhammad Chishti was may 


claim some interest, I give also the Arabic inscriptions of the lower west side and of the 
east face— 
asl) Gye pally By Sy Spall Soll yb Ge 48 Jat Ley Ye & 
Metre: Rajaz. 
* Ah! He that is occupied with his earthly lifeand the length of his hope (ze., his 
hoped life-time) deceives himself! Death comes unexpectedly, and the tomb is the coflin 
of his work.” 


sabe ayy Lo ali) Jy) ons il Mall D pray cas aL ang 
Jal, ea vs 9 Une rl SSI, pes Lai Lil J) 


“Tn the name, efc., there is no God but, e/c. Ts not the worid verrly like the 
station of a camel-rider? Will he sleep in the evening when he is to depart in the 
morning ?” 

4. Outside the Nagdr-Gate is also the enclosure known as Shaikh J unaid’s tomb. 
The stone on the west contains the name of the builder twice, who, in spite of the omis- 
sion of any title, may nevertheless be identical with the Shaikh named, from his also being 


2 This formula is very popular for amulets all over the East. It is engraved on bracelets just'as on swords (see Proceed. 
ings As. S. Beng. for November 1872, p. 169). Mr. Blochmann gives it in his Ain-i Akbari Translation, p- 507, with an 
unmetrigal alteration in the second line. But see also Proceedings As. 8S. Beng. (loc. cit.) 

5 Some of the following inscriptions were published by Blochmann, in Proceedings As. 8. Beng. for ara 1877, 
pp. 94 seg. 

4 The most extensive essay on the whole branch of the Chishti Saints (see ante, p. 145)is in the Sawd¢?’ 
ul-anwér, a copy of which work is in India Office library in London. The contents of this large volume (481 pages of 17 lines 
each) have been copiously described by Prof. ©. H. Ethé in his Catalogue of the Persian Manuscripts of the India Office 
Collection (No. 654), for access to the proof sheets of which I am indebted to the kindness of Dr. R. Rost. It is known that 
biographies of single Chishtis are likewise given in other works and that there are writings treating of single members as the 
Matlib uttdlibin, which is restricted to the life and deeds of Nizdm uddin Auliyd. Compared with such books those of 
the princess Jahanarai about Shaikh Mu’in uddin and of her brother Daré Shukéh (Safinat ul-auliyd) ore very dilettante, 
I have perused the whole of the first and looked over the latter in the manuscripts at the British Museum. This is not the 
place to speak at large of the value of the literary products of the two princely authors, but I may mention that I was. 
disappointed with them, and the most by Dara Shuk6h’s, which pretends to be more serious than J ahanarai’s unassuming 
nook. They do not furnish us with original information of importance concerning the Chishtis, as one weuid be disposed to 
expect, considering the close relation of both with Shaikh Mu’in uddin. 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM THE SUBA OF DIHLI. 4927 


born at Ajédhan,— the name for Dipalpir,— too striking an accord.’ But then the 
date of the latter’s death, as given in the Khazinat ul-asfiyé, which Blochmann has 
extracted, must be too early. The size of the two inscriptions is 7’ 6” by 7”, and 6’ by 
4%”, respectively. 


IS est Hin Al Bile aad cpaptres atu dha IM ants cy BS) hag) pos) ABN pnd 
“In the name, efc. On the first Rabi’ul-awwal, 927 (9th February, 1521). The 
builder of jt (tas) Junaid, son of Chandan.” 


“On the first Zi'l-Qa’da, 931 (20th August, 1525). Its builder (was) Junaid, son 
of Chandan, son of Mahmid, of Ajédhan.” ® 


There are some other inscriptions fromthe same Mausoleum, but of novalue. One, 
measuring 2’ 13" by 6”, contains, in two lines, the Bismilléh and the Kalima; two others 
from the north and west sides of the N.-W. pillar of the tomb, each measuring 1’ 1” 
square, bear Qordn, Stra cxii, adorned with flowers,’ 

5. Over the western arch inside a tomb, west of the road leading from HisAr 
to Dana Shér, outside the town half a mile from the Dihli-Gate, is an inscription in stucco; 
it measures 1’ 2” by 1’ 13”, and contains eight lines, but very much damaged— 


- ry 4 
@ 8. 6 e¢ 6} aha) ree) al} et 


too, yeh” S4e 0 
éilblLn 9 ikl wa ee 6 8 pled 


wp dilaty aye}, lel, 
ldsUIy yj! cyles 


wre se 2 oo 6 Tp oo oo 
wa) ale [?] pw 30 fas CCAR 0-3 Or 


ay plod Kyloeudy wryly rad)  e} dhs ee peer et ie 


‘In the auspicious time and reign of Humaytin (the hing, ete.)—May God perpetu- 
ate his kingdom and his rule, and elevate his condition and dignity !—this building of 
Waltt Khan.....,sonof Mir.....son of Sultan Malik Bég, was finished 
on the third [?] of month Ramzan, A. 948 (13th February, 1537).” 


Along the right-hand side, almost in the same line with the above, are the following 
words :— 


ob plaid [9] pul up yyie gat ploial [p] aru 065 Ia eany ar ery . . tévh ce seul 


6 Shaikh Farid uddin Mas’id was also born at Ajédban,—see W. Pertsch, Verzeichniss der persischen Handschriften 
der Kiniglichen Bibliothekzw Berlin, No. 590, p. 556. 
Mr. Ghulam Husain, who prepared the impressions of all these inscriptions with the same care as those of the former 
Panjab series, remarks that both have been published by Amin Chand in his Settlement Report, a work which is not to hand. 
In the neighbourhood of this Mausoleum also the pre-Mubammadan pillar stands which, according to Captain W 
Brown,—Journal of A. 8. Beng. vol. VU, (1838), p. 429,—“ has the appearance of having been partially worked by Feroz 8 
orders, and probably some inscription was cut upon it by his workmen, but of which there is now no trace owing to the peeling 
off of the exterior surface.” Of, Gen. Cunningham’s Archeological Survey Reports, vol. V, p. 140 et seq. ; 
12 


428 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


© 4. « 20,000 copper-tankas (1,000 rupees) was completed under the superin- 
tendence of Shaikh Munawwar, son of Qasim.” 

Owing to the bad condition of the stone all the words are not certain. 

€. The following two inscriptions come from the same place as No. 5. Their sizes 
are 3’ 13” by 1’ 9”, and 3’ by 1’ 6”, respectively, each containing seven lines. The tomb 
itself is in poor condition and greatly neglected, but the iaseriptions have been well 
preserved— 


* 4 

pale piled Soy yore dye 90 pazy!! weay) ab} eon? 

piled das® giltall, wlualee Olly gh) glut] 5 Biel 

bh 805 Gray Gray ale ey coyboe gy) ais AVES cojé slob 

JS tl dt pled loans, etayl ol 

wily cold Sle? 6)» he wth 

Craw) ahie Gy slaw bG 50 wb i 5 
“In the propitious time and angust reign of the king of India and Khorasin, who 
raises the banners of holy strife and war, Muhammad Humaytin, Badishah-i Ghazt,— 
May (God) perpetuate his kbalifate!—this building was completed in the month Rajab— 
May its dignity be magnified!—of the year 944 (began the 4ih December, 1587). And 
this cupola (was made) for the sake of Tardi Kuchuk, son of Mir Barantagq, the 


Moghul; and this youth attained martyrdom in the army of Gujarat. The cost was 
15,000 copper-tankas (750 rupees).” 


apied elyty uote Are? ASE) casz!l po 
csjestl 5 olaale) OL) aly Glue) 5 dill tab 
ale pati GIA TA oJ tol yilea ais* Quy 
Et ecele Slate el tlle 5 ctetity Cay) Be gf) 


wth dd che Ld pre up das pile pus 
eesly coolest olst ed 59 lye 


BA Gd slew KK slhd sojlo alyre 


“In the propitious time and august reign of the king of India and KhorAs4n, who 
raises the banners of holy strife and war, Tahir? uddin Muhammad Humayin, 
Badishih-t Ghdzi,—May (God) perpetuate his khalifate!—this building was completed 
during the month Ramazan of the year 944 (began the Ist February, 1538). It was 
made for the sake of Mir ’Ashiq Muhammad, son of Mir Shah ’Ali,® and this 


youth attained martyrdom in the army of Gujarat. The cost was 12,000 copper-tankas 
(600 rupees).”” 


* Mr. Blochmann has wrongly read HumAytin’s common kunya Nasty 7 i 
5 ya Nasix uddin; but here Tah: din hi 
Mirada ; ere Tahir uddin has been engray ed. 


® Here ’Alaéd has been engraved, but this is no name. 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM THE SUBA OF DIHLI. 429 


Both youths probably served i in the Gujarat war that ended with Bahadur Shah’s 
victory, A.H. 942. Then, or perhaps in Muhammad Zama4n Mirz4’s attempt to over- 
power the country, their death may have occurred, and they afterwards founda tomb at 
home, Gujarat being lost to Humaytin. 

7. Over the mihrab of an ’ Idgéh at Dana Sher, one mile south of Hisar on the old 
Hansi road, is an inscription of four lines in stucco, measuring 1’ 9” by 42”. It is in 
very bad condition, being exposed to wind and weather. I try to read it thus— 


lees leet hele eee Gla Oy? op! El. ons e 19] SEOs 
alot age jo ate o etre ee ino entices 
wee ee ab ls 66. . ate ute! [sic] ep gud du [blu 


gly [Le] toile elieo8 Gk ecco be we ne oe ° 


“This mosqueof . . . Bég, son of Pildd Sarvini . . . son of Idris 
Sarvani . . . the high Masnad of the Daulatkhana, was finished in the reign of 
Shér Shah, the king, in the year 947 (began the 8th May, 1540) . . . The cost 
wasi2,000 . . .” 

With Messrs. Ghulam Husain and the late E. Rehatsek (who made rough 
versions of many of these epigraphs) I have supposed that we have here a barbarous 
construction, contrary to the Arabic usage, the date beginning with the hundreds 
instead of the units. g would then be for &le ‘hundred’, scarcely for e«; so I 
read the monarch’s name as Shér Shah, which is possible. And surely, if e were only 
a blunder, perhaps of the stone-cutter, a reiterated dés’, only with a shortening of the 
long stroke of the sim, and the date in this case were 749, one could not read the 
king’s name as Muhammad, as would then be necessary, or the word after sab’ as mi’at. 
Besides, there are some words, especially ‘in masjid’, that I cannot warrant as certain,’” 


Hans? 

Mr. H. B. W. Garrick (uf sup., pp. 15, 16) gives a list of the principal inscriptions 
found at Hansi. Some of them have already been published by Blochmann, that of the 
Dini mosque, also ante, p. 159. There are several others perhaps also deserving notice 
that are not mentioned in Mr. Garrick’s list; but I miss also’ some inscriptions of his 
in Mr. Rodgers’s collection." 

Because Hansi was an important place in the times of the early Pathan Sultans, it is 
not surprising that numerozs old inscriptions of that dynasty are found there. If we do 


In the Ma’dthir ul-Umard, vol. 1, p. 583, it is mentioned by the way that the ddrdghagi of the 
daulatkhéna was bestowed only upon trustworthy men. The author of the Térikh-i Shérshahi, Abbas Khan, son of Shaikh 
? Ali, was also a Sarwani, an Afghan tribe tracing its lineage to the mythic Batan (see Ain-i Akbari, I, 91), likewise Azam 
Humaytin (who lived in Sult4n Ibrahim Lédt’s time, of. Babar's Memoirs, pp. 347, 392; Akbarnéma, vol. 1, p. 108) and there- 
fore also his son Fath Khan Khanjahan (Bébar's Memoirs, pp. 390, 392, Akbarndma, vol. I, pp. 103, 104), and grandson 
Mahmtid Khan (Bdbar’s Memoirs, p. 398, Akbarndma, vol. I, p. 104), or Bah&dur Khén, whose tomb Babar visited at 
Sdgandpar (Memoirs, p. 491), and others. For another Shér Sh&h inscription of the same year (at Sakit) see Proceedings of 
As. Soc. Beng. for May 1874, p. 105. 

» e.g. Nos. 1, 3,4, I leave it to the reader to correct Mrz. Garrick’s little mistakes eoncerning the single inscriptions 


and their readings. 


430 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


not take into account the Dihli inscriptions from the years 587 (E. Thomas, The Chro- 
nicles of the Pathim Kings of Dehli, p. 22 or Journal Asiatique, V™ série, vol, XVI 
(1860), p. 274) and of 592 (E. Thomas, Chronicles, p. 24, and Jour. Asiat., p. 240), we 
have here the oldest dated Muhammadan one in India, viz. of 593 (of the same year is also 
a Dihlt inscription,—see Jour. Asiat. u.s.p. 240). Shaikh Ni’mat Ulah’s tomb has 
no original inscription relating to this pious man, and is a remnant of even an older period 
for the saint in 559 A.H. became a martyr in Sult4n Shihab uddin Ghéri’s attack upon 
the fort of HAnst (see Mr. Garrick’s Report, p. 13). Not a few inscriptions evidently 
are also very old, but they bear no dates. bs 

8. The yectangular sandstone, with the following inscription of one line, measuring 
411” by 6”, serves now as a lintel to the doorway of the third enclosure of Shaikh Ni mat 
Ullah’s tomb. Formerly it belonged to a mosque built by ’A1i, son of Isfandiyar; it 
is of the 5th year of Muhammad ibn Sam’s reign :— 


Bylo Cpmody uptronly Geld dw gesIod phe 3 jbaidul op dle aia asda bay pe) 


** This mosque was ordered to be built by the slave (of God) Ali, son of Isfandiyar 
on the 10th Zil Hijja, 593 (24th October, 1197).” 

9. The masjid walls of the second enclosure of Shaikh Ni’mat U114h’s tomb 
contain also other inscriptions that originally had nothing to do with it. Into the 
outer western wall a rectangular light-coloured sandstone has been built horizontally, 
bearing one line (size 3’ by 1’), and mentioning the monarch’s name under whose rule 
the inscription falls. Originally it was the jamb of a door. It is frightfully decayed, 
but the following is quite legible :— 


ww en pthtpell nel old ple yp dos” pileall[ a1] 


“{ Abul) Muzayar Muhammad, son of Sam, the helper of the Khalif of the 
faithful.” 

The other jam) contains also one line (measuring 3’ 73” by 11”); the lintel has not 
been found :— 


~ 4 » ° & ~ - 
wee [BIS Np [0 aN] By Wit 3 free WU Gy ye etd) gent) AU) as 


‘*In the name of the merciful and compassionate God! Who builds a mosque in 
this world for God, God will build for him a castle in paradise...... ul 

Other inscriptions from Muhammad ibn Sam’s reign, besides the above-mentioned 
Dihli ones, have been published by E. Thomas in his Chronicles of the Pathdn Kings, 
pp. 24 (A.H. 594) and 25 (A.H. 596). 

Of no historical value are the inscriptions over the doorway inside gou by 11’), 
only a fragment, in large characters, containing two words, being a part of a king’s title 
Fb _S]3; over the northern window in the outer wall (2’ 5” by 82”), the first half of 
Ba li, verse 215—, and in the northern inside wall (1’ 7” by 6’), a fragment, 
pre] WG ul yas (l=) ox!) (Qordn, Siya ix, verse 9). But there is no reference to the 
age of all. 

10. South-east: of the town, about 150 yards from the walls, is the tomb of the four 
Qutbs or Saints (cf. Mr. Garrick’s Report, p. 14, and plate vii). In the wall of the 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM THE SUBA OF DIHLI. 431 


enclosure is the following inscription, which originally belonged to the grave of some 
unnamed noble lady. It consists of two lines and measures 4’ 3” by 11’— 


Leela 5 Ld MUI ty Loyd I yi allel) nyinell pil eas 
Eloi cyiphe i} dw sda] d ye gols!l grb 03, [sic] utoayl eal & 


“Finished was the tomb of the veiled noble lady,—May Allah illumitate her tomb 
md may Allah pardon her in the garden of the asylum (Paradise)! O most merciful of 
the merciful! This took place on the 1st Zil Qa’da, 622 (4th November, 1225)” 

It is curious that the word qabr is used as feminine, of course only from its being 
occupied by a woman. The year 622 falls in the reign of Shams-uddin Altamsh, 
as does that of the following inscription, No. 11. 

Entering the courtyard of the tomb one mects an undated fragmentary inscription, 
which has found a place in the wall, facing south, its original position not being kaown. 
It is much decayed, and consists of two lines (1’ 1023” by 1/13”). A complement of it must 
be Mr. Garrick’s sixth one— 

De erty bes 
Oy) cgilebe Jas® opame fly 

“[Gijiani and to Firdaus Sultani. He was a slave of Mas’dd Mu- 
hammad of Isfahan.” 

In the wall of the mosque of the four Qu/ds is a fragmentary inscription of two lines, 
measuring 14” by 1’— 
ree Gt wus payee 


* By the grace of his highness Kam dl, son of..,...... os 


11. At the mosque of Bt Ali Bakhsh in the Moghulpara-Quarter of Hansi is 
a rectangular sandstone, measuring 2’ 6” by 6”, with two lines— 

Lethow! dos” Vp doa)! CHs24)) died) aso} tlec ldo 
Kladwy wis, eee) éhw Sd) ey) wraiiel) 9 

‘This building (és) the mosque of the feeble slave (ef God) Ahmad, son of 
Muhammad,of Asmand. Inthe middle of Rabi’ II, 623 (began the lst April, 1226). 

Mr. Biochmann remarks that Asmand is a small place near Samarqand. 

There are also two other inscriptions over the north and south arches of the 
same mosque, the first (1 3” by 73”) containing the Bismillah, with the Kalima, the 
second (1' by 7”) being a fragment. 

12. Half a mile to the west of the town, in the fields, is an *Idgaéh and on the left 
of its central arch (mihrdb) is an old fragmentary inscription of two lines ( measuring 
2°10” by 1’), very much damaged. It runs— 

® 4 
saile Ute Jz5] Uy, el ry wp! cw JG easy) wrap) LIT jem? 
ww tbe oy) O02” [P] pabodnal wally iol pools 


“In the name, etc. Jesus, the son of Mary, hassaid, ‘‘O God, our Lord, send down 
to us a table from heaven [ts be to us as a festival, etc. ],— Qordn, Sura v, verse 114, 


432 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Because the inscription is so worn there may be doubts about the king’s name. 
I think it was Nasir uddin Mahmdd, second son of Altamsh of that name, who 
reigned A.H. 644-664, of whose time only one inscription has yet been published, viz. 
by Blochmann in the Jour. As. Soc. B., vol. XLII, p. 348, note [ A.H. 652, at Aligarh]. 
In spite of the want of any date we are scarcely allowed to think of his elder brother, 
owing to Mr, Thomas’ remarks in his Pathdn Kings, p. 84. . 

In the central arch of the same ’Jdgdh another old inscription of two lines of 
Altamsh’s reign is said to be, size 2’ 92” by V’. | 

13. On a loose stone in the courtyard of Bti "Ali Bakhsh’s mosque is + 
fragment, (the right half not being found) of three lines, size 1’ 4” by 1’ 23” :— 


PERU Pes yes als 
Coys yo aile la tbls 


Bylaiony pled, eran dhe Aye? ow 6 og? coil Ghee op Jyhe 

“The king of the world Mu’izz uddunyéa,...,......the Sultan,—May (God) 
perpetuate his reign !—in the time of.........Bah11, son of Mihr4 (?) Bég, Alani... 
Muharram, 687 (began the 6th February, 1288).”’ 

The name of the grandee is not certain. For other inscriptions of Kaiqobad see 
Ep. Ind., vol. TI, p. 158, and note 42. 

14. About a quarter of a mile north of tbe fort of Hansi is the tomb of Walayat 
Shah Sulian Shahid. Here are two inscriptions of no value; one mentioning the 
date 718, measuring 1’ 103° by 1’ 23”, in three lines, the other measuring 1/102’ by 52’, 
in one line, being a portion of Qordn, Sura ii, verse 256. 

15. At the mosque of the Quibs (see No. 10) a rectangular sandstone bears eight 
lines in coarse and indistinct characters; size 3’ 8” by 11’ :-- 


bU SLAs 
S&S clipe M6 UI let athe saiy Jt all) gait 
teal Sapa ape AU ud pills! pad paldall alu sifted yay Gaye jf 
say AF coll tall @ Al) GH Slam aed phe oti) abs bly 50 
ibe lala Saiy wlew la eds 50 adil slU)yyis alyhe dist} 
ested W1dG jL3 as? 0 iS BUS wl) ds 3) spe aU) we yy pi 
ee eg ee GBB CIE GS ody Gyre Crt ai oly [PY it 


[PJ S22 DPD tel Gain B1bied, prensa dhe 5 ray rey hee pyiptially peels} 


“The Kingdom belongs to God ! ll 


‘ By Almighty God’s grace, the slave of the glorious court, Ab& Bakr by name 
Jalwan},” one of the disciples of the guiding spiritual chief, the king of Shaikhs, Shaikh 
2 Jn Bébar’s Memoirs occur also Jalwdnis, by name Isina’il (pp. 338, 486, 487) and Mubarak Kha 


RAi Husain, a partisan of Shér Khan (vide Akbarndma, vol. I, p. 164), and others. 
line) instead of 2b4z, as has been engraved on the stone. 


n (p. 491), or 
I have read fndn (first word of the 7th 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM THE SUBA OF DIHLI. 433 


Abu’! Fath,—May God sanctify his dear secret !—has laid the foundation of this mosque 
at the feet of the pole of the poles of the world, Shaikh Jamdl ul-hagg washshar’ waddtn 
(i.e. Shaikh Jam4l uddin),—May lis grave be fragrant! May (God) make 
Paradise his mansion, and may God illuminate his resting-place !—at the time when the 
king of Shaikhs, Shaikh Fartd,—May God lengthen his life !—ascended to the throne 
of the spiritual rule. Every one who prays in this mosque should remember these men 
in his prayer. 

“The writer of the words (wae) Raz& Qutb, the representative of the judge of 
Hansi. . . On the 25th Rajab,—May its power increase |—896 (3rd January, 149 1). 
The stone-cutter (was) Amin(?) Bir Lal of Nagér.” 


In the first line, to the left of the words “ The kingdom belongs to God,” in smaller 
characters, the name of the reigning king is:given—: 


Haba, Seal) Wd linkin LE Syst? yy? old joie EP] ube} ately ae yo 


“In the time of ‘the king of the age, Sikandar Sh4h, son df Buhl] Shéh, the 
king,—May God perpetuate his kingdom and his rule !” 

16. In the north inner wail of the Barsi gate in Hansi is a rectangular sand- 
stone, measuring 1’ 5” by 1’ 1”, on which are five lines— 


CGhe ptam pam ease Wg se iS Bho ert! Colee shhy 

prballysd cypblin) salu dye 50 Eilerrwy id) dh mdse af 

Ah dpee He dime Jae 70) dita ale sD) ALA taba alt pant) 

SOS yr SS Patel 9 dom? [5] ert cob dull jo, JUS te%o}] 
Cops de pad salpitd SB Ralamandy uytytnty lad daw aba 6d ryt ps tt oe eee. 


“The building of the edifice of this solid, high gate, together with the repairs of 
the strong upper fort, dated 702 A.H. (began 26th August, 1302), (took place) in the 
time of the king of kings, dbu’l Muzaffar Ibrahim Shah, the king,—May God 
perpetuate his kingdom and his reign!—and during the governorship of the high 
Masnad Hamid Khan, son of Amanat Khan KamAl and during the shigdéri of 
Khwaja Shaikh Muhammad, and by order of Muwakkal, sonof Kam4liy., 
on the 5th Zi’l Qa’da, 928 (26th September, 1522). The writer (was) Khanzada 
Nasr, the Mufti of Hansi.” 

Hamid Khan is known to have been governor of His4r Firdza; he was defeated 
in battle by Prince Humfyin A.H. 932 (Akbarndma, vol. I, p. 94, and Babar’s 


3 Aswe learn from an inscription on the same gate, to the left of the entrance, published by Blochmann in the 
Proceedings of As. Soc. B., for May 1877, p. 122, and mentioned by Mr. Garrick (No. 6), the correct year of the first 
fortification of Hansi was 703, not 702. The repairing of the fort which most probably Muhammad Shak had intended 
be an outpost against the Moghul, was useless against their final invasion under Akbar. 


3K 


434 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Memoirs, p. 389, where he is styled Hamida Khan Khassa Khaili, shigdér of Hisar 
Firédza). 

The following inscription refers also to Muhammad Shah’s fortification of the place.” 
Originally it consisted of three parts that are now scattered. The larger portion, given 
here, is at present doing duty as the headstone of a grave near the Husain Gate; a smaller 
one has been let into the brick wall of a well, near the same gate, and is fast being 
destroyed. The inscription, in heavy characters, is a very fine one, and ought to be 
preserved. Two lines, size 3’ 8” by 1’ 6’— 


[ qAblled) Mlb] see 50 oti Slyey ghee yee yl wylee sis 


[yt Jad) ald dae” pabollor} reojtivw piled lotbny ts aa 


“The building of the edifice of this strong fort and solid gate (2cas) in the time of 
(the king of kings) celebrated like Jamshéd, of high dignity like Solomon, the Alexander 
of the period, Abul Muzafiar Muhammad Shah, the king......”* 

17. Inside of the mihrabd of the mosque of the Makhdaim Sahib Ashraf in the 
Weavers’ Quarter of Hansi, isa very old inscription in square Kufic characters that 
must be of the first Path4n period. It measures 1’ 1” by 9” and consists of the 
Kalima only. Over the outer gateway of the enclosure of the same mosque is found 
a poor inscription of three lines (93” by 6”), giving the date, “‘ Month Safar 989,” (began 
7th Mareh, 1581). The old mosque therefore was repaired in Akbar’s time. 

18. Outside the stables of Haidar Bég, high up in a wall is a rectangular sandstone, 
bearing an inscription of nine lines (size 1’ 93” by 1’ 2”). It is frightfully worn and 
can be deciphered only with the greatest difficulty. But the following is certain :— 

eroded) pale L505 Bye 50 
Kale dos” uiallioted pilbeltys 


4 Perhaps also to the Barsi Gate (Blochmann No. 3, Garrick No. 6). 

%© Other inscriptions of *Alé uddin Muhammad Shdh’s reign (A.H. 695-715) have been published in General 
Cunningham’s Archaeological Survey Reports, vol. XX, p. 76 (A.H. 705, at Bayana), by E. Thomas, Chronicles of the 
Pathdn Kings, p. 173 (A.H. 710, at Dibli), and by Blochmann, Proceedings of As. Soe. B,, for August 1873, p. 156 
‘A.H. 711, at Rapri), (also No. 22 below). I would here call attention to a work that may be very important for the: history 
of another monarch of the Khilji tribe, vz. of Mahmad Shab I. of Malwa.. The Royal Library at Berlin possesses a MS 
that seems to be unique; at least I have found no second copy in the accessible catalogues of manuscripts, and the late Mr. BE. 
Rehatsek did not know of one elsewhere. Its title is Ma’ dthir-« Mahmiidshaht wa siyar-i khildfat-pandhé, written athe 
lifetime of Mahmiid hah I, of Malwa, as the author *Ali Jon Mahmdad ul-Rirm4ni states, by Mahmidd’s own order 
The writer shows himself well acquainted with many private adventures of his sovereign, especially with his dreams before the 
occupation of the throne, and he describes fully these inviting divine messages as justifying the rebellion of the subject against 
his former master. Although partly composed in a very bombastic style, it would still be worth publishing, all the cae as it 
isa proof of the taste then reigning at the court of Malwa. Mahmdd is related to have been always a Caen of learned 
men. It is stated in this work that for the engraving of the inscriptions on the splendid Madrasa BAm-i Bihisht, built b 
Shah Mahmid A.H. 845 in his capital, he employed Persian artists because of their higher dexterity, and these a ; lied ho 
thulth and muhaggag kinds of writing (Fol. 89). This may bea hint in cases where nothing is related concerning the Sine 
of the stone-cutters. It is remarkable how many of the ‘modern’ Indian caligraphists mentioned in the 34th cha: ter 
the first book of the Ain-¢ Akbart (of. also Mr. Blochmann’s translation, p. 100, e¢-seg. and notes) were strangers es eth 
and only afterwards settled in India, The Kufic style that has flourished in Arabia, Egypt and Spain has eed onl 
some scanty flowers in India, but this is easily explained by the later date of Islam in India, the Kufic period then sia 


having passed. Some remarks about the caligraphy of the inecriptions are to be found in the Jour, of 4s. 8. B., vol XL 
p-257-8, aud in Ravenshaw’s Gaur. aoe ” , 


MUHAMMADAN INSCRIPTIONS FROM THE SUBA OF DIHLI. 435 


ceild Mol hye lb 0 Is 
4 

billable y acle sU} ala 

cee oo Om Uj tle oe we 


eo @ 8 e «-6e jE AL st Sed eX) 


ed aac lt aS 

“By the favour of . . . in the time and reign of the king of kings, 4u’l Mu- 
gaffar Shihéb uddin Muhammad, second lord of the conjunction, ShAhjahan, 
Badishéhi Ghazi—May God perpetuate his kingdom and his rule! . . .of this well 
for women . . . onthe 7th of the honoured month Sha’ban in the year 1057 (7th 
September, 1647),” 

The words chéh-i zandn—* well for women,” seem to be certain, so that there can be no 
uncertainty about the establishment the inscription refersto. In the fourth chapter of the 
third book of the Ain-i Akbari, vol. I, p. 284, it is stated amongst the duties of 
the Kotwdl, to reserve separate ferries and wells for men and women, 

19. On the east wallof the enclosure of a tomb in the court-yard of Makhdim 
Séhib Ashraf’s mosque is an inscription, measuring 1’ 2” by 83”, in a very bad con- 
dition ; only the date —#)) , ited erw diw yo SA.H. 1087’ (began the 16th March, 1676) and 
‘the name of the architect 2.1 r0 we ‘by the effort of the architect Sharif’ are 
legible. The reigning monarch was Aurangzéb Alamgir. 

20. There are also some fragments of inscriptions, found at H4nsi, that for want ot 
any characteristic indications, cannot be ascribed to a certain epoch, e.g. a portion of the 
so-called throne-verse (Qordn, Sura ii, 256) engraved ona sandstone that has found a 
place above the outer doorway of the courtyard of the mosque, a little west of the fort, or 
a part of the well-known hadith about the building of mosques, on the well in the 
Dak Bangla compound (size 8” by 20”, ore line). 


BHATINDA, 

21. Bhatinda, the Bhatti’s city, according to the very probable etymology of Mr. 
Garrick, p. 5, has always had a strong fort.’ There is preserved a large cannon of 
Aurangzéb’s time bearing two inscriptions :— 

tel) 52 
Sas” pill =* pallyal age yo 
ys pe sole yj jo! 
52 Sy} yh gjle aliioty 
eye herp OUR Nir Bee BA rae = 
; Ue eS pene ee 
rye © re ce yd doles 
I, Sle 


16 Bhatinda is mentioned in the 4in-i Akbari amongst others as a place where Akbar often hunted leopards vol, I * 
207, and near which camels were numerous, vol. I, p. 146. 


3°K 2 


436 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


** He (God) is the conqueror! In the time of Abw'l Zafar Muhyi’ddin Muham- 
mad Aurangzéb Bahddur ‘Alamgir, Béddishéh-i Ghazt, the Aurangshéh- 
cannon was set up in A.H. 1078 (began the 16th August, 1662). By the efforts of the 
devoted and sincere subject Mu’tamid Khan, in the 5th year of the blessed reign.” 


cst |e plo} eie oe yo 
a 
JS oie WIS sal 50 
“ During the office of Mathurdd4s Dild4r4mji......... the cannon has been 
placed in the fort of Gw4liar.” 
The cannon, consequently, was placed at first at Gwaliar, where Mu’tamid Khan was 
commandant from the 24th Jumadi I, 1071.” Afterwards it was brought to Bhatinda. 
Inscriptions from other cannons have been published by Major St. G. D. Showers, — 
Sh&hjahan’s gun Jahdnkushé by name, see Jour. As. Soc. B., vol. XVI, (1847), p. 589,— 


and by Blochmann—a trophy gun formerly belonging to the Bengal Artillery, A.H. 
1186 (began 4th April, 1772),—see Proc, As. Soc. B., for November 1872, p. 169."* 


RourTaxK.”” 


22. Over the mihrad of the Adina mosque in the town of Rohtak are two 
lines, size 4’ 6” by 1’ 2”; the letters partly are very much damaged :— 


usta[_ete oo ce oleae sd, oo 0 (gtes* ee 0 SIA 50 lop pas Cassy 
tol Dalste oy hee tm Gal 2, athe aU ala tala) sl doe” paballys) Le? nels 
Oy) Spe? j] Ute daria Jlu Glas, ale ae ee O23 Wyle 
Through the graceol the sublime Gods.7 sce: sacsngeacaeectaes soo sveed. ssaem eam eevesaces 
Alé uddunyd waddin,......... of the kings of the world,........ Abul Muzaffar Muham- 
mad Sh4h, the king,—May God perpetuate his kingdom !—has deigned to build this 


mosque of the true believers and...... place of the people of the faith. It was on the 
lst Ramazan A.H. 708 (12th February, 1309).” 


23. Over the outer archway of a small mosque in the fort of Rohtak, nearthe Dihli 


Gate of the town is a rectangular sandstone, with an inscription of two lines, size 3’ 02” by 
8)”, the right end of which is missing :— 


abe! ald Glas ably Gls} ysiGe optlly LW GLE Gable) Glebe _pjlé aldol 
Dre 9 Cemby daa yy flu iy ne lade Sire abe fe ithe le dos” 6ls[4] 


- “(In the time) of the Baddishah-i Ghazi, the king of kings, Ghiyéth uddunyd wad- 
din, the Alexander of the period, Abu’! Muzaffar Tughlugq Shah (this mosque has been 


7 See the particulars concerning this officer given by Blochmann from the Ma’dthér-< * Alamgtrt in the Proceed- 
ings of As. Soc. Beng. for Augast 1874, p. 179. 

18 J have collected considerable materials respecting the artillery of the Moghuls, for an essay on their army and warfare, 
now in the press (E. J. Brill, Leiden). 

9 See HE. I, vol. II, pp. 143 ef seg. 


SRIDHARA’S DEVAPATTANA PRASASTI. 437 


built, through the grace of the Lord, by) Muhammad’Ali SultAnt. On the first 
of the blessed month Ramazén,—May its blessings be general !—A, 724 (22nd August, 
1324).” 

This inscription is the second as yet published of Tughluq Shah’s reign (see Bloch- 
mann, Proc. As. Soc. B., for August 1878, p. 157; A.H. 722, at Mah6ba). 

Perhaps the mosque was repaired in Babar’s time; there is at least an inscription 
over the central archway (measuring 1’ 10” by 1’ 1”) outside, that seems to mention 
such a fact, but it is too much injured to allow a decisive judgment. The first line is 
nearly altogether gone, also the beginning of the second and the whole third of the line 
are illegible ; almost all dots are missing. 


eet » lay weal BUN] jean 
skbe AU) MA pile alto lb des” Ql rgb pdm . 0. oder. ee ede ww, 
RBar cn erasers sre theR od ch oon es eee 0.0 Gh) 6 6) 6 6 6 6 8 ow ais 


“This mosque............in the time Of........000. His Majesty Zahir uddin Muham- 
mad Babar, Bddishéh-i Ghai... .........00. RamMazan......93-” 


The date, of course, must be between 932 and 937. 


XXXV.—SRIDHARA’S DEVAPATTANA PRASASTI. 


By Dr. G. BUHLER AND VAJESHANKAR G. OzHA. 


The subjoined inscription is the same as that noticed by Colonel Tod in his Travels 
in Western India, p. 513 f. and by Mr. Postans in the Journal Bo. Br. Roy. As. Soc., 
vol. II, p. 16f. According to both these authors it was found at Devapattana or 
Somnathpatan near Veraval on a pillar near the Qazi’s house. At present the slab on 
which it is incised is built into the wall of the fort, to the right of the great gate 
of the town. Both Colonel Tod and Mr. Postans give what is said to be a translation 
of the document, prepared, “with the assistance of a learned Jain priest,” by Mr. 
Wathen, according to an eye-copy made by Ramdatt Krishnadatt Purani. Mr. Wathen’s 
translation teems with the most extraordinary statements regarding the Chaulukya 
kings of Anhilvad, which, however, fcrtunately have received little attention. The 
present edition has been prepared according toarubbing by the late Pandit Girja- 

shankar Samalji, which Mr. V. G. Ozha forwarded for publication to the first-named 
| editor, togetber with a transcript,’ a Gujarati translation and some explanatory notes in 
the same language. 


The slab measures according to the rubbing 30 inches in breadth and 27.in length, 
a space of 5 inches having been left blank at the lower end. At the upper left-hand 
corner a piece has been broken off. To the right considerable portions of a good many 


1 This transcript seems to have been done according to the original on the stone, as it contains much that is not Tead- 
able in the rubbing. All this, as well as a number of misreadings, has been given in the footnotes to the edition with the 
signature V. G. O—[G. B.] 


438 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


lines have been half or entirely effaced,? the injured spots becoming larger and larger 
towards the end of the inscription. 

The workmanship is good. In the first line some of the anusvdras have been made 
highly ornamental, being surrounded by three semi-circles, to the uppermost of which a 
stroke resembling a mdtrd is attached. At the end there are two signs of good omen, ° 
the second of which is a Svastika. The name of the first is not known to me. It con- 
sists of an oblong with two small circles at the top and one in the centre and a triangle 
attached below. ‘The characters are ordinary Devanagari of the 13th century. It 
must be noted that va does duty for ba and va, and that the groups like jy, éiva, ddya 
are invariably spelt jy, tva, and dya. In verse 45 we have the curious word Gdrjardtrah 
corresponding to the modern Gujardt. In my opinion it has been coined out of the 
latter just like Suratrdna out of Sultan and Garjanaka out of Ghaznav. Gujarat 
itself is probably a hybrid formation, the Arabic collective affix dt, being added to the 
name of the Gurjara or Gujar clan. 

The contents of the inscription, which, with the exception of the first and last words, is 
throughout metrical, are as follows :— 


(1) A mazgala, verses 1-8, the first two being addressed to Siva, identified with the 
supreme Brahma. 

(2) A eulogy of the temple and town of Somanatha, which the Moon founded in 
order to eseape from the intolerable disease of consumption, verses 4-5. 

(3) A eulogy of certain members of the Vastrakula race and of the Chaulukya 
kings of Anhilvad, verses 6-25, 

(4) A eulogy of Sridhara, the representative of the Vastrakula family in Vikrama 
Samvat 1273, who built several temples at Devapattana, verses 26-51. 

(5) A eulogy of an ascetic, Vimalasiva (?), who sccms to have been the spiritual 
head of the Saivas or priest of the temple, verses 52-57. 

(6) A notice of the author of the poem, whose name is lost, a prayer for the 
duration of the new temples and a notice of their architect (name lost) verses 58-60 
and the date. 

The eulogy of the Chaulukya kings teaches us nothing new. They are all there 
from Milaraja I. to Bhimadeva II. with the exception of Bhimadeva I., whose name 
has been lost by a break in the first Pada of verse 16. Their description is almost en- 
tirely conventional. The only historical fact mentioned (verse 28) is that Bhimadeva IT. 
built a Somesvaramandapa, or a hall connected with the temple of Siva, which bore the 
name Meghadhvani. The description of the Vastrakula family possesses greater 
interest. Verse 7 informs us that its Vedic gétra was that of Sandil ya, and that its home 
was Nagara, #.e. Vadnagar in northern Gujarat. To this race belonged Uy4bhatta 
(verses 7-8) a pious astrologer, through whose benedictions king Mila, 7. e - Milaraja, 
I., enjoyed, untroubled by foes, for a long time his kingdom, which might raise envy in 
Indra’s breast. Possibly this may mean that Uyabhatta was Milaraja’s Joshi or 
court-astrologer. This man had three sons, Madhava, Lila and Bhabha, whom the 
king charged with the supervision of his charities and commissioned to look after the 
digging of square and round wells and tanks as well as after the erection of houses of 


? Those letters, which are very faint or doubtful, have been enclosed between brackets.—[G. B.] 


_ SRIDHARA’S DEVAPATTANA PRASASTI. 439 


refuge, colleges, temples and alms-houses, gilt flagstaffs, arches, markets, towns, villages, 
drinking-fountains and halls (verses 9-10). King Chamunda continued to show them 
favour and bestowed “ the village of Kanhegvara on the great councillor (mahadmantrin) 
Madhava,” “his father’s friend” (verse 12). Theline of the Vastrakulas was continued 
further through the offspring of UyAbhatta’s second son, Lila. The latter had ason, 
called Bhabha oralso Lila(?) (verse 24), who was a friend of King Bhimadeva I. 
Bhabha-Ltila begat Sobha, “ the dear friend of him who was called J ayasimha” (verse 
25). His son Valla became an official (suchiva) under Kumérap4la (verse 25) and 
married Rohini. ‘She bore to him Sridhara, who caused his race to unfold just as 
the moon makes the night-lotuses open their blossoms” (verse 26), and ‘‘ was honoured 
among the officials of illustrious King Bhima,” i.e. of Bhimadeva II. (verse 27). The 
poet then goes on to lavish the most extravagant praises on this person with which are 
mixed a few apparently historical statements. Verse 40 inform us that Sridhara was 
much married and had three wives, Savitri, Lakshmi and Saubhagyadevi. Accord- 
ing to verse 42: “ He quickly made again stable by the power of his mantra (i.e. his 
political wisdom or charms) the country, that had been shaken by the multitude of the 
[impetuous | war elephants of Malva resembling a forest of dark Tamala trees, and he 
protected glorious Devapattana by his own power.” 

From this statement it would appear that he somehow assisted his sovereign to get 
over the troubles with King Arjunavarman, who some time before A.D. 1216 effected 
the bhanga of Gujarat, and that he was governor of Devapattana. The latter point 
seems to be hinted at also in the next following verse, where it is asserted that “ Sridhara 
the pride of the fort*® made like to much grass the host of heroic Hammira, that moved 
like the high rising waves of the ocean which on the dissolution of the world inundate the 
shores,—that smashed the hills by the impetus of the mere movement of its feet and 
that split in twain the circle of the earth.” 

“ Heroic Hammira”’ is probably one of the Musaiman generals, who more than once 
attacked and temporarily conquered Gujarat during Bhimadeva’s reign. How great. 
and important these successes in politics and war really were, must remain doubtful, as 
a little goes a long way with the composers of Prasastis. Verse 44 informs us that 
Sridhara built in Somnathpdtan two temples, at Rohinisvamin, sacred to Vishnu, in 
memory oi his mother and a temple of Siva, called after his father Valla. The remaining 
verses are so badly mutilated that it is impossible to speak with any certainty as to their 
contents. ‘The date Vikrama Samvat 1273, Vaisakha sudi 4 Friday corresponds, 
according to Professor Jacobi’s Tables (ante, volume i, p. 403, ff.) to Friday, April 22, 
A.D. 1216. 

TRANSCRIPT. 
L. 1. —— —: fava n 
waitaanteyRiaaa aTaTaaas | 
warae Ut aa TaRATTT ye [n*]’ 
fi ifs is f fiefencnt- 
faerarcata fayaatad aang | 
aq: Bay ear- 


3 Or, possibly, “ he whose pride was the fort.” Restere 1 #8: fxaTy: Metre, Anushtubh. 


440 


EFIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


—-—-—-— wm WIS 


weat faaru: facfa fafosraafaeg: ne [**] 


TUG Bical: eUT aeUA- 
Taeitquatfat: aafrat watacrarate: | 
at dapntaral aaa- 


— — warfearay- 


ciftaguerauraatreraritad a: fran a [n*]° 


aaa car qatcrergfaca arfa | 
wrraraTMaaeut gates qaaat us [ue] 
ieee ce 


aeaefagawaataarafaat ge 
aniathad gt safes arfea: afarat oy (nt. 
safe afeacqareatriverfad aati 
saree ferar- 

— wiatadt ard aatafeny: | 


ana friar ad gasrafe | 


UeterHaraaaLagweqayqer a aq ue [u*]? 
SHdT- 
— oF 2aqwa oe case TE aTaTaratg uo [n*]” 

ACTA Ar! TACT HT UTA 
yqafa aad freateg usd Farad | 
fava erorararufeagt qaauta: 
nya aqaana qaaraaratad is [ve]. 
waTwaTe= 

WAHT RTAATAHA ATTTAAAAT: | 
@ Bess GoRqaTS waa aMsaaaT: ye [ue] 
qTUTRUASITA EAASUTaT SAAT AAT 


Ao) 
AACA CUT TUYTATATTAS ATF | 
ait father ae TACT 
5 Metre Sikharint.— Restore SaMAITAGe—[V. G. 0.) ioe Metre, Sardilavikridita, Restore wrafearrey? bei 
°@y-faaat erroneously,—[V. G. 0.] Dele stop after qeTafe: : 
6 Metre, Sarddlavikridita.— Restore aqae aaa— 10 Metre, Salint —Restore 
, , — BAMA; —BIN(S 
[v. GO ae : FV G0: ? ( )& erroneously 
7 Metre, Upajatii—Read “atatife®, 4 Metre, Sikharint, 


* Metre, Prithvii—Restore YWAaTE”.—[V. G. 0.] | ™ Metre, Upajati.— Dele Avagraha in asttyaer: 


33 9. 


ree LU 


4 
99 13. 


SRIDHARA’S DEVAPATTANA PRASASTI, 


44) 


a: shaercrarferfr- 
eurafrranaaed Teyarastate: wee [ue] 
GMAY Kang wqiyaaaasa- 


fairs: uewafa: fafarciaty nara aon ee [*y* 
afaayia araatananrarartad qatar: 
vefefatraraiagrararstrsn § Aa 


Wren araat eet fasfigfiar- 


a Heat 
a: STATA Te ETH faeT nee (u* 
TAMAAqTA Sang: Tiyent: Shara: 
GMA AITIIAAsanrAaaz | 
THRITEt —f— auwad egrfaqer- 


aT 


faxial fret watgquaze qafate wan ee [u*]" 


AMAA SACTAATAT 
AAAI HARCATTUARTSMN | 
wal aa uff -- — — — — 


Sarre eg frrgats: es [0] 


Thee wwae- 
faaanisaatfvatiateman: | 
aefraagty MaaTAa AT 


wuufaucifaaad waty nu ey [n*]? 


at if zai a ite 


3 Metre, Sardalavikridita.—Read °acafa: .—{V. G. 0.] aka. — TFC 
44 Metre, Sarddlavikridita—Read oae’.—[V. G. 0.) | Wfwa? [V. G. 0.], which is against the metre. 


@ax® erroneously.—[V. G. 0.] 


15 Metre, Sarddlavikridita.— Heze erroneously.—[V. G. 


17 Metre, Vasantatilaks.—afcdfafuc fa etary fasafca 


8 Metre, Malini—Read waqarratat.—_tV. G. 0.] 
** Metre, Sragdhara.—V. G.O. reads after “xa (Fa -— 


—— — — denit —— Hi). Read “nata—[V. G. 


2 16 Metre Garddlavikridita. -aaaTgantes’.—[V.G. 0.]| 0.]. The same corrects erroneously aUtfrer°. 
Tifwu° to be read. 


3.1L 


449 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


J. 14, can frame fa: 
atfasrg afcarfa acini uv go [u*]” 
wmtiaa sata fafaysrad aaat ae- 
waseaufcanci frewat atta fa—fra: 1. 


rise aradtarwageaa: warararet: wee [n'y 
afaqiganqnad adtecaraatanata: 


MAMTA a, FACTS: Ways yan ee nu *]® 
ESM anit, ce at Seatac Ta—Ta- 
veawzeat- 
» 16. arealeiem: Ware: | 
arate wre Aaa ae 
safataraaaraertasy vara il ge [1 *]* 
arasanigfaa a af ya aaa — — | 
—----- aeuRISTAATT At | 
ANE AMATATATT RQ [RV*] 


TeaRMU TAMA TAU fam fra aE | 
mars TapeRTAT aaa Meier ears Vz [ * ]* 
[warasrat safa fadhe: pthiteea: afaagare: . 
z- 
» 18. aft Maacdsald dasa Aaafaaraaa: uv 2a [ *]” 
aaa: Tastee fate araTt 
waa qeitaaque faa [1 | 
ae a 
pa es ufaaaraargetdz: | 
we LO: ae fn*y- 
AMAARATASTASATT 
ahifirs: fragesatarare: | 
aaa: afaarrafams aa: 
alarajat efacare waren” yeaa fn #7” 


MR (ee ee ree er feat. 
qaifaam: aa- 
20 Metre, Vasantatilaka. —V. G.O. reads after afara- * Metre, Upajati. ; 
{awarnts qa — — —]; read qaTatat—[V. G. 0.] * Metre, Upajati.—The first Pada is very indistinct. 
Z a Meso aera! G. ve reads faeT(@t) = sae Vasantatilaka.—qere(@ larg wastage aa: 
Se Mane. Upajati. ; ae N rags ott eerie pb ll he es 


o i] 
* Metre, Malini—aeftyty arafaareara’.—[V. G.0.]] 8 Motre ¢ S 
os s d , first three Padas Vasantatilaka 
2 . ae Upajati—Ursagqay: | SAM aqTYITA’.— | the end of the inscription with the figure one tae 


SRIDHARA’S DEVAPATTANA PRASASTI. 443 


L. 20. | wafaareya: | 
AAAATSA Rancawanc- 
watan: wbacaradgar : xe [n *]” 


shiny. 
Sees ufafaatfrertaatar: 20 [n *]° 
MM UU taqaraza aaa [1] 


SywTArHaaaaes wfacaar wv re [y*]* 


pers ware warerata | 
[quart] area narafatan fra fatserdt 
aret wate eadecrat aeufa tat sn ef n* J” 
fasted —- -—-—-—--—--——--—--—-— 


waft We Fes FaR: GT go [ wy * |” 
arate a tas: waste a arkeafagq | 
saufa a arate — — —-— — — — [Naen® 
alatfadt faquloreunrada- 
gana: 

pode waatattHeaet VAT 
faaa FaUaeraauaca- 
faaicaanfartangqaer fate uae fu* 7% 
saragrearad [foxafe: wersrdgarad] 
[arfaet ] — — erad wena: witigaen- 

ued ae | 
wif: dca 5 wafafe wraaiarad 
qentet grad fatanat we: watarad ugg [ * J” 


faatei [zat] - - ---——------- 
Mile: WTeNaTs- 
Metre, Vaméasth4—wataaa efaat q Ofedt— 8 Metre, Sarddlavikridita —gethararger’.—[V. G. 0.) 
‘[V. G. 0.] % Metre, Vasantatilaka.—fardtadqegaa fare gey— 
% Metre, Vasantatilaka.—Jeatgyal ,—yaracuawe- | aaa aTATTA.—[V. G. 0.] 
waMAa-—LV. G. 0] * Metre, Anushtubh.—fezifa a wy saET—L[V. G. 0.) 
" Metre, Anushtubh, @dwerqeaarad (aarayfca * Metre, Vasantatilaké. 
@ua)—L[V. G. 0.) % Metre, Sarddlavikridita.—afeet staaraa.—[V, G.0.} 


3 LQ 


444 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


L. 26. aaaaufaeeeareyen: | 
Stee vias grafteraaediaiean- 
fra aa GT aaa afd dra — — — —[2ae* |” 
—------- at faalataretar 

Pee darafraraaem: [ * J 


aut fara afaaraara aati arar agutfa aa gy [0 * 
wat aa eta Gafcaufeaiegqua: 
oa 2 afewafarct atfa gaat [1 J 


GG Gat aafaayufaarcryt 
AAAGULAGATIUA GA VEAT | 


0; afaadtefiaza- 
wew afaarfafar a afcaqetad go [un * ]* 
feacaraaadaraiaaeneaint 
wetfelaera: — — — — — — — = qafal i *] 
UsiaeTYTT- 

» 30. mufaat fainaraate- 
fica anai ae afaaamdaagtarar na [u*]" 
wartiaraatar sefsfeataarfeal gat Tat] 
[snitaet adfarrfeaqeaa- 

Wool: tae: alfaaat 
Me wrParqutanaggnrecarawa- 
feqai xradat safe wfwofantee sere u ae [u*]” 
——-— — — wfaaaaitradarenn: [1*] 

» 32. Seararatmaraian weer waa: nv ge [n*]* 
afanardaiia: derfafea araz: [ 1 ] 
[at Wea waaiardaciog: uv 3e] 
— — — (araaeara |aaranra- 
aaraa- 

i BOs wacatiat ya a: [i*] 
lala: fact aufe daaea aeat 

‘7 Metre, Sragdhara.—axeat cqufatfaa: Sqau: ware 


-([V.G. 0); a: - = - Haart s frre— [V. G.0.] — fart —[V. G.0.] Read “arate. 


ae " Metre, Sarddlayikridita. —° ee 
® Metre, Upajiti.—(ueattutarm ) gaat (fe) fasitet a a rdlayikridita.—°arn (arcataaraeiqey ) 
arat’.—[V. G. 0.) Read faaa:— 42 Metre, Sragdhar&. 


°° Metre, Sikharini, 
. 43 
® Metre, Prithyi— — — aHe— — anit — — qaar Metre, Anushtubh (w8 Wary) eTfaat°—[V. G. 0.] 


SRIDHARA’S DEVAPATTANA PRASASTI. AA 


Sau AAAI AINA TAT sR (n*]* 
qaasefaaeanaaa aaa 


TEU: “fea quem: nee [i*]* 
Tg: arergatagehegurt Ufeutarfaareat 


ql ear fcaityg Aap a ee SS 


ax Ory ae vt. art —f- — — fi") 
(aa[e] sted elermé afrerere arat 
wrate: araturaaaatarsa: arta: — — — [sun*]” 
a ee rg WATTAT SA CATICT: 


» 97. fafrextqoarfaarhicita — —I- —- —- — — [ix] 
OO rg [useu*]* 


5s 38. MATA ats ATU; — — — [1*] 
sre eh ge pe ee ATSERACATATTTATAT: tt ve [1*]” 


cetera eel gr re ee ae [i*] 


ee OD T1 [ 1? ie 
ja ly cige aide eee Re gery 


40. wore = = [0% 
C5 ea Se Tem a ee Bae ee eed 


Rie a ee ee ee Ba: uae [a 


“ Metre, Vasantatilaka.—SaTtaTaaa.—[V. | a. 05 48 Metre, Sarddlavikridita wea’ ; a:—aitazqartacr 
Probably WuTe? to be read. Seafeatae a1 aa: ferci(<) | A¥TTG afmenTaTaTe — — [V. G. 0] 


erroneously—[V. G. 0.] Metre, Upajati—fesitrdtates® ; arear areax° 
45 Metre, Malini. su ib nhlbdh lblaps —[V. G0.) —[V. G. 0] 
46 Metre, Sragdhara.— 74#— — — — — — — — — 50 Metre, Anushtubh.—Beginning of first line, 8T@teuT; 
afan adfet a°—L[V. G. a —afq —— —— sare} | afrder F2%;—[V. G. 0] 
[V. G. 0.) ot Metre, Anushtubh. 
“7 Metre, Sragdharé.— AEG = Sos wee 9 Metre, Malini. fawat; waat: arra.—[V. G. 0.) 


— — eae ga°—LV. G. Ol; °xt: Om—[V. G. 0]; 58 Metre, Trishtubh—ugt yfasra aurszara ad faura 
arate afta: wace.—lv. G. 0.] ayer ant -[V.G. 0.] 


446 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


We AUT AHTTE- 
»» 42. alae 


OTL ai ee Lungu*]® 


» 48. deirfeyorfal far] 


, 4d atafeay: [1 * J 


45. | afi] 


sarc gen Magee ee ea og neck Cot a bd [uve nu *]* 


ara- 
» 46. feutefa-—-—-—-—--—-—--—-—--— 
Bs ah og wp Ee gu rie] 
[araatet fawcfafa] —-——---—-—— 
C5 Lay Ma ce ie tl ee Med oe) w [yo [ ut J” 
[xt] — — —— am oratet: 
» 47. afaargan: | 
[6 Cueon*] 
stafemagrdag (reg aa Sara gfe 8 wa [Fror]fcafatetirrreg nx 
aaa WET 
4 One, (Rfrarh), ufarufeadt a ¢ —(third 87 
mine Goh tam mi | an a Rana ge 
ot Metre; Ghcddlavikriditas see ctre, Upajati. At the end of pada 1 wHT—[V.G.0] 


efemft | = © Mandakranté fawcfa fawsafi Se (eae 
Sere anon on: cl panes raanfed avid caer. a Ustatraar — 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTS. 447 


XXXVI—ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTS ACCORDING TO THE GIRNAR, 
SHAHBAZGARHI, KALSi AND MANSEHRA VERSIONS. 


By G. Biuuer, Pu.D., LL.D., C.1.E. 


For the subjoined edition of the four full versions of the Rock Edicts the following 
materials have been used :— 

(1) Girndér, a new most excellent estampage, taken by Dr. Burgess during the 
working season 1887-1888, from which the accompanying facsimiles have been pre- 
pared. 

(2) Shahbdzgarht, a very fine estampage, taken by Dr. Burgess in 1886,! and a 
second estampage (B) of Edicts XIII—XIV, prepared by him in 1888. Both have been 
collated afresh with the text, published formerly. 

(3) Mansehra, an estampage, taken by Dr. Burgess in March 1887,” as well as a 
second one (B) prepared by Ghulam Husain in 1889. The latter has been collated for 
all those passages where its state promised good results. 

(4) Kdls¢, an excellent estampage, taken by Dr. Burgess in October 1887, ac- 
' cording to which the accompanying facsimile has been prepared. With respect to the 
latter it must be noted that the readings of the transcript occasionally, though rarely, 
differ. And it must be borne in mind that in difficult passages the reverse of the 
estampage has been consulted, where the letters appear in high relievo and where some- 
times those superficially damaged on the obverse are perfectly plain. In the most 
important cases the discrepancies between the facsimile and the transcript have been 
pointed out in the notes. 

The gain which the new collations yield for the texts is most considerable in the 
case of the Kalsi version. ‘There a good many alterations had to be made, which mostly 
however refer to very minute points, such as d-strokes, Anusvaras and the like. In some 
cases new word-forms have come out, but only very little that affects the sense. The 
new transcript gives for this version also the grouping of the words, indicating by short 
strokes between the words, those which have been written continuously by the scribe, and 
there are some cases where the grouping is important for the translation. Thus, in Edict 
V, 1.14, the position of the syllables desam-pi hdpesati, proves that we have to transliterate 
desam apt hdpayishyati, not desam apihdpayishyati. Unfortunately the grouping 
becomes irregular in the more negligently written lower portions of the inscription 
where in some lines vertical strokes, sometimes placed wrongly, have been used to show 
which words belong together. Next, the new estampage B has furnished some valuable 
new readings for the thirteenth Edict of Shahbazgarhi version. Quite a number of new 
letters, not recognisable in the earlier estampage or not included owing to the shortness 
of the sheets, are readable on Ghulam Husain’s squeeze B. of the Mansehra version. 
It is now perfectly certain that the Mansehra version is most closely related in its word- 


ing to that of Kalsi. 
1 This was used for my German article in the Zect- 2 Also used for my German articles in the Zeitsrh. der 


schrift der Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, vol,| D. M. Gesellschaft, vol. XLII, p. 274, and XLIV, p. 702ff. 
XLII, p. 1288, 


448 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


The new facsimiles of the Girndr and KAlsi versions, which give the letters in rather 
larger size than any others published before, are also very instructive for the palzeography 
of the 3rd century B.C. Everybody who pays even slight attention to the alphabet, 
will now see that the Southern Maurya characters certainly do show a good many vari- 
ous forms, and among them cursive ones or such as are usually considered marks of later 
periods. Thus, an initial @, consisting of two verticals and a crossbar or of a curved line 
open to the left, and a vertical on the right connected by a crossbar, occurs occasionally 
in the KAls? inscription (see, e.g., Ed. XIII. 2, 1. 15 pépoté me a). The second form is 
observable also in the Indo-Skythic documents, and perhaps is the parent of the modern 
Devandgari a of Western India. Andhra forms are found in ka, which has the dagger- 
like form, (see, e.g., Kalst Ed. IV, 1. 11, putdé-cha kam.) ; in chha, which sometimes con- 
sists of two circles with a vertical line standing on the point of the junction (¢.g., Kalsi 
Ed. V, 1. 14, bachhati) in ja, which is angular (e.g., Girndr Edict IX, l. 1, rdj@) ; in da, 
which is round in atapdsamde, Kalst Ed. XII, 1. 31, and occasionally shows acute angles 
in other words of the same line; in ¢a, which very commonly has a rounded left-hand 
limb, both in the Girnar and in the KAlsi inscriptions; in va, which is triangular in the 
superscribed vijaye Kalst Ed. XIII, 2, 1.18. As peculiarities of the vowel-notation 
commonly observed in the later inscriptions may be noted (1) d-strokes running upwards 
or downwards (see, ¢.g., Kalsi Ed. XIV, 2, ll. 21-23 passim, (2) e-strokes, slanting 
downwards, much like the modern méérds (see, e.g., Kalsi Ed. XIII 1, 1. 39, Satabhdge, 
and Ed. XIV, 2, ll. 21-23 passim) ; and (3) a looped o in no hutapuluvd, (Kaélsit Ed. V, 
1, 14). Finally, the Anusvara is occasionally placed above the letter to which it 
belongs, (see, ¢.g., the first of dhatmam, Kalsi Ed. XII, 1. 83, dhammamahdmatd, Kalsi 
Ed, XII, 1. 84), and it seems not improbable that the short strokes which sometimes 
(e.g., in the third syllable of sdlavadhi, Kalst Ed. XII, 1. 34, and in the second syllable 
of Satabhdge, Kalsi Ed, XIII, 1, 1.39) are attached to the tops of the consonants, in reality 
are serifs. These points, to which others might be added, in my opinion leave no doubt 
that in Asoka’s times much more developed forms of the Southern alphabet were used in 
everyday life, which conclusion has an important bearing on the question whether the 
art of writing had then been newly introduced into India or had been cultivated for a 
long period. With respect to the Northern or Kharoshthi alphabet, it may also be 
safely asserted that its characters show numerous vacillations.® 


TRANSCRIPTS, 


Eprcr I. 
Girnar. Shahbézgarhi. 
fyam dharhmalipi devanarh priyena [1} Priyadasina [A]ya[zn]* dhramadipi §devana priasa 
rand ape [:] idha na kirn-[2]chi jivarh rafio likhapitu{:] hida no  kichi jive 
arabbitpa prajihitay var [3] na cha samajo ara[bhi]t.6 prayuhotave? no pi cha samaja 
katayvo[.] Bahukarn hi dosarn [4] samajamhi pasati kata[va]’[.] [Ba]huka hi dosharh sama. sa 


‘3 For the present I will only point to the introductions of 5 Read arabhitu ; the last vowel has been lost, 
my two articles in the Zettschrif¢ der Deutschen Morgen- 5 The vowel of the second syllable has been placed too high 
. landischen Gesellschaft, vol. XLIII, p. 12 ff, and 276 ff, where | but to read ye is not correct. : 
some remarks on the Kharoshthi /ips have been published. 
4 The Anusvara is probable according to the reverse, but 
not certain. 


7 Possibly kratava, 


[jon worpuy py tobi 


“Yis-L T3foas 


‘T ON :SLOIGH VHOSV AYVNUID 


FIZ Seoeung £ 


éb 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTS, 


Girndr. 

devanam priyo  Priyadasi = r4ja(.5] Asti 
pi tuekacha samaja sadhumata devanarn [6] priyasa 
Priyadasino rAfio[.] Puré mahanasamhi![7]devanarhn 
ptiyasa Priyadasino rao. anudivasarh ba-[8]hdni 
pranasatasabasrani arabhisu 
sipAthaya[.9] Se aja yada ayam 
dhammalipi’* likhitaé ti eva pra-[10]n4 arabhare 
sipathadya dvo moré eko mago[.]) So pi [11] 
mago na dhuvol®[.] Ete pi tri prand pachha 
na Arabhisare’”, [12] 


Mansehra. 


Ay[i] ® dhramadipi [de]vana [pri]yena [Pri] yadra- 
[si]Jna’® ra, na. ikhapita[:] hida no kichi jiv[e] 


arabhi{t.] pra(yu]-[1] [ho]taviye no pi cha 
sama(ja] kataviya[.}  Bahuka hi [dosha 
samajasa**  devajnarn prive Pri{yadrasi ra]ja 
skha. [.] Asti pi  chu(2] [e]katiya samaja 


sa[dhu]ma[ta] devana priyasa [{Pri]yadrasi[ne]** 
rajine[.] Pura maha[nasa]si [devana] pri. sa 
Pri. . éisa ra-[3]jine anudiva. bahuni pranaga- 
[tasa]hasrani. a{ra].isu supa[th]raye[.] Se[i. ni]* 
. . ayi dhramafdipi lijkhita ta[da]  ti[ni] 
ye. pranani a . bbi. ti du[vje 2 maju-[4jra 
eke 1 m[rJige[.]®” Se] pi chu]mrige® no dhravarn [.] 
[Etani] pi chu [tini pranani pacha no arabhi . . [.] 


449 


Shahbdzgarhit, 


devana priy{o] Priadragi raya d.khati®[.] Asti 
pi cha ekatie? samaye srestamati devana priasa 
Priadragisa rafio[.] Pura mahanasasi devanarh 


priasa Priadrasisa rafio anudivaso bahuni 
pra(nagatasajhas[rjani?  afrabbJifyisu] su. 
[pathaye [.] So ida[nJi yada alya]}* [2] 
dhramadipi likhita tada trafyo] vo prana 


harhfamti majura duvi 2 mrugo 1 [.] 80 pi 
mrugo no dhruvarh[.] Eta pi pranatrayo pacha 
na arabhisamti [.} 


Kalet, 
Tyara dhathmalipi devanath-piyend Piyada- 
sin(a) ekh[it]é [:] hidé na-kichhi® jive 
alabhi[tu] —_ pajobitaviye [1] no-pi-cha 
samaje  kataviye {.] Bahuk [8]-hi ®! dos& 
saméjas[@]**  devanath-piye — Piyadast laja 
dakhati [.] Athi-pi-ché ekatiya sa{m]aja 
sidh[a]mata _ devanarh-piyasé, Piyadasis[4] 
lajir [2] Pule-mab4nasasi dev4narh-piyasd 
PiyaddsisA _—lajine anudivasarh babuni 


panasahasani alabhiyisu supathay[e .] Se-iddni 
yada [iya]m dharnmalipi lekhita tad&  tirnni’ 
yeva pandni alabbifya]imti [8] duve majula 
eke mige[.]  Se-pi-cha mige no-dbuve [.] 
Ktani pi-cha*? tini panani  no-Alabhiyisarati[.] 


Epicor IT, 
Girnar. Shéhbdzgarht. 
Sarvata vijitamhi dev4nazh priyasa Priya- Savratra vijite devanath priyasa Priyadrasisa 
dasino®  rafio[]] evamapi prachamtesu yathd ye cha  falrnta*! yatha [Cho]da (3] 
Choda Pada Satiyaputo Ketalaputo Pamdiya Satiyaputra Keralaputra 
4 Tarnba- [2] parhni Asntiyako Yonaraja ye va Tarnbbapamni Armtiyokon nama Yonaraja ye cha 
pi tasa Armtiyakasa samipam**? [3] are tasa Arhtiyokasa samarnta[ra]jano 


8 The top of the letter da has been destroyed and it is 
impossible to say whether the word was dekhati or dakhatt. 

9 The obverse seems to show akatie, while the very thin 
e-stroke is visible on the reverse. 

30The sa has a serif which makes it look like se. At 
the end of the line a second mhi has been scratched in. 

1! Tho second sa-stroke is not certain. 

12 Possibly supathraye. 

18 Possibly ayam. 

4 The long é is probable, but owing to an abrasion not 


absolutely certain. 
6 Owing to an abrasion the second d-stroke is somewhat 


abnormal. 

16 Possibly dhivo is to be read. 

7 Jt is possible to read drabhisamre, as there are two 
deep holes after sa. But both are probably accidental, 

18 The last vowel is uncertain, as the upper portion of the 
apparent é-stroke is abnormal and less deep than the lower one. 
Hence the reading may have been ayo. 

9 Only the right half of the Sa of Priyadrasina is visi- 
ble on the reverse. 


20 Possibly za@ or no to be read, 

31 Possibly bahuka to be read. 

2 Dosha samajasa is very indistinct. 

33 Samdjasé is more probable than samdjast. 

4 The last syllable of Pstyadrasine is not certain; it may 


have been sa. 
% J, ni, ie. iddni is uncertain; the reading may be a. x. 


ie, adhuna. 

26 The Anusvara is at least probable. 

27 'Yhe raestroke of mrige is not quite certain, 

28 The ma has besides the é-stroke two little horizontal 
lines to the right and to the left, which, strictly interpreted, 
would give the nonsensical form mruige, The left one has 


probably been added by mistake. 
29 Ktdni-pi-cha is distinct on the reverse of the impres- 


sion. ae 
#® Possibly Piyadasino is to be read. 


31 Only the lower part of the fixst sign of azta has been 


preserved. 
32 The reverse 0 


the last syllable is pamhe 


f the impression shows distinctly that 


3M 


A450 'EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 
Girndr. Shahbdzgarhi. 
rajino sarvatra devanarh priyasa Priyadasino savratra®® devanarn priyasa Priyadragisa rafo 
fafio dve chiktchha kate [4] manusachikichha duvi 2[chiki]sa kif[tra] manuga[chiki]sa Vs 
cha _pasuchikichha  cha[.] Osudhani cha _ pasu[chiki]sa cha[.4] [Oshudh Jani* 
yani manusopagdni cha**[5] pasopagdni cha manusopakant cha pa[so] pakant cha 
yata , yata nAsti sarvatra hArdpitdni cha yatra yatra nasti savatra har[o]pita® cha 
ropapitani cha! [6] milani cha phalani cha vuta cha kupa cha khanapita pratibhogaye 
yata yata ndsti sarvatra hardpitani cha pagu-manusanarh[. } 
ropapitani cha** [.7] Parthesi kipa cha 
khanfpité vrachha cha ropdpita paribhogaya 
pasumanusinarn[.8] “ 
Mansekra. Kalsi, 

Sa.tra jitasi devana riyafsa Pri- Savata* vijitasi  devadnarn-piyas[4] Pi- 
ya]dragisa rajine ye cha arnta a[tha] [5} [Cbo- yadasi{sé]  lajine ye-cha-amnta ath& Cho- 
da] Pafrhjdiya*® Satiya[putr.] Keralaputr[e] da Parmn[di]y4 Satiyaputo Kelalaputo** 

bapani ._tiyo[ke] nama? Yona. . Tarnbaparnni [4] [Am]tiyoge-ndma Yonalaja 
yecha . 6&2 . . oo. he) ve) Samarnta) =ye-chd = arhne =tasé’ = [Am]tiyogasA s&marnta 
raja. > «, Watra .- 4°. «+.  priyasa ‘Jajano savata devanamn-pi[ya]s4 
Priya[dra]gisa —_rajine [6] duve 2  chikisa Piyadasisa lajine duve chikisaka* 
kata manuégachi[kisa cha] pasuchikisa cha[.] katé | manusachikisd-ché  pasuchikis4-cha[,j 
Osha[dhiJni manu. . ka[ni cha] pa . .= Osadhan[i] manusopagani-cha, pasopa- 
ka({ni cha yaltra yatra na . . vratra ganicha a[ta]ta nathi [5] savata 
harapi[ta cha] ropapi{ta cha] [.7] [Eva]me- hdaldpita-cha lopapita-cha [.E] vame- 
va mulani cha phalani- cha tra  atra vA mulani-cha phalani-cha ata(ta] 
nasti , . tra harapita cha ro[papi]ta nathi savata halapita-cha lopapita- 
cha [. ] Mafgeshu] ru(chha] . . pitas cha [.] Magesu lukhari lopit&ni —udu- 
{ku] . - + « «4 tani [pa]tibhogaye pAnani-chd khanapitani patibhogaye 
pasum[a]nugana‘* [.8] pasumunisdnam [, ] 

Epicr IIT. 
Girnar. Shahbazgarhi. 


Devanarh priyo Piyadasi raja evarh fha[:]dbada- 
savasdbhisitena maya idarh Afapitarn[:1] sarvata 
vijite mama yuta cha rajike cha pradesike cba 
pathchasu _ parnchasu vasesu anusamn - [2] 
yauarh niyatu etayeva athaya imaya 
dharnmanusastiya yathd ana-[3]ya pi karnmaya [:] 
sadhu matari cha pitari cha susrds4 mitdsarhstutafa- 
tinarh 47 bamhana-[4] samandnarn sAdhu 


3 Possibly savrathra to be read, as there is a hook above 
the ta, which, however, looks very abnormal, 

34 At the end of each of the lines 5, 6 and 7 the word 
cha has been inserted as a correction. 

35 The first and the third signs of oshudhani are uncer- 
tain ; likewise the vowel of the second. 

36 _Haropita is the apparent reading, but the o-stroke may 
be accidental. The reading harapita has, in any case, to be 
restored. 

37 Savatd, not savata, is the reading of fhe new impression. 

38 The reverse of the new impression makes the two la 
exceedingly probable. Itconfirms also the curious nomina- 
tives in 0. 

39 The Anusvara is doubtful. 

40 The first sign of nama has erroneously an upstroke to 
the right of the lower end. 


Devanarn priyo Priyadrasi raja aha ti [: ] [bada]- 
yavashabhisitena** . . + + «» . sava.(5] 
vijite yuta rajuko pradesik [e] 
pa{racha]sbu pa[rncha]shu 5 vash[{e]shu anusarm- 
yanamn nik[rjamatu* etisa vo karana imisa 
dhramanuSasti yatha*® ahaye pi kramaye [:] 
sadhu matapitushu sugrusha mit [r]asarhst[u] taiia- 
[ti]kanarh bramana[sra]mana[nath] sa, pra. . . 


41 Chikisakdé is the distinct reading of the new impression 
(facsimile £2), which also shows that no other sign, but a hole, 
exists between kd and katd. 

4 Cha, not cha, is the plain reading of the reverse of the 
impression. 

4% Possibly pasumuniSana. 

44 The first two signs of badaya® are indistinct, but the 
reading baraya® seems impossible. Possibly the correct form 
was badasa°, 

4 The raestroke of nikramatu is not certain. 

‘6 The tha is somewhat abnormal, the upright line being 
slightly bent. 

47 Read mitra®, An Ge-stroke was probably not intended 
but in its stead the short upward-turned ra-stroke. 


41034 “SS308NS 
Y3IS-{ .9/Reg 


rp. aa rs TUT aN ee 
1y 4 LCS eal k oe qe 


oni? fas all 


oy 


Pies ey Se Nae gd g Dt Sarre cue jaeee § 2 
vy 2 sey Nera Z Fs : Oe f : NX 
> i S : . if : . SS ® + Pie pane ~ Z R <4 aie 
Bua cot i ee ee. Dy a a Sian mo ‘ Nias ere 
3 ey ae a aes f i Pete ayes S 
c e x - Ae 2 3 . Pease 2 = BRSt 
i. aie fi ce > Re hee) Yair estas 
2 ~ * ‘ Bas YN (igo LS ae arise re * 5 5 
= J. « . Jone = i « > B te « a . . 
3 Pe a Paar * FS 5 
aes 5 " peng 
ae as a: 


Press 


EN ate A ; s AI SS 5 Raa E> 2a us < Y see 
: & vi eee ; : 5 ap es : ss 
<e : = Sisson Sree ae) SON gcse 2S os “J” s we). 
f ae alee fe Gh Se Oe Re t ey ela he oie : J. 2 : i 
ss Hi at Bees f Rass i Sade : i eo, vi ao | Bie A Bea Le BS 5, Fr 
; Sa ; ee ar vee es ae &, sae = = ae - 
nie © oe . ‘wit : 
3 Ole ae a a LS <6 : ! 
ae : : oe x 4 aN As c) ks 


bes 


Magica ate: 


‘IJ ONVIT ‘SON :-S5OIGH VHOSV YVNYID 


hans prt ashe PRAY arte e 


JBurgess, fect. 


ASOKA IN; 


cRIPTION AT KALSI—(1) souTH FACE, UPPER HALF, EDICTS. I-VIII. 


Scale; 3-10ths of original. 


2 


rere 


W. Griggs, lith. 


ASOKA’S RO 


Girnar. 

sadhu andrarmnbho 
sddhu[.5] Parisé pi 
gananayam hetuto cha 


dana prananarh 

apavyayata apabhamdata 
yute  Afapayisati 
vyamjanato cha[,.6] 


Mansehra, 

[De]vana priye [PJriyadrasi raja eva aha (:] 
duva(da |savashabhisetena®! me ayam 
[a]napayi[t]e [:] savratra vijitasi [me]. ta raju. 
{pra]desike . chashu parh(chashu} 5 vasheshu [9] 
anusamyanam nikrama([rn]tu,°* etaye® varh athraye 
imaye dhramanugastiye ya.ath anaye pi 
kramane _[:] sa. matapi. shu 
susru[sha]{mi]trasarnstuta-[10] fiatikanath cha’? 
bra[ma]naSramananam sadhu dane  pranana 
a.rabhe sadhu apa[valyata®  apabhada[ta] 
sadhu[.] Parisha pi cha yutani  gananasi 
(ana]payisati hetu[te] cha viya. [11] nate cha[.] 


Epic 
Girnar. 


AtikAtarn arntararn bahiini vdsasatani vadhito eva 
prAndrarnbho vihirnsa cha bhiitdnarh fatisu [1] asarh- 


pratipatt brAmhanasraman4narh asarhprati- 
pati®[.] Taaja devdnam priyasa Priyadasino%™ 
rafio [2]  dharnmacharanena  bherighoso aho 


dharnmaghoso vimanadasané cha hastidasana cha [3] 
agikharhdhani cha afiéni cha diyvani ripdni 
dasayitpa janarh[.] YArise bahdhi vasasatehi [4] 
na bhitapuve térise aja vadhite devanarh priyasa 


Priyadasino rffio dharnmanusastiyé an&rarh-[5] 
bho prindnarh, avibisa®” bhitanarh fidtinarh 
samnpatipati brahmanasamandanam 
sampatipati mAtari pitari [6] susrusa  thaira- 


susrusi[.] Esa afte cha bahuvidhe dbarma- 


48 The Anusvara is not certain. 

49 Read parisha pt. 

50 Ah, not dha, is the reading of the impression. 

5} The third letter of duvadaSa° is not certain and may 
have been da or an abnormal ra. Perhaps °abhisitena 
to be read. 

32 Possibly anusamydnum to be read. 

33 Possibly imdya to be read. 

% The Anusvd4ra is very probable, but not absolutely 
certain. 

55 The second sign is abnormal and might be read tre. 

36 Read dhamumdnusathiyé. 

37 The last syllable of mdtapitisw is distinct on the reverse. 

38 Sususd alone is the possible reading tothe reverse of 


the impression. 
39 Cha ought to stand, not before, but after bramanas- 


ramananam. ; ; 
60 Dane, not ddnem, is the reading of the impression. 
© The reverse of the impression decidedly speaks in 


favour of °¢4, not of °¢8. 


CK EDICTS, 451 
Shahbdzgarhé. 

[6] apavayata apabha[rh] data*® sadhu[.] Pari[pi]* 

yuta[ni gajnanasi anapesernti hetuto cha 


vahanato cha[.] 


Kadisi. 
Devanarh-piye Piyadasi 14j& [he] varn®-4ha [: 6] 
duvadasavasabhisitena-me iyarh 
anapayite[:] savata vijitasl mama yuta lajuke 
padesike parnchasu parnchasu vasesu 
anus[alyanarh,*? nikhamarhtu etaye-va athdye 
imay[e],** dharhmanusathiya® yath& arnndye-pi 
karhmaye [:] sidhu [.7] matapitisu®? 
sususa*8 mitasarhthutanatikyauarh-cha 
barbhanasamananarh-ch& sidhu dane” pandnarn 
andlarnbh{e] sddhu apaviyata®! apabharndata 
sidhu [. ] Palisd-pi-cha yuta[ni] gananasi 
anapayisarhti hetuvata-cha viyarnjanat[e]-cha[.] 


vy. 
Shahbdegarhé. 


Atikratam arhtarara bahuni vashaSatani vadhito vo 
pranararnbho vihisa cha bhutanath fatinarh [asa] m- 
pa[ti]pati® sramanab[r] amananarh] [asarhprati] - 
pati®*[.] [So aja devanarh] priyasa [Pri] ya[drasisa 
rafio] [7] dhramacharanena bherig[h]osha aho 
dhramaghosha vimananam draSanarh [ha]stino 
jotikarndhani afani cha divani® —rupani 
dragayitn®*janasa[.] Yadiga[ra)?bahuhi vashagatebi 
na bhutapruve tadise aja vadhite devanarh priyasa 
Priyadrasisa rafio dhrarhmanuSastiya” anarar- 


[bho] p[rananarh] avihisa bhutanarh fiatinam 
sa[xnpratipati bramana]-[8] Sramananam 
sampatipati matapitushu [vudhanam] 


susrusha[.] E[ta]aham cha bahuvidha[1n]dhrama- 


& The vowel of the third syllable is not certain. 

8% Only the lower portions of the first two signs are dis- 
tinct ; the fourth looks like thé. 

6 The first four signs are very indistinct. The same 
remark applies to the following bracketed words and syllables 
with exception of the vowel of so, of the word aja and of the 
last vowel of rano. ar 

6 The syllable pa has been inserted afterwards. 

66 The syllable da has been inserted afterwards, 

67 The syllable Az has been inserted afterwards, 

68 To the right of the lower end of da appears a curve, 
and the letter is probably the fore-runner of the later da, 
which looks like éra. 

69 The reading damSayitu is not impossible, but a combi- 
nation of the ra-stroke with the upstroke on the left is more 
probable. 

7 The Anusvara is not certain. 

7 The form dhramma°, which occurs also below Ed. X 
1. 21, seems to be owing to a mixture of the Northern 
dhrama® and the Magadhi dhamma°. 

du 2 


452 


Girndr. 


charane vadhbite vadhayisati cheva devanarm 
priyo [7] Priyadasi r4ja dharoma(chajranarh idarn[.] 
Putra cha potraé cha prapotré cha devanarn 
priyasa Priyadasino rano [8] vadhayjsarnti idarh 
dharnmacharanam ava sarnvatakapa(.| Dharnmamhi 
silamhi tistarhto dharhmarm anusdsisamti [ .9] 
Esa hi sestie karame ya dharh- 
manusfsanam [, | Dharhnmacharane pi 
na bhavati asilasa [.] Ta imamhi athamhi [10] vadht 
cha ahini cha sddhu[.] Etdya athdya idarh lekhapi- 
tara [:] imasa athasa vadhi yujamtu hini cha? [11] 
ma, lochetayva[. ] Dbadasavasabhisitena 
devanarh priyena Priyadasind rand idarh 
jekhapitam[.12]. 


Mansehra. 
Atikr[a]tamh” a([zn]ta[rarhn]’® bahuni vashaésa.ni 
vadhite varn pranara[rabhje vi[h]i[sa]’® cha bhu- 
tanarh fiatina aeapa[t]ipati Sramanabramananarn 
asatopa[ti]pati[.12] Se aja devana priydsa 


Priyadragine rane dhrama(cha]ranena bherigboshe 


aho dhramagoshe® vimanadrasana_ hastine agikarh- 
dhani afa[ni cha] divani ropani  draseti 
janasa [ .18] [A]dise bahuhi [va]sha(Satehi na hu] ta- 
pruve tadise [aja|vadhite ~[de]vana priyasa 
Priyadrasine rajine dhramanuSsastiya anarabhe 
prananam avihisa bhutana fatina [14] saznpatipati 
ba[manaSramanana[ra} sarapatipati matupitushu 
susru[sha] vudhrana susrusha[.] Kshe ane cha ba- 
huvidhe dhramacharane vadhrite[.] Vadhrayisati yeva 
devana priye[15] Priyadrasi raja dhramacharana 
ima[.]. Putra pi cha ku natare cka panatika 


devanarn priyasa Priyadrasine rajine 
pavadhayigarnti © dhramacharana imam ava 
kaparmn dhrame gile [cha] {16} 


[ti]stitu [dhramarh] anugasisa[m]ti**[.] Eshe hi 
sre[th]e ath dhramanu [Sa] sana|.| 
Dhramacharane® picha na hoti asilasa[.}] Se 


72 Tt is impossible to read chd. 

73 The bracketed letters at the end of the line are very 
indistinct. 

74 The Anusvaras of this and of the two preceding words 
are uncertain. 

75 The second and third letters are not distinct ; the fourth 
may have been ora. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Shahbdzgarhé. 


charanath vadhitarn vadiiSati chayo devanaim 
priyasa Priyadragisa ratio dhramacharano im. [ .] 
Putra pi cha ku nataro cha pranatika cha devanam 
priyasa . Priyadrasisa ra{fio —- vadhe] Sarnti 
. miaf[charanarn imaro avakaparn dhra]me 
Si{le cha]”* [9] tistiti dhramarh anuSasisamti [.] 
Eta b[i sre}th{arn] k[rjam(arh) ya[th]™ dbra- 
[ma]n[u]Sasanarh [.] [Dhrama]charanam pi cha 
na bhoti asilasa [ ] So imisa athrasa vadhi 
ahini cha sadhu[.] Etaye athaye ima[m] dipi- 
sta [:] imisa athasa vadhi yujarht. hini cha 
ma loche[sh]u [l.] Ba[duya]vasha[bhi]sitena’® 
devanam priyena Priyadrasina raha [idJarh, nam” 
dipa[pi]tam [,] 
Kailsi, 


Atikaratarn arntalarn bahuni vasasaténi va[dhi]- 
te-va panalambhe = vihisa-ché — bhutanarn 
natinam®  asarnpatipati samanabarnbhandnarmn 
asarapatipati[.} Se-ajé devanarn-piyasa Piyadasine 
]ajine dharnmachalanena bhelighose aho dharnma- 
ghose vimanadasana®(9] fha]thini agikarndhani 


amnani-cha divyani lupani dasayitu 
janasa[.] Adis[e] bahuhi vasa[sa]tehi na-huta- 
puluve tadise aja vadlite devanarh-piyasa 


Piyadasine lajine dharhmanusathiye® analarnbhe 
pananarn avihisa bhutanarh nati[su]**[10]sampati- 
pati barnbhana(sa] mananar sampatipati matapitisu 
sususa[.]| Esha-cha®* — arnne-cha babuvidhe 
dharamachala[nje  vadhite —-vadhiyisati-cheva 
devanarhn-piye Piyadasi 14j4®° imarn dharnmachala- 
nara [.] Puta-cha-karh®” natale-cha pan [Ati]kya- 


cha devdnam-piyasd —-Piyadasine lajine[11 ] 
[pa] vadhayisamti®*-chev[a]*°  dharnmachalanaiin 
i{ma]ra avakapamm § dharnmasi silasi-cha 


[chi]thi{tu]® dharamarh anusdsisamti[.] Ese-hi 
sethe karnmarn*? arn-dharhmanusdsanam[.] 
Dhathmachalane-pi-ché —_—no-hoti_asilasi(.] Se: 


S Read dhammdnusathiye. 


%* The new impression seems to offer ndtisu, instead 
of ndtinam. 


8 Heha-cha, not eshe-chd, is the reading of the new im- 


pression. 


8 [474 looks exactly like été. 
7? Kam, not ka..., is the distinct reading of the new 


76 The first omitted sign looks somewhat like chu, mo or | impression. 


di, but I am unable to find a suitable word. The Dhauli 
version has in the same place two illegible signs. 

77 Possibly attkramtam. 

73 The two Anusvaras are not certain. 

79 The third sign of vikisa is not quite distinct and the 
reading vihinsa not absolutely impossible. 


88 The additional pa is badly mutilated, but certain; 
compare also the Mansehra version. 


© Cheva, not eva, seems to be the reading of the im- 
pression, : 

® The first badly mutilated syllable may have been cds ; 
the second is, according to the reverse of the impression, 


% Possibly ndtind to be read, but the abnormal shape of | distinctly ¢A#, not thas; the third seems to be tu. Compare 
the apparent d-stroke points to its original form, an Anusvara | the reading of the Mansehra version. 


joined with the na by an exfoliation of the rock. 
3 Read vimdnadasané. 
® The unaspirated ga ig very distinct. 


°° Kamman is now more probable than °me, 
® The Anusvara is doubtful. 
%3 The va is abnormal, and similar to a na. 


GIRNAR ASOWA Et 


J Burgess, fecté. 


Seale. 1-Sth 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTS. 


Manschra. 


imasa athrasa vadh(rji ahini cha sadha[.] 
Etaye[17] athraye i{marn] li[khi]te[:] e[ta]sa [a]. 
sa vadhra™ yujarntu hini cha ma anu{lo]chayisu%[.] 


453 


Kalsi. 
imasi athasé vadhi  ahini-chA — sAdhu[.] 
Etaye athaye i[ya]m likhite[: 12]imasa a[th]asa 
vadhi yujarntu hini-cha ma-alochayisu[ .] 


Duvadasavashabhisitena devana priyena Duvadasavasabhisitend devanarn- piyend 
Priyadrasina rajina iyarn’” likhapite [ .1$] Piyadasina® lajina lekhitarh[ .] 
Epicr V. 
Girnar. Shahbdegarhi, 
Devanarn priyo Piyadasi rajA evath bha[:] Devana priyo Priyadraéi! raya evam aha ti [:] 
kalanarn dukararn[.] ye? a .. .? kalanesa* ka([lanarh] . ukararhf.] Yoa . .[ro] ka[la]nasa 


so dukaram karoti [.1] Ta may& bahu kalAnarn 
katarn({.] Ta mama _put& cha potra cha pararh 


cha tena ya me apachath Ava sarhvatakapa 
anuvatisare tatha [2] so sukatarn 
kasati[.] Yo tu eta desarn pi hapesati so 
dukatarn = kAsati[.] Sukaram hi pAparh[.] 


Atikatarh athtaram [3] na bhitaprurvarh’ dharnma. 
mahamita ndma[.] Ta maya traidasavasAbhisit. na 
dharhmamahamaté —ikata[[.] Te  savapdsarh- 
desu vyapata dhamadhisténdya [4]. . . . . 
° : : : : . .  dharnmayutasa 
cha Yona-Kambo , Garndhirdnarh Ristika-Peteniké- 
nam ye va piamfeaparata[.] Bhatamayesuva[5}] . 
[s.]khaya 


. . e . * e . e . » e e e 


dharhmayutinarn apaiigodhiya vyapata  te[.] 
Barndhanabadhasa” patividhaniya [6] . . . . 
ee a ke ss 2 pra jakata- 


bhikaresu va thairesn va vydpata te [.] Patalipute 
cha bahiresu cha [7] . . 


Sena .e Va pis me aile aatika 
sarvata vydpaté te[.] Yo ayarn dharhmanisrito 


Soi. oo 

e s e s e ° e 
dhathoiahamata [; ] Bray a” athAya ayaa dharh- 
malip? likhita [9] PET en Sateen Fat sss 


. ° . . e e ° . e ° e 


% Read radhré. 


% Read alochayisu. 
% The reading PiyadaSind is distinct also on the rubbing. 


97 The form of the Anusvara is abnormal. 
1 The second ra-stroke of Priyadrasi is abnormal. 
4 Possibly yo to be restored, as there is an abrasion at the 
top of the ya 
3 The tails and tops of the lost letters are wigtble and 
it is not dilficult to see that the first was ds. 
4 Read kaldnasa. 
5 Read kalanam. 
6 Read tena. 
7 Read anuvatiSamts. 
8 Read exam; kamn and the following bracketed letters 
are very indistinct. 
9 Read bhitapirvam or purvam. 
10 The first and second letters are doubtful. 
tira® or toda is possible. 
U The ra-stroke is doubtful. 
% The second va-stroke is doubtful, 
3 Possibly vapatra. 


The reading 


so dukararn karoti[.] So maya bahu_ kalath® 
kitrarh[.] Tarh ma[ha] putracha nataro cha pararn 
chat. .a® [ya] me apacha {a]chharnti avaka- 
parh tatharh ye an.vatiSamti’ te sukit[rjarh 
kasharnti[.] Yo chu ato .[karn pi hapesati]® so 
(du]katarh kashati[.] Paparmn hi sukararn[,] So 
atik[rarh]tarh arhtararh na [bhu]tapruva dhrama- 
mahamatra nama[.]So[tidaSavasha] bhisitena!” [11] 
maya dhramamahamatra kit [r]a![.] Te savrap[r]- 
asharndeshu” vapat[a]!> dhramadhithanaye [cha] 
dhramavadhiy[e] hidasukhaye cha dhramayutasa 
Yona-Karboya-Garndharanam Rastikanara Pitini- 
kanarh ye va pi apararnta[.] Bhatama[ye]shu 
bramanibheshuanatheshu v fu] dheshu® bitasukhaye 
[dhra]may [u]tasa apalib[odhe|! vapata [te] [ .12] 
Barndhanabadhasa patividhanaye apa(li]bodhaye 
mo(chhay je iyarn a[njubafdh]am prajava kita. 
bhikaro va mahalaka” va viyapatra[.] Ia?! babireshu 
cha nagareshu savreshu orodhaneshu bhratunam 
cha me spasunam*™* cha ye va pi amie fatika 
savatraviyaput[a][.] Y[arn*ijyarndhramanisrite 
ti va dhramadhithan([e]** ti va danas[a]lyute* ti va 
savatra vijite ma[ha] dhramayutasi viyapata te 
dhramamahamatra|.] Ktaye athaye ay([arh] 
dhramadipi dipist [a]** [:] chirathitika 
bhotu tatha cha praja* anuvatatu [13] 


M4 Read dhamadhistandya. The single ma is to be read as 
double. 

15 Possibly vadheshu. 

16 The last sign has apparently also an Anusvara. 

7 The za has been added later as a correction. 

18 The second sign of mochhaye is not quite distinct, 

19 The last syllable of anubadham stands lower than the 
others. 

20 Possibly mahkalake. 

21 Possibly Ata. 

22 Regarding the first sign of spasunaz, sec the note to the 
German edition. 

2 Restore ye vd pi. Before e there is only a vertical stroke, 
not a za. 

24 The vowel is not certain. 

25 ‘The last vowel is not certain. 

26 The third vowel is not certain. 

37 The ya has been added later. 

28 The lower end of the last syllable has been destroyed. 

29 The ra-stroke is abnormal, 


454 


JMansehra. 


[| Devanarn] priye Priyadrasi raja evath aha [:] kalanam 
dukararn{.] Ye adikare kayanasa se dukararh 
karoti[.| Tarn maya bahu kayane kate**(.] [Tarn] 
ma[a]*> putra [cha] [19] natare** pararn cha tena ye 
apatiye me ava.paih tatharn anuva[t]isati®® se sukata 
kashati[.] Ye chu atra dega pi hapesati se 
dukata kashati[.20] Papehinama supadarev[a}™ [.] 
Se atikratara arhtararh na bhutapruva dhrame- 
mahamatra nama[.] Se tredasavashabhisitena maya 
dhramamahamatra kata[.] Te savrapashadeshu[21] 
vaputa dhramadhithanaye cha dhramavadhriya 
hidasukhaye cha [dhra]mayutasa Yona-Karnboja- 
Ga(rn]dbaranarn Ratrakra-“Pitinikana ye va [p]i ane 
aparata[.] Bhatamaye-(22] shu bramanibhyeshu ana- 
theshu vudhreshu hidarnsu[khay]e dhramayutaapalibo- 
dhayeviyaputa te[.] Badhanabadhasa pativi({dhana] ye 
apalibodhayemochhaye(cha] iyarn*![23] anubadba paja 
ti va kartabhikara ti va mahalake ti va viyaprata te[.] 
Hidarn bahireshu cha nagareshu savreshu [0]rodha- 
neshu*? bbatana cha spasuna cha [24] ye va pi afie 
hatike savratra viyapata[.] E iyarh dhramanisiti ti 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Kalst. 


Devanam-piye Piyadasi 1aja aha*[:] kayane 
dukale{.] E-adik{alje*! ka[y&]nas4 se-dukalar 
kaleti[.] Se-mamay4 bahu kayane kate[.] T[4-ma]- 
ma [pu]ta-cha natale-[cha 13] palarn-[cha] te[hi 
yle- apatiye-me dvakaparh tatha anuvatisarti se- 
sukatarh kachharnti[.] E-chu het& deearn-pi [ha] pa- 
Ly] isarnti*? se-dakatarh kachhati[,] P&pe-hi-ndma 
supadalaye[.] Se-atikarhtarn arntalam no-huta- 
puluva dharamamahamata-nama[.] T[e]dasavasa- 
bhisiten’ mama[ya] dharnmamahamata [ka]ta([.] 
Te-savapisamdesu. viy@[pa]ta [14] dharnmadhi- 
thanaye-chi dhammavadhiya hi{da]sukhaye-cha*® 
dhammayutasa Yona-Karmmboja-Gamdha([1a] nam*® 
e-vA-pi arnne apalamta[.] Bhatamayesu barhbbani- 
bhesu— anathesu vudhesu hidasukhaye 
dharnmayutaye apalibodbaye viydpata-te[.] 
Barndhanabadhas& _patividhandye apalibodhaye 
mokhaye-cha eyarn anuba[dharn)  pajdva-ti- 
vi [15] [katabhika]le-ti-va mabalake-ti-va viydpa- 
ta-te[.] Hida babilesu-cha na[ga]lesu savesu [olo]- 
dhanesu bhatinarn-ch[aJ-ne*® bhagininé*+ e-va-pi 


va dhramadiiithane ti va danasarnyute ti arhne n&tikyesavata viyapata[.] E-iyarh dharnma- 
va _—_-savratra vijitasi maa dhramayntasi _ nisite-ti-va danasarhyute-ti-va savata vijitasi mama 
vaputa(te] [25] dhramamahamatra[.]  Etaye dharamayutasi viyapatd-te dharhmamahamata[.] 
athraye ayi dhramadipi likbita [:] Etdye atbaye* [16] [iJyarh dharnmalipi 
chirathitika! hotu  tatharn cha me _ praja_ lekbita [:] chilathitikyé hotu [ta] tha- 
anuvatatu(.] ch{a|-me pa[ja] anuvata[rb]tu (.] 
ook Epicr VI. 
Girnar. Shahbdzagrhé. 
Devanamn pri? si rajé evarn  ha[:] Devanstn priyo Priyad{ra]si*? raya evaf[th] aba 


atikrdtara arhtararn [1] na bbitapurva sava. lat? 
athakarname va pativedana va[.] 
Ta may4 evar katamn [2] save kale bhurhjamanasa 


30 The new impression gives distinctly ahd for dhd. 

31 The reverse of the impression gives ddikale, which is 
supported by the reading of Mansehra adikere. 

32 Possibly kati to be read. 

33 Only the foot of the second sign of maa has been 
preserved, 

34 Possibly nataré to be read. 

% Possibly anuvatisati to be read. 

36 The impression has the Anusvara distinctly, which 
must probably be deleted. 

37 There is a stroke, above va which, however, seems not : 
to be a real e-stroke, but an accidental scratch. 

3% The impression seems to offer hida®, with a badly 


blurred da instead of izta°, and ché instead of v4. 
* Theimpression shows no distinct letters, but merely 


scratches, between °yutasd and Yona®. 
# Read Rastika, the second letter has not been written | 
completely. . 


ti [:], atik [ra]tarb*® arntaram na .[bhuta]pruvarm 
savram kalarn athakramam va pativedana va[.] 
Tah maya evam kitarh [:] savrarh kalara aSamana- 


® Cha is much defaced and looks like che or je; the 
Anusvara of iyam is not certain. _ 

“2 The first letter is much disfigured by several scratches 
and looks nearly like a deformed cha, 

® The impression offers distinetly xe (i.e. xa2) instead na, 
and according to the reverse cha is more probable than chu. 

* Bhaginind is more probable than °nam. 

*° The lingual of athdye is plain both in the rubbing and 
on the impression. : 

Only the lower portions of the first letters are dis. 
tinct. heh 

7 Possibly Priyadamsi, but see the motes to the German 
edition. 

48 The ra-stroke is doubtful, 

“° The tops of rva, va and Ja are gone. 
savam kdlam. 


Restore *rvazxv 


> 
fe) 
Z. 
uw 
a 
= 
a) 
fs) 
- 
MS 
Cc 
77) 
< 
[24 
fA. 
Zz. 
= 
Oo 


OO ‘ Sees a 
: ; “ ~ ae 
: ” Peres AoE EEN 
3 : ; - eae: “> . 
% . % ae pron A z § 
i 3 5 Pe - 
: . : ; 


(<p 
Ab 4 


ia 
Ys i 
am 
a 
¥ 


4 OCT on ee 
; Pte oe i 5 
> : Z > S 


ay 


ne 


* 
aS 
4 

\ 


Q 
ETS Ld OTR 


¥ 


PLES LAB 
AOGSE Li 
a 


is 


AY 


. > 
Pees 


— e ‘ et : , . 3 i ee iy mt ur a oe, 
. 3 ~ Pap RO hs erie 
< : Pee rer. ae y ee 2 : 
Z Pe : er at, neh son - 
CRETE Ne POPES a ; pete. a 5 
—< . ’ ~ F. é 2 S 2 : ee ; 
ae ANS 4 1.2 ee fe as 
; ‘ ; , F ‘ eps * 
oe ee a ‘tap, - 
fee tate Se za i . ae z 
i  e A oa, Wiser es ph 3 ae ‘¢ e 
2% : Be 
medi sere, Pani A 
= te Pp} 
tj 
-_ 


¥ ore Be ss 
a in Cas r 
= is fate 4 &, y 
ede >. 5 
fi eS Be ne ; 
oe - 


fos 
“se 


4g 
we 65 oo pee ee 
es we N's he 
Pea es : he i a3 Z hs 
a bs . 
af; e . a I 
ie sp : wf ee 
bi . - ‘aca eters ~~ : 
‘ fi Se Te vi He ae z 
Wirt o os By pie Ayes 
- eS yy : 
ae rs) 2 


es 3 
<? 
¢ 
§ Se ea Be fe ae Se Regt es Ae) eae 2 ° : ‘ ye 
: F A ae - > Poe oe Se 4 a 
: sh : ee “e eS ce Y 
: Sacer ee ee grey en “% “4 
ih EES SN ae a t aN aie ie 
See Seeh sre ige ee : 4 


z 


: Se & 


Rr ees 


Pe 
a ase & 


qo. 
Al 


ALY 


ke 
£3 Oder by 


eros 


ay 
s 
5 ; yy 
ae De 
fe te 
4 


Ya: 
J 
‘ay 


wR 
— 

@ 

ye. 
A wy ay aS 


) = Ab 


* 5 bee 
AY 0 ha asta 


J BURGESS FECIT 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICYS, 


Girnar, 


me orodhanamhi gabhAgaramhi vachamhi va [3] vint. 
tamhi cha uyanesu cha savatra pativedaka stita athe 
me janasa [4] pativedetha iti[.] Sarvatra cha janasa 
athe karomi[.] Ya cha kirnchi mukhato[5] aflapayAmj 
svayam dapakarh v4 srdvapakarh v4 ya. va puna 
mahamitresu [6] achdyika®® aropitarh bhavati taya 


athaya vivaédo nijhatt va sarnto parisdyarn [7] 


Anarhtararh pativedetayvarh®® me sarvatra sarve kAle ie 
bi 
me toso[8] ust&namhi athasarhtirandya va[.] Kata- 
yvamate hi me sarvalokahitarn[.9] Tasa cha puna 
NAsti 
hi karnmatararn [10] sarvalokahitatpa[.] Ya cha 
kirhchi pardkramami aharn[,] kirhti [?] bhdtanarn 
4narhnath gachheyarh[]1] idba cha nani sukbapaya- 
mi paratra cha svagarn aradhayarntu[.] Ta etdya 
athaya [12] ayarn dharhmalipi lekhapita(,] kixnti [?] 
chiramn tisteya iti tathd cha me putraé pota cha 
prapotra cha [13] anuvataramh® savalokahitaya[.] 


Evam maya aia pitam[. | Nasti 


esa mitile ustanarh cha athasarhtirana chal] 


Dukarath tu idarm afiata agena parakramena[.14] 


Mansehra. 


Devana[tn] priye Priyadragi raja eva[th} aha [:] 


atikraratarh arntararn[26]n[o]hutapruve savram kala 


athrak [rama] va pativedana va{.] Ta maya evarh 
kitam []: savrakalarh aSatasa 


orodhane grabhagarasi vrachaspt"! vinitaspi uyanaspi 
savratra pa[t]i[veda]ka athra janasa [27] pativedetu 


me savratra cha janasa athra karomi  aharn[.] 
Yarn pi kichi mukhati anapemi aharh dapakarh 
va éravakatn va yam va puna mahamatrehi 

50 Below f2 stands a u-stroke, 

51 The final sign is probably intended for sys ;—seeé the 
notes to the German edition of the Mansebra text. 

52 Possibly puna to be read. 


me 


455 


Shahbdzgarhé, 


same orodbanaspi grabhagaraspi vrachaspi vinitaspi 
uyanaspi! savratra patrivedaka atharn janasa 
pat[rJivedetu me savatra cha janasa athra karomi[.] 
Yarn pi [cha] kichi mukhato anapayami 
[aharh da]pakarh va Sravakarh va yarn va pana®® 
mahamatranarn v[o** achayjika a. pitarh® bhoti 
taye athaye vivade va ni[jha] ti® va sarhtam parisha- 
ye anamtariyena prativedetavo me[14]savatra®’cha 
atharh janasa karomi a[barn] [.] Yarn cha ki 
{chi]®* mukhato anapemi abarn dapakarh va éra- 
vaka va ya va pana mahamatranath achayikarh 
aropitarh bhoti taye athaye vivade sarhtarh nijnati” 
va parishaye § anamntariyena _patrivedetavo 
me savatra sav [r]arh kalarn[.] 
Lvarh anapitarh maya[.] Nasti hi me tosho utha- 
nasi athasarntiranaye cha[.] Katavamatarh bi me 
sav(rJalokahitarh [.] asa cha mulamh et[ra] 
uthanarh athasarntirana cha[.] Na([sti] hi 
kramatararn[15]s[rJavalokahite[na]®![,] Yarh cha 
kichi  parakramami [;] kiti (?] bhutanarh 
ananiyatn yracheyarn ia cha [sha] sukhayami 
paratra cha spagara®® aradhetu[.] Etaye athaye 
ayi dhrama® dipista[:] chirathitika bhotu 
tatha cha me _ putra nataro parakramarhtu 
savalokahitaye [.] [D]ukara[m] tu[kho] imarn 
atbfatra agre® parakramena[.16] 
Kalsé. 

Devanarh-piye Piyadasi 1aja hevarh-aha ea 
atikarntarh arntalarn no-hutapuluve savarh kélarb 
athakarnme-va [pat] ivedana-va [.] Se-ma[ma]ya 
hevarn kate [:] savarh kalarhn adam [a] nasé-me”’[ 18] 
olodhanasi gabhaigalasi vachasi vini[{tasi uyAnasj 
savata) pativedaka] atharn janasd [pati] vederntu 
me?*[,] Savata?’ janasa atham kacbhami hakam[.] 
Yarh pi ché [kichhi mukha]te ana[paya]mi ha- 
karn’* da[pakam]-vi. [sdvakarh v4] ye-vd-pund 


83 Possibly ayo to be read; read dhramadipi. 
51 Read anuvateram. 


6 Read agrena. 
6 The Anusvaras cf devdnam and evam are not quite 


53 Possibly dchdyikam or °ke to be restored, as there are | distinct. 


two large abrasions on both sides of the ka. 
The vowel of vo is very indistinct. 
5 Complete aropitam. 

56 The jha is indistinct. 

57 The passage from savatra down to parisha has been 
repeated by mistake. 

88 Tt looks, as if another sign had stood between kz and 
chi. 

59 A remnant of va below the ya is visible. 

60 The stroke indicating the aspiration of jha is indise 
tinct. 

61 The rasstreke of svava* is not quite certain, 

6 The initial sign of this word shows the same form as in 
ovodhanaspt, above |. 14, and seems to be intended for spa. 


54 


on 


67 The vowel is doubtful. 

68 Possibly karnma to be read. 

6 The lingual in atha? is more probable than the dental. 

70 The new impression shows a tolerably distinct me at the 
end of line 17, and only scratches at the beginning of line 18. 
In the third syllable of adamanasé a short a is more probable 
than md. 

71 The last sign of this word and the next two show 
the abnorma! form, which probably stands for spi. 

72 No letters seem to have been lost between me and savatd, 

73 At least one syllable, probably cha, has been lost after 


savatd. 
74 Hakam, not sakam. is the reading ot the new im 


pression, 


A56 EPIGRAPHI 


Mansehra. 


achayike aropita hoti(28] taye athraye vivade nijhat 
va satnta parisbaye a[narn]taliyena pativeditaviye 
me savratra savra kala[.] Kva[rn] anapita mayal.] 
Nasti hi me toshe u([thanasi] athrasarhtiranaye 
cha[.291 Kataviyamate hi me  savralokahite[.] 
Tasa chu [puna] eshe mule uthane athrasatirana cha[.] 
Nasti hi kramatara savralokahitena[.] Yarn cha 
[kiJechi para{kra]mami aharn([;] kiti[?] bhuta- 
narn [80] ananiyarn yeharn ia cha sha sukhayami 
paratra cha spagrasb*! aradhetu ti[.] Se etaye athraye 
iyarh dhramadipi likbita [:] chirathitikarh hotu tatharn 
cha me _ putra [nata]re  para[k]ramarhte™ 
eavra-[82] lokahitaye[.] Dukare chu kho afiatra 
agrena parakramena|. | 


EDICT 

Girndr, 
Devanath piyo Piyadasi raja sarvata ichhati 
save pAsarnda vaseyu [. | Save te 


sayamam cha [1] bhavasudhirn cha ichhati[.] Jano tu, 
uchdvachachharhdo uchdvacharago[.] Te sarvatn 
va kAsarnti ekadesarh va kasarnti[.2j Vipule® tu 
pi dane yasa nasti sayame bhavasudhita 

katatbfhata va dadhabbatité cha nicha badham [.3] 


va 


Mansehra. 
Deva[na priye] Priyadrasi raja savratra ichhati 
Savra pashada vaseyu[.] Savre hi te sayama 
bhavagudhi [cha] [32] ichhamti{.} Jane chu 
uchavuchachade uchavucharage[. ] Te  savrarh 
ekadeSarn va pi kashati{.] Vipule pi chu 
dane yasa nasti sayame bhavasuti 
kitanata dridhrabhatita® cha [83] niche badham{[.] 


Epicr 

Girnar. 
Atikatam arntararh rajano vihara- 
yatam faydsul.| -Eta Magay vi anani 
cha etarisani{1]®*! abhiramakAni ahumsu[.] So 


7° Nijhati, not nikati, is the distinct reading of the re- 
verse of the impression. 

‘6 The absence of the Anusvara and the reading ¢mute are 
certain from the reverse of the impression, 

77 Tasd is more probable than tasa, 

78 Palata, not palatd, is distinct. 

79 Read Glddhayamtu. 

80 Read parakramamtu, 

81 Possibly chu. 

81 The initial sa is again abnormal and the sign must be 
read spa. 

8 Read Priyadrasi. 

83 The apparent second »-stroke which makes the word 
look like vipdle is, to judge from the impression, an acci- 
dental scratch. 

31 ‘Pie short final of [pd]sazhda seems certain, as there is 


abhuvasu is perhaps possible, 


A INDICA. 


Kalsé. 
mahdmAtehi[18]atiyayike[a. pitarn]hoti tayethaye 
vivade nijhati-va’® sarntam paliséye anarntaliyend 
pati « . .viye me savata savarh kalarn hevarn 
Anapayite mamayA[.] Nathi-hi-me dose-va uthanasa 
athasarntilandye|-cha[.] Kat[a]viyamute’’-hi-me 
savalokahite[.] ['l'as4-pund” es[e]-mule uthane[19] 
athasaxhtilana-[eh]4[.] Nathi-hi karnmatala sava- 
[loka jhitens[.} Yarn-cha-kichi palakamémi hakarh 
[;] kiti [?] bhutAnarh [a]naniyarn yeharh hida-cha- 
kanisukhdyami palata-cha’® svagarn aladhayitu’®[,] 
Se-etayethaye iyarn dhamalipi lekhita[.] Chila- 
thitikyé hotu tatha cha me putadale palakamatu 
savalokahita[ye] [.20] Dukale-ch[a]*! iyamm anata 
agenda palakamen4([.] 


41 Wie 
Shahbizgarhi. 

Devanamn priyo Priyasi® raja savatra ichhati 
savre [1] prasharnda vaseyu[.] Savre hi te 
sayama bhavasudhi cha ichharnti[.2] Jano chu 
uchavuchachharndo uchavucharago[.] Te savram 
va ekadeSarn va [3] pi kasharnti[.] Vipule 
pichu dane yasa nasti sayama bhava-[4]éudhi 
kitrafiata didhabhatita niche padharh [.5] 


Kalsi. 

Devanarn-piye Piyadasi 14j4 [sa] vata [i]chhati[.1 
sav [a pa |sarnda vas[e]vu[.]** Save-hi-te sayamarn 
bhas asudhi-cha® ichhamti[.] Jane-chu 
uchavuchachharnde® uchdvuchalage[.] Te-savarh 
ekadesarn-pi kachhamti([,] Vipule-pi-chu 
dan [arn] asd nathi [21] sayame bhavasudh{i] 
kitanata® didhabhatita-cha niche-badbarh[.] 


VIII. 
Shahbazgarhi, 
Atikratnayn® arntaramn devanarn priya viharae 
yatra nama nikramishu [, ] Atra mrugaya afani 


cha [hJedigani a[bhi]ramani abhavasus? [.] So 


no stroke or abrasion to the right of the da. 

8 Chd, not cha, is distinct. 

85 The impression shows everywhere distinct] 
not uchdvacha. 

87 Ddnam is, according to 
more probable than ddze. 

8 According to the impression the reading is kitandta 
which kitanatd must be read. ; 
One of the ra-strokes in dridhra® is superfluous, and 


ht 4 , ; - 
Hye be removed. The form was probably didhra®, i.e. 


*° This stands for atikrantam just like savra for sarva 
% Read etdrisdni. i 


® The second vowel is not 


'y uchdvucha, 


the reverse of the impression, 


for 


quite distinct, and the reading 


21 


Ed. viii. 


J Burgess, GALAES, 


ASOKA INSCRIRTION AT KALSI—({I1) SOUTH FACE, LOWER HALF, EDIC1 


Scale + 3-10ths of original. 


(FIRST PART). 


Epigraphia Indica, vol JI 


W. Qriggs, ith. 


CIRNAR ASOKA EDICTS: 


J BurJ6! | fecrt. j ; Scale: 1-87 


Epgraphia indica. vol Lf, 
y- NOS. VIN. Vit and Ix. 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTS. 


Girndr. 
devanam piyo Piyadasi raja dasavasdbhisito. 
samto ayaya sarmbodhith* [.2] Tenesd dharnma- 
yata[.] Etayam® hoti bamhanasamandnam 


dasane cha dane cha thairinarn dasane cha [8] 
hirarnnapatividhano cha janapadasa cha janasa%$ 
dasanam dharnmanusasti cha dhamaparipuchha 
cha[4.] Tadopay4 esd bhuya rati bhavati devanam 
piyasa Priyadasino rafo bhage arhfe [5.] 


Mansehra. 
Atikratarn amhtararn devana priya viharayatra 
nama onikramishu[,]  I{ha]® mrigaviya  anani 
cha edigani abhiramani husu[.] 
Se devana priye Priyadrasi [34] raja? dasavashabhi- 
site saratarh nikrami sarhbodhi({.]  Tenad[arh]? 
dhramayadra[.]  Atra iya hoti{:]  Sramana- 


bramanana draSane dane cha vadbrana dragane 
[cha] hifiapatividha[ne™ cha} [35] janapadasa 
janasa drasane dhramanusasti cha dhramapari- 
puchha cha[.] Tatopaya eshe bhuye rati ho([t]i 
devana Priyasa Priyadrasisa [36] rajine bhag[e} 1 
ane [37] 


EpIct 

Girnar. 
Devanarh piyo Priyadasi rajé evarh aha[:] asti 
jano uchavacham marhgalarh karote abadhesu va [1] 
Avahavivahesu va putralab hesu va pravdsarnmhi va [, 


Etamhi cha ahamhi cha jano  uchavacharm 
marngalarn karote [.2] Eta tu mahidayo bahukarn 
cha bahuvidharn cha cbhudam cha _niratham 


cha marngalarp karote[.] Ta katayvameva tu 
marngalarn{.] Apaphalara tu kho [3] etarisarn’® 
mamgalarn[.] Ayam tu mahaphale marngale 
yadharnmamamgale(.] Tata dasabhatakamhi samya- 
pratipati gurinarn apachiti s[a]dhu [4] p&nesu 
sayamo sddhu bamhanasamananamm sddhu danam(.] 
Eta cha afa cha etarisarh dhammmamamgalam ndmal[_] 


% The dra looks very much like dum. 

%4 The impression makes the second Anusvara very pro- 
bable. 

% Etayam stands for Lta iyam. According to the analogy 
gename for yena ime, etc, ;—see E. Miller: Simplified Pali 
Grammar, p. 60. 

9 The Anusvara is doubtful. 

97 Possibly tenadra to be read. 

% Read janasa. 

9 The dra looks very much like dam. 

1 Possibly eshe to be read. 

2 The upper part of the ¢-stroke is very faint. 

3 Possibly za is to be read. 

* Ché, not cha, is the reading of the impression. 

5 The impression shows no Anusvara. 

6 This looks like rajam. 


457 


Shahbdzgarhé. 


devanath priyo Priyadrasi®® raja dasavashabhisito 
sato nikramisabodhi[rn]® [.] Tenarnd [a] dhrama- 
yatra[.] Atra iyarn hoti [:] Sramanabramananam 
drasane — danarh vu(dha]narm dragane® 
(h]i [va] fa patividha[ne] cha [jana] padasa janasa 
drasanarn dhramanugasti dhramapa[ri]puchha 
cha[.] Tatopayarn esh[a]*bhuye rati hoti devana 
priyasa Priyadrasisa ratio bhag([i? ajmfi[17.] 


Kalsi. 
Atikarhtarn arntalam devdnarh-piyé vihalayAtarn. 
nima nikhamisu[.] Hid& migaviyé aranani- 
chat bedisn[i] abhila man [i] husu'[,] 
Devanarn-piye Piyadasi J4j& dasavasabhi- 
site sarntarn® nikami[th]4® sarnbodhi [.22] Tenata 
dharnmayata[.| [He]taé iyarn hoti samana- 
barhbhandnarn dasane-cha ddne-cha vudhanam ~ 
dasane-cha hilammnapatividhdne-chA janapadasd 
janas4! dasane dharnmanusathi-cha! dhamapali- 
puchha-cha[.]  Tatopayd ese bhuye lati hoti 


devanath-piyasd Piyadasisa lajine — bhage 
amane [.23] 
IX, 
Shahbazgarhi. 


Devanarh priyo Priyadraéi raya evarn aba ti [:] 


jano uchavucham margalam karoti abadhe 
avahe vivahe pajupadane pravase[.] 
Etaye afaye [cha] edigiy, ja[njo [ba]}¢ 


marmgalazn karoti{.) Atra tu  striyaka bahu 
cha bahuvidharh cha putika[rn} cha nirathriyarn 
cha mamgalazh ka[rotne]!”[.] So katavo [cha kh]o 
marngala[.] Apaphalazh tu kho — etarm!.] 
Imar: [tu] kho mahaphala ye mamamga- 
la[xn]? [.18] [A]tra ima [:] dasabhatakasa samma- 
pratipati 


garuna apachiti prananam 
sarhyama 6ramanabramanana dana[.] 
Etarh afiam cha dhramamarngalarn namal.] 


7 Possibly tenadra is to be read. 

8 The obverse of the impression seems to give sate, but 
the reverse shows sazntam to be the right reading. 

9 Possibly nikhamithé to be read. 

10 The impression shows no cha after janasq, only super- 
ficial scratches. 

1 Read hiraiiapatividhane. 

12 Read dhammdnusathi, 

13 There is no Anusvara in dhamapalipuchhé. 

44 Possibly the reading may have been bhagz. 

18 Read ediSiye. 

16 Read bahu; only the lower half of the first letter has 
been preserved ; the second has been omitted. 

1 Karotne stands tor karonte. 

18 For efdrixam. 

Read dhramamamgalam. 


458 | 


Girndar. 


Ta vatayvaro pité va [5] putena va bhatra va 
svamikena v4/:] idarnsédhuidam katayvarn marhgalam 


ava tasa athasa nistanaya(.] Asticha pi vutarh [:6] 
Sadhu 


dJanarh® iti[.] Na tu etarisarn asti danarh va anagaho* 
va yarisarh dbaramad&inam va dhammanugaho val .] 
Ta tu kho mitrena va suhadayena v4 [7] fatikena® 
va sahayana® va ovaditay varn tamhitamhi pakarane (:] 
idari’ kachatn idarn sfdha*® iti imind sakarh® [8] sva- 
gam frfdhetu itif.] Ki cha imina katayvataram 


yatha svagaradhi[.9]} 


Mansehra. 


Devana priye Priyadragi raja evarn aha [:] jane ucha- 
vucha[m” ma]gala[m]*” karoti [1] abadh{a]si ava- 
[ha]si vivahasi prajopadaye pravasaspi®® [.] Etaye 
aflaye cha [edi]sa[ye*! jalne [2] bahu marhgalarm 
A[tra] tu balika- janika bahu cha 
bahuvidh[a]** cha khud[a]*® ‘¢ha ‘nirathriya cha 


kajroti[.] 


magala[rhj*” karoti[.] Se ka.vi.cha kho [3] 


[ma]gale[.] Apaphale chu.’ kho e{she][.] Iyarm 
chu kho mshaphale y[e] dhramamarngale[.] Atra 


iyarn[:] dasabhatakasi samyapatipati guru[na 
apajchiti [4 pranana-sa[ya]m¢ éramanabramana- 
na [dane][.] Eshe ane cha edige dhrama- 


magale nama[.] 


-a{va pativesiyena pi 
kataviye magale ava tasa athrasa nivu[tliyal.] 


0 The first letter, which is badly damaged, seems to have 
been one of the abnormal signs, occurring Ed. VI in oro- 
dhanaspi and so forth, and is probably meant for spa. 

» The last sign is the same as in orodhanaspi and so forth, 

' 32 Read dana. 

8 Probably a mistake for anugaho. 

4 The ra-stroke is not quite certain. 

*6 The second and fourth vowels are not quite distinct, 
and one might possibly read nivuteyeti. 

6 The last vowel is not quite certain, 

7 The two signs of this word stand the one above the 
other. 

8 Read ndtikena. 

9 Read sahdyena. 

© Possibly pana to be read, 

51 Possibly za 10 be read. 

32 Read sddhu. 

* The Anusvara of sakam is at least very probable. 

* Possibly pana to be read. 

*© Read dhramamamgalena. 

%© The Anusvara is uncertain. 

*7 The Anusvéra is uncertain. 

* Thus distinct in B, instead of pravasasi. 


Se vataviy[e]pit[u]na®* pi putrena 
pi bhatuna pi spamikena . [5] mitrasarhstute[na 
[:] iyarn sadhu iy [arn ]*? 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


Shahbdzgarhi. 


So vatavo pituna pi putrena pi bbratupa pi 
[spa]mikena®” pi mi(tra]sarnstutena ava prati- 
vesiyena[:] imar sadhu imarh katavo [marh]galar 
yava tasa athasa nivutiya[.] Nivutaspi®) va pane 
[19] imarn ke[sha] [?] Ye hi-et[ra}ke** magale 


sa(th]éayike tarn[.] Siya vo taro atharm 
niv[a]tey[a]** ti[,] siya pana ialokach[e}* 
vo tithe [.]  Tya*puna dlramamagalamn 


akalikarn[.] Yadi p[u]na® tara athar 
nivate [h]ia*[,] [#]tha paratra anarhtarh pufham 
prasavati[.]  Harnche. p[u]na** [a] thar 
nivate ti tato ubhayasa Jladharn bhoti 
ihachaso atho paratrachaanamtam pufam prasavati 
tena dhramarngalena®® [.20] 


na 


Kailsé. 


Devanarn-piye Piyadasi laja aha [:] jane ucha- 
vucharh®? marbgalarh [kal]eti [.] Ab&dhasi avA- 
hasi vivaéhasi pajopadaye* pavasasi etaye arnné- 
ye-ch&8 edisdye jane bahu magalarh 
kaleti{.] Heta-chu abakajani[yo]# bahu-cha 
bahuvidharh-cha khudd*=-cha  nilathiyam-cha** 
magilazn kalamti*® [.24] Se-katavi-cheva-kho* 
marngale[.] Apaphale-vu-kho es[e]  Iyarh- 
chu-kho mahaphale ye-dharnmamagale[.}j He[ta]” 
iyam  dasabhatakasi samyApatipati-guluna®! 
apachiti pa. dnarh sayame samanabarnbhananarm 
déne[.] Ese arane-chad hedise tarn-dharnma- 
magale-nima®*[.] Se-vataviye pitina-pi putena- 
pi®® bhatiné-pi suvdmiken[4]-pt mitasatnthutend 
dva-pativesiyenf-pi (:20] iyarn sddhu  iyarh 
kataviye [ma]gale 4va-tasd athasd nivutiyd*[.] 


39 The ww in the third syllable is distinct. 
40 The lower stroke is nearly straight and pajopaddne a 


possible reading, but see the Mansebra version. 


4t The first and last syllables of edéSaye are very indistinct. 

# This is the reading of the reverse, distinct except in the 
last syllable. 

* Khuda, not khudum, is the reading of the impression. 

44 Read nilathiyd or °yam. 

45 Possibly bahuvidhe to be read. 

“© Possibly khude to be read. 

7 The Anusvara is uncertain, 

48 Kalamti, not kaleti, is distinct. 

49 Read kataviye, 

5° The existence of this word is certain, the quantity of 
the last syllable doubtful. 

5} Guluné not °nam, is the reading of the impression. 

3 Nam, not ndma, is the reading of the impression. 

8 Putena, not putend, is the reading of the impression. 

5* Possibly pitina to be read. 

-° The ya has besides the Anusvara an apparent e-stroke, 
which must be accidental. 

58 The third syllable of xivutiyd is superficially damaged: 
The reverse lenves no doubt regarding the reading. 


ASO 


GIRNAR 


‘ 

mb 

Sap 

leh ¥e we 

Wa — he 

SO Rae Rea 4 

Ki ‘ ca ¢ é is 

at di 
ie 


‘A EDICTS: Nos. X, XI and XI, 


2 a 
oa es} 
ibs \ 
Pithsd 
“>! 

Ni 3 » ¥ 
vey Fe 
ES 
Vaginas 
*hXy 

y o Y 

vow 

Gees 

By ite he 

ae Or 
4 

Greco Cy 

. aE 

\ en) 

pee 
<i 
ae 

oe 

bye 

mae 
Sie pe 

par 

ke - 

Vee y 
7 U 
‘ : 
~ , 
Ve. 
Xv as 
- 
ed 
f 
+ 
y) 
dy 


; sony Rea Gees 
ee Met So yea 


| q- BX ex Sm be i ae 3 
, ~ x “4 > ree cor of 


dict, vol I. 


raed, OVE Epigraphie in 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTS. 


Mansehra. 


Nivutasi va puna ima k[e]sh[a}miti [?] E hi 
- [6] éasayike’® se[.) [Si]ya 
{va} ta[m] athrarh nivateya[,] siya pana no 
ifha]ch[a]loki{cha}® vase[.] Iyarn pons dhrama- 
magal{e] akalike[.] Hache pi tar athram na 


{a}trake®® ma .. 


nivat(e] ti [hida] [a . paratra 
an[armh]tam pufiarh’* prasavati[.] Hache . [puna 
tara aj.ra nivate ti hida tato ubbayasa 
lajdhe. [ho]ti hida cha se athre paratra cha 
ana[rn]tafrn]” punazh _—pprasa[va]ti 
dhramagalena’'[.8] 


(7) 


[va 


tena 


459 


Kale. 
Imam ka[tha]m-iti [?] E-h 
ivale’?  magale _sathsayikye-se [hoti}[.] 
Siya-va-tarn atharh®! nivateya —_siy&-pundeno 


hidalokike-cha-vase[.] Iyarh-puna dharhmamagale 
akalikye[.] Harnche-pi  tarn-athar no-nite-ti 
hida atharh®* palata anarhtarh-pund pavasati®/, ] 
Harnche-pund-tarn -atharh nivate-ti hida® tato%” 
ubhaye®’,[26] [la]dhe hoti hida-cha® se-athe 
palata-cha anarhtarh-purhnam pasavati 
tend dharnmamagalena[.] 


Epicr X, 


Girndr. 


Devanath priyo Priydasi rija"* yaso va kiti va na 
mahsthavahé marhiate afiata tadatpano dighaya cha 


me jano [i] dharamasusrusa”® susrusatarn dharnma- 
vutam cha anuvidhiyatam([.] Etakaya devanazh piyo 
icbhati[.2] 
pardkamate devadaarh  Priya- 
raja. ta savarn paratrikaya([;] kirati [?] 
sakale appaparisrave asa[.] Esa tu parisrave ya 
apumimarh’[.3] Dukarara tu kho etaryh chhudakena 
va janena usatena va afatra'agena parakamena’® 


Piyadasi raji yaso va Kkiti va 


Yam tu _kirnchi 
dasi7® 


Shahbazgarhi, 


Devana priye Priyadraéi raya yaso va kitri va no 
mahathavaha mahati ailatra =-yo pi 
yaso kitri va ichhati tadattaye” ayatiya cha [janJe 
dhramasuérasha’® sugrushatu me ti dhraramayu- 
taro cha anovi[dhiyatu] (.]Etakaye devanarh priye 
FPriyadrasi raya yaso va kitri va [21] lichha ]ti[.] 
Yath tu kichi parakramati devanarh priyo Priya- 
drasi raya tath savrath paratrikaye va [;] kiti [?] 
ga(kale]’® aparisrave siya ti[.] Eshe tu parisrave’ 
yam apufarn(.] Dukararh t[uj] kho eshe khudra- 
kena vagrena usatena, va afatra agrena parakramena 


savam parichajitpa{.}] Eta tu kho usatena savara paritijitu{.) Etarn chu  usate® 
dukararm [4] . . ot) ve siee la 
Mansehra. Kailsi. 


su .(shajtu me 


dhramasusrusha 


3? This may be read tchale, 

38 Possibly efrake or ciwke according to B., which also 
shows the ma. 

69 This is plain in B. 

60 "he existence of this word, which is not found in the 
closely corresponding Mansehra version, is very doubtful. 

8 The lingual of afkam is plain in the impression both 
here and in the next sentences. 

62 This may also be read shacke loki cha or shachalokike. 

63 Read nivate-ts and atha. 

6 Thus according to B. 

6 Rend pasavati, as suggested by M. Senart. ; 

Hida, not Aidd, is the distinct reading of the impres- 

ne 

< Tato, not tatd, is the reading of the impression, though 
the e-stroke is short (compare Mansebra and Shahbazgarhi.) 

68 Ubhaye ie distinct on the reverse, but the following 
omitted syllable is very doubtful. It looks most like an original 
nam or ndrr. I would conjecture whhayesam in accordance 
with the Mansehra and ShAbazgarhi versions. 

Hida, not kidd is the reading of the impression. 


[8] priye Pri .draSi raja yaso va biti va 
n{a] mahathravaharh mafiati anatra yarn pi ya[so 
va} kiti va ichbati tadattaye ® ayatiy[a)°* cha jane 
ti 


Devanath-piye Piyadashi®! 14j& yasho-va_ kiti-va 
nosmahathava®* manati anaté yath-pi yaso 
va kiti-va ichhati tadatvaye ayatiye-cha jane 
dharamasususha - susushatu.me-ti® 


i 7 The two Anusvaras are probable, but not certain. 


7 Read dhramamagalena, 
7\The syllable de bas beea inserted between sé and ré and 
| the syllable rd between 7d and 74. 

73 The apparent Anusvara after srw is too irregular in 
| shape to be read. {t is probably due toa flaw in the rock. 

74 Regarding the sign see the remarks to the German 
edition. It is, of course, possible to read tadatmaye or 
tadatraye. 

7 Read dhramasusrusha- 

76 Restore priyo before Priyadasi. : 

77 The Anusvara is fainily visible on the impression. 

78 'Yhe ka has been added as u correction. 

7 Possibly pardkramena to be read, as the top of the 
ka ie slightly bent towards the right. 

% Phe conclusion of the ‘edict is missing and seems not 
to have been incised. 

8 Read Piyadaské, 

£2 Possibly mahathdvahd to be restored. 

® it is, of course, possible to read tadatmaye or tadatraye. 

4 Possibly ayative is to be read, 

% A Vedic imperative. 


3N2 


460 


Mansehra. 


. . [9] [tarn] a{nujvidhiyatu ti[.] Etakxaye 
devana priye Priyadra[si] raja yaso va kiti va 
ichkati(.] [E tu] kichi parakrama.i devana priye 
Priya(dra]éi [raja tarn]savrarh para[trikaye va] [;] 
{kiti] [?] . . ~ [10] [a]paparisave siya ti ti*"[.] 
Eshe tu parisave e[apujiia[rn] [.] Dukararh chu [kho] 
eshe khudrakena va vagre[na usa]tena va a[na]tra 
a{gre]na  parakramena = savramn _pariti.. tu[.] 
EB. [tu kho] usatena va duka([ra] [.] 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Kalsi. 


dbarnmavatam-va anuvidhiyatu-ti[.] Etakaye 
devinarh piye Piyadasi[27] 14j4 yasho-va™ kiti-va 
ichha®’[.] Aro-cha-kichhi-lakamati® devanam-piye 
Piyadashi® jaja ta shavarn palatikydye-va [;] 
kitt (?] Sakale apapalashave  shiya-ti-ti?*[.] 
Eshe-chu-palisave® e-apurmne[.] Dukale-chu-kho 
eshe khudakena-va vagena ushutena-ya"* anat[a]%® 
agené  palakamend = shavarn —_palitiditu[.] 
He[ta]-chu-kho [28] ‘ushatena-va dukale[.] 


Epict XI. = 
Girndr. Shahbdzgarhi. 
Devanarn priyo Piyadasi raja evarn aha([:] Devanarh priyo Priyadrasi raya evarn aha ti [:] 
nisti etdrisarn danarn yarisara dharnmadanarmn nasti edisarn danam yadisarn dhramadanam 


dharnmasamstavo va dharhmasarhvibhago va dharnma- 
sarnbadho va [.1] Tata idam bhavati dasabhatakamhi 
samyapratipati matari pitari sddhu susrusd mita- 
sastutanatikanam bamhanasamananam sadhu 
danam [2] prananarn andrarnbho  sddhu(.] 
Eta vatayvara piti va putrena va _ Dbhata 
va mitasastutanatikena va ava pativesi- 
yehi [:] idarh sédhu idam katayvarn[.3] So tatha” 
karu ilokachasa dradho hoti parata cha arnnarhtam® 
_ purhiiarn bhavati tena dharmmadanena[4] 


Mansehra. 
. . .,. [prilye Priyadragi raja evar aha [:] 
nasti. dise dane adige dhramadane dhramasa . ve 
dhra]masa(m)vibhage’ dhrama . , dhe [I.] 


Tatra eshe [:] dasa[bba]ta . sa sa[mya]sampatipati® 
matapitushu . . . © « [12] sathstutafatika- 
na sramanabramanana dane  pranana ana- 
ramabhe[.] Eshe vataviye pituna pi putrena pi 
bhatuna pi ApAawit rs “ty. pe mitrasatn- 
stutena ava pativesiyena. [:18] iyam sadhu iyam 
krataviye [.] Se ta[tha] kararntarm hida . ka cha! 
aradhe .i . Yatra cha a. tam  punam 
prasavati . . [dbhra]madanena [.14] 


8 Yasho, not yaso, is the reading of the impression. 

8? Read ichhati. 

8 Read palakamati. 

® Piyadashi, not °si, is the reading of the ixapression. 

90 Read 1474. 

| Stya ti ti is also the reading of the Kalst version. It 
stands for ¢¢¢#t, which occasionally occurs also in Sanskrit, 

% Read apapalishave ; shiyd, not siyd, is the reading. 

% Eshe, not ese, is the reading of the impression here 
and in the next sentence. 

% The westroke is distinct. 

96 A short final is more probable than a long one. 

% This looks like pitina, with two u-strokes, 


dhramasarmstave dhramasarhvibhago 
sambamdho[.] Tatra etarn[:] dasabhatakanam 
sammapratipati matapitushu susrusha mitra- 
samnstutafatikaoarh Sramanabramananam [23] 
danam prananam anarambho [.] 
Etarh vatavo pituna®® pi putrena pi bhratuna pi 
[sa]mikena pi mitrasamhstutena ava prativesi- 
yena [:] [ijmarh sadhu imam katavo[.] So tatha 
kararntarn ialoka[rh]*® cha aradheti paratra cha 
anatarn pufiath prasavati [24] [te]na dhrama- 
danena [.25] 


{dhra]ma- 


Kalsi, 


Devanarh-piye Piyadashi 14j4 hevam-hat (J 
nathi hedishe dane [4]disharn? dharnmadane } 
dharnmasharhvibhage? | dharnmashambadhet? | [.] 
Tat[{a] eshe ;:] [dashabhatakashi | shamyapatipati 
m4tapitishu | shushusha | mitasharnthutana [ti]kya- 
narh samanabambhananam dane [29] paaanath ana- 
larnbhe [.] Eshe -vataviye pitina-pi pute-pi’ 
bhatina-pi [sh] avamikyena-pi® mitasar- 
thutana® ava pativesiyena [:] iyarn sadhu iyarh 
kataviye [.] Se tatha kalamta hidalokikye cha karn 
@ladhe hoti  palata-cha anarnta!’ purnnd 
paSavati ten’ dharamadanena [.] 


% This may possibly be hialoka, 

1 Read Ghd. 

2 Possibly adisham to be read. 

8 Dhammashamvibhage, not °vibhdge, is the distinct 
reading, 

4 The impression shows no Anusvara in °badhe. 

5 The Anusvara is uncertain. 

§ Possibly samma°® is to be read. 

7 Read putend-pt. 

8 Read shuvdmikyend, 

9 Read mitasarhthutend; the ta stands below the line. 

There is no pi after this word. 
10 Possibly « sign (kw?) may have stood between cha and 


°7 The two apparent d-strokes after ta are due to fissures | #”@the.t. 


jn the rock. 
% Probably anamtam. 


1 Poesibly anaéa to be read. 


ASOKA INSCRIPTION, KALSI ROCK—{II1) WEST END, EDICT XIII. (contd.)-& xrIv. 


Ed XIV 


J. Burgess, feeit 


Seale: 3-10tns of origir 


LBI ASOKA INSCRIPTION, 


—(IV) ON EAST END OF THE STONE. 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTs., 


461 


Enict XII. 
Girnar. Shahbazgarhi. 
Devanarn piye Piyadasi raja eavapasarhdani Devanarh priyo Priyadragi raya savra prasharhdani 
cha! pavajitani® cha gharasténi!® cha pfjayati pravrajital graha(tha]ni eha pujeti 
danena cha vividhaya cha pijaya pijayati ne [.1] danena vividhaye cha pujaye[.] 


Na tu tathd danarh va pija va devanarh piyo 
marhhate yatha kiti[?] sfravadb? asa savapdsarn- 
danam [.] Saravadbi" tu bahuvidha [.2] Tasa tasa!® 
tu idarh milarh ya vachiguti [;] kirti [?] Atpa- 
pasarmndapijé va parapdsatbdagarah4” va no bhave 
apakaranamhi Jahuka va asa [3] tamhi tamhi 
prakarane[.] Pijetaya!® tu eva parapdsarnd4 tena 
tana” prakaranena [.} Hvarn karurn 4tpap4sarhdam 
cha vadhayati parapasarhdasa cha 
upakaroti [.4] Tadarnfiatha karoto- dtpapdsarhdarh 
cha chhanati parapasarhdasa cha pi apakaroti(.] 
Yo hi kochi atpapdsarhdarh ptjayati parapasarndam 
va garahati [5] savarn Atpapdsadabhatiya [;] 


kimti [?] atpapasarndarh dipayema iti so cha 
puna tatha karato” atpapdsarhdaih 
badhataram upabanati = [.] Ta samavayo 


eva sadhu [; 6} kirnti [?] arnfiamarhfiasa dharnmarh 
srunaru cha sususera cha [.] Evarh hi devanarh 
piyasa ichha [:] kirnti®* [?] savapdsarnda bahusruta 
cha asu kalanagama cha asu[.7] Ye cha tatra 
tate prasarnna tehi vabayvarn {: ] devanam piyo 
no tatha danam va pija va mamfate yatha kimti(?] 
sdravadhi asa sarvapasadanam bahak a*° 
cha{.] Etaya [8] atha vy4pataé dharnmamahamata 
cha itbijhakhamahamata cha vachabhimika cha afie 
cha’ nikaya[.] Ayarn®® cha etasa phala ya Atpapasarn- 


davadhi cha hoti dharnmasa cha’ dipana[9] 
Mansehra. 

Devana priye Priyadragi raja savra_prasha- 

dani pravrajitani gahathani cha pujeti danena 

vividhay[e]* cha pujaya[.] No [chu] tatha 

dana va puja va[{l] devanarn priye mafati 


atha kiti [?] salavadhi siya savrapashadana ti[.] 


1 Dele cha. 

12 Possibly pravajitdnt to be read. 

18 Possibly gharistdns to be read. 

1 Pravrajita, first read by M. Senart, stands according to 
a direct photograph above the line, just before grahathani. 

16 The apparent d-stroke after ra is probably an accidental 
scratch or a serif. 

16 ‘The first ta and the second sa of tasa’ tasa-have been 
obliterated, as the sense requires. 

7 The syllable sa7h has been added as a correction. 

® Read °garaha. 

19 Probably a mistake for pujetayvd. 

% Read tena tena. 

2 Dr. Burgess’ new facsimile shows more distinctly than 
the older materials this reading. My former reading prakara. 


No chu tatha dana[th] va puja va ee devanayh priyo 
mafiati yatha kiti[? ] salavadhi siya savraprashath- 

dana (x) [.] Salav(a]dhi tu bahuvidha[.] Tasa 
tu iyo mula yarn vachaguti [; 2] kiti[?] ata. 
prasharhdapuja va parapasharndagarana!® va no 
siya aprakaranasi [,j lahuka va siya tasi tasi 
prakara[nje[.] Pujetaviya va chu paraprasham-[3} 
{da] tena tena {a)karena”[.) Evarh kara[m]tam 
{a] taprasharndarn vadheti paraprasharhdasa pi cha 
upakaroti[.] Tada afiatha ka[rata cha] ataprasharn- 
darn [4]chhanati paraprasharhdasa cha apakarot:[.} 
Yo hi k(oJehi ataprashadam pujeti paraprash{a}da 
garabati savre ataprashadabhatiya  va/[;] 
kiti [? 5] ataprashaindam dipayami tif;] so cha 
puna tatha kararatarh so cha puna tatha karatarn™ 
badhatararn upaharhti ataprashadam[.] So sayamc 
vo sadhu[;] kiti[?] afiamahasa dhramo [6] 
Sruneyu cha sugrusheyucha ti[.] Evarn bi devanam 
priyasa ichha[:] kiti[?] savraprasharnda bahusruta 
cha kala[na]gama cha siyasu[.] Ye cha tatra 
tatra[7] prasana tesharn vatavo[:] Jevanara priyo 
na tatha danarh va puja va manhati yatha kiti[?’ 
salavadhi siya ti savraprashadanarh bahuka chal. } 
Etaye a . . [8] vapata [dhra]mama(ha]matra 
i[stridhijyachhamahamatra vachabhumika  ajfie 
cha nikaye[.] Imarnchaetisa phalarh yam ataprasha- 
davadhi [bhoti]. [9] dhramasa cha dipana[. 10] 


Kalst 
Devana-piye-Piyadashi [30] aja shava pasharh- 
dani*® pavajitani gahathani va pujeti-danena- 
vividhena**-cha-[puja]Jye [-] | No-chu-tathi* 
dane-va puja-va dev4narh-piye manati ath 
kita” (?] Sdlavadhi siya-ti SavapAsarhdanarh® [.] 


nena is impossible ; so is M. Senart’s pakarena. 


22 Read karoto. 

%3 Dele the repeated words. 

4 The syllable ¢¢ has been inverted as a correction. 
35 Possibly the reading was tatra tatra, 

6 Read bahukd. 

27 The word cha has been added as a correotion. 
28 'The letter a has been added as a correction. 

2 Only the right half of the anusvdra is distinct. 
3 Read pdshamddnt. 

4 Meant for vividhdye. 

% Possibly vividhaya to be read. 

26 Chu, not cha, is the reading of the impressicn, 
27 Possibly “été to be restored. 

28 Naz stands, as a correction, above the line. 


462 


Mansehra. 

Salavrudhi®¢ tu bahuvidha[.] Tasa chu iyarh mule 
am vachaguti [;2] kiti [?]  ataprashada- 
puja va parapashadagaraha va no _ siva 
apakaranasi(,] lahuka va siya tasi [ta]si pakaranasi(. ] 
Pujetaviya va chu paraprashada tena tena [3] 
akarena[.] Evarn karatarn atmapashada’’ badbaria 
vadhayati parapashadasa pi cha _ upakaroti(.] 
Tadafiatharn karatarh atmapashada cha chhanati 
parapashadasa pi cha[4] apakaroti[.) Ye bi kechi 
atmapashada pujeti parapashada va _ garahati(,] 
savre atmapashadabhatiya va [;]  kiti (?] 
atmapashada dipay[a]ma” ti[.] . . puna tatha 
karatarn [5] badharhtararhn upaba[na|tit! atma- 
pashada[.] Se samavaye v{a] sadhu [;] kiti (?] 
anamagasa dhramarh sruney[u] cha susrusheyu 
cha til.j E{wjat bi devana[zn] priyasa ichba [;] 
kiti(?] savrapashada bahusruta cha [6] kayanagama 
cha haveyu tif.] E cha tatra tatra prasana 
tehi vataviye (:] devana priye n[ota]tha dana[m] va 
pujarh va manati atha kiti [?] salavadbi siya 
savrapashada[na](7] [bahu]ka cha[.] Etaye athraye 
vaputa dhramamahamatra — istrij[h]achhamaha- 
matra** vrachabhumika afie cha nikaya[.] Iyarh 
cha etisa phale [8] yarh atmapashadavadhi cha bhoti 
dhramasa cha dipana(.] 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Kalsi. 
SAlavadhi-na bahuvidha® [.] Tasa-chu ivarn-mule 
{a]-vachaguti [;] kiti [?] ta atapasarhde 
puja” palapasarnda-galaha-va no éaya® (31) 
apakalanaéi lahaka-va™ siya tasi-tasi-pakalanasi”® 
[.] Pujetaviya chu  palopitadé § tena-tena 
akdlana’6[.] Hevath kalata atapasadai badham 
vadhiyati palapésada-pi-va upakaleti(.} 
Tada-arnnatha® kalata atapaéada-cha chbanati 
palapasada pi-v& apakaleti[.] Ye-hi kechha 
atapdsada punati” [32] palapashada-vé |ga[la] hati t 


shave atapdsharm[da]bhatiy4-va[;] kiti | (?] 
Atapasharnda | dipayema she-cha-pun§ tathas 
kalamtam | badhutale | upaharnti | ata- 


pasharndashi I[.] Samavaye-va shadhu([;] kiti | [?] 
arhnamanashddharamam |shuneyu-chalshushusheyu 
eha-ti| [.] Hevatb-bi devanam-piyasha-ichha[:] 
kiti[?33] Savapasharbde| bahushuta-cha kayanaga 
cha|** huveyu-til[.] E-va-tata-tata | pasharnna) te- 
[hi] vataviye {{:] devana-piye-no-tatha | danarb-v3 
puja-va| macnnatil atha-kiti[:] shalavadhi siya 
shavapashamdatim® | bahuka-cha | [.] Etayathaye 
viyapata dharnmamahamata | ithidhiyakhamaha- 
mata] vachabhumikydjane-va-nika[y 4} [34] Iyam 
cha-etisha | phale | yara ata pashamdavadhi-cha | hoti 
dhamasba-cha-dipana [.] 


Epicr XIII. 


Girnar. 


° . . . e e a a e 


© . . ° 


. dhe satasahasra- 


miatrarn tatra hatarn bahutavatakam matarh(.] 
Taté pachhd adhanat® ladhesu Kalirmgesu 
tivo duammavayfo]a[}i-a 4) se 6.2) 6 oe 
» « « Vadho va maranarh va apavaho va janasa[.] 
Ta[m]badbarn vedanamatam cha g[ujrumataih 
cha) -deva(naane. 2 [ae) [2]) 3. os a 


% Read tu for nd. Vi stands above the line. In the next 
sentence chu, not cha, is the reading of the impression, 


Shahbdzgarhi, 
A[stava]sha‘® abhisita(sade]vana priasa Priadra- 
gi{sa] rafio Kafliga vijita.] [Diyadha]matre 
[pranaéatasa | hasre yetato apavudhe Satasahasra- 
[ma]tre tatra hate bahu[tavatake] mute[. 17 
Tato [pa]chha achuna ladheshu [Kalimngeshu] 
tivre dhrama[palanam]* dhrama{ka]mata dhra- 
manuéasti cha devana prifya]sa[.] So asti anuso- 
chan[arm] devana priyasa vijimit(u]** (Ka]limga- 
{[mi}{.2] Avijitam bi [vijiJuaman[i yejtatra 
vadh[o|* va [ma]ranarn va apava[ho] va jana- 
sa[.] ath badharn vedaniyamatam gurumatam 
eba devavarn priyasa[.] Imam pi chu tato 


% Read puzeds. 
* Possibly dipayema to be read, if it may be assumed 


* Regarding the third sign of this word see the note to | that the e-stroke can stand at the top of ya. 


the German edition. 


. 4 The na is a little indistinct and seems to be a correction 


| Thus corrected by the acribe from ta apdsarmde-vd | as it has been put quite close to the following letter. 


puja; dele firet ta and change de to da, 


~ " Thus corrected by the scribe fiom vd td wd anagaluhd 


% Read Siyd. 

* Read lahukd, 

** The Sa of the first ¢asi is imperfect. 

% Read dhdlena. 

7 It is, of course, possible to read here and in the sequel 
instead of aéma®, atra® or atta®. 

*® Dé stands above the line, 


42 Read kaydndgamd. 
43 Read shavapdshamddnam. 
“ Possibly istrijachha° to be read; at all events the stroke: 


denoting the aspiration is very faint and short. 


4 Sta is probable according to B. 

46 Read adhund. 

‘7 The last three letters are not recognisable ia B. 
® Possibly vijinsti in B, 

* Thus B. instead of vadhe 

© Thus B. for ime pi cha. 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTS. 


Girndr. 
° e e ° ° . e ° a . .7 
si, matapitari susu!th]sa 
gurususiis’ mitasarhstutasahdyafiatikesa disa[bha] 


® . ° ° e ° e ° ry ° 


Eee eee [h]ayanatika vyasanar 
prapunati[.] Tatra so pi tesarn upaghdto 
hoti(.] Patibhago ches§, sa[va] A [san.] 
se 6 es © & + 6 « -» - ($] fbi yatra 
nasti manusinam ekataramhi pisarndamhi na nama 
prasi[djo[.]- Yavatako jan. tad@ (5). . . . . 
ne cee pon na ya sakam 

chhamitave[.}. Ya ies pi ataviyo devanarh 

priyasa piyite-patiel Ge co ke lk 
Se eee ee? 6 ew 2, SAVaDh tana 
acbhatizn cha sayamarn cha samacherdrn cha madavarh 
cha [7] vo ° ’ . ° e e . e e e ° . 


° « . e . ° e e ° 
° ° e e 6 ° ° ® ° ° e 
e ° e e ° ® ® ° . 2 ° ° ° ° 


+ »« « » .« Yonaraj& pararn cha tena chatparo 
rajano Turamayo cha Amtekina® cha Maga cha [3] 


2 e ° . e ° . . e e e © ° 


nae Sr aria ae ee a Aaahe: P [iJrirndesu savata 
devanam piyasa dharhmanusastirn anuvatare[.] 
Aatespoautiel 6-9 8 ee eg 


5. all jays Ser atha puna vijayo pitiraso 
wae: Ladha sa pitt hoti aga £10] 


ee m vijayam ma vijetayvasn maiis®[;] 
sarasake eva vijaye chhati[m] cha . [11] 


51 Possibly vihitam according to B, 

52 This is probably according to B., instead of “bhuti, 
83 Thus both A. and -B. 

4 Thus B. plainly for ekatare. 

55 Looks like priv. 

5§ Thus plainly B., instead of prashamde juna nama. 
5? Thus both A. and B., instead of °bhago. 

Read holi. 


463 


Shahbdzgarhé, 

gorumata. ram [deva]narh priyasa[.] Tatra h[i] 
[3] vasarnti bramana va éramana va arhfie va 
prashamnda gra[ha]tha va yesu vibita®! esha agra- 
bhu[ti}® sugrasha matapitushu suégiusha guru- 
nam suérusha [mitra]sarnstutasahaya-[4] fiati- 
keshu [da]sabha[ta]kanam | sammapratipati 
didha[bhatita][.] Tesharn tatra bhoti apagra- 
tho va vadho va abbiratana va nikramayam(.] 

Yesh. va pi saravihitanarh [ne]ho aviprahino 
@[te]sha § [mi]trasarhstutasahayafatika vasana 
[5] prapunati[.] Tatra tarh pi tesha vo apagra- 
tho bhoti[.] Pratibhagarh cha etam savrarmn 
manuéanam ®? gurumatarn cha devanarh priya- 
sa[.] Nasticha ekataraspi ®* pi 5 prasharndaspi 
na nama** prasado[.] So yamatro [jano]tadaKalige 
hato cha mut[o} cha apavudb[o]cha[ta]to [6] sa- 
tabhage®” va sahasrabhagarh va aja gurumatarh 
vo devanarh priyasa[.] Yo pi cha apakareya ti 
chhamitaviyamate vo devanam priyasa yarn éako 
chhamanaye[.] Ya pi cha atavi devanarn 
priyasa [vi]jite bhoti ta pi anuneti anunij[hjape 
ti{;] anutape pi cha p[r]abhave devanamh priyasa[.] 

Vuchati tesha[:] kiti[?] avatrapeyu na cha hathniie- 
yasu[.] Ichhati bi devanam priyo savrabhutana 
achhati sarhyamam samachariyarh rabhasiye[.] 

Eshe cha mu({kha]mute® vijaye devanarh priyasa 
yo dhramavijayo[;] so cha puna ladho devanarh | 
priyasa iha cha ‘sa(vre|shu cha arnteshu [8] a 
shashu pi yojanasa(te]shu yatra Amtiycko nama 
Yonaraja pararh cha tena Arstiyokena chature 4 

rajani Turamaye nama Axhtikini nama Maka 

nama Alikasudaro nama[,] nicha Choda Parhda 
ava T'arnbaparmniya evameva Hidaraja[.] Visha- 

Vajri- Yona- Karhboyeshu Nabhake Na[bhi] tina [9] 

Bhoja-Pitinikeshu Arndhra-Puli{de]shu savatra 

devanarn priyasa dhramanugasti anuvatarnati[,] 

Yatra pi devanarh priyasa duta na vracharhti te pi 

éru(tu] devanarn priyasa dhramavutazh vidhenazh 

dbramanugasti dhramarn [an]uvidhiyamti anu- 

vidhiy isarti cha[.] Yo [cha] ladhe etakena bhoti 
savatra vijayo sa[vatra puna] [10] vijayo pritiraso 
so[.} Ladha [bhoti] priti dhramavijayaspi[.]° La. 
huka tu khosa priti{.] Paratrikameva mabaphala 
menati devanarh priyo[.] Etaye cha athaye ayo 
dhramadipi [di]pista[;] kiti[?] putra papotra me 
asu navara vijayata ma vijetavi[ya|rm manishu [;] 

wka_. yo®* vijaye [chharn]ti cha lahudarn[da]. 


pajdpati for prajdvati. 


59 Possibly mukhyamute according to B, 
60 Possibly Amtekini to be read. 

5} Read dtd. 

62 Thus B. plainly for °vijayast. 

68 Read munamtu. 


Not legible with certainty in B., where tha first syllable 


With pijite for vijite compare Pali | looks like spra. 


Girnar. 


. ilokiké cha paralokika cha[.12] 
Kals:. 
Athavasha | bhisita | shi devanarh piyasha Piyadashi- 
ne { lajine | Kaligy& vijita |-[.] Diyadham|[a]te | 
panashatashahaée | yetapha apavudhe | satashahasha- 
mate| tata hate! bahutavarmtake | va mate [.] 
Tata [pa]chhd | adhuna ladheshu | Kaligyeshu | 
tive | dharnmavaye [85] dharhmakamata | dham- 
manushathi chi { devanarn piyashd | [.] She 
athi anushaye | devanarh piya[sha] | vijinitu | Kali- 
gyani| [.] Avijitarn hi| vijinamane| etaté | 
vadharn va| malane va! apavahe va| janasha | 
[.] She  badha! vedaniyamute| gulumute 
cha | devanarh piyashi | [.] Iyam pi chul tato! 
galumatatale | devanarn piyasha | [. 36] (Sa]vata) 
vashati barnbhand va shama va ane va paéarhda 
gihitha va yeéu vihité esha ag[a]bh|uta]shushusha | 
matapitishushusha” galushusha” mitasharhthutashaha- 


yanitikeshu  daéabha[ta] kashi shamyapatipati 
didbabhatita[.]  Tesharn tataé hoti [u]paghate va 
vadhe va abhilaténarh v4 vinikhamane [37] 


Yesh(arn] v& pi [sha]ravihitanarh shinehe  avi- 
pahine etanarhn § mitaSarhthutashahayandtikya”! 
viyashane papunati[.] Tata she pi [té]nameva upa- 
ghate hoti{.] Patibhage cha esha shava manu.[narh] 
gulumate cha devanarh piyasha [.] Nathi cha she 
janapade yat& nathi ime nikaya dnarnta yenesha [38] 
barnhmane chi sbamane chA nathi cha kuva pi 
janapadashi [ya]té nathi manushdnarh! ekatalashi 
pi | pashadashi | no nama pashade| [.] She avatake 
jane | tada Kalirngeshu [la] . shu hate cha! mate 
cha 1 apavudhe cha ; tata shatebhige’® va | shahasha- 
bhage va | aja gulumate va | devanarn piyasha [39] 


a e . ry cy e . . ° 


° e ‘ ° e . ° ° 


neyul.| Iechha ° ° ° . . ry . [3] 
shavabhu . . «© « wrayama shamachaliy arn 
madava tif.| Tyarnvumu . , agrees fs 


devanamn piyeshd’? ye dharnmavijaye[;] she cha 
puna ladhe devanam pi. . . [da] cha [5] shaveshu cha 


6 The last Anusvdra seems certain according to B. 
6 Read vijayam manamtu. 


87 Tt ic not certain, especially in the beginning, whera the | tinct. 


lines really end. 
6 Read shamanéa. 


69 Read méta® 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Shadhbazgarhé. 
tarn®® cha rochetu tazn e[va] vija mafia.® [11} 
yo dhramavijayo[.] So hidalokiko paralokiko[.]} 
Savra cha nirati bhotu ya [s]ramarati[.] Sa hi hi- 
dalokika paralokika[.12] 


Mansehra, 


.(Kaliga] . oe Ee 
-pranaga . : 
ciye pachha adhuna la(dbe|sbu Ka[lige]shu 


. e e . « “ 


ma[noéa] . eha. . « « « 


Way. 


. .[afpava]he va jana} . . Se, 
vedaniyama . . e..« 


€ 


[3]. . . esha agrabhu. suetaahy 


matapishu [suérusha] guru- 
sugrusha mi.s[amstu] . . . 4 
[4] . va [abhi - narh] va vinikramane[ .] 


Yesharh va [pi] sarnvi ham sinehe avi- 
prahi[ne e]ta mitrasarn 

Meer (on haar 2S 

: - Savram manufganata 

gurumate cha [deva]namh priyasa[.] Nasti cha se 

janapade ya[tra] nasti ime nikayaa , 


- yenesha 
{bramana cha fra[ma] . . 
ph she eine ac a. eee ee [6] 
nonama prasade [.] Se yavatake jane tada 


Kalipechu [hate cha] .: 3. 6 0. 3 . 
[a] pavudhe cha [tata] satabhage va sahasrabhage 


ajaguruma .e . va , priyasa[.] . , 
. . ° ° e ° . Ae e e mitavi [7] . 


Seng Gre tee [Ya] pi cha atavi devmuaee 
priyasa vijitasi [h]oti [ta] pi anunayati anu([n]i 


' [jha]paye ti[;] anu[ta]pe pi cha prabhave deva- 


[math] priyasa[.] Vuchati [tesharh] , 


vane paige) [8] : 


ee ee We ee age 
[de]vanarh priyasa ye dhramavijaye[,] [se cha 


puna ladhe de] vanarh priyasa hida cha savreshu cha 


” Read galushushushd. 
7| The nd of ndtikya stands above the line, and ig indis- 


™ Read shatubhdge, 
™ Read piyashd, 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTS. | 


Kalsi. 


{ateshu a shashu [p]i yojanashateshu at[{a]’* Atiyoge 
nima Yora- . . palam cha tend [6] 
Amtiyogena | chatali 4 lajine’®’ Tula 
maye nama Arhtekine’’ n[4]ma Mak4 na-[7] ma 
Alikyashudale néma[,] nicharh Choda-Parndiya avarn 
Tarhbaparnaiy&hevameva hevameva” (8] [Hi]dalaja[.] 
Visa-Vaji-Yona-Karhbojeshu Nabhake’® Nabhaparh- 
tisha Bhoja-Pitinikye[shu][(9] Adba-P.I[a]deshu 
shavat& dev&narh pifya]shé dharnmanushatbi anuva- 
tamti(.] Y{a]ta® pi dutd [10] devanarh piyasé no 
yarhti te pi sutu devanarh piyamya®! [dharh] mavutarh 
vidhanam [11] dharam&nusathi dharhmarh anuvidhi- 
yathti anuvidhiyisarmti cha[.] Ye se [la]dhe [12] 
etuken4 hoti savat& [vija]ye® pitilase se[.] Gadba 
s& hoti piti piti dharnmavijaya-[13]shi[.] Lahuka va 
khosa piti[.] Palamtikyameve™mahaphalé maranam [ti] 
devenam pine® [.14] Etaye cha athaye iyarn dharnma.- 
lipitikhita[;]kiti[?] puta papota mea .**(15] navarh 
Vijaya ma vijayarntaviya manishu[.] Sbay[a]kashi 
no® vijayashi khamti cha Jahu-[16] daxndatacha loche- 
tu tameva cha vijayarn manatu ye dharhmavijaye[.] 
She hidalokikyapalalo-[, 17] kiye®’[.] Shava cha 
nilati hotu uydmalatif.] Sha [h]i hidaloki{k]upalalo- 
kikya[. 18] 


465 


Mansehra. 


amteshu a shashu piy ...t.shu.. . yok. 
MIGMMA-GeNG edias [Oars ced ve cto gi” cep 
« [Maka nama] 
‘Alikasuldade) erisni loath ahs Choda-Parhdiya 
a Tarhbapathniya evameva . . raja[.] 
Visha-Vaj[ri]-Yona-K. . shu [Nabha]ke”® [Na]- 
bhaparhtishu- .oja-Pitini, shu Arhdha-P...,.[10] 
(6 ». 6 Ho 4  « «. «+6 (MA priyasa] no 
y . tite pi Srutu devanarh priyasa dhramavutam 
vidhanarn dhramanugasti dhrathmarh anuvidhi- 
yarnti anuvidhifyisarhti cha][.} Y . . . 
. takena [hoti vija.] 


[11] 


® ° e . ° . ° e ° e ° e ° e 


. priye[.] [Etaye] ath[ra]lye iyarn dhrama . . 


likhita [;] kiti[?] pix prapotramea . hava . 
es e . e e a e e ° e * [12] 


e ° e e © e e 


: [lokike] ig ] Savin a nir: eli 
ani ya[s|rama([rati][.] Sa{hihida]lokika paralo- 
kikaf .] 


Epict XIV. 


Girnar. 
Ayam dharnmalipt devanarh priyena ~ Priyadasi- 
na rafia lekhapita asti eva [1] sarkhitena asti 


majhamena asti vistatana®*[.| Na cha sar- 
vam sarvata ghatitam ['2] Mahalake hi vijitaro 
bahu cha ikhitarn likhapayisarn cheva ([.] 


Asti cha eta kam [3] puna puna. vutain tasa 
tasa athasa®! madhiirataya [;] kimti [7] jano tatha 


Shahbdzgarht. 
Ayo dhramadipi devanam priyena Prisina‘? 
rafia dipapito asti vo satmkhitena  asti 
yo vistritena[.] Na hi savratra 
[so] savre ghatiti[.] Mahalake hi  vijite 
babu cha likhite likhapesami —cheva[.] 
Asti cha atra puna puna f[lajpitarn tasa 


tasa [atha]sa madhuriyaye [y|e[ua] ja{na] tatha 


patipajetha[.4] Tatra ekad4 asamatarn likbi- [13] pratipajeya ti[.] So siya va atra kichi asa- 

tarn asa desarn va sachhdya kéranarn va[5] matarhn likhitata desazn ya satnkhaye karana va 

ajochetpa lipikaraparadbena” va [. 6]. alocheti dipikarasa~ va © apavadbena[. 14] 
Kaisi. 

lyatn dhatnmalipi devanatn piyend §Piyadashina lajina likhapita athi yeva sukbi-[19] tena 

an majhimena athi vitbatend [.] No hi savata save ghatite®[.] Mabdlake hi vi-[20] jite 


74 The apparent e-stroke in the second syllable is accidental, 


7 Read ldjdne. 

76 The last syllable is perfectly distinct on the reverse. 

7 Dele hevameva. 

78 The last vowel is distinct on the reverse. 

79 The older impression reads [ Nabha)ka. 

8 The apparent 4-stroke in the first syllable is accidental. 

% Read piyasa. 

% Vijaye stands above the line, the vi is triangular, the 
ja badly formed. 

83 Read °meva, 


% Read mamnati devdnam piye. 
85 Restore asu. 
8 Probably shayakashakashi yo (i.e. [e]vo for eva) to 


be read, 


87 Probably °hikye to be read. 
88 Ayo according to B. 
89 Read vistatena, 
9 Read Priyadrasina. 
% The syllable sa bas been added as a correction, 
% Probably a mistake for lipikardparddhena- 
93 The syllable 7i stands above the line. 
30 


466 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Kalsi, 
bahu cha likhite lekhapeéimi cheva nikyarh [.] Athi cha heta punarhpuna lapi-[21] te tashd 
tasha athash& madbulivaye yena jane tatha patipajeya [.] She shiya% ata kichhi a-[22]samati 
likhite dish v& shathkheye kélanazh va alochayitu lipikalapaladhena va [.23] 


TRANSLATION OF THE SHAHBAZGARHI VERSION)! 


Epicr I, 


This religious edict has been incised by order of King Priyadarsin, beloved of the 
gods :—No animal may be slaughtered and offered here as a burnt-saérifice ; nor shall any 
festive assembly be held; for King Priyadargin, beloved of the gods, sees much evil 
in festive assemblies. There are, however, also some kinds of festive assemblies consi- 
dered most excellent by King Priyadarégin, beloved of the gods. 

Formerly many hundred thousand animals were slaughtered daily in the kitchen of 
King Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, in order to prepare curries. Now, when this 
religious edict is incised, only three animals are slain datly, two (2) peacocks and one (1) 
deer; the deer, however, not even regularly. But in future even these three animals wil’ 
no longer be slaughtered, 


Epict IT 


Everywhere in the empire of King Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, as well as among 
those nations and princes that are his neighbours, such as the Chodas, the Parndiyas 
the Satiyaputra, the Keralaputa, Tambapamni, the Yona king, called Amtiyoka 
as well as among those who are ths vassal-kings of that Arntiyoka,—everywhere King 
Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, has founded two (2) kids of hospitals, both hospitals 
for men and hospitals for animals. Everywhere where herbs wholesome for men and 
wholesome for animals are not found, they have been imported and sown by the king’s 
order. And wells have been dug by his order for the enjoyment of men and beasts.® 


Epicr IIT. 


King Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, speaks thus:—When I had been anointed 
twelve years [this following order was given by me}:—‘“ Everywhere in my empire both 
my loyal Rajukas* and vassals shall go forth on a tour every five hie: reason of this 


% Shs stands above the line. 

1The subjoined translation of Edicts IX, XIV differs only slightly, as the text requires, from that given, Arch, 
Survey, South Ind., vol. 1, p. 121. The translation of Edict XII has been taken over almost unaltered from the first volume 
of this Journal, p. 19f. The translation of Edict XIII is based on my German rendering in the Zeitschrift der Deutschen 
Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, vol. XLIII, p. 172f. The few notes given nae mostly contain matter vot given in my 
former articles on these inscriptions. 

2 The Chodas are the Cholas of Kaficht ; the Parndiyas are the PAndyas of the extreme south; the Satiynpata is pro- 
bably the king of tbe Satvats; the Keralaputa, the king of Kerala or Malabar. Tarhbaparani, or Tamraparyf, is Ceylon, the 
Yonas are the Yavanas or Greeks, and Antiyoka is Antiochos II (see below Edict XIII). 

3 Two sentences bad been left out, and the last has been mutilated (see the Dhauli version). 

4 Rajuka, in Pali rajjuka, literally, “rope-holder,” means “ Revenue Settlement officer ;’—see the Zeitschrift dex 
Deutschen Morgenlandischen Gesellschaft, vol. XUVII, p. 4668, 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTS. 467 


is the preaching the sacred law—as also for other business, (saying) :— Meritorious is the 
obedience towards mother and father[ meritorious is the liberality }towards friends, acquain- 
tances, and relatives, towards Brahmans and ascetics; [meritorious is the abstention from 
killing living creatyres], meritorious is the abstention from reviling heterodox men. 
Moreover, the teachers and ascetics of all schools will inculcate what ia befitting at divine 
service, both according to the letter and according to the spirit.” 


Enpicr FV. 


A long period, many hundreds of years, have passed, during which the slaughter of 
animals, the cruel treatment of created beings, the unbecoming behaviour towards rela- 
tives and the unbecoming behaviour towards ascetics and Brahmans have only increased. 
But now, in consequence of the fulfilment of the sacred law by King Priyadarsin, 
beloved of the gods, the sound of drums,° or rather the sound of the law, has been heard, 
while the sight of cars of the gods,° elephants, and other heavenly spectacles were exhi- 
bited to the people. As has not happened formerly in many centuries, even so have 
grown now through the god-beloved King Priyadargin’s preaching of the law the non- 
destruction of animals, the good treatment of living creatures, the decorous behaviour 
towards relatives, the decorous behaviour towards ascetics and Brahmans, the obedience 
towards parents, the obedience towards the aged. Thus, and in many other ways, the ful- 
filment of the sacred law has grown, and King Priyadargin, beloved of the gods, will 
make this fulfilment of the sacred law grow still more. Moreover, the sons, grandsons, 
and great-grandsons of King Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, will make this fulfilment 
of the sacred law grow until the end of time, and will preach the sacred law, abiding by 
the sacred law and by virtuous conduct; for that is the best work, viz. the preaching of 
the sacred law; but the fulfilment of the sacred law is not poesible for a man destitute of 
virtuous conduct. The growth of this very matter and its non-diminution are meritori- 
ous. For this purpose, viz. that they may cause the growth of this matter and may 
not permit its diminution, this edict has been written. This edict has been written by 
King Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, when he had been anointed twelve years. 


Epror V. 


King Priyadargin, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :—-Good works are difficult of 
performance. He who is the originator’ of good works does something difficult. of 
performance. Now-much good has been done by me. J/ then, my sons and my grandsons 
and those among my descendants who may come after them until the end of time, will 
thus follow my example, they will do what is meritorious. But he who will give up even 
a portion of these virtuous acts will commit sin, for sin is easily committed. 

Now a long period has passed, and the officials called the Overseers of the Sacred 
Law have formerly not existed, Now, when J had been anointed thirteen years, I appointed 
Overseers of the Sacred Law. They are busy among ali sects with watching over the 
sacred law, with the growth of the sacred law, and with the welfare and happiness of my 


5 Compare Jétaka, iv, 269.76 : dhashmabheris chardpesi. 
5 Compare F' Hian’s account ( Beal, p. 106, ) of religious processions at Patna. 
? The word adikara—Adikala has been completely preserved in the Mansehra and Kalsi versions alone. 
. 302 


468 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


loyal subjects, as also among the Yonas, Kamboyas, Gamdharas, Rastikas, Pitini- 
kas,°and all other nations which are my neighbours. Among my hired servants, among 
Brahmans and Vaigyas, among the unprotected and among the aged, they are busy with 
the welfare and happiness, with the removal of obstacles among my loyal ones. With 
the prevention of unjust imprisonment and of unjust corporal punishment, with the re- 
moval of obstacles and with loosening bonds, for these purposes they are busy, considering 
that there is a numerous progeny, or that the person concerned has been overwhelmed by 
misfortune, orthatheisaged. Here, and in all the outlying towns, they are everywhere 
busy in all the harems of my brothers and sisters, and among my other relatives. These 
Overseers of the Sacred Law are busy with what concerns the Sacred Law, with watching 
over the Sacred Law, and with what is connected with pious gifts, in my whole loyal 
empire. This religious edict has been written for the following purposes, viz. that it 
may endure.for a long time, and that my subjects may act accordingly. 


Epict VI. 


King Priyadargin, beloved of the gods, speaks thus:—A long period has elapsed, 
during which formerly the despatch of business and the hearing of the informers have 
not regularly taken place. Now I have made the following arrangement, that the 
informers may report to me the concerns of the people at any time, while I dine, in my 
harem, in my private rooms, in the latrine, in my carriages, and in my pleasure-garden 
and everywhere I despatch the business of the people. . Moreover, if, with respect to 
anything which I order by word of mouth to be given or to be obeyed as a command, or 
which as a pressing matter is entrusted to my officials, a dispute or a fraud happens in 
the committee of any caste or sect, 1 have given orders that it shall be brought forthwith 
to my cognisance in any place and at any time; for I am never satisfied with my exer- 
tions and with the despatch of business.’ For I consider the welfare of all people as 
something for which I must work. But the root of that is exertion® and the despatch of 
business. There is no more important work than éo secure the welfare of all. And 
what is the purpose of every effort which I make? It is that I may discharge the debt 
which I owe to the creatures, that I may make some bappy in this world, and that they 
may gain heaven in the next. This religious edict has been written for the following 
purpose, that it may endure for a long time and that my sons and grandsons may thus 
exert themselves for the welfare of all men. But that is difficult te carry out without 
the utmost exertion. 

Epict VII. 


King Priyadaréin, beloved of the gods, desires that adherents of creeds of all kinds 
may dwell everywhere ; for they all seek after self-controland purity of mind. But 
men possess various desires and various likings, They will put in practice either the whole 
or a part only of what they profess. But self-control, purity of mind, gratitude and firm 
attachment are laudable in a lowly man,” to whom even great liberality is impossible. 


® The Rastikas I identify with the Rishtikas,a southern nation. The Pitinikas, or Pitenikas, probably had their seats 
in the same districts. 


® Compare Mahdbhdrata, XII. 66,34 and 38, 14, where wtthdna “exertion” is prescribed for kings and declared to 
be the root of all good gévernment, 


1 The form nichd in the Girnar version instead of niche, may be explained ss a contraction of nichdya i.e, nichdya ; 
compare Pillar Edict iv, note on nijhapayitd, 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTs., 469 


Epict VIII. 


A long period has elapsed, during which the beloved of the gods used to go forth on 
so-called pleasure-tours.” On such occasions the chase and other similar amusements 
used to be pursued. Now, when King Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, had been anoint- 
ed ten years, he went forth in search after true knowledge. Owing to this event, reli- 
gious tours have become a regular institution here in my empire. On that occasion the 
following happens, viz. the reception of, and almsgiving to, Brahmans and ascetics, the 
reception of the aged, the distribution of gold, the reception of the people of the provin- 
ces, the preaching of the Sacred Law and inquiries concerning the Sacred Law. Jt is 
thus that,in exchange for post pleasures, King Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, since 
then enjoys the pleasures which these virtuous actions procure. 


fpicr IX. 


King Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, speaks thus :—The people performs various 
auspicious rites in misfortunes, at marriages of sons and daughters,” on the birth of sons, at 
the time of startingon ajourney. “On these and similar occasions the people perform many 
auspicious rites. But at such times the women perform many and various despicable and 
useless rites. Now, auspicious rites ought indeed to be performed. But rites of this de- 
scription produce no results. But the following, the auspicious rite, which consists in the 
fulfilment of the Sacred Law, produces, indeed, great results.” ‘That includes kindness 
towards slaves and servants, reverence towards venerable persons, self-control with re- 
spect to living creatures, liberality towards ascetics and Brahmans. These and other simi-. 
lar virtuous actions are called the auspicious rites of the Sacred Law. Now a father, or a 
son, or a brother, or a master, ought to speak as follows :—‘ This is meritorious; this 
auspicious rite must be pract’sed until the desired aim is attained.” To the success of 
which auspicious rites does this refer? For every worldly auspicious rite is doubtful. 
It may be that it accomplishes the desired object; but it may be that it remains even in 
this world. But that auspicious rite of the Sacred Law acts without reference totime. If 
it does not secure here the desired object, it yet produces endless merit in the next world, 
But, if it secures the desired object both are gained ; here that desired object, and endless 
merit is produced “ in the next world through that auspicious rite of the Sacred Law. 


Epict X. 


King Priyadarégin, beloved of the gods, does not think that glory and fame bring 
much profit, except that he desires glory and fame with the view that at present and in 
the future the people may practise obedience to the Sacred Law, and that they observe 
the duties of the Sacred Law. For this purpose King Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, 
desires glory and fame. Butall the efforts of King Priyadavsin, beloved of the gods, are 
made with reference to the results for a future life. Howso?P Jt is his wish that all 
may be free from danger. Now the danger is sin. But assuredly the thing is difficult 


N The word vihdravdtrd occurs in the sense of “ pleasure-tour” in Aévaghosha’s Buddhacharita, III, 3, and parsim. 
Por the use of dvdho and vivdho compare the Ambattha Sutta 2-1 ( Diyhanikdya, vol. I, p. 99). 

8 Compare the beginning of the Jaina Daéavaikalika stitra, —dhammo mangalam ukkattham, ete. 

4 Compare Jétakas, LV, 239, 9, mahantam puiiiam pasardmits 


470 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


to accomplish, whether for. the low or for the great, except by the greatest exertion and 
by the renouncing everything. But it is [most difficult] for the great. 


Epicor XI. 


King Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, speaks thus:—“There is no such gift as the 
almsgiving of the law, nor anything like the intimacy through the law, the charitable gift 
of the law and the connection through the law.® This Jaw includes the good treatment 
of slaves and servants, obedience towards parents, liberality towards friends, acquain- 
tances, relatives, ascetics and Brahmans, and the non-destruction of liviu.g creatures. 
Therefore a father, or a son, or a brother, or a master, or a friend and acquaintance, or 
even aneighbour ought to give advice on this matter, saying :—‘ This is meritorious; this 
ought to be done.” He who acts thus both gains this world and produces for himself 
endless merit in the next through this almsgiving of the sacred law. 


Epict XII. 


King PriyadarSin, beloved of the gods, honours men of all creeds, both ascetics and 
householders, by gifts and honours of various kinds. But the Beloved of the gods thinks 
not so much of gifts and honours as of what ?—that an increase of essentials may take 
place among men of all creeds. But the increase of essentials may happen in various ways. 
But this is its root, viz. guarding one’s speech—how so? “Honouring one’s own creed and 
blaming other creeds shall not be in unimportant points, or it shall be moderate with re- 
spect to this or that'important point.’”’ But other creeds must even be honoured for this or 
that reason. Acting thus, one exalts one’s creed and benefits also the other creeds. Act- 
ing differently, one hurts one’s own creed and injures the other creeds. Howso? For he 
who honours his own creed and blames all other creeds out of reverence for his own creed 
thinking “I promote thereby. the interests of my own creed,” however, acting thus, 
injures his own creed exceedingly. Henceself-restraint’® alone 7s commendable. How so ? 
“They shall hear each other’s law and love to hear it.” For this is the desire of the 
Beloved of the gods. What ?— that men of all creeds shall have heard much aid shall 
possess holy doctrines. And to those who adhere to thir or that faith it must be said: 
‘The Beloved of the gods thinks not so much of gifts and honours as of what ?—* tat 
an increase of essentials may take place among men of all creeds and a large one.” For 
this end are working the Overseers of the Sacred Law, the Superintendents of women, the 

Vachabhimikas * and other bodies of officials, And this is its result, viz, the exaltation 
of one’s own creed and the promotion of the interests of the law. . 


Epict XITI. 


King Priyadarsin, beloved of the gods, being anoixted eight years, conquered the 
country of Kalinga. One hundred and fifty thousand souls were carried away thence, one 


* Compare Ittivutta%a, p. 98 (Windisch), where most of the terms used inthis Edict occur, 


views. as well as the general 


‘© The reading of the other three versions samavéya “concord, harmony” 
with respect to opponents. 

7 Or, possibly, [they shall obey (it as far as it is worthy to be obeyed).) 

ts As the Mansehra version offers Vrachabhiimska, the term may mean either 
bhimika) “ Overseers of cowpens,”see Kamasiva, p. 290, }. 1 (DurgAprasada). 


is better than sayamo “ seli-restraint,”’ i.e. 


“Overseers of the latrines,” or (vraja. 


ASOKA’S ROCK EDICTS. 471 


hundred thousand were slain, and many times as many died. Afterwards, now that Kalinga 
has been conquered, are ‘found with the Beloved of ihe gods a zealous protection of the 
Sacred Law, & zealous love for the Sacred Law, a zealous teaching of the Sacred Law. 
That is the repentance of the Beloved of the gods on account of his conquest of Kalinga; 
for when an unconquered country is being conquered ® there happens both a slaying anda 
dying, and:4 carrying-off of the people. That appears very painful and regrettable to the 
Beloved of the gods. But the following appears to the Beloved of the gods still more 
regrettable than that; for there dwell Brahmans, or ascetics, or men of other creeds, or 
householders, among whom the following is practised, viz. obedience towards the first- 
born (?); obedience towards parents, obedience towards venerable persons, becoming 
behaviour towards friends, acquaintances, companions, and relatives, slaves and servants, 
and firm attachment. Such men suifer there injury or destruction, or forcible separation 
from their beloved ones, Or misfortune befalls the friends, acquaintances, companions, 
and relatives of those who themselves are well protected, bué whose affection is undi- 
minished. hen even that misfortune becomes an injury just for those wnhurt ones. 
All this falls severally on men, and appears regrettable to the Beloved of the gods. And 
men have faith not merely in a single creed.” 

Even one hundredth or one thousandth part of those men who were slain, died, or 
were carried off during the conquest of Kalinga, now appears to the Beloved of the gods 
a matter of deepest regret. Even, if a man does him an injury, the Beloved of the gods 
holds that ajl that can be borne should be borne. Even on the inhabitants of the forests, 
found in the empire of the Beloved of the gods he takes compassion, 7f he is told that he 
should destroy them successively,—and the Beloved of the gods possesses power to torment 
them. Unto them it is said—what? ‘Let them shun doing evil, and they shall not be 
killed ;’”’ for the Beloved of the gods desires for all beings freedom from injury, self- 
restraint, impartiality and joyfulness. 

But this conquest the Beloved of the gods holds the chietest, viz. the conquest through 
the Sacred Law. And that conquest has been made by the Beloved of the gods both here 
in his empire and over all his neighbours, even as far as six hundred yojanas, where the 
King of the Yonas, ealled Amtiyoka dwells, and beyond this Aintiyoka, where the 
four (4) Kings dwell, viz., he called Turamaya, he called Amtikini, he called Maka, 
and be called Alikasudara”™ further in the south, where the Chodasand Pamdas dwell 
as far as Tambapamni, likewise where the Hida-king dwells, Among the Visas, 
Vajris,” Yonas, Kamboyas, in Nibhaka of the Nabhitis, among the Bhojas, the 
Pitinikas, the Amdhras, and Pulidas—everywhere they follow the teaching of the 
Beloved of the gods with respect to the Sacred Law. Even those to whom the messen- 
gers of the Beloved of the gods do not go, follow the Sacred Law, as soon as they have 


19 For the construction compare the reading of the MSS. A and B inthe passage Jdtaka, III, p. 275 -—Senuko ndm 
“rajjamh kérento Bodhisatto Sakkattam kéresi. 

%0 The King means to say that on the occasion of conquests many oreeds suffer, as there is no country where the people 
are contented with one only The KAlst version, with which that of Girndr seems to have agreed, is more explicit, as it says : 
“ And there is no country where there are not found these countless congregations into which these Brahmans and ascetics a7'e 
divided. And there is nowhere a country where the people have faith in one creed alone.” 

" According to Lassen, Indische Alterthumskunde, Bd. II, p. 254 f. the five Yona or Greek kings named are Antiochos 
AL, king of Syria (died 247 B.C.), Ptolemaios If., king of Egypt (died 246 B.C.), Antigonos Gonatas, king of Macedonia 
(died 239 B.C.), Magas, king of Cyrene (died 258 B.C.), Alexander, king uf Epiras (died between 262 and 258 B.C.). 

* The Visas are probably the Bais Rajputs, the Vajris the Vyijis of Eastern India. 


472 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


heard of the orders of the Beloved of the gods, issued in accordance with the Sacred Law, 
and his teaching of the Sacred Law, ard they will follow it in future. 

And the conquest which thereby has been made every where—a conquest made every- 
where—yields a feeling of joy. But this joy is indeed only something small. The Beloved 
of the gods esteems as precious only that which refers to the next world. 

And this religious edict has been written for the following purpose. Why? ‘In 
order that my sons and grandsons as many as they may be, may not think a new con- 
quest desirable, in order that on the occasion of a conquest, only possible by the sword,” 
they may find pleasure in mildness and gentleness, and in order that they may deem a 
conquest through the sacred law alone a real conquest. That yields bliss in this world 
and in the next. All their joy be the joy in exertion ; for, that yields bliss in this 
world and in the next. 


Epict XIV. 


These religious edicts* have been written by order of King Priyadagin, beloved of 
the gods, under a form, whether abridged, or expanded. For not everything is suitable in 
every place. For my empire is large, and much has been written, and I shall write 
still more, Certain sentences have been repeated over and over again because of the 
sweetness of their import. And for what purpose has that been done? It is with the 
intention that the people may act thus. But it may be that something has been 
written here incompletely, be it on account of the space, be it on account of some 
reason to be specially determined, or through a mistake of the writer. 


XXXVII.—A COLLECTION OF SANADS OF MOGHUL EMPERORS. 


By Pav Horn, Ph.D., Srrasspure. 


Mr. H. Blochmann remarks in his translation of the Ain-i-Akbaré that the 19th 
chapter of the second book on the Saydrghdls is one of the most interesting in Abul 
Fazi’s whole work. The collection of seventy sanads discussed here may therefore 
claim some interest' as almost all of them refer to the grant uf such rent-free lands, and 
thus illustrate the formalities and usages of the institution in the most instructive 
manner, even if they fail to furnish much valuable historical information. 

The general points concerning the granting of Sayiérghdls being well known. I shall 
restrict myself, after a few short remarks as to the age and origin of the sanads, to hint 
at some details that arise from their study, giving as specimens the text of three of them 
with translation. They belong chiefly tothe pargana of BatAla (spelt Batdlah or Batala, 
and perhaps in the oldest of the documents Watalah) in the Panjab, only a small number 
beirig from other cities or districts as Akbarabad, Jalalabad, Bi&h, Chaméri, 
Dabhawala, and Patihaibatpir. Occasionally we find mention of such villages a 
Bhagwanpur, Faizuddinpdr, Harpdr, Kartarpir, Rahimabad, Rasdlpdr 


* The translation gives a free rendering of the Girnar reading, sarasake eva, literally “ only possible by arrows.” 

34 The word dhramadipt or dhammmalipi bas here to be taken in a collective sense ; compare the use of Smriti, Sruti 
and similar terms in Sanskrit. 

* These sanads were obtained by Mr. O. J. Rodgers, of the Archmological Survey in the Panjab, and by the 
Government of India were ordered to be distrit-zted among the British, Caicutta, Lahore and Lakhnau Museums, 


A COLLECTION OF SANADS OF MOGHUL EMPERORS. 473 


and Shahjahanptr, belonging to the pargana of Batdla, or PAdishAhptr alias 
Kalankhurdpitr, belonging to Patihaibatpfr, or with localities in Bat&la as the 
masjid-t-jdmi’-i kaldn ‘ the large jami-mosque’ and the mahalla-i qézi Isma’il Muhammad 
‘the quarter of judge Ism’ail Muhammad.’ The sanads were written under the rule 
of the Emperors Babar, Jahangir, Shahjahan, Aurangzéb, Shah’Alam, Farrukh 
Siyar, Muhammad Shah, Ahmad Sh4h, and Timar Sh4h. 

Among all the names of the persons on whom lands were conferred through these 
papers only a very few belong toimportant men. They are almost all small pecple, mostly 
women who scarcely would be found in the chronicles, not even the Shaikhs and QAzis that 
sometimes appear. No assignation of grounds to one person reaches a hundred bég’has, an 
allowance that Badauni (vol. III, p. 205) states as too mean for a learned man, and in 
most cases the grants vary between 10 and 12 big’has or something more, except rare grants 
of 40, 60 or 70 to Shaikhs, or once to a wife of such a pious man. The b7g’ha is defined 
asa jarib-i shastgazi, i.e. 60 gaz long and by 60 broad;? if fractions of bég’has occur 
we find disewas, but no biswansas. It was not customary, as appears from these sanads 
generally to execute a separate document for every single little allotment, but to take 
together several persons in one party. Sometimes an order extends even to several parties, 
the amounts of the property of individuals not being specified in the text. But the 
statements in question are given on the back, written in siydqgat-characters. Also, 
the individual members of each party are not enumerated in the text, but only one as a 
representative followed by the words wa ghairuhu, wa ghairuhd, or seldom wa jamda’ atuhu, 
with or without the added shurakd-é (for men and women), viz., sharikahad-t farman. 
A farman, e.g., generally concerns musammdt Maulind Khatib wa ghairuhu, and after- 
wards we learn that these others were Maulana Hamid, Maulan& Ahmad, and Maulana 
Ya’qib; or if is about musammdt Daulat Khatiéin wa ghairuhd, and on the back 
we find the other names Rahmat Khatin, Bibi Aima, Bibi Fatima, and Maryam Khatin, 
all written without diacritrical points and in very cursive characters, the representative 
person pointed at only by a mushdr ilaihi, A farman of a first grant of lands naturally 
always prescribes the measurement and boundaries (paimédan wu chak bastan) of the 
new territory, a superfluous business if the grounds were already in the possession of 
somebody and if therefore the matter was only a re-investment, In this case in the 
beginning the date of the first grant is always mentioned. We seldom read that the 
donations took place at different times (batawdrikh u sanin-i mukhtalifa). 

For a rent-free fee the Chagatai word sayérghdl is only once used, viz., in the oldest 
sanad of Babar’s time, and the Arabic aima seldom occurs ; generally the Arabic-Persian 
madad-i-ma’dsh is used. If an owner has died it can be transferred to his heir, and so 
we find grounds that have been for some centuries in the possession of the same. family. 
Likewise the heir succeeds to the testator in ¢ase of the latter undertaking at an 
advanced age the pilgrimage to Makka and Madina. Once the grant is renewed because 
one of two parties has died, the other being alive. In the new farmén therefore the dead 
person is replaced by his heirs and the lands are granted anew to those and the old surviving 
possessors, quite on the former conditions. A sanad of Shihjah4n’s reign mentions 


2 Of. Col. H. S. Jarrett’s note in his translation of the Ain-i-Akbart, vol. I, p. 61, and the 10th chapter, p. 62. We 
Jearn from Badauni (vol. IL, p. 206) that the salary of a commander of twenty, lowest rank of an officer in the Moghul 


army, was equivalent to the revenues of a thousand big’ has. A 
; P 


474 ‘EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


an order that restricted the right of the heirs in the Siiba of Lahér to part of the 
property of the testators in saydrghdl-land, viz., to 58 bég’has 8 biswas; in one case the 
number of 107 big’has 8 bdiswas is diminished therefore by 49 big’has that were 
again made domain lands. ( khdlisa shartfa), and the rest was handed to the heirs. This 
may be one of the many tricks invented by the sadrs and gdzis—who, as Abul Faz] says, 
wear a turban (asa sign of respectability), but are bad at heart, and who wear long sleeves, 
but fall short in sense—in order to injure people if they did not prefer even open force. 

If a person gets a fee for the first time, it is always stated that he was a worthy 
one and could not gain his livelihood by other means, the latter formula also occurring 
in the re-instatement of a former possessor or on the succession of his heir. The former 
owners of these sanads therefore must be reckoned amongst the third class of men that 
lands were bestowed upon (Aén-i Akbart, vol. I, p. 198)—Lf may mention here that 
saydrghdls are conferred on certain ysrsons even in the so-called ‘ Institutes of Amir 
Timir,’ (see Davy-White’s edition pp. 235, 305). Besides, it was to be proved by 
credible witnesses that the people in question were alive, a function mostly performed by 
two Shaikhs, at Batdla often by the mudarras of the jadmi’-mosque and the mufti. 
Before the sanad could be written a memorandum ora yddddsht-i wiqi’a was to be 
presented, and such papers are sometimes specially mentioned. 

It is often said that the owners of a rent-free fee are to be ‘ assiduous in prayer for 
the perpetuity of the enduring empire.’ This was also the common benevolent phrase 
for persons that were discharged from the service in the Moghul empire (conf. ’ Alamg?r- 
nama, p. 594). 

In Akbar’s time the rule followed in conferring land was, that all saydrghdl-lands 
should consist of one-half of tilled land and one-half capable of cultivation; in these 
sanads only land of the latter kind is granted (zamin-i ufldda-i ld’ igq-i-zird’at) and some- 
times banjar-land, i.e., such as has been uncultivated for five years or more (Ain-i- Akbaré, 
vol. I., p. 297). 

Of course a certain order is observed in putting the seals on these farmdnhd-i thadét 
—such were issued for conferring saydérghdls according to the Ain-i Akbari, vol. I, p- 
194—as in all Muhammadan public documents; naturally with some differences under 
various kings. The sanad of Babar’s time renewing the grant of a village with a reve- 
nue of 5,000 copper tankas (¢.¢., 250 rupees) to Qazi Jalal, judge of Batala, in A.H. 933, 
has been signed only with the emperor’s own seal—round the middle field bearing the 
words Zahiruddin Muhammad Babar and the date 928, in five panels the names of his 
ancestors to Amir Timur have been inscribed. Likewise the documents bestowing a 
first saydirghdl, besides the tughrd, bear only the seals of the emperors, viz., Jahangir—a 
square, round the centre the names of his forefathers inscribed in circles, and in the four 
extreme corners four names of Alléh ; ’Alamgir—a square exactly like that of J ahangir’s, 
only larger; and one with the seal of prince Aurangzéb before his accession to the 
throne, dated the 6th Jumddi’l awwal 1069 (30th January 1659), the juddés being on the 
2th Ramazén (the 15th June) of the same year. The seal of the king’s son is a 
round one and contains the words Muhammad Aurangzéb Bahadur Ghazi thani-i Sahid- 
qirdn thdni These sanads are all on paper about 33 inches by 17 (but the margins are 


> See Ep. Ind., vol. II. p. 147, note 23.—A drawing of Aurangzéb’s imperial seal is to be found in Sir Thomas Roe’s 
account of his residence at the court of the Great Moghul (¢f. Histoire générale des voyages Paris. 1746 seq, vol. xi, p. 57.) 


A COLLECTION OF SANADS OF MOGHUL EMPERORS. 475 


now all more or less cut and torn off), and are handsomely written in fair ¢a’léq, except 
Babar’s one (that measures 13 by 7} inches, and is in very cursive characters). In 
Akbar’s and Jahangir’s time we find the I/éhé era exclusively used, while later it is seldom 
mentioned, but that of the Hijra is employed. 

There are also some sanads granting saydrghdls sealed only by officials, and not 
by the emperor himself, whose name however is read on the seals of the latter. The 
size of these sanads is considerably smaller than that of the monarch’s ; it varies between 
16 to 20 inches by about 83 inches; the writing generally is very irregular. Sometimes 
the Sadr ul-suddér commands the performance of an imperial Jarman and gives orders for 
the assigned lands to be surveyed; such sanads in ’Alamgir’s time bear only the seal of 
the functionary named, whereas under Jahangir and Shah *atam the seals also of the 
Diwan or of the Khan Khéndu were affixed. In Farrukh Siyar’s reign in these cases the 
Qazi’s seal takes the first place accompanied by those of different lower officials and. 
private people. If the matter is a re-investment, as in most cases, we always find 
two seals. 

There occur as sealing Sadr ul-Sudir’s : 

Rizawi Bukhari, 24th year of ’Alametr (who died in the same enh Soon Mw é- 
thir-i? Alamgiré, p. (207) and Ma’ athir ul- Umard, vol. II, pp. 308, 309); 

Sharif Khan, 25th year of "Alamgir (who was elevated to this dignity in the same 
year,—conf. Ma’ dthir-i’ Alamgiri, p. 219); 

Asad Kh4n, 15th and 82nd years of Alamgir (with the dates 1081, l4and 1088, 20 
on his seals), @.é., Agaf uddaula Jumlat ul-Mulk Asad Khan. He is styled Tarkhan 
in another farman (16th year) ; and 

Amjad Khan Sadr Jahn, 49th year of Shah ’Alam. 

Not bearing the title of Sad, ul-suddr on their seals, as also Asad Khan does not, 
but in that function, appear: 

Siyadat Khan, 88th year of Alamgir (with the date 1096, 28 on his seal, in which 
year he, Sayyid Oghlan, received this title, cf. Ma’dthir ul- Umara, vol. II. p. 495); 

Amin Khan Bahadur, 47th year of "Alamgir (with the date 1118, 46 on his 
seal); and q 

Amir ul-Umara, 48th year of Alamgir (with the date 1113, 45 on his’ seal). 

In the re-investment-documents we find two seals: that of the Diwdn (-¢ qul) and 
that of the Sadr, but generally without titles. That one of them must belong to the 
Diwdn is (besides Aini- Akbar, vol. I, p. 195, line 6 e¢ seq.) shown in a sanad of the 
50th year of *Alamgir which bears Hafiz Khan’s seal, who in that year became Diwan 
of Lahér,—till then having been in the service of Gauhararai Bégum, younger sister of the . 
emperor (Ma’dthir-i’ Alamgiri, p. 513). The same document has also the seal of Mir 
KhwAja Shah, who is here exceptionally styled Sadr. The dates of the entries of 
the sanads in the registers of the saddrat and the diwdn (-i-sa’ddat) are always noted, 
the latter falling one or more weeks later than the first. The sadr’s seal is placed 
outside the text in the vertical fold on the right, that of the Diwdn is a little higher 
up, above the text itself and under a single line containing the name of the, reigning 


- The same was also the case during the Sassanian period (cf. Mitteilungen aus den orientalischen Sammlungen der 
koeniglichen Museen zw Berlin, Heft IV, Sassanidische Siegelsteine, herausgegeben von Paul Horn und Georg Steindorff, 
Berlin, 1891, p. 28.) The Sassanian high functionaries did not seal with the portrait of the king, but often with his name. 

3P 2 


476 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


king (on the mergin the monarch who had first granted the fee is shortly mentioned with 
his pcst-morlem-title). The following Diwdns and Sadrs appear together : 


Sabir ’Alf and Sayyid Ahmad, 11th and 18th. years of Jahangir, 

Diy&nat Khan and Nizamuddin Hasan Qadiri, 23rd year of ’Alamgir (the first 
with the date 1084, 17 on his seal) ;° 

*Abd Ilahyarul-Husaini and Aslam Khanazad, 33rd year of "Alamgir (with 
the dates 1089, 21, viz., 1093, 27 on the seals) ; 

Mir Ahmad Khan and Aslam Khanazad, 37th year of ’Alamgir (the latter with 
‘the date 1094, 27 on{his seal) ; 

Abd (?) Kazim and ’Abd ul- Baqi, 44th year of Alamgir (with the dates 32, viz., 
1110, 42 on the seals); ‘ 

Sa’Adatmand Khan and Sayyid Ashraf Khan, 8rd year of Shih *Alam (with 
the dates 1120, véz., 1119, 1 on the seals) ; 

Sa’Adatmand Kh4n and Khwaja Futth, 2nd year of Farrukh Siyar (the latter 
with the engraved ‘ first year’ on his seal, as also in the following case) ; 

Fazl’Ali Khan and Khwaja Futih, 4th and 5th years of Farrukh Siyar; 

Ziyéuddin Muhammad Khan and Futth Khan, 7th year of Farrukh Siyar 
(the latter with the date ‘third year’ on his seal) ; 

Sayyid Shahamat Khan and Mir Muhammad Salih, 5th and 8th years of 
Muhammad Shah (with the dates 1133, viz., 1134 and 1135 on the seals) ; 

Sayyid Shahamat Khan and Sayyid ’Aziz Khan, 10th year of Muhammad 
Shh (with the dates 1138, viz. 1139, 9 on the seals) ; 

Sayyid Shahamat Khan and Sayyid Miraksh4h Khan, 14th year of Muham- 
- mad Shah (the latter with the date 1142, 12 on his seal); 

Sayyid Shahamat Khan and Sayyid Sultan Husain Khan Mausawi, 15th 
year of Muhammad Shah (with the date 1138, viz., 1145, 15 on the seals) ; 

Sayyid Shahamat Khan and Mir Muhyi’ddin Mausasvi, 18th year of 
Muhammad Shah (with the dates 1138, viz. 1148 on the seals) ; and 

Sayyid Shahamat Khan and Khwaja Isl4ah Khan, 19th year of 
Muhammad Shah (with the dates 1138, viz., 1149, 19 on the seals). 

With one seal only (on the right) the same documents have been sealed inthe 25th 
year of Muhammad Shah (Sayyid Mirak Khan, 1153, 22), in the 2nd year of Ahmad 
Shah (Shamshérbég Khan Khanazad, 1161,1), andinthe first year of Timdr Shah 
(Dawar Khan Sadrul-éudir). Except the farmans sealed with the personal seals of 
the emperors a tughrd has but seldom been added the drawing of which is then always 
very poor and artless. 

Even the higher functionaries did not employ a new seal every year, that is to say, 
they did not alter the date. ‘We often find seals therefore with years that considerably- 
differ from those of the sanads themselves. 


On some signets the possessors are styled murid or murtd-i pddishah, a title 
introduced by Akbar. 


* Nizdmuddin Hasan Qidiri ocours as Sadr wl-Suddr also in the text of some sanads from ’Alamgir’s 22nd year 
The QAdirls were a darwésh order. Nineteen principles of theirs sre enumerated in the Berlin Persian eee ‘ 
Petermann, No. 721, (cf. Pertsch, Verzetchniss der persischen Handschriften der Koniglichen Bibliothek zu Berlin, 
No. 233, 2, p. 276).—Khanazads were a sort of pages educated at the imperial court (cf. Ma’dthir ul-Umard, vol. I,p. 797). 


A COLLECTION OF SANADS OF MOGHUL EMPERORS, 477 


There are also some private documents in this collection of sanads, the most 
interesting of which concern the sale and purchase of lands, ‘We learn from them the 
value of arable lands in the pargana of Batala, viz., 251 rupees for 100 bég’has, 20 rupees 
for 5 déy’has, 42 rupees for 15 bég’has 17 biswas, 122 rupees 8 annas for 35 bég’has banjar- 
land, and 60 rupees for 20 dég’has zamin-i bdrdni, the price of the bég’ha varying there- 
fore between 23 and 4 rupees. The sales took place under the rule of Muhammad and 
Ahmad Shah, the rupees and the annas being specified as ’dlamgiré. In Shih ’Alam’s 
time once Buhlilis or Dém-i ’déldmgiri’s are mentioned. One-half of the fixed amount 
is always paid on account. As is customary in Christian countries by illiterates to draw 
a cross instead of the signature, we find a circle once adopted for this purpose by a 
woman obliged to sign the document about the sale of her grounds. These papers bear 
the seal of the Qazi as of the competent official and the signatures and seals of a 
number of witnesses. Judges of Batdla were according to our sanads :— 

Qazi Arjumand in the year 1115 (2), the seal with the date 1112; Qazi ’At& Ull4h, 
son of ’Azim U114h, 1189, on the seal 1120; Qazi Ahliyat Ulléh, 1141, on the seal 
1188; Qazi Mir Muhammad, 1141, 1147, and 1161, and 

Wali Muhammad, son of the dismissed Q4zi Hibat Ull4h, ‘ who, as his father 
exfended the hand of oppression and tyranny over the inhabitants,’ and for this reason, 
in the second year of Shah ’Alam’s reign, the citizens presented a petition that he should 
be deposed and be replaced by their former just Qazi Ghulam Muhammad, whose seal 
with the date 48 appears on documents from ’Alamgir’s 49th year. Iam not sure if 
this request was entirely successful, at all events in A. H. 1120, 1125, and 1126 the desired 
Ghulam Muhammad was not judge, but Muhammad Wali U11ah, who is perhaps 
identical with the unjust Wali Muhammad. 

In the 16th year of Muhammad Shah Mir Muhammad, son of Mtr Muhammad 
Qaim, was appointed judge of Batala, as successor of AmAnat Ullah, and he was con- 
firmed in this office after Ahmad Shah’s accession to the throne, The documents bear 
the seals of Mir Muhy’iddin Khanazad, 1118, and Shamshérbég Khan Khanazad, 1161. 
That Jalal was Qazi of Batala in A.H. 933 has already been mentioned. 

Finally there are a few other sanads, €.g., one concerning the grant of a daily 
allowance of 12 annas to Shaikh Nir Muhammad and his companions in Patihai- 
batpdr, to be paid by the fautaddr of that town, or regarding the lease of the village of 
PAdishahpdr alias Kalankhurdpdr in the pargana of Patihaibatpir, amounting to 550 
rupees a year and being to be delivered to the fawtakkdna, which need not to be 
further described. 

I now give as a specimen the text® of three saydrghdl-sanads, together with their 


English translations :— 

el} GBD HOLT ne) Baty eg af at polo GLiMal, yLallh ybed ybiserione Wipe 
tthe Uphdy CA gly clene tle oare dary 9 le biped ites calles Bi iI eae ofA 
Slee y (ha af sty isles Eablye jlybayd eyo <tiy leds aye) clistle ipo JT ola af th jie 
Uillan y fol 5 i153: Ga Spal any Gy mayen ly apt etl! Stel» Se eloyry wblote 5 


_ © I have spelt the Persian words more correctly than they appear sometimes in the originals. 


478 EPIGRAPIIIA INDICA. 


Je yo $1, sinllas ote aie Sle p> OU ysl 5 ips palje ilo Ay» _Sthby elite as 
Ad aily Wy ppb i) bya Sle Sys rig Gedy GAG shied [7 ails aitlo < jae sho 


TRANSLATION. 


“In this happy time the high order which is necessary to be heard came forth that 
40 bég’has of fallow land, capable of cultivation, allodial to the pargana of Chamari 
that belongs to the ééba of the Panjab, according to the endorsement were bestowed as 
a rent-free fee upon P, P. RAj Bibiand companions. They may spend the revenues of 
it for their needs, being assiduous in prayer for the perpetuity of the enduring empire. 
The present and future magistrates, tax-gatherers, jagir-holders and krérés having sur- 
veyed the stated lands and marked their boundaries’ should give them into their posses. 
sion, and by no means allow any alteration or change. After the settlement of the 
boundaries and the new cultivation one should not trouble them for any demands of the 
Government and the levies of the court in theshape of quit-rent, taxes, and tributes, as 
gutlugha, presents, the rates of jaribina,®’ zdbitdna, muhassildna, mahrana, daréghagana, 
for war and chase, the muqaddimé and qdniingdy7, and the annual sequestrations. 
Regarding this no new order should be yearly expected and other eventual existing 
appointments not considered. Written on the 29th Shawwal of the 40th year since 
the sublime accession to the throne (viz., of ’Alamgir).” 

On the back the text of the yédhdsht-i wiqi’a, dated Monday, the 13th Rabi II, of 
the 39th year (21st November, 1695) is given, and besides the dates of entry in the 
. registers the names of Raj Bibi’s companions, viz., Nur Bibi, Sahib Khatan, and 
Sharifa Band, each of them getting 10 bég’has. 

Another sanad concerning a re-investment runs: 


Jas} ae ad sits slitols als dos” Opa Spiel 

See Pe splet diye shaw Wty BS 3 Juni 7 SE vbyhy yblose slits 
Ode bay 59 yySde BS) iI ne) bake ye Cojlye pr hin ghed p pull Hype Spade lasleiles 
pie Gila ye Sipst at) Sale das Coy aad, lille s gles cbt Laat wildy) ne shee 
5 5 Si) Spake 5 Ga} apase 2b) y BB 5 Lem patil see aS Congas cyt) OU Gude iyo wal 
eel gle] aijJod le pod Spada aly Sle G5 Goaly ol thy AJ etre bay 00 poe 
wtih chile Boyy'T pel wanay Boy 2 fol pebb> Slog jlolo Lass GSU lake of: UME IB lel gl 
Sr 5 aS byty Gale gina gailen 319 wesiye Goh! UB MEI gil ys alee Sue olay 
Lajas Lilley feel siti, UT Spat 59 1 ngbne itj AF aly go Atala Fle 5 Sie Lad ne 

7 Inother sanads the Chaudharés (1 cannot understand for what reason Blochmann has banished this spelling into the 


notes of his Ain-i Akba é-edition,—fie. vol. I, p. 198, line 15, instead of putting it into the text), Qdningéis, Mugaddams 
and Mdj/iks are said to have taken part and consented to this act. 


8 These technical terms are all fully explained in the dictionaries. 


* I know that this last phrase also could be translated ‘ if they should have possessed something in another place (besides 


the above saytrghal) it should not be tak tice of,’ , i . ee : 
hs ee ghal) e taken notice of,’ but I have preferred the above translation as more harmonizing with 


* Corrected from margima-ré according to other sanadg. 


A COLLECTION OF SANADS OF MOGHUL EMPERORS. 479 


eeablye jl bu} Joo loo csteny diabw loosd glistle wsye Slay Jlw » Peds as 1,if lela U wins 
Sector peat ot? YW ys? cpt AAG jbiel JT sithsisle Gyre Gale* 50 M1) sishioyaine 
Sat diallers 111A Sia Glee cobstc Cwgla 1A Siw 


TRANSLATION, 


“Shah ’Alam."—His Majesty Muhammad Shah-i Ghazi, may God perpetuate 
his reign for ever! 

“The present and future representatives of the Jdégir-holders and Krérés of the 
pargana of Batala, belonging to the éiba of the Panjib, may know: According to the 
high order of His Majesty, dated the 2nd Sha’ban of the third fear (7.e., of Shah ’ Alam), 59 
big’has of the land of the pargana stated have been bestowed as a rent-free fee, by former 
Sadrs upon P. P. Ndr KhAtdn and companions, partners of the farmdn, and upon P. P. 
*Abd ul-Ghaniand companions, heirof Muhammad ’Aqil and companions. It now 
being evidenced through trustworthy testimony that the above-named are alive, really 
own and possess the stated lands, and do not get their livelihood otherwise, on that 
account as an alms of the blessed head of the slave (of God), His Majesty the sovereign 
of the world, the master of the time, the author of safety and security, the covering 
shadow of the sublime God, the excellent viceregent of the peerless distributor of justice, 
the most perfect manifestation of the all-nourisher, the universal pity of the creator, 
the founder of the institutions of the world-possessing, who lays the foundation of the 
carpet of graciousness, the asylum of the khalifate,—the possession of the stated lands, 
in the former place and on the former conditions, according to the endorsement has been 
graciously ratified and intrusted. One ought to restore the described grounds into their 
possession, hindering them not at all, and absolutely not from spending the revenues 
from season to season and year to year for their own needs and to be assiduous in prayer 
for the perpetuity of the everlasting empire. If there should exist any appointment, 
otherwise” it is not to be taken notice of. Written on the 2nd Jumddi’l awwal of the 
18th -year since the sublime accession to the throne (¢.¢., of Muhammad Shah), cor- 
responding to the year 1148 of the holy flight (the 20th September, 1735).” 

On the back the endorsement of Shah ’Alam is written, as always in these cases. 
The names of Nir Khatdn’s partners were ’Aziz Khattn, daughter of Shaikh 
Muhammad, ’Amila, Shams Khatdin, daughter of Ily4s, Haydt Banu, those of 
’Abdul Ghani’s Jan Bibi, Saliha Bana, ete. 

Babar’s sanad runs—* 

la 
css pb dox® ep pbb yes 

S52) Coy) ASEM ee ys SK EY SI GS BL aly gleeghe gle =) uy 


2 Rhuld-manzil was Shih ’Alam’s post-mortem-name. 

22 Cf. note 9. 

8 This farm4n is very difficult to decipher. The characters want almost all diacritical dots; they are indeed 
not more fluently written than those of the other sanads, but the tenor is different, so that it cannot be understood by the 
help of the others. Iam indebted for a very few hints to Mr. Jami Khan Ghévi at Berlin, who has seen the document, 
but notwithstanding there remain some doubtful words. My transcript of the name of the village is quite tentative. 


480 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


asl Live Layate 5 palpe cabpayie pilev y cleans fle ley 5 sin Ut glaie yay jyimtilen 5p We sitloee 
Sey y yey dase » dt gspals aold [2] cyee ray Git OF del ge lst sym 9 adh ayes ytd 
OPT Kw sided Ws? rt Bd py? Law pas [9] Ue} jo aiilas cis vis” 


TRANSLATION. 

** He (God) is the conqueror ! 

‘“ Farmdn of Zahir-uddin Muhammad Babar-.i-Ghazi. 

* Now the order to be obeyed by all the world and necessary to be respected has the 
honour of setting forth that the village of Manchharakal, belonging to pargana 
Watala, the total register of which amounts to 5,000 copper- -tankas (250 Rupees) and 
which asa Saydrghdl has been bestowed upon Qazi Jalal, judge of the city named, is 
now granted to him on the same conditions for six years. Noone should molest 
nor trouble the aforesaid for quit-rents, jihdt and sdir mutawajjihdt.* On request it 
was further enjoined that the imperial seal has been affixed for evidence, and every year 
a new farman or order shall not be thought necessaxy. Written at........in 
the castle ‘ Phoenix,’ in the month Zi Qa’da, 933 (began. the 80th July, 1527).” 

On the back the following words are written :— 

“Order of the chief wazir of the cities of faithful mankind, Shaikh..,............” 
Unfortunately the name of the Shaikh is not legible and his seal is also very indistinct. 


XXXVIIL—FURTHER PABHOSA INSCRIPTIONS. 
By G. Biuuer, Pu.D., LL.D., C.L.E. 
In addition to the three larger inscriptions, published by Dr. Fihrer (ante, p. 240ff), 
the Pabhosa cave contains a number of small and difficult ones, regarding which I 
offer some remarks at the request of the Editor, though I am unable to give in every 
case certain and complete readings or satisfactory explanations. AJl of them are some- 
what carelessly incised on the hermit’s bed and seem to belong to a period, when the 
cave was no longer occupied by the original donee or donees. The characters show the 


types of the seventh or eighth century A.D. The language is incorrect Sanskrit, 
occasionally, it would seem mixed with Prakrit. 


No. I. 


TRANSCRIPT. 
L. 1. Sri-Prayagara var[e ?Juttam(?)[p PJodhaki(? )h 
L. 2 . Suttadharfa ?] akharnndatah 
L, 8. Suttadhar[a?] yayyo ?{a?] ubba ?,daya [) *] 
Above 1.1 stands high up in the left hand cornera large sign, which may be 
intended for j#d, and lower above the middle of the line two letters, the second of which 


14 Otherwise sdir jihdt. 


Eypigraphia Indica, vol. IT. 


PABHOSA INSCRIPTIONS: ON THE HERMIT'S BED INSIDE THE CAVE. 


Dr. A. Fuhrer, impress. Scale: 4 of originals. 


vy peel 
mR Sa 2 


; Osh 


q a Chee : . 
feels ates on 2 hia me 


ON THE wrest WALL 


PABHOSA INSCRIPTIONS . 


ON THE HERMI?T’S BED INSIDE THE CAVE, 


elig~ yay 


“* 


x 


+ (NSIDE THE CAVE, 


Dr. A. Elihrer. impress, 


FURTHER PABHOSA INSCRIPTIONS. 481 


iska. Below ]. 3 there is the representation of a conch-shell and to the right three rudely 
seratched illegible letters. 

As regards the interpretation, the only certain facts are (1) the occurrence of the name 
of “glorious Pray[a* ]ga” and (2) the mention of two swtadhdra or masons, Possibly 
the whole may be intended for: Sré-Praydg[déd Varaputtro Modhaki for Podhaké), 
sitradhdro’ khanditah stitradhéro Yayya ubhalyoh*| deyam\ orin English “From 
glorious Prayaga, the unblamed mason Modhakin (or Podhakin) son of Vara, (and) 

‘the mason Yiayya (Jajja),—the gift of both these.” If this is correct, the inscription 
probably records repairs of the cave, done by the two persons mentioned. 


No. II. 


TRANSCRIPT. 

Sri-KalasefSe* ]Svaradisi(?)14 kutti 1 

The reading of the seventh and eighth consonants is uncertain ; kutté is probably a 
mistake for kuté, the two dots, which I have taken for stops, may, of course, denote the 
Visarga, which however would be wrong. The translation is: “The cella (or temple) 
of glorious Kalagesvara and the rest.’’ Kalaga is the name of a Néga, and the 
inscription probably refers to the legend, which makes the cave the home of an enormous 
Naga, (see ante, p. 241). 

No. III. 

The only signs readable with any certainty are: rvvadalta towards the end of the 

line. 


No. IV. 
eNamualdaiaprasado Olle oe metiett ngs nr ts) yen's se Ses 0 os teteeuls eis 


No. V. 


DOV irre eae oi Neiis | loys, (ini ol fe nes catus is! Sens re Sid was ois Sia nen he, oe os 


No, VI. 
TRANSCRIPT. 
Om Ke[Ki*]rane[sv]arit(?)ila(?)kedali(?)va . . . sya [1*] 
The inscription seems to refer to a deity called Kiranesvari, which seems to occur 
again in No, VII. 
No. VII. 


TRANSCRIPT. 

Kirane[$va]rigr[i* }ka[r* ]tta [1*] 

If the restoration is correct, the translation will be, ‘The maker of (the statue of ) 
glorious Kiranesvari”’ and the inscription may refer to one of the masons, mentioned in 
No. I, see also No. VIII. 

3Q 


482 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


No, VIII. 


TRANSCRIPT. 
Sri-Krishnagopirapakartta [1] 
The second ta of °karttd looks like va. The translation is, ‘The maker of the 


statues of glorious Krishna and of the milkmaids.” The inscription probably refers to 
one of*the masons in No. I. 


Nos. IX AND X. 


TRANSCRIPT. ~ 

Vijayasenasyah[ya*] | 

Kiranabhojak[a? ] 

These two pieces may belong together and may possibly mean, “ Of Vijayasena, 
the temple-priest of Kirana (ie. Kérapesvari).” If this interpretation is correct, the 
two notes may indicate that Vijayasena visited the cave when the two masons, named in 
No. I, repaired it. The contents of the whole series may perhaps be connected as 
follows :— “ Some time in the seventh or eighth ‘century the P&bhosa cave was 
gratuitously restored by two masons of Prayaga and dedicated by Vijayasena, the 
Bhojaka of KiraneSvari, to the Ndga Kalasa and other deities.” This would account 
for the existence of the legend mentioned by Dr. Fiihrer, according to which the cave is 
inhabited by an enormous Naga. . 


XXXIX.—AN ADDITIONAL NOTE ON THE BAIJNATH PRASASTIS. 


By G. Bituugr, Pu.D., LL.D., C.I.E. 


During the Christmas vacation of 1892 Dr. M. A. Stéin, the energetic and learned 
Principal of the Oriental College at Lahore, visited the Kangra district and spent some 
days at Kiragraéma, where he studied the Baijnath Prasastis on the spot and made 
enquiries regarding various facts they mention. After a certain show of resistance the 
temple-priests became communicative, no doubt, as Dr. Stein thinks, because they wanted 
to learn what their inscribed tablets contained. And the results of his enquiries are so 
valuable for the interpretation of the inscriptions that I am sure I shall render a service 
to the readers of the “pigraphia Indica if I publish here a translation of the portion 
of his letter, which contains them. Writing from Lahore on February 6th, 1893, he 
says :— 

“ Navagrdma, mentioned in the inscription [I, 33] is probably identical with the 
village of N&ur,’ where the temple still owns 2} halas of land. Naur lies about 3 
miles west from Kiragrama and belongs to the ancient pargana of Palam, which latter 
word I would identify with the name of the village of Pralamba, of which the inscrip- 
tion speaks [IJ, 81]. About thirty years ago, when the introduction of tea-planting 
induced many Europeans to settle in Kangra, Palam? was turned into Palampur, 


1 The Sanskrit prototype of Naur would be Nava pura, which probably was another nameof Nava g rama —(@. B. ] 
2 The Kangra Gazetteer still mentions Palam. 


NOTES ON THE SIVASKANDAVARMAN GRANT. 483 


“In the bazar of Kiragrama I was shown the spot where, so late as two generations 
ago, stood a shop, belonging to the temple and where the two pious Banians, whom the 
local traditions too know as the founders of the temple, are said to have lived. ‘Lhis is 
clearly the paryasald mentioned in the Pragasti II, 34. Regarding the oil-mill which 
Manyuka and Ahuka dedicated I could not hear anything; and the god has long lost 
the income from the mandapikd. But there was formerly a custom-house on the frontier 
of the territory of Mandi which passes close to the village. On the rocky hill which 
rises near the village and is now occupied by the Dak bangalow, the Rane family is said 
to have had a fort. I do not dare to decide if these Rdnes, whose descendants are 
still Rajput zamindats in the pargana of Baijnath, are identical with the Réjdnakas 
of Kiragrama.® | | 

**But in illustration of what you have said on p. 102, vol. I, of the Epigraphia 
regarding the intermarriage of this Rajput family of Kiragram with the Rajds of 
Traigarta, I may mention that the Raja of Kapurthala quite lately married a girl from 
the house of a bitterly poor Rajput of the Gulherian Mian clan, who lives as zamindit 
not far from Baijnith. Though the man is so poor that his daughter, the present Rani, 
used to work for wages in the tea plantations, his countrymen have not yet pardoned. 
him that he contracted the alliance with the Raja. 

“Your proposed identification of Sugsarmapura with Kot is fully confirmed by the 
local traditions. 

“The temple [of Baijnath] is well preserved, and ia my opinion it has not undergone 
such very great alterations as the earlier describers state.* Thus, big statues of Ganga 
and Yamuné, which clearly belong to the time of the inscription, are found on the gateway 
pillars of the Puri, exactly as Rama describes them in the Pragasti, I. 29, and his other 
detailed statements regarding the building fully agree with the actualities. Only the 
roof seems to me modern ; according to the statements of the Purohitas it was renovated 
about one hundred years ago by RAja Sarhsirchand.”® 


XL—A NOTE ON THE PRAKRIT GRANT OF THE PALLAVA KING 
SIVASKANDAVARMAN (Votvme I, pp. 2—10) 


By Ernst Leumann, Pa.D., StRasspure. 


Prakrit inscriptions always present particular difficulties. Dr. Bihler, with his 
usual sagacity, has removed most of those connected with Sivaskandavarman’s grant, 
Some others of the same inscription can only be mastered when further documents of a 
similar type turn up. A few, however, may perhaps be dealt with now. We have 


8 J consider the identity of the Rdze family with the Rdjdnakas to be very probable. Rdjdnaka is also the parent of 
the title Rdnd.—[G. B.] 

4 Cunningham, Arch. Surv. Rep., vol. V., p. 179 £. 

6 1 take this opportunity to note that Professor Kielhorn has published in the Indian Antiquary, vol. XX, 
pp. 114 ff, certain emendations of my readings of the two PraSastis in accordance with rubbings made by Sir A. 
Cunningham. The following among Professor Kielhorn’s proposals appear to me acceptable:—I. 6, sureshu nasthhm 
apareshu kurvatdm ; 1. 29, bhahtitrutallobhamalena tena; J. 87, Sastradrishtim anustitya ; IL. 2, sa patu vo Makédevo 
Brahmddyé bhaktim Asthitah ; and 11.9, Kritdrthau. In addition, I would mention that I now translate astrijano in I, 
13a by “archers” instead of by “heroes,” as aséré is clearly the nominative of astrin ; note 64 must be altered accordingly. 


3 Q 2 


A484 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


to correct the following passages in Dr. Bihler’s transcript (on. pages 5—7 of 
volume I) :— 

1.1, Read aggitthoma, The irregular combination {th (for ¢¢h) is a mistake of the 
engraver which has crept in on account of the similarity of the signs for ¢h and fh. 

1.8, Separate visaye savattha, ie. vishaye sarvatra ‘everywhere in our (amham) 
country.’ 

1. 4, Read mddabika and restore it tomddambika. This word, which means ‘ chief of 
a madamba district’ is often found in the older Jain literature ;' its base madamba 
occurs in the same texts and beside in some Niryuktis and Bhashyas. 

1. 5, Read drakhddhikate, which stands for drakkhddhikate and is equivalent with 
drakkhiya ‘guard’ of the Jain literature ; literally it means ‘employed as a guard 
(draksh@dhikrita). As to the sign khd, cf. lines 27 and 38. . 

1. 7, Read e instead of cha and ef. the sign for e in lines 27, 30, 34. The word ettha 
(atra ‘here’) opens of course a new phrase, and we need not follow Dr. Bihler 
in inserting a second verb; vitardma is indeed the verb wanted and closes well the 
preceding phrase. The first verb (dzaveti), however, is certainly well supplied by 
Dr. Biihler; only we think its place is not before amham (in 1.3), but after ppayutte 
(in 1. 6). At any rate we are not to combine in irregular co-ordination the accusa- 
tives of lines 3--6 with the genitive samcharan-taka-dhada-manusdna. 

I would then translate the whole passage thus:. . . .'. . . “Sivaskanda- 
varman informs (ézaveti) in our country everywhere the royal princes, generals, rulers 
of larger and smaller districts (rafthikas and mddambikas), local prefects and others, 
the freekolders of various villages, vallavas, govallavas, ministers, guards, captains? 
tithikas, neyikas and all others employed in our service: We grant an exemption 
from (any taxes that might be levied by or for) sasicharantakas, soldiers or other 
persons.® 

1. 44, Read vasudhddhipataye (acc. pl. from pati). 


e.g. in the Aupapdlika stitra, Paryushandkalpa (‘ Kalpasitra ’), ete. 
2 The corrected reading ¢rakhddhikate (in |, 5) makes it very probable that the word immediately follo wing (gumika) 
is ulso a military term, 

3 In reply to Dr. Bihler’s appended notes, I may remark that the persons favoured by the grant are undoubtedly “the 
Brahmans, who are the freeholders of the settlement. (kodunka) called Chillareka.” The gift is therefore a Brahmana 
parihéra, i.e.‘ an immunity granted te Brahmans. Honorific allowance, as Dr. Biihler proposes, does not change the 
sense, but is less appropriate, kodunka is apparently acontracted form of kodumbaka (Sans. kautumbaka) : in a same: 
way naiyyoka seems to me to stand for naiyogika, which would bea synonym of the term dbhiyogika-‘servant?—of the 
Jaina literature. The term kumdéra parihdra similarly denotes an immunity presented to a prince; the Jataka phrase 
adduced by Dr. Biihler means— “ When, afterwards they noticed that he was a prince, they no longer gave him any work 
to do, but spared him, so to say, by a princely immunity.” 

Tho inscription, of course, mentions, also, the persons who are to respect the grant, 2.e. who are not allowed in 
any way to trouble the above-named Brahmans (by levying taxes, etc.). So the two cognate Pallava plates clearl 
state: Sarvdyuktakah sarva-naiyyokah rdjavallabhak samcharantakds cha tat-simam sarva-parihdraih paharee 
parihdrayanté cha ayutiu savva-parihdrehi pariharantu parihdrayan (tu cha), “The persons of the king’s service and 
party must spare and cause to spare the territory (described before) by all the (eighteen) kinds of exemption. “In face of 
these parallel passages, the words—samcharantaka-bhadamanuséna... parihdram vitaréma, can only have the sense 
which I have given them, without pretending, however, that my translation reflects accurately the grammatical construction 
This latter can only be made clear when the three syllables before parihdram are deciphered. ; 

_ That samcharantakas are a nuisance to people, we learn, e.g. from the description of a model town given in the 
Nemicharita, 1. 14 (on Hemachandra’s Bhavabhdvand, v.5): in that town no samcharantakas are allowed to stroll about 
(.++ samcharantehim tirai na tattha bhamiun... .). Another Prakrit word of the Pallava Inscription (which however 


occurs also elsewhere) is bappa ‘father ;:’ this is found in DaSavaikdlikasutra vii, 18— See Zeitsch. d 
‘Gesellech. vol. LVI. pp, 628. ew eget ae eee ee ic 


NOTES ON THE SIVASKANDAVARMAN GRANT. 485 


1. 45, Read mejataye, i.e. mejjdtaye. In Jaina Prakrit marydddé becomes mejja, the 
last two syllables being contracted. The Sanskrit sounds arya in Prakrit generally 
are changed to era, sometimes to ejja or ariya or ajja. 

1. 46, Separate cha st. The word si refers to mejdtdye, and therefore represents a 
singular case like tasydh; it is indeed a short form for the anaphoric pronoun se that is 
often met with in the Miryuktis and Bhdshyas of the Jain literature. The function 
and origin of se has been well discussed by Professor Wackernagel in the Zeitschrift 
fiir Vergleichende Sprachforschung (vol. XXIV, p. 600). Though se and si refer to ail 
genedrs and numbers we find occasionally in the Miryuktig and Bhdshyas a special 
plural form sim which, by the addition of the. Anusvara, has been formed after the 
fashion of plural genitives like ¢esisn (¢eshdm), etc. 

What remains to be said is of less importance; we are probably to read vdédaka for 
vitake (in lines 12 and 30); misprints are apparently hiroga for hirogo (10), pali- 
bhago for patibhdgo (12), patébhdgo for pattibh-(21), ttivas® for ttivds® (36), pila for pila 
(40), datéd for datd (48), hada for kada (51), brdhmana for brahmana. and lekhakha 
for lekhaka (52). 


SOME FURTHER NOTES ON THE GRANT OF SIVASKANDA- 
VARMAN. (VoxumeE I, pp. 2—10.) 


The corrections of my reading and rendering of Sivaskandavarman’s grant, which 

Professor E. Leumann has proposed above, make, [ think, a few further remarks 
from me desirable. 

(Line 1.) Professor Leumann’s statement that the plates have aggitthoma, not aggit- 
thoma, is correct. I should say that the nonsensical form has been. caused by a 
confusion between the two possible forms with ¢tha and ¢tha. Both in literary and in 
epigraphic Pali, Sanskrit shta or shtha is represented occasionally by the dental tenuis 
and the tenuis aspirata. Thus, we have in literary works for kroshtri ‘a jackal,’ both 
kotthuka and kotthuka, or even kutthu, as well as forms in ¢¢ha for various past participles 
in shta. And the Sanchi votive inscriptions offer sethz and sethi for éreshthin; ASoka’s 
New Edicts both vivutha and vyutha for vyushta. In such words the Pali ¢ttha probabl gy 
goes back to originals with s¢a, similar to those in the Shahbazgarhi version of the 
Rock Edicts, where we find sresta for Sreshtha, dipista (3rd pers. sing. aor. Atm.) 
equivalent to a Sanskrit form adipishta. 

(L. 3.) Professor Leumann is right in separating eisaye savattha, but the 
correction has already been given by me in the Addenda and Corrigenda to vol. I, 
p- 479. 

(L. 4.) The plates have not mddabika, as Professor Leumann asserts. The last sign 
is mutilated, the crossbar of the ka on the right having been omitted by mistake. 
The sign, which has thus come out, can only be read nu. Professor Leumann’s restora- 
tion mddambika“ governors of Madambas,” instead of mdmdabika “ custom-house officers,” 
is possible, though, owing to the rarity of the word madamba (except in Jaina works), 
somewhat doubtful. I add an explanation of the term madamba, which Professor Jacobi 
has kindly furnished to me from the Jaina commentaries: madambdni sarvato'rdha 
yojanat parato’vasthitagrdmani. 


486 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(LI. 5-7.) Professor Leumann’s readings drakhddhikate and ettha for my dranadhikate 
and chattha are certainly correct. His translation of lines 6-7, ‘‘ We grant an exemption 
from (any taxes that might be levied by or for) Sasncharantakas (soldiers) and other 
persons” cannot stand, for °bhadamanusdéna is separated from parihdram by a not now 
readable word ending in 0, and in all probability the two expressions do not belong 
together. Even supposing that samicharantakabhadamanusdna parihdran vitardma had to 
be taken together, the meaning could only be, “We grant an exemption to Sarncharantakas, 
etc;”> it is. against the custom observed in the grants to name first an exemption and 
afterwards the object granted. I must add that my translation of parihdra by ‘an | 
mmunity” ought tobe changed to‘a honorific grant.’ Of late I have found in the 
Jaiakas several passages where parihdra has a concrete meaning and is used for 
« appanage, honorific allowance, special grant.’? In several stories it is narratea how 
queens receive or are deprived of their parihdra, and there is the compound kumdra- 
parihdra “an allowance suitable for a prince.’’ 

(L. 40.) The correct reading is pild (not pild, as Professor Leumann says), the short 
4 being expressed, as is done very often, by a complete circle. 

(L. 45.) Majdtdye is the reading of the plates, not, as Professor Leumann holds, 
mejatdéye. The little stroke above the ma has been caused by a slip of the ev:graver’s 
punch. A real me looks very different (see lines 1, 29, 41) 

(L. 46.) Assisi is permissible for tesimh, etesisn and esim, according to Hemachandra 
Prékrita Vydkarana III, 81, and occurs, as Professor Leumann says, in Jaina works, I 
agree with him that its equivalent si in cha si should be written separate. (Si refers, 
however, not, as Professor Leumann thinks, to majdtdye, but to the grantees. Compare 
the corresponding passages in the Sanskrit grants, e.g. Indian Antiquary, vol. V. p. 196, 
1. 6; p. 207, 1.9; p. 212, 1. 25; vol. XI, p. 113, 1. 43; p. 159, 1. 50. 


TABLES FOR CALCULATING HINDU DATES. 487 


TABLES FOR CALOULATING HINDU DATES IN TRUE LOCAL TIME. 


By Hermann Jacosi, Pu.D., Sanskrit Proressor, Bony. 


In my paper on the computation of Hindu dates, etc. (vol. I, page 408 ff.), I have 
given rules for calculating, according to the curiously inaccurate Hindu method, the cor- 
rections which must be applied to a date, computed for mean sunrise, in order to cbtain 
the same for true sunrise at any given place in India. As this calculation is rather 
tiresome, I have computed the following tables, which will make the process easy without 
detracting from the accuracy of the results. As the problem, to solve which these tables 
serve, is somewhat complicated, a few remarks on the theory of true and mean time may 
not be amiss. 

1. Suppose the sun to move with an equal motion on the equator (instead of on 
the ecliptic) ; then this equatorial sun will exactly regulate mean time. His rising will 
occur at 6 o’clock for every place on the earth the whole year round, marking the mean 
beginning of day. The interval between his risings at two distant places will be the 
time-difference between these places (see vol. I, Table XXV). 

2. Now assume a second sun to move with the same equable motion on the ecliptic 
This supposed sun is meant when the ‘“‘mean sun” is spoken of. It is obvious that 
this mean sun and the first will not rise at the same time, except when they coincide 
at the two points of intersection of the equinoctial and the ecliptic. At every other 
time the second will, in places in north latitude, rise earlier than the first, when he 
is in the northern half of the ecliptic; and later, when he is in the southern half, 
Table XXVII, A-F, gives the interval in ghatikds and vinadis between the risings of 
both supposed suns,’ for every degree of the ecliptic as entered in the vertical index to the 
left and right of each table, and for all degrees of north latitude from 10°—335° as entered 
in the horizontal index at the top of each table. At the intersection of the horizontal and 
vertical columns is given the interval of rising for the tropical longitude of the mean sun 
‘and for the terrestrial latitude in question; e.g., in Table XX VII-B, we find that for 44° 
trop. Long.© and 20° terr. Lat. the difference in rising is lgh. 22v. If the trop. Long. © 
is entered in the index to the left, the ecliptical mean sun rises before the mean beginning 
of the day ; if on the index to the right, it rises after the mean beginning of the day. 

3. We thus find the time of rising of the mean sun (moving on the ecliptic), but 
what is really wanted is the time of rising of the trwe sun. The true sun only twice in 
the year coincides with the mean sun; at every other time he either precedes or lags 
behind the mean sun. Their difference in longitude is the equation of the sun’s centre, 
the amount of which in degrees, minutes, and seconds is furnished by Table XXIV-R, 
If the equation has the sign —, the true longitude of the sun is greater than his mean 
one, ana consequently the true sun rises later than the mean one; if the equation in 
Table XXIV has the sign +, the true sun rises before the mean one; always by the time 
corresponding to thesun’s equation of the centre. In order to compute the equivalent 
in time for the sun’s equation of the centre, we must know how much time is occupied 
in rising by one degree of the ecliptic at the place where the sun is at the moment 
in question in a given latitude. The amount in rinddis is furnished by the entries imme- 
diately below the degrees of terrestrial latitude in Tabie XXVII. Though continually 
changing, it is considered by Hindu astronomers to be constant throughout each single 


1Or between the risings of a point on the equator and one on the ecliptic, which have the same distances from the 
equinox. 


A488 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


sign, and equal tc the mean.? As the different parts of Table XXVII represent the 
tropical signs, one entry serves for the whole part. Thus we find in Part B that on the 
20th parallel one degree of the ecliptic (between 80° and 60° trop. Long.) takes up 8°79 
vinddis in rising. Knowing the time taken up in rising by one degree, we can easily 
caleulate the time corresponding to any given value of the equation of the sun’s centre. 

4. Table XXVII refers to tropical longitude, while the other tables yield sidereal 
longitude. The former is found by adding to the latter the ayandméas (or amount of the 
precession of the equinox) for the year in question. 

The rule for calculating the ayandigas is given in section 39 of the former paper 
(page 421); to find them without calculation is the object of Tables XXVIII and XXIX, 
e.g., we find by Table XXVIII that in K. Y. 4683 the ayandmsas were- 


16°" 14" 427, oz K.Y. 4600 = 15°° 0" (67 
S0lyears= 1° 32". .0” 
ter Led 

Ayanainéa = 16° 14/ 42” 


Table XXIX serves for the Brahma Siddhdnta and Siddhaénta Siromani, Table 
XXVIII, for the other Siddhdntas. 

5. I shall now illustrate by examples the working of these tables in connection 
with the Special Tables; for when such accuracy is wanted, that the difference between 
mean and true time comes into consideration, the calculation must be made by means of 
the Special Tables.’ 

1st Example.—Let it be proposed to calculate the true Tithi for true sunrise on 
the 7th (solar) Jyaishtha K.Y. 4128 at Aligarh, whose latitude is 27° 53’ (or roundly 28°) 
and time difference + 14 vin. We use for this and the following examples the tables 
for the Sarya Siddhénta:— 

(a2) We calculate the elements: Distance ¢«—®© etc., for the year and day in 
question, viz.— 


Dist. C—O (’s An. ©’eAn. Corr. 

4100 years . 69° 43° 0” | 217° 8 30” | 282° 44’ 16” | + 20g. 54a, 
eS arenes Sy cae yn Ce oh thd ere Meme EY oF chp. 
Tth Jyai. . . 66° 40’ 84”| 97° 16’ 96”| 34° 29° 46" 

254° 16’ 37” 13% SOs ST 7 1S 2 eg pty ee 


(6) Add the time difference, with the sign changed, for the place in question, to 
the Corr. ( + 69%. 11lv.— 140. = + 5gh. 57.) and find bv Table XXII the corresponding 
increase of the elements, distance, etc.— 

5gh. 1 OS 5 Ne GY el 4’ 56” 
570. 854 TAS bY/ 56” 
bgh. Biv. = 1S 18 sett Pe IT ay +5’ 59” 


(c) Add (or subtract, according to the sign) the increase from the first result, — 
254° 15° > 3725) 13° 3 83%) 817918" 59” 
sb) de Eee iy’ 44” Bomoee 
aps? 96’ 9” {| 14° 91" 17" |" 917° 19”) 44" 


(¢) Find the equations for the anomalies of the moon and sun by Table XXIV— 
An. ¢ 14°)" 2 Bq Cac? Fite 24988 
Aan olic 20° .. Eq. O= — 1° 29’ 122 


Sum of eq’.s_ = — 2° 44° ag 


? The same inaccuracy pervades all Hindu calculations of true sunrise, and makes all figu 
when compared with the true values. However, we do not require the latter, 
ealenlations. 


* I shall indicate below §7, how’ these tables may be used in connectiox with the 
difference between mean and true local time. 


res in Table XXVI wrong 
but those which the Hindus essume in their 


general tables for an estimate of the 


TABLES FOR CALCULATING HINDU DATES. 489 


(e) Add the sum of equations to the distance; the result is the true distance at 
mean sunrise for the place in question, viz, 255° 28’ 9” — 2° 44’ 44” = 252° 43’ 25”, 
(f}) Find the sidereal longitude of the sun by subtracting from the above 
the ©’s an., the same for beginning of the century. (Table XIII.) 
317° 19" 44” 
— 282° 44° 167 
Sid. Long. @ = 34° 55’ 28” 


(g) Find the ayandmésas for the year in question, by Table XX VIII— 


K.Y. 4100 er OU OF 
28 years= 25 12 
K.Y.4128 = 7° 55’ 12 


(h) Add the ayandmsas thus found to the sidereal longitude of the sun, the 
result is the tropical longitude of the sun.— 
34° 385’ 28” 
Ube dl TYRE bed 
Trop. Long. © = 42° 380’ 40” 


(‘) Look out in Table XXVII the “interval of rising” of the degree of trop. 
Long. © now found for the latitude of the given place. 

If the left-hand index (0 — 180) is used, the amount is subtractive; if the index to 
the right (180° — 360°) the amount is additive. 
In this case we get, for trop. Long. 42° on the 28th parallel, — lgh. 46. 

(k) Take, from the same part of the Table just used, the time required by one 
deyree in rising, as given there immediately below the degree of latitude in question, 
and calculate the equivalent in time for the sun’s equation. If the equation has the 
sign +, the amount is subtractive ; if —, it is additive. 

In the present case: 1° takes up 8:24 vinddés, consequently 1° 29 will take up 12, 
The equation being negative, the amount is additive. We put it down ds + 120. 

(1) Add (or subtract according to the sign) the vinddis in (#) to the result in 
(<); find the increase of Dist. « —© for the sum, in Table XXII; add the increase (or 
subtract according to the sign of the sum) to the true Dist. ¢—© (found ine). The 


result is the true Dist. « — © for true sunrise at the place in question. Here — lgh. 
460. + 120. = — lgh. 34v. S 
gk = 198" 11" 
347, = 6 OBA” 
— 1gh.84r. = —19 5” This, added to tke result in (e), wzz., 252° 4 


52”, makes 252° 24’ 20”. 


(m) This result is not quite correct, because we have made use of the mean 
increase (or decrease) of Dist. ¢« — © instead of the true, as the Hindus do. However, we 
may rest satisfied with this approximation when the true distance comes out larger 
or smaller, by 4 minutes or more, than an entire number of degrees marking the end 
of a Tithi. This is the case in the present example: 252° mark the end of the 21st 
tithi or the 6th tithi of the dark fortnight; but as we found the true distance to be 252° 
24 20”, which is more than 4’ above the end of the Tithi, viz. 252°, the final result 
is not affected by the slightly incorrect calculation. 

In rare cases where the strictest accuracy is required, proceed as follows :— 
Add the increase (or decrease) of the distance, etc., for the sum found in (2) to the 
3B 


490 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


result in (e) ; again,, find the equations of « and ©, as in (da), and add their sum to 
the distance, as in (¢). The result is the true distance. In this case — lgh. 34v.:— 


Dist. (—O (’s An. ©’s An. 
1 gh. ° ° . . OCT Sel Val a OP ae ae 0’ 59” 
34 v, . . : . 6 54 7 24 34 
= 1 gh, Siar aes 19 5 20 28 | + 1 383 
subtracted from . . . 255 28 9 1421 17 |317 19 44 
makes . ‘ ° : f 255 9 4”| 14 0° 49” | 317 18’ 117 
An. @ 14° l’eq..= — 1° 187-49" 
An. @ 817° 18'eq. = — 1 30 8 
Sum of eq’s. = — 2 43 57 
Dist. p> —© +255 9 4 
True dist. 252° 25° 7” 
This then is the strictly accurate true distance « — ©. The error in the preceding 
method was — 47”, p 


It may be borne in mind, however, that it is a waste of time to attempt this degree 
of accuracy, unless we know the Hindu value of the latitude and longitude of the place 
for which the date is tu be calculated. This uncertainty is enhanced when we have to 
deal with dates in inscriptions; for we never know for what place the almanac was 
calculated, from which the date recorded in the inscription was taken, though in most 
cases we shall probably be right in assuming that the almanac referredto the capital of 
the kingdom. 

The following examples will be understood without further comment. I use the 
same letters as in the first example to indicate the operations to be gone through :— 

Ea. 2.—K. Y. 4128, 4th Bhadrapada; place: Ratnagiri, 17° Lat. and time difference —34 vin, 


»>—O >’s An. ©’s An. Cor. An. 
(a) 4100 years . 69° 48’ 07| 217° 8 80’ | 282° 44° 16” + 20 gh. 54 v’ 
Peey se Li 4h 3 58 88 37 ae — 14 43 
4th Bhidra . 96 2 4] 216 11 10 ae ee Se Se arts 
283 37. 7\| 181 58 17 46 55 265 (2) + 34 
5 + 6 4d 
(yew Gog 5 1 ta Sa toe es 5 5B 
Ab v. ‘ 9 9; 9 48 44 | (d) eq. € == mm 8° 43° 447 
984 59 95| 183 26 28 47 2— 4 ne = +1 86 5 
(CO eae ier eee ca ae 
282 51 46 
Oe fe, : : : 
ee 44 18 (an. © + 360°), (g) 4128 K Y., ayunamsa as above 7° 55’ 12” 
124 17 48 (sid. Long, @) 
(4)+ 7 55 12 
132 13 + (trop. Long. @) 
(i) trop, Long. © = 132°, on 17° Lat:, Interval = —=262"ven 
(4) Eq. @ = + 1° 86’ (1° = 10°97 vin.), time of rising . = — 18 vin 


(2) 282° 51’ 46” a ; 
See I Se) 
282 41 37 . Result, 
Ex. 3.—K. Y, 4325, 4th Margagira, Srinagar, Lat, 34° 6’, time diff ; 
° at, ! erence — 8 - 
(a) 4300 years ~ 845° 24’ 0% | 276° 1? 30” 282° 43’ Fae 
lene e Vie bar atie oh os 


4th Marg... =, «187-85 2 | 388) «09 «48 | 14 5) 44 ate : 
208 526. 2 1206 088. be. | Stare sp gg. | es pe 
(6) + 8 


TABLES FOR CALCULATING HINDU DATES. 491 


(c) 52 gh. . = 10° 88’ 55") 11° 19’ 99”{ 0° 51" 18” 


10 v. . eMac e ey 10 
52 gh. l0v.= —10 35 57 —il1 21 34 — Hl 25 (d) eq. ¢ = 4+. 4° 55’ 16” 
202 26 2 | 206 3% 56 | 137 85 34 eq@re f lear” 7 
makes 191 505 | 28 11 22 | 1396 44.9  ®£\%Sum = + 6° 26’ 23” 
Sum ofeqg.. + 6 26 23 : eee oes 
(e) 198 16 28 
(f) 496° 44° 9” (an. © + 360°) (g) 4300 ayandhsa . =10° 30’ 0” 
— 282 43 53 25 years .= 22 30 
214 0 16 (sid. Long. ©) 4325 K. Y. ayandhsa . =10° 52’ 30" 
(4) + 10 5% 30 
224 62 46 (trop. Long. ©) 
() trop. Long. © = 225° on 34° Lat. Interval : sted gh. S2:y. 
(4) Eq. — = 4 1° 81’ (1° = 12. 18), time of rising == — 18 
Sum = + 1 gh. l4v. 
alee x2 i= 12 0 eas 
= Zeal , 


lav. ° e 
Seteiey 0 SDB (aided toe) 
198 16 238 
makes . : A 198° 31’ 30” Result. 

6. In §62 of my former paper I have said: ‘In the Siddhdnta Siromani Goldd- 
hydya” IV, 20, Bhaskara states that the ancient astronomers * assumed that at Lanka (or 
on the Equator) the zodiacal signs rise in the same time with 80 degrees of the equinoctial, 
while in fact they do not. The tables give the interval according to Bhaskara’s theory. 
If the value without Bhaskara’s correction is wanted, it may be elicited from the tables. 
For that purpose the column 0° has been added; in it are given what Bhaskara calls the 
udaydntara. They must be added to, or subtracted from (according to the sign), the 
value in the table. Under this supposition, we shal] get in (¢) of the first example above 
lgh. 24v. instead of lgh. 46v., and in (%.) we find 8:27 vin. instead of 8°23 as the time 
taken up in rising 1 degree; the latter correction does not, in this case, sensibly affect 
the final result, while the former will. 

In calculating dates anterior to BhAskara (K. Y. 4251) the value of the “interval” 
given in the table should be corrected in the way just explained. 

7. The present tables may be used roughly to estimate the difference between mean 
Indian and true local time, as in the following example. 

In §24 of my first paper we found that in K. Y. 4682 the 11th tithi of the bright 
fortnight of Vaisakha ended 46 shatikas after mean sunrise in Lanka on the 18th Vai- 
éakha of the Tables. What is the corresponding local time at Purniya (26° N. Lat. and 
+ lgh. 58 vin. time difference) ? 

First add the time difference to the given Lanka time: 46gh. + lok. 580. = A7gh. 
58 vin. Vhen look out in Table VIII the sidereal Long. © onthe 18th Vaisakha: 
16° 40’; add the ayandmsa-for K.Y. 4682, vic. 16° 15’; the sum is the trop. Long. ©, 
16° 40’ + 16° 15’ = 32° 55’ (or nearly 33°). Now look out in Table XX VII, Part B, the 
interval between. the mean beginning of the day and sunrise on the 26th parallel and 
for trop. Long. © = 33'; viz. lgh. 25v. The left hand index being used, the true 
sun rises before the mean beginning of the day ; accordingly we must add the inter- 
val to mean time. 47h. 580. + gh. 250. = 49 gh. 23 v. This is the required trye 


local time for the end of the 11th tithi in Purniya. 


4 Qur text of the Sdrya Siddhdnta III, 43, 4A, is in accordance ‘ith Bhiskara’s theory, and must therefore be later. 
From the error in the position of the Moon’s node relative to that of the Sun, I am persuaded that the present text of the 


Sirya Siddhénta was fixed not before the 13th century A.D. The bija is a still later addition 


3 a2 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


—331°.) 


0°—29°, 36U° 


. (Part A.—Trop. Long. © 


Taste XXVII 


BD RONDO DWOAH OADNO DYNAM CAMNRS w4¥maNY doe PO. 1D FON 
FSBigiDwH WOOO DAAHH SIARAH SHRSS SOBA M ESBOWS BODOH DARA BISA SSSSS G2 32 99 39 SD, 
pe] 09 OD OD OD CD OD OD DOD ODO OF CD OD ODO) OD OD OD ODO) 0. OD OD DOD GD GD OD VD mH OD OD OD CD CD OOD OD TOD MMM ODM CDM ODED OD MON MM ON oD OD CD OD 
ONWKNO ATKNAA FOKHH OCODHMO DOMMD ONNRS x é i 1700 ORO 
% & . OMS NAGS ARAHS BHAAS VSBBVRO a oi Oe re rant ae oe totem oo OER OO, AOL ED Oo) ened yon, ot oa ON 
iil SBSOODSOCO ©COOOS OSSOS OSSOSOS COOSSCSO SHeHAS & prec e Sache, ; bate ae opugie isa 5 ees 
fol SOAWMENAAPORBH MODON WN AAA VHDHAMHO DOOMMNR i 
x © i SAAN ANNAN 6300 00 HH HH 19 1919 10 2 o hs oneea 1B BAO DB 62°] 0d Stay eat wl 
| BO SOSS SO00S 90906000. SO095 SS6505 Oestne 2) claeouit| ice ATES mee Z 
Seria BOSSSS COS90S9 COSCO CORA AAA aa 
SONTKNA AHMOWS AWKAH WOWMOHM wWNANH OMOM® a 
3 SAIN ANNAN ODO HAA HH Hidad 1916 3 2 SOMMOFT DOVNS oh Wels ted 82 02 Ft 108 CV 19 WO 8 1 8 
SSSOCCO COCO COCOOCS COSOSo COOSS ConA H >i aes is DS OIGOG COO ons x ; 
: BOSSSS OSOOSOS 90990 SOOFA Aah HAA 
- SONANRA HMHONRD AHOWDSO ANN AA MNMMDON BoODONM : 4 
S () i SSR Re NANAM OOOH SSS3S38 wD 12 D> % o SOMEMOM MROMDO MDIOML SROOMD MONORH WLR 
™ | BoCOSSo 00090 009S0 SOS00 COOSDS COOK e Flere tne aR I ie Nga Se diag a 
a es é. BOTOCODO COODO COCO CO COCO nA AA A Ane ee 
SBONAFODWD ONAN HMWMEATMM0OEeA AMoOWO NAN Fc OO 3 
& 8 : AAA AANAA MMM BAAGiy 1939190 lites EOMDOGH OANOA WHA OAH WNOWN OHOOB 
= | SOSCOSS OS009 SOSOSS SOO0S SoOCS SGOGOn So Nias ll soe SL RT ee ae ae 3 
BOSOSSOS SOSSS OOSCOCSO COOOR AAA AA eRe 
SONFOWD CONAWOHDH ONHOD ONHOHO CONAWOHO ONHODH Sapa ae 
& ES = AAR NANAN 630000 000 SH XA 19 1919 1919 mee le oO SBOMORN 6 & S128 ate ot QR C19 00 69 19- O ESD 
™ | Scococeo COSC OS COOCO COO OS COCO COO SCS SH Ren bee | Fl NIRA Co aes 
: = s BOSCOCS SOOOCS DOCS C COCO AAA AA AAAS 
° nm | SONTOO ONPON GQHAMWMNR AHMMN AANGTO DWONMLO 2 : : 
& S St INNA AOD 0D OD OD OOD SO OR OX KAD 19 20 210 = n 2 SOMOAN On es S52 a 64 MeN Se pas sO) os, 38 Oe ea 
® | SSSSOSS SSSDOS COSSS COS09 OSOCO SCOGCO tg ye aes SA yta mead 
| SOSSOSO COSOOSD: DOO 0S SDO90S BPH AAA AAAS 
No) SONFTON HRAMMEH RONAHWO ROGMN RAAMNHT OMOAW - ; : 
%: | a i Aes ANANNANN NYO OHHH WH <x es) SOMOAYN NOSHO AI B HG 2B BAIHO MOAB 
me °7 
| P | BOSCO SSD CSOOSDSD COO SOS COSCO OS OS000 COC cO ae PR] So) TO ea ee ee init . 
I MOSSSS COSDSCO SGOS00 COSCO On AAA aR HAeS 
4 SONFAMEH AAMNMAO DORM OPROAT OWMDOSG ID OoNn : 
rc) q s 3 SARA ANNANNN ANH DOO Ga Fea 2D 2 Pu fe aBOMOOR <~S233 bers de ote 249 az ES CS OUI) OO ot SC Se 
® | Seoeoso oS0SS SS090 COSC SOODS COSCO uence ae nay ppc pp Bcc 
~ we 
a SONMMR ARONAWY NRAHAFT ONOHA WoWoORs BROS a aida” pra thaenah sien atie habs, scllndt cibenach in Wai TEEN ie ee 
a | a : SAHA HAAN AANHDH MONDO HHAGS a RRR ee 4 ER ages ER 
Snhee SOSCOCOS CCOSDS CODCOD CSOOSCSO COC CO COCCCSo iS Fa ae TAs etek OYE CR GS CSG CO ES ee 
> rt s 
s ke ; < 
m | FOR MON Wales SHSHS Woon atone mao ; MOSSODO SCOSCS CSOD S00 OD000 COn An AAR 
oo oo | SAA AANAN AANA OOD ODD SIH oS : ; 
x “| Soeaoele ooo Sea au eee ooo ee a SOMNM OM MOAI HASH SHBQRA MORAT NAAT 
3 aes HAAN O60 00.00 SX Hag 29.2920 ae 
SONIDO OWDRHMH ONAON PHORWO HMNOD AHA A] ek 
% | & Sr Sat AM AAN AAANS MMe AAs SOSOSSOS 00099-50000 0SO000 COORR RAHA 
a | 3 : S 
2 SCOCSSCS SOCOSDSD DSD0S00 COCO CO COCCO CCC OO pore eae 0 SBE wi 
co oD © Coal ive) La OD x Ed y ron 
SOMO GO RAOAM MOOAN AWONRO CAMO ROON & | 2 OOOO ARAAR SASAS SIIB BESS wee 
|. 8 : FAA AAA AAAAA HHH SHINS feed es §$o000S C6000 Coos Coase COo Om Home 
aS 2 BSOOSOSSCS OSCOSOS OSOCOS CSCC O COSCO CCOGO ie : 
SCAMKS ANNONA WNON® NROAHNR ONWMNO ARAN 
BOHMAO RROCHNM HONWSO HHHVONR DOHMH WRWMOR ° 6g - AAR AAN ANH DAHA SH 29291529 a 
y2 Bl ivr) 
i} 19 3 SAA BAAN ANNAN OD CO CD CD CD CD CD XH <A Ny re 3 
P | BCCOSS SOSOS SOSDOS9 COODO COSC0OS COOOS BSOSSSS COOSS COSSCS SOSOOSO SOOO - 
; q 9S ey F DON DA CHAMH DOR DA CHAM WOK a3 : we WF MWOrMDR CHAMP MORN MDA OHA 
3 Rd 2 Sa SAS a OA IACI Al 3 RS oF a i aaa Sena aN 


TABLES FOR CALCULATING HINDU DATES. 493 


TasLe XXVIII, (Part B.—Trop. Long.@ =30°— yer 330°— 301°.) 


Lat. 14° 15°. 16° 17° 18° 19° 20° 21° 22° 28° 
% 9°4, 9°34, 9:29 9°22 917 9°11 9°04 8:98 8:92 8°79 
Long. | gh. v.| gh. v.| gh. 2.| 9h. v.| gh v.' gh. v.| gh. v. 19h. v.| gh. v.| gh. gh. | gh. v.| gh. 4. 
30°] 0 43/0 45 | 0.47) 49/0 51/054) 056/0 58/1 0/1 2/1 5/1 7/1 10/4 12 | xg 
31 | 0 43 | 0 45 | 0 48 | 0 50/0 52/0 55/0 57/059/1 1/1 4/1 6]1 9] 1111 1.13] 399 
82 | 0 44) 0.46 | 0 48; 0 51/053;055/058/1 0/1 2/1 5/1 71110/112/1 141 399 
33 | 0 44) 0 47 | 0 49 | 051 | 054!056/059/1 1]1 3/1 6/1 8)111]1 14/1 16] 397 
84/0 45 | 0 47/0 50|052/055/057/1 0/1 2/1 4/1 7/110/1 12) 115] 117 | 396 
35 | 0 46 | 0 48] 0 51/053] 055/058/1 0/1 3/1 6/1 8]/111}.114] 116] 119 | 905 
36 | 0 46 | 0 49 | 051] 0 54/056)/059)/1 1/1 4/1 7/1 9/112]115)118] 1 20 | 304 
37 | 0 47| 0 49| 0 52|054/057)1 0/1 2}/1 5/1 8/110)/113]1 16] 119] 1 22 | 393 
38/0 47| 0 50|053/055/058/1 1/1 3/1 6/1 9]}112/114/117] 120] 1 23 | 999 
39 | 0 48/0 51|053/056/059/1 2/1 4/1 7/110/113]116]1 19) 1 22] 1 95 | 397 
40} 0 49|051/054/057/1 0)1 3/1 5/1 8{112]1 14/117] 1 20/1 23] 1 26| 399 
41/0 49/ 052/055 ,058/1 0/1 3/1 6/1 9]112]1 15/118] 1211/1 24] 1 274 319 
42|050|052|056/059/1 1)/1 4/1 7/110|113/116/119]1 23] 126] 1 29] a18 
43|050|053/0561/059/1 2/1 5)1 8/111]/114]117]1 20/1 24/1 271130] a7 
44/051|054/057/1 0/1 3/1 6/1 9/3 12]115]}119]1 22}-1 25/1 28/1 32| 316 
45 |0 52/0 54/058/1 1/1 4/1 7/110/113]116]1 20/1 23/1 26] 1 30/1 33 | gis 
46| 052/055 /058/1 1/1 5/1 8)111/114]117]1 21] 1 24/1 27/1311 1 35 | 314 
47|053/056/059/1 2/1 5)1 9/112/115]/119]1 22/1 25/1 29/1 32/1 36] 313 
48|053|056/1 0/1 3)1 6/110/113/116|1 20/1 23|1 27/130] 134) 1 37| 319 
49] 054/057/1.0)1 4/1 7/111])114) 117) 1 21/1 24] 1 28] 1 32/135 | 1 29] 311 
50]054/058/1 1/1 5/1 8]/111/115]118]1 22/1 25|1 29/1 33/1 36/1 401 310 
61/055/058/1 2/1 5/1 9/112/116]119]1 23) 1 27/130] 1 34/1 38| 1 42 | 309 
52/056/059/1 3/1 6/1 91|113|117/ 120] 1 24] 1 28] 131) 135) 1 39| 1 43 | 308 
58/056/1 0/1 3}/1 7/110] 124/118] 1 21] 1 25/1 29) 1 33] 1371/1 40) 1 44 | 307 
54/057/1 0/1 4/1 8{111/115]1 19/1 22] 1 26] 1 30) 1 34/1 38] 1 42/11 46 | 306 
55/058/1 1/1 511 8/112]1 16/1 20/1 23!1 27/1 31/1 35/1391 43/1 47 | 308 
$6/058{1] 1/1 5/1 9/118|117)1 21] 1 24/1 28/1 32}1 36/1 41| 1 44| 1.49 , 304 
57/059|1 2/1 6/110/114|118]1 22] 1 26/1 29] 1 33/1 37|1 42| 1 46/1 50 | 303 
58|059/1 3/1 7/111/114]1 19/1 23] 127) 1 30|135|1 39] 143] 1 47/1 51 | 302 
59|2 0/1 3/1 8/112] 1 15] 1 20] 1 23} 1298/1 32|136)1 40] 1 44/1 48/153 | 301 
| 


82°. 33° 
Vin. 8°52 845 8:38 791 784 +008 
| 

Long.| gh v.| gh. 2.1 gh o.| gh. .|gh. | gh. v.| yh. v. J) gh. | gh. vi gh. v.| gh. v.|\ gh. v hk. v.' Lon 
30°11 14/4 1711 2014 22/1 2511 28|4'30 | 1 33 | 136/139) 142) 1 45 | 29 | 336° 
Blois? “162. 219) 7 Shh 1 27/1 29|1321135/138/1 41/1 45/148] 0 22 | 329 
CC el eee fs ee Tae 1 29/1 31)|134/137]140|1 44/1 47/150} 0 22 | 328 
paas 491-1 29-) T2511 1 30] 133|136|189|1 42/1 46| 1 49] 1 52| 0 22 | 327 
Re 2-201) 28 {1 26) 1 1 321135/138|1 41] 1 44/1 48/151|155| 0-22 | 826 
Sei) 291 2512 2811 1 34/137]140!1 43/1 46] 150/154] 1 57 |~o 22 | 325 
36|1 23|1 26/1 29}1 1 36/1 39|1 42/145] 1 49|152/156|159| 0 22 | 324 
37/1 25|1 28/1 381] 1 l 37/1 41/1 44114711 51/155/158/2 2] 0 22 | 323 
3811 2611 30/1 33/1 1 39|142/146/149]153/157|2 0/2 41] 0 22] 322 
3911 28/1 31/1 34/1 1 41/1 44/1 48/151 }155|159/2 2|2 6| 0 22) 321 
40/1 29/1 33/1 36/1 1 48 }1 46/1 50/153] 157),2 1/2 5}2 9/0 22 | 320 
At) §3h--1- 84) 1. B74 1 44/1 48/1 52/155/159;2 8/2 7/211] 0 92) 319 
42|1 32/1 36|1 39/1 1 46/1 501154/157/2 1/2 5/2 9/218! 022) 318 
43 | 1341-12-87} 1 .41 | 1 1 48/152/155/159/2 31/2 7/211/216| 0 22| 317 
44:1 “35 | 1- 39)2 42/1 1 501153/157/2 1/2 5|210/214/218] 0 22] 316 
45|/1 37/1 40/1 44] 1 1 51/155/1:59/2 312 7) 212) 2-16 | 2 20 |—o 92 | 315 
46/1 38|1 42}1 46/1 1 53115712 1/2 5/2 9|214]2 18] 223] 0 22} 314 
47/1 40/1 43/1 47/41 1 55/1389/}2 3/2 71212] 216] 2 20/2251 06 22/ 313 
48/1 41/1 45/1 49] 1 1 57/2 1/2 5/2 91214/ 2 18] 2 23) 227] 0 22] 312 
2919. 40:1.2247 13 5211 1 58/2 3/2 7|211/2 16/2 20/2 25)230] 0 22] 311 
BO|1 44/1 48/1 52/1 2 012 4/2 8|213] 218 | 223 | 2 27.| 2 32 |_-0 22 | 310 
51/1 46/2 50/1 54) 1 2 2/12 6/211] 215] 2 20/2 25/229] 234] 0 22 | 309 
52.11 47/1 51)1 85/1 2 4/2 8/213) 217] 2 22|2 2712 32/237] 0 22) 308 
ry i ee 3 i ae Nay 0 2 6/210/215/219| 224! 229/234) 239] 0 22] 307 
54/1 50/1 54/1 59] 2 2 7/212/217)2 21] 2 26| 231 |236|2 41] 0,22 } 306 
Se 124. $1) 2.862. 0} 8 2 912 14] 218) 2 2312 28] 233 | 2 38 | 2 44 |—0 22 | 305 
5611 83/1 5712 2/2 2 11/215 | 220] 2 25| 230: 235|2 41/246] 0 22 | 304 
svt» 54/1 5912 8/2 2 12/217) 222/227 | 2 32) 2 38/2 43/248] 0.22 | 303 
5811 86/2 1/2 5/|2 2 14/219) 2 24/2 20/235/240)245/2 51] 022] 3 
soi1 57/2 2/2 7|2 2 16| 2 21/2 26/2 31 | 237 | 2 42 | 247] 253). O 22 | 80k 


494. 


Taste XXVII. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(Parr C.—Trop. Long. 9 =60°—89°, 800° 127° ) 


12° | 18° 15° 48°) 19 rl 20 23° 
10°50 | 10-47 | 10-45 10°40 10°35 | 10°32 | 1029 | 10°27 10:18 
gh. % | gh. v. gh. gh. A gh. 
14 eas 1 1 12: 1 54 
1 Pear ea aoa: loa) 1 1 1 1 54 
13: ) Pec 1 1 1 i 1 54 
Ve mA a ee ely fs) i 1 1 1 Ik 1 54 
O58 Oe Te araiice 1 1 fl 1 1 54 
OFSS7 | Meee al 6c 1 i 1 1 1 53 
OVW ASI bea Key gh al 1 1 1 1 153 
0-87 (20 0.11) 8 lel 1 1 1 1 1 53 
O56 OS Fi 1 1 i 1 1 53 
0 56 | 0 1 4/1 1 1 1 1 1 53 
0 55 | 0 1.4/1 9 1 1 1 1 1 53 
0 55 | 0 133-09 1 1 1 1 1 52 
0 54] 0 lees ye 1 1 1 id 1 52 
0 54/0 s Yeats We 1 1 1 1 1 1 52 
0 53 | 0 1 2/1 8 1 1 1 1 1 52 
0 53 | 0 jira | pe Say 1 1 23/1 1 1 52 
0 52] 0 Leta 1 1 1 1 151 
0 52/0 1.50 lekaae 9/1 1 2311 1 1 51 
051) 0 LON eles 6: ON ey 1 il 1 1 51 
0 51/0 heer hie Eat tae has 1 1 1 ashy 
0 50/0 54/059/1 5 Stat 1 1 1 TBI 
0 50 | 0 058;1 4 Wele 1 al 1 1 50 
0 49 | 0 53] 0 4, qlee 1 1 iy 1 50 
0 49 | 0 9 1 3 rea 1 1 rail 1 50 
0 48) 0 0 1 3 6/1 1 1 a 1 50 
0 48 | 0 0 1 2 6| 1 1 1 l 1 50 
0 47 | 0 0 1 2 Salel 1 1 1 1 50 
0 47 | 0 0 I 2 5/1 1 1 1 1 49 
0 46 | 0 0 Tan] 4|1 1 1 a 1 49 
nN 46 0 a ean | 4|J 1 1 1 1 49 
Part C,—continued, 
Vin.| 1016 | 1018 | 1010 | 1007 | 1004 | 1000} 997 | 994 | 991 | 987 | 983 | 979 | os 
Long.| gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. h. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v h. v he v, 
60°| 159] 2 4) 2 8] 213] 218/293 | e8| 233 | 2 39 244/949 | 9 55 26 $5 
61} 159; 2 3) 2 8} 213] 218] 2 23} 2 28] 2 33/2 39/2 4412 50/955] 0 99 
62) 159/ 2 3/ 2 8} 213) 218) 223 | 2 28/2 33/2 39/2 44/250) 256] 0 21 
63| 159} 2 3| 2 8| 213} 218/223 | 2 28] 2 34] 2 39) 2 45/250] 256] 0 29 
64/ 158) 2 3/ 2 8| 213|] 218] 2 23 | 2 28] 2 34/2 39] 2 45] 25019561 0 19 
65 | 158] 2 3/ 2 8} 213] 218] 2 23] 2 28 | 2 34] 2 39 | 2 45] 2 50 | 2 56 Io 49 
66] 158) 2 3} 2 8| 213] 218] 223! 2 28 | 2 34] 239] 2 45 | 2 50/2561 0 19 
67| 158) 2 3} 2 8} 213] 218] 2 23 | 2 28 | 2 34/2 39/2 45) 950/257] 0 17 
68) 158] 2 3| 2 8/ 212/ 217] 2 23/2 28] 2 34] 2 39) 2 45/1 250/957] 0.16 
69} 158) 2 3) 2 8] 212] 217/| 2 23] 2 28] 2 34] 2 39/2 45/9511957] 016 
70| 157/ 2 2) 2-7) 212) 217] 2 23 | 2 28 | 2 34] 2 40 | 2 45 | 9 51 | 2 57 |_o 5 
71) 157) 2 2) 2 7) 212) 217/223 | 2 28] 2 34] 2 40) 2 46/9 5119571 09 14 
72; 157); 2 2) 2 7) 212) 217 | 223) 2 28] 2 34] 2 40 | 2 46] 2 51] 958] 0 13 
73 | 157} 2 2) 2 7) 212) 217) 2 23] 2 28| 2 34] 2 40] 2 46] 251/258] 0 43 
74| 157| 2 2) 2 7] 212] 217/ 2 23} 2 98 | 2 34] 2 40] 2 46/2 51/258] 0 Jo 
75 | 157} 2 2) 2 7| 212) 217) 2 23) 228 | 2 34/2 4012 46) 2 59] e 5810 4 
761 156) 2 2) 2 74.2 12} 2 17} 2 93) 2 99 | 9 34 1-2 40 oe 252|2591! 0 10 
77| 156] 2 1| 2 7] 212] 217) 223] 2 99] 9 34] 2 40] 5 46 | 2 5212391] 0 10 
78) 156) 21) 2 7) 212) 217) 2 23/2 29/2 34/2 40] 247) 2521959] 9 9 
99; 3156) 2 1) 2 7) 212) 217) 2 23] 2 291 2 34) 2 40 | 9 47 2521259! 90 x 
80}. 156] 2 1] 2 6] 212] 217 | 2 23] 2 29 | 2 34/2 40] 2 47 
gl] 156| 2 1| 2 6| 212| 217|2 23/2 09! 9 35/2 411 2 4719 se SORES 
82; 155); 2 1) 2 6] 211] 217 | 2 23| 2 29| 2 35 | 2 41] 2 ay 253/30] 0 6 
83] 155) 2 1) 2 6! 211] 217] 2 23] 2 2991] 29 35 | 2 41 247125318 0] 0 5 
Sai enone on Vee oe Gst orl leon yaieo 23 | 2 29 | 2 35 | 2 41 | 2 47/253/3 0 0 4 
8} 155! 2 0; 2 6] 211} 217] 2283/2 29129353|24 247 | 2 
86] 155! 2 0] 2 6| 211] 217|223)2 99/2 3512 41 | 2 48 aor lee.laoes 
87 ]}-155} 2 0) @ 67). 211} 817 | 2 983 1-2) a919 Sk o 47 248125413 1 6 2 
88; 155] 2 0] 2 6] 211] 217] 2 293] 299] 235/241 2 48 2254/3 1) 01 
89) 154) 2 0] 2 6] 211] 217] 2 23] 2 29 235 | 2 41 | 2 48 | 275413 1 One) 


TABLES FOR CALCULATING HINDU DATES, 495 


ABLE XXVII. (Part D.—Zrop, Long. © =90° — 119°, 270° — 241°.) 


10° 11° 12° 17° 18° 19° 20° 
Vin. | 10°98 | 11°01 | 11°03 11:05 | 11:08 11:10 11:13 1115 11:18 | 11:21 11:23 | 11:26 | 11:28 11°32 
Long. | g&. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v% | gh. v. | gh, v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh v hh, v. | Long. 
90°|0 45 |0-49 | 0541/1 0/1 3/1 8/113] 18] 1231/1 2814 33 | 438/443 4 49 | o70° 
Oi 0-440) 48 1-Or53510°59 |) b e2e L712 | a a7 | 22 1 27) 32) 1-87 |d 4151 1 48) 1" 269 
SOnmMORASHIONA Tal OPbon Orbit Le Lai Le On De 6 ts 21 P26 WS ase 1 40:1) 1 47") 268 
CSIOLAD I TOTAGN Onn La ,Orp ve tete Onde Soa, TeLONl el Pash 2052 257) 1630 (e185 2239.1 W481 967 
94!0411045/1050;,056;059;}1 4/1 8/114/119] 1 24/1 28) 1 34) 1 381] 1 43 | 266 
95/0 40 | 044 | 0 49 | 0551058 )}1 8)1 7) 2-33) 1 18 | 1 22 | 1271-1 32) 1 36 | 1:42.) 265 
96 | 0 39 | 0 43810 48)054/057}1 2/1 6/112)1 16) 1 21) 1 26) 1 31) 1 35-11 41 | 264 
971,038.10 42 1 0 47 |0 53') 0.56.) TF -1.) L. 5} 10) 1 15) 1 20 | 125 |. 1 30] 1 34 | 1 -39:} 263 
98 |.0 3710 4110 46/0521055;11 0/1 3) 1 &]1.141]1.19) 1 23) 1 28 |.1 331-1 38 | 262 
OOEICO) 38651 0r40) (50-4510) 5) 1 0 S47)-0°58 | 1 2) 2 Si jet 13 | 2187). 1 9211797.) 1 31 hay 37 | 261 
100 | 0 35 | 0:39 | 0 44 1-0 50] 0 538/057.) 2 1/1 7/122) 1 16) J 21-)-1°26; 1 30 |.1 35. | 260 
TO. 10°34 10 38 ; 0 48 0 491 0521056.) 1 0 1-1. 6) 1 11-] 115 |] 1 201-1 95) 1 281-1 341259 
102 | 0 33 | 0 37 | 0 42/0 48/051) 0 55] 059] 1 5 | L910 14) -19)} £28 | 1°2741-1 335) 258 
TOS 10282 110. 8610.41) 0 47-050") 0-54, )0 68 193) 1 89) L 18-1 17 |, 29)\ 1 267 a Br 2 257 
TOAR OMS IetsOne> 120240 120046710) 481058470 572) 22 7 1 125) 1 ies eh Pb 25 61. 80) F256 
105 | 0 30 | 0 34| 0 39] 0 44] 0 47) 052)0086;1 1/1 6/110/]1 15] 1 20} 1 24] 1 29 | 255 
106 | 0 29 | 0 38} 0 38) 0 48] 0 46/0 51)054}/1 0);1 5)1 9}114}1 18) 1 22) 1 27) 254 
107 | 0 28 | 0 32 | 0 37/1 0 42) 0 45|049|]0:53)059)1 4)1 8/112/)117) 1 21} 1 26) 258 
108 | 0 27 | 0 31 | 0 36] 0 41] 0 44) 0 48/052)058;1 2})1 7/111) 1 16] 1 20) 1 25) 252 
109 | 0 26 | 0 30] 0 35 | 0 40| 0 48 | 0 47;051)057)1 1)/1 5/110)115!1 18) 1 24} 251 
110 | 0 25 | 0 29 | 0 34 | 0 39} 0 42) 0 46/050/055)1 0);1 4/1 9)1138] 117) 1 22 | 250 
111 | 0 24 | 0 28 | 0 32] 0 88] 0 41 | 0 45 | 0 49) 0 54/059/1 311 7|)112)1 16, 1 21 | 249 
112 | 0 23 | 0 27 | 0 81 | 0 327: | 0-40 | 0 44 | 0:48 | 053 | 0 58)1 2/1 6] 1111) 1 15} 1 20} 248 
113 | 0 22 | 0 26 | 0 30] 0 86 | 0 39 | 0 43 | 0 47 | 0 52] 0 66) 1 141 5)110) 113] 1 18 | 247 
114 | 0 21 | 0 25 |-0 29 | 0 35 | 0 38 | 042 | 0 45 | 0 51] 0 65) 059/11 4)1 9)112)117 | 246 
115 | 0 20 | 0 241 0 28 | 0 34] 0 87] 0 41 | 0 44 | 0 50 ORFS OLS solr onli aay op leu elem Onn 
116 | 0 19 | 0 23 | 0 271 0 33 | 0 86] 0-89 | 0 43 | 0 49 | 053} 057)1 1/1 6/1 10/1 14) 244 
Wa 1s | 0 22 | 0 26 | 0 32 | 035 10 38 | 0 42 | 0 47 0°52 | 0 56) 1 OO; Ll G) Lt 8) 1-43 | 248 
118 | 017 | 0 21 | 0 25 | 0 31 | 0 34) 0 37 | 0 41 | 0 46 | 0 51) 055 |059)1,.3/1 711 12) 242 
119 | 0 16 | 0 20] 0 24} 0 29 | 0 383 | 0 36 | 0 40] 0 45 OAD SOF SSE OPoShilen orieiaon ed Os E24 


Lat. | 24° 25° | 26° 27° 28° ay | 30° | 37° | 32° | 33° | a4 | ase 0° 

Vin. | 11:34 | 11:37 | 11:40 | 11:43 | 11-46 | 11°50 | 11°53 | 11°56 | 11°60 | 11-63 | 1167 | 11-71 |—0-75 
- 0. h. v. h. 0. h. v. |gh. v. | gh. v. | gh, v | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. v.| Long. 
hong) | OO] 251 Sil | B16 | 2 23 )2 29 | 235/241 | 24g /254/3 Lio 0| 76: 
91/ 153] 159| 2 4) 210] 215] 2 21 | 2 27 | 2 34 / 2 40; 2 46/254) 3 0} O 1| 269 
92/ 152] 157] 2 2] 2 8] 214] 2 20] 2 26; 2 32 238 | 2 45 | 253}258! 0 1 | 268 
93 | 151! 156] 2 1] 2 7] 212) 218) 2 24} 2 30| 2 37/2 43/ 251/256] 0 2] 267 
94} 150} 154] 2 0] 2 5] 211] 217] 2 23] 2 29 | 2 35 | 2 42 | 250/255] 0 38 | 266 
95| 148/ 153] 158] 2 4) 2 9] 2 15/2 21) 2 27 | 2 33) 2 40 | 2 48 | 2 53/40 4 | 265 
96] 147| 152] 157] 2 2] 2 8| 2 14] 2 20] 2 26] 2 32] 2 38) 246/251] 0 4} 264 
971 146| 150] 155] 2 o| 2 6] 212/218) 2 24) 2 30) 2 37) 2451249) 0 5 | 263 
98 | 144/.149] 154] 159] 2 5]|211/2 17] 2 23 | 2 29] 2 35 | 2 48) 2 48) 0 6/ 262 
99/ 143/148] 153] 158] 2 3/2 9/215] 2 21) 2 27) 233) 241/246] 0 7 | 261 
food 142"- 1-46) 1 51.) 157) 2.2) 2 81213) 2 19 2 26 | 2 32 | 2 40 | 2 44 ;40 7 | 260 
101| 140} 145] 150] 155] 2 0;2 6|212) 218! 2 24) 2 30) 2 38) 243] 0 8 | 259 
102 | 139| 143] 148] 134| 159/2 5/210] 216 | 2 22) 2 29/2 37/241!| 0 9 | 258 
108} 138) 142] 147] 152) 157/2 3/2 9/215 / 2 21) 2 27) 2 35 | 239] 010 | 257 
api |) 2 86) 4241} 146] 1 bach 1°56) 2 2) 2.7) 218 2 191 2 25.1233) |62) 3 0 10 | 256 
105 | 135|/ 139/ 144} 149] 1535/2 0/2 6/2 12/218 | 2 24, 2 31) 2 36 |+0 11 | 255 
106} 1341 188.) 1438-1 48 | 153)159)2 4)2 LON 2elGs no Don ko 28 234) 012 | 254 
107 1 -32)|-21-387.| 1°41) 1.47)| 1 52) 1 57-}2 3 2 9)) 2) V4) 27205) °2)26 1e2582-1 0113 1 253 
108 | 131] 135] 140} 145] 150/156/2 1/2 7] 218) 219) 2 25 | 2 31 013 | 252 
109} 130| 134] 189] 144] 149/154)2 0 2 wonlee TIS QA e2eesale2 290 On ae os) 
108 oie |) 1087 }) 14) 1-47 (153 } 1 58 | 2 42 10 1-2 15) 2 21 fe 27 +0 15 ; 250 
Hl 7.O7 4081 |; 136) 1 41). 1.46) 2 51) 157 | 2 2) 2 8) 2°14 )2 20) 2 26) 0 16 | 249 
112| 126) 130].134] 139] 144/150/155/2 1 2 6/212/218) 224] 016 | 248 
W3-| 124") 2 28) 1s 138] 1438/1 48/1 54/1 59 74 BPE SE AG eT 0) 17 247 
114| 122] 127] 132) 137] 141]147/152/158]}2 3/2 9/215}|2 20} 018 | 246 
1261 130} 135| 1401/1 45/151/156/2 1/2 7) 213] 218/+0 19 | 245 
ite 1 3 1241 1991 134] 188|144/149}155)2 0/2 6)/211/2137| 019 | 244 
Wied 1811 23°)" 1697 1) 1 32.) 1-87 [1 42 |.) 48 Tce eleocn een oe On ezelo | On 20ne243 
8) 1171) 121) 126) 1381) 13641 41) 1 46) 1 51 )}157}2 2) 2 8 214] O 21 | 242 
iN Fees Bos) | 120! 125) 129} 134/139]145)150)155)2 1/2 6/212) 0 22) 24) 


496 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA 


Tanne XXVII. (Part E.—Trop, Long. @ = 120° — 149° ; 240° —— 211°.’ 


Lats Ae 1°; 12° 18° «14° 15° 16° Tyee ecse ige | 20° 21° 22° 23° 
Vin. | 10°54 | 10°60 | 10°66 | 10°71 | 10°78 | 10°84 | 10°91 | 10°97 | 11:03 | 14°09 | 11:16 | 11°22 | 11:29 | 11:36 
Long.| gh. v. | gh hi ©, he v h, v. | gh. v. | gh. v | gh. v. | gh. v. gh. %. | gh. 0. | gh. % | gh. v. | gh. v. | Long. 
120° 0 15 {0-19 | 0 23 |.0 29 | 0 3110 38 |.0 39 | 0 44/0 48|052/086/1 1/1 4/1 9 | 240° 
121 | 0 15-| 0 18 | 0 22 | 0 28 | 0 30] 0 35 | 0 39 | 0 48 | 0 47; 051/055 |059)1 3)1 8 | 289 
122 |015|017 | 0 22 | 9 27 | 0 29 | 0 34 0 3881042) 0 46;050/054/058)1 1/1 7} 238 
123 !014]0171|0 21 0 27/0 28] 0 33 | 0 37/0 41 | 0 45 | 0 49/053/057/1 0} 1 5 | 237 
124 |.013]016]| 0 20 | 0 26/0 28| 0 32| 0 36) 0 40 | 0 441048, 052 )056/059)1 41 236 
125 |013]015 | 0 20 | 0 25 | 0 27 | 0 31 | 0 35] 0 89 | 0 43] 0 46] 0 50/0 54/0 58;1 3) 235 
1261012)015|019]| 0 24] 0 27| 0 30] 0 34] 0 88 | 0 42 | 0 45 | 0 49 | 0 538} 0 56/1 1 | 234 
127 | 91210141019] 0 24! 0 26 | 0 30 | 0 33 | 0 87/0 41] 0 44/0 48] 0 52) 0 55) 1 O | 233 
128 |011/ 014/018] © 23] 0 25 | 0 29 | 0 32 | 0 86 | 0 40 | 0 43 | 0 47 | 0 51] 0 54] 0 59 | 232 
129|011/013)|0 17] 0 22] 0 24] 0 28] 0 31 | 0 35 | 0 39 | 0 42 | 0 46 | 0 50 | 0 52] O 57 | 231 
130 | 0 10] 0121017] 0 21 | 0 23] 0 27) 0 80] 0 84 | 0 38 | 0 41 | 0 45 | 0 48 | 0 51 | 0 56 | 230 
131/10 9/]012]016] 0 20] 0 23] 0 26] 0 30} 0 33 | 0 87 | 0 40 | 0 43 | 0 47 | 0 50} 0 54 | 229 
132 |0 9/011] 0 15] 0 20; 0 22] 0 25 | 0 29 | 0 32, 0 36 | 0 89 | 0 42 | 0 46/0 48} 0 53 | 228 
133 |0 8|011/015/ 019] 0 21 | 0 24] 0 28] 0 31 | 0 35 | 0 88] 0 41 | 0 45 | 0 47 | 0 52 | 227 
1384/0 8|010/0 14/019] 0 20] 0 24] 0 27 | 0 30 | 0 33 | 0 87 | 0 40 | 0 48 | 0 46 | 0 50 | 226 
185 }0 7/0 91{018] 0 1810 20] 0 23 | 0 26 ! 0 29 | 0 82 | 0 36] 0 39 | 0 42! 6 45} 0 49 | 225. 
136;0 7/9 9/018/017] 0 19] 0 22] 0 25 |-0 28! 0 81] 0 34] 0 38 | 0 41 | 0 43 | 0 48 | 294 
137 |0 6/0 8/012/017]0 18] 0 21 | 0,24 | 0 27 | 0 30 | 0 33 | 0 36 | 0 40 | 0 42 | 0 46 | 228 
1388/0 6/0 8|012/016]017 | 20 | 923 | 0 26 | 0 29 | 0 82] 0 35 | 0 89 | 0 41] 0 45 | 222 
1389/0 5/0 7/011/0151]0 16] 0 20] 0 22] 0 25 | 0 28) 0 81 | 0 34] 0 37 0 40] 0 44 | 221 
1440/0 5/0 6/010) 014/015]019] 0 21] 0 24 | 9 27 | 0 380] 0 33 a, 36 | 0 38 | 0 42 | 220 
1441/0 4/0°'6}010/014/0 15 18 | 0 20 | 0 23 | 0 26 | 0 29 | 0 32 | 0 35 | 0 37] O 41 | 219 
142;0 4/0 5/0 9) 043/014 17 | 0 20 | © 23 | 0 25 | 0 28} O 31 | 0 34] 0 36] 0 40 | 218 
1438/0 3/0 5/0 8|012!01410 16! 0 19 | 0 22 | 0 24) 0 27 | 0 29 | 0 32 |} 0 34 | O 38 | 217 
144/;0 2);0 4/0 8|012/;0138)015|0 18] 0 21 i 23 | 0 26 | 0 28 | 0 81 | U 33} 0 37 | 216 
VAp SO: e2ee0) S100" 710) AO) eC On Aa Oe 7s 0820 NONZ27 Or 2a O27 sOroOn Ono lanOrsomlaa ley 
146;0 110.8); 0 6/010|011) 014) 0 16) 019 | 0 21.) 0 24] 0 26 | 0 29 | 0 80} 0 34 | 214 
147;0 170 2/10 6/010/010/013;0 15)|0 1810 20) 0 22 | 0 24} 0 28] 0 29 | 0 33 | 213 
148), 0° 0: | O= 241-0 5-1, 0:8 92.0) 9710) 1271 OF 14) 0807), O19) 1 0-21 | 0°23) | 0826: 20028 |5O-si oT? 
149°|-0: 0 | 0 2|-0—4) 0-8 1-0 92] 0411'}-0, 134 0 162)-0: 18 1-0:-20-) 0 22 1 0 25 "0 27-)70 30 | oir 
Part E,—continued. 
Lat. 24° 25° 26° 27° 28° 29° | 30° Big 32° 33° 34° 85° o° 
Vin, | 11°48 11:50 1157 11°63 | 11-71 | 11°78 | 11:86 | 11:95 | 12:03 | 1211 | 12:18 | 1227 | +0-03 
Long.| gh. 7 gh. 0. | gh. ». gh. v. | gh. %. | gh. v. | gh. v. | gh. %. | gh. v. | gh. %. | gh. 0. | gh. v. | gh. v | Long. 
120°} 114/ 119) 123; 128; 1383/1 37)143)1 48/1 54)159|2 4) 210 |+0 22 | 2409 
U2 Selo U say ELT Woo Wi2oal 1 Slo esone Al Weleay (el b2ol Leo tale ei Onno a Si Os20RnORG 
W225) VAI 16k 205) 254), 29) |) 34-11) S98 45-50 fd bdo O82) 6k 0122) ess 
L23 ole tOD Seles olor sls 237 ale 28a Soul Sash le tenn Lobos eo Salsa enon on 
AR ke Os eel LS lean ge| onli} 1 26 | 2 31] 1 36! 1 41)]145/)151/156)2 11! © 22 | 936 
Eo eee yG| ly 12 ae et 1 2¢ 1 24 | 1 29) 1 34] 1 39} 1 43 | 1 49 | 1 54/1 59 |+0 22 | 235 
126]; 1 6} 110; 114; 218) 122 | 1-277> 182)4 8744 47 | 4? | 1 S94 56-4. 0-824 294 
ma) 1 Sil 9) 1 12,116) 1 21-)'1 2851-80) 1 85 | 1 39] 2 45 | 4 49 11 54 | 0 0204 ose 
1238/2 3) |- 1 Far} YY Us| 2-19-)-7 24.11 28 | 133 1 87 | 2 42) 2-47 | 7 Ke 0 90 Ione 
129 boSed Go 1 9 PIS hs 11728) 2 26 mish ksh) 1) 460 Asset 60 nO. oe eae 
130s) 2-0 ae) cd. 8) 312): 1 1621-1 204)7 24 1-129 | 2.88 | 1-38) ie 48) Pay 6 oo cosa 
TSE O88 TB 1 Oy EO.) VIS 1b 18a 2311 27 ob Sle) b-36 | 1 40 | 45 0 oe hoes 
132; 067) 1 J} 1 4) 1 8} 1932/1 16) 1-2) +1-95 | 1.201134] 138) 17 48! © 99 | 998 
163!) 0 06-)5 Osta ds BS E25 Te 19 te BOS 29 Se. Sect ail) neon none 
134.) 07555) 0:58) POPS) Sep de Oo PAB 17 SE 28 | 1°95 | 130.1 84 1188) Oreo) ose 
US5z a O-d38h 0 Sel de Os esas ee slok Ti edhe (e280) ai osalsle28s tessa TER +0 22 | 295 
136 | 052] 055] 058/ 1 2/ 1 5/1 9/1 138]1 18/1 21/1 26] 1301] 1 34) © 92] 994 
137-0 50: | O'S4) = 0-57 | TE S0re clo of Sesh 1 ay bal te 196] 128 | on i eonteag 22 | 223 
138 049] 052; 055) 059] 1 2/1 6/1 911141117] 1 21/125) 1 99] 09 99 929 
139 247 |. 0 52} 053) O52) D014 1 84 12 11 15-119) 1-93") ong 96 291 
140 | 046) 049) 052) 055) 059/1 2}/1 6/110|113}117 | 191) 1 25 |40 92] 2 
141); 045| 048; 050) 054/ 057/1 07/1 4/1 8)111/115/1 19/1 99 ay 22 ah 
142 | 043; 046; 049; 052/ 055)059}1 2}1 6/1 9)113]}116)1 901 0 22 | 218 
143 | 0 42] O 45) 0 47) 050) 053 / 05717 O0}2 4/1 7/2 21 11 4417 78 1. Oo 99 217 
44) 9467 043) J 46! 0%) 05210551058 /1 2/1 5)1 9/119 TETGH | On 22s O06 
145 | 039] 042) 044} 047] 050;}053/056;1 0/1 311 71110)/1 13 |+0 22 
146 037); 040) 042) 046) 048/051 '055/0-58)/1- 1/1 4/1 > 814 71 e 22 ou 
147 0 36 | 039} O41) 044] 047/049; 053/056/059/1 2)/1 6/1 9! 0 99 213 
148 | 0 34! 037] 039] 0 42} 045/048 / 050/054} 0571/1 0/1 8 1 7! O 22) 212 
149 | 0 33 | 036; 038) 041) 0 43/0 46/049/052/055/058/4 11/1 4 O20) ort 


Lat. 


Ven, 


———] 


10° 


10°00 


Long. | gf. 


150°: 


151 
152 
153 
154 
155 
| 156 
157 
158 
159 


160 
161 
162 
163 
| 164 
165 
166 
167 
168 
169 


170 
1171 


CDooCoCeo OCOoOeOSDeO COotcOoo COoOCOCOSCO COOoOSCOCO SCSeOeSoSe 


Cocco oO Coco oCOoeoooOoODO CCoOSCO CoSoSCOoOo ooococe 


TABLES FOR CALCULATING HINDU DATES. 


Tapiy XXVII. (Parr F.—Trop. Lony. © =160° — 180°, 210° — 180°.) 


11° 


10°05 


<Q 


ocoocooc cooca ceoeco oooco aoocceeo oooceo? 


qoooooc coood DBoooe2 coo000 cooo0o0o0 Coo°0°ees 


if 


10°12 


<Q 


qooocoecoc cecoc ccooco cooooCo Soo°eoo eoeoeeoe 


DOCOKH SS Me meee ereeibp bh bobo ppp wwo wt wwwwwe 


138° 


10:19 


\ 


=] 


D2ooccoeceo coeoeco cooeoo cooeoo ooeoSooe eoooceoe 


DOCK RH HRD MNhwWwW WWW PHP oo oHoUIAMe 


<Q 


cococooe coooco ceooasc coeco seoSCcCoo oooo°o 


14 


10:27. 


Part F.—continued, 


10'96 


pent fend fom Head fret fred feet feet 


COeMPWHRE ANTMWOGS KPNNM OHSAS 


oooo°o°o qgqoooc acnTeeoace 


16° 1e°-| 17° 18° 19° 20° 219 22° 

10°34 | 10°41 | 10°49 + 10°57 10°64 10°72 | 10°80 | 10°88 
0,| 9h. 0.) gh. v.| gh. v.\ gh. v.| gh. gh 0. “gh. v. 
8/010/012/015|017/019 | 0 21] 0 24] 0°26 
8/01010121014/017| 019] 0 211 0 23]'0 26 
8/010/011}013/016| 018] 0 201] 0 22] 0 25 
7/0 91011/013/016/01710 19} 0.22] 0 24 
710 940111012/015/017|019]0 21| 0 23 
7/0 81/010}012/014/016 0 20' 0 22. 
6|0° 8/010] 012]0 14] 0 15 0.19 | 0 21 
6'0 810 9'011{/018]015 0 18:| 0 20 
6}0 710 9]011/013/014 01810 19 
610 710 91010/012)] 013 017 | 0 18 
510 7/0 8/010/041] 013 0 16 | 0 18 
5-10°°6)0 $10 91:0 11 | 0.12 015/017 
51/0 61/0 7/0 9/010/012 0 144 0 16 
510 610 7/0 8/010) 0 014/015 
4/0 510 7/0 8/0 9]010|012)0 13] 014 
41/0 510 610 7/0 9/010/0 11/70 12|018 
4.10 S10: 6)0 710 810 91-010 10 1Y.|0 12 
4/0 41/0 51/0 61/0 7/0 8/0°9/010/0N01 
50) 40 eb Or 6 10.17 10. 8)-0 -9 1-010 }.0°11 
SO 4210 50 510 60, 710-810 946 10 
310 310 410 51/0 610 616 7/10°816 9 
21/0 310 41/0 410 510 6/0 610 7/0 8 
SiO S10 S10 440 510 S10 61:0 610-7 
210 210 8310 31/0 410 410 5/0 6|0 6 
210 .2)/0 210 810 83/0 410. 4/0 510 5 
1/0 11/0 2/0 2/0 3/0 3/0 410 410 4 
TD 140 2:0 2:10 210 S60, 310-370 4 
V0 10. 11.0 1.10 210 210, 210250 8 
TOSS | Oust sO eee 1. Osab 0: Ee S02 0-58 
OG Ol SGaO 01 Onl Oo Lh OL Ort 0a 
O16 010 0/0 610.016 0160 010 O10 6 


28° 


29° 


20° | 


81° 


SSo0oeso COOSCS COOOO’SCCCCS SOOSo CSOOCSS 


ODM we Gara 


SSO0SOS9 SBOSCS SCOSDOSO COOSCSD OSOoOoSo Gooo Os i 


SQ 
Ra 


SOSoooo OOOO O ODO OO Oe OSCSO COSCO O CSoSoOCS 


Lai 11:30 
vo | gh #8 
36 | 0 39 
Sia) ets! 
34 | 0. 36 
Bij es 15) 
31/0 34 
380 | 0 32 
2910 31 
2810 30 
2710 29 
25 |0 27 
24; 0 26 
23 | 0 25 
22); 0 23 
2110 22 
19|/0 21 
‘18 | 0 19 
17|0 18 
16/0 17 
15/0 16 
13;0 14 
12;0 13 
ie) ee 
10/0: 10 
8/0 9 
7j-G) 78 
6,0 6 
5/0. 5 
4/0 4 
2,0 38 
eiO nee 
O10 0 


11:39 


Sore w kb O~r 


eccoocoo soco0eco ceoooo eocooo cocoe“se coo 


11:48 


0 41 


SeEOOR ANT HOOMWH HAWSENM BasOoo HWE Oat 5 


i167 | 1166 | 11-76 | 1187 | 1297 | 1207 | +073 | 

gh. v.\ gh. 0.) gh. ov.) gh. 2 | gle %.| gh 0.) gh. e. | Long.| 
0 47/0 50] 053105610 59] 1 2140 22 | 210% 
0 46/0 48/0 51/0 54)05711 0| 0 21 | 209; 
0 44/) 0 46 | 0 4910 52) 055 |058 0 21} 208} 
0 42 | 0 45 | 0 48 | 0 50 | 0 53 | 0-56 | 0 20) 207 | 
0 41 | 0°43 | 0 46 | 0 49) 051); 0 54!) 019] 206) 
0 39 | 0 41! 6 44] 0 47 | 0 49 | O 52 [40 18 | 205 
0 38 | 0 40 | 0 42 | 0 45 | 0 471.0 50| 018 | 204 
0 36 | 0 38 | 0 40 | 0 43] 0 45 | 0 48 0 17 | 203 
0 35] 0 87 | 0 39| 0 41 | 0 43] 0 46} 0 16 | 202 
0 33 | 0 35 | 0 87 | 0 89.| 0 41 | 0°43 | 0 16} 201 
0 81 | 0 33 | 0 35 | 0 37 | 0:39 | 0-41 |+0 15 | 200 
0 30 | 0 32 | 0 33 | 0.36 |-0 87 | 0 39 | 0-14 / 199 
0 28 | 0 30 | 0 82 | 0 84.) 0 35 | 0 37; 013) 198 
0 27 | 0 28 | 0 80} 0 32 | 0 $3 0 35 | 0 13] 197 
0 25 | 0 27 | 0 28 | 0 80} 0 82/0 33] 0 12 196 
0 24 | 0 25 | 0 26} 0 28 | 0 30 | 0 31 |+0 11 | 195 
0 22 | 0.23 | 0 25 | 0 26] 0 28) 0 29} 010) 194 
0 20 | 0 22 | 0 23 | 0 24] 0 26} 0 27 | 0 10} 198 
019 | 0 20] 0.21] 0 22] 0 24/025] O 9]-192 
017/018] 019} 021] 022/023] 0 8}191 
016/017} 018/019] 020] 021/40 7 | 190 
014/015!016/017|0 28/019; 0 7] 189, 
013}013/014+015/}0 26/017] 0 6| 188 
0.11/012|012]018!024)014) 0 5 | 187 
0 9}010/011/ 011] 022)012| O 4| 186 
0 810 8/0 9/0 94010) 0107+0 4; 185 
0610 7/0 71/0 71/0 8/0 8} O 3{ 184 
0 51/0 510 5/0 610 6/0 6] 0 2| 188 
0 3/0 3(0 4/0 4/9 4/0 41 0 1).182 
02/0 2/0 810 2)}0 2/0 2; 0 1] 181 
0 0}0 5]0 ofo ojo ofo o| o o| 180 


498 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Taste XXVIII.—The Ayandhsa for centuries of the Taste XXIX.—The Ayandm&sa according to the 
Kali Yuga and for odd years.* Siddhduta Stroman. 


Ayandméa, 


= 


oO 
rc) 
es 


© COTO Ot me CO DO 
OONTH OS DH © 
ss, : 
CSCUON HO te 
8 CO NT Os Or Or im CO DD 


0° 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
1 
1 


Hert OoDOOooo oococoeco°oes 


oooocooooo of 
SSS8SSS5 


* Before K.Y. 3600 the AyanAmésa are negative; but they were probably not yet known at thet time. 


INDEX. 


3s 2 


paw ne 
PAGE 
Pace | Alberint . ° ° 304 
Aba, Abeyaka,a village aeennitentete 96,115 | Alhanadevi, Chedi aaiens her Bonk. Ghat ieteiotian 
Ab&-Bakr Jalwant @cice : e * » 482 : edited . . 5 . 7-9, 16 
Ald as-Samad ‘ . . : ° : ° 133 —135, . daughter of Viseyasiicha and wite of the 
Abeyaka, Aba-, village ° . e ry By 96, 116 | Chedi Yasahkarna i, - ‘ 304 
oo Sheth Basta tome aete an eee i "Alt Dost Khan Barbegt. 9.5 6 0, 142 
ayadeya-siri . A ° e ikasnd : 
Abhimanyu, a Kechchhapeghate ciinse ee ts 234 eR hia Afghan. os niaes eae, os: oh 
abhisheka, inauguration ceremony =. ° ‘ » 6x. | Alfnaka, pr.n. ; : pe ee ; 327 
Abu’l Fath, Shaikh . - c é ° ° 433 | Allata; pr. n. A ee 5 : on klT 
Abu’l Fazl wie etre Wa. hse) ses ta 9 Od” Al shabat: of Beesley inscriptions whet sca Dea aoks 
Abul Ma’Ali : 5 e ‘ : 4 » 130,143 | aluna . ete : cae ' « 268 
Achalaé, nun . - c 0 A 97, 385 | Amaga, fem. n. o é é 2 $86 
Achhavada, Achhavata, placename - 106, 111, 115, 378 | Amdédnta, scheme of months in dates . : é . 224 
Achhavati, nun ; ; A 2. . « «882 Amardja . . ° Se iea, Chi Se SIE nS : 40 
‘Addai S4khé of Osvals 5 ; 5 z 4 41 | Amari, fem. n. ° : 55 i A ' 30 
Adhapura, pln. rey a0 ° ; - + 112 | Amarodadhi-siri 5 5 ; n ~ $9 
ddhikdrika, an office . 6 é : rae tt 341 | ambakapilika ‘ : C é . 258, 259 
Adhichhatra kings . wis ° : . e 243 | Ambarasena,ypr.n. . ° ; ° ‘ a 236 
Adinatha tirthamkara ; - p . 78, 81,83 | Ambasdlavans Chaitya  . : ; A 5 320 
Adisimha, a king of Magadha . ' A 6 « 3844 | Ambikd devi : A 5 5 : A ; 37 
‘ Adity a-bhogika : : 5 ' 4 4 19 | Atchala gachchha ’ - 34, 36, 39, 78, 79, 83, 86 
Adityaéarma . ° : . 5 . 20f | Amdhras (see Andbras) : . oo toe y er Tae 
Advaitasata, a poem by Gasgidhara G 5 . ‘. 832 | Amoghavarsha III, Rashtrakita k. . , 168, 172 
aggitthoma . . . . . . . 484, 485 | Amobini, fem. n. . . ° : 199 
Agidey4,afemale’s name . & 5 G C 871 | Amraprasida, Guhila prince . 0 : ° - 4082. 
Agidodeva, personal name © 5 : ° . 95 | ArbtikinizAntigonos Gonatas 5 reli A 471 
Agila, pr. n. . ° . ° eee 112 | Armtiyoka=Antiochos II . ° . » 466, 471, 
Agisima, pr. n. . . . ° : . 95, 104 | Anahillapura, t. ‘; ; : : 41, 86, 304, 437 
Agnisvamin, author. : 5 A ~ . 23 | Anamda VAsithiputa . A 5 4 Fe oe A) 
Agrotaka family, Jaina . A 5 5 e 244 Anandakuéala, jays he es - js atte : 39 
Ahamada&vad (Ahmadabad) . ° . e « 41, 84 | Anandasdgara-stri J 5 ’ 3 See east, 
Ahihaya (=Haihaya) family . . . - - 229 | Anandavimala-siri ie ° e % ‘ 38 
Ahimita, pron. . ; : . : . - 93, 870 | Ananta, country . : c : ; 118 
Ahmad Sultan of Gujarat A . ° - 24, 28, 33 | Afichala gachchha, Pattdvali of ; ; ; . 39 
Ahmad Sbah Durrani . . ° : ° 136 » (Amchala) 3 34, 36, 78, 79 
Ahmed Shah, emperor of Dehli. + + = 473 | Andhra king defeated by the Chedi Yaéabharg ; 2,7 
aima . 5 < ve . ° . . 473 | Anga, country . ° ° . ° - 193. 
Ahuka, pr. n. ed at oye Werte ar orig NESye Qe LORE Th a Reo ple ic k's © + = 409% 
Ajemera (Ajmir) . eee “ : e 41, 80,84 | Anhilvéd (Anahillapura), Bkiguioe I, of r 4 «304 
Ajanava, pln. . : : ‘ 3; 2s 399 »  Chaulukya kings . : . ° - 437, 438 
Ajarani,fem.n.  - . ° ° : « 869,378 | Annigere, town . ° : 2 . ° « 170 
Ajayapala, k. of Bayani i . < » 275, 276 | Antarapata, vill. . * - ‘ 5 er 175 
Ajayasirohadeva, Chedi prince . ° C - 805 | Antarapura, pl. n. . ° ° . - ; ae 41. 
Ajitamana, pr. 2. : ‘ ‘ ; A 344 | Antarvedi Doab % c : * ; . 240 
Ajitanatha, Jina =e “ie C 5 7 é 85 | Anugaha, pr. n. - 5 re Mien in SDSS ery 
‘Ajitiguia, pr. n. seek oe, AOL, B68 (80Be. | epahets. 68. ke See ee en By 268 
Ajivikas : . - . - —- 272, 274, 323 Apaka, pr. n. 5 ° a 3 . . « 327 
Ajodban, Dipalpur, ie cure 6 427 | Apakani, fem. n. ay Sew 0 Saeki Ae ae 379 © 
Akbar, Moghul emp. 37, 88, 77, 86, 130-132, 137, 142, 146-149, | dpana . ° - ° ‘ ‘ = 5 eae 
265n, 280 | Apathaka, pr. n. . 101 
Akbarabad, t. a) Cowie . . ° ° - 472 | Araha, -data, -dina,-dasa, Ge. pr. Duy 95, 101 103, 106, 107, 
Riadive pe | Fgh rate pas Af) 329, 381 
Amalgir, emperor, see Nicanlgeu A A 435, 436 | Arahadind, pr.n. . = eee : ; - 383 


500 


PAGR 
Arahaguts, -zota, pr. on. ; &9, 99, 100, 882, 883, 897 
Arehaks, monk ‘ A ‘ ‘ . 877, 398 
Arehatapélite, pr. n. : . . ‘ a 377 
Arvohatarakbita, pr. B. f ° e : - 392 
Arajonaji (Gedi&) . e ° ° : 26, 30 
érakhddikate, drakkhiya , ees 484, 486 


&rkpina, Avapina, Arapana, 6, 108, 105,107, 116, 369, 379, 460 


Aavavati, vill.. ~~ . cee te , 


Aévina, first month of the year een Sar 299. 
Atha, pron. . ° . . : ° cae aE OS 
athamipakhdye Se i ir . oe woes 266 
Athakavagara, pl. n. . ° ° . é » (878° 
Atri, son of Brahman ; the moon sprang fromhiseye . 5 
Atukur or Atakur inscription of the time of Krishna ; 
III. dated 8.-S. 872, . : : 167 ff.- 
Aurangzeb (’Alamgir) emp. . 139, 148, 149, 152, 164, 473, 
474, 476 
AuttareSvara, » worshipper of Uttareévara (Siva) « 127. 
avalagaka, avalagana, 5 ° 343 
Avalladevi, Hana princess, md. the Chedi Rare loca: 2, 6, 
304 
Avanive:man, Chanlukya chief, father of Nohal& « 304 
AvAsika, pr.n, . 4 ° ‘ ° ° 399 ° 
 vesanit aioe : : 5 Avy 94 
Avisini, pron. .. . -- : ° . . 105 
Aya, prem. . ° ° ° . ~ 296, 398 
ayagapata ‘ ° . ° de 811, 313, 314 
dyandmsas al : ° ° C BB 
Aysvati—Aryavat - c ee e e 199 
Ayodhya, t. one tees , is Fi ® 2 o 344 


. 107,115, 368, 379 © 


ardtinishidana, abiruda - , ‘ - : 215 
Arbuda, mount Abas ws. kek 181 
Arthadata, fem.n, .. Reve a a eo 
Arisiraha, Gubila prince of Mowhd tito rt wie 409 
ete Uitiaacoe aes. ° ees » 202 
‘Arjona-Sahasrarjuna s,s pacientes 9,14 
» ‘aKachchhapaghata prince . °-. . « 284 
Arjunavarman of rch yah ans . gente, S00) 
Arjunondhiké, vill. Re caer cates Beat Sears >. .216.:) 
Arnordja of Sakamthart Tete Ar eet ep 422 
Arandirivervat. a oes \citca un Dota eel 
Arya-Hattakiya tula of ee Aten keen ° 201 
Aryanyista kula of Jains 9 55 6 ww e198 
‘Avyarakshita-sdri ~ * Pes Gael 39 
AsabbA, nun . ie r re ie 4 - 2879 
Asada, prin. cd - 7 eieioae . 95, 105 
Asadavaé, nun 4 ‘ nen tie °, « 400 
Asadeva,nun’ .. i ae ae aa. 398 
As&dhasena, prea. © : ‘ A * » 242, 243 
Asagnta, pr.n. . : : ° . : » . 879 
‘Asdpuridevi.  . ~ 2. «6 -* oo even neces es 
asavira . ‘e . cs eae ees 04 
*Ashiq Mohammad (Mix) : e ‘ A thane 4es: 
Ashraf (Sayyid) : e A C : 2 285, 286 
ashtdpada—symbol” se ° : . a eee: 
Asika. pron. eee ues 3 A “ 276 
Asmand, vill, . . ene ° ° 431 
Afgoka, edict of, a4 SAfichi a « . 87 f, 366, 367 
» pillar edicts . s . 2458: 
». Yock edicts at Girnar, Shakbazgarht, Kalst and 
Mansebra_ . ° d ‘ o 447, 
Astaka (P) asurmame » . ® ° . - 18 19 
Aévadev&,fem.n.-.  . : : ° 100, 374 
Asvarakhité,fem.n, 2° 3 : . ee 380 


— 


INDEX, 


PaGE 
Ayyabhyista ule . ° ° . ° ° + 209 
Ayyana I., W. Chalukvak. . : . ° ° 171 


*Azam Khin Mir Muhammed Bagir Iradat Khan . 


B 


Babar, emperor : . Ld, 141, 144, 148, 478-475, 480 
Badal pillar inscription of the time of Beslat 2c 
‘edited ° . ° . ° ° . 
Bada vishuya . * . ° ’ ° 
Badhaka, Badhika monk ns > 
Bagadage or Bagadige ndd Bagenad dist, 


. 160£. 
348, 357, 358 
' 388, 389, 400 
168, 170, 174 


Bagumra, vill. - . é : - : #23 
Beksidiesge.o.:. a., << Ga ee pmepeatoo 
Bahadur Sultan of Gujarat . - - ° Gait 
Bahasatimittra, Byihaspatimitra, king ; » 242, 243 
Balti Shdb;emp. “©. . 2 ~ ss « (487 
Bahula, pr.n. : : ° . . 398 
Baijnath Pragsasti, Note oD, « . . - 482 
Baladata, fem.n. . ; r a 5 A ry BES 
Balaharsha, Chedi king ° 304 
Valaka, pr. n. . . . . ‘29, 95, 390, 397 
Bulaka, fei 4. 4.” Oe ee ees 373 
Balamitra, pr. np. . - 5 é Salt 95, 106: 
Dilasinhaypy Be << ww at 
BalatkAragana, A . ° F »- 40 
Balutréta, Balattrata,. prey pr. 2 4 - _« 197, 208 
Balban, Abu'l Muzaffar,emp. . » -. 138, 139, 158 
Balika, fom.n, . Fue ric . 376, 382 
Baluchara -. . s on) el AsO STy 
Barmhadasia kula, of Jainde Pr 4. 210 
Banava, pr. n. ; ‘ > ; 5 mae $27 
Banavase,. dist. 1 a : - 168, 169, WZ 
Bappabhatti °. 5 ' Tite : : AO 
Batada hshetrapéla . ° : : ° e 83 
Barantag (Mir) - 2... x A A : - 428 
Barbak Shah, k.of Bengal. 2. . .  . 284 
Barulamisdna(?) gothé . ; ‘ . 7 92, 102 
’ Barwala, t. and Mulammadan inscriptions ~~. A 158 
Batala pangors ‘and t. ° . 472, 473, 479, (Watadla) 480 
_ Bayana, t.". *. , 3 4 . . .. 180 
Bayyé Ibréhim’ (Molik) te ee Bo e ' 292 
'. Bedakara, pln. ¢ . B.S. Sc eS 109 
Belatiur, vill. ee eacerec ey : scteis ° 169, 173 
- Belvola or Belvala dist. ey s 168, 170, 174 
Benares copper-plate inscription of Karnadeya, edited . 297f. 
Bhabha, son of Si 8 ee ee Sh ay) 
Bhabha-Lala, son of Lils- alee s a ae 439 
Bhadaguta, pr. Q.- « . 5 Se. Fe . - 375. 
Bhadaka, pr.n. .° = Sy Ait tenuate ae 5 ~ 101 
Bhadanakata, pl. n. Mivikece eS eae : 110 
Bhadika, pr. n. mee, aerate o. Ss . 37, 389 
Bhadranadi, pr. n. . a Aaa pie ween on sonioale ALY) 
Bhadrayaga, prin. 6 6 ee lw 807 
Bhadu, pr. 2. ° eee tet - * «. 889 
Bhaduka, Aya, monk . ~ « 108, 384 
Bhagalpur copper-plate of Wistyacapaies referredto . 161 - 
ee Muhammadan inscriptions . : ° 280f. 
Bhagavata, king . . en. ce <. - 243° 
Bhagwanpnr, vill. fe freebies WO Sear he x yey 
Bhaileka, Maurya chief . ~ - + . . « 223. 
Bhajikan atasyamin 2 aoe . 22 


INDEX. 


rs 
Bh&kamiéra, minister of the Chedi Yuvardjadeval. . 174 
Bhamduka, monk . . - 93, 98, 110, 379, 384, 388 
Bhamduka, Gotiputa . . ‘: - 4 368 
Bhammaha-desi =. gw kee 8 
Bharada, py. n. . ‘ x = aii s 327 
Bharadiya . : ; » AOE 
Bharadvaja, the first of the Mace pabaene : . 332 
Bharadvaja gotra . A - : : c - 216 
Bharanabhiti, monk . i . shit i's 491 
Bharata, a mythical king ea ° ‘ ° 5 
Bharhut inscriptions referred to. ° . . 89, 90 
Bhatinda Muhammadan inscriptions . —_. ° . 435f. 
Bhattibhava, pron, : 210 
Bhattiprolu Buddhist inscriptions, edited, Pref ix., 323£., 368 
Bhatta Vishnu, pr. n.. 5 0 ° 409 
Bhava, vil), . 5 ae 8 5 ; v= 348, 357 
Bh&vadeva, pr. n. : ; - ’ : as ako 117) 
Bhavadyota, pr. n. . O ° . cee Bub hate 
Bhavanagara, t. 4 : ° - 3 42, 78 
Bhavarakta Allata, pr. n. E A Ct : 118 
Bhavaségara-stri 0 0 . 5 a. 5 39 
Bhavasvamin, author ° ° ° 5 23 
Bhera-Ghat inscription of Hbaoaders, edited : FA Tf. 
Bhichhuka, pr.n. ° 5 e : ; - -.1038 
Bhichhunika . ° . . ° . 401 
Bhillama I, Yadava chief : 5 eek pa PNB) 
Bhillama IJ., Yadava chief; bis Sarngamner copper- 
plates edited é ° ° ° . : « 2I2f, 
Bhillam4la or Srimala, t. . . a : ' 5 41 
Bhima I., Maurya chief ~ o . ts '. 222 
Bhimadeva L, of Anhilvad ° skye ° - 304, 439, | 
ay lt bs “aps ° » 488, 439 
Bhima-muni, image of ees Le ° > TR 
Bhimaraja IJ., Maurya chet Oe eu eee ete - 223 
Bhimesvara,a gods An Dh ee Fi rave 
Bhinmal, Bhillamala, t. . i : 4)- 
Bhogavadhana, t. ¢ 101; 108, 109, aha ‘15, 369, ‘389 
bhogika . F Hee PG hee oe oe 19f. 
bhogikapdla + ethene rae ahaa 
Bhojadeva, Paramara i of y Mave + _ 181; 234, 235, 236. 
en k. of Kanauj. ‘+ °- % ; «804 
Bhojas, a people ° . : . ° . ATI 
Bhoningadeva, achief ». + + ‘ : o. 229 
Bhramaraéalmali, vill. op Fgoasy ‘ 344, 
Bhitarakshita, pr. BD. <--> Se rata +. 39), 
Bhitishandaka (?), vill. ee ee ” 344. 
Bhuvanakirti A eto ae cont 
Biah,t. - 5 . arene ek, Symes G 472 
bégha, land measure 5 5 Ro, ce 5 - 473 
Bibar Muhammadan inscriptions »' = + ° 291. 
Bijholi inscription of the Ch&hantanas, retarred tos. 118 
Bilbana quoted peice Ace Os fe A 4 303 
Bilri, vill. in Gujarat. . Tree Sania Pe 24 
Birbar, raja - - Gre sumer gear en: 146 
Bodhagothi- -bandabagoshthi : MeN ghee dareteMagions, 92 
Bodkana, son of the Moon.and father oe adie eee ea 3 
Bodhi, a nun Pyar ee TOR 108; 389 
Bodhideva, father of Vaidyadeva 4 eer ee _ BAB; 36: 355 
Bodi, pr. n. ° ys or 401 i 
Bohar vill., Muhammadan’ insertion at ° . 154, 155 |}: 
Bohittha-race a 5 - ; ‘7. “e A e387; 
Bohu, pr. 2. + . . 2 388 
BontbAdevi, daughter of the “Chedi king Lolsbmansrij, oR 


married the W. Chalukya Tailapa sulake 


501 


PAGE 

Brahmadeva-Haribrahmadeva ° . 5 : : 230 
brahméndakhanda : ° : : ° « 181 
brahmepura ‘ 4 Pi : 175 
| Brihat-Kharatara paakeNha- « 77, 80-82, 85 
Brihatsamhité quoted. ° A ; ‘ 7) LOA; 
Biba, pr. n. . 6 : - : : e 328 
Bubu, fem. n. 5 : A ° 209 
| Buddha, relics of, at Bhatvprols 4 : “ 327 
Buddharaja, Kalachuri k. A : ; é p 22 
Buddhi, fem. n. . ; ° ; . : : 203 
Budha, fem. n. ; ; é , A . 5 eye! 
Budhadeva, pr. n. . 5 5 . . - 349, 356 
Budhadeva pr. n. : > : 5 ° 394 
Budhaguta, pr. n. : c . : ° : 400 
Budharakhita, monk A A - 104, 368, 388, 397 
Budharakhité, nun : A 5 : 109, 388 
Budharakhitaka, pr. n. . 5 ° " - 400 
Budhapalita, Sheth 5 A ‘ 4 - 95, 397 
Budhapalitaé, nun : és ; ; - 106, 398, 401 
Budbila, pr. n. 5 : ; . » . 00, 111, 371 
Buhlil Lodi, emp. ; . C : 139, 433 
Bulika, pr. n. 5 ; A c : . 109 
Bumu, pr. n. c 2 ee iss ° A - 380 

.C 

Chadipiya, monk: . ° : ee de , 285 
Chadobha, t. 5 ° . - Ry tes 234 
Chaghafia, pr.n. . ia ac <8 tae SES aoe 
ChahamAéna priners, from Givaka I. to Vigrabardja . 117 
Chahata (?), pl. nu. ; 5 - peste mane eM 
chaityas ; ; , ‘akon a= O13 
Chajeda, gotra of the J ainas . A aaees 41 
Chakrahradi, vill. we elite 1 eee 175 
Chakrapani, a poet é . Se en REY OB 
Challesvara, a god Sie Ee eee LTS 
Chamari, t- - . op 26 se 472 
Champa, fem: n. . $ <p ao aes . 30 
Champ4ranya, a locality . Ge ei ao ~ Cee 
Chamnnda, Chaulakya Aes - : 4 2 439 

. Chandana, Chahamaua Kents : . A 117 

| Chandasiva, pr. n: eo se 5 . 118 

| Chandella king Harshadeva, =.  « A a 304 
ag » | Kirtivarman Rey el . - 304 

ms > Vijayapala Ben ate 5 304 

- » princess eas married” by ie Chedi 

Kokkalla I, ier ate ‘ - 304 

‘Chandra, Joina teachete@ G2) jones ONS Raper Aes 
chandraka, ‘the young moon’ ~ 6 - « Ida. 
-Chandra-kula of the Jainas . 5 Ane 28 : 38 
“Chandraprabhs, image of . : : . ° . 80, 83 
| | Chandraraja,Chahaminak. =. . - os 17 
+s Chahamana prince * . 4 = 117, 119 

: chaturanga, a complete army anh ve ‘ 5 5n. 
Vokituemdst 26 6 Oe or eg 261, 282 
chaturmukha bimba ares, , Sioa ° 80 
’ ChaturvimSati-itrthambara-patta . 3 is . 79, 80 
Chaulukya chief Avanivarman. . 4 5 : 304 
6 kings . 5 = Pi é 4232, 437, 438 
Chedi kings, list of them . A : . - 1,304 
» kings of Tripuri - : » (174 
Chedi era, 20, 21; year begins with hévine ° 3 299 
304 


Chedi country, called Dihala  . ° A a 


502) 


PAGE 
Cheula—Chaul,t. . rae < afieke te 42 
Chhadika, a monk . ° ; : A ri 110, 329 
Chhallipataka, vill. . A ‘ ; . Ci 176 
chhamdamndni A . A Bi Pit toe < 255 
Chhattradharé, vill . 6). 0 ‘s  « 119 
Chheta, pr. n. . . nee 6 ; 5 21874 
Chhingala, vill. . 0 ° - A ; A 344 


Chikhall, vill. . . ° . . ‘ . - « 216 


ohilathitika-chirathitika .  . . «6 88 
China,a people . . ; : . 409n. 
Chirdts, anun . a iss "100, 378, 399 
Chisht? saints of the Muslims 3 -  146f., 426 & n- 
Chitorgadh inscription of Mokala of MewAd, edited 408. 


of the Chaulukya Kumérapala, 

edited : . . ° 
Chitrakdte, the modern Chitorgadh : . 41, 409, 422 
Chitrakita, pl. u.in Bandhelkhand « “ 
Choda or Choja,a people . . «+» « 198, 466, 471 
Choli Begam . 5 > A * A . Pe 3s! 


? ” 


Chuda, pr. mn . i , : ; . . 104, 106 
Chudaphalagiri, pln. . pe na te Ae | BIS 
‘Chumvamoragiri (P), vill. . sia Bee 399 
D 

Dabhawila, pln. . 4 5 : A ° 472 
Dadda III. Gurjara k. ( . . ; F 20 
Dadda 1¥.—Prasantaraga II, . é : - ce, Phi 
Dabada, pr.n. . r c . ‘ F 236 
Dahala, the Chedi aiy : . : . - 804 
Damaka, a weaver . 5 ° ° es . 378 
Damana-bamdira, -bandira, Daman y cd . 86, 42, 78 
Damodara, a poet. . . ‘ : + 332, 333 
Darbhakaksha vishaya ' F ;  aiihas 119 
Darbhapani, minister of Deval : A ; a AGH! 
darbhatikG =. 5 ¢ 5 é j 130 
Disaka, pr. n. : . 4 , 5 : - 393 
Das& Porvals =. : : B " 4 41 
‘Dagapura clan of Brahmans Slam : 409 
Daégaratha, a poet c ‘ ; ae z 932, 333 
Data and Data, pr. nn. . : : ; 205, 385, 392 
Datakalivata (?), pr. n. 5 ‘ , * ; 877 
dates in inscriptions, see ‘ years’ é 9 . 9 

» computation of Hindu _ ’ ° . . 4878. 
Datilachayya, pr.n. ; 6 : Gs ‘ 211 
Dattajina, image of - 4 - : : =. WBE 
Dadd Khan, Afghan. eGeaaee 
Daula Khan, Muhammad-? Murid of Gtlan ; f Bee GR: 
Daulat Khan Khfgan . A A 7 % 288 


Dehli Sivalik pillar edicts ° ° ° : . 246 
‘Deopfara inscription of Vijayasena © 5 5 
de ete : Se ee se 1302, 175n. 
Deva, pr. n. Ble . . 205 
Devabhaga and Devabhigd, = mp. . 3 ae, 370, 382 
Devadata, a nun . ; “ ; 4 ‘ 394, 
Devadhara, pr.n. .- i a * é ; - 286 
Devagiri, -Daulatabad 4 A j ; 42 
Devagiri,a monk - “ c 5 
Devagrama, vill. A 5 ‘ 3 Fy ; 161 
Devahastin, Maurya chief . » « +« « 292 


Devaka, pron - : ° ° > 26, 107 
Devakarana, pr. n. ' O ‘. 3 31 
Devapala, Pala k. . . ° ° ° ° 161, 349 


INDEX. 


Devapila a Kachchhapaghata prince. . «.  « 284 
» prn, ; : A ° : : 229 
Devapattana praSasti of Sridhara A . . 437£. 
Devarskhite; prom eee 385 
Devarayadurg, vill. . e ° : . 163 
Devassrmany; pron, , et econ Went ae eee 332 
Devasena, pn. . : ie ee ; ; » 208: 
» a®daina sage . ; Pe AG pit 236 
Devasvamin, author ; - ‘ 3 eae are: 
Devavarmadeva, Chandellak. . : . ie 235 
Devendra-sari : : é ; Tein OO 
devtkumdla ; A 5 - 274 
Devila, pr. n. : - é « 203, 209 
Dhama-data, -guta, = rabhtias she r A 95 
Dhamadata, a monk at F 5 , 108, 368 
Dhamadatd, fem. n, . . : . ° * 380 
Dhamadeva, fem. n. P : C : Ae el 
Dhamadina,fem.n. . A A . 4 5 385 
Dhamaghosha, fem, mn. . 5 F eee est th) 
Dhamagiri, pr. n. P : 6 - > «© 879,377 
Dhamagirika, pr. n. “ aeons ; : 97 
Dhamaguta,a monk . . «© 4 -¢ 108, 112—114 
Dhamaka, pr.n, A F 378, 383, 385 
dhamakathika . . A 7 93 
Dhamarakhita, monk ° . ° ‘98, 104, 105, 385, 396 
Dhamarakhita, pr. n. : Na A Pete (ty © 102, 385 
Dhamaragiri, pr. n. ; . * . . 399 
Dhamasena, nun < a 7 > hr 211 
Dhamasena, monk - Py ° ° . 385, 400 
Dhamasiri, nun > Pra owe F ° 105 
Dhamasiva, Dhammasiva, pr. nu. - . e "94, 97, 108 
Dhemata, pr. n. A : 6 . ° 5 - 108 
Dhamavadbanana, t. ° 4 . ° 92, 99, 115 
Dhamayasé, nun . . - A 380 
dhammalipt . ° “ é 5 5 268 
Dhammapala, pr. n. . F : f : ; 827 
Dbarnmasiva, pr. n. ‘ b A $ - 108 
Dharhmavadhanana, t. . y 92, 99, 115 
Dhamutara pr.n. ° i . 386 
Dhan fem.n. . ° 5 384, 
Dhanabhiti inscription at Bharhut : ‘ 195 
Dhanaghosha, pr. n. 2 ; x 199 
_Dhanagiri, monk . 5 : ° 376, 385 
Dhanaka, monk ° . 5 ; % P 376 
Dhanapura, pl. n. . < ° ° e - 42,77 
Dhandhbuka, pr.n. . . é ; : . 19 
Dhangadeva, Chandellak. . 3 2 ; . 235 
Dhatiké,fem.n. ; ; : ° . - 389 
Dharakina, pl. n. (Eran) ° = . ‘ 1165, 375 
Dharanidhara, pr. n.. e “ ° : ; - 8,16 
dharmachakra . . . * = « 313, 321, 322 
Dharmadeva’s vihara 5 epee : ‘ 369 
Dharmaghosha-stri : Pi 2 - x 39 
Dharmamirti-siiri ° . . F . 389 
Dharmanatha, image of . z : 80, 84, 80 
Dharma[pala], Palak. .. : 5 A ‘ . 162 
Dharmapala, pr. n. : C ° ° A , 376 
Dharmaprabha-siri ° ° : : 5 - 389 
Dhayadeva, pr. n. & o = = 5 4 402 
Dbavalahara. district = + . ° A aoags 
Dhiraraga, pr- n. 5 A . = 117 
Dhorappa, ® prince, probably Wiranane . « 214,215 
Dhirtasvémin, pr.n. . . . . ° ° 23 
Dhyanaganacharya, pr. n. ; - fe ° - 26 


INDEX., 


PAGE 
Digambara Pattdvali . < A e : 40 
Dihli siba, Muhammadan inscriptions from : 180£., 424¢, 


Dihli ° 6 ‘e e ° ry ° . 144 
Dilavika district ° e ° e @ a ° 26 
Dilmal, vill. in Gujarat ; c 5 Py - 24, 26n 


Dina, pr. n. . ate - 204, 208, 321 
Dipalpur— Ajodhan all, ° e ° ° ’ 427 
Dirghasakhika, vill. . ° . ‘ ° . 176 
Disdgiri, pr. n. e A e 3 : 387 
disah—nymphs of the quarters ° ° » 872n, 387 
Disdrakhita, pr. n. ; A a : - ‘#327 


DisAvala Tace ° e ° ° ry . ry a 41 
Diva-bandira—Diu .. . : . : ° - 42 


Divita (Aryya)- ‘ 5 « ‘« 204 

Drakshardma in the Gerace: district, Bhimogvara 
temple at ry ° ° ° e e e 7 

dramma... * . . ‘ . ’ « 130 


Dravida, a people ° 3 ° . . < 161 
Dubkund inscription of the Kachchhapaghata 


Vikramasisnhs, edited . 2 232f, 
Dudhpani rock inscription of dasaeehon, edited - =343f. 
Digada gotra = oO ° . : +: 41,79 
duksddhya . . ° . . fre een oO 
Dujjana (misread °fajfidna) ‘ é : : 21 
Dupasaha, a nun ° 3 : e e 377 
Durlabharija, Chahamana Sates : 3 . 117 
Durlabhasen2-sivi, pr. n. “ SPs e 236 
Dvédravattpuravaradhisvara & A ° > 216 
dvinématak eu ‘ ; A : . 128n. 

E 
Kolipses, solar, in dates. A : » 22, 216, 224 
Hjavata, pl. n. 5 3 . *, ‘ ; 104, 115 
Ejavati, vill. . . : . - 868, 381 
Ekalinga, a name of the ool Siva 6 ; 5 e 409 
Ekanatha, pr. n. . ° . : 409 
Erakina, vill. (Erin, vide Dharakina) 4 ° e 96 
Erambarage, pl.n. . : 5 ° . 170 
Ereyaps, Ganga : 5 6 : 168, 170, 171, 173 


Faizuddinpur, will. . : : ae & 472 
Farid, Shaikh : : . . eats 2 «433 
farmin : . : > ° . 473, 474, 476 
Farrukh Siyar,emp. . A 5 138, 473, 476 
Fath Shah, k. of Bengal 2 e . . e 287, 288 


Fathabad, t. in Panjab eae c Cog ee 
Fathabad Muham. inscriptions . » : 424f. 
females named at Saitchi, . ° 115, 403, 404, 406 


Firoz Khan ibn Ahmad Khin . e « . 144 
Firoz Muhammad Lutfallah Afghan , < 5 137 
Firoz Shab, emp., 150,159; (Peroja). . , « 410 

» kof Bibér Sf ec: 5 Sir a8s 
forest tribes . « : F A : 471 


G: 


Gabbala, vill. ‘ ° ; seat’ ‘ ‘ 26 
Gada, pr. n., 112; Gadd,anun . ‘ ae 883 
“G@adag, t.in Dharwad . ° ‘ ‘ ‘ ‘ 170 
Gagaindata, Gangadatta, pr.n. . ° r . . 878 


Gaganasimhadeva, a ee prince 


gahapats 


Gajjana, t. (Ghai) 


Gamdhb&ra, people 


Garmdhara, a monk 
gangapuputake ° 


gana Litavagata ° 
Gandadeva, Chandella k. 


Ganga, image ° 
Gangadhara, a poet ; his eines insription 
Gangavadi dist. . 


GAngeyadeva, also calla! VikramAditye, Chedi k. 2, 5,9, 14, 


Gaokaran, pln, . 


Garga, minister of Dharmaphia . 


Garuda, god ° 


Gauda country « 


Gauradevi, fem. n. 
Gautama gotra 


Gaya, the sacred place 
Gayakarnadeva, Chedi k. 


Gediaé family 


goldta 


ry 


, kings of . 
Gaur, Muham. inscriptions 


e 


Geographical or lacs names at Safichi 
Ghamghanipara, pl. n. 


ghénaka 


Ghandhara ° 
Ghastuhasti (Aryya) 
Ghandi (?) country 


Ghulam Muhammad Qazi 
Ghunli, ruined city in snes 


Girigata, a nun 


Girnar Rock edicts of deeia: 


° 


2, 8, 9, 15, 16, 18, 19 


Gobhilaputra, founder of the Guhila famiy ‘ 
Godasa, pr. n. 
Godavari, a riv. 
Gola, pr. n. 


Golakauak=Golkonas 


Gomati, riv. . ‘ 


Gomukha Yaksha, image of 


Gonamdaka, pr. n. 
Gopadri, hill 
Gopala, Thikura . 


anes 


Palak. . 


. 


Gopali Vaihedari, wanes 
Gosaka, pr. n. 


Gosaladevi, Chedi queen; her 


Gowilaka fam. . 
Goshaka, pr. n. ° 
Gotami,anun . 
Goti race, ete. 6 


Gotiputra or Gotiputra 


gotra of Bharadvaja 


Katyayana 
Kaundinya 
Kausika 


9 


e 


Chajedé (Jaina) 


1 

° ° 327 

x . 207 

383, 399 

-. 98, 102, 201, 384 

e 88n,'196 

é F « 316 
Pas cs a es 

erties Fac) 

. é 244 

. a . 41 

segues ieesD 

. «416 

. 216, 299, 357 


PAGE 

e 234 

@ e 94 
e A 37 

7 3 468 
* 399. 

° . 258 
: 236 

e - 235 
° 483 
330 

. 168-170 


304 


: ° e 146 


e 161 
° - 319 


" 161, 198, 332, 348, 355 


° -, 161 


‘ 216 
409 


24, 28, 30-32 
: 268 
116, 407 


. . 27 
° - 346 
. 242, 243 
382 


Kumbhi Soret lta 
inscription referred to . 
» wite of the Chedi k. Jayasimmhadeva - 3805 


504 


PaGE 
gotra of Kautsa ; A 5 . « 22, 364, 365 
cf Kunkumalols (Jains) f a é ° 4l 
% Lalana “p ° A ° 41 
a Lodha rae ; Ode ASE, ° 41 
a Luniyé * 6 6 0 . 41,80 
»  Maniydna . : c : : - 85 
f Mauna - A : A ’ F 8, 16 
of Mummiyaé (Jaina). 4 ; A é 4) 
33 Nadila iets "3 5 ; 7 4) 
5 Nagada ¥ * a A A . Al 
A Nahata NaN ie A " A 3 41 
a Nirvriti 3 A ) 29 
oy BhBandily ie so Dec toe meee 161, 438 
S35 Shota (Jaina) 7 A ‘ P a Al 
3 Uhada ” . ° . ° . 4) : 


Vandhula C, c ; ‘ r . 3859 


* Visd-Srimala e ‘ . ht ones 41 
* Visvamitra . ‘ A é - 348 
a Yadugada . A : . : * 41 
Gottika, pr. n. . ° ‘ . - 204 
Govindachandra, k. of Kanauj =. "303, 347, 359, 361 
grants of . . A 358£., 361f, 
Gavicdaphle Pala k. nee Ag ; a f ee GEE 
Goyindaraja, Chihamana prince , 5 . « 117, 119 
‘s Maurya chiefs. A A 222-224 
ovindpur inscription of the poet Gasvadhare: edited . 330, 
Goyala gotra, Jaina , . : . ‘ 5 244 
Grahabala, pr.n. .  « 5 : ‘ ~ « 204 
Grahacheta, pr. n. . ° : : 5 201 
Grahadasa, pr.n. . eae : ' a 5. 0) 
Grahamitrapalita, pr. n. . ° ; “ 211 
Grahasena, pr.n. . : : : : 7 208 
Grahasiri, fem. n. ‘ 5 ' é ; - 203, 205 
grdma-pradhdna . : : ° . . 5 te 
Grishméh season. . ° 7 : . « 262, 263 
Guhila princes of Mewad cg ° « 408, 409 
Gijardtrdh é : x : : . . 438 
Gunakirti, pr. n. . ° 40 
Gunanidhana-eiri c c ; : 39 
Guravamiéra, pr. n. . : 5 a 3 161 
Gurjara, a people ae c ; - 16) 
Gurjaras of Bharoch 3 A : 19 
Gurjara race of Jainas . : : - 4d 
Givaka I., Chahamana k. ; 4 5 lily 
+ 2H » é - : aly 
Gwaliar, pls n. ‘ P - . . ; 436 
H 
Hafiz Jamal’stomb . 5 ; 3 ; 136 
Haibaya princes : ‘ A : . 5, 22, 300 
Haji-Begum . . j A : Se) 
Hajirajadeva, a gael = ; ; s F 230 
Hala, pr. n. . 3 5 SOR 
Hallara, Halar prant in Kathiavad 85 
Hamid Khao . . % ; s) -495 
Hamma, wife of the Yadava Bhillama MT. i 215 
Hammira, Guhila prince of Mewad é . . - 409 
A a Musalmén c C : z c 439 
Hamsakoficht, pl. x. 5 ; cs : - 349, 358 
Hamsapala, Guhila prince : . ° 6 
Hamsarakhita, at aie ane Es ‘ : : ie 
Hansi, t. and Muhammadan inscriptions at 159, 429f. 
Haradasaji, Gedid . 5 : ‘ : 26, 30-32 


ee | ee = as <n 


INDEX, 


PAGE 


Haribrahmadeva, a Kalachuri chief; inscription of his 


reign, edited ce 6 6 
Haribara, pr. n. : 4 A 
Harinegamesi, general of Indra . 
Haripala, k. of Bayand . . . 
Hariti, fem. n. 
Harpur, vill. . : . , 
Harsha, bill, 117 ; village , F 
Harsha inscription of the Chahamdna 

edited C . 4 5 
Harshachanda Sheth . ° . 
Harshadeva, the god Siva 

rn , Chandella k. ° . 
Hasan Shabid’s tomb . 
Hatakesvara, the god Siva ° ; 
Hatim Khan Khaqén . . ° . 
HaAtiya, pr. n. ; , - % 


heddvika . c out 
Hemabhai Fakbatshand: ia n. . 
Hemachandra, referred to, . B 
Hemantdh season ° < * 
Hida king . ° . . . 
Himadata, fem. n. « . ee 
Himagiri, pr. a. . hs . . 
Hiranakara, pr.n. « 

Hirahavagha, pr. a. = - ‘ 5 
Hiravijaya, Jaina pontiff . . “ 
Hiravijaya-stri . 2 - : ° 


Hisar Muham. inscriptions 

Hiuen Tsiang, Chinese pilgrim. 

hrimkdra-patta . fF 

Huksha for Havishka . 

Humaytn, emp. 

Hana family . é : : : 
» »® people . “ . 


Hina princess Avalladevi, area the Chedi Knane 


Husain Shah k. of Bengal : 
Huvishka, Kushava k. A A = 


I 


Ibrahim Husain Mirz&i . 5 : 
Torabim Khan Fath Jang : 
Ibrahim Shah, Abu-] Muzaffar, emp. . 
Ichchha, pr. n. . : “ 5 
Tda or a, wife of Bodhana oe 
fa: adata, pr, n. : A mee 
Idadeva, pr. n. - ° : 
Tdrapala Gotiputra . . 
Iltimish, emp. f 4 
ilyas Shah, k. of Beneilal z ‘ 
Imam Nasir of Soupat . i 


Indra, Jaina teacher . ‘ : 
Intercalary month in date <e 
Isala,fom.n. b . . F 
Tddnakipa,’ vil) oe «3 Le 
Isidasi,a nun. . ° : ° 
Isidata, Isidina, nun ; 

Isidina, pr.n. . . G 
Isiguta, pr. n. f ' 

Isika,pr.p. : A A : 
Isila, a monk ° c 4 s 
Isimita, pr. mn. 5 5 5 ° 


228, 230 
Ra hogs 
6. | 816.817 
276 
199 
472 
- 119 


Vigraharaja, 
116f- 
4 : : 36 
117, 118 
304 
134 
230 
291 
98 
130, 
; a : 83 
x 2 303 

A 262, 263 

471 
373 
103 
328 
327 
- : 25, 86 
. 38 

= . 155f,, 4268, 
é . 240, 241 

: 72, 80 

- 197, 198, 206 


e « . 


° ° . 


145, 149, 150, 155-157, 425, 428, 433 


. 6 2, 6 

8, 15, 161 
304 

. 235, 286, 288 
« 196-198, 206 


-. 136 

: 296 

140, 141, 433 

. 161 

. 5 

375, 399 

. - 381 

: » 196, 201 
- 159 

° > 282, 283 
. 139, 140 

° ° 38 
. ° is 

: 390 

‘ «lig 


* 377, 380, 397 


° ~ 875, 376, 387, 388, 399 


. : 388 
° - 107 
. - 107, 374 


Se « de 
+ 373, 374 


INDEX, 


PAGE 
Isinadana, pr.n, 6 we ee hier os 380 
Isiniké, pron. . 5 be Oe : : 383 
Isipélita, pr. n. ‘ ; . : : ‘ . 3878 
Isirakhita, -td, pr. nn. we) 2 6 oe: 104, 107, 880 
slim Qazi-Nasr . . : i A 5 143 
Iem’ail frah Raib : 5 A ° . 134 

J 
7 instead of y ‘ c 4 . 2, 298 


Jabalpur copper-plate inscription of Vadehinepidevs, edited 1f. 
Jagachcha ndra-siri Fit tte Oa UNC, Corus CL 


Jagatkirtt bhattdraka : 5 ; 244 
Jahanara, princess . ° 5 ° 145 
Jahangir, Naraddin, emp. . 36, 97, 98, 134-186, 473, 476 
Jaina inscriptions from Mathura 4 F « 1965£. 
Jaina sculptures from Mathura 311f. 
Jajja, married to Dharma 276 
Jalalabad, t. ‘ ! SW A 472 
Jalaladdin Muhammad Akter, dip, 6 ° . 181, 132 
Jalal al Haq washshar’ waddin, Shaikh ; 137 
Jalalshah of Bengal . < ; S : 286 
Jalwini family . ° : . : 5 . 432 
Jamal Khan . . ° : ‘ 147, 148 
Jamal ud din, Shaikh. : ; 433 
Jambidvipa, the central division of the vonid, including 

India . . ° ° ae re . “ 6 
Jamvalenimva, vill. : 5 6 c : e 216 
Janaka, pr. n. . ; : g . 327 
Janakabhiimi,—Mithild 5 3 C : ; 350 
Janakadevipura, vill. . . . ° ° 361 
Jasadeva, pr. n. . a 6 ° ; ‘ F 29 
Jasau, pr.n. « Be : : 2 229 
Jasavanta, Jam of Neviseeut : 9 9 ; &: blAK 
Jasoji, ” ” : ° . ° 36 
Jastika, pr. n. . 5 9 . . . » 236 
jdtam, creatures . 54 ; 4 : ° ; 259 
jatuka, bat. « ° . A ‘. P - 258 
JAuli pattald . oma : : 8, 9, 16 
Jaunpur ; . 4 144 
« Jayalipattana’ or ‘ ‘Tholigetea’ " disttict 5 : In 
Jay, fem. n. ot ~e c . : 2 - 208 
Jayabhata II. . ° . : . . . 21 
Jayadeva, pr.n. 6 é P e a 210, 236 
Jayakeéari-siri . : : s : 0 : 39 
Jayakirti, pr.n.  « : 3 : : . « 422 
Jayakirti-sdri . . - 5 2 © : 39 
Jayanaraja, pr.n. . . A 7 3 : 119 
Jayapani, pr. n. : 332 
Jayapura, t. 364, 365 ; palais 5 119 
Jayasapur,t. . . 5 . ‘ : 236 
Jayasena, pr. 1. C 199 


Jayasimhadeva, Chedik. . . 8, 9, 16, 18, 19, 305 


5 ; his Tewar inscription edited . 5 lpi 
Joyseithharsttri : G8 : . : , 89 | 
Josalamera, t. ° oc 4 Bur tec . . 42, 81 
Jeshtahasti, pr.m, «© --- : : cir 197 
Jota, a monk : : rere O70 
Thajhar, t. in Dihli Suba; insert slope from ; 5 130£. 
Jhismtasaha . 5 é AR C ‘ 27 
Jhafijha, Maurya chief é : 4 222 
Jhafijardja, a prince A, Dee Ceara Ue 214n. 
ghata A ° 6 c : . . 130 
Jiavati-pattala, dist. : : . 359 


505 


PAGE 
Jina (MahAvira) ae . c ° « '  . 288 
Jina images : iy cape 5 6 . e * 241 
Jinabhadra-stri A s < f A 37 
Jinachandra-siri . : A 5 F a omen by! 
Jinadasi, Aryya : eure |G . : 209 
Jinadatta-shri ie ee A ‘ ‘ 5 F 36 
Jinadaya-siri . . 2 . «6 ede phe 37 
Jinadeva-siri 2 ; : F ‘ A oeole 
Jinaharmsa-siri ° 5 ° c ; . 87, 2650. 
J inaharsha-siri . ° 5 C . : ‘ 37 


Jinakuéala-stri_ tae they ee BE cn 87 
Jinalabdhi-sfri =, : ; ; - Puy en ay, 
Jinamahendra-siri . he Orc 37 
| Jinamandana, author . SY 5 ele . 84 
Jioamanikya-stri .. A aS ay 8 87 
Jinamukti-siri 6 z e . ‘ces : 37 
Jinapadma-stri - Ae NC x 37 


GinapattieGsty pce: Pe eo) 65 coals eee OF 


Jinuprabodha-stri ww ww 87 
Jinaraja-siri ° . - : ; : c 37 
Jinasamudra-siri : é te tee ; 37 
Jinasaubhagya-siri = g } : é 35 


Sinannehelt ee ee oS sa ee ee 


J ineévara-stiri : P , é 4 4 + 36, 37 
J inavallabha-siri . : 36 
Jiraja, an ascetic . G . : - 25 
Jitamita, a nun % . A GGie A - 108, 384 
’ Jitamitré, pron. . A oan Os F . 2 203 
Jivanada, pr. n. 5 5 eto . ° : 20) 
Jidnabhishana> . . : : - -, 40 
Jndnamarga Bi 80 . ° . 246 
Jonhaka,a monk . . ‘ 2 . é 105 
Jovian year Plava,indate .  . . . 229 
” Sarvarin es : . 5 216 

” Saumya » . 6 a6 3 224 
Junaid, Shaikh é 0 . 5 af 426, 427 
Jyeshtahasti, Aryya . 6 ° ats 210 

K 

Kaboja, monk . A c 5 ' - 94, 97, 387 
Kachara race se ° . ‘ 5 - 5 41 
Kachchhapaghata princes ° ‘ 234 
Kachupatha, pln. . ‘ ° . 102, 116 
Kada, pr. n. . . 5 E ° : 97 
Kadambavana, vill. now Kiss re ’ ° 195 
Kadi, nun. e . . 374 
Kaiqobad, Balbani ene : « . - 158, 432 
Kakana é . : 99 
Kakanada or Kakandya, od name of Satichi “87, 366, 396. 
Kalachuri (or Chedi) kings of Tripuri : . 2,5,6 
»  kingsof Chedi . ° 304 
Kalachuti (=Kalachuri) branch of the Haya family, 229 
Kalaha, pr. n. + oP ane F . . 327 
Kalal Khan . F ° ; . : . 136 


Kelnkhardpur-PAdshAbpar, ia tee) De) ee) 78, 476 


KnlaSefvara, g.. ’ . ’ . ‘ . 481 
Kalayada, pln, .o' « . 892 
Kalinga, people, 9, 15; peanity: 193; anak ao - All 
Kalst rock edicts of Asoka A ; F « 4478, 
Kalura, pr.n. . . : : . ‘s 380 
KalyAnasigara-siri . . . C . <u ee) 289 
Kalyanasamudra-siri . . . : ‘ oF 39 
Kamachanda, Malik of Mandal ; ; e - 24, 28 


8 T 


506 INDEX. 


PAGE 
Kaman, anc. Kadambavana, vill, . p : : 195 
Kamaripa, people, 4092; country,. . . 348, 349, 358 
Kamauli, vill. . - 7 G ; p | 347 
Karhboyas, people . ‘ 5 ‘ . . 468, 471 
Kamdadigdma, vill. . ’ . « 116, 369, 372, 382 


Kamdhaji Gohel ‘ : é : : - 80, 81 
Kana, dna, a monk . . . F “ « 379, 382 
Kanauj,t. . 3 Os % cS . 235, 347 

»  k. Bhojadeva of, é 5 5 : . 304 
Kan ukdchdrya, a biruda  . . : ° . 216 
Kanhapallika, vill. ' . ° ° ; 119 
Kanheévara, vill, . : ‘ F . A 439 
Kanishka, Kushana k. P A * a . 196, 369 
Kaniyasi, fem. n. . P . ‘ é 6 5 374 
Kankali Tila discoveries . , é ‘ 195, 311, 322 
Kannaradeya, Krishna III. . ‘ « 168, 173, 174 
Kanva sdkhd of Yajurveda ‘ . * : - 216 
Kanyékubja—Kanauj . ° . . . : 236 


Kapadavanaja, t.in Gujarat =. . , . 41, °5 
Kapasigama, vill. . . : e 96, 101, 115, 391 
Kapardisvamin, pr. n. 2 ‘ ° “ : Be TR} 
kara-ghatikd . ° . : . : 236 
Karaba ; ° ° 5 . : . « 327 
Karamachandra, minister . 5 y re A 37, 40 
Karanbel inscription of Jayasimhadeva, referred to, . 9 
keranika = : ° a é ; ( o SL? 
Karari pargana « . . ° . . 4 363 
Kardamakhata, vill. ci 5 é 119 
Karttalai ‘skoription of the reign of “Diksha arti 

edited : < : é ; «  O74E. 
Karkuhastha, ieee prs sss ‘ . ‘ - 204 
Karma-raja, or-simha, minister . A - - 35,40 


Karna, Chedi king, defeated by Udaydditya of Malava 181 
Karnadeva, Chedi king, 9, 1; married the Hina princess 


Avalladevi, 2, 5; his Benares copper-plate 297, 304 
Karnata, a bcivlg ; A 181 
Karndvati, town founded by the Chedi ianadevs > 2,5 
Kartarpur, vill. . ‘ ‘ ‘ % 472 


KaArtavirya, ancestor of the Hathega princes . . 5, 300 
Kasi or Benares, ae built there by the Chedi 


Karnadeva A 5 : 2,5, 41, 85 
Kaséapiya Arhats ©. “ : : . é ‘ y) 
Kasyapa gotra . ° . . . * aa! 
Katakafiu, vill, Z ‘ = e ,101, 115, 381 
Kathina country .« : . : ° ° ° 37 
Katyayana gotra. ° ° ° ° : 18, 19 
Kaundinya gotra . ‘ ‘ : 216 
Kauéambi, or Kosimbi now Kosim Khir 88, 240, 241, 243, 

244, 363 
Kausika gotra : 216, 219, 357 
Kautsa gotre . ° . . + 22, 364, 365 
Kedaramisra, pr. n. ; . 


° : + 62 
, ° « 94, 97 
. F . 3 
$ c ° 66 


Kekateyaka, pr. n. a . . 
Kelale nad yg . é é 
Keralaputa,k. ° . ° A 
Keéava, pr. n. G i % , 


Kegavasena, Senak, ° . ; : ‘ ; cen 
Kesavasvamin, author =, 3 Vices . 93 
Keéava-upidhyaya, pron. . i : 217 
kevatabhoga ; ° é : = . 266 
Keyziavarsha-Yuvarajadeva I., Chedi k, Me Sk: 304, 
Khagin Marjad Khan + 284 288 
Khaldri inscription of Haribrahn dave cited Pam ers e 


Khalvatiké, t., modern Khalari 
Khambanagara, t. 
Khamdhuji, Khandoji, of Palitina 
Khandkartola Muhammadan inscriptions 
Khandoji IL., Gohel 

Khanjahin of Bengal 


Khan Zeman 
Khara, pr. n 


Kharatara-gachchha 


Khiravela, k. of Kalinga 
Kharoshtri alphabet 


khasrevédhé 


Khattakipa vishaya 
Khemaka, a monk 
Khetala (Maharana) 


Khimvana, vill. 
Khizr Khan 


° 


° 


Khokarakot Mati aaiwadhi feuneiptod of 1566 A. D. 


Khosru, prince 


Khurme Sultan, — Shah Jahan 
Khurshed Khan . 

Khwaja Ahmad of demarjeai, 

KhwAja Khizr ibn Dary&4 Khan Shirwint 
Khwaja-i Jahan of Jaunpur 
Kikate, Maurya chief . 


¥ country 


Kimnaras, demi-gods . 


Kira, a people 
Kiragrama, vil. 
Kiranegvari, g. 


Kirtiraja, a Kachehhapaghéta p ince 
Kirtisigara-strl . P 


Kirtisindhu-siri 


Kirtivarman, Chandella k. 
Kiru.Narayangal, vill—Kodikop 


Kisukad dist. 


Kochhi—Kautsi female 


Kodijila, pl. n. 
Kodu, fem. n. . 
kodunka 


Kokkalla 1., Chedi k, 
Kokkalla I1., Kokkalladeva, Chel as 


Kolala, t.  « 
Koliktipaka, vill. 


Korambika, pr. n. é 
Kosambi (vide Kausambt) 


Koshaka, pr. n. 
Kosiki clan 


Kot, vil. anc. Susarmapura 


Koteyar, vill. 
Kothara 


Kotikagana, Jaina sect . 
Kottiya gana of the Jainas 


Krishna, g. e 


Krishna III., Rashtrakita e 
Krishna II., Krishnavallabha, Rashtrakita k, 
Krishnadasa’s Magavyakti . 
Krishnaraja (Kalachuri P) k. 

ksh, instead of khy 
Kshatrapas of Mathura 


Ksheraka, Aryya- 


Kshetra Guhila prince of Mewad 


e 


PAGE 
- 229 

- 41,81 
35, 36 

° 288£. 
36 

7 289 
‘ 136 
« 869 

« 36, 79-81 
+.) B6E, 

- 88, 89 
. 448 
213 

- 419 

. 376 
25, 32, 33 
+. = 28 

s 138 
« 164 

7 35 
« ‘Sbf. 
5 280 
se 2eL 

« 140, 141 
. 295 
222 

94 

319 

9, 15, 181 


. 482, 483 


° 168, 170, 174 


2, 5, 


» 9, 14, 304 


481, 482 
234 

« 39,79 
- 39 
304 

170 


- 199 

° 388 
« 402 
484n. 
304 


- 169, 172 
119 
402 

S88 

° $27 
207 

° 483 

170, 174 

eat 


. . e . 37 
37, 198, 201, 202, 204, 205, 210, 


211, io 
482 


168, 169, 171, 172, 214 


« 304 


INDEX, 


PAGE 
Kubirako or Khubirako, early k. - : . $25, 328, 329 
Kujara, pr. a. . ° ° : . ° = 375, 405 
Kiakeka, pr.n. . ° F . ‘ ; 236 
Kukkanir, t. in Dahon ; : ‘ 5 ‘ eelgO) 
Kulabhishana, a Jaina sage . (i 5 ; 5 236 
Kumirabhadra, Sreshthin. - - «© © «+ .26 
Kumaragupta, inscription of, ° ‘ . 210 
sf mahdréjddhirdja . . 1198, 210, 263 
Kumirapala, Cane) k. 439; his Chitorg: th iuscrip- 
tion ° . ° ° ry ° 5 
Kumirapila, Pala k. : . , : . 848-350 355 
Kumirila, author. ; ‘ 5 A 23 


Kumbha or ghata, Jupiter in sign of, in date . - 410 


Kumbhakarna, Guhila prince of Mewad . . 410 
Kumbharaja, of Mewad . . 35 
Kumbhi copper-plate inscription of Gomlndert referred to 1 
Kumthanitha, image of . 5 = . 5 . 80 
Kundagrima, vill. : ; 5 3 ; : 817 
Kundakunda, Acharya. - ° ° . - 40 
Kundakundanavaya gachchha : . . 5 40 
Kuiga, a people . : ‘ - 9,15 
Kunkumalola gétra . : ‘ A A + 
Kura, pr.n 5 bie 


106, 108, 111, “U6, 369, 376, 378, 

382, 383, 890, 397, 398, 400, 402 
96, 99, 108, 115, 869, 374, 382, 86, 387, 
389, 394, 396 


Kurama, pln. : 
Kurara or Kurara, pl. n. 


Kuraghara, vill. 


Kurari, pr. n. - ° . . . 101 
Kurtakoti, 6. ‘ e ° ° . ° 170 
Kushana kings. 2 ° ° ° e - 196, 198 
Kusuka, pr. mn. « . . . . . . 378 
kittaha 4 . . . . ° . : 180 
Kuthukapada, plo. ° . 5 ‘ 5 376 
hy instead of ksh pe iG : : . 298 
L 
LAbhapuva,—Lahor . ° . . 38 
Lachchhiayva or Lakshmi, wife of the YAdava Bhillama a 
Tl. « 2 . e ° ° e r) ° 

Ladana 4 5 : . ‘ . - ie 32 
laghamtt . : . ° ° . - 258 
Laghn-arjunondhf, vil. . A 4 , 5 4 216 
Laghu-vavvulavedra, vill. . : < eee ae . 216 
Taghapiata, gachchha » . . ; 89 
Laghusakha of Osvils - : > c 3 So ae 

= of Porvals ; : . ° 41 

3 pieriaAiie. gato ott Gpader ose Ns an ae 
Lajika or lajuka, rdjika, clerk 4 . . 258, 254, 273 
Lakhnauti, t. . : F é ve Fy i 5 Deh 
Lakkundi, t. in Dhdrvad % A a 5 : 169 
Lakshasimha, Guhila prince of Mewad : ; . 409 
Lakshmadeya, Paramairak. . - : A : 181 
Lakshmana, pr.n.  . 7 si e - 236 


a Rachevbopaetita prince . . ° 234 


ror ee Maharaja, ¢g erant of. « ° . 363-365 


Lakshmanardja, Chedik. 304; Karitélai inscription of 


his reign : : ‘ . wml 748: 
Lakshmesvar, t. in Duden . . ° A « 170 
Lakshwisigara .. . . . e's . 39 
Lakshmi=Lachchhiavvé . a . “ : 214 
Lakshmidhara, pron. . a A 5 ‘ - 181 
Lalana, gotra . . e . ° e oo VAL 


Lalitakirttijit, bhattéraka 


Lasha or Lakha, pr. n 
Lata family of ascetics 
ldta . ° 
Latavagata gana , 


Lavana, a chief or general 


lekiaka . ss 
Lodha gotra 


Lohacharya, Jaina teacher 
Lila, son of Uyabhatta 


Lumpaka sect 
Lunly4 gotra 


Machhavata, pln. 


: Madalachhikata, t. 


madambika A 5 


« 


Madaéphara—M uzAffar Shah . 


MAdhava, son of Uyabhatia 
- 96, 98, 103, 


Madhuyana, vill. 


Madhurika, fem. n 


Madhuvatika, vill. ; 
Madhyandina S4%44 of the Yajurve 


Madrapurika, vill, 
Maga Brahmans, 
Magadha kings 5 


Magavyakti of Kyishpadhes 


Maha, pr. n. 


Mahaban Prasasti of Sah 1207 


Mahabat Khan 
Mahdachakra, vill. 
Mahagiri, monk =, 


Mabakachchayana, pr. n. 
Mahakuta pillar inscription 


mahallaka 
mahdmandala-niétha 
mahdmitra ° 


M&hamoragi, pl. n. - 
Mahandman, pr. n. 
mahipallapate : 
mahipramatara 
Maharakhita, ascetic 
Mahasati, pl. n. 
Mahavira, last Jina 
mahdyagnas Q 


Makdipur Maiaainaien pce niane 


Mahendra-siri . 
Mahendrasimha-stiri. 
Maheégvara, pr. n. 
Mahi, pl. n. . . 
Mahichandra, pr. n 
Mahida, pr. n. . , 
Mahidhara, pr. n. 

ne apoes. 
Mahidegvartya Matha 


Mahim, t. and Muhammadan inseriptions there, 


Mahimida—M nhammad St ah 


Mahipéka pron. .« 


Mahipéla, pr. n. . . 
a Kachebtispea tata brine 


”? 


. 


507 


PAGE 

° . e 244 
. - 26 

8, 16 
° . - 130 

. . . 236 
. . Saeue H yf 

: : 94 

° . e 41 

: ; . 244, 
438, 439 

. . 38 

: . . 41, 80 


‘ ; - 389 


. - 105, 115, 376 
. - 484, 485 
° . : 35 


. » 438, 489 


106, 109, 115, 369, 370 


376, 385 

“ : - 869 

@ e 224 

; j - 216 

5 . 119 

é : - 381 
832, 344 

: A . ddln. 
é ; S209) 

é P 275f, 
5 : esl 

; A 236 

- 3 Se 083 

: 0 96 

. . e 21 

° : 331 

; 5 . 224 

A . 87 

; 105, 115, 371 

- . 389 


. ° eee 

° . ° 299 
. : - 199 

° . e 389 
- 200, 205, 315 


. . 8, 16 
. « 390 

° ° ’ 236 
. . 95, 109 


. - 332, 333 
ie atte 25 


143, 144 

148-152 

kp iet 35 

a. Sarg 
emg 385 


. : » 234 


508 


Mahtpala Pala k. 
Mahirakhita, pr. n. . 
Mahisati, t. now Mandal 
MAahishmatt, pl. n. 
Mahmid Shah, emp. 
on k. of Bengal 
i k. of Jaunpur 
I. k. of 2 Malwa 
Mahmad of Ghazni 
Maitrdyantya sd/h4 of tho Cilasvadee 
Majhada-shana, minister 
Majhamg: sakhd 
Majhimé, pr. n. . : 
Maka=Magas of Cyrene ; 
sun in sign of, in date : 
Makarapétaka, vill. 
Makara-samkrdnti, in date 
MakéudavAda, t. 
Mala group of 12 (villages: 
MaAlava rulers, Nagpur inscription of 
MA[}A]vaka, a locality or district 
Malik Beg, Sultan. A 
Mallindtha, a Jina 
Malijja hula of Jainas | 
Mamdanaji, Ramta 
Mamdali, ee : 


Makarg, 320 ; 


Mami, Bat 


MAna family of Magus ‘ust: 


Mana, pr. n, 


Manalarata— Permadaas 
Mandal, Mamdalf, t. in GujarAt 


Mandara, vill, 


° 


. 


MAndhatri, ancestor of ibe Mourys family a 


Mandi, dist., 
Mandya, t. in Maisur 
Mahgalardja, a Kashchlispeabita pine 
Mahgaliéa, Chalukya k. 
Manglaur, vill. near Rurki . 
Manguhasti, Aryya-, 
Maniyana gotra 
Manorama, a carpenter 
Manoratha, pr. n. 
Mansehra Rock-edicts of rey 
Manyuka, pr. n. 
Marupallika, vill. 
Mas’id Shah, emp. . 


.Ma'sdm Khan 
Mathura ~ 


a Jaina inscriptions . 

» Jaina soulptures 

» gachchha of Jainas 
MAtribhata 
MAtulingt, river 


_ Mauna gotra 


Maurya alphabet . 


Fi 
» family. 


Maydrapadra, vill.. 
Medapata, the modern Mewad © 
Meghadhvani temple 
Meghaji, head of Lumpika sect 
Megham, Gedia 
men's names at Safichi 
moru, a kind of temple . 


. 


Ae 


INDEX, 


PAGE 

849 

° - 891 
96 109, 115 


: 280 


‘ 410 


» 409 

169, 173, 174 
24, 27n, 28 
348, 857, 358 


889 
, 982, 358 

. 4A7E. 

. 488 
: 119 

. (187 

i 143 

+ 200 
1958. 

. Ble. 

244 

* ‘ 20 
216 

. 8,16 

828, 825 
erie 


’ Mufijpur, t, in Gujarat. - ; - 


PAGE 

Merutunga, author . ' ‘ 4 + ae BF 
Merntuhga-stri . ' é a eee 39 
MesAnd, vill. . A ; : A Z . 42, 78 
MewAd, prince Mokalu of . - - oe akite 408 
Mibila, pr. n. es ; A os tie | 2 307,820 
MihiravihAra’ . F 4 ; A 6 ‘ 212 
MimArsakas . A A ° a . : ; 29 
Miéra “Amodara, pr. n. : ee bis A 223 
Mita, nun . i ° ° ’ . ‘4, 95, 105, 381 
Mitasiri, nun =. . . . ° F ° 11, 890 
Mita-Siri, pr. om ° ' 5 - A . 202 
| Mithila, co. ‘ : ‘ . 848, 350 


Miyan Raib, pr. n. . / ' A A 4 « 183 


moohi—ashoemaker’. . . . «6 « 229 
Modhakin, pr.n, ENG : ; o te «6481 
Moga, mahardja ; ; ° : A . - 196 
Moggaliputa, pr. n. ’ A ; utes . 89 
Moghul sanads F 5 . ee . 4728, 
Mohiké, nun ° ° : i . . 392 
Mohoté race . - 41 
Mokala of MewAd ; his Obitorgadh insertion . 408, 409 
Mokhalapataka, vill. rn : A A Secu 
monks, names of, at SAfichi . é ’ + 113, 408 
months named in dates :— 

_ Ashadha =, tek - 118, 224 
Bhadrapada =. : : ; A . 216, 234 
Magha . : All A - 2, 229, 410 
Mairgaéirsha ; A ; - 9 
Phalguna . ° . . 299 

rivana A a, tre é ; ° 18 
Tapasya=Philguna. . ; : : 4 410 
moon, sprang from Atri’s eye . F : ° 5 
* Morajahakata, vill. - . A ‘ c : 385 
Morasihikata, vilk . ; : , , Zeol 
Morayahikata, vill. . ; i ‘ 4 a 899 
Moshini, fem.n.  . : - + 210 
Mu’azzam Khan, ae of Senate j i : 290 
Mugdhatunga-Prasiddhadhayata, Chedi k. . . 804 
Muhammad Akbar, son of Aurangzeb . , ; 148 
Muhammad ‘Ali Sultant . > ’ 425, 437 
Muhammad ibn Sim ; , 5 ‘ ‘ 430 
Muhammad Ibrahim F ‘ ; : : 182 
Muhammad Jamal Chisht!, ‘ ; 145 
Muhammad Shah, emp. ‘ . 436, 473, 476 
f of Jaunpur A - 292, 298, 295 
Muhammad Sultan of Gujarat . 5 : : 24, 86 
Muhammad Zam§n, MirzA : = 429 
Muhammadans called Sukas, Yavanas and Marches 409 
Muhammadan inscriptions from Dihli Sdba . + 130£, 424£ 
i ” from Bengal , . « 280f 
MuktisAgara-sdri . A . . ; 89 


Mula, Mala, Mula, pr.na. , 


. 95, 107, 388 
Muladata, fem. n. . 


rae - 873 
Miladeva, a Kachobhapaghit pone ° . : 234 
Mulagiri, pr. n. : F A ° : . 872 
Malaraja, (adeia, k. . “ + ,' 422, 438 
Milasamgha . eee et Nae 


Mumbai, Mumbai- binders Bombey 

Mummiya gotra . ‘ 

Munawwar, Shaikh 

Muner or Maner, vill, in Bihar with Muksrmadan 
inscriptions —. . . : . > stg SOGE, 

+ 24, 28m, 

M va&ja, Maurya chief at Lae ; “ e 22 


. 42, 82, 83, 85 
ie Fee ee eae 
» 498 


INDEX. 


PAGE 
Mufija, Mufijadeva, Moftjardja=Vakpati, Paromara k. 
of Malava . ; : . 181, 214, 216, 304, 
_Munk pargana ° ; ° . 137 
Murala, a people. “” 9, 15 
Murdd Qagshil Khan (Naw Ab M ea A 289 
murid . . . ; 5 : - 476 
Mu’tamia Khan : 5 - - i 436 
Muzaflar Sultan of Gujarat. ° . « 24, 35 
N 

Nabhaka of the Nabhitis . ; 471 
Nabhinpura, t. in Kachh (Nalinapura P) A 42, 83, 85 
Nabhitishandaka (?), vill. . : 9 ; 344 
Nadavu, pr. ne . 5 5 ; 5 5 5 99 
Nadiguta,a monk . ; ‘ F - 95,1038 
Nadinagara (v., Namdinagara), t. 97, 106,.108, 110, 111, 386, 
387, 400 

Nadini, fem,n.  . F ; ; 389 
Nadir Shah . 5 é wee te 144 
Nadivirohi, pr. a a Fo . a A 99 
Niduka, Aya-, a monk 112 
Nadila gotra 5 41 
Naga princes. . ’ 117 
Naga of Prabhisa . . . 2408. 
Naga, t. . . A 322 
Nagi, Nagadatta, Nagila, sien pr. nn, : r i 95 
Naga and Naga, pr. mn, 102, 369, 372, 384, 398 
Naga, Jains teachor . . : . 38 
Nagada golna ’ . : * ; 41 
Nagadata, Nagadata, a ate ‘ ; 206, 386, 896 
NaAgadatd, pr, n, : ; ; - 110 
Nagadina, Sheth, 109; a et 4 ; A 371 
Nagidina, fem. n, . ' : : : 883 
Nagamita, fom. n ; 5 : ; A - 882 
Nagapalité, fom. n, ; , . 111 
NaAgapiya Sheth . : : : "88, 89, 106, 111, 378 
Nagara—Vadnagar, t. ; : : ; 5 438 
Nigarakhita, a monk  . , ' ’ . 898 
Nagaravada, vill, 5 : ‘ ‘ a3 
ndgavane - 5 . - , 265, 266 
Nagila, pr. n. 92, 106, 396; a Sheth 387 
Nagor, t. . 145, 150 
Nagpur, inseription of the mies of Matava, edited 180f, 
Nahaté gotra “ . 41. 
Naigameshin, god, at Elura : ‘ : 3162. 
Naimisha forost . 5 ; : : : - 822 
natyyoka . . . . ; r A 484n. 
Naji, fem. n, . 373 
Nalinapura, t. (v. Nabhinpery ; 42 
nakshatras ° - 266, 869 
nakshatra of Aryaman, #.¢. Paivvi eo eent in date, . 410 
” Hasta, 18,118; Rohini,  . 22 
nakshatra names. OFT .6 . » 95 
Namaiindi, vill . ; . ; : . 89,16 
Narhda, pr. ne ; 6 ' A é : 376 
Namdigiri, pron» - - . . - 95, 109 
_ Narndinagara, Nandinagara, vill A 96, 115, 876, 377, 380, 390, 
391, 398, 394 
Nayhduka, monk ; nee “tate aad 400° 
Namdutard, fem. n, 5 ‘ hoes fae ORG 


509 


PAGE 
Nanaghat insoription referred to . : : - 88,91 
Nandagiri, Mt. . . > , ; 4 169, 173. 

-Nandapura, pl. n. 5 ° . . ° + 329 
Nandi, pr. n . . . . ’ 206 
Nandidvarta, Arhat . Fi ° ‘ p -, 204, 321 
Nandika, monk , . 212 
nandimukha .« A : r 5 268 
Nandini, Vasishtha’s cov. s ° A 181 
Nandinagara (v. Namdi-) pl. a. . 369, 376, 393, 394 
Nandivisdlo, name of anox . 5 : ' 96 
Naregal, vill. . f . . 170 
Navasimhadova, Chedi k. ri . 8, 9, 16, 18, 19, 804 
Narnasing Thakura_ . . . : : ° 27 
Naravahanadatta mahardja ~ =. F : . 364, 365 
Navavarmadeya, Paramfrak. . ; 18] 

NarAyana, pr. n. : < 29¢ 

Navayanapala, Pala k. ; Badal foparipene of his time 160 
Nargund, vill. =. . : . . ; F 170 
Narmada, river ° é : . A - 7, 8,16 
Nasika, t a . ; ; 217 
Nasir ’Abidallah iba Aninae: a Sayyid 138 
NAsir ud-din Mahmud . ’ 432 
Nathi, fom, n. as ° A . Ae RUE 
Nati,nun . : A : . 387 
NaAtika, NAdika (? ) hile. of Teiuas : ‘ 108, 207 
Natta, Chandelld princess, wife of the Chedi k. 

Kokkalla I. A , A ; ‘ : - 804 
Naur, vil. A ‘ . : c . + 482 
Navagdma, vill, . 93, 102, 103, 115, 868, 869, 871, 872, 387 
Navagrama, vill. . . ‘ F : re PHN 
Navahasti, fem. n, 5 A 4 208 
Naydnagara, t. in Halay ; : 85 
Navangi vritte 5 ’ ’ ‘ 36 
Navinapura, Navanagar, t. in Holar A ° » 36, 36 
Nayapila, Palak, =. ; 5 4 A 8.19, 350 
nayala “ ‘ » 18,19, 230 
Nayaki, wife of the Mina chief Govindaraja IL. 224 
Nazar Quit Turkmén “ : ; + 156 
Negamesi, Naigameshin, Nemesa, or Neratio; god 200, 314-313 
nhusd=snusha , ; : - : : 4 90 
Nicwa . : . . : ; ; eye 
Nigadi, pr. nn. . 5 ; ; ; 0 fr 109 
Nigamthas . ' : . - os, «= 02, B74 
nifhati, . 274 
Nikdyas, five Buddhist ananere ; 93, 104, 269 
nilakhiyats Fs A Pee ; 266 
Ni'mat Ullah’s (Shaikh) ets ; : ; 430 
Nimbadika, vill, A ; A : - 5 119 
Nimma race... ° - A 4h 
nimsidhiyd : . as 274 
Nirgundipadraka, vill. . : ‘ é A . 29, 28 
Nirihullaka . . ° é . 22 
niruddham . e : ; i ; : « 1292, 
Nirvriti gotra ‘ C : : . . 29 

» dJainateachor  ., : . ’ . A itl 
Nishida, people A deb . “ 409n 
nivartana . — A A 4 : . 224 
Nizdm-nd-din Beg Mirak : A 4 ; 156 
Noghanaji of Palitina . 7 ‘ : . - 36, 84 
Nohali, daughtor of Avanivarman, and wife of the 

Chedi king Yuvarijadeval.  . : we he 804 
nuns, names of, at Sdiichi ° e . » 118, 403€ 
Nusrat Khén . » 3 ‘ 130 
Nuégrat Shah, k, of Bergal - ; : » « 286 


510 


QOdaka, pr.n. ° 
Odala, pr.n. . 
QOdatiké, nun . 

Odi, nun : 
Ohanandi, pr. n.. 5 
Oisa race . . 
okapinda « . . 
omkdra patta ‘ 
Opedadata, pr. n. 

Osa race * 

Osval race or iacinia 


PAbhosé, inscriptions at 
pachanekayika . 
packchhipagamana 
Padaliptanagara, t. 
Padamim, fem. n. 
PaAdana, vill. Padaniya 


INDEX. 


PAGE 

e . 391 

. : - 827 

é 371 

. 94, 106, 111, 398 

. . 206 


5 ° . 40 
. . 258, 260 


. «79, 80 
eee Te ye 
fe ee OE 
(ili tp? Seb 88688 


C . 240F, 480 


: . : 93 


. . ° 269 

. . . 80 
. . 5 30 

- 96, 198, 112, 115 


paddnudhydta . . : ‘ ° . 2 
Padmikara, Maurya chief ‘ A ‘ s . 222 
Padmanandi. 5 . 5 : “ 4 40 
Padmanatha, image of . , fs : : 82 


Padmapala, a Kachchhapaghata pence . . 4 234 
Padmaprabha, Jina 5 ' é % ‘ . 244 
PadshAhpur,—Kalankhurdpur . e 7 - 473, 476 


Padukulika, vill. . ‘ 5 + 92, 110, 115, 397 
Pai, fem.n. 4 : 4 . dl - 348, 357 
Pajja, pr. n. é ) é 276 
Pala kings of Bengal, ioe Dharmapate ‘6 Vigrahapala 

Ill. 6 ° ° ° . - 161, 348, 349 
Pala, pr.n. « . : . . . : -= 2199 
Pala, monk : . 5 5 : A A 400 
Palaghosha, pr. n. . . 8 ° ; . se 199) 
Palakadujjana (misread Palakatujiiana) . O 20 
Palam, vil., Pralamba? . : 3 $ : a 482 
Palanapura, t. in Gujarat. ; > . 24, 28n, 42, 83 
palasale—rhinoceros é : “ Fe 5 - _ 260 
Pali, vill. . A ‘ A : F 363 
Palitand, t. in Kathiawad i : . 34-36, 42, 85 
palli . . ° 5 F b : - 344 
pallikd ° : . . 6 5 . - 1297. 
Pamchanagara, t. . 0 : 3 : . 396 
Pamdas, Pandyas oa v.), ‘sale: ‘ A ‘ 471 
pamnasasa ° . . ° - 208, 260 
Parnthaka, monk . 5 f 5 A ree Ley 
Pafichala, dist. . c fe : - - 161, 243 
panchamahdsabda “ : ‘ 4 3 . 3b 
panchaparameshthi-patta . 5 < : 80 
Paiichdrthala doctrine . . . rete Piers Gh 
Panduah (Hazrat), Muhammadani inscriptions at . 282k. 
Pandya, people . . . 9, 15, 193, 466, 471 
Panipat, Muhammadan inscriptions at . i a 136 
Pankajavasini, goddess of eloquence . ; 5 . 23 
Pappaka, pr. n. Fs , 5 : “911 
Paramabhattaraka . . s 22 
Paramfra kings of Malava, ae Virigena “IL, to 

Lakshmadeva ‘ 4 A s ; 181 
Paripanaka, (?) : f e . 377 
Paréva Parsvanatha ° - 78, ‘81, 85, 86, 207, 244, 311 
Parvan days ‘ . =: 264, 265 
Parwez, prince, son of Jahangte - : , 134, 281 


PAGE 
Pasaladevi, pr. n. 3 C . 4 A <) ode 
Pasanaka, Aya-, ; A 4 ° 93, 97, 1132. 
Pashanihrada, vill. . n i ; A ° 22, 23 
Pasupata ascetic *% . : . ; : Hae ehh Es) 
patahé . . 4 4 - “ 129n. 
Pataliputra Bauddha Goaaall:: 5 F . “ 89 
Palid, monumental stone : 4 5 " 5 28 
Patihaibatpur, t. ; r ; : 3 . A472, 473 
Patithdna, pr. n  . A : ° - - 387 
Patithiya, gahapate 2 - - 99, 384 
Pattabaddhaka vishaya . f . r zo LS 
Pattadakal, Kisuvolal, t. ; d i a ; 170 
patiald, a district A . ; . ° . 89,16 
Patuda (?), a monk 4 ° . - 107 
Pauranik worship, early occurrence of . : A 95 
Pavida, pl. n. . : : ° : 5 BTS 
Payachanda gachchha ; . . . - 39 
Pemata, Pemuta, pl. n. 3 A ; » 387, 394 


Peroja, #.¢. Sultin Firoz Shah, ‘ine of the Yavanas, 
i.e. Musalmans, ; a 409, 410 
Permanadi-Biitayya . 3 . 168-171, 173, 174 


2 . . 


Phaguna, pr. n, : ‘ e r - 95, 104, 379 
Phalguyasa, pr. n.. . . A . ° - 200 
Phelaparvvatika, vill. A F “ « 364, 365 
Phujakapalli, pl, n. : : ; . = » 384 
phuramdna, firmdn . A (3 4 ‘ 38 
Pigalaka, Pitgalaka, pr. n. 3 . C < 327 
pigeons at Makka A Z i 3 : 289 
pippalavdlikd ° = ° 5 130 
Pippaliya, branch of Rancho sachith en 2 - 37 


Pirojt rupee . é 5 
Pithe, pr.n. . - : 
pithikd, platform . ‘ 5 
P:tinikas, people ; - 
Piyadasi (Asoka), pillar edicts of 


2 oy eas 
cies) = (rae ae 
ee ee ke 
hee 468, 471 
at an ee eae 


i 7 rock edicts of r 5 : AA4T7E, 
Piyadhamé, nun . . C z 4 5 108 
Piydra Baba . ; : : * ess 
place or geographical names at Saifichi a - 115, 407 
Podavijha, pl. n. + 3888 
Pokhara (Pushkar), t. “96, 106, 108, 11s, 369, 387, 388, 397, 
Poravijhaka for Porayikhika 7 A 2 - pe 
Portugal,—Puratakala e : 3 4 36, 78 
Porval race 5 ‘ . : F 5 : 4) 
posatha days é 5 2 : 264, 265 
Pota, Potaka, pr. nn. 5 c ; . : 397 
Pothadeva, fem. n. ; F Fi ; : 95. 372 
Pothaghosha, pr.n. . . : . - ‘ ; 199 
Pothaka, 2 monk . . : 95, 106 
Pothaya race ° : : : Z : 196 
Prabhasa, Pabhosa, vill. ‘i ‘ . ; 240, 244, 480 
Pradyumna . : . 5 : . : 314, 315 


Pragjyotisha bhukti 
Pragvata vamsa, Porval race 
pravabdhi . 


" J : . 348, 358 
: ° : - 25, 41, 78 


Prasantaraga Il.— Dadda IV. ; ; . ; oe 
Prasasta, pr. n. . : : rs 
Prasasti ; the following 4 are called pratistice 

Bhera-ghat inser. of Alhanadevi ° : 7 


Harsha inser. of Vigraharaja ; e P 116 
Badal inser. of Naréyanapala . : fi sot 160) 
Nagpur inser. of the rulers of Malava =, 18 
Khalari inscr. of Haribrahmadeva . 228 


INDEX, §1l1 
PAGE PAGE 
PraSasti: the following are praSastis—contd. RAjendrasdgara-siri i : Soe aoe 
Dubkund inscr. of Vikramasimha  . d 232 | Rajubula, satrap . : : : ? 196 
Govindpur inser. of Gabgadhara . ° . 330 rajuka, clerk : 4 ‘ . . 369, 381, 466 & n 
Dudhpani inscr. of Udayamana 343 | Rajuka, pren. k : i 2 376 
Chitorgadh.inscr. of Mokala . . 408 Rajula, ahh shaerapa 4 , - 196 
Chitorgadh inser. of Kumarapala Sees 421 | Rajyapala, probably a king of Kauaaj : . 234, 235 
Devapattana insor. of Sridhara : 437 Rajyavasu, pron. . . . : : ° - 209 
Prasiddhadhavala—=Mugdhatunga, Chedi k. ; 304 | Ralladevi, prem. . d : : ‘ 161 
Pratapasirnghaji of Palitana : 36, 83, 84,85: | jaime Guravamié 18, pr. n. P : 161 
Pratithana, t. ’ 94, 96, 98, 104 Ramachandra, the Kalachuri chief Piaalve 230 
pravara : : : : » 16,299 Ramadasa, pr. n. i ‘ a : . 229 
Pravarasiikara (), Maury 2 chiet : ves Ramadeva, a Kalachuri chief ; : : . 229 
RrQines the eeeren, piacd:ah ALABSDEG + + op +.. 2 Gy aA& SPL i aldrth 0.0 (oo eae ae os ee aa aes 
Premachanda,aJaina =» - + 78 | Ramanagar—Adhichhated . Sie tere ge ae 
Prithvidhara, pr: n ° . . ° ° . 8, 16 Ramapila, PAla k, x e g a - 348—350, 355 
Priyadarsin rija—Aéoka eee M002. | Ramataiikeds; plone. ss ego thea, MOY 
Palad Sarvani : _ : ‘ : is Rampirva Aégoka pillar ‘ ° ° . 245 
Pulidas, Pulindas, a people ca Ramtek inscription of Kalachuri chiefs, seferied to . 280 
Punaroasu days * See Ranaka, Rand, titles 5 ‘i 5 « 28, 4832. 
Puiiavadhana, t. ‘ ‘ ¥ LOB 118,880 Hernia = f 5 . a = ’ 20, 21 
i LN as Se en 2 Pipuslibapsie nn pe ee oO 118, 119 
a ae r ee, a Ranapattala, dist. : + SOL 
Purstakila (Portugal) patasdhi ‘ : : 5 Bye tik a prince, probably the W. ae a. 
Puravikha (?), pln. . . . - : : - 108 Rane family ; : ; e ; : ; : Sle 
ee See : soa eet i Pe Rashamalla, son of urate : . 0 168, 173 
drnimdnta scheme of months in dates 2, 299, 410 Rishtrakdta k. Krishna IL 304 
Purtiravas, son of Bodhana yt. C : 5 sees tie See 2 
Purushottama, a poet, 332, 333; a ace pace (?) . 239 oe see! = ; : : ‘ ns 
Puruvida, pl. n. : : > 387 Rastlods aie : ; . 472 
Pai eee one eo ( 25 Lukas 8 BaD ae Wa ee eee ee ego 
Pusadata, Leal 5 3 * : : aa Rathadova: PESTs be = ; P * » 229 
BP tease eee oh rae aero eases vane Chie: nbs eae 
Pusaka, » monk a0 gey Ratnasimha mahdmantrin . ° = . e 77 
Fusatakhita, prom. -« : polls, aS Ratnodadhi-siri . : ; 6 : “39 
Pushkara gana, Jaina =. . ‘ Bet hikes ao : = " i ‘ : 484 
Pushkaratirtha, sacred place at Pobbat : F é 118 Rautta, Gedia x ; y : ; , 28 
Pusiniya, prem. som ee : : : - iia Rayabrahmadeya=Haribrahbmadeva . . « 230 
Pusyamitra, pr.n. > : z : : 201 Raypvr inscription of Haribrahmadeva, referred to . 230 
Reas (Mr. A) discovery of Vhattiprolu-Buddhist relics, 
etc. ° 5 ° . preface and 323¢ 
Q Rebila, pr. n. Soe | sgtte cca ae est ee BOD 
Meee RUCK an eea ee gg no ry AO] POONA ESOS ae Dales ge aay. nse on 
Qaéséay4n’s mosque at Mahim . 160, 152 | Reva, a ee s : : : : oe 
rte lily Saris Da te eat Berisha arial ee ees eee er 
Rigveda, students of 5 . ‘ 216 
R Rishabha, Rishabhasvamin, Jaina Tirthskara ORY) 
Rishi, pr.n. . . ° ° . . - 236 
Radhenepura, t. in Gujarat . . Boece MINN phils Sek ates eee: 203 
Rabada, wife of the Chedi Lakshinakartic 175, 304 Rizawi, Bukharl E A ‘ P : RT I 
Beata DO ia eg Feline oe dees as ODS Leos fom ipa a% Oo vet ey eee 80] 
Rahimabad, vill. : : 472 | Rohanadeva, fem. n. . . 5 5 386 
Raja, Rajagi, Rajan, or Srirdja, a Yadava chief . - 213 | Rohani, fem.n. . : ; < ‘ = : 373 
vdjadauvinika . . A . ° ° . 216 | Rohanika, pron, A : Z - 401 
Rajaditya Chola. : ‘ ° 168, 169, 172 | Rohinipada, Rohani, pln. . ‘ ; "107, 109, 116, 401 
Rajakoshthigara family . ; : ‘ 40 | Rohini, pr. 0. é C ‘ F } & oo ELS 
Rajakadraha, vill. . . . ° : - 236 | Rohinisvdmin temple . 0 - 3 i ‘ 439 
rdjalipikara, royal scribe. é 6 ° - 94,369 | Roho, vill. in Gujarat  . ; ; ; 24, 29n. 
Rajamalla of Chitor . : ° : - 35 | Rohtak, Mubammadan inscriptions at . 143£., 436E. 
Rajanagara,—Ahmadabad . 6 4 ; 41, 78—81, 84 | Rudra, pr. n. . ‘ ° : ‘ 331 
Rajasigarasdti . . . ° . + 39 | Rudramana, k. of Mashdbs . . , 332 
Rajasima-siri se . . ° . : 39 | Rudrardéi, pr.n. . . . : . : . 8,16 
Rajasekhara, author . . ‘ ‘ 84 | Rudrena, a Tomara prince ' é : 117 


512 


PAGE 
Rimi Khan . 6 s si tens 132 
Rupai, Bat : . os ibe ° 4 oe. 27 
Rustam Beg, Amir . ; } . 425 
Rustam Khan bin Muhammad Khan Sachast 6 134, 135 


cf . * 


Sabarasyamin, author Pee at ‘. a ‘ . 23 
sabha ‘ G Fe te ‘ et 236 


Sachamhita, pr.n. . . ve epee kOF 
Sadajhamta, mdndalika . . ; ; . 27 
Saddsahs, pr.n. rte ° c: z Awe tf 
Sadhana, monk . an : é P 100 
Sadhyasika I., Maurya chief ; ; cuba - 222 

a Il, ” c c F . é 223 
Sadité, fem.n,  . . ‘ i t c . 3206 
Sadr Jahn, poct ; ¢ ; c ‘ 290 
Sadr ul-Sudir ‘ . . » 475 
‘Saduktikarndmrita of SiidharadAcd F ° A 332 


Sagara gachchha, 36, 79-83; Pattdvali of... . 89 


Sagha, pr. n., 95; Sagha . . 5 . 5 wera 
Saghadeva, pron, + 2s Oe ss aes 106 
Saghadinaé, nun =. , - : . 2 LOL 
Saghamita, monk Q - 112, 397 
Sagharakhita, pr.n., 1132, 386, 396, 398 ; 3 rakhité. 883, 397 
Sahasrakita, tirtia, 38; image or representation of . | 78 
Sahsaram, t. in Bihar : - é A . A aed 
Saiva names s 3 ' é cs . : 95 
Sajja, Bai. . . : ° : ce tnen 30 
Sakas—Musalmans . : 5 ; 409 
Sakadina, pron... ; : . d : 375 
Sakadvipa . 7 4 ; 6 : c 331 
Sakadvipiya Brahmans . : 5 : 6 Gril! 
Sakalakirti, pr. n. 0 5 5 3 ‘ 5 40 
Ealarbran homes. © aa eee ates 119, 422 
Sakarakhita, pr.n. . : : ; . é 392 
Sakyamuni, image of . E 5 c : ‘ 212 
Salimnagar, fort . » i ‘ 291 
Salipura, ; é é F 422 
Samadhisa or * Samiddbeds, a name of Siva . . . 409 
SamaAdhyf, fomon. . 5 : : 6 t 210 
Samana, wonk 5 ‘ ; A 327-329, 378, 393 
sdmanera . 4 . 5 5 - » 98,103 
Samantadeva, raja. = : 6 : : ~ 144 
Samatika (?), pr. p.  - 3 5 394 
Sémaveda, students of . 5 F , A 216 
Samayaka, Sreshthin . : ; 2 . 25 
SAmba, son of Kris) na and oe ‘ . « 832 
samcharanakas ; . 484, 486 
Samdhana, monk . c . , 103 
Samgemanagara, t.=Samgamner . . ° : 216 
Sathgami, vill. =. 4 ‘ rs F 284 
Sarhgamner copper- ie of ihe Yadava Bhillama II., 
edited : ‘ ‘ - 2128, 
Narhgha, pr. n, 272, 274, 378; Gamghh : : 893 
Sarhgha of Magadha ‘ ’ ; . ; . 3866 
Sumghadata, prem. ‘ ; P 381 
Samgharakhita, pr.n, ; ‘ F 95, 384, 388 
Samgharakhité, nun . n ; ; . 100, 392 
Samghavala race. . ; ; 3 ; eat: 
Samghila, pr. n. . P *: ‘ 3 . 96,377 
Samgréma-Réma, a birnds a : : 3 5 ON 
SamgrAmasimha of Chitor : 35 


INDEX. 


PSOE 
Samidata, SAmi-, monk . r 5 C - 95, 104, 393: 
Samiddheévara, a name of the god Siva. d 409, 422 
Samika, SAmika&, nun «yj. ‘ 6 102, 110, 393 
Samika, trader . A 4 A 374, 375, 393 
Sarhkaragana, a Kalachuri i. : . A ° 22 
e son of the Chedi Kokkalla Ling 175, 304 
Sarhkarana . 6 ’ P . ; Wn cots 
Sarnkardnaka, vill. . 7 é > ‘ : 119 
Sarapi. . ° 7 . ; = ; ‘ > oF 
Sdmsdrika doctrine . ° ’ . 118 
Sathvalita, prom.  . 4) ehh ena aoe 
samvegapakshi . . . ' . 85. 
Sathvijfiayamargtya, Tapa ipsenotha 2 . 39, 82. 
sanads of Moghul emperors : j . 4728. 
Saiichi, anciently Kakandda or Kikaphvw 5 F 87, 366 
SAiichi votive inscriptions . : 87£., 366£. 
» sculptures . * 3 ’ ; A oi Sh 
Sandhi, pn. =. ; : : - 197, 208 
Sandilya, race of, 161 sgotra . ? 3 - 438: 
‘ Saniadari, vill. . ‘ ji ; } “ : 23 
Sankhas . : . : : 5 321 
Saika[ragana], Chedi prince : ‘ ; : 175. 
Sankheda Land grants! . é 5 . ooo sanen Lote 
»  t.inGujarat ~~. ; 3 : : 23 
Santilla, pren. A a 5 ° c . 22 
Santinatha, Jaina tirthakdra , 81, 82, 239 
SantipAtaka, vill. . % Z é 348, 357 
Santiraja, Maurya chief : pails 223 
Santisfgara-stri =. et ; . 39, 79 
Santishena, a Jaina sage ‘ A 2 ateente 236 
§aunkagama, vill, . 5 : . : ° - 375 
sapadalaksha country , ; 3 : c 422 
Sapaka, nun . . ° c c 5 . sued 
SApha race : . c . . 38 
Saphineyakas, Saphineyika z : Ss 371, 374, 401 
Saradasimnbadeva, a Kachchhapaghata prince » 234 
Sarahkotta vishaya . . : . : 119 
Sarasvati, river ‘ , P 5 : a 168 
» gachchha ., A . . 40 
Sarbuland Khan Khwaja Rahmat Allah ns nD 
sdrikd, a starling ° 5 ° : 259 
Sarkarddevi, prea. . C : 5 - 161 
Sarotra, vill. in Gujarat . . + 24,322 
Sarvastivada teachers - 212 
Sarvasira, Maurya chief . , ‘ 222. 
Sasada, Sasdda, vill. c 99, 397 
Sasadaka, pl. n. H . 5 : f 116 
Sdsana-paita P : ‘ 217 
sdshtidasaprakrityopeta 216n. 
Sasidhar va, prem. ° . ‘ - 8,16 
Sataji, Satrusulya, Jam of Mavinaca . A : 36 
S&takuni, Andhra k. , A : A . : 88 
Sathisiha, fem, n. : : ‘ ‘ ; 201 
S4tila, pron. . é . . . Pe A 95, 376. 
Sitisiri, nun = : : 882 
Satiyaputra, perhaps ib of Babvate. ae +  « 466. 
Satrusnjaya Jaina inscriptions Pui, : 84f. 
i, ; Siddhagaila, sacred place m é » 88,86 
Satrugalya, Jam of eee ° . : « 85,89 
sattra . ° : . . . « 224 
Batugha—Oateughng pr. n. 5 . : . 327 
Satyabhama and Krishna 2 : < - 814 
Satyavakya Kohgunivarman,.k, . . C ; 172 
Savithadesa, countiy C : on ee é 359: 


aayilrghals ‘ ; : 


Sayyid Bayavtd . : F 3 


seasons =. , ; 
aohyaka ‘ ’ : P 
Sellavideya, & hivada ’ , : ; 
Sona, prea, « . . . . 
Bena dy nasty ’ 7 


Sonart’s versions of the Afoka ATR ’ F 


Sesha, chihna of Piréva pS 
setakapote—grey doves . , : 
Setapatha, pl. n. : : F 
Sethi. 

Seuna or Heanachendice 3 Yadnva ki. . 
Seunachandra I., Yadava k. 
Sewah, t. in Dihlt Saba ‘ ; : 
Shabhika—Sabhika, pr. n. , 6 
Shagathi nigama i ‘ : ‘ 
Shah Alam, emp. . 

Shahbazgarhi Rock adiots of Aéka 
Shahjahin, emp. 


Shahjahanpur, vill. 


Shaikh Nasir. 4 5 6 ° 
Shamsher Khan... . ; - 
Shams-uddia Altamsh a : 


2 


Shamuda—Samudra, pr. 
Shargi rulers. 
shashtyabda . : 
Sher Buhlil’s mausoleum 
Sher Shab Sharqi . 
Sherpur, t. in Bengal 
Shota gotra . ‘ 
Sidakada, Siddkada, pl.n. . 
Siddhachakra : 
Siddhantasamudra-stri 

Siddharaja, Chaulukya k. 
Siddhagaila, or Satrumjaya . 
Siddhesandtha or Siddhesvara, the gud Siva 
Sidhatha, pr. n. : 
Siha, nun 
Siha, sheth 
Sihadeya, pr. n. » 
Sihagiri, Siha-, pr. n. 
Sihamitra, pr. n. 
Sihanddika, pr. n. . , 
Siharakbita, pr. n. 
Sijhs, fem. n. 
Sikandar Shah, emp. 

of Bengal 

Sikha, vill. f 
Simgha—the Kalachuri chee. Ae 
Simbadata, fem. a. - . ‘ 


Simhagoshtha, vill. A ‘ 
Simhana, a Kalachuri chief . 3 
Simhaprabha-stiri A 


Simbaraja, pr. n. : 5 4 4 
Sirnharaja, Chahamana k, . : a 
Suhharsamkrdnti in due . , } 
Sirnhatilaka-stri . A : : . 
Simhardja, pr. n. 2 6 ; : 
Sinda chielg . ; , 
SindhurAja, ParamAra ke ; . 
Sindinagara, t. : ; 

Sirhind, dist. 

Siri, nun 3 


INDEX, 


PAGH 
472-476, 480 
» 188 

. 262-264 

« 180 

' 218 

’ » 206 
» 849, 360 

‘ » 246 
. 811,812 
260 
895 
» 94 

224 

. « 218 
. 138 

. 3829 

328 


. . 


. 473, 475-477, 479 


. 447f. 


35, 143, 147, 151, 152, 281, 290, 435, 436, 


473 

. . 473 
° 161 
146, 154 

« 431, 432 
327 

291 

230 

157, 158 


. 144, 150, 151, 429 


288, 290, 291 
é 4) 
397, 398 
‘ V7 

39 

+ 422 

86 

224 

377 

112, 379, 394 
108 

393 

105, 371 
201 
Gly 

97, 98 
oO, 

. 137, 433 
282, 283 
18, 19 

230 

374 

Re a WS 

. 229, 230 
’ . 89 
. 276 
117, 118 

° - 118 

89 

. 276 

Pee 4°) 

‘ 181 

- 14, 216 

144 
° 4 


513 


PAGE 

Siribhiga, pr. n, ts ' ’ ' . 804 
Siridina, nun ; ‘ 2 110, 993 
Siriguta, pr. a. . 7 7 ® 102 
Siriké, fem. u. - , ’ ‘ . » 380 
Sirimita, nun , ; ’ ’ ° 894 
Sivipdla, pr. n, : ie Tey ap a » «+ 9876 
Biri-Sitakani, Andhrak,  . ° . ° F 88 
Sirohi, t, ‘ : : ’ . . ° 42, 80 
Stsodia clan F ° . . a: ei 41 
SitalanAtha, i image Pe ; e ‘ A » 81, 85 
Siva’s eight bodies =. j Se paper lin. 
ivadasa, pr. n ites wee 8 229 
Sivadeva, pr. n. ; é ; ‘i ; ; 208 
Sivaghoshaka, prim - : : : ‘ . 207 
Rivajt of Palitand ; : ‘ ; 7. . 35f, 
Sivanadi, pr. n. E Fi : ; 95, 101 
Sivasena, pr. n. . ‘ 208 
Sivaskandavarman, (Prakrit i janet: of) Ratee on, . 483f. 
pe var. readings in, : . - 483, 485 

Sivati, pr.n. . 3 : . : - . - 394 
Sivayaga, fem. n. ; S : . 5 200 
Siyaka, Paramara k. . 5 ej : 181 
Sobha, son of Bhaba Lila . 5 e 439 
Sodasa, mahakshatrapa . é 5 ; 198, 196, 199 
Sohada. Sreshthin : ° i & . . 26 
Soman itha, the god Siva . : . 6 213n. 
Somanathapitan or Devapattana 437-439 
Somasvamideya,—Vishnu 175 
Somesvara, pr. n. 161 
5 minister of the Chedi latebeanaeted 174 

= L, W. Chalukyak. . c 304, 
Sona, pr. nu. 373 
Sonadeva, pr. n. : ° : c ‘97, 371 
Sonak, vill. in Gujarat, Sdaaka ° ° ° 24, 33n. 
SonakAyana, k. . : 3 : 5 243 
Sonara,—Sonari, vill. - 96, 112, 116 
Sonasiri, nun. ° . ° . e 402 
Sonpat Mubammadan ecg . . 138£. 
Soyasa, p.m, . ‘ - 110, 405 
S:amanaka, pr. a, ° - 204 
Sreshthin . e . ° ° > e ° 236 
Srey Arsa, image of . . 86 
Sridhara’s Devapattana Pragasti . 4371, 
Sridhara, pron. ° . : . e 438, 439 
Brahman . 348, 349, 357, 358 
Sridharaddsa’s Saduktikar piimrita - ° 5 * poe 
Siidhantamana, pr. n.. : Z 7 ‘a ; 344 
Srigriha sammbhoga of Jainas . . ° « 204, 209 
Riel race’ 2-20) Selo ee Wage 41 
srimara A ‘ : é 6 A 258, 260 
Sriparnaka, vill. Pain Piet ee east oe 
Sripatta . . ° . ° . - 3844 
Sripura, SrtkAsttpura, ¢ a. ee c . ° 37 
Gi-Sivalidevi . eae a 5188, Be 
Sruta-devatd, ‘the goddess of magne’ 5 6 232 
Stambhatirtha,—Cambay A < ° i 5 BS 
Sthana, ¢ ee ° . ° ° ‘ 211 
Sthdnika hula of the Sodus ., tpt » 204, 207 
Sthird, fom.n. . | ’ . . . ° ‘ 210 
Stipa, of the Jainas e ° ; - 204, 312, 318 
Ram PM ae ke , S RON Boa 
Davunskatitiape Dr 4g a 
Subhaga, and Subhaga, pr. nn. 99, 332, 371, 396 
Stobhashitdvali of Vallubhadeva, Guoted’ pie ee 14a, 
Sugunasevadhi-siri . : ‘es ‘ 39 


3U 


514 


PAGE 
§dlapani, prin. . ‘ 3 ° ° a » 9831 
Sulasa, pron. : : . . ° ; 381 
Sumana, monk ° ’ . ’ . ° « 112 
Sumatikirti, pron. . . . . : ‘ 40 
Sumatinatha, Tirthakdra q A . ’ + 78, 84 
Snumatisagara . . é c ’ 38 
Sdnaka, vill., now re, : ‘ ‘ A + 25, 33 
Suga dynasty . . . . . : . 195 
Suparnas—demi-gods. . . C . 319 
Supirévanatha, Tirthakdra ‘ . ‘ . 82 
Supathimd, pr.n. . . . . . . . 887 
Supratibuddha, pr. n.. 0 A : ; . 37 
Bara, a poet, 120, 121; family . ‘ . ’ » 204 
SfrapAla, Pala k., probably Vigrahapdlal. .  . 161 
Sfrasimghaji of Palitana . P ‘ A . . 36,85 
Gurashtra, country . ‘ . . Z ‘ 232 
Snrata-bandira,—Surat . ‘ ‘ : + 42, 78, 79 
Suriya, nun ‘ . ‘ . ° . « 894, 395 
Suriydbha, god ‘ ° ’ . . ‘ - 820 
Sirpata, pr. n. . ; b ‘ c C A 246 
SySarmapura, tu. now Kot 3 c A ‘ » 483 
Susi or Susf, vill.. o C 4 . ° . 299 
Susthita, Jaina teacher . : : . ’ e 37 
Sutatika, pr. n. . . ° ° . . . 400° 
sutdtikint . 5 7 6 6 . ‘ . 93 
sultadhdra, mason 5 Fy 5 . ‘ ° 481 
Sutta> Pitika . . ‘ 4 ° . 93, 105 
Savanamaha, pl.n. ° . : ‘ 329 
Sivrattajma, ee ol. ’ . : ‘ 84 
sodmin . e . E . ° e 22 
Svasaga (P), t, or “vill. 5 ‘ . A . - 299 
svastika . 6 . . . ° . ‘ 312 
Svatiguta, pron, ° 95, 100 
Sydmaladevi, daughter of Udaydditya ‘of Malava and 
wife of Vijayasimha . ° , ° . 9, 16 
T 
Tailapa, W. Chalukya k., married Bonthadevi .» « 304 
Takarapada, pln. . ; : . ° . 384 
Takkola,t. . S 4 . . C 168, 169, 172 
Takshaka, MauryachieE . a ° . . 222 
Tamalipti, t& . . . 3 ° ° . - 344 
Tarnbalamada, vill. . 5 5 : - 103, 116 
Tambapamni, Tamraparnt : . . - 466, 471 
Tamraparni, river 5 : ' ° . 193 
Tandulapadraka, vill. Tandalaja 4 5 ‘ ’ 23 
Tantrapdla, a chief defeated by the Chdhamfna 
Vakpatiraja ° é ° 6 a) 117 
Tapa gachchha of the Fainad ry 36, 38, 78, 80, 82-86 
Pattdvali of . . ° «= 37f. 
Tapast, Tapasiya race see eto 101, 106, 373, 374, 380 
Taranga, vill. and tirtha in Gujarat < ee 24 
Tardi Kuchuk 5 Sade ere ’ » 428 
Teja . . ° 5 . ‘ ° a 81 
Tejaraja, pr. n. a Se ° : ower 1278 
Tevani, Traivarna princess . ° Poe on a 243 
Tewar inscription of Gaydkaradeva, referred to. : 8 
Tewar inscription of Jayasimhadeva, edited . ’ 17 
Tharhbhaka, pr. n. « . 5 eke ° » 211 
ThAniys dula of the Jainas. Nes a 203 
Thera Naga . ° ° ° . ° e 885 
Thirakan pe, Ge ee 6. eae AE 


INDEX. 


PAGE 
Thorasisi—Sthaulagishi, pr.n. é . . 337 
Tikisa(?), pr. n. O f s é . 397 
Tilhana, pr. n. ° . A 5 : . 232 
Timgyadeva (?), pr. n. . > . 4 . 348, 355 
Timdr Shah, emp. . - ‘i é A 473, 476 
Tiridapada, vill. c ' 5 102, 116, 384 
Tisa, pr. n. 5 A ‘ ‘ . ° - 327, 384 
Tisaka, pr.n. . be PG ees 3 93, 104 
Tishya days ‘ ° . . . 259, 262, 264-266 
Tihana, pr. n. ; - A » 232 
Tithis in dates :—Bright half goat. — 
8rd . ° ‘ 7 f - 118, 234, 410 
6th . ° ‘ 3 ° ‘ F 18 
Oth . . . : ’ ° . 229 


llth ry ° y . ° . . 9 
13th and 15th e . ° . ® 118 
Dark half month :—2nd . ‘ ‘ ‘ 299 


8rd « . ° ry . 6 . 410 

9th ’ . . ° ‘ « ‘ 299 

10th =. . ° . ; ° . 2 

15th é : ° 5 ° é és 216 
Tomara prince Rudrena > . ° . : 117 
» another chief . . . ° ° 117 
Traigarta, km. . ° . . . 3 483 
Traikalakaka, vill, 7 4 0 118 
298 


Trikalinga, country . 


Tripuri, capital of the Kilachan or © Chedi Linge - 2, 5, 182 


Trigala, mother of Mahavira 5 : 315, 317, 318 
trisilas . 3 » 312 
Tlechsnapdladers, probate a " of ai 235 
Tubavana, Tumbavana, pl.n. . 91, 96, 99, 116, 369, 384, 392 
Tuda, Tuda, Tuda, pr. nn. . ‘ 5 ‘ 384, 388 
Tughluq Shah : “ : 2 : 159, 436 
Turhbavana, pl. n. (v. APabavans). 369, 384, 392 
Tanakipaka group of 12 [villages] . . . 118 
Turamaya, Ptolemy II. . G ° 463, 471 
Turushkas—Muhammadans- . 181, 4097. 
U 
Uchenagari gakha of Jainas ; é - 205, 208, 210 


of Malava; his daughter 
SyAmaladevi 9. 16, 181, 304 


Udayaditya Paramara k. 


Udayamana, a chief ; his Dudhpani rock inseription 343f, 
Udayaraja, pr. n. : ° “ . . 232 
Udayarnava-siri . 5 5 . : 5 . 39 
Udayasagara-siiri F : 39, 79 
Udaypur prasaséi of the rulers of “Malava, referred to 181 
Uddharana, pr. n. > ’ ° 331 
Udubaraghara, vill, 5 . 96, 98, 107, 115, 400, 401 
Udyotana-siri 4 a ° * : : . 36 
Uggahini, pr. n. ° . 6 7 . 207 
Ugira, t. ° . ° ‘ . 5 ° e 100 
Ugrasenapura, t. . . : . . . 41 
hada gotra i . . ° 41 
Ujeni, Ujeni, Ujjain, ae of Malwa c - 92, 96, 100 


102, 104, 105, 107, 110, 269, 372- 374, 379- 381, 385, 391 


Ukeia wieg. a) os tose, ee 
Ulugh Beg, Amir eee Pity Me 157 
Unadaji, Unnadaji, of Palitind © a et + a Brae 
Unnata durga Tey ete Ce aoe 88 
Upakesa Tape e ° . ° ° ° e 40: 
Upasijha; monk oe as ‘iy ar dees 104 


Upedadata, Upidadata, pr. n, 


Urvasi, wife of Purfravas. 


Usa, race 


Usabha (Rishabha), pr. n. . 
Ushkar-Hushkapura, vill. in Kaémtr : 


Usitha(?), vill. 
Utara, 9 Rajuka 
Utaradasaka, pr. n. 


Utaradata, and Utaramita, pr. nn. 


Wtkala, a people 
Uttaresvara—Siva 


Uyablatta, an astrologer 


vachabhiimikas . 


* 


Vachchhaliya kula of Jainas 


Vachha—Vatsa, pr. n. 
Vachhi (== Vatsi) mother . 
. Vaddiga or Vandiga, a Yadava chief 


Vadhigiva, pr.n. . 
Vadibhashana 


Vadivahana, VAdi- and Vadi-, t. 


Vadnagara=Nagara 


vagalikammatabhimi 
Vaghli inscriptions, edited 
Vaghumata, geog. term 


Vagvyara, 00. . 
Vahila, py.n. 


vaideha 


Vaidyadeva, k. of Kamardpa 
” inscription of . 


Vaidyanatha, name of Siva : 
Vairt, Vaira, or Vert Sé424 of Jainas 
Vairisimha, Guhila prince 


3 II., Paramara k, 


Vaishnava names. 
Vaisyas A 


Vajanagari Saékhd of Teitias 


Vajaranadya, pr. n. 
Vajasaneya S4khd . 
4 samhita 
Vajiguta, pr. n. 
Vajini, nun 
Vajinika, pr. n. 


Vajris, Vrijis, people 
Vakaladevi . 
Vakala, a queen 


108, 110, 


. . ° 


Vajradaiman, a Kacksthaver ghita prince. 
Vajra-sdkhd of Jainas : 
Vajrasena, Jaina teacher 


116, 368, 370, 391 


INDEX. 


PAGB 

91, 95, 101, 373 
Ab aE A 

% . 4 
é 206 

A . 198 
; 359 

- 38), 393 
: 198 

. 386 

: ei! 
: 127 

. 438, 439 


. 470 

. 198, 202 
° 329 
199 
214 
208 
40 


438 
224, 
221f, 
101, 116, 37 


e Q 


° 41 


381 
° 129n. 


« 348-350, 355-357 


Vakhatchand, ee of Ahmadabad 


vakhulikehetra 5 
Vakiliya race... 


Vakpati¥aja, Chahamana k. 
Vakpati-Muiija, Paramara k, of Mélava 


Vala, pr. n. 


Valabhi, city in Sarkshicn 


Valabhi, ‘lord of, . 
Valika 


Valaparija, Maurya chief 


Valivahana, pl.n. . 
Vallatemple . 


* 


°. . 


347f. 

> 16 

2 203, 321] 

6 Phils 

‘ 181 

° - 96 
° 468 

. - 201 
f 208 

- 299 

f 22 

. - 370 
C 390 

. 394 
: 234, 235 


38 


38 

471 

93,94 

370 

36 

. 224 

92, 100 

117 

304 

° - 397 
- 222 

168, 149, 173 


Vejaja, vill. . 5 
Veni, river 


Verd or Vaird sakha of the Thea 


Verohakata, t. . 
Vesila, vill. . ; 


Vesamanadata, pr. n. . 
Vidhipaksha gachchha 


Vidyabdhi-siri . 


Vidyadhara, Jaina teacher 
VidyAdharas, demi-gods 
Vidyadharadeva, Chandella k. 
VidyAdhari S4khé of Jainas 
Vidyananda-stri, Jaina 


Vidya-stivi . 
Vigrahapala, Pala k. 


Vigraharaja, Chahamana k. 17, 119 ; ne 


scription edited 
Vijala, pr. n. 
Vijaya Anandasiri 


vijayabharana, a biruda 


e 


o 


Vijayabharananatha, (a temple of for), 


Vijayadana-siri 
Vijayadayaesiri =, 


515 


PAGE 
Vallabharaja, probably the Rashtrakita Krishna IF. or 

Krishnavallabha . : : : 300 
vallavas . . . ° » 484 
Vamadeva, tants in Chedi caea pcos : - 2, 7, 298 
Vamana, pr. Bn. ° : ° ° - 299 
Vamgapala, k. . ° 243 
vanakitakabhimi . . A 6 - 224 
Vavaraja, Gedia . it . - 24,28 
‘Vandhula gotra ° : ; - 359 
Vanga, people, . - 9, 18, 355, 4092. 
vdnija, -nika :. : ° . 94 
Vankshu, river . ° . * . 181 
Vappaiva, Maurya chief . 5 ° - 2a 
Varadata, pr. n. . .  _. 390; 391 
Varana gana of Jainas 198, 201, 203, 204, 207, 209 
Varanahasti, pr. n. ° ° . . 210 
Varasena, fem. n. .« ’ ° 390 
Vardhamana-suri . . - 36,37 
Vardhamana Tirthakara A « 199 205, 208, 209, 211 
Varendri, country 5 6 : - 348, 357 
Vargatika tribe of Brahmans . . . = 18" 
Varnamana, k. of Magadha . ‘ 382 
varshdh, season ; é A - 262, 268 
Varuna, pr. 2. ‘ . ‘ ° ° . 381 
Vasavé, nun =. . “ B 6 391 
Vasithiputa Anarhda . . . - 88 
Vastavya family ' . . . 229 
Vastrakula race ° ° . o . « 438, 439 
Vasula, fem. n. e e 375, 381, 391 
Vasumita, nun ° . ° . 391 
Vasushka, MahArhjaz: Vasudeva c ° ° 369 
Vatagartika, vill. . one 5 . > 176 
Vatayakshinivdta . i - - 234 
Vatsaraja, ChAhamana prince . ° ° - 27,119 
Vavva, pr, mn. ; . 5 ; 5 Yel 
Vavvulayedra, a group of tine villages. A » 26 
Vayudata, fem. n. A ° « 373, 380 
Veddngas . . e . « 3842 
vedaveyaka > ‘ . 2658 
Vedikas ‘ . 819 
Vedisa, t. "93, 96, 101, 102, 110, ‘ns, 369, 371, 378, 


883, 386, 390, 393 
« 92, 98, 115, 385 


: 299 

fi ‘ 204 

° . 116 

r ry ° 299 

‘ + 95, 99 

° *, . 39 

. : 39 

5 ; . 38 

‘ « 312, 32) 

: : 234, 233 

5 - 198, 21% 

* f . 289 

c: 39 

‘$48, 349, 355 
Harsha in- 

- z 116f. 

ite 409 

+ 79, 82 

A eee othe 

4 . 214 

: 38 


516 


Vijeyadeva, Jaina pontiff . 
Vijuyadeva-sixi . ; 
Vijayadeyendrarsiri . 


Vijayadhanegvara-siri —. : . . 
Vijayddhivdja=Vija dais the Kachchhapaghata 

prince ' . 
Vijayajinendra- -siri R ‘ : 
vijaya-kajaka . . ville : 
Vijayakirti, Jaina sage. ‘ > 

” Viole oe ° 

Vijayakshama-stiri . 


Vijayapala for Ajayapala . : 
Vijayapila, a KachchhapaghAta prince 

»  » VijayapSladeva, Chandella k. 
VijayapAladeva, probably a k. of — 
Vijayaprabha:stri 7 > i; 
Vijayasena, Jaina pontiff 

» priest . . . 
Vijayasena-siri 5 
Vijayasimhba, Guhila prince of Mowsa 

i Jains pontiff . 
Vijayasimhadeva, Chedi k. . 
Vijayasimha-siri ; 
Vijayasiaga, Acharya 
Vijayagixi,fem.n, . . 
Vijha, monk . - 
Vijita, pr. n. 
Vijjahara- PArévandtha 5 A 
Vikanera . : = A . 
vikatd ; 


VikramAditya, name oof the Chedi k. Ggoyadera 


Vikramaditya I., Chalukya k. 


Vikramasimha, a Kachebbapghite prince ie Dub- 


kund inscription 
Vimalaharsha 
Vimalaéiva (?), an skola: 
wimnSopaka . : ; : 
Vinhuka, pr. n. . ‘ 
Vipula, monk, 401 ; Vipula, as 
Vira, monk, 378 ; Vird (P), nun, . 
Virabhadra, pr. n. . . 
Viradeva, pron. , - 
Virasend, pron. 
Virasirnhadeva, a Kachchhapaghita ries 
Virohakata, pl.n. . A 
Visi Osvdls, VY. Porvala =. 
Visa, prom, . ‘ . " 
Visa tribe . c A : 
Visi-Siimala gotra . : : 
Visikha, a monk A . . 
Visikharakhita, pr. n. 
Visala, pr. n. 
Visdlanagara, t. in Guest 
Vishnu (?), pr. n. ° 
Vishnubhadra, pr, a. A 
Vishnubbava, pr.n. . = 
Vishnuvaméodbhava 
Vifsivadeva, pr. n. ; 
Viévakarman, the architect af the go 
Viévamitra gotra . . 
Visvardpa, pr. De . Ses 
Vitariga ° ° e . 
Vitirifahda (P), ehi, pl. ity r) ° e 
Vivekasigara-giri . ; rales 


° ° 


° 


“he, 327, 376, 401 


= 1? 
bh : 
i 


INDEX, 


PAGE 

Voddiyayvh, wife of the Yadava viata (Vaddiga) , 214 
Vodva Stfipa, Jaina . - 7 F » 204, 821 
Vyidhahasti, a preacher , A / . 204,821 
Vriddha §44h4 of Osvals . ; - ; ; Al 
» Srimalis ; A 5 yeaa 2! 
Vriddhistgare. shri. ; ° . ; ‘ 89 
Vudind, fem. n, « : , h - F - + 90 
Vughlaka, pr. n. ; ‘ F ; ; 827 
VyApura mandala . : : A « 481 
vyutthanika . F ° ‘ “ ; 344 

Ww 

Wali Muhammad 4 ; 3 * 3 . 476 
Walta Khan ; ; ; . : - + 247 


Week days in dates :— . 
Sunday . : 5 A : p . - 9,18 
Monday . : , : 3, 118, 234, 299 
Thursday . . : ° . . ; - 410 


Saturday 5 ° ° - 229, 299 
Western Chalukya Seuitiaes I, and Tailapa A - 304 


Y 
y mstead of 7. . A ° : . e : 298 
Yadava dynasty . . . . : ° - 218 
YAdgar Taghai, Amir . . ° . : . 149 
Yadugada gotra . > ° ° . : - 42 
Yakhadasi, nan . : ri ; r < . 377 
Yakhadina, monk . . - 872 


Yakhi, nun. A = é - . - 101, 378, 890 


Yakhila, monk A : é - « 109, 311 
Yakshas . ‘ ° - - ; 2 818 
Yamadata, pr. mn, . “ e r, ‘ - 386 
Yamarakhita, pr.n, . : . S s 96 
Yamuni, riv, F “ 6 
Yaéahkarnadeva, Chedi ke 9, 15, 304; his Jabalpur 
copper-plate inseription edited . : ° . 1,8 
Yasild, pr. n. : . ° - 100 
Yasogiri, monk . - Pty ar > 112 
Yaéomati, pr.n. « . ° fs e 286 
Yasopala, pr. n. . . : . . . 371 
Yavanas—Muhammadans : = ° A 409. 


Yayya, p.m. . 
Years in dates :— 
Chedi-samvat $46,391 . 


: . 20 
= i een a es 299 
3 872 grb eck els” Wis Raeeee 
. 87.4(?) ite a gee 2 
Co ee eal ener e Perce fa 
o O237a ne, es 213 


” 928 ° . ® ° . 
Saka-samnyat 922 —t«. ° ° . : 213 


* 900° :3° s) ee), oa renee 
» TO6G 75.0" ay Shae cive ss 831 
4 1334 (for 1386) 6 ical se eS 
- 16S ae a eee 68 
% PbS hg ws? Lua Se - Say 
yy 1641 e e e .J r) 64 
2 1658,1050- 5. . -. 77 
7 1708,1726,1751 . . . "98, 1) 
ae TIGA, 2766 sin pc ee 


PAGE PAGE 
Years in dates—(continued) :— Hijra dates: 891 . : ; 287 
Saks- sara vat RBM tar Miers a. 8 SB ” 892 ; ; 426 
- Vip epee gees one 2 BE 7 Ca ee 438 
” 1765, 1768,1770 . ; 83 i 904, ; ’ : = oy hOd 
He 1781, 1806 ° 4 7 PNA: )) ” S18 ss 5 “ ; 286 
(Gupta) samvat 168 . ° hoe) ; 866 ” 927, 931 : . . 427 
Vikrama-samyat . 1013, 1027, 1030 , 5 ; 118 ” 1: f ; : 4 140 
7 1145 ’ A ‘ F . 284 ” 930 ‘ ° - , » I4l 
a 1161 ~~. 3 . : ; 182 ” 934 ‘ - 144 
” 1162 ° ' ‘ - 859 » 936 . Z Pee) 
_ TROP canes eget 8 Sep BEDARD ” 237 it awe 149, 286 
+ 1217, 1282 ° . ° ° 28 % 939 ; « - 65 
a 12738. A ’ . ° 439 ” 942—=C«w - 7 a » 150, 156 
> 1295 (P) . . ; A es ” 943 A 4 A : . 427 
ee 1299 . fm 3 ; 29 ” 044 =, ‘ < ‘ : 428 
a 1356 e . é ° - 33 ” 946 ° ° 5 ; 145, 425 
iy 1358 =. S . ° . 25 ” 947 ~« . . : 2 429 
. 1582 a A : 4 . 26, 27 ” 949 a ; : A . 160 
“9 1687 . . ° . » A2, 47 ” 951. : ° . ° 157 
A 1596 . ° ° ° A 33 % 960 ‘ ° ° ° - 293 
‘ 1470 (for 1471) . . . 229 » OO Ars aan og ee eee 142 
3s 1485 . i é : ; 410 ” 966 5 < 5 ° 146 
oe 1620 . ° ° . 3 49 ” 969 ~«. e : 5 143 
i 1640 cpio tears: | vette er SabS ” 970 + came ge ae pete gk Ooy ANG 
x SGAaeeer Tacha kee ees 84 ” eS ea ee eer ak 154 
A 1650 a cae 9 el 1, 975 oats. -  « 146, 157 
- 1652. C : 4 ° 69 ” 976,1002 , . “ : 138 
” 1663, 1676 . . ° 68 ” 979 (P) ° e ° ° e 147 
an 1674, 1678 °. . . ‘ 30 ” 989, 5 : - 183, 289, 434 
A 16765 . Ps 60, 64, 67 ” 1020, 1029, 1036 . ° . 134 
. 1682 E : s : . 87, 68 » 1022, 1028 (P) ° ° A 296 
” 1684, 1686 . e : . "2 ” 1032 ° ° ° . e 281 
es 1685 = - r A . 81 ; > 1035, 1086 . ° . . 135 
i 1889,1696 . . . . 82,38 ” 10308 6 ee lw 188 
1606; 1710). cal Ge a es » 1042. ey Pegs us 290 
in 1783, 1788, 1791, 1794 , é 77 ” 1044, : . . . . ‘Ia 
Fi 1810, 1814, 1815, 1822, 18481860 78 » OCT ss ee = ss ues a fe 161 
x 1860, 1861, 1867, 1875, 1885, ” 1057 . . e . » 436 
LC ea ea ae s 100d evs | a Cues tere 08 
i 1887-89 . ° ‘ ‘ a 80 ” 1071, 1073 : ° A - 486 
3 1891-93 A . - _ 81 ” 1078, 1090 . . ° - 152, 163 
A, 1893, 1897 . . . ‘ 82 ” 1100, 1106 e F F 148, 158 
1900 to 1943 co eR n L108, (116 = ee ee ee aa 
Hijra dates :— + 1128, 1180, 1148. . 138, 281, 479 
f 693 . ° : ; e « 430 » 1181 (P) : Shes ; 143 
4; 622 —(w e ir a é 481 | Yoga Subha in date 4 A A : + ells 
7 643 5 ° A . 187 | Yogadeva mantrin . : A i 4 - 348, 355 
» 670 A A 5 ; 139 | Yona, pr.n. . A , i ; A A « ©6895 
Ay 680, 688 . . ° ‘ + 158 | Yona—Greek . . ° 453, 463, 465, 466, 463, 471 
” 687. ° . 4 A 432 | Yudhishthira-muni, image of . A A 5 = 77 
» 702 ; ; 0 ; . 433 | Vépas, sacrificial pillars . : A f ; 813 
4 708 . - ° P i 436 | Yusuf ibn Hasan Sir. ; 5 r son 150;21 5): 
fs 715 iy peek oc uP ie gaan BOT 4 WAaul PHAN owEnenEEnnes oak ear sctee ng 284 
” 724 =. 6 ; : : 437 | Yuvaraja, a Kachchhapaghata prince R P - 284 
re 725 . ; : “ F . 169 | Yuvardjadeva I.—Keytiravarsha, Chedik. . 174, 304 
732,763 =. . < y 292 Ps II, Chedik . 5 5 - 2,6, 804 
767 . ° ° . - 169, 294 
” 776 . . 2 A 283 
5 798 ‘a ° ° Fi » 295 
nh 799 4 ‘ * 7 131 Z, 
” 847 : ° * 4 - 293 
oe 850 ry ° ° ° ° 280 Zafer Khan ° ° ‘ ® » ij . 288 


» 885 5 ww ww 884 | ZiyfeieMulk (European?) »  - 0 se 88 


518 


ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA. 


2, line 16, and page 7, line 16.—See page 298 
note 7, 
7, 1. 831—for Tohwan-read Tolman, 
10, 1. 3—read inscription. 
15, in note 73,—read Sri. 
17, 1. 25—for Tohwan read Tolman. 


1, 35—read Vrahmddi-. 
19, 1. 5 fr. bot. for Aditya read Aditya. 
25, ll. 1, 2—for Harad4-ajt read Haradasa-ji. 
13, 1. 2—from bottom, for Dey 4-karana read 
Devakarana. ; 
35, foot-note, prefix *. 
81, 1.27—for nayara read nagara. 
87, 1. 6—for twenty, read nearly seventy (68). 
» 1. 9—for hundred read hundred. 
», 2nd foot-note, prefia *. 
94, 1.5—for Dhamae read Dhamasiva. 
126, 1. 7, and p. 127, 1. 1.—As suggested by 
Prof. Aufrecht in his Catal. Catalogorum 
the word Séra of the original should be 
taken to be a proper name, and the two 
passages should therefore be translted: 
‘The following is a verse of Stra’s,’ and 
‘This is (a verse of) Stra’s.’ 
128, 1. 41—before which add of. 
131, 1. 18—for the pardoned deceased son of, 
read son of the deceased pardoned. 
foot-note, prefiz *. 
ll—for »y] read op! 
Ism'ail, son of RAib. 
ll. 24 and 28, delete “ and.” 
1.18—for Ué)2 we may read Jeo ayo ice. 
Durgah Mall. 
136, 1. 1l—from bottom, dele of before the 
renowned, 
148, 1.13, from bottom—read Bu) ee wt &) 


usile pide ail} ge, (1. 6, from bottom) 
“The poor, wretched Khan Yisuf Agha, 
son of Shaikh Yisnf. 

150, 1, 20—for epasS vii read wast! ov ice,, 
(1, 29) his Solomon-like majesty. 

154, lines 25, 26, 27, for Bohm read Bohar, 

157, 1. 6—for  ,2lé read cs) 

160, 1. 12, dele the sign of punctuation after 
Asiatic. 

161—prefiz * to the first note. 


133, 


134, and 1. 8, read 


134, 
136, 


Page 162, 1. 13—read eur’. 


7°99 1. 
9 175, 1; 29— ,, “cra. 

» » in note 7 —read been ¥. 

», 176, 1. 32—read “efi. 

», 180, 1. 28— ,, vdshpdmbhahkana. 

” 185, ibs 23— ” Raw. 

” 1, 25— ” aaa’. 

» 192, note?® add:—As pointed out to me by Prof. 


A 


27— oP) fa fafsrar’. 


Biihler, this verse evidently contains a re- 
ference to the towns of Kalyana, Asavalli 
and AyodhydS; but I cannot give yet an 
entirely satisfactory translation. 


» 212, last foot note,—prefiz 1, and add :—Dr. Fleet 


informs me, that these copper-plates now 
belong to Ganpatsingh bin Narayansingh 
Pattewala, of Sarngamner. He also informs 
me that the Garuda of the seal is repre- 
sented as a man, squatting, with his hands 
joined palm to palm, and with a high tiara 
on his head; and that his wings are depict- 
ed in much the same way as on the Paithan 
and other Rashtrakita seals. 


» 217, note 18 add:—Dr. Fleet, after cleaning the 


original plates, has kindly furnished the 
following notes on the printed text :—In 
line 16 the inserted letters (compare note 9) 
are sydkhyd; the anusvdéra is omitted.—In 
line 29 the reading is °madana-médyan- 
manini’?.—In line 30 read tha hi narendro.— 
In line 31 for [nanu] read atha.—In line 31 
for [tale] read bhrito.—In line 38 the 
bracketed ‘aksharas ra and wvd are quite 
clear.— In line40 read yen=4@°. 


3, 219, 1, 51—read fayea. 


3? 


” 


be) 


” 


9 


” 


” 


223, 1. 
It 
226, 1. 
anal 


229, 1. 


230, 1. 
238, 1. 


6— ,, “TIER. 

42— ,, anvitah. 

3— ,, faa: 

24— ,, wefan. — 

41— ,, Strya-stddhdnta, 
30— ,, “Gata. 

32— ,, area’. 


», 240, note 2—for Laskshmana read Lakshmana. 
5 255, 1. 3l—for! read (f). 

», 265, 1. 10— ,, Posaha read Posatha. 

» 287, 1. 21—for Path read Fath. 

» 297, in note 3—read Lanman. 


ADDENDA AND CORRIGENDA., 519 


Page 307, 1. 24— read °arera?, Page 411, 1. 7-—read a¥taa’. 
» 934, 1, 15—add the sign of visarga opposite » » note4— ,, sag. 
the figure 8. » 412,1.10—,, G4. 
» 335, 1. 4—read°g@. Fr 3 1 19—,, awa. 
‘oy le Ls 5, Cw fare. » 418,1.17—,, fafaeve? 
a GBT TE 31—put a comma after was. 3 » 1. 82—,, ened 
» 839, 1, 18—put a comnta at the end of the line. » 415, 1 84—,, um~dte. 
» 9343, 1, 9—for whch read which. » 416, 1. 16— ,, “aqT’. 
» 345, lL 6+read wyar®. » 420, 1. 23—,, azer. 
» » Lb 2l—.,, Save. », 421, 1. 23—addacomma at the end of the line. 
» 861, note %—for Kielhern read Kielhorn. 5 422, 1, 24—read Rémakirti and Jayakirti. 


»» 366, note ®, last line—for See place reudSee plate, | ,, ,, 1. 25 fora read any. 
» 9867, 1.16 (2nd col.)—for odatd- yead odatd-[4.] 


cr 
bo 
Oo 


EPIGRAPHIA. INDICA 
SUPPLEMENTARY 10 
THE CORPUS INSCRIPTIONUM INDICARUM. 
_ Edited by Pin BUROESS, Ci1.8., LL.D, ¥.R.8.B, etc, 
Assisted by A, FUHRER, Px.D., and EB, HULTZSCH, Pu.D. 


“ Lildéede réunir en une publication ¢péeciale ies macriptions de plus en plus nombreuses et 2 mesure qu'elles sont mises au 
jour par, les,deverses branches de l’Archwological Survey, est excellente. II était temps que l’Inde eft A son tour son Ephemeris 
Palaographica.”—A, Bartu. ‘ 5 

“ Hitherto the student’ of Indian inscriptions had to search for the records as yet published in the pages of various learned peri- 
odicals of India and Europe, besides the volumes of the Archalogical Survey and other independent works. ‘lhe foundation of a 
Pe spain exclusively devoted to Epigraphy is sure to meet with a very warm reception, therefore, on the part of all students of 

ndian history. 

ce Bye Burgess has succeeded in securing the assistance of the most competent scholars in every branch of Indian Gl Sy de 
and the majority of the records published in the brst three parts possess an exceptional value ahd interest.”—Prof. J. JOLLY, In 
Trubner’s Record, 

“A cété des diverses séries de “ Reports,” dont la marche est forcément peu régulitre, M. Burgess a créé un organe périodi- 
ue, ’Epigraphta Indica, paraissant par trimestre et spécialement réservé aux inscriptions. L’épigraphie indienne aura ainsi son 
phemeris avant d’avoir son Corpus. Si M. Burgess arrive de cette maniére A.centraliser, ne fdt-c&que dans une certaine mesure, 

les travaux épigraphiques actuellement éparpillés dans une infinité de recueils, dont plusieurs sont des publications locales absolu- 
ment inaccesibles en Europe, il aura rendu une fois de plus un service inestimable aux études indiennes.’”’—Revue de |’ Histoire des 
Religionse 
ce At the Congress of Orientalists lately held in London the very highest praise was awarded to Dr. Burgess for his share in 
this undertaking as chief editor. No higher praise could be accorded here to Dr. Burgess than this statement of the value attached 
to his labours by so many of the highest Oriental scholars.’—The R. J. B. A. Fournal,.22nd December 1892. 
CALCUTTA :—SuPERINTENDENT OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA; THACKER, SPINK & Co. 
LONDON :—Luzac & Co,; Bernard Quaritcu; KEGAN PauL, TRENCH, TRipNER & Co.; A. ConsTABLE & Co. 


119838 


DS TOR; 
m8, 119833 
#68  Epigraphia Indica. 

Mec 


Bpigray hia 


Weanc 


THEOLOGY LIBRARY 
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY AT CLAREMONT 
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA 


PR? PRINTED IN U.8.A. 


Sh 


sf 
eter 
salsa ra 


Bet) 
et 
ct 


Sea 
Pena 


Rat 
REEOgS 
0 
Set 
Sore: 
a pater. 


iy 


Satie 
i 


3 
3S 


a 
ag 


S 
2 


Darereo cre 


Sia ben 
aN PaNY 
eoneye 


sy 
ie 
oy 
i 


ty 


TRS eC 


vases rasan 


re 


pera 
eaeyasaees 
Eremerree tert td 
eae ie 


ne 
deport 
Fete 


82: 


eat 
en 
a 


a. =, rr eee 
ere etre Ree sa nig ee 
Sic veuiry ae soneeeaces eta 
uaa sored maa eins eras 


2 ibe, 
Siete 


‘i 
on 


pbrarba ce 


eae 


SS aa 
=: pepe 
So 


Smee 


Sanus : ra ena Baa kec meena 
pile aan Lena Mesh eid 8 err niae 

St ae raen ainct = Berea ae my 
Sie oe Stas E 


saves anuimen tee 
aaa as 
Ralphs eee ro 


ae Species 
Soe par 


Agee 


$8 
etree tits 
Ente ee 


are 
Precis iad 


pt 
Paiighne 


Ail 


det 
UT 
wy: 


is 


Sees 
pie ae oe 


apa 
PES 
ess 
s Steet 
ao ewes tas : 
Bae eater) UES See. 
Ree pet an ren 


TEE SL na See 


i feurat: 
puree 
ite 


Soe 


