

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
ARCH/EOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA 


CENTRAL 

ARCHEOLOGICAL 

LIBRARY 


ACCESSION NO. 



CALL No. 4 -/ 7 - 












PUBLISHED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
AS A SUPPLEMENT TO THE “INDIAN ANTIQUARY. 



EPIGRAPHIA INDICA 

C V V, v 

AND 


RECORD OF THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA. 


EDITED BY 

E. HULTZSCH, Ph.D., 


GOVERNMENT EPIGRAPHIST ; FELLOW OF THE UNIVERSITY OF MAnKA- 
CORB. MEMB. OF THE BATAVIA SOCIETY OF ARTS AND SCIENCE- 
AND OF THE ROT AL SOCIETY OF SCIENCES AT GOTTINGEN. 




CALCUTTA : 


OFFICE OF THE SUPERINTENDENT 
BOMBAY : EDUCATION SOCIETY’S PRESS. 
BOS DON.- LUZAC A Co. 

&EW YORK: AVESTERMANN & Co. 

CHICAGO: 8. D. PEET. 


OF GOVERNMENT PRINTING, INDIA 
jj IP/.IO OTTO HABRASSOWITZ. 
PARIS: E. LEROUX. 

BERLIN: A. ASHER Co 
VIENNA: A. HOLDER & Co. 









CALC TIT \. : 

’OfFKKMFNl 0* INDIA CENTRAL PRINTING ^FCICE> 
8, HASTINGS STREET. 


Reprinted in 1959 at the 
Government of India Press, Photo Lit ho U in 6 


New Delhi. 



CONTENTS. 


The names of contributors are arranged alphabetically 

Ret. J. E. Abbott, B. A. : — 

No. 12. Ahmadabad inscription of VLaladeva , [Vikrama-]Samvat 1308 

1 1 G. Bhaxdvrkar, ILA., Ph.D., C.LE. : — 

No. 20. Deoli plates of Krishna III.; §aka-Samvat 862 . * « • 

The late Professor G. BOhleb, Ph.D,, LL.D., C.LE. : — 

No. 1. The Asoka edicts of Padaria and Nigliva . • • • • 

,, 5* Two grants of Dadda IV. Prasautaraga ; [Chedi-]8amvat 392 

J. F. Fleet, Ph.I)., C.I.E. (Indian Civil Service, retired) : — 

No. 2. Yekkeri Took inscription of the time of Pulikesin II. 

„ 3. I t'Criptiona at Jlanagoli 

„ 18. Sravana-Belgola epitaph of Marasimha II. . 

„ 25. Inscriptions at Ablur 

E. Hvltzsch, Ph.D. : — 

No. 4. Four pillar inscriptions of Eastern Chalukya chiefs at SiiKUrmam 
,, 6. Eight Vattelattu inscriptions of Chola kings .... 

„ 8. Rayakdta plates of Skandasishya 

} , 13. Four inscriptions of Kulottunga-Chola • 

17. Chebrolu inscription of Jaya ; after Saka-Samvat 1135 . • 

Profbssos F. Kielhobn, Ph.D., LL.b., C.LE. 

No>. 7 and 21. Dates of Chdla kings {continued) ..... 

No. 11. Dibbida plates of Arjuna of the Matsya family; buka-Samvat 1191 
., 15. Three copper-plate inscriptions of Govinduchandra ot Kananj * 

16. Sis Eastern Chalukya copper-plate inscriptions .... 

,, 19. Assam plates of Yallabhaddva ; Saka-Samvat 1107 • . » 

,, 22. Yakkaleri plates of Kirtivarman II. ; Saka-Sariivat w9 ♦ 

„ 24. Daulatpnra plate of Bh.* jadeva I. of M.ihodaya ; [Ilarska- jSamvat bK) 

„ 26. A note on the alphabet of the 1 Vmcpiindi grant • * 

H. Krishna Sastrj, B.A. 

No. 10. Pithdpuram plete* of Vira-Chuda. dated in bis twenty-third year » 

„ 23. Mindigal inscription of Rajadkiraja.; Saka-Samvat 970 . • 

C. V. Ramamceti, B.A. 

No. 9. Konkudum plates of Allaya-Dodda ; SdkvSamvat 1352 
Mating Tun Ntein : — 

No. 11. Maunggun gold plates ••••**** 


* \0' 

. 188 

1 

t- 
9 

151 * 

2 l;i 

31 
41 
49 
103 
142 


48 and 197 
• 106 
. 112 
. 118 
• 181 
. 200 
• ?JS 
. 265 

. 70 

. 205 


101 


INDEN 


APPENDIX.— A List of the Inscriptions of Northern India fronr about A.D, 400 By Professor 

F. Kieihobw, Pb.D., LL.D., C.LE. . • * • • * » 1- * 9C 

INDEX TO THE APPENDIX. By the same ,**•...* 97—121 


LIST OF PLATES. 


1. 

2 , 

3. 

4, 

5, 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 

14. 
jo. 
It). 
17. 
is. 


•jo. 

23. 

at. 


As6ka edicts in Nepal . * . . 

Yekkeri rock inscription of the time of PulikeSin Ii 
Sai’kheda plates of Dad da IV. — Nos. I. and II. 

Vattejuttu inscriptions of Chula kings. — A. and B. 

„ „ „ C.andD. 

„ » „ ,. E. to IL 

Ha \ ak6ta plates of Skandasishya . • 

Mannggtm gold plates .... 

Grantha inscriptions of Kuldttuhga-Chola 
1 Jibbida plates of Arjnna of the Matsya family. — Plate i 

** >> »» *i »j ff 

Edern plates of Vijayaditya II. 

ATasnlipatam (?) plates of Yijay&ditya III. 

Bezvada plates of Bhiina I. . 

Masulipatam plates of Amma I. 

Misulipatam (?) plates of Chalnkya-Bhima II. 

Masullpatam plates of Amma II. • 

C l ehfjln pillar inscription of Jaya ; after Saka-Samvat 1135 
Sim van a - Bel goja epitaph of Marasimha II. 

Assam plates of Yallabhadeva. — Plate i. . • 

*> n» j? it it* • • 

Deoli plates of Iv nshna III. ; Saka-Samvat 862 . 

Vakkaleri plates of Kirtivurman II. — Plate i. 

)' tt V >5 tt II. . 

31 indiiral inscription of Rajadhir&ja ; Saka-Sarhvat 970 
ii s -notion of about A.D. 1200 
! K r.ef undi gr.uit of Namaya-Nayaka. — Plate i, 

- „ A • 


to face page 4 

tt „ „ S 

between pages 40 A 41 
to face page 42 
** tt »» 44 

it »» M 46 


between pages 50 A 51 
to face page 101 
it tt tt 104 

between pages 110 & 111 

to face page 112 
between pages 120 & 121 
„ „ 124 A 125 

„ „ 128 A 129 

to face page 1 32 

tt tt tt 136 

„ „ „ UO 

between pages 146 A 147 
to face page 178 
between pages 182 A 183 
„ „ 184 A 1*5 

„ « 194 A 

„ „ 2* >2 & 

tt tt 204 A 
to face page 


195 
203 
2* <5 
2h7 


between pages 264 A 
„ „ 266 A 


ZOZ 

m * ; 



ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS. 


» 

A. — VOLUME IIL 

Page 226. — When publishing the Alanipundi plate of Yirupaksha, I had to suspect its genuineness, 
owing partly to the numerous mistakes which it contains, and mainiy owing to the 
absence of any reference to this son of Harihara II. in the published records of the 
first Vijayanagara dynasty. The historical information conveyed by the plate is 
however, confirmed now from an unexpected source. In his Report on a S^ircl 
for Sanskrit and Tamil Manuscripts (p, 90), Mr. Seshagiri Sastri, Professor of 
Sanskrit at the Madras Presidency College, lias published extracts from a Sanskrit 
drama entitled Ndrdyanivildsa. This drama was composed by a royal author 
named Yirupaksha, who was the son's son (here the published reading putro f ‘ son,' 
has to be corrected into pa'tird. ' son’s son ’) of king Bukka, the daughter's Son of 
king Rama, and the son of king Hariliara. Of Yirupaksha it is further said that 
he was the lord of the Karuata, T uadira, Chola and Pandya countries, that he 
planted a pillar of victory in the ibland of Simhala (Ceylon), and that he was 
devoted tu the performance of the ‘ sixteen great gifts.' In describing the genealogy 
of Yirupaksha and his conquests, the Alampundi grant and the drama 
Ndrdyaniviidsa are practically at one with each other. The performance of the 
* sixteen great gifts/ which is mentioned in the latter in connection with 
Yirupaksha, is attributed in the former to his father. There is no doubt whatever 
as to tlio identity of the author of the Sanskrit drama in question with prince 
Yirupaksha of the Alampundi grant. The former is more explicit in describing his 
relationship to king Ibvma, inasmuch as he is there called 4 the daughter’s son ' of 
king Rama, while the latter simply bays that his mother Malladevi belonged to 4 the 
family of Ramadeva/ It may therefore be concluded that Ramadeva, whom 
I proposed to identify with the Yadava king Ramachandra (above, Yol. III. p. 225), 
had a daughter uanud Malladevi, who married Harihara II. of the first 
Yijayanagaia dynar.\. ami that prince Yirupaksha, who was born of this marriage, 
made extensive conquests in Southern India. — \ . \ enkayya. 

Page 36?, ar t id e 1 Any a-Pillai/ for read queen. 

„ 372, line 14?, for Jina-kalpa, read Jina-kalpa. 

r ^ from tho bottom, read 4 Kaoamba, $, a. Kadamba. 

B. — VOLUME IV. 

Pa^e 1^5, 1. 10 ff. Mr. Ramayya, has kindly informed me (through Dr. Hultzsch), that the 

correct spt llbg ot the modern name of the village is Denduluru, not Deudaluru, as 
rnven in Mr. Sewell's Lists of Antiquities. — As regards the identification of other 
localities mentioned in the Chikkulla plates, Mr. Sewell has been the first to 
write to me that Ravireva (in line 20) might be the village of ‘RaverA&h’ 

( Ravirela) on the north bank of the river Krishna, just at the top of its great bend, 
long. 80° 10' E., lat. 16° 50' N. The same identification was afterwards suggested 
by Dr. Fleet and by Mr. Ramayya. Mr. Ramayya further writes that about six 
miles to the east of Ravirela there is the village of Navabupepa, with a temple of 
S 6 munath as v am i n which may U the S6magirisvaranatha temple in line 23 of the 
inscription. The country m wkeh the villages were situated is called Nat [ri]pati 



EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[ VOL. V. 


(>n line 19). This Mr. Ramayya believes to be the more modern Natavdda , M which 
is mentioned in an inscription of Saka 1123 at Bezvada, in which the donor is 
described as Ndtavadi Radradevardjuln , i.e. Rudradevaraja of Natavada. The 
capital of this chief was Madapalla or Madapalli, and there is a village of this name, 
reported to contain the ruins of an old fort, close to the west of Madhira, a station 
of H. H. the Nizam's State Railway, and not far from Kondapalli.” — F. Kielhorn. 

Page 206, line 8 of the text. — I have altered the original reading - Pandy-Otpala-rnahipatayo 
to -Pdndy-Otkala-mahipatayd, which on page 207 I have translated by “ the Pandya 
and Utkala kings but I was wrong. The original reading Pandy-Otpala is correct, 
and the translation should have been “ the Pandya and king Utpala. ” Utpala is 
another name of the Paramara king Munja, who is mentioned under that name 
also in line 42 of the Kauthem plates of Vikramaditya V. {hid. Ant. Vol. XYI. 
p. 23, where he is described as kavivrishd , i.e., havindrah ), and in the Miraj 
plates of Jayasimba II. and the Yeur inscription of Vikramaditya YI. {ibid. 
Vol. VIII. p. 15, where the text has Utkala with the various reading Utpala ). 
— F. Kielhorn. 

„ 342, text line 43, for -bhara-bhar-, read -bhara-bhar-. 

„ 350, last line, for son, read grandson. 

„ 361, line 3, for Abhata, read Abhata. 

„ 368, article ‘ Digambara,’ for 286, read 28n. 

377, line 9, after Kulottunga-Rajendra-Ch&daraja, add do. 

„ 384, „ 13, for Odu-nadu, read Odu-nadu. 

„ 386, „ 7, for Pratipa, read Pratipa. 

C. — VOLUME V. 

Page 1 and passim . — For Paderia, read Padaria ; see J. it. A. S. 1898, pp. 526 and 580. 

„ 15, line 5 from the bottom, for full-moon read new-moon. 

„ 20, line 12 from the bottom, for Vikramaditya (V.), read Vikramaditya (IV.). 

„ 22, line 17, for Saraftadevi, read Saradadevi. 

„ 28, line 16, after ‘ the eleventh tithi,’ insert ‘ of the bright fortnight.’ 

,, 37, line 15 from the bottom, for Sanklrda, read Siinkheda. 

„ 47, text of H., line 7, for ervippar-, read erivippar=. 

M 56, footnote 12, for p. 311, read p. 319. 

,, 64, text line 141, read 

68, line 6, for Adavani-, read Adavani . 

91, text line 232, read xffagw. 

„ 120, footnote 6, line 2, for 4 goddess at fortune,’ read 1 goddess of fortune/ 

168, note 4. — As regards the Nandisvara day or tithi, Mr. Rice has drawn my attention to a 
note by him, overlooked by me, in his Insert at Srav.~Lel. Introd. p. 20 (note 3). 
From the information given by him there, it appears that, in a Jain record, any 
such expression as “the first Nandisvara day, or the first day of the Nandisvara ” 
would denote the day of the eighth 'tithi of the bright fortnight of the month 
Ashadha, K&rttika, or Phalguna, as the case may be, but that any such expression 
as “ the chief Nandisvara day, or the chief day of tho Nandisvara, ” might, perhaps, 
rather denote the day of the full-moon tithi if the Nandlsvara-pujd ended with 
any very special observances on that da}. — J. F. F. 

y, 132, toe 2 from the bottom, for inscriptions, read inscription 

„ 189, line 11, for Riehiappa, read Rishiyappa. 

„ 229, lines 26, 27.— It may be noted that the words in the original, which have been rendered 
by “a very Dilipa in generosity, a very Champapati (Karna) in truthfulness,” arc 
audanfla-Dilipom tatya-Ghampjpati . 



ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS, 


v. 


Page 233, the last line but one, for one thousand trees, read four thousand trees. 

238, line 20, for 4 in kdlavan, line 19/ read ‘in dharmmavan, line 93, as contrasted with 
dharmmamam , line 90/ 

„ 246, text lines 22, 23, for adiy=a gaihika, read adiy~ag=aihika. 

247, text line 32-33.— It was not noticed that kurushvatha is not a correct funn or 
combination. If the ahshara after kuruskva is an imperfectly formed tha, as it 
seemed to be, we can only conclude that the composer was using kurushvu at ha, 
and, misled by the metre, carelessly combined them into kurushvatha instead of 
kurushv=dtha . Bnt it now seems more likely that the composer wrote h nrushva 
vai ; that the writer wrote kurushva ve , omitting the subscript stroke which would 
turn ve into vai ; and that the engraver* did not complete the t;, and did not cut clearly 
the superscript e, of which some indications can be detected. 

„ SJ text line 37, for mum-kott=it=av[u*]d=avudu, read mum-kottad=avad-avudu. — Also, 
for Bana-Dinisala, read Ban-[a*]di-nikhila. I am indebted to the courtesy of 
Mr. H. Krishna Sastri for this, and for several other suggestions, some of which 1 
find it most convenient to acknowledge by connecting with them his initials in 
brackets. — J. F. F. 

„ 248, text line 42, for meyi-gaydane 5 , read meyi-g[e]ydane 5 ; and in note 5 substitute Read 
mey-geydane, which seems to mean, somehow or other, “ did be shrink ? ” 

,, in the latter part of note 4, substitute In what follows, read gay-gon<jane, for kay • 
gondane, hey-gondane, key-kondane . Are is are (4), 1 hesitation, doubt. * 

249, text line 52, for dole(li)t-asi, read d&r-lat-asi. — (H. K. S.) 

,, „ text line 62. — It might perhaps be better to take dkhyana as a mistake for dkhydfa, 

and, further on, to analyse the text into dhatri par-dhr%(hri)tey=dge. — (H. K. S.) 

„ 250, note 14, for yj-nn, read jirnn. 

252, text line 94, the correction of vakyamgalum into vakyaibgalam is not necessary.— 
(H. K. S.) 

„ u text line 99, for tavamdhiy=amt=am, read tavanidbiyam tam. — (H. K. S.) 

, ,, text line 100, for idir-erdda, read idir-erdl[u*]. — (EE. K. S.) 

255, line 1, “ the congregation (of S divas on the earth ) has be:n afflicted among the Jains 
and Buddhists.” There is a difficulty here in connection with the word utkata, 
qualifying samaya, which latter word may mean either ‘ congregation * or ‘ time/ 
Mr. H. Krishna Sastri considers that, instead of connecting utkafa with its 
meanings of 4 uneven, difficult ; intoxication, pride ; affliction/ it is better to take it 
in its meaning of 1 mad, furious/ In this case, the translation would be — “there 
became a mad or furious congregation or time among the Jains and 
Buddhists;” or freely, “ an opportunity arose for the Jains and Buddhists to 
become furious ( and aggressive ).” 

256, line 1, in accordance with the corrected reading in line 37 of the text , notified above, for 
the devout Ganas Bana and Dinisala, and so many others, read Bina and all the 
other numerous devout Ganas. 

„ „ line 16 ff., “ While the disciples were saying/' etc. Mr. H. Krishna Sastri has sent au 

interpretation of the first part of this verse, which has given the clue to a better 
rendering of it. Regarding are-gayi-goihdane and raeyi-gaydanpj see the 
corrections, notified above, for text line 42, and notes 4 and 5, on page 248. In 
gondane, nodidane, geydane, and jpdrdane. the e , e, is the particle of questioning, 
not of emphasis It is better to take kurpu in its meaning of 4 sharpness/ than in 
its meaning of valour/ The proper nominative for enutam is, of course, Rdmam. 



VIM 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V, 


And we must find the verb for bhaktar in badge , which, therefore, is not the dative 
of bal , 4 a sword,’ but is from bdl, as the later (and now customary) form of bdl , 

4 to live, to live prosperously, happily,’ with 90, an optional affix for the third person 
of the imperative. The translation, then, will be : — Did he hesitate ? ; did he 
draw the sword simply to gaze at it ? ; fearing the sharpness of it, did he shrink P ; 
did he look for calamity (i.e. did he anticipate evil in the shape of failure to win 
his wager) ? ; ( No 1 ; but), in the very act of saying 44 May ( all ) believers prosper !,” 
Rama, that man of ability, etc. 

Pasre 256, note 4, the folloicing may be added : — In line 24 of the T6rdal record of A.D. 1123 
(Ind. Ant. Vol. XIV. p. 17), mention is made of kadanguva Mari, u the raging 
Mari.*’ And in line 48 of a Balagami inscription of some date after A.D. 1054 
(P. S. O.-G. lasers. No. 158, and see Mysore Inscrs. p. 124), in a long and curious 
description of the five hundred Svomins of Ayyavole, we have the phrase hoha 
Mdriyafyh] challav-dduvarufn baha Mdriyan=idir-ggoluvarum, — “who make the 
departing Mari fiee confusedly in all directions, and who confront the coming Mari.” 

,, 257, line 10, in accordance with the corrected reading in line 52 of the text, notified above, 
for the friend of those vho swing the sword in adzing the wives of inimical kings, 
read whose friend (assistant) in seizing the wives of inimical kings is the sword 
of his arm which is (as lithe ) as a creeper. 

„ „ the last paragraph. If the alteration suggestedfor line 62 of the text, and noted above, 

is adopted, — (in favour of which it may be said that dhdtrtpa, with the long i, 

would be a more correct word for 4 king ’ than dhdtripa, with the short i), the 

translation would be ; — 44 When (many) kings, who were possessed of dory and 
renowned fame and valour, and whose prowess has been recited in stories, bad passed 
away in the lineage of the Chalukya kings which caused itself to be called the 
chief ornament of the Lunar Race, and when the earth had (for a time ) been 
seized by others, then Tailapa (II.), who may be called, ” etc. And. in that case, 
note 5, on page 257, should be cancelled. On the other hand, the actual reading is 

akhyana, not akhydta ; and a Tailapa — (who, however, mav be Taila I U.) was 

occasionally quoted as an instance; see the example giv»*n under surra 117 of 
Kesiraja’a Sabdamanidarpana, yi. 142, — 4fc the sword of the aim ot Tailapa caused 
itself to be called the ftudra who is the fire that is to destroy the scorll" 

„ 258, lines 14 to 16.— Mr. H. Krishna Sastri considers that, for 44 (to restrain him from 
altogether too excessive conquests),” we should adopt the explanation k * (flint is to 
say , tvas always holding him tight, dinging tightly to h*m, was always remaining 
with him,),” 

259, last line, and page 260, line 1,/or and, to shew that there is no doubt about this, lie 1 

quotes the sayings of Manu of former times, read, m accordance with the remark 
on line 94 of the text (see above), and the precepts of Maim have said, in former 
times, that there is no doubt about this being the case ; and cancel note 1 on 
page 260. 

260, line 10 f., for Saying “ (As) I am thus < - f nrioushj) a very treasury of austerities 

directed towards Hara, any small effort is n * (becoming to me),” Eama, etc., rout 
Having acquired a very treasury of austerities ir 'Tara (i.e., having practised -Teat 
austerities in his devotion to Hara). and having ( done so in such a ivaij that he ) 
caused it to be said that his zeal was not small, Hama, etc. 

» „ line 19.— Hr. H. Krishna Sastri remarks that it would be no credit, ft r-m the stand-point 

of a Hindu, to build a temple with contributions from kinzrs, and that the 
translation should be Not spending (in vain ) even so much as a hag a 2 which the 



ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS. 


ix 


devotees, standing in front (of 3 tea), gave with reverence for ( the building of) the 
temple, and not going- to the kings and with humility importuning them (for 
contribution -«), through the inexhaustible favour, etc. 

Page 263, text line G. — Mr. H. Krishna Sastri considers that it is not necessary to correct 
ddna-vidan into duaa-vidhan, which latter word assumes an adjective based upon 
ddna with vidhd in the sense of 'act. action.’ And duna-vida. with the meaning 
‘who has acquired (the habit of) giving’ or ‘who bestows gifts,’ can be justified by 
the analogous words k'-rti-vida, ‘a man who has acquired fame,’ and su vay d-v id a, 
1 one who has at t a ini d the prirno of life * (for these two words, see Kit tel* s 
Kannada- English Dictionary,) and the Yedic variiu-vid, ‘bestowing freedom, repose, 
treasures’ (see Monier- Williams’ Sanskrit Dictionary). 

„ ,, text lino 7, for noppada 13 purutara, read no[r*]ppad=ap[p*]=urutara ; and cancel 

note 13. — (H. K. S.). — It may be added that, as Kittel’s Dictionary does not give 
any forms from nofu or nbl introducing an r. perhaps we ought to consider that 
the text contains a mistake for nulpada, rather than for no/pada . 

„ 264, lines 18 to 21, in accordance with the corrected reading in line 7 of the text , notified 
aboie, read who K devoted to the water-lilies that are the feet of spiritual precep- 
tors, — who is a man possessed of the very greatest resoluteness such as is not seen 
anywhere else. 




EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


VOLUME V. 


No. 1.— THE ASOKA EDICTS OF PADERIA AND NIGLIVA. 

By G. Buhler, Ph.D., LL.D., C.I.E. 

T HE two new Asoka edicts of Paderia and Nigliva are edited here according to inked 
estampages, furnished by their discoverer, Dr. A. A. Fuhrer, who found the second in 
March 1895 and the first in December 1896. Both come from the Nepal Terai, where Nigliva is 
situated 38 miles north-west of the Uska Bazar station of the Bengal and North-Western 
Railway, in the Nepalese tahsil Taulihva of the zillah ButauU Paddria lies two miles north 
of the Nepalese tahsil Bhagvanpur of the same zillah, and according to Dr. Fiihrer’s estimate 
about thirteen miles from Nigliva. 8 Both are incised on mutilated stone pillars, and the 
Paderia edict, which was found three feet below the surface of the ground, is in a state of 
perfect preservation, while that of Nigliva has suffered a great deal on the left side and has 
lost the first five letters of line 3 as well as the first seven of line 4. 

The characters of the two edicts agree exactly with those of the north-eastern pillar- 
edicts of Radhia, Mathia and Rampurva. 3 And their language is the MSgadhi of the third 
century B.C., which i 3 found also in the other pillar-edicts, in the Kalsi, Dhauli and Jaugada 
versions of the rock-edicts, in the two Bairat and the Sahasram edicts, in the cave-inscriptions 
of Barabar, and in the Sohgaura copper-plate, and which may be recognised by the invariable 
substitution of la for ra and of na for na, by the nominatives singular in e , and by the word 
hida for idha. A peculiarity which re-occurs only in the north-eastern pillar-edicts, is the 
comparatively frequent shortening of final a in piyadasina y lajina t atana and kalapita. New 
words and forms, not found in the other Asoka edicts, are athabhagiye (Paderia, 1. 5), dgdcha 
(Paderia, 1. 2 ; Nigliva, 1. 3), ubalike (Paderia, 1. 4), usapdpife (Paderia, L 3; Nigliva, 1. 4), 
Bhagavath (Paderia, 1. 4), mahiyite (Paderia, 1. 2 ; Nigliva, 1. 3) and vigadabhi (Paderia, 1. 3), 
to which may be added the names of Konakamana (Nigliva, 1. 2), Lumminigdma (Paderia, 
1. 4) and Sakyamnni (Paderia, 1. 2). The wording of the two inscriptions agrees very closely, 
and leaves no donbt that they were incised at the same time. It makes also the restoration 
of the lost portions of the Nigliva edict easy and absolutely certain. 4 


1 See Dr. Fuhrer’s Annual Progrest Report for 1894-9o, paragraph 3. 

1 I take this and all other details about the localities from a memorandum, kindly furnished to me by 
l>r. Fuhrer, 

* Ep, Ind Vol. II. p. 245 ff. 4 below, p. 6, notes 1 and 2. 

E 



o 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


The great importance of the Paderia inscription for the topography of ancient India and 
the sacred history of the Bnddhists has been fully recognised by Dr. Fuhrer, who has 
discussed it in an article in the Pioneer of December 1896. 1 It fixes with absolute certainty 
the situation of the garden of Lumbini where according to the Buddhist tradition prince 
Siddhartha was bom. No adverse criticism can shake the evidence of the repeated assertion: 
“ Here Buddha Sakyamuni was born,” and : “ Here the worshipful one was born,” as well as 
of the mention of Lumminigama , the first part of which name agrees with Lumbini in accordance 
with the analogy of Pali amma for ambd and drammana for alambana . Even the possible, but 
a j priori improbable assumption that the pillar might have been brought to Paderia from some 
other place, is barred by the fact mentioned by Dr. Fuhrer, that the site is still called Eummin- 
d6i, and by the evidence of Hiuen Tsiang. The Chinese pilgrim, 2 as Dr. Fuhrer has duly 
noted, mentions the pillar as standing close to four Stupas, the ruins of which are still extant. 
He further says that it was broken in the middle through the contrivance of a wicked dragon ; 
and its upper part actually seems to have been shattered by lightning, which the Buddhists 
ascribe to the anger of the Nagas, called ‘ dragons 3 by the Chinese. If Hinen Tsiang omits to 
mention the inscription, the reason is no doubt, rs Dr. Fuhrer thinks, that it was covered at the 
time of his visit by an accumulation of debris. As stated already, it was found three feet below 
the ground, and the portion of the pillar which was visible on Dr. Fuhrers arrival, a piece only 
ninu feet high, is covered with pilgrims’ records, one of which was incised about A.D. 800. It is 
evident that the Asoka inscription must have been covered at least at that date. 

The Paderia edict, of coarse, fixes also the site of Kapilavastu and of the sanctuaries 
in its neighbourhood. Fahion says 3 that the Lumbini garden lies 50 li or, adopting Sir A. 
Cunningham’s reckoning, 4 8J miles east of the capital of the Sakyas, and Dr. Fuhrer has 
found its extensive ruins eighteen miles north-west of Paderia “ between the villages of Amauli 
and Bikuli (north-east) and Ramghat on the Banganga (south-west), ” covering a space 
seven miles long and from three to four miles broad. The country of the Sakyas, it now appears, 
has been looked for too far south by Sir A. Cunningham and his assistants. Sir A. 
Cunningham’s error has been caused by the vague statements of the Chinese pilgrims, who 
both say that in travelling from Sravasti to Kapilavastu they went south-east. As he had 
discovered by epigraphical evidence 5 6 the identity of Sravasti with the modern Set or Sahet- 
Mahet between Akaona and Balrampur, it was but natural for him to infer that Kapilavastu 
must lie either in the Basti district or in Gorakhpur. Nevertheless, the town lay milch further 
north, and it may be pointed out that its real position agrees with the hints, given in the 
Ceylonese canonical books. According to the Ambattha-Sutta 6 the banished sons of Ikshvaku 
or Okkaka settled yattha Jlimavantapasse pokharaniyd tire maha sakasando ; “ where there wa 3 
a great grove of sdka trees (Tectona grandis) on the bank of a lake (situated) on the slopes 
of the Himalaya. ” This description fits the Nepalese Terai better than the absolutely flat 
districts of Basti and Gorakhpur, 7 which are still some distance from the hills. The fact that 
the Sakyas were real jungle-Rajputs is not without importance for their history and the 
explanation of their curious customs. It makes their assertion that their ancestors were forcibly 


1 Compare also my remarks in the Anzeiger der phil.-hist. Classe der Wiener Ahademie, January 7, 1897, 

and M. Barth in the Journal des Savants y 1897, p. 65 ff. 

3 SiyuJci, Vol. II. p. 25. 3 Travels, p. 67 (Letrge). * Ancient Geography , p, 415 . 

* Arch. Survey Reports, Vol. I. p. 359 ; compare also the second inscription, found by Dr. Hoev 2nd Ant 

Vol. XVIII. p. 61 ft. 

6 Digha-N\kdya , iii. 1,15 (Vol. I. p. 92, of Bhys Davids and E. Carpenter’s edition). 

’ Imperial Gazetteer of India (1st ed.), Vol. I. p. 493 : “ It ( Hasti) has a mean height of only 326 feet 
above tae sea level and no natural elevations of any description divt.-r-ufy its surface.” Vol. III. p. 440 ; “ The 

district of Gorakhpur lies immediately south of the h>wer Himalayan slopes, but forms itself a portion of the 

great alluvial plain No greater e ; evatiou than a few sand hills breaks the monotony of its 

level surface.'” 



No. 1 .] 


THE ASOKA EDICTS OF PADERIA AND NIGLIVA. 


3 


ejected from the more civilised districts in the south very credible, though the tnzth of the 
cause of their banishment, stated in the Buddhist work quoted above, may be doubted. 
Further, their isolation in the jungles may have led, as the canon alleges, to their custom of 
endogamy, so repugnant to all Rajputs and to all the higher castes in India. And this custom, 
— not their pride of race, as they themselves asserted, — was no doubt the reason why the 
other royal families of Northern India did not intermarry with them. This isolation and the 
consequent estrangement from the rest of the Hindu population probably accounts also for 
their disinclination, mentioned in the Ambattha-Sutta , to show hospitality to the Brahmans 
who came to their settlement from Sravasti or other parts of India. Their religion, however, 
was Saivism and of the ordinary type of Hinduism. Hinen Tsiang 1 was still shown near the 
eastern gate of Kapilavastu the old temple of isvara, where the infant Siddhariha was 
taken by bis father, because “ the Sakya children who here seek divine protection always 
obtain what they ask.” According to the legend the stone image then raised itself and 
sainted the prince. Mr. Beal has correctly recognised that the scene is represented on the 
Amaravati Stdpa. The legend is therefore ancient and undoubtedly points to the conclusion that 
Siva was the huladevatd of the Sakyas. Perhaps Dr. Fiihrer will pay special attention to this 
temple, which certainly must be one of the oldest Sivite monuments of which we have 
knowledge and possesses great interest for the history of the Brahmanical religions. 

In addition to the ruins of Kapilavastu Dr. Fiihrer has also succeeded in tracing the site of 
Napeikia-Nabhika , 2 * the supposed birth-place of the mythical Buddha Krakuchehhanda, and 
of the Stupa of his Nirvana, which is still eighty feet high, exactly in the position indicated by 
Fahien, 5 viz . one yojana or 7 miles ” south-west of Kapilavastu. T^jie important sites of 
Ramagrama and of Rusinara, where Asoka’s pillar with an undated record of Sakyamuni’s 
Nirvana existed in Hiuen Tsiang’s time, will have to be looked for in the eastern portion of the 
Nepalese Terai. If the direction given by the Chinese, — east of Lumbini,— is correct, Kusinara 
cannot be identical with Kasia in the Gdrakhpur district, where Sir A. Cunningham and 
Mr. Carlleyle believed to have found its ruins. 

The value of the Nigliva edict for the history of Buddhism has been pointed out in my 
preliminary notice of the document. 4 As the Stupa of Konakamana was " increased M or 
enlarged for the second time in Asoka’s fifteenth year, it would appear that the monument had 
been erected before the beginning of the king’s reign, or before B.G. 259. Konatcamana or 
Konagamana belongs to the long series of purely mythical predecessors of the historical founder 
of Buddhism. The mythology of Buddhism must not only have been developed, but the 
myths must have been fixed locally, before it could occur to the Faithful to build Stupas in 
honour of their heroes. It seems difficult to believe that all these stages of the development 
could have been accomplished in a short time. As they had been completed in the first half 
of the third century B.C., it becomes probable that the origin of Buddhism lies very much 
earlier and that, therefore, it is impossible, as some scholars have done, to fix the Xin ana iu 
B.C. 350 or in B-C. 325. The remoter date, cir. B,C. 477, is, also on this consideration,^ the 
more probable one. I regret that, when writing my first notice, I overlooked that the Stupa, 
the pillar and its inscription are mentioned by Hiuen Tsiang in the Snjnki,^ Vol. II. p. 10. 
If I had noticed this, I might have announced at once that the site of Kapilavastu must 
be looked for in its neighbourhood. Dr. Fulirer, who years ago had shown Mr. Carlleyle’s 
identification of Bhuila with Kapilavastu to be erroneous, apparently found the passage and hence 
gave expression to the expectation of discovering the Sakya capital near Bhagvanpur in his 


1 Sit/vki, Vol. II. p. 23. 

J Kegarding this identification see the number of the An-eigerder [Ail. -hit. Cias'e der Wiener MaJemie. 
quoted above. 

8 Travel ? , p. 64 (Le^e). 

4 Wiener Zeitschrift fiir die Kunde des Uorgenlandes, \ o\. IX. p. 175 if. ; Academy I80u, April 27. 



4 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Progress Report of 1895-96. According to an article in tie Calcutta Englishman of June 1st 
and extracts in the Journal of the Mahdboihi Society , Vol. V. pp. 82 and 83, Dr. L. Waddell 
made the same discovery in 1896, published it in the Englishman , and applied for permission 
to proceed to Nepal. 

As regards Asoka’ s history, the two edicts inform us that in the twenty-first year of 
his reign he went on a pilgrimage to the sacred places of -the Buddhists situated in the 
extreme north. Very probably he visited on this occasion, as the legend in the Divydvaddna , 
p. 386 ff. (Cowell and Neil), asserts, not only the Stupa of Konakamana and the Lumbini 
garden, but also further east the site of Buddha’s Nirvana and Ramagrama, and further 
west Kapilavastu, the Stupas of Krakuchchhanda and the old town of Sravasti, in several of 
which localities, pillars with his inscriptions were extant in Hiuen Tsiang’s times. The 
Archmological exploration of the Nepalese Terai will bring certainty on this point. Asoka’s 
route from Pa$aliputra awards the Terai is perhaps marked by the series of pillars extending 
from Bakhra near Vaisali through Radhia and Mathia to Rampurva in the Champaran district, 
most of which were later on inscribed with the so-called pillar edicts. T.ae fact that Asoka 
undertook such a journey may be interpreted as indicating that he was at the time a 
believing Buddhist. But it may also be looked upon as one of the dhammaydtds which, as the 
eighth rock-edict says, he undertook regularly since the eleventh year of his reign in order to 
obtain enlightenment. 

The two edicts tend also to show that the Nepal Terai formed part of Asoka’s dominions. 
This is indisputable if the Paderia inscription declares that the king remitted the taxes of the 
village of Lummini. But even the mere fact that Asoka planted his pillars all over the Terai 
favours the view that it was subject to his rule. 


TEXT OP THE PADERIA EDICT, i 

1 Devfina-piyena Piyadasina l&jina-visativasabhisitena 

2 atana-agacha mahiyite hida-Budhe-jate Sakyamuni-ti 

3 sila-vigadabhi-cha kalapita siiathabhe-cha usapapite 

4 hida-Bhagavam-jate-ti Lumminigame ubalike-kate 

5 athabhagiye-cha [||*] 

TRANSLATION. 

King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, having been anointed twenty years, came [l] 1 2 
himself and worshipped [2], saying [3] : ** jlere Buddha Sakyamuni was born.” And he 
caused to be made a stone (slab) bearing a big sun (?)[4] ; and he caused a stone pillar to be 
erected [5]. Because here the worshipful on6 was born, the village of Lummini lias been 
made free of taxes and a recipient of wealth [6]. 

REMARKS. 

1. Agacha stands for PAli dgachcha , Sanskrit dgatya , and shows the substitution, frequent 
in the Prakrits, of a single consonant for a double one as well as the then necessary 
lengthening of a preceding short vowel. 

2. Mahiyite stands for mahiyitam. The construction is the bhdve praydga , and the literal 
translation : “ it has been worshipped,” or “ worship has been performed. M The verb mahiy in 
the sense of * to worship 9 occurs also in Sanskrit ; see the larger St. Petersburg Dictionary , s. v. 


1 The words connected by hyphens are written continuously in the text. 

2 The figures within crotchets refer to the remarks given below. 


Asoka Edicts in --Nepal. 


Paderia Pillar 




2 


from inked estampaqes by dr. a. fuhrer. 




No. L] THE ASOKA EDICTS OF PADER1A AND NIGLIVA. 


3. Tij rendered here by ‘saying/ may of course also be translated by ‘for ’ or ‘because.’ 

4. The translation of vigadabhi is not certain. It may be a word governing sild , and 
a technical term of unknown meaning. My translation is based on the supposition that it is 
a compound adjective, qualifying slid and equivalent to Sanskrit vikafdbhri. Vikafdbhrt might 
be represented in a Prakrit dialect of the Pali type by vigadabbhi , which would become 
vigadabhi according to the popular spelling of the edicts. For ga instead of ka occurs in 
Arhtiyoga (Kalsi edict ii. 1. 5, ed. xiii. 2, 1. 9) for Afhtiyoka (in the other versions), in loga 
(Jaugada sep. ed. ii. 1. 7) for loka , and in adfiigicha (Bairat i. 1. 6) for adhikritya. And da 
instead of ta is found in ambavadikd (Allahabad, queen’s edict) and ambaoadikyd (Delhi 
Sivalik pillar-edict vii. 2, 1. 2) for Pali ambavatikd , in Bhasikada (Cunningham, Sdnchi Stupa , i. 
No. 156) for °kata , and in apadihata on the Indo-Grecian coins for Pali apafihata and Sanskrit 
apratihata . If my transliteration vikatdbhri is correct, the second part of the word must be 
either abhri or abhra. The first will not do on account of its meaning, and the second will 
suit only if it is taken to mean ‘ the sun,’ which meaning is assigned to abhra in the Kdtas. 
A stone slab, bearing a large representation of the sun, might have been put up in the 
Lumbinl garden in order to indicate that Sakyamuni claims to be arkabandhu or ddityabandhu , 
a scion of the solar race of Ikshvaku. Professor Pischel, whom I consulted regarding the 
three difficult hapax legomena of this inscription, takes the word differently. He says : tl I 
suspect that vigadabhi is the Sanskrit vigardabht . According tc Hemochandra, ii. 37, 
gardabha becomes in Prakrit gaddaha or gaddaha . In Marathi it becomes gddhava and ia 
according to Molesworth also ‘ a term for a rude block or a rough stone.* Hence vigaddabhi 
might mean ‘finely wrought, polished/ or something like it. Literally it would be ‘not so 
uncouth as a donkey.’ ” 

5. Usapdpite is equivalent to Pali ussdpito and Sanskrit uchchhrdpitah . For the double 
pa compare likhdpdpitd , Delhi Sivalik pillar-edict vii. 2, 1. 10, and Pali viiindpdpeti, 

6. 1 here adopt M. Barth’s rendering, published in the Journal des Savaiits , 1897, p. 73. 
M. Barth explains ubalike , in accordance with a suggestion of M. Senart, as equivalent to 
Sanskrit * udbalikah and derives athabhdgiye from arthabhaga. The explanation of the second 
word is unobjectionable and is supported, as M. Barth points out, by the statement of the 
Divyauadana (p. 390), according to which ASoka presented on his visit to Lumbinivana one 
hundred thousand ( suvarnas ) to the people of the country. The identification of ubalike with 

* udbalikah, which was suggested to me also by Professors Leumann and Oldeuberg, offers some 
difficulties. Taken ps a Bahuvrihi compound, * udbalikah would mean udbhutah or udastah 
balih yasya sah , ‘rich in taxes’ or ‘with raised taxes/ in accordance with the analogy of 
utpaksha , utpuchchha / udagra , udambhas , etc. And as far as I know, there is no Bahuvrihi in 
which ut is used in the sense of mukta. Taken as a Tatpurusha, irregularly enlarged by the 
addition of ka, *udbali(ka ) must stand, aocording to the Edsika , loc. cit., for baleh utkrdntah , 
‘one who has left the taxes;’ compare also the numerous analogous compounds like uchchhrin * 
khala , utpuchchha , utsutra , udbila , udvdsa, unnidra , etc. The use of * udbalikah in the sense of 
‘exempt from taxes’ would therefore be unidiomatic, and it is not supported by any -analogies, 
as compounds like *utkara for akara or nishkara , * udrina for anrina or nirrina, and 

* uchchhulka are not found. Perhaps it will be better to explain ubalike , as Mr. Tawney has 
suggested to me, by # avabalikah or * apabalikah ; regarding the contraction of ava and apa to 
o, u or u in Pali, see E. Muller, Simplified Pali Grammar , p. 42 f. 

TEXT OP THE NIGLIVA EDICT. 

1 Devanam-piyena Piyadasina lajina-chodaaavasa . . t . n . 2 

2 Budnasa Konakamanasa thube-dutiyam vadhite 


1 See the Kdiikd on P4iiini, ti. 2, 196. 


1 Restore choda9avasdbhi$itena. 


6 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[VOL. V. 


3 . , , , sabhisitena^clia atana-agacha-mahijite 

4 papifce 2 [II*] 

TRANSLATION. 

King Piyadasi, beloved of the gods, having been anointed fourteen years, increased for 
the second time the Stupa of Buddha Kdnakamana [1] ; and having been anointed [twenty 
years], he came himself and worshipped ; [and] he caused [a stone pillar to be erected]. 

REMARK. 

1, With the form Kdnakamana for Pali Kondgamana compare Makd (Kalsi edict xiii. 2, 
1. 7) and Maka (Shahbazgarhi edict xiii. 1 . 10; for the Greek Magas , as well as Aintek'md 
(Girnar ed. xiii, 1. 8), Amtikini (Sh&hbazgarhi ed, xiii. 1. 10) and Amtekine (Kalsi ed. xiii. 2, 
1 . 7) for the Greek Antigenes , 


No. 2. — YEKKERI ROCK INSCRIPTION OF THE TIME OF PULIKESIN II. 

By J. F. Fleet, Ph.D., C.I.E. 

Yekkeri is a village about four miles towards the north by east from Saundatti, the 
chief town of the Parasgad taluka of the Belgaum district. The record is engraved on a 
rock in a glen, somewhere about a mile or a mile and a half to the north-east of the village. 
The existence of it was brought to my notice in December, 1894, by Yehkangauda bin 
Yellapagauda, of the neighbouring village of Hull. I edit it from ink-impressions which 
Dr. Hultzsch was kind enough to obtain for me. 

The whole writing covers an area about 7' 2" broad by 3' 11 * high. About two feet of 
the breadth, however, are occupied by the benedictive and imprecatory verses, which starid 
on the proper right of the essential part of the record : to avoid reducing the scale of the 
collotype too far, it has not been thought necessary to include them in the Plate ; but the 
mi of bhumi, line 13, is discernible just before the commencement of line 3; and the marks 
below it represent, imperfectly, parts of the word phalam, lino 14. — The characters are 
of the regular type, for the locality, of the period to which the record refers itself, viz, the 
first half of the seventh century A.D. ; and they are boldly formed and well cut. They 
include numerical symbols in lines 5, 7, 8. 3 The size of the ordinary letters ranges from §* 


1 Restore e tsaiivasabhisitena. At the beginuing of the line a remnant of the long t seems to be visible, and 

so is a portion of the fourth letter. 

3 Restore silathabe-cha usapdpite, according to the Paderia edict. 

3 In line 5 we have, for ‘four,’ the symbol which Pandit Bhagwanbl Indraji has given in Ind . Ant. Vol, VI. 
p. 44, col. 4, from the Gupta records; but it seems pronounceable as pka or pkra rather than nka. — In the 
same line we have, for ‘ five,* the symbol which the Pandit has given in col. 5 of his Table (see the central one of 
the three forms) from the Valabbi plates ; be admitted that it looks like ni (as it does here), but held that it is 
only a corruption of trd. It must be noted that, in the collotype published herewith, the symbol has not come out 
well from the ink -impression — (on the whole, the better of the two) — which I selected for reproduction ; the lower 
side-stroke, to the right from the bottom part of the akshara , shows only faintly : in the other impression, the 
akshara is quite clear and unmistakable ; and thei 5 it distinctly reads as nd , — In the same line, again, *.ve have, 
for 1 eight,* a symbol which, in the side-stroke to the loft from the top of the akshara, in the down-stroke on the 
right from the end of the top-stroke, and in the line across the ceutre of the body of the akshara , differs a good 

deal from any of the forms given by the Pandit and interpreted by him a shra or hrd. In line 7 we have, for 

* fifty / a symbol from which the symbol given by the Pandit in col. 5 of bis Table, from the Valabhi plates, may 
very easily have been derived by corruption. But, whereas he held that his symbol is a corrupted form of the 
anunasika, turned the wrong way, we seem to have here clearly the akshara bat. And I notice that Mr. Bend&II 


No. 2.] 


YEKKERI INSCRIPTION OP PULIKESIN II. 


7 


(in the pa of nrupa , line 1) to (in the bha of bhagavato , line 4). The Sri of 
rdjya-Srt , line 2, is high. — The language is Sanskrit ; and, except for the two bene- 
dictive and imprecatory verses, the whole record is in prose. The record was composed, 
however, by someone who had a very imperfect knowledge of the language, and who could 
neither construct his sentences properly nor even spell correctly. I have noted, in and below 
the text, a few corrections of the more simple kind. But, from udita , line 1, to rdjye , line 4, the 
whole text requires emendation : either the whole must be turned into a compound, — in which 
case, we must read (line 2) pritkivi-svami , and (line 3) prithivy-apratiratha and Srimat ; 
or else maharaja (line 4) must be turned into the genitive, mahdrdjasya , and we must read 
(line 1) prasutasya and bhutasya , (line 2) svdminah and rdjya-Sriyah, and (line 3) 
mandalasya , apratirathasya t and Srimatah . — In respect of orthography, the only point 
calling for special notice is the unnecessary insertion of the anusvdra before the nasals in 
va?hnsa t line 1 (twice), sdmaihnta and mamrtdala , line 3, pa?hiicha y lines 5 and 6, pumnyam , 
lines 6 and 9, pamhohdSat, line 7, and vasumndhard/n , line 16. 

The inscription refers itself to the reign of the Western Chalukya king Pulikesin 
II.i It is dated in one of his regnal years ; but all that can be made out here is a numerical 
symbol which, if we contrast it with the symbol for 1 eight ’ which we have iu line 5, must, I 
suppose, be interpreted as meaning * six:* just before it, there is an illegible akshara f which may 
be either the syllable ni or nam of samvatsarani or saihvatsardndj'n , or a numerical symbol 
meaning ‘ ten, T ‘twenty, 7 or some higher figure : the date mentions also the full-moon, tithi 
of the month Karttika ; but it does not include any details that admit of calculation. The 
object of the inscription was to record that certain lands, in certain towns, were the 
property of the god Mahadeva (Siva). 

Mention is made of villages or towns named Benira, Dhutipura, and Agariyapura, and 
perhaps Krishnapura ; but these places cannot now be traced on the map. 

***** 

About four feet away to the left of the above record, there is engraved on the rock, in 
similar characters, another inscription, of four short lines, covering an area about 2' 0" broad 
by 1' 10" hmb. The first line of it is illegible. The remainder speaks of four nivartanas 
of land at a place named, apparently, Sindavalaga. 

TEXT. 2 

1 Om 3 Svasti Anuruddha-shurit 4 -6dita-nra(nri)pa-vamhsa-prasuta sva-varimsa- 
lla(la)lama-bliuta daksbinapatha- 

has found la used to denote ‘ fifty ’ in a syllabic system iu Malabar which has survived to even the present century 
(Jvur R A Soc. 1896, p. 739 ft.) — I.t line 8 we have a symbol to which the closest resemblance that can be detected 
in the Pandit’s Table is’to be found iu the centre one of the three symbols for • eight > given in bis col. 5, from the 
Valubhi plates (it mast be noted that the faint line upwards from the right end of the lower part of the body of 
the akshara , which npnears in the collotype published herewith, is dne to a depression in the stone; it is not an 
engraved part of the akshara). But, in the fa*e of the symbol for ‘eight’ which we have in line 5, it cannot be 
taken as meaning • eight.’ And I can only take it as a symbol for ‘sir,’ approximating to the symbol for that 
numeral given bv the Pandit in col. 3 of Ids Table, from the Kshatrapa coins and inscriptions. The Pandit 
considered that hi's forms of the symbol for ‘ eight ’ are the akshara hra or kr4 ; and that 1 six ’ is phra or phra. or 
some other akshara containing ph. Here, in th.s record, the akshara closely resembles ha ; as it also does, to my 
eves it, the form given by the Pandit in his detailed account of the symbol for ‘eight’ (foe. cit. p. 46): and 
Mr. Bendall gives ha for ‘ six ’ in the svllab.c system of Malabar described by him. 

i X)lnt the king mentioned is Pulikesin II.,— not his grandfather, of the same name,— is shewn by, among 

Other things, the use of the title Maharaja. 

» From the infe-im, -ression. S Represented by a , latn symbol. 

4 R 0fU l durit.— As regards the following portion of tne text, as far as r&jyi, line 4, see the introductory 

remarks. 


8 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


2 pri(pri)thivya[h*] svami chatur-udadhi-mekhal-oparjjita-rajya-sri pratap-attisay- 

opanatah || 

3 samagra^-samamnta-mamndala pri(pri)thivyam=apratiratha s rim am Satyasraya- 

Pulekesi-vallabha- 

4 m a h ara j a-ra jy e varttamane likhitam=iti [I*] Benire bhagavatG Mabadevasya 

Divarttanani 

5 chatvari 4h || Dhuti-pure nivarttanani ashta 8h 1| Agariya-pure 

niva[rttana]ni pamncha 5 2 

6 panasa-vriksha paiiinchah 3 Jj Krishn6(sh.u.e) Harasena-inatapitro[h*] pnmny-opa- 

cbayaya De(?)varo(?)Iaka- 

7 bhu my ams=c ha 4 nivarttanani pathncliasat 50 || Yinita-vidagdha-Vaisikacharyy^na 

stbapita . . gbita [||*] 

8 Karttikasya purmimasam 5 likkita prasast=iti 6 || Samvatsara . • 6 7 

rajya iti [II*] 

9 ts[a*]nena iikhita [||*] Yad=atra pumnyam [ta]d=bhavatu s . * 

• « • • 

10 gane [||*] 

11 [Ba]hubhir 9 =vvasudha bhukta 

12 .... na 10 Sagar-adibhi[h*] 

13 [yas]y[a] yasya yada bhurni- 

14 s=tasya tasya 11 tada pbalam [||*] 

15 Sva-duttarii para- Tilsit] t |_am] va 
1G y o hareta va[sujmndharam 

17 shashti-varsha-sa]hasrajni 

18 narakC paripacbyate || 

19 S]vja.sty=a[j>tu lc]khnka-vachaka$ya 12 

TRANSLATION. 

0m ’ Hail 1 The reign being current of the Maharaja, the glorious Satyasraya- 
Pulekesin (II.), the favourite, v.dio lias been born in a race of princes who rose to the front by 
ronfi mtiug difficulties, who has become the forehead-ornament of his race, who is the lord of the 
( enuutrv of tli * region of the south, who has acquired the sovereignty over the (whole 
rarth) giit about bv the four oceans, who has bowed down the entire group of chieftains by the 
excess of ihi*') prowess, (and) who has no antagonist (of equal power ) in the world, 13 — if is 
written as follows : — 

To the divine fgod) Mahadeva there belong four, (or in figures') 4, nimrtanas (of land) at 
(the village of) Benira ; eight, 8, nirartanas at the town of Dhutipura ; five, 5, nivartanasy 


I Head dtiiay-opanata-gamagra. 3 See page 6 above, note 3 3 head paiicha. 

4 Head bhiimydm cha . 6 Read pnrrm^mdstfd m. 

r Read praSasttr- di. t See pajre f> ab >ve, no f o 3. 

" The va of this word wns at first omitted, and then was inserted below the line. 

- M**tre : Sloka (Annshtnhh) ; and in the following verse 
10 Perhaps rdjdnah , by mistake for rdjahhih, whs engraved here. 

II There a?e two aksharas below th® ta of this word. The first of them is What the other is, cannot 

be made out 1 hey have no connection with the text 

12 Ite^d ISkhaJca-vdrhakdbhydm. 

u This was an E?rlv Oapta epithet; gee, e o.j Qup f a TTircrirffionv, p. 14, and note 4. Tn rhe Western 
Ch.dukva records, it occurs also in Hue 5 of the Kaira grant of Vijayavarmarij.i of A D 643 {Ind. Ant. Vol. VII. 
P 248). 



Yekkeri Rock Inscription of the time of Pulikesin II 



w 


oo 


o 




No. 3.] 


inscriptions at managoli. 


tr T’ at the t0Wn ° f ; and, at (? the town named) Krishna- 

2“"?’ * y ! ’ n ! va ' tanas “ land called Devarolaka-bhumi (?), (which were granted ) for 

Etl °° ° f ^ llg ‘° ns ment for the parents of Harass a. (And) by the refined and clever 
vaisikacharya there has been set up . 

(Line 8.)— (This) pradasti has been written on the full-moon tithi of (the month) Kftr- 
leTit be 9 year 6 m th0 reiSn ‘ 3 W r ‘ tten ^ Whatever “HPoa. merit there is in this, 


(L. 11.)— The earth has been enjoyed by many [kings], commencing with Sagara ; whoso- 
ever at any time possesses the earth, to him belongs, at that time, the reward (of making the 
grant that is now recorded if he continues it) ! Whosoever confiscates land that has been given 
whether by himself or by another, he is cooked in hell for sixty thousand years ! Hail to the 
writer and the reader ! 


No. 3. — INSCRIPTIONS AT MANAGOLI. 

By J. F. Fleet, Ph.D., C.I.E. 

Managoli 1 * 3 is a village about eleven miles to the north-west of Bilge wildi, the chief town 
of the Bagewadi taluka of the Bijapur district. With the difference of the lingual n for the 
dental n, its name occurs in the ancient records as Manigavalli ( e.g., A. below, lines 18, 19) and 
ManimgavalU ( e.g ., ibid, line 17) ; and we also have the Sanakritised f orm Manikyavalli , “ the 
village of rubies ” (e.g., ibid . line 20). From A. below, lines 18, 24, we learn that it was in the 
group of towns and villages which was known as the Tarda vadi thousand, and which took 
its nz^me from a town that is now represented by the small village of Taddow&di,— the 
* Tuddehwarree’ and ‘ Tudewadee * of maps, — on the south bank of the Bhima, in the Jndi 
taluka, about thirty-seven miles to the north of Bijapur. 4 And line 54 of the same record 
mentions it as an agrahdra ; in consequence of which we may perhaps reckon it among ** the 
eighteen agrahdras ” which are spoken of in other records. 5 

The records at Managoli are on stone tablets which have been built into the walls of a 
modern temple of Hanumat. I edit them from ink-impressions made by my own mam 


A. — Of the time of Bijjala; A.D. 1161. 

The writing of this record covers an area about 2’ 10" broad by 4' 65* high. From 
the beginning of line 36 to the centre of the last line, there is a fissure by which the tablet has 


1 The word Kfishni{»hni) seem* to stand by mistake or ellipsis for Krisknapure . 

* Or, perhaps, “ the year 16, or 26,” etc. ; see page 7 above. 

* The* Mungo lee * of the Indian Atlas, sheet No. 57. 

« See Ind . Ant. VoL XIX. p. 269. 

1 e.g., Ind. Ant. Vol. X. p. 163, and Yol. XII. p. 47. — They appear to have been towns nf religions 
importance, scattered over the Kanarese country. Hdli, in the Belgium district, ww one of them ; nnd Nargnnd, 
in Dh&rw&r, was another. Other* perhaps, were Pambal in DbArwir, Knroet in Belgauin, and Honw&d in 
Bijipur. 


C 



10 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Yol. Y. 


been broken into two pieces : but even along this fissure there are but few letters that have been 
destroyed ; and the rest of the record is in a state of very good preservation.— The sculptures 
above it, at the top of the tablet, are, in the centre, a linga , with the sun and moon above it ; 
on the proper right, a seated figure; and, on the proper left, a crooked sword, dagger, or knife, 
and a cow and calf. — The characters are Kanarese, of the regular type of the period to 
which the record refers itself ; and they are well formed and well executed throughout. They 
include decimal figures in lines 39, 43, 46, and 60, and the distinct form of the lingual d all 
through : the virdma is represented .sometimes by its own proper sign, as in satiyol , line 4, 
ddal , line 8, tiruvar, line 46, nadasal , line 64, sthaladal , line 66, and samayamgal, line 67, 
and sometimes by the sign for the letter u, as in pogalaln, line 17, mathadalu, line 44, and 
kayyalu, line 52; cases in which the two methods of expressing it are pointedly contrasted, 
are, enal and enal\ i, lines 24 and 30, and padaval , mudal f badagal , padavalxx , mudalu , and 
badagalu., lines 42, 47, and 43. The size of the letters ranges from about f 7 to f 7 . — The 
language is Kanarese. 1 There are ordinary verses in lines 1 to 35, and some of the customary 
benedictive and imprecatory verses in lines 55 to 59. We have the nominative plural ending 
in u, as in the modern or colloquial form of the language, in aynurvvaru , line 24, where 
the. metre shews that the u is to be pronounced ; and with this we have to contrast the archaic 
or stilted form samayamgal , in line 67 : cases in which it is not certain whether the u is to be 
prononnced, or whether it represents the virdma , are illustrated by pamditaru , line 50, and 
koffaru, line 67, as contrasted with pamditar, line 51, and kottar , line 67. The accusative singular 
neuter in v occurs in gokulavam, line 59 ; but, otherwise, the archaic form in m appears 

throughout, as in jasaman, line 27, dspadamam , line 32, haumdramam, line 44, and 

dharmmamam , line 54. — In respect of orthography, the only points that call for special notice 
are (1) the use of ri for ri, throughout, as in alamkriti, line 3, and nripatige , line 7 ; (2) the 

use of b for v in sebyam, line 24, and dibya, line 31 ; and (3) an affected use of the 

Dra vidian l in Chalukyar : line 5, and alarhkdrav , line 24. 

The inscription is a record of the time of the Kalachurya king Bijjala. Before, 
however, it proceeds to recite certain donations made in his reign, it makes reference, in lines 
1 to 59, to certain events of the time of the Western Chalukya king Perma-Jagadekamalla 
n. In that part of the record, after some introductory genealogical and historical matters, 
a register is made of certain grants which were bestowed by Perma-Jagadekamalla II. himself, 
and by other people, on the god Siva, in the form of the local god Kalidevesvara, — “ the 
Siddhalinga of the south,” — of Manigavalli. The introductory part mentions a person named 
lsvaraghaUs§sa, of the Harita gotra (line 16), who, it asserts, was a Jagadguru or leading 
pontiff in the time of the Western Chalukya king Taila II., and was endowed by that 
king, at his coronation, with the town of Manimgavalli ; and in the lineage of this person 
it places a certain Madhava (line 20), who is to be identified with the Madiraja (line 37) 
who held the post of Afahaprabhu of the village at the time when the grants were made. 
Its further tells us that the temple of Kalidevesvara had been built by a certain Basava (line 
28) or Basavarasayya (line 30), son of Chandra or Chandiraja and Chandrambike (line 28), 
who belonged to the Kasyapa gotra (line 25) and was one of the five-hundred Mahajanas or 
Brahmans 2 of Manigavalli. And the occurrence of the names of Basava and M&diraja 
in this Saiva record from the neighbourhood of Bagewadi, and in connection with the foundation 
and endowment of a Ztw^a-temple which was evidently of some considerable size and 
repute, is rather suggestive of our having at last met with an epigraphic mention of the 


1 From line 42 onwards, there occur various technical terms and other words (some of them to be found 
in other records also), which are not given in dictionaries, and the meanings of which cannot at present be made out. 

* Comparison of the expressions Mahdjanamgabaaynurvvara, lines 20,21, und mikidicarkkal*aijnurvT)ar%, 
lines 23,24, shews that the Mahdjanas of a rillage — (a technical expression which occurs m many records)— were 
the collective body of the BrAb roans of the vilkge. 



No. 3.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT MAN AGO LI. 


11 


original of that Basava who, according to the Lingayat traditions as embodied in the Basava- 
Purana and Channabasava- Purdna, was bom at Bagewadi to a Saiva Brahman named Madiraja, 
and subsequently, becoming the prime-minister of the Kalachurya king Bijjala, overthrew the 
Jains, revived Saivism, and established the sect of Vira-Saivas or Lingayats. The remainder 
of the record, line 59 to the end, refers to the reign of the Kalachurya king Bijjala ; and 
it registers a variety of grants made by various persons to the same god Kalid6v6svara. 

The record contains two dates,. As the first date (lines 38-40), for the donations that were 
made before the time of Bijjala, it cites the tenth tithi, coupled with Thursday and the winter 
solstice, of the bright fortnight of the month Pausha of the Dnndubhi samvatsara, which was the 
fifth year of the reign of Perma-Jagadekamalla II. The given samvatsara was Saka-Samvat 
1065 current. And this date does not work out correctly. The tithi ended, at about 14 hrs. 
2 min. after mean sunrise (for Bombay), not on a Thursday, but on Tuesday, 29th December, 
A.D. 1142; and this was four days after the winter solstice, which, as represented by the 
Makara-samkranti or passage of the sun into Capricornus, occurred at about 3 hrs. 8 min,, again 
not on a Thursday, but on Friday, 25th December. There must, therefore, have been some 
mistake made, either in taking the date from the archive from which the material for this part 
of the record was derived, — (the characters shew that the whole record was put on the stone 
at one and the same time, by one and the same hand), — or else in the original computation of 
the date. 1 The second date (lines 59, 60; is the sixth tithi , coupled with Tuesday, of the dark 
fortnight of the month Bhadrapada of the Vishu samvatsara , 3 which was the sixth year of the 
reign of Bijjala. The given sam v a tsar a was Saka-Samvat 1084 current. And the corresponding 
English date is Tuesday, 12th September, A.D. 1161, on which day the given tithi, of the 
avndnta Bhadrapada, ended at about 18 hrs. 8 min. after mean sunrise. In line 64, the tithi is 
mentioned by the technical name of kapila-chatti. 

****** 

In lines 67, 68, mention is made of a festival called nula-parvan. The reference must be 
to the nula-hunnuve or full-moon of the month Sravana. And it may be useful to give here 
the Kanarese names of all the full-moons and new-moons, as given to me on three or 
four different occasions, with the explanations of them as far as they can be determined at 
present. 3 As will be seen further on, there are references to some of these special names in 
other epigraphic records. 

The month Chaitra ; March- April.— The full-moon is called davanada-hunnuve because, 

I am told, on this day the people place the fragrant leaves of the davana- plant on the images 
of the god Mallikarjuna of Srisaila. 6 — The new-moon is called akshatadige-amavase ; because 


1 The full descent of the reigning king is not given. But the use of the style Pratdpa-ChaJcravartin 
(line 36) stamps him as Perma-Jagadekamalla II.— On the chance, however, that the record, which is not a contem- 
poraneous one, makes a mistake between him and his ancestor who had the samp biruda, I have calculated the date 
for also Saka-Samvat 945 current, in the reign of Jagadekamalla-Jayasimha II. But here, again, the details do 
not work out correctly. In that year, the given tithi ended, not ou a Thursday, but on Wednesday, 5th December, 
A.D. 1022, at about 18 hrs. 36 min. after mean sunrise; and this was eighteen days before the Makara- 
samkr&nti, which occurred at about 1 hr. 56 min., again not on a Thursday, but ou Monday, 24th December. 

1 The original has Visha, by mistake for Visha.— Monier- Williams’ Sanskrit Dictionary does not recognise this 
name of the samvatsara (the fifteenth in the cycle), and gives only the name Vpaha. But Kittel’s Kanuada- 

English Dictionary gives Visha as the name current in Mysore ; the same name is given by C. P. Brown in his 

Carnatic Chronology ; and it occurs in other records also from the Kanarese country. 

1 The line of inquiry is an interesting one. And I hope that, now that attention is drawn to it, other scholars 
may be able to throw more light on it. 

4 Instead of hunnuve and amavase, the rustics generally nse the word habha, ‘ festival.’ 

* Reeve and Sanderson’s Canarese Dictionary mentions {s.r>. davana ) the davanada-habba, davanada-lvrynijnt, 
hut, overlooking the reference to the fall-moon, explains it as “a feast on the twelfth lunar day, when the above 
fragrant shrub is in perfection.’ * 

c 2 



12 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V. 


it is followed, on Vaisakha sukla 3 ( tadige = tritiyd), by the festival called akxha-tarfige, i.e. 
akshaya-tritiyd or aksliayya-iritiyd . l * This new-moon name occurs in records of A.D. 1054 
and 1195 (see page 14 below). 

Vaisakha; April-May. — The full-moon is called agi-huunuve ; apparently because the 
time then arrives for transplanting the seedlings (agi) of rice, tobacco, pepper, etc. — The new- 
moon is called badami -amavase ; because, it is suggested, worship is then done to the goddess 
Banasumkari of the well-known temple two or three miles south of Badami ia the Bijapur 

district. 

Jyaishtha ; May-Jane. — The full-moon is called kara-hunnuve ; from kdru , “the rainy 
season,” which commences in this month. On this fall-moon day there is celebrated the festival 
■ailed kari ha.rhjuva habba, when bullocks are raced, — the winner being the one that first 
reaches and breaks a string of leaves drawn across the course, — in order to obtain an augury as 
the prospects of the season. 3 * * * * 8 — The new-moon is called mannettina-amavase ; because the 
prop!. P'ea make clay images of bullocks (mann-ettu), and worship them. 

Astudha ; June-July. — The full-moon is called icadlegadabina-lmnnuve. Two explana- 
tions arc suggested : one, that the people then make cakes ( kadabu ) of gram ( kadle , kadale) and 
offer them to the goddess Yellamma ; the other, that the cultivators then decorate the necks of 
their bullocks with strings of such cakes. — The new-moon is usually called n a gara- amavase ; 
because it is followed, on Sravana sukla 5, by the ndga-panchami, when worship is done to the 
cobra (ndgjby ndgara-hdvu). But it appears to be also sometimes known as Divas i -amavase ; 
because, it is said, girls, after marriage, then worship images of a goddess named Divasi- 

Sravana; July- August. — The full-moon is called nula-hunnuve ; because on this day 
the ceremony is annually performed of renewing the sacred thread ( nulu , otherwise called 
jam' 'dra, and in Sanskrit yajndpavita ). — The new-moon is called chauti -amavase ; because it is 
followed, on Bhadrapada sukla 4 (chauti, chavuti, = chaturthi ), by the Ganesa-ckaturthi , when 
worship is done to the god Ganesa. For the same reason, it is sometimes called benakana- 
amavase; Benaka being a corruption of Vinayaka, one of the names of Ganesa. 

Bhadrapada; August-September. — The full-moon is usually called anantana-hunnuve ; 
because the preceding day is the ananta-chaturda'si, which, Molesworth’s Marathi Dictionary 
says, is sacred to the god Vishnu, in the form of Ananta. It seems to be sometimes also called 

1 Kittd's Kannud i- English Dictionary explains the aksha~triUye y as it ia there called, as a Saiva feast on 

Chaitra sukla 3. But Ganpat Krishnaji’s Pahckahg and the Patwardhani Panchdhg place the feast on Vai&ikba 

sukla 3; so, also, Monier- William / Sanskrit Dictionary, which explains it {s.v. akshaya) as “a festival, the thim 

dav of the bright half of Vaisakha, which is the first day of the Satya-yuga, and secures permanency to actions 

then performed ; ** so, also, Reeve and Sanderson’s C^narese Dictionary, which. ex v la in a it (s.v. akxha-tadige) as 

“a ceremony, in the second Hiudd month, on the third lunar day, of married women, who bathe, present to each 

“other turmeric, betel nut and fruit, and then make an offering of flowers, etc., to Gauri” 

8 This fe>tival is described in the Basava-Purdna (see the Rev. G, VVurth’s translation. Jour. Bo. Br. B. As. 
iSoc, Vol. VIII. pp. 90, 91) : it is there placed on the full-moon of the third month of the Hindi! year (*.c. 
Jvaishtha) ; and we are told that, if a black bullock breaks the string, all sorts of leguminous fruits will succeed, 
while if a white bullock breaks the string, the white millet will thrive. — Kittel, also, in bis Kannada- 
English Dictionary, s.v. kdru , places it on the kdra-hunnuve in the third month. Under the word kari (3), 
* unpropitiousness/ he explains that kari hari means *• to tear, i.e. do aw*y with, unpropirionsness ; an act that, 
*• on a certain dav (kdra-hvnnive) ia repiesented by throwing an iron ball, that is attached to a rope, overa 
“fdrana, and thus pulling down the Mrafw, when the ornamented bullocks of the place, that previously bad 
«• passed under the (Oran's, are playfully driven about.” But the ceremony described in the Basava- Purdna 
is the one with which I am familiar : except that the divination seems to be more directed to the comparative 
prospects of the early and Ute crops ; the idea being that, if a white bullock is the winner, the Inter crops will 
be the better, whereas, if a bullock of another colour wins, the early crops will give the better yield.— Reeve ami 
Sanderson's Ganarese Dictionary, s.v. kari , explains the festival as “a ceremony of breaking in two, by bullocks 
or other means, the triumphal arch of a pate way, the day after pohgai -feast,” and thus (»ee KitteBs Dictionary. 
s.v. pohgalu ) would place it the day after the Makara-samkrinti, in the month Pausha. 



No. 3.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT MANAGOLI. 


13 


jokytoa-hunnuve ; but I have not obtained the explanation of this. — The new-moon is called 
navaratri-amavase, or mahanavami-amav&se ; because it is immediately followed, on Asvina 
sukla 1, by the nine-days festival ( nava-rdtri ) of the goddess Durga, ending with the dasard- 
boliday on the ninth day which is called muha-navami, “the great ninth tithi .'* 1 

Asvina; September-October. — The full-moon is called sigi-hunnuve ; because, it is said, 
on this day the people worship the goddess Gauri under the name of Sigi-Gauri. 2 It appears 
to have been called in ancient times herjuggiya-hunnuve, “the full-moon of the principal 
harvest- time M (see page 15 below). — The new-moon is called dipavali-amav&se, or 
divalige-'imavase ; because during the same or the immediately following night there is the 
dipdvali, diralt, or divalige festival of lamps, when the houses and streets are illuminated. 

Karttika ; October-November. — The full-moon is called gauri -hunnuve ; because, it is 
said, on this day worship is done to the most honoured form of the goddess Gauri, as Hire- 
Gauri, “the great or original Gauri.” — The new-moon is called chatti-amav&se ; because it 
is followed, on Margasirsha sukla 6 (chatti shashthi ), by the champd-shashthi , when, accord- 
ing to Molesworth’s Marathi Dictionary, there is a festival of the god Khandoba or Khanderao, 
an incarnation of Siva. 

Margasirsha ; November-December. — The full-moon is usually called hostala- 
hunnuve ; because thresholds ( hostalu ) are decorated and worshipped on this day. But it 
<eems to be sometimes also called rande-hunnuve ; in some connection, it is said, with the 
goddess Yell am ma as a widow (rande ). — The new-moon is called yella-amavase ; because it 
stands next before the Makara-samkranti or winter solstice, in celebration of which complimen- 
tary packets of sesaraum seeds ( ellu , yellu) are sent about to friends and acquaintances. 3 

Pausha ; December- January. — The full-moon day is called banda-hunnuve, or banada- 
hunnuve ; either, it is suggested, because the trees of the forests ( bana , vana) begin to sprout 
at about this time, or because ou this occasion there is another festival of the goddess 
Baoasarhkari of the well-known temple near Badanu.— The name of the new-moon has been 
given to me as avartra-amavaso, avatra-amavas^, and avar&fcri-amsvaso ; 1 have not 
succeeded in obtaining any explanation of the name, or even in determining the exact form 
of it. 

Magba ; January- February. — The fall-moou is usually called bh&rata-hunnuve, or 
sometimes bharati -hunnuve ; apparently in some connection either with the public reading 
of the Mahdbhdrata , or with some worship of the goddess Bharati (Sarasvati). It appears, 
however, to be also known as gudi-hunnuve ; because, it is said, the people imagine that 
on this day the gods go from the temples (gudi) to the houses of their worshippers, who, 
accordingly, welcome them during the night with shouts of “ the gods have come,” and with 
the sounds of gong3 and other musical instruments. 4 — The new-moon is called sivar^tri- 
amav&se ; because°just before it there is the well-known great festival called muha-sirardtri 
in honour of the god Siva. In the twelfth century A.D., this new-moon was called k&man- 
amavase, “ the new-moon of Kama ” (see page 15 below) ; evidently in connection with the 
ensuing fcoZi-festival of Kamadeva, the god of love, which ends with the burning of an effigy of 


1 Kittel’s Knnnnda-English Dictionary, s.v. ellu, would give this new-moon the name of ella-amat>d*e, with 
the explanation that the manes are worshipped on this day. The manes are worshipped with se<amum seeds (elU), 
I think. But ella-amaod*e is given to me,— and correctly, I believe,— as the name of the new-moon of M4rea4ir»ha. 

a I cannot verify this in auy way. And it seems more likely that the name has some connection with the 
ripening: of the pods of the ^ye-shrub, which are used like soap for washing the hair, etc. 

« As already remarked (note l above), Kittel’s Kannada- English Dictionary, #.*. ellu, gives the ye\l*-amavd" 
as the name of the new-moon of Bhadrapada . 

♦It may be noted that Kittid’s Dictionary, *.t>. gudi (1), gives the meaning of “ a pole erected on the 
newWs dsy before the louse-door; the festival competed with it (Marithi gUkt).- The day, however, 
is a different one. 



14 


EP1GRAPHIA JKDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


him in commemoration of his having been reduced to ashes, by the flames from the third eye 
in the forehead of the god Siva, when he was trying to inspire Siva with love for Parvati. 

Phalguna ; February-March. — The full-moon is usually called holi-hunnuve ; in connec- 
tion with the TmZi-festival, (see above, under Magha), which ends on this day. Kittel’s 
Kannada-English Dictionary, s.v, kdma , gives it also the name of kamana-hunnuve, “ the 
full-moon of Kama ; ” in the same connection. — The new-moon is called ugadi-amavase* 
i.e. yugadi-amavase ; because the next day, — Chaitra sukla 1 ; usually known as samvatsara- 
pratipadd , — is the commencement (ddi) of the new year (yuga is here used in the sense of 
samvatsara or varsha). 

Of opigraphic instances of the mention of special names of the fall-moons and new- 
moons, four can be quoted, iu addition to the reference to the nula-hunnuve in the present 
record : — 


1. — An inscription at Balagamve in Mysore ( Pali , Sanskrit, and Old-Canarese Inscriptions 
No. 158 ; Mysore Inscriptions , p. 121) is dated — Sa(sa)ka-varshada 976neya Jaya-samvatsarada 
Vaisakha babul a akshaya-tri(tri)tiyad*amav&se Adivara-nimittam ; " on account of Sunday 
(coupled with) the new-moon of the akshaya-tritiya of the dark fortnight of Vaisakha of the 
J aya samvatsara, which was the Saka year 976 (expired).” Here, a mistake was made, 
through carelessness on the part of the writer of the record, either in allotting the new-moon 
in question to Vaisakha, instead of to Chaitra, or in allotting the akshaya-tritiya tithi to the 
dark fortnight, instead of to the bright fortnight, of Vaisakha; the text maybe construed either 
way. As regards the results for the date, — in the given year, the new-moon tithi of Chaitra 
ended, as required, on Sunday, 10th April, A.D 1054, at about 19 hours after mean sunrise ; 
whereas, the new-moon tithi of Vaisakha ended at about 6 hours on Tuesday, 10th May, 
and cannot he connected with a Sunday at all. 1 

2. — An inscription at Tadi-Malingi in Mysore is dated, according to the romanised text 
( Inscriptions in the Mysore District , Part I. p. 146, No. 31),— Saka-varsada lllSneya Rakshasa- 
samvatsarada yaksha-tadige Bihavara suryya-grahanadalu ; “ at an eclipse of the sun (on) 
Thursday {coupled with) the akaha-tadige (new-moon) of the Rakshasa samvatsara , which 
was the Saka year 1118 (current).” Here, according to this version of the text, the new-moon 
tithi is not expressly mentioned ; though the text in Kanarese characters indicates otherwise, 
having the curious and meaningless expression ' yakshatahelamdsa, instead of yaksha-tadige ! 
But, however that may be, the mention of an eclipse of the sun shows that the new-moon 
tithi was meant ; not the akshaya-tritiyd tithi . And the new-moon tithi of Chaitra, in the 
given year, ended at about 3 hours afte? mean sunrise on Wednesday, 12th April, A.D. 1195; 
and on this day there was a total eclipse of the sun, perhaps visible in Southern India (see Von 
Oppolzer’s Oanon der Finstemisse , pp.230, 231, and Plate 115). This is, perhaps, not the given 
week-day. But the want of agreement between the romanised and Kanarese texts suggests 
that the original may not have been read correctly, and that the real reading may be 
Budhavdra (Wednesday), not Bihavara (Thursday). 


3* — The Kargudari inscription (Ind. Ant. Vol. X. p. 249) i 8 dated— srimaeh-Chilukya- 
Vikrama-varshada 33neya Sarwadhari-samvatsarada herjjuggiya-punnami Somavarad-andina 
subha-lagnadol ; “ at an auspicious moment of Monday ( coupled with.) the herjuggi full-moon 
of the Sarvadharin samvatsara, which was the 33rd (year) of the glorious Chalukya-Vikrama- 
varsha.” Here, the given year is Saka-Samvat 1031 current. The month is not specified. 
And this full-moon name is not to be found in any of the lists given to me. But Mr. Venkat 
Rango Katti, of Dharwar,— one of the gentlemen by whom the lists were made out for me,— 


w m *y be ® dded th,t 00 the 10th M», there wm a total eclipse of the ran, visible rio-hf ... i 4 - , 

Von Oppolzer’s Canon der Fiiuiemieu, pp. 216, 217, and Plate 108). which one would exneft r 7T ^ 

“ record > if were the date really intended. On the 10th April there w U no ecli^e ^ 'oent.oned 



No. 3.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT MAXAGOLI. 


25 


informed me eventual]/ (see loc . cit. p. 254, note 30) that, “ though the name is but rarely used 
“ now, herjuggi, or, in its modern form, hejjuggi, is at some places still known among the 
4 * Lingayat cultivators as another name of the sigi-hunmive or full-moon of Asvina ; and that 
“ the explanation is that on that day the cultivators prepare a hnggi , or mess of boiled rice mixed 
“ with split pulse, salt, pepper, cummin seeds, etc., and, taking it to their fields, scatter it abroad 
“ in handfuls at every step ( jiejje ).” And, as a matter of fact, the full-moon tit hi of Asvina, in 
the given year, did end, as required, on Monday, 21st September, A.D. 1108, at about 23 hrs. 
48 min. after mean sunrise. 1 * . Now, the above explanation of the name cannot he accepted ; 
for the reason that herje does not occur as the older form of hejje. But the true explanation 
can be established. In Kanarese, an initial $ is liable to become ; in composition. 3 We have a 
clear instance in the name of the perjnnka or hejjuhka tax, — mentioned in many epigraphic 
records, — which unquestionably comes from per , her , Marge, great/ + sunha , 4 toll, duty, 
customs/ On the analogy of this, herjuggi is to be derived from per. her , -j- svggi, 4 * harvest- 
time/ and is to be interpreted as meaning ‘‘the great or principal harvest.” Thus, the 
herjuggi full-moon is the harvest moon. And this name exactly fits the Asvina full-moon, 
next before the autumn harvest, when the muhgari, kharif , or early crops, sown just before the 
commencement of the rains, are gathered. 3 

4. — xYn inscription at the temple of Virabliadra in the fort at Lakkundi in the Gadag 
taluka, Dharwar district (I quote from an ink-impression), is dated — srimach-Chalukya- 
V ikrama-varshada 45neya SarwarP-srfthvatsarada Magha-Ynasada EAman-amavasye punya- 
dinad-amdn ; “ on the meritorious day ( of) the new-moon of Kama, of the month Magha 
of the Sarvarin saihvatsara , which was thd 45th (year) of the glorious Chalukya-Vikrama- 
varsha.” Here, the given year is Saka-Samvat 1043 current. And the corresponding English 
date is the 19th February, A.D. 1121, when the full-moon tithi ended at about 2 hrs. 8 min. 
after mean sunrise. For the meaning of the name, see page 13 above. 

TEXT . 6 

i Om* Cm 7 Naraah Sivayah 8 |j Naraas 9 -tuiiiga-siras-chnriibi-chamdra-chamara-charav^ 

trailokya-nagar-arambha-mula-stambhaya Sambhav6 || 0m [II*] Srimat l0 -kaih- 


1 See, also, Ind, Ant . Vol. XXII. p. 110, No. 5, where Prof. Kielhom gives the same date, with the earlier 
ending-time of 21 hrs. 36 min, 

* For instance, pon , ' gold/ + svrige t ' knife/ — ponjurige,- * a golden knife,' and mum (muudu), * that which 
is before,* + sir, * eaves of a house/ — munj4r, * the front eaves * (see KittePs Kannada-Engiish Dictionary, 
under the letter/); so also, I suppose, hejjdve, *a certain medicinal plant* (see the same, e.v. hej) t is from her , 
‘ large, great/ + sdve y 'a certain grain.* 

* It should, perhaps, be added that, in the given year, two other full-moon tithis ended on the given weekday, 
— the full-moon of Vaisakha, at about 4 hrs. 40 min. after mean sunrise on Monday, 27th April, A.D. 1108, and 
the fall-moon of Magha, at about 16 hrs. 16 min. after mean sunrise on Monday, 18th January, A.D. 1109 ; 
also, that on those days, as on the dny of the A$vina full-moon, there was no lunar eclipse to be mentioned in the 
record ; also, that either of those two full-moons might perhaps be connected with the spring harvest, when the 
hihgdri, rabi % or later crops, sown in October and November, are gathered. But it seems to me that the autumn 
harvest is the more important one for the greater part of the Kanarese country, and that Mr. Venkat Bango 
Kafcti was rightly informed that the herjuggi full-moon is the full-moon of Aivioa 

4 Read Sdrrvari, 

1 From the ink-impression. A transcription is given in Sir Walter fillb/t’s Car»dtaca-D*sa Inscription** 

Vol. I. p. 746: it contains many inaccuracies ; and giving, — after the words homg^ayvatt^e eyam koffar in 

line 65, — a few words which do not stand in the original at all, it then terminates, with the statement that tbs rest 
of the stone is broken away ! 

4 This word is represented here by an ornate symbol,— by a somewhat less elaborate symbol in Hue 36 
(before tcasf*), and in line 59, — and by plain symbols near the end of this line, and in lines 31, 35 (the tfrrt 6 m) 
46, 48, 49, and 53. 

* Here the word is expressed in writing. 8 Read Sivdyo. 

* Metre : S16ka (Anushtubb). l * Metre : Sarddlavikridita. 



16 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V 


2 chana-kanti-bamdhnritav=asa-simdhura-si*em-dhatn-madliyam nele deva-dampati-sata- 

krida-vilasam nij-6ddama-srig=abhirama-dhama- 

3 v=ene sapta-dyipa-aapfc-arnpava-8t6in-alaihkri(kri)ti ramjikum yiyidba-keli- 

kamdaram Mamdaram || Kanakanaga l -daksbin-6rYvi-vamtAkuntalav=einppa 

Kumtala-dhareyam 

4 vmutam Chalukyar-aldar=Mmanu-sutrada tikid-embinam cbarifcram 1 | Vasava- 

vilaaadim simhasanav^asbtadasam pravarttise rajya-sri(sri)-satiyol nere- 

5 da 2 yaso-bbasura-Chalukyar-olage hadmemta(ta)iieyal || Tribbuyana 3 -visratam 

Kisuvolal=tanag=anyaya-rajadhaiiiy=ad=abliinuta-kirtti Kattiyaradeva- 
5 na tamdeya tamman=anvaya-prabhavar=enippa pattada Chalukyara 

santatiyol^Sureib a-sammbban=esedam Chalukya-kula-bbushanan=Ayyanadeva- 
bhubbujam || i'esa- 

7 r 4 -Yett-Ayyana-nri(nri)patige jasav=eseya Chalukya-Vikramadityam sabasa-Meru 

puttidam sri-Vasudevam pnttuv-anto Yadava-kuladol || Kahiti-mabita-kirtti- 

paha- 

8 1^-pati-Lakshmana-raja-putri saabbagya-samanvite BomtMdevi jagam-nnte 

Devakiy=enisi Vikram-amganey=adal || Batta-nri(Dri)pa-ditija-knla-3am^ 

gbattadin=agba patta Chal 

9 ki 5 -kulak«abbyudayam putte bhayav=abitaram bemn-atte dis=adbipara sabbega]am 

matte jasa (| Adiya Chalukya-variisa-inab-6dadbi-sasiy=enipa Vikramam- 
kamgam Bomthadevi- 

10 gam magam tan=ad=i Kri(kri)sbn-ayafcara-li]am Tailam || Bamtina mey-gali 

Tailam temtanisuvar=alave bayala kale(la A gamam nu^emtam kadidan=enbatt- 
emtam komdarh pratapadim kotegalam !| Beda- 

11 rada 6 mamneyar=bbirutii pogada maudala-natbar^arggi targgada nele-g6te 

dbuli-patay-agada durgga-kalam kunmbgi pimgada para-mamdalam nadngi 
kappatnan=lyada yairi-raya- 

1 2 r=ar=adatina babu-sahasa-samagrateg- Ahavamalla-Tailana 1 1 Pariy att 7 =ekamga-viram 

masagida Javanam poltu tad-Rashtrakut-ambara-bbasvacb-cbamdrarain Kakkara- 

nri(ari)pa-rana- 

13 kambh-avauipalaram sambarisuttam jiya 8 bapp=embinav=avani 4 alam Kumtal- 

^ryyi-yaso-bbasara-rajya-snyan^atyayatiyole taledam lil[e*]yim Taila-raja |j 
Dba- 

14 rapiyan 9 =a ra8a[ta]ladoUarddudan=adi-varaba-rdpadim Sarasijanabhan=uddharisid- 

andade Ratta-iira(iiri)pa-pragbattadir3x jarida Chalukya-rajyaman=ila-nuta-kirtti 

var&ha- 

15 cMhnan*uddharisidan =3 jagakke kali Tailane mart tya-Mukumdan=aI lane || 

Chalukya 10 -rajya-lakghmi-]ila-Gamganadi-Himacbalan=akbil-6ryvi-lalan-e3am Nurm- 
madi-Tailam Trailokyama- 

16 llan« Ahavamalla || ParamAafrvvada-pararbpare mja-rajy-abhivri(vri)ddhig= 

ndbbayay=enip=isyara-ghalis 4 aamgo jagad-garnge Harit-abja-ravigo dhara-purvva || 
Batta-gba- 


1 Metre: Kanda ; and in the next verse, 

* This akthara, da, was at first omitted, and then was inserted, on rather a small scale, in the margin before 
the beginning of the line. 

1 Metre : Champakam&14 4 Metre : Kanda; and in the next four verses. 

4 Instead of Cha\ jfei, — in which the f has the virdma , — read Cha{ki. 

6 Metre : Champak&m&ifc. * Metre : MahAsragdhara. 

8 This word either muy be some colloquial form from the Sanskrit./!, ‘conquer, J or may stand for the Kanarese 

jtyya, * a father, a grandfather ; an epithet applied to any superior, such as a king, master, lord, etc.* 

* Metre: ChampakamaU, 10 Metre: Kanda; and in the next two versr 


No. 3.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT MANAGOLI. 


17 


1 7 ratta-vesar=ddhareg=ittalav=ene rajya-pattabamdb-dt9ayadol=kottam Mammgavalliyan* 
ottajikege kalasay-iduva teradim Taila || Dbare 1 pogalalt* Chalukya-pnti- 
Taila-nri(Dri)- 

p-archcbita-padan=ittan=Isvara-ghaHs&san-urjjita-Harka-kTi!-agrani tane mukkyav- 
ag-ire vara-vipra-paihchasata-rajige pu jisi Tarddavadi-sasirad-olagsoll it am Ma- 
nigavalliyan*] sasi-suryyar^ullinam j| A prabbuvin=anvayadalli || Abhiman- 2 

omnati Mamdar-adrig=oreyam kafctittu varamgana-subbagatvatb. Madanamg= 
an&darane- 

yam raadittu sa(sa)svad-vach6-vibhavarn Karnnanan-elisitt^enisuvam M&nikya- 
valli-pura-prabbu vikhyata-Harifca-gdtra-vilasal-Lakshmidhavam Madhaya || Maba- 
janamgal=a* 

ynurvvara mahimey=emt-ene || Yara-varnn-ddrama-dliarmma-nirmmala-gtina-sri-veda- 

vedarfaga-vistara-sastr-arfctha-vicbara-sara-satata-svadhyaya-yajua-kriya-guru-pu- 
j-akara-vipra-pamchasata-chamQhad-brahmya-tejo- nay-abharanam ramjisugum mabi- 
surapuram Mamkyavalli-pura || Manu-marggakke mani-pradipav=enisitt= 

acbara-sampatti 

sajjana-harsh-abdbige cbamdra-laksbmiy-enisitt^andaryyav^ngra-d vishad-ghana-darpp- 
adrige balpa vajrav=enisifct=cmd=amdu babyo param janare bappu Manlm- 
gavalliya mabide- 

varkkal-aynurvvam || Cbaruteya^ sabaja ; sarate rarajipa Tarddavadi-s6sirav» 

emb=i nariya kucha-mcbir-alariikarav=enal dharege Manigavalliyo sebya(Vya y ih || A 
negalda Manigavalliya bbu-nutar=aynurvyar=olage Kasyapa-gofcr-am bhonidh i - 

sasi G6yarddhanan=anata-ripn Vaji-yamsa-varan=ndayisidam || Hurvvina jarvva viii- 
shtara barvvida badatanada koryyan=ndagisnm=adarim 

namada gurvyina Govarddhanamge narndanan=empa || 
vibbug=atmajar=agrani Nagadevan=o- 
lpina kani Visbau punya-nidhi Goyyarasam Halidham 

vetta nalvar=avar=i kiriyam hiriyam jagakke sajjaoa-mdht Chamdraraam 

iaaaman=eydisidam Himavam-nagefih]- . . 

dratnam || A 5 Chamdir&ja-yibhugam sr5-Chamdramb,kegav=afcmajam 
urvvi-chakra-tmta-gnn-abdhi sad-acharateyim nimirchcbi jasamam 

Parabitadol 6 -parakramadol=arppino- 
29 l=urjjita-§aktiyol=Mahesvara-pada-bhaktiyol=tanage 

' yol=nereda Manimgava Iliya dbaramara-pamt . 

ki-bhaskaran-enalu negaldam Basavam gua-akara || Kayyam? nosalge 
damd=emm=ayyam gnniy=emdu pogale 

Basavarasayyam ari-Manigava- , . ... 

ilig»uriiitay=enisal II Ora II Ida 9 veda-traya-tat[t*]va-dhamav=,d=anamt-anad.. 

‘ samsiddhav =imt=ida tej6raaya-dibya(vya)-bmgav=ida lil&.16ka-sammdhyav= 

emba day-abhynmnftti cbem- A , 

naa=ada Kalideyesamge 16 k- 6 teav-aspadainam madiHidam mj-anvay-yasas- 
samdohamam gebamam II Ida* rajat4driyimd=adhikay=e I hbraegam Basavam 

nivasa-sampadaman=o- _ , * , , . . ,, , . 

darcbcbidam Manigavaljiya yipra-yar a r=Kkuberaaol=paday=ea,=-ir P pa bhakt,- 
‘ yatar=illiye 8 amtatay=irppen=emba saihmda(dba)tanav=oppuv-amte Kabdeva- 
mahesa nivasav^oppugum I! 


18 


19 


20 


21 


22 


23 


24 


25 


26 


27 


28 


hurvvinavar=emba 
Jana 4 -nuta- Revadasa- 


dharitri jty=ene pesar- 


30 


31 


32 


33 


puttidan= 

Basava || 

pasatiy=ar=pperar=emba bemme- 
dbaramara-pamcbasat-anuraga-pamkarnba-yi- 
gun-akara || Kayyam 7 
dharo sale lokakk=ayyan=enisippa 


1 Metre r ChampakamfclA. 

* Metre : Kanda ; and in the next two verses. 

* Metre : Kanda. 

7 Metre : Hand*. 


3 Metre: Mattebhavikridita ; and iu the next two verges. 
* Metre: Charapakam^ll 
6 Metre : ChumpakRro&tt. 

» Metre: Mattebharikri^to. 5 Metre: Champ.k»mAli. 

D 



IS 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


34 Sale 1 mfirum-jagav^ld^Tiparjjisida punyam murtti-vett-amte mrmmala-dharmm- 

omnati-semnutam sakala4akshmi-vasain=ad-amte bhu-laiau-alamkri(krijti-ratna- 
rasi Dered-irdd-aiht=avagam rarhji. 

35 kum Kalidevesa-yilaga-bhasura-gri(gri)haih 16kayka 2 -sobbavaham || Om || Om 

Svasti Samastabbuvanasrayam siipri{pri)tbvivallabbam maharajad biraj am 

paramesvaram para- 

36 mabbattarakam Saty§sraya-kula-tilakam Ch&luky-abharanam srimat- 

pratapachakravartti-Jagadekamalladevaru Kalyanapurada nelevidinoUsukha- 

samkatha-vino- 

37 dadim rajyam-geyyrittaTn-ire [(*] Tat-padapadm-opajivi mabapraebam da-dam da- 

nayakam mane-verggade Bammanayyamgal mahaprabbu-M&diraja-pramukha- 

38 mahajanarhgal-aynilrvvar=aimmatadim bimnapam-gevyaDavadharisi sumaj-Jagad- 

ekamalladevaru ManimgavaUiya daksbina-sri-Siddhalimga-Kalidevesvara- 

39 devargge mja-bhuja-vijaya-nam-ainkita-varshada Sneya Dumdubhi-samvatsarada 

Pushya 3 suddha 10 Bri(bri)haspativ&rad-aihd»uttarayana-saihkramti-vyati- 
pata-pa- 

40 rvva-rumittav-agi jagattmhga-Bhujftmgavali-knla-tilaka-Kalamukba-naishtbika-parama- 

tap6mshtha-brahmyakula-bala-brabmaebari-sri-Sady6jata-pamdita- devara 

41 k&lam karcbcbi dbarApurvvakam-madi deva-karyyamam nadayisuv-amt-agi 

Manimgavalliya temkana bolada Mogevadad-olage KAllamgurukeya ba- 

42 tteyim paduvala Homnoleyavara keyyim mudalu Mulaatbana-devara 

Kemganawe-deviya keyyim badagala Chemna-Gesimayyana bittejra varamogeyim 
temka- 

43 1 kattid=alagina nalvattu-gena bamdiya-gadimbada gbaleya xnattar=ayvattam 

kottar=A mattar 50j*~olage devar-amgabbog» v Cbaitra-pavitra dhup-arate 4 naive- 

44 dya khamda-aphntita-jSmn-oddharakkam m&ttar=ippatt-aydiL mathada Sri-Sarada- 

deviyar^amgabhdgakkam tapodb&B&r^ahara-d&nakkam mattar=emta matbadalti* 
kaumaramam 

45 vakkbani6nv=Tipadhyayargge mattar=aydu devara brahmapurigal n&lvarggam 

mattar=eintti Amri(mri)tarasi-parnditarggo muliga-vrittiy-agi sarwa-badha- 6 
pariba- 

4b rav-agi k&duduva mattar ualku autu mattar 50kkav=a£uvacavam mattari mge 
hamdiya salikey=omdam tijruvar [||*] Om [||*] Devara bu-domtekke Nirgguliva 

47 halladim badagalt* Yalajikave(?vi)ya-Kesyanana tbmtadim mudal Mah[a*]- 

vishnu-bhattara tomtadim temkal Kuliya-basadiya tomtadim padnval bamva-gola 

48 mattar=omdumam &arvva-namasya(sya)v-agi kottara [||*] Om [||*] Sat[t*]rada 

maneyim paduvak Bhagavati-geriya Hdiyim badagal raja-bidiyim mudal 
Aytama-se- 

49 ttiy^amgadiyim temkal dSvargge earvva-namasya(sya)v-agi kotta amgadi D&lku [||*] 

Om [|1 # ] Devara keriy=olage devargge namda-divigege sarvva-namaSya(sya)v- 
&gi kotta ganav=omdu [||*] Om [||*] Deva- 

50 ra keriy=olage devara brabmapuriga[l] nilvarggam Amri(mpi)tarali-pamditani kotta 

uivesan&m ualku alii kaumarad=up^dby&yargge kotta nivesaoav=omdu [|J*J 

Om [||*] Devara L 

51 k&riv=olage devara brahmapurigaja »iv&a[na]dim temkal 8auva[r*]npamge 

Amri(mri)tarafii-pamditar kotta iiiv6sanav=omdu [||*] A nivesanamgak pramapu 
temkan-Adiyim mo- 


1 Metre M&ttfebhavikri^ifca. 
* Ke*d drati t or drti. 


1 Read Uk-aiU. 

1 Read *artra*bddh4. 


* Read Pansha. 


No. 3.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT MANAGOLI. 


19 


52 [da]l-omdu bad&gana mere vara[m*] nal-gena piaman[i]na kayyalw parisutradim 

paduval mugayya-battayam kaled=iriinesajra ( *aladal nivesanad=agalav=arn- 

£ a y[y*]i n5 J a 

53 hadinayda kayya pramanu || Om Svasti VI nftt-aneka-veda-vedamga'tat[t*]vd- 

jnaiia-marttamda-jvala-iriamdita-pumdarika^ s b a - .rahma-lakshmi-lakshita- 
visala-vaksha[h*]sthala-hamsa- 

54 y a va ti- sara j i- - v i ra j a m anar= a p pa srimad=ntta[ma]d-agrabaram Manimgavalliya 

mahaprabhu-mukbyav=asesha-mahajanamgal=ayiiurvvar vi 4 dharmiuamaw tamma 

55 dbarmmav-agi sa[d*]-dbarramadim sasana-raaryyadeyimdav=a-cha^mdjr-[a]rkka-tiiram 

baram pratipaiisuvar || Samany6b=yam dharmma-setar=uri(iiri)panam kale- 
kale palaniyo 

56 bhavadbhih sarvvan=etan=bbaginah parttbivemdran bbuyo-bbuyo yacbate Rama* 

chamdra[h # ] (| Sva 6 -datt[a*]m para-datt[a*]m v& jo hareti(ta) vasuihdhara[m # ] 
shasbtkir-vvarsba 6 -sahasrani 

57 vishtba) am jayate krimih !| Sasanarn7=id=avud=elliya sasanav=ar=itlar=eke 

salistiven=inb=i sasanaman-emba patakan^a sakalaiii rama\akke ga]agalaD~ 
iligum || 

58 tj r[o*]deyar=akke ganav=akk-ur=alv=aras=akke nada-k6ihde( te)yar=akk=imt=ar='] 

dharmmaman=alidad[e*] vorant-ire rauravakke galaga!an=ilign[m*] || 

Gamgasagara-Yamna 8 -saihgamadol V arauasi Ga- 

59 yey=emb=i tirttbamgaloUagaiiita-sad[d # ]\djapnmgava-goknlavan=a!idar=im^i[dan- 

a]lida[m*] || Om Svasti Srjmat-Kalachuryya-bbujabalachakravartti-tribbuvan- 
aikavira-Bijjaladeva-varsha- 

60 da 6neya Vish[u*]-samvatsarada Bbadrapada babula 6 Mam gala vara d^ 

amd[u Svasti] Sama8ta-vastn-vistii-ima-ghurnnit-arDnava-nii3ada-praiiU(nu)t- 


61 


62 


63 


64 


65 


66 


67 


au’j(nu)ta-bhuvaua-vikhyata*pamchasata- 

yira-sasana-labdh-aueka-gnna-gan-alamkri(kri')ta-satya-saueh-;u:kar a-charucharitra- 
na[ya-vinaya]-viinaiia-vira-Banamja-dkarmma-pratipalanar=fippa srimad-Ayyayo- 

ley-aycurvvafr*] svamiga- 

In’ mukkyav-agiy=emtu nada padinaravarnm nana-dos-abbyamtarada 

^ayajcgaflum marii]muridaiiidamum patta[da] mane Manimgavalliyal maha- 

nad-agi nered=4ka-8tbai'-8g-irdd=aHi- 
ya prabhu m u k h y a v-e m d - ay n u rr v a m m talada 

ad(ia heruva settiyarum 

gottaliyum Tarddavadi-sasirada hittma 
galeya b&rikanuih. nered=eka-sthar-ag-irdda 

nimittay-&g[i sri]-Siddhabmga-Kalidevesyara-deyargge deva-karyyamarh nadasal 

tamma dharmmav-&gi nakaramgal ha- 

tti hamnir-ddhanya samasta-bhamdavane mamkay^olag-agi tarn maru-gomd- 
amtappa bhamdakke homg=ara-visamam kottara g&lr.gar* tavr. mand=elege 

homg=ayvatt=eleyarii kottar heruva , , , . , , . , 

settiyam hojagaphhdam tamda harhmr-dhanja modal-ag! samasta-bhamdavane 
manikay=olag-[a]gi taodn roaxitakke homge visamam kotf*ru t sthajadal 

tavu m&xu-gomdu tumbida 

bbattakke homge visamam kottar telliga-gottahgala devara nx. -dmgege 
ganamgalaUomd-omdu haligey=enneyam kottara eabga-samayamga. ganaa 


settiyarnm nakaramgal m (lam) 
eleya-gatrigarum telliga- 

kapila-chatti- vy atipata-parwa- 


mukbyav-Agi nula-pa- 


• TU. akshara, hd, .« at firs, omitted, and then i»«r«ed above ihe line 

This »», perhaps, a mistake for sarvja. , y * _ lt(l 

* Metre: SAIini. * Metre : SMk« (Anushtubh). ‘ , ' 

? Metre: K^ndA; aad La U>e foU^kig twro verses. 


-l'i7 L ZZ. 



20 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V. 


68 rvvakke varsham-prati okkalalli visav=aydam kottar deda(va)ra kottaiigai 

nula-parvvakke halurh nulum bajragd berattumb=okkalalli varsham-prati 
visav=aydam kottaru seniga-gottaligal nu la-pa- 

69 rvvakke varsham-prati kuriba-senigar=okkal-okkalalw visav=aydam kottar billa- 

munurvva[r]um bitta dharmmav=oyemdu 1 2 maruva hedageya hannu hampal 
badu-kayge hidi- 

70 badu hidi-hannam kottar medar-okkalugal huvina-karadage bedalage matbake 

ye . . kerasiyam sada-kalam nadasuv-amt-agi kottar gaudu mukbyav-agi gaud- 
okkala neravigal 

71 g&mda-gftsa bem-gufl=omnade maduvege v3sav=aydam devar=avav-agi kottar 

varsham-prati valiy=era[dara] kottar [||*] Int=i dbarmmaman=a-cbamdr- 
arkkarh sthayi-varam nadev-ant-agi kottar=i dharmmamam sasana-ma- 

72 ryyadeyim nadugal pratipalisuvar=i dharmmakk=adda-khamdavf* nadugalg= 

idir-adavan=avamge samudra-ma da(?da)ne bira-vanigau= 

adakk=ay nu rvvara besadim bilia-munurvvaru kavar [||*] Mamgaja-maba-sri || 

ABSTRACT OF CONTENTS. 

^ After an invocation of Siva (line 1), and a verse in praise of the same god under the name 
of Sambho, the inscription proceeds to recite that, in the centre of the earth, there is the 
mountain Mandara (l. 3), the ornament of the seven continents and the seven oceans. Over 
the land of Kuntala (1. 3), which was -considered to be a lock of hair (kuntala) of the woman 
who was the land to the south of the golden mountain (Meru), there reigned the Chalukyas 
(1. 4), in so praiseworthy a manner as to illustrate well the observances of the code of 
Manu (l. 4). When they had continued during eighteen secessions, 3 among the renowned 
Ch&lukyas (1. 5), in the eighteenth (succession), in the desceat of the royal Chalukyas who 
claimed to be born in the lineage of the younger brother of the father of Kattiyaradeva (11. 5, 6) 4 * 
whose hereditary capital was the world-renowned Kisuvolal (1. 5), 6 there was king Ayyanadeva 
(I.) (1. 7). To him there was born Vikramaditya (V.) (1. 7), whose wife was BontMdSvi (1. 8). 
daughter of king Lakshmana of the Bahala country. And then,— prosperity returning to the 
Chalki family, which had suffered mishap through being bruised by the race of the demons in 
the shape of the Ratta kings (11. 8, 9),—— their son was Taila (XX.) (1. 10), a very incarnation of 
Krishna, who fought a hundred and eight 6 battles out in the open country, and captured 
eighty-eight fortresses. None of the hostile kings could shake off this Ahavam alia- Taila 
(II.) (1. 12), who, resembling Death, annihilated those kings, the pillars of Kakkara? (1. 12) 
in war, the moons of the sky which was the Rashtrakuta (race), and, amidst the applauses of 
the whole world, with an exceedingly great effort acquired the sovereignty of the land of 
Kuntala (1. 13). Just as (the god) Sarasijanabha (Yishnu), in the form of the primal boar, 
lifted up the earth which had sunk into the lower regions, so Taila (XL) (1. 15), bearing the 
crest of a boar, lifted up the Chalukya sovereignty which had fallen through being over- 


1 The vowel of the first syllable is illegible ; it may be any other vowel, quite aa much as a. 

1 This is, perhaps, by mistake for dharmmav^emt-ene. 

* This is an imsginative statement, not in accordance with facta. 

* Thi. i. a purely imaginary person, not mentioned in any other reeord tbst baa ret come to no-iee • nniesa 

indeed, the name ia intended for that of Ktrttivarman II., who, however, did not atand in the asserted relationship 
to Ayysna [. ^ 

* The modern Pattsdskal, in the BAdAmi tAlaks, BijApnr district 

* Why this particular number should be mentioned, is not apparent. In the same way, the Eastern Chalnkv* 

king Kargndramrigarlja-Vijaylditya II. is said to have fought a hundred and eight battles, by day and bv night 
during twelve years, with the armies of the Qahgas and the Battas (eee Ind Ant. Vol XX „ loll ’ ’ 

T The BAxhtraktita king Kakka II. 



No. 8.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT MANAGCLI. 


21 


thrown by the Ratta kings. So this Nurmadi-Taila (II.), otherwise called Trailokyamalla 1 
and Ahavamalla (11. 15, 16), became the lord of the whole earth; and, at the festival of his 
installation in the sovereignty, when his name, “ the grindstone of the Rattas,” began to fill 
the earth, he gave (the town of) Manimgavalli, with libations of water, to tsvaraghalis&sa, 
the Jagadguru or pontiff of the world, the sun of the water-lilies that are (the members of) the 
Harita ( gotra ), who was considered to be the cause of the great growth of his sovereignty 
(11. 16, 17). And isvaraghalisasa, the leader of the family of the Haritas, whose feet were 
worshipped by king Taila (II.), the leader of the Chalukyas, gave the choice Manigavalli, 
in the Tardavadi thousand, to the five-hundred excellent Brahmans of whom he himself was 
the chief, as a grant to endure as long as the moon and sun might last (11. 17-19). 

In the lineage of that lord (1. 19), there was a certain Madhava (1. 20), the Prabhu of the 
town of Manikyavalli, the very Vishnu of the renowned Harita gotra. And now to 
describe tbe greatness of the fire-hundred Mahdjanas (1. 20) : — [Here come (11. 21-24) 
two verses in praise of the virtues and accomplishments of the five-hundred Brahmans 
of Manikyavalli or Manimgavalli, followed by a repetition of the statement that 
Manigavalli was in the Tardavadi thousand; and then we are told that] — Among the 
five- hundred of Manigavalli, there sprang up a certain Govardhana (I. 25), the moon of the 
ocean that was the Kasyapa gotra , an excellent member of the race of Vajins. 2 His son was 
Revadasa (1. 26). The latter had four sons, — Nagadeva, Vishnu, Goyyarasa, and Hujidba 
(1. 27). The youngest of these became the greatest, and, nnder the name of Chandramas, made 
his reputation reach even as far as the Himalaya mountains. To that lord Chandiraja (1. 28) 
and to Chandrambike there was born a son, Basava. There were none who were like him 
in devotion to the feet of (the god) Mahesvara (Siva) ; and this Basava (1. 30) attained the 
fame of l>eing esteemed the sun that caused to bloom the water-lily that was the affection 
of the five-hundred Brahmans of Manimgavalli. This Basavarasayya (1. 30) came to be 
considered the father of the world, since the whole world, putting their hands to their 
foreheads, saluted him with the words “Our virtuous father;'’ and thus he brought 
greatness to the famous Manigavalli. Manifesting the height of graciousoess in saying “ This 
is the abode of the essence of the three Vedas; this is the accomplishment of that which has 
no end and no beginning ; this is the lustrous divine hnga ” (1. 31), he caused to be made 
for the beautiful (god) Kalidevesa (1. 32) a dwelling-place, the abode of the joy of mankind, 
which gathered together in itself all the fame of his lineage. Saying “Basava made this 
beautiful abode, in such a style that it surpasses the silver mountain (Kailasa) ; the excellent 
Brahmans of Manigavalli are full of devotion, so as to rival Kubera ; I will abide here always, ” 
the great lord Kalideva (1. 33) approved of the abode. And so this glorious pleasure-house 
of Kalidevesa (1. 35), the chief beanty of the world, shall be charming for ever. 

Hail ! (1. 35). While the asylum of the universe, the favourite of fortune and of the 
earth, the Mahdrajddhirdja , the Par imeh'ara, the Paramabhattdraka. the glory of the 
family of Satyasraya, the ornament of the Ch&lukyas, the glorious and valorous emperor 
Jagadekamalladeva (II.) (1. 36), was reigning, with the pleasure of an agreeable interchange 
of communications ( with his feudatories) , 3 at the capital of Kalyanapura,-— on his 
feudatory, the most intrepid Bandandyaka. the Manevergade Bamraanayya (1.37), preferring a 
request, with the assent of the five-hundred Mahajana headed by the Mahdprabhu M&dir&ja, — 
the glorious Jagadekamalladeva (II.) (1. 38), having well thought over it, — to the god 
Kalidevesvara, the holy Siddbalihga of the south, of Manimgavalli,— on account of the 


1 This biruda did not really belong to Taila II. He hid only the biruda Ahavamalla. The two biruda* 
TrailAkyamall.i and Ahavamalla belonged to his descendant ^dm^svara I. 

1 Meaning, apparently, of the sect of tbe Vajasaneyirs or follower* of the' White Yajnrv&U. 

1 i$ukha-*nmkafhd-T%n6da. 



EPIGRAPHTA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


>2 


vyatipata and par van of the Utrtar&yana-samkr&nti of Thursday (coupled with) the tenth 
tithi of the bright fortnight of (the month) Pausha of the Dundubhi samvateara 
which was the fifth of the years marked by the name of the victory of his arms (1. 39), 
— having laved the feet of the youthful Brahmachdrin , the illustrious Sadyojatapanditadeva 
(I. 40), who was the glory of the Bhnjamgavali family, eminent in the world, who was 
completely conversant with the Kalamukba doctrines, who performed the most austere 
penances, and who belonged to a family of Brahmans, — with libations of water, — for the purpose 
of maintaining the rites of the god, — gave fifty mattars (of land) in ( the hamlet of) Mogev&da 
of the southern fields of Manimgavalli, (according to the measure) of the pole 1 called the hoar- 
staff (of the length) of forty spans, on the west of the road to Eiallarngurnke, on the east of 
the cultivable land of the Honooleyavaru, on the north of the cultivable land of the goddess 

Kenganavve of (the shrine of) the Muiasthana god, and on the south of the 

of the ridge of the paddy-field 2 of Chenna-Gesimayya. In those fifty mattart 
'1, 43), twenty-five mattars were for the angabhoga of the god, and for the purificatory 
rites of (the month) Chaitra, the waving of burning incense, and the repair of whatever might 
become broken or torn or worn-out; eight mattars were for the angabhoga of the goddess 
Saradadevi of the maiha , and for the provision of food for ascetics ; five mattars were for 
the teachers who explain the Kaumdra 3 in the rnafha ; eight mattars were for the four 
( Brahmans whose households made up the) Brahman settlements 4 of the god; and four mattars 
were an outright allotment, free from all demands, to Amritarasipandita. As the aruvana - 

tax on these fifty mattars, they shall pay one on each 

mat tar. 

For the flower-garden of the god (1. 46), they gave one mattar of the circle (of lands), 
{by the measure) of the Brahmans* staff, as a sarvanawasya-gY&nt, on the north of the stream 
called Nlrguli, on the east of the garden of Valajikaveya-Keayana, on the south of the 
garden of Mahavishnubhatte, and on the west of the garden of the Jain temple called Kuliya- 
baaadi. 

On the west of the house where food and shelter were given gratis (1. 48 », on the north of 
the road to the street of (the goddess) Bbagavati, on the east of the king’s highway, and on 
the south of the shop of Avtamasetti, they gave to the god four shops, as a sarvanamasya - 
grant. 

In the street of the god (1. 49), they gave one oil-mill, as a sarvanamasya-g rant, for the 
perpetual lamp of the god. 

In the street of the god (11. 49, 50), A mritaraSi pandit a gave foar sites to the four 
( Brahmans whose households made up the) Brahman settlements of the god ; and one site there 
was given to the teachers of the Kaumdra. 

In the street of the god (11. 50, 51), on the south of the site of the Br&hman settlements 
of the god, Ampitarasipandita gave one site for the sauvarna . 

The measure of those sites (1. 51), from south to north, in cubits of the measure of four 
spans, was six cubits of breadth and fifteen cubits of length for each site. 

Then comes (1. 53) a mandate to the five-hundred Mahajanas , headed by the Mahdpralhu, 
of the excellent agrahdra of Manimgavalli, to preserve this act of religion, as if it were their 
own act, as long as the moon and snn may last. And this part of the record ends (11. 55-59) 
with five benedictive and imprecatory verses, — two in Sanskrit, and three in Kauarese* 


1 Ohale seems to be another form of gale, 1 a bamboo rod or stake; a pole, a staff. * 

* ia thus explained in Reeve and Sanderson's Canarese Dictionary. But KitteTa Dictionary give* it in 
only the sense of ‘a missile wenpou ; a dart, spear, javoliu. * 

* \je. the Kdtantra grammar. 

* A literal trausUfciou would be “ to the four peisous (t vko are) the BrtUira >9 Wwai.” 



No. 3.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT MANAGOLI. 


23 


Hail! (1. 59) On Tuesday (1. 60) (coupled with) the sixth tithi of the dark 
fortnight of (the month) BMdrapada of the Vishu samvatsara which was the sixth of 
the years of the glorious Kalachurya Bijjaladeva (1. 59), an emperor by the strength of his 
arm, the sole hero of the three worlds, — when, headed by the five-hundred Suamins of the 
famous (town of) Ayyavole 1 (1. 61) who were preservers of the strict Bananja-religiou, the 
sixteen of the eight districts (1. 62), and the Gavares of many districts, and the Mummuridanda , 
were met together in a great district ( assembly ) at the royal abode Manimgavalli, and were 
standing in one place, — and when, headed by the Prabhu of that place (1. 63), the two five- 
hundreds, 2 and the Settis of the locality, and the Sakaras , and the Sett is who made a business 

of lading and the betel-leaf Gdtrigas, and the guild 3 of oilmen, and the 

sealer of flour and churning-sticks 4 of the Tardav£di thousand, were met together and were 
standing in one place, — on account of the festival of the vyatipata of the (tithi called) 
kapiia-chatti (1. 64), to the god Siddhalinga-Kalidevesvara, in order to continue the 
rites of the god, the Nakaras gave 5 half a visa^ per horinud on each bale 8 of the things 
which they bought, including rubies and all the stock 9 of cotton and the twelve kinds of 
grain; and the Gdtrigas (1. 65) gave fifty betel-leaves per honnu on the betel-leaves that they 
sold; and the loading Settis (1. 66) gave a visa per honnu on the sale of such things, including 
rubies and all the stock of the twelve kinds of grain, which they imported from outside, and 
a visa per honnu on the paddy which they bought aud loaded in the locality itself ; and the 
guilds of the oilmen (L 67) gave one halige of oil on each oil-mill, for the perpetual lamp of 
the god ; and the guilds of the weavers, headed by the Gauda , 10 gave five visas per poll, 11 year 
by year, for the a festival ; and the Kottalis of the god (1. 68) gave five visas per poll, year 

by year, for the ?iulu- festival, on those who dealt in milk, thread, and ; 

and the guilds of artisans gave five visas per poll of the Kuriba-seriigas (1. 69), year by year, 
for the nulu-i estival ; and the three-hundred of the caste of toddy-drawers (?) (1. 69) gave a 
handful of dried unripe fruit and a handful of ripe fruit on each basketful that they sold of 
ripe fruit, , . , ♦ * , , and dried unripe fruit ; and the basket-makers and mat-makers (1. /0) 

gave a flower-basket and i n order to maintain for ever the 

at the mafha ; and the groups of the kinsmen of the village-headman, headed by the Gauda 
himself, gave, as a perquisite of the god, five visas on each marriage (1. 71), no matter 
whether of a boy or of a girl, and two baits year by year. 

The record ends (11. 71, 72) with a mandate to the people of the district and to the 
three-hundred of the caste of toddy-drawers, to preserve this act of religion. 

B. — Of the time of Bijjala ; A.D. 1165. 

The writing covers an area about 1' 8" broad by 1' 11* high. The tablet is broken into 
three pieces, by a fissure running from the beginning of line 14 to the end of line 9, and by 


1 The modern Aibote, in the Huugund t&luka, Bijapur district. 

a U. the five-hundred Srdmins of A v> a vole, and the five-hundred Mahdjanas of Maniro-ravslli. 

* Kittel’s Dictionary explains kotta\i (which would become gottali in composition) *s ‘a multitude or 


assemblage, as of fishermen, etc.* 

• Reeve end Sanoerson’s Dictionary explains bdrika as ‘one who applies a public seal or stamp.’-Whether 
A, ft, and gale are really to be taken as meaning here « flour ’ and ‘ churning-stick/ >s not quite certain. 

• *.e. here, and thronghout, ‘‘agreed to give annually. 

• Kittel’s Dictionary explains vita as ‘ oue-sixteeuth of a hana;’ A ana as * four aDnas and eight kaius , and 
kdsu as * the smallest copper coin, a cash/ 

7 The same explains honau as ‘ a geld coin, the half of a rardha (one rupee, seven annas, four cash).' 

• Bkanda seems to be for bhdada, ‘ a pack or bale of goods or merchandise.’ 

• BUndavdne seems to be another form of bandavdla - ba^davala, 1 capital,- fond. ; stock, store.’ 

1. The mention here of the Qauda or village-beadmaD seems rather lnoongrucu*. 

11 \je . a capitation-tax of fire vuat each. 



24 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


another from the top of the tablet to about the centre of line 10 : but very few letters have been 
completely lost thereby, except near the middle of lines 1 to 8 ; and in other respects the record 
is very well preserved. — The sculptures at the top of the tablet have been so much damaged 
that it is difficult to make out what they are. — The characters are Kanarese, of the regular 
type of the period to which the record refers itself ; and they are well formed and boldly 
executed. They include decimal figures in lines 18, 25, and 26, and the distinct form of the 
lingual d all through : the virama is represented by the mark for the vowel u, throughout; 
and a pointed instance of this is the word iabu. da, line 4. The average size of the letters is 
about — The language is Kanarese ; except for the two opening Sanskrit verses. — As regards 
orthography, the only points calling for special notice are — (1) the use of ri for ri, e.g. in 
vrittiya , line 24 ; (2) the use of b for v in byatipata, line 20 ; and (3) a frequent confusion 
between the sibilants, e.g . in vriSabha , line 5, and amkusarh , line 7. 

The inscription is a record of the time of the Kalachurya king Bijjala. And it 
registers certain grants that were made to a temple of the god Vishnu in the form of 
Channa-Kesava. 

It is dated at the time of an eclipse of the snn on Sunday coupled with the new-moon 
tithi of the month Margasira of the Parthiva samcatsara, which was the tenth year of the 
reign of Bijjala. The given samvatsara was Saka-Samvat 1088 cut rent. And the 
corresponding English date is Sunday, 5th December A.D. 1165, when* the new-moon tithi 
ended at about 8 hrs. 28 min. after mean sunrise. On this day, however, there was no eclipse 
of the sun. 1 

TEXT. 2 

1 0m 3 Oru 4 [II*] Namas 5 =tasmai Yarahaya lilay=6[d*]dhara[t6 ma]him khura- 

madhya-gato yasya 

2 Merum 6 khanakhanavate [| Namah . . . ara-viiasad-rupa- 

3 lavanya-simdhave J|(|) gopijaua-mand .... rajahamsaya Sa- 

4 rngine || Om Svasti Samadhigatapariichama[hasa]bada-maharajadhi- 

5 raja Kal&(l&)mjara-puravarAdhisva(sva)ram s|_uvai’una]-vrisabhaEdhvajam 

damar[u]- 

6 ga- 1 u ryy a-nirgghosa ( sh a) nam Kalachuryya-[kula]-karnala-raarttam(ia kadana- 

7 prachamda maua-kanakachalam subhatar=[adi]tya kaligai=amkusa(sa)rh 

sa(sa) ran-[a]- 

S gata-vajra-pamjaram pratapa-Ijamkesva^sva)ram para-[n]ari-sahodaram giri- 

durgga*ma- 

9 11am chalad-amka-Ramam vairdbha-kamthiravam nissai ssa)mka-malla nam- 

adi-prasa( sa)s[t]i>sa- 

10 hitarh srimatu bhujabala* [chakra va]r[tt]i vira-Bij[j]alad6varu Kaly&- 

nada n[e]levi- 

11 dinolu sukha-samkatha-vin6[da]d[im] rajyarn [g]eyy[u*]ttam-ire [|*] 

Om Om 

12 Om Svasti Yama-niyama-svadhyaya-dhyana-dharana-m6(mau)n-anushta- 

(shtha)- 


1 But there wxs a *olar eclipse, not visible in India, on the preceding new* moon day, of the month Kifcrtfcika, 
falling on Friday, 5th November (see Von OppoUer’s Canon der Finsternisse , pp. 226, 227, and PUte 113). 

* From the ink-impression. This record is not included in the Car nataca-Desa Inscriptions. 

1 This word is represented here by an ornate symbol, which stands above the first word, dm, of line 1. 
line 4, a very similar ornate symbol is used. In lines II and 12, the symbol is ornate, but of a different pattern. 

4 Here, the word is expressed in writing. 5 Metre : Sl6ka (Anushtubh) ; and in the next verse. 

• Read Meruh. * Bead vrishabha. 



25 


No. 3.] INSCRIPTIONS AT MANAGOLI. 


13 na-japa-samadhi-si(si)la-sampannar=appa srimad=uttamad=agrah[a*]- 

14 ram Man[i]gaval4iy& prabhu Madiraja pramukham=asesha-mahajanam- 

galum 

15 srimanw-mahapradhanam yammanayya^damdanayaka pramuk h a ka- 

16 rana[m*]galumm 1 * 3 =amt=inibarimi Pamgeya-Vasudeva-nayakaru madi- 

17 sida pratishte(shthe)ya sri-Chamnna 3 -Kesavar=aiixgabhoga-khaiiida- 

8phuthi(ti)ta-j5rnn6dharakkam 4 

1 8 srimatw-Kalachuryya-chakravartti-vira-Bijjaladeva-varshada 10- 

19 neya P&rtti(rtthi)va-saihvatsarada M&rggasirad=amavasye Adi- 

tyav&- 

20 ra 8uryya-grahana-bya(vya)tipata-mmittadim kotta kayye 6 nelam IT- 

21 kkaliya batt[e # ]yim paduvalw tupparaju-geyyim badagalu 

22 Ra(P)lakkiyabbeya-Hariichikeya batteyim mu dal a hare k 4- 

23 ra-gey[y*]im temkalw Pamgey a- Simgarasa- V asuda ( de) vanayakaru taxh- 

24 m=ibbar=anuchchayeya vri(vri)ttiya stbalad=olage hiriya-kola ma- 

25 ttara hamneradam sarvva-namasyav-agi bitta mattara 12 devara nam- 

26 da-divigege sarvva-namasyav-agi bitta gana 1 srimanu-maha- 

pradha- 

27 nam Ammanayya-damdanayakam pramukha karanamgalu tamin=aya- 

28 da hejimg=obbala mulya-vattamam bittaru [II*] 


ABSTRACT OP CONTENTS. 

The record opens with invocations of the god Vishnu as the boar pine 1), and as 
Sarhgin (11. 3, 4). It then refers itself to the time of the Bhujabala-chakravartin Bijjaladeva 
(1. 10), — the Ma h d raj d dh iraja who had attained the panchamahasabda (h 4) ; the supreme loul 
of EAlanjara, the best of towns (1. 5) ; he who had the banner of a golden Garuda ; he 
who was heralded in public by the sounds of the musical instrument called damaruga 
(11. 5, 6) ; the sun of the water-lily that was the Kalachurya family (I. 6),— who was 
reigning at the capital of Kalyana (1. 10) with the pleasure of an agreeable or friendly 
interchange of communications (with Ins feudatories) (1. 11). 

All the Makdjanas , headed by Madiraja (1. 14), the Prabhu of the agrahdra of Mani- 
gavalli, and the Karanas* headed by the Mahdpradhdna and Dandandyaka Ammanayya 
(1. 15), — for the angabhoga , and for the repairs of whatever might become broken, torn, 
or worn-out, of (the god) Channa-Kesava (1. 17), which had been established by Dahgeya- 
Vasudevanayaka (1. 16),— on account of the vyatipata of an eclipse of the sun 
(1. 20) (on) Sunday (coupled with) the new-moon tithi of (the month) Margasira 
of the P&rthiva samvatsara which was the tenth year of the Kalachurya emperor 
Bijjaladeva (1. 18),— gave a plot of cultivable land (1. 20) on the west of the road 
to Ukkali 7 (11. 20, 21), on the north of the cultivable land called Tupparaju-geyyi, 
on the east of the road to (?) Ralakkiyabbeya-Hanchihe, and on the^ south of the 
cultivable land called Harekaxa-geyyi. (And) Dahgeya-Sihgarasa and Dangeya-Vasudevanayaka 
(1. 23) allotted twelve mattars, (by the measure) of the big staff, as a 5a rvanamasy a- grant, in the 

Bite of their 8 allotment. For the perpetual lamp of the god, 

there was allotted one oil-mill (1. 26), as a sarv a namasy a -grant. (And), headed by the 


1 Head Ammanayya ; as in line 27. * Bead °ga\um* 

* Bead jirnndddhdrakkam. 8 Bead keyyi. 

' The modern IJkli, seven miles to the north-east of ManagdJL 

8 The meaning of the word dnuchchdyeya is cot known. 


* Read Channa. 

* The scribes, the accountants. 


X 



26 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Mahdpradhdna and Dandanayaka Ammanayya (1. 27), the Karanas allotted one bala 1 * * of 
. . . . , . * paddy per heru z of their perquisites. 


C. — Of the time of Sankama ; A.D. 1178. 

The writing of the whole record covers an area about 1' 11|* broad by 2' 11* high. The 
tablet, however, is broken into four pieces, of which one, containing portions of lines 15 to 25, 
has been lost. In addition to this, many of the letters in the two extant upper fragments, 
which extend as far as line 23, are a good deal obliterated. And it has, therefore, been found 
convenient to reproduce the text from line 24 only, from which point it is all on one fragment 
of the stone and in a state of much better preservation; giving, in the abstract of contents, 
the substance of lines 1 to 23, which can be read quite sufficiently for that purpose, though 
they cannot be edited in full. — The sculptures at the top of the tablet are, in the centre, a 
linga , with the sun and moon above it ; on the proper right, a squatting figure, facing 
full-front; and on the proper left, a cow and calf. — The characters are Kan arese, of the 
regular type of the period to which the record refers itself ; and they are well formed and 
boldly executed. They include decimal figures in line 25, and the distinct form of the lingual 
d : the virdma is represented by the sign for the vowel u, throughout ; and pointed instances of 
this are trimatn, line 24, and pdrtthivemdranu, line 41. The average size of the letters is 
about — The language is Kanarese ; there are ordinary verses in lines 10 to 24, and some 
of the customary benedictive and imprecatory verses in lines 40 to 46. The accusative neuter 
singular occurs both with the archaic m, e.g. dhanamam , line 33, and with the v, e.g . 
dharmmcivamn =, 1 . 38, where, from the use of the anusvdra before the n , we seem further to 
have exactly the modern form, dharmavannu. — In respect of orthography we need only 
notice an occasional confusion of the sibilants, illustrated by varSada, line 24, and sudhdha , 
line 25. 

The inscription is a record of the time of the Kalaehurya king Sankama. And it 
registers grants that were made, by the direction of the king himself, to the Mahajanas or 
Brahmans of Manigavalli, headed by the Mahdprabhu Isvaradeva, and to some other persons. 

It is dated at the time of the Dakshinayana-samkranti or summer solstice, coupled with 
Sunday and the eleventh tithi of the bright fortnight of the month Aehadha, of the Vilambin 
5 a m vatsara, which was the third year of the reign of Sankama. But the date does not work 
out correctly. The given samvatsara was Saka-Samvat 1101 current. And the given tithi 
ended, not on a Sunday, but on Tuesday, 27th June, A.D. 1178, at about 14 hrs. 34 min. after 
mean sunrise ; while the samkrdnti also, which occurred on the preceding day, Monday, at 
about 18 hrs. 58 min., cannot be connected in any way with the Sunday. 


TEXT. 4 

24 janam || Cm 5 * Svasti Srimatu-Kalachuryya- 

bhu j abalachakravartti-Samkamadeva-varsa(rsha)da murane- 

25 ya Vilu[mbi-sarii]vatsarad=Asada' 5 sudhdha? 11 Adityavara dakshin&yana- 

samkramana-parvva-nimittam sriman-maha- 


1 Kittel’a Kannada- English Dictionary explains bala, balla, as ‘ a measure of capacity, the fourth part of a 

lcolaga or four 

* The exact meaning of mulya is not apparent. 

* Kifctel’s Dictionary explains hiru as 1 a load, especially a bullock-load.’ 

* From the ink-impression. This record is not included in the Carnofaca-Dtsa Inter >ptiont , 

* Represented by au ornate symbol, both here and at the end of the record. 

* Read AMdha. 7 Ke«d sudd/io. 



No. 3.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT MANAGOLI. 


27 


26 pradhanam hiriya-damdanayakam dandanatha-Narayanam srlmatu-Kesimayya- 

damdanayakarmh a- 

27 vara may dunam sri(sri)man-mahapradhanaiii Brah made va- damdanayakarum 

avara berggade Mattarasaram cbakravartti- 

28 ya belikeyim tamm=alkeya snmad=uttamad=agrabaram Manigavaljiya maha- 

prabbuv=Isvaradeva pra- 

29 mukhav=asesha-mahajanamgaligam muligarigam pamcbamatba 

ligam samasta-prajegaligam sama- 

30 sta-jati-varggakkam dhara-purwakam-m&di bitta dharmav=emt-emdade [ | # ] 

ManigavaUiyal^apatrikaru sattar=appad=avara dvi pa- 

31 di-chatuhppadi 1 -dhana-dhanya-gri( gri ;ha-ksbetrav^emb=inituman=atana strl-mukhyav- 

agi hemgusu-makkalu 

32 vibhaktar=ada tayi-tamde annatammamdir=avara makkaluih a . . . , gilu 

jnati gotra ant=avar-olag=ar=iddad=i- 

33 ddavare kaledu-kombar=amt-anibar=olag=aruv=illad-idda[r=a]ppad=a dbanamam d$va* 

dayigalige dbarmmada- 

34 ttay-agi kuduvaru Sharhbikesvara-devargge hiriya-k[6]la mattar^ yippattumam 

airiidra-parvyamam hora- 

35 vadisi veda-paragar=appa brahmanaran=odisi pu[ji]salu sarvva-namasya(sya)v-agi 

kottaru brahmaiiara 

36 manegalalti kula belal-agad=emdu dbara-purvvaka[m*] -madi bittaru [||*] Imt=i 

dharmma[rii]galam adhika- 

37 ri karanam prabhu mabajanamgalurii samasta-prajegalum sasana-maryyadeyimd= 

a-cbamdr-arkka-taram ba- 

38 ram pratipalisuvaru [1*] l dharmmavamn=ar-anum kidisidar^appade srf-Vara- 

nasiyalu v [y *]atipata-samkrama- 

39 na-suryyagrahanadalu koti-kavileymam 2 * mu(P)vatfcit-sa8ira-br4hmanarumarh sva- 

bastadim komda ma- ^ 

40 hapatakavan=eydnvaru || Sloka || Samanyo3=yam dharmma-setar=nri(nri)panam 

kale-kale palaniyo bha- 

41 [va]dbhih sarvvan=etan=bhagina[h*] partthivemdranu tMy6-bhuy6 yachate Rama- 

chamdrah || Sva 4 -datt[a*]m para-datt[a*]m 

42 va yo hareti(ta) vasumdhara[m*] sashtir-vvarsha-sahasranr* vishthayam jayate 

krimi[h*] || Gamgasagara 6 -Ya- 

43 munft-saihgamadolu Varanasi Gayey=emb=l tirtthamga!ol=agan.ta-sadhvi(ddvi)ja- 

pumgava-gokulama[n=a]- . 

44 lidan=imt=idan=alidaiii || Sasanam=id=avud=elliya 8asanav=ar--ittar=eke salisnvev= 

emb=l sa(sa)sanavan=emba pa[ta]- 

45 kan=a sakalam ranravakke galagalan=ilignm || Ur[o ]deyar=akke ganav= 

akk=dr=alv=aras=akke nada-komteyar=akk=[a]- 

46 r-ar=i dharmmaman=alidade v&rant-ire rauravakke galagalan=ihgum || Mamgaja- 

m&ha-sri Om [II*] 


abstract op contents. 


The record opens with an invocation of the god Vishnn nnder the name of Pnmshottama 
(line 1), followed (11. 1, 2) by the well-known verse Jayaty=dtishkritam Vishnor, etc., in praise 


i Bead ckatuthpadi. 5 Read katileyumam. 

4 Metre : Sldka (Anushtubb). 

1 Bead shathti’Vortha-sahatrani. 


* Metre: SAlint. 

Metre : K*nda ; and in the following two verse*. 

k2 



EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vot. V. 


2S 


of the incarnation of the same god as a boar. It then refers itself to the time of 
the asylum of the universe (11. 2, 3), the favourite of fortune and of the earth, the Maharaja* 
dhirdja and Paramesvara, the supreme lord of Kalanjara the best of towns, he who had the 
banner of a golden Garuda (1. 4), he who was heralded in public by the sounds of the 
musical instrument called damaruga, the sun of the water-lilies of the Kalachurya family 
(11. 4, 5), he who was successful (euen) on a Saturday (1. 6), the champion against hill-forts, the 
Kalachurya-bhujabala-Chakravartin, the glorious Sahkamadevarasa (1. 8), whose victorious 
reign wa3 continuing, with perpetual increase, so as to endure as long as the moon and sun 
and stars might last, at the nelevidu of Navile (1. 9), with the pleasure of an agreeable or 
friendly interchange of communications ( with his feudatories) (11. 9, 10). He who subsisted 
(like a bee) on the water-lilies that were his feet, was the Bandadhipa Kesava (1. 12). 
The Mahdprabhu of Manimgavalli (1. 16) was Isvaradeva. His son (1. 18), a very moon of the 
ocean of the Harita family, was the Prabhu Madiraja (1. 19), whose virtues are praised 
in the next few lines, with another mention of ManimgavaUi in line 23. 

On account of the festival of the sun’s commencement of hiS progress to the south 
(on) Sunday, (coupled with) the eleventh tithi of (the month) Ash&dha of the Vilambin 
samvatsara, which was the third of the years of the Kalachurya emperor Sahkamadeva, 

(11. 24, 25), — at the command of the emperor, — the Bandandyaka Kesimayya (1. 26), a 
very Narayana among leaders of the forces, and his nephew the Mahdpradhana and Banda - 
ndyaka Brahmadeva (1. 27), and the Hergafe of the latter, Mattarasa, gave the following 
religious grants to all the Mahdjanas , headed by the Mahdprabhu Isvaradeva, of the agrahdra of 
Manigavalli (L 28) which was the seat of their authority, and to the M&ligas (1. 29) and to 

of the five mathas , and to all the people, and to all the 

castes; namely, 1 2 at Manigavalli (1. 30), if any one should die without sons, his wife, female 

children, divided parents and brothers and their children an( j 

any kinsmen and relatives of the same gotra , who might survive, should take possession of all 
his property, such as bipeds, quadrupeds, coin, grain, house, and fields ; and, if none such 
should survive, ( the authorities of the village) should make over that property, as a religious 
grant, to those who hold the grants of the gods. And they gave, as a sarvanamasya-grant , 
twenty mattars (of land), (by the measure) of the large staff, to the god Shambikesvara (1. 34), 
in order to do worship after proclaiming the amdra-festival 3 and making Brahmans read 
who are versed in the Vedas; this they gave with libations of water, saying that 

. . 3 should not be said in the houses of Brahmans. 

The record then ends (11. 36 to 46), with a mandate to the Adhikdrin, the Karana , the 
Prabhu , the Mahdjanas, and all the people, to maintain these grants, and with five of the 
customary benedictive and imprecatory verses. 

D. — Of the time of Jaitugi L ; about A.D. 1200. 

The writing covers an area about 2' 6" broad by 2' 3 V high. It is mostly in a state of very 
good preservation. But, from half-way through line 29, all the formal part of the record has 
been broken away and lost. — The sculptures above it, at the top of the tablet, are, towards 
the proper right, a liwja, with tho sun and moon above it, and a standing figure on each side of 
it ; and towards the proper left, a cow and calf.— The characters are Kanarese, of the regular 
type of the period to which the record refers itself; and they are well formed and well executed 
throughout. The formal part of the record, commencing with line 27, is separated from what 


1 I am indebted to Mr. Krishna Sastri for some assistance in interpreting the following passaees. 

2 Apparently, some festival on - the eighth day in the second half of the month Margallwha, and of the 
month Pansha ** (see M^nier- Williams’ Sanskrit Dictionary,#. ©. aiairll. 

^ The meaning of k u\a y line 36, is not apparent. 



No. 3.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT MANAGOLI. 


29 


precedes it by a blank space about four inches high ; and, though written apparently by the 
same hand, it was probably put on the stone at a subsequent time. The characters include the 
distinct form of the lingual d all through. The virdma is represented by the sign for the vowel 
m and pointed instances of this occur in pogalaluke, line 15, and chamchadu-brdhmya , line 22. 
The size of the letters ranges from about f''to f \ — The language is Kanarese ; and lines 1 to 26 
are all in verse, with a few short connecting prose links. The accusative singular neuter in v 
occurs in pradesavan> line 18. In lines 12, 13, we have two rather peculiar or unusual words ; 
Icharvatfa, = kharvata , Jcarvata f which apparently means * a market-town;* and maifamba which 
I do not find in any dictionary, hut which must denote some other kind of village. — In respect 
of orthography we may notice (1) the use of ri for r», throughout ; (2) the use of b for v in 
hraja, line 9, sebyam, line 15, and bratiharan , line 25 ; (3) the use of t* for b in dorvvala , line 6 ; 
(4) a good deal of confusion between the sibilants, illustrated by riiayam, line 14, iast, line 
17, and Hhjaih, line 25 ; and (5) the doubling of t before y , — very exceptional at so late a 
period, — in apattya , line 25. 

The inscription is a record of the time of the Devagiri-Y&dava king Jaitugi I. The 
introductory portion of it is complete. But the formal part, containing the date and the details 
of the grants that were recorded in it, has been broken away and lost. 

TEXT. 1 

1 [Om 2 || # Sri]mat 3 -kamchana-kamti-baihdhuritav=asa-simdhnra-sreni-dhatri-madbyam 

"hele deva-dampati-sata-knda-vilasam nij-6ddama-srig=abhirama-dha- 

2 [mav=ene] sapta-dvipa-sapt-[arn]n[ava]-st6[m-alam]kri(kri)[ti ram]jikum vividha- 

k^li-kamdaram Mamdaram || Sphurad 4 -arhbhonidhi-vele mftvala- 

3 si Jaihbudvipav=atyamta-baihdhura-va — w u ™ ^ geyikkumba v^/ •“ * 

Jdu Mamdarav=a Mamdara-dakshina-stha-Bharatakshetraih jagam nem- 

4 w ^ rav=a kshetra-mnkhakke lochanav=en oppug[u]m Kuntalam |j 

Adan=anamdade palisutta padadimd=irddam nat-arati sam- 

5 na keli-nilaya[m*] virodhi-vilayam Dbarmmatmajam Raghavam Yadu-vamsa- 

prabhavam jaya-pravibbavam bhuri-pratap-odaya[m*] madavad-dorwa(rbbajla- 
chakrava- 

6 rtti naya-lakshmi-vallabbam Bhillamam || A tana 5 . tanayam 

bhutaladoj= 

negaldam Mamdhat-6pama-charitan=enisi Jai- 

7 tugidevam || Mata 

Gu(gu)rjjara-P&rndyam jita-Cholam jita-L&lam jita-Gaulam 

Jaitapala-dhatripala || 

8 Om [||*] A nri(nri)pa-padambuja-seva-nipunam 

manam sauryy-adhanam Sahadeva-damdanatham 

negaldam || M&lava 6 -damda- 

9 natha-dharanjdhara-Vajradharam Kalimga-P&mchalak»-[damda]natha-karat;- 

bra(vra)ja-pamchamukkum Turuhka^Nepatoka-damdanfttha-vasudha-vila- 
10 yam ^ ^ ^ damdanath-ali-bhujaihga-raudra-Garu[dain] Sahadevan-atarkya- 

vikramam || Harig^adyad-Balan=ArjjQnamg=atula-Bhimam Lakshmanamg=firjji t .a. 

1 From the ink-impression. A transcription is given in Candtaca-Deta Inicrtptiont, Vol. II. p. 370 

a Doubtless represented by an ornate symbol, as in lines 8, 27. 

* Metre : SardvlIavikrSdita. This ver.e has already been met with, id A. liue 1 ff. 

4 Metre : Matt£bhavikrSdita ; and in the next two verses. 

5 Metre : Kanda ; and in the next two verses. 

8 Metre: UtpalamAlika. 7 K«d TuruMa 8 Metre: Mattebhavikri lit. 



30 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


11 [cha]ranam Ragb.avan=amnan=ada teradim sri-Mallidevam kal-abharanam 

visruta-damdanatlia-Sahadevamg=adan=agr6dbliavam vara-vi- 

12 r-ari-cbamupa-darppa-dalanam damde[sa]-16kottamam || Amt=enisida damdanath- 

adbikara-paripalana-yilasam-bettu(ttu) | V ilasita'-kheda-kharvvada-ma- 

13 damba-puramgalm=amttL tamnol=aggalisida devamatre(tri)kav=enippa polamgalin= 

e cbuta-samkmla-nava-gamdha-sali-vanamaih taled=int=ide ta- 

14 [ne] bhoga-bbutalav=ene Taddavadi-visa(sha)yam su^ — visayayka 2 -bb.usbanam || 

Cbarutaye 3 sahaja-sarate rarajipa Taddavadi-sasira- 

15 v=emb=i nariya kucba-riic]iir-alamkarav=enab4 dharege Manigavalliyo sebya(vya)m |) 

Dhare 4 pogalahtke vipra-kula-dipan^uparjjisi tamdu yitta- 
10 n=lsvara-glialisasanaurjjita-Harita-kul-agrani tane mukhyav-ag-ire vara-vipra- 
pamchasata-rajige pujisi Taddavadi-Ba8irad=olag=ollitam Mani- 

17 gavalliyan»i sasi(si)-suryyar=ulliiiam || Negalda Manimgavalliya mabaprabbny= 

lsvaradevan=atma-lakshmige nija-vakshamam vinnta-vag-yadbug=anana- 

18 mam visala-kirttige gagana-pradesavan=anarh nele madidan= attar- ottaram mige 

vibbu Madii'aja-sutau=udgha-Harifca-ktil-abdlii-cliam- 

19 dramam I| AbMman 5 -6n[n*]ati Mamdar-adrig=oreyam kattittn vaga(ra)mgana- 

subhagatvam Madanamg^anadaraneyam madittu sa(sa)svad-yas6-vibhavam 
Karnnanan=elisi- 

20 tt=enisuv=i Maniky avail! -puram prabhn 5 vikhyata-Harita-gotra-tilakam Laksbmi- 

dkavam 7 Madhavam || Alliya mabajanay=aynurwara mahimey=em- 

21 t-emdade || Vara-varnn(rnn)-asrama-dharmma-nirmmala-rga(ga)nam sri-yeda-yedaxhga- 

vistara-sastr-arttba-vichara-sara-satata-svadhyaya-yajna.kriya-gurn-puj-akara-vi- 

22 pra-pamchasata-chamahadw-brahmya-tejo-nay-abharanam ramjisugu[m] mabi-snra- 

puram Maniky avail! -puram || Manu-marggakke mani-pradipav=eni- 

23 sitt=acbara’8ampatti sajjana-hars(rsb)-abdhige cbamdra-iaksbmiy=enisitfc^andaryyay= 

ngra-dvisa(sha)d-ghana-darpp-adrige balpn vajray=enisitt=emd=amdu bahyo 

24 param janare bahpu 8 Manimgavalliya mabidevarkkaUainfti^yarnm 9 || 

Acha[r*]yy-anvayav=emt-emdade || Vara-vidya-ni- 

25 dhi Gauladeya-mtLnipamg=atm-agra-sisya(sbya)m jita-Smara-banam sncbaritra- 

varddhi Malay ala- Jnanarasi-bra(vra)tisvaran=adam tad-apattya- 

26 [n=a]tyannpamam nana-kala-kovidam dharani-vismta-Dharmmarasi-mnniparii 

prakhyatiyam talidam || 

27 0m Svasti Samastabhuvanasrayam sripri(pri)tbvivallabham bhaya-lobha- 

durllabharii Y[a> 

28 [da]va-kula-kamala-martta[m*]dam kadana-prachamdam nam-adi-prasa(ga)sti- 

sahitam srima[j-Jaitrag]i[deva-vi]- 

29 [ja]ya-rajyam=uttar-dttar-abhivri(vri)ddhi-pra I0 [varddhamanam=a-chamdi>arkka - 1 a r a m 

baraiii saluttam-ire] * 


1 Metre: ChampakamAIA. 3 Re*d vishay-aika. 

8 Metre: Kanda. This verse has already been met with, in A. line 24. In the first word, for chdrutayr, 
read chdruteya, 

4 Metre : Champaknm&lA ; and in the next verse. The InBt three pddas of this verse have already been met 
with, in the verse commencing dhare pogalalw. Chalukya-pati , in A. line 17. 

9 Metre : Mattebhavikridita ; and in the three following verses. The first three of these verses have already 
been met with, in A. lines 19 to 24. 

s Read pura-prabhu , as in A. line 20. A. has enituvam , instead of eniruv^t. 

7 A. has gdtra-tilagal-Lakshmidhavam. 8 Read bdppu. 

it is usual to find this word written aynurvvarum with ay, not at, in the first syllable, 
i® The remainder of the record is broken away and lost. 



No. 4.J 


FOUR INSCRIPTIONS AT SRIKURMAM. 


31 


ABSTRACT OF CONTENTS. 

The inscription opens with a verse, occurring also in A., which mentions the 
mountain Mandara (line 2). It then mentions Jambudvipa, or the central division of the 
world (1. 3.) ; and then, again, the mountain Mandara, to the south of which there is the land 
of Bharatakshetra or India, in which there is the country of Kuntala (1. 4). The ruler of 
that country, born in the race of Yadu (1. 5), was Bhillama (1. 6). And his son was 
Jaitugideva (I.) (11. 6. 7), also called Jaitapala (1. 7), who conquered the Gurjaras, the 
Pandyas, and the Cholas, and the countries of Lala (Lata) and Gaula fGauda, part of Bengal). 
One of Jaitugi's officers was the Daadandtha Sahadeva (1. 8), who defeated the leaders of 
the forces of Malava, Kaliiiga, and Panchalaka (1. 9), of the Turashkas, and of Nepalaka. 
And Sahadeva’s elder brother was Mallideva (1. 11), who also held the post of PandHa (1. 12) 
or Dandandtha. His authority appears to have been limited to the district known as the 
Taddavadi thousand (11. 14, 15). In that district there was the town of Manigavalli (1. 15) 
or Manimeravalli (1. 17), which isvaraghalisasa, of the Hants family, had presented to the 
five -hundred Brahmans (1. 16). And the Mahdprabhu of that town was Isvaradeva (L 17), 
son of Madiraja, a very moon of the ocean that was the Harita family (1. 18), The record 
then mentions a Prabhu of the town of Manikyavalli (1. 20) named Madhava, of the Harita 
gotra , — evidently identical with the Prabhu Madiraja, son of Isvaradeva, who is mentioned in 
C. line 19. thouo’h the verse used to describe him here is that which in A., lines 19, 20, is 
applied to his grandfather Madhava or Madiraja, the father of isvaradeva. It then proceeds 
to recite the virtues and accomplishments of the five-hundred Mahdjanas or Brahmans of 
Manikyavalli or ManimgavalU (11. 20 to 24). And this part ^ it concludes by telling us 
that, in the lineage of the Arjinrvas, there was a certain Gaui^ueva (1, 25) \ his chief disciple 
was Malaysia- J nanarasi , and the son of the latter was Dharmarasi (1. 26). 

The formal part of the record commences with line 27. The name of the king, in line 23, 
is almost quite illegible. But he is described as belonging to the Yadava family (11. 27, 28). 
And the superscript i near the end of line 28, clearly discernible in part and at ju^t the place 
where it should be, enables us to recognise that the inscription is a record of the time of Jaitrugi 
I. himself, — not of one of his successors. 


No. 4. FOUR PILLAR INSCRIPTIONS OF EASTERN 

CHALUKYA CHIEFS AT SRIKURMAM. 

By E. Hcltzsch, Ph.D. 

The Vishnu temple of Kfirmesvara at Srikurmam near Chicacole in the Ganjam district 
contains many inscribed, pillars of hard black stone, which have successfully withstood the 
influence of the climate. Most of their inscriptions are consequently in much better preservation 
than other stone records in the Telugu country. Four of the pillars bear the subjoined 
four inscriptions of three chiefs who profess to have been descendants of the Eastern 
Chalukya king Vimal&ditya (A.D. 1015 to 1022) (A. verse 1) and of his son Bajaraja 
(A.D. 1022 to 1063). This king resided in Rajamahendrapattana (A. v. 4) and is said to 
have translated with the help of scholars the history of the Bharata race into Telugu < ibid 
v. 3). Here we have an important epigraphical confirmation of the tradition according to 
'which Nannayabhatta, the first Telugu translator of the Mahdbharata t wrote his work at 
the direction of Rajaraja of Rajamahendri. 1 


1 Compare above, Vol. IV. p. 303, note 3, 



32 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. 


V. 


A descendant of this Rajaraja was Vijayaditya (I.) (A. v. G). The latter had a 
named Rajaraja, who was the minister of Viranrisimha (A. v, 7b This Rajaraja hod tw»> 
sons, viz. Vijayaditya (XI.) (A. v. 9) or Vijayarka (D. v. 1) and Purushdttama (B. v. 1, and 
D. v. 2). Purushottama’s son, Jagannatha or Visvanatha, was a vassal of Virabanudeva 
rC, 11. II to 15), For Vijayaditya II. we have the date Saka-Samvat 1195 (A.), for PurusliOttama 
Saka-Samvat 1199 (B.) and 1240 (D.), and for Jagannatha Saka-Samvat 1231 (C.). Consequently 
king Viranrisimha whom Rajaraja, the father of Vijayaditya II., served as minister (A. v. 7), ha* 
to be identified with the G-anga king Viranarasimha I., whose reign ended 13 years before 
that of his grandson Viranarasimha II., the 21st year of whose reign corresponded to Saka- 
Samvat 121 7. 1 Virabanudeva, the sovereign of Jagannatha or Visvanatha, is identical with 
the Ganga king Virabhanudeva II., the successor of Viranarasiiiiha II. 2 

The alphabet of the four inscriptions is Telugu. The language of A. and D. is Sanskrit 
verse, and that of B. and C. Sanskrit verse and Telugu prose. A. records that Vijayaditya 
(II.) granted twenty-five cows, the milk of which had to be used for ghee to feed a lamp in the 
temple. B. contains a similar grant of fifty-two 3 ewes for a lamp by Purushottama. 

C, consists of 49 lines, of which I am publishing only lines 1 to 16 and 28 to 30, omitting 
two passages in Telugu prose, which enumerate various offerings and the persons among whom 
they were distributed, and one imprecatory verse (sva- da ttdm etc., 1. 47 f.). The inscription 
records a grant of 40 half-pagodas ( nishka , 1. 4 f,, or gandamdda , 1. 28) by Visvanatha for 
providing offerings to the god. D. was composed by the poet Nrisimka (1. 6 f.) and states that 
Purushottama granted a golden necklace to the god. 

A. — Dated Saka-Samvat 1195. 4 

TEXT. 5 

East Face . 

1 i gn sjffwUrnfr trfnmr: [i*] ^nrsc- 

2 <wfa+wiRciN?fiWTif wwh i [\*] trr 

3 mr fw g[?r]: i 

i m i O*] ?P3TT3^ f^ fa q ff nrq f t[i]- 7 

5 i wfr* 

6 finf favf WTT- 

7 <d4sirri i 0*] ttsprtv- 9 

8 [i*] tw arNr 

9 fT3B I [8*] ^ ^T^Rrt 10 

1 Journ . Bengal At. 8oc. Vol. LX V. Part I. p. 270. According to p. 269, verse 96, BhAnudfiva I., the father of 
Vinmarasimha IX., married JAkallad£vi of the ChAlukya race, who was probably a relation of VijayAditya II. 

3 Ibid. Vol. LXIV. Part I. p, 132. 

* Thus in 1. 6 f. of the Telugu portion. The Sanskrit portion (l. 2) has only fifty ewes. 

* No. 352 of the Government Epigraphist’s collection for 1896. 

5 From inked estampages, prepared by Mr. H. Krishna Sasfcri, BJL 

« Bead *i*^*^°. 7 The anusvdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 

a The nr* of nripa is corrected from nya ; read c ^ftw. 

a The *T of TT5pTT° was first omitted and then inserted below the line between XT and XTT* The a»«#P<fra 
-tands at the beginning of the next line. 

lb The anusvdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 



No. 4.] 


FOUR INSCRIPTIONS AT SRIKURMAM. 


33 


North Face. 

10 w^sTr€rfkrTPrf%?ru(:) trrat- 

11 R*nr i ^rreTt 

12 sriffa[:*] RTcTHT R«rfe|%frTRI"nftf 3 SR- 

13 i [**] utu fwwr- 

14 tRt WfTt i wM^RRjTt^tC’fr] 

15 i U*] rrwnencrR tt^t rmrr- 

16 ?r ifa four: 2 i hrY ^rwtrm- 

17 fwfur : i l/o*] <tri di ^ i n fa *« : [i*] 

18 STTRlfH rYw ?pr isii=h<tw: i [c*] 

West Face . 

20 % ^fteunt Or?]*: Our i ut- 

21 ^Tftxrn i e q^£|-d«*i^i , n , 0) «dfWni«ei font' Ht- 

23 <* r^Hj^d4^^MlT(TT^ fa: [i*] wnf 

24 RMfiT g r : 10 h[r]U7T: ii 11 [*•*] 


TRANSLATION. 

Hail ! (Verse 1.) There was born formerly in the race of the Moon a glorious (and) 
renowned chief of princes, the Chalukya emperor Vimal&ditya. 

(V. 2.) As in the region of the sky the moon alone is possessed of splendour (and) 
subdues (her) enemies— the flowers of the day-lotus, thus (was) he on the circle of the earth. 

(V. 3.) From him was born the glorious king RSjaraja, whose fame was very great, 
whose lotus-feet were worshipped by princes, (and) who, together with scholars, it is said, 
translated into Andhra (i.e. Telugu) the history of the excellent Bharata race, which is the 
essence of all Smritis . 

(V. 4.) Though residing in R&jamahendrapattana, which was crowded with princes 
who had come to worship {him), {he) shone on the surface of the {tchole) earth which was 
covered by (his) lustre. 

(V. 5 ) He whose pair of feet was illuminated by the splendour of the gems on the 
heads of rival kings, produced on gods the impression of a fresh great ocean by {his) army; on 


1 Bead fatRTWR- 

s The ietter ? seems to be corrected 
« Read °W. 

’ Read fall. 

10 Read qH«Ttq:. 


2 Read • 

from and S from H j read 

s Read *T]W. 6 Beftd M ^ TlT ^ 

8 Read 9 R « ad 

11 This punctuation is expressed by some ornamental symbols. 



34 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vo L. V. 


men that of a collection of clouds, formed by the mass of the dust rising from that (army) ; 
(and) on rivers that of a shower of rain by the rutting-juice trickling from the huge temples of 
its (viz. the army’s) elephants. 

(V. 6.) In his race was born a prince called Vijayaditya, who belonged to the excellent 
gutra of the Manavyas 1 (and teas) the abode of the goddess of victory. 

(V. 7.) From him was born a moon among kings, named Rajaraja, who resembled 
Vachaspati 2 in great wisdom (and was) the minister of Viranrisimha. 

(Yv. 8 and 9.) His son, the noble emperor Vijayaditya, who was a moon in the ocean 
of the Chalukya racr, whose great valour was equalled (only) by (Indra) the lord of the gods, 
who understood (i.e. fail: lied) the desires of scholars, (and) who resembled the mine of gems 
(i.e. the ocean) in virtues, gave forever, in order to obtain the objects of ( his) desires, ten 
pair and five (i.e. twenty* five) cows (which had to supply ghee) for a lamp, to the great lord of 
Kurina, — hail ! in the prosperous S&ka year measured by the arrows (5), the treasures (9), 
the moon (I) and the earth (1), — (i.e. 1195),— while the sun stood in Tula, on the day of 
Rudra, on a Wednesday combined with the bright (fortnight) . 3 

(V. 10.) By (aZZ) pure-minded Yaishnavas and by (all) villagers who know the law, this 
charity should be for ever assiduously protected. 

B. — Dated Saka-Samvat 1199. 4 

TEXT. 

1 6 [>re] fa fv rs fi % fh m Phh fhnra 8 

2 r HH (eft K I "! [l*] tH[T]v(T)fniW^rf Tpq f«lfa [:*] 35^- 

3 Triform [<Mt*]vt<T ^k[T*]W5l[T]- 

4 <*m: I [t*J II 10 u^ 11 ^hh [t*]^h:- 12 

5 gi*i<sl’s<riM«3 rifTcra T[T*]WTTW^Tf^T 13 5Rt- 

6 *Ht*t ifrfee^ 

7 T§ [«*] £ W 3 t*!RT5r(:) 1 


TBANSLATION. 

(Verse 1.) Hail ! In theproperous Salta year measured by nine, the treasures (9), the earth 
(1) and the moon (1), — (i.e, 1199), — the virtuous prince Purushottama, the son of the 

1 The author of the inscription uses, instead of Manavya, the form Mdnaryasa, which is due to a wrong 

etymology, as Eari'asa, above, Yol. III. p. 255, note 4. 5 6 

2 I . e . Bribaspati, the minister of Indra. 

" On this date Professor Kielhorn remarks The date did not fall on a Wednesday in Saka-Samvat 1195 
current or expired. The date corresponds, for Saka-Samvat 1195 current, to Tuesday, 4fch October A.D. 1272- 
and for Saka-Samvat 1)95 expired, to Monday, 23rd October A.D. 1273. So the probability is that Saumy atari 
(1. 2u), ‘on a Wednesday/ is wrong for Sdmavdre, * on a Monday/ ” 

4 No 359 of the Government Epigraphist’s collection for 1»96. 

5 The word is written on an erasure. 6 Read 

7 The four syllables seem to be written on an erasure. 

6 Read >^^7. 9 Read - 

10 In the phace ot this sign of punctuation, which is superfluous, the figure *' 1 ” had been originally engraved. 

11 The first and third figure of “ 1199 ’’ are engraved on erasures, 

u Bead ,s Read 


No. 4.] 


FOUR INSCRIPTIONS AT SRIKURMAM. 


35 


glorious Rajaraja, gave, for the greater increase of (his) prosperity and fame, fifty excellent 
ewes (which had to supply ghee) for a lamp, as long as the moon and the host of stars endure, 
to Mura's enemy (i.e. Vishpu) who has the form of a tortoise. 1 

(Line 4). In the Saka year 1199, the emperor PurushdttamadGva, the son of 
Rajarajadeva, gave to the god who is the lord of Srikurma fifty-two ewes, in order to keep a 
perpetual lamp (burning) for ever. 

(L. 7.) This charity is placed under the protection of (all) Vaishnavas. 


C. — Dated Saka-Samvat 1231. 3 
TEXT. 

South Face . s 

1 Slangy VT[wg]- 

2 TTT% <*ld4fdori w- 

3 f^rt: [i*] wt- 

4 cf fWTWt*I fw- 

5 fchtihjgdK 

sj 

6 fal diyi r*WPTT^ [» t*] 

7 : *rtwr5nTrw* 

3 wou 7 !5*ii(uvta)y<lMw 

10 g^q1-dnf^[ffT]xm: gw i [*•] 

11 ^ftaRT[v]TOtV* f*|aKK > l«Hi[^]WTf- 

Fast Face. 

12 ^ 0]!J wrf% ww 

13 snnft vig«wqwn*f- 

16 fw?i g^fi^efa f a pi 13 




1 Kamatha is synonymous with kirma, from which the name SrtkfinnMB is <tonred. 
a No. 332 of the Government Epigraphist’s collection for 1596. . . * 

* The figure of * bow- the crest of the Cb&lukyw- i> engraved on the left of hue. lto* 

*. Bead M I d |'^ T T T° . 1 Re*d * 

1 The engraver baa placed bomoatal lines over the three eylUble. in order to ehow thet the, here to be 

° mitted ‘ . „ »• Bead 

* Bead WlTOnT. *Be«dWW. * . . 

n The 3 of Wf U entered below the Une ; the .econd prt of the «i of .tend. et the beguuun* of the 
next line. 

* Bead u Head 

* 2 F 


36 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Tol. V. 


North Face. 

28 %t%^T I'sg 8® [l*] T 2 

29 f is i i 3 ^rfwsTT^nft^ %- 

30 W»»I5Rrf% [«*] 


TRANSLATION. 

(Verses 1 and 2.) Hail ! In the prosperous Saka year containing the moon (1), the qualities 
(3) and the suns (12), — • ( i-e . 1231),— in the bright fortnight of the month of Asvayuj, on the 
Kaunteya-£i£/ii, on a Thursday, 4 — having founded (%n the temple) of the lord of Kurmapuri, who 
is an ocean of divine love, the sinless (and) wonderful rite (called) " the holy (rite of) Jjyyana- 
Visvanatha” after that moon in the ocean of the glorious Chalukya race, who was named 
Visvanatha, — he (viz. Visvanatha) gave to Vishnu, the lord of Kurina, ten double pairs ( i.e . 
40) nishkas (as) srihgdra-bhdgaf (which is to continue) as long as the moon and the stars, (and) 
which may confer prosperity on this (Visvanatha), the crest- jewel among Sdmantas , who 
surpasses (Indra) the enemy of Danu’s sons in prowess, (and who is) the son of the glorious 
prince Purushottama ! 

(Line 10.) Hail! In the [3rd] year of the victorious reign of the glorious Jagannatha- 
deva, (which was) the prosperous Saka year 1231, on Thursday, the 5th : (tithi) of the bright 
(fortnight of the month) of Kaoya, — while the glorious Virabanudeva-Jiyya was ruling, 6 — 
the glorious Visvanathadeva-Jiyya, the virtuous son of the glorious Purushottainadeva-Jiyya 
who was a Chalukya emperor (and) belonged to the gotra of the Manavyas, paid 40 ganda- 

mddas into the treasury of the lord of Srikurma in order to 

obtain for himself long life, health, wealth and prosperity, and an abundance of sons and grand- 
sons. 

(L. 23.) May this charity belong to the lord of Srikurma, as long as the moon and the sun 
exist, ( under the name of) “ the holy Visvandtha-bhoga ! ” 


1 

2 

3 

4 


D. — Dated Saka-Samvat 1240. 7 


TEXT. 


’ft: [n*] -r- 

r ^ o ^ 

sfrrsr: ii [t*] TryifTT tprefaurt ff u rfgrfinpjt 





1 Read *TT^f*T. 2 Read 8 Bfa( j °^ T ^^?rT% Ti 

4 Regarding this date and the corresponding one in the Telugu portion (11. 10-12) Professor Kielhorn 
remarks : — “ 1 have not found Kaunttya anywhere for 5 (or any other number) ; but taking the date to be Saka- 
Samvat 1231, Thursday, the 5th tithi of the bright half of the lunar month Asvina and the solar month of Knny&, 
I find that it is incorrect for Saka-Samvat 1231 current and expired (as well as for 1230 current aod 1232 expired). 
It would correspond, for Saka-Samvat 1231 current, to Friday, 20th September A.D. 1308, when the 5th tithi ended 
23 b. 39 m.; and for Saka-Savat 1231 expired, to Tuesday, 9th September A.D. 1309, when the 5th tithi ended 
23 h. 5 in. So the date is of no value." 

5 This technical term appears to mean a fund for defraying the expenses of the rite founded by ViivanAtha. 
In 1, 29 below it is called SH-VUvandtha-bhoga* 

6 The term veharana is probably a tadbhara of viharana, * roaming.’ 

T No. 288 of the Government Epigraphist’s collection for 1896. 

9 Read 9 Read 

Vj 



So. 5 1 


TWO GRANTS OP DADDA IV. PRASANTARAGA. 


37 


mft: i srr% 




6 f^n 2 RH^r^pTc4i^rfefT iriirai 3 ^rtfrWfi [ii \*] wr 

7 ihfUftT 5 irofsr: i 8 


TRANSLATION. 

Prosperity ! (Verse 1.) In the race of the Moon was born on earth king R&jaraja, an 
emperor among princes, who was beloved by good people. His son ( was ) a victorious, righteous 
(a nd) grateful king, named Vijayarka, whose conduct was pure. 

(V. 2.) His brother, the virtuous king Purushottama, gave to the merciful lord Nrihari 
(Vishnu) who is pleased to reside at Srikurma, (and who is) a giver of virtuous sons, a 
heavenly, charming necklace, made of seven nishkas of gold, in the Saka year containing the 
•sky (0), the ages (4) and the suns (12), — (t.e. 1240),— in the month of Nabhas. 

(Line 6.) This eulogy (jpratasti) was composed by the poet Nrisimha. 


No. 5.— TWO GRANTS OF DADDA IV. PRASANTARAGA; 
f CHEDI-]SAMVAT 392. 


By G. Buhler, Ps.D., LL.D., C.I.E. 


I here re-edit the two inscriptions of the Gurjara chief Dadda IV.,’ which were discovered 
in 1895 by Mr. Vitbal Nagar of Baroda. 8 At my request, Dr. Hultzsch obtained the 
originals from the owner, Dhed Narayan of Sankheda in the Baroda division, through the 
kind offices of Colonel N. C. Martelli, Agent to the Governor-General at Baroda. Dr. 
Hnltzsch’s impressions yield some better readings, among which however only one, khadtra 
for vihira (No. II. 1. 11) affects the sense. The grants, which have been drawn up on the 
same day, by the same writer, and in favour of the same person, are written each on two 
plates, showing, as is usual in Gurjara tasanas, each two holes for the ( n0 ^ os ^') rlD ® 8 ' e 
plates of No. I. measure 10 inches by 5f, and those of No. II. 10 inches by 6. 

The characters show the western variety of the southern alphabets, which is found 
regularly in the inscriptions of the kings of Valabhi, of the Gurjaras of Broach, of their 
successors, the Rath6rs, and of some other dynasties. 9 As might be expected they agree m 
particular very closely with the Kheda grants 10 of the same Dadda, written in (Chedi-)Samvat 
380 and 385 by the same writer, with which they share the use of the characteristic little 
buttons at the tops of the vertical strokes. Nevertheless there are small differences in some 
letters, which extend even to these two new documents, where e.g. the medial i of No. I. does 
not agree with that of No. II. Much greater and more important variations appear in the 


1 Bead Vtfkjfaqd TU 
3 Read 5 Re* d 


3 Read 

5 Read ctffacTT. 


6 This is a single vddn in the Vasantatilakft metre. # w , .. , 

. ® Qat a-S»fhvftt 400 415 and 417 to he spurious, call this 

1 Those who consider the three Gurjara grant* of Saka-bamvat aw, Buu * 

"‘“It™ « a-**- - >» ^ »“«•*«-• «“ *' 

W mi MmmmtmH V*. 1. tat U. 


paragraph 28, A. 

10 Jour • £oy. At. Soc., H. S., Vol. L p. 247 ff. i ***. Ant . Vol. XlH. p. 78. 



EPIGRAPHI A IXDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


33 


Valabhi s< Uanas, stated to have been written by the same writer, as may be seen from a 
comparison of those drawn up by the divirapati Skandabhata. Among the signs of 
interpunctuation we find, besides single and double vertical strokes, a single dot, e.g. after 
'-sirnni (No. I. 1. 10) and after °$andhis=eha (No. I. 1. 13), as well as a double point, 1 * looking 
like a visarga y after v a tavr iksha s--cha (No. II. 1. 11). The language, except in* the imprecatory 
verses from the Mahdbhdrata > is good Sanskrit prose, and the orthographical and clerical 
mistakes are very few. 

The form of the two grants, likewise, closely agrees with that of the Kheda 6dsana$ r 
differing chiefly by the shortness of the Prasasti . While the Kheda grants contain, in 
accordance with the rules of the Smriti? descriptions of three generations of princes, the new 
inscriptions offer only the eulogy of the donor. This, of course, is literally identical in the four 
documents. In the technical parts of the four inscriptions there are only small verbal 
differences, which, however, extend even to the two Sankheda tcisanas. Though they do not 
affect the general meaning, they are very instructive for the manner in which the clerks of 
ancient India worked. These men apparently cared for exactness not more than the modem 
Karkuns, since we see here that the same writer, though working according to an older office 
copy, permitted himself to introduce small changes in two documents which he drafted on the 
same day. 

The object of the grants is to convey two fields, one at Suvarnarapalli (No. I.) and one at 
Kshirasara (No. II.) in the Samgamakhetaka* vishaya, to the Brahman Surya for the purpose 
of defraying the expense of his sacrifices. The gain from these inscriptions for the history of 
the Gurjaras of Broach is but small. Their date, the full-moon day of Vais&kha of 
(Chedi-)Samvat 392, shows, however, that Dadda IV. Prasantaraga ruled at least until 
A.D. 641-2, and that the Sankheda grant 3 of (Chedi-)Samvat 391 was really issued during 
Dadda’s reign as Mr. Dhruva conjectured. Its grantor, Ranagraha, the son of Vitaraga, whom 
Mr. Dhruva rightly considers to he a brother of our Dadda, probably held some villages as his 
gras. Further, the two inscriptions show that the territory of the Gurjaras extended up to the 
frontiers of Khandesh and Malva. For the town, after which the Samgamakhetaka- visbaya 
was named, is undoubtedly the modern Sankheda. Samgamakhetaka means etymologically ‘ the 
village at the confluence (of two rivers)/ and the Unchh and the Or 4 join near Sankheda, 
The vishaya or province of Samgamakhetaka probably included the Sankheda Prant of the 
Gaikov&d’s possessions, as well as the neighbouring portion of the Revakantha Agency, 
still called Sahkhfcda Mevas. 5 The partial identity of the name 9 of the two districts indicates 
that they once belonged to a larger province, the capital of which was Sankheda. As the 
Trigonometrical Survey maps of these districts are not accessible to me, I am unable to fully 
prove these assertions by the identification of the villages of Atavipataka, Kukkutavallik&, 
Kshirasara and Suvarn&rapalli, mentioned in the two grants. But I may state that an old 
map of Gujarat in my possession shows south-east of Saonkaira (Sankheda) the village of 
Kookreylee (Kukr£li), the name of which corresponds to Kukkutavalli. 

The donee, the Br&hman Sfirya, who lived in Kshirasara, belonged to the Bharadvaja gotra 
and studied the Madbyandina recension of the White Yajnrvfida, was an emigrant from 
Dasapura, the modern Man -Das dr in Western Malva. 6 The corporation of the Chaturvedins of 


1 See the section of the Qmndnsi quoted, paragraph 88, C. 5 (p. 84). Numerous instances, in which this 
»ign is used, have been found of late by Professor Knauer in the MSS. of the Manata-QrihyaaUra; seethe Preface 

to hi* edition. 

? See the Gm*driss der Indo-Ar Phil, mnd AU?rtum*k Vol. II. Part 8 (Recht und Sitte ), p. 114, and 
Prof. J . Jolly’s article in the Zeittchrijl der Deutechen Afory. GeseUsckaft, quoted there. 

3 Bp. Ind. Vol. II. p. &1 f. * Bombay Gazetteer, Vol. VII p 355. 8 Ibid. Vol, VL p. 14 ff. 

* See Dr, Fleet’s Gupta Intcript io%s t pp. 79, 142. Add to Dr. Fleet’s list of passages, mentioning DaHapnra, 

Mighadu ta t verse 48 (Wilson). 



No. 5.] 


TWO GRANTS OF DADDA IV. PRASANTARAG A. 39 


Dasapura is mentioned in the spttrione grant' of DharasSna II., dated Saka-Samvat 400, and 
a member of the Brahman caste of Dasapura ( Daiapura-jMti ) composed the Chitdrgadh 
inscription of Mokala of Mfivad. 3 At present DasapnrJyas are not found in GnjarAt. 

The writer of the grant, the Sdmdhivigrahika Beva, is known from the KhMft grants. The 
name of the dufaka, Karka, in No. II. line 27, is new. His title, bhbgikapdhka, literally ■ the 
protector of the bhogikas or village proprietors,’ the technical meanirg of which is not known 
to me, occurs also in the SahkhSda grant of Samvat 391, where in line 9 the facsimile ha« 
dutakd=tra bhogikapalaka- Dujjdna, and not, as Mr. Dhruva reads, bhogika-Pdlakafu-jfldna. 


TEXT OP NO. I.» 

Fint Plate . 

3 c ren ma fa d dfa g W ftr qt t*f« *Tfng *4 xw&m iro i - 6 

4 Pd fircTfarc r wfgt y i ftrcrfirc r: ^twTNTqrgrrwT- 7 


6 ^r: 

7 fa *4 ^ q « 1 fa C » pi * *1 fa H 4 * s44ifa fd fa : 10 

8 *i<*if*M i.^iH^fa*fa^rd<.*- u 

9 *fr fafacTwifw: *nr*i- 

toffaN* 1 11 * 

10 qpg p q ff - 

No. I. 

i dirq- 
I [11] 


^«ra: siUiHWW- 
^ttrreffa: srror: pz?fifliFifm* 


No. II. 

[ 10 ] *mw*T 

waft WfiiRjW: 
m W3W [11] n- 


1 Ind. Ant. Vol. X p. 284, U 17. * E P- Imd - ¥oL H. P- 420, U 52. 

* From ink-impre**ionJ received from Dr. Huttiecb. 

4 Expressed by a symbol. 

* In No, II. line 1 ends with No. II* b*» °€C£ c * 

9 In No. II. line 2 ends with 

* In No. IL line 8 ends with °*f**r(Wt)° — E< » d °gV<G° with No - ,L 

* In No. II. line 4 ends with * ,a Ho. IL Un * 6 ** d * with * 

* In No. IL line 6 ends with — ® 0- ^ 

11 In No. IL line 7 ends with « 

" No. IL h*e c xrf>nnf^»Tft 0 .~ 10 No - 1L Uo ® 8 * n<1 * with 


40 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. 


No. I. 

[12] ^pjTfT: 

i rr^rrwr ^ i 

<t: tot: 4 

Sd^fjd WdfV^ir 


No. II. 

zfbtw n l wh: 13- 

l^r^dir^P 1 

[12] iigi'ddHw' utftar 


14 etafoK 




15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 


Second Plate. 


^rJHpeRnfN r^^uT t ^^ r f^ i^r- 8 


•fcfw - 9 

^twwhro *n<Tifa^Ui*nq tsm^wr^sn^- 

qrcfavwfcrr- 10 

ffTW ^rTl^l^^k^^HllfwT^iqfdfa: IHdM^dwfidt^fw^rT*;^- 
^pf 11 



^IWRTWSI 




WhPJTT- 18 

UMfdd&tfq l ls 

ift 3 m h Pd ftn q ia rg rru P c HvP*fe<i 1 1 P^edj wnrm q i gultd r u 
^fh^i-smid^: wgar: 14 

firefir [>*] wnawr ^t^t- 16 


1 This afcpa of interpunctuation looks like a visarga . * Read 

I Read 4 Read V*fT:. • Read SpamY, 

6 In No. IL line 12 end* with °ftfeffT°. T I n No. II. Hoe 13 ends with °f^rf*TC°. 

8 Bead <^3<° with No. II., which omits °^n^f° and reads °f^Tf%° for ^Utfoij 0 i n No. II, line 14 and 

plate i. end with °WfT3I° — Bead with No. II. 

» No. II. has — In No. II. line 15 ends with No. II. has 

10 In No. II. line 16 ends with W.- No. II. omits °57 and has 
“ In No. II. line 17 ends with 0 *fawfa°.— Read °Sfoff and °mnr° with No. II. 

13 In No. II. line 18 end* with n ^Ki«n^41° . lt In No. II. line 19 ends with ° ^fiK . 

14 In No. II. line 20 ends with °Hd^} n No. II. has wrongly ^nft^T — Read °^Tcf^° with No. II., which 
has °^SWT°. 

II In No, II. line 21 ends with °WSC°,— No. II. has ^§*1 and k— In No. II. line 22 ends with 


Sankheda Plates of Dadda IV. — [Chedi-] Samvat 392. 

No. I. 


■W Tf TU £ 8>*a l }V-!>J<mQ<3ar 0 ; 

SXSrsttfiV %bx&r-'is?x i mr'$ \ 

. ^ fttunCirQf d'41 w ntr* *{ 7 V* \ u i/P I 


' :2 «>: &$ *’«£*<£ ^ *i *r < f & h r m 
: Hr- « y« r 8 J? f r« 4 J v iy a jg 1 £ t «4) flj '*’ S i a «g> £ • . * ^ t ■ j- I &.s= 


* -* w ^ J VJ ^ .0 M.‘0. V M p) U ^ — " 


ei^JSS 



X Lws*^w 8§cw.^i« 


; 5’«i’5i^!>a>^'i *,£» gi'Vi'U nre-* 

$ tr t && *!&&$& pa# J»*(3 ^ 

- ; * m tj ^^8 v 8*»'» ^ - : 


e. HULTZSCH. 


SCALE TWO THIRDS. 


W. GRIGGS, PHOTO-LITH. 


Sankheda Plates of Dadda IV.— [Chedi-] Samvat 392 


. >&« *&%%* 




18 


«£**$** 




■ ^ * e &&<§*. ^ 1 *- at? oj.9§%j. v a^<w.x v*@£s- ^ ; 

“ rf.l^ 5!^HQ«7tr it, % -trv ? i f ' ' 

JLj ?$5 ,J 8 *MS f - 


y ni.T^S ? !>;--?>Tf • ~ 

S ?;■ ?'*?•*>* AA> a$f*i * %’S- & '». 

I ■«' S' iftr-gag# A 

1 ;'•', : it) P,@ HA Sv'Jj 1 A 

. f 'A,r 

... ,», R&r 


* '# .'A..,- iT * n >c'* 

W <r \J'e^' t U<2,ci 

WS/*|i«<&'— 


e^\prt 


i£iM££*lv££H 








;.Mfe,vs;tra, 5 ; ; 4 




•tots:' I' 


sy 


E. HULTZSCH. 


SCALE TWO THIRDS. 


W. GRIGGS, PHOTO-UTM. 



VATTELUTTU INSCRIPTIONS OP CHOLA KINGS. 


41 


No. 6.] 

24 s?TT ^ ?TRfa ir# ^ II RrereteCTlfa* : 

[i*] arssnvtfr f? wnm tr- 1 

25 f*er § u SffHs^rT w* trsrfir: [i*J w 

zn?r »jfw^i rT^r f^rr xfiw ii spfrr ht?-* 

26 1% grr [«*] foaMdmremfamfa 

rrrf^T «mr *rrg: H^rrr^frrr » *n?- s 

27 ttt tRspeit tt 53W glvrfsr i ^ ^rr^f- 

tf-mmimra* [ii‘] 


No. 1. 


No. II. 


^g gRaicH^ [28] 


[27] % 




^ ai TO^npg^ i rt f%f*3- j f ^rrwtwrrert wtf^nn^Rrars^?^ 

crfrn? 

[29] e.o * 

\o i ^HtrT* 

Tnng^t: w^rtv 41«mi»cRT4i« 

[«*] 


M%rf q if^foqfV^gW ^T§nsf- 
[28] * ^#0 5.0 ^ tnT*f n 
l • <{ fi^ch^Wsi^Hrt^l 

tPRgft : ^ftW- [29] 

frHU rer B 


j^ 0t 6_ EIGHT VATTELUTTU INSCRIPTIONS OP CHOLA KINGS. 

Bt E. Hultzsch, Ph.D. 

Professor Buhler in Lis Indian Paleography (p- 72 t of ^ German edition) and 
Mr. Venkayya in his paper on the Kottayam plate of Vira-Raghava (above, ,\6L IV. p. 293) 
have lately urged the necessity of publishing Vatteiuttu inscriptions, the dates , of which can 
be fixed withsome certainty. Hence I take this opportunity for issuing mechanical copies of 
eight Chola inscriptions. None of these is in acondition of complete preservation ; but 1 trust 
that, even in their necessarily imperfect state, the accompanying facsimiles will prove useful for 

tracing the development of the Vatteiuttu alphabet. ^ ^ 

. . .. / n 4 -r, Vl\ ar& engraved on two boulders in the Stha$iunatha 

F„, rf the ' MmirC C.moru, i» ft. Sftft, -d ft. 

remaining three ( . •) . , Thev belong to the reigns of the Chola kings 

BhbrmMevi in the Tinnevelly district. They oeiong « . s 


i 'u^r^S^i* .ah E«a ^ -ft n- 

“ ..ft -ft ». 1L _ 

* la No, IL line 25 end. with H* H. *•» TO* 




EPIGRAPHIA rai)ICA. 


[Yol. V 


Parakeaarivarman (A.), Parantaka I. (B.), Bajaraja I. (0. to G.) and ftajendra-Chola I. 
(H.). The fact that all these inscriptions are found in the extreme south of the peninsula 
proves, what the Vatteluttu inscriptions of the earlier Pandya kings suggest, that, about the 
10th century of our era, the Vatteluttu was current in the country of the Pandyas, but unknown 
in the native territory of their Chola conquerors. 

The characters of the subjoined inscriptions agree more closely with those of the Cochin 
and Tirunelli plates 1 * than with those of the plates of Jatilavarman. 3 Throughout F., G. and 
H. once in C. 3 and twice in D. 4 occurs a variant of y, which is known from the Kottayam 
plates of Sthanu-Ravi. 5 In H. the double h is written as a group, as in many inscriptions in 
the Tamil alphabet. As in all other Vatteluttu inscriptions, Grantha letters are occasionally 
used in the subjoined eight records. The following is a list of the Grantha words and 
letters : — 

Svasti $rl at the beginning of each of the eight inscriptions. — A., 1. 11, sabhai . — C., 1. 4, 
brahma ; 1. 5, Mahade; 1. 11, sabhai. — D., 11. 4 and 6, ja of Bajaraja; 1. 7 f., brahma and 
m of brahmadeyam , and Sujintira. — E., 1. 8, brahmade and mah[d*]salhai. — F., 11. 3 and 4, 
Bajaraja ; 1. 4 t., brahma , mahd and chchaturvve. — H., 1. 1, srt and jendra of srUBajendra, ja of 
Irdjardja ; 1. 2, brahma ; 11. 2, 8 and 9, sa of Vaigdnasa ; 11. 5 and 6, £ri. 


A. — Inscription in the Sthanunatha temple at Suchindram. 6 * 

This^ inscription records the gift of a lamp to the Siva temple at Tiruehchivindiram, the 
modern Suchindram, and is dated in the 34th year of the reign of the ancient Chola king 
Parakesarivarman.7 As we know from the large Leyden grant and from actual examples in 
the history of the later Chdlas that the titles Rujakesarin and Parakesarin were borne 
alternately by reigning king3, 8 some of those inscriptions which are dated in the reign of 
Parakesarivarman — without any distinguishing epithet, a3 Madirai-konda in the case of 
Parantaka I.,— may perhaps be attributed to Vijayalaya, the grandfather of Parantaka I. and 
the earliest historical person that is referred to in two genealogical inscriptions of the Chfila 
dynasty. 9 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 


TEXT. 10 


Svasti 

rkku 11 

vv-[a]n[d]u 

chivindirattu 


[II*] Ko=Pparake[sa]ri[vanma]- 

yK^du muppattu-nalu i. 

Nanji-na[t]tu Tirucb- 

[M]ud[t>]varkku Te- 


n-nattu Talaikkulattu [A]raiyan=A- 

ravin[dan] sandi[r-ad]l[tta>v a [la]- 

m IJ nijaai njakku ne[y] mnttfaj- 

mal erivadaga vaichcka tiru-no- 

nda-vilakkn onrnnkku vaich[cha*] 

[s]ava [mu]va per ada a[m]badu [|*] fi] V ai 
aimbadurn paiud [ ai]- sabhai y a rkku ;j}*] 


1 Above, Vcu III. p. 6G and 2nd. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 285 If. 

5 Ihid. \ol. XXII. p. 57 if. c the Second ydndu of Line 2. 

4 In yam, 1. 8, and udaiua, 1. 12. 5 Compnre above, Vol, III. p. M f. 

* No. SI of the Government Epigraphies collection for 1890. 

1 To tho same rci g n belong Neb. 85 end MS of South* 2nd. Inter. Vol. I , and No. 11 of Vol fit 

* Ibid. Vol. I. p. 141, note 4. 

* Ibid. Vol. II. p. 3<9. Vijaydlaya is not mentioned in the SholingUur inscription ; above Vol IV u 

" Prom an inked es tarn page. 11 Bead rku or rkku. * Kead _ c J ' * F ' 







No. 6.] 


TATTELUTTCT INSCRIPTIONS OF CHOLA KINGS. 


43 


TRANSLATION. 

Hail! Prosperity! In the year thirty-four hf tin reija) of king* Parakesarivarman,— 
in this year Araiyan Aravindan of Talaikkulam ’D the southern country (Ten-nadu) gave to 
(the temple of) Mahadeva (Siva) at Tiruchchivindira’il in iNTahji-nadu one sacred perpetual 
lamp, to burn without fail foue) of ghee per day, as long as tne moon and the sun 

exist. For ( this lamp he) gave fifty full-grown ewes, which must neither die nor g^ow old. 5 
These fifty {eices-were mide over) to the members of the assembly* ( 0 / the village). 

B.— Inscription in the Sthanunatha temple at Suchindram.s 

This inscription is dated in the iOch year* of the reign of “ Parakesarivarman who 
conquered Madirai (Madhura) and I lam 1 Ceylon,” Le. the Cndla king Parantaka I., 6 and 
records that a merchant of Karavandapuram 8 granted two lamps to two shrines of Vishnu, 
which seem to have been located in the Eotrt temple at Sucmndram. 


TEXT. 

1 Svasti [srt] [||*] Madi[raiyu]m ilamum konda ko=P- 

2 para[ke]sa [n] vamuarkau [yan]du narpadu i- 

3 v[v-an]du ’ Kn;m]ba-na[y]ir[ru]=Ttiruehehi- 

4 vindirat[tu] EmberamanukkusKkalak- 

5 [k]ud[i]-nattu-[X]kara[va]ndapurat[tu] vi[y]apari Oru- 

6 [h]g[ai] Arahgn[n] vaitta tiri-nonda-vilakku o- 

7 [n]ru nira [palattu] mn[ppadn] [I*] i[iln] m[sa]dam 

8 uj'\[kk-a]rai ne[y] matta[mal] pa [gain] aa ^ iravnm 

9 [sa]ndi[r]-adi[tta-var] e[r]i[vadajga [vi]t[ta] [i^]va mu- 

10 vu-[n]per=ad[n elu]ba[tt-ainja] [I*] i^a L ne] ^^L 11 ]" 

11 ve[hlgada[mlai]kkn [vaitta ti]ri-[non]da-vilak- 

12 ku ~onri[nuk]ku [ni]sa[da]m al[a]k[ku] ne[y] mer- 

13 [pa]di~ "[e]ri[va]da[ga] vi[t]ta 4d[n ijrubatt-ai- 

14 nju [I*] a[ga] adu nu[rnm pa]radai-chcktvm[yj»|rkkuj 

15 [kat]ti=kkudu[t]tana [II*] 

TBANSLATION. 

Hail ! Prosperity ! In the year forty (of the reign) of king Parakesarivarman who 
conquered Madirai and ilam, — in the month of Kumbha of this year, Ornngax Arangap, a 
merchant of Karavandapuram in Kalakkudi-nadu, gave one perpetual lamp, weighing thirty 
falam, to (the temple of) Emberumun (Vishnu; at Tiruchchivindiram. In order that this 




6 > 




1 Ia which have to be replaced by fresh ones ft hen they die or cease to supp y 
South-lnd. Inter. Vol, II. p. 375, note 3. , . . , „ ArrnI . (i f . 

* Sabhai or Uvai is the Tamil form of the Sanskrit sahhd, and paradox .3 perhaps a corrupts 
Sanskrit parishad. 

1 No. 82 of the Government Epigraphist’s collection f«»r 1896. 

4 An inscription of the same year ia noticed in Souta-Ind, Inter. Yol. . p. t an 


1 inscription of the same year : 

* See ibid. p. 379 and note 8 . 

1 The same place is mentioned in two PAndya inscriptions ; ina. J3.ni. 1 rt ’ " 

» A. stated ia Sonth-Ind. Inter. Vol. II. p. 132. note 3. nondd-eilaklca or naada-cxlakku are corrnptmn. of 
•xundd eifailcu, which occur, m H., line 4. nnd in an inscription at Tirnkkalukkunram (above \o! III. p. 284). 
The foru, tiri-nonda-vilakku in the present inscription farther suggest! thzx hru-nunda-vxlaM*. a sacred lamp 
*hich ia never trimmed,’ has been developed by folk etymology from tiri-nundd-vx\akka, a lamp the w le k 0 f 
which is never trimmed 9 (because ghee is continually supplied to it). 

2 c 



44 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


(lamp) might burn without fail, as long as the moon and the sun exist, during day and night, 
(one) ulakku and a half of ghee per day, (he) granted seventy-five full-grown ewes, which 
must neither die nor grow old. 1 For one (other) perpetual lamp, which the same person gave 
to ( the shrine of) Tiruvehgada[nilai], 2 * (he) granted twenty -five ewes, in order that (this lamp) 
might burn, in the same manner as stated above, (one) dldkku 3 of ghee per day. Altogether 
one hundred ewes were shown and made over to the members of the assembly. 

C. — Inscription in the Sthamin&tha temple at Suchindram. 4 * 

This inscription records the gift of a lamp by a native of Ceylon (lla-n&du) in the 10th 
year of the reign of the Chola king Rajaraja I., who ascended the throne in A.D. 985. 6 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 


TEXT. 

Svasti sri [|j*] Ko Irasairasa-Kesarivan- 

markku yandu p attain yandu tudan- 

gina Karkadaga-£ia[yi*]rru pfa]nji-nat[tu] 

brahma deyam Tiruchchi[v]in[di]rat[tu] 

Mahadevark[ku l]la-[na]ttra Maja[va]- 

[raiya]n [Se]n[ni] Ka[nda]n [nisadajm 
k[ku] ney san dir- adit ta-val ira- 

[vu]m pa[ga]lum [mu*][t]ta[ma]l erivadaga [vai]- 
chcha tir[u]-nonaa-vilak[k]u onru [|*] [i]duk[ku] 
vai[ch]cha [sa]va 6 muva=pper=adu anmbadu 7 [f*] 
ivai mula-paradai-[sa]bh[aiy]ar vasam katti= 
kkaduttana || mula-paradai-chcha[vai]yarum 

Emberuman [VJettirkudi [Pa]dait[tarn]- 

[raa]n Kanai[ya]n=du[n]ai[y=a]kki 9 va[sa*][m] k[a]tti= 
k[ku]duttana [||*] 


TRANSLATION. 

Hail ! Prosperity ! In the tenth year (of the reign ) of king Rfijarfija-Kfisarivarman, in 
the month of Karkataka with which (this) year began, Mala[varaiya]n [Se]n[ni] Ela[nda]n 
of [I]la-nadu gave to (the temple of) Mahadeva at Tiruchchivindiram, a brahmadeya in Nafiji- 
nadu, one sacred perpetual lamp, to burn without fail during night and day, as long as the 
moon and the sun exist, (one) ulakku of ghee per day. For this (lamp fo)gave fifty full-grown 
ewes, which must neither die nor grow old. 9 These (ewes) were shown and made over to the 
chief members of the assembly. And (by) the chief members of the assembly they were 
entrusted (?), shown and made over to [Pa]dait[taruma]n Kanai[ya]n of [VJettirkudi, (a 
village belonging to the temple of ) Emberuman (Vishnu). 

D. — Inscription in the Sth&nun&tha temple at Suchindram . 10 

This inscription is dated in the 14th year of the reign of the same king as the preceding 
inscription. Its purport is doubtful owing to the bad preservation of lines 14 to 24, of which I 
am unable to publish a transcript and translation. 


1 See above, p. 43, note 1. 

’ Veng.'dam is the Tami] name of the hill of Tirupati, which is s&cred to Vishnu. 

* 1 dldkku — i ulaklcu ; &ee South- Ind. Inter. Yol. II. p. 48, pgte 5, and p. 130, note 8. 

4 No. 71 of the Government Epigraphy's collection for 1896.-* 1 See below, p. 48 and note 6. 

e Head muvd=. T Read aimbadu. 8 Read W«aaty=> (?). 

9 See above, p. 43, note 1. 10 No. 75 of the Government Epigraphies collection for 1896. 



Vatteluttu Inscriptions of Chola Kings. 










No. 6.] 


VATTELUTTU INSCRIPTIONS OF CHOLA KINGS. 


45 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 


Svasti [sri] [||*] 
[Ka]tga-padiy am 
[y]ga-vali[y]um 
[n]da ko 

[r]ku y^[n]da 


TEXT. 

Kandalur-Salai kalam=aruttu 
Nulamba-padiyum Tadi- 

Vengai-nadum ko- 

B£jar&ja-[K]esarivanma- 
padi-nalu ivv-a- 


ndu 

[va]lan&ttu 

yam 

tevadanam 
r*ppal 

3 kil-kkaranmai 
gal taneda udaiyar 

[nilajhgal [Ner]i[yan] -Mftvendavela[r] 

tn&]t[tu] 


Yi[ra]ch[ch]iga-iia[yi*][rru] Irajar&ja- 

Nanji-na[t]tu brahmade- 

SajintLrattu Emmernma[n] 1 * * 

Niruba[s]egara[va]lanallu- 
[T]envalanallur mun* 

[k]udi- 
udaiya 
Solla [N&]fiji- 


udaiya 


TRANSLATION. 

Hail ! Prosperity ! In the year fourteen (of the reign ) of king Rajaraja-Kesarivarman. 
^ho, having destroyed the ships (at) Kandalur-Salai, conquered Ganga-padi, Nulamba-p&di, 
Tadiga-vali 4 and Vengai-n&du, — in the month of Vrischika of this year, the cultivators 
who were formerly snb-tenants of Tenvalanallur, a portion of Nripasekharavalanallur, a 
devadana (of the temple) of Emberuman (Vishnu) at Sujindiram, a brahmadiya in Nafiji- 

fc&du, (a district ) of Rajaraja-vajanadu, 5 * * * at the bidding 

of Neriyan-Muvenda velar® 


E»- — Inscription in the Sth&nunatha temple at Suehindram J 

This inscription is dated in the 15th year of the reign of the same king as the two 
preceding inscriptions (C. and D.). It consists of 22 lines, of which lines 9 to 22 are here 
omitted because I cannot make them out in full. 

TEXT. 

1 Svasti §r[i] [||*] Tiru-magafl] p61a=pper[u]-ni[la]-chchelvi[y]un=danak[key=uri]- 

2 mai [p]undamai mana-k[k]ol=Kkan[da]lur-Chchaiai 8 kalam=arutt=aruli=K[ka]- 

3 nga-padi[u]m* Nutembar-p[a]di[u]m 9 Tadi[ya]r-pa[d]i[u]m 9 [Ve]h[gai]- 

nadu[m Ku]- 

4 dagamalai-n&du[n]-dan[dar]=kko[n]du tann=e[l]il vilaitga ftjiyil e[l]l[a-y&]- 

5 ndnn=do[l=Udag][ai*] vila[n]gnm yaodey [Se]liyarai tesa kol k6 IrSsara[sa}- 

6 Kesari[vanma]rkku [y&]ndu padin-ain[ju] iv[v]-andn Kanni-[nay]irp mnv[v-a]- 

7 n [diy=ag]i [S]e[v]vay-[k]kilamai perra [Pujrayirattadi-nal Irasarasa-va[]a]- 

8 natta fNkfij]i-nAttu brahmadeyam T[irnohJChiTi[nd]ii8ttU mah[a J- 

sabhaiyom kala- 


1 Read Emberumdn. * Read mun. * Read kil-. 

4 Ocher inscriptions have the forms Tadigaipddi, Tadtgapddi, Tadigapddi and Tadigavali ; see So.th.-Ind. 

Iter. Vol. III. p . 29. 

1 Thia designation was bestowed by Rajarija I. on the Pindya country ; see ibid. Vol. IL p. 149, note 7, and 

Vol -tII.p. 15> note 4. 

• The same person is mentioned again in the unpublished portion of the same macription, L 16 f, 

1 No. 85 0 f tbe Government Epigraphist’s collection for 1895.* 

• Bead » Bead -pddiy***. 



46 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[ V ot>. Y s 


TRANSLATION. 

Hail ! Prosperity! In the year fifteen (of the reign) of king Rajaraja-Kesarivarman, 
who, (in) the belief that, as well as the goddess of Fortune, the goddess of the great Earth had 
become his wire, was pleased to destroy the ships (a£) Kandalur-Salai ; who conquered by 
(his) army Ganga-p&di, Nulambar-p&di, Tadiyar-padi, Yeagai-nadu and E/udagamalai- 
n&du; 1 and who, in the long tone during which his youth was resplendent, deprived theSeliyas 
(i.e. the Pandyae) of (their) splendour at the very moment when Udag[ai], 2 * which is 
worshipped everywhere, was ('most) resplendent j — in this year, on the day of Purva-Bhadrapada 
which corresponded to a Tuesday, three evenings having expired of the month of Kanytr, — we, 
the members of the great assembly of TinichcMvmdiram, a brahmadeya in Nanji-nadu, (a 
district ) of Rajaraja-valanadu, 

I\ — Inscription in the Ramasvamin temple at Sherrnddevi. 5 

This inscription is dated in the same reign and the a une year as the preceding one. It has 
been left unfinished by the engraver. 


TEXT. 

1 Svasti sri 4 [I!*] Tini-magal pola^pperamila-chchelviyun-daTnkkey-uriniai 

pundamai fm ana]- kk61=Kkanda[lur]-Chch[a]- 

2 lai kalara=aratt=ara]i~Kkanga-padiyu=Nulam[ba]-padiyun==Dadigai-padi[y]um 

Ven[g]ai-nadan=[G]u[da]gamalai-nadun=sdan- 

3 dal=k[ko]ndu tan^ejil va]ar uliyul [el]ld-yandun=dol=TTdag[ai*] vi[la]ngutn 

yandey Soliya[rai]=ttesi s kol kovHrajaraja-Kesari- 

4 vanmarkku yandu. padin-anjavadu iw-andu R4jaraja-va[bi]nattu [M]ulli-nfittn 

brahmadeyam Seraman-mah[a]devi-chchatu- 

5 [r]wedimangalat[tu] 


TRANSLATION. 

Hail ! Prosperity ! In the fifteenth year (of the reign) of king R&jarfija-Kesanvarman*. 

who, e^. 6 — in this year of Seram&n-n.ahad^vi-chatar- 

vedimahgftlain, 7 a brahmadeya in Mulli-nadu, (a district) of Rajaraja-val&nfidu, . . 


G. — Inscription in the Ramasvamin temple at Shermfidevi. 

This inscription opens with the usual historical introduction of the later inscriptions 8, of the 
Chola king Rajaraja I., which, however, has been left incomplete by the engraver. 


1 Other inscriptions read Nulamba-pddi^ Tadiya-pddi (compare above, p. 45 , note 4 ), and Kndam tlax-ndd*. 

• See South’Ind. lmcr. Tol. II. p. 250, note 3. 

* No. 182 of the Government Epigraphist’s collection for 1895. 

4 These two words are engraved in large letters to the left of lines 1 and 2. 

* Read = ttliu . 

4 The historical introduction of this inscription agrees almost literally with that of the inscription E. 

1 This is the ancient name of Shermad^vi. In a later inscription (above, Voh III. p. 240) the form S^ravan- 
mahkd^vi occurs. Both S^raman and Sera van are Tamil designations of the Ch^ra king. 

• The introduction agrees with theTirnmalai inscription of the 21st year Inscr . Vol. 1. No. 66) in 

not mentioning the conquest of Rattap&dt, which is first referred to in an inscription of the 22nd year at Timvai^iju 
(No; 217 of 1894). 



Vatteluttu Inscriptions of Chola Kings. 
E. 











No. 6.] 


VATTELUTTU INSCRIPTIONS OF CHOLA KINGS 


47 


TEXT. 

1 Svasti sri [||*J Tiru-[ma]gal [polj _ [peru-m*]liu-selvij U m tanakke u[r]imai 

pt<i]ndaaiai mana-[k*]kol Kanda[lu]r-Salai kala[ta=a]rut- 

2 t=arali Vehgai-nadumh^ 5 Ga[nga-pa<L*]yum Nulamba-padiyum Tadigai- 

[va]liyum Kudamalai-na[du]m Kollamum Kalingamum 

3 en-disai puga[l] tara ila-ma[ndalamum*] tin-diral venri-tandal [ko]ndu tan=elil 

valar u[li]yul ella-yandu- 

4 m tol=Udagai yila[ngu] 

H. — Inscription in the Ramasvamin temple at Shermadevi. 1 2 

This inscription is dated in the 3rd year of the reign of the Chola king Rajendra-Chola 
I., who ascended the throne in A.D. 1Q01-2. 3 It records that certain Vaikhanasas pledged 
themselves to supply daily one half of the amount of ghee that was necessary to keep one lamp 
burning in the temple, which bore the name Nigarili-Sola-Vinnagar.* Shermadevi itself had 
then the surname Nigarili-Sola-chaturvedimahgalam. These two surnames suggest that 
Nigarili- Solan, i.e> 1 the unequalled Chola/ was a blruda of Rajendra-Chola I. 

TEXT. 

1 Svasti sri [||*] Kd=Pparakesarivan[ma]r=ana sri-Raje[ndra]-Soladevarkk[u] 

yandu 6 [m]unrava[du] I[rajara]ja-mandalattu Mulli- 

2 nattu bra [lima] deyam Niga[r]ili-[851a]-chchaturvedimahgalattm Njgarili-Sola- 

Vin[na]gar Vaiganasa- 

3 ro[m] [i*jvv-ur [i]r[u]kj_kjinra V e l[l] Ala[ri] Kada[n]-Jeiulan pahkal 

[mun] nahgal ka[su] kondu i-tte[va]rkku ti- 

4 ru-nunda-vilakku eri[kka]=kkadavam=ay erichchu [vajramnra vilakku arai[y] [}*] 

ivv-a[rai] vilakku- 

5 kku[m] nisadafm] alakku neyy=aga [e]rippotn=agavum [1*1 i-sri-ko[y]il u\U 

alavu[m] sandir-a- 

6 di[t*Jtargal nl=alavum e[r]ippom=agavum [|*] eriyad=oli[yil] anru sri-koyil 

vari[yam] se- 

7 y[va]rey muttina ney[y]=iratti attuviehchu ervippai -agavum [|*] [ij-pparifsu] 

ni[sa]da[m] a- 

8 Jakku neyyu[m] mut[tama]l [e]ripp6l_m]=;t L v]im\rn V]aiguriasaroia [I*] i- 

pparisu o[t]ti 

9 [i]-kkasu konda Vaigdnasar[om]il [munj-iji^n^Jfrjome erippdm=anom [||*1 

TRANSLATION. 

Hail! Prosperity! In the third year (of the trig*) of king Parakesarivarman, alias 
the glorious Rajendra-Soladeva, — we, the Vaikhanasas of the Nigariii-Sola-Vinnagar 
( temple ) at Nigarili-Sola-ehaturvedimangalam, a brakmadtxja in Mulli-nadu, (a district) of 
Rajaraja-mandalam, having previously received money from the cultivator \ tiding) Kadan 
Sendan, who resides in this village, and having ( thereby ) become bourns to burn a sacred 
perpetual lamp for this god, have been burning half a lamp. We shall have to barn fone) 
dldkku of ghee per day in this half lamp. As long «.s this holy temple exists, and as long as 


1 Read - naduh a. " No. 179 of the Government Epigraphies collection for 1895. 

3 Above, Vol. IV. p. 266. 

* On Vinnagar or Vinnagaram , * a Vishnu temple/ see South- I%d, Imcr. Vol, II. p 115, note S ; p. 260, note 

2 ; and p. 344, note 3. 

5 Head i»4°. 


48 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V . 


the moon and the sun exist, we shall have to burn (if). If (we) do not burn (it), those who 
shall be in charge 1 2 of the holy temple at that time, shall make (u$) burn (it), causing (u#) to 
supply double the quantity of the missing ghee (as fine). Thus we, the V&ikhSnasas, shall 
have to burn without fail (one) dldkku of ghee per day. Having thus agreed, we, the 
representatives of the Vaikhanasas who have received that money, shall have to burn ( that 
lamp). 


No. 7.— DATES OF CHOLA KINGS. 

By F. Kielhorn, Ph.D., LL.D., C.LE. ; GSttingen, 

(Continued from Vol . IV. page 266.) 

A. — RAJARAJA. 

No. 25.— Inscription in the Stbanunatha teraplo at Suchindram near Cape Comorin.* 

1 Svasti sr[i] [||*] Tirn-maga[lj pola~ 

5 • ....•....ko Irasara[sn]- 

6 Kesari[vanma]rkku [yajndu padin-ainjju] iv[v]-aniu Kanni-[nay]irru mav[v-a]- 

7 n[diy=4g]i [S]e[v]vay-[k]kilamai perra [Pftjrayiruftadi-ual 

“ In the year fifteen (of the reign) of king Rajaraja-Kesarivarman, — on the day of 
PGrva-Bhadrapada, which corresponded to a Tuesday, three evenings having expired 3 of the 
month of Kanya in this year,” 

We have found before (above, Vol. IV. p. 266) that Raiaraja’s reign commenced between 
the 24th December A.D. 984 and the 26th September A.D. 985. A date of the month of Kanya 
( August-September) of the 15th year of his reign, therefore, will be expected to fall either 
iu A.D. 999, in Saka-Samvat 92L expired, or in A.D. 1000, in Saka-Samvat 922 expired. 
As a matter of fact, this new date works out correctly for Saka-Samvat 921 expired. 

In Saka-Samvat 921 expired the month of Kanya lasted from the 27th August to the 
25th September A.D. 999, and daring this period the moon was in the nakshatra Purva- 
Bhadrapada — by the equal-space system for 15 h. 6 in., by the Brahma-siddhanta for 3 h* 
56 m,, and according to Garga for 3 h. 17 m., after mean snarise — on Tuesday, tho 29th 
August A.D. 999, which was the third day of the month of Kanya 4 (and the full-moon 
day 5 of the month of Bhadrapada). 

The date reduces the period during winch the reign of Rajaraja must have commenced 
to the time from tho 24th December A.D. 984 to (approximately) the 29th August 
A.D. 985. 6 7 

B.— KTJ LOTTUN GA-CHOLA I. 

No. 26.— Inscription in the Rajagopala-Perumal temple at Manpargudi 
in the Tanjore district.? 

1 Svasti srih SL. PagaUmadu vi[Un]ga kov= 

I rajakesari van mar-ana Tr[i]bhuvanachakrava[rtt]i[gal] sri-Kulottuhga-Sola- 


1 Compare South. Ind. Inscr . Vol, III. p. 9 and note 4. 

2 The first H lines of this inscription are published above, p. 45 (No. 6, E). 

3 I.e. either ‘ on the night of the third solar day / or • on tho fourth solar day/ 

4 The moon also wa. in PiWBludrapadi on^Ionday, the 25th September A. D. 999, which the 30th day 

of the month of Kanya. 1 

* The full-moon tit hi ended 13 h. 36 in. after mean sunrise. 

^ [According to the Sac hi,. dram inscription C. (p. 44 above) it commenced in the month of Karkataka — E H 1 

7 Ho. 103 of the Government Eplgraplust’s collection for 1897. * 1 



No. 8.] 


RAYAKOTA PLATES OF SKAXDASISHYA. 


49 


2 de[va]rkk=iyanfdu] 48 3vada Makara-nayarra purvva-paksliattu tray odasiy urn 

Tingat-kilamaiyum perra Tiru[v]adirai-nal. 

“In the 48th year (of the reign) of king Raj ake sari var man, alias the emperor of 
the three worlds, the glorious Kulottuhga-Choladeva, — on the day of Ardra, which 
corresponded to a Monday and to the thirteenth titki of the first fortnight of the month of 
Makara.” 

Above, Vol. IY. p. 2GJ, we Late seen that a day in the month of Kumbha of the 43th year 
cf the reign of Kulottunga-CLola I. corresponds to the 25th January A.D. 1118, This date, 
of the month of Makar a which immediately precedes the month of Kumbha, of the same 
48th year, will therefore be expected to fall within a month befoi'e the 23rd January A.D. 
1118, the first day of the month of Kumbha of that other date. And so it really does. For, 
the date corresponds to Monday, the 7th January A.D. 1118, when the 13th tithi of the 
bright half (of the month Magha 1 ) ended 15 h. 1 m.. and when the naksliatra was Ardra, by the 
equal-3pace system for 14 h. 27 m., by the Brahma- siddhanta for 0 h. 39 m., and according to 
Garga for 2 h. 38 m„ after mean sunrise. 


No. 8.— RAYAKOTA PLATES OF SKANDASISHYA. 


By E. Hultzsch, Ph.D. 


This inscription is edited from two sets of Sir Walter Elliot’s ink-impressions, which I owe 
tn the kindness of Dr. Fleet. On the wrapper in which I received the impressions are the 
following remarks in Dr. Fleet’s hand The original copper-plates belong to Sir Walter 
Elliot. Three plates, about SJ' by . In go«.d order. They are quite smooth ; the edges 
are not raised into runs. The ring been out. It is about J" thick and 31" in diameter. 
The seal is circular ; 2" in diameter. It has, in relief on the surface of the seal, a kneeling 
bull facing to the proper left, and some small emblems, which I do not quite understand, above 
it ; and a line of writing, which I cannot read, all round it. The label on them says that they 
ve re received from Captain Campbell of RoyaWa. ” Koyakota is the former spelling of 
Rayakota ( properly Rayakbte in Kanarese ), a hill fort, village and post office in the 
Krishnagiri taluka of the Salem district. 2 

The inscription consists of throe Sanskrit verses, a passage in Tamil prose (11. 11 to 33), 
and a fourth Sanskrit verse at the end. The four Sanskrit verses must have been written or 
copied by a person who had only a very faint knowledge of that language. The Tamil portion 
is more correct, but shows many cases of doubling of initial and final consonants which are not 
sanctioned by the Tamil grammars. 3 

The alphabet of the four Sanskrit verses is Grantha. The prose passage is written 
in Tamil charact— s. occasional^ interspersed with Grantha words. The alphabet of the 
inscription is dorVledly more developed than that of the Kuram and Kasakudi plates,* but 
more archaic than that of the Mammalia plates.* If it is admissible to compare the characters 
of stone inscriptions, which sometimes retain older forms, I would say that the alphabet of 


1 

3 

4 


The tithi of the dote therefore is one of tlie KalpJdis. 
Mr. Sewell’s Lists of Antiquities^ V ol. I* P 195. 
Wherever the doubling is inadmissible, 1 have enclosed Qlle 
South-lnd . laser . Vol. I. No. 151, and \ oh 11. No. 73. 


(or two) of the consonant* in round brackets. 
5 Ibid. No. 76. 


H 



50 


EPIGRAPHIA IX DIC A, 


[Vol. V. 


the Rayakota plates lies between the two Kil-Muttngur inscriptions of Narasimhavarman as 
the tipper limit, and the two Ambur inscriptions of X ripatunga- V ikramavarman as the lower 
one. 1 

After an invocation of Vishnu (verse 1), the inscription furnishes the same genealogy as 
three inscriptions of the Pallava dynasty {viz. the Kailasanatha inscription of RAjasiriaha, 2 the 
Kasakudi plates/ 3 and the Udayendiram plates of Pallavamalla 4 ) as far as Asvatrth&man. But 
while the Pallava inscriptions 5 continue the line from Asvatthaman to his son Pallava, the 
Rayakota plates seem to state that Asvatthaman had, by a N&ga woman, a son named 
Skandasishya, a descendant of whom was another Skandasishya, or, as he is called iD the 
subsequent Tamil passage (1. 11), fed iujA^a-SkandasishyaWikramavarman. 

The Tamil portion states that, in his fourteenth year, the king issued a written order to the 
inhabitants of the district of Paduvur-kottam and to the inhabitants of Mel-Adaiy§ru-n§du, 
a subdivision of this district, by which he granted to a Brahmana the village of Sarugur (1. 14) 
in the same subdivision. This village received the surname Skandasishyamangalam (1. 22 f.) 
in honour of the donor. Among its boundaries we find (the hill named ) Timvelalamudi 
(1. 26). This is tho Tamil equivalent of Velalasikhara, a hill which is mentioned in the 
Udayendiram plates of Pallavamalla 6 among the boundaries of Udayachandramangalam — the 
modern Udayendiram in the Gudiyatam talaka of the North Arcot district. 7 Consequently 
Sarugur must have been situated near Udayendiram, which, like Sarugur and Ambur, 8 
belonged to Mel-Adaiyaru-nadu. 9 

The etymological meaning of Skandasishya is ‘the pupil of the war-god/ The dynasty 
to which he belonged is not named in the inscription. That he claimed connection with the 
Paliavas is evident from the two facts that his seal bears a bull, 10 and that he derived his descent 
from the same mythical ancestors as the Pallava kings of Kanchi. On the other hand, the two 
words fed vijaya which are prefixed to bis name, and the title Vikramavarman which follows 
it, in line 11, connect him with certain other princes who profess to have been descendants 
both of the Pallavas and of the Western G-angas. 11 As I have stated before, the alphabet of the 
Rayakota plates would well suit this allocation. The legend according to which Skandasishya 
was a remote ’descendant of another Skandasishya, who was born to the sage Asvatthaman by 
a Naga woman, seems to be connected with a similar legend, the heroes of which are the 
ChQla king Kokkilli and the Tondaiman (*.e. the Pallava king) Ilandiraiyan. 18 An inscription 
at Tirukkalukknnram mentions a Skandasishya who was anterior to the Pallava king Narasim- 
havarman I. 13 and who, accordingly, must have reigned long bafore the king who issued the 
subjoined grant. 

According to line 12, the grant was made at the request of Mah&vali-V&nar&ja, who 
must have been a feudatory of Skandasishya. The title Banadhiraja or Mavali-Vanaraya was 
bestowed on the Western Gangs king Prithivipati II. by the Ch61a king Parantaka L 14 and 
appears to have been the hereditary designation of the B&^a chiefs, who derived their descent 
from the demon Bali. 15 


i See above, Vol. IV. pp. 182 and 360, Plates. * South- Ind. Inter. Vol. I. p. 9. 

3 Ibid.Y ol. II. p. 342. 4 xhid. p. 363. 

5 See, in addition to the three inscriptions quoted in the last sentence, the Amar&vat! pillar inscription of 

Simhavannan II. ( ibid. Vol. I. p. 25 ) and the K&ram plates p. 144). 

* Ibid. Vol. II. p. 368, text Line 70 f. 7 See ibid. p. 365. 

6 Above, Vol. IV. p. 180. 9 South- 2nd. Inter. VoL It. p, 382. 

10 See page 49 above. n Abo ve, Vo l. IV. p. 181 f. 

13 South-Ind . Inscr. Vol. II. p. 377, note 5. « Above, Vol III. p. 277, 

i* Sov.th-lnd. Inter. Vol. II. p. 381, and above, Vol IV. p. 222. 

15 See abo\e, Vol III. p. 74. 


Rayakota Plates of Skandasishya. 











NA S.j 


RATAEoTA PLATES OF 5KASTDASISHTA. 


51 


TEXT/ 


First Pi *if? 

3 Lakishmidbama radha . hetn-vasudLAsambhattn-Kamsat 


gajganatalakshanaraprasissisindnvvidhih 


2 Svasti srYh — ] 
patroaksha L h° 

sayalu-Danavavadhuvaidhavvadano Hari[h*] || 4 L l*j 

s*tribhuvana-janaga 9 Sripadenn&bhipatmaputratasy^Amgira 
ni Dishanatasya 10 sunur=vyabhuvah Sayutasyamayo^bhut 
dbah 1 1 sri-Bkarad v&j a-nam [a*] dronah 12 Dranah pravinab 
labdha- 

van janma tasman || [2*] Asvarttam=asya u tarn tnr=bha vat i 

vikramanyakra- 13 

tariy ato Dvij ihv-aiiigin i-putrahvahritiya taj agat am 


visbab 4 
kshiramboclh b 6 
Asid=Ambdjayonl- 8 
svan samnja- 
samabhavad=anii> 
eharanam=upagatam 13 


khaln 


pnra 


le Skandhasi- 


9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 


17 

18 

19 

20 
21 
22 


shy-adhiraja 17 || 
ran=yatum=lsah 


tat 19 vamse 
kartta 


raja 21 || [3*] Svaeti 


Second Plate ; First Side. 

19 (sri-)Skandhasishyah samachani- 0 chaturasy=aka- 
inasaH Kal asabhava lva 1} tiramay asaksb i- 

sri [!*] ko visaiya-Kandasishya-VikkiramaparuCma’jrkku 

yandu 

padinalftvadu Mahavali- Vanaraj ar vinnappatt&l Mahe- 

svara(h)-bhattar anattiy=aga=Ppadu(T)vur-kk6tta[ttu*] Mel-Adai- 

(y)y[&*lru-(’i)n&ttu §aruguni(m)m-adanai=chchurriy --Sfnr-ulu-[p]alam et a-p-. 
padum=aju-kadurti pidiligaiyatn ula-kollaiyum eri-kaduxn(m) majn*]^ 

m ' (k)kalum > (k)karaiyum (p)parisum (k)kurambum (t)tala.-ppela.yum 

Second Plate ; Second Side . 

» H pp6r.ppatw nil [ajriQui V.t».gSta,tta Pri™*cham..>< 

.tta-tln Mi[dh(i*]va5annaia-bhattar[k"]fcTi=]itQdn(r)tti>(Dun)nj=egic: s ^ tottattark- 

ka».»»MSrkka(m)m=cIa ? u->*ti™.«B»m >>.r»]«.chche,d» ,»)««“ [| ] adn ka,da 

k6tta[t]i»r.< m )a=aiBima, <»)tdn*. d , 

kar»Dattnkkn=kk6yil-aiiaikknm . 

n,natto=kkadnttn [I*] .Mi a.a,y-ola..ppadi ..Eandasliisbya- 


3 Read Lakxhmi\ 


1 From Sir W. Elliot’s ink-impressions. 

% Before this word there seem to bo traces of a mbol, per aps om. 

* Rend rathihgahUi-vatHtUidiambhartri-Kamsatlvishah. 

1 Read padmdkshd. I am unable to correct the remain- er o is pa - -Ambh6ia° 

• Read L MrdrnMm-. ’ This verse contain, only three P dda, Bead -Amhkt,* . 

9 Read -janakah 3 ripater=»dbhi-p^dmdt=pidra» lati/-. ngtra . * 

10 Read Dhithanat-tatya »UHvr=babhuva I Samyus-taty a mnjo 

» Read tah. ' " Be** di ' 6 ^ Dr0 * a p 

11 Read ktharanam=»pagafaMabdharaHa»ma tasmat. 

l * Read Mvatthdm^d.ya iantur= corr( , et th , retn ain,ler of line 8 as far as jagaidm 

11 Read nkrama-nyakkr>t-dnr=jdto. I » ra which, however, offends against the 

Dvijihv-dmgini to probably meant for Dnjikr-dngana (,.c. Jfayo-ioayv}, , 

metre * 0 „ 1* Read tad-ramie. 

15 Read Skanda 0 . 17 f* ead ra 3 a . 21 p etu j bhrdmayann^Ahdhtrdjam (?). 

19 Read Skanda 90 **maja*i. 

n Read ienra ul* - 

25 The engraver has himself < 

26 Read ^eludtt-. 


16 Read =kkoyir-. 


« Read Pravachana •* 

23 Read eppSr t, •*. 

; cancelled the (r) by placing a bomonlal 

27 Read arult- . 3L i-Zkanaaiishyo^ 


30 Read ndutta. 


H 2 



EPIGKAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. Y. 


23 mangalattukku «kkil-pa (1) 1-e [1* ]lai 

24 pa (1) 1-e []*]Iai Kurumadiyin. 


[Ma]nittidalin rnerrjf^lnnn ten- 

vadakkmn mel-pa(I)l-e[l*]lai Ila[t]- 


Third Plate; First Side . 

25 t[ai]yppadiy*enuum mdn-padi^vijn'klni) 1 11 kilakkrui (v)vada-pa- 

26 r(k)k=ellaiy Turn velaia(m) rmidiyin. mciar =Kkuruklcu[di*]yin 

27 (t)te^kara [;*j ikkunjd*] aga-ppatta pennmnan k)g=ellaivin a- 

25 gambadi-ppatta hkunu 2 uni-nila'm)in=cliv=inri udumb^odi amai- 

29 v 3 iB)nagal/v)vad-^IE.Tr idjrdhmanar[k*jku=kkuduttu=kkTidntta pa- 

30 ribara (m) m= a vana tariyum (k'kdlaraum (t’fn:t[er # ]-kkdnamum (t)ta^i-kku[rai]- 

31 yu(m)n=nali-avu(m)n=nall-erBdam i I)ia-ppucLebiyum idai-[p]- 

32 puchchiyum ull-irakkjiyum (m)marrum 4 epp6r-ppatta sa[r]vva- 


Third Plate ; Second Side . 

5 oada-[pari]Mrattal j! Yasuvkii-' vs.snrcbja uatt& rajuhhi'h] SavirajabluAA 
34 yfajsya ya?ya yad had br-HuItasya tu -va td 9 phalain i! [4 iA ] 


TEAN 3 LATION. 

A . — n ! ?i '' b /■ • £ po r ; * o . 

('Lur' 1,) Hail { Prcspuiity ’ [Verse 1, which is ineomphte, ss-.ms to enumerate 
- \V:k^ «.£ Hari (Vishnu)]. 

f Yw;s 2 and 3, which are very corrupt, contain the follow ir’g genealogy : — From the lotus 
or. the r:v'el of Sripati (Vishnu) was produced the lotus-born (Brakmd). His son was Angiras: 
mi m n Dhislunrt (Brihaspati) ; his son Samyu; his son Bharadvaia; his son Drona ; and 

.• *a Asvatthaman. His smi (?) by a Nag a woman (Dvijdir-dhaa^lFj ) was tlio nyerlrid 
( F '.raja) Skand ? e ishya. In hit family was born (another) Skandasishya, w ho resembled 
the mts nor -burn ( Vgastyn)]. 

B , — Tamil portion , 

(L. 11 ) Hail ! Prosperity ! In the fourtoonth year (of rbw) of the kine^ the 
Vi *r }r!m<. SkandasIshya~Vikra:ois varfinajn,---- < jhe king) was pleased to hsre the* following 
writr - ”1 i' io the MLUiutants > j l\.' k.* f >in and to the i T , habitants of the nadu:—'* At tot 
reepea!" * r Mahav^h»v TT-.y., ..laLi* svaia-hLatt'i being the cv. Tutor, ^ wo hare given to 
dl dlrojva: ' . i - y u of tbo v lUa yotra (ami; of th w * Pravactmra rzi'ra/ 1 (the village oPj 
Sarugr.r m IvIel-Adaiyfalru-nadu, (a subdivision) of Paduvur-kottam, — the we*te land under 
euHivntmn whwi: mrreurrH Uu> (\ lh ,4 je) % (tlm land) irrigated by water-levers, cut jungle, 
FJih*jc.>F <S,T - son! niid i v entt: brmr jungl*, commons. 4 ’ 3 channels, embankments, 

TUTy-b^ah- enu-rvays, tadaip^Li J 4 him J! other kinds of land.’* 


I The or, ~ rji ,'c.r h;* 1 * bim3 **f cuBCuU-u. t) .* Jcu of (kku) b\ placing a horizon tul line above it. 

3 Il#>d S J O ' J he III 4 ltod(l epfjr*. 

* 3v '”>'1 ‘ f t m * 5 i».eid , " ib;atl Sagar-ddii-hih, 

8 pai i lL * ,ri\-=*4*ha. y ILa.i 

r A' r Tam.i theS.m-kyit T<r r /- j cmr.^e iin«- 10S f. of the XiHkArii ].Utes. 

il x\oc- ’ .n~ ej FiNTf. -ssor ^nlly (Rechf und sate, ji. 4), rachanas&tra i* :h- sair.o n» Baudhayanatvtra* 
nine tLim ->conrs iu two of the {\byen<l : ram grr.nu ; see above, Vo!, ill. p. HI, au \ Inter. Yol 

1 1 373. 

II ih ter u ‘'ccuis m !w ’-^2 of t}j« iaiv. I.*-yden crant, 



KONEXDURU PLATES OP ALLAYA-DOED- 


No. 9.] 


(L. 19.) Having seen this (order), the inhabitants of the hot taw and the inhabitants oi 
the n&4u reverently placed (it) on their heads and planted stones and miik-bnsn (.. y /".■ 
boundaries ) l before an accountant oi the royal palace and an elephant of the royal palace. M 

(L. 22.) According to the royal order which was issued in uniting, the e«*st rc h ' ttndary 
of this (village of) Skandasishyamangalam (is) to the /.es t of Karitfldal; the &uutL.-r:i 
boundary (»<?) to the north of Kurumadi; the western boundary (A* to the ea*d jf the 
ancient village called Ilattaippadi ; aad the northern boundary (*>) to tie south of 
Kurukfeu[di] on the west of the Tiruvelalamudi (h'l!) 

(L. 27.) The land enclosed within the four gre c a ba/Uti'u-ies thus ver tiu j 

iguana runs and the tortoise crawls, 3 not excluding ;ho cnl-iw.td laud. 4 was *.:vj: u- ih. 
Brahmana. 

(L. 29.) The exemptions granted are (the ta? on) looms and (the tax on) shv/p**,- tnc r*i+l 
of the goldsmiths, 6 the cloth on the loom, 7 the best cow and the best bud,-' tu* r»x 
toddy, 9 the tax on weights, 1 ^ and (the tax on) residence within (the village); viiiL r t - i 
(/Vow these) and all other kinds of burdens (the village was granted). 

[Verse 4 contains one of the customaiy admonitions to future kings.] 


No. 9.— KONKUDUKU PLATES OF ALLAY A-DODDA ; 

SAKA-SAMVAT 1352. 

Bt G. V. Ramamubti, B.A.; Pabiakuildi. 

These plates were discovered iu 1887, deposited in a small square receptacle in a brick 
mound in the village of Eohkuduru,’- 1 5 miles north of Rft maebandrapuram in the Godavari 
district. They were not claimed by any one as private property, and Hr. S. H. Wynne, the 
Collector of the Godtivari district, sent them in September lWo to The Huh....-.., u. kept 
in the Madras Museum. The set consists of seven copper plates with raised nu» t.nd strung 
on a ring. The ends of the ring are secured iu the crescent-shaped base of an mg jedtstai. 
which bears a recumbent figure of tbo sacred bull Nandi, with tae symbols o t-. ■ un mu whe 
moon in front of it. One end of the ring is loose, and the pi nes may be detached from tae 


rili 


tbo rit-*-Lv»ic 


nag by bending it. The size of each of the plates about 
about | T in diameter. The ring measures about 4 V' iu diameter aud about t 

I edit the inscription from two of ink-im[>i<?s. w iOns, kindly sent to mt 9^ H . t 
All the plates except the fifth and the seventh are numbered by Tekyu numeral ci^aveu 


of L”e h. tr. • 
• tin t ax i n < 


I Compare line 1X0 f. of the KuSXkddi platen. ^ - 

3 Compare U. 174-176 of the large Leyden graot; ami I«d. Ant . Vol. AA. p. 
s See South- Ind. Jnser. Vol. II. p. 360, note 1. 

4 Sec ibid. Vol. III. p. 26, note 2, and 1 305 i of the lar^e Leyloo gr.o.- 

5 The two terms taf i and kiVam occur in the sum* "rder ia line / / 
later inscriptions have tany-ira i, * the tax oo looms/ a. A kadaiy- t.rat, 

V ol. I. p, gg f. 

e With tattdr-kkdnam compare tultdr-ppattam, ih»d. Aol. U. y. H 4 * lC °““ J 
tattdr ; and 1. 303 of the large Leyden grant. 

7 Instead of fari fcfcurat, the same grant 0- 303) has th* »yDony*ioiyr® J ; , 

8 The same two terms occur iu line 127 of the Ka.akuJv plates •■dm hue th 

9 Instead of Va-ppuchchi, the same grant (1. 23t>j re '- i( s * a,n ^ " *** , ... 

» With idai-ppiclcM compare U,- PP dtU m in the same g r,..t 0- 304) and 

Vol. IL p. 117, . 

II No. 18 on the ifodrai Survey Map of the RAmachandrapuram talnka. 


d Vol. XXII. p 75. 


Us. Il 


i.-h&dr 

S’b'wLl- 


f this, tw' 
./dd'. i*wr 


below ; Vol I Indt-x, s. v. 


large L 


riyden 

South 


grant 
Jnd. I::>cr 



54 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[VOL. V 


on the left margin of the second side of each. Each plate bears writing on both sides. A few 
letters on the first side of the first plate and a few others of the other plates, which are indistinct, 
being excepted, the inscription is on the whole well engraved and in good preservation. The 
language is, from line 1 to 130 and again from line 179 to 190, Sanskrit verse of various 
metres, while the intervening description of the boundaries of the village granted (11. 130-179) 
is in Telngu prose. Some ungrammatical and archaic as well as obsolete words occur in the 
Telngn portion. The anusvara in such words as ddinha. (1. 135) and vdmgu (1. 139) is now omitted 
or attenuated into half -anusvara. 1 The following are some of the peculiarities of the alphabet 
and orthography of this inscription (1) The alphabet closely resembles the modern Telugn 
character ; d, l, s, i, d in (a, and a few other letters, however, present older forms. (2) In such 
conjunct consonants as nga, the anusvara is used instead of the proper nasal. (3) The anusvara is 
improperly used in several cases, as prasamna (1. 126) for prasanna ; in tummma (1. 138) the m is 
superfluous. (4) In numddi (1. 15b) and amtta 0 (1. 174), d and t are incorrectly doubled; the 
doubling of y in pdlaniyyah (1. 182) appears to compensate for the shortening of the preceding 
long vowel, though it is incorrect. (5) Except in the word svargga (1. 184), consonants are not 
doubled after r. (6) The vertical bottom-stroke which the modern alphabet employs to mark 
the aspirates is here generally dispensed with, except in the case of bh. 2 Where the top-stroke 
is not used, a small vertical stroke or a mark like a circumflex is placed beneath or by the side 
of the letter (11. 35, 37). The bhd of vibhdti (1. 33) is distinguished from the fed of hdla (1. 34) 
by the angle under which the d is affixed to the consonant. (7) The secondary form of l has 
two different shapes; compare (in 1. 99) Mallaydrya with JallipaUi. (8) Conjunct consonants 
as rya, ryo, rva are expressed, as in modern Telugn, by the full form of r, to which the secondary 
form of y or v is attached (11. 44, 47, 54) ; but rvd and rve are also expressed by the repha mark 
on the top of vb and vd. (9) No distinction is made between the short and long sounds of e and 
o even in Telngu words. (10) Two ways of marking 4 and 6 are noticeable. (11) In conjunct 
consonants the secondary form of v is not distinct from that of p (11. 31, 32, 35). (12) The 

second k m dikkamtd (1. 35) is a full k without the top-stroke. (13) The ri of Rigveda (1. 100) 
has a top-stroke. ’ * y 


As may be seen from the abstract of contents (p. 87 below), the inscription contains the 
following pedigree of the Reddi chief Allaya-Dodda of Rajamahendra 


Dodda I. 

of the [Po]lvola-gotra, 
a subdivision of the Panfca-kula. 


] 

Annavrola. 


Vema 

or AU&ya-Vema. 


Kotaya. 


Virabhadra. 


Alla or Allada ; 
m. Vemambika, daughter of 
Bhlma of the Chbda family. 


Dodda II. 
or AHaya- Dodda 
or Alladareddi- Dodda. 


Anna. 


See above, Vol IV. p. 315. 

Compare Mr. Krishna Sastri’s remarks, above, Vol. III. p. 


2L 



No. 9.] 


KONKUDURU PLATES OF ALLAY A-DODDA. 


55 


The date of the grant was tlie time of Ardhodaya in the month Pausha of Saka-Samvat 
1362 (expired), which corresponded to the cyclic year Sadharana (v. 23). Professor Kielhorn 
kindly contributes the following remarks on this date “ The Ardhodaya takes place on the 
new-moon tithi of the o manta Pausha, provided this tithi falls on a Sunday, when during 
day-time the nahshatra is Sravana and the yoga Vyatipata. This most auspicious conjunction 
for making donations did take place in the given year. For in that year the new-moon tithi 
of the amdnta Pauaha ended 2 h. 20 m. after mean sunrise of Sunday, 14th January A.D. 
1431, when the nahshatra was Sravana for 17 h. 4 m. and the yoga Vyatipata for 18 h. 56 m. 
after mean sunrise.’ * 

The object of the grant was the village of Gumpini (v. 23), which was surnamed Allada- 
reddidoddavaram (v. 24) or Doddavaram (11. 146, 155, 159, 169, 173, and v. 89). This 
village cannot be traced on the map. But its position is defined by several villages which are 
mentioned in the description of its boundaries, and which, as Dr. Hultzsch informs me, are found 
on the Madras Survey Map of the Amalapuram taluka. These are Devarapalli (No. 27 on the 
map), Palavela or Palevela — now Palivela (No. 42 on the map), Mnmmadivaram — now 
Mu mm adi varapadu (No. 26 on the map), Inthakota — now Itakota (No. 22 on the map) 
Ketarajupalli (No. 19 on the map) and Veduresvaram— now Vediresvaram (No. 20 on 
the map). The northern boundary of Gumpini was the Katin teya river. This must be 
another name of the Gautami, or of its southern branch which passes to the north-east of 
Palivela. 

I may here insert some facts mentioned in two Telugu poems composed by Srin&tha, 1 
viz. the Katikhantfam and the Bhimakhandam , 2 as they confirm and even add to the information 
recorded in this inscription. The poet was contemporary with the last three Reddi princes 
of the dynasty and dedicated the former poem to Virabhadrareddi, the brother of the Doddaya- 
reddi who issued the'present charter, and the latter poem to the minister of Virabhadra. The 
Kasikhandam contains the following account : — Among the divisions of the Sudra caste, one is 
famed by the name of Panta-kula, 3 of which PerumacRreddi, of the village Duvuru, became 
celebrated as a devotee of Siva. He belonged to the Desati-vamsa. His wife was Annamamba, 
by whom he had five sons, Allaya, Pedakota, Annaprola, Doddaya and Pinnakota. The 
fourth, Doddaya, 4 5 is styled Pantakularaja. He married another Annamamba and had three 
sons, Prola, Kota and Allada. The last is described as a great conqueror, and from the 
description the poet gives of his achievements, he seems to have risen to some importance and 
perhaps established a petty principality. His wife 6 was Verna mba, the grand-daughter of king 
Anavema, who bore four sons, — Verna, Virabhadra, Doddaya, and Annaya. 6 The eldest of 
them is said to have led an expedition as far as the Vindhyas and to have conquered Sapta- 
madiya-raya, the king of Jhude-jantaru-nadu, the chiefs of Barahadonti, and the kings of 
Oddadi and Kataka. He is also said to have received tribute from Panduvasuradhani, 
the king of Odde-desa, the king of Karn&ta, the king of the Yavanas (?), and the chiefs 


1 This famous Telugu poet lived about the year 1435 A.D. He was patronized by the Reddi chiefs of 
R&jamahSndra. Of his many works, the Panditardy acharitam was dedicated to Mauiidi-Praggaduvi, commander- 
in-chief of Vem&reddi’a forces; the Naiskadham to Mautri-Sing&na, Praggadayya’s brothei ; tue BhimSivara- 
khandan to Bendapddi Annayya, minister to Virabhadrareddi ; and the KdUlchandam to Virabhadrareddi; see Rao 
Bahadur K. Viresaliugam’s Telugu Poets, Part I. p. 66. 

1 The introductory verses in the first canto of this poem and generally the initial and the final verses of each 
canto contain numerous references to incidents in the lives of the Reddi chiefs. 

3 Compare verse 4 of this inscription. 

4 The inscription traces the genealogy of the dynasty from this chief. 

5 Vem&mbi was, according to the inscription, the daughter of Bhiuoa of the Chdda family. 

* There is a peculiarity in the nomenclature of these Reddis. The name of a chief is often prefixed to that 
of his son. Allada’ s sons are known as Ala- Verna, Ala-Vira or Allanri pa- Virabhadra. So also, Kama’s son is called 
KtUaya*Vema or Katamart^di-Vemarfcddi ; see above, Voi, IV. p. 328. 



56 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


of Barahadonti-maime and Saptamadiya. 1 The titles by which he was well known are — 
RAyavesyabhujamga, Samgram apart ha, Karpuravasantaraya and Jagauobbaganda. The 
second chief, Yirabhadra, is described as even more powerful than his brother. The chiefs 
of Kasimikota, Vehkatayi, Kappakonda, Killeda and others are said to have been subdued 
by him. He was crowned during the life-time of Yemareddi. Yirabhadra married Anitalli, 
the daughter of Verna, the son of king Kata. 2 He was a votary of Siva and a great 
warrior. The third chief, Doddaya, 3 4 is also reported to have made many conquests. 
He led an expedition to the north and reduced Oddadi, Sringaramkota and Lotugedda.* 
He was a very skilful horseman. On the race-courses he made his horse jump over 
a space of twenty-four cubits in one bound. 5 After briefly describing the virtues of the youngest, 
Annaya, the poet expresses the wish that his patron might rule the whole country including 
Chikati, Kalinga, Chilkasamudra and Simhasaila 6 from his capital Rajamahendra 7 

As regards the connection between the Reddis of Kondavidu 8 and those of Rajamahendra 
nothing definite is known. The Bhimahhandam states that the chief Allada became the ruler 
of a kingdom extending as far a3 Simhadri, with his capital at Rajamahendra, by the influence 
of his relationship with Prolaya, Anavema, Anapbta, Alavema, Kumaragiri and others, who 
were the rulers of Pakanadu . 9 It is probable that the Anavema whose grand -daughter, 
Vemamba, according to the Kdsihhandam, was married to Alladabbupati, is the Anavema of 
Kondavidu. 10 But the present inscription says that Yemambika was the daughter of Bhimaof 
the Choda family. To reconcile these two statements, it may be conjectured that Yemambika 
was the daughter of Anavema’s daughter and that Bhima was his son-in-law. We learn from 
the Tottaramhdi plates that Kataya-Yema’s wife and mother were, respectively, the daughter 
and sister of Anavota, the elder brother of Anavema; 11 and the Eds ikh an dam tells us that 
this Kataya-Yema’s daughter was married to Yirabhadra, the second son of VemambikY 
Thoagh the relationship between these two Reddi dynasties is thus established, it is not eany 
to explain how the kingdom of Rajamahendra came into the Hands of Verna and Vira- 
bhadra. Kataya-Yema is said to have received it as a gift from Kumaragiri of Kondavidu; 12 
and he must have possessed it until at least A.D. 1416, the date of the latest inscription 


1 Sapta-mddit/a probably means ‘seven hills’ and Bdrahadontt-manne * twelve hill states'* (?). Oddadi is in 
the Vizagapatam district and Kataka in Orissa. There is a villuge called Panduva in the Godavari district. The 
Yavanas are the Muhammadans. 

2 This is the Reddi chief Kataya-Yema of Rajamahendra, ou whom see above, Vol. IV. Nos. 46 and 47. 

3 This is the Reddi chief who issued the present grant. 

4 These places are in the Vizagapatam district. 

8 Compare verse 19 of the inscription. 

5 Chikati is at present a Zamindari in the Ganj&m district. The extent of Kalinga was perhaps at this time 
much reduced. Chilkasamudra is the lake Chilka to the north of Garij&m. Simhasaila is a hill with a temple in 

Vizacripatam. 

t The position of Rajamahendra is described in the Kdiikhandnm as follows : The river (Cmd&vari) along tbe 
western city wall, the temple of Sri-Mullagftri-Sakti in the N.E. corner, and the temple of Mad ina-G6j.AU in the 
fort. 

8 Regarding the Reddis of Kondavidu Mr. Sewell says in his Lists of Antiquities, Vol. IT. p. 187 “After 
the subversion of the Gajapati Rajas of Orangal by tbe Muhammadans in A. I). 1323, the Reddi chiefs in different 
parts of tbe eastern coast rose to power. Amongst those the Kondavidu chiefs were for a century so important 
that their government rises to the dignity of a kingdom, and their family to that of a dynasty.” Then he 
gives a list of six chiefs with dates which do not tally with those given at p. 53 ff. Kumaragiri- Reddi is said to 
ha\e ruled from A.D. 1381 to 1395 ( p. 187 ) ; but on p. 58 two inscriptions referring to him are recorded 
which are dated in A.D. 1405 and 1407. 

9 The tract of country from Kondavidu in the KiBtna district to Kandukuru in the Nellore district is said to 
be called Pakanadu. Compare above, Vol. III. p. 24 

10 No. 4 in the genealogical Table of the Reddis of Kondavidu ; above, Vol. IV. p. 321. 

» Above, Vol. IV. p. 321. Ibid. p. 311. 



No. 9.] 


KOXKUDURU PLATES OF ALLAYA-DODDA. 


57 


referring to him. 1 He had a son, 2 but it is not known whether the latter inherited the 
principality. 3 

From the foregoing facts and from the inscriptions noted by Mr. Sewell, it is evident that 
this dynasty exercised bnt an ephemeral sovereignty. Doddaya, the fourth son of Peramadi, 
first rose to some importance, probably as an officer of the Kondavidu Reddis. Then his third 
son, Allada, improved that position and transmitted it to his adventurous sons, who established 
a principality with Rajamahendra as their capital. But neither Verna’s sons, if any, nor 
those of any of his brothers seem to have inherited their throne. The Gajapatis of Orissa or the 
kings of Vijayanagara must have driven the Reddis from Rajamahendra. The encouragement 
which these Reddis gave to Telugu poets is one noteworthy fact their short-lived government, 
which entitles them to the gratitude of posterity. 


TEXT. 4 

First Plate ; First Side . 

2 *r^F5Rfri wrfwT i t- 

3 0]rg?¥?T 5 df'^Tc^^f^ufT || [\*] =3TR 

4 [Oft i ^<.^[^1*1 

5 [f<Psw]f7T it [**] s Fss'PR*$rF wr^rt 

wr' J 

7 TV. TTtwf^: fsm»jcT II [t*3 yw: grr- 

8 i *RT ffsnwraf:*] 

9 [ti^]Ti^arprr xj^^f ndtd ii [«*] rRwbirfffTt 

10 T rfinfdHch) 

11 [ftj^t^nrNT^wt: i iTf?R#x8TRR 

12 5ft ft«ft II [s.*] 

vj 4 sj 

13 1 ^fTT: TRdT‘. I *RI- 

Ft? 'I ria f e ; Second Side, 

14 «T ^T N «T XR rT^THtfrr^dfJ'^^xn: II U*] ^rf’Rffir 9 ^ 

13 ij^§nnT?Rf'> l fftW^hrnTRT^rT- 

16 wfaftftr wf^RT trr: h [s*] uwvtfRt xrz fmj- 


3 Sec tbiil. 


1 Ibid . p. 328 . 

5 In his Lists of Antiquities , Vol. I- p* 41. Mr. Sewell notes two inscriptions at 
1416, which refer to Allatfa-bhdpaia (the father of Verna and Virabhadrft). 

4 From ink-impressions supplied by Dr. Hultzsch. 6 • 

6 The anutvdra stands at the beginning of the next line- 

8 Bead ^^TTrT. 9 Bead 


lions at Palakol, dated A.D. 1415 and 


• Head . 

10 Read 



5S 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


17 

18 

19 

20 
21 

22 


23 

24 


25 


26 

27 

28 


29 


30 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 


37 

38 


39 


fvrt Tpdwrf%^hn i fwWTcTT 

f%wf?r ii [c*] snit: *rc 

ftW WTUT n [a*] 

<tt ^rferiTw jpr: ii [*«*] ^rr fwsrapw- 

•rr ^ wraTww^Tppftwrr: i n*Tl srjt <+y<jmifiKi*i[;*] M*iV 
^(wt ) 5 ^ 5 f-Tawf^wiwr ii [u*] iwnft ^jgra^prmT 6 rnrrfa- 
TTWr^t I ’qWWTrRrRTTWT ^i ^ HTch T ^KI fa gt- 

Os 

>tt ii [t**] wrg^r^R 1rqfa.ni in rrwfarer q&R mtr w 7 
ij+Hii't lt ^ora <«y«t w^tcr i f^rrg 

fa r^^^Tl ,, Uwd i n i ^<7) <i^i rrsnr^RTTRTTT ^spr- 

% II [^*] fRIRRt TTWTTf^TTW^rrfvrlwt 8 fewi! I rtlRfa- 

Second Plate ; First Side . 

m *n?cpft™s[:*] ^rhdr^fafafr iwfa ii [\ »*] ^rwwqftar? 

fqvnrs- 

9 fqn)PufHi«5 I tpnTTtfcrR^' WfacR«On?*rrfT- 
faw? ii [t^*] ^rrqnrfarrsnn^ «Hifa <m rTt fipftwTqdt i ^qfiR- 

5^[ T > 

g^Trft %WT^W?W^rtfft II [U*] il-rfl+din <¥y4J(ufa«|i ?j[;*] *fb 

i fw^rrfpr giu < $ *fa TRRnn?nTt^ft 

®s 

<i*7i®sin'5: ii [ t^*] ^rr*T^f%f?ixfrt!ichH*ffiininfHmnn!i'^bRi«ii- 
isrfzm <?i«7i<n>: i f^mTiRR^iTf^- 

y afa i*5 0 ft d *1491 1 <fa[fa*]qT3Rt 10 fasrat ^tswht- 

^ ii fa c *] 11 ^Ki*4'^<!w'3r"T)y<r^chMsuicl , 3r ^r^mrt ^r? grat- 

f ^’ 3 3# i far fa* <f*fcratfifrr(T)*TTt- 

*<*- 

#r f^rwR ^Wfaq*T«jwifa * u*kfa mar ii [*<l*] gr- 

*farT- 


1 Read 3 Tbe anusvdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 

3 Read °>T* . 4 Read tjlW 3 . 

8 Read 1 Tb e anusvdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 

* Read facTtW- :o Read °WT3\ 

12 The word dvidhd has to be taken with langhayati and not with trigunita , 
j nddent in the Edsikhandam gives the length of the jump as 24 cubits. 


* Read 
8 Read 
11 Read 

as the description of 


the same 



No. 9.] 


KONKUDURU PLATES OF ALLAYA-DODDA. 


59 


40 ^ f?rert4o4tfd <£<* u<: i fwi fedTfq 

41 f?r ii [*•*] 

Cs v 

42 KTT dddlP<4kMda I f^f *W1T 1w 

Second Plate ; Second Side . 

43 % r|H^^KT51% 4|^^'<4W*MI$ddi)4*i(44^% II [***] ^T- 

44 Pd 41 41 P4d m r4<rfan i ^T»rrfa Twrf% fwr- 

45 z( »nrT?TzwrTFrftT ^rg4[^]cr ii [r^*] 

<0wr- 

46 ^ i Tltjqkqdlft c ^WTTriZ I HTR 4- 

47 fqf<lMWch §sisl 4*4111 1 «<* 9lS^t^»iV fetid i d I * 

48 ^*||dm : 11 [^^*] ^dd<d*fl<ddl44ir$fT^tdt^5 I 4 ^T- 

49 4 fiTS R PIT * d =1 M « I « ' < ft II [?8*] °t° II dPdWdt 

f^T*r- 

50 TT fenc'd ffTTTft a*TI7T I WWTTfd^ '^^^rVTTf^T- 

51 : II j>**] wsr T *Tffa STTWUt oMMsHUdT dM^Jlfi: i 4ftw[:*] 

4irsj*mod- • 

52 %wrf%w4t 2 II [^4*] M «<; *i =4 1 fsn*« i r^r^t S[T*] *T3I f^pr«T 

i wrer- 

53 alni^Mi^i: affs*4t ^'gtjoq^: 3 n [^*] 4hrr- 

54 i ^npgen4lfli T?Rd: f»J«i«u4f ii [^ c *] 

55 w Mt fwrc^: i <=ntr«*4l s- 

56 spn hz\ ii [^<£_*] 4\«itn^i^4>: ai^Mi^idilrr i -% ii^41 

*T3j- 

Tkird Plate ; First Side. 

57 fa fte[:*] ’ftaggWTTW^: II l> 0 *] f^TR 

58 jtwi; *fa^ ii iH*l ^w^Tf^wro^ 

TT5P|f5T- 


1 Bead 


* Bead *P3ft, 


3 Bead T®^T.* 


I 2 



eo 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Voi. V. 


59 ?r: i ilTffr u [^*] *nrtaT*rer7r: *pr[:*] 

sfiPnTUT- 

60 i f^if^!4an[:*] wt 11 [m*J 

61 %^arre * zvjk : i ^ronft ^wr^^TTTirw^t: n [^8*] 

ftralrf - 1 

62 t *ns f^nw^T fWiTrrr. i ^Rwhftnn: ?tst- 

63 Tjf^RT: II [%%*] xn^^iaqir^TS?^: I 

^ *rr%r 

6i Tfast Tmw^ft: ii [**♦] WTT?Twr^%^nrr[:*] s mq i i] g*rr- 
i ^srt- 

65 TrTJT^g^ iHijj|?rr^r ^tf%?r: ii [ 33 *] srsrsteT^si^RT^r^pnr- 

66 l ^^iiwjRt?: ii [^c*] feHi ^ qrif t ' 

67 *?twr i w^T?i»i: i 

ii [l^*] 

68 2T«T fdiltdt ^fwr^j; I 7rzfT^TTJP7%^t WTW- 

60 fnrniwi ii [so*] ift ^ » M^^ir^ [:*] i 

*rtcU- 

70 gwra^Pw ii [ n *] TftHiftf^ftirwft 


Third Plate ; Second Side . 

71 3iH^: i ^t^wjixji trtriyuJd^w: ii [a**] <*, [;*] 

72 ^rewfaiftTO: 1 || [a**] t«T^- 

f^rt- 

73 %ifTnr: ^rrs^tr: fsnrcrrarsr: i ^nni^rerr 8 *prt wfa- 

74 ^nr^: n [8 8*] ^ «*[:*] ’T^^j^rJTT^f^nr^mra: 3 i nw:aw- 

irt[fs]- 

75 gmt ^t?tt g’ulW ii [88,*] ^ff^[:*J 

WTW^rrfa?- 


1 The anuttdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 


2 Bead 


3 Bead 



No. 9.] 


KONKUDURU PLATES OF ALLAYA-DODW 


76 i n [8**] 

77 ?ny HusTl i d^^fadigfri: sfrfcr^t f^rst- 

78 *r?r: n [*<$*] Mw<^ifid<^f<wk[:*] Outran <T^ii?r: i ^rfaj- 

79 snfHt ajwrsr yyjcrf^T « [» C *J ¥1 t<t: 


80 

81 

82 


I TTcTTW^T^ft: II [8 A*] ’Tte'TTft- 

ffttfr wiraw: i ^sr5j[:*' 
ii [*«•] wrw^t <d<yd<:^iyV^: i 


J^TT^fTT 


JPJT- 

83 q fd^ffi : ii [a.?*] tjfcofe&vpr^i i<tT ^rwf^nft: i vrn^wr 

84 ^cr^i jchl fdTrr?T ii U =?*3 ^rra: ^tapnrosar: i t- 


Fourth Plate \ First Side. 


85 g|T iK<fd!j<f l <^l'4ld <£)fedt WfH II IX^*] «hl^M[:*] Xtfaf- 

*KRra§§- 

86 i Mld-MT^f ^r^^rfnl^WfTt ii [*8*] XHt- 

87 eOR fectiU i d t p i: stIIwr^tst: i flT^rraf 

88 imto II [a**] Xter^ee^i^aNl wfrrn^m: i ^hr- 

89 ir^ftrafr ii [a. k*] ^rrf^rmf?r: 5 ji«r. 

90 ^nrr ztsjitiz: i *twtot- 

91 : n [y^>*] ’nrcrerTfa?: i t 

92 ^frrfwT<ft f^prf^fT: ii [X c *] dr(<iHi'ftd*ii4w ^gn- 

93 i ^iTlrMTsff *pr3T*rf?dt3T ii [y.A*] ^?w- 

[:*] ^t^rr" 

94 ^nF^rat *nrvjxp»n i ^ciTnrraf ufd*iM ^rsprsrT- 

95 xns t rtw. II [*•*] mb*] *te*rtr**: i f?ro- 

smJf srf.- 

96 ai^^o gTf^pfi: h [U*] ^ ^^X)fWJWi4t?R 


STfTt I ^§- 

97 xgvjjrnznrd': Rt^nrr^f h <kTi<^ rr^t^rff- 


1 Bead 


62 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


fV0L. V. 


98 «rfr 




r : 1 ii Uf*] 


Fourth Plate; Second Side . 

99 , qrfgxrfw^j^rgf 

100 ii [f«*] ^ifRr^wsn i wr^T^r: ftnprnNi- 

101 xi^n=nirfi*iM N ii [f**] i wrtt- 

102 wr *r*wr5pft<ft mn^: u [*$*] Hi^rrocr- 

103 g^r: i ^rert wr§i(T)^%p? iwi;' 1( [**>*] 

104 ^nrrraf *tr^t: w^f: i w- 

10 5 sm: a foe*] ^ w ^i: 1 ’frjRWT- 

106 ?ff ^[:*]^f?rf?WR?: it [ft*] q p g t qf iPTrera - 

107 1 v^r-n^l*] ( , [^ 0 *j 

Jrrrr. 


Girz- 


108 Miwiwte 1 W[:*] ^remrf^prrat 

II [^*] 

109 wror TOJHJwauiJruaKtra: , w famfti 

110 ft ^wrffttftflnrat: , ft^ft^r..! ^ff 

uwwrnrm: 1 "* 

!" » [«,•] v fcfftwfrrftrnftm- 

<•] ^hpnrftnr i ftpmf: vftftHt vtfvm*: « fts*] 

Fifth Plate ; $/<?£. 

m Wh,„^ ft*. pkiTO* ffc 3 *. 

”• " ^ 1 *"■* .ft I ftm w 

®RTR- % 

116 *n- ' " f<H * ] , J fi - ,l5 '"«raw $rm: jafiftT- 1 

16 «w. dftnr: ^ ^ ^ 

HI ^ ' £™I 

m sl 1 i z ] ?*. ^n. 

1 Head °^Tff: €T3<nf^fT:, “ 

* The letters z: I ijf^r are written on as erasure. . TbT*n7tf 

The at the end of the line U badly engraved. 


No. 9.] 


KONKUDURU PLATES OF ALLAYA-DODDA. 


63 


120 I •^TTWft ttwri: f^TWfWiWpr II [ Co *j 

121 q^n|4Hl4: tJZ: I f^TPT vftrreTfaHTOTO- 

122 Tr pffrr^r : 11 [c^*] ^ftrrpinjf^'?: ^tf^t tt^twh: i ft- 

123 q%n 4 ) trjrtrrft ^srcfro: 11 [ c: **] 

124 1 §e6 wWnpnTOf gwr ; r[T]wra^: 11 [ c 3*] 

125 ^foptrenmanfl fctw^ T w . 1 «r[wii3T^Nnft 

126 if^t wwinffl: 11 [ c 8 *J ^ 1 

«rf%t fe]- 

Fifth Tlate\ Second Side . 

127 tt ^^t: 1 11 [c^*] ^nmrwT’snrer y iwm (Vr ]m *j<fc 3 ? :~ 1 

irnrr^rT- 

128 mm w* II [c**] [^]HXT?rnsRTwrTT5TT^f 

11 & 

129 % q rTVi^rr% *Twf^jgs* 1 l***] w *m*r ¥t[jr]r*Tt 

f^r 3WT- 

130 ^ I ipfa\ tww II [«*] & II 

<t^cK4 

131 ,, <m r *n fe H 7 ^- 

132 g *P5Tfr w\- 6 

133 fw iifcdnfrre i efc<u4j<gn iiirmx *rfw *rf&3 7 wfsrim- 

134 g^sj ^frTWT ^Ti TTf^t 

135 f% tjR ^^j^T^NfT 9 *fu Wfe0 Us«&9g<gl4< fll**|i 

136 f% ytfgfa i %faRB ^TT *T^5 «*»ldd< «lf% 

137 tpr% cfi^ftr 10 gin +Un(Mi aeeg xnnrfc 

_____ 

1 The first six syllables in this line are engraved on an erasure. 1 Bead 4f4fl4° . 

3 Read ^far*. 4 Read ftqfa*. 5 Bead tfarifa. 

6 The anusvdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 7 Read 

8 Read ^f^T. 9 Read °^t^rr. 10 Read ^rf%. 



64 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V. 


138 wfe 1 rjeetf^w ^ qqrer q- 

139 ^tnrrg Tessas qirg srtg qr=RTfq firm qeeTjq'qT qqTnfa s»- 

UO It ijqfz mUW tfaEEE HF^ra^r qwta^r ii qqqfs 3 

qfcpny)- 

141 qf qfercg^q srfr qfgqg ^Ftfsr wqrq gs- 


5^//i Plate*, First Side . 

142 ff %fa ag CTT3E3E qfqqJJ ffFTfef»T flfT %ftE3E JlWfe 

qqqfsfq f- 

143 £ft %fo£35 Trffuptsi ^eew tf3E3E ^TrTffs 

144 qqq <f^^W qqqfFfq HFf tf3EX ^T% %'4T^r«- 

qqq - 4 

145 fqqfqWTqfT tf3E3G q^OTfi tf3B3E WTf Tfqq 

%% q^ q- 

n 3 

146 fkaE ^TfRf % 5 rphjqw qq«f§3 qf% qwrf tq^qfgj WW 

ft^TH 

147 *TH*k 8 ^ qra fqqjWTqfi %f3E3E qqq- 

143 ^5 qF^rfsT =Ft?TET qtfq ^TrRf % 7 a q feq^<4q q| xrf% ^RT - 9 

149 ttt qtfq ^rfsTTnTWf q% qf? ^trRT xfrfq = 5 T- 

150 qqfs qfTTCRfpra qfFrTTqqqt«J ^trf^T qtfq qq qqfq 10 qt%q- 

151 *pqiT ^cfcdeUfsqqfsfqP* %fa£3G wqfq qf^rngiq- 

152 it qn%qqfq % 11 qf? ■qssiTj Hqiff qfeaE q? qf% S H~f h *? T 

qf% q%qqqfq- 

153 12 qfqqtqT*Tff qfesG HrlT*psPPt q? qf? qfq 5t fg f nq4<fif n q fqq - 

154 ^tqqr qfq qqqf% qfsdTqq'dif ’Srfqqgifit ^ t qffpq 15 qf%- 

155 irf^T q? qf% qq%*«T qqrf^TTf iftlS^qry 16 qt<Sl^^ ygq . 


1 2 Read < 3 fcfV . 

4 Read The anvstdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 

5 Read 6 R ea d 

’ The second anusvdr a in ^’cT^fe is marked by a dot on the left side of 
9 Read qf 1 ^. 9 Read ^ffcT. 

1 Read 12 R eac j sjf^ 

■'* ^e«3 i5 Read %mfe Tift 0 . 


3 Read °3ft. 


3- 

10 Read 
13 Read Trf%Tf. 
16 Read xfrS%°o 



No. 9.] 


KONKUDURU PLATES OF ALLAYA-DODDA. 


65 


Sixth Plate ; Second Side. 

156 [ll*] •T'§*T 

TfN ^r- 

157 g%* i ^rfwr^ 

tfaeaE g« 

168 CT^ xjfj %% ndgr Tf% qff tff- 

159 ft^w^cg ^^dgr qysysg i ^ddi% < 3TK ‘ 

W- 

160 w ijrprsH xrfr ^dTgrrff 1 * * * 5 * ddifd+i^f $4<*PcRid$ %fe^ ^nr- 

161 •*% trf%?rg^rCT *i% qf? 'tTin^K qtfa ^VtWfs 

162 ^ifreT qfw -4iddf% di qfs m^- 

163 fg 7 wftf drTT^sW df? %fW^7i% 

I64i ^njgrgtrrfe *rf%frr wrdgr 0 %dnudfi 

165 WT^r tfspe *Tdd1% ^dil^qfl dt f^R-H+J <R''!i- 

166 ?r qrnft^ %fais3E *Tf?75ft ^TddT wfw dddf% ^fgr^^gW 

167 g ^f^rgTni 10 dfefa di 

168 ^ Tjfi ^frm?: sfa ^ddfe df% %^T- U 

169 shtj <W^ 5 *g dfefa gd wfaj 13 ^Tddfe lH^*r B^' 

170 ^TT trff cfifcldT df% TTf^r <Td iPjrfai 12 ^ddf^ 


Seventh Plate-, First Side. 

171 ^ V<1W5$ TT^f qfWddT df% ^ddR dgtdTCg ft^R> 

172 g 13 *njd? di^rfd dtfd 15 ^Tddfe %- 

173 dTrsprfijf ^W^d^g »rfef*T *T5 =• sWTl Ri ddi+j^w ^Rt?r[d]^ dtfd 

174) TJtqfi 18 >15 [trfs*] ^ ^ 

n 3 

qfl Hrrr^- 


1 Read f. 2 Read 3 ^* 

4 Read ^fa. D Read °' TT ^- a , 

6 The secondary form of fi is also added to sg , read 

• Read JWfa. 9 Read q ’ t 5 U^‘ 

« Read %^<°. 18 Read 

14 Read '* Read 


s Read t. 

7 Read °f Z. 

40 Read 
> a Read 
*« Read tmfz. 

K 


66 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


175 

176 

177 

178 

179 

180 

181 

182 


183 

184 

185 


186 

187 

188 

189 

190 


trff Mpim ctTlrl*i< €tf% 


7T- 


^fa gg trf%?rpr 


t ^tTT ^TtfTRT cftfa 

<i jri ' f f tfgegg ^frfe ufafa ifasag 2 Ml<a*ioi? tiff <*!kiyiisi- 
*TRfr iarag i vfe vfwifanf&i^ 8 i *f)ra- 

^w(t)wttpt tfggge tvRnf^? wiig 4 n <$> ii ^ki«aPhh«*^< 


tre^ftir: i ^nf^cTTfiz wftr wr *nn*i ii [ c *-*] 

w^- 

wfTO: nT^jfr ^Tt*rr^ • w: 

r: 5 ^n?Tfft wt ?rr ii [<l°*] 


U- 

j 

7 T H5#ynre re i xiTTfrnm^ ^ri fsrcra 8 w%cf ii [<-%*] 
vr- 

mm»i J nh ar ^TT#^trr^pff i vr^T^^trrixjftfrT 9 m«r<rr^r- 
^ xji II [<-R*] ^?tTT tRcfrli TT ^TfT T^jj I 10 qfe4$- 
V?- 

Seventh Plate ; Second Side . 

^nfrrr fcjS RiT wnm farflT: II [i-\*] tHN wfwt ^ WTT^T 

ijjfsri i «t *rt- 

JUT «T ZhiilltffT f^rTT W^TJ II pL8*] TTTWi 

VTRV3- 

Cv 

I IT^T^WTStfiT *JT*fc]TW?W5R U [<L«t.*] 3T f STO f^ffir- 
Tgrfirgite’] f^^rt i f^wf^r vf?r h^?N- 

t* II [<L4*] II ^ ^ [||*] 


ABSTRACT OF CONTENTS. 

The inscription opens with an invocation of the hoar incarnation of Vishnu (verse 1), of 
Ganapati (v. 2), and of the crescent of the moon on the head of Siva (v. 3). From the mouth, 
arms, thighs and feet of Vishnu were produced the fuur castes. A well-known division of the 

i Bead <T*rfZ *?• 2 Read 

* Bead 5 Read 

7 Bead qT^T 3 °. e Read f^pqpjf. 

u Read 11 Bead WW^f. 


s Bead 
6 Bead 

9 Read c *iflfcT. 



Yo. 9.] 


KONKUDURU PLATF3 OF A LL A YA -DO DD A . 


67 


feet-born (i.e, the Sudras) was the Panta-kula 1 (v. 4)* To this family helomr-'d prince Pedda 
(I ) of the [Po]lv51a-gotra (v. 5). His sons were the princes Annavrola, Kotaya a 1 d Alla 
(V 6). The youngest of these, Alla (v. 7), married Vemambxka, the d'uightcr ox prmtv 
Bhima of the Choda family (v. 9). Aliada (i.e. Alla) bod four sons. — Y6ma* Viruokadra, 
Dodda (II.) and Anna (v. ]0). The eldest of these, AlIayr-YAma [i c. Yen- a, the -on rf Aim) 
(v. 11) or Verna, had for his capital Rajamakendranagar 1 (v. 12 f.). lit' younger orAnt/i* 
Virabhadra was also anointed to the kingdom of BajamaheraiKwiagaraj ■ v. lib Verse lo 
praises Verna and Virabhadra, who were apparently joint rulers. Their younger orother. Doe da 
(IT.), | had the surnames Karpuravasantaraya, 3 Sam grama bhima and Jaganobbaganda* 
(v. 17). 

(V. 2*2.) “ Once, on the ausnieions occasion of Ar Ihadnya, king Dodda (II*), having 
worshipped Siva (and) given away handsome donations on the bank of the Gahga, also 
desired to grant agraharas. 

(V. 23.) “ In the prosperous Saka (year) reck n : .v by the hands (2), the arrows (5), and 
the Tisvas (13),— -i.e. 1352,— in the i cyclic) year Sudhurarm, in (the month of) Pausha, at the* 
auspicious time named Ardhodaya, on the bank of tin- Kavnie/^b-anga, king Allava-Dodda 
crave to Brahmanas the village named Gumpini, wi:h it-» cue * a *- V- 1 '- M 

•Ji'.'ijas* ( to be enjoyed by them) as long as the moon \nr*d) us Ion/ *is tko l 

This village he named after himself Alladareddidoddavanw * -k* l.*. ' * rj - 

following donees received one share in the ag raid ret ( v. 25). 


List of donees (vv. 26-84). 


Name of donee . 

i 

Father's name ! Of. r 

b.ngayajva-Peruinadimakhin 

, OjuU’.iU 

Panuala-Kommaya * 

| Kaundmya 

Siogaya 

Son of Sib^annubvliu . Ha a 

^JairavaAIldhava , . * 


Kirra- Bharat a * . 

Atre\a . 

h-guvu-Mallulhatta 

b^aunaka . 

B u dim etta* Sar vade vain ak liin 

1 Harit.1 . 

V -’aapniakhin . . 

Krottilr*A i p u ai * an * - -'°* 

'-A i Ahh ury a« N a r &y an a 

KdLara 

Prdlubhntt i 

K.i mdinya 

i 

Lima} a , . ,1 

1 V , / . 

ATuiamajajva-Singajadlksl.ita . 1 


Ycrrajdvadhanin 

A K aya .... Ka'indiuj .* 

incuvu-MandiaudvadHnin 

V^aya . * * * au ' ,lU 

1 > ’ > o; i v . p. ‘di'J 

J '■» a * • »*, \ >* i t * ' J » l - 

, ... *3 „ 


V: i- 

T', 


j f 'i. 


p »'l.n ■ 
and arc* 1 


> v. 

i’X^ 


betel deaves. 



cs 

EPIORAPHIA 

IN’DICA. 



[Vol. V. 


List of donees— 

-conid. 




Same of donee , 

Father's name. 

G6tra . 

i 

Vida. 

j 

G u nturi-Kagayadvtidia 

... 

t 

Kapi . 



Yajus and SamaD. 

Ananta • « . • 

Golap alii- Appaya . • 

• 

Srivatsa 



Yajus. 

Ponungoti-Fdtlbhatta 

Potaya , 

* 

Atroya , 



Do. 

Adavam-Narahari*Gopaya 

... 


Kanlika . 



Rich. 

Beldhevi-Kesava . 

Singaya 


K&syapa 



Yajus. 

Appaya 

Kandugula-Madhava 


Srivatsa . 



Do. 

.Sri si rh ha .... 

Bouaglri-Madhava • 


Krfuniinya 



Do. 

Akunuri-Saga . • . 

Vishnu .... 


Kausika . 



Do. 

Pdiiialapati*Xarahftri 

Raixniya ... 


Do. 



Do. 

Kaiu vakka- V aliabhadvedin 

M allay a 


Harifca . 



Rich and Yajus, 

Sinyampad-Aubkaladvedin 

Gangaya , 


Do. 


* 

Do. 

Ganapati • . • 

Devarapu-Nrtrahari , 


Bharadvaja 



Yajua. 

Kurahnrx .... 

Sundila-Krishnahhatta . 


Do. 



Do. 

Peddayadikshita , . 

Kollur -Annamabhatta 


Do. 



Rich. 

Pot.ya . . ♦ . . 

; Singariuni-Yarraya 

o 

Ka«\apa 



Yajus. 

V .tLiiia .... 

KoruDgn nti . K6ta[\ al 


Sdudilya 


« 

Do. 

AlUda 

Kondayara*Pfcdda[ya] t 


Harita 



Do. 

BomUlap&ti-Pccld&ya , 

Aditya 


Sufjga-Bh^radviija 

9 

Do. 

Gai'gaya . 

Min a puri-D '» l h a r y al 


Atroya . 



Do. 

Putina . . , . . 

1 Koi.dAri-pochana . . 


Do. . 



Do. 

Tan " .<\m • . • 

j 

K iin i\a , . , 


Gautama 



Do, 

Tippaya . . . . . 

R&mpalli*Kdcbana 


Srivatsa • 



Do. 

Prciava . . . • 

' Jallipalli-Singaya . 


Sandilya 



Do. 

V, \ ; ’ i lo 1 1 d a - P * j< i ,i ibbat tu • 

, Gant an. a . . , 


laska , 



Do. 

J i' pahi-Si 1 s.mha • * . 

’ CLitipedJi-M-iila; a 


| Vasitlitba 



Do. 

".i caya . 

V all Ar i - M \ uch ana . 


| Ilhvudvaja 



Rich. 

\ t ; a- v.j ? aut;n 

Vv:< cr g anl .i- 1- K , , ~ 


| I)o. 



Yajus, 

S\r '\u-*U'\U\i 

Malika 


Yad hula 



Rich. 

A rt ar. guri-K a ma [ y a J 

' Yalbibhi , . t 


Bhar&dv&ja 



Yajus. 

Annama . . • • 

Undrukondala-Pedda[ya] 


Gautama 



Do. 

Karasimha . • • « 

KancharSpalli* N 4r4y an a 


Kaundinya 



Do. 


No. 9.] 


KONKUDURU PLATES OF ALLAYA-DOBDA. 


69 



List of donees^ 

— conoid . 



Name of donee. 

Father's name . 

GStra. 


Veda, 

Tippnna . 

M&ratAri-Krishnama , 

i 

i 

, j Harita . , 


Yaju3. 

Mlchana • . , , 

Submvtti- Vallaya . , 

, i Bharadvaja • 

, 

Do. 

Mallela-Gangana . , 

! Sfallaya . . , 

i 

, Kaluipfl 

. 

Do. 

Chittana , , 

Konda-Xrisimha , 

| Kama . 

- 

Do. 

Ktsava , , , 

Manga vellDN&gu[ya] 

. J K5syap3 . 

. 

White Yajus. 

Kamaya 

Mandavelli-Vallabha 

. Do. 


Do, 

P6ta M . . . . i 

Gadivdda-Annama . , 

. Kausika 


Do. 

sdra ya 

Xuntaki-Gahgana . 

, Kaundinya • 


Do. 

^UcharoantriD 1 * 

Kalahgara* Kom may amatya 

. , Do, 



Valldr- A y yalumantrin 

... 

j Do. 


... 

Mndiya.Singana , , 

... 

i 

j Do. 


Yajns. 

Bonta.Appa%ft 

... 

1 

I Do. 


... 

Ifrava-Gopana , # 

Kesapa 

, ! Maana-Bhdrgava 



Bssava . 

* • • • % 

Cbej-avu-Appaya . . 

1 

. j Kasyapa 

. 

Taj ns. 

_ 


1 

1 



Two further shares in the agrahdra were given to the Vishnu temple called Frasanna- 
vallabha and to the Siva temple of Brahmanagesvara (v. 85). Finally Dodda (II.) gave to the 
&Qt<zh(ira the village of Annavaram for subsistence ( gramagrasarthawt *), with the exception (?) 
of 4| khdrts belonging to Haranatnantrin, the son of Aubhalamatya (v. 86 f,). The 
boundaries of the granted village are written in the language of the country (i,e. Telugu) 
(v. 88). 

In the detailed description of the bound ary -line of Alladareddidoddavaram (11. 130-179). 
the following villages are mentioned : — Devarapalli, Palavela or Palevela, Mummadivaram, 
Inthakota, Annavarapup&du, Ketarajupalli and Veduresvaram. The northern boundary 
was the Kaunt^ya river. 3 

Verse 89 praises the village of Doddavaram on the bank of the AdikuntS. In verse 90, 
hmg Dodda (EL), (the son) of king All&da, requests future kings to protect the grant. Verses 
91-96 are six of the usual imprecatory verses. 


1 The addition of the titles mantrin and amdtya shows that the donee was a nig 6 gin, 

* [Compare grdmdpahdra, above, Vol. III. p. 28, text line 100, and grdmagrdsamugdnu, Vol. IV. p. 359, text 
line 51.— E.H.] 

3 In the Telugu portion (11. 131, 177 and 178 f.) this river is called Kaunteya. In the Sanskrit re r*e« occur 
the forms Kaunt£yagang& (v. 23), Gahga (v. 22) and Adikuntd, (v, 89). 



70 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V- 


Sc. 10,— PITHAPITRAM PLATES OP VIRA-CHODA, 


Dated in his Twenty-third Year. 

By H. Krishna Sastrt, B.A. 

The copper plates which bear this inscription were forwarded to Dr. Hultzsch by the 
Government of Madras. They were sent by the Raja of Pithapuram to Mr. D. F. Carmichael 
when he was Chief Secretary, i.e. between the years 1875 and 1878. Mr. Carmichael had lent 
the plates for examination to Dr. Burnell, who figured the second side of the third plate in his 
South-Indian Paleography, second edition, Plate xxix. 1 * 

The plates are nine in number. Each of them bears writing 1 on both sides, except the 
first and last which are engraved only on their inner sides. They are not of uniform size ; but 
each measures, on the average, 10" by 5 A. To the proper right of each plate is a hole, f 7 in 
diameter/ 3 Through these holes is passed a massive ring which is now cut. It is thick and 
7^" in diameter. Its ends are secured in a circular seal which measures 3^- 7 in diameter. As 
may be seen in the collotype No. 2 on the Plate facing p. 104 of Yol. III. above, the seal rests 
on an expanded lotus flower and bears, in relief on a counter-sunk surface, the legend sri- 
Tribhuvan[am~\ku£a in Telugu letters. Above the legend it bears a boar which faces the proper 
left and has an elephant-goad overhead. In front of she boar are a chaurt, a concb, and the 
moon ; and behind it, another caauri, a svastika , and the sun. Below the legend there is a # 
drum (P), an expanded lotus flower, and apparently a wooden stand for supporting the 
abhisheka dish. 


As observed by Dr. Burnell, the inscription is written in the transitional Telugu 
alphabet . 3 This is shown e.g . by the two forms, one the earlier and the other later, in which 
the wu of Dakshindmurti in 11. 162 and 163 appears. The final m is used in two cases, viz. in 
11. 45 and 63 ; but in all other cases the anusvdra takes the place of final m. The onlygroups 
in which the nasal is not represented by anusvdra are nta, nda , nta and nda . The difference in 
the secondary forms of a and d. i and £, « and u, o, 6 and au is not kept up throughout. In 
three cases the long u is marked by d and u, viz . in the u of mdndunu in 1. 215 and the u of 
durppvna in II. 262 and 263. The S of pye of bhumer=apy^ka° in 1. 278 is added to the 
secondary y . The writing is protected by raised rims and is consequently in a state of perfect 
preservation, except certain letters written over erasures. The language of the inscription is 
Sanskrit poetry (verses 1-35) and Sanskrit prose (IK 2-17 ; 18-31; 68-71; 80-186; 271-277; 
and 279 to 280). The description of the boundaries (11. 187-271) is in a mixture of Telugu and 
Sanskrit prose. As regards orthographical peculiarities, it may be noted that a consonant, 
besides being, as usual, doubled after the secondary form of r, is frequently doubled after an 
anusvdra, as in 11. 2, 21, 23, 28 etc.; that ri is used for ri in krita for krita (11. 2 and 20) and 
Hnshikesa for Hrislukesa (1. 115); and that in conjunct consonants the secondary r is not 
only omitted in several cases, but is mistakenly represented by i in sdddlye for sdrdha (1. 12), 
by im ntggUya * for rargatya (1. 15), and by d in Vishnuvaddhdno for Vishnuvardhano (1. 22). 
Stndna for sndna (1. 20) and sdrtvam for sdrtham (1. 61) are due* to the vernacular 

pronunciation of Sanskrit words. The symbol for r is used in the following cases:- (1) in 
proper names,— Chiriyanddn, Erasdvaka, Enyapdta , Kadalasirukdla, PenimburaJdcadal and 


1 See Dr. Burnet's prefatory note, p. v. paragraph 3. 

3 On the margins of the rir g-holcs of plates III. a, IV. a and IV. I, and V. a 

3. 4 and 3 are scribbled. 'lhe last figui e is not so clear as the first two. 


respectively, the Telugu 



No. 10.] 


PITHAPURAM PLATES OP VIRA-CHODA. 


71 


W 


Tirukurungucli ; (2) in the endings of Telugu names of towns, — hurra , parru and torra ; (3) 
in the Telugu words, — cheruvu (a tank), eru (a stream), harru (a bank), koradu (the stump of a 
tree), kridaratulha (?), niunntru (the sea), pdru (to dow), podarn (a bush) and rdyi '(a stone) ; 
and (4) in the Telugu names of trees or plants, — avitru, rela , rellu , and vedaturu. 

The only copper-plate inscription of Vira-Choda. which has been published before, are the 
Chellur plates of his 21st year, 1 Like these plates and other inscriptions of the later Eastern 
Chalukyas, the subjoined inscription opens with a mythical genealogy of the Chalukya familj* 
(11. 1-18) and a historical account of the Eastern Chalukya kings (1. 19 ff.). This part of the 
inscription contains nothing new to us. but agrees in every detail with the account given in the 
Chellur plates* 9 The reign of Vira-Choda is described in verses 18-26. Of these verses, 
18-21 correspond to verses 18-21 of the Chellur plates. Verse 20 gives the correct reading 
of the town where Vira-Chbda was crowned, viz. Jananathanagari,^ which is perhaps a poetical 
form of Rajamahendrapura, the modern Rajamahendri. In verse 21 the Saka date of Vira- 
Choda* s accession is expressed by the numerical words sasi-kh-ambar-endu . This various 
read ip sh ows fhat "Or. Knltssch wns right in understanding the word khadvaya in sasi- 






72 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


The donees of the grant were no less than five hundred and thirty-six Br&hmapas, who 
are grouped according to their gotras . Appendices A. and B. contain the names of these 
Brahmanas, and the names of the various gotras to which they belonged, in alphabetical order. 
The titles which are added to their names are : — sahasra , shadangavid, bhatfa , Dafapuribhatfa 
or Da&apuriyabhatta, 1 * 3 trivedin or trivedibhatta , and somaydjia or bhaffasomaydjin . * 
Arasabrahma and Parthaslrathi are the only two names that occur without any titles. The 
majority of the names are of Tamil origin. For most of the following explanations of these 
names I am indebted to Mr. V. Venkayya, M.A. Tillanayaka and Ambalatt&di are names of the 
god Nataraja at Chidambaram. The former means 4 the lord of Tillai' (Chidambaram), and 
the latter 4 the dancer in the (Golden) Hall.’ Kamakotisahasra is called after the goddess 
Kamakoti at Kanchi. Taniyaperuman stands for Tanigaiperum&n, i-e. the god of Tanigai, 
which is another name of Tiruttani near Arkonam. The temple at Tirnttani is dedicated to the 
god Snbrahmanya. Kanda is a Tamil (or Prakrit) form of the Sanskrit Skanda. Vennakuta 
is a modified form of Venneykkuttan, i.e . Krishna, who was very fond of butter ( [venney ). 
Ulahamnndan means 4 one who swallowed the universe/ This may perhaps refer to Krishna, 
who, while yet a child, was one day suspected by Yasoda of having b wallowed mud. On being 
asked by her to open his mouth, he did so, and to her astonishment Yasoda found that the whole 
universe was within him. Karimakya is probably a mistake for Karim an iky a, 4 the black 
gem,’ a Tamil surname of Krishna. Kariyako, 4 the black king,’ also refers to Krishna. 
Chendamarakanna has to be dissolved into fan-damarai-kannan , i.e . 4 he whose eyes resemble 
red lotuses/ This is the Tamil equivalent of the Sanskrit Pundarikaksha, an epithet of Vishpu. 
Palligondan, 4 he who is sleeping/ refers to Seshasayin (Vishnu). Simhapiran is the lion-god 
Nrisimha. Siralango stands for Sir-ilan-goj Z which means 4 the illustrious yucaraja / This 
refers to Lakshmapa, who is often called Ilaiy’a-Perumal in Vaishnava works. Kadalusirukala 
refers to Hanumat, who jumped over the sea ( hadal ) as if it were a small canal (siru-bdl). 
Malahiniya-nindran 4 is properly Malai-kuniya-ninrdn , meaning 4 one who stood so that the 
mountain bent/ Tbis refers to the sage Agastya, who commanded the Vindhya mountain to 
prostrate itself before him. Tiruvarafi gamuday an and Tirumalayuday&n are named, respectively, 
after the gods at Siirahgam and Tirumalai (or Tirupati). Arulara or Aralala is derived from 
the Arulala-Perumal temple at Little Kanchi. In Attiyaralibhatta, Attiyar is perhaps a 
mistake for Attiyfir, the Tamil name of Little Kanchi. Chelva stands for Selva, i.e. 
Selvappillai, the god at Melukote in the Mysore State. Tirupoliyanindran means 4 one who 
stood resplendent/ This is the name of the god at Tirukkurugur, aB mentioned in the 
Gimcparampardprabhdva. Tirivayikkulamudayan is perhaps derived from Tiruvaykkulam, 
one of the names of the Rajagopala-Perumal temple at Manimahgalam in the Chinglepnt 
district . 5 Vittirindan, 4 one who is pleased to sit/ is the name of the Vaishnava temple 
at Dusi in the North Arcot district . 6 Tirnkuruhgndibhatta is callejl after the village 
of Kurungudi in the Tinnevelly district. According to the Guruparampardprabhdva, 
Yajnamurti was the name of a certain samnyasin of the Advaita school. It is said of him that 
he held a disputation with Ramanuja and, being defeated, became a convert to the Vaishnava 
faith. Alidevayabhatta is named after Tirumahgai- Alvar, who in Tamil works bears the 

1 According to Dr. Fleet ( Gupta Inscriptions , p. 79, note 2) Da^apnra is the ancient uatne of the modern 

Mandasdr; see also above, p. 38. 

3 The title pandita ^ occurs only in the erased word Prabddhafcvapandita (1. 177, foot-note), which seems to 
be the name of a Saiva (Aradhya) Br&hmana. 

3 The name Siriiangd occurs iu two inscriptions at Manimangalam ; South-Ind. Inter. VoL III. Nos. 35 and 
38. 

4 The name MalaiginiyaninK&n occurs in three inscriptions at Manimahgalam ; ibid. Nos 35 39 and 41 

5 Ibid. Nos. 33 and 36. ’ * 

« See the Government Epigraphiafs Annual Beport for 1892-93. The name Visprund4n algo ^ ^ ^ 
inscription at Manimangalam ; South-Ind. Inter. Vol. III. No. 40. 



MTo. 10.] 


PITHAPURAM PLATES OP YIRA-CHODA. 


73 


epithet Tiruvahnadan, i.e. ‘ he who comes from the prosperous AH country/ Alavandan and 
Adahiyamanavala are the names of two Yaishnava icharyas. The first of these was the 
grandson of Nadamuni, 1 * and the second name is a corruption of Alagiyamanavala or, in 
ans rit, Ramyajamatri, i.e. ‘ the beautiful bridegroom/ 3 Ghritasi is probably a Sanskrit 
rendering of Neyyunda, which forms part of the name of Neyynndalvar, one of the Yaishnava 
charyas mentioned in the Guruparampardprabkava. The list of Acharyas given on pp. 82 and 
of this work,* includes, among many others, the names of Sundarattoludaiyan, Periyandan 
and Chiriyandan, while that of Periyanambi occurs on p, 153. Sundarattoludaiyan also occurs 
in the Tirupparahk unram inscription of Sundara-Pandya 4 and means 4 the god who has beautiful 
arms. Tirunandudayanbhatta is called after Tirunandu, which occurs in Yaishnava works as 
a synonym for Yaikuntha, the abode of Vishnu. The title Nadavirukkum, which means 

# 0ne w ^o is io the middle/ 4 an arbitrator * ( madhyastha ), occurs in 1. 177 of the subjoined 
inscription and is found also in the large Leyden grant, 1. 138, Cbida in Chldabhatta is the 
same as^Sidan, a Tamil form of sishya , 4 a pupil/ Tevadi means 4 the feet ( i.e . the servant) of 
god. Aramudu means 4 fresh nectar / Manattukkiniyan means 4 one who is pleasing to the 
mind ; and Ayiramjoti is 4 the thousand-rayed/ i.e . 4 the bud/ Two of the Manimangalam inscrip- 
tions 5 mention the names Donaya and Donaiya ; the similar name Donaya occurs repeatedly 
among the donees. Such an abundance of Tamil names in the list of donees of Yirachodachatur- 
vedimangala leads one to infer that a large immigration or importation of Tamil Brahmanas 
to the north must have taken place during the reign of Kulottunga-Chola I. The large 
proportion of Yaishnava names among the donees further suggests that about this time the 
Ramanuja faith counted many devotees, who adopted as their names the Tamil equivalents of 
Sanskrit names, which occur in the sacred works of Vaishnavas. 6 7 Three of the donees bear 
the title Brahmamahdrdja, which must have been an invention of the Chola king Rajaraja I. 
in whose inscriptions it is first found? Of these three donees one was called Kulottungaclioda- 
brahmamaharaja after the reigning sovereign. The second was a military officer ( sendp a H ) 
and had the title RajarUjabrahmamaliar&ja, which, as we know from the Chellur plates, had been 
conferred on a certain Potana. The third had the name Kumaranarayanabrahmamaharaja, 
whioh was perhaps derived from a surname of Yira-Choda himself. 

The boundaries of Virachodachaturvedimangala were : in the south, Ponnavada and 
Mallavrolu; in the west, Kolliprolu and Chembrolu ; in the north, Folakumbarra, 
Dahkalapupdi and Bendapundi; and in the east, tbe sea (II. 186-188). W'itb line 188 begins 
a second, much more detailed description of the boundary-line of the granted village. This 
passage enumerates various canals, tanks, ponds, hamlets, hills, boulders, pieces of waste-land 
and high ground, foot-paths, ant-hills, valleys etc . It also includes the names of a number of 
trees, an alphabetical list of which is given in Appendix C. Of the villages that are mentioned 

1 [An abbreviated form of this name is NAtha in Sanskrit, as will be seen from the expression 
•ddhyalhaletinishthd Ndth&dayah, which occurs on p. 36 of the Yat( ndramatadipikd of Srtntv&sad&sii, Telugu 
edition, Madras, 186%. In his remarks on this work [Report on the Search for Sanskrit Manuscripts for the 
year 1883-84, p. 70, No. 154), Dr. Bhandarkar gives a list of the Vaishnava Acb&ryas mentioned at the beginning 
of the Yattndramatadipikd. In this list occurs Sripar&hkusiinfttba as the name of one of the Acharyas. But the 
term SriparAnku^anUtha evidently denotes two individuals, SriparknkuSa and Natba, the former being the name of 
Nammaivir, alias Sath&ri or, in Tamil, Satjagdpa. The latter, N&tha, refers to N&damuni.— V.V.] 

* This is tbe name given to Rima in Vmshnava works. 

* Madras edition, Kaliyug&di 4090, Virddhin. 

4 Archaological Survey of Southern Indiu % VqI. IV. p. 52. 

1 8ovth~Ind. Inter . Vol. III. Nos. 31 and 36. 

• The JSdldyiraprabandham , which is called the ** Dravida-V&da/* is a collection of Tamil poems written bv 
the Alvars. The Ramanuja Vaishnavas, especially those of tbe Tengalai sect- have a greater regRrd for Tamil which 
is the language of their sacred texts, than for Sanskrit, jast as the Madhva Vaishnavas prefer the Kannada 
language. 

7 South-Ind. Inter. Vol. III. p. 14. 



74 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


in the grant, the following admit of identification. One of the two villages 1 which formed the 
southern boundary of Virachodachaturvedimangala, Ponnav&da, may be identified with Ponnada 
which is found to the east of Pithapuram on the Madras Survey Map of the PitMpuram 
division. The western boundaries, Kolliprolu and Chembroln, are found on the same map as 
Gollaprol and Chebrolu, on the high-road from Pithapuram to Kattipudi, Bendapundi, one 
of the northern boundaries, is Bendapudi, on the road to Vizagapatam. Two other villages 
between which the northern boundary passed, Singavikrama and Dontengi (1. 25d), 
are found on the map as Srungarrukham and Tondangi between Bendapudi and the sea. 
Among the boundaries of Navavada, a hamlet of Virachodachaturvedimangala ( 1. 266 ), we 
find Bendapundi ( the modern Bendapudi) and Duggavada. This village is identical with the 
modern Durgada, which is found on the map between Bendapudi and Chebrolu. Chembrolu, 
the modern Chebrolu, belonged to the district of Bottepinandu (1. 209 )J 2 The district 
of Prolunandu, in which Malavelli and Ponnatorra were situated (11. 69 and 182), is already 
known from two inscriptions in the Kuntimadhava temple at Pithapuram, and included also 
Xavakhandavada (near Pithapuram ) and Sarpavaram. 3 


TEXT. 4 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 


First Plate . 


tnrra [i*] 





rT- 

J 

rnsnfiWf PW: cHTt 

ddT 


JTtsiTf^^gTdfshd U Id «: 7 [|| \*] 

?nTt wfd: rm: 


; fTfT: n[T*]vtV: rfd*lWdTTrT: rnrt f^Td: 

?nfr sratd: ?nft *rvrvft*r: 

rpft wfrT^T: <TfT: 

rnft ddt Wrft v[t.*]cT. TTTfr 

ddt fauvd: rrenvsrahrr: dcnsR- 

psr: dd^«y*qt dd: trlrfeTd <r?ft 

nn^Tiq: rn?t fwf^ert^: ?m: 


tnnfrm: <TfT: ^ <q [-*] 

drTl 




.. i A " 0 S^r^ e iM eI il 0 P ° rti0n i!, 204 , } two Plages belonged to the district of Uttarsvarusa, in 

"hicb, according to line iM, Alarm, one of the three components of VirachddachaturvSdimangala was situated. 

1 The same district is mentioned in 1. 202 as Bontepinaadu. 8 * 

3 See above , Vol. IV. p. 230 and note I. 

* From the ori 8' lnal Pktes. a Read aftanSTO* 0 . , Rpa . ^ 

7 Reed W- * Head c <mf. 



Xo. 10.] 


75 


PITHAPURAAI PLATES OF VIRA-CEODA. 


9 : fT?r: rTrft ^Trr?*' ?m: 


10 



11 «rrar <i'j| i UUftwn <? Pet ''i i m ^ ^TcafT 

sn- 

12 ^i i ! H<*44|« T[cT] [l*] d*fl»P yfif^nd %TW*4Tt«q<3ft 

rim <gf 3 %‘ 

13 Tj »imr ». T^K^iW| gT ctsust^i f^^RStTm-y iT^idl 

fWT *Jrft fa^pTfST^- 

14 *nr^fT [l*] ^T ^ rP6I IWT^l 6 «n<asn«PiP'Hlf«T 

cfi[T*]TteT rWliwr T [l*] * ^ WTV 

15 fTrrTfdl ftfm® 7 ^d?TRT^ fUKdKIW 

WTTprorg ^- 8 

16 tT^ 9 syddM3*W<^U^*r?T[sr]^T^t['fa’] gi<*»5»mi«idir«T f’T^TTT’TN 

^TTRTWf^^T- 

Plate; Fir^t Side . 

17 ft «wt*ra «3Wiinrft>7ftttTftftar“ 84 *i*ifnra“ T®w 

tnWTTTT- 

18 * [|*] d<amlP^iP < M t [i*] MtSHM^cmn 

TO^srrg * [**] 7T ^ H ‘ 

19 : ipa ji ftreiw: **pt: 1? ^f%^w[T] ** 1 ^ w?Tt 

^T^r^mpnffFT^- 

dMPd^P*d^yin 15 ^T- 

21 ^PTT 3 <d ^ * fc^ irenwr^re 1G l^rf^^ft^T 17 

WrfJT efrft^r^EPnrRET [|*] 


3 Read crf3r*[. 


1 Read °5 T f »t : 3 Read 

4 Read OTqV*r°. 8 Read 

* The word is wi itten partly on and partly below an erasure. 

1 Read foj fa 8 The anusvdra stands at the beginning of the neit li ne, 

» Read *t 7 TT 7 TC°. 10 Bead f^f^TTT 0 . 11 Bead 

“ Read °*T»J tfV°. 15 B ead '* ?**? ^ mT '_ 

w Read 11 Read ** 



76 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA 


[Vot. V. 


22 rmn\ s?*rep »<[:*] 1 TOT f^TTfa 

cr<S<TT f^RT^] 2 •TW wrRr 7T* 

23 trwN^rf?f ?r^^r srcftrw*ffcsi d^RTsr: 
tRTWT^ (rr)ffW «T?IT f^pr- 

24 5 wN^rt ^itW rT^^t fs^-H I R«T|irr^f citHW 8 
f*r^nhr[:*] 

25 ^[2rf^]^TrT rTWrft ^3 ^«k r^i %: i -q cdi K d' dcwrc 

O 

WW- 

26 4 ?T^m ^nfg^rr^g^iRvifi ?r[5]Tgf^*«iRc£j«r 

?r|X|- 

27 ^aqwfafWrT c!<H7T: ^tsfwwf^nrrf^^i^reR 9 ?i<w<fr[w]Tiw- 

WrRr fTrPni 10 

28 WT 5 f^[T*]^T H[T*]^fr fff^RSn fsnfi*T[T*]f?W 

*trt«t ^rn^TTwom ^[f]«nwK *- 

29 ^JT^^rrsrrg^t tt^i 11 fT^^Trrsr: tj^Rfufw 

Iwt gd Ttfa [i*] 

so rrrraflf^ifrwtftr [|*] wSt 

13 0]T5n£wT: *rfiinr«iiw 14 ^rO*] 

31 fw ^[^*]wqr[^X [i*J fTW^rwH w?r^ »jd3<flqr: [i*J 

f%^(T)qnf^<?n?xira[: mqr*]*n*rR df^rt[^*] i 0*] tt-, 

32 T^nft ^nrordt snRWhrw TT^m^R??: [i*] ^TfrxRm^eR* 

^ H^nir^wRnTT%- 

33 ^tt: 15 [ii »*] nt ^sr *Rt*r# fqajcjuT arran wrJXJrf^ftf 

^rfrsrrftr p^T’ 6 f^W trr[w]T ^ *r- 


Second Plate ; Second Side . 

34 #T | dW ^Tnf5TR[€]sr Wlfd m w^rsu: 


I Read 5 Read °Wft. 

* Read * Kead 

i Read 8 Kead 

10 The anusvdra stand* at the beginning of the next line. 

II Bead TTCU. " Bead c ^q^Yf%. 

«« Bead “Bead 


* Rend °3^fir5^n3r:. 
6 Read ^}fw. 

9 Head “wrwmfR. 

11 Bead ST«rroV 
" Bead °^t- 



No. 10.] 


PITHAPURAM PLATES OF YIRA-CHODA. 


77 


35 II [n*] * |qUei*«|»M [^]fw qwVi| » ll«ill 
WTrU^W^rT 1 W fafawiHl SRTcqT- 

36 h tit snshfr^ 2 * srsrit fwrit whrw 

37 wfsrfcnfitfw: 3 [»•] »nnw- 
f3^n[uY]fT^r <*lfrl%[ut]* TTW5- 

38 ^ I l>*J VRTTCil^fTit^ wi' ^rten^- 

?TWPW [l*] W^WT f%^f7r[T*]5fTWi[»rlTI*] 

39 [*]ra[wr3]?^fw[<| 8 i [ c *] 9 s ^ to fpc « rrm ^ v d a « i Rsi h 3 (ti «m 

■J 

R^id 10 iiOTr^Cf]- 11 

40 [d*T^][T*]faf<ifoj ^TPT [W"TTcT] [l*] *T5T 12 dtfdM *£Tm 

VRT^IT Pd-dS RVfWrl 

41 sR^Td^n 13 $frifrm t[ww]5 i 0*] tftihrnfanfl»iM fdlXJfaar- 

^i[t*]^ r«« d i did f%«r[^T] 7 rr- u 

42 [•*] ^ w^ff *r?fir 15 

^q^r% u: 

43 1# ^idK^ ^jAnfd«feWI -q|s<.l«jr«rqw: I [*<>*] 

T^rrfwrTW^- 17 

44 u ^[^prjirnrw ^rtfa sr wp ’ 

[l*] ^dlW^TT- 

45 T^ dilfd f^dmi*^^ ^fTT <3^*^ 4 Td 19 m WtWf%7TT 

n [u*] 4 <i«iWl Xr 

46 TJ U%rtV. WTTTWt^n f^JT W Wt 

I [**][**]- 


1 Read ? <g li ^ I'^ vj-^^fc T. * Read ’SHFtftV 1 Bead 

4 Read 1 * The akthara of seems to be corrected from 

8 Before *T stand. the first half of another, incomplete W. The of *WT4J*fiT looks almost like if. 

T Read 1TTO. 8 The syllables sa t bhd, nu and va are corrected from others. 

* Read 10 Read 

31 A. syllable, probably mma, has been erased at the end of this I me. 

n The beginning of this line up to ^TT* t is written or an erasure ; read VI til. 

18 Read °K$m ^V Tf qfft^TVrt. 14 Be*d *?f^fcrT°- 11 Read * t* 

18 Read e 17 Bead « Bead 

M Read * Read 



'8 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


47 ST 1 ^< T ^ T^ 2 ufH [^]WT qiwfwitwjftw?! 

fxTrrr 3 ^f^rrat- 

48 *3x: i [^*] WqfrrfKiw qqr fqf^drfqwr [i*] wfar- 

tpar jqi f^rarf^r- 

49 n [t**] q w q^jT^Tf^r xftFFmmw. [i*] wfT 

6 r^rffanr[qt] fqq ^< 4 lu*fr *re: i [t«*] 

50 *n7TfH ,; qbc gr whjfr *r? ii qwr ^rfh ^qrnhq 7 -swuji^- 

faq: ^ « [u*] *Da]w rrt 


Third Plate ; First Side . 

51 ^rTT 5 TRWT qqiqfrT[q]T 9 I WfIdfsqY*?lfq Hm-UT^^ItT W 

W. i [u*] -?ftqi< 3 qr 3 <g[<Tt] 

52 ^ qpng ?t^t 10 [i*] 

»jw fqftwrqnrW ii [v®*] 

53 fT^rnra 12 ^ftr €b?qts $wt< n^rfaq rrgq? 13 [f%]spr wrat 1 * 

[i*] ^fc]qfinr dw 15 vra f*ft- 

54 sg?:^ 16 fqrT^ 17 fsrcfa HT^ »J^dlffTrqf|qd II U c *] TWTfaq 

mr^qsnwnw 

55 ^q^crfedsif-**}*!! [i*] m i wdh [nw.*] fr*rrrw[:*] 

^iTJIfRiq * [#:] qnj - 18 

56 fqq II [\£*] 5jqMPr|«MT« T I5|fa 5i < T *f T^ I5 T W W^[q]rn* 

ijqi^rHdT Sic^T cT- 

57 qT 19 qf^ff i sn reit ” gni dPUdmd^^vmkqi fs 11 ftnjwwhiHW* 

W^ n ^q^rt w[t]- 

58 «di^r*id<y fd: 23 i [>•*] wf^iqT[^brfart ftrfejTfq^ 3 * 

Tfr sfe® |[f%]- 


1 Read a Read °X\M‘ 

4 The ^ of is corrected from 
6 Read l^Tcrt. 7 Read ^Tpfa. 

* Read 10 Read 

13 Read 0 *VQ. 18 Read 

15 Read TpRci?. 10 Read °*3TSR 

17 The five letters are written on an erasure, 

13 Read ^p£T ; the anusvdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 

19 Read 90 Head ^TT^ft. 

21 Read , u The u of dyttih is written on an anutvdra. 

34 ^ is corrected from ^ ; read °^. » Read 


3 Read • 

6 Read K^T^°- 
0 Read ^TT 
u Read 
l * Head °?cff. 


31 Read 



No. 10.] 


PITHAPURAM PLATES OF VIRA-CHODA. 79 

59 vft snr \ <**hr *nr% ^*wi<iU i **nfa - 

fWT 

60 w W«*nra[:*] ^: 3 i [>**] ^ 

\5 

61 ^JpsiflU^i^T Jjt^r I mr mw 5 mr^ 

fW^jfnrfr- 

62 1 [***] *j^«hisn?ni Prfr^iw?Tt #^rr- 

I.SrTrjf^^tMST 8 * * * tjf^lni ^*|^[6 T*]5T- 7 

03 fir » wpjiTwIwr qfcim tr^[wt]*rrfTRf trtt 10 

wTlmmrrrm ii 0 ^*] «r- 

Ji ^ mr<M 12 trf%nf^^r mrf?r mcu^w^ ^t 13 f%^%5rr- 

^tcf. R'^inrf^fTHTTfR^ [%]- 

05 ^ j [fgjsnrsrwfg wrrf^rt^f^rr 14 

Wt^mflcf 15 ['STj^nffT^rf W- 

66 * ’iWWTfH ii 0«*] ?ra<T 16 [$t] T^JJ+iWT ^IffTfw 17 

i ^rrfTfr 18 «r^tTW^?(T)^[^]- 


Third Plate ; Second Side . 

07 f^OrJsT i [**•] ^[T*]f^nrgfg5T(RR ifVrcnrt g ^ f cifa^PtH 

s ^[ in i] [i*J ireraraH- 

68 sTJpftTzrsi tfon^ ur^nR^R^^i^snn^ 19 ii [^*] * 

69 Trrr3r[T*]fw3fr xrnw?[T*]T9>: vwii«i^r[:*] 

srfcTtg^r: RT^'TT^f^Rrfsr* 

70 *nfwt Tre^ingwT* toi Trf^gtrfwt^nxrfk- 

5^P5T(T)ft^T- 

71 [fr] ^u-dfa^i-diMAird 1 ?nrr 21 1 ^tptt 22 rItt^ iKnrf?iw(%- 

WWit vr- 


1 Read 3 Read °*5tC?f?T. 

4 Read C TWfffTTginf 5 3c?«^Kf^l. 


6 Head ^J<q^TR 

* Head 

13 Htad T?rf^ 0 , 

15 Head °Hcf^. 

W Head 

21 Head Wf. 


7 Read °^ft°. 
10 Read W t 
12 Read Wtf 
18 Read 

'* Scad ^5f°. 
u Road V^Pft 


I Read HtR. 

* 

s Read ^TSJ. 

4 Read ^nrnu 3 . 

II Read HUPfift. 
14 Read °srfc<i 
l * Read Vwi. 

30 Read 



80 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(Tot. V. 


72 ^T 5 ! 1 amil'I [l*] 13*TTW e M<.[*^V] ^wh*l[fi(]?i 

mdfi^[T*]fw^T Tftw[T*] 4faf?T tWT' 

73 f$fk ii [*••] fft ^rmT n[w]wr 3 ^- 

f%TT trerro vnfra^fta: 

74 ferri^r : [i*] Ti^rt «Nr fwsni; w^t- 

w ^niTcj, ’Tf 1 ?: 

75 mlwr ^nwr^m ii [?^*] Tm[fWl3Tf*r 

4r «nlR r w ^sPrfa: [i*] fwfa*] W f%- 


76 [fa]*r^ wrafi fwt^nr1%^ ftrfw 6 i 

swsnraT *wt[f*r] *p*rrf%rnf 


[*£*] mnt*r 


77 frw [i*] Iwfd Orf^wf^r[^]witt snrfw ^nr$^- 

^a: i f^o*] gipsr rtMmryud<Tdi faw- 

j u ^ a VJ <L N9 

78 [l*] RTrWTTWWT^^Wrr t WtfrT t^T 

gjfsHTT: [n n\*] a wT^rwT- 


79 



fwtfTT f^rrfrg *jfs- 


[«*] 


Urraaim ^tptt: 


80 ^t : 11 [ii 3**] a ^n*mt *flT?ra f?rww i ?nr mw^fwra^sfw- 

x[^i] ifd farat rrgftf¥[<d] 12 m- 

81 JTT?TTR [|*] i Tter^vr?: I I ^TTWSTW?: I 


’Ttereiws: I I 

82 %gpnr?: f?rprr«rg^n[a]»Ti: i zm^wi: i wrefrwwr. i f?nr 

wujssisroi: frm- 

83 ^tsttswi: mw?: Ttwn: i 13 *n^nTF. Tfamu?: i ars[^]- 

1%ex3)^rra[w]i[:*] 


Fourth Plate ; Fir*t Side. 

84 %grwi: areffK'wr: i %*rwi: [t]a^rw?: i • 


1 After this word four alcshara* are miseing J dTM <y«il would suit the metre. 
3 Read W. s Read ?wf. 

5 Bead farfWT. # Read fafanr. 

8 Read ITtHT. » Read rg§*T°. 

n Read ^T:. u Read ^ I ^f+lfa 0 . 


* Read 

* Bead 
1# Read 

15 Read *rm. 



No. 10.] 


PITHAPURAM PLATES OF VIRA-CHODA. 


81 


85 \ Pkto: 1 1 5 rf?fwnHS ’ 1 * i 

^rtenfft^ro: #r- 

86 T^nr?: ^T[wt]^n : 3 1 1 1 ^rn- 

1 <=ti 1 fi-t^ q- 

87 1 1 *nTT[Vjr«T¥: 

1 [to]w^to: 1 fd^* 

88 TOKT34JI4TO: | TW^TTO I ^TH^TO: I «TKIWi^lfacr » 

•rnwr . 1 1 fttimr- 

89 ^rro: 1 1%^jto: 1 1 fw^ro: 1 ^rrrnnPTf: 1 

I *1KI*WT?: I t^frT- 

90 *tf. 1 ifHTWTftwf: 1 wm^fWF f**rero: 1 ’PrfFnrro: t 

‘^nrermfsro: 1 

91 ^ft»^TO: 1 fd^fn^r^f: 1 hkhwts: 1 fMwrro: 1 iftfa?- 

TO 1 iftffT^- 

92 to 1 «r[T*M%]fero: 1 ’sterwro ’starwfii: fiMhrprwr 

93 [ 1 ] fr*ra[*r]?: 1 ^nrftriTO: 1 wtjrto: 1 twcr- 

I •tKl'MW- 

94 ver: 1 i fnmmjg : [i] i iro: 1 3Tt[V|w?s: 

^ptto: ^dunvi: 1 ?f%<T*]* 3 fd- 

95 to: 1 wwtaw?: 1 wrenpsJTO ^ta^rro: 1 ^nrnrw?: 1 %n- 

$ro: 1 1 faw - 7 

96 iprrrnnr^cT: 1 ^nft^TTO 1 jtt^ito 1 wuroro: i fd^roni- 

^T 5 [[vr]f: 1 

97 to: 1 1 jpw?: i fdw^r^TTsrTO: W»w^: 1 

f^JJTO: I 5TFf^- 

98 ^p^r: 1 ’tNtto i df^nr^wr^rer^: 

ww. 

99 TO^pi^ro: 1 fnw: 1 H?rr[fai]TO 1 ^rm^fTO: ^dsnssTro: r 


1 Bead Vj;. * This name is inserted in the place of HI which has been erased. 

* Read UTKnUT. 4 Read STTO. 8 Beftd 

* Read * H«q T ) r fc . » The onutvdro stands at the beginning of the neit line. 

* R ead 4tere°. 

9 The vitmrga at the end of this line belongs to the erased name e( fa which is still partly seen. 



82 


EPIGRAPHIA I3TDICA. 


[Yol. Y. 


100 i •tttrtoits! i ^fynT?! i *rncnT^W 5 *. 

srrrnrsnrr. 

Fourth Plate ; Second Side . 

101 *<$ eh i <r fy iq^TR?mg wr i ^frfy^n: 1 ^mwrf*wi: i 

wn*rapjfa- 

102 pjrwt i frrf^mrwr. f^pn: fRW: i ^ttty- 

tptt, ^twn ; i sfd wfa- 

103 »ry i i i <fM- 

mrs: f^raws: i 

101 wf. i ifirorow. «imre*iPi^ i i 

’hK^misht?; i l^nwrftR- 

105 i: sikpsiwf. i i f^*FT3<n«nTF: i fy^pr?: i ptt^t- 

m\ i 

106 i: •ttcrfpts: i i ^rnf«[w]s: i i ?t- 

jfl^vrF. ! *rfrwWf: i wf%- 

107 i ^rrf^wi: i ^rfawf^: i ^m^TPWf: i fw- 

WRU!: i f^* 

108 W!: i wfrRrnwi: i ’frf^PTf: i ^rg^rw?: i grid^iu^s facf 

i *iTf T f^ i: i w- 3 

109 rttttyMhf: i fww: i w*rs*: 

i 

110 %: ^nrni[w]wi: i 1 * ?f?r tj'fr'fR^Tfru^ 

i *o 6 

111 i iraTwrffWs: • i nry[g*]*if: i t^iwirvrs: 

fas±in3*i- 

112 fy?? i fw fi u fa flsr«wi: i i ’srcr^i'rwg: i 

113 mf<fafa<i 6 i j £fa«n«fafad i 7 ?iT^¥rF: i 3nnyfay<fl i gwir- 

i it- 8 

in i i strrw?: i Smxzi • 

^twr^rfycT i sra- 


1 Read ^TK. 

* Read 

7 Read 


3 Read TS^-fq rf. a ^e&d Sf^T. 

*““*** ‘ Read 

Tie anus vara stands at the beginning o£ the next line. 


No. 10.] 


PITHAPURAM PLATES OF VIRA-CHODA. 


83 


115 i i ^srtwr?: i m^r- 

116 i f?rwNrTOW?: i i ^rfr^r- 

*rs: [i] 

117 s: i (roraw : i i i ^nn- 

toj?: i 

Fifth Plate ; First Side. 

118 rTOW. I ^rfwwT^: 3 -*favtrxw. \ 

f^ws: i *rr- 

119 ftmduft q » ?[T*]*ik<wrc i €ft«nPws: i %^wi: i 

quimhfg : I I 

120 f^fee^fpr[H?](:)^l^iT^ i 3 5 kmwi: i 

§frg(T)*ffw?: i ¥- 

121 [ft] 7 TiTt[^] 5 n: WrtwWrtnf [i] ’nrranrer. i mrzwz: i 

122 ^nfms: i i i ^raws: i vtfmviw- 

123 %\ i *rr[^i]w?: i [n]W3^*HJ i StoroNfen i i 

121 1 q<s^<yT s wi: *it(V]ws: ^i^gWT^pn: i ’^^HJ*** 

wtm: *r*rcws: [%]*- 

125 ?wi: i faw^rsprs: [i] Sfonwrw?: 

3 3 km* 

126 m: i fas^rs: 1 *nf^r«rtf[*r]f*Rl [i ^]iw : ' 

127 i nfiwwi f frt i i Nwt 

i *nfa*^tf?ra- 

128 I *ts^ws: « 'rrrpm?: i i 3 fT*n[WT*]w?: 

i ^nwrfws: i *t * J 

■> Kead "W!:. ’ R« ad M ^'^ - 

* Bead T?T. The anuscdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 

u 2 


1 Ke\d T^T°. 

4 Read °*p'r’. 
s Read ^T*PI, 



84 


EPIGRAPHIA. INDICA. 


[Vot. V. 


129 new. i M if* 

»ftw: (0 '4iKlTK^^Tfrir^ i *?t- 

130 jres^usrtiraE I %W^ms: i fl i tirawf. 

i « 

131 ip&mKZ: I wftr*TTO: i i ' 

f?r[^]^Ji^n5pr- 

132 i: i srrf^snrs: i i 

( TlTT €t e nlM«Tl^^t II 

133 f&rs: « i ii vtaro: ' *f?r ^t- 

*(t): $<«hiW3i t: [i*] 

134 *u<mu rai: i i ^pw[i*]: i ^t^RTWS: i 

tro 1 i JtteWte'- 1 

135 i ^TT^nFrwr: i favHqqqtrs: i i 

Fifth Plate ; Second Side. 

136 wi: i i i i wf*<iiti«Jifaq. 

I ] 

137 q THi< gr «n ig: i ^nfafaRwiiwiw i ^* 

arw: i «it- 

138 tto*ws: i *f?r ^ft 3 MnranwftTsrr: i i 

qpn: i wturc- 

139 «n: i i ^$%sws: i irnrorg: ^rRnr- 

«e i 

14.0 to: i fa^ro: i i 5t*nro: i 5ftnr[T*MRw5: 1 

straws: i iTJTTTwfw?: i 

141 Tnro: i ^tr#»fTO; i snrc’nrrlXI’TO: i grcnaffiirrgfrreT# i 

<Tflt?TO: i 4t- 

142 *T*tro: wnpro: i *?t*h5RTO: ^taro: i piww s: i 

*rwror?: i PfR^gsyR*]- 


• Bead 


* Bead WT. 


* Bead W. 




No. 10.] 


PITHAPURAH PLATES OF VIRA-CHODA. 


85 


143 xnrs: 1 i i i i 

i wT^tws: i m[Vfa- 

144 irg: i iumkwi: » <reprnws: 

C 

145 m: i =sfcra^ns: i i i 3 ro?: 

i rrn^wrs: i ^r- 

146 wsm i gRT^n rg: i ?tpw?: i ^rwnsr?n: f?re- 

^rnr^wnrew: i fn- 

147 •nrnppr?: 4 g^rtt%Wf: ^tnwfn: *tt- 
rnpwi- 

148 [:] fsrsrpf^m: i ntntwm: i i fafu- 

ns: i n)w'an(*)ws: i Pkwtc[:] 

149 HPnrreTn *f*r *rfo ^[f%] 5 nit^rr: i 

i rd*iW ?reng[:3 

150 [?iT]w*OTg: i i f*rws: i ^rfwirrfa^r?: ^wi: i 

151 s: I toiTf: I nfirgmro s: ^l«i: i i ^*tt- 

nw: ’alciw?: 

Sixth Plate-, First Side. 

153 nreprai: i sre^rrrrawfn: f^TforP^w: i ^t^nrsnfSnr i 

TOra[f]rc i timva- 

154 [:] i Tan^mHsrrfnron « Sitftimz- 

wsO^Pw- 

165 i ^rrm^: i %wm[*] ifir 

7 ?f^rntw: i ’ftron: i *i**<*iKiw- 
156 m: i ^TWTWNftwi: l I 

< fa - 

* Read 

• Read «#■ 


1 Read °«pi5'.. 
‘ Read 


3 Read 

6 Read °^tfe. 




86 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


157 i i i *rsnjf£- 

*rr. 1 i ^n?- 

158 wc[h]i: : ^trr[*T]wf: fwf^Trf^^rpnrf: i iRTTwre: i 

^Kl^rerrws: 1 t ^irmT- 

159 vn: i ^trrrrvn: i snrrawvrc: %*(>[]- 

W^lfWcT i w^- 2 

160 irfocT i nrw: [i] ^ftTrmrf: ’sKtws: wsnsnr?: i 

TT*WF. i %?T?[vt]?; ^pq^TVff: 

161 [^]n;rcp!T(sO*np£: i ^t^T^cnn: i 

f%fTTrfg^^-p[^<jr5rG- 

162 i; i f*Mw[<i[w*j[f]: ’sMVJrrew. 

i i ^fwrjfw: 

163 %ii=rRW: i 

^fw^- 

164 ftmi: <i)fq^«T?: ffareir?: [f%]f^nwi: i i 

^wrvn: ^<cj|<[ T ]. 

165 ^’nvr?: ^snf^rerwi: ^Ki^uvri: ’ftarvr?: i ^fsnwi: irfar(T)2i- 

Hi: i ^sm?: xi|prTwii[:] 

166 n'fltwn: 4H 6 <m «7h ^ i : [i*] trwws: i 

167 tvt?: i *rrf%t^wi: i tr?Frr[*T]*r5: ?rreT*p*nTf: 

fd<i=H«l^54l*nT?: 

168 wi?: ^rf%5rnwi: f^rmr?: ’rttum?: srrrnrwi: frrirwtftH?: 

169 *|.:*] iftffmft - 

I>*]*tt: i ^rsfsrajmrcnrs: 

170 fnv^ldi^wfs: ^[«]?: ^fanrerro: «rr*R»n. %*pra[*]?r 

^rwrr- 

171 i f<H *r?: *jwrc?n: ?frT i ^nwifi nrg: 0] 


1 Read 5TT<I, 
3 Read 


The anusvira stands at the beginning of the next line, 

1 Read c «rrsnff5: I fiffi- • Read*f%*. 



Xo. 10.] 


PITHAPURAM PLATES OF VIRA-CHODA, 


Sixth Plate ; Second Side- 

112 ^ORterwi: sR[fr]- 

sfb 1 w f*r?r- 

173 f%[JTtJ^T5TT: [l*] 5^1 fact I ^r^T^irf^cT 

I «r*nT*R* 

174 5?wr[1%fT] i rfa srr^fTWfiJfT^onw i wpswpftii^T^ 2 ^ftirg- 

m: ’fbrTrrar: i ffw ^^rr- 

175 ft fw[T*]r*4-=»<Tt^«ii: i i ^renr?: i #amrf: 

i 3wnrf?r: j tt^t- 

176 *TW5W¥TTmt ^iTTT^TTT^W^WTTTTTT^fT WR^T- 

3T*r i f^Rncwis i *f‘ 

177 ^r^rrewi: i i ^ 1 ^ T ' 

VJ 

TOnpf: n 4 

178 II ft i ^t^Wf^rnt i 

it nin*n^'®<i i *nw*t(T)f^nr5: T ■ 

179 wwftw : i cr^tw: i ^fTO: mo*l5*]w5: 

i rfir mf^wr^Twr: i 

180 [: i] rsrat i 5 nrnrR?: i *nr4^ws ^tir^inT?. 

THTTO^rntwr: i ** 

181 (i) ^aptrfsTTrW ^3' 


182 =5RrT«T57r«f trlVturUJ 

W. TTRrftgg[?T]T- 

183 YRTTR 





184 gpTRTT <jl| ffl ' 8 [t*] Wl ftg u 3 wfnWq^i^+li" CTfrOTR 

s*r[f] Tr ff ^ y xir ^fRrferN]- 

1 Read 3 Read ^TT^’ 

4 The rest of this line after ^ has been erased; bat the erased words ; WT^TTXTT 5 ^ are Sw. 

faintly risible. 

6 Read 6 Read ^5^T°. 

7 The anusvdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 61 ^ ta * 



88 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


185 H^unfiwufe* 1 * ^ ^ ^rfrrrur: ^[xffjwt- 

fg-wr[^] <i«MiTir <tth[ 4] nfrfsr 

n wrefawr: i 

187 qfiwa : « ftw^r wi[at]^ ftarr i trfom: 

wfoTT II '3 tR 7T: II tf^TfW* 

188 ggg I 3 * ®^rer[^]Ww [t]^f^fsr vfarfrr]: II sNeUlH I* || 

ij4fT: i ^twptit f*fa TTtw^ 

189 wdldpc ftenj ftfz mf% fHw xr§- 

wfj fc^Tf-i <rtf% rnf^ ffarr ii ^%w?r: 

190 ftf»r[t] #^f?r wt1% ^rm #^f?f fsrfajfspfi 

<ft% <rreg ftf¥% #^§f?r fN^[?]?T- 


Seventh Plate ; First Side. 


191 srg ^tf*r [XKfafV «F»f? <frf% jrrsg ftfa trsu< gg q ^ afl>g 

$H=€U^- 

192 [tj]^^t fH% ^f%WtpT 

[feai]^ 

193 mfee* ^r^ir ftfc 

f^ng^g’g l^rt?ra«j[<q]- 

m z&3)^ ^iTa wred[*]sg ftfa ftnjT^pfee 

^rT^i^r OJ^eeiTOj ftf* <?- s 


195 fwa%* fawra^ulwj ftfeen fteg 7 ftfr rfmq * 

i^ifee aftt- 

196 fz ftfwfo f 'Hfn«<g ^QflJ^f^sr TTfromw ftf?r 

TT^TA 5Tter[T*]^ ftff TT^TA mm- 

197 10 ft dlfs[ftT]?^ flf«i«n MshIa qnpftff &9ra«J ffifa q; 

*5 [*]« TfajTT frfe STft feTUm 

198 flfd* difsl^g dtPs ii£»j ftfsrq» q ^sn fg 

r »r - ^ »\ • «v ^ ^ 

’Tfeeig ft- 


i Head °fe*. 3 Read 

4 Read #*fT*T;. 5 Read f^rfsf, 

7 Read ^d*?. 8 Read 

10 This line up to rdyvnu is written on an erasure. 


3 ReadV^ns 0 . 
6 Read 
• Bead 



No. 10.] 


PITHAPUKAM PLATES OF VIRA-CHODA. 


S9 


199 fsns w tedJw^r srfefg gig ftfagi snra^npr 

g- 

200 ? ?rtl% ^rm^fieegg ftfggr yearns «frf% gigg 

rr^TTZ: grcgfee- 

^ cl 

201 fa ^f?rgi *rfsfk CtfasR xtsmTz ^ea»- 

g^?g ftfsrai UgtTZ 2 

202 ¥tfq?T g^’T gig ftfa T^fTfig-fH^Pd"!- 

<r*t ^gea>g- 

203 ^ *rfafa ir§*iz ^fea 

gig *taT it t^rsrr fa- 

204 fa i ^TH^^ i ?T«5Ui r i i wtwsg gfeg &9Tgg flfa 

^frnjg wfa*d citfa gggg 

205 gVf*r gf[|] nffa mfa wgee>g^[g*]g 

ftfagi qiq°n*jg gggg ftfa trprc 

206 ifffa grea-’ ^rfwwTig 5 jtwtit gfa^ 

’ftfz gi* 7 ftag i ^w[tJ- 

207 3TT 9 fa[fa] i gtfa^ gra^ripT wg?T trgjrfz mfergg 

<^fa=B g*£ ^ef?r gigg ftfrm <frrcg- 

208 «t ^sqgqz ^qjf?r gig ftfa 3n«*j«Hf3i <frf% gig ftfg 

S THqg g[T*]wrgg ftfg str^t 

209 ^f fadC ieefe $ig ftfa ^rngg ^rfafrgg gfafggTft? wt- 

g[g] gfa* gtfe ?rwri^|^ g- 


Seventh Plate ; Second Side. 

210 ^g'° gtfg g^g 11 gfa gtg[fz] <rtfa 3^3 ftfa ^gg 

ifaggr gfawgg giwgg ftfg- 

211 fa gqjg 12 gm?rfg rftfs ggrrgg 13 ftf* 3 ^<gg 

ftfggr <5-rKgg [**f]ggg ft- 


1 Read 5f^fir^r. 
s Read C ^T^*T. 
c Read yfwi. 

* Read °*pr, 
l * Iitad^yiT. 


5 The aauirdra stands at the beginning 
4 Kehd as in 1. 209 below, ’ 


of the next bne. 

Re.id c fr^r^* 


7 Reid ^5?^ 
Read 


6 Read ~?JT. 
11 Read crtr?f. 


« Read 


X 



90 


EPIGHAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V 


grfea 

cT 


fgg? ^ 'T*R *Tf«migg 

gtfg wq ggfg ^»wfgg- 

gwg g*«*3igg gtfg '3 tk^*< grgg grf&9 gtfagngg gtfg gg* 

<T 

ftfe eefl^ W gf%g ?f^ gfrfg^ i TT^TIZ 

eeig^ *n?vfg ggr- 

*?tirg ! *r§g frfg* wrggigg g^Jggg’g §fg tgg gj%g 

gtfe gifag^g ^tf*T3i gg[Y]gg g- 
fgjgTTgg ftfe gfa <frf% gWTgg frfg grR^r 

grq^'ggrrt-fog gfeg gffe YHrGgg 
ys &9Tw^ gfcrg h ^TMi Igfg i ?tfgfggT*gggg fffggTfg 
(Ttf% iffr^M.1 ftfgg g^ig Tkr*3T- 

gg ftfg^? g[«r]g ^f^HiM gtfe gfrm « ^tt ^ i ' 

f^fai i gtfg g*»?g 2 gsg g\fg- 
^ gsRT gtfgi?T[g]g ^tfsRF gT*fa+l*1 ^T(T)^TfsT ?frf% TJI- 
gg gtfgsfi groggg %- 

g gtfg gsgg gjjpr gfigfg gtfg gsgg gtfggi 

g^g wggrgg 

gtfg^ g^gggg gtfcgigg gtfggr gugg^g grpngg gtfggr 

^rr^ggg g^gigg 

gtfg^f gf^rgg gggtggg gtfggr gfepinjg gi<n*y gtg^gfeg 

Ytggg gfgg * " 

gtfz ggeeig^gg gtfgg g*rg *gggg ^[g] ^vfcmgg gtfgg 
g^g 2 teeif gggfz 

g? gtfgiiTgg ftfgg gt§g ge^T gs^T gtfgg gtfz 

g^g g? ggraigg gHggr g^g 2 

gtgex3)g gffggrfg gtfe gigg gftg g^g qsgggggrg 

ggn^Tgg gtfg g^J- 

g Tftgft g?gg gtfgg, gig^rgg gnwigg grfgg grasr- 
gg gsgfsfa 3 gtfg- 


gtfgg 


grggr- 


The ii of wtt is expressed hv G J aa( j tt 


2 Head 


Read ’oftftf. 



No. 10.] 


PITHAPURAM PLATES OF V1RA-CHODA. 


91 


227 p ^5 g ^ 1 ^ fgggg ftfa g^rc 1 

fHfa g^fo 1 %e6Jprn:g^ sr- 

228 s ggg(T)^[T*]gg gtfa g^g 1 jftftR <frf% g^gg 2 £f-fa gtgjf 

Wwrgg ^tfa g*W %*r- 4 


Eighth Plate i First Side . 

229 jt <?ti% giM^ngg gtfara &!Hg«ifafaifafeiifa <ftf% tgg 

<ifa ?to«t *rgg =ra?f %^h?[wt]- 

230 gg ftfg £[g]Tggg ggg rftfasifayigg frf^F rnfo 

r O ^ ° 

gtfe Orjgeaigzgg gtfggr g*rc ^ggg- 

231 g ^ ^rfg*rrgg ftfggi g^ sftfgwrfsr <?tf% a Ttfi re i g g 

gtfa rro^r ‘"rro^.-fa gt% g?gg ftfar* tan^r- 

Cv J C\ 

232 gg ^[gj^eeigsggfz r ^t^gn^g tft^rgji 

gr^rg%^re[T*]fg <rtf5 [ntjtwrg- 

233 g gtfa=fi g*&r ^ng^&S)#^g^e6 3 ^giuPi^fi ^rfea 

Tfgrfg^TTgg gtfarar tajprg^ f^Vr^ngg * 

23i gtfa<* tuijsygvi nffa ffrf% gigg ftfarar ggrg sn^ifa 
<ftf% ftfongg glfag? Brngg ^irst- 9 

235 gfs 10 grrrgg gfa«Tfg <frf% fggmgg ftfa^ 

taiHgH Wtr^Tgg gtfa^ ^grgg 11 sw- 

236 g^fafa TTtggg w^ggfaw <r^ glf-ra wtw- 

°N Cy, 'J v Cy\3 

gg gwi^tgrfanfrfe *uMg- 

237 gg glgiTgmgg gtfapfi ^Tg^igg ,2 %farg^fb?rfa g?gg gtfarer 

238 gg gtfan* tanggg ^5 <rtf% g?g gtfgg? irngg^r g^r- 

fggNifa g?gg gVfa- 

239 * i*r Hq«< gs fad^ igg gtta iarrggg ^gnrfeji% 

gf^gg g*rfa OJwr 

1 Read gpthr. a R p . l( j 17733. 3 Road ^T- 

4 The anusvdra stands at the beginning of the next plat 5. 

1 Read cHpr. « Head Tpff. 7 Read 

* Read 9 Read ^r^°. After this a letter has been erased. 

10 Bead °qf». n Read c ^f ^W 3 . 13 Read ^T° . 

*2 



22 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vot. V- 


240 <frf% fMcWyy ftfaai fsTtaya al^PTateS^a 1 <£5* 

fa^lri t^TPT- 

241 5tf% s <frfs iaJT^T 

^tfspR fei raya ftfsrar t^IT- 

242 aya ty atfe y[s] 3 f^n^irlrl •ftf’Wf tsrray^r %l- 

afaf? 1 arf% hi^pt 5 ftfaa? t*nw* 

243 WtnBrryy ftfaat ifrjraya %y <fti% Rd^trjy 

vpltiM-cyg Wsafs maya 8 

244 yfea faa*?rfa ysyfy] ^ffaa> g4=r &9?r <ftfa 7 

gg Site =3¥**Tfa <rt- 

245 fe agy 3 frfa^T rPqa yfafacpnyy ^tfaa? y^ 3 q«.«Miyy 

^rafaan aay a %5R?r <fr[f^r] a- 

246 irj?rgg Ttfa yya a <ftTay ftfa a^a 9 fad^Tfa 

rfrt% awryy ytraar 

247 smatayy affwrfa atf% tsnreyyg ytfya? yT^ffW 

^f-pjfee 3-rt*ya grranyy 


Eighth Elate ; Second Side. 

248 ytfa ^ sfyf^rryy ytfa ynja 10 y?pafaaa<aaai ytfs f^r- 

*nyy ytfafat *rnayyyyr[fy3- 

249 yyteajawy%fe arfee faasnyy atfaai ''y^aaTfyy^edKTwy^fe 

^rRy 3TS M^l^Sy ytfayj g£- u 

250 fa#fe arffid ^fyjfi TOTy 12 yfe aifed -3wfy t*!3 

yfy[f%]**Ty«y3 ytfaar f- 

251 si I ay T^&9Jy aed>a asyaT afy fspay yrnyy fa<i**iTH 

atfaa< isyayafa^fc arfee a- 

cT 

252 »Tf <fH% aw^ryy ytfa ^a afa^fe arfee ty <ftf% yffa?- 

wryy ytfa ywa wfe a?- 


> Read °*?*J. 

4 Read °*T3f2T. 


5 Read %fr. 


5 Read 


35 Tf. 


M vj r - 3 *' 

8 The anutrdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 
• Bead Sfjtf (?)• 5 Read <J^f. 

u Read <Tdg. 


« Bead <nf 


* Read*rr *T*&rr- 

7 Readfft^r. 

10 Eead A. 

Os-* 


13 


No, 10.] 


PITHAPURA11 PLATES OF VIRA-CHODA. 


93 


253 fee ?Ttft Twfe 1 3 jf &3 

<T 5 3 

<?tft ffft <3^ 3 ftfaftwfe]- 

254 g ^t*TTpT ^tfe &3) wft m^MiciTV 

255 ^tfiT ^fe'JTJpr *ftfa (frfe wets 41 =H J I* 

gg ^tf^f ?rwi^ m*Hfee[X!- 

256 ft TT g^g <)ft 5 ? , *IIHi|*J *1 Tfrft rTtft t 3 T*T*n«J«i. ^TT; 


257 -dTRJJ«f 1 33 «H«* ^rrR^*T ^TfW!j533 

'iiTKy^ *Ttfti <fl- 

258 ft t#n^ <^ft ^tT?^T ftfarfaspj fmfti 

259 zr^«T ?Ti f«fi ?nft ^pfanNnra 3 *rftT [#*] ^rn?ri ftft [< 4 ] 

ftft t^rje6)^T33 3; 

260 [ftjftyifcrft *fft <3*5 ^tft^rn^r^r 

v\U*m sjyi 4 

26 1 eetn^i frft ^eeir*^ *rftp *r«^«*i 33 ftft 

t^jT[*r*]^*r ^«u?rft <rTfe 

262 [,] af^i g^r ' ftwIWM WTf *&* ***** 

ftft^r eeis *■ ^ c 

263 ft t^erft WTi «s fii f-i ii 4 *? 

xie 6 » [*]W ^ ^ ^ 

264 ft* ftrT^ 7 £ft ^ f^T ^ ^ IWWtft 

265 mfg *ft *Tf3 ^r ^ w%m 

srfea ?frft 

Ninth Plate. 

366 *5, ft* ,*, ***»• tf«T [«*] #» *J*"* 

«ftpr: fi*] 35*: 11 ***** 


1 Read ^qfe. 

4 Read S^sf. 

1 Read Nngfl. 
“ Read fsrf*. 


9 Read ^?*T» 

» The «J of di is expressed by d and «. 
s Read HpT. 


5 Read ff^ltdfJTJ. 

• Read flflfsj- 

* Read ^gsHT 


u Read ^Ti- 



94 


EPIGBAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


267 i m^r^r ntHT i 

*\*h i 

268 H^HTT ^*KT3% Hf%H ^tfz ^ 

ntnr ii Tj[f%]Tnr: 

269 <pHHT5g HHWW M\5I*J«1 liRlfcIH 1 H^HT I TTWT f%- 

■fir •TRI^Q'f ^f*ilf«ti*4M 

270 f^nMigri «Ihi i 3 tt?tt: tffcrfh^iH h}ht ii tj- 

irp?rr f^fh w[^]- 

271 1%*i ’jfHH *J3pT HtHT I *R ai i ^qj HF N ^T- 

HR 1 2 * * fHTSJ HR W. Ht- 

272 h[T*]* 0<*U^M Tt I %^Tff ^T^Trjl*: j 

H*r%Hsmrfhg- 

273 T3i : H[T*]nrfH vmTuqte: whh[t*K Rrear tw&r : str 5 

HRfagW shlHR: HH- 

274 FR[Hi][:*] Uw\ki TRf: ^fdP4^ i Tf?r g^fanTHT 

TRH | HiHH RqftHec t * f^Hf[r*]T- 

275 HT>ft ft I trfgtf f^Hnnrf^TOt H ft aft^rTH^ T R 
ft ww 5 ^%[^*][h]thk iRf *. 

276 f?T HH %^HTHT; I HRtnfr «f HTHT ^T tSH TT H: [qj*]- 

frfH h t RfH^^mid^^ htRt 

277 fRT® HHRT HTT%H I M^Tli tn^rTT 7 HT ft ^TrT 

[l*] Hfe qqtngwiPu ftsi'W 5TRt 3f- 

278 fir. > [m*] ht[hM %R[Sr]* <tt [|t] 

^THT^fH HFRTHWH1* I [*«*] 

279 ^tTT ^ffHHTW%HT [|*] HR ^ HfilRR HR rRT 

^ 10 [>> <«.*] ^f^RTTRHHHrt ^HMfisjfTr- 

280 WtWT WI HTHHHTTSrfH: tr itstht: ^ l ^ chrll f^HHf: 

%^r: ^r[t*]rt^t: -& ■$> 


1 Read s Read ^^ gf . 

* Read ‘ Read WTT^ft. * 

7 Read ^fft. s Read 

9 Tiie e of ia added to the secondary form of y , 


3 Read 3TTO. 

6 Read IWX ^fai. 

19 Read W[. 



No. 10.] 


PITHAPURAM PLATES OF VIRA-CHODA. 


95 


ABRIDGED TRANSLATION. 

(Verse 1.) The glorious Hari (Vishnu), the first of the gods, produced from the lotus of 
his navel Virinchi (Brahm&), in order to create these three worlds. From him was born, it is 
said, the great sage Atri ; (and) from Atri the Moon, who has taken up his abode on the crest 
of Maheivara (Siva). 

[Lines 2-60, except verse 15 which is translated below, agree with the Chelldr plates of 
Vtra-Choda.] 

(V. 15.) w 0 brave (son) ! Take up the burden of the VSngi country which is hereditary 
in (our) family. Powerful men, though young, are verily fit for their duties.*’ 1 

(V. 22.)* Protecting a crore of the poor by granting (them) the objects of (their) desires ; 
those in fear by (his) arm which dispelled the fears of refugees ; and the subjects by adhering 
to his duty, he bears the name Samastabhuvandtray a (i.e. the refuge of the whole world), 
which is full of significance. 

(V. 23.) Rising from the earth, attaining to great heights, spreading over all quarters, 
transcending all heavens and reaching still higher worlds, his fame, which destroys (all) evils, 
far excels the Ganga, which drops from heaven, falls upon this earth (and) takes a still more 
downward course. 3 

(V. 24.) The king of serpents (Sesha), having abandoned the toils of the burden of the 
earth, protects the lower world undisturbed ; the whole earth, too, avoiding other, bad rulers, is 
freed from agitation ; and the hosts of gods enjoy the numerous sacrifices of the prosperous 
twice-born. Thus these three worlds are verily in great glee while this (king) is bearing the 
burden of the earth. 

(V. 25.) While ruling the earth unopposed, he was called (back) by (his) father, the emperor. 
(who was) desirous of gazing on the beauty of (his) body which was blooming with youth. 

(V. 26.) Looking at him, the youth, who, like the (i waxing ) moon, was day by day 
acquiring new splendour which gave delight to the eyes, the lord of kings conld never satisfy 
his eyes, but sent (his) son back in the fifth year, in order to conquer the north. 

(L. 68.) This asylum of the whole world, the glorious Vishnu vardhan a 
mahdrdj ddhiraja, rdjaparamesvara , paramabhattdraka, the most pious one, the glorious Vira- 
Chddadeva, having called together all householders, (viz.) the Rdshtrakutas etc. inhabiting the 
district of Prdlun&ndu, thus issues bis commands in the presence of the ministers, the family 
priest, the commander of the army, the heir-apparent and the door-keepers . 

[Vv, 27-32 are in praise of the Brahmana caste.] 

(L. 80.) These (Br&hmanas) are enumerated with their names and gotras. 

[LI. 80-180 contain a list of the donees. 4 ] 


1 This verse follows verse 15 of the ChellAr plates. In these plates it is omitted by the engraver, though 
required by the context. 

* This verse follows verse 21 of the Chellilr pistes. . , 

' The attribute, given to the fame and to the Gahgi admit of a second explanation, suggesting that the 

former went to heaven and the latter to hell. ,, ^ , 

* The names of 8 donees have been erased, tit. of [Ma]tin.atibhatta and Mediyabhstta in 99; ot 

Adahiyknbhatta in L 111; of Sri-VAsud5vabhatta»nd Sri [Rama]nda[ya*]bbatta in 1. 123 ; of Alavandaobhatta in 
'• 1M ; of Sri- Ra[nga]nithabhatta in 1. 1 66 ; and of I’rabftdhaSivapandita in 1. 177. On the other hand the following 
6 donees received 8 extra shares Abhirilmamurti who was the officiating priest (pur6h,ta) of the king 
0- 80),- 1 extra share; Niravadyabhatta who performed the Tdjapifa sacrifice (It. 148-149), 1 extra share ; 

' . . wKn waa Hie commander or toe forces 



of the text (536 and 644), may be arrived at by adding the 8 erased names to 528 which is the number of 
donees actually named in the plates, and by adding 8 extr,. shares to the siogle shares of the 536 donees. 



96 


EPIGEAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


(L 180.) “ Be it known to you that, — having assigned five hundred and forty-four shares 
— (some getting) less and ( [some getting) more — to these (Brabmanas), five hundred and thirty- 
six in number, who are engaged in performing the six duties ; having united three villages, viz. 
the village named Malavelli with its twelve hamlets (pw nf%) and the village named 
Ponnatorra, (both) in your district, and the village named Alami in the Uttaravarusa district ; 
having converted (these three villages) into a well-established agrahara , by name the prosperous 
Virachodachaturvedimangala ; having fixed an annual assessment of one and a half nishka 
on each of these shares ; and having remitted the siddhaya , avendaya, abhinava and other 
(revenue) besides this ( assessment ), (the tax) called kridarasulka> and what is due to the king 
from merchants and well-to-do people, — we have given (the said village ), with exemption from 
all taxes, with libations of water, to last as long as the moon and the sun, on the occasion of 
the summer solstice. 

(L. 186.) “The boundary villages of this (village are): — In the south Ponnavada and 
Mallavrolu (form) the boundary ; in the west Kolliprolu and Chembrolu (form) the 
boundary ; (and) in the north Polakumbarra, Dahkalapundi and Bendapundi (form) the 
boundaries.” 

[LI. 188-266 contain a more detailed description of the boundary-line of the granted 
village. In this passage the following villages are mentioned besides those already referred 
to in 11. 186-188 : — Lingamakurru, Puluvangurru, Garaparru, Medaparru, Dareki, 
Jammaparru, Bhimavura, Kappaniparru, Singavikrama and Dontehgi. The boundary in 
the east was the sea (1. 188).] 

[LI. 266-271 contain a description of the boundaries of Navav&da, a hamlet (pundi) of 
Virachodachaturvedimangala. In this passage the villages of Bendapundi, Duggavada, 
Nagada and Trummiki are mentioned.] 

(L. 2/1.) “In this (village) one share (was assigned) for the maintenance of one who 
expounds grammar; two to the expounder of Mimdmsd ; one to the expounder of Vedanta ; one 
to the teacher of the lligveda ; one to the teacher of the Yajurveda ; one to the teacher of the 
Binging of the Sdmans ; one to the expounder of Rupdvatdra (?) ; one to him who teaches the 
reciting of the Puranas ; one to the physician ; one to the barber; one to the poison-doctor; 
(avd) one to the astrologer. These are the twelve shares for the maintenance (of holders) of 
offices. Two shares (were assigned) to the god Vishnu who resides in the centre of the village ; 
two^ (shares) also (to Vishnu) who resides on the western side (of the village); two (shares) 
to Sri-Kailasadeva ; (and) one (share) to the other local deities. These (are) the seven 
shares of gods.” 

[LI. 276-279 contain the usual imprecations.] 

(L. 279.) The executors (djfiapti) of this edict (iasana), which was given in the twenty- 
third year of the years of the glorious and victorious reign, (were) the five ministers 
(pradhdna). The author of the poetry (was) Viddayabhatta ; the writer (was) Pennach&rya. 


APPENDIX A.— 


Abhiramamurti, 80. 
Achchabhadarabhatta, 81. 
Adahiyamapavalubhatta, 107. 
Adasiyamanavalabhatta, 169. 
Adihanambichaturvedibhatta, 129. 
Adityabhatta, 107, 132. 
Adityadevabhatta, 165. 
Adityedevasahasra, 169. 


LIST OP DONEES. 

Adityashadangavid, 126. 
Akondavillabhatta, 115. 
Alasahasra, 97. 

Alavan danbhatta, 99. 
Alidevayabhatta, 167. 
Ambalattadibhatta, 90. 
Andamanibhatta, 172, 178. 
Appayabhatta, 124, 175. 



No. 10.] 


pithapitram plates op VIRA.CHODA. 


appendix a.— 

Appayashadafigavid, 159. 

Aramadabhatta, 133, 153, 155 . 
Aramudnbhatta, 99. 

Arasabrahma, 146. 

AruJalabhatta, 87. 

Arulaiadasapuribhatta, 87. 

Arnlarabbatta, 112, 142, 171 . 
Arularadasapuriyabhatta, 130. 

Anxlarasabasra, 116, 144, 146. 

Attadibbatta, 106, 108. 

Attamabhatta, 106. 

Attiyaralibhatta, 150. 

Attiyashadangayid, 127. 

Ayiramjotisahasra, 127. 

Ayyapi ransabasra, 114. 

Bharatabhatta, 171, 174 . 

Bhai-atasahasra, 162 . 

Bhaskarabbatta, 123. 

Bbattadevabbatta, 128 . 

Bhimanathabbatta, 108 , 131. 

BMmayabbatta, 133, 165. 

Bhi mes v arabliatta, 142. 1 

Cbandrasekbarabbatta, 118 , 131, 158. 
Cbelvasahaara, 109. 

Cbelvayabbatta, 119. 
Cbendamarakanaabhatta, 90. 

Chldabhatta, 81. 

Cbidiyashadangavid, 105. 
ChiriykudaDbhattasomayajin, 120 
Baksbinamurtibhatta, 94, 140, 144, 151, 154, 
162 , 163. 

Damayasahasra, 128. 

Bamayasbadangavid, 104. 

DamSdarabbatta, 86 , 96, 106, 126, 128, 141, 
143, 152, 172 (twice). 

B amod arabba ttasomay ajin, 178. 
Dam6darasabasra, 119. 

Barayabbatta, 146. 

Darayashadabgavid, 133. 

Battatri ved ibh atta, 149. 

Bevadev&sabbatta, 139. 

Bevaknmarabbatta, 111 . 

Bivakarabhatta, 176. 

Boddiyabbatta, 103. 

Bfinayabhatta, 93, 94, 102 (twice), 103, 105, 

140,142,165,173. 

Bonayasabasra, 153 , 170. 

Bonayaabadangavid, 114, 173. 

clin, 133. 


LIST OP DONEES — contd. 

Doniyasahasra, 107. 

Doniyatriredibhatta, 112. 

Duggayabhatta, 178. 

Erasevakabbatta, 123. 

Eriyapotasbadaiigayid, 164 

Gamgadharabhatta, 87, 96, 100, 104, 121, 155, 
166. 

Garudabhatta, 97. 

Gar dadasapariyabhatta, 130. 

Gbr tasibhatta, 99. 

Goyindabbatta, 85, 91, 101, 104, 108, 155 164 
174, 180. 

Govindasahasra, 100, 170. 
f Gundaderabhatta, 93. 

Hanumasahasra, 124. 

Hrishikesabhatta, 115. 

Isvarabbatta, 114, 145, 150. 

Isvarasabasra, 162. 

Janardanabbatta, 146. 

Janardanasbadangavid, 173. 

Jannayabhatta, 173. 

Jannayasabasra, 124. 

Jaunayashadangavid, 173. 

Janniyatriv^din, 86. 

Jatavedibbatto, 92, 126. 

Kadalusirukalabbatta, 83. 
Kailasamudayansabasra, 98, 

Kalakalabbatta, 177. 

Kamakotisahasra, 152. 

Kamayabhatta, 118. 

Kamayasabasra, 94. 

Kamayatrivedin, 113, 

Kamiyaabadangavid, 86, 136. 

Kandayasabasra, 119. 

Karimakvabbatta, 172. 

Kariyakosahasra, 102. 

Kesavabhatta, 82, 84 (twice), 94, 95, 115, 127 
134, 149, 151, 155, 160, 164, 165, 175, 177. ' 
K^savasabasra, 163, 170. 

Kolavamanabhatta, 106. 

Koiavamanasahasra, 117. 

Kondayasahasra, 169. 

Kondayasbadangavid, 173. 

Kovandanbbaida, 137. 

Krisbuabbatta, 81 (twice), 87, 92, 99, 133, ISO. 
Krisbimbbatta, 91, 103, 112, 132 (twice), 134 
137 (twice), 138, 143, 151, 162, 174. 
Krisbnudasapuriyabhatta, 131. 

Kriabuusahasra, 136, 145. 


o 



98 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vo l. V. 


APPENDIX A. — LIST OF DONEES — contd. 


Kul^fctungacliodabralimainaLaraja, 175. 
Kumarabbatta, 113, 134. 
Kumaranai'ajanabrahmamabaraja, 176. 
Kumaraperumanbhatta, 107. 
Kumarasvamibbatta, 90, 92, 101, 104, 111, 
113, 128, 140, 170, 171, 172. 
Kumarasvamisabasra, 151. 

Kuppayabhatta, 90. 

Lakshmidbarabhatta, 95. 

Lalkondavellibbatta, 156. 

Madbavabbatta, 83, 87, 88, 97, 105, 110, 111, 
113, 124, 139, 143, 146, 153, 157, 160, 170. 
Madhavasabasra, 145. 

Madbavasbadangavid, 126. 
Madbusudanabbatta, 109, 139. 
Malabiniyanindranbhatta, 112. 
Manattikiniyansahasra, 137. 
Manatfcukkioiyanbbatta, 122. 

Handayabbatta, 166. 

Maninagabbatta, 151, 168. 

Maranabbatta, 105. 

Mavayabbatta, 96. 

Maviyashadangavid, 119. 

Medayabbatta, 122. 

Medayaahadangavid, 123. 

Nagadattabbatta, 90. 

N&gadevasabasra, 97. 

Nagadonayabbatta, 90. 

Namayabhatta, 114. 

Nambiyand&nbbatta, 118. 

Nandikumarabbatta, 85, 127. 
Narasimbabhatrta, 82, 84, 93. 

N arayanabhatta, 89 (twice), 91, 95 (tbrice) 
100 (tbrice), 102, 105, 106, 110, 117, 121 
(twice), 134, 138, 142, 147 (twice), 159, 165, 
167, 168, 179, 180. 
Narayanabhattasomayajin, 156, 157. 
Narayanasahasra, 93, 161, 162, 177. 
Narayanashadangavid, 86, 88. 
Nilakanthabhatta, 123. 

Nimbadevabbatta, 179. 

Niravadyabhatta, 148. 

Nityanandabbatta, 148. 

NityanandatrivMin, 86. 

Padmanabbabbatta, 144, 165, 167. 
Palligond&nbbatta, 157. 

Parames varabbatta, 138, 

Parthas&rathi, 89. 

Partbasaratbibhattaedmayajin, 148. 


Periyanambibbatta, 120. 

Periyandanbbatta, 125, 128. 
Periyandanbbattasomayajiu, 120. 
Perumbnjakkadalbbattasomayajin, 154. 
Pittayabbatta, 99. 

Ponnayasabasra, 94, 98, 147. 
Potayasbadangavid, 159. 

Potiyabbatta, 91. 

Pdtiyashadangavid, 122. 

Purusbottamabbatta, 147, 160. 
Racbcbenasbadangavid, 153. 
Rajarajabrabmamaharaja, 176. 

Ramabbatta, 83, 94 (twice), 109, 120, 125, 
135, 138, 139, 141, 152, 158, 159, 160 
(twice), 168. 

Ramabbatta, 110. 

Ramadasapuribbatta, 121. 

Ramadevabhatfca, 145. 

Ramandayabhatta, 150. 

Ramasahasra, 92. 

Ranganathabbatta, 88, 104, 158. 
Remanashadabgavid, 112. 

Remayabbatta, 130. 

Rudrabhatta, 140. 

Rndraknmarabbatta, 158, 166, 

Rudrasahasra, 119. 

Sajjanabhatta, 83. 

Sambhubhatta, 110. 

Samkaranarayanabbatta, 109, 115, 141, 155, 
^ 164. 

Samkaranarayanasabasra, 153. 

Saxhkarasabasra, 125. 

Samkarashadaugavid, 114. 

Sarvadevabbatta, 84, 122, 135 (twice). 
Sarvadevabbattas6mayajin, 81. 
Sbashtiradrabhatfca, 150. 

Simbapiransahasra, 92. 

Smgapiranbhatta, 116, 145, 162, 167. 
Singapiransahasra, 144, 153 . 

Siralang5bhatta, 106, 119, 122, 148. 
Siralang6bbatta, 141. 

Siralaiigdsahasra, 163. 

Sivadebbatta, 126. 

Sivadevabhatta, 107. 

Sdmadevabhatta, 86, 95, 148. 

Sdmanatbabhatta, 161. 

S6mayabbatta, 154. 

Srldharabhatta, 81, 83, 98, 100, 115, 125, 136, 
155, 164, 165, 168, 171. 


No. 10.] 


PITHAPURAM PLATES OP VIRA-CHODA. 


99 


APPENDIX A.— LIST OP DONEES — concld. 


Sridharasahasra, 118. 

Sridbarasbadangavid, 113. 

Srirangasayibhatta, 84. 

Subrahmanyabhatta> 142, 160. 
Sundaratoludayansabasra, 117. 
Suryadevabbatta, 134, 143. 

Suryadevasabasra, 175. 

Tadikumarabbatta, 102. 
Taniyaperumansahasra, 98. 
Terapoliyanindransahafira, 152. 

Tevadigabasra, 125. 

Tillanayakabhatta, 88. 

Tindayasabasra, 117. ' 

Tirimalayndayanbhatta, 124, 142. 
Tirimaludayansabasra, 168. 

Tiripporibhatta, 168. 
Tmvakkulamudayanbhatta, 158. 
Tirivayikkulamudayknbbatta, 157, 161. 
TirivayikkulamtLdayansahasra, 147. 
Tirnk-arungndibhatta, 156. 
Tirumalayudayanbhatta, 83, 85, 88, 96, 97. 
Timmaludayanbbatta, 105, 115, 125. 
Tirunandudayanbhatta, 178. 
Timnilakantbabhatta, 116. 
Tirupanangadabbatta, 170. 
Tiruppanangadabhatta, 107. 
Tiruppanangadusahasra, 163. 
Tiruv&kkulamuday&nsahaara, 116. 
Tiravarangad^vabhatta, 135. 
TimvarangamudayanbhaHa, 82 (twice), 108, 

131,163,167. 

T iruvarangamuday ansabasra* 146. 

Tiru varan ganarayanabbatta, 156. 
Tiruv&ranganarayanasahasra, 96. 


Tiruvarangasabasra, 89. 

Tiruvengadabbatta, 149. 

Tiruvengadasahasra, 91. 

Trivikramabbatta, 91, 103, 164, 166. 
Ulabamundanbhatta, 104, 124. 

U ttarisvarasbadaiigavid, 10S. 

Yamanabhatfca, 84, 88, 93, 128, 169, 170. 
Yamayabharta, 96. 

Yasudevabbatta, 85, 1C9, 122, 126, 134, 139, 
142, 143 (twice), 179. 

Yaaudevasahasra, 152. 

Yedavyasabbatta, 129. 

Yemanabhatta, 150. 

Yemayasbadangavid, 159. 

Yennakutabbatta, 84, 89, 103, 114, 150, 159. 
Venuakutabhatta, 130, 136, 161. 
Vennakutasahasra, 93, 144. 

Vennakutasahasra, 117, 179. 

Vennayabhatta, 124, 150. 

Vennayasbadangavid, 85. 

Viddayabbatta, 118, 148. 

Viddayashadangavid, 111. 

Visbnubhatta, 89 (twice), 97, 102, 105, 111, 
140, 168. 

Visbnuddnayabbatta, 151. 

Visbnusaba3ra, 109. 

VittirindAubhatta, 127, 136. 

Y aj naddnabbatta, 108, 116. 

Yajhakesavabhatta, 134. 

Yajnam&rtibhatta, 112, 132, 157. 
Yajnamiirtibbattasomayajiii, 141. 

Y ajfiaskaudabhatta, 139. 

Y ajnatmabbatta, 82, 140. 
Ya]n&tmabbattas6mayajin, 101, 174. 


APPENDIX B.— LIST OP GOTBAS. 


No. 

Nametrof g6tra8. 

Number of done eg 
belonging to Qacii 
gdtra , 

1 

h A * 

Atreya . 

29 

g 

2 

Bfid&rayana ...*•• 9 * 9 * 

117 

3 

Bharadv&ja . . * 

2 

4 

Garga ...••****'“ 

18 

5 

Gautama . 

54 

6 

Harita . 

3 

7 

K&mak&yana 

2 

8 ! 

Kapi ...••** 

45 

9 

Kaiyapa . 


1 

Carried over . 

278 


0 


100 


EPIGBAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V. 


% 


APPENDIX B. — LIST OF GOTKAS — conoid. 


No. 

Names of gotras. 

Number of donees 
belonging to each 
go(ra. 


Brought forward 

278 

10 

Kausika 

46 

11 

Knndina .......... 

60 

12 

Kutsa ........... 

4 

13 

Lohita ........... 

ii 

14 

Mndgala .......... 

9 

15 

Nitnndi 

8 

16 

Parasarya . ....... . j 

3 

17 

Rathitara .... ..... . 1 

4 

18 

Salavata .......... 

6 

19 

Samkriti . ........ 

9 

20 

Sandilya .......... 

3 

21 

Bata ........... 

4 

22 

Vadbula .......... 

8 

23 

Yalakhilya .......... 

1 

24 

Vasishtha .......... 

9 

25 

Yatsa .......... 

60 

26 

Yishnuvriddha ... ..... 

1 

27 

Yisvamitra ........ 

4 


Total number of donees 

528 


APPENDIX C.~ 

Ari. 

avadn, avuru, aura,— rushes, "bulrush, 
babbila, s. a. prabbali, — the rattan tree, 
burava, buroga, s. a. buraga, — Bombax hepta - 
phylla . 

chandm,s. a. chandra, — Mimosa catechu . 
chevudu, chemudu, 8. a. jemudu, — Euphorbia 
tirucalli. 

cbikurenga, chikurenn, 8. a. chikir&ni, — 
a medicinal plant, 
chinchanika. 

cbinta, — the tamarind tree. 

dangu, daggu. 

dronchi. 

gonki, 

gottn, s. a . gotti, — bramble, 
ida, 5. a. ita, — the date tree, 
ilindi, 8. a . ilinda. 

jammi, sammi, 8. a. 4ami, — Prosopis spicigera . 
juvvi, — Ficus infectoria . 
k&ra, 8 . a. gara, — bramble, 
kumudu, gumndu, — Qmelinia arborea . 


LIST OF TREES. 

movali. 

mdvi. 

mnsindi, 8. a. mnsidi, — Strychnos nux vomica. 
nelli, — Emblic myrobalan. 
odi, s. a. oddi, — • Odina pinnata . 
punga. 1 * 

ravi, — Ficus religiosa . 
regn, — Z y typhus jujuba. 
jrela, — the Oassia tree, 
jellu, — Baccharum sara. 
ritta. 9 

tad a, — the palmyra tree. 

tangadu, «. a . tang&dti, — Cassia auriculnta. 

trnmmiki, 8. a. trumika,*— Diospyrus glutinosa • 

tumma, — Mimosa arabica. 

uppi, — Volkameria capparis sepia . 

vani. 3 * 

vedatujrn. 

velanga, s . a. velaga, — Feronia eUphantum. 
velleki. 

vempa, s. a. vepa, — the margosa tree, 
rehga, s. a. vengisa,— Pterocarpus bilobus. 


It it called hohge in Kanarese and lednuga 


1 This is the Tamil name of the tree known as Palbergia arborea. 

in Telugn. Punga is not found in the Telogu dictionary. 

5 In Msrftthi, rithe means 8apind%* enarfinatu*. 

' * W in Tamil ind ba ™ in K “ are * e ^ time * 9 the Sanskrit iamt.~Pro.opi. ^idgtra. 





Maunggun £old Plates. 


First Plate. 


Positive of /rime. 



Negative of back . 




Second Plate. 


Positive of front . 



Ntgatn r o f ha ck . 



W, GRIGGS, PHOTO 



No. 11.] 


MAUNGGUN GOLD PLATES. 


101 


No. 11.— MAUNGGUN GOLD PLATES. 

By Maung Tun Nyein, Honorary Archaeological Officer. Burma. 

These two gold plates were found in a brick last year by some people who were digging 
foundations for a new pagoda at Maunggun village near Hmawzain the Prome district. They 
were sent by Sir Frederic Frver, the Lieatenant-Governor of Burma, to Dr. Hultzsch for 
transmission to the British Museum. London. 

Each of the two plates bears three lines of writing and is inscribed on one side only. The 
letters show through on the reverse. The weight of the first plate is 110 grains, and that 
of the second 148 grains. The inscriptions consist of quotations from the Buddhist scriptures. 
They are in the Pali language and are written in characters which, it is believed, were iu 
vogue in the first century A.D. when the kingdom of Prome (Sirikhettara) was in the 
zenith of its power. The alphabet corresponds to a large extent with that used in the 
inscriptions at Pagan of the fourth and fifth centuries, and several of the letters also resemble 
those of the South- Indian class of alphabets. It is probable that the Burmese written 
language was mainly derived from India, whence colonists settled in Prome which was once a 
sea-port town. 

TEXT , 1 

First Plate. 

1 II Ye-dhamma-hetupabhara tesam-hetu-Tathagato aha-te6au=cka-yo-nirodho 

evamvadi-mahasamano-ti j| chattaro-iddhipada 

2 chattaro-sammappadhana chattaro-satiparthana chattari-ariyasachchani Sta- 

ves fa*] raj jaui pauch=inclriyAni pauchA-chakkhuni ckha 

3 asaddhlranani 4 satta-bojjhanga ariyo-atthingiko 5 -maggo nava-lokuttaru 

dbamma dasa-balani chuddasa-Buddba-koni 4 attharasa-Buddhadhammani 

Second Pla^e- 

1 II Ye-dbamma-hetupabbava te8a[m*J-hetu-Tathagato4ha teaaiUcha-yo-nirodlio 

evarhvadi-mahasamauo-ti iti-pi*so*bhagava-araham A 

2 sammasambaddho vijjacbaranavtppanno 5 sugato-lokavida anuttaro-punsadammasarat ti 

sattha-devamanussiinaiii Buddho-bhagava-ti . 6 

♦1 svakhyato-bhagavata-dhammo saudhrhiko akaliko e ipassi *o °P . *) 

pachchattani-veditavvo vinuuhUti II 


TRANSLATION, 


Fi)st Plate. 


Whatever law, are proceed from «*«. the eaaee ot there the T.thigrt. ha. «J«M. 
a. well ae the oee.ation o! beth the ceu.e and the eSeot. Thi. .5 the teaeh.eg of the g.eat 
ascetic. , 

( He ha, also explained ) the four mean, of obtaining supernatural power ^ 

four kinds of right exertion (sammappadhan i) ; the our 'ran o saess i ves ^ ra jj a) ■ 

paffhdna ) ; the four sublime truths ( ariyasachcha ) ; the four sabje c , o J- ’ 


* From the or.ginal plates. As in Professor Bhbler’s editions of the Asok, ed.cts, w 

in the original are connected by hyphens in the transcript. 4 

* Read atadhdrandni. * Kf » d 

* Head tampa n»e. ‘ He “ d °r tt ’' a !)' ko ' 


ords written continuously 
Read yo*L 



102 


EPIGRAPH IA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


the five moral qualities ( vulriya ) ; the five kinds of vision (chakkhu) ; the six kinds of 
uncommon wisdom ( asddhdran a [naraa]) ; the seven requisites for attaining supreme knowledge 
( bojjhanga ) ; the sublime eightfold path ; the nine transcendent conditions (lokuttard dhammd) ; 
the ten forces ( bala ) ; the fourteen requisites for the attainment of Buddhahood ; the eighteen 
attributes of a Buddha. 

Second Plate. 

Whatever laws are produced from cause, the cause of these the Tathagata has expounded, as 
well as the cessation of both the cause and the effect. This is the teaching of the great ascetic. 

For these raasons (viz. previously acquired virtues) the Blessed one (Buddha) is called 
the Venerable one, the truly and perfectly enlightened Being, one endowed with knowledge and 
conduct, the Happy one, one knowing the universe, the Preeminent one, the Bridler of men’s 
wayward passions, the Master of gods and men, and the blessed Buddha. 

The Blessed one has well expounded bis law, whose benefits are evident to the eye, which 
is advantageous at all times and seasons, which can boldly invite criticism, which can, if 
closely observed, lead up to Nirvana , and with whose details, severally, the wise should be 
acquainted. 


No. 12. — AHMADABAD INSCRIPTION OF VISALADEVA ; 

[ V IKR AMA-] SAM V AT 1308. 

By Rev. J. E. Abbott, B.A. 

This inscription is on a pillar in the mosque of Ahmad Sh&h I. (A D. 1411-1443), in the 
Bhadr at Ahmadabad. I edit it for the first time. The inscribed pillar is to the right of 
the pulpit and faces the latticed gallery. The letters are on the whole well preserved, though a 
few are damaged. The inscription is complete, with the exception of the beginning and end of 
the first line, which contain a part of the date. The name of the month is therefore lost. 
The language is Sanskrit, hut influenced by Gujarati, forming a mixed language common at 
that period. The form of the letters is such as is found in the inscriptions of Visaladeva and 
other Chaulukya kings of that period. 

The inscription belongs to the reign of Visaladeva and is dated in [Vikrama-]3amvat 1308 
(about A.D. 1251), on the 11th day of a month the name of which is broken away, on a 
Sunday. It records the gift of a trellis window or screen (jult) in the temple of TJttaresvarft 
at Mahimsaka, by one Pethada, a servant of Sodhaladevi. 

The question of special interest is the identification of Mahimsaka, the place in which the 
Hindu temple stood, which Ahmad Shah used as material for his mosque. 1 If it is to be 
identified with some place distant from Ahmadabad, there are three places of similar name, 
which might be derived from Mahimsaka, viz. Mansa aDd Mesana to the north of Ahmadabad, 
and Mamba in the Thasra taluka of the Kaira collectorate ; 2 but none of these places contains 
ruins that suggest of their having been use4 by Ahmad Shah as the quarry for his mosque. 
The usual custom of the Muhammadan conquerors was that of desecrating Hindu temples 
and modifying them on their own site to suit their purposes as mosques. If such were the case 


1 For a description of this m«*qoe see the Bombay Gazetteer for Ahmadabad , p. 275 ; Hope’s Architecture 
of Ahmadabad ; and Arch. Survey Report ? for 1874-75, p. 4 f. 

a I am indebted for information regarding M&nsi, MSsan& and Mahisl to Mr. F. S. P. Lely, who has kindly 
bad inquiiies made regat ding these places, and to Lieutenant Carter, who has pemouallj visited the ruins of Mahisi. 


No. 13.] FOUR INSCRIPTIONS OF KULOTTUNGA-CHOLA. 


here, then Mahimsaka would be the name of a village on the site of Ahmadab&d, whose name 
nas been otherwise lost. 


TEXT. 1 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 


• . . u 0 c . . 

[fc] U vsrv ?rrf^r% 

^ d 1 1 3t* <i fq a)*) i IT'?T[»t] 

1 (TOT *U*K|3r | ^T- 


t 2 

•T ^'3rRsyT?^f^q- 

^rr[^T]fTmT i kt« <»]t 

ws it 


*rr 5 


TRANSLATION. 

In Samvat 1308, on the 1 1th day of on a Sunday, to-day, here in 

himsaka, during the victorious reigri of the Mahdrd } ddhir«ja> the glorious Visaladeva, 
while the Mahapradhdnas appointed by him (were) Ednaka in-[Va]rdama and Mular&ja,— a 
trellis (Jali) was caused to be made in the mandapa of the god iri-Uttaresvara by Pethada, 
masahanifi Q f the lady Sodhaladevi. The overseer (was) Ud[utta] Ma[U]a, (and) the 

architect, Shma^a. 


No. 13. — FOUR INSCRIPTIONS OF KULOTTUNGA-CHOLA. 

By E. Hultzsch, Ph.D. 

A. — Undated inscription at Chidambaram. 7 

This Grantha inscription has been already published in South-Indian Inscriptions, Vol. I. 
P- 168 f . As stated on a subsequent occasion, 9 the conquests recorded in it prove that it was 
incised in the time of Kulottuhga-Chdla I., who ascended the throne in A.D. 1070. 9 I now 
subjoin an improved reading and translation of it. 

TEXT. 10 

I Svasti firi[h] |— Pfindy§n*»dande[na] jitvh prachura-6ara-much& pancha panchanana- 
snh(srir=) dagdhva Kott&ra-durggan=trinam~iva sa yatha 

From inked estam pages, prepared by myself. 

a Read Trt. a Rend • Read 

5 This syllable is engraved Ht some interval below line 9. 

[This is perhaps a mistake for mahasdhani. According to Kittel’s Kannada Dictionary , sdkani means 
* a groom/ — E. H.] 

7 No. 115 of the Government Epigrapbiat’a collection for 1887-38. 

* Hid. Vol. IL p. 231. » See above, Vol. IV. p. 263. 

* From fresh inked estam pages, prepared by Mr. T. P. KrishnAsvauii Sastri, M.A. 



EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V 


104 


2 Khandavam. Pandu-sunuh [j*] pishtva tat K£ralanam balam=atibahalam(lam) 

sri-K-al6ttu[m]ga-Ch61as-ciiakr6 Sakra-pratapas=tribhuvana-vijaya-stambham= 

ambbodhi-txre [|| ]*] 

3 Punye ] Sarnhy&dri-<rimge tribhuvana-Yijaya-stambham=atnbh6dhi-pare svacbcbhandam 

Parasinan=taruna-yuvatibhir=ggiyat& yasya kirttih [|*] 

4 sa srinian=asta-satruh 3 prabala-bala-bharaih pafieha P&ndyan-viptya 

kf*]mbuyat v t-)kshmapala-chakram(kram) saridhikam=ak&r6ch=clihri-Kul6ttuihga- 

Cholah [|| 2*] 

TRANSLATION. 

Ilail! Prosperity! (Terse 1.) Haring subdued the five P&ndyas by an army which 
discharged numerous arrows, haring burnt like straw the fort of Kottara, 3 just as (Arjuna; the 
so T ; of Pandu (had burnt) the Khandava ( forest ). (and) having crushed that extremely d^nse 
army of the* Keralas, — that glorious Kulottunga-Chola, who resembles a lion in majesty (and) 
Sakrt (In dirt) in valour, placed on the shore of the ocean a pillar (commemorative of his ) con- 
quest of the three worlds. 

(V. 2.) Haring subdued the five Fandyas by masses of powerful armies, that glorious 4 
Kulottunga-Chola, who has scattered (his) enemies (and) whose fame is spontaneously sung on 
the further shore of the ocean by the young women of the Persians (Parasi), duly placed on the 
holy peak of the Sahyadri (mountain) a pillar (which commemorates his) conquest of the three 
worlds (and) before which the crowd of kings is trembling. 

B*— Inscription of the 39th year at Tiruvenkadu. 5 

This inscription is engraved on the south wall of the shrine in the Svet&ranyesvara 
temple at Tiruvenkadu in the Tanjore district. It is written in the Grantha alphabet and 
consists of a single Sanskrit verse in the Sragdhard metre. It records the gift of a lamp to the 
temple of Siva at Svet&ranya 6 in the 39th year of Kulottunga-Chola,— perhaps the first king 
of this name. 

TEXT. 7 

1 Svastfij sr[j]h | — A Set6r=a H[i]madrer=ayati vasamatim 3r[3]-Kulo- 

2 ttumga-Chole nissimnas^tan-mahimuo jagati vitataye ta- 

3 n-navattrimsa-varshe [|*] samskrity=ajy-arttham=tLrwin=dvija-kula-tila- 

4 ko nittya-dipan=uyadhatta Svetaranye Sivaya kshiti-vidita- 

5 Mahadeva-nama vipaschit 6\_ Marhgalam=maha-srih 61 - 

TRANSLATION. 

Hail ! Prosperity ! While the glorious Kulottunga-Chola was protecting the earth 
from (Rama s) Bridge to the Snowy Mountain, in his thirty-ninth year, in order that 
his boundless power might spread over the world, — a scholar whose name Mahadeva was 
renowned on the earth (and ivho was) the ornament of a family of twice-born, dedicated 
(a piece of) land for ( the supply of) ghee 8 and granted a perpetual lamp to (the temple of) Siva 
at Svetaranya. Bliss! Great prosperity ! 


1 Read Sahyddri .. 3 The word - (atruh seems to be corrected from -iattrah. 

3 This is a Sanskntised form of KQttaru near Cape Comorin; see South-Ind. Inter. Xo I. II. pn, 230,231 
and 236. 

4 This word is expressed twice, by irimdn and by (ri. 

6 No. 110 of the Government Epigraphist’s collection for 1896. 

6 This h the Sanskrit equivalent of the Tamil Venkddu, 

7 From inked estam pages, prepared by Mr. T. P, Krishnasvami Sastri, M.A. 

8 The gbee was required for feeding the lamp which is mentioned immediately after. 



Grantha Inscriptions 


of Kulottunga-Chola. 



<n * 

W. GRIGGS. PHOTO-UTH 

SCALE 


E HULTZSCH. 


ONE- f,fTH * 




No. 13.] 


105 


FOUR INSCRIPTIONS OF KULOTTUNGA-CHOLA. 


C.— Inscription of the 44th year at Chidambaram. 1 
This inscription is engraved on the outside of the north wall of the innermost prdhcra of 
the Natar&ja temple at Chidambaram. That portion of it which contains the date has been 
published before in the Indian Antiquary, Yol. XXIII. p. 297 f and above, Vol. IV. p. 70. 
The alphabet and language are Tamil. Lines 1-5 and 9-14 are in prose, and lines 5-9 contain 
one verse. 

The inscription is dated in the 44th year of Jayadhara (1. 5 f.). From the Ealingattu - 
Parani we know that this was a surname of Kulottufiga-Chola I., 2 to whose reign the present 
record must be assigned accordingly. Professor Kielhorn has calculated the details of the 
date (1. 6f.) and has found that it corresponds to Friday, the 13th March A.D. 1114. 3 

The first portion of the inscription records donations made to the temple at fchidambaram 
(Tillai, 11. 7 and 9, or Tiruchchirrambalam, 1. 12) by Kundavai Alvar, (the daughter of) 
Rajar&ja and younger sister ai Kulottunga-Chola. She presented the god with a golden 
vessel (1. 3) and a mirror (1. 10) and covered (the roof of) the shrine with gold (1. 8). 
The second portion (11. 10-14) states that a stone which the king of Kamboja had given to 
R&jendra-Chola was, by order of the latter, inserted into the wall of a hall in front of the shrine. 

Of the names mentioned in the preceding paragraph, Kulottunga-Chola (1. 1 f.) and 
R&jendra-Chola (11. 10 and 11) refer to the reigning king Kulottunga-Chola I., who is known 
to have originally borne the name Rajendru-Chola (II.) and to have subsequently a^umed the 
name Kulbttunga. 4 Rajaraja, the father of Kulottunga's younger sister Kundavai (11. 2 and 
9), is identical with the Eastern Chalukya king Rajaraja I. (A.D. 1022-1003). 5 

TEXT. 6 

1 6\_ Svasti sri(sri) 6c_ Tiribuvanachchakkaravattigal sri(sn)-Kulottunga- 

2 Soladevar tiru-ttangaiyar Rajarajan Kundavaiy=AIv&r 

3 al-udaiyarkku tanpi(ni)r amudu seyd'--arula itta [mjindara o- 

4 nrinal kudi-najr-kal nirai Maduraudagan-madaiyodu okkum 

5 pon 50 pa aip(m)bad[i]n kala[h]ju 6i_ Nanilattai 7 mulud=anda Jaya- 

6 dararkn n&rpattu-nal«andil Mi(mi)na=nigal nayarru Velli pe- 

7 jra UrOsani-naUIdabam podal tenilavu-polir=Rillai-n&- 

8 [ya]gar-dan=g6yil=elam sem-bon meyndal^enavarun=dolud=6- 

9 ttam Rajarajan Kundavai pu-vindaiyale Tillai-nayaga-devarku= 

10 ttiru-kkanpadiyum iftar 6L. [Sri](sri)-Rajendra-Soladevarku Kambosa- 

11 rajan katehiy-aga^kkattina kallu [— ] idu udaiyar Rajendra-Sola- 

12 devar tiru-v&y molind=aruli udaiyar Tiruchchirrambalam-udaiyar k6- 

13 yilil mun vaittadu 6U inda=kkallu tiruv-edir-ambalattu tiru-kka- 

14 l-sarattil tiru-mun-pattikku melai-ppattiyile vaittadu 6 l_ 

TRANSLATION. 

(Line 1.) Hail ! Prosperity ! Kundavai Alv&r, (the daughter of) Rajaraja (and) the royal 
younger sister of the emperor of the three worlds, irs-Kulottunga-Cboladeva, gave to the god, 

1 No. 119 of the Government Epigraphist’s collection for 1887-88. 

* See & outh-Ind. Inter . Vol. II. p. 230. note 11. 

* Above, Vol. IV. p. 71. 4 See South- Ind. Inscr . Vol. II. p. 230 f . 

1 Ab'I have stated in the/ad. Ant. Vol. XXIII. p.298, note 13, Kundavai, the elder sister of the Chdla 

king R&jar&j& I., and his daughter Kdndav4 must be distinguished from the present Kundavai. R4jar&ja, 
B&jendr* and Kundavai evidently were favourite names with the Chdla dynasty. 

8 From an inked estate page, prepared in 1888. 

* In this verse, ndnilattai rhymes with Mina % tentlavu and l^enavarun. 


P 



106 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V- 


for offerings of water, oae vessel {mind am), weighing, (by) the true standard of the city, 1 * 3 
5Q p a a — fifty halanju , — of gold which was equal (in fineness) to the Madurandagan-mddai. z 

(L. 5.) In the year forty-four (of the reign) of Jayadhara who ruled all the four 
quarters, — at the time (of the rising of the sign ) Rishabha ou the day of (the nakshatra ) 
R&hini, which corresponded to a Friday in the month during which ( the sign) Mina was 
shining, — Kundavai, ( the daughter of) Rajaraja, (who resembles) a flower in beauty (and) 
who is worshipped and praised by (all) others, covered with pure gold the whole shrine of the 
lord of Tillai, the gardens of which are full of honey. 

(L. 9.) She also gave a sacred mirror to the god who is the lord of Tillai., 

(L. 10.) A stone was exhibited by the K&mboja king before the glorious R&jendra- 
Choladeva. This (stone) was, by order of the lord Ra j endra-Choladeva, placed in front of 
the shrine of the god who is the lord of Timchehirrambalam, This stone was placed in the 
upper front row of stones of the hall opposite the shrine. 

D. — Inscription of the 30th year at Tiruvorriyflr. 4 

This Grantha inscription is engraved on the north wall of the first prdkara of the 
Adhipurisvara temple at Tiruvorriyur near Madras. It consists of a single Sanskrit verse 
in the Vasantatilakd metre and records the gift of a lamp to the temple of Siva at Adhipura, 
i.e. Tiruvorriyur, 5 in the 30th year of Jayadhara. On page 105 above it has been already 
stated that this was a surname of Kulottunga-Chola I. 

TEXT. 6 

1 Trim sat (t-) same Jayadharasya tu va[r]ttamane srl-Jnanamurtti- 

2 sukritim=Madhurantak-akhyah [|*] &ehan dram = Adhipura- vasi-Mah 6- 

3 svaraya pradat prabaddha-timir-aika-ripum pradipam || 

TRANSLATION. 

WTiile the year 7 thirty (of the reign) of Jayadhara was current, one named Madhur&n- 
taka gave to ( the god) Mahesvara (Siva) who resides at Adhipura a lamp which checks 
(its) unequalled enemy — darkness, (which is) a charitable gift (for the spiritual merit) of 
the illustrious Jnanamurti, 8 (and which is to continue) as long as the moon. 


No. 14. — DIBBIDA PLATES OF ARJTTNA OF THE MATSYA FAMILY; 

SAKA-SAMVAT 1191. 

•By F. Kielhorn, Ph.D., LL.D., C.I.E.; Gottingen. 

These plates were received by Dr. Hultzsch, in October 1897, from the Collector of the 
Vizagapatam district, and are deposited now in the Madras Museum. They were found in the 

1 of kudi+*r-kal t ‘the true standard of the city/ the Tan j&Tdr inscription. Inter . 

Yol. II. No. 6, paragraph 1 ; No. 7, 1 ; and No. 8, 1 and 8) have kudinai-kal t • the standard of the city/ 

3 This symbol appears to denote the weight of one kalanjn . 

a I.e. a gold coin earned after, or bearing the name of, Madhorintaka. This was the name of the eon of the 
Cliflla king Gandar&ditya and was also a surname of RajSndra-Chflla I . ; see above, Vol. IV. p. 331. 

4 No. 109 of the Government Epigraphies collection for 1892. 

* Adhi-pvra is the Sanskrit equivalent of the Tamil Orriy-Ar, ‘the mortgage village.* 

• From an inked estampage, prepared by Mr. T. P. Krishnasvanu Sastri, M.A.. 

1 Sam 4 is incorrectly used instead of tamdydm . 

8 This may have been the father er preceptor of the donor. 



No. 14.] 


DIBBIDA PLATES OF ARJUNA. 


107 


Tillage of Dibbida Agrahfiram, 1 * in the Viravilli taluka of the Vizagapatam district. I edit the 
inscription which they contain from an excellent impression, supplied to me by Dr. Hnltzsch. 

These are flv© copper-plates, the first of which is inscribed on one side only, and each of 
which measures about 9j ,y broad by 3^'' high. They are numbered in Telugu figures, which 
are engraved near the proper right margin of the second side of each plate.® The plates have 
slightly raised rims, and, with the exception of the fifth plate which is broken in three pieces 
and of which a small marginal piece is missing, they are well preserved, so that the writing on 
them nearly throughout may be read with absolute certainty. The plates are strung on a ring 
which had not been cut when they were received by Dr. Hultzsch. This ring is about 3f" in 
diameter and thick, and has its ends secured in a seal which bears two fishes, in relief, on an 
elliptical surface of about 1" by f".— Though not very uniform, the writing, on the whole, is 
well engraved. The characters are intermediate between those of the latest Eastern Chalukya 
inscriptions 3 4 and the Telugu characters, properly so called. On the forms of individual letters 
only few remarks are necessary. The signs for th and dh throughout are open at the top (e.g. 
in dvasatha, 1. 36, and ramdhra, 1. 31), and the sign for bh is generally open at the bottom (e.g. 
in vallabka, 1. 1). The sign for d (e.g. in Pdmdava, 1. 30, and Paragamdda, 1. 25) has no top- 
stroke (talakattu) and therefore closely resembles the l of the Eastern Chalukya inscriptions ; 
on the other hand, a, top-stroke is employed in the sign for l (in ajigalan-, 1. T-, bhilla-taruh. 
1. 59, and -talah, 1. 61), the right top of which, besides, is formed into a loop. For the initial 
ri we have an unusual f perhaps incorrect) form in Rigvedddhyd- at the end of line 39 ; and the 
signs for the medial i and t are hardly ever, if at all, properly distinguished The sue of the 
letters varies between about and A'.-' The language is Sanskrit, 3 but the description of 
the boundaries in lines 52-64 contains some Telugu words. Up to hue 36 the inscription is m 
verse, and five more verses occnr in lines 65-73. In respect of orthography, the chief points 

to be noted are that consonants (especially g, 4, & and 6A > als ° ****•’ . ’ , 

which follow upon an anusvdra, are frequently doubled ; an a , w en sue is ^ 

and dk are doubled by prefixing to them the same aspirated letters, 3 ^ 
vasuMddhardm in line 68. Before r, t is doubled in mum-Urulada-, 1. 5 ; and j M 'doubled ^af e 
in tritiyyd, 1. 32, and pdlartyyah, 1. 71. Besides, instead of we have an in avatunnas, 1. 6, 

and «n in Jdtukamna 1. 41. 

rm * ... ri a vv 20 21 and 26) that on Saturday, the Akshaya-tritiy& of the 

th e «rftO) “ d ISLfc gm.trd to cert™ IMhm W a. „« 

53K: “ ,led **!— "*- * ftet lis ft,bet - Tb “ 

fall g.»Oog, of the donor <i. .rv. Zwgltohmm, from him Atrf, nod from him 
From the lotus on ™ n P wh o one day, while wandering in the sky, saw 

Kaayapa. In his lineage was the ^M^unda mountain, descended to its banks, and engaged 
the nverMatayft which rises on th the frightened Indra sent the Apsa.as 

there m austere penance. To diet » fish {mats yd). swallowed the semen 

Manjugh^A By the sage's curse t * due couree gave iirth to a son who was 
which the ascetic had thrown into the w ater, an 

1 The • Dibbadee Agrahfiram > of the map, Indian 10S * L ° ng ' 82 56 E '’ ***' ^ 48 

1 The figure • 5 * of the last plate is almost !“*!". Cbddadtva U„ Ind. Ant. Vol. XIV. p. 55 ff„ Plates. 

* Compare, e.g., the Chelldr plates of u g* f ^ o£ ^ impregs i ou , but is clearly visible on the back of it. 

4 1“ ajigalan, 1. 12, the loop does not sh writer ^ used the aorist of tbe causal, instead 

» In the word ajtgalat, mentioned in the preceoing now, 

of a past tense of the primitive verb. , . . ,. 12 an d Tudhdiamallat instead of Tuddhamallat, 

• We similarly have garbhbkam instead of garbbham, in 

m line 20. p g 



108 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. Y. 


called Satyam&rtanda (vv. 1-8). When Jayatsena, the lord of Utkala, 1 came to know this 
boy, he gave to him in marriage his daughter Prabh&vati, and appointed him to rule over the 
Oddavadi 2 country (w. 9 and 10). In the Matsya family, founded by Satyamartanda, there 
was a long line of chiefs ( rajan , nripa , bhupa , etc.), whose names (from vv. 11-19) -are given 
here in a tabular statement. 

1. Ganga, a younger brother of Bhima. 

[ 

2. Yallabha. 

I 

3. Yuddhamalla. 


4. Gonanga [I.]. 

5. Bhima [I.]. 

6. Revana [I.]. 

7. Kokkila. 

8. Gudda [I.]. 

. . I 

9. Aditya. 

10. Kandi [I.]. 




z6. Arjuna, 

the donor of this grant (made in 
Saka-Samvat 1 191). 


1 /.«. Orissa. 


* 044* is one of the name, of Orissa ; tee Soutk-Ind. Inter. Vol. I. p. 97, and above, Vol IV p 315. 

* Arja is not numbered because apparently he was not a ruling chief. ’ V ' 


No. 14.] 


DIBBIDA PLATES OF ARJUNA. 


109 


Of the village granted, two shares wertr set aside for the gods Hari and Hara 1 * (1. 51) 
while one share was assigned to each of the following twenty Brahmanas (11. 37-51) : The 
Purohita (or family priest of the chief) Yauiadeva. a Sotna-yaga sacrifices of the Bharadvaja 
gotra ; the teachers of the Rigveda Merubrahman and Yiddana of the Harita gotra , Namana 
of the Kaundinya gotra , Vennakuta of the Salavata gotra. Potasarman of the Yadhula gotra , 
Bemana of the Mudgala gotra , and Dommana of the Bharadvaja gotra ; the students of the 
Rigveda Vennakuta of the Harita gotra, Manasarmau of the Salavata (?) gotra , and 
^ ajiiamurtyarya of the Kundioa (Kaundinya) gotra ; the teachers of the Yajurveda Akondi of 
the Vatsa gotra , Bhiunrivararva of the Bharadvaja g'dra. Srirangarya of the Kaundinya gotra ; 
\ irabhadresvararya of the Gautama gotra , and Lokanatha of the Kasyapa gotra ; the students 
of the Yajurveda Raghava of the Mudgala gntrc i and Purushottamasarman of the Gautama 
gotra ; the student of the Kanva s-ikhn (of the Yajurveda) Madhavarya of the Jatukarna gotra ; 
and the student of the Sri-bhagavata (Purana) Maukanarya of the Harita gotra. The grant 
made in favour of these donees included the services or taxes." due from the village artisans, 
viz. the carpenter, goldsmith, barber (?), blacksmith, potter and sesamum-grinder (v. 22) ; but 
apparently 3 was exclusive of eight dronas * of land which had been previously given by the 
chief to the minister Peddana (11. 66 and 67). 


The boundaries of the village were (11. 52-64) : 4 On the east, a babul tree on the northern 
Bide of the embankment of the lank of Manki-Nayaka ; 5 to the south-east of this, a house; 6 
thence (the village of) Kakatikhandi ; thence the embankment east of a nimba tree ; thence 
the embankment of (the) Edrabmda ( tank) ; thence an ant-hill ; (and) thence the northern 
corner of the embankment of the tank of the low-caste people. On the south-east of the village, 
a fixed 7 stone ; to the west of this, the tamarind trees of Tur[uru] ; (and) thence the bricks of a 
temple. On tbe south-west of the village, a garlic field on the west of a poison-tree ; thence a 
house of bricks ; thence the space between a wood-apple tree and a poison-tree ; thence a bhilla 
tree; thence the tamarind trees of Anupumali; thence a green piece of land to tbe south o 
Boddap&du ; thence an ant-hill ; thence three tamarind trees ; thence a young palmyra tree 

(and) thence a stone on an ant-liill. On the north-west of the village, a stone 

tbe top of a hill ; on the east of this, a grinding-stone ; thence a shed and a rock ; thence a 

tvarnapuslpi tree; thence a ksliira- tree; thence a ant-hill, thence an^ o xe 

stone; (and) thence an ant-hill. On the north-east of the village, a fixed large stone. 

Lines 67-72 of the inscription contain three of the ordinary imprecatory verses. 

Regarding the chiefs mentioned in this inscription I have not obtained any information 
from other sources. 6 Nor am 1 able to identify any of the localities, except the village of 
Drubbidi itself, which must be the Dibbida Agraharam where the plates were foun . 

The date of the grant regularly corresponds, for Saka-Samvat 1191 expired, to Saturday 
the 6th April A.D. 1209 . On this day the third tithi of the bright half ot V ai sakha ended 
6 h. 6 m. after mean sunrise, and the day therefore was the proper day for the Akshaya-tritiya 
festival. 9 


1 I.e. Vishnu and Siva ; compare Ind. Ant. Vol. XI\ . p. 68, 1. <0. 

1 Compare ibid. I. 54 : t„ir=ddtga-karam^ipH th ^ brMmanibhyMaddModa. 

1 The passage in which this statement occurs is mutilated in the original. 

* I.e. ‘as much land as is sown with a drSna of corn. . . ,, . XfAhJcAditva 

* I suspect that this is another name of the chief who above, in the genealogical ^ 

« r * r , w 7 Khdta seems to be used in the sense ot nifcMta. 

Dkuk* perhaps the same a. C htp»rupalle (in the Vizagspatsm district) plate, 

A Matsya family apparently is mentioned in one i t r n 17 — According to 

of tbe Eastern Chaluky* Vishnuvardhaua 1. (of A.D. 632) ; see . ' i user lotions of a ‘ Mahd~ 

Mr. Sewell's Li.t. of Antiguitie, Vol. I. p. 1 5. Sir W. Elliot’s collection contain, some .uscnptions of a MaU. 

fRQndaliivara M&hk&ditya HahdTdjn' from Muddurru in the 1 iraiil i t i 

* See Ind. Ant. Vol. XXVI. p. 179. 



110 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vo t. V* 


TEXT . 1 

First Plate . 

1 Svasti 2 Sri-vaUabhasy*imn=nabbyAm=am[bb]bb6rti[bam]=m[ahat] [|*] 

2 tato BrahmS, jagat-kartta tasm&d=Atrir-abhut=kramat [|| 1*} 

3 Kasyap-akbyas=tatas=tasya Naramggo mnnir-anvaye [f*] 

4 kadacbid=ambbar6 gachcbhan=sa dadarsa malia-nadim [|| 2*J 

5 Mukumdda-gm-sambbbbutam=mnni-ttrida8a-8evitaih [| # j 


Second Plate ; First Side. 

6 prasanna-salil-ambbbh6jain=Matsy-akliyam bbbhnvi visrotam |(||) [3*] 

Avatirnna(nna)s=sa 

7 tat-tire gboram chakre tatas=tapa^ I sva-pada-cbyuti-bbitena Sakrena pre- 

8 sbita, tada |(||) [4 # ] Nanartt=apsarasam=adya Mamjjughosba muneh 

9 purab | amogbam s6=srijad=viryyam drisbtva tam 

10 kama-vibvalah |(||) [5*j Chiksbepa cba jale vi[r*]yyaih tapo-vigbna-krudha ta- 
ll tab i sasapa cba munir=nnadyam bbbbava matsy=eti tam kshanat I(||) [6 # ] 

S^ajiga- 

12 lan=munor=yviryyam sapa-matsya sur-arnggana | sadyo garbbbham(rbbham) 

ddadbau ta- 

13 tra kale cba snsbuve satam |([|) [7 # ] Trikala-jnais=sisns=tatra munibbi [r] -rvi- 

Second Plate; Second Side . 

14 bita-kriyah 1 Satyam&rttamda-nam-aaid-atnlya-bala-vikramah |(||) [8#] Tam 

viditv=[6]tkal-a- 

15 dbiso Jayatseno naradbipa^ | prMit=Prabh&vatim tasmai sva-putrim fiubha- 

laksba- 

16 nam I (II) [9*] Abhishiktas=tri ten=asav=Od«l8Vftdi-8amahvaye | dese prabhrashta- 

ra- 

17 janya mabim cbiram=apalayat |(||) [10*] Kbyatas=tadvamsa-sainbbbhuta-r«j4- 

18 do bahavb gatah | BMmabhup-anujas=tasinin=yam- 

19 se=bhud=Gamgga-bbupatib 1(11) [11*] Tasmad=Vallabha-bhupal6 Tu- 

20 dhdha(ddha)maUas»tat6 nripab | tasmad=G6namgga-iiam=a8id=Bliimfls-ta8m&- 

21 n=nrip-6ttamah |(||) [12*] Bevan(n)-akhyas=tata3=tasmat=Kokkil6 nama bhu* 


Third Plate; First Side. 

22 patih | Gud.da-nam& autas=tasya tasmad=Aditya-bhupatib |(||) [13*] Kaniddi- 

ulrna nripas=ta- 

23 8mat=tasmad=BMmanrip4hvayah | Bevan6(n6).varajas=tasya t%smadpG6namgg8- 

bhupatih |(||) [14*] 

24 Guddas-tasy=amij6 bhupas=tasm-U=Kamddi-nrip6=bhavat | taj-jad=Aryya-nripad=asl* 

25 t=Baragamdda-nripas=tatah |(||) [15*] Gudda-bhupas=tat6 BMma-bhupas=tasy=&nuj& 

26 nripah I Nrisimhas-tasya putr6=bhud=bi(bhi)md Matsyakul-ottamah |(||) [16*] 

Tasy=a- 

27 sld=raja-4&[r*]ddul6 M&mkadityo mahipatih | tasmad=vam§a-pmdip6=bM- 

28 d=BMmo Bhimagraj-opamah |(||) [17*] Tasy=anuj6 mabipalo Jayamttd jaya-la- 


1 From an impression supplied by Dr. Haltzsch. 


3 Metre of verses 1-19 : Sldka (Anushtubh). 



Dibbida Plates of Arjuna of the Matsya Family. — Saka-Samvat r 191. 


, / _ ^ * * , ^ T - ' V ’ " 'A' 1 a j>t ■* .4 








!^j 

gw 

<V'Q 


I 

s/ ^ 
-0 f 

K^f a ok ^J^-TA ^r-V+n-/ ?/*0 y .k ,^,uD P,?; XK (4o 'jtz; 

1 


P - y>y^i -< Xj « r f//rX X/ iciv : t-- v & - cu J x 

^Vu-Wrly,-.- . ..;, g./ry ,,.- .WC 

m ■'■' ,X< o.Ai X /O') -jOr'v ■'■' ' '■' r^/ ^-'o'X CV o s 

V- •;*. VkoKk'CN-'v.O • *L - '-"rt - ■'-- 0'>v rt^n 

<* shc^'^* 

5/ *kk' k v;, 

°4 <po ,-A 1 i/0. p .r)£/Xj$r. ■}^j£~y, Q p . • *a '.r- > • r : c ^ v '‘- ' 

rsV H <? / 0°k/ ^ O " u wV^ f v ^ * — 

C7~ 


k n kk-k 
* ^ w 'k > 


\y^- 

^ - V x / 


' Gw’ y '/ vrSV; ^ jSjr-r 

O-vX'x'^-rvvA^ ct i A< e i 7T -)<■; A^r <£ ex 


(tp •y / fi-. , 0-' ii.’-- 0 ';- ' O-.— k 

0 * - ' o Co- ^ ^ ^ 


«>& ~ f 4; ' $,, 0- 

’ '.9 k? *0 vj * ^ ' k / r 1 1 c> c' 1 ^ o v, ' - 1 

W >r- j ;/yp; *>J J n,‘ "< r- - - *- • 0 , r 00 > ‘ i 


r< , - <" f 

V C/ , 


- X v r V t 
— 

^ G * i; v ‘ 






E - HULTZSCH. 


SCALE TWO-THfROS 


W. GRIGGS. PHOTO-LITM. 





No. 14.] 


DIBBIDA PLATES OF ARJUNA, 


111 


29 kshanab | tasy=ibid=agra-mabisbl Chirnggainambbta] yasasvini |(||) [IS*] Tasjam 

jjat6=rjju- / 

Third Plate ; Second Side . 

30 nas»tasmat=Pamdav-Arjjuna-vikramab | tena satya-pratijnena dattam prastuya- 

31 te=dhuna || [19*] ^ak-abdS chamdra-rariidb.ra-kshiti-sasi-ganite y=akshay-adyfi 

tri- 

32 tiyy&(ya) Vaisakhe m&si tasy&m Ravisuta-divase Matsya-vams-Arjjun-esah [I*] 

33 viprebhy6 veda-vidbbyab ksbitipati-tilana(ka)s=CMmggamambb&-suputrah 

34 prMad=da[t*]tv=agTabaram vvimala-matir-idam sasanam sasit-arih || [20*] 

35 8 Jayamtta-ITAr4yan.a-iiama kritva gramo=dya vo Drabbidir*arkka-chamdram | 

s-aranya- 

36 sasy-avasatbab pradattah pitu[r*]^mmam=amutra sukbaya viprab |(||) [21*] 

Asminn=agra- 

37 hare pratigrahitara ime pratyekam=ekaika-bbaginab | Bharadvaja-gotrah 


Fourth Plate ; First Side . 

38 purohitd Vamadeva-somayaji | Vatsa-gotro Yajurwed-adbyapa- 

39 ka Akomddi-nama | Rigved-adbyapako Harita-gofcrd Merubrabma | Rigyed- 

adbyfi- 

40 pakab Kaumddiny6 Naman-akbyat | Rigved-adbyayi Harita-gotro Vennakuta- 

nam& | 

41 J fttukarnna (rnna) -gotrafr 1 * 3 * * * Kamddava-sakb-adbyayi Madbavaryyab | Yajurvved- 

&dby&pako 

42 Bharadvaja-gotrO BhimSsvararyyah | Yajurvved-adbyapakab Kaumddinya-g6- 

43 tra Sriramggaryyah | Ye(ya)jarvved-adhyapako Gautama-gotro Virabbadresvara- 

44 ryyah | «Sribh&gavat4dhyayi Harita-gotro Mamkanaryyah | Mudgala-gro(go)tr6 

Yaju- 

45 rw5d-adhyayi Raghav-akbyah | Rigved-Mhyapakas=Salayata-g5tro Vennakuta-nama | 

46 K%apa-g6tr6 Yajar\rved-adhyapakd L6kanadha(tha)-nam& | Gautama-gotro Yaju- 

47 rwMAdhyayi Purusb6ttama4anmn& | RigvM-Mbyapako Vadbula-gotrab* P6-« 


48 

49 

50 

51 

52 

53 

54 


Fourth Plate ; Second Side . 

RigvedAdby&pakd Mud[g*]ala-gotr6 Remana-nama 
Rigved-adbyapako Bbaradvaja-gotrb 

Kumdina-gotra. 


Rigv£d-adbyapak6 
Domman-&kbyah | 


ta6armm& 

Hari- 

ta-gotr6 Viddan-&hvah | 

[S&lavata ?] 7 - r 

gotra Ri g ved-adhy ay i Mlna^arma | Kumdma-gotra [Ri]- 

gved-idhy&yi ' Tai[fi]amart y a[r]yyah8 [|*] d6v6(vau) Hari-Harav=ekaika-bha- 
gin6(nau) |(||) Adha(tha) grama-simA [l # ] Punrvatah* Mamkinaya- 
ka-tataka-sot-uttara-parsve ba[r]bbura^i _ -%neya- 

t6 ' dbisbdnib 10 atah K&katikhamddih atd nimbba-purwa-setuh a- 


1 Metre • Snurdherft 2 Metre: Upajdti. ' Bead Kdnca-. 

* OHgta.ll, .u tagm.ri. ‘ Originall, -,i«t 

; H-taj a „„ ««■ Tb. »H,taj ta 11.. 50, „a 1. 

51 before tbe word dtc6(vau), is rather carelessly engraved. 

■ Bead Yajnamurtydtyyah. , 

» Here, and in other places below, the mlea of tamdhi have not been observed. 

*• This is clearly the actual reading. The intended reading probably is dhuhnih, as in L 58. 


112 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


55 ta Edrabamdda-setuh ato valmikam ato=ihtyaja-tataka-set-u- 

56 ttara-kona[h] [}*] gram-agneyatah khata-sila etat-pa^imruttas=Tur[u?]- 

Fifth Plate ; First Side . 

57 [ra?] chimcha atah. prasad- eshtakah [|*] grama-nirnmtyam 1 vishataru-pa- 

58 schima- grim jj ana m ata ishtaka-dhishni[h] atah kapittha-vishataru-madhyam 

59 ato bhilla-taruh atah AnupumaR-chimchchah ato Boddapati dakshi- 

60 na-pasurnguniya ato valmikam atas=tri- chime hah ato 2 bala-ta- 

61 lah ato valmike sila [1*] grama-vayavye parwat-agra-korchcha- 

62 sila atah prachyam nuru-sila atd 3 mamttapa-drishatau(dau) ata sva- 

63 rnnapnshbi(shpi) atah kshira-taruh atah kroln-valmikam atah pura- 

64 na-khata-sil4 atd valmikam [|*] [gram-ai]sanye(nyam) khata mahati 3il=eti [||*] 

65 Takshaka 4 svarnnara(ka)ras=cha ksh[anrikab ?] 5 ka[r*]minakarakah [|*] 

knlalas=ti- 

Fifth Plate; Second Side . 

66 la-[ha]mtt& [cha] pradatta grama[-karuka ?]% |(||) [ 22 *] Peddan-amatyasya 

pura- 

67 tana-dattam me-shta-drona-mana- [n ?] . . . 7[kshe ?]traxh [||*] 8 Sva-dattam 

ppara-dattam va 

68 y6 harct=tu vasumddharam [|*] [shashtim] 9 warsha-sahasrani vishthay&- 

69 m jayate krimifh] |(||) [23*] 8va-datta[d*]=dvi-gTinam pp[u]nyam 10 paradatt- 

anupalanam [|*J 

70 paradatt-apah[&*]rena sva-dattam nishphalam bbav6ta(t) l(||) [24*]. Satron=api 

kpito dha[r]mmah 

71 palamyyah(yab) prayatnatalj. [I*] §atmr=eva hi satrn. syad=dha[r]mma4=§atru- 
[r]-nna kasyachit |(||) [25*] Matsya-vaihsa-pradip[e]iia Jayamtta-nripa-sunxma 

[| # ] datta- 

73 m=A[r]jjuna-bhupena s&sanam [dh]dha[r]mma-setuna |(||) [26*] Sri £ri 6rS [||*] 


No. 15 — THREE COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTIONS 
GOVINDACHANDRA OP KANATJJ. 




Bt F. Kielhorn, Ph.D., LL.D., C.I.E.; Gottingen. 

The originals of these inscriptions are now in the Lucknow Museum. My account of 
them is based on impressions, kindly furnished to me by Dr. Fuhrer, 11 w ho also has informed 
me where and when the original plates were found. 18 I have treated of them in the same 
manner as of the Kamauh plates of Govindachandra, above, Vol. IV. p. 101 ff. 

j ^ T rri ‘ S *\ 1 The reading zna, possibly be 4 Mia-. 

* The ordinary Sanskrit spelling would be mandapa-. 

* Metre: Sldks (Anuahtnbh).— Compare Ind. Ant. Vol. XIV n fis ll Si ka 

6 With the exception of part of the sign for at*, the letters in V v , 

* The ak.hara, in these brackets, which I have Zil^ N jackets are broken away. 

i Here about three aktharas are broken away 3 ! « ‘ Uppl, f ’ are eut,rel ? broken ***?• 

» The word in these brackets is entirely broken away. ° f * 8 ** 6 5 S14k * ( Anush ? abh J- 

10 Originally paraddatt - was engraved. 

11 Of the inscription C. an impression was triven _ 

* See also Dr. Fuhrer>s uLm. *'**** 

pp. 185 and 263. rtptten* t n the North- Wetter* Province t and Ondk, 









No. 15.] 


THREE GRANTS OP GOVINDACHANDRA. 


113 


A. — pJLlI plates op govtndachandra and his mother 

RALHANADEVl, OP [YEKRAMA-]SAMVAT 1189. 


These plates were found at the village of Pall in the Dhnriapar pargana of the Bansgaon 
tahsil of the Gdrakhpur district of the North-Western Provinces, and were in January 1895 
presented to the Lucknow Museum by the Collector, Dr. Hoey, who had obtained them through 
Pirtbipal Rai, the Zamindar. They are two in number, each of which measures about V 1J 7 
broad by 10* high, and is inscribed on one side only. The plates have raised rims, and the 
writing, in consequence, is in an excellent state of preservation throughout. There is a ring- 
hole in the centre of the lower part of the first plate and a corresponding hole in the centre of 
the upper part of the second plate, but the ring on which the plates were strung is missing. 
With the plates, however, is preserved a circular seal, about 2-' in diameter, which bears in 
high relief, across the centre, the legend 4[ri*]mad-G[5']vindachandradeva , in Nagari letters 
about ^ high; above the legend, the figure of a Garuda, squatting down and facing to the 
proper right ; and below the legend, a conch-shell.— Each plate contains 17 lines of well executed 
writing. The size of the letters is about §." The characters are Nagari, and the language is 
Sanskrit. As regards orthography, the letter b is everywhere denoted by the sign for v ; the 
dental sibilant is frequently employed instead of the palatal, and the palatal occasionally 
instead of the dental ; and j is used instead of y in the word juti f 1 . 20. 

The inscription is one of the Paramabhatfaraka MaMrajadhirdja Paramesvara Govinda- 
chandradeva. The king records in it that, after bathing in the Sati at the ghatta of the god 
Svapnesvara, on the occasion of the Akshaya-tritiya festival in the bright half of the 
month Vaisakha, he made over to his mother, the MahdrdjmU^lhmAdevU 1 ten ndlukas (of land) 
in the village of Guduvi, in the Gdyara pattald of the Onavala pathaka, as a gift for the 
Thakkura Jayapalasarman, son of the Thakkura Indraditya and son’s son of the Thakkura 
Pevalaha, a Br&hman of the Mudgala gotra , whose three pravaras were Maudgalya, Angirasa 
and Bharmya4va, — The taxes specially mentioned (in line 26) as due to the donee are the 
bhagabhogakara and pravanikara. In line 34 the inscription is dated, in figures only, on 
Saturday, the 8th of the dark half of Jyaishtha of the year 1189. The grant was written 
by the Thakkura Vishnu. 

The date in line 34 regularly corresponds, for the Kdrthhadx Vikrama-Samvat 1189 
expired and the purnimdnta Jyaishtha, to Saturday, the 20th April A.D. 1133, when the 
8th tithi of the dark half ended 15 h. 48 m. after mean sunrise. The preceding Akshaya-tritiyfi, 
on which the donation was made, fell on Sunday, the 9th April A.D. 1133, when the third 
tithi of the bright half of Vaisakha commenced 1 h. 17 m. and ended 23 h. 5 m. after mean 
sunrise. 2 


The localities I am unable to identify.- From the present inscription ,t appears that 
the pattald, so often mentioned in cognate grants, was a subdivision of the path aha, a term 
which does not occur in the inscriptions of the kings of Kanauj hitherto published, hut which is 
met with also in another Pali plate of G6vindachandra that will be referred to below. Another 
unusual term in this grant is ndluka, in line 19. This word apparently is derived from and 
is equivalent to, the Sanskrit nalva, a measure of distance equal to 400 (or, according to others. 
100, or 120) hastas. The same term occurs, both in the form »« nfc« and in the abbreviated 
form ndlu, in the Kahla (now Lucknow Museum) plates of the (Kalachun ?) Maharaja dhtraja 
Sodhadeva, the successor of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Maryadasagaradeva, of V. 113o, of which 
Hr. Fuhrer has kindly sent me an impression. 


it , . . , . . ,1 ’DAl'kam.ad&vk and Halhctd&v\ ; Bee above, Vol. IV. p. 113. 

1 In other inscriptions the name is both Ralhanacie ri ana jta « > 

* The tithi, on which the donation »»de, therefore was a k.haya-Mhx. 

* See Gupta W. p. 173. note 1. * 114 * n ° W 4< 





114 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vox.. V. 


EXTRACTS PROM THE TEXT. 1 

First Flute. 

15 s -8iimad-Q6Tiibdaohamdradev6 vijayi || 3 

4 [ 6 ]navala-pntliake Goyara-patta[la*][y]arh 

16 Guduvi-grama-nivasi(si)n6=khila-janapadan=upagat4D«>ap»tta»-*r&ja-r&jni-® yuvaraja- 

marhtri-puro- 

17 bifca-bliarndagarik-akshi (ksha)patalika-bhislia g-naimitfcik-Antakpurika-duta- 

karituragapattanakaragokii- 

j Second Plate . 

18 ladliikari-purushan^ajaapayati vo(b6)va(dha)yaty=4di§ati cha || Viditam=astu 

bhavatam yath=6pariligyi(k3ii)- 

19 ta-grame 7 8 nal aka-das f N s)=a tike =pi naluka 10 sajala-sasthala-salavanakara- 

samatsyakara-sa- 

20 garttosbava-samramadhukayanavitapayatikatrinaj&Cy^) tigtahara- a6rddh[y # ]adha- 

svasimaparyanta-cliaturagbatavisu(su)ddhah 9 Maudgala- 

21 gotraya Maudgala-Angirasa-Bh&rmyasa-trihpravarflya 1 ® thakknra-sri-Pevalaha- 

panfcraya tbakkara-sri-lmdraditya-putraya 11 thakku- 

22 ra-sii-Jayapalasa(sa)rmmane vra(bra)braanaya Vais&(£a)kM masi si(si)te 

pakshe 12 akshaya-tritiyayam parvvani deya-§ri-Svapn§sva(sva)ra-gba- 

23 te(tte) Satyarii vidhivat=snatya deya-manuja-bhfita-pitri -gap arias =tarppayitva 

s[u # ] rya-puja-pury vakam Bliayani-patirh. satnabbyarchya prachura-pa- 

21 yasena havisha havirbhujam. hntva tribhavana*tr4tnr=bhagavat5 Vasudevasya 
cha pujam vidhaya matapitror-almanas-cha pnnya- 

25 yasb(so)-bhivriddhaye g6karnna-ko.salat&-puta-karatal-dkam 13 matri-maharajui-sri- 

Ralhana&Qvi 14 asarii haste pradatto 15 ma- 

26 tva yathadiyamana-bhagabh6gakara-pravanikara-prabhriti-Baraasta-mi(ni)y a t - a d & y an 

yidheyibhuya dasyath=eti [||*] 

27 Bbayanti ch=atra slokah l 16 . . . 


1 From an impression supplied by Dr. Fuhrer. 

3 Up to this, the text is practically identical with the text of the Kemanli plate of Gdvindachandra, published 
above, Vol. IV. p. 100 f. The nine verses at the commencement of the inscription are numbered here with 
numeral figures. 

1 This sign of punctuation is superfluous ; read « >*jayy=». 

4 The akskara in brackets looks as if t had been first engraved, and then altered to 6 . 6nazala> corrected 

out of onatala y occurs as part of the name of a pathaka in a P&lt copper-plate inscription of GovindsichHndra of 
V. 1171, the first plate of which has been presented by Dr. Hoey to the Lucknow Mnseum. In line 13 of that 
plate, of which also I owe an impression to Dr. Fiibrer, we read : Saruvdrddnavala-potkakS 1 Sirasi-pottaldydm H 
Pdligrdma’prabhrxti-gramithu , r 

• Instead of ap=Uara- nearly all the other plate, of the same dynuty have am cha. 

• Originally rdjulra- was engraved, bnt the akthara ra is .truck out. 

7 Originally -grdma-prabhriti.hu was engraved, with a sign of anutcdra above the line, between it and thu ; 
bnt the word prabhptuhu is struck out again, and the sign of the vowel i above the an of grdma is faintly visible 
on the hack of the impression. 

* One would have expected here daia ndlukd ahkUpi nilukd 10 .a-jala-.lhaldh , a-lavandiardh , etc. 

* Read °ddha . ‘ 

Originally Bhdrmydsa- was engraved; read Mudgala-gdtrdya M.a*dgaly-Ahgircu 9 -Bhdrmya*T) a * 

tnpravaraya. ' 

11 Read -jr-lmdrf, 13 Read palcth^Uhaya-, 

14 Road °dtvy^dsdm (for simply °d£vyd). 

15 One would have expected pradattd • see above, note 8. 

" H T f °! ,0 ". the SCVeD te " e9 commencing Bhumim pah pratigrihndti, Sank had. bhadr-d.anam, BahubUr* 
rasudha , Sia-datt rm para-dattdm erf, Shashtim car,ha »aha,roni. U dm-ekdm, and Sarrdn^td^bhdcinak. 


19 Read -haratal-ddalca-purvam. 



No. 15.] 


THREE GRANTS OF GOVINDACHANDRA. 


115 


^ ....... Mamgalarii maha-srih || Sarhvat 1189 

J[y # leshtha-vadi 8 Sa(sa)nau ! Likhitam ch^edam thakkura-Vifshnu]!! 1 - 
eti [||*J 

B. — MACHHLISHAHR PLATE OF GOVINDACHANDRA 
OF [VTKRAMA-] S AM V A T 1201. 

This is a single plate which was found, in September 1888, in a field close to a small hamlet 
seven miles north of Machhlishahr (Ghiswa) in the Jannpnr district of the North-Western 
Provinces, and is now in the Lucknow Museum. It measures about V 3f v broad by 11J V high, 
and is engraved on one side only. In the centre of the upper part it has a riDg-hole, through 
which passes a ring, with a circular seal which is about 2\* in diameter and bears the same 
legend and emblems as the seal of the inscription A., but apparently not so well preserved 
The plate contains 29 lines of writing which, on the whole, is well preserved. The size of the 
letters is between and The characters are Nagari, and the language is Sanskrit. 

The writer has done his work well, and in respect of orthography, therefore, it need only be 
stated that, except in the word babhramur- in line 9, the letter b is denoted by the sign for r, 
and that the dental sibilant is occasionally employed instead of the palatal. 

This is another inscription of the Paramabhattdraka Mahdrdjddhtrdja Paramqsvara 
Govindachandradeva, who records that, on Monday, the Akshaya-tritiya tithi of the 
bright half of the month Vaisakha of the year 1201 (given both in words and in figures), 
after bathing in the Ganges at Benares, he granted the village of Peroha in the Mahasoya 
pattald to the Pandita Vam sad haras arm an, son of the Pandita Padmanabha and son's son of 
the Pandita Bharata, a Brahman of the Kasyapa gotra , whose three pravaras were Kasyapa, 
Avatsara and Naidhruva. — The taxes specified (in line 20) are the bhagabhogakata , 
pravanxkara and turushkadantfa. The grant (tdmra) was written by the Kdyastha Dhandhuka. 2 

About the exact equivalent of the date I am somewhat doubtful. It is true that, for 
the Gkaitrddi Vikrama-Samvat 1201 current, the date would regularly correspond to Monday^ 
the 19th April A.D. 1143, when the third tithi of the bright half of Vaisakha ended 21 h. 52 m. 
after mean sunrise. But as current years are only quoted very exceptionally, and as for the 
Kdrttikddi Vikrama-Samvat 1202 expired the date would correspond to Monday, the 15th 
April A.D. 1140, which was entirely occupied by the third tithi of the bright half of 
Vais&kha, I am rather inclined to assume that this is really the day on which the grant was 
made, and that in the inscription the year 1201 has been quoted erroneously instead of 1202. 3 4 

Regarding the localities I can only say that the Mahasoya pattald of this inscription 
undoubtedly is the same district which in an inscription of Jayachchaudra^ is called the 
Ma h asd pattald. 

EXTRACTS FROM THE TEXT. 5 

12 6 -srimad-Govindachandradevd vijayi [| 7 Mahasoya- 

pattalayam | PSroha-grama-nivasind ni[kh]ila-janapadan=upagatan=api cha 
raja-raj fii-yuvar&j a- mam - 


1 J im somewhat doubtful about the akshara in brackets; above it the sign for the medial e was engraved, 
but has been struck out again. The Thakkura Vishnu wrote the grant of Gdvindaebandra published above, 
Vol. IV. p. H3 f. 

2 This very probably is the same writer who in another inscription of Gdvindachandra is described as tbe 
* Thakkura Dh&dbtika ; * see above, Vol. IV. p. 114, inscription L. 

1 There are numerous other dates, of both the Vikrama and the Saka era, in which we find tbe same error. 

4 See above, Vol. IV. p. 122, line 18 of tbe text. 8 From an impress! >n supplied by Dr. Fuhrer. 

• Up to this, the text is practically identical with the text of the Kamauli plate of Gdvindachandra, published 

above, Vol. IV. p. 100 f. 

* Thia and the other signs of punctuation in lines 12-19 are >*jrm*uns. 

Q2 



116 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vox* Y. 


] 3 tri-purohita-pratihjk^-senapati-bhandagarik-akshapatahka-bhishag-naimittik-antahpurika- 
duU-karituragapattanakarasthanag6kuladhikari-purushan=ajna- 

14 payati vo(bo)dhayaty=adisati cba yatha | viditam=asa(stu) bhavatam | yath= 

oparilikhita-gramah sa-^‘ala*stbalab sa-loha-lavap-akarab sa-matsy-akarah 

sa-ga[ r# ]tt-a(o)- 

15 sharah sa-madhuk-amra-vana-vatika-vitapa-trina-yuti-gochara-paryantab s-orddhv-adhas= 

chatur-aghata-visuddhah sva-sim^-paryantah samvatsarana[m eka] 1 dliika-d vadasa- 
sateshu 

16 Vaisakhe m&si sukta(kla)-pakshe skshaya-tritiy&yaih tithau Soma-dine 

snke-pi samvata 201 2 * Vaisakha-sudi 3 Some sdy=eba srimad-Vara[na]syam * 
Ga[hg]&yarii snatva vidhivan=mant[r]a- 

17 deva-muni-manuja-bhuta-pitri-ganams=tarppayitva timira-patala-patana-patu-mahasam= 

Ushnar6chisham=upasthay=Aushavi(dhi)pati-sakala-sekharam samabbyarchchya 

tribhuvana-tratur=bhaga- 

18 vato Vasudevasya puj&m vi[dha]ya prachura-pavasena havisha havirbhujam hutva 

matapitror=atmanas=cha punya-yaso-bhivriddhaya ssmabhir=ggokarnna(rnna)- 
kusalat^-puta-ka- 

19 ratal-oiaka-purv^am Kasya(6ya)pa-gotraya | Kasya(sya)p-Avats4ra-Naidh[r]uya- 

tripravaraya | pamdiva(ta)-sri-Bharata-pautr&ya | pandifca-sri-Padmanabha- 
putraya | pandita-sri-Vamsadhara- 

20 sarmman[e*] vra(bra)hmanaya chandr-arkkam y&vach=chhasanikritya pradatto 

matva yathadiyamana-bhagabhogakara-pravanikara-turushkadanda-prabhriti-sarvv- 

adayan=ajna-vidheyibhuya dasya- 

21 th=eti || chha || Bhavanti ch^atra £lokah || 4 * . 

^ ® cbha (I 6 Efa[t=tu] tamra[m=akhi]la-ksbitipala-raauli- 

29 sreni-nighrishta-charanasya tad-asya rajnah I kftyastha-ratnam=alikhad= 

vivu(bu)dh-aika-va(ba)ndhur=Ddhandhuka ity^marasindhu-viauddha-klrttih || 
cbha || || 

C.— BANG A VAN PLATE OP GOVIITOACHANDRA A ND HIS QUEEN* 
GOSALADEVl, OF [VTKK AM A-] S AMVAT 1208. 

This also is a single plate which was found, in December 1887, in a field near the village 
of Bangavan in the Daryabad pargana of the Ramsanehi-Gh&t tahsil of the Bara Bank! 
district of Oudh, and which is nowin the Lucknow Museum. It measures about 1' broad 
by l f high, and is inscribed on one side only. At the lower proper left corner a square piece, 
about \\ broad by 2^ bigh, is broken away, causing the loss of about four aksharas at the end 
of each of the lines 19-25 ; otherwise the plate is well preserved. In the centre of the upper 
part it has a ring-hole, through which passes a ring, with a circular seal which is about 2 ? 
in diameter and bears the same legend and emblems as the seal of the inscription A « The 

1 The reading of the letters in these brackets is doubtful, because some correction haa been made here in the 
plate ; originally there was not room for more than one akshara between °ndm and dhika-. Bead °ndm*Siddkika-. 

2 Read samvat 1201 ; the figure for the unit (1) is quite clear and distinct, and cannot be read dHfcfantlj. 

* Read - Vdrdna*ydm. 

< Here folio, the twelve verses commenong Shimim y^h pratigrthndti, SanHam l hadr-dtanam, 
S*rvSn=ttd»=bhdm»*1h Bahubhir^tasudhd, OAm^tkdn, Taddgdndm .ahavina, Sva-dattdm para-dattdm td, 
Shashtim vurtha-tahatrdni, Vdri-hlnUhv=*ronyiahu, Jia vUham tiikam, Ydn^Ua dattdni, and Vdt dbhra- 
vibhramam. 

* Metre : Vrtsantatiiaki. 

• S.. far as 1 can judge from the impression sent to me, the legend on the seal actually is jrimad- 
Qdnndachadradtta, m Mgarl letter, between •/ and |" high ; and the Oarudo above it seem, to be very much 
like the figure of Gatuda on the M&ndh&ti plate* of Javasimha, above, VoL 111. p. 50, Plate. 




No. 15.] 


THREE GRANTS OF GOVINDACHANDRA. 


117 


plate contains 25 lines of writing. The size of the letters is about The characters are 
Nagari, and the language is Sanskrit. The writer and engraver have done their work in a 
rather slovenly manner so that the text contains a large number of minor mistakes. As regards 
orthography, the letter b is denoted by the sign for v , the dental sibilant is often employed 
instead of the palatal, y is used instead of y in - parjantah , 1. 16, and the word iekhara is written 
ieshara, in line 19. 

This is another inscription of the Paramabhafidraka Mahdrdjddhirdj a ParameSoara 
Grovindachandradeva. 1 The king records in it that, on Tuesday, the full-moon tithi 
of Karttika of the year 1208 (given both in words and m figures), his queen, the 
Pafpimahadevi Mahdrajm Gosaladevi, endowed with all royal prerogatives, after bathing in 
the Ganges at Benares near (the temple of) the god Lolarka, 2 in the presence of that deity, 
with the king’s consent, gave the village of Gatiara in the Bhimamayutasa . . 3 pattala 

to the Thakkura Anatasarman, son £f the Thakkura * . * and son s son of the 

Thakkura Kulh$, a Brahman of the Vasishtha gotra and student of the Chhandoga Aakhd (of 
the Sama-veda), who had come from Pataliputra. — The taxes specified (in line 22) are the 
bhdgabhogakara and pravanikara . The writer’s name either was not given or is broken away 
at the end of the inscription. 

The date is irregular ; 5 for the full-moon tithi of Karttika of Vikraraa-Samvat 1208 
current ended 17 h. 43 m. after mean sunrise of Monday, the 6th November A.D. 1150, and that 
of Vikrama-S*mvat 1208 expired, 3 h. 58 m. after mean sunrise of Saturday, the 27th October 
A.D. 1151. The date would be incorrect also for Vikrama-Samvat 1209 expired, but correct 
for both 1206 and 1210 expired. 

Of the localities, Pataliputra is the modern Patna in the Patna district of Bengal ; the 
village Gatiara and the pat t aid in which it was situated I am unable to identify. 


13 


14 


15 


16 


EXTRACTS PROM THE TEXT. 6 

12 7.srimad-Govindachandrad§yo(v6) v[i]jayi 

Bhimamayutasa ■ . 8 -pattalflyam Gatiara-gr^ma-nivasino ^ niyi(khi)la*janapadan= 

u[pa*]gatan=api cha rMa-mjDi-mamtri-purdhita-pratiham-s[e]napati- 

[bh ]amdagarik-akshapatalika-bhishag-ni(nai)mittik-antahpurika-su(du)ta-kanturaya(ga)- 
pattan&karasth&nag6kuladhikari-purushan=ajnapayat:(ty )=&disati ^ 

v&(bo)dhayati cha | yatha® viditam=astu bhavatam yath=6pa,rilikhita-gramah 
sa-jala-sthalafc sa- 16 sla(ha)-lavan-akarah sa-gartt-dsharah sa-na(ma)dhukah(.ka)- 

chuta-da(va)na-vitapa-[va]ti- * , A . 

k&-trina-yuti-g&chara-parja(rya)ntah 8 ^rddh[v*]4[dha]s=chatn^aghate-^u(an)ddhah 

sva-sa (si ) ml-pary antah |»» samvataaranarh" ash[n&vi(dln)ka-dvadat y a(sa)- 
8a(sa)t6shu Kftrttike m&si [su(su)]kla- 

1 Compare the inscription of Gfimdachandra and his qasea KayapakSUdfivi of V. 1X76, above, Vol. IV. 
p. 107, F. 

2 LSldrka is a form of the Sun. _ . , 

I The two fcst oktharas of this name are illegible in the original. 

* 15 October 

: ? «— •> zrzs ~r“' 

to practically identical with that of the Kamanli plate of Gflv.ndachandra, pnhh.hed above, Vol. IV . p. 100 f . 

• Here two (apparently damaged) ni.Anra* are illegible in the .mpress.on, 

* This word is superfluous. - 

10 This and the other sign, of punctuation in lines 16-22 are snperflaons. 

II Bead V<Sndfn=. 


118 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V. 


17 pakve(kshe) paurnnamasyam tithau Bh[au]ma-dine skve(nke)-pi samvat 

1208 K&rttika-sudi 15 Bh[au]me I! ^ad-etat-sammatya 

samastarajaprakriyopeta-sarvvalamka- 

18 ravibhushita-va(pa) [ttajmahade vi-maharajni-sri-Gdsaladevibhih srimad-Varanasy&m 

Kartti[ki]-parwani deva-sri-Lolarkka-sannidh6(dhau) Gang&yam snatva [timi]- 

19 ra-patala-pa[ta]nam 2 =ITshnar6vi(chi)sbam-upastha y = Aushadhipati-sa ( s a ) kala- 

[se]sha(kha)ram samabhyarchchya trilu(bhu)vana-tratur=Vvasudevasva(sya) 
pCtjam vidhaya havisha havirbhujam [hutva mata]- 3 

20 pitpor=atmanas=cha punya-yas6(so)-vi(bbi)vriddbaye svargga-dvara-kapat-arggal- 

odgbatanaya 4 ayuh-sreyah-kam-arthe Ya(cha) | deva-sri-Lolarkk-agre 

gokar[nn]a-ku[salata]- 

21 puta-karatal-6daka-purYYam=asmabbib 6 FataR(li)putra-vinirggataya [Chchhajnddga- 

ga(sa)kh-adhyayine Y asishtha-gotraya thakkara-sri-Kulhe-pautraya(ya |) 6 tha-6ri- 

1 

22 putraya(ya |) 6 tba-gri(sry)-Anatasa(sa)rmane vra(bra)hmanasa(ya) sasanikritya 

pradatto matva yathadiyamana-bhagabh6gakara-sra(pra) vanika[ra*]-prabhriti- 
sa[ma* ]st-adayan=[ajna-srava]- 

23 na-vidhevi(yi)bhuyabhuya 8 dasyap(th)=4ti || cbchha || Bbavanti ch=atra dbarm- 

anusam(sa)siiiah s[l]ok£h | 9 


No. 16.— SIX EASTERN CHALUKYA COPPER-PLATE INSCRIPTIONS. 

By E. Kielhorn, Ph.D., LL.D., C.I.E. ; Gottingen. 

A. — EDERU PLATES OP VUAYADITYA II. 

[A.D. 799-843.] 10 

These plates were found, about twenty-five years ago, at the village of Ed§ra (the 1 Efcdra 7 
of the Indian Atlas , map 94, long. 80° 48 r E., lat. 16° 43 ; N.) in the Nfizividu Zamind&ri of 
the Kistna district of the Madras Presidency, and they are preserved now in the Madras 
Museum. The inscription which they contain bas been already published, by Pandit S. M. 
Natesa Sastri, in the Indian Antiquary , Vol. XIII, p, 55 ff, I re-edit it from an excellent 
impression, supplied to me by Dr. Hultzsch. 

These are thro© copper-plates, the first and last of which are inscribed on one side only, 
and each of which measures about 7 broad by 2^ 7 high. The plates have slightly raised rims, 


* One would have expected here atmat-sammatyd ; see above, Vol. IV. p. 109, 1. 19 of the text. 

* Read -pdtana~patu-mahasam=. 

« The alcsharas in bracket* at the end of lines 19-22 are broken awaj. 

4 Read °tandy=. * This aimdbMh i# superfluous. « I. e . thalckura 

1 Here three or four aUhara, are broken away. a Read -vidhiyibhiya ddT. 

* Here follow the four verse* commencing Bhimim yah pratigrihndti, Sahkham bhadr-dtanan, Gdm » 
ti&m, and SAasAfm varsha-sahatrdnt. 

10 Here and below I add the times of the reigns of tbe donors, from Dr. Fleet’* account of the Eastern 
Chalukya dynasty in 2nd- Ant. Vol. XX., to indicate in a general way the period to which each of the ail inscriptions 

belongs. 

n Compare also Dr. Fleet in Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 101, H. 



119 


No. 16] SIX EASTERN CHALUKTA GRANTS. 


and are strung on a ring which had not been cut yet when the impression was taken by 
Dr, Hultzsch. The ring is about 3, ' in diameter and thick, and has its ends secured in the 
base of an elliptical seal, about 2* by 1^' in diameter. The seal bears across its breadth the 
legend m - Tribhuvanakuinta { for '‘ndmb.is *), with, below it, an expanded lotus flow’er, and, above 
it, the sun within the moon's crescent, — The writing, which is rather roughly engraved, is, on 
the whole, well preserved. The characters belong to the southern class of alphabets, and 
are of the regular type of the period and part of the country to which the inscription belongs. 
As regards individual letters, it may be stated that for kh (which occurs in pramtikhdn, 1. 15, 
and in khandika , 1 21) and for b we have throughout the older square forms, and that, with 
perhaps one exception, 1 the older, not the later cursive, form is also used in the case of L It 
may moreover be noted that the sign for b is generally open on the left (or proper right) 
side — a form of 6, which is employed throughout already in the Chipurupalle plates 2 of 
Vishnuvardhana I, of A.D. 632 — and that occasionally a similarly open sign 3 is used for j } e.g . 
in Dhanmnaj[d]nuja, 1. 11, and aid)jnaptir , 1. 25. Final forms of consonants occur for n in 
pramukhaiiy 1. 15, and perhaps for m in sva-datc L a*]m, 1. 27, and va sandbar dm, 1. 28. The 
size of the letters is between VV' anc * i - — The Sanskrit and, with the exception 

of three verses at the end, the inscription is in prose. The text generally is plain, but contains 
a number of mistakes, due to carelessness of either the writer or the engraver. Whether the word 
kufdka, which in line 15 occurs in the place of the usual Tashtrakuta , is correct or not, I am 
unable to decide. In respect of orthography, it may suffice to state that the Dravidian l is 
used iu kaladhauta, 1. 12, and in the names Ohalithjdndm, 1. 4, Palhi-bhait[d*]ruk[d*]ya< 
1. 20, and Bolarenduvafi, 1. 24 ; that the sign of the medial d is frequently omitted ; 4 and 
that the word padma is spelt patma, in line 9. 

The inscription is one of the Eastern Chalukya Vijayaditya [II. Narendramrigaraja], 
the son of Vishnuvardhana [IV.] and son’s son of Vikramarama ( i.e., apparently, Vijayaditya 
!♦)• It records the grant, on the occasion of a solar eclipse, of part of the village of 
Va[Qd]nipite[y]u in the Kanderuvadi-vishaya, to a Brahman named Palla-bhattaraka, an 
inhabitant of Minamini. The Ajhapti (or dutaka ) of the grant was Bolama. 

The inscription is not dated. Of the localities, none of which have been identified, the 
Kandefuvadi (or °vatr) vishaya is mentioned in South-Ind. Inscr. Vol. I. p. 40, 1. 43, and p. 45. 

1. 21, and was most probably mentioned also at the end of line 10 of the inscription published 
ibid. p. 33 and Did. Vol. XX. p. 415, which mentions the villages of Va[nd]rupite[y]u& 
and Korraparu (or c pajrim) of the present inscription.* Below, p. 129. text 1. 23, mention is 
made of the TJttarakandejmvadi vishaya . 


1 I refer to the sign for /, used in -garydlakamtdya >n line 20, which comes very near to the later cursive 

form. 

* See Plate srvii. of Dr. Burnell's South- Mian Paleography Occasionally tlie open form' of the square 
* occurs also in other early Eastern a. well as Western Chalukya inscriptions. It is met with also in Pallava and 
Eastern Ganga inscriptions, and is used throughout in the Chikkulla plates of Vikramoiidrcv,. email II (above, Vol. 
IV. p. 195), athile in the GAdavari plates of PritbivimAla (Jour. Bo. As Soc. Vol. XVI. p. 1 JG) it •ernrs only once 
nr perhaps twice, out of six times. 

1 On the open,; see below, p. 122. 

* The only important omission of the sign for d occurs at the end of line 5 , where it might sen. doubtful 
whether the proper name, given there, should be read Fikramarama or F.kramardma. Iu favour of the former 
reading one might perhaps quote the name Fishnurama which occurs above, Vol. IV. p. 310 , H- 3 and 4 of the 
text ; but the fact that in the present inscription the name ^immediately p-eceded fay Hie word alh,rama. in my 
opinion, renders it certain that Fikramardma is really intended. 

1 See below, p. 120, note 10. 

« With the name Senduvati in line 21 of the present inscription one might compare fieinla, . ntu) va d ila in 
I*d. Ant. Vol. Xlll. p. 18 R, II. 18 and 81 . 



120 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 
7 


8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 


15 

16 

17 

18 


TEXT. 1 

First Plate. 

Svasti [|*] Srimatam sakala-bhuvana-samstuyamana-M!a]iavyasag6tr[a # ]n§m Hari- 
tiputr&nam 2 Kausiki-yaraprasa[da*]-labdha*rajyanam bhagavan-Nar[a # ]yana-pras£da- 
sam[a # ]- 

sadita-vara-varahalanchhan-ekshana-kshana-vasikrit- aratimandalanam 3 asva- 
mMhAvabhrita(tha)snana-pavitri(tri)krita-vapiishaiii Chalukyanam kulam=alamka- 
riehn6[r]= wividha-yuddha-labdha-vijayasiddhe[r*] = bhuvana-maiiO-bhiraina- 

Vikrainar[a*]- 

nxasya pautrah pratapavanata-paramandala-nripatimandalasya sri-Vi- 

8h[n]uvandha(rddlia)naf-raah[a]rajasya priya-tanayah 4 mja-bhaja-nisit-[a]sidh[a]- 


Second Plate ; First Side . 

ra-prasamita-parachakra-vikramah 6 sak[t]itray-alamkrita[h] kshira-sagara 

iva Lakshmi-prabha(bha)vd diuakara iva satata-ranjita-patmah 6 sasadba- 
ra iva [kajinudavana-priyo Dkarmmaja iva mja-dharmma-iiirmipalo 
Dharrnmaj- [a]nuja iva Daisasana-kshaya-karah 7 Merur=iva stbira-.sfcbi- 
tir=atula-tuladhrita -kaladhauta-dhauta-durbala-malinah 8 para- 
mabva(bra)bmanyo Yisbnu(shnii)r=iva jishim(8hnu)[h # ] samastabhavan- 
[a # ]sraya-sri-Vija- 

y§ditya-mabarajadbir[a # ] ja-paramesva [ra # ] - bbattarakab Kanderuv[a*]- 9 


Second Plate ; Second Side. 

di-vishaye 10 Va[nd]nipite[y] u-nama-gramasya kfitaka-pramukhan 

11 katambinas^8arwan-ittbara=ajriapayati [|*] Viditam=asta vd=smabhih 12 

Mmamim*v[a*]stavyaya Kasya(sya)pa-gotraya Apastabham-sufcraya Taitri- 13 

ya-bva(bra)bmacbarine 14 Tn(tu)rka^aririma-tredi-paxitra | 16 veda-ved[arii]ga-vi- 


I From impressions supplied by Dr. Hultzscb. a Read Kaniikt 

* Read °ndm=a4va-. « Read .fanayo. 

% The third aJcthara of this word looks as if tya had first been engraved and then altered to tra. 

6 Read •padmah ; Mr. Ustesa Sastri read rakiMta-padmah. The sun always reddens the water-lilies; the 
king always pleased the goddess at fortune ( Padmd ) or 1,000 billions (padma) of people. The moon is dear to 
the night-lotuses ; the king was fond of fostering the happiness of (the inhabitants of) the earth. 

* Read - Jcard . 

8 ‘ He washed off the dirt of the weak (i.e. the poverty of the needy) by tbe nnprecedented (amount of) gold 
and silver (ka\adhauta) which (equivalent to his own weight) was placed on the balance.’ Compare Ind. Ant. 

Vol. XIII. p. 186, 1. 8 : <™tka-tulddhrita-idtakumbha-n(rdnan.[d , ]vaddta-iari{rt)rasya. 

» The impression looks as if originally, between the akthara, nde and *•*, the sign of ntarga had been 
engraved. 

10 Mr ' Nate “ Sa8tri omit8 thi8 name ' R y Fleet (Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 101) it was read Yamrnpireyn or 
Yamrupileyu. The village is the same which, as situated west of Korea parru (see below, 1. 23). is mentioned in line 
44 of the other known grant of Vijay&ditya II., where the name by Dr. Hultzsch was read Vd[ndhrt\pe[day£\ y and 
by Dr. Fleet Vdndrdpedayd ; see South-Ind. Inter. Vol. I. p. 34, and Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 417. 

^ The sign of anutrara in this word is placed within the sign of the rowel i of hi. 

II Read rah I Asmdbhir=*. 

M Re*d -gotrdy-Apaitamla-rCtrdya Taittirtya-lra° (or, perhaps, °ya;abra°). 

14 Mr. N.teaa Sastri read this name Turkanarmma-, bnt the third akthara is distinctly (a in tbe impression. 
T^name Tirkaiarman occurs below, p. 124, teat line 20, and in a Pallava inscription, Ind. Ant. VoL V. p. 165, 

u Read •trivedi-pautrdya. 



A. — Ederu Plates of Vijayaditya II. 


§#fc 

^ te % vp! 

'ix fir 5a. .hi X; otr» 1 I 
v fc Fb 3 , ‘a^ yi 1 

l x c t) 'll 5 hj.-Ti 

^ Heitor j- hrfHr . 

t> Jfj 


§ fillip 

'i. 


P^J wyft ‘co 

P Kf^ 5 fefcRTJfO-. 

^'••':-'r.. '<{ CO Ct=> JJj^ffr 


• % f fewt^j I 

't--> Xf-jX h ) >r- ■ I 

°^*i 47 r> *fc, * 

• w> *> ’H.ts: <5 hrJ® ! 
•htfOSJtP’ft TT^ty/. 

•/a c^YV ?• » u ^ >^ ^ 


'tf *) Tile'S: TT . 5 

. @ a. *p , 

6 5 F- 6 ™ WSJ I 

■<2/? I >5& t ii . ! 

l^f^S 'j 

Ti s I 

■■£ I * Mfe, £ $ 

k 5 w >l1 • 

cvb^«g^p rc? 

QT (J ^ A? r\05lA *-• 

r-^^^cn ! 


<X> 


O 




<0 00 o 

Ol 


m 


-12* ft* 


i^sr ^ 

S C4 'lVlt? ^ r\l l 
; .v : ! *i} V^^ t-4j 


t - v :^ Pl ' P ^ 


' t — w-* rf . 

♦f* v 

V 1 . * * D~'", 


- . w : nXt k ; 

#•* ^ “«x * “*-> ^ fc* « * 

; ^ i'Ct 


*»:■? V > Ur pnjD 
C?SJ r>- (S. v s ^ ^ 

frklil 

'% £ 1 ^ S&J &3 ^ 


'-' $=^ta 

ir *>. u • 

i 




^ « & 
■^j-q t^ v , 


r. -nj'^ ilr^TK’Pp, 

■ r >. 1 


cm 

CM 


* 

CM 


<0 

CM 


00 

CM 


K o. 16 .] 


sis: eastern- chalukya grants. 


121 


19 de shatkarmma-nirataya ^onasafrjmma-trivedi-putra j 2 bva(bra)lirnana-g*u- 3 

20 na-gap -alakamtaya 4 Palla-bhatt[a*]rak[a*]ya su[r*]yyagrahana-nimi- 

21 tte 6 asminn=6va grume 6 dvadasa-khandika.k6drava-bija-samsthanam 

Third Plate. 

22 [kshetra] [n=cba ?]? | avasana[m] sarvva-kara-paribari 8 da[ttam | ? ] 

Chat[u]r-avadhi 9 

23 purwatah Korraparu-simah(ma) daksba^kshi natah [ta]takah paschimatah Ra- 

24 mfiti uttaratah Renvu(ndu)vati Bolarenduvati [I*] Ette 10 chatur-avadhi [||*] 

25 ^ACa^jiiaptir^asya dbarmmasya nirmmald dbarmma-sagraiiiham 12 [1*] 

Bolama-nama(ma) 16- 

26 ke=smit(n)= pnnya-chitte(tto ?) nar-ottamah [|| 1*] Bahubhir=wasudh& datta 

bahubhi4'ch=4nu- 

27 palita [|*] yasya yasya ,yada bhu(bhu)mis=tasya tasya tad[a] phala[m ] 

!(!|) [2*] Sva-datt[a*][m] 

28 para-dattam va yo haretu 13 vasundhara[m] [(*] shashtim varsha-sahasrani 

vishta(shtha)sam(yam) jayate k[ri]mi[h || 3*] 


ABSTRACT OP CONTENTS. 

The son’s son of Vikramarama (1. 5), who adorned the family of the Chalukyas (1. 4) 
who are of the Manavya gdtra and are Haritiputras (1. 1), and who obtained the success of 
victory ( rijaya-siddhi ) in various battles : 

The dear son of the Maharaja Vishnuvardhana (1. 7) : 

The asylum of the whole world, Vijayaditya (1. 13), the Mahdrdjddhirdja , Par amid vara 
and Bhatfdraka , who is most demoted to religion and is victorious like (the god) Vishnu, thus 
issues a command to all the cultivators, headed by the Eutahas, of the village of Va[nd]ru- 
pite[y]u in the Kanderuvadi-vishaya (1. 15) : — 

“Be it known to you ! On the occasion of an eclipse of the sun (1. 20), a field in this 
village, the extent of which is such that it may be sown with kodrava 1 * grain to the amount of 
twelve khandikas, (and ?) a dwelling-place have been given by Us, with exemption from all 
taxes, to the Brahman PaUa-bhattaraka, an inhabitant of Minamini (1. 17), who belongs to the 
Kasyapa go^ra and Apastamba sutra , and is a student of the Taittiriya \ eda, a son of t e 
student of three Vedas Donasarman and son’s son of the student of three Vedas Turkasarman. 

The four boundaries are (1. 22) : On the east, the boundary-line of Korraparu ; on the 
south, a tank; on the west, Ramati ; and on the north. Renduvati (and ?) Bolarenduvati. 

» This U the nctual reading, and the name occurs, spelt in the same way, in other inscriptions : the correct 

spelling wonld be Dr6naiarmma~. , , . 

i „ ead . putrdya. ’ Porhsps the intended reading is brdhmanaya gu.. 

* Read .ilamkritdya. * R- ad ttwminn*. „ u u . , . . „ 

« Instead of khandika Mr. Nates* Ssstri read vendilca ; the correct reading; h»> been already given y 

Hr. Fleet, in Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 106, note 20. Compare also ibid. Vol. XIII. p. Sj>0, 1. -7 of e , J 
mdnina dvadata-kkondim-kodrava-Uj a-vdpa-kshitram , and Vol. XIV. p. 55. 1. 116. dhanya-khandakan,. 

T The engraving is quite clear here, bat I caunofc read the akshara in these brackets with auj confidence. 1 c 
following sign of ponctoation is superfluous. After dvatanam one would have expected cia. 

* Head * parihdrikfityc *. , ,, . 

* Instead of this one would hsve expected Tasya chatvdro=vadhayah y or only Ta$y=dvadhayah. . 

Apparently intended for etc chatva r 6*vadhayah.-l suspect that some s.mdar phrase w intended .n 

line 45 of the other grant of Vijay&ditya II. (mentioned above, p. 120, note 10), where the published texts have 
eh*[t*r*imiatuai\ and H4thdm=apy=ava{?)tta. 

11 Metre from here to the end : Sldka (Auushtubh). n ^ad ’t^agraU. 

u Originally hariti appears to have been engraved ; read hartta. 

14 KSdrata i* stated to be* an inferior sort of grain, Pasprluji frumentaceum.’ 

R 



122 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Lines 25-28 give the name of the A jiiapti, Bolama, and contain two benedictive and impre- 
catory verBes. 


B.— MASTTLIPATAM (?) PLATES OP VUAY ADIT Y A HI. 

[A.D. 844-888.] 

There is no definite information as to where these plates were founds or what became of 
them ; but, judging from the dimensions, this may perhaps be a grant which is entered as 
follows in a memorandum of Sir Walter Elliot * 5. Inscription on 5 plates, received from 
Mr. Porter, Collector of Masulipatam, I9th December 1846 ; Yijayaditya. Seal, a Boar, and 
Tribhuvandmkusa. Length ; breadth, 3f . Weight, 258 rupees.” I edit the inscription 1 * from 
Sir W. Elliot’s own impressions, supplied to me by Dr. Fleet to whom I also owe the 
preceding information. 

These apparently are five copper-plates, the first and last of which are inscribed on one 
side only, and each of which measures 9|* broad by about 3§* high. They were strung on a 
ring for which there is a hole on the proper right side of each plate. The writing on the 
original plates undoubtedly is well preserved, but the impressions contain some partially 
illegible passages, owing to the fact that many letters in the original are blocked up with hard 
rust, which was not cleaned out before taking the impressions* — The writing is well done, 
and carefully engraved. The characters belong to the southern class of alphabets, of the time 
and part of the country to which the inscription belongs. As regards individual letters, the 
chief points to note are, that for Jch and l everywhere the later, cursive forms are used, while 
for b we have the older square form ; and that the signs for both b and j throughout are open 
on the left (or proper right) side. Of the open b I have spoken above, p. 119. The 
o^en j is used occasionally already 3 in the fideru plates of Vijayaditya II. (above, p. 120), and 
in the Ahadanakaram plates of Vishnuvardhana Y. (Ind. Ant . Yol. XJJL p. 186, e.g. in 
kanadirajul , 1. 30). It is also found now and then, more or less developed, in Eastern Gahga 
inscriptions, e.g. in lines 1 and 2 of the Chicacole plates of Indravarman of the year 146 (?) 
and in line 25 of the Vizagapatam plates of Devendravarman of the year 254 ( ibid . Yol. 
XIII. p. 123, and Vol. XVIII. p. 144) ; and it occurs pretty frequently in the Chikkulla plates 
of Vikramendravarman II. (above, Yol. IY. p. 195), which have also the open b. And both the 
open j and the open b are used throughout in the two Bana inscriptions, published in Ind. Ant . 
Yol, X. p. 39, which therefore, in this respect, come nearer to the present inscription than any 
other records examined by me. 4 Of final consonants which are not joined with a following letter 
our inscription only contains t (in kenachit, 1. 29) and n (in pramukhan, 1. 18, pdrtthirendrdn t 

1 For an account of the contents of the inscription see Dr. Fleet in Ind . Ant. Vol. XX. p. 103, J. 

1 Excepting the word which precedes the name Turkic asarmmanah in line 20, and one or two akthnras in the 
names of village, the illegible passages cause little difficulty. 

t j do not venture to quote with confidence the Nellore district plates of Visbpuvardbana II. of A.D. 664 
{Ind. Ant. Vol. VII. p. 186). where the open j seems to oeetr in Bhdradvdja, 1. 16, and *vam*kh*djnd?, 1. 67 . — 
The Tables io Or. Burnell's and Prof. Binder’s works on Indian palaeography contain no specimen of the open J, 

* On the Plate facing page 167 of Ind. Ant. Vol. X, there are photolithographs of two abort PatJadakal 
inscriptions, one of which has the ordinary open j (consisting of three separate lines), while the other furnishes 
an instance of that peculiar form of the opeuy, which has a vertical line in the middle and three horizontal line* 
to the right of the vertical line. The origin of the latter form of j, which, together with the ordinary open/, i» 
used e.g. in the spurious Merkara plates {ibid. Vol. I. p. 362), is well shewn by the different forms of /, employed 
in the Chicacole plates of Devendravarman {ibid. Vol. XIII. p.275 ; compare the different forms of / in eg. 
Fdgardj*, 1 23, nija, 1. 7, and vijaya , 1. 1). The origin of the later, cursive/, in my opinion, is equally well shewn 
by some forms of / in the Alamandi plates of Anantavarman of the year 304 (above. Vol. III. p. 18; compare the 
forms of j in e.g* jfnita-jaya, 1. 6, and r.ija> 1. 8). Perhaps 1 may state here that a form of /, which comes very 
near indeed to the later cursive /, is used already in the grant of Attivarraan {Ind. Ant. Vol. IX. p. 102, e.g. in 
jana , 1. 3, and ya/«v, 1. 6), which shews an early form of the Qrantha alphabet and is, in my opiziion, not later than 
A.D- 650. 


No. 16.] 


SIX EASTERN CHALUKYA GRANTS. 


123 


1. 33, pratdpavdn , 1. 35, and Jriman, 1. 38). Of these two, t is denoted by the ordinary sign for /a, 
and n by a Blightly smaller form of the ordinary sign for ita , with the sign of virdma, which hardly 
differs from the sign of the superscript r, placed above them. The size of the letters is betweeti 
'ft* and — The language is Sanskrit. In addition to four benedictive and imprecatory 
verses and two others which give the names of the Ajnapti and the writer, the text contains 
five verses eulogizing the donor and his predecessors and the donee ; the rest is in prose. 
Verse 3 does not admit of a proper construction, and in verse 5 an essentially necessary word 
is omitted. The orthography calls for no remarks. 

The inscription is one of the Eastern CMlukya Vijay&ditya [HI* Gunaka], the son of 
Viahnuvardhana [V.] who was the son of Vijay&ditya [II. Narendramrigarfija], here also 
called CMluky-Arjuna. It records that, apparently as a reward for advice which was given 
ia the matter of the defeat of an enemy named Mangi, the king, on the occasion of a lunar 
eclipse, granted the village of Trends [pa?Jru in the Gudravara-vishaya to the Brahman 
V mayadigarmati, a son of Dam6dara5arman and son’s son of Turkasarman who was an inhabitant 
of Urputruru. The Ajnapti of the gTant was P&ndaranga (whose name occurs again below, 
p. 130, text 1. 46, where a grandson of his is mentioned), and the writer Katta[y]a. 

The inscription is not dated. Of the localities, none of which have been identified, the 
Gudrav&ra vishaya is also mentioned below, 1 p. 137, text 1. 22, and in South-bid. Jnscr . VoL I. 
p. 48, 1. 25. Below, p. 141, 1. 22, the name of the district is spelt Gudrdvdra ; and an earlier 
form of the name is Gudrahdra, in Ind.Ant. Vol. XIII. p. 138, 1. 17, and Vol. V II. p. 191, 1. 12, 
and a later one Guddavadi, ibid. Vol. XIV. p. 53, 1. 77, and Vol. XIX. p. 431, 1. t 9.* The name 
of the village of Urputuru 3 occurs ibid. Vol, XX. p. 416, 11. 25 and 35. 

On the rather scanty pieces of historical information furnished by the inscription compare 
Dc. Fleet, ibid. Vol. XX. pp. 100-103, and Dr. Hultzseh, above, Vol. IV. p. 226. 


TEXT. 4 

First Plate. 

6 Svasti [| # ] SrimatAm sakala-bhuvana-samst&yam&ua-M&iiavyasagotx&n&m 

H&ritipu- A . 

tr&n&m Kau4iki-varaprasada-labdha-rajy&nam H&trigana-paripaHt4n&rh fevami- 
Mah^na-p&d&Dudhy&tanam bhagavan.N&r&yana-prasada.samaskdi- 

ta-vara-varahalanchhan^k8hapa-k8hana-va^krit-arfitimandaIanim=aSTamedh-& y a b h r 1 - 

[thajsnana-pavitrikrita-vapuahaih Chalukyta&m kulam=alamkansbn6b 

samastabhuva- 


Knee writing the above, 1 have been able to examine impression., kindly by Dr Haltxsch of the 

inscription (or inscriptions) on the M«dm Mtuenm plate, desenbed .n Mr. 9e ** 1 |* TnUed 

- a* Nn 19A T find line. 1-33 of these plates contain a complete inscription of a Chdja chief} named 

ax' . . . . ? the village of Mandara to the god Siva (under the name of Pr£t!$*ar» ?); 

at r *; " "??? TxS ^ be c^ in tL inscription B. here edited, the letter, J and i throughout 

and that in this inscription, exactly as wU>e c»«n ^ w , nd ; the later cursive sigu. are used.- A, 

are denoted by the ordinary open y ti assistant I may mentioo that the inscription referred to— it is 

Mr. Sewell b„ not been well served by ^'vZot^eh who are said to belong to the family of the Chdla 

ss 

. -J oa .o or * pair of (districts called) Gudravira’ is mentioned. 

‘ Above, Vol. IV. p. 49, verse 18, a 0ndravdra^va t aor p. v 

* (On Guddavldi see above, Vol IV. P- 88. “’*** 'J ^ R Ut . 16° 67*" W. 

* Perhaps thia is * Vnpputuru,’ Indian Atlat, map 76, long. 

« Prom Sir W. Elliot’s impressions, .npplied to me by Vr. <* 

1 Thia word was perhaps preceded in the original by a R 2 



124 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. Y. 


Second Plate ; First Side . 

6 nasraya-sn-V ijay&ditya-maharajasya sakala-di^am[ga]na-lalatik4yain&iia 

7 yaSomandalasya 1 Gamgakula-kai&nalasya kalikala-mada-bhanjanasya Chaluky-A- 

8 rjjuiia-iiamaciheyasya | 2 Utkhata-satataravfoi-vidarii-arinagadhipasya ha- 

9 rinadhipa-vikramasya [|*] sokakulArivanita-najanambti-sekaili kopanalah 

prasamam=e- 

10 ti vina ua yasya |(||) [1*] Tasya priya-tanayah garwalftkasraya-Sri- 
Vish^uvarddliana 3 -inaha- 

Second Plate ; Second Side . 

-11 rajah. || 4 Ya3minn=arudha-daBtiny=ari-kttlam=adhisaiiirdhati kshmabhrid-agrain 
yad-bahav=atta- 

12 khadge ripuyavati-kara grihnate chamarani [|*] abaddhay&m bhrukuty&m 

madhu ripa- 

13 bhayane yasya badhnanti bhriihg& yad-dliamany=ajibhen-dhvaiiaiiam=aini 

sivaassatru- 

14 dhamni dhvananti || [2*] Tasya priya*tanayab | Kanter=induh 5 * * 

kshamayah kshitir=amara- tarns- tyaga-sakteh 

15 pratapasy=arkkas=sauryya8ya simhd jaladhir=api mah&sa[t*]tvataya yath^ayam f|*] 

sthanam 

Third Plate ; First Side . 

16 8yad-eyam=anyan=na hi bhayati mam=6t=iva bMtan=nita[nta]m nityam 

sarvv-atmana yam prabhajati vimu- 

17 khe yatra n=&nya~pratishtham |(||) [3 # ]« Sa samastabhnvanyraya- 

gri-Vijayaditya-maharajah? Gudravara- 

18 vishaye sarvvan=eva rashtrakht^pramukhan kntruhbina ittham=Ajnapayati [| # ] 

Vidita- 

19 m=astn v6=sm4bhih Urpputuru-v&gtavyasya Kansika-g6trasya Apastamba- 

20 sutrasya Ve£ni(nni)[>a?]ma . . sya 8 Turkka^armma^ah pautr&ya shatkarmma- 


Tkird Plate ; Second Side . 

21 nirataya Taittiriya-grihasdha(sth&)ya v6da.y6damga-yidab Dam&da- 

22 rasarmmanah putr&ya | Yash=shaMan=d6habh&ja[m=avaj]i[ta]-jagat&[m= 

abh]yajaishjd=arin4jh 

23 varggam yam pr&pya Pamk6ruhabhuvam=api cha vyasmara[d= brahma]-* 

lakshmih [|*] g^shtbi-josham gu- 


1 Originally mnndalasya was engraved, bat the d of tnd has beea »tnick out. 

* Metre : Yas&ntatilakk. 

* Originally, over the • of earddhana, part of the vowel ♦ was engraved. 

* Metre of verse* 2*4 : Sragdhark 1 This sign of viiarya was originally omitted. 

« The general sense of the verse is, that beauty and the rest eagerly pay homage to the king, aware that even 
the moon etc, would not be so suitable a home for them; but the verse, in my opinion, does not admit of 0 
proper construction. 

* Here, and in other places below, the rules of tamdhi have not been observed. 

* The ahthara which precedes the syllable $ya is quite illegible. 

* The two akthartu in these brackets are illegible, but have, I think, been correctly supplied • compare 

brakmairi-lhdMzara-dyniih , 1 resplendent with holiness/ in 8o*th-lnd . Inter. Vo!. L p. 45, L 26, ' ^ 


B. — Masulipatam (?) Plates of Vijayaditya III. 


f'H' 


- T ~" 




-ob - 

- 5Vi '&• 10 u 

1 r 7 a - ^9 ■ 

f t w 


ft?- ^ fT> V 

(K" ^ t- \ 

^ SS 

•9T) 5 j * 

s: fee <zt i < 


ii 7™* 


5 




9 


i= 


.;v> 

"4 


o ^ £i ,' 

. «t !G - ^ < 

■ i»5." 

| ?' 7 £T- '! 

s> '■ ?, 

hj s .'l >S5 

> r-r § 

? £ 1 *. 

Ops. &. fc. (ji 

Ha (s ]t ,. — 

“ to 

# r J 

k 

>9 . W ' 


— . -*>1 

>v?=> 

>0 



•> W 

-i 

•■T> 


^0 


.~f 


£ CL- iff-.. S’ (S' •• 

£ gfc 5V% f f 

d cT= toU. >c )h :i 


• S- Q3 2D ►£,' 

:cgr 5'tf 9® 
C? S.' y %- ,5-cS r 

$■■ | .Si- §^& 

■'*.. % O'j, Or? 2- 

d5 % o- ^ «?; 

■ l=c® ^ k F 

$ v' \ *9 _ ^ '~ j jrn 

< ir% •ft.:'" ..-ST J? 

\ ill l) *f; V"' t (9 oo 

: |f>:' $ 

■ #•' $L.* u Jg^ ITT 

: §. & n «= II 

vi^y a p°&- 

-H 9 11 £ »j i 
idr' s 

#<?-■'■ ■?' 



c- .. 

It/’ 


I; ^5. C' ^ 


0 Cf b‘ 


O i 

*•* j? 



W 


FLEET. SCALE-87 W. GRIGGS, PHOTO— LITH. 




No. 16.] 


SIX EASTERN CHALUKrA GRANTS. 


125 


24 nanam=abhajata nikaro yatra cba kv=apy=alabdbam na[r]mm-alape=pi vani n& 

bbavati vitatba satya- 

25 sandbasya yasya |(||) [4*] Hatva 1 Mamgim vijita-sakai-&rati-bhup4Ia- 

varggam rag-6drekad=dhasita-nripa- 


Fourth Plate ; First Side 

26 ti-tya[ga]-s[aa]ryya-pratapam [|*] nana-hety-abata-baya-bbat-6nmatta-basti- 

prakirnne^rnne) yuddhe yasya 

2? dvi[ja]-gana-varasy=adbbut 2 -adesa-fcushtab 3 |t||) [5*] Tasmai VinayadisarmmanS 
dhandragrahana-nimitte sarvva-kara- 

28 paribankrifcya Tranda[pa?]ru-nama-gra[ioo dajttab [|*] Tasy=avadbayab purvvatd 

daksbina- 

29 tas-cba Amgaluru pascbimatab Ve[l]puru uttaratab Chavi[ta?]paru [||*] Asy= 

bpari kenachit badba 

30 na karttavyai [|*] yab karbfci sa panchabhi^ mab&patakair=yynktd bbavati [||*] 

Vyasen=apy=uktam [|*] 4 * Sva-dattam 

Fourth Plate ; Second Side . 

31 para-dattam va y6 bareta vasundharam [|*] Bbaabti-varsba-Babasr&ni 

vishta(shtba)y&h jayate krimib |(||) [6*] Babu- 

32 bhir=wasudba datta babubbis=cb=anupalita [| # ] yasya yasya yad& [bbiijmia^ 

tasya tasya tad a pbalam [|| 7*] 

33 6 Sarvvan.=etan=bbavinab parttbivendran bbiiyo bbuyd y&cbat6 R&mabbadrab [| # ] 

sa- 

34 many 5 =yan=dbarmma-setur=nnripan&ih kale ka!6 palaniy6 bbavadbbih || [8 # ] 

*Ajnaptir=asva dharmma- 

36 8 ya vikram'akranta-satravah [|*] dvitiya iva Blbhatsuh Pandaramgah 
pratapavan |(||) [9*] 7 Sivam=a- 

Fifth Plate . 

36 stu sarwa-jagatam parabita-uirata bbavantu bbtita-gan&[b |*] [d]6sb&b 

pray&ntu na£am 

37 tishthatn. suchiram jagati dharmmah || [10*] Patrah* iri-Mftdha[ra*>ya 

Bpufsphu)tam=i- 

38 dam=alikhach=chhasanam Katta[y]-akhyah» Mmin sachchhila-yuktA 

39 nfipavara-Vijay&ditya-raj-ajnay[4 tu | praptalj paraj^m ka[l&]nam kritishu 

cba ku6a!6=tya- 

40 ntam=l^na-pautr6 nana-sastr-arttha-[s4]U parahita-niratd hSmak&r4graganyah || [H*] 

abstract of contents. 

The asylum of the whole world, the Mahdrdja Vijay&ditya (1. 6), who adorned the 
family of the CMlukyas (1. 5) who are of the Manavya gotra and are H4ritiputras (1. 1) , 
was a fire of destruction to the Gangs family, and, as he broke the frenzy of the Kali age, 
was named Ch&luky-Arjuna (1. 7). 


1 Metre : Mnnd&kranta. , , . 

> Over the ak.hara dbh » the vowel i ha* been engrsved, bat it seems to have been st rack : out egain. 

• The subject of the sentence apparently is PijayddUyah, Which mast be sappl.ed from the context. 

• Metre of verses 6 and 7 : Sldka (Anushtabh). _ “ e ‘ re ! ^ ,n j; 

• Metre : Slfika (Anushtabh). * Metre : Aryl. e re 1 • 4 

. The letter in brucke ts may possibly be m. « The ok, bora, in these bracket, .re donbtfnU 



126 


EPIGRAPHIA 1NDICA. 


[Vol. Y. 


(Y. 1.) Valorous like a lion, he with his unsheathed sharp sword split open (the frontal 
globes 1 * of) the lordly elephants — his adversaries ; the fire of his wrath is not extinguished 
unless it is sprinkled with the tears of the sorrow-stricken wives of his enemies. 

His dear son was the asylum of all mankind, the Mahdrdja Viahnuvardliaxia (1. 10). 

(Y. 2.) When he ascends his elephant, his enemies ascend the mountain-tops ; when his arm 
takes the sword, the hands of the youDg women of his adversaries take up the chowries ; when he 
knits his brows, the black bees 3 make honey in the palace of his adversary ; when the war- dram 
is sounded in his abode, the jackals howl in the abode of hiB opponent. 

His dear son — who 3 excels the moon in beauty, the earth in endurance, the tree of 
paradise in generosity, the sun in splendour, the lion in bravery, and the eeii in greatness of 
disposition — the asylum of the whole world, the Maharaja Vijayfiditya (1. 17), thus issues 
a command to all the cultivators, headed by the Rdshfrakutas, in the Gudrav&ra-vishaya 

“Be it known to you ! On the occasion of an eclipse of the moon (1. 27), the village of 
3*ra$d&[pa 0* 28) has been given by Us, with exemption from all taxes, to the Taittirfya 
householder Vinayadisarman (1. 27), a son of Damodarasarman and son’s son of the inhabitant 
of Urpnturu (1. 19), the . . . . 4 5 Tftrkasarman, who belongs to the Kau^ika gotra and 

Apastamba eutra. 

(Y. 4.) He has conquered the host of the six enemies 6 of mankind who have subdued all 
the world ; when she came to him, the Glory of holiness forgot even the lotus-born Brabman j 6 in 
his society the assemblage of virtues find pleasure, 7 * such as they have nowhere experienced ; 
true to his word, he in jest even does not give utterance to false speech. 

(Y. 5.) When on the field of battle, strewn with horses, soldiers and infuriated elephants 
that were struck down by various weapons, ( the king 9 ) bad slain Maiigi, who had defeated the 
whole host of hostile chiefs and in the excess of his fury had ridiculed the king’s liberality, 
bravery and power, he was well pleased with the marvellous advice of this best one of the twice- 
born.” 

The boundaries are (1. 28 ) : On the east and south, Angalhru ; on the west, Velpuru ; and 
on the north, Chavi[ta?]parn* 

The rest of the inscription warns the people not to obstruct this grant ; quotes three 
benedictive and imprecatory verses, ascribed to Yyasa ; (in verse 9) gives the name of th.eAjilapti 
of the grant, P&pdarahga, who for his prowess and valour in war is compared to Btbhatsu, t.e. 
Arjuna ; (in v. 10) contains a prayer for the welfare of the people and the progress of religion ; 
and (in v. 11) records that this edict (tasana), by order of the king Vijay&ditya, was written 
by the foremost of goldsmiths, Katta[y]a, the son of Madhava and son’s son of IdAna* 


1 There is bo donbt that this wu present to the mind of the author of the verse ; compare, e.g. t Vdtavadatid t 
p. 102, hari-kharonakhora-vidtritaknmbhatthala-vikala Tirana. According to Dr. Fleet in Jnd. An*. Voh AX. 
p. 101, the »ord ndgddhipa would seem ** to h&ye a double meaning, and to indicate also a defeat of some hostile 
chief of the Ndgat.** 

* The presence of the black bees in the palace of the enemy as well as the howling of the jackals portend evil* 
Compare fiarshacharita, Bombay ed., pp. 180 and 181, vavdiiri Sivdndm rdjny<*b • • « • bnbhrdmn 
bhrdmaram patalam. 

8 I only give the general sense of verse 3, which I cannot construe. The king waa mahdsattun on account 
of his noble disposition ; the sea is so, because it contains a number of big creatures. 

* Here one word, apparently a name, is partly illegible in the original. 

5 Compare South ‘Ind. Inter. Vol. 1. p. 35, note 3. 

‘The original bar Pankiruhab/ti-, compare, t.g., Ambhdjalhica and Jalajalkava in Jnd. A»t. Vol. XIL 
p. 92, L 40, and p. 93, L 48. 

* According to the dictiouarie*, the word jitht, in classical Sanskrit, would seem to be used only a. an adrerb, 
in the form jitkam ; but it occurs a. a substantive, in the sense of tukha, e.g. in Bar.kackarita Bombay ed., 

p, 169, L 8. 

* This hss necessarily to be supplied ; the king, of course, ia Vijayidity* hi mse lf. 


No. 16.] 


SIX EASTERN CHALUKYA GRANTS. 


127 


C.— BEZVlpA PLATES OP CHALUKYA-BHIMA I. 

[A.D. 888-918.] 

These plates were found 1 on the 25th June 1S97 in the rock-hewn chamber of the quarry- 
compound at Bezv&da, in the Kistna district of the Madras Presidency, and were sent to Dr. 
Hultzsch by Mr. J. K. Batten, I.C.S., the Acting Collector of the Kistna district. I edit the 
inscription which they contain from an excellent impression, supplied to me by Dr. Hultzsch. 

These are five copper-plates, each of which measures about V broad by 3* high. Plates 
2-5 are inscribed on both sides, but the writing on the second side of the fifth plate is less than 
half a line. The first plate is inscribed on the second tide only, and on the first side contairs. 
from the proper right to the left, representations of a conch-sheil, the sun, and a club. — With 
perhaps the exception of the first plate, the plates are quasi-palimpsests. On the plates 2-4 
the writing which had first been engraved on them is well beaten in, so that only few traces 
of it remain ; but on both sides of the fifth plate the original writing is still so clearly seen that 
much of it may be made out without any difficulty. The characters of this original writing 
closely resemble those which were afterwards engraved on the plates ; and this, together with 
the fact that the words at the bottom of the second side of the fifth plate are sa sctrvvalokaJrciya - 
in~Yishnuvarddhana-ma[hdrdy in my opinion, leaves no doubt that these plates originally 
were used for another grant of Bbima I., which either was not completed or for some reason or 
other was cancelled. — The plates have high rims, and are strung on a ring, whicKhad not been 
cut yet when this record came into Dr. Hultzsch s hands. The ring is about 4^ in diameter 
and t’ thick, and has its ends secured in the back of a circular seal, about 2J" in diameter 
The seal bears, in relief, the legend 4rt>Tribhuvan[d?'] nhuiah, with a flower below it, and, 
above it, a conchant boar which faces to the proper left and is surmounted by the sun and t e 
moon’s crescent, while behind it is an elephant-goad. The writing is well pieserved throughout. 
The characters belong to the southern class of alphabets, of the time and part of the country to 
which the inscription belongs. As regards individual letters, hh, j, b and l are denoted through 
out by the later, cursive signs ; but for the initial * (in Indra, 1. 8) we have ere stn t 
earlier form, consisting of two horizontal dots with a wavy line above them. Of special signs for 
final consonants the inscription only contains one, for » (in dattavdn 1. 21, but not m pratapavan. 

1. 46) ; and of letters which occur more rarely, the initial f, ai and 6 (in Udnatah and f™ya- 
gunfha, 1. 32, and om, 1. 1 ). The size of the letters is about f.".- The anguage is Sanskrit 
except that some Telugu words occur in the proper names. In addition to five benedict, ve and 
imprecatory verses, the text contains one verse referring to the donor and another which gives 
the name of the Ajnapti; the rest is in prose, but in lines 15 and 17 reads as if the official who 
drew up the grant had had verses before him. The text is full of minor mistakes In respect 

of orthography, it will suffice to note the doubling, beforo y, o t in a y ’ y , . > 

Vijayddittya, 1. 13, of « in tdnny^va, 1. 37, and of I in nirmmallya, 1. 44; the ^ 0Q ^' D 5^‘^^ 

k it yaiatskardni, 1. 44 ; the doubling of m after anusvdra in tSsham mmayd, l 40 ; the 

of t and d for the corresponding aspirates in saprdrtlito (for sampr&rtUto ), L f’jff*T**?* 

1. 42, dha^drtta-, 1. 44, and sdduh, 1. 45 ; and the use of the palatal for the dental sibilant m 

tahaJrani , 1. 36. 

Th. inscription is ... .t «b. B ““* W 

called Cb&luk7B.Btilina 3 ). of -he .. .the inscribe, hs. y.t been ton.* 

„ . . 1 tiiA tim Pi of his coronation (vatfabandha ) king 

stated (in verse), in a general ^ that at t J ordg that the Mahdrdjddhbrdja Vishntt- 

Bhima gave away a village in perpetuity, it formally to a 8tndent 


T&rdhana granted the village of Kukiparra in 


. , , e . , TM-nffaitig to contain a jrrant of Vishanvardlmim HI., 

i The pUtee were found together with a .et of plates profaM»n* to conta » 

which t consider to be epnnoiw. * Dr Fleet in 2nd. An*. Vol. XX. p. 10*. 

gee line 81 of th® text of the preaent inscription. *** v * 



128 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. y. 


of the kramapotha named Potamayya, who (or whose grandfather) was an inhabitant 1 of 
Ummarakanthibol. The A jnapti of the grant was Kad.eyai.aja (a grandson of the Pandarahga 
of the preceding inscription); and the writer Kondacharya. 2 

The inscription is not dated. The localities mentioned in it have not been identified. 3 

It may be noticed that, up to the present, this is the earliest record which gives the full 
historical genealogy, with the lengths of the reigns,* and that this gx^ant for Bhima J. gives 
the second name Vishnuvardhana. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 


8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 


15 

16 


TEXT.® 

First Plate; Second Side. 

Om namo Nna(na)rayanaya [ii*l Svasti [|*] Srimatam sakala-bhuvana- 
samstuyamana- 

Manavyasagotranam Haritiputranam Kansiki-varaprnsada-labdha-iajyanam Ma- 
trigana-paripalitanam SvamiOfahasena-padanndhyatanam bhagavan-Na- 

r a y a ii a - prasada-samasadita-vara-varahalamnchhan- c ekshana- 
kshana-vasikrit-aratimnndalanarii' asvamedh-avabhrithasnana-pavitnkri- 

ta-vapusham Chalukyanam knlam^alaihkarisbnoh Sattyasraya-valla- 

bhendrasya bhrata Kubja-Vishnuvarddhano*shtadasa varshani 8 [|*] tat-pntro Ja* 


Second Plate; First Side. 

ya8imgha(ha)-vallabhas=trayastiiihsard* varshani 9 [|*j tad'annja- 1 * 

Indra-bhattarakasya 

priya-tanayo Vishnuvarddhana(no) nava samvatsarani [|*J tat-pntro 
Mariigi-yu- 

varaja[h*] pamchavim^ it-samvatsarAni 11 [|*] tat-putro Jayasimgha(has)«tra- 
yodasa samvatsarah' 2 [ i *] ta[d^].dvaimatnr-anu(nu)jah Kokkili(lih) shan(ij)=ma- 
sah ,s [!*] tasya j[y*]eabtho bhrata Vishnuva[r*]ddhana sv-anujamadam= 14 
nchchatya sapta- 

trimsat-sam[a]h 15 [|*j tat-tarmjo Yijayadittya-bhattarakah 16 asbtadaSa 

sam[a # ]h [j*] 

tad-auraso Vishnurajah shattrimsad-abdani 1 ? [|*] tat-suto Vijay^dityah 
chatvarimsa- 

Stcond Plate ; Second Side. 

18 t-sam[a*jh 19 ashtottarasat:i-siimai ma)n-Narendresvara-karakalj [|*] tad-atmajah Ka- 
li-"Vi8hnuvarddhanaa»sarddlia-satuah 50 [|*] tan-nandan6 Vijayadityas»chatu- 


1 Literally, c a master of the Vedas and VedAngas’ (!, 26). 

1 This name occurs again as the name of u writer ibid. Vol. XIII p. 250, I. 37. 

J Regarding the name of the vishnya, see above, p. 119. 

4 See Dr. Fleet in Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 2G6. 1 From impressions supplied bv Dr. Hultzseh. 

6 °ldnchh'in~ ; the sign of anusrdra may have been struck out already in the origmai. 

* Originally z mamnda° seems to have been engraved ; read c ldndm~. 

8 Here, and with similar accusative rases below, *e have to supply a verb meaning * he reigned * 

* Read 'iatam varthdni. u -anuj .£*dra-. n Re „ d ' vi *{ afith sarh ' 

11 Read °tsaram. Read sdn. i. Reld , t . dnv j am ^ 

11 Read 3 iatam samdh. 

16 Here, and in other places below, the rules of samdhi have not been observed. 


U Read °(atam=abddn 


18 Head tam sa°. 


11 From here up to * Jcdrakah the text apparently is half an Auushtubh 
** Head -tamdm. 



Bezvada Plates of Bhima I. 



it a. 



18 


20 


iib. 


c- 

i/rp 




16 


16 §(^«ar< £yjc3#pr^g juc^> : oxne: «g, 

k#*f 1 •«£&?*' «g ' 

fj’ 'Jo r -J A C3 ^gpc-3'-^ ; 18 

^ 571 d?% 0 f&§fr^{j&) o^5 rT<n/.%) ^ g ! j 

qjXXJczVtidv&<fi<&&\ f~ 


P J 

r^P r I 

Pi v- ' 


20 


;// a. 


22 


24 


26 



dWf^y3O«*0^ 22 
^ 

' Cj ^ V ^r'i SP 1 


0 $ : & c rf £ , '^ €:1 ' 

“ (dj<xY§f g.c°PP §jd[ & dp ^ '■ 


cr; 


•g ^ s£ £>ar, < 3 \ §§& cPWjcJ? ? c f $?* i '7a ^ ^ j 

c # §f -i Sur^oeo?) p <ppPjdr°g/ ^ 


24 


26 


C. HULTZSCH. 


SCALE *6. 


W. GRIGGS, PHOTO-UTH. 




No. 16.] 


SIX EASTERN" CHALUKYA GRANTS. 


129 


17 

IS 

19 

20 


21 


scbatvarimsad-varshani 1 f|*"i 
tya-bbupateh pntro 

dibbut-akliil-as-avani-Tvoma 
n-anandanah [I*] vi: , 6=sau 


2 Tad-bbriitnr=yyavarajasra Vikramadi - 

Bhimah [I 5 *] 3 Snman=kirttU4fikhhka-rasmi-visa- 

m!-K asuma yudbona gmiiua vid v 

nija^pattabandha-samaye saniu’ah*avaa* ii)=>asvata 'm 4 


gra- 

mam sri-jayadbama-Bhima-Dripatis=sapi*artrit6 5 darta^an j(:i‘ [1~] Sa sarvvalo- 


22 


24 

25 

26 


27 

23 

20 

30 

31 


32 

33 

34 

35 

36 


37 

38 


T'tit d Plate: First S h. 

kasraya-sii-Vishnuv a r d d h a n a - m a L A” a. j a d h i v a j *■> - p a v a m l I v a r a - p a r a m a - 
bbartarakah paramnbrahaaanya Uttarakanderrvadi-' vishaya-n ivasinO 

rash t r a k u t a - p r a m a k b a a = k u t u m b i n a s = 5 a r v v an - a m a b u y = t* - 
ttham=ajfu\pnyati | Viditam=astu Yah [E] Ko^kau mdinya-gutrah Urnma- 

rakanthib61-veda-vedaniga*pui*agab Revamay\ a' tat-pmro 


Third Plate ; Second Side. 


Dvdnabhattah tat-putrah 9 Pjtamavya-kramayita 9 -namiie Kukipa- 

rru-namfi-grArna[h*] sarvva-k:i ,, a-pariluu , am--iidaka-piu , vYa:ii kritv-asmabliir* j =datta- 
m=iti 10 [|*] Asy = a vadb ay a h purvvatah Potaryamgari-ckeruvu Agnt*- 

yatah Paruvula-guntba(nta) daksba K k&bi)iiutah Chaki-cliernvu 

Nairityat.ib - 1 &i- 

m=aiva ” simafma) paseba^cbi)matah Chintareni-cheruvu Vay avyatab Juvvi- 

guntba(nta) 

F-.Hiih Plate ; F'nt Side. 


uttaratah li ai)A\natnb Airiviya-gun 

nacbid=badbam karoti yah sa painchaoUiv-: 
gitas-sldk[a*]h H*] ' Babiibbii^vvas’idhA 

ta [j*] ) asy a yasya yadA bhurnib 

Sbasbtbim(slitiml 

varsba-sabasra(sra;ni | u svargge niudati 


tka(nta) [I!* 4 ] Asy^opan i: ke- 
inii3abapcitakair=lb.lb:pyate J! 5 *] Vya«a- 
da 1 1 ah (t t a ) ba bubb ia = c b - An i; pal i • 
ta-va tasya tad a phalara h [2*] 

bb urn id all | AkahlptA ob=a- 


ra(nn)manta eba 

paramahipati- 
vamsaja va I! 14 


Fovrth Plate ; Second Sule. 

tauny=eva narake vasif r # ] !||(l| i [-3*] -’.Uad-vnmiuja 

papad=apota-mauaso ’ohavi bhavi-UiupiT li *1 | y£ 


1 Bead °satam varthdni. „ . t..,/ v rt i 

* From here up to the word BJitmah the text is part iu Auusaruoa ve ’ *■ P 

XIII. p. 249, 1. 13. 

3 Metre : Sarddlavikridita. 

* H ere a full stop was engraved, but has been struct ® nt sec above, p. 120, I. 14. 

* Read aamprdrtthito. . . b lUv'tn'i ui, out wh.it looks like the sigu of the vowel 

I At first sight the reading might he taken to lie n<-i u • 

d, is really the remaindei of an akshara ki, which Ufts been beaten in. .eu Majya . . 

8 Read tat-putrdua . T , , , v » vtti d -*>[i j io, f or 

* I take hramayita to be a mistake for Jemma s , V, used <>s /“ ^ a^id 1. 29, Command 

kramaka or kramavid ; compare South-lnd. Insc/. ol. . p. » 

kramavid. 

10 Read datta tti. # ;i iw ; app 3 reutly left out before **. 

U Bead Na irrityatah. After this word the proper na.no of ^ ^ ^ ^ (Aausb tubh). 

13 Read yah kaichid=bddhdm kardti $a. XIctre of ve e 

14 These signs of punctuation are superfluous. 

11 Metre : YasantatilaU — Original!} map vain- was eng aveu. 


6 



130 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [Yoi, V, 


39 pal ay anti mama dbarminani= imam (mam) sammastarh | l 

40 tesham jmna(ma) va viracbifco^mjalir-eslia murdhni |) [4*j Sama-* 

41 ny6=yan=dharmma-setur=nripanam kal6 kale palani- 

Fifth Plate ; Fir*t Side . 

42 y6 bhavadbhih [|*] sarwan=etan=bh4vinah partti(rtfchi)y-endran=bhuy6 bbuyt> 

43 yacbate Ramabhadrah Q| 5*] 3 Yan=tha dattani pura narendreb* danani dhfc- 

44 rmm-artta(rttba)-yasasskarani [j*J nirmmallya-varggu- & prat l imani tani kv> 

45 nama sadub(dhub) punar=adaditah 6 [|| G*j ? A jnapfcir=asya dbarmmasya j* 

Kadeya- 

46 rajah pratapavan | pitamah6=bhavaimyasya» Pandar[a # ]mgab paranfcapab [|| 7*] 


Fifth Plate ; Second Side . 
47 Kond[a*]charyya-likbifcam [||*] 


ABSTRACT OP CONTENTS* 

Om. Adoration to Narayana ! Kubja-Vishnuvardhana (1. 7)— the brother of Saty&sraya- 
vallabhendra, who adorned the family of the CMlukyas (1. 6) who are of the M&navya gotra 
and are Haritiputras (1. 2) ( reigned ) for eighteen years ; his son Jayasimha-vallabha (1. 8) for 
thirty-three years jVishnuvardhana (1. 9), the dear son of his younger brother Indra-bhattaraka, 
for nine years ; his son Mangi-yuvar&ja (1. 9) for twenty-five years ; his son Jay&siihha 
(1. 10) for thirteen years; Kokkili (1. 11), his younger brother from a different mother, for sis 
months ; his eldest brother Vishrmvardhana (1. 12), having expelled the younger brother, 
for thirty-seven years ; his son Vijayaditya-bhattaraka (1. 13) for eighteen years ; his son 
Vishnuraj a (1. 1 1) for thirty-sis years ; his son Vijayaditya (1. 14), who built a hundred and 
eight temples of (Siva) Narendresvara, for forty™ years; his son Kali-Visbnuvardbana (1. 16) 
for one year and a half ; (and) his son Vijayaditya (1. 16) for forty-four years. Bhima (1. 18) 
is the son of his brother, the Yuvardja Vikramaditya. 

(V. 1.) That glorious hero, by whose fame all quarters, the earth and the sky are whitened 
as by the moon’s rays, and who gladdens the learned with the excellent god of love, 11 that 
glorious home of viotory, king Bhima, at the time of his coronation, well pleased, has 
given a village in perpetuity, requested to do so. 

He, the asylum of all mankind, Vishrmvardhana (1. 22), the Mahdrdjddhirdja , ParamSivam 
and Paramalhatfdraka, who is most devoted to religion, having called together all the 
cultivators, headed by the RdshfraUfas, who inhabit the Uttarakanderuvadi-vishaya, thus 
issues a command to them (1. 25): — 

“Be it known to you! The village of Kukiparru (1. 27) has been given by ns, with 
exemption from all taxes, to the student of the kramapdfha Potamayya, the son of Dr&nabbatta 
who is the son of Revamayya, a member of the Kaundinya gotra, and a Vedic scholar 
('inhabiting) TJmmarakanthibol (1. 25).” 


1 Bead tamattam, without the sign of punctuation 

* " £ ‘ re i nar Hrair--. . Bwd . vdnta .. 

. ™ f . .. . , Metre : (Anushtnhh). — Bead Ajnartir*. 

\ V Wt r nC “ ,t,p£r ® 0 T Wowing PAd. contains one syllable too many. 

* Bead *bhavad=ya*ya. 10 See Dr. Fleet in Ind. Ant . Vol. XX* n 100 * 

I do not see the exact force of this itatement Tn . „ , 

, purity the god of love sec Zed. ** Vol. XU, p . ^ 





No. 16.] 


SIX EASTERN CHALTJKYA GRANTS. 


131 


The boundaries are (1. 29): On the east, the Potaryangari-cheruvu (tank) ; on the south- 
east, the Paruvula-gnnta (tank); on the south, the Chaki-cheruvu (tank) ; on the south-west 
the boundary-line of (P) 1 * ; on the west, the Chintareni-cheruvu (tank) ; on the north-west! 
the Juwi-gunta (tank) ; and on the north and north-east, the Airiviya-gunta (tank). 

The rest of the inscription warns the people not to obstruct this grant; quotes five 
benedict ire and imprecatory verses, ascribed to Vyasa; (in verse 7) gives the name of the 
Ajnapti of the grant, Kadeyaraja, whose grandfather was Pandarahga ; and records the name 
of the writer, Kondacharya. 


D. — MASUIiIPATAM PLATES OP AMMA I. 

[A.D. 918-925.] 

These plates were found, some twenty years ago, in the vernacular record room of the 
Collector’s office at Masulipatam, in the Kistna district of the Madras Presidency, and they are 
preserved now in the Madras Museum. The inscription which they contain has been already 
published, by Mr. R. Sewell, in the Indian Antiquary > Vol. VIII. p. 77 £f. ; s I re-edit it from an 
excellent impression, taken and supplied to me by Dr. Fleet. 

These are three copper-plates, the first and last of which are inscribed on one side only, 
and each of which measures about 8J" broad by 4§" high. The plates have raised rims, and are 
strung on a ring which had been cut before this record came into Dr. Fleet’s hands iu the year 
1884. The ring is about 5f 7 in diameter and ¥' thick ; it is joined to a circular seal which 
is about 31* in diameter. The seal bears, in relief on a slightly countersunk surface, the 
legend tri-Tribhuvan^d^mhuta ; below the legend, a floral device ; immediately above the legend, 
a boar, standing and facing to the proper right ; and above the boar, an elephant-goad 
surmounted by the moon’s crescent. With the exception of a small part of the first plate 
the writing of which is somewhat corroded, the plates are well preserved. — The writing and 
engraving are good. The characters belong to the southern class of alphabets, of the time and 
part of the country to which the inscription belongs. For hh, j> b and l we have throughout 
the later, cursive signs. The initial i does not occur in the text. Of the three final consonants 
which occur, n and m are denoted by special signs (in mdsdn, 11. 9 and 13, trimsatam, 11. 
10 and 11, apd chatvdrimsatam, 11. 12 and 14), while for t the ordinary sign for ta is used, 
with the sign of trirdma above it (in Kumar avat , 1. 27, and anlne(na)$at, 1. 29). The size of 
the letters is about T y\ — The language is Sanskrit. Besides two benedict ive and imprecatory 
verses, the text contains eight verses treating of the donor and the donee and their ancestors ; 
the rest is in prose. In respect of orthography, it may be noted that the rules of samdhi have 
been frequently neglected, and that there is a fairly large number of other minor mistakes, 
omissions of letters, etc. A special point which may be drawn attention to -is, that after 
an anusvara a, consonant is doubled^ in Marhggi, 1. 8, \einggi and Trikalirhgga , 1, 17, 
pamchchavim£atim,h 8, kimehoha, 1. 30, and in vatsarandm nnija -, 1. 16, but not in other places 
where the same rule might have been followed. 

The inscription is one of the Eastern Chalukya Ammar&ja [I.] Vishnuvardhana. It 
records that the king granted the village ofDrujjuru in the Pennatavadi-vishaya to Mahakula, 
a general, and son of a foster-sister, of (Ammaraja s grandfather) Chalukya-Bhima (or 
Bhima I.). The Ajhapti of the grant was (the ?) 4 * Katakanvja. 

1 See above, p. 129, note 11. 3 Compare also Dr. Fleet io Ind . Ant Vol. XX. p. 266, K. 

* The same Vale is ’observed once (in regard to m) in the precedmg inscription C. We also find it occa- 

m on ally observed e.g . ia the inscriptions published in South-Ind. Inscr. Vol. 1. p. 39 ff., and Ind. Ant 
Vol, XIII. p. 213 ff. See also above, p. 107. 

4 See above, Vol. IV. p, 309, note 1. 

8 2 



132 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vo-,. V. 


The inscription is not dated. Of the localities, the Pennatavadi vishaya is mentioned al-o 
^ n< ^‘ ^ ol. \ II. p. 16 , 1 , 39. The village of Drujjuru has bj Mr. Sewell been identified- 

with the village of Zuzzfiru in the Nandigama talnka of the Kistna district, the • Joodjoor ’ 
the Indian Atlas, map 75, long. SO" 28' E„ lat. ltP 44' N. Mr. Sewell may be right, but, except- 
ing Gooteemookola which may be Gottipiolu. I do not find, the name 3 of the villages which 
in tae inscription are said to form the boundaries of Drujjuru, anywhere near the 1 Joed] tor 
of the map. 2 


i -mix x . 


First Plate. 

1 Sivam=astu sarvva-ja[ga*]tah [||*] Svasti £|*j Srimatam sakala-bhnrana- 
sa[m]stuyam£ina-Ma- 

- navyasagotranam Harit[iputranarii Kaajsikhi(ki)-varaprasada-labdha-rajySnariv ram ■ 
Ma- 

3 tFigana-paripalitanam SvamkXIahasSna-padanudhyatanam bhao-avan-Nf.ra- 

4 yana-prasada-samasadita-vara-varaha 1 a th e h h a n - 6 k s h a [ $ a ] - k s h a n a° v a 4 i k r • 

5 t-arat!mapdalaram= asvamedh-avabhritha s n a n a - p a v i t r i k r i t a - v a p n s li a n 

6 Chaiukyanam knlam=alamkarishn6h Satyasraya-vallabhasya bhrata Kub;a- 

Vishnuvarddhano* J 

7 shtadasa varshani* ! tat-pu*r& Jayasimha-vallabho bha>trayastririisad-var*kAJ' • 

tad- oh rata- * J 

8 1 Indrarajasya sutah 5 Vishnurajo nava ( tat-putro Mamggi-yuvar&jah 7 

pamchcliavims'itiiii- [j*] 

9 tat-pntr6 Jayasimhah trayodasa | ta[d*]-dvaimatur-anniah Kokkilih. 

shan^masan [j] J * 


Second Plate ; First Side. 


tam=nchchatya Vishnuvarddhanas»saptatrimi' 


atam 3 


10 tasya jyeshthd bhrata 
tat-putro Vijaya- 

.1 ditya bhatt§,rakah ashtadasa I tat-suto Visbnuvarddhanah shattrimsatam 
tat-sUDar=aMit6tta- 

12 ra 10 -Xarendre^var-ajatananam 

Kali- 

7 * 4 . masan | tat-putro Vi jay&di try a-maharaj as =ch a- 

1 C ,! a ' ar !? Sa am } , 13 Tad-anuja-ytivarajad=:Vikramaditya-namnah 

lo prabh n r=abhavad=ara ti-vrata-tul-anal-anghah li [|*J nirnpama-nripa-Bhi- 


kartta | !I Vijayadityas=cjaatvarimsatam | tad-atniajah 


1 See Ind. Ant . Vol. VIM n am i „ o ,,, # 

a According fo Mr s?* i| P * Ml 4 " l “ ewe * 3 Ll$t * °f Antiquities, Vol. I. p. 46. 

of it, ■* on the east side* of foreslcovered hUU wh.ch wf’uTh"' 1 x <W *“ t) ° f ; 8nd .T* 

of Maikapurain ” lc ^ wo ° ^ tbus have been included in tbe grant, is the village 

I From Dr. Fleet’s impressions. 

« Here, ami with similar accusative cases below wa ^ » , . 

‘ Head c iatam virshdni. * b e to S "VP ] J » verb meaning * be reigned/ 

* Here, and in other places below, the rules nf v 

7 Head Xarngi-. • Head ^ ** ° bserve<3 ’ 

14 Hire the word (at a has been omitLl , * Here one w0,lId ex P l ' l ' t tmrtMv- 

Soi'th-Ind. Inter. Vol. I. p. 39, 1.13. * com - pare ti,a teat o£ the preceding inecription, line 15, and 

II This sign of punctuation should be struck out. 

,a Here, again, one would expect tarshdni. ,, - 

*• Originally %11aughahv.es engraved bur the • f •. v Metre : Mai, i.i. 

j . tngravta, but the » of m has been .truck out again. 



D. — Masuiipatam Plates of Amma I 



J - F. FLEET. 


SCALE-73 


W. GRIGGS. PHOTO-LITH 










Xo. 16.] 


SIX EASTERN CHALUKYA GRANTS. 


133 


16 mas-trimsataxn vataarauam nni(mj 3 Vguna-gaua-kirtti-Yyapta-dikckakra[vajlah [|| 1*] 

Tat-sunu- 

17 [rj=Vvijayadityah shaum^masun-Vemggi-mandalam 1 Trikalimgg-atavi-Yuktam 

paripalya [di*j- 

16 ram yayo(yau) I Ajavata : sutas=tasya bliubk jiji , -6dvaliana-k.shaiaa[h | *] 

Ammara- 


Secoii l Plate ; Second Side. 

19 ja-mahipalah palit-asesha-bhutahli [!| 2*] Yasya padam.buja-cliclia(chchha)yam=a- 
-0 sritam nVja-rnandalarii [!*] dandit-arati kodandam manditam mandala-traye 
II [3*] Kund-endu-cllia- 

c dl valam yasya | 3 ya&o /anijita-bliutalam | gayanti galit-arate || 3 v- 

V vidyadba[r]yvd= 

22 pi Yinaya || j~4*] Sa sarwalukasraya-si i-Visbnuvarddhana-mabarajah Pe[nn]ata- 

23 vadi-vishaya^niYasiuo iashtrakuta-pramukhan=kutim(tuih)binas=sarYvan=ahfu]- 

24 y=ettham=a[jiia"!pavati |j Viditam=astui Yah L | ] Chalukya-Bhima-bhupala-dha- 

25 ttri dliatr=i(i)va ch-apara [|*j ksharaaya kshatriyapiaya Xagipdtir=iti 

sruta 1| [5*] A- 

26 sit=tasy[a]s=suta Gamakdmba uam=Aiiibika-sama I raatu stanyain samikritya 

Bhi- 

27 ma-rajena ya papati II [6*] S=ajijanat=kamaram [cha*] sakti-yukta[ra] 

Kumaravat 1 Bhi[ma]-raja- 


Tliird Plate . 


28 sya senFa*]nyam | 4 Mahakalam=maha-matim il [7*] Yas=ch=anekasuh Anyony- 

[a*]stra*samayo- 

29 ga-samjat-[a*lgnau maliahave [|*J svatnin6=grasar6 dhiro ripu-sainyam= 

anine(na)sat || [S*] 

30 Kimckeka 5 | rupoua ^laua&ijab. kftpona A amah sahry\t?iui Dliauamj’iyah. 

sahasai[h*] 

•31 Sudrakah || Tasraai Dnijjuru-nama-gramo=smabhi^^ rV va-kura-parih:i. 

32 rena manyikritya dattah [i*] Asy=avadhayah purvvatah e Talugummi^i- 

33 in=aiva sima'l 7 * (lakbluna(ua)tah Gottipr^iu-sim=aiva siina I 7 paA-lmua^h 

Malkapora mu-si (Si)m-aiva j 4 

34 sima ntmratah Adupu-sim--aiva 4ima [II^J Asy=6pavi badli[aj na karttavya 

Tatba cha Vsa-.'n^bktam I Bithabhir=vva%ii- ^ 

35 dha datta baliubkis--cli -Anapdliti [I*] yasya yasya yada bhumis=tasya tasya 

tada phalain | (!i) i sva-dat.tam=para-dattam 

36 va i6 liarotut.ta')' 5 vasundharam [I*] shasbtiih varsha-=ahasr;iui(i.i) 

vibbti(shtha)y;iixi jiyato krimih [II 10*] Ajuapti[h*] Katakanijuh [II] 


, rr- • • , , 7 - 7 /■■ 2 Metre of verses 2*10 "Moka 'Anush rub M 

1 Reau yemai' and Tr^kafimfj’, ‘ 

* n * c l *.* .nnaHn.iiM 4 This $:grn ot punctuation !■* suiei till ous. 

* These signs of punctuation are supei minus. - r 1 

6 Read Kirncha, and omit the follo'iine sign of punctuation. 

« Mr. Sewell read this and the two nest names Tunv/um.ni-, CtotUbrolu-, ami A tlkul 


t These signs of punctuation are supei thin, is. . 

Perhaps ih's coriection has been made a. ready in the original. 



134 


EPIGRAPHIA IN DIC A. 


[You V. 


ABSTRACT OP CONTENTS. 

Commencing with the words * May the whole world be blessed !, ,] lines 1-14 give the 
genealogy, with the lengths of the reigns, as far as the Maharaja Vijayaditya, the son of 
Rali-Vishnuvardhana, in substantially the same manner 1 2 as the preceding inscription C. 

(Y. 1.) From his (i.e. Yijayaditya’s) younger brother, the Yuvardja Vikram&ditya, 
sprang that mighty fire-brand to the cotton — the host of his adversaries, the incomparable king 
Bhima, who filled the horizon with the fame of his many excellent qualities for thirty years. 

His son Vijay&ditya (1. 17) went to heaven when he had ruled the Vengi-mandAla, 
joined with the Trikalinga forest, for six months. 

(Ys. 2-4.) To him was born a sou, able to bear the burden of the earth, king 
Ammaraja, who rules the whole surface of the earth. The kings in a body have resorted to the 
shade of his lotus-feet; the bow with which he chastises his enemies is glorified in the three 
worlds. 3 Evon the Yidyadharis sing to the lute his fame which, white like the jasmine and the 
moon, has reddened 4 the surface of the earth, the fame of him whose enemies have perished. 

He, the asylum of all mankind, the Maharaja Vishnuvardhana (1. 22), having called 
together all the cultivators, headed by the Bdshfrakutas, who inhabit the Pennatavadi-visliaya, 
thus issues a command to them : — 

‘‘Be it known to you ! 

(Ys. 5-8.) King Ch&lukya-Bhima had a foster-mother, named Nagipoti ; she was (to him) 
like a second earth, like a warrior endowed with endurance. She had a daughter, named 
G&makamba, like unto Ambika, 6 who drank her mother's milk, sharing it with king Bhima- 
She brought forth a son, endowed with strength 5 like Kumara, the high-spirited Mahakala, 
(w ho became) a general of king Bhima. In battle where fire is produced by the clashing 
together of the opponents’ arms, going before his master, this brave one more than once has 
annihilated the enemy’s army. 

To him the village of Drujjuru (1. 31) has been given by Us, with exemption from all taxes/’ 

The boundaries are (1. 32) : On the east, the boundary-line of T&lugummi ; on 
the south, the boundary-line of Cxottiprolu ; on the west, the boundary-line of Malkapdramu ; 
and on the north, the boundary-line of Adupu. 

The rest of the inscription warns the people not to obstruct this grant ; quotes two 
benedictive and imprecatory verses, ascribed to Yyasa ; and records that (the P) Katakaraja 
was the Ajhapti (of this grant). 

E.— MASUHIPATAM (?) PLATES OF CHALUKYA-BHtMA H. 

[A.D. 934-945.] 

These plates belonged to Sir Walter Elliot, and are now in the British Museum. From a 
rather illegible label on the original, they seem to have been obtained through Mr. J. C. Norris 
from Masulipatam. I edit the inscription which they contain from Sir W. Elliot’s own 
impressions, supplied to me by Dr. Fleet J 

1 Instead of this, the other known grant of Amma I., published in South- 2nd. Inter. Yol. I. p. 39 ft., lias au 
Auushtubh verse, conveying the same meaning. 

2 Verbal differences are: The family name here, in line 6, is ChaluJcya (not Chdlukyd) ; in the same line we 
nave Satydiraya-vallabha (instead of -vallabhendra) ; in line 8, Indtardja (iustead of Indra-bhatfdraka ) ; in 
the same line, Fish nw rdja (instead of Vishnuvardhana) ; in line II, Vishnuvardhana (instead of Vishnurdja) ; 
and lti line 13, Vijaydditya-mahardja (instead of only Vijayaditya ). 

J M and ala-tray a (the bhumandal a, gagana-mT, and dyu-m°.) is equivalent to tti-ldka . 

4 Or * has gladdened the inhabitants of the earth.* 5 j e , goddess TArvati. 

6 KumAra, the god of war, also is iakti-yulctay i.e . ‘furnished with a gpear \iakti-dkara ). 

1 Compare Dr. Fleet in lnd. Ant . Vol. XX. p. 270, Ji. 



No. 16.] 


SIX EASTERN CHALUKTA GRANTS. 


135 


These are three copper-plates, the fiist and last of which are inscribed on one side only, 
and each of which measure* about 7'i" broad bv 3f high. They have high rims, and are strung 
on a ring, about in diameter and ^ thick, which had been cut already when, the original 
came under Dr. Fleets notice. To the ring is attached a circular seal which is about 2f in 
diameter. It bears, in relief on a countersunk surface, across the centre, the legend srU 
Tribhnvandmkusi ; above the legend, the san and moon, two sceptres for perhaps lamp, 
stands, or chowries), au elephant-goad, and a hoar, standing and facing to the proper left : 
and below the legend, a conch-shell and a floral device. The engraving is good ; the letters 
throughout shew marks of the working of the tool. — The writing for the greater part is well 
preserved ; but sides i, iia and iii, towards the ends of the lines, have been subjected to the action 
of fire or some corrosive fluid, and in a few places the first and third plates are corroded 
right through. The characters belong to the southern class of alphabets, of the time and 
part of the country to which the inscription belongs. The consonants throughout have the 
later, cursive forms, and the later form is used also in the case uf the initial i (in it t ham . 
1. 22). The sign of the medial au is very similar to one of the signs of the medial J, so that 
it is difficult to distinguish between the two signs. Special signs are used for the final n 
(m mdsdii, 11.9 and 15), and m (in °trimsatam i 1. 7, °vimsati>ii } 1. S, etc.), but not for the 
final t (in °pdlayat , 11. 7 and 17), which is denoted by the ordinary sign for ta , w,th the sirn of 
virdma above it. The size of the letters is about The language is Sanskrit, except that 

one or two Telugu words occur in the description of the boundaries, in lines 32 and 33. In line 
28 wo have the unusual word punch i-vdri, the meaning of which apparently is similar to that 
of the more common paucha-kula. Besides two benedictive and imprecatory verses, tlio text 
contains nine verses treating of the donor and the donee; the rest is in prose The grant has 
been written out somewhat carelessly, and in lines S and 9 contains two grossly incorrect state- 
ments. In respect of orthography, too, the text shews a fairly large number of mistakes, owing 
to the disregard of the rules of samdhi, the omission of single letteis and whole syllables, etc. 

The inscription is one of the Eastern Chalukya Chalukya-Bhima [II.] Vishnu- 
vardhana, but the first of these two names does not actually occur in the text, which 
describes the king only as ’ the son of Melamba and Vijayaditya.* It records that the king, 
on the occasion of the sun’s progress to the north, granted a field at the village cf 
Akulamannandu in the Gudravara-vishaya to a student of the kramapdtha named 
\ iddamayya, a son of the Soina-sacrihocr Mudhava, who was a son of Tyukkiya, a student o J 
the kramapdtha, and inhabitant of Vangiparru. No Ajuapti is mentioned. 

The inscription is not dated. Of the localities, the Gndravara vishaya has been spoken of 
above, p. 123. The village of Vangiparru is mentioned also in Incl, Ant. Vol. XX. p. 416, 1. 
26 ff. ; perhaps it is ‘ Vahgipurarii, Indian Atlas, map 76, long 80° 27' E„ lat. 16’ 8' X. Akula- 
mannandu, as Dr. Fleet points out to me, is the * Aukulmanaud ’ of map Do, long. 81° 10’ E., 
lat. 16° 15' N. 

The donee of this grant, Viddamayya ,, 1 is the donee also of the Paganavaram grant of 
Chalukya-Bhima II., published ibid. Vol. XIII. p. 213 ff., in which (in line 49) the name of 
his father’s father is given as Turkama (not Tyakkiya). 

TEXT . 3 • 

First Plate. 

1 Svasti [|*] Srimatam sakala-bhuvana-samstayamana-Manavyasagotranam H&ri- 

2 tiputrSn&m Kansi[k]i-varaprasada-labdha-rajyanam Matri[ga*]na-paripalitanam 

Sv[a]- 

1 Viddamayya occurs n. the name of the father’s father of the dome of tho Yelirarru grant of Amma 11 , 
published ibid. Vol. XII. p. 91 ff. ; but that Viddamayya belonged to the Kasyapa (not the Gautama) ySira. 

From Sir Vf. Elliot’s impressions, supplied to me by Dr. Fleet. 



136 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


3 mi'Maliasena-padarmdhytitanam ^bavagavan-Narayana-prasada-samafsaJdita-yara- 

4 varaha(ha)lamcba(chba)n-eksbaua-ksbana-vasikrit-ankimandaJanam 1 2 -asva[m] edh-ava* 

5 bhritbasnana-pavitrita-vapusbam 3 Chalukyanaih kulam=alamkarisbnos=Sa- 

6 tyasraya-vallabbendrasya bbrata Kubja-Vishnuvarddhano»shtadasa yarsb[a]ni 

Ve mg[i] -mandalam=a[nvapa]- 

7 layat |) tad-atmajo Jayasimhas=trayastrimsatam ]| tad-ana j-Endra[raj a] -nandano 

Vishnu[varddha*]nd 

8 nava || tat-sunn[r # ]=Mmamgi^yuvarajah paucbavimsatim || tat-putro 

Ja [y asim]lias ■ t ray as tri [m ] - 

Second Plate ; First Side. 

9 satam 4 [| tat-sutab 5 Kokkili[h*] sban^masan |j tasya jyesbthd bbrata 

Vishnu[va]r[ddlia]nas=tam=:ucbcba- 

10 tya sap tatrim satam 6 || tat-putro Vijayaditya-bhatt[a]rakah 7 ashtadasa 1| tat- 

putro Vi- 

11 shnuvarddhanashava(sba)ttrimsatam || tat-sfi(su)tah Vijayaditya- 

Narendre(ndra)mriga[ra]jas=sasbtacba- 8 

12 tvarimsatam l(||) tat-putrab KaU-Vishnuvarddbano=ddhyarddha-varsba[m] || 

ta[t-s]utab G-una- 

13 ka-Vijayaditya-mabarajas=cbatuscbatyai , imsata[m] || tad-anuja-yu- 

14 yaraja-Vikramaditya-bhubhrid-atmajas=Chalukya-Bhimas«trimsatara || ta[t-pu]trd 

Vijay&di- 

15 tya[h*] shan=masan || tasy=[a*]gra-s&aur=A(a)rama[ra*]jas=sapta yarsba[n]i |) 

tat-suta-Vijayadityam krita-ka[ntb]i- 

16 ka-pattabandh-abhishekam j| 9 balam-uebcbatya Tah-adhipd masam^ekam || 

CMlukya-Bhima-tanayd 

Second Plate ; Second Side. 

17 Vikram&ditya-raja ek[a*]dasa m[a*]san=bhuvam=ap[a*]layat || 10 Mela[m*]M- 

Vi j ay aditya-nandano 

18 nandita-prajah. [|*] ba[d # ]dbva k ram- % at am pattarh rakshaty=a- cbandram= 

urwaram |(||) [1 # ] Utkbat-6ddbatta(ta)ripuna pratiro- 

19 pita-bandhuna | kund-endu-dbavalam yena nitan=da8a di§6 yaSab [|| 2 # ] Lil4 

rajn[d*]m virajant[e # ] yasmin=n=A- 

20 tanyatra 11 rajasu [|*] padmakara-gatan=tejab kim=asti kumud-akar[e*] || [3 # ] 

Sa sarvralokasra- 

1 Read bhagavan 3 Instead of the akshara rd, led was originally engraved. 

1 The cognate inscriptions have pavitrilcfita instead of pavitrita . 

4 This is a mistake for trayddaia. 

* This ii a mistake for tad^dvairndturAnujah or tad-avarajah. 

* After this one would have expected the word varthSni. 

7 Here, and in other places below, the rules of tarhdki have not been observed. 

8 The same reading (°rdjas=sd° in which the sa, prefixed to ashtd° is quite out of place) we have in Ind. Ant . 

Vol. XIII. p. 249, 1. 11, and it was perhaps intended in Sovth-Ind . Inter. Vol. I. p. 47, L 12. Instead of it, we 
have °rajat~ch^d° (the cha of which is superfluous) in Ind. Ant. Vol. VII. p. 16, 1. 12; VoL XIL p. 92, L 14 ; 
Vol. XIV. p. 62, 1. 41 ; above, Vol, IV. p. 306, 1. 40 ; aod below, p. 140, I. 10. Both the sa and the cha are 
omitted in Ind. Ant. Vol. XIII. p. 213, 1. 15 (in one of the earliest inscriptions which give 48 years as the dotation 

of the king's reign) ; Vol. XIX. p. 429, 1. 37 ; and Vol. XIV. p. 56, 1. 13. 

* This sign of punctuation is superfluous. 

18 Metre of verses 1-11 : Sldka (Anuah^ubh). 


11 Bead n^dnyatra. 


E. — Masulipatam (?) Plates of Chalukya-Bhima II. 


w.c3)cvhi&:j& % 

— ~ ~°--- ^ c ‘ ? 


I# cJMjS? <>Ao ^ 

' ey 


4 





W(Z] A'd 

.o' 

pcnc- •;>•? 


4 


c? $T ci^:®p «gg|JW» § <5 ’ «§ Jjrsjgj &»$■ ; 


fci ' ^ *» 


18 


24 


na. 



J - P. PLEET 


SCALE 87 


W. GRIGGS, PHOTO-LITM . 


FROM SIR WALTER ELLIOTS INK-IWPRE9SI0NS. 




No. 16 .] 


SIX EASTERN CHALUKYA GRANTS. 


137 


21 ya-iri-Vishnuva[r , ]ddhana-maliaraj[a*]dhiraja-pararaesvarah paramabrahmanyb 

22 pitri-p[& # ]d [a*]nudhy [a*] tab Gudrav§ra-vishaya-nivaain6 r&shtrak(lta-pramukhan= 

kutn[m*]binah ittha- _ 

23 m=ajn[a*]payati || Vamgiparru-ma^agrama-vastavyo G[au]tam-&nvayah [| ] 

Tyakkiya-kramak6 namna Tu- 

24 rashad-vibhav6=jaDi || [4*] Tasya tanftjb Madhava-e6mayaji Janarddanfi [| # ] 

bhaktim&ne 1 jagad-ana- __ , 

25 ndi vibhavair=udit-oditaih [II 5 # ] Sri-Viddamayya-kramakd vipranam=utsav-6dayah [| J 

tanayd brahmava- 

Third "Plate . 


26 [r]chcbasvi tasy=&py=a[ta]nu-p[au]rusbah II [ 6 *] Yad-griha[th?]iti-puja 3 . . . . 

kshalan-ambhasi | 

27 a j Irani ka[r]ddamibhutam punaty^-saptamam kulam || [7*] Yat-putra-p6(pau)tr[a] 

vatav6 vara-g6- . A . 

28 sbtbii]shn 3 vagminah [I*] pameha-vari[m*] samapayya | sampujyanbj 

mahajanaih 1 ( 11 ) [ 8 *] Ya[s]ya 5 . . m=anu S htha- 

29 na[tn] punanam klinavo nayah [I**] abbyaso hi mr-ayaso vedaaa[m] 

pranavasya [cba] || [ 9 *] Ta[smai] Aku- ,, r , „ r 

30 lamannandu-caina-gramii*paschiiaa-disih(4i) Damodara-krama[k-o r] [pan . J 

. , , [ksh]etram 6 A . 

31 tat-pautra ev=aya[m]=iti sa[r]vva-kara-parihar6n=6daka-purwam kntv= 

32 emtbhSaulm^vidito^astn vah II Asy=avadbayah purvvatab pedda-k&du || 

33 duT^paSltS 6 ^ZraihkatavTfi-sima || uttaratas=sa eva^ || Asy= 6 pari ua 

34 bubH[r>vvasu d d h ba ' ( 'lihabhis=cb=anupalita [I*] yasya yasya yada 

35 dattlT^-daS ^^^(ta) vasnndbarani [I*] shashti-varsha- 

sahasrani visbta(sbtha)yam j[&*]yat£ kpimib II [H ] 


abstract op contents. 

, n r,\ the brother of Satyfisraya-vallabhendra, who adorned the 

Kubja-Visbnuvardhana (1J toavya g6tra and are Hftritiputxaa (1. 1)- 
family of the Chfiluky J»S (h 5) h his son j aya8irnha (1. 7) for thirty-three 

ruled over of L younger brother Indra-rfija, for nine (years) ; 

<7*“»> • Vl.htmv.rdh.Bt. (I. n J * bi> m , vlMbb . 8) for thirty* 

hi, “ ». month. ; b.vi»g etpollrf bio, hi, olde,. brother 

illegible in the impression, remaps me 

'prakshdlan'dmbhatd. v 1 I n 45 1 28 

* Compare South-Ind. Inter- c >. • ^ , &ve ^ , trnck ont ,l re ,dy in the original. 

♦ Thia ugn of punctuation i P* J ^ i§ obliterat *d, the plate being corroded throngh. 

s Here one akshara “ q “‘‘ 2tbout 8even 0 t,*ar« are illegible. 

6 Between krama and fethe fl ^. g ^ave * thirteen. 

; m • hi. w «- * ' - ■"* • “■ 



138 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


for eighteen (years) ; his son Vishnuvardhana (1. 11) for thirty-six (years) ; his son 
Vijayaditya Narendramrigaraja (1. 11) for forty-eight 1 (years) ; his son Kali- Vishnuvar- 
dhana {l. 12) tor one year and a half ; his son, the Maharaja Gunaka- Vijayaditya i\. 13), for 
forty -four (years) ; Chalukya-Bhima (1, 14), the son of his younger brother, the Yuvaraja 
Vikraxnaditya, for thirty (years) ; his son Vijayaditya (I. 14) for six months ; his eldest son 
Amma-raja (1. 15) for seven years ; having expelled his son Vijayaditya, who had been 
inaugurated with the necklet and by the tying on of the tiara, 2 (and who was still) a child, 
Tah-adhipa (1. 1G) (ruled) for one month; (and) Vikramaditya-raja (L 17), the son of 
Chalukya-Bhima, ruled the earth for eleven months. 3 

(Vs. 1-3.) 4 (Voir) the son of Melamba and Vijayaditya protects the earth, having tied 
on the hereditary tiara. He has uprooted the haughty adversaries and reinstated his 
relatives. 


Ho, the asylum of all mankind, Vishnuvardhana (L 21), the Mahdmjddhirdju and 
Pa/a»K$u<xra> who is most devoted to religion, having called together the cultivators, headed 
bj the Ldbhtrakutas, who inhabit the Gudravara-vishaya, thus issues a command to them 
(1. 23) 

“ Be it known to you (1. 32) ! 


(Vs. 4-9.) There was an inhabitant of the great village of Vahgiparru, Tyakkiya, a 
student of the kram.ip.Uha, of the Gautama lineage.* His son was Madhava, r. Soma-.saerificer, 
devoted to Jatiardana ( \ ishpu). His son, again, is Viddamayya, a student of the kramapdtha, 
emment w religious learning and full of manliness ; whose hospitality purifies the family to the 
seventh generation ; 6 whose? sons and grandsons, youths eloquent at committee-assemblies, are 
honoured by the chief people who have made them serve on the committee of five ; who en<ra-es 

m holy performances, follows Mann’s guidance, and is not weary of repeating the Vedas and the 
syllable om . 

To him (1. 29), on the occasion of the sun’s progress to the northerns been given by Us, 
with exemption from all taxes, the field in the western quarter of the village of 


1 Compare I>r. Fleet in Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 100. 

7 Tliis seems to me to indicate that Vna\idUva had Wt, *. ^ 

tonne.- by the necklet and the latter by the trine- on of the t nT « / T * W * a and 88 kin S- tlle 

donbt that the kanlhitcd and the pattabaldha arc two senarate insi i V j- f “" y ?‘ C ’ there ran b<J D ° 

r r • r r ir? bee - zr-*- z k » 

note 27. In Bane's KtiLbari, *^8^ P 21 edTI* n ^ ^ V ° l XX * 103 ’ 

inauguration as Yvtardjrt, that tie waa abhitkeka-darianSriham^anat'' 8< " °> i*" Uiimediately aftrrhis 

eakshahsthalah, ‘his breast was embraced by the pearl neekl ice ' > a P “O t-mand*len=eca haren=Mihgiia 
Rishis come there to view the inauguration -ceremony.’ 0 , ’ " hicb w * 9 ilk0 the of the seven 

tile shape of the ushnUha) is enumerated among the insignia which are be t ’ U ItZ-’ ^ pat - tahandha ( in 
Compare also l. 18 of the text of this inscription.- Six of^e • T 8t In " u ^ rati0 “ «* *»*»• 

was es pel led while he was still a boy. 6 * n8cn P‘«>«« «.te merely that Vijayiditya 

* On the omission of the reign of Yuddhamalla, «bp fir TTv,u 

; XZXZZS “ - * - ir- — ~ '• ' - 

with the word cara-gSshihishu. Vdr a here and in pahcka^drl nr v^uj a ***** 8 ° f 0nr ,n *Cription <*cure, also 
word occurs, by itself and in vdra-pramutcha, in an apparent] v * en ° t ^ a the member of a committee ; the 

Vol. I. p, 173 ff. The meaning of pnhcha-vdri perhaps is similar tothlTrt* l* ^ Siy ** 6 “ i inneription, Ep. Ind. 
pare with it also the word pdhchali in line 16 of the Nepal * . °. tfie more common pa ncha-k *Ia ; com* 

to the late Dr. Bhngvanlal Indraji {ibid, p, \ f 7\ f nofe 26) * Cn ^ l0n m ^ r ol. IX. p, 173. According 

administered ia Nepal by committees called gut^t (^6shth(), em ^ ** aD< * eD( * 0wm cnU, at the present day, are 



No. 16.] 


SIX EASTERN CHALUKYA GRANTS. 


139 


Akolamannandu, which 1 Damodara, a student of the kramapatha 

because he is his grandson.” 

The boundaries are (I. 32) : On the east, a large rivulet ; 2 on the south, a rivulet ; on the 
west, the boundary-line of Krankatawa ; and on the north, the same. 

The rest of the inscription warns the people not to obstruct this grant, and quotes two 
benedictive and imprecatory verses. 


F.— MAStTLIPAT AM PLATES OF AMMA II. 

[A.D. 945-970.] 

These plates also were found, some twenty years ago, in the vernacular record room of the 
Collector’s office at Masulipatam, and are no v in the Madras Museum. The inscription 
which they contain has been already published, by Mr. R. Sewell, in the Indian Antiquary , 
Yol. VIII. p. 74 ff . ; 3 I re-edit it from two excellent impressions, taken and supplied to me by 
Dr. Fleet. 

These are three copper-plates, the first and last of which are inscribed on one side only, 
and each of which measures about broad by 3^" high. They have high, very sharp rims, 
and are strung on a ring, about 4j" in diameter and §" thick, which had been cut already 
before this record came under Dr. Fleet’s notice in the year 1884. To the ring is attached a 
circular seal, about 2§" in diameter. It bears, in relief on a countersunk surface, across the 
centre, the legend 6rl-Tri\_bh]uuandmkusa ; above the legend, a boar, standing and facing to 
the proper right, and surmounted by the sun; in front of the boar, a conch-shell with the 
moon above it ; and behind the boar, an elephant-goad; and below the legend, a floral device. — 
The writing is good, and generally in an excellent state of preservation ; but a small piece of the 
first plate is broken off at the lower proper right corner, causing the loss of two aksharas , which 
can be easily supplied. The characters belong to the southern class of alphabets, of the time 
and part of the country to which the inscription belongs. With regard to individual letters, 4 
it is sufficient to state that a special sign is used only for the final n (in mdsd n, 11. 8, 13 and 
15, °ddhatdn y 1. 16, and dattavdn, 1. 25). The size of the letters is between T */ and The 
language is Sanskrit, except that several Telugn words are used in the description of the 
boundaries, in lines 26-30. Besides one benedictory verse, four verses occur in the genealogical 
part of the text; the rest is in prose. The orthography does not call for any special 
remarks. 

The inscription is one of the Eastern Chalukya Ammaraja pi.] Vijayaditya, also called 
R&ja-mahSndra. It records 6 that the king granted some fields at the village of Pambarru in 


1 The illegible words perhaps stated that the field formerly belonged to Pamodara, of whom Viddamayya 
(although called his pautra) probably was a daughter’s son. . 

i According to Campbell’s Teloogoo Dictionary the Telugu word Tcodu means a nvulet, the branch of a 
river ; ’ in Kanarese, the same word means ‘ the peak or top of n bill.’ 

1 Compare also Dr. Fleet in Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 2< 1, Q- 

4 I am doubtful about the form of the initial i which occnrs towards the end of line 2 o. It has not come out 

clearly m that the 8entence in lines 22-25, which records the actual grant, although preceded by 

the usual Utham=djudpayati, is not wo.ded like an order, but merely states the fact that the king made the grant, 
and that the donor is spoken of in the third person, as Ammaraja, instead of being denoted in the ordinary 
wav bv some form of the pronoun of the first person (aham dattavdn, or asmabh,r=dattam). Moreover the first 
two words (atha ta S „6h, ' now to the son of that Pammava’) of the sentence suggest the idea that it was taken 
from some other record in which the donee’s mother had already been spoken of, and that the grant was made in 
consequence of something or other, done by her or her son. 0 


140 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yot. Y. 


the Gudr&vara-vishaya to the Ytivardja BaIl[a]lad 0 va-Vel&bhata , 1 also called Boddiya, the 
son of (the lady) Pammav£ (of) the Pattavardhini (family). 2 No Ajftapti is mentioned. 

The inscription is not dated. Of the localities, the Gudravara vishaya has been spoken 
of above, p. 121 ; the villages which are mentioned I am unable to identify. 3 

TEXT. 4 

First Plate . 

1 ^ Svnsfi Srimatam sakala-bhnvana-samstuyamana-Mdnavy asagotrAndfm] 

Haritiputr[a]- 

2 n&m Tvansiki-varaprasada-labdha-rajya[nam] Matrigana-parlpalitanam Svami- 

Mah/Uena-pa- 

3 danudhyafanam bhagavan-Naravana-prasada-saTnasadita-vara-var4ha(ha)l&hchhan- 

ek^hana-fkshal- 

4 na-vssikrif-avatimandalana T n~aivamedh-avabhrita^tha)snana-pavitn k r ita-vapnshfi,m 

Ch&luky[a]- 

5 rLftm knlam -alamkari^hnfth Satyasraya-vallabh^ndrasva bhrat& Kubja- 

Vishnuvar ddhano * sh tad asa [ varsh ani ] 

6 VSmgi-desam^ioaHvat ! tad- atm a j6 Jayasimhas-travastrim^atam | tad-anuj- 

Endraraia-nandan[o] Vi- 

7 shnuvarddhano nava } tat-sunnr=Mmarhgi-ynvardja[h] pamchavirhsatim f 

tat-putrd Jayasim[has*tra]y6- 

8 dasa ! tad-avarajah Kokkilih [sha] n=masAn f tasya jyeshth6 bhr&ta 

Vishnuvarddhanas*tam=uchchatya 8aptatrim[satarh |*] 5 

Second Plate ; First Side . 

9 tat-putr6 VijaySditya**bhattarako*shtadasa | tat-sutd Vishnuvarddhanash* 

shattrirhSatam | tat-sutd 

10 Vijay&ditya-Narendramrigaraja9*ch=a8htachatvAnrhsatarii | tat-satah Kali- 

Vishnuvar ddhano^* dhya- 

11 rddha-varsham | 6 7 tat*pntro Gunag&mka-Vijaya[di]tyaS*chatuscbatv&rimsatam | 

tad-bhratu- 

12 r=Vvikramaditya-bhdpates=sunns=Chdlukya-[Bhi]ma-bhupala^-trirhsatam | tat-sutah 

13 Kollabiganda-Yijayadityash*3han=masan | tat-sunur^Ammara[ja*]s«8apta varshani I 

7Tat-su- 

14 tarn Vijayadityam balam=uchchatya lilay& [|*] T&l-adhipatir*4kramya m&sam = 

&kam=apa- 

15 d=hhuvam. |(||) [1*] Tarh jitva Ch&Lukya-Bhixna-tanay6 Vikram&ditya ek&daSa 

masan | tatas^Tal-ftdhipa- 


1 In the original the first name is written Ballaladeva, probably by mistake; the name VUdbha\a also occurs 

in Ind. Ant Vol. XIII. p. 250, 1. 36. 

3 The Pattavardhini-vamsa is mentioned in South-Ltd . Inter. Vol. I. p. 40, 1. 45. 

* Mr. Sewell, in Lid. Ant. Vol. VIII. p. 76. states that the modem name of Pdmbarru is PAmarru j that 
VUpur is a village close to Pdmarru, Krishna eastern delta; and that Qa^thaidla also is a village in the Krisbnfc 
eastern delta. I find ‘ Guntasalah ' in the Indian Atlas , map 95. long. 3T E., lat. 16° 12 N. ; about 11 miles north 
(not south ) of it, * Paumur; * and about 4 miles west ( not north) of Paumur, * Vailpoor.* 

* From Dr. Fleet’s impressions. 

5 The corner of the plate, with the aksharas in these brackets, is broken away. 

8 Between ta and tpu another a kshara appears to have been originally engraved. 

7 Metre : Sldka (Anuslitubh). 




F. — Masulipatam Plates of Amma II. 



km* .T7 /■ ■$£ • ^v3r ^ r 
toS?* ,•> tjS _i', - /* 

§T.r<^ v .vVr '/£ 

£ Kj. (Yrr Jj - >’g fe5J££L } {P • 

(Cp i hr r . Qs ° J-- o j^r/- >.■? 

(K rC ^ 

'Ti k: •© >6 ‘ 

i r r~* s~ r 



r 'tsi. >■?> 

" 0-1 Kj^G+izC 

3d »9 h" 

^5 ►?>. rnr - 


I 1 £ P 

§ S9S 

g ,o v -bi rCb^P) \y £ \ ^St; 

*y»: & 



•S. A3 ’ 

i£3 c*j ^ r(« 

: ... W ,M3 Trf 

F© 0) S k> Hr 3»| 

v.sr?£ •^•c.'^-'Siil 

ct'.Rj Sc fxfiro ' J 


CM 





No. 16.] 


SIX EASTERN CHALUKYA GRANTS. 


141 


16 8unu[r # ]=Yyuddhamalla[h*] sapta varshani | ^irjjity^Arjuna-sannibhd janapadat= 
tan=nirggamayy=6ddhatan daya- 


Second Plate ; Second Side, 

17 dan=inabhanu-lina-bhagan-akaran=vidhay=etara[n |*] Yajr=iv=6[r*]jjita-nakam=Amma- 

njipater=bhrata kaBlyau=bhu- 

18 vam Bhimo bbima-parakramas=samabhanak=samvatsarad(n)=dvadasa |(||) [2*] 

Tasya 1 2 Mahesvara-mu(mft)rtt£r=Uma-s&mari-akriteb 

19 Kumar-abhah [|*] Lokamahadevyah khalu yas=samabhavad= Ammar&j-akhyah |(||) 

[3*] 3 Kavi-gayaka-kalpataru[r*]=ddvija-muiii- 

20 din-andba-bandbnjana-Surabbih [|*] yachakajana-cbintamanir=avan3sa-manir-mmah* 

dgra-raabasa dyumanih [|| 4*] 

21 Sa samastabbuvan[a*]sraya-^ri-Vijayaditya-mabar[a]j6 4 rajadbiraja-param[e*]svaj^b 

paramabha- 

22 tt[a*]rakah 5 Gudr§viira- 6 visbaya-mvasin6 ra8htrakuta-pramukhAn=ku(kii)tumbmas= 

sarvv[A # ]n=ittham=ajnapnyati | Atba 

23 tasyah Pattavarddhinyah Pamniav-akhyayam(yah) sutaya yuvaraja- 

Bali[a*]ladeva- V eiabhat&ya 

24 Boddiya-namne Fambarru-nama-gramasya daksbinasyan=disi No mi- k she tram 

Ptitasa[pa]ri[ya ?]- 

Third Plate. 

25 ksbetram 7 Ammarajo R[a]ja-mahendro dattavan [||*] Asya ksbe[tra # ]- 

dvayasy=[a*]vadhayah 8 [J*] Purwatah Inda[m]- 

26 cbejavu J daksbinatah 9 Ratt[o]di-chenu | pascbimatab Sa[gu PJmm[u]-cheoa(ni) 

garusu | uttaratab Yelpu-jenu(ni) 

27 turpuna 10 pamiasa | Purwatah Damapija-pannasa j daksbinatah pedda-trova | 

paschimatah ye- 

28 ju | uttarata[h] Gantbasala-yappavayyari-[pa]nna(na)sa li ] Griha-kshetram cba I 

Purvvatab Badira- 

29 lama[jji ?]ya-patu j daksbinatah Tintburf[6]fcama-patu | paschimatah Jivaraksha- 

patu | 

30 uttaratab rachcha |(||) Asy=dpari na kenaehid=badha karttavyA [|*] yah karbti 

sah 1 * pamcba-mahapataka-yu- 

31 kt6 bbavati |(||) Tatha ch^oktam Vyasena | 13 Bahubhir=vvasudha dattA 

bahubbis=cb=anupalita [|*] yasya [ya]- 

32 sya yadA bhumis=tasya tasya tada pa(pba)lam |(||) [5 *] 

ABSTRACT OP CONTENTS. 

Lines 1-20 give the line of succession, with the lengths of the reigns, from Kubja- 
Viflhnuvardhana to Ammaraja, the son of Bhima (t.e. Chalukya-Bhima IT.) and 

1 Metre : SArdfilavikrhJita. 3 Metre : Ary A. * Metre : AryAglti. 

4 -mahdrdjd rdjddhirdja* perhaps has only been written by mistake for mahdrdjddkxrdja 

1 Bead °rakd. 

• Originally Gudr&tdrd - was engraved, but the sign of the last d has been struck out. 

J One would buve expected cha after this. 

8 In the description of the boundaries which follows, there are several expressions which I do not understand, 

and I am unable to state with confidence which of the names in it are names of villages. The word pannasa is also 

found in Ind. Ant. Vol. XIII. p. 250, 1. 30, and patu apparently ibid. Vol XIV. p. 59, 1. 73. 

9 This may possibly have to be read £att6di~. 10 Bead turpuna. 

11 I make the correction in this word, because the word is spelc pannasa above, and in Ind. Ant, Vol XIII, 

250,1. 30. n Bead sa. M Metre: SI6ka (Anushtubh). 



142 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Lokamahadevi, in substantially the same manner 1 as lines 1-30 of the inscription edited and 
translated in Ind. Ant. Vol. VII. p. 15 ff. 

He, 2 * the asylum of the whole world, Vijayaditya (1. 21) the Maharaja , the llajddhirdja,* 
Paramesvara and Paramabhattaraka , thus issues a command to all the cultivators, headed by 
the Bashtrakutas, who inhabit the Gudravara-vishaya 

Now to the son of that (lady of the) Pattavardhini (family), named Panama va, viz. to the 
Tuvardja Ball[a]ladeva-Velabhata, named Boddiya, Ammaraja Rajamahendra 4 gave the 
Nomi field (and) the Putasa[pa]ri[ya /] field in the southern quarter of the village of 
P&mbarru. 

The boundaries of these two fields are (1. 25) : [of the first field], on the east, the 
Inda[ni]-che£uvu (tank) ; on the south, the field of Ratt[o]di ; on the west, the margin of the 
field of Su[gu ?]mmu ; and on the north, the pannasa east of a field of Velpu ; [of the second 
field], on the east, thepatiuasa of Damapiya; on the south, a big road ; on the west, a river ; 
and on the north, the pannasa . . . . .of Gantha^ala. 

[He] also [gave] a house-field [the boundaries of which are ] : On the east, . , , 

. . . on the south, . . . . cn the west, . . . , and on 

the north, the court of audience. 

Lines 30-32 warn the people not to obstruct this grant, and quote a benedictive verse, 
ascribed to Vyasa. 


No, 17. — CHEBROLU INSCRIPTION OF JAVA ; 

AFTER SAKA-SAMVAT 1135. 

By E. Hultzsch, Ph.D. 

This inscription is engraved on the four faces of the right one among two pillars in front 
of the gopura of the Nagesvara temple at Chebrolu in theBapatla taluka of the Kistna district. 
I edit it from an excellent inked cstampage, prepared in 1897 by Mr. H. Krishna Sastri, B A. 
The inscription is in very good preservation. The letters are so clear and well-formed that it 
can be read as easily as print. The alphabet is Telugu, and the languages are Sanskrit verse 
(lines 1-110 and 149-158) and Telugu prose (11. 110-149). 

The inscription opens with some invocations (verses 1-4). Then follows the genealogy of 
the (Kakatiya) king Ganapati, who traced his descent from the Sun (v. 5), his son Manu (v. 6), 
and the family of the Raghus (v. / f.). The earliest historical ancestor, mentioned by name, 
is Durjaya (v. 8). His son Beta (v. 8) is identical with Betma, alias Tribhuvanamalla, of the 
fikamranatha and Anmakonda inscriptions. 5 After him raled Prdla and his son Rudra (v. 8). 
MaMdeva, the uterine brother of the last (v. 9), and Mahadeva’s son Ganapati (v. 10), who 


1 Minor differences whirh may be mentioned are: In line 1 we here have the spelling Hdriti- (instead of 
Hdriti-), end in line 13 Kotlabiganda (instead of Kollalhiganda) ; in line 12 we have only Vikramdditya 
(instead of guvardj a- Vtkramdditya), and in lines U and 15 Tahddhipati and Tdl-ddKpa (instead of Tdlapa 
and Tdlapa-raja ) j moreover m line 6 the length of Jaynsimha’s reign is (correct! v) given as thirtv-three (instead 
of thirty) years.— Verses 2-4 of our inscription occur, in addition to others, in the inscription mentioned above ; 
verse 2 is also foand in *7 uth-Ind . Inter. Vol. I. p. 48, 1. 20; and verse 3 ibid. 1. 22, and in Ind . Ant. Vol. XII. 
p 92, 1. 23. 

2 I.e . Ammaraja. 

s The writer p-rhap« meant to say only ‘the ddahdrdjddhirdj a.* 

4 I.e. * the great ludra (or chief) of kings/ * I n< j, XXI. p. 197. 


No. 17.] 


CHEBROLU INSCRIPTION OF JAY A. 


143 


was surnamed Chhalamattiganda 1 (tv. 18 and 19). This genealogy agrees with that derived 
from other Kakatiya inscriptions, 2 bat acquaints us with the name of Beta’s father, which was 
hitherto unknown. 

Verses 13-27 refer to Jaya (v. 20) or Jayana (v. 13), a chief whose genealogy is given in 
detail in the Ganapesvaram inscription of Saka-Samvat 1153. 3 He was the chief of the 
elephant-troop 4 * of king Ganapati (v. 13) and received from his sovereign, in Saka-Samvat 
1135, the city of Shanmukha (v. 20), or Tamrapuri (v. 19), or Tamranagari (v. 27). The 
two last names are Sanskrit equivalents of the Telngu word Chembrolu (1- 120;, the modem 
Chebrolu. The same town is designated • the city of Shanmukha’ on account of its temple of 
Kum&rasvamin (v. 22 and 1. 114). which is now called Nagesvara. Jaya is stated to have built 
a wall round Chebrolu (v. 27) and to have repaired its temples (vv. 21-26). 

The Telngu portion consists of a list of the villages and shares which were the property of 
the temples at Chebrolu, and of the persons who had granted lamps to these temples. This list 
was evidently compiled from the records of the temples at ihe order of J aya, after he had 
received Chebrolu in gift from king Ganapati. The majority of the villages and shares 
apparently belonged to the temple of Kumarasvamin (11. 110 and 114). The temples of 
Chodabhimesvara and Vasudeva (1. 119 f.) cannot now be identified at Chebrolu. The 
temple of Ananta-Jina (1. 121) may have been located on the site of a Siva temple, in the 
court -yard of which Mr. Krishna Sastri found three beautifully carved Jaina figures. Two 
further temples at Chebrolu, Mulasthana 6 and Kaduvittesvara, are mentioned in verse 26. 

Of the villages which are referred to in the Telugn portion I can identify only three, mV 
Kolluru (1. 114 f.) in the Repalle taluka ;« Kolankaluru (1. 116), now Kolakaluru, 3 i a the 
same taluka ; and Valluru (1. 117). 9 miles south-west of Chebrolu in theBipatla taluka. 

As stated before, king Ganapati granted Chebrolu to Jaya in the mouth of Chaitra of 
Saka-Samvat 1135, the cyclic year Srimukha (v. 20), i.e. A.D. 1213-14. This is the earliest 
authenticated date of Ganapati’s reign. The inscription itself may have been incised some 
years later ; for Jaya must have required several years for accomplishing the buildings which 
are referred to in the inscription. 

TEXT. 7 


East Face. 

l i snrfb imtf- 


2 

3 I gcteca-gotfafTW- 

4 AKifaj: 

5 II U*] 





2 Tttg liruda ia elsewhere apelt Chalamartiganda . It was borne by Rudr&mba and Prstaparudra (Ind, Ant. 
Vol XXI. p. 199), and by tbe chief Vanapati (above, Vol. IV. p. 315). 

* See above, Vol III. p. 95. 8 Above, Vol. III. No. 15 

4 Compare verse 38 of tbe Ganapesvaram inscription. . 

t A Ch£br6ln inscription (No. 151 of 1897) of Gohka of VeWndn, dated in S^s-Samvat 998, the AVa* 
samvatsara, record* the eift of three lamps to the temples of Mdlasthana-Mah&d^va and Kamarasvamin. 

6 g* e Mr. Sewell’s Lifts of Antiquities, Vol. I. p. 79. 

7 Fiom an estamnace, prepared by Mr. H. Krishna Sastri, B.A. 



144 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V* 


8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 
21 
22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 


i tw 
f^rftnrr *r^r- 

^STW^t: qrerr * [>*] n- 


(VRTfrftfxg qnusiT- 1 
wwrRTvmrTf^r: ahrtrsr- 

M 

^wr?R^prpc*rra qrete*:: ii [^*] 
wn wre^TT^T srefrroij- 

trret i ^rreTTTwN' ^ftwrr^r- 
?r ^pr: n [»*] 

TRT'. f% W^IWT*TTf^#- 

g: [<] tr* *fwr<pnrnfff»r ^rfsrc- 
^ frjiW^ng: w*: stt- 
ii [\*] wgtspmt^f 
wnglXfrr^TRwr: i fXwrfX 
«r ^rw- 

^wrr. ii [**] r reuPj-diftcreH^ufi a 

^urwwfft i srrMffir - 

^iwr f^wwgf^i^tgxT^^rwsrnri^:- 

svTks I ri^lt-i i i ^ f^lf- 

t II O*] mj *Ht iwi fard q Pf T- 

(\ 

<T- 

W* ^ik- 

ifprO^T^lXf 

TTft ^ *TTtw* ^ II [c*] ?T7T^fMr[:*] 

_. f~ »s 

^3rfrraTWT5qTTTWr TTfT?^- 
TfrT 7T>flf^pr% I 


1 The annsvrfra staods at the beginning of the next line. 


1 Reo< * °**s?*r c . 


No. 17.] 


CHEBROLU INSCRIPTION OP JAYA. 


145 


4^ 1%? frl q fd Hu -0 JMfjg -i *4 p^5 R»rr- 
40 n [«.•] 


North Fact . 


41 '•w irr^TT^t^Nrr- 

42 SHd^faq fa* f fa5rrerf*Hmt*pft : i 

43 fasKfa tfiPii^ri: K^dl %- 

44 TfWT^^I? gy# II [^o*J 


45 



46 jst ^cST Trsrfw^rfm: s- 

47 farfadicM WTWl «m d l d i w- 

48 qi is r dtqqd^fdfl^«aq<°q’g - 

49 


60 faremfa n [u*] *rr si 

61 TRprm g*?r: tf- 

62 *nrn %f% farter 


IT- 


63 ^Hrtr faR dl^Ud I ^<!|«|fd si- 

64 Tif? *r*fa ainsrfs ^t *rrsm w 

65 ^Tfa fa^fad facfafrl wmwlwrg - 

66 W. N [\R*] stt WTCH l 3 <a<fl fag- 

57 ar^gr^rr. i sn^rw^rsrr^i- 

68 tfasnrmwt; s»fwwifaiwrf<r- n [^*] s* 

69 wtfrWtfddtfd Rd<Vf^«*yianUi!rd^l- 

60 sfansts g^twwnrr : i 

61 ^‘fa^rfa: 

62 sifa fanatwra b [>8*] ?rsrr*nTrrfafwd- 

63 fas Tr9w^fe*p*5^f grrfa *t- 

64 snfamfa i u- 

66 ^T g fa^dj}fd^-eiM^ l <i E ^i irST- 

67 tfstg ^ II [u*] HTT *r. fafarnwg- 

68 Sfrafaf^cfT^fafa <?cK§: l Tdt* 

69 s nifcpq g n q^^MCi^ i fa B K - 


t 


146 


EPIGRAPH1A UTOICA. 


[Vol. V. 


70 m n [h*] ar^T^tfW 4HW 

7! : tnt?r 

72 T3PK *rr ^ I TfR PlfiMfiHUWWi *" 

N* 

74 mFT^^ri ii l\**] *rft 

73 frrwsf^f^wm 1 +T*r w-* 

7G v?M\ WTOPfarifaTfc]- 

77 % i ^ wr- 

78 % fwfr ?re ^p^rof%»T5^- 

79 wr ii U^*] ^Nj^t 

80 fo*][fa]ataT^ fkfam ^tfr fi tf«n^H : i *r- 

82 HT<TMt WfrfxT^: II [\t-*] ’CRTfW^- 

83 i}d<'«amR^T^ *nf*t HT- 

84 fa * 3 Tf r nrafaM 3 .fi . 

85 wff [i] mwTTwrg^rr- 


Wed Face. 

86 #cf%m tn^^fforanvir ^^ [t] 

87 ii fao*] ig 

88 H^rrrnFfT^T-dt 'imfa^wwfa 

89 fanr wd?r: i u- 

90 3TTfaj rTT JT^TS^ ?T?T: *- 

91 ^tri ndiMpH^ » fa**] 

92 *r ^ T^rssfawra qwah+iqfafr - 

93 cf fTTT^TTT%: l 7Tfagrfrffl ^U<vfaq - 

94 rTgrfar ii fa^*j 

95 Tfwzdtrtf ^ 

9 M ITO TO ^ , [M .J *. 

97 ^ ^ITHffWT ?fahfaf 9 ^ 

m a faro , hiwt ^ ^ 

* Bead “ff^tnr. ~ T^T ~ — — 

1 Road j*re, . „ . T* ? ‘ Und * “ the beginning of the nest Una. 

•H„ 4ftTO ». . M ,M. 



Chebrolu Pillar Inscription of Jaya; after Saka-Samvat 1135. 


Ep. lnd. Vol. V. p. 14^ 












f. 




r L t 


- O, 


3 V J 


o. 



rjQ (* ( *> i-i 

CD D "■ •"!" 

y-^) 3 D '} S' -<- 
V O. V? *• 
no x5- rS 


'4 




, . ;: d >p > u 

. I . > V < i » j f f '; \ ' 

1 I', ) ( 0‘ -A ■ 

■■ j tj o )C - 

) ] >>u w ' 

r — 

,o >* o > r 

P >cwn- ,.;■ 

xSl 03 -' H ' j < 

g- a s-ii 


' v/ 


>3 , 


.. - r\ • .V .' : 
• vl- ,0 ^ ! 


S) '■'£ « 2 g 3 'J '£.#• 

p. Au: Vi 0 3 
"I 03 3 ODD fc Q is. i. 


'• ’D 


C} ' 
f; ( 

f ^ 


-— K CD 
'£*-•■ 3 vjD O 

fias 
a 0 £ f 

g»y iOua 

in )D° v O 'C 

&»s D 5'? i 



Vr^ v ^ 

d hJj \r> 
2 <D 


£? p 

sO 


vj - 
o 

r ^v<i 

Yt: O 


, ? 
. i 


'Y 


<r> 

oo 


00 

00 


,10 ,0 ^sr «; _ 

>6 io y >0 ,'0 b v-3 :v 

O jf >| ^.'£,- lv 2 f . '? 

P O iff Va D , : 
'O p p )0 ^ ■ >;■> Yp^o 

>o co o >o >0 c? D $ 
’Qoro -no o ^ o k3 U 


p q o > 

!? no * 

^ Pi ?. r £< V 'Dj ; 
>0: D CO r 

* ' i*' '*■ ' - ^ 


No. 17.] 


CHEBROLU INSCRIPTION OF JAY A. 


147 


99 

100 II [^8*] ^WfTWIW^frr TrfNTT^fWSTT- 1 

101 f 

102 <CH4f4t I 


103 ga^ fwTssm 

104 vrrggr: a 0**] >?» ^TffN- 

105 i »argi g i wrf?T 5 T?i^frf^- 

106 fw: xifbfN^r: H [H*] ^ rrigggrt- 

107 irfwrt RT^TTWSTrf^- 

108 fg?pftg* w, i *rnnf?T Shr 

109 gfgfgf^iig ?*fgg *r fwf^rr gfttfw- 

110 m ii {>'©*] t ^ i JF* w- 

111 <Pd^gm g i tiftsteggfs i 

112 ^ i i i 

113 •' dHIrHgfe i « 31' 

114 gf ^rfcRNTir R’Bg i 

115 ft ^ I 1 *- 

116 fwf% i i fsrrrcr [i*J 

117 dfafa wrer gfsfii ^ ** ^3*1 

118 ^ ^ 3RNS ^ W \ ^&9* ^ t [|*] 

119 g)s5^4RcH<T*gi NTf^fs I ^Tgt- 

120 *TTfi gftrfefg ^ t[*J 

121 gg ggcrfggg^If ^r *. 1 £ 5n l^¥ *3 

122 sr-svgft aT§r^ ^ t® ^frogT- 

123 fgggftgrfgggjN^rf' ^ * ^r©fgf% ^ * ^[^]- 

124 fgfg> *? ^ 3««i^g» *3 ^ <*1^1*1^ w ^ ^Tgw 

125 ^&3gr^tgTg gfgfwg'f gw[g]- 

126 gfi '"gf^ftf^N^TfT%?rg 'Nt^fgr ^ * 

127 *§ * gs«D fa fa ^ * ^ngwinfgfa * 

128 H^ifa rfa <3 r *3 t whrftfa 

129 -Mlafai fli <3 * gg®*i<a«iifafa ^ * ^^TTNT- 

130 fa-fa *? * ^&9>*rrfafa *§r * Sftdifafa ^ * w[g]^rr- 

131 fafa *3 * gg^ferrfafa ^r ^ ^<yfaif<fa ^ * 


V 2 


1 The ani'svdra stand9 at the beginning of the next line. 


148 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


132 

133 

134 
133 

136 

137 

138 

139 

140 

141 

142 

143 

144 
143 

146 

147 

148 

149 

150 

151 

152 

153 

154 

155 

156 

157 

158 


South Fact. 


ftf% ^ * ?rfRrf% *3 r *§r * ^rrtrrfT- 

[»] 'iifOTff *=r * 13 r *t- 


fw^rarir w * trf=rr^ ?m ?m 
trg^r wfa pw?- 


i ^ranrrv fW- 

Vrayp^F WFff WTl %- 

f? <TRi nj II 

[i*] ^wrfw 

f?r * [i*] *Tsf<rert| wr% i ®r- 

c^wf^Rr «f£r i i iniprfftrs \ i ^rr- 

NJ ^ 

%fpi| l t * i ^st- 

zj-g ? i grr^ i i 

VJ s* x VJ 

* i pmtp * i *n»roul3 

l i sriwt^f i i w41fafa zfitw i i c»rTtr- 

«• n i trsfmtf i i u|«utd i i «raift- 

* i ^riwtfaRr w3r i i f?p[% 0 [i*J 
t^*nt r \ *rro% i n & » *rr^i yftrarr- 
ffari i wr^n^mT- 

frf?r «i^T*|7wir«f it 0«=*] ^ttt ttt- 
«rrrt nt wr^- gfafsT 1 i wNrft^- 
m ?T5rr#5tgcrpr*r « Oa*] ^g m qfi - 
Trnjprpjpf^ri TTTafrnrreR^r ^Hr?- 
g[:] i \rR<fa ^PFraw^rar wf$ «r- 

3 i nm+il^^ H [^°*3 *T*f 

rnr^f^m *r? i Rr* ^rnr^gtrei 

^ninrs: ir^w‘ » Ot*] 


ABSTRACT OP CONTENTS. 

A . — Sanskrit Portion. 

The inscription opens ivith invocations, addressed to the boar-incarnation of Vishnu 
(verse 1) ; to the crescent of the moon on the head of Siva (v. 2); to Ganapati (v, 3) ; and to 
Sarasvati (v. 4). Verse 5 praises thd Sun- His son was Manu (v. 6)* His son was 


1 The syllable fif is entered below the line- 
3 The atiuxvdra stands at the beginning of the next line. 


• Rend °TOJ°. 

• Read HTO'%. 




No. 17.] 


CHEBROLU INSCRIPTION OF JATA. 


149 


Ikshvaku, who was followed by Sagara, Kakutstha, Dilipa, Dasaratha, and Ramachandra 
(v. 7). In the family of these Raghus was born Durjaya, and from him Beta; after him ruled 
Prola, whose son was Rudra (v. 8). He was succeeded by his uterine brother Mahaddva 
(v. 9). His son was Ganapati (v. 10). The Madra king, the Panchala, the Videt.a king, the 
Hammira, the Huna, and the king of Kasl are stated to have been waiting at his door (v. 12). 

(Y. 13.) “ Verily, prosperous is Jayana, the chief of the elephant-troop of that lord of the 
earth (viz. Ganapati), the leader of all actors and Vedic scholars, (and) the crest-jewel of the 
assembly of poets.” 

He was the favourite servant of king Chhalamattiganda (viz. Ganapati) (v. 18). 

^-y 19 ) « Now once, returning from the conquest of the kings of the Southern region, the 
heroic Chhalamattiganda came on the way to Tamrapuri, (a city ) with fluttering banners.” 

(Y. 20.) “ In the Saka year eleven hundred 1 and thirty-five, in the month Madhu (i.e. 
Chaitra), in the ( cyclic ) year Srimukha, that king gave (Tamrapuri) to the glorious general 
Jfiya, saying : ‘ By my order rule thou from to-day this city of Shanmukha (Kumara- 
svamin), which has been protected before by the arm of the maternal uncle of thy mother. 2 ’ ” 

He (viz. Jaya) repaired and whitewashed all the temples (prdsdda) in that city and placed 
golden pinnacles (kalaia) on them (v. 21). He covered with gold the imago of Tarakarati 
(Kumarasvamin) (v. 22) and supplied vessels of gold, silver, copper and brass for the worship 
of this god (v. 23). He gave another image of the same god and images of his two consorts, 3 
which were made of base metal (loha) and were meant to be carried about in procession at 
festivals (maha), and built an enclosure, a mandapa of Sani (Saturn), and a gopara of three 

storeys (v. 24). 

(Y 25 ) “ Then he made for this (god) a mandapa for resting after the sport of the 
< hun t -4 on the day of every Makara-Samkrdnti. On the painting in this (mandapa). tho 

gods, assembled for the occasion, regard with a thrill the representations of fierce battles between 
the gods and the demons.” 

(Y 26 ) “ He set up again the linga of the MulasthSna (temple) and (the ling a called) 
Kaduvittesvara, which had both been destroyed by robbers.” 

He surrounded Tamranagarl with a wall surmounted by towers (v. 27). 


B . — Telugu Portion. 

/Line 110 ) “ The villages of this god’ (are), from the east towards the south 
Nfirikddapumbundi. Manchedlu. Kovilambunji. Komarajambundi Venjefilu. 

Ummetalanundi Suddhapundi. Serapundi. Mulukalapundi ; of this (village), one half 
Z god [KumLl^min. <«*) »” *» “» » l K ° Uto ‘' 

Gummapundi. Vadlambundi. Gudapundi.” 

/t n 6 \ « (The following are) the shares 15 kha* of land in the middle of the peacock? 
pillarsat Kolafialurxi ; 15 kha at Valluru; 2 kha at Kranteta ; 1 kha at Kadungalu; 1 kha 

^ mTfi.) “ To the god ChodabbimSsvara (belongs) Tadlambundi; (and) to Vasudeva 

12 kha in Kattempundi.” 

i Literally. ‘ Rudra’a humlrTd 7co™P are J -' d - Ant.\o\. XXI. p. 202, note 43. 

Laterally, nt mother and of thy maternal uncle. 

» ; ge/tbe colophon of No. 1064 in my Second Report on Sanskrit i v U, 


p. 102. . g * The temple of Kum&rasvamin (now Nageivara) is meant. 

* See above, Vol. III. p. 7 , no. • Brown’s Telugu-'Enplith Dictionary, s. v. putt t. 

• Tbie is an abbreviation of kharut% » 

7 Ibis bird is sacred to Kumarasvamin. 



150 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. v. 


(L. 120.) “ In the land of Ch.embrdlu, to the god Ananta- Jina, 5 kha ; to the pujaris, 
12 kha ; to the 14 Brahmanas of the Brahmapuri 1 * of the god, 14 kha ; to the superintendent of 
edicts and the omperor of poets, 2 kha ; to the astrologer, 2 kha ; to the doctor, 2 kha ; to the 
chamberlain, 2 kha; to the accountant, 2 kha ; among the three hundred dancing-girls, to each 
of all those who serve in the temple from the age of eight years, 2 kha ; to the door-keeper, 2 kha ; 
to the dancing-master, 2 kha ; to one who beats the big drum, 2 kha ; to one who beats the email 
dram, 2 kha ; to the vdsekanu, 2 kha ; to each of the singers, 2 kha ; to one who blows the white 
conch, 2 kha ; to one who blows the trumpet, 2 kha ; to one who plays the gauru , 2 kha ; to one who 
beats the kettle-drum, 2 kha ; to the jagatfavadu, 2 kha ; to one who beats the gong, 2 kha ; to one 
who decorates ( the temple ), 2 kha ; to the garland- maker, 2 kha ; to th o piligaragavdtfu, 2 kha ; to 
the potter, 2 kha ; to the carpenter, 2 kha ; to the blacksmith, 2 kha ; to the masons, 4 kha ; to the 
washerman, 2 kha ; to the torch-bearer, 2 kha ; to Alli-B6ya, 2 kha” 

(L. 135.) “ These persons shall live in peace, doing their respective work and enjoying 
(^etr) shares. And the three hundred Brahmanas shall assign one part ( of the produce ) of their 
land to the god and enjoy (the remaining) three parts themselves.” 

Lines 140-149 record the names of 20 persons who had granted lamps. Verses 28-31 con- 
tain the usual admonitions to future kings. 


POSTSCRIPT. 


Another inscription of J&ya and of his sovereign Gtenapati (No. 250 of 1897) is engraved 
on three sides of a pillar which is now built into the roof of the Lihg6dbhavasv^min temple at 
Tsandavolu, the capital of the chiefs of Veian&ndu, 3 The second face of the pillar is turned 
towards the roof and is hence invisible. The first face opens with the same passage as the 
Chebr61u inscription published above, and breaks off with the words fevrfrT TRfWrT : *3T- 

v-S 

of verse 10. The third face bears five Sanskrit verses, the first of ■which is incomplete at the 
beginning, and a passage in Telugu prose. I subjoin the text 3 c* the first sixteen lines of the 
third face. 


1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

11 


* 1 WT '5TTW5RT[«T i sr- 

fa ^ nfm *[<*]smrrcc=ra- 

mr wr^rr^i i fa srra- 

falvrci n htt- 

triune faftre- 


flVPI I 



1 See above, Vol. 111. p, 296, note 9, and Vol. IV. p. 128. 

1 See above, Vol. IV. p. 33 f. and Addition* and Correction 8, p. v. The inscription itself refers to two of 

those chiefs ; see below, p. 151, notes 6 and 6. 

3 From an inked estampage, prepared by Mr. H. Krishna Sastri, B.A. - Bead 



151 


No. 18.] 


SRAVANA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OP MARASIMHA TI. 


12 SRS [t?]TWTTf?[^]e | ^STcf 

13 mi? <frrei fX] Bjrvrrer [n] 3 

14 *[«] z^rr cP3I 

15 [fpj^r j 

16 [ift^rfs^m^rsr ■, i 

17 [*r<] [i*] 1 . \ ..... # 


It appeal^ from the pfeove pys^sgc £Lv : [l' ; ng Gnnrvpati] put the general Jay a (lines 1 and 
5 f.) in ciiargc of a tempie or b'uhka’a (^±vah which Lad been founded by king K.uidttunga- 
E^jendra-Gonka 5 and bad ixon rx-.-u Paudistara (1. 5) alter [Panda]. 15 the younger brother 
of Goinsa I* Ja^a provided Ulc god a ~v~bn pedestal (p't/ui), as the olu one Lad been stolen, 
placed golden pinnacles ( kumlha ) on the umpie. and granted vessels for the worship. King 
Ganapati himself (1. 15) gave to t no temple the village of Goval-ika or, in leiagu, Grcvada? 
(1. 16). 


No. 18.— SKAYAXA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OF MARASTMHA II. 

By J. F. Fleet, Pu.D., C.I.E. 

This inscription, engraved on the four fares of the base of a pillar, which is known as tho 
K%6-Brahmadeva-kamblia ; at tho entrance to the area occupied by the temples on the 
Chandragiri hill at Sravana-Belgola. was hist brought to notice and edited bv Mr. Kice in Lis 
Inscriptions at Sravana- Bel gala , No, de (see also, il. Introd, p. IS £E.). I edit xny version of it 
from ink-impressions supplied to me by Dr. Hultzsch. 

The wiiting consists of one hundred and fourteen lines: twenty-*even on the south face 
of the pillar, covering an urea about 1' 11-’" broad by 2' S'" high ; twenty-eiglit on the west face, 
covering an area about 1' 0" bread by 2' 1C" high ; twenty-eight on the north face, covering nr 
rrea about 1' 10£ 7 hioad bv 2' 10" high, and thufcy-oce ou the east face, covering an area 
about 1' IGF broad by o l" high. Lines 23 to 19 on Die vr.bt face, and the whole of tho 
writing on the north face, are very much damaged ; so much so that no connected oassa^cs 
worth reproduction, can he made out. The iv*t of the record. hcnve\er, is m a state or <y~oi d 
preservation.-— The characters ere Kanarc&e, ui me regular type of the nened to which the 
record refers; and they were boldly formed and veil executed throughout T Lev shew, of 
course, only the later or cursive forms of the kh (in M ihy<il:kCt,i. line 5 12, 100) and h (e.g. 5u. : a, 
line 12, alwhlam, lino 84).* They do not appear to include the sepaiate distinct form of the 
lingual d They shew the virdma, lep resented by its ovt proper sign, in bhumjan and baldi, 
line 2, ?col, line 112, and ir* line ii3; und they do not include any final forms. In lines 1 to 
109, the average size of the letters ia about i ' ox In hues 110 to 114 the chai actors are 
somewhat smaller and thinner, though oi the same type, an! possibly written rut by the same 
hand, with tho rest of the record ; tins may be dm to the per- m who wrote out the record, for 
the engraver, having not enough space to uni-sri i* in complete!’. v.'v.form clnacter- ; or the 


1 Head 3 The fT,iUSC ' irJ "tands at the beginning < i rLe>i,st : - t \ 

8 This verse ia identical with v^rse 23 of the Cheorn.u in&^nptw.u, 

* Lines 17 to 25 contain a description of the boundaries v.f uo^da »n the TV. „*j huscuage. 
e >V>. 10 of the Table, above, Voi. IV. p- 35, f 12 ,t tie mib* Kelt. 

•i j u t ) ;e KCpalle talnka, about 7 naiks nwTh*e»*c of Tsanda nm;. 

8 For the importance of tho u=o of the earlier and iatei forcn ot £5 a 'd •<, m eonnaoeicn with u.vb:ca 
about a century or a century and a half earlier, ve page 15b boliv, no'v * 


records 



152 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yo l. V- 


passage may be, as suggested by Mr. Rice, a slightly later addition. — The language is Sanskrit 
in lines 1 to 83, and Kanarese, of the archaic or stilted type, in lines 84 to the end. There are 
verses in lines 1 to 4, 28 to 99, and 112 to 114 ; and I am indebted to Mr. H. Krishna Sastri 
for several very useful suggestions in dealing with both the text and the translation of some 
difficult passages in. the Kanarese verses. The Sanskrit gadya or ornate prose, in lines 
5 to 27, is not very successful, there not being enough of the usual alliteration and rhyming 
endings ; and there is nothing remarkable in such of the Sanskrit verses as remain in lines 50 to 
55: in the Kanarese portion, however, the author, who was evidently an accomplished writer in 
that language, has done full justice to his topic and to himself, both in sonorous diction and in 
sense. — The orthography does not present anything calling for special notice. 

The inscription is a panegyric of the Western Gangs prince M&rasimha IT. It mentions 
him by his proper name in line 42, and throughout the rest of the record by various birudas and 
epithets, of which the most frequent and evidently the most highly prized one is Nolambakul- 
Antaka, “ the Death of the family of the Nolambas,” — with reference to his successes against 
the Pallavas of the Nolambavadi thirty-two-thousand province. Lines 110 to 114, at any rate, 
were written after his death ; and they tell us that, a year after his completion of the career of 
conquest which is the subject of the earlier part of the record, he abdicated, and died in the 
practice of religion, at the feet of a Jain teacher named Ajitasena, at Bahk&pur in the 
Dharwar district, — starving himself to death, like so many others whose epitaphs are at 
Sravana-Beigola, by a three-days fast. 1 * And it seems plain, in fact, that, like various others of 
the records at Sravana-Beigola, the whole of this inscription is an epitaph,— not a contemporane- 
ous record engraved while he was still alive. The record is not dated ; but it may be placed 
in A.D. 975, as an inscription at Melagani shews that Marasimha II. either died or abdicated 
in or shortly before June-July, A.D. 974. a The contents of it are noticed in detail on page 
169 if. below. 

I have given, elsewhere, 3 a full expose of the spurious nature of certain copper-plate grants, 
which purport to present an unbroken genealogical list of the Western Gangas going back to 
the second century A.D. And I have shewn how utterly unreliable, for purposes of ancient 
history, are those grants and a Tamil chronicle, called KongudeSa-Rajdkkal, which purports to 
furnish information of the same kind. The results of the inquiry on that occasion were, that 
the earliest authentic Western Gahga names are those of Sripurusha-Muttarasa, who, pending 
more precise discoveries, was to be placed somewhere in the period A.D. 750 to 850, and of 
Sivamara, who was to be placed either immediately before or immediately after Sripurusha- 
Muttarasa ; and that the alleged genealogy was invented in the ninth or tenth century A.D., 
when all the great families of Southern India were beginning to look up their ancestral 
belongings and devise more or less fabulous pedigrees. Since the time when I wrote, some new 
records on stone have been brought to notice, and a critical version has been published of a 
copper-plate grant which was already known but was not satisfactorily available for use. And 
these new materials, militating in no way with the conclusions at which I arrived, enable me 
now to put together a genealogical and successional list of the Western Gahgas of Tal&k&d 
(see page 153), 4 and to make a first serious attempt to determine the real history and chrono- 
logy of the family. 

1 For a description of the tallelchand or vow of starving to death, see Mr. Bice’s at Srav.-Se}. Introd. 

p. 15 ff. He has pointed. oat (ibid. p. 17) that, among the varions instances of it mentioned in the records there, 
the-e is one of even so late a date as A.D. 1809 (No. 72). The process sometimes lasted for three months (No. 2). 
But it was accomplished in three days in also the case of Mallish^na (above, Vol. III. p. 207, verse 72). 

* See page 168 below, and note 6. 1 Above, Vol. III. pp. 169 to 175. 

4 The numbers before some of the names indicate the members of the family who actually ruled, or probably 
ruled, over the Gahguv&^i province, and the order in which the succession went. When the exact relationship 
between two consecutive individuals is not established, dotB are used instead of lines. 



No. 18.] SRAVANA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OE MARASIMHa II. 


The Western Gahgas of Talakad. 

(1) Sivamara I. 

(About A.D. 755 to 765) 

| 

(2) Prithm-Kohguni- 
S v t pu. ru sha-Mutt ar asa . 

(About A.D, 765 to 805) 



(3) Sivamara II. 
(About A.D. 805 to 810) 


Aparajita-Prithinpati I. 

(A contemporary of Awdgli&varsha I. 
in the period A.D, 814*15 to 877*78) 


Marasimha I. 


Hastimalla-Prithivipati II. 
(A contemporary of ParAutaka I, 
in fcbe period A.D. 900 to 940) 


(4) Nitimarga-Kongumvarma- 
Permanadi-Ranavikrama. 
(About A.D. 810 to 840) 


(5) Satyavakya-Kongumvarma- 
Permanadi-Rajamalla. 

(A.D. 870-71.) 


(6) Satyavakya-Kongunivarma- 
Permanadi-Butuga I. 
(A.D. 870-71 and 891*92.) 


(7) Nitimarga-Kongunivarma* 
Permanadi-Ereyappa. 

(A.D. 893-94 and 909-10) 

(8) Rachamalla I. 


(9) Satyavakya-Kongunivarma- 
Permanadi-Butuga II. 

(A.D. 940 aud 949-50) 

By RAraka- I By Kallabbarasl 


Maruladeva ; 
married Rijabbe. 


(11) Satyavakya-Kohguuivavma- 
Permanadi-Marasimha II. 
(A.D.' 963*64 to 974) 


(10) Rackcha- Gangs. 


(12) Satyavakya-Kongunivarma 
Pauchaiadeva. 

(A.D. 975) 


(13) Satyavakya-Kohgunivarma- 
Permanadi-Rachamalla II. 

(A.D. 978 and 984) 


I 



EPIGRAPHIA INDICA 


[Vo l. V. 


154 


The earliest authentic Western Gangs name is that of Sivamara I. His existence is 
proved by an inscription at Vallinsalai in the North A-rcoc district , 1 about eighty miles to 
the epst from the Garina tow c. of Koiar, which enumerates four generations, — Sivamara I.; his 
son. Srlpurusha;- Biipurusha's son, Ranuvikraxria; and Rauavikrama's son, Rajamaila, — 
and says that Rajauialla, having «een thu hili on which the record is. took possession of it, 
and founded a Join temple the 10 in token ci having done so. The record, indeed, does not 
tell us that these pcusms were Gah^.ia. But their names fit in so exactly with the statements 
in the spurious grunts and in cert pap. unquestionable records in the Western Gang a territory 
itself which will oe mentioned lurtbci on. that no hesitation need be felt about identifying them 
as Western Ganges of Talakad, 

Their :*re records in Hy-m-e, which may he ascribed to Sivamara I. One is a stone inscrip- 
tion at I/ebuiG which menu .ms him as simply Sivamara, without any regal title of any 
kind, but u?es a technical expression which stamps him as holding a rank and authority 
considerably gicntoi tbr.n those of any more local governor . 4 And others are stone inscrip- 
tions at Ramp am and IVliAaL.vlir which mention 4 * the Koaguni king (urx*a) Sivamara,” and 

v A* / Vo* IV. i . A — !n the Postal Liro:ury of the Mnjrzs Circle, the name of the place is given 
jis ‘ V Mi iic 1 '. rti. J 

3 The spines g.-api : *1 -e.G „ *, ir irrsh? {wh^v* proper oanv, Mat tar as a, they do not give) sometimes as the 
soc, and jimu time < »■% f r «i. V.; p tie lath* i*‘s fame), r-f ruvam&ra !.• V' Sri pure. >ii a they allot 

tvo sons, biv i .lorn Tf r •:*! V 1 j y .'it/i: hoc? they !cp> , - , $etrc hiijanmhi as the sou cf \ !i ,,v *3idi "ye. (.-»:?*? the tabies, 
above, v oi. IU. pp :6i. 177} . a i furiously enoj'rb it is the pretended earlier record**. ri„._ ;* j.ur, N again niiga la* 
a*,d Mmne (for the Usl set* p. gi UC below, note 7), *vlich wrongly rep'Wiu: i, as the grandfather 

of Sripiruslvi j while tk. ,mr> .. ‘cr;>jru g to be write, n nearly a century and a half after the Marne grant, 
correctly s;xm> a of the tso - ‘V > - sr .. k:p.~~ T‘i>s *hori bet v viable record from Valjiiuami disposes 

'dually of ore step n t I u **' o-* c ’• . t ’An.h toino ot tn^ spurious giants place between Sivamara 

1. and ITjuai a*a to?, v ‘ j u 1 ' ‘ v 

3 Mr. IV* E; /- "> *■- r-~% .o a % A I*. . N;. ?■? - m- Tkc* has preferred to allot this record to tie 

c r * jn * " * • ; ■.* ? ’• * * v ' person non •*d JEr*-ya. With this person Mr. Rico identifies the 

Jfu h&rdjz !>.. in. * or a*. In- *7 i«t‘u* Mudfii Ml 08), and the Ere* or Elea of an inscription at MfidabaJ|i 
(•.hid. Nj. IS 7 ), .nd n; E- Verm * r d: tf a «p*;rious reeoiu ^ ii'ittavlc: {'bid. Sj. 199, with a lithograph) which 
pa r p -rts to lo d »t-«3 ^ i U1 l i f : thus iv^ r' 5 *b ,k Madur ?.ud M ddaha]]i records, as well as that nt 

Debur, to thu tiu». /»*»d b*j sdt.-s .1 ^ ot Ac Gatuv^ai inscr'ptioa from S.-5. ill to S-S. 

71I> so -<s io bn 'g ch.. '*. )i J t \ f o A.Ll 7-.»* ~ si. r e ' , v... n ^ar to tie period of bivaioara II Ibe GattavAdi 

1 riser* y tit n, hr.*?t< . , h'-s tt. l^er cur-./e f rm o: tl e o, .n runty yaro , line 10, and llo^ 1] : therefore it 

<annot be p.**c«Hi t ^ A. A >S.»i « . " Ith.^ > ) ; aud the general style of the characters suggests a 

period ni ler*.L a c - ' : ” r y I.aor ‘un . ih^c true. 

4 The express', w. ; j ijci'Stion ». . or Ify w, 4< to reiga ever the earth.* 1 It ig prrpeMy a tech- 

tj.cal expresbor '*f }-< rnmonct so*'»-r Gee the sec'i-.d edition of i»y Dft.a^tP.* of th° Kanarese Uutrictt in the 
Go •zettrer of the Saovay Preside* cj % Yol I I'ort If, 12S, note 4) , but tbr way in which it is to be 
applied, has a!*\aya t> b«» determined oy fcho C'.iitrxt aid general 8 'rrour.dinge. The Western Gabgas of TalakAd 
wmc not paramount ?o r erMgn- except- cccassocaj v, lhey be'on^ed r o t *i e da?s cf great feudatory nobles who 
were m>re or less uiderrCr.deiK in tnA* owu hereuirary territories, «uiJ position is always very clearly 

rc-'oguhaY.e, if the r»c«.c% a r e dtodied ..tfciitively, fr- „u the -ar*.o\i8 techo.^al titles and expressions that are so 
ba.. r ' i Iv used or alstaip^l from. The8il&h>as of Kauld, f u.; great leudatory aoblea of some other famiKea, 

r.»cd tlr ^7} Te~*b'\\ wVr.a-si^athA-iinddadim. or, in Sanakfit. mkh^wamhathdiinddena raj yah 

kn. The properly u«ed by r’*-. T * v o«t*c »' G in ‘h-^r own province, was prl(h>tbrfSjya<hyryu ; and it 

wii] bet-' urd !na*’iio«*t all cf ti-**r rceo-'ig v.b'* s "A.-'i *" Vre* r ** heredb C r s .fr<:o,y ; to the contrary j can quote, 
at r^w.it, onl*. r’jjan luvir-ottarv-' %q* (motor, ' t r f ”, ‘nop rf, -»ri*,c’.y, paramount aovereigatv) in the 

Kukpere m«ci.i:i*on of t h* t*» ' r * i 1 ''* . «• :*’.d tr f •»«? ■ 7 tie p.'Tjiy sul-'r i**u«te exprnsp»c*n d\v t * to govern/ in 
tb- *'*'.'* c --f Ere).ippa A the * *■- - f * *•*. -it /■ :■ . 1 1- 'p 4 •;.> /:V,0r in»-.rij: t/ ,t. the ether hand, the 

prrp^. e*.p to denot' V . : p*»& : v ! e their own province cf Ujtp^av&dl, y/, t g and we 

lied this July use*! in tbf r^’i A .ViWvr.b- K. ,i to. u • .^rAojnt Adairguuchl, Gundfir, and Hebh&l, and even 

ic tl j ci-e of Pafeh'ilidt -a Ac ‘os -'y' r . " tv*- M jignnd. 

1 hp. Cam. Vo.. !•!.. Nj 5*J, 3 j**. Tns -*• * r I’.ra ir.? ?ription, again, has teen assigned by Mr. Rice to 
.si .aoiim IT. lint ti,** •:«** ? c-ss *h\ is a s*; onsr indicaticr, Mint the records are to be ascribed to the first 

fc‘:ar*ira. Mmt.,:jL*a b n .?.v o 5 .-.' cna'.ly s J/’* 4 'ird;dd^ir*i; J :n.d Pi? ram* ft ir a ; in the amplified form phama- 



Xo. 18 .] 


155 


SRAVASA-BELOOI-A EPITAPH OF MARAS! MH A II. 


u=e the same technical espiessiou high position. Time three records are not dated in any 
era. And there is nothing in the contents of them to enable us to establish any synchronisms, 
and so to assign an err act date to them. But the characters of the Bc'bur inscription are attri- 
butable to any time rritbjn about fifty years on either side of A.D, 800. 1 The period of tho 
record will bo determined more closely further on. 2 

The authentic existence of the second of the four persons meutioncd in tho ValHmaiui 
inscription, viz. Sripurusha, had already been established 3 by some undeniably genuine stone 
records at Talak&d,* Sivara, 6 and Si varps tna, 5 in Mysore. The Talakad inscription, which is 
dated in his first year; 6 and tbs inscription at Sivara, give him the full style of 11 the 
Maharaja Prithu\d-Hohguni-lVIuttarasa-Sripurusb.a ;** while, ct the Sivarpatna inscriptions, 
one styles him “ the Maharaja Siupurusha/' and the ether, which is dated in his twentieth- 
odd year,— perhaps the twenty-ninth, 7 — calls him “ the Kongani Maharaja Sripurusha :** 
evidently, Muttarasa was his name, and Sripurusha, “ husband of Fortune , 99 was a biruda . 
Like the records of Sivamara L, these records of Muttarasa, — and also those which 
will be mentioned further on,— are not dated in any era; and they do not contain 
anything by means of which synchronisms can at present be established. But they are, 
similarly, to be referred, on paleographic grounds, to the period A.D. 750 to 850, or there- 
abouts. xVnd one particularly instructive character, — the old square form of the letter h, 8 — 

MzhdrJjddhi rdja (regarding which, see page 163 below, note 2), the use of the first of these two titles was con- 
tinued by all Ms descendants from Hanavikrama onwards ; aud it does not seem likely that his son Siviun&ra II. 
would revert to the simple designation ar.u*.— Another inscription at Mudahalli (Nj. 126) is probably also of the 
time of Sivaro^ra I. ; hut the name of tu* prince is illegible. 

1 l write on the authorit) of ao ink-impression, which Mr. Rice kindly sent fo* my inspection. I have not 
bad the means of examining the D&mpura and MtidahalH records in the same way. 

1 The s pane as Hallegerj 2 "" ant (£> Cam i. Vol. III., Md. 113, with a lithograph) cites a date in the month 
Jyeihtha (May-dune). Saka-Samvat 633 expired, falling in A.D. 713, as being in the thirfj-fonrth year of 
Sivam^ra I. t and so would phee the commencement of his rule in A.D. 679-SO. This latter date is altogether too 
early. And it is net likely that the record has even hit off a true date for him in A.D. 713. — The Nag* manual* 
erant wou'd place the commencement of the rule of his successor Sripurusha-(Muttarasa) in A.D. 727-28 (see 
page 156 below, note 2); and this, with the Hallegere grant, would give Sivamdra I. a rule of forty-eight 
yeais, immediately before a rule of seventy-eight years by his son ! 

3 See above, Vol. III. p. 173 f. 4 Ep. Cam . Vol. Ill , TN. 1 ; with a lithograph 

* Here I write on the authority of photographs which Mr. Rice kiudly sent me, — one from Siv&ra and 
two from Sivarpatna. 

6 PratharriQ-vijaya-safnlatsaram Karttige punname^andu ; lines 3, 4. 

7 The words *vijdya-$a1m]vat$ara[m], followed by the aksharas irppi, are quite clear, in line 2 I 
conjecture that whet follows them staads for ttombattaneyolu. Bat the passage (and, in fact, the whole of 'the 
remainder of this record) has been so spoilt in painting the stone for photography, that it is a matter of conjecture 
only. Since writing this note, I have found an indication that Mr. Rice would take tbe record to be dated in the 
twenty - p ight'o year ( Ind. Ant . Vol. XIII* p. 188 ). The aksharat ttentanepolxi^ however, seem insufficient for the 
space and for tue marks shewn in the photograph. — This practice of painting inscriptions by hand for photography 
cannot be too strongly condemned : it presents the record* as they appear to the eye of the person who paints them 
and not as they really are; it introduces mistakes, or at least doubt, in even the clearest passages, — for instance 
the lithograph of the Talak&d inscription of Muttarasa shews in the word tornbarnttaru , line 9, an anusvdra in the 
eeeond syllable which one cannot believe to be in the original, and the word Kadabur or Kadabur in one of the 
Sivarpatna inscriptions, contraited with what reads at first sight as Kadambur or Kadambur in the other 
record at the same place (see p;tge 161 below, note 1), is another case in point; it often results, as in the date 
of this Sivarpatna inscription, and in fact throughout tbe record, in the ertation of arbitrary and fantastic signs 
which render whole passages quite unintelligible; aud, in short, it prevents altogether the purely mechanical 
reproduction which is absolutely necessary for the satisfactory and critic il study of the records. 

$ It occurs in the Talakad inscription (see the lithograph) in the words sambatsaram (line 4) and tombattar u 
(line 9).*— For tbe importance of the old or square and later or cursive forms of kh and 6, as a help in fixing the 
dates of records of the period with which we are dealing, see above, Vol. III. pp. 162, 163. Records containing 
thp ruwive forms of these two letters, cannot be placed before A.D. 801. The square forms continued in Je 
up to A.D. Sdo. But the cursive forms,- the introduction of which, into epigrapbic records, seems to be connected 
with the encouragement that was given to the Jains aud their literature in the time of the Rashtrakdta king 

X 2 



156 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V. 


proves that at any rate they cannot have been engraved much, if at all, after A.D. 850 ; while 
the general palaeographic standard of the Talakad inscription points distinctly to a time 
somewhat earlier than A.D. 800, as the date of the preparation of that record. It is, thus, 
not impossible that the person or persons who fabricated the spurious Hosur and Nagamahgala 
grants, had available, or hit off, true dates for him, in A.D. 762 and 776-77, or at any rate in 
the latter year. 1 Bat it is not possible that, in A.D. 776-77, he had already been ruling 
for fifty years, as is claimed by the Nagamangala grant ; 2 for, the synchronisms which are 
established for some of his descendants, in both lines, shew plainly that the long life and rale, 
which he nndoubtedly enjoyed, were made out by continuing into the ninth century A.D. 
The approximate limits for him will be indicated below. 

There are other records of Sripurusha-Muttarasa in Mysore, at Devalapura, Yarana, 
Purigali, Hemmige, Bannur, and Holalavadi. 5 The first four of them belong to the earlier 
part of his career : for, the Purigali record styles him “ the Maharaja Sripurusha, ,, as also, 
apparently, does the Devalapura stone ; the Yaruna record calls him tv 'the Kongani Maharaja 
Snpurusha;” the Hemmige record describes him as “ Prithm-Kongani-Muttarasa/' without any 
title ; and the Bannur record probably styles him “ Prithn[vi-Kongum-Muttarasa-Sri]pu^usha, ,, 
again without any title. All of the records which contain such a reference at all, use the same 
technical expression of high position and authority which is used in the case of SivamAra I. 4 
And the Holalavadi inscription marks an epoch in his career, by also givincr him the para- 
mount titles; it styles him “ the Konguni Ma h drd jdd h iraja and Param^svara Sripurusha.” 

As far, therefore, as individual names go, the authentic history of the Western Gangas 
of Talakad starts with these two persons, Sivamara I. and his son Sripurusha- 
Muttarasa . 5 Records giving names for earlier times may, of course, be obtained hereafter ; for, 

Am&ghavarsha I. (A.D. 814-1 5 to 877-78), — were then in uso, and are found in a record of A.D. 865. And 
record of mnch about the same date shews both the forms of b, mixed ( loc cit. o. 163, note 1). — The old or square 
form of the b occurs in also one of the Siva^oatm. records of Muttarasa, in the word Kadabilr, line 5 • and doubt- 
less also in the same word in line 3 of the other Sivarpatna record, where, however, the trae appearance of the 
original has been mnrh spoilt by painting the stone for photography, I do not find a h of either form in the SivAra 
record. And none of the four records appears to include a Jch.— Ivtv attention has been drawn to the fact that a 
cursive Jch appears, in the lithograph, at the end of line 12 of the Harihar grant of VinnyAditya of A D 694 
(In#, dnt. Vol. VI T. p. 300). An inspection, however, of the photograph, which is given with the lithograph in 
P. 3. and O.-C. Insert. No. 17, will shew that this is onlv due to iniudiciotu touching up by hand of a 
damaged 'square Jch ; this wus done at a time when it was thought more important to publish clear and easily legible 
lithographs, than to produce ahsom^ely mechanical and faithful facsimiles which an unpractised eye might find it 
difficult to deal with. 

1 .Tust as a poss'hlv true year mnv have been available, or was hit off, for BAtnga IT., in the spurious Sddi 
grant (see page 167 below, note 2) which refers itself to his time. Bat calculations shew that the details of the dates 
cited in the Hosftr and Sddi grants ore not correct for the years that are quoted ; and this detracts a good deal from 
any value that might be attributable to them. 

a This would place the commencement of his rale in A.D. 727-28. And, as the spurious Snradh&nupura 
grant (see page 160 below, note 7), which mt^s the Sarvafifc samvatsara, Saka-Samvat 729 (expired) = AD 
807-808 as the third vear of Sivamara II., would thus place the commencement of the rule of SivaraAm II in 
A.D- 8^5-804, this wonld give Muttarasa a total rnle of seventy-eight years. 

* Pp. Cam. Vol. IU.. Mv. 2>, 55 ; Ml. 87: TV. 53, 113; Nf. 23.— He is apparently al ao mentioned 
as Sriourushayya in an inscription at Felavntte (ibid My. 6), and as Muttarasa in another inscription at 
B&nnftr (ibid. TV. 115\ from which Mr. Rice has inferred (ibid. Introd. page 3) that Banndr was bi« 
birth-place. This Banmlr inscription mentions also the name of Ereyappa, and therefore seems to be not of 
Muttarasa’s own time, hut about a Century later. 

4 Prithivi.rdjifam-aey'iy or Jceyn • see page 154 above, note 4. 

5 Mr. Rice (Up. Cam. Vol. III. Tntrod. pp. 3, 7) has pi iced between them a MArasimha I. whom he 
identifies with the alleged and unnamed son of the first SivamAra and father of Sripurusha-(Muttarnsa) who 
is mentioned in some of the spurious grants (see page 154 above, t.ote 2) ; quoting “ the Salem grants’* as his 
authority^ for doing go.^ But there is no foundation in fact, of any kind, for this. The alleged generation 
between Sivamara I. and Sripnru»ha-Mattar> sa has now been disposed * f by the Valjiraalai record^pa^e 154 above) 


No. 18.] 


SRAVANA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OF MARASIMHA II. 


157 


that the Western Gangas were a people of importance and power at least a couple of ceutarms 
before the time of Sivamara I., is shewn by the fact that the Kadaruba king Mrigesa rarman 
claims to have defeated them. 1 But it is not at all probable that they will give a connected 
genealogy : the plainly imaginary nature of some of the names which the spurious grants place 
before that of Sivamara I„ is a strong indication that materials for compiling a genuine earlier 
pedigree were not available even then ; and the most that we may expect, is, a few detached 
notices. 2 All that we know as yet about the Gangas during the centuries immediately following 
the time when Mrigesavarman was in conflict with them, is, that they were conquered by the 
Western Chalukya king Kiitivarman I. in the period A.D. 567-6S to 597-9V 3 and again by his son 
Pulikesin II. about A.D. 60S, 4 and that the Harihar grant of Pulikesin’ s grandson Vinayaditya. 
dated in A.D G94, speaks of them as hereditary servants of the Western Chalukya kings. 5 
And it is plain that they first came prominently to the front on the downfall of the Western 
Chalukya dynasty. Even then, they did not immediately assert the independence which, 
undoubtedly, they subsequently enjoyed for a while. That they felt their way gradually to the 
latter step, is shewn by the facts that Sivamara I., while adopting a technical expression indi- 
cative of considerable power, used simply the title of a rasa, “king/’ and that Xluttarasn, 
though mt.kiug an advance on this, did not at first assume any higher designation than that 
of Maharaja , and developed into a Mahdrdjddhiraja and Paramesvara , as which he figures 
in the Holalavadi record, only at some later time. Now, the last Western Chalukya king. 
Kirtivarman II., lost the northern and central portions of his dominions to the Rashtrakutas, 
under Dantidurga, before A. I). 754. He was still in possession of the southern territory up 
to A.D, 757. But shortly after that time he was completely overthrown by Dantidnrga*s 
successor, Krishna I., — say, about A.D. 760. And the same period saw the extinction 
of another great dynasty of Southern India, — that of the original Pallava s of 
Conjeeveram, who also, through the possessions that they held in the Nolambavadi province, 
must have had much to do, though not so directly as the Western Chalukyas, with the Gahgns 
of Talakad. The last great Pallava king known to us, — and, unquestionably, the last repre- 
sentative of his line, — was Pallavamalla-Nandivarman, Nandipotavarrnan, or Nandipotaraja, 
son of Hiranyavarman. 6 He was a contemporary of the Western Chalukya king Vikramaditya 

11., at some time in the period A.D. 733-34 to 746-47. And we have records dated in hi 3 
twenty-first, twenty-second, and fiftieth years. 7 Now, he succeeded to the Pallava throne aft r 
a distant kinsman, Paramcsvaravarman II.; 8 the latter was preceded by his father, 
Narasimhavarman II.; and Narasiiiihavarman was preceded by his father, Parumesvaravarmnr 

1., who was contemporaneous at some time in the period A.D. 055 to 080 with Vikramaditya T 

And the person whom Mr. Rice thus misplaces,— through a mistake which is to be attributed to the imperfect 
original rendering of the Udayeudiram grant of Hastimalh- Prithi vipati II, in Mr. Foulkes' Manual of the $a?e m 
District, Vol. II. p. 369 ff.,— is Marasimha I., grandson of the second Sivamara (see page 162 below). 

1 Iud . Ant. Vol. VI. p. 25; for “ the family of Tuhgaganga” read “the lofty family of the Gannas.*’ 

5 This much, at any rate, is certain,— as I have already said (above, Vol. III. p. 175),— \h*t nothing will 
ever be obtained to authenticate such dates as those of A.D. 248 and 466 which two of the spurious grants purport 
to give for Harivarman and Avinita-Kohguni, unless it upsets in some way or other the genealogy that is asscrUd 
by the grants ; and, on the other hand, if the genealogy asserted by the grants (or anything like a real ba<is from 
which it can have been concocted) is ever authenticated, then the dates will be upset, in favour of much later 
ones. The genealogy and the dates cannot possibly stand together.— It is not likrlv, however, that there is any real 
basis of ancient fact for either the asserted erenealosry 0 r these two dates • see the Postscript, page 174 below. 

• Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 19. 4 Id. Vol. VIII. p. 244. 5 Id. Vol VI!. p. 303. 

• See Dr. Hultzsch’s South-Ind Inscrs. Vol. II. p. 342 ff. 

v They are, respectively, the Uday&odiram grant {South-Ind. Inscrs. Vol. II. p. 361); the KnsAkfidi grant 
tihid. p. 342); and an inscription at the Paneuap&ndavamalai hill (above, Vol. IV. p. 136, A). In aspect 
cf the last of them, we must understand that it is dated m the fiftieth year in which he was still reigning; not in 
simply the fiftieth year from the commencement of his reign, cited at a time wheu he himself was dead,— a 
rendering, suggested as possible by the editor of the record, for which there is no substantial authority. 

• And there wae, perhaps, also a short intermediate reign, of ]Mahdndra\ «i man III. 



158 


EPIGKAPHIA INDICA. 


[V OL. V. 


the great-grandfather of Vikram&ditja II. In such circumstances, it is not at all probable 
that Pallavamalla-Nandivarman can have completed the fiftieth year of his reign between 
A.D. 733 and 747. It is much more likely that his reign did not even commence till A/D. 715 
or later. And fifty years from that point would bring him on to just the time to which vre may 
refer Sivamara I. and Muttarasa. The spurious Hanne grant, indeed, 1 would carry him on to 
even later times : it says, speaking of Sivamara II., that u his forehead was adorned by a 
fillet {of royalty) placed there with their own hands, when they performed {his) anointment to 
the sovereignty, by the two ornaments of the Rashtrakuta and Pallava lineages named 
Govindaraja and Nandivarman, who were ( already ) anointed on (their own) foreheads.” s 
Gdvinaaraja seems to be the Rashtrakuta king Gdvinda III., whose reign began about A.D. 
783-84 and ended in A.D, 814-15 : Sivamara II. was undoubtedly contemporaneous with him 
towards the end of his reign : and we shall find reasons, further on, for believing that he did 
assist or recognise the succession of Sivamara II. to the leadership of the Gangas, Nandi- 
varman must be Pallavamalla-Nandivarman, son of Hiranyavarman. 3 He cannot have had 
anything to do with Sivamara II. at so late a time as the date of hi3 succession on the death of 
Muttarasa. And it seems that, mixed up with a real act of Govinda III. towards the second 
Sivamara, the Manne grant has preserved an anachronistic reminiscence of a real act of 
Pallavamalla-Nandivarman towards the first Sivamara; viz, that, on the downfall of the 
Western Chalukyas, he formally recognised Sivamara I. and crowned him as the chief, more or 
less feudatory, of a powerful tribe on the borders of his own outlying province of Nolambav&di. 
The date of A.D. 760, mentioned above as the closely approximate time of the complete extinction 
of the Western Chalukya power, is within the period to which Sivamara I. is to be referred, and 
within the time to which the reign of Pallavamalla-Nandivarman may be carried on. And we 
shall probably be very near the truth, if we take A.D. 755 as the initial date of the succession 
of Sivamara I. to the leadership of the Western Gangas, and A.D. 760 as the time when 
he was recognised by Pallavamalla-Nandivarman. We may then place the accession of 
Muttarasa about five years later, in A.D. 705; and, as there are indications, as already 
mentioned, that he had a long rule, and as we have a record which is actually dated in 
perhaps his twenty-ninth year, we may assume that he ruled for about forty years, up 
to A.D. 805. As the record which seems to be dated in his twenty-ninth year still gives 
him, like the earlier ones, the title of Maharaja , it would appear that it was in the last ten 
years of his time that he threw off all semhlage of vassalage and assumed the paramount 
titles ; till then, he must have been more or less feudatory, at first to Pallavamalla- 
Nandivarman, and then to a kinsman of his own, Vijaya-Narasimhavarman, who, as we 
shall see just below, succeeded to the Pallava throne after Pallavamalla-Nandivarman. 4 

1 For this record, see page 160 below, note 7. 

a The original, which I am able to qnote from photographs which Mr, Bice kindly Bent me, runs— (plate iv, a , 
line 10 ff ) — R[d*i\thtraJcu{lcu)ta-TaUaf}‘dnvaya4ilakdbhydm murddh-abhishikta-GQVwdardja-Nandivarmm* 
dbhidhtydbhydm samanushti(shthi)ta'rdjy-dbhishikdbhydm nni{nx)j d-kara-ghatita-patfa-vibhUshitad aldtapattd 
• fH‘Sivamdradiva{'h*]. — I have taken latdtapaita , ‘thefii.it surface of the forehead,’ as 

simply an alliterative expansion of laldta . Otherwise, we might divide the compound, laldia-pat to, and translate 
»< t he (hereditary Gahga) fillet (of royalty) on his forehead was adorned by (other) fillets placed there with 
their own hands, ” etc. ; this, however, doe9 not seem so satisfactory a rendering. 

t it might, perhaps, be said that he ia the later Nandivarman, also called Yijaya-Nandi-VikramavRrman, 
son of Oantivarman (see page 159 below). But this does not seem at &U probable. And, if it weie so, an anachronism 
in the other direction would be involved ; for, Nandivarman, the son of Dantivarman, cannot be placed as early as 
A.D. 797, which is the pretended date of the Manna grant ; ho cannot be placed before A.D. 804, which 
ii the date that we have for Oantivarman. 

* The Humcba inscription of A.D. 1077*78— (see Mr. Rice's Atinnal Report fo- the year ending 31st March 
1891 ; this record contains a great deal of mythical matter, relating to the S&ntara family as well as to the 
Western Gangas, and is, of course, of no more value than the spurious copper-plate grants in respect of the 
early history which it pretends to give)— asserts that Sripuru 3 ba-(Mutt*rass) was the first of the Western 



No. 18.] 


SRAVAN A-BELGOLA EPITAPH OF MARASIMHA II. 


159 


We shall revert presently to the descendants of Sripurusha-Huttarasa. Meanwhile, we may 
conveniently notice here another branch of the Western Ganga family, which succeeded to 
the Pallava dominions. 

Two tirgals or monumental tablets at Ambur in the North Arcot district, 1 — which 
commemorate the death in battle of two heroes, followers of a certain Piradi-Gangai'aiyar, 
on an occasion when the army of the Nulamba, i.e. the Pallava prince of Nolambavadi, 
attacked the village for a cattle-raid, — cite the twenty-sixth year of a king named Vijaya- 
Nripatunga-Vikramavarman. There are other inscriptions of the same king in the Tanjore 
and Trichinopoly districts. 2 And on palaeographic grounds, as well as for reasons connected 
with the history of that part of the country, it is necessary, Dr. Hultzsch tells us, to place 
the reign of this Yijaya-Nripatunga-Yikramavarman before that of the Chola king Parantaka I. 
(about A.D, 9C0 to 940). There are also two copper- plate grants of the same king, 3 one 
of which, obtained at Babur near Pondicherry, and dated in his eighth year, names his 
immediate ancestors and gives the pedigree that he claimed. That pedigree is, first, the 
Puranic genealogy of the Pallavas, from the god Brahman to the eponymous Pallava, the 
alleged founder of the family. From his family, the grant says, there were born Vimala, 
<k Kohka^lika/ , and ** other kings.” When they had passed away, a certain Dantivarman 
became king. His son was Nandivarman, whose wife was Sankha, of the Rashtrakuta 
family. And their sou was Nripatungadeva, or Vljaya-Nripatungavarman as he is 
called in the Tamil portion of the grant, — i.e. the Vijaya-Nripatuhga-Vikramavarman of the 
stone records at Ambur and elsewhere. Now, the seal of the other grant of Vijaya- 
Nripatunga-Vikramavarman bears the bull-crest of the Pallavas, — in due accordance with 
the descent that is put forward for him. But we may safely adopt Dr. Hultzsch’s suggestions, 
that the name of u Konkanika” is a reminiscence of the “ Konkani ” who is represented as the 
original ancestor of the Western Gangas in the Udayendiram grant of Hastimalla-Prithivipati 
II., 4 and who is, of course, the mythical Kongunivarman whom the spurious grants from 
Mysore claim as the fouuder of the Western Gahga family ; and that consequently, in 
spite of the Pallava pedigree, a connection with the Western Gangas was claimed by 
Vijaya-Nripatunga-Vikramavarman. And we may also safely follow Dr. Hultzsch in his 
identification of Dantivarman with the Dantiga, king of Kauchi, whom the Rashtrakuta 
king Govinda III. subdued and levied tribute from in A.D. 804, 5 and in his inference that 
the Rashtrakuta princess Sahkha, wife of Nandivarman, was a daughter of Govinda’s son 
and successor Nripatunga-Ainoghavarsha I. (A.D, 814-15 to 877-78), after whom her son 
must have been partly named. 

There are also, we are told by Dr. Hultzsch, 6 various stone records, not yet published, 
which may be attributed with some probability to Dantivarman and Nandivarman : there 
is a record of Dantivarman in the Yaikuntha-Perumai temple at Conjeeveram ; 7 and there 
are inscriptions at the Yirinchipuram temple in the North Arcot district, and at Sadupperi, 
near Yelur in the same district, 8 dated in the ninth, forty -seventh, and fifty-second years 
of a Vijaya-Nandi-Vikramavarman who may be identified with Nandivarman, son of 


Gangas to assume the designation of Peimanadi, and that he took it from a Pallava kiug of Kanchi, on 
defeating him. We have already seen that it was Mattarasa who first assumed the paramount titles. And so, 
though his records have not yet disclosed the use of the designation Permauadi by him, the Humcba record 
very possibly preserves, iu the above assertion, a real historical item, mixed up in the usual mythical matter 
in which it follows more or less the spurious grants. The said king of Kiuch!, defeated by him, would 
be his kinsman Vijaya-Naraaimhavarman,— defeated when he threw off the yoke of vassalage. 

i Above, Vol. IV. p. 180. a P* 181. 3 /jjd. p 18a 

4 For this record, see page 162 below. * Ind. Ant. Vol. XI. p. 127. 6 Above, Vol, IV. p. 181, 

7 See South’Ind* Inters. Vol. II. p 344, note 3. It styles him Mahdrdja. 

0 Id . Vol. I. p. 133, Nos. 124, 125 ; p. 130, No. 108. 


160 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA 




Dantivarman. And at Ukkal in the North Arcot district there are inscriptions 1 giving the 
came of a Kampavarman, or more fatly Vijaya-Kampa-Vikramavarman, who may have 
belonged to the same family with Yijaya-Nripatunga-Yikramavarman aud his ancestors. 

But, of more importance for present purposes, is the fact that, at Kil-Muttugur in the North 
Arcot district, there is an inscription , 2 dated in the eighteenth year of a king Vijaya- 
Narasimhavarman, which shows, in the sculptures below it, the Western Gahga emblems of the 
elephant and the goose or swan, — the emblems being connected with V ijaya* Narasi/iiliavarman 
himself by the fact that he was, evidently, the maker of the grant that is registered in the record. 
The name of this person is, characteristically, a Pallava name : but the emblems mark him 
as a Western Gahga; and he has been appropriately described by Dr. Hultzsch as “a Pallava 
by name, but Western Gahga by descent/* Now, the alphabet of this record at Kil-Muttugur 
is moie archaic than that of the Ambur inscriptions; and Vijaya-Narasimhavarman must, 
therefore, be placed at any rate before Yijaya-Nripatuhga-Yikramavarman. That he was 
connected with Vijaya-Nripatunga-Vikrainavarman, and also with Vijaya-Kampa-Yikrama- 
varman, is plainly indicated by the use of the prefix ko, “king,” in all three cases, and of the 
word iijaya , in the Tamil form vi§aiya , as part of the proper names : and it appears that one **i 
the grants of Yijaya-Nripatuhga-Yikramavarmau actually places a Narasimha ia the genealogy, 
before Dantivarman . 3 4 Whether Kampavarman came before Narasimhavarman, or after him, is 
not vet known. But the retention of the Western Gahga emblems by Narasimhavarman refers 
him to a period when "he members of this branch of the Gahga family had not fully turned 
themselves into Pallavas. And it seems probable that he was the one who secured the succes- 
sion to the Pallava dominions. If so, as he must have done it on the death of Pallavamalia- 
Nandivurman, son of Hiranyavarman, we may place his initial date somewhere about 
A.D. 760 to 770. 4 He was eventually followed by DantivarmaD, Nandivarman or Vijnya- 
Naudi-Vikramavarman, and Yijaya-Nripatunga-Yikramavarman. And one or other of them, 
or perhaps Vijaya-Karnpa-Vikramavarman, discarded the emblems of the Western Gangas 
and adopted those of the Pallavas, — thus converting himself into a Pallava, just as the Pastern 
Chalukyas became Cho]as in the time of Kulottuhga-Choladeva I . 5 The exact connection of 
Yijaya- Narasimhavarman with Sivamara I. remains to be discovered. 

We revert now to the descendants of Sripurusha-Muttarasa, The spurious Sftdi 
grant gives the name of Sivamara II., as his eldest son ; 6 and the spurious grants from Sura- 
dhenupura and Manne purport to be records of this person himself . 7 Now*, one of the 


1 See above Vol. IV. p. 182, note 4.— Two of these inscriptions are at Ukknl, in the Arcot taluka ; and one 
of them is dated in his tenth year, aad the other in his fifteenth year: th^se two records mention him as 
KampavarmaD. An inscription at Push near MAm&nddr in the same tahika, gives his name in the fuller form of 
Yijaya*Kampa-Vikramavarman. I am able to quote these details through Dr. Hultzsch’s kindness in sending me 
advanced proofs of some pages of his South-Ind. Insert . Vol. III. 

1 Ibid. p. 177 ; see also p. 182. 

« See Mr. Sewell’s Lists of Antiquities, Madrtir, Vol. II. p. 30; this is the grant in the office of the 
Collector of North Arcot, — not the Ii&h&r granted quoted in the text above. 

4 See page 158 above. 5 S**e Ind. Ant. Vol. XX p 277. 

« This grant (for which, see page 167 below, note 2) would give him the second name of Sa ; gotra ; so, also, 
The Humcha inscription of A.D. 1077-78 Tsee page 158 above, note 4). He is evidently the Saigotta-Sivamarh, 
rt'i alleged feudatory of a king Anidglidvarsha, for whom a record of about the eleventh century A. I)., at Kalbhavi 
3 .. ti Bejgaum District <Jnd. Ant. Vol XVI II. p. 309), purports to furnish a dste in A.D. 303, 314, or 339 (the 
d tills ff the date are so incorrect that the exact year which is intended cannot E* determined). 

1 These two grants are mentioned by Mr. Kiee in his Ep. Car*. Vol. III. Iutrod. p. 3. The Sarulh^nnpur* 
gran* is not yet available in detail . But I am able to quote the Manne grant from photographs which 
Mr. Rice was kind enough to send me.— It appears that the Suradhenupm a srraj.t cites the Saivajit samvatsara 
&aka-° >rh<?at 729 (expired*, =* A.D. 807-303, aa ihe third year of Sivamara IT, and thus would place the 

commeu ent of hia ule in A.D, 805-SC6.— The Manne grant, however, taking the genealogy as far ii» 



No. 18.] 


SRAVANA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OF MARAS IMHA II. 


161 


* 

Sivarpatna inscriptions makes mention of a Sivamara who was governing- the village of 
Kadabur or Kadabur, 1 — which may be identified either with the modern t Kadabu^u , in 
the Gundlupet talnka of the Mysore district, or with Kadaba in the Gubbi taluka of 
the Tumkur district, — in the time of Sripurusha-Muttarasa, and in, perhaps, his twenty- 
ninth year. 2 There i3 nothing in this record to establish any relationship between this 
Sivamara and Muttarasa. Bat we may take it as tolerably certain that he was a son of 
Sripnrusha-Muttarasa, as stated in the spurious grants, and that we have here another 
authentic name, that of Sivamara II. We have already noticed the fact that the spurious 
Mamie grant speaks of a fillet of sovereignty being placed on his head by the Rashtrakuta 
king Govinda III. (from about A.D. 783-81 to A ,D. 811-15). Spurious as the record is, there 
is nothing impossible in the truth of the statement ; especially if it is taken in connection 
with certaiu statemeits in the records of Govinda III. himself, which tell us that he released 
from long captivity, and sent back to his own country, one of the Gangas, who had been 
imprisoned by his father Dhruva. 3 The Rashtrakuta records, indeed, do not disclose the name 
of the Ganga who was thus treated. But the clue to his identity is tarnished by the spurious 
Manne grunt, which asserts that Sivamara II. made himself famous by being victorious 
against the armies of the Rashtrakutas, the Chalukyas/ and the Haibayas ( i.e . the Kalachuris), 
when they were encamped at a village named Mudukundur, and that he defeated the countless 
cavalry of Dhruva which had overrun the whole earth. 5 Sivamara II. may very well have 
been entrusted with the commaud in some war between his father and Dhruva. And we 
may suppose that, during the campaign, he tvas eventually defeated, captured, and imprisoned 
by Dhruva, and that, on Muttarasa's death, he was liberated by Govinda III., in order to 
succeed to the leadership of the Gangas, on which occasion the Rashtrakuta king would 
very likely crown him, — as the spurious Manne grant asserts,— with some feudatory crown. 
This event may be placed somewhere about A.D, 805. The same passages in the Rashtrakuta 
records tell us that, after no long time, Govinda III. found it necessary to re-conquer the 
Ganga, who through excess of pride stood in opposition to him, and to put him in fetters 

Sivainura II. soil of Sripurmha, tlieu tells us that Sivamara’s so». was Mirasimha; it then proceeds to 
record a tyrant that was mad to a Jain temple at Mluyapura with the permission of this Mirasimha, who, 
bavins attained the position of Yvvardja % was administering the whole ^of the Ganga manda^a ; and then, after 
specifying the boundaries of -he grant, it gives the date, in the month Ashldha (June-July), S.-S. 719 (expired), 
falling in A.D. 797. It would thns establish for Sivamdra II. a date, when he either was ruling or else had 
ruled and passed away, eight years before the commencemmt of his rule according to the Surndhemipura 
^ Mirasimha, son Sivamara II.* is not meutioued in any other record that has as yet come to notice. 
And the D«*rson who is introduced in the Manne graut seems to be the Mirasimha I. of the Udayendiram grant,— 
iu real’ tv the grandson of Sbauiara II. 

1 In this record, the third uksham of this name appears at first sight to be a badly formed mhd ; hut 
this must be attributed to the original being spoilt in painting the stone for photography. A pl.ee which 

undoubtedly the same, is mentioned in also the other Sivarpatna inscription; there, the third ukshara 
is uGthin^ but btl and,aiuless we assume that the painting of the stone ha<* produced the obliteration of an 
amwara over the second akshara , the amue is distinctly either Kadabur, with the dental rf, or Kadabilr, with the 

lingual d. 

2 See page 155 above, note 7. 3 Ind. Ant. Vol. VI. pp. 69, 70; Vol. XI. pp. 160, 161. 

4 rp 0 avo i(i attributing to the Manne grant any more anachronisms than are inevitable, we may take this as 
referring to the Eastern Chalukyas. Narendramrigardia-Vijayaditya II.* of that dynasty, is described (see 
Ind Ant Vol. XX. p. 101) as waging war for twelve years, by diy and by night, and fighting a hundred 
and ei^ht battles, with the armies of the Gangas and the Rashtrakuta* : the passage, however, does not 
mention the name* of any individual Gahga; and the period of Vijayaditya II., A.D. 799 to 843, covered a great 
deal more than the time of Sivamlra II. 

• The original runs— (plate iv. a., line 3 ff.)— Mud»kundur-n ndw-gr 6m’6pav^Jitfi>Rdshtraku{kii)ta- 
Chnlvkua-Hathaifa^ramnkha^rapiivi^sarMh^mlhilka^ainyn-mia^^kh, hvfa-prabhdvah [»*] A pi 

chah (read cha) 1 Dhor-diviy am sama,itdt=pra 7 jal'J,n^‘pagata-v>jdpta-dik-chn!:, nirjity=dnika~samkhyam 

e t c — Dhdra is the Profit form of the name of Dhruva r it is used in also the passages referred to in note 3 

above. 

T 


t 


162 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[VOL. V, 


again. This would probably be about five years later, — say in A.D. 810. And it was 
doubtless this second imprisonment of Sivamara II. that let in his younger brother 
Ranavikrama to the Western Ganga succession. 1 

A copper-plate grant from Udayendiram in the Forth Arcot district 2 carries this 
line of descent three generations further : it mentions, in the lineage of il Konkani, the first 
of the whole Ganga race/' — in which lineage, it says, following the spurious grants, there 
had been born Vishnugopa, Hari {i.e. Harivarman), Madhava, Durvimta, Bbuvikrama, and 
“other kiogs,” — Sivamara EL; 3 his son Prithivipati I., otherwise called Aparajita; 4 5 
Marasimha I., “ the light of the Ganga family/’ son of Prithivipati I. ; and Marasimba’s 
son, Prithivipati II., otherwise called Hastimalla, “a flamingo in the tank of the Ganga 
family.” In the way of historical information, it tells ns that Prithivipati I. saved Iriga 
and Nagadanta, sons of king Dindi, — one of them from Amoghavarsha, i.e. the Rashtrakuta 
king Amoghavarsha I. (A.D. 814-15 to 877-78), and the other from the jaws of death; 
that he fought a battle at a place named Vaimbalguli ; and that he defeated the 
Pandya prince Varaguna in the great battle of Sripurambiya ; B and that Prithivipati II. 
received from Madiraikonda-Parakesarivarma- Parantaka, i.e. the Chola king Parantaka I. 
(about A.D. 900 to 940), “the dignity of lord of the Banas,” — t.e. that Parantaka I. 
conferred on him the leadership of the Bana kingdom, 6 which is defined elsewhere as 
“ the land to the west of the Andhra country/’ 7 And it registers the fact that, at the request 
of Prithivipati II., Parantaka I., in the fifteenth year of his reign, — t.e . in or about A.D. 
915, — converted the village of Kadaikkottur, together with Udayasandiramahgalam 
(Udayendiram itself), into a brahmadeya , or grant to Brahmans, which was then called 
Viranarayanachch&ri after one of his own appellations. The record says that, from the 
time when the Bana kingdom was conferred on Prithivipati II., it was thought that he 
was born of the race of Bali, i.e. of the Bana race ; and the Tamil portion of it actually calls 
him Sembiyan-Mavali-Vanaraya, meaning apparently, “ (he who was appointed) Mahabali- 
Banaraja (by) the Ch61a king.” And it further discloses the fact that, while retaining 
the Western Ganga title of “lord of Nandi (t.e. Nandagiri), n he took the title of “lord of 
the city of Parivipuri/’ 8 and assumed the banner of a black-buck and the crest of a bull. 
It is thus evident that, like his connections who became Pallavas, Prithivipati II. turned 
himself regularly into a Bana. 


1 Somewhere about the end of the time of SivamAra II. there was, — if the Kadaba grant (above, Vol. IV. 

p. 332) might be relied on, — a certain Ch&kir&ja, who is described in that record as “ king of the whole of the 

Ganga province,” in A.D, 813. But I have not found any trace of such a name in the Ganga records. 

* South’Ind. lasers. Vol. II. p. 375. It was first brought to notice by the Rev. T. Foulkes, in the Manual 
of the Salem District, Vol, II. p. 369 ff. But it has only recently been made properly available, by Dr. 
Hultzsch’B critical edition of it; and some remarks by me (above, Vol. III. pp. 165, 167), based on Mr. Fonlkes’ 
version of it, require alteration. 

* The synchronisms which the record establishes for Prithivipati I. and his grandson, and still more, the 

actual date of A.D. 915, or closely thereabouts, for the grandson,— oblige us to identify this person with the 

second Sivam&ra, not with his grandfather of the same name. 

4 Dr. Hulfczsch has suggested (above, Vol. IV. p. 182) that Prithivipati I. may be the Pirudi-Gangaraiyar who 
ia mentioned in the Ambftr records of the twenty-sixth year of Vijaya-Nripatnnga.Vikramavarman (page 159 
above). 

5 The modern Tiruppiiambiyam (the * Thirnparambiam * of the Madras Postal Directory) in the Kumbba- 
konam tAluka of the Tanjore district (see South-Ind. Insert. Vol. II. p. 381). 

6 An inscription of Parantaka I. at Sholingbur in the North Arcot district, six years earlier in date (above, 
Vol. IV. p. 221), also mentions the conferring of the BAna kingdom on Prithivipati II., and the popular belief, 
from that time, that he belonged to the Bftna race ; it further gives him the name of Vira-Cbdla, and speaks of 
his defeating some unnamed enemy ia the battle of VallAja. 

7 Above, Vol. III. p. 78, verse 7. 

9 In the Sholingbur inscription (see the last note but one) this name appeals in a slightly different form ; 
Ppthivipati II. is there called “ the king of the people of Pafivai.” 


No. 18.] 


SRAVANA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OF MARASIMHA II. 


163 


In the other line of descent from Sripurasha-Mattarasa, the Vallimalai inscription has 
given ns the names of his son Ranavikrama, and Ranavikrama’s son Kajamalla* 1 The 
latter is evidently the Dharma-AF ahdruj dd hirdj a 2 Satyavakya-Kongunivarma-Permanadi- 
R&jamalla, “lord of Kovalala, the best of towns,” and “lord of the mountain Nandagiri,” 
who is mentioned as the ruling prince in an inscription at Husukuru, in Mysore, 3 dated 
Saka-Samvat 792 (expired), = A.D. 870-71. This mnst be taken as his final date. An earlier 
record, at Doddahnndi in Mysore, 4 mentions him as simply Satyavakya-Permanadi, and 
his father Ranavikrama as the Dharma-Mahdrdjddhirdja Nitimarga-Kongunivarma- 
Permanadi, 44 lord of Kovalala, the best of towns/' 5 and u lord of the mountain Nandagiri : 
this record was written on the death of the father ; it tells us that Nitimarga died, and that 
there survived, to ( render service to) his son Satyavakya, a domestic official named Agarayya, 
who is apparently described in the text, and represented in the sculptures above it, as 
tending Nitimarga in his dying moments. 6 

The Husnkuru inscription of A.D. 870-71, quoted above, mentions also a certain Butarasa, 
who then, in the time of Rajamalla, was governing the Kongalnad and Punad districts, 
as Yuvardja . With this person, whom we may conveniently enter in the table as Butuga 
I ., 7 and wbo, as tbe Yuvardja or cbosen successor, was in all probability the actual successor, 


1 The spurious S&di grant (see page 167 below, note 2 ) gives R&jamalla’s name, and two of his secondary 
appellations, correctly, — Satyavakya-Kongunivarma-Rajamalla. But it calls his father VijayUditya ; as, also, 
do some other records of the same class. — It is not unlikely that the name of Vijayaditya was borrowed, by a 
particularly gross mistake, from tbe Eastern Cbalukya dynasty, two members of which had hostile relations with 
the Gangas : for one of them, Narendram/igaraja-Vijay&ditya II., see page 161 above, note 4 ; the other is his 
grandson, Gunaka- Vijayaditya III., who, we are told, being prompted by tbe Rashtrakilta king, conquered the 
Gangas, at some time in the period A.D. 844 to 888 (see Ind. Ant. Voi. XX. p. 102, and above, Vol. IV, p. 226) ; in 
this passage again, there is unfortunately no mention of the name of any individual Gahga. 

a This title means literally “a Mahdrdjddhiraja by or in respect of religion/’ or by free translation “ a pious 
or righteous Mahdrdjddhiraja ” It occurs, in earlier times, unquestionably as a title of paramount sovereignty, 
in the case of the Pallava king Siva-Skandavarman. In the Western Ganga records, however, it is an amplification 
which attracts attention, of the plain title Mahdrdjddhiraja which, coupled with JParam&Zwra y is given in the 
Holalav&di inscription (see page 156 above) to Muttarasa, wbo, in one period of bis career, wa3 undoubtedly a 
paramount king. And the recurrence, in the subsequent Western Gahga records, of the same amplified form 
without any other paramount title, suggests that it was used by the Western Gangas more as a hereditary and 
honorific designation than with the intention of implying any claim to paramount sovereignty. Like the great 
feudatory nobles of other families, the Western Gangas were doubtless semi-independent in their hereditary province ; 
but in all other respects they seem distinctly to have acknowledged the supremacy of the Rasbtrakdta kings. 

* Ep. Cam. Vol. III., Nj. 75. 

4 Ibid. TN. 91; with a lithograph. The original stone is now in the Bangalore Museum. — That this record 
was written not much, if at all, after A.D. 850, is shewn by its containing the old square form of the kh % iu vdkhya, 
by mistake for rakya % line 6. 

8 Mr. Bice’s transcription of the text gives puramrcZmra: but his lithograph shews puraparasvara ; while 
a genuine photograph from the stone itself, sent to me by Dr. Hultzsch, shews clearly puraparisvara , which may 
stand either for para var-es vara, or for para-para, nZsvara.— These two hereditary titles are used iu the records 
on almost every occasion. But it will not be necessary to repeat them in every instance in the following pages. 

« g e ge ems to be represented as drawiug out from Nitimarga’s left side a dagger with which the death-blow 

bad been given. . 

T xbe name Bdtarasa is only another form of Bfituga; other forms are, in Kanarese Bdtayya, and in 

Sanskrit BhCdArya, (see page 166 below) ; and we may at any time obtain genuine records mentioning Bdtarasa 
as Bdtuga or Butayya. He is, in fact, spoken of as Bdtuga in the Humcha record, and in tbe spurious Sudi 

erant which latter record would further give him the biruda of Gunaduttaramga, “the lintel of virtue.’’— The 

Sudi grant says that he married Abbalabbi, daughter of (the R&shtrskdta king) Amdghavarslia (I.) (A.D. 
814-15 to 877-78). This statement, however, remains to be verified ; and it may possibly be based on nothing 
bnt the fact that his descendant B4tug* II. married a daughter of Amfighavarsha-Vaddiga (see page 1G6 below).— 
The name Bdtuga is rather a peculiar one, if, as according to Kittel’s Kannada- English Dictionary, it means 
only ‘a shameless man; (a boaster).’ It is derived from butu, which means, according to the same authority, 
•fonl, shameless, obscene language; obscenity,’ but to which Beeve and Sanderson’s Kanarese Dictionary would 
give the meanings of ‘ exaggeration fear, apprehension. 




164 


EPIGRAPHIA 1NDICA. 


[Vol. V 


of Rdjamalla, 1 — we may venture to identify the Dliarma- Ma harujadhird ja Satyavakya* 
Kongunivarma-Permanadi of an inscription at Biliur, in Coorg, 3 which cites a date in the 
month Phalguna (Feb. -March). Saka-Samvat 809 (expired), falling in A.D. 888, as being in his 
eighteenth year, and thus fixes the commencement of his rule in A.D. 870 or 871. And, as we 
know that not long after this date there was a ruler of the Gangavadi province named 
Ereyappa, whose son Rachamalla was killed by Butuga in or before A.D. 940, to Butnga I. we 
may also ascribe an inscription at Iggali, in Mysore, 3 which, again, mentions the ruling 
prince as the Vharma-Makdrcijildhtrdja Satyavakya-Kongunivarma-Permanadi, and men- 
tions Ereyappa also, and further speaks of a certain Racheya-Ganga, who, it tells ns, died 
fighting against the Nolamba, i.e. the Pallava prince of the Nolambavadi province, in the^twenty- 
second year, i.e. in A.D. 881-92. 4 

Butnga I. must have been succeeded by Ereyappa. We have a record of this prince, 
mentioning him by the name of Ereyappa, in the Begur inscription, 5 which describes him as 
a spotless moon in the sky that was the family of the Gangas, and says that, having deprived all 
his enemies of power, he was governing the Gangavadi ninety-six. thousand as an united whole, 6 
and which further mentions a war between the army of the Nagattara and a certain Vira- 
Mahendra 7 who was probably one of the Pallavas of Nolambavadi, and an attack upon a 
person named Ayyapadeva. 3 And, from the way in which the date fits in, we mav ascribe to 

1 The spurious Sudi grant (see page 167 below, note 2) would make him a grandson of RujnmalTa, giving the 
intermediate names of Nitimarga-Kongunivarma-Ereganga, (on of Rajamalla, and of a second SatyavLva- 
Kongunivarma-R&jamalla, son of Eregahga and elder brother of Bdtuga-(Bdtarasa). As Yumrdja, he mav "of 
course, have been the grandson, quite as well as the son, brother, or nephew, of Rajamalla. But I cannot 

find anything to authenticate any of the alleged intervening names. 

2 Ind. Ant. Vol. VI. p. 102, No. II., with a lithograjfh ; Coorg Inscriptions, p, 5.— As is to be expected from 
its date, this record shews the later cursive form of the J, in Biliur , line 8, beddore, line 9, elpadimbarum line 
10, and several other words, and the later cursive kh, in Wchittam , line 13. In sartba , for sarvta , Une 7 and in 
some similar combinations, and in Be\xutu, line 14, it has a form of b which might suitably be called the “open ” b 

^ Bp. Cam. Vol III., Nj. 139. 

4 I am dealing with only the really important and useful records, — mostly those which can bo used to 
determine the succession or may be referred to specific individuals, through their giving personal names or dates or 
which otherwise present points of leading interest. In Bp. Carn. Vol III., a record at Kyatanhalli (<r. 147. with 
a lithograph) mentions Satyavakya-Kohgunivarma-Permanadi and Epeyappa, and another at Mddalulli fNj. 130) 
mentions Perm&di, Mahidevi, and Ereyappa,* inscriptions of a Satyavakya at Rlmpnra (Sr. 143. \Wh a litho- 
graph), at Kappusdge (Nj. G8), at Gatfcavadi (Nj. 97), and at Nagarle (Nj. 155), may be records of Satvmftkyn- 
Bdtuga I. (or of some other Satyavakya), and so also may another inscription at Kottir, in Coorg (hd Ant. 
Vol VI. p. 103, No. HI; Coorg Inscriptions, p. 6); and an inscription at Pattasdmahalli (Sr. 134) may be 
referred either to Bdtuga I. or to Ereyappa. But these records teach us nothing, and cannot be placed with am' 
certainty until we obtain other records, assignable without any doubt, mentioning the priests, etc., whose name* 
occur in them. 

6 Bp. Ind. Vol. I. p. 346 ; for a lithograph, see the frontispiece of Mr. Kice’s Mysore Inscriptions . 

8 The expression in the original is ika'chchkattra-chchhayeyol , “ under the shadow of a single umbrella.** Its 
purport is explained by such passages as that which tells ns that GahgarAja, the minister of th<> Uoysala prince 
Vishnuvardhana, having driven out all the feudatories of the Chdla king from the Gangavadi province, “ brought 

under one umbrella all that ( territory ) which had become (split up into various separate) districts,” ndd-ddud* 

ellaman-fta-chchhatram-mddi (Bp. Cam. Vol. III., Ml. 31, line 34; and compare a similar passage in Inters, at 
Srav.’Bel. No. 90). 

J Mr. Rice (Bp. Carn. Vol. III. Introd. pp. 4, 6) seems to Identify this person with the Maliendr&lhirflja of an 
inscription at Baragdr, who was the son of Pallav&dhirAja and of Jfcyabbe, younger sister of a Ganga who had the 
appellation of Nttim&rga, i.e., apparently, of Ereyappa himself.— From a transcription which Mr. Rice has kindly 
sent me, it appears that the Baragdr inscription describes the younger sister of Nitimarga as also a daughter of 
Eajamalla. This Nitimfcrga, therefore, was a son of Eajamall*. 

8 I have said (Bp. Ind. Vol. I. p. 350) that it is possible,— but by no means a certainty,— that this person 
may be the Western Chalukya Ayyana I., of the time between the period of the Western Chalukyaa of B&dftmi 
and the period of the Western ChAlukyas of Kalylni. Mr. Bice, however (see Bp. Cam. Vol. III. Introd. p. 4, 



No. 18.] 


SR AVAN A.-BE LGOLA EPITAPH OP MARASIMHA IT. 


165 


him an inscription at Kulagere. in Mysore, 1 which mentions the ruling prince as the Bharma - 
Mahordjudhirdja Nitimarga-Korigunivarma-Permanadi, and is dated Saka-Sariivat Sol 
(expired), = A .33. 809-910. The Iggali inscription has given a date for him in A.D. S91-92. 
That, however, is a date for him in the time of his predecessor. And, from an inscription at 
Honnayakanhalli, 3 it would appear that his rule began in S.-S. 815 (expired), =A.D. 893-94, s 
It would seem that he did not secure the succession without some opposition. We have, just 
after the date mentioned above for tlio commencement of his rule, an inscription at Tayalur, 
in Mysore, 4 i.e. within the Western Gahga territory, which is dated S.-S. 817 (expired), 
= A.D. 895-96, and mentions, as then reigning or ruling, a certain Nolamhadhiraja, — that 
is to say, the Pallava prince of the Nolambavadi province. The explanation of this is 
evidently furnished by the statement in the iiegur inscription that, when that record was 
drawn up, Ereyappa was governing, after having deprived all his enemies of their power ; 
plainly, his accession to the leadership of the Western Gahgas was opposed, and chiefly by 
the Pallavas of Nolambavadi, who succeeded in occupying for a time part at least of his here- 
ditary possessions. 

From the Atakftr inscription, 5 we know that Ereyappa had a son named Rachamalla I./’ 
and that it was by fighting and killing Rachamalla that another member of the family, Butuga 
If., obtained the succession. As will be seen further on, this occurred in or before A.D. 940. 
yy 1 0 have no records attributable to Rachamalla I. l>ut the length of time fiom the initial 


note 3), appears to have obtained evidence that Ayyapadeva was a Pallava.— The evidence seems to be the Hire- 
Bidiin ur inscription (mentioned by Mr. Rice as the Goribidmir inscription in Mys. Inscrs. Introd. p. 45), which, 
according to a transcription that Mr. Rice has kindly sent me, distinctly mentions Ayyapadeva as PaUaudnvaya aud 
as having also the name of Nolamhadhiraja. 

1 Bp Cam . Vol. HI., Ml. 30.— As I have already intimated (page 152 above), my identifications, upon which 
this part of the succession is arranged, must be taken as tentative for the present : the miscellaneous subordinate 
items of information, contained in the records at present available, do not help at all ; aud we want more 
facsimiles in the case of records which are not dated. But my identifications are at any rate more satisfactory than 
those proposed by Mr. Rice. Thus (ibid. Introd. p. 4, and see also his Classified List which follows page 36), he 
would identify the NitimArga of the Kulagere inscription, and Ereyappa, with, respectively, the Nitimarga and 
his son Satyavakya (whom I identify with Ranavikrama, the son, and Raj a mall a, the grandson, of Muttarasa) 
of the Doddahundi inscription (page 163 above); whereas, the date of the Kfilagere inscription, and the period in 
which we mu«t of necessity place Epeyappa, are altogether inconsistent with the use of the old form of the Jeh in 
the* Doddahundi inscription. Ard he would farther identify with the Nitimdrga of the Kfilagere inscription the 
Satyavakya (whom 1 identify with Bfituga I.) of the Iggali inscription (page 164 above) ; whereas, it seems clear to 
me that a Nitimarga is not to be identified with any Satyavakya. 

a Mentioned by Mr. Bice in Bp. Cam . Vol. III. Introd. p. 4. I assume that Mr. Rice means that this 
ord* actually contains the appellation of NitimArga, and that he does not simply allot it to a Nitimarga 
(namely to the NitimArga to whom he would allot also the Doddahundi and KAlagere records) on some merely 

inferential grounds. _ 

3 Here, aga ; n, I am dealing with only the really important records. Other records of Ereyappa, m 

B Cam Vol. Ill are TN. H5, at Bannur, and Nj. 78, at Husukfirn. For others which mention him with 
„?• nrodece«sor, and” for one which may belong to either of them, see page 164 above, note 4. And we may 
perhaps allot to him records of a Nitimirga at Kannegak (TN. 140), and at Gattavhdr (Nj. 98) 

F * By Cam Vol. III., Md. 13 .— Mr. Rice {ibid. Introd. p. 4) speaks of it as “apparently an independent 
OTant by^Nolamb&dkiraja, ” but also suggests that Nolamb&dhirlja was “perhaps subordinate to Nitimarga,” 
B to Erevanna I think, however, that the true explanation is that which I suggest. He also (toe. c.t.) 
* r noses to treat as **ao intrusive Pallava inscription” another record at Tiyahlr (Md. 11. with a lithograph). 
Which is dated in the month Tirana (July-Ang.l, Saka-Samvat 829 (expired), falling in A.D. 907 : here, however, 
there is nothfbg to refer the record to any particular family ; it only registers a grant made by villagers, and n 
does cot mention the ruler at all. 

& See page 166 f M below. , . . ,, , - „ 

• The Humcha inscription (see page 158 above, note 4) appears to give his name in the form of RAjamalla ; 
„ also probably does the spurious Sudi grant (page 167 below, note 2). The Shdi grout would give him the appella- 
tion of Nitimirga, and the biruda of Kachcheya-Gahga, “ the quarrelsome or fighting Gangs ; ” but the Hnmsba 
inscription appears to shew Rkjamalla and Kachcheya-Gahga as separate persons. 



166 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[VOL. V. 


date of Ereyappa, A.D. 893-94, to the latest date that we have for Butuga II., A.D. 949-50, 
renders it probable that he did actually succeed to the leadership of the Gahgas, though perhaps 
for no long period ; and the Rashtrakuta record which mentions his overthrow and fixes the 
latest date for it, seems, in fact, to describe him as actually in possession. 

The next in succession was Butuga II., 1 whose name appears in Kanarese in also the 
form of BAtayya and in Sanskrit as Bhiitarya, and who had the full appellation of the 

Dharma-Mahdrdjddhiraja Satyav&kya-Kongunivarma-Permanadi-Butuga , 2 and the bimdas 

of Gahga-Gangeya, “a very Karttikeya, Kama, or Bhishma, among the Gahgas, ” 
Ganga-Nar&yana, “a very god Vishnu among the Gahgas, ” Nanniya-Ganga, “ the truthful 
Gan ga,” and Jayaduttaramga, “the lintel of victory. 1 " 3 It has already been noted that the 
Atakur inscription tells us that he obtained the succession by fighting and killing Rachamalia 
I., son of Ereyappa; and, that this occurred in or before A.D. 940, is shewn by a 
RAshtrakAta grant from Deoli, dated in that year, which mentions the fact of the overthrowing 
of Rachamalla (therein called Rachbyamalla), and implies that Butuga (therein spoken of as 
Bhutarya) received material assistance from the RashtrakAta king Krishna III. 4 The Hebbal 
inscription of A.D. 975, from the Dharwar district, 5 tells us that, during the reign of the 
Rashtrakuta king Krishna II.,BAtuga II. married Revaka, who was a daughter of Vaddiga 
(grandson of Krishna II.) and an elder sister of Krishna III,, and that he received, as her 
dowry, the districts known as the Puligere or Purigere three-hundred, which was the country 
that lay round, and was named after the ancient name of, Lakshmeshwar, in the Miraj State, 
about the centre of the Dharwar district, — the Belvola three -hundred, which lay in the same 
neighbourhood and inclnded, as various records shew, Gadag, Annigere, Kurtakoti, and 
Nargund, in Dharwar, HAli in the Belgaum district, and KukkanAr in the Nizam’s 
Dominions, — the Kisukad seventy, which was a small district of which the chief town was 
Pattadakal, the ancient Kisnvolal and Pattada-Kisuvolal, in the Badami taluka, Bijapur 
district, — and the Bage, Bagenad, or Bagadage seventy, which ,,as another small district 
lying round Bagalkot, the ancient Bagadage and Bagadige, the chief town of the Bagalkbt 
taluka in the same district. This marriage must be placed somewhere towards the end of the 
reign of Krishna II. ; say, about A.D. 910. 6 The same record mentions also another wife of 
BAtuga II., named Kallabbarasi, and his mother Bhujjabbarasi, the elder sister of Battayya, 
Simhavarmarasa, and Chechchapayya. Of the time of BAtuga II. himself, we have an 
inscription at AtakAr, in Mysore, 7 dated in the Saumya samvatsara , Saka-Samvat 872 


1 The Hnmcha inscription and the spurious Sudi grant represent him as a younger brother of lUjainalla, i.e 
Mchamalla I. This statement, however, has not yet been verified. 

1 The spurious SAdi grant would give the first component of this appellation in the form of Satyanitiv&kya ; 
this, however, is an anomalous form, which is not at all likely to be authentic. * 

* These birudas are given in the AtakAr inscription. In the last of them Jayad is, by euphonic combination 

for jayada, the Kanarese genitive singular of jaya. r 

4 The original says, according to Dr. Bhandarkar’s translation, that Krishna III. planted as it were in 
garden in the field of the Gahgas the holy tree of BhAtdrya, having uprooted the poisonous tree of Rachl A 11 » 

(Jour. Bo. Br. B. As. Soc. Vol. XVIII. p. 251); so, also, the Kar&d grai.t of A. D. 959 ^nt^d hi 

Gangap&ti. as in a garden, the pure tree BhAtArya, having uprooted the poisonous tree BachhvAm*ui” / w * 
Vol. IV. p. 289). 

1 Above, Vol, IV. p. 350. 

5 Krishna II. succeeded to the throne in or very soon after A.D. 878; and the latest date that w e have for 
him is A.D. 911-12. According, therefore, to the actual wording of the Hebb&l inscription, the marria e ma^have 
taken place at any time between A.D. 878 and 912. But we must place it as late as possible in that'^riod* 
because Krishna II. was a great-gTand father at the time of the marriage, and Mamjadgva, the son of BAto a II* 
and Revaka, was not born,— so the record tells ns,— until the reign of Vaddiga, i.e between A D 933 an( t 94A 

* Bp. Ind. Vol. II. p. 168 ; since then, it has been edited by Mr Rice also (Bp. Cam. Vol. Ill Md^l wi h 

a lithograph), to whose rendering I owe the name of the hound KSli in line 10.— Mr. Ri C e (ibid Introd * 
and see the Classified List of the Inscriptions) would connect with Butuga certain inscriptions at Varuna ** * 

(My 35 to 37 and 40 to 45), which appear to mention CMlukya princes named Narasimha and Gugg^o” 



No. 18.] 


SRAVANA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OP MARASIMHA II. 


167 


(current), == A.D. 949-50, which records the facts that Krishna III. fought and killed the Chola 
king Rajaditya at TakkMa, — the modern Takkolam, on the south-east of Arconum Junction 
in the North Arcot district Madras Presidency, 1 — and that Bdtuga II., being pleased with 
the prowess in battle of his follower Manalarata, of the lineage of Sagara, who had the biruda of 
Bdtugana-ahkakara, “ the warrior or champion of Butuga.” and the hereditary title of “ lord of 
Valahki, the best of towns/ 7 bestowed on him, as a mark of favour, a hound named Kali; that 
the hound was set at a big boar on a hill in the village of Belatur in the Kekle district ; that 
the hound and the boar killed each other; and that, in commemoration, the stone which bears 
the record, and which has on it a sculpture shewing the fight of the hound and the boar, was 
set up at Atakur, and a small grant of land was made. It is an addition at the top of this 
record which tells ns that Butuga II. had, previously, obtained the Gangavadi province by 
fighting and killing Raehamalla I., the son of Ereyappa; and it adds that it was Butuga II. 
who actually slew the Chola king Rajaditya, and that Krishna III. then gave to Butuga II., i.e. 
confirmed him in the possession of, the four districts mentioned above as forming the dowry of 
Revaka, and also gave him the Banavasi twelve-thousand province. 3 

The Hebbal inscription tells us that the son of Butuga II. and Revaka was Maruladeva; 
but it does not say that he ruled, and perhaps implies that he did not. To Maruladeva and 
Bijabbe, it says, there was born a son, whom it perhaps names as Rachcha-Ganga ; and he, it 
says, did rule : we have, however, as yet, no records attributable to him. 

Next in succession, it tell* us, there < ame another son of BQtuga II., by another wife 
named Kallabbarasi, viz. Marasimha II., who had, as we learn from it and other records, the full 


a god named Bute a vara, which seems to commemorate cither Butuga II. or his predecessor Butarasa-BOtuga I. t 
and a battle between two persons called Budiga and Polukesi, the latter of whom, he suggests, may have been the 
Western Ch&lukya kicg Irivabedanga-Saty&sraya,— whose period, however (A.D. 997 and 1008), is half a century 
too late for Butuga II. Till we have lithographs, it is impossible to make any satisfactory use of these inscriptions. 

1 I owe this identification to Dr. Hultzsch, who tells me that at Takkolam there is, among other records, an 
inscription of Krishna III. himself. — Takkdlam is a postal town, in the W&Uj&pet taluka, and, aa such, is duly 
mentioned in the Indian Postal Gv'Je, which I had overlooked. 

a A copper-plate grant from Sudi, in the Dharwar district (above, Vol. III. p. 158, with a partial litho- 
graph), purports to be another record of Bdtuga II., and to be dated in the month Karttika (Oct.-Nov.), falling 
in A D. 93S or 939, ot the Yikarin samvatsara, coupled with Saka-Samvat 8G0 expired, perhaps correctly (accord - 
ino- to the northern luni*solar system of the sixty-} ear cycle), or perhaps by mistake for 861 expired (according 
toldie southern luni-solar system). It presents a perfectly possible da.e for Bdtuga II. ; and it quotes his birudas 
correctly. On the other hand, it includes the fictitious genealogy, before Sivamara I., which is given iu the 
unquestionably spurious records; in mentioning a real historical fact, viz. the marriage of Butuga II. with a 
daughter of Amoghavarsha-Vaddiga, it leaves us to infer that her name was Divalamba, whereas the name given 
in the Hebbal inscription is Kevaka; th» characters in which it is engraved present a decidedly later general ap- 
earance than those of the Atakdr inscription, and of any records, that I am acquainted with, belonging to 

within fifty years or so after the asserted dale ; and the details of the date do not work out correctly for either of 

the two years to which it is possible to refer them. These points present reasous for viewing the record with 
great suspicion. And there is the following -additional reason for stamping it conclusively as a spurious record : 
namely, it mentions the victory over the Chola king Rajaditya as a fact already accomplished in A.D. 938 or 939 ; 
whereas, not only is this event not mentioned in the D«‘dli grant of A.D. 940, which enumerates the achievement# 
of Krishna m. pretty fully, and would certainly not have omitted such an event as that, if it had occurred, 
but also the Atakur inscription distinctly places the • \ent in A.D. 949-50.— I have said (above, Vol. III. p. 176) 

that the characters of the SAdi grant seem to be distinctly more modern than those of the Korumelli grant of 

R&iaraia I. ( Ind . Ant. Vol. XIV. p. 48, and lithog; ipn), which was issued in or after A.D. 1023. The Korumelli 
an t is from the eastern part of Southern India. , Among the western records, the characters of the Sudi grant 
resemble most closely those of the grant of the Silahira prince Miiasimhn, of A.D. 1058 (Cave-Temple Inscrip, 
tions No. 10 of the brochures of the Archaeological Survey of Western India, p. 102, ani lithograph).— The Sudi 
rant purports to supply various other items of history in connection with Butuga II. (amongst them, that 
after the defeat of Rajaditya, he besieged Taujapuri, i.e. Tanjore, whici was possibly a fact ; see above, 
Vol III p 283), and a few in connection with some of his predecessors. I do not quote them ; because it is 

undesirable to encumber my pages, further than canuot well be avoided, with alleged names and events fo which 

we have no reliable authority. 



168 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vat. V. 


style of the JDharma-Mahdnijddhirdja Satyavakya-Kongunivarma-Permanadi-Marasimha, 

with the Urtulas 5 of Ganga- Kandarpa, “the Gafiga god of love,’’ Ganga- Vidyadhara, 
“the Ganga Vidyadhara or demigod,’' 3 Gangachudamani, “the crest-jewel of the Ganges,” 
Gangamati clalika, “the Ganga chieftain,” Gahgavajra, “the Gaaga diamond or thunderbolt,” 
Ganga nisimha, “the lion of the Ganges, ” Gangarolganda, “the hero among the Ganges,” 
Guttiya-Ganga, “the Ganga of Gutti,” with reference, apparently, to the town of Gntti in the 
Bellary District, 3 Nolamb- Antaka. “ the Death of the Nolambas,” and Nolambakul- Antaka, 
“ttie Death of the family of Nolambas,” i.e. of the Pallavas of the Nolambavadi province, 
Chaladuttaramga, “the lintel of firmness of character,” Dharmavatara, “the incarnation of 
religion,” Jagadokavira, “ the sole hero of the world,” and Mandalika-Trinetra, “ a very god Siva 
among chieftains* He is evidently the Satyavakya-Permanadi, in connection with whom an 
inscription at Karya, 4 in Mysore, cites a date in the month Magha (Jan-Feb.), falling in A.D. 

968, of e Prabhava samvataara, Saka-Samvat 890 (current), as being in his fifth year, 

thus n nis initial point in A.D. 963 or 964. And an inscription at Melagani, 6 in Mysore, 
whicn mentions him as Permadi-Marasimka, tells us that news that he had passed away 6 ' 


1 Some of them occur in the Hebbil inscription, and all of them in the Sravona-Belgola epitaph.— He was 
perhaps, also known as Rajachndainnni “the crest-jewel of kings;” in which ease, he was the father-in-law of the 
R&shtrakdta prince Inclra IV. (see page 17u below, note 4-) : but this is not certain. 

2 The word r idyadhara denotes a “particular kind of good or evil genius attending upon the gods” 

(Monier- Williams’ Sanskrit Dictionary;. 3 6 

3 But, taking gutti as a corruption of gv.pti, we might render this birwd* by “ the secret or reticent Gano- a ,” 
on the analogy of Nanniya-Ganga, “the truthful Ganga,” which occurs in the case of hi* *«thei (<ee pa^l66 
above). 

4 JEp. Cam . Vol. IH., Nj. 192.— The day is called Peretale-divaaa, “ the day of Siva ( pere-tale, pere-dale 

* he on whose head is the crescent * ) : the same day o i Sravana 13 mentioned iu an inscription of A D. 907 at TAvaidr 
(ibid. Md. 14; noticed on page 165 above, note 4); and the same day of Mar-asirsha, in an inscription at 
Kampura ( ibid. Sr. 148; noticed on page 164 above, note 4). One would think, at first sight, that the 
expression denotes the day of the fourteenth tithi of the dark fortnight, on which there is the Si varltri-f estival in 
honour of Siva, in every month, all through the year; in which case, we might compare with it the expression 
Sivadit hi 9 ** tithi of Suva” (in No. 292 of Prof. Kielhorn’s Suka dates ; I,id. A,it. Vol. XXIV p *0°) a lied 
in verse to M&gha krishna 14, which in another record ( No. 325 in the same list ) has the fuller name of ~8ivardtri- 
mahdtithii also in verse. But it really denotes the eighth tithi , as rendered by XIr. Rice in his translations- thus 
a verse iu the Chaturvarga-Ckintdmani , Vol. III. Part II. p. 865, line 9, for which I am indebted to Prof* 
Kielhoro, says — saptami Saptasapt$s=tu Ashtn .nMes-tath-dfiht'fmi. “the seventh is Sdrya’s tithi and the 
eighth that of Siva;” and it appears to be applied to the eighth tithi of both the bright and the dirk fortni^htc 
In a similar way, the spurious Sddi grant (see page 167 above, note 2) names the eighth tithi of the br' 
fortnight of K&rttiki “ th c tithi of Nandisvara/’ t.e. ot Siva as the lord of the bull Nandi; and the NandJvar 
day of the bright fortnight of PhMguna, without auy specification of th etitki, is mentioned in the Pe^eu-fir i 
tion of A.D. 978 (see page 173 below). — In this last record, the name is followed by a word which b-is VoT been 
satisfactorily settled yet. Mr. Kittel read ya,uiUoarath talpa-devr^cftii-dge, and translated « when th V V' r 
(day) was the ebair-day ” (Ind. Ant. Vol. YI. p. 1U2) ; and Mr. Rice has suggested the reading of XroidUvaml 
tallaj~dva$am=dge (in which, however, we ought to have dm^on), with the transition “ ufc the rising 0 f the h 
house (or sign) of Taurus” or “on the day that Nandisvara was stopped ” (id. Vol, XIV. p. 70 and Co or / 

Horn, p. 7). But neither rendering is satisfactory ; the latter, iu particular. Nothing final can be s’.i(7untTw" 
have a purely mechanical facsimile of the record. But the published lithographs seem to make it certain ^hat the 
reading is not tallaj-dvasam (according to Mr. Rice), and probable that it is tale-deramm, rather than talpa 
devasam (according to Mr. Kittel). And we have the same expression, Mp-demia/n^dne in a nV * > * 

tion of A.D. 1032 at SuUdni [Ep. Cura. Vol. Ill, Nj. 161 ; treated by Prof. Kielhorn, from another tracer ipt" 
above, Vol, IV. p. 69), m a pnssi»ge wLich nn*r*t.r,ns the full-moon of Karttika as thp tnl* ? 9 

specifies the second tdhl (of the dark fortnight) as th-.- Jat : of the record. It has been propoIIdUo Trnndnti 
tale-decasa in this passage by “first day in support of wl.Uh might 'mote tuh-hdaalu ? • 1 

entrance (of a house),’ and Me-vidu, ‘a chief place;’ but it is nor apparent why the fu'I-mnr,n • P u" L '?i 1 


>e<*n proposed to translate 

last day of the bright fortnight, should be called “ the first day ” wah'reW^^ 

fortnight, and still less so why the Naudisvara day, the eighth ti-b, should itself he called “ tl f ^ d ^ 

8 See lasers, at Srav.-Bel, In trod. p. 18, note 7. 

6 The word in the original is atVa, literally * gone by.’ It may mean that he «.is d-.a 
abdicating and going into religious retirement at Banka ’<11. 


' first day.” 

'*■ may lefer tu h:s 



No. IS.] 


SRAVANA-BELGOEA epitaph OF MARASIMHA 11. 


169 


had reached the Pallava princes Pallavaditya, Nolambadhiraja, and Chorayya-Nolamba, 
who were then at Sayra-Miniyftr, 1 in the month Ashadha (June-July), falling in A.D. 974, of 
the Bhava samvatsara, S.-S. S96 (expired). An inscription at Nagarle, in Mysore, 2 dated 
S.-S. 892 (expired), = A.D. 970*71, mentions him as Permadi. An inscription at Adaragunchi, 
in the Dharwar district, 3 with a date in the month Asvaynja, falling in October, A.D. 971, of 
the Prajapati samvatsara, S.-S. 893 (expired), mentions him as then governing the Gahgavadi 
ninety-six-thousand, the Purigere three-hundred, and the Belvola three-hundred; in the reign 
of the Rashtrakuta king Khottiga. An inscription at Gundur, in the same district, 4 with a 
date in the month Ashadha, falling in June, A.D. 973, of the Srimukha samvatsara, S.-S. 
896 (current), mentions him as still governing the Puligere three-hundred and the Belvola 
three-hundred, in the reign of Khottiga* s successor, Kakka II. The inscription of A.D. 975 nt 
Hebbal, in the same district, 5 speaks of him as having had in his hands, in the course of his career, 
the government of a very large area, including not only the Gahgavadi province, the Puligere 
three-hundred, and the Belvola three-hundred, but also the Nolambavadi thirty-two-thousand, 
the Banavasi twelve-thousand, the Santalige thousand, and every thine: included as far as 
“ the great river.” 6 And his epitaph at Sravana-Beig^la, now edited, gives a full list of his 


1 This may perhaps be the ‘Minur’ of the Madias Postal Directory , iu the Gudiyatam t&luka, North Arcot 
district. 

2 Ep. Cam, Vol. III., Nj. 158. 

8 Ind . Ant. Vol. XII. p. 255. — It moy be noted that this and the record next quoted distinctly refer to 
Khottiga and Kakka II. as the reigning kings, aud do not allot the usual title Dha r ma-Mahdrdj dd h i rdj a to 
Marasimha II. 

4 Ibid , p. 271. 5 Above, Vol. IV. p. 350. 

6 The word used in the original is pa done, which i- a compound from per, * great,* and tore , * a stream or 
river:’ in other places, it appears m the forms of peddore and bed do re ; and we may at any time meet with the 
later form heddore . KitteTs Dictionary gives prrdore and heddore in the sense of ‘ a large stream or river,’ 
but without suggesting any identifie ition. And Mr. Rice has said that the term generally denotes the KiUhna 
( Coorg lasers, p. 5, note), and has applied it in that sense in an inscription at Basural in Mysore {Ep. Cam . Vol. II l. 
Md. 122 and lutrod. p. 19). But there arc passages in which it certainly does not denote the Krishna, The 
Bilidr inscription of A.D. 88S (see page 161 above, under Bhtuga I.) speaks of that village as peddore-gareya Biliur 
(line 8), which may no doubt be literally translated, as was done by Mr. Rice, by “ Bilnlr of, i e on, the bank of the 
peddore f but means more probably “ Bilnlr of {the district that was known by the name of) tbe banks of the 

peddore ” especially if wc pay atteution to the expression beddore-gareya el padimbarnm enhokkalum in lines 9, 

10 of the record. And the Peggu-ilr inscription of A.D. 978 (see page 173 below, under IJacharaalla II.) mentions a 
certain Rukkasa, described as beddore-gareya, i^dluttdre (liue 8), which mav no doubt be literally translated by 
‘while governing tbe bank of the bed dure” but seems much more probably to mean “while governing ( the 
district that was known the name of) the banks of the be id ore,” These two record* are ii) Coorg. and belong 
to that part of the country only. There can be no reference in them to the Krishna, which, even at the nearest 
point, is almost three hundred miles away. And Mr Rice has suggested (Coo rg Iasc rs. p. 5, note) that in these 
two records the words peddore and he lJare probably denote the Lakshnantirtha. In this, be followed Mr. Kittel, 
who said (hid. Ant. Vol. VI. p 100) tint the term may perhaps here denote the Lakshmintirtha, especially her ause 
that river is also called Judda-We, n term in which d„dd.r t again, means * great,’ and hole i< synonymous with tore. 
Now, perdo re would be exactly represented in Sanskrit by mahdnedt, which explained in Momer- Williams’ 
San-krit Dictionary as meaning ‘any great liver which has a long course.* The Lakshmantirfha is a perennial 
river, which supplies several important irrigation canals. But its whole course is not more than sixty miles ; after 
which it flows into the Kaveri. There is no apparent re: sou why it should be classed among the great rivers. 

And it seems much more likely to me that,— as was, in fact, suggested as an alternative possibility bv Mr. Kittel 

(loc. c/?.),— in the Bilidr and Peggu-dr inscriptions, the words peddore and fce 7 denote the Raved, which, 
with its course of about four hundred and seventy-five miles, may fairly be chided among the grnt rivers 
of India : the Kaveii, also, rises m Coorg ; and it runs right through the vcv centre of the province, whereas tbe 
Lakshmantirtha only runs for some twenty to twenty-five miles through the south-east corner of it ; and tin 
province might be called “tbe banks of the Kavmi" much more nppi opriately than “the banks of the 

Eakshuiantirtbu.” It may be noted here that, in Thacker’s Reduced Smvey Map cf India, 1891, and in 

Constable’s Hand Atlas of India, 1393, plate 34, the name Lakshmmr -rtha has been applied, not to tht 
Laksbmantirtbii itself (winch is, in fact, not fully shewn), but to that part of t e K.Wew which lies in Coorg,— 
The PasaWU inscription mentioned above, detines the limits, apparently in A.D. 1237, of the territory of the 
Vira-SomesVjiM cud it specifies, on the eist, Kuhelu,— on the west, Vvlivura. he. I'elur in tk« 

7 . 


Hoy*** I a kmg 



170 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


achievements : l it mentions several times his successes against the Pallavas of the Nolambav&di 
country (lines 19, 22, 86, SS), which bordered on his own hereditary territory; it farther 
tells us that he became known as “ the king of the Gurjaras,*’ through conquering the northern 
region for the Rashtrakuta king Krishna III. (11. 7, 8), — that he overthrew a powerful 
opponent of Krishna III. named Alla (11, 9, 84) , 2 — that he broke the power of the Kirataa or 
mountain- tribes in the neighbourhood of the Yindhya mountains (11. 19, 11), — -that he 
protected the encampment of the emperor (i.e., probably, of Khottiga, or else of Kakka II.), 
at the town of Manyakheta (1. 12), 3 — that he crowned Indraraja, i.e. Indra 1Y. (grandson of 
Krishna III.), 4 — that he prevailed against an opponent named Vajjala (11. 14, 85), 5 — that he 
despoiled the ruler of the Banavasi country (1. 15), — that he made the M&turas do obeisance 


Has^an district, Mysore, — on the north, the perdore , — mid, on the south, a place the name of which Mr. 
Uice tells us, is defaced bat looks like Chalaseravi, and which, he seems to suggest, may possibly be ‘Chalasen’ 

near Povaiii in the Malabar district. Here, the term perdore cannot denote the Kaveri; because Belur is to the 

noitb of that river. Nor can it denote the whole course of the Kj-ishuA ; because at that time the D£vagiri-Yadaya 
king Singlmna was in possession of the territory king south of the Krishna and west of the Tuhgabhadra, as far at 
any rate as Pnnavinsi. In this record, therefore, perdore probably means the Krishna on from the point at 
which the Tuagabhadra loins it* In the Hebbal inscription of A.D. 975, mentioned in the text above, perdore m*y 
mean either the Krishna towards the north, or the Kaveri towards the sooth. In the Mulguod inscription of the 

same year (see page 172 below, under Pauchaladeva), it must mean the Krishna, because of the mention of the 

soutnun ocean as the boundary on the south, and because the record itself ia to the north of the Kaveri. 

1 Theic is also a mention of him in a record at Doddabagilu (Ep* Carn. Vol. Ill,, Tii, 93) ; but the "ecord is 
rather fragmentary, and the published text cannot be quoted to any useful purpose.— Mr. Rice would find a 
reference to him, u utter the name of Marasirhhavarman, in au inscription at Hale-Bdgadi (ibid. My. 15), which 
mentions also an Akalavavsba, i.e., doubtless, one or other of the Rashtrakuta kings named Krishna. But here the 


termination vetrman seems to iudic-ate someone else. 

3 T his person has mt yet been identified.— A3 Dr. Hultzschhae reminded me, the name occurs in two inscriptions 
at Gwalior, in the case of Alla, a guardian of the fortrw-thcre, who was a son of Viillabhatta of the VarjAra 
family (Ep. Lid. Vol. L p. 154 ff.) ; his date, however, was A.D. 875-76, a century before the time of Marasirhlm. 

3 MAnyakbeta (Malkhcd in the Nizam’s Dominions) was the Rilsbtrakuta capital. — Siyaka-Harsha, one of the 
ParAmaru kings of Malwa, claims to have taken the wealth of Khottiga in battle, and- apparently, in A.D. 972-73 
tn h ive sack’ d even Manyakhut.v itself (Ep 2nd. Vol. I. pp. 225, 226). The present passage may mean that 
on chat occasion, Maradihha repulsed the invader at the very gates of M&nyakh&ta; or it may refer to some event in 
the waifare between Knkka II. and Taila II. 

4 This was evidently done in an attempt to continue the RAshtrakdta sovereignty after the overthrow of 
Kakka II by the Western Chalukya Taila II. in A.D. 973 or 974. The attempt is to he attributed to the close 
counoetuvn that exited between the two families ; as we have already seen, Biltuga 1 1, was a brother-in-law of 
Kpwbna III., and owed his possession of tbe Gahguvadi province to that king (page 166 above ) ; and Indra IV 
was the son of a boh of Krishna III. by a daughter of Gahga-Gahgeya, i.e. Butuga II. (Inters, at 8rav,-Be{. 
No. 57 = Mr. Rice, id. Infcrod. p. 21, at first identified the Gahga-Gaogeya of this record with RAcbaraalla II a 
successor of MArasim lift ; but his grounds for doing so were completely erroneous, and he has now adopted the 



i another record at 

Srava^a-Pelgola (No. 68); but it does not s-em that the blhida RAjrtcbddamflOi, in that record, is intended to 
belong to H|K and it appear not at all unlikely that it mtliy denotes MAr as imha II. The attempt to carry 
on the RAshtrakAta sovereignty was not successful, though Indra IV. lived on for some nine years, eventually 
dying in A.D. 982 (see Tutors, at Sw.~£el. No. 57, and Jnd. Ant. Vol XX. p. 35, where’ some cor- 
rections have to be mode in the relationships stated ,y me).— Mr. Rice (Insert, at Srav^Be}. Intro 1. p 19) would 



... . reasoning : “ Kho^iga i* 

.. . . , . C 4P£* * or Gdviud* aud, whatever may be the 

oanskpt word which it represents, that word 13 le^st not “ Indra,” 


itself tbe Prakrit form of a proper name, analogous to 
mts, that v 
identified 
here a hoi 

further cu ;} appear* to describe uitn as 


’ Tti * P« r * oa W'gbt nth Vujj -.d.. IL, of cue at tbe Konk a9 branches of the SlUbir. family 

«bose initial date was somewhere about .‘.0.9: 3 But another record at Sraveoa-Bcl-oJa, So. 109 (noticed* 

£ L . , brut -' w Qi iAUluWuila, »bicb uame'°doe 8 uot occur iu the 

bilab*ra record u 


No. IS.] 


171 


SRAVANA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OF MARASIMHA II, 


to "him, — that he reduced the hill-fort of Uchchahgi, which even the Kaduvatti, 1 great 
as was his prowess, had previously failed to reduce (11. 20, 93), — that he destroyed a 
Sahara prince named Naraga (11. 21, 51, 9G), — that he made the Cheras, the Cholas, and 
the Pandyas, as well as the Pallavas, bow down before him (11. 21, 22), — and that he destroyed 
a Chalukya prince named Rajadifcya, who had declared war against him (11. 50, 51) : 2 in 
recapitulating some of his conquests, lines 100 to 102 add, among the places at which he was 
victorious, the banks of the river Tapi (the Tapti), the town or village of Gonur, 3 and 
Pavaseya-kdte or the fortress of Pavase : 4 it says that he preserved the doctrine of Jina (1. 22), 
and founded Jain temples and mdnastambhas 5 at various unnamed places; and finally, as 
already noted, it tells us (11. 110 to 112) that eventually he abdicated, and ended his days 
in the practice of religion at Bahkapur (in the Dharwar district), at the feet of a Jain teacher 
named Ajitiibeua. 6 From other sources, we learn that Marasimha’s successes against 
Vaijala and at Gonur and Cchchahgi were actually achieved for him by a minister named 
Cbamundarava or Chavundaraja, who "wrote the Chdmundardya-Purdria 7 and was a minister 
of also Rachamaila II. who came next but one in the succession after Marasiihha II. Thus, 
another record at Sravana-Belgola s tells us that *■ the array of his (Chamundaraya’s) enemies was 
broken, like a herd of deer, on him, resembling a tusked elephant running to and fro (among 
them), when he stood in front of the victorious elephant, his lord, the glorious king 
Jagactekavira-(MarasimhaII.), when the latter, at the eommaud of king Indra, 9 lifted up his arm 
to conquer Vajjaladeva, whose strength was as terrible as that of the ocean disturbed (and 
bursting its boundaries in the universal disorder) at the end of the age, (and) who was the younger 
brother of Patalamalla and the Ohamiindaruya-Purdda tells us 10 that Chamundaraya was 
born in the Brahma-Kshatra race,— that he was a pupil of Ajitasena,— that his lord was 


l p r9m a transcription which Mr. Bice has kindly sent me, I find that the Mel&gani inscription of A.D. 
974 (see Liscrs. at Srav.-Be(. Introd. p. 18, note 7) goes on to mention a person who was called “the affliction 
UatngasMa, = samkasMa, = satokat<z) of all people; the ornament of the Pompala family ; bora in the Kaduvatti 

race ; supreme lord of Kafichipura ; he w 10 is like a thunderbolt in the van of battle (just 

after this, unfortunately, the record conies to au end, without disclosing his name). This shows us that hdduvatti, 
in line 92-93 of tlie epitaph, is not a verbal form, but is the nominative which is required in apposition with 
iumpa-pardhramam and the following verbs. And we can now recognise the same mime, for an earlier period, 

in the GulganpodeBanainscriptionNo.il., which mentions “the whole of the forces of the Kaduvatti ” (Ind. 

Ant. Vol. X. p. 39, text Hue 6). 

a This person has not been identified yet.— The same name occurs among the Chalukyas, aboub- a ceutnry and 
« half earlier in the case of R&idditva, father of the ALzhdsdmanta Buddbavarasa, of the Salukika (-Chalukika, 
C batik r a) race, who is mentioned in the TdrkhSde grant (above, Vol. III. pp. 57, 58). 

3 Mr Rice tells mo that Gondr is the village of that name,— the ‘ Goonoor ’ of the Indian Atlas, sheet 
No 59 - three miles on the north-east of. Chitaldroog. It may be noted, however, that the Madras Postal 
' * the Srtlem district, and a ‘ Gonuru 1 in the Bangalore district. 

7W<ory men * amed Hin . asi (= p£ va se) in the Karajgi tiluka of the Dharwar district. It is doubtful, 

b0n 7 rle word literally ‘a column of honour,' is explained by Mr. Rice (I M cr,. at 

< Bel Introd p 19, note 2) as denoting technically “ the elegant tall pillars, with a small pinnacled 
mlnf IPO 'at the top, erected in front of the Jain temples ; ” a-il he refers us to a discussion regarding them in 

Fergusson’s Indian and Eastern Architecture, p. 276. . 

% Th : s person i3 mentioned again as the teacher of M&ras.mh* s minister CUmnndar4ya (see further on,. 

. This work mnears to have been finished in the Isvara iumvattara, Saku-Samvat 900 (current),- A. D. 

_ „ KpI Introd n. 9;Z\ — A record at Aigd<J {Bp Cam . Vol. III., TN. 69) mentions the 

977-78 ilvscrs. at Srav-Bel. lntrou. F- ° * „ » « , . » , z . 

V , , . ■, r. * anna MAhalavva and lsvarayya, who were followers of Nolambakut-Antaka, t.e. 

names of Gavmdamayy^ h.s so NUhalayy^ ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ minigter c^^ya ? 

Mdrasim a ■> a 'V ‘ " ;n'j _ In Mr. Rice’s text, I alter Fjjvzln into Vajjala, and ahatiMkam into 

8 Inscrs. at orav.- w. ik.*?. 

iv- a h . 

- * o z k,} T,^r/vi o 34 — The Pardna mentions various other btrudas and achievements of 

See Iwcrs. orav.-i: ref. x.iwiw*.. t'- w , 

Chimundarlya; they may be quoted when the text can be verified. 

z Z 



172 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


IYol. V. 


Jagadekavira, otherwise called Nolambakul-Antaka, i.e. Marasimha II., — and that he acquired 
the biruda of Samaradhuramdhara, “ the yoke-bearer or leader in war,” from his defeat of 
Vajjaladeva in “the Khedaga war/' 1 and the biruda of Viramartanda, “a sun among heroes,” 
Irom the valour which he displayed in the plain of Gonur in battle against the Nolambas, 
and the biruda of Ranarangasimha, “a lion in the battle-field,” from his fight at the fort of 
Uclichangi. The details given in the epitaph and the Purdna indicate, in addition to external 
fighting, some local insurrections, which must probably be attributed to opportunity afforded by 
the absence of Marasimha on the campaign in Gujarat for Krishna III, And not the least 
remarkable among them is the statement that he had occasion to despoil the ruler of the 
Banavasi country; for, that province had been given to bis father by Krishna III., and pre- 
sumably had passed by inheritance into his own hands. The explanation of this, however, 
and of the immediately following mention of the reduction of the Maturas, seems to be 
furnished by a record at Deogiri in the Karajgi taluka, Dharwar district, of the tenth century 
A.D. and referable to A.D. 958, 2 which mentions a Mahdsdmantddhipati Santivarman of 
the Matura family, with the hereditary title of “ supreme lord of the town of Trikunda- 
pura,” and having the Xandanavana-umbrella, the crest of a horse, and the mirror-banner, 
who was governing the Banavasi twelve-thousand. From A.D. 878, or earlier, to 945, the 
administration of the Banavasi province was in the hands of the Chellaketana family. 3 
In A.D. 949-50 Krishna III. gave the province to Butuga II., who doubtless allowed the 
Chellaketanas to continue to govern it for him. Butuga must have died a few years before 
A.D. 903-64, when Marasimha II. succeeded Rachcha-Ganga. And it would seem that when 
he died, or else during the time of Rachcha-Ganga, the Maturas seized the province from 
rhe Chellaketanas, and that they retained it until Marasimha could make it convenient to 
reduce them. 

Marasimha II. must have been immediately succeeded by the Dharma-MaJidrdjddhirdja 
Satyavakya-Kongunivarma-Fanchaladeva, whom a fragment at Mulgund, in the Dharwar 
district, 4 with a date in the Yuvan samvatsara, Saka-Sarhvat 897 (expired), falling* in 
August, A.D. 975, 5 describes as governing “ without any disorder 9f the whole territory from 
the eastern, the western, and the southern oceans as far as “ the great river.” 6 Pauchaladeva 
"terns, then, to have taken advantage of the confusion that must have attended the over- 
throw of the Rdshtrakuta king Kakku II. by tho Western Chalukya Taila II., to set 
bimself up as an independent king; but he was shortly afterwards killed in battle by Taila II. 
Earlier facts connected with him are to be found in the Adaraguuchi inscription, 7 which tells 
u3 that in A.D. 971, when Mlrasiriiha II. was governing the Ganguviidi ninety-six-thousand, the 
Purigere three-hundred, and the Belvola three-hundred, under the Rushtrakuta kino- Khottiga, 
he himself was governing a small circle of villages which was known as the Sebbi thirty and 

1 Dr. Hultzwh Ins suggested to nm that “ Khedaga ” may stand for Khefaka, i.e. Man vakil eta 

2 flie inscription is on a stone m Survey No. 85. I quote it fr.mj an ink-impression. It is dated with full 

detail-, in the KAlayukti sa mvafsara, coupled with Saka-Samvat 522 by mistake for 520 or 523. But the characters 
pi, ice it in the tenth century; and I believe that the real date of it is Monday, 15th November A D 958 in the 
Kalawikti samvatsara. S.-S. 880 expired. It does not register a grant of land ; ami it is, therefore, diljicnlt'fco say, 
at present, why a false date should have been cited in a record which, in all other respects, seems to be thoroughly 
ge mii ne. 

s See Dyn Kan. Distrs. pp. 403, 411, 420. 

4 At the temple of Ramadeva; I quote from an ink-impression. 

5 The details of the date are Bphaspativara, i.e. Thursiay, coupled with BhUdrnpada knshna 2 and the 
Kany^-sarhkranti. And the corresponding English date is Thursday, 26th August, AD. 975:' on this day the 
Kama-sarhkrAnti occurred at 16 li. 5 m. after mean sunrise (for Uijiiu), and the given tit hi ended kb^ut 
26 minutes earlier, but might d mbdess be made the current tithi of the iamkrnnti by more exact calculations 

« The W.n u-ed m th- original is perdore , whirh mu-t here denote the ivrislml ; see page 169 above, note 6. 

7 See page 189 ah.»w, and note 3. 




V 


No. IS.] SRAVAXA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OF MARASIMHA II. 


probably took its appellation from the ancient name of Chabbior Chebbi in the HuWi taluka 
D Liar war district, and in the Gundur inscription, ^ svhich mentions him as governing' a ninety-’ 
sis district in A.D. 973; this ninety-sis district has not been identified: bat possibly tho 
•expression is an abbreviation for the Gangavadi ninety-sis- thousand, which Marasimha II — 
who is mentioned in the same record in connection with the government of only the Purigere 
three-lmudred and tut Beivola three-hundred, under Khottiga’s successor Ka'kka II.,— mav 
have entrusted to Panchaladeva, in the course of ridding himself of the cares of office before 
pacing into religious retirement at Bankapur. The Mulgund inscription describes Paiiclmla- 
deva as ChUnky a-pancluhiana , " a lion to tho Chalukyas. ” and al«o as “ subsisting (1,7;,. a l ee) 
on the water-lilies that were the feet of Chaladuttarariura, Jagadekavira, the glorions Xolamhnknl- 
Antakadeva these epithets both stand in the string of titles that precedes the mention of 
Pauchaladeva’s name; and the second of them, while capable of being interpreted to mean that 
Marasiriiha II. was still alive, in retirement at Bankapur, in August, A.D. 975, may perhaps 
refer to only tlie previous relations between the two persons. 


Shortly after Panchaladeva. there was Raehamalla II., who had the full style of the 
Dhanna-Mafotrajadhirdja Satyavakya-Kongunivarma-Permanadi-Rachamalla. An irserip- 
tion at Peggu-ftr, in Coor-r which mentions him by all his appellations, furnishes a date for 
him in the month Phalguna ( Feb.-Mareh), falling in A.D. 978, of the livara samvotsara, 
Saka-Samvat 899 l expired ), and speaks of a certain Rakkasa, with the birvda of Annanabanta, 
“the warrior of his elder brother/’ who was governing the district called the banks of the 
great river and an inscription at Dodda-Homma, in Mysore, 4 which, however, does not 
mention him by his proper name, perhaps turn ; -Vick for him (or else for Panchaladeva) a date 
in the preceding year. 5 He was probably the last rf the great Western Gahga princes; and his 
final date seems to be A.D 9 S±.° Chamundaraya, who has already been mentioned in connection 
with Marasimha II., was a minister of .Raehamalla II. also ; and, while holding office under thi-. 
master, he caused to be raaue tbe colossal Jain image of Gommata or Gommatesvara at Sravana- 
Belgola, 7 and attained so great a reputation for devotion to the faith to which he belonged, that 
he was remem bered long after his death, and was quoted as one of three special promoters of 


1 See pMge 169 above, ami note 4. In hues 8, 9, of the text, tbe reading should he Pamchala not 
Pamjala . 

2 Jnd. Ant. Vob VI. p. 102, Xo. I. f with a lithograph, and V<>1. XIV „> 76; see aUo Cooret Inscriptions, 
p. 7, also with a lithograph.— 1 he day is called the day of Nandisvara, followed by an expression^ probably tale- 
fievavam^'iye, whn h has not been satisfactorily settled yet (>ee page 168 above, note 4). 

5 The expreSMon used in the original is leddore-qare ; as regards the meaning of beddore and its application 
here to probably the Kaveii, see page 169 above, note 6. 

* Fp. Cam. Vol. III., Np 183 ; according to the published reading, the prince to whom this record belong? bad 
the biruda of Jasadnttaramg*. “ the lintel of fame.”— The full details of the date are, the ll vara *am vatsara , Saka- 
Samvat 899 (expired) ; the full-moon of Ashadha ; Anglravara, i.e. Tuesdny ; an eclipse of the moon. And the 
corresponding English date is Tuesday, 3rd July, A.D. 977 ; on this day, the given tit hi ended at about 13 hrs. 
30 min. after mean sunrise (for B mi bay), and there was an echpse of the moon. 


» Mr. Rice has allotted to him a record at Kottatti (Ep. Cam. Yo III., Md. 107) which wo, 01 jr* m . his name 
in tbe form of Rajamalla, with the birudas of JagadutUrarhga, “ the lintel of the world ” (*Uu‘h rath,.r 

dubious), and Haral-Autaka. But tne da* - © is so iu> itisf actory, that it is impossible to place thi> record propei lv. 

. .. , ...» . . tll.t d ifa it tKo Pt* . 111m I - ? I vr> m vnf-of \.rt n -.T. ,0 J ..‘.L 1 . . . . ^ .. . . 


dubious), and * - *« ,,u r ui,5iu i' pia» f ton recoru propeiiv. 

The published text represents the date is the Pr.iuiAdm samvatsara, coupled with Sik.i-Stubvat 899. Praraadin, 
however, was either S.-S 876 current, - A.D. 953-54. or S.-S. 936 (current), *» A.D. 1013-14 ; while 8.-S. 899 
rrent, - A.D. 976-77. was the Dbat i *a*Mhara % and 8 -S 899 expired, - A.D. 977-78, was the Isvara 


vatsara. Even if Praimidin has oeen read by mistake for Pramathin, there still remains a mistake, either in the 

original or in the reading of it, of S-S 899 for 931 (expired) or 902 (current), a A.D. 979-80. 

* Mi. Rice tells U3 (liters, at Srar.-Bel. In^rod. p. 22) that he has inscriptions, n- t yet published, which 
prove that the reign of Raehamalla II. ended in Saka-Samvat 906 (expired), - A.D. 9SI-85. 

7 Ibis is recorded in Inters. a* Sr rt* -Bel. Nos. 75, 76, and more fully in No. 85, verses 6, 7- — - l he image stdl 
exists. For a full account of it and of the legends connected with it, s-e tbe Introduction of Mr, Rice’s book, 

p. 22 to 33 ; the fruntUpie -e of the L< >< k m-e- n : o»g’apa ..f the i 'age 



in 


EPIGRAPHIA I5DTCA. 


[Yon. Y. 


the Jain religion, — the other two being Gangaraja and Hnlla, minister? of the Hoysnla piinces 
Yishnuvard liana and Narasimha I. in the twelfth, century A.D. 1 

POSTSCRIPT 

While the first proofs of the above article were passing through the Press, I began to make 
a fuller examination, than has as yet been attempted, of the dates of the spurious records of 
Western India, for all of which there should be some explanation forthcoming, if we can only 
find the clue to the solution of them. 

I have referred to two of these dates in note 2 on page 157 above. One of them is from 
the spurious Tanjcre grant (Ind. Ant. Yol. VIII. p. 212\ which purports to give a date in 
A.D, 24-8 for an imaginary Western Ganga whose name is given in this record as Arivarmnn, 
by a mistake — (due to the carelessness. of the writer in writing, in line 10, inmadarivarmma 
instead of srimaddharivarmma , i.e. in omitting a subscript dh ) — for the Harivarman of the 
other spurious records of the same series. The details of the date are the Prabhava samvatsara, 
coupled with Saka-Samrat 169 expired, the new-moon titki of Phalguna, Friday, the Revati 
nakshatra , the Yriddhi yoga, and the Vrishabhn, htgna . And, in the period to which the 
concoction of this record is to be referred on pa Ideographic grounds. I find that in the Prabhava 
s> uh vat sara, S.-S. 1009 expired, the new-moon tithi of Plialguna ended on Friday, 25th 
February, A.D. 1088. The moon, indeed, was not then in Revati, and did not come to Revati 
till about 4 hrs. 28 min. after mean sunrise on the Saturday : but the moon often is in Revati on 
the new-moon day of PMlguna. and may possibly have been actually so shewn for that day in 
S.-S. 1009 expired by an erroneous almanac or by a calculation worked out wrongly for the 
person who fabricated the record ; or the forger may have added that detail on chance, simply 
to give a greater air of plausibility to the record, as he certainly did in respect of the Yriddhi 

i which cannot ever occur on the new-moon day of Phalguna. 2 The result of the 25th 
February, A.D. 1088, fully meets the palaeographic requirements of the case, and, I believe, 
fixes the actual time at which this record was concocted : viz., the forger was working on. or 
had in view, Friday, the new-moon day of Phalguna of the Prabhava samvatsara . S.-S. 1009 
expired; and he produced the necessary appearance of antiquity by striking off from the Sakn 
year. — in order to suit, more or less, a fictitious pedigree and chronology that had already 
become established and well-known, 3 * 5 and at the <ame time to obtain a samvatsara which 
would bo correct according to tie southern ]uni-«olar system, — exactly fourteen of the sixty-* 
rear cycles, and thus obtained the year S.-S. 169 expired which he actually quoted in the 
record. 

The second of the two dates to which I have referred in note 2 on page 157 above, is from 
the spurious Merkara grant (Ind. Ant . Yol. I. p. 363, and Coorg Inscrs . p. 1), which has been 
supposed to give a date in A.D. 466 for an imaginary Western Ganga named Avinita-Konguni. 
This date has to be explained in a different way. The details of the date are the year 38s! not 
specified either as current or as expired, the fifth tithi of the bright fortnight of MAgha, 
Monday, and the Svati nakshatra. The samvatsara is not specified ; and so we have not the 
particular help that we have in the case of the Tanjore grant. Also, the era is not specified. 
As regards this detail, ±o has always been assumed that the Saka era was intended, wdth'the 

1 The verse, which mentions Cbamundnr&ya as “ Kays, the minister of king lUcharaaila ” i 9 to be found 
about half-way through Inscrs. at Srae.-£el, No, 137. 

2 At sunrise on the Friday in question, the yoga was Subha ; and the Yriddhi g6ga had occurred about eleven 
days earlier. — The remaining detail, the Vyishabha layna, means only the rising of the sign Tanrua. I cannot 

calculate it with the Tables available to me j but it would naturally occur at some time or other during the 

twenty-four hours of the Friday. 

5 The Tanjore grant was certainly not the earliest of the spurious records in order of fabrication. 



No. IB.] 


175 


SRAVAXA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OF MARASIMHA II. 


exception that Prof. Kielliorn has marked the point as dubious in examining this date as a 
Saka date (Lid. Ant. YoL XXIV p. 11, No. 169, and p. 181, No. 7) ; and no doubt the person 
who fabricated the record did intend the year to pass muster as Saka-Samvat 388. But, even 
with the correction made below, the date is not a correct one for S.-S. 388, either current or 
expired ; and it is not by means of the Saka era at all, that we solve the puzzle of this date. 
The solution is furnished by an era which is still in use in Bombay and Madras under the 
name of the Fasli or harvest reckoning with the epoch of A.D. 590-91, which is the true 
original epoch, and iu other parts of India with the artificial epochs of A.D. 592-93 and 593-94. 
It has, indeed, always been supposed that these harvest reckonings were created in the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries A.D. by the emperors Akbar and Shah Jehan. But, if 
so, a most extraordinary coincidence happened, in the creation by Shah Jehan of a reckoning with 
the exact epoch of an era which had existed a thousand years before his time ; and I 
think it can be made clear that wkat Akbar did was simply to adapt an original Hindu 
era to official purposes in certain parts of the country, with an alteration of two or 
three years in die proper reckoning of it, and that what Shah Jehan did was to accept 
for official purposes in other parts of the country the true original reckoning which had 
survived there. 1 The era with the epoch of A.D. 590-9). appears fust in the Goa grant 
of Satyasraya-Dhruvaraja-Indravarman (Jour. Bo. Br. B. As Soc . Yol. X. p. t 348), which is 
dated in the twentieth year of his government, coupled with S.-S. 532 (expired) = A.D. 
610-11. It appears next in the records of the Eastern Gahga kings of Kalinganagara, who 
were his descendants ; for instance, in the Cbicacole grant of Indravarman II. , dated in the 
year 128 (Jnd. Ant. Yol. XIII. p. 119), the donation was made on the occasion of an eclipse of 
the moon iu the month Margasira, which eclipse is thatr of the 12th November. A.D. 718. 
Traces of it are distinctly to be found in several of the spurious dates of Western India. And 
I believe that the fictitious Western Ganga chronology and pedigree derive their origin from 
genuine dates in this via. which were ignorantly or intentionally applied as Saka dates and 
were then coupled with imaginary names. A 3 regards the date now under consideration, that 
of the Merkara grant, — the specification of the Svati nakshatra , if it means an} thing at all, 
requires us to understand that the writer of the record wrote the bright fortnight M by mistake 
for k * the dark fortnight for. the moon can never be in Svati on Magha sukla 5. but may be on 
March a krishna 5. In the year 3SS of the era of A.D. 590-91, Magha krishna 5 began on 
Monday 20th January, A.D. 979 ; but the moon did not come to Svati till late on the Tuesday 
or soon after sunrise on the Wednesday. In the next year, however, 389, Magha krishna 5 
ended on Monday, 9th February, A.D. 980 ; and on that day the moon was in Svati at 
sunrise and for more than ten hours after sunrise. The result meets fully the paiaeographic 
requirements of the case. If take the date of the 20th January, A.D. 979, we must 
assume that the mention of the Svati nakshatra was introduced in circumstances similar to 
those suggested above for the mention of the Revati nakshatra and the Y riddhi yoga in the 
Taniore date. But I believe that the result of the 9th February, A.D. 980, is the proper one 
and fixes the actual time at which this record was concocted : viz., the forger was working on, 
had in view Mondav, Magha krishna 5, of a year which was described in the almanac that 
was consulted as the Saka year 901 (expired), and may have been also described there as, or else 
was known to him to be, the year 3S9 of an era to which possibly no name was attached ; he 
produced the necessary appearance of antiquity by adopting the figures of the more recent era, 
with the intention that they should be supposed to be figures of the earlier era, the Saka ; he 

W * tn nnote the saitivatsara, because he saw that, the difference (901— 389 = 

SMS. 901 e.pired „»ld »ot b. 

ct for S ^ 359* and, in copying out the date, he made the mistake of writing iuddh a 


1 I sh .11 go into tbe matter fully m 
Kalinganagam and on tbe Spurious Dates 0 


separate articles on the Records of the Eastern Ganga Kings of 
Western Iudla. 


176 


EPIGRAPEJIA 1NDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


(actually sudhdha , as lie put it) instead of krishna , and for some reason or other cited the year 
as 3 bb instead of 389. 1 

TEXT.* 

South Face. 

1 Om 1 * 3 [Svajsti [||*] M — - 4 ^ um=ndadhim kritv= 

avadhim mediiu — 

2 — chakra w dharh bhumjan bkuj-aser=b[b*]alat | — 

3 nya-sri-jaga — w — w w patir=Ggamg-anvaya-kshmabhujam | bhusba- 

4 ratnam=abhu[d=arati]-vanita“Yaktr-endu-megh-odayah [|]*] Om Om 

5 Om Gadyam j Tasya sakala-jagati-taI-6ttumga-Gamga-kula-kumuda- 

6 kaumudi-mahat[eja]yamanasya | Satyavakya-Komguniva- 

7 rmma-dharmmamaharajadhirajasya | Krishnaraj-ottara-dig-vijaya- 

8 vidita-Gu(gu)rjjar-adhirajasya I Vanagajamalla-pratimalla-balava- 

9 d-Alla-darppa-dalana-prakatikrita-vikramasya | Gandamarttanda-p[r]ata- 

] 0 pa-parirakshita-simhasan-adi-sakala-rajyacbibnasya | Vimdhy-ata- 

11 [vi]-nikata-vartti ...... ndaka-Kirata-prakara-bhamga k a ra s y a | 

12 [bhu]ja-bala-pari[palita] -Manyakheta-pravesita 5 -cba kravartti - kata- 


13 [kasya |] vikram-[anushthita]-srimad-Indraraja-pattabandk-6tsavasya | 

14 samutsahita-samara-sajja-Vajjala- 

15 gha ...... nasya | bhay-opanata-Vanav&si-des- 

&dhi- 


16 [pa] manikundala-madadvip-adi-samasta-vastu- 

gra- 

17 [ha]ua-samupalabdha-samkirttanasya | pranata-Matura-vamsaja[sya I ] 6 

18 [ra]jasuta-sa(sa)ta-bhiija-bal-avalepa-gaja-gbat-at6pa-ga rvva-durvvri- 

19 tta-sakala-Nolamb-adhiraja-samara-vidkvamsakasya | sain un mu- 

20 lita-rajya-kantakasya | samchurnnit-Ochchamgi-giridurggasya | ganihri- 

21 ta-Narag-abhidhana-Sabara-pradhanasya [ pratap-avanata-Che- 

22 ra-Chola-Pandya-Pallavasya I pratipalita-Jina-silsanasya I 

23 •••••. [ma]ha-dhvajasya | balavad-ari-nripa-dravin-apaharana- 


1 It is probnble that the year was 389 current ; and he may have turned it into 388 in order to cite the expired 
year. Fe that as it may, instances of tlie quotation of a wrong year can be adduced from unquestionably genuine 
dates. And, among the spurious dates, an interesting and instructive instance is furnished by the Kurtakfl^i 
grant (2nd. Ant. Vol. VII. p. 217), which purports to be of the time of the Western Cbalukya king Vikram&ditya 
I. and to be dated Saka Samvafc 630 (or 532) expired : the details of this date are correct— (except that the 
solar eclipse, quoted as a total one and described conventionally as such, was an annular eclipse; to the extent 
however, of eight and a half digits, and therefore a well-marked one) — for Sunday, llth May, A.I>. 1H9 i n 
S.-S. 1041 expired, and in the year 529 (current) of the era of A.D. 590-91: here, the forger produced the 
necessary semblance of antiquity by distinctly quoting the year of the biter era as a Saka year ; and here 
again, he intentionally omitted to quote the samvatsara , because he knew that the tamvatwro f ()r S S 1041 
expired would cot be correct for S.-S. 529 or 530 (or 532) expired. 

* From the ink-impressions. 

* Represented by a plain symbol, here and throughout, except in the case of the centre one of the three at 
the end of line 27, where an ornate symbol is used. 

4 Metre, Sard ilia vik rid ita. 

5 Mr. Rice's text has pravdsita , which, of course, at once suggested pravdsita, “expelled (from Mdnya- 
kbeta) .” The real reading is quite clear. 

« Mr. Rice’s translation represents the NoJamba as swollen with pride from receiving obeisance from the son of 

of the Matdra family; and this implies some proper name, illegible, after vamsaja. R u t there is no 

mom for any name : at the beginning of line 18, there is only one illegible akshara, which is evidently to be 
restored as rd ; and at the end of line 17, after theya, the back of the impression distinctly shews remnants of 
sya. 



No. 18.] 


SRAVAXA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OF MARASIMHA II. 


1 77 


24 

25 

26 

27 


28 


to 


49 

50 

51 

52 

53 

54 

55 


k[ri]ta-mahadanasya | paripalita-setu(tu)bandha-bhai- 

dhu-sambandha-vasumdhara-talasya [ sri-Nolamba-ku- 

[l-£nta]kadevasya 1 sauryya-sasanam dharmma-sasanaih cha 
samehara- 

tu dig-mandalAntaram=a-kalp-antaram=Achandra-taraih |(H) Cm 6m Ora 

West Face. 

1 Lines 28 to 47 contain five Sanskrit verses, in the Sardulavikridita metre. 
The original has suffered so much damage that only a few detached 
words can be made out, — no connected passages capable of translation. 
And it is sufficient to note that we have — dri-Gamga-chuddinanik, line 
31; PaUava , line 33; Garhga-bh&jfati and Nolamb-Antahah , line 35; 
Nolarhb-Antakah, line 39 ; Pallava y line 41 ; and iri-Mdrasimha, line 42d 
Lines 48 and 49 contain the first two pddas of another verse, in the same 
I metre, which, again, are almost quite illegible ; and the verse ends as 
k follows : — 

ity=adhi(vi)shkrita-vira-samgara-girah Chalukya-ehudamane 

Ra j &dity a-harer =d da v - agnii -a j ant sn-Qamga-chudama[nih }|] 

Daity 3 -endrair=Mmadhu-Kaitabha-prabhritibhir=dhvastair=Mmuradv[esbina] 
kim m ay-aribhir=ittham=utthitam=iti kshm=atamka-samka-kri[sa] 

lair=Nnarag-asurasya vasudh-anand-asru-misrais=si(?) — 

tv(?)air=akardt=saragam=avani-ehakraih Nolamb- Antaka[h ||] 


North Face. 


56 


to 


83 


These twenty-eight lines appear to contain six or seven more Sanskrit 
verses, of which we can recognise that one is in the Sragdhara metre, 
and one in the Sardulavikridita metre. The original has here suffered 
still more damage ; and nothing worth quoting can be made out, except 
iri-Gamga-cbui&manir, line 74. 


84 

85 

86 

87 

88 

89 

90 

91 

92 

93 


East Face. 

Bageyal 3 =alurhbam=appa balad=AHana[n«6]disi 4 gelda [4aur]yyama[ih] 
pogalveno dhatriyol=negalda Vajjajanam bidey-attid=elgeyam 
pogalveno Pallav-Mhipatra] — ^ ^ mam tave konda viramam po- 
ealveno pelim=e vogalven=end=ajriyerii Chalad-uttaramganam II 
Oliye 6 kodu Pallavara pan-daley=ellaman=eyde datrti ka- 
alikar=uri sari para-man dalikarkkalau=amma nivu[m]=iy=o- 
,i ’ nimma pan-dalegalam baral-iyade kapdu balvu[d] 6 =al-61iy[o]- 
i=embina[ih*] negaldud=ottaji MandaUka-Tri^etranfc II Turaga-pa- 
rakramam palavu-kalam=agurwise sntti-vutti bitt=nihgada K&- 

duvatti kolal-ara[da] munnam=er.ippa pempin=Uchchamgiya ko- 


, - - in Mr Kice’s text suggest*, at first sight, a mistake for another reference to 

‘ I^r/orS b'vever, really ha. (Hoe 30) r^dnya 4v=4hitS, “ no other enemy, indeed.” 
iUnynkheta. * Metre, CbampakamM. 

! V^R* e’s text' gives ball* DaXlanam kedisi , which does not even suit the metre. In line 8-9, he read 
1 r \ lCe 9 , hnfc i n8 tead of recognising that it was to be divided into ba\avad-Alla t be treated it as if 

i “»* * "*• 

. ,, TT*'tia1amAlik& : and in the next verse. 

• We have here bdtvudu. an optional form of the 2nd pers. plur. imperat. of bdl, « to live, to be alive,’ etc . ; so, 
also, niltudtt, in line 114. 



179 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vo l. Y. 


94 teyam jagam=asuih-gole konda [nejgalfce muru-lokamgalolam 

95 pogalteg=edey=adudu Guttiya-Gamga-bhupana I! Ka{ka>ndam || 

96 Kalano 1 * Ravanano Sisupalano tan=enisi negalda Naragana tafie] 

97 tann=al=ada kayge vandudu hel-asadhyadole Gamga-chudamaniya II 

98 Nudidane kavudane elde-gidad=ir[u] Javan=itta-rakke ninag=i\ udau= 

erii nn- 

99 didane el[l*]adu kayyadu nu^idudu tappugume Gamga-chuda- 

maniya || 

100 Oni Intu Virndhy-atavi-nikata-Tapi-tatavum | Manyakheta-puravara- 

101 vum | Gonuru- I m=Uchchamgiyum I Banavasi-desavum | Pava- 

102 seya- koteyum modal-age palav-edeyolain^ari- 

103 yaraih piriyarnvam kadi geld a palay-edegalolam maha-dhva- 

104 jaman=ettisi maha-danam-geydu negalda Gamga-vkh adharam f 

Gamga- 

105 rol-gandaih | Gamgara-siihgam | Gamga-cLudamani | Gamga-Kan- 

darppara | Gamga- 

106 vajraih I chalud-uttaramgarii | Guttiya-Gamgam | dharmm-avataram | 

jnga- 

107 d-eka-viraiii | nudid-ante-gandam | ahita-martiandam | kadana- 

karkkasam | 

108 mandalika-Trinetram [|*] sriman-Nolamba-kul-Antakadevam palav-e- 

109 degalolam basadigalum mana-stambhamgaluvam madisidam |(||) Marii- 

galam |(||) 

11C Om Dharmmaihgalain namasyam-nadayisi balivam=ondu varsbarii 
rajyamam pattu-vittu Bam[ka]- 

1 1 1 puradol=Ajita$ena-bhattarakara Br!-pada.sannidhijo}=aradbana-vidhiyini 

muru-d[iva]- 

112 s&m non[t]u samadhiyam sadhisidam || Vritta || Ele 3 4 Chola- 

kshitipftla santav-eldeyam nirh nivi-kol |* ni- 

113 nna — ge(?go)le mand=att-iru Pandya Pallava bhayarh-gond^odad- 

ir | 5 ninna mandaladim 

114 pimgade mlvud=igaw ^ ^ — Gamga-mandalikam deva- 

niviwid=atta vijayaiii-geydam Nolamb- Antakam [ r ||*] 


TRANSLATION. 


[After the exclamations Om !, Hail !, the record opens with a verse, a good deal of 
which io illegible and cannot be restored, but which is directed to the praises of a er 
not mentioned in it by name apparently, but identical of collide with the Marasimha cf 
the rest of the record, who is h're described as enjoying, through the power of the sword of his 
arm, the whole earth, up tc the ocean,— as being a very jewel to adorn the kirn's of the 
Ganga lineage,— and as darkening, like a bank of clouds, the moon that was the fa’ces of the 
women of his foes. It then proceeds] : — 


(Line 4) — Om ! Om ! Om ! Ornate prose Let the record of the prowess and the 
record of the piety of him, the glorious Nolambakul-Antakadeva,— who played the part of 


to 


1 Metre, K Hilda ; and in the next verse. 

1 Mr. Race’s text hvs Pariseya . But the second akshara is distinctlv va, not ri 

1 Metre, Mattebb»vikridi f a. 

4 » # These marks of punctuation nre very exceptional in the middle of a \ersv. There ought 

be* a similar mark after the word Pandy r ; theie, however, it is omitted. 


for uniformity. 





o 

o* 

Li 

< 

o 

CO 


FROM INK-IMPRESSIONS SUPPLIFD BY DR HULTZSO' 





No. 18.] 


SRAVANA-BELGOLA EPITAPH OF MARASIMHA II. 


179 


the great lustre of moonlight for the water-lily that is the Ganga family, standing up very high 
on the surface of the whole earth ; (i i-ho had the appellation of) Satyavakya-Kohgunivarman, 
the pious Mahdrdjiidhiraja ; who became known as “ the king of the Gur jaras,” by conquering 
the northern region for Krishnaraja (III.) ; who displayed prowess in destroying the pride of 
the mighty Alla who set himself in opposition to Vanagajamalla-(Krishna III) ; who by 
(], ;.<) might preserved the throne and all the other insignia of royalty for Gandamartanda- 

(Krishna III.) ; who dispersed the bauds of the Kiratas who dwell 

on the skirts of the forests of the Vindhya mountains; who by the strength of (his) 
arm [protected] the encampment of the emperor, when it was located at (the city of) 
Manyakheta ; who by (his) prowess [accomplished] the festival of the binding on of the 

fillet (of sovereignty ) of the glorious Indraraja (IV.) ; who by 

. . . prevailed against Vajjala who was (ever) 

prepared for war ; who came to be greatly extolled for capturing the 

and the jewelled earrings and the rutting elephants and all the other possessions of the lord 
of the Vanavasi country who bowed down in fear ; who made those who belonged to the 
Matura lineage do obeisance (to him) ; who destroyed in war all the kings of the Nolambas 
who misconducted themselves through self-conceit in consequence of the arrogance of the 
strength of arm of hundreds of princes and the pride of troops of elephants ; who eradicated 
the thorn-like troubles of (his) kingdom; who ground to powder the hill-fort of Uchchangi ; 
who destroyed the leader of the Sabaras named Naraga ; who by (his) prowess made the 
Cheras, the Cholas, th 9 Fandyas, and the Pallavas to bow down (before him) : who preserved 
the doctrine of Jina ; who .... the great banner who [acquired the means for 

making] great gifts by appropriating the wealth of powerful hostile kings; {and) who protected 

the sm face of the (whole) earth by building bridges and — travel 

abroad throughout all countries to the end of time, as long as the moon and stars shall endure ! 

Orn ! Om ! Om ! 

[Lines 2S to 47 mention the person who is the subject of eulogy a* the crest-jewel of the 
Gangas, the Ganga king, Nolamb-Antaka, and Marasimha, and speak of vietoi’.es over 
the Pallavas. And then the record continues]- 

(L 5 Q) He, the glorious crest-jewel of the Gangas, became a very forest-fire for 

(the destruction of) the lion Rajaditya, the crest-jewel of the Chahtkyas, who in these word- 1 2 
had made a brave declaration of war. When the world was wasting away with a feverish 
apprehension that Mndhu and Kaitabha and other leaders of the demons, slain by (the god 
Vishnu) the foe of (the demon) Mura, had thus risen again, (old) foes in (fresh) illusory 

disguises, he, Nolamb-Antaka, made the (whole) circuit of the earth happy with the 

: . [lamentations] of the demon-like Naraga, which intermingled with the tears of joy of 

the earth. 

[Lines 50 to 83 contain a farther description of the prowess and conquests of the same 
person, who is mentioned again as the crest- jewel of the Gangas in line 74. But no con- 
nected passages can be made out here. The record then continues] 

(L. S4)— Shall I praise the valiauce which put to flight and conqnered Alla, who was 
possessed of strength that was too great to be realised f ; shall I praise the magnificence 
which brought shame to Vajjala, who was famous in the world?; shall I praise the bravery 

which utterly slew the of the Pallava kings ? : say, bow shall I praise 

him. the lintel of firmness of character ? ; I know not how ! Glorious was the array 3 of him 


1 Referring to an illegible passage in lints 4S, 49. 

1 Mr Rice' lias in his text given clta/e, wlncu meens ‘a heap, mass, company, abundance, a row,’ but in 
his translation has given • tribute,’ for which the proper Kauarese word is otfaja. 'ilie actual reeding is offaji 
which is probably to be taken as a variant of ot(aje. 

2 a 2 


180 


EPIGRAPHIA INDIO A. 


[Vol. V. 


who was a very Trinetra (Siva) among chieftains, at that time when the skull- wearers, 1 
having cut off ( and arranged) in a string all the newly decapitated heads of the Pallavas, 
(i and ) having greatly tottered ( under the harden of them ), (and) having placed (them) on the 
ground/ made proclamation to the other chieftains and said — • u Aho ! Let not your own newly 
decapitated heads come into this string; but, having seen (tohat has happened to the Pallavas ), 
preserve yourselves (by timely submission ) in the ranks of ( living ) men !” The achievement 
of him, the king Ganga of Gutti, became the theme of praise in all the three worlds, — the 
achievement of taking, amidst a slaughter of the (whole) earth, the great fortress of Uchchangi, 

which previously had been found impregnable by (even) the Kaduvatti , 2 

possessed of eminent prowess, who, inspiring terror for some time, surrounded and besieged 
(it), but had to quit (it). Kanda : — With the very greatest ease, the head of Naraga, who had 
acquired such fame that he was considered to be a very Kala or Ravana or Sisupala, (but) 
who became (his) bondsman, fell into the hand of him, the crest-jewel of the Gahgas. He 
has spoken, (and) he will protect; let not your courage fail ; 3 the protection of Yama (shall be 
with you ) : he will give you that which he has promised : shall any of the deeds or words of 
him, the crest-jewel of the Gahgas, ever fail ? 

(L. 100)— Om! Having thus fought (and) conquered (the aforesaid ) enemies, and 
numerous other people, on the banks of the Tapi in the neighbourhood of the forests of the 
Vindhya mountains, at Manyakheta the best of towns, at Gonur, at Uchchangi, in the 
Banav&si country, at the fortress of Pavase, and in various other localities, (and) having set 
up great banners 4 at various places, (and) having bestowed great gifts, he, the glorious 
Nolambakul-Antakadhva, who had (thus) become famous, — (who had the titles of) the Vidyd - 
dkara of the Gahgas, the hero among the Gahgas, the lion of the Gahgas, the crest-jewel 
of the Gahgas, the Ganga Kandarpa (god of love), the Gahga diamond (or thunderbolt), the 
lintel of firmness of character, the Gahga of Gutti, the incarnation of religion, the sole hero 
of the world, the keeper of promises, the sun (for the destruction) of enemies, the rough in battle, 
the very Trinefcra (Siva) among chieftains, — caused to be made, at various places, Jain temples 
and manastambhas (May there be) auspiciousness ! 

(L. 110) — Ora ! Having carried out acts of religion in a most worthy fashion, one year 
later he laid aside the sovereignty, and, at the town of Bahk&pura, in the performance of 
worship in the proximity of the holy feet of the venerable Ajitasena, he observed the vow (of 
fasting) for three days, and attained rest. 

(L, 112) — Metre : — Aho ! Chdla king, quiet down by gentle rubbing (thy palpitating) 

heart ! ; 0 P&ndya, cease thy and give up weeping ! ; 0 Pallava, run not 

away in fear; 0 ..... • retreat not from thy territory, (but) remain 
the Gahga chieftain, Nolamb-Antaka, has gone in triumph to the abode of the gods ! 


1 A kdpdlika is a worshipper of Siva, characterised by carrying stalls of men as ornaments and by eating 
and drinking from them. The mention of k&pdlikat is introduced here in connection with the comparison of 
M&raatmba with Siva as ‘'a very*Trinetra among chieftains.” 

1 For * f tbe K4duvatti,” see page 171 above, note 1. In line 92, I analyse hitta umgada. The latter word 
mv possibly be a proper name ; or it m*y be something similar to gada, ‘ indeed, certainly;* 0 r it may perhaps 
bfaiid for uggadu, =» uggata, =* utkafa, ‘excess ; affliction, trouble.* 

1 In elde, we have another variant of erde,=*ede, * the chest, (the heart), courage ;* it occurs again io line 11B. 
Fw erde -gidu, ‘courage to fail/ see Kittel’s Dictionary, under erde, 

« Dhtuja, • banner/ probably stands here for dhvaj a^ttambha^ •flag-staff/ i.e . a stone column representing 
a u«nner. 

• See page 1*1 above, note 5. 


No. 19.] 


ASSAM PLATES OF VALLABHADEVA. 


181 


No. 19.— ASSAM PLATES OP VALLABHADEVA; 

Saka-Samyat 1107. 

Bt F. Kielhokn, Ph.D., LL.D., C.I.E. ; Gottingen. 

These plates belong now to the Asiatic Society of Bengal, to which they were presented 1 
by Mr. W. Winckler, Assistant Executive Engineer of Tezpur, the chief town of the Darrang 
district of Assam, Constable's Hand- Atlas of India , Plate 30 Bb. The text of the inscription 
has already been published by Dr. Hultzsch, in the Zeitschrijt D . ATorg . Ges. Vol. XL. p. 42 ff- 
I re-edit the inscription 2 from excellent impressions which were taken by Dr. Fleet in February 
1886, and given to me by him some years ago. 

These are five copper -plates, the first and last of which are inscribed on one side only, and 
each of which measures from 7-1 J* to 8" broad by from 5J" to 5|" high. Plates i to iv 3 are numbered 
with numeral figures, which are engraved on the proper right margin of the second side of each 
plate. In the middle of the upper part each plate has a hole, for a ring, which had been cut 
already when the impressions were taken. The ring is l T y' in diameter and j" thick ; on it there 
slides another, thin pear-shaped ring, the ends of which are joined and were evidently run into 
the socket of a seal ; but the seal is not now forthcoming. Some sides of the plates are quite 
smooth, others have rims, partly raised and partly fashioned ; but, on every side, the writing 
is in a perfect state of preservation. The engraving is good throughout ; the letters are shallow 
and, though the plates are thin, do not shew through on the backB. The average size of the 
letters is about — The characters belong to a variety of the northern alphabet which was 
used, about the 12th century A.D., so far as T can judge at present, in the most eastern parts of 
Northern India. They closely resemble those of the Deopara inscription of Vijayasena, published 
with a photolithograph in Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 305 if., and apparently also those of the three 
Sena copper-plate inscriptions, published with indifferent photolithographs (or lithographs) in 
the Journal Beng. As. Soc . Vol. VII. p. 43 ff., Vol. XLIV. P. I. p. 11 ff., and Vol. LXV. P. I. 
p. 6 ff. That this alphabet belongs to Eastern India, is shewn at once by signs like those for e 4 
(e.g. in etat, 1. 47), kha (in kha-dale khalu , 1. 2), nka and nga (in NMankasimhasya , 1. 23, a id 
mangalasya , 1. 3), (a (in tatl-prakatd, 1. 2), ta (in bhagavate , 1. 1), etc., as well as by the numeral 
'figures 5 on the margins of the plates ; and signs like those for ja, (in jagatdm, 1. 3), pha (in 
sapholitah, 1. 15), la (in kha-dald , 1. 2), and especially those for jha (in jhdta, 1. 41), and for the 
initial i (in iti, 11. 49 and 54), together with other peculiarities which the characters of this 
inscription have in common with those of the Deopara inscription, clearly distinguish the 
alphabet here used from another variety 6 * * of eastern writing. As a trustworthy photolithograph 

1 I take this information from Dr. Hultzsch’s account of the inscription. 

2 When I suggested to Dr. Hultzsch the great desirability of having the plates photoluhcurraphed, he most 
readily gave his permission to do so, aud himself requested me to re-edit this record. The photolithograph has been 
prepared under Dr. Fleet's supervision. 

3 I do not know whether there is a numeral figure on the second side of the fifth plate ; there is none 

on the first side of it. 

* See above, Vol, IV. p. 255. 

3 The figures for * 1 ’ and 4 3 * are the same as those used in the Gayfi Buddhist inscription, Ind . Ant. 

Vol X. p. 342 Plate; that for * 2 9 occurs, in the same form, in the last line of the Tarpandigbi plnte of 

laakshmanasSna, Jour. 'Beng. At. Soc. Vol. XLIV. P. I. p. 12 (where it has been mistaken for ‘ 3 ’) ; and that for 
‘ 4 > in line 53 of the Barnaul! plates of Vaidjadeva, to be mentioned below. The Mine plates, in line 53, and the 
Gdvindpur inscription of Gangidhara (to be mentioned below), ir. line 35, have a d.fferent form of ‘ 1.’ 

* 1 allude to the alphabet used, e.g., in the Kamauli plates of VaidvadSva of Pra.-jy 6ti»h.i, published with « 
photolithograph in Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 347 ff. One special feature of that alphabet, which is essentially the same 
a. that of the G&vimlpur inscription of the poet Gahgidhara, published ibid. p. 330 ff., is, that tasty letters, at 
the top, have a kind of triangle. And another peculiarity is, that the letter r, before another consonant, is 
denoted by a short line which is sideways attached, on the proper right, to the middle of the akthara of 
which r forms part. In the Gdvindpur inscription r is so written in all conjunct.. ; in the Kamauli plates, this 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. y. 


1P2 


is published herewith, I need not attempt a minute description of all individual characters ; but 
one or two more general points may be drawn attention to. In deciphering the text, as was 
stated already by Dr. Hultzsch, a difficulty is occasionally caused by tbe great similarity of 
two or aven three different letters. Thus, it is not always easy to distinguish between p and y , 
between n andZ (compare nalinUdaiaaja , 1. 6). between ch and r (compare k lri chandra 1. 9), 
ch and v (compare vachobhir= . 1. 32;, v and dh (compare vadhu-vaidhavya 1* 11), or between 
the subscript u andr (compare induh, 1. 4, and 2 rag^ndrau, 1.7) ; and where letters like these 
happen to oecnr in proper names such as we find in lines 36 and 43-49, it is impossible to vouch for 
the absolute correctness of tbe transcribed text. Another matter which may be mentioned 
is. that for some letters we have two or more different forms. This is particularly the case with 
the subscript w, but also, e.g .. with l and dh ; (for the form3 of u compare Vdsud>jvdya. 1. 1, 
dijvmanind , 1. 4, °pd aadyuge, 1. 8, ind^h. 1. 4, and punatu, 1.5; for those of l, khalu, 1. 2, 
Lami'Zdarah, 1. 3, and ktli-kula, 1. 25 ; and for chose of dh, dhriia , 1. 6, and khadg-d yudhct, 1. 34). I 
may u l so state that the letter r, where it immediately precedes another consonant, is written by 
the ordinary superscript sign, except in the coujuncts rgg , rnn, and rf/i, the forms 1 of which may 
be seen from svargga , 1. 38, Udayakarnnah , 1. 17, and '"tyartham, 1. 15. In the word varnndvali 
in line 2, the superscript r has been wrongly engraved on tbe top of an akshara which would 
be rnnd, already without it. 2 The sign of av agralia is net used in the inscription ; nor are there 
any special signs for final consonants. The sign of annwdra is always written above the line 
and is nowhere employed in the interior of a simple word, instead of the nasal of one of the five 
classes • and the sign of vis*rga, T differing from the sign which is used in the Deopara inscriptions, 
is much like an English 8, except that often, at the bottom, it has a short tail. 3 — The language 


sign for r is generally used when the sign of the consonant with which r is combined has a triangular top, as 
is the case in conjunct* like rkk, rchchh , rjj, rt t, rdd, rdJh, rll, rvv, etc. Neither of these two peculiarities is 
found in the Deopara inscription or in the inscript! n\ here edited. It is true that in these inscriptions the signs 
of certain akshara?, such ns ku, tit , tra, irt , twi, etc., more or less frequently, have an angular top, but we 
non here see the triangle ; and r uever is denoted in them by the side-line, described above. [Iu Hoes 1—46 of 
Vaidyaduva’s inscription, according to Mr. Venis’s edition, the letter r, as the first part of a conjunct, is omitted 
ly tbe engraver 36 times, — twice (according to the impressions only once) before y } once before m, and no less 
than 33 times where the r would ordiuauly be denoted bv the side-line. According to my experience, this side- 
line generally is very thin and shallow in tbe original inscriptions, so that often it does not shew at all clearly in the 
impiessions ; and, in the c.ise of Vaidyadeva’s plates an examination of four impressions, of which I owe one 
to Mr. Venis himself and three to Dr. Fuhrer, enable, me to state with confidence that the engraver is not guilty 
of so many omissions as would seem to occur at first sight.] — As regards the letter gh, it will suffice to compare the 
sign tovjh (which is almost exactly like the jh of the modern Bengali) in jhafa in line 41 of the present 
inscription, and that for jjh in the aksh trajjhi (notyAi) of ujjhitd »n line 21 of the Deopara inscription, uiththe 
qu.te different signs for the same letters in the words jhatiti and vjjhita in lines 23 and 7 of Vaidyadeva's plates. 
The initial i, iu the G6vindpur inscription, is denoted by two circles, placed side by aide, with a kind of circumflex 
above them ; and in Va'nhadeva’s plates we have two signs for t, one with two circles below (as in iti, 1. 3), and the 
other with the two circles at the top (as in ita, I. 45, and imd k , 1. 66), both quite different from the % of the 
inscription here edited. [I may ineutiou that \ aulyadeva s plates furnish two corresponding forms of the rare 
initial i. One of them occurs at the end of line 40, in Pdi, ichpre the photolithograph omits the vertical line 
l*t ween the tico circles , by which i is distinguished from i, and which is perfectly clear in the impressions ; and the 

other form we have in the ^ord Uana, in line 54, the t of which has been erroneously taken to be ai.~\ If I bad to 

suggest special names for the two varieties of the alphabet spoken of above, I, with my present knowledge, should 
call that of VaidvadOva's plates the Palo, and the other the Stno variety. 

1 Tbe same signs, which of course owe their origin to the fact that the sign for r was written on not 
abo\e, tbe top-fine, are used in the Deopara inscription and elsewhere. 

2 The sirne mistake was made by the engraver of the Gauhati plates of Indrapalavarman {Jour. Beng As. 
Sor. Vol. LXVT. P. I. p- 123 ff.) in tbe word arnnava , Plate Via, 1. 5 ; compare the pioper sign for rnna, without the 
superscript sign for r, in varnna, ibid. Plate lib, ,1.2. The sign transcribed by nnya (corrected to rnnya), ibid. 
1 late da, 1. 3, is really' rnnya in the original. Whether in tbe Gauhati plates, in the conjunct rgg, r is writteo cn 
or -tbove the line, it is uifficult to decide. 

3 The two circles were joined, so as to enable the writer to form the sign of visarga with one stroke of the pen. 

To a similar process we owe the form of tbe initial t, here used. “ 1 ' * 



Assam Plates of Vallabhadeva. — Saka-Samvat 1107 



' . FL GET. 


SCALE 75 


W. GRIGGS, PHOT O-LlTH . 





No. 19.] 


ASSAM PLATES OP VALLABHADEVA. 


1S3 


of the inscription is Sanskrit, and, with the exception of the introductory om dm namo 
bhagavate Ydsadevdya, the whole is in Terse. Of unusual words, or words used in an unusual 
sense, the text offers ndrapatya , 1. 20, ‘rule, reign,’ hdsa(sa)ra , 1. 33, ‘a buffaio/ chhurikdra 
1. 34, * one who is skilled iu the use of the dagger/ jhdta in the technical expression sa - 
jhdta-vitapa , 1. 41, ‘with the woods and thickets/ and dkarshaka , 1. 45, ‘the extent (? of a piece 
of land)/ In respect of orthography the following points may be noted : The letter b is 
written by the sign for v ; the palatal and dental sibilants are confounded in sainsira (for 
samsdra ) t 1. 25, husara f 1. 33, sirnd, 1. 42, sringdra , 1. 24, subhe and saste , 1. 41 ; the guttural 
nasal is employed instead of the sign of anusvara in the word vanta, 11. 9, 16, and 52 ; before 
y , l is doubled in sallyasya , L 31 ; and eight times the rules of samdhi have not been observed 
in regard to the final consonant of a word before a following consonant. Besides it may be 
noted that in line 21 samutsritdni is used instead of samuchchhriidni. 

The inscription is one of a prince Vallabhadeva of whom, in verses 3-10, the following 
genealogy is given : In the race of the Aloon there was a certain Bhaskara ; his son was 
the king or chief Rayarideva-Traiiokyasimha (whose wife 1 was Vasumatt ?) ; his son, again, 
was Udayakarna-Nihsankasimha, whose wife was Ahiavadevi 2 ; and their son was 
Vallabhadeva-Srivallabha. Nothing of historical importance i3 recorded of any of these 
chiefs. 

According to verses 1 *>-22, Vallabhadeva, at the time of the sun’s progress to the 
north in the Sakayear 1107 (given in numerical words), at the command of his father and for 
the spiritual welfare of his mother, founded an alms-house or place for the distribution of food 
(bhakta-tdld, anna-sat tf a), near a temple of the god Mahadeva (Siva) to the east of Kirtipur 
in the Hapyacha 3 district ( uiandala ) ; endowed it with (the revenues ofj certain villages and 
hamlets the names and bouuuaries of which are given, and (so far as I understand the text) 
assigned the services of five men, whose names also are recorded, and of their families. 

The localities mentioned in the inscription I am unable to identify. The date does not 
admit of verification ; it would correspond to the 25th December of either A.D. 1184 or 1185, 
according as the Saka year 1107 is taken as a current or an expired }eai\ 


TEXT. 4 


First Plate. 


1 0iii & orii namo bhagavate 

2 tati-prakat=ali-mala varnn-aval=iva 

3 ngalasya j Lamvo(mbo idarah sa 

4 nandatam dyumaniua saha 

5 la-talad=divam=utpatisbnor=\ vishri5h 

tanA«i“tamir=vvah I yat-tundakhanda-dhrita-bhft-nalioidalasya sa- 

7 lbka-nSla-sadmau II [2*] ^»idd-bM«ibhu- 

S'COnd Plate; First Side. 

8 jam= mafil i -mani- jala-vai atrika | „ yeu=6 r anad-TUge= 

9 kari Chandra-vanse* sa Bhaskarab II [3*] »Tasmat w saurya-vibhava- 


Vasudevaya || 6 Yad-ganda-inanda1a- 

kha-dale khalu ma- 

jagataih yasasam prasaram=ra- 

yavad-induh || [1*] Patala-palv«- 

punatu krita-gbrishti- 


i See my note on the translation of verse 4 5 Or. perhaps, AVavadiat. 

* Compare the name Hapyoma. in Hcipyoma-vishat/a in Plato ii*, line 6, of the Gauhatl plates of 

ladrapilavarnian, mentioned above. 

* From Dr. Fleet’s impre^ion.. * Expressed hr a nvmWd. 

* Metre of verses 1 and > : Yassiitatilski. ; Metre : SWka (Anmmtubh). • Read -carnal 

* Metre of verses 4 and 5 : Sardulavikridita. 10 Read tasmdcL =. 


184 , 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


10 66 r=vvasumati-visvasa- 3 ata-priy 6 jajiie yuddha-dhurandharo 

11 ripu-vadliu*vaidhavya-yajna-dhvajah j yasmina 1 Snr~apavadam=a- 

12 jjvalatamam lol^eti jir-avadhi chikshepa pratipaksha-laksfca- 

13 dalano RAy&ridevo nripah || [4*] Yea=apasta-8ama$ta-sastra- 

14 samayah sangraraa-bhum[au] ripus=ciiakre Vanga-karindra-8anga*vb 


Second Plate ; Second Side , 

15 shame satopa-yuddhotsave []*] yen=atyarthara=ayam svaye.m saphalita- 

16 h 3 Trailokyasimho vidhih s6=bhud=Bhaskara-varisa-rajatila- 5 

17 ko . Ray&ridevo Bripab || [5*] 4 Udayam=Udayakarnnah purnna-chandra- 

18 h Sumerau vivu(bii)dha-8atnab}iirame rajhi Rfiyarideve i kara- 

19 vibhava-kalapair=nnandayan sarvva-lokan dadhad^iha pada- 

20 m=apa kshmabbritam mastakesbu II [6*] 6 Nihsankasimha-iiripater=iha na- 

21 rapatye bbumibhujah sva-bhuja-vii-ya-samutsritani 6 | santatyaja- 

Third Plate ; Tint Side. 

22 r=yadi na va giri-kandare=pi tishthanti d&ra-vibhavah katbara=anyatba 

va |) [7*] Ra- 

23 j no 7 Nihsankasimhasya mahishi pratia-sammita | nam=Ahiavadev«iti s=a- 

24 sid-yasyam prati[sh]thitarn || [8*J 8 ^ibsankasi[m # ]ha-nripa 9 -tDanasa-ra 3 ahanisi 

srh sri)ngara- 

25 keli-kula-kairava~chandra-l .\ntih [|*] samsi(sa)ra9ara-sarasi-sarasiruha-sri- 

2d r=avirwa( v rbba)bbuva su^bam-aika-nivasabbumih || [9*] 10 Tabbyan=tufiga-tapah- 

prabha- 

27 va-muditat samlabhya Ganri-pate 11 yab | sarvvair=nDripa*vira-piitra- 

28 Garude 12 Narayand giyate j lavdhah(bdbah) putrataya prasadam^atu- 

*29 lam Sri-vallabho Vallabhadevd vairi4fumara-varavanita-vikra- 


Third Plate) Second Side . 

30 nti-Iila-patih || [10*] Yasy=akbeta-kath6ra-pat*ana-pat6r=a0pa- 

31 m^alokittuh* 3 | a mulanahish-avaii pravisatah sal! vasya de- 

32 va-vrajab | ayat& jay a Vallabh*ety=anuyayub sarwe vachdbhir=mmu- 

33 da tatr^aiko vimukhah sva-kasaisaira-paritranaya yato Yaniah I(||) [11 *J 

34 u Khadg-ayudha-jnah 16 chchbarikai-a>mukhy6 dbanushka-vidya-prasha(r.ha)maikar&- 

35 khah 16 | Kamv6(mfc6)ja-vaji-vi^jA-vahaiieridra-yant=abhavacUVallabhadAra e- 

36 va || [12*] 17 Hftpyacha-mandala-madbya-stbe 19 Mahadevasya sannidhan ) bhakta- 

si(sa)la ksbu- 

37 dbarttana[m # l Kirtti-purvva-purah purab |(||) [13*] Dade Ka(va)llabhadevena 

!Nihsankasi[m]- 


1 Read yasmiii=. 3 Read s = . 

3 Read •vamsa-. Originally • rdj'ttihx w.*u hat the i of j% is strmk nut 

4 Metre: Mfttiui. 5 Metre: \ a^ant-tulnk 6 RcmI ’gam»chch hrttani. 

7 Metre: Slok« ( Anu^htub'n). 8 Metre: Va^antatilaka 

9 The nkshara pa looks as if originally ma had been engraved, 

19 Metre of verses 10 a**d XI : Sa* ddlav *kt iditft. 

11 Read -patir=yah sz°. n Read Garvdair* u Read°f#w=d mMdn=aiahi s h-jvalim 

14 Metre : Indravajra. 15 Read -yuai^chhu 3 . 

I should have expected khd instead of khah ; nee the note on the translation. 

17 Metre of verses 13*22 : Sloka (Anoshtubh;. The first 1'ihla of verse 13 is incorrect. 
w Read -stha- ; perhaps this correction has been made alreidy in the original. 



Assam Plates of Vallabhadeva. — Saka-Samvat 1107. 


in b. 



38 


40 


42 


44 


- is 


‘fmm 

*•'>-» ^ ,.'Q . ,>* • ^ If -v-' 





W* j* ' v. * j£’ v ~ " * 



J. F. FLEET. 


SCALE 75 


W. GRiGGS. PHOTO-UTH 






No. 19.] 


ASSAM PLATES OF VALLABHADEVA. 


185 


Fourth Plate ; First Side . 

38 ha-sun una [I*] akshaya-svargga-labhaja jananya janak-ajnaya || [14*] 

Etamya(sya) bha- 

39 kta-salaya nirvvah-artbam maba-bhujah | visala-kirtti-£Minyab sri- 

40 man=Vallabhadevakah II [15*] Sake naga-nabho-Rudraih samkhy§t6 

ch*dttarayane(9e) [I *] 

41 su(su)bh6 subhe kshanS r&sau sa(sa)ste vyasta-tambgunah || [16*] Sa-jhata- 

vitapafn] 1 2 

42 graman ea-janan sa-jala-stbalan [|*] dadau sapta cbatubsi(si)ma-saihsthi[t]a- s 

43 n=nama-lekbitan || [17*] Ch&di Devunikonchi cba Sa[j]japig-&pi 

Vanga[ka]h [I*] 

44 Samsrahikonehika ch=aiva p6[shr]ip&taka-samyuta [|| 18*] Sonchip&taka- 

sa[m*]jna- 

45 s=cha sapta gr&man=iman 3 subban || (|) sima cha likbita yatnata 4 

bbumy-aka- 


Fourth Plate ; Second Side . 

46 rsbaka-sasani [|[ 19*] Purwato Mun takas vast hah paschime Gosaridharah I 

uttare 

47 R&jak£,nis«cha dakshin£ Karddamftlika, II [20*] Etat-sima vahiskri(shkri)fcya 6 

Maitadfi- 

48 Dvaripataydh [I*] madhye shat£ pataka datfca Aehad§hedik4 tatba |(||) [21*] 

Tha- 

49 thi-Padharu«Vatb61a L6batadi-Basayanau 7 [|*] iti pancba sahaya3=cha putra- 

50 dara-samanvitah || [22*] A 8 BMskarad»aparim^na-paramparinb-rajye bhav6- 

51 d=yadi nripab katam6 madiye [|*] tam tunga-mangala-gira pranayat® 

yra(bra)viti 

52 Sri-vallabhd mama yasab paripalay=eti || [23*] 10 Asmad-vanse 11 parikshipfc 

53 k6=pi syad=yadi bbbpatib [|*] na syam kd nto tasy=abam y6 me kirttim na 

54 lumpati || [24*] Iti 18 likhita-samaste sima-sambbinna-de4e vidadhafci yadi 

Fifth Plate. 

55 kechifc kv=api papam kadacbita(t)[|*] tad=iti samavadadhre vra(bra)bmanair* 

weda-vidbhih 

56 sapadi di^ati tesh&m 6astim=agr6 Varabah || [25*] Iba surapuray^tr-amitra- 


1 The term ga-jhdta-vitapa also occurs in line 38 of the Tarpandighi plate of Lakshmanasena {Jour. Be %g. 
At. Soc. VoL XLIV. P. I. p. 12), in line 45 of the Madanapada plate of Visvarupas&na {ibid. Vol. LXV. P. I. p, 13), 
and in line 60 of the P&kerganj plate of the same (ibid. Vol. VII. p. 46) ; in the first inscription the published text 
has tamdfamfapahj in the second sasdtavitapafi, and in the third tatdddxnuidhavd ; but the published 
lithographs, inferior though they are, sufficiently shew that the Second syllable of the word is neither md nor td. 
I have not found sa-jhdta-eifapa elsewhere, and the occurrence of it in the present inscription, therefore, quite 
accords with the fact that this inscription is written in an alphabet which is peculiar to the Sena inscriptions. 
I suspect jh&fa, to be a Dravidian word. 

* This akshara looks like nnd, altered to td . In the S6na copper-plates the corresponding term is 
chatuhsim* d oachch hinna . 

* Bead =imdn^. 4 Bead yatndd*. * Bead itat-simd-vahiahJcritd (?). 

* The sign of virdmn of this t is very faint, but it is there. 

T If the division, adopted in the text, is correct, the last word should have been spelt Basdyanau. 

* Metre : Vasantatilaka. • Read pranaydd *. 10 Metre : SI6ka (Anushtubh). 

11 Bead 11 Metre of verses 25-27 : Mklint 

2 S 


186 


EPIGRAPHIA INDIO A. 


[V oi. V, 


57 yatre=nna-sattr3 kshanam=anu cha vidhatte y6=nukulam 1 [hri]d=api [j*] sa 

ilia sakala-sa- 

58 mpad-bhajanam nirjjih-&rir=abhimata*sural6ke modate=mutra ch=aiva |) [26* j 

Yad=i« 

59 ha sabaja-dharmma dharmmakarmm-aikachitta^L kim=api kim=api karmma 

kv=api 

60 ye kurvvate te [|*j iha dadhatu vibhutim putra-pautrair=amutra Tividham= 

abhilabhantam svargga- 

61 m=avyagratn=ugram |) [27*] 2 Sva-dattam para-dattam^va 3 yo hareta 

vasundharam | sa vishthayam 

62 krimir=bhutva pitribhih eaha paehyate || [28*] Va(ba)hubhir=vvasudha datta 

rajabhih Sagar-adi- 

63 bhih | yasya yasya yada bhumih 4 tasya tasya tada phalam=iti || [29*] || 

TRANSLATION. 

Om ! Om ! Adoration to the holy Yasndeva ! 

(Verse 1.) May Lambodara 5 rejoice over the spreading of the glory of the worlds, as 
Jong as the moon continues with the sun, — he, the row of bees on whose round cheeks verily 
is like the line of letters of a blessing on the leaf of heaven ! 

(V. 2.) May the body of "Vishnu purify you, — the body of him who, in the body of a hog, 
rising, as from a pool, from the lower regions towards the sky, bore on his tusk the earth, like 
a lotus-leaf of which the tortoise and the lord of serpents 6 looked like the root and the stalk ! 

(V. 3.) In the race of the Moon there was that BMskara, who on his pair of sandals 
put a multitude of jewels from kings* diadems, as straps. 

(V. 4.) From that sun of valour sprang, dear to the earth 7 for the confidence which he 
inspired, a leader in battle whose banner was (the performance of) the sacrifice — the widow- 
hood of his enemies* wives, 8 a destroyer of lakhs of adversaries, king R&yarideva, (residing) 
with whom Fortune, to the end of his life, divested herself of her most patent blemish, that oi 
fickleness. 

(V. 5.) He, king B§y6rideva, the frontal ornament of the kings in BMskara’s race, 
it was, who, at the gorgcons festival of battle which was fearfnl on account of the presence of 
the lordly elephants of Vanga, made the enemy abandon the entire practice of arms on the 
battle-field ; and who, in his own person, rendered the creation of * the Lion of the three 
worlds * exceedingly fruitful. 9 

(V. 6.) As the full moon, rising on the Sumfcru which is dear to the gods, delights all 
the worlds with the collection of her rays, and takes her place on the mountain-peaks, bo 

1 To judge from the back of the impression, it is possible that the alcshara hjri has been altered to ka t or that 
an original lea has been altered to lifi, 

* Metre of verses 28 and 29 : Slflka (Anushtubh). 

i Read *daiidm vd. 4 Reftd 

s f, e . the god Ganesa, * who has a large or protuberant belly/ It is hardly necessary to remind the reader 
that GaneSa has the head of an elephant and that this is the reason why the bees settle on his cheeks. With the 
end of the verse compare Up. Ind . Vol. I. p. 197, verse 2. 

• The earth is carried by Sesha, the lord of serpents, who again rests on the back of a tortoise. Compare, 

Ind. Ant. Vol. XV. p. 13, verse 14. 

t i aspect that Vasumati was the name of Bky India's wife. 

* Compare expressions like ripuvadh^-vaidhavjfa-baddha’Wata in other inscriptions. 

• Ray&rid6va hod the surname TratlokyasimAa. The poet therefore says that he wag created t 
TraxUkyatimha and that, by his valorous acts, he really was a Hon of the three worlds. 


No. 19.] 


ASSAM PLATES OF YALLABHADEVA. 


187 


Udayakarna, springing from king Rayarideva ivho pleased the learned, delighted all people 
with heaps of wealth, and took his place over the heads of princes. 

cv. 7.) In the reign of king Nihsarikasimha (other) kings entirely ceased to uplift their 
valorous arms ; but for this, 1 how would their wives and their wealth continue even in mountain- 
caves ? 

(Y. 8.) King Nihsankasimha had a queen, dear to him as his life, who bore the name 
Ahiavadevi. 2 

(V. 9.) A swan in that Manasa lake which was the heart of king Hihsankasimha, for 
every kind of amorous dalliance what the moon in loveliness is to the water-lily, glorious as 
the lotus in that lake which is the quintessence of mundane existence, she stood manifested 
as the one dwelling-place of exquisite beauty. 

(V. 10.) Having received on unprecedented favour from the Lord of Gauri 3 who was 
pleased with the might of their great austerities, they obtained as a son tbe Favourite of 
Fortune Vallabhadeva, who by all the valiant sous of kings, as if they were Garudas, is sung 
of as Nar&yana, 4 and who by bis heroism sportively overcomes hostile princes, as if they were 
courtezans. 

(Y. 11.) The groups of the gods, having come to witness the might of his arrow which, 
able to pierce whatever is hard (to pierce) in a chase, entered up to the butt into a row of 
buffaloes, all followed him, joyfully shouting ‘ Be victorious, Vallabha ! * Only one of them, 
Yama, 5 turned back, to preserve his own buffalo. 

(Y. 12.) Vallabhadeva alone knows 6 how to wield the sword, is the chief of those skilled 
in the use of the dagger, is sole and supreme 7 in the science of archery, and is a rider of 
teams of Kamboja horses as well as of lordly elephants. 

(Ys. 13 and 14.) In the proximity of (the temple of) Mahadeva, situated in the Hapyacha 
tnandala , to the east of Kirtipur, Yallabhadeva, the son of Hihsankasimha, at the command 
of his father, gave an alms-house for the hungry, in order that his mother might obtain heaven 
everlasting, 

(Ys. 15-17.) For the support of this widely famous alms-house, the long-armed illustrious 
Vallabhadevaka, who has thrown off the quality of darkness, in the Saka year couijted by 
the mountains (1), the sky (0), and the Kudras (11), 8 at the sun’s auspicious progress 
to the north, at an auspicious moment, and under a happy sign of the zodiac, granted 
— with their woods and thicket 3 , with the people in them, with th ir water and land, and 
settled within their four boundaries— seven villages, the names of which are written here 9 

(Ys. 18-20.) Chadi, and Devunikohchi, and Sajjapiga, (and) Vahgaka, and 
Samsrahikohchika together with Do [shr]i pataka, and (the village) named Sdiichip&taka — 
these seven pleasant villages. 

1 If the king's had opposed Nihsahkasimha, he would have entirety exterminated their families and appro- 
priated all their wealth. The words yadi na vd of the original text seem to me rather superfluous. 

a The name may possibly be Ahiavadtvt. 3 /•<?■ the god Siva, GaurPs (Parv&ti’s) husband, 

4 The meaning is that other princes served VuIIabha as readily as the Garuda, Vishnu’s vehicle, serves that 
deity. The passage, in my opinion, does not imply that Vallabha was named X&rayana. 

* Yama hnB a buffalo for his vehicle. 

6 In the original the past tense is used in this verse. 

1 The original has pratkam-aika-rekhah (for, in my opinion, °khd), the meaning of which is given in the 
St. Petersburgh Dictionary, under the word reHd. In the Madanapada plate of Visvarffpa (Jour. Btny. As. Soe. 
Vol. LXV. P. I. p. 9 ff.) we have saic.idarya-rekhd, in line 2S, in the sense of * exquisite beauty,’ and in line 13 
Iiakshmauasena is described as traildkya-n'kh-ddbhuta, which I take to mean ‘marvellous in being the most 
exquisite beiug of the three worlds/ 

* I.e. in Saka-Samvat 1107. 

s jjj original we have the compound naTTia^lSkhitcij instead of l&khxt<j*(oT 


2 b 2 



EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


183 


The boundaiy al.-so is carefully written (here), settling the extent (?) of the land : On the 
east is Muntak&svastha, on the west Gosaridhara, on the north Rajakani, and on the south 
Kardamalika, 

(Vs. 21 and 22.) Outside these boundaries, in MaitadA and DvaripatA, six hamlets were 
given, and also Achadahedika. Also five assistants 1 * (were given), viz, Thathi, Phdharn, 
Vathola, Lohatadi, and Rasayana, together with their wives and children. 

(V. 23.) Whatever king there may be in this royal lineage 3 of mine, descending without 
limit from Bhaskara, to him Srivallabha, with words of good omen, frankly says : f Guard 
roy lame !* 

(V. 24.) And if, when my own race is extinct, some other king come, what indeed will I 
not be 3 to him who does not curtail my fame ! 

(V. 25.) If any persons ever commit any wrong in regard to any part of this (grant) 
which has been thus fully described, and the localities of which with their boundaries have been 
stated, and the fact be ascertained by Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas, 4 5 then the 
primeval Boar 6 * at once will mete out due punishment to them. 

(V. 26.) Whoever, even for a moment or even in thought, does the slightest kind act to 
this alms-house, which is both a pilgrimage to tbe city of heaven and a victorious march against 
adversaries, 6 he in this world defeats his enemies and is the recipient of all good fortune, and 
in the life to come rejoices in the coveted world of the immortals. 

(V. 27.) People who, religious by nature and with their minds solely directed to acts of 
religion, do anything whatever here in regard to this (alms-house), may they with their children 
and children’s children enjoy prosperity in this world, and in the life to come obtain the 
manifold delights of everlasting glorious heaven ! 

(V. 28.) Whosoever taketh away land, whether given by himself or by others, he becometh 
% worm in ordure and is burnt together with his ancestors. 

(V. 29.) Land has been granted by many kings, commencing with Sagara ; whosoever at 
any time possesses the earth, to him, for the time being, belongs the reward (of a grant). 


No. 20. — DEOLI PLATES OP KRISHNA III. ; 

SAKA-SAMVAT 862. 

By R. G. Bhandarkar, M.A., Ph.D., C.I.E. 

The copper-plates, a transcript and translation of which are given below, were found in a 
well in Deoli, about 10 miles south-west of Wardha near Nagpur. They were first published 
by me in Vol. XVIII. of the Journal of the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society. The 


1 Viz. for the management of tbe alms-house, or as servants I cannot be sure that I have given the proper 
names, which follow, correctly. F 

1 The original baa rdjyi, literally ‘in this kingdom’ or « reign’ ; but the context shews what is in the anthor’s 
mind. 

• U. I promise (or am ready) to be to him whatever he wishes me to be ; I will be to him even— as the text 

implies- a nasy-dnka, i.e. an animal (such as a beast of burden) * which is - marked with the noee-«tring (na» v d) ’ 
In an Orissa copper-plate inscription {.Tour. Beny As. Soc. Vol. LXIV. P. I. p . 151, 1. 3, th( . tecon j o{ „ 

similar verse is : tasy^dham kara-lagnah eydm yd mal'TdrttUm na lumoati. 

* Compare above, Vo!. 1 II V p. 262 , 1 . 22, and similar passages in coguate inscription*. 

5 I.e. the god Vishnn. 

« I take the wr.ter to have formed a Drsndva compound (winch may always be used in the neuter singokr) 

*t gurapvrayatrd and amxtraydtrd. ® 9 


No. 20.] 


DEOLI PLATES OF KRISHNA HI 


189 


Editor of the Htjngraphia Indica having procured the original plates from the Secretary of the 
bociety and having got a new facsimile: prepared. I now publish a revised edition of my paper on 
those plates. 

The plates are three in number, each being about one foot in length and about eight inches 
in breadth. The inscription is engraved on one side of the first plate, on both sides of the 
second, and on one side of the third. The letters are carefully and well formed in the first pait. 
but in the latter the work is negligently Uoue, and iu consequence seveial hotels look alike. 
The seal bears a figure of Siva. 1 

The inscription is a charter announcing the grant of a village, named Talapurumshaka 
(11. 53 and 57) and situated in the district of Nagapura -Nandi vard bans, 2 to a Brahman named 
Rishiappa or Rishiyapayya (11. 53 and 57), of the Vedie sen v.ls of Fajia £ nd Kanva and of 
the Bharadvaja gotra. The grant was made by Krishna III. or Akalavarsha of the 
Rashtrakuta family in the name of his brother Jagattuhga 'll. 4S t. and 51). while staying at his 
capital Manyakheta (1. 46 f.), in the year 889, expired, of the Saka ora. corresponding to 
940*41 A. 3D., on the 5th tifhi of the dark half <A \ aisakha, the cyclic vear being Sarvarin 
(1. 47 f.), The genealogy of KriJiua III. is thus given : — 


2, Krishnaraja. 


1. Dantiduiga, 3; Grovindaraja. 4. Nirupama or Kalivallabha. 

I 

5. Jatrattunga. 

J 

6. Nripatutga, 

7. Krishnaraja. 

I 

Jagattunga. 

I 


8. Indraraja. 11. Amdghavarsha. 


9. Am6ghavarsha. 10. Govindaraja. 12. Krishnaraja. 

1 [Dr. Gerson da Cunba was good enough to send me the plates and seal for examination. The seal is 
soldered on the two ends of a copper ring, which is in diameter and about thick. The ring had been 
already ent when l received the plates. The seal is of square shape, like that of the Karda plates of Kakka II. 
(Ind, Ant . Vol. XII. p. 263). It measures 2|" both ways and bears, in relief, a seated figure of Siva, which faces the 
front and holds a snake in each hand. On Siva’s proper right are, from top to bottom, an image of Ganapati,a 
chsuri and a lamp ; aud ou his proper left the goddess Parvati riding on a lion, and below her a svastike. At the 
base of the figure is inscribed the legend S run at 6 $ rthadasya, in which Arthada, * the giver of wealth, must be 
taken as a synonym of Akdlavarshay which was a biruda of Krishna III. Along the margim of the seal passes a 
border of various indistinct emblems, amoug which a linqa and an elephant-goad are recognisable.— E. H.] 

» [It deserves to be noted that the names of the village granted and of its boundaries and district, as well as 
those of the donee and of bis father, sdkhd, gotra and native village, are engraved on erasures, Hence the names 
of the four boundaries of Tilapurumsbaka are difficult to read and uncertain.— E. H.] 



190 


EPIGRAPH1A INDICA. 


[Vol. Y. 


This grant clears up several doubts and difficulties as regards the genealogy of t e 
Rashtrakutas. In the first place, the Rashtrakuta family is said to have sprung from t e 
S&tyaki branch of the Yadava race and to be known by the name of Tonga (\erae ). e 
genealogy begins -with Dantidurga (v. 8), as it was he who acquired for his family t e supreme 
sovereignty of Maharashtra or the Dekkan, the limits of which were the Narmada in the north 
and the Tungabhadra in the south. He was succeeded by his paternal uncle Krishna I., who 
is represented to have decorated the earth with many temples of Siva, which looked like the 
Kailasa mountain (v. 9). I have shown in my Early Bekhan History that a temple of 
exceedingly great beauty was caused to be constructed at Ellora by this Krishnaraja, and have 
said that it was -perhaps the Kailasa itseli. I should have said that it could be no other than the 
Kailasa, For, if the demigods saw it while moving in the sky in their aerial cars, and were 
struck with its beauty, as stated in the Baroda inscription, the temple must have had a carved 
exterior ; i.e. it must have been a temple entirely cut out from the rock, and not a mere cave 
temple without an architectural exterior. There is one such only at Ellora, and that is the 
Kailasa. The comparison, made in the present grant, of the temples constructed by 
Krishnaraja with Kailasa points, I believe, In the same direction. 

The circumstances under which Dhruva Nirupama superseded his brother Govinda II. 
are distinctly given. Sensual pleasures made Govinda careless of the kingdom ; and, entrusting 
the affairs of the state to his younger brother, he allowed the sovereign power to drop away 
from his hands (v. 10). Nothing particular is stated about Govinda III. or Jagattunga, 
His son, known as Amdghavarsha, the great patron of the Digambara Jainas, is here called 
Nripatunga (v. 12), which name is found in a Jaina work also. The city of Manyakheta, 
which, in one grant, is mentioned as simply flourishing in his time, is represented here to have 
been founded by him. His son, Krishna II., who is also known by the name of Akaiavarsha, 
is spoken of as a powerful prince, aud several particulars are given about him. He frightened 
the Gurjara, destroyed the pride or the Lata, taught humility to the Gaudas, and his 
command wa 3 obeyed by the Anga, the Kalinga, the Ganga and the Magadha (v. 13). As 
this Krishnaraja was not the reigning prince, whom the writer of the charter might be 
suspected of flattering, and as the grant is not reticent about the faults also of some of the 
other princes, this account may be relied on as true. Akaiavarsha is represented as a powerful 
prince in the Braiasti at the end of the TJttara-Fur&tia of the Jainas also. The Lata prince 
alluded to seems to have belonged to the Gujarat branch of the Rashtrakuta family, 
which was founded in the time of G6vinda III. or Jagattunga, who assigned the province of 
Lata, that he had conquered, to his brother Indra. Akaiavarsha, the grandson of Jagattunga, 
seems thus to have humbled or uprooted his kinsmen of the Lata country. 

Jagattunga was the name of Akaiavarsha a son. From the mere fact of the mention of 
his name in the grants, he was supposed to have been a reigning prince; and, following others, 
I stated in the first English edition of my Early Dekkan History that he became king after his 
father. But from a number of circumstances it soon appeared to me that he could not have 
been an actual king, and in the Mar3thi edition of the work I corrected that statement. 
This inference of mine has now been confirmed by the grant before us, in which he is 
represented to have been taken away by the creator to heaven without having succeeded to the 
throne, as if through the solicitations of the heavenly damsels who had heard of his beauty 
(v. 14). Akaiavarsha was thus succeeded by his grandson Indra III., the son of Jagattunga. 

There has hitherto been some confusion as regards the next prince, named Amoghavarsha, 
who was the son of Indra III. He is not mentioned by name or as a king in the Sahgali grant 
of h is brother aud successor, but is noticed in the Kharepatan grant ; while, in the third and 
only other grant which gives ns information about the two princes, there is a mistake which 
has led all writers on the subject to drop Govinda IV. altogether and regard Am6ghavarsha as 



No. 20.] 


DEOLI PLATES OF KRISHNA III. 


191 


the only prince. But the grant before ns clears the difficulty. Amoghavarsha is there spoken 
of as “ having immediately gone to heaven, as if through affection for his father *' (v. 17). He 
reigneu therefore for a very short time (for a year, as stated in the Bhadana grant published 
after this), and hence is not noticed in the Sangali grant. The next prince, Govinda IV., is 
of course highly praised in his Sangali grant. But the grant before us represents him to be 
a prince addicted to sensual pleasures, and to have died an early death on account of his 
vicious courses (v. 18). The Kharepatan grant agrees with it in speaking of him as “ the abode 
of the dramatic sentiment of love ” and as “ surrounded by women/' 

Our grant agrees also with that found at Kharepatan in representing his successor as a 
very virtuous prince. His name was Amoghavarsha, and he was the son of Jagattnhga, and 
consequently the nncle of Govinda IV. He assumed the throne, being entreated to do so by 
the feudatory chiefs, who thought there was none else able to maintain the power of the 
Rashtrakutas (v. 19). The Kharepatan grant gives his proper name, which was Baddiga. 
He was assisted in the government of the kingdom by his son Krishna HI., who was engaged 
in wars with his neighbours and subjugated Dantiga and Vappuka (v. 22). He uprooted 
Bachhyamalla and placed on the throne in the G&nga country (Gahgapati, t.e. Gahgavadi) a 
prince of the name of Bhutarya (v. 23). In an inscription at Atakur, noticed by Mr. Rice 1 
and published by Dr. Fleet, 3 one Butuga is represented to have killed a prince of the name 
of Bachamalla and to have made himself master of the Ganga country. Butuga assisted 
Kannaradeva, i.e m Krishna III., who is mentioned at the beginning of the inscription, in 
destroying Rajaditya, the Chola king, and received a reward from him. Butuga is elsewhere 
called Butayya, 3 and our Bhutarya is a Sanskritised form of this, while our Rachhyamalla is 
clearly the Rachamalla of the Atakur iuscription. But in the latter, Krishna's connection 
with the destruction of Rachamalla and the rise of Butayya are not mentioned. The reason 
probably is that it was not necessary to state the fact in that manner. But there can be no 
question that Butayya was assisted by Krishna III. and owed bis elevation to him, since, in 
the fight with Rajaditya, Butayya acted as if he was his feudatory and received a reward as 
from a master. The name of the Palis va whom Krishna III. is stated to have subdued was 
Anniga (v. 24). Who the Dantiga and Vappuka were, that he put down, it is difficult to say ; 
but the former name was borne by some Pallava rulers of Kanchi. 

On the death of Am6ghavarsha, which seems to have taken place a short time before the date 
of this grant, Krishna HI. ascended the throne (v. 28). He was called Akalavarsha also, as 
the other princes of this dynasty, bearing the name Krishna, were. Here too the present grant 
clears up a difficulty. Misunderstanding a passage in the Karda grant, Krishna III. is made 
by writers on this dynasty to be an elder brother of Am&ghavarsha, and another Krishna is 
brought in, who is identified with one of his younger sons, who never reigned, but is represented 
to have reigned and is called Krishna IV. In my Early DeJekan History I have given the 
true sense of the passage and shewn the mistakes. The Kharepatan grant, which gives the 
true relationship and is perfectly clear on the points, was disregarded. But now the present 
grant confirms the account in the Kharepatan plates, so far as it goes, and, according to 
them both, Baddiga or Amoghavarsha had no brother of the name of Krishna who could have 
preceded or succeeded him ; the king who preceded him was his nephew Govinda IV.; and 
the Krishna who succeeded him was his son. There was no other Krishna, who followed 
this last and could be called Krishna IV., according to any of our authorities. JagattuAga, the 
brother of Krishna III., in whose name the grant of the village is made, must have died before 
him ; for the latter was succeeded by Khottiga, who appears to have been Krishnaraja’s step- 
brother according to the Karda gTant, and he was followed by the son of his brother Nirupama. 


* Inscription! at Sravana-Befffofa, p. 81. 

* I»d. Ant. Vol 111. p. 270. 


2 Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 173. 



192 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Voi. V. 


Jagattnhga’s name therefore does not appear in the subsequent history, but those of his 
brothers who were probably his step-brothers. 

The name of the grantee ends in appa, or apayya , which shews that he was a Southern 
Br&hman. He belonged to the Kanva school of the White Yajurveda, and even at the present day 
there are followers of that school near Nagpur. The village T&Lapnramshaka, which was 
granted, was bounded on the east by another of the name of [Madfitadhindhara], on the south 
by the river [Kanhana], on the west by the village of [Mohama] or [Mohama] grama, and on 
the north by [Vadhrira] (1. 56 f.). Of these, KanhanA is the present river of the same name? 
which has a course from the north-west of Nagpur to the south-east ; Mohama or Mbhamagrama 
is the Mohgaon of the present day, situated in the Chhindwara district, about 50 miles to 
the north-west of Nagpur ; and Vadhrira is Berdi in the vicinity of that town. Nothing 
corresponding to the remaining two names appears on the map, and I am not able to identify 
them. 

TEXT . 1 

First Plate . 


1 

2 


[«*] *r srafw 




[\*] snrfrr 




PucirctfsufTn- 5 

ii [>*] 

fit wraw* 


4 

sfhrrw- 

firaw 


6 ^ 11 [^*] flWfMiUHm.: ^^TWt^rr <ftatwrT- 

MRyjRdim: i ^fr- 

7 Mtwv Trrr&r fafdd3 fofrorepnr . h 

[»*] *nre*g[>r]- 

8 diiPd^ m w i ^rfw- 

9 [ft] « [**] ^[<rr]f- 

10 httw: i sprfa ffH 

Tr[fw]?rr 


1 From Dr. HultzacV* mk-impresiious. 

« Bead«T^- * Bead 

‘ Bead * Bead 


’ Expremd by a •ymboL 
* Bead fWT°. 



No. 20.] 


DEOLI PLATES OF KRISHNA III. 


193 


11 II [*•] ^ ^Wf<y^r«ny«£Hf^ *s: 

i ?mg h WTt[^]3- 

12 hwt <is$z4ji: ii [*•] WT^rf^[fH]?rTirH- 



13 frf i <r* #ot 3 

?<4 ii [<=*] [h]htt- 


15 f%* ftwfw II [<L*] 

7 TW HiJH 5 HTHT wt- 


M- 

HWT- 

Tfn 


Plate; First Side . 


16 1 ^rrarnjw 6 fwiljr] w^rar^n* 

fsrfwNHnr ii [t®*] [at]- 


17 H ldH-dPdd ^ifHWHTWH I HTT: 9KlR|Pd*KH- 

vflft m<fr HHHH- 8 

18 [^Hiftnrsr: ii [U*] h^tthhh^ 

ftHTf%WT^: I m HTHTt- 

19 sshtn ii [***] ?rwt- 

■d pwl ( I ■^n’5491 1 A^* 

20 ^tgTH T fHHHHHTOH!«jii«i*jsP*islT8<.: I ^KW[»r]Tifgif- 

hth^th* 


21 9 rwrfwsrfvi* ^ i*Ti*thct ii [t**] 

^pjsPTrm Tfn fff%- 

22 4jin*iiHi*fri*r. i 10 ^rani^i: h f^i P4P«i«3 f^rt- 

HTHT I l\**] H- 

23 PdfdHMH'UR^ T Jl 1 HMIHH- 

24 [H Wg]HH fMdl«*mp!!4nmfM»M fH3T[rl]g: WQ$ n [Hi] VTHT R 

[X'i*] 


1 Head 

* Bead 

« The akshara 3 is entered above 

• Read 3fflvP*T. 

N» 

“ Read fW«S. 


J Bead =gqra=jq°. 
* Read ifTST. 

the line. 

» Bead °wf^?TT 0 . 
‘* Bead °3ff. 


1 Bead 


1 Read fw. 
10 Read 


2 c 


194 


EPIGRAPHLA INDICA. 


[VOL. V 


25 I ^RT 

ith: ii [u*3 fW fc- 



26 4 fn[g]f^ uwTiTW 



TTW ^4 


27 iwrew^T srrfa^Tw sfk 1 2 * fa*r?RTn§sr: ii [^*] €Nsptrtsrt- 

qnrf«i[^]^f^JT [t] - 

28 J^^Rlfq^IhrrPEP^R^: II ftwfitafaw fl^frl ^]wi: HTtR5|Sf R¥- 

gnfar- 


29 fa ^Tfl5n[^] II [^c*] fa]m«d[<]3T 

t%*nfa fwrf^rr ^faf- 

30 ^tWTtfWT qfart: | ’3P3fT^r TTWT 

cfT<*qsnn[fa*]- 5 





Second Plate ; Second Side . 

31 ^«VcH^«il|fft: II [^<L*] 

^R^fa i 

32 [st]: srfirerc: ^ i*Tl n [^«>*] [’st^STTsstgr^T- 

??gmfT[wt] Stt^ tt- 

33 -Hti'sti i fag^rr fwqsr«rt: ^smttff 8 ?tff[^]^[^T]TfT ii fa^*] 

^*1 *WWfc=< y»Hi«4t- 

34 Oft] Wtq*TfTSI I falft gfa ^ II 

0**] *[^M*]fa*[i*i]^- 

35 [w] f’tffR’T 4fan *rtot i *jfn4y<ydw mftfsrq- stfamifa 

ii to*] ^[sT]f%[mf%r]- 

36 fa]Trir*tofasfati>] fwst^pf i fastRfa sntrtfa i r r fa flfa%- 

[fa]»tfafa q 7 |>«*] 

37 I stfefTT Tthmmrtm. 

38 I. to*] g^^fafafa^*^^ , 

4 [«rjsT- 


1 Read TO. ^ 3 Read 

4 Read ^f^HK * Read ^jf^° t 

7 This W represents a mark of punctuation Q). 


5 Read wf$°. 

* Read c ifTO*. 

\ 


Deoli Plates of Krishna III. — Saka-Samvat 862. 



u a. 


‘•Sr 


1 6 


18 


20 




'vy-l 

'^rcT^r 




,*S) 




LI 


,t 

22 *< i x;.-%,Z5l£. ^^Ilad CMOJO i^IpI 'Vl rd <4 -M VI o Vf l<a CMrUrA 1 c^j \t^Oj \ <i 

— s -- ■' 1 /S v-"~i '* a'* ":v ' v '\ \ j\\ ■ -vv/v^ 

i ? 33 3 3i s;ts v 3- J -3 S3 oijfrwH 


24 


26 


28 


30 




FiA F" t\-' 


■\\5(] *ff3j 0 =T T a" 7 € 5T * fi<£ % 


rrT ’/7? J T !.‘ 




5« r <i ov,.U ; ' ' 


t: JIT V -- 




16 


18 


20 


22 


24 


26 


28 


30 












No. 20.] 


DEO LI PLATES OF KRISHNA III. 


195 


39 


ii [**•] 


40 5 RVf^r?n1%frnTfiwtFH ^ h^TtI: i m^T v ^[wt]tw 


[HT]^Tf fWH?T- 3 

41 [wi]^ Nif*^ ^nf TTfi[:] 4 irofhsmrrsr. sthto: him - ii 

' " 0'S*] Wf* 5t , hiWhi% *t[h]h 

42 f^/ fe-rufafa ’Starnfrer fimTJtT[vrrf^J<Tft 5 TTwrfv[t]^t^ i 

43 ^nrowT^ww^njng^fw: 7 ii [^*] 
*r ^ *it[*t]- 

44 * *1 *T [f ] T - 8 


45 

46 



[wh]5tt^: srwt ^t[%K wm[^]pn[HjT’srm[^r^ *]: 
rm [^t]HT[^]- 


Third Plate . 


4,7 [%*] [zlTT^DH^pKM^ ^^M^Midid^OUTSld^HCTO 

[f] aj|4fTH- 

48 [^5HTT]*fr*rfrtjrnsrw^r7^ 5 iri 10 hh jnf%]witfh f h y h h 


«ng]: ^W- 

49 ^pnrtfii^ n ^wrfa u ^ 1^ T 

f^m rt [w]fas f^nft 

50 [^r]w: #f[^]^ 12 [wl’fhra: tHfta xww n[rtph]3tt 13 i 

^ **[*]- ^ 

51 *5 fHTt i *F'. u 

[^<l*] sr^nfwfa’TT wit ^rfc* 



*P 


> Bead MW- 1 Bcad ^ 

« The lower dot of the lisarga after *TcT is missing. 

« Read Wm°- ’ Bead 

» Read 10 Read V***™- 

11 Read 

i* Read «****:. The sign after * in ¥*T** may be intended for the jihvdmuliya. 
i* Read 


3 Read fa^H^T 0 . 

5 Read (TtftrT. 

8 Read tfr^T^WTcT. 
11 Read 


2 c 2 



196 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vot. Y. 


53 *TT[>r] ^mr: vt- 

54 R[frM<]: vf^Jarftrefv?!: 

55 T^[4y]fw^g:^irtra5fr i 1 * * d«<i^r[t>rrro!‘ ^fr: i v- 

56 ps t$sfo[:*] [nK(if35<]^[TW] yna: i ^rf^rr: Orw] 5 ^ i 

ufg*ra: [>fr?<]yur. i 

57 Tf[Trr. ^kym] m^nilX]^ 2 trfwrw[^ 

w]«rt: cir^mt 

58 »jwr wtsnmt ^t pr %]5rf%ymifT: [*r]rcr[:] s vt ^[vt]- 

rf tnvrf>T ¥ *TfT- 

59 ttt<^: *rpr: ^t?t ii n ^ttt vc^rr st vKfa 

*r^*rt i W fwRt Sf[fa]- 

60 *hn ftierfir: Mf ttww ii [$•*] ^Twisyly 9rc% 

^t[%] «Nfs: i r- 

61 3 i[ 5 TK mfirpr]: vrf^^^wvt rptr ir[ir]«5: n |>**] 

[^]tt5i[^t]^i [~*Rrcr] ^i[^t«#]- 

62 ?T f< 5 T[ferrfh]f?T [ll*] 

TRANSLATION. 

[The first 28 verses are identical with verses 1-8, 10-13, 15-21, 24, and 26-33 of the Karhad 
plates and have been already translated above, Yol. IV. p. 286 ff.J 

(Line 43.) And he, the Paramabhattaraka MaMrajadhiraja Paramehara , the great devotee 
of Mahesvara (Siva), the prosperous Akalavarshadeva Prithvivallabha, the prosperous 
Vallabhanarendradeva, who meditates on the feet of the Paramabhattaraka Mahdrdjddhiraja 
Paramehara , the prosperous Amoghavarshadeva,-— being well, commands all the people of his 
country : — 

(L. 46.) “ Be it known to you that, while staying in the prosperous capital M&nyakhSta, 
when eight hundred and sixty-two years have elapsed from the time of the Saka king, on the 
fifth tithi of the dark (half) of Vaisakha falling in the year Sarvarin, for the enhancement of 
the holy fame of (my) younger brother, the prosperous Jagattungad$va, who is dearer to me 
even than (my) life, — 

(Verse 29^) “ Let this grant of land fulfill the wishes of that Jagattunga who has always 
surpassed Lakahmana in serving {his) eldest brother with incomparable devotion, the god of 
love by {his) beauty, the well-known lovable son of Dharma (».e. Yudhishthira) by (his) good 
deeds, the cool-rayed (moon) by (his) lustre, and the lion by (his) bravery j-1 

(L. 51.) “ With this intention I have given to Rishiyappa, who has come from 
Nandi vardhana, belongs to the Bharadvaja gotra, is a student of the V&ji-Kanva idkha (is) 

1 Head fT3T° . * Read 

3 Read , the upper dot of the visarga is missing. 

5 Bead 


* Instead of this V read I. 



No. 21.] 


DATES OF CHOLA KINGS. 


197 


the son of Bhailla, and is conversant with the Vedas and their subsidiary treatises, the village 
named Talapurumshaka, situated in Nagapura-Nandivardhana, along with what is set aside, 
with the appurtenances, with the assessment in grain and gold, with the flaws in measurement 
and inflictions of fate, with all the produce, up to (its) four previously known boundaries, (and) 
to be respected (i.e. not to be interfered with) as long as the moon and the son endure, in the 
manner of a gift to a Brahman a.” 

(L. 55.) To the east of it (is) the village named [Madatadhindhara] ; to the south the 
river [Ka nh ana] ; to the west the village of [Mohama] ; (and) to the north the village of 

[Vadhrira]. 

(L. 57.) No one should cause obstruction to Rishiyapayya while he cnltivates 
Talapurum shaka, defined by these four boundaries, causes (it) to be cultivated, enjoys (t£) 
or causes (it) to be enjoyed. And he who causes obstruction will incur the five great sins; 
for it is said : — 

(V. 30.) “ He who takes away land that has been given by himself or others, becomes a 
worm in ordure and is cooked (in hell) together with (his) ancestors.’* 

(V. 31.) “ Ramabhadra again and again entreats all future kings that they should from 
time to time protect this bridge of virtue, (which is) common to (all) kings.” 

(L. 61.) Engraved by Y6[gr&shtya], the brother of [Ch§]v&na[nvera]. 


No. 21.— DATES OF CHOLA KINGS. 

By F. Kielhorn, Ph.D., LL.D., C.I.E. ; Gottingen. 

(Continued from page 49.) 

A,— RAJARAJA. 

jSo, 27. — Inscription in the Vaikuntha-Perum&l temple at Mapimahgalam . 1 

1 [Ti * ]rn-magal pol ....... .... • 

2 k-iyapdu I5vadu Isha[bha]-n&[ya]nu pfirwa-ba(pa)kshattu [da]samiyu[m # ] 

Viyala-kijam[ai]yu[m p]erra [A]ttattin nal. 

« In the 15 th year (of the reign) of , 2 on the day of 

Hasta, which corresponded to a Thursday and to the tenth tithi of the first fortnight of the 
month of Rishabha.” 

As Rajaraja’s reign has been fonnd to commence between the 24th December A.D. 984 
and (approximately ) the 29th August A.D. 985 (above, p. 48, ^o. 25), a date in the month of 
Rishabha (April-May) of the 15th year of his reign will be expected to fall either in A.D. 999 
(in Saka-Samvat 921 expired) or in A.D. 1000 (in Saka-Samvat 922 expired). 

In A.D. 999 the month of Rishabha lasted from the 23rd April to the 24th May. During 
that time the 10th tithi of the bright half (of the lunar month Vaisakha) commenced 0 h. 53 m. 
after mean sunrise of Thursday, the 27th April, and ended 1 h. 4 m. after mean sunrise of 
Friday, the 28th April ; and the nakshatras on the two days were— 

on the Thursday, by the Brahma-siddh&nta and according to Garga, Uttara-Phalguni 
the whole day ; and by the equal space system, Pfirva-Phalguni np to 9h. 12 m., and afterwards 
Uttara-Phalguni ; 

1 Now *89 of the Government Epigraphies collection for 1897. 

* The name of the king U lo*t, but the historical introduction, the whole of which U preserved, makes it 
certain that the inscription belongs to the tune of Rijar&ja I. 


198 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V 


on the Friday, Uttara-Phalguni, hy the equal space system and according to Garga for 
10 h. 30 m., and by the Brabma-siddhanta for 7 b. 13 m. ; and afterwards Hasta. 

In A T>. 1000 the month of Rishabha lasted from the 23rd April to the 23rd May; and 
during that time the 10th tithi of the bright half (of the lunar month Jyaishtha) ended 20 h 
53 m. after mean sunrise of Wednesday, the 15th May, when the nakshatra was Hasta, by the 
equal space system and according to Garga for 22 h. 20 m., and by the Brahma-siddhanta for 
19 h. 3 m., after mean sunrise. 

From this it follows that, if the year of the king’s reign is correctly given, either the 
nakshatra (Hasta) has been quoted incorrectly, or tbe weekday (Thursday). In A.D. 999 the 
10th tithi of the bright half of the month of Rishabha may undoubtedly be joined with 
Thursday, the 27th April, because tbe tithi commenced as early as 0 h. 53 m. after mean sunrise 
of that day; 1 * but daring no part of tbe Thursday was the moon in the nakshatra Hasta. On 
the other hand, for A.D. 1000 the day of the date would undoubtedly be tbe 15th May, when 
the nakshatra was Hasta np to nearly the end of the day; but the 15th May A.D. 1000 
was a Wednesday, not a Thursday. 

My own opinion is, that the day of the date probably is Thursday, the 27th April A.D. 
999, and that the writer, confounding the solar and the lunar months Jyaishtha, without 
verifying his statement, has coupled with that day the nakshatra Hasta, because in the great 
majority of years 3 Hasta really is the proper naksha tra for the 10th tithi of the bright half 
of the lunar Jyaishtha. 

I may add that I have calculated the date also for the surrounding years A.D. 998 and 
1001, as well as for A.D. 1009 and 1010, without any satisfactory results. 

B. — KULOTTUNGA-CHOLA I. 

No. 28. — Inscription in the Bajagopala-Pemmal temple at Manimangalam. 3 

1 Svasti Sri [||*] Tiribuvanachchakkaravattigal sri-Ku}6ttuhga-S63ad6vajkku yandu 

48&vadu Kumbha-nayarpi purvva-[pa]kshattu dvadas[i]yum Vel- 

2 [l]i-kkilamaiyum perra Sadaiya[tjtu nal. 

« in the 48th year (of the reign ) of the emperor of the three worlds, the glorious 
Kulottuhga-Choladeva, 4 — on the day of Satabhishaj, which corresponded to a Friday and to 
the twelfth tithi of the first fortnight of the month of Kumbha.” 

Since, during the month of Kumbha, a twelfth tithi cannot possibly be joined with the 
nakshatra Satabhishaj. I feel confident that the twelfth is wrongly quoted here instead of the 
second tithi of the bright half, and that the date, therefore, in every respect is the same as 
No. 20, above, Vol. IV. p. 262. 

C. — KIJLOTTTTNGA-CHOIiA III. 

No. 29.— Inscription in the Dharmesvara temple at ATanimangalam. 5 
1 Tiru-v&[y*]-kk[e]lvi mu[n]n=aga Tribhuvanachchakkaravattigal Maduraiyum I]amum 
Pandiya[n] m[u]di-ttalaiynh=gond=:anx[!]iya srhKulottunga-Soladevarkku yandu 

i I could quote very many similar dates from ray lists. 

i A comparison of twelve native calendars for different years has yielded the following result for the day on 
which tbe 10th tithi of the bright half of the lunar Jyaishtha ended : Id nine years the nakshatra was Hasta at 
the commencement of the day, and in two others towards the end of it; and in the remaining year the nakshatra 
at the commencement of the day was ChitrA, which follows immediately upon Hasta. 

J Sonth-Ind. Inscr. Vol. III. No. 32. 

* The identity of this king with Kulottunga-Choja I. is proved by the fact that three persons mentioned in 
this inscription are also referred to in another inscription at Manimangalam (above, Vol. IV. p. 262, No. 20), which 
opens with the a sual historical introduction of the inscriptions of Kulottuhga-Chdla I. (PugaUmddu m\ahffa), 

5 No. 282 of tbe Government Epigmphist’s collection for 1S97. 



No. 21.] 


DATES OF CHOLA KINGS. 


199 


2[9]vadu Mina-nayarru p[ur]vva-pakshattu snttamiyum Buda[n]-kilamaiyuru 
perra Mirugasirishattu nal. 

K 1^ the 2[9]th year (of the reign) of the emperor of the three worlds, the glorious 
Kulottuhga-Choladeva, who was pleased to take Madurai, Ijlam, and the crowned head of the 
Pandya, — on the day of Mrigasirsha, which corresponded to a Wednesday and to the seventh 
tithi of the first fortnight of the month of Mina. M 

As the reign of Kulottunga-Chola III. commenced between the 5th June and the 8th 
July A.D. 1178 (above, Yol. IV. p. 266). a date in the month of Mina (February -March) of the 
29th year of his reign will be expected to fall in A.D. 1207 (in Saka-Samvat 1128 expired) ; and 
for that year this date is correct. 

In A.D. 1207 the month of Mina lasted from the 23rd February to the 24th March ; and 
during that period the seventh tithi of the bright half (of the ltxnar month Chaitra) ended 20 h. 

16 m. after mean sunrise of Wednesday, the 7th March A.D. 1207, when the nakshatra was 
Mrigasirsha, by the equal space system and according to Garga for 19 h. 42 m., and by the 
Brahma- siddhanta for 18 h. 23 m., after mean sunrise. 

No. 30. — Inscription in the Vaikuntha-Perum&l temple at Uttaramallur. 1 

1 Svasti sri [||*] Tiru-[v]ay-kkelvi munn=aga Tribhavar)ackchakravatt[i]gal 

Maduraiyum [lla]mun=Garuvurum Pa^difyajn mudi-ttalaiyun=gond=a[ru]li 
virar abhiskekam[u]m visaiyar abhishekamum paimi aru[l]i[na] Tribhuvana* 

2 vi(vi)radevarku yandu 37avadu Mi[th]una-nayaj*fu purvva-pakshattu na[va]miyuui 

Nayarru-kki]a[mai]yum 2 * [p]erjra Attattu na[l], 

“ In the 37th year (of the reign) of the emperor of the three worlds 
Tribhuvanaviradeva, who was pleased to take Madurai, llam, Karuvur, and the crowned 
head of the Pandya, and was pleased to perform the anointment of heroes and the anointment 
of victors, — on the day of Hasta, which corresponded to a Sunday and to the ninth tithi of 
the first fortnight of the month of Mithuna.” 

According to what has been stated above, a date in the month of Mithuna (May-June) of 
the 37th year of the king’s reign will be expected to fall either in A.D. 1214 (in Saka-Samvat 
1136 expired) or in A.D. 1215 (in Saka-Samvat 1137 expired). As a matter of fact, this date 
is correct for A.D. 1215, 

In A.D. 1215 the month of Mithuna lasted from the 27th May to the 26th June j and 
during that time the 9th tithi of the bright half (of the lunar month Ashadha) ended 17 h. 

17 m. after mean suurise of Sunday, the 7th June A.D. 1215, when the nakshatra was Hasta, 
by the equal space system and according to Garga for 5 h. 55 m., and by the Brahma-siddhantu 
for 2 h. 38 m., after meau sunrise. 

The date reduces the period during which the reign of Kulottunga-Chola III. must have 
commenced (by three days, viz.) to the time from (approximately) the 8th June to the 
8th July A.D. U78. 

No. 31.— Inscription in the Rajagopala-Perumal temple at Manimangalam. 4 

1 Svasti sri [i|*] Tribuvanasakkaravarttiga[I] 

2 Madurai [yum*] [Pjaudiyanai mudi-tta- 

3 laiyum kond=aruliya Kulot- 

4 tufiga-Solade^arkku yandu 20- 

1 No. 67 of the Government Epi graph ist’« collection for 1898. 

3 The syllable mat seems to be entered below the line. 

* No. 276 of the Government EpigraphUt’t collection for 1897. 



200 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


5 ayaau Virashaba-nayarrci purva-pakshattu dasa- 

6 miyum Viyala-kilamaiyam perra Svati-nal. 

‘“In the 20th year (of the reigr) of the emperor of the three worlds, Kulottunga- 
Choladeva, who was pleased to take Madurai and the crowned head of the P:\ndya. — on the 
day of Svati, which corresponded to a Thursday and to the tenth tithi of the first fortnight 
of the month of Vrishabha.” 

From what has been stated above, this date of the month of Rishabha (April- May) of the 
20th year of the king’s reign would be expected to fall in A.D. 1198 (in Saka-Samvat 1120 
expired) ; but for that year the date is quite incorrect. 

In A.D. 1198 the month of Rishabha lasted from the 25th April to the 25th May, and 
during that time the 10th tithi of the bright half (of the lunar month Jyaishtha, as a 
kihaya-tithi) commenced 0 h. 43 m. and ended 22 h. 43 m. after mean sunrise of Sunday, 
the 17th May, when the nakshatras by the equal space system and according to Garga were 
Uttara-Phalguni and Hasta, and by the Brahma-siddhanta Hasta and Chitra. 

Of the many years for which I have calculated the date, only the year A.D. 1200 (the 
month Rishabha of which would fall in the 22nd year of the king’s reign) yields an approxi- 
mately correct result. In that year the tithi of the date ended 7 h. 9 m. after mean sunrise 
of Thursday, the 25th May, which was the last day of the month of Rishabha, and on which 
the nakshatra was Svati, bv the equal space system and according to Garga from 19 h. 42 m., 
and by the Brahma-siddhanta from 16 h. 25 in., after mean sunrise. 1 Even this result I cannot 
regard as satisfactory, because, in my opinion, this Thursday, the 25th May A.D. 1200, would 
nave been described as 4 * * the day of Chitra.’ 


No. 22. — VAKKALERI PLATES OF KIRTIVARMAN 11.; 
SAEA-SAMVAT 679. 

By F. Kielhokn. Ph.D., LL.D,, C.I.E. ; Gottingen. 

These plates were first brought to public notice, about twenty years ago, by Mr. L. Rice, 
C.I.E. , who in the Indian Antiquary , Vol. VIII p. 23 ft., gave the text and a translation 
of the inscription which they contain, with photolithographs prepared under Dr. Fleet’s 
supervision. The plates were obtained, and are still, at Vakkaleri, the head-quarters of a hobali 
in the Kolar district of the Mysore state. My revised text 2 3 is based on excellent impressions, 
furnished to me by Dr. Hultzsch, for whom the original plates were kindly obtained on loan 
by Mr. Rice. 

These are five copper-plates, the first and last of which are inscribed on one side only, 
and each of which measures about 9^'' broad by from 4jp (in the middle) to 5" (at the two 
ends) high. The plates have raised rims and are strung on a ring, which had been cnt 
already before the impressions were taken. The ring is about 4f" in diameter and i" thick, 
and has its ends secured in the base of an elliptical seal, which measures about 1±" by V 7 and 
bears, in relief on a countersunk surface, a standing boar which faces to the proper right.— 
The writing is well engraved and is in an excellent state of preservation, so that almost every 

1 It is easy to prove that during the time, which is actually occupied by the tenth tithi of the bright half, the 

moon cannot possiblj be In the nakihatra Svati during the month of Kiehabha. 

3 A revised text of part of the inscription was given by Dr. Hultzscb, from the published pbotolithographs 

m South-Ind. Inter. Vol. I. p- 146.- Dr. Uultzseh informs me that be cleaned the plates with diluted nitric’ 

auid before taking the fresh impressions, from wnicb the accompanying pfcotolitho-raphs have been prepared under 

Dr. Elect's sopervision. 



No. 22.] 


VAKKALERI PLATES OP KIRTIV ARMAN II. 


201 


single letter may be read with absolute certainty. The characters 1 belong to the same variety 
of the southern alphabet which is used, e.g., in the Togarchedu and Karnul district plates of 
the Western Chalakya Vinayaditya, Ind. Ant. Vol. VI. pp. 86 and 89, and Platen. As 
regards individual letters, the chief point to note is that, except in the akshara Id, in. which we 
have the full form of l of the older inscriptions, the letter l is everywhere denoted by the sign 
which in the earlier Western Chalakya inscriptions, so far as I know, is employed for the 
subscript l only. 3 For other test-letters, such as kh , j and b } the ordinary earlier types are used 
throughout. 3 The inscription contains no sign of punctuation, nor any form of a final consonant. 
The size of the letters is about — The language of the inscription is Sanskrit, and, 

with the exception of a well-known verse in praise of the god Vishnu in lines l and 2 and three 
benedictive and imprecatory verses ascribed to Vyasa, in lines 72-76, the whole is in prose. 
From the word drimatdm in line 2 to ajhdpayati in line 61 the text forms a single sentence, 
the construction of which is net always correct, and in which occur two forms 4 which are 
contrary to the strict rules of grammar. In respect of orthography, it will suffice to draw 
attention to the use of the Dravidian l in pdlidhvaja > 11. 20, 27 and 33, and in some proper 
names the most important of which are Kalabhra , Kerala , Ghola , and bi/hhala, and to the 
fact that vtsarga before surd guttural and labial letters has mostly been changed to the 
jihvdmuliya and upddhmdniya , and has nearly always been assimilated to a following d and s . 
In general, the text is remarkably free from clerical mistakes. 

The inscription is one of the Western Chalukya Mahdrdjudhirdja Paramedvara Bhaftdraka 
Kirtivarman [II.] Satyasraya, styled Sriprithivivallabha , ‘ the favourite of fortune and the 
earth/ whose genealogy is given in lines 2-59, It records (in lines 61-69) that, when 
six-hundred and seventy-nine Saka years had gone by, in the eleventh year of his 
reign, on the full-moon tithi of the month of Bhadrapada, while encamped at the village of 
Bhandaragavittage on the northern bank of the river Bhimarathi, the king, at the request of 
a certain Dosiiiija, granted the village of Sulliyur, together with Nengiyur and Nandivalli, 
situated in the midst of the villages Tamaramuge, Ptaungal, Kiruvalli and Balavuru, on the 
southern bank of the river Aradore, in the Panuhgal-vishaya, to Madhavasarman, the son of 
Krishnasarman and son’s son of the student of the Rig- and Yajurvedas Visknusarman, of the 
Kamakayana gotra. The charter (according to lines 76 and 77) was written by the 
Mahdsdmdhiv'igrahika Anivarita Dhanamjaya, 5 styled Puny available, ‘ the favourite of religious 
merit/ 

The date does not admit of verification ; for Saka-Samvat 679 expired it would correspond 
to the 2nd September A.D. 757. Of the localities mentioned, Bhandaragavittage, according 
to Dr. Fleet, must be ‘ Bhandar-Kawte ’ in the Sholapur district— the ‘ Kowteh ’ of the map— on 
a stream which flows into the Sina, which again flows into the Bhima (the Bhimarathi of the 
inscription') ; Panungal is the modern Hangal in tho Dharwar district, and Balavuru seems 
to be the modern Balur, three miles south by east of Hangal ; the other places have now- 
disappeared. 

* See Prof. Biihler’s Indische Palaographie, Plate VII. col. ivi. The sign No. 12, given there as hka. is 
really tn ; and the sign No. 19 is tga, not dga. Under No. 2. the sign for A is omitted (see 1. 37 ot the inscription); 
on the other hand, the form of pha, given under No. 28, does not occur in the inscription. 

1 .Compare, e.g., the subscript l of the akshara lla of the word valtabhina in the last line of the Togarch&du 
plates ^ Ind Ant Vol. VI. p 87. This sign for l differs from the sign for l which is used throughout in the 
Naus&ri plates of the Gujardt. Chalukya Yuvardja Sryasraya-Sillditya, and very frequently in the Surat plates of 
the same ; see Joar. JBo. At. Soc. Vol. XVI. p. 2, and Plates, and Vienna Or. Congress.. Anan section, p. 225, 

and Plates. . . , , 

* The sign for b in labdhfki, L 55, is open on the left (or proper right) Sl de ; see above, p. 119. 

4 Atmaidthfitya in line 14, and hasi&kfitya in line 43. 

* This, perhaps, is the AnivAriU.puny»wllabba who wrote the H^nchi inscription of Vikram&ditya (probably 
II. the father of Kirtivarman II.) ; see above, Vol. III. p* 360. 

2 d 



202 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Of lines 1-59 of the inscription, which contain the genealogy of the donor, commencing 
with Polekesi-vallabha (Pulikesin I.), it would be superfluous to give a translation or even 
an abstract of the contents. Lines 1-35 have been translated by Dr. Fleet in Ind. Ant. 
Vol. IX. p. 128 f., 1 2 and lines 36-52 by Dr. Hultzsch in South-Ind. Inscr. Vol. I. p. 146 i ; 8 and 
every historical fact, recorded in the inscription, has been fully discussed by Dr. Fleet and by 
Prof. Bhandarkar in their accounts of the Western Chalukya dynasty. 

TEXT . 3 

First Plate . 

1 4 5 Svasti [| # ] 6 Jayaty=avishkrita[m] Vishn6r=vvaraham ksbobhit-arnavarii [I*] 

dakshin-6nnata-darh8hfr‘%r&-visranta«bhuvana[m] 

2 vaptLS= 6 Srimata[m] sakala-bhuvana-samstuyamana-Manavya-sagotranam Hanti- 

putra- 

3 nSm sapta*16kamafcribhis=sapta-matribliir=abhivarddhitanarii Kart ti key a-parirakshana- 

pra- 

4 pta-kalyanaparamparanam=bbagavan'Narayana-pra sada-samaaadita-v arahalam* 

5 chhax^ekshana-k8hana-vasikrit-asesha-mahibhritan=Chalukytoa[m] 7 kulam=alarhka- 

6 mhv6r=a8yamedh-£vabbritha8nana“pavitrikrita-gatrasya sri-Poleke- 8 

7 si-vallabha-mabarajasya sunuh^parakram- [a*]kranta- Vanav§sy-adi-paranripati-ma* 

8 ndala-pranibaddha 9 -visaddha-kirfcti sri-Ki(ki)rttivarmma“pritbiviyallabba-mabarajas= 

tasy=a- 

9 tmaQja] s-samara-samsakta-sakalotfcarapathesyara-sri - Harshavarddhana-paraja- 

10 y-d[p]atfca-parame3varasabdas=taaya 10 Saty&sraya-sripritliiyina(va)- 

Second Plate ; First Side. 

11 Ilabha-maharajadhiraja-paramesvarasya 11 12 priya-tanayasya prajnata-naya- 

12 sya khatga(dga)matra-sahayasya Chifcrakanth-abhidhana-pravara-tura[rii]gamen 13 =aiken= 

aiy=b- 

13 J3 t8adifc-asesha-vij[i]gisb6r=avanipatitritay-aiitaritaiii sva-gTir6 14 sriyam=atma~ 

14 satkritya 15 prabbava-kuUsa-dalita-P&ndya-Chola-Kerala-Kalabhra-prabbriti'blui- 

15 bbrid-adabbra-yibhrama8y 16 =ananyayanata*K &ncbipati~maknta~cliumbita'pa- 

1 For the proper eiplanation of the word trairdjya io line^lS, see now Dr. Fleet in the second edition of his 
Dynasties, "Bombay Gazetteer, VoL I- Part II. p.362, note 6. 

2 Owing to my different reading, I do not take the compound ghdrnamdn-drnas in line 49 as a proper name. 

8 From impressions supplied by Dr. Hultzsch. 

4 From here down to the word bhatfd ralcasya in line 35 the text is essentially the same as the text of the 
three Nerfir copper-plate inscriptions of Vijayaditya, published in Ind . Ant. Vol. IX. p. 126 ff. Some slight verbal 
differences will^ be pointed out below. 

5 Metre: Sldka (Anashtubh). 6 Bead vapuh II. 

7 Two of the Nerfir plates, mentioned above, have Chalilcydndm. 

• The two plates, mentioned in the preceding note, have PulaleSSi 

» This is the reading also of the cognate inscriptions, with the exception of the Haidarabid plate* of 

Polik^sin II., which have pratibaddha ; see Ind Ant . Vol. VI. p. 73, text I. 7. 

19 TIils tasya is ont of place here and should have been omitted. The three Nerfir plates have °(abda»ya. 

11 Here one would have expected °ivaras=tasya. 

12 At first sight °gaminJ° seems to be engraved, but the last ahshara in the original really is nai. 

18 The three Nerdr plates, mentioned above, have tsdriU. 

14 Originally iriyam seems to have been engraved. 14 Bead sdUlcfitvd. 

14 The four copper-plate inscriptions of Vinayaditya, instead of this, have an epithet which, in my opinion, is 
prabhdva-lculita-dalita-Chola-Vdndya-Kirala-dharaMJuira-nliyatndna^mdnairimgasya; see Ind. Ant Vol. VI. 
p. 86, 1, 16, and p. 89, L 16, Vol. XIX. p. 150, 1. 11, and Vol. VII, p. 301, 1. 15. The epithet of our text occurs 

first in the plates of Vijayaditya, ibid. Vol. IX. p. 127, 1. 12. 


Vakkaleri Plates of Kirtivarman II. — Saka-Samvat 679. 


1 • , 'l.x. -> ,'0. 




1 


/ yJ x ' -'t '' r 
A 7 •' " >J : 7t 


^ 7 . yy-f 5 i ’-V s v" 5 


i . A7 - ' y.H 'yr< i^p 4 : V)lX 0 lrji» 

\y ■' yp'fonjJt-g, ij y < 

f fydy- y-sjQ i'/F)y5 , '%y'pcpj' 

■ ; » AdS?fiP g, * 

A •#> 5 * ^ J 3 °^4v2M5QiJyd& : ^ , 

It c3 r -r X/ / — 1 ,ti , v”. -r--^ m y -r -T - *v v X r~>. C7 T' //7 -f P. / ) O 


_7 <4 ^ 3 <~: r J' : n Jf > 

7 ^ A'fe'ptpjb y> y^Aypp'rp' "2 'i?'Pz>, 


6 $ P 

*7/ 


.? n ' , :r " > . • 

|'7<j ~-7^6 J /^fjp e-. 





rflJW 


' ' )G 


,l'f../i v*- - * u 7 

’° *7x^7 jWU* 


f -t 


■yVg'O-pd^ , 

'Uida 3d * 


it a. 


12 


14 


16 


18 


J. F. FLEET. 


SCALE *75 


W. GRIGGS, PHOTO-LITH. 



from ink-impressions supplied by dr hultzsch. 


20 




22 


24 


26 


■<&'(p &gf 


'?*> CJ 





' - '? 

■S^3S^~ 


i’J d 


rP /y- , 


y> 


ti 

dl 


'£Z - 


f t%CC 7) 7 

f„ ^ ^ A ^7 ? 4 Si Mgggi 

±n<3jf^i 


S^-rSh] ij iMs 


S n 


c? a=) 


W ' Q ‘\ S .^ y p S 


- S tJI 3 • 


■ m .. . ... . 

;-•- 7,^’ ^ ^'c? ^ i> •£/ to .*/!?;*> . •<•>* a- - f-*- • 

s 99 asmS ; l _ ';,•- 1 



i S ^ 3 ? S >' 


n "Tv jj O' 




, ^ „ ■ . - 7 ' . 07' •; 

_r y -) y ' p / ^ — -■ " j 'v** : ^ 4* 


•~}J 








No. 22.] 


VAKKALERI PLATES OF KIRTIV ARMAN II. 


203 


1 6 dambujasya Vikram&di ty a-Saty&sray a-sriprithiviv allabba-mab 

17 rajadhiraja-parataesyara-bhattarakasya priya-sundr 1= Balendu£ekha* 

18 rasya Tarakaratir=iva Daitya*balani=atisarriu.ddbatarii trairajya-Ran.ch.ipati* 

19 balam=avashtabbya karadikrita^Kavera^Parasika-Simhal-adi-dvip-adbipa- 


Second Plate ; Second Side. 

20 sya sakalottarapatba-natba-rQathan-oparjiit-orjjita-palidhvaj-adi-saiaasta- 

21 paramaisvaryya-chmba(hna)sya 3 VinaylidityarSatyasraya-sriprithiyi(vi)vallabha-tDahara- 

22 jadbiraia-pai'ainesvaraJbhattarakasya priy-atruajas^saisaya ev=adhigat -aseah-a- 

23 strasastro dakshinasa-vijayini pitamahe saumnmulita-nikhila-kapta- 

24 ka-8ambatir=uttarapatba-vijigish6r=gur6r=agTata ev^ahava-yyapara- 

25 m = acbarann = ar a t i - g a j a-g b a U- p a t a n a - v i s i r y y a m a n a - k r i p a n a - 

26 dbaras=samagra- vigrab-agre3aras=Ban 6 ^sab asa-rasikaht=parammtikhikrita 6 *§a- 

27 tmmandalo Gaihga-Tamuna.paIidhyaja-pa[da]dliakka7-mahasabda-chinha(hiia)-in&- 

28 nikya-matamgaj-adin=pitrisa t=kurvvan = paraih = palay a in a[nai] r-asadya 

29 katbam=api vidhi-vasad=apanito=p[i] pratapad=eva visha- 


Third Plate ; First Side . 

30 yi-prak6pam=arajakam=utsarayan=Vatsaraja iv-anapekshit aparasaha 

81 yakas=tad-&vagrahan=nirggatya svabhu^vashtambha-prasadhit-asesha-visvambharab 

32 bbM=akhamdiva(ta) -saktitrayatvat(cb)=chbatru-mada- bb a 0 j an a t v a d = ud a r a tv a u = 

33 d=yas=samastabhuvan- 3 sraya 8 =sakala-p a r a m a i s v a r y y a - v y a k t » - beta- pal l. 

34 dh™j. S a,.«iQ‘>»U-pr%»--W<' . , „ Vijayaditya-Satyasrftya- 3 riprBbm- 

35 8 va(?)vallabha-maharajadbiraja-paramesvara-bbattarakasya P ^ P 

36 8 => 08 akala-bbnvana-sann:ajya-kksbi(kshmi)- 8 vayaihvar- abbisbek a-samay-ananta- 

37 ra-aamupajata-mahotBakab 11 atma-vamsaja-pu^-a-nnpatx-chchbay-a- 

38 pahkriJh prakfity-amitrasya Pallavaaya 8 a m ul-on m ula- 


Tkird Plate ; Second Side. 

39 aSy. !H*»*"-*IW* prapj.ibW B ...(kh)-ipl«n. 


Nandipotava- 


> The three NerAr plate, have -tunoh pUur^djnayd B/P. 

> The same plate, have Zamira- ; see Dr. Fleet m Ind. Ant. Vob “ 

« Bdramaitvarya i. formed from paramiioara a. rdjapaun'hya r. from rdyapurvOa. 

* Origin.lly '‘dhUat- w.. engraved. , Eead pa rdkmukhf. 

* The three NerAr plate, have ,at-iahaia-. i mn re. 9 ions, may possibly be da (hut is not to). 

» The aUKara in M4 ^^'le^reading in the three NerAr plates. Above. Vol. XV. p. 313, 1. 50, 
There >. the eame uncertainty about the ^ac a * hD|Mw in8Cr i p tion noticed by Dr. Fleet in Ind. Ant. 

the reading appears to b epada (not pada). n -iadh*kkd and in the second, padadhakkd. Mr. 

Vol. VII. p. 113, the leading distinctly is, in J the _ of < a keftle-druu, ' Above, 

Rittel’s Kannada-EnglUh Dictionary give padadakke wa p 

Vol. IV. p. 306, 1. 26, and Mattdraka^ta.ya. 

: £ Srdown to the .XZZla in line 52 the teat is given and treated by Dr. HM i» 
South-lmd. Jn$cr . Vol. I« p. 146. 

: DC. BOtob — *• T**~<*~ <••• »** 

mandalam ; but the reading of our text might possib y e * m 2 D 2 



204 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vo L. V* 


40 rmm-abbidhanam=Pallavam rana-mukbe samprahritya prapalasya(yya) katumnkba- 

vadi- 

41 tra-samudragbosh-abhidbana-Yadya-visesban^khatvaiiigadbYajajlih*] prabhuta- 

prakbyata- 

42 haatiyaran=svakirana-n ikara-vikasa-n irakrita -timiram = manikya-rasi- 

43 n=cha bast^kritya 1 2 Kalasabbavanilaya-haridamgan-amcbitakamchiya- 

44 manam Kamchim*ayinasya pravisya satatapravritta-dan-ana(na) 3 ndita*dvijja(ja)- 

45 dm-aaatha-jano Narasimhapotavarmma-Dirramapita-silamaya- Raja- 

46 simhesyar-adi-devakula-suvarna-rasi-pratyarppan-oparjit-orjita-pnnyab 4 a- 

47 nivarita-pratapa-prasara-prat apita-Pandya-Chola-KSrala-Kalablira-pra- 

Fourth Plate ; First Side . 

48 bhriti-rajanyakah ksbubhita-karimakara-kara-bata-dalita-sukti-mukta* mu ktapb ala- 

49 prakara-mari(ri)cbi-jala-yilasita-yel-akule ghu(gbu)ruaman-arn6-nidbane 5 * dakshin-a- 

50 rpaye sarad-amala-sasadhara-visada-yasorasimayam jayama(sta)mbba- 6 

51 m=atisbtbipad = 7 Vikramaditya-Satyasraya-sripritbiy iyallabha-mabarajadhira- 

52 ja-paramesvara-bbattarakasya 8 priya-sunur=balye susikshita-sastra^astras^satru* 

53 sbatya(dya)rgga-uigraba-paras=svaguna-kala[p]-anandita-bridayeiia pitra sama- 

54 ropita-yauyarajyab svakula-vairinab=K&fiebi-pat6r*nnigi*abaya mark preshaya i- 9 

55 ty^adesam prarthya labdhva tad-anantaram=eva krita-prayanaB-sann=abbimukbain= 

aga- 

56 tya prakasa-yuddham kartum=asamarttbam pravisbta-durggam=Pallava[m*] bhagna- 

foktim kritva 

57 mattamatamgaja-manikya-3uvarna-k6tir=adaya pitre samarpitava- 


Fourth Plate ; Second Side. 


58 n=eyam kramena prapta-8aryvabbauma-padah=pratap-anurag-avariata-8ainaiita-maku- 

59 ta-mala-rajah-pumja-piinjarita-cbaranasarasirhab= l0 Kirttivarm ma-Satyls raya-srt- 

60 pritbiviyallabha-mabarajadbira ja«parame£vara-bhattarakas = sarvyan = eya- 

61 m=ajnapayati [|*] Viditam=astu v6=smabhir=ga(na)va8aptaty-uttara-sbatchhate8hu 


Saka-varshe- 

62 shv-atiteshu 

63 mane 

64 m=adbivasati 

65 yijbapanaya 

66 sarmmanah=pautraya 

67 Pfi[nu]ngal-vishaye 


pravardham&na-vi jayaraj ya-samvatsare 11 ekadase vartta- 

Bhimarathi-nady-uttaratatastha-BhandAragavittage-nama-grama- 

vijaya-skandbayare BMdrapada-paurnamasy&m £ri-D6siraja- 
Kamakayana-gotraya Rig-yajur-vveda-paraga-sri.Viflhnu- 

Krishnasa[r] mmapnh=putraya MadhavaSarmmane 

Ayadore-nadl-daksbina-tate Tamara- 


Fifih Plate. 

68 muge F&nungal-KiruvaUi B&Javuru ity=etesham grama^i&m madhye Nengiyfir- 
Knandivalli- 


1 Head -viiethau. 

1 According to the strict rules of grammar this should have been hatte Jcritcd ; see Pfcnini, I. 4, 77. 

3 This correction may have been made already in the original. 4 Bead -punyd=%ivdr%ta-. 

3 The reading, in my opinion, is distinctly nidhdtd, not bhidhdnL 

6 There can he no doubt that the actual readmg is jayamambha-. 

* Instead of the passage from farad- to atiihthipad a, oue would have expected a compound, commencing 

with tthdpita-iarad- and ending with 0 maxfa-jcya^ambhS. 

8 Here, again, one would have expected ’bhat(draJia**>tatya. 9 Read pr&hoy*4. m 

Head °xfru^a&=. 11 Bead 0 tsar a. 



Vakkalen Plates of Kirtivarman II. — Saka-Samvat 679. 


U-' J, - 4 J „ 7 / '/ (7 cC // -V.- CC n : l 

: ^ 3 • ^ ° ; 4 CCG 3 -3^ 3 y .7 3 a ~/ 3 . P- ; 

; G ^ 1 xnA'/A n 3 57 - CdG-, ss ° 7 ^ ^ V ■ r J? r ,' 

, i S{ > 73 U Q MtfyjQlifZ 

; a A ^ /f ^ fi J 3 3 .r> tg-jrriSJ) i 

J 3j * 5 sp'.ft<? ; cp% 5 g ;±: 


.. r ,v-^, 

^ -.'; rv , . I 


7 >- j 


Jd a 


y / 33 


/ -G --• 


-/ / r\ 


-7 (3 z7t?S&) *& ocfqn^?-, A/>jj TPa ! 


3 29 9 3 '3 y ~r 33' y '(4 z/J/.gtpf? & D ''p 33 :,; >/ ’, 


\ :Lffi%£W$$T'-' x ‘^5 XfaA-y ' 


I '>;';■ A AA-'-lc-J &-$■:■ ,j 370 -A'~A ' 5 rljQT^Crjp- / , 

v> £j77- <£ ^ ^>W&<J£<a.r ,xj n < ■■? ^ = 5 >' x/ t x / 3 

G>, <1 JieG 

/“C j J* rf j . / Cl/ ^ . * "‘ y VC ^ „ , - ' ^ ^ / : 


/ co rZ. / 37 > r ) 
s-\ I !l \rL> 


■AMiP pP 7 s/xP aa fmi»^ypA : - 

■ vSR? -fciy&wj 7 ' 7i 343 3 / yd ; > 

•• KAA;pmr-3& A 77 % 4 - G y $ * ' C v ‘ 

3 ~ §A C;7 5 SC-TC.y y^ G dC 
rf' : c cc ■(j'S'f ^ ^ y c_ y ’,*'/GG,sy c /c Cr>^ 3 t 
- v ' 'y C' rpQ^P^ v>3 G g&OA; 7 J 3 Xj Gy 


' n J 'jj ^ ^ ^ripy’^y ’-*' ) ryr) '~ i -' ^ u ' ■’ y* 


c'i~> jr 1 "r ■ ~y i 'X 

h fee. <*; > — 3 

^ t .y. 


J- F. FLEET. 


SCALE -75 


r — -'O - 1 

^Xj Xp ^j _ T _-'-^ 

- — '-.!3 

W. GRIGGS, PHOTO-LITH 


FROM I NK-fMPR ESS IONS SUPPUCO BY OR. HULTZSCK 






No. 23.] MINDIGAL INSCRIPTION OF RAJADHIRAJA. 205 


69 sahitas=Sulliyur=nnama gramo dattas=tad=%amibhir=asmad-vamsyair=anyais=eha 

rajabhir=a- 

70 yur-aisvaryy*adinam vilasitam=achiramsu-chanchalam=avagachchliadbhir=a-chandr-arka- 

dhar-arna- 

71 va-sthiti-sama-kalam yasas=cbicbirshu(sbu)bhis=svadatti-nirYvisesham=paripalaiiiyain= 1 

Uktan=cha 

72 bhagavata veda-vyasena Vyasena [|*] 2 Bahubhir=vvasudha bhukta, rajabbis= 

Sagar-a- 

73 dibhih [|*] yasya yasya yada bhumi8=tasya tasva tada [pba] 3 lam [||*] Svan= 

datum 

74 Bumabach-chhakyam duhkham=anyasya palanam [|*] danam va palanam y=etti(ti) 

danacb=cbbrey6= 

75 nupalanam [||*] Sva-dattam=para-dattam va yo bareta vasva(su)ndharam [|*] 

sbasbtim varsba-sa- 

76 basrani visbthayam jayate krimir=iti [||*] Mabasandbivigrabika-srimad-Aui- 

77 varita-Dhanamj&ya-punyavallabbasya 4 likbitam=ida[m ] sasana[m] [|{*] 


No. 23.— MINDIGAL INSCRIPTION OF RAJADHIRAJA; 
SAKA-SAMVAT 970. 

By H. Krishna Sastri, B.A. 

Mindigal is a village about eleven miles north-west of Chintamani, the bead-quarters of 
the Chintamani taluka of the Kolar district in the Mysore State. The older form of the 
name, Mindumgallu, occurs in line 9 of the inscription, which also states that the village 
belonged to the district of Koyyakore-nadu. 

The subjoined record was first brought to my notice by a goldsmith of Mindigal, who sent 
me for examination a pencil-sketch of the writing on the stone, expecting some bidden treasure 
to be referred to therein. It was, however, found out to be an important inscription of the 
Chola king Rajadhiraja, dated both in the Saka era and in a year of bis reign, and I was 
at once deputed by Dr. Hultzscb to prepare inked estampages of the stone, from which I now 
edit the inscription. The slab on which the inscription is written measures 5' by 4' 9" and is 
fixed into the platform of the Somesvara temple in the fields to the north-east of Mindigal. 
At the top, to the proper right of lines 1 and 2, are engraved the figures of a cow and a calf. 
The characters are of the old Kanarese type and are neatly engraved between horizontal lines. 
The language of the inscription is throughout Kanarese, with the exception of the Tamil words 
kov=Irdjakesaripadmar=dna ufoydr in 1. 3, and ydndu in 1. 4. 

As regards the orthography of the inscription, I have to make the following remarks : — 
(1) Except in the case of d, the secondary forms of long vowels do not differ from those for the 
corresponding short ones. (2) The anusvdra is represented by a small dot, which is placed at 
the right upper corner of the letter^o which -t belongs. The same symbol is used in 1. 1 for the 
cypher, as in other Kanarese and Telugu inscriptions. (3) The superscribed form of r does not 
occur in the inscription ; and where such a form is required, it is indicated by the doubling of 
the consonant to which it was meant to be prefixed. (4) The anusvdra takes the place of other 
nasals before ga (11. 9 and 13), gha (1. 5), da (1. 5) and pa (1. 8). (5) The virama is 

j Re*d c ni$am if. 1 Metre of this and the following rersea : Slfika (Anushtubh). 

3 Instead of pho, la or lam *eem* to have been originally engraved. 4 Read c llabh£na. 


206 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


represented, as in modern Kanarese and Telugu, by a zigzag line attacked to the talekattu. 
(6) The consonants ra and ro, la and la are used in their proper places, except in the cases of 
alivam for alivam (1. 11) and golamgam for golagam (1. 14). 

In galdeyuvam (1. 15 f.) and Banardsiyuvan (1. 17) the accusative termination is, in strict 
accordance with the rules of grammar, affixed only to the last of the nouns which are the 
objects of the same verb, while the others remain in the nominative case combined with the 
copulative conjunction urn ; but in Sdleyu[m * ] (L 3) the accusative termination is omitted. 
The word samvatsaradal (1. 1 f.), which ought to stand after muvaitaneya (1. 4), has been 
misplaced. 

The inscription records the gift of some land and of an oil-mill to the temple of 
Somesvara at Minduthgallu by the JDandanayaka Appimayya, sumamed Rajendra-Chola- 
Brahmamaraya (11. 4 ff. and 11 f.), who governed the Marajav&di Seven-thousand country 
from his camp at Valluru. This grant was made when a certain Bairayya, surnamed 
Bajeodra-Chola-Pompalamaraya, 1 the son of Muddarasa of Muruganamale (1. 7 ff.), had 
repaired the temple of Somesvara. The land granted was irrigated by two tanks, — 
Pallavakattu (11. 9 and 12) and Badngana-Pompaiakattu (1. 13 f.)> the first of which had 
been built by Bairayya and the second by Appimayya. 

The record is dated in the Saka year 970, which corresponded to the current 
Sarvajit-samvafcsara and to the thirtieth year of the reign of (the Chola king) 
Rajakesarivarman, alias B&jadhirajadeva, ‘who took the bead of the glorious Virapandya 
and the Sale of the Chera king.’ This date corresponds to A/D. 1047 -48 2 and has enabled 
Professor Kielhorn to calculate the dates of four other inscriptions of the same king and to 
show that hia reign commenced between the 15th March and the 3rd December A.D. 10 18, 3 
i.e. during the reign of his predecessor Rajendra-Chola I. whose reign extended from A.D. 
1011-12 to at least A'.D. 1033/* Consequently Rajadhiraja must have been the co-regent of 
Rajendra-Chola I. and did not rule independently before the death of the other. 6 The birudas 
of the chiefs Appimayya and Bairayya, viz. R&jendra-Chola-Brahmam&raya and Rajendra- 
Chola-Pompalamaraya, were evidently acquired by them during the reign of Rajadhiraja’ s 
predecessor Rajendra-Chola I. The conquests of Rajadhiraja are described in detail in an 
inscription of his 29th year at ManimahgaLam. One of his achievements is stated to have been 
that he routed the Chera king and followed the example of his ancestor Rajaraja I. in destroying 
the ships at K&ndalur-Salai. 5 This is the incident alluded to by the birvda ‘ Seramana 
Sdleyu[m •] konda which is given to Rajadhiraja in 1. 2 f. of the subjoined inscription.* 
The 4 taking of the head of Virapandya’ is not mentioned in the historical introduction of 
thcrMa nimangalam inscription, which refers to three other Papdya enemies of Rajadhiraja. 6 

Of the proper names contained in this inscription the following admit of identification. 
The M&r&javadi Seven-thousand province (1. 6), over which Appimayya ruled, is mentioned 
in other inscriptions as Maharajapadi, Marayap&di and Marjavada-rajya, and Valluru (1. 6 f.) 
the residence of Appimayya, has been identified with a village of the same name, about 8 miles 
north-west of Cuddapah. 7 Muruganamale (1. 7) is identical with Murugamale, a village near 
Chintamani. The first of the two tanks mentioned in the inscription, viz . Pallavakatfu, 
appears to have been situated near the Somesvara temple (11. 9-12). The ruins of it still exist 
a few yards to the east of the same temple. B 

1 [On the Pompal* family compare above, p. 171, note 1.— E. H.] 

2 Compare above, Vol, IV. p. 216. * See ibid. p. 218. 

* [This will be shown by Prof. Kielhorn under the Chftla date No. 34.— E. H.] 

1 South-Ind. Inscr. Vol. HI. p. 52. 

* Sdle is the Kanarese equivalent of Salai, i.e. K&ndaldr -Salai. 

* South- Ind. Inter. Vol. III. p. 106. In hia Epigraphxa Carnatica, Vol. IV. Introduction, p. 20, Mr. Ri ce 

mentions Valldr as b*ing situated “ to the north-east of Mysore and described aa the capital of the plmaraiav&cli 
Seven -thousand/* This name is perhaps a mistake for Mab&rajavadi. J ' 1 




W GRIGGS, FHOTO-UTH. 











-t 



No. 23.] 


207 


MINDIGAL INSCRIPTION OF RAJADHIRAJA. 


TEXT. 1 

1 Svasti sri [||*] Saka-varisha 970-ne yi Sabbajitu-samva- 

2 tsaradal srimat-Virapandijrana taleyurii Serama- 

3 na Saleyu[m # ] konda kov=Irajakesaripadmar=ana 2 udeyar sri-Raj&dhi- 

4 rajadeva[r*]gge yandu piuvattanyea [I*] srimat-[Da]ndanayakam A- 

5 ppimayyan=appa o[r*]-kkettu-gandam ganda-Narayana Cholana-simgham 

Rajemdra- 

6 Chola-Brahmamarayar M&rajav&d[i] Elusasiravan^alntta V[a]llu- 

7 ra bidinal sukha-sa[m]ghata-vinodadim 3 alutt— ire [|*] Muruganamaleya 

8 Muddarasara magam Bairayyan*app[a] Rajen&ra-Chola-PompaJamaraya- 

9 r Koyyakore-nada Mindumgallal Pallavakatt=endu hosa kereyafrh] 

10 katdisi tumban=ikkisi bh&miyam tildi 4 * Somesvaradevara degmlava 

11 [a]livam 6 [so]disi soteyan=ikkisal Appimayyan=appa Rajendra-Chola- 

12 6 Bramhmam&rayar 7 iy=ftra Somesvaradeva[r*]gge Pallavagattina tubina 

13 modalal Cholana-simgam ko[l]agadal kandugam gald[e]yum Badagana-[Pom]- 

14 pa[la]ka[t]t=endu kereya katti[si*] tuihban=ikkisi a kereyal ai-golamgam 8 

15 gal[d]eyum nan[da]-divigege iy=ura g[a]nam ondum bha[t*]ta[ra*]rige pattu 

kola gam ga- 

16 ldeyuvam S6mesvaradeva[r*]gge arasar-damma-dattiy=age bi[tta]r [||*J p 

17 dammavan=alidavar kavileyum Bana[r]asiynvan=al[i]da papakke 

18 popar [||*] 


TRANSLATION. 

(Line 1.) Hail ! Prosperity ! In the Saka year 970 {which was) this ( current ) Sarvajit- 
samvatsara (and) the thirtieth year (of the reign) of king Rajakesarivarman, alias the 
lord irf-R&jadhir&jadeva, who took the head of the glorious Virapandya and the Sale of 
Serama (t.e. the Chera king) ; — 

(L. 4.) while the glorious Dandandyaka Appimavya, alias Rajendra-Chola- 
Brahmamaraya, a chief who alone makes ( his enemies) tremble, a (very) Narayana among 
heroes, the lion of theChola (king), was governingthe M&rajavadi Seven-thousand (province) 
(and) was immersed in the delight of pleasing conversations in (his) camp at Valluru; — 

(L. 7.) when Bairayya, alias Rajendra-Chola-Pdmprlam&raya, the son of Muddarasa 
of Muruganamale, having caused to be constructed at Mindumgallu in Koyyakore-n&du a 
new tank called Pallavakattu and a sluice to be built, having levelled the ground and having 
examined the cracks in the temple of Somesvaradeva, had (them) plastered, — Appimayya, 
alias Raj endra-Chola-Brahmam§r&ya, gave to (the temple of) Somesvaradeva in this village 
(one) kanduga of paddy-land, ( measured ) by the kolaga (named after) Cholana-Simga, 10 at the 
"base of the slnice of the Pallavakattu (tank ) ; 

(L. 14,) and, having caused to be constructed a tank called th© Northern Pompalakattu 
and a slnice to be built, (he gave) to (the temple of) Somesvaradeva, as a gift for the merit of 


1 From four inked estampages. 2 Read c varmar=* 

3 Read -samkathfa. Samghata might be translated by ‘crowd* or ‘ abundance/ but the phrase occurs in 

many other inscriptions as suJcha-$aihkathd~iin6dadim, 

4 Read tirdi and compare with it the Tamil tirutti which, as Mr. Venkayya informs me, meant ‘having 

reclaimed.* 

* Read alivath. * Read Brahma ? . * Read ly=*. 

8 Read •golagam. 9 Rend t. 

10 According to 1. 5 this was a birvda of the Dandandgalca Appimayya. 



20S 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


[Yol. V. 


the king, 1 * five kolagas of paddy-land at that tank, one oil- mill of this village for a perpetual 
1 amp, and ten kolagas of paddy-land for the priest. 

(L. 16.) He who destroys this charity will incur the sin of destroying cows and (the city 
of) Banarasi.* 


No. 24.— DAULATPURA PLATE OF BHOJADEYA I. OF MAHODATA ; 

[HARS H A-] S AM Y AT 100. 

By F. Kielhobn, Ph. D., LL.D., C.I.E.; Gottingen. 

This plate is said to have been found, some thirty years ago, among the ruins of an ancient 
temple near the village of Siva, the * Sewa* of the map, about 7 miles E.N.E. of the town of 
Didwana in Jodhpur (Marwad), R^jputana, Indian Atlas , quarter-sheet No. 33 N.E., long. 
74° 44' E., lat. 27° 27' N. It was taken at the time to the small fortress of Daulatpura, about 
4 miles E.S.E. of Didwana, but since September 1897 has been deposited in the Historical 
Records Office at Jodhpur. I edit the inscription which it contains from impressions, which 
were kindly furnished to Dr. Hultzsch by Hunsiff Debiprasad of Jddhpur and by Dr. 
Fiihrer. 

This is a single plate, inscribed on one side only. It is very similar to the Dighwa-Dubauli 
plate of Mahendrapala and the Bengal As. Soe.’s plate of Yinayakapala, published by Dr. Fleet, 
with photolithographs, in Ind. Ant % Yol. XY. p. 105 ff. and p. 138 ff. The plate is about 
1' 9f* broad by 1' 4| 7 high, and on to its proper right side is soldered a heavy brass seal, about 
6^* broad by 9f" high, the top of which is raised into an arched peak. The letters of the legend 
on the seal are in relief, and the arch contains a standing figure which is only faintly visible 
in the impressions. The writing on both the plate and the seal is well executed, and in an 
excellent state of preservation. The size of the letters on the plate is between f* and and 
on the seal, between §* and The characters belong to the northern class of alphabets, and 
are similar to, but in some particulars 3 more antique than, those of the two plates mentioned 
above. They include, in line 16 of the plate, numerical symbols for 100 and 10, and the 
numeral figure for 3. 4 The language of the inscription is Sanskrit, and, with the exception 
of one verse in lines 15 and 16, the text is in prose. In respect of orthography, I may note 
the use of the sign for v, to denote h ; the constant doubling of t before r ; the employment of n 
instead of anusudra in the word ansa, in lines 10 and 14 of the plate ; the use of parambha - 
gavatibhaktd in lines 4 and 6 5 of the plate, and of para mbhagavatibhaktd in lines 5 and 10 of the 
seal, for paramabhagavatibhaktd ; and the occurrence of the term samvatsro , 6 for samvdtsarah 
or the ordinary samvat, in the date, in line 16. 

The inscription is one of a Maharaja Bhdjadeva, who, from his residence or camp of 
Mahddaya, on the representation of one of the people concerned, renews here a grant which 
had been made by his great-grandfather, the Maharaja Vatsar&jadAva, and continued by his 
grandfather, the Maharaja N&gabhatadSva, but, in hi3 own reign, had fallen into abeyance. 
The object of the grant is the village of Siv&, in the pSndv&naka-vishaya of the Gurjaratrft- 


1 Viz. his sovereign, the Chfila king Rajadbir&ja. * I.e. VtrAnasl (BenareB). 

1 l refer especially to the different forms of the consonants j and t ; of the subscript u in the dksharas pn, yu 
and thu ; and of the medial S (a*, d, and au). 

* For other northern inscriptions which exhibit both numerical symbols and numeral figures, see my List 0 / 

Northern Inscriptions, Nos. 528 (which is about 78 years older than the present inscription), 541, 560, 602, 616, 651, 

and 655. 

* In line 6 the engraver has actually engraved paranbhda* 0 . 

* See my List, Nos. 542 (where the actual reading ako appears to be samtatsrd), 544, and 545. 



209 


Xo 24.] DABLATPURA PLATE OF BHOJADEVA I. 


bhumi. The dutaka of this 1 charter, issued by Prabhasa, * was the Yuvardja Nagabhata ; 
and the date is the 13th of the bright half of Phalguna of the year 100. 

Date of the Daulatpura Plate . 



SCALE -67 

The genealogy, of Bhojadeva, which is given on both the plate and the seal, waa known 
already from the DighwcUDubauli and Bengal As. Soc.’s plates mentioned above. The 
Dighwa-Dubauli plate, which is dated 55 years later, records a grant of his son Mahendra- 
, pala ; and from the Bengal As. Soc.'s plate we know that Mahendrapala’s son and successor 
was another Bhojadeva (or Bhojadeva II.), who in turn was succeeded by Vinayakapala, 
his brother from a different mother. All the three grants were issued from the skandhdvdra 
(i.e. either a camp or royal residence 1 ) at Mahodaya. As was first pointed out by Dr. F. E. 
Hall, Mahodaya or Mahodaya, according to the lexicographers, 2 is another name of Kanyakubj& 
(Kanyakubja, or Kanauj), and there is no reason now why that identification should not be 
accepted here. So long as only the two other grants were available, which refer to localities 
about 250 miles south-east and 150 miles east, by north of Kanauj, it could well be doubted 3 
whether the government of these Maharajas had extended so far west as to include Kanauj ; but 
we now see from the present inscription that these princes held sway even over a part of the 
country which is more than 300 miles west of Kanauj, and for the three grants together it 
would be difficult to find a place of issue more favourably situated than that well-known city. 

Our inscription indicates the solution of another difficulty presented by the other grants. 
The plate of Mahendrapala, in line 14, contains the half-verse Srimad-Bhdka-prayuktasyn 
fdsanasya sthir-ayatSh , and Vinayakapala’s plate, in line 16, has the similar half- verse Sri - 
Harshena prayuktasya idsanasya sthir-dyateh. To make some sense of these incomplete 
sentences Dr. Fleet had to supply the words ‘ this is the writing of ; ’ but now a different 
explanation is furnished to us. Instead of the half-verse we here, in lines 15 and 16, have 
the full verse Prabhdsena prayuktasya Jdsanasya sthir-dyateh Srimdn^N dgahhato ndmnd 
yuvardjo^tra dutakah. This verse makes it clear, that the half-verse of the other grants also 
is part of a customary verse, the object of which was to record, in the second half, the name 
of the dutaka ; and that, through the force of habit (and perhaps for a reason which will 
appear below), the half -verse was inserted -even when no dutaka was to be mentioned. The 
exact interpretation of the details of the verse solely depends on the sense of the word 
prayuktasya . In my opinion, the meaning which at once suggests itself for Msanam praytij, 
is, ‘ to employ a command for a certain purpose, to address an order to somebody, to proclaim 
an edict, to issue a charter,’ and Prabhdsena prayuktam Msanam , therefore, could hardly be 
anything else than Prabhdsasya idsanam , ‘ an order or charter of Prabh£sa/ which, in the case 
of the present inscription, of course would mean ‘ of Bhojadeva.* In accprdance with this 
interpretation I take the three names, Prabhasa, Bh&ka and Harsha, to be second names of 
the three Maharajas who issued the respective grants; and I suspect that in the grants of 


i e.g. Haliyudha’s Abhidhdnaratnamdld , II. 131 : ilcandhdvdra iti prdjuai rdjadhdnl nigadyate. 

* See ibid. II. 132: Sanyahubjd Mahodaya* * See Ind. Ant. \ ol. X\ . p. 111. 


210 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Mahendrapala and Vinayakapala the by themselves meaningless half-verses, to some extent, 
were inserted for the very purpose of recording those second names of the donor* . With the 
full verse of the present inscription I would compare the concluding verse of the Achyutapuram 
and Parla-Kimedi plates of the Ganga Maharaja Indravarman, 1 in which also the second name 
of that prince, Rajasimha, is mentioned, as it were incidentally, only in connection with the 
writing of the grants. 

The localities mentioned in this inscription admit of easy identification. The village of 
Siv& of course is the very place near which the plate was found, and the name of the 
DOndvan aka-vishay a survives in that of the town of Didwana which is about 7 miles 
W. S . W. of Siva. The Dendvanaka-vishaya is stated to have been in the Gurjaratrd-bhumi. 
I have not been able to trace the name Gurjaratrd in any of the published records but I find 
the term Gurjarafrd-mandala , denoting the same part of the country (and no doubt synonymous 
with Gurjaratra-bhumij, in an unpublished inscription of about the 8th century at Kalanjar. 3 
That inscription speaks of a man who had gone forth from Mangalanakd, Situated in the 
Gurjaratra-mandala, and Mangalanaka 4 clearly is the 4 Maglona ’ of the map, which is only 
about 28 miles N. N. E. of Didwana. 

The date of the inscription, like the dates of the two cognate grants, must be referred to 
the Harsha era. It does not admit of verification, but, judging by the date of Mahendrapala’s 
plate, it would probably correspond to the 2nd March A.D. 706. 

The Maharaja Bhojadeva I. of our inscription was preceded by his father, the Maharaja 
Ramabhadradeva, and succeeded by his son, the Maharaja MahendrapaladOva. The same 
names we find again, in the same order, in the list of the later Maharajadhirajas of Kanauj, 
According to the Peheya (Pehoa) inscription of [Harsha-] Sam vat 276, No. 546 of my List , the 
Maharajadhiraja Bhojadeva was the successor of the Maharajadhiraja Ramabhadradeva; and 
according to the Siyadbni inscription, ibid . Nos. 18 and 20, Bhojadeva was succeeded by the 
Maharajadhiraja Mahtodrapaladeva. This alone would go far to prove that the later 
Maharajadhirajas were descendants of the earlier Maharajas . But in addition to this, like the 
Maharajas the Maharajadhirajas also, in the Siyadoni inscription, 5 apparently are referred to 
as ruling at Mahodaya as their capital ; and so far as we can judge from the known inscriptions, 
the extent and situation of their respective dominions, at least from the west to the east, were 
about the same. On the west, we have seen above, the plate of the Maharaja Bhojadeva I. 
takes us to Didwana in' Marwad ; and on the east, the plate of his grandson, the Maharaja 
Vinayakapala, records the grant of a village near Benares. The direct distance from Didwana 
to Benares is about 540 miles ; and from between the two places, and not far from a straight 


1 See above, Vol III. p. 129, and Ind. Ant. Vol. XVI. p. 134 : Idam Yinayacbandrena Shanuchandrasya 
sununa idsanam Rdjasinhasyz likhitam sva-mulck-dj haya. 

1 I find Ourjardtra\_h ] in Up. Ind. Vol. II. p. 445, 1. 13, corresponding, according to Prof. Buhler, to the 
modern Gujardt, and, according to him, coined out of the latter ; see ibid. p. 438. 

3 The inscription is above a statue of Siva and Parvati in a cell nenr Nilakantha’s temple. £ photolithograph 
of it is given in Archceol. Surv. of Tndia> VoL XXI. Plate U. K. The following is a full transcript of the text 
from Sir A. Cunningham’s impressions 

[1] [Jayati*] bhuvana-karaoam Svayambhuv=jjayati Purandara*namdan5 Murarir=jjayati Gi- ,* r - a-niraddha- 

d*eh6 

[2] [ du 1 rita-bhay-apahard Hara$=cha devah H Srimad-Gurjjarattramapdal antahpati-Marhgalanaka- 

vinirggata- 

[3] N6makanvaya-Jend[u]ka-suta-Deddukena Bbagavatyah karita-mandapika-prasa[m]gena tad-bharyaya 

Lukshmya pra- 

[4] tishtbapitd=yam~Umamahp^ara'pattah |} 

* In an inscription of [Vikrama-]Samvat 1272, which tvmes from Maglona itself, and of which I owe 
impressions to Dr. Viihrer, the name of the place is spelt Mamgr ldwaka 

* See Up. Ind. Vol. I. p. 178, 1. 40 of the text, where Mahoda\a is compared with Indra’s town Amaravati, 



No. 24.] 


DAELATPURA PLATE OF BHOJADEVA I. 


211 


line connecting them, we have, from wes: to east, the Rajorgadh (in Alwar) inscription of the 
reign of the Ma hard] ddhiraja Vijayapaladeva, No. 39 of my List , the Gwalior inscriptions of the 
reign of the Mahdrdj ddhiraja Bhojadeva, (bid. Nos. 15 and 16, the Asni inscription of the reign 
of the Mahdrdj ddhiraja Mahipaladeva, ibid. No. 25, and 1 the Jhusi plate of the Mahdrdj ddhiraja 
Trilochanapaladeva, ibid . No. 60. Since of the reign of the Mahdrdj ddhiraja Bhojadeva we 
besides have an inscription at Peheva (Pehoa) in the north, ibid . No. 546, and another at 
Deogadh in the south, ibid. No. 14, the kingdom, in his time, in either direction may have been 
far more extensive than under the Maharajas ; but that they also ruled over part of the more 
northern country, is shewn by the Dighwa-Dubauli plate of Makendrapala which, like the 
Madhuban plate of Harsha, records a grant in the Sravasti-bhukti, and future discoveries may 
shew that their rule extended farther to the north and south than we know at present. 

Regarding the connection of the Maharajas of Mahddaya with any of the earlier rulers of 
Kanauj, and particularly concerning their relation oo the great king Harsha, I am unable to 
give any information. I can only draw attention to the fact that the manner in which their 
genealogy is given in their plates, and especially the way in which each of them is described as 
the devotee of a particular deity, remind one of, and apparently are adopted from, 2 * the 
corresponding portions of Harsha’s own grants. 

TEXT. 4 

The Plate . 

1 Om 4 svasti [||*] Sri-Mahodaya-samavasit-aneka-nau-hasty-asva-ratha-patti-sampanna- 

skandhavarat =para mavaishna- 

2 vo maharaja-sri-Devasaktidevas*tasya puttras=tatpadanudbyatah sii- 

Bhuyikadevyam=utpannah parama- 

3 mahesvaro maharaja-sri-Vatsarajadevas=tasya puttras=tatpadauudhyatah sri- 

Sundaridevyam=utpannah 

4 5 * parambhagavati v 'hakto maharaja-sri-Nagabhatadevas=tasya puttras=fcatpadanudhyatah 

srimad-isatade- 

5 vyam-utpannah paramadityabhakto maharaja-sn-Ramabhadradevas^tasya pottras= 

tatpadanudhyatah sri- 

6 mad-Appad§vyam=atpannah ! pamnbh agavat lbhakto maharap-sri-Bhojadevah 5 II 

Gurjjarattra-bhumau | 7 Dendvana- 

7 ka-vishaya-samvafmbalddba- 8 Sivagram-[a*]grahare samupagatan=sarvvan=eva 

yathaBthana-niynktdn=prati vasina s=cha 

8 samajhapayati | Bhatta-Harshukena(na) vijnapitam | Uparilikhit-agrabaras^ 

sarvvaya-sameta a-chandr-arkka- 

1 Perhaps also the Karri inscription of the Mahdrdj ddhirdj a Ya&hpala, who probably was a king of Kanauj, 
No. 62 of my Lift. 

a The same may be said of the genealogy in the DM-Baranirk inscription of the Mahdrdj ddhirdj a 
Jlvitaguptadeva II. of the family of the Guptas of Magadha, Gupta laser, p. 215. 

8 From impressions supplied by Munsiff Debiprasad and Dr. Fubrer. 

4 Expressed by a symbol. J Head paramabhaga . 

8 Read °dero, and omit the following sign of punctuation. 

* This sign of punctuation is superfluous. 

8 This clearly is the reading of the plate, but the forms of the consonants of the four aksharas Sivdgrdma 
appear to be more modern than the forms of the same letters, elsewhere employed in this inscription. The 
difference is particularly striking in the case of the s and m ; but the^r of grd also does not agree with the gr 
of the following grakdrS , and the v of v d differs somewhat from the v in e.g, the word lhagavatt of the pre- 
ceding line. At the same time, I see nothing in the impression which could lead me to think that another name 

had been previously engraved. 


O v 9 


212 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V 


3 kshiti-kalam purvvaclatta-devavra(bra)hmadeya-varjjitah paramadevapadanam 

prapitamaha-maharaja- sri-V at sa- 

10 r&jadevena nmt-pitamaha-bhatta-Vasudevaya sasanena dattb bbuktas=cba ten a 

ch=asya sbashtb-anso 1 * bhatta-Vishnave pra- 

11 tigraha-pattrena dattab pitamaha-mabaraja-sri-Nagabhatad©V'en*anumatir=ddatta 

deva-rajye ta tach=ehhasanam=anuma- 

12 tis=cba vigatim=upagate 3 [|*] Tad=ittham vijuapitam sasanam=anumatim 

pratigraha-pattram bbogan(n)=cba jiiatva may a pittrob puny-abbivri- 

13 ddhaye Kasyapa8ag6ttr-Asvalayanava(ba)hvriehasavra(bra)hmachari-bhattaY asudev- 

anvayaja-vra(bra)bmananam Katyayanasagottr-Asva- 

14 layanava(ba)byricba8avra(bra)bmacbari‘bhattaVisbnvanvayajavra(bra)b mananan = cba 

pragbboga-ki'amen=aiva 3 yathansam=anumcdita iti viditva 

15 bbavadbbis=samanumantavyab prativa£ibbir=apy=ajnasravana-vidbeyair=vbbu(bbbu)tva 

sarvv-aya esbam samupaneya iti 1 1 Prabhasena 4 prayukta- 

16 sya sasanasya stbir-ayateb | sriman^Nagabhato namna yuvarajo=ttra dutakah || 

Samvatsro 5 100 Ph&lguna-sudi 10 3 6 niva(ba)ddbam || 


The Seal . 

1 Paramavaishnavo maharaja-sri-Devasakti- 

2 devas-tasya putiras=tatpadanudhyatah sri-Bhuyik[a]- 

3 devy&m=utpamiah paramamabesvaro mabaraja- 

4 sri-Vatsar&jadev8C8*tasya puttras=tatpadanudhyata[h] 

5 sri-Sundarid6vyam-utpannah 7 pararnbbagavatibbakto 

6 maharaja-sri-Nagabhatadevas«tasya puttras=ta- 

7 tpadanudhyatah srimad-isat&devyam-utpannah para- 

8 madityabbakto mabaraja-sri*Ramabhadradevas*ta- 

9 sya pnttras=tatpadanudhyafcah srimad-App&devyain*utpanna[h] 

10 7 pararhbbagavatibbakt6 maharajja]-sri-Bhdjadeva[h] [11*] 


TRANSLATION. 

(Line 1.) Om. Hail ! 

From tbe royal residence, 8 furnished -with many boats, elephants, horses, chariots and foot- 
soldiers, which is fixed at tbe glorious Mahodaya 9 

( There teas) tbe devout worshipper of Vishnu, th ^Mahdrdja DevaSaktidSva. 10 Begotten 
on Bhtxyik&devi, bis son, who meditated on bis feet, (was) the devout worshipper of Mahfis- 
vara (Siva), the Mahdrdja Vatsar&jadeva. Begotten on Sxmdaridevi, bis son, who meditated 
on his feet, (iras) tbe devout worshipper of Bhagavati, 11 the Mahdrdja N&gabhataddva. 
Begotten on isat&devi, his son, who meditated on bis feet, {was) the devout worshipper of 
tbe Sun, the Mahdrdja Ramabhadradeva. Begotten on App&devi, his son, who meditates 
on his feet, the devout worshipper of Bhagavati, the Mahdrdja Bhojadeva, issues these com- 
mands to all appointed to the several offices and to the inhabitants, assembled at the agrahara 










1 Bead *drni6. 

4 Metre : SlAka (Anushtubh). 5 Read tamvatsarah. 

6 The numbers 100 »nd 10 are denoted by numerical symbols, and 3 by a numeral figure. 

7 Head paramabhagd 8 Or * from the camp .... which is pitched at/ 

* The sentence is continued below, in the words * the M^ahdr&jt % Bhdjadeva/ 

10 In the original the names of the Mahdrajas and their wives have the word #r| or irtmat , * the illustrious,’ 

prefixed to them. 

u Ij}, either the goddess Durg& or Lakshmi. 


No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


213 


village of Siva, which belongs to the Dendvanaka vishaya in the Gurjaratra country 
( bhumi ) ; — 

(L, 8.) The Bhatta Harshuka has apprised (ws) that the above* written agrahdra , with 
every income from it excepting previous gifts to gods and Brahmans, by means of a charter 
was granted by our great-grandfather, the Maharaja Vatsarajadeva, for as long as the moon, 
the sun and the earth endure, to his grandfather, the Bhatta Vlsudfiva, and was possessed 
( by the latter ), and that by him (the Bhatta Vasudeva) the sixth part of it was given by a 
deed of donation tcvthe Bhatta Vishnu ; that our grandfather, the Maharaja Nagabhatadeva, 
signified his consent ; but that, in onr own reign, that charter and consent have fallen into 
abeyance. 

(L. 12.) Having heard, then, of that charter thus brought to our notice, of the con- 
sent, the deed of donation and the ( fact of) possession, we, for the increase of the religions 
merit of our parents, have given permission that ( the agrahtvra ), shared in exact accordance 
with previous possession, shall belong to the Brahmans born in the lineage of the Bhatta 
Vasudeva, who are of the Kasyapa gotra and are students of the Asvalayana {sakhd) of the 
Rigveda, and to the Brahmans born in the lineage of the Bhatta Vishnu, who are of the 
Katyayana gotra and are students of the Asval&yana ( [Mkhd ) of the Rigveda. Knowing 
this, you should assent to it, and the inhabitants, being ready to obey our commands, should 
make over to these people all income {due to them), 

(L. 15.) Of the firmly enduring charter, issued by Prabhasa, the dutaka is here the 
Yuvardja, the illustrious Nagabhata. 

Recorded on the 13th of the bright half of Phalguna of the year 100. 1 


No. 25. — INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 

By J. F. Fleet, Ph.D.. C.I.E. 

Ablur is a village about two miles to the west of Kod, the chief town of the Kod taluka 
of the Dharwar district. Its name occurs in the ancient records in the fuller form of 
Abbalur or Abbaluru; and the record E. places it in the Nagarakhanda seventy, which was 
a subdivision of the Banavasi twelve-thousand province (see below). Ink-impressions of 
seven inscriptions were obtained for me at this village. The most important of the inscrip- 
tions is E., the record which gives the history of the revival of Saivism in the twelfth century 
A.D. This will be edited in full ; so also F., a short record connected with it, and G., which is 
interesting as being a virgal or monumental tablet, belonging to a class of records of which not 
many specimens have as yet been made fully available. The other records all present points of 
interest : but they are not important enough to repay the time and trouble that would be 
required to edit them in full j and it will be sufficient to give abstracts of the contents of them. 

A. and B. — Of the time of Vikramaditya VI. — A.D. 1104. 

These are duplicate copies, almost word for word the same, but not absolutely so, of a 
record at a temple of Siva which is now known as the temple of Basavesvara, though, as the 
records themselves shew, it was originally called the temple of Brahmesvara 2 because it was 
founded by a Gdvun(ja or village-headman named Bamma or Barma, i.e. Brahma. A. is on a 
stone tablet outside the temple ; and B. is on a stone tablet inside it. 

1 The text of the seal is identical with part of the text of the plate. 

7 Brahmitcara-devara degula , e.y., A. line 62; and Brahmeivara-devata-stTidna, e.g., C. line 27.— The 
founding of it ia mentioned in A. line* 27, 28. 



214 


EPIGKAPHIA INDICA. 


[VOL. V. 


In A., the writing, consisting of eighty-five lines of about seventy letters each, covers an 
area about 4f 1" broad by 6' 5" high : it is in a state of very good preservation as far as line 70 : 
from there it has suffered a good deal of damage ; but the illegible portions can almost all be 
supplied from B. In B„ the writing, consisting of ninety-one lines of about sixty -five letters 
each, covers an area about 4> f 1" broad by 6' 10'' high : at about one- third from the proper right 
side, the tablet is broken into two pieces from top to bottom ; but no entire letters are destroyed 
along the line of fissure : in other respects, it is in a state of very good preservation, except fora 
few places in lines 79 to 91, where, however, the illegible passages can almost all be supplied 
from A. — In both cases, the sculptures at the top of the stone are, in the centre, a linga , with 
an officiating priest, inside a shrine ; on the proper right side, towards the top, the sun, and, in 
the lower part, a standing figure inside a shrine, with the bull Nandi near the edge of the 
stone ; and on the proper left side, towards the top, the moon, and, in the lower part, another 
standing figure inside a shrine, with a cow and calf near the edge of the stone. — The characters 
are Kanarese, of the regular type of the period to which the record refers itself ; and they are 
well formed and well executed throughout. The size of the letters ranges, in A. from about 
\' to and in B. from about to The second part of the record, commencing in A. line 
72 and B. line 77, was engraved.by the Buvdri 1 Honndja or Honnoja; and the first part was 
engraved by the same person in conjunction with the Buvdri S6voja: the writers or composers 
of the two parts were different people : but, on each stone, the execution is so uniform through- 
out that, in each case, the whole record must have been put on the stone at one and the same 
time, at or soon after the second date, in A.D. 1104, which must, therefore, be considered the 
proper date of the record.— Except for the opening invocation of Siva, repeated in A. line 72 f. 
and B. line 77 f., and for the verse which follows it in the first instance, and for one imprecatory 
verse in A. line 71 f. and B. line 76, the language is Kanarese ; partly in verse, and partly in 
prose. In addition to ruvari, i an engraver/ jthe record gives us another word, khanffarisu 
(A. line 85, B. lines 77, 90), evidently meaning 4 to engrave/* whi-h is not found in Mr. KitteFs 
Kannada-Engliah Dictionary, and dhdli (A. line 6, B. line 7) as a variant of dull, ‘attack, 
incursion, invasion/ gdvunda ( s.g ., A. line 19) as a variant of gauda , gavuda , ‘ a village- 
headman (the Marathi pdtil), and bhdnasn (A. line 75, B. line 80) as a variant of bdnasa , 
bdnasu , * kitchen it also gives, in A. line 6, B. line 7, kutktla, ‘ a mountain KitteFs Dictionary 
includes this word ; but Monier-Williams* Sanskrit Dictionary seems to give only the form 
kukila . 

The whole inscription is a record of the time of the Western Chalukya king Vikramaditya 
VI. It is a Saiva record. And it registers grants that were made in his twenty-sixth 
year, in A.D. 1101, and in his twenty-ninth year, in A.D. 1104. On the first occasion, when 
the Dandandyaka Govindarasa was ruling the districts known as the Hanumgal five-hundred, 
the Basavnra hundred-and-f orty , and the Nagarakhanda seventy, he came in state to 
Abbalur, and saw the temple of the god Brahmesvara which Bammagavunda had caused to be 
built there, and was pleased ; and, at the request of Bammag&vun4a’s son Echagavunda, he 
granted to the temple a village named MuriganahallD in the Nagarakhanda seventy. On 


* Sivdfi U doubtless a tadbhata corruption of the Sanskrit ripakdrin, • a maker of images, a sculptor,’ as 
snegestedby Dr. Hultzsch, who compares pujdri and pijdkdrin (above, Vol. III. p. 207, note 8) Though 
Kittel’s Dictionary does rot include Hivdri, it gives rur«, as well as rupu, as a tadUava corruption of Upa. 

3 So, also, C. line 52 gives khandarane , evidently in the sense of ‘ engraving/ 

* This name is not found now in maps, etc.- The place is mentioned .gain in a record of later date — an 

addition at the end of an inscr.ption of A.D. 1162 at Balagdmi (P. S. O.-C. Iter*. No. 184 • and see Mi* Iter* 
p. 96),- which registers a grant of the villages of Karinele and Maruvasi and Muriganahalli and K underage (?) 
in the Nagarakhanda kampana, and Chikka-Kannuge in the Hinnmgal kampana, for the ahgabHpa of the gods 
Daksbiua-KSdar^vara (of Balagami), Sdmanatha, and Brahmesvara of Abbalur— Chikka-Kannuge is evidently 
the modern ‘ Chikkangi * in the Hangul taluka. '* e 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


215 


the second occasion, grants were made by some of the villagers to provide for the angabhoga 
and the perpetual lamp of the same temple. 

The record contains two dates. The details of the first date, — when the grant was made 
by the Dandanayaka Govindarasa, — are Sunday, the new-moon day, when there was an eclipse 
of the sun, of the month Vaisakha of the Vishu (properly called Vrisha) samvatsara , which was 
the twenty-sixth year of the reign of Yikramaditya VI. This date was not recorded correctly. 
The given samvatsara was Saka-Samvat 1024 current. There was, indeed, an annular eclipse 
of the sun, which was probably visible in Southern India, on the specified new-moon day. 1 
But the tithi ended, by Sewell and Dikshit’s Tables, at about 2 hrs. 12 min. after mean 
sunrise (for Ujjain) on Tuesday, 30th April, A.D. 1101 ; and it cannot be connected with the 
Sunday at all, as it began at about 30 min. after mean sunrise on the Monday. The details 
of the second date, — when the grants were made by the villagers ; shortly after which time, 
presumably, the whole record was put on the stone, — are, Sunday, coupled with the sixth tithi 
of the bright fortnight of the month Bhadrapada of the Tarana saihvatsara , which was the 
twenty-ninth year of the same reign. The given samvatsara was Saka-Samvat 1027 current. 
And the corresponding English date is Sunday, 28th August, A.D. 1104; on which day the 
given tithi ended at about 18 hrs. 42 mm. 


# * * * * * 

Lines 8 to 17 of this record men tier a Dandandyaka Govindaraja, who is described as 
*' ruling,” but without any hint ns to the sphere or nature of his powers. Lines 59 to 62 mention 
a Mahasamantadhipati and Dandanayaka Govindarasa, who in A. D. 1101 was “ ruling” the 
Hauumgal, Basavura, and Nagarakhanda districts. And a third passage, — A. lines 75. 70, B. 
line 80. — mentions a Dandanayaka Govindarasa, who in A. D. 1104 was administering the 
Banavasi province and the vaddardv?da-duty at the command of Anantapala, a high minister of 
the Western Chalukya king Vikramaditya VI., who is mentioned in many of the records of 
this period. 

The Govindaraja of the first passage was the son of a certain Krishnaraja, whose 
pedigree is not disclosed, and of Padmahulovi, am elder sister of Anantapala. And he seems to 
be identical with the Govindarasa of the second passage. This is inferred, partly from the 
fact that it would have been unnecessary to mention him with such prominence in the first 
passage, and especially as “ruling.” unless more details were to be given about him further on, 
and partly from the description of the Govindarasa of the second passage as mavauagandha - 
vdrana, which is taken to mean “ the choice elephant of his maternal uncle,” — with reference to 
Anantapala, who stood in that relationship towards the Govindaraja of the first passage. 2 It 


1 See Von Oppolzer’s Canon der Fi>isterniup y p. 220, No. 5484, and Plate 1X0. 

3 Mdva means * a mother’s brother,’ and also ‘a life’s father/ This record does not mention anyone, with 
reference to whom it coold be taken in the latter sense in the case of the G6vind»raja of the first passage. And 
on the other hand, it does not seem at all probable that Kanarahzabhairava-Gdvindarasa (regarding whom, see fur- 
ther on) was either a nephew or a son-in-law of AnantapftL ; no such hint is given in any of the passages mentioning 
him, though they describe him ver\ fully. — Moreover, the full description of the Gdvindorasa of the second passage 
in this record {line 59 ff.) runs — Samidhipaiapamchamahdsabdamahdsdmawtddhipati-mahdprachaihdadanida- 

ndyakan=dsthdna-vastu-ndyakam nijti-1eula’kuva[aya~isudhdkaram yuna-ratndkararh sukara~sukat'i-pika'n> kara* 
rndkamdam Jcirtti-lafd-kamdam satnara-samaya’Shanmukhoth chat%ra~Chaturmmukhaih dushta-darppighth - 
6Jhdha(ddha)t-drdti~mada-nit dranam mdoana-garndhardranam fidm-ddi-iamasta-pr'isastusahitam srimad- 
damdandi/aka-Govindara*aru. The birvda K.marangabbairava does not occur iiere. And I do not find any of 
these epithets applied to RananmvHbhaii HvaUidvinduasa, or anything bearing on them in the various descriptions of 
him, with the exception that in line 39 of the record of A.D. 1114 be is described as samar a-muk ha -Shanmukha, 
which may be compared with the samara-samaya-Skanmukha cf the present passage; but this is not conclusive 
and the dsthdna-vastv-ndyaka of the present passage occurs elsewhere (see page 217 below, note 8) in the case of 
Anantapala, and no* of Rauarangabhairava -Govindarasa. 



216 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vot. V. 


may be remarked, in passing, that the allotment to the G&vindarasa of the second passage of so 
high a rank as that of Mahdsdmantddhijoati, is undoubtedly incorrect, whoever he may have 
been ; just as much as in line 4 the record makes a mistake in describing Anantapala as merely 
a Mahdsdmanta , instead of a Mahdsdmantddhipati • 

The Gdvindarasa of the third passage, however, — though the special biruda does not 
occur in it, 1 — being described as having a much more extensive authority, is most probably 
another person, to be distinguished by the full name of Ranarangatohairava-Govindarasa, 
who was apparently a paternal uncle of the Govindaraja of the first passage, and regarding 
whom we learn the following facts from records at Balagami and Talgund. 2 He belonged to 
the Parasara gotra, and was the son of Dasiraja, son of Kesiraja and Nilabbe, and of Sovala- 
devi or Somambike (e-g., the records of A. D. 1102, line 241, and A.D. 1114, line 37 1). The 
record of A.D. 1102 styles him (line 44) Krishnardj-dnuja , w the younger brother of 
Krishnaraja,”— with reference, doubtless, to the Krishnaraja of the Ablur inscription ; and the 
record of A.D. 1112 styles him (line 37) annan-ahkakdra , u the champion of his elder 
brother,” and Krishnardjan=a nug ina-tamma, u the affectionate (or beloved) younger brother of 
Krishnaraja.” The record of A.D. 1114 further describes him as Ldt-anvaya-laldta-mandala- 
tilaka , which expression, taking lalatamandala as meaning much the same thing as laldfapattci , 
we may render by “ a forehead-mark of the broad forehead that waB the lineage of the 
Latas : ” so, also, the record of A.D. 1102 describes Anantapala (in line 8) as Lata-kula- 
kumudavana-vidhu-kara , “ a very ray of the moon to (open) the cluster of water-lilies ( flowering 
at night) that was the family of the Latas : ” evidently, both the persons traced their origin 
to ancestors who were natives of the Lata country ; and this, no doubt, accounts in part for the 
intermarriage and the special favour c hewu by Anantapala to Ranarangabhairava-Govindarasa. 
His biruda of Ranarangabhairava, u a very Bhairava (Siva) in the field of battle, 51 figures 
more or less prominently in all the records. And the record of A.D. 1114 styles him (line 40) 
Tribhuvanamalladeva-vijaya-dakshina-bhuja-danda, “the staff of the victorious right arm of 
Tribhuvanamalladeva-(Vikramaditya VI.).’ 5 In A.D. 1102, the JDandanayaka Anantapala, the 
Mahdsamantddh'ipati w r hohad attained the panchamahd^abda; J was “protecting, with the delight 


1 No string of titles aud epithets is connected with the name of Govindarasa in this passage. After giving the 
titles of Anantapala, the record simply says [Anantapajlarasara besadirh srimad-dctndandvakajh G6timd-ara*aru 
Banav6se-(etc. t as in a note further below). 


a The records are : — 

Of A.D. 1102 ; P. 8 . O.-C. Inters. No. 168; Mys. Inters. 
Of A.D. 1103; . . . No. 171; 

Of A.D. 1107; . . . No. 218; 

Of A.D. 1112; . . . No. 172; . , 

Of A.D. 1114 ; . . . No. 175; 

The term pauchamahdiabda, meaning literally 


78. 

139. 

199. 

82 . 

176. 


— r , 0 j ‘five great sounds/* denote* the sound* of fire musical 

instruments, the u B e ot which was allowed, as a special mark of distinction, to persons of high rank and authority. 
The epithet eamadhigatapanchamahdsabda is found most commonly in connection with the namee of great 
feudatories and high officials ; the instance, in which it occurs among the epithets of paramount sovereigns, are bnt 
few. I have given a general note on the term in my Qupta Imcrxptions, p. 296; in the course of which I have 
quoted a paper in Ind. Ant. Vol. Xll.p.95f. which tells ns that the Lihgay.t Vivikachinidmani enumerates 
the five instruments as bemg the ifinga or horn, the tammata or tambour, the iahkha or conch-shelL the bkSrt or 
kettle-drum, and the jayagbantd or gong. And an inscription of A.D. 1032 at Suttfiru in Mysore (Ep. Can. 
"Vol. III., Hj. 164; I quote, however, from an ink-impression) enumerates them as the ft'eaffi], dadda kkandike, 
jayagante. and kale, and provides an allotment to the god Isina-tsvaram-ndeyar for playing Ahe’se musical 
instruments, and perform, ng the worship of the god, three time. . day— For the idle, which is the same u the 
trxnga, see a note further below. The word dadda may perhaps stand for daddata, which is explained in Kittel’s 
Dictionary as ‘ the drum of a Pomba.’ The tivali and khandxke remain to be‘ identified. The former of them was 
the special musical instrument of the Kashtrakuta kings of Malkhdd and of the Ra(ta chieftains of Sanndatti - For 
the special instrument, of some other great families, reference may be made to my Dun. Kan Dx.tr, n. 327 and 
note 7.- The custom of kings being heralded in public by musical instrument, i, mentioned by the Chinese pilgrim 
Hiueu Tsiang, in connects with Siliditja-Harsbavardhana of Kauaujj he tells n. (Life, Beal’s translation, 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLGR. 


217 


of an agreeable or friendly . interchange of communications (with Ms 'paramount sovereign )/’ 1 the 
two- six-hundred ( i.e . the Belvola three-hundred and the Purigere three-hundred), the Banavase 
twelve-thousand, and the vaddardvula and perjunka duties ; and his subordinate, 2 the Bandandyaka 
Ranarangabhairava-Govindarasa, holding office by the favour of Anantapala., 3 was “ protecting, 
with the delight of an agreeable or friendly interchange of communications (with Anantapcila )/' 
the vaddardvula of the melvatte , 4 the eradum-hilkode , and the perjunka, . In A.D. 1103, 
Anantapala, with the same two titles and also those of Mali dp rad hu n a and Bhdnasavergade , 
was “protecting, etc.,” the Belvola three-hundred, the Purigere three-hundred, the Banavase 
twelve-thousand, and thepatwuya-duty of the saptdrdhalakshe or seven-and-a-half-lakh country ; 6 
and the Bandandyaka Ranarangabhairava-Govindaraja, who had obtained the administration 
of the Vanavasi twelve-thousand through his favour, 6 was “protecting, etc.,” the Banavase 

twelve-thousand, the vaddardvula f and the aehchupannaya of 

,, 7 and had, under himself, a Samdhivigrahddhikrita or minister for peace and war 
named Isvarnyyan&yaka. In A.D. 1107, the Mahdpraohdna , Bhdnasumanevergade , and 
Bandandyaka Anantapala 8 was “happily governing” 9 the two-six-hundred (i.e. the 
Belvola and Purigere districts) and the Banavftsi twelve-thousand ; and his subordinate, 
the Bandandyaka Ranarangabhairava-Govindaraja, who had attained good fortune by 
bis favour, 10 was “protecting, etc.” the Banavasi twelve-thousand, the vaddardvula , the 
perjunka, and the eradum-bilkode ; 11 and this record mentions, as a subordinate of him, 


p. 173) that, “as Siladityaraja marched, be was always accompanied by several hundred persons with golden drums, 
who beat one stroke for every step taken j they called these the ‘ music-pace-drums : * Siladitya alone used this 
method, — other kings were not permitted to adopt it.” 

1 Sukhn-samkathd-vinodadim pratipdU$uttam-ire ; see Dyn. Kan. Distrs. p. 428, note 4. 

5 Tat'pddapadm'Opajici. 8 Anantapdla-prasddAsddit-ddhikdra-lakshmUvildsa. 

4 The meaning seems to be that he was admin Dtering the collection and expenditure of that portion of the 
vaddardvula which was levied on, or was allotted to, an object called the melvatte nr melvatte. The genitive 
melvat\eya may qualify also the eradum-bilkode and the perjunka. Kittel’s Dictionary gives melvatta , ‘an 
awning’ (in which vatta is for patta ; and patte occurs as another form of patta), and milu-botte (which might 
easily occur in the form of also melvatte), ‘superior, fine cloth. But the vatte may equally well stand for 
batte , ‘ a road ; ’ and melvatte may indicate the levy of the duty, or the three duties, on the principal high-roads : 
compare milu-durga , * & high, superior fort/ and melu-pahkfi, ‘ the best or principal row. 

5 J.e. of the whole of the Western Chalukxa dominions ; see Dyn. Kan Distrs. p. 341, note 2. 

6 Tat-prasdd-diddiia-VanavdA'dvddaiasahasr-ddhikdra-lakshmi-vibhdsi. 

7 The rendering in Mys. Inscrs. p. 140, and n< te, would read chhatra-chchhdyeya chappannad^anhchu* 
panndyamam, and would translate “the panndya-d ues cf the fifty-six (ie. merchants) within the shadow of 
his umbrella (i.e. within his jurisdiction)” Ihe word chhatra-chchhdyeya is quite distinct, and seems to qualify 
the achchuponndya here in the way in which melvatteya qualifies tne vaddardvi la in another passage (see note 4 
above). The next akshara is not legible with any certainty in the photograph ; and there may be an akshara 
between the ppa and the *»«. If the reading really is chappznad, or more likely chhappanad , it does not 
at any rate mean “ fifty-six merchants : ” there might, iu that case, be possibly a reference to the chappanna - or 
chhappanna-deia , “the fifty-six countries,” — in the sense of “ all the world/’ or rather “all the territory 
entrusted to him •” this also, however, d^es not seem satisfactory. I cannot at present find any other passage, 
helping to elucidate this one. — The aehchupannaya variety of the panndya U mentioned again iu a record of 
A.D 1108, at D&vangere (P. S. and O. C. Inscrs. No. 137 ; Mys. Inscrs . p.17), in line 15, where the rendering 
in Mys. Inscrs . wrongly finds the title “lord o\er Achehupa Ndyaka.” That record tells ns that the 
A ekchvpanndyadadh ishthdy aka or “ superintendent of the aehchupannaya ” Barmarasa,— who had been appointed 
to the office of Alahdmdtya, entrusted with all the duties of government, by the command of the 
Mahdsdmaniddhipati , Mahdpradhdna , Bhdnasavergade , and Bandandyaka Anantapala,— was then “governing, 
with punishment of the wicked and protection of the geed," the panndya of the Nolambavadi tbirty-two-thousand. 

4 Among his epithets here, there occurs the phrase dsthdna-vastu-ndyaka , meaning something like 
“director of all arrangements for public darbdrs,” which is included among the epithets of the Gdviudarasa 
of the second passage in the Ablfir inscription (see page 2J5 above, note 2). 

Sukhadin=*dluttam-iral. 10 Anantapala-prasdda-Mamasddita-prdpta-lakshmUnilaya. 

n The original seems to have here bilkdde , with the vowel a in the second syllable. But, from tbe 
other records, the vowel o appears to give the correct form of the word. 

2 r 



418 EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. ’ [Vot. V, 


a certain Trivalibiiatta. of tlie Vatsa gotra , — described as tbe mayduna , i.e. sisters 
hnsband, or wife’s brother, of the Da ndanayaka Goyindarasa, — who was holding office as 
Pergade 1 of the mahavad da-village of Tanagundur (Talguud). The record of A.D, 1112 
introduces a new official superior of Ranarangabhairava-Govindaraja : it tells us that, under 
Vikramaditya VI., the Pandya Mohd mandalesvara Tribhuvanamalla-Kamarasa, “ the lord 
of Gokarna the best of towns/’ — who belonged to the liije of the Pandya rulers of 
Sisugali, the capital of the Haive division of the Konkan, — was, 44 ruling with the deiight 
of an agreeable or friendly interchange of communications ( with his ‘paramount sovereign ) ;’ 
that AnantapMa gave him the Vanavasi country; 2 that, on receipt of it, he made 
appointments ; and that, by appointment from him, Ranarahgabhairava-Govinda, mentioned 
further on in the record as the Dandddhtsvara Govinda, was “protecting” the Banavase 
country. 3 * The record of A.D. 1114 does not make any reference to the Pandya prince : 
it speaks of Anantapala a feudatory of Vikramaditya VI., but. evidently with reference 
to past events only, as, * :e the record of A.D. 1112, it does not couple any titles 
with his name; it speaks of the Dandddhipa Govinda as a raja ha ms a or flamingo 
dwelling on the water-lilies that were his feet , and it describes him more fully as the 
I£ahasamantadhipati who had attained the pu uehama husabdaj he who was a very 
Itanarafigabhairava, the Mahapradhana, the Manevergade, the DandanayakaGovindamayya, 
who was governing ” the Banavase twelve-thousand, the Santalige thousand, the two- 
MS-liundred (i.e. the Belvola and Purigere districts), and the vaddaravula and pannayu duties. 
By this time, then, Ranarangabhairava-Govindarasa had been promoted to most of the high 
offices that had been held by his patron Anantapala. 5 6 

* * * * * * 

When the Dandandyaka G6vindarasa made his grant in AD. 1101, as mentioned in line 59 ff. 
of the record, he laved the feet of a Saiva teacher or priest namM Somesvara, who is intro- 
duced to us in a passage, commencing in lino 51, which runs thus : — 

Srimad-Abbalfir^Echa-gavumdana gurogal srBS6mesvara-parhdita-devar=ajja-gurugala 
tar-ah-prabhavam=emt-erhdode || Dhareg 9 =CBcva Sa(sa)kti-parshege kaiam=agraniy=enipa 
Parvvat-&valiyol«i Muvara-k6neya-6arhtatig«4bharanara Kedarasakti-yatipati negaldam || 
A Ked&ra-yatimdrana 7 loka-prastuna 8 si8hyan=atyanpla-gun-anikam nirmmala 9 -charitam 


1 The original has perggatana, which must be a mistake (unless it is found to be an authorised abbrevia- 
tion) tor perggadetana. 

2 Arantar&la seems, from this, to have been retiring from office about that time. 

8 The original ran t—R'inaramg'thhairavam ****** pdlisuttamdre JBanavaseynm Mai a par a juju 
sudhd-nirmmala-paTafra-yaiah-prabhdia-nidhi Govindarh . Tbe rendering in Mgs Insert, p. 85, and note, 
would find,— instead of svdhd, ‘nectar, ambrosia/ with which the fame of Govinda is compared,— the 
Maidthi word suddhdm , ‘together with, along with, besides/ in its modern K.maiese corrupt form sudd , 
and would translate “ was protecting Banavase and the Malapara jiju (?) also.” Tbe word juju, ‘gambling/ 
seems to be used here, to suit the convenience of the composer of the verse, instead of jvjngdra, * a gambler/ 
The idea evidently is, that Gdvinda cut off the h^ads of the Malapas and used them as nice. And a Ksmarese 
ballad somewhat similarly describes a Governor of Bombay as Proposing to cutoff the heads of Holkar and 
Scindia and play the game of juggling halls with them before the Peshwa Bajirao 

« It is iu this passage that l.anarangabhairava-Govindaiaja is described as tamara-mukha-Shanmukha 
(see page 215 above, note 2). 

* We have a later date for Raiiarnngabhairava-G6vindaras« in A.D. 1117*18, quoted by me {Dgn. Kan . 
Distrs. p. 451' from ? record which is not accessible to me at present. 

6 Metre. Kanda; and in the next two verses.— The fiist verse occurs in line 19 f, of an earlier record, 
of A.D. 109T, at Balagaoii (see page 220 below, tnfce 3), with, in essential points, only the difference of munipati 

for yatipati . The whole passage from tbe words Dhareg~cieva to S^yogiTc-dgrUaram, occurs in lines 31 
to 38 of the Halag&ini inscription of A.D. 1102 (see the same note) ; and it is from that record tha I take the 

various readings given in the footnotes, 

V. I munimdrana. 8 Read prastutam , * V ? } yaiah-paiakam. 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT A BLUR. 


219 


Srikamtham vibudha-chutavana-kalakamtharii || Hara^padambhojadolM chittaman=eseva 
mukhambhojadojal u 1 2 Bharati-saumdaramam 3 charitradol?* mrmmalateyan=akhiLams 4 -amtadola 
^akra-dik-ktLmjara-bhasvat-kirttiyarii bappure 5 ndisidan=udyad-gun-augham munimdr- 
&bbaranam Srikamtha-devam budha-jana 6 -tilakam tarkka-vidya-samudram || A 
mabannbhavana sishvanc doreyan=emdode 7 || Kelabar 8 =ttarkka-visaradar=kkelabar=apt-alapa- 
samb6dhakar=kkelabar=imataka-k6vidar=kkelabai , =ol*gabbaiTigaJaiii ballavar = kkelabar = 
bya(Tya)karana-jilar=imt-imtumam balJ 9 -umnar=ill-ellatnam sale Somesvara^ihi 
ballan-anagbam Naiyya(ya)vik-agresva(sa iram |j Akalamk-ambrnkujata 10 -Chaitra-samayam 
Lokayat-anibhodhi-sitakaram sarakhya-di>fi 1 -disarm la id nnmath.v-aihgjmkkambii-kamtha-kanan- 
mauktika-bhushapaiii Sugata-nirejata-chariid'imsn rbrkkika-Somesvara-suri pempu-vadedam 
Naiyayik-agi*L*sva(sa)ram i| : u — namely, “To dt-ainbo the ctficacy of the penances ot the 
gTandfather-preceptor of tbe holy Somesvarapanditadeva who was the preceptor of 
fichagavunda of the famous Abbalur : — In the line named Parvatavali, which was esteemed 
to be greatly ( i.e> nndonbtedly) the leading f division ) of tbe sect, celebrated in tbe world, 
named Saktiparshe, there became famous tbe eminent ascetic Kedarasakti, an ornament 
to tbe succession named Muvarakoneyasamtati. 13 Of that great ascetic Kedara, the disciple, 
praised indeed throughout tbe world, was Srikantna, abounding in extremely pure virtues, 
of spotless behaviour, a very cuckoo (or ring-dove) in the grove of mango-trees O.&t 
are learned men. Amidst great applause, Srikanthadeva, abounding in g^eat virtue, m 
ornament of great saints, a forehead-ornament of learned people, a very ocean of the science 
logic, firmly fixed his thoughts on tbe water-liiic* that are the feet of the god Hara (Siva), and 
made the beauty of the goddess of eloquence abide in the charming water-hly that was his mouth, 
and maintained purity in all bis behaviour, and established to the ends of all tbe points of L kj 
compass a brilliant fame like that of (Airavataj the elephant of (the east which is t tbe quarter 
of Indra. To give an idea of tbe disciple of that great man : — Some people are learned in 
logic, and some can impart the knowledge of well-chosen speech ; some are acquainted with 
the dramas, and some arc conversant with good poetry, and some know grammar : there ore 
none ( others ) who know all of these; but the learned Sdmesvara^indoed, the sinless one, the 
leader of the Naiyayikas, knows them all. A very season of Chaitra (i.e. a very month of 
spring) to ( develop the fruit of) the mango-tree that is Akulanka, 14 — a very cool-rayed moon 


1 Metre, Mahasragdharii. 3 Lead m^khdrrJiJidjcdoh i. 3 V. L, sundarlyaih* 4 Read as. 

8 F, ckitfarade nilisidam $'id-qvn-'id>/a(d l *ffu)/a. 6 V . L, huia. 

* B,, line 61, has the same; except that it drives s'; wane. The record of A D, 1102 has, similarly, Ushyonc 
doreyan-endade. Bead sishyana ; -t n In dr, or ciif-end rde, 

8 Metre, M&ttebhnvikridita ; and in the n*_ x t veite. In the record of A.D. 1102 these two verses arc 
transposed ; this one comes after the other. 

9 F, bdpp-intu visvamhhari-i'ihviol bril a^r-d) .leya 1 h«i v\d>i-dhl?n ^omescaram. 

10 V . l. y dmbrauiahti'i. Read, in either ca«e, a./*rr, tor t i! f. dhsra. 

13 In the A blur record there follows on*.* in" r<1 voi?oub'»Mt $ou/L«iro * but It docs not present nr,\ thing of 
interest ; and it is not included tn the lWhigami record of A.D. llbli, 

15 I have not found anything vet to explan the mem’ng of this name. Mlvrra m bo the venitiV* 5 
of muvaru, ‘ three persons,’ unless it can bo connected with mi'. * mudr, ‘advanced nge.’ For Icon-, of uhich 
koneya is the geuitive, the dictionary only gives the meanings of 4 a pitcher ; an inner apartment ot chamber, \ 
room.’ 

14 It seems impossible to avoid taking the word a\‘a7r»>i l :a as a proper name ; to render it by suupiy sta,nle*« 
people,” seems to give a very inadequate meaning t>tne f ext. At the same time, we do not vet know of nnv Saiva 
writer named Akalahka ; and Sdme?\ara can hardly have given encouragement to the writings of the Jain Akalanka, 
even in the department of tarka or logic with which the name of that Akalanka is sometimes specially connected 

(eg. in line do ot a Jain record of A.D. 1077 at Balaga ni, P. S. O.-C Inscrs. No 163, Mys. lasers. p. 1^9). 

Tbe next three epithets, also, are puzzling. From line 65 of the Aldur inscription, we learn that $6me»vara 
was a follower of L*kuli*t; and (v»e paere 227 below) L.ikuli^i w*c an opponent nf t 1 -** IAkavatas, Mimamsakas 
and S&mkhyas.— There are, perhaps some hidden second meanings, which 1 » ive failed to see. Kujdta, for 
instance, may mean * baso-born,* as well as * tree ; but the alternative reading mahija is opposed to that. 

2 r 2 



220 


EPIGRAPH! A. INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


to {bring to full tide) the ocean that is the Lokayatas,— a very guardian elephant of that 
quarter of the regions which is the Sdmkhya- doctrine — a very pearl-ornament glittering on the 
white throat of the woman who is the Mimdmsa, — a very hot-rayed sun to {close) the water- 
lilies {blooming at night) that are the Buddhists the logician, the learned Somesvara, the 
leader of the Naiyayikas, attained greatness.” And a farther passage, in lines 63 to 66, 
describes him, in rhyming epithets, as— Yama-niyama-svadhyaya-dhyana-dharana- 
maunanushthana-japa-samadhi-sha-sampamna vibudha-jana-prasamna nyaya-sastra- 
vistri(stri)ta-sarojavana-divakara Vai4eshika-v&rddhi-varddhana-sa(sa)rat-sudkakara sanikhy- 
ao-ama-pravina-maniky-abharana gum-charana-sarasimha-shatcharana sabda-sastra-sahakara- 
vana-vasamta prajh-oday-bdbuddha-Lakula-siddhamta nirupam-opanyasa-devanadi-pravaha 
nija-datta-marhtra-prasada-samvarddhita-4ishya-samdbha sahitya-vidya-maha-nadi-pravaha- 
niranao-adhisvaiu bhakti-pravaha-paritushta-Paramesvara niravadya-nirmmala-tap6-gnn-aika- 
nilaya°kirtti-kaumndi-mndita-medini-valaya n&m-adi-samasta-prasasti-sahita, — namely, u he 
who is possessed of the glory of such names as he who is endowed with self-control, the 
observance of restraint, the repetition of the scriptures to himself, meditation, immovable 
abstraction of the mind, the observance of silence, the muttering of prayers, deep contemplation, 
and good character, and who is gracious to learned men ; he who is a very sun to (open) 
the great cluster of water-lilies {blooming in the daytime) that is the Nydyasdstra , and who is 
a very autumn-moon to bring to full tide the ocean of the Vaiseshikas ; he who is a very ruby- 
ornament of those who are versed in the Sdmkhyagama, and who is a very bee on the water- 
lilies that are the feet of his teacher ; he who is a very spring to the grove of mango-trees that 
is the Sabdatdstra , and who has given new life to 1 * the Lakulasiddhanta 2 by the development 
of his wisdom; he who is a very stream of the river of the gods in unequalled reasoning, 
and who has made the assembly of his disciples to prosper by the favour of the counsel 
given by him ; he who is a very ocean to ( receive ) the stream of the great river that is the 
Sahityavidyd , and who has quite satisfied the god Parameavara (Siva) with the unbroken flow 
of his devotion ; he who is the sole abode of the virtue of blameless and spotless penance, 
and who has delighted the whole circuit of the earth with the moonlight that is his fame.” 

We gather a good deal of information about the Muvarako^eyasamtati from various 
records at Bajagami. 3 And, in the first place, we find that it was connected with the sect of 
the Kalamukhas, which is already fairly well known. We learn this from the record of 
A.D. 1112, which says (line 49) — Parwat Amnayada Muvara-koneya-santanada Sakti- 
parisheyol-negalte-vadedu sishya-chataka-varshakala-mnkhar=enisida Kalamukharol, — u among 


1 Lit. 4< hft8 awakened/* 

i Regarding Lakula. tbe founder of the tenets that were classed under the general head of Ldku]as\ddkdnta, 
see page 226 ff. below. Several references to him and big writings will be quoted from tbe Balagimi records. And 
mention is made of tbe IAkuldgam* in line 21 of the Bijspur inscription of A.D. 1074 ( Ind . Ant . Vol. X. p. 128). 

The principal ones,— of which the first wag edited by me, Ind. Ant. Vol. V. p. 342, at a time when the 
purport of the verse Dhareg^eseta, etc., could not be guessed, and the others all ddsbrve, for various reasons, to be 
properly dealt with in full — are 

Of A.D. 1094; P. 8. O.-C. Inters. No. 165; 


Of A.D. 1102 ; . 
Of A.D. 1112; . 
Of A.D, 1129; . 
Of A.D. 1139; . 
Of A.D. 1149; . 
Of A.D. 1155*56 ; 
Of A.D. 1162; . 
Of A.D. 1168; . 
Of A*D, 1192; . 
Of AD. 1215 . 


No. 168 
No. 172 
No. 178 
No. 179 
No. 180 
No. 181 
No. 184 
No. 185 
No. 200 
No. 201 


Mys. Inters, p. 73. 
• • • p. 78. 


82. 
87. 
134. 
97. 
100 . 
p. 92. 
p. 109. 
p. 103. 
p. 78. 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


221 


the Kalamukhas, 1 * who, haying attained fame in the Saktiparishe of the 
Muvarakoneyasamtana of the Parvat&mn&ya, had caused themselves to be spoken of as the 
very burst of the rainy season for the c&afo&a-birds that are disciples,” — and then goes on to 
place among these “Kalamukhas” Kedarasakti, his son Srikantha, and Srikantha’s son 
Somes vara. This passage would, indeed, seem to identify the Kalamukhas with the 
Muvarakdneyasamtati. But this appears not quite consistent with the fact that the college 
( sthdna ) of the Kalamukhas of the ancient Balligave was the temple of Panchalinga, 3 whereas 
the college of the Muvarakbneyasamtati was a different building. And it seems probable that 
what the passage really means, is, that the founder of the Mfivarakbneyasamtati was a member 
of the Kalamukha sect who established some particular school, the tenets of which differed in 
some respects from the general doctrine of the Kalamukhas. The verse Dhareg=e$eva, etc * , 
seems to name, as the order of development, first the Saktiparshe, 3 then the Parvatavali, and 
then the Muvarakbneyasamtati. On the other hand, the prose passage, just quoted, indicates 
first the Parvatavali, then the Muvarakoneyasamtati, and then the Saktiparshe. The verse used 
in the record of A.D. 1129 (see page 223 below), and in some subsequent records, does not 
mention the Saktiparshe, and indicates first the Parvatavali and then the Muvar&koneyasamtati. 
And the record of A.D. 1192 mentions only the Parvatavali. 

The members of the Muvarakoneyasamtati were the hereditary priests of the temple of 
the god Siva in the form of Dakshina-Ked&rSsvara, “the K6d&resvara of the South,” 4 * 
which, as we learn from line 57 of the record of A.D. 1112, was on the Sri or raised bank of a 
tank called T&varegere and T&vareyakere, “ the tank of water-lilies,” which was in the 
southern part of the lands of Baljigave. They had also the temple of Siva in the form of 
Nagares vara or Nakharesvara , 6 * which, again, — as we ai* 1 told in line 26 of the record of 
A.D. 1094, — was at the Tavaregere tank. And, from A.D. 1139 onwards (see page 224 f. below), 
they had also a temple of Siva in the form of Kusuvesvara, which was then built in connection 
with the temple of Dakshina-Kedar&Svara. Their matha or college is Bometimes spoken of as 
the Kdd&ramatha and the Kedarasth&na. But its actual name was, in Kanarese, Kodiya- 
matha, which appears in a Sanskrit passage as Kdtimatha . 8 From line 60 f. of a record of 


1 In every other passage known to me, this name is spelt with the long d in the second syllable. The short 

a is used here probably only in connection with the play on the meaning of the components, or supposed 
components, of the name. The word kdlamukka appears to denote ‘a kind of monkey/ and also to be another name 

of the kdldgnrn or black ayara- tree. 

* See page 227 below, and note 1. 

* It may be mentioned, incidentally, that another record at Balagimi, of A.D. 1098 (see page 223 below, 
note 2), discloses, in line 34, the name of another parit had st the ancient BaUigive, t n*. the Sileyaparshe. 

a Dakehina-Kddir&vara was an image established *t Bafiigive as the southern re preaentative of Siva as 
worshipped at K&lirnith in the north, a famona temple and place of pilgrimsge in the Garhwil district, North- 
West Provinces, situated, according to Thornton’s Gazetteer, in lat. 30° 44% long. 79° 5', in the Himalayas, and 
standing 11,765 feet shove the level of the sea.— From the titling! of the trs ascriptions, in Sir Walter Elliot's 
Camdtaka*DSsa Inscriptions, of some of the records mentioned in note 3 on page 220 above, it appears that the 
temple of Dakshipa-KSdir&vara is now known as the temple of Baiavsnna. 

* The name appears as Nakbar&rara in the record of A.D. 1094. Elsewhere, it is usually written 
NagarMvam, which, no doubt, was the real correct form. Its name is explained in a passage in line 46 ff. of the 
record of A.D. 1129, which runs,— Bal\igdveyo\=daksMna-dik-tota-nika^atnrtti manditn-pundarik island- 
6pdntam=n*t=alli nogaro-jana^ga\=dwjjisid^aganya~punyo-pnmjame Siva-hhaixMv^dd-ante Hagarisvaramm 
enisi pesar-nadedn sogayisuttam-irppndu 11 at BaUigive, cloee to the southern boundary, there is an ornamental 
garden Inpdnta seems to be used here for npanama] full of water-lilies j snd there there stands, in all its beauty, 
the temple named Nagar&vara, the veritable abode of Siva, (a* embodiment) indeed ipf) all the incalculable 
religious merit amassed by the people of the town. u 

* This, which seems to be only a Sanskritiaed form, la taken from line 19 of the record of A.D. 1215. Id 
the photographs of some of the records, the vowel of the first syllable might be taken to be 4, instead of 6. But 
the name appears very distinctly,— K64iy*™tb*,— in line 61 of the record of A.D. 1158 (see page 222 below, 
note 1). 



222 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


A D 1158 1 which speaks of " Vamasaktipanditadeva, tlie Achdnja of the Kodiyamatha of the 
Beraade Ven namarasa of that place (Balligave),” it seems to have been built for the members 
of the line by the said Vennamarasa. And it would appear that it was named the Kodiya- 
matha because, probably, it stood somewhere near the kudi or outlet of the Tavaregere tank. 
That the Kodiyamatha was the matka of the Muvarakoneyasamtati, we learn explicitly from 
the record of A.D. 1162, which mentions, as belonging to ‘*the succession of the family of the 
Ourus of the Kodiyamatha,” two persons, Gautama and the Vamasakti mentioned above, who, 
ay will be seen, were disciple-descendants of Kedarasakti. And the same record further^ gives 
fline 27 ff.) the following rather singular description of the mafhet , — Dakshina-Kedara- 
sthanamum Sivadimga-pujApnlaka-sasya-sarasa-kklarasthanamum naishthika-brahmacharyya- 
Siva-munijan-aimshthana nhhtHta-sthanamum sArhga Rig-Yajas-Sam-Atharvva-chaturvveda- 
Bvadhyaya-sthanamum Kaumaia-Paniniya-Sakntayana-fcabdanusasan-adi-b y a(vya)k arana- 
bya(vya khyaua-sthanamum nyaya-vaiseshika-iaiumihsa-sariikhya-baTidhdh(ddhj -adi-shadw- 
darsana-byA vya khyana-sthanamum Lakuhddhdh b ddhfOmta-PMariijal-adi-y ogasastra- 

t- a(vya kbana-sthanamum ashtadasapumna-diiarmniasastra-sakala-ka b y a(vya) - n a t a k a - 
natik-adi-vividha-vidya-sthanamnm din-auatha-paihgv-amdha-badhira-kat haka-gayaka- 
yudaka-vfnhsika-narttaka-voitalika-nagna-blLagna-ksbapanak-aikadaihdi-tri da m di-ha riisa- 
pavamaha ms-adi-nami-desa-bhi ksh uka jan-a ni v ary y- [a*] mnadana-sthanamum nan- anatba- 

rd^ijana-rodlia-bhaishajya'Sthanamnih sak‘t]a-bhdt-^bhaya-pradana-sthanamum=agi Kodiya- 
mathav=irppudu, — namely. •• there is the Kodiyamatha, which has become the abode of the 
god Kedara of the South, — a very field charming with a crop which is the standing erect of 
bhe hairs of the body that is induced by doing worship to the liiiga of Siva, — a place devoted 
r i the observances of Saiva saints : leading p rpetually the life of celibate religious students, — 
i olu’C for the quiet study of the four Vedas, the Ijini. Yajus , Snman, and Atharvan, together 
v i-lt auxiliary works, — a place where commentaries are composed on the Kaumdra , 

Pi/ziu'Vu Sdkafdyana, Sul Idnuils and otluu grammatical works, — a place where 

commentaries are composed on the six systems of philosophy, namely the Nijdya , Vaideshika, 

Mimdinsa, Sdmkhya , Bauddha , etc.?— a plnce where commentaries are composed on the 
Ldkidasiddhanta , and the Pdtanjala and other YunaxUtms . — a pHcc for (studying) the eighteen 
Pur anas, the law’ -books, and all the poetical compositions, the dramas, the li^ht comedies, and 
the other various kinds of learning,— a place where food is always given to the poor, the helpless, 
the lame, the blind, and the deaf, and to professional story-tellers singers, musicians, bards, 
players, and minstrels whose duty it is to awaken their masters with music and songs, and to 
the naked and the crippled, and to (Jaw and Buddhist) mendicants, to (Brahman) mendicants 
who carry a single staff and also those who carry a triple staff, to hamsa and paramahaihsa 
ascetics, and to all other beggars from many countries, — a place where many helpless sick 
people are harboured and treated, — a place of assurance of safety for all living creatures.” 

The founder of the Muvarakoneyasamtati appears to have been Ked&rasakti; at any 
rate, we have obtained no earlier name at present. For him, we have as yet no date. 

The son and chief disciple of Kedarasakti, and evidently his successor as head of the 
matha* was Srkantha. The record of A.D. 1094 names him as his chief disciple (line 21) ; 
and the record of A.D. 1112 names him as his son (line 50). In the record of A.D. 1094, 
after the verse Dhareg=eseva, etc., there is used (line 21 f.), to describe Srikantha, a verse which 
we can now render more correctly, as follows, — A 4 munipan=agra-sishyar srimat Srikantba- 

' P. 5. O.-C. Inter*- 2s o. 183 ; My ft. Insert, p. 152. 

s The Siva-mt'nijana of the text seems to stand for Sai va-munijana. 

s The U'jual enumeration of the six systems seems to ue Nydya, Vaiieshika , PUrva-Mimdmsd, JJttara - 
Mi Sdmkhya, and Yoga. This passage speaks of six systems, but names only five. The inclusion of tbe 

±>auddha or H*iddhi«t system is rather peculiar. 

* Metre, Kauda. 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT A BLUR. 


223 


pamditar=vvasudhevol=imn=e ma[t]o Lakulisar=ttam=ene Sarvvajha-kal par = e sedar = 
alumba[m], — “the (bief disciple of that great saint was the holy Srikanrhapandita, who, 
being but little infeiior (in knoirledg*) to the Omniscient one. shone out excessively in the 
world just as if, — what more could be said?, — he was Lakulisa 1 kirhself.” For Srikantha. 
again, we have as yet no date. 2 

The sod and disciple, and evidently the successor, of Srikantha was Somes vara. The 
record of A.D. 1094 names him as his disciple (line 22) ; and the record of A.D. 1112 names 
him as his son (line 52). In A.D. 1094, 3 he was the Achdrya of the god Nakharesvara ; and his 
feet were then laved by the assembly of the Pattanasvamin and other representatives of the 
people of the town, on the occasion of making a grant to that god. In A.D. 1101, as we learn 
from the Ablur inscription A., he was at Ablur, and his feet were laved by the Band andy aka 
Gdvindarasa. on the occasion of making a grant to the god Brahmesvara of that village. The 
record of A.D. 1102 describes him iline 49) as the Achdrya of the sthana of the god Dakshina- 
Redare^vara, and tells us that his feet were then laved by the Dandandyaka Ranarangabhairava- 
Gdvindarasa, in making a grant to that god. And in A.D. 1112 his feet were laved by the 
Pandya Mahamandalesvara Tribhuvanamalla-Kamadevarasa, when another grant was made to the 
same god. 4 This last record describes Somesvara, in line 34, as the Aradhya or family -priest 
of Kamadevarasa. 

The record of A.D. 1129 opens the account of these teachers with a new verse, which 
runs (line 58 f.) — Muvara 5 -koneya-samtathdevabra(vra)tan=eseva Parvvat-aval iyol = tan = 
avirbkbha(bbha)visidan=amala-yas6-viblni Kedarasakii-pandita-deva[m*], — “in the famous 
Parvatavali there was born Kedarasaktipanditadeva himself, the lord of pure fame, a devotee of 
the gods in the M^varak6neyasamtati. ,, It mentions Srikantha as the disciple of Kedarasakti, 
and Somesvararyya as the disciple of Srikantha. After Somesvara there came, it tells us, his 
younger brother tfidyabharana. But he, it says, did not care for any occupation except the 
steady pursuit of knowledge ; and so he transferred all the business affairs of the matha to his 
own chief disciple V&masakti. In A.D. 1129, however, when the grant registered in this 
record was made, — namely, the allotment of a village for the repairs and other purposes of the 
matha , — it was Vidyabharana who was summoned (line 69), and whose feet were laved, by the 
Western Chalukya king Somesvara III., who had then come south to make a state progress 
through his dominions and was encamped at Hulluniyatirtha. 6 Vidyabharana’s name was 
afterwards expanded into Vadi vidyabharana, by which appellation he is mentioned in the 
Ablur inscription C., and line 44 of the Balagami record of A.D. 1149. 

As far as dates go, the next name is that of Jn&nasakti, who is mentioned as a disciple of 
Vadividyabharana in the Ablur inscription C. This record gives dates for him in A.D, 1130 
and 1144, In A.D. 1130 his feet were laved by the Nalprabhu Barmagavunda, when the 
latter made his grant to the god Brahmesvara of Abbalur. In this record there is used a 

1 The vowel in the first syllable of this name is properly the short a. It was lengthened here to suit the metre. 

* A record of A.D. 3098 (P. S, O.-C. Inters, No. 167, Mys. Inters, p. 107) mentions (hue 31 f.) 

“ Srikanthapanditadeva, the Achdrya of the temple of Pancbalmga” But he must have been a different person, 
if only because the date there given for him is later than the date of S6m£svara, the son and disciple of the 
8rikantha who was the son and disciple of KAdarasakti. 

3 Mr. Rice {My 9 . Inters- Introd. p. 90, note) would allot to him an earlier date, in A.D. 1071, from another 
record at Balaam (P. S. 0 -C. Inters, No. 160, Mys, Inters, p. 164). But the person there mentioned (lines 26, 
29 f.) was a different person, namely Sdmesvarapandita, Sthdnapati of the god Mallika modes vara, and a disciple of 
Chandrabhhshanapandita. 

4 This record was composed by MaUik&rjunarya or Mallildrjunabhatta, who describes himself as a servant 
{kimkara) of Somesvara. In it, he three times (lines 34, 60, 64) speaks of Somesvara as sd.asvata-makddaya, 
which may or may not mean anything more than simply “ a master, a leader, of learned people/* 

5 Metre, Kanda. 

6 Dig'trijayam-geuyaDendu dakshin-dbhimukhan^dgt bandu Hullvniya-tirtthadoL^btdam bittu. 


224 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


variation of the verse given in the record of A.D. 1129 ; and the whole passage (line 36 ff.) runs 
— Muvara-k6neya-santati-devabra(vra'itar-eseva Parwat-avaliyol=tam=avirbhb h a(r b bha)- 
visidar=araala-ya£6-vibhava-vinutai*=artbar=acharyyarkkal || Va |] Avar=o]age|| S vast i Yam a- 
nivama-svadhvaya-dhyfma-dharuTia-mo • man) nanushthana-iapa-samadhi-sila^ampa nnaruih I 
vihudha-jana-prasamnarum | srimad-Vadividyabharana-pamdita-devara sishyarnm=appa 
Mmadu-Jfianasakti-pamdita-devara kalaiii karehcbi, ere. There does not appear to be any 
mention of this Jhana^akti in the records at Balagaaii. 

We take np the line again from the record of A.D. 1129. The arrangement of tins 
document is rather unusual. The ordinary part of it, — ending with the date and the details of 
the grant, — comes to a close in line 72. Rut the benedictive and imprecatory passages, which 
would usually stand next, do not commence till line 76. And there intervenes a parenthetical 
passage, which is now to be considered. As already stated, this record says, in lines 62 to 64, 
that Vidyabharana transferred all the business affairs of the mat ha to 44 his own chief disciple 
Vamasakti;” the words in the original are. — Enisid=a Vidyabharana hi vidya-bharana- 
vyasaihgav=allad-itara-vyasamgaman=ollade mutha-vyasamgarmim nij-agra-sishyaimm guru- 
kula-samuddharana-vama-saktiyum=enisida Vamasakti-munisvaranol=niy6jisid-agale : and this 
prose passage introduces a verse which says that he directed Vamasakti to 41 protect ” the matha , 
i.e . to manage it. But the opening verse of the record invokes the protection of the god 
Kedaresvara for Gautama, who is described in it as having received the ddhipatya of the 
Kedaramatha by the favour of the commaud of Vidyabharana. And the parenthetical passage, 
which intervenes between the donative portion and the benedictive and imprecatory passages, 
commences by telling us that Vidyabharana transferred the office of head of the matha to “ his 
own chief disciple Gautama;” here, the text runs (lines 72, 73), in verse, with a prose 
connection, — A 1 Vidyabharanarii vidy&-vividha-vir6dn-yoga-saukhya[m] sthiti-[blia]rhg-avahav= 
end=adan=elisi bbuvinuta-nij-ugra [6isb]y[a]-Gau[tama-muniyol || Math]-adliipatyamaih 
niyojisid-agale. There is nothing in the record that explains why Gautama, as well as 
Vamasakti, is called the chief disciple of Vidyabharana, and why Vidyabharana “ censured ” or 
came to regret the happiness of having devoted him-elf to the various delights of learning 
because it bad proved “ destructive of stability,” and on that account, appointed 
Gautama to the office of Mafhapati. And it is not at all intelligible w by, — after a verse 
in lines 73, 74, wffiicli runs on in construction with the words niyojisid-agale , and says 
that, just as saints before him, like brilliant lamps, had lit up the matha , so Gautama lit it 
up, like a very pure gem that serves as a lamp, —the parenthetical passage ends with a verse 
(lines 74 to 76) which makes no mention at all of Vidyabharana, and says that the fortunes 
of the matha were nourished by Somesvara, and then by Vamasakti, and then by Gautama. 2 
But, evidently, when he entrusted the management of the affairs of the matha to Vamasakti in 
order that he himself might devote his whole time to study, Vidyabharana retained the actual 
office of Mafhapati in his own hands. And it seems clear that the record, though registering 

a orant made in A.D. 1129, was not really drawn up till some time after that date. In the 

interval, something or other must have occurred, — not disclosed in the record, — which 
prevented the eventual succession, that was doubtless intended, of Vamasakti as Mafhapati , 
and led to the substitution of Gautama as being the next senior disciple. 

The Vamasakti who is mentioned in the record of A.D. 1129, does not figure in any other 
of the records. But, for Gautama we have subsequent dates in A.D. 1139 and IU 9 ; and he 

is mentioned in also some of the later records. The record of A.D. 1139 speaks of him as 

1 Metre, Kanda. The aksharas in square brackets are illegible in the photograph, and are supplied from the 
transcription in Sir Walter Elliot's Cdrwitaka-Desa Inscriptions. There can be no doubt, however, about the 
correctness of them. 

2 This verse, however, prevents our assuming that Vidylbhar ana’s thief disciple had. t w0 names, - 
Vimafe&kti and Gautama. 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


225 


Gautamarya and Gautamadeva, the Achdrya of the Kodiyamafha, and tells us that two 
sculptors named Bavana and Ravana, in order to do away with. i.e. to make amends for, some 
t fauit committed by their guild, founded a temple of the god Kusuvesvara in connection with 
the temple of Kedaresvara, and gave it to Gautama, and that, along with some other grants, 
Gautama himself allotted, for the purposes of this temple of Kusuvesvara, sixty kammas of 
rice-fields in the hakkalesaya- land belonging to himself m the open plain on the east of the 
culturable land of the god Narasirnha. The record of A.D. 1140 speaks of him as Gautamarya 
and Gautamapanditadeva, the Achdrya of the Kedarasthana, and the disciple of Vadi- 
vidyabharanapanditadeva, and tells ns that his feet were then laved by the Santara Mahd- 
mandalesvara Tribhuvauamalla-Jagaddevarasa and his son Bammarasa, who had come to 
Ballig&ve, on the occasion of granting to the god Dakshina- Kedaresvara a village in the 
Santalige thousand. 

The successor of Gautama was his son and disciple Vamasakti, — the second 
of that name. He is mentioned first in a record which belongs to the end of 
A.D. 1155 or the beginning of A.D. 1150, according to the way in which we interpret 
the date, which is not recorded correctly. This record does not mention any members 
of the line previous to Gautama. It introduces him with another adaptation of the 
verse that is elsewhere fotiud first in the record of A.D. 112‘J; here (line 35 f. ) it runs, — 
Muvara-k6neya-santati-devavratan=esava Parvvat-avaliyol tan=avirbbhavisidan=amala-yas6‘ 
vibhava-vinutan=enipa Gautaina-muuipa[m*]. The next verse tells us that Gautama’s son 
was Vamasaktipanditadeva. And the donative passage describes Vamasakti as the Achdrya of 
the > ithana of the god Dakshina- Kedaresvara, and tells us that his feet were laved by the 
Mahdpradhana and Dandandyaka Mayidevarasa, the llergade of the vaddaruvala and hejjunka 
duties of the Banavase twelve-thousand, on the occasion of making a grant to that god. A 
record of A.D. 1158 1 mentions him in lines 60, 61 as the Achdrya of “the Kodiyamatha of the 
Hergade Vennamarasa,” — in line 72, as the Aradhya or family-priest of the Muhapradhana and 
Dandandyaka Kesimayya, Kesiraja or Kesavadeva, — in line 74, as the son of Gautamamuni, — 
and in line 75, as the Rajaguru or royal preceptor ; and it tells us that his feet were then laved 
by Kesimayya. The record of A.D. 1102 describes him in line 40 as the disciple of Gantama- 
charya, and tells us that then, on the occasion of making a grant to the god Dakshina- 
Kedaresvara, his feet were laved by the Kalacburya Mohdmandaltsvara Bijjala, who was 
encamped at Balligave iu the course of a state progress undertaken with a view to secure the 
possession of the southern provinces. 2 The record of A.D. 1168 mentions him again as the 
Achdrya of the sthdna of Dakshina- Kedaies vara, as the Rajaguru, and as “the beloved 
disciple of Gautamadeva,” and describes him (line 33 if.) as “ a very Panini in grammar, a 
very Bhushanacharya in political science or moral philosophy, a very Bharata in knowledge 
of dramatic representation and the other Bharatasastras , a very Subandhu in poetical 
composition, a very Lakulisvara in establishing conclusive arguments, and a very Skanda 
on the earth at the feet of Siva, 3 and tells us that his feet were then laved by the Mahasamanta, 
Senddibdhattaraniyogadhishthdyaka, Muhapradhana , Sarvddhikdrin and Mahdpasdyita, the 
Dandandyaka BoHkeya-Kesimayya, in making a grant to the god Dakshina-Kedaradeva. A 
record of A.D. 1171 4 mentions him again as the Rajaguru Vamasaktideva. A record of 
A.D. 1179 6 speaks of him as “thebeloved son of Gautama,” and as the Rajaguru and Achdrya of 
the sthdna of the god Kedaresvara. and tells ns that his feet were then laved by the Kalachurya 


1 P. S. O.-C. Inters. No. 183 ; Mys. Inters, p.152. 

a Dakshina-dig-bhdgamam tadhisal-emdu Bijgala-mahdrdjam Hjayam-geydu Ballxgdveyola bidam-bittu. 

3 The same verso, with certain variations, occurs iu line 24 If of a record of A.D. 1179 (see note 5 below ) ■ 
hut there we have the name of the poet Magba instead of that of Subandhu, and the name of Lakulisvara appear* 
in the form of Nakulisvara (regarding which, see note 2 on page 226 below). 

x P. S . O.-C, Insert. No. 188; Mys. Inters, p. 174. * P . S. O.-C. Inters. No. 189; Mys. Inters, p. 76, 

2 G 



226 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vor.. V. 


king’ Saiikama, who had come to the south, the best of all countries, with all his ministers, on a 
pleasure-trip, 1 and also by the Mahdmandaledvaras Tailabadeva and Eraharasa, who added to the 
grant made by Saiikama a grant by themselves because the Gurus of the sthana were their own 
family-preceptors ; and an addition to this record i*egisters the fact that in A.D. 1186 Vamasakti 
himself granted some land to the masons Bisandoja, Bavoja, and Singoja, being pleased with 
them for building a mantapa of the god Kedara. And finally, we have a later date for him 
from the record of A.D. 1192, which mentions him again as the Rdjaguru , the son of Gautama 
of the Parvatavali, and tells us that his feet were then laved by the Mahdpradhana , 
Sarvadhikarin , and Mahdpasdyita , the Dandandyaka Ereyanna, in making a grant, on behalf 
of his sovereign lord the Hoysala king Vira-Ballala II., to the god Dakshina-Kedaresvara. 

After this, there were another Srikantha and a third Vamasakti ; and with them onr 
knowledge of the line comes to an end for the present. We take their names from the record 
of A.D. 1215. This record contains, in line 19 f., the following verse, in connection with the 
temple of Dakshina-Kedaresvara which is mentioned just before it, — Upasate Virupaksham 
tatra Kdti-matha-sthitah Vama6aktir=yyatha purvvam=upamanyur=mmaha-tapah , — “ there they 
worship the god Virupaksha ; as formerly did the zealous Vamasakti, abiding in the 
Kotimatha, and practising severe penances.” The reference here may be to either the first or 
the second Vamasakti. The record goes on to mention, in lines 20, 21, “ Vamasaktideva, the 
disciple of the Achdrya Srikanthadeva.” It speaks of him in line 24 as the Sthandcharya . 
And it tells us that then, in A.D. 1215, his feet were laved, at the sunkddhikdra or office for 
the collection of customs of the Banavase nd$, by a certain Hemmayyanayaka, an official of 
the Mahdpradhana , Sarvadhikarin and Mahdparamavitivdsin Mayidevapandita. 

• *•#** 

In the mention of the IAkulasiddh&nta in line 65 of this record at Abiur, and in certain 
allusions in some of the Balagami records quoted above, reference is made to the doctrine of 
a Saiva teacher named Lakula, Lakulisa, L&kulisvara, and Nakulisa , 2 the founder of the 
school of the Lakulisa- Pa sup atas, regarding whom some information may conveniently be put 

together here. The Cintra praSasti, which was composed in the period A.D. 1274 to 1296, 

(edited by Dr. Buhler, Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 271),— claims that he was an incarnation of the god 
Siva. It mentions, in connection with him, a place named Karohana, in the Lata country, — 
which Dr. Bidder has identified with the modem Karvan, about seven miles towards the west 
from Dabhol in the Baroda State, 3 — where four branches of his school were established by 
four of his pupils named Kusika, Gargya, Kaurusha, and Maitreya. And Dr. Bidder under- 
' stood it to imply that Karohana- Karvan was his birthplace. Now, however, in the light of the 
facts that I shall adduce further on, it seemB clear that the words used in the original, samdtya 
Kdrohanam-adhyuvdsa, — meaning, literally, as translated by Dr. Bidder, “he came to and 
dwelt at Karohana,” — are not to be interpreted as implying that it was at Karohana that the 
god became incarnate, but mean that Lakulisa came from some other part of the country and 
settled there. Dr. Bidder has told us that the doctrines of the Lakulisa-Pasupatas are explained 
in Sayana’s Sarvadartanasamgraha . But, he added, “ nothing is known regarding their history.” 
And it is interesting, therefore, to he able to fix, from the southern records, the period when 
the founder of the school lived. 

1 Samasta-pradhdnar tahxtam vinddadim dakskina-diidoarakke vamdu. 

5 For this form of the name, see Dr. Biihler’s remarks (in his paper referred to in the next sentence), p. 274 

and note 10. He has there told us that Nakuliia is the form that is commonly used in Sanskrit literature; and he 
has expressed the opinion that the older form is Laknlisa, which be explained as c ‘ a compound of lakulin , ie 
lakutin, and iia , 4 the lord wearing the staff/ t e the khatvdnya ” We find the form Nakulisvara in the BalagAmi 
inscription of A.D. 1179 (see page 225 above, note 3). 

1 Kirvin, being on the north of the Narmada, is outside the original L&ta country, but within the limits to 
which, on the north, t bat country was extended about the middle of the eighth century A.D, (see Dyn., Kan 
IX*trt. p. 309 ff.) 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


227 


llie most important record is an inscription at Balagami of A.D. 1035, of the time 
of the Western (Jhalukya king JayuMrhha II. (P. S. 0,-C. Inscrs. No. 155; and see Mys, 
Inscrs. p. 140). It registers grants that were made in that year for the purposes of the temple 
of the god Pahchalinga, founded by the Pandavas, which was the college of the Kalamukha 
Brahman students of Balligave, the capital of the Banavase twelve-thousand.” 1 And it states 
(line 11 ff.) that the grants were made. — samasta-tarkk-adi-sastra-paravara-paragarh vadi- 
Rudrarii vadibha-mastaka-nakh-asphala(ta )na-kisora-kesari vadi-mah-aranya-davadahanam 
dushtavadi-nibhthura-patishtha-sarddulam Bauddh-abdhi-badavamukhara Mimamsaka- 
d hat lid hara- vaj rarii Lokayafca-niaka-taru-vidiirana-krakacham sarhkhy-ahimd ra-rumdra - 
Vainateyamn 2 ^advaitavadi-bhuja-kuthai‘an=Akalamka-tripm*a-dahana-Trinetram Vadigharatta- 
disapattam Madhavabhatta-gharattam Jhananaihda-mada-bhamjana[iii] Visvana[m]da- 
pralay-6gr-analan=Abhayacharadi*a-kalanalam Vadibhasi[m]ha-sarab ham Vadiraja- 
mukhamndra[rii] Nayanaiiidi-disapattam Naiyayika-sa[rh]rakshan-aika-daksharh sva-paksha- 
p6shana-para-paksha-dushana-patutara-Virirhcham vagwarihu-mandanan^asthana-Padmasanam 
viveka-Narayanam gamaka-Mahesvai'an^upanyas-amarapaga-pravaliarh vyfikhy ana-keli- 
lafriiJpata-manohara-sarasiruha-bhrirhGran^avadata-kirtti-dhvajan^amalina-charitram dvishta- 
darppishtha-pandita-gala-K[a]la-pasam vadi-Digambara-dhumaketuv=adi ru[m]dra-gupa-nam- 
amkitar-appa srimal-Lakulisvara-panditargge, — namely to the holy Lakulisvarapandita, 
who was distinguished by names, of great virtue, such as 3 he who has penetrated to the very 
end of both the further and the nearer shores of ( the ocean that is) the tarka and other 
dastras ; he who is a very Uudra (Siva) among disputants; he who is a young lion in tearing 
open with his claws the heads of the elephants that are (hostile) disputants; he who is a 
jungle-fire to the great forest of ( hostile ) disputants ; he who is a cruel and very crafty tiger 
to those who dispute unfairly ; he who is a submarine fire in the ocean of the Buddhists ; he 
who is a thunderbolt to the mountains that are the Mnnamsakas ; he who is a saw to cleave 
asunder the great trees that are the Ldkayatas ; he who is a great Vainateya (Garuda) to the 
large serpent that is the Sdthkhya- doctrine ; he who is an axe to^ the trees that are those who 
propound the Adua^a-philosophv ; he who is a very Trinetra (Siva) to burn the three cities in 
the shape of Akalahka; 4 he who has utterly confuted 5 Vadigharatta ; 6 he who is the grindstone 
of Madhavabhatta ; he who has broken the pride of Jnanananda; he who is a fierce fire of 


1 The text here (line 18 ff.) runs— ( irimal -Lakultivara-pand.it argge ) Banavase-pannirchchhdsirada 
rdjadhanx Balligdveya Kdldmukha^brahmachdri-sthanam Pandava-pratishtheya Pamchalimga-devara degulada 
khandasphufitada mdtakkam , etc. — It is this same record which gives the tradition about the Pandavas 
establishing the five lihgas at Balagami, iu a verse (line 2 iF.) which says that, in order to acquire the means for 
(a celebration of) the sacrifice that should astound the world, the five Pandavas went (somewhere or 

ether), and, having there collected wealth and tribute, turned back, and came to Balligave, and set up the*e fiv t 
lihgas . The complete reading of the verse cannot be made out from the photograph ; and no help is to he 
derived from the transcription in Carn.-Desa Insers. Vol. 1. p. 59: but the end of it runs — Ppdndavar = 
Bbal\igdryeoe vand^ayvarwn-aydu limg ama^ivam samsthapanam-madidar, 

3 Read Yainateyan. 

* The word that is used here, tundra , occurs twice in this passage. For a note on the origin of it, from ru.ida . 
see Ind. Ant. Vol. XI. p.273. Some other passages in which it lias been met with, are, Jnd. Ant. Vol. IV. 
p. 204, text line 7; Vol. VI p. 24, text lme 1 ; Vol. X. p. 252, text line 27; and Vol. XVIII. p. 38, text line S. 
KitteFs Dictionary includes it, with the meaning of ‘large, great,’ and says that it is the word which, instead 
of vadra % appears in the Mysore Amarakosa. 

4 It is not necessary that the persons mentioned in this passage should have been actual contemporaries of 
Lakulisa. And Akalanka is, doubtless, the well known Digamhara Jain teacher and author who flourished about 
the beginning of the eighth century A.D. (see Dyn. Kan. Distrs . p. 407, and Ep. Ind . Voi. III. p. 186 f.). 

5 Disdpafta. The word has been met with before, e.g., Jour . Bo. Br . R. At. Soc. Vol. XII . p. 35, text line 16, 
[and above, Vol. IV. p. 270 and note 2]. KitteFs Dictionary gives it,— with the single t , diddpata,— as a 
Sanskrit word meaning * causing (his enemies) to be scattered in. all directions;’ and, as such, we may derive it from 
diid t * region, direction,’ and pata , which is to be traced to the root pat f 4 to split, cleave, tear, etc/ 

This is evidently the biruda, used instead of the proper name, of some well-known leader of some other 
sect or religion. So, also, Vadibhasiihba, which occurs further on. 


2 g 2 



228 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


destruction to Visvananda; 1 lie who is a world-destroying fire to Abhayachandra; 2 he who is 
a saralha to (the lion that is) Vadibhasimlia ; 3 he who has silenced Vadiraja; 4 he who has 
utterly confuted Nayanandi ; he who is supremely clever in protecting the Naiyayikas; he 
who is a very Virincha (Brahman) in being most expert in supporting his own adherents and 
refuting the adherents of his adversaries ; he who is the ornament of the goddess of eloquence ; 
he who is a very Padmasana (Brahman) in darbdr ; he who is a very Narayana (Vishnu) in 
discrimination ; he who is a very Mabegvara (Siva) in making things clear ; he who is a very 
stream of the river of the gods in reasoning; he who is a very bee on the charming water-lilies 
which are those who are lustfully addicted to the sport of commentating; he who has the banner 
of pure fame ; he who is of spotless behaviour ; he who is a very noose of Death to the throats 
of hostile pandits puffed up with pride ; he who is a fiery portent in ( the sky that is the array of) 
the disputant Digambaras.” These grandiloquent terms plainly describe, no ordinary priest of 
a temple, but someone of great note, who was a recognised leader among the Saivas. And we 
need not hesitate about identifying the Lakulisvarapandita of this record with the Lakulisa 
ot the Cintra prasasti, who, therefore, was alive in A.D. 1035 and was then at Balagami. 

An earlier date for him is furnished by an inscription at Melpadi near Tiruvallam in the 
North Arcot district. 6 This record is dated in the ninth year of the Cholaking Parakesarivarma- 
Rajendracholadeva I., i.e. in A.D. 1019 or 1020. 6 It registers the fact that certain shepherds 
of that village pledged themselves to supply ghee for a lamp in the Arinjisvara Saiva temple. 
And the declaration was made before the Pujdri Lakulisvarapandita, of the matha of the god 
Mahadeva connected with the temple. Here, we need not assume that mention is made of 
simply some namesake of the great Saiva teacher, or that thj matha at Melpadi was a branch 
of an establishment previously founded in Gujarat; we may safely identify the 
Lakulisvarapandita of this record of A.D. 1019-20 with the person of the same name of the 
Bulawami inscription of A.D. 1035. And it would seem, therefore, that Lakulisa commenced 
his career at Melpadi in North Arcot, and laid there the foundations of the reputation and 
influence that he subsequently acquired,— that from there he went to Balagami in Mysore, 
and attached himself to one of the great Saiva establishments at that place,— and that it was 
towards the end of his career that he proceeded to Gujarat and then, settling at Karvan, 
founded the school of Pasupatas which carried on the memory of him for so long a time. 


ABSTRACT OF CONTENTS.? 

The record opens with the usual verse Namas=tumga-Siras-chumbi, etc., in praise of the god 
Siva under the name of Sambhu, followed by another which runs— Girija-srirngdr-emduh 


i If the name here were Vidvanaoda, we could identify the person. The second aksh 
distinctly hd. 

a This name ... . , A - 

referred to a period early enough for the person there mentioned to be the one who .3 spoken of in this passage 
3 This hiruda occurs in the case of a Jain teacher named AjitasSna (above, Vol. III. 

- . , Ti _ 1 In unurinns Tanior^ crranf. nn«nA>t: nM 


Cannot be 


ara, however, 

occurs in a record of A.D. 1398 (lasers, at Srav.-Bel. No. 1051, but apparently 
i early enough for the person there mentioned to be the one who is spoken of in this p ttS : 
*~*~*j~Tbis hiruda occurs in the case of a Jain teacher named Ajitasena (above, Vol. III. p . i 88) , who . however 
m av have been of later date, it also occurs in the spurious Tanjore grant, purporting to be dated A.D 248 
Uad Ant Vol. VIII. p. 212), which says that the fictitious Western Ganga Harivarman conferred it on 
Madhavahhatta, son of Govindabbatta of the Bhfigu gotra, for defeating in disputation a Buddhist called 
Vadimadagajendra. — A sarabha is a fabulous annual, supposed to have eight legs and to inhabit the snowy 

mountains, which is represented as stronger than a bon. 

a This is probably the Jain Vadir^a who is mentioned n the Sravana-Belgola epitaph of Mallishena 
(above, Vol. III. p. 187). For another mention of apparently the same person, see Mr. Rice's Kamdtalca- 
iMdinidsanam, Introd. P . 21 .- For the word mukhamniram Prof . Kielhorn tells me that 
com in the Naishadhtyacharita, V. 120, where the commentator has rendered it by mauna, « silence.’ 

3 South-Iad. lasers. Vol. III. p. 27. I am able to quote it through Dr. Hulttsch’s kindness in sending me 
advanced proofs. 

6 TD&cre 206 above, note 4. . , . — T , 

7 FronT'the ink-impressions. A transcription of B is given in Sir Walter Elliot’s Carn.-hisa laser,. Vol I 
p. 389; A. is not included in that collection.- In my abstract, the lines mentioned m brackets are those of A. 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


229 


pravarttayaty^amtaram mand-vdrddhim sura-danuj-drddhyasya cha yasya stavah=pdtu mam. 1 
It then refers itself to the reign of the asylum of the universe, the favourite of fortune and of 
the oarth, the Mahdrdjddhirdja . Pannnesvara , and Paramabhattdraka, the glory of the family 
of ^atyasraya, the ornament of the Chalukyas, the glorious Tribhuvanamalladeva- 
(Vikramaditya VI.) (line 3). And it then mentions his feudatory, 2 the Mahdsdmanta who 
had attained the panchamahdsabda, the Dandandyaka Anantapala (1. 4), 3 who in the north 
subdued the seven Maiava countries 4 up to the Himalaya mountains, and in the south drove 
all the kings of the dakshindsd or Dekkan into the ocean (1* 5), and thus became famous 
among the leaders of the forces of the emperor ; at the command of the Chalukya emperor, 5 
he led an invasion, and gave the seven Malavas to the flames, up to the Himalaya moun- 
tains (1. 6). 

The elder sister of the thus famous Dandandyaka Anantapala was Padmalad£vi (1. 7) 
She became the wife of Krishnaraja or Krishna (L 8). And to them there were born 
Lakshmana and Govindaraja (1. 8). They had two younger brothers, named Mallideva 
and Ganapati (1. 9). And all four of them attained the rank and office of Dandandyaka 
There follow here two vert.es in praise of the Dandandyaka Lakshmidhara (1. 9) or Lakshina 
(1. 11), and six in praise of Govindaraja (1. 11), otherwise called the Dandadhipa Govinda 
(1. 13). And then we are told that, while the famous Govindaraja was ruling (1. 17): 6 — 

There was a certain person named Mudda (1. 17), a resident of Abbalur, who was possessed 
of such unequalled virtues that he was looked upon as the very father and mother and friend of 
the Banavase twelve-thousand.? He belonged to the Madanda or Madanda family (1. 18). 8 
To him and his wife Bhaganabbo, there were born Bamma (1. 19) and Ej*ahagavunda : the former 
of them is also mentioned as Bammagavnnda (1. 22) and Bammadeva (1. 23) ; and he is described 
a8 having the management of the hejjunka, vaddardvula, and bilkode duties of the ndd or district 
(in which Abbalur was situated) (1. 24). Four verses follow in praise of his virtues and 
liberality ; one of which tells us that he, a very Dilipa in generosity, a very Champapati (Karna) 
in truthfulness, a very tree of paradise for the benefit of other people, caused to be made, in 
such a fashion that- Abbalur (1. 28) became famous, a temple, 9 in respect of which people said 
that it was the mountain Kaijasa, the home of Is vara (Siva),— that it had all the grandeur of 


except where otherwise specified, towards the end of the record, where passages illegible in A have to be supplied 
from B In many respects, B. is more easy to read than A. ; but I have quoted the lines of A., because this copy is 
outside* the temple and would probably be more easy of access to anyone who might wish to examine the original. 

1 The last pdda is imperfect; and B., which reads yaiya stavah=pdtmdm, does not help to supply the 
deficiency. This verse is omitted iu the transcription in Cam.-Desa Inters. 

* Tat-padapadm-opajivi . 

3 The original, in both copies, has mahdsdmamtan^ddi’pracliamda-dafndanayakan. This is unquestionably 
a mistake for maMsdmantddMpati-mahdprachandadandandyakan ; see the description of Anantapala in all the 
records quoted on page 216 f. above. 

4 Sapta* Maiava ■ and elum-Mdlava in line 6. The seven Mftlavas {Mdlavam-elum) are mentioned again in 
line 16 of an inscription of A.D. 1019 at BaUgami (P. & O.-C. Insert. No. 154, My*. Insert, p. 148; in my 
published version of it, Ind. Ant. Vol. V. p. 15, we have to read Mdlavam-efmmam, not Malava-melumam), and in 
line 12 of a record of A D. 1054 at the same place (P. S. O.-C. Inters. No. 158, ilys. Insert, p. 121) ; this latter 
passage mentions also the seven Kohkans (see Dyn. Kan. Distrs. p. 282, note 5), and the seven Male countries. 

6 AmUtam negalte-vaded^arasn-geyye. No bint is given as to the sphere or nature of h.« powers. 

, Here in metre, and in prose in line 61, the name is spelt with the short a m the third syllable. It occurs 
with the long d, Banavase, in prose, in A. line 76 ; but the corresponding passage in B„ line 80, gives the short 

a,— Banavase.^ ^ ^ clearly, Ifadamda ; but Madamda equally clearly in lines 41, 49, 77. B., line 22, seems 

to h&ve Madamda here (with the dental d in both syllables); but it has Madamda clearly in line. 48, 56, 81. 
Iu A. line 30 and B. line 35, it cannot be said whether the d in either syllable is dental or Ungual. 

9 Namely, the temple of Brahmesvara, at which the record is. 



230 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


the golden mountain (Mem), the abode of Achyuta (Vishnu), 1 — and that it looked like 
the mountain of dawn, for the rising of the sun. Then there comes a string of epithets in 
prose, in the course of which he is mentioned as haying acquired the excellent favour of the 
god Brahmesvara (1. 30). And then we are introduced to his wife, Suganabbe (1. 31). To 
them there were born two sons, — Belli (1. 33), ficlia (1. 34*), fiehama (1. 41), or fiehagavunda 
(1. 51), and Muttiga (1. 33) or Mutta (1. 45). Seventeen verses follow in praise of the virtues 
and prowess of the two brothers. Then the record reverts (1. 48) to the elder brother, 
fiehagavunda, whom it mentions as a bee on the succulent water-lilies that are the feet of 
the god Hara (Siva) (1. 40), 2 — as the moon of the water-lily that was the Madanda family, 
— as a very Vatsaraja with restive horses, 3 — and as being also called “the lion of his father ” 
(1. 50) . 4 His Guru or religious preceptor was Somesvarapanditaxleva (1. 51), the disciple 
of Srikantba (1. 52), who was the disciple of Kelarasakti, who was the ajja-garu , lit. 
‘grandfather-preceptor/ of Sdmesvarapnnditadeva (1. 51), and was an ornament of the 
succession of teachers called the Muvarakoneyasamtati (1. 52). 

While the MaJidsdmant ddhipati* who had attained the piirichatnahdsabda (1. 50), — the choice 
elephant of his uncle (1. 60), 6 — the Dandanayaka Govindarasa (1. 61), was ruling the 
Hanumgal five-hundred, and the Basavura hundred-and-forty which was a hampana 
included in the Banavase twelve-thousand, and the Nagarakhanda seventy,? punishing 
the wicked and protecting the good, with the delight of an agreeable or friendly interchange 
of communications {with his official superiors) (1. 62), 8 he came in state to Abbalur, 9 
and saw the temple of the god Brahmesvara which Bammagavuuda had caused to be made, and 
was pleased. And, fiehagavunda (1. 63) preferred a request, on the strength of which he 
(Govindarasa) laved the teet of Somes varapanditadevu (1. 67), and made libations of water, 
and, at the time of the vyatipata and an eclipse of the sun on Sunday the new- 
moon day of the month Vaisakha of the Vishu samvatsara, which was the twenty-sixth 
of the years of the glorious Chalukya Yikrama (1. 69), 10 he gave, as a gift to the god 
Paramesvara, 11 the village of Muriganahalli, a town that was included in the Nagarakhanda 
seventy (L 67 ), u for the angabhbga of the god Brahmesvara of Abbalur (11. 67, 63), and for 
the frankincense and the oblation, and for the repairs of whatever might become broken, torn, 
or worn-out, and for the provision of food for ascetics and for boys who were desirous of being 
taught, 13 a » a sarvariamasya-gnmt , free from all imposts. 

After two verses (one in Kanarese, and one in Sanskrit) about the merit of preserving and 
the sin of confiscating religions grants, we are told that the record was written (v.e., apparently, 


i The original has, in both versions, htrntmy &dri , which can only be a mistake for haim-ddri. As haima 
means according to its derivation, either ‘ wintry » or * golden/ we might take haim-ddri as equivalent to either 
htmddri ‘the mowv mountain, Himalaya/ or hemddri, ' the golden mountain, M$ru.* but Achyuta is a 
distinctive name of Vishnu. Ami the explanation seems to be that his paradise, Vaikun^ha, is placed, according to 
some authorities, on the eastern peak of mount Blftru. 

i ffara-charano-saTata-sarastruha madhukara. 

j SuUVkala-h'iyu-rafsardjam ; see page 236 below, note 1. 4 Ayyana-timgam. 

5 ThU t iu e ; however, must be a mistake, as remarked on page 216 above. 

6 Mdvana gamdha-vdranam . . , , . . 

7 The words Ba*avate-pam*irckchhdsirada baliya kampanam are probably intended to qualify Xdgara- 

le hamdav-elpattumam, as well as Btsavura-nira-Mtumam. 

8 Sukha- s amkathd-vin6dadimd=ara,u-geyyutt-,rddu. 

to 26neya Vaiidkhadm 

and st Adiiyavdr.i r yatipsita-suryyagrakanad^mdu. 
i* p ,,;,mesva{iva)ra-dattiy=ayi bitta (lath. 

== S^raihamdr.v-tlpallara baUya bdda Murrganakalhyan. 

n Tapoihanara mdydrtthcmd^g^akira-ianakkam. 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT AB1.UR. 


2‘>1 


composed) by the facile poet Charaja or Acharaja (B, L 77) end the bom ooet Mai I ideva 
(1. 72). 1 The Euvari S6voja (B. 1. 77) and the Euv>lri Hornit'*ja : engraved it 2 


The record then repeats the verse Na r “ * '-turn ga-slras-ch” fahi. It then proceeds to 

refer itself again to the reign of Tribhuvanamalladeva-{Vikramaditya VT,) (1. 74.), While. 
— by the command of his feudatory, 4 the Mdhdwmant'hUiipaii who had attained the 
panchanirthasabda (1,75), the Mahdprudhdiw, the Bhanasu* * u'ju'le] or chief of the kitchen, 
( the Dandanayaka Anantap&]larasa (B. 3. 80), — the Daudan-bjitk i Grovindarasa (B. 1. 80) was 
[administering] the Eanavase twelve-thousand 78; and tie* * > f !4 ,L > punishing 

the wicked and protecting the good, with the pleasure <>t r* n cable or friendly interchange 
of communications ; 5 — 


And while he who was the moon of the cluster of warer-lib***. that was the Madanda family 
(1. 77), he who was a parawiamdhdsi'u ra or most devour- ■worshippw of the god 3Iuhesvura 
(Siva) (1. 78), he who had attained the exeelbrt favour <4 ;hc g*d Brahmesvara (B. 1. S3*. lie 
who was the lien of his father (1. 79 namely tchagafviu.u’i j. tee PruUo j i of Abbaiur (1. #fc*), 
was [governing the nod or district J 9 — 

Mai ^ ?)gara-Dasaya (B. L 84), and his youncrer brother Jlasnnhyfi H. 79, 89), and 
narnvu-Sirr-aimna-Btrana, and Reveya-Galeya. and Maleyanayaka. and .Tdgi*etti-CJ<>r:a . . . 

and Tippana, (B. 1. 85), and Kcsiynna, and Xfdamgmdya* 
Marana, and A 1 "'to. — these ten persons M. 81), on Sunday, (coupled with) tho six+h 
tithi of the bright fortnight of the month Bhadrapada of the'Tarana samvatsnra, which 
was the twenty-ninth of the years of the Ch&lukya Vikra'ma (1. bib 
the Prabhn Behagavunda for the worship of the shrine (B, 1. b6)j— 

hundred (M aha Jan a*) acquired * * ‘ 

9 ^ nc f Mali-Chattaya (1. 82), and Maydana. and Jakkayag*"tara (B. 1.87), and 

Sunnada-Btrana, — these four persons joined with the ren (mentioned abo-e). and gave gold, 

and acquired 10 And all of these, headed by Mottakajra-lloleyan.i 

(B. I. 88), allotted, for the angabhdga and the oil of the perpetual lamp of the god Bra limes vain 

(1. 83), the turmeric of (B. 1. 88), and the turmeric of . . 

and the • > and CT)e pana per annum 

on each ladder (?),“ (as a grant to continue ) ae long as the moon and .sun should last. 

The Senabova Madiyanna (B. 1. 9") and CJiattiyanna wrote (i.e.. apparently, composed) 
this. 12 The Rue dr i Honnoja engraved it. 13 


iiuvir.g gi v t n gn'o :n 
tkev, and the time- 


* Sttkara-kariu-appa Chardin*** <■» ^p,^Aehardj„vm) Mallidfpanvm baradnru. In hne 

55 of the Balagami inscription of A.1* 1 102 (>e- paste 2 6 a'.ov., mre 2» menu n is made ot an diukati named 
Nitnjaksba. 

2 In R, line n0, this name *ipi»ei* « vifh the H^nnO’i 

> Kh«n,darhidarn. r,.„,p,r« ; \»r,d,nnne, • enenai- (r, ’ u» f i’«ie 52 [and above. Vo). III. p. 198, line 3\ 

4 Tot •patio pod m-opajit" 

5 Banord,^pnnntrchihhn^iro^t , <;h T-diordr ,}od * svrrj-amvr. on dvphta n tpraha-suMa-praUrflanamr 

?e v du iv[kha-sa mkathd-vinodad t md =,' -A* *«"• 80e F*S« 220 above. 

note 7. 


r> Avyana-sirnga. 

I Both the enpiC'a fail here, I*. *, 84 « * »■ '** 

5 ChdU/kya-V ,Icfarra-r'7jS‘'i{r!ihi''‘o 2 Vh* ’> -' ,Tfv ' " 
A d tfyo v \arad*a mdu 1 , 

9 BftdjaihffitiJl' ha« hhoj o<j o rr * ’ ,rt 

cri ves ubhoya edmya in ilie .-etist* ft * tie- t' 1 

* O''. n'Tship ’ 

10 Z r bhaya-sdmi/a t again ; men nine not Vn**« 

11 Koyldlid-aritinamvma* htdjavrgad-ay.^remvn Jm 


, , >: yidtirp. In A. tVm m hi is iHeL r il*lc. 

- . \> } ? RhdJrajada s*dhdt,a ( ■ eat? indd'-a) t* 

, ff- T'>-ii'jnc not ii nun,- D'elienar' 

V - h r ■ sdmya , l -:iMy st*rN J s for exd*nt, u ^ 

d f ab f .dtjajnutnam rarshakJc^irtiy - pjh paw,- 


trutrr'ftv 

,z Bt'an am . 


11 K^o mdarixda. 


232 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


C. — Of the time of Perma-Jagadekamalla II. — A.D. 1144. 

This inscription, also, is at the temple which is now known as the temple of Basavesvara, 
but wa 3 originally called the temple of Brahmesvara. — The writing, consisting of fifty-two lines 
of about fifty letters each, covers an area about 2' 11'' broad by 4' 8|" high, and is in a state of 
perfect preservation almost throughout. — The sculptures at the top of the stone are, in the 
centre, a lihga, with an officiating priest, inside a shrine ; on the proper right side, the bull 
Nandi, with the sun above it ; and on the proper left, a cow and calf, with the moon above 
them.— The characters are Kanarese, of the period to which the record refers itSelf ; and they 
are almost exceptionally well formed and engraved. The size of the letters ranges from -i 
to 1". — Except for the opening invocation of Siva and one imprecatory verse in line 45, the 
language is Kanarese, partly in verse, and partly in prose. The record gives ns a word, 
khandarane (line 52), evidently meaning 4 engraving,’ which is not to be found in dictionaries. 1 
And, as variants, it gives gaunda ( e.g . line 7) and gavunda ( e.g . line 10), as farther forms 
of gauda, gavudci ; 2 ndl (in nalprabhu , , lines 21, 51), as another form of ndl, — ndd , ‘district’ ; 3 
and hdl (line 33), as another form of hdl, ‘ ruin, desolation, a waste ’ (i.e. land left unculti- 
vated). In respect of metrical license, we may note that in line 8 Jakkave is written for 
Jakkavve, and in line 29 eppat-okkalum is written for eppa tt-okkaluin, simply to suit the metre. 

The inscription is a record of the time of the Western Chalukya king Perma- 
Jagadekamalla II. It is a Saiva record. And it registers grants that were made, both in the 
rei^n of that king and on a previous occasion, to the temple of the god Brahmesvara. The 
later grant was made by a Dandanayaka named Mallibhavarasa, who was administering the 
V'iddaravula and hejjunka taxes under the Dandandyaka Yogesvaradevarasa who was in 
charge of the Banavase twelve-thousand province ; and it consisted of an oil-mill and a tax, 
for the maintenance of the perpetual lamp of the god. The earlier grant was made by a certain 
Bammagaunda or Barmagaunda,* the Nalprabhu or official in charge of the^loeal district; 
aud the chief item of it was an area of land, as much as his horse was able to go round, ridden 
at full speed. 

The record contains two dates. The details of the first date, — when the grant was made 
Lv Bammagaunda, — are Monday, the new-moon day, when there was an ecliose of the sun, 
of the month M&gha of the Saumya samvatsara , which was the fourth yeai of the Western 
CMlukya king Bhuldkamalla-Somesvara III. The given samvatsara was Saka-Samvat 1052 
current. And the corresponding English date is Monday, 10th February, A D. 1130 : on 
this day, the tithi ended at about 2 hrs. 29 min. after mean sunrise (for Ujjain) ; but there 
was no eclipse. The full details of the second date, — when the grant was made by the 
Dandandyaka Mallibhavarasa; shortly after which time, presumably, the whole record was put 
on the stone,— are Sunday, coupled with the fifth tithi of the bright fortnight of the month 
K&rttika of the Raktakshin samvatsara , which was the seventh year of (Perma)-Jagadfikamalla 
II (the son and successor of Somes vara III.). This date was not recorded correctly. The given 
samvatsara was S.-S. 1067 current. And the given tithi ended at about 10 hrs. 50 min. 
after mf. a sunrise (for Ujjain) on Tuesday, 3rd October, A.D. 1144, and cannot be connected 
with the Sunday at all. 


i So also, A. and B, have given us the verb khnndarisu, ‘ to engrave. 1 
3 The further variant gdvunda {e.g. line 21) has already been noted under A. and B. 

3 Kittel’a Dictionary includes ndl as a form of tidd ; but not nal. It does not include the word ndlrrabhu 

( which occurs in other ancient records also); but it does give the equivalent nddodeya, which it explains as * the 

chief of a country, or of a district. ' n . Q , 

* This Bammagaunda was a son of Echagaunda (lines 8, 9) ; and consequently he wag a grandson of the first 

Bammagivunda, the founder of the temple of Brahmesvara,- Echagaunda being mentioned in A. line 33, as a 
son of the first Bammagfivunda. 



INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


233 


No. 25.] 


ABSTRACT OF CONTENTS. 1 

The record opens with the usual verse Nama9=tumja-6irai-chumbi, etc., in praise of the god 
Siva under the name of Sambhu. It then refers itself to the reign of the asylum of the 
universe, the favourite of fortune and of the earth, the Alahdrdjddhiraja, Param^svara, and 
Pa ra ma bhatt dr aka , the glory of the family of Satyasraya, the ornament of the Chalukyas, 
the glorious Bhulokamalladeva-(S6mesvara III.) (line 3). And it then says that, while 
he was reigning, there was a certain Bammagaunda (1. 7), Bammagavunda (1. 8), or 
BarmagavundLa (1. 10), — son of Bchagaunda and Jakkavve (11. 8, 9), — who was an angry bee 
on the water-lilies that are the feet of the god Kara (Siva), 2 and whose wife was Bhagale (1. 20). 

One day, while the Ndlprabhu Bammagavunda (1. 21) was enjoying the pleasure of a 
talk about religion, the Senabova or accountant Boppa (1. 22), Boppana (1. 24), or Boppimayya 
(1. 25), — himself, also, a bee on the water-lilies that are the feet of the god Hara, 3 — faced him, 
and reminded him that religion is one’s aid, one’s ornament, and one’s treasure, and that 
therefore it is a man’s duty to accumulate good works ; that so it was that the shrine of the god 
Brahmesvara at Abbalur (11. 26, 27) had come along under the protection of Barmagavunda's 
grandfather and father ; that his ancestors and himself owed all their success to granting 
allotments to the shrine ; and that the seventy husbandmen (1. 29), 4 — born in the lineage of 
the Settiguttas of the place, and themselves always playing the part of angry bees on the water- 
lilies that are the feet of the god Ahindrabhushana (Siva), 5 — had lifted high the religion of 
Siva, by concurring in all the religious proposals that he had made. 

On this representation (1. 30), Bammagavunda, inflamed more than ever with a desire for 
union with the passionate woman that is devotion to the god biva, immediately mounted a very 
tall horse, and promised that, as far as his horse should run at the top of its speed, so far he 
would give land to the god Brahmesvara. 6 And so, having made his horse run (1. 33), and having 
laved the feet of Jn&nasaktipandifcadftva (1. 38), the disciple of Vadividyabharanapanditadeva 
of the M uvarakoneyasamtati, with libations of water, at tho time of the vyatipata on 
Monday, whon thero was an oclipso of tho sun, tho now-moon day of tho month Magha 
of the Saumya samvatsara, which was tho fourth of tho years of tho glorious 
Bhuloka[malla*] (1. 39), 7 8 * * for the oblation aud the perpetual lamp of the god, and to provide 
food for ascetics, and for the repairs of whatever might become broken, torn, or worn-out (1. 40), 
he gave, free from all imposts, eight mattars of rice-land in the open field w called Uarineya-hal 

(1. 33), and six mattars 9 and fiffceen * ‘° 

and a betel-nut plantation of one thousand trees below the large tank, and sites for twenty houses 

in that part of the town which belonged to the gods. 11 


1 From the ink-impreseion. A transcription is given in Cam.-Desa Insert. Vol. I. p. 690. 

2 Hara-charana-kamala-yuga-madavat-shatacharanam. 

* Eara-eharana-kamala-bhrimgam. 

* Eppatt-okkalum. Other records mention bodies of “ sixty hnsbandmen ” and « fifty husbandmen.” And 
the Postal Directory oj the Madras Circle places villages called Aivottokkalu, lit. “the fifty husbandmen, ” in 
the Padinitlknad tiluka of Coorg and the TTppinansadi taluka of South Kannra. 

s AUrnirabhi,hayy-6tpu(tphu)lla-Jpad-dmhnj-6nmada-madhubra[,,-a)tar. 

6 Embudum Bamma-gdnundam Siea-dharmma-katM-iraoana-mani-karnnapuranum Siva-dharmma-kath. 

4 m ri{mri)ta-rata-cariha-bahalita-pulaka-sasya-sarasa-keidranum=dgi Siva-bhakti-Udmint-earndgaman i- 

rdaam ' kay-ganme tat-kthanado\=uttuhga-turahgam-druda’dha)n=dgi maf-turahgae=elli.varav=ati-jaeadim 
V ari«ud=alli-taram (ri-BrahmiSeara-dtvargge bhimiyam net fane kottappen=emdu pratijn.drida(dha)n=dgi. 
p i Srimad-Bhiloka\_malla*]-tarshada 4neya Saumya- samvatsarada Mdghad=amavdsye riryya-graham 
Sbmavdra vyatlpatad^andu. 

8 Bayal. 

* Hdligutadanenneganvmam ; meaning not known, 

l* Berddaleyumam ; meaning not known. 

u Devara purad=o]ag~irppattu maneya nivtsanamumam . 



EPIGRAPKIA INDICA* 


[Vol. V. 


•::T4 


After a mandate, in prose, to preserve the grant thus made, and two verses (one in Kanarese 
and one in Sanskrit) about. the merit of preserving and the sin of confiscating religious grants, 

the record proceeds (1. 4o) 

On Sunday, (coupled with) the fifth tithi of the bright fortnight of the month 
Karttika of the Raktakshin samvatsara, which was the seventh of the years of the 

asylum of the universe, the favourite of fortune and of the earth, the Mahdrdj dd hirajq, 
Pa ranidsvara, and PaaimabhaUdraka, the glory of the family of Satyasraya, the ornament of 
the Chalukyas, the glorious Pratdpachakravartin Jagadekamalla (II.) (1. 47), 1 while 
the Landau l yak a Yogesvaradevarasa was ruling the Banavase twelve-thousand, punishing 
the wicked and protecting the good, with the pleasure of an agreeable or friendly interchange 
of communications (with his paramount sovereign )? Mallibhavarasa (1. 49), the Landandijaka 
of the latldar icnla and hejjunka taxes, came in state to Abbalur, I * 3 * and saw the grants that had 
been made to the temple of the god Brahmesvara, and was pleased, and allotted, for the oil of 
the perpetual lamp of the god, one oil-mill and the okk<ilu-dere tax on one shop, free from all 
imposts. 

The A dlprabhu Bammagavunda (1. 51) and the great saint Jnanasaktideva* shall preserve 
( these -jr-mts). The writing (i.e., apparently, the composition) 5 is that of the born poet, 6 * the 
Maliadevabhatta, and of Malliyana, the nephew of the Senabova Boppimayya ; the 
engraving" is that of Satoja, the son of Lalara-Chandoja. 


T>. — Of the time of Taila III. — About A.D. 1153. 

This inscription is on a stone tablet in a held, Survey No. 137.— The writing, consisting 
of forty lines of about forty letters each, 8 covers an area about 2' 1" broad by 2' 1 1" high. It is 
in a state of very good preservation as far as the end of line 13. From that point onwards, it has 
suffered more or less damage. But all the historical information that I quote from it, can be made 

out without any doubt. And it is only from line 28 that the record becomes undecipherable. 

The sculptures at the top of the stone are, in the centre, a linga ; on the proper right side, 
a squatting figure, facing full-front, with the sun above it, and perhaps a water-pot . beyond 
it ; and on the proper left, a cow and calf, with the moon above them. — The characters are 
well-formed Kanarese characters, of the period to which the record refers itself. The size of 
the letters ranges from §’ to — Except for the opening Sanskrit verse in praise of Siva, the 
language is Kanarese, throughout all the legible portion, partly in verse, and partly in prose. 
Lines 10 and 12, 13, give the word turaya, as a corruption of turaga, ‘a horse,’ whieh is not yet 
shewn in dictionaries. 

The inscription is a record of the time of the Western Chalukya king Taila HI. It 
mentions also his feudatory, the Mahdsdmantddhipati, Kariturayapat(asdhani or groom of the 
head-trappings of elephants and horses,* and Manevergade, the Dandandyaka Mahadevaraaa 


i Srimatn-pratdpaekakravartti-Jagadikamalla-varakada 7 neya SaktSk.M-,amvat,arada Kdrttika n(iu) 

s Dv,hta-nigraha-iiihta-pratipd(anam-geydu tukha-tamkathd-tinodadim r djyam-geyyuttam-in 
i Srtmatn %addardtu\a -kejjumkada dandandyaka* ilallibhdv-arataru Abbaliringe bijayam-qeudm 

A. . V.. barn iiiAmi * *9 


Khandarane. 


I SrlWMJtU CdMarotutu - f 

‘ The first component of this n&tne is here written jydna. 

% Sara a 6 - 

» With perhaps originally some more, now broken sway and lost, below the extant portion. 

» Kari is, of coarse, the Sanskrit karin, ‘ elephant.’ Turaya is evidently a corruption of the Sanskrit turaa. 

. horse J ’ and is, in fact, explained aa such by the occurrence in me 30 of the Silfihir* grant of A.D. 1058 (Cart 

Temple Inscription*. No. 10 of the brochores of the Archaeological Survey of Western India, p. log) of ita 
Lskpt form fn the epithet turaya- Biva^a, which appear. .. turaya- Biua.ta in, line 10 of the present record 

f.ttl is given in Kittel’s Dictionary as meaning, among other things, the frontlet, or fillet with s golden tablet, 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


235 


who was ruling the Banavase twelve-thousand province and the Huligere three-hundred 
district; and a subordinate of the latter, the Dandandyaha M&yideva. 1 And it further 
mentions a Mahasnandalesvara named S6vid©varasa, belonging to some branch of the B&daniba 
family, who had the hereditary title of “ supreme lord of Bandhavapura, the best of 
towns,” 3 and the epithet of “he who has attained the excellent favour of the god 
Pranam6£vaf a. ” 3 

That part of the record which contained the donative passages and the date, is either illegible 
or broken away and lost. But, from the fact that Mahadevarasa is here described as a feudatory 
of Taila III. himself, as also in the record of A.D. 1152, 4 whereas in the Balagami inscription 
of A.D. 1155 6 he is described as a Dandandyaha of Bijjala, we may refer the present record to 

about A.D. 1153. 


ABSTRACT OP CONTENTS.* 

The record opens with the usual verse Namas-tuihga-Hras-churhbi, etc., in praise of the 
god Siva under the name of Sambhu. It then refers itself to the reign of the asylum of 
the universe, the favourite of fortune and of the earth, the Mahdrdjddhirdja , Paravie&vara, and 
Paramabhatfaraha , the glory of the family of Saty&sraya, the ornament of the Chalukyas, 
the glorious Traildkyamalladeva--( Taila in.) (line 3). And it then proceeds to say that 
the Cholika (1. 4) came against him in war, but had to unwillingly pay tribute to him ; that, 
in the other direction, the king of Malava (1. 5) was frightened and fled away to refuge, and 
the Gurjara saved himself only by giving even more than the Chola had given (1. 6) ; and 
that all other kings had to acknowledge the sway of the emperor Nurmadi-Tailapa (III.) 
(11.6,7). 

While he, the Pratdpachakravartin (1. 8), bearing the burden of the whole earth, was 
reigning with the delight of an agreeable or friendly interchange of communications (with his 
feudatories)^ - — -and while his feudatory, 8 the Mahdsamantddhipati who had attained the 


which is tied to the head of a king’s favourite horse or elephant.’ And the same dictionary gives sahani, sdhani , 
and eahaniga, in the sense of ‘groom/ and sahana, in the sense of * the act of tending and training horses/ and, 
under sahani , quotes the Mala}alara chdni. [Compare p. 103 above, and note 6]. — • The same official title, with the 
same use of turaya for turaga , occurs again in a record of A.D. 1152 (see the next note). 

1 These two persons are mentioned together in other records also (1) An inscription of A.D. 1155-56 at 
BalagAmi in Mysore (P. S. O.-C, Inters. No. 181 ; and see Mgs. Insert, p. 100). The construction of this record is 
— TraiUkyamalladivara vijaya-rdjyam (lines 3, 4) ***** * mahdmamdalesvaram Bijjana- 

dSvarasaru (11. 10, 11) #•*•** tan-mahaprachamda-damdandyakam (11. 11, 12) •*•••# 

MahadStarasam (1. 13) • * * * * * tan-mahapradhdnasn (1. 16) * • * * * * Mdyidharasan 

(1. 20). This describes M&yiddvar&sa as a Mahdprad hdna cf Mahadevarasa, and the latter as a Dandandyaha of 
Bijjala, during the -eign of Taila III. (2) An inscription of A.D. 1152 which is said to be at a temple of Siddhappa 
at Para in the KoiJ tAluka, DhArwAr district ( Carn.-Desa Inters . Vol. II. p. 1 : but there does not seem to be a 
village named Pur or Pura anywhere in the DhArwAr district ; perhaps Puradakeri, in the Kdd tAluka, is intended). 
This describes Mahadevarasa as a feudatory of Taila HI. himself, and as a Mahdsdmantddhipati , Karituraya- 
patfasdhani, Senddhipati, and Dandandyaha, enjoying tbe^Kuligere three-hundred and the Banavase twelve- 
thousand, with the pleasure of an agreeable or friendly interchange of communications ; and it describes 
MAyid&varasa as a Mahdsdmantddhipati and Dandandyaha subordinate to Mahadevarasa, and as enjoying 
the hejjunka and vaddaravu\a taxes. 

* Bdndhata-puravor-ddhUvara. The reading is very distinct. — The place is not otherwise known. Can it 
be the modern • Band bole/ in the Krishnarajpet t&luka, Mysore district ? 

* It might be expected, I think, that the name would be Prana ve$ vara. Bat the consonant in the third sy liable 
is distinctly m, not e. 

*, 1 See note 1 above. 

* From the ink-impression. This record is not in the Cara-Dew Insert. 

* Sukhasamkatha-tinddadifn rdjyaw-geyuttam~ire. 

8 Tat*pddapadm-6pmj{v%. 


2 H 2 



236 


EPIGRAFHIA INBICA. 


[Vol. V. 


panchamahdlabda (11. 9, 10), a very Revanta with horses, 1 the choice elephant of his father 
(1. 12), 3 the Kariturayapattasdhani) Manevergade , and Dan da nay a ka Mahaddvarasa (1.13)** 
was ruling the Banavase twelve-thousand and the Huligere three-hundred, punishing 
the wicked and protecting the good, with the delight of an agreeable or friendly interchange of 
communications ( with his paramount sovereign) (1. 14), • 4 — the feudatory of the latter 5 was the 
DandddhUa Mayideva (1. 16). 

While Mayideva (1, 21), having acquired \_{the charge of) the vatfdardtmla and hejjttnka 
taxes] 6 of the Banavase twelve-thousand, was protecting the people and was happily ruling 
or administering {those taxes) — 

The record then (1. 22) introduces the Mahd mandate* vara Soviddvaraea (1. 26), who is 
described a3 the supreme lord of Bandhavap ura, the best of towns (1. 23),— the sun of the 


1 Turaya-Revantam , line 10. For turaya , = turaya , ' horse/ see page 234 above, note 9.— The same epithet 
turaya- Ricanta occurs in line 11 f. of an inscription at Balag&mi (P, S. O. C. Insert. No. 171; and Bee My*- 
Insert, p. 139, where Mr. Bice b translation, confusing turaya with turiya, gives 44 a fourth B^yanta’’) ; and. tb© 
Sanskrit form turaga-Revanta has already been quoted from a Silahara grant of A.D. 1058 (see page 234 above, 
note 9). And it is explained by such expressions as haydrudha-praudha-i Sfchd-RSeanta, r *a very R&vanta, a 
perfect rekkd among those who are mounted on horses ” (i> 8. O.-C. Insert. No. 31, line 7; and see Mys. Inter t . 
p. 232, « a Revanta among skilled horsemen see also id . p. 325, “ a R£kha-R6vanta in riding the most unmanageable 
horses’ 1 ), and by a long compound in line 47 f. of an inscription at Harihar (P. 8. O.-C. Insert. No. 125) 
which runs grahana-nirgata-prerana-lagna-$td(sihd)pan.6llalita-sddi-su[chana ?fs4(H)lca\a-tapti -samkul A- 
grdhitapamchadhara-prapaTKcha-samcharana-chaturatara.sure'khd'Rivantanum, and is not altogether intelligible 
at present.— I am indebted to Prof. Kieltiorn for the information that Revanta was a son of Surya, begotten 
by SArya. who had taken the form of a horse, on Gandhva in the shape of a mare; and for a verse in tbe 
J larkandigapurdna, LXXVIII. verse 24. which, after telling how SArya and Gandbyfi produced the two 
Alvina, says, in seeking to explain the name of Revanta, — Ritasd^nU cha RSvantah i Uadyt charmi Unuira- 
dhrile aiv.drudhahsamudbhiitd bdna-tuna-samanvitah; ** and, when the seed came to an end, there w as produced 
Revanta, armed with a sword, clad in leather, w earing armour, mounted on a horse, and equipped with arrows and 
a quiver/ 1 And in explanation of the terms Hkhd and tur&khd , for which it is ratner difficult to find a suitable 
English expression in such combinations,— (rSkhd means literally ‘aline, streak, row, series, the first or prime 
meridian he has giveu me a passage which speaks of tarn kshiti-tatt vara-kdmintndm sarcdnga-sundaratagd 
pralham-aika-rlkkdm, “her, who by the beauty of her body is the first and sole rftchd of the handsome women 
on the face of the earth/ 1 i.e. “the most beautiful woman, of all/* Foir some other instances of the same use of 
the word rSkhd , see page 187 above, note 7.— Another name mentioned with horses in the same way, to form 
& similar epithet, is that of Vatsar&ja; e.g., haya-Vatsarojamy 44 a very Vatsaraja with horses (Jour. Bo. Br. R. 
ds. Soc. Vol. X. p. 204, text Hue 8), and vishama-haya- Vatsardjalnum ], 44 a very Vatsaraja with troublesome or 
vicious horses,” in line 12 of an inscription at Talgund (P. 8. O.-C. Insert. No. 218; My*. Imcrt , p. 200, 
gives 44 like Vatsa to poison 11 ), and tu(iu)kala-haya-Vat 8 ardjam 7 4 *a very VatsarAja with restive horses ' 
(A. above, line 49). And the two names occur together in line 23 f. of the Silahara grant of A.D. 1058, 
already quoted above, which describes Marasimhn as Repantd Vatsardjo tara-turaga-chay-drudba'rSkhJ- 
^iuddhauy “a very Revanta, and a very Vatsaraja, in the exact determination of who might be the most eminent 
among those who are mounted on troops of excellent horses/* Revanta was the chief of the Guhyakas, and, 
therefore, is apparently not to be identified with \atsaifija. 

% Ayyana y aindha-ndranaih. 

* The original h;.» dandandgakam mag am Mahadimrasaru Banara.e, etc..— porhnps implying that he bad* 
lather of the same name; compare the description of Brahma, the general who re-established the Western 
Chain*?*. sovereignty for Sdiu«vat* IV., as the kumdra Bammayya (e.g., E. below, lines 0h, 70; and in other 
records also!, in order to distinguish him from his grandfather of the same name. 

‘Duikta-nigraha-iisMa-pratipalanadim mkha-eamkathd-vinddadimd^araeu-geyuttam-ire. 


* Tat-pddapadm-Spajtoi. 

• These words, though quite illegible here, may he safely supplied from lines 26 ff. 0 { the Balngam, 
inscription of AD. 1155-56 (see paste 235 above, note 1). which run -3ni,ida nahdpradhaaam Banavcse- 
pannirchcUdurada taUardtula-ht i} »mk«da hennode dandannyalam Magidecatasar rdiadhdni.Balltgrdmega 
nelevtdmol t ukl>adin=irdd=ondu dixa'an — So also the inscription of A.D. H52, which is said to be at Pure in the 
KAd taiuka, Dharnar district (see the same note), describes him as the Mahd.dmantjdhipati and Dandandgaka 
SUyidevarasa, who was enjoying (anubUvi.ut tarn) the hejjvnka and r addardvul a taxes. 

7 Banardac-panmrchcbhdsirada [r addardvaUmum heygumkamumam] padtdu prajegam fratipdlUi 

snlchaaiiL^aratu-geyuliaw're. 


No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


237 


water-lily that is the Kadamba family, 1 — the champion of his father (1. 25), 2 — he who 
had attained the excellent favour of the god Pranamesvara, 3 — who was ruling the Nagara- 

khanda seventy (1. 26) and punishing the wicked and 

protecting the good, with the pleasure of an agreeable or friendly interchange of communications 
(with his official superiors) (1. 27). 4 But after this, from near the end of line 27, the remainder 
is hopelessly illegible. 

E. — Of about A.D. 1200. 

This inscription is on a stone tablet standing against the wall, or perhaps built into the 
wall, on the right of the god inside a temple of Siva under the name of Somanatha, which appears 
to be the temple the foundation of which is recorded in the inscription. — The writing covers an 
area about 3 f 7\ n broad by 6' 1* high. It is in a state of good preservation almost throughout. — 
The sculptures at the top of the stone are, in the centre, a liiiga , with a standing priest ; on 
the proper right, the bull Nandi, with the sun above it ; and on the proper left, a cow and 
calf, with the moon above them. — The characters are Kanarese, of the period to which, from 
the internal evidence, the record is to be referred. The size of the letters is somewhat 
irregular, ranging from about T 8 ^" in the n of jana , line 15, to nearly V in the sh of manushya , 
line 24. The characters are mostly well formed and well engraved. But in many places they 
are difficult to read, because the execution is indifferent and imperfect, owing to sometimes the 
tops of the letters, and sometimes other parts of them, not being completed in the engraving, 
though marks in the ink-impression shew that they were sketched on the stone and were 
partially cut by the engraver. Some pointed instances of this are as follows : — In line 8, 
nishada-himavanta reads at first sight g ishada-bdvavana, the hi, which may always be easily 
confused with ha, being badly formed, and the side-strokes which would turn gi into 7ii and 
va into ma , and the whole of the subscript t, having not been filled in by the engraver, though 
the ink-impression shews that they were more or less outlined on the stone ; in line 9, the tops 
of the second, third, fifth, and seventh aksharas are similarly imperfect in sama-mahimd- 
kamdaram , and the rtti at the end of the line was left almost, altogether unformed ; in line 12, 
there are two instances in prakatitak , in which the k reads at first sight as r, and another, in 
sukebyu, in which the superscript vowel, as well as the top of the k, was left unformed ; and 
in line 48, if the name of the Jain temple were not known from other sources, it would 
probably bave been read dyegejjya, instead of dnesejjeya . Many other similar instances might be 
pointed out ; but the preceding ones seem sufficient. Whether these faults are due to pure 
carelessness on the part of the engraver, or to his coming unexpectedly on very hard places in 
the stone, it is difficult to say from simply the ink-impression. The characters include the 
upadhmdiriya in puhpali , for pushpdli , line 2. The lingual d is usually expressed by its 
distinct sign, which appears very clearly in mandana, line 7 ; but in a few places we have 
the ordinary d . The dental dh is formed properly enough in svardhuni , line 9 ; but in some 
other places it is hardly to be distinguished from v , e.g. in dhdmarh , line 2, and dhdrd , line 61. 
There is a somewhat rare mediaeval form of y in ativayadolu , line 62 : we have clear instances 
of the corresponding forms of m and v in marigi , line 44, and nilipevu, line 39 ; and the m is 
carried back to A.D. 804 by the Kanarese grant of Govinda III. (Ind. Ant . Yol. XI. p. 125 ; 
see para-dattam=bd , line 14). The virdma is represented by its own proper sign in puradol , 
line 13, and in biman, line 84, and by the same mark, but imperfectly formed, in dural , line 
50 : elsewhere, however, it is represented by the vowel « ; and there are pointed instances of 
this in bhavanu , line 26, timing, line 41, alnki , line 41-42, bimadu, line 60, and e£dnu, line 98. 
The anusvara is written sometimes, in the usual fashion, above the top line of writing, and 
frequently bo faintly that it does not show in the lithograph, and sometimes, in a larger form, 
between the lines of writing; the word kamdaram , line 9, illustrates both methods of forming 

1 Kddamba-lcula-ltamctla-mdrttandaih. * Ayyan^amkaldram. * See pa^e 235 above, not# 3. 

4 JJushta -n> g raha-*ishta-prat%p<$l*nad\m tmlcha-tamkathd-vinddadim rajyam^gsgutttwn.'ire. 



238 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[vol. v. 


it. — The opening invocatory verse is in Sanskrit ; a Sanskrit proverb is quoted in line 19 ; 
three Sanskrit Slokas are introduced in * lines 25 f., 32 f. ; and there are seven of the usual 
benedictive and imprecatory Sanskrit verses in lines 94 to 98. With these exceptions, the 
language is Kanarese, in prose and verse mixed. Now that we have a proper vocabulary, 
the interpretation of this record presents no real difficulties, though I am indebted to Mr. H. 
Krishna Sastri for Assistance in respect of the verses in lines 22, 35, and 40, and to Prof. Kiel- 
horn for advice in respect of some dubious points in Sanskrit passages : but it would have been 
impossible to deal with this exceptionally interesting and racy document verba tim, all through, 
without the Rev. Mr. KitteFs Kannada- English Dictionary ; and I take this opportunity of 
recording prominently my appreciation of the great value of that scholarly and admirable 
work, which has now, for the first time, placed it in the power of Western students to 
understand fully, and do justice to, the beauties of the Kanarese language, especially in its 
classical and mediaeval dialects, and also of expressing my thanks to Mr. Kittel himself for 
kindly perusing the proofs of my text and translation of this record and suggesting a few 
refinements in my rendering. 1 The language of this record may be described as inter- 
mediate between the classical and medieval dialects of Mr. KitteFs classification. The 
forms are mostly archaic. But the more modern forms appear here and there, even in the 
metrical portions: in the pro3e passages, we may note iddalli , line 71, kshetradalli , line 
91, the termination galige , lines 51, 77 (in the copulative form), aud the ordinary neuter 
accusative with v , instead of wi, in kdlavan , line 19, and the copulative accusative with v 9 
instead of m, in kavilegaluvam brdhmanaruvam , line 93; in the verses we may note tfie 
neuter nominative in t>, instead of m, in de6av, line 11, utkatav , line 23, and various other 
places, and the neuter accusative with v, in dnamdavam , line 42-43, and such words as 
pratyakskav-dgi , line 31, and balikkav , line 43, where, again, ve have the v instead of the 
m. In respect of vocabulary, we may note that lines 43, 48 give us balikham , baliham, as 
variants of balikkam , balikam ; lines 73, 93 give, as also do various other records, alh as a 
variant of ali, ‘to destroy, to be destroyed ; ’ and line 78 gives bHkum as a variant of lelkum , 
= belku, beku, * it is wished, it is due, it must, etc. 1 — In respect of orthography, there is a 
oonstant use of b for v in Sanskrit wot’ds> and of ri for ri, 2 3 which requires to he corrected in the 
verses so as to preserve the metre which is usually satisfied only by restoring the vowel ; but 
the only points to which special attention need be directed, are, the occasional use of at and aiy 
for ay, in Rdmaiyanam , Ime 47, RdmaiyyamgaU, line 61, Bamaiyamnum , line 70, ainuruvam> 
line 85, and ainufar, line 88, and a frequent omission to double consonants after the letter r. 

The inscription does not refer itself to the reign of any particular king, and is not dated. 
But it is assigned to .about A.D. 1200, or a few years earlier, by the mention, in lines 81 to 90 
and 99, of the Kadamba MaM mandates vara K&madeva, and by the statement, in line 101, 
tli at the record,. though put into shape by another person, was composed by the Dandanayaka 
Kesavarftja. For Kamadeva, who belonged to the Haugal branch of the Kadamba family, we 
have dates ranging from A.D. 1181-82 to 1203 ;* and Ktsavaraja must be the Mahdpradhdna 
and Dandanayaka Bolikeya-Kesimayya or Kesirajayya, for whom wc have dates ranging from 


1 The epigraphic records contain many technical expressions,— pa^ i -iiiarly in rhe w a y of titles territorial 
terms, names of gods, guild* professions, taxes, teWs, metres, and -on, : l. u * also some more ordinary word*- 
which Mr. KitteTs dictionary does not explain, because, no dr nbt, they tso not o,aur in ordinary literatnre or in 
the Native vocabularies ‘of the language. It maybe hoped that, it he should ever wane a supplement to it, 
he will examine the edited records, and see tfbat can be done to collate, examine, and explain raeh expressions ■ 
while doing what I can' in this direction, I can really do Gutle more than call att-nti-.* to points which come 
prominently to tov notice in -searching for the meanings of words which are not ihlc at t'n^t ,j,» a . aUl > 

I cannot undertake to collect all the different vamotaof Kanarese words whi, h are Jn IW- ;■ ."Vr*. / 

We still rsqnire a grammar of the classical and mediaeval dialects, written Fn English , I?I . ( OI . ruror^r, h 
a Rather curiously, we have nispriha, with tbe vowel, m line 23, though line 33 gives nup . > 

3 D ¥ n. Kan DUtr< pp. 559, 563. 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


239 


A.D. 1168 to 1181 in records which connect him with the government of the Banavasi twelve- 
thonsand and other districts. 1 * Before them, mention is made of the Western Chalukya king 
Somesvara IV. (A.D. 1183 and USD) ; and before him, of the Kalaehurya prince Bijjala 
(A.D. 1145, and 1156 to 1167). A short passage at the end, evidently added at a somewhat 
later date, mentions a Kadamba prince iMallideva, 3 4 and recorded some grant which he, also, 
made to the same temple. 

The interest and importance of the record centre in the fact that it discloses the name 
of the person. Ekantada-Ramayya, who towards the close of the twelfth century A.D. brought 
about a revival of the worship of Siva, or a fresh impetus to the Saiva faith with elaborated 
and improved rites and practices, which eventually culminated in the establishment of a 
sect of Sivabkaktas or worshippers of Siva, called technically Vira-Saivas, i.e. *■ brave, fierce, 
or strict Saivas, Saiva champions,” and popularly Lingayats or Lingawants, i.e. “ those who 
have the linga or phallic emblem.” The Lingayats — fusing the appellation by which all 
average members of the sect would describe themselves) — are outwardly distinguished from 
the ordinary Saivas by the practice of carrying about with them a miniature linga , usually in a 
silver box suspended from the neck and hanging about the waist. And the chief characteristics 
of their faith and practices are, adoration of the linga and of Siva's hull Nandi, hostility to 
Brahmans, disbelief in the transmigration cf the soul, contempt for child-marriage, and approval 
and habitual practice of the remarriage of widows. They are found chiefly in the Kanatv>e 
country; their vernacular is Kar arose ; and it is due almost entirely to them that this 
beautiful, highly polished, and powerful language has been preserved, in later times, amidst the 
constant inroads of Maruthas from the north. They now constitute about thirty-five per cent 
of the total Hindu population in the Belgaum, Bijapur, and Dliarwar districts. 3 In Mysore 
and the Kolhapur State, they number about ten per cent, of the Hindu population. And they 
are also found, but in smaller proportions, in the districts of Poona. Sholapnr, Satara. and 
North Kanara. Elsewhere, they are constantly met with; but as the result of the migration 
of isolated families, mostly in connection with trade and manufactures. In the Bijapur and 
Dharwar districts, and possibly in the neighbouring parts of the Nizam’s Dominions and 
Mysore, the sect appears to be still steadily gaining ground. And an interesting internal 
movement was observable in 1SD1, when large numbers of the members of it claimed to have 
themselves entered in the census returns under the designation of Vira-Saivas, in preference to 
that of Lingayats, with which they had been content on previous similar occasions. 

According to the tradition of the Lingayats themselves, as embodied in their prineipd 
sacred writings, the Basavapurdna and Channabasavapnrdna* the events which led up to tin* 
establishment of the new sect were as follows ; — 

To a certain Madiraja and his wife Madalambika, pious Saivas of the Brahman caste, and 
residents of a place named Bagewadi which is usually supposed to be the subdi visional town ot 

1 Dyn. Kan. Distrs. pp, 485, 487, 4b9. 

3 Probably identical wit b the Madikarjuna or Mallideva, for whom we have dates ranging from A.D. 1215 16 
to 1252 ( j Dyn. Kan. Disfrs. p. 56 Q. 

3 For detailed acc"iim> i-t them In these districts, with their doctrines, customs, etc , and their divBi.'ns i.e < 
Pure, Affiliated, and H.ilf-Linja\ats, see the Gazetteer of the Bombay Presidency , Voi. XXI. Belgium, pp. 1-jy 
151 ; Vol. XX II. Dharwar, p:>. U)2 to 116, and Vol. XXIII. Bijapur, pp. 219 to 280.— For a more general account, 
see an “Essay on the Creed, Customs and Literature of the Jangams/’ by Mr. C. P. Brown, iu the Madras Jo»r 
of Lit. and Science , Voi. XI. pp. 143 to 177. 

4 Abstract translations of those two works by the Rev. G. Wurth have been published in the , Tour. Bo. B 
B As. Soc. Vol. VIII. pp. 65 to 97 and 98 to 221, from which I quote.— In a verse quoted by Mr. Kittei in his 
Sabdamanidarpana , lutrod. p. 26 , we are told that the Basavapurdna was finished on Srava" , kri-hna 10 
Thursday, of the Sauraya samvatsara, Saka-Samvat 1291 (expired). The given ttihi, however, ended, not on a 
Thursday, but on Sunday, 29th July, AD. 1369.— The Channabasavap urdna appears to hare been written iu 
S.-S. 1507 (expired), = A.D. 1585-86 (Jour. Bo. Br. E. As. Soc. Vol. VIII, p. 221). 



240 


EPIGRAPHIA 1NDICA. 


[You Y. 


that name in the Bijapur district, there was horn a son, who. being an incarnation of Siva's 
bull Nandi, sent to earth to revive the declining Saiva rites, Was named Basava. 1 When the 
usual time of investiture had arrived, Basava, then eight years of age, having meanwhile 
acquired much knowledge of the Saiva scriptures, refused to he invested with the sacred 
Brahmanical thread ; declaring himself a special worshipper of Siva, and stating that he had 
eome to destroy the distinctions of caste. This refusal, with his singular wisdom and piety, 
attracted the favourable notice of his uncle Baladeva, prime minister ” 2 of (the Kalachurya 
king) Bijjala, who had come to be present at the ceremony ; and Baladeva gave him his 
daughter Gangadevi or Gangamba in marriage. 3 * The Brahmans, however, began to persecute 
Basava, on account of the novel practices propounded by him. And he consequently left his 
native town, and went to a village named ; Kappadi/ where he spent his early years, receiving 
instruction there fiom the god Siva, in the form of the local god Samgamesvara. 4, 

Meanwhile, his uncle Baladeva died. At the advice of the deceased minister’s relatives, 
Bijjala decided on securing the services of Basava, whose ability and virtues had now become 
publicly known. After some demur, Basava accepted the office ; having the hope that the 
influence attached to it would help him in propagating his peculiar tenets. And, accompanied 
by his elder sister Nagalambika, he proceeded from ‘ Kappadi' to Kaly ana. 4 where he was 
welcomed with deference by the king, and was installed as prime minister, commander-in-chief, 
and treasurer, — second in power to only the king himself ; 5 and the king, in order to bind him 
as closely as possible to himself, gave him his youDger sister Nilalochana to wife, 6 

Somewhere about this time, from Basava’s unmarried elder sister Nagalambika. who was 
an incarnation of the intelligence of the goddess Parvati, there was born, by the working 0 f the 
spirit of Siva, a son, who was an incarnation of Siva ’3 son Shanmukba or Karttikeya, the "od 
of war, 7 Because, the Channabasav a p Tirana says, he was more beautiful than Basava in many 
respects, he was named Chanhabasava, i.e, “ the beautiful Basava.” 8 And he seems to be 
depicted as playing a more important part than even Basava himself in the propagation of the 
tenets of the new sect ; for, Basava is represented as receiving from him instruction on 
important points connected with it. 9 

The two Purdnas are occupied, for the most part, with doctrinal expositions, recitals of 
mythology, praises of previous Saiva saints, and accounts of miracles worked by Basava, And 
it is only quite at the end of each of them, that we come again on any matter that purports to 
be historical. They assert, however, that, with the influence that his official position gave the 
uncle, Basava and his nephew propagated with great energy and activity their doctrines 
which included the persecution and extermination of all persons, — and especially the Jains — 
whoso creed differed from that of the Lingayats. 10 Coupled with the lavish expenditm-e 
incurred by Basava, from the public coffers, on the support of the Jangams or Lingayat priests, 
the proceedings aroused in Bijjala, who was of the Jain faith, 1 ! feelings of uneasiness 
and distrust, which are said to have been fanned from time to time by a rival minister named 
Manchanna, in spite of the latter being himself, in secret, a Vira-Saiva. 12 And at length an 
event occurred, which ended in the assassination of Bijjala and the death of Basava. 


1 Loc. cit. p. 67.— The word basava is treated as a corruption of the Sanskrit vrishabha, ‘ahull/ in its special 

desig'ivon of Nandi, the bull on which Siva rides.— From Wilson’* Descriptite Catalogue of the Mackvnzit 

Collection, p. 305, it would appear that some versions of the Butavapurdna substitute, for Bagewadi, Ihgl^shwar 

wh.ch U a 'ill ige in the same neighbourhood. ’ ' ' 

* The Mackenzie Collection, however, gives the temuical official tide Dandaniyaka or ‘leader of the forces’ 

which would not necessarily denote a prime minister. ’ 

» hoc. cit. p. 67. 4 Loo. cit. p. 68. s £o». e ; t p _ 69 _ 

‘ Loc. cit. p. 70. * Loe. cit. pp. 113, 119, 120. * Zoc. cit. p. 123 

» Loc. cit. p. 125. 10 Loe. cit. p. 71. u Uc _ eit p> ?a ' 

»« Loc. cit. pp. 78, 88, 128. 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


241 


At Kalyana, there were two specially pious Lingayats, named £ Halleyaga J and 
‘Madhuveyya,’ whom Bijjala, in mere wantonness, caused to be blinded. Thereupon, says the 
Basavapurana Basava, — himself leaving Kalyana for a place named * Saihgamesvara,’ 2 
— deputed one of his followers, Jagaddeva, to slay the king. And Jagadcleva, with two 
unnamed friends, succeeded in making his way into the palace and accomplishing his errand, — 
stabbing the king even in the midst of his court. Civil war ensued. And, the news coming to 
Basava as he was journeying, he hastened on his way. and, reaching ‘ Kudali-Samgamesvara/ 
was there absorbed into the god ; 3 while Channabasava fled to UIvi, in North Kanara, where 
he found refuge in a cave. 

The Channabasavapurdna gives a somewhat different account. 4 It places first the death 
of Basava, who, it says, was absorbed in Samgamesvara in the month Phalguna, falling in 
A.D. 785, of the Raktakshin Saka-Samvat 707 (current); 5 and the only reason 

that it assigns, is, that news had reached Basava that a certain Prabhu, who was an incarnation 
of Siva, 6 had left Kalyana, and had been absorbed into Siva in a plantain-tree at Srisaila, — 
leaving it to be inferred that Basava simply followed an example set to him by Prabhu. On 
the death of Basava, Bijjala appointed Channabasava to the office that had been held by his 
uncle. After this, the king caused the pious ‘ Halleija* and ‘ Madhuveija' to be tied to a rope 
and dragged about the ground till they died. In revenge for this, Bijjala was slain by two 
torch-bearers, named Jagaddeva and Bommana. Then Channabasava, who had meantime sent 
away many Lingayats to UIvi under the pretext of celebrating a feast in honour of the god 
Jahgamesvara, gathered together his horses and men, and left Kalyana to follow and join them. 
The “ son-in-law ” of Bijjala started in pursuit. And a battle ensued, in which the pursuers 
were destroyed, and the king was taken captive. At the advice of N&galambika, however, 
Channabasava restored the slain army to life; and, having impressed upon the king that* he 
should not persecute the Lingayats, as his predecessor had done, but should walk in 
righteousness, he anointed him, and sent him back to govern his country. ? 


1 hoc . ext . pp. 96, 97. 

3 Meaning, apparently, the* Kudali-Samgamesvara ’ which is mentioned further on. 

* According to Sir Walter Elliot (Jour. R. As. Soc. f F. S., VoX. IV. p. 22, note, and Madras Jour, of Lit. 
and Science , Vol. VII. p. 214, note), the place of Bassva’s absorption is said to be Sahgam, in the Hungund taluka, 
Bijipur district, at the juuction of the Kjishna aud the MalparbhS, where, he added, a depression in the linga at 
the temple of Sarhgam&Svara is still pointed out as the exact spot into which Basava entered. I am not prepared 
to deny the correctness of these statements. Still, as regards the true identification of the place, the prefix ‘ Kudali‘ 
seems to me to point rather to the historically much more important (see, e.g., J>yn. Kan. Distrs. p. 445, note 1) 
KddaUSangarn, at the junction of the Krishna aud the Tungabhadra. 

4 Loc. cit. pp. 219, 220. This part of the narrative is put as a prophecy in the mouth of Channabasava. 

5 I.e. t according to the southern luni solar system of the cycle, by which the calculation would be made 
backwards from the time when the Purana was written.— The Channabasavannakdlajndna (Wilson’s Descriptive 
Catalogue of the Mackenzie Collection , pp. 312, 313,) gives the month Phalguna of Saka-Samvat 696, equivalent 
as a current year, to A.D. 773*/ 4, as the date of the absorption of Basava. 

* See also loc , cit . pp. 71, 72. 

1 The Furdna ends with various other prophecies, not connected with the present subject, to the effect that 
the king, thus anointed, should reign for sixty years from the death of Basava; that then, at a time when the 
Hoysala kingdom was flourishing, the Turks,—* (the original probably mis Turushkas),— led by the giant P'tamb&ra, 
born among them by the blessing of Siva, should come and vanquish Bijjala, destroy Kalyana, kill cattle in the 
temple of Siva, erect a mosque there, and build the town of Kalbnrigi ; that the kings of Aneguudi should 
build the town of Vijayanagara, near Bampe ; that Pitambara and his house should reign over the land fer seven 
hundred and seventy years; that then there should arise a king named Vasantaraya, who would drive the Turks 
out of the country and restore Kaly&na ; that, all the Saiva saints coming to life again, Channabasava shoo’d 
become the prime minister of this king, and Basava the commander of his forces; and that thus the Lth.ra.tt 
religion should be re-established and greatly increased.— These “ prophecies ” are, of course, nothing but confined 
reminiscences of intervening history up to the time when this Purdna was written (AD. 1585-86; see pagt -iR 
above, note 4 ). 

2 1 



242 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[You. V. 


Tlie Jain account, as given in the Bijjalardyacharitra y l puts things very differently, 
Basava's influence with the king is attributed to the fact that he had a very beautiful sister, 
whom the king took as a concubine. And the end of Bijjala and Basava is related thus : — 
Bijjala had marched against and subdued the Kolhapur chief, i.e. the Silahara Mahd - 
mand aids vara , who must have committed some act of rebellion. During a halt on the way 
back to Kalyana, a Jangam arrived, sent by Basava, and disguised as a Jain, and presented the 
king with a poisoned fruit, the mere smell of which caused his death. He had time, however, 
before dying, to tell hi3 son ‘ Immadi-Bijjala/ Le. “ the second Bijjala” 2 3 that it was Basava 
who had sent the fruit, and to enjoin him to put Basava to death. Immadi-Bijjala accordingly 
ordered that Basava should be apprehended, and that all the Jangams, wherever seized, should 
be executed. And, on hearing this, Basava threw himself into a well, and died ; while his 
wife { Nilamba poisoned herself. Channabasava, however, after Immadi-Bijjala’s resent- 
ment was allayed, presented his uncle's treasures to the king, and was admitted to favour and 
to a ministerial office at court. 4 * 

Such are the traditional accounts. There are, however, no apparent reasons for attributing 
either to the Lingayat Purdnas, of which even the earlier one was written two centuries after 
the events which it purports to record, or to the Jain poem, any greater historical accuracy than 
other Hindu works of the same class have been found to possess. And, on the contrary, there 
arc fair grounds for questioning the correctness of the narratives given by them. The Lingayat 
and Jain accounts differ very markedly, and to a far greater extent than can be accounted for 
on simply the supposition of a representation of true facts from different sectarian points of 
view. In respect of the circumstances immediately attending the deaths of Bijjala and Basava. 
even the Lingayat Purdnas are not at all in accordance with each other. The Channabasava- 
purdna allots to these events the absurd date of A.D. 785, which is too early by close upon 
four centuries. Even the Jain poem appears to place them, 6 not only twelve years before the 
time, in A.D. 1167, when Bijjala, still alive, abdicated in favour of his eldest son, but also 
even before the time, in A.D. 1156, marked by the introduction of a reckoning of his own, 
when Bijjala commenced his independent career. And whereas, if Basava and Channabasava 
really held the high office that is allotted to them by tradition, we ought to have found by this 
time a clear mention of them somewhere or other in the mass of epigraphic records 
that has now come under observation, no allusion of any kind, applicable to either of them 
has been obtained, except in the Managoli inscription of A.D. 1181 (above, page 9) That 
record gives us the names of Basava and Madiraja, both of which appear in the Basava- 
purdna , in connection with the foundation and endowment of a Z/»ya-temple, evidently of some 
considerable size and repute, at Managoli in the neighbourhood of Bagewadq the alleged 
residence of Madiraja and birthplace of Basava ; and, in doing so, it really seems to give us the 
original of the traditional Basava who figures in the Lingayat Purdnas and the Jain book 
And, in disclosing the facts that the parents of Basava were, not Madiraja and Madalambika, 
but Chandiraja of the KaSyapa gotra and Chandrambika, and that Madiraja belonged to 
altogether a different family, namely the Harita gotra , it furnishes further grounds for questioning 
the correctness of the Lingayat tradition, which, indeed, seems but little better than a legend. 


1 Loc. ei It. p. 97; and Wilson’s Descriptive Catalogue of the Mackenzie Collection, p 320. 

1 This doubtless denotes Sovideva. But there is no epigraphic evidence for calling him ImmadMiiijala 

3 A wife of Basava named NiUrnbika, daughter of one of Bijjala’ s ministers, is mentionfd from 
report - in Jour Bo. Br. R. As. Soc. Yol. VIII. p 70. 

< Sir Walter Elliot has said that Basava’s sister, who became the king’s mistr^s, was named Padmavati* 
that it was at Ulvi that Basava drowned himself; and that tbe*e events occurred, aceordin- to the Jain poem' 
,n Kulivuga-Samvar 4255 (expired), = SakvSaihrat 1077 (current), = A. D. 1154 55. But I have not been able 

to F:id the authority for these statements. 

* See the preceding note. 



INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


24:: 


No. 25 ] 


For the full story that is told in the record now published, reference may be 
made to the translation, page 252 below ; a great deal of it cannot be materially abridged, 
without detracting from its interest and merits. We have to make allowance for the super- 
natural agency, the divine birth of the hero as an incarnation of Yirabhadra the attendant of 
Siva, and the miracle of his cutting off his own head and having it restored to him by his 
god, — all of which, narrated apparently while the subject of the story was still alive, or at 
any rate very shortly after his death, illustrates how quickly, in India, real historical events 
may come to be overlaid with what is purely imaginary and mythical. But, if that is done, 
the narrative is reasonable and plain, and has the clear ring of truth in it. It shews us 
the real person to whom the movement was due, and the way in which he started it. And 
it amounts to this : — 

To a Saiva Brahman named Purushottamabhatta, who belonged to the Srivatsa gotra, and 
was an inhabitant of a town named Alande in the Kuntala country , 1 there was born a son 
named Rama, who became an ardent devotee of Siva, and, by the intensity and exclusiveness of 
his worship of that god, acquired the name of Ekantada-Ramayya . 2 He visited various Saiva 
places of pilgrimage. And eventually he came to Huligere (Lakshmeshwar), where there was 
a temple of Siva under the name of “ the Somanatha of the South/’ 3 and then to Ablur, where, 
in addition to the place being plainly a stronghold of Jainism, there was, as we learn from the other 
records (pages 213, 232, above), an evidently important and influential Saiva establishment at the 
temple of Brahmesvara. At Ablur, he got into controversy with the Jains, who, led by one of 
the village-headmen named Sankagaunda, sought to interrupt and put a stop to his devotions. 
Some wager was made, the terms of it being recorded in writing on a palmyra-leaf, on the result 
of which the Jains staked their god and their faith. Ekantada-Ramayya won the wager. 4 
And then, as the Jains refused to do what they had pledged themselves to do, namely to destroy 
their Jina and set up a Siva instead of it, he himself, in spite of their guards, their horses, 
their chieftains, and the troops that they sent against him, overturned the Jina and laid waste the 

1 This place may be safely identified with the modern Aland or Alande, the chief town of a taluka of the same 
name, in the Nizam’s Dominions the 4 Allund ’ of the Indian Atlas, sheet No. 57, lat. 17° 33', loug. 76° 38'. At 
the temple of lsvara at Nimbargi in the Kalburigi taluka, twelve miles south of Aiand or Alande, there is an 
inscription with dates in A.D. 1047 and 1098 ( Cam.-Desa Insert. Vol. I. p. 92); and the passage of A.D. 1047 
speaks of “the country of Alande in the country of Kuntala.” It registers the grant of a village named Gudiya- 
devatige in the Gonkanad district of the Alande thousand. This particular village cannot be identified with any 
certainty ; it may be * Goody/ four miles on the south-east of Nimbargi, or it may be ‘Goody/ nine miles oil the 
south-west of Nimbargi. But the Alande thousand is evidently the country round Aland or Alande and Nimbargi 
From the entry in the Indian Atlas, the modem name would seem to be Aland. Iu the titlings. however, of souk 
inscriptions at the neighbouring village of Kuddawadi, it is given as Alande in Sir VValter Elliot’s collection. 

a For the explanation of the prefix to his name, see lines 28, 29 of the text. 

3 The temple still exists.— There is another mention of Sdmanatha of Purikara (t.e. Huligere) in an 
inscription of A.D. 1096 at BslugAmi (P. 8. and O. C. Insert. No. 166, line 31 f.), which says th*t it was through 
the excellent favour of the god Somesvara of the city of Purikaranagara that his son Some? vara or Sovideva was 
born to Sarvadeva, a Dandandyaka of the Western ChAIukya king V ikramaditva VI. It is worth noting that 
the form of the name in this record is Purikara, — not Pulikara, as given by Mr. Rice (Afy s. inters, p. 172), and as 
it occurs elsewhere. The second akshara is rather indistinct in the photograph : but it is recognisable as ri ; and 
the prdsa or alliteration requires that the consonant should be r. ^ 

* The record asserts that he cut off his own head, and laid it at the feet of his image of Siva, w hich had heen 
brought out of the temple for the purpose of the ordeal ; and that, after seven days, it was restored to him by bis 
god, safe and sound, without a scar. And the exact spot on which, according to tradition, this was done, is 
marked by the next record, F., page 260 below.— The story of his cutting off his head is mentioned in the Channabasara - 
purdna {Jour. Bo. Br. R. As. Soc. Vol. VIII. p. 198) : but the controversy, in the course of which it is 
to have heen done, is there attributed to a Jain having entered a Saiva temple without removing his shoes ; and 
the occurrence is located at Kalina, where, it is said, RAumyya bad gone in order to see Bijjala, whose fame h*d 
spread in all directions. The same passage makes RAmayy a quote, in his address to the Jain, an instance of t 
previous saint, MahAkila, having performed the same feat at a village named ' Jam bur/ and also attribute * 
repetition of the feat to a subsequent saint, ‘ Baukideva/ who heard the story of Rimayya. 


2 I 2 



244 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vot. V. 


i a;,i, .as is gathered from subsequent passages, built for his own god, under the name of 
a-iiomanatha, at Ablur, a temple as large,” the record says, “as a mountain.” The Jains then 
v cut and complained to Bijjala, who became much enraged, and sent for Ekantada-Ramayya, 
and questioned him as to why he had committed so gross an outrage ou the Jains. Thereupon 
Bkantada-Ramayya produced the writing on the palmyra-leaf, and asked Bijjala to deposit 
it in his treasury, and offered that, if the Jains would wager their eight hundred temples, 
including the Anesejjej'abasadi, 1 he would repeat the feat, whatever it may have really been, 
tl.a r he had already accomplished. 8 Wishing to see the spectacle, Bijjala called all the learned 
men of the Jilin temples together, and bade them wager their shrines, repeating the conditions 
on a palmyra-leaf. The Jains, however, would not face the test again ; saying that they had 
-■ J comp! ur. of the injury that had already been done to them, and not to wager and lose 
,i' v -.lore of their gods. So Bijjala, laughing at them, dismissed them with the advice that 
thenceforth they should live peaceably with their neighbours, and gave Ek&ntada-Ramayya, in 
■ assembly, a jnyapattra or certificate of success. Also, pleased with the unsurpassed 

. ningwith which Bkantada-Ramayya had displayed his devotion to Siva, he laved Ramayya's 
1 r ‘ ai.o granted to the temple of Vira-Somanatha a village named Gogave, 5 to the south of 
.V -gunda in the Sattaiige seventy in the Banavasi twelve-thousand. Subsequently, the 
r ‘ ' ' i .-ays, when the Western Ghaluky a king Somesvara XV . and his commander-in-chief 
P.-iht.ia were at Seleyahalliyakoppa. 4 a public assembly was held, in which recital was made 
. : the merits of ancient and recent Saiva saints. The story of Ekantada-Ramayya being told, 
IV. wrote a letter summoning him into his own presence at his palace, and laved his 
! and granted to the same temple the village of Ablur itself in the Nagarakhanda seventy in 
r' B vnavasi twelve-thousand. And fiually, the Mahamandalesvara Kamadeva went and 
-no temple, heard all the story, summoned Ekantada-Ramayya to Hangal, and there 
1./. 1 iis feet and granted to the temple a village named Mallavalli, on the north of Jog«sara 
\.a. Maviagod iu the Hosanad seventy in the Panumgal five-hundred. 5 


In this account, there is nothing inconsistent with the possibility of others being concerned 
the matter and helping the movement on,— for instance, the Basava or Basavarasavya of 
' Easyapa gotra, of the Managoli inscription of A.D. 1161, who was a contemporary of 
r.Kuut.ida-Ramayya, and in whom we' may find the original of the Basava of the Lihgayat 
I'.’.r/nias. And very possibly the Lingayat or Vira-Saiva sect was actually established, in 
-.me wlmt later times, by a person named Channabasava. In fact, as regards the first point, 
tn..ngh the worship of Siva languished iu some parts of the country, it had by no means died 
out ; and on some other occasion we may go into the history of the Kalamnkha sect, of the 
various other Saiva establishments at Balagami, of the five-hundred Svdmins of Aihole of the 
adherent, of the Vira-Banafijn doctrine, and of other religious bodies, scattered about all over the 
K-.uarc.se country, from whom the movement must have received encouragement and support 


of A.D 1076, which savs (Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 39, line 20 f) th..t it was foaoL'i ^f 7™^°“ 
1’uri -it.-, by Ku.nkv.r.Wa.U-vi, ttie younger oster of “the Chdluky cchak, ravartin Vnayidi, vs.aTllhl • a 

name seeing to be u^d to denote the Western Chalukya, kit:<» Vijayadityn (A.l). 696 to 733-34) ^ 1 j w i 

* ll,c ^• <vrd ***? ° CC T U ' h * Unde,t0 '* k th#t * sftercuttin « off his own' head, he would even 

ubw m$ opponents to burn it, and -tdl womd recover n. * wouia even 


] h is i-. the ntoairn 




J 8. from Abldr, in 


* r- — - Bevecieen miles S. S 

r. akarpur taluk-i. district, Mysore. Main -and* apparently does not now exist 

< i nis place i mnot now be found in maps etc., unless it may be identified with * ... 

d s.ii.iiwslon of the KdUiapur State. Ti.e word koppa , with which the V’ Dear Gar K 6tl \ m 
. * tti viila^-names in tue Kauarese country, means ‘ a small vjlUffe,* ^ ***** 

" . J cod ‘■till under the same name, in the Yellapur taluka nf v .u r - 

... *. v, A,d «r* *• 

a . hi Vi-jd &n.l J ogesara iwhich was perhaps a temple) cannot he traced. ^ 80 £ru “> 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


£45 


quite as much as from the Saiva establishment at the temple of Brahmesvara at Ablftr itself. 
But the present record indicates a crisis in the history of Saivism, when is waa specially exposed 
to danger from the attacks of the Jains, and, apparently, of some still existing Buddhist 
influences. 1 * It shews plainly that Ekantada-Ramayya was the person who came most 
prominently to the rescue of the waning worship. And, as it describes Bijj'ila as simply a 
Mahamandalesvara at the time when, after settling the quarrel between Ekantada-Ramnyya 
and the Jains of Ablur, he made his grant to the new temple of Vira-Somanatha which Ramayva 
founded there, it places the exploits of Ramayya shortly before A.D. 1162, in which year 
Bijjala completed his usurpation of the sovereignty by assuming the paramount titles. 


TEXT.- 

1 Om 3 [|| *] Namas 4 -tumga-sirahs 5 -churhbi-chandra-ch;\raara-charave trail okva-nagar- 

araiiibha-mula-stambhaya Sambhave |j Srimad 6 * -Gariiga-taramgri> 

2 chchalita-jala-kana-sreni-puhp~ali-s6bha-dhamam chamchaj'jata-pallavam-amri(mnjta- 

kar-odyat-phalam bahu-sakka-ramam Gauri-lat-a- 

3 limgitam=amara-nutam Sambhu-kalpadruv=adarii Ramamg=ig=arttliiyim v:\chchhira*- 

phala-chayamaih sariitat-otsahadimdam || Srikantkam Ramadevamg= 
anuppaipajma- 

4 ma 8 himamg=ige sampattanedurhnana 9 nakauk-anika-mauli-prakava-mani-trana- 

sreni-s6n~arhsu-jala-byakirnn-agLri l0 11 -dvay-al a m k r i ( k r i ) t a n = a m a r a - v a r a m 
sitasaile[iii*] dra- 

o kany-alok-amsu-sri-nivasam sakala-gann-vri(vri itaih Vira u -S6*mesan=Isam i| 

Chalad 12 -ugra*graha-vaktra-chchu[chy u;ta-tiniimikar-atuchehh‘.i-puclu‘hh-agra-g h a t- 
akulit-am- 

6 bhah«kumbhi'yutha-prakara-8ajala-phutkara-hast-abhri\bhra)-malA-militaih sutt- 

ippo( r ppu)d=udyan-mani-gana-kirana-sphara-mukt-amsu velachala-maluih 

7 bhu-rama-mandana-vipula-katidesa-mudram samudraui |] Va 13 |j Ant-auek-i* 

jalachara-niva[sa*]mum sam[u # ]ttumga«lahari-niva->amu’n=eni»i sogayi^uva 


1 Three records at Kanheri ia the ThaQa district, of the time of the Kashtrakdtu king Amoghavarsha I. 

(A.D. 814*15 to 877-78), shew that Buddhism was theu still a living religion, favoured by the authorities, m 

Western India (Ind. Ant. Vol. XIII. p. 134 ff. ; and see Dyn. Kan. D^strs. p. lol, Nos. 3, 4 and p. 4U6, No. 8). 
The Darabal inscription of A.D. 1095, of the time of the Western Chain kya king Vikrainaditya VI . records 
grants made to vihdras of Buddha and Arya-Taradevi at that town, in the Dbarwar district (Ind. Ant. Vol. X. 
p. 185; and see Dyn. Kan. Distrs. p. 452). An inscription of A.D- 1098 at Balagapni in Mysore incurious 
Nagiyakn, the tavdsi or attendant or house-servant of the BauddhaUsa or Buddhist establishment at that town 
(P. S. O.-C. Infers. No. 167, lines 34, 35; aud see Mys. Insert p. 109). And an inscription of A D. 1129 at the 
same place mentions that Baaddh&laya again, and tells us that it was one of the five ma(has of Balagann, the 
others being establishments of Vaishnavas, Saivas, worshippers of Brahman, and .Tains (P. S. O.-C. Inters. No. 176, 
line 44 ; and see My 8, Insert, p. 90). 

1 From the ink-impression. A transcription is given in Cam -De'sa Inters. Vol 11. p. 121. 

1 Represented by an ornate symbol. Less ornate symbols are Used in lines 61, 81, 99 ; and plain symbols in 
lines 80, 90, 98. 101. 

4 Metre, Sldka (Anushtubh). 5 Head liras. 

* Metre, Sragdharft ; and in the next verse. 7 Read r imehuita. 

* This akshara, ma, was perhaps at first omitted, and then inserted m the margin before the beginningof the 

line. But there are various places in this record, at which the lines begin rather irregularly. 

* Read saihpattan=endum.— From the ma of Hamad evamy, a* far as the dum , the existing text hss been 

written over something else which cannot be made out. The original passage ended with nand; and th» se two 
uktharas were left uncancelied. 

10 Read rydktrnn-amghri. 

11 In the first akshara , mi was engraved and then was corrected into rf 

la Metre, Mahasragdhara. 15 <!•*•» vac?* mam. 



24C 


EPIGRAPHIA IKD1CA. 


[ V OL. V. 


10 


11 


12 


13 


14 


15 


16 


17 


18 


19 


20 


21 


prasphara-sitadyuti-rucbi-nichaya-bhrajitam 
Himagi[ri]ndrada daksbina-parsva-vafrtti)- 


•23 


1 avana- samudvadi m parivri(vri)tav=ada Jambudvipadi teriikalw Nila-NishadafdbaV 
Himavanta-parwatamgalolav=alli|l Vri 1 || Esegmh* purvv-apar-ambbomdhi- 

vitafc-ayumadim aiddb.a-kanya-visar4namg-6rn-keli-srania-sama-mahima-kamdaram 

svardhum-vah-prasar-opakskuuQa-naiia-fnaga-in]- 

kara-galad-gan&asail-ali-mala-yisaraih 

[sjitasailam li V"a I (II) 
y=att=ippa Bharat a varshadolu Kumtala-desav=embud=adhika-s6bbe-vefcfc=esevud= 
alii || Ka 3 (| Sogayipud 4 =AIandey=embudu nagaram cbeluv=esedu 

nadev(y)=Ama- 

ravatigain migil-cnisi vibudha-janadimd=aganita-dhana-dhanya-jala-sarari (mri)- 
ddhiyia=emdum || Matta || Prakatitak=Amaravatiyolw Suk[e]siju[mJ 3Iamju- 
ghosheyum tam=irbbar=aa- 

kala-vadhu-tatiy-ellam su-kesiyar-mmam]U'gli6slieyar=ttat-puradol || Vri || Ada 5 
nanavidha-gandhasali-vanadim aawattukedyana 6 -namdanadim purnna(mna)- 

tataka-kupa- 

sara&i-sumndbhadirh 7 saras-onmada.bliri(bbri)xiigbpika-k5ka-keki-snka-8amgh**aiiika- 
sakunta-nadadin=ettam gauika>via6da-kri(kri)ta.vma-nadadiihd = eppagum 8 |(ll) 
Va |(||) Ant=aparimita-ke* 

dara-bkumiyuihm 9 =apara-jalasrayAbbiramamum babu-jan-aku , nDa(rnna)mu/n=ameya- 
ganika-nivasamum=agamta-vanigjan4srayamum=enisi sdbha-nivasam=age || 

Vri II Avataris 10 -irddan=alii rajat-ackaladiih Girija-3ami*tam=Titsavadole Soma- 
nathan«akhil-&mara-m6(mau)li-vinaddha-ratna-Baialihava-k[i*]rana-prabli&- pat a la- 

pumja-paraga-pada[bja]n=artthiyimd-a- 

vanata-bhaktik-abhimata-siddbi-pbal-6daya>kalpabhuruham |) Ka H A n Soma- 

natha-pura-samvasitarola brahmapurigaloGpi(vi)prarol=a Bya(vya)sa-Suka-Vama- 
deva-Parasara- Kapi 1-adi- s adri (dri) saa=o- 

rbban = negal dam II Ka II Srivatsa-gotran=urbbi rvvijdeva-nutam nikbila-veda- 
vCdam'Ta-vidam pavana-ehantra-guna-sadbhavam Purushottamam dpi(dvi)j- 
ottamau=eaiparii II Kam II A viprana sati Sitadevigav=a [Sajtya- 
tapana-satigam guna-sadbkavado Padmambike sale pavana-sucbaritre pati-hita- 
braivva)tey=euipal || A dampatigal=pa]a-kalav=anapatyar=ag-irdd=oriidu devasaih 
n=aputrasya Ioko=sti yemba, veda-vakyama[m*] ti- 
[lidu] II Ka |(ll) Putr-arttkav-agi satya-pavitr-acharanurh negalda Purusho- 
ttaman*apat-[t*]ranan=lsan=emdu kalatr-anvitan=agi Sambbuv'am pujisidan || 

Va [||*3 Amnegam=itta divija-dannja-vri(vri)ibda-vandita-p[a]daraviihd3- 
fn-appa] Mshcsvarwa Eaviiusa -parbba(rvva)tada ramya-bbumiycilu Kesava- 
L Vasav-Abjabhavar=61agisal=asamkbyata-gana-parivri(vri)tan=Uma-sahitam v[o*]dd- 

blagadoUt sukha-samkatba- 

vinbdadimdam=u-e Naradan=emba gan-esvaran=iut-erhda || Vri || Ohila 18 

Dasi(sa) Cheinna Siriyala Halayudba Banan=Udbbatar^dehadol=omdi barnda 

M <vU\yGvara Kesavarajar=adiy=a gaihi- 

ka-saukhyamam bisut-asarnkbya-ganam nijav=ada bbakti-sad-g5badoI=ill=iral« 
‘ samayam=utkatav-aduvu( du) Jama-Bau[d]dharola(l) || Embadum Mahesvaram 

dara-babita-vadanaravirii- 


K-ad tri ; 

Metre, Kanda; and in the next verse. 

Read sandohadim. 

Metre, Cli..ff,pakasAl&. 

■ Read Ka»Jd«>- 


I Metre, Mah&sragdbara. s /.«•„ kanda 

• Metre, Mtttebhavikriflta. « Bead tarvi-arttuk-od^na. 

• R “ d op rT- 9 Read 

Metre, Kanda ; and in tbe next three verses. 

II Metre, Utpalauiilika. 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR, 


247 


24 dan=agi \ irabbadranam nidi manushya-lokadoht nimn=amsadol=orbvi(rbba)nam 

puttisi para-samayagalarh niyamis=embadum Virabhadranum Purusho- 

25 ttama-bhattarggo svapnadol=tapasa-rupadim bamdu pntram para-samaya- 

niyamakam nimage puttugum=e[m*]du mattamm^imt-emda || Sloka || 
Jaina 3 -marggesbu ye ya- 

26 ta bahavo daksbinapathe te dushita bbavana sarvve Ramena tava sununa JJ 

Va || Endu va(pa)rama-prasadam-madi popudum Purushottama-bhattaru 

27 kn(kri)t-arttbar=agi sariitasani-battu maganam padedu jatakarm-adi-kriyegajam 

madi devat-6d[d*]esadiin Raman=e[m*]du pesaran=ittar= A tanum tannu 

dibya (vy a) - janm-anurupam-a- 

28 ge Siva-yoga-yuktan=agi nispriba-vri(vri)ttiyim cbariyisuttum || Kamda || 

£kagra 3 -bbakti-y6gadin=6kakiy=enalke samdu Sivanam pirid=app=6kantadoU 
aradhi- 


29 siy^Ek&mntada 4 -Raman«emba pesarafm*] padadam || Yri || Satatam 5 samdu 

Siv-agam-okta-vividba-ksbetpamgalolii Sambbav-ayatan-aneka-nadi-nada-prakaradola 
Gauri(ri)var-agbridpa- 

30 y^-asrita-vak-kaya-mand-nugam cbariyisuttum baihdu k an dam sur-arcbcbitanam 

Dakshina-S6manatbauan=agb-augba-trasiyam pritiyim || Va || Antu bamd= 

anavara- 

31 ta-vinamad-amara-vara-mauli-mani-kirana-mam^jari-rairij i t-a m. gb riyugman = appa 

Huligereya S6manatbanan=aradbisuttam-ippudum=& paramesara 8 pratya- 

ksbav-&gi || 

32 Atra sloka-dvayam || Abbaluru 9 -vara-gramam gatya R&ma mam=ajne(jna)ya [|*] 

tatra vasam kuru syastham yaja mam bbakti-yogatat || Jaiiiai[h*] saba 
yivadam cba samkam bitva ku- 

33 rusbv=atba | sva-6ir6=pi panam kri(kri)tv& putra tvam vijayi bhava || 

Emdu S6maDatba-devar^besasidad=Ekantada-Rkmayyan«Abbalura Brahme- 
Svara-stb&nudalu 10 nispri(8pri)ba-vri(vri)ttiyiihdam-ire || Ka |(||) 

34 Yu(u)lid ll =addi-bamdu Jainar«palar=ant=a Sarnka-gau^da-sahitam piridnm 

chaladim kaivarisidar=ttolagade Jina aaivan=endu Siva-samnidbiyolu || Va || 
Adam keld=Ek&mntada-B&mayyam- 

35 n 12 =ati-krudbdha(ddba)n=^ Siva-8arimidbiyoI=anya-devat^-Btavanam m&dal-agad= 

emdftd=ada(da)m manade nudiy [u*]ttdral=imt=emdam || Vri || Jagamam 13 

maduvan=avan=avan=adan=a- 

36 pat-kfi[la]dol=kavan=im mige kopam tanag=age 8ambarisal=&vam dakshan=a 

Sambhu sarvya-gau=irdd-ante gata-prabhava-vibbavam samsaradolu biddu 
damdngadoln bardvu(rddu) tapak[k # ]e sarddu 

37 sukbamam pordd-irppanurii deyane || Ka l| Haran 14 =antdr=iyan=e nimm= 

arubam mum-kott=it=av[u*]d=ayudu mun[n*]am Haranol=padadar=anekar= 
yyaramam Bana-Dinisala-bbakta-ganamgalw || Ka || Ene Jai- 

38 nar-emgu nim mumnina bitarara 16 belal=4ke nimnaya si(gi)ramam 

janam=apyal=aridn kott=atanol=im pade nine bbakt*in=atane devam || Ka |) 
EnaREktotada-R&mam Manasijaripug=ittu taleya 


» mattam. a Metre, Sldka (Anushtubh). 1 Metre, Kaodm. 

4 Read AkdiUada. 5 Metre, Mattebh&vikridita. 6 Read dmyhridvay. 

1 Mamajari w*8 written, Mid then was corrected into mamjart . 

8 Read pnrameivaram. 9 Metre, Sldkn (Anusbtabh); and in the next verse. 

10 sthdnado] a. 11 Metre » K » nd ** " Bead ^utuda-Udmayyan. 

* Metre, Mattebbavikridna 14 Metre, Kandn ; and in the next three verses. 

14 Baud hitaram . 



248 


EPIGBAPHIA INDICA. 


[VOL. V. 


39 nam padedade niv=enag=iva panam=ad=en=ene munid=emdar=Jjinana kittn 

Sivanam nilipevu || Ka || Ene kaduvucUoleyam niv=enag=em<l=itfc=61e 

gomdu siramaiii tarn bho[m*]kenal=aridn kuduva padado- 

40 1 u Sivanam samnidhya-madi Ramam nudigum || Vri || Udugade 1 * Sambhn 

nine saran=emnadadam manam=anya-ba(bha)vadol=odardadam 3 =i kri(kri)p&na- 
mnkhadim tale pogade nilk=ad=aliad-i- 

41 rddade Siva nimna mamn-adig=urul?*g=enntam kali Baman=*arddu key- 

gidad=arid=ikkalumrayi8idam 3 siramam Sivan=amghriyugmadoltt || Yri || Are 4 - 
gayi-gomdane kittu nbdidane kurppamg=a- 

42 l«kd meyi-gaydane 5 seragam parddane balge bhaktar-enutam ball-ala 

Bfimam sva-kamdharamam cbakkene hulla kattan=ariv-amt=aklesadimd= 

agal-amt=arid=ls-amghriyol=i[kki Samkara-]ganak[k 1 ]-ana[m # ] da- 

43 vam madidam || Ka H Arida 6 taley=elu-devasam baregam meradim 

balikkav-ittam Haran=adaradim tale kaley=illade tirav=adudu 16kav=ali(£i)ye 
Bamatm*] padadam || Ka || Bera- 

44 g-agi Jainar*ellam marigi Jina-prale(la)yav=3embudam madad-ir=imn=ed-eragi 7 

kal-vidiye manade bara-sidil=amt=eragi Jinana taleyam mnridam || Vri || 
Badi 8 -gorhd=orbbane sokki bale- 

45 vanamam kad-ane pokk-ant-im^ kadagalw kapina viraram turugamaiii 

samantaram tuldu mamarppadegah* 10 11 Jainara Mari bandud^enutum 

be[m*]-gottu pogalu Jinam kedev-a[m]nam badid^alli kai-ko- 

46 lisidam £ri-Vira-S6mesanam || Vri || Adan=ellam nejre p6gi Bijjana- 

mahipalamge Jainarkkal*urkkavadiih u peldu vir&dhav-age piridnm dil^att- 
iralu kopa-durmmadan^a Bijjana-bhubbujam 12 munisinim 

Bfimaiyanam 13 kamdu nm=idan=anyayaman=eke madidey=enal=kot[t*]=dleyam 
tofidam || Ka || Avar u =itta yoley=ide nin=avadhari8uvnd=ikku nimna 
bbaiiid aradol =im- 

n-avar=oddav=iraliy=inn=odduvud=arppade nimna munde Jinaram palaram || 

[Va*J || Ant=appad=i taleyan=arid=avara kaiyol=od[d»]uven=avai^adam 
gattim-balikav=am pad[u*]ven=enag=Anesejjeya-basa- 
m[u*]khyav=agiy=em-nuruva basadi 15 Jinaram 
Bijjana-rayam nam^i kautnkamam n6davav=omdu 16 
rnmam Jainavam 17 karadu nim-a(a)ppade 


47 


48 


49 di 


palaran=odduvud=ene 
pamdita- 


1 Metre, Charapakam&la. 

1 For the sake of the metre, either odardadam must be pronounced as if it were written vodardodam 
or else we must read todardadam , , which gives exactly the same meaning. Otherwise, the last syllable of^bhdvadol 
remains short, and the metre is violated. 

1 Bead tkkal=drayisidam * 

* Metre, MattS bhavikridit*.— In what follows, read gdygomdane. Qdy is for gdya, « ghdya , ‘a wound* 
For are-gay , see ara-gdya , under ara . 

1 Bead mey-gdydant. 5 Metre, Kanda; and in the next verse 

» The prdta, or alliteration of the consonant of the second syllable of each pdda t ig violated here And 

metre is faulty in the next word. . * 

8 Metre, Mattebhavikrldita ; and in the next verse. 9 Read iralrx . 

10 B ea d mdrppadeg a/ u . And see under r*dr 9 = mdru (2). 

n Read ukkivad'im, The prdsa is violated here. 

w The second syllable, bhu, was at first omitted, and then was inserted, rather minutely and indistin tl 
above the line. 

11 Read Edmayyanam. 4 Metre * Kanda. 

i* Read emtu-ntr+m-basadiya. “ K«d *4duvtt*emdu. 

it Bead ainarumam. 


No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


249 


50 bas&digalam panam-madi oleyam kudiv=endad=avar=ay=i-mumn=odada basadiyam 

dftjal bandev=alIadin=oddi Jina-prale(la)yam-madalw bamdavar=alle(lla)v=ene 
Bijjana-rayam 1 nakku mv=imn=ii8i- 

51 rade p&gi Bnkhadin=iriv=emd=avaram kalipi R&mayya[m*]galig=ellaruv=ajriye 

jaya-patramam kottu(ttam) |(||) Vri || Ari s -raya-ksbitibhri(bhri)m-Nag&riy=ari- 

ray-ambbodhi-Knmbhodbba- 

52 yam ari-ray-eihdhana-tibra(vra)-yabni ari-ray-Anamga-Bhalekshanam ari-rAy- 

6gra-bhajamga-bhuri-Garadam sri-Bijjanam vairi-rajya 3 -ram-akarsliana-d61e(li)t- 
asi-suhri(hri)daiii kirfcy-amgaria-yallabhaiii || 

53 CholananMkki LSlanan»adliakkarisi sthiti-hioa-madi Nepalanan-Amdhranam 

talida Gurjjaranam serey-ittu Chedi-bhupalana maimeyam inuridu 
Vamgana biais[i] kadi komdn Baiii- 

54 gaia-Kali [rii*]ga-Magadha-Pata8vara- Malava -bhumipalaram palisidam dbara- 

vale(la)yamam kali Bijjanaraya-bhubbnjam || Ka II Kodad s =olage putti 
kadalam kudidam GhataySni put[t*]i Kalachuryya- 

55 ro]>6gadisade Chalukyar-anyaya-gadalam kudid=urkku saj-janam Bijjananolu || 

Va || Svasti Samadhigatapamchamahasabda-mahamandaleSyaram | Kala(la)m- 
jara-paravar-adhUvaram [|*] suyarnna(rnna)-yri(vri)sha- 

56 bba-dhvajam | damaraga-turyya-nirggboshanam | Kalachuryya-kula-ka[mala]- 

ma[r*]ttandam [I*] kadana-prachandam | mone-matte-gandam [|*] 

subhatar=adityam | kaligal=amkusa(sa)m | gaja-sa- 

57 manta-saranagata-yajra-pamjaram [|*] pratapa-Lamkesvaram [|*] para-nari- 

sah&daram [(•] Sa(sa)niyara-siddhi [I*] giridurgga-mallam [|*] chalad- 

a[m*]ka-RAma[m |*] mssa(ssa)mka-mallan=ity=akhila-nam-adi-8a- 

58 masta-pra$asti-sahita[m*] srimatu Bijjanadevam B&mayyamgalu mAdida 

parama-sAbasakam niratisayav=appa MA(ma)kesyara-bhaktiga[m*] mechchi 
Yira-S6manatha-deyara degula- 

59 da mata-kuta-prakara 6 -khanda-8phutita-jirnn-6dharakka 7 devar=amgabh6ga- 

naivedyak£k*] am Banavase-enichhasirada 8 kampani(nam) Sat[t*]a^gey-» 
ep [p*]att*ia ma[m*]neya Chat[t*]arasanuin»ft ka[m*]panad=agrayita-pra- 

60 bhn-ganndugalam 10 mumd=ittu srimadu-Bijjanadeva[m*] Sattaligey-eppattar=olage 

Malugumdadim temkana Gogavey-emba grAmamarii prasiddha-sima-sahitam 
tribhogamumam 

61 Srimad-Ekantada-Bamai(ma)yyamgala kalam kachchi dbArA-purbba(ryva)kam 

madi kottn [pjratipalisidam II Om [||*] Srt 11 -nntarkirti-vikramadol= 
omdida Soma-kul-aika-bhushanam tan=enip=i 

62 ChaltLkya-nri(nri)par-anvayadolu va8udh-AdhmAthar=AkhyAna-parAkramar=kaliye 

dhatripar=abri(bri)tey-age Tailapam tane Chalukya-dbatri-knla^aUan= 
enalu mudadimde taldidam II 


> The «£ .u at first omitted, and then was line - 

* Metre, MattSbbavikridita. - . 

♦ Metre. Utpalam&liki ; the verse consists, very uoneoally, of five pad*,. 

Z F , • The more usual expression here would be prdsdda. 

Metre, Kanda. - „ , ^ 

ReadyWdddWra**™. Bead pann.rchcha^rad* 

. We might correct the Sataligey of the original into Sofafi^ey, in accordance with G. line 9, where the 
remiing i. quite clear, just a. readily a. into Sattaligey. But the next lme here show. very clearly ; 

and we must accept that as the form intended in this place also. 

" Bead gauLugalumat »; and, in the preceding line, Ck*U*ra,a.»ma» would be better. 

» Metre, Utpalamklika. 

2 s 



250 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V. 


63 

64 

65 

06 

67 

68 


69 


70 


71 


73 


74 


75 

76 


Amt=a TailapadSvamge Satyasrayadevan*emba raagam pnttidam tat-tanayam 
Vikramadevam tatacO-aimjam Dasavarmmadevaii 2 *ataiia magam Jaya- 

simgarayan-fctana magan=Ahava- 

mallan-at&na magam TribhuvanamaUa-Permadirayan*atana magam Bhu- 

lokamal[l*]a-S6mesvaradevan-ataiia maga[m*] pratapachakravarti-Jagad Aka- 
mai [l # ]an-atana tam[m*]am Trailo- 

kyamaUa-Ntirmmadi-Tailapan-atana magam Tribhuvanamalla- Somes vara - 

devan-atana par&krama-prabbavam=emt-emdade || Yri || K6d 3 -nll=Tigra- 

madebhav=omd-erad=enal[k]=empattuv=od-ag-iraP=kod=i- 
tt=anade taltu kadi geldam 5 k6d-illad=omd=aneyirii nadam bidan=ibbamgalam 
turagamam Somesvaram billamam n6dalk=a Kalachu(chu)ryya- 
variriaman=adam nirmuiavaih madidam || Yri || Da(dha)- 


re' 


i® nig&patnav^agalu siri nija-vasa(sa)dirii sa[m*]d=udarakke 


tan=&garav= 

Dichcha[m # ] 


Amndha- 

dhareg= 


ftgalu kirtti dik-p&laka-nikara-mukh-adesav=agalu jaya-saumdari 
tola balam Beje-vidid-ire samrajyamam taldidam du- 
rddhara-danryyam Vira-Somesvaran^aliita-vadhu'iietra-mreja-sbmam H 
tamav 7 =empa Kalachuryy-amdbam mabulalko tarhna tejade 
anubandham tamnole sale sammaih- 
dbise CMl[u*]kya-r&ya-S6mam negaidam || Ya || Ant^a Tribhuvanamalla- 
SomSsvaraddvam sakala-cbamunatba^sirbmaniyiuh Chalukya-rajya-pratisbtfi- 
pakan 8 -appa ka- 

mara-Bamaiyamnum 9 tarm[m*] SeIeyahal[l*]iya-koppadolu snkha- 

8amkha(ka)thA-vin6dadin=irddjorhdu devasaih dbarmma-gosbti(sbtbi)yol=irdu 
purktaf na]-nfita[na*]r=appa Siva-bhaktara gu- 

pa-8tavanam-madttttam-ird~Ek&ntada-Hamayyamgal=Ab[b^]alural=iddalli Jainar* 

ellam neradu bamdu maha-vivadam-m&di xxi[m*] taleyan=aridu-komdu 
§ivana kaiyol^padadey-appade Jina- 

nan=odedu Sivanam pratishte(shthe)-ma<5tav=emd=oddaman=oddiy=61eyaih 

[ko]ttod=avam kott=61eyam koiiidu tamna taleyan=aridu-koihdu Sivamgo 
pflje m&di balik=ft taleyam yelu- 

devasake nmnnin-ante taleyam 10 po(?)le(?)-vilav-antu padedu Bij[j*]ana- 
dfivana kaiyjala jaya-patravam puje-sahitam kondndumarii Jinanan=odedu 

basadiyan=a}idu bisn- 

tu nelanam kha[m*]dm u Vira-Somanatha-devaram pra[ti]shtbe-madi Siv-Sgam- 
6ktav-igo parbba(rvva)ta-pra[ma*]nada degulamam trikCuav-age madi^Ur- 
embudam k[6]ldu Tribhuvanamal[l*]a-S6- 5 ' 

mMvaradflvam vismayam-bi(ba)ttu ndduv=artthiyim binnavattaleya: 
barisiy =a varan= i d i [t* ] -gondn. tannam 13 maatg^oda-gondu pogi 

satkaradim ptiji- 

Srimad-Yira-Sdmatiitha-dedevara 13 ^ degulada mata-kfita-pr&kara-khamda-sputita- 
jinn-odharakkam 1 * devara amgabhoga-ramgabboga-naivedyakkam Chaitra- ? " 


barayisi 

piridnm 


si 


t Uni- 

s The •« of the third syllable was at first omitted, and then was inserted above the line. 

• Metre, Sardfibmkridita. * Read embattun^odd-dg-iral. 

» To «oit the metre, this word mast be pronounced geladam. 

• Metre, Mabtangdbara. In the second word, read uitsdpalnyat. 

I Metre. Kande. R®*4 a*dh<it"mar. * Read pratit^t^pnkanum^ 

• Read Bammayyanum, This word seems to be 

it Of perhaps we should read mufi/s* 

II Read d«v<ira. 


H«d anne «‘««y repetition. 

Kevi iphutiia ji-An iddkiralekaa 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


251 


77 pavifcra-va3amtdtsav-adi-pa[r*]yyagaligav=aniiad&iia-vidyadiuiakka[m # ] BftHSV&so* 
panichbasirada 1 ka[m*Jpauam N&garakliaiii(Uy-eppat[t*]aj=olaga^a 

Ab[b*]aluran=& devargg=a yur=aga- 

T8 ltt-belknv=emdti parama-bbaktiyimd=& ka[m*]pana[da] manneya Mallidfivanam 
mu[m*] d-it fc=a vftra melalike-manneya-sumka damda-d6sha*nidhiniksbepa- 
sabitav-agi Ekanta- 

79 [da*]-Kamayya[m*]gala kalam karchcbi piLryva-prasiddba-simsUsabitam 3 

tribhdga-sahitam dbara-purvakam-madi Pa(pa)ram6$vara-dattiy-&ge(gi) tabra- 3 
sasanamam kot[t # ]=aneyan=eli(ji)si me- 

80 xayisi parama-bhaktiyim pratipalisidam [||*] Om [|| # ] Srikamtha- 4 

padambajaman=anakula-cbittadole pujipam Siva-8amaya>prak4ran=ela(ni)8i sale 
negald^Ekkntada-Raman^lsa- 

81 bhakti-premam If Om [|| # ] Sriynm 5 di[r*]ggh-ayuvam klrttiyan=anudinavTim 

malke giryvana-vri(vri)riida-jyayam sri-Vira-Soraani vidhri(dhpi)ta-bimakaram 
K&madevamg»udara-sri-ynktam- 

82 g-Adrija-sasmita-sita-taral-al61a-visfc&ra-lila-ney(tr).fU6k-6ddha(?)ta-Sri-lalita-ra t i-k a 1 a- 

lasya-sailClsba-vesbam || Svasti Samadhigatapamcbamabasabda-mahamaih- 

83 dalesvaram Banav^si-paravar-adi(dhi)syavam Jayanti'Madhukesvara-deva-labdha- 

vara-prasadam vidvaj-[j*]an-arhladam 6 Mayurava[r*]mma-kula-bbftsbanam 
Kadamba-kantbiravam kadajia-pracbandaih saba- 

84 s-6ttu[m*]gam kaligal=amkasa(sa)m satya-Radheyam saranagata-vajra-pamjara[m*] 

yachaka'kamadh[e # ]nav=ity‘akbila-nam-avali-sabitan=appa sriman maha- 7 

mandalesvara[m*] EAmadev-arasa- 

85 r*Ppanumgal[l*]-aindruvaih 8 da3htamigraba~sLabte-pratipalanadin=aluttam-irdd= 

Abbaldra Vira-Sowanatba-devaram bariidu kandu Ramayyamgalu Siv- 
%ava(ma)-vidba- 

86 nadim m&disida parbba(rvva)t-6pamanam=appa degalamam kand-avaru madida 

sahasamam Ba-vistara[rii*] keldu mechchi parama«pritiyimd-oda-gomdu pogi 

87 F&numgalla nelevidinol=pradbanarii[ih*] tanum Madukeya-mamdalrnika^-sabitarii 

8ukha-samkathAvin6dadi[m*] kullirddu ^parama-bbaktiyim Vira-Sdman&tha- 

88 devargge Panu[m*]gaU-ainurar l0 =olagaua kampanam Hosanad-eppattax^olage 

Mundagoda samipada Jogesaradim badagaaa Mallavalliy*emba gramamam 
prasiddba-si- 

89 ma-sabitav-agi tribhog-abbyantaram namasyam-madiy=a devara degalada 

kbapda-sputita-jiriin-odbdarakam 11 £evai^amgabhdga-ramgabhdga-naivedya[kkam*] 
Cbaitra- 

90 pavitra-vasamt6tsav-adi-parbba(rwa)ga]gam=anna-danakkariiv l9 =eriidii B&mayy&mgals 

kalam karchi dhara-purvvakam-madi parama-bbaktiyim kottu d barm mam am 
pratipalisidam |(||) Svasty=astu Om || 

9L Int=i dbarmmamgulam pratipaliyisidavam 13 sri- Varanasi Pray age K'nrukshefcra 
Arggbyatirttba Sriparyvat-adi-punya-kshetradalii sayira kavilegala kodum 
92 kolaguvam honnol= kattisi chatu[r*]yveda-paragar=appa s[u*]*brahmanargge 14 
s(iryyagrahana-somagrahaaa-bya(vya)tipata-sa[m % Jkrama 9 -[& # ldi-p u n y a-k al a d 
vidhi-yuktav-age kotta 


I Bead pannirchckasirada. 

9 The syllable *a was at first omitted, and then was inserted above the md of stmd. 

9 I.e. f tdrhbra , for tdmra. * Metre, Kanda. * Metre, SraffdharA. 

• Head ahlddam . 7 Head iriman-mahd' 6 Read ayniiram. 

9 Head mamdalika. 30 Bead aynurar m 11 Read tpA*tiiQ-jtrnn-6dd hdrakkam . 

II Read ddnakkav. 11 Read pratipd(i*idnvartt. 

u The sellable hma w*a at first omitted, and then was inserted above the line. 



252 


epigraphia INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


93 pa(pha)lavam padevaru i dharmmavau=alidavar=a Gamge Varanasi Korn- 

kshetra-Pray ag-adi- punya-ksh&rariiga|ol=4 kavilegaluvam br&hmanaruvam komda 
papamam padevar=iy=arttha-sam* „ 

94 debav =ill=embudam mumnnam 1 Manu-v&kyamgalu(la)m pelgu[m*] || B16ka || 

BahubhirWvasudha bhnkta rajabhih Sagar-adibbih yasya yasya yada 
bbamis^tasya tasya tada pa(pha)lam || Ganyamte pamva(sa)vd 

95 bhft mer =gany a [ rh* ] te vri(vri)shti-himdavah na ganyate vidhatr=api dharmma- 

samrakshane pbalani || Sva‘dattra*]ni para-da tt [a* ]m y6 bareta 

vasumdharam | skashthir-warsha 3 -sahasrani visbtbayam ja- — / 

96 yatc krimih j| Karmana manasa vacha ya[l?*] samartth6=py=upekshat6 I 

sabhya(bhya)s=tath=aiva chamdala[h*] s&rvva-dharmma-bahishkri (sbkri)tab II 
Kulani tarayet^kartta sapta sapta cba sapta cha | adh6=vapa- 

97 tayed=dharta sapta sapta cha sapta cba || Sldka || Api Gamg-adi- 

tirttheshu hamtur=gam=athava dvijam nisbkriti 4, syan=na d[^*3vasva- 
brahmasva~baran[£*] nri(nri)narii || Samanyo 5 =yam dharmma-setn= 

98 nriparnam 6 kale-kale palaniyo bhayadbbit sarvvan^etauii bb&vita(na)b 

parththavemdra 7 bh&yo-bMyo y achate Ramachamdrah || Svasty=«ftu 
mamgalam cba | sris=cha |( Om 

99 Om [H*] Haranol s =tavanidhiy=arrit=arh darav=urav=ill=emsi padeda degnlavam 

Purabaraaa Kailasad=amt-ire viraehisidam Sambhu-bhakti-dhamam Ramam || 
Vri || Begulak^endu bbakta- 

100 janav=adaradmd=idir-erdda kot[t*]ada(da)m hagavan=adadam kaladu-kollade 

bedade nade dve(dai)nyadim pogi nri(xjri)palai*am Sivau=anugrfthav= 
aksbayav-age madidam degu.la[va]rri Har*adr[i]g=en[e]- 

101 y-ag-ire Raman=id=em kri(kri)t-artthand || Ka || Kdsavaraja 10 -chamftpam 

sasanavam peldan"arbt=adam tirddi nirayasane baradan^=I&ma dft s ai h 
Siva-cbaranakamala-saranam Saranam || Om [||*] 

102 Svasti Brimattri"Hara-dbarani-praflutfl.-M iiVV ftTrinft- y^ ftrhhft«[vftTT>6A*]rmn Bana- 

v[&]s[i]-puravar-adhisvarariim sii-Madu(dhu)kanatha~d6vara dibya(vya)-$ri-p&dft~ 

103 padm-aradhakaru 12 || Mal[l*]idevarayarum \\K Nftgarakha[m*]deya • 

rige-nadumam . . • . 

kottara || 


TRANSLATIONS 

Om ! Reverence to tbe god Samblm (Siva), wbo is made beautiful by a chaur% which is the 
moon that lightly rests upon bis lofty head, and who is the foundation-pillar for the erection of 
the city of the three worlds ! May that tree of paradise which ifl Sarnbhu, praised by the 
gods, which is tbe abode of tbe beauty of clusters of flowers which are the rows of drop* of 


Metre, 816ka (Anosbtnbh) ; and in tbe next five versee. 

' " 3 ’ * Metre, Silinb 


11 The metre i i faulty here. 


1 Read munnam, 

« Read ,U,hti.* a r,ha. ‘ Read •Mlcriti. for wUUMtih. 

Read ,it*r*»rxp<ln6m. 7 Read pdrtthivtmdr&n. ' ' 

Metre, Kanda. The metre is faulty in the third pdda 

• Metre, Utpalam&liki. >° Metre, Kanda. 

Read drddhakarum . The following inart n t 

, ue ^uowmg mark of punctuation is onneceMtrr. 

Ibis mark or punctuation is unnecessary, 
are not in^the^ sessions I have, like other*, been accustomed to give in iUlicfl, in bracket*, word* which 
for instance in are neee * 8 *rj to complete tbe sense and make readable sentence# in B*gbah; 

*!*' “Ll2 e e ..T h ™ g r*. K : hia reCOrd - the wotds " V* " before - Sembho,” - bi.” before “ 

_j Te i n italic*, in hmet °'' 1 e " t ' lre 1 siiail 8> ve al1 ,ncl > wordi in common type, without bracket*, and »b*ll 

teite, and aa to the co re t 3| ° n ’ Wl,r , W ^ ' c ^ sre ^ded to explain or enpplement the meaning of tbo ori?' D *' 
texU, and ae to the correctoe*. or emtabiliiy of which aoy doubt ma, be pomible. 


Ablur Inscription of about A.D. 1 200. 



FLEET. COLLOTYPE BY W. GRIGGS 

SCALE 20 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


253 


water thrown up by the waves of the holy river Gahga (that flows through the coils of his hair) ; 
which has for fresh sprouts his dangling matted hair ; which has as its growing fruit the 
ambrosia-rayed moon (on his forehead ) ; which is pleasing with boughs that are his arms ; and 
which is embraced by a creeper that is the goddess Gaud (Parvati),— give to Eama, 1 in 
particular, with perpetual activity, an abundance of such fruits as are longed for by a peti- 
tioner ! May Srikantha (Siva), who is Isa (in the form of) Vira-Somesa, surrounded by all the 
Ganas , 2 who is adorned by feet in which there are set here and there the numerous crimson 
rays of the clusters of the jewels in all the tiaras of the multitude of the gods ; who is the best 
of the immortals ; and who is the abode of the splendour of the rays of the glances of (Parvati) 
the daughter of (Himalaya) the lord of the mountain of cold, — always confer good fortune 
upon Hamadeva, upon him who is of unequalled greatness ! 

(Line 5) Round about it (namely Jambudvipa) is the ocean, which is met by banks of 
clouds that are the trunks, blowing out spouts of water, of numerous herds of elephants which 
agitate the waters by the blows of the tips of their tails that are as efficient in doing so as the 
shoals of great fish which fall out from the mouths of the fierce monsters of the sea that glide to 
and fro ; from which there rise the rays of many jewels and the lustre of large pearls ; which 
has lines of mountains on its shores ; and which ia enclosed by the broad hips of the woman 
who is the Earth. And there, on the south of Jambudvipa, which is girt about by the salt 
ocean which is thus beautiful as being the abode of numerous marine animals and the place 
of very high waves, among all the Nila, Nishadha, 3 and Himalaya mountains, the cold 
mountain (Himalaya), — which has vast glens for rest after the fatigue of the great dalliance 
of love of the crowd of the daughters of the Siddhas ; which is full of rows and rings of huge 
rocks falling down from the many piles of mountains that are pounded by the torrent of the 
waters of (the Mandakini) the river of heaven ; and which is irradiated by the mass of the 
tremulous lustre of the cold-rayed moon, — is beautiful with a length stretched out so as to 
measure the eastern and the western oceans. 4 * 

(L. 10) — In the land of Bharatavarsha, which lies on the southern flank of that same 
Himalaya, the king of mountains, there shines, with exceedingly great comeliness, the 
country of Kuntala; and there there is beautiful the city that is called Aland©, full of grace 
and splendour, and ever esteemed to altogether surpass Amaravati (the city of the gods) 
with learned people and with a countless wealth of cattle and grain and water. Moreover : — As 
is well known, in Amar&vati there are Sukesi and Maujughoshe, 6 these two; but in that town 
there is a whole multitude of women, all of them with beautiful hair and sweet voices. It is 
charming with various plantations of sweet-smelling rice, 6 with parks and gardens which are 


1 J.e. to the Ramayya, or fik&ntada-Kamayya, who is the subject of the record. In the licit verse be is 
meutioned as RamadSva. He is called simply Rama again in lines 41, 42, 43, 99, 101. 

1 The Qanas are the attendants of Siva. Mention ia made of them again in lines 21 to 23, below. The 
leader of them was Narada (line 22) ; and some of them were deceased or translated Saiva saints, who are named 
in the same passage. 

1 According to Monier- Williams* Sanskrit Dictionary, Nila or Nil&dri “ the blue mountaiu,** is “ one of the 
principal ranges of mountains dividing the world into nine portions and lying immediately north of Ilavfita or the 
central division/* and Nishadha is a similar range “lying immediately south of Ilavfita aud north of the Himalaya.** 

4 Compare the opening verse of the Kumdrasambhava, which describes Himalaya as reaching to the eastern 
*nd the western oceans, as if it were the measuring-rod of the earth. 

1 These are two of the nymphs of paradise ; for the first name, see Kittel’a Dictionary. The verse contains 
a play on the meanings of their names. 

6 Gandha-idli is explained in Monier- Williams* Sanskrit Dictionary as 'a sweet-smelling kind of rice.* He 
also gives mahd~£<Ui, * a kind of large and sweet-smelling rice.* And fliueu T».iaiig mentions the “ Ma haiali -rice • 
this rice ia as large as the black bean, and when cooked is aromatic and shining, like no other rice at all; it 
grows only in M&gadha, and nowhere else; it is offered only to the king or to religious persons of great 
distinction, and hence the name rice offered to the great house-holder/* ( Lije , p. 109 ; see also Records, VoL II. 
p. 82, where it is called “ the rice for the use of the great ”). The gandha~idli is mentioned again in G. below 
line 4, and also in one of the ManagA)i inscriptions (page 30 above, line 13). 


254 


EPIGRAPHIA IRDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


in bloom through all the seasons, with plenty of well-filled tanks and wells and pools, 
sounds everywhere of cranes and buzzing bees and cuckoos and ruddy geese and peacocks and 
numerous flights of parrots and blue jays, and with the music of lutes in the diversions of 
courtesans. And when it had thus become a place of many charms, as being known to be the 
site of an infinite number of parks, and pleasing with inexhaustible pools of water, and crowded 
with many people, and the dwelling-place of innumerable courtesans, and the abode of a countless 
number of merchants, there came down there, from the silver mountain (Kailasa), 1 accompanied 
by Girija (Parvati), with great gladness, the god Somanatha (Siva), who has the water-lilies that 
are his feet made tawny by the mass of the multitude of the rays that dart forth from the jewels 
inlaid in the tiaras of all the gods, and who is a very tree of paradise having for the ripening 
of its fruits the accomplishment of the desires of worshippers who bow down before him in 
supplication. 

(L« 17) — Among the residents of that town of Somanatha, 2 in the Brahman quarters, 
amongst the Brahmans, there became famous one who resembled those ( well-known ) Vyasa and 
Suka and Vamadeva and Parasara and Kapila and others ; namely he, Purashottama, who was 
called the best of Brahmans,— belonging to the Srivatsa gotra ; praised by ( all other ) 
Brahmans ; acquainted with all the Vedas and Veddngas ; of an excellent disposition through 
possessing the virtue of pure behaviour. The good wife of that Brahman was Padmambike, 
of pure behaviour, devoted to her husband, who by her virtuous disposition caused herself to be 
likened to both Sitadevi (the wife of Rama) and the wife of that (well-known) Satyatapas(P). 3 
And, that husband and wife having remained for a long time without offspring, one day, having 
come to know the saying of the Veda that “ there is no heaven for him who has no son, 4 the 
famous Purushottama, who practised truth and purity, did worship, together with his wife, 
to Sambhu, in order to obtain a sou, saying “ l&a is the protection from misfortune. 

(L. 20) — At that same time, when MahGsvara (Siva), whose feet, resembling water-lilies, 
are worshipped by the crowd of gods and demons,— with Kesava (Vishnu) and Vasava (lndra) 
and Abjabhava (Brahman) in attendance upon him, and surrounded by countless Ganas , and 
accompanied by Uma (Parvati), — was enjoying the delight of an interchange of pleasing 
conversations in yoyal darbdr in a delightful part of the mountain Kailasa, Narada, the leader 
of the Gamxs , spake thus “ While Ohila, Dasa, Chenna, Sirivala, Halayudha, B&na, 
Udbhata, and Malaye^vara who came here in human form, and Ke^avaraja, 5 and in- 
numerable other Ganas, resigning the happiness of earthly life, have been dwelling here in this 


1 Hiuen Tsiang mention* a w silver mountain,” and appear* to place it in the country of 0*ki-ni t f omewbere on 
the north of the Himilaya range : he says — “ this mountain is very high and extensive ; it is from this place that 

the silver is dug which supplies the Western countries with their silver currency ” (Life, p. 36). 

3 The text perhaps means to say that Alande was also known by the name of Sdmanathapara. 

* The akshara before the tya at the end of line 18 i* small and imperfectly formed, and is almost quite 
illegible. I can only conjecture that it is ta. Satyatapas appears to be “a Muni who was once a hunter 
but, after performing severe austerities, obtained, as a boon from DarvAsas, that be should become a great sage 
and saint.” But it is usually SltA and Arundhati (wife of Vaaish$ba), who are quoted as patterns for wire* to 
imitate. 

4 We seem to have here some well-known proverb, L6Jca t * world/ must stand for para loka t * the other 
world, heaven/ — For a very similar expression. Prof. Kielhorn has referred me to aputrdndm kila na tanii Idkdh 
iubhdh (Kddambariy Peterson's edition, p» 61, line 14), — words which the queen heard at a recitation of the 
Mah&bhdrata. 

5 The reference here is to various famous Saiva saints, most of whom appear to be mentioned in the 'Batata- 
purdna . — Mr. H. Krishna Sasfcri has obliged me with other references for some of these persons: for 
Siriyila (in Kanarese) or Siruttondanayanar (in Tamil) the fourteenth divasa of the Vrishabhindravijaya 
of Sbadakshari, and also the Tamil Periyapvrdnam (prose version, Madras edition, p. 217 ff.), with the difference 
that Siriyala is here represented as the sou of Siruttooda, and not identical with him, as asserted in the other 
work ; for HaUyudha, the fifteenth dsv&sa of the V ri»habhi\*dravij aya, which incidentally mentions also Dasa 
and Chenna (verses 4, 6, after the introduction); and for MalaycSvara (in Kanarese) or S&raman-Perumal (in 
Tamil), the Periyapuranam, p. 220 it, which says that, when ruling at the town of Koduhgdlur, he became a 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


255 


especial excellent abode of faith, the congregation (of Saivas on the earth ) has been afflicted 
among the Jains and Buddhists. 59 On his speaking thus, Mahesvara, with a smile on his 
face that resembled a water-lily, said to Vliabhadrar— 1 “ Do thou, in the world of men, beget 
a man with portion of thyself, and then pat a stop to those hostile observances.”’ And 
thereupon Virabhadra came in a dream, in the guise of an ascetic, to Purushottamabhatta, 
and said “ There shall be born to thee a son, who shall suppress hostile observances and* 'he 
further said “ Those many people, in the region of the south, who have trodden in the paths 
of the Jams, all of them shall be put to shame, 0 master!, by thy son (who shall be calhd ) 
R&ma.”^ Having thus spoken and having manifested great graciousness, he went away. And 
Furushottamabkatta, full of content at having succeeded, obtained a son, and performed 
the birth-ceremony and other rites, and bestowed the name of Kama in accordance with the 
bidding of the god. 

(L. 27) And while he (Rama), haring become imbued with meditation on Siva in a manner 
suitable to his divine birth, was practising observances with stric: indifference to other things, it 
came about that, through the intensity of his devotion which was directed entirely to one object, 
he was called one who had one sole aim ; and, having worshipped Siva with great exclusiveness, 
he acquired the name of Ekantada-Rama. And in the course of practising observances, with 
speech and body and mind always devoted to the feet of (Siva) the lord of Gauri (Parvati), at 
various sacred places prescribed by the Saiva traditions and on all the numerous great and small 
rivers where there are altars of Sarobhu, he came and beheld with joy the Somanatha of the 
South, 1 honoured by he gods, who drives away all sin. And when, having thus come, he was 
worshipping that Somanatha of Huligere, whose feet are beautified by the cluster of the rays of 
the jewels in the tiaras of the greatest of the gods who unceasingly bow down before him, that 
supreme lord became manifest, and said, — (Here are two si okas) 2 — 11 Go, 0 Tt&rr*a !, at my 
command, to the excellent village of Abbaluru, and take up thy abode there at ease, and 
sacrifice to me with strict devotion ; and, without any apprehension, enter into controversy with 
the Jains, and wager thy head ; and be victorious, 0 son !” 

(L. 33) — And when, on the god Sdman&tha having thus given his commands, Ek&ntada- 
R&mayya was abiding, with complete indifference to other things, at the shrine of the god 
Brahmesvara of Abbaluru, some of the Jains, together with that Sankagaunda, 3 concerted 
together, and came to obstruct him, and with great resoluteness persistently sang the praises (of 
their own god) in the proximity of Siva, saying “ Jina is the (true) divinity/ 5 When he heard 
that, Ek&ntada-Ramayya became very full of wrath, and said “ It is forbidden to praise any 
other deity in the proximity of Siva but, refusing to desist, they continued vociferating ; and 
then he spake thus : — H Who is it that creates the earth P ; who i3 it that protects -it in the time 
of calamity P ; and further, who is it that is able to destroy it, when his anger becomes great ? : 
it is that same Sambhu ; and, in the face of the existence of him, who pervades everything, how 
can he (Jina) be a god, who came by chance into the world, and lived 4 in bewilderment, and 
applied himself to practising austerity, and (only thus) attained happiness ? : does your Arhat 
bestow gifts as Hara (Siva) does ? ; has he ever given even ever so small a thing p ; (it is) from 

follower of the famous Saiva devotee Sundaramdrtinayanar (see id. pp. 1 to 51), and visited various Saiva shrines 
in the south, and eventually followed Sundaramdrti on horseback to Kailasa, and which, in connection with 
the same story, mentions a certain Bap* or Baaabhadra as a musician who received presents from Seraman on the 
recommendation of the god at Madura. 

1 I.e. Sdmanatha, (sc. Siva, in that form) of Huligere (Lakshmeshwar), who is mentioned in the next line.*— See 
page 243 above, note 3. 

3 Thus in the original, by way of parenthesis ; like the vachana, 1 prose/ kajida, * verse/ and vritta $ ‘ metre/ 
which also we have here and there. 

8 I e. “ together with Sankagaunda, one of the village-headmen of that place.” 

* Bardu seems to be a form of the past participle of bal t ‘ to live/ — a root from which we have bardu , baddu 
* increase, greatness, etc.' 



256 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vo L. V. 


Hara (that) in former days tlie devout Ganas Bana and DiniS&la, and so many others, obtained 
boons/’ On bis having thus spoken, the Jains said — u It may be so ! ;* but why dost thou simply 
talk of former worthies P ; cut off thine own head, under such conditions that all people may 
know of it, and offer it to him, and get it back from him, ( and then toe will admit that) thou 
art indeed a pious man and he is indeed the god.” 

(L. 38) — When they had thus spoken, Ekantada-B&ma said w If I offer my head to 
(Siva) the foe of Love, and obtain it baok, what is the wager that ye will pay to me?;” 
whereupon they replied, in anger, “ We will pluck up our Jina and set up (an image of) Siva.” 
Then, saying “ Give me (it in writing on) a palmyra-leaf,” and taking the palmyra-leaf that 
they gave, Rama brought ( his image of) Siva into the presence (of the Jains) at the place where 
he was to straightway cut off his head and make an offering of it, and spake thus : — “ If I have 
ever not said that thou alone, 0 Sambhu !, art my protection without fail, and if my thoughts 
have ever gone astray after other gods, my head shall not go from me by the edge of this 
scimitar; 1 2 but, otherwise, 0 Siva!, let it roll down before thy feet and, thus speaking, the 
brave Rama, with a loud shout, and with an unfaltering hand, set himself to cut off his head 
and lay it at the feet of Siva. While the disciples were saying w Surely he inflicted but a small 
wound ; he drew the sword and thought, indeed, to do a bold thing, but then he became 
afraid and has preserved his body unhurt ; he must have devised some mischief to the sword 
(blunting it , so that it shall not wound him),” R&ma, that man of ability, quickly and 
instantly cut through his own neck with as little difficulty as if he were shearing through a 
bundle of grass, and placed (his head) at the feet of l6a (Siva), and caused joy to the attendants 
of Samkara (Siva). 

(L. 43) — After the severed head had been exhibited in public during seven days, Hara 
kindly gave it back : the head became sound again without any scar ; and R&ma received it back, 
to the knowledge of all people. In much perturbation, ail the Jains, in great distress, bowed 
down on the ground and seized his feet, imploring him to abstain from destroying their 
Jina; but, refusing to abstain, he fell on it like a thunderbolt from a clear sky, 3 and broke 
the head of the -Jina. Just as a wild elephant in rut plunges into a grove of plantain- trees, and, 
though alone, sweeps everything away before him, so he, putting forth his strength, scattered 
the heroes who guarded it, and the horses, and the chieftains, and, while the Qpposing ranks of 
the Jains, crying out that Mari (the goddess of plague or death) 4 had come upon them, were 
running away in flight, he beat the Jina till it fell ; and there he made them accept the holy 
Vira-Somesa. 

(L. 46) — When the Jains, having gone in a body, and having related all the matter in a 
cunning way to king Bijjana, were, with enmity, making a very slanderous complaint about it, 
king Bijjana became mad with anger, and looked at R&mayya with wrath, and said “ Why 
hast thou done this evil thing ? ; *' whereupon he shewed the palmyra- leaf that they had given, 
and said : — “ This is the palmyra-leaf that they gave ; weigh it in thy mind, and place it in thy 
treasury ; let them wager again ; if they dare further stake, in thy presence, (all) their various 
Jinas, then I will cut off my head and place it as the stake in their hands, and will recover it even 
after they shall have burned it ; but they shall wager to me the various Jinas of their eight 
hundred shrines, the chief of which is the Anesejjeyabasadi.” Thereupon king Bijjana said 
“ We will see this marvel ; ” and he summoned the wise men of the shrines, and the (other) 


1 Brngu, lice 38, is to be taken as enge (= ehage , eJiahge ), * in what manner?, how ?,* + * (= u ) t — * howsoever, 

it may be.* 

3 l.e . " let me not have the courage to cut it off.” 

s Lit. “like a dry thunderbolt, unaccompanied by rain.” 

4 There is a reference to Marl in line 28 of the Ssargi inscription ( Jonr . Bo. Br . B. Am. Soc. Vol. X. 
p. 243); and another occurs in an inscription at Balmuri (Bp. Cam Vol. III., Sr, 143), in which she is called 
Manya-mhri, 41 the destroying deity Mart.” 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


257 


Jains, and said “ All of you vrager your shrines, and give (if in writing on) a palmyra-leaf. 
But they said “We came to lay a complaint about the shrine which has already been ruined ; 
we have certainly not come to lay a wager and lose (any more of) our Jinas!” Then king 
Bijjana laughed, and dismissed them, bidding them to go without any farther words, and to 
live in peace ; and he gave to Ramayya, in such a way that all of them knew of it, a certificate 
of victory. 

(L. 51) — A very Indra to the mountains that are hostile kings ; a very Agastya to the 
ocean of hostile kings ; a hot fire to the fuel of hostile kings ; a very Siva to Love in the form 
of hostile kings ; a great Garuda to the fierce serpents that are hostile kings ; such is the 
glorious Bijjana, the friend of those who awing the sword in seizing the wives of inimical kin°“s, 
and the favourite of the woman Fame. Having put down the Chdla, having humbled 
Lala, having deprived Nepala of stability, having crushed Andhra to pieces, having made 
the Gurjara captive, having broken the greatness of the king of Chedi, having ground 
Vanga in a mill, and having fought and killed the kings of Bangala, Kalihga, Magadha, 
Patasvara , 1 and Malava, the brave king Bijjanar&ya has protected the whole circuit of 
the earth. Agastya was born in a pitcher, and drank up the ocean; and in Bijjana, that 
excellent man, born among the Ka^achuryas, ( there was displayed ) the power of drinking up, 
without vomiting, the ocean that was the lineage of the Chalukyas. 

(L. 55) — Hail! The glorious Bijjana'deva,— who was possessed of all the glory of the 
names of, among others, the Mahdmandalzsvara who attained the paiichamahd&abda, the supreme 
lord of Kalanjara the best of towns, he who had the banner of a golden bull, he who 
was heralded in public with the sounds of the double drum called damaruga, he who was 
the sun of the water-lily that was the family of the Kalaehuryas. the fierce in fight, the 
hero in the clash of battle, the sun of good warriors, the elephant-goad of brave men, a very 
cage of thunderbolts to ( protect ) elephant-like chieftains who sought refuge with him. a very 
(Havana) lord of Lanka in prowess, (he who behaved like) a uterine brother to the wives 
of other men, he who was successful (even) ou a. Saturday, the wrestler against hill-forts, 
a very Hama characterised by firmness of character, the wrestler free from apprehension,- — • was 
pleased with the great boldness that was displayed by Ramayya, and with his unsurpassed 
devotion to the god Mahesvara; and, for the repairs of whatever might become broken or 
torn or worn-out belonging to the enclosure, 3 with beautiful pinnacles, of the temple of the god 
Vira-Somanatha, and for the ahgabhoga and the perpetual oblation of the god, — having put 
forward (to manage the grant) Chattarasa, the chieftain of the Sattalige 3 seventy which 
was a kampana of the Banavase twelve-thousand, and the chief Prabhus and village-headmen 
of that kampana , and having laved the feet of the holy Ekantada-Ramayya,— - he gave, 
with libations of water, the village named Gdg&ve to the south of Malugunda in the 
Sattalige seventy, with its established boundaries and (to be enjoyed according to) the 
tribhoga , 4 and so maintained (religion). 

(L. 61) — Om! When many kings, possessed of glory and renowned fame and valour, 
endowed with prowess (that has been preserved) in legends, had passed away in the lineage of the 
Chalukya kings which was considered to be the chief ornament of the Lunar Race. 
Tailapa (II.)* — as an instance of a typical king, 6 — who may be called one of the seven principal 
mountains of the earth which was the Chalukyas, with happiness possessed (the world). To 


1 This seems to be a variant of, or a mistake for, Patacbchara, which is given as the name of a people in 
Monier-Williams* Sanskrit Dictionary. 

* See page 249 above, note 6. * See page 249 above, note 9. 

♦ 1*. to be enjoyed in three equal shares by the god, the Brahmans, and the grantee ; see Ind. Ant . Vol XIX. 
271. 

» Ahfiteydge, line 62, seems to be used in the sense of ud&kritam-dg3. A more hteral translation would be,— 
“when kings are brought together (fo select an illustration). 

2 L 



258 


epigraphia indica. 


[Yol. V. 


that Tailapadeva there was born a son named (Irivabedanga)-Satyasi*ayadeva ; his son 
was Vikramadeva (V.) ; his younger brother was Dasavarmadeva ; his son was Jayasihga- 
raya (II.); 1 his son was Ahavamalla-(S6mesvara I.); his son was Tribhuvanamalia- 
Permadiraya-(Vikramaditya VI.); bis son was Bhulokamalla-Somesvaradeva (IEE.) ; his 
eon was the Pratdpachakraoartin (Perma)-Jagadekamalla (II.); his younger brother was 
Trailokyamalla-Nurmadi-Tailapa (III.) ; and his son was Tribhuvanamalla-Somesvaradeva 
(IV.), whose prowess and majesty were as follows : — 

(L. 65) — When eighty fierce tusked elephants in rut were massed together (to oppose him ), 
laying aside fear, and not relying upon (any other means), with one tuskless elephant he repulsed 
them as if they were but one or two, 2 and fought and conquered the countries, the towns, the 
elephants, and the horses ; (and so ) Somesvara uprooted that race of the Kalachuryas, as if it 
were but a billa-tree. In such a way that the Earth became free from enmity, and Fortune, 
haying come under his control, became herself a very mine of generosity to him, and Fame laid 
his commands on the mouths of all the rulers of the points of the compass, and the lovely woman 
Victory was ever fettering the sword of his arm (to restrain him from altogether too excessive 
conquests ), Vi ra- Somesvara (IV.), whose valour was unassailable, and who was the moon of the 
water-lilies that were the eyes of the wives of his foes, acquired the sovereignty. A very close 
connection between the earth and himself being formed at that time when the dense darkness that 
was the Kalachuryas dispersed before his brilliance, the Chalukya king Soma became famous, 

(L. 69) — That same TribhuvanamaUa-Somesvaradeva (IV.),— when the kumcira 
Bammayya, 3 the chief of all the leaders of the army, the establisher of the Chalukya 
sovereignty, and he himself, were at the small village of Seleyahalliyakoppa with the 
pleasure of an agreeable interchange of communications, and were one day engaged in a 
discourse about religion and were reciting the praises of ancient and recent devotees of Siva, — 
heard the story of how Ekantada-Ramayya, when he was at Abbalfiru, and when all the 
Jains assembled and came and entered into a great disputation wicn him and made a wager 
that, if he would cut off his head and could get it back 4 * from the hands of Siva, he might 
break their Jina and set up Siva, and gave (it in writing on) a palmyra-leal*, took the palmyra- 
leaf that they gave, and cut off his own head, and then, after doing worship to Siva, on the 
seventh day got back his head free from all injury just as it was before, and obtained a certificate 
of victory, together with respectful treatment, from the hands of Bijjanadeva, and broke 
the Jina, and destroyed the shrme and flung it down, and laid waste the site, and set up the 
god V ira-S6manatlia, and in accordance with the Saiva traditions founded a temple with three 
pinnacles, as vast as a mountain. And Tribhuvanamalla-Sdinesvarad^va (IV.) was astonished, 
and, from a desire to see him, caused a letter of deferential invitation to be written, and made 
him come, and met him with respect, and took him along with himself to his own house, and did 
worship to him with great reverence, and, — for the repairs of anything that might become broken 
or torn or worn-out belonging to the enclosure 6 with beautiful pinnacles of the temple of 
the holy god V ira- Soman atba. and for the angabhoga and* the rangabhoga and the perpetual 

1 There are mistakes here : Jayastmha II. was, indeed, a son of DaSavarman ; but the latter was the younger 
brother of Ijivabedanga-Satyasraya, not of VikramsUiitya V. ; and Vikramaditya V. was a son of DaWrman : see 
the table, above, Vol. III. p. 2. 

’ Compare a verse in the Gadag inscription of A.D. 1192 (Ind. Ant. Vol. II. p. 300, text line 29 f.), which, 
properly translated, describe. Brabma (the general who helped Sflm^vara IV. to recover the kingdom, and who 
is mentioned by the name of Bammayya in line 70 below) as conqnering sixty tusked elephant, with one young 
tuskles. elephant, when, in contempt of (i.e. m mutiny against) his father, he was depriving the Kalachuryas of 
the sovereignty. 

s I.e. “ the younger Bammayya ; ” so called to distinguish him from bis grandfather of the same name (see 
Byn. Kan. Dittrs. p. 464, note 3). He is the Brahma who is mentioned in the preceding note. 

* Padadey-nppade, line 71, from padadey, for padaday, + appade, is a somewhat stilted equivalent of 

padadade or padaaode. ’ 

* See page 249 above, note 6. 



No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


259 


oblation of the god, and for the occasions, among others, of the purificatory ceremony of the 
month Chaitra and the festival of spring, and for the giving of food and the imparting 
of knowledge, — saying that the village was to belong to that god, — with the very greatest 
devotion, having put forward Mallideva, the chieftain of the hampana , ( to manage the grant), 
and having laved the feet of Ekantada-Ramayya, gave, with libations of water, (by) a copper- 
plate charter, as a grant to the god Paramesvara (Siva), the village of Abbaluru in the 
Nagarakhanda seventy which was a hampana of the Banavase twelve-thousand, together 
with the customs-duty called melalihe-manneya of that village, and with (the right to) fines and 
punishments and buried treasure, and with its boundaries established in former times and with 
the tribhoga ; and he seated him on an elephant and paraded him in public, and thus with the 
very greatest devotion maintained (religion), 

(L. 80) — 0m ! Ekantada-Rama, who worshipped the water-lilies that are the feet of 
Srikantha with thoughts free from any perplexity, and who became famous in being considered 
to be the bulwark of the Saiva rites, delighted in devotion to Siva ! 

(L. 81) — May the holy god Vira-Sdma, — who is the greatest among all the gods ; who 
carries the moon (on his forehead) ; and who wears the garb of an actor in the dance of amorous 
dalliance which is lovely on account of the beauty imparted to it by the smiling, white, tremb- 
ling, full glances of tbe sweet smiles of (Parvati) the danghter of the mountain (Himalaya^, — 
day by day confer fortune and loDg life and fame upon Kamadeva, upon him who is endowed 
with nobility 1 

(L. 82) — Hail! When the illustrious MahdmandaUsvara Kamadevarasa, — possessed of 
the string of names of, among others, the Mahdmandalesvara who attained the padchamaha^abda ; 
the supreme lord of Banavasi, the best of towns ; he who acquired the excellent favour of the 
god Madhukesvara of Jayanti (Banavasi) ; the delight of learned people ; the ornament of the 
family of Mayuravarman ; the lion of the Kadambas; the fierce in tight ; he who excelled in 
audacity; the elephant-goad of brave men ; a very Radheya (Karna) in truth ; a very cage of 
thunderbolts to (protect ) those who sought refuge with him ; a very cow of plenty to petitioners, 
— was governing the Panumgal five-hundred, punishing the wicked and protecting the good, 
he came and saw tbe god Vira-Somanatha of Abbaluru, and beheld the temple, as large as a 
mountain, which B&mayya had had made according to the precepts of the Saiva traditions, 
and listened in detail to the daring that he had displayed, and was pleased, aDd took him 
along with himself with the very greatest affection, and went away ; and, — when his ministers 
and himself, together with the Mantfalika Madukeya, were seated (tn assembly ) at the capital 
of Panumgal with the pleasure of an agreeable interchange of communications, with the very 
greatest devotion he made the village named MallavalU, on the north of Jogesara which is 
near to Mundagod in the Hosan&d seventy which is a hampana in the Panumgal five- 
hundred, together with its established boundaries and including the tribhoga , into a namasya- 
grant for the god Yira-S5manatha, and laved the feet of Ramayya, and gave it, with libations 
of water, with the very greatest devotion, for the repairs of whatever might become broken or 
torn or worn-out belonging to the temple of that same god, and for the angabhoga and the 
rangabhoga and the perpetual oblation of the god, and for the purificatory ceremony of the 
month Chaitra and the festival of spring and the other occasions, and for the giving of food; 
and thus he preserved religion. May it be well ! 0m ! 

(L. 91)— Those who preserve these acts of religion shall obtain the reward of fashioning 
in gold the horns and hoofs of a thousand tawnv-coloured cows at the sacred Varanasi or 
Prayaga or Kurukshecra or Arghyatirtha or Sriparvata or any other holy sites, and giving them 
to Brahmans versed in the four iVedas at such meritorious times as an eclipse of the sun, an 
eclipse of the moon, a v yatipdta, a passage of the sun from one sign of the zodiac to the next, 
etc . ; those who destroy these acts of religion shall incur the sin of slaying those same cows and 
Brahmans at the Ganges or Varanasi or Kuriikshetra or any other sacred sites ! And, to shew 

2 l 2 



260 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vot. V. 


that there is no doubt about this, he 1 quotes the sayings of Mann of former times : — The earth 
has been enjoyed by many kings, commencing with Sagara ; whosoever at any time possesses 
the earth, to him belongs, at that time, the reward ( of making this grants if he continues it) ! 
The dust of the earth may be counted, and the drops of rain ; but the reward of preserving a 
religious grant cannot be estimated even by the Creator ! He who confiscates land that has 
been given, whether by himself or by another, shall be born as a worm in ordure for the 
duration of sixty-thousand years ! He who, though capable ( of better things ), displays neglect 
in act or thought or speech, — whether he he a person of good condition or a man of low caste, 
he is outside the pale of all religious rites ! The maker ( 0 / a grant ) shall raise seven times 
seven times seven families (to heaven ) ; but he who confiscates shall cause the same number of 
families to sink down (into hell) ! There may be absolution for one who slays a cow or a 
Brahman on the Ganges or at any other sacred place, but not for men who confiscate the 
property of gods or Brahmans ! u This general bridge of religion should at all times be 
preserved by you thus does Ramachandra make his earnest request to all future princes l 
May it be well and auspicious ; and may there be good fortune ! Om ! Om ! 

(L. 99) — Saying “(As) I am thus ( notoriously ) a very treasury of austerities directed 
towards Hara, any small effort is not (becoming to me ),” R&ma, the abode of devotion to 
Sambhu, constructed (this great) temple of (Siva) the destroyer of the cities (of the demon 
Tripura). Without spending or asking for anything, even so little as a hdga , 2 which devotees, 
standing in front of him in reverence, might offer for the shrine, but going with great humility 
to the princes (and obtaining their contributions ) , through the inexhaustible favour of Siva 
Rama made this temple, resembling (Kailasa) the mountain of Hara; how successful he was ! 

(L. 101) — Kesavar£ja, the leader of the forces, spake this record; and Sarana, — the 
slave of Isa; he whose refuge is the water-lilies that are the feet of Siva, — put it into proper 
shape, and wrote it with facility. Om ! 

(L. 102) — Hail ! Mallidevaraya,— - [who belonged to the race of*] Mukkanna-Kadamba 
who was born from the holy Hara (Siva) and the Earth ; the supreme lord of Banav&si, the 
best of towns ; the worshipper of the water-lilies that are the sacred and holy feet of the holy 

god Madbukanatha, — 

of Nagarakhande, gave 


P. — Of about A.D. 1200. 


This record is on a stone tablet outside the temple of S&man&tho.— The sculptures on the 
stone are, at the extreme proper right end, a Unga, with an officiating priest standing to it, 
and with a human head on the front part of the abhisheka - slab and the headless body below it, 
propped up against the lower part of the stand of the Unga ; and, along the rest of the stone, 
a representation of a fight : next to the Unga, there are five standing figures, armed with spears 
and shields, and facing away from the lingo, and evidently intended to be Saras fighting in 
defence of it? in front of them, there are five or six standing figures, armed with spelts only, 
and attaching them ; immediately behind the latter, there are four smaller figures, each blowing 
a large horn held up in its circular shape over his head ;=> further on, there are two groups, 

1 Nf’ pelv, i.he composer of the record. 


3 A haga is a very small coin, equal to one ane and two kdsus. 

* The horns are of the kind called in Kanarese kahale 1-Ai - 

„ 4 „ .. . . * ’ or kale, and in Mar&tM Hha Thev are n* 

m the services of temples, as well as in religions and secular processions, at weddinzs and ” 

former day. they were used as battle-horns. They are made sometimes all in one niece sw’ ^ • ' 

coutmuou. curve covering rather more than half a circle, and sometime, with a joint in the middTe Tiba^ 


No. 25.] 


INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLUR. 


261 


each of four standing figures, apparently spectators ; and some seven or eight men are lying 
stretched out wounded or dead, all along below the feet of the combatants and of some of the 
spectators. — The writing runs along the top of the stone, above the sculptures, and covers an 
area about 5' 2| v broad by O' 2§ 7 high. It is in a state of very good preservation, except that 
seven or eight letters are missing at the end of each line ; it would seem that the stone has been 
at some time or another trimmed at that end, and that these letters have been cut away, and 
perhaps, with them, some sculptures, — possibly some horsemen and, at the extreme end, an 
image of Jinendra. The purport of what is lost at the end of line 2 is plain enough, though it 
need not be supplied with exactly the same aksharas that I shew in square brackets in the text ; 
but it is impossible to say how the missing word or words at the end of line 1 should be 
filled in. The second line of writing commences below the s of samka-gdinnzdam in line 1. — The 
characters are well formed and boldly engraved Kanarese characters of about A.D. 1200. The 
size of the letters ranges from about f 7 to l 7 . — The language is Kanarese. 

The inscription is not dated, and does not refer itself to the reign of any king. It simply 
marks the place where, according to tradition, Ekantada-Ramayya cut off his head and offered 
it to Siva, and then obtained it back again, as recorded in the long inscription, E. above. 

TEXT. 1 

1 Sri-Brahmesvara-devaralli Ekantada-Ramayya basadiya Jinan=oddav=agi taleyan* 

aridn badeda tavu || Samka-g&vumda basadiyan=od[e # ]yal*iyadhe(de) alum 
kudurey . . . . . 

2 n=odd-iralit Ek&ntada-Ramayya kadi geldu Jinanan=odedu li[mgamam pratisbthe- 

mMidam ||1 

TRANSLATION. 

The place where, at (the temple of) the holy god Brahmesvara, Ek&ntada-R&mayya, 
when the Jina of the shrine had been wagered, cut off his head, and received it back again ! 
When Sankagavunda would not let him destroy the shrine, and arrayed his men and horses 

(to defend it), Ekantada-Ramayya fought and 

conquered, and broke the Jina, and set up a linga. 

G. — of the time of Siiighana. — A.D. 1219. 

This record is on a stone tablet standing against the wall, or perhaps built into the wall, 
outside the back of the temple of Basavesvara. 2 — At the top of the stone there is a compartment 


addition to being used in the circular shape, the two parts of them can be turned so as to stretch out in reversed 
curves like an elongated S. To the European ear, they are chiefly associated with nothing but a discordant 
tumult of sound; and not incorrectly, when they are blown in processions, with simply the object of making as 
much noise as possible. But this use of them does not do justice to them. In the Kanarese country (and doubtless 
elsewhere also) some of the men, whose profession is to play these large horns, have well-merited reputations* 
reaching far and wide ; their services are much in request, and are well rewarded ; and it is a gTeat treat to get 
hold of one of these skilled players and hear his performance. He will first stand upright, and wind the horn, 
which for this purpose he holds in its circular shape, sweeping right up from his mouth over his head. He will 
then sit down, with the horn, in the same shape, sluug by a cord lound his neck and running from his mouth 
down under one arm-pit and then up over the other shoulder ; and it is surprising what sweet sounds he will produce 
with it, especially when he places the mouth-piece inside his mouth and sings an a:r through the horn. And he will 
usually finish by placing the mouth-piece against the outside of his check, or against his throat, and then also, 
apoarently, playing it in the same soft mode ; but this, which is also done by some players on the tankha- shell, 
is of course only a trick,- though it is a very clever one. I do not know wbat authorities confer the distinction ; 
but the more specially skilled players are entitled to carry turdyis or plumes, which are fixed into sockets in the 
rims round the mouths of the horns. Similar plumes for drums are mentioned in some of the Kanarese ballads 
( Ind . An t. Vol. XV. p. 352, Vol. XVIII, p. 359).— The kale was one of the five instruments used in producing 
the 'panchamahdiabda ; see page 216 above, note 3. 

1 From the ink-impression. This record is not included in Carn-Vesa lasers. 

% That is, according to the return made to me. But iu Cam ‘Desa Inters, it is described as being inside the 
temple. 



262 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


Tol. V. 


of sculptures, shewing, in the centre a linga , with a priest standing to it; on the proper right, 
two seated figures, with two standing figures waving chaurh over them, and with the moon 
above ; and on the proper left, the bull Nandi, with the sun above it. Then come lines 1 to 10 
of the writing. Then comes another compartment of sculptures, shewing two seated figures, 
each inside a small pavilion, and with a standing figure, holding a chauri , on each side of each 
pavilion. And then comes the remainder of the record. — The writing covers in lines 1 to 10 
an area about 2' If" broad by O' 7'' high, and in lines 11 to 16 an area of the same breadth by 
about O' 4'' high. It is in a state of good preservation almost throughout. But down the 
proper right of the tablet there is some projection which more or less hides the first akshara 
of each line in lines 1 to 8 and 10, and prevents it from appearing fully in the ink-impression. 
And the record appears to have been left unfinished in the last line. 1 * — The characters are 
Kanarese, of the regular type of the period to which the record refers itself ; and they are well 
formed, though the engraving is rather thin and not very deep. The size of the letters ranges 
from about T ? _ /y to nearly f*. The anusvdra is formed in two ways, as in E. above ; sometimes 
on the line of writing, and sometimes above it. The virdma is represented throughout by the 
sign for the vowel it ; and a noticeable instance of this is in tatu-kshanadi , line 12> The 
lingual d is represented throughout by its own distinct sign. — The language is Kanarese, of the 
same transitional kind as that which we have inE. above. And the record is in prose and verse 
mixed. In line 3, we have the word baliya , — a variant of the baliya of other records, — which 
according to dictionaries means “ near to ” (lit, “ of the vicinity of ”), but which in such passages 
as the present is equivalent to the Sanskrit madhyavartin or antarvartin , “in the middle of, or 
incloded in.” 3 In the same line, we have bdda^ a tadbhava corruption of the Sanskrit vata , — 
which usually means, as here, “a town,” but is sometimes used in the sense of kampana f which 
'Kittel’s dictionary gives in the sense of “a district,” and which I have sometimes translated by 
“ an administrative circle of villages. And in line 15, we meet with the rare form dgu f for hogu, 
in odar , = hodar , “ they went.” — In respect of orthography, the only points that call for 
special notice are (1) the use of auvu for au, in pauvurnnami, line 1, and in gauvuda , lines 5, 8, 
10 ; and (2) a very uncommon use of the initial long i in the middle of words, owing to 
which we have avaliin for dvaliyin , line 3, ialii and olii for idliyi and oliyi , line 4, lilei for 
Uleyim , line 6, saira for sayira , line 9, and, still more extraordinarily, vairi for vairi, line 12. 

The inscription refers itself to the reign of the Devagiri-Y&dava king Singhana ; and 
to a time when (a feudatory) SihganadOvarasa was governing the Banavasi twelve-thousand 
province. The tablet is a virgal or monumental slab, in memory of the death of two local 
heroes, Macha and Goma, in battle, on the occasion of a cattle-raid at Ablfir. The raid was 
led by Isvaradeva of Belagavatti. From Mr. Rice’s Mysore , 2nd ed., Yol. II. p. 448, we learn 
that Belagavatti 3 is the modern Belagutti in the Honnali taluka of the Shimoga district, 
Mysore,— the * Bellagooty * of the Indian Atlas, sheet No. 42, in lat. 14° 11', long. 75° 35', 
twenty-four miles S. S. E. f S. from Ablur, — and that Isvaradeva belonged to a family of 
local chiefs mentioned in records there, which give another date for him in A.D. 1216, and 
give also the names of Mallideva, A.D. 1196, Simhaladeva, A.D. 1232, and Biradeva, A.D. 1249. 

The record is dated on the full-moon day, coupled with Monday, of the Pramathin 
samvatsara , specified as one of the years of Singhana. The regnal year is not cited, though it 
is usual to cite it in any date expressed in this manner. 4 The name of the sa ihvatsara, however, 


1 See page 264 below, note 3. 

* For this word, and boda , both of which occur also in A. (see page 230 above, noies 7 12) see a note in 

Jour. Bo. Br . B. At. Soc. Yol. X. p. 280. ' *' 

8 Mr. Rice writes the name ‘ Belegavatti.’ In the present record, however, the vowel of the second syllable is 
distinctly a, — not e . 

* It should have been specified as his tenth year. The transcript in Cars^Vesa Insert, actually* inserts 
lOneya, as if it stood in the original ; and it further reads Pramddhi, by mistake for Pramdthi. 



INSCRIPTIONS AT ABLER. or 


as “ > u as ^aka- ^um \ fit 11 12 cun cut. And this date, again, lia^ not btru n.c.ndt- 

1 r ' r 'y ' b-r U'VC'i flint ended, not on a Monday, but on Saturday, 2‘JtL June, A.D. 1219 
.-.boat V h i>. -1 n.iu. a* ter mean sunrise Uur Ujjain). 


TEXT . 1 

1 Om 2 3 Sva.-ti Sumasta-prasa'sa)sti-sahiram sri-Simhanadeva-varushada' 

Pramathi-samvatsarada Asa(sha)dha pauvurnnami 4 5 * Somava- 

2 [ra]dabi pratapa-vira-Simganadevarasaru Banavase-pamnitsasii\ivau==aluit-ire 

Albva kampaiuuii Nagarakha[m~]- 

3 [da]v-Lp jEattara bai.\a bad a Abbalura vistarav=ent-eihdade || Gi!i- J 

;cui id bit di ; iii pik-iival L!i r *=o]>]mv.i namdanadiih vilasadim 

4 adda sraiivllia-saln 7 * * Siv-aIayad=olii’ Bha!aneti'a-pujita 0 -£rri 'gri -bad:m 

babul hi ka-kalfividu- vini -sum idiadimdii d ;=i- 

'J ja-talad-o]a 2 f-Abbalur=.Jti-vielntrritarain nijam=agal-oppugum || Antn sibbe- 
i • tt- Abbalura Bira-gauvudana 10 gnna- 

o [k • d! j !K\v-ent-em-la le |i Vri 1 * il Pava-liitan-eiiidu d:ina-vida(dh.i )n=eihdu nu:- 
L'ill* budbiy - 1 "iu* lu il U i 1 ~ ka(khu;rakara-tcjniiam gui u-padaiubn- 
~ g: i biukranap-fiitu i.iniMda 13 pnrutara-dhairyyanam >akalu-vamb’Juii-.i-:\ivu- 
knlpavri. Majk^lnr.am i ai d'u Jh-uikaraih nun lade barn- 
; [:■ 'ui>n^um 1 -ale Bira-gauvudanarh 13 {| Ant=a Bira-gauvuda IlJ aiiklMdin;(i*iv= 

ire Bhc(be)lagavatti-isvaradeva[ih*] hala- 
d bam maihneyara kuli Sataligo-nadha(da) nayakara kud'-koindu battu-sasn.i 
a III sail a 1 " k ud ure viim- 

10 si nadadu bnind-Abbali'iran- ihdu hinrd]u-[s]ere-turuvam kuriib-alliy a sere- 

tuni.-aiii bimddkki Bira-gauvudana 1 ’ Ixsa-vanim 

11 Bariagi-Ketojana makkalu Macham Gomamgaiu madida virav enint 19 - 

eAnjdcUk* 11 Kit 20 || Gbatri-r 1 nuiukida \ajiya that pi m katt- [;i]ju Badagi- 

12 Macham tannin intnG Gomanu yise padal-ntudu taf'-k-hanadi vairi - 21 

bala v- erut*amtuih !) Mut-cioj pi lal~itii- 

13 t-upam-alUam nnd.il ati-bii.i} .uukaram=ecal=imt-amt=ari-balanuun.iu , v i io Ketojauu 

mnga 23 Maeha pokku ti Yukon pala- 

14 ram || Sodarar-ibbava'ra) viratn mediniV-achchariy^id^unisi uLurade ' ]>‘il aae. 

kadi tave komdu 24 svargg.i- 


Cmi.-ZIAa l use rs, V-d. II. y. 3SS. 


1 ircon the ink-impreSMon. — A trim script inn j£ this rec.uM 

2 Iu wiv.sented by a small unit? in-i<h* a lur^er one. 

3 Tilt? won! lOhrf/rr ought :> i >:!.►* here, but wa- omitted. 

4 Head pfivrnnai.ii Conipm- line- 5, 10, below. 

a Metre. Cluunjiak.in aid ; and m the m \t \erse. 

5 Head dv'tht/in. Com pare two .-imilar .u^linees in f he iu\t one, an 1 t'n. s n I, ies (\ 0, 

* Head (for sniiy\ m). " Heal t < >/n). 

9 The prdsti, or rtlliteratiou of tl . * e n ^ r-uant th »* -eeond iw’aolo e e p > t " v .*■ d he : . 

10 Head gavdaypt. 11 * Hi id ir ; i.e*iri**i. li u. i aa ; ; c’< 

13 Head norpp'tdt'm. 14 * He*d bunp u'y 'im. 

16 Hi ad fjavdam. 17 Head 'oqi rn, 

19 Head ent . ;a /.r., k irr-da. 

31 Mitre, Kanda ; and in the next two 

33 The metre is faulty here ; the word mn<ja , whch ss necessary for the si use .t cstwosL:rt 

too many. 

34 The mare is faulty here, alsc, as the effect of the sv i* to lengthen the u. 


1 5 Held <?.z uti . n > 
18 ieead pc.j7hi 

J3 Read vnri 

s necessary for ihe siT SSt - . i 



EPIGRAPHIA JXDICA 


264 


[Vol. V. 


lo kk-odar=jjasav=esoye Maehanumm^a Gomanum || Jituna 0 labhyate laksliml 
niri(mri;tC*n=a- s 

TRANSLATION. 

Ora ! Hail ! On Monday the full-moon day of tho month Ashadha of the Pramathin 
samvatsara of the years of the glorious Simhanadava, who was possessed of all eulogistic 
titles ; while the powerful and brave Singanadevarasa was governing the Banavase twelve- 
thousand, — to describe the excellence of Abbaluru, a town that was included in the 
Nagarakhanda seventy which was a kamjjatia of those parts : — 

(Liue 3) — Abbaluru is truly charming on the surface of the earth, in a most exceedingly 
beautiful manner, by reason of a park which is pleasing with Sights of parrots and numbers 
of cuckoos, by the sweet-smelling rice 1 * 3 4 that grows luxuriantly, by a number of temples of the 
god Siva, by a shrine, to which {much) adoration is paid, of that same god in the form of him 
who carries a third eye in his forehead, and by a multitude of brave men who excel in strength 
and are skilled in arts and sciences. 

(L. 5)— To give a description of the merit > of Biragauda of the Abbaluru that is thus 
charming : — Saying that he is devoted to the welfare of others, that he bestows gifts, and 
that he is a very ocean of virtue, the multitude of good and wise people jovfuily praise 
Biragauda, who is in mien as radiant as the hot-rayed sun, — who is in every way devoted to 
the water-lilies that are the feet of spiritual preceptors, — who is possessed of the very 
greatest resoluteness,— and who is a very tree of paradise in giving support to all people who 
proclaim his praises. 

(L. 8) While that same Biragauda was continuing in happiness: — Bolagavatti- 
isvaradeva, with various chieftains and with the Ndyakas of tho Satalige district, 5 together 
with ten thousand men and a thousand horses, came along, and descended on Abbaluru, and 
seized the herd of penned-up cows ; and then, to describe the bravery displayed by Macha and 
Goma, sons of Badagi-Ketoja, in rescuing the penned-up cows at the command of 
Biragauda : — 

(L. 11) While the valiant Badagi-Macha, having rained blows on the array of horses 
that he drove away, was still attacking them, and while Goma, having stared fiercely at them, 
was shooting arrows, the whole of tho hostile force immediately fell down in alf directions. 
What words can I use ? ; if you consider, it surpassed all comparison!: meeting them in the 
most terrifying manner, Macha, the son of Ketoja, plunged recklessly into the hostile force, 
and pierced many of them. In each a way that the bravery of these two brothers was a 
wonder to the earth, Macha and Goma fought in battle with many people, and killed numbers 
of them, and went with great fame to heaven. 


1 Reftd Mdchanum. The metre is faulty here, even with this correction. It might be set right by reading 
Mdchanum Qomananum . And, from certain marks on the akshara go, it would seem that the writer recognised 
his omission of the am the first syllable of MacUnum,- began to correct it, by writing Macha after that 

word,— and then turned the cha into go, and so produced the reading that actually stands. 

3 Metre, Sloka (Anushtubh). 

s After this, there should come enother line, containing the completion of this well-known verse, tu., pi tor- 
imgand kshana-tidhvamsini kiye k& chimtd marine rani. These words ma, perhaps be somewhere on the side 
or back of the stone, and may have been overlooked by my copyist. But there is no reason whv they should not 
have been engraved on the front of the stone, immediately below line 15 ; the stone was smoothed in order to form 
the subscript k of kkodar at the beginning of that line, and was not smoothed any further ; and it seems therefore 
that the completion of the verse was carelessly omitted, either by the engraver or in the written copy from-which 
he worked. J 

4 See page 253 above, note 6. 

’ Satalige is evidently a variant of the Sattalige which we have in E. line 60 ; see page 249 above, note a 










ma. 


22 


24 


26 






> /'■ 


‘O 4'^j 


•DJA 

JM"' ' 


ir\ 




r> 




rjo' r 




;• 


' ~\G O w 


j^w' r* 
r\' 




\ 


oo 


: ! ^?b { SJ CoO 0 o c 


, -,CVC\ 

C70'}0> ,1 


•fs.ri. 


. P "n r\ /~\p A^r^Cv 
O W-O j C J G — ’ O { 




I C' 


OJ, 


CN GO/ 

DGoOlisO 


G >:OppP>pO 0 JtOc OH C90Op ^pO -t 




28 


NOTE OX THE DOXEPUNDI GRAN' 


265 


Nj. 26 .; 


(L, 15) — He who conquers obtain;* fortune;* and even one who uies [wim* a woman of 
the gods : since tlie body perishes in a moment, why should one distress ones>eii about dying in 
battle r]. 


No. 26.— A NOTE ON THE ALPHABET OF THE DOXEPUNDI GRANT. 

By F. Kieleouv, Ph.D., LL.D., C I.E. ; Golizxgen. 

Dr. Hultzsch having kindly consented to publish the accompanying photolithograph, which 
has been prepared under Dr. Fleet’s supervision, of the Done pun di grant of riaka-Samvat 1259, 
edited by me above, Yol. IV. p. 356 if.. I take the opportunity of adding a fo\, remarks on the 
writing of that most beautifully engraved inscription. I have ahendy st i t -1 that th*~» charaoters 
are Telugu, In general, they are the same as those of the Yum paid of Anna-Vvma, 

published with a photolithograph above, Yol. III. p. 5211., which are only aoout forty years 
later; but there are one or two interesting differences between the characters of the two 
inscriptions. 

Of initial vowels the Vanapalli plates contain a, d, %, and rl; in the r resent grant i and ri 
do not occur, but, on the other hand, we here have also ?, in the word l in lines 42 and 51 ; u, in 
TJma , 1 . 1 ; and e, in Suath, 1 . 15, ctad, 1. 38, etc . 

Of the ordinary Sanskrit consonants, uh, h, jh and dh do not occur in die Dor.epiindi grant ; 
and the signs for chh and n only occur in conjuncts, as subscript letters, i (ir.cichchhav , 1. 31, 
ydvachchhrimdn, 1. 39, and vijiidna, 1. 34. The signs which may be specially drawn attention 
to are those for k, ph, and bh. 

In the sign for k the horizontal line between the top-stroke ( talakattu ) and the circle is 
joined with the latter by a straight line, which forms a sharp angle with the horizontal line, as 
may be seen from kart , 1. 1, kruta, 1. 2, etc. This (cursive) sign for k . which does not occur in 
the Vanapalli plates and is not found in any of the published palaogrupliic Tables, is clso used 
in the Dibbida plates of S aka- Sain vat 1191, published with a photolithograph above, p. 106 ft*., 
and in the three inscriptions of Kataya-Vema" of baka-Sarhvat lolo-3S, published above, V ol. IV v 
p. 32S ff. It clearly is the immediate precursor of the k of the modern Telugu alphabet. 

The sign for ph is distinguished from the sign for p by a separate semicircular line, placed 
below the sign for p ; compare the pha of phala^ 1. 4, with the pa of la?fipafu, 1. 6. 1 be same 

sign for ph is used in the Vanapalli plates, e.g. in phalatca , 1. 7. In a Ghobrolu inscription of 
Jaya of Saka-Samvat 1157, we still find the earlier sign in which the distinguishing semicircular 
line intersects the proper left vertical line of the sign for p. 1 2 3 

The sign for bh, in the aksharas bha , bhu, bhu , bhya and bhyd, is distinguished from the 
sign for b by the top-stroke of bh ; compare the bha of bhava-, 1. 3, with the ba of babhu-. 1. 9. 
In aksharas where there is no room for the top-stroke, bh sometimes is distinguished from b by 


1 This verse is usually given more or less incorrectly,— for instance, P. S. O.-C. Insert No. 212 has 
niddamsanakdydrh', and No. 225 has viddamsani ; while No .182 has surdgandm kshana-yuddhasani. But the 
first word is always jiUna {e.g., P. S. O.-C. Inters. Nos. 212, 225, in both of which it is very clear, as also in the 
present record). The interpretation of it seemed difficult to Prof. Kielhorn also, who suggested some time ago 
that the original reading might be jtvSna {Ind. Ant. Vol. XVII. p. 202, note 4). But he now considers 
that jittna is correct, and is to be translated “ by him who has conquered,” on the analogy of vidita, “ one who 
has learnt " in the first verse of the Kirdtdrjuniga, where the commentary cites pita gdtah, bhuktd brdhmandh, 
and vibhaktd bhrdtarah , all in an active sense. - Since writing the preceding remarks, 1 have beard from Prof. 
Kielhorn that he finds that the verse is from the Pardiarasmriti, , Ach^rakapda, Adhy^a III. verse 37 (Bombay 
edition, Vol. 1. Part II. p. 273), which gives it in the form Jit&aa ItthkyaU Lakshmir mrit4u=api turdngandh 
kshayadhtamsini ka^smin kd cbintd marane ranS, aud that MMbavacharya explain 3> ;Va as a past passive parti- 
ciple denoting the agent (“one who has conquered ”), exactly as suggested by Prof. Kielhorn. 

2 T owe excellent impressions of these inscriptions to the kindness of I)r. Hultzsch. 

a la the same inscription, of which 1 sh*U treat in Vol. VI., the sign for dh is distinguished from the sign for 
a by a semicircle, open to the proper right, which is placed below, and attached to, the proper left curve of the sign 
for d. 



L >U 


EPIGRAPHIA TNDICA. 


[ Vnr, V 


:» simdl opening in the lower part of the sign for bh, as in vibhdvyatc , 1. 14, and nalho , 1. 11 ; but 
I i st nr, often there is no difference at all between Ik and h, as may be scene.//, from a comparison 
n' 1 dr- (for ;ibkor~). 1 . 19 , with Lola tit . 1 . 4S, or from tibimin - (for vibhinn-), 1 . 14, tibishh 
(bn ab'‘tsl f-), h 3G, etc. It is interesting to observe that in all such cases (where in the 
n »nopiinJi grant bh practically does not differ from b ), in the Vanapalli plates, the sign for bh is 
"'■ntTally distinguished from tho sign for b by just such a separate semicircular line as above we 
h i v e found to distinguish ph from p ; compare in the Vanapalli plates vibhdti.} 1. 3, Sambhur =-, 
1. 4, ndbfii. 1. 7, etc. Moreover it may be noted that in the inscription B. of Kataya- Verna, above, 
Vol IV. p. 329, in the bh of Bhinidsvara in line 8, the distinguishing semicircular line has been 
changed into a downward stroke, so that the sign for bh looks exactly like the bh of the modern 
Telngu alphabet. 

In addition to the signs of the ordinary Sanskrit consonants, the Donepundi grant also 
contains the sign for the Dravidian l , e.g . in sun ir mulct , 1. 11, and the sign for r, e.g. in eru, 
1. 44. In the sign for the r of taruvdta in line 49 the engraver erroneously has omitted the 
horizontal line in the interior of the letter. 

Regarding the signs of subscript consonants it may be noted that in the conjuncts i in and 
nn the same sign is used for both (the second) n and n , 2 as in nnamah , 1. 1, and uishanna(nna), 
}. 13. Attention may also perhaps be drawn to the form of the subscript 7, eg. in Emdapalli , 
b 45, and putlu , 1. 53. — Of final consonants which are not joined with a following letter, only t 
occurs, in arainjay it , 1. 17, and dhd(da)ndt ) 1. 23. 

As regards medial vowels, I have already indicated that there is hardly any difference 
between the signs for t and i ; compare e.g. gita-kirtih, 1. 5, and didhitun, 1. 27. In engraving 
the ahshara mi of ktum^ishte in line 21 the engraver has made a mistake, which, to judge from 
tin; impression, was subsequently corrected by him. Another mistake was made by him in 
eugiviving the ahdiara no at the end of line 15, as may be seen by a comparison of the propel 
sign for nd in sdnur=nno y 1. 24, or the no of Jaganobbagamdda in line 27 of the Vanapalli 
plates. 

That the plates, near the proper right margin of the first inscribed side of each plate, 
contain the numeral figures from 1 to 5, has been already stated. 


i The akshara bhd of this very word is reproduced in Prof. Buhler’s IndUche PalaograpAie, Table VIII. 
col. is. No. 33, but without the characteristic semicircular line at the bottom, which is quite clear and distinct in 
the published photolithograpb of the Yauaparlli plates. Tbe same column contains other similar errors winch need 

nut be speci lied bore. 

1 The same practice is followed in some very much earlier inscriptions ; compare e.g. in the Sitara plates of the 
Kastern Chalukya Yuvardja Vishnuvardba.m I. (Ini. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 809, and Plate) sampannch, 1. 4, and 
paurnnamasyam, 1. 13.- It may be noted that both in tbe Donepflofi grant and in the Vanapalli plates the conjunct 
rnn is always wiitten by the sign for rnn. 



Vol.fV.No.ji. 


Donepundi Grant of Namaya-Nayaka. — Saka-Samvat 1259. 


nib. 



iv a. 



J * F Pteer. 


W. GRIGGS, PHOTO-LITH. 


SCALE-77 

FROM INKHMPRESSKmS SUPPLIED BY DR. XULTZSCH. 



INDEX 


t AOE 

! Agastya, fishi , .... 52, 72, 257 

Page agi-hunnuve, . • . . . .12 

163n agrahara, . 9, 22, 25. 25, 67, 69, 90, 107, 212, 213 

. 123a 

21::, 25:* 


A b ba la lib a, q u ee n of B 1 . 1 aga I . , 

Abbaliir, s. a. Abiur, 213, 214, 219, 223, 229, Agranipidugu, ChCla ch ., . 

230, 231, 233, 231, 255, 255, 259, 261 j Ahadanakaram, vi., . 
Abkayachandra, m., ..... 228 j Abavamalla, stir, of S0m6svara I., 

Abliidhanaratnamala, q voted, . * . 209n j Abavamalla, sitr. o/Taila II., 

abkiuava, tax, . . . . . . 90 ; Ahiavadevi, queen o^Udayakarna, 

Abhirarnamurti, m., . . . 9 on. 90 , Ahmadabad, n., . 

Abiur, vi, . 213, 216, 217n, 219n, 223, 226, 

243. 244, 245, 202 
. . 231 

. 155 


A butte, m., 

Aebculabt-dika, vi . , 

Acliaraja, in., 

ackarya, . . . 31, 73, 

Ackckabhadarabhatta, in., 
aeli.jbiipannava. tax, 

Aw.'yutppuram, vi., • 

Ad .Liyamanavala, s. a. Alagiyaiaanavala. 
Adahiyamanavalubhatta, in., 
Adahiyanbhatta, m., 

Adavaguucbi, vi., , 

A d is iyamanavalabhatta, w., . 
Alavani-Narabari-Gopaya, m., 
adLikarin, . . , 

Adhipnra, s. a. Tiruvorriyur, 
Adhipurisvara, te. t 
adLiraja, . , , , 

Adibanambichaturvedib hatta, m ., 
Adikunta, $. a. Kaunteya, 

Ad>tya, m., 

Auiiya, Mats y a ch., 

Adityabliatta, m 
A d ity adevab hatta, m., , , 

Adityadevasahasra, m„ • 

Adityashadaiigavid, m., 

Adupu, vi.. 

Advaita, doctrine , 

Agarayva, ch., • . 

Agariy ipnra, vi., • • 


222, 223, 225, 226 
. 96 

. 217 
. 210 
. 73 

. 96 

, • 95n 

154n, 169, 172 
. . 90 


1 4 he tigures refer to pag^s 


Ahmad Shah I., Gujarat k 
Aihoje, vi., 

Alndra festival. . 
Airiviya-gunta, tank. • 
Avattokkalu, vi,, • 
Ajitasdna, Jaina preceptor, . 


152, 171, ISO, 22Sr 


a’jaguru, a g r u n>[f other •precept or, 
ajuapti, s. a. Jdtaka. 52n, 71, 96, 119 
123, 126, 127, 1: 
Akalaiika, Jain* precepto* . 

Akalavarsha, sur. cf R&shrrakuta 


6S and 


72, 


a»M. 
2S 
100 
lt*d 
52 
96 
69 
63 
103 
yo 
96 
96 
96 
134 
227 
103 
7, 9 j 


akarshaka. . 

Akbar, Mughal k., 
Akoadavillabhatta, v>.. 

Akoiuli, in., 

ak*uatadige, a. akshaya-tritiya, . 
‘ ak'ihatadige-amavase, . 


ak<haya-tritiya, tithi , • 12, 14, 11*7, 109, 113, 115 


Akulauiannagtl'i, s. a. Aiikulmamud, 
AAUnuri-Xaga, rn., 

Aiugiyamanavala, Vaishnava o char vet 
Oiakkn, measure, 


20, 21 
133. 157 
192. 103 
. 102 
23::, 24 t 

. 131 


230 


li 


2S, 131, 134 
kings, 


170n, 189, 190, 191, IiA 
. 153 


. 175 

. Ioj 
12, 14 
11, 14 


135, 13j 


Alamanda, vi 
Aland, vi., 
Aiampundi, tv., . 
Alande, vi., 

Alaude thousand. ?>,. 
Alasahasra. m„ 
Aiavandan, Vaishrui. 

Alavanda’dihatp, j/» . . 


. 73 

* 44, 17, 

. 122 :: 
71, 74n, 96 
. add. 
243, 253, 25 In 
. 2l3n 
. . 96 

7 3 

9 or. v . 6 


u ’ after a figuie, to kot notes , a ml ad-, to 


The following other abbreviations are used : — ch. - chUJ ; co. - cook .p 


o . j 

* a. 


! ditto ; dp, =» dunasty ; IE. - Eastern ; /. = ft male ; k, - 1 nj 
* Same as ; sur.=> surname ; tc.= temple; v%. = 'culap vi t. 


the a 1 "tt. >ij Cu. pp* v to 1 a 
dl. - dictri * or ate s '■.* ; 
:uG. = mountain ,* ri . - Wrfr ; 


iT. = 


2 M 



268 


EPIGRAPBIA INDICA 


[ Vol. V 


Alavema, Reddi k., . 

Ala-Yema, s. a. Yema, 

Ala-Yira, s. a. Yirabhadra, . 

Algod, vi . 

Alidevayabhatta, m., . 

Alla, ch., 12 

Alla, s. a. Allada, 

Allada, m., .... 

Allada, Reddi 1c •, . • 54, 55, 

AUadareddi-Dodda, s . a. Dodda II., 
Alladareddidoddavaram, s. a . Gumpini, 
Allahabad, vi., .... 
Allan ripa- Yirabhadra, s. a. Yirabhadra, 
Allaya, Reddi k., ... 

Allaya-Dodda, s. a. Dodda II., , 
Allaya-Y6ma, s . a., Y6ma, • 
Alli-Boya, m., .... 

alphabets : — 

Grantha, . . 42, 49, 103, li 

Kanarese, 10, 24, 26, 28, 151, 205, 2( 


Page 

. • . 56 

. . . 55n 

. . • 55n 

. 17 In 
72, 96 
. 170, 177n, 179 
54, 67 
. 68 

54, 55, 56, 57# 67, 69 

II., . . 54 

impini, . 65, 67, 69 

5 


. 42, 49, 103, 104, 106, 122n 
24, 26, 28, 151, 205, 206, 214, 

232, 234, 237, 261, 262 
. 113, 115, 116n, 117 

. 32, 53, 54, 70, 107, 142, 265, 266 
41, 42 


Nagari, .... 113, 115, 116n, 117 

Telugu, . . 32, 53, 54, 70, 107, 142, 265, 266 

Yattejnttu, . • . . . 41, 42 

Alvar, a Yaishnava saint , .... 73n 

Amaravatl, vi., . . . . 3, 50n 

Amauli, vi ...... 2 

Ambalatt&di, s. a. Nataraja, • ... 72 

Ambalattadlbhatta, m., , . # .96 

Ambattha-sutta, quoted, . . . . 2, 3 

Ambur, vi., ... 50, 159, 160, 162n 
Ammanayya, m., .... 25, 26 

Ammaraja L, E. Chalukya 1c., . 131, 134, 138 

Ammaraja II., do., . . 135n, 139, 141, 142 

Amoghavarsha, 1c., 16 On 

Amoghavarsha, sur. of Yaddiga, 163n, 167n, 

189, 191, 196 

Am6ghavarsha I., Bdsh^rahuta k., 153, 156n, 

159, 162, I63n, 190, 245n 
Am6ghavarsha II., do., . . 189, 190, 191 

AmritaraSipapdita, *»•» • • * . 22 

Ananta, m», * ■ * . . 68 

Ananta, s. a. Yiahnn, • • . . . 12 

Ananta-chaturdasi, tit hi . . . .12 

Ananta* Jina, te., • • • . # 243, 150 

Anantana-hunnuve, . . . # .12 

Anantapala or Anantapajarasa, ch 215, 216, 

217, 218* 229, 231 
Anaa*avarman, E. Gahga k., . # 22^>n 

Anant^vara, te., ... . Q 


Page 

j Anapota, a. Anavota, . . . .56 

I Anatasarman, m., . . # . .117 

anatti, s. a. ajhapti, . . . . . 52n 

Anavema. Reddi k., . . . . 55, 56 

Anavota, do., ...... 56 

Andamanibhatta, m., ..... 96 

Andhra, co., 162, 257 

Andhra, s. a. Telngn, 33 

Anegundi, vi., ...... 241 n 

Anesejjeya-basadi, te ., . . . . 244, 256 

Anga, co., 

angabhoga, 22, 25, 214n, 215, 230, 231, 257, 

258, 259 

Ahgalurn, vi., 126 

Ahgiras, rishi , ...... 52 

Anitalli, queen of Yirabhadra, . . . 56 

Anivarita-Dhanamjaya, . . . . 201 

Anivarita-Punyavallabha, fit., 201 n 

Anmakonda, vi., . . . . .142 

Anna or Annaya, Reddi k., . . 54, 55, 56, 67 

Annama, m., 68 

Annamamba, queen of Doddaya I., . . 55 

Annamamba, queen of Pemmadi, . • , 55 

Annamayajva-Singayadikshita, m., . . 67 

Annana-banta, sur. of Rakkasa, . . .173 

Apnan-ankakapa, sur. of Raparaiigabhairava- 

G 6 vindarasa, 216 

Annaprola, Reddi k., 55 

Annavaram, vi., . . . # b .69 

Annavarapupadu, vi., ..... 69 

Annavema, s. a. Anavema, . . .265 

Annavrola, Reddi k., . . . # 54 } g 7 

A ^?jga, Fallava k., . ... 191 

Anpigere, vi., 

Annpumali, vi., 

annsvara, . 181, 205, 237, 262 

Aparajita, sur. of Ppthivipati I., . . 153, 162 

Appaddvi, queen of Ramabhadra, . . .212 

Appaya, 67, 68 

Appayabhatta, m., 

Appayaabadangavid, m., t .97 

Appimayya, ch., . , ... 206, 207 

aradhya, a family priest, . . m 223 *^25 

Aradhya, a Saiva Brahman, . . m 73 n 

Ayadore, ri., 201 

Araiyan Aravindan, m., # # 

Aramadubhatta, . . . . ! 97 

Aramudubbat^a, . *0 

151, 1550^157 

ArasabrabmA, m., . . 7 . 7 q7 


162, 257 
. 33 

. 241 n 
244, 256 
. 190 


. . 56 

. 201 
. 20 In 
. 142 

54, 55, 56, 67 
. 68 


. 69 

. 69 

. 265 
54, 67 
. 191 
. 166 
. 109 

181, 205, 237, 262 
, . . 153, 162 


. 212 
67, 68 
. 96 

. 97 

. 206, 207 

. 223, 225 
. 72n 
. 201 
. 43 

. 97 

73, 97 
154, 155n, 157 
72, 97 



INDEX, 




20 * 


ardhodaya, 

Argkyatirtha, vi., 

Arhat, . 

ari, tree , .... 


Pag* 
55, 67 
. 259 

. 255 

. 100 

B 

babbila, tree, .... 


Fage 

. 100 

Arinjisvara, te., . 


. 228 

bada, a toicn , . . 

, 

. 262 

Ariya-Pillai, queen, , . 


* . ad d • 

Badagi-Ketoja, to.. 

. 

. 264 

ariyasacheha, the four, . 

♦ 

. 101 

Badami, vi., .... 

12, 

13, 164n 

Arjuna, Afafsya c^., . 

♦ 

. 107, 108 

Badami-amavase, . , . 

• 

. 12 

Artanguri-Kamaya, to., 


. 68 

Baddiga, s. a . Vaddiga, 

. 

. 191 

Artbada, 5. a. Akalavarsha, . 


. 189n 

Bagadage or Bagadige, s. a. Bagalkofc, 


. 166 

ArulalabhatU, to., • • 


. 97 

Bagadage seventy, di., . 

. 

. 166 

Arulaladasapuribhatta, in., 


. 97 

Bagalkot, vi., 

• 

. 166 

Arujala-Perumal, te., . 


. 72 

Bage or Bagenad, s. a. BagadUge, . 

• 

. 166 


Arularabhatta, n., • 

Araiaradasapuriyabkatta, m 
Arularatabasra, m 
aruvaua, tax. 

Ary a, Jlatsya ch., 
Arya^Taradevi, goddess , 
asadharana liana, the six, 
Asni, vi., • 

Aedka, Maury a k., 

Assam, co ., . 

asthana-vastunayaka, • 
asukavi. . . • 

Asvattkaman, rishi , « 
Atakdr, t?t.» . * 

Atavipataka, vi., 

Atri, rishi , ♦ 

Attadibhatta, in., 
Attamabhatta, to., 
Attivarman, k., 
Attiyaraiibhat^a, to., 

A fctiy ashadahgavid , to., 
Attiyur, s. a. Little Kanchi, 
Aubhajamatya, w., 
Aukulmanaud, «»., • 

avadu, avuru or auru, plant, 
avartra-, avatra-, or av&rativ 
avendaya, 

Avinita-Kohguni, W, Gang 
Ayiramjdtisahasra, to., 
Aytamasetti, to., 

Ayyana I. f W. Chalukya k 
Ayyana-gandhavara^a, 
Ayyan-ankakara, rfo., • 
Ayyana-sibga, t£o., • 

Ayyapadeva, Pallava ch 
Ayyapiransabasra, to., . 
Ayyavole, s. a. Aihole, 


I54n, 


. 97 

. 97 

. 97 

. 22 
. 108 
. 245n 
. 102 
• 211 
4, 5, lOln 
• 181 
215n, 217n 
. 231n 
50, 52 
165, 166, 167, 191 



. 38 


. 95, 107 


. 97 


. 97 


. 122n 


72, 97 


. 97 


. 72 


. 69 


, . .135 


. 100 

amavase, 

. 13 


. 96 

m k. t . 

. 157n, 174 


73, 97 


. 22 

• 

. 20, 164a 

la, • 

. 236a 


. • 237n 


. 230n, 231a 


. 164, 165n 


. 97 

• 

23, 256 add, i 


Bagewadi, vi., 


10, 11, 239, 240n, 242 


Babur, vi., .... 

• • lt>9, 160n 

Bairat, vi; .... 

. . . 1. 5 

Bairay\ a, ch., 

. 206, 207 

Bakerganj, vi., 

. • . 185n 

Bakina, vi.. 

4 

bala, measure, . 

. . . 26 

baia. the ten, . . . 

. . . 102 

Baladeva, 

. . . 240 

BaJagami, vi., 21 4n, 216, 218 d 

219n, 220, 

22In, 223, 224, 226, 227, 228, 229n, 

231n, 235, 236a, 243n, 244, 245n, 256 add. 

Balagamve, vi., . 

. 14 

Balavura, s. a. Balur . 

. . . 201 

Bali, demon. 

. 50, 162 

bajiya, included in, • , 

. 262 

Ballaladeva-Velkbhata, ch., . 

. 140, 142 

BaIJigave, s. a . Balagami, 

221, 222, 225, 227 

Palligrame, do., . 

• • . 230u 

Balmuri, vi , . • . 

* . . 256n 

Balur, vi., .... 

. 201 

Bammagaunda, Bammagavunda, Barmagaunda 

or Barmagavunda, to., 

232, 233, 234 


Bammagavunda, Bammad&va, Bamma or 
Barma, to., . . 213, 214, 229, 230, 23 2n 

Bammanayya, ch 21 

Bammarasa, Sdntara ch., . . • 225 

Bammayya, s . a. Brahma, . . . 230n, 25$ 

Bana, family , ... 50, 122, 162, 171n 

Baiia, Saiva saint , . . 254, 256 and add. 

Bana or Banabkadra, m . . . « 255n 

Banadhiraja, sur . of Prithivipati II., . # 50 

Banarasi, a. V ar&ijasi, . . • . 2u8 

Banasamkari, te • .12 13 

Banavase or Banavase, 5. a. Banasusi, 2l6n, 

217, 218, 225, 226, 227, 229, 230, 

231, 232, 234, 235, 236, 257, 259- * 4 
2 >' 2 



EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vci V 


Bam\ nsi, V(tf • * * * I 

Banavusi twelve thousand, di. 9 167, l 1 
172, ISO, 213, 2X5, 217, 

Lauda- or ban ada-h unrr ; ve, . 

B*j.ulhavftp’ua, vi., . * 

Band nole, vi.. ♦ , - • 

B-ingala, cj., . * • * 

Bangaiji. ri, . . 

Bacgavan, vi.. .... 

Banka pura, vi., * • 132, 168n, 

Bankideva, iaiva saint. . • 

Bannui. vi., .... 

Bara l >ar, in., .... 

Baiavur, ri, 9 . . . • 

Bjiaha-lunti or Baraliadontiinanne, dt. 9 
. a: 'in, ..... 

Cam agpvunda, 

Lari, .at a -a, oh., . 

Bair^.a. ^ . • . « 

i'J*. • . • » 

liaava g,* Basavarasayya, Ling 6 gat teacher, 

10,11, 21.240, 241,212,244 
E^avanna, a. Dakshina-Kedaresvara, . 221n 


JE AltE | 

, 253, 2 GO , 

Bet in a, Kuko.iiya k., • 


Pa si 

. 112 

170, | 

Bezvada, ci.. 


add,, 

127 

), 244, 262 ■ 

BimdAua, vi. . 



121 

. 13 ; 

bhaganiiygakaia, tor, . 

. 113, 

115. 

117 

235, 230 | 

thug ah, t /., • . . 



233 

. 2oon j 

Bhairanabbe,/’.. • 



22y 

. 257 

Bhagavata, Pur ana . 



109 

• 2 j 

Bbagavati, goddess, 


22, 

212 

. 116 

Bhagvdupur, ci., • 



1,3 

L, 173, ISO | 

Bhnilla, m„ * 



197 

. 2-13 n 

Bhaka, sur.cf Olabendrapala, 



209 

156, 165n 

bLan a§av« j rgade, bfcanasumanevergade 

or 



1 

. 16 lu 
55, 30 
. 23n 
. 223 

. 21 7n 

. IVfO 
. let'll 


bhanasuv. rgade, a thief cf the kitchen, 217, 231 
baandu (bhnmU), a Idle f good-. . . 23 n 

Bhardanga; ittago, 9. o. Bhandar-Kawte, . 201 

Bhauuir-Kawte, vi., ..... 2' >1 

bbandavAne. st'<ck, 23q 

Bbanuchandra, vi , .210^ 

Bhani'diva I., Id. Gang a An. , „ # p2n 

Bhaiadvaja, fi'.Jti, . , 

Bharata, m ., . ... 115 

Bhnran. ,uce 31, 33 

Bharata- BLarati-Lunnuve, , . ,13 


Ba^avapi-rana, name of a v:ork , 

11, 12n, 239, 

Bharata bbatta, in.. 



. 97 

210a, 211,212, 254n 

BiiarataksbGtra, lad ’ x. 



. . 31 

B liavu-vaia, tc., . 

. 213, 232, 261 

BharatA',alui>ra, tn., , 



. . J7 

hi-vAvim i nixdred and fort}’, d i.. 

214, 215, 230 

Blia ratals tra, . . 

* 


. . 225 

La^rayya, eh., 

■ . . 166 

Blarata\ur?;ia, India, . 



. 253 

Bauddha, .... 

. . . 222 

Bbaskara, k., • , 



183, 186, 1SS 

LaudJhalaya, . • 

. . . 245n 

Ehaskarabbatta, m.. 

• 


. 97 

ELvana. in., . 

. 225 

bliatta, 



72, 213 

Bj’.vja, in., 

. . . 220 

Bt.utra-ieYabbatta, m., . 



• . t‘7 

be ktore, s. a. perdore, . 

. lC9n, 173a 

’ bbatUraka, 


1: 

11, 201, 203, 204 

BeirUi, ci., , • . . 

• lo4n, i<>4. lOo 

bJ.rii , it kittP-d ru„i, . 



. . 216d 

Eciagavatti, s. a. Bejagutti, . 

. 262, *464 

BkiLitma, Yddava k.. 



. . 31 

Beiagutti, vi, , , , 

. 262 

Bhima, ch., 



54, 55n, 56, 67 

Beiatur, vi., , • 

. 1G7 

Bhima, JJatsya eh., . 



. 10S 

Bei&vatte, vi., . , 

* • «■ lot>n 

Bltima I.. do,, , , 


• 

. Kw 

Be dhOvi-Kesava, m. t . 

. . . Cy 

Biima 11,, do., , 



. 108 

Belur, vi., .... 

• . ICOn, 170n 

Bhima III., do., 

• 


. 108 

Be 1 vo la three hundred, di.. 

166, 169. 172, 

Bhima IV,, do., . 

• 

* 

. . 10^ 


Brii iha, .i, a . Ganesa, 
Ernakana-arnava^e. ,y. 
Bendapudl, n\, . 

Bci'datudi-Annayya, m 

B. i .I .pur.di. s . «. Ci-ndapudi, 
i .in, n.. 

E c rdl. /■*. . 

Bo 'a. -a Batins. 


173,217,218 
. 12 


chauti-amavaso, 


i2 

74 
55n 
* 4, ye 
. 7, 8 
. . 192 

142, 143, 149 


. 73, 74 


Bhiriia I., s. a. Ch&lukya-LLin a I., 127, 129, 

130 s 131, 134 

Bhima II., s . a. CLalukya* Biiima II., . . 1 U 

China, ri., 201 

BhimakLandam, name of a Telngv work, 55, 50 
BhimaiuanrAsa . . pat tmA, di, . . 117 

BhmaDadialltatta, m ., # . . . y7 

Bhimarathi, s. a. Bhima, , . . .201 

BLimavura, vi., • IK 



INDEX. 


271 


Page Page 

Bhimayabhatta, m Brahma, ch 286n, 241, 258n 

Bhim^varabhafta, 97 Brahmadeva, ch., 28 

Bhimdsvarakhagdam, t. a. Bhimakhandam, . 65n brahmadeya, ... 44, 45, 46, 47, 162 

Bbimeavararya, m., 109 Brahma-Kshatra, family, . . . .171 

bhogaa, the eight, . , « • . 67 brahmamaharaja, title , .... 73 

bhdgika, a milage proprietor, ... 39 Brabman.yorf, 52, 95, 107, 126, 159, 228, 246n, 254 

hhogika>palaka, ...... 39 B rah manages vara, te., , . . .69 


Bhdja I., Kanauj . . 208,209,210,212 

Bhaja II., do 209 

Bh6jaddva, do 210, 211 

Bhtula, vi^ 3 

Bhnjabala-chakravartin, tur. of Bijjala, . 25 

Bhajabala-chakravartin, sur. qf Sankama, . 28 

Bhujamgavaji, • . . 22 

Bhajjabbaiasi, W Oanga queen, • . 166 

Bhtildkamalk, *ur. of S6meavara IIL, 232, 233,258 
BhtishanAchArya, author , • « • 225 

Bhdtarya, s. a. Bdtuga, • . 163n, 166, 191 

Bhuvikrama, W . Gang a k., ... 162 

BbuyikaddvS, queen of DdvaSakti, . • 212 

Bijabbe, queen of Marujad^va, # . 153, 167 

Bijapur, 9, 220n 

Bijjala, Kalachurya Jr., 10, 11, 23, 24, 25, 

225, 235, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243a, 244, 245 
BijjalarAyacharitra, name qf a work, . . 242 

Bijjana, s. a. Bijjala, . . 235n, 256, 257, 258 

Bikuli, vi^ 2 

Bijiilr, vi 164, 169a 

bilkode, tax , ...... 229 

billa, tree , ....... 258 

Birad&vn, ch., ...... 262 

Biragauda, m., ...... 264 

Bieandija, 226 

black-buck banner, ..... 162 

boar, crest, . . 20, 35n, 70, 122, 127, 

131, 135, 139, 200 

BoddapAdu, vi., 109 

Bcxjdiya, sur. qf BallAlad^va-V&Abbata, . 140, 142 

bojjhahga, the eeven, . 102 

Boiarov, m., 119, 122 

Bojarepduvati, vi., ..... 121 

Bolikeya-K&imayya or K&irAjayya, ch., 226, 288 I 


Bommana, 241 

Bonagiri-Madhava, m. t . ... 68 

Bondalap&ti-Peddaya, m., . • .68 

Bouta-Appaya, 69 

Bontepi-nin^u, i, a. Bottepi-nAnda, • . 74n 

BonthadAvi, queen if Vikram&dity i a IV., .20 

Boppa, Boppapa or Boppimayya, . 233, 284 

Bottepi-uAn^u, di 


brahmapuri, .... 18, 22, 150 

Brahma-siddhanta, . 48, 49, 197, 198, 199, 200 

Brahm&vara, te., . 213, 214, 223, 229n, 230, 


231, 232, 233, 234, 243, 245, 255, 261 

Brihaspati, fishi, 

. . . 34n, 52 

British Museum, . . 

. . . 101, 134 

Broach, vi., 

. . . 37, 38 

Buddha, 

. 2, 3, 4, 6, 102, 245a 

Buddhavarasa, Chalukya ch., . . • 171n 

Buddhists, • . 2, 3, 

, 4, 101, 181n, 220, 

222, 227, 

228n, 245, 255 and add. 

Bddiga, k., 

• . . • 167n 

Bukka I., Vijayanagara k., add. 

bull, crest , • . 

. 49, 50, 53, 159, 162 

bull banner, 

. . . . 257 

b&ruga or bOruva, tree, 

. . . . 100 

Butaraaa, s. a. Bdtuga, 

• • 163, 164a, 167n 

Butayya, do n . • 

. . 163n, 166, 191 

But^s vara, te^ . • 

. 167a 

Butoga I., W. Ganga Jr., 

. . 153, 163, 


164, 165n, 167a, 169n 

Butuga XI., do *, • 153, 

154n, 156n, 163a, 


164, 165, 166, 167, 170n, 172, 191 
Bdtugana-ankakaja, sur . of Manalarata, . 167 


c 

Cape Comorin, . . . 41, 48, 104n 

Chabbi or Chebbi, vi., • . • , . 173 

ChAdi, vi., 

Chaifcra-pavitra, ceremony , • . . 22, 259 

ChAki-cheruvu, tank, 131 

ChAkirAja, Jr., •**... 162q 

chakkhu, tbe five, 102 

Chaladuttaranga, tur. Mirasiihha II., 168, 173 
Chalamartigapda, hiruda, .... 143a 

Chala&pm, vi., 170n 

Chalikya, s. a. Chalukya, . 202a 

Chajki, do ^ •••••. 20 

Cbalukya, family, . . . 134c, 171n, 202 

Cbalukya, Eastern, dy ., 20o, 31, 71, 105, 107, 

109n, 118n, 119, 128, 127, 131, 185, 

139,160, 161n,ld3n, 266n 



272 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Page 

Chalukya, Western, dy., . • 7, 8n, 10, 

71n, 119n, 157, 158, 164n, 167n, 170n, 

172, 176n, 201, 202, 214, 215, 217n, 223, 

227, 232, 234, 236n, 239, 243n, 244, 245n 
Chajukya, family, . 20, 21, 121, 257 and add, 

Chalukya, do 32n, 35n, 36, 71, 125, 130, 

137, 166n, 171, 173 

Ch&ukya, do ., . 20, 21, 33, 34, 36, 161n , 179, 

229, 233, 234, 235, 257, 258 
Chalukya-Bhima I., JE. Chalukya Jc ., . 127, 

131,134,138 

Chalukja-Bhima II., do., • . 135, 141 

Chalukya-chakravartin, sur *, of Vijayaditya, . 244a 
Chalukya-panohanana, sur. Pan.chalad5va, . 173 
Chalukyarjuna, sur. of Vijay&ditya II., . 123, 125 

ohamp^-shash^bi, tithi , • . • .13 

Chauiundaraya, eh., • . 171, 173, 174n 

Chamondarayaparina, name of a york, . . 171 

Chandiraja, Chandra or Chandramas, m. t 10, 21, 242 
Chandrabhilshanapandita, Saiva teacher, • 223 n 
Chandragiri, hill , . . • • .151 

Chandrambike, f*, . . • . 10, 21, 242 

Chandra6£kkarabba$$a, m., • * . . 97 

cbandru, tree, • .*•«• 100 

Channabasava, Lihg&yat teacher, . 240, 241, 242, 244 
Channabasavannakalajn&na, name of a work , ■ 241n 
Channabaaavapdr&jja, do., 11, 239, 240, 241, 

242, 243n 

Channa-K5eava, te., 

Chattarasa, ck., . 
cha^ti-amavaae, . • 

Chaftiyanna, *»., • 

Chaturvargacbiotamani, quoted , 
ohaturv^din, . . • 

Cbaulukya, dy., • • • 

chauti-amaviUe, . . • 

Chaviteparu, vi>, 

Ch&vanda, ch ., * . 

Ch&vundaraja, s. a . ChAmundar&ya, 

Cb5brdlu, vi 
Chechchapayya, ch ., . 

Ch5di t co., 

Chellak^tana, family, . 

Chellur, vi., 

Chelva, e. a. SelvappiJJai, . 

Chelvaaahasra, m., . # 

Cbelvayabbat^a, m., . 

Chembr61u, s. a. Cb5br61u, • 
cbemudo or chevndu, tree, • 

C hendamarakarma, s. a. Yiahnu, 


24,25 
. 257 
. 13 

. 231 
. 16 8n 
. 38 

. 102 
• 12 
. 126 
. 17 In 
. 171 

. 74, 142,143, 150, 151n, 265 
. 166 
. 257 
. 172 
73, 95, 107 n 
. 72 

. 97 

. 97 

96, 143, 150 
. 100 
. 72 


71, 


73, 74, 




Page 

ChendAmarakannabhafta, m. t 

. 97 

Chenna, Saiva saint, 

• * 

. 254 

Chenna-G&imayya, m., . . 

. . 22 

Chera, co., • 

,46n,171 

, 179, 206, 207 

Cbepivu-Appaya, m., 

# # • 

. . 69 

Cb5vauanv5ra, m~, 

• • # 

. 197 

Chbalamattiganda, sur. of Ganapati, 

. 143, 149 

chhuriHra, • 

• • • 

. 183 

Chicacole, vi., • 

. • # 

31, 122, 175 

Chidabhatta, 

• • • 

73, 97 

Chidambaram, 

• • * 

72, 103, 105 

Chidiyasbadangavid, 

m. f 

. 97 

Chikatii t>*\, . 

• • ♦ 

. 56 

Chikka-Kannage, s. 

a. Chikkangi, 

. 214u 

Chikkangi, vi., , 

• • • 

. 2l4n 

Chikkulla, vi.. 

• • # 

add., 119n, 122 

chikurenga or ohikur6nu, plant, . 

. 100 

Chilkasamadra, the ChUka lake , . 

. 56 

chinchanika, tree , 

• • • 

. . 100 

Cbihgamamba, queen of Jayanta, . 

. . 108 

chinta, tree , 


. . 100 

Chintamani, vi.. 

• • 0 

. 205, 206 

C hi n tapeni -cheruTa , 

tank, • 

. . 131 

Chipnrupalle, vi.. 

• • • 

. 109n, 119 

Chijiyand&n, Vaishnava dchdrya, 

. 73 

Chifiyand4nbhat^as6may&jin, . 

. 97 

Chitaldroog, vi., 

... 

. 171n 

Cb ipeddi-Mallay a. 

m., . • 

. 68 

Chit6rgadh, vi.. 

• • 

. 39 

Chitraka^ba, name of a horse, * 

. 202 

Chiftana, m., , 


. . 69 

Ch6da, family , « 

4 • « 

54, 55 n, 56, 67 

Cb6dabhlm5Svara, te^ • . . 

. 143, 149 

Ch6Ja, co., add., 31, 41, 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 50, 

73, 105n, 106n 

123n, 159, 160, 

162, 164n, 

167, 168n, 171, 179, 180,191, 

202, 204, 

206, 206, 207, 208o 

,228, 235, 257 

Cb6Jana-«ihga, sur. 

qf Appimayya, 

. 207 

ChAJika, the Ch6}a k*, . , 

. 235 

Chorayya-Nolamba, Fallava eh ^ . 

. . 169 

Cintra praaasti, 

• . . 

. 226, 228 

Cochin, vi * 

• • • 

. 42 

Cuddapah, vi., 

• * • 

. 206 


D 


pabbdi, vi* 

• • 

. 226 

dadda, musical instrument, . • 

. 216n 

Dadda II., Guyara k.. 

. 37n 

i Dadda IY., do., . 

« * 

37,38 



INDEX. 


273 


Dahaja, co., 

Dtfkshina-Ked&resvarai te., 


Pagb 
. 20 

214n, 221, 223, 

225, 226 
. 97 

. 142 
25, 28, 257 
. 97 

. 97 

9n, 245n 
. 139 
95n, 97 
. 97 

. 97 

123, 126 


Dakshinamurtibhatta, «n. t 
Damapiya, m*, 
damaruga, • • 

Damayasahasra, m., 

Damayashadaiigavid, m. t 
Dambal, »*., • 

Dam6dara, «»., • 

D&mMarabhatta, m., . 

Dam6darabhattafi6may^jin, m 
Dam6darasahasra, m. f • 

Dam6daraSannan, m. 9 • 
dandanayaka, dandadhipa, dandadhisa, danda- 
dhisvara, dandanatba or dand^a, . 21, 

25, 26, 28, 31, 206, 207, 214, 215, 216, 

217, 218, 223, 225, 226,229,230,231, 

232, 234, 235, 236, 238, 240n, 243n 
pangeya-Singaraea, *»., . . * • 25 

Dangeya-Vasud^vanayaka, m., . * • 25 

dabgu or daggu, tree , .... 100 

Dankalapdndi, vi ., . • . • 73, 96 

Dantidnrga, Bdshfraktita k .» . 157, 189, 190 

Dantiga, k u . . • 

Dantiga, s. a. Dantivarman, 

Dantivarman, Ganga-Pallava k., 158d, 15! 

Darayabhafta, m., 

D&rayasbadahgavid, 

D&reki, ®»., . • 

D&ga, Saiva saint , 

Dafopnra, t. a. Man-Das5r, 

Da&puribhatta or Daeapuriyabha^ 

DaSapurfya, Brdhmans, . • 

festival, • 

DaSavannan, W. Chalukya 
Dasir&ja, ch. t * 

dates, recorded in numerical symbols, 6, 7, 9, 

41, 208, 

dates, recorded in numerical words, 34, 36, 37, 

67,71, 107, 183, 187 


191 
159 
9, 160 
97 
97 
96 
254 
38, 39, 72u 
72 
39 
13 
258 
216 

212n 


Dattatriv5dibba^a, m„ 
Dauiatpura, vi*, 
da vanada-h manure, 
Davangere, vu, 
days, lunar : — 

bright fortnight:— 
first, . 

second, 

third. 


97 

208 

11 

217n 


13, 14 

. 198 

.12, 109,113,115 




Page 

fourth, • 


. 12 

fifth. 


12, 36, 174, 175, 232, 234 

sixth, 


. . 13,215,231 

seventh, 


. . . . 199 

eighth, 


. . 168n and add. 

ninth. 


. 199 

tenth, . 


. 11,22,197,198,200 

eleventh, • 


• . 26, 28 and add. 

twelfth, 


. . . . 198 

thirteenth, . 


49, 209, 213 

full-moon, . 

7, 

9, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 38, 

48, 117, 155n, 168n and add., 173n, 



201, 262, 264 

dark fortnight 



second, 


. . . 168n, 172n 

fifth, 


175, 189, 196 

sixth, 


11, 23 

eighth, 


. . 28n, 113, 168a 

tenth, 


. 239n 

fourteenth, 


. 168a 

new-moon, 


11, 12, 13, 14, 15 


and add., 24, 25, 55, 174, 215, 230, 232, 233 
days, solar : — 

third, . . . . . 46, 48 

days of the week : — 

Sunday, 14, 24, 25, 26, 28, 55, 102, 103, 113, 

176n, 199, 215, 230, 231, 232, 234 
Monday, . 14, 15, 34n, 49, 115, 172n, 

174, 175, 232, 233, 262, 263, 264 
Tuesday, . . 11, 23, 46, 48, 117, 173n 

Wednesday, 14, 34, 199 

Thursday, . 11, 14, 22, 36, 172n, 197, 198, 


Friday, 


200, 239n 
105, 106, 174, 198 

Saturday, • 


107, 109, 113 

D6bdr, vi. t 


. 154, 155 

DMduka, m., . . 


. • . 210n 

Delhi Sivalik pillar, 


. . . 5 

Denduldru, vi., . 


• • • add. 

pSndranaka-vishaya, di.. 


. 208, 210, 213 

Ddniya, m., 


. . . 129a 

Deo-Baranark, vi., 


. 211n 

D66gadb, vi.. 


• 211 

D5ogiri, vu, 


. 172 

D4611, vi., • • 


. 166, 167d, 188 

Deopara, vi.. 


. 181, 182 

DSsati-vamSa, 


• • *55 

d&vad&na, * 


• • • 4o 

Dlvad5vesabha^a, m., • 


. 97 



274 


EPIGBAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 



Pa gb 




Page 

D£vagiri, vi., .... 

29, 170n, 2 62 

D6nayatrirddiu, m* • • 

• 

* 

. 97 

Ddvakumarabhat^ . • 

. . 97 

Donepdndi, vi., • , , 

. 

• 

265, 266 

Ddvalapura, vi., • . • • 

. 156 

Doniyasahasra, m., 

• 

• 

. 97 

Devarapalli, vi* . • 

. 55, 69 

D6niyatriy&libhafta, 

# 

• 

. 97 

D5varapu-Narahari, m., . 

. 68 

Dontengi, s. a. Tondangi, . 


• 

74,96 

Ddvarolaka-bhumi, field, • 

9 

DdshripAtaka, vi*, 

. 

• 

. 187 

Ddvasakti, Kanauj k., . « 

. 212 

D6siraja, ch.. 

. 


. 201 

Devasdna, goddess, . • • 

. . I49n 

Dravida-Vdda, s. a. NAlAyiraprabandham, 

Cl 

CQ 

Jt- 

Ddvdndravarman, E. Gahga k., . 

. 122 

dr6na, measure , , 

• 

m 

. 109 

D5vdDik6nchi, vi., . . • 

. . 187 

Drona, fishi, 

• 

• 

. 52 

dhammayatA, .... 

. . 4 

Dr6nabhatta, m * 

. 

• 

. 130 

Dhandhuka or Dbadhfika, m., • 

. 115 

dronchi, tree , . . , 

• 

• 

. 100 

DharasAna II., Valabht h, . 

• . . 39 

Drubbidi, s. a . Dibbida Agrah&ram, 

• 

107, 109 

dhanna-maharajAdhiraja, . I54n, 163, 164, 

Druj jflru, s . a . Zuzzftru, • 

• 

131, 

132, 134 


166, 166, 168, 169d, 172, 173, 179 
Dharmara£i, m„ . .... 31 

Dharmavatara, tur. of Maraaimha II,, . . 168 

Dharmesrara, te,, . . ... . 198 

Dbaoli, vi., « • . , . 

dhishni, a house , . . • . . 109n 

Dh6ra, s. a. Dhruva, . , . , # 161n 

Dhruva, Bdshtrakuta k* . . . 161, 190 

Dhutipura, vi, . . • . * • 7, 8 

Dibbida Agraharam, vi * . . 107, 109, 265 

Didwana, vi„ • 208, 210 

Digambara, • • 190, 227 n, 228 

DighwA-Dubauli, vs. f • . . 208, 209, 211 

Dindi, k., 162 

dipAyali- or divaJige-amavAse, . . • 13 

di&pafta, 227n 

Divakara, Chola ..... 123n 

DivAkarabhatfa, 

Diva]Amba, f. t 167n 

Divaei-amavase, s, a. nAgara-amavAse, . , 12 

divirapati, 38 

Divyavadana, quoted , . , . . 4 , 5 

Dodda or Doddaya I., Eeddi k* . 64, 55, 57, 67 

Dodda or Doddaya II., do., . . 54, 55, 56, 67, 69 

DoddabAgilu, vi., ..... 17 Q n 

Dodda-hole, s. a . Lakshmantirtha, . . 169 n 

Dodda-Homma, vi., . • • . . 173 

Doddahundi, vi., .... 163, 165n 

Doddayaram, s. a. Gumpini, . , # 55 ? 59 

Doddiyabhafta, i»., . . .97 

Dommana, m., 

Ddnaiya, Ddnaya or D6naya (Dr6;ia), # 73 

Ddnagarmao, m., • * . . . 121 

Donayabhatta, m., • . . . .97 

Ddnayasahasra, m., • . , . .97 

P^nayashadangavid, ot., . , . .97 


Dnggavada, #. a. Durgada, 
Duggayabhafta, m* • 
Dujjana, m., 

Durga, goddess, 

Durgada, 01., ♦ . 

Durjaya, Kdkatiya k., 
Durvinita, W. Gahga k ., 
DuSi, vi., . . 

dutaka, 

DQvuru, vi., . 9 

DvAripatA, vi ., . , 


74,96 
. 97 

. . 39 

. 13, 212n 

, . 74 

142, 149 
• . 162 

, 72, 160n 

39,209, 213 
• 55 

. 1 88 


fichagavunda, fichagaunda, Schama, £cha or 
Echi, m., . 214, 219, 230, 231, 232n, 233 

eclipses, lunar, . . 123, 126, 173n, 175, 259 

eclipses, solar, . 14, 24, 25, 119, 121, 176n, 

215, 230, 232, 233, 259 



Edjabanda, tank , . 109 

fikAmranAtha, te. % „ 142 

Ekantada-EAma or-RAmayya, Ling ay at teacher ; 

239, 243, 244, 245, 253n, 255, 

256, 257, 258, 259, 261 


Ekj6K Cma ch . 
elephant, crest , 

Ellora, vi. t , 

Emberum&n, s. a. Vishnu, 
eradum-bilkode, tax, 
Erahagdyunda, m. y 
Epaharasa, ch n 
Eramma, k., 
eras : — 

ChaJukja-Yikrama, . 

CWdl, . # 


. 123n 
. 160 
. 190 
43,44,45 
. 217 
. 229 
. 226 
. 154n 


14, 15, 230, 231 
. 37,38, 39 


INDEX. 


275 


Page 

Fasli or harvest, . • . . 175, 176n 

Harsha, . . • . 209,210,213 

Kaliyuga, • . . . « 73n, 242n 

Saka or SAka, add., 11, 14, 15, 24, 26, 32, 34, 

35, 36, 37, 39, 48, 55, 67, 71, 107, 108, 109, 
lion, 143, 149, 154n, 155n, 156n, 160a, 

161n, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167n, 168, 169, 

171n, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176n, 183, 187, 

189, 196, 197, 199, 200, 201,205, 206,207, 

215, 232, 239n, 241, 242n, 263, 265 
Vikrama, . 102, 103, 113, 114a, 115, 117, 210n 


Page 

GahgA, the Ganges , . 95, 115, 117, 203, 253, 

259, 260 

Ganga-ehddamani, sur . o/M&rasimha II., . 168 


EpasAvakabhatta, m., • 
Erea or Elea, cA., 
Ereha-Vemmadi, cA., . 
Ereya, ch ., . , 

Epeyamma, ChSla ch, 
Ereyanna, ch . , . 

Epeyappa, IF. Gang a k 

EpiyapAtashadangavid, 


Fahien, Chinese pilgrim, 
fish, crest , . , 


153, 154n 


. 97 

. 154n 
. 154n 
. I54n 
. 123n 
. 226 
156n, 

164, 165, 166, 167 
. 97 


2,3 

107 


. 166, 258n 
# 56n, 57 

• 134 : 
. 229 I 

66, 148, 189n 
143,149,150, 151 

• 68 


Gadag, vi., 

Gajapati, dy ., 

GAmak&mbA, f., 

Ganapati, ch . , • * 

Ganapati, god, • « 

Ganapati, Kdkattya k„ . 142, 

Ganapati, m., 

Ganap^svaram, 
ganda-mAda, coin • 

GandamArtands, sur. o^Kpisbna III., 

Ga^darAditya, Ch6la k ., 
gandha-sAli, rice , 

Gan&a, s. a. Ganapati, 

Gan&a-chaturthi, tit hi, 

Gahga or GAnga .family, 

119n, 122, 125, 152, 153, 154, 156, 157, 158, 

159, 160, 161, 162, 163n, 164, 165, 166, 168, 

173, 174, 175, 178, 179, 180, 1»0> 191, 210, 

228n 

Ganga, Matsya ch, . • • ^ 

Gang!, s. a. Kaunteya, . • • • 67, 69n 


Gangad&vi or Gangamba,/*., . 
Gangadhara, poet, • • . 

GangAdharabhatta, 

Gahga-Gahgeya, sur. o/*Butuga II., 
Gahga-Kandarpa, sur . of MArasimba II 
Gahga-mandala, di. f . 
Gahga-mandalika, sur. o/Marasimha II., 
Gahga-Narayana, sur. o^Bhtuga II., 
Gahga-padi, s. a. Gangavadi, 

Gahga-pati or GAhga-pati, do., 
Gangaraja, ch., .... 
Gaiigara-simha, sur. o^MArasimba II., 
GangaroJ-ganda, do., • . • 

Gangavadi ninety-six thousand, di., 


. 240 
. 181n 

. 97 

166, 170n 
. 169 
. 161n 
. 168 
. 166 
45, 46, 47 
166,191 
164n, 174 
. 168 
. 168 
152n, 


154n, 164, 167, 169, 170n, 172, 173, 191 


. 143 
32, 36 
. 179 
. 106 
. 253n 
12, 186n 
. 12 
20n, 32, 50, 


Gahga-vajra, sur. o/Marasimha II., . # 16S 

Gahga* Yidyadbara, do., 

• . . 168 

Gahgaya, m., 

• • 

• * # 68 

Ganthaeala, vi., . 

* • 

. 140n, 142 

Garaparru, ri., . 

• • 

• .96 

Garga, astronomer , 

. 48. 

49, 197, 198, 199, 200 

G argot i, vi.. 

. 

* • • 244n 

GArgya, Saiva teacher y . 

• • • 226 

Garuda, god, 

* i 

. 187, 227, 257 

Garnda banner, . 

• « 

25, 28 

Garudabbatta, m., 

* • 

. 97 

Garudadasapariyabhatta, m 

• . . 97 

Garnda seal, • 

• • 

. . 118, 116a 

Gatiara, vi., 

• « 

. . . 117 

gatriga, 

• 

• • « 23 

Gattavadi, vi., • 

• • 

154n, 164n, 165n 

Gauda, co., 

* • 

31, 190 

ganda, or garuda, a 

village-headman f 23, 214, 232 

Gaubati, vi-. 

• • 

. 182n, 183n 

Ganla, s. a. Gauda, 

* » 

. 31 

GauladAva, m., . 

• • 

. 31 

Gauri, s. a. PArrati, 

• • 

12n, 13, 187, 253, 255 

Gauri-hunnuve, 

• • 

. 13 

gaura. 

• « 

. 150 

Gautama, m., 

• • 

. 68 

Gautama, Saiva teacher, 

222, 224, 225, 226 

Gautami, ri., 

• 

> 55 

gavape, • 

• « 

• • - 23 

gavunda, gavunda, or gaunda, 

s. a. gauda, 213, 



214, 232 

Gaya, vi., . 

• . 

. 181n 

GhiswA, s. a. Macbblishabr, . 

. 115 


2 0 



276 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[ Vol. V. 



Page 



Page 

Ohritasibhatta, m., 

• 

73, 97 

ParaSarya, • • 


. 100 

Gim&r, mo . • 

. 

. 6 

B&thitara, • , 


. 100 

Goa, t ii., * • * 

• 

. 175 

Salavata, . . 


. 100, 109 

GMAvari, ri., . • 

• 

. * 56n, 119n 

Samkriti, • • 


. \ 100 

Gdgave, vi., 

. 

. . 244, 257 

Bandilya, • • 


68, 100 

Goggi or Gagga, Ch&lukya prince , ♦ - 166n 

Bata, • • . 


. . 100 

Gojjiga, a. G6vinda f 


. 170n 

Saunaka, • • 


. 67 

Gokarna, vi., 


. 218 

Srivatsa, . 


68, 243, 254 

Gdjapalli-Appaya, m., . 


• • .68 

Sunga-Bbaradr&ja, . 


. . 68 

Gollaprol, n\, 


. 74 

Vadhdla, 


68, 100, 109 

G6ma, m., . 


. 262, 264 

Valabhilya, . , 


. 100 

Gomma^Mvara, image , • 


. 173 

Vasisb^ba, 


67, 68, 100, 117 

G6nanga I., Matsya ch., 


. . . 108 

Vatsa, . « 

62, 100, 109, 218 

Gdnaiiga 11., do., • 


. 108 

Visbnnvriddba, . 

• * 

. . 100 

Goiika I., Velandn4 u ck. 

* • 

. 143n, 151 

Vigyilmitra, • 

• * 

. 100 

Goiikanad, di . • 


. . . 243a 

Ydska, , • 

• • 

. 68 

goiiki, tree , 


a . . 100 

Gottlprdlu, vi., , 

• a 

. 132, 134 

Gondr, vi., • 


. 171, 172, 180 

gotta, plant . • 

• • 

. 100 

goose (or swan) banner 


. . . 160 

Gdvada, vi.. 

• • 

• 151 

g&pura, 

• 

. . . 149 

Gdvardhana, m.. 

• « 

, • 21 

Goribidnnr, vi., . • 

• 

. . • 165n 

Gdvatikd, s. a. Gdvada, 

• * 

. . 151 

GosaladM, queen of G&vmdachandra, . . 117 

Gdrinda II., RdshtraJcdta lc.. 

. 189, 190 

GdSaridhara. vi., * 

• 

. . . 188 

Gdvinda III., do.. 

168, 169, 161, 190, 237 

g6tras : — 



G6<rind& IV., do., • 

• • 

189, 190, 191 

Atr^ja, • • 

• 

. . 67, 68, 99 

G6vindabba$a, m ., « 

• • 

. 97, 228n 

Badarayana, . 

• 

• • • 39 

Gdvindachandra, Kanauj 1c., « 

112, 113, 

Bbaradvaja or Bbdradvaja, 

. 38,67, 68, 


114n, 115, 116n, 117 



69, 99, 109, 189, 196 

Gdvindamayya, ch., 

« * 

. 171n 

Bhyigu, • 

• 

• • • 228n 

Gdvindaraja or G6vindarasa, ch ^ • 

. 214 

Garga, • • • 

• 

. 99 

216, 216, 217n, 218, 223, 229, 230 

Gautama, 

67, 68, 99, 109, 135n, 138 

Gdvindasahasra, m.. 

• • 

. . 97 

Harita or Harita, 

10, 21, 28, 31, 67, 68, 

Gdvindpur, vi., . 

• • 

18ln, 182n 



69, 99, 109, 242 

Gdyara-pattald, di., 

• • 

. 113 

J&tdkarna, 


. . . 109 

Gdyindarasa, ch.. 

• • 

. . 218 

Kamakayana, • 


99, 201 

Goyyarasa, m., . 

• • 

. . 21 

Kanva, • • • 


. . . 69 

grdmagrasa, 

• • 

. 69 

Kapi, • 


. . 68, 99 

gramdpahara, . , 

• • 

• . 69n 

KaSyapa or Kasyapa, 


10, 21, 67, 68, 

Gddapdndi, vi., . 

a • 

. . 149 

69, 99, 109, 116, 121, 135n, 213, 242, 244 

Gudda I., Matsya ch n 

a • 

. . 108 

Katyiyaoa, . 


. . . 213 

Gudda II*, do., • • 

» • 

. . 108 

Kaundinya, 


67, 68, 69, 109, 130 

Gudda III,, do., . • 

« » 

QO 

o 

• 

• 

Kanfika, 


. 68,69,100,126 

Guddavadi, di., . • 

• • 

. . 123 

Kundina, * . 


. 100, 109 

Gudigere, vi . • 

♦ 9 

. 244n 

Kotat, • • • 


. 100 

gu^i-bunnuve, s . a. Bh&rata-h unsure • * 18 

L6bita, » ♦ » 


. . . 100 

Godimetfca-8arrad£yamaklun, tn H • 

• .67 

Minarya, . 34, 36, 121, 126, 130, 137, 202 

Gudiv&da-Anrtaraa, v%.. 

• 0 

. 69 

ilauna-Bbdrgava, * 

* 

* . . 69 

Gndiyaddratige, vi., . 

• • 

. . 243n 

Mud gala. 

. 

100, 109, 113 

Gudravara, Gudravara 

or Gndrablra, di.. 

Nitnndi, • 

• 

. . . 100 


123, 126, 135, 138, 140, 142 

Par&fora, . • 

♦ 

. 216 

Guduvi, *i\, • • 

• • 

. . 113 


INDEX. 


277 


Page 

Gujar&t, co., ^ . 38, 39, 172, 190, 201n, 210n, 228 

Gulganpode, vi., 171n 

Gummapdndi, vi . * • 149 

Gumpini, vi., 55, 67 

Gunaduttaraiiga, sur. o/Btituga I., . . 163n 

Gunaga- or Gunaka-Vijayaditya, s. a . Vijaya- 
ditya III., . . . 71n, 123, 138, 163n 

Gundad^vabhatta, * ... 97 

Grmddr, vi., .... 154n, 169, 173 

Gunturi-NagayadvMin, m., . . . .68 

Gupta, dy., . • . • 6n, 8n, 211n 

Gurjara, dy., . . . . . 37, 38 

Gurjara, co., . . 31, 170, 179, 190, 236, 267 

Gdrjaratra, s. a. Gujar&t, • . • 210n 

Gurjaratra-bhdmi, co., • . . 208, 210, 213 

Gurjaratra-maijdala, s. a. Gurjaratra-bhumi, • 210 
Garuparamparaprabhava, name of a work, 72, 73 
guftbi, a committee, . . . • • 138n 

Gutti, vi., 4 . . . . . 168# 180 

Guttiya-Gahga, sur . qf Marasimha II., . .168 

Gwalior, vi ., . . , 170n, 211 


H 


baga, coin, 


260 and add. 

Haidarabad, vi., . . 


. 202n 

Haihaya, s. a. Kalachnri, 

• 

. 161 

Haive, di., 


. 218 

Hakka]6Saya,^eW, . . 


. 225 

Halayudha, author , 

• 

. 209n 

Halayudha, Saiva saint. 


. 254 

Haje-B6gadi, vi., 

« 

. 170n 

half-anusvara. 

• 

. 54 

Mige, .... 

• 

. • 23 

Hallayya, 

• 

. . 241 

HaJJegere, vi.. 

• 

. 155a 

Hammira, k.. 

• 

. . 149 

Hampe, vi., . . , 


. 241n 

hamsa, ascetic, . 


. 222 

H&ngal, vi.. 


201, 238, 244 

Hanneya-baL field. 


. 233 

Hanumasahasra, m.. 


. 97 

Hanumat, god, . 

• 

9, 72 

Hanungal fiye hundred, di.. 


214, 215, 230 

Hkpyaoba-mandala, di„ 

• 

. 183, 187 

Hapy6ma-viflbaya, 

• 

. 183 n 

Harajantaka, sur. of lUobamalla II., 

. 173n 

Haras&ia, m., . 

• 

. 9 


Page 

Harekara-geyy i, field, ... .25 

Hari, s. a, Harivannau 162 

Hari, s. a. Vishnu, . . . .52, 95, 109 

Harihar.cj., .... 156n, 157, 236n 

Harihara II., Vijayanagara h add. 

Haviti° or Haritiputra, 121, 125, 130, 137, 142n, 202 
Harivarman, W. GaAga £., . 157n, 162, 174, 228n 

Harsha, sur. of Virayakapala, . . . 209 

Harsbacharita, quoted, .... 126n 
Harshavardhana, Kanavj Jc., . 202, 211, 

216a 

Harshuka, m. t 213 

Haruva-Singanana-Birana, m., . 231 

Hastimalla, sur, q/Tpithivipati II., . 49, 

153, 157n, 159, 162 

Hawasi, vi,, 171a 

Hebbal, vi,, . 154n, 166, 167, 168n, 169, 170a 

bejjahka, s. a, perjunka, . 15, 226, 229, 

232, 234, 235n, 236 

H&machandra, author, 

Hemmayyanayaka, ch ., .... 226 

Hemmige, vi., ...... 156 

hergade, s, a. pergade, . . 28, 222, 225, 236 n 

herjuggi or hejjaggi, the principal harvest , . 15 

herjuggiya-hunnuve or -pu$nanii, , 13, 14 

h&ja, a load , ...... 26 

Himalaya, mo., . . . 2, 21, 229, 253, 254n 

Hiranyavannaa, Pallava lc. t . 157, 158, 160 

Hire-Bidandr, t/i., ..... 165n 

Hird-Gauii, goddess , * .... 13 

Hiuen Tsiang, Chinese pilgrim, 2, 3, 4, 216n, 





253n, 254 u 

Hmawza, vi.. 

• 

♦ 

. . 101 

Hojalavadi, vi., . 

• 


156, 157, 163n 

hoji, festival , • * 

• 

• 

13, 14 

holi-hunnuve, « 

• 

• 

. 14 

HonnayakanhaUi, vi., 

• 

• 

. 165 

Honn&ja or Hoijin6ja, **•» 

• 

• 

. 214, 231 

boxmoleyavaru, . « 

• 


. 22 

honnu, coin, . • 

♦ 


. 23 

Honwad, vi., • 

• 


. • 9n 

horse, crest, . • 

• 

« 

. 172 

Hosanad seventy, di., • 

• 

• 

. 244,259 

hostala-hunnuve, 

• 

• 

. 13 

Hosfir, vi.. 

• 


. 154d, 156 

Hoysaja, dp., . • 

164n, 

160H, 

, 174, 226, 241n 

Hrisbik&jabhatja, m., • 

• 

* 

• 97 

Htili, vi., • • 

• 

• 

. 6, 9n, 166 

Hulidba, s. a* Chandir&ja, 

• 

• 

. . 21 


2 O 2 


278 


epigraphia indica. 


[Yol. y ( 


Huligeje, g. a. Lakahmeshwar, , 
Ruligepe three hundred, di., 

Hulja, ch., .... 
Hulluniyatirtha, »*., . 

Humcha, vi., 158a, 159n, 160n, 163n 
Huna, tribe , • . . . 

Husukuru, vi., .... 


Page 
. 243, 255 

tsvarad^va, ch., . 

. 235, 236 

ISvarad&ya, # 

• . 174 

Isvaragha]ie4sa, m 

. 223 

Isvarasabasra, m., , 

t, 165n, 166n 

tsvarayya, ch 

. . 149 

tsrarayyanijaka, ch., .... 

. 163, 165n 

Itak6ta, vi., . 


ida, tree, . . , 

• 100 

idaippattam, .... 

• • 53n 

idai-pptichchi, .... 

• • 53n 

idai-vari, • 

• • 53n 

iddhipAda, the four, 

. 101 

Iggali, vi., .... 

. 164, 165 

Ikshv&ku, mythical lc ., 

. 2, 5, 149 

Ilaiya-PerumSl, s. a. Lakihmana, . 

. 72 

flam, fla-mandalam or fja-Dadu, Ceylon, 43, 

44, 47, 199 

ilam-ptitchi or ija-ppfichcbi. 

• • 53n 

Ilandiraiyan, mythical Pallava k.. 

. 50 

Ilattaippadi, vi., . . 

. 53 

Hindi, tree, .... 

. 100 

Immadi-Bijjala, s. a. 85vid6va, 

. 242 

Indani-chepovu, tank , 

. 142 

Indra, god, . 34, 86, 104, 107, l42n, 210n, 

219,264,257 

Indra, Gujardt Bdsh(rakuta k., • 

. 190 

Indra III., Bdshtrakuta k.. 

170n, 189, 190 

Indra IY. do., . . . 168n, 170, 171, 179 

Indrabhatt&raka, E. Chalukya k ^ 

. 130 

Indraditya, m., .... 

. 113 

Ind rapalavarmao , Prdgjydtisha k., 

. 182n, 183n 

IudrarAja, s. a. Indrabkattkraka, . 

. 134n, 137 

Indravarman I., E. Gahga k 

• . 210 

Indravarman II., do., . 

• 122, 175 

indriya, the five, .... 

• . 102 

Ihgl^shwar, vi., .... 

. 2404 

Inguvu-Mallubhafta, m. f . . 

• 67 

Inguvu-ManchanfivadhAuin, m ., 

• • 67 

Inthakdta, s. a. Itak6{a, 

• 55, 69 

Iriga, ch., 

. 162 


IsftDE) f)\ . . . . 

leana-tsvara, te., . . 

tuat&tevi, queen of R5gabha$a, 
Is vara, g. a. Siva, 
lavarabhafta, m., . 


. 167n, 258 
9, 126 
* 216n 
. 212 
229, 243n 
. 97 


Page 
262, 264 
26, 28, 81 
10, 21, 31 
. 97 

. 17ln 
. 217 
. 55 


• 150 

. 241\ 

• 22 o 

• lln 
10 , 11 , 


jagadavadu, 

Jagadd&ra, m., . 

JagaddSvarasa, Sdntara ch ., 

Ja gad 6k am all a, * ttr . of Jayasimha II., . 
Jagad6kamalla II., W. Chalukya k ., . 

21, 232,234,258 

Jagaddkavira, sur. o/’M&rasimha II., . 168, 

171, 172, 173 

jagadgurn, title , l0> 2 1 

Jagaduttaranga, sur. o/RAchamalla II., . 173n 
Jaganndtha, E. Chdlukya ch., . . 32, 36 

Jaganobbaganda, of Beddi lings, . 56, 67 

Jagattunga, sur. of G6vinda III., . , 189,190 

Jagattuhga II., Bdshtraku^a 1c. , . 189, 190, 191 

Jagattunga III., do., . . 189, 191, 192, 196 

Jaina, . 11, 22, 143, 152, 154, 155n, 161o, 

168 add., 171, 173, 174, 180, 190, 219c, 

222, 227d, 228d, 237, 240, 242, 243, 244, 

245, 255 and add., 256, 257, 258 


Jaitapa]a, g. a. Jaitugi I., 

Jaitugi I., Yddava 1c. . 

JAkalladSvS, queen o/BhanudSva I 
Jakkavve, 

Jakkayag6tana, m., 
jali, a trellis window, 

JallipallirNrisimba, m 
Jailipalli-Singaja, m , 

Jambfidvipa, 

Jambur, vi^ . 

J ammapajxn, vi., 

jam mi or 6am mi, tree, 
Jananathanagari, s. a. R&jamah6ndri, 
Jao4rdauabba#a, #»., . . 

Jan&rdanaahadangavid, m., . 

Jangam, a Lingd y at priest , . 
JangameSvara, te^ . . 

Jannayabbatta, m ^ . . 

Janoajaaaham, m., ; 

J annayaahadangavid, m.. 


. 31 

29, 31 

• 32n 
. 233 
. 281 

102, 103 
. 68 
. 68 
31, 253 

• 243n 

• 96 

. 100 
. 71 

• 97 

, 97 

lo, 240, 242 
. 241 
. 97 

. 97 

• 97 


INDEX, 


279 


Janniyatriv&din, *»., . • • • .9! 

Jaaadnttaranga, eur. of Bachamalla IT., * 173i 
Jatavedibba^a, m., • • • .9] 

Jatilavarman, Pdntjya k., • • • • 4S 

J&ugsda, vt*, m • • • • • 1, t 

Jay a or J&yana, ch. 9 • 143, 149, 150, 151, 265 

Jayabbe,/., .*.••• 164n 
Jayacbcbandra, Kanauj k^ . • 115 

Jayadhara, *«r. of Knl6ttubga*Ch61a I., 305, 106 

J ayadnttaranga, sur. of Butaga II., • • 156 

jayagante, s, a, jayagbanta, .... 216a 
jayagbanta, a gong, . 216n 

Jayanta, Matsya ch., . . « • 107, 108 

Jayanta-N&rayana, #. a. Drubbidi, • . 107 

Jayanti, s. a. Ban a va si, • 259 

Jayapalaiarman, m., • • • * 

jayapattra, a certifi cate of success, • .244 

Jayasimba, Paramara k., • . • • 

Jayaeimha I.* E. ChalvJcya k., . 130, 137, 142 n 

Jayasimha II., do., ...» 130, 137 

Jayaaimha II., W. Chalukya k., add., lln, 227, 258 
Jayate5na, TJtkala k., • • ^ 

Jdpduka, m., • . • • • 210n 

183, 18on 

Jbude-jantaru-n&da, co., . • • .55 

Jhusijtn., 

jihvkmuliya, . • • 195 n, 201 

Jina, . 171, 179, 243, 255, 256, 257, 258, 261 

Jivitagnpta II., Gupta k., • • * 

Jiianamfcrti, m., . • • • * ^ 

Jn&n&nanda, m., ^ 

Jnknafiakti, Saiva teacher , . 223, 224, 233, 284 

Jddbpttr, vi ...••* 
J6g&ara, vi*, . • ^ 

Jfigiee^i-Gona, • • • • 

’ -j q 

okv&na-hunnnve • . • • • AO 

juvYi, tree, ^ 

131 

Juvvi-gun^a, tank A * A 


Kacbcheya-Ganga, biruda , • 
Kadaba, vi,, 

Kadabdr or Eadabdr, vi., . 
Kadaikk6ftdr, tri., 
kadaiyirai, tax, . . 

Kadaloflipik&la, j. a. Hamunat, 
KadaluaijakAlabbatta* «*» • 


. 165n 
161, 162 d 
. 161 
. 162 
. 53o 
. 72 

. 97 


Kadamba, family. 

• a 

Page 

. 157 

Kadamba, do.. 

235, 237, 238, 239, 259 

Kadambari, quoted , 


. 138n, 264n 

Kadan Sdndan, m., 


. 47 

KadeyarAja, . 


. 128, 131 

kadlegadabina-bannnve, 


. 12 

Kaduhgala, vi., 


. 149 

K adu v a^ti, fathily , 


. 171, 180 

Kadavitt^evara, te.. 

• • 

. 143, 149 

Kahla, vi., . . 


. 113 

Kailasa, te., • 

• • 

. 190 

Kailasad§Ya, te., • 

» • 

. 96 

Kailasamnday&ngabaara, m. 

• 

. 97 

Kailasacatba, te.. 

• 9 

. 50 

Kaira, vi., 

• • 

• • 8n 

KAkatikhandi, vi., 

• * 

- 109 

Kakatiya, dy., . 

♦ • 

. 142, 143 

Kakka II., E&shtrakuta k., 

. 20n, 

Kakkara, s. a . Kakka II., 

169, 170, 172, 173, 189n 
. 20 

Kajabhra, co., 

. 

. 202, 201 


Kalacburi or Kajachnrya, dy . 10, 11, 23, 

24. 25, 26, 28, 113, 161, 225, 239, 240, 257, 258 
Kalakalabhatta, m., * . . .97 

K^]akkudi«nadu, di., ..... 43 

Kalamukha, sect, • . 22, 220, 221, 227, 244 

Kalangaja-Kommayam&tya, m., . . . 69 

Kalanjara, vi., . . . . 25, 28, 210, 257 

kalxnja, weight, ..... 106 

kalasa, a pinnacle, . . . . .149 

Kalbh&vi, vi., ...... 160n 

Kalbnrigi, vi., ...... 241n 

kaje, kabaje or kahaje, musical instrument , 

216n, 260n, 261n 

Kali, name of a hound , . . . 166n, 167 

Kalid^veSa or Kaliddvesrara, te., . 10, 11, 21, 23 

Kalinga, co . » * 31, 47, 56, 190, 257 

Kalinganagara, vi n 175 

Kairngattu-Parasti, name of a work, . . 105 

Kalivallabha, sur. of Dhruva, . • • 189 

Kali-Vishnuvardhana, s. a. Visbnuvardhana V., 

130, 134, 138 

KalUbbarasi, queen of Butuga II., 153, 166, 167 

Kallamgujuke, vi., ..... 22 

kalpadi, tit hi, ...... 49n 

Kklsi, vi , • • • • * • 1* 5, 6 

K&lavakka-VallabbadYddiD, m., • *68 

Kaly&na, KalyAnapura or Kalyani, vi., • 21, 

25, 164d, 24a 241, 242, 243n 
KAmad^ra, K&damba ch., . * 2S8, 244, 259 


280 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


ePag 

Kamakoti, te., ^ 

Kamakotisahafra, to., . • . * 72, 97 

Kamana-hunnuve, s. a. holi-hnnnuve, • . 14 

Karuan-amavase or -amavasye, . . 13, 15 

Kamarasa or Kamaderarasa, j Pdndya ch 218, 223 
Kamanli, vi., . 112, 114n, 115n, ll7n, 181d 

Kamaya, m. t • . • * 68, 69 

Kamayabhatta, m., ..... 97 

Kainayasahasra, tn ..... 97 

KamayatiivMin, m., . • • .97 

Kamboja, co., . . • • 105, 106, 187 

Kamiyashadahgavid, m., .... 97 

katmna, land measure , .... 225 

kampana, a district , . 214o, 230, 257, 259, 262, 264 
Kampavarman, s . a. Vijaya-Kampa-Vikrama- 
varman, ...... 160 

Kanauj, vi., . . 113, 209, 210, 211, 216n 

Kancbar^pallbNarayana, to., . . .68 

Kanchi or Kanchipura (Conjeeveram), vi., 50, 

72, 157, 159, 169n, 171n, 191, 201n, 202, 


Kanda, s. a. Skanda, . . 

203, 204 
. 72 

Kandaldr-Salai, ri., 

45, 46, 47, 206 

Kandayasahasra, m ., . • 

. 97 

Kanderuvadi-vishaya, di., • 

. 119, 121 

Kandi I., Matsya ch.. 

. 108 

Kandi II., do., : • 

. 108 

kanduga, measure , 

. 207 

Kandugula-Madhava, m., 

. 68 

Kandukuru, vi., .... 

. • 56n 

Kanbaua, ri., .... 

. 192, 197 

Kanheri, vi., .... 

. 245n 

Kannaradeva, s . a. Krishna III., . 

. 191 

Kannegala, vi., .... 

. . 165n 

kanthika, a necklet. 

. 138n 

Kanyakubja or Kanyakubja, s. a . Kanauj, . 209 

Kapalika, sect, .... 

. 180n 

kapila-chatti, tit hi, 

11, 23 

Kapilavastu, vi. , .... 

2, 3, 4 

Kappadi, vi., .... 

. 240 

Kappakonda, vi., • 

. 56 

Kappaniparru, vi. f 

. 96 

Kappusoge, vi., .... 

. 164n 

kara, plant , .... 

. ICO 

Karad or Karhad, vi., . 

154n, 166n, 196 

kara-hunnuve, .... 

. 12 

kavana, an accountant. 

. 25, 26,28 

Karavandapuram, vi.. 

. 43 

Karda, vi., * 

. I89n, 191 

Kardamalika, vi., 

* . 188 




Page 

Kargudari, vi., • 

• 

. 14 

kari harlyuva babba, festival. 

m 

. 12 

Karikala, Chola k., . . 


. 123n 

Kariruakyabhatta, m., . 


72, 97 

Karimanikya, s . a. Krishna, . 

• 

. 72 

Karinele, vi., 


. 214n 

kariturayapattasabani, 

• 

234, 235n, 236 

Kariyako, <?. a. Krishna, 

« 

. 72 

Kari\ akosabasra, m., . • 


. 97 

Karka, m., . . . 


. 39 

Karnata. co., . 


. add., 55 

Karnataka-^abdanusasana, name of a work, . 228n 

Karnul, di., 

• 

. 201 

Karohana, s. a. Karvan, • 

• 

. 226 

Karpura-Vasantaraya* sur. of Reddi kings, . 56, 67 

Karra, vi., 


. 211n 

Karja-Bharafca, m. f . . 


. 67 

Karttikeya, s. a . Skanda, 


166, 202, 240 

Karuvur, vi., 


. 199 

Karvan, vi., 


. 226, 228 

Karya, vi., . • 

• 

. 168 

Kasakudi, vi., 

49, 50, 52d, 53n, 157n 

Kasi, s. a. Varanasi, 

. 

. 149 

Kasia, vi., , . • 


. 3 

K&sika, quoted, . . • 

. 

5 

Kaaikhandam, name of a Telugu work, . 55, 56, 58n 

Kasimikota, ri„ . . . 

• 

. 56 

Kasyapa, rishi, . 

. 

. 107 

Kata or K&taya II., Reddi h. 

j . 

. 55n, 56 

Kataka, vi., . • 

. 

. 55, 56n 

katakaraja, 

. 

. 131, 134 

Katarnaieddi-V^mareddi, s. a. 

Kataya-Vema, . 55n 

Katantra, grammar , 


. 22n 

Kataya-Vema, Reddi k.. 

65n, 56, 265, 266 

Kattaya, m 


. 123, 126 

Kattempundi, vi.. 


. 149 

Kattipudi, vi., . • 


. 74 

Kattiyaradeva, k.. 

. 

. 20 

ka^umnkba, musical instrument, , 

. . 204 

Kaumara, t. a. Katantra, • 

. 

. 22, 222 

Kaunteya or Kaunt&yaganga, 

ri., 

. 55, 67, 69 

Kaunteya-tithi, . 

. 

. 36 

Kaurusha, Saiva teacher. 

, 

. 226 

Kaotherii, vi.. 


. add. 

K&v^ra, co„ 

. 

. 203 

Kami, ri., • 


169n, 170n, 173n 

KAyastba, caste , 

• 

. 115 

Kedara or K6d&re8vara, 

s. a . 

Dakshina- 


KtMaresvara, . . . 222, 224, 225, 226 

Kedara-matha or -sthana, college , . 221, 224, 225 


INDEX, 


281 


Page 

Ked&rasakii or Kedara, Saiva teacher , . 219, 

221, 222, 223, 230 


K&larnath, te., . 

Kelale, di., 

Kenganavve, te., . 

Kerala, co. 9 
Kesapa, 

K6sava. m., • 

Kesava, s . a. Kesimayya, 
Kesavabhatta, m., 

K^Savaraja, *. a. Bo]ikeya-K6simayya, 
Kesavaraja, Saiva saint, 
K^savasahasra, m.. 


K&situayya or Kesiraja, cK ., . 

28, 225 

Xdsiraja, author , 

. 25 7 add. 

K&iraja, ch., 

. 216 

Kesiyana, m.. 

. 231 

Ketarajupalli, vi. f 

55, 69 

Xhandava t% /arejj?, 

. 104 

khandi, s. a . pntti, 

. 149n 

khandika, measure. 

. 121 

khandike, musical instrument , 

. 216n 

Khandoba or Khanderao, god , 

. . . 13 

Kharepatan, vi ., . , 

. 190, 191 

khari, land measure, . 

. 69 

kharvada, a market town, 

. 29 

khatvanga banner, * • 

. 204 

Xheda, vi., . , 

. 37, 38, 39 

Khedaga, s, a. Manyakheta, . 

. 172 

Khottiga, Bdshtrakuta k., . 169 

,170,172,173, 191 

Killeda, vi., 

. 56 

Kil-Muttugur, vi., 

, . 50, 160 

Kirata, tribe, . # 

. 170, 179 

Kiratarjuriya, quoted, 

. . . 265n 

Kirtipur, t?*., 

. 183, 187 

Kirtivarman I. t TF. Chalukya k., 

. 157, 202 

Kirtivarman II., do., . 

. 20n, 157, 

201, 204 

XjjuvalJi, vi,, 

, 201 

Kisnkad seventy, di., . 

. 166 

Kisnvoja], s. a. Pa^tadakal, • 

20, 166 

K6d, vi.. 

. 213 

Kddijamatha or Kotimatha, s.a. KMaramatha, i 

221, 222, 225, 226 j 

kodrava, grain, . 

. 121 

k6du, a rivulet , • 

. 139n 

KoduiigOlur, vi.. 

. 254n 

K6kili, Chola ch., 

. 123n 

Kokkila, Matsya ch., . 

. 108 

Kokkili, R. Chalukya k., 

. 130, 137 


. 22 In 
. 167 
. 22 
104, 202, 204 
. 69 

. 69 

28, 225 
. 97 

238, 260 
. 254 
. 97 


Page 


Kokkilli, mythical Chola k., . 

. 50 

kojaga, measure, 

26n, 207, 203 

Kolakaluru, vi., . 

. . 143 

Kolankaluru, s. a. Kolakaluru, 

. 143, 149 

Kolar, m., . . , 

. . 15 1 

Kolavamanabbatta, m.. 

. 97 

Kolavamanasahasra, m., 

. • 97 

Kolhapur, vi., 

. 242 

Kollabbiganda or Kollabiganda 

sur. of 

Vijayaditya IV., 

. I42n 

Kollam (Qniloa), vi., . 

. . 47 

Kolliprola, s. a. Gollaprol, . 

• 73,74,96 

Kollur-Annamabhatta, m., . 

. 68 

Kolluru, vi.. 

. 143, 149 

Komarajambundi, vi., 

. . 149 

Kommana, m., . 

• • 129n 

Kona, co., 

. 71 

Konagamana, mythical Buddha, 

. 3,6 

Konakamana, s. a. Konagamana, 

. 1, 3, 4, 6 

Kondaeharya, m.. 

. 128, 131 

Konda-Nrisimha, m., . 

. 69 

Kondati-Pochana, m., . 

. 68 

Kondavido, vi., . . • 

• 56, 57 

Kondayara-Peddaya, m., 

. 63 

Kondayasahasra, m., . 

. 97 

Kondayashadahgavid, m.. 

. ; 97 

Kongalnad, di., . * 

. ICS 

Kongani or Kohguni. sur. of TV. Gavga kings, 

lo4, loo, lo6 

Kohgudesa-Kajakkal. name of a work, • . 152 

Kongunivarman, If. Gang a k.. 

. 159 

Korikana, co., .... 

170n,21S, 229n 

Kohkani, or Konkanika, s. a. Kongnnivamsaii, 

159, 162 

Kohkuduru, vi., .... 

. 53 

koppa, a small village, . . 

. * 24 In 

Korraparu or °pRrru, vi.. 

119, 120n, 121 

Korumelli, vi., . . . , 

. 16 7 11 

Korunganti-Kotaya. m., . . 

• • 63 

Koruru, vi., .... 

. 149 

Kota or Kotaya, Reddi k., . 

. 54, 55, 67 

kottaji, ..... 

. 23 

Kdttara, s. a. Kottaru, • 

. 104 

K6ttarn, vi., . * • 

. 41, 104n 

Kottatti, vi., .... 

. 173n 

Kottayam, vi„ ... * 

41, 42 

Kotur, vi., .... 

• . 164n 

Kovajala, s. a. Kolar, . . * 

. 163 

Kdvandanbhatta, m„ . 

. 97 

Kovilambundi, vi., 

, 149 

Koyyakore*nadu.. di , . 

2u5, 207 


282 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Page 

Krakuchchbanda, mythical Buddha, . . 3, 4 

kramaka, kramavid or kramayuta, . . 129a 

kramapatba, . . 128, 130, 135, 138, 139 

KrankatawA 139 

JCranteta, vi., ..... . 149 

kridapasulka, tax , ..... 96 

Krishna, god, . . . . . 20,72 

Krishna I., Bdshtrakuta k., . 157, 189, 190 

Krishna II., do ., . . . 166, 189, 190 

Krishna III., do ., 166, 167, 170, 171n, 172, 

179, 189, 191 

Krishna, «\, . 140n, 169n, I70n, 172o, 241 n 

Krishnabhatta, m., ..... 97 

Kyishnapara, t>»., 7, 9 

Krishnaraja, ch. t . . . 215, 216, 229 

Krishnasarman, m., ..... 201 

Krishnubhatta, m ..... 97 

Krishnudasapuriyabhatta, m., , . . 97 

Krishnnsahasra, m., . .... 97 

Krottur-Appayayajvan, m., . . . .67 

Kshatrapa, tfy., 7n 

Kshirasara, vi ., . . . . . .38 

Kubja-Yisbnuvardhana, s. a., Yishnuvardhana 

I., 130, 137, 141 

Kudagamalai-nadu, s . a. Kudamalai-nadu, . 46 

Kudall'Samgam5svara > te., . . . . 241 

Kddal-Sangam, ri., 241n 

Kudamalai-nadu, co., .... 46n, 47 

kudinai-kal, weight , . 106n 

kudinarkal, c?o,, ..... ]06n 

Kuge-Brahmadeva-katnbba, pillar > , . 151 

Kukiparrn, vi., 127,130 

Kukkanur, vi., ...... 166 

Kukkutavallika, s . a, Kukreli, . . .38 

Kukreii, vi., ...... 3g 

Kula^ore, 154n, 165 

kuiam, a shop, ...... 53 0 

Kulbd, m., ...... 117 

Kuliya-bssadi, te., * * • * . 22 

Kulottunga-Choda II., E. Chalukt/a k ., . 107n 

Kulotfcungachoda-brahoiamaharaja, w., . 73, 98 | 

Knldttunga-Ci.oja I., Chola k., 48, 49, 71, 73, I 


103, 104, 105, 106, 160, 198 
Kuldtturiga-Chdla III., do., . . 198, 199, 200 

Kulottunga-Rajendra- Genka, Yelandndu ch., 151 
Kumara, s. a. Skanda, .... 134 

Kumarabhatta, w., . , , .98 

Kumaragiri, Beddi k., • * . . 56 

Knraaranarayana-brahmamuhamja, m., 73, 95n, 98 

KumaiapeiUQjanbhatta, , 98 


Kum&rasambhava, quoted, + 


Page 
. 253n 

Kumarasvamibhatta, m.. 


. 98 

Kamarasvamin, te.. 


143, 149 

Kumarasvamipabasra, m., 


. 98 

kumbha, a pinnacle , . 


. 151 

kamudu or gumudu, tree , 


. 100 

Kundarage, vi., 


. 214n 

Kundava, E. Chalukya queen. 


. 105n 

Kundavai, Chola princess, . 


. 305n 

Kundavai, E. Chalukya princess . 

105, 106 

Kunkamam&badevi, W. Chalukya princess 

f . 244n 

Kuntala, co.. 

. 20,31,243,233 

Kuntimadhava, te., . 

• 

. 74 

Kuppayabhatta, m., . 

• • 

. 98 

Kuram, vi., 

49, 50n, 

52n, 53n 

Kurbet, v a» • • • 

* ♦ 

. 9n 

kuriba-seniga, 

• • 

. 23 

Kama or Kurmapari, s. a. Srikurmam, 

34,36 

Kurmesvara, te ., 

. . 

. 31 

Kurtakdti, vi., . 

. . 166, 176n 

Kurukkudi, vi . . , 


• 53 

Kurukshetra, • 

, , 

. 259 

Kupumadi, vi., . . . 

, # 

. 53 

Kurungudi, vi., . 

, , 

. 72 

Kusika, Saiva teacher, • 


. 226 

Kusinara, vi., . . , 

» • 

. 3 

Kusuvusvara, te., • . 

• . 

221, 225 

kutaka, . * 

. , 

119, 221 

Kyatanhajji, vi ., . . , 


164n 


L 

lagna : — 

Vrishabha, ...... 174 

Lakkundi, vi., 15 

Lakshma, Lakshmaua,or Lakshmldhara, ch., . 229 
Lakahmana, Dahald k., . . .20 

Lak^hmana, saint , .... 72, 196 
Lakshmanasdna, Sina k . .I8ln, 185n, l»7n 
Lakaim.antiitha, ri. f ..... 169n 
Lvkshioeshwar, vi+ . 166, 203n, 243, 244n, 255n 

Lakahn.i,/., 2l0a 

Lakshmi, goddess, 212n 

Lakshmidharabhatta, m., . . .98 

Lakujasiddiianta or Lakulagama, doctrine , 

220 , 222 , 226 

Laknlisa, s. a. Lakulisa, . . 226n, 227n, 228 

Laku]isa, Lakujisvara or Lakuja, Saiva 
teacher, . * 219n, 220n, 223, 225, 

226, 227, 228 



INDEX. 


283 


Page 

Lakulisa-Pasupata, sect, . . . 226, 228 

Lala, a. Lata, . ... 31, 257 

Lalara-Chandoja, m,, 234 

Lalkondavellibhatta, t»., .... 98 

languages ; — 


Kanarese, 10, 11, 15, 22, 24, 26, 29, 73n, 

152, 205, 214, 218n, 230, 232, 

234, 237,238, 239, 244, 261, 262 
Magadhi, ...... 1 

Pali, 2, 4, 5, 6, 101 

Prakrit, 4, 5 

Sanskrit, . 7,22,24,32,38, 49,54,70, 

72, 73 f 102, 104, 106, 107, 113, 115, 

117, 119, 123, 127, 131, 135, 139, 

142, 150, 152, 177, 183, 201, 208, 

230, 234, 238 

Tamil, . . 49, 50, 72, 73, 105, 159, 162, 205 

Teiugu, 31, 32, 33, 54, 55, 57, 69, 70, 71, 

107, 127, 135, 139, 142, 143, 150, 151 
Lanka, Ceylon , . . . . . 257 

Lata, co„ 31, 190, 216, 226 

Leyden grant, .... 42, 52n, 53n, 73 
linga, . 10, 21, 26, 28, 149, 189n, 214, 222, 

227 n, 232, 234, 237, 239, 241n, 242, 

260, 261,262 j 


j M a d an a * G opala, te„ . . 

Madanapada, vi., . 

Madanda or Madauda, f jro ily, 
Madapalla or Madapali i, u, 
Madatadhindhara, vi 
Madhava, , . . 

Madhava, s. a. Madiraja, . 

I Madhava, TF. Ganga Jc. t 
Madhavabhatta, m., 
Madhavacharya, author , 
Madhavarya, m*, . . , 

Madhavasahasra, m., . 

Madhavasarmabhatta, 
Madbavasarman, m. f 
Madhavasliadaiigavid, m., , 

Madhu, s. a . Chaitra, . 

Madhuban, vi*, .... 
Madhukanatha or MadhukesVara, te. 
Madbura (Madura), vi, . 

Madhurantaka, CMla k* t . , 


Mad bu rant aka, m., 
Madhurantaka, sur, 
M adb ubu J an a r bat: 
Madbnvt.yva 
Madhva, S'*f, 


of Hajcndra-Cii 


Page 

• • 56n 
. 185n, 187n 

229, 230, 231 

* . add. 

. 192, 107 

126, 135, 138 
. 10,21,31 
. 162 
98, 227, 228n 

• * 265n 
. 109 

* 98 

♦ 52 
. 201 
. 9S 

. . 149 

. 211 
. 259, 260 

* I'd, 255n 

. 106n 
. 106 

Lj . 106n 

♦ . 98 

. 241 

. 73n 


Lingamakurru, vi*. 

. . . 96 

Liiigayat or Lingawant, s. a . 

Vira-Saiva, 11, 

15, 216n, 239, 240, 241, 242, 244 

Lihgodbhavasvamin, te*, 

. 150 

Lohatadi. m. t , . 

. 188 

Lokamahad6vi, queen of Chalukya-Bkima II. » 142 

Lokanatha, m,, . 

. 109 

Lokayata, sect , . • , 

. 219n, 220, 227 

lokuttara dhamnoa, the nine, 

. . . 102 

LolaTka, te., 

. 117 

LOtugedda, vi., . 

. 56 

Lucknow Museum 

112, 113, 115, 116 

Lumbioi, vi, . . . 

. 2, 3, 4, 5 

Lumminigama, *. a* Lnmbini, 

1, 2, 4 

M 

M&balayra, ch., . 

. 171a 

Macha or Badagi-Macha* m 

. 262, 264 

Maehamantrin, t»., 

. . . 69 

M&chana, m.. 

68, 69 

MaohhlSsbabr, ei., 

. 115 

Madalambika,/!, 

. 239, 242 

Da »4amba, .... 

. 29 


Madirai, 6. . ’rrit., 

. 43 

Madirai*ko' ' r , >u . j V 

aiantaka I., , 42, 162 

Madiraja, m . 10, 

11, 21, 25. 2‘>. 31. 239, 242 

Madiyanna, m., . 

. 231 

Madra, cn, r , 

. HO 

Madras , •; 

C. 10**, 118, 123n, 13. V.*9 

Madukc'ya, ch.* . 

. 259 

Madur, vi. 

. I54n 

Madurai, s* a. M*e\ u, 

. . . 199, 200 

I Madurandagan-madai. cw'/>, . . . 106 

Magadba or Magadba, co., 

. 190, 211n, 253n, 257 

Magha, poet, 

. 225a 

Maglona, vi, . • 

. 210 

Mahabharata, . . 

. 13,. 31, 33, 254a 

Mabadeva, a lihga , 

7, S, 43, 44, 183, 187, 228 

Mabadeva, K&katxya k*, 

. 142, 149 

Mahadeva, m . 

. 104 

Mabadevabbatta, m*, . 

• • . . 234 

M&badevarasa, ch*, 

, . 234, 235, 236 

Mabadevi,/., 

. 164a 

mabajana (Brabmansb 

10, 21, 22, 23n, 25, 


26, 28, 31, 231 

Mahakala, rt., . 

. 131, 134 

Mabakala, Saiva sairt, 

. 243n 

mabaklitta, a great hurtt, 

. 149 



234 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


(Tot. V. 


Page 

mabamandalesvara, 109n, 218, 223, 225, 226, 

235, 236, 238, 242, 244, 245, 257, 259 
mabamatya, ...... 2l7n 

mabanavami-amavase, s. a. navaratri-amava.se, 13 
ma hap ara mavis vasin, • • . • 226 

mahapasayita, ..... 225, 226 

mabaprahhu, title , . . 10, 21, 22, 26, 28, 31 

mnhaprachandadandaoayaka, . 215n, 229n, 235n 

mabapradhana, 25, 26, 28, 103, 217, 218, 225, 

226, 231, 235n, 236n, 238 
maharaja, 7n, 8, 121, 125, 126, 134, 138, 142, 

154n, 155, 156, 157, 158, 159n, 202, 

208,209, 210, 211, 212,213 
maharajadhiraja, 21, 25, 28, 95, 103, 113, 115, 


117, 121, 127, 130, 138 : 


156, 157, 103d, 196,201,202, 203, 


204, 210, 211, 

Mahaiajapadi, s. a. Marajavadi, 
mabai&jfii, . . • 

Maharashtra, the Dekkan , • 

ma! a^ali, rice , • 

mabasimanta, ... 17 

mabasamantadhipati, . 172,215 


218, 22 9n, 230, 231, 234, 235, 236n 


m ah asu m dli i vi grab i ka, 

M abaso- or MahasOya-pattala, di., 
mabavadda, village , 
Mabavali-Vanaraja, Bdna ch., 
Mahavishnubhntta, m., 
Mah^ndtadhiraja, ch., 

drapala, Kanauj k., . 

M.>}nd rapaladeva, do., 

M.ih *’ndiavarman, Chola ch.. 
M.ibendiavairaan III., Pal lava k. 


MaLO'vara. s. a. Siva, 21, 95, 106, 196, 212, 


228, 


Mal^varabhatta, . 

Mabimsak.i. vi . 

MahipaUdeva, Kanauj k., . 

Mahisa, vi., 

Maholaya or Mahodaya, s. a. Kanauj, 208, 

209, 210, 211,212 


142n, 154n, 


29, 233, 234, 235 
. 206 
. 113, 117 

. 190 
. . 253n 

In, 216, 225, 229 
,216, 217n, 


. . 201 

. . 115 

. 218 
50, 52 

. . 22 

• . 164n 

208, 209, 210, 211 

. 210 
. 123n 

• . 157n 


231, 254, 255, 257 

. . 52 

• 102, 103 

• . 211 

. 102 


Malta da, vi.. 

. . 188 

Maitieya, Saiva teacher. 

• . 226 

Malabar, co., . * . , 

• 7n 

Malahiuiyanindran or Malaiginiyaninran, s. a. 

Agastya, .... 

. 72 

Malahiniyanindraobbatta, m.. 

. 98 

Malftpa, ..... 

. 218n 

M V .va, co., . . 31, 38, 170n, 229, 235, 257 


IL, 


Malavaraiyan Senni Kandan, m., 
Malavelli, vi., 

Malayala-Jnanaraei, m., 

Malay es vara, Saiva saint 
Male, co., . 

Malegara-Dasaya, m , 

Maleyanayaka, m., 

Mali-Cbattaya, m. t # 

Malkaporamu, vi., 

Malkapuram, vi., # 

Malkhed, vi., , 

Malla, m ., . 

Malladevi, queen o/'Haidhara 
MalUva]]i, s. a . Malwalli, 

Mallavrolu, vi., . 

Mai lay a, vi., . , 

Mallela-Gangana, m., . 

Maliibb a vara^a, ch., 

Mallideva, ch., 

Malliduva, m., , 

llalhderaor Uallikarjuna, Kddambach 
Mallikamodesvara, te., 

Mallikarjuna, te., 

Mallikarjunabhatta, m. t 
Malhsbdna, Jaina preceptor 
Maliiyana, m., . 

Mnlparbba, ri., . 

Malrava-Madfaava, m., 

Majugunda, vi ., , 

Malwalli, vi., , 

Alanmndur, vi., , 

Maiuidimakbin, m ., 

Mamidi-praggadayya, m., 

ManagOli, vi., 

Manalarata, ch., 

Mauapuri-Ddchaya, m 
Manasarman, m., . 

mana-stambha, . 

Manattikiniyansabasra, m., 
Manattukkiniyanbhatta, m., 
Manava-grihyasutra, . 

Manchanna, ch., 

Maiiohedlu, vi., . . 

mandalika, a ckief, 

Mandabka-Trmdtr a, sut of Marasimba 
Mandara, vi., . # 

Man-Dasor, vi., . 

Mandavelli-Xagaya, m., 
Mandavelli-Vallabha, m., 

Mandayabhatta, m., 


9 , 


Page 
. 44 

71, 74, 96 
. 31 

. 254 
. 229n 
. 231 
. 231 
. 231 
. 134 
. 132n 
170n, 216n 
. 103 

. add. 

244, 259 
73, 96 
68. 69 
. 69 

232, 234 
31, 229, 259, 262 
. 231 
. 239, 260 
. 223n 
. 11 
. 22 3 n 
152n, 228n 
. 2?4 
. 241n 
. 67 

244, 257 
. 244 n 
. 160n 
. 67 

. 55n 
25n, 242, 244, 253n 
. 167 
. 68 
. 109 
171, 180 

• 98 
73, 98 

• 38n 
. 240 
. 149 
. 259 

II., . 168 
. 123n 
38, 72n 
. 69 

. 69 

. 98 



INDEX. 


285 


Mandhata, island , . , 

manevergade, 

ilaiigalanaka, s. a. Maglona, 
Mangi, h # 


Page 

• . • 116n 

21, 218, 234, 236 
« 210 
. . 123, 126 


Maigi-Ynvaraja, E. Chalukya k., . 130, 137 

Manigavapli, t. a. Managoli, 9, 10, 21, 25, 26, 28, 31 
Manikyavalli, do., . . . . 9, 21, 31 

Mammahgalain, vi., . 72, 73, 197, 198, 199, 206 

ilanimgavajli, s. a. Managoli, 9, 10, 21, 22, 23, 28, 31 


Matsya, ri„ 
mat tar, land measure , 
Matiarasa, m., * 

family, . 
Maunggun, vi.. 


Mavali-Vanaraya, sur. of Prithivipati II., 50 162 


Maninagabhatt t, m 
Manittidal, vi,, . 
Mahjugkosha, nymph, 
Mahkaditya, Matsya cli., 
MazAaditj^ maharaja, c4., 
Mahkanavya, m., , 

Manki-Nayaka, m., 
Maiinargudi, vi., 

-Marine, vi., 

mannettina-amavase, • 
tuanru, commons, * 

Mnnsa, vi., 

Mantri'Singana, m., « 
Mauu, rishi, 


. . . 98 

• • • o3 

. . 107, 253 

• * 108, 109n 

. . . 109n 

• . . 109 

. . . 109 

• 48 

154n, 158, 160, 161 

• . . 12 

. 52n 

, . . 102 

* • , ODD 

20, 138, 142, 148, 260 and add. 


Mavanabhatta, m., 
Mavana-gandhavavana, sur . 


Manyakheta, ». a. Malk'neil, 170, 172n, 176n, 

177u, 179, 180, 1S9,190, 196 

Manyapnva, vi., 161n 

Maiajavaili seven thousand, di., . . 206, 207 

Marasimha, Silah&m ch., . . . 167n, 236n 

Marasimha I., TV. Ganga k., 153, 156n, 157u, 

161n, 162 

Marasimha II., do., 152, 153, 154n, 167, 168", 

169d, 170n, 171, 172, 173, 178, 

179, ISOo 

Marasimhavarman, ch., 

Maiaturi-Krishnatna, m., . 

Marayapadi, ». a. Marajavadi, , 

Mari, goddess, . , 

Marjavada rajya, s. a. Marajavadi, 

Maikandevapurana, quoted, 

Marnjadeva, TF. Ganga k., . 

Maruvasi, vi 

MaryadasagaraJeva, Kalachuri (?) k., 
mafahani, s. a. mahasahani (PI, . 

Masaneya, m., . . . 

Masulipatam, vi., . , 122, 131, 134, 139 

matta > • 22, 23, 28, 221, 222, 223, 224, 228, 2 45n 

m athapati, 224 

*’*•. 1, 4 

Matin, anhhatta, m , 95n 

Matsya, family, . . , 107, 108, 109n 


a IV 


. 170n l 
. 69 

. 206 
256 and add, 

. 206 
• 230n 
153, 166n, 167 
. 214n 
. 113 
. 103 
. 231 


Marayabbatta, m., , 

Maviyashadaiigavid, m.. 

May d ana, m., . # 

Mayideva, ch., . 

Mayidevapandita, ch ^ 

Hayiddvarasa, ch., 

Mayuravarman, Kadamba h 
Mcdaparyu, vi., . 

Medayabhatta, m . 

Medayashadaugavid, m 
Mediyabhatta, m 
Megbaduta, quoted , 

Mel-Adaiyaru-natlu, di,, 

Melagaui, vi., 
melalike-manneya, tax , 

Melamba, queen of Vijayadity 
I Melpadi, vi., • 

Meiukote, vi., 
melvatte, . . t 21/ 

Merkava, vi., .... 122n, 174, 175 

Morubrakman, m., . , . , 

Mesaoa, vi., . , • . 102 

Mevad, 

Miinamsii, doctrine , • • . 96, 220, 222 

Mimamsaka, • 2l9n, 227 

Minamini, vi., . . . . , 119^ 12 1 

inindanj, vessel, . « . , , .106 

Mindigal, vi., 205 

Mindumgailu, s. a. Mindigal, . 205, 2u0, 207 

Minur, vi., ••*... 169n 
3Iii*aj, vi., * * ... add. 

miiror banner, 172 

Mogevada, vi., ,22 

Moharna, s. a. Mohgaon* • 1^2, 197 

Mobgaon, vi., •**,., 192 

Mokala, Gahila Jc., . . . .39 

months, lunar : — 

Asbadha, 12, 26, 28, 161n, 168 add., 1 69. 

173n, 199, 264 

Asvayuj or Asvayuja, ... 36, 169 

Asviua, 13, 15, 36 

2 p 2 


Page 

• • . 107 

. 22, 25, 28, 233 

. 2S 
170, 172, 176n, 179 
101 


• . . 98 

of Govindaraja, 

215, 230n 
. . 98 

. . 98 

. 231 
- 235, 236 

• . 226 

. . 225 

• . 259 

. . 96 

. 98 

* • 98 

* . 93n 

* * 3Sn 

• 50, 52 
152, 16S, 171n 

• • 259 

. 135, 138 

* 223 



286 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Pagb 

Bhadrapada, . 11, 12, 13n, 23, 48, 172 b, 

201, 215, 231 

Chaitra, . . 11, 12n, 14, 143, 149, 199, 219 

Jyaisbtha, . . 12, 113, 155n, 198 r 200 

Karttika, . 7, 9, 13, 24n, 117, 155n, 167n, 

168n and add., 232, 234 
Magba, . 13, 15, 49, 168, 174, 175, 232, 233 

Margasira or MargaBirsha, 13, 24, 25, 28n, 

168n, 175 

Nabbas, s. a. Sravana, .... 37 

Pausha, . • - 11, 12n, 13, 22, 2 Sb, 55, 67 

Pbalguna, 14, 164, 168n and add., 173, 174, 

209, 213, 241 

Sravana, . * 11, 12, 165n, 168n, 239n 

Vaisakba, 12, 14, 15n, 38, 107, 109, 113, 

115, 189, 196, 197, 215, 230 
Moon, race of tbe, 33, 37, 95, 183, 186, 257 and add. 


Mottakara- Holey ana, m., 
movali, tree , . • 

m6vi, do 

Mrigdsavarman, Kadamba k., 
Mudaballi, vi., 

Mudda, m., • . • 

Muddarasa, ch ., . • 

Muddurra, vi., . 
Madiya-Singana, m., • 

Mudukundur, vi 
mnkharaudra, #. a. mauna, . 
Mukkanna-Kadamba, mythical k. 
Mukunda, mo., . 

Mularaja, m 
Mulasthana, te., . 
Mfdastbana-Mab&deva, te 


apadu, 


Mulgund, vi„ 
muliga, . • 

Mul}i*nadu, di., • 

Mnlukalapdndi, vi ., 

Mummadivaram, s. a. Mummadivar 
Mummadivarapadu, vi,, 
mamrnuridanda, 

Mundag6d, vi ., ... 

Munja, Paramdra k ^ . 

Mnntakajgvastba, vi., . . 

MuriganabaJJi, vi* 

Murngamale, vi., 

Mnrnganamale, s. a. Mnrugamale, 
muaindi, tree, • 

Mu$ta or Mu^tiga, m* 

Muttarasa, W. Ganga k., . 152, 153, 154n, 

155, 156, 157, 168, 159, 160, 161, 163, 165 


231 
. 100 

. . 100 

. 157 

154, 155n, 164a 

. 229 

. 206, 207 

. . 109a 

. . 69 

. 161 
. 228a 
• . 260 

. 107 

. 103 

22, 143, 149 
. 143n 


154b, 170n, 172, 173 


46, 47 
. 149 
55, 69 
. 55 

. 23 

244, 259 
. add. 
. 188 
214, 230 
. 206 
206,207 
. 100 
. 230 


Pag* 

Mdvarak&neya-sariitati or -samtana, 219, 220, 

221, 222, 223, 224, 225, 230, 233 


N 


Nabhika, vi., . . . . 

. 3 

Nadamani, Vaishnava dch&rya , . 

. 73 

nadavirukkum (madhyastha), an arbitrator, . 73 

Naga, a snake, .... 

. 2, 50, 52 

Naga, family, .... 

. . 126n 

N&gabhata, Kanauj k. t 

208, 212, 213 

Nagabhata, Kanauj prince. 

. *209,213 

Nagada, vi., .... 

. 96 

Nagadanta, ch.. 

. 162 

Nagadattabbat^a, . 

. . 98 

Nagadeva, m., . 

. 21 

Nagaddvasahasra, m.. 

. 98 

JS T agad6nayabbatta, m.. 

. 98 

Nagalambiki,,/*., . , 

. 240, 241 

N agamangala, vi 

154n, 155n, 156 

N aga- pane h ami, tithi, 

. 12 

Nagapura-Nandivardhana, di * 

. 189, 197 

nagara-amavlUe, . . 

. . 12 

Kagarakhapda seventy, di., . 213, 214, 215, 

230, 237, 244, 259, 264 

N&garakhande, vi., . 

. . 260 

Nagardsvara or Nakharlfivara, te.. 

. 221, 223 

Nagarle, vi., .... 

. 164n, 169 

N&gattara, family 

. 164 

Nag6svara, te 

142, 143, 149n 

Nagip^i,/., .... 

. 134 

Nkgiyaka, «... 

. 245 n 

Nagpnr, vi 

. 188, 192 

Naishadham, name of a Telugu work, . . 65n 

Naishadbiyacharita, quoted, . 

. 228a 

Naiy&yika, «... 

219, 220, 228 

nakara, • . . . . 

. 23 

nakshatras : — 


Ardr&, • . * . . 

. . 49 

Hasta, 

197, 198, 199 

MpigaSiraha, • 

. 199 

PdrvabhadrapadA . • • 

. 46,48 

Rfevati, ..... 

. 174, 175 

H6bini, . . 

. 106 

Satabhishaj, .... 

. 168 

Sravana, .... 

. . 65 

Sv&ti . . 

174, 175, 200 


Nakulisa or NakullSvara, #. a. Laknjisa, 226n, 226 
NMAyiraprabandham, name of a work , . . 78a 



INDEX. 


287 


Page 

lialprabbu, an official in charge of a distent. 

Na rend res vara, te.. 




Page 

. 130 


223, 232, 233, 234 

l Naigund, vi., . 




9n, J6G 

ualu or naluka, s. a, ualva, . 

. 113 

\ Nan kedapum bund i, vi., 




. 149 

nalva, land measure* • 

. 113 

\ N,u*!uri-Mallaya, m., . 




. 68 

Namana, m. s 

. 109 

, Naiiua la, /*/ , 




190, 22b n 

namasya, s . a. sarvanamasya, 

. , . 2-53 

| nasyui.ka, . 




. I88n 

Namayabbatta, m., . 

. . . 9S 

; Xataiaja, te,. 




72, 105 

Nambiyandanbbatta, in.. 

. . . 93 

\ Nat.ivada, co., 




. add. 

Nammalvar, Vaishnava saint, 

. • . 73n 

\ Nati.a, s. a. Nadamuni, 




. 73n 

Nandagiri, s. a. Nandi, 

. . 162, 163 

: Nat ri pari, s. a. Natavada, 




. add. 

Nandanavana umbrella, 

• 172 

\ Na'i-.ari, vi.. 




. 201 n 

Nandi, hill, 

... 162 

Navabnpcta, vi., . 




. add. 

Nandi, Siva's ball, 168n, 214, 232, 237, 239, 

Nava kb an davada, ri., . 




. 74 


•210, 262 

Nawtmma, Chola ch., . 




. 123n 

Nandikumarabhatta, m., 

98 

navaratn-amavase. 




. 13 

Nandisvara day, . . 16 Sn and add- 173n 

Xavavada, /*/., 




74, 96 

Nandivalli, vi., . 

. 201 ; 

N a vile, 




. 28 

Nandivardhana, r i., 

. l.'b 

i.ayaka. 




. 2GI 

Nandivaiman, Nanuipotavarman 

/-/’ Nandipe- - 

Nn\anak*‘lide\i, queen o/*Govinda^handia. 

. 117n 

taraja, Pallava k.. 

107, 15S, 100,203 

X a van and i, u., . 

. 


, 

. 228 

Nandi var man, s . a. Vijaya-Nandi 

-Yikrainavar- 

neWidu, 


• 

• 

28, 230n 


man, ..... 

l5Sn, 159. 160 

Nanjbnadu, di.. 

13, 44, 45, 16 

Nannayabhatta, Telugu author , . 

. 31 

Nanniya-Ganga, sur. of Butuga II., 

. 166, IGSn 

Napeikia, s . a . Nabhika, 

• • 3 

Narada, riski, .... 

. 253n, 254 

Naraga, Sahara ch., 

171, 179, ISO 

Narahari, in., .... 

. 68 

Naranamantrin, m.. 

. . 69 

Narabga, sape , . 

. 107 

Narasirnba, Chdlukya f rivet, 

. lObn 

Naraeiriiha, m . 

6^ 

Narasirbha I., Hoysala k., . 

. 174 

Narashhha, te., . 

. 225 

Narasimhabh-itta, in., . 

. 98 

Narasimhapotavarnian, Pallava k.. 

. 204 

Narasiihbavarman, s. a. Vii i\ a-Xai asimbavar- 

man, 

50, ICO 

Narasimhavarman I., Pallava k., . 

. 50 

Narasimbavarman II., do., 

. 157 

Narajapa, s. a. Visbnu, '28, 130, IS". 202, 

20", 228 

Narayanabbatta, m 

. 98 

Naiayanabbatt«»somayajin, m.. 

. 98 

Narayanat«abasra, m., . 

os 

Naiay.tiiashadaugavid, m., 

98 

Naiayarbvila-a, quottd. 

. add 

NarCnrramrigaraja, sur. of Vijuvad 

it va I 1 . 

20 n 119,122 138. 16 In. 16? t 


nelli, tuc, .... 

. 100 

Ncllure, vi., .... 

122 n 

"Semak a, family, ... 

. 210:1 

Nengnur, ri., .... 

. 201 

Nepal, Nepala or Xepalaka, co., 1, 4, 31, 138n, 257 

Neriyan-Mii von da ve]ar, m-, . 

45 

Xerur, vi., ..... 

202u, 203 ii 

Neaargi, vi., .... 

«- . 256a 

Neyyundalvar, Vaishnava ochdrya, 

. 73 

X igaril i-SOla-cb aturved imaiigalam, s. 

a. Slier- 

rnadevi, ..... 

. 47 

Nig:irili-8o!an, sur. of Ilajendra-Chola I., . 47 

Nigarili-Sola-Yinnagar, te., . 

. 47 

Xigliva, vi., .... 

1,3,5 

N*h?ankasimha, sur. of Udayabarna, 

. 1S3, 187 

N..i, wo., .... 

. 253 

Xilabbe, /., .... 

. 216 

Nilakantba, te., .... 

. 210n 

Nilakanthabbatta, m., . 

. 9S 

Nilalochana, f., .... 

. 210 

Ndambii or Nilambika,/., . 

. 242 

Nimlndevabbtitta, m., . 

. 08 

Kiinbatgi. - i. 

. 2t:n 

Nira\ad\abhatta, m . • • 

. 95n, 98 

Nirgulr, ri.. 

. . 22 

Nirnpama, Pdshtrakuta 4*., • 

. 191 

Niuipama, sur. o/Dbruva, . 

. 189, 11*0 

Nirvana, ..... 

. 3, 4, 1C2 

Nl&ltadba, mo., .... 

253 



288 


. 98 

. 98 

. 170a 
7, 8,9 
. 69n 


nislika, a half-j)agoda, 

Nitalaksha, m., . • 

Nitimarga, sur. of TV. Gahga Icings 


Ereyappa, 

Nitimarga-Kobganivarma-Pernu 
Banavikrama, • 

Nityanandabbatki, m., . • 

Kityanandatrivediu, rn., 

Is itvavarsba, sur. of Pashtrakuta Icings , 
nivurtaua, land measure, 
imugin, 

Kolamla, s. a. Pallava, 152, 164, 168, 172, 176n, 179 
Nolambadhiraja, Pallava ch., . . 165, 169 

Nolambakulantaka, sur. tf/YTarasimlia II., 152, 

168,171ii, 172, 173,178, 180 
Nolambantaka, do., • . . 168, 179, 180 

Nolambavadi thirty-two thousand, di., 152, 

157, 158, 159, 164, 165, 168, 169, 170, 2l7n 
Nomi, field, ...... 142 

Nfipakama, Chola ch., . . . , , 123n 

Nripa&ekhaiavalanaUut’, vi.,» . . . . 45 

Nripatnuga, sur . of Aruogliavarsha I., 159, 189, 190 
Nripatungadeva, s.a. Yijaya-Nripatuhga-Yikra- 
mavanuan, . , . . . .159 

Nripatunga-Yikramavannan, do., . .50 

Nrisimha, god , ...... 72 

Nnsimha, m., ..... 32,37,68 

Nnsirbba, Matsya ch , . . . . 108 

2 iula-hunnuve or nula-parvan, . 11, 12, 14, 23 

Nulamba, s. a. Nolainba, .... 159 

Nuiamba-padi or N ulambar-padi, s. a. Kojamba- 

. 45, 46, 47 
. 231 

• • 43n 

. . 69 

. 21 
. 235, 258 

. 220, 222 


EPIGEAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vol. V. 

Page 



Page 

32, 36, 37, 96 

6ldla, Saiva saint. 

... 

. 254 

. . 231a 

O-ki-ni, co.. 


. 254a 

. I64n, 165n 

Okkaka, s. a. Ikshvaku, 


. 2 

W. Gahga 

okkala-dere, tax , • 


. 234 

. . 164n 

Onavala-pathaka, di., . 


113, 114a 

, sur. of 

Or, n . , . ( . 


. 38 

. 153, 165 

Orangal, vi., . • 


• 56 n 

i, sur . of 

i OrisF3, co „ 

• 56d, 57, 

108n, 18Sn 

. 153, 163 

Orungai Arangan, m ., . 

. 

. 43 


parladhakka, drum , • 

Padaittaraman Kanaiyan, m 
Patlaria, vi. , 

Padharn, m., . 

Padmaladevi,/’., 
Padmambike,/., 
Padmanabha, m . 9 
Padmanabhabbatta, *» 
Padmavati,^, . 
Paduvur-kottam, di.. 


vudi, . * * • . 

Kiilnihgoriya-Marana, in., . 
nunda-vilakku, a perpetual lamp , 
Nuntaki-Gaugana, m., . 

Kurmridi-Taila, s. a. Taila II., . 
Nuvm.idi-Taikpa, s. a . Taila III., , 
Nyaja, doctrine, 


Odda, Orissa, 
Oddadi, vi., 
OdijUvadi, co., 
Otlde-:eca, co 
odi, tree, 


Pagan, vi., • 
Paganavaratn, vi., 
Paka-nadu, co., . 

Pdla, family , . 

PaUkdd, vi., 
palam, weight, 

Palavela or Palevela, s, 
Pall, vi , , 

jalidbvaja, 

Palivela, vi., 
Pnllabhattaraka, m 
Pallava, dy 


1 


. 203 

. 44 

and add., 2» 4, 6n 
. 1S8 


215, 229 
. 254 
. 115 
. 98 

. 242n 
50, 52 
. 101 
. 135 
. 56 

. 182n 
• 57a 
. 43 

a. Palivela, . 65, 69 

113, 114a 
, 203 
. 55 

119, 121 
50, 119n, 120n, 162, 157, 


! 15S, 159, 160, 162, 163n, 164, 165, 

168, 169, 170, 171, 179, 180, 191, 203, 204 
Pallava, mythical k., . • . • 60, 159 

| Pallavadhiraja, ch., • • 

! PallavadUya, Pallava ch., • 

Pallava-kattu, tank, 

Pallavamalla, sur . o/* Nandi var man 
Palligondan, s. a. Vishnu, 


. I08n 

55, 56 

. 108 

• 55 

. 100 


Palligomlanbhatta, m., 
PatnaUpati-Narahari, m ., 
Pamarru, vi., 

Pamb'jn-u, s . a. Pamarru, 
Pammava, /, * . 

pana, coin , 
paucha-kula, 


.164a 
. -169 
206, 207 
50, 157, 158, 160 
. 72 

. 98 

. 68 
. 140n 
139, 140n, 142 
139n, 140, 142 
, . 231 

. 135, 138a 



IXDEX. 


2S9 


paucha pradhanah, the jive ministers, 
pancba-vari, .... 


Pagb 

Pancb ala or Pancbalak a, co., • . 31,149 

Pane ha lad eva, W. G-ahga Jc., 153, 154n, 170n, 172, 

173 

panchali, .*.•••• 13Sn 
Panchalinga, te. t . . . 221, 223 n, 227 

pancba-maha3abda, 25, 215n, 216, 218. 229, 

230, 231, 236, 257, 259, 261n 
Pancbapam]tavamalai, hill, . ' . . . 157n 

71, 96 
135, 13Sn 

Panda, Yelandndu ch., . • 151 

Pandaranga, m. t . . 123, 126,128,131 

Pandavas, 227 

Pandisvara, te„ ...*•• 151 
pandit a, ...... 72o, 115 

Panditarayacharitaui, name of a Telugu work, 55n 
Fanduva, vi., 56n 

Panduvasmadhani, k., . . . . .55 

Pamlya, co., add., 31, 42, 43n, 15n, 71, 162, 171, 

179, 180, 199. 200, 2u2, 204, 206, 218, 223 
Pandyas, the live, . • . « 10*1 

Panini, grammarian , . 204n, 225 

Panin iya, grammar , . • • • 222 

Patmala-Kommaya, m. t • * . .67 

pannasa, 141n, 142 

pannaya, tax, 217, 218 

Panta-kula, 54, 55, 67 

Pantaknlaiaja, sur. of Doddaya I., • . 55 

Panungal, s . a. Hangal, . . • 201, 259 

P&nuiigal five hundred, di., • • 244, 259 

Panungal-vishaya, di., . . • . 201 

paradai, an assembly, • . . . 43n 

Paraganda, Mat&ya ch , 108 

Para k^ari varman, Chela k ., . • • 42,43 

Parakeaarivarman or Parakesarin, sur. of ChSla 
kings , . . . . 42, 43, 47, 162, 228 

paramabhattaraka, . 21, 95, 113, 115, 117, 

130, 142, 196, 229, 233, 234, 235 
paramahamsa, ascetic , . • . . ♦ 222 

Paramara, dy., . . add., 170n 

param^gvara, • . 21, 28, 113, 115, 117, 

121, 130, 138, 142, 154n, 156, 157, 163n, 

196, 201, 202, 203, 204, 229, 233, 234, 235 
Parana &§ vara, s. a. Siva, * . 220, 230, 259 

ParamMvarabhatta, m., .... 98 

Paramos vara varman I., Pallava h. 9 . • 157 

Paramegvaravaiinan II., do., . • * 157 

Parantaka 1., Chola A, 42, 43, 50, 153, 159, 162 

Paraaurasmriti, quoted $ . 265n 

Paraai , the Persians, . 104 


Page 
. 203 
. 162 
. 210 
72, 98 
, 98 

, 131 


Parasika, the Pei'sians , 

•Parivipuri or Parivai, vi 
Parla-Kimedi, vi., 

Partkasarathi, m , 
Parthasarathibbattaeomayajirj, m., 

Paruvula-gunta, tank , . 

Parvatavali or Parvatamnaya, 219, 221, 223, 

224, 225, 226 

Parvati, goddess, . 14, 134n, 189a, 210n,240, 

253, 254, 259 

Patachchara, co., 

Patalamalla, ch., 

Pataliputra, s. a. Patna, . 

Pataiijala, yogaS&stra, 

Patasvara, s. a. Patachchara, 
path aka, a district, 
pattabandha, a coronation. 


Pattadakal, vi., • 
Pattada-Kisuvolal, s. a 
pattala, a division, 
pattamahadevi, . 
pattanasvamin, . 
Patta^oinaballi, vi., 
Patta vardh ini, fain ily, 
patu, . , 

Pavase, vi ., 

Pedakota, Beddi Jc., 
Peddana, m., . 

Peddayauikshita, m., 
peddore, s. a. perdore, 


Pattadakal, 


Peheva (Pehoa), vi., 

Pennacbarya, m., 

Pennatav&di-vishaya, di., 
perdbre, a great river, , 169n 

Peretale-divasa, Siva’s day , 
pergade, a chamberlain, 

Periyanambi, Vaisknava dchdrya, 
Periyanauibibhatta, m. t 
Periyandan, Vaisknava dchdrya, 
Periyandan bhatta, m., • 

Periyandan bhattasdmayajin, m., 
Periyapuranam, quoted, 
perjunka, tax, . . . 

Perma, sur. of Jagadekamalla II., 1C. 
Perrcadi or Permadi, sur. o^Marasimba 
Perma b. vir. if Vikr.tinaditya VI 
Permadi, XT. Oavga k.. 

Permanadi, sur. of Muttarasa. 

Peroba, vi., . . • 


20n 


16Sn 


170n, 171 
4, 117 
. 222 
. 257 
113, 114n 
127, 138n 
122n, 166 
. 166 
113,117 
. 317 
. 223 
. 164n 
140. 142 
. 141 n 
171, ISO 
. 55 

. 109 
. 68 
. 169n 
169n, 173 
210,211 
. 71, 96 

131.132,134 
170n, 172n 
. 1 6S u 
. 218 
. 73 

. 98 

. 73 

. 98 

. 98 

. 254 n 
15,217 
1. 232, 258 
II .168, 169 
. 258 
. 164n 
. 159n 
. 115 



290 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vol. Y 




Page 

i 

Page 

Perumadi, Eeddi jfc., . 

. 

55, 57 

pravaras : — 


Peruniburakkadalbhattasomay 

ajin, m.. 

. 98 

Angirasa, 

. 113 

Pethada, m., 


102, 103 

: Avatsara, . , 

. 115 

Pevalaha, m., . . # 


. 113 

| B barmy as va, . 

. 113 

pidiligai, .... 


. 52 

I Kasyapa, . « 

. 115 

piligaragavadu, . . , 


. 150 

; Alaudgalva, . 

. 113 

Pilla, ch>, .... 


. 170n 

j Xciidhruva. . . . 

. 115 

Pinnakbta, Heddi k., . 


. 55 



Pirudi-Gabgaraiyar, s. a. Prithivipati I 

159, 162n 

1 Prajaga. s. a. Allahabad, 

. 259 

Pitambara, Mu salmon ch., . 


. 241 n 

| Pietisvara, te., . . . 

. 123n 

Pithaporam, vi., 


70, 71, 74 

1 Frtthivi-Kougani or PrithivBEoiiguni, sur. of 

Pittayabhatta, m.. 


. 9S 

Aluttarasa, 

153, 155, 156 

Piyadasi, sur. o/’Asoka, 


. 4,6 

Frithiviniula, k., • 

. 119n 

Polakumbarra, vi., 


73. 96 

Fritkivipati I., TP. Ganga k., 

. 153, 162 

Polekesi-Vallabha, s. a. Puliku 

sin I., 

. 202 

Prithivipati II., do., . • 

50, 153, 157n, 159, 162 

Polukesi, A’., , 


. 167 n 

iYiti.mvallabha, »tir. o/’Kirtivarman I., . 202 

Polvula-gotra, 


O 1, 0 i 

PricLvi^vai'St, P eb.nidndu ch . 

. 71 

Poinpala, family. 


171n. 206 n 

Pnthvivallablia, sur. of Krishna III., . • 196 

Pompala-kafctu, tank, . 


206, 207 

Pivli. EiiLatiya k., , 

. 142, 149 

pongal, feast , 


. J2n 

Piula. s. a. Annavrola, » 

• • • 55 

Pouuada, vi.. 


. 71 j 

P ri/aya, *r. , . . . 

• 68 

Ponnatcrra, a., . 


71, < 4. 96 

f rA:a\a ( HuMi l., 

. 5b 

Ponnayada, $. a . Ponnada, 


73, 71, 96 * 

Prul'i-Ti\7. da, di.. 

. 71,74,95 

Ponnaya>ahasra. m„ 


. OS : 

r.-au..;, . . . 

. 101 

Ponniigoti-FOlibhatta. m., 


. 68 j 

puj'iri, .... 

. 150, 214n, 228 

Potamayya, m., . 


128, 130 ’ 

Pulakifm or PulekOsm, s. a. Pulikesin. 8, 202n 

Potaua, 77i., 


68, 73 | 

Puli kara, s . a. Huliger e 

, . 243n 

P6i arya n gari -cberu vu , tank, 


. 131 ! 

Pulikeb.n I., Chalukya k., • 

. 202 

POtasarraan, m., 


. 109 ! 

Pullkesin II., TP Chalukya k. 

. 7, 157, 202n 

Potaya, m., 


68, 69 ! 

Puluvangurrn, vi., 

. 96 

Potayashadar.gavid, m., • 

• 

* 98 J 

Pun ad, di., 

. 163 

Potivabbatta, m.. 

• 

. 98 | 

pundi, a hamlet , . 

71, 96 

Putiyasbadaugavid, m., 


. 9S ! 

P’ubgu tree. 

• 10O 


Prabhasa, sur . o/’Bboja I., . 
Piabbavati, Utkala princess, 
pi&bhu. . . . 21, 23, 2 5 : 

Prabiiu, m., • . , , 

rrabodhasivapandita, m., 
Piagjyutisba, co.. 

Pr.tri aii vara, te., . , 

l*i. „r. n ail ibha, . . . , 

Pi - .:a g«i. •/►. *r Daddu II., . 
P . . til :* g 4. - 7 . t : v" i* idd i I V. . . 


P ra t . t p t -c h a kravart i n , sur. of Jagadekamalla 

u lln, 234, 258 

i'laiapA-ii'okrdvartin, au,'. o/Taua III.. . 235 

L'-a, ICHatiya l., . . . 14,3a 

4 latidlakka >J rum, . 9 03n 

. . . 113,115,117 


■ 200, 213 

. 105 
31, 231, 257 
. 241 
72n, 95u 
. lBln 
. 235, 237 


37, 33, IfcO 


FunyavaiLibha, sur. of Anivarita-Dhanamjaya, 

201 

Pura, vi., ...... 235d, 236n 


Furadakeri, vi., 

Pm ana, 

Pungali, vi., . 
Pungere, s. a, Huligere, 


• 235n 
96, 222 
. 156 
. 244n 


Pnri-ere or Puligtre three hundred, di,, 168, 

169. 172. 173, 217, 218 
Punkara, s. a. Huligere, . . . . 243n 

paruhita, a family priest, . , . 95n, 109 

Purushottaraa, E. Chnlukya ch . 32, 34, 35, 

36, 37 

Purushottamabhatta, m., . . 98, 243, 254, 255 

Purushottamasarman, m ,, . . . • 109 

Putasapariya,jWrf, 142 

putti, measure, 149n 



INDEX. 


291 


Pagb 

R 

Raehamalla I., T V. Gahya k., 153,164, 165. 

166, 107, 191 

Raehamalla II., do., 153, 169n, 170n, 171* 173, I74n 


Racbcha-Gahira, do., • * 

Ruchehenashadangavid, in., . 

Racheya-Gahga, ch., • • 

Rachhyamalla, s . a. Raehamalla I. 

Raania, vt., . . • 

Raghava, m., 

Raghu, mythical Tc., . 

Rajachudamani, sur. of Marasimha II 

rajadhiraja, 

Rajadbiiaja, Chola k , 

Rajaditya, Chalukya ch 

Rajaditya, Chola k., 

Rajagopala-Perumal, te., 

rajagnru, a royal preceptor, 

Rajakani, vi., • .«*** 

Eajakesarivarman or Rajakesarin, sur. of 

Chola kings, . . . • 42, 49, 206, 207 

Rajamaheadra, sur. of Ammaraja II., • 1^9, 14-» 

Rajamahendra, Rajain abend ranngara, °pattana 

or °pura, s. a. Rajamahendri, - 31, 33, 54, 

55u, 56, 57, 67, 71 

• . 1 7 1 

Rajamahendri (Rajahmundry), vi., • t5A ’ ' 

Rajamalla, s. a. Raehamalla, • 165n, 166n, 1< 3a 

Rajamalla, W. Gaiiga L, 153, 151, 163, 161, 165» 

, , A Q J 

rajaparamesvara, . . . • • 

R&jaraja, JS. Chdlukya ch .. • 32, 34, 35, 3/ 

Rajaraia I., Chola k 42, 44, 45 n, 46, 48, 73, 

105n, 197, 206 

RajarajaL, E. Chalukya k 31, 32, 33, 105, 

106, 167n 

Rajaraja-brahmamaharaja, m., • 73,95n,?8 

Rajaraja-Kesarivarmau, s. a. Rajaiaja L> 44. 45, 46, 

4$ 

Aajaiaja-mandalam or -valanadu, the Tandy a 

, 45, 46, 47 
. 50 


210 
204 
227 u 


country , . . • 

Rajasimha, Pal lava k., 

Rajasimha, sur. of Indravarman I., 

Rajasimhesvara, te . • 

Tajasuya, sacrifice , 

Rajendra-Chola I., Clwla k., 42, 47, 106n, 206, 228 
Rajendra-Cboja II., s. a. Kulottuiiga-Cboja 
I W5,106 

Rajdndra-Chola-brabmamaraya, sur . of 


153, 167, 172 
. 98 

. . 164 

. 166, 191 

. 1,4 
. 109 
. 142, 149 

168n, 170n 
. 142 
205, 206. 207. 20Sn 
. 171, 179 

. 167, 191 

. 48. 72, 198, 199 
. 225, 226 

. 18S 


Appimayya, 


206, 207 


Page 

Rajeudra-Chola-Pompalamaraya, sur. of 
Bait ay va, ..... 206, 207 

Eajiga-Chola, s. a. Kuluttanga-Chula I., . 71 

Rajiga-Chula-manubhahga, sur. of Pdndya 
chiefs , 71 

Rajurgadh, vi., . . . • • .211 

Rajputs, tribe, • . . . • • 2, 3 

Eajukonda-Peddibhatta, m., • . • .68 

Rakkasa, ch., ..... I69n, 173 
Ralakkiyabbeya-Hanchike, vi., • .25 

Ealhaievi or Kalhanadevi, Xanauj queen, • 113 

Rama, k., • . . * - • • a( ^d. 

Rama, saint, . . 73n, 123n, 254, 237 

Rama, Eamadeva or Ramayya, 5 . a. RKantada- 
Rama, 243, 244, 245, 253, 255, 256 

and a.dd., 257, 259, 2C0 and a*ld. 
Earn abba Jra, Ranauj k., • • • 210, 212 

Eamabhadta, s. a . Rama, . . • .197 

Ramabhadract'va, Ranauj k., . • .210 

Eumahbatta. ni., » • • • • 

Ramabhatta, ^8 

Eauiathandra, s. a. v Ruma, . » • 149, 260 

Ratnachandra, lalavak., .... add. 

R amaebanu rapui am, it ^3 

Eamadasapuribliatta, m., . . . • 

Laina-bjv. 1 , te., D 2n 

Ramaduvabhatta, m., * • * • .98 

Eamagiuma, ct., • • * • *3,4 

Raman day abhatta, m., . • • 95n, 98 

Ramanuja, s aint, • • * #2, *3 

Ramasabasia, ?«*, • • • • * ^ 

Bamasvamit), te., ... - 41, 46, 4* 

Ramati, vi .»•*** 

Karuax a, 67,68 

* o 

Ram ghat, vi., « • # w 

Ramptdii-Kuehana, m., . • . GS 

Kampura, vi., . • * 15 4, 15on. 164n, 168n 

Rampurva, vi., . • • • * • A * 

Ramy«jair.atri ,s.a. Alagiyamanavala, . . 73 

Rana^raha, Gurjara jjnncc * . .38 


ranaka, 


103 


ma raiigabhaira va-G6v i ndarasa , -G5 t :nd a, 
•Govindamayva, or -Goviudar.ija, ch., 215, 

216, 217, 21S, 223, 231 

Ranarahgasimba, sur. of Chamundaraya, . 172 

Ranavikiama, TF. Gahga k., 153, 154. loan, 

162, 163, 165n 

rande-bunnuve, a . hosUia-hurmuve, . . 13 

rangabbo^a, « 

Rari^anatbabhatta, m. : . * • 95n, 98 



292 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Page 

Rasayana, m. 

rashtiakuta, a headman, 95, 126, 130, 134, 138, 142 
Eashtrakuta, dy., 20, 155d, 157, 158, 159, 

161, 162, 163n, 166, 168u, 169, 170, 

172, 189, 190, 191, 216n, 245n 

Satbdr, dy., 

Eatta, s. a. Eashtrakuta, 

Eatta-padi, co., . 

Rattodi , vi 
rautta, 

Bavana, m., . % 

ravi, tree, . 

Eavir&la, vi., 

Eavireva, s. a. Ravirela, 

Raya, s. a . Chamundaraya, 

Rayak6ta, vi 
Rayarid^va, k., . 

Eayavesyabhujamga, sur. of 
V^eAAx, family, 
regu, tree , . 
rekba, 
rela, tree , . 

Tellu, do., . . « 

Reinana, w., 

Remanashadahgavid, m. t 
Eemayabhatta, m.. 

Rendu vadala, vi., 

Rendu vat i, vi., 

Reva, m . 

Edvadasa, m. y 

R&vaka, queen of Butnga II %] 

Revamayya, m . 

Eerana I., J LaUya ch 
Eevana II., do., . 

Eevanta, son of Surya, 

Reveya-Galeya, m., 

Risbiyappa or Rishiyapayya, 

rifcta, tree, 

Ruddawadi, vt., . 

Rudra, Kdkatiya 1., , 

Rudra, s. a. Siva, 31, 140n, 

Kndrabbatta, m. 9 
Kudradevaraja, ch,, 

Eudriikumarabbatta, m 
Rudramba, Kdkatiya queen , 

Rudrasahasia, m.. 

Rum mind ei, s. a . Lurabini, 
rundra, 

rupakarin, a sculpt ,r. 


Eupavatara, 

ruvari, s. a. rupakarin,. 


Page 
. 96 

214, 231 


149, 16r 


Sahara, tribe, 171, 179 

Sabdamanidarpana, name of a work, 239n, 257 add. 

Sabdasastra, 220 

Sadupperi, vi., . 

Sadybjatapanditadeva, m., 

Sagara, mythical k., . 

Sahaddva, ch . 
sahani, a groom, 
sahasra, title, 

Sahara m, vi., . . 

Sahet-Mahet, vi., , 

Sahityavidya, 

Sahvadri, mo., 

Saigotta, sur. of Sivamara II 
Saiva, 10, 11, 12n, 72n, 214, 218, 219n 
226, 228, 232, 239, 240, 241 


244, 245, 253n, 254n, 255, 258, 259, 260 


Sajjanabbatta, m., 
®ajjapiga, vi., . 
Sakatayana, grammarian , 
Sakti-pariabe or -parahe, 
Sakya, tribe , 

Sakyamuni, s. a. Buddha, 
Sale, s. a. Kandajur-Salai, 
Salem, vi., 

Saleya-parsbe, 

sallekhana, 

Salukika, a. Chalukya, 


»»uiania, 

Samaradhuramdhara, sur. of Chamundaraya, . 172 
SamastabhuvaDasraya, biruda, 

Sambhnbbatta, 
samdhivigrabkdhikpita, 

8athdhivigrabika, . 

Samgamakbetaka-vishaya, di., 

Sam frames vara, te 

Samgramab hima, sur. of Dodda II. 

Samgiamapartba, .sur. of \ dma, 

Samkaran&rayanabhatta, m., 

Samkavanarayanasabasra, m., 

Samkarasahasra, m., » 

S&mkaraehadangavid, m., 

Samkhya, doctrine, , 

samkrantis 

Daksbi^ayana-samkranti, . 

Kanya-samkranti, . 


159 
22 
188, 260 

. 31 

103n, 235n 
. 72 

1 
2 

. 220 
. 104 
. I60n 
222 , 

243, 


98 
. 187 
. 222 
219, 221 
. 2,3 
2, 3, 4, 5 
206, 207 
. 156n 
. 221n 
• 152n 
. 171n 


71, 05 

• 98 

. 217 
. 39 

. 38 

240. 241 
. 67 

• 66 

. 98 

. 98 

. 98 

. 98 

219n, 220, 222, 227 


26,28 
• 172n 



INDEX. 


293 


Pag i 

Makara-samkranti, . . . 11, 12n, 13, 149 

Uttar&yana-samkranti, 22, 71, 96, 135,138, 183, 187 
sammappadhana, the four, .... 101 

Samsrahikohchika, vi., • . . . 1S7 

samudraghosha, musical instrument , . * 204 

samvatsara-pratipada, tit hi, • . . .14 

Samyu, rishi, ...... 52 

Sanchi, vi., ...... 5 

Saiigali, vi., ..... 190, 191 

Sangam, vi., 241n 

Sani, Saturn , ...... 149 

Sankagaunda or °gavnnda, m., • 243, 255, 261 

Sankama, Kalachurya k., . . 26, 28, 226 

sankha, a conch-shell , . . • 216n 

Sankka, Rdshtrakuta princess, . . * 159 

Sankheda, vi., ... 37 and add., 38, 39 

Santali^e thousand, di ., . . 169, 218, 225 

Santara,/a»id7y, .... 158n, 225 

Santivarman, Matura ch ., • . . .172 

Saptamadiya, di., . . . • 55, 56 

Saptardhalakshe, co., ...» * 217 

sarabha, fabulous animal, • 228 

Sarada, a. Sarasvati, . . 22 and add. 

Sarana, • 260 

Sarasvati, goddess , 

Sarasvati- Pvolubhatt a, m,, 

Sarpavaratn, vi., • 

Sarugur, vi., .... 
Saruvaraunavala-pathaka, di, 

Sarvadaisanasamgraha, name of a tvo) h 
Sarvadeva, ch., . . . • 

Sarvadevabbatta, m., . 

SarvadevabbattasdmayajiD, m., 
sarvadhikarin, . . 

sarvanamasya, 

Satalige, s. a. Sattalige, 

Sat&ra, vi., 

Sathari, s. a . Nammalvar, 

Sati, ri., .... 
satipattbana, the four, 

Satdja, m., , 

Sattalige seventy, di., . 

Satyaki , family, . . • • 

Satyamartanda, Matsya ch., * * 

Satyasraya, sur. of W. Chalukya kings, 8, 21, 

201, 202, 203, 204, 229, 233, 234, 235 
Satyasraya-Dhruvaraja-Indravarman, Chalu- 
kya k., 

Satyasraya-Vallabha or -Vallabhendra, s. a • 
Pulikesiu II., .... 190, 134n, 137 


13, 148 
. 67 

. 74 

50, 52 
. 114n 
. 226 
, 243n 
. 98 

. 98 

. 225, 226 

22, 25, 28, 230 
. 264 
. 2£6n 
. 73n 
. H3 
. . 101 
. 234 
244, 257, 264n 
, 190 
. 108 


175 




Page 

Satyatapas, rishi, 

• 

. 254 

Satyavakya, sur. of W. Gang a kings, 

164n, 165n 

Satyavakya- Kongunivarman, do., 

153, 

163, 


164n, 172, 179 

Satyavakya-Kongunivarma-Permanadi, 

do.. 

153, 163, 164, 166, 168, 173 

Satvavakya-Permanadi, do., . 

• 

163, 168 

Satya-yuga, .... 


. 12n 

Saucha-Ivandarpa, sur. of Chalukya-Bbima I., 130n 

Saundatti, vi., .... 


6, 216n 

sau varna, ..... 


. 22 

savai (sablia), .... 


. 43n 

savasi, an attendant, . 


. 245 u 

Say ana, author, . 


. 226 

Sayra-Minivur, vi., 


. 169 

Sebbi thirty, di., 


. 172 

Sele} ahalliyakoppa, vi., 


241, 258 

Seliya, s. a. Pandja, . 


. 46 

Selvappillai, te., .... 


. 72 

Sembiyan, the Chola king, • 


. 162 

Sena , family, . . • 

181, 

182n, 185n 

senahova, an accountant , » . 

231, 233, 234 

senadhii ati, .... 

. 

. 23 5 n 

senadibal.attaraniydgadhisbtbayaka, 


. 225 

senapati, * 

• 

73, 95n 

Serama, the Cher a king, . • 

- 

. 207 

Seraman or Seiavan, do., . . 

• 

. 46n 

Sernuan-mabadevi-ehaturvedimangalam, 

s. a. 


Sheruiadevi, . • • • 

48 

Sertman-Perumal, s. a. Malaycsvara, 

254n, 255n 

Scrapundi, vi., • • 

. 149 

Seravan-mahadeyi, s. a. Shermadevi, 

• . 4Gn 

Sesba, god, • • • • 

72, 95, 186n 

petti, * • • • • 

. 23 

settigutta, .... 

. 233 

Setu, *. a. IUmesvara, . 

. 104 

Shadaksbari, poet , » • 

. . 254n 

shadangavid, .... 

. 72 

Shahbazgarhi, vi., • • 

6 

Shah Job an, Mughal k., 

. 175 

Shambikesvara, te., . • • 

. 28 


Shanmukba, s. a. Kumara, 


143, 149, 215n, 

218n, 240 


Shasbtirudrabhat^a, #&.» 
Sheloli, vi., 

Sberaiadevi, vi., • • 

Sholingbur, vi., • • 

sidan, s. a. sisbya, 
Siddhalinga, s. a. Kaliddvesa, 
Siddhappa, te., . 


. 98 

. 244n 
41, 46, 47 
42n, 162n 
. 73 

10, 21, 23 
. 235 n 
2 q 2 



294 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


rvoi. v. 



Page 

Siddhartba, s. a. B^ddba, 

. 2,3 

siddhaya, tax, .... 

. . 96 

sigi-hunnuve, ... * 

13, 15 

Si-aiitxa, sur. of Harshavardhana, 

. 21 6n, 217n 

Silabara , family, 154n, 167u, 170n, 234n, 236n, 242 

Simhadri, s. a. Sirhhasaila, . , 

. . 56 

Simbala, Ceylon, . 

. add., 203 

Simhaladeva, ch., 

. 262 

Simbapiran, s. a. Nrisimba, 

. 72 

Simhapiransabasra, m ., 

. 98 

Simbasaila, hill , 

. • 56 

Simbavarmau II., Pallava k.. 

• » 50n 

Simbavarmarasa, ch., . 

. 166 

Sina, ri», ..... 

. 201 

Siudavalaga, vi., 

. . 7 

Singamadvecin, rn., . * 

. 67 

Singanadevarasa, ch . 

. 252, 264 

Siugapiranbbatta, m . 

, 98 

Siiigapiransahasra, m., 

. 98 

Singaremi-Yarraya, m., 

. 68 

Singavikrama, 5 . a. Srungarrukbam, 

. 74, 96 

Singava, m .... 

67, 68 

Siiig.iyajva-Peruicaflimakhin, m., . 

. 67 

Singhana or Simbana, Yadava k., 170u, 262, 264 

Slngoja, m , .... 

. 226 

Siralangbbhatta, m. t 

. . 98 

Siralangobhatta, m . . t 

. 98 

Siralangosahasra, m., . . . . 

. 98 

Sirasi-pattala, di., . . 

« • ll4n 

Sirikhettara, s. a. Prome, 

. 101 

Sirilango, s. a. Ilaiya-Penimal, 

. 72 

Siriyala, Saiva saint, . 

. 254 

Siruttondanayanar, do., 

• • 254 n 

Siiiugali, vi., .... 

. 218 

Siva, god , 3, 10, 1,3, 14, 20, 42, 43, 55, 56, 

66, 67, 

69, 104, 106, 109n, 123n, 130, 143. 148, 

151, 168, 180, 187n, 189, 190, 

210n, 

213, 214, 216, 219, 221, 222 

, 225, 

226. 227, 228, 230, 232, 233, 234, 235, 

237, 239, 240, 241, 243, 244, 252, 253, 


254, 255, 256, 257, 258, 259, 260, 261, 264 


Siva (Sewa), vi., .... 208, 210, 213 

Sivadebhatta, 98 

SivadevaVhatta, 93 

Si samara, TP. Gang a k., . . . . 152 i 

Sivamara I., do ., 153, 154, 155, 156, 157, 158, j 

160, 16 7n | 

Sivamara TI., do., 153, 151d, loon, 156n, I57n, 

158, 160, 161, 162 | 
. . 155, 156n 


Page 

Sivaratri-amavase, . . , . .13 

Sivarpatna, vi., .... 155, 156n, 161 

Siva-Skandavarman, Pallava k., • . . 163n 

Siva-tithi or Sivaiatri-inahatithi, . . . 168n 

Siyadoni, vi., . 138n, 210 

Siyaka-Harsba, Paramara k. $ . , . 170n 

Skanda, god 72, 225 

Skandabhata, m., . . . . .38 

Skaudasishya, mythical Pallava k , . 50, 52 

Skandasishya, Pallava k., . . 50, 52 

Skandnsigh vamaDgalam, s. a. Saragur, . 50, 53 

skandbavara, ...... 209 

Sodhadeva, Kalachuri (?) k., . . 113 

Sodhaladen, queen . . . . 102, 103 

Sohgaura, vi., ...... 1 

' Sdmadcvabbatta, m., ..... 98 

Soruagirisvaranatha, te., .... add. 

Somainbike, s. a. Sovaladevi, . . . 216 

Soman atha, te ., . 2l4n, 237, 243, 254, 255, 260 
Somanatbabbatta, m,., ..... 98 

Somanatbapura, s. a . Maude, . . . 254n 

Sdmanatbasvamin, te., .... add. 

Somayabhatta, m., ..... 98 

somayajin, ... 72, 109, 135, 13S 

Somesvara, Saiva teacher , 218, 219, 220, 221, 

223, 224, 230 

Somesvara, te., . . . 205, 206, 207, 243n 

Somesvara or Sovideva, ch., . . . 243 n 

Somesvara I., TF. Chalukya k., . . 21n, 258 

Somesvara III., do., . . 223,232, 233,258 

Somesvara IV., Vira-Sumesvara or Soma, do., 

236n, 239, 244, 258 
Somes varapandita, Saiva teacher, . * 223n 

Sonehipataka, vi., 187 

Sovaiadevi,/*., ...... 216 

Sovideva, Kalachurya k., . . , 242n 

Sovidevarasa, Kadamha ch., # . 235, 236 

Sovoja, m 214, 231 

Sravana-Belgola, vi., . 151, 152, 168n, 169, 

170n, 171, 173, 228n 
Sravasti, s. a . Sabet-Mabet, . , . 2, 3, 4 

Siavasti-bhukti, di., . 211 

Sridharabhatta, m., . .... 98 

Sridharaaahasra, m., . .... 99 

Sridhara^hadangavid, m., . . , .99 

Srikantba, Chola ch., 123n 

Srikantha I.,_ Saiva teacher, 219, 221, 222, 223, 230 

Srikantha II., do., . 226 

Srikantbapanditadeva, do., .... 223n 
Srikurmam, vi., . . . 31, 35, 36, 37 


S’vara, vi.. 



INDEX. 


205 


iSri-Mullaguri-Sakti, to. , * • * '^ un 

Srinatha, Telugu poet, . • ■ .00 

s'rmga, s. a. kale, . . . * • 21 un 

sriiigarabhuga, ^6 

Sringaraihkota, vi., . . * • • ^ 

Srinirasadasa, author, • , 

Siiparankusa, s. a. Nauimalvar, . . . 73n 

Sriparvata, vi. § • . • • • .239 

Sriprithivivallabha, sur. of IT. Chalulyn 
king*, . . . \ 201,202,203,204 

Siipurambiya, s. a. Tiruppirambiyam, . • 102 

Siipurusha, sur. of Muttarasa, 152, 153, lo4, 

155, 156, loSn, 150, 1*50, 161, 163 
•; . 70 

snrangatn, vi., . . . • • 4 w 

Sriraugavra, on., . . * - • l 1 -^ 

Svirangaeayibliatta. on., - • • * 

Srisaila, vi., . . * • • ^ J 

si i-Tribbuvanamkusa, legend on v ' f . 70 . 1 19 , 

122, 127, 131. 135. 139 
Srivallabha, sur . of YaUabhadeva, • 1S3, 1SS 

Si iyampad-Aubhahdvedin, »//., » • * ^ 

Si ungarrukbain, vi.* . . • • # i 4 

Siyasraya-Siladitya, Gujarat Ch'fnluf k.* * 2 oln 

stbana, .... 221. 223. 225, 226 

sthanacharya, . « . • * * 

sthaiinpatj, 22 .m 

Sthapunatba, te . . 41, 42, 43. 44, 45, 4 S 

Sthanu-Eari, 1c., . 4 “ 

Subandbu, author, . — * 

Snbrahmanya, s. a. Skanda, . * * * i- 

Subrabmanvabbatta, m*, • • • 

go 

Subruviti-Yallaya, m., 

SucMndrara, W., . • 41, 42, 43, 41. 45, 4> 

Suddbapundi, vi., . . . • . 

Sudi, vi., 154n, 150n, 160, 163o, 104n. 165^. 

10 On, 167n, l 6 Sn 

Sudra, caste, ...» * f VK ' 

o n) 

fcuganabbe, /., . . . • * ~ 

Sugummu, vi., • • . * . I4w 

SujindiraiE, s. a. Sucbindram, . . . 45 

Sulliyur, vi, 9 . . * * 

« v 103 

Suinana, m., • - * • ' 

Sun, race of the, . 

Sundaramurtinavanar, Saiva sain 7 , * ■ 

* *■ 

Sundarananda, Chola ch., . • * ' 

Sundara-Pandya, Pandya 1c., • 

Sundaratoludayansahasra, m., 

Sundarattolmlaivan, Yaishncva acharya , * i ^ 

* * ** , . 212 
Sundaridevi, queen of Yatsaraja, . 


five hundred 


Page 
. • 6S 

. . 226 

. 231 
156n, 160, 16 In 
, 201 n 
. 69 

16Sn f 212, 236n 
» • 3s 

. . 99 

. 99 

. 121 , 126 
• . 52n 

. 52 

. 168n, 216n 
. 3S 
23,241, 250 add. 


. 201 
. 103 
142, 148 
. 255n 
. 123n 
. 73 

. 99 

. 73 

212 


Sundila-E rishna 1 > h atta, on., 
sunkadhikara, 
Sunnada-Biruna, in., 
SuiaJLcnapura. vi., 

Suiat, cl , . . . 

Sumy a, ;u.. 

Surya, g>>d, 

Surra. *//? , . • 

Sur\ adevabbatr 1 . or.* . 
Suryadcr.isai a? r a, m., • 

SUtift" : — 

Apa.-hvnba, 

Baudbayana, . 
riaracbu’ia, . 

S Ltturu, ri., • • 

Suvainarapalii, vi., 

of Aihole, the five i 
S'-apnOtvara, te . , 
Svotaranya, s. a. Venkadu, 
S\etarapye 3 vara, te., . 


Taddt vAdi, ri., •-•••• ^ 

Tadigai-padi» Tadiga-padi, Tadiya*padi or 
T.'diyar-j adi. di*t • 45n, 40 

Tjdig.rl-vah, Tadiga-vali or Tadlya-vali, s. a . 
Tad'gai-padi, . . • • • 45, 4/ 

Tcduumuii, vi , 

Tidikuirarabhatta, on., .... 99 

TadiOhilingi, vi ., 14 

Tadlambundi, vi., 149 

, , ... 100 

tadu. .... 

Taludhipa, s. a. Talap*, • • * . 13S 

Taila or Tailapa II., JF. Chalulcya k., 10, 20, 

21, 170n, 172, 257 and add., 258 

Taila or Tailapa III., do., . 234, 235, 25/ add., 258 

Tailahadeva, ch., • • > • • ' ~ _ 

Takko'.am, ri., ..-••• 167 

TilaUiipa, s. a. Talapa, • • • • u2n 

, , 43 

Talaikkulam, vi-, 

talaippolai, “ 

Talakad, • • 152, 15S, 154, 155, lob, 15, 

talakattu or talekattu, . . • l® 7 , 206, 26o 

Talapa, JE. Chalukya k., .... 14-n 

Talapurumshaka, vi 189 ’ 182 ' 19/ 

. \ ... 168n, 173n 

taie-derasa, • 

. , j . 216. 218, 236n 

Talgund, vi ... 



296 


EPIGRAPHIA IX DIG A. 


[ Vol, V. 


Page 

TaAugummi, vi., • • • * * 

Tamaramuge. vi,, . * -91 

tammata, a tambour , ..... 216n 
Tanunaya, rn., #•*••• 
Tamranagari o/* Tamrapuri, s. a. Cbembrolu, 

143, 149 

Tanagimdur, s. a. Talgund, .... 218 

tangadn, tree , 100 

T.inigai, a. Tiruttani, . . . .72 

Tamyaperumansahasra, tn 72, 99 j 

Taiijapuri, s. a . Tanjavur, . . . . 167n 

Tafijavui- (Tan j ore), vi,, 106n, 167n, 174, 1/5, 228n 
Tapi, s . a Tapti, • . . .171, 180 

Tapti, ri., 171 

Tarakaiati, s. a. Kumara, .... 149 

Tardavadi or Taddavadi thousand, di., 9, 21, 23, 31 
tari, a loom, ...... 53n 

tari-kkurai, ...... 53u 

tari-ppudavai, . • * • • . 53 q 

tariy-irai, tax, ..... 53 u 

Tarpandighi, vi-, .... 181n, 185n 

Tatliagata, s. a. Buddha, . . . 101,102 

tattar-kkanam, , • . . . . 53n 

tattar-ppattara, . . . . . . 53n 

Tavaivg<-re or Tavareyakere, tank, • 221, 222 

Tat alur, vi., . . . . • 165, 168n 

Tensraiai, sect, • • • . • • / 3n 

T^n-nadu, the southern country , « • .43 

Tcnvalanallur, vi ..... 45 

Terdal, vi-, • • • • • 256 add. 

Terupoliyanindransahasra, tn., . . 72, 99 

TtGadisab&sra, m., • . . . 73, 99 

Tezpur, vi., . • • • . .181 

thakkura, ..... 113, 115n, 117 

Thathi, m., ... . 188 

Tillai, s. a. Chidambaram, . . 72, 105, 106 

Ti liar ay aka, s. a. Nataiaja, . . . ,72 

Tillanayakabhatta, tn., .... 99 

Tindayasahasra, tn., 99 

Tippana, m . . • » • .69 

Tippana, m., ...... 231 

Tippaya, tn,, ...... 68 

Tirimalayudayanbhatta, m., ... 99 

Tirimaludayansahasra, *»., .... 99 

tiri-nonda-vilakku, s. a. nunda-YiJakku, . . 43n 

Tiripporibkatta, m., . . . .99 

Tirivakknlamudayanbhatta, m., , .99 

Tirivayikknlamudayanbhatta, m., , . . 99 

Tirivayikkulamudayansahasra, m., . . 99 


Tiruchchirrai&balara, 9 . a . Chidambaram, 105, 106 


Tiruchchivindiram, s. a . SuchSndram, 42, 4 
Tirukkalukknnram, vi,, . 

Timkkurugur, vi., . . ... 

Tirukurungudibhatta, m., 

Tirnmalai, hill, ..... 
Tiiumalai, vi., ..... 
Tirumalajudayanbhatta, m., • • 

Tirumaludayanbhatta, m., 
Tirumangai-Alvar, Taishnava saint, 
Timnandu, s. a. Vaikuntba, . • 

Tirunandudayanbhatta, m., . • • 

Tirunelli, vi., ..... 
Timnilakanthabhatta, m., . • 

Tirupanangadabhatta, m., • , 

Tirupati, vi., ..... 
Tirupoliyanindran, te., 
Tiruppanangadabhatta, m., ... 
Tiruppaaaugadusahaera, m., 
Tirupparankunram, vi., • 
Tiruppirambiyam, vi., • • 

Tiruttani, vi., ..... 
Tiruvaiyaru, vi., .... 
Tiruvakkulamndayansahaara, m , . 

Tiruvalinadan, s. a. Tirumangai-Alvar, . 
Tiruvallam, vi., ..... 
Tiruvarangadevabhatta, m , 
Tiruvarahgam, s. a. Srirahgam, • 

Tiruvarangamudayanbbatta, m ., 
Tiruvarahgamudayansabasra, m., . 

Tiruvaranganarayanabhatta, m., 
TiruvarangAn&rayai^asahasra, m., . • 

Tiruvararigasahasra, m., . . 

Tiruvaykkulam, s. a. Eaj a go p& la -Per umaj, 
Tiruvelalamudi, kill , .... 
Tiruvengadabhatta, tn., ... 
Tiruvengadanilai, shrine , . , 

Tiruvengadasabasra, 

Tiruvenkadu, vi., ...» 
Tiruvorriyuf, vi., .... 
tivali, musical instrument, • • 

Togarchedu, vi,, ..... 
Tondaiman, the Pallava king, • 

Topdai-mandalam, co 
Tondangi, vi., ..... 
Torkhede, vi. t . 

Tottaramudi, vi., .... 
Trailokyamalla, sur. of Somd^vara I., 
Trailokyamalla, sur . of TaLU II., • • 

Trail6kyamalla, sur , of Taila III., 
Trailokyasimha, sur. of Eayariddra, 


Page 
43, 41, 46 
43n, 50 
. 72 

72, 99 

. 72 

. 46n 
. 99 

. 99 

. 72 

. 73 

73, 99 

. 42 

. 99 

. 99 

44n, 72 

. 72 

. 99 

. 99 

. 73 

. 162n 
. 72 

. 46n 

. 99 

. 73 

. 228 
. 99 

. 72 

. 99 

. 99 

, 99 

. 99 

. 99 

[, ■ 72 

60,53 
. 99 

. 44 

. 99 

, 104 
. 106 
. 216n 
. 201 
. . 50 

. 203d 
. 74 

. 171n 
. 66 
. 21n 

. 21 
235, 258 
. 183, 186n 



IXDEX. 


207 


trairajya, ...... 

Page 
202n, 203 

Uhihamundanbhatta, m., 



Page 

72. 99 

Trandaparu, vi., . . . 

123, 126 

ulakkn. measure. 



43, 41 

tribhuga, ...... 

257. 250 

Ulv’i, vi., i. 



2 11. 2 12 n 

Tribhuvanamalla, sits, of Betma, . 

. 142 

Ummarakantbibul, vi., 



128, 130 

Tribhuvanamalla, sur. of JagadJevarasa, 

. 225 

Unm etalapundi, vi., . 



. 149 

Tribhuvanamalla, sur. of Kamarasa, 

218, 223 

Uncbb, ri; . • . 



. 38 

Tribhuvanamalla, sur. of Somesvara IY., 

. 25S 

Undrukond.da-Peddaya, m., 



. GS 

Tribhuvanamalla. sur. of Vikrainaditya 

VI., 

upadhiuaniya, . . • 



201, 237 

216, 229, 231, 25S 

iipadlvvaya, 



. 2.34 

Tribbuvanaviradeva, sur. of Kulottunga- 

Chula 

ujpj, tree , 



. 100 

III., 

. 190 

Urputuru, vi., . . . 



123, 126 

Trikaliiiga, co., , j 

. 134 

Utkala, s. a. Orissa, 



. 108 

Trikundapura, vi., . . • 

. 172 

Utpala, $. a. Muuja, 



. add. 

TrilorhanapAIadeva, Kanauj k. f . 

. 211 

Uttai aka i ul e r u va d i- vi s b ay d i. , 


no 

, 127, 130 

Trivahbhatta, cb., .... 

. 21S 

Uttai.imaiiur, vi., 



. 199 

trivedin. ...... 

72, 121 

Uttaia-P.nuna, no hie of a work, 



. 190 

Trivikrairabhatta, m., . 

. 99 

Uttaiavarusa, di., 


i 

1. 7 in, 96 

trummiki, tree, . 

. ino 

Titue.-vara, te., . . 



102, 103 

TrummiM, vi., ...» * 

. 96 

Uttai isvurashadaugav id, m., • 



. 99 

Tsandavulu, vi., ..... 
tumma, tree, . 

150, lain 
. 100 

V 





Tnndak.i-vibhaya, s. a . Tondai-mandalam 
Tundiva, co., .... 

Tunga, family, . 

TungaMadra, ri., . . • 170i 

Tupparaju-geyyi,^V/rf f . 

Turaga- or Turaya-Itevanta, biruda , 
Turkama, m., ...» 

Turkasarman, in., . . 120n, B 

Tururu. ri., ...» 

Tuinshka. a Musalmdn, . 

turushkadumla, ^ofx, 

Tyakkiya, »!.. . 


. a.ld. 

. . 190 

. 170n, 190, 241n 
. 25 

uda, . 234n, 230 
. 135 | 

120n, 121. 123, 120 J 
. 109 • 
. 31, 211n 1 
• H5 

. 135, 138 


Y.uldanguntala-Kunma, m., ... OS 

vaddamvula, tax , 215, 217, 21S, 225, 229, 231. 

232, 234. 23 5n, 23G 


Vuddiga, Ra^htraluta 
Vudhnra, s. a. llcrdi, . 
Yadiidusimha, m., 
Yadigliavatt.i, m.. 


. 163n, 160, lC7n 
. 102. 197 

. 227n. 22S 


ubhaya*saraya, 

Uchchangi, vi. 9 . . . 171, 172, 1*9, l^ 11 

Udagai, vi ^ , 

Udayac hand ram an^al am, s. a. Udayendiram, 

50, 162 i 

Udayakarna, k., . . . • • 1^3, 

Udayendiram, vi,, . 50, 52n, 157n, 159, 

l61n, 162 | 

Udbhata, Saiva saint , . . • • • 1 

ugadi* or yu gad i-ama vase, . * • • H 

Ukkal, vi., ...••• 

TTkkaii, vi., ^5 

Ukli, i. a . Ukkali, ^5 n 


Yadimadairajendra, yu.. 

. 22Sn 

Vadiuija, m , . 

. . . 228 

Yadividyubharana, s. a. Yidyabharana. 223. 

224, 225. 2 33 

Yadlambundi, vi,, 

. 119 

Yaidyadcva. Prdyjyotisha k.. 

lSln, lS2n 

Yaikbanasa, 

47, 4S 

Yaikuntlia-Perunjai, te., 

. 159, 197, 199 

Vailhibhatta, ch., 

. • . iron 

Yaisobaiguli, vi.. . 

. 162 

VakSili, vi.. 

. . . 4 

Vaiseshika, doctrine, . 

. . 220, 222 

Yii"»t nava, 

31. 35. 72, 73, 245n 

Yaisikacharva, in , 

9 

vaj.tpc} a, sac rifice, 

. 9 5 n 

Yajjada II., tdahdra ch., . 

. . . 17 On 

Yajj.tli, <*//., 

170, 171, 172, 179 

VaUkaleri, vi., . 

. 20 » 

Yalabhi, vi., 

On, 7n, 37, 38, 167 

Vajajikaveya-Kesyana, m., . 

. . • 22 

Yallabha, m. t • • • 

• 65 



298 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Page 


Vail ab ha, 3ft* ch.. 

. 

. 108 

Vallabl.au *vn, a „ . 

. 

. li>3, W 

VallablianaiL-ndra leva, iu, 

■. of Krishna III., . 196 

Vallabl ary 'i- Yu ray ana, m 

, . 

. 67 

Vallabbasiatitm, m., 


. 68 

Yallala, vi.. 


. 162n 

ValH. godde**, 


. 149n 

Yallimalai, vi., . 


154, 155, 136n, 103 

Vallur-Ayyalumantrin, vi 


. 69 

Valluri-Maficbanca, m., 


. . . 6S 

Valluru, vi ., 

♦ 

143, 149, 206, 207 

Yamadeva, m., . 

• 

. 1< )9 

Yainanabhatta, m., 


. 99 

Vamasakti I.. \ii<a teacher. 

'>') \ 

Yamasakti II , do., • 

. 

• 225, 226 

Yamafeakti III., do., 

. 

. . . 22<; 

Vainayabhatta. m. 9 

, 

. 99 

Vamsadbara^arman, m.. 

. 

. 115 

Vana^ajam.dbi, sur. of Krishna 

III., . . 170 

YAnapalli, vi., . 

. 

. 265, 20i*» 

Vanapati, eh.. 


* . . 143n 

Vanavasi, s. a. Banavasi, 


179,202, 217, 218 

V an d rupi t e \ u , vi., 


. 119, 121 

Vaisga, co., 


. . 186, 257 

Yangaka, vi.. 


. 1S7 

Vangiparru, vi., . 


. 135, 138 

Vangipuram, vi., 


. 135 

van), tree, . 


. loo 

Vappuka, l.. 


. 191 

vaia-gbshthi, a committee • 

assembly, . . 138n 

Varatruna, Pdndya k., 


. 162 

Varanasi, a. Varanasi, 


. 259 

Vaian.i&i ' I’enares), vi., 


115, 117, 208n, 210 

vara-pramnkha, 


• • . I38n 

Vardamri, m., . 


. 103 

Varjara .family, 


• • . 170n 

Varuna, vi.. 


• * 156, 166n 

Vasantarnva, k. t 


. 241n 

VasavadattA. quoted, . 


. 12 6 n 

vase kail u. 


• • * 150 

VAsudeva, m , 


* 213 

YasnaOva, s. a. Krishna, 


. JS6 

Yasudeva, te , 


. 143, 149 

Vasudevabbatta, m., . 


95d, 99 

Vasudevasahasra, m*, . 


. 99 

VasunKiti. queen of Eajarideva 

t • • 183, 186n 

Vathola. m.. 

, 

. 188 

Yatsaraja, Kanauj k.. 


. 208, 212, 213 

Vatsaraja, mythical k., 

. 

• . 230, 230n 

Vedanta, doctrine , 


. 96 


\t*Ja 3 and c 'akhas : — 


Atharvan, 

a . 

222 

Riy, • . 67. 68, 

96, 109, 201, 

21? 222 

| Asvaiayana, 

, . 

. 213 

i Sarnan, 

68, f 6, 

li7, 222 

Clihandoga . 

# 

. 117 

| Ya .i^* 2} n, 38, 67, 68, 69, 

96, 109, 192, 

2<>1, 222 

Kanva, 

109, ISO, 

192, 196 

i Yladhyamdina, 


. 3S 

| Taittiiiya, . 


121, 126 

Yajasaneyin, 


. 2In 

Yajin, 

21. 

1S9, 196 

Veda turn, tree. 


. 100 

Vedavyasabhatta, m. y . 


. 9y 

Vedi repaid re, vi.. 


. 55 

\cdun II., Ttlan&ndu ch.. 


* 71 

\ eduiesvaraui, s. a. Vediresvaram, 

Oil, t)9 

^ elabbata, m , 

. 

. 140a 

\ e Likin khara. a. a. Tiruvelalamndi. 

. 50 

Vela-n and •!, dt., . 

. 71, 143n, 150 

velauga, tree. 


, 100 

Velavura, s. a. Belur, . 


• 169n 

Yellalaa. a cultivator, 


. 47 

vellcki, tree , , 


. 100 

^ dlpn. a. Vtdpur, 

* • 

. 142 

Yelpur, vi., 

* • 

. 140 n 

Velpfi . i , cl., 

♦ * 

. 126 

Velur, dr., . 


. 159 

Verna, Rtfli k.. 

. 54, 55, 57, 67 


Yemamba or Veinambika, queen of AUada, 54, 


Vemanabhatta, m , 

55, 56, 67 

. , , 99 

^ ermireddi, s. a. Vema, 

• . 55d, 56 

Veuiayashadungavid, m.. 

. 99 

vempa, tree. 

. 100 

venga, do., 

. 100 

\ engadam, s. a. Tirumalai hill 

. . . 44 n 

A enuai-na-du, s, a. A emO, 

45, 40, 47 

A engi or Vengi-mandala, co., 

. 71,95,131,137 

\ efijedlu, vi.. 

. 149 

Venkata.) i, vi., . 

. . * 56 

Vennakuta. m., . , 

. 109 

A enn.ihdta or Venneykkuttan, s. 

a. Krishna, . 72 

Vennakutabbatta, m., . 

, 99 

Vennakutabbatta, . 

. . . 99 

Vennakutasahasia, m., 

. . . 99 

Vennakut.iMhasra, 

. 99 

Venn.im.trasa, ch.. 

. 222, 225 

Yem ayablhitta, m.. 

* 99 

A ennayashadiugavid, in.. 

. 98 



INDEX, 


Page 

vesarajjft, the four, . • • • .101 

Vettirkiuli, vi., . • . • • • 44 

Viddamavya, m., . • « 135, 138, 139n 

Viddana, m., ...••• 109 

Viddayabhatta, m., . . • 71,06, 99 

Viddayasnadangavid, m., 09 

Yidcba, co., . . . • • * 1-^9 

Yidy abharana, Saiva teacher , . • 223. 2-4 

Vidyananda, m . . • • 228n 

vihara, 215n 

Vijayaditya, TV. Gavga k., • • 154n, 163n 

Vijayalitya I., P. Chalulya ch ., • • 32, 34 

Vijayaditya II., do*, . • . . 32, 34 

Vijayalitya I., P. Ch at uly<x k., . • * HO 

Vijayaditya II., do., 20 n, 119, I20n, 121, 122, 

123, 125, 130, 13S, 161n, 163n 
Vijayaditya III., do,, . 123, 126, 130. 134 

Vijayaditya IV., rfo., • • • 134, 135* 138 

Vijayaditya V., do., . 1^ 

Vijayaditya VI., s ar. of Ammaraja II., . 139, 142 

Vijayaditya or Vi javadityavallabha. TV. Cha- 
lukya k., . ' . . . 202n.2o3, 244n 

Vijayadityabhattaraka, s. a. Vija3 adit} a I., 130, 13# 
Vijayakama, Chola ch., . . • • 

Vijaya-Karapa-Vikramavarman, Gang a- Pal- 
lava k., . . . . * • 

Vi jay alaya, Chtla k., • . • • 

Vi j a} an a gar a, vi., . . • add.5/,241n 

Vijaya-Nandi-Yikramavarnmn, Gahga-P allard 
k., 15^n, 159, 160 

Vijaya-Narasiiiibavarman, do., • 138, 159n, l60 

Vijaya-Xrip.ituujjavarnr.an, s. a. Vija} a-Nvipa- 
tnnga-Yikrarnavarman, . . • 

Vijaya-Nripatuiiga-Vikramavanrao, Gahga- 

Paltavak .... 159, 160, 1620 
Vijaynpabiddva, Kanauj k., • • • 

^ ijayarka, s. a. Vijayaditya II.« . * ^ 

^ ijayasena, Sena Jc., . . * * * 

\ ijayavarmaraja, TV. Chalulya eh., • • 

\ ikramadi va, s. a. Yikraroaditya V 
Vikramaditya I., P. Chalulya k 130, 131, 

138, 142n 

Vikramaditya II., do., . ^ 1 ^ 

Vikramaditya I., W. Chalulya k., 137, lD3n, 2' 3 

Vikramaditya II., do., . . 157, 15S. 2 n ln, - 1 4 

Vikramaditya IV., do., . . • -° ‘ md add * 

Vikramaditya V.. do., • • • add *’ ~5Sn 

Vikramaditya YI., do., add., 214, 215, 216, 218, 

229, 231, 243n, 245n, 2o8 
Vikramavama, s. a. Vijayaditya I., • H9> 1-1 


VikrarLiayarman, sur. of Skanda'sishya, • 


Vikramdndravarman II., I\» • • 119n, 122 

Vi mala, 1^9 

Vimaladitya. P. C halukya k .» • • 31, 33 

Yinavaebandra, in., • • • . * 2lOn 

Vinayad : sa rman, tn , • < . 123, 126 

Vina\ duitva, IV. Chalnkya k., • I56n, 157, 

201.202n t 203 

Vinavakapala, Kanauj k., . . 208, 209, 210 

Vindhva, mo.. . • - 65, 72. 170. 179, 19* * 

Vinnagai* or Vinnagaram. a Vishnu temple , . 47a 

Yira-B.iltala IL, Boysala k., . . . 226 

Yii-a-Binanja or -Bananj u, doctrine , , 23, 244 

Virabanudds a, 5. ci. Viiabkanudeva II„ . 32, 36 

Yirabhadra, god, * ' ‘ * 213, 255 

Yirabiuulra, Redji l., • 54. 55, 56, 57n, 67 

Virabhadra. te., . • • • • . lo 

Yirabharlrds vararya, *»., .... 109 

YiiabbanudeVa IL, P . Gang a k., • . 32 

Vira-Chuda, P Chalukya k., . .71, 73, 95 

Vivacho<lachatuiTedimangala, vi., . 71,73,74.96 

Vira-Chola, sur . of Pritlm ipati II., . . 162a 

yirnma, . 10, 24, 26, 29, 123, 131, 135, 151, 

205, 237, 262 

Viramabendra, ch 164 

Yiramartanda, <ur. o/Chamundaraya, . . 172 

Viranarasimha I., P. Gang a k., . , .32 

Viranaia«5iniha II., do., • • • • 32 

ViianarAyanachcheri, vi.. • * . . 162 

Vivanri/imha, a. Viranarasimba I., . 32, 34 

Vira-Pandya, Patujya k., • • . 206, 207 

Vir.vBasibava, k., . • • • 41 

Virai juna, Ch*>la eh., ..... 123n 


Vira-Saiva, sect, 


. 164 

>ya, . . 172 

. 32 

. 32 

. 162 
I., . 32, 34 

. 206, 207 

. * . .41 

. 123n 
11,239,240, 244 


159, 160, I62n 

Viia-Soau, -Somanatba or -Somesa, 

tr., 244, 

. 211 

245, 253, 256, 

257, 

258, 259 

32, 37 

Vira-Somesvara, Hoysala k., 


. 169n 

. ‘181 

virgai, a monumental tablet, • 

159, 

213, 262 

. . 8n 

Yirlucbipnraw, vi., ... 

• 

. 159 

. 25S 

Virrirundani te., ... 


. 72n 

130, 131, 

Yirupaksha, Yijayanagara prince , 

• 

. add 

138, ] 42 a 

vi'sa. coin, .... 

• 

. 23 

. 138 

Visaladeva, Chaululya k., . 

• 

102, 103 

157, 176n, 2i 3 

visarga • 

• 

. 1S1 

15S. 201 a, 204 

Vishnu, god, 20, 21. 24, 25. 27. 31, 3-5 

— rvi "-l 

b 36. 

37, 


121,138, 148, 160, 179, ISO. l*7n, 

188n, 201, 212, 230, 254 
Visbnn, ... 21, 68, 113, 115n, 213 

Y i&bnubbatta, to., • • • . • 9y 

2 E 



300 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V 


Page 

Vishnudonayabhatta, m., * • • • 99 

Visbnug6pa, W. Gahga k., • • • 162 

Vishnuraja, s.a. Vishnuvardhana II., . .134a 

Vishnuraja, s. a. Vishnuvardhana IV., • . 130 

Vishnurama, ch., • • • • • 119n 

Yishnusahasra, m., ..... 99 

Vishnu sat man, m. t . • . . .201 

Vishnuvardbana, Roysala k» 9 . . 164n, 174 


Yajiiatroabhatta, w., . 
Yajnatmabbattnsomayajin, m 
Yarna , god, . 

Yamuna, ri., 

Yasahpaia, k+ , ' . 

Yatindramatadipika, quoted, 
Yavana, a Musalmdn , 
yeais of the cycle 


Vishnuvardhana I. f E . Ckalukya k . 109n, 

Bhava, . . 




. . . 169 

119, 266n 

Dundubhi, 




11,22 

Vishnuvardhana II., do . . 122n, 130, 137 

Isvara, • 




. 171n, 173 

Vishnuvardhana III., do., . • 127n, 130, 137 

Jaya, 




. . . 14 

Vishnuvardhana IV., do., « 119, 121, 134n, 138 

Kalayukti, 




. 172a 

Vishnuvardbana V., do., . . 122, 123, 126 

Nala, . 




. . . 143n 

Vishnuvardhana VI., sur. of Chalukya-Bhima I., 

Parthiva, 




. . 24, 25 

127, 128, 130 

Prabhava, 




. 16S, 174 

Vishnuvardhana VII., sur. of Ammaraja I., 

Prajapati, 




. 169 

131, 334 

Prainadin 




. 173n 

Vishnuvardbana VIII., sur. o/Chalukya-Bhirna 

Pramathin, 




. 262, 261 

II., . * • • * • 135, 138 

R&kshasa, 




. U 

Vishnuvardhana X., sur. of Vlra-ChMa, . 95 

Raktakshin, 




. 232, 234, 241 

Yissaya, m., • . . . • 67, 69 

Sadharana, 




. . 55, 57 

Visvananda, m., ...... 228 

Sarvadharin, 




. . . 14 

Visvanatha, s. a . Jagann&tha, . . 32, 36 

Sarvajit, 




156n, 160n, 206, 207 

Visvarupasena, Sena k., . , 185n, 187n | 

Sarvariu, 




15, 189, 196 

Vitaraga, Gurjara k. t . . , .38 

Saum^a, 




166, 232, 233, 239n 

Vittirindanbhatta, m., . . , 72, 99 

Srimnkha, 




. 143, 149, 169 

Vivekachintamani, name of a work , , . 2l6n 

Tarana, • 




. . 215,231 

Vizagapatam, vi . , . . . , 74, 122 

Vikarin, 




. . . 167n 

Vrishabhendravijaya, quoted , . , . 254n 

Vilarnbin, 




26, 28 

Vyasa, rishi , . 126, 131, 134, 142, 201, 251 

VirOdhin, 




. . • 73n 

vyatxpata, , . . 22, 23, 25, 230, 233, 259 

Vishu (Vrisha), 

Yu van, # 



. 11, 23,215,230 
. 172 


Wardha, vi., 


w 


Y 

. add 


. 188 


Yadava,/tf77uV y, 

Yadu, mythical k., 
Yajnadonabhatta, m., . 

Yajnakesavabhatta, m., 
Yajnamurti, m., • 
Yajnamurtibhatta, 
Yajuamurtibbattascrmayajin, 
Yajnamurtyarya, m., . 

Yajuaskandabhatta, m. } 


years of the reign, 3, 4, 
25, 26, 28, 32, 36 
48, 49, 50, 52, 
106, 155, 1 56n, 


6,7 


9, 11 


42, 43, 44 
71, 95, 96 


Page 
. 99 

. 99 

180, 187 
. 203 
. 211n 
• 73n 
65, 56n 


22, 23, 24, 
45, 46,47, 
104, 105, 
. 167, 158, 159, 160, 161, 
162, 164, 168, 175, 197, 198, 199, 200, 
201, 205, 206, 207, 214, 215, 228, 232, 


., 29, 31, 170.i 

, HO, 2*2 

Yekkeri, vi., . . 

Yelivarru, vi., . . 



233, 234, 262n 
. . « 

. , 135n 

• » « 

. 31 

yella*ainavase, . . 



• 

. 13 


. 99 

Yellamma, goddess, 




12, 13 


. 99 

Yerrayavadhanin, m., . 



• 

. 67 

• • 

. 72 

Yeruva-Gopana, m. t . 



• 

. 69 

• 

. 99 

Yeur, vi., * , 




. add. 

m., . 

* • % 

. 99 

. 109 

yogas : — 

Vriddhi, 



• 

174, 175 

• # « 

. 99 

Vyatipata, 



« 

. 55 



INDEX. 


901 


Page 

j 


Paqr 

Y6gesrarjd£varasa, eh., 

. 232, 234 

Karkutaka, 

• • • 

, . 41, 4Sn 

Yograshtva, m . 

. 197 

Kumbha, 

• • * 

, . 43, 49, 19(1 

vojana, 7 miles , . 

- 3 

Makara, 


. . • 49 

Yudd ham alia, E. Chalukya k., 

. 13Sn 

Mina, 


. . 106, 199 

Yuddhamaila, Matsya ch ., . 

. 108 

Mithuna, 

. * 

... 199 

yuvaraja, an heir-apparent. 

130, 134, 138, 

Rishabha or 

Yrishabha, • 

106, 197, 193, 200 

140, 142, 161n, 163, 164n, 201n, 209. ? 

Tula, . 


• • • 34 


213, 266n j 

Yriscbika, 


• • • **’3 



Zuzzuru, v%.. 


. . . 134 


Zodiac, signs of the : — 
Ranya » . 


36, 40, 4S 




APPENDIX 


A LIST OF THE 

INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA 

FROM ABOUT A.D. 400. 

Bt Professor F. Kielhorn, O.I.E. ; Gottingen. 

I N compliance with the request of several scholars who are interested in Indian epigraphy, I 
publish herewith part of a list of Indian inscriptions, which primarily I had prepared for my 
own use only. What I offer at present, may be roughly described as a list of the inscriptions 
of Northern India, from about the end of the fourth century A.D. Similar lists of the 
more numerous inscriptions of Southern India, and of the inscriptions before A.D. 400, are 
under revision and may "be published hereafter. 

Within the limits indicated, this list gives, or is intended to give, all inscriptions of any 
importance that have been published, or noticed with details of their contents, in the periodicals 
and official volumes accessible to me ; and it includes some unpublished inscriptions of which 
rubbings or impressions have been kindly presented to me from time to time by Drs. Burgess. 
Fleet, Fiihrer, Hoernle and Hultzsch, and by the late Sir A. Cunningham. I shall be grateful 
to every one who will draw my attention to any inscription which may have beeD omitted. As 
it stands at present, the list deals with rather more than 700 inscriptions: 1 about 250 copper- 
plate inscriptions, and the rest, with one exception, 2 inscriptions on stone> and rocks. 

In arranging the list, I have been guided partly by the eras 3 according to which the 
inscriptions are dated, and partly by the localities where the originals were discovered. Thus 
Nos. 1-5G8 give the inscriptions dated (or, in some cases, supposed to be dated) according to the 
Malava-Vikrama era (1-328, marked V.), the Saka era (340-38*3, marked S.), the Kalachuri- 
Chedi era (387-425, marked K.), the Gupta-Yalabhi era (430-507, marked G. or Valabhi-s ). 
the Harsha era (528-547, marked H.), and the Newar era (559-568, marked N.) ; together 
generally, with those undated inscriptions the time of which may be approximately determined 
by reference to the inscriptions dated according to one of the eras mentioned (329-345, 426-435 
508-527, and 548-558). Nos. 5G9-5S7 give the small number of inscriptions which are (or have* 
been taken to be) dated according to the Saptarsbi eia (569-571), the era of Buddha’s Nirvana 
(575), the Lakshmanasena era (576-578), and the ivmha era (579-5S4), with references to three 
inscriptions which, dated according to other eras, also quote the corresponding years of the 
Hijra era, the “Bengali San,” and the Ilahi era of the emperor Akbar (585-587). And 
Nos. 588-68S give the remaining inscriptions, which either coutaiu no date at all or are for the 


1 This number includes some ius-ti prions which are mentioned hi footnotes only. Snue inscriptions which 
cauie to my notice when part of this list was aluadj in tyj.e are gwi V- the e* 1 !, turner tin head of jLddendci. 
a This is the iron pillar inscription No. 508. 

8 The list includes all Indian inscriptions known to me which are dated according to the Saptarshi era, the eia 
of Buddha’s Nirvana, and the Malava-Vikraica, Kalaeburi-Chcdi, Gupta- Valabht, Harsha, Newar, Lakshmanasena. 
Simha, and G&hgeya eras. But it contains only 21 inscriptions dated exclusively according to the S.ika era, and uone 
which are dated according to the era of the Kalivuga, and the Koll im and Chalukya- Vikrama eras. Tears of the 
twelve-years ejele of Jupiter are quoted in the O.iptA dates ot Nos. 451, 453, 45o and 459, and in No. 522; years 
°f the sixtv-years cycle of Jupiter in oul} O ikrama) dates ; aui auk a (le^ual) ^ears only in Nos. 3G*, 369. 

370, and 671. 

B 



o 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


most part 1 dated in regnal years, broadly arranged according to the tracts of country where they 
were found, from Rajputana and the Panjab on the west to Orissa and Gaiijam on the east coast 
of India. I am aware that a number of the inscriptions towards the end of the list, as well as 
others which are dated according to the Saka era, properly belong to Southern India, but have 
given them here on account of the connection of some of them with northern inscriptions. To 
draw an absolutely strict line between the north and the south appeared to me as unnecessary as 
it would be impossible. 

On the information given under each number little need be said here. As far as I was 
able to do so, I have tried to state, not merely where an inscription has been discovered, but also 
where it is now. I have also indicated whether Plates of an inscription are available. 2 When 
an inscription has been edited several times, I generally have thought it sufficient to state where 
it has been published last. In the case of dated inscriptions, I have given throughout the 
original dates, and have added their European equivalents when they could be ascertained with 
confidence ; moreover, I have shewn whether the numbers which may occur in a date are denoted 
by numerical symbols or by numeral (decimal) figures. As regards other details, I have mostly 
confined myself to recording the genealogy or line of succession (where it is given in the 
original) of the king or chief to whom an inscription belongs, and the names of the princes 
who are mentioned in connection with him or his predecessors ; but, in the case of copper- 
plates, I have also given the names of the places from which the grants were issued, and, in the 
case of prasastis , the names of their authors. 

I venture to hope that this list will be of some service both to these of my fellow students 
who are engaged in the publication of Indian inscriptions, and to any one who would wish to 
ascertain whether an inscription on stone or a copper-plate inscription, which he may meet with, 
is new or ha.> already attracted the attention of scholars. To render the list more useful, the 
principal names that occur in it are given iu an Index. 


A. — Inscriptions dated according to the Malava-Vikrama Era. 

1* — V. 428. — Gupta Inscr. p. 253, and Plate. Bijayagadh pillar inscription of the Varika 
Vishnuvardhana, the son of Yasovardhana, grandson of Yasdrata, and great-grandson of 
Vyaghrarata : — 

(L. I).— Siddham kriteshu chaturshu varsha-Sateshv^ashtavih&shu 3 400 20 8 
Phalguna(na)-bahulasya pahchadassyam=etasyam=purvv&yam. 

2. V. 480 (?).— Gupta Inscr . p. 74, and Plate. Gahgdhar inscription of the time of 
Visvavarman, the son (?) of ^aravarman, recording the building of temples, etc., by his minister 
Mayuraksbaka 

(L 19). Yateshu cbatu[r]sbu kri(kri)teshu sateshu sausyaishva(?shtba)sita- i 
sottarapadeskv=iha vatsa[reshu] N(|) sukle tray odasa- dine bhuvi Karttikasya masasya 
sarvva-jana-ehitta-sukh-avahasya II 

3* V. 493 and 529,— Gupta Inscr . p. 81, and Plate. Mandasor inscription of the time of 
Kumaragupta p*] and his subordinate, the governor at Dasapura, Bandhuvarman, the son of 
Visvavarman ; (composed by Vatsabhatti) : — 

(L. 19). Malaviiuam ganasthitya yat[e] sata-chatushtaye | trinavaty-adhik&=*bd&nam= 
ri(ri)tau sevya-ghanastane H Sahasya-masa-sublasya prasaste=hni trayodase | 


1 Nos. 676-684 give the inscriptions the dates of which are actually referred, or probably belong, to the reign 

of the GScge\a family (or the G&ngeya era). 

3 The Plates collected in Dr. Fleets Indian Inscription, (Ind. Inter.), which are sometime, quoted in the list, 
have not been published yet. 

1 Head 'vtmsishu. * Dr. Fleet suggests sau my tthv^ati ta- ; compare Qvpta Inscr. p 73, note. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


3 


(L. 21). — Vatsara-sateshu pariichasu visamty-adhikeshu 1 navasu ch=abdeshu | yateshv= 
abhiramya-Tapasya-masa-sukla-dvitSyayam || 

4*. — V* 589. — Gupta Inscr. p. 152, and Plate. Mandasor inscription of the time of the 
Rdjddhirdja 2 Yasodharman-Vishnuvardhana, 3 recording the construction of a well by 
Daksha (?), the younger brother of Dharmadosha who was a minister of Vishnuvardhana, 
in memory of their deceased uncle Abhayadatta ; (engraved by Govinda 4 ) : — 

(L. 21). — Paftchasu sateshu saradam yateshv=ekannanavati-sahiteshu | Malava-ganasthiti- 
vasat=kala-jnanaya likhiteshu || 4 

5. — V. 718. — Ep. hid. Yol. IV. p. 31, and Plate. Udaypur (in Rajputana) inscription of 
the time of the Guhila Raja Aparajita, recording the construction of a temple by the wife 
of his leader of the forces, the Mahdrdja Varahasimha ; (composed by Damodara, the son of 
Brahmacharin and grandson of Damodara) 

(L. 12). — sariivatsara-sateshu saptasu(sv=) ashtadas-adhikesu(shu) Magra(rga)sirsha- 
Jsuddha-pahchami(myam). 

6. — V. 740. — Ind. Ant. Yol. Y. p. 181, and Plate. Jhalrapatan inscription 5 of the time or 
Durgagana ; (composed by Bhatta Sarvagupta) 

(L. 16). — s am vatsara-satesliu saptasu shatchatvaririisad-adhikeshu. 

7. — V. 770. — In his Annals and Antiquities oj Rajasthan , Yol. I. p. 799, Colonel Tod gives 
a translation of an inscription “of the Aiori Princes of Cheetore, taken from a column on the 
banks of the lake Mansurwur, near that city.’’ It contains the passage : “ Seventy had elapsed 
beyond seven hundred years (samv(itisir)y when the lord of men, the king of Malwa, 6 formed 
this lake.” 

8. — v, 794. Ind* Ant . Yol. XII. p. 155, and Plate. Dhiniki (spurious) plates of the 

Mah drdjddhird j a Jaikadeva of Saurashtra, issued from Bhumilika: 

(L. 1.)— Yikrama-saiiivatsara-sateshu saptasu chaturnavuty-adhikeshv=amkatah [79] 1 
Karttika-mas-a])ara-pakshe am a v asy ay am Aditya-vare Jyeslu ha-nakshatve ravigrahana- 

parvvani | asyaiii saiiivatsara^masa-paksha-divasa-purwayani tithav =ady=eha. 

The date is irregular ; see ibid . Yol, XIX. p. 369. No. 190. 

9 # y. 795. Ind Ant . Yol. XIX. p. 57, and Plate. Kanaswa inscription of the prince 

Sivagana, the son of Sahkuka who was a friend of the king Dhavala of the Maurya lineage ; 
(composed by Devata, the son of Bbatta Surabhi j and engra\ed by Sivanaga,' the son oi 
Dvarasiva) : — 

(L. 14), Samvatsara-satair=yataih sa-pamchanavaty-arggalaih saptabhir=Mmalav-esanam 

10. V. 811. In his Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, Yol. II. p.764, Colonel Tod 

reports that at Chitor in Rajputana he found an inscription ^hich vas dated 

“ Sambut 811, Magha-sndi 5th, Yrishpatwar (Thursday).” 

Thursday, 3rd January A.D. 754; see hid. Ant . Yol. XIX. p. 373, No. 196. 


1 Read vimsaft/-. 

- This occurs m verse, aiid is not a formal title. 

* In the published edition laiodkarman and mhurnardhana are taken to be the names of two I'nuces , se. 
Ind . Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 227. 

* See below. No. 329. 

‘For another, fragmentary inscription which is on the same stone, see I,.d. Ant. \ ol. V. p I S 2, aui 
Plate. . .. - ...I i • • c j , „ 


• The probability is, that in the original inscription the era of the Malava kings is referred to. 

7 The British Museum possesses a fragmentary and partly effaced inscription winch apparently w. 


a 3 eoffravi^d 


bv the same Si\anag.t. 



4 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


11. — V. 847.— Zeitsehr. D. Morg. Ges. Vol. XXXVIII. p. 547 ; Ind. Ant. Vol. XIV. p. 45. 
Shergadh (Kota) Buddhist inscription of the S. 'manta Devadatta ; (composed by Jajjuka) 

(L. 20). — samvat sa 847 Magha-sudi 6 { l 

Vindunaga ; his son Padmanaga; his son Sarvanaga, married Sri; their son Devadatta. 

12. — V. 898. — Zeitsehr . D. Morg. Ges. Vol. XL, p. 39. Dholpar inscription of the 
Cbahavana Chanda raahasena : — 

(L. 21).— Vasu nava [a*]shtau varsha gatasya kalasya Vikram-akhyasya ij] 
Vaisakhasya sitaya[m # ] Ravivara^yuta-dritiyayam || Chandre Rohini-samyukte 2 lague 
Siihghaeya 3 Sobhane yoge | 

Sunday, 16th April A.D. 842; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 35, Xo. 57. 

Isaka; his son Mahisbariima, married Kanhulla (who became sati) ; their son Chauaa 
(Chandamahasena). 

W3. — V. 918-— Jour. Bog. As. Soe. lS-5 5 p. 516. Ghatayala inscription of the Padihara 
(Prafcibara) Kakkuka:— 

(L. 16). — Varisa-saesu a navasnrn attharasam-aggalesu Chettammi I nakkhatte vihu* 
hatthe Buha-vare dbavala*biae f| 

The date is irregular. 

Rajjila, a son of the Brahman Harichandra and his Ivshatriya wife Bbtdrfi ; his son 
Xarahada (Xarabhata) ; his son Xalruia i XAgabhut 1 ) ; his sou Tata ; his son Jasavaddhana 
(Yasovardhana) ; his son Chanduka ; his son Silluka ; his son Jhota; his son Bhilluka; bis 
son Kakka, married Durlabhadevi ; their son Kakkuka. 4 


^4. — -V, 919.— Ep. Ind , Vol. IV. p. 310; ArchwoL Snrv. of India , Vol. X. Plate 
xxxiii. 2. Deogadh Jaina pillar inscription of the time of the Mi hd rd jddhira j a Bhojadeva 
[ot Kanauj], and of his feudatory, the Mahdsdmanta Vishnurama, governor of Luacbchbagna 
(Deogadh) : — 

(L. 6). — samvat 919 Asva(sva)yuja-suklapaksha-chaturddasyarh Vri(bri)haspati-diDena 
t ta rabhad ra pa cl [a ] - n ak s h a tt r e. 

(L. 10). — [Sa]kakal-[abda]-saptasatani chatnru<ga)sity-adhikani 784 [[|] 

Thursday, 10th September A.D. 862; see In U. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 28, Xo. 30. 

\Ah . — V. 932.— Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p 156. Gwalior inscription of the reign of Adivaraha 
(Bhojadeva), the son (?) of Ramadeva, 5 [of Kanauj]: — 


1 


7). — Xavasu satt*.shv-avda(bda)narii dvattriinn(ttrim)sat-sariiyuteshu Vaisakhe 1 

G. — V. 933- — Ep. Ind. Vol. I, p. 15'J, and Plate. Gwalior inscription of the reign of 
Bhojadeva [of Kanauj] : — 

(L. 1). — samvatsara*satesbu navasu ttrayastrinsad-adhikeshu 6 Magha-sukla-dvitiyay am 
sain 933 }lagha~sudi 2. 

(L. 5). — asminn-Ova samvat >are Phfdguna-*va(ba)hula-paksha'pratipadi. 

(L. H). — 'asminn=eva samvatsare Phalguna-va(ba)hula-pak 3 ha-navamyaih, 

17.— V. 930— Arohrol. Sure, of India , Vol. X. p. 33, and Plate xi. Notice of a 
fragmentary inscription at Gyarispar : — 


sateshu 


Malava-kalficb-chbarri.fHm sbattrlrr/ttriiii sat-sariiyut^ahv^utiteshu | navasu 


1 In Zeitsehr. T> Ilorg. Ges. the published te^t has ** samuat so 841 JLfogha-sudi 6 ; ’* in Ind. Ant , ^samvat 
sard aka 7 Mdgha-iudi 6 ; ” and in Ind. Ant. Vol. XIV, p. 351, the date by Dr. Fleet is read “ samvat S00 70 ( > 
Md'/’/a hu di 20" I take samvat sa to be an abbreviation of samnatsara-sateshu ; compare my remarks in Ind 
Ant Vol. XXVI. p. 152, note 34. 

2 Kcid Jftohim-yvkte. s Read Simhasya. * See below, No. 330. 

i Sec bch>v\, No 510 of II. 270 * Read ^stnmsad-. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


18- — V. 980. — Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 173. Siyadoni (Sironi Khurd) inscription, recording 
x large number of donations, made from V. 960 to V, 1025, 1 mostly by private persons, in 
favour of various Brahmanical deities at Siyadoni. Date of the reign of the Mahardjddhirdja 
Mahendrapaladeva, [the successor of Bhojadeva, of Kan an j] : — 

(L. 2). — sarii[vatsa*]ra-sateshu nava-sata shashty-adhikeshu Srava 

. samvat 960 Srava[na] .... 

19. — V. 900. — Ind. Ant. Vol. XVII. p. 202. Terahi memorial tablet of the time of the 
Mahasdmantddhipatis Gunaraja and Undabhata : — 

(L. 1). — sam [l|?] 9b0 Bhadrapada-vadi 4 Sanau || 

Saturday, 16th July A.D. 903; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 173, No. 110. 

20. — V. 904 . — Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 173. Siyadoni inscription ; 2 date of a grant of the 
Mahasdj/iayitddhipati Undabhata, of the reign of the Mahardjddhirdja Mahendrapaladeva, 
the successor of Bhojadeva, [of Kananj] : — 

(L. 4). — samvatsara-sateshu nava-sata [sha*]shty-adhikeshn chatur-anviteshu 

Marggasiramasa-vahulapaksha-tritiyayam samvat 964 Margga-vadi 3. 

21. — V. 905 . — Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 174. Date in the Siyadoni inscription 2 : — 

(L. 8 ). — samvatsara-sateshu nava-sata pane hasbashty-adhikeshu Asvina-mase pratipadayam 
samvat 965 Asvi[na-sn]di 1. 

22 . — V. 907 . Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 174. Date in the Siyadoni inscription 2 : — 

(L. 11).— samvatsara-sateshu nava-[sa]ta sapta[aha # ]shty-adhikeshu Phalguna-masa 
amavasyam samvat 967 Phalguna-vadi 15. 

03 y. 939 . Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p- 175, Siyadoni inscription : 2 date of the time of the 

M a hd rdj dd hi rdj a Dhurbhata, governor of Siyadoni 

13) samvatsara-nava-sateshu ckonasaptaty-adhikeslm M.lgha-mase pahehamyam 

samvat 969 Magha-sudi 5. 

24.— v. 973 . Jour. Beng, As. Soc . Vol. LXII. Part I. p. 314 Bijapnr inscription 

(below, No. 53) ; date of the time of the Rashtrakuta Vidagdha, the son of Harivarman, of 
Hastikundi : — 

(L. 30).— Rama-sriri-namda-kalite Vikmma-kule gate tu Suehi-mase | srlmad- 
V a(ba)labh‘jdra-gur 6 r= V vidagdhar&jena duttam=idam II 
(L. 32.) — samvat 973. 

25 _v. 974 .— Incl. Ant. Vol. XVI. p. 174, and Plate. Asm (now Fatehpur-Haswa) 
inscription of the reign of the Mihdrojddhintjn Mahipaladeva, the successor of 
Mah[endra]paladeva, [of Kanauj] : 

(L. 5 ).— sammvat-ara-«afsa)tesu(shu) navashu(sn)^ cliatu [h* 1 saptaty-adhikesu(shu) 

if. i a "Mi c-o nfom t**! mm ^evaiii saiimivat 9/4 Alaglm-vadi /. 

Maghamasa-suklapakshya°-saptamyamm vwmi „ 

26 y. 981.— Ind- Ant. Vol. XIII. p. 251. British Museum fragmentary inscription 

of the ascetic Vakulaja; (composed by Pevananda) : — 

(L. 9).— samvat 9Sl J Karttika-sudi 13. 

27 _v. 983.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XIII. p. 250. British Museum inscription of the ascetic 

Vakulaja : — 

(L. 16).— samvat 9S3 5 Chaittra-sndi mpafpnm chamyalFmyari.) 


1 The dites are given here seuaratelv muivr the different re.us. 

3 Dr Fleet su trusts <) m'zs-a*itWapa&*kv<z m ' 

5 The uubibhf d text has 7S3. 


3 Seeaho\e, No Ifc 

4 The published tent has 781. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. [Vol. V. 


28. — V. 991.— Ep. Ind. Vol I. p. 177. Date in the Siyadoni inscription 1 : — 

(L. 33).— sa[mvat] 991 Magha-sudi 10. 

09 . — V. 994 . — Ep. hid. Vol. I. p. 176. Date in the Siyadoni inscription 1 : — 

(L. 26). — samvat 994 Vaisa(sa')kba-vadi 5 sa[m*]krarhtau. 

22nd April A.D. 933 ; see Ind. tint. Vol. XIX. p. 181, No. 133. 

3 Q — V. 990 . — Jour . Beng. As. Sog. Vol. LXII. Part I. p. 314. Bijapar inscription (below, 
No. 53) ; date of the time of the Rashtrakuta Mammata, the son of Vidagdha (above, No. 24), 
of Hastikundi : — 

(L. 31). — Navasu sateshu gateshu tu shannavati-samadhikeahu Maghasya | kris hn- 
aikadasyamriha samarpitam Mammata-nripena(na) || 

(L. 32). — samvat 996. 

31. — V. 1005. — Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 177. Siyadoni inscription; 1 date of the reign of 
the Mahardjddkiraja Devapaladeva, the successor of Kshitipaladeva, [of Kanaujj, and of 
the time of the Maharajadhiraja Nishkalahka, governor of Siyadoni : — 

(L. 28). — samvatsaranarii sabasr-aikam panch-ottararii Maghamasa-suklapaksha- 
panchamyaih samvat 1005 Magha-sudi 5. 

32. — V. 1005. — As. Res. Vol. I. p. 264, Translation by Charles Wilkins of a Sanskrit 
inscription, copied by Mr. Wilmot in A.D. 1785 from a stone at Bodh-Gaya ; (mentions 
Amaradeva, one of the nava ratndni in Vikramaditya’s court) : — 

“ On Friday, the fourth day of the new moon in the month of Madhoo, when in the 
seventh or mansion of Ganisa, and in the year of the Era of Veekramddeetya 1005. 

Friday, 17th March A.D. 94S ( ?) ; see hid. Ant. Vot. XX. p. 127, note 12, 

33. — V. 1008. — Ep. Ind. \ ol. I. p. 177. Siyadoni inscription date of the time of the 
Maharajadhiraja Nishkalahka, [governor of Siyadoni]: — 

(L. 30). — samvat 1008 Magha-sudi 11. 

34. — V. 1008 and 1010. — Bhdvnagar Inscr . p. 67, and Plate ; Prdchinalekhamdld , Vol. 
II. p. 24. Udaypur (in Rajpntfma) inscription of the time of [the Guhila] Allata, the son 
of the queen Mahalakshmi and father of Naravahana : — 

(L. 5). — Karttika -sit a- paheh amy am - Agra fa • niim n a susutradharena | prarabdham deva- 
griham kale vasu-sunya-dik-samkhye || Dasa-dig-Vikrama-kale Vai&iikhe snddha-saptami- 
divase I Harir=iha nivesito^yam ghatita-pratimo Varahcna II 

35. — -V. 1011. Ep. Ind. \ ol. I p. 124, and Plate. Khajuraho inscription of the 
Ckandellas Yasovarman and Dhahga ; (composed by Madhava, the son of Dedda) 

(L. 2S). — samvatsara-dasa-satesbu ekadas-adhikeshu samvat 1011. 

In the family of the sage Chandratreya, Nannuka ; his sou Vakpati ; his sons 
Jayasakti and Vijayasakti ; Vijayasakti s son Rahiia ; hri son Harsha, married the Chahamana 
princess Kahchbuka ; their son Yasovarman- Lakshavarman (contemporary of Devapala, the 
son of Herarabapala who was a contemporary of Sahi, the king of Kira) ; his son Dhahga 
(also called Vinayakapaladeva ?). 

36. — V. 1011. — Ep. Ind. \ol. I. p. 136 ; Arclceol Surv . of India, Vol. XXI. Plate xvi. J 

Khajuraho Jaina temple inscription of the time of [the ChandSlla] Dhahga (?) : 

(L. 1). — samvat 1011 samaye || 

(L. 10). — VaGa(sa)sha(kba)-sudi 7 S&ma-dine || 

Monday, 2nd April A.D. 955 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 35, No. 59. 



1 See above, No. 18. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


KijputW— ° U *~ Pr ° feSSOr Benda11 ’ 3 Burney, p. 82, and Plate. Inscription at Amber in 
(L. 1).— samvat 1011 Bhadrapade(da)-badi 11 Sn(su)kra-dina. 

Friday, 28th July A.D. 954, or, perhaps, Friday, 14th September A.D. 955 1 * * ; see Ind 
Ant. Yol. XIX. p. 174, No. 111. 


tj f®* V * 1013 ' Ep- Ind. Vol. II. p. 124. Date of the completion of a temple of the 
xiarsha(Siva), in the Harsha inscription of Vigraharaja (below, No. 44J ; C 

(L. 32), — samvat 101 [3] Ashadha-sudi 13. 

^77 — Ep ' Ind ‘ VoL TIL P- 266. Rajorgadh (now Alwar) inscription of tht j 
Mahdrdjddhirdja Mathanadeva, the son of Savata and his wife Lachchhuka, of the 
Gurjarapratihara lineage ; of the reign of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Vijayapaladeva, the successor 
of Kshitipaladeva, [of Kanauj] ; issued from Rajyapura 

(L. 2). samvatsara-sateshu dasasn sliodas-ottarakeshu Maghamasa-sitapaksha- 
ttrayodasyam Sani-yuktayam=evam sam 1016 Magha-sudi 13 Sanav=adya. 

Saturday, 14th January A.D. 960 ; see Ind. Ant . Yol. ,XIX. p. 22, No. 3. 

40-— 1025. — Ep . Ind. Vol. I. p. 178. Siyadoni inscription ; 2 date of the time of the 

Mahdrdjddhirdja Nishkalarika, governor of .Siyadoni : — 

(L. 36). — samvat 1025 Magha-vadi 9. 

41. — V. 1027.— Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 124. Date of the death of the Saiva ascetic Allata, in 
the Harsha inscription of Vigraharaja (below, No. 44) : — 

(L. 32). — Jate=vda(bda)nam sahasre ttrigunanava-yute Simha-rasau gate=rkke sukla 
y=asit=tri[ti*]y& Subha- Kara-sahita Soma-varena tasyam j 

Monday, 8th August A.D. 970. 

42. — - V. 1028. — Bhdvnagar Inscr . p. 70. Udaypur (in Rajputana) fragmentary inscription 
ot the Guhila Naravahana ; (composed by Amrakavi, the son of Adityanaga) : — 

(L. 17). — Vikramaditya-bhubhrifcah asht[a # ]viriisati-samyukte sate dasa-gun& sati || 

43. — V. 102[8]. — From a photograph supplied by Dr. Burgess (see Archcval. Snrv. of 
India, Yol XXIII. p. 125). Nimtor (in Rajputana) inscription of the reign of the 
Mahdrdjddhirdja Chamundaraja » 

(L. 6) maharajadhiraja-sri-Chamundaraja-rajye. 

(L.8) . . , samvat 102[8] .... 


44. — V. 1030.— Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 119, and Plate. Harsha inscription of the Chahamana 
Vigraharaja ; (composed 3 by Dhtranaga, the son of Thiruka) : — - 

(L. 33). — samvat 1030 Ashadha-sudi 15. 

In theChahamana lineage, Guvaka [I.] ; his son Chandraraja ; his son Guvaka [II.] ; his 
son Chandana (defeated the Toraara prince Rudrena==Rudrapala r) ; his son Vakpatiraja 
(defeated Tantrapala) ; his son Simharaja (contemporary of a certain Lavana) ; his son 
Vigraharaja. — The Mahdrdjddhirdja Simharaja also had a brother, named Vatsaraja, and (besides 
Vigraharaja) the three sons Durlabharaja, Chandraraja, and Gdvindaraja. 

45. — V. 1030. — Wiener Zeitschrift , Vol. V. p. 300. A Baroda (or Patan) plate of the 
Chaulukya Mularaja I., according to Mr. H. H. Dhruva. is dated : — 

“ V. S. 1030 Bhadrapada-sudi 5, Monday.” 

Monday, 24th August A.D. 974. 


1 On this d«y the tithi of the date com men ced 2% 12 in. after mean sunrise. 

* See above. No. 18. 

* The inscription also contains some verses of Sdta s. 



8 


EPIGRAPH! A IKDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


46. — V. 1031.— Ind . Ant . Vol. VI. p, 51, and Plates. Dharampuri (now Indore) plates of 
the Parainara Maharajadhiraja Vakpatirajadeva, issued from Fjjayani : — 

(L. 13). ekatr i ri) m sa- sahas rika- sam vatsa re =sm in Bhadrapada-sukla-chafcurdda- 

syam(syam) pavitraka-parvvani. 

(L. 32j. — saiii 1031 Bhadrapada-sudi 14. 

Krisbnaraja; Vairisimha; Siyakaj Yakpatiraja-Amogkavarsha. 

47. V. 1034.— Jour. Beng, As, Soc. Vol. XXXI. p. 393, Plate i. No. vi. Fragmentary 
inscription on the pedestal of a Jaina fignre at Gwalior, of the time of [the Kachchhapaghata] 
Maharajadhiraja Vajradaman (below, No. 73) ; — 

. Sammvatah | 1034 sri-Vajradama-maharajadhiraja Vaisakha-vadi pancbami . 

48. V. 1034.— In his Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, Vol. I. p. 802, Colonel Tod 
gives a translation of an “ inscription from the ruins of Aitpoor,” apparently of the time 
of the Gnhila Saktdkumara, which contains the date — 

“In Samvatsir 1034, the 16th of the month Bysak.’* 

1030.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XIV. p. 160; Ind. Inscr . No. 9. Ujjain (now India Office) 
plates of the Pa ram a ra Maharajadhiraja Vakpatirajadeva, issued from Bhagavatpura and 
written at Gunapura : — 

(L. 11). shattri(tri)msa*sahasrika-samvatsare=smin K&rttika-suddha-paurnnimayam 1 
so ma grab an a - pa rv va ni, 

6th November A.B. 979 ; a lunar eclipse, visible in India ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 23, No. 4. 

(L. 28).— samvat 1036 Chaitra-vadi 9 j 

Line of succession as in No. 46. 


50. V. 1043. hid. Ant. Vol. VI. p. 191, and Plate. Kadi plates of the Chanlnkika 
(Chaulnkya) Maharajadhiraja Mftlarhja I., the son of the MaUrdjddhirdja Raji ; issued 
from A^ahilapataka : — 

(L. 8). — suryagrahana-parvvani. 

(L. 21).— samvat 1043 Magha-vadi 15 Ravau. 

,^^ U xT da o’o 2Bd JaDIlary A ' D ' 987 ; a solar eclipse, not visible id India ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. 
p. 166, No. 83. 

J- 1049 -., 7w<7- P* ^7, ai1 ^ Plate. Dewal (Illahabas) inscription of Lftllfi 

of the Chhrnda family ; (composed by Nebila, the son of Bhatta Sivarudra) =— 

(L. 26). • samvatsara-sahasra 1049 Margga-vadi 7 Guru-dine || 

Thursday, 20th October A.D.992; 3 see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 364, No. 177. 

i 6 l amily sa ® e Cbyavana, Vairavarman ; his son Bhushana ; his youngei 

brother Malhana, married Anahila of the Chuluklsvara family; their son Lalla, married 

1 .a tchmi » 7 


, r .. 52 :. V.ioei .— Wiener Zeitschrift, Vol. V. p. 300. A Baroda plate of the Chanlukya 
Mularaja I., according to Mr. H. H. Dhrava, is dated 3 

“ V S. 1051 Magha-sudi 15,” at a lunar eclipse. 

19th January A.D. 995 ; a lunar eclipse, visible in India. 


1 Bead -paurnam6*i/dm. 

mahdrdj*dhirdja-parametvara-s H-Mlarojaditah. ' * * P *** r ^' dvali V*rxavat V aramabhaH<$raka- 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


9 


53 - V- 1053.- Jour. Beng. As. Soa. Vol. LXII. Part I. p. 311. Bijapur (sow Jodhpnr) 
inscription of the Rashtrakftta Dhavala of Hastiknndi; (composed by SuryLiarya) 

(L. 19).— Samtyach4ryais=tripamchasa-sahasre saradam=iyam / Magha-sukla-trayo- 
dasyam supratishthaih pratishthita || J 

(L. 22).— samvat 1053 Magha-sukia 13 Ravi-dine Pushya^nakshatre. 

Sunday, 24th January A.D. 997. 

Hanvarman ; his son Vidagdha (above, No. 24) ; his son Mammata (above. No. 30) ; his 
son llhavala (contemporary of [the Paramara] MunjaiAja, Durlabharaja, [the Chaulnkya] 
u araja [ .] ; Dharanivaraha, and Mahendra or Mahindra ? ) ; his son Balaprasada. 


q i^* 1055.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVI. p. 202, and Plate. Nanyaura (now Bengal As, 

oc. s) plate of the Chandella Mahdrdjddhirdja Dhangadeva, lord of Kalaniara : issued from 
Kasika : — 


A samv atsara-sahasre panchapanchasad - ad hike Karttika-paurnnamasyam Ravi-dine 

tfvath samvat 1055 K[a*]rtti[ka]-sudi 15 Ravau ady=eh=[ai]va Kasikayam Sainhikeya-graha* 
grasa-prave&krita-mandale | R6hini-hriday-ananda-kanda-harinalahchhane |] 

Sunday, 6th November A.D. 998; a lunar eclipse, visible in India: see ibid. Vol XIX 
P- 23, No. 5. 

In the family of the sage Chandratreya, Harsha ; l his son Yasovarman; his son Dhanga. 

55. — V. 1058.— Ep. hid . Vol. I. p. 148 ; Archaiol. Surv. of India , Vol. XXI. Plate xix. 
Khajurahb inscription of Kokkala of the Grahapati family 2 : — 

(L. 22). — samvat 1058 Karttikyam. 

Atiyasdbala or Yasobala (settled at Padmavati) ; his son Mahata; his son Jayad^va; his 
son Sekkala or Sekkalla ; his younger brother Kokkala or Kokkalla. 

56. V. 1059.— Ep. Ind . Vol. I. p. 140; Archival. Surv. of India, Vol. XXI. Plate xviii. 
Khajurahb inscription 3 * of the Chandella Dhangadeva, put up after his death ; (composed by 
Rama, the son of Balabhadra and grandson of Nandana) : — 

(B. 32). — samvat 1059 sri-Kharjjurava[ha]ke i4ja-£rb[Dham]gadeva-rajye. 

In the family of the princes descended from the sage Chandratreya, Nannuka ; liis son 
Vakpati; his son Vijaya ; his son Rahila ; his son Harsha, married Kanehhuka; their son 
Yasovarman, married Puppa ; their son Dhanga, 

57- — V, 1078. — Ind. Ant. Vol. VI. p. 53, and Plates. Ujjain plates of the Paramara 
ATalidrdjddkirdja Bhojadeva, issued from Dhara : — 

(L. 8),— atit-ashtasaptatyadhika-sahasrika-samvatsare Magh-asita-tritiyayam | Ravav= 
ndagay ana-parv vani . 

Sunday, 24th December A.D. 1021 •* see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 361, No. 169. 

(L. 30), — samvat 1078 Chaitra*sudi 14, 

Siyaka ; V&kpatiraja ; Sindhuraja ; Bh6ja. 

58. — V. 1080 Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 211, No. xli., and Plate. Mathura Jaina image 

inscription : — 

(L. 3). — samvatsarai(re) 1080. 

59, — V. 1083. — Ind. Ant. Vol. XIV. p. 140. Sarnath (now Benares College) inscription 
of Mahip&la, 5 king of Gauda, and his sons (?) Sthirapala and Vasantapala : — 

(L. 3). — samvat 1083 Pausha-dine 11. 


1 In line 6 the original has sri-Sriharshadeva. 3 See below, Nos. 125 aud 130. 

3 For the date of the renewal of this inscription see below, No. 86. 

4 On this day the tithi of the date commenced 3 h. 24 m. after mean sunrise ; but the word tritiyay&m m&v 

perbaps have been put erroneously for dvitt'jnydm. 

1 See below. No. 540. 


C 



10 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


(Tol. V. 


60. — V. 1084— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 34, and Plate. Jhusi (now Bengal As. Soc.’s) 
plate of the Mablrajidhiraja Trilochanapaladeva, the successor of Rivjjapaladeva who was the 
successor of Vijayapaladeva, [of Kanauj ?] ; issued from near Prajaga on the banks of the 
Ganges : — 

(L. 8). — dakshinayana-samkrantau. 

(L. 16). — sam 1084 Sravana-vadi 4. 

25th June A.D. 1027 ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 174, No. 112. 

61. — V. 1088. — lad , Ant. Vol. VI. p. 193 ; Bhavnagar laser, p. 194, and Plates. Radhanpur 
plates of the Chaulukya Mahdrajddhirdja Bhimadeva I., 1 * issued from Anahilapataka : — 

(L. 1). — Vikrama-samvafc 1086 KArttika-sadi 15. 

(L. 5). — adya Karttiki-parvvani. 

62. — V. 1093. — A s. Res. Vol. IX. p. 432; Jour . Deng . As. Soc. Vol. V. p. 731 ; Colebrooke's 
Misc. Essays , Vol. II. p. 278. Karra (now Calcutta Museum) inscription of the 
Mahardj d dhiraj a Yasahpala : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1093 Ashalha-sudi 1 ady=eha srimat-Kate maharajadhiraja-sri- Yasahpalah 
Kausamba-mandale. 

63. — V. 1093.— bid. Ant. Vol. XIII. p. 185 (see also Vol. XIV. p. 352). Udayagin 
Amrita-cave inscription, containing the names ‘ Chandragupta 9 and ‘ Vikramaditya 9 : — 

(L. 4). — samvat 1093. 

64. — V. 1099. — Jour . Beng . As. Soc. .Vo 1. X. p. 671. Inscription from a tank at 
Bussuntgarh 3 at the foot of the Southern range of Hills running parallel to Mount Aboo ; 
ends : — 

Navanavativ(r=?)ih-asid=Vikramaditya-ka!e jagati dasa-satanam=agrato yatra purna f 
prabhavati Nabka-mase sthanake chitrnbhanoh sa 1099 || 

A prasastiy composed by Matrisarman, the son of Hari ; mentions 3 Utpalaraja, Aranyaraja 
(? Arno raja), Adbhutakrishnaraja (? Krishnaraja), Vasudeva, Srinathaghoshin, Mahipala, 
Vandhuka (? Dhandhuka) who married Ghritadevi, their son Puraapala, his younger sistei 
Lab ini who married Vigrakaraja, etc. 

65. — V. llOO.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XIV. p. 10; Ind. Inscr . No. 7. Byana Jaina inscription of 
the time of [the Kachchhapaghata ?] Vijayadhiraja (Vijayapala ?) : — 

(L. 6). — Naiarii yatu satarh sahasra-sahitam samvatsaranam drutaih 1 ma[ya?J- 
<Bhadrapadah sa hhadra-padavim masah saroarohatu I s=asy=aiva kshayam^etu Soma-sa[hi]ta 
krishna dvitiya tithih ... 

(L. 17). — sam 1100 Bhadra-vadi 2 Chamdre kalyanaka-di[ne). 

Monday, 13th August A.D. 1044; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 181, No. 134. 

66. — V. 1107.— Ind, Ant. Vol. XVI. p. 205, and Plate. Nanyaura (now Bengal As. 
Soc.’s) plate of the Chandella Mahdrdjadhirdja Devavarmadeva, lord of Kalanjara ; issued 
from Suhavasa :• — 

(L. 7). — samvat 1107 Vaisak ha-mase kri[shnaj-pakshc tritiyayarh Soma-dine . * * 
atmiya-matuh rajni-sri-Bhuvanadevyah sarnvatsari(ri)ke. 

Monday, 1st April A.D. 1051 ; 4 * see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 364, No. 178. 

Vidyadhara ; Vijayapala; Dcvavarman, whose mother was Bhuvanadevi. 


1 Compare Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 253. 

* According to Munshi Debiprasad, this is Basantgftdh in the Sirohi State of Kajputana, where the inscription 
still is. According to the same authority, there is a fragmentary inscription of Furnapdla, ot “ samvat 1102/’ 
at the village of Bharunda in the Godv&r district of Jddhpur. 

3 The inscription requires to be re-edited, to enable one to give a proper account of its contents. 

4 On this day, which is the proper equivalent of the date for the given year, the tit hi of the date commenced 

6 b- 40 m. after mean sunrise. 



INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


II 


Appendix.] 


67. — V. 1112.— Ep. lnd. Vol. III. p. 48, and Plate, Mandhdta plates of the Paramara 
Mahd raj dd hi rd j a Jayasimhadeva, issued from Dhara : — 

(L. 20). — sariimvat 1112 Ashaclha-vadi 13. 

Vakpatiraja ; Sindhuraja; Bhbja; Jayasimha. 

68. — V. 1116.— Jour. Beng. -Is, Soc. Yol. IX. p. 549. A modern inscription at Udaypur 
(in Gwalior), which distinctly states the Paramara Udayaditya to have been ruling in “ Samvat 
1116 or Saka 081 ; ” see Jour . Amer. Or. Soc. Yol. VII. p. 35. 1 

69. — V. 1136. — Ind. Ant. Yol. XXII. p. 80. Notice of an Arthuna inscription of tht 
Paramara Chamundaraja ; (composed by Chandra, a younger brother of Vijayasadhara and 
^on of Sumatisadhara) : — 

(L. 53). — samvat 1136 Phalgnna-sudi 7 Sukre. 

Friday, 31st January A.D. 1080* 

In the family of the hero Paramara, Vairisimha ; his younger brother Dambarasimha : m 
his family, Kahkadeva (who defeated a ruler of Karnata, an enemy of the Malava king Harsha 2 ) 
his son Chandapa; his son Satyaraja ; from him sprang Mandanadeva ; his son Chamundarajn 
(defeated Sindhuraja). 

70. — V, 1137. — l n d. Ant. Yol. XX. p. 83. Notice of an Udaypur (in Gwalior) inscription 
of the Paramara Udayaditya: — 

(L. 5). — samvat 1137 Vaisa(sa)kha-sudi 7, 

71. — V. 1145. — Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 237 ; Archceol. Surv. of Lidia, Yol. XX. Plates xxi. 
and xxii. Dubkund inscription of the Kachchhapaghata MaharajudJiiraja Vikramasimha ; 
(composed by Vijayakirti. the son of Santishena 3 ) : — 

(L. 61). — samvat 1145 Bhadrapada-sudi 3 Soma-dine II 

Monday, 21st August A.D. 1088 1 4 see lnd. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 361, No. 1/0. 

In the Kachchhapaghata family, Yuvaraja ; his son Arjuna, an ally or feudatory of [the 
Chandella] Vidyadhara, slew in battle Rajyapala [of Kanauj ?]‘ ; his son Abhimanyu (a 
contemporary of king Bhdja) ; his son Vrjayapala ; his son Vikramasimha. 

72. — V. 1148.— Ep. Ind. Yol. I. p. 317, and Plate. Sunak plates of the Chauloky:. 
Hahdrdjadhird ja Karnadeva Traildkyamalla, issued from Analiilapataka . 

(L. 1). — Vikrama-samvat 1118 V aisakha-sudi 15 Some | 

(L. 6). — adya somagrahana-parvani. 

Monday, 5th May A.D. KM ; a lunar eclipse, visible in India. 

73. — v. 1150. Ind Ant Vol. XV. p. 36, and Plate; PrdeMnalekhnmd’d, Vol. I. p. 81 

Gwalior Sasbahu temple inscription of the Kachchhapaghata Mahipaladeva ; (composed by 
Manikantba, the son of Govinda and grandson of Rama) . 

(L. 40).— fikadasasv=atiteshu samvatsara-sateshu cha | ek6napanchasa(sa)ti cha gat£shv= 
adve(bde)sha Vikramat || Pauchas£(s£) ch=Asvi(syi)ne mase knshna-pakshe . . . 

amkato=pi 1150 || Asvi(Svi)na-va(ha)hnla-pamchamy&rii. 

In the Kachchhapaghata (Kachchhapari) family Lakshmana; his son Vftjradaman 
(defeated a ruler of Gadhinagara, i.e. Kanauj, and conquered Gopadn, ».s. Gwalior); 


C nf the inscription executed, shys about it: f ‘ The person for 

* Dr. P. E. Hall, who had two Udayluitva of Malava: but it is clear that, 

whom that wretched scrawl was indited calls himself a descendant ua } 

■'hetUt-r eo or not, he knew nothing of UilayfUlitya & family. 

! J he or 'y iunl has ’ ri f, rlh “ r A a . f the tin? Hidjadeva, defeated hundreds of disputants who had assailed 
» Santishena, » a aabba held before the _ J ^ u . siri( who WM the sou of Kuiabbdshana and 

Arubarastina and other learned men. He was the son of U urUDnase 

£?Tandson of the Guru D^vaseun, of the IAtavag»ta gan<*. . 

4 On this day the titii of the date commenced 3 h. 23 in. af r mean su . 

J c l 



12 


EPIGRAPHIA IN DIC A. 


[Vol. V. 


Mangalaraja ; l * Kirtiraja; his son Mulad£va, also called Bhuvanap&la and Traildkyamalla, 
married Devavrata; their son Devapala ; his son Padmapala; succeeded by Mahipala- 
Bhuvanaikamalla, who was the son of Suryapala, but is called the brother of Padmapala. 

74 — v, 1152.— Archceol. Surv. of India, Vol. XX. p. 102, and Plate xxii. Dubkund 
Jaina pillar inscription : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1152 Vaisasha(kha)-sndi pamchamyam || 

75. — V. 1154. — Ini. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 11, and Plate. Bengal A a. Soc.’s plate of the 
Mali drdj ad hirdj a Madanapaladeva of Kananj, recordinga grant which was made at Varanasi 
by his father and predecessor Chandradeva on the date here given : — 

(L. 11). — chatuhpa(shpa)mchasa(sa)dadhika-sa(sa)taikadasa(sa)-samvatsare Maghe 

masi su(su)kla-pakshe tritiyayarii S6ma-dine Varanasyam uttaranayana-samkrantan 9 ahkatah 
samvat 1154 Hagha-sudi 3 S6me. 

The date is irregular; see ibid. p. 10, and Vol. XIX. p. 371, No. 191. 

Yasovigraha ; his son Mahichandra ; his son Chandradeva (acquired the sovereignty over 
Kanyakubja, i.e. Kananj) ; his son Madanapala (Madanad^va). 

76. — V. 1154. — Ini. AnL Vol. XVIII. p. 238; Archceol. Surv. of India, VoL X. Plate 
xxxiii. 3. Deogadh rock inscription of the Chandella Kirtivarman and his minister 
Vatsaraja : — 

(L. 8). — samvat 1154 Chaitra-[su]di 2 Ravau. 

Sunday, 7th March A.D. 1098 ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 36, No. 61. 

In the Chandella family, Vidyadkara ; his son Vijayapala ; his son Kirtivarman, 

77. — V. 116L— Ini. Ant. Vol. XIV. p. 103. Bas&hi (now Lucknow Museum) plate of the 
Mahdrajaputra Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Asatika on the YamnnA: — 

(L. 8). — samvat sahas [r*]-aik6 ekashashty-uttara-£at-&bbyadhik& Paosha-mase sukla- 
paksbe paihchamyam Ravi-dind 3 ’hke samvat 1161 Pausha-sudi 5 Ravau 3 . . . 

(L. 16). — uttarayana(na)-samkr&mtau. 

Probably Saturday, 24th December A.D. 1104; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 363, No. 176. 

In the Gahadavala family, Mahiala’s son Chandradeva (became the protector of the earth 
when the kings Bh6ja and Karna had passed away, and established his capital at Kany&kubja) ; 
his son Madanapala ; his son Govindachandra. 

78. — V. 1161.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XV. p. 202. Gw&lior (now Lucknow Museum) fragmentary 
inscription of the successor of the KaehchhapagMia Mahip&laddva (above, No. 73); 
(composed by Yasftdeva 4 * ) : — 

(L.9). — sri-Vikramarkkan|ripa-kaUtita-8amvatsaiAnemmMkasliashty-adhikey&m=ekada6a- 
saty&m Magha-snkla-shashthyam. 

Bhuvanapala; his son Apar&jita- Devapala ; his son Padmap&la; MahSp&la .... 

79. V. 1101.-1?*. Ind, Vol. II. p. 182. Nagpur Museum inscription of the Paramara 
Naravarmadeva ; (probably composed by himself) : — 

(L. 40). — earn 1161 || 

In the family of the hero Paramara, Vairisimha; his son Siyaka ; his son Mnnjaraja ; 
his younger brother Sindhuraja; his son Bhftja; hia relative UdayAditya (defeated the 
Chedi Karpa) j his son LakshmadAva ; his brother Naravarman. 


1 This name occurs in & fragmentary inscription at By&n&; aee Ind. Ant. VoL XlV. p 9 

* Read nttardy ana- . 

1 Piobably put erroneously for 8ani-din6 and Sanau. 

« He wrote out the inscription of M»hip»!a, shore, No. 73, which wu composed by his friend Msniksnth*. 

% Read - samvatjarandm 



Appehdix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


13 


80. — V. 1162.— Ind. Vol. II. p. 36. K'amanli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of the 
Mahdrdjaputra Govindaehandradeva of Kair * issued from Vishnupura on the Ganges : — 

(L. 6). — 8amvat-sahasr-aike dvi> ^hty-uttara-sat-abhyadhike Karttika- 

sai(pau)rnnamasye (syam) Bhaume dine *nke=pi samvat 1162 [Karttika*-]sudi 5(15) 
Bhaume . . • 

(L. 14).— Karttikyam nimitte. 

Tuesday, 24th October A.D. U05. 1 

In the Gahadavala family, Mahiyala’s son Chandradeva ; his son Madanapala ; his son 
Govindachandra. In line 23 mention is made of G6vindachandra’s mother Ralhadevi ; see 
below, Nos. 96 and 118. 


81. — V. 1163 (for 1104).— Jour. Boy . As. Soc . 1896, p. 787. Notice of a plate of 
M&d&nap&ladeva of Kanauj and his (P) queen PrithvisriM, issued from Varanasi: — 

(L. 12). — trishashtyadhika-sataikadasa-samvatsare Paushe masi krishna-pakshe 

amavasyam Soma- dine suryya-grahane. 

Monday, 16th December A.D. 1107 ; a solar eclipse, visible in India. 

82. — V, 1184— In the Transactions Boy. As. Soc . Vol. I. p. 226, Colonel Tod has given 
the 14 substance of an inscription from Madhucara-ghar, in Harouta, of the reign of the 
Paramara Naravarman, which is said to mention an eclipse of the sun (!), and the date of 
which is rendered — 

« On the full moon of Pausha, Samvat 1164.” 2 

The inscription apparently mentions Sindhuraja (Sindhula ?), Bkoja, Udayaditya, and 
Naravarman. 


83.— V. nee.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 15. Rahan (now Bengal As. Soc.’s) plate of 
the Mnhdrdjaputra Govindaehandradeva of Kanauj, recording a grant which, during the 
reign of Madanap&ladeva, was made by the Rdnaka LavarSpravaha ; issued from Asatika 
on the Yamuna : — 

(L. 17).— sam 1166 Pausha-vadi 15 Ravan || 

(L. 18). — R&hu-graste eavitari. 

The date is irregnlar ; see ibid. p. 15, and Vol. XIX. p. 371, No. 192. 

In the Gahadav&la family, Mahitala; Chandradeva ; his son Madanapala; his son 
G&vindachandra. 


84 _y U71 Ep Ind. Vel. IV. p. 102. Kamanli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 

the Mah&rdjddhirdja Govindaehandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Var&nasi a 

(L. 17). — fekasaptatyadbika-8a(sa)taikadas a (sa)-samvatsare Karttika-mase 

pu(pan)r V ni(rnna)m&sy&m tithan Soma-dine ahkatah samvat 1171 K&rtt.ka-sudi 15 S&mA 

The date is irregular. , , -i v- 

Yas6vigraha ; his son Mahfchandra ; his son Chandradeva ; his son Madanapala ; his son 

G5 vindach andra. 

85 — V U72— Ep Ind Vol. IV. p. 104. Kamanli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 

the Mah&rdjddhirdja Govindaehandradeva of Kananj, issued from Var&nasi 

(L. 16).- samvat 1172 Vaisa(aa)kha-sudi 3 S6m« II • • • akshaya-tyitiyayam 

parvva^i | 

Monday, 17th April A.D. 1116. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 


1 On thi. day the uthi of the date commenced 2 h. 29 m. after mean .uuriae. 

» See above, No. 81, and Ind- A»t. Vol. XX. p. 130, note 15. 



EPICtRAPHIA indica. 


[Vol. v. 


:4 


30 v 1173. Ep. Lid. Vol. I. p. 147. Date of the renewal, by the Chandelk 

Jayavarmadeva, of the Khajuraho inscription of Dhangadeva of V . 1059 (above, No. 56) • 

(1, 34 — samvat 1173 Vaisa(sa)kha-sudi 3 SukiAII 
Friday, 6th April A.D. 1117 j 1 2 see Ind. Ant . Yol. XIX. p. 362, No. 171. 
g7._V\ 1174. — Ep . Ind. Vol, IY. p. 105. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate ol 
the Mahardjddhirdja Govindaebandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Devasthana f r) : . ^ 

(L. 14). — chatu[h*]saptatyadhik-aikadasa(sa)sa(sa)ta*sarhvatsarai(ra) Asyi(svi)ni(ne; 

masi krishna-pakshe pn[m*]chadasyfi(syaih) Yu( bn)dha-dine samvat 11 [74^] Asvi(svi)na- 
vadi 15 Vu(bu)dhe pitnh samvastaf tsa)rike par rape sraddbe. 

Wednesday, 29th August A.D. 1117; or, less probably, Wednesday, 16tb Octobei 

A.D. 1118. 


Genealogy as in No. 84. 

88. — v. 1174 (for 1175 ?).— Ind. Ant. Yol. XVIII. p. 19. Basahi (now Lucknow Museum) 
plate of the Mahardjddhirdja Govindaebandradeva of Kanauj ; — 

(L. 13). — cbatubs8ptatyadhik-aikadasasa(sa)ta-sRmvatsare Phalgune masi krisbna* 
pakshe tritiyay&n^tithau Sukra-dine=nke=pi samvat 1174 Phalgu[na-vadi 3 (?)] Sukre. 

Probably Friday, 31st January A.D. 1119 ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 367, No. 183.- 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

89. — V. 1175. — Ep* Ind. Vol. IV. p. 106. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate oi 
the Mahardjddhirdja Govindaebandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Varanasi : — 

(L. 15). — parhcha[sa]ptatyadhika-sp.(sa)taikadasa(sa)-samvatsare Magbe m&si 

pu(pau)rngi(rnna)masyam Soma-dirA ankatab samvat 1175 Magha-sudi 15 Soma-dine. 

Monday, 27th January A.D. 1119(F). 3 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 


90,— V. 1176. — Ep. Ind. Vol. IV. p. 108. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 
the Mahardjddhirdja Govindaehandradeva of Kanauj and his queen, the Patfamahdden 
Mahdrdjhi Nayanakelidevi ; issued from Khayara on the Ganges : — 

(L. 16). — sbatsaptatyadhika [e]kadasasata-sa[rh*]vatsare Jy5sbtha-mase krishna-pakshe 
pamchadasyam titbau Ravi-dine ’nke=pi samvat 1176 Jyeshtha-vadi 15 Ravau • • 

Rabu-graste divakare. 

Sunday, 11th May A.D. 1119 ; a solar eclipse, visible in India. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 


91. — V. 1176.— Ep. Ind. Vol. IV. p, 109, Notice of a Karaanti (now Lucknow Museum) 
plate of the Mahardjddhirdja Govindaehandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Varanasi : — 

(L. 15).— sbatsaptatyadbika-sa(sa)taikadasa(sa)-samvatsare K&rttika-sndi navarayam 
ankatah samvat 1176 Karttika-sudi 9 Vu(bu)dhe. 

The date is irregular. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 


92. — V. 1176.— Ind. Ant . Vol. XVII. p. 62; Archceoh 8urv. of India, N. S., Vol- I- 
p. 71, and Plate ; Jour. Beng. As. Soc . Vol. LXI. Part I„ Extra No. p. 60. Sefc-Mabe* 
(now Lucknow Museum) Buddhist inscription, with references to Gdp&la, ruler of Gadhip^ro 
(Kanauj), and to the king Madana ; (composed by Udayin) 

(L- 18). — samvat 11 76 A 


1 On this day the tithi of the date commenced 2 h. 16 m. after mean sunrise. 

2 The date is incorrect for V. 1174, current and expired, but would be correct for both V. 1J72 expired a»4 
V. 1175 expired ; and I now give the preference to V. 1175 expired. 

3 On this day the tithi of the date commenced as late as 12 b. 37 m. after mean sunrise. 

« Not 1276 ; we Ind. Ant . VoL XXIV. p. 176. 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


15 


93. — V. 1177. — Jour. Beng. As. Soc. V ol. XXXI. p. 123. Plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja 
Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, sanctioning a transfer of land which had been previously 
granted by [the Kalachuri] Baja Yasahkarnadeva h — 

Samvat 1177 Karttika-sukla-chaturdasyam. 

94. — V. 1177. — Jour. Amer. Or. Soc . Vol. YI. p. 542. Plate of the Kachchhapaghata 

Mahdrdjddhirdja Virasimhadeva, issued from the fortress of Nalapura : — > 

Samvat 1177 Karttika-vadi amavasyam Ravi-dine . . ♦ pnnye=hani. 

Sunday, 24th October A.D. 1120 (with a solar eclipse, visible in India) ,* see Ind. Ant 
Yol. XIX. p. 167, No. 84. 

In the Kachchhapaghata lineage, Gaganasimha ; his successor Saradasimha ; his son. 
from Lashamadevi, Virasimha. 


masi 

1178 


95. — v. 1178. — Ep. Ind. Yol. IY. p. 110. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate 
of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Varanasi : — 

(L. 12). — [a]shtasaptatyadhik-aikadasatsa > )sa(sa)ta-sariivatsare Srave(va)na(n£) 
su( su)kla-paksh6 paurnnamasya[iri*] tithau Su(su)kra-din£ hkato=pi sa[rh*]vat 
Sravana-sudi 15 Su(su)krA 
Friday, 21st July A.D. 1122. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

% m v. 1181. Jour. Beng . As. Soc . Yol. LYI. Part I. p. 114, and Plate vii. Benares 

plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj and his mother Ralhana- 

devi 2 ; issued from Varanasi : — 

(L. 16).— samvat 1181 Bhadrapada-sudi [4] Guram 

Thursday, 14th August A.D. 1124 ; 3 see Ind. Ant. Yol. XIX. p. 357, No. 160. 
Genealogy as in N o. 84. 

97 Y 1182. Ep. hid . Vol. IY. p. 100, and Plate. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) 

plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj. issued from Madapratihara 
(or Apratihara?) on the Ganges : — 

(L. IS).— samvat 1182 'Mugha-sudi 15 Sa(sa)nau . . . somagraliana-parvvani. 

The date is irregular. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

93 y 1182 (for 1183 ?).— Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Yol. XX\ II. p. 242. Plate of the 

Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj. issued from Isapratiskthaua«(?) on 
the Ganges : — , . . _ . . , . A , , A . ... . 

Dvyasityadhik-aikadasasata-samvatsari Magha-masi krishna-pakshe shashthyam tithav= 

ahkatah saiiivat 1182 Magha-vadi 6 Snkrfi. „ 

Perhaps Friday, 4th February A.D. 1127 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 36o, No. 1/9. 
Genealogy as in No. 84. 

99 — V 1184 — Ep Ind. Vol. IV. p. 111. Notice of a Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) 
plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Varanasi :- 

(L 15) chaturasityadhika-sataikadasa-samvatsare KarttikS masi sukla-pak»hc 

paurni(rna)ma[s*]yam Manvadau Bukra-dine=hke=pi saihvat 1184 Karttika-sudi 15 Sukrf. 
Friday, 21st October A.D. 1127. 

Genealogy as in No. S4. 


. h , 1>te correspond! ne to the 25th December A.D. 1122, see below, No. 410. 
J This* is^tbe "^true reading of ‘ the original inscription. Above, ,n Nos. 80 and 118, the name 

£m ?0 » 'this day the titki of the date commenced 6 h. 43 m. after mean sunrise. 

4 See Ini. Ant. Vol. XV1U. p- 33, note. 


16 


EPIGRAPHiA IXDICA. 


[Vox, V. 


100. — V. 1185.— Jour. Beng. As. See • VoL LVI. Part I. p. 119, and Plate viii. Benares 
plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Varanasi : — 

(L. 15). — pamchasf(sl)tyadhik-aikadasa(sa)sa(sa)ta-8amvatsar4shu Chaitre m&si 
su(su)kla*pakshfi paurrmamasyam tithau Su(su)kra-din6 ahk6=pi samvat 1185 Chaitra-sudi 
15 Su(su)kre . . . Manvadau. 

Friday, 5th April A.D. 1129 ; l see Ind . Ant . VoL XIX. p. 362, No. 172. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

101. — V. 1186.— Archceol. Surv. of India , Vol. XXI. p. 34, and Plate x. A. Kalanjar 
pillar inscription of the time of the Chandella Maharaja Madanavarmadeva 

(L. 3). — sam 1186. 

102. — V. 1187.— Archceol. Sttrv. of India, Vol. XXI. p. 34, and Plate x. B. Kalanjar 
pillar inscription of the time of the Chandella Madanavarmadeva 

( L. 1). — samvat 1187 Jyeshtha-sudi 9. 

103. — V. 1187.— Jour . Beng. As. Soc . Vol. LVI. Part I. p. 108, and Plate vi. Baiwan 
(now Lucknow Museum) plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, 
issued from Varanasi : — 

(L. 18). — samvat 1187 Margga-sudi paurnni(rnna)masyam tithau Soma-dine f| . . .. 

samkrantau. 

Perhaps Monday, 17th November A.D. 1130 *, 2 see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 372, No. 193. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

104. V, 1188.— Archceol. Surv. of India , Vol. XXI. p. 35, and Plate x. C. ; (and Jour . 
Beng. As. Soc. Vol. XVII. Part I, p. 321, No. 4). Kalaiijar rock inscription of the time 
of the Chandella Mahdrdjddhirdja Madanavarmadeva, lord of Kalanjara : — 

(L. 9). — samvat 1188 Karttika-sudi 8 Sa(sa)n[au] || 

Saturday, 31st October A.D. 1131 j see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 23, No. 6. 

105. — V, 1188.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 249. Notice of the Ben (now Lucknow Museum) 
plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Benares 3 

Samvad=ashtasity-adhike(ka) ekadasa(sa)-sat& Kartika-paurnnam&syam tithau Sukra* 
din5=nkat6=pi sam Kartika-sudi 15 Su(su)kre. 

Friday, 6th November A.D. 1131. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

106 ;7 1190.— Ind. Ant. Vol. VI. p. 55, and Plater. Ingnoda inscription of the 
Mahdrajadhiraja Vijayapaladeva, the successor of Tihunapaladeva who was the successor of 
Pfithvipaladeva : — 

(L. 1),— samvatsara-sateshv=ekadasa8U navaty-adhikeshu Ashadha*su(su)klapaksh- 
aikadasyam samvat 1190 Asbadha-sudi II ady=eha Imganapadre. 

(L. 6). — Ashadha-suklapaksh-e(ai)kadasyam parwani. 

107. V. 1190.— Ep. Ind. Vol. IV. p. 112. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 
the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj 4 : 

(L. 15).— navatyadhik-aikadasasata-samvatsare Bhadrapade masi su(su)kla-pakshe 
tritiyay&n=titliaa Sa(ia)ni-dine ’nkatah samvat 1190 Bhadrapada-sndi 3 Sa(sa)nan. 

Saturday, 5th August A.D. 1133. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 


1 On this day the tithi o! the date only commenced 10 h. 59 m. after mean sunrise 

* But there was no tamJcrdnti on this day. 

• The original does not actually mention Benares, hot has M-AtiktUuM# *•]**•■« 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTION'S OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


27 


108. — V. 1190.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVI. p. 208, and Plate. Banda district (now Bengal As. 
Soc.’s)_ plate of the Cliandella Mahurujddhirdja Madanavarmadeva, lord of Kalaujara, issued 
from near Bhailasvamin : — 


(L. 10). — navat3'adhika-sa(sa)taik-6peta>sahasratame samvatsare Hfighe rnasi su(su)kla- 
pakshe purnnimayam Soma-vare ariikato=pi samvat 1190 Magha-sudi 15 Some || 

The date is irregular ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 368, No. 187. 

In the family of the Chandratreya princes (rendered illustrious by Jayasakti, Vijayasakti, * 
and others), Kirtivarman ; Prithvivarman ; Maaanavarman. 

109. — V. 1191. — Ep. Ind . Vol. IV. p. 131, and Plate. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) 
plate of the Sihgara Mahdrdjapatra Vatsarajadeva (Lohadadeva), of the reign of the 
Mahdrdjddhiraja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj ; issued from Varanasi : — 

(L. 18). — sariiYatsara-sahasraike(ku) ekata(na)vatyadhika-sat-anvite Bhadrapata(da)- 
su(su)klapaksha 2 ashtamvaiii Bh6(bhau)ma-vare samvat 1191 Bhadrapada-sudi S Bhaumc 
Katya(nya)-samkramt6(tau). 

Tuesday, 28th August A.D. 1131. 

110. — V. 1191. — Ind. Ant . Vol. XIX. p. 353. Date of a grant (issued from Dbara) of th*e 
Paramara Mahdrdjddhiraja Yasovarmadeva (confirmed by his son and successor, the 
Mahdkamdra Lakshmivarmadeva, in his Ujjain plate of V. 1200, below, No. 121) : — 

(b. 7).- sri-Vikramakal-atita-samvatsar-aikanavatyadhika-sataikada[se]sbu Karttika- 
sudi ashtamyam 8amj&ta-maharaja-sri-[Nara]varmmadeva-’samvatsarike. 

111. — V. 1192.— Jour, Beng. As. Soc. Vol. XVII. Part I. p. 322; Archceol. Surv . of 
India , Vol. XXL p. 35, apd Plate x. D. Rock image inscription at Kalanjar : — 

(L. 4). — samvat 1192 Jyeshtha-vadi 9 Ravau. 

Sunday, 26th April A.D. 1136 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 178, No. 125. 

112. — V. 1192. — Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 349 ; Ind. Inscr. No. 51. Ujjain (now Royal 
As. Soc.’s) second plate only of the Paramara Mali ardja Yasovarmadeva i— ■» 

(L. 12). — samvat 1192 Ma[rgga]-vadi 3. 

The inscription mentions a lady, Momaladevi, wboprobably was the mother of Yasovarman. 

113. — \r. 1194.— ArchceoL Surv . of India , Vol. XXL p. 36, and Plate x. E. Inscription 
in a cell near the Nilakantha temple at Kalanjar : — 

(L. 7). — samvat 1194 Chaitra-vadi 5 Gurau || 

Thursday, 3rd March A.D. 1138 ; see Ind . Vol. XIX. p. 174, No. 113. 


114. — V. U95.— Arcfo-eol. Surv. of West. India , No. 2, Appendix, p. xiii. No. 56- 
Bhadresvar fragmentary (?) inscription of the reign of the Chaulukya Mahdrdjddhiraja 

Jayasimhadeva : — 

(L. 1).— Vikrama- samvat 1195 varshe Ashadha-sudi 10 Ravau asyam samvatsara-masa- 
paksha-divasa-purvayam tithau. 

Sunday, 19th June A.D- 1138. 

115. — V. 1196. Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 361. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 

the Mahdrdjddhiraja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Varanasi 

(L. 16). samvat 1196 Asvi(svi)na-sudi 15 Soma-dine . . . Rahu-grasta-chandramasi. 

Monday, 9th October A.D. 1139 ; a lunar eclipse, visible in India. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

116. — V. 1196.— Ind. Ant. Vol. X. p. 159. Dobad inscription 3 of the reign oi the 
Chaulukya Jayasimhadeva : — 

(L. 8). — ^ri-nripa-Vikrama-samvat 1196. 


1 Sec above, No. 35. 


; Bead ^ak>he=shta° . 1 See below, No. 124. 

D 



18 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


117. — V. 1197.— Ep. Ind . Vol. IV. p, 114. Notice of a Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) 
plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, issued from VaranaBi *. — 

(L. 15). — samvat 1197 Phalguna-vadi 1 Ravau || Vri(bri)hadrajni-divase. 

Sunday, 23rd February A.D. 1141. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

118. — V. 1198.— Ep . Ind. Vol. IV. p. 113, Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 
the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Varanasi 

(L. 17). — samvatsar-aikadasa'sati^te=)shtana[va*]tyadhike Pbalgune ,masi asita-pakshe 
pratipadayam tithau RavLdino(ne) [samvat] 1198 Phalguna-vadi 1 Ravau || Vri(bri)hadrajm- 
R&lhadevi(vi)-divase l| 

Sunday, 23rd February A.D. 1141. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. Ralhadevi was Govindachandra’s mother ; see above, 51 os. 80 
and 96. 

119. V. 1199.— Ind. Ant . Vol. XVIII. p. 21. Notice of the Gagaha (now British 
Museum) plates of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindachandradeva and the Mahivrajaputra 
Rajyapaladeva of Kanauj : — 

(L. 18). samvatsareshv=ekadasa-sa(sa)teshu navanavaty-adhikeshu Phalgune masi 
[su]kla-pakshe(ksha) eka[da]syayam l tithau Sa(sa)ni-dine tath=ahke=pi samvat 1199 
Phalguna-sudi 11 Sa(Sa)nau || 

Saturday, 27th February A.D. 1143 ; see Hid. Vol XIX. p. 23, No. 7. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

120. — V. 1199.— ArchcBol. 8urv. of India , Vol. III. pp. 58-60, and Plate xxi. 

Inscriptions on temple pillars at Gadhwa, dated : 

Samvat 1199j sam 1199 ; and 1199. 

121. — V. 1200— Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 352 ; Ind. Inter. No. 50. Ujjain (now Royal 
As. Soc. s) first plate only of the Paramara Mahdkumdra Lakshmivarmadeva, confirming a 
grant which was made by his father, the Mahdrdjddhirdja Yasdvarmadeva, in V. 1191 ( above, 
No. 110):— 

(L. 15). samvatsara-sata-dvadasakeshfu] Sravana-sudi pamchadasyam somagrahana- 
parvvani. 

28th July A.D. 1143, or 16th Jnly A.D. 1144; with lunar eclipses, visible in India ; 
see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 40, No. 80. s 

Udayaditya ; Naravarman ; Yasovarman ; the Mahdkumdra Lakshmivannan. 

122. — V. 1200 — Ep. Ind. Vol. IV. p. 115. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 
the Mahdrdjddhirdja Govindacliandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Varanasi .— 

(L. 19.)— dvada^asa(sa)ta-8amvatsar[e*J Sra(4r&)vane masi su( 9 u)kla-pakshe 
po(pau)[r ]nnamaaya[m*] tithau Ravi-dine ahk[e*J=pi samvat |) 1200 Sa( 4 rk)vana-sudi 15 
Rava(vau) || y 

Sunday, 16th July A.D. 1144; (a lunar eclipse, visible in India 3 ). 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

Ant. Bemains Bo. Pres. p. 179; Bhavnagar Inter, p. 158, and Plate. 

Mangrol ( Mangalapura) inscription of some members of the Guhila family, 4 of the reign of 


* Reed tk hdaiydm. 

, ® ei) tionert there, were all visible in India. The two equivalents of the date, given here* 

are those for the erpired Chaitrddi and JC drttikddi year. V. 1800. ‘ 

9 See above, K o. 121. 


4 This family most not be confounded with the family of the Gobil* kin*?* 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


19 


the Chaulukya Kumarapala, the successor of [Jayasimha-JSiddharaja : (composed by 
Prasarvajna) : — 

(L. 23). srimad-Vikrama* samvat 1202 tatha sri-Simha-samvat 32 Asvina-vadi 13 Sonael) 

Monday, 15th October A.D. 1145 ; l see Ind. Ant . Vol. XXIL p. 109. 

124. — V. 1202.— Ind. Ant . Yol. X. p. 159. Date in a postscript to the Dohad inscription of 
V, 1196 (above, No. 116), of the time of the MahamandaUsvara Vapanadeva of Godrahaka : — 

(L. 9). — sarh 1202. 

125. — V. 1205.— Ep. Ind* Yol. I. p. 153. Khajuraho Jaina temple inscription of some 
members (sreshfhins) of the Grahapati family 2 : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1205 | Magba-vadi 5 j| 

126. — V. 1207. — Arch&ol Surv. of India , Yol. X. p. 97, and Plate xxxii. 12. Inscription 
on pedestal of boar at Chandpur : — 

(L. 1).— sa[m # ]vat 1207 Jyoshtha-vadi 11 Ravan || 

Sunday, 13th May A.D. 1151 ; see Ind. Ant . Yol. XIX. p. 354, No. 151. 

127 V. 1207.— In Archceol. Surv* of India , Yol. I. p. 96, Sir A. Cunningham mention* 

an inscription on a pillar at •• Bathiya-dah,” of the time of “ Gosalladevi,” the queen of 
Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, dated— 

“on Thursday, the 5th of the waning moon of Ashadha, in Samvat 1207.’' 

Thursday, 5th July A.D. llol ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 131, note IS. 

128. V. 1207. Archceol. Surv. of India, Vol. XX. p. 46, and Plate s. ; Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p- 

276, 3 and Plate. M&haban inscription of the time of the Mahdrdjddhirdja [A?] jayapaladeva 

(L. 29).— samvat 1207 Ka[rttika*]-paurnnamasyam maharajadhiraja . . . jayapa- 

iadeva-vi]*ayarajye. 

129. — V. 1207 .— Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 422. Chitorgadh fragmentary inscription of the 
Chaulukya Kumarapaladeva ; (composed by Riimakirti, the pupil of Jayakirti) : 

(L. 28). — samvat 1207. „ 

Mhlaraja [I.] ; . . • Siddharaja ; Kumarapala (defeated the ruler of feakambhari 

and devastated the Sapadalaksha country). 

130. — V. 1208 .— Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 296. Vailnagar inscription 4 of the reign of the 

Chaulukya Kum&raphla ; (composed by Sripala) 

(L. 44).— samvata(t) 1208 varshd Asvina-sudi [o ?] Dnrau.- 

In the family of the hero * Chulukya, Mftlaraja [I.] (conquered the Chaphtkata princes) 
his son ChamundaVaja; his son Vallabharaja ; his brother Durlabharaja ; Bhima [I.]; his son 
Kama; his son Jayasimha-Siddhadhir&ja ; Kumarapala (defeated Arnftraja). 

131 -V 1208— From a rubbing supplied by Dr. Burgess. Bangawan (now Lucknow 
Museum) plate of the Mahdrujddhirdj* Govindachandradeva of Kanauj and h.s queen, the 
Paftamahadevt Mahdrdjni Gosalad6vi; issued from Varanasi. . . 

(L 16 ) — sarirvats&ranam ashtadhika-dvadasa(sa)sa(sajteshn Karttike maSl sn(su)kla- 
pakshe paurnnamasyarh tithau Bh[au]ma-dinfi 'hke=pi samvat 120S Karttika-sudi 15 Bhaume. 

The date is irregular ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 367, No. 184. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 


"* Ou this day the MU of the date 3 h. 58 m. after mean sunrise. 

! II. pp. 275 and 276, mention U made of another inscription from Mahiban, which -show, 

the name of Ajayap&la's success Baripdta and the date 12^ 

\ wTtlT “rea^th! date" mT/perha^ correspond to Thursday, 4th September A.D. 1152, but on 
this day the 6th MU only commenc'd It h. 12 »• after mean snarl, S. q 



20 


EPIGRAPHIA INETCA. 


[Vol. V. 


132. , V. 1208 Arrfueol. Surv. of India , Yol. XXI. p. 49, and Plate xii. A. Ajajgadh 

inscription of the reign of the Chandella Madam&v&rmaii •— 

(L. — samvat 120S MArgga-vadi 15 Sa(sa)nau || 

Saturday, lOtli November A.D. 1151 ; see hid. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 167, Xo. 80. 

133. v. 1200. — Bhavnagar Inscr. p. 172. Keradu fragmentary inscription of the reign of 

the Chaulnkya Makar rlj&dhirdja Kumarapaladeva apparently contains an order of the 
Maharaja Alhanadeva of Xadula, and mentions the UakaTojiptitra Kelhanadeva : 

(L. 1). — samvat 1209 Magha-vadi 14 San.au. 

(L- 6). — Sivara tri-chat urddasyarii. 

Saturday, 24th January A.D. 1153. 1 2 

134. — v. 1210. — Indr Ant . Voi. XX, p. 210. Ajruere inscription, 3 containing portions of 
the Rarakili-ndtaka, composed by the Chahamana Maharaja dhirdja Vigraharajadeva ot 

Sakambhari : — y A 

(L. 38).— samvat 1210 MArga-sudi 5 Aditya-dine Sravana-nakshatre Makara-stbe 
chandre Harshana-yoge Balava-karane. 

Sunday, 22nd November A.D. 1153. 

135. — V. 1211. — Rp. Ind . Vol. JV. p. 116. Karaauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 
the Mahdrdjddhxrdja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj. issued from Varanasi : — 

(L. 15). — samvat 1211 Bhadrapada-vadi 15 Bhaume i 

Tuesday, 10th August A.D, 1154. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

136. — V. 1211. — ArchaoL Surv. of India , Vol. XXL p. 73, and Plate xxiii. D. Maboba 
image inscription of the reign of the Chandella Madanavarmadeva 

(L. 2). — sam 1211 Ashadha-sudi 3 Sa(sa)nau || 

Saturday, 4th June A.D. 1155. 

137. — V. 1214.— Ep. Ind. Vol. IV. p. 311. Date of the Tutrahi Falls rock inscription of 
the Ndyaka Pratapadhavala of Japila : — 

(L. I ).— samvat 1214 Jyaishtha-vadi 4 Sa(sa)nau. 

Saturday, 19th April A.D. 1158. 

138. - — V. 1215.— Arc hoeoh Surv . of West. India , Vol. II. p. 167. Girnar inscription: — • 

(L. 1).— Sam- vat 1215 varshe Chaitra-sudi 8 Bavau ady=eha sriraad-Orjjayaihta-tirthA 

Sunday, 9th March A.D. 1158; see Ind . Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 29, No. 32. 

139. — V. 1215.— Ep. Ind. \oL I. p. 153. Khajuraho image inscription of some members 
of the Grahapati family, 4 of the reign of the Chandella Madanavarmadeva . 

(L. L) — samvat 1215 Magha-sudi 5. 

140. — V, 1216.— Ind . Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 214 ; Archaol Surv. of India , Vol. XXI. Plate 
xxviii, Alba-Ghat inscription of the reign of the Kalachuri (Chedi) Mahdrdjddhirdja 
Narasimhadeva 5 of Dahala, and of the Rdnaka Chhitmla, the son of the Mahdrdnaka 
J alhana : — 

(L. l),~sarhvata(t) 1216 Bhadra-sudi-pratipada It a van 1 1 

Sunday, IGth August A.D. 1159 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 29, No. 33. 


1 Coro pa vc below. No. 34-3. 

* On tliis d»v the Uthi of the date only commenced 8 k 31 m. sifter iman snnrhe, but the day is the proper 
.me for the Siv^rdtri. 

* For other AjniKt' inscriptions, which contain portions of Souuul5v.iV Laht i- rigrahara/a-ndiaka, composed 
mi honour of Vi-rtaLurajidcva of SttkAtuhhiu j, gee Hid. p. 205 If. and Xachrtchtt* ion dtr K. Ges . d. Wits, zu 
(jotting?** 1803, p. 55^ 

4 See above, N‘>. 55, 


5 Sec below, Nos. 415 and 410 of K. 007 and 900. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


21 


u ! 41 ~7' l21a — Jo “ r - Bo - See. VoL SIX. J, 30; Lid. Jnscr. No. 10. Nadol (now 
oya As, Soc. s) plates of the Chahumana MahlrOja Alhanadeva 

(L. 18). sain 1218 varshe I Sravana-iudi 14 Ravaa | astmnn=eva mahi\chaturdda<i- 
parvvaru || 

Sunday, 0th August A.D. 1101 : see Lid. A, it. Vol. SIX. p. 30, No. 35. 

^.ihnnniiia family there was, at Xadula, Lnkshmana; his son. Sohiya; his son 
almija;^ his paternal uncle Vigrahapala ; his son Maliendra; his son Anahila; his son 
Balaprasada ; his brother Jeudrardja; his son Prithiupiila ; his brother Jbjjala ; his brothel 
vsuraja ; his son Alhanadeva. 


V. 1219. — Ep. Ind. Vol. I\ . p. 158. Date of a grant (issued from Vuridurga) 
>t the Chandeila Malwrajodhiroja Madanavarmadeva (confirmed by his grandson and 
immediate successor Paramardideva in the Semra plates of V, 1*223, below, No. 146) : 

(L. 13).— samvat a 1 1219 Magha-vadi 15 Guru-rare . . . Ruhu-graste divakare. 

The date is irregular. 2 


14o. [V. 1220]. — Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 343. Udaypar (in Gwalior) fragmentary 

inscription of the reign of the Chaulukya Mali ardjddhirdja Kumarapaladeva 

(L. 1). — [samvat 1220 varslie Pau*]sha-sudi 15 Gurau i| 

(L. 11). — sdmagrahana-parvvani. 

Thursday, 12th December A.D. 1163 ; a lunar eclipse, visible in India. 

144. V. 1220. — Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 218, and Plate. Delhi Siwalik pillar 
mscriptions of the Chahamana Visaladeva-Vigraharaja, the son of Avelladeva, ot 
Sakambhuri : — 

(A., line 1). — samvat 1220 Vaisakha-suti 15. 

(C., line 5).— samvat sri-Vikramadityc 1220 Vaisaklia-suti 15 Gnraa. 

Thursday. 9th April A D. 1164 ; see* ibid. p. 36, No. 62. 

145. V. 1222.— Ind. Ant . Vol. XVIII. p, 311. Udaypur (in Gwalior) pillai 
inscription : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1222 varshe Vaisakha-sudi 3 Sdm£ \ly=eha Udayapure akshayatritiva- 
parvani. 

^ Ion day, 4th April A.D. 1166 ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 30, Xo. 63. 

146. — V. 1223 . — Ep. Ind. Vol. IV. p. 157, and Plate. Semra (now Lucknow Museum) 
plates of the Clumdclla Malutrdjddhxraja Paramardideva, lord of Kalaiijara, confirming a 
grant which was made by his grandfather and immediate predecessor Madanavarmadeva in V. 
^319 (above, No. 142); issued from So nasara: — 

(L. 12) . — samvata 3 1223 Vaisa(sa)kha-sudi 7 Guru-vure | 

Thursday, 27th April A.D. 1167. 

In the family of the Chandratrcya princes (rendered illustrious by Jayasakti, Vijayasakti. 4 5 
md others), Prithvivarman ; Madanavarman ; his grandson Paramardin. 

147. — V. 1224.— Arclccol. Surv. of India, Vol. XXI. p. 74, and Plate xxiii. G. Mahoba 
image inscription of the reign of the Chandeila Paramardideva, lord of K:\lanjara 

(L. 1). — sarhvat 1224 Asbfnlha-sudi 2 Ravau || 

Sunday. 9th June A.D. 1168; sec Ind. Ant . Vol. XIX. p. 36, No. 64. 


1 fiend samvat. 

2 If the week-day were Wednesday, the date, for V. 1219 cunent and th cpiirnhndnta MAgha, would coi respond 

to Wednesday, 17 th January A.D. 11 * 2 , with a -olar eclipse which « as wdble iu India. With Thursday, it 
<-'>rresp<)nds f for the same yiar and the am'intii Ma^hu, to riiur&dav, I 5 .L 1 Febiuury A.D, 1102 ; hut on this daj 

i } Jere uas no eclipse. 

5 Read /tan rat. 

* above. No. 35. 



22 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vgl. V 


14 8. — V. 1224. — Ep. Ind . Vol. IV. p. 118. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate ot 
the Mahdrdjddhirdja Vijayaehandradeva of Kanauj, and his son, the Ywaraja 
Jayachchandradeva, issued from Varanasi : — 

(L. 17).— [cba]turvvi[Eh]satyadhi[ka-dva]dasasa(sa)ta-sa[m]va[tsa]re ’ [m]ke=pi sarh 
1224 [A]shadha-na(ma)sa(si) [sukla-]pa[kshe] dasamyarii [tijthau Ravi-dine. 

Sunday, 16th June A.D. 1168. 

Yasovigraka ; his son Mahichandra; his son Chandradeva ; his son Madanapala ; his son 
Gov in da c hand ra ,* his son Vijayachandra ; his son, the Yuvardja Jayachchandra. 

149. — V. 1224.-— In A*. Res. Vol. XV. pp. 443-446 — compare also Transactions Roy . As, 
Soc. Vol. I. p. 154 — is a translation, by Captain E. Fell, of an inscription from Hansi 
apparently of the reign of the Chahamana Prithviraja, the date of which is given thus : — 

“ In the year of Sumbut 1224 (A.D. 1168), on Saturday, the seventh of the white 
fortnight of the month Magha. ” 

The date is irregular ; l see Ind. Ant . Vol. XX. p. 132, note 20. 

150. — - V. 1225.*— Archival. Surv. of India , Vol. XI. p. 125, and Plate xxxvii. 2 ; ibid N. 
S. # Vol. I. p, 50. Jaunpur pillar inscription of the reign of Vijayaehandradeva (F) of 
Kanauj : — 

(L. 1). — sarnvat 1225 Chaitra-vadi 5 Vu(bu)dhe. 

Wednesday, 19th March A.D. 1169; see Ind . Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 182, No. 135. 

161. — V. 1225. — Ind. Ant. Vol. XV. p. 7 : bid. Inscr, No. 12. Royal As. Soc.’s plate ot 
the Mahdrdjddhirdja Vijayaehandradeva of Kanauj, and his son, the Yuvaraja 
Jayachchandradeva : — 

(L. 17). — pamchavimsatyadhika-d vadasa[sa*] ta-samvatsare=ihke-pi sam 1225 Mngbi- 

paurnnamasyaih. 

Genealogy as in No. 148. 

152. — V. 1225.— From Sir A. Cunningham’s rubbing. Phulwariya (R6htasgadh) 
inscription of the Nay aka Pratapadhavaia of Japila : — 

(L. 3). sam vat 1225 Vaisa(sa / ;kha-vadi 12 Gniau Jupiliya-nayaka-sri-Pratapadkavalasya 
ki[r]ttir=iyam (| 

Thursday, 27th March A.D. 1169 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 179, No. 126. 

153. — V. 1225.— Jour. Amer. Or, -Soc. \ ol. \ I. p. 548. Tarachandi rock inscription of 
the Mahdndyaka Pratapadhavaladeva of Japila, declaring a certain copper-plate inscription 
of Vijayachandra of Kanauj to be a forged document : — 

Samvat 1225 2 Jyeshtha-vadi 3 Budhe. 

Wednesday, 16th April A.D. 1169 ; s eelnJ. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 184, No. 143. 

154. — V. 1220.— Jour. Beag. As. Soc. Vol. LV. Part I. p. 40. Bijhdli rock inscription of 
the reign of the Chahamana Somesvara : — 

(L. 27). — Prasiddhim=agamad-d6va (?) kale Vikrama-bhasvatab shadvimsa-dvadasa-sate 
Phalgune krishna-pakshake || 91 j| Tritiyayam tithan vare Gnrau tare cha Hastate V*iddhi- 
namani yoge cha karane Taita(tijle tatha || 92 || Samvat 1226 Phalguna-vadi 3. 

Thursday, 5th February A.D. 1170 ; see I v d. Vol. XX. p. 133, note 21. 

Verses 10-28 apparently contain the genealogy of the ChahamaDas from Samanta to 
Somesvara. 3 


1 In V. 1224 current the tithi of the date commenced 12 h. 49 m. flfter mean sunrise of Saturday 2&th January 
A.D. 1167. 

a Compare also Colebrooke’s Mhc. Essay*, Vol. It. p. 295, where the y ear is 1229. If this should be correct, 
tie corresponding date would be Wednesday, 2nd May A.D. 1173. 

: To enable one to give a proper account of it, the inscription requires to be re-edited. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTION'S OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


23 


155. — V. 1226. — Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Vol. LY. Part I. p. 46. Menalgadh inscription ot 
the reign of the Chabamana Prithviraja : — 

Malavesa-gata-vatsara-sataih dvadasais=cha shatvimsa-purvakaih (?). 

156. — V. 1220.— Ep. Ind. Yol. IY. p. 121. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 
the Mah drdj ddhirdja Jayachchandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Yadaviha : — 

(L. 22). — samvatsaranam 8hadvnh(dvim)sa(sa)tYadhikeshu dvadasa(sa)sateshn(shr=) 
Ashadhe masi sukla-pakshe shashthyfim tithau Ravi-dine ahkatd^pi samvat 1226 Ashadha- 
audi 6 Ravaa . , abhisheke. 

Sunday, 21st June A.D. 1170; date of the king's coronation. 

Yasdvigraha; his son Mahichandra ; his son Chandradeva ; his son Madanapala ; his son 
Govindachandra ; his son Yijayachandra ; his son Jayachchandra, 

157. — V. 1227.— ArtJiTol. Surv. of India , YoL XXI. p. 49, and Plate xii. B. Inscription 
on jamb of Upper Gate of Ajavgudh : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1227 1 Ashadha-sudi 2 Some. 

Monday, 7th June A.D. 1171 ; see Ind. Ant. Yol. XIX. p. 357, No. 162. 

15S. — V. 1228.— Ind. Ant. Yol. XXV. p. 206; Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Yol. LXIY. Part I. 
p. 156, and Plates. Ichchhawar plates of the Chandella Ma h d raj ddhiru j a Paramardideva. 
lord of Kalahjara, issued from Yilasapura : — 

(L. 12). — asht[a*]vimsatyadhika-satadvay6peta-sa(sa)hasra(sra)tame samvatsare \ 
Sravana-masi Sukla-pakshe pahchadasyan=tithav=ahkato=pi samyat 1228 Sravana-sudi 15 
Ravi-vare Rahu-graste nisakare. 

Sunday, 18th July A.D. 1171 ; a lunar eclipse, visible in India. 

Genealogy as in No. 116. 

159. — V. 1228.— Ep. Inn. Yol. IY. p. 122. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 
the Mahdrdjddhirdja Jayachchandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Prayaga on the Veni : — 

(L. 21). ashtavi [m*] sa ( sa) tyadhika-dvadasasata-samvn tsare Magha-mase su(su)kla- 

pakshe maha-saptamyam titho(thau) Bhauma-dine ahkato=pi || samvat | 1228 Magba- 

sudi 7 Bhauma-dine . Manvantaradnu . . . 

Tuesday, 4th January A.D. 1172. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 

150. v. 1229.— Ind. Ant. Yol. XYIII. p. 317. Udaypur (in Gwalior) inscription of the 

reign of the Chaulukya Maharajddhxroja Ajayapaladeva •— 

(L.l).-— samvat 1229 varshe | Yaisakha-sudi 3 Some || 

(L. 7).— akshayatritiya-yugadi-parvvani. 

Monday, 16th April A.D. 1173 ; 2 see ibid. Yol. XIX. p.362, No. 173. 

10j y. 1230. Ep. Ind. Yol. IY. p. 124. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 

the Mahdrdjddhirdja Jayachchandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Yaranasi :~ 

(L. 24).— samvat 1230 Margga-sudi 15 Yu(bu)dba-dine | 

Wednesday, 21st November A.D. 1173. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 

102— V. 1231.— Ep. Ind. Yol. IY. p. 125. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 
the Mahdrdjddhirdja Jayachchandradeva of Kanauj. issued from Kasi 

(L 20)— uamvataareshu dvadasa-sateshu(shv=) Akatririisad-adhikAsbu Karttike masi sukla- 
pakshS paurunamasyam tithau Guru-dine ahke=pi samvat 1231 Karttika-sudi 15 Gurau. 

The date is irregular. 


1 Bv Sir A Cunningham thi* was read 1237 . 

a On thi» day the tit hi of the date commenced 1 b. 40 


nj after mean sourise. 



24 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


According to a postscript in line 32 the plate was engraved * sarhvat 1235 Phalguva(na)- 
vadi 9 Snkre/ Le. on Friday, 2nd February A.D. 1179; see below, X o. 104. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 

163. — V. 1231 (for 1232 ?).— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 82. Plates of the reign of the. 
Chaulukya Mahdrdjadhirdja Ajayapaladeva, the successor of Kumarapaladeva who was tlu 
successor of Jayasimhadeva, recording a grant of the Mahdmandalvsoara Vaijalladeva of the 
Chahuyana (Chahumana) lineage ; issued from Brahmanapataka : — 

(L, 11). — nripa-Vikraraa-kalad-arvvak ekatrimsadadhika-dvadasasata-saiiivatsar- 

amtarvarttini Karttik& masi sukla-pakshe ekadasyam Soma-dine up 6 shy a Karttikodyapana- 
parvvani. 

(L. 31). — samvat 1231 varshfi Karttika-sudi 13 Vu(bu)dhe || 

Probably Monday, the 27th, and Wednesday, the 29th October A.D. 1175 ; see ibid. \ oh 
XIX. p. 365, No. 180. 

164. — V. 1232.— Ep. Ind. Vol. IV. p. 127. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate 
of the Mahdrajadhirdja Jayachchandradeva of Kanauj (mentioning the king's son 
Harischandra), issued from Kasi : — 

(L. 20). samvatsareshu dvadasa-sateshn dvatrirhsad-adhikeshu Bhadre masi ashtamyam 
tithau [Ra]vi-dine anke=pi samvat 1232 Bhadra-vadi 6 Ravau . . . rajaputra-sri- 

Hari[s*]chamdradeva-jatakarmmani. 

Sunday, 10th August A.D. 1175. 1 

According to a postscript in 11. 31-32 the plate was engraved ; sadi 1235 Phalguna-vadi 
9 Sukre/ i.e . on Friday, 2nd February A.D. 1179 ; see above, No. 162. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 

165. V. 1232.— Ind, Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 130, and Plate. Benares College plate of the 
M a harajadhiraj a Jayachchandradeva of Kanauj (mentioning the king's son Harischandra)? 
issued from Varanasi : — 

(L. 23). — dvatrimsadadhika-dvadasasata-samvatsare Bhadre masi sukla-pakshe 

trayodasyan=tithau Ravi-dine ankato=pi samvat 1232 Bkadra-sudi 13 Kavau . . . 

(L. 28). — rajaputra-sri-Harischamdra-namakarane. 

Sunday, 31st August A.D. 1175; see ibid. Vol XIX. p. 30, No. S7. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 

166. — V. 1232.— Archml. Surv. of India, Vol. III. p. 125, and Plate sxxviii. No. IS. 
Gaya inscription of the reign of Gdvindapaladeva 

(L. 3.)-— samvat 1232 Vikari-sammvatsare | sri-G6vindapaladeva-gata-rajye chaturddasa- 
sammvatsare Gay ay am || 

(L. 12). — JLsvine sukla-pafiehamya . . . (?). 

Monday, 22nd September A.D. 1175 (?); see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 358, No. 163. 

167. — V. 1233 .— Ep. Ind. Vol. IV. p. 129. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plate of 
the Mahdrdjddhirdja Jayachchandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Varanasi 

(L. 22).— 2 tritrimsatyadhika-dvadasasa(sa)ta-samvatsare Vaisashe(khe) masi su(sn)kla- 
pakshe tritiyay&m tithau Ravi-dine aakatd=pi samvat 1233 Vaisasha(kha)-sudi 3 Ravau 

Sunday, 3rd April A.D: 1177. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 


> On this riay the l.tti of the Hate only commenced 11 h. 5S m. after mean sunrise, hut n,* Uthi being tht 
Krishnajanm'd&htzmi, the date is correct. 

3 Read traycistrimiad-adhika 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


-25 


168. — V. 1233 .— Ind. Ant . Vol. XVIII. p/135. Bengal As. Soc.’s plate of the Mahd- 
rajddhirdja Jayachchandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Varanasi : — 

(L. 24). — traya[s*]trimsa(sa)dadhika-dvadasasata-samvatsare Vaisa(?a)khe masi 

su(su)kla-pakshe dasamyam tithau Sa(sa)ni-dine ahkato=pi samvat 1233 V aisa(sa)kha-sudi 
10 Sa(sa)nau. 

Saturday, 9th April A.D. 1177 ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 37, No. 65. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 

169. — V. 1233. — Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p: 137. Another Bengal As. Soc.'s plate of 
the Ma hdrajadh ira] a Jayachchandradeva of Kanauj, issued from "Varanasi; of the same 
date. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 


170. — V. 1233. — Jour. Deng. As. Soc . Vol. XXXVIII. Part I. p. 26, and Plate i. 
Bulandshahr plate 1 of Ananga (?) ; according to the published text, mentions Chandraka (r), 
Dbaranivaraha, Prabhasa, Bhairava, Rudra, Govindaraja, Yasodhara, Haradatta, 
Tribhuvanaditya, Bhogaditya, Kuladitya, Vikramaditya, Padmaditya, Bhojadeva, Sahajaditya 
(Rajaraja ?), Ananga; and is dated : — 

(L. 18). — samkrantau vishuve kale ... 

(L. 24).— samvat trayastrimsadadhika-dvadasasatani I Vaisaklie cha | 

171. v. 1234.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 138. Bengal As. Soc.’s plate of the Mahd- 

• rdjddhirdja Jayachchandradeva f Kanauj, issued from Varanasi: ^ a 

(L. 24). — chatustriiiisa(sa)ty(d)adhika-dvadasasa(sa)ta-samvatsare PaushS mas! 

su(su)kla-pakshe chaturthyan=tithau Ravi-dine ankato=pi sarruat l~o4 Pausba sudi Rava 

uttarayana(na) -samkrantau. ^ 

Sunday, 25th December A.D. 117/ ;~ see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. oC3, No. i 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 

172. - Y. 1235 and 1230- Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Vol. VII. p. 736. Piplianagar plates «t 
the Paramara Mahdkumdra Harischandradeva, issued from some place on the Narmada 

eri-Vikramakal-atita-1235-panchatrimsadadhika-dvadasasata-samv a t ■ a r - an * a J P at i- 

Pausha-vadi amavasyayam samjata-surya-parvaui 4 . . • • ^ / tatha 1-36 sha.tnmsac - 

adhika-dvadasasata-samvatsar-antahpati-Vaisakha-masi paurnamasyam. ^ tt nn'cnl mnrlra 

Udayaditya; Naravarman; Yasovarman; Jayavarman; the Mahukumara Hanschandra 
who was the son of the Mahdkumdra Lakshmivarman. 

173 - V 1236 -Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 140. Bengal As. Soc.’s plate of the Mahd- 
rdjddhirdja Jayachchandradeva of Kanauj, issued from Ra^avaion the Ganges 

(L. 21). — shattrimsa(sa)dadhika-dvadasasata-samvat s are Y aisa(sa)khc masi ukla- 

pakshe purnnimayam tithau Sukra-dine ahkata(t6)=pi sam . VmsaCs^kha-sudr 15 b»Uu 

Friday, 11th April A.D. 1130; see ibid. \ ol. XIX. p. 37, No. b6. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 

174 - V. 1236.- M .!»<■ Vol. XVIII. p. 141. Another Benchl A. Soc/o plat, ot 
the U.M,ijddkMj. Jayachchandradeva ol Kanauj, issaod Iron. K.nda.tu on the Gang.,, oi 

the same date. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 


1 Compare Jour. Beng. At. Soc. Vol. Vm. after mean sunrise. 

* 0n thi8 the «»* ° f the If vZZldLrad'v-ipalca nUi 

3 The original has chaturmMa-lfarkkanMvaraa^ r .. 

tirthdjru*]bh6bhih tuatvi. . amiuta Pausba of V. 1235, current or expired. 

« There was no solar eclipse in the purnmduta or amanta rausu 


vimalatara-pavitra- Sarmmadd* 



26 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[VOL. V. 


175— V. 1236.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 142. Another Bengal As. Soc.'s plate of the 
MahJ.n'j'idhirdja Jayachchandradeva of Kananj, issued from Randavai on the Ganges ; of tin 

same elate. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 

176— V. 1239.— Archceol. Surv. of India, Vol. X. Plate xxxii. 9 and 10 ; and Vol. XXL 
pp. 173 and 174. Madanpnr inscriptions on the defeat of the Chandella Paramardideva o 
Jejakabhukti by the Chahamana Pfithviraja, the son of SdmeSvara and grandson o 

Arnoraja : — 

(10, line 4). — sam 1239. 

177. — V. 124- (?).— Proceedings Beng. As. Soc. 1880, p. 77, and Plate viii. B6dh-Gaya 
Buddhist inscription, mentioning Jayachchandradeva of Kananj ; (composed by Mandratha, 
the son of Sida) : — . A 

(L. 1G). — — ^ veda-nayan-endu-nishthaya saihkbyay=aiika-paripati-lakshi e 

V lkramahka-naranatha-vatsare Jyaishtha-masi. 

X 75 __V. 1240.— From rubbings supplied by Dr. Burgess. Kalahjar rock inscription ot 
the reign of the Chandella Paramardideva:— 

(L. 1). — srimat-Paramarddi[deva]-vijayarajye samvat 1240 . Vais&(s&)kha- 

sudi 14 Gurau. 

Thursday, 26th April A.D. 1184; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 37, No. 67. 

179.— v. 1240.— Archceol, Surv . of India , Vol, XXI. p, 72, and Plate xxii. Fragmentary 
inscription from wall of Fort at Mahbba : — 

(L. 15). — Vy6m>arnnav-a.kka-samkhyate Sahasamkasya vatsare. 

(L. 17). — samvat 1240 Ashadha-vadi 9 Some. 

Monday, 4th June A.D. 1184 ; see Ind . Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 179, No. 127. 

150. — V. 1243.— Archceol. Surv. of India , Vol. XXI. p. 50, and Plate xii. C. Inscription 
on jamb of Upper Gate of Ajaygadh 

(L. 1). — samvat 1243 Jyeshtha-sudi II Vu(bu)dhe. 

VVednesday, 20th May A.D. 1187 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 37, No. 68. 

151. — V. 1243.— Ind . Ant . Vol. XV. p. 10 ; Ind . Inter. No. 13. FaijaMd (now Royal As. 
Soc.’s) plate of the Mahdrdjadhirdja Jayachchandradeva of Kanauj, issued from V&r&^asi : 

(L. 24). — trichatv&rimsa(^a)dadhika-dvadasa4ata-8amvat8ar^ A^sh&dh5 m&si su(£u)kla- 
pakshe saptamyam tithau Ravi-din5 ahkatd=pi samvat 1243 Ash&dha-sudi 7 Ravau. 

Sunday, 14th June A.D. 1187; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 37, No. 69. 

Genealogy as in No. 156. 

182. — V. 1244.— Archceol. Surv . of India , Vol. XX. p. 90, and Plate x. Pillar inscription 
at the entrance gateway of the Fort of Tahangadh : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1244 [Jyejshtha-su 15 Gur6(rau). 

Thursday, 12th May A.D. 1188 ; see Ind. Ant . Vol. XIX. p. 373, No. 197. 

183. — V. 1244.— Archceol. Surv . of India, Vol. VI. p. 156, and Plate xxi. Visalpur pillar 
inscription of the reign of [the Cbkhamana] JTithvlrftjaddva 

(L. 2). — Ppthvirajadeva-rajy£ tatra tasmin kale samvat 1244 §rftvana-pCurvam(?). 

184. — V. 1247 (?),— Ep. Ind . Vol. I. p. 47. Ratnapur (now N&gpur Museum) inscription 
of the time of Prithvideva m. of Ratnapura; (composed by Devagana, the son of 
Ratnasiniha 1 ) : — 

(L. 24). — samvat 1247 (?). 

Jajalla [II.] ; his son [Ratnadeva III., defeated Ch&dagahga P] ; his son Pfithvidfiva [IH ]» 


i Batuftsimha composed the Maih&r inscription of Jftjalladeva II. of Ratnapura ; gee below, No. 418 of K. 91 9- 


Appendix] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


1S5. — V. 1252.— Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p, 208. Baghari (now Lucknow Museum) inscription of 
the Chandella Paramardldeva, and his ministers Sallakshana and (his son) Purushottama - 
(composed by Devadhara, the son of Gadadhara and grandson of Lakshmidhara) : — 

(L. 24). — Paksha-[trya]kshamukh-aditya-samkhye Vikrama-va[tsa*]re | Asvina-sukla- 
panchamyam vasare Yasar-esitnh |j 

Sunday, 10th September A.D. 1105; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 30. No. 38. 

Among the Chandratreya princes, Madanavarman ; his son Yasovarman ; his sor. 
Paramardin. 


186. — V. 1253.— Ind. Ant. Yol. XVII. p. 228, and Plate. Rewali (now British Museum'* 
plate of the Mahdranaka Salakhanavarmadeva of Kakaredi, of the reign of the Kalachun 
(Chedi) Mahdtrdfddhirdja Vijayadeva, 1 lord of Trikalinga; issued from Kakaredi: — 

(L. 13). — samvatsaranam sa[m]vata(t) 1253 Marggasira-mase krishna-pakshe saptamyani 
tithau Sukra-dine. 

Friday, 27th October A.D. 1195. or, more probably, Friday, 13th December A.D. 1196 
see ibid . Yol. XIX. p. 171, No. 104. 

Dhahilla; Vajuka ; Danduka ; Khojuka; Jayavarman; his son Vatsaraja; his sous 
Kirtivarman 2 and Salakhanavarman (see below. No. 218). 


187. — . V. 1253. Archceol. Sutv. of India , Yol XI. p. 129, and Plate xxsviii. Belkhara 

pillar inscription of one of the rulers of Kanauj (?) : — 

(L* 4).— samvat 1253 Vai$asha(kha)-sudi 11 Bhaum[e*]. 

Tuesday, 29th April A.D. 1197 ; see Ind. Ani. \ ol. XIX. p. 38, No. 70. 

188 . v*. 1260 .— Ind. Ant, Yol. XL p. 71, and Plate. Patan plates of the Chaulukya 

MahdrdjddKiraja Bhimadeva II., issued from Anahilapataka 

(L, 17). srimad-Vikramadity-otpadxta-saihvatsara-satSshn dvadasasu shatpamchasad- 

uttareshu Bhadi'apadamasa-krishnapaksh-amaTasyayam Bh6(bhau)ma-vare ’tr=amkato pi 

samvat 1256 lau° Bh^drapada-vadi 15 Bhaume ^ ’syam samyatsara-masa-paksha-vara- 

pQrwikayam tithav=ady=eha srimad-Anahilapatake mavasya-parvani. 

Tuesday, 4th August A.D. 119S, or, more probably, Tuesday, 21sfc September A.D. 1199 : 

see ibid. Yol. XIX. p. 173, No, 109. rT n 

Mular&ja [I.]; Chamundaraja ; Durlabharaja ; Bhima [L] ) Karna-Trail&kyamalla : 

Jayasimha-Siddhachakravartin ; Kumarapala ; Ajayapala ; Mular&ja [II.] ; Bhima [II.]- 


Abhinavasiddharaja. 

189 —V 1256 Ind Ant. Vol. XVI. p. 254, and Plate. Bhopal plates of the Paramara 

If JLJ U^vJLdeva. issued fj Guvadaghatta on the Reva 

(L. 11).— sri.Vikramakal-atita-shatpamchasa(sa)dadhikaylvadasasa(sa)t a - s amvatsar* 

•Intahpr&Cp^ti’ amke 1256 Vaisakha-sudi 15 paurnnamasy&m tithau Visa(sa)kha-nakshativ 
Parigha-y5ge Ravi-dine maha*Yaisa^a)khyam parwani. 

Sunday, 30th April A.D. 1200 ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 38, No. 71. 

Yas&varman ; Jayavarman; the llahdktmJra Lakshimvarman ; the Mahakun 
Harischandra : his son, the Mahdkumdra Udayavarman. 

190.- V. 1258- Jowr. Beng. As. Soc. Vol. XVII. Part I. p. 313 ; AM Surv. of India. 
Vol. XXI. p. 37. Kalaujar inscription of the Chandella Paramardldeva; (composed by 

himself) : — 

Samvat 1258 Karttika-sudi 10 Some. 

Monday, 8th October A.D. 1201 ; see M. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 354, No. 152- 


3 

t 


e. Vijayositiihadeva ; see below, No. 422 of K. D32. 
:S^eV.Mfohhe date eo— 0 h. 30 m. after mean sunnse 


E 2 



EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol, V. 


2b 


191. — V. 1263 —Ini. Ant. Vol. VI. p. 194. Kadi plates of the Chaulukya Maharaja- 
dhiroja Bhimadeva n., issued from Anahilapataka : — 

(L. 13). — srimad-Vikramadity-otpadita-samvatsara-sateshu dvadasasu tri(tri)shasbti(shty)- 
uttaresbu lau° Sravanamasa-suklapaksha-dvitiyayam Ravi-vare , tr=amkato=pi samvat [12] 63 
Sravana-sudi 2 Ravav=asyaih samvatsara-rnasa-paksha-vara-purvvikayaih tithav=ady=eb& 
srimad-A[nahilapata]ke , dy=aiva Yyatipata-pa(pa)rvvani. 

Sunday, 9th July A.D. 1206; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 30, No. 39. 

Genealogy as in No. 188. 

192. — V. 1264. — Ind . Ant. Vol. XI. p. 337, and Plate. Timana plates of the Mehara Bdjo 
Jagamalla, of the reign of the Chaulukya Mahdrdjddhirdja Bhimadeva II., issued from 
Timbanaka : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1264 varshe lau° Ashadha-sudi [7 or 8] Some. 

Monday, 4th June A.D. 1207, or Monday, 23rd June A.D. 1208; see ibid. Vol. XIX. 
j>. 358, No. 164. 

193. — V. 1265. — Ind . Ant . Vol. XI. p. 221. Mount Abu inscription of the reign of the 
Chaulukya Ma h drdj ddh irdj a Bhimadeva II., while the [Paramara] Mdndalika Dhara- 
varshadeva (with Prahladanadeva as Yuvardja ) was ruling at Chandravati; (composed by 
Lakshmidhara) : — 

(L. 20). — samvat 1265 varshe Vaisakha-sn 15 Bhaume. 

Tuesday, 2 1st April A.D. 1209 ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 38, No. 72. 

194. — V. 1266.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 112; Ind. Inscr . No. 11. Royal As. Soc.’s 
plates of the reign of the Chaulukya Mahdrdjddhirdja Bhimadeva II., issued from 
Anahillapataka : — - 

(L. 1). — snmad-Vikramanripa-kal-atita-samvatsara-sateshu dvadasasu shatu(t)shashty- 
adhikeshu laifkika 0 Margga-masasya suklapaksha-chaturdasyam Guru-dine atr=amkat6h(to=)pi 
sri-Vikrama-samvat 1266 varshe £ri-Simha-samvat 96 varshe lauki 0 Margga-£udi 14 Gurav^ 
asyam samvatsara-masa-paksha-dina-vara-purvayam tithav^ady=eha. 

Thursday, 12th November A.D. 1209; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 24, No. 9. 

Genealogy as in No. 188. 

195. — V. 1267. — Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Vol. V. p. 378. Piplianagar plates of the Paramara 
Arjunavarmadeva, issued from Mandapadurga : — 

Saptashashtyadhika-dvadasaSata-sariivatsare PhUgune^ne) I267 1 sukla*dasamyam= 
abhisbeka-parvani samvat 1267 1 Phalguna(na) uddha 10 Goran. 

Thursday, 24th February A.D. 12il , see Ind. Ant . Vol. XIX. p. 24, No. 10. 

In the Paramara family, Bhoja, after him came 2 3 Udayaditya; his son Naravarman ; his 
son Yasovarman ; his son A^avavnrman ; his son Vindhyavarman ; his son Subhatavarman ; 
his son Arjuna (Arjuuavarman, defeated Jayasimha). 

196. — V. 1269. — Archceol. Surv . of India , Vol. XXI. p. 50, and Plate xii. D. Ajaygadh 
inscription of the reign of the [Chandella] Bdjd Trailokyavarmadeva 

(L. 1). — samvat 1269 Phalguna-vadi . . Sanau. 

197. — V. 1270. — Jour. Amer. Or. Soc. Vol. VII. p. 32. Bhdpal plates of the Paramara 
Maharaja Arjunavarmadeva, issued from Bhrigukachchha : — 

3 Saptatyadhika-dvadasasata-samvatsare Vaisakha-vadi amavasyayam s&iyagrahana- 
parvani . . . • samvat 1270 Vaisakha-vadi 15 Some. 


1 The published version both times has 1237, bat this is a printer’s error; see the editor's reference to the 
inscription in Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Vol. VII, p. 736. 

4 The original has tat6=hhud=Udayddity6. 

3 In an earlier part of the inscription there is the date Ashdaha-vadi 15 S6me, without any year. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


29 


P 


Monday, 22nd April A.D. 1213 ; a solar eclipse, visible in India ; 
175, No. 114. 

Genealogy as in No. 195. 


see Ind. Ant . Yol. XIX. 


198. — V. 1272. — Jour. Amer. Or. Soc. Yol. YII. p. 25. Bhopal plates of the Paramara 
Maharaja Arjunavarmadeva, issued from Amaresvaratirtha at the confluence of the Reva and 
Kapila : — 

Dvisaptatyadhika-dvadasasata-sam vatsare BhMrapada-paurnamasyam chandroparaga- 
parvani samvat 1272 Bhadrapada-sudi 15 Budhe. 

Wednesday, 9th September A.D. 1215; a lunar eclipse, visible in India ; see Ind. Ant. 
Yol. XIX. p. 31, No. 40. 

Genealogy as in No. 195. 

199. — v. 1272. — Ant. Remains Bo. Pres . p. 1S6. Siyal Bet image inscription of the time 
of the Mehara Baja Ranasimha : — 

Samvat 1272 varshe Jyeshtha-vadi 2 Ravau ady=eha Timbanake. 

The date is irregular, 1 

200. — V. 1273— Ep. Ind . Vol. II. p. 439; Bhdvnagar Inset, p. 195. Yeraval 
(Somanithadevapattana) fragmentary inscription of the time of the Chanlukya Bhimadeva 
n., being a eulogy of Siidhara and other members of^ the Vastrakula family, and of the 
Chanlukya kings of Anhilvad from Mularaja I. to Bhimadeva II. • 

(L. 47).— srimad-Yikramanripa-samvat 1273 varshe Vaisakha-sudi 4 Sukre. 

Friday, 22nd April A.D. 1216. 

201. — V. 1273 Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Yol. XIX. p. 454. Jannpur district inscription, 


containing a deed of mortgage : — 

(L. 1).— samvat 1273 Ashadha-sudi 6 Ravau | ady=eha Mayunagaryyam. 

Sunday, 11th June A.D. 121 7. 3 

202.— V. 12[7]5. Bhdvnagar Inscr. p. 205. Bharana fragmentary inscription of the reign 

of the Chanlukya Mahdrdjddhirdja Bhimadeva II. • 

(L. 1).— sri-Vikramat samvat 12[7]5 varshe Bhadrapada-iudi .... 

203 — V 1275— Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 311; Care-Templet of West. India, p. Ill, Plate. 
Harsauda (now Amer. Or. Soc.’s) inscription of the reign of the [Pawnin'] Mahdrdjddhirdja 

DAvapatedeva of Dhara : — , , , fA 

(L. 4).- samvat pamohasaptatyadhika-dvadasasat-amk e] * 12/o Margga-sudi o 

a( aT)-Adhike pamchasaptatya Jdvadas-avda(bda)- sate sake [!*] vatsare Chitmbhanan 
tu Maiiggasirshe site dale || 4 || Pamchamy-amtaka ; samy6g6 nakshatre Vishnu-daivate ||(|) 
y&ge Harshana-samjiie tu tithy-arddhe Dhatn-daivate II 5 II 

Saturday, 24 th November A.D. 1218; seed'd. XIX. p. 24, ho. 11. 

204.— V. 1279— Dp. Ind. Vol. IV. p. 311. Robtasgadh rock inscription of the time of 

tbek a S l ( f-hC'2L^t t hrm7nimd ra ir=vasaranam=adhlsaih parikalayati samkhyum vatsare 
SibaiL^I ^Madana-vd jay ay utra-mamgale masi Chaitre pratipadi sita-kantau vasare 
Bhaskarasya || 

Sunday, 5th March A.D. 1223. 


, J , V«1 YV n 362 tbc date apparently is Pausha-radi 5 . bur with this fading alec 

1 According to Ind. Ant. v oi. a v . y- > 

it u irregular. n^mmenced 4 h. 53 in. after mean sunrise. 

* On this day the titki of the date commenced 4 n. 

3 See Prof. Bhandarkar’s Report for 1883*84, P- 3 —> 

* Read a £ai$=mk&* 




30 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[V Ol. V. 


205. — V. 1280.— Ind. Ant. Vol. VL p. 196. Kadi plates of the Chaulukya JLf abirdjddhirdja 
Jayantasimhadeva, issued from Anahilapura : — 

(L. 20). — asyam tithau samvatsara-masa*paksha-vara-yuktay&m gata-samvatsara-dvadasa- 
varsha-sateshu asity-uttareshu Pausha-mase sukla-pakshe tritiyayam tithau Bhauma-varv 
samjata uttaragata-surya-samkrama-parvani amkato ’pi samvat 1280 varshe Pausha-sudi 3 
Bhaume ’dy=eha samjata [uttajranayana-parvani. 1 

Tuesday, 26th December A. D. 1223; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 25, No. 12. 

TIidaraja [I.] ; Chamundaraja ; Vallabharaja ; Duriabharaja; then to Bhima £11.] as i n 
No. 1S8 ; after him, in his place, Jayantasbhha-Abhinavasiddharaja. 

206. — V. 1283.— Ind. Ant. Vol. VI. p. 190. Kadi plates of the Chaulukya Ma hd raj adhirit ja 
Bhimadeva H., issued from Anahilapataka : — 

(L. 16). — srimad-Vikramadi[fcy-6]fcpadita-samvatsara-sat6shu dvadasasn 2 tri[a]siti- 
uttureshu lauki[ka-Karttika-purni]mayarh Guru-vare 'tr=&mkato 'pi samvat 1283 varshe 
Lnuki 0 Karttika-sudi 15 Gurav=a[dy=eha] srimad-Anahilapatake ’syam samvatsara-masa- 
pr ksha-purvvikayaiii tithau. 

Thursday, 5th November A.D. 1226 ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 25, No. 13. 

Mularaja [I.] ; Chamundaraja; Vallabharaja; Duriabharaja; then to Bhima [II.] as in 
No. 1SS. 

207. — V. 1288,— Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p, 83. Notice of an Udaypnr (in Gwalior) 
inscription of the reign of [the Paramara] Devapaladeva [of Dhara] : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1286 varshe Kartti[ka*]-sudi . . Su(4u)kre 

208. — • V . 1287 Ind. Ant . V ol. VI. p. 201, Kadi plates of the Chaulukya 2Iahdrdjddhirdja 
Bhimadeva II., issued from Anahilapataka : — 

(L. 11).— srimat(d-)Vikramadifcy'6tpadita-samvatsara-sateshu dvadasasn sapta^ity- 
uttareshu Ash&dhamasiya-sukl4shtamy&m Sukra-vare ’tr-amkato 'pi samvat 1287 varshe 
Asliadha-sudi 8 Sukre 'syam samvatsara-m^sa-paksha-vara-purvvikayAm tithav=ady=eha. 

The date is irregular; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 369, No. 188. 

Genealogy as in No. 206. 

209. — V. 1287.— Mr. A, V . K&thavate’g edition of Som^svara'a KtrUJcaumudi , Appendix B. , 
B/Vvnagar Inscr. p. 218. Mount Abft inscription of the reign of the Chaulukya 
2la h i rajadhiraja BhimadSva H., and the Paramara Mahdmandalelvara Edjakulci 
Somasimhadeva of Chandravati (whose son was K&nhadadeva 3 ) ; mentions the Chaulukya* 
t Vaghela) MahawicindcilesvaTa Eanakci VlradhavsladAvu, the son of Bava^aprasada deva ■ - 

(L. 1). — [sam]vat 1287 varshe laukika-Ph&lguna-vadi 3 Bavau. 

Sunday, 3rd March A.D. 1230. 

210. — V. 1287 (F).— As. Ees. Vol. XVI. p. 302; Mr. A. V. K&thavate's edition oi 
Sotnesvara s Eirtikautnudi , Appendix A. ; Ehavnagar Inscr* p. 174. Mount Abil inscription, 
being a eulogy (by Somesvara) of Viradhavala's ministers VastupAla and T6jahp&la; mentions 
the Chaulukyas (Vaghelas) Arnbraja, Lavanapras&da, and Vlradhavsla; and the Param&ras of 
Chandravati Dhumaraja, Dhandhuka, Dhruvabhata, R&madeva, his eon Yasodhavala (who 
defeated the Malava king Ballala, an opponent of the Chaulukya Kum&rapala), his son 
Dharavarsha, 4 his younger brother Prahladana (who fought with Samantasiraha), Dhar&varsha’s 
son Somasimhadeva, and his son Krishnarajad6va. 

According to the As. Ees . dated f< Sunday, the third of the light fortnight of Pbalguna, in 
the year of Vikrama 1287,” which would be Sunday, 17th February A.D. 1230. Mr. 
Kathavate's text has “ Vikrama-samvat 1293 varshe M-Srdvana-badi 3 Ravau” and his 


1 Head uttardyana *. 

1 i.e . KfishnarajadOva ; see the next inscription. 


3 Read trifaftty. 

4 See above. No. 193. 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


31 


translation “ Sunday, the third of the dark fortnight of Sravanain the year 1287 of the Vikrama 
era. And the edition in Bhavnagar Inscr line 47, has “ bi-Yikrama- samvat 1267 varsht 
Pkdlguna-vadi 10 Saumya-dinS 

211. — V. 1288. — Ind. Ant . Vol. VI. p. 203. Kadi plates of the Chaulukya Mahdrujitdhirdja 
Bhimadeva II., issued from Anahilapataka : — 

(L. 16). — srimat(d-) Viki'amadity-orpadita-saihvatsara-sateshu dvadasasu ashtasity- 
uttareshu Bhadrapadamasiya-sukla-pratipadayam Soma-vare ? tr=amkat6=pi samvat 1288 varshe 
BhadravfUsudi 1 Some ’syam samvatsam-masa-paksha-vara-purvvikayam titliav=ady=eha. 

The date is irregular; see ibid . Vol. XIX. p. 266, No. 181. 

Genealogy as in No. 206. 

212. — V. 1288. — Archceol. Surv. of West. India , Vol. II. p, 170, and Plate xxxv. Girnai 
inscription 1 at the temple of the ministers Vastupala and Tejahpala; mentions the Chaulukya 
(Vdghela) Lavanaprasadadeva and his son Viradhavaladeva : — 

(L. 1) . — sri- Vikrama- samvat 1288 varshe 2 Phaguna-sudi 10 Budhe. 

Wednesday, 3rd March A.D. 1232 ; see Ind. Ant . Vol. XIX. p. 25, No. 14. 


213. — V. 1288 or 1289.— Arc lice ol. Surv. of West. India , Vol. II. p. 173; and Ant. 
Remains Bo . Pres. p. 315. Girnar inscription of the minister Vastupala 

(L. 2). — sri- V ikrama-samvat 1288 (or 1289) varshe Asvina-vadi 15 Some. 

Monday, 7th October A.D. 1230, or, more probably, Monday, 5th September A.D. 1233 , 
see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 358, No. 165. 

214. — V. 128[9].— Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 83. Notice of an Udaypur (in Gwalior) 
inscription of the reign of the [Paramara] Mahdrdjddhirdja Dovap&ladeva [of Dhara] : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 128[9F] varshe Marga-vadi 3 Gurau. 

Thursday, 2nd December JVP. 1232 (?). 

215. — V. 1295. Ind . Ant . Vol. VI. p. 205. Kadi plates of the Chaulukya Mahd - 

rdjadhirdja Bhimadeva 33., issued from Anahillapataka : — 

(L. 17). — [srimat(d)]-Vikramadity.6tpadita-samvatsara-§ateshu dvadasasu paihchanavnty- 
uttareshu Marggamasiya-sukla-chaturddasyam Guru-vare , tr=amkat6=pi samvat 1295 varshe 
M argge (rgga) * s udi 14 Gurav=asyaih samvatsara-masa-psksha-vara-phcvvikayaih tithav=ady = 
eha. 


The date is irregular; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 368, No. 185. 

Genealogy as in No. 206. 

216 — V. 1296 Ind. Ant. Vol. VI. p. 206. Kadi plates of the Chaulukya Mahd* 

rdjddhirdja Bhimadeva II., issued from Anahillapataka : 

(L. 19).— srimat(d*) Vikramadity-otpadita-saruvatsara-sateshu dvadasasu shatna(nna)- 
vaty-uttareshu M^rggamasiya-krishna-chaturddasyam Ravi-vare tr amkato pi II Vikrama - 
samvat 1296 Margga-vadi 14 Ravav=ady=eha. 

Sunday, 7th November A.D. 1238 ; see ibid. \ ol. XIX. p. 166, No. 82. 

Genealogy as in No. 206. 

217. v. 1296.— Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 119. Jaina inscription in the temple of Vaidyanatha 


at Kiragrama : — 

(L. 1).— samvat 1296 varshe Phaguua-vadi 5 Ravau. 

Sunday, 15th January A.D. 1240 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 167, No. 87. 


i mu . . . t- , liui : n Ant Remains Bo. Pres. p. 283 £f., with five similar Girnar inscriptions 

1 The same inscription is published m Anr. nemum* t 

... , , , 5 , r , * .. whirh tire in ArchaoL Surv. of nest. India > Vol. II. riate xxxv. 

of the same date, photo-lithographs of two ot wmcn ure j 

Thew in.criptions contain verses by Sdmesvara, Maiadbdn-Narschandrasur,, MaladharwNarcndrasdr, and 

U<la M^tl^and 4 the years 1279, 1277 and I27fi are («itl. the omiss.on of the hundreds) denoted by torn 79 
vtrtha-pirvvam, tom 77 varth f and tarn 76 vartha-furt.an*. 



32 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V. 


218 V. 1297. — hid. Ant. Vol. XVII. p. 231. Rewah (now British Museum) plates of 
the Mahdrdnaka Kuril arapaladeva of Kakaredi, of the reign of the [Chandella] Mahdrdjadhirdja 
Trailokyavarmadeva, lord of Trikaliiiga 1 : — 

(L. 35). — saptanavatyadhike dvadasasata.-sariivatsare amke=pi 1297 Karttikya[m]. 

In the Kaurava family, the Mahdrdnaka Dhahilla ; his son Durjaya; his son Sbojavarmau, 
his son Jayavarman ; his son Vatsaraja ; his son Salashanavarman (see above, No. 186) ; his 
son Hariraja ; his son Kumarapala. 

219. — V. 1298.— Ind. Ant. Yol.XYII. p. 235. Rewah (now British Museum) plates oi . 
Mahdrdnaka Harirajadeva of Kakaredi, of the reign of the [Chandella] Maharaja 
Trailokyamalla 2 3 : — 

(L. 36). — samvata(t) 1298 Maghe mask 

From Dhahilla to Yatsaraja as in No. 218; Vatsaraja’ s son Kirtivarman ; his brother 
Salashanavarman ; his son [Y]aha[da]varman ; his brother Hariraja. 

220. — V. 1299. — Ind. Ant. Yol. VI. p. 208. Kadi plates of the Cha.u\uky&> Mahdrdjadhirdja 
Tribhuvanapaladeva, issued from Anahillapataka : — 

(L. 14). — srimad-Vikramadity-dfcpadita-samvatsara-sateshu dvadasasu navanavaty 
uttareshu. Chaitramasiya-sukla-shashlhyam Soma-vare ’tr=amkat6=pi samvat 1299 varshe 
Chaitra-sudi 6 Some ’syarii samvatsara-masa-paksha-vara-purvyikayam sam° lau° 
Phagunamasiya-amavasya(sya)yam samjata-suryyagrahana-parvvani samkalpitat tithav= 
ady=eha. 

The date is irregular ; see ibid. Yol. XIX. p. 372, No. 194. 

From Mularaja [I.] to Bhima [II.] as in No. 206 ; after Bhima [II.], Tribhuvanapala. 

221. — Y. 1300.— Ant. Remains Bo. Pres. p. 186. Siyal Bet image inscription : — 

Sam 1300 varshe Vaisakha-vadi 11 Budhe. 

Wednesday, 4th May A.D. 1244. 

222. — V. 1311.— Ep. Ind. Yol. I. p. 25. Dabhoi fragmentary inscription of the Chaulakya 
(Vaghela) Visaladeva, the son of Viradhavala ; (composed by Somesvara) : — 

(L. 59).— samvat 1311 varshe Jyeshtha-sudi 15 Vu(bu)dha-dine || 

Wednesday, 14th May A.D. 1253 ; see Ind. Ant. Yol. XIX. p. 28, No. 27. 

223. — V. 1312,— ind. Ant. Yol. XX, p. 84. Notice of a Rahatgadh inscription of the 

reign of the [Paramara] Mahdrdjadhirdja Jayasimhad3va s of Dhar& : 

(L. 1). — samvat 1312 varshe Bhadrapada-su 7 [So]ma 

Monday, 28th August A.D. 1256. 

224. V. 1315.— Ant. Remains Bo. Pres. p. 186, Siyal Bet image inscription — 

Samvat 1315 varshe Phaguna-vadi 7 Sanau Anuradha-nakshatr& ’dy^eha sri-Madhu- 

maty am. 

Saturday, 15th February A.D. 1259; see Ind . Ant. Yol. XIX. p. 170, No. 98. 

225. — V. 1317.— Ind. Ant. Yol. YI. p. 210. Kadi plates of the reign of the Chanlnkya 
(Vaghela) Mahdrdjadhirdja Visaladeva, 4 recording a grant of the Mahdmandatfivara Rdnaka 


1 This is the title of the Kaiachari (Chedi) kings ; the proper title of the Chandella kings is * lord of 
Kalanjara.’ 

8 I.e. TraiDkyavarmad&va, 

3 This 18 the JaitugidZva, the son of the Paramara Ddvapila, in whose reign (in V. 1300, on ft (lay 
corresponding to Monday, 19th October A.D. 1243) A&dhara finished his commentary on the Dharmdmrita ; see 
Prof. Bhandarkar’s Report for 1883-84, pp. 105 and 392.- For a„ nnpnblished Odaypur inscription which' probably 
belongs to the same king see Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 84, note 3. 

» He ia described as‘ a submarine fire to dry up that ocean— the army of fthe D&vagiri-TAdava] Sihgbana. 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


33 


the son of Samgramasimhadeva and grandson of Liinapas&jadSva, of 

Mandali 

(L. 1). — snmad-Vikramakal-atita-saptad&sadhika-trayodasasatika-samvatsare laukika- 

Jy esh ta (sh tha) masasy a krishnapaksha^haturthyam tithan Gurav=ady=eha. 

Thursday, 19th March A.D. 1261 ; see ibid . Vol. XIX. p. 183, No. 138- 

226. — V*. 1317.— Ep. Ind . Vol. I. p. 327; Archceol Surv. of India , Vol. XXI. Plate xiii. 
Ajaygadh rock inscription of the Chandella Viravarman and his queen Kalyanadevi ; (composed 
by Ratnapala, the son of Haripala and grandson of V atsaraja) : 

(L. 14). — Sagar-emd v-agni-sudhamsu (su) -mite Vikrama-vatsare • • • • samvat 

1317 . Vaisasha(kha)-sudi 13 Guran || 

Thursday, 14th April A.D. 1261 ; see Ind . Ant. Yol. XIX. p. 373, No. 198. 

In a family sprung from the Moon, Kirtivarman (defeated [the Chedi] Karna) , his son 
Sallakshana; Jayavarman; Prithvivarman ; Madana; Paramardin ; Trailokyavarman ; his son 
Ylravarman, married Kalyanadevi, the daughter of HahGsvara and Vesaladevi (?), of whom the 
latter was the daughter of a prince Govindaraja, while Mahesvara was the son of Snp41a and 
grandson of [Chajdala, of the race of Dadhichi. 

227. — V. 1318. From a rubbing supplied by Dr. Burgess. Jhansi (now Lucknow 

Museum) inscription of the Chandella Viravarman (?) 

(LJL9). — samvat 1318 Sravana-vadi 2 Yu(bu)dha-dine. 

^^ednesday, 5th July A.D. 1262 ; see Ind. Ant. Yol. XIX- p* 179, No. 12 . 

228. — V. 1820 .— Ind. Ant. Yol. XI. p. 242 ; Bhdvnagar Inser. p. 224. Veraval inscription 
of the reign of the Chaulukya (Vaghela) Mahdrdjddhirdja ArjunadSva 

(L. 2) . — ftri- Y is vanatha-prat i va ( ba) dd ha-tan (nan) jananam *0* dha' ka-ras ula- 

Mahammada-samvat 662 tath& sri-nripa-[Vi]krama-sam 1320 tatha srimad-Yalabin-sam 945 
tatha sri-Simha-sam 151 varshe Ashadha-vadi 13 Ravav-ady=£ha. 

Sunday, 25th May A.D. 1264 ; see Ind. Ant. Yol. XIX. p. 180, No. 129. 

229. - V. 1324.- Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Vol. LV. Part I. p. 46. Chitdrgadh inscription of 

the reign of the Gnhila Mahdrdjo TejahsimhadSva [of Mewad] : 

(L. 1). — samvat 1324 varshe. ... A 

127, »a iu.m» 23. G.y, 

inscription of Vanar&jaddva (?), of the time of Ghiy&s-ud-din Bal ( ) * 

(L. 1).— samvat 1325 Ph&lguna-§udi 1 Ravau || 

Sunday, 3rd February A.D. 1269. . 

231. — V. WS.-AM Surv. o, India, Vol XXI. p. 51, *• *7**' 

inscription of the reign of the Chandella Viravarman •— * 

(L.2).— Viravva(va)rmma-r&j[y*]5 samvat 1325. . ... ... 

v ' ' ' , , . !• i n P Hultzsch. Pathan inscription of the 

232. - V. 1326.— From a rubbing supplied by Ur. tluimcn. rai ^ v 

m *\z *** 

naksbatre .... Bamastarajavalisahita-Jaisimghadeva-rajye. 

Wednesday, 10th April A.D. 1269. . . , , 

. i vr „ infi Odinara inscription, being a eniogy of 

233. V.- 1328. Ind. Ant. o . ' ( Vaehela) Visaladeva; (composed by Ganapati- 

Nftn&ka, 1 a court-poet of the Cbaolnkya (Vagheia; visau* , v f 

Vyasa 8 ); — 

Samvat 1328. 

~ . TZ7Z ~ ™»ed bv Krishna (called B41.-SarM.atl), which is at the same 

1 For another, undated pralatti of N&nAka, composed y 

place «e ibid. p. 102. detraction of Dh4r4 by Visaladeva. 

* He is stated to hate composed a poem (?) on tn ^ 



34 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[VOL. V. 


234. — V. 1331.— Ind. Ant . Vol. XXII. p. 80; Bhavnagar Inter, p. 74; Arihmal. Surv . of 
India , Vol. XXIII. Plate xxv. Chitor inscription of the Gnhila family of Medapaja (Mewad) ; 
(composed by VedaSarman 1 ) : — 

(L. 54).— sam° 1331 varshS Ishadha-sndi 3 Sukre Pushye. 

Friday, 8th June A.D. 1274. 

The princes here eulogized are Bappa, Gnhila, Bhdja, Sila, Kalabhoja, Mallata, 
Bhartribhata, Snfaha, Mahay aka, Shummana, Allata, Naravahana, Saktikumara, Amraprasada, 
Suchivarman, and Naravarman. 8 

235. V. 1332.— Jnd. Ant. Vol. XXI. p. 277. Kh6khra fragmentary inscription of the 
reign of the Chaulukya (Vagh&la) MaJiardjddhirdja Sarangadeva :— 

(L. 1). — samvat 1332 varshe Marga-sudi 11 San4v=ady=eha. 

Saturday, 1st December A.D. 1275. 

236. V. 1335.— Jour. Beng. As. Soc . Vol. LV. Part I. p. 48. Chit6rga<Bi inscription of 
the reip of the Gnhila Samarasimha, 3 the son of Tejahsimha and his wife Jayatalladevi, of 
MMapata (Me wad) : — 

Samvat 1335 varshe Vai6akha-£udi 5 Gnrau. 

Thursday, 28th April A.D. 1278. 

237. V. 1335.— From a rubbing supplied by Dr. Burgess. British Museum inscription of 
the reign of the Chaulukya (Vaghela) Hahdrdjddhirdja Sfcrangadeva :— 

(L. 1).— samvat 1335 varshe Vai^asha(kha)-sudi 5 S6me=dy^ha Srimad-Anahillavatak- 
Mhishthita- Saramgadeva-kalyanavijayaraiye. 

Monday, 17th April A.D. 1279. * 

238. — V. 1337.— Jour. Beng. As. Soc . Vol. XLIII. Part I. p. 108, and Plate x. “ Palam 

Baoli” inscription from the village of “ Boher” in the Rohtak district, of the time of the 
Hammira Gayasadina (Ghiy&s-ud-dln B alb an) : 

(L. 21).— 8amvatsare=smin=V aikramaditye samvat 1337* Sravana-vadi 13 Vn(bn)dhe. 

Wednesday, 26th Jane A.D. 1280, or Wednesday, 13th August A.D. 1281 ; see Ind. Ant. 
Voh XIX. p« 186, No. 147. 

The country of Hariyanaka was first ruled by the Tdmaras, then by the Chauhanas, and 
then by the following ‘ Saka kings ’ : Sahavadina (Shihab-ud-din Ghori), Shudnvadlna (Qutb- 
nd-din Aibak), Asamasadina (Shams-ud-din Altamish), Peruja-sfihi (Rukn-nd-din Firoz Shah 
I.), Jalaladina (Jalal-ud-din), Maujadina (Muizz-ud-din Bahram), Alavadina (Ala-ud-din 
Masafid), Nasaradina (Nasir-ud-din Mahmud), and Gay&sadina (Ghiyas-ud-din Balban). 

239. - V. 1337.— Arohaol. Surv. of India, Vol. XXI. p. 52, and Plate ziv. G. Ajaygadh 

rock inscription of the reign of the Chandella Viravarmadfi va (P) 

(L. 19).— Sagar -anala. ved-endu-y u k t[e] samvatsarS va[r6 | P] Maghe masi si(si)te pakshe 
tray&dadyam Vidh6[r]=dme || 14 || Samvat 1337 Miigha-sndi 13 S6me || 

Monday, 3rd February A.D. 1281 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 25, No. 16. 

240. - V. 1337 —ArchmoJ. Surv. of India, Vol. XXI. p. 74, and Sir A. Cunningham’s 
transcript of the original inscription (which has been lost). Dahi plate of the Chandella 
Mahdr&jddhirdja Viravarmadeva, lord of Kalanjara :— 

(L. 28). — samvat 1337 samaye Vaisakha-sudi 15 Ravi-dine. 

Sunday, 4th May A.D. 1281. 6 


1 See below, No. 243. 

* The later prince of the same dynast, were eulogized by the same poet, but the stone which contains the 
continuation of this inscription does not seem to have been found. 

'. " tU “• — ~ ■'« r- «• 

* On this day the tithi of the date commence 7 d h. 18 m. after mean sunrise. 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


35 


,»d ' n> ^ Um ' 

Ck d ■ I W _ _ - _ 


7r\ V pt 34 f "“ ^ rom rnbbin S s supplied by Dr. Burgess 
(D. 3).— Chaitra-sudi 3 Vu(bu)dhS sam 1340 

Wednesday, 3rd March A.D. 1283; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 31, No. 41. 


Inscription at Kalanjar : 


Of the reign of the Chandella vSvarfalSva 6 ^ ^ H(Brn!e ' Gal " ha 8atUtone inscription 
rajJ. L ' 1} '~ 8aiilTVat 1342 SalMy5 Chaitra - Sndi 3 ady=eha ^mad-Vtravarmad^a- 

Wednesday, 27th. February A.D. 1286. 3 

* r ^ nt ‘ ^47 i Bhdvnagar Inscr. p. 84, and Plate Mount 

a. ;“ U ° f ““*!** (M6WM) , (coropmed by VMa™, 

(L. 4*8). sam 134[2] varshe Margga-sudi [1]. 
ir'i Sf. in f? ri P tion eulogizes the Guhila princes Bappa (Bappaka), Guhila BhAm fin. 

Sa^uilra^?*'* 5 Mah ^ ika > ■ Shumn.4na (Khummana), Allafa, Nailvtoanaj 

aKtifcumara, Suchivannan, Naravarman, Kirtivarman, Vairata, Vairisimha Viiarasimba 
Ansimha Chdda, Vikramasimha, Kshemasimha, Samantasimha, Kumarasiribha, Mathanasimha’ 
Padmasunha, Jaatrasimha, Tejahsimha, and Samarasimha. ’ 


ti mt > 24 t'I V nl 3 *?~ :Ep - htd ' V0L L P ‘ 28 °- V ™ ! ( now Cint ™) inscription of the 
DhMdL) h !_ ChaUlakya (VagMIa) SaraAgad ® va ; (composed by Dhararudhara/ the son of 


(L. 66). — £rf-nripa-Vikrama-sam 1343 varshe Magha-sudi 5 Some. 

Monday, 20th January A.D. 1287 ; see Ind. Ant - Vol. XX. p. 137, note 28. 

Vi£y amalla (Visaladeva, married NagailadSvi) ; his younger brother Pratapamalla • his 
son (the successor of Visvamalla) Arjunadeva ; his son Sarangadeva. 


245 — V. 1343. — Ant. Bemains Bo. Pres. p. 186. Siyal Bet image inscription 
Samvat 1343 Magha-sudi 10 Gurau. 

The date is irregular. 


246.— V. 1344.— Jour. Beng. As. Soc . Yol. LY. Part I. p. 19. Udaypur (in Rajputana) 

inscription of the Guhila Samastamahdrdjahula Samarasimha of Medapata (Mewad) • 

(L. 1). — samvat 1344 Vaisakha-4udi 3. 


247. — V. 1345 — Jour . Beng. As. Soc. Vol. VI. p. 882, and Plate xlviii. with specimen 
facsimile. 3 Ajaygadh (now Calcutta Museum) inscription of Nana, a minister of the Chandella 
Bhojavarman ; (composed by Amara) : — 

Ksbanad-e^kshana-gata-^ruti-bhuta-samanvite | samvatsare £ubhe=lekhi Vaisakha- 
masa-sad-din6 || ahk&=pi 1345 samaye Vaisa[khe*]. 

248. — V. 1348.— Ind. Ant . Yol. XXII. p. 82. Notice of a Sarwaya inscription of the 
reign of Ga^apati, the son of Gopala, of Nalapura ; (composed by Somamisra, the son of 
Sbmadhara) 

(L. 33).— samvat 1348 Chaitra-sudi 8 Guru*dine Pushya-nakshatre. 

Thursday, 27th March A.D. 1292. 


1 See above, No. 35. 

* On this daj the tith* of the date commenced X h. 29 m. after mean sunrise* 

3 Compare Bp. Ind . Vol. 1. p. 332, note 8. 

r2 



36 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


249. — V. 1352.-— Bhdvnagar Inscr . p. 227. Chmbay fragmentary inscription of the time (?) 
of the Chaulukya (*V&ghela) S&rangadeva; mentions (in lines 5 and 6) Lfinigadeva, his son 
Viradhavala, Pratapamalla, his son Arjuna, and (in line 26) S&rangadfrva : — 

(Ii. 25). — samvata(t) 1352 varshe 4ri- V ikrama- samatita- varsheshu trisatft samam 

dvipamchiUadvinair=evaih kale 'smin (P). 1 * 

250. — V. 1353.— Archoeol Surv. of India , Vol. XT. p. 118, and Plate xxxvii. 3 ; 
ibid* N. S., Vol. I. p. 51. Jannpnr pillar inscription r — 

(L. 8). — Jyeshthe masi site pakshe d74dasy4(4ya)m=Vu(bn)dha-va8are • • • • 

Plava-vatsare || Samvat 13[5]3. 

Wednesday, 16th May A.D., 1296 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 31, No. 42. 

251. — V. 1355. — Ind . Ant . V ol. XXII. p. 81. Notice of a Narwar inscription of the reign of 
Ganapati of Nalapnra ; (composed by Siva, the son of L6had& and grandson of Damddara) : — 

(L. 21). — samvat 1355 Karttika-[va]di 5 [Sukre?]. 

Friday, 26th September A.D. 1298 (?). 

Ch&hada ; his son Nrivarman ; his son Asallad£va ; his son G6pMa ; his son Ganapati. 

252. — V. i860.— Ind. Ant . Vol. XX. p. 84. Notice of anUdaypur (in Gw&lior) inscription 
of HarirfijadSva (?) : — 

(L. 1). — [sam]vat 1360. 

253. — V. 1366.— Ind. Ant . Vol. XX. p. 84. Notice of an Udaypxir (in Gwalior) 
inscription of the reign of the [Param&ra P] Mahdrdjddhirdja Jayasinghadeva 
(Jayasimhyldva) 8 [of Dhara ?] 

(L. 1). — [sam] 1366 Srfivana-vadi 12 [8ukr6P]. 

Friday, 24th July A.D. 1310 (?). 

254. — V. 1372.— ArchcEol. Surv . of India , Vol. XXL p. 54, and Plate xiv. 0. 
Inscription on pillar of gate at Ajaygadh : — 

(L. 14). — sa[m]vat 1372 P[au]sha-vadi 10 Sanaa. 

Saturday, 22nd November A.D. 1315 ; see Ind . Ant Vol. XIX. p. 168, No, 88. 

255. V. 1373.— From impressions supplied by Dr. Fuhrer. Jddhpur inscription of the 
reign of Sultan Kutrudi (Qutb-ud-din) 

(L. 30). samvat 1373 varsh5 Bhadra-vadi 3 Su(su)kra-din§ • , , samastar&javal i* 

samalamkpto 3 Alavadiiia-pntrar8Uratr&na«Kntvudl-vijayakaly&narajy6(jy0 |), 

Friday, 6th August A.D. 1316 4 * ; or Friday, 26th August A.D. 1317. 

The inscription enumerates the ‘ Saka kings ' of 1 Pbiliy beginning with S&hapadina 
(Shihab-ud-din Ghflri) ; see above, No. 238. 

256. V. 1377.— 'As. Bes, Vol. XVI. p. 285. Translation by H, H. Wilson of a fragmentary 
inscription at Mount Abh ; ends : — 

** Samvat 13/7 (A.D. 1321) on Monday the eighth of the light fortnight of Vaisakh , in the 
reign of Lundhagara, residing in Bdhunda, near to Chandrdvati f the great temple of AchaliivafUy 
on Arbuda mountain, was repaired by Sri Lundhaga, of the imperial race/' 

Monday, 6th April A.D. 1321. 

The inscription apparently mentions Sindhuputra, Lakshma^a, M&nikya of S&kambhari, 
Adhiraja(P) • . • . Dandana (?), Kirtip&la, Samarasimha, Udayasimha, 6 M&navasimha, 

Pratapa, etc. 

1 In line 3 is the date tamtai im vorshi Jyhhta(*hthayvad% 7 S6mS % without any indication as to what it 

refers to. 

1 This apparently is not the Jayasimhadera of Nos. 223 and 232. * Bead °krit'Ald°. 

4 On this day the tithi of the date eommenced 4 h. 2 m. after mean sunrise. 

* For a date of the reign of an Udayaaimhadera, corresponding to Sunday, 1st August AD 1249, aec I*d‘ 

Ant. VoL XIX. p. 175, No. 115. 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


37 


257. — V. 1380.— From Sir A. Cunningham s rubbings. Inscription at Udaypur (in 

Gwalior) : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1380 varshe Bhadra[mva(va)*^]-sudi 3 Some | Hastu(sta)-nakshatr[e] | 
[Uda ?]pura-nagare raja-srl-Yachchhaudevasya sadhanika .... 

Monday, 16th August A.D. 1322 ; see Ind. Ant. Yol. XIX. p. 28, No. 28. 


258. — V. 1384. — Proceedings Beng. As. Soc. 1873, p. 105. Delhi Museum inscription of the 
time of Mahamanda Sahi (Muhammad ibn Tughlaq) : — 

Kritir=Madanadevasya turyy-asht-agni-nisakare | \ ikram-abde=site Bhadro tritiyayam 

Gurdr=dine || 17 || Samvat 1381 miti Bhadra-vadi 3 Guru-dine. 

Thursday, 6th August A.D. 1327 ; see Ind. Ant . \ ol* XX. p. 138, note 29. 


259. — V. 1384. — Ep . Ind. Yol. I. p. 93. Another Delhi Museum inscription of the time of 

Mahammada Sahi (Muhammad ibn Tughlaq) : — 

(L. 15). — Veda-vasv-agm-chamdr-amka-samkhye=vde(bde) Yikramarkkatah | pamcha- 
myam Phalguna-sita likbitarh Bhauma-vasare || • . * Samvat 13S4 Phalguna-sudi 5 

Bhauma-dine || 

Tuesday, 16th February A.D. 1328 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 26, No. 18. 

The inscription mentions the Mlechchha Sahavadina (Shihab-ud-din Ghori) as the first 
‘Torashka ’ who seized, and ruled at, Dhillika (Delhi). 


260. — V. 13[8]8.— Ind. Ant. Yol XY. p. 360. Hathasni (now Bhavnagar Museum) 
inscription of the Mehara chief Thepaka (Thevaka) 

(L. 17).— samvat 13[S]G varshe || Bhave saihvatsare purnno Ashadhe shadasitike 
saptamyam Soma-varena. 

Monday, 19th June A.D. 1329 ; see ibid. Yol. XIX. p. 3o9, No. 166. 

The inscription mentions first, in the lunar (?) race, a king Shagara (Khagara), in whose 
family was bom Jasadhavala (Yasodbavala) who married Priyamala of the solar race, and 
had from her three sons, Malta, Mandala. and Meliga. It then states that in the family of 
Vashalaraja (Vakbalaraja) there was Nagarjuna (the companion of Mandalika), whose son 
Mahananda married Riipa, Mahgalaraja’s (') daughter, who bore to him Jhepaka. This 
Mehara Thepaka “ had the royal dignity conferred on him by king Mainsa, ” and apparently 
was subordinate to a king Kuntaraja, “bom in the family of Yalladitya, and descended from 
Surya-Yikala ” (r). 1 2 


261. V. 1387. — Archoeol. Surv. of West. India , No. 2, Appendix, p. xv, Nm 58. Mount 

Abft inscription of the reign of [tho Chahumana] Tejahsimha (. ) of Chandravati 

(L. 13).— samvat 1387 varshe Magha-sudi 3 Bhargava-dine Satabhishag-nakshatre 

Kumbha- s the chamdre. 

Friday, 11th January A.D. 1331. 


Yol. XXI. p. 143, and Plate xxix. A. 


262.— V. 1390 .— Archceol. Sitrv. of India, 

KSvati-kund pillar inscription : — m 

(L. 4).— samvat 1390 samaye Bhadra[myai ?]-vadi 4 Sa(sa)nau dine. 
Saturday, 31st July A.D. 1333 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 17o, No. 116. 


263.— V. 1380.— Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Vol. V. p. 342, and Plate ix. 1. 
Fort of Chnnar, of the time of Muhammad ibn Tughlaq (?) =— 

(L. 10).— samva[t*] 1390 Bhadra-vadi 5 Gurau. 


Inscription from the 


1 For come of the names in the above compare below, Nos. 276 and 284. 

2 See below', No. 265. 




38 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. Y. 


Thursday, 10th September A.D. 1332, or, more probably, Thursday, 21st July A.D. 1334 ; 
see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 185, No. 144. 

264 . - V. 1304.- From Sir A. Cunningham’s rubbings. Two inscriptions at Udaypur 
(in Gwalior) : — 

(L. 1). — sam 1394 1 Haha(gha)-vadi 1 Vu(bu)dhe. 

Wednesday, 7th January A.D. 1338 ; see Ind . Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 355, No. 154. 

265. Y. 1304. — Ind. Ant. Yol. II. p. 256. Mount Abu inscription of the reign of the 

Chabumana Bdjd KSnbadadeva, the son of Tejahsimha, of Chandra vati A 

Sri-nripa-Vikrama-kal-atita-samvat 1394 varshe Vaisasha(kha)-^udi 10 Gurav=ady-e 
sri- C hamdrava ty am . 

Thursday, 30th April A.D. 1338. 

266. — V. 1307. — Archceol. Surv. of India, Yol. XXI. p. 143, and Plate xrix. B.—D- 
Three memorial pillar inscriptions at Kevati-kund, of the reign of the Maharaja Hamira eva 
of Lukasthana, and others : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1397 aamaye [or varshe] Magha-sudi 4 Soma-dine )| 

Monday, 3rd January A.D. 1340 ; see Ind . Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 22, No. 2. 

267. — V. 1404.— Archceol. Surv. of India, Vol. XXI. p. 19, and Plate xviii. Inscription 
at the Fort of Marpha, of the reign of Sidhituhga 2 (?) : — 

(L. 3). — samvat 1404 Karttika-sudi 14 Gurau. 

Thursday, 18th October A-D. 1347 ; see Ind . Ant . Vol. XIX. p. 356, No. 159. 

268. — V. 1404.— Archceol. Surv. of India, Yol. IX. p. 34, and Plate ii. 4. Rampur 
Sati- pillar inscription of the queens of the Maharaja Virarajadeva (?) 5— 

(L. 1). — samvat 1404 varshfi Phalgum(?)-vadi 14 Saum5 (?). 

Wednesday, 16th January A-D. 1348 (?). 

269. — V. 1412. — Archceol. Surv. of India, Yol. IX. Plate ii. 3. KaritalaS inscription of 
the reign of the Maharaja Virar&madeva of Uchahadanagara : — 

(L. 1). — samvatu 1412 sama[e]. 

270. — V. 1429.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 314. Gaya inscription of Kolachanda, a governor 
of Gaya, of the reign of Sultan Piyaroja Saha (Firoz SMh) : — 

(L. 2). — Asima-rajye nripa-Vikrama[r]kke gate grah[air ? ]=yugma-yug-endu-kale I 
phillpati-sri-Piyarojasahe bhuvam sama^asati vairi-dabe || 

(L. 6). — Paramabhatfcarak-etyadi-rajavali purwavat srimad-Vikram&dityadeva-nripater^ 
atit-avde(bde) samvata(t) 1429 M&gha-kpshna-tray&da£yaih tithau Saniv&sar-anvit&y&ba. 

Saturday, 22nd January A.D. 1373. 

The Thakura Kulachanda (Kulaehandaka) was a son of the Thakura H6mar&ja and son s 
son of the Thakura Dala, of the family of a prince Vyaghra (Vy&ghrar^ja). 

271. — V. 1437— Ind. Ant. Vol. VIII. p. 186 ; Ant. Remains Bo. Pres. p. 181. DhsmlSj 
inscription of the time of the Vajaka chief Bharma of Prabh&sa, and his minister 
Karmasimha : — 

(L. 14). — samvat 1437 varsh5 Ashadba-vadi 6 Sanaa || 

Saturday, 26th May A.D. 1380, or Saturday, 13th July A.D. 1381 ; see Ind. Ant . Vol- 
XIX. p. 186, No. 148. 


x One of the two inscriptions has varshS after 1394 . 

* So the name was read by Sir A. Cunningham, but to judge from a faint rubbing, the original seem* to have 
sri • Dhilamga-rdjy S. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


39 


272. — V. 1439 Archceol. Suro. of India, Vol. VI. p. 79, and Plate xi. Hachadi (near 

Alvar) inscription of the time of the Mahdrajddhirdja Gogadeva, the son of Asaladeva, of 
the Vadagujara family, and of the reign of Sultan Poroja Sahi (Firoz Sh&h):— 

(L. 6). — samvatsare =smin sri-Vikramaditya-rajyo (r) saiiivat 1439 Sa(sa)ke 1304 varshe 
Vaisa(sa)sha(kha)-sudi 6 Ravi-dine 1 Pushya-nakshatre | sri-surat&na-Perojasabi- 
rajye ... 

Sunday, 20th April A.D. 1382 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 31, Ivo. 43. 

273. — V. 1442 .— Ant. Remains Bo. Pres. p. 185. Veraval inscription of the time of the 
chief Bhanna of the Rashtroda (Rashtrakuta) family 

Samvat 1442 varshe AsMdha-vadi 8 Sanau || 

Saturday, 11th June A.D. 1384. 1 

274. V. 1443. Arc,hmol. Sura. of India, Vol. III. p. 6S, and Plate xxiv. 1-3. Masar 

(Mabasara) Jaina image inscriptions of the reign of the Raja Nathadeva of Mahasara 

(Inscr. 1, line 1).— earn 1443 J[y*]eshtka-sudi 5 Gurau. 

Thursday, 3rd May A.D. 1386. 3 

275. — V. 1445 .— Archceol. Surv. of India, Vol. XVII. p. 41, and Plate xxii. Boramdeo 

Sa ^-pillar inscription : — „ . A 

(L. 1).— samvat 1445 Bhavamama-samva[tsa]re Asvi(svi)na-sud\ 13 Some. 

Monday, 14th September A.D. 1388; see Lid. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 32, No. 44. 

276. - V. 1445— Ant. Remains Bo. Pres. p. 178. Vanthali (Junagadh) inscription of some 


Chud&samS chiefs : — . T * 

^ara-yuga-manu-samvatsara-1445-varshe PhalguCna^-sud.-pamchamr Some « 

Mondav 1st February A.D. 1389 ; see In d. Ant . Vol. XIX. p. 26, Tno. < • . 

The inscription mentfousShahgara (Khahgara), Jayasimha, Mahipat., Mokalasnnha, etc. 

277.- V. 1445— Ant. Remains Bo. Pres. p. 1S3. Chonvad (Junagadh) inscription of 

some chiefs of the Shattrimsa family . 

' Samvat 1445 varshe Phagana-sudi 5 Some. 

Monday, 1st February A.D. 1389. T *. « w ^ 

The iJriptkm -entices U*» ! «• »»» Bhi-esi.i.h. i 1,, so. I l» »■» 

Lokshmssimk. Lek.he, end Lasbenepila ; Letshmes.ohs s son Esj.s.mha ; etc. 

979 V 14 <52 __ Ant Remains Bo. Pres. p. 179. Maugrol inscription of the time of 

hJ^ of T*Mp«. <““> “ J ““ 0t 

•*££ 1452 earalio *gtt5*jg l gg- 

vr ,, .. .• « , „;^nktre*l M-Gunara-dhantryam sn-DapnaraKnane rajyam .urvau. 

Nasaratha-vi]ayara]ye tan-niynkt(_e J b “ / , 7 , VTY or-- w 155 

Sunday, 7th May A.D. 1396 ; see lad. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. o5o, No. loo. 

279 V 1455 -Bihar (Darbhahga) (spurious ?) plate of the Maharajadhiraja 
fi . 279 rJ- * fj Devasimba, [of Mitkila], recording a grant which was made in 
Sivasimhadeva, the son of De ^ a “ L 5?8 o£ Ashmanasena-s. 293 (?). 

favour of the poet Vidyapati , see Dclo , • ... ,, , 

r , A I V t YXTI n 83. Notice of a Raypur (now hagpur Museum) 
280.— V. 1458— Ind. Ant. . BraYima deva of Rayapura, 3 and his minister, 

inscription of the time of the Makar aj J 

the N%afeu Hajirajadeva :- g Sa(i5)ko 1322* samayG SarvajitaC^-nama-samvatsare 

Phaglu(lgu)na-sudha-ashtami 5 Su(su)kre. _ ___ . 

“ 77 . a 4 Chaitrddi V. 1442 current, and the purnimdnta Ashadha. 

1 This is the equivalent of the date sunrise. 

* On this day the Htki o£ the date com H1 .aoed 3 n. 5° 

» In No. 283 it is stated that the chief s cap , Re&d Mdh 

4 Wrongly for 2323. 


40 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V, 


Friday, 10th February A.D. 1402 ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 26, No. 20. 

Lashmideva (Lakshmideva) ; bis son Simgha (Simha) ; his son Ramachandra ; his son 
Harirayabrahman (Brahmadeva, or Rayabrahmadeva). 

281. — V. 1466. — ArchceoL Surv. of India , Vol. XXL p. 18, and Plate xiv. Rasin 

inscription of a chief (mahipati) Paramardin : ^ 

(L. 1). — samvat 1466 varshe Chaitra-sudi 7 San[au] | 

Saturday, 23rd March A.D. 1409 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 355, No. 156. 

282. V. 1467. — Jour . Beng. As. Soc. Vol. XXXI. p. 422, and Plate iii. No. xv. 

Gwalior inscription of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Viranga (or Virama) ?-deva 

(L. 1).— samvatu 1467 varshe Marga-sudi 5 So[ma ? ]-dinam || maharajadhiraja-sri- 

Viramgadevah (?). 

Monday, 1st December A.D. 1410. 

283. V. 1470 ( for 1471). — Bp. Ind. Vol. II. p. 230. Khalari inscription of the time 

of the Kalachuti (Kalachuri) Haribrahmadeva (Brahmadeva 1 * ) of Khalvatika ; (composed 
by Misra Damodara) : — 

(L. 15). — samvat 1470 varshe Sa(sa)ke 1334 3 shashtyavdaydr=mmadhye 3 Plava-nama- 
samvatsare Magha-sudi 9 Sani-vasare Rohini-nakshatre. 

Saturday, 19th January A.D. 1415. 

In the Kalachuti (Kalachuri) branch of the Ahihaya (Haikaya) family, Simhana ; his son 
Ramadeva (slew in battle Bhonihgadeva) ; his son Haribrahmadeva. 

284. — V. 1473. — Ant. Remains Bo. Pres, pp, 176 and 316. Junagadh (GimAr) inscription 
of the time of [the Chudasama chief] Jayasimha II. ; (composed by Samala (?), the son 
of Mantrisimha and grandson of Dhandhala) : — 

Samvad=Rama-turamga-s&gara-mahi-saaikhye~tha Sakre 4 site pamchamyam Bhyign- 
vasare. 

Friday, 21st May A.D. 1417, 

In the family of Yadu, Mandalika [I.] ; his son Mahipala ; his son Khangara ; his son 
Jayasimha [I.] ; his son Muktasimha ; his son Mandalika [II.] ; his younger brother 
Meliga ; his son Jayasimha [II.]. 5 

285. — V. 1481. — Jour . Beng . As. Soc. Vol. LII. Part I. p. 70. Debgadh (now Calcutta 
Museum) Jaina inscription of the time of Sahi Alambhaka (“ Hushang Ghori alias Alp 
Khan 99 of Malava, the founder of Mandu, here called Mandapapura) : — 

(L. 14). — samvatsare=smin=nripa-Vikramaditya-gatavda(bda) 1481 Sak5 grl-S&livahanat 
1346 Vaisakha-mase sukla-pakshe 15 purnnam&syam Guru-vasare ( Sv&ti-nakshatr£ I Simha- 
lagn-odaye || (and evidently afterwards repeated in verse). 

Thursday, 13th April A.D. 1424; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p, 32, No. 45. 

286. — V.1485.— Bp. Ind. Vol. II. p. 410 ; Bhdvnagar Inscr. p. 96. Chitdrgadh inscription 
of the Guhila Mokala of Medapata (Mewad) ; (composed by Bkanatha, the son of Bbatta 
Vishnu) : — 

(L. 50). — Abdo ban-ash ta-veda-kshiti-parikalite Vikramambh6jabaihdh6h punye maso 

Tapasye savitari Makaram yati jive Ghata-sthe |j (|) pakshe sukl-^tarasmin^Suraguru-divase 
ch=Aryama-rkshe tritiya-tifchyam. 

(L. 53). — samvat 1485 varshe Magha-sudi [3] Guru-din6 . . . 

Both dates are irregular. 


1 See above, No. 280. * W.ongly for 1336. « Read ihathtjabda-madhyl. 

* So far as 1 can make out, this is equivalent to Jyaiththi . * See below, No. 345, 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


41 


In the Guhila family, Arisimha ; his son Hammira ; his son Kshetra ; his son Lakshasimha ; 
his son Mokala (defeated Peroja, 4 the king of the Yavanas,’ i.e. the Sultan Fii*oz Shah). 

287. — V. 1493. — From impressions supplied by Dr. Burgess. Deogadh Jaina inscription : — 
(L. 5). — samvatu 14’J3 Sake 1358 varshe Yaisasha(kha)-vi(va)di 5 Gurai(rau) dine 
Mula-nakshatre || 

Thursday, 5th April A.D. 1436. 1 


288. — V. 1494. — Bhdvnagar Inscr . p. 112. Nagacla Jaina inscription of the reign of tin* 
Guhila Kumbhakarna, the son of Mokala, of Medapata (Mewad) : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1494 varshe Magha-sudi 11 Guru-vare. 

Thursday, 6th February A.D. 1438. 

289. — V. 1496. — Jour . Beng. As. Soc. Vol. XVI. p. 1224. tjmga (in Bihar) inscription 

of Bhairavendra : — 

(V. 21). — Jate tarka 6-nava 9-mbudhi 4-ndu-gu(ga)nite sambatsare 2 Vaikrame Vaisakhe 
Guru-vasare sitatare pakshe tritiy[a*]-tithau | Rohinyam Purushottamam Halabhritahi 
Bhadram Subhadran=tatha pratyashrhapayad=ekad=aika-vidhina sri-Bhairavemdro nripah || 
And further on : — ankato=pi Vikram-abdah || 1496 |) Vaisukha-sudUtritiya Guro(rau) [| 
Thursday, 16th April A,D. 1139 ; see lad . Ant. \ ol. XIX. p. 32, No. 46. 

In the town of Umanga there was, in the lunar race, Bhumipala ; his son Kumarapala 
his son Lakshmanapala ; his son Chandrapala ; his son hayanapala ; his son Sandhapala ; his 
son Abhayadeva ; his son Malladeva ; his son Kesiraja ; his son \ arasihihadeva ; his son 
Bhanudeva; his son Shmesvara ; his son Bhairavendra. 

290. — V. 1496. — Bhdvnagar Inscr . p. 114; PrdchinaUkhamdld , Vol. II. p. 28. Sadadi 
Jaina inscription of the reign of the Guhila Rand Kumbhakarna of Medapata (Mewad) : — 

(L, 2). — Srimad-Vikramatah 1496 samkhya-varshe. 

The inscription gives the following list of the Guhila princes : Bappa, 3 Guhila, Bhoja, 
Sila, Kalabhoja, Bhartribhata, Sirhha, Mahayaka, Khummana, Allata, Naravahana, 
Saktikumara, Suchivarman, Kfrtivarman, Yogaraja, Vairata, Vam^apala, 4 Vairisimha, 
Virasimha, Arisimha, Chodasimha, Vikramasimha, Ranasiriilia, Khemasiriiha, Samantasimha, 
Kum&rasimha, Mathanasimha, Padmasimha, Jaitrasimha, Tejasvisimha, Samarasimha, 
Bhuvanasimha (defeated the Chahumaua king Kituka and the Sultan Allavadina), 
his son Jayasimha, Lakshmasimha (defeated the Malava king Gogadeva), his son Ajayasirhba, 
his brother Arisimha, Hammira, Khetasimha, Laksha, his son Mokala, Kumbhakarna. 

291. V. 1497. Jour. Beng. As. Soc . Vol. XXXI. p. 422, and Plate iii. No. xviii. 

Gwalior inscription of the reign of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Dungarendradeva 

(L. 1).— samvat 1497 varshe Vaisa(sa)sha(kba)-[sudi] 7 Sukre Punarvasu-nakshatr[<3*] 

Sri-Gopachaladurgge maharajadhiraja-raja(ja)*sri-Pumga .... 

Friday, 8th April A.D. 1440. 

292. — V. 1500.— Bhdvnagar Inscr. p. 162, and Plate; Prdchlnalekhamdld , Vol. II. p. 26. 
Mahnva inscription, recording the construction of a tank by the SreshtUn Mokala on the land 
of the Gdhilla S&rahga : — 

(L. 1).— Svasti svastimati prasiddha-nripati-sri-Vikram-atikramat samvad= Vishnu- 
padadvay-eshu-jagati-samkhye Prajanampatan I mitre ch=6ttara-ge prachamda-kirane dhanye 
madhan Madhave sukle purnpa-tithau Gumucha Gnru-bhe sadyoga-bhoga-kshane || 


1 

1 

a 


On this da, the tithi of the date commenced 6 h. 31 m. after mean sunrise. 


Head tamvatsarS. 

For the princes from Bap pa to 
Below, in Nos. 415 and 431, we 


Samarasimha see the list above, No. 243, which differs in some respects, 
find the name Bamsapdla. 

G 


42 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


(L. 16)* — Svasti sriman-nripa-Vikramarkka-samay-atita-saihvat 1500 varshe Prajapati- 
uamni samvatsare | uttarayane | vasamta-ritau | Vai£akha-£ukla-pamchainyam Gurau | 

Thursday, 23rd April A.D. 1444 ; see Ind. Ant . Vol. XIX, p. 38, No. 73. 

293. — V. 1503.— Prom. Sir A. Cunningham’s rubbings. Inscription at Udaypur (in 
Gwalior) : — 

(L. 1). — samvatu 1503 varishe Phaguna-vadi 10 Su(£u)kra-di[va]se. 

Friday, 10th February, A.D. 1447 ; see Ind. Ant . Vol. XIX, p. 168, No, 91. 

294. — V. 1510. — Jour . Beng . As, Soc. Vol. XXXI. p. 423, and a rubbing, supplied by 
Dr. Burgess. Gwalior inscription of the reign of the Haharajadhiraja 'Duhgarendradeva : 

(L.l). — samvat 1510 varshe Magha-sudi 8 Some sri-Gopftgirau raaharajadbiraja*raja(ja)* 
sri-Pumgaremdradeva*rajy[e # ] pravarttamane I 

Monday, 7th January A.D. 1454 ; see Ind . Ant . Vol. XIX. p. 374, No. 199. 

295. — V. 1515,— Archceol Surv. of India , Vol. XXIII. Plates xx. and xxi. Inscription 
in the uppermost storey of the Guhila Kumbha karaa’fl Kirtistambha, or 4 column of fame, 
at Chitorgadh : — 

(V. 185), — Srx-Vikramafc=pamcbadas-adliike=8min=varshe £ate pamchada^S vyatite 1 
Chaitr-asite=naihga-tithau vyadhayi sri-Knmbhamerar=vasudhadhipena l) 1 

296. — V. 1516. — ArchceoL Surv. of India , Vol. III. p. 131, and Plate xxxix. 
Inscription on jamb of temple of Gayasuri Devi at Gaya : — 

(L. 26). — Varshe [sastra ?]-ku-va[na]-oham[dra-8a]hite Mesham gate bhaskare Cbaitrt 
naga-tithau sit[e] Guru-dine 

(L. 30). — samvat 1516 varsb6 Chaitra-sudi 5 Gur[u]-din[6] || 

Thursday, 27th March A.D. 1460 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 39, No. 74. 

According to an account prepared for Sir A. Cunningham, the inscription contains the 
names of Sindhuraja, Dami [I.], Sandevara (?), D&mi [II.], Mahipala, Devidasa, Shryadasa, 
and of his son Saktisimha and grandson Madana. 

297. — V. 1545.— Bhdvnagar Inscr. p. 117. Udaypur (in Rajputana) inscription of the 
time of the Guhila Rajamalla.the son of Kumbhakarna, of M&lapata (Mewad) ; (composed by 
Mahesvara, the son of Atri and grandson of K£sava-Jh6tinga 2 ) : — 

(V. 99). — VatsarS npipati-Vikram-atyayat vana-veda-4ara-bhumi-sammite 1545 Chaitra- 
Sukla-dasami Guru-vare. 

Thursday, 12th March A.D. 1489. 

The inscription especially eulogizes the Guhila princes Arisimha, Hamira, Kshetrasimha, 
Lakshasimha, M6kala, Kumbhakarna, and Rajamalla. 

298. — V. 1553.— Ant. Remains Bo. Pres. p. 266, Borsad stepwell inscription : — 

(L. 1).— samvat 1553 varshe Sravana-vadi 13 Ravau. 

Sunday, 7th August A.D. 1496 ; see Ind. Ant . Vol. XIX. p. 178, No. 124. 

299. — Ash&dh&di-V. 1555.— Ant. Remains Bo, Pres* p. 264. Adalij well inscription ot 

the Rani Rudadevi, the wife of the Vaghela Virasimha of Dapdahid&Sa; of the reign of the 
‘Patasaha’ Mahamuda (Sultan Mahmud Baiqara) : 

(L. 21). — Sriman-nripa-Vikrama-samay.^tit4 Ash&dh&di-samvat 1555 varshe Sak[e*] 
1420 pravartamane uttarayana(na)-gate f§ri-eury[e # ] 3iSarutau 3 Migha-m&sS gakla-pakshe 
panchamyarh tithau Budha-vasare Uttarabhadrapad[S # ]-nakshatrA Siddhi(ddha)-namni 
Bava-karane Mina-ra6au sthite chamdre. 

Wednesday, 16th January A.D. 1499; see Ind. Ant . Vol. XIX. p. 27, No. 23. 


1 In verses/184, 186 and 187 there are other dates of V. 1505, 1507 and 1509, 

1 Below, in No. 301, the second name is spelt Jdtinga. 1 Bead Mirarta*. 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


43 


The Vaghela Mokalasimha ; his son Karna ; his son Muluraja ; his son Mahipa ; his son 
Virasiriiha, married Rudadevi; their sons Varasimha and Jetra (? Jaitra). 

300. — V. 1550.— Ind. Ant. Vol. IV. p. 368; Ant. Remains Bo. Pres. p. 254; Bp. Ind. 
Vol. IV. p. 298. Ahmadabad well inscription of B&i Harira, of the reign of the * Patusaha’ 
Mahamuda (Sult&n Mahmud Baiqara) : — 

(L. 12). — samvat 1556 varshe Sake 1421 pravarttamane Pausha-sudi 13 S6me. 

The date is irregular. 1 

301. — V. 1556 and 1561.— Jour. Beng. As. Soc. V ol. LVI. Part I. p. 79. Nagari (near 
Chitdr) inscription of the Guhila R&jamalla (the son of Kumbhakarna) of Medapata (Mewad) . 
and his wife Sring&radevi, a daughter of the prince Yodha (the son of Ranamalla) of 
Marusthali (Marwad) ; (composed by Mahesa, the son of Atri and grandson of Jdtinga- 
Kesava 2 ) : — 

(V. 24). — Ritu-bana-bana-sasi-samkhya-vatsare Nabhasab sita-Smaratithau sa- 

Bhumijeh(je). 

Tuesday, 31st July A.D. 1498. 

Samvat 1561 varshe Sake 1426 pravarttamane uttarayana(na)-gate sn-surye vasamta- 
ritau mahamamgalya-prada-Vaisasha(kha)-mase sukla-pakshe tritiyayam punya-tithau Budha- 
vasare yathavarttamana-nakshatra-yoga-kara . . • 

Wednesday, 17th April A.D. 1504. 

302. — V. 1557 (?).— Naralai inscription of the reign of the Guhila Rayamalla 
(Rajamalla) ; see below, No. 306. 

303. - V. 1581 Archml. Sun. of India, Vol. V. p. 144, and Plate xli. H. Delhi 

Siwalik pillar inscription of the reign of Sultan Ibrahim Lodi •— 

(L. 1).— samvat 1581 va° Chaitra-vadi 13 Bhauma-dine. 

Tnesday, 21st March A.D. 1525 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 176, No. 117. 

304. V. 1587.— Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 42; BMvnagar Inscr. p. 134. Satrunjaya 

inscription on the seventh restoration of the temple of Pnndarika ; mentions the Sultans of 
Gujarat Mahimuda (Mahmud Baiqara), Madaphara-saha (Muzaffar II.), and Bahadara-saha 
(Bahfidur), and the Guhila rulers of Chitrakuta Kumbharaja, his son Rajamalla, his son 
Samgram asirhha, and [his son] Ratnasimha ; (composed by Lavanyasamaya) 

(L. 2). — samvat 1587 varshe. , . 

(L. 30). — Vikrama-samay-atite tithi-mita-samvatsare ’sva-vasu-varshe I 1587 I S&ke jagat- 
tri-bane 53 Vaisishe(khe) krishna-shashthyam cha II . . • • vahamane Dhanur-lague. 

305. - V. 1585 — Proceedings Beng. As. Soc. 1875, p. 16. Tilbegampur inscription of the 

reign of the emperor Humaum (Humayun) 

Sri-nripa-Vikramaditya-rajyo samvat 1595 Sake 1460 varshe Margasira-mase sukle pakshe 
daiami-tithau Sani- visaro Uttara-nakshatre Vanyana-nama-y6ge. 


The date is irregular. 3 

306.— V. 1597 (for 1557 ?).— Bhilvnagar Inscr. p. 140. 
the Guhila Band Rayamalla (Rajamalla), the 


SOU 


Naralai inscription of the time 
of Kumbhakarna, of Medapate 


(Mew&d), and of his son, the Mahdhmara Prithviraja 

(L. 2). — samvat 1597 varshe Vaisakha-mase | sukla-pakshe shashthyam tithau Sukra- 


(L. 2). — samvat 

vasar^ Punarvasu-riksha-chamdra-yoge 


* The 13th «tK of the bright half of Pausha of V 1556 expired ended on Sunday, 15th December A.D 
1499, and the same tithi of the dark half on Monday, 30th December A.D. 1 99. 

! Ab#Te > ln No - 29 ^. tiie first name sp*'*' ^wf^^ber A P. 1538, with the nakshatra Uttarabhadrapadi and 
.. * Th « in . tende d d ‘7 “V *• onl „ fenced 16 h. 34 m. after mean sunrise. The date of 

kfie y&ga V.riya. ; hut on thi. day the ^ ^“'^^'correapond to Friday, 25th October A.D. 1538. 
a corresponding Persian inscription, published iota., 

G 4 


44 


EPIGRAPHIA IND1CA. 


[VOL. v. 


For V. 1597 the date is irregular; for V. 1557 1 it would regularly correspond to Friday, 
23rd April A.D. 1501. 

307. — V. 1648— Proceedings Beng. As. Soc. 1875, p. 83. Benares inscription of the time 
of the emperor Akavara (Akbar) and his minister Todara : — 

(L. 8). — Kri(ri)tu-nigama-ras-atma(?)-1646-sammite vatsar-ese. 

308. — V. 1850.— Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p.50, No. xii. Satrunjaya Adis vara temple inscription ; 
eulogizes some members of the Tapa gachchha , and mentions the emperor Akabbara (Akbar) ; 
(composed by Hemavijaya). Latest date : — 

(L. 77). — gagana-bana-kala-1650-mite ’bde. 

309. — V. 1651 and 1852.— Ep. Ind. Yol. I. p. 323. Inscription in the temple oi 
Vadipura-Parsvanatha at Anhilvad, containing a pat t avail of the Brihat-Kharatara gachchha . 
date of the reign of the emperor Akabbara (Akbar) : — 

(L. 3). — Patisahi-sri-Akabbara-rajye | sri-Vikrama-nripa-samayat=samvati Iftol 
Marggasirsha-sita-navami-dine Soma-vare | Purvabhadrapad[a # ]-nakshatre. 

Monday, 11th November A.D. 1594; see Ind. Ant . Yol. XX. p. 141, note 31. 

Another date in the same inscription : — 

(L. 47). — Kara-karana-kaya-ku-pramita-sarhvat Altai 41 varshe | Vaisasha(kha)-vadj 
dvada^i-vasare Guru-vare Revati-nakshatre. 

Thursday, 13th May A.D. 1596; see ibid. Yol. XX. p. 141, note 32. 

310. — V. 1652.— Ep. Ind. Yol. II. p. 59, No. xiii. Satrunjaya Jaina inscription of the 
reign of the emperor Akabara (Akbar) : — 

(L. 1). — sri-samvat 1652 varshe Margo (rga)-vadi 2 Soma-vasare Pushya-nakshatre. 

Monday, 8th December A.D. 1595. 2 

311. — V. 1654,— Proceedings Beng . As. Soc. 1876, p. 110. Rohtas inscription of the time 
of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Manasimha 

(L. 1). — samvat 1654 . . . Ambhodh-ishu-ras-emdubhih parimite punyayane hayanc 

Chaitre masi valakshe(ksha)-pakshe(ksba)-valite sbashthyam tithau Sitagoh | vare. 

Monday, 14tb March A.D. 1597. 

312. — Y. 1654. — Bhavnagar Inscr. p. 144. Sadadi inscription of the reign of the 
Mahdrdnd Amarasimhaji [of Mewad] : — 

(L. 3). — sri-nripa- V i kram arka-samay [a*] fc || samvat 1654 va[r*]she Sak[e*] 1520 
pravarttamane mabamamgalya-prada-Yaisasha(kha)-m[a*]se krishna-pakshe dvitiyayam tithau 
Brihaspatta(ti) -vasare. 

Thursday, 13th April A.D. 1598. 

313. — V. 1675.— Ep. Ind. Yol. II. p. 60, No. xv. Satrunjaya Jaina inscription 3 of the 
reign of the emperor Jahangira (Jah&ngir) 

(L. 1).— sam 1675 Yaisakha-sudi 13 tithau Sukra-vare suratana-Mradina-Jahariigi ra ’ 

Savai-vijayirajye || 

Friday, 16th April A.D. 1619. 


1 The year V. 1557 fails in the reign of lUjamalla; already in V. 1587 his grandson Batnasimba was 

reigning ; see above. Nos. 301 and 304 

3 But on this day the moon entered the naJcshatra Pushya only 19 b. 3 m. after mean suDrise, 

3 Other Satrunjaya inscriptions of the game reign and date ibid. p. 61, No. jviii. ; p. 62, No. xvil; p. 63, 
No. xix. and No. xx.; p. 67, No. xxiii. and No. xxiv. ; aad of the same date, p. 60, No. xiv . ; p. 61, No. xvi , and 
p. 67, No, xxii. 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


45 


314.- V .1075 and 1676. Ep. Ind. Vol. II. ? . 64, No. ai. Satrunjaya Jaina inscription of 

S? I ! me /T ° T f I Jasavanta ’ the son of **» Satruaalya, of NavSnapura (Navanagar) in 

idaiiara (Malar Prant) ; (composed by Devasagara) : — 

(L. 1 ) samvat 1675 varslie Sake 1541 pravarttamane | 

T> J,*' L ' .! 9) ' _ Pr * gu kta ' vatsarS ramyel Hadbav-arjjuna-pakshake | Rohini-bha-tritiyayam 
Budnavasara-sariiyuji || 


Wednesday, 7tH April A.D. 1619. 

(L. 25).— samvat 1676 varslie Phalguna-sita-dvitiyayam tithau Daityaguru-vasare Revati- 
nakshatre. 


Friday, 25th February A.D. 1620. 


315. — V. 1880.— Proceedings Beng. As. Soc. 1875, p. S2. Benares inscription of the time 
of a prince Vasudeva of the lunar race : — 

(L. 1 ). — Vy6m-ashta-skat-cbandra-1680-mite subhe=bdau(bde) | mase Suchau Brahma- 
tithau sivayam. 

316. — V. 1683. — Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 68 , No. xxvii. Satrunjaya Jaina inscription of the 
reign of the emperor Jihahgira (Jahangir) ; (composed by Devasagara) : — 

(L. 1 ). — samvat 1683 varshe |) Patisaha-Jihamgira.sri-Salemasaha-bhumamdalakhamdala- 
vijayarajye || 

(L. 33). — samvat 1683 varshe | Magha-sudi trayodasi-tithan Soma-vasare. 

Monday, 30th January A.D. 1626. 

317. — V. 1686 . — Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 72, No. xxx. Satrunjaya Jaina inscription of the 
reign of the emperor Sahajyaham (Shah-Jahan) : — 

(L. 1 ). — samvat 16S6 varshe Vaisakha-sudi 5 Budhe Sake 1551 pravarttamane. 

(L. 3). — Patasaha-sri*Sahajyahaiii-vijayarajye. 

Wednesday, 8 th April A.D. 1620. 

318. — V. 1888.— -Jour. Beng. As. Soc . Vol. VIII. p. 695. Inscription of the Tomara 
Mitrasena, on a “slab removed from above the Kothoutiya gate of the Fort Rohtas”; 
(composed by §ivad 6 va, the son of Krisbnadeva) 

(V. 18). — Sandham bbumindu(ndra)-chudamanir=akrita vasudvandva‘shat-chandra-1688- 
samkhyG varshe sri-Vikramarka-kshitipatbganite samvate sammata-srih | 

In the Tomara family at Gopachala (Gwalior), Virasimha; his son Uddharana; his son 
Virama; his son Ganapati; his son Ilungurasimha (Duhgarasiiiiha ?) ; his son Kirtisiruha ; his 
son Kalyanasahi; his son Manasahi; his son Vikramasahi; his son Ramasahi; his son 
Salivahana ; his sons Syamasahi and Mitrasena (contemporaries of Sahi Jallaladina). 

Compare the Narwar pillar inscription, ibid. Vol. XXXI. p. 404, Plate iv. 

319. — V. 1680 . Ep. Ind. Vol. I/p. 301. Date of tie renewal of the Vadnagar inscription 

of V. 1208 (above, No. 130) 

(L. 45 ).— Chaitra-mase subbre pakshe prat i pad- Guruvasare | Namd-ashta-nripe 1 1689 
varshe prasasti[r*=]likhita punah || 

Thursday, 28th February A.D. 1633.“ 

320. — V. 1717 . AtcIicqoI. Surv . of India , Vol. XXL p. 136. Notice of a Chamba 

inscription, dated (according to Sir A. Cunningham s rubbings) 

(L. 1 ).- sriman-nripati-Vikramaditya-samvatsare 1717 sri-Salivahana-sake 1582 sri-Sastra- 
samvatsare 36 Vaisasha(kha)-vadi trayodasyaiii Vu(bu)dha-vasare | Meshe=rka-samkr[a]ihtau. 

Wednesday, 28th March A.D. 1660; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 152, No. 6 . 


1 Here one syllable is wanting. 

a On this day th efithi of the date commenced 1 h. 25 m. after mean sunrise. 



46 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[VOL. V. 


321. — V- 1718, 1722, and 1732* — Bhdvnagar Inscr. pp. 145 and 150. Rajanagar- 
Kankaroli inscriptions, containing the second and third iargai of Ranachchhoda’s Rdjapratast t- 
mahakdvya. 

322. V. 1724. — Jour. Amer. Or. Soc. Vol. VII. p. 4. Ramnagar inscription of king 

Hridayesa of Gadhadesa and his wife SundaridSvi ; (composed by Jayag&vinda, the son oi 

Mandana) : — A ,, 

(From Sir A. Cunningham’s rubbings, line 64). — Veda-netra-hay-endv-abde Jyesntne 
Vishna-tithau [s]itau II .... samvat 1724 varsh5 Jyeshtha-snddha 11 Sukra- 
vasar[e] || 

The date is irregular; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 369, No. 189. 

The inscription enumerates: Yadavaraya (a monarch in Gadhadesa), Madhavasimha, 
Jagannatha, Raghunatha, Rudradeva, Viharisimha, Narasimhadeva, Sdryabhanu, Vasndeva, 
Gopalasahi, Bhupalasahi, Gbpinatha, Ramachandra, Surat&nasimha, Hariharadeva, 
Krishnadeva, Jagatsimha, Mahasimha, Durjanamalla, Ya^ahkarna, Pratapaditya, 
Yasaschandra, Manoharasimha, Govindasimha, Ramachandra, Karna, Ratnas5na, Kamalanayana, 
Naraharideva, Virasimha, Tribhuvanaraya, Prithviraja, Bharatichandra, Madanasimha, 
Ugrasena, Ramasahi, Tarachandra, Udayasimha, Bhanumitra, Bhavanidasa, Sivasimha, 
Harinarayana, Sabalasimha, Rajasimha, Dadiraya, Gbrakshadasa, Arjunasimha, Samgramasahi ; 
Dalapati, married Durgavati ; 1 their son Viranarayana ; Datapaths younger brother 
Chandras&hi; Madhukarasahi ; Pr6manarayana (Pr^masahi) ; Hpidayesa, married Sundaridevi, 
their daughter (?) MrigavatL 

323. — V. 1770. — Bhavnagar Inscr. p. 155. Udaypur (in Rajputana) inscription of the 
time of the Edna Samgramasimha of Mewad : — 

(L. 20). — Svasti sri-Vikramaditya'rajy6(jem ?)dra-gata-kalatah | gagan-adry-a^va-bhu- 
samkhye (1770) vatsare Sobhan-ahvaye || 10 || Tatha cha Saka~*am£asya Salivihana-bhupateh 
[|*] pamch-aguy-ashti-pramitike 1635 ’svanibhe harasyad6 (?) II 11 II Saumy&yane savitari 
guru-£ukr-6daye subhe | Chaitrasya paurnimayam cha. 

324. — V. 1861.— Proceedings Beng. As. Soc . 1869, p. 204. N&gpur plate of Ratnakum&rikfi, 
the wife of the chief Jayantasimha [of Sambalpur] : — 

Ashadhe Ravi-vasare £ubha-tithau tatrdparage sini 2 samvate= 

shtAdasa-sat£ ekashashty-utfcar-akhyake Vikramaditya-bhupasya ...... Svarbhanu- 

vatsare. 

Perhaps Sunday, 22nd July A.D. 1804, with a lunar eclipse, visible in India ; but this day 
fell by the mean-sign system in the Jovian year Yuvan, and by the southern luni-solar system 
in Raktaksha. 

325. — V. 1874, 1875, and 18W.— Ind. Ant. Vol. IX. p. 193. Nepal inscription of 
Lalitatripurasundaridevi, the widow of the Mahdrdjadhir&ja Banab&hadurasjjha ; of the 
time of his grandson, the Mahardj adhirdja Rajendravikramas&ha 

Veda-sapta-gaj-endu-mite 1874 Vaikrame sake Snchi-£akla-navamyam S6m-anvitay&ih. 

Monday, 23rd June A.D. 1817 ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 35, No. 56. 

Tasminn^eva £ake Bhadra-kpshna-navamyam Sakle. 

Friday, 5th September A.D. 1817 ; see ibid. p. 176, No. 120. 

Bana-svara-naga-bhh-mite 1875 sak 5 Magha-masi(P) tritiyayam Gurau. 

Thursday, 28th January A.D. 1819 (?). 

1 DurgAvati, together with her son ViranArayana, is said to have died by her own band, after a battle with 
jUapba-khAna (Asaf Khan), who had been seut by the emperor Akabara (Akbar) for the purpoee of levy* n & a 
contribution. 

a Bead chandr- 6 parage sati (?). 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


47 


Tasnunn=eva sake Marga-krisbna-pafichamyam BudhA 

Wednesday, 18th November A.D. 1818 ; see ibid. p. 169, No. 96. 

Palala-l&ka-vasu-vasumati-sake Jyeshtha-krishna-dasamyam Ravau, 

Sunday, 7th May A.D. 1820; see ibid. p. 177, No. 121. 

Pritiivinarayanasaka ; his son Simhapratapasaha ; his son Ranabahadurasaha ; his son 
vnrvanayuddliayikraraasaha ; his son Rajendravikramasaha. 

3 a 26 / - V ' 1876 ~~ Archceol. Surv. of India, Vol. III. p. 70, and Plate xxiv. Mas&r 

(Mahasara) Jaina inscription : — 

(L. 1). — sa[m] 1876 Ve(vai)sikha(kha)-siikla 6 Sukre. 

(L. 5). — Amgareja-rajye varttamane Karusha-dese. 

Friday, 30th April A.D. 1819. 

327. V. 1881 t —Ep, Ind . Vol. II. p. 244, and Plate. Pabhosa Jaina inscription : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 1881 mite Margasirsha-^ukla*shashthyaih Sakra-vasare. 

(L. 10). — * . , Amgareja-vahadura-rajye. 

Friday, 26th November A.D. 1824. 

328. — V. 1915 and 1917.— Archceo l. Surv, of India , Vol, XXI. p. 136. Notice of a 
Chamba plate of the Mahdrajddhiraja Srisimhadeva (?), dated (according to Sir A, 
Cunningham’s rubbings) : — 

(L. 1). — srimad-Vikrama[rka]-saihvatsare 191 [5] ^ri-Sastra-samvatsare 34. 

(L. 7). — Mmad-Vikramaditya-samvatsare 1917 Sastra-samvatsare 36. 

(L. 8). — Vikramaditya-samvat 1915 sri-Sastra-samvat 34. 

(L. 18). — Vikramaditya-sariivat 1917 Sastra-samvat 36. 

a. — Undated Inscriptions connected with those under A. 

329. — Gupta, Inscr, p. 146, and Plate. Mandas6r pillar inscription 1 * of the king 
Yas 6 dharman, to whom homage wa 3 rendered by the king Mihirakula ; 8 (composed by Vasula, 
the son of Kakka, and engraved by Govinda 3 4 ), 

330. — Jour. Roy . As. Soc . 1894, p. 4. J6dhpur inscription of the Pratihara Banka 

(L. 21). — samvyat 4 Chaittra-sudi 5 || 

The Brahman Harichandra from his Kshatriya wife Bhadra had four sons, Bh6gabhata, 
Kakka, Rajilla, and Dadda ; Rajilla s son Narabhata- Pella pelli ; his son Nagabhate, married 
Jajjik&d6vi; their sons Tata and Bhdja ; Tata’s son Yaiovardhana ; his son Chanduka ; his son 
Siluka or Bilnka (defeated Bhattikadevaraja) ; his son Jh6ta; his son Bhilladitya ; his son 
Kakka, married Padmini ; their son Bauka (slew Mayura, who had defeated Nandavalla).* 

33L — Ep . Ind . .Vol. I. p. 244, and Plate. Peheva (Pehoa, now Lucknow Museum) 
inscription of the reign of Mahendrapdladeva 5 * * [of Kananj], recording the construction of 
a temple of Vishnu by some members of the Tomara family. In this family there was the 
Rajd Jaula ; a descendant of his, Vajrata, married Mahgaladev! ; their son, Jajjuka, married 
Chandr& and NayikA ; and their sons were Gogga, Purnaraja, and Devaraja. (Composed by 
Mu . . (?), the son of Bhatta R&ma). 

1 Por a fragmentary duplicate copy of this inscription see Oupta Inscr. p. 149, and Plate. 

3 See below. No. 621. 

* He also engraved the Mandasdr inscription, above. No. 4 of V. 589, 

4 Compare the GhapiytUa inscription, above. No. 13 of V. 918. 

* See the da tes in the Siyadftni inscription, above, No. 18 of V. 960, and No, 20 of V. 964.— The British 

Museum possesses two unpublished inscriptions of the reign of Mah§ndrap&Iad$va. One of them ends (in line 8) : 

F*ramabhaMrakawMrdjddh%rdja-paramMvara-iri-Mah&ndrap4ladi*a-rdjyi I tamvat 2 Mdrgga-indi 91 
krit^Syark StharudrSn^Sti fl ; and the other (in line 3): Sri^MahSndrapdladSva^rdjyS samvat 6 (?) JySshfha- 

**di . . (?). 


48 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[vol. v. 


332. — Ep. Ind . Vol. I. p. 122 ; Archceol. Surv . of India , Vol. XXI. Plate xvi. B. 
Khajurahd fragmentary Chandella inscription ; mentions Jejjaka and Vijjaka, 1 and 
Harshadeva ; also Kshitipaladeva 2 [of Kanauj], 

333. — Ind. Ant . YoL XVIII. p. 237; Archceol . Surv. of India , Vol. X. Plate xxxii. 
1, 2, 4-6. Dudahi inscriptions of the Chandrella 3 Devalabdhi, a son of Krishnapa and his 
wife Asarva, and grandson of the Mahdrdjadhirdja Yasovarman. 4 

334. — Ep, Ind . Vol. I. p. 221 ; Archceol. Surv. of India , Vol. XXI. Plate xxi. 
Fragmentary Chandella inscription from Mahoba (now in the Lucknow Museum) ; mentions 
Jeja 5 and his younger brother Vija, Dhahga, his son Ganda, bis son Vidyadhara ( conte mporary (?) 
of Bhdjadeva [of Dhara]), Vijayapala (contemporary of the Chedi Gahgeyadeva), and his son 
Kirtivarman 6 (who conquered Lakshmikarna, i.e . the Chedi Karna). 

335. — Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 197. Mau (now Calcutta Museum) fragmentary inscription of 
the Chandella Madanavarmadeva ; mentions [Dhahga], his son Ganda, his son Vidyadhara, 
his son Vijayapala, his son Kirtivarman, his son Sallakshanavarman, his son Jayavarman, 
Sallakshanavarman’s younger brother Prithvivarman, and Prithvivarman’s son Madanavarman. 7 

336. — Jour. Beng. As. Soc . Vol. XVII. Part I. p. 317 ; Archceol. Surv. of India, Vol. XXI. 
p. 39. Kalahjar fragmentary Chandella inscription ; apparently mentions Vijayapala, the Chedi 
Karna, Jayavarman, Madanavarman, his younger brother Pratapavarman, and Viravarman . 8 

337. — Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 333 ; Archceol. Surv. of India , Vol. XXI. Plate xv. Ajaygadh 
rock inscription of the time of the Chandella Bhojavarman ; gives an account of some 
members of the Vastavya clan of Xayasthas, and mentions the Chandellas Ganda, Kirtivarman, 
Paramardin, Trailokyavarman, and Bhojavarman. 9 

338. Prof. BendalPs Journey , p. 82, and Plate. Ar (near Udaypur in Rajpntana) 
fragmentary inscription, containing the name of the [Guhila] king Slaktikum&ra . 10 

339. — Bhavnagar Inscr. p. 72, and Plate. Udaypur (in Rajpntana) fragmentary 
inscription, containing the names of the [Guhila] kings Saktikumara and Suchivarman. 

340. — Ep. Ind . Vol. I. p. 233, and Plate. Udaypur (in Gwalior) fragmentary inscription 
of the Paramara rulers of Malava ; mentions, in the lineage of the hero Paramara, 
Upendraraja ; his son Vairisimha [I.] ; his son Siyaka ; his son Vakpati [I.] ; his son 
Vairisimha [II.] Vajrata ; his son Harsha (defeated the [Rashtrakuta] king Khcttiga) ; his 
son Vakpati [II.] (conquered Yu vara ja [II.] of Tripuri) ; his younger brother Sindhuraja ; 
his son Bhojaraja (at war with Indraratha, Toggala (?), and [the Chaulukya] Bhima [I.]) ; and 
Uday&ditya . 11 * 

341. Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 350; Ind. Inscr. No. 52. Ujjain (now Royal As. Soc.’s) 
first plate only of the Paramara Mahdrdjadhirdja Jayavannac^eva , 18 issued from 
V ardhamanapura. 13 

Udayaditya; Naravarman; Yasovarman; Jayavarman. 


1 They are called Jayasakti and Ytjayaiakti in other inscriptions; see, e.g, t above, No 35 of V. 1011. 

* See above, No. 31 of V. 1005. * This is an earlier form of the name Chandilla. * 

4 See above, No. 35 of V. 1011. 

6 After him JejdhhuJeti ( JiydkabhuJcti , see No. 176) was named. He is the Jayaidkti (JSjjdka), and Viia 

the VijayasaJcti ( YijjdJca ) of other inscriptions. 

9 See above, No. 76 of V. 1154. 

7 See above, from No. 101 of V. 1186 to No. 142 of V. 1219. 

8 See above, from No. 226 of V. 1317 to No. 242 of V. 1342. 

9 See above, No. 247 of V. 1345. io See above. No. 48 of V. 1034. 

u See above. No. 68 of V. 1116, and No. 70 of V. 1137. 

15 The grant may be assigned to the time between V. 1192 and 1200. 

13 But. when the grant was made, the king was at Chandra purl 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


49 


3-1-.— E}>. Ind. Vol. I. p. 215, and Plate. Jitansi (now Lucknow Museum) fra^mentarv 
inscription of Sallakshanasiriiha (?) ; l mentions Kanyakubja ; the chiefs Sidhuka and 
Mamaka (r) ; Lakkhata and Rajahpala ; Rajaladevi ; [the Chandella] Eirtivarman • 
Oanapala(r) ; [the Paramara] Udayaditya of Avanti ; Nrisimha ; Hira or Hiramsu(?)' and 
oallaksbanasiiiika. J 1 


343.— Bhavnagar Insr. p. 206. Ratn Jpur (in Marwad) fragmentary inscription of the reign 
of the Chaulukya Mahdrdjddhirdja Kumarapaladeva ; 2 contains an order of PunapakshadSva 
or his queen, the Mahdrajni Girijadevi, and mentions a Maharaja Rayapaladeva. 

^ 34-4 — Bhavnagar Inscr. p. 214. Cambay unfinished inscription of the Chaulukya (Vaghela) 
Visvaiadeva: Arnoraja married Salakshanadevi ; their son Lavanaprasada, married 
Madanadevi; their son Viradhavala, married Vayajaladevi ; their son Visvaiadeva. 3 

34S- — Archvoh Sitrv. of West. India, Vol. II. p. 159, and Plate xxx.; Ant . Remains Bo . 
Pres. p. 302. Girnar fragmentary inscription of the Chudasama chiefs; 4 * mentions, in the 
Vadava family, Maudalika [I.], his son Navaghana, his sen Mahipala [I.], Shangara 
(Khangara), Jayasimha, Mokalasiiiiha, Melaga, Mahipala [II.], and his son Mandalika [II.]. 


B. — Inscriptions dated according to the Saka Era. 

346. — s. 400.-— Ind. Ant. Vol. X. p. 253, and Plate. Bombay As. Soc.’s (spurious) plates 
of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Dharaaenadeva, the son of Guhasena (who is called heiv) the sou of 
Bhattarka (Bhatarka) ; issued from Valabhl: — 

(L. 23). — Sakanripa-kal*atita-saihvachchha(tsa)ra-sata-chatushtaye Vaisakhy[&*]rh 

paurnnamasi. 6 

Compare below, No. 468 of G. 252. 

347. — §. 400 .— hid. Ant. Vol. VII. p. 03, and Plate. Umeta (spurious) 6 plates of the 
Gurjara Mahdrdjddhirdja Dadda II. Prasantaraga, the son of Jayabhatta (Jayabbata) 
\ itariiga who was the son of Duda (Dadda) I. ; issued from (the camp before the gates of; 
Bharukachchlra : — 

(L. 22). — Sakanripa-kal-atica-saihvachchba(tsa)ra-sata-chatushtaye Vaisakba- 

paurnnamasy am . 

Compare below, Nos. 395 and 396 of K. 330 and 385. 

348. — S. 415 . — .bid. Ant. Vol. XVII. p. 199, and Plate. Bagumra (spurious) plates of the 
Gurjara Mahdrdjddhirdja Dadda It. Prasantaraga, the son of Jayabhatta (J.iyabhat a) Vitaraga 
who was the sou of Dada (Dadda) I.; issued from (the camp before the gates of) 
Bharakachcbba : — 

(L. 21). — Sakanripa-kal-atita-sariiva[ehchha(tsa)]ra-sata-ckatushtaye paiiiehadas-adkike 
Ye( jye)shth- [ a]mavasy[ a*] -su(au)ryagrahe. 

There was no solar eclipse on any of the possible equivalents of the date ; see ibid. Vol. 
XXIV. p. 11, No. 170. 


1 Of about the I2th or 13th century A.D. 

* The inscription is similar to No. 133 of V. 1209, and in its concluding lines has some names which also occur 
in the last lines of that inscription. 

* See above, No. 222 of V. 1311, and No. 225 of V. 1317. 

* See above, No. 276 of V. 1445, and No, 284 of V. 1473. 

4 Head paurnnamdtgdm. 

* See i*d. oL XIII. p. 72, VoL XVII. p. 185 and Vol. XVIII. p. 92. 


E 



50 


EP1GRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V* 


349. — s. 417 . — Ind. Ant . Vol. XIII. p. 116, and Plate. Ilao (spurious) plates of the 
Gurjara Mahdrdjadhirdja Dadda II. Prasantaraga, the son of Jayabhata Vitaraga who was 
tbe son of Dada (Dadda) I. ; issued from (tbe camp before tbe gates of) Bbarukacbchha : — 

(L. 18). — Sakonripa-kal-atlta-sari’vacbcbba(tsa)ra-sata-cbatushtaye saptudns-adbike 

Ye(jye) s htb-[a*] ra [a*Jva s y[a*3-su(su) r yag r ahe. 

There were solar eclipses on tlio new-moon days of tbe and tbe amlnta 

Jyaishtha of S. 417 expired, corresponding to tbe 10th May and the 8th June A.D, 405, 
but neither eclipse was visible; see Hid . Yol. XXIV. p. 10, Xo. 165. 

350. — S. 631. — Ind. Ant. Yol. XYIII. p. 234, and Plate. Multai (in tbe Central Provinces) 
plates of tbe Rashtrakuta Xandaraja-Yuddhasura : — 

(L. 21). — K art t i k; i - pa ur a ii am a sy a i h . . 

(L. 20). — Sakakala-samvatsara-^atOsbu sbatcbbv(tsv)=ckatri[in # ]s-otlai , e^bn. 1 2 3 

Iu the Rasbtrakuta lineage, Durgauija ; bis son Govindaraja ; bis son (?) Svamikaiaia; 
bis son Nandaraja-Yuddhasura. 

351. — S. 726 (?).— Ep. Ind. Yol. I, p. 112. Baipiath inscription (second prasa*tv) of the 
time of tbe Bdjdnaka Lakshmanachandra of Kiragratna, and the reign of the king 
Jayachchandra of Trigarta (Jalandhara) ; (composed by Rama, tbe son of Bhringaka) : — 

(L. 33). — Sakakala-gat-abdab 7 [26]. 

The inscription mentions the following Rljdnalcas of Kfragiama: Ivanda ; his son 
Buddha; his (?) son Vigraha ; bis son Brahman; his son Dombaka; his son Jihuvana; hie 
son Kalhana ; his son Bilhana, married Lak^hanika, the daughter of king Hriduyachandra 
of Trigarta ; tbeir sons Rama and Lakshmana (Lakshmanachandra, who manned Mayatalla). 

352. — S. 784.—* Deogadh Jaina pillar insoiption of tbe reign of tbe Mahdrdjadhirdja 
Bhojadeva [of Kananj], and of his feudatory, the MahcLsdnianta Vishnurama, governor of 
Lu'icbchhngira (Doogndb) ; see above, Xo. 14 of V. 919. 

3r>3. S. 836. Ind. Ant. Yol. XII. p. 193. Hadclala places of the Chapa Maht- 
s< ' t/iUfi 'ad upafi Dharanivaraha, a feudatory of the j Udj»hlhirdja Mahipaladeva^ issued from 
Yard ha mana 

(L. 25). — p^Apt-odagayano-raahaparvvani . 

(L. > V ) . — y*<l'n-somvat 836 Pausba-sudi 4 uttarayane || 

23rd r A.D. 9U; s-e Hid. Vol. XXIII. p. 114, Xo. 6. 

In tbe Chapa family, Yikramarka; bis son Addaka ; bis son Pulakesi ; bis son 
Dhruvabbota . liis younger brother Dharamvaraha. 

354. S. 040. U i"v r Zf-Jschrijt . Yol. VII. p. 8$. Notice of the Surat plates of tbe reign 
of tbe Chalukya 4 Mal^mandal h ara Kirtiraja of Latadesa, the son of G6ggiraja and grandson 
of Barappa vho the son of Xirabarka ; recording a grant which was made by the 
Rashtrakuta chief Samburaja, tbe son of Amritaraja and grandson of Kuridaraja. 

355. S. 960 .— Ep. huh Yol. I\. p. 190. Date of tbe coronation of the Gauga 
Malidr tjddh irlja Vajrahastadeva, lord cf Crikalmga, as giv'en in bis Nada^am plates of 
S. 979 (below, Xo. 357) : — 

(L. 34). Viyad-ritu-nidbi-samkhyani jati Sakfivdarbda)-sofurb6 dinakrid-Vri Anbhn- 
stha 5 BA(r6)bini2bh[e*] s[u]-lagne [(•] Dbanusbi cln sita-pakdio Sutyya-varo tn'iCuiYyaj- 
yuji sakala-dharitrim rakshi turn (turn) yf.(jo»“blupi(&bi;ktah II 


1 Head Q trimsnJ~vttar"shv. 

2 For the first pfiZrnU of BaijnVJ: ?e* below, No. 500 of H v j^ankik/C ^ ir q) 

3 According to Prof. Buhler, h* have be* n one of tbe HnAdLunkU uf GirnAs 

* Below, in No. 356, we have Chan, nky* instead of Cud 

5 Head e J leriti Vrishabha-stht. 


Junlg.iUb 



Appendix.] INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 51 


With tins reading the date is irregular ; but for the month of Mesha (instead of 
Vrishabha) it corresponds to Sunday, 9th April A.D. 1038. 1 

356. — S. 972. — huL Ant. VoL XII. p. 201, and Plates, Surat plates of the Chaulukya 2 
Trildchanapala of Latadesa : — 

(L. 52). — Sake nava-sa($a)tair=ynkte dvisaptaty-adhike tatha Vikrite vatsare Panshe 
mas4 pakshe cha tama(ma)se || Amavasya-titbau surya-parvvariy- Angara-varake. 

Tuesday, 15th January A.D. 1051 ; a solar eclipse, visible in India; see ibid. Vol. XXIII. 
p. 124, No. 65. 

In the Chaulukya lineage (descended from the mythical Chauiukya and a Rashtrakuta 
princess from Kanyakubja) there was Barappar/ija; his son GogginVja ; his son Kirtiraja ; his 
son Yatsariija : his son Triloehanapati (Trilochanapala). 

357. — S. 979. — Ejp. hid. Yol. 1Y. p. 189, and Plate. Nad a gam (in the G ah jam district) 
plates of the Grnga Mahdrdjtidhirdja Vajraliastadeva,* lord of Trikalinga, issued from 
Haling anagara : — 

(L. 53). — aja-giri'nidhbSak[a # ]vde(bde) | Ph[a*]lgun-amala-pakshe ) dvadasyam= 
Aditya-yare | 

Sunday, 8th February A.D. 1058. 

In the lineage of the Gangas of Trikalinga there was (1.) the Maharaja Gnnamaharnava : 
(2.) his son Vajrahasta (reigned 44 years) ; (3.) his son Guudama (3 ys.) ; (4.) his younger 
brother Kamarnava (35 ys.); (5.) his younger brother Vinayaditya (3 ys.) ; (6.) Kamarnavas 
son Vajrahasta- Aniyahkabbima (35 ys.) ; (7.) his eldest son Kamarnava (| y.) ; (8.) his younger 
brother Gundama (3 ys.) ; (9.) his brother, from a different mother, Madhu-Kamarnava (19 ys.) ; 
(10.) Vajrahasta, the son 4 of Kamarnava (7.) from Vinayamahadevi of the Vaidumba family. 

358. — S. 999. — hid. Ant. Yol. XVIII. p. 163. Date 5 of the coronation of the Gahga 
Mahdrdjddhirdja Anantavarman-Chodagangadeva, lord of Trikalinga, as given in his 
Yizagapatam plates of S. 1003 (below, No. 359) : — 

(L. 30).— Sak-avde(bde) Nanda-randhra^grabagana-ganite Kumbha-samsthe dinese sukle 
pakshe tri ( tr i ) tiy a-y uj i Ravija-dine Reyati-bhe Nriyugme lagme(gne). 

Saturday, 17th February A-D. 1078; see ibid . Yol. XXIII. p. 132, No. 111. 

359. — g t 1003. Ind. Ant. Yol. XVIII. p. 162. Yizagapatam (now Madras Museum) 

plates of the Gahga Mahdrdjddhirdja Anantavarinaji-Chodagangadeva, 6 lord of Trikalinga, 
issued from Kalinganagara : — „ 

(L. 40). — Haimnayana-viyad-gagana-chandra-ganito Sak-avdAbde) Mcshamasa-knehn- 

ashtamyam-Aditya-vare. 

Sunday, 4th April A.D. 10S1 ; see ibid . Yol. XXIII. p. 13-, No. 112. 

Genealogy as far as (10.) Vajrahasta as in No. 357 ; (he reigned 33 years) ; (11.) his son 
Rajaraja (8 ys.) ; (12.) his son, from Rajasundan, the daughter of Rajendrachola, 

Anantavarman-Chodaganga. 

360. — S. 1040.— Ind. Ant. Yol. XVIII. p. 166. Yizagapatam (now Madras Museum) 
plates of the Gahga Rdjddhirdja Maharaja Anantavarman-Cliodagangadeva, hud of 
Trikalinga, issued from Sindffrapora 

(L. 114) . — viyad-udadhi-kh-emdu* ganiteshu Saka.vatsareshu punye=hani. 


J On this da y the third tithi of the bright half commenced 1 A h. 40 m„ the nakshatra was Udhini Irons . ' t 
14 b., and the lag no, Dhanna from about 15 b,, after mean sunrise. 

J Above, in No. 354, we have Chdlukya instead of Chaalvkya. 

> Compare above, No. 355, and below, No. 635. ! Accord.ng to No 360, the son o. 3. .u.ina... 

• The same date we have in 1. 93 of the Viiajapitam plates of S. 1040, and iu 1. -A '.am 

plates of S. 1057 (below, No«. 360 find 361). ^ ee ^ K 



52 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. *. 


Genealogy from Ananta (Vishnu), through the Moon, to Gangeya ; from him to Kolahala, 
the founder of Kdlahalapura in Gahgavadi, and his son Virdchana ; then, after 81 kings of 
Kdlahalapura, Virasimha, who had five son3, Kamarnava [I.], Danarnava, Gunarnava [I.], 
Marasimha, and Vajrahasta [I.]. (1.) Kamarnava [I.], after defeating Baladitya, took Kalinga 
(and reigned at Jantavura 36 years) ; (2.) his younger brother Danarnava (40 ys.) ; (3.) his 
son Kamarnava II. (reigned at Nagara 50 ys.) ; (4.) his son Ranarnava (5 ys.) ; (5.) his son 
Vajrahasta II. (15 ys.) ; (6.) his younger brother Kamarnava III. (19 ys.); (7.) his son 
Gun&rnava [II.] (27 ys.) ; (S.) his son Jitanknsa (15 ys.) ; (9.) his brother’s son Kaligalankusa 
(12 ys.) ; (10.) his father’s brother Gundama [I.] (7 ys.) ; (11.) his younger brother Kamarnava 
IV. (25 ys.) ; (12.) his younger brother Vinayadifcya (3 ys.) ; (13.) the sou of Kamarnava IV., 
Vajrahasta IV. (35 ys.); (14.) his son Kamarnava V. (| y.) ; (15.) his younger brother 
Gundama IL (3 ys.) ; (16.) his brother, from a different mother, Madhu- Kamarnava V I. (19 ys.) ; 
(17.) his 1 son Vajrahasta [V.] (30 ys.) ; (18.) his son Rajaraja (8 ys.), married the Ch5da 
princess Rajasundari; (19.) his eldest son Anantavarman-Chddaganga. 

361 . s. 1057.— Ind. Ant . Vol. XVIII. p. 173, Vizagapatam (now Madras Museum) 

plates of the Gahga Mahdrdjddkirdja Anantavarman-Chodagangadeva, lord of Trikalihga, 
issued from Kalihganagara : — 

(L. 32). — sr[i*]-Sak-avde(bde)shu muni-sa(sa)ra-viyach-chham(cham)dra-ganiteshu 

Vrischika-mase. 

Genealogy as in No. 359. 

362. — S. 1059.— Ep. Ind . Vol. II. p. 333. Gdvindpur inscription of the poet Gang&dhara ; 
mentions the Mana 2 princes Varnam&na and Rudramana of Magadha : — 

(L. 34). — Nand-endriy-ftbhr-eridu-same Sak-avde(bde) . . . Saka 1059. 

The inscription treats of the Maga or Sakadvipiya Brahmans Damddara, his son Chakrap&ni, 
his sons Manoratha and Da^aratha, Manoratha’s sons Gangadhara (who composed this 
inscription 3 ) and Mahidhara, and Da&xratha’s sons Harihara and Purushott&ma. 

363. — S. 1004.— Jour. Beng. As . Soc. Vol. LXV. Part I. p. 242. Date 4 of the coronation of 
the Ganga Kamarnava of Kalinga, the son and successor of Anantavarman-Chodaganga, as 
given in the Kendupatna plates of Narasirhhadtva II. of S. 1217 (below, No. 367) : — 

(V. 37). — V eda-rttu-vy 6ma-chandra-pramita- Saka-samjbprapta-kale dine^e Chapa-sthe= 
nya-grah-aughe va(ba)lavati. 

364. — S. 1107.— Zeitschr. D. Morg . Ges. Vol. XL. p. 43; Ep . Ind . Vol. V. p. 183, and 
Plates. Assam (now Bengal As. Soc.’s) plates of Vallabhadeva 

(L. 40). — Sake naga-nabh6-rudraib samkhyate ch=6ttarayane ! 8u(6u)bh3 6ubh6 kshan5 
rasau sa(sa)ste. 

In the lnnar race, Bbaskara ; his son Rayarideva-Traildkyasimha ;• bis son Udayakarna- 
Nihsankasimha, married Ahiavadevi; their son Vallabhadeva. 

365. — S. II4I.— As, lies. Vol. IX. p. 403 ; Colebrooke’s Misc. Essays, Vol. II. p. 242, and 
Plate. Tipura (Tipperah) plate of Harikaladeva Ranavankamalla (?) ; — 

(L. 22). — Sakanripater=atita abdah 1141 Ranavankamalla- srimat (?) Harikaladeva padan&m 
saptadasa-samvatsare’bhilikhyamaneyatr±anken=api samvat 17 suryya-gaty& Phalgnna-din^ 26. 5 

1 According to No. 357, the son of Kamarnava V. According to Noe. 359 and 361, Vajrahasta V. reigned 33 
years, 

2 Compare below, No. 623, 1 He also composed a poem, entitled Advaitaiata. 

4 The same date we have in the Puri plates of Narasimhad5va IV. of S, 1305 aud 1316 (below. Nos, 369 

and 370), 

5 The published text has rurya-gatyd tula-din & 26. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


53 


366. — §. 1165. — Jour . Beng. As . Soc. YoL XLIII. Part I. p. 322, and Plate xviii. 
Chittagong plate of Damodara :— 

(L. 1).— Sak-abdat 1165. 

In the lunar race, Purushottama ; his son Madhusudana; his son Vasudeva; his son 
D&modara. 

367. — S. 1217 (for 1218).— Jour. Beng. As, Soc. Yol. LXY. Part I. p. 235, and Plates. 
Kendupataa (in Orissa) plates of the 21st anka - year of the Ganga king Narasimhadeva II. 
[of Kalinga], issued from Remnna : — 

(PI. y. b , 1. 16). — saptadasottai'a-dvadasasata-Sakavatsare chaturddasabhuvaDadhipaty- 
adi-virudavali-yirajamanah H 1 sri-vira-Narasimhadeva-mahipatih svarivjyasy=aikavimsaty- 
anke=bhilikhyamane Simha-sukla*shashthyaiii Soma-vare. 

For S. 1217 the date is irregular; for S. 1218 expired it corresponds to Monday, 6th 
August A.D. 1296. 

Genealogy from Vishnu, through the Moon, to Gangeya; and from him to Kolahala 
Anantavarman who founded Koiuhalapura ; then many other kings. After them, Kamarnava 
and four others (see No. 360) took possession of Kalinga. Descended from Kamarnava there 
was, in this Ganga lineage, (1.) Vajrahasta, who married Nahgama ; (2.) his son Rajaraja [I.], 
married Rajasundari ; (3.) their son Chodaganga (reigned 70 years) ; (4.) his son, from 
Kasturikamodini, Kamarnava (was anointed king in S. 1064, 2 and reigned 10 years) ; (5.) 
Chodagahga’s son, from Indira of the solar race, Raghava (15 ys.) ; (6.) Chodaganga’s son, 
from Chandralekha, RajarAja [II.] (25 ys.) ; (7.) his younger brother Aniyahkabhima 3 (10 ys.) ; 
(8.) his son, from Baghalladevi, Rajaraja [III.] (17 ys.) ; (9.) his son, from Mankunadevi (?) 4 
of the Chain kya family, Anangabhima (34ys. 5 ) ; (10.) his son, from KasturadSvi, Narasimha [I.] 
(33 ys.) ; (11.) his son, from the Halava king’s daughter Sitadevi, Bhanudeva [L], married 
J&kaliadevi of the Chalukya family, and died in the 18th anka- year of his reign; (12.) his son 
Narasiiixha [II.]. 

368. — S. 1304.— M&chad! (near Alvar) inscription of the time of the Mahdrdj ddh trdj a 
Gogadeva, the son of Asaladeva, of the Vadagujara family, and of the reign of Sultan 
Peroja Sahi (Firoz Shah) ; see above, No. 272 of Y. 1439. 

369. — S. 1305. — Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Yol. LXIY. Part I. p. 136. Pun (in Orissa) plates 
of the 8th arifca-year of the Ganga king Narasimhadeva IV. [of Kalinga], issued from 
V&ranasi-kataka (?) : — 

(Pl. vi. a, 1. 13). — Saka-nripater=atiteshu pamch-adhikeshu trayodasa-sata-samva- 

chhchha(tsa)reshu chaturdda&[bhu*]dha(va)nMhipat-ityMi-rirudavali-virajamAnab srimAn 
Nrisimhadeva-nripateh 6 sva-rajyasya asbt-anke abhilikhyamane Chaitr5 masi sukle pakshe 
tray6dasy&m(4yam) tithau Ravi-vare. 

For S. 1305 expired and the solar month Chaitra the date corresponds to Sunday, 
6th March A.D. 1384. 

Genealogy as far as (12.) Narasimha [II.] as in No. 367 ; (he reigned 34 years) ; (13.) his 
son, from ChMadevi, Bhanudeva [II.]* (24 ys.) ; (14.) his son, from Laksbmi, Narasimha [III.] 
(24 ys.) ; (15.) his son, from Kamaladevi, Bhanudeva [III.] (26 ys.) ; (16.) his son, from 
liiradevi of the Chalukya family, Narasimha [IV.]. 


i Read °mdnah irU. * See above, No. 363. * See below. No. 670. He is also called Anangabhima . 

4 According to the Purl plates, below, Nog. 369 and 370, the name is Sadgunadevi or Ounadevt. 

* According to the Puri plates, 33 years. a Read •nripat\h. 

7 He was at war with Gayasadina (GhiyAs-ud-din Tughlnq, A.D. 1321*25), 



54 


EPIGRAPH l A INPICA. 


[Vox-. V. 


gyO s. 1316 (for 1317). — JGar. Bena. As- Soc- Vol. LXIV. Part I. p. 151. Pari (in 

Oi-issa) pUtl of flit- 2;ii..l .inJ 2:3rd anka-ye-as of the Ganga king Narasimhadeva IV. 

[of Kalihgul isattoil fn>m Vamuasi-kataka (tj : — 

(Pi. \ i, a, l. l'J;.— ft ika-nripater=atitesliu sh6dash (s)-adhikeshn iruyddaia-sata- 

dariiviit-aieOiu' thiiturdUGabhuvanadLipat-ityadi-viraclavali-virajamAnah sii-vira- 

HriMmLadcvn-nGpatih ava-ra jj asya dvaviihsaty-auke abhilikhyamaue \'iohh;t sukla 
okada^yam Mamgala-vare. 

Por 9. 13 id the date is irregular; for S. Pi 17 expired it corre.-fponds to Tuesday, 23rd 
November A.D. 131*5; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XXV. p. 285. 

(Pi. vi. b } i. 1). — asmin rajye trayovimsaty-anke Viehha dvitiya-krishna-saptami 
Pandit a- vare. 

Wednesday, 2-nd November A.D. Id 9b ; see ibid, p. 285.^ 

(PI. vi. b, L 5), — e srahi Miua-sarhkrauti krisluni ekadaii Sani-vaitk 

Saturday, 2ifch February A.D. 1397 ; see ibid. p. 2b6. 

Genealogy as in No. 369. 

371- -S. 1321. — Bibar (Darbhahga) (spurious?) plate of the MahurtijdJhiraja Siva- 
simhadeva, the son i.f Devasiruha, [of Mithiiaj, recording a grant which was made in favour 
of the poet Vidyapati; see below, No. 578 of Lakshmanasena-s. 293 (?;. 

372. S. 1322 (for 1323)- — Raypur inscription of the time of the Mahar d jci dhir i*j a 

Brahmadeva of Rayapura, and bis minister, the Niiyaka Hajinijadeva; see above, No. 280 
of V. 1458. 

373^ 1334 (for 1338).— Khalari inscription of tlio time of the Kalachuti (Kalnchuri) 

Haribrahmadeva (Brahmadeva) of Khalvatika; see above, No. 283 of V. 1470 (for 147 1) * 

374. — S. 1349 . — Deogadh Jaina, inscription of the time of Sahi Alambhaka; see above, 
No. 285 of V. 1481. 

375. —. S. 1358. — Dedgaclh Jain a inscription ; see above, No. 287 of V. 1493. 

37$. — s. 1377. — Ind. Ant, Y r ol. XX. p. 391, and Plate. Kisfcna district plates 1 of Gana- 
deva of Kondavidu, a contemporary and tributary (?) of Kapila-Gajapati of Kataka (Cuttack 
in Orissa) : — 

(L. 29). — Sake sailaduramgam-agni-sasi-samkhyate Yuv-abde £ubhe 
Bhadrapaao vidhJr^gralia-dine. 

The date is irregular; see ibid. Yol. XXIV. p. 17, No. 198. 

The inscription eulogizes, as reigning at the time, Kapilendra-Gajapati (Kapila-Kumbhi- 
raja) of Kataka, of the s.dar race. In his race (?) there was Cbandradeva; his son Gubideva- 
patra;his sou Ganadeva (surnatned Rautaraya or Rahuttaraya) of Kondavidu. 

377, — S. 1420. — A'hllij well inscription of the Rini Rudadevi, the wife of the Yaghela 
Virasiriiha of Dandahid5-a; of the reigu of the ‘Patasaha* Mahamuda (Sult&n Mahmud 
Baiqara) ; see above, No. 299 of Ashadhadi-V. 1555. 

375 , — s. 1421. — Ahmadubad vrell inscription of Bai Harira, of the reign of the 
« PAtu^aiu ’ Makamuda (Sultan Mahmud Baiqara) ; see above. No. 300 of V. 1556. 

379. — S. 1426. — Nagari (near Chitor) inscription of the GuLila Rajamalla of Medapata 
(Ale wad) and his wife Sringaradevi ; see above, No. 301 of Y. 1556 and 1561. 

330. — s. 1453. — Satrunjaya inscription on the seventh restoration of the temple of 
Pundarika; see above, No. 304 of V, 1587. 


1 Three > ** the fourth pl.ite, together with any otksr plate that way have followed it, are lost/* 



55 


AriFVfv] INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


"'I* Tilbeg.mipnr inscription of tlio reign of the emperor Hnmaum 

fflumayfin); sec above, No. O'.’S of V. 15P5. 

S*wiadi inscription of tJie reign of the Mahdrdiul Amarasirbhaji fof 
Mcvtad] ; see above. No, 312 of V. 1034. 

Satrunjaya Jaina inscription of tlie time of Jasavanta, the sou of the 
I etna Satru^iya. of Xuvinapura (Navauagar) ; see above. No. 314 of V. 1675 ami 1676. 

3S4.— S. 1551. Satrunjaya Jaina inscription of the reign of the emperor Sahajyaham 
(Shah-Jahan) ; see above, No. 317 of V. lt>80. 

385. S. 1582. — Notice of a Chamba inscription; see above, No. ->29 of V. 171?. 

386. — S. 1635 — Udaypur (in fiajputana) inscription of the time of the Itdn.i 
Samgramasimha of Monad; see above, No. 323 of V. 1770. 


C. — Inscriptions dated according to the Kalacburi-Chedi Era. 


387.— K. (?) 174. 1 

— U'fjna / X * 7\ p. 

3 1 S, an,! 

riat- . 

Km n 

r llAj p! .T M -f tb. 

* Af,,*. 

Jayanatlm, j — ued Icon 

r r h< — 







(L. 2 J ), — “Sftmb.iT >. 

irn ■=•» j \ < b *,t n >* 

•r 


\x!-;» I n *1 - 

-iru-a \ 

.1 . l.M- ' .1 

diva -A 

asy a lii cl i v a s a - p u i v v ay an 

i. 







(Ti. 2 1 ).— * samba t* 

I OH 7»j 4 4 -L»dh 1 *1 

i 10 4 

I 





The MahJt'dj't Oghadeva ; his s'»n. (; .»* 

.» K • - 

l’"' 

• dev l. tl»‘ 

. 

■d i Km' ..n*,,. 


from Jay;ts\ umini, the 

\f.i bn t l j’i J.iy tx 

Ol( {I . 

h 

i" - -u. 

(.-ii 

Hapuvi-'.v th^> 

V'W ,;. t 

Vyhgbra ; bis son, from 

\ i jl lit Ti h ,*i. i b • > V 

J '* - 1 

• .r 

r. ' M-fiiii 




368.— K. (?) 177. - 

- r Ti p f ‘i 0 ]> i 

1 7w, ' ■ 


j’*.,,,. 

K ‘ 


’ • \ . f , , • 

Jayanatha, issued fr<*m 

i:. bilmkaliM • — 







(L. 21). — samva^m 

a s,j ’■» <pt ptafy. 

o,’t < ‘i ' 

1 r t 

' ( 'Ii dtu 

•lllcl-.,- 

] - \ j - ( * ■'< i : : 

*r,A 

Genealogy as in No, 

, 3 ">7. 







3Si>. — K. (?) 193. - 

^ e- 

] *'n 

7 1 

Pk.^j 

F’-dh 

oh.tcj : ♦} . 

” ‘ ’ r. * t ; 

Sarvanutha. F-nt‘d }%,.»»« 

r h-ivih ,ipi 







( Ij. 29). — J 

l i ti *•; ti i n a 

f 1 ’ t * t 't 

1 r* 

tir-;' 

r -o i 

“ ‘ ‘ O *< 'to* 


Genealogy as far as , 

hi r , uii uliii as iv No. 

J 

:Tb7 . ! 

ins 

S'Jti, t ?•' 

•Mi • i 

’ i' ■ -o\ j * i i *- * 

v / : ' ; , 

Sarvn r.;‘>( l.n. 








290 - K - (*) 197/ — 

- G'7 t < 1 hi*‘'r, p. 1* 

to 

,] 

Pinto ! 

Kb..h - 

• ,i‘d jA 1 ' ’ J 

V [Of ti- 

M '/diVvid Sar van * \ t h n J : - 

- 







(In hr.iho 

It - t J. . \ *1 Jl" , »t V* 


4 

-vn i ii j v 

; Fa-.C' 

r , t*‘t ’ i *•-,{! .ir**. 


i . — k *>(»7 .— Jjh 

/ h .. . i \ S' ■ \ v >1 

XV T. 

p, 

'<7 r. 

i V 

. O , T-l , 

t ' 

ps I.t the 

}f<lh <> r> ' I't 13.U li’OSr >m < ot 

t h»» 4 1 , .r t v> 1 

5 -'k . 


.A. 

1 fp*M 

\, 


( Ti. ). - -mil 2/" 7 

\.-uo.kh l* n ; ’* 

■ j • i i 


, / , i « 

*■ 



392. — K. (?) 214,’- 

- G' r *: 1 -*v p. 1 

*b'. ;u 

1 1 

PGv. 

Kb 

; f »bo 

Mi! v;;., 

9 a rv anat ha, i»uul from 

Ufb.-lr»k*.lp. -- 







(Ti. 27* =;:i[rii # 1 vats 

;ira*S‘if d \ ;» v'» »•“»' ' < 

■V 1 1 


- r ' T 

V*. 


‘At 

Grmeiih vry in No. ! 

TS>, but Mnriir d-wl- 

\ i i > ! 

3- 1 

' ^ : i ' 1 ■ 


i i. 


1 fir- I *./ f v..i. X ! \ 

1 -t . . * 

p i-7 r ' Ket! «* r , 

n ’ -i*\ •, •' ; o o. 

■.,> <• 

•' • 



1 

Jk .'l V . 

' .lit . 



,ni . 



56 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


393. — K. 245.— Cave-Temples of West. India , p. 58, and Plate. Dr. Bird’s Kanheri plate, 
recording the erection of a chaitya at the Mahdvihdra (or great convent) of Rrishnagiri ; dated 
in the reign of the Traikutakas ; — 

(L. 1). — Tr[ai]kutakana[m] pravarddharDana-ra]ya-sa[m]vYat8ara-£ata-dvaye pancha- 

chatvari[m] sad-uttare. 

394. — K. 340,— Ep. Ind. Vol. IL p. 20, and Plate. S&nkheda second plate only [of a 
Gurjara king ?] : — 

(L. 10). — samvatsara-4ata-trayain(ye) shatchatvarih6-6ttarake l * || 346. 3 
The only name which occurs in the plate ia that of the writer, the Sdmdhivigrahika 
Aditya-bhogika. 

395. — K. 380.— Jour . Boy . As. Soc ., N. S., Vol. I. p. 273, and Plates ; Ind . Ant. Vol, XIII. 
p. 82. Kaira plates of the Gurjara Dad da II. Prasantar&ga, 3 issued from Nandipnri : — 

(L. 43). — Karttikyam. 

(L. 50). — samvatsara-sata-traye=slty-adhike Karttika-4addha-paiichadasyam .... 
sam 300 80 Karttika-su 10 5. 

In the family of the Gurjara kings, the Sdmanta Dadda [I.] ; his son Jayabhata [I.] 
Vitaraga ; his son Dadda [II.] Prasantaraga. 

390. — K* 385. — Jour. Boy. As. Soc., N. S., Vol. I. p. 273, and Plates ; Ind. Ant. Vol. 
XIII. p. 88. Kaira plates of the Gurjara Dadda II. Prasantaraga, issued from 

Naudipuri : — 

(L. 41). — Karttikyam. 

(L. 49). — samvatsara-sata-traye pauehasi(si)ty-adhike Kartt[i*]ka-paurnnam&8yam 
. , . saiii 300 80 5 Karttika-bhu(su) 10 5. 

Genealogy as in No. 395. 

397. — K. 391.— Ep. Ind . Vol. II. p. 21, and Plate. Sahkheda second plate only of 
Ranagraha, the son of Vitaraga and relative of Dadda [of the time of Ranagraha’s brother (?), 
the Gurjara Dadda II. Prasantaraga] : — 

(L. 8).— samvatsara-sata-traye ekanavatye(te) Vaigakha-bahula-pauchadasyam sam 300 
90 1 Vaisakha-ba 10 5. 

39S. — K. 394.— Ind. Ant. Vol. VII, p. 248, and Plate. Kaira (now Royal As. Soc/s) 
plates 4 of the Gujarat Chalnkya Vijayaraja, issued from Vijayapura 
(L. II). — V aisakha-purnnamasyam. 

(L. 32). — samvatsara-sata-traye chaturnnavaty-adhike Vaisakha-paurnnam&sy&m 
. , . samvatsara || 300 90 4 Vaisakha-su 10 5 [[ 

In the lineage of the Cbalukyas, Jayasimharaja ; his son Buddhavarmaraja, snrnamed 
Vallabha-Ranavikranta ; his son Vijayaraja. 

399.- K. 406.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 267, and Plate. Bagumr& (now British 
Museum) plates of the Sendraka Nikumbhallasakti :— 

(L. 24). — Bhadrapada-paurnam[a # ]syam. 

(L. 37).— samvatsara-sata-chatashtaye shad-uttare Bhadrapada-su(sn)ddha-pamcha- 

dasv[aiii*]. 


1 Read. 0 tv dr Mad -uttar alee. 

5 Thia number is expressed by numerical symbols for 3, 4, and 6. 

3 For three spunous plates of his, see above. Nos. 347-349, of S. 400 f 415, and 417. 

* Thc same plate, contain a cancelled inscription of the same prince who ’i* called in it VHavavarinariis and of 
the same date ; see ibid. pp. 251*53. J J 4 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


57 


In the lineage of the Sendraka 
Prithivivallabha-Nikumbballasakti. 


kings, Bhanusakti.; his son Adityasakti ; his son 


, ^ Jour. Bo. As. Soc. Yol. XYI, p. 2, and Plates. Nausari plates of the 

Gujarat Chalukya Yuvardja Sryasraya-Siladitya, issued from Navasarika:— 

(L. 20).— Makha(gha)-suddha-tray6dasyam .... samvatsara-sata- 
chatushtaye ^kavihsaty-adhike 400 20 1. 

In the lineage of the Chalukyas, Pulakesi- Valiabha ; 2 his son Dharasraya-Jayasimha- 
varman (younger brother of the ILahdydjddhirdja Vikramaditya-Satyasraya-Prithiv] valiabha) ; 
his son, the Yuvardja Sryasraya-Siladitya. 

401. K. 443. — Vienna Or. Congress, Arian section, p. 225, and Plates. Surat plates of 
the Gujarat Chalukya Yuvardja Sryasraya-Siladitya, of the time of the Western Chalukya 
Vinayaditya-Satyasraya- Valiabha ; issued from Kusumesvara near Karmaneya : — 

(L. 25). — * punye tithau Sriivana-paurnnamasyam. 

(L. 36). — sa rh vat sara- sat a-c hat ushtaye 3 trichat variusad-ad hi kG Sravana-suddha- 

paurnnamasyaih | sarhvatsara 400 40 3 Sravana-sudi 10 5. 

The Maharaja Saty asray a- Pulakesi- Valiabha 2 (defeated Harshavardhana, 1 the lord oi 
the whole northern country ’) ; his son, the Vikramaditya-Satya^raya- Valiabha ; his 

son, the Ma hdrdjddhi raj a Vinayaditya- Satyasraya- Sripritbivi valiabha ; his fathers brother 
Dharasraya-Jayasimhavarman ; his son. the Yuvardja Sryasraya-Siladitya. 

402. — K. 458. — Ind. Ant. Vol. XIII. p. 77, and Plate. Nausari plates of the Gurjara 
Jayabhata LH., issued from Kay avatar a : — 

(L. 30). — Magha- s u d d h a- pa fi c h a da sy am (sy am ) | chandr-dparage | 

(L. 41). — samvatsara-sata-chatushtaye shatpauchasad-uttarakc Magha-suddha- 

panchadasyarh . . . , sarii 400 50 6 4 ma 5 * -vaiv | 

Tuesday, 2nd February A.D. 706/’ with a lunar eclipse, visible in India ; see ibid 

Vol. XVII. p. 220. 

In the lineage of the Mahdrdja Karna, Dadda [II.] (protected a lord of Valabhi who had 
been defeated by Hnrsliadeva) ; his son Jayabhata [II. J ; his son Dadda [III.] Bahusahaya : 
his son Jayabhata [III.]. 

403. — K. 488,— Ind. Ant. Vol. V. p. 113. Kavi second plate only of the Gurjara 

Jayabhata m. : — 

(L. 15). — Ashadha-sud[dh]a-dasam[yam] Karkkataka-r[a*]sau sa[m]krant[e] ravau 
punya-tithau. 

(L. 24). — sa [m] vat sara-sat a-chat ush taye [sha ?]•••* .... 

[sa]m 400 80 6 Ash ad ha -su [10 P] Aditya-varo. 

Sunday, 24th June A.D. 730 (?) 7 ; see ibid. Vol. XVII. p. 221. 

404. — K. 490. — Vienna Or. Congress, Arian section, p. 230, and Plates. Nausari plates 
of the Gujarat Chalnkya Pulakesiraja : — 

(L. 30). — ^iahakarttikyaih. 


1 Read ekavimsaty 3 This is Satyah*aya-Pulike>in II of Dr. Fleet’s Table. 

8 Read trichatrdrimxad * * About six akharaa are broken away here. 

5 See ltd . Ant. Vol. XIII. p. 79, note 33 : “ Enough of this letter remains ... to show indubitably 

that it was ma. It is, of course, a nutter of conjecture whether the preceling akshara was s6 or lhau /’ 

6 With the epoch which best suits the later ICalachuri dates, the original date would be expected to fall in 

A.D. 704-5, not in A.D. 705-6. 

7 This may be the intended date, but there are difficulties. Judging by the later Kalaehuri dates, the 
original date would be expected to fall In A.D. 735, not in A.D. 736. Resi les, although in A.D. 736 the 
Karkata-samkranti did take place during the 10th tit hi of the bright hdf of Asha Un, this tithi fell on Friday, 
the 22ud June, and the tithi which ended on Sunday, the 2 4th Jun**, was the 12th of the bright half. [Accord- 
ing to my calculations for all the years from Kaliyuga-samvat 3691 to 3925 expired, the date would work out 
quite correctly only for A.D. 576 and A.D. 793.] 



58 


EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


(L. 48). — sam vat sara- sat a 400 90 Karttika-suddha 10 5. 

The Maltdrdjddhirdja Satyasraya-Prithivivallabha-Kirtivarmaraja his son Satyasraya- 
PulakeM- Vallabha (defeated Harshavardhana, 1 * 3 4 the lord of the northern country 5 ) ; his son 
Sutyasiuya-Vikramadityaraja ; his younger brother D h ar a s ray a - Jay a s i rii h a var m araj a ; his son 
Jayasraya-Mangalarasaraja ; Jiis younger brother Pulakesiraja 2 (who from the king Snvallabha 
received the epithet) Avanijanasraya (and other titles). 

405. — K. 724. — Ind . Vol. XX. p. 85. Notice of a Chandrehe inscription of the 

ascetic Prasantasiva and others of the Mattamayura 3 (spiritual) lineage ; (composed by 
Dhamsata, the son of Jeika and Amarika, and grand&on of Mehuka) : — 

Samvat 724 Phalguna-sudi 5. 

406. — K. 789 (?). — Archceol. Snrv . of India , Vol. XXL p. 113, and Plate xxviii. 
Piawan rock inscription of the Kalachuri (Cliedi) Gahgeyadeva : — 

(L. 6j. — samvat 789 (r). 

407. — K. 793. — Ep. Inch Vol. II. p. 305, and Plate. Benares plate9 of the Kalachuri 
(Cliedi) Mahdrdjddhirdja Karnadeva, lord of Trikalihga. issued from Prayaga on the Vein 4 : — 

(L. 39). — ih=aiva pituh srimad-Gangeyadevasya samvatsare(ra)-sra(sra)dclhe 

PhalguDa-va(ba)hulapaksha«dvitzyayam Sa(sa)naischara-vasare Veiiyam snatva. 

(L. 48). — sariivat 793 Phalguna-vadi 9 Some. 

The first date is incorrect; the second corresponds to Monday, ISth January A.D. 1042. 

In the lineage of the Haihayas, Kokkalla [I.] (contemporary of Bhoja, 6 Vallabharaja, 
[the Chandella] Marsha of Chitrakiita, and Samkaragana) married the Chandfilla princess 
Natta (Nattadfivi); their son Prasiddhadhavala ; his sons Balaharsha and Vuvar&ja [1.1 ; 
Yu va raja’s son Lakshmanaraja ; his sons Sarhkaragana and Yuvaraja [II.J ; Ynvaraja’s son 
Kokkalla [II.] ; his son Gaiigeya ; his son Karna. 

40S. — K. 840 .— Archceol Surv. of India, Vol. XVII. p. 35, and Plate xxii. C. Boramdfio 
inscription of the reign of the Rdnaka (?) Gopaladeva : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 840 ra[naka ?]-sri-GopuladGva-rajye. 

409. K« 808.— Ep. Ind , Vol. I. p, 34, and Plate. Ratnapur (now Nagpur Museum) 
inscription of Jajalladeva I. of Ratnapnra : — 

(L. 31). — [sa]mvat 8GG Marga-sudi 9 Ravau | 

Sunday, 8th November A.D. 1114. 

In the family of the Haihayas was Kokalla, the ruler of Ch£di, the eldest of whose 
eighteen sons became ruler of Tripuri. Kalin garaja, the descendant of one of the younger sons, 
conquered Dakshinakosala ; his son Kamalaraja ; his son Ratuaraja (Ratnesa)[T.j, "married 
Nonalla, the daughter of Vajjuka of the Kom6 mandali ; their son Prithvisa (Prithvideva)[L], 
married Rajalla; their son Jajalla [I.] (contemporary of one Somesvara). 

410. [K. 874.] Ep. Ind . Vol. II. p. 3. Jabalpur (now Nagpur Museum) first plate only 

of the Kalachuri (ChGdi) Mahd rd j ddhirdja Yasahkarnadeva : 

[Monday, 25th December A.D. U22. G ] 

In the Kalachuri family, Yuvaraja [II.] of Tripur! ; his son Kokalla [II.]; his son 
Gauge yadfi va- V ikramiiditya ; his son Karna, married the Huua princess Avalladevl ; their 
son Yasnhkarna. 


1 Tins is Ranaparakratnik • K irtivarman I. of Dr. fleet’s Table. 

3 He repulsed an attack of the Tajika (Arab) army. 

3 See below, Nos. 429 and 430, and compare Ep . Ind. Vol I. p. 354. 

4 In line 33 of the inscription I now read Praydgu-samaidsita • ; see Ep. Ind Vol IV n 19' 

5 Compare below. No. 429. ' ‘ 4,4 

‘ According to a transcript of tbe text of the lost second plate, the grant recorded in the insmptio,. 
n.ade -at the titre of the Makara-samkranti, on Monday, the 10th oi the »aw.,g moon of lia-ha.”- Compare 
above, No. 93 of \ - 1177. ° 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTION'S OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


59 


411. — K. 893.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 84. Notice of a Kugda fragmentary inscription of 
the reign of Prithvideva II. of Ratnapura : — 

(L. 25). — Kalachuri-samvatsare 803 raj a-snmat-Pri thvid e va- [ra jye] . 

The inscription mentions a queen Lachchhalladevi, Ratnadeva(P), and one Vallabharaja. 

412. — K. 898. — Ind . Ant . Vol. XYII. p. 139. Rajim inscription of the chief Jagapala 
(Jagasimha), of the time of Prithvideva II. of Ratnapura; (composed by Jasanauda, the son 
of Jasodhara) : — 

(L. 18). — K[n]lachuri-sarhvatsar[e] 896 Maghe masi su(su)kla-pakshe rath-fish tamyam 
[\ T ]u(bu)dha-dine. 

Wednesday, 3rd January A.D. 1145. 

The inscription mentions Jajalla [I.], Ratnadeva [II.], and Prithvideva [II.] of Ratnapnra ; 
and gives an account of Jagapala’s family, commencing with his ancestor, the Thalckura Sahillu, 
f the spotless ornament of the illustrious Rajamala race which gave delight to the Pafieliabamsa 
race/ Sahilla had a younger brother, Vasudeva, and three sons, Bhayila, Desala, and Svamin ; 
Svamin’s sons were Jayadeva and Devasimha ; and to one of these his wife IJdaya bore Jagapala. 
who had two younger brothers, Gajaia and Jayatsimha. 

413. — K. 898. — Archceol. Surv . of India , Yol. IX. p. 86, and Yol. XVII. Plate xx.; and 
Sir A. Cunningham's rubbing. Date of a S ed r i na ray an inscription : 

Kalachuri-samvatsare j] 898 |) A(a)svi($vi)na-sudi 2 Soma-dine. 

Monday, 9th September A.D. 1146 ; see Ind. Ant . Vol. XV II. p. 216. 

414. — K. 902. — bid. Ant, Yol. XVIII. p. 210. Tewar inscription of the time of the 
Kalachuri (Chedi) Gayakarnadeva and his son, the Yuvardja Narasimha ; (composed by 
Prithvidhara, the son of Dharanidkara) : — 

(L. 20). — Navasa(sa)ta-yugaba[bd]-adhikya-ge Chedi-disht[e] ja[na*]padam=avat=iniaih 
3ri-Gay&karnnadeve | pratipadi Suchimasa-svetapakshe-rkka-vare. 

Sunday, 17th June A.D. 1151. 

In the Atreya gotra, Karna ; his son Yasahkarna ; his son Gayakarna ; his son, the 
Yuvardja Narasimha. 

415. — -K. 807. Ep. Ind. Yol. II. p. 10 ; Cave-Temples of West. India, p. 107, Plate. 

Bhera-Ghat (now Amer. Or. Soc/s) inscription of the Kalachuri (Chedi) queen Alhanadevi, 
the widow' of Gayakarnadeva, of the reign of her son Narasimhadeva 1 2 ; ( composed by 
Sasidhara, the son of Dharanidhara) : — 

(L. 29).— samvat 907 Margga-sudi 11 Ravau H 

Sunday, 6th November A.D. 1155 3 ; or, less probably, Sunday, 25th November A.D. 1156. 

In the lineage of Sahasrarjuna of the lunar race, Kokalla [ID] ; his son Gahgeya , his 
son Karna ; his" son Yasahkarna ; his son Gayakarna, married Alhanadevi, a daughter of 
Yijayasimha (a son of the Guhila Yairisimha who was a son of Hariasapala 3 ) and his wife 
Syamaladevi (a daughter of [the Paramara] Udayaditya of Malava) j their sons Narasimha and 
Jayasimha. 

416 —K. 809 .— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 212 ; Archceol. Surv. of India, Vol. IX. Plate ii. 

1. Lal-PaMd rock inscription of the time of the Kalachuri (Chedi) Narasimhadeva, lord of 
Trikalinga : — 

(L. 7).— 8a[m]vat 1 909 Sra(sra)vana-sndi 5 Vu(bu)ddh6(dhe). 

Wednesday, 2nd July A.D. 1158. 


1 See above, No. 140 of V. 121fi. 

2 On tliia day the tithi of the date commence. t 2 h. 12 m. aftei menn sui>r.>e. 

3 See above, No. 290, where we ba\e the name Va msapvla. 



GO 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V 


417. — K. 010. — Archceol. Surv. of India, Vol. XVII. Plate xx. Date of a Ratnapur 
(now Nagpur Maseum) inscription of the reign of Pritb.vid.eva II. of Ratnapura : l — 

Kalachuri-samvatsare 910 raja-srimat-Prithvideva-vijajarajje || 

418. — K. 919. 2 — Ep. Ind . Vol. I. p. 40. Malhar (now Nagpur Maseum) inscription of 
the time of Jajalladeva II. of Ratnapura ; (composed by Ratnasimha,* the son of Mame, of 
the Vastavya family) : — 

(L. 28). — samvat 919. 

In the lanar race, Ratnadeva [II.] (defeated Chbdagahga) ; his son Prithvideva [II.] ; his 
son Jajalla [II.]. 

419. — EC. 926. 4 — Ind . Ant. Vol. XVII. p. 226, and Plate. Rewah (now British Museum) 
plate of the Mahdrdnaka Kirtivarman of Kakkaredika, of the reign of the Kalachuri (ChMi) 
Mahdrdjddhirdja Jayasimhadeva, lord of Trikalihga: — 

(L. 14). — samvat 926 Bhadrapada-mase sukla-pakshe va(cha)turthyam tithau Gurn-dine 
ranaka-sri-Vatsarajasya nimitte pimdarchana-sthane. 

(L. 19) . — samvat 926. 

Thursday, 21st August A.D. 1175. 5 

In the Kaurava family, the Mahdrdnaka Jayavarman ; his son, the Mahdrdnaka Vatsarfija ; 
his son, the Mahdrdnaka Kirtivarman. 6 

420. — K. 828. — According to Sir A. Cunningham, Archceol. Surv . of India , Vol. IX* 
p. Ill, and Ind. Eras , p. 61, there is a Bhera-Ghat inscription, dated “928, Magha-badi 10, 
Monday.” 

Monday, 27th December A.D, 1176 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XVII. p. 217. 

421. — K. 928.— _Ep. Ind. Vol. II, p. 18 ; Cave-Temples of West. India, p. 119, Plate. 
Tewar (now Amer. Or. Soc.’s) inscription of the time of the Kalachuri (Chedi) Jayasimhadeva, 
the younger brother of Narasiibhad^va, and son of Gayakarna : — 

(L. 7). — samvat 928 Sravana-sudi 6 Ravau Haste || 

Sunday, 3rd July A.D. 1177. 

422. — K. 932.— Jorr. Beng. As. Soc . Vol. VIII. p. 481, and Plate with specimen of letters 
and seal ; and Vol. XXXI. p. 116. Kumbhi plates of the Kalachuri (Chedi) Vi jayasimhadeva 
and his mother Gosaladevi, issued from Tripuri on the Narmada : — 

Samvat 932 srimat-Tripuryam yugadau Narmadayam vidhivat=snatva. 

Genealogy as far as Yasahkarna as in No. 410 ; his son Gayakarna, married Alhanadevl ; 
their son Narasimha ; his younger brother Jayasimha ; his son Vijayasiihha ; the Mahdkumdra 
Ajayasimha. 

423. — K. 933. — Ind . Ant. Vol. XXII. p. 82. Notice of a Khar6d inscription of the time 
of Ratnadeva III. of Ratnapura ; — 

(L. 28). — Cbedi'Samvat 933. 

In the family of the Haihayas, Kalinga; his son Kamala; his son Ratnaraja [I.] ; [W® 8< J n 3 
Prithvideva [I.] ; his son Jajalla [I.] (defeated Bhujabalaof Snvarnapura) ; his son Ratnadeva 

* The inscription is almost entirely effaced. — The Nagpur Museum contains another ranch effaced inscription, 
dart'd (inline 36) samvat 315, which apparently treats of the chiefs of the T.ilal a. i murid ala ; see Bp. l*d- Vol. 

1 p. 33. 

a Fora Seorinarayan inscription, dated Chidi'Sarnmvut 919 , gee Archceol. Surv. of India t Vol. XVll. Plate 

XX. 

* Compare above, No. 181 of V. 1247 (?). 

4 In the Nagpur Museum there is a much effaced inscription, dated same at-shnd vims atyuttara-na^oiatd 
{t$=) nkb>pi 926 f apparently of the time of the Kalachuri (Chedi) Jnyiisimhad£v&, and composed by SaSidbara, the 
son of Dhar^nidhara (see above, No. 415). 

1 Ou this day the tithi of the date commenced 8 h. 7 in. after mean sunrise. 

* See abovk*, No. 186 of V. 12^3, 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


61 


[II.] (defeated Ch6daganga of Kalinga) ; his son Prithvideva [II.] ; his son Jajalla [II.], 
married Somalladevi ; their son Ratnadeva [III.]. 

424. — K. 934. — Archceol. Surv. of India , Vol. XVII. Plate xxii. Sahaspnr image 
inscription of Ya so raj a 

(L. 5). — samvat 934 Karttika-sndi 15 Vu(bn)dh6 || 

Wednesday, 13th October A.D. 1182 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XVII. p. 217. 

The inscription, besides Yasoraja, mentions the queen Lakshmadevd (?), the princes 
Bhdjad£va and Rajad6va, and the princess Jasallad6vi. 

425. — K. 958. — Archceol. Surv. of India , Vol. XXI. p. 102, and Plate xxrii. Besani 
fragmentary inscription : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 958 prathama-Ashadha-sndi 3. 

The month Ashadha was intercalary in A.D. 1207 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XVII. p. 219. 

c.— Undated Inscriptions connected with those under C. 

426. — Gupta Inscr . p. 130, and Plate. Khoh first plate only of the Maharaja Sarvanatha, 
issued from Uchchakalpa. 

Genealogy as in No. 392. 

427. — Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 23, and Plate. Sankheda first plate only of Saritilla, the 
general (bal-ddhikrita) of the Bhogikapdla Mahdp[i]lupati { Nirihullaka who meditated on the 
feet of [the Kalachuri P] Samkarana (Samkaragana ?), the son of Krishnaraja ; issued from 
Nirgundipadraka : — 

(L. 9). — adi[tyo*]paraga-kalam. 

428. — Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 175. Karitalai (now Jabalpur Museum) fragmentary inscrip* 
tion of the time of the Kalachuri (ChSdi) Lakshmanaraja, and his minister Somesvara, tne 
son of Yuvaraja’s minister Bhakamisra; mentions Yuvaraja [I.], [his son] Lakshmanaraja 
whose queen was Rabada, and [their son] Samka[ragana]. 1 * 3 

429. Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 254, and Plate. Bilhari (now Nagpnr Museum) inscription ot 

the Kalachuri (Chedi) Yuvarajadeva II. 3 ; (the first part of the inscription was composed by 
Srinivasa, the son of Sthiraaanda; the second by Sajjana, the son of Thira ; and the concluding 
verses are by Sirnka 3 ). 

In the lineage of the Haihayas, Kbkkalla [I.] (supported Krishnaraja in the south and 
Bhdjad&va in the north) ; his son Mugdhatnnga ; his son Kfiyuravarsha- Yuvaraja [I.], married 
Nohala (the daughter of the Chaulukya Avanivarman who was a son of Sauhanva and grandson 
of Simhavarman) ; their son Lakshmanaraja ; his son Samkaragana ; his younger brother 

Yuvaraja [II.]. The inscription also mentions, in connection with a Saiva ascetic 

Mattamayftranatha, a prince or king Avanti. 4 

43 Q t pjp t y 0 l. I. p. 354. Ranod (Narod, Narvad) inscription ; gives an account of 

certain Saiva ascetics (Kadambaguh&d hi vasin, Sankhamathikadhipati, Terambipala, Amarda- 
katirthanatha, Purandara, Kavachasiva, Sidasiva, Hridayesa, and VydmaSiva), and mentions 
(in connection with Purandara) a king Avanti or Avantivarman who resided at Mattamayura 
(composed by Devadatta). 


1 The published text h.»a mahdpalupati , altered by the .ditor to mahdpallapati ; but the photolithograph 
shews thrtt the akshara which precedes la contains h superscript i or < t and the word mahdpUupati actually 
occurs, immediately after mahdbhogika, , in lme 28 of the Tarpandighl pUte of Lakshmftu^ua, below. No. 648. 

s See above. No. 407 of K. 793. 

* Siruka in one of his verse# refers to the poet Uajaiekhara . 

4 See Nos. 405 and 430. 1 405 * ud ^ 



62 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vot. V. 


431. — Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 216. Karanhel unfinished inscription of the Kalachuri 
(Chedi) Jayasimhadeva. 1 

In the Kalachuri family, Yuvaraja [II.] ; his son Kokalla [IT.] ; his son Gan gey a ; his 
eon Karna; his son Yasahkarna; his son Gayakarna, married Alhanadevi, a daughter of [the 
Guhila] Vijayasiihha (a son of Vairisirhha who was a son of Hariisapala in Pragvata) and hi 3 
wife Syamalad^vi (a daughter of [the Paramara] Udayaditya of Dhara) ; their sons Narasimha 
and Jayasimha. 

432. Ind, Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 21S, Notice of a Gopalpur fragmentary inscription of the 
time of the Kalachuri (Chfidi) Vi jayasimhadeva. 2 The inscription mentions the Kalachuri 
kings Karna, Yasahkarna, Gayakarna, Narasimha, Jayasimha who married Gosaladevi, and their 
son Vijayasiihha. 

433. Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 84. Notice of an Akaltara fragmentary inscription of the 
Kalachuri rulers of Ratnapura (composed by .Devapani ), containing the names Ratnadeva, 
Harigana, Lachchhalladevi (see No. 411), Vallabharaja, and Jayasimhadeva. 

434. Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 84. Notice of a Muhammadpur inscription of the Kalachuri 
rulers of Ratnapura, containing the names Jajalladeva, Ratnadeva, Prithvideva, and 
Vallabharaja. 

435. Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 85. Notice of a Tewar fragmentary inscription, containing 
the name Bhimap&la. 


D* — Inscriptions dated according to the Gupta-Valabhi Era. 

436. G. 82.— Gupta Inscr. p. 2 o, and Plate. Udayagiri cave inscription, recording 

a gift of the Sanakanika Maharaja . . dha(?)la, the son of the Maharaja Vishnudasa and 

grandson of the Maharaja Chhagalaga, a feudatory of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Chandragupta 

n. : — 

(L. 1).— samvatsareSO 2 Ashadhamasa*sukl-e(ai) kada sy am | 

437. G. 88. Gupta Inscr. p. 37, and Plate. Gadhwa (now Calcutta Museum) frag- 
mentary inscription [of the time of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Chandragupta II.] : 

(L. 10). [ * *sri-Chandragupta'ra]jya-sarhvvatsare 80 8 . , . , [asyarii 

divasa]-purvvayam Pata(ta)liput[t]ra .... 

438. G. 93.— Gupta Inscr. p, 31, and Plate. Sanchi inscription of the time of the 

Mahdrdjddhirdja Chandragupta II., recording a gift in favour of the Arya-samgha at the 
Mahdvihdra (or great convent) of Kakanadabota (i.e. Sanchi itself) : 

(L. 11). — sam90 3 Bhadrapada-di 4. 

439. — G. 98.— Gupta Inscr. p. 43, and Plate. Bilsad pillar inscription of a certain 
Dhruvasarman, of the reign of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Kum&ragupta I. 

(L. 6). -sri-Kumaragaptasy=abhivarddharaaua-vijayarajya- 0 anivatsare shannavate asyan= 

divasa-purvvay am. 

The Maharaja Gupta ; his son, the Mahdrdja Ghatotkacha ; his son, the Mahdrdjddhirdja 
Chandragupta [I.] ; his son, from Kumaradevi who was the daughter of Lichcbhavi, 3 the 
Mahdrdjddhirdja Samudragupta ; his son, from Dattadevi, the Mahdrdjddhirdja Chandragupta 
[IT.] ; his son, from Dhruvadevi, the Mahdrdjddhirdja Kumaragapta [I.]. 


1 See above, Nos. 415, 419 and 421 of K. 907, 926 aud 928. 

3 See above. No. 422 of K. 932. * Or “ of a Lichchhavi (king).” 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


63 


440. — G. 98. — Gupta Inscr. p. 41. and Plate. Gadlxwa (now Calcutta Museum) fragmen- 
tary inscription [of the time of the Mahd rd jddh i raja Kumaragupta I.] : — 

(L. 2 ). — [-sri-Kumaragupta-rajya-samvatsajrc 90 8 . , . [asyrm divasa]- 

purvvayarii. 

441. — G/106. — Gvpta Inscr . p. 258. and Plate. Udayagiri cave Jaina inscription : — 

(L. 1 ). — Gupt-anvayanam nripa-snttamanaiii rajye kulasy=abhivivarddhamaue sbadbhir= 

yyute varsha-sate=tlia muse £||*J Su-KarttikC* bahula-dine=tlia pamckamc. 

442. — G. 113 (?). — Ep. Ind . Vol. II. p. 210. No. xxxix., and Plate, Mathura (now 
Lucknow Museum) Jaina image inscription of the reign of the Mahd ra j a d h i raja Kumaragupta 

I. 

(L. 1).~ -^ri-Kumaraguptasya vijayarajya-saih [100 10] 3 Ka .... ntama , 

[di] • sa 20 asyaiii pu[rvvavam]. 

443. — G. 129. — Gupta Inscr. p. 46, and Plate. Mankuwar Buddhist image inscription of 
the reign of the Maharaja 1 2 * 4 Kumaragupta I. : — 

(Ii. 2). — sainvat 100 20 9 maliaraja-sri-Kumaraguptasya rajye Jyeshthamasa-di 10 8 . 

444. — G. i 3 i. — Gupta Inscr. p 201, and Plate. Saiichi inscription, recording a gift in 
favour of the Arya-samgha at the Mahdvihdra (or great convent; of Kakanadabota ( i.e . 
Sanchi itself) : — 

(L. 11).— samvvat 100 30 1 Asvayug-di 5 l| 

445 . — G. 135. — Gupta Inscr. p. 203, and Plate. Mathura (now Lucknow Museum) 
Buddhist image inscription 

(L. 1). — samwatsara-^ato paihchastn (trim )s-ottara tame 100 30 5 Pushya-musc di\ase 
vi[mj>[ej di 20 . 

446. — G. 138, 137, and 138.— Gupta Inscr. p. 58, and Plate ; Bhuunayar Inscr. p. 21, and 
Plate. Junagadh rock inscription of the time of the Rdjddhinlja* Skandagupta, recording the 
restoration of the embankment of the Sudarsana lake by Chakrapalita, the son of Painadatta 
who was governor of Surabhtra : — 

(L. 15). — Samvatsarhiiam=aclhike sate tu trimaadbliir=anyau*=api shadbhir=fwa I ratrau 
dine Praushthapadasya shashthe Gupta- prakale gap an am vidhaia I (II) 

(L. 18).— Sam vat sa ra p a m =adh i ke sate tu triihsadbhir=anvair=api saptabhis=cha | . 


(L. 20).— Graishmasya masnsya tu purva-pa[kshe] ... • [pra]thame-hm. 

(L. 27). — varsha-sate-shtatriiiise Guptanaiii kala .... 

447 . g. 139.— Gupta In<cr. p. 2G7, and Plate. Kosam fragmentary image inscription of 

the time of the Mat id raja BhimEvarmart : ^ 

(L. 1).— . . . Mab[a*>[a}jasya sii-Blumavarmmanah samva[t*] 100 30 0 • • • 

2 (?)3 diva 7 utad-[d*]ivasa. ' 

448. - G. 141— Gupta Inscr. p. 07, and Plate. Kahaurh Jaina pillar inscription ot the 

reign of Skandagupta : — 

(L. 4).- varshe ^trin^,d-d^-aik- 6 ttaraka-=atatamd JyesI.tha-mAsi pn.pai. no !(||) 

1 In later i,. S cri,.t lu ns, also, kin-s, "W ..tie or.i.na.ily i, JIuMrtjiM* V »• " 9 W lh *‘ t,,K ’ 

raja. 

2 This omits in verse, and is not a foimal titl*-. - 1 v d d t u ’* 

s It is doubttul whether the two marks, tiaiiscuL e i l > y ‘ * lU * r ^' i k' ’* ' 

4 Read ttrimiud-. 



64 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


449. — G. 140.— Oupta Inscr. p. 70, and Plate. Indor plate of the Brahman Deva vishnu, 
of the time of the Mahdrdjadhirdja Skandagnpta and his feudatory, the Vishayapati 
Sarvan&ga of the Antarvedi country : — 

(L. 3). sri-Skandaguptasy=abhivarddhamana-vijayarajy a-samvvatsara-sate 

^hachchatvansad-ufctaratame Phalguna-mase ♦ . . varttamane. 

450. — G. 148.— Oupta Inscr. p. 268, and Plate. Gadhwa (now Calcutta Museum) 
fragmentary Vaishnava inscription : — 

(L. 1). — . . . sya pravarddhamana*vijayarajya-samrvatsara-sate=shtachatvarihsad-uttare 
Maghamasa-divase ekavinsatime. 2 

451. — G. 150.— Oupta Inscr. p. 95. Khoh (now Lucknow Museum?) plates of the 
Parivrajaka 3 Maharaja Hastin, the son of the Maharaja Damodara, grandson of the Maharaja 
Prabhaujana, and gTeat -grandson of the Maharaja Devadhya : — 

(L. 1). ■ 4 Shatpailchas-ottare=bda-sate Guptanripa-rajya-bhuktau Mahavaisakha- 
sambatsare 5 | Karttikamasa-suklapaksha-tritiyayam =asyan=divasa-purvvayam. 

[19th October’ 6 A.D. 475; see ibid. Introduction, p. 105], 

G. (?) 158.— Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 364, and Plate. Pali (now Lucknow Museum) 
plate of the Maharaja Lakshmana, issued from Jayapnra* — 

(L. 15).— -samvvatsam -sate sh tapamchasad-uttare Jyeshtha-mase paurnnama 9 yam.^ 

The inscription mentions, as dutaka , the Maharaja Naravahanadatta, 


453. G. 103. Gupta Inscr. p. 102, and Plate. Khoh (now Lucknow Museum) plates of 
the Parivrajaka Maharaja Hastin (described as in No. 451) 

(L. 1}.— Ttmhashty-nttare=bda-sate Guptanripa-rajya-bhuktau Malifisvayuia-samratyare 6 

Chaittramasa-suklapaksha-dvitiy[a*]yam=asy[a*]n=divasa-purvv[a*]ya[m*]. 

[7th March A.D. 482 ; see ibid. Introduction, p. 105.] 

454— G. 165.- Guptas, p. 89, and Plate. Eran pillar inscription of the time of 
Budhagupta and has feudatory, the Mahdrdja Surasmichandra, recording the erection of tho 
pillar by the Ma&uwya Matrmshnu and his younger brother Dhanyavishnu 

, r , O'.T * SatU P fmcLashas %; adhik S varahanam bhupatau cha BudhaguptS | Ashadhamasa- 
s[ukla]-dvadasyam Suraguror=ddavase | sam 100 60 5 . . . asyam sarhvatsara-masa-divasa- 
purvvayam, 

Thursday, 21st June A.D. 484; see ibid. Introduction, p. 83. 

455. — G. 191.— Qupta Inscr. d. 92, and Plato -n * . .. 

.... ..f J, "* ’ S^-pil la r inscription of the widow 

of Goparaja, the son of the Ba/a Madhava and follower (?) of a king Bh&nutniDta •— 

,oo pm^i — * 


456. — G. 191. — Gupta Inscr. p. 107, and Plate. 
Maharaja Hastin (described as in No. 451) : 


Majhgawam plates of the Parivrajaka 
(Li l)-' fckanavaty-uttere=bda-.ate irWi pm „ rd a h!1 „ 3n ,. 


* ftead c frdWw#W., and SkacimialitamS. 


1 Read shatchatvarimiad- . 
a The original has nripatiparivrdjafa-kul-otpanna. 

4 Read shat pahchdsad-ut tare. R Reud 

6 The original date contains no details by which the correctness of' theZ't Tv of • 

be tested; the same remark applies to the equivalents of the original date, , i V < 'l mvftlent fould 

7 For G. 158 this date would correspond to the 13th May A D 477 i""* ^ 453, 456, aod 459 ’ 

visible in India. J • • * ien taere was a lunar eclipse which was 

* See below, No. 520. * Tl 

10 Read sa 7 hratsara-. e rS * 1 “ of this Arya is incorrect 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


65 


(L. 20).— sambat 1 * 100 90 1 Magha-di 3. 

[3rd January A.D. 511 ; see ibid. Introduction, p. 105.] 

^5^- 207.— Up. Ind. Yol. Ill, p. 320, and Plate. Ganesgad (Baroda) plates of the 

Mahdsdmanta Maharaja Dhruvasena I. of Valabhi, issued from Valabhi 

(L. 29). — sam 200 7 Yaisakha-ba 10 5. 

(In the family) of the Maitrakas, the Bhatakka (Bhatarka) ; his son, the Senapati 

Dharasena [I.] ; his younger brother, the Maharaja Dronasimha ; his younger brother, the 
Mahdsdmanta Maharaja Dhruvasena [I.]. 

458. 207 .— Ind, Ant. Yol. Y. p. 205, and Plates. Bhavnagar plates of the Maharaja 
Dhruvasena I> of Valabhi, issued from Valabhi 

(L. 26). — sam 200 7 Karttika-su 7. 

Genealogy as in No. 457. 

459. G. 209.— Gupta Inscr. p. 114, and Plate. Khoh plates of the [Parivrajaka] 
Maharaja Samkshobha— the son of the Maharaja Hastin, grandson of the Maharaja 
Damodara, and great-grandson of the Maharaja Prabhanjana who was the son of the 
Maharaja Devadhya — born in the family of the king-ascetic Susarman : — 

(L. 1). — Nav-ottare=vda(bda)-sata-dvaye Guptanripa-r[a* jjya-bhuktau srimati pravarddha- 
mana-vijayarajye Mahasvayuja-sa[m*]vaisare Chaitramasa-saklapaksha-trayodasy [a*]m~asyarh 
samba(va)tsai'a-masa-divasa-purvvaya[hi # ]. 

(L. 24). — Ckaitra-di 20 8. 3 

[19th March A.D. 528 4 ; see ibid. Introduction, p. 105.] 

460. — G. 216.— Ivd. Ant. Yol. IV. p. 105. Wala plates of the Mahdsdmanta 
Mahapratihdra Mahddandandyaka Mahdkdrtakritika Maharaja Dhruvasena I. of Valabhi, 
issued from the village of Kkuddavediya : — 

(L. 30). — sam 200 10 6 Magha-badi 3 (?). 

Genealogy as in No. 457. — The inscripfion mentions the king’s sister’s daughter, the 
paramopdsikd or Bauddka devotee Dudda, as the foundress of a convent at Valabhi. 

461. — G. 217. — Jour. Boy. As . Soc. 1895, p. 382. British Museum plates of the 
Mahapratihdra Mahadanjandyaka Ma hdkd r t dkr i tika Mahdsdmanta Maharaja Dhruvasena I. 
of Valabhi 5 : — 

(L. 30). — sam 200 10 7 Asvaynja-ba 10 3(F). 

Genealogy as in No. 457. — This inscription, also, mentions the king’s sister’s daughter 
Dadda (see No. 460). 

462. — G. 221.— Witner Zeitschrijt , Yol. VII p, 297. \ avadia-Jogia plates of the 

Maharaja Dhruvasena I. of Valabhi, issued from Valabhi : — 

^L. 33). — sam-200 20 1 Asvay[u*]ja-ba 1. 

Genealogy as in No. 457. 

463. — G. 230. — Gupta Inscr . p. 273, and Plate. Mathura (now Lucknow Museum) 
Buddhist image inscription : — 

(L. 2). — samvatsarah 200 30 | 

464. — G. 240 (P 237). — Ind. Ant. Vol. VII. p. 67, and Plate. Plates of the Maharaja 
Guhasena of Valabhi 6 : — 

(L. 31). — sam 200 40 (? 200 30 7) Sravana-su . . 


1 Read tamvat. 3 Described here as Mahdrdja onlv. s See Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p 379. 

4 9 h. 30 m. before mean sunrise of this day thp Mesha-samkranti took place. 

5 The name of the place from which tbe grant was issued i3 illegible. 

• The name of tbe place from which the grant was issued is not given. 

K 



66 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Genealogy from Bhatarka to Dhruvasena [I.] as in No. 457 ; then (with the omission of 
Dharapatta. see below, No. 468) the Maharaja Guhasena. — This inscription, also* mentions the 
lady Dudda (see above, No. 460). 

465. — G. 246. — Ind. Ajit. Yol. IV. p. 175. Wala second plate only of the Maharaja 
Guhasena of Yalabhi : — 

(L. 18).— sam 200 40 6 Magha-ba[di P] . . . 

This inscription, also, mentions the lady Dudda (see 'above. No. 460). 

466. — G. [2]47. — Ind. Ant. Yol. XIV. p. 75, and Plate. Wala fragmentary inscription, 
containing the name of Guhasena [of Valabhi] : — 

.... [200*j 40 7 sri-Guhasenab. 

467. — G. 248. — Ind. Ant. Yol. V. p. 207, and Plate. Bhavnagar second plate 1 * of the 
Maharaja Guhasena of Yalabhi [issued from Valabht] : — 

(L. 15). — sam 200 40 8 Asvayuja- . . . (?), 

468. — G. 252. — Bhavnagar Inscr. p. 31, and Plates ; Ind. Ant. Yol. XY. p. 187. Jhar 
plates of the Sdmanta Maharaja Dharasena II.- of Valabhi, issued from Valabhi r — 

(L. 33).— sam 200 50 2 Chaitra-ba 5. 

Genealogy from Bhatarka to Dhruvasena [I.] as in No. 457 ; Dhruvasena’s younger brother, 
the Maharaja Dharapatta ; his son, the Maharaja Guhasena ; his son, the Sdmanta Maharaja 
Dharasena [II.]. 

469. — G. 252.— Gupta Inscr . p. 165, and Plate. Maliya (Janagadh) plates of the 
Maharaja Dharasena II. of Valabhi, issued from Valabhi : — 

(L. 36). — sam 200 50 2 Vaisakha-ba 10 5. 

Genealogy, here and in Nos. 470-472, as in No. 468. 

470. — G. 252.— Ind. Ant. Vol. VII. p. 68, and Plate. Sorath (Junagadh) plates of the 
Maharaja Dharasena II. of Valabhi, issued from^Valabhi ; of the same date. 

471. — G. 252, — Ind. Ant , Vol. VIII. p. 301, and Plate. Bombay As. Soc.’s plates of the 
Maharaja Dharasena II. of Valabhi, issued from Valabhi ; of the same date. 

472. — G. 252.— Bhavnagar Inscr. p. 35, and Plates. Katapur (now Bhavnagar Museum) 
plates of the Maharaja Dharasena II. of Valabhi, issued from Bhadrapattanaka (?) ; of the 
same date. 

473. — G. 289.— Ind. Ant. Vol. VI. p. 11. Wala plates of the Mahasamanta Maharaja 
Dharasena II. 3 of Valabhi, issued from Bhadropatta (?) : — 

(L. 32). — • sam 200 60 9 Chaitra-ba 2. 

Genealogy as in No. 468.— The inscription mentions, as dutaka f the Sdmanta Siladitya. 4 

474. — G. (?) 269. Gupta Inscr. p. 276, 5 and Plate. Bodh-Gaya (dow Calcutta Museum) 
inscription of the Buddhist teacher Mahan&man : — 

(L. 14). — samvat 200 60 9 Chaittra-sudi 7. 

475* — G. 270. Ind. Ant. Vol. VII. p. 71, and Plate. Alina plates of the Mahdsdmanta 
Maharaja Dharasena D. of Valabhi, issued from Bhartritattar.aka (?) : 

(L. 40). — sam 200 70 Pbamu(lgu)na-ba 30. 

Genealogy as in No. 468.— This inscription also mentions, as dutaka t the Sdmanta 
Siladitya. 

1 On the first plate very few words only &re said to be legible. 

3 For spurious plates of his see above. No, 346 of S. 400. 

s In the signature described as Mahddhiraja (?). 

4 This probably is the king’s elder son. 

6 See ibid. p. 324. tub voce Mah&nfiman II; compare also below, No. 525. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


67 


476. — G. 288.— Ind. Ant. Vol. I. p. 46. Wala fragmentary second plate only of Siladitya 
I. Dharm&ditya of Valabhi [the son of Dharasena II.] ; — 

(L. 16). — sam 200 80 6 VaJsakha-va (P) 6. 

477. — G. 286. — Ind. Ant. Vol. XIV. p. 329. and Plates. Wala (now Bombay As. Soc.’s) 
plates 1 of Siladitya I. Dharmaditya of Valabhi, issued from Valabhi ; — 

(L. 35). — sam 2o0 80 6 Jy£sbtha-ba 6. 

Descended from Bhataika, Guhasena ; his son Dharasena [II.] ; his son Siladitya [I.J 
Dharmaditya. — This inscription, again, mentions the lady Dudda (see above. No. 460). 

478. — G. 290. — Ind. Ant. Vol. IX. p. 238. and Plates. Dhank (now Rajkot Museum) 
plates of Siladitya I. Dharmaditya of Valabhi, issued from the homba (?) before the gates of 
Valabhi 

(L. 38). — sam 200 90 Bh[a*]drapada-ba 8. 

Genealogy as in No. 477.— The inscription mentions, as dutaka. the illustrious 
Kharagraha. 2 

479. — Gr. 310. — Ind Ant. Vol VI. p. 13, and Plate; Bhdcnagar Inzer, p. 40, and Plates. 
B5tad (now Bhavnagar Museum) plates of Dhruvasena n. Baladitya of Valabhi. issued from 
Valabhi : — 

(L. 45) — sarii 300 10 Asvayuja-ba 10 5. 

Genealogy as far as Siladitya [I.] Dharmaditya as in No. 4// , his younger biother 
Kharagraha [L] ; his son Dharasena [III.] ; his younger brother Dhruvasena [II.] Baladitya.— 
This inscription, also, mentions the lady Dudda ^see above, No. 460) ; and, as dutaka , the 
Sdmanta Siladitya. 

480. — G. 318 (or 318 ? ).— Ind. Ant. Vol. XIV. p 98 ; Prof BendalTs Journey , p 72, and 
Plate. GolmadhitM (Bhatgaou) inscription of the Maharaja Sivadeva I. of the Lichchhavi 
family, recording an order which was made at the request ot the Mahdsdmanta Amsuvarm&n 5 
issued from Managriha 3 : — 

(L. 15).— aaihvat 300 10 6 (or 8?) Jyaishtha-sukla-diva dasamyam. 

431. — G. 328. — Jour. Bo. As. Soc. Vol. X. p. 77 ; Ind. Ant. Vol. I. p. 14, and Plates. 
Plates of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Dharasena IV. of Valabhi, issued from Valabhi 

(L. 58). — sam 300 20 6 Ashadha-su 10. 

Genealogy as far as Dhruvasena [II.] Baladitya as in No. 479; his son, the 
Paramabhatfdraka Mahdrdjddhirdja Paramehara Ghakravartin DharasSna [IV.].— The 
inscription mentions, as dutaka , the king’s son (rdja-putra) Dhruvasena. 4 

482.— G. 328. Ind. Ant. Vol. I. p. 45. Notice of a Bhavnagar second plate only of the 

Mahdrdjddhirdja Dharasena IV. of \ alabbi, dated— 

« S. 326, the fifth day of the dark half of Magha.” 

This inscription also mentions, as dutaka , the king’s son (rdja-putra) Dhruvasena. 

4g3 q ( 330.— Ind. Ant. Vol. VII. p. 73, and Plate. Alina plates of the Mahdrdjddhirdja 

Dharasena IV. of Valabhi, issued from Bharukachchha :— 

(L. 53). — sam 300 30 Marggasira-su 3. 

Genealogy as in No. 481.— The inscription mentions, as dutaka , the king’s daughter (raja- 
duhitri ) Bhfipa (see No. 484). 

1 This, so far as l know, is the earliest Valabhi inscription which, in the introductory passage, has the reading 
gampanwa, instead of the reading sapatna of the earlier inscriptions ; compare Dr. Hultzsch s remarks in Ep. Ind. 
Vol. III. p. 319. 

* This probubly is the king's younger brother. 3 See beiow, No. 526. 

♦ TbiB probably is the prince who afterwards ruled as Dhruvasena III. 

K. 2 



68 


EPIGKAPHIA IKDICA. 


[Yol. Y. 


484. — G. 330. — Ind. Ant. Yol. XV. p. 339. Kaira plates of the Maharajddhirdja 
Dharasena IV. of Valabhi, issued from Bharukachchha : — 

(L. 57). — sam 300 30 dvi-Marggasira-su 2. 

The date apparently falls in A.D. 648 1 (in Kaliyuga-samvat 3749 expired) when, by the 
rules of mean intercalation, there was an intercalated month which might be called either 
Pausha or Margasira 2 ; (see Sewell and Dikshit’s Ind. Calendar, p. xxiii, and Gupta Inscr. 
Introduction, p. 93 fL). 

Genealogy as in No. 481. — The inscription mentions, as dutaka , the king’s daughter Bhftva 
(see No. 483). 

485. — G. 334. — Up. Ind . Yol. I. p. 86. Kapadvanaj plates of Dhravasena m. of Yalabhi, 

issued from Sirisimminika : — 

(L, 50). — sam 300 30 4 Magha-su 9. 

Genealogy as far as Dharasena [IV.] as in No. 481 ; he was succeeded by Dhravasena 
[III.], the son of Derabhata who was the son of S iladitya [I.], the [elder] brother of the grand- 
father [Kharagraha I.] of Dharasena [IV.]. 

486. — G. 337. — Ind. Ant, Yol. VII. p. 76, and Plates. Alina plates of Kharagraha II. 3 
of Yalabhi, issued from Pulendaka (?) : — 

(L. 50). — sam 300 30 7 Ashadha-ba 5. 

Genealogy as far as Dhruvasena [III.] as in No. 485 ; his elder brother Kharagraha [II.]. 

487. — G. 350.— Ep. Ind. Yol. IY. p. 76. Lunsadi plates of Sil&ditya HI. 4 of Yalabhi, 
issued from Kbetaka : — 

(L. 67). — sam 300 50 Phalguna (na)-ba 3. 

Genealogy as far as Kharagraha [II. ] Dharmaditya as in No. 486 ; after him, Siladitya 
[III.], the son of Siladitya [II.] 5 who was the elder brother of Kharagraha [II.]. — The 
inscription mentions, as dutaka , the king’s son ( [rdja-putra ) Dhruvasena. 

488. — G. 352.— Ind. Ant. Yol. XI. p. 306 ; Bhdvnagar Inscr. 45, and Plates. Lunsadi 
(now Bhavnagar Museum) plates of Siladitya HI. of V alabhi, issued from Meghavena s— 

(L. 65). — saiii 300 50 2 Bh&drapada-su I. 

Genealogy as in No. 487. — This inscription also mentions, as dutaka , the king’s son 
(■ rdja-putra ) Dhruvasena. 

489 — G. 305 (?).— Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Yol. VII. p. 968. Kaira plates of Sil&ditya III. 
of Yalabhi r — 

(L. 66).— sam || 365 || (?) VaiSakha-Sa. || 1 || (?). 

Genealogy as in No. 487.— This inscription also mentions, as dutaka, the king’s son (rdja- 
putra) Dhruvasena. 

490 — G. 372.— Ind . Ant. Yol. Y. p. 209, and Plate. Bb&vnagar plates of the 
Maharajddhirdja Siladitya IV. of Yalabhi, issued from the camp at the tank of Bal&ditya .* — 

(L. 58). — sam 300 70 2 Sravana-ba 9. 


1 The year 330 of the date would thus correspond to the [Kdrttikddi] Vikratna year 330 + 375=705 expired; 
see Ep. Ind. Vol. III. p. 303. 

* The case, however, is not free from difficulties. According to the 8Arya- «nd Arya-txddhSntas, and by 
the modern rale of naming- intercalated mouths, the intercal&ied month would be Pausha ; and it would be Pansha 
also by the Brahma-siddhdnia and the earlier (Brahmagupta's) role. And MArgai.r* it can be called only on 
the supposition that it was calculated by the Surya - or Arya-$iddhdnta f and named in accordance with Brahma- 
gupta's rule. Compare below, No. 530 of R. (?) 34. 

> In later inscriptions sen-named Dkarmdditya. 

* In the inscription* of his successor described as Paramabhatfdraka MdKdrdjddhirdja ParamUwo. 

4 I follow Dr. Fleet in calling this Silftditya ‘ Sillditya II/ By other scholars he is not numbered, with the 
result that the kings of the same name, who are here numbered from III, to YU., in other account* bear the 

numbers from II. to VI. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


69 


Genealogy as far as Siladitya [III ] as in No. 4S7 ; his son, the Paramabhattaraka 
Mahardjddhirdja Paramehara Siladitya [IV.], — The inscription mentions, as dutaka , the 
king’s son (raja-putra) Kharagraha. 

491. — G. 375. — Wiener Zeitschrift , Vol. I. p.253, and Plates ; Bhdvnaqar Inscr. p. 55, 
and Plates. Devali (now Bhavnagar Museum) plates of the Mahardjddhirdja Siladitya IV. of 
Valabhi, issued from the village of Purnika : — 

(L. 60). — sam 300 70 5 Jyeshtha-ba 5. 

Genealogy as in No. 490. — This inscription also mentions, as dutaka , the king’s son 
( rdja-putra ) Kharagraha. 

492. — G. 370. — From impressions supplied by Dr. Burgess. Plates of the 
Mahardjddhirdja Siladitya IV. of Valabhi 1 

(L. 59). — sam 300 70 6 Marggasira-su 10 5. 

Genealogy as in No. 490. — This inscription also mentions, as dutaka , the kings son 
( rdja-putra ) Ediaragraha. 

493. — G. 382.— From impressions supplied by Dr. Fleet. Plates of the Mahardjddhirdja 
Sil&ditya IV. of Valabhi, issued from Valabhi : — 

(L. 65). — sam 300 80 2 Marggasira-£u 6. 

Genealogy as in No. 490. — The inscription mentions, as dutaka , the king’s son (rdja- 
putraj Dharasena. 

494 — G. 380. — Ind. Ant. Vol. IX. p. 163, and Plates. Chahgu-Narayana (near 
Katmandu) pillar inscription of M&nadeva :— 

(L. 1). — s am vat 300 80 6 Jyeshtha-mase ^ukla-pakshe pratipadi 1 [Ro]hininakshatra- 
yukte chandramasi muhurtte pra3aste=bhijiti. 

28th April, A.D. 705 ; see ibid. Vol. XVII. p. 210, and Gupta Inscr. Introduction, p. 95. 

Vrishadeva ; his son Samkaradeva ; his son Dharmadeva, married Rajyavati ; their son 
M&nadeva. (Compare below, No. 541.) 

495, G. 403. — Jour. Bo. As. Soc.V ol. XI. p. 335, and Plates. Gondal plates of the 

Mahardjddhirdja Sil&ditya V. of Valabhi, issued from Khetaka : — 

(L. 61). — sam 400 3 Vai4akha-su[ddha 10 3 ?]. 

Genealogy as far as Siladitya [IV.] as in No. 490 ; his son, the Paramabhattaraka 
Mahdrujddhirdja ParamSsvara Siladitya [V.]. — The inscription mentions, as dutaka, the kings 
son (rdja-putra) Siladitya. 

495 G. 403. Jour. Bo. As. Soc. Vol. XI. p. 335, and Plates. G6ndal plates of the 

Mahdrdjddhirdja Sil&ditya V. of Valabhi, issued from Khetaka : — 

(L. 60). — sam 400 3 Magha-ba 10 2. 

Genealogy as in No. 495. — This inscription also mentions, as dutaka, the king’s son 
(rdja-putra) Siladitya. 

497 G. 413.— In d. Ant. Vol. IX. p 167, and Plate. Devapatana (near K&tmftndu) 

fragmentary inscription of the time of Manadeva :— 

(L. 1). — samvat 400 10 3. 

498 q.. 435. l n d . Ant. Vol. IX. p. 167, and Plate. Lagant61 (Katmandu) fragmentary 

inscription of the Mahdrdja Vasantastoa, 8 issued from M&nagpiha 

(L. 20).— samvat 400 30 5 [A^vajynji £ukla-div& 1. 


1 Tbe name of the pUce from which the grant was issued is illegible. 


2 See below, No. 541. 



70 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. Y. 


499. — G. 441 — Ind. Ant. Yol. YI. p. 17, and Plate. Lunavada plates of the 
Maharajadhiraja Sil&ditya YI. ofValabbi, issued from Godrahaka : — 

(L. 70).— samvat 400 40 1 (?) Karfctika-su 5 (?). 

Genealogy as far as Siladitya [V.] as in No. 495; his son, the Paramabkat(draka 
Maharajddhirdja Paramesvata Siladitya [VI.]. 

500. — G. 447. — Gupta Inscr. p. 173, and Plate. Alina (now Royal. As. Soc.’s) plates of 
the Maharajadhiraja Siladitya VII. Dhrubata 1 of Valabhi, issued from Anandapura : — 

(L. 77). — 8amva[t]sara-sata-chatashtaye saptaehatvarinsad- 2 adhike Dyeptha(Jyesbtha)- 
^uddha-parhchamyath ankatafh*] sava** 400 40 7 Sre(jye)shtha-ga(sn) 5. 

Genealogy as far as Siladitya [YI.] as in No. 499 ; his son Dhrubata, styled the 
Paramabhattaraka Makar djddhird ] a Pararnesvara Siladitya [VII,]. 

G. 535. Ind . Ant. Yol. IX. p. 168, and Plate. Lagant61 (Katmandu) fragmen- 
tary inscription ; mentions, as dutaka , the king’s son [raja-putra) Vi kra masons 

(L. 18). samvat 500 30 5 Sra[vana]-sukla-diva saptamyam. 

G. 585.— Ind. Ant. Vol. II. p. 257, and Plate. Morbi second plate only of 

J&ihka : — 

(L. 16). ■ Pamchasitya yute^tifce samanam ^ata-pamchak6 j G[an]pte dadav-ado nripal? 
s6parage=rkka-mamdale || 

(L. 19). — sariivat 585 Phalgana-sudi 5. 4 

503. Valabhi-s. 850. — - Wiener Zeitschrift, Yol. III. p. 7 ; Bhdvnagar inscr . p. 186. 

Yeraval inscription of the temple-priest Bhava-Brihaspati 6 : 

(L. 54). — ■ Valabhi-samvat 850 Asha[dba] .... 

The inscription mentions the Cbaulukyas Jayasimha-Siddharaja and Kumarapala (who 
defeated the king Ballala 6 of Dhara). 

504. Valabhi-s. 850 (?).— Bhavnagar Inscr. p. 184. Juuagadh fragmentary inscription 
of the time of (?) the Chaulukya Kumarapala ; is said to be dated:— 

(L. 34). — Valabhi-samvat 850 £ri-Simh a- samvat 60 varshe.7 

505. Valabhi-s. 911. Bhdvnagar Inscr. p. 161, and Plate. GhelarA (near Mahgrol) 
fragmentary inscription : — 

(L. 1).— srimad- Valabhi-samvat 911 [varshS] . . . [4u]di 5 Sukre. 

506. — Valabhl-s. 827 .— Bp. Ind. Yol. HI. p. 303, and Plate. Verbal image 
inscription : — 

(L. 1)- srimad-Valabhi-sa[ih]vat 927 varshe Phalguna-siadi 2 Some || 

Monday, 19th February A.D. 1246. 

507 ;~ Valabhi - 8 - 945.— Veraval inscription of the reign of the Chaulukya (V&ghela) 
Mahdrdjddhirdju Arjunadeva; see above, No. 228 of V. 1320. 


d. Undated Inscriptions connected with those nnder D. 

508.- Gupta laser, p. 141, and Plate. MSharauli (Mihraull) iron pillar inscription, being 


a posthumous eulogy of the conquests of a powerful king Chandra . 8 


3 Read samvat. 


1 J.e. Dhruvabhata. 2 Read °tvdriSniad-. 

\ T It XV1L p - 2 \ 1 -r d XX - P- 381 ; wTnVoductloa.p. 97. 

* See below, No. 527. 6 See above, Uo. 210. * 

;™ 8 csn ”f be COrr y‘- ^cordiug to the date of the Verival inscription of the reign of Arjnnsddva (No. 2*8) 
the d.fference between a Vaiabhi year and the corresponding Simha year (for the month of A.hi^ha is 79*. 
while here the difference between 850 and 60 is 790. * 1 

8 See Gupta Inter, p. 140, note 1, and Jour. Rot/. At. Soc . 1897, p. 9 ff. 


Appekdix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


71 


500. — Gupta Inscr. p. 6. and Plate. Allahabad pillar inscription of the Ma hdrdjddhirdja 
Samudragupta , 1 who captured and again liberated <fc Maheudiu of Kosala, Vyaghraraja of 
Mahakantara, Mantaraja of Kerala, Mahendra of Pishtapura. Svamidatta of Kottura on the 
hill, Damana of Erandapalla, Yishnugopa of Kanchi, Nilaraja of Avamukta, Ha^tivarman of 
Vehgi, Ugrasena of Palakka, Kubera of Devarashtra, Dhanamjaya of Knsthalapnra,’* 2 and all 
the other kings of Dakshinapatha, and exterminated ‘‘ Rudradeva, M^+ila, NagaJattn. 
Chandravarman, Ganapatinaga, Nagasena, Achyuta, Nandin, Balavarmai),” and other kings of 
Aryavarta. (A kdvya in verse and prose, composed by the Santa hivigrahika Kumdramatya 
Mahddandanayakj Harishena, the son of Dhruvabhuti). 

510. — Gupta Inscr. p. 20, and Plate. £ran (now Calcutta Museum) fragmentary 

inscription of Samudragupta. 

511. — Gupta Inscr. p. 256, and Plate. Gaya (spurious) plate 3 of the Mahdrdjadhirdja 
Samudragupta, issued from Ayodhya : — 

(L. 14). — samvat 9 4 Yaisakha-di 10. 4 
Genealogy as in No. 439. 


512. — Gupta Inscr. p. 35, and Plate. Udayagiri cave inscription of the time of 
Chandra gupt a II., 5 recording the excavation of the cave by the order of his minister, the poet 
Virasena, otherwise called Saba, of Pataliputra. 


513. — Gupta Inscr. p. 26, and Plate. Mathura (now Lahore Museum) fragmentary 
inscription [of the Mahdrdjadhirdja Chandragupta II.]* 

514. — Gupta Inscr. p. 40, and Plate. Gadhwa (now Calcutta Museum) fragmentary 
inscription of the reign of the Mahdrdjadhirdja Kumaragupta I. 6 : 

(L. 2) . — sri- Kumaragupta-rajya-[samvatsare] divase 10' [asyam 

divasa-purv vayam] . 

515 . — Gupta Inscr. p. 265, and Plate. Gadhwa (now Calcutta Museum) fragmentary 
inscription [of the time of Kumaragupta I. ?]. 

510 Gupta Inscr . p. 49, and Plate. Bihar fragmentary pillar inscription of the time of 

the Mahdrdjadhirdja Skandagupta . 8 , . . 

Genealogy as far as Kumaragupta [I.] as iu No. 439 ; his son, the Matiarajadhiraja 

Skandagupta. 


517 — Qupta Inscr. p. 53. and Plate. Bhitari pillar inscription of Skandagupta, recording 
the installation of an image of the god Vishnu and the allotment to the idol of a village. 
Genealogy as in No. 516. 

518.- Jour. Beng. As. Soc.YoU LVIII. Parti, p. 89, and Plate; Ind. Ant. Yol. XIX. 
p 225 Bhitari (now Lucknow Museum) seal of the Mahdrdjddhtrdja Kumaragupta 

Genealogy as far as Kumaragupta [I.] as in No. 439; his son. from Anantadev, the 
Mahdrdjadhirdja Puragupta; his son, from Vatsadevi. the MahdrdjddhirdjaS aras.mhagupta : 
his son, from Mahalakshmidfivi (?), the Mahdrdjadhirdja Knmaragnpta [II-J. 


S5 published translation, but it should be stated that Dr Fleet has the passage, 
translated by * Mantaraja .... on the hiU,' under further consideration ; compare also Bomba, gazetteer. 

> Xhe^rant j acco^d^ng 0 *^ Dr^Fl^t*, haa the genial appearance of having been fabricated somewhere about 
the beginning of the eighth century A.D. 

; ttST" G ' Pta "sLboYVc.. 439-443 of O. 96-1*9. 



72 


EPIGRAPHIA IKDICA. 


[Yol. V. 


519. — Ep. Ind. Yol, I. p. 239, and Plate. Kura (now Lahore Museum) inscription 1 of the 
reign of a Edjddhiraja Maharaja Toramana SMha (or SMhi) Jauvla, recording the 
construction of a Buddhist convent : — 

(L. 1). — , [raja] . raja-maharaja-T6ramana-sha[hi] . Jah • . [bhivardhamana-rajye . . 
samvatsare] .... me Margasiramaaa-sukla-dvitiyayam. 

520. — Gupta laser . p. 159, and Plate. Bran stone boar inscription of the first year of the 
reign of the Mahdrdjadhirdja Toramana, recording the building of the temple, in which the 
boar stands, by Dhanyavishnu, the younger brother of the deceased Maharaja Matriviphnu 2 

(L. 1). — Varshe pratham£ prithivim prithn-kirttau prithu-dyutau maharajadhiraja-sri- 
Tbramane prasasati 1 ( 1| ) Phalguna-divase dasame | ity=evam rajyavarsha-masa-dinaih [I*] 
etasyam purvvayam | sva-lakshanair=yukta-purvvayam |( (| ) 

521. — Gupta Inscr. p. 162, and Plate. Gwalior (now Calcutta Museum) inscription of 
the 15th year of the reign of Mihirakula 3 (who broke the power of Pasupati), the son of 
Toramana, recording the building of a temple of the Sun, by a person named Matricheta, on 
the mountain Gopa (Gwalior) : — 

(L. 4). — , . . abhivarddhamana-rajye pamchadas-abde . . . Karttika-mase prapt[e # ] 
gagana-[patau (?) nijrmmale bhati .... tithi-nakshatra-muhurtte samprapte suprasasta- 
dine. 

522. — Gupta Inscr. p. Ill, and Plate. Bhumar& pillar inscription of the [Parivrajaka] 
Maharaja Hastin and the Maharaja Sarvanatha [of Uchchakalpa] : — 

(L. 7). — Mahamaghe sambatsare 4 * Karttikamasa-divasa 10 9. 

Ibid. Introduction, p. 105 ff., it is shewn that the date might correspond to either the 13th 
October A.D. 508 (in Gupta-sarhvat 1S9) or the 2nd October A.D. 520 (in Gupta-samvat 
201); but according to Ind . Ant . Yol. XIX. p.228 the Mahamagha samvatsara of this date 
commenced in A.D. 484 (in Gupta-samvat 165). Compare above, Xos. 389, 390, 392, and 451, 
453 and 456. 

523. — Bhdvnagar Inscr. p. 30, and Plate. Bahkodi (now Bhavnagar Museum) fragmentary 
inscription, containing the name of Guhasena 6 [of Yalabhi] 

524. — Ind. Ant. Yol. XII. p. 148 ; Bhdvnagar Inscr . p. 64, and Plate. Gopnath first plate 
only of a Yalabhi grant, which breaks off in the description of Dharasena III., the son of 
Kharagraha I. ; issued from Y alabhi. 

525. — Gupta Inscr . p. 279, and Plate. Bodh-Gaya Buddhist image inscription, recordirg 
the presentation of the statue, on the pedestal of which it is engraved, by the Sthavira 
Mahanaman. 6 

526. — Ind. Ant. Yol. IX. p. 168, and Plate. Fragmentary inscription from near the 
Sivapuri hill, five miles north of Katmandu, of the Maharaja Sivadeva I. of the Lichchhavi 
family, recording some act done at the request of the Mahasdmanta Am6uvarinan ; issued 
from Managriha. 7 

527. -— Bhdvnagar Inscr. p. 208. Yeraval fragmentary inscription of the temple-priest 
Bh£va-Brihaspati ; 9 mentions the Chaulukyas [ Jayasimha-] Siddharaja, Kumarapala, Ajayapala, 
Mularaja II., and Bhimadeva II. 


1 Of about “the fourth or fifth century A. D.” There is no evidence to shew that the T6ramdna of this 

inscription is in any way connected with the Toramana of No, 520. 

3 See above, No. 454 of G. 165. 3 See above. No. 329. 

1 See above, Nos. 464—467 of G. 240 ( ? 237) — 248. 

? See above. No. 80 of G. 316 (or 318 ?). 


4 Read samvatsard. 

6 See above, No. 474 of G. ( ? ) 269. 

8 See above, No. 503 of Valabhi-8. 859. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


£.— Inscriptions dated according to the Harsha Era. 


528. — H. 22.— Ep. Ind. Yoi. IV. p. 210, and Plate. Banskhera (now Lucknow Museum) 
plate of the Mahdrdjddhiraja Harsha, issued from Vardhamanakoti : — 

(L. 16). — samvat 20 2 l Kartti[ka # ]-vadi 1. 

The Maharaja Naravardhana ; his son, from Vajripidevi, the Maharaja Rajyavard liana [ Lj; 
bis sou, from Apsarodevi, the Maharaja Adityavardhana ; his son, from Mahasenagaptadcvh 
the Mahdrdjddhiraja Prabhakaravardhana ; his son, from Yasomatidevi, the Mahdrdjddhiraja 
Rajyavardhana [II.] (subdued Devagupta and other kings); his younger brother, the ILahd- 
rdjddhirdja Harsha. — The inscription mentions, as officials, the Mahdsd manta Skaudagnpt i 
and the Mahdsamanta Maharaja Bhana (F). 

529. — H. 25.— Ep* Ind . Vol. I. p. 72. Madhuban (now Lucknow Museum) plate of the 
Mahdrdjddhiraja Harsha, issued from Kapitthika 2 : — 

(L, 18). — samvat 20 5 Marggaiirsha-vadi 6. 

Genealogy as in No. 528.; — The inscription mentions, as officials, the Mahd$dma*tsa 
Skandagupta and the Samanta Maharaja Isvaragupta. 

530. — H. (?) 34, 3 — Prof. Bendall’s Journey , p. 74, and Plate. Sundbara damaged 
inscription of the Mahdsamanta [Arhsuvarman 4 ], issued from Kailasakutabhavana ; — 

(L. 16). — samvat 30 4 prathama-Pausha-iukla-dvifciyayam. 

Judging by the date of No. 542 of B. 155, the month of Pausha of Harsha-samvat 34 
would be expected to fall in A.D. 639-40 (in Kaliyug^ -samvat 3740 expired), but in that year 
no month was iutercalhry. In (Kaliyuga- samvat 3741 expired^) A.D. 640-41, by the rules ot 
mean intercalation, there was an intercalated month which might be called Pausha on the 
supposition 5 that it was calculated by the Brahma-siddhdnta , and named according to the 
modem (not Brahmagupta’s) rule for naming intercalated months, but which ordinarily would 
be called Margasira. (See Sewell and Dikshit’s Ind. Calendar , p. xxiii). 

531. — H. (?) 34.— Ind. Ant. Vol. IX. p. 169, and Plate. Bungmati (near Katmandu) 
fragmentary inscription of the Mahdsamanta Amsuvarman, issued from Kailasakuta- 
bhavana : — 

(L. 14).— samvat 30 4 Jyeshta(shtha)^akla-dasamyam. 

532. EL (?) 30. Ind . Ant. Vol. IX. p. 170, and Plate. Devapatana (near Katmandu) 

inscription of Amsuvarman, issued from Kailasakhtabhavana : 

(L. 22). — samvat 30 9 VaiSakba-sukla-diva dasarayam. 

The inscription mentions, as dutaka , the Yuvardja Udayad&va* It also mentions 
AmSuvarman’ s sister Bbogadevi, who was the wife iff the king’s son (rdja-putra) Surasena, and 
the mother of Bbogavarman and Bhagyadevl. 

523 45 (?).—• Ant* Vol. IK. p. 171, and Plate. Satdhara (near Katmandu) 


inscription of Aihsuvarman : — 

(L. 1).— samvat 40 5 (? 7 ) Jyeshtha-§ukla . . • • 

1 ThU deno ted by a numeral figure, but the preceding • 20 * and tbe following * 1 ’ by numerical symbols. 

* The published text has FitUkikd In line 10 reference is made to a forged grant {kuja-idsana) 

. Prof H L6ri. in the Asiatiqne, 1894, Juillet-Aodt, p. 62, has referred this date (and those of the 

following dUes, in which n sign of interrogation bs, been put here after H.) to a .local era the epoch of which would 
fall in a!d. 695. But since for Amsuvarman we have the date No. 533, of the year +4 or 4.5, even the adoption 
of such a new era would not meet one of Prof. Levi’s main objection, to the assignment of tins date (of the year 34) 
to the Harsha era-tbe objection, namely, that according to Hiueu Ts.ang s account AmSuvarman could not have 


lived after A.D. 637. 

4 See above. No, 480 of G. 316 (or 318 ?)* am aai a qqc 

* This supposition would be the very revene of the supposition made above, under No. 484 of G. 330. 

f bdOW ^|Q f 54l « w, 

T According to Dr. Fleet, the year of tbe date is either 41 or 45 ; see Gupta Inter* Introduction, p. 180, Y . 



7i 


EPIGRAPEIA IXDICA. 


[Yd. V. 


531 — H, C ; ) 4 S.— In2. Ant. Yob IX. p. 171, and Plate. Lalitapattana (near Katmandu) 
in- *•_».. ct Jisniiugnpi^, issued from Kailasakutabhavana ; — 

C J / *21 ». — Muhvat ±0 S Karttika-sukla 2. 

TX- :: 'script Lm mentions, in connection -with Managriha, the Maharaja Dliruvadeva ; l * 
also the 3 f vHi : raja A ih invar man ; and, as dutaka, the Ye card' a VLlinugapta. 

535. — H. 08.— Gupta laser, p. 210. and Plate. Shalipur image inscription of the re ; "n of 
Adityasei ade^a- [of the family of the Guptas of Atagadha], recording the installation of the 
iiuaco by iho " ieral (bal-ddJoikrita) Salapaksha at, apparently, Nalanda (?) : — 

(L. 2,.— jumvat 60 6 Margga-sudi 7 (?) asyan^divasa-masa-samvatsur-anrpurvTyaiii. 

536. — H. (?) 82 (?). — Prof. Bendall's Journey , p. 77, and Plate. Gairidhara fragmentary 
inscription, issued from Kailasakutabhavana: — 

(L. 29 j. — samvat 80 2 (?) [Bhadra]pada-snkla-cli . . . 

The inscription mentions, as did aka , the Yuvaraja Skandadeva (?). 

537. — H. (?) 119. — Ind. Ant. Vol. IX. p. 174, and Plate. Lagantol (Katmandu) inscrip- 
tion of the Mahtirdjndhirdja Sivadeva H., 3 issued from Kailasakutabhavana : — 

(L. 23). — samvat 100 10 9 Phalguna-su kK-diva dasamyam. 

The inscription mentions, as dutaka , the king's son (ruja-putra) Jayadeva. 

538. — H. (?) 143 (?)• — Ind. Ant. Yol. IX. p. 176, and Plate, Katmandu fragmentary 

inscription of the Mafulrrfjddkirdja [Sivadeva II.?] : — 

(L. 37). — samvat 100 40 (?) 4 3 *\shtha-suklu-diva trayodasyam 1 

539. — H. (?) 145. — Ini. Ant . \ ol. IX. p. 177, and Plate. Lalitapattana (near Katmandu) 

fragmentary inscription : — 

(L. 17). — samvat 100 40 5 Pausha-sukla-diva tritiyayam 1 

The inscription mentions, as dutaka, the Yuvaraja Vijayacleva. 

540. — H. (r) 151.— Prof. Bendall s Jourmy, p. 79, and Plato. Inscription of a private 
pei sou, on a water-conduit slab near the temple of Jaisi, Katmandu : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 100 50 1 Yaisakha-sukla-dvitiyuyam. 

511.- EL (?) 153. Ind. Ant . Yol. IX. p. 1/8, and Plate. Katmandu inscription of 
Jayadeva Farachakrakama ; (with the exception of five verses, which are by the king himself, 
composed by Buddhakirti) : — 

(L. 35), ■ — samvat 100 50 3 5 Karttika-sukla- navamy am || 

In the solar race there was Lichehhavi ; in his family was Supushpa, born at Pu^bpapura 
(Pataliputra) ; after him came, omitting 23 kings, Jayadeva; after him, omitting 11 kings, 
Vrishadeva; his son Sariikaradera ; his son Dharmaduva ; his son Manadeva (see Nos. 494 
and 497); bis son Mahideva ; his son Vasantadeva (the Vasantasena of No. 498).— -The 
inscription then has Udayadeva (mentioned as Yuvaraja in No. 532) ; [his son] Naremlradcva ; 
his son, Sivadeva [II.] (Nos. 537 and 538), married Yatsadovi, a daughter of the Mnukhari 
Bhogavarman and daughter’s daughter of Adityasena of Magadba (°No. 535) ; their son, 
Jayadeva Parachakrakama, married Rajyamati, the daughter of Harshaddva, king of Gauda, 
Udra etc and of Kalihga and Kosala, of the family of king Bhagadatta (or of the Bhagadatta 6 
kings). (See ibid . Yol. XIY. p. 346 ff. and Oupta Inscr. Introduction, p. 185 ff.). 

542. — H. 155.— Ind. Ant . Yol. XY. p. 112, and Plate. Dighwa-Dubaull plate of the 
Maharaja Mahendrapaladeva, issued from Mahodaya (Kanauj) : — 

(L. 12). — savituh Kumbha-saiiikrantan snatva 

(L. 14). — samvatsra(tsr6 ?) 100 50 5 MAgha-sudi 10 niva(ba)ddham. 

i See below, No. 557. 3 See below, No. 550. s See below, No. 541. 

4 This may possibly be 20 or SO. 3 This ‘ 3 1 is denoted by a numeral figure. 

6 For the lineage of Bhagadatta, see below. Nos. 652, and 711-714. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


75 


20 fell January A.D. 701 ; see Gup+a laser. Introduction p. 178. 

The Maharaja Devasakti; his son, from Bhuyikadevi, the Maharaja Yatsaraja: Lis son, 
from Sundaridev'i, the Maharaja Nagabhata ; Lis son, from Isatadevi. the Maharaja 
Ramabhadra; his son, from Appadevi, the Maharaja Bhoja [I.] 1 ; his son, from 
Chandra bha^Mbkudevi, the Maharaja Muhciidrapala (surnamed Bhaka r[. 

543. — H. 184 .— Ind. Ant . Yol. XXVI. p. 29. Punjab inscription of the reign of a certain 
Vigraha (?) : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 134 Sravaua-vati 15 atra dine. 

544. — H. 188.— Ind. Ant. Yol. XY. p. 140, and Plate. Bengal As. Soc.’s plate of the 
Maharaja Vinayakapaladeva, issue 1 from Mahodaya Kanauj'j : — 

(L. 14). — shashtlivaiu (?) Ganiraya L iii # ] snatva 

(li. 17)— s am vat sro 100 80 S Phalguna-vadi 9 niva(ba)ddham !| 

Genealogy as fur as Muhendrapalu as in No. 542 ; his son, from Dolianagadovi, t Jio 
Maharaja Bhoja [II.]; his brother, the sou of Mahbulrapnla from M th’devidevi, the 
Maharaja Yinayabapala [surnamed Har&ka ?]. 

515. — H. 218. — Ind. Ant. Yol. XXYI. p. 31 ; Arrhn?!. Si'-/ v. of India , Yol. X. Plate is. 1, 
and Yol. XXL Plate xvi. A. Khajurhho image inseri prion : — 

(L. 2). — samvatsrd 200 10 b Magha-sudi 1"). 

540. — H. 278. — Up. Ind. Yol. I. p. 186. Peheva (Pehoa) inscription of the reign of the 
Mahd r*i jdd hirdja Bhojadeva, the successor of the Mahdrujadhirdja Rdmabhadrad£va, 2 [of 
Kanauj] : — 

(L. 2). — samvat sura-® a ta*d rare shatsaptaty-adhikd Yaisukhamasa-suklapaksha- 

saptamyuih sain vat, 276 Y.i‘>.tkln-sudi 7 a.syam sanavatsara-masa-divasa-p^rvvuyfuk tithav=iha 
sri-Prithudak-5dhMiLhuae p»'L\old-chaturddasyaiii 3 ghoruku-} utrruyam *:uuu\ata .... 

547. — U. 503 (or 562 ?). — hid. Ant. Yol. XXYI. p. 32; AiCna^d. Sure . of India, Yol. 
XIY, p. 72, and Plato xsii, 3. Notice of a Panjaur inscription 

(L, 1). — sariimvat 503 < or 562 r) Jethu-sfidi 9 vara tiftkrah. 

Friday, 17tli May A.D. 1103. 

e. — Undated Inscriptions connected with those under E. 

545. — Gupta laser, p. 232. and Plate. Sonpas copper s-ul in-eiMption of the 
MaMrdjd Ihirdja Harshavardhana. 

Genealogy from Rajvavardhana [I.] to Harshavardhana (Harsh a) as in No. <>2S of H. 22. 

5P9. Ep. Ind. Yol. I. p. 130, and Plate. Kndarkep (Gavidhumai, now Lucknow 

Musynm) inscription, 4 5 recording the erect; ju of some building in memory of Takshadatta Lv 
his father Uurivarruan (Mamma), the sou of Hariuatta who had bcun ’rhol to eminnice by 
the illustrious Harsha* [of Kanauj] ; composed by Bhadra. ik 1 son ot ^ amunu). 

550, On phi Inscr . p. 20*2, and Plate. Aphsad inscription of Adityasena^ [of the family 

of the Gaptas of Magadha], his mother Srmniti, and his wile KomnL vi. 

Krishnagupta ; his son Harshagupta ; his son Jivinguptr L I._ : L;< vn KunrmagupM \jit 
war with [the Maukhari] Isanavarman 0 ) ; his son Damo lor m'npta (Ld ia a battle with the 
Maukhari) ; his son Mahasonagnpta (defeated Susthituvarman) ; his sou Madhavagup; ■ 
(contemporary of Harsha [of Kanau j]) ; his son Aditvasena* 


1 See below. No. 710 of H. 100. 

8 See above. No. 15 of V. 932. 

8 This is the 14th tit hi of the dark half of the aminta Chaitra or purnuninta Yi\\AA\.\ ] see Lid. Ant. 
VoL XXVI. p. 179. 

4 Of about the latter half of the seventh century A.D. 

5 See above. No. 535 of II. 6b. 


6 See below. No, 551. 



76 


EPIGKAPHIA INDTCA. 


[Vol. V. 


~ Inscr . n. 212. Mandar Hill rock inscriptions of the Maliard jddhirdja 

.. ^.yasenadeva «>f the faidly of the Guptas of Magadha] and his wife Ko^adevi. 1 * 

552. — Gupta Inscr. p. 215. and Plate. Deo-Barauark inscription of the Af«Adra/ad/nrd/a 
Jiritaguptadeva II, [of the family of the Guptas of Magadha], issued from Gdmatikottaka. 

Madbavagapta ; his sen, from Srimati, Adityasena ; his son, from Kdnadevi, the 
Makar jd'Jiirdja Devagupta ? his son. from Karnaladevi, the Mahdrajddhirdja Yishnugupta; 
ids 3 > :i. from JjVulevi, the M and rdjadhirdja Jivitagupta [II.]. — The inscription mentions, as 
previous kings, B.iladitya, Saivavarman, and Avantivarman. 

55?*. — G'fpta Inscr . p. 229, and Plate. Jaunpur fragmentary inscription of Isvaravarman, 
of the lineage of the Mukhara kings. 3 

554, — Giipta Inscr. p. 2*20, and Plate. Asiigadh copper seal inscription of the Mankhari 
Mahdrajddhirdja Sarvavarman. 

The Makar dj . Harivarcn an ; his'son, from Jayasvamini, the Maharaja AcHtyavarman ; his 
on, from Ilarshagupta, the Maharaja Iscaravarman ; his son, from UpaguptA, the Mahd- 
rdjadhirdja fsanavarman ; 4 his son, from [Lakshmi]vati, the Mahdrajddhirdja Sarvavarman. 

555. — Gup "a Inscr. p. 022. and Plate. Barabar Hill cave inscription of the Mankhari 
Anantavarman, Tie son of Siirdula. 

5 oil. — • Go.pt \ loser, pp. 02 1 and 227, and Plates. Nagarjnni Hill cave inscriptions of [the 
Maukhar^ Anantavarman, the son of Sardulavarman who was the son of Yajhavarman. 

557. — Ltd. Ant. Vol. JX. p. 173, and Plate. Katmandu fragmentary inscription of 
Jishnugupta, 5 issued from Kailasakutabhavana ; mentions [as lord paramount ?] the Bhat0raka 
[Mahdjraj-x Dhruvadeva of the Lichchhavi family, who resided at Managriha. 

558. - — J id. ArJ. Vol. IX. p. 174, and Plate. Katm&nda fragmentary inscription of tho 

reign ot Jishnugupta. 

F. — Inscriptions dated according to the Newftr Era. 

559. — N- 203. — Prof. Bendali’a Journey , p. 80, and Plate. Lalitapattana (near KStm&^du) 
image inscription of V&nadeva, the son of a king Yasddeva : — 

(L. 1). — Tribhir=varshaih samayukte samvatsara-sata-dvaye 1 VaiMkha-Sukla- 

8a(sa)ptamydm Budhe Pushy-ddaye subha(bhe) || 

Wednesday, 26th April A.D. 1083 ; 6 see Ind . Ant. Vol. XVII. p. 248, No. 7. 

560. — N. 250. — Prof. BendalPs Journey , p. 81, and Plate. VaramtM (K&$mAndu) 
inscription of the reign of the Rdjadhirdja M&naddva 

(L. 1). — samvat 200 50 9 7 Bhadi-apada-krishpa-saptamyam | 

561. — N. 512. — Prof. BendalTs Journey , p, 83, and Plate. Lalitapattana (near KitmSpdc) 
inscription of the reign of the M aha rdjadhirdja Jayasthitir&jam&ll&d6v& 6 

(L. 1). — sriman-Naipalika-samyat 512 Vaisakha-krishna-shashthyam tithau || Gara- 
karape 9 | Visva(sva)-muhurtto Bravana-nafeshatre | Aindra-y6gA | Aditya-v&$a(sa)r6 If 

Sunday, 12th May A.D. 1392 ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XVII. p. 249, No. 12. 

i For a modern Deogtwr inscription winch glorifies Adityasena and his wife * K6shad6vl/ see Gupta Inter, 

p. 213, note. 

s gee bel >w, No. 6l 4 . For another Devagupta, see above. No. 528, 

s ^ Mo 554. 4 See above. No. 660* 1 See above. No. 634 of H. (?) 48. 

• Un this day the tithi of the date commenced 4 h, 7 tn. after mean snnrise. 

» This ‘9’ is denoted by a numeral figure. • Called SthitxnoUa in No. 563. 

? The published text has iaraJearane. 



INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


77 


Appendix.] 


562. — N. 533.— Ind. Ant. VoL IX. p. 183. Katmandu inscription of the Mahdrdjddhirdja 
Jayajotimalladeva : — 

(V. 11). — Samvan=Nepalak-akhye $ribhuvana-dahane Kama-'bane prayatfc Haghe sukle cha 
Kame tithi ^ vidite Priti-yoge cha punye | vare Push-abhidhane Makara-ravi-gate Yugrua- 
rasau sasanke ...... samvat 533 Magha-sukla-trayodasl Punarvaau-nakshatiA 

Priti-yoge Aditya-vare. 

Sunday, 15th January A.D. 1413 ; see ibid . Vol. XVII. p. 247, No. 3. 

Sthitimalla 1 * of the solar race married Rajalladevi ; their sons Jayadharmamalla, Jayajotimalla 
(married Sams&radevi) , and Jayakirtimalla. The inscription further mentions Jayajotimalla’s 
son-in-law Jayabhairava (the husband of Jivaraksha), and Jaynjotimalla’s son Yakshamalla 
(governor of Bhaktapuri), and another (?) son Jayantaraja (described as the son of Jayalakshmi 
and husband of (?) Jayalakshmi). 

563. — N. 757.— Ind. Ant . Vol. IX. p. 184. Lalitapattana (near Katmandu) inscription of 

Siddhinrisimhamalla : — 

(V. 17). — Nepala-varshe svara-sara-turagair=ankite Phalguniye pakshe prapte valakshe= 
marag urn- di vase Sankara-rkshe dasamyam 

Samvat 757 Phalguna(na)-mase sukla-pakshe dasamyam tithau Ardra-para-Punarvasu- 
nakshatre Ayushman-yoge Brihaspati-vasare. 

Thursday, 23rd February A.D. 1637 ; s see ibid. Vol. XV II. p. 250. No. J6. 

The king Harisimha ; 3 in his lineage, Mahendramalla ; his son Sivasimha ; his son 
Hariharasimha, married Lalamati ; then son Siddhinrisimhamalla. 4 * 

564. — N. 709.— Ind. Ant, Vol. IX. p. 188. Katmandu inscription of Pratfipa 
( Jayapratapamallad&va) : — 

Samvat 769 Phalguna-sukla- 6 * shaahthyam tithau Anuradha-nakshatre Harahaga-y6g£ 
Bpihaspati-vasare. 

Thursday, 22nd February A.D. 1649 ; see ibid. Vol. X\ II. p. 250, No. 17. 

In the family of Ramachandra of the solar race, Nanyadeva ; 6 his son GangadSva ; his son 
Nrisimha; his son Ramasirhha; his son Saktisimha ; his sOn Bh&palasimba ; his son Harasimha 
in his family, Yakshamalla ; his son Ratnamalla ; his son Suryamalla ; his son Amamraalla ; his 
son Mahendramalla; his son Sivasimha ; his son Hariharasimha , his son Lakshmi nrisimha ; his 
son Prat apa (who defeated Siddhinrisimhamalla 8 and others), manned Rupamati (a sister of 
Prananarayana and daughter of Viranarayana, the son of Lakshminar&yana and grandson of 
N&rayana, whose capital was Viharanagari) and Rajamati. 

565- — N. 777. — Ind. Ant. Vol. IX. p. 189. Katmandu inscription of the Mahdrdjddhirdja 
Jayaprat&pamalladeva ; (composed by the king himstlf) : — 

(V. 30). — Nepale samvat§=smin-haya-giri-munibhih samyute Magha-mase saptamyam 
Sukla-pakshe Ravidina-sahite Revati-rikshar&je | ybge sri-Siddhi(ddha)-sarivjhe. 

Sunday, 11th January A.D. 1657 ; see ibid. Vol. XVII. p. 251, No. 18. 

In the solar race, in the family of Rama's son Lava, there was Harisiihha (who dug tanks in 
Mithila and settled Nepala) ; his son 9 Yakshamalla ; his son Ratnamalla ; his son SGryamalla ; 
his son Nar6ndramalla ; his son Mahindramalla ; 10 his son Sivasimha; his son Hariharasimha ; 
his son Lakshminarasimha ; his son Pratapamalla. 


1 Called JayaMitirdjo lla in No. 5G1. 

* On this day the tithi date commenced 5 h. 49 m. after mean sunrise 

* Below, in No. 564, t°. * Harasiihh i / but see i*b*o No. 66*. 

• See below. No*. 564 ,* * Re»d kfishna*. 

• The name Rdnya c a beiow, in No. 647. 1 In Nos. 5(33 and 565 the name U Harisimha. 

• See No. 563. 

* But see ab ve, No. 564 ; in the same inscription Narendramalla is calle 1 Ama> atnalla. 

10 Jn Nos. 563 and 564 called Mahtnuramalla . 



73 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[VOL. V. 


566. — N. 782 — Inch Ant, Yol. IX. p. 192. Bungmati (near Katmandu) inscription of 
the Raja Srinivasa 1 .* — 

NepaMibde lockana-chchbidra-sapte sri-pauchamyfim. 

567. — N. 810 .— hid. Ant. Yol. IX. p. 191. Katmandu inscription 2 of the queen 
Riddhilakshmi, the mother of the king Bhupalendraraalla : — 

(Y. 3). — Nepal-abde gagana-dharini-naga-yukte kil=Grje mase pakshe vidhu-virahite 
su-dvitiya-tithau .... Ravau. 

Sunday, 20th October A.D. 1689 ; see ibid. Yol. XVII. p. 251, No. 19. 

568. — N. 843 *—IvaL Ant . Yol. IX. p. 192. Lalita] attana (near Katmandu) inscription of 
the princess Yogamati, recording the consecration of a temple in memory of her son 
Lokaprakasa : — 

(Y. 10). — Ahde Ram a-praj es var a sy a- va s ubhir= M a gh e = si t e pakshake Sule ch=0ttara 
pkalgime Sasadhare rare dviliyAtithau. 

Monday, 11th February A.D. 1723 ; see ibid. Yol. XYIJ. p. 251, No. 21. 

Siddhinrisimhamalla 3 of Lalitapattana : his son Srinivasa; 4 his son Yoganarendramalla ; 
his daughter Yogamati ; her son Lokaprakasa. 


G.— Inscriptions dated according to the Saptarshi Era, the Era of Buddha’s 
Nirvana, the Eakshmanasena Era, the Simha Era, the Hijra Era, 
the Bengali San, and the Ilahi Era. 

569. The [laukika] year 80. Ep, I t >J. Yol. I. p. 1<j 4. Baijnath -inscription (first 
pra6asti y ) of the time of the Bdjdnaka Lakshmanachandra of Kiragrama, and the reign of the 
king Jayachchandra of Trigarta (Jalandhara) ; (composed by Rama, the son of Bhringaka) :~ 

(L. 32). ' Samvatsare^ititame [prajsa[nne Jyaishtka]sya sukla-pratipat-tithau cha | 
[sr i] ma [ j- Ja]y achchandra-narendra-rajy e Ravfc[r=di]ne Rama-krita prasastih )).... 
. , [Sakakala-gat-&bdah] .... 

The yeai 80 of this date has been taken to correspond to Saka-samvat 726 expired (=A»D. 
804-5), v-hich probably is the date of the second Baijnath pra&asti ; but for that year the date 
is irregular. 6 

570. The [laukika ?] year 30. - Ep. Ind. Yol. I. p. 120. Kangra Bazar Jama image 
inscription of the Sun Abhayaehandra and others of the Rajakula gachchha 

(L. 1). — samvat 30, 

The year 30 of this date has been taken by Prof. Buhle-r to correspond, probably, to 
A.D, S54[-55], r 1 

571. The [laukika?] year 5. hp. hid . Yol. I. p. 192. Kangra inscription (containing 
the BhavanbJvaiamukhi siotra of Raghavachoitanya), put up during the reign of the king 


1 See below, No. 568. 

3 n O u the upper portion of the same stone is found a hymn to Siva, in 
Sri-srUJayabhupdtindramallaE 


the Iihnjahga metre, composed 


by 


3 See above. No. 5G3. 4 See above, No, 566, 

; ? or ° f 6U . *' 0Te> No - 351 0f * 726 (•->- Compare also Ep, Ind, Vol. II. p. 482. 

See /»<?. - . Vol. XX p. 154 where i hare stated that, of ,di the expired 26th years of the centime. of the 
Saka era from S cJo to 1426, only the year S. 1126 would yield the desired weekday (Sunday, the 2nd May A.D. 


Appendix.] 


79 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


Samsaraehandra [of Trigana], the son of Kavmacliandra who was the son of Meghachandra, 
under Sahi Mahammada 1 : — 


(L. 19). tasmat -Samsarachandrah. samajani nripatih pamcham-a[bd-a]bhishiktah. 
lof. Bahlei lias Uandated p Ufictiam-dbd-abhiAiktiih by ** who was anointed in the fifth 
yeai' (oj the Lokakdia ).” and lias taken the year to correspond to A.D. 1429-30. 

572.— The [laukika] year 60.— ZeiMir. D. Morg. Qcs. Yol. XL. p. 9. Notice of a 
Hanparvat memorial tablet of the reign of Mahammada Saha (Muhammad Shah), dated - 
Sarii oO bra vati ] era Sakre | Mahanimada-siihu-rujye || 

Friday , 9th July A.D. 1454 ; see I, id. Ant. Yyl. XX. p/l53, Xo. 9. 


5/3. Sastra-s. ~ 30.— Xutiee of a Chamba inscription ; see above. No. 320 of Y. 1717. 

Sastra-s. 34 and 30. — Notice of a Chamba plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Sri- 
simhadeva(P) ; see above, No 323 of Y. 1915 and 1917. 


575. — The year 1813 after Buddha's Nirvana. — Ind. Ant. Vol. X. p. 342. and Plate 
Gaya inscription of Purushottamasimha, the son of KAniadevasimha and grandson of 
Jayatungasimha, of the Kama country ; (composed by Mail junandin, the son of Jivanaga and 
grandson of Yasu.de v a, of the Nandin family) : — 

(L. 25). — Bka gavati pari nir vrite samvat lbl3 Karttika-vadi 1 Yu(bu)dhe|| 

With an epoch falling in 038 B.C., this date for the amanta Karttika would correspond to 
Wednesday, 20th October A.D. 1176. 

The inscription mentions Asokavalla. 3 a king of the Sapad.daksha mountains, to whom 
Purushottamasimha was tributary, and a C Khimki* chief (of Gaya). 

576. — Lakshmanasena-s. 51.— Jo*ir. Bo. As. Soc. Vol. X\ I. p. 358. and Sir A. Cunning- 
ham’s Mahabodhi , Plate xxviii. A. Budh-Gava inscription of the Mu hard j a Asokavalladeva 5 : — 

(L. 12). — srimal-Lakshmanasenaiy -atita-rajye sam 51 Bhadra-dme 20 J 

577. — Lakshmanasena-s. 74. — I, id. Ant. Yol. X. p. 316. and Plate. Bodh-Gaya iiw?rn tion 
of a dependant of the prince Dasaratha who was the youngest brother of the Rdjddhirdja 
Asokawlladeva, k * lord of the ELhasa kings of the Sapadalakslia mountains " : — 

(L. 6). — sr i mnl- L ak a inn a riasen ade va] >ad an a m = at it a-ra jy e sam 74 Yaisakha-vadi 12 

Gurau || 

Thursday, 19th May A.D. 1194; see ibid, Yol. XIX. p. 7. 

578. : — Lakshmanasena-s. 293(?). — hid. Ant. \ ol. XIY. p. 190 ; Proceedings Beng, As, Soc . 
1895, Plate iii. Bihar (Darbhanga) (spurious ?) plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Sivasirhhadeva, 
the son of Devasiihha, [of Mi thila], recording a grant which was made in favour of the poet 
Yidyapati ; issued from Gajarathapura : — 

(L. 6). — La-sam 292(r) || Sravana-sukla 7 Gurau || . . . Avde(bde) 

Lakshmanasona-bhupati-mato vahni-graha-dvy-ahkite m&si Sravana-samjhako muni-tithau 
pakshe valakshe Gurau | 

(L. 21). — sana S07 sariivata(t) 1455 Sake 1321. 


According to Sir A. Cunningham, Mulnmmad Saiyid, emperor of Delhi from A.D. 1433-46; see ArcAc?ot. 
Surv. of India, Yol. V. p. 163. According to E. Thomas, Pathan Icings of De?hi, p. 334, Muhamiuad Shah ibn 
Farid reigned from A.D. 1433-43. 

« For the different expressions, used to denote venrs of the Saptirshi era, see Ini . Ant . Vol. XX. p. 149 ff. 

3 The published text has AsokachaV a, but see Jour. Bo. As. 8vc. \ ol. XI 1. p. 338. 

4 See above, No. 51. For a Bod b- Gay 4 fragmentary inscription of the Chhinda family, which mentions 
VaUabharaja, his ?on Desaraja, his sou Ayichchha (Aditya), etc , see Lid. Ant. Vol. IX. p. 143, and Vol. X. p. 343. 

8 For a short inscription of Asokavalla, at Gopesvar in Uarhwil, see Iai . Ant. \\>\. X. p. 345. 

8 The published text has Bhddra~di 8 rd 29. My remarks on the date in Lid. An*. Vol. XXII. p. 3 
which were based on this incorrect reading, must be withdrawn now. 



80 


EPIGRAPHIA INDTCA. 


I Vol. V. 


For S. 1321 expired and the Kdrttikddi Vikrama year 1465' expired the date regularly 
corresponds to Thursday, 10th July A.D. 1399 (see Ind. Ant . Vol XV 13,1. p. 31) ; but this day 
would fall in the Bengali San 806 and in the Hijra 1 year 801 (not 807) ; and in tho 
Lakshin anasena year 279 expired (not in 292 or 293 ; see ibid. Vol. XIX. p. 1 if). 

579. — Simha-s. 32.— Mangrol (Mangalapura) inscription of some members of the Guhila 
family, of the reign of the Chaulukva Kumarapala ; see above, No. 123 of V. 1202 

580. — Simba-s. (?) 58.— Ant. Remains Bo. Pres. p. 312. Gimar image inscription 

(L. 1).— earn 58 varshe Chaitra-vadi 2 S6me. 

Monday, 13th March A.D. 1172 2 (?) ; see Ind. Ant. Vol. XXII. p. 109. 

581. — Simha-s. 80 (?).— Junagadh fragmentary inscription of the time of (?) tho 
Chaulukya Kumarapala ; see above, No. 504 of Valabhi-s. 850 (?). 

582. — Simba-s. (P) 93.— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVII T. p. 109 ; Ind. Inscr . No. 17. Bombay As. 
Soc.*s plates of the Chaulukya Mahdrdjddhirdja Bhimadeva [II.?], issued from Anahilapataka : — 

(L. 1). — samvat 93 Chaitra-sudi 11 Ravau. 

(L. 5). — adya samkramti-parvvani. 

With this reading, the date is irregular ; but with vadi instead of 6udi, it would, for Simha-s. 
93, correspond to Sunday, 25th March A.D. 1207. — According to Dr. Hultzsch, the inscription 
probably is one of Bhimadeva I„ and the samvat 93 of the date, therefore; might be intended for 
Vikrama-samvat 1093 ; 3 but for that year also the date would be irregular. See Ep. Ind . 
Vol. I. p. 317, and Ind. Ant. Vol. XIX. p. 253. 

583. — Simha-s. 98. — Royal As. Soc.’s plates of the reign of the Chaulukya Mahdrdjddhirdja 
Bhimadeva H. ; see above, No. 194 of V. 1266. 

584. — Siihha-8. 161*— V&raval inscription of the reign of the Chaulukya (Vaghela) 
Mahdrdjddhirdja ArjunadSva; see above, No 228 of V. 1320. 

585. — Blahammada-8. 4 * 882. — Veraval inscription of the reign of the Chaulukya (Vaghela) 
Mahdrdjddhirdja ArjunadSva ; see above, No. 228 of V. 1320. 

586. — Sana 807 (?). — Bihar (Darbhanga) (spurious ?) plate of the M>ihdrdj&dhirdja 
fiivasimhadSva, the son of Dfcvasimha, [of Mithilfc], recording a grant which was made in 
favour of the poet Vidyapati ; see above, No. 578 of Lakshmanasfcna-s. 293 (?). 

587. — A11M (Il&hi) year 41.— Inscription in the temple of Vadipura-PM^van&tha at 
Anhilvad ; see above, No, 309 of V. 1651 and 1652. 

H.— Undated 6 * Inscriptions, not enumerated above. 

588. — Gupta Inscr. p. 252, and Plate. Bijayagadh (in Bharatpur, R&jput&na) fragmentary 
inscription 8 of a Mahardja Mahdsendpati whose name is lost, of the tribe of the Yaudheyas. 

1 Dates of manuscripts shew that tana denotes both the Bengali San and the Hijra yeurs. 

* On this day the tithi of the date commenced 1 h. 51 m. after mean sunrise. 

* Compare the plates of Bhimadeva I., above. No. 6i of V. 1036, in which the names of the writer and his 
father, as well as that of the diitaka, are the same »s in this inscription. 

4 l.e. the Bijmyear. 

* This part of the list (Nos. 588-688) includes 42 inscriptions, dated (apparently) in regnal years, and one 

(No. 671) dated in an anJca year. It also contains three inscriptions (No«. 682-684), the years of which are 
distinctly referred to the reign of the Qdhn&ya.tamia, and six others (Nos. 676-681), the years of which probably 
belong to the same era, the exact epoch of which has not been ascertained yet. The same era may possibly ha vs 
been followed in the date of No. 655, the reading of which is doubtful. . Hcgarding the ^enrs of the dates of 

Nos. 606 and 663, the reading of which also is doubtful, 1 cannot offer any suggestion. 

* *• Of decidedly early date.'* 



Append is.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


81 


589. Ind. Ant. Yol. X. p. 3i and Plate; ArchvoL Snrv . of India. Yol. XX. Plate xii. 
K&ma or K&mavana (in Bharat pm*. Rajputftna) fragmentary pillar inscription 1 of some princes 
of the Surasena family : Pbakkn. married Deyika ; their son Kulabbata, married D ran gin i j 
their son Ajita, married Apsarahpriya ; their son Durgabhata. married Vachchhullika ; their 
son Durgadaman, married Vaehehliika; their son D£vaiaja, married Yajiiika : their son 
Vatsadaman. 

590. Gvpta Inscr. p. 2S3. and Plate. Lahore 2 copper seal inscription 3 of the Maharaja 
Mahesvaranaga, the son of Npgabhatta. 

591. — Gupta Inscr. p. 2»U, and Plate. Tusam (in the Paiijab) rock inscription, 4 recording 
the building, by the Achdrya Somatrata, of two reservoirs and a house, for the use of the god 
Vishnu. 

592. — Gupta Inscr . p. 28S, and Plate. Nirmapd (in the Paiijab) plate 5 of the Mahdsdmanta 

Maharaja Samudrasena : — 

(L. 14). — samvat 6 Khc(vai) sudi 10 1. 

The Mahdsdmanta Maharaja Yarn pa sen a ; his son. from Prabalika. the Mahdsdmanta 
Maharaja Samjayaseua ; his son, from Sikharasvamini. the Mahdsdmanta Maharaja Ravish era • 
his son, from Mihiralakshmi. the Mali isd,aan*a Mahd.'dja Samudrasena. — The inscription 
also mentions, as a chief of the past, a Mah irdja Sarvavarman, 

593. — Ind. Ant . YcL XYI1. p. 11. Chamba (in the Pahjab) plate 6 of the Malta- 
rdjddhirdja Somavarmadeva, a son of the Mahd rdjddhirdja Salavahanadeva (nlso called 
Sahasahka, Nibsahkamalla. Matamata.'rmha. and Karivarslia, born in the family of Sahilladeva 
of tho Paushana or solar race) and his queen Rardkadevi, and of his successor Asatadeva ; issued 
from Chanpaka : — 

(L. 27). — pravardkarnana-kalyana-vijayarajy5 srimad-Asatadeviye samvatsare prathame 
Y aisakha-sita- [d vi] tiyayaiii S ukravai epa. 

(L. 30). — pa [ra?] -samvat 11 Bhadrapnda-[suti ?] 12 [Sa P] 

594. — Ind. Ant. Yol. XVII. p. 10. Notice of a Chamba (in the Pahjab) plate 7 of the 
Mahardja Bhotavarmadeva, the successor of the MahdrdjdJhirdja Mapikyavarman. issued from 

Chanpaka. 

595. — Archceol. Surv . of India , Yol. XI\ p. Ill ff., and Plate xxviii. B&rmavar (in 
the Pahjab) image inscriptions of the Mahd rdjddhirdja Meruvarman, the son of Divakara- 
varmadeva, grandson of B ala var made va, and great -gi andson of Adityavarmadeva. 

596. — Gnpta Inscr. p. 250, and Plate. Pahladpur (in the Gliazipur district of the North- 
West Provinces, now Benares College) partly damaged pillar inscription, 5 vith the name of a 
king (?) Sisup&la, and that of the Parthivas (r). 

597. — Qupta Inter, p. 271, and Plate. Deoriya (in the Allahabad district of the North- 
West Provinces, now Lucknow Museum) image inscription,® reeordirg the gift, by the Sakya 
mendicant Bodhivarman, of the statue of Buddha on the pedestal of vhich it is engraved. 

598. — Gupta Inscr. p. 281, and Plate. Sarnatk (near Benares, now Calcutta Museum) 
inscription, 10 recording that the sculpture (representing scenes in the life of Buddha), below 
which it is engraved, was made by order of the religious mendicant Harigupta. 

1 Of about <4 the eighth century A.D.” 

a The seal was bought by Sir A. Cunningham at Lahore, but it is not known where it was originally found. 

» Of “about the end of the fourth century A. I)." 

4 Of about “ the end of the fourth, or the beginning of the fifwh century A.TY’ 

4 Of “ about the seventh century A.D.” * Of about the middle of the eleventh century A.D, 

T Of about the fourteenth century A.D. (?). 5 Of about the fourth century A.D. 

* Of “about the fifth century A.D.” 10 Of about “tho fifth century A.D.” 



82 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


599. — Gupta Inzer, p. 272, and Plate. Kasia (in the Gbrakhpur district of the North-West 
Provinces) image inscription, 1 recording the gift, by the MaJidvihdrasvdmin Haribala, of the 
figure below which it is engraved. 

500.— Up. Ind. Vol. I. p. 12, and Plate. 2 Lakkha Mandal (at Madha in the Jaunsar Bawar 
district of the North-West Provinces) inscription, 3 recording the dedication of a Siva-temple by 
the princess Isvar& of the royal race of Singhapura, for the spiritual welfare of her deceased 
husband Cfcandragupta, a son of a king of Jalandhara; (composed by Bhatta Vasudeva, the 
son of Bhatta Skanda and grandson of Bhatta Kshemasiva). 

Among the kings of Singhapura, who belonged to the race of Yadu, there was Senayarman ; 
his son Aryavarman; his son Dattavarman ; his son Pradiptavarman ; his son Isvaravarman ; 
his son Yriddhivarman ; his son Singhavarman ; his son Jala[varman] ; his son Yajnavarman ; 
his son Ackalayarman-Samaraghanghala ; his son Divakaravarman-Mahighanghala ; his younger 
brother Bhaskara[varman]-Ripughanghala, married Jay avail, the daughter of Kapil avardhana ; 
their daughter lsvar&, married Chandragupta, a son of a king of Jalandhara. 

601. — Gupta Inscr. p. 285, and Plate. Sarnath (near Benares, now Calcutta Museum ?) 
fragmentary Vaishpava inscription 4 of a king Prakataditya, a son of B&laditya and Dhaval&, of 
Kas! (?). The inscription mentions at least one earlier Baladitya, 

602. — Ind . Ant. Vol. XX. p. 124. 5 Lucknow Museum plate of the Mahasdmanta 
BalavarmadOva, the successor of the Mahdsdmanta PanduvarmadGva, issued from 
Bfihadgriha : — 

(L. 12). — samvat 20 6 * * | Chaitra-Sudi 2 | 

603. — Proceedings Beng. As. Soc. 1877, p. 72, and Plate ; Ind. Ant . Vol. XXV. p. 178. 
PandukeSvar (in the Kumaun division of the North-West Provinces) plate of the 
MahdrdjddJiirdja Lalitasuradeva, issued from Karttikeyapura : — 

(L. 19). — [ut]tai4[ya]pa~8a[m*]kr[a*]nt6(ntau). 

(L. 23 ) . — pravarddhamana-vijay arajy a-samvatsare ekavin^atimS? samvat 21 Magha-vadi 3. 9 

Nimbara ; his son, from Nasudevi, the J lalidrajddhirdja Ishtagana ; his son, from Veg&d£vt, 
the Mahdrdjddhirdja Lalitasura, [married] Samadev!. 9 

604. — Ind. Ant. Vol. XXI. p. 170; Plate in As. Ees. Vol. IX. p. 406, and Colebrooke’s 
ATtsc. Essays, Vol. II. p. 247. G6rakhpur (in the North- West Provinces, now Bengal As. JSoc.’s) 
plate 10 of the time of Jayftditya, the son of Dharmiditya, of Vijayapura; recording a grant of his 
minister Madoli, a son of the minister, the great Sdmanta Kpitakirti. (Composed by the 
Kayastha Nagadatta and his younger brother Vidyadatta.) 

605. — Ep. Ind. Vol. I. p. 64. Bad&un (in the North- West Provinces, now Lucknow 
Museum) inscription 11 of the reign of the HashtrakHta Lakhapapaia ; (composed by (?) 
Goyindachandra, the son of Gahgadhara and grandson of S&mesyara). 

In the Panchala country, at Vodamayfita which was ruled by princes of the R&shtrakfita 
family, there was first the king (i narSndra ) Chandra; his son Vigrahap&la; his son Bhuvanap&la; 


1 Of “about the end of the fifth century A.D.” 

* This inscription had been edited before in Jour. Boy. At. Soc . Vol. XX. p. 464. 

8 Of about the end of the seventh century A.D. 

4 Of “ about the end of the seventh century A.D.” 

# This inscription had been edited before in Jour. Am. Or. Soc. Vol. VI. p. 688. It may be assigned to about 

the beginning of the ninth century A.D. s 

8 This * 20 * is denoted by a numerical symbol, but the following *2 9 by a numeral figure. 

T Read ikavimiatitamt. 

• The date perhaps corresponds to the 22nd December A.D. 853; compare Ind. Ant. Vol. XXV p 178. 

• See a fragmentary inscription from Bag&rar, in Jonr. Beng. At. Soc. Vol. VII. p. 1058 " 

“ 0f » bout the beginning of the tenth centnry A.D. n Of .bout the thirteenth century A. I. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA* 


83 


liis son Gdpula ; Lis sons Tribhuvana[pala], Madanapala, and Devapala ; D6vapala’s son 
Bhfmapala ; his son Surapala ; his son Amritapala ; his younger brother Lakhanapala. — The 
inscription also gives an account of the Saiva ascetics Varma^iva (whose original home was 
Anakilapataka), Muziigana, and Isanasiva (the eldest son of Yasavaua, a resident of Simhapalli 
l n the Hariyana 1 eountzy). 

606. — Ind. Ant. Yol. XVI. p. 99, and Plate. Sirpur (in Khandesh) fragmentary plate 3 of 
the Mahdrdja Rudradasa : — 

(L. 9). — varsha 100 (?) 10 8 (?) vaitrayaya 3 2. 

607. — Jour . Bo. As. Soc. Yol. XYI. p. 90. Plates 4 of the Rashtrakuta Abhimanyu, the 
son of Bhavishya who was a son of Devaraja, the son of the Rdja Manahka ; recording a grant 
which (in the presence of a certain Jayasirhha who is described as the chastiser of the Kotta 
Harivatsa) was made at Manapura. 

608. — ArcJiceol. Surv. of TFesh India , Yol. IV. p. 133, and Plate lviii. No. 6. Ajanta 
somewhat damaged inscription, 6 recording the excavation of a cave-tcmple by the Buddhist 
mendicant Buddhabhadra. The inscription mentions Bliawiraja and Devaraja, the ministers 
of an Asmaka king; and also the ascetic, the Sthavira Achala. 

609. — Gupta Inscr. p. 2S0, and Plate. Sanehi (in the Bhopal State of Central India) 
fragmentary pillar inscription ; 6 appears to have recorded the gift of the pillar by the 
Vihdrasvamin Kudra . . . , the son of Gosurasimhabala. 

610. — * Gupta Inscr . p. 193, and Plate. Arahg (in the Central Provinces, now Nagpur 
Museum) plates of Maha-Jayaraja, issued from Sarabhapnra : — 

(L. 24). — pravarddhamana-vijaya-samvvatsara 5 Margasira 20 5. 

611. — Gupta Inscr. p. 197, and Plate. Raypur (in the Central Provinces, now Nagpur 
Museum) plates of MahS-Sudevar&ja, issued from Sarabhapura 

(L. 12). — uttav&yan£. 

(L. 27). — 'pravarddhamana-vijaya-samwatsara 10" Magha 9.7 

612. Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Yol. XXXV. Part I. p. 196. Samoalpur (in the Cental 

Provinces) first and second plates only of Maha-Sudevaraja, issued from Sarabhapura. 

613. — Jour. Beng . At* Soc . Yol. XVII. Part I. p. 69. Udaypur (in Gwalior) inscription 
containing a hymn in praise of the sun. 

614. Archceol Surv. of India , Yol. XXI. Plate ix. L. Kalafijar rock inscription ; 

mentions a king Udayana of the Pandava family. 8 

615*— Ep. Ind. VoL IY. p. 257. Notice of a Nagpur Museum fragmentary inscription 9 of 
which a rough lithograph and translation are given in Jour. Bo. As. Soc. Yol. I. p. lol. The 
inscription first mentions a king Sfiryaghosha ; long after him came Udayana of the Pandava 
family ; he had four sons, of whom the eldest was Indrabala (?), and the youngest Bhavadeva, 
also called Ranakesarin and Chintadurga. (Composed by Bhaskarabhatta.) 


1 See above. No, 238. , , ,. . .. 

3 Of about “the sixth century A.D.” (?). The characters shew “ a certam amount of resemblance to the 

characters used in the Vak&toka inscriptions,” below. No. 618 ff. 

« From' Dr^ B^u'DAj^s coileetion; according to Dr. Bhagvsnlal Indraji of about the fifth but according 
to Dr. Fleet of about the seventh century A.D. The letters “ resemble those of the Va abb i plates. 

* Probably of abont “the latter half of the sixth or beginning of the seventh century A.J3. 

* Of about “the fifth century A.D.” ' Expressed by numerical symbols. 

* See Xp Ind. Vol. IV. p. 257, note 4. ’ Of about the beginning of the eighth century A.D. 

H 2 



84 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V 


616. — Gupta laser, p. 294, and Plate. Rajim (in the Central Provinces) plates 1 of the* lord 
of K6sala. the Raja Tivaradeva (Mahasiva-Tivararaja), the son 2 of Nannadcva who was a son 
of Indrabala, of the family of Pandu ; issued from Sripura : — 

(L. 24). — ■ Jyeshtliu-dvada&yani. 

(L. 35). — pravarddhifcmana-vijayarajya-samvatsaru 7 Karttika-divasu ash tha (sht a) m a 8. 3 * 

617. — I/icJ. Anf. Vol. HI. p. 179; Archieol Sur* . of India. Vol. XVII. Plate xviii. A 
Shpur i^Sripiua. in the Central Provinces) inscription ; of the time of Sivagupta-Baiar juna ; 
(composed hy KiHhnanandin, the son of Devanandin). 

In the lunar race, the king Udayana ; his son Indrabala ; his son Npmvideva (Xannesvaru) ; 
his son Chandragupto. ; his son Harshagupta ; his son Sivugupta-Baliirjuua. 5 * 7 * 

618. — Gupta Inscr. p. 234, and Plates. Nachue-ki-tulai (in the Bundelkhand division of 
Central India) inscriptions of the Maharaja Prithivishena" of (the family of) the Vakatakas. 
and his feudatory Vyaghradeva. 

619. — Gupta Inscr. p. 236. and Plate. Cliam rank (in East Berar, Central India) plates of 
the Vakataka MulArdja Pravarasena II., recording a grant which was made at the request of 
Kondaraja. the son of Satrughnaraja ; issued fiom Pravarapura : — 

(E. GO), — sarhvvat save- sb t adasu ( se ,> lu b dyeslitharaasa-suklapaksha-trayoda^viViii*). 

The MaJ dr .1 ja Pravarasena [I.] ol - the family of) the Vakatakas; his sons son — the son 
of Guiuamiputra and of a daughter ox the Maharaja Blmvanaga of the Bharasivas— the 
Maharaja Rudiasena [I.] ; his son, the Mihdrdja Pritlmiskena ; his son. the Maharaja 
Rudtasena [JI.] ; his son (from Prabhavatigupta. a daughter of the Mabhdjddhirdja 
DevaguptaM, the Maharaja Pravarasena [II.]. 

620. — Gupta Inscr. p. 215, and Plate. Siwani (in the Central Provinces) plates of the 
Vakataka Maharaja Pravarasena II. 

(L, 18). — pravaiddhaniaua-rajya-sa[m*] watsare | ashtadasame 5 | Ph;dguna(na)-sukla- 
divdasyara. 

Genealogy as in No. 619. 

621. Rp- I'cM. V ol. III. p. *»h0. and Plate. Dudia (in the Central Provinces) plates of 
the Vakataka Maharaja Pravarasena II., issued from Pravarapura : — 

(L. 28). — * sarb watsare twiyovitsatirae 9 varsh[a*]-pakshe chatumhe divase dafiame. 

Genealogy as in Xo. 619 

022.— Archau.L Sun. of West. India. Vol. IV. p. 124. and Plate lvii. Ajorit* fragments) 
Vakataka inscription; mentions the kings Vindliyasakti. Pravarasena [L]. Rudrasctm ft.]. 
[Pri]thivi[shenaJ. Pravarasena [II.], Devasena, aud Harishena ; and the ministers Hastibhoja 
and V a ra hade v a ij ) . 

62:i.— Archil Sun-, cf West. India. Vol. IV. p. 138. and Plate Ik. Ajanta Gbaiotkaeha 
cave fragmentary insenpu.m ; gives the pedigree of Hastibhoja (of the Vullura clan of 
Brahmans), the minister of the Vakataka king Devasena. 

1 Of about tbe middle of the eighth century A.D. 

2 According to Dr. Fleet, the adopted son. 

5 Tbe * 7 9 is denoted by a numerical symbol, and the ‘8 * by a numeral figure. 

« Of about the beginning of the ninth century A.D. 

5 For cognate fragmentary inscription* see Archaol Surv . of India , Vol. XVII. Plate* xviii B. lix. and 

ix. E. 

See No. 619. 

7 Apparently the son of Adityaseu* of tbe family of the Guptas of Magadha; see above, No. 552. (For 

another Devagupta see No. 528.) 1 

Bead ashtddaiS. 9 Head traydvimiaiitat)}^ 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA, 


S5 


624. — ArchtxoL Surv. oj Tlesf. India , Yol. IV. p. 129. and Plate Ivi. Ajautfi fragmentary 
inscription of a family of kings subordinate to the Vakatakas (?) ; mentions Dhrir.irashtra, 
Harisamba, Saurisamba, Upendragnpta, Kaeha [I.]. Blukshndasi, Niladasa, Kacha [II.], 
Krishnadasa. and Ravisamba ; and [the Yakataka r] Harishena. 

625. — Gupta laser, p. 280, and Plate. Calcutta Museum 1 fragmentary imago inscription, 2 
recording the gift, by the Sakya mendicant Dkarmadasa, of the image of Buddha on the 
pedestal of 'which it is engraved. 

626. — Gupta laser . p. 2S2, and Plate. Bodh-Gaya (now Calcutta Muse nr i) image 
inscription. 3 recording the gift, by the two Sakya mendicants Dharmagnpta and Daihshtrasena 
of Tishyamrat irtlia, of the statue of Buddha on the pedestal of which it engraved. 

627. — Gupta laser, p. 2S4. and Plate. Rohtasgadli (in Bengal) stone seal-matrix of the 

Mahdsdmant a Sasankadeva. 4 

628. — Fp. Ind. Yol. II. p. 345. Dudhpani (in Bengal) rock inscription"* of 
Udayamanadeva ; mentions a king of Mngadha. named Adisimha, and the three bi others 
Udayamana. Sridliautamana and Ajitaraana.® who originally merchants of Ayndhya. wire made 
Bajas of the three villages Bhramarasalmali, Nabhutishaiulaka. and CliluLgala. 

629. — Proceedings Bony. As. S^e. 1S90, p. 192. and Plate ii. Inscription" from a stone 
fonnd at Mudgalasrama, Kashtahai ani-ghut, Mungir ; mentions a king (uripa) Bhagiratlia 

(L. 4). — . . . samvat 3(r). 8 

630. — Rajendralal Mitra's BiuWta-GayCu p. 195. and Plate xl. Bodli-Gaya (now Calcutta 
Museum) inscription of the Ra&litrakuta 9 Turiga-Dharmavaloka, the son of Kirtiiaja who was 
a son of Nanna-G unavaloka 10 : — 

(L. 20). — samvat 15 Sravana(?)-dina(r)-panchamyam { 

631. — Arcluvnl. Surv. nf India, Yol. I. Plate xiii. 1. and Yol. III. p. 120. Nalanda image 
inscription of the reign of the Malta rdjdditiruja Gopala 

(L 2). samvat 1 (r) Asvina-sudi 8 }>aramabhauaraka-maharajadhiL , aja-paramesvmc-sri- 

G6pala-rajani (P). 

632. — Sir A. Cunningham’s Malutlodhi, Plate xxviii. 2. Bodh-Gaya image insciipiion of 
the reign of Gopaladeva : — 

(L. 4). — srl-Gopaladeva-rajyo . . .(•*')• 

633. — Proceedings Benq. As. &»c. 1SS0. p. 80 : Sir A. Cunningham's Malidbodhi. Plate 
xxviii. 3. Bodh-Gaya inscription of the veign of Dharmapala 

(L 7). Shad vin sat it.iruc 11 varsho Dharmmapald mahibhuji Bhadra-va(ba)liula- 

pahe hammy am suii6r=Bhaa»karasy=ahani (?) ]| 

f}34 Jnur. Brag. As. S>>c. Yol. LXIII. Part I. p. 53. and Plates: Fp. Ind. Yol. IV. 

p. 247, and Plate of seal. Khalimpur (now Bengal As. Soc.’s) plate of the Malidrdjddhi r <ja 
Dharmapaladeva, recording a grant which was made at the request of the Mahals hnantadhipati 
N&rayanavarman ; issued from Fatal iputra : 

(L. 60).— ab hivard dhamana-vi jayara jy $ samvat 32 Maiga-dinani 12 || 


1 There is no information as to where the inscription was found. 

* Of about “ the fifth century A.D.” 3 Of about “ the sixth century A.D 

* Accord in" to Dr Fleet “the age of the characters would justify us in identifying him with the b nO'Aa, *rg 
of KarnasuvQrna" in Eastern India- the contemporary and murderer of Rajyavardhana II. of kananj,- who i* 
mentioned by Hiuen Tailing as a persecutor of the Buddhists” 

* Of about the eighth century A.D. ^ . 

« For two Mina piinees of Magadha see above, No. 362 of b. 105v. 

_ g , , . fll ™ fnr ~ a D The published translation has samvat 13. 

i Of about the tenth century A.u. v 

» Compare below. Nos. 635 and 640. “ Compare Ind. Ant. Vol. IX. p. U*. note 3. 

11 Read shadvimia 0 . 



86 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA, 


[Vol. V. 


Dayitavishnu ; his son Vapyata ; his son Gdpala [I.], married the Bhadra king's aaugnter 
Deddadevi ; their son Dharmapala. — The inscription mentions the Yuvardja Tribhuvanapala as 
the dutaha who communicated Narayauavarman’s request to Dharmapala. 

635.^ — K e8t ** P* 123 > an(i lithograph; Ind . Ant. Vol. XXI. p. 254. Mungir plate 

of the Makar ajddhirdja Devap&lad6va, issued from Mudgagiri : — 

(L. 46). — samvat 33 Marga-dine 21 | 

G6p&la [I.] ; his son Dharmapala, married Rannadevi, a daughter of the RAshfcrakuta 1 * 
Parabala ; their son Devapala.— The inscription mentions, as dutaha , DevapMa’s son, the 
Yuvardja Rajyapala. 


636. Ind. Ant. Vol. XVII, p. 309, and Plate. Gh6sr&w& (now Bihar Museum) Bud dhis t 
inscription, of the time of king Devap&la. 


637 .— Archmol. Surv . of India , Vol. III. Plate xxxvi. Gaya inscription of the time of 
N &r&yanapalad6va : — 

(L. 15). Sri-NArayanapaladeva iti yah rAjna8=tasya gun-Amalasya 

mahatah samvatsare saptame Vai£akhya[m] .... 


638. Ind. Ant. Vol. XV. p. 305; Jour. JBeng. As. Soc . Vol. XLVU. Part I. Plates xxiv. 
and xxv. BhAgalpur (now Bengal As. Soc.’s) plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja NdrSyanap&la- 
deva, issued from Mudgagiri 

(L. 47). — samvat 17 Vaisakha-dine 9. 

G6pala [I.]; his son Dharmapala (after defeating IndrarAja and others, gave the 
sovereignty of Mahodaya (Kanauj) to Chakrayudha 3 * * ) ; his younger brother VAkpAla ; his son 
Jayapala; his elder brother Devapala ; JayapAla’s son VigrahapAla [I.], married the Haihaya 
princess Lajja ; their son Narayanapala. 


639. Ep. Ind. Vol. II. p. 161, and Plate. Badal pillar inscription of the time of 
N&r§yanap&la ; mentions Dharma[pala], Devapala, Shrapala, and Nir&yapapila. 

„ J^rJ 0Ur - Beng : i s - 5 o ‘-y° L LXI - Part L p- 82. DinAjpur plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja 
Mahip&ladeva, 3 issued from Viiasapura (P) : — J 

(L. 49). — vi§u(shu)va-samkrantau. 

(L. 53). — samvat • . [na ?]-din£ , 

Genealcp as far as NArayanapala as in No. 638 ; his son RAjyapAla, married BhAgyadevi, 
a daughter of the BashtrakAta Tonga;* their son G6pAla [II.] ; his son VigrahapAla Til 1 • his 
son Mahip&la. F L 9 


641.— Archaol. Surv. of India, Vol. III. p. 122, and Plate xxxvii. 5 ; Ind. Ant. Vol. IX. 
p. 114. Bddh-Gaya inscription of the reign of Mahip&laddva 

(L. 2).— paramasangata-srSman-MahipaladSva-pravarddhamAna-vijayarAjyS ekAdasamS 6 

samvatsare abhilikhya pahchamyam tithau. 


642 -“ Proceedings Beng As. Soc. 1879, p. 221 ; Archceol. Surv. of India, Vol. III. Plate 
xxxvn. Gaya Krishna-DvAnka temple inscription of the reign of Wayapftladfiva •— 

(L ; 1 P ~~ Sa “ asta ' bhClma ?4 alfv - 1 -%a-bhArem=Avi(bi)bhrati Ari-NayapaladAvd I vili- 
khyamane dasa-pancha-samkhya-samvatsarA siddhim=agAch=cha k3[rtt]ih II ^ 

The inscription mentions Sudraka 6 and Visvaditya. 


1 The Ra.hfr&kdta family, here referred to, may be the one mentioned above, in No flan 

’ Compare Ind. Ant. Vol. XX. p. 187. * See above. No. 59 of V. 1088 ’ 8M " 

* See above. No. 630. 

« Bead chddaU.- In the Bih&r Moaeom there is another (Buddhiat) inscription (of which I possess 

Of the eleventh year (.«,«< ii) of the reign of MshipiwL. L JL of 


* See below. No. 646. 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


87 


643. — Ind . Ant . Vol. XIV. p. 166, and Yol. XXI. p. 100. Amgachhi (now Bengal As. 
Soc/s) plate of the Makdrdjddhirdja Vigrahapaladeva III. 

(L. 40). — sbmagraha- . . . 

(L. 42).-— samvat 13 (or 12 F) Chaitra-dine 9. 1 

Genealogy as far as Mahipala as in No. 640; his son Nayapala; his son Vigrahapala 

[ii 


644. — Ep. Ind. Yol. II. p. 350, and Plates. Kamauli (now Lucknow Museum) plates of 
the Makdrdjddhirdja Vaidyadeva of Pragjyotisha, 3 a subordinate or feudatory of the Pal a 
Kum&r&p&la of Gauda ; (composed by Manoratha, the son of Murari) : — 

(L. 46).— Etasmai sasanam pradad= Yaidyadeva-kshitisyarah | Vaisakhe yifiu(shu)- 
[va # ]tyan=cha svarg-artham Hari-vasare || 

(L. 51).— chaturth-abda sam Yaisakha-prathama-dina. 

(L. 53). — sam 4 suryya-gatya Yaisakha-dine 1 ni. 

The inscription mentions, in the solar race (Mihirasya r am£e) and Pala family (hula), the 
kings of Ganda Vigrahapala [III. ?], his son Ramapala 4 (who killed Bhima of Mithila), and 
his son Knmarapala ; and their ministers Y6gad£va, his son B6dlnd£va, and his sou Yaidyadfeya, 
of whom the last was appointed by Knmarapala to rule the eastern country, in the place of 

Tingyad^ya. 


645.— Archceol Surv. of India, Yol. III. p. 125, and Plate xlv. 17. Jaynagar image 
inscription of the reign of Madanapaladeva 5 a 

(L. 4). — 6riman-Madanapaladeya-raj y 6 samvat 19 (?) Asvina 30 (P). 

646 — Ind Ant. Yol XYI. p. 64. Gaj;a inscription 6 of a king (narfadra) Takshap&la, 
the son of Viivarupa who was the son of Sudraka,? of Gaya; (composed by Murari* of the 
Agigrama family). 

647, Ep. j n d. yol. I. p. 307, and Plate. Deopara (in the Rajshahi district of Bengal, now 

Calcutta Mnsenm) inscription of Vijayasena ; (composed by Umapatidhara, and engraved by 
the Eanaka Sulapani, the son of Brihaspati and grandson of Manadasa). 

In the lunar race were Yirasena and other sonthern rulers. In that Sena lineage there was 
S&mantasena, ‘the head-garland of the clan of Brahmakshatriyas ; Ins son H6mantas«na, 
married YaSodSvi ; their son Vijayasfina (defeated Nanya, 9 Vira, and other kings). 

648. - Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Yol. XLIY. Part I. p. 11, and Plates. Tarpan%hl plate of 
the Mahdrdjadhirdja Lakshmanasenad6va, the successor of the Maharajadhvraja 
Ball&lasen&deva ; issued from Yikramapura : 

(L. 56).- — sam 3 Bhadra-dine 2. 10 . 

In the lunar race, Hfemanta of the Sena family ; his son Vijayasena; his son Ballalasena , 

his son Lakshmaaas&na. 


> Tb. .1 ,b. J.U, (tb. 2..) Mmh A.D. 1086), t, ». » Ud. M M. HO. P- TO >• 

.< tb. mb ^ « ***"“•' “» «” 

- **-*••’ — ‘ •.b.oW^l.b. 

India, Vol. III. p. 124. . .. third year ,, am 3 VaiidJcha-dini 24) of the reign of 

* P- W* i9 of the 19th year (earn 19 VaiiaHa^di 5) of 

MadauajiU. And inscriptions of the eighth year l > 

king MahMrapdla are mentioned ibid. pp. 123 and ^ ^ ^ name oecnrs aboT e, in No. 642. 

• Of about the 12th centnry A.D. , _ U| nnme above> in No. 564 of N. 769. 

8 Thia name occurs above, in No. 

10 The published test baa *am 7 Bhddra-di*S 5. 



88 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


649. — Jour. Beng. A s. So'. Vol. VII. p. 43, and Plate xlv. Bakergafij plate of the 
MahrfrJjadhir a j a Visvarupasenadeva, 1 lord of Gauda. the successor of the MahJrojddhirdja 
Lakshmanasenadeva, lord of Gauda, issued from near Jambugrama : — 

(L. 56).— tri(?)tiyavdi(bdi)va-Jvaishthadiria. 

(L. 65) . — sam 3 Jyaishtha-dine . . . 

In the lunar race, Vijayasena ; his son Ballalasena; his son Lakshmanasena, mairied 
• • * • (?); their son Visvarupa (Visvarupasena). 

650. — Jour. Beng . As. Soc. Vol. LXV. Part I. p, 0, and Plates. Madanapada plate of the 
Maha r ajadhiraja Visvarupasenadeva, lord of Gauda. the successor of the Ma hdrajddhiroj a 
Lakshmanasenadeva, lord of Gauda. issued from near Phalgugrama : — • 

(L. 51). — chatm , ddasiyavdi(bdi)ya-Bhadradina. 

(L. 60).— sam 14 Asvina-dine 1. 

Genealogy as in Xo. G49, 

651. — Proceedings Beng. As. Sor. 1S85, p. 51. and Plate. Dacca (Ashrafpur, in Eastern 
Bengal, now Bengal As. Soc.’s) plate 2 of the king (nripati) Devakhadga : — 

(L. 15). — samvat 10 3 Vaisakha-di 10 3. 3 

Jour. Beng . As . Soc. \ ol. IX. p. 767, and Plate with specimen of letters and seal* 
Tej pur (Assam) plates of the Ma rd j.id h < »• ija Vanamalavarmadeva of Pragivotisha, dated 
“ samvat 19 

From Adivaraha (Vishnu) and the Earth sprang Naraka; his sons Bhagadatta and 
Vajradatta. In the lineage of Bhngadatta, 4 Pralambha, married Jivada ; their son Ha[r]jara, 
married Tara; their son Vanamala. 5 

653 . — Proceedings Beng. As. So;. 1860, p. 148, and Plates. Sylhet (Assam) plates of 

Kesavadeva : — 

(L. 55). — • Pandavaknladipal-abda (?) 4328 (?). 

In the lunar race, Kharavana (r) ; his son G6kula (? Gdlhana) ; his son Narayana ; his son 
Govinda- Kesavadeva. 

654. — Proceedings Beng. -H Soc. 1SS0, p. 152. and Plates. Sylhet (Assam) plates of 

Isanadeva; (composed by Mad Lava of the Dasa family) ; 

(L. 32).— sam 17 Vai sakha- dine 1. 

In^the lunar nee, Gokula (? Golhaua) ; his sou Nar&yaua ; his son KeSavadera; his son 
Isanadeva. 


655.— Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Vol. XL. Part I. p. 165, and Platen. Bamanghati (in Orissa, 
now Calcutta Museum) plate of Banabhanjadeva, the son of Digbhanja who was the son of 
Kottabhanja, of the Bbafija family : — 

(L. 36). — samvat 200 6 (?) 80 S Pushya-sudi 1 7 (P). 


i This norae was by Prinsep misread as Kliatasina, which was supposed to have been substituted iu the plate 
for, perhaps, Mddhata atria. 

» Another plate from the Dacca district (purchased by the Bengal As. Soc.), also dated in “ .amt at 13," is 
mentioned in the Proceedings Beng. As. Soc. 1890, p. 242, and 1891, p. 119 ; it does not seem to have been 
published jet. 

* Both times the * 10 ’ is denoted by a nnraericr.1 symbol and the ‘ 3 ' by a numeral figure. 

4 For a king Phagadatta cr Bhagad-jtta kings see above. No. 541. * 

5 "fbe inscription also, liefore Pi alambha, appearsto mention a Hue of king, commencing with Salastarobh. 

and ending w.th Hansha (Harslm ?), but, to enable one to give a reliable account of its contents, it requires to be 
re-edited. — Compare below. Nos. 711-714. H 

6 d lie s \ mbol, used here, is exactly like the alcshara and has been taken to denote 200 * but I doubt tbte 

being correct. 1 

7 Expressed by a numeral figure (which may possibly be 7). 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA, 


89 


656. Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Vol, XL. Part I. p. 168, and Plate iii. Bamanghati (now 
Calcutta Museum) plate of Rajabhan jadeva, the son of Rapabhafija who is described here as the 
son of Kottabhanja, of the Bhahja family. 

657. — Jour . Beng . As. Soc . Vol, VI. p. 669, and Plate xxxiii, Gumsiir (in the Gan jam 
district) plates of Netribhan jadeva, the son of Rapabhanjadeva and grandson of Satrubhanja- 
deva, of the Bhanja family : — 

(L. 36). — samvat (?) Magha-sudi (?) [saptami?]. 1 

658. — Jour. Beng. As. Soc . Vol. LVL Part I. p. 159, and Plate ix, Orissa (?) plates of the 
Maharaja Vi dyadharabh ah jadeva, the son of Silibhan jadeva, 2 grandsou of Diva(?)bhan jadeva 
and great-grandson of Vra(?)nabhan jadeva, of the Bhanja family. 

659. — Bp. Ind. Vol. III. p. 341, and Plate. Patpa 3 (now Bengal As. Soc/s) plates of the 
Mah drdj ddhird ja MaM-Bhavaguptara jadeva [I.] Janamejayadeva, lord of Trikalinga, the 
successor of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Sivaguptad6va. of the family of the Moon; issued from 

Kataka 4 : — 

(L. 39). maharajadhiraja-paramesvara-sri-Jananiejayadevasya vijaya-rajye samva- 

chchhare 5 shashtheh Ashadha-mase sita-pakshe t[i*jthav=ashtamyam yatr=ankato=pi samvat 
6 A(a)shadha-sudi 8. 

650. — Ep. Ind Vol. III. p. 847, and Plate. Katak (Cuttack, or Chaudwar. in Orissa) plates 
of the Mahardj ddhird ja Maha-Bhavaguptadeva [I.], lord of Trikalinga, 6 the successor of the 
Mahdrdjddhirdja Sivaguptadeva, of the family of the Moon ; issued from Kataka : — 

(L. 43). — -mah&rajadhiiaja-paramesvara-Somakulatilaka-Trikalingadhipati-s ri-Maha- 

Bhavaguptadeva-padapadma-pravarddhamaua-vijayarajye ekatriiisatcime 7 samvatsare i 

Margga-sudi tithau trayodasyam yatr^auken=api samvat 31 Margga-sudi 13. 

661. Proceedings Beng . As. Soc. 1882, p. 11 ; Ep. Lid. Vol. III. p. 346. Other Katak (or 

Chaudwar, now Bengal As. Soc/e) plates of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Maha-Bhavaguptadeva [I.] ; 
of the same date. 

662. Ep. Ind. Vol. III. p. 346. Notice of other Katak (?) plates of the Mahdrdjddhirdja 

Mahfi-Bhavaguptadeva p.] ; of the same date. 

663. Ep. fad. Vol. III. p. 351 ; Jour. Beng. A.?. Soc. Vol. XL VI. Part I. p. 153, and 

Plate x. Katak plates of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Maha-SivaguptarSjadeva Yayatira jadeva, lord 
of Trikalinga, the son and successor of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Maha-Bhavaguptarajadeva [I.] 
Janamejaya, of the family of the Moon ; issued from Vinitapura 

(L,63). maharftja-paramesva[ra*]-S5makulatilaka-Trikalingadhipati-sri-Ja(ya)yatiraj a - 

deva-pravard dhamana- ve( vi) jay arajy e navame samvatsare 9 Jycshtha-si(si)ta-tray6- 

da§y4[m] 13. 8 

Ep. Ind. Vol. III. p. 356, and Plate. Katak (?) plates of the Mahdrdjddhirdja 

MaM-Bhavaguptar& jadSva [II.] Bhimarathadeva, lord of Trikalinga, the son and successor 
of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Maha-Sivagnptarajadeva Yayati (who himself was the son of 
Janamejaya), of the family of the Moon ; issued from Yayatinagara 

(L. 42). — stirya-grahane. 

1 The date probably contains numerical symbols. r ^ ^ 

2 In Ep. Ind. Vol. Ill, p. 353, 1. 33, mention is made of a place Sildlhanjapdfi in the 04 ra country. 

3 A Native State, attached to the Sambalpur district. Central Provinces. 

4 But when the grant was issued, the king was at Mdrasima. 

5 Read tamvatsari shatktha. * He is also called KStalSndra, ‘ lord of K6lala.’ 

f Bead Skatrimiattami *amvat$ar$. 

8 In Ep. Ind. this * 13 * is taken to be denoted by numerical symbols for 10 and 3, but iu my opinion the plate 
contains numeral figures for 1 and 3. 

N 



90 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[You Y. 


(L. 70). maharajadhiraja-paramesvara-Sbmakrilatilaka-Trikalihgadhipati-sri-Bhiinaratha- 

devasya pravaiddhamauurvijayarajye triti(ti)[ya*]-samvatsare Margasirshamasiya-sukla- 
paksh[e*] tithau trit[i*]yayam yatr^ahken^api samvat 3 Marga-sudi 3 h j| 

665. — Bp. Ind. Yol. IY. p. 258, and Plate. Kudopali (in the Sambalpur district of the 
Central Provinces, now Nagpur Museum) plates of the Ed naka Punja, the son of Yoda (?), 
of the Mathara family; of the reign of the Mahdrdjddhiruja Maha-Bhavaguptarajadeva pi.], 
lord of Trikalinga, the successor of the Mahdrdjddhiraja Maha-Sivaguptarajadeva, of the family 
of the Moon, residing at Yayatinagara ; issued from Ya(?)mandapat! : — 

(L. 4). ma(ma)harajadhiraja-paramesvara-S6maknlatilaka-Tri(tri)kalingadhipati- 3 r t - 

Maha-Bhavaguptarajadeva*tnahi-pravarddhamana-kalyacu(na)%njayarajye trayodasa-samvatsare 
a(a)tr=anke samvata(t) 13. 

666. — Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Yol. LXIY. Part I. p. 125. Puri (in Orissa) plates 1 of the 
Maharaja Kulastambhadeva or Bala(na?)stambhadeva (?). 

667. — Bp. Ind. Yol. Ill, p. 313, and Plate. India Office plate of the Mahdrdjddhirdja 
Vijayarajadeva, issued from (?) Kataka. 

The inscription mentions the Mahdrdjnis Lachchhidevi and Hamsinidevi. 

668. — Jour. Beng. As. hoc. Yol. "V II. p. 558, and Plate xxiv. Bhuvonesvar (in Orissa) 
partly damaged inscription of the reign of the Mahdrajddhi raja TJddyotatesarirajadeva, lord of 
Trikalinga ; (composed by Bhatta Purushottama) : — 

(L. 20). srimad-Uddyotakesarirajadevasya vijaya-rajyd samvat 18 Phalguna-sudi 3 . . . 

According to the published text, the inscription mentions Janamejaya 2 of the lunar race, 
his son Dtrgharava, and his son Apavara who died childless; after him. Vichifcravirya (another 
son cf Janomejaya), his son Ahhimauyu, his s un Chandihara, and his son Uddyotakesarin, 
v, hi.se mother was Kolavati of the solar race. 

669. —* Jour . Beng. As, Soc . Yol. YT. p, 89, and Plate vii. with specimen facsimile. 
Bhuvanesvar (in Orissa) inscription, being a prasasti of Bhatta Bhavadeva, surnaraed 
B a 1 a v al abhi bh u jan ga, 3 a minister of Harivarmadeva ; (composed by Vachaspati). Dated 
4 * samvat 32 ” (?). 

670. — Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Vol. VI. p. 280. and Plate xvii. -with specimen facsimile; also 
Vol. LXVI. Part I. p. 18. Bhuvanesvar (in Orissa) inscription of the time of the Gangs 
AniyankabhAma of Trikalinga; (composed by Udayana). 

The inscription first mentions the Bdjapntra Dvaradeva (in the gotra of Gautama), his son 
Muiadcva, his son Ahirama, and his son and daughter Svapnesvara and Surama ; and then 
Chodaganga of the lunar race, his sou Rajaruja who married SnramA, and Rajaraj’a’s younger 
brother Aniyahkabhima. 4 

671. — Ind. Ant. Vol. I. p. 355, and Plato. Balasor (in Orissa) plate of the Maharaja 
Purushottamadeva 

(L. 7). — e 5 auk a Mesha di 10 am Soma-Mra grahana-kMe. 6 

672. — Ep. Ind. Vol. IV. p. 199. Gafijam plates of the Gangs Mahdrdjddhirdja Mahdrdja 
Prithivivarmadeva, the s..n of Mahindravarmadeva, of Kalinga ; issued from Svetka (?) :— 

(L. IS). — vishuka(va)-saukranyafntyarh). 


» The plates may be compared with those of the Mahdrdja Prithivivarmadeva, below, No. 672. 

7 This name occurs above, in Nos. 659, 663 and 664. 

s See Prof. Eggeling’s Catalogue, No. 1725. * 4 He ia the king (7.) in No. 367 above. 

* The equivalent of the date (Monday, the 7fch April A.D. 1483), given by me in Ind. Ant. Vol. XXII. p. 108 
is not jmtiifactory. * 1 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


91 


673 — Ep. Ind. Vol. III. p. 43. Buguda (in the Ganjam district, now Madras Museum) 
plates of Madhavavarman, issued from Kaingoda : — ' 

(L. 37). — suiyagrah-dparagfina. 

„ The inscription mentions Puliudasena, ‘famous amongst the pebples of Kalinga;* 
Sailhdbhava; Ranabiiita; his son Sainyabhita [I.]; Yasobhita; his son Sainyabhita [II.] ; and 
his son Madhavavarman. 

674. — Ep, Ind . Vol. IV. p. 144, and Plate. Kdmarti (in the Ganjam district) plates of 
the Mahdrdja Chandavarman, 1 lord of Kalinga, issued from Siriihapura: — 

(L. 20). — samvatsarah shashthah 6 2 Chaiti’amasa-sukla-pamchami(mi)-divasah j| 

675. — Ind, Ant. Vol. XIII. p. 49, and Plate. Chicacole (in the Ganjam district, now 
Madras Museum) plates of the Mahdrdja Nandaprabhanjanavarman, lord of the whole of 
Kalinga, issued from S&rapalli. 

676. — GahgSya-s. (?) 87.— Ep. Ind . Vol. III. p. 128, and Plate. Achyutapuram (in the 
Ganjam district, now Madras Museum) plates of the Gahga Mahdrdja Indravarman R&jasimha 
of Kalinga, issued from Kalihganagara : — 

(L. 13). — udag*ayane. 

(L. 22). — pravarddhamana-viiayarajya-samvatsarab saptasiti[h*] 80 7 Chaitr-aniavasyum j 

677. — G&hgeya-s, (?) 91. — hid. Ant. Vol. XVI. p. 134; Ind. Inscr. No. 18. ParltV 
Kimedi (in the Ganjam district, now Madras Museum) plates of the Ganga Mahdrdja 
Indravarman Rhjasimha of Kaliibga, issued from Kalin ganagara : — 

(L. 18). — prayai’ddhamana-vijayai-ajya-samvatsarAh eka(ka)navati[h*] 90 1 Magha-dina 
trihsatima 30. 

678. — G&ng§ya-s. (P). 128.— Ind. Ant . Vol. XIII. p. 120, and Plate. Chicacole (in the 
Ganjam district, now Madras Museum) plates of the Gariga Ma/mru/a Indravarman of Kalinga, 
issued from Kalihganagara : — 

(L. 10). — Matggasira-paurnnamasyarh s6m-oparage. 

(L. 20). — pravarddhamana-vijayarajya-sambatsara 3 100 20 8 Chaittra-di 10 5. 

679. — GRtng6ya-s.(?) 140 (?)• — Ind. Ant. Vol. XIII. p. 123, and Plate, Chicacole (in the 
Ganjam district, now Madras Museum) plates of the Gahga Mahdrdja Indravarman [of 
Kalinga], issued from Kalihganagara : — 

(L. 15). — Magha-saptamyftm. 

(L. 23). — pravarddhamana-vijayarajya-sarhvatsarah 100 40 6 (?) 4 * Maglia-di 10 h(P). 

680. G&hgeya'S. (?) 183. — Ep. Ind . Vol. III. p. 131, and Plate. Chicacole (in the 

GRthj&m district, now Madras Museum) plates of tne Gahga Maud raja Devendravarman, the 
Bon of Gunarnava, of Kalinga, issued from Kalihganagara : 

(L. 11).— M&gha-masy=udag-ayane such(kl)-a8htamy3tii. 

(L. 25 ).— pravarddhamana-vijayarajya-sambachchhara-satam 6 trirasite 6 100 80(?) 3(P) 7 
§r&vap.6 m&si divh vihsati 8 2 0. 

5 QI # G&nggya-s. (?) 264 .— Ind. Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 144, and Plate. Vizagapatam 

plates of the G&nga Devdndravarman, the son of the Mahdrdja Anantavarman, of Kalinga, 
issued from Kalihganagara : — 

(L. 13). — ayana-pu(ph)rwakam. 

1 See below. No. 686. * Denoted by a numerical symbol. * Read -Mamvattordh. 

4 The numerical symbol, employed in the original, seem# to me to be the symbol for 1 8* rnthor than that 

for « 6. * The following • 10 b ' may really be * 10 2.* 

5 Bead tarinattara*. 9 Bead tryaiitih. 

? The writer, in my opinion, has wrongly employed the numerical symbols for ‘8* and * 30, ’ instead of those 

for * 80* and * 8. * The following 20 he ha# denoted by the symbol for c 2 ’ and the sign for nought. 

• Bend dini vim4S. 

N 2 



92 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. v. 


(L. 27). — 8amvachchha(tsa)ra-sata-dvay3 chatushpancha(ncM)§-&bhyadliike 254 1 

Phalguna(na)-prathama-pakshe pratipadi. 

682. — Gangeya-s. 51 (?).— Ind. Ant. Yol. XIII. p. 275, and Plate. Chicacole (in the 
Gan jam district, now Madras Museum) plates of the Gahga Devendravarmadeva, the son of 
the Maharaja Anantavarmadeva, issued from Kalinganagara : — 

(L. 15). — sft[r*]yagrah-6parage. 

(L. 22). — GangeyaYahsa 8 -prayardhamana-yijayarajya-samvatsaram=ekapancha(ncha)sa[m*]. 

683. — Gangeya-s. 304.— Ep. Ind. Yol. III. p. 18, and Plate. Alamanda (in the Yizaga- 
patam district) plates of the Ganga Anantavarmadeva, the son of the Maharaja Rajfendra- 
varman, issued from Kalinganagara 

(L. 18). — su(su)ryagrah-6parag6 . . . 

(L. 28). — G[a*jhgeyavahsa 2 -praYardham[a]na-vijayarajya-8ainvachhrara-sat[ a ] triui 

chatu[ro]tara. 3 


684. Gang§ya-s. 351.— Ind. Ant. Yol. XIY. p. 11, and Plate. Chicacole (in the Ganjam 
d^rict, now Madras Museum) plates of the Gahga Satyavarmadeva, the son of the Maharaja 
Devendravarmau, of Kalihga, issued from Kalinganagara : — 

(L. 17). — su[r*]y“6parage. 

(L. 34).— GangeyaYansa 2 -samYachha(tsa)ra-sata-tray-aikapahchasa(sa)t. 4 

685. Ep. Ind. Yol. III. p. 223, and Plate. Parla-Kimedi (in the Ganjam district, now 
Madras Museum) plates 6 of the Gahga D&raparaja, the son of Ch61a-Kamadiraja, of the reign of 
the Gahga Mahdrdjddhirdja Vajrahastadeva ; issued from Kalinganagara. 

686. — Ind. Ant. Vol. V. p. 176, and Plate. Kollera lake (in the Godavari district) plates 

of the Salankayana 6 MaMrdja Vijayanandivarman, eldest son of the Maharaja Chandavannan* 
issued from Y engipura : — ' * 

(L. ^ ) ■ pravarddh am ana-vi j ay ar&jy a-saptama-sa [m*] vat sarasy a Panshyafahalm&sa- 

krishnapakshasy=ashtamyam. J v J 


687. — Ep. Ind. Yol. IY. p. 195, and Plate. Chikkolla fin the a i . . 

the n„ the elde.t eo. of the MaUrdja I,de.bhi.t 

, , ’ and great-grandson of the Maharaja Madhava- 

varman, of (the family of) the Yishnnkundins ; issned from Lendnlftra : — J V 

(L. 25).— vi[ja]yarajya-samvassarambo} 10 masa-pakkam 8 gihmi 5.» 

688. — Jour. Bo. As. Soc. Yol. XVI. d. 116 and eu. ..... 

Ttithivimula, the «... ot the MMrija Pnihikt^ S 


* The decimal figures for 4 and 5, here nsed, “ are of a decidedly excentiou.il bn. ... , . 

of them in words, would most naturally have been read aa 6 and 8." P " typ ’ d ‘ lut ,or tbe explanation 
3 Read Vmia*. 

3 Read •jamvatsara-SaMni trini chatur-uttardni. 

4 This reading w ns suggested to Dr. Hultzsch by Mr. G. V. Baraamurt* 

5 Of about tbe 11th century A.D., and therefore nroht.hu . U . 

Na<Jag4m plates, above. No. 357 of S. 979 (A.D. 1058). ’ ° ° f the who issued tbs 

6 By Dr. Fleet this is taken to mean “of the Salankayana gdtra ” 

7 According to Dr. Hultzach (Ep. Ind. Vol. IV. p I43) he m 1 • , 

1 « [«— « 5. Tb. ...w. 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


93 


request of Mitravarman’s son Indradhiraja, the conqueror of a certain Indrabhatt&raka • 1 issued 
from Kandali 

(L. 34). — prava[r # ]d[dh*]amana-vijayarajya-samvatsarani panchavi[m*]sa 2 20 5 vas& 
4 (P) 3 divasam 3. 

Addenda. 

689. — V. 1117.— Bombay Gazetteer, Yoh I. Part I. p. 472, No. iv. Bhinmal (Srtmala) 
inscription of the reign of the Paramara Mahdrdjddhirdja Krishnaraja, the son of Dhandhuka 
and grandson of Devaraja 

(L. 3). — samvat 1117 4 M%ha-sudi 6 Ravau srS-Srimale Paramara-vaths-odbhavo 
maharajadhiraja(ja)-sri-Krishnarajah sri-Dhamdhuka-sutab srimad-Devaraja-pauttrah tasmin 
kshitise yijayini | 

Sunday, 31st December A.D. 1060. 

690. — V. 1123.— Bombay Gazetteer, Yol. I. Part I. p. 473, No. y. Bhinmal (Srimala) 

fragmentary inscription of the reign of the [Paramara] Mahdrdjddhirdja Krishnar&ja : 

(L. 1). — samvat 1123 Jyeshtha-vadi 12 Sanaa || ady=eha sn-Srimale maharajadhiraja-sri- 
Krishnaraja-rajye. 

Saturday, 12th May A.D. 1067. 

691. — V. 1134 and 1135.— From an impression supplied by Dr. Piihrer. Kahla (in the 
G&rakhpur district, now Lucknow Museum) plates of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Sodhadeva, the 
successor of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Maryadasagaradeva (apparently of the Kalachuri family 5 ) ; 
issued from Dhulia-ghatta on the great river Gandaki : — 

(L. 39) . — 6 * chatustrinsatsamvatsaradhik-aikadasa(sa)sa(sa)ta-samvatsare Pausha-masi 

8u(su)kla-saptamy&m Ravi-dine | su[r # ]ryy-6ttarayana-samkrantau mahanadi-Gandakyam 
vidhivat snatva. 

Sunday, 24th December A.D. 1077. 

(L. 57). — samvat 1135 Chaitra-va(ba)hula-ahashthyam || Ravi-dine | likhit6=yam 
tamvra-patta 

Sunday, 24th February A.D. 1079. 

592. — V*. 1171.— From an impression supplied by Dr. Fiihrer. Pali (now Lucknow 
Museum) first plate? only of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Gdvindacli&iidr&dev& of Kanauj : — 

(L. 18). — ekasaptatyadhika-sa(sa)taikadasa(sa)-samvatsare Bhadrapade masi. 8 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

593, — v. 1189. — Ep. Ind . Vol. V. p. 114. Pali (now Lucknow Museum) plates of the 
Mahdrdjddhirdja G6vindachandrad§va 9 of Kanauj and his mother, the Mahdrajhi 
Ralhanadevi 10 : — 

(L. 22). — Vai3a(sa)khe mfisi si(si)t5 pakshe akshaya-tritiyayam parwani . . 

(L. 34). — samvat 1189 J[y*]eshtha-vadi 8 Sa(sa)nau | 

Saturday, 29th April A.D. 1133. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 


1 Probably the Indrab ha ttirakavarm an of No. 687 above. 

2 Read panchavimiatik. 

3 The published text has Vdfdka-divasarn ; I take the original to mean r arthd-pakthah 4 ; compare Ep. Ind. 
Vol. I. p. 7, h 49, “ vdsa 6 diva 5” 

4 The English translation has 1113. 

% The impression of the first plate in some parta is so indistinct that, for the present, I cannot give the names 

that occur in the genealogical part of the inscription. 

« Read chatuttrimiai°. ’ See Ep. Ind. Vol. V. p. 114, note 4. 

8 Here the writing on this first plate ends. 

9 The king made the grant after bathing in the river Sat! at the ghafta of the god Svapnfcsvara. 

10 See above. No. 96 of V. 1181. 


94. 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


594 # v. 1201 (for 1202?).— Ep. Ind . Yol. Y. p. 115. Machhlishahr (GhiswA no^ 

Lucknow Museum) plate of the Mahdrdjddhiraja Govindachandradeva of Kanauj, issued from 

Y&ranasi: — _ 

(L. 15).— sarirvatsarana[m ekapdhika-dvadasa-sateshu Yaisakhe masi sukta(kla)-paksne 

’kshaya-tritiyayam tithau S6ma-dine ’nke=pi saihvata 2 201 Yais&kha-sudi 3 Some. 

Monday, 19th April A.D. 1143 ; or, perhaps, Monday, 15th April A.D. 1146. 

Genealogy as in No. 84. 

695. — V. 1208. — Jour . Boy. As. Soc. 1898, p. 101, and Plate. Horniman Museum Jama 
image inscription of some members of the Grahapati family 3 : — 

(L. 1). — gam vat 1208 Yaisa(sa)kha-vadi 5 Gurau j| 

Thursday, 27th March A.D. 1152. 

696. — V. 1238.— Bom bay Gazetteer , Yol. I. Part I. p. 474, No. vi. Bhinmal (Srimala) 
inscription of the reign of the Mahardjaputra (?) Jayatasimhadeva (?) 

(L.l). — sam 1239 Asvina-vadi 10 Yn(bu)dhe ady=eha sri~Srim41e maharajaputr&Mrt- 
Jayatasihadeva-r&jy6 || 

Wednesday, 25th August A.D. 1182; or Wednesday, 12th October A.D. 1183. 

697. — V. 1282.— Bombay Gazetteer , Yol. I. Part I. p. 474, No. vii. Bhinmal (Srimala) 
inscription of the reign of the Mahdrdjddhiraja Udayasimhadeva 5 

(L. 3). — sam vat 1262 varsh& ady=eha sri-Srim&16 maharajadhiraja-sri'Udayasimhad^va- 
kaly&pa-vijayar&jye. 

698. — V. 1274 .— Bombay Gazetteer , Yol. I. Part I. p. 475, No. viii. Bhinmal (Srfm&la) 
fragmentary inscription of the reign of the Mahdrdjddhiraja Udayasimhadeva 

(L. 1). — samvat 1274 varsh6 Bhadrapada-sudi 9 Sukre=dy=6ha flri-Srim&16 
maharaj lidhiraja-sii-UdayasiihhadSva-kalyana-vi jayarajy^. 

Friday, 31st August A.D. 1218. 

699. — V. 1305.— Bombay Gazetteer , Yol. I. Part I. p. 476, No. ix. Bhimn&l (Srim&Ia) 
fragmentary inscription of the reign of the Mahdrdjddhiraja fUdalyasimhadeva 

(L. 4). — sam 1305 varshe ady=6ha sri-Srimale mah&r^jadhiraja-*srS-[Uda]yasi[m]had5va- 
kaly &na~ vi j ay ar&jy A 

700. — V. 1320.— Bombay Gazetteer , Yol, I. Part I. p. 477, No. x. Bhinm&I (Srim&la) 
inscription ; (composed by Subhata) : — 

(L. 14). — sam 1320 varsh6 M4gha-6udi 9 navami-dinA 

701. — V. 1330.— Bombay Gazetteer , Yol. I. Part I. p. 478, No. xi. Bhinm&l (^rimikla) 
fragmentary inscription, containing a reference to the Bajadhiraja P UdayftsilbhadGva ; 
(composed by Sabhate) : — 

(L. 13).— samvat 1330 varsh6 Asvina-fiudi 4 chaturthi-dinA 

702. — - V. 1333.— Bombay Gazetteer, Yol. I. Part I. p. 480, No. xii, BhinmAl (SrimAla) 
inscription of the reign of the Maharajakula [Ch&]chigad6va ; (composed by Subhata) 

(L. 5). — samvat 1333 varshe || Aivina-4udi 14 S6me | ady=4ha firi-6rimA14 
mah&rAjakula~§ri-[Ch&?]chigadAva-kalyfkna-vijayi(ya)r&jyA 

The date is irregular. 7 


J Bead * > ndm=4kddhika-. 2 Bead taihvat 1901 . 3 See above. No*. 56, 126 and 188. 

* A* thUha* been rendered by • Mahiracl/ the original text perhaps has mahdrdjakula 

6 Compare above. No. 256 , note. 8 Thia title occara in a verse. 

7 For Kdrttikddi V. 1383 expired the date would correspond to Sunday, 12th September A.D. 1277. 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


95 


703. — V. 1334.— Bombay Gazetteer , Yol. I. Part I. p. 481, No. xiii. Bhinm&l (Srimala) 
inscription of the reign of the Maharajahula ChAchiga: — 

(L. 2). — samyat 1334 varshe Asvina-vadi 8 ady=eha 6ri-Srimal6 mahArAjakula-sr$- 
ChAchiga-kalyana-vijayarajye. 1 

The inscription mentions, in the Chahuraana lineage, the Maharajahula Samarasimha ; his 
son, the Mahdrdjddhirdja Udayasimhadeva ; his son Yahadhasimlia ; and [his son P] 
ChAmundarajadeva. 

704. — V. 1339.— Bombay Gazetteer , Yol. I. Part I. p. 483, No. xiv. Bhinmal (SrimAla) 
fragmentary inscription of the reign of the Maharajahula Samvatasimhadeva (?) 

(L. 2). — samvat 1339 varshe As vina-sudi | (?) Sanav=ady-eha sri-Sriin&16 maharAjakula- 
6ri-SAmvatas!hadeva-kalyana-vijayarajye. 

705. — • V. 1340.— Ep. Ind. Yol. IY. p. 313. ‘ Burtra* (now Jddhpnr) inscription of 

RdpAdAvi, of the reign of the Mahdrdjahula SAmya(ma ?)ntasimhadeva 2 3 : — 

(L. 18). — samyat 1340 varshe Jyeihta(shtha)-vadi 7 Some ’dy=eha mahArajakula-6ri- 
Samya(ma)mtasiiiihadeva-rajye. 

Monday, 8th May A.D. 1284. 

Samarasimha ; succeeded by Udayasiiiiha ; his son, the ChahumAna ChAva (ChAcha ? s ); his 
daughter (from Lakshmldevi), Rftpadevi, became the wife of the king Tejasimha, and bore to 
him Kshetrasimha. 

706. — V. 1342.— Bombay Gazetteer , Yol. I. Part I. p. 484, No. xv. Bhinmal (SrimAla) 
inscription of the reign of the Maharajahula Samvatasimhadeva (?) :— 

(L. 3). — samvat 1342 Asvina-vadi 10 Ravav^ady=eha sri-Srimal^ mahArajakula-srl- 
S Am vatasiliadeva-kaly ana-v ijay a raj ye. 

Sunday, 15th September A.D. 1286. 

707. — V. 1345.— Bombay Gazetteer , Yol. I. Part I. p. 486, No. xvi. Bhinmal (§rlmala) 
inscription of the reign of the Maharajahula Samvatasimhadeva (?) 

(L. 14.). — samvat 1345 varsh6 Magha-vadi 2 Sdme ’dy=eha srl-Srimale maharajakula-eri- 

Samvatasimghadeva-kalyAna-vijayarAjyA 

Monday, 10th January A.D. 1289. 

708. — K. 392.— Ep. Ind . Yol. Y. p. 39, and Plate. Sankheda plates of the Gurjara 
Dadda H. 4 PrasAntarAga, the son of [Jayabhata I.] Yifcaraga, issued from Nandipura : — 

(L. 18). — YaisAkha-iuddha-panchadasyam. 

(L. 27). — sam vat sara-5 ata-t ray e dvi[na]vaty-adhik£ YaisAkha-suddha-panchadadyAm . . 

. • . gam 300 90 2 Yai6akha-3u 10 5. v 

709. K. 392.— Ep. Ind. Yol. Y. p. 39, and Plate. Other SAakhedA plates of the 

Gurjara Dadda n. 4 PrasAntarAga, the son of [Jayabhata I.] Yitaraga, issued from Nandi- 
pura : — 

(L. 17). — YaiSAkharpaurnnamasyam. 

(Ij. 26). — samvatsara-^ata-traye dviuavaty-adhike Yaisakha-paurnijiamAsy&m » • • 

• . sam 300 90 2 Yaieakha-Su 10 5. 


1 la 1. 15 the inscription has the date sam 33 varthi CAaitra-vadi 15, 

2 See Nos. 704, 706 and 707. 

3 See above, No«. 702 and 703, where we have the name Chdchiga. 

4 By Prof. Buhler, who took the inscriptions Nos. 347, 348 w and 349 to be genuine records, be is called 
Dadda IV, Compare aboye, Nos. 395-397. 



96 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


710. — H. 100.— From impressions supplied by Munsiff Debiprasad and Dr. Fiihrer. 
Danlatpura (now Jodhpur) plate of the Maharaja Bhojadeva L, issued from Mahodaya 
(Kananj) 1 : — 

(L. 16). — samvatsro 100 Phalguna-sudi 10 3 2 niva(ha)ddbam || 

The Maharaja Devasakti ; his son, from Bhuyikadevi, the Maharaja Vatsaraja ; his son, 
from Sundaridevi, the Maharaja Nagabhata ; his son, from Isatadevi, the Maharaja Rama* 
bhadra; his son, from Appadevi, the Maharaja. Bhoja [I.] [snrnamed Prabhasa ?]. — The 
inscription also mentions, as dutaka , the Tuvaraja Nagabhata. 

711. — Jour. Beng . As . Soc . Vol. LXVII. Parti, p. 106, and Plates. Bargaon (Assam) 
plates of the Maharajadhiraja Ratnap&lavarmadeva, the successor of Brahmapalavarmadeva, 
of Pragjy&tisha : — 

(L. 63). — samkrantau vipnn(shnn)padyan=cha panchaYims-aTda(bda).rajyake. 

Hari( Vishnu) ; his son Naraka ; his son Bhagadatta ; his brother Vajradatta. After 
certain descendants of his came the Mlechchha Salasfcambha 3 and twenty-one(P) other kings, 
from Vigrahastambha to Tyagasimha. Then, in the Bhanma (Le. Naraka’s) lineage, Brahma- 
pala, married Kuladevi ; their son Ratnapala. 

712. — Jour. Beng . As. Soc. Vol. LXVII. Part I. p. 122, and Plates. SualbnchS (Assam) 
second and third plates only of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Ratnapala varmadeva, the successor of 
Brahmapalavarmadeva, of Pragjyotisha : — 

(L. 39). — rajye shadvihsad-avdi(bdi)ke. 

713. — Jour. Beng. As. Soc. Yol. LXVT. Part I. p. 123, and Plates. Ganhatl (Assam) plates 
of the Mahdrdjddhirdja Indrap&lavarmadeva, the successor of Ratnapalavarmadeva, of 
Pragjy6tisha :— 

(L. 44). — rajye ’shtama-same. 

From Hari (Vishnu) and the Earth sprang Naraka; his son Bhagadatta ■* his son (?) 
Vajradatta. In this lineage there was Brahmapala ; his son Ratnapala ; his son Purandarap&la, 
married Du rlabha ; their son Indrap&la. 

714,.— Jour. Beng.. As. Soc. Vol. LXVI. Part I. p. 289, and Plates. Nowgong district 
(Assam) plates of the Mahdrdjddhirdja. Balavarmadeva of Pragjydtisha, issued from 
[Harft]ppeSvara 

(L. 49). — samva . • Vai 

Up6ndra (Vishnu) ; his son Naraka ; his son Bhagadatta; his younger brother Vajradatta. 
After many kings in that race, Salastambha,® Palaka, Vijaya, and others. Then Harjara; his 
son Vanamala (see No. 652) ; his son Jayamala; his son Virabahu, married Amba ; their son 
Balavarman. 


715. — Ini. Ant Vol. XII. p. 275. Wal4 
Pushy £na, the son of the Maharaja Ahivarman, 


clay seal of the Mahdrdja Mahd[sSnd]pati 
descended from Jayaskandha. 


716. — Ind . Ant. Vol. XVIII. p. 289, and Plate, 
name [M]attila. 


Bulandshahr terra-cotta seal, with the 


by a numeral figure. 


1 See above, Nos. 542 and 544 of H. 155 and 188. 

1 The numbers 4 5 100 * and * 10 9 are denoted by numerical symbols, and « 3 1 

3 See above, No. 652, note, and below, No. 714. 

• After him the family, in line 4, is called the Bhagadatta-vamia (the published text h. Da ^ „ 
bnt the reading on the plate is Bhagadatta-vansa); compare above. Nos 541 and 652 T i- 
spoken of as ‘ the Bhauma lineage,’ after the Earth or her son Naraka. See Jour. Bog As. ^ ” 

5 See above, No. 711. * * **’ 



INDEX . 1 * 


Abbayachandra, Jaina Suri, 

Numbbb 

, 570 

Abhayadatta, m., . • « 

• 

4 

Abhayadeva, ffmanga ch-, . 

• 1 

289 

Abhimanya, Kackchhapaghdta £•, 

m 9 

71 

Abhimanyu, Bdshtrakuta ch., • 

• 

607 

Abhimanyu, Trikalihga k. } . 

* 

668 

Abhinavasiddbaraja, sur. of 
Bbima 11., • 

Chaulukya 

188 

Abbiflavasiddbaraja, sur. of 
Jpy&ntasiihba, 

Chaulukya 

205 

Aohgda, Buddhist Sthavira , . 

. 

608 

Achalavarman-Samaraghanghala, S inghapura 
ch., •••*••• 

600 

Acbynta, k. in Ary&varta, . • 

• 

509 

Adbhutakfishnar&ja (or Erisbnaraja ?), ch., . 

64 

Adctaka, Chdpa ch.. 

. 

353 

Adhir&ja (?), ch., . • 


256 

Adisimha, Magadha k.. 

. 

628 

Aditya-bhogika, Sdihdhivigrahika , 


394 

Adityasakti, Sendraka ch., . 

• 

399 

Adityaseoa, Gupta k. of Magadha, 535, 541, 

550, 651, 552, 619n 

Adityavardhana, Eanauj k ^ 


528 

Adityavarman, k.. 


595 

Adityavarman, Maukhari k 


554 

Adivaraha, s. a . Kanauj k . Bb6ja, 


15 

Advaitaeata, poem by Gaiigadbara, 


362n 

Agigrama, family. 


646 


Ahiavadevi, queen q^Udayakama-Niheankasimha, 364 
Ahihaya, s. a . Haihaya, 

Ahir&ma, ch., • « • 

Ahivarman, ch., • 

Ajayap&la, Chaulukya k ., . 

[A]jayapdla, k 

Ajayasimha, Guhila k ^ 

Ajayasimha, Kalachuri prince, 

Ajayavarman, Paramdra k. 9 


283 

. . . 670 

. . . 715 

160, 163, 188, 627 
. 128 

. 290 

• • • 422 

. 195 


Number 

Ajita, Surasena ch., 5 g 9 

Ajitamana, ch ...... 628 

Ajjhitaderi, queen of Vchchakalpa ch. Vyaghra, 387 
Akabara or Akabbara or Abavara, emperor 
(Akbai), . . . 307, 308, 309, 310, 322n 

Alavadina or Allavadina, Sultan (Ala-ud-din 

Masaud), 238, 290 

Alhana, Chahumdna ck. of Nadula, . 133, 141 
Alhanadevi, queen of Gayakarna, . 416, 422, 431 

Allata, Guhila k., . . 34, 234, 243, 290 

Allata, Saiva ascetic , ..... 41 

Allavadina, s. a. Alavadina, .... 290 

Amara, poet , ...... 247 

Amaraddva, ...... 32 

Amaramalla or Narend ram alia, Nepal k 664, 665 
Amarasirhhaji, Mewdd ch ^ • . . .312 

Amardakatirthanatha, Saiva ascetic, . . 430 

Amar^svaratirtha, place, . • . .198 

Amba, queen of Yirabahu, .... 714 

Am6gbavarska, sur. of Par amara Yakpatir&ja, 46 
Amraka, vi. f ...... 391 

Amrakavi, poet , ...... 42 

Amraprasada, Guhila k, 9 . . . 234 

Amritapala, Bdshtrakuta ch. of Ydddmayuta , 605 

Amritaraja, Bdshtrakuta ch ^ . . 364 

Amsuvannan, Nepal k ., . 480, 526, 530, 631, 

532, 533, 634 

Anabila, Chdhumana ch . of Nadula, . . 141 

Anahila, queen of Malhana, • • • .51 

AnahilapStaka or Anabilapura or Anabilla- 
pataka or Anabillavataka, vi. (Anhilvad), 

50, 61, 72, 188, 191, 194, 205, 206, 

208, 211, 215, 216, 220, 237, 582, 605 
Anandapura, vi. (Anand), .... 500 

Ananga, ch ., ...... 170 

Anangabbima, P. Gahga k., • • . 367 

Anangabhima or Aniyaiikabbima, do., . 367, 670 

Anantadevi, queen of Kumaragupta I., . • 518 


1 The figures refer to tbe numbers of the list ; ‘ n * after a figure, to footnotes. The following other 

abbreviations are used ch. = chief ; co. « country ; di . = district or division ; do . =* ditto ; E. =* Eastern ; 
f a female ; k. - king ; m. ~ male ; min . = minister ; mo. - mountain ; rt. = river ; s. a, ■ same as : 
surname ,* rt. * village or town ; W. 3 Western. 

Tbe index does not contain the names of the places where the inscriptions are, nor those of tie ancestors of 
authors of praiastis. 


o 



93 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[ Vol. V. 


NrilBEE 

Anantavarman, E. Ganga kings , • 681, 682, 683 

Anantavarman, Maukhari k., , . 555, 556 

Anantavarman-Chodagaiiga, E. Ganga k., 

359, 360, 361 

Anantavarman- Kolahala, Gafiga k., . .367 

Angareja. English, .... 326, 327 
Aniyaiikabhima or Anangabhima, E. Ganga k., 

367, 670 

Aniyaiikabhima, sur . of an E. Ganga Vajra- 
hasta, ....... 357 

Antarvedi, co 449 
Aparajita, Guhila k., * . • . .5 

Apar&jita, sur . of Kachchhapaghata D5vapala, 78 
Apavara, Trikalihga k„ . . . 668 

Appad6vi, queen of Mahodaya ch. Ramabhadra, 


Apratihara {or Madapratihara ?), vi., 
Apsarahpriya, queen of Ajita, 
Apsarodevi, queen of Eajyavardhana L, 
Aranyaraja ( or Arnoraja ?), ch., 
Arbuda, mo. (Abu), 

Arisimha, Guhila kings, 

Arjuna, Kachchhapaghata k„ 

Arjana or Arjunadeva, Vaghela k., 
Arjuna o r Arjunavarman, Paramara k 


243, 286, 290, 297 
. 71 

228, 244, 249 
195, 

197, 198 


Arjimasimha, Gadhadeia ch. t 
Arnoraja {or Aranyaraja ?), ch • 
Arnoraja, Chaliamana k . of Sakambhart 
Arnoraja, Vaghela k.,, 

Aryavarman, Sing hap ura ch 
Aryavarta, co., .... 
Asalad^va, Vadagujara ch., . 

Asalladeva, Nalapura ch., . 


Asamasadina, Sultan (Shams-ud-din Altamish), 238 


Asapha-kbana (Asaf Khan), . 

Asaraja, Chakumana ch. of Nadula, 
Asarva, queen of Krishna pa, 

Asata, k . . • • « 

Asatika, vi., • • 

Asmaka, people, . • 

Asokavalla, Sapadalaksha k., 
Atiyasobala or Yasobala, m . 


542, 710 
97 
589 
528 
64 
256 


. 322 
. 64 

130, 176 
210, 344 
. 600 
. 609 
. 272 
. 251 


. 32 2n 
. 141 
. 333 
. 593 
77, 83 
. 608 
. 575, 576, 677 

of Grahapati 


family, ...... 

• 55 

Atreya, gotra, . ... 

. 414 

Avallad£vi, queen of Kalachuri Karna, . 

. 410 

Avamnkta, vi. or co., .... 

. 50 

Avanijanasraya, sur. of Pulak&braja, . 

. 404 

Avanivarman, Chaulukya ch.. 

. 429 

Avanti, co., .... 

. 342 


Numb ee 

Avanti or Avantivarman, Matt amay ura ch 

429, 430 

Avantivarman, Magadha (?) k., . . . 552 

Av611adeva, Chdhamana k. of Sakamhhari , . 144 

Ayichchba (Aditya), Chhinda ch., . . 575n 

Ajodhya, vi., 511 , 628 


B 


Baghalladevi , queen of Aniyaiikabhima,. . 367 

Bahaaara-saha, Sultan (Bahadur), 

. 304 

Eahunda, vi., .... 

. 256 

Bahusahaya, sur. of Dadda HI., . 

. 402 

Bai Harira, f,. 

. 300 

Baladitya, Ealihga k.. 

. 360 

Baladitya, KaH (7) kings, 

. 601 

Baladitya, Magadha (?) k., . 

. 552 

Baladitya, sur. of Dhruvasena 11., 

479, 481, 490 

Balaharsha, Kalachuri k», 

. 407 

Balaprasada, Chahum&na ch. of Nadula , . 141 

Balaprasada, Rashtrakuta ch. of Haetikundi, . 53 

Balarjuna, sur . of Sivagupta, 

. 617 

Eala-Sarasvati, sur . of Krishna, poet. 

. 233a 

Balavalabbibbujanga, sur. o/Bhatta Bhavadeva, 669 

Balavarman, ch , 

. 602 

Balavarman, . 

. 595 

Balavarman, k. in Aryavarta , 

. 509 

Balavarman, Prvgjyotisha k. y 

. 714 

Balira ja, Chahumdna ch. of Nadula, 

. 141 

Bailala, Mdlava k. y 

• 210, 503 

Ballalasena, Sena k. 9 . 

. 648, 649 

Bandhuvarman, governor of Dafapura, feuda - 

tory of Kumaragopta I., . 

3 

Bappa or Bappaka, Guhila k.. 

234, 243, 290 


Earappa or Barapparaja, Chaulukya (or 


Chalukya T) ch. of LatadeSa, . . 354,356 

Banka, Pratihara ch., «... 330 

Bhadra ’ co 

Bhadra, poet 549 

Bhadra, wife of Harichandra, . _ pg ( 330 

Bhadrapattanaka (P), vi. 473 

J Bbadropatta (?), vi., 

j Bhagadatta , k., or family of king t, . 541, 7!3n 

Bhagadatta, mythical k. of PrAgyyStUha, 

652, 711, 713, 714 

Bhagaratpura, vi., 

Bhagiratha, k., 


Appendix. J 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


99 


NrilBEB 

Bhagyadevi, daughter of Surasena and Amsa- 


varman’s sister Bhogadevi, . . . 532 

Bhagyadevi, queen of Tala Rajyapala, . . 640 

Bhailasvamin, vi. (Bhilsa), . . . .108 

Bhairava, ch ., . 170 

Bhairavendra, t) manga ch , . . . • 289 

Bhaka, sur. (/) of Mahodaya ch . Mahendra* 
pala, ....... 642 

Bhakamisra, min. of Yuvaraja I., • . • 428 

Bhaktapuri, vi . (Bhatgaonb .... 562 

Bhana (?), official, 528 


Bhaiija, family , . • . 655, 656, 657, 658 

Bhaaudeva I., II.. and III., P. Gahga kings , 


Bhanud5va, tfmahgd ch., 

367, 369 
. . 289 

Bhanugupta, k, t . . 

. 455 

Bhanumitra, GadhddeSa ch., 

. . 322 

Bhanusakti, Stndraka ch., • « 

. 399 

Bharasiva, tribe or family , 

. 619 

Bharatichandra, GadhadeSa eh., . 

. 322 

Bharma, Vdjaka ch. of Prabhdsa, 

. 271,273 

Bbartribhata, Guhila k ., . 

234, 243, 290 

Bhartfitattanaka (?), vi., 

. 475 

Bharnkachchha, vi. (Broach), 347, 348, 349, 

Bhaskara, ch., .... 

4S3, 484 

. 364 

BMskarabhatta, poet, . 

. . 615 

Bbaskaravarman-Ripughanghala, Sihghapura 

ch., . * 

. 600 

Bhatakka or Bbat&rka, Valabhi k., 346, 457, 

464, 468, 477 

Bhatta Bhavadeva Bdlavalftbhibbujahga, min . 

of k. Harivarman, . 

. 669 

Bhatta Purusbottama, poet, * 

. 668 

Bhatta §arvagupta, do.. 

6 

Bhatta Vasndeva, do.,* 

. . 600 

Bhattarka, s. a . Bhatarka, Yalabhi k„ 

, 346 

Bhattikad^var&ja, ch., . • • 

. 330 

Bhauma, family, . * • 

. 711, 713n 

Bhava-Brihaspati, temple-priest , . 

. 503, 527 

Bhavadeva, ch., ...» 

. . 615 

Bhavanaga, Bhdrattva ch., • 

. . 619 

Bhavanidasa, Gadhdde^a ch.. 

. . 322 

Bhavini-JvAlamukbi stotra , 

. 571 

Bhavishya, Bdshtrakuta ch., • 

. 607 

Bhavviraja, min. of an Atmaka k ., 

. 60S 

Bbayila, ch., * • • 

. 412 

Bhikahudasa, ch 

» . 624 

Bhill&ditya or Bhilluka, Pratihdra ch. 

. 13,330 

Bhima I., Chaulukya k ., . 61, 

130, 188, 340 


Ndmbe & 

Bhima II., ChauluJcya k., ♦ 188, 191, 192, 

193, 194, 200, 202, 205, 206, 208, 

209, 211, .215, 216, 220, 527 
Bkima, II. or I. (?), do,, .... 5S2 

Bhima, Mithila k., . . . . . 644 

Bhlmapala, ch . (?) 9 ..... 435 

Bhimapala, Bdshtrakuta eh. of Vdddmayutd , . 605 

Bhimaratha, sur. of MahAbhavagupta IL, . 664 

Bhimasimha, ShattrimZa ch., . . .2 77 

Bhima varman, ch., . . . . 447 

Bhogabhata, Pratihdra ch ., .... 330 
Bhogadevi, sister of AmBuvarman, • .532 

Bhogaditya, ch., . . . . .170 

Bhogavsrmau, Maukhari k., . . . 541 

Bhogavarman, son of Surasena and Bhogadevi, 532 
Bhoja, Guhila k., . . . 234, 243, 290 

Bhoja, k., 77 

Bhoja, Kanauj K 14, 15, 16, 18, 20, 407, 429, 54£ 
Bhoja I., Mahodaya ch., . . . 542, 710 

Bhoja II., do., ...... 544 

Bh5ja, Paramdra l\, . 57, 67, 71, 79, 82, 195, 

334, 340 

Bhoja, Pratihdra ch., ..... 330 
Bhojadeva, chiefs, . . . .170, 424 

Bhojavarmac, Chandella k., . . • 247,337 

Bhoningadova, ch,, ..... 283 

Bhotavarman, k., ..... 594 

Bhramarasalmali, vi., ..... 628 

Bhrigukachchha, vi., . . . • .197 

Bhujabala, SuvamaPura ch., . . . 423 

Bhumilika, vi. (Bhumli), .... 8 

Bhumipala, V'mahgd ch., .... 289 
Bhiipa or Bhuva. Valahhi princess , • 483, 484 

Bhupalasabi, GadhddtSa ch., . . • 322 

Bhupalasiriiha, Kepal k., . . . 564 

Bhupalendramalla, do., .... 5^-7 

Bhushana, Chkhida ch., • . • .51 

Bhuva, s. a. Bhup4, .... 4S3, 484 

Bhuvana, Kirajrdma ch . • • .351 

Bhuvanadevi, mother of Devavarman, . . 66 

Bhuvaiiaikamalla, sur. of Kaehchhapaghdta 
Mahipala, • • • • • .73 

Bhuvanapala, Bdshtrakuta ch. of Voddmayutd , 605 
Bhuvanapala, sur. of Kaehchhapaghdta 


Muladeva, ...• 

73, 78 

Bhuvanasimha, Guhila k , . 

. . 290 

Bhuyikadevi, queen of Devasakti, 

. 542, 710 

Bilhana, Kiragrdma ch., 

. 351 

Bodhideva, min. of a Pdla k ., 

. 644 

BOdhivarmau, Buddhist mendicant , 

. 597 


O ‘2 



100 


epigraphia indica. 


[V oh. v 


Number 

Brahmadeva, Kalachvti ch . of Edyapura, 28 0> 283 


Brahmakshatriya, clan, .... 647 
Brahman, Kiragrama ch .... 351 
Brkhmanapataka, ui., . . . . * 163 

Brahmapalavarman, Prdgjyotisha k., 711, 712, 713 
Byihadgriha, vi., ..... 602 

Brihat-Kharatara gachchha, . • . 309 

Buddha, Kiragrama ch., . . . .351 

Buddhabhadra, Buddhist mendicant, . • 608 

Buddhafeirti, poet , ..... 541 

Buddhararmaraja, Gujardt Chalukya ch ., . 398 

Budhagupta, k. t . . . . . . 454 


c 

Chacba (or Chava P), s.a. Ch&cbiga, . . 705 

Cb&chiga, Chdhumana k. } . • 702, 703 

[Cha]dala, ch ., 226 

Chahada, Nalapura ch., • • • . 251 

Chahamana, family, . 35, 44, 134, 144, 149, 

154, 155, 176, 183 
Chahav&na, do., ...... 12 

Chahumana, do . . 141, 261, 265, 290, 703, 705 

Chahuy&na, do., 163 

Cbakr&paLita, governor in Surashtra , • . 446 

Chakrapani, Maga Brahman , . . . 362 

Chakrayudha, k., • * • . . 638 

Cbalukya, family, . . 398, 400, 401, 404 

Chalukya, do., . . • . . 367, 369 

Chalukya (or Chaulukya P), do „ , . 354, 356n 

Cbamundaraja, Chdhumana k„ • . .703 

Ch&mandaraja, Chaulukya k 130, 188, 205, 206 

Chdmundaraja, k., 43 

Cbamundaraja, Paramdra ch., . .69 

Chanda or Chandamab&sSoa, Chdhavdna ch., . 12 

C bandana, Chahamana k , . . . .44 

Chandapa, Paramdra ch., . • « .69 

Ch&ndav&nnan, Kalinga k., . . .674 

Chandavarman, Salahkayana k., . • . 686 

Ch&ndMla, family, 35, 36, 54, 56, 66, 71, 76, 

86, 101, 102, 104, 108, 132, 136, 139, 

142, 146, 147, 158, 176, 178, 185, 

190, 196, 218, 219, 226, 227, 231, 

239, 240, 242, 247, 332, 334, 335, 

336, 337, 342, 407 


Chandihara, Trikalihga k., . . . . 668 

Chandra, poet, ...... 69 

Chandra, Bdshtrakuta ch. of Vdddmayutd, . 605 
Chandra, a. a. (?) Chandragupta I., . . . 608 


Number 


Cbandii, queen of Jaj juka, • 

. 

. 

331 

Chandrabhattarikaddvi, queen of Mahodaya 


ch. Bh6ja I», • . . • 

• 

. 

542 

Chandradeva, Kanauj k., 75, 77, 

80, 83, 84 




148 

,156 

Chandradeva, Kondavidu ch., • 

. 

• 

376 

Chandragupta, . ... 


• 

63 

Chandragupta, ch., « • . 



617 

Chandragupta, I., Gupta k ^ 



439 

Chandragupta II., do., 436, 437, 

438, 

439, 




512 

!, 513 

Chandragupta, Jdlandhara prince , 

m 


600 

Cbandraka (P), ch., . • 

* 


170 

Cbandraldkha, queen of Cb&dagahga, . 


367 

Chandrap&la, V’manga ch., . 

• 


289 

Cbandrapuri, vi., * 

• 


341n 

Chandraraja, Chdhamana k^ • 

• 


44 

Chandrar&ja, Chdhamana prince, 

• 

• 

44 

Chadras&hi, Gadhddeia ch., . 

• 

• 

322 


Chandr&trdya, sage , or ( Chandella ) family, 

35, 54, 56, 108, 146, 185, 240 
Ohandrararman, k. in Arydvarta, . . 509 

Chandravati, vi., . 193, 209, 210, 256, 261, 265 
Chandrella, s. a. Chandella, «... 333 
Chanduka, Pratihdra ch., . . . 13, 330 

Chanpaka, vi (Chamba), , . . 593, 594 

Chapa, family 353 

Chapdtkata, do., ..... 130 

Chaubana, do., 238 

Chaulukika, s. a. Chaulukya, do., . .50 

Chaulukya, do., . 45, 50, 52, 53, 61, 72, 

114, 116, 123, 129, 130, 133, 143, 

160, 163, 188, 191, 192, 193, 194, 

200, 202, 205, 206, 208, 209, 210, 

211, 215, 216, 220, 343, 354n, 356, 

429, 503, 504, 627, 582 
Chaulukya-Vagbdla, do., . 209, 210, 212, 

222, 225, 228, 233, 235, 237, 244, 249, 344 
Ch&va (or Chacha ?), s. a. Cbachiga, . . 705 

Cbddi, co., . 79, 140, 186, 226, 334, 336, 
406,407, 409, 410, 414,415, 416, 

419, 421, 422, 428, 429, 431, 432 


Chbagalaga, Sanakdnika ch., . . m 436 

Chhibula, ch., 

Chhmda,/am%, .... 51, 575 

Chhingatt, vi., ..... 628 

Chintkdurga, sur. of Bharad^va, . . .615 

Chitrakuta, vi. (Cbitdr), . 304 

Chitrakuta, vi. or co., ..... 407 
ChAda, family 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


101 


Number 

Cboda or Chodasimha, Guhila k., . 243* 290 

Cbodadevf, queen o^Narasimha II., . . 369 

Chodaganga, sur . of E. Ganga An ant a var man, 

184, 359, 360, 361, 367, 418, 423, 670 
Cb6Ja-Kamadiraja, Ganga ch., * . . 685 

Qhixdkshmk, family, • .276, 284, 345, 353» 
Chulukisvara, do,, * . . . 51 

Chyavana, sage, 'progenitor of Ckhinda family , 51 


D 


Dadda I., Gurjara 1c,, • . 347, 348, 349, 395 

Dadda II. Praaantaraga, do ., . 347, 348, 349, 


395, 396, 397, 402, 708, 709 

Dadda III. Bahnaabaya, do,, 


402 

Dadda, Pratihara ch • • 


330 

Dadbicbi, progenitor of a family, . * 


226 

Dadiraya, Gadhadeia ch., . • 


322 

pahala, co. t . , 


140 

Dahrasena, Traikutaka ch., 


391 

Daksha (?), m., . . . « • 


4 

Dakshinakosala, co., .... 


409 

Dakshinapatba, co ,, . . « 


509 

Pa ILch., 


270 

Dalapati, Gadhddeta ch., * . • 


322 

Datnana, Hrandapalla k. t * . • 


509 

pambarasimba, Paramara ch., * 


69 

Dami I. and II., chiefs , 


296 

D4m6dara, ch . • . « 


366 

Dam6dara, Maga Brdkman , • 


362 

Damodara, Parivrdjaka k., • 

451, 459 

Dam6dara, poet , . . . • 

• 

5 

Damddara, s . a. Misra Damddara, 

• 

283 

Damddaragupta, Gupta k. of Mag ad ha, 

• 

550 

Damsb^rasena, Buddhist mendicant. 

« 

626 

D&D&rnava, Ganga k ., . 

• 

360 

Dand&hiddSa, co., • * . 

• 

299 

Dandana (?), k. (?), * . . • 

« 

256 

Danduka, Kakaredi ch*, 


186 

Dapbara*kbana, Sultdn (Zafar Kh&n), . 

. 

278 

Daraparaja, Ganga ch., • 


685 

IdtesL, family, . 

• 

654 

Da^apura, vi, (Dasor or Mandasor), • 

• 

3 

Dasaratba, brother of Aiokaralla, 

• 

577 

Daaaratba, Maga Brdkman, » « 

• 

362 

Dattaddvi, queen of fiarandragnpta, 

• 

439 

Dattavarman, Sihghapnra ch., . 

• 

600 

Dayitaruhnu, father's father of Pdda Gdp&la 
I., • • • • • • • 

634 


Number 


DeddadevJ, queen of Tala Gopala I., . • 634 

Dehanagadevi, queen of Mahodaya ch. 


Hahendrapala, . • 

• 

« • 544 

D&rabhata, Valabht k., • 


. 485 

Desala, ch., , . 


. 412 

Desaraja, Chhinda ch., 


. . 575n 

Devadatta, ch., , 


. 11 

Devadatta, 


. 430 

Devadhara, do.. 


. 185 

Devadhya, Parivrdjaka k.. 


. 451, 459 

Devagana, poet, 


. . 184 

Devagiri-Yadava, family, » 


225n 

Devagupta, Gupta k. of Magadha, 

. 552, 619 

Devagupta, h, . 

, 

• 528 

Devakhadga, k., , 

. 

. . 651 

Devalabdhi, Chandrella ch.. 

. 

. 333 

Devananda, poet, . 

• 

. 26 

Ddvapala, Kachchhapaghdta k., 


73, 78 

Devapala, Kanauj k.,. 

. 

31, 35 

Devap^la, P&la k. t 

635, 636, 638, 639 

Ddvapala, Paramara k ^ 

203, 207, 214, 223n 

Devapala, Bashtrakuta ch. of Yod&mayutd, . 605 

Devapani, poet, • . • 


. 433 

Devaraja, min. of an Aimaka k*, 


. 60S 

Devaraja, Paramdra k. y 


. 689 

Devaraja, Bashtrakuta ch., 


. 607 

Devaraja, SdrasSna ch., 


. 589 

Devaraja, Tomara ch., • 


. . 331 

DdvanUhtra, co., . • 


. . 509 

Devasagara, poet, 


. 314, 316 

Ddvasakti, Mahodaya ch., . 


. 542, 710 

Devasena, Vdkdtaka k., 


. 622, 623 

Ddvasimha, ch., . 


. 412 

Devasimba, Mithild k., 


. . 578 

D6va*tbana (?), vi., 


. 87 

Devata, poet, 


9 

Devavarman, Chandella k *, 


. 66 

Devavishnu, Brahmaup, 


. 449 

D^vavrata, queen of Kachchhapaghdta Hula- 

deva, • • • * 

• 

. 73 

Ddvendravarman, E. Ganga kings, 

. 680, 



681, 682, 684 

Devidasa, ch~, . • 

• 

. . 296 

Deyika, queen of Phakka, 

• 

. 589 

Dbabilla, Kakaridi ch*, 

• 

186, 218, 219 

Dbamsata, poet, . 

• 

. 405 

Dhanamjaya, Kusthalapura k., 

• 

. 509 

Dbandhuka (or Vandbuka?), ch., 


. 64 

Dhandbuka, Paramdra ch. of Chandr&vatt , . 210 

Dhandhuka, Paramara k., . 

• 

* . 689 


102 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Yol. V. 


Number 

Dhahga, Chandella k., 35, 36, 54, 56, 334, 335 

I) h any a vishnu, brother of M&tri vishnu, 454, 520 
Dhara, vi., . 57, 67, 110, 203, 207, 214, 

223, 232, 233n, 253, 334, 431, 503 
Dharanidhara, poet, ..... 244 


Dharanivaraha, ch 
Dbaranivaraha, Chdpa ch,, 
Dharanivaraha, k. (?), 
Dharapatta, Valabhi k ., 
Dharasena I., do 
Dharasena II., do,. 


. 170 
. 353 
. 53 

464, 468 
. 457 
468, 469, 470, 471, 

472, 473, 475, 476, 477 
. 479, 524 

481, 432, 483, 484, 485 
. 493 
. 346 


Dharasena III., do., . 

Dharasena IV., do., 

Dharasena, Valabhi prince, 

Dharasenadeva, s . a. Dharasena II., 
Dharasraya-Jayasimhavarman, Gujarat 

Clialukya ch., . . . 4<X), 401, 404 

Dharavarsha, Paramdra ch. of Chandrdvati , 

193, 210 

Dharmadasa, Buddhist mendicant , . . 625 

Dharmadeva, Lichc h ha vi k, of Nepal, . 494,541 

Dharmaditya, sur. of Kharagraha II., 4S6n, 487 
Dharmaditya, sur. of Siladitya I., . 476, 477, 

478, 479 

Dharmaditya, Vijayapvra ch., . . . 604 

Dharmaddsha, min. cf Vishnuvardhana, . 4 

Dharmagnpta, Buddhist mendicant, . . 626 

Dharmapala, Pdla k., . 633, 634, 635, 638, 639 

Dbarm&valdba, sur. of Tunga, . . . 630 

Dhavala, Maurya k., . . . . .9 

Dhavala, B&shtrakuta ch. of Hastikundi, . 53 

DhavalS, queen of Kdti (?) k. Baladitya, . 601 

Dhilaiiga (?), ch ., .... 267n 

Dhili or Dhilli or Dhillika, vi. (Delhi), 255, 

259, 270 

Dhiranaga, poet , ..... 44 

Dhritarftahtra, ch., ..... 624 

Dhrubhata, sur. of Siladitya VII., . . 500 

Dhruv&bhata, Chdpa ch ., .... 353 

Dhravabhata, Paramdra ch. of Chandrdvati, 210 
Dhruvad^va, Lichchhavi k. of Se-pdl, . 534, 557 

Dhrnvaddvi, queen of Chandragupta II,, . 439 

Dhmvasannan, m., . . 439 

Dhravasdna I., Valabhi k., . . 457, 458, 

460, 461, 462, 464, 468 
Dhruvasena II. Baladitya, do., . . 479, 434 

Dhruvasena III., do., .... 485, 486 

Dhruvaseua, Valabhi prince, . 481,482, 

487, 488, 489 


Numbbr 


Dhulia-ghatta, place, ..... 691 

Dhumaraja, Paramdra ch. of Chandrdvati, . 210 

Dhurbhata, governor cf Siyad&ni, . . 23 

Digbhanja, ch 655 

Dirgharava, Trikalihga k., . . . .668 

Diva(?)bhanja, ch., 658 

Div&karavarman, k 595 

Divakaravarman-Mabighanghala, Sihghapnra 

ch 600 

Dombaka, Eiragrama ch., . . . , 351 

Drangini, queen of Kulabhata, . . . 589 

Dronasimha, Valabhi k., . . . 457 

Dndda , Valabhi princess, . 460, 461, 464, 

465, 477, 479 

Dungarasimha (?), Tdmara ch. of Gwalior, . 318 

Dungarendra, Gwalior ch., . . . 291,294 

Durgabhata, SuraseTta ch., .... 589 

Durgadaman, ’ do., , . . . 5 S 9 

Dnrgagana, m., . .6 

Durgaraja, Bashtrakuta ch. t , . . 350 

Durgavati, queen of Dalapati, . . . 322 

Durjanamalla, Gadhddeta ch., . . .322 

Durjaya, Eakaredi ch., . . , .218 

Durlabha, queen of Purandarapala, . . 713 

Durlabhadevi, queen f Kakka, ... 13 

Durlabhar&ja, Chahamdna prince, . . 44 

Durlabhar&ja, Chaulukya k., . 180, 188, 

205, 206 

Durlabhar&ja, k. (1) 53 

Dvaradeva, ch., 670 


E 

Ekanatha, poet, 286 

Erandapalla, vi., 509 

F 

Fir6z Shah, Sultan, . . . 270, 272, 286 


G 


Gadhadeaa, co., ..... 

. 322 

Gadhinagara or G&dhipura, vi. (Kananj), 

73, 92 

Gaganasimha, Kachchhapaghnta k„ 

. 94 

Gahadavala, family, . 

77. 80, 83 

Gajala, ch., ..... 

. 412 

Gajapati, sur. of Eataka i. Kapila, . 

. 376 


Appendix.] INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 103 





NujiBEB 


NuMBJJfi 

Gajarathapura, vi. % 

• 


. 57S 

Gopala, Nalapura ch.. 

248, 25 1 

Ganadeva, Kondavidu ch . 

. 

• 

. 376 

Gopak [1. ?], Pdla k 

631, 632 

Ganapala (?), ch 

. 


. 342 

Gopala I., do., .... 634, 635, 638 

Ganapati, Nalapura ch 



248, 251 

Gopala 11., do,, • . 

. 640 

Ganapati, Tomara ch, of Gwdlior, 


. 318 

Gopala, Rdshirakuta ch. of Yoddmayutd, 

. 605 

Ganapatinaga, k . in, Aryavarta , 

• 

. 509 

Gopaladeva, ch., . . 

. 408 

Ganapati-Vyasa, poet , • 

• 

• 

. 233 | 

Gbpalasahi, Gailh&deSa ch., . 

. 322 

G anda, Ohandella k., . . 

• 

334, 335, 337 

G6paraja, ch., 

. 455 

Gandaki, ri., . • - 

. 

. 

. 691 

Gopinatha, GadhddeSa ch., . 

. 322 

Gahga or Gang*, family. 

357, 

359, 

360, 

Gorakshadasa, do., .... 

. 322 

361,367, 369, 370, 

670, 

672, 

076, 

Gosaladevi, queen o/’Gdvindaehandra, . 

127, 131 

677, 678, 679, 680, 

681, 

682, 

683, 

Gosaladevi, queen of Kalachuri Jayasimha, 


684, 6S5 i 

Gahgaddva, Nepdl k., * • • • • 564 i 

Gahg&dbara* Maga Brdhman, poet, . . 362 , 

Gangavadi, co., • •••*• 360 j 

Ganges, ri., • • 60, 80, 90, 97, 98, 10on, 

173, 174, 175 

Gan gey a, mythical Gahga k., • • 360, 36/ 

Gacgeyadeva, Kalachuri k • 334, 406, 

407, 410, 415, 431 
Gauda, co., . . « 59, o41 } 644, 649, 650 

Gautama, gotra , . . • • .670 

Gautamiputra, Yakdtaka prince , • ♦ .619 

Gavidhumat, vi. (Kudarkot), . • . 519 I 

GayMi., • * • 166, 270, 575, 646 { 

Gaykkarna or Gayakarna, Kalachuri k., 414, i 

415, 421, 422, 431, 432 ; 


Gayasadina, Sultdn (Ghiyas-ud-din Balban), . 238 
Gayasadina, do. (Ghiyas-ud-din Tughlaq), . 369n 
Gbat&tkacha, k„ son of Gupta, • • .439 

Gbiyas-ud-din Balban, Sultdn* • * 230, 238 

Ghiyaa-ud-din Tughlaq, do. y . * * 369q 

Gbritad^vi, queen of Dhandhuka (or Van- 


dhuka?), • • • * * 

. 64 

Girijad£vi, queen o^Punap&ksba, . • 

. . 343 

Giryknayuddbavikramasaba, Kepdl k . 

. 325 

G6drabaka, vi. (Gddhra), 

124, 499 

GAgadeva, Mdlava k., • • • 

. 290 

G6g&d£va, VadagHjara ch., . 

. 272 

Gogga, Tomara ch,, . . • * 

. 331 

Goggiraja, Chaulukya (or ChdlukyaT) 

ch. 

of Ldtade$a, .... 

354, 356 

G6billa,/a?»i/y 

. 292 

Gokula (or G61haija ?), . 

653, 654 

Gdmatikottaka, vi., 

• 552 

G^jpa or Gdpachala or G6padri or Gopagiri, 

i no. or vi. (Gw&lior), . 73, 291, 

294, 


318, 621 

Gipkls, Gddhipura (Kanauj) k., 

. 92 


422. 432 

Gosurasimhabala, ?»., ..... 609 

Govinda, engraver , . , . . 4, 329 

Govindachandra, Kanauj k., . 77, 80, 83, 

84, 85, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 93, 95, 96, 

97, 98, 99, 100, 103, 105, 107, 109, 

115, 117, 118, 119, 122, 127, 131, 

135, 148, 156, 692, 693, 694 


Govindachandra, poet (?), . 605 

Govinda-Kesava, ch., ..... 653 
Govindapala, JPdla (/) 1%, . . . ,166 

G6vindaraja, Chdhamdna prince, . . 44 

Gdvindaraja, chiefs , . . . . 170, 226 

Gorindaraja, Kdshtrahuta ch., . . 350 

Gtivindasimha, Gadhadila ch., . . . 322 


Grahapati, family, . . . 65, 125, 139, 695 

Guhasena, Valabhi k .346, 464, 465,466, 

467, 468, 477, 523 
G abide vapatra, Kondavidu ch., . . . 376 

Guhila, family, . 5, 34, 42, 48, 229, 234, 

236, 243, 246, 286, 288, 290, 295, 

297, 301, 302, 304, 306, 338, 339, 

415, 431 


Guhila, k. t • 234, 243, 290 

Guhila, fam Vy, 123 

Gunad£vi (or Sadginjadevi? ), queen of Raja- 


r&ja III., . .... 

. 367n 

Gunamahaxnava, K. Gahga k., • • 

. 357 

Gunapura, vi., • • 

. 49 

Gunaraja, ch., . . . • 

. 19 

Gunarnava, E. Gahga kings, . • 

360, 680 

Gunavaloka, sur. o/*Nanua, ... 

. 630 

Gundama, K. Gahga kings. 

357, 360 

Gupta, k. 9 . • • • • • 

. 439 

Gupta kings, see Chandragupta I. and 

II., 


Kmnaragupta I. and II., Narasimhagupta, 
Puragupta, Samudragupta, and Skandagupfca. 
Gupta kings of Magadba, • 535, 550, 551, 553 


Gipkla, Gddhipura (Kanauj) k.. 


104 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Number 


Gurjara, co., ...... 278 

Gurjaia, family , 347, 348, 349, 394, 395, 396, 


397, 402, 

403, 708, 709 

Gmjarapratibara, do., • 

. . 39 

Guvada-ghatto, place , . 

. 189 

Guvaka I. and II., Chdhamdna kings , 

. 44 


H 


Haihaya .family, . 283, 407, 409, 423, 429, 638 

Hajirajad&va, min . of Brahmad^va, 

. 280 

Hallara, co. (Halar Prant), . 

. . 314 

Hamira, Lukasthdna ch., 

. 266 

Hamira or Hammira, Guhila k ., . 

286, 290, 297 

Hamsapala, do., . 

. 415, 431 

Hamsinidevi, queen, 

. 667 

Haradatta, ch .... 

. 170 

Harakeli-nataka, title of a play , . 

. 134 

Harasimha (/or Harisimba), Nepdl k 

. 564 

Haribala, Mahdviharasvamin, 

. 599 

Haiibrabmaddva, 5 . <x. Brahmad&va, 

• 280, 283 

Harichandra, founder of Pratihdra 

(Padi- 

hdra) family, .... 

13,330 

Haridatta, m., .... 

. . 549 

Harigana, cA. (?), 

. . 433 

Harigupta, Buddhist mendicant , . 

. 598 

Harihara, Mag a Brdhman , . , 

. 362 

Haribaradeva, GadhadeSa ch., 

. 322 

Hariharasimha, Nepdl A., 

563, 564, 565 

Harikaladdfa Ranavahkamalla (?), cA., 

. 365 

Harinarayana, Ga^Adde&i cA., 

. 322 

Haripata, A., 

. 128n 

Hariraja, Kakaredi ch., 

. 218, 219 

Harirajad£va, cA. (.?), . 

. 252 

Harirayabrahman, s. a. Brahmad^va, 

• 280, 283 

Haris&mba, ch., .... 

. 624 

Harischandra, Paramara A., 

. 172, 189 

Harifichandra, son of Kanauj k. 

J ayach- 

chandra, .... 

• 164, 165 

Harisha (for Harsha), FrdgjyClUha A., . 652q 

Harishena, min . o/Samudragupta, 

. 509 

Harish^na, Vdkataka A., 

. 622, 624 

Harisimha, Nepal A., . 

5b3, 564, 565 

Harivarman, A., . 

. . 669 

Harivarman, Maukhari k., . 

. 554 

Harivarman, .RdsAfraAwto cA. 0 / 

Kasti* 

kundi , ..... 

24, 53 

Harivarman (Mamma), 772. , . 

. 549 


Number 

Harivatsa, 1 the Kotta,’ . • . . 607 

Harijana or Hamanaka, co. t . . 238, 605 

Harjara, Prdgjyotisha A., • . . 652, 714 

Harsha, Chandella 1c., . 35, 54, 56, 332, 407 

Haraha, Kanavg A • 528, 529, 548, o49, 5 oO 

Harsha, Paramara A., . . . 69, 340 

Haisha (Harisha), Prdgjyotisha A., . . 652 n 

Harsha, svr. (?) of Mahodaya ch . Yinayaka- 

palft, 544 

Harsh adeva, k. of Gauda , Udra, etc ., s. a . (?) 

Harsha, Prdgjyotisha A., ... 541 

Harsbadeva, s. a . (?) Harsha, Kanauj A., • 402 

Harshagupta, cA., 617 

Harshagupta, Gupta k . of Magadha , . . 550 

Harshagupta, queen of Maukhari Aditya- 

Varman . .554 

Harshavardhana, s. a. Harsha, Kanauj A.. 


401, 404, 54S 

[Haru]ppe8vara, vi., . 

. 714 

Hagtibboja, min. of Ddvasdna, 

. 622, 623 

Hastikundi, vi., .... 

. 24, 30, 53 

Hastin, P arivrajaka k., 451, 453, 456, 459. 522 

Hastivarman, Vehgt A., 

. 509 

Hdmantasdua, Sena A., 

. 647, 648 

Hdmaraja, cA., .... 

. . 270 

Hdmavijaya, poet , 

. 308 

Hdramhapala, Kanauj A., . # 

. 35 

Hira or Hlr4m§n (?), ch. (/), 

. . 342 

Hiraddvi, queen o/Bbanudeva III^ 

. . 369 

Hridayachandra, Trigarta A., . 

. 351 

Hnday^fia, Gadhddiia ch., • . 

. . 322 

Hriday5fe, Saiva ascetic , . # 

. . 430 

Humadm, emperor (Humaydn), . 

. . 305 

family, .... 

. 410 

Hdngurasimba ( for Pnhgarasimba ?), Tdmara 

ch. of Gtcdlior, . . # 

. . 318 

Hushaog Ghdr! alias Alp Kfcan, . 

. 285 


Ibrahfm L6di, Sultdn 

Ijjadevi, queen o/Visbijugnpta of Magadha, . 662 
Indira, queen of Chodaganga, . _ # 367 

I “drab ala, ch., . 615, 616, 617 

Indrabhattaraka, b, s.a. (?) Indrabhattfrakavar. 

man ' 688 

Indrabhattarafeavarman, Vuhnulcundin k., . 687 

Indradbiraja, ch 68 g 

Indrapalavarman, Prdgjydtisha k., . . 713 



A. .'HSUS.' INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. Po 





XC3JBE2 


Kumijt : 

Indiauija, £\, 



* C3^ 

dasananda. ))o> t, .... 

• 

112 

IndiaTutlia, k., • • 



. *340 

J&savaddiiana (Ya-ovardhan i\ Prutilj > .i 

•A. 

IS 

Indravavman, E. Oituga k., 



(NS, e'79 

Jasavaiita, Sa n I'tjutra ch 

• 

311 

In d ra v ai man B uj . » < hid . ; j , So*, 



‘570, 077 

JAula, Tuniar t ch . 


331 

Inganapadia, vl. (Iiignddab 



« 1 Ot' 

Jauvla. sUi‘ ••f'lL * ramuna SI aSa ("/• S1--0 i\ 

* 

•310 

Is&naduva, ch. ; . 



. 05 i 

Jayabhairavc, cf JayajoLi,: a *a. 


r,v> 

leaaasiva, Xeiva o^c'iic, 



. 0('5 

Jaiabbata 1. Vi tardea, Gumu\t l' , 317. 0 

IX 


Isanavi.rman. 2LX ’■ ’ 7 i '< > k., 



55*\ r, 5 L 

?40, 5. 

7"*' 

7 . t,i 

1 sap rut i s i t h ; iua . ? X 



< \ 

,T v iLO . + a IT , r7 , 

• 

i 1 l L 

isutujcTi* yitu.L 'j ' i* 

X 

_T 

.r 

.i ,;■! 'i.HLt/-., . 


1" 




7 Id. 7V> 

.Xvam upal'ii 'uiiiu 1 ,-. ’ c . . 


‘X 

Isbtagana, 



. OW; 

Jay.D-Lcl.a’idi,', Kjusi-i l , It", 111. XO. 1 

5,1 


lsuka, Cho^ctru 'id c 7 ., 



' 1! 

101, 1C-, 1CJ. IC". T7. ;•••-!. 1 

01 > 


tsvarA. Siuyft ij v v j ■ • •- 7"*. 



. o.. 

173.173. ir: 175 

177, 

XI 

lsviixagnpta, *; JJ'ci'i K . 

• 



Aayaci^clur.di.t. T f i^trUf X, 

XX. 

,3 0 . i 

Is v lira v a r man, 2T>n^ \dr< v . 



5 ••51 

*) a y idc\ il, <*/<». , • » . , 

* 

112 

ldvarawtiuiau, on. .i - •• 



1 

•J r-,A'v.i. /*. hc:>h u'l A-. -0 3 ; T . 

• 

XI 





> \ ot ri, »/'. 'X ti' >• ** i Jo <mi y* , 


* “ 





A addv 3S3/* ’/ jt'i'ie*, . . . 

. 

5’ 7 

J 




J.r.ildva IAudc 1 ! J<*a\:i'oa, X5y»r/ / . 


51) 





A • id ,>.ri .pi .dli, 

. 

7 

dagamalii, Milara. . X, 



• - 

A •; .. r. \ 


»• 

Jd'J.Ul’ At I’D, Crii‘1'* ' X -t < U « * 



. *’j-j 

•!-} . . 


i 

Janata!* to* .1 jcias < 1 , , 



. 4 1 15 

J 1’ ' 7 


2 

da^at^imlia, G-wth" :t*u t\., 

• 


. 30- 

3a% aMtl > n.,u, i, XV/ o 7 ; r ’c. • . 


, J 

Juliaugira or Jiliuiigira, 

,• {.i. 

1'A L 

1 ), j 

Java! ikslimi. XV/-A7 /, •«. 


'-’*"•2 




o.3, 3' 0 

J.a.imala, Pi’-iy y . 

. 

7 1 1 

JaikiJur.i. SaMAWX'V X, « 




d.tvi i*aa, ( . i a wX, 3^7. 


12 - 

rla’uka. A*«* 



- , > 

•I l , Xt/ < / in, t r . 


0 ' ‘2 



t 7 

►, ■*> 



*1 - 

•I ai s * ii£C ! iiv Lo va 1 o av asnij ia *, j. u r 

‘ 1 ' ' 



#> U "Ulvlia> ^ |V ' 1 ' /# '* - 



J iiitro s 1 ii i a a, a.. * 



-r, - o 

a \.i\inMih a. >i\'f yu>' c! . 


3M 

daitugidcva (.layasnnA P « --a • • 



, rjoa . 

.i iV,p ads. / *r/p <3.. 



.lAj’ula I., liainai jra ch., . 

: 

. 4 L‘i 

{ O J ^ f 

J.i;. JiXMtap. suiila, XV/ 1 ' 7 ^ , 

0 • i. 

0 23 

Jujaiia II., 7o,, . » . 


> J 

, , s : : 

J .11 HI t’/., .... 


.1 

Jajjaua, pot i t 



il 

J.pa-akti, C/Vp/V '2 X, .35 V 

Ill, 

» 

JajjikAlovi. qti' Cji <f Pi’Uirw *v 

Nu;i 


o.’ • 

J.. ' a^Vidn, 


• 7 

A j i ] i. k a , Toj< 2 t' ?*-< i v-i . 



X L 

■ \ as ’ nil u, 0V< ’/•/„, 114 Ilf-, li? 

1 7 • 


Jak&lladpvi. <//;• ' ;* */ t>!.,* , r,:ao\a 

T 


. ;• ; 

103. 1>>, 

*j‘ 1 J, 

527 

.1 a i Ala d i n a, S 2 ' // 1 1 /i ( J al. il - u J - : pi ; : 



. -3S : 

Jayasiriibi, CX* 1 i » <*t >/? • c\iys. . 370. 


.45 

Julandtrira, co. or vi. t . 


;iol. 

500. **•'>. 1 

; Joyas-iiidia, Gut i'>i h , 

. 

20 1 

J alava i m an , *St A;' 7» op f * ?w cl 

. 


0- iO 

| Jay.isiniii.i, / .. ..... 

. 

7- 3 

lull -n% c/j.. 



. lu» 

1 Jii\asuii*i 1 . K r * ' *X'X 7 * ‘'.1’. *Av. »2X . 



Jam 1 : .r a dpi, t'i., 

- 


0- 10 

1 J * 

• 


nil (*■''« o/ 7 AlauaLLavag 

"C.P * 

i . ( 


: JayaMinl a. Pa, >*., >>' ' '* . -*~c 

*_ J, 

2 ’ ,1 




< I’rO. G‘4 

Java'uidi..ra] , 0/[ :r ‘ t ’a * f «■ .. 

• 

; ,-s 

inr.rucj.u ; , J <■ tvi iltvi l : 



. ( '"'S 

1 Jaya^imlia-Si til . .(‘L.i'.r p.a. . i 



.iun'U'.'.r,, . 


. 

:'t >! 

! \H-m.r .. ... 


i - . 

Jupi ; D, t-2 , ... 


12“ 

» 133. L“3 

J* ' .i-Siduiui .1.:’ ' s 7 • 

« 

A 3 j 

A l- « A aval a .YeXu IV; v iLV .vX, 

• 

• 

, 

i” tV . . 15.- 

A:.- 

~ 




■ X: 

* , u 1 d cv f 





EPIGRAPHIA IXDICA. 


m 



XuilBEH 

JayaSraya-Mangalarasaraja, Gujarat Chulukya 
ch., • • » • • > . 4 1 *4 

Jayastbitirajanialla, Nepal k„ , . 5G1, ot>2 

J ayasvamin, TJchchakalpa eh., . . . 387 

Jayasvamini, queen of Maukkari Harivarmau, 554 
Jayasvamini, queen of Kmnaradeva, . . 387 

Jayatallad5vi, queen of Guhila Tejahsimha, . 23G 
Jayatasimha (r)» k. {?), .... 696 

Jayatsimha. ch., . . • • >412 

Jayatiuiga.siihha, ch. of Kama co., . . "75 

Jay avali, queen of Bh askaravavm an -Rip agnan- 
ghali, ....... 600 

Jayavarraan, Chandella Jc . 86, 226, 333, 336 

Jayavarmun, Kakaredi ch., . . 186,218,419 

Jayavarmau, Paramara k., . 172, 189, 341 

Jeja, s. a . Jayasakti, ..... 334 

Jejabhukti or J^akabhukti, co., . . 176, 33 in 

Jejjaka, s. a, Jayaeakti, .... ^32 1 

J5ndraraja, Chaliumdna ch. of Kadula, . 141 t 

J6tra (for Jaitra ?), Vayhela ch., . , . 299 I 

Jhota, Pratihdra ch ., .... 13, 330 

Jishnugnpta, Sepal k., . 534, 557, 533 

Jitankusa, E. Ganna lc , . . . . 3o‘> 

Jivada, queen of Pralanibhu, . 652 

JiraiaksLa, Sepal p/ incest, . . , . ,562 

Jivitagupta I., Gupta k. of Magadha, . . 550 

Jivitagnpta II., do ., ..... 552 

Jojjala, Chdhumana ch. of Nadula, . , 14] 


K 

Kacha I. and II., chiefs, .... 624 ' 
Kachebhapagbata or Kaebchbapari, family , 

47, 65, 71, 73, 73, 94 
Kadambagubadhivasln, Saioa ascetic, . . 430 

Kailasakutabhavana, palace in Kcpdl, . 530, 

o31, 532, 534, 536, 537, 557 
KaiugOda, vi., ...... 673 

Kakanadabota, ri. (Safiebi), . . . 43s, 444 

Kakaredi, s. a . Kakkaredika, vi, (Kakreri), 

1 B 6 , 218, 219 

Kakka, Pratihara ch ., , , . J 3 } 33 ^ 

Kakkaredika, s. a. Kakaredi, li, . „ . 419 

Kakkuka, Pratihera ch , . . .13 

Kalabl 6 ja, G uhila k,, . . 2*1,212,29 0 j 

Kaluckuri, /!*/;<»/ y, 93, 1 iO, 186, 406. 4« '7, 410, ! 

414, 415, 4lu, 119, 121, 422. 427. 

128, 429, 431, 432, 433, 434, 691 | 
Kalaohuti, $. a. Kaiachun. .... 263 j 


• Ncmbeb 

: Kalafuara, vi., 54. 66, 104, 108. 140, 147, 156, 2 m 
; Kalbana, Kira grama ch., .... 351 
i Kaligalauku&i. E. Gahg>/ k., . . , 3 60 

j Kalinga, co.. 360, 367, B69, 370, 423, 541. 672, 
i 073, 674, 67 5, 676, 677, 678, 679, 68o, 

! 661, GS4 

; Kalihga or Kalifuraraja, Ealachuri ch.,. 409, 423 

' K-ilinganagura or KaLiigasiagaia, vi. (Mukha- 
. iiLgaui ». 3o/. o59. 3ul, t . 6/7, 6/s, 079, 

! r, -A oSI, 682, 6b3, 684, 0^3 


Kalingaiuja < r Kaliiiga, A'al.t ■ huri ch . 409. 4*23 

KalyanadtvJ, queen of Viravarinan,. . . 226 

KaUanasahi. Tomato, ch. of Gwalior, . . 31^ 

K i T n 1 . to.. . . , . . .575 

KaniaUu*ra>iinba, ch. of Kama co., , . 575 

Kamabt or JCamalaiaja, Kahtchuri ch., , 409, 423 


Kb’DjaUdovi, qw en f De\*gn pta of Magadha, 552 
Kau.aladcvi, qiu>.n o/XarabtiiiL^ ill., . . S62 

Kamalanayana, Gadhddeia ch., . . 322 

Kamalaraja or Kamala, Kalachuri ch ., 409 , 423 

j KaiLarnava, E. Gahga kings, . 357, 360, 367 

Kauurupa, co., C44n 

K^nauj. cl, 14. ’ 16, 18, 2<k 25. 31, 29, 60, 

71 , 75 , . 7 . 80 81 , 83 , 84 , 83 , 87 , 88 , 

89, 90, 91, 93, 95, 90, 97, 98, 99, IOO, 

103, 105, 107, 109, 115, 117, 118, 

119, 122, 127, 131, 125, 148, 150, 

151, 153, 156, 159, 161, 102, 164, 

165, 107, 168, 109, 171, 173, 174, 

175, 177, 181, 187, 33i, 3 32, 5 42, 

544, 546, 549, 550, 038, 692, 693, 

694, 710 

Kaiichbuka, queen of Chandella Harsha, 35, 56 


Kaiichi, vi., 509 

Kan da, Kiragrdma ch., . , . .351 

Kanaali, vi., 688 

Kanhadadeva, Chahumdna ch. of Chandra • 
vuti, 265 

Kanhadadeva, Paramara ch. of Chandravati, 209 
Kanhnila, queen of Mahisbaiama, • .12 

Kaiikadeva, Paramara ch , . . . .69 

Kanyakubja or Kanyakubja, vi. (I^ananj), 

75, 77, 342, 356 

Kapila, ri. t 198 

Kapila-Gajapati or Kapila-Kumbhifaja or 
Kapilendra*Gajapati, Kitaka Jc., . . 376 

Kapilavardhana, ch 6 O 0 

Kapitthika, vi., . . . , . 520 

Kamarsha, sur. of Sabtvabaiut, . . . 592 

Eaimachandra, Triga) ta k„ . . .571 



Appendix.] 


ixscthpito:^ of northern ixdia. 


107 


N cmlt:: 

. 401 

. 271 
72. 13 A I S3 


Karmanuya, ? /., . 

K.irmasimhs, mm. of T> <.”i c.: t 
Karna, Ckaulukva k. t . « 

Kama, GadhddtSa cli . • 

Kama. X\, . . . . . . .77 

Kama, X*., ancestor of the Gvrlaro Han*. , ;/2 

Karna, Kalachuri k., . 70, 220, 336* 4a’7. 41 >. 

414, 415, 431, m 
Kama, TdghilcL ch. t • , . . „ 2 a 9 

Karr.ara, <o., . . « . •> «_ . 

K ami- Trailukyaua alia, s. a. Chauluk^a Karr.’, 

72, 1S>» 

Karttikovapura, vi., • • « 603 

Karu^ba-4£sa, co.. ..... 320 

KAsi. ? »’ i B^care*), . . . 102,104 0 1 

F abiK.ii, y , . , . j , ,’5 

K ihU'l’il Ik , i, yi /- rJ 1 nO An » ; „fi» bur,.. „ . 

Kit. i iK do, . , \ 


J\ at ik ^ { l\i t ta \i ' , . 3 ,“0 . i 

Kantav*:,,/'* / v. 

KaubAirb i-maiiO-Ja, t?i.. 

K.tvacbasivi. Sai^a u&'rfir, . 

K ivaawAia, ;•/ , » 

T\ »* 1 1 . a r .a, O' ■' w t‘/ta pci if f X.v l u? j 

At" i, c * • 

Kop iva, p. a. Cio'.ii lU-Tvc.ku 
Iv *‘?.ivast?na, a W('<r, t y i am- } • • • 

KO&irAja, Cmavn&ih.* 

HA} u:avai'ba, s. a. Kalachuri Yuvaiaja I., 
K h a i: At a Fb ;u; Ara 

V t.t/ .-'*■! LA ,,,* . t v 


I Kira, ro,, . 

! Ki>-'«-T-\ :j 


:na, # i7.. 


XuiirEK 

35 

• . • . 35 1, 509 

KutipaU,.?., 256 

} KMnaja, Chaulukya (or Chdlukia t) ch. rf 
l XfWefT, 351,350 

* I\ir ir-\j a Kcrht l * ,/ •. • i 7 •//.• 5 ,. , . . 73 

| EntT-ija. j\ -7 » . * .... 030 

; KirMMiihd. T.V n\ ’ /? ’ 'j'.ur, . . 318 

1 Ivin Aar ii. ar., C 1; , A / . 7 ( '. 1 *>, 22*". 334, 

335, 337, 3 12 

Kiitivarniau, Gnhila k\ t . . 243,290 

Kirtivwiuan. Kakandi ch., . . 186.219,419 

* Kituka. C ■ t/tumnna k; .... 290 

Jv»ka:!u kka-H I., Kalachuri k. t 407, 409, 429 
A.iV'.ih t»r K.-sk tl-a II„ d->„ 407, 410 415, ;'l 

K 1 1 * 1 ’ a i a Xv v/K ,CvO la, ?n • t.j (jriuha^c 


i\K> IV 1 , 1 . 


KAAknla Arai.ta\f 
K 'n * r\ 

- ’ « . 1 \ CL,' i' ' MM! 


:> o. 


J, 


4 : 

19 

Ku’n >*T"an4nIa 

7^ 

. 403 

< 

*2 

j Kunadcvi, 


./AdityasL'u. 

. 5oO, 551, 552 

4. 

*0 

KdpOai.', 1 . 

. /V. 


. rid 


■,o 

K A\.ipvM 

s, ?7*. 


. » . O / ' • 

13*' 

K Od (*/* 

T\V>: 

«la. ro., . . "( 

09, 5 Vx o; . 1 9' >. 



TC*- -1: .dovi 

, -Vi 

bu-naJi w\ 

. . ” 1 1 


t-53 „ 5 1 K, tt) II i: AaNa. 

• 019n t K» tt 'bkafija, ch, f 

. 2-9 


• o , 


Kottura. v/., .... 

Kr\'.» a, / v7V >7 Ba-a^ara^vati. 


tOJ. too 

. 5 1 >9 
. 23 3 n 


JV \ Iv 
; ai’i: 


Kbaragraba I.. IA?'\iAw k . . 
Khaiagraba II. Dhannailitva, . 
Khaiagrraha, TV/-, t h i p ri i: cr, 17 

Kb n avar -a (r >, rh., 

Kha^a, }?< •of r, . 

Kba\ aia, i7 , • . . ^ 

Kb »* taka 0 ;Kairi', , 

K .1 I P* i: : 1 . / - 


t ' ! ? 

' K*-v 

f *■ - ( V‘* 



2"i,?t) 


Guj’’ i i' 

j 4 . 

. L ’ 

185,521 

I\ j .-I 

nat.andin, }'• . 

. 

. o;; 

ISO, 4b7 

Kri*t 

inapa, C f /un O/'V -5.. 

. 

» • . tz J o 

491, 192 

Ivr ; <! 

M.rV,i (.-.i- A 


A V H r 

♦ 0 

Kr9 

i.av'ij -V • ’ ' * i 


* - - t 

. 577 1 

K:.A 

•aiaji Pa, ‘.nuo, >2 



. 20 

KrO' 

ri: .. t P- . 


t . 210 


i. 


iW:» ’3* lllud liSil 


2; ^ 290. 227 

K bO j nk a r- r S b .i y.* man,. t/rrc^ i c''., 1 86. 21 H 

Kb yolf t . . . .3 “ 

Tv > : \kiA O', a . . *C r i 

Khnui^On; , bOMiinAnA, (7-*' AV v, 23 i, 243 s 29J 


Kobt^iusiiii. ■ 


230 



105 


EPIGRAPH!,! LSTHCA. 


i\*hitipala, Kanauj k* } 

Tvubora, TJCra rushtra 
K\! tbI.At i. biirasena ch., 

IvrJ. . c ! i a ■ <-! , governor of Go ha, 

1C til X _ T i r . : n J3r LeuiAu v: ' 
iCuki hty.x, eh.. . 

ICukistamblia (or IGJaimi rRtpmbl 
KumamdOva, Uchchaka? pa eh., 

K nmaradc v i. y ueen of Cb and i . ■ gup 
K u it ar a 45 w, queen of Ogh ri S i : a . 
Kumjrasrupta I., Gvpta l., 3,4 

413, 

Xi.mar igupta II*, do., 

m ara gn pt i. Gupta k. of J la < ' ' 

x .tl- v.Y r \ 

1 i: r ; X\ 2; 
a . > . * 1 j a i h < l x • 1 • > 1 > , . 

k\- - a: : i la, l*."' <: A\. 

in if 1 1 • 0 hm* c^.j , 

Xnuai jvlvrl a, 0/ v h H>- V , 
Xam^lial.'Tra or KumL!»aiu;\ 

ICmnbhiraj i, ?a. Gaj.ipati. . 
ICarah-ia;}, R uhtrtikl'f'* .X.. 
Xi:n’,r\i .. 7 , . 

k ?♦}.,'! a X“ ,J / 0, 

\ .ntiip, .*r, 

iCrvid:, (Qutb-iid-din) 


mar 


Xoi i*Li 

31, ;3‘j, rs-2 
. 50* 
, 5"9 


r), £*/* , 
1 1 .. . 


711 
170 
COO 
3S7 
430 
:H7 

30, 440, 442, 

014, 515, 516, 518 
. 5 IS 
550 


U 


2^ s . - ■ k 
07» SOI , 3Ji. *’0 1 
. 370 
3 5 1 
2C>0 

. 101 


' L H4 : : a a n a , Jayapu ra ch.. . 

i LakHirmn.i, l . 

| Lakshin ina, Kachchh n? • q l at a l\ % 

\ Lakshin am cr L .kshm.inaG 

j Ki\i grd.no el., 

, Lak'-L^.-n .pah, G /? ^ f * 7 <s 

s L ikslmitinanija, Koh'rhicri k., 

| LnhHuun sdna, Sena h\, . 

' Lakshinunasirhha, Gv\Ui h., 

, Lik«:imasimha, Slatf, iikta /*/>., 

\ Lahsbiiii, queen of Lai la, 
j Lakshin i, qvecn o/* Bhanudeva II , 

! Lakshmido\ l, queen 0/*CLu».ba (or Cl 
1 LakshiiiMbara, piet, 

1 LaV-kr ; C i -<*, * lU If.:, - 


,a> Lor lull iJy\ i, queen, . . 411,433 

LaJichliidhvi, do., . 0*17 

Lachchhukti, queen of Savata* . . . 3'J 

Laliini, s stcr of Purnaj ala, . . • »’ l 

Lnjja, q vpr-n of Pfda Yigr I., ♦ , 03 S 

L*tk hanupaljy JRdehtrahuta ch. of 7~4Ai,'.a- 
pf-d. 603 

Likkh^ta, eh., • . . . , 3 1 2 

I nk-ba, a. a LaksbaNimba, . , . 200 

L:k'h l, Sh a Uririt'it ch., . 277 

LaksbaniLu, qvcen of Lilian », , . . 331 

Lpkshasliiiha or Laksba. Gvhlla I\, 2S0, 2C0, 207 

Laksbavarman, s ii r. of Channel a Y ( .Xuv'arn.an, 75 

LaksliD add* va, Para nid ra k, , .7') 

Laksbojadovi (?), queen, . , . lot 

L'jkshtijna, Ch ahum ana eh. f Xaf.'-a. H| 


[VOL. V 

Svyibr,:, 

. 452 


351. 500 


407, 42s. 429 


S, 649, 65U 
200 
. 277 
. 51 

. 369 
i '■»). . 705 

. 103 


L -li : a nrr an. P-r it., a . 

(_L. ! y vein u/* i varui an , 

L,9vx :-ti, ^ • r/IIariliaraXii.hn; 

L3’*ta 

La iM-sua, h . 

L t * it * i i i m i,r da? i 1< \ i, x , 
Ii.tMi uirafraha, . 

Ltlifi. . ai Ij.t-rartka. title of a 

LaR>. f'hhhidjL ch , . . 

Lashaii! idovl. queen of vSaradasimha, 
Li*Ka sp.tla, Shaf rif: ch , 

- 11 ' '< va ( Lakshu.i ‘-ra . a 


pu 


* ,r t 


"*’4, 365 
.3 * *. 
il 

5H, 3 

21, 172 ; Iso 
. 554 

. o Oo 
. 56s 

. 0j0 


13 In 
51 
04 
277 
1^0 


4 a '/ y •) j. 


La\a: a. h. </), 

Lavr:npra^;j la, Taqhdd l\, . 
Iitvannpllfl, Shaft ri /h ft d t , 

I..ivf»n\ ,i?aniay», poe+, . 

ijitva >t.,v lIj eh , 

Lfuduluia, i*7. (Driidalum), . 
L::li»:khavi, family, and it a founder, 


4: 


I '■* *)\ :6 <ni \ i^aihia, 

L*3\ iTnak t »-a, A.p V prince,, 
1’ia-iiJ X^'r.i. r< (F* cadh;, 

Lukaslhd’ia. ri ., ... 

Laii.ipa.^rr a, hHovda? i ch., 

Lunnh’jgi i\ • ,,y tandLugara (:), ch 
Ldnua, Sh t frim' i ch., 


apra-a U 




35J. S'O 
. 7lv 
. 44 

290,210, 212, 341 
. 277 
. 304 
. 83 

. HS7 
K ISO, 
20.511, 557 

i, .■ 


1 i 
266 
225 
256 
277 
21 : 



rynO 


INSCRIPTIONS or NORTTTKRX INi,.- 


M 


NUiiLES 

. SPG 


«r? 


Aladana, c^., 

Aladana, GMlopura (Kanai t) {f\ . 

Aladana, s.a. ChanJVln Aladan.iva'.man. * 220 

Aladanadera, $. Kunu y n k. Mad in i] ala, . , 5 
Aladanadevi, queen oj ‘ Lava nap a- i la. . . 5-4 

Aladana tala, Kanauj k.< 75, 77. SO, Si, S3, Si. 

US. 170 

Madanapdla, Pdlo k., . 

Aladana} ala, Basltrakuta ch. of Vo 7 r >-‘< y \ ft-** 1 05 

Madaua&imha, GadhddCa ch , . . 5-2 

Aladanavarman, Chun della k„ 101, 102. 104, 

10?, 132. 180, 139, 142, ] 16, 385, 240. 835, 330 
Mad fiph ara-salia, Su 7 tan s M r* > a ? *vi l 1 • ’ - 3 ‘. 5 1 

Aladapratil.dra (or A prat i’ dv ' 

Miiil.ava./Vi.O^orv (/) c/’I’}.. a j*.v. - 455 

Ala lh&\a, p< its, 

A!ii>iiuv? 2 iip a. Cup: * k. : r 1/ r '■ ~ '* •••’ 

ATddl twa-ai. . "/OnU n ' V 

MAdluvaxit! a. ' /'< V * . • • • 

A1 adl • ava v .tr in at) , AV 7 M - <?>- . 

OdddLi.ivavaniiuTi, J iC n~> A/ / /> I\, 

ATadLu-Kd ir d v n av a, A < '* • £ , 

Aiadhulnia-AH, /- >< V < ’ 

: 01 ihv.v • , . --*• 

5 tad 1 ' i-'dmv 1 * . ‘ J 

Id a >3 011, ;«'/*. '■! ‘it*;:. 

Ma^a or Sal* iavi, s , a U*1*;v»’ . - • - 

Magadlia, /a.’., 3 ,l 2. 53'-', < - 55* ’, 551, 5». 2, 

Ala 1 i‘ibharar*pta I. Janai: \. o ,\r 

1 1 , mj ;. 

AT a! *‘ ! ,1 i\7 n ' ' ■ I lit.!’ ' r , .0. 

- . 

AI i a ■ - ‘ . 

MrdMd;.-.: If- 
AI al’AT ilc^li i:- " '.1 ' * • * 


»■*. f* 3 


Nai 


*■ d * 1 * ■' '' t /'j 

Id d ay * a or 51 .l i\ il:.i, C 1 7 

Id I: u ^ r /' i h‘ > i u, '1 \, 

Id . 7 -‘ T ra ; . ’ . *0 . '■ 

Mr 1 . ‘Mir i. V ’»';>> ■ u,a ~ . . 

Id dMndia:ad , ;i, 5,, A l. . 
OL’.r *.r p v - , A' . 
mV 't- 1* q :tia, •/ ; d . ' .0, 
M.iluid. •. V.s v.. 

51a! Vaa o7' Ala! v*7vaia, £••€{, . 

Aid j'ca, n., 4 
Ala 1 - ,• u ,\z f ’ . 


S;7.8M ■ I>l'-- , 5.'i.kvav .r., 

ow ' .V-! it. h U-'<- M..1 V 


1 


M ; M . J . \ J. 
M.v.l, . ' . - 


ALd 

A!.** i-,;.,. 


A w 


-to < .a T ■ ) 


y p V-V - i.< M.v ir;, 

AL V !-■ " '\* r nt 1 ‘vi. «. - or Adityr.a’d 
Alal^ i ■ • 

Maid- ' '-T ' 'v'Aa. .10 . -0. 

Alai' -*/ '• : V T ' ' : 



EPIGRAPH LI IXDTCA. 


j'lLirVanmni, ,n., 


'•t‘! 


-"i. 1 1 ''he'll ivi l\ nf Si pal 

x 1 . . . 

. . 7’ in 3\ U 

-*,!?■ P *'.» 7 , 


v, . 

m'M. - 


i \ ’ i ’ns / \ 


k.i, ch*, . 

J U -r*>, , . , 


‘i, K ' ' J ^7 ^ 

„ i aja. a nr. of. J a\ a-'r,o j. 

’ / , « 

■»:il *n, a ,, , . 

Mp, p • 

;* 0-/ 1 8'7vn w : 
, i III., 


, ;?.jn of v> 

],'/ * f \ 7 

i, (IcJ/.’O ' h , * 

i . » 3 1 1 v *,.<1 } . 

.pira. .A a <*’7 :.* * /- •’ 

• it i s . 'it. ^ ’ ,i\ l : i it. a 

■va, rv* *.*•"' - 

M-.-u r t*., . 


,' 1 ' 0 { ' - . . 

K' r J. *7., 

; ura, 7’/? t of U'r* Ue* 
jura, vir.. 

*. A F aii nl h a. > i-iz n ; : 


L All^r- 1 


. . 510 | 

5r t >!, ja 'In: 

-kun-r h 30, 53 j 

Maakran 

. 362 J 

Maurja, r 

401, 407, 541 j 

y natal a 

. . ZOO 

:\ • a , Ui r f 

, 10 Y20. 1 

y 1. r 


NlTAIL'EE 


, 201 
. 330 


o«?i. *>u/ i 

. o 07 : 


jI.. 5 urjk?ha!ca, min. of \ isravarman, . . 2 

IL-’apata, co. llk-v/d), . 234, 23d, 243. 


(., 



210, 250. 2SS, 2y0, 

2S\ 3ol. 2u6 


2l * ^/a/haadra, T> i >y. e -i' CJ 

• . 571 

311 

5ICg)iavlna, v> 4 . 

• 4S8 

236 

Mebara,/awify, 

192. 199, 260 

260 

Melaga o;* MeJiga, Chudosamfi c h.> 

. 284, 345 

225 

MeJiga, ch 

3Ieiuvarinan, 

. . 260 

. 595 

■ 

3Iibira\'u]a, / . 

. 32? 521 

- '* 

-*J Mill in’, yv tf HaVI^Le!' 1. 

5**2 

} .* 

'jPm La/iOlaia. 

. 283 

1/5 

.VA 

Ai ..^a, /• - , 

5 5i 57 h, t44 

2 s 5 

Mitrasi na, 72V " c/ ^ /; *, ; ,, 

. 318 

531 1 

Mitrav.irroi/, < 

. . 6bS 

260 

lllfipjchha, . , 

« 259, 711 

73 | 

MOka'a, Gulila k, t . # 286, 

2 S3, 290, 297 

404 1 

1 Muk&la, pi.j 

. 292 

7-3 : 

' 3Iu ka ! , m h i, Ch C> 1 > , 7 i e / V , 

. 276, 345 

256 

5!5kuli^.ralia, Y\u>.-1a d . . 

. 299 


KJ H'w ii,;M m Jjrr p U ., M im 

o 75 ‘ V ; U..W, . . . . . 112 

5IuJfMo;n, 1.. (Mungir), . . , rt;)5, 63S 

3u/ Mugdlihta&ga, a. A.ula*'ltu>‘' t Fiasidfliia- 


. ,72 , dhvrala. 

. *02 ; M’:h .1 ibn Tu^hian, Sh*',^ 

. >41 Mwh;/ ^aA-ia, 

- 1 • /»’./ .a i* »1 \h 

. V«) ■ M 1 l >,4 "t j I i 5 n Fpri,, 

• VV Mm/ i/.ii? am, S t ,jf L [ n) 

• o«'l M'.kl.' i/i, a\ a. Maukhari, 

. • M ,J '\7 via ' ; v ,, 

. * ; M J'_ , 

• .V ' r,. aV 

" -^rJirRii L, Chuuhjya k.> . 45, 50, 52, 


. 429 

OT ;i( 

. orin 

x - •> 

. 57 In 
. 238 
. 553 
. 2S4 
. 670 
. 73 

, 53, 


P v 2'f0, 20-5, 206, 220 
. 188, -27 


eh.. 


»*> mnj:, !(•:« -ire? . 

f 1, OU0 / < + , 

. 4 * 7 M ‘ ai. i i., . 

. t Mi-.ti.'ims. ^lie-i tjbcriie, 

Murnr.tlasvaom i, qneeji of 

. 359,392 


. 

53, 79 

. 646 
. 659n 
. 605 



ArrEXDix.] 


INSCRIPTION’S OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


Number 


MuzafFar II., Sultdn, • . . . .301 

Mrigavati, daughter (J) of Gadhadeia cJi . 


Hridayesa, ..... 

. 322 

N 

Nabhutishandaka, vi.. 

. 623 

Nadula, vi. (Nadol), .... 

133, 141 

Nagabhata, Mahodaya ch ., . 

542. 710 

Nagabbata, Mahodaya prince. 

. 71* > ; 

Nagabbata (Xahadaj, Pratihdra ch.. 

13, :;;o - 

Nagabbatta, ch .... 

. 590 j 

Nagadatta, k. in Aryaca7ia, 

. 509 j 

Nairadatta, poet , .... 

. 6< »4 [ 

Nagalladevi, queen of Vdgkebt Visab.ddva, 

. 241 ; 

Nagara, vi. (s. a Kalibganagara), 

. 360 j 

Nagarjuna, ch., .... 

. 260 

Nagasena, I 1 .. i» 

- 509 

Nahada (NagabbataJ, Pratihdra ch. 9 

. 13 

Nalanda (?), vi., .... 

. 535 

Nalapura, fortress, .... 

. 94 

Nalapura, vi., ..... 

248, 251 

Nana, min. of ChandtPa Bbojavarn^n, 

. 217 I 

Kanaka , court -pod tf Vdgh<"o \ i'jaladCva, . 233 I 

Nandaprabhaiijauavaimai). Kn‘n\g i h., . 

. C75 | 

Nandaraja- Vuddhasura, Edshtrahuta ch., 

. 350 

Nan lavalla, ch., .... 

. 330 

Nandin, family, .... 

. 575 

Nandin, k. in Arycvarta , . 

. 509 

Nandipura or °pnii, vi., . 395,396, 

O 

QO 

0 

Nangama, queen of an E. Gahga Vajrahasta, . 3C7 

Nanna-Gunavaloka, Eashtrakuta ch., 

. 030 

Nannadeva or Nannei?vara, ch., 

616. 617 

Nannaka, Chandella k.. 

35, 56 

Nanya, k., ..... 

. 647 

Nanyadeva, Nepal k.. 

. 564 

Narabbata or Narabada, Pratihdra ch.. 

13, 330 

Narahaiideva, GadhadeSa ch., . 

. 322 


Naraka, son of the god Vishnu and the 
Earth , .... 652, 711, 713, 714 

Narasimha, Gadh&deta ch., .... 322 
Nafo&imba, Ealachuri . 140, 414, 415, 

416. 421, 4*22, 431, 432 ! 
Nara^imba or Xrisimha I., II., III., and IV.. 

E. Gahga kings, . . . 367, 369, 3/0 

Narasimhagupta, Gupta k., . . . 518 

Naravahana, Guhila k., . 34, 42, 234, 243, 290 

Naravahanadatta, ch., . . . . . 452 

Naravardbana, Eanauj k., . . , . 522 

NaravarmaD, ch., • . . # • 2 


Naravarman, Guhila k., 

Naravarman, Paramo ra k., 

110, 123, i 

Katarana. ch .... 
Naiayana, F thdranagari ch., 
Narayanapala, Vo] a k., . 637. 6 

Narayanavarman, ch., . . 

Nareudr^dova, Ndpdl k., 

Xa’i'n.irarnala // Aaa* iMiiil.i. </ , 

X.'.mift >a, / < , 

•N asaxvn.ina, Sultan (Nd-ir-ud* .1. IT* .* 
Nasaratha, Sultan (X.isiat 
Nasir-nd-din JIahmuJ, S 
Nasrafc Shah, do., 

Na^udcvi, qu»en iAv 0 , 

A athadeva, Afa/ia^ma c, . , 

Natta or Natt«iovi, ^ m > .,6 *. . ka I , 
Navagbaaa, Chudova. w ■ X, 

Navasarika, vi. (Nau^ui/, 

Narinapura, ri. (Navannga; }. 

X ayanakclided, queen r f fed. *i,andr 
Najanapala, Cmarg-* cl . 

Nayapala, Pdl .• v . 

Nayika. qiitcn <f >1 ■d j .1 „ 

Ndhila, po<t, .... 
Nepala, Co>., . 

Netribhauja, ch., 

NihsankaiualLi, &ur. SVavabana, 
Nihlanbasirbba, of UdavaWiiPi. 
Nikunibhaliatakti. Sindrala a . 
Niladasa, ch., , 

Nilar&ja, Avamukta k., 

Nimbara, k., «... 

Xiinbarka, (or Ch luh a 

of Ldtadt* /, .... 
Nirgundfpadiaka, vi., 

Nirihullaka, feudatory (*) <./* 8an.: 

(Samkaragana ?). . , 

Nishkalanka, governor of Si y/ Jdn l, 
Ndhala, queen of Yuvaraja I., 

Non&lla, queen of Ratnardja I., 

Nrbimba, ch., . 

Nrisimha, Nepal k., . 

Xrismaba or Nara^imba, I., II., III., ar. 

E. Gahga kings , . . . o 

NVirarman, Xalapura ch , . 


X; 


2. i95 311 


la.'’’. 


^ > 


56 t 


6J 1 
0.,i 
14! 


27^ 

■J\S 


1W, 


0 . 


Oghadeva, Uchchakcslpa ch , 



XurtEr. . 


XcilEEK 


T 

1 


- ■, A*. 


p 

t o, 

f'i? 


T\iu..ja^a 

P.J: :*iii, .*;•/“ K.ikka, 

pa- ■. 

i : . ]ia,l ' t. </,' l j., 

TV ! ■..*», .c.. 

P .' 1 ,i r , 

Pa’ d.lxU't U-, 


Pal . 

Paiiti: 


. - . X iW. 
,i, t > .4 7 



Pras-.a: 

1, L J>|, . . 

* • 


« 

431 

■ ii i 

Prat, la 

ana, Paramo r a 

c/i. o/* 


. 170 





193, 

210 

11 

?r ikata«li*ya. AO.'i ( ? i A. 

. 



601 

79. 7^ 

Pr •' u,» 

bLa, Prao}fjCii.Jt 

T A., 



652 

2 13, 290 

Fraivacarayana, Vtu iraa^yori c//.. 



£64 

• 55 

Pra=antarai:a, 6'?/?’. of Dad la 1 347. 

348, 

349, 


. 3 Si > 



3 'jo. 39' 

1, oO 

7, 7o3. 

709 

( * t > 

Fr C;t. 

"a'iva, o sec , 




4i'"> 

. 714 

I 111- .IX 

.'jfn./'A, 




123 

rr, M 

Via- 

iiadLat iu i, </. 

Kal acini >'i 

dluL 

riha- 


412 

tij, - 

i, . 




407 

, 6 5 

Pra* u* 

, * /i.. 

. 



201 

•«,5 ■ ,* 


i. s 

. 

. 


256 

»/•« 

L4\rar» 

i 0/’ Prat iti a iiia] la 

,>.(/. dayilj’l’ 

ita^amalia, 







564. 

565 

i« • (,4 <- 

p i* 

[ . 1 .id k. -7 •>> 1 f . 

. 

13 

7, 152, 

153 

07. 

• 4 i\ all* v ii, c i//vA 

, CJ , 



322 

72 

1 Pla r UJ 

im.iPa. a. J.*» a; 

• ratapaiaalia 

• 


565 

• |{ 9j 

, P. at an 

r.J/WVcJ , 



244 

, 249 

U2 

! Piataj* 

ivarnnn, Cha id* 

r la p, 'ace, 



336 

« 'Lr, .*■ ) 

r* .rOi.i 

ita ;R*liima),/0 

»nl 


13 

, 3.jt * 


1 ia\ai 

ti'ioi, m.. 



619 

, t 2i 

; ^ 

P ra’/ji 

ai't. T a j , / ' {> ^ 

\ a £ , 


619 

, <*22 




r nan ,,‘i. ■ ■ 

V o" a rr : ■. i 
r.u'.lr . .. i : t « 

: V , t , 

i : ..r,;i; ! . ■ j, i 'Tit: a;, 

P.: sU ; =-d ir • /vcN 


-lot, ‘5 -r, l.v. r>-J2 

‘.iy.i. . . w; 

5;» J 


i'mvaia^>;nj, II., do., . . 619,620,621, 022 

Piajagi, ri. lAilaiuiba J), , „ 60,150,407 

Pi^Miinaiiiy ana or Pietnasabi, GadhadtZa c/t., 322 

Pi ii.ii i\ imu;a, A\, . . . . # 6^*8 

521 ! P« itiiivii ala, C/idhumdaa clt. of JSadula, • 141 

437,512.511,634 Pi Ulm '&b5na. VaHitfaiu A\, . . 618, 610, 622 

5 * >3 Pr'uinvivaliabi.a, it nr, of XikuTiibhaliabiikti, . 309 

p (i ( .j Xur.iM.ata, . . . :;:;o 1 PiithivivarmaTi, A’. Gan<(a A*., . * . 672 

l\'>> ,\.o< of f'*> ) / ^ (Ki.u/ SUO), . 2S4 ri/tHUaka, W. (lelievu, PcIm>u), . . • 516 

I*- l( ; i >5’ i, £’ •'! m (i u«'/. Si lb), . • 272 ?uiK\ i I.*\a I., RttuajJi’, ,t eh . . . 409,423 

l 1 ' iu a ^ *i.i iV 7 *. a ! Ii i,k ii •’! u*! i *1 Fiioz Sbdli Piuliuaev* IP, do- 9 . Ill, 412, 41/, 41S, 


PiaAa, 8- '* • 

I n <’/ , 

F.al.t iii\.ra. r/ , ♦ 

Plya*. ;-i ?a..a Sv J - *,* (F«-z ShuM, 
P.asulu.t. y 'C-* '/ Vai ..na^aa, . 
PrabO.tka a, A 1 ., . 

Prat ’-i - av .-'ardh^". ’«> Ko'i 1 > k , 
rijibl-r. r ijai.A. Porur’t c.a 

Pr i t ■ * as-*, / it , ■ • * * 

Prabi a 'a. sir#*. ' / ’ 1 v f * Ik"’ 1 <'- 7 ' 

PrabOPa, 

Pr..UJ av.t "uj.ia /.’^s i c* a;, 

Pi id y »>. -S. : . c 


ni- Pjid.v ^va . 

650 Pi .Piviihara, poet, 

500 ' Prith\inavaTanasilia, JVt/*»7 a., 
27<) Pritlivipala, A' , 

592 i l' itLviraja, Chakamo an k.. 


423- 434 
. 1S4 

. 414 
. 325 
. 10G 
119. 155, 


i 




176. 

183 

328 1 

; Fi -T 

f viraja. 

f706.b?flO, . 

. 

?23 

159 

1 r.t 

•>\ i’ 1 m. 

< >.* '/// '■/ v% . 


306 

170 , 

Pnt 


Pi i- i« va 1., 

* 

409 

710 

Pii* 

..vi-iiKa. 

7'^ c/# (/J (>*' Kona y 

A- M.ulanopala, 

81 

271 

PiitLvivariuar, Chandtlla 

. 108.110. 


619 




226, 

335 

r* -U 

Priv 

imala. q 

u< " Ju-adLavala, 

. 

26o 

t . a 

P .1: 

x d*i. U 

c 7 t , . . 

• • 

s;.; 


, ■ a , 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


113 



YoiEiJ 

i 

Xtmeeb 

P ulakesiraja- Avan ij anas ray a, G ujardt 

Chain- 

Eajaiii a III., E. Gahga k.. 

. . 367 

kya ch., 

. 40, 

i j Eajasekhara, poet , 

. 429n 

Pulakesi-Yallabha, W. Chalukya k, Satj 

'as ray a- 

j Rajasiiiilia, GadhadeSa ch., 

. 322 

Pulikesin II., .... 

. 40C 

'■ j Rajasimha, ShattrimSa ch., 

. 277 

Pulendaka \?), vi,, 

. 4S6 

1 Rajasimha, sur. of Indraviiimau, . 

. 676, 677 

Pulindasena, Ealihga ch., 

. 673 

j Eajasundsri. queen of Rajaraja I., 

359, 360, 367 

Punapaksha, ch., .... 

. 343 

j Rajenuraohola, Chad a k., 

. 359 

Pauja, ch ..... 

. 665 

1 Eajendravarman, E. Gahga k .. 

. 683 

Puppa, queen of Chandtlla Yasovarman, 

56 

j Kajendravikramasaha, J Xepal k., . 

. 325 

Puragupta, Gupta k., . 

. 518 

j Raji, Chauiukya k., . 

. 50 

Purandaia, Suiva ascetic, • 

. 430 

j Rajjila, Pratihdra ch. t 

13, 330 

Purandnrapala, Prdgj ydiisha prince , 

. 713 

| Rajyainati. queen of,] ayadeva Paracbakrakama, 541 

Purnapala, ch., .... 

. 64 

1 Rajyapala, Eanauj (?) k., . 

60, 71 

Purnataja, Tomara ch-. 

. 331 

j Rajj apala, Pdla k.. 

. 640 

Purnika, vi., .... 

. 491 

[ apala, son of Eanauj k. Goviudachandra, 119 

Purushottama, chiefs , 

366, 671 

' k*ajs apala, so?i of Pdla Devapala, 

. 635 

Purushottama, Maga B/ ^hman, . 

. 3€2 

lia ; yapura, vi. (Rajorg.ulh), 

. 39 

Purushottama, min. of Chandtlla Paramardin, 185 

' Eajyavardhaua I , Kanauj k„ 

528, 54S 

Purushottama, s.a . Bhatta Purushottama, 

. 668 

i Rajvavardhana II., do,. 

> 528, 627n 

Purushottama&imha, eh. of Eamd <£>., 

. 575 

; Eajyavati, queen of Dharmadeva, 

. 494 

Pushpapura, vi., s. a. Pataliputra, 

. 541 

[ R*ia (na ."jstanibha (or Kulastambha 

?),ch, . 666 

Puahjena, ch.. 

. 715 

lutlbadcvi Of Rai han&dovi, mother of IFmuzuJ 



k. GC-vindachandra, . . so, 96, 113, 693 



Rama, Riragrdma ch., 

. 351 

0 


Rama (sou of Baiabbadra\ poet, . 

. 56 

X 


j Rama (son of Ehrimraka), do., 

• 351 , 569 

Qutb-ud-din Aibak, Sultdn, 

238, 255 

Ramabhadra, Ranauj k.. 

. 546 



Ramabhadra, MahCdaya ch.. 

. 542, 710 



Ramachandra, GadhadeSa ch ., 

. 322 

R 


Ramachandra or Ramadeva, Ealaehuti ch-. 




280, 283 

Ragbava, E. Gahga k., . 

. 367 1 

Ra mad ova, Paramara ch. of Chandrdvati , . 210 

Raghavaehaitanya, poet , 

. 571 ! 

Ramadeva, s.a. Eanauj k. Ramabhadra, . 15 

Raghunatha, Gadhddeia ch 

. 322 J 

Ramaduvi, queen of Jayasvamin, . 

• 387 

Rahada, queen of Lakghmanaraja, 

. 428 l 

Ramakiiti, poet, • 

. 129 

R&hila, Chandella Jc ., ... 

35, 56 } 

Ramapala, Pdla k\, . 

. 644 

Rahuttaraya, s. a. Rautaraya, 

. 376 j 

Ramasahi, GadkddeSa ch., . 

. 322 

Rajabhanja, ch., 

. 656 | 

Ratnasihi, Tomara ch. of G icdj ior. 

. 318 

Rajadeva, ch., ..... 

. 424 { 

Ramasiiiiha, Xepal k.. 

. 564 

Rajahpala, ch .... 

. 342 

Eanabahadurasaha, do.. 

. 325 

Rajakula gachchha, .... 

. 570 

Ranabhailja, ch., 

655, 656, 657 

Rajaladevi, queen , .... 

. 342 

Ranabhita, Ealihga ch., 

* • 673 

Rajalla, queen of Prithvideva I., . 

. 409 

Ranachchhoda, poet, 

. 321 

Rajalladevi, queen o/*SthitiraaIla t 

. 562 

Ranagraba, son of [Jayabhata I.] Yitarao-a, . 397 

Rajamala,/a#n7j/, .... 

. 412 

Ranak5sarin, sur . of Bhavadeva, . 

. 615 

Rajamalla, Guhilak ., . 297, 301, 302, 304. 306 

Ramin alia, Marusthali {Mdrwdd) ch.. 

. 301 

Rajamati, queen of Jayapratapamalla, . 

. 564 

Ranarnava, E. Gahga k.. 

. 360 

Rajaprasasti-mahakavya, title of a poem , 

. 321 

Ranasiriilia, Guhila k.. 

. 290 

Rajaraja I., E. Gahga k,, . . 359, 

360, 367 

Ranasimba, Mehnra ch.. 

. 199 

Rajaraja II., do., .... 

367, 670 

RanaQa ?)stambha • * Ivu’asta'nhl.a 

oh., - 6’jii 



114 


EPIGRAPHIA TNDICA. 


[Vot. V. 


Number 

Ranavahkamallaf?), sur. of Harikaladeva, . 365 

Banavikranta, sur. of Buddbavarmaraja, . 398 
Randavai, vi., . . . • 173, 174, 175 

Rannadevi, queen of Pdla Dharmapala, . . 635 

Raulbaiev i, quetn of Salavahann, . . 593 

R as h t r akuta , fa m il y , . 24, 30, 53, 340. 350, 

3-54, 356, 605, 607, 630, 635, 640 
Bashtroda (Rashtrakuta), do . . . 273 

Ratnadeva I., Ratnapura ch see Ratnaraja. 

Eat nadeva II., Ratnapura ch., 411, 412, 418/ 

423, 433, 434 

Ratnadeva III., do . • . 184, 423 

Eatuakumarika, queen of Sambalpur ch. 

Javantasimha, . . . . . 324 

Ratnanidlla, Ntpdl k., . • . 564, 565 

Ratnapa ! a, poet , ..... 226 

Ratnapala varman, Prdgjyotisha k., 711, 712, 713 

Ratnapura, vi., 184, 409, 411, 412, 417, 418, 

423, 433, 434 

Ratnaiaj * or Ratadsa I., Ratnapura ch ^ 409, 423 

Ratna-ena, Gadhadeia ch., .... 322 
Ratna-dmha, Guhila k., . • 304 

Ratn^imha, poet, .... 184,418 

Kant ir,jUa or Kahuttaraya, sur. of Ganadeva, 376 
Rarisamba, ch., ...... 624 


Eavisheaa, . • . . . * 592 

Rayabrahmadeva, Kalachuti ch. of Rdyapura, 

280, 2S3 

Ray ara alia, s. a. Rajamalla, . . , 302, 306 

Eavapala, ch., 343 

Eay.*puia, vi. (Kaypur), .... 280 

Eaj.arido^a-Trailokyasimha, ch>, . . .364 

RemunA vi., ...... 367 

Rev a, ri. (Narmada), .... 189, 198 

Riddhilakshmi, Nepal queen , . . . 567 

Ripughanghala, sur. of Bhaskaravarman, . 600 
Rudadovi, queen of Vdgkela Virasimha, . 299 
Rudra, ch., ...... 170 

Rudra . . . , Viharasvdmin, . . . 609 

Eudvadasa, ch., . . . . . . 606 

Rudradeva, Gadhddeia ch., .... 322 

Rudradeva, k . in Arydcarta, . . . 509 

Rudramana, Mdna ch.of Magadha, . . 362 

Rudra^ena I., Vdkdtaka k . . 619, 622 

Rudrasena II., do., ..... 619 

Rudreaa = Rudrapala (P), Tamara prince , . 44 
Pwukn-ud-din Firoz Shah I., Sultdn, , . 238 

Rupa, queen of Mabananda, , . . 260 

Rupadevi, CMhumana princess , . . , 705 

Rdpamati, queen of J ayapratapamalla, . 564 


Number 


Saba, s. a. Virasena, min. of Chandragupta 
II*, ....... 512 

Sabalasimha, Gadhddeia ch., . . . 322 

Sadasiva, Saiva ascetic ,• .... 430 

Sadgunadevi [or Manknnaddvi ?), queen of 
Rajaraja III., ..... 367n 

Sndhanva, Chaulukya ch., .... 429 

Sihajaditya (Rajaraja?), ch„ . . . 170 

o&hajv&bam, emperor (Shah-Jahan), . . 317 

Sahapadina, Sultan (Skihab-ud-din Ghori), • 255 
Sahasahka, sur. of Salavahana, . . . 593 

Sabasvarjuna, mythical ancestor of Kalachuri 

family, 415 

Sahavadiua or Sahavadina, s. a. Sahapadina, 

238, 259 

Sahi, Kira k., 35 

Sabi Alambhaka (Hushang Ghdri alias Alp 

Kkan), 285 

Sabi Jallaladina, ..... 313 
aani Mahammada, Sultan (Muhammad Sayid), 571 

Sahilla, ch., 412 

Sahilla, k., 

Sadodbhava, Ealing a ch., .... 673 
Sainyabhita I. and II., do., . . . .673 

Sajjana, poet , 429 

Saka, Muhammadan ( kings of Delhi), . 238, 255 

Sakadvipiya or Maga Brahmans, . . . 362 

Sakambhari, vi. (Sambhar), . 129, 134, 114, 256 

Saktikumara, Guhila k., 43, 234, 243, 290, 

338, 339 

Saktisimba, ch., 296 

Saktisimha, Nipdl k., .... 564 

Salakbana^arman (Salashanavarman), Kakaredi 

ch > 186, 218, 219 

S daksh&nadevi, queen of Vagheld Arndraja, . 344 

Salanka} ana, fa m / ly, 686 

Saiapaksba, general 535 

Salashanavarman (Salakhanavarman), Kakaredi 

^ ch '> 186, 218, 219 

Salastambba or Salastambha, JPragjyotisha 

k '* 652 n, 711, 714 

Salavaiiana, lc„ . 593 

Salivabana, Tamara ch. of Gtcdlior , . . 318 

Sallaksh-ma, min . of Chandella Paramardin, 185 

Sallakshana, s. a. Sallakshanavarman, • • 226 

Sallak^hanasiihha, k., . . . . .342 

Sallakshanavarman, Chandilla k., . . 336 

Samadevi, queen of Lalitaeura, , . • 603 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


115 


Numbeb 
. 286 
. 154 
. C47 
. 210 
243, 290 
. 225 


. COO 
* 703, 705 

236, 243, 246, 290 
. 256 
. • 354 

. 322 
. 304 
. 225 
. 323 
. 592 
494, 541 
. 407 


Samala (?), poet, 

Sam ant a, C ha ha man a k., 

Samantasena, Sena k., 

Samantasimlia, ch., . 

Samantasimha, Guhila Tc., 

Samantasimha, Mandali ch . 3 
Samantasimha, see Samyantasimha. 
Samaraghanghnla, sur. of Achalavarinan, 
Samarasimha, Chdhumdna k., 

Samarasiriiha, Guhila k., 

Samarasimha, k., • 

Samburaja, Poshtrakuta ch., 

Samgramasahi, GadhddeSa ch., 

Samgramasimha, Guhila A., 

Samgi amasirhlia, Mandali ch., « 

SamgTamasimha, Meicdd ch., 

Sarhjayftsena, ch., • 

Samkaradeva, Lichchhavi k. of Nepal, 
Sarhkaragana, k., . . 

Samkaragana, Ralachuri k ., . 407, 428, 429 

Sarhkarana (Samkaragana ?), Kalachuri (/) k., 427 
Samkshobha, Parivrajaka A., . . 459 

Samsarachandra, Trigarta A., . . .571 

6amsarad5vi, queen of Jayajotimalla, . . 562 

Samudragupta, Gupta k ., . 439, 509, 510, 511 

Bamudrasena, ch., . • 592 

Bamvatasimlia (?), Chdhumdna k ., 704, 706, 707 
Sarny a(ma Pjntasimha, s. a. Samvatasimha (?), 705 
Sanakanika, tribe, ..... 436 

Sandevara (?), ch., . . . . • 296 

Sandhapala, "O manga ch., . . . . 289 

Sankbamathikadhipati, Saiva ascetic f . . 430 

Sahknka, ch., ...... 9 

Santilla, general , . • • • • 427 

fiantish£na, Jaina scholar , • . • . 7ln 

Sapadal.tksha, co. or mountains, . 129, 575, 577 

Sarab hap ura, vi., . • • €10, 611, 612 

Saradasimha, Rachchhapaghdta k., • . 94 

Sarariga, Gohilla ch., • • • • • 292 

Sarahgad&va, VdgUld k., . 235, 237, 244, 249 

Sarapalli, vi., . . . . . .675 

Sardula or Sardulavarman, Maukhari k., 555, 556 

fiarvagupta, s. a. Bhatta Sarvagupta, . . 6 

Sarvnnaga, ch., . . . . . .11 

Sarvanaga , feudatory of Skandagupta, . . 449 

f?arvan&tha, Uchchakalpa ch„ 389, 390, 392, 

426, 522 

Sarvavarman, ch ., . . • . . 592 

Sarvavarman, A., ..... 552 

Sarvavarman, Maukhari A., . . • 554 


Sagahka, ch.. 

Sasidhara, poet, . 

Satrubliunja, ch., 

Satrughnanlja, 

Satrusalya, Navinapura ch.. 

Satyaraja, Paramdra ch ., . . 

Saty asraya-Prithivivallablm-Kirtivarmaraja, IF. 

Chalukga Kirtivarman I., . 

Satyasraya-Pnlakesi-Valiabha, 

Pulikesin II., . 

Satyasraya-\ ikram adityaraja, 

K .... 

Satyavarman, E. Gahga l\, 

Samashtra. co., . 

| Saurisamha, ch., 

| 8a vat a, Gvrjarapratihdra ch., 


Ncmbee 
. 627 
415, 41 9 n 
. 657 


619 

314 

69 

401 


IF. Cliahikya 
. . 401, 404 

TT. Chalukya 

. 404 

• . • C84 

8 

.624 
39 


Sob, alia or Sckkala, m, of Gr aha pat i family, . o£) 

Sena, family, 647, 6 IS 

Senavarman, Sihghapura ch., . . . G00 

SCndrakn, family, 

Shngara (Ivhagara), A., . . . .260 

Shah-Jahan, emperor, ..... 317 

Shams-ud-din Altamish, Sultan, • . . 238 

Sbahgara (Kfcangara), Chuddsamd ch 276, 

284, 345 

Shattrimsa, family, ..... 279 
Shihab-nd-diu Ghuri, Sultan, . 233, 255, 257 

Shojavarman or Khojuka, Kakcridi ch., 186, 218 
Shuduvadina, Sultan iQutb-ud-din Aibak), . 238 
Slmmmana (Khummana), Guhila k., 234, 243, 290 

biddhaehakravartin, sur. of Chauluki/a 
Jayasimha, 1S8 

giddhadbiiaja, do., . , . , 230 

Siddharaja, do., .... 123, 129, 527 

Siddliinrisimhamalla, Nepal k., . 503, 5C4, 563 

Sidhitnnga (P), ch., 267 

8idhuka, ch , . . . . . 342 

Sikhaiasvainini, queen o/Samjaya^ena, . . 5G2 

Sila, G nhila k., .... 234, 243, 290 

Silaiitya, sec Srjasraya-Siladitva. 

Siladitya I. Dharmaditya, Valalli k., . 476, 

477. 47S, 479, 485 
Siladitya II., YalahM pri'ice, , . , 4^7 

Siladitya III., Valahhi k., . 4^, 4^S, 4S9, 490 

Si’a ;itya IV., do., 490, 491, 492.493,495 
Siladitya V„ do., , . 40 ^ 4pp >f JOO 

Siladitya VI , do., , . # 490^ 5(yj 

Siladitya VII. Dhi d ata, do., . . . 5< 0 

Siladitya, Talabhi princes, 473, 475, 479, 495, P'6 
Silibhanja, ch., G58 

Q2 



116 


EPIGRAPHIA IX DIC A. 


[ V CL. V. 


XrMBER 

Silluka or Siluka or Siluka, Pratihhra eh 13, 330 
Simha, Guhita k., . . 234, 243, 290 

Simka (Simgha) or Simkana, Kalachuti ch., 

280, 283 

Simhapalli, vi , * . . . . • 605 

Simhapratapa&aha, Nepal k., 325 

Simhapura, vi . . . . . *674 

Simharaja, Chohamhna k., - . . . 44 

Simhavarman, Ckaulukya ck., . . * 4*29 

Sindhuputra, k., . , . . . 256 

Sindhuraja, eh., . . « 296 

Sindhuraja, k., ...... 69 

Sindhuraja, Paramdra k., , 57, 67, 79, S2, 3 10 

S in dura pdra, vi., . . • . .360 

Singara»/bo«f7//, * . . . • ♦ 109 

Siiighana, JDecogiri-Yddava k. % . . . 225n 

Siighapura. vi., ..... 600 

Singhavarman, Sivy ha pur a ch., . . . GOO 

Sirisimrainika, vi., . . . . .485 

Siruka, poet , ...... 429 

Sipupala, k. (?), . . • . . . 596 

Sitadevi, queen of Xarasimha I. f , . . 367 

Siva, poet , . . • . . .251 

Sivadeva I., Lichchhavi k. cf Nepal, . 480, 528 

Sivadeva II., Nepal k ., » • 537, 538, 541 

Sivadeva, poet , ...... 31S 

Sivagana, ch . . 9 

Sivagupta, Trikalivga k.% . . . 659, 660 

Sivagupta-Balarjuna, ch., .... 617 

Sivasimha, GadhddeSa ch., .... 323 

Sivasimha. Alithila k .... 578 

Sivasimha, Nepal k., . . . 563, 564, 565 

Siyadoni, vi (Shorn Khurd), 18, 23, 31, 33. 40 
Siyaka, Paramdra kings, . . 46, 57, 79, 340 

Sbandadeva (P), Nepal prince, . . . 536 


f Nepal, 


f Xr.MiiTK 

Some? vara, tfmahgd cl , . . . 2b9 

Sonasara, vi, . . # , . .146 

Sii. queen of Sarvanuga, . . . .11 

Sridhara, m. of Yastrdknlaf .trail y, . . 200 

Siidhaatainana, ch., ..... 628 
Srimala, vi. (Bhinmal), 6,89. 690, 696, 697* 

69S, 699, 702, 7< 3, 704, 706, 707 
Siimati, queen of Madhavagupta, . 550, 552 

Srii.athaghoshin, ch., . . . . .64 

Sringa»adevi. queen of Rajamalla, . . 301 

SuniTasa, Nepal k., .... 506.568 

Srinivasa, poet , ..... 429 


Skandagupta, Gupta k., 446, 448, 449, 516, 517 

Skanda^upta, official, . . . 528, 529 

SOdhadeva, Kalachuri (?) k., . . . 691 

Sokiya, Chdhumdna ch. of Nail id a, . . 141 

Somadeva, author of a play, . . . 134n 

Soraalladevi, queen c/Jajalla II., . . . 423 

Somamisra, poet, ..... 24S 
Somasimha, Paramdra ch. of Chandrdvati, 

209, 210 

Sdmatrata, Acharya , ..... 591 

Sdmavarinan, k., ..... 593 

Somes vara, eh., • . • • * • 409 

So mes vara, Chdhctmuna k., . . .154, 176 

Somes vara, min. of Lakshnjanaraja. . . 428 

Soncesvara, poet , . . - 210. 212n, 222 


. 44 Siirnati, queen of Madhavagupta, . 550, 552 

• 429 Srii.athaghoshin, rh,, . . > * .64 

. 256 Sringa»adevi, queen of Rajamalla, . . 301 

. 296 Siiniyasa, Nepal k., .... 506.568 

69 Srinivasa, poet , ..... 429 

79, S2, 3 40 SiipAla, ch., ...... 226 

. 360 Sripala, poet , ...... 130 

• 109 ■ Nrpnii, .... 616, 617 

. 225n ; Si^ihWLva Am* k., . . . . . 328 

. 600 I Srivail.ibha. W. tl.th*kya l., . . 404 

• 600 j Sryasraya-biladityn. Gu/cmt Cl tlakva ch., 

. 495 j 103, 401 

. 429 j Sthirapala, son {>} of PVa Milupabi. . . 59 

. 596 ! Sthitimalla, $. a. JasastLitu.ijamalla, . . 56,2 

. 367 i Suhkata, poet, .... 700. 701. 702 

. . 251 I Subhatctvarman, Paramdra k., . . . 195 

480, 528 Suckivannan. Guhila k., . 234.243,200,339 

537, 538, 511 | Sudarsana, lake, ..... 446 
. . 31S | Sddraka, ch. (r), ..... 642 

. 9 j Sudnkn Gaya ch., 046 

659, 6G0 Suhavu'.a, /•*., ...... 66 

. 617 Sundaiidevi, queen o/* Hridaye^a, . . . 322 

. 323 j Saudaridevj, queen of Afuhodaya ch. 

. 578 j Tatsaiaja, 542, 710 

564, 565 j Supushpa, Lichchhavi k., . . . .oil 

31, 33. 40 ; Sura, poet , *•••«. 44n 

7,79,340 j Surama, queen of Rajaraja II., . . . 670 

. 536 i Surapala, Pala k., . . , , 639 

b 516, 517 i Surapala, Paditrakuta ch. of Voddmayutd, * 605 
528, 529 ! Surasena,/awzj7y, ..... 5b9 
. 691 | Surasena, husband of Rhugadevi, . . . 532 

. 141 j Saiasktra, co., . . . . . .416 

. 134n i Sarasmichftndra, feudatory o/'Budhagupfc*, . 454 

. 423 I Suratanasimha, GadhddtSa ch , , , 322 

. 24S I Suryabhanu, do., 322 

a ?i Surya-diarya* poet, . . , .53 

209, 210 SAryudusa, ch., . . . . . . 296 

• 591 Suryagho-iha, k . ’615 

. 593 Suryamalla, Nepal k., . . „ ^64, 565 

• 409 | Surjapala, Karh chhapag l dta prince, . , 73 

154, 176 ; SArya-Vifcala (?). ch , . . . . , 260 


. . 659, 660 

. 617 
. 323 
. 578 
563, 564, 565 
18, 23, 31, 33. 40 
. 46, 57, 79, 340 
. 536 


. 322 
. 53 

. 296 
. '615 
564, 565 
. 73 

. 260 


428 j SiiKtrman, king-asc tic, founder 


Pa ri v raja k a fa m it y , 




Susthitavarman, [ATanl'kari .?] k., • 

XciMBER 

. 550 

Suvarnapivra, vi.. 

. 423 

Svamidatta, Koftura k., 

. 509 

S vamik ara j a, Pdsht ra \ a hi ch., 

. 360 

Svamin, ch., . . . , 

. 412 

Svapnesvara, eh.. 

. 670 

Svetka (?), vi., ..... 

. 672 

Syamaladevi, queen of Guhila Yijayasitbha, 

Syamasabi, Toniara ch. of G ivCdior , 

415, 431 
. 31S 

T 

Tajik n, Arah, . 

. 404i 

Tak shad at ta, m.. 

. 549 1 


Talabun-mandala, di. t . . . . 417n I 

t 

Tantrapala, ch,, . . , . ,41 

Tapii y ache hit a, . 303 

Tara, queen ofHarjara, .... 052 

Tatachandra, Gudhadeka ch., . « . 322 

Tata, Pratthara ch., . , . . 13, 330 

TO j al i \ ala, Tii i n . of X i rad h aval a , . • 2 1 0, 2 12 

TejaWimha, Chaim man a eh* of Chandra- 
vat i r . . . . . . 201, 265 

Tejahsimha or Tejasvisimha, Gvlula k , 229, 

230, 213,290 j 

Tejasiihha, k\, . . . . • 705 j 

Tejasvisimha, s. a. Guhila Tejahsimha, . . 290 1 

Teramhipala, Sale a ascetic, • * - 430 j 

Tbepaka O'* Thevaka, Mihara cl . . 260 

Tihunapala, k., , . . . 1O0 

Timbanaka, vi. (Timfina', . . . 192, l'.'O 

Tingyadeva, Prdyfyotisha k., . . *61-1 

Tishyamratirtha, place . .... €20 

Tivaradeva, s. a. Mahasiva-Tivaranija, . . 616 

To diva, mi 7i, of Akbar, . . . . 307 

ToggaU 340 

T6mara,/i/m^y, . . 11,233,313,331 

Toranmna, k\, ..... 520, 521 

Toramana Shaba (or Shdbi) Jauvla, A\, . . 519 

T ra i k u tak a , fa m Hi/, . . . 391,393 

Trailed* yam alia, s, a, TrailOkvavannan. , . 219 

Trailokyamalla, sur. of Chavhtkya Karna, 72, 18S j 
Trailok yam alia, sur. of Ka ckchha pan hat a : 

Ofuladeva. ...... 73 

Trailokyasimha, sur. of Ha y:\rideva, . . 361 1 

Trailokyavarman, Chandella k., . 196, 218, 

21911, 226,240, 337 


j XriiEEii 

| TribbnvaDaditya, oh., ..... 170 
j Tribliuvanapata, Chauluhja \ h. y . . . 220 

Tiibhuvanapala, Pd.Aitrakuta ch. of 
Todd may did, ..... 605 
Tn bliu van aj ala, i/iivardfa. , . . 634 

Tribhuvanaraya, GadhddCa eh., . . . 322 

Trigarta, eo., .... 351,509, 571 

Trikali nga, co., . 1S6, 218. 357, 359, SCO, 361, 

407, 416, 419, 659, 660. 663, 664, 

665, 668, 670 

TrilOchanapala, Kanauj (?) h. 9 . .60 

Iriloehiinapala or °pati, Chaulukya (or 
Chalul //a ?) ch. of LdtadUa, . . .356 

Tripnri, vi. (Tewar), . . 340, 409, 410, 422 

Tutiga, RdshtraJciita, s. a . (?) Tunga- 

Dharmavaluka, ..... 640 
Tufiga-Dhaimavaluka, Rfchtralvta ch., . 630 
Tura^hka, 31 uho mmodon {ruler of Dtl hi), . 259 

Tyugasimha, Prdg/yCtisha k., . . .711 


u 

Ucbabadanasrara. vi., ..... 269 
Uchehakalpa, W., . 3S7, 388, 389, 392, 522 

Td ipnra (?>, vi., 057 

Udaya. queen, . . . . . .412 

Udayadeva, hStptrf yuvardja, and l’., . 532, 541 

Udayaditya, Poramdra k., . GS, 70, 79, 82, 

121. 172, 195, 340, 341. 342, 415, 431 
Udayakarna-Nihsaiikasiniha, ch., . . ,364 

' IMsuani.m, c 7 i , . . . . . 6*28 

Udinana, ch., .... 614, 615, 617 

Vd.iyam, p<jrt, . . . . . .670 

l"']a}a]nabha^Hri, do,, .... ,2l2n 

! Udavipnra, vi. (Ud ay pur in Gwalior), . . 145 

j T\I ay as i m ka , Ch d ’ v man a k . , 6 9 7 , 69 S, 699, 


IMayaMiiila, GadldJA'a ch., 

701, 703, 705 
. 322 

Yd, nasi mb a. k 

. 256 

Vday.ivamnn, Par^mdra k., 

. ISO 

Udayi n,p>>rf, .... 

. 92 

TMdharan.i, Tdmaco ch. C' G^'dlior, 

. 318 

Fddiutakesarin, Tril'aUhou k., . 

. 6G8 

Fdra. co. (Orissa), 

. 541 

'G^rasdna. Gwild 7 C.r rh. y 

. 322 

UgriWma, Palakka k\. 

. 509 

Ujjayani, ti. (Ujjain), 

. 40 



118 


EPIGRAPHIA INDICA. 


[Vol. V. 


Number 


Umaiiga, vi. (Omga), .... 2S9 
Umapatidhara, poet , ..... 647 

Undabhata, ch 19, 20 

Upagupta, queen of Maukhari fsvaravarman, 554 
Upendragupta, ch., . . . • 624 

Upendraraja, Paramo ru k., . . • . 340 

LTrjayantatiitha, place, .... 13$ 
Utpalaraja, ch,, ...... 64 


V 


Yacbaspati, poet. 

. 669 

Yachcbhaudeva (?), ch., 

. 257 

Yachchhika, queen of Durgadaman, 

. 689 

Vaehchhullika, queen of Durgabhata, 

. 589 

Yadagujara, /amity, . • 

. . 272 

Yadaviba, vi., .... 

. 156 

Yaghela, family. 

. 299 

Yaghela, do., . 209, 210, 212, 222, 

225, 228, 

233, 235, 237, 244,249,344 

Vaba[da]varmaii, Kakaredi ch., . 

. 219 

Yabadhasiihha, Ch ahum ana k., 

. 703 

Vaidumba , family, 

. . 357 

Vaidyadeva, Prdgjyotisha k ^ 

. . 644 

Vaijalladeva, Chdhuydna ch., 

. 163 

Yairata, Guhila k.. 

. 243, 290 

Vairavarman, Chhinda ch., . 

. 51 

Vaiiisiriiba, Guhila k., . 243, 290, 415, 431 

Vairisirhlia, Paramdra kings , 

46, 69, 79, 340 

Yajaka, family, 

. 271 

Yajjuka, K6m6*mandala ch.. 

. 409 

Yajradaman, Kachchhapaghata k., 

47, 73 


Yajradatta, mythical k. of Prdgjyotisha, 652, 

711,713,714 

Yajrahasta, E. Gahga kings, 257, 359, 360, 

367, 685 


Yajrahasta- Aniyahkabbima, E. Gahga k., . 357 

Vajiata, sv.r, of Paramdra Vairisimha II., . 340 
Vajiata, Tomara ch., ..... 331 

Vajrinidcvi, queen of Naravardhana, . . 528 

Vajuka, Kakaredi ch., . . . . 186 

Yakata or Vakataka, family , . 618, 619, 620, 

621, 622, 623, 624, 687 

Yakhalaraja (Yasbalaraja), ch., . . .260 

Yakpab, Pdla k., 638 

Yakpnti, Chanaefla k., ... 35, 56 

Vakpatiiaja, Chdhamdna l\, . 44 


Number 

Yakpatiraja, Paramdra kings , . 46, 49, 57, 

67, 340 

Yakulaja, ascetic , . . . . 26, 27 

Yalabbi, vi., . 346, 402, 457, 458, 460, 461, 

462, 464, 465, 466, 467, 468, 469, 470, 

471, 472, 473, 475, 476, 477, 478, 479, 

4S1, 482, 483, 484, 485, 486, 487, 488, 

4S9, 490, 491, 492, 493, 495, 496, 499, 

500, 523, 524 

Vallabhadeva, ch . . . . .364 

Yallabharaja, ch., . . . 411, 433, 434 

Vallabharaja, Chaulukya k., . 130, 205, 206 

Yallabharaja, Chhinda ch., .... 575n 

Yallabharaja, s. a. Krishnaraja, Edshtrakuta 
Krishna II., ...... 407 

Valla litya, ch., ...... 260 

Vallura , clan of Brahmans, , . . 623 

Ya ?)manilapati, vi., • . . . .665 

Vamsapala, Guhila k., ... . 290, 415n 

Vanadeva, JYepdl k., . . . .559 

Vanamalavarman, Prdgjyotisha k., . 652, 714 

Vauarajadeva (?). ch., .... 230 

Yandbnka (or Dhandhnka?), ch., . . 64 

Yapanadeva, Godrahaka ch., . . . 124 

Vapyat3, father of Pdla Gdpala I., . . 634 

Vaiahad era (p), min. of a Vakataka k., . 622 

Vai ahasimha, general, ...» 5 

Yar&nasi, vi . (Benares), . 75, 81, 84, 85, 

89, 91, 95, 96, £9, 100, 103, 109, 115, 

117, 118, 122, 131, 135, 148, 161, 165, 

167, 168, 169, 171, 181, 694 
Yaranasi-kataka or Varanasi* kataka, vi* (7), 


369, 370 

Yarasimha, tjmahgd ch., , . . . 289 

Varasimha, Vdghela ch., .... 299 

Vardhamana, vi., .... * 353 

Vardhamanakoti, vi., . . . • . 528 

Yardbamamipura, vi., ..... 341 

Varidorga, vi., ...... 142 

V&nka, t^ihe, ...... 1 

Yarmaeiva, Saiva ascetic , . . . . 605 


Yarnamana, Mana ch. of Mag ad ha , . • 362 

Yarunasena, ch., ..... 592 

Vasantadeva or Yasantas^na, IAchchhavi k. of 
Nepdl, ...... 498, 541 

Yasantapala, son (?) of Pdla Mahipala, . 59 

Vasantasena, s. a . Vasantadeva, . . . 541 

Vasavana, m. f ..... .* 605 

Vasbalaraja (Vakbalaraja), ch., . • • 260 

Yaatavy a, /amity, .... 337,418 


Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OP NORTHERN INDIA. 


119 


Numbee 

. 200 
210, 212, 213 
. . 600 
64, 315, 366, 412 
. 322 


Yastrakula, family , 

Yastupala, min . of Vi rad h aval a, 

Vasudeva, 5. a. Bhatta Yasudeva, 

Yasudeva, chiefs , 

Yasudeva, GadhadeSa ch., 

Yasula, jpoet, 

YataabhattU do ., 

Vatsadaman, Surasena ch 
Yatsadevi, queen of Paragupta, 

Yatsaddvi, queen o/oivadeva II., 

Yatsaiaja, Chdhamana prince , 

Yatsaraj*, Chaulukya {or Chalukya ?) ch. of 
LatadeSa,, . • 

Vatsaraja, Kakaredi eh., 

Vatsaraja, Mahodaya ch., 

Yatsaiaja, min. of Chandella Kirti 
Yatsaiaja, Sihgara ch., 

Yayajaladevi, queen of ViradhavaH 
Yedasarman, poet, 

Vegadevi, queen of Ishtagana, 

Yengi, vi . or co% , 

Y&ngipura, vi 
Vend, ri . , . 

Y^saladevi (?), queen o/Mabesvara, 

Vichitravirya, Trikalihga k., 

Yidagdba, Bdshtrakuta ch. of Hastikundi, 

24, 30, 53 

Vidyadatta, poet, * 

Vidyadhara, Chandella k., 

Yidyadharabhanja, ch., • • 

Vidyapati, poet, * 

Yigraba, ch. (/), • * • • 

Vigraha, Kiragrdma ch., 

Yigrakapa'a, Chd humdna (fh. of Nadula 
Vigrahapala I., Pdla k, f • • • 

Vigrahapala II., do., . . • • 

Yigrabapala III., do., 


329 

3 

539 

513 

541 

44 


356 

186, 218, 219, 419 
542, 710 
varman, . 76 

. 109 

. 344 
234, 243 
. 603 
. 509 
. 686 
159, 407 

• 22 b 

. 668 


. 604 
66, 71, 76, 334, 335 
. 658 
. 578 
. . . 543 

- 351 
. 141 

138 
. 640 
643, 644 


Number 

Yijayadeva, s. a. Kalachuri Vijayasirhha, . 186 

Yijayadhiraja, s. a. {?) Kachchhapaghata 
YijayapaU, ...... 65 

Yijayakirti, poet, . . . . .71 

Yijayanandivarman, Sdlahkdyana k., . . 686 

Yijayapala, Chandella k • 66, 76, 334, 335, 336 

VijHyajala, k., ...... 106 

Yijayapala, Kachchhapaghata k., • 65, 71 

Yijayapala, Kanauj k., . . . .39 

Yijayapahi, Kanauj (?) k., .... 60 

Yijay.ipura, villages or towns, . . 398,604 

Yijayaraja, k., ..... 667 

Yijayaraja or Vijayavarmaraja, Gujarat 
| Chalukya ch., ..... 398 

j Yijayasakti, Chandella k., . 35, 108, 146, 240 

j Yijayasena, Sena k., . . . 647, 648, 649 

i Yijayasimha, GuhUa k., . . 243, 415, 431 

Yij.iyasimha, Kalachuri k., . 186, 422, 432 

Vijayavarmaraja, Gujardt Chalukya ch., . 39S 

Yijjaka, s. a. Yijayasakti, .... 332 

Yikramaditya, . . . . .63 

Yikraniaditya, ch., . . . . .170 

Vikramaditya, sur. of Gangevadev3, . . 410 

Y iKr.m;aditya-Satyasraya*Prithivivallabha or 


Yigrabapala, Bdshtrakuta ch. of Voddmayuta, 605 
Yigrabaraja, ch., 

Vigraharaja, Chdhamana k 
Yigrabaraja (Yisaladeva), do., 

Yigrahastamblia, Pragjyotisha k 
Yiharanagari, vi., 

Yibarisiiiiba, GadhddeSa ch., 

Yija, s . a. Yijayasakti, 

Yijaya, Prdgjyoti&ha k., • 

Yijaya, 5. a. Yijayasakti, 

Vijayachaudra, Kanauj k ., 


Yijayadeva, Nepal yuvardja , 


64 
. 44 

134, 144 
. 711 
. 564 
. 322 
. 334 
. 714 

. 56 

148, 150, 151, 

153, 156 
« . 539 


-Vallabha, W. Chalukya k.. 

400, 401 

Yikramapura, ri., .... 

. 648 

Vikramarka, Chapa ch.. 

. 353 

Yikiamasahi, Tumara ch. of Gwdlior, . 

. 318 

Yikramasena, Nepal prince, 

. 501 

Yikraaiasiriiha, Guhila k., . 

243, 290 

Yikramasirbba, Kackchhapaghdta k.. 

. 71 

Yikrameudiayarmaa I. and 11., Yithnuku 

ndin 


kings , 

Yilasapura, vi., . 
Yilasapura (p), vi., 
Vinayaditya, K. Gang a k 


. 687 
. 158 
. 640 
357, 360 


YiDayaditya-Satyas'raya-Sriprithivivallabha or 


-Vallabba, 7F. Chalukya k.. 

. • 

401 

Yiuavakapala, Mahodaya ch.. 


544 

Yinayakapala, sur . (?) of Dhanga 
Vinayamahadevi, queen of an 

, • . • 

E . Gang a 

35 

Kamarnava, . . • 


357 

Yindhy.isakti, Vdkdtaka k ., 


622 

Yindhyavarinan, Paramdra k 


195 

Vindunaga, ch., . . 


11 

Ymitapura, vi., • . • 


663 

Yira, k., 


647 

Yirabaku, Prdgjyotisha k . 

. 

714 

Yiradhavala, Vaghela k., 

209, 210, 212, 



222, 249, 344 



EPIGRAPHIA IX DIC A. 


[Vo L. V. 


120 


Yirama, To mar a ch. of Gwalior, . 


XfilBEE 

. 31S 

Virarna (or Virahga r;-ddva, ch., 

• 


282 

Yiranarayana, Gad hades a ch., 



322 

Yiranarayana, V ihdranagari ch 



564 

Virauga (or Yirama) -do va, ch.. 

• 


to 

GO 

VirarajaJeva (rj, ch., , 

. 


13 

OS 

QO 

Yiraraoiadeva, Uchahadanagara ch., 



2G9 

Virasena, also called Saba, poet , min. 



Chandragupta II., . 



512 

Virasena, Sena k 



647 

Virasimha, GndhadeSa ch., . 



322 

Virasi mha, Gahga k , . 



360 

Virasimha, Guhila k., 



290 

Virasimha, Kackchhapaghdta k., 



94 

Virasimha, Tamara ch. of Gwalior , 



318 

Virasimha, V dghela ch. of Panda hide 1 



299 

Viravaruian, Chandella k.. . 226, 227, : 

231, 


239, 

240 

242, 330 

Virdchana, Gahga k., . 


. 

360 

Yisaladdva, Y dghela k ., . 222, 

225 

233, 244 

V isaladtka- Yigrahara ja, Ch dhamana 

k. 



Sdkamhhari, .... 


9 

144 

Vishnudasa, Sanakdnika ch ., 


9 

436 

Vishnugdpa, Kaacht k ., 


« 

509 

Vishnugupta, Gupta k. of Mag ad ha, 



652 

Vishnugupta, Nepal yuvaraja, • 



534 

VisKnukundin,ya»Ji7y, 



687 

Vishnupv.ra, vi., .... 



80 

Vishnurama, governor of Luachchhag 

ira , 


feudatory of Kanauj k. Bhdja, . 

. 


14 

Vishnuvardhana, s. a. Y r asddharnian« Vishnu* 


vardhana, .... 

. 

. 

4 

Vishnuvardhana, Yarika ch., 



1 

Visvaditya, ch. (?), 



642 

Visvaladeva, s. a. T dghela Visaladdva, 



344 

Yisvamalla, do., .... 



244 

Visvarupa, Gaya ch., . 



646 

Visvarupa or Vis'varupaseoa, Sena k., 


649, 650 

Vis'vavarman, ch.. 


. 

2,3 

Vitaiaga, sur. of Jayabhata I., . 347, 

348, 


349, 395, 

397, 708, 709 

Vdda (?), ch., 

• 


665 

VoJamayuta, vi., . . 

0 


605 

Vra(?)nabhanja, ch ., . 



658 

Vriddhivarman, Sthghapura ch., . 

0 

. 

600 

Yrishadeva, Lichchhavi k* of Nepal, 


494, 541 

Vyaghra, Uchchakalpa ch., 



387 

Vyaghra or V\ aghraiaja, ch.. 


m 

270 

Yvaghradeva, feudatory of Prithirishena, 

m 

618 

Vy3gln*araja, ch,, • • 

. 

9 

270 


Vyaghraraja, Mali aka ntdra k, 

Numbep. 

. . 509 

Vyaghrarata,* Yarika ch.. 

1 

Vydmasiva, Saiva ascetic , 

. . 430 


Y 


Yalava, family, .... 284, 

345, 600 

Yadavaraya, GadhddMa ch.. 

. 322 

Yajhavarman, Maukhari k.. 

. 556 

Yajnavarman, Sihghapura ch., . • 

. 600 

Yajnika, queen of Siirasena ch. Devaraja, 

. 589 

Yakshamalla, governor of Bhaktdpun, . 

. 562 

Yakshamalla, Nepal k., . . 

564, 565 

Yakshapala, Gaya ch., 

. 646 

Y’amuna, ri., ..... 

77, 83 

Yasahkarna, GadhadeSa ch . . 

<n 

CO 


Yasahkarna, KalacJiuri h., . 93, 410, 414, 

415, 422, 431, 432 


Yasahpala, k., . . , . .62 

Yasasekaudra, GadkddeSa ch., . . . 322 

Yasubala or Atiyasdbala, m. of Grahapati 


family, .... 


. 55 

Yasdbbita, Kaliriga ch., 


. 673 

Y r as6deva, Nepal k , 


. 559 

Y T as6deva, poet, . 


. 78 

YasOdevi, queen of Hdmantasena, 


. 647 

Y'asddhara, ch., . 


. 170 

Y r as6dbarman or Y’asodharman-Y'ishnuvardkana, 

K 

, . 

4, 329 

Yasddhavala, Paramdra ch. of Chandrdvati, 

. 210 

Yasomatidevi, queen of Prabhakaravardhana, 

. 528 

Yaeoraja, ch.. 

, 

. 424 

Yasdrata, Yarika ch., . 

. , 

1 

Y r asdvardhana (Jasavaddbana), 

Pratthdra 

ch., • • . . 

, . 

13, 330 

Yasdvardhana, Yarika ch., « 

, . 

1 

Yasovarman, Chandella k., . 

. 35, 54, 56, 333 

Yasovarman, Chandella prince. 

. . 

. 185 


Y'asdvannan, Paramara k . 110, 112, 12 1, 

172, 189, 195, 341 

Yasovigraha, fathers father of Kanauj k. 
Chandradera, ... 75, 84, 148, 156 


Yandheya, tribe , . • . # .588 

Yavana, k. Perdja, . . 286 

Yayati, sur. o/* Mahasivagupta, . . 663, 664 

Yayatioagara, vi., . . . . 664, 665 

Yddha, Marusthali { Maricdd ) ch., • . 301 

Ydgadeva, min. of a Pdla k., . . . 644 

Ydgamati, Nep&l princest, .... 568 



Appendix.] 


INSCRIPTIONS OF NORTHERN INDIA. 


121 



Numbbb 

Numbbb 

Y5ganai4ndramalla, ESpdl • 

. . 568 

Yuvar&ja II., Ealachuri k., 340, 407, 410, 429, 431 

Y6garaja, Guhila k. 9 . • 

. 290 


Y6ginipura, vi . (Delhi), 

. 278 


Yuddh&sura, tur. of Nandar&ja, . 

. 350 | 

z 

Yu vara ja, Eachchhapagh&ta k ^ 

. 71 


Yuvar&ja I., JLalachuri k. t . * 

407, 428, 429 

Zafar Khan, Sultan , . * 278 


CORRECTIONS. 


Page 2, line 21. — For these, read those. 

3 , No. 7. — Judging from a rubbing given to me by Prof. Bendall, I believe that this in^ 
scription is now in the British Museum ; but it has not been found jet. 

5, „ 25. — For HahipaladGva, read Mahipaladeva. 

„ 8, footnote 3, and page 10, footnote 2.— For Munshi, read Munsiff. 

12 , line 11 .— For -samkrantan, read -samkrantan. 

„ 19, No. 131. — This has been edited now in Ep . Ind . Vol. V. p. 117, 

, 41, line 18. — Insert a semicolon at the end of the line. 

„ 47, No. 331. — For Lucknow, read Lahore. 

5J 47, footnote 5, line 3. — For “91” read *' 9 1/ 

51, No. 359, and page 52, line 13.— After R5jar&ja, add [I.]. 

„ 79, line 13. — Insert a full stop at the end * of the line. 

79 , — Insert the figure “ 1 ” before the first foot-note. 

96 No. 710. — This has been edited now, with a facsimile of the date, in Ep. Ind. VoL V. 

” ’ p. 211 . 










