# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 1918-chakravarty-tantrasara-abhinavagupta.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 06:27:17
# Total Pages: 282
# File Size: 13.59 MB
# Text Layer Status: CLEAN_TEXT (avg 961.6 chars/page in sample)
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
Tantrasara 
of 
Abhinavagupta 
Translation from Sanskrit and Introduction 
by H.N. Chakravarty 
Edited by Boris Marjanovic

--- PAGE 2 ---
Tantrasara of Abhinavagupta

--- PAGE 3 ---
Tantrasara 
of 
Abhinavagupta 
Translated from Sanskrit 
with Introduction and Notes by 
H.N. Chakravarty 
Edited by Boris Marjanovic 
Preface by Swami Chetanananda 
Rudra Press

--- PAGE 4 ---
Published by Rudra Press 
P.O. Box 13310 
Portland, OR 97213-0310 
503-236-0475 
www.rudrapress.com 
Copyright© H.N. Chakravarty, 2012 
All rights reserved. No part of this work may be reproduced 
in any form or by any means without permission 
in writing from the publisher. 
Printed in the United States of America 
Cover art by Ana Capitaine -
Cover design by Guy Boster 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Abhinavagupta, Rajanaka. 
(Tantrasara. English] 
Ta~trasara of Abhinavagupta I translated from Sanskrit with 
introduction and notes by H.N. Chakravarty ; edited hy 
Boris Marjanovic ~preface by Swami Chetanananda. 
pages cm 
Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN 978-0-915801-78-7 
1. Kashmir Saivism-Early works to 1800. 2. Tantrism-Early works to 
1800. 3. Ahhinavagupta, Rajanaka. Tantraloka. I. Chakravarty, 
H · N ·' 1918-2011, translator, writer of added com men ta ry · 
II. Marjanovic, Boris, editor. III. Abhinavagupta, 
Rajanaka. Tantraloka. IV. Title. 
BL1281.154.A3513 2012 
294.5'95-dc23 
2012008126

--- PAGE 5 ---
Contents 
Preface by Swami Chetanananda 
vii 
Foreword by Boris Marjanovic 
ix 
Introduction by H.N. Chakravarty 
1 
Abhinavagupta's Tantrasara 
51 
Chapter One 
51 
Chapter Two 
58 
Chapter Three 
60 
Chapter Four 
67 
Chapter Five 
79 
Chapter Six 
87 
Chapter Seven 
101 
Chapter Eight 
107 
Chapter Nine 
123 
Chapter Ten 
135 
Chapter Eleven 
140 
Chapter Twelve 
148 
Chapter Thirteen 
152 
Chapter Fourteen 
168 
Chapter Fifteen 
173 
IV

--- PAGE 6 ---
VI 
CONTENTS 
Chapter Sixteen 
175 
Chapter Seventeen 
179 
Chapter Eighteen 
181 
Chapter Nineteen 
183 
Chapter Twenty 
186 
Chapter Twenty-One 
201 
Chapter Twenty-Two 
205 
Notes 
215 
Bibliography 
265 
About the Translator 
267 
About Rudra Press 
269

--- PAGE 7 ---
Preface 
One day in May of 1980 in South Fallsburg, I was sitting in my 
room in between programs at the Siddha Yoga Ashram reading 
some science fiction book, when Muktananda came in the room. 
As always, when Swami Muktananda came in the room, every-
body's foreheads immediately hit the floor, and that day was no 
exception. Mine was on the floor immediately. The first thing 
Muktananda did in looking around the room while I was on the 
floor was to note there was a book on the bed. He asked me what 
it was. I told him, and he said, '"Don't read that; read Kashmir 
Saivism." And that began my decades-long interest in the study of 
what is now cal led Sakta-Saivism. 
One of the great deficiencies that those of us who have an inter-
est in Saivism have suffered under is the absence of qualified 
scholars who are willing to engage in translation projects. The 
Buddhists are fortunate enough to have living traditions-esoteric 
Saivism lost its last living lineage holder with the passing of 
Swami Lakshman Joo-and a great deal of reserve of both cultural 
and financial capital in the organizations that promote Vajrayana 
Buddhism, and none of this has existed in support of those of us 
who have great interest in esoteric Saivism. Because of that, I have 
caused many different works to become translated. 
This particular project has been going on so long, I can't even 
remember when it started. After Swami Muktananda passed away, 
I began visiting Swami Lakshman Joo in Srinagar. I was never 
really able to stay there long enough to really study with him or to 
consider myself a student of his, hut I was and am a great admirer 
VII

--- PAGE 8 ---
VIII 
PREFACE 
of him. His blending of intellectual development and a uniquely 
human quality of compassion was really extraordinary. and he was 
an extremely beautiful person. Sometime in the early 1990s, how-
ever, it became too difficult to go to Kashmir, because of the poli-
tics of the place. Still intent on continuing my reading and study 
of Kashmir Saivism, and having met all the Kashmiri pandits, I 
went to Benares to meet Pandit H.N. Chakravarty. In doing so, I 
also met many of the people associated with him in Benares, such 
as Bettina Baumer and Pandit Kamalakar Mishra, whose work on 
Kashmir Saivism I published more than a decade ago. At the time 
I met Pandit Chakravarty, I requested him to translate the Tan-
trasara into English, and he agreed. And so we launched on the 
project, and it was a couple of years later that he delivered a manu-
script which, in fact, was absolutely unreadable. While his knowl-
edge of Saivism was deep, his English was extremely limited, and 
there was really nothing I could do about the publication of the 
manuscript; it was just impossible. So it languished for years, until 
th~re was pressure from Chakravarty's side and from some of his 
fnends in Canada for us to do something about the manuscript. 
What eventually came about was that Boris Marjanovic took on 
the project, and it was really his effort to bring a readable English 
translation of the Tantrasara out that has given renewed 1 i fe to this 
pr?ject and ultimately brought it to the extremely fine state that it 
IS Ill. 
Boris Marjanovic deserves an enormous amount of credit for 
the existence of this manuscript in the quality that it is. I am grate-
ful to Pandit H.N. Chakravarty and to all of his friends, including 
Bettina Baumer, for her support, and I am especially grateful to 
Boris Marjanovic. 
Swami Chetanananda 
January. 2012

--- PAGE 9 ---
Foreword 
Tantrasara (TS), as its name suggests, is the summary of impor-
tant notions, principles, doctrines, and practices found in the Tan-
tras in general and in the Tantraloka (TA) in particular. The TA is 
Abhinavagupta's most extensive work on the principles of nondual 
Saiva doctrines written in verse, while the TS, which is its sum-
mary, is significantly shorter and written in prose. 
It was the tradition of some of the ancient pandits belonging 
to different schools of Indian thought to write brief and simpli-
fied versions of the main principles and doctrines of their schools. 
The purpose of this practice was to provide those interested in the 
subject but unable to devote years of study to Sanskrit grammar 
and logic, deemed prerequisites for the study of any other branch 
of learning, with a simplified and comprehensible overview of the 
main principles of their respective schools. Abhinavagupta and 
his disciple K~emaraja wholeheartedly embraced this practice. As 
early as the second benedictory verse of the TS, Abhinavagupta 
declares the complexity, vastness, and depth of the topics dis-
cussed in the TA as the main reason for writing its short version. 
The primary aim of the TS is to make knowledge easily acces-
sible; thus, Abhinavagupta avoids getting into complex and lengthy 
philosophical arguments and elaboration, and lays out the subject 
matter smoothly and concisely. For us, on the other hand, who 
are attempting to study and to understand this text a millennium 
later, the brevity of the style of the TS presents a significant chal-
lenge. Furthermore, the Sanskrit used by Abhinavagupta in the TS 
is not easy, and the notions and practices found in it are obscure 
lX

--- PAGE 10 ---
x 
FOREWORD 
and sometimes incomprehensible. It is because of these difficulties 
that this text remains inaccessible not only to the general public 
but also to Sanskrit scholars and Indologists whose specialty is 
outside of Tantric studies. However, it should be pointed out here 
that a reader at the time of Abhinavagupta would have experi-
enced significantly less difficulty in understanding this text than 
we are experiencing today, especially when it comes to ritual prac-
tices and observances. The reason for this is that the tradition was 
alive and its teaching and practices were widespread and therefore 
understandable to those interested in learning them. 
For example, in Chapter Sixteen, Abhinavagupta speaks of 
the application of the net Ualaprayoga), the procedure by which 
the initiator catches the departed souls during the ritual of ini-
tiation. There he explains that these departed souls, for one rea-
son or another, hadn't received initiation before their death but 
deserved to be initiated because of their service to the teacher 
or some other devout activity. It is the command of Siva, Abhi-
navagupta further clarifies, that the teacher, through the appl ica-
tion of the net, should bring a departed soul to enter the figure 
of ku, a grass that represents a departed devotee, and then per-
form the initiation procedure. This knowledge, according to Abhi-
navagupta's own admission, was transmitted to him orally by his 
teacher Sambhunatha. It is difficult to fully comprehend from the 
available sources what the nature, method, and application of this 
practice were. It seems clear, however, that the power of the deep 
meditation of the teacher was believed to be the deciding factor for 
the success of the entire process. 
As already pointed out, the brevity of the style of the TS pre-
sents a serious difficulty in understanding this text. Fortunately, 
these doctrines are often discussed at length by the same author 
in his TA as well as in his other works. The translator then is 
required to read the TA along with the TS if intent on grasping 
the meaning and wider context of topics discussed. Thus, the TA 
and the TS complement each other, although on rare occasions the 
translator is fortunate to find additional information or explana-

--- PAGE 11 ---
FOREWORD 
XI 
tions in the TS itself that were left out and not elaborated on in the 
TA. This conforms to the style of Abhinavagupa that he adopted 
from his teacher Sambhunatha, which was not to keep knowledge 
completely hidden but also not to reveal it all at one place or in a 
single book. This. of course, is meant to provide necessary prac-
tice for students as well as to test their devotion to knowledge. 
Finally. Abhinavagupta refers to a number of Tantric and other 
texts that are now lost to us. including the Bhairavakulormi Tan-
tra, Nityti Tantra, Paramesvaranuttara Tantra, Tantrasadbhtiva 
Tantra, Yogasmhctira, and other texts which have clearly influ-
enced his thought. Fortunately, in recent years some of these texts, 
such as Tantrasadbhtiva Tantra.were edited and made available to 
scholars. 
My association with Pandit Chakravarty goes back to 1997. At 
that time I lived in Varanasi with the intention of reading Sanskrit 
texts with Prof. Shri Narayana Mishra. Shri Narayana Mishra was 
the first and the most important of my teachers during the time I 
worked on my Ph.D. thesis and other projects. It is because of his 
selfless teaching style that I learned how to read and understand 
stistric texts. 
As I was primarily interested in Kashmiri Saiva philosophy 
and practices, I began to visit the home of Pandit Chakravarty. a 
renowned Tantric scholar with profound understanding of Kash-
miri Saivism. His recognition as a scholar was derived from his 
1 i felong study of Sanskrit and its philosophy. but more than that, 
his recognition came from his close association with Mahamaho-
padhyaya Gopinath Kaviraj. During one of many conversations 
that we had. I found out that in addition to already publishing his 
translation of the TS in Hindi, he had also completed the Eng-
lish translation of the same text. Furthermore. he told me that he 
had suhm itted the manuscript for publication to Rud ra Press many 
years ago. However. for reasons unknown to him. the publication 
of his work had never taken place. It was only several years later 
when I met Sharon Ward. the head of Rudra Press at that time. 
that I learned the reason: She explained to me that they felt that

--- PAGE 12 ---
XII 
TANTRASARA 
the translation was in need of a good editor, which, because of the 
complexity of the text, they were unable to provide. It was then 
that she suggested that I work together with Pandit Chakravarty 
and help him put the translation of the TS into English that would 
be understandable to a wider audience. 
When we began to work together in the summer of 2004, I soon 
discovered that the problem with Pandit Chakravarty's English 
translation was not the lack of knowledge of the English language 
on his part but his desire and insistence on I iteral translations. 
Thus, his English translation preserved the syntax of Sanskrit sen-
tences, which, combined with the obscurity of the text, resulted 
in English sentences that were incomprehensible. We spent the 
next two years going carefully through the text sentence by sen-
tence. In addition to helping him to express the Sanskrit text in 
simple and easily understandable English sentences I have written 
explanatory note for Chapters Twelve through Twenty-Two as well 
as several notes for Chapter Nine. 
Generally speaking, the problem with reading translations of 
Sanskrit philosophical texts is that a reader is usually unfamil-
iar with the style and technical terminology used by the ancient 
Sanskrit authors. Sanskrit philosophical literature is specialized 
literature, the understanding of which requires training. Thus, the 
readers of this translation might find it difficult to grasp the mean-
ing of some parts of this text. In order to overcome this problem, 
Pandit Chakravarty conveniently summarized each chapter of TS 
and included it in his Introduction. I strongly recommend that any-
one who makes the effort to study this text in depth first carefully 
read his Introduction. 
Boris Marjanovic 
Los Angeles 
December 18, 2011

--- PAGE 13 ---
Introduction 
Chapter One 
The Tantrasara begins by stating that perfect knowledge (pflr~ia­
pratha) is the cause of liberation. It is the revelation of Siva-nature 
in one's own Self. Siva, who by His power of freedom (svatantrya 
sakti) appears to be limited in knowledge and action, removes all 
veils by the same power. As a result of this, He shines in His pris-
tine, self-refulgent, pure consciousness. On the dawn of supreme 
knowledge of the nature of light (prakasa), marked by reflective 
self-knowledge (vimarsa), everything shines nondifferently in the 
mirror of consciousness. While describing the nature of mok~a, 
Abhinavagupta writes in the Paramartha-sara that there is no 
separate region of it, nor is one to proceed toward it, but it is to 
be realized by piercing the knots of ignorance by virtue of the 
full development of one's own power of freedom. However. mok~a 
should not be taken as the effect of knowledge (j1za11a) and the lat-
ter the cause of it, but as the manifestation of the real nature of the 
Self (atman). 
According to this Savadvaya system, ignorance is accepted as 
the cause of salizsara, yet the nature of ajiiana is known as a~wva 
ma/a, a limitation innate in the individual. It originates from the 
absolute freedom of the Lord. The a~zavamala operates in the indi-
vidual soul in two ways: (i) the loss to consciousness of its free-
dom, and (ii) the sense of agency without bodha. This limitation of 
j11a11a and kriya is known as spiritual (paun1~a) and intellectual/ 
scriptural (bauddha) ignorance (ajiiana). 
Ignorance, known as bauddha ajiiana. is of the nature of inde-
termination (aniscayasvablzavam) and determination of contradic-

--- PAGE 14 ---
2 
TANTRASARA 
tory nature (viparltanifraya). Because of the presence of the first, 
the individual soul in bondage fails to definitely know the real 
nature of the Self, and because of the second one, experiences 
and feels himself to be the experiencing subject of what is really 
non-self, such as: body, intellect, prarza, etc. Pauru~a ajiiana, 
characterized by limited knowledge brought into existence by 
til}avamala, is considered by Abhinavagupta and his tradition to 
be the cause of worldly existence. 
Pauru~a ajfiana can be removed by initiation (dlk~a), but a 
person cannot avail himself of it while the impurity known as 
bauddha ajfiana lying in his intellect remains. This is because 
initiation is necessarily preceded by the firm conviction regard-
ing right knowledge of the things to be avoided, and right knowl-
edge of the things to be accepted (heyopadeyaniscaya). Right 
knowledge can only be obtained from the sacred literature (sastra) 
taught by Paramesvara. He is the highest authority and origin of 
all sacred literatures. These revealed texts are the givers of release 
to the souls in bondage. The number of the revealed texts known 
as agamas are ten, eighteen, and sixty-four. For Abhinavagupta, 
the essence of them is the Trika system, and the most important of 
them is the Malinlvijaya Tantra. 
Abhinavagupta writes that he will give an exposition of the 
1:f a!inlvijaya, for he argues that unless the real nature of things 
Is determined, one will be unable to attain liberation. It is pure 
knowled~e alone that possesses the quality of bestowing relea~e. 
The highest principle, which is of the nature of light, is Siva. 
He, the most desirable of all, is one's own unique nature (sva-
~hava). Light (prakasa) is pure consciousness, which is the very 
hfe of everything; though shining in all, it shines as blue and jar 
distinctly, separate from each other. This notion of separateness, 
the knowledge of duality, is considered to be ajfiana, but pure 
consciousness (caitanya) is really knowledge (jnana). It is uni-
versal (sarvasamanya). It is present everywhere, and possesses 
absolute freedom of wisdom and activity (jiianakriytivan). The 
non-shining of this universal light to the person who is limited is 
the primary ignorance of the Self.

--- PAGE 15 ---
INTRODUCTION 
3 
The light of which we have spoken above is independent. Its 
independence means that it depends on nothing. It is all-encom-
passing, eternal, has the nature of assuming all forms, and at the 
same time it is without any form (sarvakaranirakara svabhava). 
Its absolute freedom is the "power of bliss" (ananda sakti), the 
relish of one's own bliss (ananda) is iccha sakti, its self-reflective 
light is j11anasakti, its unifying relation with all is kriyasakti. 
Siva, though associated with all His principal saktis, always 
remains free from limitations and rests in His blissful nature. 
When, by His absolute freedom of will, He manifests Himself as 
limited, He is then known as the bonded soul or limited know-
ing subject (a~zu). Then, as a result of self-recognition, He again 
shines as Siva, marked by absolute freedom and unlimited light. 
By virtue of His absolute freedom, He either shines without any 
means (anupaya) or sometimes with means (upaya). These upayas, 
the ways of absorption of the individual consciousness into the 
divine, may be of the nature of iccha, jiiana, or kriya. These 
ice ha, jiia na, and kriya are the saktis of Siva. When a yo gin 
is able to grasp any of them, it becomes easy for him to attain 
Siva. As the means (upaya) are three, so the forms of absorption 
(samavesa) are also three; hence they are known as sambhava, 
sakta, and a~zava samavesas. 
This, in short, is the summary of the first chapter of the Tan-
trasara. 
Chapter Two 
The second chapter begins with a brief presentation of anupaya. 
Anupaya is not counted under any upaya on account of its subtlety, 
and even more, because the person on whom the most intense 
descent of grace (saktipata) has fallen does not have any need for 
internal or external help in order to realize his identity with Siva. 
The word of the teacher, heard only once, places him on the tran-
scendent path (anuttarapatha), the stable ground of the blissful 
nature of Sakti, upon which he at once realizes the self-manifest 
Lord as his own very Self.

--- PAGE 16 ---
4 
TANTRASARA 
Siva is eternal; therefore there is no possibility of realizing 
Him by any means (upaya). As He is self-manifest, the means can-
not add anything to Him. If it is said that some means would assist 
in the removal of the veils, then this is untenable, for there is no 
~ltimate existence of any of the veils. In the same way, the ques-
tion of the merger of the one into the other cannot stand, for there 
is the total absence of two separate entities. This chain of reason-
able arguments causes a firm conviction to manifest in the aspi-
rant. As a result of this conviction, he realizes that the Absolute, 
..tte mass .. o! bliss, is the single Truth, and that Siva is the UI~iversal 
am ~e m whom everything shines inseparably in the mirror of 
~onsciousness. Thus, when firmly contemplated, he finds himself 
m absorption, in oneness, with the divine. 
, _ In the Tantraloka, Jayaratha comments that in the sa mblzava, 
sa~ta, and a~1ava upayas, there is a possibility that duality may 
anse because of the functioning of icclul, jiitina, and kriya saktis; 
for example, iccha becomes externally inclined because of the 
phresence of something desirable (esaniya) in the core of icclul. On 
t e other h 
d · 
· 
· 
· 
f' -
I 
, 
. 
an , m anupaya because of the funct1onmg o ananc. a 
Sakt1 Wh · h · 
. 
' 
. 
· 
f 
' 
ic Is said to be Brahman Himself, there IS not even a tint 
o an upay 
. . 
. 
a ex1stmg as separate from 1t. 
Chapter Three 
The atman h 
· f 
f 
as the characteristics of light and freedom, and 1s ree 
rom all th 
, 
is 
. 
ought constructs (vikalpa). It is Siva, the absolute. It 
Without Parts, the integral whole of infinite light that encom-
passes everyth· 
· 
· 
h d 
mg-the smgle realm of hght where thoug t 
oes 
not reach (ni 
·k l 
. 
· 
I · 
· 
· rvz a pcukadhaman). Although an ordinary sou . 111 Its 
contracted t 
. 
· · 
sate as a result of the influence of the three impurities 
(malas!, is not different from that light, it is unable to conceive this, 
and fails to realize its identity with that light. As soon as grace 
descends on it, even a little he begins to realize the truth, and by a 
5.udden flash. he is able to ~erceive that light without the interven-
tion of any upaya. This perception is direct and immediate.

--- PAGE 17 ---
INTRODUCTION 
5 
In this perception of light there is no separate entity to be 
reflected upon. It is of the nature of self-reflection and has the 
characteristic of vibration. Here the yogin resorts to icchti sakti as 
a means for realizing his identity with that light. 
The absolute freedom of the Lord (svatantrya sakti), men-
tioned above, causes the images of entities (bhavas) to manifest in 
the clear mirror of pure consciousness. The bhtivas cannot shine 
by themselves; they shine in the void of consciousness as reflec-
tions. For this reason, the Lord is said to be immanent. As this 
sakti is sentient, not inert, so too is its timarsa or cognition; that is, 
her self-reflection continues ceaselessly. Her self-reflective nature 
is known as paranada, which in the agama literature is repre-
sented as a goddess called partivtik, the Supreme Sound. 
Speech (vak) is sakti and is not different from reflective aware-
ness (vimarsa). The saktis which extend and assume the form of 
the universe are chiefly three: anuttara, iccha, and unme~a. Basi-
cally, they are nothing but the nature of reflection (partlmarsa), 
assuming the syllabic form of the letters, such as: "a," "i," "u." It 
is from them that all the saktis originate. The fifty syllables of 
the Sanskrit alphabet come broadly under two groups: the sixteen 
letters from a to visarga are known as vowels, and the rest, from 
ka to ha, are consonants. The vowels are the seeds (bijas) and the 
consonants are the receptacles (yonis) for receiving the seeds. 
Primarily, the Lord who is anuttara becomes ananda, which 
is the self-reflection of universal consciousness (cit). As cit in 
its slight vibration becomes intent on externality, it is known as 
ananda. Similarly, iccha becomes isana when it rests in icchti. In 
the same way, llrmi is the reflective unme~a. As syllables, these 
three are indicated by "a," "i," "u." From u onward, kriya sakti 
begins to function. The former three paramarsas have the charac-
teristics of praktisa. Hence, they are of the nature of the sun, and 
the latter para ma rs as. the long vowels "tt," '' r." "fl," are of the 
nature of soma or moon, with the characteristic of rest. 
When icchti and lsana become inclined toward activity, or, in 
other words, when activity enters them, disturbance sets in, which

--- PAGE 18 ---
6 
TANTRASARA 
causes a break within that tranquility. Then iccha and I.Sana are 
known as i$yama!:za. In one, the light is predominant. while the 
other is of the nature of rest. They are known as "r," ""r." "I," 
"!." They are the only semivowels, and are unlike the consonant 
sounds of ra and la; therefore they are not considered consonants 
as such. Since they retain both the vowel and consonant sounds, 
they are considered to be neuter. 
The creative movement which proceeds to flow from anuttara 
gives rise to different syllables. The impelling force of kriya sakti 
terminates after giving rise to the var~zas like "e," ''ai," ··a," and 
"au." After that, the inward movement begins to operate. As a 
result of this, the resultants are then put to rest in anuttara. It is to 
be noted here that this anuttara is different from anuttara known 
as akara, the supreme Bhairava. It manifests as a1.n, which is pure 
consciousness in essence. From that anuttara, visarga unfolds . 
. Visarga, better known as visarga sakti, is the creative force 
which manifests herself as the universe. She remains inseparably 
united with the Absolute before the rise of agitation in it. The uni-
ve~se as we see it is the manifestation of light as indicated objects 
(vacya~, and in turn, the reflection of that light stands for each 
of th.e Indicative sounds as represented by "a," "a," "i," etc. The 
~a?ifestation that occurs in this twofold way (vclcya and vacaka) 
is, 10 reality, the manifestation of vak, the supreme speech. The 
s~pre~e, known as akula, is possessed of power (sakti) which 
give.s rise to th~ universe. This power is called kaulikl sakti. She 
retams the umverse within herself in a very subtle form. but 
because of the creative impulse expands herself in three stages. 
These stages of creation are internal but are projected externally 
by t?e Lord by means of His visarga sakti. Creation, as known to 
us. IS predominantly of the nature of difference or duality (bheda)~ 
this is the gross form of creation. In the language of the aga-
mas, it is known as c7~wva visarga, creation on the objective level. 
The creation in which difference and nondifference (bhed{/bheda) 
shine is called sakta visarga; this is the subtle form of creation. 
The creation of nondual nature is known as sambhava visarga. the 
subtlest of all creations.

--- PAGE 19 ---
INTRODUCTION 
7 
A~wva visarga shines externally in a gross form. The entire 
creation consists of the instrument of knowledge and the object 
of knowledge (pram{u:za and pranzeya), and knowledge with its 
limited nature shines as mutually different and also different from 
the Self. In sakta visarga, however, the universe shines in a dual-
nondual relation. In a~wva visarga, difference is predominant. It 
is of the characteristic of ha' while in sakta visarga, all that is 
experienced (seen, heard, touched, etc.) by the self is obliterated. 
The universe becomes perfectly intent on pure consciousness. It is 
the awakening of citta toward cit. Citta, though cit by nature, in 
its empirical consciousness becomes the experiencing subject, and 
in its view all objects shine as different from it. This occurs due 
to the subject-object relationship. Because of this relationship, the 
universe shines with a variety of objects. At this stage, cit, the 
experiencing subject of the world-picture, descends down to the 
level of citta by imposing upon itself the limitations of objects. 
In sakta visarga, citta is not shining as the subject and its 
objects with their mutual differences, but rather, it is shining as 
one with consciousness. In the former case, the resting and ter-
minating of citta is in objects having limitations, while here it 
is submerging all sorts of limitations into all-inclusive pure con-
sciousness. For this reason, it is known as citta sambodha, the 
awakening of citta; that is, in this stage, citta becomes intent on 
offering itself in the partless nature of Siva, who is characterized 
as integral Light. 
In sambhava visarga, however, there shines neither difference 
nor non-difference; even the universe is absent there; moreover, 
not even the slightest trace of citta is perceptible. It shines as uni-
versal consciousness (cit), free from all limitations, and remains 
completely refulgent in its perfection. This is the highest visarga, 
characterized by ananda. 
The person who has realized his identity with that light experi-
ences that everything from the earth to Siva shines in the mirror 
of consciousness. The very nature of sambhavopaya is this kind 
of comprehension. Abhinavagupta has presented this idea in the 
Tantrtiloka in this way: Bhairava, the clear void of consciousness,

--- PAGE 20 ---
8 TANTRASARA 
creates the picture of the universe in Himself. He manifests it and 
experiences: "I am the universe." Thus, He assumes an immanent 
nature; this is His function of creation. Then, He maintains the 
six-fold paths and experiences them as being reflected in Himself. 
Thus, He is the one who manifests maintenance. Lastly, the entire 
universe is withdrawn and dissolved into the flame of all-consum-
ing fire; this is His function of dissolution. 
The person who is able to realize the partless one as the 
single, integral unity of consciousness in which these three 
functions-creation, maintenance, and dissolution-have their rise 
and rest, is absorbed in the supreme by means of sambhavopaya. 
Chapter Four 
The highest end for human beings is to attain the very nature of 
Paramasiva, who is ever free from determinacy or "thought con-
structs" (vikalpa). One is able to rid oneself of thought constructs 
by means of pure reasoning (sattarka), by listening to holy texts 
known as agamas, and by following the teachings of a spiritual 
teacher Th 
· 
· 
· 
h · 
· 
e practice of contemplating or v1ew111g everyt mg as 
the essential reality (Siva) is the means by which one is able to rise 
abov_e impure thought constructs (asuddha-vikalpas). The Tan-
trasara states that one considers oneself bound because of vikal-
pas. The wrong conception of one's true nature as body, etc., is 
the ca.use of mundane existence; however, when a vikalpa of the 
?PP.OSite nature pure "thought construct" (suddha-vikalpa) is born, 
1
~ dispels the wrong kind of thought construct, places one on the 
right path, and enables one to attain the highest good. 
Though pure thought constructs are of no avail in revealing the 
natu~e of Paramasiva, the supreme reality, for it is everywhere 
and lil every way ever luminous, it is the considered opinion of 
the author that pure vikalpas remove the sense of duality from the 
Self. The sense of duality is not something positive, but is only 
ignorance (aklzyati) of one's essential nature. This sense of duality 
is removed by pure thought constructs (suddha-vikalpa). 
Pure knowledge (suddhavidya) leads to sattarka, or pure rea-

--- PAGE 21 ---
INTRODUCTION 
9 
soning. One should bear in mind that sattarka is distinct from the 
form of gross reasoning as understood in the Nyaya system, for 
it is said that sattarka arises by itself in a person whom sakti has 
keenly touched. This tarka leads to the continuity of ideas similar 
to suddha-vikalpa. It is stated in the Tantrasara: The supreme 
reality is unlimited by nature and consists of an undivided singu-
larity of consciousness. It transcends all the principles of limited 
nature which terminate in Siva. This renders stability to all and is 
the vitality of universe. Through it the universe "throbs" with life, 
and that is "I" (alzam). 
The continuous practice of sattarka regarding the nature of 
reality brings about the purity of "thought constructs." The high-
est excellence of sattarka terminates in blzavana, by which one is 
able to make manifest as distinct even the most indistinct. 
In some, sattarka may arise by itself, without the need for 
recourse to any spiritual guide or the reading of holy texts. When 
it is enlivened in a person, he is considered to have been initiated 
by the luminous goddesses of his own consciousness (smrzviddevis), 
the deities personifying consciousness itself. 
However. the person on whom the grace of the Lord has 
descended less keenly should be initiated by the spiritual teacher, 
after which he is able to secure the right of listening to agamas, 
which by their proper understanding help one to become free from 
doubts. Afterwards. the truth that is contained in the agama gives 
rise to sattarka in him. 
Sattarka is the light of '"pure knowledge" (suddlzavidya). It is 
considered to be the most excellent and direct limb of yoga. It is 
stated in the Tantrasa ra that yoga is also a kind of vikalpa, but 
that it is characterized by intensive awareness (anusandlzanatma) 
regarding essential reality. For the purpose of keeping the essen-
tial reality ever luminous in his view, the _vogin takes recourse to 
this form of vikalpa for the maturity of his awareness. 
Paramesvara is by nature pure consciousness and is ever ful 1. 
His fullness is His Sakti. the Divine I-consciousness. By the grace 
of suddhavidya. one has recourse to cit §akti, which finally leads 
the aspirant to Sambhu, the Lord.

--- PAGE 22 ---
10 
TANTRASARA 
Chapter Five 
When a thought construct (vikalpa) cannot become pure hy i tseI f, 
and one has to depend on other means for its purification, the 
aspirant is decidedly staying in the lower stage of spiritual devel-
opment; in other words, in him saktiptita has occurred to a lesser 
degree. Therefore, for the purification of vikalpas, and because he 
is limited himself, he resorts to means that are also Ii mired. Hence, 
the individual takes up practices of the intellect (buddlzi), vital 
energy (prru;a), or the body itself for this purpose. 
Among these kinds of aspirants, those more advanced proceed 
on the path of meditation (dhydna). The Tan trasti ra gives a brief 
account of how this contemplative meditation is to he performed. 
Though it is called dhyana, it is quite distinct from the dhyanas 
f
00 n~ in va_rious_holy t~xts, especially those in ~h ich the as pi rant 
magmes his desired deity as having a face and limbs. 
The Tantrasara describes dhyana in the following manner: In 
the core of his conscious heart the aspirant meditates upon the 
s.elf-luminous essential reality 'which abides in all. This medita-
tio · 
' 
~is to be performed in such a way that the three-namely, the 
s~bJect, the instrument of knowledge and the object, representing 
fire th 
' 
d 
h 
' e sun, and the moon respectively-have coalesce to get er 
and be co 
h 
· 
' 
· 
TI · 
d 
. . 
met e unity of a single mass of consciousness. 
11s me -
ltat1on is t b 
h . 
"d 
. . 
0 e continued as long as they have t eir separate i en-
tities, until they shine as one light and blaze up as the fire of the 
tgrealt Lord. This fire is to be meditated upon as surrounded by 
we ve Kalis Th 
I 
· 
f 
. 
· 
ese Ktills are none but the flames of the whee of 
1 Ire. This fire should be thought of as emitting rays through out-
ers such as the eyes, which take their rest on the object of external 
sens~s. The object is to be thought of as being nourished hy the 
creative energy of the moon, then it is maintained and made mani-
;est ?Y the sun, and finally it is dissolved by the energy of fire so 
hat Jt may be drawn inside and made transcendent (a 11 u ffa ra). 
Wh~n this type of dhycina is continuously performed, the aspi-
rant quickly realizes that every object and idea is nothing hut the 
essence of pure consciousness. He further realizes that c re at ion 
and other functions are essentially the play of the Lord.

--- PAGE 23 ---
INTRODUCTION 
11 
After dlzya na, the text gives a description of ucca ra. The 
upward movement of pra~za is commonly known as uccara; how-
ever, ucctira has the characteristics of spanda, which is the very 
soul of it. 
Prti ~za is of two kinds, one general (samtinya) and the other 
specific (vise~a). In the former, difference of any sort is totally 
absent, while in the latter. because of distinct activities the same 
' 
pra~w shows itself in five forms, known as pra~za, apana, samana, 
udllna, and vyclna. It is quite evident that these five have their 
base in the general prti ~za. 
Because of the vibrating movement of prti ~za, inarticulate 
sound. known as the '"unstruck" sound (antihatanada), becomes 
manifest. It sounds continuously, without any break, in the heart 
of every living being. This nada is associated with two bi}as, 
namely sr!jtiblja (sa) and salizharabi}a (ha). 
The activity of pra~za functions without any conscious effort on 
the part of the I iving being. Usually prd ~za moves along the chan-
nels of ida and pingala. The middle path remains blocked for the 
ordinary human being. When, by the grace of the spiritual teacher. 
the middle path opens up, then the aspirant's journey toward the 
supreme begins. 
The aspirant realizes that the movement of pra~za is associated 
with Sak ti. It is she who, in the form of ha1J1sa, is moving forward 
and is the real mover of pra~w. At that time, the aspirant realizes 
that she gets the two bljas nourished in the two places of their 
origin, namely, the heart (11rdaya) and dvadasanta, the top of the 
head. Upon this realization, the yogin feels that the pra~za, before 
its rise, takes rest in the void of the hearc then, by its externaliza-
tion as apana, the external objects not only shine forth but also get 
nourished by apana, the moon. The yogin then experiences the 
all-pervasive nature of pra~w. On account of specific activities of 
prd ~za in various parts of the body, the yo gin experiences various 
kinds of delights according to his aptitude in causing the prti~za to 
rest in these spots. These delights (llnanda) are named 11irtina11da 
and others. They are six in number. 
By the experience of these delights in different parts of the

--- PAGE 24 ---
12 
TANTRASARA 
. 
. hest place of rest is some-
body, he finally realizes that the_ h1g Ultimately, he realizes the 
where other than the body and pra~w.. 
1 bliss (J·agadananda), 
. 
k 
s umversa 
highest form of delight, nown a 
. 
h. 
s in all directions and 
in which there is no limitation, for it s we emains. It expresses 
. . 
· 
s alone r 
where ever-shmmg consc10usnes 
ledge and the known 
f know 
' 
itself as the knower, the means 0 
d. ·ne J· 0 y of absolute sov-
f the ivi 
objects. It expands by the nectar 0 
templation. 
ereignty in which there is no need for con 
nd apana are two fac-
, 
h 
rana a 
. 
It should be noted here also t at P_ 
·1 ·on and creation, while 
· 
f disso uo 
tors which perform the functions o 
in the inner vi$uvat, the 
samana balances the two pulls of energy 
. ns to flow a long the 
void. Then udana, the upper current, b:g~omes vyana, the all-
middle path. Finally, the vital e.nergY 
e their end. 
pervading one in which all limi~ations h:V:servation of. two ~l!as 
The yogin, by means of his clo~e 
5 free from 1mpunt1es. 
mentioned above, should make his vikafpaering the place of rest 
Then, according to his proficiency of. en~ first experiences the 
in different parts of the body (vi§rantt ), 
e d by udbhava, ka mpa, 
delights (anandas) mentioned above, followe they are experienced 
nidrai, and ghlirni. The bodily centers wher~elu, and dvadasanta. 
are known as muladhara, kanda, hrdaya. ktmdalinl, is the place 
Dvcidasanta, which is known also as urdh~L It is of the character-
where the difference of Sakti and Siva en ~t~panda). 
· · 
f " · b 
· 
" (s am v 1 
1st1c o 
v1 ration of consciousness 
· 
. s ever present, but it 
The inarticulate sound (anahatanada) ~of pra~w, which gives 
becomes manifest by the rhythmic moverne; be borne in mind that 
rise to var~za, or syllabic sound. It sh0U\ is the cause of syllables. 
this nada is not properly called vanza, as 1. hara (sa and ha) are the 
Seed mantras (bljas) known as sr$ti_ and 5~
1~ anahtit~nada becomes 
two chief syllables in association with w~tc his mind 111 them so that 
manifest. Therefore, the yogin tries to ft~ 
5 hearing the nada by 
H 
racuce 
l 
. 
t 
ct· 
. 
he may get the touch of nada. 
e P 
. a vowe 01 no en 1 ng 1 n 
Uttering different syllables either ending in ·n all the var~ws, latent 
·des t 
any voweL for he knows that nada abt 
mind the ever-sounding 
in an undivided form. Even by calling to ciousness. 
nada he experiences identity with pure cons

--- PAGE 25 ---
INTRODUCTION 
13 
Chapter Six 
Chapter Six describes the method for the realization of essen-
tial reality by external means. In the preceding chapter, Abhi-
navagupta describes a~wvopaya, which helps the aspirant attain 
absorption into the divine Self through the means of uccara, 
dhyana, var~w, and kara~za. The present section discusses how 
a yogin adopts pra~zavayu as the means for attaining his or her 
desired goal. 
From this chapter onward, whatever is described up to Chap-
ter Twelve comes under the "formation of the place" (sthanapra-
kalpana). The locations are three: the vital energy, the body, and 
other external objects. 
The six paths (adhvas) are immense. They have their base in 
general pra ~w, while the adhva known as time (kala) has its base 
in a specific pra~w. 
The objects shine in two ways, either with sequence or with-
out any sequence. The act of confining anything within limits 
(kalana) is the function of time (kala). Although pure conscious-
ness is free from all limiting adjuncts, the universe in the form 
of the knower and the known is made manifest by its freedom of 
will. As a result, they shine forth with their distinctive and limited 
character. The agency of the delimiting power of consciousness is 
known as kala sakti, which is power in the form of time. However, 
before the apparent externalization of objects, sequence and non-
sequence remain latent in its pure nature. The entire universe not 
only remains inseparably one with the light (prakasa), but in order 
to show itself as limited, praktisa at first negates the universe 
and experiences '"I am transcending the universe.'' Thus, the void 
(frinya) transcending everything is known as sanya pramtita, the 
knowing subject of the void. 
Because of its association with impurity (ti~wva mala), the 
knowing subject of the void (sunya pramatcl) becomes externally 
inclined. and the universe that was previously rejected or negated 
is now thought of as the most desirable object. Then a vibrating 
upsurge occurs in it, which shows itself as pra~za.

--- PAGE 26 ---
14 
TANTRASARA 
Pra~w is the first expansion of consciousness. It shows itself as 
spanda, the very nature of self-reflection. For this reason. pra ~za 
is said to be predominantly of the nature of the power of activity 
(kriya sakti). Therefore, though it is inert Ua(la), it is primarily of 
the nature of consciousness. For this reason, by resorting to pro ~za, 
the aspirant is able to attain the supreme reality. 
Pra(la is the very life of every living being. It is always on the 
move. Because of its activities in different locations of the body, 
the universal pra~w is known as pra~za, apana, samana, udana, 
and vyana. Of these five, pra~za and apana function as the activity 
of inhaling and exhaling. The incoming movement of the breath 
starts from the heart and ends "twelve fingers above one ·s head," 
known as dvadasanta, while the outgoing movement of the breath 
starts from dvadasanta and ends at the heart. This movement con-
tinues and goes on functioning 21,600 times in a single day. 
Pra~za is the manifest form of sakti, and al 1 the six adhvas 
-namely, var~za, mantra, and pada on the one hand, and kala, tat-
tva, and bhuvana on the other-have their respective locations in 
it. ~tis to be noted here that adlzvas are generally known as paths 
which lead the aspirant in a sequence to the supreme. In the end, 
however, for the one in whom the right view of nonduality has 
developed, these adlzvas become absorbed in I-consciousness. For 
this :eason, adhvas are not simply paths but are also something 
that is absorbed. 
. 
Hence the yogin makes an effort to realize the supreme real-
ity by resorting to pra~za, and thus puts an end to the mutations 
caused ?Y the impelling force of time . 
. By Its nature pra~za is constantly vibrating. This vibration 
anses spontaneously in the location of kanda (bulb) below the 
~enerat~v~ organ. The spontaneous movement of pra ~w bestows 
IJttle sp1ntual result in comparison with the movement of the vital 
energy that is caused by the conscious effort of the yogin. Hence, 
by his deliberate effort in association withjyenha sakti, the yof!,ill 
tries to impel his prcl~za from the center of the heart along the 
path upward so that it may reach the dvadasanta, twelve fingers

--- PAGE 27 ---
INTRODUCTION 
15 
above one's head. After letting it rest there, it is made to move 
again toward the heart. This ingoing and outgoing process is sim-
ply known as inhaling and exhaling, but to the yogin it means 
something else. In the primary stage, the yogin with keen observa-
tion watches each movement of pra~1a rising in the heart, proceed-
ing upward and coming back into the heart again. He divides the 
whole course of pra~w into sixteen divisions. Each of these sixteen 
divisions is known as tufi, representing a day. Similarly, the exha-
lation represents a night. When the yogin becomes sufficiently 
proficient, he then takes each movement of pra ~za and apana to 
represent a month. 
The course along which pra~w and apana move measures 
thirty-six digits (a1iguli). The yogin assumes that the hour, the 
tithi, and other long and short units of time get their rise in pra~za. 
It should be noted here that kriya sakti, which operates externally 
as kala sakti in pra~w, is without any definite form. For this rea-
son, whatever shines in pra~w as measures of very small amounts 
of time, such as k~ana, lava, and so forth, may shine as a year or 
more than several years. Not only do they shine and rise in it, but 
they also terminate in the highest equilibrium. 
When pra~w runs the course of two and one-quarter digits, the 
duration is known as a tufi. Four of such tufis make a prahara, 
while half of a tufi is known as gap (sandhya). The exhaling and 
the inhaling represent the day and the night. 
In the same way, the yogin also conceives that a month, consist-
ing of thirty lunar days (tithis) with broad divisions of two fort-
nights, rises in pra~za. All the titlzis from the first day of the lunar 
fortnight (pratipad) to the night of new moon (amavasya), and 
then again from pratipad to the full moon day (par~1ima), lie along 
the course of the inhaling and exhaling movement of pra~w and 
apana. The sixteenth tithi, consisting of half a tu ti at the start and 
another half at the final resting place, is considered to be the san-
dhya, the meeting point of the day and the night. These two halves 
of tufis are free from the influence of time, and for this reason 
sandhycls are considered to be very auspicious. Similarly. during

--- PAGE 28 ---
16 
TANTRASARA 
the dark fortnight, the moon or the aptina offers its digits (kalti) 
one by one to pra~za, the sun, and the final one is offered near 
the dvadasanta at the fifteenth tu,ti, after which the moon itself 
gets dissolved into the sun. This is known as amtivasya, when the 
moon remains latent in the kalti known as ama. When the span of 
one half of the tufi occupied by amtivtisya gets into the portion of 
pratipad, the duration of the tithi is cut short and therefore a solar 
eclipse occurs. The eclipse obliterates the difference of the know-
ing subject (pramata), the instrument of knowledge (prama ~za), 
and the objects known (prameya). Therefore, the occasion is con-
sidered to be auspicious because it bestows otherworldly results. 
Similarly, a year is supposed to get its rise in a single move-
ment of prcz~za. For this reason, the entire course of the movement 
of pra~za and apana corresponds with uttartiya~1a (the progress 
of the sun to the north) and daksinaya~w (the progress of the sun 
t~ the south). In this case, the tithis occupy only one-fifth of a 
digit and the "sun's passage from one sign of the zodiac (rasi) to 
another'' (smizkranti) occurs every six digits. 
For the purpose of minimizing the influence of time, the yo gin 
fur_ther strives to get twelve years to rise in a single movement of 
prw:za and apana. He locates sixty tithis in a digit, and the passage 
of_ one ra~n to another is supposed to be the duration of a year. In 
this way, he is able to observe the duration of twelve yea rs in the 
singl~ movement of pra~za and apana. 
Like prafJa, time is thought to arise in aptina. It arises in the 
heart and goes down to muladhara. Just as Brahma and others are 
supposed to be the causal deities residing in different locations, 
namely, in the heart and other places as mentioned above, in the 
same way, they are said to have their locations in the heart and 
other places down to kanda, etc. The yogin meditates upon the dei-
ties as the causal agents of the stages of childhood, youth, old age. 
death, rebirth, and liberation of the embodied soul. From Brahma 
to Anasrita, these six are considered to be the cause of different 
states through which a living being must pass. As they give rise 
to these stages of I ife, in the beginning they are accepted by the

--- PAGE 29 ---
INTRODUCTION 
17 
yogin, but are ultimately rejected by him. To him, the most accept-
able object is the supreme Goddess, the seventh, called unmana. 
Once the aspirant is united with unman a, it is possible for him to 
reach beyond these states. 
The movement of apana ends in the dvadasanta, otherwise 
known as the yoginivaktra. If the yo gin is able to find rest there, the 
distinctions of the upper and the lower will be put to rest forever. 
This method is followed similarly in samana. Samana arises in 
the navel, flows along the 72,000 nadis of the body, and becomes 
manifest in the heart. It flows along the ten principal nadis: i(l.a, 
pi~1gala, su~wnna, gandhari, !zastijilzva, alambusa, pusa, kuhu, 
and samkhini; but of these, the first three are the most important. 
The heart is like a lotus with eight petals pointing to eight direc-
tions. Because of its association with eight directions, it imitates 
the activities of the Lord of directions, and appears to be cruel 
or placid. It is known as samana because it remains uniformly in 
the body. Just as an equinox (vi~uvat) occurs in pra~za, similarly, 
the yogin ascertains five passages (sanikrantis) and two equinoxes 
(vi~uvats) during one day. They also occur during the night in the 
same way. It is well known that vi~uvats are the equinoxes, when 
the day and night are of equal duration. This time is considered to 
be very auspicious. 
The movement of udana proceeds from the heart up to the 
dvadasanta, a center of pra~za twelve fingers above the head. The 
yogin tries to watch the entire measure of time from one tufi to 
sixty years in the single movement of udana. It is thought to have 
the characteristic of vibration (spandarapa). Vyana is all-perva-
sive by nature, and so it is free from sequence; still, time arises 
there in the form of a subtle vibration. 
The subtle forms of the vowels of the Sanskrit alphabet 
(vanrns) arise without any effort, but in their gross forms, the 
var~zas rise through personal effort. The syllables are of three 
kinds: transcendent, subtle, and gross. The transcendent are of 
two kinds: paratama is the highest form that preserves a distinc-
tion among the vowels, while nada is an uncreated sound, hence

--- PAGE 30 ---
18 
TANTRASARA 
it is known as anahata, a sound that resounds ceaselessly without 
beginning or end. It is united with all the syllables as their source, 
and in this sense is the supreme transcendent form of sound with-
out distinctions. 
Chapter Seven 
In the seventh chapter, the text presents destidhva, the path of 
space. It consists of objects of multifarious forms made manifest 
by the Lord by means of His power of activity. The form of any of 
these objects, such as house, courtyard, market, temple, garden, 
or forest, which are different from one another, shines to a limited 
subject only as being mutually distinct from one another, and also 
from the subject himself. To the Lord, who is perfect and there-
fore free from all limitations, all subjects and objects shine as his 
very Self. In reality, these forms have their substratum in pure 
c~nsciousness, and so they shine nondifferently from it. In its free 
Will, consciousness (sarfzvid) veils its pure nature and manifests 
before the view of the limited subject as sanya, prti!Ja. and buddhi, 
and from this the embodied soul sees pictures of objects as distinct 
f~~m the experiencing subject. Thus, f!lnya, prti~rn, and buddhi 
s me externally as objects but really they are not different from 
the Self. 
' 
_ ~he adhvas have their locations in sanya, pra ~za, in a II the 
n~dt cakras, and in the body itself. As they proceeded from con-
s~wusness, they are to be dissolved into it by involutionary meth-
o 5: As the adhvas are vast, it is practically impossible, even for a 
yogm, to do so in an eon of ages. 
Therefore, one should know, first of all, the real nature of 
these adhvas. They have their real resting place in consciousness, 
and. through it smnvid. the entire adhva (consisting of the void, 
~he 111tellect, the vital energy, and everything), whether it abides 
111 the body, the image of a deity, or the sacrificial altar, becomes 
comp~ete. When the aspirant is able to realize this, he dissolves 
them 111to Brahma, the Lord of Brahmaf)(la; then, the tattvas from

--- PAGE 31 ---
INTRODUCTION 
19 
puru~a to kala are dissolved into Vi~I).u, who is their Lord; then, 
may a, the knot (grant hi) into Rudra, upon which maya is to be 
dissolved into Isvara, who is its Lord; then, suddhavidya should 
be dissolved in Sadasiva, and Anasrita Siva is to be dissolved in 
Sak ti and Siva; and finally all of them are dissolved into Parasiva, 
the all-pervading One. 
The Tantric text called Trisira Bhairava presents pure con-
sciousness as if it were a tree, consisting of three portions. The 
extreme fringe, the root, is known as bodhamula, where "this-
ness" is predominant; it is the gross form of bodha (conscious-
ness). The middle portion of that tree is not predominantly dual in 
nature because, though it shines as "this-ness" here, it has merged 
with consciousness. The most perfect is bodha, the uppermost part 
of that tree, where there is no separate existence. This state is 
known as bodhagra, the highest consciousness, where everything 
has its existence without any separate distinction but shines non-
differently from pure consciousness. 
From this, it is evident that all the adhvas, consisting of thirty-
six tattvas, are not different from Parasiva, the Supreme. One who 
is able to realize the most delightful adhvas as nondifferent from 
his own consciousness can attain Sivahood without delay. 
This chapter gives a detailed account of all the tattvas from the 
earth onward, and the bhuvanas contained in each. 
Chapter Eight 
In the previous chapter we saw that worlds (bhuvanas) are the 
expansion of Sakti, which keep all the multifarious forms of sub-
jects and their objects of experience within herself. Permeating 
them all is the highest universal. known as Paramasiva. who 
remains ever shining. That which is less pervasive than the high-
est universal, present in some bhuvanas but absent in others. is 
defined as a tattva: for example. solidity, firmness, and grossness 
are all qualities found in Bralmzti~z(la alone. 
The next discussion in this chapter is the relationship of cause

--- PAGE 32 ---
20 
TANTRASARA 
and effect (ktiryaktira!J.abhava). According to this system. the 
relation is of two kinds, namely, the transcendent (para ma rth i ka) 
and the artificial or fictional (kalpita). The transcendent relation 
is such that, because of the Lord's freedom of wi 11, because He is a 
free agent, everything beginning with Siva and ending in the earth 
shines nondifferently from Him and rests in Him. The artificial 
relation of the cause and the effect, however, is such that every-
thing follows a regular sequence. The relation of cause and effect 
is created by His power of niyati. According to this system. the 
rod, the wheel, and clay, considered essential for producing a jar, 
are only expedients. The real cause is the Lord, for He remains 
associated with all of them as the cause and the effect. In order to 
support this view, it is stated that it is He who brings al 1 the causes 
together and sets them apart. The impelling force of universal 
consciousness is considered to be the real agent of everything. 
When the potter makes a jar, he himself is one with that universal 
consciousness who is the real doer. 
Parasiva is perfect and full with His five saktis. These .\(aktis 
are inseparably united with their Lord and are manifested in five 
aspects by His free will. These five are: cit, ananda, iccha, }Flana, 
~?d kriya. The five principles, namely siva, sakti, sculdsiva, 
z~vara, and Suddhavidya, are the manifestations of the .\(aktis men-
tioned above. It should be noted here that Sakti is one and affluent 
with all the Saktis, but due to the dominance of one over the other. 
distinctions are also observed among them. For example. in .Siva 
tattv~, con:ci.ousness (cit) is predominant~ when (111anda becomes 
d?mmant, ~tis called §akti tattva. The lords of the five pure prin-
ciples are Siva, Sakti Sadasiva Isvara. and Ananta. These five 
beginning with Siva ~nd endin~ in Ananta have their respective 
ga~ws or hosts. They are named sambhava, sakta, mantrefvara, 
and mmz.tra. This is known as pure path or adhva. 
The impure adlzva is created by the wil I of the Lord for f u 1-
fil ling the desires of limited souls. Aghora is the creator of the 
impure adhva by causing agitation (k~obha) in maya.

--- PAGE 33 ---
INTRODUCTION 
21 
The principle called mayo is the material cause of the insen-
tient universe. It should be remembered in this context that the 
mayo. sakti, belonging to the Lord, is that which manifests mayo, 
the material cause, and is quite different from mayo, the principle 
or tattva. The entire universe is born of mayo tattva, from which 
kala is born. It, in turn, is responsible for the rise of limited power 
of action in the limited soul. Maya veils the pure conscious state of 
the self for which it loses its power of knowledge and activity. 
Ka lti, though born of may ti tattva and being impelled by its 
force, becomes attached to the limited soul. These two, that is, 
kalti and a~w, remain firmly attached to each other, so they cannot 
be easily differentiated. Those who remain under the influence of 
mayti tattva fail to get release so long as they do not receive grace 
from Ananta, the Lord of maya tattva. Only then can puru~as 
differentiate themselves from mayti, and as a result they become 
vzjFzanczkala souls. Similarly, when one realizes his distinction 
from prakrti, he never goes below prakrti; and when one realizes 
one's distinction from kala, one doesn't go beyond kala tattva. 
When the residual trace of the malas become totally absent from 
the soul, he becomes one with Siva. 
It is to be remembered in this connection that the kala tattva is 
the giver of limited activity to the limited soul. The impure vidyti 
bestows on the insentient subject a limited cognitive power. Only 
because of its presence is the limited subject able to see the real 
nature of the intellect, and distinguish happiness and others from 
the mass of objects which are reflected in the mirror of buddhi. "I 
know something" and "I do something" are the forms of judgment 
aroused by vidyti and kalti, respectively. 
These rczga, vidyti, kala, kala, and niyati are of two types; 
because of grace, they are considered pure and therefore function 
as means for the attainment of Sivahood. Kala tattva becomes 
pure when it consists of activities like worshipping, etc.; raga tat-
tva becomes so when it gives rise to attachment to the Lord. Vidya 
becomes pure when it causes discernment regarding the Lord. In

--- PAGE 34 ---
22 
TANTRASARA 
the same way, ktila provides potency to the teachings regarding 
the Lord (tadupadesadi vi$aymneva kalanam), while niyati sup-
ports the soul in remaining steadfast in His worship. 
The group of kala and other tattvas are different according to 
the difference of the individual souls, for the activity in them is 
seen to rise differently in different limited subjects. 
It is noteworthy that the agenthood with the characteristic of 
limited nature gives rise to pradhana, the equilibrium of the three 
gw:zas, i.e., sattva, rajas, and tamas. The supreme Subject in the 
beginning is made limited by maya, which takes away all of His 
glory. He is bestowed again with a little of His glory by means of 
kala tattva and so on. Thus, He becomes a pasu, a limited subject, 
an.ct the maya, kala, raga, vidya, niyati, kala tattvas serve Him as 
veils (kafzcukas). 
. The author further points out that prakrti is of two kinds. One 
is ~he equilibrium of the gu~zas; the other is gw:w tattva itself 
which, being disturbed by the predominant Lord of the tattva, 
ca~se.s agitation (k$obha) in prakrti, which in turn gives rise .to the 
prmc1ple of buddhi. Prakrti should be accepted as the recipient of 
the agitation, otherwise it would not be possible for the 1 i berated 
soul ~o remain uninvolved in bondage. According to this system, 
the disturbance (k$obha) inprakrti is caused by the Lord Himself. 
~h.O!.nkara arises from buddhi, which sees the 1 ight of pu ru~a 
as .1f m a mirror that has become slightly impure, and because 
of its contact with objects it makes one experience "I know this" 
an~ "I do this." Thus it feels identity with the object and thinks 
of Itself as "I." Buddhi receives the reflection of objects and at 
the same time, though insentient, manifests the light of puru~a. 
Fro~ ah.wnkara that is predominantly sattvika in nature come 
th~ five mner and external sense organs, from rajasa aha1J1ka ra 
anses manas, and from the tamasa nature of aha171kti ra the five 
tanmatras are born. Thus the tanmatras give rise to five gross 
elements: ether (nabhas), air (vayu), fire (tejas), water (apa>. and 
earth (prthvl). 
This chapter discusses all thirty-six principles, which are mutu-

--- PAGE 35 ---
INTRODUCTION 
23 
ally related to one another. These are classified in a threefold divi-
sion consisting of nara, Sakti, and Siva. Siva pervades all by His 
characteristic nature of luminous consciousness. The principle in 
which this characteristic of light is more prominent is considered 
more extensive than the other. For example, Siva is more extensive 
than Sakti, while the latter is more so than nara. 
Chapter Nine 
This chapter classifies all the tattvas grouped under fifteen 
aspects as viewed by the seven kinds of knowing subjects: siva, 
mantramahesvara, mantresvara, mantra, vijiianakala, pralaya-
kala, and sakala. These subjects each possess one of seven saktis; 
thus counting the saktis and the possessors of these saktis, the 
number becomes fourteen. Including svarflpa, which refers to the 
"object in itself," with these fourteen, each of the tattvas from 
prthvl to prakrti has fifteen aspects. 
The Lord possesses three saktis in the form of the goddesses 
as para, parapara, and apara para. The transcendent sakti func-
tions as the subject (pramatti). She is para sakti, who is insep-
arably united with the supreme Subject. The goddess paraparti 
sakti is the instrument (pramti~W), and tiparti sakti operates as the 
object of experience (prameya). 
The earth and other tattvas have their distinctive svarapa; 
that is, they are objects in themselves. In other words, the tattvas 
from prakrti down to the earth shine as objects without having 
the reflection of any of the limiting adjuncts of the subject and its 
instruments. This is said to be the pure nature of each object; its 
existence does not rest in the subject. The object has its rest in 
itself, meaning that it exists independently of the limits of ordi-
nary sense perception. 
It should be noted in this context that the object as such shines 
in this distinctive way by the grace of tiparti sakti. The pure objec-
tive aspect of all the tattvas from the earth to prakrti broadly 
comes under the nara group, the basic concept of Trika as charac-

--- PAGE 36 ---
24 
TANTRASARA 
terized by nara, Sakti, and Siva. When saktis related to different 
subjects become predominant, however, and the object in its turn 
rests in them, this is known as its sakta form. It shines thus by the 
grace of parapara sakti. These sakta forms are seven, because 
the numbers of saktis related to the different subjects are seven 
in number; but when the subject possessing these saktis becomes 
predominant and the objects rest in the knowing subjects. it is 
known to be of the form of Siva, who is the possessor of the saktis 
(saktiman). They shine thus by the grace of para sakti. The subject 
characterized as possessing a particular sakti, that is, a saktiman, 
is of seven kinds. 
The first of these seven subjects, known as sakala, has vidyti 
and kala as its saktis, but they lie dormant in pralaytikala souls, 
and though they are abiding in vijFzanakala, it is as if they are 
disappearing. In the subject known as mantra, vidyii and kala 
function as pure knowledge (suddhvidya), about to become awake, 
but the residual trace of it is still there. Mantresa knowing subject 
is free from the above residual traces and suddhavidva has awak-
~ned fully in them. This very suddhavidya is going to become 
zcchasakti in mantramahesvara, while in siva it becomes fully 
manifest icchti with the characteristic of svatantryasakti. 
The whole scheme may be presented by the following chart: 
(I) Prameya 
(2) Pramana 
(i) Prthivi to Prakrti 
Vidya!Kala 
Svarllpa = 1 
7+7+1=15 
(ii) Puru~a to Kala 
Vidyti and 
(3) Pramata 
(a) Saka/a 
(b) Pralayakala 
(c) VijFz(inaka/a 
(d) Mantra 
(e) Mamre.Sa 
(f) Mantramalzesa 
(g) Siva 
Kala are dormant. (a) Pralaytika/a 
(b) Vi}Fulnaka!a

--- PAGE 37 ---
Svarupa = 1 
6+6+ 1=13 
(iii) Pralayakala 
Svarupa = 1 
5+5+1=11 
(iv) Vi}Fzanakala 
Svarupa = 1 
4+4+1=9 
(v) Mantra 
Svarapa = I 
3+3+1=7 
(vi) Mantresa 
Svanlpa = I 
2+2+1=5 
(vii) Mantramahesa 
Svariipa = 1 
1+1+1=3 
(viii) Siva 
Ma~w is without 
object. 
prama~w is about 
to disappear 
Suddhavidya 
Awakened 
Suddhavidya 
Ice ha 
INTRODUCTION 
25 
(c) Mantra 
(d) Mantresa 
(e) Mantramahesa 
(f) Siva 
(a) Vijiianakala 
(b) Mantra 
(c) Mantresa 
(d) Mantramahesa 
(e) Siva 
(a) Mantra 
(b) Mantresa 
(c) Mantramahesa 
(d) Siva 
(a) Mantresa 
(b) Mantramalzesa 
(c) Siva 
(a) Mantramahesa 
(b) Siva 
(a) Siva 
(b) Sakti 
Svarflpa = Svatantrya 
It has been stated before that the universe is characterized by 
the three: nara, Sakti, and Siva. The aspect known as svarapa is 
the sentient object in which objectivity is predominant and where 
the subjectivity of consciousness is totally absent. Siva is of the 
characteristic of pure consciousness; He is the supreme Subject 
(parapramata). His Sakti, which shines as iccha, jilana, and 
kriya, manifests herself as six knowing subjects (pramatas). Of 
the six, the first three, mantramahesvara, mantresvara. and man-

--- PAGE 38 ---
26 
TANTRASARA 
tra, do not have any objects, so therefore are known as pure sub-
jects (suddha grahaka), but vijnanakala, pralayakala. and sakala 
are considered as impure subjects. 
The author shows, as an example, how the earth principle 
(prthvi tattva) shines in relation to pramata and prameyas. The 
light that shines nondifferently from the Earth (dhara) is Siva. He 
supports his view by quoting the fruti Dharamantramahesvara: 
being impelled by the will of Siva leads to dharamantre.frz for 
bestowing siddhis on those who are desirous of it, and who are 
connected with dhara. Mantras are the vacakas of the super-
intending deities of different bhuvanas under prthivl tatti'a, in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed by the non-Saiva doc-
trines. He remains as pralayakala knowing subject abiding in the 
earth principle (dharapralayakevali) and will have his egoism 
abide in dhara. 
Then, the author shows how all the tattvas abide as pra ~za .frzkti, 
r~l~ted to the knowing subject (pramata). One single pr[z~w, con-
sistmg of sixteen tufis, extends until the emergence of the (vedya), 
the ~hing to be known. Among the sixteen tufis, the first is the 
undifferentiated one, the second is the one that manifests the gra-
hak~, the last tufi is inseparable from the object, and the one pre-
cedmg the last has the form of a fully manifest grahaka. Thus, 
twelve tu.tis out of sixteen are divided broadly into two divisions. 
The first six are of the nature of nirvikalpaka and the next six are 
the characteristic of parapara, from where vikalpa begins to rise. 
All the subjects from mantramahesvara down to sakala shine 
along the twelve tufis, two for each subject, while the first tu.ti. it 
should be remembered, is the location for sakti. 
The fifteen aspects with their varied distinctions are observed 
in two tu/is each. Just as in the cognition of a jar, the character-
istics of the fifteen aspects can be watched, in the same way, this 
is observed in the vital energy when it is engaged in grasping any 
object. It has been hinted earlier that when a knowing subject. 
such as a sakala, does not participate as a subject-that is, when 
it is taken as a svarupa-the aspect of fifteen becomes thirteen.

--- PAGE 39 ---
INTRODUCTION 
27 
Thus, the number of aspects diminishes gradually by twos. Then 
finally, as distinction disappears, the number of tufis diminishes. 
At last, the yogin is able to attain absorption in Siva. Here, the 
time unit consists of two tufis-the first tufi is considered as being 
fulL and the other has the character of Siva-Sakti. It has been 
stated in the Tantraloka that one who is able to absorb oneself in 
the second tuf i is sure to attain the power of omniscience. 
Now the author explains the nature of states known as waking, 
dreaming, deep sleep, the fourth (turya), and beyond the fourth 
(turyatita). All subjects, along with their saktis, are knowers of 
the objects of all the tattvas. These states are the manifestations 
of consciousness conditioned by knowables (prameyas). The 
prameya state is said to be the chief characteristic of the waking 
state Uagrat), otherwise known as (addlzi~i;;fheya), the locus. 
In the Ma !in ivijaya it is known as pi~z(lastlza, for the yo gin, 
taking his stand on dhara and others as the base, is able to iden-
tify himself with them. But to thej11a11i11 who is well advanced in 
meditation, it is known as sa rvatobhadra, for to him, the jag rat 
state is one which fully pervades the objects of experience. Tech-
nically, the waking state is the object of experience (prameya) or 
adhi~'f lzeva, the base, while the dreaming state (svapna) is known 
as prama~w or adlzi~flzana. and adlzi~flzauz or the subject is the 
pramMd in deep sleep (su~upti). 
All the states have subdivisions of their own: (1) jagrat-jagrat, 
jagrat-svapna. jiigrat-su~upti, andjagrat-turya: (2) svapna-jagrat, 
svapna-.\TO/J/la, svapna-su~rnpti, and svapna-turya; and (3) su~­
upt i-jag rat, su ~i;;upti-svapna, su~upti-su~upti, and su~upt i-tu rya. 
Jagrat is known to have four portions. The object that is expe-
rienced is ahuddlza. insentient, and the instrument of experience 
is called huddlw; right knowledge, born from instrumentality. is 
known as prabuddlza and suprabuddlza. Of these two, prabuddlza 
is of the nature of lmddhi, while suprabuddlza is free from impuri-
ties of the object of experience and therefore is of the character-
istic of resting in the self. This chart may be of some help for the 
understanding of the scheme:

--- PAGE 40 ---
28 TANTRASARA 
I 
2 
3 
4 
Prameya 
Prama~w 
Pramtitti 
Pramiti 
Jag rat 
Svapna 
SU$Upti 
Turva 
Pi~z¢astha 
Padastha 
Rapastha 
Rapatlta 
Sarvatobhadra 
Vyapti 
Malzavytipti 
Pracaya 
T 
u 
R 
y 
A 
T 
I 
T 
A 
M 
A 
H 
A 
p 
R 
A 
c 
A 
y 
A 
Pi~z¢astha may be explained as that which abides in the body. 
The abode of all paths (adhvas) is the vital energy (pra~za) and 
intention/thought (swizkalpa). Everything lies in the vital energy 
and sa1izkalpa, hence it is known as abiding there, and therefore 
it is also known as padastha. Rupayati is the one that gives form 
to the respective objects, and then withdraws them into the Self, 
which is none other than the atman. The Self, where they abide, is 
identical with the object. This identification and merger is known 
as rupastha, but the form which is beyond all these is cal led 
r~ipatlta. To the jifrinin, svapna, whose nature is vika lpika, is con-
si.d~red to be vyapti, for his jizana is then free from external con-
d1t10ns, and he is the active agent in changing and arranging the 
order of his thoughts. In the state of deep sleep, the }iltinin feels 
freedom from limitations; therefore, it is considered as mahliv-
yapti. Th~ j!lanin in the turya state sees the universe collected 
together hke an amalaka fruit in the palm of his hand; therefore, 
the name is pracaya. 
lagrat is the state which a sakala knowing subject enjoys, 
w~ile svap~a is enjoyed by a pralayakala, and su~rnpti by a vi}ilti-
nakala subject. Mantra and mantramalzesvara subjects have their 
abode in the turya level, but in the turyatlta state, al I beings, 
~hether they are prameyas or pramatas, become one with Siva-
Sakti and shine nondifferently with it. 
The fifteen aspects mentioned above are also observed in five 
states known as jag rat, etc., thus:

--- PAGE 41 ---
INTRODUCTION 29 
(1) 
From dhara 
to prakrti 
(a) Svarupa-Sakala-Sakti 
Jag rat 
(b) Pralaya kala 
svapna 
( c) Vijiianakala 
SU$Upti 
(d) Mantra and others 
turya 
( e) Siva-Sakti 
turyatlta 
(2) 
From Puru$a 
to Maya 
(a) Sakata 
Jag rat 
(b) Pralyakala 
svapna 
( c) Vij!ltinakala 
Sll$Upti 
( d) Mantra and others 
turya 
( e) Siva-Sakti 
turyatrta 
(3) 
Maya 
(a) Pralayti kala 
Jtigrat 
(b) Vijiitintikala 
svapna 
(c) Mantra 
SU$Upti 
(d) Mantresvara 
Mantra1nahesvara 
turya 
( e) Siva-Sakti 
turytitlta 
(4) 
Above Mtiyti 
(a) VijFzti ntikala 
ltigrat 
(b) Mantra 
svapna 
( c) Mantrasvara 
SU$Upti 
(d) Mantramalzesvara 
turya 
( e) Siva-Sakti 
turyatrta 
(5) 
Suddhavidyti 
(a) Mantra 
ltigrat 
(b) Mantresvara 
svapna 
(c) Mantramalzesvara 
SU$llpti 
(d) Sakti 
turya 
(e) Siva 
turyatrta

--- PAGE 42 ---
30 TANTRASARA 
(6) 
ltvara 
(a) Mantresa 
lclgrat 
(b) Mantramahesasakti 
svapna 
(c) Mantresa 
SU~Hlpti 
( d) Sakti 
turya 
(e) Siva 
turivatlta 
(7) 
Sadasiva 
(a) Mantramahesvara 
Jag rat 
(b) Kriyasakti 
svapna 
( c) Jiianasaktis 
su~rnpti 
( d) Icchasakti 
turya 
(8) 
(e) Siva 
U ndiff eren tiated 
stage 
(a) Kriya 
Jczgrat 
(b) Jiiana 
svapna 
(c) lccha 
su~rnpti 
(d) Ananda 
turya 
(e) Cit 
turyatlta 
Chapter Ten 
Chapter Ten begins with a description of the general features of 
the :ubtle units constituting the manifested universe called kaUis. 
Abhmavagupta defines a tattva as that which threads through all 
the worlds (bhuvanas), and kala is that which invariahly abides in 
the group of tattvas. 
The number of kalas are four, i.e .. nivrtti, prati~f)f/za, vidya, 
and sanM. The four a~uj,as: parthiva, prakrta, maylya, and sd kta 
are made of these kalas. 
Nivrtti kale! operates in the earth principle (prthivl tattva), 
prati~'fha from the water principle ()ala) to prakrti. vidyd kala 
~rom above prakrti to nuiya, and from above mclya .. frlktcz operates. 
Siva is considered to be beyond the kaltis, for He is ni5/ka/a; how-

--- PAGE 43 ---
INTRODUCTION 
31 
ever, for the purpose of meditation, He is said to possess a kala 
named santatit(/. The sphere or egg (a~1(ia) is a kind of covering 
which exists up to Sakti, and though the bhuvanas exist under the 
Siva tattva, they are said to be of the form of the void and there-
fore do not serve as a covering. 
Chapter Eleven 
This chapter discusses saktipata, but before givmg a detailed 
account of it, the text deals with issues concerning the occurrence 
of the descent of grace in a particular individual. This has been 
dealt with in detail in our translation of the text and the additional 
notes. The author presents and critiques three standard views 
regarding saktipata: (1) bondage, or smhsara, has ignorance as 
its root. When the rise of right knowledge occurs, the descent of 
grace also comes into being. This view has been refuted by the 
author. (2) Next, the view known as karmasamya, that is, the bal-
ance of two opposing actions, is summarized. According to this 
theory, when karmasamya occurs, saktipMa is sure to take place. 
The author does not accept this view either. (3) The third view 
considers the ripening of mala (mala paripaka) as the cause of 
saktipMa. which is also rejected by the author. 
According to Abhinavagupta, these views may be acceptable 
to the fol lowers of dualist philosophies, but according to the non-
dual system known as Paramesvaradvayavtzda (known to modern 
scholarship as Kashmir Saivism), they are not tenable. According 
to this system. the Great Lord, in the course of His play, veils His 
true nature and assumes a limited nature. When the concealment 
of His pure nature disappears, the limited self becomes the recipi-
ent of ,fo kt i p iU a and is ab 1 e to a tt a i n the pro x i rn it y of s var ii pa . 
the true form of the Lord, either by fol lowing a sequence or by 
attaining proximity to the Lord without sequence. The Great Lord 
(Malzesvara) is in essence free, and the causal agent of ,foktipata, 
for which he does not depend on anything or anyone. The person 
who is eager to have worldly and otherworldly enjoyment (bhoga)

--- PAGE 44 ---
32 
TANTRASARA 
can also attain saktipata, but for the bhoga to be manifested, some 
actions must be performed. Likewise, the person who has the 
desire for both blzoga and mok~a is also required to perform cer-
tain acts in order to attain them. 
It has been stated in the Tantraloka that saktipata is, in 
essence, the descent of the highest light on the limited soul. It is 
free from all limitations and is of the characteristic of pure con-
sciousness. However, saktipata of a slightly lower nature, though 
shining with all the fullness of consciousness, is conditioned with 
the limitations of bhoga. 
It should be remembered in this context that saktipata is 
really the nature of the iccha or will of the Lord. It is He who, 
by His freedom of will veils Himself and manifests all subjects 
and objects as limited' entities. Due to His activity of conceal-
menL known as tirodlzana, the objects to be enjoyed shine before 
t~e view of the limited subjects. Thus, He willfully and playfully 
bmds Himself, then removes these bonds, and finally shines in 
the fullness of j!lana and kriya. His play of freedom is such that. 
though He assumes limited forms in an outward journey of con-
cealing Himself by manifesting and sustaining the universe, He 
makes a return journey to Himself through the descent of grace 
an? revelation of Himself to Himself, ultimately shining in His 
pristine pure nature. 
Grace is said to be of two types: the higher, that is, the more 
pure and potent form, is called para; and the less potent form is 
a~ara. The para form of saktipata is bestowed only by the Lord 
!-"hmse~f, but the apara kind of grace is bestowed by the super-
intending lords of the domain over which they have control. The 
forn: of_ Saktipata bestowed by them does not lead the sou 1 to 
attam Szva-hood, hence it is inferior to the one which flows from 
the Lord Himself. This apara grace is further divided into ma~z(la, 
less keen, and tivra, exceedingly keen. When apara sakrip(lfa is 
ma ~1 (/a, it gives bi rt h to right judgment in the sou L upon w h i ch 
the ability to distinguish between prakrti and puru~a occurs. The 
result of this type of discrimination is that the soul does not a hide

--- PAGE 45 ---
INTRODUCTION 
33 
in the worlds below prakrti. When the descent is exceedingly keen 
(tivra), however, the soul by its merit is able to discriminate his 
own being from kala tattva, and as a result becomes one of the 
Vijiianakala souls. He even arises to the level of mantra when the 
Lord wills it so. 
After .foktipMa, the author explains the nature of concealment 
(tirobhavaa) as one of the five functions (paficakrtya) of the Lord. 
Tirobhava is of two types: niyati krama, when the Lord is seen as 
the one who ordains the law and the one who bestows the fruits 
of action in accordance with the merit and demerit of the soul. 
Here, He takes recourse to niyati, and therefore the functions of 
creation. maintenance. and dissolution flow from Him. But above 
ma_vcl ~1(/a' that is, at the level of sakti, which is beyond the sphere 
of karma, there continues creation of immense nature. This cre-
ation is known as malzasr~fi. Similarly, the pralaya of greater 
nature. that is, the highest form of dissolution, is also performed 
at this stage. Creation and dissolution of this nature are performed 
by the Lord without taking recourse to niyati, but those which are 
performed from the level of mava downward are accomplished by 
his taking recourse to niyati. Therefore, at that stage, though He 
is, in essence, always prabuddlza, the enlightened one, he behaves 
in the worldly level as an unenlightened one. 
Chapter T·welve 
In th is chapter, the author presents and substantiates the rea-
sons for the performance of initiations (dfk~a). In addressing the 
question of the necessity of drk~a, the author states that initia-
tion alone is the means that leads the soul to enjoyment (bhoga) 
and finally helps one to attain liberation. Primarily, drk~ti sanc-
tifies the soul and produces in it the competency for receiving 
knowledge (jiiana), yoga. etc., for without obtaining drk~ti fol-
lowing the course of Saiva Yoga would not be possible. Therefore 
drk~\'{[ is considered to be the preliminary step in the progression 
from sa1izskara. to the proper practice of yoga, to perfection in

--- PAGE 46 ---
34 
TANTRASARA 
yoga, and finally to liberation; or, to put it another way: initiation 
sariiskara, perfection in mantra, worldly and otherworldly enjoy~ 
ment (bhoga), and finally, liberation. 
It should be remembered that the highest kind of knowledge 
is obtained from the holy texts (sastra). One who is uninitiated is 
not considered to be the right person to receive instruction in the 
sastras; therefore, dlksa is essential. On the other hand. those who 
have received the highest kind of grace, and thus earned compe-
tence, do not require any formal dlk~a, for their innate knowledge 
serves as dlk~a for them. To those who are unable to fol low the 
path of knowledge, however, the easier path is rec om mended; it is 
predominantly of a ritualistic nature. 
S~ana, bathing, is the preliminary step to dlk~a. Ge.nerally, 
bathmg cleanses impurities of the body, but esoterica! ly 1t helps 
one to become absorbed into Paramesvara. Ordinarily, bathing is 
performed with water; according to this system it is a little bit dif-
~~ren~: one who goes to take a bath should think of the presence of 
Siva 
h. 
· 
, m is eight forms. By uttering a mantra one should perform 
ones bath with the eight prescribed materials. Bathing is of two 
~h~es, external and internal. The former is done by earth, water, 
sacred ashes, etc., but the internal one is performed by one's 
concentrat · 
· 
b · 
· 
h. 
ion m various locations of the body. The o ~ect with 
w ich one 
+ 
• 
h 1 
periorms one's bath is charged with a mantra and thus 
e ps the bod 
b 
. 
cl 
. 
Y to ecome steady in reality, refreshes the body, and 
eanses It of impu .t. 
n ies. 
Chapter Thirteen 
Here the author explains the necessity of and reasons for the ritual 
procedures that are to be performed on hilltops, river banks. and 
o~her holy spots. Though those places are considered to be auspi-
c~ous,. th~y are really external, and thus of little help for attaining 
szddhzs, m contrast to the internal seats (plfhas), which are much 
more use_ful, ?ecause they concentrate the vital energy in differ-
ent locations m the body, and through this one is able to attain

--- PAGE 47 ---
INTRODUCTION 
35 
liberation. Just as there are many sacred places existing externally, 
in the same way, there are many sacred places located inside the 
human body, and are divided into groups known as plfha, upapl-
fha, sandohaka, k~etra, and upak~etra. The group of plfhas con-
sists of three sacred locations: ktimarupa, pur~wgiri, and ut;i.t;l.i-
yana. The ktimarupa plf ha is of the form of iccha; the other two 
are of the nature of nada and bindu, respectively, and have their 
locations at the right and left side of the body. The following chart 
shows further details: 
(b) Upaplfhas are three 
1. Devikoffa: Stikta 
2. Ujjayini: Bindu 
3. Kulagiri: Vytipinl 
(c) Sandohaka are also three 
1. Pu~z(fravardhana: Ltilana 
2. Varendra: Vaindava 
3. Ek ti mra: Vyapti 
(d) K~etra are the petals of the heart lotus 
1. Prayaga 
2. Vara~zti 
3. Affahtisa 
4. Jayantika 
5. Vara~zasl 
6. Kali1iga 
7. Kulata 
8. Lahu[{l 
(e) 
Upak~etra: the eight tips of the lotus 
I. Viraja 
2. Eru(lika 
3. Hala 
4. Elapz1b 
5. K~lrika 
6. Purl 
7. Mayapurl 
8. Marudesa 
(f) Upasandohaka are the junctures of the eight petals of the 
heart lotus with the center 
I. Jalandhara 
2. Naipala 
3. Kasmlra 
4. Gargika 
5. Harab 
6. Mlecchadigdvaravrtti 
7. Kuruk~etra 
8. Khefaka 
Although outer sacred places are of no help in attaining release, 
they are suitable places for worship, because deities who are well 
versed in jiiana and yoga are born there and have sanctified the 
place. Moreover, by staying in those places, devoted people may 
become recipients of }Ilana and yoga; therefore, aspirants make 
pilgrimages to sacred places. The author further clarifies that such 
places are to be selected as the setting for rituals as they bestow 
satisfaction to the heart lotus.

--- PAGE 48 ---
36 
TANTRASARA 
For the purpose of worship, one should attain the state of a pure 
heart and stand outside the ritual space and perform nyrLr;;a With 
either the matrka or mtilinl orders of the Sanskrit alphabet, or both. 
The nytisa of matrka is performed in the following way: 
forehead 
-
a 
right shoulder-
k 
mouth 
a 
eyes 
i/I 
forearm 
kh 
hand 
g 
ears 
u/u 
finger 
gh 
nails 
n 
nostrils 
r/rL 
left shoulder 
-
c 
cheeks 
!I.I .. 
left arm 
ch 
teeth 
e/ai 
hand 
J 
fingers 
jh 
nails 
11 
lip upper -
0 
right hip 
t 
lip lower -
au 
thigh 
th 
top of 
the head _ 
am 
foot 
d 
tip of the 
tongue 
-
ah 
fingers 
dh 
left hip 
nails 
I) 
t 
right and left 
thigh 
th 
arm pit 
p/ph 
foot 
d 
back 
b 
finger 
dh 
belly 
bh 
nails 
n 
heart 
111 
skin 
y 
bones 
s 
nails 
r 
fat 
~ 
meat 
§ukra 
s 
mqjja 
v 
pra ~wko~a 
h 
The nyasa of malinl is: 
n ~ r I J !I th c dh ID u u bk kh g gh n i a v hh y c;l <) h 
n J rt P ch I as al) h $ k$ m s arp t e ai o au d ph. 
th jh

--- PAGE 49 ---
INTRODUCTION 
37 
Performing nyasa with the malinl order is quite different from 
matrka nyasa. Nyasa is performed first in the fingers, which is 
followed by nyasa in the body. Malinl and matrka both are Siva 
and Sakti by nature. The supreme form of Siva in this tradition is 
Bhairava; the mass of phonemes (sabdarasi) is contained indivis-
ibly and inseparably within Himself. This sabdarasi is also Sakti 
Herself, because it is she who, like a mother, gives birth to her 
creation in its differentiated forms; therefore, she is called matrka, 
the mother. Malilll is put on by the Rudras like a mala, or gar-
land, by which they bestow enjoyment and liberation. In deriving 
the word mala, the author says that the phoneme "ma" represents 
salizhara; that is, withdrawal. The phoneme "ra" means granting, 
and since "ra" and "la" are identical. "la" means to receive. 
Nyasa should be performed in order to bring into predomi-
nance the sakta body in the worshipper. It is done in the sacrifi-
cial vessel (arghapatra). The teacher (acarya) then purifies all the 
articles of worship with a few drops of water from the arghapatra. 
After worshipping the external deities outside the door, the acarya 
enters within and watches the interior with the vision of the Lord. 
If the disciple is desirous of release, the acarya sits facing north; 
if otherwise, he sits facing east. The highest light of conscious-
ness is the middle, from which the other directions proceed. Just 
as the Lord manifests the respective distinctions of directions, so 
does the sun. It is the sun which represents the Lord'sjiiana sakti. 
While deciding directions, one should think of the unity of the 
three-namely, the self, the sun, and the Lord-as coalesced into 
one. It is followed by the ritual practice of burning of the physical 
and the subtle bodies. and by this relinquishing I-consciousness 
in the physical body. However, it should be pointed out that the 
physical body is not actually burned: rather, offerings represent-
ing the body, etc. are consigned to the fire. Afterwards, whatever 
remain as ashes are regarded as nothing but the residual traces of 
the former bodies. 
Then, the acarya should remain steady in the state of pure 
consciousness. It is like a tranquil sea from where the creative

--- PAGE 50 ---
38 
TANTRASARA 
consciousness (smizvit) begins to break into waves. The first cre-
ative impulse of consciousness causes the pure body to rise. This 
newly born body is characterized by the unlimited power of Bhai-
rava. This body is really the supreme form (para marti) of the 
Lord and is characterized by the mantra "0171 ha17z." Other nyasas 
are performed so that all the tattvas may rise there. All the saktis 
associated with nine principles are to be worshipped, after which 
the sixfold nyasa follows. 
There are five states, namely, waking Uagrat), dream (svapna), 
deep sleep (SU$Upti), the fourth (turya), and beyond the fourth 
(turiyatlta); but anuttara is beyond them all. This is called the 
state or condition of one's own nature (svabhavadasa). These 
states have Brahma Visnu Rudra, Isvara, Sadasiva, and Siva 
as their lords, and a're th~s 'are associated with the real cause of 
thirty-six categories. Because of this, when nyasa is performed in 
the body, the entire universe becomes one with the real cause of 
the tattvas, from which pure creation begins to manifest. Miirti 
n -
ya~a. and other practices are performed only for the purpose of 
attammg nonduality 
I 
. 
-
t_ may be asked: Is there any use of further nyasa after the 
b5,~rnmg of the body once one has attained steadiness in tranquil 
iva? To an 
h. 
h 
s'. 
. 
." 
swer t is question the author states t at 1va is not a 
static realit 
h 
· 
. 
' 
d 
f 
Y t at is entirely separate, transcendent, and exclude 
r~m all the other tattvas. Rather, Siva is the great I ight of con-
sc10usness wh · h h. 
. 
. 
. 
Af 
Ic s mes m mult1fanous forms. 
~er consecrating the body the worshipper then performs 
sulab1 
-
· 
' 
f . 
a nyasa m the vital energy. One should think of earth, water. 
ire a d 
· 
' 
n 
Wmd elements as located above, and supporting the 
energ~ which .is situated four digits below the navel. One digit 
each is occupied by earth and the others. The bulb (kanda) is 
su~posed to be like a boat that helps one cross the ocean. The air 
ab.ides there, and the sky is lying within it. Then the worshipper 
th mks of the staff named ananta going up to lambika, the aper-
ture below the palate (Mlurandhra). It contains all the tanmatras, 
subtle elements, etc. Above it is the knot of maya, where four legs

--- PAGE 51 ---
INTRODUCTION 
39 
of the sidzhasana, in the form of a lion, stand. Dharma, jflana, 
vairagya, and aisvarya assume these forms, whereas adharma, 
ajiiana, avairagya, and anaisvarya are the joining planks. They 
occupy southeast, southwest, northwest, and northeast, respec-
tively; adharma and others occupy the east, south, west, and north. 
Above maya and below the trident, the silizlzasana is covered 
with two sheets of cloth: the lower one represents maya for veil-
ing the real nature of manifestation, and the upper one is for the 
purpose of covering maya itself. The worshipper then meditates 
on the vidya lotus; that is, suddhavidya as a white lotus. Its pet-
als are occupied by the saktis known as vama and others, with 
Brahma, 
Vi~~zu, and Rudra representing creation, maintenance, 
and dissolution. Object of knowledge (meya), knowledge (ma~a), 
and subject (matr) are superintending, seated on three ma~z(lalas, 
one above the other, from lambika onward. Isvara is located above 
Rudra, and further above, Sadasiva is lying, like a corpse, but he 
is ever awake and is of the nature of reflecting nada, primal sound. 
Three lotuses have grown from his navel, consisting of a three-
pronged trident, piercing three apertures of His head; the trident 
is of the nature of nadanta and made luminous by the three saktis, 
i.e., sakti, vyapinl, and samana. Above them is the aunnzanasa, 
where one should meditate on the supreme Goddess as having been 
made of all the tattvas as her seat. In the process of worship, one 
offers the entire universe to her. Meditation (dhyana), mantra rep-
etition (japa), etc., are to be performed internally. 
This is followed by external rituals. If the disciple desires ini-
tiation, he is given consecratory rites (adhivasana). This is per-
formed in order to make him worthy to receive various smizskaras, 
and to cause the deity to become intent on him. 
Then the author explains in detail how adlzivasana is performed. 
It is to be noted here that both guru and the disciple pass the night 
in the place of adhivasana. If the disciple sees any inauspicious 
dream, he reports it to the teacher the next morning. The teacher 
then allays the inauspicious elements by performing certain rituals. 
Then, the teacher worships the Lord. When this is complete,

--- PAGE 52 ---
40 
TANTRASARA 
the teacher enters inside the body of the disciple by the outlet of 
the pra,1:za in order to come in contact with the six presiding dei-
ties located in the six centers. Then, meditating on the forty-eight 
sarhsktiras, rites are performed in the body of the '"newly born 
child"; that is, the disciple, through contact with Brahma, Vi~r:iu, 
Rudra, Isvara. Sadasiva, and Siva, located in the hrda)'a, kantlza, 
talu, ghrumadhya, lala,ta, and brahmarandhra, respectively. The 
eight rites of purification are meditated upon differently in each 
of the six centers. Thus the number becomes complete, and as a 
result the disciple becomes twice born (dvlja). Then, causing the 
pra7Ja of the disciple to rest in the respective places for a while, 
the teacher comes out and gives him the mantra along with flow-
ers. Then he tells him the code of conduct (samaya) which he 
should follow as long as he lives. 
Chapter Fourteen 
This chapter describes the procedure of initiation called putraka. 
On the third day after anointment, a ma~ifi.ala or diagram con-
sisting of three tridents with a lotus on each prong is drawn on 
the ground. All the rituals described in this chapter are to be 
performed in relation to it. Those groups of deities called the 
"external retinues" and the "deities at the door" are worshipped 
outside. Then, in front of the mandala, moving from northeast 
to southeast, Ganefa, one's teach~r· (guru), the teacher's teacher 
(paramagurus), the lineage of previous teachers, the yoginis. the 
Goddess of Speech (VagISvarI), and k!jetrapalas are worshipped. 
After receiving their permission, the teacher worships the nine 
paths (adhvas) in the tridents. On the middle prong of the middle-
most trident, ,the Goddess Sripara and Bhai rava are worshipped: 
the Goddess Sriapara is worshipped on the left, and the Goddess 
Sriparapara on the right. On the trident to the right, Srlparapara is 
placed in the middle prong, while on the trident to the left Srrnpara 
is placed in the middle. Bhagavan is the supreme Goddess, and 
because of her presence everywhere, all activities become perfect.

--- PAGE 53 ---
INTRODUCTION 
41 
and therefore all the rituals should be performed in the middle-
most prong of the middle trident. 
Then, the teacher meditates on the unification of the jar 
(kumbha), kalasa, ma~z(lala, agni, and the self as one. He cog-
nizes the all-pervading aham as being present everywhere through 
the method known as mantranadi prayoga. 
He sees to it that all the articles for the ritual are not collected 
in a miserly way. If the person is poor, on the other hand, maha-
ma~z(lala yaga is not recommended. 
Then, the author describes animal sacrifice (pasu homa). 
When it is complete, the teacher brings the disciple in front of him 
and performs al 1 the adlzvanyasas in his body, and purifies his 
inauspicious deeds, provided he is desirous of blzoga. In the case 
of the disciple who desires mok$a, both his auspicious and inaus-
picious deeds should be purified. Then, the teacher, reflecting on 
the main mantra, purifies all the adhvas abiding in the disciple's 
body, meditating on the nondual nature of Siva. 
After attaining oneness of consciousness, the teacher abides 
in the body of the disciple from his toes to the top of his head, 
and having absorbed the consciousness of the disciple's body, the 
teacher rests, along with the disciple, in the ocean of bliss, which 
is in essence the wealth of freedom. The teacher merges along 
with him into the Lord, resplendent with icclza, jiiana. and kriya. 
Thus, the disciple becomes non-different from the Lord. If the 
disciple is desirous of blzoga, the teacher unites him with that par-
ticular principle. Finally. the teacher bestows on him a pure body 
for performing deeds in mundane life. 
Chapter Fifteen 
This chapter describes the initiation given to a dying person. The 
recipient of such a dik$ti is a person who has been suffering from 
an incurable disease. The teacher, after making nyflsa of all the 
adlzvas in him and purifying them one after the other, performs 
a ny{/sa called marmakartanl, by which he severs all the delicate

--- PAGE 54 ---
42 
TANTRASARA 
joints and brings his consciousness to brahmarandhra. For the 
purpose of unification (yojana), he then offers the final oblation 
into the fire. Thus, the disciple becomes one with Paramasiva. 
Chapter Sixteen 
In this chapter, the author describes the method of initiation that 
is given to those who are dead and who are not present during the 
procedure. For the purpose of bestowing it on the departed soul, 
the teacher brings nearby a device known as mahajala prayoga, 
the application of a large net. To the person who is absent but not 
dead, this procedure is not followed. 
Chapter Seventeen 
This chapter gives the procedure known as liligoddhdra: it simply 
means "rescuing a person from a fallen state." It is performed for 
o_ne who has gone away from the right track by receiving i nitia-
tion from persons belonging to other systems, such as Vai~1)ava, 
Bauddha, and other lower Saiva schools. However, the teacher will 
~ran.t this type of initiation only when he becomes convinced that 
saktzpata ~as definitely occurred in a prospective disciple. 
Accord,1?g to the author, the Trika is the superior system, for all 
the oth~r sastras, as preached by Kapila and others, lead the seeker 
to attam release from prakrti, but they do not help him attain 
release fr.om n1llya. On the other hand, Saivcigamas. as expounded 
by the Tnka, lead everybody to the ultimate immediately. 
Chapter Eighteen 
In this chapter the method of abhiseka is described. Abhiseka is 
given both to putraka and accirya types of disciples, provided they 
have received the sablja form of initiation. The term sabzja means 
"with seed," but it really signifies that this form of initiation is 
given to those who are competent enough to follow certain strict

--- PAGE 55 ---
INTRODUCTION 
43 
rules of conduct during their lifetime. On the other hand, the nir-
bija form of initiation is given to old and decrepit persons who are 
less assiduous and therefore unable to follow strict codes of con-
duct as enjoined by the holy text. 
Ahhi~eka is restrictive in the sense that not everybody is con-
sidered competent enough to receive it. In particular, acarytibhi-
~eka is given to those who, after receiving initiation, have attained 
proficiency in tigamic knowledge; those who have restraint over 
their body, mind, and speech; those who follow the duties as 
enjoined by the scripture; those who have become proficient in 
unification of the adhvas in their respective order (adhvtinusan-
dhana); those who have gained perfection in the highest knowl-
edge by 1 istening to it from their teacher; and those who continue 
mental exertion for retaining it, followed by meditative thought 
(fruta, cinta, and bhavana) terminating in identity with Siva. The 
author categorically states that even after receiving abhi~eka, only 
one who has really attained perfection in the highest knowledge is 
worthy of bestowing grace to others. 
Chapter Nineteen 
The funeral sacrifice is the final rite for every human being. Ini-
tiation is given during that period only to a person who, though he 
belonged to the highest Saiva order. on account of some unknown 
factor lost the tradition and expired without performing the rites of 
atonement before death. Such a person is given initiation when his 
body is placed on the funeral pyre. 
For the purpose of rescuing the deceased, all the rituals are 
performed upon the body. The final offering into the fire (pllr-
nahuti) is performed by burning the body. In order to convince 
ignorant people, the person who initiates causes the dead body to 
shake. He does this by means of kriyll, j1hlna, and yoga. though it 
is not necessary for the release of the soul. 
If the deceased person cannot he given initiation during the 
burning of his corpse, he may be given initiation during his frad-

--- PAGE 56 ---
44 
TANTRASARA 
dha rite. The teacher takes a ball of rice in his hand and meditates 
on it as the form of the energizing Sak ti, and by doing so, the soul 
of the dead person is possessed. This food is considered to be the 
portion of animal-like quality of the soul and is really the thing to 
be enjoyed. When both the bhogya and bhogya sakti become uni-
fied by the meditation of the acarya, it becomes fit to be offered 
to the supreme enjoyer, the Lord. Thus, leaving the animalistic 
portion behind, which is the essence of the bhogya, the bhogya 
sakti, along with the self, is offered to the supreme bhokta, the 
Lord. In this way, the soul becomes identical with Him. It should 
be remembered that the final procedure is preceded by the homa 
sacrifice and other rituals. 
In this chapter, the author raises a relevant question: whether 
for the knower of reality (tattva jnanin), rituals such as sraddha 
and others are necessary or not. He answers saying that when, by 
the light of true knowledge, darkness has been totally removed 
from the enlightened one, there is no need of a final ritual like 
antye~ti fraddha, etc. But, for the people who had been closely 
associated with the departed one, the day of his unification with 
the Supreme is observed as a day of parva, the day which causes 
fullness of consciousness in him. 
Chapter Twenty 
~he present section discusses the disciple's obligations, known as 
se~avartana, the duties that should be carried out unti 1 the end of 
h.is life. T~e~e ?uties are of three kinds: obligatory (nitya}, occa-
s10nal (namzztttka), and krunya, those performed for the fulfill-
ment of some desire. 
The nitya procedure is described in the following way: One 
should get up early in the morning and call to mind one's desired 
deity first. After completing his essential activities, 1 i ke wash-
ing, etc., and cleansing himself, he should take his seat facing 
north. He then purifies his body, the place where he sits, and his 
mind. Then he performs nyasa upon the appropriate places with

--- PAGE 57 ---
INTRODUCTION 
45 
the mantra, followed by displaying an appropriate mudrti. Then 
he performs dhyana in two ways: first, abiding in duality, and 
then in a mixed dual-nondual way. Next, mental worship of the 
deity is performed in the body, then in pra~w, in the intellect, and 
finally in the void (vyoma). This is followed by japa, and finally 
the completed sequence of worship is offered to the deity. All this 
is to be performed every day, in every sandhya, for the purpose of 
achieving identification with the deity. Four sandhyas have been 
mentioned in Chapter Six. According to the author, through medi-
tation during sandhya, endless absorption (anantatanmayi bhava) 
in the Supreme comes about, which in turn gives birth to a lasting 
state. 
The worshipper should worship his deity in the altar (sthm:z-
(1.ila). He should view it as a clear sky with the characteristics 
of consciousness, where all the deities are shining as reflected 
therein. Viewing bare open ground really signifies invocation 
(avahana). This practice ensures that the disciple identifies with 
the desired deity and the highest mantra. 
Invocation of the all-pervading Lord is not possible; only 
desire (vasana) for the Lord is invoked and drawn within, since 
the great Lord can neither be invoked or withdrawn. 
The person who is totally absorbed in the highest mantra in the 
way stated above becomes free from the stains of animal proclivi-
ties and is finally able to put an end to all bonds by the blow of 
bhakti. After that, whatever remains is the most agreeable object 
for the worshipper. 
Then, the author describes the activities related to the parvas, 
which are performed occasionally by the disciple. 
Chapter Twenty-One 
This chapter presents the authority of agamas. In the Tantra/aka, 
agama has been defined as a well-known fact of old, as prasid-
dhi. It also emphasizes the point that even agreement and contra-
riety (anvaya and vyatireka), which are the very life of inference.

--- PAGE 58 ---
46 
TANTRASARA 
also depend on prasiddhi. Similarly, perception looks for prasid-
dhi as its support; for without its help, which is thought to be of 
the nature of self-reflection (svtitmavimarsatmika prasiddhi), it 
would not be possible to consider anything as acceptable or avoid-
able. Therefore, prasiddhi lies at the root of every worldly transac-
tion. The great Lord, who is all-perfect, with the characteristic of 
I-consciousness, and who is omniscient, is the source of all pra-
siddhis. He, the Lord is adorned with a multitude of prasiddlzis 
with the form of enjoy~ent (bhoga) and release (apava rga). 
The entire universe is of the nature of consciousness, which is 
nothing but reflective nature, and that again is, in essence. sound. 
The reflection (vimarfanam) of objects contained hy the univers_e. 
and of the diverse relations of past deeds and their result~. is 
known as holy texts (sastra). All the sastras are not really d1ffer-
e~t from the nature of Paramesvara. The holy texts have a single 
aim; yet, because of the limiting condition of niyati, people are 
strongly attached to only a portion of them. Therefore, some fol-
low the dual system and others are attached to the nondual. In 
the end, the author concludes that a particular agama should 
be resorted to only after it has been shown to produce excel Jent 
results. 
Chapter Twenty-Two 
This last ch 
. 
-
l 
Id b 
apter explams the nature of Kulacara. It s 1ou 
e 
noted at the outset that this form of worship is not meant for every-
body b 
· 
the.' 
~t 
1
~ only for those who are well advanced, and in whom 
mchnat1on for performing such rituals has grown strong: only 
b~c.ause of this are they entitled to perform th is worship of the 
divme according to this method. 
. 
When a person becomes free from determination (vikalpa) and 
IS able to attain steadiness in the indeterminate state (nirvikalpa), 
?n.ly then is. one entitled to worship according to kulakrama, for 
It .Is s.tated In the Tantraloka that if, during the performance of 
this ntual. one thinks of the object of worship as different from

--- PAGE 59 ---
INTRODUCTION 
47 
himself, he fails to attain either siddhi or mukti. One who has 
plunged into the secret of this ritual and follows its course is really 
endowed with the highest knowledge. Therefore, Jayaratha writes 
in his commentary on Tantraloka 29: 102 that those great souls 
who are really free from vikalpas take up this course, as pre-
scribed by the Kula system. Particularly, they follow the course 
only to see if their mind, in the presence of allurements, is truly 
steady in pure consciousness (Sa!Jzvidadvaite) or not. For this rea-
son, they do not think it immoral to practice in the company of 
female partners (duti). 
Kula ritual is performed in six different ways, namely: (1) 
externally, (2) in sakti, (3) in one's own body, (4) in the unity of 
both male and female, (5) in the vital energy, and (6) in conscious-
ness. The worshippers are of two kinds: those who desire enjoy-
ment (siddhis) and those desirous of liberation (mukti). Those 
desirous of siddhis should perform kulayaga according to the 
methods listed as second, fourth, and fifth, while those who desire 
liberation should perform the sixth. 
The author gives a short description of each of the methods in 
a cryptic way. In the past, the tradition was to be handed down 
orally, only to those qualified; therefore, many of the matters are 
not very clear to us. Therefore, we prefer to say little about this 
secret cult. 
H. N. Chakravarty

--- PAGE 60 ---
Tantrasara of Abhinavagupta

--- PAGE 61 ---
<i"""?tfll{: 
~ 
i:p•n ™ 
Cf5J1 ' 
fc:t A C1 d5C1 I SITT:rrft:F1 cffl ~A 
t5 I ~ 
~ Ra a i ~ q sa ':!)'© lJca '6 ru Jf T01 Cf): 
%~~~ 
IAC'ifl])')Ra~ lctfaflJfAd 
@G:~ A ii1'<1 'ici C1x1 Bli ti f\j)'J'<ci I a, I 9 I I 
Chapter One 
May my heart (hrdaya) pulsate in the form of emission 
(visarga) embodying the nectar of supreme transcen-
dence by the close union of the pair: Siva and Sakti 
(ytimala). One of the pair is Vimalakala, the mother 
who has taken within herself a new creation (Abhi-
nava) in the form of light, and the other is the father, 
Pancamukha Siri1hagupta, who is the embodiment of 
perfection and is intent on expressing himself in the 
fivefold activity. 
Exposition: The above benedictory verse hints at a number of 
technical terms or concepts commonly used in the doctrine of 
Trika Saivism. In this context, the word heart (lzrdaya) indicates 
universal hliss (jagadananda), which unifies everything into an 
undivided singularity of consciousness. Its form is an ever-shin-
ing light, knowing neither rising nor setting. Restfulness is its 
very nature. The author as pi res to attain and realize that heart of 
C()nsciousness. 
Another technical term found in this verse is vamala, which is 
described as the highest equilibrium, [a union] .of both Siva and 
51

--- PAGE 62 ---
52 
TANTRASARA 
Sakti. This is a union in which Siva is neither Siva nor Sakti, and 
Sakti is neither Sakti nor Siva, but each is the combined union 
of both. This union is also known as coitus (salizgaf,fa). In the 
creative process, [expanding from] this union, all the principles, 
known as tattvas, emerge. Throughout this process of creation, 
the nondual nature of the absolute equilibrium remains tranquil, 
like a waveless ocean. This process of creation is the result of a 
slight impulse of creativity, an upsurge in the form of a vibrating 
agitation, causing the unity to break. This absolute union (yamala, 
smizgaffa) remains in its pristine state, even in the process of cre-
a~~on. Dur!ng that process of creation, 'It' first shows itself as two 
[Siva and Sakti], expanding outward into three, and then many. 
The word kula ordinarily means 'body,' but in this context it 
refers to the seventeenth kala, the immortal phase of the moon. 
The word visarga is the 'emission of drops' emerging from perfect 
~exual union. The drops reflect the colors of [Siva and Sakti]: one 
is white and the other red. It tends to move outside [into the mani-
fested universe] and creates the bodies of all living beings. In the 
Tantric doctrine, visarga is stated to be hardhakala, one-half of 
t .. ~e sound 'ha.' The mother is none but the autonomous energy of 
Sr~'a, with whom she remains inseparably united. The nature of 
t?1s autonomous energy, which is beyond all limitations, is 'reflec-
tive awareness' (vimarfa). This verse also indicates that Vima-
lakala ;vas the name of Abhinava's mother. The father is the five-
faced .Siva [with each face represented by one] of the five saktis: 
c_onsc10usness, bliss, will, knowledge, and action. They are the 
five .outlet~ through which everything becomes manifest, or in the 
lummo~s imagery Abhinavagupta often employs, through which 
the entire universe shines. Each of Siva's 'faces' is ever-engaged 
in performing one of his five functions through these .foktis. These 
five functions are: creation, maintenance, dissolution, veiling, and 
bestowing grace. 
ru C"1 cHfF?l 1 Ml Cf.>1 ru J 11 f% cj) ~Cf ~ I Cf\'Jl ci ~: I 
*IJj)cfcFi ru '<fa C"1 f1"l ci ~ a '01 f1 I;( (l<l:" ~UJR I I ~ I I

--- PAGE 63 ---
TANTRASARA 
53 
As everyone is not capable of delving deep into the long 
text of the Tantrtiloka, this Tantrastira is composed in 
simple language. Therefore, please listen to it. 
m~~~ 
I 'fdS{"ci {O IR q I a l>'i ~I q l I a f=i Cf>l a J:t I 
3:rfc;""FiC:PJ)L("fgtl~J1ilamruja A@~l'iJ1"i@a1: 11~11 
By falling at the feet of the venerable sun-like Sambhu-
natha, whose rays have removed all limitations from the 
lotus heart of Abhinavagupta, please collect this for the 
purpose of worshipping Mahefa. 
~ ~ 
m 
a"1 Cf5 I'< o i ~·"ifl"hi ffl ~ $4 H ffl fc:Rlti Cf5("C1 I a,; fufuti q 
~ 
ef~ ~ 
q; ITT ~f;st:llciJ:t 3fFPtr<~~~. fdq••naP1-?(]~1c-Ach 
:a- I ~ 
~ mCf5fqfCI~ "ffg;')frj(1\;i~lc-Acb, c=racr q 1Ifld51{Uj f=if11{ffl 
~ 
er~ lifff-;:ruf~ I ITT m~ ~ 
cfianf~ RCIRcilfcr, 
ffil ~ cfianfq ~f~ 3FrWClf11~1c-ACh ~ 
~ 
;:r ~-~ 
TI~~ 
~cf 
ct5 fC1 I fl 
a fCI ~J)f~ I Cl ~l J1 "i I'{<) q I~ I cfl a-TTm 
~ I 
c=r?r 3fW Cl f1 I <0'11 c-A ch ~f~~Cf "$4"Fl" ~UR+=(, ~Cf q 3lW ffl A I ;:i 
tff~ ~ 
f-;:ref~, fcl Cf)fq f=i fuw I f1 ffl 3if& ffifq I '""ci a I q acrm;: 
Tl\l 
1 fci ct5 r-q 1 f=i ef 
LR1 -"ftfcl 0l ct51 ~'*'cf! f%" 3Tic=m ~ 1 ci ~ ~ 
~ 
"ff"Cf m 
f1A*"C""!Clftj)~ f1~5~R-9d~lc-Acb ~~~ 
I c=ru:r ~llf.51~cf~ I 
~ 
:c:l" ~ 
9iRmf~Cf ~A Io 1 l=( I ~ q '< ~ 11 f.51l ffi I "i I A claj ITT c1~;:r 
3f9ql1A1a, 
c:mwfc=rf~-~fmf~*'qo11-c,a, 
<9-;:r 
~q{lllA1ffi 
~ 
c=rrcrc=r "(!CT ~ 
fef+iT~' ;:r "ff"Cf~' "ff"Cf~ ~ fum~ 
~ 
~ { ~ 11 f5i , q 5iH;>il ill ( 1=fti) tl ~ 11 ISCl I ct~ I Cl~ t(/l{ef~ I c=rffisfq 
"ff"Cf~ ~ 
"ISfSU~ll-eilfuT I ~i<::flsfq lTifrr;::fifclJ1~A I act;:alf<lm~: 
' 
' 
"Bct5 fl~ 1~1 Cfl'l1 P1 *' q ~ 
1 ;:r q 3:rf~ a ci f(j)ci =c=q ffl 11mc=cf A1 a ct5c=d 
m, ~J)CS!'ffl $1H~CI <l~l'{<)qfCilci, ~ 
I ~Wtt1$4H:JtC1C""Qlfl q{q){)til~ 
afff1CS!'~ ~ 
3-TR~ I 
According to this system, knowledge is the cause of libera-
tion (mok~a), because it opposes or contradicts ignorance, which

--- PAGE 64 ---
54 TANTRASARA 
is the cause of bondage. Ignorance is twofold. 1 One abides in the 
intellect (buddhigata), and the other lies in the self (paztru$a). The 
one which abides in the intellect is ignorance of the nature of real-
ity (anifrayasvabhavam) and an erroneous conception of the Self 
as non-self (viparltanifraya). On the other hand, the ignorance 
lying in the self (pauru~a) is of the nature of thought-constructs 
(vikalpa), characterized by a limited form of the light of con-
sciousness. This type of ignorance is the root cause of worldly 
existence. This topic will be discussed in the section dealing with 
the nature of impurity (mala). The ignorance abiding in the self 
(pauru~a) can be removed by means of initiation and other similar 
procedures. However, even initiation in the presence of the igno-
:ance characterized by indeterminacy (anadhyavasaya) remains 
meffective. This is because initiation is preceded by a determinate 
conviction as to what is to be accepted and what is to be rejected, 
and is followed by the purification of the principles (tattvas) and 
unification with Siva. Thus, the attainment of that determinative 
k?owledge steadily abiding in the plane of the intellect is the prin-
~ipal factor. Indeed, this practice uproots the ignorance abiding 
1 ~ the self (pauru~a), because when consciousness in the form of 
vzkalpa is practiced, it ultimately terminates in consciousness free 
from vikalpa. 2 
The Self (atma) is the light of consciousness (prakasa) free 
from the li}llitation of thought-constructs (vikalpa), and is the very 
nature of Siva. Therefore, the attainment of the 'right knowledge 
?fa deter.minate nature' (samyannifrayatmaka171 jiianam) regard-
mg all Objects in every respect is desirable. The attainment of this 
knowledge is preceded by study of the holy texts (fastras). The holy 
texts are authoritative, as they are revealed by the highest Lord 
(Paramesvara). The subject matter as enunciated by other scrip-
tures is accepted as distinct, not directly related to the totality of 
know1edge, and is proved by arguments not directly related to that 
subject matter. Therefore, the knowledge taught in other holy texts 
(agamas) is said to grant liberation only up to a certain extent. but

--- PAGE 65 ---
TANTRASARA 
55 
not from all bondage. On the other hand, the holy texts revealed 
by the Lord Paramesvara bestow release from all sorts of bondage. 
The holy texts (taught by Paramesvara) come in a fivefold stream3 
and are divided into groups of ten, eighteen, and sixty-four. The 
most perfect among them are the texts named Trika, the quintes-
sence of which is the Malinlvijaya tantra. The subject matter con-
tained therein is difficult to gather and properly elucidate. Without 
the proper ascertainment of the essence of reality, this knowledge 
neither possesses the property of liberation nor is instrumental in 
granting it. It is only unblemished knowledge that possesses such 
a nature. The highest human end has its root in knowledge, which 
should be practiced in one's own being. It is for the attainment of 
this type of knowledge that I begin writing this text. 
3-rnR ~ ~ 
~ 
~ 
art4ia 
~uf $'1 H CBC'il ~~ <ref~ FllfC1<1t JI mm I 
~ fa I ~1 ~Ji ft I c-Ji fi Fa '1~ m 
aT &]" a "i I Jj)"i I 
~UT~CB'<l.lrn Rf~ iqJ$1iqafci ~ 
11 
The lack of right knowledge (ajiiana) is explained in 
the holy texts to be the cause of bondage. It is known 
as impurity (mala). At the rise of perfect knowledge 
it is uprooted in its entirety. Upon the emergence of 
Self-consciousness, at the time when all impurities are 
destroyed, release (mok~a) is attained. For this reason, 
I shal 1, with the help of this text, reveal the real nature 
of that which is to be known. 
' 
3q I C§'lci: 
d?I ~ ~~Trcr 'QCf ~m~c:;r:, ~ q-
~ci:11c11..-1i 
>ra~1~1*'ci 
l!CT 
3-Tqmrvr~ ~~1TCT"fTT~qq~:, ~ ~ ~FTCB: qCf)T~~ 
c=rfac-1-<tc1~~~~n "fCf'l-ncr*~'l-TTCrT"f(; ~~1cf5IC"llc1m -a-
3-~ 
-q cq~ , cr<:ITefq-
("f 0i CB I ~I fCI ~ I Cl fa I fl , "$fc=r 1!CP gq ~ CB I~ I : , ~ gq 7a"

--- PAGE 66 ---
56 TANTRASARA 
~I 
31V~ Ch I~ I {Clq I IB ~ 
~ 
"ffCfmm 3-lfefCTTG: t!Cf I ~ u s:i Cf) I!~ n 
~ 4'<ct~=. ~Ch1~1q~a w 
41'<ct;::;;;lq+=t, s:iCb1~<:ia1 -u s:ict51~11;a'<1qf~q, 
~ t:l" ~Chl~ll"""ct~ f*f'XRl W"f<l ~ 
'{q(i;:;;:;j l!Cf): s:iCbl~I:, ~ICi~lctq 
' 
t:l" -e:~IChlC'11Chl'<ldJ9G:fcH61ct, d:ilq(f)l Rcx:r: ~~'<ICbl'<felmcr:, 
~ 
t:l" '«!lcF?QJOt 3"lH;::a:~1fu5:, Cifr:Pici:t>I'< 
$i:81~1fffi:, s:iCbl~l'{ClqCil 
fo mfus =, Jl 1+:1~1 fc-+:1Chct1 $11"W1 fu5:, ~Cb 
1 '< <:il fnc:cf f¢t> <:n ~ 1 Rn: ~ 
~~~ 
mffif~ ~ffiTsfq ~ 
$i81$11"if'ctS<:il~IRnqm: 3-FTQ"f~ 
~Chl~ll RIJil ... Hifct~ 1)1q{t)q:' ~ ~ 'Ri ICi;:;;:;ll ICi 341<-·A 1;:1 ~~~ 
' 
~JI I. 
' 
3-TQ~ JlOJRfci ~I 
Y)"i'<N q fd lc-Al'""1 fq(i;:;;:;j(il:i I s:iCbl~ll:lfa I~ 
3"l"iafm::i~ct51~1~1a'{Clqctl10 ~a:>1~1ci 1 "Ci?ITfq ~ 
1a'""?l'la~11c=t ~~a 
"{"qlc-+:11-=i ~Ch1~11qm mLITd err, mq1<:ic-8sfLr ~err ~ 
err f~ 
"CIT 
31~~ ~ 
~m ~*~;:r 
w:rm~. C1?f ~ru~ 
~~:mr3qfd:~;qci I 
Introduction 
In this world, 'innate nature' (svabhava) 4 is the highest aim to 
be attained. This innate nature belonging to all entities is of the 
nature of 'light' (prakasa), 5 as that which is not 1 ight cannot be 
proved to be this innate nature. Furthermore, that 1 ight is only 
one [literally translated: 'it is not more than one'], for there is an 
absence of existence of any other innate nature in that light which 
is different from it. This is because of the non-existence of dif-
ferentiation in that light. Time and space cannot bring or cause 
differentiation in it, for they possess that 1 ight as their innermost 
nature. Therefore, the light is indeed only one, and that 1 ight alone 
is consciousness. The nature of consciousness is to bring illumina-
tion [manifestation] to all objects. In this regard there is no differ-
ence of opinion among scholars. 
This shining of that light is not dependent on anything outside 
of itself. The state of being illuminated by another 1 ight should 
certainly be called dependence, as the state of being illuminated

--- PAGE 67 ---
TANTRASARA 
57 
depends on others for its illumination. However, in the absence of 
any other 1 ight, there is only this single and 'autonomous' (svatan-
tra) light. It is precisely because of this independence that this 
light is not limited by time, space, or form. Therefore, it is all 
pervasive, eternal, and it has characteristics of being omniform, 
and at the same time it is devoid of any definite or specific form. 6 
The freedom belonging to that light is its energy of bliss (ananda), 
its relish of delight (camatkara) is its energy of will, its illumina-
tion is its energy of consciousness, its cognizance is its energy 
of knowledge, and its association with all forms is its energy of 
activity. In this way, although associated with the above principal 
energies, this unlimited light of the nature of Siva remains resting 
in its own bliss. Being of this nature, he, in the process of unfold-
ing or manifesting, takes on a limited form because of his freedom. 
Therefore, he is designated as atomic (a~rn). Then, he manifests 
himself as autonomous so that he again shines as that unlimited 
light of the nature of Siva.7 In this process, he manifests his own 
Self by the force of his own power of freedom either with or with-
out 'means' (upaya). If he manifests himself with means, then the 
iccha, jiicl na, and kriyasaktis are used as the means. In this way, 
the means appear to be threefold and the [state of] absorption 
(sanulvesa) 8 is then divided into sambhava, stikta. and ti~zava. In 
this text, the salient features of the fourfold means (upaya)
9 are 
gradually going to be explained. 10 
3ffi=BT ~ ct> I~ I Ci Y){"& fucr: fckF"?I : 
fd kF?lFi 4-<~ RJf fQ {<)q '""t I 
f1 "Cl§ I ca l:i (ij)+< fq >T~ li_ul 
c=ru:r ¢tSA 1¢tSACi~llC!~ fu~ 
11~11 
The Self with the body of light is Siva, lwho is] free. He, 
by the delightful sport of his power of autonomy, veils 
his innate nature and opens up his perfect form again, 
either with sequence or without it, or by three distinct 
means.

--- PAGE 68 ---
58 
TANTRASARA 
3l~ 3"Fj)4 Ill A q ~ 
CQ 11 {.~ I f<'l I+:! : I -ac:T ~ 
~¢"ft) q I Ci I ftj ct:: 
~ ll A q ~ 
ftj 8 all ra ~q 
l1flcfC:F"l J:t 3fflm<f I ClGJ ~., {i q I ~ Fa { f% a1 
R~1fua: 3R(:1 ~~ 
I 3l?f -a- "flCf5 ECf m~ 
~ 
cn0 rn-a-~ 
~ 
~, ? ~ 
- ms"lf ~~ 
fd~Cf)l~l'{(iq: fCllc-AI c==r?f ~ 
~~ 
-;i- ~'{Cl4fllm Rflkql("1 ~ mra: ~~kf)l~IAHfcHC"1, -;i-
3ilCHUlfct•1i:i: '3lliHUl«J d'5«1foc::fq ~~. 
;::i- ~~W:" 31-1~: 
Eli Ri R ffiflf 3lmcm=f I Cf5%JT?f ~ 
C"1 f<'i I fq c:£i Fa R "ft) f{:i 31-1qcffi: 
<IBlIB ~~ct 
fo 441 ?tafci cnm~ 3-TCPf-m=f / ~~;:r 3-Tefef~I 
Nrfof~{Jf11'1~,, 3ITTpfufii"<RllFlc=i" I ~ffi~ 
I 
~A 101~XTR, 
~: 
>l~101qlf;:affl ~~ 
~'{C)Yfllm~~ -a-, fCICi;"?j ~tr.=f 
~. ~-a3®=\~31;:a4f'll fu~ WM'ef~ ~ "¢ fcrfusa1~~ 
~~er~~ ~-m R'641lld5 ECT, ~-a- ;:r ~-~JfT-mr.=r­
q<JiffuRlF;;i!a1r cPTfu"q 
1 
Chapter Two 
In this chapter we will exclusively deal with anupa~va. 11 
Vv_'hen a person 'keenly touched by energy' (saktipclta) discerns 
by himself thus, after listening to the words of his teacher only 
once, then his permanently awakened absorption in to the Lord 
has ta~en place without any means (anupaya). In this instance, 
reasonmg alone (tarka eva) is taken to be a limb of yoga. Other-
wise, how could discernment be possible? If this is the question. 
we reply: What can be accomplished by ·means' (upaya) regard-
ing the supreme Lord who is self-manifest and one's own self? 
This cannot be the attainment of 'innate nature'(svah/u/w1), as 
innate nature is eternally present; it cannot be the attainment of 
the recognition (jiiapti) of Paramesvara, as Paramesvara is self-
iJJuminating; it cannot be the removal of the veils, as the existence 
of any veils [in that supreme reality] is impossible~ it cannot be 
the penetration of one into the other, as the one who is enter-

--- PAGE 69 ---
TANTRASARA 
59 
ing and the one who is entered into are not different from each 
other. Then, what could the role of upaya be, as the existence of 
anything separate from that reality cannot be proved? Therefore, 
the entire universe is a unique consciousness alone, beyond the 
mutation of time and limitation of space. Furthermore, this con-
sciousness is unaffected by the "accidental attributes" (upadhi); 
it is not restricted by shape and form; it cannot be conveyed by 
words; nor be described by the instruments of knowledge. It is the 
cause (nimitta) of the very nature of time, down to the instruments 
of valid knowledge, manifested by his free will. In essence, it is 
an autonomous, condensed bliss, which is "I" myself (aham). In 
that innermost core of mine, the universe shines as a reflection. 
The absorption related to the supreme Lord, [attained by] one who 
discerns with firm conviction in this way, is not dependent on any 
means. This kind of person does not need to be restrained by dis-
ciplines, such as taking recourse to sacred syllables, rituals, medi-
tation, and observance of spiritual practices. 
3q1lfoi1ri ;:i-rnct s:tct51~1il(\ 
U"t;:r RB mfu fH5 f.i ctl fUfu: I 
ru a 
-a~ rn <ta Jj)G: 1-<c;:~f;:i = 
~s:tct51~i ~I 
It.. 11 
The multitude of means (upaya) does not reveal Siva. 
Could the thousand-rayed sun be illuminated by a jar? 
That person of broad vision, while discerning thus, 
enters immediately into self-manifest Siva. 
31~ <jOcillF"il~d5~ I 
31~~1 
~"f!C\ ~ ct> I ~ I ~Li ~ I Cl Ci n:l '""l :rff51=( I ITT 3"1 '1@! 0 $A 0 $fl m-r ~~ 
;:i-
~fu. eKr ta1a~~1R=PBcr 3TIUCPt ~ 
Rfcfct5fQACf ~'<ClflAla~ 
' 
' 
~cmsrIB. 3-T<::f --a- ~ 
JWw: - ~f~ 
~, ci J1, a mw-TTR -ITT~ kl A 1 ?i 
mffim~a-roTiqa ("Cl I<"\. ~ w -ITT~ kl f<'i r=ra-rut - ~ ~~;:i-

--- PAGE 70 ---
60 TANTRASARA 
i11 fti a '"l ~ 
3F~ CQ 1 fli ~~ 
mfu- CK( m=ill'~, ~ 
'&1 *1 q fl:l a 
~, ffi ~ ~G:Ct, TFU ~ urur, m~rifQ~f $Cf ~~, 
~~CiCJ)'J~lrufY~IT err 3"l~:'{"tl~f~~ 
I ~~ 
cx:IT-f8- I -;:i- ff:~~ 
~ 
Ci(d)llfCLllfU~IA'il~~~: I -;:rrfq ~ 
~ 
efUFr: ~ 
3l~ 
c=r<:IT-< ~1 J 11 Ci C5f4 q '<AH H I'< PlTI<1 q I -;:r q ill -;:r ~ 
~"ITT CG: C'"H Rt f1l If ITT 
m~ I ~sfq~~CPTsfticrfm~~IJIU§~I ~~~fCbl\QI: 
~ 
I Fc:f (;fW ~ 
~farnf~ mfu- c=l"~Cf fu~ ~9d'<~ct51~l I 
~ 
3-T?f ~ 
fu5 ~ 
? m~ fchfo<=t I ~ 
f~ 3"lct51'<01c:h Cffl ? 
~ ~ ~~ - ~ fcj;) m~a1a1-q~, ~&J ~~:rr.R"a 
~ICi~lq'{q~fol m~, fu~~Wfh=ctl-c>ci fu9dk-Act5C"Ci 
wrcm:, fifa-=Aci IB- fa:~ Ja~f\Q ~~,~er 
ff: fu~, 
m ~, ~ 
m:m~u1R("Ct'"l ~, rru:r CfTCR1 fu9d1c-Act5C"Ci 
~~~~3"l'il'iti ~, ~~ 
~*1YlrilA~f~qq-R: 
I ~ 
{<iq HI A ~f ~ m-
cH~j)C"ll ~Cf ~I ~ 
9-tl 3-l-d -;:r mct-f"C1"Cf5: I 
3f"fq ~ ft:R=fq~ I Cl Ci I A I ?H I ;a {l zrcP: q '< """11 G: w4 
3TI):" , ~ -:er 
l'l I a Ii 
fu~~~ 
~1Ht5d5C'11q: cild""fl'"l ~l'i~lfci I 
Chapter Three 
One who is unable to enter the unbroken circle of light, 12 already 
explained as the reality of Siva, [who takes recourse to] view-
ing the power of autonomy (svatantrya) 13 as extraneous to him, 
experiences the indeterminate (nirvikalpa) absorption helonging 
to Bhairava. What follows are the instructions leading to this type 
of absorption. 
AIJ these multitudes of beings (bhtivas) are merely reflections 
in the void of consciousness 14 because they possess the charac-
teristic marks of reflection. These are the characteristic marks of 
reflection. That which cannot shine separately, but shines when 
merged with others, is known as reflection; for example, the 
reflection of the shape or form of the face in a mirror, the reflec-
tion of a taste in saliva, the reflection of a smell in the nose. the

--- PAGE 71 ---
TANTRASARA 
61 
reflection of sexual touch in the organ of pleasure, the reflection 
of a sensation of sharp contact by a spear or lance in the inner 
organ of touch, or the reflection of an echo in the void. However, 
this taste is not the original, 15 and being only the effect of that pri-
mary principle. it is not known to cure diseases, etc. In the same 
way, smel I and touch are not considered original because in the 
absence of the principal subject (gu~zina~1), the existence of smell 
and touch cou Id not even be postulated, and more so because they 
do not set in motion any series of effects or results. On the other 
hand, we cannot say that these two are non-existent, as shaking of 
the limbs and emission of semen can be seen. Even a sound is not 
original because someone utters it and the approaching of its echo 
can be heard. 
Thus, just as an echo, etc., appears shining as a reflection, 
similarly the universe is reflected in the light of the Lord. Now, 
the question can be raised: What is the 'original image' (bimba) of 
this reflection? The answer is that there is none. Does this mean 
that the reflection of the universe is without cause? Alas! Your 
query is then aimed at finding a cause. In that case, what would 
be the purpose of verbal reasoning? The cause will indeed be 
the Sakti belonging to the Lord, whose other name is 'autonomy' 
(svatantrya). This Sakti is the immanence of the Lord because 
She is the bearer of the reflection of the universe. This universe is 
permeated with consciousness. and this universe is the locus of the 
manifestation of that consciousness. That consciousness indeed is 
this universe in which it is reflected in the reverse order. There-
fore, the Lord is designated as the bearer of the reflection. Fur-
thermore, the Lord's innate nature. which includes the totality of 
immanence. cannot be devoid of reflective awareness (amarsa), 
because the one who is consciousness cannot be devoid of reflec-
tive awareness regarding his own Self. If. however, consciousness 
lacks self-awareness (awareness of its own innate nature), then 
it would condescend to the level of insentiency (ja{/a). 16 Further-
more. self-reflective awareness is not created by convention, but 
is experienced as being inseparable from the innate nature of

--- PAGE 72 ---
62 
TANTRASARA 
consciousness, and impregnated with the 'supreme sound· (para-
nada).17 This supreme sound reflects all the multitudes of energies 
belonging to the Lord, which determine this universe. 
"ITTf ~'L~lffilqfl ~ 
~~ 
~lffi~:-~~-~-~lSf ~. 
~4'<1JWf~lP=t Jr-~-3~ ~Cif+"lltlCf Ga~1a ~= ~1f-m~qsa: ~. 
~ 
FQ f%" fu~~'<I~~=·, $m1~1ilcr fcrmf~ t~. ~lSf l!Cf IB 
fu~llf~{<)f#: ~ f~~l~I~'): ~. 
c=re:Cfq'<IA~f?t~~ 3-TT-t-JJ ~ 
I 
mf ~mm 4'<PWblct ~iJlllfll'<("Cll(\ ~~f,i=tci'), ~ 
Y'<:IA~f~ 
fuf$l Ir~ ti:l mcrr-~t:rR:ml fl1 A I \J:i Cf) A I 
~ 
l'l I Cl ("d) A f~ 
~>mm ;rITttr 
1 'llGJ C1 $~'~'tt ~m ~ CP-4 ~m~ 
~elf( 
$G!:iJ=tlOl'""l ~~~J=tlOl'""l ~-:a-~. (1G1 3ffa ID ~~ ~Cf)l~IAl~trf 
"{.sefc=r: I fer~ 
r=r~fu: 
I ~ 
~~I 
Cf c=a I C"t I $ tX"i A I 0 i -a- ;r 
<Sll~Cifl ~. 
~'JG{<)4~ ~Cf R+=tfui ~. 
~ ~ 
tvA" CTT, 3Rf: 
3i~'JGC"Cllfl FQ ~~ 
~:. -;r ~5\J1'1Cfft ~"Cl:' I ~%Uf"W1~ 
3~<hl§lli1UIR("Cllfl ~~ 
-?H:-~-W-~ ~I 
The Lord possesses three principal powers, namely. the 
supreme (anuttara), will (iccha), and act of unfolding (1111 me~a). 
These threefold cognitive reflections (partimarsa) are ··a, .. •· i, .. 
"~1. ''
13 Out of these three main powers, multitudes of power evolve. 
Ananda
19 "a" rests in anuttara "a," lsana "l" rests in icclzd. while 
armi '~u" rests in wune~a. This (lirmi) is the initial stage of the 
evolut10·n· of the energy of activity (kriyti !.fakti). The first group 
of cogmt1ve reflections (paramarsa), that is, ''"a," '"'i," and ""u,'' 
being essentially part of light, are identified with the sun. The 
second group of reflective cognitions. that is. "ti,., ... I.,. and "(t ... 
being of the nature of repose and predominantly blissful hy nature. 
are identified with the moon. Up to this point. even the slightest 
trace of activity has not entered (into the process of manifestation). 
When, however, in the power of will (iccha) and in 'the power of 
wil1 to Jord over' (lfana), activity enters. then they are cal led 'the 
object of the power of will' (i~yama~w) and "the suhject of the 
power of will' (isyamcl~za). At that stage. activity (karman) divides

--- PAGE 73 ---
TANTRASARA 
63 
itself into two: the semivowel ''f' when light dominates, and the 
semivowel '"/" when it is at rest. 20 This is because semivowels "r" 
and "!" have the nature of arresting the light. However, (at that 
stage of manifestation) 'the object of the power of will' (i~yama~za) 
is not discernable as an external object. If it were discernable it 
would be created like an external object would be. However, nei-
ther wi 11 (icclza) nor 'the power to lord over' (lsana) are clearly 
discernible. For that very reason, "r" and ".l" are only semivowels 
and not consonants like "r" and "!". Furthermore, this group of 
letters. "r." "'rl. ·· ""!" and ".(," are considered neuter because they 
bear shades of both consonants and vowels. 
3qf"l'<l"i""G:<:il: ~~ 
~ 
~ 
(ffil crof~ l!-m ~ 
I ITTTfLr 
~~f"l'<H""G:f"i~ crof~ ~-m ~ 
I m ¢ 
f¢5l:il~lfW, c=rnq-
-a- crof~~ 
"(!-~ m-m ~ 
1 "fl(1: ~;:r: f¢5<=i1~1ffl:i...a ~ m~ 
~ 
~ 
~~. 
CilClaCI ~ 
f"iaC\"ifil'<Cil:il s:lct51~1Al?l~"i f"6l~Cil:il 
~ 
- 3if"Bfu I Ci Ci «1 :31 Cf ~~ 
fcR:rm JIT<:ffi - 31: ~ I gc:f 
msmB q{IA~1faj W3H""Cl*1qJ:t ~ 
I c=rrrzj clf5\JHl\Ach mfTi*1qJ:t 
' 
'·~ 
' 
1 c=r?r 3q~ 
CBCfTf:, ~ Cf/1.1 l:i 1 
= $ m I l:i 1 
= qqrf:, "fiCPf"B"CITTm $ m 1L11 ill 
ccruf «"1 Cl l f .l?tl, ~~ 
qqif: -ef m q 5d Cf) l:il TTTC1 q 5d Cf) C"Q A, I $ £8 I L1 I l!Cf 
f?rfumzrr: <:l" -~ -ff!:, ~~ 
Cl Cf) I'<: , $"Cl§ I <Ji I l!Cf f?rfutrr<:rr ~ -~ -m:, 
fc:R:mfc=( e< Cf) 1 '< = , mf~mTTJr: a=rcf5K: 
1 ¢w=t ~ 
'l"J l 1 a 1 i ~m 
l!Q 
~~cH*1q: I ~-a-~ q)ffucm mf1lf~1fus:, z:mT ~H~*1qlft >f~ 
~ 
ef~f~~;:r s:ifll~Ci: ~q'<IA~lf l!Cf ~«ifC1*1qaj >ITC<1T:" 
1 ~-a-~ fcR:n"ffum, 3l"fUT"Q: fu"f"l"fu-mf;a*1q:, ~ 
~°ITTO"ffa=rur:, 
mcira: fa f1 !•i<:1 L1 *1Q: ~ 
I 
When the expansion of anuttara '"a" or ([1za11da ""([" in the 
di re ct ion of icc/l(/ .. i," etc., takes place, then the two syllables ""e" 
and "o" come into existence. Then again, when these two sylla-
bles, "e'' and '"o, ,. are closely united (smizglzalfa) with anuttara '"a" 
and l11u111da "a." then the syllables "ai" and "au'' are born. This 
indeed is the play of the energy of activity (kriya §akti), which

--- PAGE 74 ---
64 
TANTRASARA 
shines in the manifestation of the four syllables, that is, ''e," ''ai," 
"o," and "au. "21 Then, at the end of the development of the power 
of action (kriya sakti), just before entering anuttara, all that 
which has been created up to this point takes repose and abides 
in the bindu 22 (m,n), which is light alone and the very essence of 
knowledge. At that very place where bindu rests in unsurpassed 
(anuttara), the "anuttara visarga" is born, which is ''a~z." Thus, 
the aggregate of sixteen letters, which are seeds (blja). are said 
to be the very nature of all reflective awarenesses (para marsa). 
The recipients (yoni), which are consonants. are born from that 
vi+sarga. From anuttara emerges the "ka" group of letters; from 
'will without an object' (iccha) the "ca" group of letters; from 
will with an object the "ta" and "ta" groups of letters: and from 
unme§a the "pa" group ·of letters is born. It is because of being 
united with five 5aktis that the five groups of letters are produced. 
It is from this threefold division of the will (icchti) that the semi-
vowels "ya," "ra," and "la" are born, while the semivowel "va" is 
born from unmesa. 
The letters "fa," "sa " and "sa" are created from the threefold 
division of will (iccha).' From visarga, "ha" is born, and the let-
ter '·k~a" arises from the union of two consonants: "ha" and "'sa." 
Thus, the Lord who is supreme (anuttara) becomes the ·Lord of 
t_he ~~~up of letters' (Kule§vara). It is this single kaulikl visarga 
sakti - of the Lord, which as the flow of vibrating impulse in the 
form of reflective cognition (paramarsa) such as groups of letters, 
etc .. extends from ananda to external manifestation and assumes 
the f?rm_ of the external principles (tattvas). Visarga is threefold, 2 ~ 
that is. a ~zava, which is the restful state of citta; .fr/ k ta, character-
ized by the awakening of citta; and sclmvabha, which is the dis-
solution of citta. 
~ ~ 
t!Cf fu~ ~ 
efm: I ¢c:n={ ~ 
"l:fGJ 
Rfch"llJk1\QI gq q{1iwf: "fJG:T l!CP 1!Q" ~ 
<ftJml~ ~ 
4'{1J:Fif m~ 
Wm.lkJ IL!~ 31tSCld14'<1A~T ~~~~ 
~CICllf:, 
l!~1d14'{1A~fITT~ lfkll~IG:lc-ACBCil I ITTfft1 ~~Cl<?O:lll*~-q'{l+Wf~

--- PAGE 75 ---
TANTRASARA 
65 
ect>l~nfcif)qfCIJ:LI cHtj)C""lf(j) ~ l!Q Y'<IA~lf:, SHHOl~fafiiHOll'il~ 
~ 
~ 
~~ 
fu~~ufc:t:r g;ro1f.::a 
I rn l!cr lTclr: 
Y'<IA~Tf)YCCllq ~lml'il ~lick~= ~ct>lfc4d51 ~ 
R{iffil: I l!R 7E.l" ~IM'{C)YI 
l!Cf ~~ Y'<IA~IT: -~J~W<::ii Y'<IY'<f)qcil;:r 
All:ilTil~Al?lflct>ldlc""( 
Fdwfd<Q~'<*'qai ~I 
Al<::ill'ii ~;:r:~~~mm 
Al~l<::iaofai 
~, 
~ q~<::i""cilA~~ C£i1ag1R:ct>fCIJ:L 3ITT1m ~*'qfffq­
~~1aa1q~~ ~ 7E.l" A1~l<::i13fftl~1fl-<ct>f<fo~T01m-r1~;8, m-r 7E.l" 
~"!Sfll=( 3mT"lil{<l: Jfff~-4: ~"t: Y'<IA~l ~JJ11a;:i ~ 
C1GJ 
~ ~m 
~~, ~ 7a" Cil1~11 m"llli1arnG:T:, ~ 
flct>C14'<1A~ffd~ 
A I ?If) cj !>'I fa fd f~ ci fl A~ 
Ci fC1 ~~*~ 
3"11 'A I ;:j q ~ lfr1l Rfcf ct>r:q ci <::i I 
vrl~ fl A I a 
~l ;:r \Jil a 4ma I I :mrR1 ~ 
;:r A'""?! I ful'i '""?!I a 11 Ct.> I fb fu fa 
I 
Thus, visarga is the power belonging to the Lord capable of 
creating the universe. 25 When that reality is cognized as integrated 
reflective consciousness, then the Lord alone shines. On the 
other hand, if that reality is cognized as being divided into con-
sonants and vowels, then it is known as the 'possessor of power' 
(saktiman) and sakti herself. When that reality is cognized as 
eightfold pararnarsa along with cakresvara (the letter k~a), then 
it is divided into nine groups. Furthermore, if one cognizes that 
same reality placing the emphasis on each and every individual 
paramarsa, then it is divided into fifty. Finally, when that real-
ity is cognized as existing with possible subtle divisions, then the 
number becomes eighty-one. 
In reality, reflective cognitions (para ma rs as) are only six. 
26 
However, on account of expansion and contraction they become 
twelve and thus nourish the fullness of the Lord, as the possessor 
of all the saktis. All these saktis of the Lord, being of the nature 
of reflecting cognitions, are known as Kalikas, n divine goddesses. 
These pure reflective cognitions are energies by nature, which on 
the level of pure knowledge (suddhavidya) appear as vidya (man-
tra) and vidyesvara (mantresvara), as supreme and nonsupreme

--- PAGE 76 ---
66 
TANTRASARA 
because of the limitation which was created by the slight emer-
gence of maya. However, they appear divided into distinctive 
groups and function as letters belonging to maycl. 
When these syllables finally descend through the stages of 
pasyantl, madhyama, and vaikharl 28 and assume the nature of 
external categories, then they take on the role of worldly transac-
tions. Although on this level they are syllables belonging to maya 
and are seen as bodies (that is, devoid of life), when by means of 
the aforesaid ingenuity they are enlivened by pure reflective cog-
nitions,29 which symbolize their very life, then they become invig-
?rate.d. If they become invigorated, then they are capable of giv-
ing liberation and/or enjoyment. When one conceives oneself as 
the.single resort of all possible reflective cognitions in which the 
entire multitudes of principles (tattvas), beings, and regions are 
r~flected, one attains liberation while living through the absorp-
tion born of sambhu, 30 which is free from determinate knowledge. 
For at.taining this type of absorption, as in the case of anupaya, 
there is no need whatsoever for adopting painful procedures such 
as the use of mantras, and other such practices. 31 
~mfu~ 
J1ll~lc-A416 
"t:l G:m fb 5H i:F1 I '3)'~)1 '< I ;:a '< I fl I 
mu:~ RJifcpwf'<flli'F~I 
fu~ G'<lli~lfa -;TI- Jj)g)1'<'<f1W (_! I I 
The entire universe is shining on the clear inner core of 
the Self. The multifarious forms shine on the surface 
of the mirror, but the mirror is not aware of them. On 
the ?ther hand, supreme consciousness, by rneans of 
co~Hrnuous flow of its own delight of self-consciousness. 
reflects the universe. 
~cl'"i l~Cf5J:t I 
' 
3l~ ~lltt>l41~: 
ITT ~ f~ ~UT "ff ~1{lrl fl A~ ;:a '<l ff)~'{<) q ~Cl m, c=rm

--- PAGE 77 ---
TANTRASARA 
67 
~ 1 a~ 1 wA ~ fl fl cf') fl~ I l I A fl C\l1~~cf~ W"«l ~Tr: 1 "f!"wIB-
fci ct>crq CSl MI Ci 
l!Cf Jl"""Cial ~ 
3ilc-AHA 
3lf~J:J~;ci, ~ 3lf~ 
' 
' 
' 
~fl 1 { ~ ~<I= , 3:rc=r: mc=ref;:g:*' q1 fci Cf.) fq 3-f"G,""ff: ~fl 1 {@ <i fci Cf.) (Ytj 
~ 
~ 
3-T~tll'i@Cj): I ~-a- l!Cf-~ flAttl~ Gf'efm~tc1~m: 
1)1a1...a~ rn=a~ ~ 
3f11ofJ:I, 34qRfm~fim4"l1?1*'Y c=racr -a- "CRm~ 
' 
' 
I 
~ ~ 
~. 
Clcl fu~ 311Jr:, cl-;:r mfuifu fu~, ~Cf q 
~I 3-lc=IT fu~filuif fu~ 
q ~~I~ 
q 3-l"ti ~ 
-;:r 
3Cll£Aci flflct>fC!l~ 31~ I ~ru1a1m IB Cild4"11?1 l!Cf ~ 
'<lllCi"fd;::i 
R l'i f1l c-i 1 ~ 
-;:r 3'cict~f~ sfrn=r~4\@i c-i i ~, 
C1(f:" fl fl cf1fl ~ ll I Ji fl~~ 
tl$~,a~ {!Cf 1 ~wffi ~m 
·~ru1a1m: flJifCilttl mW'<lllOI '<Wal: I 
-;:r ~ ~ 
f ;:a ~ 
c=rfci ~$'1$'1HafJfa1: I I ' ~ 
I 
Chapter Four 
When, for the purpose of attaining one's own innate nature (sva-
bhtiva), thought constructs32 are gradually purified, 33 as described 
in the previous chapter, the course of meditation (bhavanti), pre-
ceded by right reasoning, study of appropriate clgama texts, and 
instruction by a teacher, becomes essential. It is because of the 
power of thought constructs (vikalpa) that living beings wrongly 
conceive of themselves 34 as bound. A firm conviction (ablzimana) 
regarding one's own nature becomes the cause of freedom from 
sali1sara. When this new vikalpa arises, 35 it neutralizes those 
vikalpas which are the cause of bondage. This new vikalpa 
becomes the cause of ascent (abhyudaya). enabling one to attain 
his or her own innate nature. This is as follows: The supreme 
reality is unlimited by nature and consists of an undivided singu-
larity of consciousness. It transcends all the principles of limited 
nature which terminate in Siva. This renders stability to all and is 
the vitality of the universe. Through it the universe "throbs' with 
life, and that is '"I" (alwm). Therefore, I am both transcendent

--- PAGE 78 ---
68 
TANTRASARA 
and immanent. This kind of conviction, however, does not arise 
in those blinded by maya, because they lack right reasoning (sat-
tarka), etc. Vai~r:iavas and others are restricted to their own scrip-
tures by the principle of attachment (raga). For th is very reason, 
they show no interest in studying superior agamas in spite of their 
being available. In this way, they show jealousy in regard to right 
reasoning, right scriptures (agama), and the correct instruction of 
a teacher. As it is said in the Paramesvara Ag a ma: 
All the Vai~r:iavas, etc., are restricted by their attach-
ment to limited knowledge. They fail to understand 
the nature of the supreme reality only because they are 
devoid of knowledge emerging from omniscience. 
~ 
°ffi~Cl1<t>~lfffiq1Cil~ 
1!Q 
flC!llP=n~UT 
fckf5ctj 
fi'Ri1(:q ~ ~ 
mcrm~ 1 ~ ~ 
~ c=rn:i fctdJCVlLi'{<)c:i ~ 
? . 
~ 
-
f8ct5ftH~ ~~~·Al~ =aRa1~, ~ rrfci C1 "flcf?r 
~fiqft~I 'fq!'iffil~IACf ~ 
;:i-
ITTT fadSfll: ~~ 
3°efct:>Cll4 
xga5-=11~ err' a 
34fci1<t>~1Risq 1a 1me&:ffl fd<Jiilcr "fiifm~Cf)c=i Cl 1 ~ 
~fu. msm ~cftf~ °filfa1c1 ~ ~ 
I 3F"lH"<:i 311lP1wiJUT ~ 
t1fcn:~{ m'mYlfl>ld51~12l Cf~ I f-cB C1 11~'1!:1l IA R'{<)qo1 
C'Cl 1q I{:, 
c=rwfuofQ(f)(YY>l{Sl;:a l!Cf ~ 
~ 
3m:, ~ t!Cf -a- ~ 
~ 
34 ~1G ('Cl I a, ~ 
3-T~c=rfl:HH"tj;1G ("Cl I q I a2l ;:i- ~ 
-am ~ 
I ;:i- -a 
Wf flf1d5fct -~J~faW!>id51~1'{C)YICi ?f0" ~ 
m11Tef marrc=r 3q1<Jl: -
~~= 
R~ACllfflf, 3-Tf~-iu' Cil=J~Cf)l{ffl', ~~= 
~ 1011~ IJ:fqlf~ 
aUJ=ITef~-;r Q5 ~ ~fqfu &:i I q I"!:: 
I ~~I~ 1 '<l sfq Cf)"{UT~flfBCf 
mfc=mti wm"f(, 
mRUl{DllflAlu-msfq 
<::rm~ 3:r~lfi¢f5AUT 
f~l=fFIT m~altlk-~ ~: fcrc=r~~: I 31~.IU ~ ~ 
ft?1a1,AR ~~ 
-;r ~~Cf I ~fa~Gffl ~f~ef~Cf){Ul{()C 
n w 3-TmIB:-~g:~H~11f5l1tlmo-~mw1flaa,. ~f~ C1 ~ fun~ 
311C!ICi~ -;r 34Yfl{DTI~A" ~Cf)~ 3-Tmm: I 
' 
' 
Therefore, only those keenly touched hy the energy of Siva,

--- PAGE 79 ---
TANTRASARA 
69 
after following the path of right agama, etc., purify their vikalpas 
and enter the supreme reality. 36 Here a question can be asked: If 
this is so, shouldn't the supreme reality also be a form of deter-
minate knowledge (vikalpa)? The answer to this question is, 
"certainly not," because determinate knowledge fulfills its purpose 
simply by removing the impressions of duality. 
The supreme reality is everywhere; it is omniform and self-
manifesting. The forms of determinate knowledge are not capable 
of either lending any support to it or refuting it. Right reasoning 
(sattarka) spontaneously arises in a person keenly touched by sakti. 
It is said that this kind of person is initiated by the Goddesses. 
In the case of others, the form of right reasoning arises by 
the study of scriptures, and so forth. This topic will be discussed 
at length in the section entitled Saktipataprakasana. However, at 
this point it will suffice to say that the role of the teacher is to 
select an appropriate agama text for a disciple to study. The role 
of agama, on the other hand, is to give rise to the proper type of 
vikalpa (suddha-vikalpa), which is instrumental in generating the 
series of homogeneous thoughts free from doubt. This series of 
homogeneous determinate thoughts is called right reasoning (sat-
tarka), and this right reasoning is called meditation (bhavan~). 
Through bhavanti 37 past objects [objects that have gone to rest 111 
the past] that were indistinct, are now made as if present by ren-
dering them distinct. In this context we can say that no other direct 
means but reasoning, which is the light of pure knowledge, can 
serve as the limb of yoga. For example, tapas, etc., belonging to 
the niyama group, ahilizsa, etc., belonging to the yama group,
38 
various types of prti~1tiyama, etc., all are finally based in objec-
tive existence. Therefore, what could be their role in regard to 
consciousness? Even pratytihti rti 39 only renders excellence on the 
level of senses, that is, the instruments of knowledge and action. 
In the same way, dhti ra~ul, dh.vana, and samtidhi, if practiced 
gradually and in th is particular order, could grant to the medita-
tor the identification with the object of his meditation. However, 
meditation or practice on the supreme reality, which is identical

--- PAGE 80 ---
70 
TANTRASARA 
with Siva and is one's own innate nature, is not at all possible. The 
practice of one who is established in consciousness is the process 
of steadily establishing pra~za, intellect, and body in it. Th is is not 
unike carrying a burden, studying the real meaning of ltistras, or 
practicing dance. In the case of consciousness, however, nothing 
can be added or taken away from it. 40 Therefore, how can practice 
(in regard to consciousness) be possible? 
fcB c=rcturrfq ~ 
~, 3mA ~ -tcnf wm:rR-< 1 f"l ~ Cf51-< l!Cf 3-R-f -;r ~ 
3Fm( fd') ~ ffi fa 1 ffifc5-ctsfir m 31'R:lffi fa c: 1 c-J:t c=8 ~ ~ 
*1 q ffl ~ 
(ffll -a-~: 31fii A a'{<) q a 1 ~ ct5 cl axuT c=rR a-<'(<) q ;z,p m;:t -a- ~ 
t!15f ga 
31~ef: I ~ 
~ ;:r fchfuc=t JiqlfflJ:t ~ ~ 
I ~ucm:Tisfq 
;nl=f ;r C5~ tt~ ~~ 
31Rr "Q ~ 
'{C)q 1 
{.,~:n Fa J:t 15i ~, 31<11 ~a 1q1 +Ft 
fd Cb~~ fux«:r $ f<j)~'): I 31d ~~: -~ 
~Ct.> I~ I J:t H '""l 3"l {._~ I m 
'{() q ca 
wi ~IC1;;;>QIC1, ~ 
~UT ID~ factSlfll~~, 3-T~ fcrcpf~ 
$~~~ ~Uf >ld51~1a, C1W >ict51~HAft1 ~~ 
fCl*1YACI", Ciffll(( 
;r ll1J11~·1 f;nnanq JQTll: 1 c=rcf5 "Q ~1Jeufi-qm, f"l f1 ch l!CT m afR1 c=rn 
m, ~~-q~~mn, ff~~>lct5l'<a~1 ~~ 
~, 
c=rum-unTI 
6Tm~m=t<Wr~, 
Now the question arises: "If this is so, then what can be accom-
plished by right reasoning?" We have already answered this ques-
tion. by sayi.ng that the role of right reasoning is on I y to remove 
th~ 
1 ~press10ns of duality and nothing else whatsoever. As every-
thi~g IS of the nature of consciousness, the main purpose of even 
ordmary practice is to create the desired form in the hody. pra~za. 
etc., and put the undesired form in a subordinated place. How-
ever, it has already been explained that nothing can he taken away 
from the supreme reality. Even the impression of duality is not 
something different from consciousness. It is merely ignorance 
of one's own essential nature. Therefore, it was said that duality 
is removed by pure determinate thought (.foddha-vi ka !pa). The 
supreme essential nature has an innermost nature (svabhtiwz) that 
is self-shining, which assumes the state of ignorance th rough its

--- PAGE 81 ---
TANTRASARA 
71 
own freedom. Then gradually, by forsaking it, it first becomes 
intent on blossoming, then it begins to blossom, and finally it 
becomes fully blossomed. Thus, by manifesting [literally 'shin-
ing'], following this sequential order, it manifests itself in its full-
ness. This shining is the very nature of the Lord, and for that 
reason the limbs of yoga cannot be the direct means. However, 
reasoning (tarka) is of great importance here, and right reasoning 
(sattarka) alone is the direct means. This right reasoning is pure 
cognition (suddha-vikalpa), which gets purified through differ-
ent means, such as through oblation (yoga), offering of food into 
the fire (homo), repetition of mantra Uapa), religious observances 
(vrata), yoga, etc. 
~ ~ 1 a 1 .-i i ~m ~ 
~ 1!Cr ft:vf-a:, 
.-i 1 ~a mfufttf51=f 
' 
' 
3TIB" ~ 
fctct>fY{C)fG;f'~ ~~ 
1!Cr ~~ui ml!:, ~ u 
@~fQI(\ ~ ~fuq~~ ~~iJCf ~ 
~ 
~~ 
~9Q{ JiLfun:t 
~ur 
@~1.-ii ~1=f(f(fUT1R.mfiaj m%{C)q~1n 3-m:I ~ mar: 
~~JITBm ~ 
~"efcict>fYS'll~ ~~faa:.-iMaJff~ fi+:J«l'm 
Cl ~ I f"l '<: f f"l ct> <i I f ~ 
cn9-"JIT q I ?I I Cl ~l ~ C""Ci fi 6 fi +:J ta mcrfc:t fl q ;:i °ITT"+:J: I ~W 
3~ ~ 1,A ct> q { 1A~11G:m~ mtUTCJZi ~"' 1fu>m~cm:r~1Cl1 .-i q amcr ~ 
-futi 
Clfl "Cf{ ~ 
~mer~ ~ ~ 
q{IA~f;:f Jrq:" I ~?r ~~ F= 
1{)41Ci4'<:A~~AHC'11~ ~~cHfi+:JcilftmR-;::r ~~ 
umefq 
3-icffITep-;::j- ~ 
1 <:rmffi m-;::rf 
..-a:~ 1 ~ 
1 Ci 1 +:j , .. . • • • • • . . ~"fITRi ~ 
' 
' 
wn=t 1 ' ~ 
1 ~ 
fcrf~= ~~crm~= ruct5ftl: ~ 
~f~ct5r-Y 
~~crcf5 ~clc=rn:f >I ct5 I~ I a ~Cf f"l ;:i I a ;:i a wfcrEJ >I ct5 I~ I+:! I ?I a I {C) <b ~ 
C"1 R"Q {Clq I ifi ~ H l\A I ru ct5fY ru ~lm mn: I 
Yoga is offering of all entities to the Lord for the purpose of 
attaining firm conviction in the form of the determinate knowl-
edge: "All entities are firmly established in the Lord and there 
is nothing separate from him." For those who are spontaneously 
enjoyers of penetration into consciousness, it is easy to make this 
offering (yoga) to the Lord because it is pleasing to the heart. It is

--- PAGE 82 ---
72 
TANTRASARA 
with this purpose in mind that offerings such as beautiful flowers, 
sandal paste, etc., are prescribed to be offered externally. Offer-
ings into consecrated fire (homa) is dissolution of all entities into 
the fire of consciousness of the Lord, who takes delight in con-
suming all and making them remain as the flame of fire alone. 
Homa is for the purpose of attaining this steady determinate con-
viction: "All entities are made of the light." Repetition of a man-
tra Uapa) is for the purpose of enlivening reflective cognitions, 
but without being dependent on them existing as knowables either 
externally or internally, and appearing as if they are distinct from 
the highest reality. This kind of reflective cognition of the highest 
reality, which is not different from one's own Self. is calledjapa. 
Religious observance (vrata) is the perception with firm con-
viction that the body, a jar, etc., are in essence identical with the 
Lord. This is for the purpose of attaining the supreme Self con-
sciousness (abhimana) of the Lord, which is not to be attained by 
any other means. As it is said in the Srlnandisikha, ''"The highest 
vow (vrata) is the harmony of all." That supreme reality, which 
is independent from all forms of thought constructs, shines forth 
through various forms of determinate knowledge which possesses 
elements of pure knowledge (suddhavidy(1). Yoga, which is a par-
ticular type of determinate knowledge (vikalpa), and whose nature 
is the unification with one's own innate nature, exists for the pur-
pose of establishing one firmly in that ever-shining I ight. 
a qz4~ lluf°ff~m-cr:, ~of#cr ~ 
Wm:,-wc=r WB~ 
3Jf-+:f: ~ 
"fTR ~ 
fu~rn: mf~ cmm ~oft ~ 
crruTI mm 
~ Fl<=m ~ef~ 3TITm~CW a=act""i:Jtl~n-rW: 31f~mz:IB, 
~;:r ~;:r ~UT ~<:Fri ~ 
311 {("I I A ~ 
I m -a- fP=t 'J ~I R=nill ~~-;:r 
l{ofa1fiftjc-p:kbl~lci I ~&J m'3ffi"wzn: I fc5 ~. ~ 
fu~ ill 
m~lffi~:, <1T:C5~~~~1~1:~ I ~~~fq~ 
fP""ll~fl. 
<:rm ~ fwcnfG:tHU lFCi JO\ 3ITTH.h0ZH=i fq :r:i:i I ?I {C)q Ci <Ji I fu~ -a- ~ 
q~q~~ffimmqmrfm: I w:rfq~Ol~~I~ 
~~~ 
ffi 3R<:T ~lq'{lq'<l~lfm: I <:rm q'{~'{f°qf°qffilc-A;:i I *a~ m

--- PAGE 83 ---
TANTRASARA 
73 
The essential nature of the great Lord is the 'fullness of his 
consciousness' 
(par~10sm71vitsvabhava). This fullness of con-
sciousness is his Sakti, 41 which is known as body (kula), capacity 
(samarthya), wave (urmi), heart (hrdaya), essence (sara), vibra-
tion (spanda), glory of power (vibhuti), the three-formed goddess 
(trlsika), the cause of kalana (kall), one who minimizes (kar~i~zl), 
dreadful (ca~1¢l), speech (va~zl), enjoyment (bhoga), knowledge 
(drk), and the superintending deity of lunar phases (nitya). This 
Sakti is expressed by these and other appellations based on various 
grammatical derivations, which are technical terms used in the 
agamas. Let this Sakti abide in any of these forms in the heart of a 
meditator. If this Sak ti is viewed collectively, as consisting of the 
totality of all saktis, the fullness of consciousness becomes mani-
fest. The Lord possesses innumerable dynamic energies (saktis). 
What more can we say? The entire universe is his sakti. There-
fore, it is impossible to enumerate all of them in this instruction. 
However, the whole universe can be summed up under three main 
saktis. The supreme energy (Sriparafakti) of the Lord is that sakti 
by means of which this universe, beginning with Siva and ending 
with earth principle (tattva), is born, seen, and manifested by the 
Lord in indeterminate consciousness. Sriparaparafakti of the Lord 
is that sakti by means of which he projects the universe just like 
the reflection of an elephant, etc., in a mirror: as different-cum-
nondifferent. The glorious Aparafakti is that sakti by means of 
which he manifests this differentiated universe, in which all these 
objects appear as different from one another. 
l!ClC1 &fu~t z:rm u I {O I~ ~er 
~iref5rtur ~~ 
~, 
W ~ 
~-P ld<il .sITT-qter mJ:t:;+J IQfl'id:IClct>lflct>lf'fumfu~l&:IT"fl{ 
R '<im 1 1 ill l!ffT: a a~ : ~ 1 m ~: fCI 1a~1 <"1 ~cf> fu~er ci-cf~ 1 ~~ 
fu;rcft ~"ITT{ -a ~ 
~ 
ircrf~ I <l"mf%- -9 ~~ 
~cf+=( 3RRer mer 
ct> fl~ IB, ~ c=ra1- ef~ 
f\j)~ G Ci~ I ct>fl ~ fu, ~ ~er ef m Ji~ Ci i T[tnc=crT 
<l"c=r: c=rBer ~ 
3"l ;a {14 fi fJ1ghfm ct>M ~Fa , 'd <lff %1 %m=i"~crtrr~ill

--- PAGE 84 ---
74 
TANTRASARA 
~ 
f:if4011m tX ~ 
tX, ~ ~tt1~18J·i~ mer~ ~ 
~"ITTtur 
Ct.>M~m, f,_ (1(1 Jqfit510:f +:r4-cf ~~~~er 
cnMl'irn, ~ C1cf 
3qfi@q{q~ICICt.>M~ ~'iG\ld~ dlfFilc-A"il 31Cff~ ~~ 
CJ; ff fct rJ'.11 ~ I Cl ~l l'f<li 
Ct.> M ~ fci , l 
C1c=r: 
fCl {C) q CfJ M """! H I ~H.1 l'l CfJ Jl ~q 
Cf) '{U I =a d1 Cf) fl~ R1 , ~ 00: CfXUl ~ 
Cb f1 l'l R-1 I 9 0 c=rc=r: cnf~ A I ?:il \Q 
~P""llCi{Clqi:tN Ct.>fl~m, 9 9 f1~~"ciflillll4xstfuCbm~~o1"!:f~cnJ:JN ~J:J1a1:;( 
Ct.>M ~fa , 9 ~ ITTTI" fcrCt.>ff1 Ci i:t fq ~ 
ct> f1 l'i fc-1 ~ 
1!ill ~ 
~ l I a fll: 
~: ~~ 
1!c5 mfq ~ 
-q1Tcrf( ~ur f~ f~ ~-ef~ 
~~1f?1~: 
"ciwaa:1ac=f+=1HI 
~ 
AlfidJMl'<l~l'il~Uf 
3R1ffi QT UGqc1~urrfq ~lfi+:JHI: ~~ 
fCllCiT"?ci 1:!~ 
~ct51M1~1&:a1~1= 1 ~ 
""ci" -m arm ~ 
nuR mmaRUT ~ 
'fqlc-i:tf!Jl(f)"{Uf tX 
I ~= m~RF<:IJ"1l1~ 
I filq 13"$1 H h::a CPTffi 
ct5M;oia~IC1~1~... I' ~ I ~ -a-
31~: C15T C1?f +=rf~~ facHul 
~ffi'{Ulfal?i1a1 ~err~ I ~ ~IB{B'<°<:i'i 1!Cb?f {..Cl:llcii I ~ Ll" ~w 
~~IB3H"A~"!\ct: I 
That sakti, by means of which the triad of saktis are born, 
that is, embraced (withdrawn) internally into the Lord th rough the 
process of unification (anusandlzana), is the glorious Parafakti. 
That 5akti (although remaining) Sripara is now cal led Srimatrsa-
dbhava,42 Kalakar~il).I,
43 etc. Each of those four saktis. because 
of their freedom, shines in threefold manner; that is, creation, 
maintenance, and dissolution. In this way, the number increases to 
twelve. 
44 This takes place in the following way: 
I. First, consciousness only shapes (ka lay at i) entities 
(bhdva) within. 
2. Then it projects (kalayati) them externally as distinct 
forms. 
3. Then consciousness accepts external objects as something 
pleasant and desirable, and then it throws (kalayati) them 
internally with the desire to dissolve them within. 
4. Next it creates doubt regarding various ohstacles in the 
process of dissolution, after which it dissolves those ohsta-

--- PAGE 85 ---
TANTRASARA 
75 
cles as well. 
5. After this, the portion of entity shining as doubt, which is 
going to be dissolved, is assimilated (kalayati) within the 
self th rough the process of withdrawal. 
6. Then it creates (kalayati) the agent of withdrawal and 
realizes it as being his own Self. 
7. In the process of creating (kalayati) the agent of with-
drawal, it creates some entities as existing in the form of 
impressions (vtisantis) and some others as existing in the 
form of consciousness alone. 
8. Then it creates the wheel of instruments (of knowledge 
and action), preceded by the process of the activity of 
manifesting its own nature. 
9. Next it shapes (kalayati) the lords of the instruments. 
10. Then it creates (kalayati) the limited subject belonging to 
the level of mtiyti. 
11. After this it creates (kalayati) the knowing subject, who is 
intent on abandoning limitations and accepting the blissful 
state of consciousness. 
12. Next it manifests (kalayati) the fully bloomed form of his 
own Self. 
Thus, the "twelve divine Goddesses of consciousness' (dvadasa 
Bhagm·a tya ~1) manifest themselves, either to all subjects or only 
one, simultaneously or sequentially, either in two or three. They 
move in the manner of a circle like a wheel, and also shine exter-
n a 11 y in the form of months, and other minute divisions of time, 
the signs of zodiac, and finally in the form of pot, cloth, etc. In 
this way, they nourish the autonomy of the 'Lord of the Wheel' 
(Cakresvara) and are expressed by the word SrI Kall. 
The different meanings of the word kalana 45 are: moving, 
throwing [projecting]. knowledge, enumeration, causing all the 
objects to become objects of enjoyment, sounding, and withdraw-
ing [assimilating] the objects into oneself. As it has been stated 
by the teacher SrI Bhutiraja: '"She is known as Kall on account of 
projecting, knowing. and enumerating." The meaning of Kall can

--- PAGE 86 ---
76 
TANTRASARA 
be seen in detail in various places of my Paratrlsika Vivara~w and 
the monograms of my hymns. It is the tradition of my teachers 
that esoteric secrets should not be disclosed in one place, nor is it 
proper to keep them totally hidden. 
~ 
~ffi i•:w1g1'""11fu C1"C1 l!ci-fuo ~~ 
~ 
i:t.-aC'Ci~ 1 ~ 
f%" 
~ 
~<:f~f1:Rqtj Fa WF1: ~irm ~I Ci I Tfi ~I 
q (i ~I ~~I 
ClW 
-rn~~ 3iCl~ll~IJl:iJ=t 3q~mfmmr, c=rcrclBcr fcrmfUlIB: 
3q,~atti1~ ~ 
~, l!ci-fuo IQ1J11tl1 m~ 
-a- qs:ach ~c:B 
~~~et.>1-< R{Clra: <:rm <:rm cmrm c=r~ ~,~CJ; ~a-m~~C@~}ffe 
11ra~chF"l~I ~tp:J1fJ$ia~I ct>fll"iPil~fll{IQI fCllc-J:JI ~~ 
~ 
3m 
~1 ctafol ~ IB- ~ 
a "«J)Til ~ 
~1 Ci C"Ci Ci fl, ~ 
a~ 
Ci 3"P~Jf~rjl c;:~ 1 fl, 
G:ITi~CI cm~, -w~~Cl"C1 ITTf ~~~Uc=( 
WG:~1;:a{sfq 
-r=rm, me:;:i 1 ;a '<A 3ffl(f - (fg]ftkl C"Ci 1 a ~ 
~ 
~, Tu 1 a ill c;: ~ 1 ~ 1 Fa 
'~"" -· 
' 
' 
' 
' 
mmrn=cf "efmf'fict ~~=tH1cu+•a11is1R=rt -a-~ er~ 
1 aMtfl 
-&fu:cnrc1, ~~fu mm.ltRffiJ;.l.-aa~<!')Ci'l~tS11 lfu~11f5llmTsftr m ~ 
fcrfu: en R&m err "ffis?f <:ITCiGf'~~ l!cr ~ ~ 
1 c=r~cr -a- 3ffi 
~lctafo.1, ~ 
ci~IMlCt.>lci 3i;:8~J:t I 
, 
' 
' 
m R~ 
q ~}J"H t<'i J15lsft:B eptj -
fi q 1~1 a1 sfu:r Ji f'rHl sW=r q{R-ffi sft:B 1 
$~ciG:~Ci<t>R~~f'fl~I 
mr;qfu~fu~ 
11 
<:rm <:rm R 9,J[;f $cp 11 l2'i <i 
"ff~O"ti LR<TifTRT w.:r I 
~ Cl "«J)ll I~ I c-R:l fa ~1:•"1 IQ I ~ 
ru~1f§;a~ ~1~1a~H11101: 11' 
All that has been stated about yaga, homa, and so on, should 
be understood to be only for Mahesvara. 46 All perceive those very 
things that are to be avoided as those that are to be accepted. and 
also perceive everything from Vi~I)u to Siva as Paramasiva. This

--- PAGE 87 ---
TANTRASARA 
77 
kind of view is wrong and it should be rejected by yogins fol-
lowing the path of the Absolute (anuttarayogins). For this very 
purpose, Vidyadhipati has made great effort in his monograms 
entitled "AnubhavaStotra. '' 
. Thus, in each of these five, beginning with ytiga and ending 
with yoga, there are different levels of steadiness to be attained. 47 
One should act in such a way that one may attain a steady convic-
tion in them. This kind of yogin should not think, "This food is 
sanctioned and th is food is prohibited, or this is pure and this is 
impure," and in this way cause suffering to his own self. Purity, 
impurity, etc., are not invariable properties belonging to the 
object, but in essence. products of the imagination. Thus, it is 
stated in the Srrpo rva :48 "Purity is not the essential attribute of 
an object in the same way as the property of being blue. etc., is 
not the essential nature of an object, for it has been stated to be 
impure on other occasions." In (the case of) an offering of gifts to 
one who has been initiated, if it is argued that because of directive 
statement (codana), this offering of gifts is impure with refer~nce 
to that (directive statement), then it is similar to some other direc-
tive statement (codantintara) which may contradict the former. ~ut 
such a contradictory directive statement is unreal because of [this] 
incongruity-if it is so argued, then we say, ··no," that is not right. 
The directive statement uttered by Lord Siva himself is sufficiently 
forceful to annul other directive precepts. It is well-supported by 
logical reasoning, and also [well-established] in numberless tiga-
mas like the Sarvajllanottara and others. We shall speak of it lat.er 
in the sequel. Therefore, the rule which is enjoined, in the scrip-
tures, as the precept to be followed and the thing that is to be 
prohibited, beginning from the Vedas down to the Tantras of the 
Lord as understood by the Siddhantins, such as Kulocclzu!jlllG and 
others, serves no purpose in this context: therefore the truth of the 
matter is established. In the Srrpo rva and other texts it has been so 
stated. One should seek a detailed account of it in the TantrMoka 
and other texts. 
Bound souls possess a firm conviction of the follow-

--- PAGE 88 ---
78 
TANTRASARA 
ing nature: "I am dulC I am much-enticed by the bonds 
of past deeds, I am impure, I am led by others." Upon 
perfect attainment of a firm conviction contrary and 
distinct from the above, the same bound soul immedi-
ately becomes the Lord (pati) with the immanent form 
of pure consciousness. 
The perfect yogin should always be mindful that a firm 
conviction of the aforesaid nature should be attained. 
He should not endanger himself with doubts [arising 
from] notions lacking the true nature of things, or by 
the unsound precepts of dullards. 
3l~ qXJliJ:t 31 lffiCt>J:t I 
' 
ITTf irCJ fci Cf> ft! : fCI lP=i Cl t=f ©I'< J:t :mcm';:r 3 q I Ci I ;:c=J '< f'~ alcf4a 
~ ~~I (1?J mrt 
q I~ I Cl Cl'i I q I {I C1 
~c=r: ~~~WOT 
~m-rf'ffif'4a1 '°"t ~ 
3q I l'ki ~I 
3"l Cl Ci J0&:1 AH : mffi ~ 
:mfumcrirfu I ~ttUr Roff a J:t 3FRR (!q mf~ I ~ 
C1 3 q I Ci I ;:a '<J:t 
m=rt 
fClfi'Rfl1"<1e.f 
fqct>r-q1sqaffi, 
~ ~f~!):i 101ct6UGI 1~ 
q R fl:! a *'q 1 i 3q 1 ll fci-;i- 11:~ ~ 
"ITTL<1" 31Turcf ~ 
3-rrfcrmefl'ffu, 
ITT ~f~ tl4 HI fc-A Cf> I , "ITTur: ~ 
~ 
frl=f 9-tl, 
31TU 
3 -vd I'< a I I \A I , 
3vi::m:ui q ;:ni:r qxr s:i1011m '[~.~fr~ CJUf~l~Cll~l er~. ~g: 
t=ff;:rc)-~ I fci ~l ~ lc·J:J I Cf>{U I~ I &:Cl I "CM:, U Cl I ct~l mem: ~USfff~JIT­
~41 li ci li I CPTcffli&!:lJ:JIOll: I <1?f mFl ~ 
~ 3f'~ ~~. 
"ll"f{ {!(1"f( fCls:lct>l~i f1cfafClHi~c=f ~ ~ 
~, ~er R\Ji~~CiciilV 
taffCIT, ITT ~s:!J:JIOls:!Ali{C)q~ Cl@cf1mB"f?laCif'Q ~~ ~ 
~ 
mrt +:rITTil"{Cfffr;:r: w H Cl 1aflfi:tCG'1ct51 '<: ~~ 
, ~ 
!):i 1wri~1 
fffiJCllMl9'1ct~lct>4fuI~ "cict'Jlc-J:J.-i: 
-a-aj;OO~ 3-F"CiCiA'\!)~'<m{ur 
R=fJciffl ~ 
~1~1c-AR fu~ ~C1. ~;:r q-
fcr~;:r ~~ 
~ 
flTJ:Jf'qalil ~f~ur ~f«l, c:rcr: 
3"lch'{C)YCil:il f~

--- PAGE 89 ---
TANTRASARA 
79 
31cfmf'~ , c=rffi sfq ~~ 
{<) q Ci li I fcn;=n°fqc=f , c=ra: 3"l ifi {I c-Ji Ci 1 J:t 
mf'G,C=f U1 I U <""t I l!cf Ci \:,"ci ci1 fl A fci CS1 I~ Cl ttCI *~~uf ~~ 
I c=rffi 
Cllfl'"il~l~ ~ 
~;:i- ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
I~ 
3IB:r 3"l'"iCl{ci 
mrfz:r.:r: ~fq;;::q131q{J:JIW~ ~~fl61{~CS1~ ~~«ilCi~ 
~q{+:Jlci(=Cf Ll" ~fefGJ ~ 
"flU l!CI" 'it~mcr: I 31Wlfllf( ~ 
fl Cf Rfrn ffi ~ 
1 C!~ sRr 1 
~~ct>l~i fl+:Jfci lc-+:JCi"fci A l?11fud1 ~ 
I 
3"F"(i : cp<""li fu.ra" w I u 
~Ci li I +=avn:rR- I I 
~~~61~1IBs{f°kA"ci2bm fcr~ I 
~4:fl{&;:ltU ~Zll~ctitOO:Ufu~ICICBJO\ 11 
~~·n-aflcfo I~ 1.-:a~fci+:J05f1A lc-J:JR I 
-m~mm 
~1aci «ilc-A'"i= >rm 11 
~ 
fi~t:<~fllct>I: I~~ 
I 
Chapter Five 
When a discursive thought (vikalpa) is capable of purifying itself 
in itself without depending on other means, it loses the function-
ality which is commonly associated with bonded beings (pasli).
49 
Then, by the grace of pure knowledge (sliddhavidya), it (vikalpa) 
becomes transformed into the energy of the great Lord, and after 
taking recourse to it as the 'means' (uptiya), it becomes capable 
of manifesting the knowledge belonging to sakti (sakta). This pro-
cess was explained in the previous chapter. 
When, for the purification of discursive thought (vikalpa), one 
needs to rely on the ·means' (upaya), then he or she can take 
recourse in the intellect (buddlzi), pr{i~w. body, jar, and other 
external objects of a limited nature. 50 By doing this, one descends 
to the level of an atom (a~1u) and causes the 'knowledge of limited 
nature' (cl~10va) to manifest in his soul. On that level the bud-
dhi possesses a meditative nature, and prd~w is of two kinds:
51 
gross and subtle. The former is of the nature of moving upward

--- PAGE 90 ---
80 
TANTRASARA 
(uccarm:w). This moving upward possesses five modalities: pra~za, 
apana, samana, udana, and vyana. The subtle form of pra~za is 
denoted by the syllabic sound (vanza), which will be explained 
later. The body, possessing a specific type of arrangement, is 
denoted by the word kara~za.
52 Jars and so forth are external 
objects, which will be described as the means for the purpose of 
worshipping the altar and the phallic form (liliga). 
Among all of these means, it is appropriate to give instruc-
tion regarding meditation first. It has already been pointed out 
that the self-shining supreme reality exists externally in all the 
principles (tattvas). Having meditated on that supreme reality in 
the heart of one's own consciousness, 53 one should then meditate 
on the close union of the three, which are fire, the sun. and the 
moon. In this context, fire stands for the knowing subject, the sun 
for the instrument of knowledge, and the moon for the knowable 
objects. One should meditate in this way as long as Bhairava's 
fire is not manifested by the fanning of the air in the form of 
meditation. This fire is to be conceived as being encompassed by 
the aforesaid twelve flames of energy, 54 assuming the form of the 
"wheel," out of which these energies emerge th rough one of the 
outlets. such as the eyes, and take their repose on the objective 
level. .While it is resting [on the objective level], one should first 
conceive of it as being externally replenished by the moon in the 
order of creation. Then, it should be conceived of as being made 
manifest by the sun in the order of maintenance. Further. it should 
b.e conce~ved as being made to dissolve by the all-encompassing 
fire of withdrawal. 55 Finally, it should be conceived of as being 
merged into transcendence in order to become one with it. In this 
way. the "wheel" attains fullness with no difference from ohjective 
existence. Then, one should meditate by means of that ""wheel" on 
the residual traces that remain from the entities, and should dis-
solve them in a similar fashion. 56 The person who persists with this 
practice of meditation attains the firm conviction that the series of 
creation, maintenance, and dissolution are in essence nothing but 
his own consciousness, which in reality is freedom (sva tantr_va).

--- PAGE 91 ---
TANTRASARA 
81 
shining as creation belonging to one's own innate consciousness. In 
this way, one realizes the state of Bhairava without delay. However, 
it is only through practice that one attains all sorts of desired goals. 
One should meditate in the blissful and luminous abode 
of one's heart as the self-manifest, integral unity of the 
Self consisting of three, that is, knower, knowledge, 
and object of knowledge, having brought them into the 
core of his heart. 
One should meditate on the Lord, the all-pervading 
One, the Lord of the "wheel" presiding over those 
twelve powers of its rays, who is emerging outwardly 
through the outlets (voids, vyoma), and is the agent of 
creation, and so on. 
The yogin should meditate on the totality of entities, 
both external and internal, which have been dissolved 
into the Self and are going to take repose (vifranti) 
therein. Thus, the light of the Self shines forth. 
3l~ 3iill'<: I 
c=r?r ~ 
3Thcicil{~: ~cf ~ 
l!Cf ~~ fu~, C1ffi ~ 
mul~, c=rc=ITsfq we_ti >ffcl 3i q I Ti ci ""f'I ~~;:i- "ffCTf~ ~, 
C1c1: 
~{ct515~aTI ~. c=rc=r: flAHl~ ~~mf~ ~~, 
C1<1 JG: H Cl ttq)~ +:rrc=p~0flfuct5fH I ~ 
I c=f?\~ I fl CBC! ~s:i ~I ii ~~ 
"ffCTf ct m 
tl a :r:u:r: ~ 
I l!Cf" ~~ 
"s:l"~fu ~HI Tfi m l!fIT fu~ I ""fl <:i: 
ill l!Cf RJ"I HT"G.l, R'<:H~:, q{H;:c\l, ~6JH;:c\l, A~H~:, f=aa:1+=a: ~ 
~ 
~~l=f(:f Nf~, l:i I fl I l=l l!aJ: ~~men JG: <Ji I 'ttl A <:if CfITT-;::r: ~ 
rfcfmf;;:aq{Jiltl~ JllltllTi~: I (f(l ~ 
3WR~~ 
~cj;) ~~ 
"fl"Cfm err fu WR:1 ~ 
Ci~ 6 s:i I a 11 fumf'c=rftfi') fu mf""fl Ci~ J:L 3i I fl I G: <Ji fu 
I cracr ~f~~JIT1:1cil'<:Ol'<:6fflJ:L ~~Cft,Tf{ fcict>fci ~~~, 
~ 
""a" fumf~ ~cB LfXT ~ 
~~ 
~~ICil'<:CilR"'ilCi,I c=r?r 
s:i IJ I H ~: ~ufai~ I fq ~If~, c=ICl ~ 
a-TUi Fl:~ I {l wmi ~=, "CiC1: C:5l=q:

--- PAGE 92 ---
82 
TANTRASARA 
fefckilctJI~ aek11G:lc-Ri~1r~, CttJl Rw-
~~M<Ql<"t I 
~ 
3"1'ilc-AR 3WB~ 
ffi~ 'tC!lc-A"i: °ffcfJ:Jli("qlft ~ 
~~ 
fuffi"r«l ~, 31ffi -qf uf: A e: 1 Cll I LflY)~ 1 m 1!ill J1 1 ~ c: 1 ~~+:f(:1: f?ra5 
'to1Cf);e:@tllfJ;pfg)105ffl;:f)actJ~d~l cmn~ I ~ 
3L;a1"1Ja$'11;:cti ~ 
q-{ 
~ 
l I frkl I~~~ a ti I "[.fW 3 f ;;q tj dci I <:i ~-CB f ;+ff'~ti 
I cracr fM ~f51 iq '""t, 
-qrn feflcH1{ I ~ 
qT?r ffiW mD'Hl~C!:li'""t I m ~~ 
~~~{C)qa1 
flCbl t:lrnctSl'<i lc-Rili I IQ IAC'1{ClYC"1l G:~ "i ru fPTCbfl I fd ~I f.;.:a fl Im $~fl A I 
' 
' 
3"I ~ ct5 I~ I : ~ 
3"1 'j)~ a ~I : I 
~~u~wm 
fu~ "4zj q Rcr'{~ a 1 
~S?rfu~ AIQil<:i-
fumnm~ "fl~ I I 
oq I l0Q I~ fu.smR:ffu ill ~ 
~: 
~-mc5~m<:r~I 
~IOllCilQl - -
fffl""i"&J ~~ 
gqxr: I I 
31~1*1Pl~'1s?r ~ ~Rcfi~'\ -
fcn:m~w:i~ruQ:ur ~ 
1 
~ 
3"I Hi'<~ Ml CB I : I ~ 
3 i::£ll '< o 1 '""t I 
Now, the topic related to the 'upward movement' 
(uccara~w) of the vital energy (pra~w): 
One desirous of moving his vital energy upward (uccti ra) 
should first make it rest (vifranti) in the heart, 57 the void, and then 
through the rising of pra~za should have it rest in external ohjects. 
Pra~za should rise there while being replenished by the moon of 
apana, by means of which one experiences one's a 11-i nc I usive 
nature and becomes indifferent to everything disti net from the 
Self. With the rise of samana, balanced energy, one experiences 
the state of unification of all objects. which then rest in a state 
of repose. Then. with the rise of the fire of udana, the limit-

--- PAGE 93 ---
TANTRASARA 
83 
ing distinction between subjectivity and objectivity is dissolved. 
With this consuming fire, which devours objects, knower, and 
knowledge, and with the subsiding and rising of vytina, the high-
est knower, free from limitation, becomes manifest. Thus, it is 
explained that all the 'stages of rest' (visrtinti) beginning with 
void (sunya) and ending with vytina, are all different stages of 
bliss. They are as follows: nijananda, 58 nirtinanda, 59 partinanda, 60 
brahrnananda, 61 mahananda, 62 and cidananda. 63 Universal bliss 
Uagadananda) is the one blissful state, which unifies all the other 
six states mentioned above. This universal bliss is free from rising 
and setting, and is repose in one's own Self. One should take rest, 
either in two [different] ways or in every respect, on one of the 
fiveprti~zas in any of the stages of uccara~za. By doing this, one is 
able to attain the reality of the 'truth of repose' (viirantitattvam), 
which is different from body, pra ~za, and so on. This is indeed the 
secret of pronouncing the seed mantras of creation "sa" and dis-
solution '"ha." By continued unification of these two syllables one 
should purify discursive thoughts (vikalpa). 
The above-mentioned 'stages of rest' have five stages, each of 
which depends on the comparative proficiency of the practitioner 
in absorption. However. if one is well practiced in the above means, 
then the 'bliss comes in the beginning' (pragtinanda)
6.i because 
of the glimpse of the fullness of the Absolute. As a result of this, 
an 'upsurge' (udbhava) takes place for a moment as one gains the 
firm conviction that he is free from the body. After this, 'shaking' 
(kampa) fol lows because the conviction that the Self is identical to 
the body has been loosened by the overpowering nature of one's 
'potentiality' (bala). This is followed by the 'void of sleep' (nidrtt) 
as the tendency toward externality disappears. In this way, the 
notion of the self dissolves in the nonself, and the notion of the 
nonself dissolves in the Self because the Self is of the nature of all. 
Then the yogin experiences 'great expansion' (malulvydpti), hav-
ing 'firmly rooted himself in the truth' (satyapada), upon which a 
'whirl' (ghlir~zi) takes place. All of these are the stages of the states 
of consciousness, which begin with the 'waking state' (jttgraf), 65

--- PAGE 94 ---
84 
TANTRASARA 
and end with the state 'beyond the fourth' (turyatlta). 
These stages become manifest when a yo gin enters the triangle, 
i.e., the 'bulb' (kanda), the heart, and the palate cakras, and the 
higher 'coiled state' of sakti (ardhvaku~z(ialinl). That state, where 
the 'moving upward' (uccara) of the vital energy has its repose 
(vifranti), where the entity of knowables has dissolved into a 'tran-
scendent vibration' (para1J1spandam), where knowables appear in 
a budding state, and where they where they have fu I ly blossomed, 
[that state] is known as threefold li1iga. 66 The nature of this three-
fold liliga will be described when the occasion for that arises. The 
highest liliga according to this system is cal led 'I-lea rt of Yoginf' 
(Yoginihrdaya). Of the above, the principal one is characterized 
by vibration. When this vibration expresses itself in the form of 
contraction and expansion with the nature of the 'unity of the two' 
(y~mala), it attains repose with the form of the 'subtle emission' 
(visargakalci). Here, I should stop revealing esoteric secrets. The 
entrance into it (samavesa), however, remains unrevealed. 
In the beginning, one remains steadily established in 
one's own innate consciousness; then by 'repose in the 
object' (prameye viframya), one fills the knowable. 
!hen he quickly dissolves the distinctions of subjectiv-
ity and objectivity, and takes rest. 
Thro~gh expansion one experiences repose [(vi §ra 11 ti)] 
on different levels. These levels are six, along with 
the void (sllnya), and as such they serve as the means. 
Waking and other states remain merged in this fivefold 
pra~w, beginning withpra~za and ending with vyllna. 
One well established in the above is able to ascend to 
(~r become established in) the abode of the creation and 
dissolution of 'self-awareness' (vimar.fo). 
~[f ~ 
a-i:rn Io 11 c-A I quf: I 
3IT~ l!Cf mm ~ 
3ieliffilicpf-c=rmm ~-;:r: cruf: I ~

--- PAGE 95 ---
TANTRASARA 
85 
ef~~:Tf ~-&:t ~, c=rcr~ 1fl1 fl q '<fi fct R=rcr=rrw, <=r~ -cnm ~ 
~ 
~ 
err 3-F=a '<"n:>ci 1 R-R ~ 
err fl A fct ~ 1 tt;: fi fct RtFG:~ ~f:, 
flAlil"""P~f~ 
qf~uf:, 
flAlilqfeauTisfq ~ 
"fl"G:~mcrc:PT 
~'<1~1fG:cR=( ~~fctrttl~lffl ~qx1@fd50~~~ mct~11Tf!tF:i 
~ 
-a- ~wm~ ~ 
cruf'<~ffl~ I 3iTf1:4.,'<f~;::i;::a{f!Jj)~ 
fffCiqla l~Tf!{ ~ 
3C§'IO?O:n:i1;:j fifctct~ 3-9~1C1lifci ~ 
chf~:k"l I 
Cil"CAfct{~UI ~ 
-
' 
~.-c!:l~~cf.,J1f°aR'<.ltlT~ I 
~C1~~a~11C"=t 
~ 
-fuIDJffY05qoffctur 11 
~ 
3-ilTfl'<~fllW I ~ 
qoffctfu: I ClRUt C1 Jj)~l~CBl~lrt "Ci"~ I 
fct CB C'Q : CB ffl I fQ fCI li Ai q li ~a 
f+=t li <""I I -
"Jj)q I li I R"i 'Rf5 I { ~ 
~ ~S?r %OT 
1fufu mul" ~ ~ 
61f%Rflli101C1ali1 
~Pi offal ~m q{45Mfudr ~ 
1%" fCWJ"l I 
~ mBG."f~L("11"<:Al4fcRf'~ 
<i'""?lfll~ 
JilUlq~Cbl~H 
;:rp:r 
qXlAAl~CB~ 11 
Now on the topic of 'syllabic sound' (var~za), which is of the 
nature of subtle vital energy: 
In that 'upward movement' (uccara) of the vital energy, there 
is a sound (dhvani), which is continuously sounding as if it is 
imitating the unmanifest. 67 This sound is called 'syllabic sound' 
(var~za). The most important characteristics of this syllable are 
the seed mantras of creation "sa" and dissolution "ha." One 
can attain supreme consciousness by the practice of these man-
tras. For example, when letters beginning with ''ka" and ending 
with "ma, "6 8 either with or without vowels, are merged into the 
core of the vital energy or simply brought to memory, then one 
experiences a balanced state of vibration of consciousness. This

--- PAGE 96 ---
86 
TANTRASARA 
is because the 'word,' that is, mantra, is free from conventional 
relations (samaya) 69 and therefore is full in every respect. Even 
the words which depend on convention are also capable of con-
veying their respective meanings according to the imagination of 
one's mind. After one has experienced supreme consciousness [in 
this way] he should bring together the heart, the throat. the lips, 
and the two 'ends of the twelve' (dvadasanta). Then, one should 
unify all of them in the 'core of consciousness' (hrdayam). This is 
the esoteric secret of this syllable (vanza). Some explain that from 
the 'reflective consciousness'vibrating in the 'core of the heart' 
e.merge white- and yellow-colored syllables. It is hy this medita-
tion that a yo gin is able to realize consciousness. 
By the vibrating consciousness in absence of any object 
to be denoted, and by restraining the movement of 
both moon (indu, that is, apana) and sun (arka, that is, 
pra~za), a person, because of entering into the realm of 
~onsciousness in a balanced way, becomes fully perfect 
In regard to cit, blja, and pi~1f]amantras . 
. This is the brief summary in verse of the topics discussed in 
this section of Chapter Five Here ends the elucidation of the way 
of the_ 'syllabic sound' (var~a). Kara~a will be explained in the 
mudra section. 
T~ some, discursive thought (vikalpa) attains fullness 
~Ithout resorting to any means, and to some it is puri-
fi~d by taking recourse to means. The expediency in 
this system is manifold. It is in the intellect (huddhi), 
th~ vital energy (pra~a) in the body, and in external 
Objects as well. They have been explained as limited, 
but at the attainment of the result, how can there be any 
distinction? 
3l~ tsftOAl~dJA I 
' 
3l~ ~ lttirufu: I

--- PAGE 97 ---
TANTRASARA 
87 
"fl" l!Cf ~HS•kf>("q•=p~1&,-;::r Sffi:, ITT f?rm W"Ff-~UOICll<1): ~~ ~ 
q, ITT >rfUT c=rrcrc=i:f~f'cu:, ~= 3Rtl" Cf a:=<:i A 1o1 : 31~ ~ 1 o I '$?..1: ct5 flh4 , ~ 
ctJA I ¢f)A Cf) C1 ~ Cl C51"('f:' "fl" q ~ 
m ~ JRmfu' a 'id: I fFi q ~ 
~ 
~ 
efm:, ~~-;::i- c=J ClGJmffi ctiAl¢bA<::f1: ~101qRi: I "ftfcra-cr f%" ~~ 
fqirffi ~ 
lJED 11 f<-1 ' 3-T<l l!Cf q 3"l Cl ma <Ji I~ auc=rt m;:ffi -;::i-~' c=ra: 
ta 1a;:;;xq1 a, -B-a ~CfJR1~~ R q a .-a1 fw<::i 1~1 furn-tTFIT ~ 1oH1{<)q1 
3ilctf"Clmcrr qxrm ~= ~-g ~ 
~~. c=rc=ITsm iliR ~mm 1 ITT 
fw<::i 1~1m1 CITTffi~ ~cmn, ~ 
c_i l!fcf-&fo~{C)q1 ~m~. ITT cruf-
~ 
-qcrr~ CPTIB~ fu:rfu: ~ 
-"f1B:-"A"-~M 
{C)q c=q I<"\ I ~~ 
Cln:f-~-ct5C11c-A"'il ~ 
'1."lfdt51qf<-1 fdlctfi{ I ITT~~ 
fi&l~IR:i"'"ci'<~ 
3"i'J a~ I a{<) q : >rfUT:, c=rwRf ~ ftgG fi chm IQ M : 3Rfl" ~d IQ I c"W~~ ~, rn=f ~ 
~ 
R{C)qon~ 1 c=r?r >r~efm: 3"llc-A~1rw <:lR ~ 
~ 
~101xu1 ~=-
~~~~ 
1 c=r?r t'4d<::il1 ma~11;ai;:ci ta1~&1: ~~ 
~~,a~fl= 
~IOl"cil'(: ~ 
~ 
q, fct'lfba61fl<::iMdt5("ql(i, fiaf\Q I ITT ~IBct51 fc:rfv: 
+nm crt5f ~ cr:fffll-grc=m, ~ 
fi A ff! : Cf5lrl: m fi A I GQ a I ITT fi q Xl i ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
f~ 
mCCP1G:U:, mc:cPT -IB ~ 
atSI~')= af=tl 1a, 
g>fi L(""t fl'i ~fl I irctfu I 
Chapter Six 
External Practice 
This external practice is denoted by the term 'formation of the 
place' (sthtinaprakalpana). According to this system. the loca-
tion (sthtina) is threefold. i.e., vital air (prti~za),
70 the body, and 
external ohjects. 71 The procedure (vidhi) with regard to vital air 
(prti~w)
72 is as follows: The entire sixfold path. which will be elab-
orated later, is conceived as abiding in the vital air. Time (kala) 
is the sequential and non-sequential unfoldment73 of 'mutative 
activity' (kalana). However, it should be understood that time also 
exists within the Lord. The manifestation of time is caused by that 
sakti belonging to God called KalI. 74 On the other hand. the mani-

--- PAGE 98 ---
88 
TANTRASARA 
festation of both sequence and non-sequence, which brings about 
external differentiation, is the modality of vital air (pra ~zmrtti). 
It is indeed consciousness alone which assumes th is nature by 
isolating itself from the knowable.75 As a result, consciousness 
assumes the form of void (nablza), which because of the associa-
tion with limitation assumes the nature of 'knowable object' (ved-
yatam). Then consciousness, being intent on accepting the objects 
of knowledge because of its freedom, is as if it were falling from 
its original state and becoming predominantly of the nature of 
the 'power of activity' (kriya sakti).76 Then the form of vital activ-
ity, which is the very life of living beings, fills the body with five 
forms of pra~za. In this way it shines as a living being. 
The 'path of time' (kaladva) shines in the early portion of 
kriyasakti, while the 'path of space,' characterized by a diversity 
of forms, shines in the later portion of kriyasakti. The states of 
var~ia, mantra, and pada abide in the path of time because they 
are the supreme, subtle, and gross forms respectively. The state 
of the path of space (desadhva) that is 'principles' (tattvas), the 
'w_orlds' (bhuvanas), and 'subtle elements of the universe· (kala) 
will be explained when the occasion for that arises. 
Although the vital air remains interwoven inside and outside 
of the body, pra~w moves from the heart by the perceptible effort 
of _the knowable objects; (that is, taking pra ~1a as the knowable 
Object). The three iaktis: 'belonging to the Lord' (prabhu sakti), 
'one's own iakti' (atnul sakti), and 'effort' (yatna) are the causes of 
t?e movement of pra~w. This is accomplished through their rela-
tive dominance and subordination.77 
The length of the breath, both the inhalation and exhalation 
of all living beings, from Brahma to an insect, is thirty-six digits 
(wigulas) if measured by (the length of) their own fingers. 78 This is 
~ecause aJI living beings have the strength, effort, and body befit-
ting them. The entirety of time, that is, the lunar days, months, 
years, and number of years, is contained in the movement of the 
vital air. One minute (ca~aka) is made up of one and one-fifth dig-

--- PAGE 99 ---
TANTRASARA 
89 
its (G1igula). Fol lowing this line of measurement, one hour (glzaf 
ika) arises. Therefore, counting the inhalation and exhalation of 
the breath, the total becomes seventy-two digits. 
31~ fu~C\ <:i : 1 f"l q 1 C\A ~c=rn:ti (jfr: :w:IB, ~ 
=t:rn f! ~ ~, cJQJci 
~tlcvr~tm, l!ciA-rm~, ~~. 
~fu~ 
I 
Next, the rising of the lunar day (tithi) will be described. One 
tuf i consists of two and a quarter digits. Four tufis make three 
hours (prahara). The duration of both dawn and twilight is half 
of a tufi each. Thus the inhalation and exhalation of one breath is 
known as the day and night. This is the way of the arising of the 
lunar day. 
31~ +m=IT~ I CVf ~ 
~?WI q a=r: I ~~I 
ITT~ ~c=utl ~ 
-a~tl fu~~ 
3"iCBIMCB~, 11"~ qsqa~I ~m~fu~, ITT 
~d)l~ll fu~~~ ~ 
lTcl {!Cf fu;:rf~ I Cl?f ~tPilk11~Cbl~ll ~I 8~~ 
fail I { fufil~ m?I: I ~ q 
!):i Cf) I~ I fu~ 
ftmf~fu ?Cl I a 3-FF(l~~ 
I 
' 
a Ri I ~ ~ fc1 ~<:ff( I (1?f q1 &J I q af 
!):i I a II Cf 1 3"I q H a'""?: 3IBZfff~ 
~epf Cf) ('i 1 J:t 
3-TLf"l:ffu I ~ 
q 5ci tl ~ <:i i 
~tt g:i tl ~ 11 ;:c"1 fi Al q 
aTIUft! W~Ci Cf) ('i I !):i f"l { : £l <rf\A I : ~ I a 11 cf 1 'QC[ ffi~ I a tl.., ;:c"1 { ~ 
~ffitl 
~ qa-mf~ I ~ 
q ~cu-cl~ !):i I~ '"t 31cll=( 3"11 A I q ffl I fu<=IT-tj mf~ 
I C1?f mf~ ef~ ~ 
~ 3"i1Ala~l mTlT ~ 
Cblfi\;i<:lMlaURTf 
tlcpC"l lfl fuf2'lmctlfl fa~1fci ~ 
rn ~~01~, m -a- a~'«lqfil1ifif:~m 
A I <:i I \;i A IQ~: ~~I 
Cl C"1 Ci I fa MI Y"i l~lffi: Ch Cl fl~ 3"11 il§ltl"i A l?I fii:ttl: 
~Ulk=i ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
I ·~n:rR~)•P=tlDl\;iA~a<:l1f°a<JO:J1lld5IRfCllfl ~ 
~m:r: C5Tfl: q I '< M1fenCB45 M \;i tl : I (lcl: mcmfu ~ I al fo tl cf 1: ~ ~1 d5 <:i I Cb fl <:i I 
3"I q H £l <rf\J:t ~~, ~ 
q s:a a~ fl Qfc: ~fufm, a ct"i ;:c"1 { qa-rnf'~ 
~-a~ 
!):llJCICi,, ~ 
Q QIBCblf)fl!):ltlJOt, ~ 
lTIBT~ I 
Now the rising of the month will be explained. Here, the day is 
the dark fortnight and the night is the bright fortnight. 79 The first 
half and the last half of the tufi is considered as "rest' (vi.frllnti) 80

--- PAGE 100 ---
90 
T ANTRASARA 
because it is beyond the influence of time. However, the inter-
mediate fifteen tufis make up one fortnight. There, in these tithis 
light and rest occur, which are known as day and night. Day is 
when the manifestation of the knowables takes place, and night 
is when they dissolve into the knowing subject. 81 Day and night 
have infinite divisions because of the variety of prolonged and 
temporary duration. The 'equinox' (vi~uvat) is the occurrence of 
the balance of both. During the dark fortnight. the moon, which 
stands for vital energy (apana), offers replenishing lunar phases 
(kala) one after the other to the sun (pra~za), until the fifteenth 
tufi is reached. This fifteenth tufi is adjacent to the 'end of twelve' 
(dvadasanta), the waning moon from which al 1 the phases have 
been separated and thus has become emaciated, i.e .. dissolved into 
pra~za. The tufi that follows is the conjunction of the half month 
(pakta). The first half of that tufi is related to the night of new 
moon (amavasya) and the latter half to the first day of the lunar 
fortnight (pratipad). When the portion related to (amtivasya) 
enters into the portion related to pratipad as a result of a conscious 
effort of expelling air, such as a cough, it causes a break in the 
l~ngth (that is, the flow) of the vital air, usually one titlzi in dura-
tIOn. '!'his is known as an eclipse (specifically, a lunar eclipse). At 
that time, rahu, the knowing subject of mtiyd, who is insepara-
?1Y associated with the object of knowledge and who is naturally 
mcapable of obliterating, but only of veiling f the moon]. drinks 
the nectar of the moon that abides in the sun (pra ~za). This is 
an auspicious time, capable of bestowing extraordinary results, 
because this is a moment in which indivisible unity of the knower, 
known, and knowledge takes place. When the prcl ~w enters the 
realm of apana, consciousness in the form of the sun fills up the 
apana gradually in the form of the moon (offering to it) one lunar 
phase after the other. This process continues until the full moon 
(ptirnima), which consists of fifteen tufis, develops. After this, 
the c?njunction of the half moon and an eel ipse takes place as 
described previously (solar eclipse). However, this eel ipse bestows 
only mundane results. This is the rising of the month.

--- PAGE 101 ---
TANTRASARA 
91 
31~ Cltttd:\'Jl: I C1?f cpm1qa=r l!Cf 3tHJ?JlOj q 
q ~ 
~ctSIPa: 
"T"T""Ad'S-...---.-.'<1-.-C"l fB~~ I C1?f Sk<•HfM ~ 
IB~, ~ 
ThTi'<l~fumTT:, Fci 
~~ 
G:fa:1011?Jl;:j, -rr~m, ~mr, ~~~ ~tSliC""aJ:J 3id:Cll'<Ai: 
3id:Clt11, \J"F'l"ilfu"fuChl{t5i~,ch ~ ~ ~ 
Ji~Hlf~ ~ 
l,
1
c=r2tcf ~ 
3Bf ~ 
~f'qc=f Ch'<l fa I 3-Br -a- cramrr: fq Ci I Jig I ;a I ~ 
~Im l'l &:l" 
9'1tl~ll~, ~ 
a~1ct0l: I 
Now the rise of the year will be described. The 'dark fortnight' 
(kr~~w pak~a) is the passage of the sun to its 'northern course' 
(uttaraya~w). The passage of the sun from one side of the zodiac
82 
to the other (swhkranti), beginning with Capricorn (makara) and 
ending with Gemini (mithuna), is six digits (migula) in length. The 
five lunar phases (tithi) consist of one digit each. In these lunar 
phases there is also a division of days and nights. 
Thus, when inhalation occurs, that is known as the passage 
of the sun to its southern course (dak~inayana). The six changes 
found in living beings, i.e., the state called insemination, the will 
to become, the desire to be born, the state in which birth becomes 
imminent, starting to arise, and real appearance, are all included 
in the signs of the zodiac beginning with Capricorn and ending 
with Gemini. The other six human conditions, i.e., birth, length 
of life (stithi), transformation (pari~zati), growth (vrddhi), decay, 
and death, are included in the last six signs of the zodiac. For this 
reason rituals performed during this particular time (according to 
the zodiac) bestow the appropriate results. The rudras, beginning 
with Dak~a and ending with Pitamaha, together with their saktis 
are the superintending deities of the twelve signs of [the] zodiac. 
83 
Here ends the description of the arising of the year. 
\;i~~fi ef~ fuw:r ~ 
~UT ~~ 
crfl=( ~;:r ~UT 
~m~~= mct~ll~l~, \;i~~fi fumaj ~ICi?lld I ftJ:J5aims"[A 
~. <:l?f ~ 
d6id'5~ 3ml=( ~ 
llOITi\'Jll ~~ 
Q"xr Cfl5rlfuT, ~ 
3-R"m 
Qf{q1cu1 
{!Q)f~ murf;:nf~~l(f)IM 
6iteU&.l~, 3l?T

--- PAGE 102 ---
92 
TANTRASARA 
eCBRi~1R1trn~1fUr ~ 
~ICilA ffe fumaj ~~ I Ci 1acil 1!Cf 3"1Bl{I~ 
>l I u I f1 'L~ I , ~ 
;:r t5! tct:Hi~l ~ 
3ITTm GfT ~ 
3"1 H ""fl'i I fl I "Ci?f +i9~ 
~ ~ 
fffiw, 3-Fl;:r ~UT fG:cx:rrR m 
G: ~I a bf fH:~ ~ I fOT ~1Tn=l 
I i:lfCllR ?ftfur ~ ~ 
~ ~ 
~cqfu mcIT~ ~: ~ 
~~ 
I 
~TTRP=l eCB'<"1ca~1 Ji ;=a ;=a '<+"l, 
Ara~~: ~cfffii:r: ~Teti f~, 
~ 161 RH Hi 
CB I ft 1 f;;::i c: J ~ crfl Cf5?i ~ ~ 
-a-
ffi~ ~A sn•i:n fq"ff 
~ 
0FfT ctl"TCfef~fu=rr JI ;::i C'il ch s:l fl~ I Cf5 C1l ~Z-1" fc:rtsOf~ I ~~ 
'!?&"ii 0 gg I Ga')~ 11 w +:rITTmct ~sR=r I <lfl1" R ~ 11 fl A I L("11 ~rem ~re: I 
m l=fR;:r Qlfm<=f ~~= I Cl\l fQIDIT: fG:;::f a I a cil q m?t: I ~ 
~ 
~= 
1 <1<1 ITT ~w ~amm 
'<1¢0:~, a1aa1 m?t:, ~ 
~, a ma l1 fq q- 31cffu: 
1 C1?f ~ 
(fG:"Cff~ ~ 
1 a fCI l I Fa = , ~ 
JTI5°fud51'<1Clftr:, ~~Ul'<Cf51uli ~ 
fG:;::f 
~lci{C)~loli, "Rm Ci ldCil, 
~ 
q-
~1Cil11~f I ~1Cifi¢t:I~ ~6"1105fa;::i1~1: I t!cf 
J1C1Cifd1Cl 
3iclfffil~Ji_ ~Cf ~ur {1¢0:1011+-t ~= I ~cf~'<ifHffl ~ 
~ 
I 
oo.!U ~~lfi~.!U ~CB1Ro1: 3-Tcx:rffi IBtaPa ~ 
I $$f}(f)o~-;::i 1~9-tl (1GJ 
~I 
~Sdl~'<>lft~:, ~ 
ef"'5G: I C1?f ~llf511~'<Jj)"tf51 3lfLr ~Jl'1~ 
I~ 
sITTCBO~·-=tl~ ~ 
~: ~ 
~epqrfwrt '<1~101i ~. ~ 
~, ~ 
~= 
(1(\ ~~, 
c=rrcrcTI- 1!Cf a=JLIT, ~ 
-a fl A fa A a 
l1 I~ I~ i m 
ff1 ~a I -q;;:r: JI g ~~I : ~Jffu I ~ ~ 
3"1 clfrf)(f) I C1 : c=f ~~ 
WW lj)O I fu ("Cl I l1 I~ I Fd;i Cf)~ 
I cncrffi ~ 
I "fl" 1!Cf ~ 
I q I <A I Ct.> I C'1: 
wclm"R;:r W0Tc1 Q~ 
f~ 
1 JJ?r mun JllTfl ~Jffu, a 1 a a1 ~, 
m >i1orn~1l1:, muT q- ~(Jf'CSfffiwf8 ~sfq m ~~, Ci?lllZilffi=f 
~ 
1 Qm cnffi wtlffifl1tuIB m -ttxsm, C1fl ~~ 
f~, ~ 
Rm, ff "QCf l161>lft~: I ~~ 
«idJlflqR~ f~~~ft.rcPT 
~ 
~ 
ffi<:Rl. ~ 
mr~, ClC1 am~, w -a- 3-FITT~ 1 
Wtt>CBIM;:oi w~.fq:rr~furR-;r ~~~ 
I 3Rlf~ fllAri~ tra, 
~ oo '<"1 IJ=H ffl t1fRt oo ~CJ I ~ 
fl I +Fi~ I a 3"1 Cf5 f{:l I Ci d'5 I C1 I fl 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
' 
f~m~tS!JOll?iCi~I m~tS!Cf)IC'iSH"Hs:lfafl~=c:A~trmG:<:1: I ~ 
G:m w 
'<"16~Ji_ ~cl "ffaf Rqc=f cffifc:: ~cf '!~ ~ ~ 
qzj ~ 
~?:

--- PAGE 103 ---
TANTRASARA 93 
~ 
1=1"~ ~tl~ ~~UT 
G:~ll1f01a1R 346GIG:~I. ~ 
llf01afqfu: I 
t!CJl=( 3ffi"&:fl: ~fte~Ml'il: l"!CBf~ ~~ 
~. "ffisfq tifaffi, m 
3LITW I "ff f=a ~ 
I :;Q 
I f=a :;::J:j I ?I fil q 3flf ~ 
-~ 
cmffi-~ ~ 
I C1c1 l!Cf 
fqG••H=ict>fYIG.1 ~f"ci?ClJi 3IB:f ~ fc:m"~ I ~ 
"l'i"W ~ 
CblftlG:l'i: 
"RW 3fqA5fq ~<i l'i I C1 ~"fflf)-~~ I <::TW ~ ~("Cf)U ~·-"fff<.1-~ 
-~ 
~ 
mc:~11;:8~ ~6=f-~-mr-~1a1 
.. =t1f-~m1xo..~ 
d'S1"1.:01~cepi:f 
c=r~ 
~ 
s-Rr 
~ c=ct.>~ I "i ~ 
-~C5T-:a -~ 
ct51 fl -g: 1c:~11 ;:fl~, ~-.Jr~~ crrtlCf5-
RtFf -"T1~ -'j)nx:i ~ 
~ I 
If the sixty lunar phases (tithis) are conceived in the breadth 
of each finger (migula), then following this method of calcula-
tion, one year is conceived in the passage of the sun from one 
sign of the zodiac to the other. Counting in this way, in the in-
going and the outgoing breaths, the raising of twelve years takes 
place. 84 When in one digit (aJigula) the number of lunar phases 
is conceived to be three hundred, then one-fifth of a digit makes 
one year. 85 Following this method of calculation, what was previ-
ously described as one casaka, i.e., one and one-fifth digits, then 
the period of five years ~ill place in one passage of the sun from 
one sign of the zodiac to another (sadzkrtmti). Following this pro-
cedure, the rising of sixty years takes place in a single inhalation 
and exhalation of the breath. Therefore, the number of the lunar 
phases is 21,600, which is the number of inhalations and exhala-
tions of the breath in the course of one day and night. A number 
higher than sixty has not been examined because it borders on 
infinity. 
Furthermore, one year for human beings is the lunar phase 
(tithi) of the gods. 86 Following this procedure, 12,000 heavenly 
years composes the four yugas. The duration of these four yugas 
is 4,000, 3,000, 2,000, and 1,000 years, beginning with krtayuga. 
There are eight junctions between them, which are 400, 300, 200, 
and 100 years in length. One manvantara 81 consists of 71 cycles 
of these four yugas. Fourteen of these manvantaras make up one 
day of Brahma. At the end of this day of Brahma, the three worlds

--- PAGE 104 ---
94 
TANTRASARA 
are burned up by the 'fire of time' (ktila agni). However, the upper 
three worlds88 are overpowered by sleep caused by smoke. The 
creatures living there are propelled by the rapidly burning [cos-
mic] fire to a world called Jana and remain there as pralaydkala 
souls. But those creatures called Ku~maI)Qa. Hataka. and others 
who are properly enlightened souls continue to play in a world 
called Mahas. When the period of that night of Brahma is over, 
creation starts again. Following this system of measurement, the 
life span of Brahma is one hundred years. This is the duration 
of one day and night of Vi~I)U. His life span is also one hundred 
years. The life span of Vi~I)U is one day in the 1 i fe of Rud ra, the 
Lord of the Rudra world, which is above the world of Vi~IJU. The 
duration of his night is of the same length: one year is as described 
above. One hundred of these years is the 1 imit of the Ii fe of Rudra. 
At the end of one hundred years [of his 1 i fe] he attains identity 
with Siva. The functional period of Rudra is one day consisting 
of 'one hundred rudras' (satarudras), who support the sphere of 
Brahma. Their night is of the same length. Their life span is also 
one hundred years long. At the time of the death of the satarudras, 
the destruction of Brahma's reign takes place. Thus. the 1 i fe span 
of the rudras abiding in the water principle to the end of the pri-
mord.ial nature principle (prakrti) is counted in the following way: 
!he life span of the rudras, abiding in the lower principle, is a day 
m the life of those who live in the higher principle. 
Then Brahma and Rudra (although their worlds are destroyed~ 
Brahma and Rudra are not), who are presiding over water, and 
the other tattvas, remain in an unmanifest (avvakta) state. At that 
time, Lord Srikal)tha becomes the agent of des~truction. This is the 
intermediate state of dissolution 89 which ends in avvakta. When 
the time of destruction is over, a new creation hegi ns again. At 
that time, those who attained liberation by fol Iowi ng other .frlstras 
are also created. 90 The span of life of Lord Srikat)tha is one day 
of those rudras who abide in the veils (kaiicukas). 91 The length 
of their night is the same. One day of Gahanefa is the 1 ife span 
of Rudra. The length of his night is the same. During the night of

--- PAGE 105 ---
TANTRASARA 
95 
Gahanefa, everything that remains dissolves in mtiyti. After disso-
lution, Gahanefa creates again. When the life span of the unmani-
fest state (avyakta) is multiplied by ten parardhas (one parardha 
is 100,000 bill ion years), it is said to be the period of one day of 
mayii. The same is the case for the length of the night of maya. 
The night of maya is stated to be a dissolution (pralaya). The time 
span of maya, when multiplied by one hundred parardlza, is one 
day of Isvara. There, the vital energy (pra~za) creates the universe. 
The same is true for the length of one night, during which pra~za 
takes rest. In the cavity called bralzmabila, where the vital energy 
stops its function and although consciousness there remains in 
a tranquil state, even there this sequence persists. When the life 
span of Isvara is multiplied by one hundred parardhas, the number 
we arrive at amounts to one day of Sadasiva. The same occurs in 
the length of his night. Sadasiva's night is known as mahapra-
laya. 92 After the end of his period, Sadasiva encloses bindu. 
ardlzrachandra, and nirodhika within himself and dissolves him-
self into nada. Nada dissolves into sakti, sakti into vyapinl, and 
vyapinl into an(/Sritasiva. One day of anairitasiva is equal to one 
day of sakti when multiplied by 10 million parardhas. Anasri~a 
rests in the realm of samanti. This equilibrium of samana is 
known as Brahma. From this state of equilibrium (the most sub-
tle state of mind), which is beyond mutation, all these aforesaid 
'mutations of time' and their dissolutions arise like the cyclic 
motion of the 'wheel of time,' similar to the opening and closing 
of the eyelids. The procedure of counting is as follows: 1; 10; 10 
x 10; 100 x 10: 1,000 x 10: 10,000 x 10: 100,000 x 10: 1,000,000 
x IO: 10,000,000 x 10: 100,000,000 x 10: 1,000,000,000 x 10: 
10,000,000,000 x 10: 100,000,000,000 x 10: L000,000.000,000 
x 10: 10,000.000,000.000 x 10: 100.000.000,000.000 x 10: 
l ,000,000,000,000,000 x 
10: 10,000,000,000,000,000 x 10. 
These a re n a rn e d e k a, d as a. .<at a. s a lw s ra, a y u ta. I a k ~a. 11 iy u r a. 
kofi, arbuda, vrnda, klzarva, niklzarva. padma, smiku, samu-
dra, antya, madlzya. parllrdha. Thus, the number coming later 
is ten times higher than the former. The total of these numbers

--- PAGE 106 ---
96 
TANTRASARA 
is eighteen. Thus, numerous creations and dissolutions occur in 
one breath, 93 having the characteristic of the great creation. That 
breath abides in consciousness, the consciousness in an acciden-
tal attribute (upadhi) (with the characteristics of forms. features, 
etc.), which accidental attributes go to rest in the singularity of 
consciousness. The vibration (spanda) is nothing but the mani-
festation of consciousness, which appears in the form of the emer-
gence of time. Therefore, this diversity that occurs in dreams and 
imagination does not create any contradiction in regard to time. 
Just as the emergence of time occurs in the form of pra ~10, in the 
same way, it occurs even in apana, which proceeds from the heart 
to the end of muladhara. As the six causal agents. that is, Brahma, 
Vi~l).u, Rudra, Ifa, Sadasiva, and Anasritasiva, who appear in 
the heart, throat, palate, forehead, randhra, and in the 'end of 
twelve' (dvadasanta), 94 operate in the upper region. in the same 
way in apana, these deities operate in the throat, valve, genera-
tive organ, causing it to contract and expand, and in the "end of 
twelve' (dvadasanta). They are the superintending deities of boy-
hood, youth, old age, death, rebirth, and 1iberation. 95 
31~ w=rR- Cf>Tffi~ I f1A1"il ITTCIT~ ~ 
~~ ~~ 
~Ahl 
~-g ~-;:i- ffifcft-;:i- ~"R I m rullt:(ICb °ff~ c=rf~c=rcJ~ ~ 
' 
' 
' 
~= 
311..,.,._ct>,........1'<......lqfa~ 1 3)~~ 
"ff~ fffi:r~ ~~ 
ll<illlci CITTTfu 1 m 
~~ct r0 ~ 
~~m ~ 
mCCPi 11"~ ~ 
1 <lCiT ~Cl~, a, A-
murfuea q I a I I Ji_, ~ 
l I a H Li I ef-g: mtfufc Ct.> I g: cj crn=f Gf'filUT CffB Gf'BJUT 
crr"B ~ 
qxr °ff ct:> I '"fi q: I ITTr: "fiwrf--a q sq ch Ci~ ~~ 
~cf~ 
uR:ct51~~Fact:>1'"f11~refa-rut~ fu'1ct~~~ !'l101~1a1f:i 1 c=ralsftr 
ef a:ruT crrB Gf'arur crrB Gf'filUT ~ "ffwrf ;:a q sq ch , ~cj:) ~Cl~ I Ci I R 
~er mrcrfq, ~ fu I l"!ci ~ctfuctfl ~ 
U ~ 
~ 
~ctJl;M(i\Q: 
I C1fil ~~am~ °ffwrf~f~~ I ~ 
~~ 
~Al~A{lhl 
~"[ti mmr~rrr~ 
1 3BITRr g:1ct~11~1~ ~cfcrc==( 1 3G:R C1 
m 
ct~ 11 -=a 1 ct FO~ fY ~A 1 ?I le-A "i = Cb 1 M ffl 1 3BITRr ctcf a c=t fcrfu: 1 cx:rR C1 
~1Qct5fdl<"1 ~sfq 
~fr+:Jla9C1flllflil;:r CblMlct\Q: I

--- PAGE 107 ---
TANTRASARA 
97 
Now the rising of time in samana: 
As breath in the form of samana moves along the ten channels 
(na(li) born in the heart, 96 it causes fluids, etc., to flow throughout 
the entire body in a balanced way. The samtina, while wandering 
along the eight different directions, causes the knowing subject to 
imitate the activities of the superintending deities of the quarters. 97 
While moving upward and downward, it (samana) goes on mov-
ing along the three channels. 98 So it is that on the day of equinox 
(vi~uvat) it moves externally in the morning along the middle path 
for one and one-quarter ghafiktis. Then, the number of movements 
of the breath being nine hundred, it moves externally for a period 
of two and one-half ghafikas from left to right, again from left 
to right, and then from the left. Thus, five occurrences of the 
movement of the sun from one side of zodiac (salizkrtinti) to the 
other takes place. With the passage of the sun through five signs 
of the zodiac, and after a duration of thirteen and three-quarters 
ghafiktis, (its) being over the autumnal equinox takes place, and 
at mid-day, nine hundred movements of the breath occur. Then, 
from there the breath moves from the right to the left, then from 
the right to the left, and then right. In this way, the sun passes 
through (another) five signs of zodiac. Thus, the number ~f 
breaths is nine hundred for each passage of the sun (smizkrtintz). 
This also occurs during the night. Therefore, during the day and 
night of viJuvat (equinox), there are twelve smizkrtintis in each. 
With the increase and decrease of the duration of the day, the num-
ber of smizkrtintis will increase or decrease. Thus, in one breath 
of sanuzna the passage of two years occurs because of the absence 
of the meeting of the inhaled and exhaled breath. In this manner, 
the passage of twelve years occurs as described before, while in 
the breath known as udclna, the movement of breaths occurs up to 
the 'end of twelve' (dvadastinta), where time is characterized as 
a vibration. Here again, the same method of calculation should be 
followed. On the other hand, in the type of breath (called) vyana, 
which is all-pervasive and free from sequence, the emergence of 
time is associated with a subtle surge.

--- PAGE 108 ---
98 
TANTRASARA 
3f~ qoffe:a: I ITT 310~ 3fU~ cmTc:m- ~cffi:r ~. ~ 
~ 
[ ~ ~ 
\;llOllTilA I~ 
~vrc=r "ci~ChlfUT "$"fu 3N:, 
' 
' 
' 
3fll1i 34 a C""i aTI quff~ I lk"i J1 f1 ~~ 
3"H: U g U cl <:i "'"'?!Cl I~ ""'I Ci C"1 
' 
' 
~ 
fu?f 1=P5IT~ fG:cnf~ ~~"Cruc=( ~CRfm "fl6 
ctlC::lc:-RiA ~ I ITT OOfG:R !J'ilUlcil{fl{..~ih~ 3G:<:if"i~ C\Ql{..c(;ilctl I 
ctff\cP1f~ <1G:W:\ ~TfcUf5AUI ~fH~lci ~ ~ 
~. ~ 
~ 
~~ 
a-B 
"ci I'< fQ {ti q fu~ I Tfl ~ 
, 
~ I a I "ci I { 
aftu) , 
Cf5 I Ci~ I \Cl 
~ ~11 ~a~ -&cf~ f:a ?I~ I R=Bf;:rtj"{ ~ 
I CITTff~~ ga 
~m:cn: Ti" au~c;: fi I \!51 '< ~ 
$11 ~Cl~ 
I $11 ~ ~ <:i I a Ii 3-fflf~ 
"ff~ a:rur:, mun~ t.f wf~ ~CT ~I ~ 
~ 
- ~w 
Rid'5fG$1HA l!CB Ti" fu;f~ ~ 
-
m~~l&il{C)NCic=cf I~ Al?llaT 
3IBr W~d'5~1a 1 ~ 
·a~1raa ~a:1nAci~· 1 (mo ~o 9-~-
~~) ~ I -
'{"tl~l;:a{ mcrc1 ~ 3-fcrc=f ~ 
~CT ~ 
I 3-0 
~ Qd'5 I ~TI fa q G:~ '{U I ti ti~ fufu~wrt~~~~;:r lTcP 
l!Cf mft 
tR"B~~ ~ 
d"51M'/tl~~ 31fdCf5&qlc-l=ll 1!CI" ~~ 
"$"fu I ~ 
~ 
Q)IBT~ muTIG.Gf Q"Q ~, 
~Rc:fi g I'< i ~ fct f'a 5i 1 i ~~ 
<tlq 31 ld'5C1 <F( I 3-TTfJ=Fr l!Cf qK4~ ~ 
J1 Hi ~ 
"(!Cl" ircrfu ~ 
I I 
fl f8~4'fl1 lc:-A.-i: !l'i 10 l~lf#5 
~tj Cl?flt "ci I fa d"5 I Ci J:t I 
mci1 ~ RcJ ffi fi ~I'< "ci ~1-
f ;f f41~ml ikcTI~ ICIA ra I I 
~ -~fh:ref~ca I "ci 1 lffcH fo a 
C1 ;;;51 f1 I { 
q)ITTf~ ~Ch I~ I ;i ~ 
tj t5(3A I f€d'5'"{ I I t.. I I 
Now we will explain the rising of the source of phonemes 
(van:za): 
During the period of balance in an equinox (vi,Juvat). in the 
duration of two halves of prahara (one and a half hours) there 
arise the phonemes, [which emerge] in groups (kavarga, etc.). 99

--- PAGE 109 ---
TANTRASARA 99 
When the breath for each phoneme becomes 216 internally, it 
occurs externally to the extent of thirty-six ca~akas. This is the 
rising of the phoneme automatically, all by itself, without any 
effort. On the other hand, the rising of the mantra with effort is 
like applying the force of determination to a single effort. Then 
a teacher, while continuing to think a mantra day and night with 
the thought of unification, becomes identified with the deity of the 
mantra. 
The number of rising of mantras is interpreted by the rising of 
the movement of breath. When that breath is doubled, the rising 
becomes half. Therefore, following the same method, the rising 
occurs with reference to the wheel consisting of 108 divisions, and 
the rising of the breath becomes 200. According to this method, 
one who is able to rest in the movement of the breath, either gross 
or subtle, while the movement of breath becomes attenuated and 
when time is consumed in this manner, for that one everything is 
experienced as one consciousness which is perfectly full with the 
variegated saktis. 
The difference of time is the cause of a distinction of knowl-
edge and not a distinction of a knowable object. It is like the 
knowledge of one standing on the mountaintop looking down-
ward. This knowledge, as long as it is existent, is known as 'subtle 
moment' (k~ana). In the rising of one breath, one thought exists. 
This is correct. Otherwise, the knowledge of a thought-construct 
(vikalpa) cannot be considered to be one because of its gradual 
association with the element of a word. This is the case even with 
matras 100 (dirgha, pluta), which are also gradual. As it is said 
in the A~fadhyczyr 1.2.32: "The first pada of the svarita vowel 
extending to one-half of the duration of the short vowel is udatta, 
while the remaining part is anudatta." 
Thus, so long as another vibration does not arise, there is a sin-
gularity of thought. At the time of bringing the mantra consisting 
of eighty-one divisions into the realm of memory and by means of 
entering different forms of attributes, it remains one with refer-
ence to the determinate thought (vikalpa) of Paramesvara, and the

--- PAGE 110 ---
100 
TANTRASARA 
experience free from vikalpa takes place as a resu 1 t of the absorp-
tion of time. Thus, seeing the entire path of time in the arising of 
the breath, counting the diversity of creations and re-absorptions 
as innumerable and diverse, and cognizing oneself as the one pos-
sessing the great riches of the Lord, one experiences that he is 
already 1 iberated. 
Visualizing one's own power of breath. which is nondif-
ferent from one's own consciousness, which transcends 
time along with being ever engaged with the wheel of 
creation, maintenance and dissolution, one becomes 
one with Bhairava, the Lord. 
31~ f1l<""IJ1~ 1md5~ I 
31~~tcrr I 
(E:f "f1llttr 1!Cf 3f<:f 1ifcf ~ ~ 
X"i I it I f1 ;:i ~I RP J1 j ~~ 
~fufu fu ~I 
~mur ~~ ~~ muT ~~~ 
m6= ~-{ -mcrf~U5rl­
~ fa s:i 1 Ci1 
f1 s:i ttil s terr qfef~~, "ff 
f1 i:1 ttJJ=1 31~ ~~ fa M 1 ca, 
~-g "if muT. c=r fm~. c=rt ~~. c=rffia~. R-tj~~uf~~ ~mm 
~~~lf1"fdfq{C)q$1:, %filurf ffiqci; ~lq{C)qj W~l'li fq~~ 
~a co:<) ct. :wRm <Rrmrrmr ~ 
~-;::r rreufT<:rr<=( i:i 1Cl1J1mmdi1 Rut 
fq WJ)~ 6l I fu"ci1 CIT, ~ 
3rcNd IDct:> ~ I $1 H q {UT irfa Ci Cl'1 A, I %7ff5 ';f 
ITT~~1q{ ~ 
....... I'~ I Cf?f l!f~c=n=ci ~ICiCBlfmf'Cffifruf 
~~IO$lllf1d5{C)q'i I~ 
3R1: CITTRTf~~ q1a1M1f';::r ~f~ ~ 
~~~Cf)~ I ~EJl0$6115) fl~101i ~ 
I -;:r u ~6JIU5Hi ~~ 
fuuR I rrffi U'<lci"fdlft ~ut J1MC""ln:i 
I Cl<l ~ffi ~rm={ 
3"iias1-<1;8 1 c=ruw J1ff ~~ii: 
a;+J151qsqd)1a1d51ct~1J 1msia=>R&TI 
~ I 3"i ~as 1 '< k"l ~I a lJ)u i ~f4a=n:i I (f(1: ~rn 
s:i q') ~ n:i , G Ci 1 a 0i q? c-<::i a 5 +:[ 
I C1W ~5"llU$C1("1 3Rf~I s:iq'JfcicifCllC""l 
~fltSICffci LT 
ct~lf"l~f.'lffi I 
lj;~ R-l1fu: "ff ~UT I f~~n"{ ~a=rm d5 C1 I Ci n::t I ;=a J=t I HUW 
f;:raf-c=r: wr: ~~qm Q)Tff: C5ffi -am 1 d5M 1an:i1 c=t cmfcm mm. 
l!C""11Cift Al~IO$J:( I Al~lfffCll<"l ~~crm ~fqfurc=rr I fama~lfl

--- PAGE 111 ---
TANTRASARA 
101 
$~'<Ci"t"Ci ~I Ci ct>1fcm I $ ~ {(ifq ICi ft ldl '!:..~ ftt5'&1ct>l fcm I ft ldl'!:..OQ ICi 
q~lJ)fU"ffi -m'man::l'""t, "$"fu ~1~05,J:t I m Wma:rf1Zf ~ 
fu~~ 
~IB'<lffl a~1a cx:rrfq;:fi 
1 eqAa1f;::r ~~ 
3"llq'<a1al'i1 
cffiBRTR c=rn:rrf'-;:r -~ 
C'l'i I q ch ~a Cl'i I Qi A,_ ~ ~ 
~~ I l'i I q a~ 
rlfflfma n::i 1 ;:a'l s ~ 
Tu 1 a a n:i ~ Cl'i 1 Qi= 
1 ~ 
1 q a "fci 1:!~ti ~Eal-muf 
~~ 
~ 1 q ci') -a-
1 ea "fl n::i 1;:a'<1 fl q a1f:i mf~ ~q .-i 1 R a c=q a~ FCr 3:r?f 
ef ~ 
fufilr "$"fu I c=f~ 3"11 ~Ci~~ -a fl;! ~ ;:8 c=faj Cl?f nfu c=f fuITTT~ I 
ct:>Jil~:>ci 3'~~ ~'<~f"""fl cITa11ctSAOI I 
Chapter Seven 
The Path of Space 
The entire "path of space' (destidhva) 101 born of Sakti. which 
creates diverse forms, rests in consciousness. This entire path. 
through the outlet of consciousness, 102 attains its extreme external 
limit in the void (sunya), intellect, prti~w. and the groups of chan-
nels and subchannels. Then it expands externally in the body and 
(al I the way) to the extent of the liliga, altar, and even the image of 
deity, etc. 
The knower of the truth of the real nature of the thirty-six 
tattvas first dissolves all these paths into the body, [then from] 
the body into prti ~w. pra ~za into intellect, intellect into void, ai~d 
finally void into consciousness. In this way, this kind of yoglll 
becomes permeated with consciousness not dependent on any-
thing external. Then he experiences consciousness as Paramasiva, 
and transcending even that state, he experiences himself as being 
immanent as well. Hu 
However, in a lesser way (if one is unable to experience the 
fullness of consciousness], one may take up a portion of know-
ables such as Brahma or Vi~I)U, the superintending deities of the 
sphere of maya, as the highest. In this way, one should become 
well acquainted with the knowledge of prakriya. As it is said: 
"There is no knowledge superior to prakriya :· The following is

--- PAGE 112 ---
102 
TANTRASARA 
the scheme of prakriya: in the path of space. the expansion of the 
earth principle (prthivltattva) extends one hundred krors in length. 
It is spherical like the egg of Brahma (Bralzma~z(ia).
104 At the lower 
end of that Brahma~z(ia is the 'fire of time' (kalagni), followed by 
hell, the nether worlds, earth, and heaven, which extend to the 
world of Brahma. Outside the egg of Brahma are the worlds of the 
hundred rudras (iatarudras). 105 There is no fixed number of Brah-
ma's worlds. The principle called water (}ala) is ten times the size 
of the earth. In this way, each subsequent principle ending with 
egoity (ahwizkara) is ten times the size of the previous tattva. 106 
These tattvas are: water, fire, air, akasa, the five subtle elements 
(tanmatras), the five motor organs, the five sense organs, the mind 
(manas), and finally the ego (ahamkara). The principle of intel-
lect or buddhi tattva 107 is one hundred times the size of ·egoity' 
(ahwizkara). The principle of primodial nature, or prakrti, is one 
thousand times more extensive than the buddhi. This is the extent 
of the sphere of prakrti (prakrti a~z(ia). 108 The spheres of prakrti 
are also innumerable, just like the spheres of Brah ma. 
The puru~a principle is ten thousand times larger than the prin-
ciple of prakrti. The principle of 'natural law,' or niyati, is one 
hundred thousand times larger than that of puru~a. From niyati up 
to the principle of limited doership, or kala, each subsequent prin-
ciple is one hundred thousand times larger than the preceding one. 
These principles are 'natural law' (niyati), 'attachment' (raga), 
'impure knowledge' (asuddhavidya), 'time' (kola), and 'limited 
doership' (kala). The maya principle is ten million times larger 
than kafrl. This makes up the 'sphere of mayo' (maya~z(/a). The 
principle of 'pure knowledge' (suddlzavidycl) is ten million times 
larger than tn(/ya. The lsvara principle is ten million times the size 
of .foddhavidy(/, while the sadd5/iva principle is one bi 11 ion ti mes 
the size of the rsvara principle. The sakti tattva is one billion 
times larger than saddsiva. This is known as the ·sphere of fakti' 
(saktia~z(ia). As this sakti exists pervading all paths externally and 
internally, it is called vyapinr. All these subsequent principles 
exist as the sheaths of the prior one. The subsequent one is per-

--- PAGE 113 ---
TANTRASARA 
103 
vasive and the prior one is pervaded. However, all of the paths, 
ending with sakti, are pervaded by Siva. Furthermore, sivatattva, 
being immeasurable, transcends and pervades all six paths. The 
Lords of the worlds who exist in the intervening regions of each 
principle also have their abode on this earth. Those who died in 
these places are offered respective places by the Lords. Then they 
lead them from one lower region to the upper one by means of the 
procedure of initiation. 
ct5 I C1 I fl;q: Ck&i Io 5l 
+<:d?~ll BIGffilS~ ~("fflq: I 
~mr Jj)RM1~ 
~ 
q5C1105i:imnc;: 11 
31crR"S~s:il=tL11: 
Cf) q I ffl Cl @;:c"1 R 5+f Fa (Si I C"l I 'L~ I : I 
"ffef~ q Rimm fw:r-
~~ 
~~~~qfa: 11 
~ 
ms~IY)'<~Ci(\ -
qrf~CIJ1U5 RqIBd5C"l I I 
flg)?ctl~1~~-
ftosu1lQIG,l q Cj)tij)'<RA~1 11 
~~,f1~~~11mra 
f1 ffl &I ~k~:n c-+:i d1 I tSG d') mffilr 1 
~ '< Cl d? C! I '<Ji B I -
, 
ct5 I f1 I Ji W I JJ J1 fl1 I 'L~ I : I I 
*~~~-
fufc:r J])tu I tSCld5 m d ~ 
I 
mB~ 
f1mi:if1-
ct5+•©cFi h@tf1q)?{1fffifaJ ll:l l'L~ I: I I

--- PAGE 114 ---
104 TANTRASARA 
The fire of time, Ku~umal).<;la, the Lord of the nether 
world, Hataka, the cauldron of the earth, Brahma, 
Muni, Lokefa, and Rudras reside in the intermediate 
regions of five spheres (a~z(ias). Below Ananta exists 
Kapalin, Agni, Yama, Nirrti, Bala, Sigra, Nidhisvara, 
the Lord of vidyas-Sambhu, and at the end of the head 
is VIrabhadra. These sixteen worlds are included in the 
sphere of the earth, and kala is nivrtti (which is the ele-
ment that gives birth to the sphere). 
These eight are called the Lords of water: Lakulifa, 
Bharabhuti, Dil)QI, A~a9hi, Pu~kara, Nime~a, Prabhasa, 
and Surefa. Bhairava, Kedara, Mahakala, Madhyamra, 
Jalpa, Srifaila, and Hariscandra are called Guhya~taka, 
the eight secret gods who exist in the principle of fire. 
3i IB l])t£l I ~Cf)~ <i fl -
~ 
fkFAI~ "fflal I 
~1011qo1f~~ 
~ 
rITCf5Ufd'Jl '""161fl~Cf): 11 
3i m 
lj)ffi ~Cf)1 a -
a~1qa:~qfuj"& I 
~~-
~R1 Ch I f1 I SkJT~ +:fUSff~ I I 
'11CblCJIU5f'm-
U§Jlf11051~d') <""Q6gl{ I 
~ 
<""Q6~H1.-a1-
'«"lrJil3ilUllk~lfDI ih""lll~: 11 
fufu dq~l"i~lS~ 
wpill W~ 
fcBM 1q;a~~ I 
~ 
fll(il~Cf)~ 
~ fa f ~ R1 : fl fM f1 a «!) 'if1 I ""fl I I I

--- PAGE 115 ---
;:rR al+:JIW ~ 
l!ct>IC:~I fuMMIRlifa'1) ~ 
I 
~ci? ~q "i 9:li -
+:f~ Cff5fti R~lllii ~ 
11 
3"l t:Gla t:GI fci ~I fa-
~ 
fcrm +<1rn~11;:arnliit 1 
fuwlii qxr~­
fcfil~11t:e:<t>+:1it~ ~ 
11 
fi IC: I 'l.~ q Xl ct>rn fa 
3"lt:Glct~l~qRd51 ~ 
I 
3-T~l"i~tj ~ 
~ 
muls~ fufu l=ITTi~ I I 
fifufu~~~­
~ufc=q1Jt-<:dl~ 11 
~~ 
'<~ 11 fi "i 'tj)R {)N ("1 
~~+:JC'1fid5C'1 I~ 
fufu";:r~ wm mur 
fifufuf;:Rt~ 4~lifa 4'<il~1it 11 
TANTRASARA 
105 
~ .sITT+:ref~ ca I "ci 1 af"CR"f~ 
("101 fi I { 
-amta ll'i ct> I~ I ;:j 
;:rm 
fil("t+:J+:JI~ lll911 
' 
The group of eight highly secret gods is situated in the 
principle of air in the instrument of knowledge along 
with tanmatras. They are: Bhima, Indra, Attahasa, 
Yimala, Kanakhala, Nakhala, Kuruk~etra, and Gaya. 
Sthanu. Suvan)a, Bhadra, Gokarna, Mahalaya, Avi-
mukta, Rudrakoti, and Vastrapada [this group of] the 
pure eight Lords, exist in the principle of the ether 
(void).

--- PAGE 116 ---
106 
TANTRASARA 
Sthula, Shulesvara, Sankukan:ia, Kalanjara, Mai:ic)ala-
bhrt, Makota, Dural)Qa and Chagala1:ic)a, [these eight] 
remain in the principle called ego (a ha mka ra). 
According to the view of some, however, the subtle ele-
ments and sense organs have their location in the prin-
ciple of ego (ahamkara). 
In the principle called intellect, the group of eight heav-
enly born beings is located, while in prakrti the group 
of eight yogas beginning with akrta, etc., is found. 109 
These 'worlds of seven groups of eight beings' resting 
in the kala named prati$fhti are located in the water 
principle and are pervaded up to prakrti. In the pun1$a 
principle are located 110 the worlds of the eleven rudras 
called vama and so on. The principles of impure vidya. 
kafrl, and niyati have two worlds each, 111 while the 
principle kala has three, and the principle maya has 
eight worlds. 112 Thus, from puru$a to maya the num-
ber of worlds is twenty-eight. In pure vidya there are 
five worlds, 113 and in the lsvara principle the number [of 
worlds] belonging to the Lords of vidyas is eight. In the 
principle called sadakhya there are five worlds, while 
in the kala called sclnta there are eighteen worlds. 114 
Conceiving all these paths (adhvas) either in the body, 
or in the vital energy, or in the intellect, or in the great 
void of consciousness as the highest, one attains the 
fullness of Bhairava. 
Here ends Chapter Seven of the Tantra.\'(/ra of Ahhinavagupta 
revealing the nature of the path of space. 
3l[f 31 t:CJ ip:n ~ 
ct5l1 I 
' 
3l[f <ffCfTun Pi'{<)~ a 1 
mG.Cf fcn-ia lc-Ad1 
~ciTiJ1 lfl'j)ffi nm<pa H:r:a Fm'-a?rmTmm I

--- PAGE 117 ---
TANTRASARA 
107 
Cl?f ~nc=fl=f"ITT - ~Cf) I~ I '{Cl cj Cle=( 
~-H5 I~ I~ I~ ct.>C'"Y ~I 
Cl{<) q +"l I ~ 
Cf5faqlict>~*~nc=f ~ 
~, -aw i:rf~ ~ 
q~·~+W~ 
11ru{<)q I Cf>lfl I fr;:rn~-cf)-{~~Cl~~11rufaf~a-t1A'tt1~6Jl051iJ If! I I 
Chapter Eight 
Whatever has been stated previously regarding the creation of the 
worlds is [the result of] the greatness of the Lord's power of free-
dom. The world contains within it myriads of knowers having the 
diverse forms of objects for their enjoyment. What permeates all 
of these worlds like a "great universal' (malzasamanya) 115 is the 
Great Lord (Paramesvara). On the other hand, tattva is the form 
abiding in only some [of these worlds] possessing distinctive fea-
tures. For example, the earth principle possesses qualities of bear-
ing, hardness, and grossness. It permeates the entire sphere of 
Brahma, beginning with Kalagni and ending with VIrabhadra, 116 
whose regions are superintended by their respective lords. 
ITT t!"CSli Ci fCI , ., i Q)l(fCPRUTmcIT ~~, "ff u fufuw - q I {A I ftlw 
~l5C$3J I c=r?T Yl'Ullf'cic:p eCilClli mCPRUTmcIT-~c=r cm=!~~ 
fCla~~ wrcrc=r 
l!cf-fuU-~ ~~~ 
~m fCl'(C)qf'mf~ 
fCl{<)qfu~~ -a-
~~ I CPffqflftj) mCPRUTmcr: ~~mml 
f~ 
~ I 0 I li I 
Rf·~=h=r:, 
"ff u 
li I Cl Fa 
<:fGJ 
Fl~ a q1crftl<:ffcrim:F 
t ~ 
31f~ fq{<)qli~ ~fllCl~Cf. ~~ mmmrffisfq ~ 
mJITG:ftr, fQGilc:.1 ~~ful ~ 
u ~~ 
cmlfCl1'=tq1~ ~ 
3icf5f~sftr m=tt q1'<s:i1f'~ep: fm l!Cf 
1 q1'<A1ftlct IB fm~-a 
~ 
~ 
~B ~ 
3f m {.,~A I ;::j UC<l ~ 3-Fli"W, 3«i {!Cf ti I AW I l!Cf 
' 
' 
CB1'<01c==ci -qffi 1 m IB fis:ittimcR=tc:if+=rm tC1a;;;iif1a~~. c=rw 
~~~~IChlflmcmf~cmcfl ~cj;) ~fC!'(C)qf~fiA~ 
C1W~illm IB JR:rmmcrl -aw -aw 3-Tfucffi~ c=rw c=rw m~ 
fq J11 a1 z:rc=ci a'"' a~~ ~~. -~ct "fi"a~;:i fCI 1 a~ 
fCI mer: ~ 
m 
l!Cf 
fu.Qq<J.:J 1ci~1 {l "'<l 
~~men-~fq 
~f<i a1 s~~

--- PAGE 118 ---
108 
TANTRASARA 
~ ~Cbl'<~l'<l'<f{'i ~ m<Rlf~~ Rai"Lfl\l C5ci ~ct>l{~l~l{tu 
cm!°fQTf~? ~ ~ - ~~ 
ea1f11 UGTf~ cef~ I 
~ 
t11J=1 W q I C!.l sfq fumffi~ "f"f a 
~;;i fil Cf emf ft I~ I J:L 3°CIT &iM Cf5: I 
"B-{f IB ITTrW ;:r ~ 
c=rwfum uc:: 
1 ~ cnf~s~ 
Ct.> 14 c=a ~~ 
a -ea Hi Cb 1lfCb1'<a1 ~ 
~ 
<:{Cl %>i Cf) 1 { ci:i ~ 
~Tfc=f , m 
A~ 1 ft Cf.IT"CT<l 
GITlll"Cl§lcil ~1:f~ ~~ 
I (1?I" H\Jift~1~11 c=j- 'cnf~ 
G:~kil+:!: I 
Now the relation of cause and effect in regard to these prin-
ciples (tattvas) is going to be explained. The causal relation 
(ktiryakara~wbhava) is twofold, i.e., 'absolute' (paramarthika) 
and 'created' (sr$!a). 117 The causal relation of the absolute nature 
is of such extent that the Lord, as the ultimate causal agent, mani-
fests in all forms, beginning with Siva and ending with earth, as 
nondifferent from his own Self while at the same time he remains 
resting in his own Self. The cr~ated or 'imagined' (kalpita) causal 
relation is created by the will of the Lord and brought to life by 
~he restrictive power of niyati. The extent of this causal relation 
IS such that in spite of the presence of the manifestation of regular 
priority and posteriority, 118 and even if some other features are 
present externally, the continuity of the innate nature (svarapa) 
remains invariably present. 119 Therefore, a sprout is created by 
the will of a yogin as well as from a seed. In a dream one creates 
a jar, etc. Even there the agenthood of the Lord cannot be denied. 
Therefore, although the created or imagined causal relation is also 
present, the existence of the absolute causal relation is undeniable. 
All of this, which was described (potter, clay, which constitute 
supposed causal relation) becomes possible only if the Absolute, 
as the foundation, remains steadily established and not otherwise. 
Therefore, it is proper to say that the causal relation is the totality 
of all causes. This totality of causes consists of all beings having 
been woven together by the greatness of the knowing conscious-
ness, which possesses absolute freedom. 120 
This power of the Lord assumes the nature of a particular

--- PAGE 119 ---
TANTRASARA 
109 
group of entities conditioned by space and time. Each individual, 
at the time of its creation, assumes such a nature. Although being 
of this nature, these entities assume distinctive forms; it is because 
they become associated with exterior factors that they change 
and attain comparative distinctions. 121 Thus, the very nature of 
the great Lord is consciousness and independent freedom of will. 
This Lord, who possesses the entire universe consisting of the 
multitude of beings as his body, is the creator of the jar, etc. This 
is because the consciousness belonging to the potter is not differ-
ent from that Lord: furthermore, the body of the potter is also 
included in the totality of objective existence. Then, how can it be 
possible for the potter to have any sense of egoism in this regard? 
The answer to th is question will be that the sense of egoism of the 
potter is also created by the Lord, just as is the pot, etc. Even the 
theory of the totality of causes to propel agenthood [to produce an 
effect] in reality belongs to the consciousness which is the imma-
nence of the Lord. Though Mount Meru exists in some distinct 
place, it cannot be supposed to be the cause of this particular 
jar. 122 Thus, on this topic of the created or imagined effects of the 
principle of causal relation in regard to the principles (tattvas), 
there are diverse views found in the sastras. All these different 
views are relevant: 123 as for example, the birth of a scorpion can 
take place from cow dung, worm, by the will of the yogin, by the 
application of mantras, and by the usage of various medicines. 
However, we will explain this created or imagined principle of 
causal relation according to the understanding of our scriptures. 
a ~ 
~ 
qxrfw mf'mfw Rif"{ ~~. 
~ fQ 1a~ lfl mf'ffi 
film 
l=r'!:...~ a l:i 1 !,:i cnG l:i :r:t qxrm Fa~ Fa 
1 ~~ 
~ 1 ct a fCI A , 
' 
~~ 
' 
' 
3"l1+=~!,:i1~ mf'maf"CIA, $mrn1~ ~1c:tc=tfCIA-$m1<:i1 -IB ~-
, 
' 
fIB<:i l:il: 
'fl I R:l '{Clq l~qJ l'""l lc-'""ld5C""Q lfl, 
$1 H~I f"ffim~ 
~~'<flfCIJ:t, 
fIB<:l I~ I fffim~ fq m Ci "fCI '""I ~ I 3-T?f q 
~mi: fucr-mf'm-
' 
~"'1~1a.9d-<:H.-a1=-~ Flc!·~l l!1SJi fi1+:J1~{<)q101i ru~1~1 ~J1furu~<:l1: 
~. c:ruw - ~-mm: 
'""!~A~~~~~. -~ ~~~

--- PAGE 120 ---
110 
TANTRASARA 
I ~ 
m~ 
Mer: epfil I ~~~~tel l'"i+:J'"i:r"(i 1q"!:'"i IA I rn~~ ~Jffu-. 
$.9ci~a§ld~l'"i ~~Wm"ffffiff1d5HIJ1Ulaj mnf~~~ I c=I?f ffif~St 
io h:s•F<:fr1 I {Cl q : q R fq ~: 31cf5-4epaj'ii fl I ~A I ?I ii Cf ~ 
tX:'l ct cfcB ct l:ll J Cl a Fa I 
-;:r lWr: ~fltfi"C"Ql'""C"l-<:J:t 
1 -<:1J1afei Q; CB11fafm~1sf~ 1 CBlf ~ 
ITT ctsi:h11?i, ef~~ ~ 
Cf5lf*ef~ ~ 
fucinm Cf~ I msti 
lWr: ~~ 
fd1c-irnmm2Jm1a: :r:ii~c=t fcBT~. ~ 
q- ~ 
-
~mm1c-J=J;Old om:efq dfCj)fdlfl I ~ q +iffi fa$1HChaM fa£A+:JH~ 
~tfl 4'© ~ 
-;:r fd a:> I a Cf5lf 3"11 lZi I IQ fu I ~fl Cl d? a fl f0i C1 J!~ 
FCf Wttr ~ +:rffimmff"ff Cf5lf -tt~f~m"l1 faj'~ - ~ 
~lldlf1'"ilifqes'\H1J=Jai;:rt mnf~ m"JiFl 3-TUT~~ ~Jffu ~ 
~~ffi. ~ 
q 
~an'li $mm1C1M1acr J15'f\Q ~ 
¢~ 
3ffill"f~ 1 ~"l"f ~ 
foe\fo~q1C1m l!Cf, ~ 
fa~qJ=l~. 
31fu~q~a l:rfr:, C1ffl q ~ 
~mm1Al;i. C1C1 l!Cf q- Rc=d 
~~l=JIOld«!~ ~ 
J15<il:ilm-trf'l:itX:i+:JIOla~llC""l'f\Q ~ 
JI ga li I~ 
-fo ~ 
J=J I a 1c=a1 fl Jli ti a:>M a:> 1acx::nq.,1 G '{<) q c:-ct I -c,£l 
a::n q d1 
Al~I'!:..~ ~ 
3q1C\Hffil'<:Oi, ~iJltia:>lf~ q- ~~ 
All:lHIA 
~ 1 RtH•a a~ s;:4cr 1 
It has already been explained that the Lord's perfection con-
sists in him possessing five powers (foktis). While the Lord is 
manifesting any [one] of his individual saktis, his principal Sakti 
remains shining in five different ways. When the power of con-
sciousness (cit) becomes predominant, it is called Siva princi-
ple (tattva). Similarly, when [the power of] bliss (tinandafakti) 
becomes predominant, this is known as the sakti principle (tat-
tva). When. on the other hand, [the power ofJ will (icclul.fokti) 
becomes predominant, this is the sadllsiva principle. It is because 
of the dominance of the [power of] will that a balanced state 
of }Fz an a and k r i y (i exists in the sad ll .<iv a pr i n c i pl e . W hen the 
[power ofl knowledge (jFzanafr1kti) becomes dominant, this is 
the fsvara principle, and when the power of action (kriya.<akti) 
becomes dominant, this principle is known as pure knowledge

--- PAGE 121 ---
TANTRAS.A.RA 
111 
(suddhavidya). 124 The lords of these principles are Siva, Sakti, 
Sadasiva, Isvara, and Ananta. The lord of nivrttikalti is indeed 
Brahma, etc. These lords are of the nature of universal, and indi-
viduals [living beings in these worlds] closely follow these lords. 
They are also of five types, i.e., belonging to Siva (Sambhava), 
belonging to sakti (sakta), mantramahesvara, mantre5vara, 
and mantras. 125 These five principles belong to the pure path 
(suddhadhva). Up to this extent, i.e., from Siva to suddhavidya, 
Siva is the direct creator. 126 The impure path (asuddhtidhva) is 
created by Lord Ananta, whose other name is Aghorefa. This is 
the will of the Lord, and the creation is for the benefit of limited 
knowing subjects who are longing for the experience as they have 
been agitated in this way. Here, the word 'longing' (lolikti) stands 
for the vibrative longing that is of the nature of conceiving oneself 
as not being complete. This is only 'desiring' without any object in 
sight, that is to say, a feeling of the deservedness to remain limited 
in the future. This 'defilement' (ma/a) is not a separate category 
belonging to the sou 1 (puru~a). The raga principle, on the other 
hand, is desire conditioned by objectivity. However, here in mtiyti 
principle an object is merely an object [e.g., let me have something, 
without having any clear idea of what kind of object is desired]. 
On the other hand, the attachment (rciga) [that] is a property of 
buddhi is diversified into different kinds of objective aims. T.he 
difference between the two wi 11 be explained later. These 'defile-
ments,' anava, karma and mavzva, arise as a result of the will of 
the Lord io conceal hi~ own Self ~nd is not a separate entity.
127 It is 
because of the wil I of the Lord that the earth and other principles 
possess distinct reality. 
. 
This defilement (mala), existing in the vijiianakala souls, IS 
intent on being destroyed. and for this reason it does not cause ful-
fillment of any objective accomplishment.'2 8 The ma/a belonging 
to pralayakala souls indeed remains in the process of blooming or 
opening up. There the kc7rma ma/a. being helped by {i~wvamala, 
becomes the cause of the diversity of worldly existence. Thus, 
it was rightly stated that the revered Lord Aohorefa creates [an 
b

--- PAGE 122 ---
112 
TANTRASARA 
impure path] for the purpose of enjoyment by Ii mited souls who 
are permeated with latent desires for that enjoyment. The agita-
tion (prak~obha) of the mala is the result of the forceful impact of 
the Lord's will, as insentient beings are incapahle of acting at any 
level of creation. The shining of sentiency and i nsentiency is only 
with regard to limited souls. The nature of sentiency or conscious-
ness is indeed 'lordship' (aisvarya), while ahsence of conscious-
ness, or insentiency, is its defilement. In the process of creating 
maya, both sentiency and insentiency turn out to be of the nature 
of the will of the Lord; therefore, it is also eternal. The nature of 
the substance to be created will be manifested to appear as insen-
tient. Therefore it is created as such and as it has the characteristic 
of spreading through all the created objects. This al I-pervading 
principle is named maya. This maya is the material cause, whil~ 
the power which manifests it is called mayclfakti. Th is 1ndyasakt1 
belongs to the great Lord and is distinct from mdyd principle (tat-
tva) itself. 
~ Cf5"ffffaa fCI Hi u '<Hi H Pi fq ~ 
f;:i *' ~ H 1 3l?f -a ~ 
>iAIOIJifq ~~~"{q: I m=( "ff~ ~ 
ffi:qw~c=f {Sff-gzfLr 
3ifuf ~~ crq;m UC ~ I "ffW -a-
Al<'ild5Ml~~efq-
~-q 
Cf(f;fi ~ 
chaf11;q~1 ~: I 3-R~ -a-
Al<'ild5Ml!O'iCJ?~~ef~ 
fITfrllMl'<{<lci ~ 
~ ~ 
cis~~ ~ 
~ I 1!Cf ~ 
Jil<'ilCifdfct 
fcr.smrnq: I ff iT mJfq 3"lci1A~d "ffwf(r 3ffict~l I ~So~~ 
I 
Now the twofold character of the principles (latrva) from kala 
down to the earth will be investigated. The evidence regarding 
this twofold nature of principles has been given by Ahhinavagup-
ta's teachers in the following way: What~ver shines in an idea 
(salizkalpa) las being nondifferent from itJ, that al so shines exter-
nally as distinct, like a jar, possessing a clearly manifested phy-
sical form. The same method applies to the mavc1 and ka/(l prin-
ciples, as well as a 'sky flower.' Therefore the iogical reasoning 
called 'positive argument alone' (kevalanvayin) is applicable here.

--- PAGE 123 ---
TANTRASARA 
113 
Those who attain direct experiential knowledge regarding this 
dual nature of maya, kala, prakrti, and buddlzi are also 'perfected 
beings' (siddhas). In this way the twofold nature of maya has been 
proven. This being so, it is from the maya principle that the emer-
gence of this universe takes place. Although the emergence of this 
universe takes place without succession, on the level of imagined 
causal relation the sequence appears to occur. 
msfq ~I 
c=p)f >i ~I c-li ct5C1 I fuq l ff fcm:r:-a ("Cf) 14~ axf c=al Yl g:M ~I a.: 
~~1,li*~;::r ~. 
~ <1 crrf: ct5e:1r=a1 t!<ffi-~ mt:r tmmm 
m+nf'J1ct51c-J:Filfl:rq, ~ 
~Sti CPffif~: ~~ ~ ~~~lk1lU 
"ff~~qzv=nHT~TJ;,UT"RJTCBrdCBHT - ~~H~fuef~T"fl I ~ ~ 
~~ffiqlC1Cl~llC1 "ffW ~ 
~ 
Cfa""lillifCia:ict51~12J I ~~ 
Ci fuq '<la : 1 ~ 
li I~ 1 a~ CPffi JfRlT, m ~~ 
3fUj fci1 fa ((f)<f ~;:r 
~efm m -a- 3 ~~ ci er ~fl 1"1.:1511 JIB:r, li I~ 1 o cil ~~= °ffmTffil 3cq ~ 1 fCr 
mm fcfa:rnfu, ;::r 3-Tfu Cf) 1 lfl=fU11=l - ~ 
li 1 ~ 1 ct51 a("CI J:t mm: 1 QCl1=( 
3R::IT~~ 3-Wf a--rurr~ 1 ;a { c=ci 1@M lfl = 
1 
li 1 ~ IJ 1 mfu ct51 Ra' '«1> 
ctH<:if=ac:fl~ >if11e:11 f1cfct54~ +:J1~1y;'<l~~aCB1 ~. 
~+:rrmra 
fu$11"i1a:>C'1 ~, 
;::r ~f~ mmv:, ~fcra-Cf.>T err ~~~cl 
~ 
I >i<pfaY)~cr-acm crT ~~ >l"ORTW ~ °ff"ffi"C1 I ~'<i~~~<t 
~ ~I a f1 A H c=ci 
I ~~uf 
Ci 11t:G1 ~ ~I Cl ("Cl il ~fu I Fcf ct5 C'i I fffCI A er 
fcM'a c=cBq~~, ;::r -:q- cm!~ ~ 
~ 
1 fcITTa J$1("Cl1e:1 fo '"<:i ~1~ 
mn (f)C'11al JfTill, m -:q- fcmT ~f-t ~, 
~9,J ~~~ 
m-a-~ 
1reonfu" I ~~UR=fcBTuflct51"1.:l~I fu-a"~ ~~~°C1 I Cit"AICi, 
W'·~gs~ f2-t fd f ~al mcIT fcm ~ I fcrf~ I 
Now the emergence of the universe is being elaborated. In this 
system, the function of 'limited doership' (kala) and the other 
'veils' (kmzcukas) is considered different with regard to every indi-
vidual. This is hecause the effect of kafrl. etc., in the form of 
promoting doership, is perceived as being different in regard to 
each individual. These 'veils' (ka11cukas) sometimes, as a result

--- PAGE 124 ---
114 
TANTRASARA 
of the will of the Lord, become unified and become 1 i ke the indi-
vidual selves as aesthetes. Kala and the other kaiicukas are pure 
when they perform their own functions [which are] congenial to 
the great Lord, because their sole objective is the attainment of 
one's own nature as they stand as the opposite of duality. The 
kancukas assume that nature because of the force of the descent 
of power [(saktipata)]. How this takes place will be clarified when 
the topic of descent of power is discussed. However, the impure 
[form of five kaiicukas] is the opposite of this. Kala is born from 
maya, which unites the limited self, existing in a state similar 
to deep slumber, with limited doership (ki171citkartrtvam).
129 This 
kala is, as it were, the swelling of the seed of the world. Although 
kala is born from the unity of mdycl and the Ii mi ted se 1 f (a ~zu), it 
causes maya to undergo change, but it does not create any change 
in the limited self (puru$a), which is changeless. Thus, the indis-
cernible distinction between the limited self (puru~a) and kala 
cannot be easily noticed because of their mutual interpenetration. 
However, by the grace of a certain person endowed with lordship, 
~biding as a superintending deity in the womb of ma ya, all the 
impurities of past deeds are destroyed and the discerning knowl-
edge between maya and puru$a takes place. As a result. a dis-
cerning soul exists as a vijFWnakalcl soul above mclycl and not in 
any way below mclya. One who attains discriminative knowledge 
bet~een kala and pttrU$G remains above kala. Similarly, one who 
attams perfection in this discriminative knowledge between purzt-
JG and prakrti does not transmigrate in the worlds below prakrti. 
However, this discriminative knowledge between a~zm·amala and 
purtl$G leads to the state of resemblance of Siva. With full real-
ization of the fullness of puru~rn one attains Sivahood. Thus, it is 
the kala principle which is the bestower of limited doership, but 
this doership is meaningless to a person who is devoid of k110wl-
edge. Impure knowledge (vidyd) which gives limited knowledge 
is born of kala. That vidya perceiving the intellect and abiding 
there through discrimination experiences pleasure, etc. The intel-
lect, being of the nature of the three gu ~ms, is i ncapahle of corn-

--- PAGE 125 ---
TANTRASARA 
115 
prehending the reflected images [in itself] with discrimination. It 
is for this very reason that the images reflected in the buddhi are 
discerned through knowledge (vidya). 
fchf-afCbc{c=ci 
fchru<?>:1J1~ q=qf~q cml~ ~ 
3-Tif 
Q<:f q ~Fa ' a=af'~cr -a- ~ 
~ 
'<I l I <i"fd ~ Cl'l I q I'<: I ~ q 3ffl'< I l<~ cpc-i 
~ -
3ffl'<lll'i~lfq 3-Rf'~~ I #~ UAfalqftr ef~~ 
I CI~ -a- ~ 
- 3ffl"{ll(:fcm-asfq ~ 
I -R~ fcr;:n-
~'<I l l'i I iNf"fl !):l +J~·IC"\ I CBTff~ m 
Cbftti'tt1G:C1~ ~~ 
ct>fl\Qfc:l, ~~ a=af'~ 3lf~Cf cml~ ~if Rmla:ri~I 
cnr4Cb 1'<a1 ~sfq ~ 
Fer a:n q 1 '<: 
~~ Cf5ffR1 
'Ger 
QCfci:hj)~ 
~' ~Cf ~~~ ~ 
3lf~t:qft): ~fl:r $~ci'{<)ql "fi""fQC\ 
~<::f~G:Tlill ~f~~ I ill~ 11T"aTf~cj;) ~~(ITT\ 
~ 
I ~fucn A I l'i l'i I ~'«"!a 
c-a-;::i- Cbfl I c:f) ~ 
3Gft q I fa '"ii ~CBcrc=t 
~ 
I l!Cf fci-:> fa fCbc{c=ci° ~ 
A I \QI Cb I a "fl?T fcB"f=a C"d f8 ~ 
~ 
~~ 
fcrn-~' c=r?T ~ 
l'i A I a 11 G5ffi fCTurfcrn ti q ~ <j)=' "$"fu ~~ 
I ~ 
fcrn"tS[UfmrIT ~ fcB-fW~m1 ~~ Cf5T<::f .IX1 "ff ~ 
m CPffi 
~1c-A:r:i= 11~ ~ 
ffiCfc=( l!tsf t!Cf ~~~t51c-ACBmmfcm~ 
tq\C"1fl'1 
+I IA l~A I ?I~ %a I +11J=<~ lq{'"i 18: >rcpfaafClfl'i "fllf:, "$"fu 
~:ihpm~llfl~ ~q 
d5M1afd1q-a1 ~f~ 1 ~ 
~aj q1taa~ qm 
~A<S14:4Cf ~f~~ffi, mm"ffisfq ~~~er 
1 ~&J 
fqt41'<1lllct1;::ri fcrf~sfq ~ ~ 
crfu Cf5Tsfq f~ ~ 
~ 
I ~~ f~::Jct5AR{C)qo1i:iftr ~~~ ~~ 
3-Tf~ ATftai, 
c=racr ~ mll'i+JIAl;::ti >ra-Tiwrc=f 1101afCIA, I ~ 
~~ Wl\Q'{<)q>iCf)l~I: 
~. 
r:~ !):!Cf)1~11!):lco1~11~1M:r:i1c-Ad5Ji 3-lCl {!Cf 
f~\Ql'{<)c:i ~ m-g: 
' 
'2> 
' 
~CB I~ 11 ~ I Cl {<) q ~ 
A : I f?t a l'i A fq t!C1C=r ml \Q {<) q A I {!ci" P.-1~ >l"mffi 
' 
' 
~ 
' 
' 
Cf>(f Cl'l I ;:a {l ~ 
' -;::i- 318lwrf'G:°fu I an~ 3"l q ~\QA Cf 3"l Tfl {I fl 31~ q l I Tfl Cl'l 
"$"fu ~ 
m'L~ IY f~ 
'1W~ 111JlCTnj I ~ q an~~~~ 
~Cf, ~m 
f~ 
~~ >rfu ~ 
-;::i- ~c:{ I c=rffi l101afdl(\ ~~ 
<:f?r ~!):!Cbl~ll ~~ 
>rfuf~ 3"1Q\Qci: I

--- PAGE 126 ---
116 
TANTRASARA 
Limited doership (kiiicitkartrtvam) exists for the purpose of 
establishing a portion of the attribute known as · 1 i m ited · (killcit), 
which fulfills its purpose [in regard to a particular object] by 
implying, 'in some place' (kvacit). This raga principle has its 
function in regard to a particular object. It should not be under-
stood that doership is due to the activity of non-attachment. Even 
a person who does not possess non-attachment is sometimes seen 
to be free from attachment. On the other hand. a person who 
possesses the quality of non-attachment is sometimes seen to be 
attached, as, for example, when performing meritorious deeds. 
Furthermore, a person who becomes fulfilled by eating good food, 
etc., might be free from attachment~ however, in th is instance, 
latent impressions of attachment cannot be denied. Otherwise. in 
the absence of this (a latent impression), the logical inconsistency 
of the rising of non-attachment could occur. The principle of time 
(ktilatattva), on the other hand, by causing limitation in regard to 
effect, imposes a I imitation on doersh ip as wel I. The Ii m itation 
of a particular object is common to both time (kala) and niyati. 
The function of the niyati principle is to restrict or limit doership 
only to an object at hand. The function of nivati is also present 
in regard to causal relation. 130 In this way, the- group of four veils 
(km1cukas) has been created. Only th is much is the function of 
maya; limited doership is the function of kala; (governing) the 
present moment (adhuna) is the function of kala; knowing (jiiana) 
1~ the function of vidya; being attached (abhi:;vakta) is the func-
tion of raga; and "I am doing" (karomi) is the function of niyati. 
When consciousness functions in this way, abiding in a subtle 
body. then it is called a bound soul (pasu). This group of six, 
beginning with mtiyti, is also called six veils (kaiicukas). At this 
stage, the innate nature of consciousness has been pushed into the 
background and hidden, because k(lla, etc., become dominant and 
exist as veils, covering the innate nature of the Self. It has already 
been said that agency, capable of doing only little. is the result 
of maya. In this condition, the agency attributed to the limited 
(kilicit) [agent] is the qualified subject. Kala, which is fu net ion ing

--- PAGE 127 ---
TANTRASARA 
117 
there (kartrtvam), is the cause of emergence of vidya, etc. This 
has already been explained. 
Now the portion of the qualifying, which has been named 'lim-
ited' (ki!lcit), becomes the object to be known and affected. 131 That 
very kala which differentiates }iiana and kriya from itself is the 
creator of the principle prakrti. This prakrti, which is also called 
the state of equ i 1 ibrium of gu~zas characterized by pleasure, pain, 
and delusion, threads through specific types of objects and like 
universal abides in them all. In this way, the creation of both pairs, 
i.e., the enjoying subject (a~zu, puru:ja) and enjoyable objects, 
takes place under the control of kalcl. It has already been stated 
that their creation in reality occurs without any sequence. How-
ever, it must be pointed out that (for all practical purposes) succes-
sion exists here. The order of sequence regarding vidya and raga 
is seen differently~ for some, being attached, come to know, while 
others who know, become attached, etc. In the Tantras, such as 
Raurava, etc., the sequential order is different. However, it should 
not be understood that there is any contradiction between the two. 
Prakrti is the generic form of an object of enjoyme?t. .whi/3~ 
the gu~za principle is that which abides in the state of agitation. 
Pleasure (suklza) is sattva in nature, which is the illuminating light 
manifesting the enjoyable nature of an object. Pain is character-
ized by the oscillation of I ight and absence of it. For this reason, 
rajas is of the nature of activity. Delusion or molza is total absence 
of light, that is to say, it is darkness (tamas). These three, sa~tv.a, 
rajas, and ta mas, make up the objects of enjoyment. Thus it .15 
clear that the evolutes of prakrti come out of an agitated primodtal 
nature (pradlu:lna) and not from an unagitated one. It is necess.ary 
to admit the existence of agitation vibration as an intermediate 
state between primodial nature and gu~zas. In this way, the exis-
tence of a separate principle unknown to the Sa1i1khya called gu~w 
has been proved .133 The agitation of prakrti takes place only as the 
result of the intervention of the superintending deity of prakrti.
134 
Otherwise, if this agitation in prakrti is not caused by intervention 
of the superintending deity. then it would be impossible for prakrti

--- PAGE 128 ---
118 
TANTRASARA 
to be involved with each individual pu ru~a. Then, the principle of 
intellect comes from the gu~za principle. where the reflection of 
the light of puru~a and the reflection of objects take place. 
ef(§:afQ1a, ~ 
-a-;r ef@fmm~ am=r~ ~& 1~ 
3"irJl,AR ~ 
~ 
~~Al"""lq<""t I 31<1 L?Cr C5R $~;"l..,­
q:1a Cf)(i:P"l 3IB:1 :rrf5, w~ 
"fl C1c1 ;:r <:!~ , ~ IB ;:r 34 I c-Ji ;:fl stfcn: 
l~fAlicilA, ~,era 
C'.b qxf~ ~ 
$"Ct91i:f: I c=rea- ~~ ~ 
l!Cf 
3"i~Rill1f11 ~k·AdAcii51{{<iYlS~ I ~sm 
3"l~d51'<~ (f)'{Ol@;::JQ: I 
~~crf?rfu~~*~ 
1 a~n:rc:ITT l:i~IC"l ~&:r 
C!i) f~l1 q sq d1 ·~r, Cf?f l=Rft:r ~ 
fl c§a "41 I ?I J"H +~i I Am~ 
~ J1 ""1 d5: I 
~ 
C'.b ~l&!\JHrJf1IAcifdR!1t5G ~, ~ 
mu1 ~Jl"""l"""ll:illl:i<i l;g)ffi ~, 
ajfcict5itfQ ;:r~ ·m ~· 
$flll~i11i:i1w 41GJ:t ~d5fdJ:t. 
Cf5'<01C"ti;::i 
"d" ~ 
ct5{~1~~h=ai:i, ~w Cf5'<011:r:a"<cflJ1""1llW=T 
' 
' 
-
I~~~~~. 
°R;:r ~~ CfKOT ~ 1w. ~ 
fcmr, f~ 
q)ffT I ~~SU 
3"16;::al{C)4$1 Hfct=Sl:i H4J IA lfl, ~"f 
fkH"ll?l~crf~ C'.b "ffiffdd51ctq mct51'<1fl cniff~l:i45qCf5JOt I '3li 
11m1f'A· ~ 
~qf~ 
cm<:f<ITTUTfill=f: ~"Rti", ~ 
~~~ 
~ 
~ 
ac;:~-q ~ flJOlffllfq ;:r rrfc=rfCtmc::: 
I ;:r u 
ct5c:fCllf1ict54Jj)mlaa- ~=, ~ 
Cf5-<:01Cf51~L ~~-:a- 11A;oi 1c:fl;:rt fas~ 1Cfl 
;:r ~~ 
~ 
Cf.ilOllG:Ci~ 
~OlfdlC"t, <i~l<i, 34Cl~Cil9qW 
cniff~: I "ff "d" l1XJCP: ~~f("! I Cl fCI I c"t I <=rV"rIB ~fa I Cl~ 1l11 li 
err 19m;u: ~1c;:1;i1li err m 
err. 3ir<:Rf~;:r fct*14fu~ err, 
m ~UT~: trrfur: ~ 
3w.:r ~ 
I 3Rl: mutl~l:idiAf~~~ 
cnfrrf~, <l;:r ~~ 
~ 
~ 
rn:r;:f c=rc;fq ~f~Ci~q ~ 
~ 
A~CllA I~ Ct.iitf+=c=liJiN -;r $f~~1+=flii:f 3"llq@<""1 I~ 
'<IJ1flf4 
' 
' 
' 
VYICl 
~~ctkCIJ:t ~: 
I ~ 
C'.b '<IJ1f11"4=!;o:i ~= 
I ~ 
~ -~-rrH-aCtJIC"1 
~ 
'<IJlfllvd ~~UT~ I md1~ll:C:UIG:CtJIC-t ~ ~UHl~~·l'<IC"1 
a'4=t1?11frrr ad~UT qxr 1 ~cm~ w an'l""f 1,J:1""1i 
~a>J=l 
3HHT~ >rf1mfcr fl p:11 ~ 
'""l 3lfcm lSi 1 c-A d') <lC1 
~I~ <i ;::io11 ?i 
I ea

--- PAGE 129 ---
TANTRASARA 
119 
~sfq crrc:ti I C1?f ~l&iCi~l?ilCi ~ 
3iCld5l~ICiH<:l'llq1{ -;:rw -
' ~1 • 
' 
~l&i~ ~~l'<ilCld51~1'<iBC""CllCi, I ~l&iCi"""""""ll?i arr~~: ~l&if(j) ~ 
-;:rcmn fcRBT~ I ~ 
a;!fcm=f c9-Jr: ¥l];uft CJ; ~cf Cl Ci, I «1: a;!"R:rc1 3IB1: 
¥ ~ 
l{cfClc=t I TAJ: arr~ mT ~ 
tkctl'<:: ~~ 
I ~ 
~l§ifq~lf~ 
~, 
$<=Li I fuct=Sil a I qxr~ ITTUfi ~ 
A~ ;:fl I lJ)O I fPj)Ci I~ A I ?i U ef~, 
~ 
1J)uTI ~ 
I 31f"ftj-?a CifQd5f11q J;~~l])ui &:11qc:h, R<p~lJ)uT 
CJ; a:nu:r I "'<i" gq "J];~ 3 ("Cf) t:ff - ~ 
~ 
fc:Ri- l];O 11 ;:a~ ";:( 3 q q cu ci I 
"ff~ 
ef~~ Tu 1 ckrfa 1 c=t ~~fu J1 Ma "fd.., oq 1 ca A.., ~ 01ff c9-JR=IT $ fl'i 1 fu 
~lctmfffifffciA,_ 11 
~ 
Ci~l?PIOlk~lfDI 
~ 
Y)A I ;:aJ 5C])d5 lj)cRj/{J)CG:A,_ I 
fumfu~1~;:afl:i~ 1~t1fuc=t -
~ta'<:~·s:ifl'<:>id51'<:: 11 
~"(l" 
.~fhrct-f~ ca I "ci 14-Fcrefu-R 
Ci :r:?I fl I { 
Ci fCI fCI {Cl q S'i a:> I~ H 
'"ilJilt5GJiJil~d5'""l 11l11 
Then, from the intellect emerges the egoity (alzmizkara) prin-
ciple, by means of which an erroneous notion of non-self as Self 
is conceived. This takes place when the light of puru~a, which 
has become tainted by contact with a knowable object. reflects 
on the screen of the intellect (buddhi). This (notion of egoity as 
one's true nature) is the erroneous notion, just like mistaking 
mother-of-pearl for silver. Therefore, the word aha111 is suffixed 
with ka ra, the active agent. Th is suffix also indicates that some-
thing has heen created. The followers of the Sa1i1khya school, on 
the other hand, do not accept the self-reflective nature of the Self. 
We, on the other hand, assign it the status of agent. Thus, the 
agency (kartrtvam) regarding aham is in essence pure reflective 
consciousness having none to oppose it (apratiyogi). It relishes 
its own bliss as 'I' (a/Janz). This is an aspect of instrumental-
ity belonging to alzalizkara. 135 But the other aspect belonging to

--- PAGE 130 ---
120 
TANTRASARA 
ahadzkara is its being the originator of the ten sense organs, five 
tannuUras, and the mind, because it has a threefold nature, which 
is the result of its division into sattva, etc. While the mind is being 
created, 136 it is conceived of as the originator and is endowed with 
the capacity of giving birth to five tanmdtras. In regard to the 
ear, the mind is endowed with the capacity of giving birth to the 
particular subtle element called sound. Furthermore, in regard to 
the olfactory sense organ, it is endowed with the capacity of giving 
birth to the subtle element called smell. It is not feasible to consider 
sense organs as being born of matter. 137 This is because in concepts 
such as "I hear," the sense of egoity still persists~ for this very rea-
son it is said: the sense organs are born of egoity (ahalizkara)._ It 
(the sense organ) remains in contact with that portion of the egoity 
(ahG1izkara); otherwise, if use is made of other intermediate organs. 
the defect of infinite regress would take place. 
Egoity (ahwizkara) is indeed the subject portion of the agent. 
Therefore, purw;a possesses two main instruments. Limited 
~nowledge (afoddhavidya) and limited agency (kala) serve as 
1 ~struments of puru~a in regard to knowledge and action, respec-
tively. It is for this reason that lame or bl ind persons experience 
no ~bsence of knowledge and activity which are characterized by 
egoity. It is from the sattvika aspect of aha1i1kll ra, attributed by 
the augmented portion of the subtle elements (udriktatanm{lfra-
bhag~i). that five motor elements emerge. It is because of egoitY. 
(ah~mk.tira) that the organ of locomotion of a person possessed ot 
egoity IS capable of performing its function with a thought such 
as ."I am going." The principal locus of locomotion, i.e., the foot. 
exists externally; however, locomotion ex is ts equally in other 
places as well. It is for this very reason that a person bereft of feet 
is not completely devoid of ability to move. Furthermore. the mix-
ture of various actions performed by different motor organs should 
not be brought into doubt because of the reasons stated before, 
that is. because of the existence of a single cause in the form of 
aha lizka ra related to the subject. 
Action is performed by organs; e.g .. movement possesses activ-

--- PAGE 131 ---
TANTRASARA 
121 
ity as its principal nature. This, however, is not the case regard-
ing the perception of color, form, etc. According to the Vaise~ika 
school, form, color, etc., is understood to be a property (gu~za); 
therefore, the group of motor organs is fivefold because it is aimed 
at that particular number. For example, for the ascertainment of 
activity, external Iy some motor organs exist for the purpose of giv-
ing or excreting, and others for the purpose of accepting or taking 
in, or for both. Or, they may be free from both, or may be for the 
purpose of repose in one's own nature. These motor organs are in 
the following order: anus, hands, feet, and sexual organs. When 
the ascertainment of activity, which remains interwoven with the 
vital air (pra~za) takes place, then this is the function of the organ 
of speech. Therefore, it should be understood that the movement 
present in the hands, which is the locus of that particular motor 
organ, is the same movement present in the feet. It is for this very 
reason that an infinite number of activities does not lead to an infi-
nite number of actions. 
Some argue that up to this extent the rajas portion of 
ahalizkara remains involved in the process of creation. Others say 
that the mind emerges from rajas; yet others maintain that mind 
is the product of the sattva aspect of alzmizkara, while the senses 
are said to be the product of rajas. The five subtle elements (tan-
nultras) as well as five gross elements, which are nothing but the 
knowable objects, are born from the predominantly tamasic and 
delusive aspect of ahalizkara which veils the agency of the enjoy-
ing [experiencing I subject. 
All individual sounds have in their background a single, unspe-
cific and generic sound that precedes them, which is free from 
agitation (k~"iobha). Th is form of sound is the subtle element of 
sound called .fobdatanmatra. The same holds true regarding smell. 
taste, touch, and sight. From the vibrating subtle element of sound 
~ 
~ 
emerges ether (d ka.fo), which provides space to all because it is 
capable of al Iott i ng space to the objects spoken of, so that they 
can occupy their particular places. Air emerges from the agitated 
subtle elements of sound, but air is not separate from the element

--- PAGE 132 ---
122 
TANTRASARA 
of ether (tikasa). Fire emerges from the agitated subtle element 
form (riipa), while the properties of sound and touch remain pres-
ent in it. From the agitated subtle element of taste water is born, 
while the three properties of sound, tactility, and form remain 
present there. The earth emerges from the agitated subtle element 
of smell, while the four previously mentioned properties remain 
in it. Others hold a view that from the agitated sound and touch air 
is born, and when all five subtle elements are agitated the earth 
is born. The earth is nothing but the aggregate of al I properties; 
however, there is nothing else that exists which is the substratum 
of all properties. In this collection of principles (tattva), the qual-
ity (gw;a) [belonging to these principles] which is above the lower 
one is more pervasive, while the lower one is less pervasive than 
the upper one. The excellence of the quality (gu~za) can be defined 
as that without which other qualities cannot come into existence. 
Therefore, the principle of earth is pervaded by al I the principles 
beginning with Siva and ending with water. In the same way, the 
water principle is pervaded by the fire principle, etc. The same 
takes place up to and including the §akti principle. 
The gross elements, the host of subtle elements, the 
sense and motor organs, prakrti, puru~a veiled with 
sheaths, and also from vidycl to the sakti, all of these 
are nothing but the order of expansion of the waves in 
the form of one's own consciousness. 
31~ ., a A A I mct5JOt I 
31~ cfraHi ~ 
R{<llZlci 1 
"fl" q ~w 
~cl~ 
"QCf ~ 
~m;:r Jm: I Cl?f fmcrr: A~ 
A~~ 1r: 
~ffi: ~ 
fu$1Hld5C11: s:iC1l:ildSC11: fl(f)fll ~ 
~ 
Wn:>A:r:a: I ~ 
~~, 
<i~G:l<i_ ef2:1C£ll~~Ul'i<ifQI~ ~m~~: 
~cf5 ~ ~ 
qsqG:~IJi_ I ITT~~ ~~TI:f ~l,Af~ - 31LRT~~~, 
>n=JTQ~ 3f~~ ~ fu~;n~ ~ ~q ~111"1')~

--- PAGE 133 ---
TANTRASARA 
123 
sITTJ:J ("q'( I q '{Ii~ I (fUl ~ti 
~I ffil "i i a I Cl "fCI I C1 I efmJ:J ~q s:l uR 
Q; ~J:JlqCID ~ 
fu~ amfffiJ:Jfa:§q{C)tj ~J:Jc<H1~g1RCBli~g1a,, ~ 
flcarnti -s:ll=l1qo1i ~1cic=wqfu fict>Ml'""dHi a1cia1s=t 3mfCllC11 
Chapter Nine 
In this chapter, the distinct features of the principles (tattvas) 
are going to be examined. 138 In the Trika doctrine, the supreme 
Lord himself has taught the existence of the sevenfold variation 
of the principles: sivas, mantramahesvaras, mantresas, mantras, 
vijntintikalas, pralayakalas, and sakalas. 139 Thus, there are seven 
possessors of saktis (saktirntin). They possess only seven saktis. 
It is because of these variations of the principles, beginning with 
earth and ending in pradhtina, that there is a fourteenfold division 
of each. 140 When 'unique nature' (svariipa) is added to this division, 
then the division becomes fifteenfold. 141 Among them, the unique 
nature, which rests in itself, deserves to come under the purview of 
the knowable objects (prameyatayogya). 142 This can only be cog-
nized by the grace of the goddess A.para. On the other hand, the 
subject in whom the energies (saktis) are overflowing and who 
becomes the place of repose for the objects, is the very nature of 
that which belongs to sakti (stikta). This can only be known by the 
grace of the venerable goddess Parapara. The sakta form is sev-
enfold because it was stated earlier that number of saktis is seven. 
When the subject possessing the saktis (saktiman) becomes pre-
dominant with reference to the host of knowing subjects and [the 
objects] rest in the knowing subjects, then it [the knowing subject] 
is of the nature of Siva, the possessor of the saktis (saktiman).
143 
This becomes manifest by the grace of the venerable goddess Para. 
That also is sevenfold because the number of knowing subjects 
beginning with Siva and ending with sakala is stated to be seven. 
(f?f ef-m~crracr >n=ffiluTI ~-a:, "ff~ ~Cf)'{Oll~ fi(f)Ml~UT 
wn:m I (f?f fi Cf)(1 '«Oil fCHO'l I Cf)M efm: ill~~ {ti q ("q I C1 ~~Cf)J:j f ~aj 
I

--- PAGE 134 ---
124 
TANTRASARA 
~C'i~ld5C'iffl <1 "Cl '(!q" -Rfcftjlkd 1a, ~ 
, rn $1H1ct5f1 f{'i ~ ~ 
fcp I C'i ci:f)~ a ct1 «BI 'Hi fo a I >l C!CS::U A H I ~(§:Fa m A~ ffl I Ci ffi fCt) I'< ~1 tj I 
"#er~~~~ 
1 "ftcr $m1~1rm'{Clqai fCllCi~fCI~ fJrqa=Fffi 
A~Ag~ I $a91ffAC51 '<"\i)')G~ICi;:::;;<:;ilf°fACf51 ~IClffl ~ 
ffim~ 
~ ~ 
1 a '£4'<1J1 cpa &J" mm A R1 >n=rrcr~ *c:= - CfRUT~ 
~iJaqlfafiHl<i 
~1-ci')Q:a q 3"i~FciRm1~ 1: CfS'<uf1~ ~1c:t<::ffq 1a ~ 
~-~: 
I Ci'ttj)ci: ~Cf5 Q"Cf f=aC"fCllCi~l~;:efu~ 
>fliT(i1 I ITT ef~ ~ 
{<)q A I 5i ftj ~ 
~ 
-a-m9" ClGJ fCI {Cl q 'i ~ 
~ 
mfu tl'~~~~ ~?lfc:ITG:R J11T=t1l=l1fu, 
c=r?r 
~ct:>M~I~ 
fid5C'i~1fnsA~qcpa 
~{<)q1;:a{ 
~er, l!Ci" 
~1ci1.-ai:1fcr 
~. 
Tu1a~ifmRt6 ~1a~~~ q 
fu~ JfRTfB ~ 
Sk=tei~tu 
fucrr~~I 
It is because of this variation of the saktis that the number of 
knowing subjects is divided into seven. In order to clarify this, it 
is stated in this particular order, i.e., sakala, etc. Saka/a subjects 
have vidya and kala as their saktis. 144 The saktis that function 
in the inner senses and motor organs are only particular forms 
of these two: vidya and kola. In the case of pralayakala souls. 
vidya and kala remain indistinct 145 because they are devoid of 
objects. In vijlianakala souls, vidya and kala are going to be dis-
solved, but still persist aided by [their] residual traces. In mantra 
souls, iuddhavidya is in the process of awakening. In lords of the 
mantra (mantre§a) souls, suddhavidycl becomes fully awakened 
when the total absence of any residual trace occurs. In the case 
of mantramahefvara souls, foddhavidya is eager to assume the 
form of icchaiakti, whose innermost nature is svd ta 111 rva. With 
reference to Siva souls, §uddhavidya, which is of the ;1ature of 
wilL clearly assumes the manifest form of freedom (svtitantrya). 
Here ends the description of the seven principal variations of the 
saktiS.
146 The knowing subjects possessed by these .<aktis are col-
ored by them, and because of this a distinction among them arises. 
It is because of the difference of the instruments that a distinction

--- PAGE 135 ---
TANTRASARA 
125 
of agency is created. 147 Sakti alone, which is inseparable from the 
agent, can be made an instrument and not anything else. Other-
wise, the fallacy of infinite regress would occur. In reality, there 
is only one single knowing subject resting in bliss and freedom. 
When the earth is known in its own innate nature, at that time 
her innate nature alone shines; for example: "I know the object 
that has been seen and experienced by Chaitra." In this experience, 
which is perceived by the powers of the sakala soul and by the one 
who is the possessor of all the saktis, another innate nature defi-
nitely shines. This statement applies to all the knowing subjects up 
to Siva: "I know the universe," which steadily abides in the unity 
of Siva and Sakti, when viewed with reference to both, and which 
later takes its repose in Siva because of the existence of a specific 
concept. 
~ 
~1ct~ ~ 
-a-"{f(ff ~ ~= (iffiqf~ a~. attfqJ:Jfl.r aw=( 
$R"'F1Ci'tm I Ci'm LT Jll ICilS~~ ~s:i(f.)l~liler, (17:fT q att(qla~ 
~mTT ~ 
G:l"~? 3Br ~ 
-
~ c=rc=( ~ ~: '{=Q{C)qf<::i 
ttWltt>c=ct 11. fcf5 "C1Tif "C1Cl, ~WfITT s:i A 1 a R -:a- Uc=t fu.mf~~ 
Uc=t ~ ~ ~ 
"Ci"Cl· ~s:ict51~1iler ~ 
s:id51~1 ~ ~ fcffi'~ ~ 
~ 
~~~~Tf~~~{IYltti~ 
I 3"f;oi~s:iAlqfia~ 
~Cf "C1Cl ~ 
~ 
a1am H~CBT~lfi{C)4(ql(i, "$"fu ~ s:iAl~~'<:fiacr 
~+:rRf'crtrr: ~. 
c=JW (1f<::f ~ 
fifl'l~ 31~fwli1d51f~ <liter, 
q '< 1~ li A I "i i Cf) I ;'.("I i ~err ~ 
"ti+TI"tXffu I 
~I Ci~~ fu mr~ <!')nt 
~ 
~crwfu f1Affll"iT"C1s:iAlqfu~ ~ ~ 
~uffirq"fu 
zjqft~ afU1cR1, a~ 
Ci 41 M ~ ~ 
s:i A 1 a R "lT"f( fu~ 
<l~ '{=Q s:i d51~1 f<:1 
~~~ 
- ~ 
qs:ac;:~11c-Ad5c==ci gf~ 
~~fu ~u1;:iat=aq4~ 1 
Ci lcfr-qfum'<: ll 11 ~Cf5XJ)Cf5~ fi(f.)fi ~ s:iA lq(q IC1, fi(f.)flf<:1 IN "(!Cf q IXlct~<i 
~ 
a1aa~c=ctlc=t I ~ 
tl"~ f;,uff°ff Ci'""?llfllcEI 1~ ~~fu 
Cf5f11Cifdl:r::c=i ~~W-f1Cf5f1~ ~ 
s:iAlqCilliln~ ~~ffiAdlc-A"il 
~ a g: li ~ 
s:i fLi ff! A <:n 1. c=rw -:a- f1 d5 fl ~ 
'{=Q {Cl q (q il er ~ 
, s:i fl li 1 d5 fl f<:1 
'{=Q {<)4 c=Cl ~uTf ~~ 
~ 
I ~~ 
~ 
{C)q c=Cl ~: ~c=a qxr I

--- PAGE 136 ---
126 TANTRASARA 
A •='.;p•1@ ~ 1 ffl fd '{Cl4 c=a WRIB ~CBffl q w:rrcrc=a Wmwf'ffi A~ c: 1 fl ~ 
1 
~ 1 Cl ffl ~ ~Cb 1 
~1 C5fm~·{i kF?li R ~ 
;:i- <ffisfq ~ 
~a 
f c=c:11 fl I 1!Ql{ 
31ti -mqm ~ ~~~~ 
f~l1'1: ~q;:r*~fux:f d)'{l fu I 
~ 
mf~ 
~sfCr ~$Ci'<>ffl ~m~ 
JmC""QIC"( I 
3l?f 7a ~ 
it C!Cbfl"i ll I ~ii 
~$'1 H g)':>q\6 Ml Ci~ I Ml ct>A q 3-TCf~ 
I 
Now the question arises: If an entity does possess the quality 
of being cognizable or perceptible (vedyatti) as its own form, then 
it would be knowable to all. 148 The quality of being cognizable 
would itself also be knowable; this would involve the fault of infi-
nite regress. Then the universe, although fully manifest. would 
be blind and in deep slumber because it would involve the fallacy 
of association with two contradictory attributes: the capacity to 
be cognized and the quality opposite to it (viruddlzadharma~voga). 
That question is answered in the following way: the capacity to 
be cognized (vedyatvti) does not belong to the knowable object 
as its very self because the capacity to be cognized, belonging to 
the unique nature (svarllpa) [of an object], has been stated to be 
something different. That which first takes its repose in the energy 
(!fokti) of the subject, and then in the subject itself, is indeed 
the sharer of restfulness. That sharer of restfulness is indeed 
the innate nature [of any given object]. That innermost nature 
is indeed self-luminous and it shines with reference to none. 149 
Therefore, the question of omniscience, infinite regress, and con-
tradiction between two opposing attributes has been refuted. 
That very innermost nature (svariipa) remains one, even when 
cognized by countless limited knowing subjects. Its character 
is of this singular nature because al 1 these cognitions are of the 
nature of manifestation (llbhtisa). Therefore, there is no hindrance 
regarding the rising of perceptions and inferences among dif-
ferent subjects. Its character is real because it has the capacity 
to serve in worldly transactions~ for example, seeing a heautifUl 
woman watched by others, one experiences jealousy. 150 Also, while

--- PAGE 137 ---
TANTRASARA 
127 
conceiving Siva as the abode of rest, one experiences absorption. 
Seeing an object in which a great number of subjects have been 
immersed, one experiences fullness. It is like watching the dance 
of a young woman, 151 or seeing 'blue' with its unique character-
istics when it becomes merged with the subject. In this way, self-
reflecting consciousness arises. Thus, everything beginning with 
earth and ending with prakrti is of the nature of fifteen. This is 
because of the fact that in sakala souls, raga and the other veils 
(kaiicukas) have become active, and because it is the sakala souls 
who are the experiencing subjects. A sakala soul has this form of 
fifteen characteristics because it also comes under the dominion 
of 'knowable [objects].' This topic has been dealt with at length in 
the Tantra/aka. 
From the puru~a 152 to kala tattvas, these divisions are thirteen. 
Since a sakala soul is not associated with subjectivity, the two 
characteristics, .fokti and the possessor of sakti, do not arise. In 
this case, the sakala soul exists merely as the innermost nature 
(svarupa). When the pralayakala soul is the innermost nature and 
the remaining subjects are five [in number], then the distinctio~s 
become eleven. When, on the other hand, the vijlianakala [soul] is 
the innermost nature, and subjects are four, then the variations are 
nine. In the case when the mantra [soul] is the innermost nature, 
and the subjects are three, then the variations are seven. When the 
mantresa is the innermost nature, and the subjects are two, then 
the variations are five. When the mantramahefvara [soul] is the 
innermost nature, and the single Lord is subject, the variations 
become three, because of the distinction of sakti and the possessor 
of sakti. In the case of Siva, who is solely of the nature of light, 
consciousness, and freedom, there is no variation, because He is 
perfect in every aspect. These distinctive variations of the catego-
ries were given in the text titled Para111e.~\1ara11uttara11aya. These 
distinctive variations of the categories are responsible for the 
great variety of worlds (blwvanas). This is expressed only because 
the nether world, heaven, and those worlds belonging to rudras, 
though similar, being constituted of earth, yet have differences in

--- PAGE 138 ---
128 
TANTRASARA 
their natures due to comparative remoteness. One curious to know 
about the subsidiary variations of each of the many enumerations 
should try to understand it by studying the Tantraloka. 
~ 
Qc?hCfJUGltl':;fll{o11fq ~~l~l'"ii ClfC1Hi ~ 
R{<)NC'i: I 31~ 
~ 
ef~ tj1 a =rci "ITTTIC!~ ii <:i {Cl q J:t 3-f~ R {<) ~ ci - m tH I C'1 ~ 
1 'B~;:r 
~ 
~ fucr: I "lfW ~ 
'ef~~cf §1~' ~ 
I ~'<IC'in:Jf'ffict:~<ili 
~ 
~ tl '<:I A~ Ag m:, ~ 
u '<I A~~ I: I (i fii a Ir~ +"i I A Cf) fq ""1 ~ C'i I c-A ct5T 
qrucpl ~, fl i'L~ I fuq P~~ I Cl fcwl-al of~ Id fcl tmt>il a I 3f~ ff1 q I f'~a lfl J fl S~ 
nt<=fq;~ tl '<:I~ $11 ;i I Cf5 C1 : I q I~ I Cl fu £A I ct'5 ii UT 31~ ff1 q I f'~rr: CB fY I ;<l 
mul err tl '<:I~ C1 <Ji d1 Cl C1 : I m~~ f%" ClfCI I a ~ I d ~ II a Cf f=a ?I 'fl'l 'fCI Gl1 ~ 
3G."-a: ~ 
~ITTTf~ A I ;i f(j) u '<I f1 <hci : I IDITftr ~~Cf)~ 
J i:rranm 
"chj)d~IC"Qiot ~ 
~AIQ(ilq::l«'l tHICifcH~ <ITT:r:, ~CJ;~~ 
~ii ~it~' 
~ 
3"i4'<:?11N I 
Thus, by following the [example of] one single clay jar, the 
distinctive variations of earth principle and the other categories 
have been examined. 153 Now an exposition of the entire category 
of earth with its characteristics of subject and object of knowledge 
will be given. That light which shines as nondifferent from the 
earth is Siva; as it is said in the Vedas: '"The earth itself is Brah-
man." He who is the Lord of the mantresvara [knowing subjects 
who represent the earth principle] sends those who are the givers 
of siddhis, and those who are thus sent are mantresvaras. The 
mantra [knowing subject] is one who is the embodiment of ego-
ism. which assumes the form signified by the term mantra. The 
vijiianakala [knowing subject], related to the earth I principle], 
is one who has rid himself of sdli1khva, and other systems fol-
lowed by bound souls, and practiced ptirthiva_voga hy means of 
saivavidyti, but was unable to attain the permanent state. 154 How-
ever, there are those who, at the end of the ka /pa or a ft er death, 
experience release from the earth as dlzartipralayakeva!as' 55 by 
means of parthivayoga, described in the text of pafus. To them. 
the earth remains dissolved. However, in the state of deep sleep

--- PAGE 139 ---
TANTRASARA 
129 
there is a possibility of the arising of strange and different kinds of 
dreams as a result of the overpowering nature of the tattvas. The 
person who identifies himself with the earth [principle] is called a 
dharasakala. Even in the state of being a dlwrasakala, because of 
the prominence of sakti and because of its subordination, the vari-
ety is fourteenfold. 156 Thus. these are the variations of the earth 
[principle]. which have taken the role of the subject. Their innate 
nature (si'arzlpa) is the pure knowable object (suddlzaprameya). 157 
The same applies to the other principles. 
3-T~ 
t!CPf~ 
S:P:"l I Ci R 
s:n a I~ RTil36Ci Ci~ I *G:R '{Clq a I'"\ 
~ 
;fifi" 1Jeurc1: >rrur: Q;fvsi15~1dilc-AI ~~~~ 
~fu, rn 3-TTW 
ef~~di{C)YI, f~m Ql6cnlmlfi'{Clql, ~~mtmf'~a~l:il, 
341~1 C1~~aQ16cii{C)YI,11m ~ ~ 
~fGmct~1c:h c=FB~ 3n£i 
~ 
Rfcfciicrqfcimci" fciciicvq1m1ctc:b, ~ 
-a m 
~ur ~ 
'\ 
'\ 
Qfc:, 3ffC:l§IC:"""tla q 
fad?~ q~'{ClqC"CfJ:t, 3f~~. 3f~t:if11, mu 
~ ~W~l{C)qfCllfl Q;fG9:~1~-*tF:c;:+R~ wa:101'{Clq("Cll~, 
Jf~~ fcict>llfcmf~ 
-a 
~CIAlt:l91ct~lclaCf5fYqlXlfcr~ 
fq '{Cl q I -c,£1 ~ 
a=run Rfcf di crq di 1 : , c=rillsfq Frfcf CB fY ffl tci fi s:i Ha 1 . ~ 
faCBcvq «"'i, 3-f~~ 3-f;:;i::i ~"fl I ~fGg:~ I f2-Ad51 3-f~~ u ~ 
~ ~ 
I fcid514ciiqill~ Ql6d1{C)qCi1 ~Jffi~m~~. ~fcracp~ 
~~w~~ 
YIXlC:~~ m~~ 
fufaXl<i I 
Now. the variations of the tattvas as they abide in the vital 
energy with reference to one perceiving subject will be exam-
ined.158 In this world, any given person perceiving 'blue· possesses 
[his ownl vita I energy consisting of sixteen tu/is (fuf i~oflasakatma). 
This vital energy extends up to the end of the knowable objects. 
taking possession of the thing known. The first tufi is free from 
any division and remains an undivided unity. The second is of the 
form of a knowing suhject who is about to come forth [into mani-
festation]. The last is identical with the object to be known. while 
the penultimate one is the manifest form of the knowing subject. 
The intermediate group consists of twelve tu/is; the first group of

--- PAGE 140 ---
130 
TANTRASARA 
six is nirvikalpa by nature, which veils the vikalpa form of knowl-
edge. Among these six tufis, one is innate nature in itself (svariipa), 
and the remaining five tufis are engaged in vei 1 i ng determinacy 
(vikalpa). The desire to open and the state of openness both consist 
of two tzqis because they are characterized by the wel I-manifested 
form of activity. This is because an action or [subtle] vibration [of 
an action] persists in the perceiver for more than one moment. The 
state of openness and the state of being an agent with regard to 
the objects of activity are thus established. Th us, because of the 
fivefold nature of determinacy (vikalpa), which is to be concealed, 
and because of nature in itself, the nirvikalpa state consists of six 
moments: the state of nirvikalpa in the process of being dissolved, 
the actual dissolution of vikalpa, the intention to open, the state 
of openness consisting of two moments, and the state of open-
ness itself combined constitute the six tuf is. Its own functioning 
capacity is nothing but the form of being the nature of the knowing 
subject; therefore, it is not counted separately. In the manner dis-
closed above, a person having proper discernment, following the 
course of instruction by spiritual teacher, analytically discerns the 
state of fifteen everywhere. 159 
fu Cf5crq '"<fi c::tj 
~ 
efq;rcn 
~~~fcrnrfcra 
mcrc=t 
3ifu Cf)fq ~q 
I 
ffi~ fq Cf)(Yq fu ~ 
(ffl=( 
316 ~I A Wl{ 
3"I 6ra 1 m1 rea~~ 
Cf)(Yq ~ '<"1 ~ r;:rru~ fcn:wf ~~ 31ITTl5Tfffilf~ 
~-~:\&1a1~ ~~ 
~. fcrn5cvqR~f~~ ~ m 
~Cf51~1a ~ ~ 
~ 
3R11 ~ 
4AltP4Al6Cf5m: "ffTCfURCTT ~ 
3-Tf~~~ I l!cf -a 
41XlG:~~ f~ ~ 
*Y)~~G:.-alc-+:1;::i'1 ~~ 
~-;:rc=rr ~ 
~ 
~ ~ 
mQ\( rn(j)IBd5: ~ldld~I:, m rn ~ 
~ 
~, fuJll:ll ~$1HCf5{U 
rrfcr:Gr~~+:!l~I ~$1fC1'<"1cfd51~ ~ 
-;:r C13-TIW I ~ 
sITT~ 
'(j)IB q 1 a ~· 31?f q 1a~1 &i ~ 
'WrCfill ~1AM1 c:?1 A 1<1f1~1 a1 ~ 
~rf~rm 
~ 
'<6ffll'<f:ffl;?j~ I Fci° +:!~+:Jg~l(j)~: ~~ 
c=nlG:~ lfi IC""!, C""lf1ffflfc§:: I 
As the vikalpas become fewer, the number of tuf is also 
decreases, as in the experience of happiness which terminates in

--- PAGE 141 ---
TANTRAS.ARA 
131 
the state of nirvikalpa . 160 Even ordinary people, by means of rest-
ing (visrtinti) vikalpas in I-Consciousness, apprehend the nirvi-
kalpa state, the abode of reflective consciousness, which extends 
up to the state of this-ness and is covered with an I-Consciousness 
[that is] almost indistinct. This is like the state of unhappiness 
resting in happiness, which begins to shine clearly only after grad-
ual reduction of vikalpas. This is known as close attentiveness 161 
regarding relation between the perceiver and perceived. This is the 
view held by Abhinavagupta's teachers. 
When the differentiation in the form of clear manifestation of 
this-ness diminishes, and if it continues to diminish by twos, the 
aspirant attains full penetration into Siva (avesa) for the duration 
of two tufis. Of these two, the former is full in every respect while 
the second, being practiced by absorbing it into omniscience and 
omnipotence, rewards the aspirant with omniscience and omnipo-
tence. The same is not the case with first tuf i, as stated by revered 
Kalla ta: '"tuf ipata, 162 and so on." In this context, the word "pa ta" 
is understood to be the Devi, SrimatkalI, Matrsadbhava, Bhairava, 
Pratibha, etc. That is now enough of revealing what is an esoteric 
secret. Thus, from the tufi belonging to mantramalzesvara onward, 
the attainment in the respective spheres occurs by means of prac-
tice appropriate to a particular sphere. 163 
3l~cr \Ji 1 ~a: 1 ca c:Hm Pi{<) lLi ;::ci , -"ff?T -a~ c=rfutsi li 1 li 1-?tl ~f cm 
<:fC=r ~fci'XO'lJ:I ~~a-i "fl<1 m ~, 
;::r a~ 
Chcifl~ ;::r wfq 
' 
' 
' 
a1ct fl I li I: ~fcrc;:T ~ wf(r ~~ 
~~ 
~ I "ff?T "li"GJfws5~ ~{C)q Ci li I 
~ 
c=rGJ \Ji I~ a: ct f{?Xf B~ ~ 
+:rR -a- I ~ 
~ ~Cf 3lf~ lS6 H {C)q Ci I 
~ 
~epcvq: C1cIT '<""ct Gi I cH"W I "QGJ ~ ~ 
~ 
IS(S IQ{<) q Ci li I J) Ji k·+:J Ci l1Cf 
~ 
c=rGJ ~~ca1am 1 ~ 
~ ~ 
~li!,:i+:J1orn+:J1?1atcrr: ~c:B 
Jll~ctlfu~~ ~fcfm ~ 
I "QGJ ~ c=rf~q- >n=llQfcr~~ ~: 
~ufc:ft4~ c=R\~UT ~ufffi4~Cilil ~ 
C1G.1 ~m~. "ffT -a-~ 
~~ct 
-fu~ 3-T~ 1 ?t li 'i JWti q ~ li 1 in fu ~mfzrcm >n=llQm 
°f"Q I (i ~ 
'{i I~ I , 
~Cf> CU A~~: >fllTQ !,:i Ji Io I !,:i il <:«nf~cB ~

--- PAGE 142 ---
132 
TANTRASARA 
~~16Ct.>c=Cllc"t Br~G.T I ~Cf ~l'Gti f~ 
~{<iq1a1a~1~mfrFIT ~Gi6-<R=r. ~~~ 
mc=n~ cx:ITT~ 
A61&:'11fca:™~~= I 3-R:f~~~ C"i~IMl~~ct>Cilfc=fcb-a 
I <:{W ~~cl 
~ffl ~ 
Cj)iQ T<il ci ~=rcrfrftc=f A~ I~ a ci LT Fl'{<) q ~ Rr I 
fc5 q ~ 
~ 
ffl ~ 
~ 
~m;u <1Cl ~. 
~er a ft:qaiQ= 
~, ~ C'i ll I Cf)C'i 'fli mrr: ~~ 
~~L(=f, m fq $1 H I Cf) M «'i mrr: 
mmn~~1(f.){ai ~ A'""5i1a1;:ii ~ mrr:. ~1aHi f~*~~fa1a 
flGiTCil<"1Ji_ 
I ~ ~{<i4flct5M1 
9 
~f1l:11ct>f1: 
~ fcl$1Hlct>f1: 
:? 
A"""'5i<"1Cil~l<"1;;:+J§~ldlf: 'd fucr: <.,, ~ 
YXlct~l*a qsq ~ 
I ~ 
~C'illlCBC'i ~~UT 
~lllG:~lm, ~ 
fq$1 H lct>M~I rm: fq$1 Hld1C'i 
$~CBIG:~I~. ~ 
~ 
ci~l~ll: A~~ll: fucr: fucr ~ 
w:c=r*a. ~ 
A§~1~1Rn:•mft:P:fuef~trxr*a. ~ 
fw~1~1rm: $11ri~1~ 
$t81~ifm: fucf ~fu~. 3-TI~sflr ~1aaf8 fo"J~1$11~-cu1+·~~~q~· 
~ 
~H=il.cllHlllll~ qjrjqc;:c-c:p:l ~ 
11 
~ 
afciJ11&l -;:i-IB ~ 
dY)«111~i ~~Al(j)= 
~~ 
~1-<fa "ff %UT "J:lT(fl-TicITS~ ~~I fl I 
ci ;::i if fl"Fod ~ J1 I M ct'5 A l I a Cf5 fl"""Ji R-Fcf ct> r=q I A ~;:a I -
«! I a ;:;;xJi I A ~Tfl I'< i ~WR"fc-f >ff9C1 'R1 I c-'"Hi fl 1 J:t I I 
"$"fu 
~~ca1a14fa-<f'aa 
a~f11{ 
c=rn:r*ct~ct>1~1;1 
;:rn=r 
;::iaAJ:il~CBJ:J_ 11~11 
Now. in the fifteenfold variations. waking and the other states 
[of consciousness] are going to be examined. The knowable object 
and the consciousness related to it, which causes diversity in con-
sciousness. being mutually dependent, are known as states [of 
consciousness]. It neither belong to the object of knowledge alone. 
nor to consciousness alone, nor are they separate from each other. 
When any particular experience occurs. having externality as the 
substrate. then this is the state of wakefulness which remains asso-
ciated with the knower, the knowledge, and the object of knowledge.

--- PAGE 143 ---
TANTRASARA 
133 
When, on the other hand, any particular experience shines as 
the substrate (adhi~flztina)
164 in the form of an instrument, which 
appears as a desire, then this is the dreaming state. When knowl-
edge shines as the governing agent in the form of seed alone, then 
this state is known as deep sleep. These three states, with refer-
ence to the object of knowledge, the instrument, and the subject of 
right knowledge, are said to have a fourfold division each. When, 
however, in place of the rest of the subjects, the emergence of light 
occurs because of his inclination toward inwardly directed full-
ness and awareness unfolds, then that state is known as the 'fourth 
state.' For example, the knowledge: "I see the form by means of the 
instrumentality of knowledge" transcends the knower, known, and 
knowledge. 165 The knowledge "I see" rests in the subjectivity of the 
knower without any means and is in essence autonomy (svatantrya). 
This fourth state is the giver of roles such as subjectivity, instru-
mentality, and objectivity, respectively, by means of proximity, 
middle range, and distance. It is because autonomy is the giver of 
the grace of these states that they are said to be threefold. 
The yogins acknowledge these states by the names pi~z(lastha, 
padastha, rapastha, and rapatita, respectively. Those rich i~ 
the subtlety of meditation call these states sarvatobhadra, vyaptl, 
mahavyapti. and pracaya. The derivative meanings of these 
names are given in the Tantrdloka, as well as the Slokavartika 
(MatinlvUaya). That which permeates all the other states and is all-
inclusive and perfect is the state beyond the fourth (turyatlta). It 
transcends all; therefore, it is denoted by the name mahapracaya. 
Moreover, that which is distinct, steady, and well-connected is 
the waking state. That contrary to it is the dreaming state, which 
is the state of experience of pralayakala souls. Deep sleep is non-
awareness of all the knowable objects, which is the state of expe-
rience of vijilanakala souls. The fourth state is the experience of 
the process which makes the object nondifferent from the subject. 
This is the state of experience of the mantra. mantresvara, and 
mantramahefvara souls. The absence of difference from Siva in

--- PAGE 144 ---
134 TANTRASARA 
any entities is the state beyond the fourth (turiyatlta). This is the 
state that transcends all. 
Now, how the fifteenfold variation occurs in the five states 
with reference to different subjects is given below: 
1. Jagrat (waking state)-sakala in its innate nature 
2. Svapna (dream)-Pralayakala 
3. Su~upti (sleep)-Vijnanakala 
4. The fourth-Mantra, Mantreivara, Mantramahesvara 
5. Transcending the fourth-Siva 
In the thirteenfold variation following the order mentioned 
earlier, in regard to the essential nature and pralayakala souls, 
etc., five states also remain present there. Following the order of 
t~~ 'thing in itself' (svarupa), the energy of vijt1anakala and th~ 
vzpianakala souls, the variation is elevenfold. In the ninefold vari-
ation, they are the 'thing in itself' (svarupa), mantras, lords of the 
mantra, the lords of these lords sakti and Siva. In the sevenfold 
variati~n, ~hey ar,e the thing in, itself,' lords of the mantra, t~eir 
lords, saktz, and Siva. In the fivefold variation, they are the thmg 
in itself, the energy of mantramalzeivara, sakti, and Siva. In the 
threef~Id variations they are the thing in itself, the icchli, }t1tina, 
a~d .krz~asaktis. In the principle cal led Siva, though it is free fr~rn 
dis.tmction, yogins, rich in the perfection of enumeration, conceive 
a fifte~nfold division by means of the presence of the iccha · )Fzana, 
and krzyasaktis. 
The beautiful form devoid of rest in consciousness, seen 
in the host of categories such as earth, etc., is not as 
beautiful as that of the supreme subject, as his know-
able shines in multifarious ways. Take recourse to this 
multitude of principles created in sequential order, 
which are in essence indeterminate I-Consciousness 
impregnated with autonomy and reflective awareness-
and attain your own Self.

--- PAGE 145 ---
TANTRASARA 
135 
3m fa 1 a(\ c=rn:n~ 1 ct5M 1 ca~ ~ R {<)l<:i ci , ffi <:rm ~ 
3-9mfl=r 
fcm~ (1 "("Cl J=t ~~I c:rw c=rffl~ cntm <::f"f( 3-9mfl=r ~ 
(ff( cPffi -
Q(f)'{<) q Cf5 C'4 "1 I fi f% tDJ)("Q I a, I <RTW -qf wx:ri ~f-:n:-Ra cf ci lkl fci fcH"P f 
~ I JlCVfff~U H 1;:8 crif 
~ fcit5(51-Cbl'<:Olcil:i IC<:i ll:i"ilf'<UICf>I ~ 
I 
g)+:f I fu A I Ci 1 ;:ci fum -~CU fc:1 '<:l ~ 
~fcrfilfu ax:l I fl I ~C§'fcH:~ I fu~ I~ ;fl 
~, 
~ct?a 
'<:~{I q ~ p=11 <""l 
1 ~er 3"I o sthj)te:d Lflf2.fcr-mcp<1-A 141 <:i -
~ 11m1 fci:r~ I ef~d:llfu~lml"11J=t 3Br ~ 
~1Rtsa~ mCK{ q{fq~IT 
~, ~~ 
~ fis:lfciu("Qmfu a1afa <:!ffi1=( 34usfCl'=t 1 ~1aa~ 
~ 1 Hi 1 ah=rr -~~vi-~ 1 a.., 1 a fG:1 ct5 fl'i A H fCt 1 <""l 
1 
fCI a ;;;5j Q ~ ~, 
ITTTRr <::fC1 mrBti a ci:t5 M kil a A 1 lTCi qx1q CPrTr: ~ c ~ 
~ 1 
"C"1 c=a 1 R I 
' 
' 
' 
Chapter Ten 
[In the previous chapter], the path of principles (tattvas) has been 
explained. Now the path called kala, the subtle units of tattvas, 
etc., wi 11 be described. It has already been stated that the specific 
character which threads through all the worlds is called 'prin-
ciple' (tattva). In the same way, that which invariably abides in the 
group of tattvas is named kala. This is because kalti is capable of 
fashioning or shaping (kalana) in a uniform way; for example, in 
regard to the principle earth, it is nivrtti because a process of the 
creation of the principles stops with it. 166 
The kala named prati~fha functions in the group of tat~v~s 
beginning with water and ending with pradlzana because It IS 
instrumental in nourishing and replenishing. The kalti named 
vidya functions in the group of tattvas beginning with puru~a and 
ending with 11u1ycl, be;ause of which knowahles begin to diminish 
and the ascension of consciousness occurs. From pure vidyti to the 
end of faktitattva the siinMkala operates. Due to its function, the 
activity of veils (kaiicukas) rest in tranquility. Therefore, there are 
four spheres 167 (a~ujas): born of earth (p{/rtlziva), born of prakrti 
(prt1krw), horn of nuzva (mavtva), and born of sakti (saktti). The 
energies he longing to -the ea;tl; and other tattvas have their abode

--- PAGE 146 ---
136 
TANTRASARA 
in these spheres up to the end of the principle ca I led sakti; there-
fore, in the principle iakti subtle tactile contact exists. 168 Tactile 
contact possesses the nature of resistance, and therefore it is rea-
sonable to conclude that the spherical worlds exist up to the end 
of the sakti principle. Furthermore, in the sivatattva, there is the 
concived kala called santatlta whose existence is created only 
for the purposes of instruction, meditation, and worship. 169 The 
supreme reality possesses absolute freedom; however, even there, 
that which is beyond the scope of knowledge is also beyond kala 
(kalatita).
110 Thus, the number of kalas is indeed five and the num-
ber of tattvas is thirty-six. 
"Rurf%"-~~fci fum-~~a-~;:r ~ ~ I 
Cf)'{Ulc=ci fum 
- ~;t crn{CTRQfm u Vc=r ~ 
1 
Cf5'<01cfl~~~1a~')c:C""C11ct 
q-xr I 
~}G\Cf5~~ qxr I 
furrfc=rc=rfuci:i I l I ("1 l'i I fa Cf) I ff! 4~ 
qxr 
I 
°ffQfq ma~&~ Tu I Cl a fci ~~mi:( I C1£1?J" Nfu ~ l'i a mcx:rR err (,f({ 
a&fate14Mf, C1c1 ~Wi ffi~ ci:ild:lAl2J ~WB, ~ 
tJ ~-~ 
'~1CX:iA1Ti~· 3RCITm::ifC11f1T"?l'imfTR1 crm~ 
fll(i~~l!Q"4QCl'f1H1(1, ~R;d~j c=j fldC""lfdl~Uff1l'ilf"i~ICl:llci£8ctA efc=r 
q Sil Cf5M ifcrrtr: 1 ~ 
$1 H '1CfiM~4~ 3"l k-A Chfl 1 , ~~ fa m Ch fl 1 , ~ 
~ICICf5C1T ~ 
~ac=qfufcr: I 1!cf ;::iq("lfdl~fq ~(1" ~I ~m~llll4t 
~a-14q{{Ciq("q1 ~ &furn ~ci Ti a fQ Cf)fl, c-A, ~*c;:. ~fu ~ 
"C1"2ta 
&futr: I ITT >Tli I a I a I ll i CfG:Tt'.EIT I s:l A I a I ~er an ci:i ("1 '( ~(~ II l=<•ra I l'i i lF?TTtal I 
("J(W~I~ ~~:PilflCilllf QUTf~, "ff l!Q q- 3Rft f11cifa fu~ ~ 
~ 
efc; ~Cb«1 Cf ~tT0i ~ 
I 
Qdl4;;;5iqUfAd') 
Y>'<~ls~1d') ITT-fu q- RqR1: 
1 
fffcU a f A fTTi Ti lFi 
'< fl ~ I '< Y)'< A f.51 A TO?i q a A ;:{;l I I I 9 I I 
~Cifd 1of fuCf>qa-
~ 
CffCff ar~cH A q '{ Cf)fl I I

--- PAGE 147 ---
TANTRASARA 
137 
34 l :r<:i a f Ci =c=q il d5 d5-
q d:A ;::;i ~~cFl f1l fa ~ 
I I ~ I I 
~~ 
qurf: AG:A~-
Ci "fa A ci') -a- ~ 11 ~ 
Cil ci ~A I 
3-ITT+•i cPJ)c:8 """1 I ~ f -
, 
?I <:i lj)i=b f"i Q t5 I~ ~'R:f: I I ~ I I 
The knowable is twofold; following its division into 
gross and subtle qualities, the total number of tattvas 
becomes ten. Instrumentality is also twofold: first, 
there is pure instrumentality, and second, instrumen-
tality is connected with agenthood. Thus, the number 
of tattvas also becomes ten. Next to them are five tat-
tvas where instrumentality has become subordinate and 
agenthood has become distinctly prominent. Next come 
five tattvas that are the result of the purity of agent-
hood. The next five tattvas are those whose distinction 
from one another dissolves with the intention toward 
fullness. The thirty-sixth is the principle known as Siva, 
who is free from all Ii mitations. When this is taught or 
meditated upon, that in which the mind gets a solid base 
is called the thirty-seventh principle. When this princi-
ple is also made an object of meditation, then the num-
ber of principles becomes thirty-eight: this does not 
involve infinite regress, however. because when Siva, 
who is associated with unlimited freedom, is being 
meditated upon, it terminates in the thirty-seventh tat-
tva. 171 However, the thirty-sixth principle has to be con-
ceived of as beyond al 1 other principles. Here ends the 
method of conceiving [grouping! all principles under 
the scheme of five kaltis. 
When atmi"ikala extends up to vijllanakala, and vij1zanakalti 
extends up to Tsvara. and the remaining tattvas are pervaded by 
Siva. this is the method of conceiving all the tattvas under the

--- PAGE 148 ---
138 
TANTRASARA 
threefold scheme. The same scheme should also be assumed in 
regard to nine tattvas. 172 
The threefold division of the sixfold path, in the form of the 
worlds (bhuvanas), principles (tattvas), and kalas, which ~re ?f 
the nature of gross, subtler, and subtlest, is on the side of objecuv-
ity. When, on the other hand it takes its repose (visranti) in the 
subject, the division is simila;ly threefold. '73 When it shines as the 
instrument of knowledge in this subjective aspect, then it is ~alled 
the path of pada. But when the waves of agitation in the mstru-
ment of knowledge are going to rest, then it is cal led the path 0: 
"!ant.ra. When, on the other hand, the agitation is completely paci-
fied m the fullness of subjectivity, then the path_ is th~t 0~ vanz~­
When that very varna takes rest in its fullness, 1t attams its ow 
n.ature. Therefore, it is proper to conclude that one path possesses 
sixfold divisions. 
The number of pada, mantra, and var~w is one, and 
the number of the worlds is sixteen; thus, the princi-
P_le ~arth is composed of the kala cal led nivrtti · The 
fue Is number three and the eye is number two; th~r_e­
fore, the number of principles from water to prakrtz is 
t,wenty-three. The word rasa signifies number six ai:d 
s~ra number five; therefore, the number of the words ts 
fifty-six. This is pratinhakala. 
The number of syllables constituting the principles from 
puru~a to maya are seven. The number of mantras and 
padas is two, while the number of the worlds is twenty-
eight. This is vidyakaUi. The number of principles are 
three, that is, suddhavidya, lsvara, and sadasiva · The 
mantra here consists of three syllables, while the num-
ber of the worlds is eighteen. This is santakala. 
The number of pada, mantra, and principles (tattva) is 
one, while the number of syllables is sixteen. This is 
santatltakala. These three verses in a rya meter have been 
composed by Abhinavagupta for the use of his students.

--- PAGE 149 ---
TANTRASARA 
139 
<1?f 
l'ilctc=t ~ ~ 
"fRl m~ ~~ 
3-TlfQTff~ 
<:l"W~~c=<:l"T ~. ~~ 
cra;qJ:J101~1mn=( 3tr<:ITJlllA"ilfl 
~ 
cfT~d') am~A._ I C15r en: 3-Tf~ ~ 
R{'lqo11~ mf:mq1cfl 
fcrmz:f~ I C1?r <Ef~ ~: ~mq 
34$11"i~r1: ~~ 
CidYllil 
~~ 
efm q 1 a ~ 
~m f1 +:\Q Cb, ~~ 
1!Cf f* <p<=r ~ 
a 1 =rM i:i,, 
CP+=f Jt ~ 
c=CI 
"Cf>1=f lb M ct 1 m 
J 1 ci c=ct ~ f1 ~- mfm;:r -a mf m q 1 a 1 ~qrrc=tt 
3-lfc=t~'f!~·:, t~mrf~fl~ <1 
~ctl'it;q ~~~ 
#<:l"W 
U, °$~ ~~f"l~·:, fa{)4l'i): CP+=fuil": f"IAcilfll'il: ~~~ 
CP+=f~, "f1(f: W'mq 1 a ~ 
~, ;:r -~Cb~ fcRTumTTfRl, fcRT~sfq 
34 ;;q ~ 3-TTcHi (§:~ "Cf>l=fun ~ 
J I a H ~ f1 ~-kt 
I 3"ffa {it§'Cf54~ill ~Cf 
agq1a~f"l~·lfl, Jtl~l<jJ~d ep+:f ;:r ~~ 
mll~aila <1 ~mc9" ~ 
~, wc=r: - ciCTf54f1<?.\ld ~mm:~~ 
m mlls:idlfl tmfuf~ 
I 3-T~ AMqR:q1a') W'mq1a: msfq fcbfCl'{Clq: ? fci? Um Rf~? 
~. l!R~ #~ 
~f~m f~w ~er~~ 
~~Jfl ~c;g<J} 
~ffi ~ 
~G:Cnf ~ 
"f"!Cf+=( 34 f1 A 5\Ji f1 J:t I ~ 
C"1 ;J)I q '< '< il ~ 11 E;:l:i a I cf Q; 
3qq'Qfl ~. ~~ 
- ~m: 
fCl'{ClYl£l§ld"i¢5l5fm ~: ~~S°1: 
"ftm:r:, ~ q ~ 
~~1Chlf1fq'{Clq*ef~a: ~ 
~af~~ 
~{Cl q ~ c=l'i I q R=i" 
~GIB CfT ~ur CfT "f1"liT ~ 
mf 
m q I ("1 q I ?I JO\ 3101: 
~, 
fCI 1a~A1?If11 '< ~ ~ 
qzi:rf~ ~ 
qrnf-ac=rr ~ 
~a-r 
l!Cr Wm q I c=fl ~ fCI {<) q ~~I Cf5C1: I ~ 
mm~~ 
X1" epajq a-r: I roe 
mn{{<)qmm~~ <1 "f"I" "Q'Cf mfmq1a= qzq~mffiRaA1<:'11J1mft 
rcnm l:l {i ~fcrIDJ,~grr -f~ur 
I ~{Cl 
q c=d A I l'i I ~fqc}cj? 1:t~crcicf5 
1qcpf'fficra-cB 
~C[f~craCb A ;;q ·c:,"q 
q)f:f >f9crFr: 
(1C;U '<a f"CI mrr 
~~. 
mrn=rra-nm:n-~~ mn C:Pllfqa-n, ma-T <1 cn~a:r: ~ 
~a-Tf~a-1: I ~ q er-rm - Cbf+"llfl epf~fu-acr ~fX1" mfmYIC"1 ~, X1" 
t!Q ~~ 
<lm mm~ 
f"tcifd c.ffism ~~ 
;:ni:r ~tm;:r fu~LicpC"11 
qTCG=fl~ I

--- PAGE 150 ---
140 
TANTRASARA 
Chapter Eleven 
Whatever has been stated up to now 174 can serve some as a direct 
means for the attainment of liberation (apava rgaptaye) using 
the 'short-cut method' explained above. On the other hand, the 
instruction given above can also lead others to initiation (dik~a), 
performance of the rituals, etc. Therefore, it is necessary to give 
an account of the nature of initiation (dlk~a), rituals, and so on. 
Here the question arises: Who is entitled to receive initia-
tion? In order to answer this question, the topic of the "descent of 
grace' (saktipata) is going to be discussed. Some are of the opin-
ion that worldly existence, which is rooted in ignorance, occurs 
as a result of a lack of knowledge, but when ignorance is removed 
upon the rise of knowledge, 175 the descent of grace takes place. 
However, they should explain why and how this right knowledge 
develops. If it is the outcome of deeds, then it would not be dif-
ferent from the results of actions; it would be a contingency of 
being an object of enjoyment. If the person who is the enjoyer 
(enjoying an object) is accepted as the recipient of grace, then 
the 'f~llacy of wideness' (atiprasa~1ga) occurs. If the wi 11 of the 
Lord is supposed to be the cause of saktipata, then the "fallacy 
of mutual dependence' (anyonyafrayata) occurs and, moreover. 
it serves no purpose. This theory would also entail the question 
of the Lord's partiality. Furthermore, it is not tenable to assume 
that mutually opposed actions, having equal capacity to suppress 
each other, could balance (past) actions in order that the descent 
of grace might occur. 176 This view is not tenable because actions 
are sequential and therefore are unable to oppose one another. 
Even if it is accepted that they might oppose each other. the ques-
tion is raised as to how other actions, which are not opposing one 
another, bestow their results. If actions that are not contradictory 
to one another do not occur, then one would instantaneously drop 
one's body. It is not correct to say that only the actions bestow-
ing the results of birth and life span are not suspended, and that 
only those acts that grant experiences of happiness and suffer-

--- PAGE 151 ---
TANTRASARA 
141 
ing remain suspended. This view is incorrect because it does not 
answer the question of why, even if it is assumed that the descent 
of grace occurs in the presence of such actions, grace is afraid of 
the deeds that bestow the results of experience. Furthermore, if 
the question of grace could be satisfactorily resolved by resorting 
to the theory of the ripening of impurities, 177 then the question 
of the nature of this theory needs to be answered, as well as the 
question of its cause. By this question, all possible causes, such as 
detachment, specific form of merit, service to righteous people, 
association with saintly persons, and the worship of deities stand 
refuted. Thus, arguments advanced by dualists are repudiated as 
incoherent. 
According to this nondual system of the autonomous Lord. we 
maintain the position that the great Lord, by way of sportful play, 
veils his innate nature and takes up the form of a bound being 
(pasu); however, there is no contradiction regarding the distinc-
tion of space, time, and his innate nature. 178 Similarly, the Lord, 
by removing (the freely chosen) limitations upon his innate nature, 
reveals himself either instantaneously179 or gradually
180 to that 
recipient of grace cal led a limited knowing subject (a~w).
181 Th~ 
great Lord is in essence autonomous, and it is He who causes saktz 
to descend; therefore, the descent of grace, which is dependent 
on nothing, becomes fruitful by the realization of one's innate 
nature. However, for one desirous of enjoyment (blzogotsuk~sya), 
the descent of grace depends on his deeds. Upon one desirous 
of otherworldly enjoyments (lokottaranipabhogotsukasya), grace 
descends through the agency of Rudra, Vi~t)U, and Brahma, the 
presiding authorities functioning in the sphere of maya, [who are] 
impelled only by the will of the supreme Lord. This kind of grace 
yields resu I ts such as the attainment of the status of mantra know-
ing subject (mantrapram(zta). etc., and (the capacity for) discrimi-
nation between [the principles of] mayti and puru~a, puru~a and 
kaUi, pun1~a and prakrti, and puru~a and buddhi, and thus bars 
that kind of person from enjoying those fruits belonging to the 
lower principles. For one desirous of enjoyment and liberation, the

--- PAGE 152 ---
142 
TANTRASARA 
descent of grace has to depend on rituals when it comes to enjoy-
ments and is dependent on nothing when it comes to liberation; 
therefore, the descent of grace is both dependent and non-depen-
dent. It is not proper to ask why the descent of grace occurs only 
for that particular person. This is simply because the great Lord 
shines in that particular way. This being the case, then to which 
person might this kind of injunction related to (the enjoyment of) 
some object be directed? 182 
~ m-ti mnsq1al ;:rcrm, -
cft~-+:fa:f-A""G:~ ~-m~­
~: 
-g;~fu~, <l?r 3fe!')~a1 ~ 
~ 11f51I=a14-;:rqfa-TUI: fCI ~ fli ~ «'1 
mm~~ ~~ ~~ 
fcFtcr 
mJ11qqJf~ mm~ 
J1f1Rf<1t:ll a ~ w 
;:r t11•:i <:zn fu Cf.)flFi 1 cnrf~. 3-T?ITfq- a 1 ~a RO:Hi 'id:I a= 
-
$il§l~fo51q1a ~. ~ 
mfui:rc=a ~llf511W~a-TI ~ql~ll'l mf(r, 
' 
~ Rfmm=rf~~~ 3mmf~ mfc=ri:i~IJIA~ ~. 
~w ~mm ~m;:r -c=rffiR-m ~~ ~ 
1 
' 
' 
' 
~~ ~ :wnfzj'~f;:rdt ~~ldHi eftC1C1l'llfucp~~ I 
~~ 
ffimq1a1c=t 
~{)ru~~1 
f~~1f11 ~. ~~ 
~~ 
ffimq1a1<lq-
1 ~~ ~ 
am1f5la=c=a$1Hq_uf: mam=t 
'l1JlqJ:{q~ l!Cf, mfTFJlsfq 
"fef~ZH"ci$1HCi~Cf +:JlaCf>c--8 
W 
°l1fJlifcH~ m'l11JliMldU~lfuAfcH~~~~ I ~~ 
~ 
"ffCf l!Cfl l!ci ~: 
l1~= ~afDli cfta=ri ~fu ~ 
"f1"U ~ ~ 
irqfu Jft"crnfr.r. 3l?r 31cff!T~ Cf.)~ ~11f5ltim~ ~~~ 
' 
' 
' 
"ci fltl I~ I C1 $ fli I tl lfl ~zy I 31~ I f1 d al CIT ~ 
"f1"U l!Cf "ITTUTf~f 
Jf(f)f 
man r=riffi, m "fl mUTfilOT gq Cf5mf ~ 
Cf~ ~I m~m 
3fei')te1A~ ffimq1a1a, ~amnTsfq fCl1c-i:i;::i: ft?lqCill'li ~ c=rw 
1<t>~faqr=rr irqfu, m(ll:ff~q1Cf.)ct")~ur Q; ~~ 
r~ l!Cf, "A"m~ 
"fl ~ldCil<ij)cnTSfq m"Tffi~: irafu ~ 
c=r2tcr cftam:rf ~i"J IJ1;:oiA_, "ff u 
mm~ 
JR~q ~-g;:r mrt ~UQT ~~ 
fuq l!Cf I Rq')tC/A~ 
~~ur mn ~UQT ~1ac=q~ ~. ~ 
+:r~ &mmm~CPffi ~ 
~UR~ (ftll ~ 
- ~,QcHA~idJmq1~Ci~I l'lCiffi~ 3-it~~'

--- PAGE 153 ---
TANTRASARA 
143 
~~I 
A 01 <:fl~ &J ~ m a=rcr<:f Tf"I C"C1 i=l 3lC1: "W'm41<"1 {<)4 a I I ~ 
Cil'{ciRJilf( ~fu~, ~~ 
~~ 
~1fffiq1a: I ~wlalC:.l'ii ~ '{IJ11i~ 
~ma=i1:r:aa1$IB~~rcra~1 fi1a~1ftll1f~i~~~. 
m ~ ~ 
t::OI ~ ~ 
3lfq ~ uRT Ql'{fi'{I CIT,~~ ~1RP41Cil ftjfu3i1sftr 
Cil'{C"1R=i~Rrx"'i1Ci_ fcm:IB, ~ 
c?lru1a1ru~ tP=ta:nruwA01 ~-~ 
u ~ 1caqR:q Id): ~:ill"uf~J ldC"tll5U~l lf5i4'{AlfUct51R:a1J:t l!Rr, ~ 
3CT1 ~fr:Ef)~ ur 3FR1~~~ 
I cmsfq 3"Ef5A i=l ~ 
3Rl 1!Cf 31tmtH~ 11 fH m 
~sfq ~ 
AOsC'iAl?l~~f~sfq 3Rfuct51Ra1:, Jlcl~ W 
31ITTTU'<~l lf"t;:i ~f<Oj)a ~ 101~fa-~offC1lf( ~ 
~~ 
I ~ u ~ftrcpl 
w 3"11 a 1 ~1 en a1Q"5: ~~, "fl 7aTti ~uf~ '(!Cf "fn:if~ - ~ fcHr 
cft"arruf:fqR: 1 mm~ 
4iC1l«!>~ ~ 
-afu 3q1~1qa~ 3"iOQaf%aAa 
tpff mc1 vrm: 3q1~1~~~ ~ ~ 
-eq ~ 
mfilsfq 31~trraffl 
~a 
fa 1d5I5~ a-fl LT ~ 
11~ g?~ f<.=t 1 sai:IT~-a·-~rr.=fll~ arm ~ 
~ crffi1 I ~uf$1 HlJ){i~ Pl c=f._.}ITT:rf~Tfl"Bq I ~ 
msftr ~"CF( f°tjq•f)ci en 
~~ fc5 ~ ~I~: 
I "4Ci $fu ~11:" I ~ 
IB ~Of$1 HC"CI lfl gq WlTUmcf ~ 
3"i a i:F"11 fG: d') Tu 6Q J I a "4Ci ch ;:i Rm 3"l ~1 J ~("Ci H 1-~cH=a ("Ci I ra 'i I R fl:t ti "i ~ 
~. %q1f"t2l ~a~1ti ~UT.'-;::r af"l:ill'i 1~3q~~ 
Wn:>41ctT 
FR-qa:r l!Cf- d5Af~R~~LlafUTTC1 I 
The descent of grace is ninefold, with three variants: intense, 
moderate, and slow, combined with a further threefold division: 
supremely intense, moderately intense, and mildly intense. The 
occurrence of supremely intense descent of grace results in the fall 
of the body. whereupon the state of Paramesvara is attained. With 
the descent of moderately intense grace, the recipient is himself 
firmly convinced of the nature of reality and does not require any 
aid either from the scriptures or from a teacher. In him, intuitive 
knowledge opens automatically (prtitibha}Fzdnodaya~z), where-
upon, without undergoing external forms of purificatory rites, he 
becomes the giver of enjoyment and liberation to others. This kind 
of recipient of grace is called a teacher of prtitiblza type. This 
person is not required to observe any customary behavior as used

--- PAGE 154 ---
144 
TANTRASARA 
in society. Even among the prtitibha type there may be the pos~i­
bility of comparative distinctions among recipients of grace. This 
is because of the diverse nature of the wi 11 of the Lord. Though 
being intuitive by nature, the person endowed with this type of 
grace may rely on the scriptures; this he does only for the verifica-
tion of truth. Thus, some teachers belonging to the pr ti tiblu1 type 
may not be established in the sastras while others may be well 
established in scriptural knowledge. Therefore, they are of vari-
ous types, but in all the cases the element of intuition (pratibha) 
reigns supreme. In the presence of the teachers of the prtitib/za 
t~pe, other teachers have no authority. Just as in dualist systems 
(Saiva Siddhanta), sivas who have attained I iberation are unable to 
perform the functions of creation, destruction, etc., in the pres-
ence of the beginingless Siva. 
From the descent of mildly intense grace, a desire to approach 
a.righ~ kind of teacher183 develops, while one's leanings in the 
direction of incompetent teachers disappear. It is only because 
?f grace that one goes toward the right kind of teacher from an 
mc?mpetent one. The true teacher is fully conversant with the 
entire truth contained in sastras. He is none other than the revered 
Lord Bhairava. Even a yo gin is the giver of release to others only 
through the knowledge gained by practice. In this regard, his com-
pete~cy as teacher comes from his identity with Siva, while the 
~ovelmess and charm that he might possess are not essential. The 
mcompetent teacher might possess all these other 4ual ities except 
union with Siva. 
Thus, the person who feels a desire to approach [such a] teacher 
receives initiation, characterized by knowledge, th rough which he 
immediately attains liberation while still living (jivanmukti). This 
initiation takes place in different ways: hy mere glance (avalo-
kana), through discourse, by enlightening the disciple regard-
ing fastras, by means of viewing external rites, or by offering 
semen and menstrual fluids. A person we! I practiced in meditation, 
etc., receives initiation at that time which severs the bond of vital 
energy (prti~za): however, this kind of initiation should be given

--- PAGE 155 ---
TANTRASARA 
145 
only at the time of death. This particular type of initiation will be 
explained later. Thus, the intense type of descent of grace is of a 
threefold nature. 
One who receives initiation as a result of supremely moder-
ate grace does not feel a deep conviction regarding his identity 
with Siva. However, by gradual ripening of that realization, he 
becomes Siva after he drops his body. One upon whom grace 
descends in a moderately moderate manner, although eager to 
attain Sivahood, is overwhelmed by the desire for enjoyment. In 
spite of this, this kind of person is a recipient of the pure knowl-
edge granted to him through initiation. He, in the present body, 
experiences enjoyments obtained by the practice of yoga and 
becomes Siva at the time of dropping his body. From the mildly 
moderate descent of grace one attains Sivahood only after experi-
encing enjoyments in another body after dropping the present one. 
Thus, the moderate type of grace is also threefold. 
When a person's eagerness for the enjoyment of pleasures dom-
inates, then the nature of grace is said to be slow. The recipient 
of this grace becomes eager to attain identity with supreme Lord 
through the means of yoga, such as repetition of mantra; beca~se 
mantras and the practice of yoga finally terminate in liberation, 
they are decidedly of the nature of grace. Here also, as a result 
of comparative distinction, the mild descent of grace is threefold. 
These are the main principles of the descent of grace. Regard-
ing Vai~l)avas and other systems, the descent of grace is like _the 
grace of the king and therefore does not culminate in liberatwn; 
therefore, th is type is not going to be discussed here. It has already 
been stated that in every descent of grace, sakti abides as insepara-
ble from Siva; however, this cannot be the 'supreme one' Uye~fha), 
but either fearsome ( f?/wrd) or dreadful (ghoratama). 184 Although 
already diverse, the descent of grace becomes further differenti-
ated by means of comparative gradation. A person belonging to 
the Vai~l)ava and other orders, who follows the method prescribed 
by the teacher but at the same time follows this sastra of the five-
fold current, becomes in due order sufficiently mature and is able

--- PAGE 156 ---
146 
TANTRASARA 
to gain the highest competency for receiving the Trika, the all-
transcending and supreme sastra, which is revealed by the Lord. 
Others attain (the highest competency for receiving the Trika) by 
skipping some stages, thus creating indefinite divisions. Yet oth-
ers may attain (the same competency) instantaneously, i.e., with-
out any sequence (akrama). Thus, teachers belonging to the lower 
orders are not entitled even to see the sacred diagram (mm:ujala), 
while the teacher belonging to the higher orders is instrumental 
in enlivening the lower doctrines. He is able to do th is because, 
on account of his perfection, he is entitled to al 1 the sclstras. This 
kind of person is a teacher (daisika), a guide (guru~z), one who fol-
lows the rules and teaches others to follow them (dcii rya), an ini-
tiator (dik~aka~z), or a voracious reader (cumbakaM. Among them, 
the best one is that one in whom the fu 11 ness of know ledge has 
completely flourished, without which the fulfillment of initiation, 
etc., would be impossible. 
. 
A yo gin who is associated with a person desirous of attain-
mg results is capable of granting him immediate results by 
instructing him to adopt a certain means (upaya) which will 
lead him to his goal. If that person, through the means taught 
to him, remains concentrated only on knowledge, then he may 
also attain liberation. A person desirous of having perfect knowl-
edge should approach many teachers; he should remain close to 
them. hoping to attain ever more superior knowledge of different 
kinds. However, abandoning a teacher perfect in knowledge defi-
nitely requires a need for expiation (prclva.fritta). The question 
might arise: What if the teacher does not~ give instruction, or he 
gives erroneous instruction~ shouldn't one aha ndon him? To that 
we reply, "no,'' as that kind of teacher is free from attachment 
because he has attained perfect knowledge and therefore has no 
personal reasons for not revealing secrets. The teacher's silence 
might be the result of lack of merit on the side of disciple or for 
want of a surrendering spirit in the disciple. This disciple should 
continue to make an effort to serve this kind of teacher and should 
not abandon him. Thus, the descent of energy, having grace as

--- PAGE 157 ---
TANTRASARA 
147 
its purpose. is indeed independent. If the descent of grace were 
dependent on bad or good deeds, or restrictive causal laws (niyati), 
then it would be nothing but the function of veiling belonging to 
the Lord (tirobhava). 
fc=mmcr 
~, fc=m men f6 
CPlif~ ~:'<St Al g mff 1fQ45M : , 
~wf%" -
~Cf>l~l~ICi~kl ~~sfq li<t>CICi._ ~~ ~ 
q st<t>dt:Gi 
H.-c\Ri, c=rw ~G;1sfq ~~~ 
J:J~1'<1ITTTfCRPt ~?<:if<""(, ffim, ~w 
q ~ 
~~~ 
T¢t5l'i A I a 11 fq ~~ 
m~ ~ 
c=rw 3-IB:l ~~~' 
m "Q R~i:t H 1 - T~C§:l£1'<01{<)q<"Q1c=t ~ 
q c=m-cr fQ~1~·AHC"Qlq "(!;:f 
~: 'f!5l s:Jl § q ~- Fl A J J1 ('i Fa ' ;:r ~ 3 c=q ;:i ~I f m q I Ci ~ fc=R1 mcflsf"ttr' 3f?ITfq q 
ct>J:Jfuq a1T - crdaa, ~~' 
<"1?11 fq q $il91~ ru~ lq l:!Ci~gs:i l?ll 4<Jo:llJ<:i~:'<St 
Cf5 M c=d en cft &11 fi i:i <'i =a <'if lJ<">tl Cl ll ~ 
1 a.1 ~ ci 1 R .-c\"il ii <:l ~Him H 1 flH~ 1 ~ 
$m1~fa?<0:11c=t fc=m~sfq ~en 
~1Rbq1a.-i qJ\Qa, lfffi err~ 
Cf241Jj):;@;::i, ~ 
45acp~~1fi'1c=d fetlc-AR ~trfl~~l!Cf, ~;:r 
~5<"1A le-A 1;::1 4~~ fl I 
<:TW Fl'< J f M ~I c-J:J fCt I Ci ""'A I <""Y '<A~ I 
3"11 m 1 a~ ffi 31 U"lli c=rw fu q OJ)<:i 1 ct f4 1 1 
3"i ~ C!c§:Sfq en ~ 
fCt f~ ~C§:q ct I "ci {Ci, I 
~ 
~Wc=r en msti ~1Rtsq1a1s;:rQa:rep: 11 
~ 
m~l(""ll"cilUfcm'~ ci~til{ efmYICi~Cf>l~l;:j ;:rm 
l2Cbltl~IAI~ 11 
'Veiling' or tirobhava is indeed dependent on deeds. and it can 
create such a situation as making one experience intense unhap-
piness and delusion. For instance, because of the free will of the 
light (prakasasvatantr.w1ll). a perfectly enlightened person can 
behave I i k e he is tr u 1 y fo o Ii sh and then b 1 am e that behavior on 
being foolish at heart. Similarly, a foolish person can imitate the 
behavior of an enlightened one, such as usage of the mantra in 
worship, etc., and then blame it (on the behavior of an enlightened 
one). However, compared to an enlightened one, the activities per-

--- PAGE 158 ---
148 
TANTRASARA 
formed by a dullard, suited to an unenlightened one. although 
performed, decline and finally end. The activity of an enlightened 
one, being blamed as a forbidden behavior, makes the unenlight-
ened become doubtful of his potency. which is the functioning of 
the 'power of veiling' (tirobhavasakti). This causes an enlightened 
one to sink into the morass of delusion. 
This veiling has no effect on a person upon whom grace has 
fallen. In this instance, as in the previous example, it is not depen-
dent on deeds. In all of the following cases, because of the diver-
sity of the will of the Lord, tirobhava persists: it results in suffer-
ing to be experienced only in this body; or in initiation followed 
by practice according to convention, such as serving a teacher, a 
deity, or sacrificial fire; or finding fault with them, like those 
engaged in service or blame; or like those who were engaged in a 
doctrinal order of Siva, and who later abandon it. Even in these 
examples of being influenced by tirobhava, one may himself 
receive the descent of grace as a result of the wonderful manifes-
tation of Lord's will, or one may receive grace even after death 
through his teacher or relative. Thus, one is the sharer of the five 
functions of the Lord coherently united in one's own self. There-
fore, he is none other but Paramesvara and should not think of 
himself as being separate from him. 
The Lord, who by nature is without any veil, covers his 
nature of light by his freedom of will; in the same way 
he unfolds it as well. In the domain of his non-enlight-
ened state, he behaves 1 ike an enlightened one and later 
wakes up. The nature of the descent of grace is to be 
independent. 
Chapter Twelve 
err anfct a') 
c{ff)~ '1 ~ 
~, err a1 I fCI fl q R fl q a II cl ~ 
Cffifcd 
AHJ:t3qfu~~<i I BFfq~:w:ffi, ~~q~~{fCl'{C)YfP=tld~I:

--- PAGE 159 ---
TANTRASARA 
149 
1 crnc:btX:l P 1+=11 IB- ~f~, dilCj)csci -a cm~sfq :wfRq'l"l lq{Clq Hi'< 
~qf1""11f~ I c=rfzy; fCICi-=?1H;;::c;:fo4=11?1fll{ 
~lc:-AR fu~ err 
ac;:;;q'{C)qf"iaC1ri1f~ ~~. m -a ~~'<qflJ:J1~m-~ ~q1§Jci, 
msfq di'R'i~ ~c;fu cifflc=(, dJ~lfq 341~1;a'<Jj)~aTI I ~ 
u 
l!CPf~*~;::r f"t +=1'tt1&:i'tt1a~1 d"q fo ct ~~ 
cnc:: 1 ru ct -a, c=rw 
3-IT~~: faf'~ ~G:: I ~ u 3f1SGW-fea fc-i J1fl4 q "i §)Ci I~ I "i I CB I~ I fl 
~~ 
fc-+:t '{C) q I ~ ~ 
~fc:f~ J:J ""?! ;;q I fl J:J f% Y I ~~'<{Cl 4 Ci <:11 'ii I fa Ci I 'tj) 
Ci IC:: I c-~ ;::r 
-a-
~~ ~ 
.QcH: fl J:J I~ ·~if)-'{ I fu fd ~-:ff: :J Ci ;;q f<'l I fq 
~ 
.9d { f"t +:j I a "ffifl-f 
"C(""I: I 
di~ I fq 
~ 
f'i H q f51 I f qf"t:G J1 '""I Cf) fQ I a, 
~m 
q 1 <Si a 1 il atfu , Tf5 -a ~ 
J:J c:: H ;;::c;: 1 c:.1- qfc:r: 3i 1 lLl 1 <:11 cfi<f Ji Mc: 161 
cx:rrf"C(""I: ~ftSG f"t I +:j &f ~ 
R-t fl I J:J ~+=( 3l~~JJJ $ ~ 
(i IR cl11 ~\L~ q)fl IR -
"Cl~ ~~ ~a 
'R'i +=1 ;;;51 'R'i a =a ~q u 1Rcq1 a, 1 cfi~~ ~ f~~, c=ruw 
- ~OJ:= err~ 
+=1~1+=1{)ct m~~ 
~J:J~11"i"i'Ji: %m-gcTI -a~1Ct.>13Wm 
RfcfdifYd5: I "c:!~ ~~;a-<:al fucq~, ~{iYlf<'lA""?l<ilC::lc:-~~ 
a 4=1 lfl ~ 
(f?f <l?f Pi J:J JJ1 ;:i ~ $~ft)~ 1 ~~ 
3i 1 '""1 ~~oct cn~URTfff 
RfT a=rul;::r ~I Cl J:J ~l ~ 
~ 
J:J ""?! "ci ct5ll~, c=rc=r: ~ 
tl 6 s:l I all~~ 
tlqf1l"ci¢t>Cicfo1~ ~ 
~~ 
fiH~ I 3iT~ z.rw - <itlCb!:'<lfu{ClqUl'<Ol<:ll 
CT?r <l?f qrf tlcrrGt ~ 
Ci ;:s:i ~l mer: I 
~~{Cl fl J:J JJ1 "i -
~ 
"fi°R z:rw ~ <i <iG:q fci I 
~mtti"fi"R 
;::r ~'!O..~ Jj)4 "ci I {<i: fc5 ~ I I 
q '( +:j I ;:i ;;::c;: R J:J JJI OJ) 
~~WIUJI 
~ 
~1ru1a-<:fu 
fuuJ) ~ 
~ 3:rcrrrut I I 
~ .sffi+:t G: I £l I~ fH-Frcr~((lfCRf~ ma""?! fl I { 
'Fl H s:i Cf5 I~ H ~ 
mc:~1J:J1f~ 119~11

--- PAGE 160 ---
150 
TANTRASARA 
It has been indicated earlier that initiation, rituals, and other 
related matters should be discussed. Therefore, for the purpose of 
determining the real character of initiation, the duties preliminary 
to it will be presented. 
Bathing (snclna) is said to be purity, and purity should 
be understood as absorption into the pure essence of the great 
Lord (Paramesvara). Removal of impurity is indeed purification. 
Although identical with the innermost nature, impurity is errone-
ously regarded as being associated with characteristics extrane-
ous to it. For example, the conviction that the innermost nature, 
although present in the Self as well as in the universe, which is 
in essence perfectly free, blissful, and is consciousness alone, is 
negated when it is associated with characteristics different from 
consciousness. This erroneous notion is called impurity, which is 
removed by means of absorption into the great Bhairava. 
In some, this absorption occurs instantaneously, while oth-
ers require a means (upaya) for attaining it. This division of the 
means in regard to different people may vary as one, two, three, or 
they may be taken as a whole, or individually. This absorption can 
happen to any individual, anywhere and at any time. In this way. 
the division of the means becomes diversified based on the attain-
ment of the firm conviction (tisvasa) in the nature of reality on the 
part of a practitioner. 
. Furthermore, this absorption is eightfold. By means of medita-
tion on the very nature of Paramesvara, and by the power of the 
placement of the mantras (nytisa) in the eightfold form of Siva, 
i.e., the earth, water, air, fire, ether, moon, sun, and the self 
(titma), and in one's own body by gaining identity with it. one 
becomes firmly absorbed in Paramesvara. In this way, a 1 imited 
soul, which functions differently as a body, etc., attains absorp-
tion in the Lord. 
But to some (for those whose conviction is not as firm) bathing 
and putting on fresh clothing cause satisfaction. Therefore, they 
are r;garded as the means for attaining Paramesvara. It is said in 
the Srimadananda Tantra and similar texts that support, nour-

--- PAGE 161 ---
TANTRASARA 
151 
ishment, invigoration, burning of impurities, pervasion, capac-
ity of creating, the capacity of maintenance, and nonduality are 
the principal results. The mantra as a unifying element assumes 
the form of this eightfold division mentioned before. However, in 
regard to the vlras, 185 they assume a specific nature; they are as 
follows: the dust emerging out of the union (ranare~zu), the water 
of the vira, the great air. the ashes of the vira, the sky above the 
funeral ground, the moon and the sun as connected with the previ-
ous two, and the self free from thought constructs. 
This bathing, with variations of external and internal, is of 
two types. 186 The external form is performed by attaining identity 
with the mantra, and when this is attained, one is to be dissolved 
into Siva. 187 However, its particular form is carried out by means 
of looking at the delightful substance (wine) in a vessel used by 
viras and having made it of the nature of Siva, one should worship 
the host of mantras in that very vessel. Then the 'wheel of deities' 
who are abiding in both body and prti~za should be worshipped 
by that very substance. This is known as the principal bath. The 
inner bath is performed by means of concentration of the mind ?Y 
the respective forms of dlulra~zti in the center of the earth. etc., m 
order to become identical with that wheel of deities. 
Immersion into the very nature of the Lord is called 
bath. When this is correctly performed, only then does 
an external bath becomes a ritual bath. The external 
form of the bath is called a ritual bath only in the sec-
ondary sense.

--- PAGE 162 ---
152 
TANTRASARA 
~ UI f'+:f d5 I u Ii , +fl =c:t§dW ~ 3fwf#d5Iu11 '"t, 
q cf a I~ I ct .!?Jd5 I ""fl c=ci '1 
fufilqqfo:<i'<ICi ~epl-~qac=aA ~ 
I m ~llllJ~I~ ef~cr fillil:r:<:i;;qlff 
~. ~= ~a. c=rrn ~-g 
1 -tr -~ -t:f5-ID , ID -3-TI -a=r --ITT ~crat 
~1fffi~1fffiAg:iikf>lmT AlfrFil~l&:'<l~IA;:;;iil~, cdb.:la 3ITCft ~ 
C1c1: 
WmAIRRi, ~ 
q1a1~1fu:ros~. ~n5t ~ ~ 
fq-q-d<:r: I Blf~ 
w wrcrffi ~~ wffi ~ Jl J1 ~1 R ti$" fi A +ci Cf) I A <1Ul=l I ~2,f 
£la ;:i I A N!:~ I ftt>A I f1 I fm:tmr ~11 ef 
"&Rlr fi fi I'< f m~ 
~I'<"""! I cttrBU 
fuf~ eawRun a I ;:i I a I ;:i ~I Rbqmr ~ 
"{ -ff -m°{a:> <""Cl 'fJi ci : I 31c1 gq IB 
~om- 1=Mf l! Ci #Q I fl I fl wff ~ 
fi 15\J"l "il sfLr l I I{) 5 ~ &JI a I fG: r;f '{53T 
~ 
~ m 
arn°fil m:ffi1 I 
Chapter Thirteen 
After the ritual bath, one should proceed toward the place of wor-
ship in a delightful mood. 188 The place of worship is where heart 
becomes filled with satisfaction and is well suited for the absorp-
tion into Paramesvara. 189 The place of worship does not have any 
other characteristics. If any other characteristic is mentioned, it is 
given only because it is instrumental in granting identification with 
the object of meditation, which is attained because of mental tran-
quility. Therefore, there is no place similar to a place of worship. 
The sacred spot (pifha), the mountaintop, etc., taught in the 
sastras as places of worship should be known as supporting this 
description. The energies (5aktis), possessing the state of absorp-
tion into Paramesvara and in accordance with his restrictive 
energy (niyati). incarnate themselves at the various sacred places. 
like the regions inhabited by the Aryans 190 of good moral conduct. 
and also the regions of barbarians prone to immorality. The moun-
taintops and other similar places are conducive to concentration 
because of being isolated (solitary) and free from distraction. 
Then, while standing outside, in front of the temple, the aspi-
rant should 'place syllables' (nyasa) in a general way. first in the 
fingers and then in the limbs of his body. This should be done with

--- PAGE 163 ---
TANTRASARA 
153 
two combinations of mantras: 'hrl171,' 'nm7z,' 'plzm71,' 'lzrl17z'; and 
'lzrl171,' 'a,' 'k~rn,' 'hrll11' indicative of Siva and Sakti, which are the 
mantras of the ma lin land matrka orders. If this 'placement of man-
tras' (nyasa) is done with only one of these two, then it should first 
be performed with malinl, followed by matrka. If nyasa is done 
for the purpose of attaining mok:;a, then it should be done from the 
feet al I way to the top of the head. However, if enjoyment (blzoga) is 
the objective, then it should be done in reverse. The goddess malinl 
is the principal form of sakti which, because of the close union 
of vowels (bljas) and consonants (yonis), is capable of fulfilling 
all sorts of desires. Her name is aptly significant. She is adorned 
with a garland of rudrasaktis blossoming in fruits. She is the hum-
ming bee of sound (nada), capable of dissolving the ice of worldly 
existence. She bears both spiritual perfection (siddlzi) and libera-
tion (mok!fa). She is associated with both the saktis of offering and 
accepting, for the syllables "ya" and "ra" are identical, according 
to Par)ini. Therefore, even the application of the mantra, which has 
lost its traditional procedure, becomes perfect (comes to its fruition) 
by the power of placement of mtilinl. Impure Garuc)a and Vai~l)ava 
mantras bestow I iberation after becoming pure (by its efficacy). 
<h~~lf"l H;::c=f'<:J:t 3:rtltitl ~ 
~ 
I ~ IB fct5~1Cf51'<Cf51Uli ~.oc 
m*rn"(f(lff1ct1ct0~ ~Jfff~ 3ctlt:<'<uncpm, rn -a- ~Cf5l'<Cf51011So\ 
~ ~9dflmcr:, 
<f?r 
~T~ ~~lqlG:HCf5'{01~~­
"ffi~f~~lf"ll~ ~<!t:<;;Qlfllfl, 
l'11~f<:i 
~~T"l:llfll<i, 
I t!ci f¢t5l:il¢f5i1UTT"fq ~~cp<iflJ:ifciCf51'<d5: ~q- ~ ~~ 
~ 
-fu;:rrfq ~'© $11 ~ dl m'R:lt ~ 
m QQ irafu 
1 l!Cn=\ mfW; 
~ 
1;!R1~qffi: ~Jff~ fil~~f~ l'11Jlfll{ 
~l:l:Tifu -a- m~ 
1 c=rc=r: ~~ 1i:io5fi ~m -& m 3TI-<S11§JqRa1'<1l'1 ~ ~ 
~~~ 1 c=rc=n-
~ 
3-TI-~CICilcictill:i ~ ~ 
~~~ I 3ill~ °C1 W~ 
°fffu m~ 
i:iosftf4fosM~ t!cr <Sil§JqRa1'<m'<aaa1a~ctJli "ctcITffi -a-
;;qlfll~ wufc=(, ~ fil-g: I rn=ITsfq ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ 
3"1f51J1cag)&f efa-iu:r 
fq&i1~qf"t 1fW"Fl ~ 
~ 
m~ 
~WaRUT~ ~ 
3"1f~

--- PAGE 164 ---
154 
TANTRASARA 
lillll!~ ~I 
After the placement of syllables (nyasa) upon the body, the 
placement is to be done on the sacrificial vessel (arghaptitra) for 
the ritual. In this system, the activities performed in the ritual form 
of worship involving verbs and grammatical cases (ktirakas)'
91 for 
the purpose of steady realization of identification with the Lord 
have been given as an example.192 Here in the sacrificial vessel 
(arghaptitra)
193 all the cases thus become one with the Lord. 
By following the order of ritual activities in this way, all the 
(grammatical) cases are transformed into the Lord· 194 When all 
these activities are seen, with this insight. even without taking 
recourse to the principal form of knowledge or yoga, one becomes 
united with the Lord. 
Th~s, .placi~g syllables (nyasa) on the vessel for rit.uals an~ 
worshippmg with flowers, incense, etc .. one should sprinkle th 
flowers, the essence of the ritual, with smal I drops of water from 
the vessel to consecrate them. Then in the orb of I ight, on the 
?roun~'. or in th~ void, one should worship the family of attend
1
-
rn~ ?eities, uttermg this mantra: "I pay obeisance to the externa 
deities of the main deity" (au111 bahyapa riwl ra_va na ma ~z). Th~n. 
at the door [of the place of the sacrifice] one should worship with 
mantra thus: "I pay my obeisance to the host of deities abiding at 
the doo " ( 
-
r 
awn dvara devatacakraya namah). 
If the external place is not a sacred one, then entering at the 
front diagram (nza~1¢ala) and the altar, one should worship the 
external deities of the family and the host of deities abiding at the 
door. and should perform the placement of the above-mentioned 
syllables, etc. This should be done inside the place of worship and 
not outside. Then uttering the mantra 'pilaf' three times with a 
flower in his hand, and energizing them with mantra 'phaf, · ~e 
should throw the flowers in the northeastern direction, and while 
conceiving all the obstacles (as being) removed, should enter in 
front of the ma~¢ala and should look on al I the sides of the temple 
kindled with rays of the light belonging to the Lord.

--- PAGE 165 ---
TANTRASARA 
155 
C1?r 
~~~'<i"fH:lf~~'fci~q_, <:fW 
ip1C1G:Ul'<ciJ1fll ~~ 
l<j)t:G q I ~ ll 
~(""( I (f?f qz4 ,QcH ~ 
k1 :r?li iJ C1 
~h"l I fl "i \Cl I fd:fb C""C1 A,_ 
3-lCf~ 1 'f! ~ fu 
1 
(f?f fa okts 1~1 
1!C1" l=fm , oo $a'< s:i fcrmm'!~=, 
~Chl~l~lCPTci~~l=l, 31ClW~ 310:, ~Cf51~H*1Jj)cir;:f ~~, ~ 
~ 
' ajn-00 cu Ci l>'i Cf) I~ I ("Cf I a 
34 "i ;:a;;( a~ Cf) I~ I~ 
efa.-run:r 
' 
-~ 
"'~ 
' 
' 
34 11~ Ck'l 1 fl ' Ci Ri Jj)'&i CI 3-TQ~ I ~ 
C""C1 I fl ~' #cl ra ct=c:hj)lSCbit I C1?r l=fm 
ip I C1 1 'i, 3'tif S~ -Q"WFf ~, 
310: q I a I fl C1 ct"SJi.., lfCI f fu raCfci Cj)~ ~ 
J){) ti I Ul '< fi 'lll Cl I J4 I 'L~ +i,, ftl Cfci Cj)~m 3Fm~ 
- ¢ct "fi"fu '4"i f% tJ Cf 
~cpc=f f-crr*cf ~ I 'fl~ R-1 , ~ 
~ 
;:r fffQ I T"fl '< '"l I <:fW <:fW -a- ~ 
a5J I \Cl I 
fl~·fuCj)+:J, ~ 
~ 
~ 
~ ~ 
<1W ~~wa1ilfd "frcfffutX'51Q:2lC1 
m~ 
~mi=( I {!Cf <:fW ~JICll'4_ fefrcr~IJICf51'f) c=rw ~<:ffsfq, 
"ff IB ~~q 
$1l'""1~1fffi"f~~ ~~,~~a~ 
~err mcr-a-
c=rw ~Cf, l!Cf fCI 1 c-+i I til-;:ffiq ~ 
*1 'j)~~ ~~ 
~'< «11 fQ I C-t I °C!Ci "fa" 
~z:f~W?IC1"4cm ~ I Cl '""1 \Cl I fu Cfci a f#c=r ~"C(ll]~ I "(!Ci fu.rcf 
~~ 
3qfd~~ d:gY)UtGCf51G.13"fi~IC1C-lWl"i ~ 
~ 
"ff"Rmcffe.r 
~~ 
-
~gC""C11a,, ClcTI Rta'<~·~"ct"UIA{C)ct>~ ef~~IC\Cllft m 
fQ)"ff 3-TIW '{:q ~Cf) C1 I ~q llrn:' ~G"R "\Cl"Wqfu t:G \Cl I Yl'i a C1 a I "ci ct")~ I fl : I 
m~-;::r -a~ ~1mm \Cl 1Jei 1:-ac;:1ft"iC""C1lfl ~JIC1;:jC11c-s:i1c:fl;:rt ~er -a-
~JeiC""Cl lft, ~ 
l1"'{Cf: I C1?r ""ci" qx:r ~ 
J11~G:ltll:, ~-a- Jq~ 
~ 
"fQ~IClct~ll ~~um, -~ 
mG;T ~~I 
ITT Cf51'{01Hi ~c;:r 
~'<ia~lfictlR?ICl~lfffi{C)q101i ~CPB 3ifUt56Hlft efsci~lflfQCtsC'ilYffi 
f'--lv.J,,b 
' 
' 
C11 fffietsffn~l ffi of~ ~~gl'<Cf5il c;:q-ciT<:lf~ crof("C1 lft, ~mer:~ l!C1c"l 
3"HCICBl~l+i, I ~: 
'3"1ci'{~·{C)<t,1 ~ 
~~ fu5 ~f~T<:llfllfu";rr' 
~ 
I ~ 
IB CiC!(.4'{~: ~~= ~ 
~lc-s:if;::r 31Cfmf~ft:G*1gl'{I 
°itfa?l'iCbllc I ~ 
~~fld"S\Cllll~ ~~~(f ~~~ 
mcrf~ ~'<~: -q;"B:Tq,_qc:rcfUfTtl<:f~~ ~:s:m-"fl I Cf?f "ffil"{ mu1 
fuf0f -a ~~UT 
~C'i I 65F<:i I *1 g)')\Cl f c=t I ("R:f[IT - 3:rT~ffillR "'tfl, 
~ 
3-Tflt C1 'fl 1 '<a,, ffiR;i Cf) 1.-a , Cf)fl 1a-c-c:t1 ;:a1 ~, s:i 1\Cl1 ,s:i CB~ m~, 
~ftsCP CB I c-+i I ~~ 
'll I q cti , ~q ~wq~ 
g I'< Cf5: "ff t!Q Ag I~ Ci : - ~UT

--- PAGE 166 ---
156 
TANTRASARA 
c1l;:oifdl<"1 mum m~;:r amc-Ad5a-g~ ~lctll=l~lfc-Ad5C"dl-c,d, ~I 
cnn~ ~UB'J~~ '"i I ct I Tf1 cffi=fvrfnsd:i I ftr-;fifi A '"i I '{<)q A'< I 
~ 
~Cf5FR, %qft ~(tqcq?i~JO{ :ffi;::s:Hfll"{, l!c=ff~ fu~ *-e: 
3ffi1-;ft-~~ 3-lfu tS() I C"J:Ci ~I ~I q d5cma;:r 
31f~(:f~ill (:f~in=rill a-crni" 
ffifYfofdl "lfC1 acr ~~~;:r 
fq~mqcfut ~CT ~JFT ~ 
~mr;:f a~ 
I ;:j ~ 
(fwfuUI Tf1 : q '<I A~ f fl CS!' I cH I ct I :r:c!.l r;;:f "fl" JJtr:, 
~ 
"ff~tlY'<IA~f~A>li;s\A6lfl\JHil (f~l<SlC'ildoC1 fu~kJ:ilCf5'<:Uj "fl"~, 
~ 
cpc=ciT q Rct I { 00 ~ 
<Sl ~'(I ~1 Fcf '<4)1 fM l I ~·Ci fl ~I C"d I <"1 ~ 
CJ\J"I ~ <t I 
ma~11;:arndmrt~~~ 
1 
a 
cfl "a ct'5 p;p i C"'lfffi ct'5 A : '<5l a '<: <"1 i ~ 
I I 
~TUl'<lff\C11SlG,d51""C""l~l A I~ ICJ\'<:O 11 FfACf51 
:t@=a •fl cl \13H=i "a I'< f ~'R:ft '<511 'i <"11 ~ H I fl I I 
A person desiring liberation should sit facing north so that all 
of his bonds may quickly be burnt by the flame of the fire emanat-
ing from the Lord Aghora. Regarding the notion of spatial direc-
tion (dik), it is stated that the Lord's freedom, by which the forms 
(milrtis) [of the spatial directions] are made manifest. is the very 
principle of the spatial direction. The manifestation of conscious-
ness itself is the center (madhya), because all the different mani-
festations of directions make their appearance from that center. 
The direction of 'above' is the region which is appropriated by the 
light, but the direction which is not so (i.e., 'below') is the 'nether' 
region. The 'east' is that which remains in front of that I ight. The 
direction different from it is the 'west' because the 'east' receives 
the light facing it. The 'south' is the direction towards which the 
currents of light ascend. It is called 'south' (dak~i~w) because of 
its agreeableness. The direction facing it is the 'north' because it is 
the region to be illuminated. This is the description of the fourfold 
directions. 
There in the center exists the Lord, his face called Isanais in 
the upper region. and below is his nether face. In the four quarters 
beginning with east. etc .. his faces, cal led Sri Tatpuru~a. Aghora.

--- PAGE 167 ---
TANTRASARA 
157 
Sadyojata, and Vamadeva, are located. In the middle of the above 
four directions, there are located four other directions. Thus, it is 
because of greatness of consciousness that the directions are mani-
fested, which are caused by the forms.1 95 For this reason, direction 
is not a separate principle (tattva); just as when one wants to cross 
over one's own shadow, it (the shadow) always remains in front. In 
this same way, the Lord always remains in the center. It has been 
stated that superior to all is the state of being in the center. Thus, 
as the Lord is the agent causing the division of directions, so also 
is the sun. It has been stated in different texts that the sun indeed 
is the Lord's power of knowledge Uiitinasakti). 
The east is that where the manifestation of light first occurs. 
Where manifestation occurs, it (the east) is definitely there. 
Although the directions, such as east, etc., are dependent on the 
self, i.e., are subjective, the region that remains in the front of 
a person is (always) east. Thus, the determination of direction 
should be accomplished by bringing the self, the sun, and the L?rd 
into one single concept. This is the knowledge regarding direction 
as thought by Abhinavagupta's teachers. 
This being the case, one should sit facing north, and by aban-
doning a sense of egoism (alza111blzava), one should burn ~he 
egoism of possessing a body in both the gross and subtle bodi.es. 
Though the body still exists, it should be looked at as the bodi.es 
of others, for the Self is without a body. Then one who is steadily 
es ta bl ished in the tranquil and unchanging abode has a natur~l 
inclination towards creativity. The first vibrative fractional umt 
of it is indeed the arising of form (miirti). Conceiving thus, one 
should install on that form (miirti) the host of divinities that are 
worshipped, as it was prescribed before. Principally, the saktis 
should he worshipped, for they are the seats of the nine-formed 
energy belonging to the Lord. This is the view of our teachers. 
There are five states beginning with waking, etc., but the sixth 
is called anuttara, the 'innate state' (svabhava da§a), which is to 
be conceived as uniting all. Therefore, placement (nyasa) should 
be sixfold (upon the six cakras). In these different cakras. Brahma,

--- PAGE 168 ---
158 
TANTRASARA 
Vi~.Q.U, Rudra, Isvara, Sadasiva, and Sakti, the causal deities, are 
abiding steadily in the host of thirty-six tattvas, separately in 
each. By the application of nyasa, one attains the fullness of Lord 
Bhairava, who transcends the phenomenal principles. In this way, 
the state of Bhairava becomes manifest. Therefore. in the case of 
those who have attained the state of identity with Bhairava, the 
performance of nyasa, etc., is meaningless. For those who are 
established in the tranquil state, what could be the utility of creat-
ing principles, nyasa, etc.? In reply to this, we say that the tran-
quil state of the body of Bhairava is so vast that he is the final 
terminating point in whose own nature the diversity of manifesta-
tions, dissolution, and creation remains manifest. 
Thus, by means of the mutual union of the two. and by meditat-
ing on the vital air, body, intellect, etc .. which have become trans;. 
formed into the Lord himself, one should worship both ("both 
refe~s to the union of the pra~za and Bhairava, the intellect a~d 
Bhairava, the body and Bhairava) externally and internally wi~h 
flowers, incense, libations, etc., for as long as possible. Then Ill 
the body, in the vital energy and in the intellect, one should install 
the trident with the lotus accordingly. 
This is as follows: 196 the root of the staff should reach the root 
of the 'basic power' (adharaiakti). 197 The bulb is perfectly pure. 
having solidity in the interior (with the capacity to hold all): the 
~taff goes up to the roof of the pa late, where the opening ex is ts· It 
includes all the principles ending in kala. It is named ananta · Th~ 
~not above it is characterized by mayti; the lotus of pure vi~ya 
is the quadrangular bedstead. It is there that the Lord Sadas1va 
abides. He himself is the great corpse (malzapreta). He is called 
mahapreta because everything finds the excellence of rest there. 
and because He is predominantly of the nature of consciousness, 
due to the absence of a body in the form of knowable objects, and 
because of being characterized by the cognition of nada. Emerg~ 
ing from his navel and penetrating through the three openings of 
his head are three prongs representing sakti, vyapini, and samana. 
above ntidanta and at the end of twelve. Above them exist three

--- PAGE 169 ---
TANTRASARA 
159 
lotuses with the nature of unmana. One should make this differ-
ence the seat of an all-pervasive superintending agent, so that it 
may become one's basis. Then the desired deity should be con-
ceived as abiding there. The offering of the entire being to that, 
which is the very essence of all entities, is called worship (puja). 
That, which brings about absorption into it, is known as medita-
tion (dhyti na). The inner reflection of that, of nature existing in 
the form of the primal sound (ntida), continuously oscillating, is 
the repetition of mantra Uapa). Following the order of cognition 
of this very type, by whose force the great fire has been awakened, 
and which has brought the entire universe to identity with one's 
own Self (visviitmikara~zam), is known as lzoma. After perform-
ing that, one should meditate on all the attending deities as arising 
from the mass of fire as its ignited sparks, and one should worship 
them in the above manner. 
Meditating on the trident from the root extending up to 
the end of twelve and resting at the top of the wheel of 
the goddess (devicakra), one who becomes free from 
sequence attains the state of wandering in the void of 
consciousness. 
From the base to the end of twelve, passing like a staff, 
this consciousness wandering through the void is char-
acterized hy its identification with the void beyond the 
void. This is indeed void because of wandering through 
the void, abiding in the void, and swallowing the nectar 
of the void. 
~ 
3•F-a l:l fl I li I ?I I a 
Cf Cl f(j)Ci : Cl') Ci CJ? ("Cl Ci I I f1 ("Cl Ci : Ci a I ~tel ffl I "Ci"wfLr 
Gfl~ ~ 
mTJ1scimct~IT"ill:l l!Cf, msfq "Ci"W ~~~ 
~ ~ 
~ 
~~ 
w~n:. "Ci"Cr~, f11 c=t ~~m 
-('1a~ffl1 ftr <'.! ~mfc= 
RTU HI l:l I ;'.("1 l:l fn: - Ci d'{<)<t> I Cl fq ~(f)ftfoiftffl ~fe§:!>'idc=ct ICi, I 3l~ ml" 
cftan faCB1&c=t ~ci1f"t~1~ ~~qR~~, nuT~, ~=~Jrt, 
~5M 
1a;:f. ~ 
-a wm"f( , ~fBRid5l'1l~ ~5C11~clT=iBCl~

--- PAGE 170 ---
160 
TANTRASARA 
~ I (l?I" 3rf~ ~l&Q~ fif{!')C""l~mill~ ~axurf+:ra 
a:;aHi, a-~ crnfcxn;:p'<§l0:Hi1§01J:J, w~~§OIJ:J 1 3qd){Ol~Ci'i101i 
-~ 
' 
' 
' 
ll I JI JJ 61 ;a cffflc:rm 
~wRJ11-q-goT-;:r 'lJfT q '<: d5 a I lfl J ~ ci I cf urflifu 
I 
(l?I" f1cif4dJ'<01'{crT ~-g fum imcrill Bl-fc=Rt A 1aq')ct5i err ~ 
(1 g:of a JI: Y)5\5fITT«=f ~ 
~ 
~&:I I 5J1 ITT- f a:mc=( I C1("1" 3m I~ J1 ca I H 
-a~mi ~OFm8:1C""1MIJll<!lR c=fJil~ur fucmz:f l!~ fu:fu 
~ 
fiug~fl, ~ 
~R~§: I (1(1: ~J~fcm1Tf1Alf1;::j ~ 
J101qa: ~· 
00:~ 
311'iT<\~~iRa~ ~ 
i\Ji~fl. C1c=IT ~IJ\QAj~Jj ~a 
~~ ip;t ~ 
fufwraaxa-;:i- ~ 
~fl{~ 
1 a A Flc=f c=f-;:i- -ff 
~~ 
I fuallldJM~l fu&"f~IA~l\Q 3R5f l[\Ji~fl I 00: ~l&Q~ ~ 
cftfa=Rffa~31~(f)M~i~ 1 ~-a~~3"l1a<!1a1 c=ic=r:m 
1J644~~ fu&Nll"HI~ tlRT 4k1~"""Ci ~S~~ 
~ ~ 
~-
m ciTI: ~ 
(Q-aT ~ 
furn fu &=rn ~ 11 Tf1 ~ I 
"fiTCf~ CBAf"""Ci ~fuacct ~la 1$1~ I I I 
Thus, only by the inner form 198 of oblation is the attainment of 
the purpose really fulfilled, but in truth it is accomplished in one 
in whom the state of absorption has occurred. Even then. external 
rituals should be performed for the removal of 1 imitations. For the 
person who has not attained absorption of that nature, the exter-
nal form of ritual is the main form (of ritual practice). He attains 
absorption by practicing it. However, even for him, the inner form 
of ritual is essential for the removal of the state of the bonded 
soul (pa.fu). When the external form of ritual is not firmly estab-
lished in his essence, then because of the strength of his desire it 
becomes the giver of purity. 
When a person is desirous of receiving initiation, for the pur-
pose of consecration one should select a spot of land, then worship 
Ganefa and other Gods, worship the small jar and the big jar, wor-
ship the altar, and then perform oblation into the fire. Regarding 
indispensable observances (nitya). occasional observances (naim-
ittika), the worship of the altar, and oblation into the fire should 
be performed. Then, the ritual of the consecration of the disciple

--- PAGE 171 ---
TANTRASARA 
161 
is performed for the purpose of producing in him the capacity to 
receive the impression of purification. It is like making the teeth 
sour, that is, to prepare him to become inclined to the duty toward 
the Lord; and as regards the teacher, it is the acceptance of such 
a disciple. As regards the materials existing in the place of ritual, 
these should be conceived as worthy of becoming the right materi-
als for worship by energizing them with the nourishing energy of 
the Lord, and then offering them. 
Then, preparing this place of worship, abundant with all these 
materials, the worshipper calls to mind the goddess malini or 
matrka, and while throwing a handful of flowers to the deity, he 
should think of them as being filled with the light of rays of those 
syllables. Then, energizing white mustard, paddy, washed rice, 
fried rice, and so on with the mantra 'phaf' and conceiving them 
as flames of fire. one should throw them, beginning from the 
northeast, in a given order. This is the procedure for the selection 
of sacred spots. 
Then, offering a seat ending in pure vidya, one should perform 
the worship of Ganesa. Next, he should worship the well-deco-
rated jar. filled with the substance of delight (wine). Then. placing 
a betel nut (pllga) inside it, he should cal I to mind the root mantra 
in the prescribed procedure as superintending over all. and. the~ 
he should make the jar charged with the mantra by repeating it 
108 times. In the second jar, he should worship the mantra 'plz~!' 
for the pacification of obstacles. After that, he should worship 
the guardians of the quarters with their weapons in their respec-
tive quarters. Then, he should hand over the jar charged with the 
mantra to a disciple who has been initiated previously, and the 
teacher himself shou Id take up the jar (kumblza). Then. following 
the disciple, who goes on pouring water in an unbroken line (from 
the left of the kalasa) in order to pacify obstacles up to the end of 
the temple, the teacher recites the following mantra: 
0 Indra. in order to pacify obstacles in your direction. 
you should remain alert hy the order of Siva to the end 
of the ritual.

--- PAGE 172 ---
'rt ~ rg_ r~ f ~ r~ ! i -~ ~ I l ---~ rws "!? ~ l~ ~ 1 ~ t 
.~ ~ 5 ~ ~ i ~ re~ ~ ~ ~ .~ ~ <t1 ~ ~ ~ -, ~ ~ ~ i 
t>' l ~ 
~ 
t .. l tµ ~ 'S ~ ~ ~ ~ 
-
[ ~ 
~ ~ - i ~,~ , .~ .: 
~ 
~r Iii r~ ~ 
µ ~ g:' ~ s- "tE; fl;, 
-~· ~-, ~ t> if . ~ 1 
t:rG (, 1* ~ 
15 ~ . 
~ '5 
, 
~ 1 
~ " 
~ ~1 fSry 
~ 1 l Ir 
~ ' ~ i I 
l~ § ·1 t 'l ;; ~, g,·~ &ti;~~ t~ ,~ ~, ~ ~ 
: ~I~~ i f i' ~'~ill ~J 1 :ti!l!l~l/t

--- PAGE 173 ---
TANTRASARA 
163 
~"\1ct.-i~ I f~ 
~l~lfciJ\Jj)llGfll@cj ~ ~?<::iffl I cicklHIJi lJ6~1Ji 
Cl"W~ LJ:pildJlf11<i_ ~ 
~ 3~1'<llfl I~~ 
~l~lfu ~~I~ 
fqsf1:la M1fCf5c:b ct:>'ls1re C1c1 lJ){lfiRdt ~ d1<::ifa 1 ac;:~RHa101 ~ ~ 
' 
' 
~ 
' 
' 
3CT:P1Sf~f'~ ~"fl I ~?f ~IC§'lct1 l1~Cf ~\:rlll(\ I ™~-a- ~fm~ 
~11fctHl(~::nra~1~1:r:t,_ ~ ~ 
I qcff"a~IR ~\:rlllCi, I ~wlqlll'<tll10fe:cfW ~ 
~ 
~ ~?~f<t I L:!Cii:l§lfF'i~ C[dJllIB1@=41 ~~I 1{lcH1 lJe<llla 
~rnrfm mTt ~~ 
I 3-TWmrf~ c:hfbc=t ~wlqlcU Cii81f51<~)1q\gf11(\ 
71{<)cpfl"'i1fcr fl"'iJtct 
I ~ 
~ 3cmtt1~ ~ 
I ~ 
~ 
f1 A 1 a I'< A f1 ;:1 ~ a')~ fa , C1Ff ~ 
c::r2:l 1~1 RP cr;:n il a I ~ 1s·1 ~di a I ~ 
~ 
' 
' 
C\ 
' 
ct.> 
' 
~-13.-•HAIWlfufu~ J1"4=!cpci ~ ~asr:qlla, I 00~ ?FIB~~ 
3i 1 <::i a., a1 wru a1 
<S1 §>l=l 12l ~ q ~ il a, , Ji ;J)I ~Ci <::i J:t 3-H q "'a ~"fl, ~a 
~ltsell: ~ 
s;lOl+z:l 3-T~YllR::l ~ 
tHCil'<~lfl'<q4~<::il GJ&m" qf{al~ 
~fami~ cfT~wfddJli c=rcf~ I mfufcrftFIT -a- Jtf<l"cid1 M~ 
1 ~ 
f"IAlfl~ 1 ~~ 
Rfl:i~\:rll<::ii ~s~ 
3-rf~. 
~~Rich~~ lJ){lAct 3-Tmcl~, ~ 
t11J:1fucn'i fcrl'w1 
3-T~ HA IC1~ i:Ll t1Af(""IA~: 
~ 
fQ A I \A H Ji 2'l I a fll Cf<::i I 
q ~ ~ tl i~•:rn fu<::rr ff;:~ G, Cb-
q<:f~ ~~:~II 
~ m~ca 
Id 14fcref~ Ci r?1 t1 I { "fflifz:rtlt a-11 ~ Cf5 I~ I~ ;:ni:r 
?llllCi~ll=ll~ 119 ~ 11 
With the name having three syllables, the word "hey you" 
(blzoM is to he uttered once. Thus, going round from the east he 
should place the jar in the northeast corner, and the jar charged 
with the mantra should be placed on the scatterings (of the offer-
ings) to the right of the kumblza. Then, worship of both jars should 
be performed. After this, the worship of the Lord is performed at 
the altar. 
Then, conceiving the fire pit as the power of the Lord, and

--- PAGE 174 ---
164 
TANTRASARA 
kindling a fire, unifying it with the fire of consciousness ab~di~g 
in the core of the heart, while cognizing the mantra aloi;g with it, 
and conceiving the blazing fire as of the nature of Lord Siva, then 
placing malinl and matrka there one should satisfy the mantra 
with clarified butter and sesame ;eeds; sprinkling water from the 
water jar consecrates the sesame seeds and the clarified butter, 
and consecration of the large ladle and the short ladle is the gla~ce 
characterized by the nonduality of the Lord. Performing oblation 
according to one's capacity, he should place both ladles ... one above 
the o ... ther, mutually facing each other, representing Siva above 
and Sakti below. The worshipper should stand, placing the t~es 
of both his feet parallel and straight. Then. he should conceive 
that the full moon has arisen from the void abiding in the end of 
the twelve from which oozes out nectar. a~d that (th is nectar) is 
fa~ling on the ladle. He should go on reciting the 111antra, ending 
with vai~ad, and should remain standing until all the clarified but-
ter has been consumed. This final oblation satisfies all the host of 
mantras. 
Then, bringing caru (boiled rice to which clarified butter is 
added while cooking) that has been purified by the sprinkling of 
~ater and offering portions of it to the altar, the big jar. the small 
Jar, and into the fire, the teacher should keep one portion in order 
to offer it to the disciple. 
Next, the offering of the tooth-stick will be described. It should 
be thrown by the disciple. If it falls to the southeast, south. and 
southwest, or straight down, that is considered inauspicious. In. 
that case, oblation into the fire while uttering the 111antra ·plzar 
will remove the fault. 
The teacher should then make the disciple stand before the 
sacred diagram (mwz~ala) blindfolded, without agitation, in order 
for him to earn the right to have a glimpse of the mantra that he 
will receive in the future. Then, he should sit on his knees and 
throw a handful of flowers into the mandala. All at once, with the 
blindfold over his eyes being removed.°he sees the 111antra directly 
before him. because the means of knowledge. being graced by

--- PAGE 175 ---
TANTRASARA 
165 
the descent of sakti, allows him to perceive the mantra near and 
directly, and he becomes identical with it. The nearness of the 
mantra is directly perceived by those whose sense organs have 
been favored by the grace of sakti, but those possessed by demons 
see it with dread. 
Then the teacher, worshipping on the right palm of his hand the 
host of brilliantly blazing deities with his left hand, should place it 
on the top of the head, heart. and navel of the disciple, burning all 
the bonds of impurities. Then to the left of the disciple, worship-
ping the rejuvenating deity having a mild nature, he should pay 
obeisance to him; then, outside of the place of worship, he should 
present the offering of wine, meat, and water to the ghosts (bhiita) 
and the deities governing all the directions. Then he should purify 
himself by sipping water. Then, eating the boiled rice (caru) along 
with the disciple, the teacher should remain awake in the enlight-
ened state while maintaining the unity of his own self with the 
self of the disciple. In the morning, if the disciple tells him about 
dreams that he had during his sleep at night, the teacher should 
not give him an interpretation of these dreams at that time, as he 
could become doubtful and afraid of them. In order to relieve 
the disciple, the teacher should worship the deity with the man-
tra 'phaf.' Then, worshipping the Lord in the former manner and 
placing the disciple before the Lord, the teacher enters the body 
of the disciple through the channel of the vital energy, and should 
touch the disciple's six cardinal spots, i.e., the heart, the throat, 
the palate, the forehead, the aperture above the head, and the 'end 
of twelve' (dvadasanta). Thus touching the six causal deities, he 
should conceive eight purificatory rites in each of the superintend-
ing deities, and making the vital energy of the disciple rest for the 
moment in each spot, he should repeat this procedure. In this way, 
when forty-eight purificatory rites 199 are performed on a person, 
attainment of a portion of Rudra occurs in him, with the result 
that he becomes samayin. Then he should worship the mantra with 
flowers, etc. 
Then, the teacher should narrate the conventional rules for him

--- PAGE 176 ---
166 
TANTRASARA 
to follow. 200 One should show devotion to the spiritual guide in 
every way. The same devotion should be shown to the holy texts 
and to the deity. One should be disinclined to contrary schools 
of thought. One should see the son of the spiritual guide as one's 
own. The person who is related to him in connection with study of 
the text and the person who has been previously initiated should 
be looked upon with regard. For the purpose of paying rega~ds, 
one should not think of them as having been born of sexual union. 
It should be kept in mind that this does not come automatically. 
Barren women should not be looked down upon as the cause of 
hatred. The name of the deity, the name of the teacher, and the 
1~antra should not be uttered except during performance of the 
ntuals. One should not make use of the bed, etc. which has been 
used by the teacher. Wordly sports. whatever they may be, should 
not be done before the teacher. One should not regard others as 
superior to one's own teacher. On occasions such as ceremonial 
rites observed for a deceased person, only the spiritual guide is 
to be worshipped. During occasional rites, one should not utter 
the w~rd sakinl, etc. One should perform worship on the days 
of festivals. One should not associate closely with Va i ~1)avas and 
others who hold a lower view of the truth. One should not look at 
those belonging to this doctrine as being members of their former 
castes, but as being identical to Siva. 201 When the members of the 
teacher's family come to the house, one should perform sacrifices 
a~cor~ing to one's ability. A person belonging to a lower order 
of VaI~l)ava, etc., should be avoided, even though he has been 
made a teacher, owning to the desire of knowing their doctrines. 
Even so, he should not be looked upon as being superior to one's 
own teacher. One should not associate with Kapalikas, etc., and 
compare one's doctrines with theirs. One should worship in accor-
dance with one's own capacity. One should abandon all doubts. 
While sitting in the cakra, the divisions of younger and older. 
which occurred due to birth, should not be brought to mind. One 
should not regard temples and sacred places with greater estee~n 
than the body. One should keep the ultimate truth of the mantra in

--- PAGE 177 ---
TANTRASARA 
167 
mind continuously. 
Thus, listening to these conventional rules, and approaching 
the teacher, prostrating before him, propitiating him with money, 
one's wife, and even by one's person as his fee, one should then 
satisfy those who have previously been initiated, as well as those 
who are poor and helpless. Then, one should worship the milrti-
cakra in the foregoing manner. In this way, the disciple becomes 
the follower of conventional rules which lead him to the ultimate. 
One earns competency in the practice of mantra, daily rituals, in 
listening to a holy text, and in its study. In regard to occasional 
worship, only the teacher is to be prayed to. This concludes the 
instruction on the subject of conventional rules. 
After meditating on all the paths abiding in one's 
own Self, one should conceive one's self as being full. 
Therefore, with a look of grace, one should see the dis-
ciple's self pervaded up to the end of the twelve. In this 
way he becomes transformed into samayin. 
312.T u<j)cf~I~ l~d5JOt I 
31~ Y)?I CfStll arrfcffu: I ~ u fd 'fC"fi of: Ci~ I fll CB I Ci, 31cfm<:f: I m~ 
~ 
I f1 A UF:fi fufti cpc=q1 ~STif ~~ 
~ 
fl IJj)C:: I fu d1 ~ 
~q, 
(f5[ CSll§]q~ ~qCil"ci¢h u ef-g: ~~, c=fffi AU5Mlicfmil" 
Q~IChlUTTq 31R~ ~~ 
efs:ilictSAUT J101qfa l]~ ~~ 
~~ 
'let fa I~ f i mf-rr.ft~ CflTIT 9dff ea~ q IM u ~~ 
I <1'f 3ITffi ti lj)fa Ci I~ 
m 
~MJtC'ilfl ~~ 
fflCictS~MI~ flA'«"1'"\ 3lmFf ~ 
~, 
c=fffi 
+:rttm ~R 
liWl'<:l~i 'l-"!JlqCil mqzr~v.m ~~*1~, 
dlAl'<:l~i 
Cl"~ ~AG:4'<:1, cITa=JOll'<:l~i m4'<14'<1, effilUT ~~+:rm m4'<:14'<:1, CTTB 
~-Ali~ WAG:4{1, ~ ~ <::l"~ I "(!Cf ™~~t5C51q~ ~Jlq~I: 
"fRf ~ 
~ 
t56 HI fl ~ 
~ 
I c=fffi +:fW ~lCi AW I'< I~ i fl A 'Ri ad Ci l"ci ct') 
fflctS q I ft I f5I q 4~ 3-Tfci:i :::i a iicr ~~"fl CldftJ t5(5 HI fl "ffcf?f ~f~ I 
c=ra: ~ 
ct>M~l i:to5&1 ~ 
{ql,J:IR u 31*~~1a;:i~1 ~ 
31iflPd g)')~Yfl, (1(1: "CRB9ci-<:lg:<•Hflq~ g)c:q1ru;:i1 ru~lt:i'lJti <j)')~Yfl I

--- PAGE 178 ---
168 
TANTRASARA 
fc5~ - acfu1.:ta~qRg:af fch1~11wufd-<f%c-fl mmuR g?~fft 1 m=rfu 
fcffi ~ A~ I A 05f1 lm n ;:r ~ 
l!Q I ~ 
9-tl Jffcrc=IT f~~ I -Rsfir IB 
l!Q+=( 3=1;:w f51 Cir ~' ~ 
Cf) I '6 fU I Cf)Ci ~ I •rn ~ fa Fa Fc:f>ffl fl I 
Chapter Fourteen 
Now, the procedure of putraka 202 and other types of initiations 
will be elaborated. This is an elaborate procedure, and it should ?e 
properly understood by studying the Tantraloka; however, it will 
also be explained here. 
After completion of the procedure for attaining the status of 
samayin, one should perform rituals on the third day for all th~ 
deities in the sacred diagram (ma~1(iala), consisting of th.,e tn-
dent and the lotus. There, the external family (parivara)- 03 of 
th~ deities and the group of deities of the doors 204 should be w?r-
shipped outside. Then, to the east of the sacred diagram, begin-
ning from the northeast to the southeastern part of the ma~1(iafa, 
one should worship Ganefa the teacher the teacher's teacher, the 
. 
' 
, 
f 
gre~t-grand-teacher, the perfected teachers of the past. the host 0 
yogu~ls, the Goddess of Speech (VagISvarI), and the guardia~ of 
the field, in linear order. 205 After receiving the proper permiss~on 
from them, he should place the entire sixfold path there, beginmng 
from the root of the trident to the end of white lotus, and should 
then worship them. 
After this, in the middle trident on the middle prong, he 
s~ould worship the venerable goddes~ Sriparabhaqa~ika togeth~r 
with Lord Bhairava. On the left prong venerable Srimadapar~. 
and on the right prong venerable Sriparapara, together with Bhai-
rava, should be worshipped. On the right trident, occupying the 
middle p~ong is goddess Sriparapara, and on the left trident the 
goddess Srimadapara occupies the middle prong, and the other 
deities are to be placed accordingly. Thus, as the supreme God-
dess is predominant over all, everything attains fu 1 I ness becaus~ 
of that superiority. Then, in the middle prong of the middle tn-

--- PAGE 179 ---
TANTRASARA 
169 
dent, the entire group of deities, ending with their weapons (astra), 
the guardians of the quarters, should be worshipped, conceiving 
them as being identical with the supreme Goddess. It is because 
of her superiority over all that it is conceived that everything has 
been worshipped. After this, in the small jar, in the big jar, in 
the sacred diagram, in the fire, and in one's own self, these five 
substratums are to be unified with nonduality. Then he should 
perform the specific worship with flowers, etc., which were nour-
ished by the nectarine fluid of the supreme Lord's essence of non-
duality. Furthermore, one should fill the ritual ground with liba-
tions of water and materials for offering, free from any deceit 
regarding the spending of money. If the person lacks money, then 
the ritual called mahtima~z(lalayaga should not be performed. He 
should offer living animals. In this way, the animals also become 
recipients of grace. By doing this, one is showing compassion to 
the animal and should not have any doubt regarding the efficiency 
of animal sacrifices. 
Clc1Ts-tjf ~~ 
faM1~1fG:fw ~ 
~s~ ~ ~mcl 
CJ)') <Ji h=t, ~ ck"1 I a ¢h 
Ci g:q Li I m~, ~-;:n:fuSft ~~~, Clc1: ~ 
~ 
fa $"1 ~ ~f'~ 
;::i f"I A~ 
-lSfS~ l!\° ht 
3-i I c-'""11 ;i 
mcrf~ ~ 
~serf~ g? Li f fl 
1 ~ 
a=rcIT afTZrt Jff ci 4J: a{<) q 1 <:i 1 i:t 3-TU- c:f ~, 
rrcfim err efaq?R-i G:ifm~+:Jl•fli:t 3ffi ~ 
1 c=rwfcrti ~ 
mfmrf'C111~mf'am ~"&fffef~&i ~f"Jfff ~ 
fi'""l'tt1s:i~ ~ 
~~ 
I <1<1 ~ 
fa"cil{~c=(, mnml: ~tj -;:i- W~~. mu 3"llf1;:tJ:t'(Ulffl 
~fli~ 'i~~ cmfcx:n ~ 
~mim 
t ~ 
C1 ~~Q"ClTfr.:r~ 
ER t'{5 c=a A I ?I I Ci fuf~ I 31?1" -a "f"!Cf?r Cl I f1 ;:i I~~ 0 IJ~ Cf ~~ 
-
'""I """?I I 0 Ii 
' 
' 
Cl I fH I i11u-U";::r Ci"fl CTf5 I lf cnrf{ c-ct I C°t I 1!cf Cl I fH I~ G: '""I ifi W<:i" ~ 
{..ciCl '""I """?I 
q'<l'""l~ffcrm~UT f"IA~A~ ~~ 
ft!ICllE;:<:ii:tlCl;oi<:il W~~ I 1!cf 
~UT q I G: I~ tSO I Ci, 
~~fu 9:1G:~11 ;:a q lf ~ fCI k-+:J d ~ fCI I c-'""I i:lc1~1ft:r~fiq: 
~~Ci~ ffl ~I tSll ~ 3-lTfJRf ~Cf 3"l ;:i ;:a I ;:i ~ 
f1 '< fu fCI I Ci~ ~"flrt 
~m1$11""if¢5Li1~1fffif'-;:i-if-<f1'""1'tt1acia1-a2hmf1+:J'tt11~mB-
~ 
l=fl ?t 1 Cl~~~~~ I q A a 5 fl c=rwfu~c:Bt~ur NI~ 
c-'""I ;:i 1 ~ 
l!cffi~

--- PAGE 180 ---
170 
TANTRASARA 
fu>$11h4A1t11c:~1. ~ 
~~~sm mrm 
1 ~ 
~ 
milt:{%= 
~ 
CTffi mer "ff"ffl m°Dmr 3IB:r ~ 
acr fl A fC"1 C£l fC"1 C"1 ~ I W~ 
I ciG:~""fi{ ~l6lqf1~ ~~~ 
$1f2;fa ~ 
~C§:Ci~Al:i ~ 
~ 
ru ""fi ~a , -~ 
f1JOItaq1~1 rn Cl I F'Ji Cf) 1 <ft fill 
1 c=rc=r: ~ 
~ 
ma=rurrfw 
~ 
~31 ~ a, I "ci""ffis-r;# ~I~ t<:i fufti Cj? ~ f c:t' ~ 
q '< I A~ : 31 Jjjct5 flWj)cfJ 
~ 
mw:nfTi, ~ 
'fql~l;:ci ~raa=t=a ~ 
311!2)C""l~:, ~ 
~urf a16l5;ffi 
I ~ fo a I ""fi Ci fd ~1~' CTffi 41\Ji R ct>ht? if.> A UT ~If i2)f?1 : I m n d§l: 
ml"fWR" ~~tlB"Cm, ~CG:a"fQ~~tl~ 1 ~ 
11~ ma-rurrfw 
~JF!l=(, ~l5f ~~an I Z1?r actAHAcB crv:ff~ ~cf ~cxrcrj wl 
~mfu II 
3Rl: f1'1fcil~ 'fqfifli 
~~ "ffm fcril G:~J\~: I 
~I Gq ffl W 
~I a I Ci Ttf;:f 3111 
ciltdct5Cii filli:J~~~~ I I 
~q)~~~ 
afffl4"f~l'"F~rndl~ I 
<TICfffi fcr~ 
ci I a ct a 
~Idle-Ji~~~ 11 
~ sITT~ca I a 1 <lfcm'-wl Ci '":;;;>J fl I~ 1:!?1cPcft 8:1 I~ di I~ I ;:j ~ 
ci<j)c:f~IJOI I rnctS+:f_ I I 9 b' I I 
Then, propitiating Paramesvara with offering of sesame seeds 
mixed with clarified butter, he should place the animal before 
the fire for the offering of marrow into it. 20r, After this, he should 
propitiate the host of deities with that marrow. Then. addressing 
the Lord and conceiving one's own Self as not different from all. 
and being perfectly full of the six paths, the teacher should bring 
the disciple in front of him. But in this initiation. which is per-
formed indirectly in the absence of a disciple who is going to die, 
the teacher should conceive the disciple as being present in front

--- PAGE 181 ---
TANTRASARA 
171 
of him, or place a substitute made of kusa grass or cow dung. The 
teacher, after sprinkling him with drops of water from the ves-
sel and worshipping him with flowers, etc., should place all six 
paths into his body. The teacher should contemplate in this way: 
The merit of one desirous of enjoyment should not be purified; 
however, for one desirous of liberation, both merit and demerit 
should be purified. For one who is to receive the nirblja form of 
initiation, 207 the bonds of conventional duties should also be puri-
fied. This form of initiation is given to one who is about to die, 
or who is extremely dull. This is the command of the great Lord 
Paramesvara. Such a person also attains perfection by his devotion 
to the teacher. god, or fire. 
Here the distinction in attainment lies in the nature of one's 
latent impressions (vasana), for mantras grant different results 
according to one's latent desires. Therefore, ascertaining the 
nature of the latent desires of the disciple, the teacher cogni~es 
the principal mantra internally and meditates on his identity wi~h 
nondual Siva, and by doing so he purifies all the paths abiding m 
the disciple's body. In this way, his body, from the small toe to 
the "end of twelve' (dvadastinta), and his consciousness should 
be made one with the body and the consciousness of the disciple. 
Having accomplished this, he should rest in the immense lake of 
bliss, the essence of which is autonomy and Lordship, perfectly 
full, with the will, knowledge, and activity of the Lord of the ??st 
of deities, full of all paths, the entirety of the sphere of e~tlt_ies 
terminating in consciousness. By means of this kind of initiatI?n 
with the self of the disciple, the disciple becomes identical with 
the supreme Lord. 
Then if the disciple is desirous of enjoyment, he should be 
united with the desired principle, either collectively or individu-
ally. After this, the teacher should conceive that the disciple has 
offered his body, composed of the pure principle, and that he has 
emerged immediately from the nature of the Lord for the purpose 
of an experience of the result still remaining to be enjoyed. The 
nature of this initiation is such as to disentangle all sorts of bonds.

--- PAGE 182 ---
172 
TANTRASARA 
Then, the student should worship the teacher by offering payment, 
etc. to him. 
After this, rituals in the sacred fire with reference to the disci-
ple should be performed. Uttering the frlparamantra, the teacher 
should say: "I am purifying this or that principle related to that 
particular person." This utterance ends with 'svaha .· Thus, three 
oblations are to be performed. These oblations, as well as the final 
one, are to be done with the mantravausat at the end. In this way, 
all the principles ending with Siva are purified. Then, following 
the procedure of unification the final oblation should be offered. 
After this, in regard to a pe;son desirous of enjoyment. one obla-
tion for establishing the disciple in the place of enjoyment, and the 
other for creating the pure principle should be offered. After com-
pletion of this, the teacher should be worshipped by the disciple, 
and by the offering of payment, etc., to him. This is the nature of 
the putraka form of initiation, by means of which al 1 the past and 
the future deeds barring the present one, are purified. 
The well-enlightened teacher, after conceiving his own 
existence composed of all the paths and comhi n i ng it 
with the interior and exterior, without any distinctions, 
should make the intellect, the vital energy, and the body 
of the disciple one with him. 
When the disciple, after attaining all at once the state of 
great bliss and consciousness, gets his rest there, then 
the pasu attains the nature of Siva. 
31~ qXlct~ l+:J 1fuct>'""t I 
m-1" :!/"l'<:lfl::IA'<Dlffl ~ 
CIT ~~~-;:'.f efffiq 1("1 3qJ1 l<:ifl, c=rn 
~ 
~ 
fl'j)@ADl~1a-Ti wmCl I fiA+aAmFf ~ 
~ 
c=f 7er ~UT 
mm~. wrqc:ft ct51M-<1?11l=l" +:nfco-R;ff ~ 
c=rm w+:J 1cwi:i 111f~ 
fcrfcm:r, ~~crRf f~~ 
wm"Cl I "fl(f:, ~cnffiwAUT mJJf;:rcPTet 
1toTIW# ~.-aw 1toTI~c=<:i~ Jftm f;:t~1.-a: qOO~ ~ 
1 ~~~ fg:cftm 1ton~fu: - m"ITWR mJRTU, a<"fu1<9 -a ~

--- PAGE 183 ---
TANTRASARA 
173 
Jilc:aw1l:l =, ~ 
~~;::n:r, ~ e_wfcn:d err cPOT ~, m IB Y{IA~ffflmcrr 
' 
'1~f\·~ 
~ 
~~~Ic'j <i ;::il ~C§:m +1 ~T CfH'i fa I f1 A lLH a { N U e Ci c=q I W· sfuc:tm: 
1 f1~kl:t0i RcffJfi ~ z:rfu err a1i 1i~ 3"11 \q 1a~1 rff)q 1 a 1 
<0:i -a ~~. 
C1G:T 
fg ~lctE\+ciG:HCblci 31ti" fufu: - GCf)l01441J~d 5"Qlfild1{1ri {cpftjf<1')fc1~f 
61 f% Cl h=•Ln d ct? Vi I Ci A I ;i A 0 5 M efa=i 0 16:@ ftFffi'~ ~ 
~ mJt 
Rh ru Ci Frf~ 3~~q) ru ~~ ft.rn LbG a:> I { q {:i:tf {I f'B= 3-ff<:l ill JF"Fi ~I R-b 
' 
' 
' 
~. "(!Cf¥~ c:f m-
~llX'tffl 1itlR f~, ~ ~ 
l?m cfta:rr 
RifJIT ~ct> I <let>'< a I f1 I J:J 2Z:ffcrtcift:r;:fi ~ 
-~I 
Cl {Io 11 A fq cft" ~;:r 
3ff>C"d I <i,, ~~'<I """fi cx:fc:rf~ G:T~z:n:rR ~ 
fft1~ ~;a~ Ci, - -a;:r 
CFTm ~: 
1~Clci ~ 
I 
J:J4Cbcf~ru~ ~~ 
fuci:i1c:truC1~ zrra~ 1 
<r-ff~'l ru a q ~ 
Pi qff>-
'tt1f1c:::1~1 ~ 
q{il~I: 11 
~ 
ml=JG:f~ 
L("1 I £114 fcRT~ Ci ;:;;51 f1 I { f1 ~ ~ 
U dl fr! I~ d5 I~ I ;:j ;:rm 
YSilC:::~IAlf~ 119~1 I 
Chapter Fifteen 
When a teacher learns by himself, or through relatives. o: a 
descent of grace on a person who is about to die. 208 he should give 
him the immediate ascension type of initiation (samutkrama?a 
dlk$a). Then the teacher, having placed all six paths in the dis-
ciple and purifying each of the six, one by one, should place the 
goddess KalaratrI in the center of the delicate joints of the body 
(manna). 209 Then he should gradually pierce the bonds of the deli-
cate points by her, 210 and should then lead the consciousness of 
the disciple and place it into the bralwzarandra. Then, following 
the aforesaid method, he should offer the final oblation for the 
purpose of unification so that. after it is offered. and after the 
individual self exits the body. he may become identical with Lord

--- PAGE 184 ---
174 
TANTRASARA 
Siva. However, for the one who is desirous of enjoyment, the sec-
ond final oblation is offered for the purpose of associating him 
with the place of enjoyment. At that moment 211 his individual self 
remains dissolved there, and for him nothing remains to be done 
in this world. 
In addition to this, a teacher may recite the brahmavidya 
212 
into the ear of the disciple. Brahmavidya, being of the nature of 
the reflective consciousness causes an immediate self-reflection 
of enlightenment in the lim,ited consciousness of the awakened, 
bound soul. The samayins and others are also entitled to recite 
it. 
213 If the nirblja type of initiation with conviction (sapratyaya)
21
-l 
is given to a dullard on whom the descent of grace has occurred. 
then the 'hand of Siva' (Sivahasta) type of procedure should also 
be disclosed to him. This procedure is fol lowed during offering of 
the hand of Siva (Sivahastadana) to him. 
There is a fiery triangle, dreadful with flames, from whic.h 
sp~rks of fire with the syllabic form of '"ra" are emerging. It is 
bemg blown from outside by waves of wind. This diagram should 
be meditated upon using the palm of the teacher's right hand. 
Throwing a seed there, one should conceive that it has the syl-
lable "ra" above and below, by which a series of 'pha( mantras 
are awakened, which burn its capacity of creativity. 215 Thus, the 
seed of both become seedless by this type of initiation. It becomes 
capable of destroying its latent seed power, as has been stated. 
and e~en. immovable objects are capable of receiving an initiati~n. 
The disciple should be conceived as being steadily established in 
the world of air and carried by it, and should also be conceived as 
being light in weight. Then, he is seen as hei ng I ighter when mea-
sured on the scale. 216 
If mantra cuts the delicate joints of the body, and if 
I ightness appears and the power of germination of 
the seed disappears, the great Lord leads one who is 
engaged in the right path to attain the desired ends 
immediately.

--- PAGE 185 ---
TANTRASARA 
175 
' 
~ 
3l~ tS115~ lit I ct5i:t I 
' 
3f~ ~ 
~ 
tlt an, f~u~ ~ -+Ifil Jft"cj-?tl 
1 m ~~ 
1!Cf ~ 
:mrf~ er 3lf~-a1'<1~ f5J0"611ga1 
~filUITfu:rcl~w 
Jj)"© I T"(""l '\( I <:i I Ci ~ I Rt> q I Cil err c=rw cfT ~ $ c=<:i I $11 
I ~ 
~ ~ 
an<:rn=( 
3if'~ Cl I f1 I fG: 
~ ~~ 
I 
A a 5M 
+:r;:;;r ~~~ 
-a?T %ffi 
fW:rr I 
3 -C-P=t lj) q Cf)'< 0 i ~~' ~ 
mwrfu' llU5fi" Gt ~iC'i I (sj11 fG:' 
3i 11') ra = 
mmcrn-151:, 
~ ~ crrt<1"-?tl. w 1., q '< «'l mfl""Fr: 
~~RtH"P=t18~1~11ff1"'il $11R"i~~. ~~UH~c.ictl ~~ 
3"ffil: 1 ~f'~ C1 <PT Cf.>m ~ 
- ~ 
~mur 3ffiT 1 ClClT aa 
~JTf~ Ci Ci I cp fu g? ~ 11 fu+:rml=( wJ WTQfc:rc=crr lJcIT f1 I fua $1 Hl ~~ 
'ur ill q~u fl, ~-:er 
~u 
I'< 11d: c=<:i !l'i ~a '1fd a a I "i Tf1., 1 su ~ 
c:f) 4 a 11 ¢t5 RJl "i I f1 ll ll H q f{l 1 c=i fufa1 q T"Cl:i I l(j)J:fl tl I 
l"l ICIC§'A l~'<IA~IBfl'<~I"© 15"1 IC'iCb"i I~ 
fim1~1~lt:GBf1C1Hl:4"i~~ Ai515\J11C'1"ilAI ~ 
11 
Q<i"'ili:l§ltl~lti ~ 
q'(C1~i ~~"iC"dAIC!.1 
q9,() I tl I ;:fl l:4 <i d Ri CBC'i A~ Clc=ITsu:rm~~ I 
341cpt:G1Cj)~ err JtcidHfd~~ cntfon~s~~ 
z:IT1i: ~~~lllJ:iqRJl~al J11C'1"i1AI A~lm: 11 
Chapter Sixteen 
In this chapter the initiation of one who is not present will be 
descrihed. This type of initiation is twofold, i.e., for the person 
who is dead, and for one who is still alive (but not present). If a 
person who offered service to the teacher but died before initia-
tion, or was sent into exile, or was killed by black magic (incan-
tation), etc., or by accident, he should be given initiation if he 
becomes intent on receiving it at the time of death, or if a teacher 
finds out from others that the descent of grace has occurred in 
him. 217 Th is is the command of the Lord.

--- PAGE 186 ---
176 
TANTRASARA 
During the performance of initiation for one who is dead, there 
is no need for consecration, etc. In the sacred diagram for the 
proximity of a particular mantra, detailed ritual is tic activities 
are needed: exquisite materials, like flowers. and so on: a place 
as the sacred seat, and so on: the mandala, the sacred diagram. 
like a trident with a lotus, and so on:·~ figure (akrti) as the spe-
cific form to be meditated upon: the mantra itself as self-effulg~nt. 
These [ritualistic activities and materialsl are for the meditative 
yogins and jiianis who are immersed in meditation, who possess 
right knowledge, and who are devoted to the Divine. They are the 
causes for the proximity of the mantra according to their order of 
priority and posteriority. What more can we say about those who 
have attained the perfect nature of the Lord? 
After worshipping the Lord, the teacher places a figure made 
of ku§a grass, etc., and should look at it following the method 
received from his teacher. That is: 
When the energy has risen from the mz1ladha ra cakra 
upward, a shaft (da~uja) from which innumerable sys-
tem of channels (nagis) come and spread out, the yogin, 
by his power. should bring the shaft under control. 
which should be thought to have gone to the void of the 
nose, and then thrown outside in order to cause it to 
pervade the entire world. Then, it should be thrown to 
the extent that, from the abode of fire. plenty of smoky 
flames may emerge and cover the entire path with its 
net. This is the application of the great net
218 to drag the 
desired soul near. 
By the application of this great net. the host of paths 
which are to be covered come under control and are 
placed before first and then are brought near later. If all 
are brought before, even then only the intended one is 
rescued or drawn before. This application. named net 
for rescuing and drawing of dead souls, I learned from 
Sri Sambhunatha.

--- PAGE 187 ---
TANTRASARA 
177 
ef~ ~i- mci ~ ~, 
3"ilCf5tfo11e.1 fcFrrWlf11C"1 ? ~ 
~ 
-
y''-'I 
' 
' 
'< IJ I a~ I fu ~1 TTCM~ Ci 01 q "f11 ~ 9d IQ f8 ~ II lql lffi1 I c=rc=IT R \q Fa R IQ P5t C"1 ("Q I a, 
3:r~lf11~qa=rr ~er I ~ C1 ~~61c-J:JCf5q{A~W"f( C1Wcmcr: 
1 ~~ 
"QCf w 11~~ut561:r•rn:1{ur ~~ltuli 31iJJE?llfa 
1 ~ -a-
31fiF•c-~•Fi IB i:i 1 $fu 3m s:i I IQ '""l I t!Cf J1 1 c-n;;g:fl l 111? tSGl Jft-cn G:T~ 
JJ"Tffi~ err ~~ f1 J4 I ftj tell ~, ~ :q-
fY :r=cta -Ji'=t: ~Io II fG:"m 
Bm~, ~WH6k11fl C1 tt=l:r=ctasfLr ~sfq af~i ¥crc=t 
m 
a=runf~ fd"S 1 '<:: 
~u-rf ~fci di JrR Cf5 I ;:c"1: I 
3l?f ~ ~a If i2)~ I ~ 
G:Tm~ 1Cf)1 '< ~ ~JJT"f"I" "('"l?:f:" 
ct5ctCICl = 
1 
t!Cl1=( ~sm 'la 1 f i2)cJcr 
31QC[~ - ~ 
~'<:Cb~<im<f&l fum: I ~~~Cf~ mrf 
crran fuac5 err CVl"ciIB - 3lfmPT-f~~, ~ 
+[ffiCG:'<Ol'i_ I Jft-Cfa1sftf 
-cffim ~ 
efm41flS~ ~, GJmct>fciCf5r-q'"iJ1lcrnpf~1=( 
I WI :r:t A I ?ll ~Ci 
~Cf 3-w:r °ftfct5 I {: I cft" filT :a- mTf+Tian~~ 
-
fCI d I f1 :r:t I iS1 Ml ~ 'ffCI I Ci , ml I ct I f"H I fq =cj§ ct '{{:l 
:a-
3l°ff ~ I cX::Pi H c-a I ff 
' 
' 
~~, cft frll ~I A 3?W~ 11f1'"ififCf51 '<.l d C1 ct H 31 "'"<:i kt c-rc-ffd5I'<1 l1 m 
I 
\.:>I~·. 
' 
' 
''~ 
' 
LRT a1 f"ICi IN m-f~ 
<"f~ $11 '"i I~ I fa ajq: ~ 
I 
~ 
9d {Ci Id~ I ct I <tiA fc°*ct I Ci :;:;;>ll ~I l lj)'(l: I 
~a-mf~m cftfa-ffifu fct>A~C"1J:t I I 
$fu m+=rcrf~cal"()l4fuef~ C"1T"?tf11{ 
~OOect1~ct51~1;i ~ 
~l5~1i:tlf~ 11 
If this is so, why does it not happen so externally? Is the 
answer then that without proper practice in dragging it cannot be 
fruitful? No; when one becomes engaged in such activity, if the 
teacher is possessed by love and hatred, he could lose his absorp-
tion of lordship internally. Therefore, in that case, the teacher 
remains conditioned by the restrictive power of niyati, so practice 
is unavoidable. But here, in the teacher, on account of the presence 
of the absorption of [in] the Lord, which is the characteristic of 
grace, he becomes free. The Lord himself, by taking recourse to

--- PAGE 188 ---
178 
TANTRASARA 
the body of the teacher as his substratum, bestows grace on those 
who are to be blessed with grace. It is true to say that grace has 
unthinkably glorious capacity. 
Thus the soul, which is drawn by the application of the net, 
enters the figure made of kufa grass or the fruit of a jtiti (Jas-
minum grandiflorum). However, it does not move because of the 
absence of the mind and the vital energy, or the totality of causes, 
but by the force of deep contemplation-it does indeed m~ve. 
Though it is of such a nature, the purificatory rite of consecrat10n, 
and so on, is to be performed, which terminates in the final obla-
tion and unification with the desired end. Then, by means of the 
final oblation, the figure made of kusa grass and other materials 
should be dissolved in the highest light of the Lord. Thus rescued, 
the soul, by the final oblation, attains liberation, whether it was 
in hell, the world of the spirit, or in the world of lower animals. 
But if the soul is living as a man, then he obtains at that moment 
knowledge, yoga, initiation, or discernment, because the body of 
the teacher is a competent authority regarding this. This is the 
procedure for rescuing the dead. 
This is the method for a person who is alive but absent when 
the descent of grace occurs. Only the figure made of kusa gra~s 
and attraction are excluded. In this regard, the appearance of his 
thorough contemplation is sufficient for his purification. 
Initiation, again, is the bestower of both enjoyment and lib-
eration, because latent traces of the impression of past deeds are 
strong and because it is impossible to root out all these desires. In 
initiation, the consecration performed according to the procedure 
of the higher doctrine is stronger, but that of the other inferio: 
doctrines requires further consecration for the purpose of puri-
fication. Even the person who is initiated in absentia experiences 
manifestation of knowledge, and so on. 
What a wonder that the teacher, by his steady absorp-
tion in the Great Lord, becomes the sharer of the free-
dom of will. Even viewing the person, though absent, 
he becomes the initiator.

--- PAGE 189 ---
TANTRASARA 
179 
3l~ ti L<"1 ct~ IJ=t ~ 
a:>+:i I 
' 
3l~ FM~~ CS'f'I'{: I I 
#w ICI 1fuef8:1a1a;;::;511;::8~ ~11fl2l~ ~ ~ 
"f1C\JJ~1mrn1 en, ~ -a-
3fl A~ 11 +Fn=w 3-'.f-fq 3-Fff~~H 
~ 11 fl "=HJ){<) q :fl fc:F1 : , -a- <:JG:T ~ 1 fnsq 1 ci ;:r 
~~u-r ~mf'¢Bq;::ci c=rcrr "ci-~ fufu:, - <1?f ~ <pa1qC11flti,. 
~~ 
mUl{OIA:r:?IL[fJ1<i~ <ictlqi ~~ J3'tlrnaf<:l 3lTiif"ff f~, 
c=rcnsm fi 1Cl 1a,, c==rc=r: m~, t:H1a:;;:act>1t:(51~ 'fit1?C""l'l, 614:i?i ~~ 
m~-;:r ~UT ~~Jrt 
ct>l'<:~C"\ I <1fl: WUl{DIA~UT ftn:ftrpcl 
~ 
~f'~ ~"fl, Ci"4=l:r:?lfi9:i ;:rm~·~ mw:nn=r ~ 
'("q I t3 I ;:ci Wff 3j)~Cl I <i, I c=rffi S fq 1I-.o If ~fa : ct}-~ 5 ;;:ci "1 I c=rc=IT °ITTf ~ 
~ 
~ZffCIT ~ 
~I Cl I $1 Cl I '3-Tf"ct>"fsa CTb{: c=q A ffl ~, ~ 
murf ~ 
cf 
Cltffuc=cn f'~~ 3-Tftj TcRI~-C1 
I ~ ~~ 
I c=rc=IT~ Wucm=rrfu 
>rmrR I cIT 8:11 <:l"~ I 
' 
' 
3-T~sfq 1TT?;~1~1RtJ~RaAHfl: I 
f"i ~') C"'Q cIT &m <:f %1 ~H sfH cil S fl~'<: I C1 ~ 
I I 
~ -~fh=ic;:1a1qff~cafd;;::ruci 
~a;:;;)lfl1{ ~~ ~ 
fll(""1G:~IA I ™d5J:t I I 9 l9 I I 
Chapter Seventeen 
Reclanzation of the linga 219 
The fol lowing is the procedure of initiation for those who 
belong to orders beginning with Vai~I)ava, etc., and ending with 
southern doctrines, or those who have followed religious codes of 
conduct conforming to other orders, and also those who, although 
being established in the highest doctrine, are engaged in attending a 
teacher who belongs to a lower order, when they are made inclined 
[to receive initiation] by the descent of the grace of the Lord. 
Such a person should fast the day before initiation, and then 
the following day, after worshipping the Lord in a general way, he

--- PAGE 190 ---
180 
TANTRASARA 
should be brought into the presence of the Lord. and his all pa~t 
deeds should be recounted before him. Then, on receiving his 
mantra from a teacher, the mantra he received from other teachers 
should be thrown into the water. Next, he should be bathed, then 
sprinkled with water from a vessel, purified with food cooke~ in 
a sacred fire (caru), and [his mouth cleaned with al tooth stick, 
and should enter the place of the ritual blindfolded. He should 
worship the great Lord with the general mantras. 220 After this, 
~ne should purify his vratalmantra in the fire transformed into 
Siva using the general mantras. Then, placing his name between., 
the mantra (as prefix and suffix) saying, '"I purify his expiation,' 
and ending with 'svaha,' he should offer oblation one hundred 
times. Next with 'vausat ' he should offer the final oblation. After 
this, he should evoke th; lord of vrata (Vratesvara) and offer puri-
fied butter into the fire. Then, by the order of Siva in regard to 
the disciple: "You, Vratesvara, be impartial to him, and do not 
cause obstacles for him," should make the deity aware of it. Hav-
ing prayed in this way, he should propitiate Vratesvara and then 
take leave of the fire. This is the method for the reclamation of the 
liliga. Then other purificatory rites should be performed as before. 
Now the disciple is ready to give dlk~d according to his will. 
When a person remaining in the lower order, being 
keenly touched by the power of the Lord, becomes 
inclined to approach the true teacher, he should, after 
purification, be given initiation even though he was for-
merly engaged with a false teacher. 
3l~ I ti'.ll~~l'"i l~Cb'""t I 
3lmF'~1 
fa"~ta$11R-i ffi~ ~ 
m m~sact -<:f(1: ~a:tu1~1;ITsfCr 
$1Hci1;:icr m~ 
~~gffi'<u1 er~ 
;:i- ~. 3lfuf~sftr 
I ~(f)IH"!AcfoT 11~ crranfG: ~~ Jrfq ;:i- ~IB. ia ~ 
~~qj~;:r ~ 
fcrU~IQG:G:lfu;n ~ 
1!Cf ~ 
cfta:tltl(f)'{Dfl{,

--- PAGE 191 ---
TANTRASARA 
181 
msfiTI~ i:t T"?I a a Ci I Ci I~ I c-R:'l ~ 
~Io i:t I Ria') ~ 
J1q6l i:t f°tj ~l lSf1: 
iJ1 I £H: o'J-;:r fq 'a I ci a ~?~ f fl, Ci c;:;::i :r:a { ~cmcIT cft a-TI"fil 31f~, 
ITT ~ w:ITR:TR cn-aTc=r, -;:r q mm q R ~Q:c=r, cm~ 
$1Ha:1 ~ GfT af<:r, 
(§C{1 lJ ~,a $1 H i:i ~ ~ 
~ 
an=r, 3Bf ~ 3:rR4 ~Cf) ra ~ 
a a crJ11 ract5J:t 1 
~~fa 
$11 "'i Ci~ I 
~cltmmfuct51'<C"li ~I 
mu a>lJ)'6Ci 1 ~~ l I-
~ 
IB Cf514ttict~ I I 
~ 
ml=fG:T~ca1a14fcHruci C"1;;:;;51f"tl{ 
31f~ct5~Cf51~1.-f ~ 
3"ite.llG:~li:t l~d5"{ I I 9 (,I I 
Chapter Eighteen 
The anointment (abhi~eka) 
The person in whom maturity of knowledge has developed 
should be given anointment in order to follow the course of a 
sadhaka, or to become a spiritual guide (guru) to others. This is 
because only the person who possesses knowledge, even though 
devoid of al I the other characteristic qualities, has earned the 
authority to follow the course of a stidhaka, or to bestow grace on 
others, even though he might have received anointment. 
221 If .the 
teacher not perfect in knowledge abstains from giving initiat10n, 
he does not incur sin. However, the former one, who possesses 
knowledge, incurs sin because he is duty-bound, for he is consid-
ered to be the bes tower of the status of the lord of vidva. Therefore, 
being of such nature, if he abstains from giving initiation, this is 
his sin. 
After anointment for the purpose of fulfillment of identity 
between the mantra and the deity, the new teacher should observe 
the regular rituals of mantra every day for a period of six months 
through the repetition of mantra, oblation into the fire, and per-

--- PAGE 192 ---
182 
TANTRASARA 
formance of specific worship. 222 From then on, being one with the 
desired deity, he earns the right and authority of giving initiation, 
etc., to others. However, he should not initiate an unworthy one, 
nor should he avoid one who is worthy. 223 Even the initiated one 
should be tested by a teacher while bestowing knowledge. The 
person who receives knowledge deceitfully should be looked at 
with indifference after this is known to be so. In this anointment. 
worship of the deities should be performed in accordance with the 
financial capacity of the person concerned. 
The person who himself is well practiced in knowledge 
and bears the authority in himself, and is able to trans-
mit that knowledge to others, possesses the nature of a 
sadhaka on the way to becoming a spiritual guide. Such 
a person should be given anointment. 
31[1 Cb l "i fci ~ I J:il ~ 
ct5 'i I 
31~ 31~ 
~cfTfll"ilJifq Ji{Olfi~~;:a{ ~~f~ 
Tf:mq1ali1ma-cr ~@l'<l'L~i cfta-Tt q)')<:lf<"t, 3'~~ 
c:bL<"H"iJ"lliHP=t ~cpCi>il<:i~:h1Hll=( - ~ ~~ 
I ITT m ~~ 
fufw sm: ~ ~ 
~ ~ 
Q1Cfcx:r:, ~rrrf~ ~ 1a~1 ;fl~, ~CITTi ~ 
>id)fci'<'ld>~ flSkli<:ilA~f~ fct'5<:11$1HWl161C""11<"1 
q)')~fa, ITT ~ldfJl"t'rt 
°ffe<l'<ct'Silur +:F?lli ~ 
J11Mct'Silur ~ 
~~~;:i~g;:i1~ ~ 
-
>i101fh011-<ctJila1 ~ ~ 
cvrrnt -a-~ ~1a~1'{17{ ~ 
1 C1<1= q-<Af°??rn 
m~~ ~ 
~ ~ 
~urf~c:qr, ~~ 
~~1~1i:t ~~ 
err ~an ~ 
~-a ~ mm 1ilf'"fl" ~~ 
"fl~ '1')01fc=t 
1 (f?f 
6TBRf fufti ~ 
;:ta~~ ~ 
c=rcITm tlh:f~ m~ ml 011Cf)1~ 
~TRlm~ma1~1,R:i~fciq~i tLrrnn ~m mmR ~~. 
~ct mmma ~~ efc=Rcr 'mlfu' ~f~cn~~anuW{ 
31 ~Ci ij-;:nfq ~ 
cpc=rrclc=rr c=rwftr ~~an: f~~~ 
q)(Vf~~ «d I 01" 
~ 
"fl"cf~~ , ~~a-nm c=R=lf'<:rmef~ 3m"J:{ -JITcrc=r: ~ 
e:11 
3ql50Frr'R:ilfld<"l I Cifd$11~ ~ Cf>Ts~ ~~~CG.l;ffi

--- PAGE 193 ---
TANTRASARA 
183 
fcrfq: ~rIT-Ci;;::+:J'<oi c=rfutllflCilR~i qcffdA ~~1i-<011a CilciCi: 
fiCiH+<"l ('.!Cf)flfd;;::+:J 1?1-lRBT~ J1lck1'i $"1HMliJfiaHra<Hict~ I ~ 
q 3Br ~G:fum ~ra~ ~~ 
Wr .mr~C§,1Aai:t. c=rfufu~ q~ 
~MR-lct5~ct51~1~ I 
3"1~~§q'<:: fuqT d~ICi<:ililJEOllf°a ti 
~ 
"L:!Cf ~ 
~~ 
~ 
fcf5 d 1Ci'1fl i:t I 
3q1l'lqf{Cf)fY~I ~ 
CiG.l~HIAl?lch 
ra~rnm ~ ~ 
qRf1iascqq1~ ~u: 11 
~ 
.~th=ref~ 
L(i I a I <lfu'<:"f-a-a-
Ci~ f1 I { ~ea 
I~ Cf) I~ I ;i ;:rn=r 
ect>l ~ fCi ~I A I ~ct5J:t I I 9 ~ I I 
Chapter Nineteen 
People, and even teachers, who followed lower doctrines should be 
given an initiation called the 'final purificatory rite' or 'last sacra-
ment' (antyasali1skara dik$a), 224 which should be performed fol-
lowing the procedure of reclaiming the dead, provided the descent 
of grace has touched them. The same applies to those who had fol-
lowed the order of the higher doctrines, but who have fallen from 
the right path and have not performed any rites of atonement. This 
is the command of the great Lord. 
All that was described as the procedure for the reclaiming of 
the dead should be performed on the corpse. The burning of the 
body is done as the final oblation. The teacher should perform 
the final rite for the dead person, for the confirmation of the faith 
(pratyaya) of the ignorant, 225 according to his power of activ-
ity, knowledge, and yoga. Then, in the body of the deceased, the 
teacher should place the mantras (nyasa) from the feet to the head, 
and, drawing the departed soul near by the application of the net, 
he should arrest it, penetrate it, stir it, and enliven it with the 
transmission of the vital energy to the heart, the throat, and on the 
forehead. In this way, the corpse begins to shake. Then, the rite

--- PAGE 194 ---
184 
TANTRASARA 
of the unification with the great Lord being performed, the body 
should be burnt as the final oblation. 
After this, the initiation called fraddhadlksa
226 should be per-
formed even for those who have been purified by means of th~ 
final rites of the dead, and also for those who have not been puri-
fied in this manner. For them, this final rite should be performed 
on the third or fourth day, every month, or every year. 
. 
Then, completing the rite ending with oblation into the fire, 
one should take up a food offering in one of his hands and, con-
ceiving his power as the virile energy of the Lord representing 
the enjoyable object, which has assumed the power abiding in the 
limited self and has made her identity with it, contemplating thus, 
the performer should offer it to the great Lord, the supreme agent 
of the enjoyable object. 227 
In this manner, when enjoyment ceases, one becomes indeed 
the master. Although by means of initiations, such as the rite for 
t,h~ dead, the reclamation of the body, and initiation during t~e 
sraddha ceremony, one attains the fulfillment of one's aim in 
r~gar~ t? those who are desirous of enjoyment, an abundance 0! 
ntuahst1c activities are performed for the attainment of a plenI-
tude of fruits. Therefore, all should be performed in regard to a 
person desirous of liberation for the attainment of oneness with the 
deity;. this is performed daily throughout one's life. like other d~ily 
p~act1ces. But the knower of reality needs no procedure beginmng 
~1th the final ritual for the dead (offering into the flame) and en~­
mg with fraddha, etc. The death of such a person is a "day of festi-
val' (parvadinam) for the disciples, for it fulfills the shortcomings 
of consciousness of those who follow the lineage. The descendent 
of the teacher has a single end which, in essence. is nothing but the 
supreme reality. This day of ceremony is like the day of receiving 
the seed of the lineage from the teacher while he was alive. 
Everywhere in the ritualistic procedure of .fraddha, etc., the 
mlirtiyaga is the most important one. This is supported by the doc-
trine called Sri Siddhamata. The procedure of it will he described 
in the naimittika section.

--- PAGE 195 ---
TANTRASARA 
185 
Siva is by nature inclined to show grace. Being so 
inclined, the person on whom He shows grace unavoid-
ably becomes identical with the Lord. It is merely his 
will by which the means (uptiya) are imagined to be so. 
Though knowing this, the wise person takes recourse 
to means having limitations, and then he remains free 
from doubts. 
3l~ ~1 ~a c=f ;=11 cl >l ct>'< a 11 """~H::i:i._ I 
C1?f m cfTan ~+chl'<RTW $1Hlfl"R:TR ~, m q 
act~lmH >rm 
' 
' 
malCftan ~JfT, ~ 
cpCill'ilJ:L 3mficr m~;:f 1_!~ 3"Qf'~ I <13f 
~, 
~-m-r~, ct>1 ~:i:i._ ~ 
f?rfuct m~~, ~ 
q m~q, 
C1c=( -;::i- ~ A %J-a O':i :i:i._ 
1 Cl?r R-ac=r~ ~, a 4"! l:Il c;:rrq Fc:f ~~, 
%~fTr ~ 
q I f"l ""4 >l fl'i 6 A "j)"'5(5"Ff , qcffG:"""f, qfq ?I CBJ:L ~ 
I c=rafi1 
~ 
fCI Cf> IM~ l'i f0i I Ci._ - ~ 
ct"f~ I ~fl:rf-:acB CJ: ~ 
31H l'i Ci+:!,_ I 
"("1"£:lW - 11'<1 Ci g:J If rn=r;:f a (q cf fu";:f $1 H fl Im~ ~~ 
- ~ 
ct-f~ I "(i?f Fl l'i Ci li_JIT, ~m-rr 
I 1_!~JIT 
I tref1!_JIT I qfq ?I Cf)A._ 
~ 
~mfu I -4-mf'~ - $1HfllW, ~llf51fllm, 1_!{lcig:Jf1JE<IJ1Ji;::j, 
(1 cf) l'i \J"F""=H=i +ch 1 '< >l I l'i a 1 Fd:"i 1 R , M1 f ctJCf)l ct"! a : , ~ 11 f5I ~ I 'L~ I 31TfuA"~, 
~ c:m 1 a:~ f-;=f, BC9CP:, fCI Gi 1 $11 , fl A~ A~') Fa fl 1 w - ~~ 
;:rflif"ffCf5 
firn-~"iCf>l{OIJ:I,_ I Cl?r 9?Ci~la11Cf5~ ~I~~ ~ur;f ~ 
~z;fcf5 
~ 
*Y>') '<a 1 f"l I'< +=1 3-Tfcv=rf~ aw 1 
J 1 
it~ a :w:r-ac,, rn=r: a ;+i llll ~ 1 a ffl ~cl 
~ ~ 
~~ 
~"""""ll•nmcrr~ ~c=(, ~ur ~Cf>TCYi C1wfu~ 
· w 1 '<MI Wf"l C@cl ~ 
LT ~ 
~ 
q ~usr9- err fut q- 3:r~-ac=( l 
(13[ @U 
~us-ff Ta A C'1 A q)')'< d@ I a ~q ~ l:i I~ ad a Id ct5 I fcrn:f 
~Rffcrf~Ber 
~m ~~ur;lau~qcftq1qt< l'<«1)fu-
lf1aa1tFl-a1fu"i1 iJi~fl. ~, 
'«!)tjlci-ci4"lllll~ldA~l~·ci ~I~ 
m ~~ 
3-rfct '<Ci+:!,_ 3-TCfffi Cf)~ a : a~{() q Rfuf-a: 3:rfu-{utcr ITT-<1. ;:r 
~ 
cnfuc=r ~ 
~UFn=r - ~ 
ci4"l~l~ I Y'<A~ci;+illll'l""lldlfqt:(J~ 
' 
' 
'

--- PAGE 196 ---
186 
TANTRASARA 
Piqfl4~1':t1f1.,1d5M~·ffl 
~fm'<f"l 11amcrwr-f"IAfciY 1~1J11Mffl ~ 
~~m4=<AJj)41a~l=l. ~~zcr: 
1 
3:rf~ ~tlw-
~ 1c:rnfH:-~d1l~Pj)&1f"I Fa m I 
4'<A l+ici1~ I 
a~1=c:fo;ci '<6fflfuC::: 11 
~W"{tm "ci A t=q1 fa'< f"I ~l &rr&fUT&l I ffl Ci I -
A I :2f A f "1 f1 Ci : ~~ I Cl q;1 "<j)ii : fCI I Al ct fi ctl f% fci:r: I 
3-11 .... H!:l+iciR~fn•q~C::~ H uh:fq I ~ct:>A IC""I, 
c=ai-acx~rn=r-g a6eClf"IC::2J eC11tl~S6Pf~ll=( I I 
Chapter Twenty 
Here, another chapter is introduced with the purpose of showing 
the lifelong course to be followed after initiation (se~avartana). 
That initiation, which is given to those worthy of knowledge 
for the purpose of steady attainment of purification, is also given 
to those unworthy of knowledge, but to them it is given for the 
purpose of attainment of liberation. This type of initiation is the 
~ablja type. 228 Thus, having given initiation. the teacher should 
mstruct the disciple about the duty to be performed during the 
remaining period of his life. 
The duty for the rest of [the initiate'sJ life is threefold: indis-
pensable observances (nitya), occasional observances (naimittika). 
and those performed with a particu Jar desire (kcl mya). The last 
one is only observed by those desiring enjoyments (sddlzaka) and 
therefore will not be described here. The nitya is the one which 
occurs regularly: the naimittika is the one by which one is able to 
attain oneness with the Lord. The auxiliaries to it are the prayers 
during the junctures (sandhya) of the day. which are to be per-
formed on a daily basis, on the day of the festivals (parvadinam). 
and on the day of the offering of ku.<a grass (JWl'itrakam). etc.

--- PAGE 197 ---
TANTRASARA 
187 
They should also be considered daily observances, for they are reg-
ulated by the time of their occurrences. This is the view of some. 
However, there are occasional (naimittika) observances that 
are not regular in regard to the followers of the lineage of the 
teacher, as, for example, the time of the arrival of the spiritual 
teacher and his relatives, the day of a festival related to him 
(tatparvadinam), the day on which he received knowledge, etc. 
This is also the view of some. In these instances regular worship, 
the prayers at the junctures of the day, worship of the spiritual 
teacher, worship during the day of a festival, and worship of the 
pavitrakam also need to be performed without fail. 
The occasional observances (naimittikas) are the days on which 
the disciple obtained knowledge, the day when he received the 
holy text (sastra), the arrival of the teacher and his relatives in 
his house, his birthday, the day of his initiation and the day of his 
departure from this world, secular festivals, the exposition of the 
scripture (i.e., the commencement of it, the intermediate [phase], 
and the completion of it), the day on which he perceived the 
desired deity, the day of union with the spiritual partner (melaka), 
a command received in a dream, and release from the observance 
of convention (samaya). All these are the conditions for perform-
ing special kinds of worship as occasional rites. 
Then the disciple who has been initiated previously should be 
given the principal mantra, which possesses a potency of its own, 
which is in essence the pulsating consciousness of the mouth but 
without being written down. 229 Then the said disciple, for the pur-
pose of being identified with God, should practice to attain one-
ness with God during the junctures of the day. Then, by means of 
that, for the attainment of such a sort of impression, one should 
worship the great Lord every day on the altar or in the liliga · 
Regarding it, in a heautiful altar, one should contemplate one's 
own form as reflected in a mirror and it should be considered that 
one's own Self has become identical with the host of deities to be 
Worshipped there. He should perceive it to be the reflected image

--- PAGE 198 ---
188 
TANTRASARA 
of the deity himself. Realizing thus, he should worship it with 
an offering of beautiful flowers, sandal paste, wine, propitiatory 
offerings of water, burning incense, lighting a lamp, presenting 
various materials, praising with songs, a recital of musical inst:u-
ments, and then should recite hymns in order to obtain undeviat-
ing identity with the desired deity. Just as f when one is] looki?g 
continuously at one's own face in the mirror, determination of its 
real nature occurs without any delay. Regarding this, no particular 
order is needed except attainment of one's identity with the man-
tra. The one who has attained absorption into the highest mantra 
and from whose nature the taints of the impressions of bonded 
beings have ceased as the result of the penetration of the flow of 
devotion, for him the net of all the bonds has dissolved and what-
ever remains in the heart is the highest, agreeable to all. This is 
the view of our teachers. 
The power of sight, composed of the highest nectar arising 
sportingly, basing itself on the light, extending as the supreme 
truth of entities, the knowers of the secret worship you with it. 
Making the earth as the base of all, and sprinkling it 
with the fluid of delight, and collecting flowers made 
of one's own mood emerged from the mind, having 
defused perfume, and placing it on the vessel of the 
priceless heart of my own-full to the brim with the 
nectar of bliss-I worship You, along with the divine 
Goddess, day and night in the divine temple of my body. 
~ ~~ffili~l=l 3'.Rlm~ ~aa1-act') ~1aua 
1 c=rffi 
~~rn~~f;:f, Jrtr:, ill~~1 mmct>ic·~;:r ~~ 
1 ~~ ~ 
~ 
3w.=IT<ne=(, ~ er ~ 
f~C1, J1 M J1 1 IB mfUR: l1cfcfifa-mr: 
~cITT:J"F"lg:!~UT, ~ 
341l1Af°d~: I +:rrJffq~~i:rafoT ~ ~ 
JfFlm 
Fl'<~ I~ - ~ ~ 
mq ffi~~m<:rr ;:r ~ 
wm"fl I fficfj err 
qft~ ~ 3ffiftc=( ~ ~ 
5M ~ ll I: I 31~ ~I ITT ;:r '< B fl'! J:t ~= ffft 
mf1 l5(3 I q ~(=(, f~mc=( ~ml{ - ~ 
~cf mill~~ 3"f 1a1 B ;:i fu-flJf~ur

--- PAGE 199 ---
TANTRASARA 
189 
~ 
~?<:ih=t 3ffU l'<:Ci<:i I I C13f lJ)'<idg ~ 
~1Rhag {~~~ll~lj)fflch 
ql'(41?i 3-T~ !>'il~'(Uj <S11Uf1<:j +fifusch t11c:tof lj)&:lJl4A~Clllfu@~qf(j)Cl')c=i 
~err~ 
3-Tci~ I C13f ~ 3:rrt11".:<S1f11dct 3ifWPTfUct5A"""?if~~ ~ 
~ 
'tcT 'tcT >10"R1=l, 3TIUR11U 11 iftj mf{;l fa kl -a- A """?i Io Ii ITT ITT mm 
~O"R1=l ~ 
~ 11 'ei l])'<d: I ~ 
~~~cw:rR ~ ~ 
fiwl{: I 
Thus contemplating the import of the two verses above in the 
core of one's heart, one should meditate on the host of deities. 
Then, showing mudras, repeating the mantra, and lastly, offer-
ing it, follows one after the other. The withdrawal (visarjanam) is 
its identity with consciousness. The main food offering should be 
eaten by oneself or should be thrown into the water. The creatures 
born in water had formerly been given initiation by means of eat-
ing caru (sacred boiled rice). If the caru is eaten by a cat, a mouse, 
or a dog, then, doubt having arisen, it becomes the cause of hell. 
The knower of the truth, with a desire of showing grace to the 
world, should not behave contrary to the social order or remain 
secluded from it. Thus, here ends the worship of the altar. 
Next is the instruction regarding the lhiga. 230 The liliga should 
not be installed with the application of sacred mantras. This is 
particularly true for the vyakta form of liliga. One should wor-
ship li1igas [that are] firmly established, following the order of 
invocation and withdrawal, because this is the basis of all worship. 
In th is regard, one should worship the body of the teacher. one's 
own body, the body of the sakti, the text in which sacred mantras 
exist, the vessel used by the heroes (vfrapatra), a rosary, a weapon 
(prahara~1a), a litiga collected from Narmada river (btil:zaliliga), 
a liliga made of pearl, made of gold, made of flowers, made of 
charming materials like sandal paste, etc., or a mirror as the lhiga. 
It is by the force of the substratum (maladlzara) that the excel-
lence of the attainment of perfection in mantras occurs. Hence, 
prior and posterior to it is the main, as the mantras act in concert 
with the quality of the substratum. Therefore, in accordance with 
the difference of aim to be attained, that very end is considered

--- PAGE 200 ---
190 
TANTRASARA 
to be the main. This is the view of our teachers. The best of last-
ing impressions is the conception of one's own identity with the 
supreme Lord. 
ITT fl, A, ;zj . fl, A , ~fl, A , ~ • fl , A , ~ 
ru ~1 m-, ru ~1 ~fl , i:i , ;zj , ~, 
~~m~1~%J ~ ~ 
qcf, - 11~ 
mo= 
1 (f5f +nf~ mm >1~ 
~ 
fG:;:f fllAl~J:t, ~~ft:(IA""1ClAi:hj)cf~1q:klc:~11R ~~ 
qa:fW: 
fllAl~fllAl~J{, 3R<TI"~~~ m<:lT: Cf&l'ii=JIU1flf1~~fua~g;:ia= 
~lT fl I A I~ f~~, lTITfmT~"f(:.f >1~'lWT: ([1 ro I "i Cl~ I'{, lft~ 
~ m~m 
q1t:DHci~IJ:t, AIU'f{:i m?111~ ~CfC'iYXlG:~<:il'{, ~~ 
h"m ~JctC'i g: I tl ~ ~ I JO{ I ~ 
~JctC1 ;;ii ~1 c;: ~ l'l I JO{ I ~ ~ II '@ f<:i cp ro 11 t:(I~ I JO{ I 
~~ 
q1t:DHci~IJ:t, 3"11~1(t)'f{:i >1~ ~I ~IClOlffl fc!>Clfl~cfmn: 
cpm1a:> I tl~ ~I A, I 
c;oi I ~q tl 'f{:i 
~~ ~Cfff ~ t:()"U I A, I 
311 ~JRU" 
~ctC'i "i a +nf~, cPiIB~ >iw=IT °Uf?r'lWT: 
~CfC'i.., ci Rl, J:t - ~ 
f~~ I fu5iliH;!.1, AUIJ1lm, FcitX•fcF•di, 11cf~;:fi~t:J1, ~dt, 
~c;oi ~era -=?.1, 1tffif~ 
I 
uIBuIT~~, fq ~ 11 '!9 I CS! g ~al 
I 
~Cl a I ci ""?-1 
~ 
I -afG: lTITf·~fhn~UT <:1"~~ ~ 
31T~Jf CfJff~ Clill 
~~m~1~= 1 3"1~m~1~~ ~fur c=rGJ ~ 
- ~qcf ~= 
1 
~-n 
-a- ;or affi >1uR - fuf~cr fern~~, ~l'l 1l1Cf)1r=t1 i'!f~ 
qcff~ l1Wf-3"1i~lll~I~ qcf~lllHIJ:t, ~mTJ1 ~fcf<:fflT cict')i!:Wf: 
~ 
rmtc:n: 1 ITT 71~ %Rf= fl fl '"fl 1.., = , CffQfC!c1, ~. ~, 
a~, 
3R1UIT, ~f~ 
err~ cicti~lll ~~~ 
- fum-~ filAW;'.J" I 
ITT Bm 11~ a tl I ci {O I WA UT 11mru fl Aw ;"fl err~ m~ ~I ~OT 
¢cf ~~ 
err qf~~ 
err 3ffifiC1, c=rc=rT TPU~~-a:rrfefw 
~UT 'l~C1, <lc1: qf?f ~ICl'{<)cj ~ 
~ltt<:iiic=f"mffi";::r ~;;r 
'lef~ ITT mtj? ffiffi ft? I Cl a~ I 'lJrf~ c=r-acr ~Cl fl Id ¢t>fl cfui cpc=al 
"i '<~I RP~ I ci I \A a:>Gi a~ A C1 d1 ~ 
3"11Cl'<011 a Ci { 0 I ct5 A UT m 
atiTimrrUFti 
CS1 f% '< '""C""I %1 c=rcfut ~Cl, ~ 
~ci 
'<a I ct5 A UT, l!ci lJ-.uT ~l=fui ~ 
y;w II fu 
I ITT 3-lTtITT fu~ qf?f ~"[,f(qf ~a Ci I ci d1 (lLff~ fq I ,i:i r;f

--- PAGE 201 ---
TANTRASARA 
191 
qf~;:r ct;:r MU°C1, qf?f"f~ ~ 
arma~1ft:P: CIT, G:~~ 
q1?11Cf51~ 
~, ID~qft 
J 1 a~ f a-=rurr~ A = f1 T"tftcprn~ ~fm a ~1R=n:, qc=rf~ 
~ft-T: ~<""11 C1 l])~ d5 I: ~~1X:lf';:a-, OR-al #~, 3Br ~W 
~ ~"ill( 
au: I 
S:P""l I~ I fl -s:rfa tSG ~ ~ 
~ ~)':>~ f c=t, cpc=qT ':!~ut a¢~ ll i 
'!" <:l fa, I 
C1C11-scrcf~ m\Ji "i I cft i 
-:q- 3-nl <:{~~ fc:raftifu' 11~ err 
~~~UHCIJf -aCICil~I&:~ ~ 
m~-~ 
cIT°ffiCf5'<~1ll: 
I 
c=rills~ mfr1011a1~c=r-~efwC1Lf~ - ~~~1"iaA'lsti~<Wr= 1 
3i 1!SG +:f a 5 C'il s-Rf ~Rfz:rnT~ qcffu"i I Fl ~Jt ~ 
""1._ Cfl5rtacr ':!ffiffi tf5 Ci A Fc-1 , 
~ ~w 
-#c1" qCi:\1""1i ~1fT1""1i ffiuli ~. 
~1R-nq1a 
~ 
~~ 
lJ){)Oll I 
The Procedure for (the Celebration of) Festival Days (Parvadinam)
231 
(Those days marked as a) festival day can be divided into general, 
general-general, general-special, special-general, special, and 
special-special; this is its sixfold division. This occasion is called 
a day of festivities (parva) because on that day the completion of 
a procedure (vidhi) is celebrated. The first and fifth days of every 
month are general occasions for festivities. The fourth. eighth, 
ninth, fourteenth, and fifteenth of both halves of the fortnight are 
general-general. Both these groups, because of their association 
with a particular constellation of stars and planets on differ~nt 
lunar days, which will be given later, become a general-special 
type of festival day (parvadinam). 
These are the days of special festivities: the first quarter of 
the ninth lunar night, or the dark fortnight of [the lunar month 
of] Margaslr~s·a (November-December); [in the month] of Pau~a 
(December-January) (the festival occurs at) the dark ninth lunar 
midnighC the midnight of Magha (January-February) (it is at) the 
bright lunar fifteenth; at midday [of the month] of Phiilguna (Feb-
ruary-March) [it is at the! bright lunar twelfth; of Caitra (March-
April), it is at the bright lunar thirteenth; in [the the month of] 
Vaisakha (April-May) it is the dark eighth of the lunar day: in 
lyai~fha (May-June) it is the dark ninth of the lunar day: [in the

--- PAGE 202 ---
192 
TANTRASARA 
month] of A~a{iha (June-July) it is the first day; of Srava~w (July-
August) it is the previous portion of the day on the dark eleventh; 
of Bhadra (August-September) it is the bright sixth lunar mid-
day; of Asvina (September-October) the bright ninth lunar day; of 
Kartika (October-November) the first portion of the night of the 
bright ninth. The star Citra is associated with the moon: the star 
Magha is associated with Jupiter: the star Ti~ya is associated with 
the m?on; the star Purvaphalguni is associated with Mercury; the 
star Srava~w, with Mercury; the star Satabhi~a, with the moon; 
the star Mula, with the suw the star Rohini with Venus; the star 
Viiakha, with Jupiter; the s'tar Sravana, ;.,i~h the moon. If count-
ing the month M{irgaslr~a onward, tl~e number of them becomes 
eleven excluding Aivina, then the parva is special-special. 
. . If any special occasion arises on any other festival day, the~ 
It IS called anuparva. If an aster ism (a grouping of astronomi-
cal objects) of a star and planet occurs. there is no importance 
[concerning the specific] time of the day, for the tithi itself is the 
bestower of auspiciousness. The main feature of performing ritu-
a!s during festival days is the continuity of the performance of the 
n.tual called. The rituals performed on the festival days should be 
given dominance to anuyaga. The words murtiytiga and cakra-
yaga are its synonyms. :m 
In this ritual, the teacher, his relations along with their sons. 
a knower of the truth, a daughter, an outcast woman, a prosti-
tute, a woman who is having her monthly period (aru~1a), and 
~ woman who knows the truth should primarily be worshipped 
m cakrayaga. They should be worshipped individually and as .a 
group. There, the teacher occupies the seat in the center. and Cir-
cling him, either in a circle or in a row. beginning with the teacher 
and ending with the disciples, following the order of vlra and sakti. 
Then, they should be worshipped individually with sandalwood 
paste, incense. flowers, etc. Then, the vessel should he contem-
plated as Sadasiva, and, filling it with wine, it should he meditated 
upon as the nectar of Sakti. Then, it should be worshipped as

--- PAGE 203 ---
TANTRASARA 
193 
Siva, its enjoying power, and by her [the agent of enjoyment], the 
host of deities should be propitiated. Then, meditating on it as a 
unity of the triad, composed of the object (nara), the instrument 
(sakti), and the supreme subject (Siva), one should propitiate it in 
order to remove the layers of coverings (avara~za). One should 
propitiate externally and internally in order to attain both enjoy-
ment and liberation. Then, the propitiation should be done in the 
reverse order. Thus, the complete circular movement nourishes 
and accomplishes the fullness of cakra. The vessel, in the form of 
the universe, should be placed on the base and then, from it, first 
propitiating the host of the deities, one should propitiate oneself 
with it. In the absence of the vessel one should shape the palm 
of his right hand in the shape of vessel (bhadra), and placing the 
palm of the right hand over the left one in such a way that no gaps 
are present. This is called vellitasukti. By the falling of the drops 
of wine, the vetala and guhyaka become pleased, and by the flow 
of it Bhairava is pleased. 
No person should be given entry into the place of worship. If, 
by mistake, [some person] enters there, one should not become 
doubtful. If one does become doubtful, then he should perform the 
circular ritual twice. After this, fried and pungent food should be 
placed abundantly before or inside the sacred house, not known 
to common people, and everybody should be made to unite and 
be named with term 'deity' (devata), excluding his personal name. 
This is the description of virasmizkaraytiga. Then finally they [the 
teacher, etc.] should be propitiated with offerings of food, betel, 
clothes, etc. This is the principle of miirtiytiga. 
. 
Even a person who has never seen the mawfala, by worship.-
ping during the days of the festivals (parvadinam) with the murtz-
ytiga ritual, obtains within a year the result of putraka initiation. 
without performing sandhyti and other rituals. This is the pro-
cedure for the elderly, those inclined to worldly enjoyment, and 
women. The teacher should give this kind of instruction only when 
the descent of grace occurs.

--- PAGE 204 ---
194 
TANTRASARA 
31~ 4 fa ?I d5 fafo: 
I ~ q-
.sffi"C MA I C1 I f?rf~+:rc1 .sffift:i (§:I A Ci I ai 
fuf~ 
~~{1$11~'<d5~, ~ 
~ 
~Ci;:Jjilflld') ·fcr;n 4~?1d'501 ~ 
R tLf)fl ~ I ' ~ 
I ITT ~I t5il(t)~JcfC1TCl ~fufmfu-=i 1.-a m qfq ?I d5So\ I 
m Cf>Tfflascpw 1 q sa co:~n '!')C'i a ci') -R ~ 
1 a ci') ~~ 
~ 
>ITT-Pi~ 1 a ;:Jji Fa a= 
I ~Cffl45aet:~n ~ 
*~'<qq?M1f+ffcw I ef&JOlllHl'""flYXlet:~n ~ 
sITT Ci r?1 f1'iCl:I q fa et:: I illf fu~~ aci ~Jff~ 3"11 ~fl'l I <lLff~ qf~ 
~. 
tf\qufJj)ffil'<:Mru~Jrja1c=t >l"~ 4G~~C51Yff1q?~IJ l~f;aAfY ~ 
I C1W~~~ 
4et:d5C'il~q"iCIOf~'LClll~RJ -a- J11;q;=aAcfJ, 
;~TkFfl A 4 ( 
d)u ~·I ;a A ""1Q Ci,, 
fuzf'~ ~ 
-~ ~ 
qfq ?I d5 I fUr 
acrra ~ 
~ f1Att11~ofa~q~~ ~. ~~~ ~ 
~ 
I 
Clffi A t5l Ri q: ~:, "ci I <j)A f fti ~~ 
f?Jfc:;:f q- ~ 
~'LCll I ;q I 4 ("(f)(llfl:, 
~ 
fu~ 1=flf~ mm 4f°a?ld5So\, 31~ "W11 l=fffi-q;, 3l~ en~· 
aet:as'<u1 ~ 
~. ~ 
3-lftr "ff~"ITT11sfq 3icITTUT >i~~m 
ffic;{Jqf%a$1Hld5'<u'1 $1HR;:co:1q=ti: I 
·~ 
mtZITfl1fu-$1-R~f~4'<:A~l~llfFl C1GJ ~ 
I'~~ 
1~ 
4m?lasmfu: 1 
The Procedure Called Pavitraka, 233 the Offering of the Sacred 
Thread 
The ritual 'offering of the sacred thread· (pavitraka) is the ful-
fillment of the command of the Lord preceded by an injunction 
sych as given in the Srlratnamala, the Trisiromata, and the 
Srisiddhamata. As it is said in the Srl Tantraloka: "Without the 
'offering of the sacred thread' (pavitraka), everything is fruitless.'· 
Therefore, from the beginning of the lunar bright fortnight of the 
month of A~d(llza until the end of kularpar~zima, the full-moon 
night of magha, this offering of the pavitraka is to be performed. 
In connection with it, on the fifteenth day of the dark night of 
K(Jrtika, kulacakra and nityacakra are to be performed. This is 
the opinion of the knowers of the Nitya Tantra. However, accord-
ing to the knowers of the Bhairava Kulormi Tantra, the pavitraka 
should be performed on the bright fifteenth night of magha, while

--- PAGE 205 ---
TANTRASARA 
195 
according to the knowers of the Tantra Sadbhtiva, it should be 
performed on the last fifteenth night of the southern movement of 
the sun, that is, the winter solstice (dak$i~ztiyana). 
During that period, one should worship the Lord according 
to one's financial capabilities, and performing oblations into the 
fire, and then propitiating him, he should offer the pavitraka. The 
garland for the pavitraka may be made either of gold, pearl, or 
silk th read, cotton th read, or kusa grass. It may contain knots 
representing the thirty-six principles (tattvas). One garland should 
be made containing the number of knots of pada, kala, bhuvana, 
var~1a, and mantra which reaches to the end of the knee. Another 
one shou Id be made to reach to the end of the navel, another to 
reach the throat, and another should be on the head. Thus four 
pavitrakas should be offered to the deity and to the teacher, while 
meditating for the purpose of the fulfillment of the entire path. 
One should be given to the remaining members of the group also. 
After completing the offering of pavitraka, one should have a 
great festival. One should perform the pavitraka for either sev~n 
or three days at the end of the four-month period (between mid-
July and mid-October), or once when there is a state of emer-
gency (an unfortunate event). If one is wealthy, he should perform 
the pavitraka every month: otherwise, during the period of four 
months as described above, or once. If one is unable to perform 
the pavitraka, he should repeat his mantra as atonement. P:- per-
son who is endowed with right knowledge and possesses nch.es, 
but refrains from the pavitraka, incurs a sin. Being polluted with 
greed, although learned, and abstaining from the pavitraka (he) 
disgraces knowledge. According to the following statement: 
One who corrupts the decrees of the Lord after obtain-
ing right knowledge must perform atonement. 
This is the description of the procedure of the pavitraka: 
$11., C9 I~ 
ffif'CPCf>T<"+t Cl 1;=ci5fq 
"fnf?T 
"ff~~ 
~Cl a 1 a ¢t5 'ff f'-;:rf'cu: 
Tcrn-~ ~, ~ "ffwfcrmfu ifLi q 0l fffi~ 
Cl"mfu-OlTcr lcrn-~l'1 ll llct1 ~')0lfq_ I

--- PAGE 206 ---
196 
TANTRASARA 
On the day of receiving knowledge. and also at the end of 
worldly festivals, the upsurge of consciousness becomes exceed-
ingly great. Therefore, the nearness of the host of deities becomes 
particularly great. Hence, considering the occurrence of such 
upsurge of consciousness, one should perform a specific addi-
tional form of the anuyaga, etc. 
3fV CLll~l~fu: I 
°ff<f~ll~fi~uf 
l];~ 
d:il{.~lcl~ 31~cl~, msfq m1~1a 
q'<~1t£l1ll1fll err f1Jj)fbaf1M1-<.1fbfi ~ 
cx:rmaTicl-, 31~ 
(f){ia11q~11q 
tmmrclf~-~~nsq1af"imcr;=rrmfua~am 
cx:rrqaffi:f-+n=f~~~ 1 a 
f;F~1fl;:if'~'R:1: ~'R:IT Rllfl:iaa 
l~V"H:Cf>l~'R:ll d:il{.~I fctJlP"llOll Lbf!CIC"fl ~. 
~~ ~efftcalllT 
~ 
3 f'm {.~ °ff~ err qmUF{ ~~ q ~ ?1 <:i qcqi:rm a I l fl ~ff 
CfflieffilUral: l Io I q fa lJ)~ -a ~~, 3n~ 
d"'l I{.~ ~ Cf5 C"Y dcrcln""( I 
(1(i: f11l"!1~1 u~ll-;:r ~ 
c=m~, c=rffi cx:nqaTicl- ~?I a 1 Cfl'i q e1 fl~~, 
~~~ 
¥~ "fP51T<!fu 5'l fl ~·fl lj)Ufa-fq Cf5C"Y I fct~ 11 ~~I li1f~ 
';:r ¥ qa=f ~ 
uc;f~ flk'id"5, q ~~mm m~ 
<il~4qfu 
~:rn:~fo i q Gfl 1 ;:fi cx:rrqaffi:f ~~, rnrfCr a ffch~ a @;fl Mui ~ 
~ 
ll I Cl~ ll I l.~ I f1 l"l I f((l: I mnsfq ~Jff<:ffaT fum"cfTW fq fl J'6 3 q f'M CU 
WTIVCK(~ I 
The Procedure to Be Followed During the Exposition l?{ the Sacred 
Text 234 
One should worship the teacher, who is fully endowed with knowl-
edge regarding all sacred texts. and who should he cordially 
invited to expound the sacred texts. 235 The teacher should explain 
the text to his disciples, or to the disciples of others, according to 
their mental development and aptitude. The teacher should explain 
the text, even to a person who is established in the lower doctrines.

--- PAGE 207 ---
TANTRASARA 
197 
out of compassion, while his heart is well-disposed with devo-
tional feelings toward the descent of grace caused by the diversity 
of the will belonging to the supreme Lord. However, the teacher 
should exclude the delicate points of secrets. 
As regards the exposition, it is prescribed that the recipient 
should be seated on a lower seat than the teacher, and the recipient 
should eagerly await receiving the knowledge, having also regu-
lated his speech, mind, and limbs. Only then does the teaching 
become fruitful. 
At first the ground should be smeared with the sandalwood 
paste on which a square should be drawn or imagined. That should 
be the base of the lotus: above it, three lotuses should be drawn. 
On the middle lotus, the goddess of speech (VagISI), and to the left 
and to the right Gar:iapati and the guru should be worshipped. On 
the base lotus, the deity supervising [prevailing over] the subject 
explained [in the sacred text] should be worshipped. Then, one 
should propitiate the sacred diagram, offering from a water vessel. 
This being completed, the teacher should expound the text contain-
ing sutras, sentences, and the section. The exposition should be 
uniform throughout, without contradicting earlier [statements] by 
later statements. The teacher should present the view of the oppo-
nent first, and should make use of 'principles of centralization' 
(tantra), 'repetition' (avrtti), 'extended application· (prasalizga). 
'figure of speech' (samuccaya), and 'admission of an alternative' 
(vikalpa), which are accepted as logical and proper for the presen-
tation of the text. He should represent properly the viewpoint of 
the opponent first, and then by refuting it. he should arrive at the 
object aimed at hy the ascertainment of the meaning of the expo-
sition. He shou Id expound the whole of the section, but not more. 
Throughout the exposition, at the end of each subject, propitiation 
and worship of the deity should continue until the end of the expo-
sition. Then they should worship the seat of learning, and perform-
ing the ritual for withdrawal, the place should be smeared and all 
the material used should be thrown into deep water.

--- PAGE 208 ---
198 
TANTRASARA 
This completes the procedure of the 'exposition of the sacred 
texts.' 
31~H"Fi~Rtif5W: l 
~ 
a=ra$11'if'it:o~ ~ 
;or ta')foa crwfL1 -w::IT~ 
m armf18:, C1q 3P1~ e;l Cj)l""t 341 a I'< ckf ;:ff c;trl~ I 34 Ci fd $11 ;ft Q 
~dJl\q"ci$1llli:\la1: ~~ 
~ ~ 
~~ 
wf~ ~ 
~cie1lfa -~~w 
dffiel'l: amau ~ 
-;:ffi~, ~ 
CJ, Gt Ci I Gt M ~ 
3-RSfUsi wra-ffi ~c=RT e Cf)6t I {I C1 >r~fu Brfra:rRfl{ 
3i I Cl ct~ C1 ~ 
~I~· I fcrc:1fa: ~, ~ 
fa ~'p:~ LiJiT: mffer iHt?lW r:, "ff 
f%00~~ I 
$fu fp4;qf:itipfci: I 
Freedom from Conventional (Samaya) Duties 
Alth~ugh a person steadily established in knowledge does not 
require the performance of any rite such as atonement, etc., he 
does have the responsibility of showing the right path of conduct 
to t~ose who conceive that only by performing rituals will they 
attam mok$a. However, a person who is not a knower of the truth. 
and whose attainment of mok~a and bhoga are thoroughly depen-
dent on the performance of ritual, transgresses the conventional. 
ru~es (samaya) by not performing aton~ment, and [because of 
this] undergoes suffering for one hundred years and becomes an 
eater of corpses (pifoca). Therefore, the procedure of the rite ?f 
atonement should be explained. In regard to such person. the~·e _is 
no at_one~nent for killing a woman. Regarding other forms of ~in. 
considermg the seriousness of the sin, one should repeat, with-
out interruption, goddess malinl once or three hundred thousand 
times. This he should continue until he becomes free from doubt: 
that is, until the feeling of guilt is gone. Then. at the end, _the 
special worship should be performed~ and even on that occasion. 
cakrayaga should be performed. Cakrayaga is essentially per-
formed everywhere as the last ritual.

--- PAGE 209 ---
TANTRASARA 
199 
This is the procedure for the release from convention (samaya). 
3l~ 1'<1'l5"1 Im fu: I 
"fnf ~ ll 11 ;:ft~ 3Lffi"~ ~ 
3-llR~: ~~Jfi g)?<A f ct, ~ f%" "fl" 
fcrWs=i·Ci~ I Cil f°tja'j ~CJ >IT~,~ ID ID~~~ 
~ 
~ 
-~ill "fnfw ~I ~ 
fd I f~d') l1U5ff ~ 
<1?f mauf t:fTW 
~ 
<1?r f"I +:I +a +:I~ ~U(QT (i (ql ~: ~ ~ 
(Rit ~ 
~ 
~ 
mJFf efa=rurn=( 3i k-A H Ji,_ ~ 
~ 
~a 
~:fl fmti mm d Rfrd I ~ 
~ 
a cti l!\JI i 1') ~fa, 1 
~ 
lj)'tl~J\l~fu: I 
~ 
~ fi:t Rid') q;i:f '1')cf* 11 wu Fa a f3fa: 
1 
fcF1 I fY $1 H <:4) l 11 ~ 
a <:4 h=t I~ o I lj)l:Ll a I I 
~ m~;::idlJ)L(""11"dl4fcR"fml 
(i~fil{ 
~~~acf;;:rnCf51~1~ ~ 
fci~IJ:flffl;d?+:t_ I l~ol I 
The Procedure for the Worship of the Spiritual Teacher (Guru)
236 
After al I the pujas are completed, and upon the day following t~~ 
completion of the cakrayaga, one should then perform gurup!IJG · 
Previously, the guru has been worshipped as ancillary to the nt~s, 
but now he should be worshipped as the main object of worship. 
However, the worship of the teacher not being performed as the 
principal object of worship, one remains bound by the bond of 
operating the functional rite [one is bound by his own entitleme~t 
performing it]. Therefore, the gurupfija should be performed m 
every respect. 
One should first draw the sacred diagram named svastika, and 
should offer a golden seat there. After this, worshipping all the 
paths in it, the teacher should be seated upon it. and worshipping 
him, one should propitiate him with offering of water, food, and 
money. Then, surrendering oneself to him, one offers praise for 
the remains of his food, and [after] consuming it, he then pros-

--- PAGE 210 ---
200 
TANTRASARA 
trates before the teacher in obeisance, and then should perform 
cakrapuja. 
This is the procedure related to the worship of a teacher: 
The person who performs the indispensable (nitya) and 
occasional observances (naimittika), etc., showing no 
misery, attains liberation only by the practice of ritu-
als, without having knowledge of the truth, or taking 
recourse to yoga. 
l!ct ~ 
f~ 
-;:tfm~ C5lf f~~ 
I 3-Tq;-;:r-r 3if4-q 3i I JI A~ 
>i1+:J1ali~ ~ 
1 ITT firu;::i:i15iA~ fu~~ "fffaft q fcn:rWR-ACbllii, 
rn+:J~fffl -a- ~l~Hl\+:Jd:>Cillii ftict:llii I fl(f)flj"1Jl~t56Clf(j);'.J: f1?!'Ciffl -a-cv 
4Q)c-HiiSl<-0~fox:i'€li ~ 
ruA~f;:i ~ 
~11~'4, - ~ 
~~mcmmr 
Fa" f1+:t'tt1= ~11f5lficrm ~ 
l!ct>Lf)Mi;:uqct>: l!Cf>Tf~~~. m ~ 
tRBW1liIB~lfffim~ m 'ml1" ~~ 
cTICf>l;'.J IA ~ 
I d'J~fl ~ 
' 
' 
t:rc=ri1G:4'<1+:J~lf,l4R dG:IJIAlf°tl~ll~ ~. ~ 
c=rwfcfo l!Q m~ 
tfT~t9JICl~llf511tl1, Q"-{ ~ fqfqmf~~ICllJ:J~f~ mcrfflct:l;:a1a1, 
~ 
~l"iliq{A9d'<a1A~f~ ~~11~, "ffi"fm=( ~ fq{flru'<C'il= 
f1 +"I '{("I I -Cl :J9 G: iSI ""W fCI I fl T?li I ;'.J ~ q {Ji I cl"ff fcl :;:+:I ~ q {A ~Cl '<: fCI '{<) q I Ji~ f ;:nc= 
+:rR ~ 
Ga>~ 11 f5I ¢A , ct-f~ ~ ~cf~cf fli 1 J 1 ct:> ii rrr ~~ 
err - $ ~ cP{ 
l!Cbtf5C'4f+if'~ l!Cb+AldCI 3"11JIAI(\ I 
Chapter Twenty-One 
Thus, all the rituals of the indispensable (nitya) and occasional 
observances (naimittika) have been described. Next. the evidence 
of this agama 237 will be elaborated. This universe is composed 
solely of consciousness, which abides in a consciousness charac-
terized by reflective awareness (vimarsa), which has been ascer-
tained to be its inner verbalization or articulation (sabdana). 238 
Sastra, the sacred text, is of the nature of reflective awareness

--- PAGE 211 ---
TANTRASARA 
201 
manifesting itself in the form of all substances existing in this uni-
verse, along with the diversity of the relations of deeds and their 
results. Therefore, the entire corpus of sacred texts is not differ-
ent from the very nature of the Lord. In reality, it is the giver of 
one fruit, but because of the regulating power (niyati) of the Lord, 
people are strongly attached to its various divisions for the fulfill-
ment of more than one purpose. Some are strongly inclined to the 
Vedas, having the characteristic cognition of duality born of mayti. 
Others who are also like them are strongly attached to Samkhya 
and Vai~IJ.ava doctrines with erroneous notions concerning libera-
tion. Still others are attached to Saiva Siddhanta, etc., which is, in 
essence, the reflective consciousness of the nature of transcendent 
Siva. Others are attached to the Matmizga agamas, etc., whic,h is 
characterized by the reflective consciousness of immanent Siva. 
But some, the rarest of the rare, are deeply attached to the doc-
trines of the Trika school, 239 characterized by the reflective con-
sciousness of the nature of the great Lord, free from all limi-
tations, whose highest essence is freedom and bliss, and who is 
composed of pure consciousness. Yet others, also forsaking the 
former, and also the latter, either leaving it or transcending it, 
thus attain the accomplishment of a single purpose by following 
only one agama. 
*~sRr fi+H""CilJl:s:tHl'i 
t!C15~-<ct514c=asfq 
~1,:110~ ~ 
3ru"f~, 
s:ilJ""llO<'i~ 
~~qlctffl 
31fdJflaa1~1: 
3Wi ~ :r:a I s:i '1~ &] 
C1f'Ci ("q I<"\ I 
q { ftH (Sl Im 
fcr~zr~{-aq 3lf"ffif·m=cp{: 
I 
~616"""1"""1Ci~CUCJ(l ~"fQJR*~ ~fd>l'<I~ (fG:~ CfCffU(\ 
~ 
~ 
fi~H'i - 3-TTS$lli*~· 45C1l("Cf)~fW ~: 
- ~q 
~ 
<sFico: P 1 ckt, A-4 ;::i Ch cfax=asfq ·frch=rcf $1 cpa fd A ?I ~~ 
- %mc=rG: 
fuRmqmr~f~:ITll1(=(, R~f8sfq 3"llJIAHi mm~ ClTCffl ~qJl~I 
3"1;:q0l~fc=R"Cf.>T't.Lfa=rrcfiaj (i()llJilOl:tffl 
~flfdlCi,, ·~ ~ 
Li~ <'i I rn' ~ 
IB -f'.fh::rf'ufasrfuq {~ ~q 
I m'ffi~q 3TITTli:" m emf~ 
1lS('J Cf) C1 , 
·~~f'a-rc=rr ~~ · ~ 
(Si 1 fl ffl mm~ 'QCf ITT rn ~n=r:

--- PAGE 212 ---
202 
TANTRASARA 
., I ;:q ll OQ Fa ~cnrcizrt - "flGJ "ff"llT: 3-Tmcrrc=f I m~ 
Ci <id: I di sftr 
3ffcffi~, m"flf~ ~ ~ffi~ ms~ CITT4~ Cf.>T<:rf<:1, d51fa(( 
~Cfll q 4ci fl 1 ~, m :q- ~"CB1=l 3-Rcnfum - ~er CS1 f2>Ci 'I\~ ffif;~g?T 
JfTT"fum. ~futlFl -m a11~nAa s:ifof;d iSIM1aa ~c;1Qqcfat11m41~ 
~ 
- ~ 
Rmffl JM1l: 3"l R1Rm1 a 1 =a'l qRts: , C1TfrT CfITTR >ITT1tt 
~P=t10ncpcfa1 31~411;.aOQAa 3"l111l"ls:llAIOl'.JiA 
,1 ~"fl" 3-TlTTli 3-TT~l'.JiUTiaT 
m ~ 
~, 
$fl1C1l""f~'"i I 
fifud'ld51~14"1\AI~ <:1~ 
~ lfll llt~lfl'i f4 c=r&fu ~a a Li-=fl: I 
~ 
flAtt!Al'.:iruK'!IB~l~l""f~T-
"f!'R ~~ 
~ll'e'iATjJ"fl'<:lc-A 11 
~ 
~~r.1cP]/cil"cillffci-<foci Ci;:;;5f fl I~ 3111 P""ll>'i IA 1o<::rna:>1~1-=i ~ 
~Cbfa~IA1f%Cbl=l I I~ 9 11 
Even in dualistic doctrines, it is accepted that all the agamas, 
being the creation of one Lord, are considered to be authorita-
tive. Depending on the validity, in one place non-contradictory 
harmony regarding truth with harmony occurs, and as a result one 
is inclined to some activity; while thinking that it is not so. one 
becomes disinclined. Therefore, they are similar. Mutual opposi-
tion with a difference of subject matter is of no account. Killing a 
brahma!Ja and the prohibition of it are like the difference between 
purity and excel Jenee of the soul. In the absence of sa lizska ra, one 
fails to earn the right to follow the code of conduct. 
Therefore. the argument is the same for both, like a difference 
of a5ramas. It is said that the excel Jenee of any act ion is deter-
mined by the excellence of its fruit, like the Upani~adic portion of 
the Vedas. 240 
If we admit that all the sacred texts (sastras) were created by 
different authors, even then we may suppose that al I the sastras 
were created by omniscient authors. This is because the agamas 
are associated with the concepts explained hy omniscient authors.

--- PAGE 213 ---
TANTRASARA 203 
as wel 1 as other relevant matters. If the eternality of tigama be sup-
posed, even then the logical arguments, i.e., anvaya and vyatireka, 
perception, etc., as well as their validity, are grounded in tradi-
tion (prasiddhi). 241 A notion such as "I see real silver" depends 
on somebody else's knowledge, as in this case on a goldsmith's 
knowledge. 
Therefore, the tradition (prasiddlzi) is agama. To some, it gives 
a perceptible result, as, for example, one who is hungry eats. A 
child becomes engaged with each individual object only because 
of being impelled by prasiddlzi, and not by the logical connec-
tion of cause and effect, and its negation. At that age, there is an 
absence of logic. etc. Furthermore, at that age, its presence is of 
little use. Inference of the logical connection of cause and effect, 
and its negation. taking recourse to prasiddhi, are required for the 
accomplishment of some action. Some prasiddlzis are the givers 
of unseen results, such as emancipation after death, dissolution 
in prakrti, and emancipation of the soul. Other prasiddhis bestow 
similarity with Siva, while others terminate in the oneness [with 
Siva]. These seen and unseen results are again manifold. There-
fore, in this world full of different traditions (prasiddlzis), what: 
ever state a person wi 11 have in the future. he selects that kind of 
prasiddhi and is forced to accept it as something highly desirable 
(or undesirable). For this reason, what would be the purpose of 
verbal argument in regard to a person who is quite empty? From 
among those prasiddhis, one should be taken as valid. and the 
val id ity of that agama should be accepted. Therefore, a person 
should take recourse to whichever agama grants excellent results. 
What could be the purpose of further arguments? 
As the wise person considers the light of the conscious-
ness shining as supreme reality. in the same way, he is 
aware of self-consciousness. Therefore, one should take 
recourse to that holy text which is the essence of the 
intuitive 1 ight of reflective consciousness characterized 
by the all-inclusiveness of anuttara.

--- PAGE 214 ---
204 
TANTRASARA 
A person exists in the behavior devised by his own con-
viction of common usage, but only becomes free from 
doubts when he becomes the supreme Lord, after attain-
ing steadiness in the highest prasiddhi, the transcendent. 
3l~mru~1A 1~d5'i 1 1 
31~*1i:tfCil ~ 
~ 
*1Jj)f::Atjfll1~11<t>C11fF"11{C)<t>li 3-lfUd51Ro1: >rfu" 
~1i:iCTt.>1fMCb~fwllll1R{<)~a,a3ffi l:ilJ1fia1'<:1G.1 
'~~C1[gfu°trtt:CU1~~af~ I 
3"l ct 501atRo1 fCi f'Ct flUJ 11 c;: H ;::c:q fJf a 1: I I 
3"1H~tjO;~i:Jl61'<:C1Jf "cict'Sf'Ct Ci1Jld51: I 
~sftr~~ 
Ci~ld"ii fu.ITT=f ~ 
11' 
cicHlll ~ 
g);fllllll:, ~ 
mGT - me_IT ~ 
~~ ~ 
mul 
"fifufu q ~I illf q ~ 
~ 
3c~?tG:, ¢ 
C[cf fCi ~~ W=( I ffi f;§:CfJ I'""! f<:f 
fuct1~1lfqsqi:i1: "frcfw Rcf~f: tjtSOf1~an:11~. ~ 
fua1ll1m 
~fl:IT~ ~~~ 
3fi~<:IT ~~"{UTT~ -a- I IT5f ~ 
~~. 
~uf 
<ft~, mwT: qc:, 1icrT~ en ~ 
1 IT5f fi 
I 'i 1 fua 
1(f~afitq 11rrrf~~q ~f~ 
~v-tj ~IOlfl~lgCbl~ 
mcrf<:ffiIT ~fcl"G:.l?tl ~I 
C1 {C)q ("Cl I Ci, ~~I 
Fa C1 I~ ~ 
3 L"ci 14 ~ci­
CRP-%"ITT-~Rf~ 3qffimcrcrTim'R:li fu~tqef~ufcn ~ 
~ :wro=a 
Y'<IY'<c-8 ~sfq q 
1 C1mf6 - mm-~-~-11ur-m-~~fu ~ 
~~Ci 
fCI I f;:r - Cfjfl I en aj ~er 3-F(=firfCTTc=( I fcnn ~I ft) I Cl fq q {I q '< ~ 
"& &1 q su Cf) fll *1 tn•fCI 1 JI 1 a ("Cl ~;G:a ("Cl 1 C!.l -;:rt omurt ~ma 
{Cl q ("Cl Ra 
3"ffi ~i:tfflg);fiwf~: 1 ~sfq qsa~1R=P: ft:~~. ~ra~1fm ci 
q sq {ti q a 1 . l!ci" q Xl ru ~ 1 ra : ~ 1 m Ci : . m .l?tl 3"l ;;ii ~ 
'""l ~ i~ 
::i m 
cm-rrr -~ 
~~{C)q~I Clil~I ~~: 
f~ 
~f~~IU[{<)qj ~L"cil'<:Al~rr}q­
~ 
~"fl - -a~ qzqf~ ~ m~ 
~"C1-Rfh ;:i- f-cB-f~wcrm. 
C1wfu~~lSOCid5'<0 I a ct'SliaO~ 
~~Q"f#-;::rr li I JI ¢'Cl'i lfITTG."lTIURf 
cft;:rfq ~~ 
~. 
oolstf~ R?1\lst1~;-ue<:i1~cr ~

--- PAGE 215 ---
TANTRASARA 
205 
~~~, c=rf~~f'~ ~ 
5 f1 I :r:<:i ftr Ci~~~ C:Wi HI A I ~t:Ol.fl J II Ci,_ ct 6 a ci')~ 
A~ =a ~b ~Ji~ fl CfCf~ ~, (1(1: s:i Io 11 ;:a: , c=ic=r: ~ 
Gi ~J\C'i 1 ,s:i ch 
~1Rb?1Cll"""cii:t1 '\9;:1 CbfY ~fl, A I~ 1;ci ft'; "flTOT 3ITTf.ITT: ~ ~lfu>?il:l l;:ci a<1qR 
~ I JC4 I fc:p=t ~ T{C) 4 I ~I Rn: -~ 
fl cp1)i£ll ~ o1 ct 3TTtTRTU <:1 :nQ I ti <pca:T ~ 
3nU<:r~Cil<:ilJ=tfq ~ 
fu~ q~~a,_. ~ 
q- fifd;:Ji~A -~ 
fu~ 
mcrcrr "Cl-;::r q Ciffll: ~~ih-ncrr ~. ~ 
3fu:c=r ~ 
qlfaffia <:R11" 
fcr~, -a-~ fficrc=( :rafu ~ 
q- fcr~1~Fa - ~ 
~a1afCi 'tifci-afCi 
-~-g;ihi I ct 9:<:i I Ci "ff~ I Ci ~ffiA 
·~ 
~ fi~clCJ?~ ........ ~ .......... I' 
~ 
I C1ill TFUqql'\9ctg)J~AIC!.li 3"ll\A~4)';:flc:tl""flli 3"lclRkal ~~ 
J1 L("Cf I 3 q f"i ~ c=<:i Jf"R -Rf'~ ~ 
iSt I tu~ ll I : I 
Chapter Twenty-Two 
The entire worship of this character is now going to be ascertained 
according to the Kaula method. This is meant for those who have 
attained the proper confidence and in whom the engrained desire 
for Kula yaga is going to develop. Therefore, in texts such as the 
Yogasalizclira, etc., it has been stated: 
Bliss is Brahman which abides in the body. That bliss is 
established in a threefold way in the last syllable under 
pa-varga that is the labials. The person who is not a 
brahmacarin and abstains from the procedure of fol-
lowing the three ma-karas (that is the ritual involving 
the three forbidden elements) is bereft of bliss. Bliss 
being bereft of wine, etc., and those who. forsaking 
it. engage themselves in worshipping in the cakra in 
both ways are cooked in a dreadful hell. Therefore, one 
should follow the prescribed procedure. 
The Kula form of ritual is to be performed in the following 
way. The ritual is sixfold: external, in the fakti, in one's own body. 
in the union of the two. in the vital air, and in consciousness.

--- PAGE 216 ---
206 
TANTRASARA 
Among the six, each latter is more excellent than the former, 
but the performance of each former one is based on one's sweet 
will. One who is desirous of attaining enjoyment should select 
the second, fourth, and fifth; but the sixth is the principal ritual 
for the one who is desirous of liberation. Even this kind of person 
should perform the rituals beginning from the second. as far as is 
possible, during the occasional observances. for in that way the 
precept is fulfilled. 
Now, in regard to performance of the external ritual, there 
is the altar; the vessel full of wine, called the vessel of the vfra; 
the red cloth; and the Siva liliga, which was described earlier. In 
this ritual, without taking recourse to [the rituall bath, etc., one 
attains purity by simply taking repose in the perfect blissful state. 
Then, while meditating on the oneness of the vital energy, con-
sciousness, and the body, and [with the awareness that this] con-
sciousness is identical with great Lord, one should repeat the man-
tra twenty-seven times. Then, one should place the mantra (nyasa) 
on the top of the head, the face, the heart, the secret part, and the 
murtis, first in the natural order, and then in reverse. In this way 
the fullness of identity with the great Lord in his apard. parapartL, 
and para forms is attained. 
The number of principles (tattvas) from mayo, puru~rn, gu~za. 
buddhi, to earth principle is twenty-seven. The principles kaltL' 
e~c., are included in it. The vidyafoktis possess the nature of the 
h1gher-~um-lower aspects. The five Brahmas (Brahma, Vigiu. 
Rudra, Isvara, and Sadasiva), Sadyajata, Bhavodbhavatva, and the 
others have twenty-seven aspects. This has been explained by the 
venerable, glorious Lakulefa as well as others. 
The great Lord (Paramesvara) possesses five .<aktis, even in 
its highest aspect, and each of these .<aktis possesses five aspects. 
Thus, the number of foktis is twenty-five. When these saktis are 
not shining distinctly as differentiated from each other. they are 
then said to be one; that is, a non-differentiated point (anud-
bhinnaviblulgti). With the pervasiveness of the twenty-seven. she 
should be meditated on as the flame of consciousness. It repre-

--- PAGE 217 ---
TANTRASARA 207 
sents the intellect and the vital energy, and it should be tied into 
the sacred hair on the head (sikhti) while uttering the mantra once. 
It should be thought of as being bound so securely with great Lord 
that nothing extraneous can approach it. Then, all the articles for 
the ritual, the place of worship, and the guardian deities of the 
quarters, which are in front of him, should all be conceived as 
being of his essence because they have been permeated by the 
whole group of instruments of knowledge dominated by that sort 
of intellect [related to the supreme Lord]. 
Then, the vessel for the offering should be filled with the per-
vasive thought of tying of the sacred hair on the head and should 
be worshipped. The altars also are to be worshipped by a few 
drops of the I iqu id uniting the tip of the thumb and the fourth fin-
ger. One should worship the host of mantras located in the cakras 
of the body, and should offer oblations to them. The worshipper 
should perform this ritual in the vital energy. 
Then, on the altar one should draw a seat with the character 
of the trident ending in three saktis representing Para, Parapara. 
and A.para. All the principles from earth to the end of maya are 
included in the syllable "sa, '' and the syllable "au .. is to be c~n­
ceived as the seat of three saktis. In the syllable '·sa, ··all the pnn-
ciples ending in mtiyti, and in "au," the threefold saktis ar.e ~o 
be worshipped and [over there] the sakti with the charactenstic 
of reflective consciousness (vimarsarzlpa sakti) should be wor~ 
shipped. Thus, uttering the mantra (saub) once, the placement of 
it as the base (adlza ra) and the one to be placed over it. (a~lzeya) 
should be done. Then, in the consciousness, which is mdeed 
cldheya, one should conceive this universe in it, which is also com-
posed of consciousness. Thus, this universe is enclosed by means 
of consciousness, and by this universe consciousness comes into 
being, because th is universe has appeared from consciousness and 
terminates in it. From the knowable objects, consciousness arises 
and gets its rest therein. The reality of the nature of conscious-
ness is arrived at only by means of mutual activity of enclosure 
(coitus). Therefore. it has been stated "enclosing all the syllables."

--- PAGE 218 ---
208 
TANTRASARA 
Then, one should offer sandal paste, incense. wine, flowers, and 
so on, as long as one does not become completely absorbed in the 
supreme. Then gaining repose in one's own Self, one should then 
throw everything into the water. 
This is the procedure of the external form of ritual. 
3-TV 
~, ITT ~~ ef ma 1 C'i I f"l I <:fl {I a 11 '{ 
3~t:rn={ 
3~~1c-J:JC5c=B;:r mm1fl~1'<~6CiFaf~~o qn·q~ C£J141"<:1a,. 
~m~ 
~ ~<§:{<)4<"1~1 rn m~, ~~-a fm1te1=aw~1N 
~ 1 Rtsfd Cli I 'L~ 1 a Ji_, rn ~ 
1-& 1 (SF"t1 Cl'l I cf<lCf q,_JFf ef m ?I <:i 1 ;a A lfl ;:j 
cn101?1~ +:rm ruf1Jh~1Rts: ~CJ;~ 
Fa~1 ~: 1 ~ ~ 
~ 
~ 
"fRf1 
~I 
The Procedure in the Sakti (Ritual) 
The pair is mutually eager to have the nature of the other. Sakti 
likes to have the nature of the vira, and vira that of .fokti. As both 
are of the nature of both, it is shining at the beginning and end-
ing i~ S($fi (coitus), essential for awakening the nature of Siva 
and Sakti in both, which is the function of both. By means of 
the restraining power of the Lord, the predominant nature is 
normally present in both. This explains the specific center. that 
is, the secret parts, which are also designated to be conceived as 
sakti. Then, it is worshipped by means of the pervasive thought of 
sikhabandha; that is, the tying of the tuft of the hair on the head. 
Visarga sakti is to be conceived in the seat ending with three saktis, 
in three corners, and in the center. This is the specific feature of 
the concept of pervasion. The same procedure is to be done on the 
specific limb of one's body, in that very cakra; then it is done in 
the brahmarandhra and in other minor centers. 
3-TV ~ 
~a101il<ie=t 
~il G:«i <"1~ s;nl ~ oa: I 
Ji I 0Q I G.l~J I fl~· I Ci Ml d1<"1 '<: qrrM"Jf IB Ci I Ci 1 c-R:i A_ I I 
~tiffi~~WI

--- PAGE 219 ---
TANTRASARA 209 
~-lcildcil fl:rws~ CiGQf"i~IRid5C"QCi: 11 
d¢t>Atlfld.1ftk~ldi"cici') "Ci"W ~ 
I 
~ 
Y)Mllru"""f l.-:(4~ ~'lj)~l*1ct1fuf~ 11 
l! d A I :r:F•G: fFG.l f% Ci fl ii) ~l 1:8C1 f ~ 
I 
3'l ~d 
¢t> l I o I &:l ¢t> Ci I a k·~ I a fii C'il l:l ci I I 
RJ1RJ1mmm-n - ~ruas1*1i:tl:lfct~44Ri:t~1 1 
¢t>A~nsiawa~= firu=c:a~h m- l1an:T ~ 
11 
3"1~awaaa k·J:ias- i:t .. n ruJ 101~{011ftn 1aa14+-t 1 
Ci m Rb Ci g:a I c-J:i d)- A :r;q I :r;q *1 '14~ I I 
~8~1fiftFdCilJ1fiaTI~ I 
a_x ~ 
I C""'l'4 4)"ci ¢t5 I o <:i fQ 
c=rrA c=raT CiT+il:llR ~ l!~ 11 
~ 
<:llAM~CiC\ llff1aR-ia1fias2i ~ClcIT 1 
¢t>ACil'<Ci~l/1J11c=t ~ 
f%" fifdfutnfti"Ug: 11 
~UIAlifl'< - ~~l:llc-Ad5J1Jl<1Cil'<Al+"Ci'i I 
-:r:TI" ~ 
"i I L<j)fuc=i ~ 11 ""dl fua 'tj\fa d5 I'< o i ~ ~ 
I I 
3'lT1ctfao9:::tqa~- "fCii fifdcti:tlc-Afilci~)Jl:lf(\ I 
~ 11 :r:a'i fu Ci I c-A d5 9'l:l -l1~ <il I 4 <1c{ fa -~ 
1.+-'Rts 
........ 
~..,..,...I Rti~i:t......-a~~ : I I 
fq I c-A I :r:<:il :r:(:l Id~ 11 Ci, ~ 11 :r:a I~ c=d 9'l:ll dl:l I c-A C"Q I a, I 
~1f=nH=Cj) ag:~fuai ~ 
y:w11Fa ;TI~ 11 
~ 
""ciT4 ~~ 
<1m ~ 
Ultt>li~llti'Ugl(\ I 
31~ ~ 
ma1 ~ sft+F( 
~ 11 :r:a'l fua u@:;r ~S~ucl I I 
~ l"CLl i f"d*ilffifl I- A"ictfmfuci ~ ~ 
I 
3fuc=f -a- mw ~ 
~'!0-cl:l 1 g:~h ~ lJ ~a -a- ~ 
1 1 
(!~~en~ fuf~$11Tilqqlfc; i:rcrfu I ~i<::rffi ~ 
~fu ~ 
-aaa ldctiJ:\ 1 1 ~ 
R'<1+=G:J4~

--- PAGE 220 ---
210 
TANTRASARA 
The Procedure Regarding the Pair (Yamala) 
The characteristic feature of the sakti is [in its being] that by 
which perfect steadiness of nonduality is attained. Therefore, 
without considering age, caste, worldly and otherworldly spiritual 
relations, one attains supreme identity of nondual ity born of both 
[male and female] (1). 
The iaktis are of three types: the created, the caused, and the born 
of the union of both. They are conceived otherwise by subsidiary 
divisions. They are mutually worshipped and propitiated because 
bliss is adjacent there (2). 
The [principal] cakra should be properly worshipped. Other m.in~r 
cakras should be worshipped after that. The external worship is 
~o be performed by the offering of flowers, sandal paste. etc., and 
m.wardly they are to be propitiated by means of offering food, 
wme, etc. (3). 
Thus, the upsurge of the mass of bliss becomes manifest by means 
of various activities and, as a result. all the minor cakras, being 
dissolved in the principal cakra, become identified with it (4). 
All of the minor cakras attain the fullness of enjoyment by means 
of enjoying their respective spheres [of enjoyment]. and as a 
result they relish their own nature. Thus, all the deities of minor 
ca~ras become centrally inclined to the principal cakra of con-
sc10usness (5). 
When the fullness of the rays, characterized by the host of the 
deities of the minor cakras, bring about vigor to hoth the sakti 
and the possessor of sakti, they both become exceedingly inclined 
toward each other (6 ). 
fAt the time of unionl of the pair, while they enter the highest 
abode of bliss, the agitation born of its vibration agitates the minor 
cakras as well, and they should be conceived as identical with it 
because they are not distinct from it (7 ).

--- PAGE 221 ---
TANTRASARA 
211 
Thus when, by means of the comparative development of balance, 
this pair loses all distinctions, which is difficult to express in 
words, then that consciousness is known as the compact unity of 
the emission of both (8). 
That steady abode of anuttara, the beyond, is characteristic of both; 
that is, transcendent and immanent, which is otherwise designated 
as the lofty, all-inclusive universal bliss. This is neither the state 
of tranquility, or ever-restfulness, nor the state of rising, but is 
called the highest Kaula, the cause of the rest and the act of rising. 
The one who is desirous of the attainment of the non-limited 
nature of the Self should make himself identical with conscious-
ness. It is true that both, with the characteristics of resting and 
rising regarding the sakti and the possessor of sakti, rise simulta-
neously (9 -10). 
On account of the mutual absorption of both, the very nature 
of the Self, both are of the characteristics of resting and rising, 
because both have the characteristics of both. However, it is the 
sakti who bears the rising of creation in her womb, but not the one 
who is the possessor of the sakti (11). 
In this sakti, the Kula, which is embodied in the teacher. should 
be transmitted into the sakti, and through her, because of the close 
union which emanates by the mutual contact of both [should be 
collected] and distributed among the people (Ila). 
Therefore, in this twofold creation of rest and rising, those who 
concentrate on the former, the state of visarga and that it ~s the 
cause of both (that is, those who reflect that everything is the 
expansion of visa rga), they become steadily rested in the perfect 
state free from all limitations (llb-12a). 
That which rises from the mutual union of both should be col-
lected externally from the principal mouth. Worship with it will 
satisfy the host of deities. and it will be the bestower of attain-
ments and liberation (12b-13a).

--- PAGE 222 ---
212 
TANTRASARA 
By t~e practice of visarga with the nature of rest, the restful [st~te 
of] Sivahood is attained, and also the host of deities shines wi~h 
the same nature. At that very state, the rising of the absolute void 
occurs, which is devoid of bliss (niranandamaya). It is free from 
modality, not only of the abode, but also of others ( l 3b-14a). 
By the delightful tasting of the external object, by which one's 
?wn blissful nature is filled, and not only by this. but also by the 
m~er organs which are taking delight from tasting the delight!ul 
obJ~ct, the nature of one's own and, by this process [of th~ tasung 
delight and experience of fullness one's own self], the perfect state 
of the inner search of this experience adds to the delightful nature 
of the minor cakras and, from there, to the main ones (15b-16a). 
This threefold visarga conforms to its meaning. It is full in ever~ 
respect, from where everything is created, from where this ma~i­
fold remains present, and where creation is dissolved. In this 
de~cription of visarga above, which is threefold, mantravrrya 
bemg continuously reflected upon in its threefold form, the t~ue 
?otency of mantra is then attained. Thus, in mantravlrya, which 
15. the inner core of consciousness, the mantra [abiding there] gives 
birth to various results (16b-17). 
In.t?e middle of the triangle, there exists an ever-blooming lot~s 
vellmg the ma~z{lala. In its center is a stalk having a lotus with six-
teen P.et~ls, with a root inseparably attached to it. In the course of 
the fnct10n of the two lotuses having a stalk attached to each .. the 
host of kalas lying within the moon, perfectly ful 1 and charnung. 
and those lying within the sun, and by the association with blood 
and semen related to the three-petal led lotus, the creation of the 
sprout representing fire occurs (18-20a). 
Thus, taking recourse to the mudrcl representing the moon, the 
sun, and fire (known as swi1gaffa mudra), one who has inter-
nalized the sequence of creation, etc .. in his heart, regarding 
the sequence of creation, etc., quickly attains the fourth state 
(anakhya) (20b-2la).

--- PAGE 223 ---
TANTRASARA 
213 
In consequence of the absorption in the klzecarl mudrti of both the 
sakti and the possessor of sakti, or, in other words, when perfect 
equilibrium of both occurs, whatever experience comes about in 
the enjoyment of drink, sport, and fun merges in vimarsa follow-
ing the course of unmanifest (avyakta), dlzvani, rava, sphofa, fruti, 
ntida, nadanta; remains as antilzata without any break; and finally 
becomes the virile energy of the mantra (mantravlrya) (21b-23a). 
[The cakras are eight:] the outgoing and ingoing of the vital air at 
the ti me of their cessation; in the ear while hearing a sound; in the 
eye while perceiving an object; the coming in contact of both the 
sexual organs; during their union; at the end of twelve; and in the 
ytimala (23b-24a). 
From the middle of the breast to the end of the lips the unmanifest 
sound exists, abiding in the throat; one who listens to it inside 
both the cakras at the time of the cessation of agitation where all 
have their rest, that is, nadablzairava, the Absolute having eight-
fold forms, that is, ardlzacandra, nada, sakti representingjyoti, 
dhvani, samaraftlzis is stated to be the absolute extension of the 
mantra (24b-26). 
Thus, calling up the above extension in the mind in every act, and 
in whatever it may be, one remains nonattached while living and 
becomes absolute Bhairava (27). 
The place where the void and the nonvoid dissolve is the midd~e 
path in the form of a shaft where the fire and air have dissolved 10 
the eq u i 1 i bri um of the trident. This is to be meditated upon in such 
a way as fluid that has gone to rest in the fluid (28). 
Remaining steady in firm conviction without allowing any doubt 
to rise, one should continue contemplating, "I am not,'' and should 
get oneself free from the bondage of llclira, witnessing the host of 
divinities in the body, merging pleasure and worries in the mass 
of consciousness, and all the time viewing the recipient of them 
which abides in the centers of the ears, eyes, mouth, and nose and 
other centers. In this way klzecarr is certainly attained (29-30).

--- PAGE 224 ---
214 
TANTRASARA 
When getting one's body placed in a distant sky and instanta-
neously following the sahasamudra, contracting both the hands 
gets it to fall, while one remains looking below. This mudra turns 
into vyomacarl (31). 
Here ends the description of the ritual named ya ma la. 
3ffic:Ll If~ if> >fro1 fu~ 
5'\l mfi fa~~ I~ I C"1qu11::Il1-0q:q I ref! +4 cfOl "i 
3q'ig:&Fi ~IOllWI: I fu~IH'{C)Rbt(j) tifa<alll: m-fyq Fl'{C)NCi: I ~ 
l!Ci~ 
<:rrn~s~ ~ 
~ 
(fWfcH'..'l R fcf f:a fct>ctiCi I q ru G Ci f@G:~: rnix.IT 
~ 
(fG] c=Rit a 'UI J I c;:~f ;::i er cf ch R1 f1 I~ I t;Ri crJ Cf) R { q ant:f cralm C£l I l(=ll T 
~31aM'1a:H\Q1 crrart~. ~am~ 
~mR1ct>i-RCl¥ 
l!a fcrfw cbaC'"P=t<.-mPl~tlHCi\QI ~ 
1 lJfl~1«1{ ~ 
g)')C1~ IJ 1: flcffct+=t:, 
~sfQ-~sfQ- ~1011qp1 filIB~;::i ;:i- f1<p~a W<1: ~ 
cr{~fci ~~I 
I 
cpfafCi?ii\CictfP+=A§l+=t~·~cHl:C:ll4a4~~C(ilq1co:H1J:t 11 
Thus, in the vital air with the characteristic of such an exten-
sion of immanence, one should associate it with consciousness. 
and then with the association of sarizvid, the offering of tarpa~za, 
food, sandal paste, incense, etc., one should be made steady. 
This is the ritual regarding the vital air. The ritual in the form 
of sarhvid has been discussed earlier in regard to one who has 
attained steadiness in it. After performing one of the rituals 
among them, if the disciple becomes free from doubts and attains 
purity of the heart, then showing him the ritual without taking 
recourse to offering sesame and clarified butter into the fire, and 
so on, he should be given initiation only by mere glance while 
keeping in his heart the aforesaid permeating extension (vyapti). 
From the initiation given in absence to the end of the occasional 
ritual, the above procedures are to be fol lowed, but they are to be 
performed keeping this as the principal ritual. The seven forms of 
kulayaga are performed in the body of the spiritual teacher. but 
when this is performed once along with the aforesaid rituaL every-
thing becomes perfect. Thus may the end be auspicious. 
This is a work of revered Abhinavaguptapada acarya.

--- PAGE 225 ---
Notes 
Chapter One 
1. Like ignorance, knowledge is also of two types. That knowledge 
called pauru~a is free from thought constructs (vikalpa) and is of 
the nature of pure I-Consciousness. It shines in its fullness when 
complete identification with Siva occurs. That ignorance, which is 
also called pau ru~a, is composed of vikalpas, which are contrary 
to the perfect I ight of consciousness on account of their being lim-
ited. This imperfect knowledge (apar~zaj11tina) is the root cause of 
worldly existence. When that ignorance called pauru~a disappears 
as a result of initiation, the impurity born of past deeds. which are 
the cause of the body. still persists. For this reason, the knowledge 
of the Self (puru~a) fails to shine forth. Defilement (mala) called 
karmamala is of the nature of prarabdha, the impressions of ~ast 
deeds that w i 11 be experienced in this body. On the complete extmc-
tion of pra rabdha, the body falls off, after which the pauru~a t~pe 
of knowledge becomes manifest. The order is as follows: initiauon. 
destruction of the pauru$a form of ignorance. competency to ~tudy 
agama texts, emergence of the bauddlza form of knowledge, hbera-
tion while living, destruction of prtirabdlza, the fall of the body. 
and the emergence of the pauru$a kind of knowledge and the 
attainment of one's own nature. 
2 · Although apparently distinct from consciousness. thought ~on­
structs (vikalpas) are not different from it. When. through nght 
reasoning (sattarka) the purification of vikalpas takes place, then 
one arrives at the state where vikalpas merge back into their source. 
which is indeterminate (avikalpa) by nature. This process of purifi-
cation of vikalpas is described in Chapter Four. 
215

--- PAGE 226 ---
216 
NOTES 
3. The descent of sacred texts (sastra) occurs through five currents, 
known as consciousness, bliss, will, knowledge, and action, repre-
senting five faces of Siva. These are the five .foktis of the Lord 
and are connected with the faces of Ifana, Tatpuru$a, Sadyojata, 
Vamadeva, and Aghora, respectively. Among the holy texts 
(agamas), some are predominantly dualistic, some are dual-cum-
nondual, and some are perfectly nondual. The number of dualistic 
aganzas is ten, while those which preach the doctrine of duality-
cum-nonduality are eighteen in number, and those whose view is 
perfectly nondual are sixty-four in number. 
4. The compound word svabhtiva~1 (svasya bluzvaM denotes the funda-
mental reality of one's own nature which is identical with con-
sciousness. 
5. The undivided, eternal, and ever-present I ight (prakasa) is also 
re?resented by the technical term spanda or 'vibration,' a con-
~c1ous throb that goes on vibrating, and illuminates everything else 
m this universe. 
6· The word nirakara means 'without any form'~ however, in this con-
text nirakara should be understood to mean 'that light is not of any 
specific form because it is of all forms.' 
7. This is the reference to the descending and ascending arcs of con-
sciousness. The descending arc is the ~nfoldment of consciousness 
which brings the universe, and all limited beings, into existence. 
!he ascending arc refers to the yogic process which brings a lim-
~ted consciousness to its fullness; that is, a limited knowing subject 
is elevated to its original source. 
8. The 'means' (updya) are a door which allows the practitioner to 
enter the inner sanctum of Siva. This entrance or absorption is 
technically called civefo. A bound being is limited and therefore 
devoid of freedom, thus a human being is i ncapahle of conceiving 
its own real nature. When this limitation disappears by the ·means' 
(updya), the state of identity with the Absolute that occurs is known 
~s absorption (samtivefo). Th is absorption is fourfold: horn of 
Sambhu or Siva (!iambhava), born of Sakti (sdkta), and born of a~lll 
M~zava). The fourth type of samavefo referred to in the text is the 
absorption brought about by anuptiya.

--- PAGE 227 ---
NOTES 
217 
9. The updyas are the 'means' to attain the supreme end of human life. 
Updya is the means and upaya is the 'end,' which is Paramasiva, 
the supreme Lord. Some of the means help to obtain that end 
(upeya) directly. while others lead to increasingly subtle states of 
being unti I the aspirant is able to intuitively realize that the 
supreme is not merely attained by entering some mental state 
th rough upd_va. Al 1 the means serve some purpose: a~zava merges 
into fakta, and sakta merges into sambhava. Upon attaining the 
sambhava upiiya, one merges into the non-sequential 'intuitive 
knowledge· (pratibha) characterized by that self-effulgent light 
(prakasa). These means are relatively distinct because of grada-
tions in the intensity of the 'descent of grace' (saktipata); that is, 
the intensity of contact with the grace of the Lord. The degree of 
grace one receives varies with the preparedness of the person. 
When the grace is supremely intense, the person does not take 
recourse to any sort of spiritual practice or meditation. He sees and 
realizes that the entire universe continuously emerges and dissolves 
within the core of his heart. 
10. The whole text of the Tantrtiloka and its short version, the Tan-
trasa ra, are elaborations on the subject of these four means. ~he 
exposition in the both texts begins with Chapter Two. in which 
Abhi navagupta describes the nature of anupaya. 
Chapter Two 
11. The term anupliya refers to the attainment of identity with Siva 
without the application of any means. 
Chapter Three 
12. The perfect Absolute is in reality partless and full~ it should be 
meditated upon as orbicular and without any parts. This reality 
shines to the _vogin who has attained 'absorption without taking 
recourse to any means' (anuplzya). as a mass of the fire of con-
sciousness into which all beings enter to be consumed. The yogin 
experiences freedom from pleasure, pain. doubts. and determinate 
knowledge (vikalpa). and is finally absorbed in the highest 'indeter-
minate state' (nirvikalpa).

--- PAGE 228 ---
218 
NOTES 
13. The 'autonomous energy' of the Lord is known as icclzasakti, which 
is inseparable from the Lord. The essence of the Lord is light 
(prakafa), which by its free will manifests the multitude of cre-
ations and dissolutions. The entire picture of the universe shines on 
the screen of one's own consciousness. inseparable from the Self. 
14. The absolute light is known as the void of consciousness and likened 
to a mirror. By means of its freedom (svMantrya) the entire uni-
verse manifests as a reflection in a mirror. The reflected objects are 
apprehended according to the cleanliness or purity of the mirr0 :· 
All objects of the universe shine in it, along with all of their indi-
vidual distinctions. The different sense organs and mind are also 
described as mirrors and their reflections possess specific charac-
teristics which are perceived according to the comparative purity of 
their surface. For example, a mirror, clear water, or the retina of 
the eye can reflect a form or color, while the sexual organ is capa-
ble of reflecting only touch, and so on. However, the light of con-
sciousness is capable of displaying all sorts of reflections. 
15· The principles of original taste, touch, etc., shine in the Lord and 
are inseparable from him. However, on the empirical level they 
become manifest as reflections. Even then, they remain in contact 
with the original (bimba). Otherwise, the chain reactions as 
referred to in the text would not he possible. 
16· That power called cit§akti is of the nature of singular, self-con-
scious light (praka§a). The insentient objects which shine in our 
se~ses are also composed of light. However, we are unable to per-
ceiv~ them as sentient because they lack an awareness that "I am 
s.en~ient.'' In contrast, the knowing subject, although remaining 
limited, is aware that he or she exists, and is capahle of consciously 
reflecting on this self-aware existence. 
17. This universe is perceived as possessing two aspects: first. its relation 
with speech, specifically the sounds that denote meaning; and sec-
ond, the entity denoted by speech or sound. The former is known as 
partimar.fo and the latter paramanfonlva, literally 'that is denoted 
hy sound.' In addition, there is a sup1:eme form of speech that is 
inseparably associated with Lord called paranada or para viik.

--- PAGE 229 ---
NOTES 
219 
18. The Lord is associated with three principal energies (sakti) called 
anuttara, iccha, and unme$a, represented by the three phonemes 
"a," '"i," and "u," respectively. Each phoneme has two aspects: a 
short and a long measure. The corresponding long forms are known 
as ananda, rsana, and iirmi. This tradition states that the short 
vowels are predominantly of the nature of light (prakasa), there-
fore, they have the characteristic of the sun; the corresponding long 
vowels, having the nature of repose, are considered to be of the 
nature of the moon. 
19. The syllable '"'"a" has another "a" as its corresponding phoneme. The 
one represents Siva and the other Sakti. The vibrative union of both 
gives rise to bliss (ananda). representing the phoneme "a." It is 
from the energy of ananda sakti that the universe comes into being, 
which in short are all the remaining phonemes beginning with 
iccha and ending in "k$a." This union of "a" and "a" is character-
ized by consciousness alone. while pratyavamarsa~za, the cognitive 
desire to create sisrk$afllul, is known as the energy of will. This 
desire representing will (iccha) is the desire to get back to bliss that 
has been as if lost. 
20. Icchti, rsana, zmme$a, and iirmi represent the energy of will and the 
energy of knowledge. respectively. The energy of action does not_ 
exist in any form either manifest or unmanifest up to this level of 
unfoldment. When activity shows itself. only then four neuter pho-
nemes, which are "r, ·· "rr. ·· "/,"and".(, .. appear. They are similar 
in nature to that of .. r" and .. !" belonging to the group of consonants. 
21. Four phonemes, namely "e," "ai," "o," and "'au," represent the 
energy of action. When the movement of the supreme vibration 
becomes completely externalized, then it is known as ··au, .. in 
which the flow of the unfoldment stops. Then all the divisions of 
the energy merge in the one which shows itself as the bindu or drop. 
22. Bindu is the compact mass of consciousness assembled into an undif-
ferentiated point from which the creation of the universe proceeds. 
23. On its way of unfolding the universe, the ak11lafakti belonging to 
Siva first manifests bi11d11 represented by one dot. Further. out of 
hindu, the kaulikl visarga sakti emerges in the form of two dots,

--- PAGE 230 ---
220 
NOTES 
one above the other. It is from this sakti that the creation of the 
entire universe takes place. 
24. Emission (visarga) is threefold, i.e., a~rnva, Stikta, and Hzmbhava. 
They are characterized by difference, difference-cum-nondifference, 
and nondifference. The picture in the form of a~zavavisarga shines 
to the view of the limited subject as "this." In this view, on the one 
end lies the limited subject and on the other lies the universe. These 
two get merged into the unity of limited knowledge and its object, 
which is nothing but the unity of knowingness (citi) and the object 
of knowledge (cetya). This is known as visarga, where repose 
occurs in the heart. In the second visarga, known as cittasam-
bodha, the entire universe-while shining as one with conscious-
ness with all the distinctions of subjects and their objects-yet also 
shines, transcending them al I. The third visa rga is known as the 
dissolution of citta (cittapralava) when al I the distinctions of know-
ing subjects and objects are obliterated, and therefore shines as one 
with the subject of supreme consciousness. 
25. The energy of emission (visarga) manifesting itself as individual cog-
nitions appears as the universe. She, that is, Sakti, is the cause, or 
the mother, of all sorts of gross words and sentences. In agamas it 
has two appellations; the one is called mdtrkti and the other malinf. 
The former is the seed (blja) and the latter. is the recipient (yoni) of 
the seed. The one, when agitated, gives birth to diverse phonemes. 
All these phonemes. being the indicative sound. represent all thirty-
six principles (tattva), beginning with Siva and ending with the earth. 
26. In reality the number of cognitions is six. They are anuttara, icclza. 
unme~a, ananda, lsana, and firmi. However, because of expansion 
and reverse movement the number becomes twelve. When anuttara 
proceeds to expand it becomes "a.'' Similarly, "i" becomes"/'' and 
"u" becomes "ii." This movement is called prasara~w. At the same 
time, mutual relation of "a'' with "i," "a" with "u, ., "i" with "a, .. 
"u'' with "a,'' "a" with bin du, and "a" with visarga occurs. It is then 
known as pratisamcara~za. Thus the phonemes which come into 
being following the above methods are of mixed character. They 
make the fullness of the Lord.

--- PAGE 231 ---
NOTES 
221 
27. The number of Kalikas is twelve. They are called Kalikas because 
they cause change through the process of mutation denoted by the 
word kalana. Cognition is nothing but the energy of the Lord on the 
pure level of consciousness. However, with emergence of mayti, 
differentiation sets in, with the result that reflective cognition 
(parii mar.Sa) descends down to the worldly level and assumes the 
character of syllables on the one hand and the principles (tattva) on 
the other. 
28. There are four levels of speech. They are para, pasyantf, madlzy-
ama, and vaikharl. For detailed account on the subject of four lev-
els of speech see Abhinavagupta's Partitrisikti Vivara~w. See also 
Padoux's Vac: The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras. 
29. Even on the level mayti these phonemes can possibly be enlivened by 
contact with pure knowledge (suddlzavidyti) through which they can 
be utilized to serve the purpose of both enjoyment and liberation. 
30. Pure absorption into Siva (samblzava samavesa) signifies pure con-
sciousness. When a yogin attains it, he realizes that all the six patl~s 
(~a<;ladhvas) are not different from his own Self. They reflect in his 
own consciousness, rise in his very Self, and gain their rest in it. In 
the integrated unitary consciousness, creation, maintenance, and 
dissolution shine inseparably from one's own nature. 
31. If one is capable of merging his consciousness into the pure light of 
absolute consciousness through stimblzava upaya, then assidu~us 
tasks, such as bathing, religious observances (vrata). purificat10n 
of the body, meditation, recitation of sacred syllables (mantras), 
sacrifice, or oblation into the fire are not required. 
Chapter Four 
32. The thought constructs (vikalpa) are of two types, pure and impure. 
The pure vikalpa, though being a vikalpa, is an aid in achieving the 
highest aim of human life, liberation (mok$a). On the other hand, 
the impure vikalpa entices beings with worldly existence. It is 
because of its existence that the Self conceives itself as limited in 
knowledge and action.

--- PAGE 232 ---
222 
NOTES 
33. The imposition on the innate nature (svabhava) of different kind of 
pure properties is known as purification (smizskara). The very 
nature of consciousness is its freedom from thought constructs 
(vikalpa). This indeterminate nature of consciousness (nirvikalpa) 
is also the very nature of the Self. This is known as innate nature 
(svabhava). Listening to this nature of the Self repeatedly, thinking 
of it, and meditating on it continuously help the thought construct 
to become purified. In the beginning, the layers of pure thought 
(§uddha-vikalpa) remain as if indistinct. However, in the long run, 
through practice, the layers of pure thought become perfectly dis-
tinct. It is important to emphasize here that the perfect purity of 
one's own innate nature (svabhava) is revealed by pure thought 
constructs (fuddha-vikalpa) when the latent impressions of duality 
are removed. At this stage the vikalpas do not stand as the cause of 
the duality. With the purification of vikalpas, in the right manner, 
consciousness shines forth with all its glory. 
34. The erroneous conception latent in the soul, "I am in bondage," is 
the root cause of worldly existence. 
35. That deep-rooted impression of the soul, ··I am in bondage," is 
uprooted by the conviction contrary to it, i.e., the pure thought con-
struct (iuddha-vikalpa). 
36. The right form of reasoning (sattarka) does not arise in the soul on 
account of descent of grace in a lesser degree of intensity. The right 
~orm of reasoning begins to show as a result of study of agamas and 
instruction by a teacher. 
37. The study of agama gives rise to the series of thought constructs 
free from doubt, which in turn give rise to the series of pure 
thought constructs (iuddha-vikalpa). This is the characteristic of 
the right form of reasoning. This right reasoning is called bhavand. 
the layers of pure thought. It is like the wish-fulfilling cow which 
grants all desires. According to this system. intuitive reasoning 
(sattarka) is considered to be the most supreme limb of yoga. By 
the right application of it, one becomes the true knower of the 
nature of reality. It is by th is means alone that one is able to discern 
right from wrong.

--- PAGE 233 ---
NOTES 
223 
38. The five under the group of self-restraint (yama) are: nonviolence, 
truthfulness. not stealing, restraining one's sexual urge, and nonac-
ceptance of gifts. They are not considered to be the direct aid in 
attainment of consciousness. This is because the real nature of con-
sciousness which is Siva is not touched by any of these means. 
39. Withdrawal of senses from the external objects and placing them in 
one's heart is known as pratyalulra. However, for the consciousness 
which is al I-pervasive, withdrawal is not possible. In the same way, 
concentration, meditation, and absorption (samadlzi) are related to 
something which is limited. Therefore, they do not serve any pur-
pose in attainment of the vision of that which is by nature unlimited. 
40. Practice is an activity which is performed consciously either in the 
vital energy, in the intellect, or in the body, etc. Lifting heavy 
loads, studying a text and continuous effort to understand its mean-
ing, occupying oneself with dancing and music add confidence and 
later proficiency to the respective spheres. However. consciousness. 
having the nature of light, is ever shining and changeless. There-
fore, practice does not add or take away anything from it. 
41. The universe is the sportive play of three energies (saktis). The ~i.rst 
is the supreme energy in which all the principles (tattvas) from_ Siva 
to the earth shine as pure consciousness, free from all deternu~nat~ 
knowledge (nirvikalpa). The second, known as Sriparapara saktl, 
by which everything shines as different-cum-nondifferent li~e t~e 
reflection of the elephant in the mirror. Though the reflec~ 10
~
1 is 
one with the mirror, yet, as in the case of the elephant. it is ~t~trnct 
from the mirror itself. The third power. named Aparafakt1, is the_ 
one by which everything under the domain of the delusive po~er t~f 
mtiyti shines with difference. There is yet another energy (sakti) 
which abides in everything, permeating and threading through all, 
which is known as Matrsadbhava, Kalakar~i1)I, and other similar 
names. Each of the above-mentioned saktis. following the order of 
creation, maintenance. and dissolution, possesses three aspects. 
Therefore the number becomes twelve. 
42. Knowingness (pramiti) which abides in all the knowers is the active 
principle. It is known as existing awareness (mMrsiidblzava).

--- PAGE 234 ---
224 
NOTES 
43. By the power of Kalakar~il)I, complete shrinkage of time occurs. As 
a result, the sequence of time completely disappears, which reveals 
consciousness in its totality. 
44. When supreme consciousness, which is the knowing subject. con-
sumes all differences, it is known as fire. In reality, heing of the 
nature of I-Consciousness. it assumes by its power of autonomy the 
forms of intellect, the mind, and ten senses. Thus the number 
becomes twelve. The knowing subject (pramMli), who is of the 
nature of fire, assuming the nature of an instrument of knowledge, 
becomes known as the sun. At that state it is known as ego 
(ahmizkara). The state which is known to be the instrument of 
knowledge is in reality the eternal aspect of the knowing subject. 
Now the question regarding the creation of the knowahles arises. 
The instrument of knowledge cannot be designated as such without 
the existence of any knowable object. Therefore, the instrument of 
knowledge itself assumes the nature of the objective universe. From 
the level of the knowing subject (pramclta), down to the level of the 
object, they assume four aspects each. These four aspects are cre-
ation, maintenance, dissolution, and the nameless (anciklzycl). The 
total number of the aspects is twelve. As these aspects are manifes-
tation of consciousness, the yogin, while wandering along in the 
void of consciousness, can easily attain steadiness in any of these 
states and attain absorption by unifying these four states. 
45. The term kalana has different meanings. Kall is the conscious agent 
who performs kalana, therefore she is known as Kall. The number 
ofKalis is twelve. They are as follows: (l) sr~tikalI, (2) Sthiti Kall, 
(3) SamharakalL (4) RaktakalI, (5) Svakall (sukalI), ( 6) Ya ma Kall. 
(7) MrtyukalI, (8) RudrakalI (BhadrakaiI), (9) Paramarkakali, (10) 
Martal)<)akalI, (11) KalagnirudrakalI, and (12) MahakalI (ParakalI. 
MahakalakalI, KalakalI). This kalana also occurs in relation to the 
knowable, the instrument of knowledge, and the knowing subject. 
As each state is of the characteristic of creation, maintenance, dis-
solution, and the nameless one (anakhyll), the number of the divine 
energies also becomes twelve. 
46. Here the word Mahesvara does not refer to the highest Lord of this 
system hut to one of the triad, Brahma, Vi?I)U, and Mahdvara.

--- PAGE 235 ---
NOTES 
225 
47. For example. while performing ytiga one can one day offer flowers 
to the Lord. Then. next day. the one may offer sandal paste, food, 
etc., until finally one is able to offer oneself. 
48. Srrparva is another name for the Malinlvijayottara Tantra. 
Chapter Five 
49. The term "'bound soul" (pasu), which literally means animal, is a 
technical term of this system. With the appearance of limitation, 
the soul, which is essentially composed of pure consciousness, 
finds itself limited in knowledge and action. Its innate nature 
becomes as if veiled, for which reason it becomes known as atomic 
(a~lU). At this level of existence the bonded souls are of great vari-
ety because they receive the grace of the Lord, which is based on 
comparative distinctions of intensity. The right form of intuitive 
judgment does not arise in all. Therefore, they have to depend on 
(igama for the rise of that intuitive knowledge. At this stage. there 
is a need for a spiritual guide. A spiritual guide is a person meant 
to lead the seeker in selecting an appropriate agama for him to 
study. When the agama is studied properly, pure thought (suddlza-
vikalpa) arises. However. in the case of those who lack right under-
standing. purification of thoughts (vikalpas) in this particular way 
is not possible. Therefore, they need to rely on other means for tha~ 
purification of thoughts (vikalpas). In short, these means are.: medi-
tation, taking recourse to the vital energy (pra~za). and makmg the 
body the instrument of knowledge as a means to attain one's e~ds. 
The body itself is a gross instrument for the attainment of the hig!1-
est aim of 1 i fe. For those who are steadily convinced that a body 15 
the Self. it becomes a suitable means. 
50. Meditation is performed by the intellect (buddlzi). This kind of 
practice is fruitful for those who think that intellect is the Self. On 
the other hand. those who are convinced that the vital air (pra~za) is 
the Self make the pr([~za a means. In order to remove vikalpas, the 
as pi rant makes use of body (kara~za). mudra. and different sorts of 
(isanas. 
51. Vital energy is of two types, one general and the other particular. 
The particular form of the vital air manifests itself in five different

--- PAGE 236 ---
226 
NOTES 
ways. They are known as pra~za. apana, samana, ud(/na, and 
vyana. These particular forms of vital energy. although manifested 
distinctly in these five ways and functioning in different parts ~f 
the body, are basically resting in the general form of vital air. Their 
basic nature is to 'move forward' (ucc(zra~za). The general prti~za is 
known as vibration (spanda), pulsation, blossoming, etc. At the 
start of the creative impulse, after manifestation of void. the con-
sciousness assumes the nature of vital energy. 
52. Kara~w is a particular type of a ~rnva upa)~a which relates to the 
meditation on the body, etc. 
53. The supreme consciousness is self-luminous by nature. It is only 
because of its autonomy that it takes on the nature of everything. In 
other words, we can say that it shines in multifarious forms. One 
should meditate in the core of one's heart because the heart is the 
essence of all the principles, which abide closest to the heart. First 
of all the aspirant should meditate with concentration on the uni-
:1avoredness (sc1marasya) of prcl~w. apana, and udana, represent-
ing the moon, the sun, and the fire. This meditation is to be per-
~ormed by stopping the outgoing and ingoing movement of vital air 
m such a way that pra~za, apana, and udana, after giving up the 
functioning in their respective manners, become one, leaving out 
all distinctions. As fire blazes up with the churning process of 
ara~zi, in a similar way, the opposing movement of both pra~w and 
ap(ina, being stopped, enters into the current in the middle path. 
which transforms it into the fire of udana, known as the great ter-
rible fire blazing upward. This fire is known as the great fire 
because it consumes the limitedness of the conscious subject. its 
object, and its instrument of knowledge. Thus, with attaining per-
fection in such meditation, the meditator becomes free from all 
Ii m itations and then he makes an effort to attain oneness with the 
highest subject. 
54. The highest subject is supposed to be encircled with twelve energies. 
They are associated with creation. maintenance, dissolution. and 
the fourth one designated as nameless (a11(ikllyc7). This nameless 
one. being without limitations. is associated with each of the other 
three. Therefore the number hecomes twelve. They are as follows:

--- PAGE 237 ---
NOTES 
227 
(a) srni-sr~fi, srni-sthiti, srni-smizlztira, srni-antikhyti (b) sthiti-
sr~ f i, s th it i-s th i ti, s th i ti-smizlzara, stlziti-anakhya (c) salizhara-sr~fi, 
sa rizha ra-stlziti, salizhti ra-smizhara, smizhara-anakhya. 
55. The transcendent wheel (anuttara cakra) consisting of twelvefold 
nature. going outside through the outlets of the eye, etc., assumes 
the nature of the object. This object is characterized by the moon; 
the sense organs, representing the sun, are the instrument of 
knowledge (pranuz~za); while the knowing subject is the fire. 
56. After the destruction of all the objects, they remain existent in the 
form of residual traces. Therefore, they should also be placed into 
the flames of the fire of consciousness. 
57. While giving exposition of the mystery of uccara related to the 
movement of the vital energy, the author states that due to this 
movement an unmanifest sound becomes manifest. This unmani-
fest sound is called unstruck sound (analzata). Before the rise of 
pra~1a, the aspirant causes it for a moment to rest in his heart. 
58. By the term void (iii nya) negation is meant. This is the state of dis-
solution of all objects. The heart is known as the void where nonex-
istence of any positive entity is possible. It is essentially of the 
nature of consciousness where bliss the essence of it, remains per-
fectly blossoming. It is because of th,is nature that it is called innate 
blissfulness (nijananda). The experiencing subject feels it as tl~e 
very nature of the Self. With direct vision of one's own nature this 
blissfulness becomes manifest. 
59. At this level, as there is no existence of objectivity in any way, the 
experience of the delight that occurs there is called .niran~nda. 
Then the energy of consciousness. after making the void manifest, 
assumes the nature of vital energy, which possesses dual form. On 
the one hand, prti~za is insentient, and on the other it is sentient. for 
the Lord has made it distinct from other insentient objects by 
bestowing sentiency on it and has made it the experiencing subject. 
It experiences the bliss of its own (11ij(l11a11da), however. as the 
experiencing subject proceeds along the knowable objects touching 
the instrument of knowledge. In other words, when it becomes 
slightly inclined toward externality, then the bliss which remains

--- PAGE 238 ---
228 
NOTES 
associated with it is known as nirananda. Th is is because it loses 
the earlier nature of blissfulness belonging to the experiencing sub-
ject alone. 
60. Parcinanda literally means the bliss belonging to the other. With 
the rise of the knowable which occurs along with the rise of apa~za, 
distinction or otherne~s shows itself. Therefore, the bliss that 
becomes manifest, at this stage, does not belong to the Self but to 
something distinct from it. It is for this reason that it is called 
parananda. 
61. On the level of samana all the knowables become intermixed with 
one another and show themselves as the unity of all. The delight 
that develops as a result of this is highly extensive and nourishing. 
It is for this reason that a yogin experiences this particular kind of 
bliss as brahmci nanda. 
62. The number of the movements of the inhalation and exhalation is 
21,600 during the period of 24 hours. When the yogin is able to 
dissolve the inhaling and exhaling breaths in the middle current 
(madhya marga), only then the vital air known as pra~w transforms 
itself and becomes udana. When one is able to rest there, one expe-
r_iences bliss abiding in the experiencing subject, which is quite dis-
tinct from nij[L!landa and other types of bliss. It is called 
rnahananda because of its greatness. 
63. After one attains and experiences mahananda, one advances fur-
ther and as a result of the rise of vyana, the great all-pervasive one. 
one experiences bliss free from all accidental attributes. This type 
of bliss is known as bliss of consciousness (cidlinanda). 
64. Some technical terms connected with the concept of repose 
(vifrcintl) are known as pragiinada, udbhava, kampa, nidra, and 
ghf"a~zi. Their meanings are as follows: when the yogin utilizes the 
means related to the body to attain the highest reality, he experi-
ences a sort of delight which is the result of his intention toward 
fullness (pfir~wtii). The emergence of delight occurs only at his 
contact with fullness. When the yogin remains absorbed in that 
delightful state (even for moment), his firm conviction regarding 
his identity with body is severed as if with the flash of 1 ight of con-

--- PAGE 239 ---
NOTES 
229 
sciousness. Then he experiences a sudden '"upward movement" 
known as ""a jump upward" (udblzava). This takes place because the 
pu 11 in the opposite direction becomes absent. As all the bonds 
functioning in the lower regions are cut off by the light, this upper 
pul 1 leads the aspirant to feel and attain his own innate potency, the 
energy of which cuts off all the bonds of ignorance. This state is 
technically known as kampa, which literally means shaking. Then 
the state that follows is called nidra. At this state all external sense 
organs cease to function, and even the internal ones stop to func-
tion properly. Hence he feels a kind of slumber which is a tempo-
rary state, for when he attains steadiness in pure consciousness, he 
experiences the immanence of consciousness and is able to realize 
that all, whatever that might be, is, in essence, consciousness. Wi~h 
this direct realization he wanders or whirls (ghanzate), that IS, 
arrives at the state of vibrate consciousness, until finally the state 
of great pervasiveness (malzavyapti) begins to shine forth. T~e 
effect of this is that his ignorance, which is his firm conviction 1Il 
the form of conceiving the nonself as the self, is destroyed first. 
This is followed by the destruction of the conviction of conceiving 
the self as nonself. Finally, the yogin directly realizes the true 
nature of the Self. 
65. The five states like waking, etc., are related to the triangle centrally 
located in the 1111.lladlu1ra, where the delight is experienced. The 
bulb is the location of udblzava, kampa is experienced in the hear.t, 
the palate is the place of the sleep (nidra), while the whirl (glzfinu) 
is experienced at the ·end of twelve' (dvadasanta). 
66. The absolute state of the heart of repose which is attained thro_ugh_ 
uccara is technically known as unmanifest [liliga]. This liliga ~~of 
three types, i.e., avyakta, vyaktavyakta, and vyakta. Avyakta lzn?a 
is characterized by absorption (/lnam) where everything loses .Its 
individuality. However, it is only experienced while one remams 
unified with it. It is this state from which the universe emerges and 
where it finally goes to rest. The manifested-unmanifested (vyakta-
vyakta) form of liliga is of the nature of absorption with highest 
reality, which shines in the form. "'I am This." Therefore, it is 
related to the pure level of dynamic energy on the one hand, and on

--- PAGE 240 ---
230 
NOTES 
the other, to the objective world. The manifest (vyakta) li1iga is of 
the nature of cognition in which I-Consciousness becomes subordi-
nated and manifests itself as if distinct from it and therefore shines 
as "This." However, even at this level it does not lose its pure 
nature of consciousness. 
67. The movement of vital energy is of two kinds. The first one is vibra-
tive and natural, while the other is of the nature of activity and is 
born of effort. The dynamic movement of the vital energy is ever 
associated with a sound which is known as unstruck sound 
(anahata). It goes on sounding automatically in the heart of every 
living being. There is none to utter it or to stop it. All the phonemes 
abide inseparably in it. Furthermore, yogins experience two dis-
tinct aspects of nada. The first is ever shining which does not have 
any rest. It only rises once and remains shining forever. Another 
aspect of ntida is one which rises but which also sets. However, the 
subtle nada where all the phonemes inseparably abide is known as 
the unmanifest sound. Two seed mantras (bljas) called srni and 
swizhara are its manifested forms. In other words, ntida is cog-
nized by the help of these seed syllables. 
68. These are the letters from "ka" varga to the end of "pa" varga. In 
this context they are used as mantras. 
69. Samaya is known as convention, i.e., a supposed relation between 
words and their meanings. 
Chapter Six 
70. The vital air is 'of the nature of universal vibration' (stimdnvaspan-
dana), which assumes the form of 'individual vibration'. (vi§e~a 
spanda) known as pra~rn. apana, samtina, uddna, and vy{i!lG. 
These five prti~ws are locations that must he harnessed for the 
attainment of supreme reality. 
71. The external objects to which one could take recourse for the attain-
ment of the highest reality are: a sacred diagram (ma~1(/ala), an 
altar. vessels. rosary beads, scriptures. the symbolic form of Siva, 
a human skull (!lira), a form made of plaster or a painting, or an 
image or statue in the likeness of one's teacher, etc. They may be

--- PAGE 241 ---
NOTES 
231 
employed in any number and exhibit a wide variation in specific 
form. provided one recognizes the object's purpose is attaining the 
highest reality. 
72. The procedure regarding the vital air (prti~za) is discussed first 
because in its creative upsurge, consciousness first assumes the 
nature of pril ~za. For this reason, one desirous of the attainment of 
supreme reality first takes recourse inpra~za. Furthermore, all the 
'six paths' (~a(iadhvils) are supposed to abide inpra~za. In the Tan-
tra loka. Abh i navagupta writes: "The former of the sixfold paths, 
which again is threefold, is known as the path of time. Clearly this 
path is established in the vital energy (pra~za)" (TA 6.37). 
73. Manifestation or luminous shining forth of entities occurs in a two-
fold way: either by following a sequential order or manifesting 
without any sequence. The former shines through the relation of 
cause and effect, i.e., the cause shines prior to the effect, which 
comes later. When it shines without any sequential order, for exam-
ple, the knowledge arising from the perception of a painting 
appears as a unified whole in which priority and posteriority sh~ne 
at the same ti me. The author states elsewhere that the 'mutative 
activity' (kalana) is responsible for the manifestation of all si~ 
paths which are distinct from one another, and also for those enti-
ties in their respective forms of limitations. Both sequence a.n~ 
non-sequence shine in the vital energy, which is one of the ac.tI~I­
ties of time. As it causes mutations. divisions. and change. it is 
known as kclla. which is derived from the verbal root '"kal, .. one of 
the meanings of which is to cause change. 
74. Consciousness is eternal. It is free from the fetters of space and 
ti me. The Lord, who is in essence light, on account of his free will. 
creates the universe composed of sentient subjects and their objects. 
This is done hy the power of time called Kall, the dynamic energy 
which is the cause that creates change in external and internal enti-
ties. However, it is relevant to note here that consciousness in its 
essence is entirely free from change. 
75. The power of time. which is inseparably associated with conscious-
ness (sa 111vit), causes everything to manifest externally. The result

--- PAGE 242 ---
232 
NOTES 
of this mutation is that the very consciousness itself assumes the 
nature of vital energy, in which all forms hegin to shine forth. 
However, in this process of externalization, consciousness by its 
free will separates the universe from itself. At that time it cognizes, 
"I transcend everything." This is the experience characteristic of 
the void (ffmya) of consciousness. This void of consciousness 
seems to be static. However, dynamism in the form of a slight 
vibrating pulsation begins to show itself. When this happens, the 
first creative flow begins to proceed outwardly into manifestation. 
This flow is not the flow of consciousness but of the vital energy. 
76. When the power of activity becomes predominant, the entire cre-
ation shines forth in a twofold way. First is the 'path of time' 
(kaladhva), and second is the 'path of space' (defridhva). The path 
of time consists of three forms known as varna, mantra, andpada. 
The path of space has also three divisions, i.e .. kala, tattva, and 
bhuvana. 
77. Normally the movement of the vital air proceeds from the 'region of 
the bulb' located below the generative organ and the anus. However. 
no spiritual result can possibly be attained by the normal movement 
of the breath. Therefore, the vital breath should be made to flow 
from the heart by one's own effort. The 5aktis named vamti, }ye~! 
ha, and raudrl belong to the prahhu iakti and impel the movement 
of the breath, either singly or in combination. While the !§aktis 
related to the Lord, one's own power. and the vital energy jointly 
all cause the vital breath to move upwards, at different ti mes they 
assume the dominant and subordinate roles with respect to one 
another. When the vamafakti aspect of prabhu becomes predomi-
nant, the person remains inclined toward the world and material 
objects; when the jye~flzasakti aspect of prabhu assumes domi-
nance, it brings about the enlightenment of the aspiranc the raudrf 
aspect of prabhu keeps a person Ii nked to the world. but at the same 
time it helps him to attain identity with Siva. 
78 · In the movement of the breath from the heart up to the ·end of 
twelve' (dvada5~linta), the vital air occupies the space of thirty-six 
digits in length. If the four quarters of the day are supposed to exist

--- PAGE 243 ---
NOTES 
233 
there, then nine digits is the length of one quarter. One half of a tufi 
is the time of the junction (sandhi). 
79. The day is the period when the sun shines and the moon, in the form 
of apa na, declines. For this reason, the day is conceived to be the 
period of the dark fortnight. Similarly, during the night, apana, in 
the form of the moon, arises; therefore, the night is conceived as 
the bright fortnight. 
80. There are two places of 'repose' (vifranti), composed of half of a 
tufi each. They are in the center of the heart and at the 'end of the 
twelve' (dvadasanta), free from the changing effects of time. Both 
locations are the junctions of prti~za and apana. The time unit for 
each of them is one tuf i. 
81. Here the concept of day and night is explained in a different way. 
The day is the period when manifestation of objects occurs; the 
night is that period when blissfulness becomes predominant. 
82. 'The passage of a planet from one sign of the zodiac to another' 
(salizkranti), occurs in six sections each along the path of the vit~l 
breath. They are: makara, kumbha, mfna, nze$a, vf$a, and nut-
huna, while on the other half they are: karka, sitiz/za, kanya, tuld. 
vr~cika, and dhanu. Similarly, the sun's progress towards the north 
and towards the south, respectively, is also conceived of as occur-
ring in the breath. The period during which the sun moves to the 
north is considered to be the bestower of good results in the other 
world, while the period during which the sun proceeds towards the 
south is considered to be the bestower of good results in this mate-
rial world. 
83. The twelve superintending deities, one for each month, are ca!led 
rudras and named Daksa Canda Hara, Candi, Pramatha, Blnma, 
Manmatha, Sakuni, Su~1~tL N~nda, Gopalak~, and Pitamaha. 
84. If the movement of the vital breath covers one digit, only represent-
ing a season (two months), then the sun's movement occupies only 
the span of three digits. As a result, the span of one year will be six 
digits and in one single movement of the outgoing and ingoing vital 
breaths twelve years can be conceived.

--- PAGE 244 ---
234 
NOTES 
85. The normal period of the year with reference to human beings and 
the supposed year of the vital breath are different. 
86. The span of a divine year is said to to consist of 12,000 human years. 
This period is divided into four divisions known as: krta, consisting 
4,000 years: treta, consisting of 3 ,000 years; dwzpara, consisting 
of 2,000 years; and kali, whose duration is 1,000 years. Thus, the 
total comes to 10,000 years, while the remaining 2 ,000 years are 
considered to be junctions. The span of these junctions is 400, 300, 
200, 100 years and counted in the following way: the last 100 years 
of the kali are added to the first 400 years of the krta; thus the span 
of the first junction is 500 years. Similarly, the duration of the junc-
ture of the krta and treta is 400 years plus 300, and thus 700 years; 
next, the duration of the juncture of the tre({l and dvapara is 300 
years plus 200 and thus 500 years; finally, the juncture of dvapara 
and kali is 200 years plus 100, yielding 300 years. Therefore, the 
accumulated duration of all the junctions is 2000 years. 
87. Different lndras are said to be the rulers in different cycles of Manu. 
During the period in which Brahma remains active, fourteen cycles 
of Manu pass on. This long period is said to be a span of one day of 
Brahma's life. His night is of the same span. 
88. The term "three worlds°' refers to the nether world along with the 
bhub. bhuvab, and svab. 
89. The night in avyakta is said to be a kind of dissolution. However, 
this is a subsidiary dissolution (pralava) and not a principal one 
(mahapralaya). 
-
90. According to the teachings of agamas, those who have attained lib-
eration following the doctrine of Saq1khya and other systems are 
certain to be created again at the start of new creation. This is 
because their liberation is of limited nature and docs not elevate 
them above mli_wl. For details see Chapter Eight. 
91. The sheaths (kaiicukas) are five or six. They are n iya ti, ka Id, raga, 
vidya, kalci, and maya. Maya is the all-pervading principle. The 
day of kalci is the duration of 100 years of those who 1 ive in the 
principle nivati. In the same way, 100 years of kala is the span of a 
day of thos~ who I ive in the principle raga. One hundred years of

--- PAGE 245 ---
NOTES 
235 
principle called raga are only one day of the principle ofvidya. In 
the same way the day of the principle kala comprises 100 years of 
the pri nc i pie vidyti. Similarly, one day of maya is made of 100 
years of the principle kala. 
92. The night related to the principle of Sadasiva is considered to be the 
great dissolution (mahtipralaya). During this period all the paths 
(adhvas) remain dissolved in the state of equilibrium. The super-
intending deity known as Sadasiva is dissolved in the primal sound 
(nada). This primal sound is in turn dissolved into sakti, sakti into 
vyapini and vyapini into sama11a. In sa111a11a there is no trace of 
time. It is the everlasting state. It is from this state that time arises 
1 ike the opening and closing of the eyelids. Though all the limit~d 
souls rest in this supreme state of equilibrium, they do not attam 
final liberation. 
93. The creations and dissolutions are highly extensive and varied and 
abide in the vital energy. The vital energy is essentially of _the 
nature of vibrative energy (spa11da). This energy, from which time 
and its divisions emerge, is ever-pulsating. Time is not at all abso-
lute but relative. and it has its base in the will of the Lord. On 
account of the vibration of consciousness, the minute moment 
becomes varied and it is experienced as highly extensive. 
94. There are two 'ends of twelve' (dvadasanta). One is above brah-
mtirandhra and the other is in miiladhara. The first is known ~s 
sivadvtidasdnta, the end of twelve related to Siva, and the other is 
known as the end of twelve related to sakti. 
95. The six causal deities (kara~za$afka) each have six centers. They 
abide in those centers in the ascending and descending order. The 
superintending deities of the respecti~e centers function in differ-
ent stages of 1 i fe and finally bestow release (mok$a). 
96. The ten principal channels that pra~za circulates through are i(ia, 
piligala, su~·wwul, gandhtirl, !zastiyjihva, pzi$a. ya.(a, alamlzbusa, 
kuh a, and S(11ikhinl. Although all the channels have emerged from 
the navel. they become manifest in the heart. 
97. The superintending deities of directions are ten. They are Indra, 
Vahni. Yama, and so on. They rotate in a cyclic order and as a

--- PAGE 246 ---
236 
NOTES 
result, limited souls act in accordance with the nature of these dei-
ties. Sometimes they are morbid, sometimes they are haughty, sad, 
elated, happy, unhappy, etc. 
98 · The names of three principal channels are i(la, piligala, and su~ 
umna. They are supposed to be located inside the spinal cord. f~[J 
is placed at the left, pi1igala to the right, and su~unzna in the mid-
dle of the spinal cord. I(fri represents the moon. pi1igalii the sun, 
and su~wnna the fire. While the vital air samana moves along 
these three principal channels up and down, they assume the 
nature of the sun, the moon, and fire. 
99. All the Sanskrit syllables are divided into eight groups (varga). All 
the vowels come under "a" group (varga). The number of vowels is 
sixteen. Then come the group of "ka," "ca," "ta," ''fa," "pa," 
"sa," and the group of semi-vowels. 
100. The number of half mc1tras regarding "ka" and so on is thirty-three. 
Half nzatras of long vowels are thirty-two. Phonemes known as 
pluta have six half matras. Therefore, the total of half matras is 81. 
Chapter Seven 
101. According to this system, the Lord's power of action (kriyasakti) 
manifests time and space as 'paths' (adhvas). The path of space is a 
means of unifying and traversing insubstantial and substantial 
forms such as the intellect, the altar or image, the void. Despite 
this diversity, all these forms abide in consciousness and have their 
place of repose (vifranti) in consciousness. 
102. On the path, all forms shine internally and externally through the 
outlets of consciousness; this is how they are created and mani-
fested. Consciousness, in its autonomy, shines as hoth the knowing 
subject and its object. The variety of objects, though not different 
from the knowing subject, appears as if different from it. 
103. The aspirant attains the nature of Bhairava hy perceiving everything. 
from the all-consuming fire (kMagni) said to ahide at the bottom of 
the earth, to the highest principle, i.e., andfrita§iva, in ascending 
order and unifying them into the singularity of I-Consciousness.

--- PAGE 247 ---
NOTES 
237 
104. Worlds of a variegated nature are included under the principle of 
earth. The sphere under which they shine is called the sphere of 
Brahma. Similarly, other spheres, e.g., the sphere of prakrti, the 
sphere of maya, and the sphere of sakti, are wider than the preced-
ing one. All the principles from water to prakrti come under the 
sphere of prakrti. All the principles from plirll$G to maya come 
under the sphere of maya. The extent of the sphere of sakti extends 
up to the Sadasiva principle. Thus, the number of spheres (a~ztjas) 
is four. The spheres are the masses of substance which have fallen 
from the state of energy. 
105. According to this system, there are ten 'guardians of the quarters' 
in accordance with the number of directions. The guardians of 
each direction are composed of a group of ten, consisting of a 
superintending deity and nine subordinates. Taken as ten groups of 
ten guardians, the total number becomes 100 deities; therefore, 
they are known as the "Hundred Rudras" (Satarudras). 
106. This system envisions a limitless number of 'worlds' made from 
and dominated by each principle. These worlds exist so that souls 
which have not received the Saiva form of initiation, but have 
attained a lower form of perfection through a continuous practice 
of concentration, receive a body and sense organs best suited for 
experiencing pleasure and pain in a particular world, an.d may 
finally attain identity with the Lord. Every world has supenntend-
ing deities who are called the Lords of that world. 
107. Located in the intellect principle (buddhi tattva) are eight ·wor~ds' 
(bhuvana), each dominated by a class of heavenly beings or -~eity_: 
pisacas, raksasas. yaksas, gandharvas, Indra, Soma, PraJapati, 
and Brahma. 
108. According to the Svacclzanda Tantra, the names of the worlds 
under prakrti are: Akrta, Krta, Vaiblzava, Brahmd. Vaf $~zava, 
Kaumara, 'belonging to Uml'i' (Auma), and 'belonging to Srikat).t 
ha.' K~emaraja explains that those who have practiced yoga with 
renunciation attain the 'world' (blzuvana) named Akrta, while 
those who practiced karmayoga reach the blzuvana named Krta. 
Similarly, those who practiced nirmanayoga go to the world of

--- PAGE 248 ---
238 
NOTES 
rbhus. The abode of Brahma is attainable to those who practice 
yoga with conviction that puru~a is one universal soul. The abode 
of Vi~IJU is the final resort for those who strictly practiced yoga 
according to Vai~IJava tradition. Those who practice yoga main-
taining celibacy (brahmacarya) go to the abode of Kaumara world. 
The abodes above this named Au ma and Sraikantha, are the 
abodes of those who pra~tice yoga according to the Saiva doctrine. 
109. There are seven groups of eight deities who preside over different 
principles. The first is called patyntaka, the group of eight Lor~s 
beginning with Lakuli§a and ending with Amare5a. The second ~s 
called Guhyti!jfaka who are the Lords of fire: the first of them 15 
Bhairava. The third group is Atiguhyti~'ftaka, which rules over the 
principle named wind (vayu). The fourth group of eight is called 
Pavitrc1naka, with Sthanu, etc., who rule over the principle called 
akafo. The fifth group of eight, beginning with Stlz(i/a and ending 
with Clzagala~14,a, rules over ahc11i1ktira. The sixth group of eight 
divinities called Yonya!jfaka rules over the in tel leer. The seventh 
group of eight is called Yogti!jfaka which rules over prakrti. 
llO. The eleven worlds of the Rudras are as follows: Varna, Bhima. 
Ugra, Bhava, Ifa, Ekavlra, PracaIJcJa, GaurL Aja, Ananta. and 
Ekasiva. 
111. The names of the worlds in impure vidva, kale, and niyati are Kro-
~hefa and Cat)Qa, Samvarta and Jyoti: Sura and Pancanta, respec-
tively. 
112. !he worlds under kala and mtiyti are as follows: Ekavira, Sikhi. 
SrlkaIJtha in kala, while in mciyti, Mahatejas, Varna, Bhava. Udb-
hava, Ekapir1ga and Isana, Bhuvanefa and Angu~tha. 
113. In pure vidya principle there are five worlds. They are: Hala-
halarudra, Krodha, Ambika, Aghora, and Yama. 
114. Every principle is composed of subtle elements (kahls). They are 
called nirrtti, prati!}fhti, vidya, fantti, and fantatltll. The number 
of worlds in nirrttikala is sixteen~ in pratisthti the numher is fifty-
six; in vidya the number is twenty-eight: in sanM the number is 
eighteen. There are no worlds in .frintcitrtti. Thus, the total number 
of the worlds in all five kalcls is one hundred eighteen.

--- PAGE 249 ---
NOTES 
239 
Chapter Eight 
115. The generic attribute of all jars is jarness, i.e., that which perme-
ates all jars. The highest Lord, Siva, is far more extensive than any 
other generic attribute; therefore, he is the greatest universal by 
whose 1 ight everything shines. 
116. According to this system. where some specific characteristics such 
as, support, solidity. etc., are found, that is to be known as the 
earth principle. These characteristics of the earth are seen in the 
regions beginning with the all-consuming dreadful fire (kaMgni) 
and ending in the world of Virabhadra. 
117. The theory of the nature of absolute causal relation states that even 
at the emergence of creation, the universe is nothing but an expan-
sion, an 'opening up' (srni) of the light of the autonomous Lor~. 
The Lord is also the cause of 'maintenance' (stlziti). i.e., the um-
verse remaining steadily present within the Self; and 'withdrawal' 
(sa!izhara), the state of rest in one's own Self. According to this 
theory, in reality no change has taken place in the Self, which is 
identical with consciousness. Furthermore, internality and exter-
nal ity are not distinct from each other but two sides of the same 
reality. The artificial or fictional causa'l relation is not real. and is 
accepted only to help explain the state existing in mayti. The ~o~er 
of causal relation is limited and governed by the Lord's restncttve 
power (niyati). 
118. For the creation of a particular object, some elements are ?resent 
in the beginning and others follow it in a regular order. This or~er 
of sequence, in the form of priority and posteriority, renrn
11
~s 
invariably presenc for example, the clay used in making a jar is 
always present before the jar itself comes into existence. 
119. Every effect has in its background the sentient cause as its agent. If 
the conscious agent is absent, the aggregation of all the causes, 
either individually or collectively, cannot produce the intended 
object. For example, even if the stick for moving the potter's wheel. 
clay, and other necessary materials for making a jar are present. 
the jar cannot be produced if the potter himself is absent. There-
fore, it is concluded that a conscious agent is required for produc-

--- PAGE 250 ---
240 
NOTES 
ing an effect. However. all of the above-mentioned instruments, 
along with the sentient agent, are considered as the cause of any 
action which in reality terminates in consciousness. 
120. It is generally accepted that the causal relation depends on or is 
controlled by the restrictive power of the Lord. Therefore, it is 
relative. but the absolute causal relation depends on none. Con-
sciousness shines in the form of the universe. For instance, all the 
principles (tattvas) from earth to Siva are dependent on the one 
prior to it. The earth is supported by the water, the water helps the 
earth for its solidity. Furthermore. all the elements are unable to 
come into being without the existence of subtle elements. In the 
same way, these subtle elements cannot come into existence with-
out the blossoming action of the sense organs. That again is impos-
sible without determination regarding different sense organs. This 
also is not possible without the existence of the primary matter 
inseparably and equally linked with all. which is known as 
miilaprakrti. This primary matter, being an enjoyable object, is 
unable to exist without the subject that enjoys it. The subject that 
experiences it is the sharer of the experience of different objects of 
experience. It is for that reason that it is considered limited. Thus. 
the limitation that is seen in a conscious subject (pztru$a) is only 
imposed and not real. This imposed limitation is due to klila, ka/[l, 
niyati, raga, and vidya, which cannot be activated without con-
sciousness (sa,,zvit). However, consciousness, being partless, can-
not manifest without the existence of the delusive power called 
maya. Freedom, the cause of 1 imitation. has comparative distinc-
tions of manifestation. These features are shining in the beginning 
as slightly unlimited, then unlimited, then slightly blossoming and 
finally are fully bloomed. However. these states of the manifesta-
tions by the power of freedom could not be possible without that 
which is perfectly luminous by nature. which in this system is 
called Bhairava. 
121. This remark explains the existence of differentiation or multiplicity 
in spite of the presence of the Ahsolute everywhere. 
122. Mount Meru cannot be supposed to he the cause of the jar, because

--- PAGE 251 ---
NOTES 
241 
it exists in a distant place. The question implied here is, how could 
the universe be created by a Lord who remains distant? 
123. This is to say that the effects can be produced in a variety of ways. 
124. Siva is, in essence. consciousness. He is perfectly full and free 
from desire. In the state of maya, the limited soul feels a longing 
for an object in order to fulfill his desires. The desire arises in the 
1 i m ited sou 1 because of some want in him. The Lord, on the other 
hand. does not lack anything. Therefore. there is no question of 
any desire in him. However, on account of his freedom, a sort of 
intention toward tasting of his delight continuously goes on. The 
pentad named siva' sakti, sadasiva, isvara, and suddlzavidyti, who 
abide in the pure path (adlzva), shine with comparative intensity 
from the relish of the taste of delight on account of his autonomy. It 
is because of the comparative intensity of this relish that con-
sciousness manifests itself as "I" (aha111). This is known as the 
state of sakti. In other words, consciousness which is absolute 
(an utta ra) now sees (as if), on the mirror of consciousness, its own 
reflection and cognizes it to be its own, then the cognition that fol-
lows is ""I am This" (alzam idam). In this instance, the substratum 
where it shines is ""I" and "This" shines as an indistinct outline of 
the picture. In the cognition, "I am This," ''I" is the principal and 
"'Th is" has the subordinate position. The principle known as 
sadasiva abides where the host of the subjects called mantre5vara 
cognizes the universal light of consciousness as ··1 am This:'' But 
on the level of the knowing subjects called mantrefrara, thi_s ~og­
mtion assumes the form of "This is L" where .. This"' is vividly 
prominent and ··I,. is subordinate. This principle is called isva:a, 
where "This" as the knowable shines with "I," invariably one with 
it. In suddlzavidvti on the other hand, there is no distinction 
between princip~lit~ and subordinacy. There both .. I" and ''This" 
shine in a balanced way. 
125. In this triadic system, subjects are of seven kinds. They are known 
as sakala, pralaytikala, vijl1tinakala, mantra, mantre.frara, 
mantramalzefvara, and Siva. Impurities are of three kinds. They 
are lz~zava, miiyfya, and karma. The a~zavamala is of two kinds.

--- PAGE 252 ---
242 
NOTES 
First, it lacks right knowledge regarding the Self, which is of the 
nature of consciousness. The second is the wrong notion of con-
ceiving non-self, that is, the body, the sense organs, pra~w. etc., as 
the Self. The impurity born of maya (maylya) causes the notion of 
difference. The impurity born of deeds (karma) appears to the soul 
to be of the nature of virtue and vice. Impurities are considered to 
be the bond by which souls remain bound to worldly existence. The 
knowing subjects who have all of the above three defilements 
(mala) are called sakala. The souls known as pralayakala have two 
such impurities, i.e., a~zava and karma. The vijllanakala souls have 
only one mala. They are of two kinds: (a) free vij1zanakala souls, in 
which all impurities have ended, and (b) vijllanakala souls, in 
which some trace of impurity still persists. From among the first 
group, eight vidyefvaras are selected, and from the second group 
seven million mantras serve the Lord to help the worldly people. 
126. Siva is always perfectly full of His five powers. However, he mani-
fests different principles in which a particular energy shines pre-
dominantly while other energies remain subordinate. On account 
of this factor different principles, even in this pure path, and dis-
tinct features like Siva, Sadasiva, etc., become manifest. 
127. According to this system, defilement (mala) is not a distinct sub-
stance as accepted by dualist Saiva thinkers. 
128. It is comparable to a seed, which does not take root and blossom 
externally and is going to be destroyed. 
129. The characteristic of kala is limited doership. 
130. In some doctrines kala evolves after niyati, but in the present text 
niyati is mentioned after kala. The reason for this is that the causal 
relation cannot stand without time, for the regular order of the 
cause preceding the effect cannot take place without time. Priority 
and posteriority can exist only when time comes into heing. 
131. Kala is the agent which creates the knowable object and the effect 
as separate from itself. 
I 32. Sukha is the state of agitation which is pleasant. raj as is the state 
of agitation which is painful, while tamas is the state of agitation 
which lacks awareness.

--- PAGE 253 ---
NOTES 
243 
133. Above intellect (buddlzi) and below the primordial matter (prakrti), 
a gwza principle (tattva) is supposed to exist. It is only an aspect of 
prakrti, the balanced state of three gu~zas. Therefore, the balanced 
state of gu~zas is called prakrti and its agitated aspect is known as 
gu~w tattva. However, gu~za is not counted as a distinct principle 
from prakrti. The impelling force that agitates or breaks the bal-
ance of prakrti is the superintending deity of the tattva. The agita-
tion in prakrti occurs in relation to those who desire enjoyment, 
but in those in whom these desires of enjoyment have disappeared, 
this agitation does not create any effect. According to the Trika 
system, agitation in prakrti is caused by the Lord SrikaIJ.thanatha. 
134. According to Samkhya philosophy, prakrti is insentient, while 
puru~a is sentient but non-active either in bondage or in liberation. 
Therefore, some external agent of aaitation is required. According 
, 
b 
f 
!o Saiva philosophy, agitation is created by the intervention ° 
Isvara. 
135 · As, for example, when one perceives an object, the cognition "I 
see a tree" arises. In this instance, "I" is a subject and a tree is an 
object. The relationship between the two, the experiencing subject 
and object is the result of alzalizktira. For seeing a tree, eyes are 
sufficient, but the sight of the tree is experienced by the instru-
ment "I" ahmizkara. 
136. When, by spiritual practice, the mind becomes subtle, it do~s n~t 
require any external instrument for perception. At that pomt, it 
can see through the sense of touch and experience touch through 
the sense of hearing, etc. 
137. This is a reference to the Vaise~ika school of thought, according to 
which sense organs are born of matter. 
Chapter Nine 
138. Here thirty-six principles (tattvas) are understood in terms of 
seven kinds of knowing subjects (pramtitti) residing on the seven 
spheres along thirty-six principles. 
139. The plural ending attached to the names of these seven knowing 
subjects indicates the existence of a great number of knowing sub-
jects belonging to each of these groups.

--- PAGE 254 ---
244 
NOTES 
140. In the lowest sphere, from earth to prakrti, reside the sakala know-
ing subjects. The sakala knowing subjects are capable of perceiv-
ing only the principles from earth to prakrti. The higher knowing 
subjects, who possess more extensive subjectivity and therefore 
possess qualitatively different energies (!foktis), are capable of per-
ceiving the higher principles. 
141. In TA 10:3-5, Abhinavagupta explains: 
The principles from earth to prakrti are divided into 
fifteen on the basis of the [seven] possessors of power 
(iaktirnan), their powers (iaktis). along with their ·unique 
nature' or "thing in itself' (svarupa). There are thir-
teen divisions from puru$a to kahl; eleven divisions 
[exist] when the pralayakala [group of knowing sub-
jects] becomes the thing in itself; it is similar with mtiyti; 
[there are] nine divisions when the thing in itself becomes 
vijnlintikala; seven divisions [manifest] when the man-
tra [knowing subjects] becomes the unique nature; a 
threefold division [arises] when the mantramahesvaras 
become the unique nature. Siva, whose nature is con-
sciousness, which is dance of uninterrupted 1 ight, has no 
division. 
142. The expression prameyarnyogya means: 'that which is worthy to 
be conceived as an object itself,' that is, as insentienc it is neither 
energy nor the possessor of energy. 
143. According to this system, the universe is of a threefold nature. 
non-transcendent (apara), transcendent-non-transcendent (parti-
para), and transcendent (para). In other words, reality is primarily 
conceived as possessing an objective side (nara). energy (sakti), 
and a possessor of the energy (saktiml1n). However, Abhi-
navag up ta points out that the 'thing in i tse 1 f' (sm nlpa) is the 
sphere of objectivity, the .frlkta is the sphere of perception, and the 
possessor of power is the perceiver or knowing subject. Therefore. 
all seven knowing subjects are Siva, who possesses different ener-
gies, that is. different powers in the different spheres in which they 
operate. The thing in itself is common to all of them, which pro-
vides a degree of objectivity.

--- PAGE 255 ---
NOTES 245 
144. Limited knowledge (vidya) and limited agency (kala) are consid-
ered to be the energies of the sakala souls, who are defiled by all 
three impurities (malas). Although sakala souls are bound and 
limited by impurities, they possess the powers of knowledge and 
action. 
145. The word asplzufa means indistinct or dormant. In pralayakala 
souls, vidya and kala are still present; however, they remain dor-
mant because they rest in deep sleep (su~upti). 
146. The sevenfold differentiation of the saktis is used for the purpose 
of elaboration and instruction. In reality, there is only one fakti 
belonging to the Lord; that is, His svatantryasakti, which is 
inseparably united with Him. This autonomy manifests itself as 
many saktis, but at the same time keeps all of them within and 
shines as one. 
147. Distinctions among the instruments do not create distinction in the 
subject. The supreme subject, by means of its power of freedom, 
creates divisions in its own Self by causing some to shine as an 
object, and others as an instrument. 
148. Here begins a long and complex argument in which Abhinavagupta 
attempts to refute 'doctrine of perceptibility' advocated by the 
Mimamsa school. According to the Mima1i1sa theory, in o~d~~ to 
be perceived, every object must possess a quality of percept1biltty.; 
any object devoid of this quality cannot be perceived. ~bhi­
navagupta disagrees and attempts to prove that perceptibility is. not 
the quality of an object, but a power possessed by the perce~ver. 
All entities already exist within consciousness, and when a given 
entity appears within the organs of perception of a perceiver, then 
it becomes an object of perception. Everything is illuminated ~y 
consciousness, including defilement (mala), as well as non-exis-
tence, because for a thing to be non-existent, it must be included in 
consciousness. Therefore, objective existence depends on con-
sciousness, and is not perceptible independently from it. For Abhi-
navagupta, it is important to establish this position. because he 
needs to argue that the knowing subject must develop a higher 
level of subjectivity to be able to perceive the larger and subtler 
spheres of reality.

--- PAGE 256 ---
246 
NOTES 
149. The one who is self-luminous does not need anyone to perceive this 
shining, because it is the very nature of the divine to shine. There-
fore, He does not assume the nature of objectivity, and because of 
that the quality of being perceptible, which is distinct from its own 
Self, does not appear in Him. 
150. The point here is that this feeling of jealousy does not abide in the 
beautiful woman, but in the person himself. 
151. The act of watching this dance becomes complete when a person 
attains the state of aesthetic pleasure by becoming one with the 
unified light of awareness manifested through the watching audi-
ence; thus, vidya and kala awaken subjectivity in sakala souls 
where objectivity is predominant. 
152. The point here is that when objectivity in the principles frompuru~a 
to kala are conceived and the portions of the veils (km1rnkas) come 
into perception in the form of objects, then the subjectivity of 
puru~a is lost. 
153. The distinctions have been ascertained. but the number of objects 
which possess multiple natures cannot be stated. Therefore, the 
author, taking a clay jar as an example, presents its varied nature. 
Its quality of being a knowable object is nothing but its identity 
with the knowing subject. Therefore. when the jar is known by all 
knowing subjects as a jar, then it comes under the sakala group. 
When. on the other hand. it is only perceived by Siva. it is none 
other than Siva Himself. 
154. The seeker who apprehends the earth principle as Brahman, but 
who dies before becoming fully established in Siva, attains the 
state of vi}Fztin{ikala. 
155. Those who practice the _voga of conceiving the earth principle as 
Brahman, by the end of the day of Brahma (kalpa), or at the time 
of death. attain the state of pralayakevala. 
156. When the group of seven knowing subjects, from sakala to Siva, is 
agitated (prak\wbha), they become intent on functioning in their 
respective fields. This agitation is known as a ·pulsation' or a 
'change.' This brings about the appearance of the seven .<aktis: there-
fore, the number of possessors of the .foktis (.foktiman) is also seven.

--- PAGE 257 ---
NOTES 
247 
157. The purity of pure knowable (suddlzaprameya) is a result of it not 
being touched by the knowing subject. This is the case with the 
earth principle as well as the thing in itself (svarzipas) of all the 
other principles as well. 
158. When a person well-established in prti~za perceives an external 
object, his breath goes outside to a span of sixteen digits (migulas). 
When the final measure comes in contact with an object, the 
breath becomes identified with it. This is explained by the term 
tanmayr. 
159. Those who are endowed with discerning capability are able to con-
ceive fifteenfold nature to the end of pradlztina. 
160. With the lessening of the number of thought constructs, the span of 
a tuf i also lessens. The lessening of the thought of this-ness 
(idanta) diminishes gradually, and it finally results in the form of 
absorption into Siva constituting two digits (migulas). 
l61. The word savadlztinata here means 'steadiness of consciousness of 
that is not to be diverted from here to there, or from this to that.' It 
means that the yogin remains attentive towards that one from 
which the knower of the object (gralzaka) arises. and from where 
the object gets its rise. It always remains steady in self-luminous 
consciousness alone. 
l62. According to early Saiva thinkers, such as Kalla.ta. the meani~g ~f 
the word piita is goddess Kall, Matrsadbhava. Bhairava, Prattb~a. 
However, the author himself is reluctant to go into depth explam-
i ng the mystical meaning of this word. 
l63. When a yogin practices meditation in the tu.ti related either ~o 
mantramalzesvara, mantrefrara, or mantra, he is able to attam 
the siddlzis corresponding to these states. 
164. The dream state is considered to be an instrument, or rather. a 
door, by the help of which one is able to arrive at the right form of 
knowledge. 
165. The supreme consciousness externally assumes threefold nature. 
These are the object of knowledge (rlipam). the instrumentality 
indicated in the sentence a hove by the expression "by means of 
sight." while the word alza111 indicates the subject of experience.

--- PAGE 258 ---
248 
NOTES 
Therefore, the subject knows the object by means of the instru-
ment, i.e., sight. However. the supreme subject (para) permeates 
and remains above these three. 
Chapter Ten 
166. According to this system, there exists a subtle energy which func-
tions to hold all the principles (tattvas) in their respective places. 
For example, the principle earth is held by the subtle energy called 
dharikcz. As the function of this energy is to contain or stop the 
earth, it is also called nivrtti. Similarly, the subtle energies called 
pratinha, vidya, and santa are active in other principles or in 
groups of them. 
167. A~z(ia sphere, or egg, is that which serves as the wall separating 
one sphere from the other. They are also called coverings or veils 
(avara~za) which do not allow one sphere to penetrate another. 
168. This is to say that the qualities, such as smell, taste, touch, etc .. 
belonging to earth and other tattvas exist also in the sakti tattva; 
however, their existence is not in the gross form but in the subtle. 
This is the reason why Siva is ritually worshipped in the phallic 
form made of five different elements. 
169. The principle called Siva is free from any sorts of mutations, limi-
tations, or thought constructs. 
170. This is to say that transcendence cannot be an object of meditation. 
If an object of meditation were to exist in it, it would not be tran-
scendent. Therefore, the kala that functions in the lower level, just 
below the highest, is known as stintti. However, Siva is beyond 
santcl; therefore, no name is suitable to describe the Immutable One. 
171. Anything that shines as knowable remains existing for some time, 
but when the quality of being an object of knowledge disappears 
from the heart of the yogin, that which remains is known as thirty-
si x principles. Even if, for the purpose of teaching, in that state, 
the divine is conceived as the thirty-seventh principle, then upon 
the disappearance of even this objectivity from it, the divine is 
conceived as the thirty-eighth principle.

--- PAGE 259 ---
NOTES 
249 
172. When the whole scheme of thirty-six tattvas is grouped into nine 
divisions, then their names are prakrti, puru~a, niyati, kala, maya, 
vidy{/, isvara, sadasiva, and Siva. 
173. The worlds are perceived as objects of knowledge shining in three 
different forms of knowable objects. They are: kala, tattva, and 
blzuvana. In the same way, when they rest in the subject, they are 
also threefold, i.e., var~w, mantra, andpada. 
Chapter Eleven 
174. Abh i navagupta 's thesis is, in essence, that consciousness (sa171vid) 
is a perfect unity, full and unchanging even when taking the forms 
of all manifestations and activities. What is contained in the first 
ten chapters of this work constitutes a short-cut for a small number 
of truth-seekers who, according to this system, have been pursui~g 
spiritual perfection over many lifetimes. The significance of this 
knowledge for others is made clear in this chapter. 
175. It is stated in the Bhagavadgita that the fire of knowledge burns 
the karma of al 1 deeds. For one undergoing the experience of p~st 
deeds, it is necessary to remain involved in actions whose fruits 
are to he experienced in the future. The doer has to experience the 
results of past actions gradually, not all at once. There is no end to 
the cycle of deeds or their results, and for this reason the descen~ 
of grace (.<aktipdta) needs to be discussed. According to the posi-
tion represented here, when Sakti 'opens up' in one's own selL 
right knowledge dawns spontaneously. 
176. Ka rmasd mva occurs as a result of balance of two mutually oppo-
site past actions. Both of these actions possess exactly equal power, 
and therefore restrict each other from producing any fruit. Accard-
i ng to this theory, saktiptita takes place when these two deeds are 
ha lanced and their results neutralized. 
177. According to the teacher Khetapala, that sakti whose nature is to 
restrain (n i rodlz i kti) arrests the ma/a. When impurities (ma/a) 
become perfectly ripened, the above sakti becomes inactive. and 
the proper manifestation of knowledge and action occurs. This cul-
minates in the decent of grace (saktiptita) on a seeker.

--- PAGE 260 ---
250 
NOTES 
178. When the Lord assumes the form of bound being by accepting the 
limitations of time, space, etc., this does not entail any differentia-
tion in His innermost nature. 
179. The term jhafiti means 'without delay,' that is. taking recourse 
directly to anupaya. 
180. The term 'by gradual process' (krame~w) refers to a method of ini-
tiation, performance rituals, etc. 
181. This is the Saiva explanation of the nature of the descent of grace. 
In the process of manifestation, the supreme Lord (Paramesvara) 
creates limited beings by concealing (tirohhava) His own Self 
through kancukas, tattvas, and the malas. He reveals his own Self 
by bestowing faktipata on limited souls. The entire process of con-
cealment and revelation is the result of the autonomy (svatantrya) 
of the Lord. 
182. This is to say that the autonomous and omnipresent Lord is impar-
tial and therefore there is no object, activity, or person that He 
prefers over others. 
183. As it is stated, the right kind of teacher (guru) is considered to be 
equal to Bhairava. This is because he possesses the fullness of self-
realization as wel 1 as the right understanding of the meaning of the 
icistras. 
184. Although sakti is present everywhere, it has different forms with 
different effects: asjye~thli-fakti, it leads one to the ultimate goal; 
on the other hand, the ghora and ghoratara-saktis, that is, the 
fearsome and the terrible, lead one toward worldly existence. 
Chapter Twelve 
185. Vlras are Saiva practitioners deemed to have attained mastery over 
the senses and a high level of spiritual development. 
186. The procedure of external bathing is as follows: keeping the mind 
steadily concentrated on the mantra given to him by the guru, one 
should follow the track of the cows while dust is still present in the 
air. One is supposed to enter. and should make three strides in the 
dust created by the cows. This is known as parthiva bath. In the

--- PAGE 261 ---
NOTES 
251 
same way, one should purify the whole body, beginning with head 
and ending with feet. by uttering the mantra of Siva with its five 
limbs (Ifana is the head, Tatpuru~a is the face, Aghora is the heart, 
Yamadeva is the hidden parts of the body, and Sadyojata is the 
whole body). Then, having cleansed the body with the mantra, one 
should plunge into the water repeating the mantra of Siva with its 
auxiliary parts. This is known as bathing with water. Taking ashes 
from the sacrificial fire. one should bur~ impurities present on the 
head, face, heart, genitals, and the feet with it while uttering the 
mantra "'plza_t." When this is done one should throw a handful of 
these ashes on the head while repeating the mantra of Siva with its 
five 1 i mbs. This is known as bathing with ashes. One should n~ove 
back and forth in the pleasing air, remembering the mantra, giv~n 
to him by his guru, in his heart. This is known as bathing with air. 
One should bring the mantra into one's mind and should remain 
concentrated there fixing his concentration on the void (akaf~). 
This is known as bathing in the void. One who immerses on~self 1.n 
the 1 ight of the sun and the moon, identifying himself with Siva, is 
cleansed of all impurities. This type of bathing is called soma and 
a rka · The last type of bath is bathing in the Self (atma). In the Tan-
tra loka. Abh i navagupta describes it in the following way: ... The 
very Self is the supreme Lord himself: it is free from dis~ipllnes 
es tab I ished in spiritual texts. It is like a great lake in exten~ion and 
depth: the universe should dissolve therein. upon which one 
becomes pure and the cause of purification for others." 
187. The expression "tatratatra" refers to the five faces of Siva. i.e.· 
I fan a. Tatpurusa, etc. One is to first identify with these five faces 
of Siva, upon ~hich one attains full absorption into Siva. 
Chapter Thirteen 
188. The author begins this chapter, which deals with initiation. by 
describing the procedure for selecting a suitable place for worship. 
mantra repetition, and practice of yoga. He discusses this topic in 
Chapter 15 of his TA, verses 80-115ab. At the very beginning, 
Abhinavagupta points out that only when one is serene and well-

--- PAGE 262 ---
252 
NOTES 
disposed in his heart (blzava171 prasannam alocya) is he suitable to 
perform worship, and only then should he proceed to the place of 
worship. 
189. In TA 15: 114a-115b, Abhinavagupta describes the place where 
the worship should take place: "The suitable place-for either 
attaining perfection or liberation with regard to the practice of 
worship, mantra repetition, or attainment of samadhi-is the one 
where heart is inclined toward beauty and at peace." 
190. The land of Aryans is between Himalaya and Yindhyacala. 
191. Karaka is a term, used by Pal)ini in his A->fchlhyllyl, which denotes 
various participants in action presented by a sentence. The closest 
equivalent in other classical and some modern languages is a word 
'case,' such as nominative, genitive, accusative, ablative, etc. 
192. Abhinavagupta, who advocates the theory of the supreme nondual-
ity, has to account for ritual action, which consists of factors or 
participants in action presented by a sentence (ktirakas), which 
because of their perceived distinction could he construed as con-
tradicting nonduality. This was certainly the opinion of Samkara-
carya and other Advaita Vedanta thinkers~ Abhinavagupta dis-
agreed with this understanding and argues that action, distinction, 
change, etc., are also included within consciousness. To illustrate, 
we can take the example of the fol lowing sentence: I offer water 
from the sacrificial pot to Lord Siva with a spoon in the place of 
worship. The factors here are: the agent of acting, the object of the 
act, its instrument. its point of ablation, and the location of the act 
of worship. For Sarnkaracarya, the supreme reality cannot be of 
the same order as that of objective existence which is transient in 
nature. The Brahman is the transcendent, immutable, and partless 
reality, and all subjective and objective phenomena are only 
appearances possessing no real existence. The Brahman is without 
attributes and as immutable, it cannot he suhject to action. The 
attribute of changeability is the most important characteristic of 
objective existence, and therefore ever-changing empirical exis-
tence must have a ground on which all these changes take place. 
The same. of course, applies to the ritual action. which. as we have

--- PAGE 263 ---
NOTES 253 
seen, consists of the factors or the participants in action described 
by a sentence. For Abhinavagupta, on the other hand, the supreme 
reality, which consists of prakasa and vimaria, even in the process 
of externalization, remains established in its own Self, 'relishing' 
(camatka ra) the bliss of 'fullness' (pilnzatti), and 'independence' 
(svatantrya) of its own essential nature which is in no way over-
shadowed by the external manifestatiod. The lower aspect of cre-
ation is a contracted form of that supreme consciousness, which, 
through the activity of maya sakti, assumes limited forms, thus 
bringing into existence the notion of duality. Thus, the supre~e 
reality consists as much of differentiation as it does of unity. This 
differentiation always remains within that I-Consciousness and 
therefore is never separate from it. Thus, unlike Samkara _for 
whom action is always binding, Abhinavagupta accepts actwn, 
such as the ritual activity, as potentially liberating. 
193 · In TA 15: 161, Abhinavagupta describes the role and the meaning 
of sacrificial vessel in Tantric ritual in the following way: "All t~a~ 
which is touched by the drops of the water contained in the sacrifi-
cial vessel becomes in fact pure. What other kind of purity ~?u
1
~,, 
there ever be but that of the touch of the rays of the sun of Siv~. 
Furthermore, "As the Lord said in the Malinlvijayottara Tantra Ill 
the section dealing with the sacrificial vessel, it is necessary to be 
careful not to conceive anything as not being purified by it. E~ery­
th i ng is purified by it and what is impure becomes pure" (!A. 15: 
162-163ab.) However, the impurity only belongs to the Itmited 
knowing subject abiding in maya and is not the essen_rial nature of 
things: "Here we speak of impurity from the perspective of bo~ded 
souls and of their systems. The essential nature of all thmg_s 
remains in fact always the same, without changing from what it 
was earlier or what is conceived to be" (TA 15: 163cd-164ab.) 
194. All the various factors which constitute a ritual action attain iden-
tity with Siva through the process of the placement of the syllables 
(nyasa). 
195. This is to say that direction depends on how the forms are arranged 
in space.

--- PAGE 264 ---
254 
NOTES 
196. Here begins description of inner worship. In the course of this 
worship, one is expected to bring one's body, mind, void, and 
prat:ia into identity with Siva. See TA 15: 295b-3 l 2. 
197. This is the reference to maladhclracakra, which, according to TA 
15: 297cd, is located four fingers below the navel. 
198. Here begins what Abhinavagupta calls 'the external sacrifice' 
because the disciple. after attaining identity with Siva through var-
ious ritual acts, should project his consciousness externally in the 
vital breath, void, and up to the external plane. 
199. There are eight purificatory rites and six deities. Therefore, the 
number becomes forty-eight. 
200. For greater details in regard to the conventional rules and their 
detailed description, see TA 15: 521-611. 
201. See TA 15: 576. 
Chapter Fourteen 
202. Putraka or spiritual son is a type of initiation in which a disciple is 
adopted as a successor of a teacher. 
203. Parivara or family refers to the group of subordinate deities cen-
tered around the main deity. 
204. This refers to the doors of the place where the rituals are per-
formed. 
205. For more details regarding the procedure of 'The Adoration of the 
Door' (dvtmlrcanam) see TA 15:184-190. 
206. Abhinavagupta talks at length about the nature of animal sacrifice 
in TA 16:28-72. There, by quoting various scriptures, he points 
out that any type of animal killing, such as for profit. a wedding. 
or sport, is not al lowed except in the course of sacrifice (ydga). 
According to him, killing consists of separating an animal that still 
possesses each of the three impurities (malas) from the vital 
breath. On the other hand, the ritualistic sacrifice of an animal is 
not killing because, in the course of the ritual. the animal is first 
separated from three impurities, and thus it is separated from its 
body. Thus, for Ahhinavagupta. ritual sacrifice of an animal is a

--- PAGE 265 ---
NOTES 
255 
form of initiation which joins the animal with the higher principles 
and for the purpose of propitiating God. 
207. The nirbfja type of initiation is given to those judged incapable of 
fol lowing the set of rules of post-initiatory conduct (samayapasa), 
as for example children, those who are dull, old people, women, 
those attached to their wealth, the sick, and so on. They attain lib-
eration on account of their devotion to the teacher, deities, and 
scriptures. On the other hand, the sabija type of initiation is given 
to those who have the gift of reason, are capable of tolerating toils 
and difficulties, and are therefore capable of following the set of 
rules of pre-initiatory conduct. 
Chapter Fifteen 
208. The initiation described in this chapter is given to a dying person. 
Ordinarily, the initiation is not given to all, and one desirous of 
initiation needs to show his devotion to teacher, deities, or scrip-
tures. This devotion is in turn seen as an indication of the descent 
of grace (saktipti.ta), a'nd saktlpata is perceived as a definite sign 
that one is suitable for initiation. The conditions under which the 
teacher is expected to grant initiation to a dying person ~re 
described by Abhinavagupta in the TA 19: 4-6: When in a dyi~g 
person, the fall of even weak power is awakened-whether he is 
taken by devotion to a teacher and others: whether the fall of grace 
is through work of friends. relatives, etc.: whether he has. b~~n 
indeed regular (sa mayin) but has not obtained the supreme mitia-
tion; whether, already having obtained it. he desi:es to leave as 
soon as possible his vital breaths, desirous of gorng ~way-the 
teacher shou Id provide for him the initiation of immediate depar-
ture, free from impurities. However, the teacher must be caref~l 
not to give initiation to a person whose impurities (ma/as) haven t 
reach maturation or to one whose karma hasn't been exhausted 
(se~·aklirmikavigr;ihe). The commentator explains this compound 
to mean: one who is not about to die, that is, one whose prtirab-
dhakarnza hasn't been fully exhausted. 
209. Marnza is the place where the feeling of the connectedness with 
the body remains present.

--- PAGE 266 ---
256 
NOTES 
210. According to the Tantraloka, this is done by means of the nyasa, 
using the k~urika and other mantras. 
211. That is, at the time of leaving one's body. 
212. Abhinavagupta describes the nature of brahmavidya initiation and 
the qualifications a teacher needs to have to perform this kind of 
initiation in the following way: "This initiation, which provides 
exit from the body, must be performed by a teacher who is experi-
enced in yoga. How could one who has not practiced various 
pra~zayama exercises be in a position to affect it" (TA 19:23cd-
24ab). (The brahmavidya) is in a position of producing its effects 
automatically, such as the purification of the principles, etc. The 
teacher, thanks to the power of ritual action and mantras, can thus 
join the disciple with the supreme principle (tattva). Even if a 
teacher hasn't practiced yoga, he is nevertheless in a position to 
execute the initiation that provides immediate exit from the body, 
thanks to the power of ritual action, malltras, and meditation. 
213. According to Abhinavagupta, both the samayill and purtka are 
entitled to recite brahmavidya. By this recitation, the dying person 
receives the samaya type of initiation. See TA 19 :31. 
214. The meaning of the expression sapratyaya is 'with signs or with 
giving signs,' as, for example. a person's dead body is re-animated 
by the power of mantra and lifts itself, etc. 
215. This is the type of initiation which, according to TA, gives hope to 
foolish individuals. It is described by Abhinavagupta in TA 20:2-7: 
The teacher, completely intent upon reciting appropriate mantras, 
must meditate on his right hand in the form of a triangle of fire, 
completely flaming, resplendent with the phoneme of fire, stirred 
by a wheel of winds. and must place there any seed and meditate on 
how it is burning, both in the hand and within his heart. In this way 
the seed, consumed by the heat of a multitude of "pilaf" mantras 
enlivened by the phonemes of fire "ra," loses every seminal quality 
and is now incapable of germinating. At the same time, by virtue of 
this same procedure, based on the power of mantras. meditation. 
and rituals, the three ma/as (a~zaw1, mayiya, and karma) are also 
'burned' in the sense that they are no longer in a position to furnish

--- PAGE 267 ---
NOTES 
257 
their products. This initiation, which has as its purpose the destruc-
tion of the seed, was described to me by the venerable Sambhunatha 
in ~is benevolence. The teacher, out of mercy, can also join the seed 
to Siva. The initiation is, in fact, full of splendor (sudipta), and is in 
a position to grant liberation also to vegetable life. 
216. This particular type of initiation, which reduces or eliminates the 
weight of a disciple, Abhinavagupta connects with the five stages of 
repose, that is, pragananda, udbhava, kampa, nidrti, and ghun.zi 
described in Chapter Five of Tantrasara. In TA 20: 14-15ab, he 
clarifies: "The leap (udbhava) is due to relief, caused by an eclips-
ing of the corporeal influence (dehagraha). The body is essentially 
constituted by the elements of earth. When the teacher, thanks to 
the mantra of lightness, which will be explained later, meditates on 
the disciple rising into the air, he loses his earthly qualities." 
Chapter Sixteen 
217. As we have seen earlier, it is the aspirant's devotion to the teacher, 
deity, or sastras which would entitle him to receive initiation, as 
this devotion is perceived as a clear sign of saktipata. However, in 
the case of the deceased or the absent one, this is obviously impos-
sible. Yet, the teacher would perform such an initiation if he could 
in some way infer that saktipata had descended on such a per.son. 
The signs of this type of saktiptita are, for example: strong feehngs 
that a teacher himself for some unknown reason, had for a 
deceased or absent soui, or the strong persistence of the family 
that advocated initiation. 
218 · Abh i navagupta describes a procedure called 'appli~ation of the 
great net' (malzajjala prayoga) in some detail in TA 21: 25-45 · 
However, the intricacies of this procedure remain unknown because 
the ii ca rya would receive oral instruction from his own teacher. 
The purpose of this procedure was rescuing departed souls who, for 
one reason or another, did not received initiation during their lives. 
A teacher would first catch the desired soul, draw him into the net, 
then reinstate him into a figure made of kusa grass, which repre-
sented his body, and then grant him liberation through initiation.

--- PAGE 268 ---
258 
NOTES 
Chapter Seventeen 
219. We have already seen that a disciple is joined to a different princi-
ple in the course of initiation. To which principle one is joined will 
depend on the school of thought whose initiation one receives. 
However, according to the Trika school, other schools of thought 
do not possess the knowledge to enable a disciple to attain identity 
with Siva. Therefore, those who have received initiation into what 
the followers of Trika consider inferior sects should be first dis-
joined or drawn away from the principles that they were joined to 
by the previous initiation, and then initiated again. The process of 
transcending the inferior doctrines is accomplished gradually 
through a succession of steps: the descent of grace, the removal of 
impurities, the desire to find the right teacher, initiation, knowl-
edge, the abandonment of that which is to be avoided, immersion 
into that which is to be accepted, giving up the sphere of the enjoy-
able, and the removal of the limitations created by a~zavamala. For 
details, see Chapter 22 of the Tantra/aka. 
220. Abhinavagupta gives 
the 
names of the 
genetic 
mantras 
(sadhara~zab mantrab) in TA 22: 20. They are seven in number 
and their names are: pra~zava or mantra awn, mMrka, maya, vyo-
mavyapl, 
~a4ak~ara, bahurapa, and the eye mantra (netra). 
According to TA 22: 15-17a, this is what a teacher says to one who 
is about to embrace Saivism and receive initiation: "This one was 
once a follower of other disciplines but is now inspired by your 
blessing; therefore bestow your grace (iaktipcita) upon him, so that 
this abandonment of other doctrines does not become a source of 
doubt for him. which will oblige him to practice rights of atone-
ment. And having attained identity with you, may he quickly 
achieve perfection and 1 iberation." 
Chapter Eighteen 
221. In TA23:3-4, Abhinavagupta explains that a spiritual guide 
should transmit his own power (svddhikara) to a disciple whom he 
thinks is at the point of being in possession of well-practiced 
knowledge. "The one,'' continues Abhinavagupta, quoting Kami-
kaf?ama, "who does not possess this knowledge is not a teacher,

--- PAGE 269 ---
NOTES 259 
even if he has been anointed and has passed through the various 
stages, such as samayin, etc." Furthermore, the only criterion for 
the selection of a new teacher is knowledge. Abhinavagupta writes, 
""The teacher who creates a new teacher must therefore select an 
ind iv id u a I of fu 11 and perfect knowledge, without considering any 
other characteristic, such as place, family, conduct, and body." TA 
23: 16b-17a. 
222 · In TA 23: 31-32, Abhinavagupta describes the responsibilities of a 
newly consecrated teacher in the immediate period after his initia-
tion. He writes: "The new teacher, after having obtained consecra-
tion, must meditate and recite the entire complex of mantras estab-
1 i shed in the scriptures for a period of six months so that he 
becomes one with them. Having attained identity with the mantras, 
and having taken possession of the potency of mantra (mantra-
vlrya), he finally becomes able to cut the bonds. Therefore, he 
should spare no effort to attain identity with the mantras." 
223. In the Tantraloka, Abhinavagupta explains that Brahmai:is. K~atri­
yas, Yaisyas, eunuchs. women, Sudras, and any other kinds of per-
son desirous of initiation should be initiated without being asked 
their caste. However, the teacher should take this into consider-
ation at the time when knowledge is imparted to them. Further-
more, the teacher who is the basis of knowledge, should set seven 
sessions. These s~ssions are: initiation, explanation. compas~ion. 
friendliness, contemplation of the sastras, unification with Siva, 
and giving away of food, etc. See TA 23: 20b/23a. 
Chapter Nineteen 
224. As for the purpose of this rite, Abhinavagupta writes: "This type 
of initiation affects the purification of the subtle body (purya$f 
aka). If the purya~faka does not exist, then there is also no heaven 
or hell." TA 24:20-21. 
225. The point here is that the entire procedure performed by teacher 
that w i 11 be described in the following I ines is performed to estab-
1 ish firm conviction on the side of the ignorant ones. The entire 
performance by the teacher. according to Abhinavagupta. is not 
helpful in any way in attaining liberation. See TA 24: 15b-16a.

--- PAGE 270 ---
260 
NOTES 
226. Here begins description of fraddlzadlksti, or post-mortem initiation. 
Abhinavagupta discusses it in Chapter 25 of his TA based on the 
authority of the Siddhayogesvarlmata Tantra. This rite must be per-
formed on the third, fourth, and tenth day after death, every month 
in the first year. After that, it should be performed once every year. 
227. In TA 25: 4-6, Abhinavagupta clarifies: "This done, the teacher 
must take in hand. first of all, the offering (naivedyam), and after 
having meditated that in this offering abides sakti of the nature of 
food in the form of potency instrumental in nourishing, he must 
conceive that the dead person for whose sake this rite is performed 
is penetrated by it. The bound part in the form of enjoyable of this 
dead disciple must then be offered by a teacher to the enjoying sub-
ject in identity with him. In this way, the disciple becomes Siva." 
Chapter Twenty 
228. This vague statement can only be understood if we read it along 
with its corresponding section of the TA, which is Chapter 26. In 
the beginning of this chapter, Abhinavagupta explains that all the 
types of initiation presented up to now, including the last sacra-
ment, have as their goals purification, enjoyment. liberation. or 
both enjoyment and liberation. Jayaratha, in his commentary, clar-
~fies that the initiation which has enjoyment (bubhuk~ub) as its aim 
is structured so that it is not in a position to directly grant 1 ibera-
tion without first granting the fruition (of the desired enjoyments). 
On the other hand, the mumuk$u~1 type of initiation. such as that of 
a spiritual son, etc., grants liberation precisely because it is devoid 
of the necessity of prior fruition. Furthermore, this type of initia-
tion can be either the sablja or the nirblja type. Only those who 
received the sablja type of initiation are expected to fol low acer-
tain set of ru Jes for the rest of their Ii ves. On the other hand, those 
deemed incapahle of following these ru !es receive the ni rblja type 
of initiation, which in itself includes mantras capable of purifying 
the bonds of post-initiatory rules (samayaptisa). 
229. Mantras should he received in the course of ritual and should be 
kept secret. The practitioner should attain identity with the 
potency of the mantra (mantravirya). without which mantras

--- PAGE 271 ---
NOTES 
261 
remain ineffective. Furthermore, mantras should be received 
directly from a teacher who has himself attained identity with the 
potency of the mantra, and not from some book. In TA26: 
20-24ab, Abhinavagupta writes: 
"The fundamental rule is the following: namely, the man-
tric form is not to be revealed by the teacher to the dis-
ciple in written form, especially in our system, which 
is superior to all. The mantras are of the nature of pho-
nemes, and phonemes are of the nature of reflective con-
sciousness. They can be transmitted to the disciple only if 
it is not separated from the consciousness of the teacher. 
Written mantras are, on the other hand, stripped of their 
potency and therefore unreal. Because of the conven-
tional meaning which clouds them, their natural splendor 
doesn't manifest from books." 
However, it has been stated in the Siddlzayoge§varlrnata 
that those who, in spite of adopting mantras from books, 
attain identity with its potency, are purified by Bhairava 
and spontaneously initiated. "Once mantras have been 
invoked," continues Abhinavagupta, "it is necessary to 
satisfy them and propitiate them with flowers, liquor, 
offerings of food and incense, proportionately to the 
fate, devotion, and capabilities of the worshipper. The 
fakti, ntida, and other mantras, which are especially fer-
vent, must be satisfied with liquor, meat, and blood at 
the beginning, and only afterwards with flowers, incense, 
etc." (TA 26:5lb-53a.) 
230. The unmanifest or avyaktaliliga is one that has been spontaneously 
formed in nature. Among all the types of unmanifest liligas, those 
not made by human hand are considered to be the most excellent 
ones. Therefore, these types of liligas are highly recommended for 
the purpose of ritual worship. However, manifest, or vyakta litigas, 
can also be used in rituals, Abhinavagupta writes: "The teacher 
can, if he wishes, install a manifest lifiga (vyakta) in the form of an 
image or painting found in a picture or book, made of wood, gold, 
or crafted by an expert and initiated artist" (TA 27:19b-20a).

--- PAGE 272 ---
262 
NOTES 
Li1igas can be made of various materials. such as "little stones, 
gems, pearls, flowers, food, clothes, and perfumed substances. 
Li1igas of stone created by artists, and so also those of metals, with 
the exception of gold ones, should be avoided" (TA 27: 12-13). 
Abhinavagupta points out that various measures, given in various 
texts, regarding the size and shape of li1igas, and other concerns, 
are of little importance because: "The li1iga which grants the 
desired fruit is in fact only the one that has been illuminated by 
mantra, animated by its noble potency" (TA 27: 14b). 
231. With the previous section, the instructions for the types of rituals 
that are indispensable observances (nitya) has been completed. In 
this section, the description of occasional observances (naimittika) 
begins. Abhinavagupta derives the word 'parva' from two roots: 
the first root, 'pr.' which means 'to fill,· is combined with the suf-
fix ·van.' The other root is 'parv,' which also means 'to fill'; thus a 
celebration of a festival day is cal led 'parvadinam,' because on 
that day consciousness attains fulfillment. 
232. According to the Siddhayogeivarlmata, the other name for the 
sacrifice of the wheel (cakraytiga) is miirtiytiga. The cakraytiga or 
miirtiytiga is of five types. Abhinavagupta writes: 
The sacrifice of the wheel is of five types, namely: soli-
tary (kevala), coupled (_vamala). mixed (mi.fra), cou-
pling of the wheel (cakrayuk), and mingling of heroes 
(vlrasalizkara). The solitary, in this context, is one in 
which only the teacher take part; the mixed is one in 
which disciples also take part. along with their wives; 
the coupled is of two kinds, based on whether the women 
who participated were wives or hired courtesans; the cou-
pling of the wheel is so-called because this is the type of 
sacrifice associated with the wheel, which because of the 
unification of faktis grants all desired fruits; finally the 
sacrifice in which everybody participates is cal led min-
gl i ng of the heroes. (TA 28: 78b-82a.) 
233. One is supposed to perform the offering of the sacred thread (pavi-
traka) to make up for any deficiency and neglect of his responsibil-

--- PAGE 273 ---
NOTES 
263 
ity regarding the teacher, scriptures, or for any transgression of the 
rules (samaya), or for those who failed to celebrate a festival day 
(parvadinam) or any of the occasional or indispensable observances. 
234. Abhinavagupta outlines the procedure applied when a teacher 
explains the meaning of scriptures to disciples according to Chap-
ter 52 of the Devyayamala Tantra. 
235. Abhinavagupta lists ten types of teachers capable of explaining the 
scriptures: "'Each of these ten types of teachers has assumed a 
human body and possesses a particular mental disposition, but are 
all identical with Siva, although they are different from each other 
th rough knowledge and action. They are all dedicated to the scrip-
tures, to worship, to the initiation rites, to sexual union, meat, and 
liquor. There are secondary divisions among these due to possess-
ing different mental dispositions, such as tranquility (calmness), 
anger, or patience, etc." (TA 28: 391a-393.) 
236. As we have seen, the spiritual teacher is worshipped in most of the 
other sacrifices, but in all of these instances this worship is an 
accessory part of the sacrifice. On the other hand, this ritual is 
primarily devoted to satisfying or pleasing the teacher. 
Chapter Twenty-One 
237. In this chapter, Abhinavagupta gives a brief outline of his under-
standing of the nature, meaning, and purpose of the dga~n~s or 
sastras. This summary is brief and cryptic, and therefore .difficult 
to comprehend without prior knowledge of the correspondm~ ,chap-
ters of the Tantraloka, Isvarapratyablzijiiavimarsini. or Isvara-
p ra tya biz ij Ii(/ vi vrtivi ma rs in i. 
238. The entire universe is the expression of consciousness. ~hic.h con-
sists of prak<l.fo or manifestation, and vimarsa, which is the 
knowledge of prakdsa in its collective and particular aspects. In a 
narrower sense, this vimarsa is language, which takes the form of 
the various ligamas. 
239. In the last three chapters of his TA, Abhinavagupta discusses the 
nature of the sastras or agamas at length. The title of Chapter 35 is

--- PAGE 274 ---
264 
NOTES 
'The Union of all the Sastras.' In it, Abhinavagupta presents his 
vision that brings together the great variety of agamic texts. both 
Hindu and non-Hindu. In his analysis. he grants all of them the 
status of being authoritative or being a valid means of gaining 
knowledge (pramti!Ja). However, he arranges them in a hierarchi-
cal order, placing the Trika sastras at the apex. 
240. For Abhinavagupta, there is only one agama from which all the 
others emerge. This broad acceptance of all sastras requires him 
to attempt a reconciliation of their differences. In order to accom-
plish this, he points out that all of them bring about the promised 
fruit. In this way, Sarhkhya gives to its follower the knowledge to 
discriminate between puru~a and prak[!i. Similarly. the follower 
of Buddhism attains the buddhi tattva, but only the Trika grants 
full and complete liberation to those who are entitled (adhikari). 
For Abhinavagupta. an adhikari is one who possesses firm faith in 
a given agama. Another question that arises here is: if it is true 
that all tigamas emerge from one and the same source. then why is 
it necessary to perform a ritual of conversion, such as 'reclamation 
of liliga' (lifigouddhtira)? Abhinavagupta explains: 
In the body of one single doctrine, as for example, in the 
Vedas, it happens that its followers, in order to attain to 
superior degrees or ranks. must submit to special rites 
of purification. The same thing can be said in regard to 
our tradition, as for example. in the case of the reclama-
tion of the liliga, etc. In other words, in the way in which 
one belonging to a lower asrama cannot enjoy the fruits 
which come from the upper tisrama, in the same way. a 
follower of the Pancaratras, etc., cannot attain the iden-
tity with Siva. (TA 35:28-29.) 
241. In TA 35: lb-2a, Ahhinavagupta defines prasiddhi as a type of 
knowledge that is necessarily based in an omniscient knowing sub-
ject and is the basis of all human activity.

--- PAGE 275 ---
Bibliography 
Original Sanskrit Texts 
Kamikagama, Piirvablzaga. No editor accredited: published by C. 
Swami natha Sivacarya. Madras: South Indian Arcakas Association, 
1975. 
Kam ikaga ma, Uttarablzaga. No editor accredited: published by C. 
Swami natha Sivacarya. Madras: South Indian Arcakas Association, 
1988. 
Matwigaparamesvara, Vidyapada, with the Commentary of BhaHa 
Ramakai:itha, ed. N.R. Bhatt. Publications of I'IFI 66. Pondicherry: 
IFI, 1977: Matmigaparamesvara, Kriyapada, Yogapada and Caryd-
pdda, with the Commentary of Bhaqa Ramakal)!ha up to Kriyapada 
ll.12 b, ed. N.R. Bhatt. Publications of l'IFI 65. Pondicherry: IFI, 
1982. 
Mellin ivijayava rttika of Ablzinavagupta, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. 
KSTS 31. Srinagar. 1931. 
Mrllinlvijayottara, ed. Madhusudan Kaul Shastri. KSTS 37. Srinagar. 
1922. 
Pdrame.fraragama, with English Translation and Notes. edited by Dr. 
Rama Ghose, Varanasi, Shiva Bharati Shodha Pratishthanam, 2004. 
Rauravagama, ed. N.R. Bhatt. 3 Vols. PIFI 18.1-3. Pondicherry: IFL 
1961, 1972, 1988. 
Sarvqjllanottarligamalz, ed. Vi, Brahmanandasvamin (edition only 
of the 'yogapdda' and. 'vidyapada' in Devanagari script with a Tamil 
translation). Tanjore, 1933. 
265

--- PAGE 276 ---
266 
TANTRASARA 
·sarvaj1zanottaragamab vidydpaada and yogapada,' ed. K. Ramach-
andra Sharma and revised by R. Thangaswami Sharma. Adyar Library 
Bulletin 62, 1998 [appeared 1999], 181-232. 
Svacchandatantra, with K~emaraja's Uddyota. Bombay: 1921-35, 
KSTS Nos. 31, 38, 44, 48, 51, 53, and 56. 
Tantra/aka of Abhinavagupta with Rajanaka Jayaratha's Commentary. 
12 vols. Srinagar and Bombay: 1918-1938. KSTS. 
Tantrasara of Abhinavagupta. Bombay: 1918. KSTS No. 17. 
Translations and Studies 
Abhinavagupta: Luce dei Tantra: TantrMoka. Raniero Gnoli, 2nd edi-
tion. Biblioteca Orientale, vol. 4. Milan: Adelphi Edizioni, 1999. 
Abhinavagupta 's Commentary on the Bhagavad Gita. Boris Marjanovic, 
trans. Varanasi: Indica Books, 2002. 
Abhinavagupta 's Commentary on the Bhagavad Gita. Boris Marjanovic, 
trans. Portland: Rudra Press, 2006. 
Abhinavagupta 's Philosophy of Revelation: Mcllinlslokavarttika, 1-399. 
Ji.irgen Hanneder, Groningen: Egbert Forsten, 1998. 
A~fadhyayl of Pa ~zini. Sr is Chanda Vasu, ed., trans. A I lahabad: 1891. 
lsvarapratyabhi}Fulka rika and Vrtti of Vt paladeva. Raffaele To rel la, 
trans. Roma: 1994. KSTS No. 34. 
lsvarapratyablzij1zavimarsini of Abhinavagupta. K.C. Pandey, trans. 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1954. 
ParMrlsikavivara~za: The Secret of Tant ric M_vsticism. Jayadev Singh, 
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1988. 
Slllizkhyakllrikll, with the Commentary by Vacaspati Misra. Ganganath 
Jha, trans. Poona: 1965. 
Vac: The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras. Andre Padoux. 
Delhi: Sri Satguru, 1990. 
Yoga Phi losoplzy of Pat([Jzjali with Bhas\'(/f f. A rar)ya Hariharananda, 
Calcutta: University of Calcutta, 2000.

--- PAGE 277 ---
About the Translator 
Pandit Hemendra Nath Chakravarty was born in 1918 in the vil-
lage of Kai ihati, in the district of Mymensingh (now in Bangla-
d.e~h), the son of Taraka Nath Chakravarty, an Ayurvedic phy-
sician. His family was initiated in the Kaulika tradition and 
worshiped Dak$ina Kali. He matriculated at the village high 
school in 1935, and studied Sanskrit and later Sarpkhya at the 
Balananda Brahmacharyasram in Deoghar (Bihar). In 1939 he 
went to Varanasi and studied Nyaya under Pt. Vibhuti Bibhushana 
B~attacharya, graduating in 1944 (Nyaya Tirtha) and 1945 (Tarka 
Tirtha) from Calcutta Government Sanskrit Association, and earn-
ing a B. Ed. in 1950. In 1958 he met the famous pandit Mahama-
hopadhyaya Gopinath Kaviraj and began to study with him. f-!e 
remained closely associated with Kaviraj until the latter's death m 
1976. He edited the sayings of Anandamayi Ma with the comm~n­
tary by G. Kaviraj in Bengali. From 1987 to 1995 he was ~hief 
Pandit in the Kalatattvako~a project of Indira Gandhi ~atwnal 
Centre for the Arts, Varanasi Branch, which at that time was 
directed by Dr. Bettina Baumer. He wrote articles for Kaltitatt-
vako$a. Beginning in 1972 he taught students and schol~rs from 
abroad (includng A.M. Breuinin, M. Dyczkowski, L.M. Fmn. D:P. 
Lawrence, J. Gengnagel, J. Dupuche, A. Wilke, and B. MarJa-
novic) mainly in the field of Hindu Tantrism, especially no11dual 
Kashmir Saivism. In 2003 he received the first "Thakur Jaideva 
Singh Award" for merit in the field of studying and teaching 11011-
dual Kashmir Saivism from the Trika Interreligious Trust (Vara-
nasi). He passed away on March 30. 2011. 
267

--- PAGE 278 ---
268 
ABOUT THE TRANSLATOR 
His publications include Naradiya Pura~w. 3rd vol. (transla-
tion with notes), Delhi (Motilal Banarsidass); Tantrasara by Abhi-
nava Guptacdrya [with Hindi Translation, notes and introduction 
in English] Varanasi 1986; ed. (with Jaideva Singh and G. Mukho-
padhyaya: Navonmesha: M.M. Gopinath Kaviraj Smriti Granth (2 
vols.), Varanasi 1987. Articles: Pra~w, Blja in: Kaltitattvako~a (ed. 
by B. Baumer), Vol. I (1988): Bindu, Naabhi, Cakra, in: Kaltitatt-
vako~a Vol. II (1992); "Tantric Spirituality" in: Hindu Spirituality, 
Postclassical and Modern, ed. K.R. Sundararajan and B. Mukerji, 
New York, Crossroad, 1997, pp. 209-231; Bahunipagarbhastotra, 
An Annotated Translation, in: Samarasya, Studies in Indian Arts, 
Philosophy and Interreligious Dialogue (ed. by S. Das and E. Fiir-
linger), New Delhi (D.K. Printworld) 2005, pp.37-47. 
Translator H. N. Chakravarty and editor Boris Marjanovic.

--- PAGE 279 ---
About Rudra Press 
RUDRA PRESS is the publishing division of The Movement Center, 
a nonprofit meditation and yoga center based in Portland, Oregon. 
We publish books by the teachers in The Movement Center lineage 
(Swami Chetanananda, Swami Rudrananda, and Bhagavan Nitya-
~anda), texts on the philosophy of Kashmir Shaivism, instruc-
tional videos for hatha yoga practice, and CDs and videos by 
Lama Wangdu Rinpoche. Proceeds from the sale of Rudra Press 
~roducts support our effort to document, preserve, and translate 
important Tantric practices and texts of Kashmir Shaivism and 
Vajrayana Buddhism -
www.rudrapress.com 
The Movement Center 
THE MovEMENT CENTER is a center for spiritual practice in the tra-
dition of Trika Yoga, a branch of Kashmir Shaivism. Founded by 
Swami Chetanananda in 1971, the Center offers programs an.d 
instruction in meditation, hatha yoga, the philosoph~ of Kashmu 
Shaivism and ancient Tibetan Buddhist ritual practices from the 
Longche~ Nyingthig and Padampa Sangye Shi-je traditions. T.he 
Movement Center is based in Portland, Oregon, and has medita-
tion centers in Los Angeles, New York, Boston, Seattle, and Kath-
mandu, Nepal ~ wwlv.themovementcenter.com

--- PAGE 280 ---
\l}!tISW·\tiUPf \''.-
V'~llY•<'lll'>.:llhl\.w •• 11,,"IL.) l 
--.;tt" 
r. 
Abhinavagupta's Commentary on the 
Bhagavad Gita 
(Gitartha-samgraha) 
US Edition 
Translated with notes by Boris Marjanovic 
Abhinavagupta lived in Kashmir in northern 
India at the end of the 10(
11 century and begin-
ning of the 11th century. He was a brilliant 
scholar and is considered the greatest genius 
of India in the fields of philosophy, aesthetics, 
poetics and dramaturgy. He was also a profoundly accomplished 
Tantric practitioner and the most influential teacher of what is now 
called Kashmir Shaivism. Although he was a prolific writer, to date 
few of his surviving works have been made available in English. 
In this commentary, Abhinavagupta explains that he composed it 
because he felt that his predecessors had not understood the eso-
teric or secret meaning of the Bhagavad Gita. In contrast, Abhina-
vagupta's work explores the very essence of the teaching of the 
Gita. This unique interpretation of the Bhagavad Gita in the con-
text of the non-dualistic philosophy of Kashmir Shaivism reveals a 
new dimension of the message of the Gita and describes the prac-
tice of the secret yoga at its core. 
$24.95 us 
378 pages 
ISBN 978-0-915801-93-0 
www.rudrapress.com

--- PAGE 281 ---
KASH.),,.\IR 9A1Vl5i\·\ 
!"1-. 
...... t~-·-··!"\--.. .. 
•-•••ld...1 H1..h• 
Kashmir Saivism: 
The Central Philosophy of Tantrism 
By Kamalakar Mishra 
Although the contribution of Tantra to Indian 
philosophy and culture is of immense signifi-
cance, very little work has been done in the 
field to date. Kashmir Saivism: The Central 
Philosophy of Tantrism gives a full exposi-
. 
tion of the Tantric system, clarifying the 
inner th read of logic running through the entire system of thought. 
The enigmatic language of the Tantric texts and their rich symbol-
~sm are deciphered, revealing a philosophy that is not an abstract 
ideology but a practical approach to life, surprising relevant to this 
age of science and technology. 
This book explores the principles, rich language and symbolism of 
the Tantric tradition, one that integrates worldly involvement with 
the goal of liberation. The text uses Abhinavagupta's most famous 
work, the Tantraloka, as a point of departure for a full expositi~n 
of the Tantric system. Kashmir Saivism demonstrates that this 
unique philosophy remains practical and relevant. 
$29.95 us 
521 pages paperback 
ISBN 978-915801-79-4 
www.rudrapress.com

--- PAGE 282 ---
$31.95 us 
Philosophy I Spirituality 
• 
• 
The Essence of Tantra 
Indian Tantric practice has an unbroken tradition ,__ 
dating back thousands of years. One of its greatest 
exponents was Abhinavagupta, the 
l 0th century 
spiritual teacher, scholar, poet and mystic whose 
masterwork, Tantraloka, is encyclopedic in length 
and as yet unavailable in English. Now, however, comes 
Tantrasara, Abhinavagupta's own brief prose guide to 
Tantraloka, in a masterful new English translation by the 
renowned Pandit H.N. Chakravarty, who completed it 
shortly before his death. This long-awaited volume takes 
us directly into the world of esoteric Tantric philosophy 
and practice. Dealing with topics such as the nature 
of the ultimate reality, consciousness itself, the creative 
energy underlying all manifestation, and the ritual and 
inner practices that awaken, sustain, and bring this 
awareness to fruition, it lays a solid foundation for 
understanding Tantric spiritual practice with clarity 
and depth. 
Rudra Pre~' 
I SBN 
$ 31 . 95 
978-0-9 1 5801-78 - 7 
5 3 1 9 5 > 
9 780915 80 178 7 I 
I 
RUDRA PRESS 
• 
Portland, Oregon • www.rudrapress.com -

