# EXTRACTED TEXT: 1919-taw-sein-ko-epigraphia-birmanica-vol1-pt1.pdf
# Total Pages: 174 | Direct: 0 | OCR: 163 | Blank/Sparse: 11
# Timestamp: 2026-09-16 18:06:02
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DELHI UNIVERSITY :
LIBRARY |
| |

I meer

--- PAGE 2 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DELHI UNIVERS.
cl. No. C-VM 231 A
Ac. No. 2G DO 06701 ap

ot gion Joan
rig
This book should be returned on cr before the dafe last staniped

below. An overdue charge of 05 nP_ will be charged for eich
day the book 1s kept overtime.

--- PAGE 3 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 4 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION
AND OTHER POEMS
WITH AN ESSAY ON
SWINBURNE AND KEATS

EE

--- PAGE 5 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

tj

Belpasie wetlast de) A batt ved!
Lhcte 2 bestia
Gee 74 7,
cera treo a \ Meter

peg elf a po
Auk % Meek, _

hh toed fal tol borg exrnbt berth
Horrible Agee Hal MGe1nt
Dew hu Mowing petals (er,
ale Mage Vnvore, Lhe Ae nog Ce ruol Cow
Of Bosceh wmaustortecn th cane 6 Mad ban, work
Yplooruth half Ly ope cgatiuewt over avarcle, #

A hdeous. Mileers Loon foes ofer.

Here uroul oldie Mat hice

bhok Keowol. Ae

det,
ad mG si fiole kapha pla coucqufenr

FACSIMILE OF THE FIRST PAGE OF THE ORIGINAL
HOLOGRAPH MANUSCRIPT OF ‘SWINBURNE’S HYPERION’

--- PAGE 6 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S
HYPERION

AND OTHER POEMS
WITH AN ESSAY ON
SWINBURNE AND KEATS
By
Georges Lafourcade

LONDON

Faber & Gwyer

--- PAGE 7 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

FIRST PUBLISHED IN MCMXXVIL
BY FABER AND GWYER LIMITED
24, RUSSELL SQUARE LONDON W.C.1
MADE AND PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN
BY BUTLER AND TANNER LIMITED
FROME AND LONDON
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

--- PAGE 8 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DEDICATION

TO THOMAS JAMES WISE

--- PAGE 9 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 10 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CONTENTS

SEE
PAGE
PREFACE xi
SWINBURNE AND KEATS: AN ESSAY 25
I. Keats and the Pre-Raphaelites 25
II. Swinburne on Keats 28

A. Keats and Théophile (1862)—Intended
Essay on Keats (1866), 28. B. Keats’s
Limitations: M. Arnold’s ‘New Poems’ (1867),
31. C. Parallel with Shelley: Keats’s mental
inferiority (Notes on the text of Shelley, 1869),
35. D. Keats’s love-letters: ‘Post Mortem’
(1878-84), 41. E. The article on Keats (com-
posed 1881), 45
1. Intended article for Ward’s ‘English Poets’ (1879), 453
2. Article for the ‘ Encyclopedia Britannica’ (1881), 46;
a. Influence of Arnold, 46; 6. The Encyclopedic style,
46; c. Keats’s masterpieces, 47; ¢. The earlier poems, 48;
¢. Keats’s unmanliness, 51
F, The last stage: Keats condemned for his
zstheticism (1884), 55. Conclusions, 57

III. Swinburne and Keats 59
A. The Early Poems (1849-60), 59. BB.
The Later Poems (1860-1909), 64
1. Metres, 64; 2. Diction, 70; 3. Style, 74; 4. Inspi-
ration, 76; a. Keats’s estheticism. Swinburne’s moral
ideas, 76; 4. Their attitude to Greek literature: A thing
of beauty is a pain for ever, 77; c. Their treatment of
nature, 79. Conclusions, 81
vii

--- PAGE 11 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CONTENTS ‘

PAGE
IV. ‘Swinburne’s Hyperion’ 8r
A. The manuscript described, 82. B. Date of
composition, 83. C. The Poem probably meant
as a prosodic exercise, 84. D. ‘Swinburne’s
Hyperion’: Diction and Metre, 87
1. The imitation of Keats, 87; 2. The Miltonic element,
90; a. Swinburne and Milton, gr; 4. Miltonic influence
on ‘Swinburne’s Hyperion’, 94; 3. The Stwinburnian
element, 101. Conclusions, 102
E. ‘Swinburne’s Hyperion’: the Inspira-
tion, 102
1. The story, 102; 2. Keatsian sources, 103; a.‘ Hyperion’
and its recast, 103; 4. Swinburne’s and Keats’s mytholo-
gies compared, 104; 3. Classical sources, 106; 4. Miltonic
parallels, 108; 5. The Swinburnian element,109. Conclu-
sions, 112
General Conclusion 113
‘SWINBURNE’S HYPERION’ 117
‘THE NIGHTINGALE’ 147
‘sono’ 153
‘EPICURUS’ 159
BIBLIOGRAPHY 163
INDEX 171

FACSIMILE ILLUSTRATIONS

I. Facsimile of the first page of the original holograph
manuscript of ‘Swinburne’s Hyperion’ Frontispiece
IT, Facsimile of page 14 of the original holograph
manuscript of ‘Swinburne’s Hyperion’ To face page 132

vill

--- PAGE 12 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

Ea

--- PAGE 13 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 14 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

EEE

Tis chief purpose of this volume is to edit some hitherto
unpublished poems by Swinburne; it would have been
easy and tempting to include more, Swinburne’s juvenile
fecundity being only equalled by Mr. Wise’s unfailing

indness. But I had no intention to print the whole of
Swinburne’s early poems or even a representative selec-
tion from these; this volume purports to have a deeper,
if more restricted, unity than would have thus been ob-
tained.

This unity is to be found in the longer of these poems
which I have, for convenience’ sake, entitled Swinburne’s
Hyperion; it is here printed for the first time as a remarkable
instance of Swinburne’s imitative powers as applied to a well-
defined model at an early period of his life I have added
a few other pieces which pointed, though less directly, to an
influence of the same model.

My initiative will, I know, be open from the first to an
objection striking at its very root: is one justified in printing
a manuscript which Swinburne left unfinished and unpub-
lished? Is the value of the poem such that, from the purely
literary point of view, it warrants publication in a some-
what elaborate and scholarly form? Of all answers, the
best is, perhaps, that this objection was first raised by
myself to myself, and that I did not launch on what will,
Iam aware, be considered by some as a rash enterprise,
without due meditation on the subject. And my choice,

1 This volume affords a very striking illustration of some of the pages in my
Feunesse de Swinburne, II L'Ocuore, Préparation et Imitation : Préface, etc,
xl

--- PAGE 15 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

though deliberate, was absolutely free from any consider-
ations of advantage or opportunity.

It seems difficult to answer the criticism that the poem
has no originality, therefore no merit, because it is pro-
fessedly a pastiche; the argument is weighty, and yet so easy
to wield! But it would be a great mistake to consider
Swinburne’s Hyperion independently as a poem and pass
sentence upon it as such. It would be a mistake from the
artistic point of view. For the fragment would then strike
us as altogether unintelligible. I here use the adjective in
its fuller sense: not only the characters and situations would
seem confused and far-fetched, but also the gems of the
style, the beauties of the inspiration would remain un-
accounted for, perhaps unperceived:

‘She ended fearless; but no less a death
Of stony silence spelled the Olympian crew;
As some worn voyager from shores remote,
Where the calm sun sleeps on the western verge
Of utmost sea, slumbring with level rays
Where in the summer sunset ever dream
His woodland race, landing on some lone beach
Thro’ tropic shades of giant verdure wide
And alleys deep with huge magnolia archt,
Odorous, long wanders thro’ the perfum’d eve,
Till in the dewy dusk a city gleams,
Her humbler towers and bastioned walls in night,
But on her topmost pinnacles the sun
Sits, turrets that flame back his western rays
From towering gold and domes of diamond-glare;
With hope amaz'd the inlaid gates he passes

xii

--- PAGE 16 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

Wide gaping to the twilight landskip dim;
Palace on palace, dome on shining dome,

Rises and arches o’er the dusky streets

With bridges of gold and stately statues wrought,
And many a pile of grey magnificence

O’er the broad silent ways, curiously wrought;
Cornice and buttress, pillars and architrave;

All stony silent as the sleeping times,

Unstirred by human breath; he gazes maz’d,
Till him too the cold petrifying night

Clasps and he stands mute in those dusky streets,
A statue among statues, wrought to life;

Nor ever voice breaks the silence of death.

No less dead-silent stood the throng amaz’d,
And Fear first trembled thro’ the deep of heaven.’

The above passage, beautiful and dignified though it
may sound, has no sease, hence no poetry, if one does not
connect it both with Keats’s description of Hyperion’s
Palace and with some of the lines in the first two Books of
Paradise Lost. ‘To overlook the intellectual element which
can neyer be absent from true poetry is a mistake; to do so
in a poem whose inspiration, being imitative, is chiefly in-
tellectual, is a sin—a sin against the very rules of Art. No
poem can be judged until it has been accepted by the
intellect; it may then, of course, be rejected for a multitude
of reasons; but not till then should Swinburne’s attempt be
in fairness rejected even by the most captious critic.

Milton’s and Keats’s styles are in their finest form admir-
able, because they are both the logical outcome of a series of
experiments and evolutions and because they correspond

xiii

--- PAGE 17 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

intimately to an inspiration without which they could
scarcely exist. Speeches in the style of Satan’s grandest
eriods would, in a poem like Epipsychidion, seem almost
intolerably burlesque; how distressing would Keatsian
cadences sound in Morris’s rendering of Beowulf! Swin-
burne’s Hyperion considered independently as an ‘original’
poem is neither good nor bad nor remarkable nor worthless;
it is simply unintelligible. »
But when loyally compared with two great acknowledged
models it strikes me as a fine artistic achievement. It
makes one’s bosom glow to come across such lines as

‘The joyous balminess of starry dews
That pearl the wan face of maternal night”

or:
‘Unfolding slow his universal lore ’
or:
“He spoke and calm amid the breathless hush
Grey Saturn rising spake with dreamy looks
Where dim Philosophy slept vision’d faint’
or:
‘And many a pile of grey magnificence’
or:

‘So having said back to his cloudy dreams

Musing he dropt, and ceasing husht the air

That trembled yet melodiously and full

With the calm awful music of his words’
xiv

--- PAGE 18 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

in spite or rather because of the fact that they beautifully
echo Keats’s cadences. The remarkable thing is that while
reproducing so perfectly an alien style, Swinburne had
already developed (in the Ode to Mazzini and the Temple of
Fanus) a style which was well his own; and that after having
thus mastered Keats’s manner, he could afford to shake it
off so completely in some of his later masterpieces. The
Miltonic lines produced by Swinburne are no less felicitous
and exhibit, perhaps, more sustained power and dignity.
Such are:

‘and they [the Titans] lay low in silence pale,
Shadows amid a shadowy world, until
Slow heaving his broad bulk, unbent as yet
With weight of stars incumbent, Atlas rose
Painfully, unlike the rapid joyous strength
That mov’d him glorying thro’ the exultant heavens. . . .

’

and:

‘He spake threatening, and scorn his proud lip curv’d
Kinglike: yet scarce they whisper’d scar’d applause.
But queenly Pallas with unruffled look,

As when in Academic groves she met

* Deep-thoughted Plato, or the reverend head
Of Socrates, or likest when she chid
The wrath of war-vext Mars at Ilion, spake
With slow melodious voice.’

and:

‘Leapt all the impious into sudden joy;
Free of this galling yoke and festering pain,
xv

--- PAGE 19 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

They triumphed and in new delight of strength
And satisfied desire of torturous days,
Exulted, running, springing blithe and light
With tread elastic and new freedom quafft
Delightful, such the joy of pain releast!
Long, long the wither’d throat of Tantalus
With fiery drought inflam’d the waters cold
Of icy Lethe bathed with pleasant draught
Sweeter than Bacchus’ bubbling purple e’er
To wearied reveller, nor brought his soul
Sane pain’s oblivion.’

But the pastiche goes further and becomes properly creative
rather than imitative when Swinburne actually combines the
Keatsian and the Miltonic styles. This is illustrated to a
point by passages like:

‘He spoke; and calm with quiet lips, and eyes
Scornful of pain or blind contention,

Sank back the grey god-sophist of the sea,

With serene look of wisdom satisfied,

Serene and mute in godlike changelessness.

But Cceus, rising like a shatter’d rock

With swift and fierce contempt and eyes that gleam’d
Red light and hideous thro’ the livid air,

Sprang up and shouted, with loud voice and hoarse.’

or:

‘Rise, rise, and seize again your ancient rule!

Or would ye die, and in the blind night swathed
Lie cold in senseless immortality,
Not by annihilation wholly crush’d

xvi

--- PAGE 20 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

But dying, as far as gods can die? now choose,
Fallen powers, for no other choice is left.’

Lastly, the swelling impulse of the genius that was in
Swinburne could not, for all its marvellous docility, be
continually curbed and bridled at will. When—as is the
case sometimes—it hejf-consciously breaks loose from its
self-imposed restraint we catch fine glimpses of a fourth
manner of style, bright yet muscular, often strongly allitera-
tive and now perfectly original,—the style of the Swinburne
that was to be; witness the lines:

‘One anguish by another recompenc’t.’
and:

‘As winds that wrestle with the storm-chafed sea...
On some lone shore clouded by screaming mews...

and:

‘In the red bolted thunder roars and rends

This circulating power of self-born life,

And smiles along the smooth, unfurrowed deep,

Shrieks down the whirlwind, mutters in the storm

Grows with the growth of sunny-bosomed woods .. .
and: —

‘... thrust by this vast hand of that
Which men call Time or Fate or Chance or God.’

and:

‘He ended, and a sudden clangour yell’d
From all the host, harsh braying, as the roar
xvii B

--- PAGE 21 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

Of charging trumpets on the battle’s verge
When shrieks the air with shafts, and clashes round
With clarions ...’

and:

‘Thy hand is strong with sceptre; men on earth
Mount up to thee their prayers in steaming clouds
Of incense, and the reek of slaughter’d herds... .’?

and:
‘,.. swung behind
Hell’s gates revolv’d with hideous clangour clos’d.’

All these passages and many others are artistically a
success; one quality they have in common: music and rhythm
united with that dignity, that stateliness, and that kind of
self-confidence which constitute the grand style. I hold
that they add something to the plentiful store of English
literature. But of course they lose all value and signifi-
cance if one fails to consider them in the light of previous
or later masterpieces. Imitation of this kind has its place in
literature as well as in painting or sculpture. Swinburne’s
attempt isa homage paid to Keats’s masterpiece, a proof of
the greatness and vitality of the poem, and as such is worthy
of attention and preservation; but it is something more
than that. Hyperion and Paradise Lost were little more to

1 Compare with:
«... they wail and cry, they rage and rend,
Shed blood with prayer for sacrifice, and make
Day foul with fumes of fires unnatural whence
Hell risen on earth reeks heaven-ward ...’
. (Marino Faliero, Act V, Scene II.)
xviii

--- PAGE 22 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

Swinburne than the beautiful models of his friend D. G.
Rossetti. Photographs of Mrs. Herbert and Lizzy Siddal
and Jane Burden, could not lessen our delight in Found and
Beata Beatrix and Day Dream. 1 would not press too far
what must prove an inadequate parallel; but Swinburne’s
Hyperion ought, I think, to have a humble niche beside
Paradise Lost and Keats’s Vision. For, while it could not
exist without them, it is something different from them,
and when its glittering ornaments, be they tinsels or mir-
rors or small gems, are set alight by their purer and
stronger fire, it flames and blazes like a minor masterpiece,
it appears and seems and is something very beautiful.

I have so far considered the poem exclusively from the
artistic point of view. But the intellectual interest attaching
to an attempt of this kind—an attempt in which Milton and
Keats are the models and Swinburne the imitator—is well-
nigh inexhaustible.

An introduction had therefore to be supplied in order to
give Swinburne’s Hyperion its full value and significance; this
I have done as thoroughly as I could, but always from the
point of view of the poem which I had undertaken to edit.
I was thus led to describe and study the fragment itself, and
also to follow up throughout the whole of Swinburne’s
poetry the development of an influence which was so clearly

oreshadowed at avery early stage. But I had previously to
examine Swinburne’s critical attitude to Keats in order to be
better able to understand the attitude of Swinburne the poet.

For this, the first part of my study, I should perhaps
feel emboldened to claim some originality. I have not
attempted to give an analytical summary of Swinburne’s
utterances on Keats; I have not collected and ordered these

xix

--- PAGE 23 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

according to a logical and exhaustive plan; for this would,
to my mind, have given an entirely wrong impression. We
may or we may not regret the occurrence, but Swinburne
certainly did not write a thesis on Keats; and certainly we
are not expected to write it for him.

I have, therefore, tried to follow the development in his
mind of some ideas and sentiments connected with the work
and personality of Keats; these evolved, although they did
not change, and were in some cases modified by the know-
ledge of new facts. These modifications I have endeavoured
to record without interfering with the chronological order;
what will be found in the first pages of my essay aims at
being an intellectual biography of Swinburne with reference
to Keats’s works and personality.

I might, with excellent reasons, have chosen for this study
another influence than that of Keats; Shelley would have
seemed to supply a clearer and more characteristic instance,
and the editing of the unpublished Temple of Fanus, which
I discovered among the manuscripts of the British Museum,
would have been a tempting task. But if, from the point of
view of diction, metres and inspiration, that study might
have yielded a richer harvest, Swinburne’s critical attitude to
a personality like Shelley’s would have been of much less
interest andimportance. It is in contrast with an absolutely
different nature that some of the most subtle features of
Swinburne’s genius can be elucidated; it will be seen that
with reference to Swinburne’s moral and intellectual atti-
tudes the parallel with Keats has served us in very good
stead,

I have, of course, been fortunate in the case I chose;
while Swinburne wason the whole hostile to Keats’s influence,

xXx

--- PAGE 24 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

. PREFACE

I have been able to prove that he had attempted a deliberate
imitation, and that the results of this early experiment were
not altogether obliterated in the years that followed, But
I suggest that in many other cases a study of one great
writer’s reaction to the works and personality of another,
conducted on the same lines of intellectual biography and
possible literary influence, might yield important and
unexpected results. If I have not been entirely mistaken
I could claim no higher praise for my otherwise unambitious
study.

I have, before I conclude, to fulfil the pleasant duty of
offering my most sincere thanks and acknowledgments to
Sir Edmund Gosse for his frequent help and advice; to
Professor Denis Saurat and Professor René Galland for
much useful information on some particular questions; to
Mr. G. C. Faber and Mr. Thomas Earle Welby; and above
all to Mr. T. J. Wise who has kindly allowed me to choose
freely among the treasures of his collection the poems which
I wanted to edit, and who has never refused the help of
his rare bibliographical science and rarer bibliographical
Instinct.

Institut Frangais du Royaume Uni, 1927.

xxl

--- PAGE 25 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 26 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS:
AN ESSAY

--- PAGE 27 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 28 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS:
AN ESSAY
- EEE

PECULIAR interest attaches to the relation between
Swinburne and Keats. Critics have failed to detect
any deep influence of the works of the latter poet on those
of the younger; indeed, while the names of Shelley, Lan-
dor, Hugo, Arnold, Tennyson and Browning occur once
and again in all accounts of Swinburne’s literary formation,
Keats has scarcely ever been mentioned. Yet Swinburne
expressed throughout his life a feeling of unfailing, if quali-
d, admiration for the genius of the author of Hyperion.
One should at the same time remember that Keats was,
with hardly an exception, the supreme idol of the Pre-
\Raphaclite Brethren.) Their admiration for him has often
been recorded and studied.1__ But the position taken by the
chief poet of the group has hitherto failed to attract atten-
tion. The following study aims, with the help of some
unpublished documents, at throwing new light on Swin-

burne’s general attitude to Keats.

I—KEATS AND THE PRE-RAPHAELITES «

N& reference to Keats is to be found in the early letters
of Swinburne. This is all the more remarkable as
comments on the works of Wordsworth, Byron, Shelley,
Browning, etc., are frequent.2 Swinburne’s friends and

1 Léonie Villard: Influence of Keats on Tennyson and Rossetti, 1914.

* Swinburne had read Keats’s poems in 1851-23 I owe this valuable in-
formation to the kindness of Sir George Young who was Swinburne’s friend
and schoolfellow at Eton.

25

--- PAGE 29 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

ssociates were all—the fact cannot be too strongly empha-
sized—devoted admirers of Keats. The Pre-Raphaelite
painters hailed him as a pioneer, and showed a keen appre:
ciation for the “sensuous element in his poetry.t To D.
G. Rossetti, Keats was ‘the true heir of Shakespeare’
and some of his works were the ‘final achievement of
English poetry’. The peculiar character of his admira-
tion Is cleatly illustrated by some unpublished letters
which were privately printed in 1919,by Mr. T. J. Wise.
e writes of The Eve of St. Mark: a

‘Keats’s unfinished poem on that subject is perhaps with
La Belle Dame sans Merci the chastest and choicest ex-
ample of his maturing poems and shows astonishingly
real medievalism for one not bred an artist’ (1880).

It is evident that it was the painter in Rossetti who
responded above all to the appeal of Keats’s poetry; this
is further illustrated by his sonnet John Keats, and by the
following saying quoted by Lady Burne Jones: ‘The
next Keats ought to be a painter’? W. Morris spoke of
Keats as of one ‘for whom I have such boundless admira-

1 It may be worth mentioning that a great many Pre-Raphaelite pictures
were inspired by Keats’s poems: G. F. Watts began by quoting some lines
of Keats to his Ec#o; next Holman Hunt painted his Eve of Saint Agnes
(1847-8); D. G. Rossetti, La Belle Dame sans Merci (1848); Millais his
Isabella and Lorenzo (1849), etc. Further instances could be derived from
the following pictures: Hyperion, Lorenzo and Isabella, Isabella and the Pot
of Basil (W. H. Hunt); Diana and Endymion (G. F. Watts), etc., etc.

But Swinburne met Rossetti when he was no longer connected with these
painters, and it was only through him that the great Keatsian fervour of the
early Pre-Raphaelite days could reach the poet.

3 See the comments of Melle Villard, op. cit.

26

--- PAGE 30 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

tion and whom I venture to call one of my masters’. His
was, however, a fastidious taste, for

‘Milton _he abused, Wordsworth he disliked, he had
little admiration for the later works of Browning, and
did not-care~fer-Fermyson after Maud. But Keats was
the first of modérn English poets.”?

On the other hand, Lady Burne Jones writes that Keats
was one of the chief subjects of her husband’s talks, and
that Ruskin delighted in reading his poems aloud to him.*
If Spenser is often referred to as the ‘poets’ poet’ it seems
that Keats might with good reason be described as the
‘painters’ poet’. ——————
Nor was this all. A casual look at the Bibliography
shows us that most of Keats’s editors and critics during the
*sixties and the ’seventies were men of Pre-Raphaelite
sympathies and personal friends of Swinburne. Monckton
Milnes it was, who, after publishing Keats’s letters and

1 MacKail, Life of W. Morris.

3 George Meredith, as Professor Galland has kindly pointed out to me,
was no heretic on this important article of the Pre-Raphaelite dogma: he
once recited (1862) the Ode to a Nightingale to Hardman. Keats’s influ-
ence is clearly felt in some of his early poems (To @ Nightingale, Daphne)
(1851), which have some typical epithets (‘mellowing’, ‘drowsy’, ‘odorous’,
etc.). His poetry of nature forms, I think, what is in the whole of Eng-
lish literature most akin to Keats’s greater achievements in this particular
field (see also The Spirit of Keats, etc.).

3D. W. Rannie in his excellent essay on Keats’s epithets remarks that
‘they are distinctly the epithets of an artist of the type to which painters and
sculptors belong. If for the moment we choose to divide poets into three
classes, those who paint (or carve), those who sing, and those who prophesy,
we must unhesitatingly place Keats in the first class.’ We should with as
little hesitation assign to Swinburne a place among the prophets.

27

--- PAGE 31 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

literary remains in 1848, first revealed to the world in
1856 what he thought to be an early version of Hyperion.
Prefaces and introductions to no less than five} successive
editions of Keats’s poems, testify to his life-long interest
in one whom he styled ‘the Marcellus of the Empire of
English Song’. W. M. Rossetti and W. B. Scott were
also responsible for several editions, and the latter records
how he ‘wrote verses to Keats in the teeth of his Professors
at Edinburgh University’. Watts-Dunton mentions in a
depressing Foreword to the 1914 edition of Keats’s Papers
that ‘he began to be steeped in Keats at the age of 14’.?
Last, but not least, John Nichol, who was the chief influence
on Swinburne at Oxford, is known to have also been an
admirer of Keats.8

But Swinburne keeps aloof for some considerable time,
and when he speaks at last his voice rings strange and cold
in this grand chorus of praise.

II—SWINBURNE ON KEATS

—_—_—_—_—

A. KEATS AND THEOPHILE (1862)—INTENDED ESSAY ON
KEATS (1866)

Gt Exar oe first reference to Keats is to be found
in his Essay on Théophile, composed circa 1862 and
privately printed in 1915. The essay has this arresting

11848, 1854, 1863, 1871, 1876.

4 and quotes from one of his own ‘sonnets’ on Keats; the whole preface
is as ‘perfect an instance of ‘puff oblique’ as Sheridan could have wished.

3 Memoir of Fokn Nichol, by W. A. Knight.

28

--- PAGE 32 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

sentence in which the whole of the poet’s later critical
attitude to Keats is already indicated:

‘There is something like Keats in the breadth and frank-
ness of this [Théophile’s] general enjoyment and susceptible
vivacity of sense; but there is a clearer air of health which
Keats has not: a greater poet is visible in his letters and a
sicklier man.’ [The italics are mine.]

We shall refrain from any further comment on this
sentence; its high significance will be recognized later;
let it meanwhile serve as an epigraph to this part of my
Introduction.

At the beginning of the year 1866, Swinburne, who after
long and strenuous déduzs in the literary field, had achieved
sudden prominence through the unexpected success of
Atalanta and the more clearly anticipated notoriety of
Chastelard, was entrusted by his publisher Payne (who was
acting as agent for the firm of Moxon & Co.) with the
editing and prefacing of a volume of selections from Byron
in the series known as ‘Moxon’s Miniature Poets’. While
still engaged on this task the poet seems to have received
from Payne another offer for a book of selections from Keats;
to this he refers in a most important and still unpublished
letter to W. M. Rossetti, dated January, 1866, from which
Mr. Wise has given me permission to quote:

“Now I am going to ask for your help and advice in a
matter of business regarding only my own interest. I have
made for this Miniature series of Moxon’s a book of
selections from Byron, with a critical essay prefixed which
has cost me some time and trouble. It will appear on the
first of next month; and to-day Payne writes to ask what

29

--- PAGE 33 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

he is to pay into my banker’s hands on this account. What
do you think I ought to say? Aan illustrious Scotch person
of the name of Buchanan has done, it seems, a like office
for Keats, and received {10 in return. This sum the
publisher is willing to lose, and to cancel the poor devil’s
work, if I will do Keats instead on those terms; and won’t I?
and wouldn’t I gratis? This forthcoming Scotch edition
of Keats, who hated the Scotch as much as I do (Scotus I
consider Northumbrian by adoption and Scotch no longer)
has long been a thorn in my side; and apart from the delight
_of trampling on a Scotch poetaster, I shall greatly enjoy
bringing out a perfect edition of Keats with all his good
verses and none of his bad. But all this does not help me
to see what under the circumstances I ought in justice to
demand for the Byron, a work less delightful and more
laborious.’

This extract is most interesting as it illustrates both
Swinburne’s eagerness to undertake an edition of Keats’s
poems, and his instinctive dislike of R. Buchanan who had
not as yet attacked him in any way. (The Session of Poets
was not published in the Spectator—with the pseudonym
of Caliban—until September 15, 1866.) But, as D. G.
Rossetti, who knew him well, experienced

‘The smell of the skunk
Led the shuddering nose to Buchanan’.
And Swinburne’s nose was particularly tender where
‘game’ of that kind was concerned?
1 It is also interesting to note that W. M. Rossetti fully shared Swin-

burne’s instinctive antipathy for the ‘Bard Buchanan’. In his answer to the
letter above quoted he remarked:

30

--- PAGE 34 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

The next reference occurs in a letter of March, 1866,
addressed to Lady Trevelyan: Swinburne, having now
finished his preface to Moxon’s Miniature Byron, is, as
we know, preparing to write a similar preface on Keats.
But nothing came of this scheme; Swinburne wrote instead
an introduction to Coleridge in 1869 and his utterance on
Keats was withheld for the time being.?

B, KEATS'S LIMITATIONS: MATTHEW ARNOLD’S ‘NEW POEMS’
(1867)

But in the following year (1867) Swinburne found means
in a review of Matthew Arnold’s New Poems® at once to
express and define the nature of his admiration for Keats.
When reading the passage which I am going to quote one
should, of course, note the high praise which it is meant to
convey; that Swinburne admired Keats was already known
from the Essay on William Blake (composed 1862-5) in

“I confess a peculiar abhorrence of Buchanan, and satisfaction that his
Caledonian faces are not to bedaub the corpse of Keats...’

This answer (in Mr. Wise’s collection) is also unpublished. (See
4 Swinburne Library, p. 45.)

1 Jn this article, published in 1866, Swinburne has some very interesting
pages on the treatment of Nature by the great romantic poets; he remarks
casually that ‘Coleridge and Keats used nature mainly as a stimulant or a
sedative’ as against Shelley and Byron whose passion in the great things of
nature was ‘perfect and ravenous’. This implied criticism of Keats for his
purely zsthetical attitude should not pass unnoticed.

2 But Swinburne—unknown to the publisher—had a hand in the edition
of Keats’s poetical works undertaken by W. M. Rossetti for Moxon in 1870
(see below). And after all he did Keats for Moxon.

3 Fortnightly Review, October, 1867.

31

--- PAGE 35 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

which ‘a man so perfect as Keats’ is contrasted with ‘a man
so imperfect as Burns’.

But one should not overlook the fact that all this admira-
tion, unbounded though it may seem, is clearly limited to
a certain sphere, above which it_cannot rise, precisely as
Keats’s genius was unable to rise above it. In fact we had
already been warned in Notes on Poems and Reviews (1866)
that ‘No one would lift Keats on a level with Shakespeare.
But the Fates have allowed us to possess at once Othello
and Hyperion, Theseiis and Hermaphroditus.’ It seems,
therefore, that Keats stands in the same relation to Shake-
speare as the statue of Hermaphroditus to the earlier
masterpieces of Greek art.) And, 48 Swinburne takes great
care to explain, ‘No one would compare it with the greatest
works of Greek sculpture’. Nor is this attitude at all
inconsistent, if one carefully weighs the full meaning of each
sentence, with this burning page of praise in which Keats is
exalted above Maurice de Guérin:

¢

‘In Keats there was something of the spirit and breath of
the world, of the divine life of things; in Guérin there was
hardly a soft breathless pulse of fluttering sympathy; here
was the anima mundi, made flesh once more in the body of
a divine interpreter such as all great poets must be after
their kind; there was the animula vagula blandula, of
a tentative, sensitive, impressible nature. + But Keats, of
all men, born the ablest to hold his own with nature and
translate her gods into verbal incarnation; Keats who was
at once the lyrist and the lyre of that nature, the priest and
the altar of those gods; more than all other poets receptive
and passive of her influences and forces, and more than all

32

--- PAGE 36 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

other poets able and active to turn them all to a divine use,
to transfigure them without transformation, to attune all
colours and attemper all harmonies; whose power upon
these things, whose gift of transfusion and expression places
him apart from all in sovereign command of nature, able to
do for nature what in his own day Shelley could not achieve
nor Wordsworth attempt; above all Greece and all Italy
and all England in his own line and field of work, to push
forward as a competitor with him in that especial field of work
where all the giants and all the gods of art would fail to
stand against him for an hour, a man who in his own craft
coyld not use the tools that lay ready to his hand—who was
nothing it seems if not a poet, and could not as much as
prove himself a poet by writing passable verse at all; this
is a madness of mistake explicable and excusable only as the
error of a foreign and provincial judgment.’ (M. Arnold’s
New Poems—teprinted in Essays and Studies.)

This is one of the best pages of prose Swinburne ever
wrote. And it is also excellent criticism; for Swinburne
here defends French poetry against the strictures of Arnold,
and never indeed was Arnold more completely and effectively
snubbed. And this is, of course, glorious and very intelli-
gent praise. But if one is not wholly carried away by the
galloping rhythm of the prose, one will notice a series of
short incidental sentences or expressions which all tend to
the same restricting effect. I have italicized the most
characteristic of these: after their kind, in his own field of
work, in his own craft, etc. The fact of the matter is that
Swinburne felt and acknowledged Keats’s perfection, but
that this very perfection was for him the sign and symbol of

c

33

--- PAGE 37 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

acertain limitation in the scope and nature of his inspiration.
Keats was supreme, but in his own sphere; and Arnold’s -
mistake is not so much that he compares a genius like Keats
with a second-rate writer like de Guérin, but that he chooses
one who shows no grasp or mastery over his material, who
‘cannot use his tools’, to set against one who is the most

/rccomplished craftsman the world has ever seen. And
this, Keats will always remain in Swinburne’s eyes: a won-
derful word-painter, but more of an artist than of a poet.
This is clearly illustrated, in the above passage, by the
reference to the gods and giants. All students of Swin-
burne are acquainted with the poet’s classification. It is an
important principle which is often referred to in Swin-
burne’s critical works, but is nowhere so clearly expressed
as in the opening lines of his Essay on 4 Century of English
Poetry (1880). ~

‘Poets, I have sometimes thought, may not improperly
be divided, though doubtless by no mutually exclusive divi-
sion, into two classes, definable by designations borrowed
from ancient mythology; the Giants and the Gods. Gods
indeed there are among them of gigantic stature, and giants
of godlike quality—godlike in grace and gentleness, as
those others Titanic in port and power: but though the
distinction may not always be equally easy to define, it can
never in any case be really difficult to recognize. From the
days of Shakespeare and Jonson to the days of Shelley and
Byron, the difference between the two confronted and con-
trasted races is in the main perceptible and patent...’

The same theory is outlined in the Essay on Coleridge
(1869), in which it is asserted that ‘the ranks of great men

34

--- PAGE 38 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

are properly divisible, not into thinkers and workers, but
into Titans and Olympians’; in the Note on Charlotte Bronté
(1877) and in the Essay on Middleton (1887). A brief
classification of the main English poets is often attempted
on those lines: Jonson, Byron are giants; Shelley and
Coleridge stand “among The_-Godsy Esch Tus Dante,

akeSpéare, Milton, Hugo are both. But Keats is not
evén named; thé classification does not hold good with
him; he is supreme, in the very words of Swinburne, ‘in
that especial field of work where all the giants and all the
gods of art would fail to stand against him for an hour’.
Being neither a giant nor a god nor both, was Keats at all a
poet according to the Swinburnian standard? The ques-
tion is well worth raising, although doubtless Swinburne
would have answered in the affirmative out of sheer poetic
instinct. But the fact remains that nothing is more foreign
to Swinburne’s art than the art of Keats, with its purely
sensuous and zsthetical achievements, depending neither
upon sweeping rhythmical effects, nor on contrasts in
violent mental attitudes. Strange though it may seem to
some, I venture to suggest that Swinburne would have con-
demned Keats’s poetry on grounds of moral and intellectual
inadequacy.

C. PARALLEL WITH SHELLEY: KEATS'S MENTAL INFERIORITY:

(Notes on THE Text oF SHELLEY—1869)
Swinburne’s Selection from Keats (W. M. Rossetti’s Edition of
Keats’s Poetical Works—1870)

This view receives further support from a passage in the
Notes on the Text of Shelley which were published in 1869.

35

--- PAGE 39 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

A parallel between Keats and Shelley is outlined, and we are
told that the latter’s

‘mark is burnt in more deeply and more durably upon men’s
minds than that of any among the great poets of his day.
Of these Coleridge and Keats get no such mark on the
spirit of their readers; they left simple and perfect examples
of work absolutely faultless, visibly unsurpassable, self-
resumed and self-content.’

There can, I think, be little doubt that Shelley, in direct
contrast with Keats, was the poet after Swinburne’s heart; *
and in the same essay the critic, confuting Arnold, goes so
far as to set Shelley against Keats even in the latter’s own
province, the field where ‘he is unapproachable’ and may
bid all kings of song come bow to his throne’—i.e. descrip-
tion of nature—Keats ‘practically alien to all things but

1 Swinburne has definitely stated that he ranked Keats below Shelley as
a poet of nature:

‘there is much sober and sedate enjoyment of nature .. . in the poetry
of Wordsworth; there is a . . . singular intensity, a matchless refinement of
relish for the pure delight of communion with natural beauty perceptible in
the poetry of Keats: but to neither was it given, to rise beyond these regions
of contemplation and sensation into that other where the emotion of Keats
and the emotion of Wordsworth become one, and are superseded by a
greater... At the sound of the Ode to the West Wind... the night-
ingale of Keats’s garden falls silent in our ears. ‘The poet who wrote that
and the poet who wrote Christabel—but these alone of their generation—
are indeed to be counted among the very chiefest glories of English poetry;
and it is surely no inadequate reward... to stand where Wordsworth
stands—but a little lower than these’ (Wordsworth and Byrom, published

1884).
36

--- PAGE 40 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

art’? is thus-dwarfed by Shelley’s Titanic size and lost in
his intellectual shadow.

In the storm that broke out in August, 1866, about the
still unpublished volume of Poems and Ballads, all the literary
schemes which Swinburne had undertaken for the firm of
Moxon came to grief: Payne became to hima thing abomin-
able and a gentleman could no more think of having to do
with him than an English Republican of raising his hat to
Napoleon III. Among these schemes was, as has been said
before, an intended volume of Selections from Keats witha criti-
calintroduction. This introduction Swinburne never wrote,
but the question of selecting Keats’s best poems was again
unexpectedly raised when at the beginning of 1870 one of
Swinburne’s closest friends, William Michael Rossetti, was
entrusted by Payne with the editing of Keats’s Poetical
Works. This was no longer to be a volume of selections,
but Moxon & Co. hinted that only a majority of the poems
were to be reprinted; W. M. Rossetti immediately wrote to
Swinburne, consulting him as to the choice and also inquir-
ing whether some unprinted verses by Keats might not be
available from the hands of the poet’s friend, Lord Hough-
ton, Swinburne answered very fully in a hitherto unpub-
lished letter which Mr. Wise kindly allows me to reproduce;
curiously enough—but very fortunately from our point of
view—Swinburne agrees with the firm of Moxon as to the
necessity of omitting some of the poems, and gives his
own idea of the lines on which a selection should be
effected:

1 Notes on the Text of Shelley, 1869.
37

--- PAGE 41 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

‘Arts Club,
‘Hanover Square,
‘May 23rd, 1870.
‘Dear Rossetti,

‘In the 2 vol. and 1 vol. eds. together Houghton I believe
has printed all of Keats’s remains except one short bawdy
song which was unfit for publication. “Cet homme
vertueux a senti dans ses veines un chaste frisson a la
lecture d’une telle chanson—Oh! Monsieur!” +

‘If I were you—and I wish I were, for of all things I
should like to edit a select Keats and do for him what I
believe he would have done for himself if he had lived—I
should do, without a hint from the publisher, exactly what
Moxon & Co. want you to do—reprint 2/3 precisely. I
should print in the order they stand—an order disarranged
in the current editions—the poems contained in his last
volume (edition 1820—it must be chez Moxon), line for
line—‘‘Lamia”, ‘Isabella’, ‘‘Hyperion”, etc., the etc.
including the Odes. Of the first volume I should reprint
nothing whatever except the song ‘In a drear-nighted
December” and some sonnets. There would then be just
room for Endymion and (if you like—I shou/d on the whole)
Otho the Great—which has glorious passages and is almost
throughout fine in style though crude in construction.
(There is another fine dramatic fragment—2 scenes and a
half or 3—“King Stephen”—in the 2 vol. Remains.)
From said Remains I should also take “La Belle Dame
sans Merci’ —‘‘The Eve of St. Mark”’—the late sonnets,

1 This alleged ‘quotation is, of course, supposed to have been spoken by
the much-suffering heroine of de Sade’s Fustine’.

38

--- PAGE 42 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

notably that on his dream of Dante, and the two last of all—
and two scraps embedded in his letters, the fragment

‘ “Mother of Hermes! and still youthful Maia!”
and the ballad-song on Meg Merrilies.

‘There would remain fully 1/3 of his writings—valueless,
or nearly so, except as studies for the special and esoteric
class of students in art or character. This was exactly the
plan I had laid out for myself when requested from the same
quarter as you to edit a selection from Keats: except that of
course on that scale I could only have given extracts from
Endymion and Otho. It will be a priceless boon to all
lovers of Keats, as the idiotic editions of Moxon—the only
ones current—have actually and inextricably jumbled to-
gether his last and best work with his first and worst, so
that till I had a copy of ed. 1820 I could never read the Ode
to a Nightingale without finding some schoolboy nonsense
thrust in my way a few pages off.

‘Ever yours,
“A, C. SWINBURNE.”

The letter is exceedingly valuable to us. If we compare
it with the contents of W. M. Rossetti’s volume (The
Poetical Works of Fohn Keats edited with a critical Memoir
by W. M. Rossetti, illustrated by Th. Seccombe, London,
J. Moxon, Son and Co. Ltd.—1872) we shall see that the
editor has slavishly followed Swinburne’s advice. The
volume includes indeed Endymion, Lamia, Isabella, The Eve
of St. Agnes, Hyperion, ‘Miscellaneous Pieces’, the Odes, La
Belle Dame sans Merci, the Sonnets, Meg Merrilies, the
‘earlier’ Hyperion, Otho the Great, King Stephen, and a few
more, i.e. all that Swinburne mentioned as worth reprinting

39

--- PAGE 43 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

and Practically in the order he recommended—but scarcely
anyt ing more. It was known, indeed, that Swinburne had
at one time thought of undertaking a selection from Keats;
but it was not known that he had done so in the volume
professedly edited by Rossetti.

The reader will find it interesting to compare Swinburne’s
‘selection’ in 1870 with his Encyclopedia Britannica Article
of 1882. It will be seen that, while the general attitude is
maintained, Swinburne has become more critical and less
generous about some poems or fragments of poems.

In fact, as early as 1876, a mild form of reaction had
already begun to set in. Sir Edmund Gosse has preserved
for us some remarks made by Swinburne in the course of a
conversation on August 16th, 1876, the following of which
concern Keats. The general tone is that of an informal
conversation but gives an additional value to Swinburne’s
remarks; he says here what he feels and just as he feels it
without any restraint or extenuation:

‘He praised the King Otho of Keats, but of the Ariosto
vein of that poet he spoke with the greatest contempt. He
thought the vulgarity of The Cap and Bells quite extra-
ordinary; he had drawn the attention of D.G.R. to it, who
had said that if it stood alone it would justify all Byron’s
insolence to Keats. It alarmed Swinburne to think that
Keats should have gone ‘‘back to his gallipots” after
composing Hyperion and The Eve of St. Agnes, and that
The Cap and Bells should be the latest of Keats’s produc-
tions. He pursed up his mouth and made an owlish
gesture with his eyes, as he added, “‘It gives one a horrid
thought!’”’’

40

--- PAGE 44 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

We find that quite naturally Swinburne was prone to
criticize the evil that is no doubt latent in Keats, rather than
praise the good that shines forth in his works.

D. KEATS’S LOVE-LETTERS: ‘POST-MORTEM’ (1878-84)

A remarkable incident is now to be noted as being
of great significance in the development of Swinburne’s
critical opinion of Keats. In 1878 H. Buxton Forman
published the now famous correspondence to Fanny
Brawne which he had acquired from L. Lindon. Swin-
burne does not seem at first to have disapproved of this
publication. But in January, 1884, he printed in the
Fortnightly Review, under the general title of ‘Post Morvem’ !
a series of four vituperative sonnets in which the sanctity of
all communications of a private character is proclaimed with
amazing energy and power of invective. Buxton Forman
/is personally taken to task and abused in the most violent
and transparent manger especially in the 3rd sonnet where
he is denounced. ‘

‘As foreman of the flock whose concourse greets
Men’s ears with bray more dissonant than brass.’

But with those personal remarks we are not here directly
concerned. The sonnets are professedly in defence of
Keats and directed against the parasites who prey on great
men’s corpses. What is of paramount interest for us is
that Swinburne saw in the Fanny Brawne correspondence so
much that was shameful and detrimental to the poet’s glory:

1 Afterwards altered to ‘Jn sepulcretis? and included in 4 Midsummer
Holiday, 1884, with two quotations from Catullus and Heine.

41

--- PAGE 45 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

‘Make bare the poor dead secrets of his heart,
Strip the stark naked soul, that all may peer,
Spy, smirk, sniff, snap, snort, snivel, snarl and sneer:
Let none so sad, let none so sacred part
Lie still for pity, rest unstirred for shame,
But all be scanned of all men. ‘This is fame.’
and again:
‘Mocked and reviled by men of poisonous breath,
A great man dies: but one thing worst was spared;
Not all his heart by their base hand lay bared.
One comes to crown with praise the dust of death;
And lo through him this worst is brought to pass.
Now what a thing it is to be an ass!’

‘this worst is brought to pass’! this was Swinburne’s final
attitude to the publication of Keats’s love-letters: hence-
forth he will neyer refer to them but as a blot upon his fame.
In fact his behaviour is here very mysterious and his true
feelings hard to fathom. In 1878, on receiving Forman’s
book he wrote a grateful line of acknowledgment:

‘3, Great Fames St.,
‘Feb. 22nd (1878).
‘Dear Mr. Forman,

‘On returning this morning to London after a month
spent in Scotland I find your doubly acceptable and valuable
present awaiting me, for which accept my most sincere tho’
seemingly most tardy thanks. The cancelled passage is of
course especially interesting and significant.

‘I remain,
“Yours very sincerely,
‘A. C. SWINBURNE.’

42

--- PAGE 46 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS
And again some three weeks later:

‘(March 15, 1878).
‘Dear Mr. Forman,

‘A thousand thanks for Keats’ letters which I find await-
ing me on my return from Scotland, and can hardly, tho’
overwhelmed with pressure of immediate personal business,
keep from devouring at once.

“Yours gratefully,
‘A. C. SWINBURNE,’?

To acknowledge the same book twice is strange enough
in itself, though one may not be justified in suggesting, as
Buxton Forman did when stung to the quick by the sonnets,
that the first of these two effusively grateful ‘letters was
‘forgotten during some three weeks’ debauch’. But the
fact remains that these two notes show no criticism or resent-
ment and may be considered as implying some approval of
the critic’s initiative.

Had Swinburne published the sonnets immediately after,
he would no doubt be liable to the charge of hypocrisy.
But this was by no means the case. He waited six years
before venting his unexpected storm of scorn and indigna-
tion. How can all this be explained? Buxton Forman
who, as is only to be expected, has no favourable explana-
tion to produce, asserts that, before 1878, Swinburne ‘had
frequent access to a set of transcripts [of Keats’s letters]
surreptitiously taken by Sir Charles Dilke when the letters
were lent to him by Mr. Lindon’ . . . and that ‘having spied,
sniffed, sneered, etc.’, to his heart’s content he grudged the

1 These letters, accompanied by a manuscript statement and a sonnet in
the hand of H. Buxton Forman, are in the collection of T. J. Wise.

° 43

--- PAGE 47 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

like privilege to others. This would, of course, puta differ-
ent complexion on the matter, but it still remains to be
proved. It seems scarcely imaginable that Swinburne if he

ad at the time intended to write his sonnets against Forman
should have sent him two letters of cordial and grateful
acknowledgment which would be as many weapons in his
hands; we all know that Swinburne was careless, and he often
showed great inconsistency in his behaviour: but he cer-
tainly was not mentally deficient. On the other hand, if we
compare the two dates of 1878 and 1884 we are immediately
reminded that a great change had occurred between them in
Swinburne’s life. He had come under the spell of Watts’s
personality. Besides, Swinburne had recently suffered
considerable annoyance from the threatened publication
of strictly private letters. On the other hand, Arnold had
disapproved of the publication in his essay published in
1881. I suggest that Swinburne had completely forgotten
his first impressions as expressed in his letters of acknow-
ledgment, or perhaps that he had sent these without having
opened the book; anyhow he was in a different frame of
mind and submitted to new influences when he published
his sonnets a few years later.

Our chief concern, however, is with Swinburne’s attitude
to Keats and, no matter what his true feelings may have been,
the publication of the letters to Fanny Brawne are a turning
point in the development of his critical views on the poet.?

1 See the review of the journal of Sir Walter Scott published in 1891:

‘We are disheartened and disgusted by the woful revelations of such
abject unmanliness and disloyalty as dishonour the names and degrade the
memoirs of poets . . . as Coleridge and Keats’
and the article on Keats in the Eacyclopedia Britannica.

44

--- PAGE 48 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

The contrast between their two natures appears more violent
than ever; Swinburne will never forget the unpleasant sen-
sation which the letters were alleged to have caused him.
His strictures on Keats’s personality will become continual
and ruthless; his criticism of his works will harden into
harsh formulas of sweeping condemnation or qualified
enthusiasm.

E, THE ARTICLE ON KEATS (COMPOSED 1881)
1. Intended Article for Ward’s English Poets (1879)

But these were after all nothing but occasional digres-
sions and oblique utterances of one great poet upon another:
Swinburne had never yet given a full and reasoned state-
ment of his attitude to Keats. Ever since the Moxon offer
had fallen through in 1866 he must have been vaguely
aware of this gap in his critical works, for when in October,
1879, Edmund Gosse asked him to write an Essay for
Ward’s English Poets he immediately selected Keats and
declined to undertake Coleridge or Blake on the plea that
he had already fully ‘said his say’ on both of them, or
Chatterton, in whom he took little interest.1. Unfortunately
Keats was claimed by Matthew Arnold and Swinburne had
to ‘do’ Collins instead. Far from resenting this arrange-
ment he wrote that he ‘would rather read Arnold on Keats
than write on Keats himself’?

1 It is interesting to note that Keats’s idols, Chatterton and Spenser, found
no place in Swinburne’s temple.
® Letter to E. Gosse, October roth, 1879.

45

--- PAGE 49 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

2. Article for the ‘Encyclopedia Britannica’ (1881)

(2) Influence of Arnold. In fact we have every reason to
believe that Swinburne was highly pleased with Arnold’s
essay. This latter appeared in 1880 and its influence is
very noticeable in the article on Keats which Swinburne
wrote in the early months of 18811 for the twentieth
volume of the Encyclopedia Britannica (published 1882).
In his condemnation of the Brawne letters and the unmanli-
ness of Keats, as well as in the recognition of a more virile
element in the latter’s character, Swinburne is merely
echoing Arnold. Arnold’s negative influence can also be
traced in the coolness with which the parallel between Keats
and Shakespeare is referred to by Swinburne.

(2) The Encyclopedic style. It should first be noticed thatin
view of the fact that the article was meant for publication in
the Encyclopedia Britannica, Swinburne adopted a terse and
condensed style which is as unlike his true manner as could
be imagined. His constant effort at setting out the largest
number of facts in the fewest words possible is evident.
Yet he sometimes forgoes this self-imposed discipline and
some sentences are typically Swinburnian. In fact, many
of his judgments acquire point and force by the very brevity
of their expression. But the remarks have a tendency
to become harsh and almost epigrammatic. The lack of
sympathy in the tone is thus made more conspicuous still.
Swinburne’s criticism deprived of the mellow redundance
of a style which is its proper raiment becomes shrill and
almost flippant. Although the Encyclopedia article con-
tains the substance of what Swinburne had to say on Keats,

—

1 Letter to E. Gosse, March 1st, 1881.
46

--- PAGE 50 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

it should be remembered that under more favourable
circumstances he would not have said it quite in the same
way.

6 Keats’s masterpieces. Asis to be expected, Swinburne
can praise very warmly the recognized masterpieces of
Keats. He frankly admits that ‘he lived long enough to
give assurance of being a poet who was not born to come
short of the first rank’, The narrative poems are first
commended, though not on grounds of narrative excellence:
two or three linés and phrases erased ‘would have left us in
Lamia ong_of the most faultless as surely one of the most
brilliant jewels in the crown of English poetry’. The
Eve of St. Agnes, so popular among the Pre-Raphaelites, is
described as a ‘perfect and unsurpassable study in pure
colour and clear melody’ and calls up the memories of
Marlowe’s Hero and Shakespeare’s Imogen. The Eve of
St. Mark is ‘no less precious’ to Swinburne, and we know
that he agrees there with Rossetti. Jsabella, however,
though overcharged with ‘effects of splendid expression’ is
‘feeble and awkward in narrative’.

Hyperion is a triumph; but Swinburne highly approved of
Keats’s resolution to leave it unfinished; he emphasizes the
importance of the Miltonic influence in it; this is of peculiar
interest to us, as is explained below.

The dramatic attempts (Osho the Greatand King Stephen)
are commented on with remarkable moderation on the part
of one whose standard is well known to have been high—so
high, in fact, that he often failed to reach it himself. But
La Belle Dame sans Merci receives long and fervent praise:
one should always remember that the lure of the ballad was
always strong on Swinburne’s mind; it can be traced to early

47

--- PAGE 51 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

memories of his childhood,? and found expression in con-
stant study of the old versions, as well as in a very large
number of imitations both in English and dialect. The
Pre-Raphaelites were great ballad-mongers indeed, and this
attempt of Keats enabled them to rank their idol as a pioneer
in this particular line also.

The ‘unrivalled and unequalled’ Odes excite unbounded
admiration. Each is very subtly characterized in a few
words. ‘Greater lyrical poetry the world may have seen;
Lovelier it surely has never seen nor ever can it possibly
see; The Ode to Maia is a divine fragment worthy of a place
beside the highest.”

But even in this series of praise there is something to
startle us: Keats ‘has certainly left us one perfect sonnet of
the first rank; and as certainly he has left us but one’.

That this commendation of the great masterpieces is
not given altogether without qualification is shown by the
strange reticence with which Arnold’s claim for the Shake-
spearian character of Keats’s work is received. Swinburne
does not commit himself and avoids to contradict the state-
ment. But, to me at least, the following sentence sounds
very much like an epigram:

‘Keats on high and recent authority has been promoted
to a place beside Shakespeare; and it was long since re-
marked by some earlier critic of less note that as a painter of
flowers * his touch had a/most* a Shakespearian felicity.’

(@) The earlier poems. Thus much Swinburne was bound to
concede under penalty of denying evidence and his own con-

1 See my Feunesse de Swinburne, Chapter II: ‘L’Enfance’.
§ The italics are mine.

48

--- PAGE 52 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

science as an artist. It is in his strictures on the less famous
poems of Keats that the strange antipathy of nature which
alone explains the younger poet’s attitude finds a clearer
expression. That Keats’s first volume is the weakest of
the three he printed, everyone would readily admit; that it
would have been by itself quite powerless to secure fame for
its author, and would perhaps have remained a most obscure
publication to this day is quite probable. “Sut no one has a
right to infer therefrom ‘that in (this) first book there was
little foretaste of anything greatly or even genuinely good’—
no one who is at once a great poet and a great lover of poetry.
And yet Swinburne proceeds to describe some of the poems
as ‘the most vulgar and fulsome doggerel ever whimpered by
a vapid and effeminate rhymester in the sickly stage of
whelphood’—while he concludes that ‘the merit of Keats’s
work at 25 was hardly by comparison more wonderful than
its demerit at 22’. The fact is, that Keats’s style at its worst
was never so vile as Swinburne would have us believe. But
what matters most is that to the modern critic all the later
developments of Keats’s genius are already adumbrated in
this first volume: the strange haunting diction with its
redundance of ‘luxuries’, ‘minstrelsies’ and ‘revelries’, the
keen eye ever ready to ‘transfigure’ nature without ‘trans-
forming’ her,! the touch of the born sonnet-writer, the whole
metaphysical creed of Hyperion, as summarized in the sonnet
on the Grasshopper, and above all the supreme felicity of
such phrases or movements as:

‘the pillowy silkiness that rests
Full in the speculation of the stars’

1 See the description of the minnows in the poem ‘I stood tip-toe...”
49 D

--- PAGE 53 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

7
SWINBURNE’S HYPERION
.or:

‘O for ten years that I may overwhelm
Myself in poesy; so I may do the deed
That my own soul has to itself decreed’
or the préqualled definition:
8 eg

oA .
a ‘A drainless shower __

Of light is‘po&Sy; "HS the sapreme of power;
Tis might half slumbering on its own right arm’

—all this is to be found there—and yet Swinburne would
not see it!

Endymion cannot be dismissed quite in the same final and
uncompromising spirit. But here Swinburne contrives to
give such reluctant and inadequate praise as makes us
wonder whether his attitude proceeds from natural in-
capacity or strong deliberate determination. Swinburne is
of course at liberty to quote Shelley’s opinion that Exdy-
mion is ‘absolutely impossible to read through’; the state-
ment is true from a certain point of view. But he certainly
reaches the very height of perversity when he writes that

‘Endymion rises in its best passages to the highest level of
Barnfield and Lodge, the two previous poets with whom,

had he published nothing more, Keats might most properly
have been classed’.

It is true that it is only in the light of Keats’s later achieve-
ments that Endymion and the earlier poems acquire their full
value and significance. But it is sheer madness on the part
of a critic to refuse to examine them in that light. Without

50

--- PAGE 54 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

the clues afforded by Lamia, Hyperion, the Odes and the
Sonnets, the inner beauty ‘of Endymion might well have
remained sealed and clouded to all times; but even then the
poem, if studied, would have been felt to differ as utterly
from the songs in Lodge’s Rosalind as the sound of an empty
jug from that of a full barrel of wine. It has been attempted
with very moderate success to give a definite sense to the
allegory contained in Endymion. But any intelligent reader
cannot be blind to the fact that there is substance in the
poem—dark and turbid though it may be. In fact it is this
half-seen meaning alone which secures for the poem that
modicum of unity which its length and the heterogeneous
character of its diction are quite unable to effect. And this
Swinburne cannot but have seen. But he would not let
himself see it.

(e) Keats's unmantiness. ‘The fact of the matter is, that
Swinburne is continually judging Keats’s personality
through his verse. While criticizing, with good reason,
the diction of Exdymion, he mentions the passage ‘where
Endymion exchanges fulsome and liquorish endearments
with the “known unknown from whom his being sips such
darling (1) essence”’ and presently comments upon it as
follows: ‘Such nauseous and pitiful phrases as these make us
understand the source of the most offensive imputations or
insinuations levelled against the writer’s manhood’.!' This
sentence, I think, accounts for the tone of the whole article.
Swinburne felt from the very first a natural antipathy for the
personality of one whose genius he could not but recognize;

1Cf. Swinburne’s general attitude to David Gray and the ‘inarticulate’
poets,
gr

--- PAGE 55 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

as he grew better acquainted with the particulars of his life
through the memoirs, reminiscences, etc., this natural ten-
dency grew stronger and more definite.

The publication of the letters to Fanny Brawne in 1878
removed his last hesitations and confirmed him in his
attitude of natural hostility. His first impulse was to
denounce the editor of the correspondence. But he onl.
disapproved of the editor because he disapproved of the
nature of the letters he edited. From that day on Keats was
convicted in Swinburne’s heart and the condemnation is
here clearly and forcibly expressed:

‘while admitting that neither his love-letters, nor the last
piteous outcries of his wailing and shrieking agony would
ever have been made public by merciful or respectful editors,
we must also admit that, if they ought never to have been
published, it is not less certain that they ought never to have

een written ; that a manful kind of man or even a manly sort
of boy, in his love-making or in his suffering, will not howl
and snivel after such a lamentable fashion’+

,' Compare with this two-edged homage paid to one of Keats’s master-
pieces:

‘The Ode to a Nightingale, one of the finest masterpieces of human work
in all time and for all ages, is immediately preceded in all editions now cur-
rent by some of the most vulgar and fulsome doggerel ever whimpered by a
vapid and effeminate rhymester in the sickly stage of whelphood.’

Commenting on this passage, Mr. Harold Nicolson remarks in his excel-
lent study of Swinburne:

‘Now Swinbyyne’s real intention was to protest against the bad taste of
editors including too many juvenilia in collected editions, but at the thought
of these editors, at the realization of how much he himself would mind if

52

--- PAGE 56 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

We now know exactly where we are. Swinburne is
entirely at one with Arnold, who had already denounced
Keats’s ‘abandonment of all reticence and all dignity’, his
‘relaxed self-abandonment’ which had in it ‘something
underbred and ignoble, as of a youth ill brought up, without
the training which teaches that we must put some constraint
upon our feelings and upon the expression of them’. Nor is
this attitude peculiar to both; it was taken up by generations
of muscular, Eton-trained scholars throughout the nine-
teenth century; and it is not so long ago that the tide
began to turn; as early as 1867 Louis Etienne, in a remark-
able articl€on ‘Keats et Swinburne’ published in the Revue
des Deux-Mondes noted that Keats was ‘le moins anglais
des poétes, 4 cause de son manque de manliness’ and pro-
ceeded to analyse with searching irony the manifestations of
this national prejudice. From an human point of view it is
hard enough to understand why Keats should not be entitled

the Triumph of Gloriana were to appear prefixed to Songs before Sunrise, the
blood seethes to his brain and he brings his stick down smash, not on the
head of the absent editor, but on the head of the unoffending Keats, who
simply happened, all careless, to be there.’ (H. Nicolson, Swinburne,
1926, pp. 190-1.)

‘That Mr. Nicolson possesses wit and critical acumen, no one who has had
the pleasure of reading him will deny; but wit and acumen are not all; and
the mere patient collation of texts has shown that Swinburne did intend to
bring down his stick on the author, not on the editor; the editors were Swin-
burne’s friends: Lord Houghton, W. M. Rossetti, W. B. Scott, etc., and
Buxton Forman was only responsible for the publication of the Brawne
letters. But the ‘unoffending’ Keats had committed in the eyes of Swin-
burne a very serious offence and he is here being chastised for it. ‘This is
4 point of literary history rather than of psychology, and Freudian ‘com-
plexes’ cannot prevail against a fact.

53

--- PAGE 57 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

to all allowances; for he felt the shadow of death across his
brow from the beginning, and was haunted by the fear that
he might not live to ‘do the deed which [his] own soul had
to itself decreed’. A bright and healthy girl like Fanny
Brawne would mean to the dying Keats far more than
love ever meant to any man. It meant life, therefore the
possibility of continuing ‘to overwhelm himself in poesy’.
With the despair which has often been observed in invalids
he clung to health in the persons of those who surrounded
him, and particularly in this strong independent image of
womanhood whose love he had once thought to have won;
he tried to drink life from her and to lose her meant the loss
of everything else. From an artistic point of view the
relation between what is referred to as Keats’s ‘morbidity’
or ‘unmanliness’ and the highest qualities of his poetry is
obvious; his keen sensuousness and soothing ecstasies have
all thé sweetness of consumptive euphoria; and it is the sense
of joy and beauty triumphant over imminent death which
gives his art that deep human touch without which it might
appear incomplete. Keats stands thus absolved both as an
artist and asaman. That Arnold, the most intellectual and
the least intelligent of mortals, should have failed to share
this view, we think natural enough; but that Swinburne,
who was born a poet and bred an artist, should fall into the
same trap, is a surprising phenomenon; but even more
significant than it is surprising. It is in vain that he strives
with Arnold and Houghton to recognize a manlier strain
in the personality of Keats. We know that this personality
was once and for all convicted and condemned and that
it is intimately blended, in his eyes, with every mannerism
of his style and peculiarity of his diction.

54 -

--- PAGE 58 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

F, THE LAST STAGE: KEATS CONDEMNED FOR HIS
AESTHETICISM (1884)

Strange and paradoxical as it all may seem, Swinburne, in
his final estimate of Keats, is borrowing from Arnold the
very formula which he professedly disproved. Swinburne
is looking for ‘a criticism of life’ in Keats’s works and fails to
find it. If Keats’s perfection is to him something limited
and special, it is in part owing to the absence of moral ideas.
This appears clearly in Swinburne’s criticism of Arnold in
his essay on Wordsworth and Byron (1884). Attacking
Arnold’s definition, he objects that it could ‘never be
strained so as to cover the case of Keats, the most exclusively
zsthetic and the most absolutely non-moral of all serious
writers on record’. And yet, with a little straining and
patching, Swinburne presently makes Arnold’s definition
his own:

‘All sane men must be willing to concede the truth of an
assertion which [Arnold] seems to fling down as a challenge

. that a school of poetry divorced from any moral idea is
a school of poetry divorced from life.’

But to such a school we know that Keats, ‘le moins anglais
des poétes’ belonged. And we know for sure that Swinburne
did not. It is in vain that the latter tentatively asserts that
‘Even John Keats himself except in his most hectic moments
of sensuous or spiritual debility, would hardly, I should
imagine, have undertaken to den ythis’. 1 He might not,
but all his work does. Yet Swinburne’s statement is of the
highest moment in so far as it enables us to get a clearer

1 The italics are mine.

" 55

--- PAGE 59 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

notion of his zsthetical code. One should not wonder
that the introducer in England of the theory of Art for Art’s
sake, the disciple of Gautier and Baudelaire, the admiring

uoter of such phrases as ‘Fe pense que la correction de la
forme est la vertu’, the critic of William Blake and the
reviewer of Solomon’s Vision of Love should in his heart
condemn Keats for his absolute and exclusive estheticism.
There is no contradiction in Swinburne’s mind.t. He
preached the equivalence of Art to Virtue. Keats pro-
claimed its equivalence to Truth. ‘Save the shape, and art
will take care of the soul for you’* is Swinburne’s ultimate and
striking definition. But art must have a soul independent
of itself. It is not on account of this soul that Art should
be approved of or condemned; but_without it, whatever it
be, Art could not exist. And we all know that Swinburne
took great care of the soul in his Art; it always has a sensuous,
political, or theological inspiration which is well its own.
And now we know that in Swinburne’s eyes a large portion
of Keats’s work had no soul We know that we were right
when we said that it was on moral and intellectual grounds
that Swinburne disapproved of Keats’s poetry. All that
Swinburne is prepared to concede is that ‘a school of poetry
subordinated to any school of doctrine, subjugated and
shaped and utilized by any moral idea to she exclusion of

1 See my Feunesse de Swinburne, la théorie de l’esthétisme, L’Oeuvre, II:
L’esthétisme et la Crise sensuelle.

2 Essay on Blake (composed 1862-5).

3 ‘There is not a line extant by the author of Exdymion which shows even
a glimmer of such simple and cordial manliness of sympathy with the homely
heroism and humble interest of actua/ /ife [the italics are mine] as informs

every line of Gautier’s noble little poem on two veteran survivors of the old
guard.’ (Wordsworth and Byron, published 1884.) _

56

--- PAGE 60 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

native impulse and spiritual instinct will produce work fit to
live when the noblest specimens of humanity are produced
by artificial incubation’.

But on the main issue—namely the necessity for a moral
soul in any work of art—he is at one with Arnold, for all his
pugnacity and eloquence. And we find that eventually
Swinburne has done the very deed against which he had
warned Arnold in 1867. He has, half consciously and
through a long winding path, joined—horresco referens—
an advanced detachment from the great army of the
Philistines.

CONCLUSIONS

This study of the evolution of Swinburne’s opinions and
feelings towards another poet has taught us a great deal
about Swinburne himself with whom we are mainly con-
cetned.

It has, I think, clearly eStablished the instinctive antipathy
of nature which separated the aristocratic poet, Belgravia-
born and Eton-bred, from the untrained poet of cocagne.
He resented the latter’s want of education, perhaps his want
of scholarship. He thought with Arnold that his was often
the style of a ‘surgeon’s apprentice’. “The obvious answer
that Keats was precisely a surgeon’s apprentice? was not
accounted by them as a sufficient excuse. Keats failed, in
their eyes, to love or die like a gentleman.

1 The italics are mine.

2 See Professor de Sélincourt’s edition of Keats’s poems (1920), p. 586,
in which a short list of Keats’s vulgarisms of diction is supplied; I have no
doubt that most of these were unconscious, and not at all ‘dangerous experi-
ments on the side of familiarity’.

57

--- PAGE 61 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

It has shown, moreover, that there existed in the case of
Swinburne a real lack of sympathy for Keats’s inspiration.?
It struck him as strangely Fimited in scope and human
depth. The unique example of the cultivation of Art for
Art’s sake afforded by Keats did not rouse his enthusiasm.
To him there was no soul to the greater part of Keats’s
works. The sonnets to Leigh Hunt or Kosciusko would
have better suited him as far as their inspiration went, but
he knew them to be artistically inferior. It was on moral
and intellectual grounds that he would have condemned tlfe
very masterpieces of Keats’s poetry.

It is none the less evident that he was keenly sensitive to
the beauty of these masterpieces and that his artistic enjoy-
ment in some of these (Hyperion, the Ode to a Nightingale,
etc.) was constant and deep.

This attitude, in its three-fold aspect, Swinburne must
have assumed from the very first; the years merely confirmed
and exaggerated its main featu@B. It remains only to be
remarked that while this attitude was almost completely
forbidding any deep influence or half-conscious imitation on
the part of Swinburne, it did not preclude a conscious and
deliberate endeavour to acquire the highest qualities of
Keats’s poetic style.

1 Swinburne was well aware of this, and his friends, so many of whom
were idolators of Keats, must often have remonstrated with him. In a
letter to the Atheneum, dated November 13th, 1886, Swinburne mentions
that the Quarterly Review accused him of degrading Byron and overrating
Keats, and remarks: ‘My Essay on Keats and Wordsworth is an answer. 4
Aigher authority [than the Q.R.] remonstrated with me for having overmuch
exalted Wordsworth, and overmuch depreciated Keats.

58

--- PAGE 62 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

III—SWINBURNE AND KEATS

a

A. THE EARLY POEMS (1849-60)

HAT Swinburne did make such a deliberate cold-

blooded attempt at acquiring what he thought worth
acquiring in Keats’s poetry is, I think, proved above chal-
lenge by the first poem which I publish in this volume: this
‘—a fragmentary epic on the theme of Hyperion—is dealt
with in a separate introduction. We are now concerned
with the bulk of Swinburne’s poetry with a view to finding
out whether, apart from such open and flagrant imitations,
Swinburne’s style was not in a more permanent and intimate
manner influenced by that of Keats.

The poems composed by Swinburne during his stay at
Oxford form a considergble body of poetry; they were all
unpublished when theiffdeuthor died in 1909, and were
bought from Th. Watts-Dunton, together with the other
unpublished writings of the poet, by Mr. T. J. Wise.
Many have since been privately printed by the latter and
not a few were included in a volume of Posthumous Poems
and in the first and sixth volumes of the Bonchurch Edition
of the works of Swinburne. But even these are scattered
and often undated. It is difficult for the student to form a
precise idea of the extent and qualities of Swinburne’s work
at this early period.

Its interest is, however, paramount for us, as the poems it
includes belong to the same cycle as the one with which this
study is chiefly concerned; we know that Swinburne’s style
was not yet definitely fixed and that, after many other experi-

59

--- PAGE 63 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

ments, he deliberately became apprenticed to Keats. The
latter’s influence might therefore quite possibly be traced in
most poems belonging to that period.

We should, however, scarcely expect to find this in the
earliest poems extant. There was no maternal ban upon
Keats as there was on Byron, and Swinburne read his works
at Eton. Sir George Young told me that in 1851-2 his
schoolfellow was engaged on Keats and Shelley. But this
first acquaintance was not to be resumed till a few years
later, after Swinburne had come to Oxford. His earliest
extant work, the unpublished tragedy named the Unhappy
Revenge,! composed in 1849, contains songs whose metre
is reminiscent of some Keatsian attempts; but Milton is
the probable source from which both poets drew their
inspiration.

‘he Triumph of Gloriana (composed 1851) has a classical
smoothness and a certain languishing redundancy in the
choice of epithets, which remind one of the Keats of the
Epistles and chiefly of Lamia. But here again this must
be attributed to a common imitation of Dryden and Pope.
The influence may have reached Swinburne through Keats,
but he certainly had slaked his great literary thirst further
up stream.

The Elizabethan plays co ed at Oxford owe, of course,
nothing to Keats’s dramatic aftempts. They are directly
imitated from the originals of Beaumont, Fletcher,
Massinger and Marston. The same remark has its appli-
cation to the border Ba//ads which Swinburne began to pro-
duce in great number in those days: Swinburne, we know,

1 See my Jeunesse de Swinburne, where this work, which I discovered
at the British Museum, is for the fn time described.

)

--- PAGE 64 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

admired La Belle Dame sans Merci and spoke highly of
Meg Merrilies. But here again he possessed first-hand
knowledge of the subject, and Keats had nothing to teach
the author of Second Love and Burd Margaret.

In the body of the Pre-Raphaelite verses, distant echoes
from the Keatsian style can, however, be recognized: the
poems written under the influence of Morris (Rudel,
Lancelot, Arthurian attempts, etc.), or Rossetti (The Two
Knights and many sonnets), or in a more independent strain,
show occasional traces of such an influence: a poem called
Letters is in the metre of The Eve of St. Mark, a fragment of
an Epistle to someone in Italy is not in tone unlike the
epistles in the volume of 1817. But here again the in-
fluence is not a first-hand one: it reaches Swinburne
through other writers, or is nothing but a mere resemblance
arising from a common attempt at an imitation of the same
mediaeval models.

Far more interesting for us is a group of poems in which,
although it is Shelley’s influence which predominates,
reminiscences from Keats are here and there obvious. We
know that Swinburne had, about this time, begun to study
‘under’ Keats; it is only natural that his schooling should
not have been all in vain. Compound epithets of different
categories are frequent in Swinburne’s style: this may be a
result of his close study of Hellenic poets, and it was cer-
tainly encouraged by his study of Shelley and Milton; but
Keats may have had his share of influence here, as I have
tried to show below in connection with Hyperion. The
opening of a poem which Swinburne composed in 1857 for
the Newdigate Prize competition and which is generally
believed to have been lost, The Temple of anus, affords

61

--- PAGE 65 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

a good example of how the rushing stream of Shelley’s
influence was carrying along with it small fragments of
Keatsian rock:

‘Earth and the changeless powers that keep her fair,
The glories of the planet-lighted air,

The year’s glad growth among its earliest flowers,
The deep and dreamless rest of golden hours,
When not a cloud the slumbrous lustre mars,
The motions of the music-wingéd stars,

The silence of the splendour-paven sea

Ere winds awake its many-voicéd glee,

The sounds and shade of forests, the swift gleams
And echoes of the everlasting streams,

These have I loved with such delight and awe
As guides them calmly by its ancient law

On their glad way unaltering; change and pain
At their mute bidding loose the wonted chain;
By their bright guidance was I led to see

Hope and those wingéd memories which to thee
Are life, and holiest strength, O liberty!’

Nor are the ‘s/umbrous lustre’ and the ‘many-voicéd glee’ all.
Sundry other epithets like ‘/ustrous’, ‘myrtle-braided’, ‘cloudy
gold’, ‘many-sceptred’, ‘patient’ and such a line as

‘The music-measured sorrow of its tone’

have a distinct Keatsian flavour. The Ode to Mazzini
is already pure Swinburne with a faint reminiscence of
Shelley. But the Ode to she Night, published in the Bon-
church Edition, yields a few other lines or epithets:

62

--- PAGE 66 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

‘With calm eyes full of meditation grave’,
‘Where thou dost sit in lone divinity’,

‘circling ocean’, ‘curvéd brows’, ‘chaos lorn’, etc. And the
short poem Echo printed in the Posthumous, Poems has some
words of unmistakable Keatsian origin: ‘dewy maze’, ‘moss-
paven’, ‘misty glimmer’, ‘pale Lethean lakes’, ‘dewy tresses’,
‘dusk waves’, ‘heaped flowers’, ‘lustrous ocean ways’, etc.
But although a minor strain of Keatsian influence is
recognizable in the diction of all these poems, the inspira-
tion sometimes, the outline and rhythm always are derived
from Shelley, who remains the most important influence.
It is interesting to note that in his Monomaniac’s Tragedy,
which was published in 1858 in the Undergraduate Papers,
and which is presumably a satire of the ‘spasmodic’ poets
(Alexander Smith and perhaps the authors of Maud and
Aurora Leigh), Swinburne introduced a large quantity of
burlesque verses; the diction of these delightful parodies is
in part nothing but a violent exaggeration of the mannerisms
of Keats’s poetic style; some of the epithets are more par-
ticularly arresting: ‘extra-paradisal’, ‘conch-like’, ‘lunar bowl’,
‘I feel very dead’, ‘rainbow-tinctured pieties’, ‘violet-poisoned
subtleties’, ‘unspeakable despondencies’, etc. Of course Swin-
burne is not directly parodying Keats, and he may not even
haye had his name in mind when he wrote this imaginary
review. But he cannot but have been aware, that all these
‘exquisite niceties’, which he denounced and ridiculed in
others, were only perversions and exaggerations of what had
become through Keats a recognized poetic style. In what
particular way this style was abhorrent to Swinburne, we are
63

--- PAGE 67 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

now better able to understand; and we may now conceive
how Swinburne could in 1881 write of the diction of Keats’s
poems that ‘such nauseous and pitiful phrases, make us
understand the source of the most offensive imputations or
insinuations levelled against the writer’s manhood’.

Conclusions: This rapid study of Swinburne’s early verse
has yielded little to prove a direct and permanent influence
of Keats. This confirms us in our belief that the poem
which we publish to-day was nothing else than a limited and
purely technical experiment. That this experiment was not
altogether in vain is seen in those poems in which Shelley’s
influence has not quite obliterated that of Keats as far as
style is concerned; and here and there in the diction of the
so-called ‘Pre-Raphaelite’ poems.

B. THE LATER POEMS (1860-1909)

1. Metres

The constant difference which, as I have endeavoured to
point out, separates Keats’s genius from that of Swinburne is
nowhere more apparent than in their use of metrical forms,
It should, of course, be kept in mind that Swinburne was
professedly a great experimenter in all kinds of rhythms and
prosodic devices. According to Maria Kado’s statistics
Swinburne used 430 different forms in his poems. On the
other hand, Keats does not seem to have handled more than
fourteen in the three volumes he published; and the total
would amount to forty at most if we include the posthumous
pieces. Swinburne’s originality in that field is self-evident;
but the amazing point is that out of these 430 metrical forms,
which constitute Swinburne’s record, scarcely four or five

64

--- PAGE 68 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

have been previously used by Keats. Swinburne had no
use for Keats’s metres, and probably thought poorly of
him as a metrist.

Swinburne’ and. Keats both employed, of course, the
rhyming couplet; but Swinburne’s couplet is at once more
classical and Dryden-like in some of its features, and more
free and violent in its use of enjambment and other licences.
Surely nothing can be more unlike Endymion than Anactoria
or Tristram: Anactoria shows a marked tendency to form
series of complete classical couplets enclosing complete
ideas; while the lyrical outburst which melts the first fifty
lines of Tristram into a living whole is utterly beyond the
metrical force which Keats could command. But if we
consider the long narratives at the end of Poems and Ballads
a certain connection may be apparent. The author of
St. Dorothy and The Two Dreams had certainly read Chaucer;
but he was no doubt familiar with Endymion.

Keats’s one great experiment in blank verse is of so
peculiar a nature and is so obviously copied from the prosody
of a great model as to be unfit for comparison where ques-
tions of metre are mentioned. It should be remarked that
Swinburne made very little use of blank verse in his lyrical
poems; that of At Eleusis seems to be modelled directly on

andor; as for Keats’s plays they cannot possibly have had
the least influence on Swinburne’s dramatic style.

The great feature of Keats’s metrical effects is their con-
stant irregularity; even so finished a work of art as the Ode
on a Grectan Urn presents a remarkable dissymmetry in the
distribution of lines which Swinburne, the great upholder of
the principle of law and recurrence in poetry and art, could
not but have strongly condemned. Swinburne, comparing

65 EB

--- PAGE 69 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

his highly elaborate Odes with those of Keats, might well
have made Ben Jonson’s complaint his own and stated that
‘John Keats had no art’. His fine ear and deep scholarship
alike would have prompted such a remark, and precluded
his imitating the, irregular forms in which Keats strove to
express himself.

rue, Swinburne used the six-lines stanza (as found in
Venus and Adonis) three times: in Before a Crucifix, Inscrip-
tions for a Pedestal, and Locrine (IV, 1), as against Keats’s
experiment in the lines To Hope; and the stanzas of Isabella
(Chaucer’s Ottava rima), find a late echo in the second scene
of the second act of Locrine. But Locrine is nothing but a
series of metrical experiments strung together, and Swin-
burne certainly was but little thinking of Keats when he
attempted this feat. The same remark applies to the ballad-
metres of Meg Merrilies and La Belle Dame sans Merci.

The iambic octosyllables of the Ode to Fancy, and Bards
of Passion and of Mirth could be paralleled in some of the
choruses in Swinburne’s Greek plays; but Keats is no
originator here. And one of his favourite stanzas, the
‘Spenserian’, was never used by Swinburne.

The two poets were both distinguished as sonnet-writers;
the difference in their treatment of this form is bound to be
here more veiled; it is none the less quite apparent. Swin-
burne never hag any crossed rhymes in the quatrains, while
this is very often the case with Keats. On the other hand,
Swinburne uses all sorts of devices in the distribution of
rhymes in the tercets: cddcee, cddccd, ccdeed,
cdcdcd, etc. But he has a marked tendency to distri-
bute his lines according to the cde, cde scheme, prob-
ably owing to the influence of Rossetti and the Italians;

. 66 :

--- PAGE 70 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

this arrangement is very seldom observed in Keats’s sonnets.

More significant still is the constant and triumphant use
made by Swinburne of anapestic and dactylic measures; it is
hardly necessary to remind the reader that some of his most
wonderful and loveliest achievements were in this particular
kind of verse. Keats preferred the iambics and trochees
and his attempts at composing anapests (To Some Ladies, and
the ponderous Lines Written in the Highlands) are strangely
stiff and inadequate.

It is partly owing to this mastery over anapests that
Swinburne’s poetry is so conspicuous for its qualities of
swiftness and movement: it is essentially ‘dynamic and rest-
less’ as D. W. Rannie excellently puts it; Keats’s poetry is
on the contrary ‘statical’, it ‘characterizes objects in repose
rather than movement’, it expresses ‘effects rather than
powers’. A remarkable instance of this is afforded by
Keats’s description of Bacchus’ revel in Endymion:

‘And as I sat over the light blue hills
There came a noise of revellers; the rills
Into the wide stream came of purple hue;
”’T was Bacchus and his crew!
The earnest trumpet spake and silver thrills
From kissing cymbals made a merry din.
*Twas Bacchus and his kin!
Like to a moving vintage down they came
Crowned with green leaves and faces all on flame;
All madly dancing through the pleasant valley,
To scare thee melancholy!
O then, O then thou wast a simple name!
And I forgot thee, as the berried holly

67

--- PAGE 71 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

By shepherds is forgotten when in June

Tall chestnuts keep away the sun and moon:
I rushed into the folly.

Within his car aloft young Bacchus stood,

Trifling his ivy dart, in dancing mood
With sidelong laughing;

And little rills of crimson wine imbrued

His plump white arms, and shoulders, enough white
For Venus’ pearly bite:

And near him rode Silenus on his ass

Pelted with flowers as he on did pass,
Tipsily quaffing.’

It is all very fine and pleasingly sensuous; but how very
quiet, and, I was almost going to say, perfectly dignified!
Now here is one of Swinburne’s versions! of the same
incident:

‘So from somewhere far forth of the unbeholden,
Dreadfully driven from over and after and under,
Fierce, blown through fifes of brazen blast and golden,
With sound of chiming waves that drown the thunder
Or thunder that strikes dumb the sea’s own chimes,
Began the bellowing of the bull-voiced mimes,
Terrible; firs bowed down as briars or palms
Even at the breathless blast as of a breeze
Fulfilled with clamour and clangour and storms of psalms,
Red hands rent up the roots of old-world trees,
Thick flames of torches tossed as tumbling seas

1 The other one is, of course, the Pre/ude to Songs before Sunrise; the

tempestuous effect is weaker, but only by comparison. ‘The above passage
is taken from Thalassius (Songs of the Springtides).
68

--- PAGE 72 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

Made mad the moonless and infuriate air
That, ravening, revelled in the riotous hair
And raiment of the furred Bassarides . . .

And in his ears the music that makes mad
Beat always; and what way the music bade,
That always rode he; nor was any sleep

His, nor from height nor deep.

But heaven was as red iron, slumberless

And had no heart to bless;

And earth lay sere and darkling as distraught
And help in her was nought.

Then many a midnight, many a morn and even
His mother passing forth of her fair heaven
Sought the sea-bird that was her boy; but he
Sat panther-throned beside Erigone

Riding the red ways of the revel through
Midmost of pale-mouthed passion’s crownless crew.’

Keats’s description might have been described as ‘Comus
and water’; but Swinburne’s certainly is ‘Euripides? and
brandy’.

Keats has, therefore, been found to be a man of few metres
and many irregularities, with a marked preference for ‘still’
iambic measures: Swinburne stands in clear contrast as a
master of iambics and anapests alike, strictly regular in his
prosody, and with an unrivalled gift for reviving or creating
a world of metrical forms among which his genius lives and
moves and has its being.

1 See the choruses of the Bacchantes.

69

--- PAGE 73 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION
2. Diction

Swinburne’s mastery of- form extended also over the
&yntax and it can be safely asserted that since Milton no one
has ever submitted the English language to the sameystrain-
ings and twistings. He was, of course, confirmed in this
tendency by his close knowledge of biblical, classical and
Elizabethan literatures. To these three models, but especi-
ally to the first two, Gunnar Serner, in his remarkable study
of Swinburne’s language, traces his most daring attempts:
inversions, double genitives, subjunctives, rhetoric figures,
redundancies of words and constructions, etc. It stands
to reason that Keats could teach him nothing in that field,
and would rather have been in need of his lessons. It
should, however, be remarked that the latter poet, for all his
want of classical scholarship, succeeded, through a mere
study of Milton and the Elizabethans, in securing some
remarkable effects which are of unmistakable classical
origin, Professor de Sélincourt has shown in his exhaustive
edition of Keats’s Poems that Hyperion abounds in elliptical
sentences, repetitions, inversions and adjectival construc-
tions which are purely Greek or Latin. This is not Keats’s
least merit: the form as well as the spirit of classical culture
he rediscovered and recreated to a certain extent. But here
again he was at best, a disciple of genius; and Swinburne was
a master.

It is, however, in the province of poetic diction that
Keats exerted what influence he could on the genius of
Swinburne. I am convinced that Swinburne felt from the
first that Keats’s superiority lay in his use of vocabulary,
and in particular in some of his boldest attempts at’

70

--- PAGE 74 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

reviving old forms, and coining new words. He de-
nounced such attempts, when he thought they were failures;
but he approved of them when they were successes; and he
adopted them. Keats was here served by his very lack of
scholarship which gave him an unwonted grammatical bold-
ness; and he was inspired by his genius. That he was a
great master of vocabulary, has been shown above challenge
by the monumental Concordance to Keats, which is found
to contain 8,700 words exclusive of inflected forms—more
than Milton and as many as the Jiad and Odyssey together.
What modern scholarship has proved, Swinburne knew
instinctively from the first. And this is no doubt the chief
reason why he attempted, in his 22nd year, such a close
imitation of Keats’s style and methods.

As far as substantives are concerned, Swinburne duly
remembered the felicitous effect derived from Keats’s use of
the -ing or -ings terminations; such analogies as: groanings,
offerings, lute-breathings, sighings, shining, etc. (Keats), and
groanings, love-offerings, lute-playing, stoopings, star-shining,
etc. (Swinburne), speak for themselves. The same parallels
could be established between nouns ending in -y or -ées
whose frequent use is peculiar to both poets.

But it is chiefly to Keats’s mastery over epithets that
Swinburne paid a deep and perhaps half-conscious homage.
Swinburne never forgot the beautiful effect often obtained
by Keats through the use of -ous adjectives; compare:
lustrous, slumberous, luxurious, tremulous, monstrous, mur-
murous (Keats), with: Justrous, slumberous, luxurious,
tremulous, ruinous, mountainous, oraculous (Swinburne).
Their use of -y adjectives is no less significant: Keats uses
more than 250 epithets of this type and Gunnar Serner

71

--- PAGE 75 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

states that the -y termination is also a great favourite with
Swinburne; compare: wazery, fiery, wormy, wintry, drowsy,
dewy (Keats), with Swinburne’s: watery, wintry, dewy, fiery,
etc., and also the famous adjective ‘fleshly’, whose derivation
is similar and which has a symbolic value.

But this does not profess to be an exhaustive study of
Keats’s and Swinburne’s language and their relation to each
other; and I hasten to what seems to me the most striking
symptom of Keats’s influence over Swinburne; I mean the
use they both make of compound adjectives. This peculiar
feature of Keats’s style has, of course, been often noted; the
concordance gives a list of over 300 words for the -ed com-
pounds only.

On the other hand, Gunnar Serner’s conclusion of his
comprehensive study of Swinburne’s language is: ‘After all
the bulk of his formations will be found in the field of com-
pounds, especially participle compounds’. To these, indeed,
we must confine our attention. For his compounds of nouns
+ adjectives, adjectives + adjectives, pronouns and adverbs +
adjectives, Swinburne had many other models than Keats:
especially Shelley and the Hellenic poets. But in this
particular category of words the influence seems direct and
evident; especially in the case of what Serner calls composi-
tion with a ‘non-genuine past participle’, that is to say, with
a word that has been daringly coined as from a verbal root,
but which could scarcely be used alone or with the value of a
verb. A collation of Serner’s lists with those of the con-
cordance gives the following characteristic instances:

Keats: on-thoughted, green-kyrtled, golden-feathered,
drowsy-footed, lute-voic'd, purple-stained, fire-winged, fair-
72

--- PAGE 76 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

eyed, calm-throated, full-throated, silver-throated, droop-
headed, full-hearted, high-thoughted, incense-pillowed, pale-
mouthed, rainbow-sided, faint-lipped, etc.

SwInBuRNE: 4on-throated, greenest-girdled, golden-girdled,
fuller-feathered, pale-mouthed, slant-sided, _fearful-footed,
purple-pillowed, weak-winged, subtler-eyed, lowliest-hearted,
golden-headed, cold-lipped, etc., etc.

A collation of the lists of present participle compounds
would also disclose resemblances and identities. But these
compounds are not so exclusively Keatsian as those formed
with a non-genuine past participle; past and present
participle compounds taken together form one-third of
Keats’s compound words; past participle compounds alone
amount to one-fourth.

That Swinburne felt this and concentrated his attention
on this particular class of adjectives is fully borne out by the
imitation of Hyperion which I publish to-day. It will be
seen that the text of the poem abounds in such compounds.
In this limited but important point of diction Keats's .in-
fluence on Swinburne has therefore been found precise and
permanent. Although the effects derived from the same
words are not always identical, it can be safely asserted that
Swinburne’s style would in one important respect not be the
same, if he had never read Keats, or, indeed, never sub-
mitted himself to the strangely severe and deliberate train-
ing which is attested by the poems that follow.

1 These compounds are, of course, taken from all the poems published
by Swinburne between 1860 and 1909 without any distinction.

73

--- PAGE 77 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

3. Style

But these technical remarks allow us to detect the strain
of Keatsian influence only by means of collations and
statistics. The Keatsian ‘style’, and by that I mean the
general atmosphere which proceeds from the blending of
metrical effects, vocabulary, and to a certain extent of
inspiration, very soon vanishes from Swinburne’s poetry.
It is not to be found either in The Queen-Mother or in
Chastelard in which the spasmodic-sadical or the solemn-
prophetic inspirations hush the last vibrations of Keatsian
harmonies. But these can still be heard in Rosamond, for
instance, in such lines as:

‘but see
How the wind drenches the low lime-branches
With shaken silver in the rainiest leaves’

or:

‘I whose curled hair was as a golden gin .
Wherein the tawny-lidded lions fell’

or:

‘Fear is a cushion for the feet of love

Painted with colours for his ease-taking;
Sweet-red and white with wasted blood and blue
Most flower-like, and the summer-spoused green
And sea-betrothed soft purple and burnt black.
All coloured forms of fear, omen and change,
Sick prophecy and rumours lame at heel,
Anticipations and astrologies . . .’ etc.

14

--- PAGE 78 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

Thy footed ghost on some unfooted lawn
Whose air the unrisen sunbeams fear to fret
Lives a ghost’s life of daylong dawn and eve.’ !

CONCLUSIONS

This rapid parallel between the poems of Keats and
Swinburne has revealed a clear though limited influence:
Keats’s poetic style is echoed in some of the early poems of
Swinburne, in the play of Rosamond in the first Poems and
Ballads, but scarcely in the later poems. On the other
hand, Swinburne’s deliberate attempt at acquiring some-
thing of Keats’s mastery over the vocabulary—especially
over adjectives and past-participle compounds, was not in
vain and seems to have permanently affected his style.

A radical dissimilarity in the inspiration and sensibility of
the two poets precludes, however, a more intimate influence;
and all the many discordances in style, diction or metre
which have been noticed are nothing but signs and conse-
quences of this greater difference.

IV.—SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

SNM

Awovs' the many unpublished manuscripts in Swin-
burne’s hand which Mr. T. J. Wise generously allowed
me to examine in the course of the years 1924-6, my
attention was immediately attracted by a set of 12 quarto
leaves, closely written over, evidently torn from a student’s

1 Compare also Swinburne’s Spring with Keats’s Autumn (Atalanta,
Chorus I, and Ode on Autumn).
81 F

--- PAGE 79 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

notebook. The manuscript had already been examined by
Sir Edmund Gosse who had at once identified it as an
‘attempt to continue and finish Keats’s Hyperion’ and
diagnosed an acute ‘case of study by imitation’. Having
studied the ‘case’ carefully, I came to the conclusion that this
fragment presented a very high interest from the point of
view of the development of Swinburne’s style; that, as an
imitative poem, it was a real success; and that, considered
independently as an original work composed by Swinburne
at the age of 22, it contained nothing which could impair
or lessen his fame as a poet; while it contained much which
would help us to understand the patience and craftsmanship
which he allied to the gift of his high inspiration.

A. THE MANUSCRIPT DESCRIBED

The holograph manuscript extends to 12 leaves! of
white ruled paper, quarto size, measuring 7% x 6% inches,
written over on both sides. ‘The watermarks are: ‘Edwin
Smith’, ‘Fellows’, ‘1846’, ‘1849’, and the figure of an armed
Britannia seated in her throne.

Twenty-three pages out of twenty-four (pp. 1b—12b) are
occupied by the imitation of Keats’s Hyperion. The poem
includes two books. The first book consists of 295 lines,
but the original numbering (in Swinburne’s hand) is 315;
the 3rd line is numbered 20 and the fragment would seem
to begin with the 18th line, but the recto of the first leaf

1 These leaves formed a portion of a volume of faintly-ruled paper, the
contents of which included two college exercises and three poems; Epicurus,
a verse translation from /Eschylus’ Agamemnon (lines 1035-55), and a
‘chorus’ after the manner of Shelley.

82

--- PAGE 80 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

(1a) is blank and the poem begins at the top of the page;
besides the last three lines of the First Book (page 8a) are
numbered 310-315; it is, therefore, very probable that
the poem is complete as it stands, and that no more of it
was ever written; but Swinburne, for some cause or other,
numbered the lines inaccurately. The second book, whose
lines are not numbered, includes 212 lines. The writing
is remarkably clear throughout; the manuscript must be a
fair copy.

In the printed text an effort has been made to reproduce
the general aspect of the manuscript as exactly as possible;
the number of each page of the manuscript is given
between brackets on the left side of each page; the water-
mark and size of each leaf are given on the right-hand
side. In the first book Swinburne’s numbering of the
lines is given on the right side of the sheet, and the
correct numbering appears, duly bracketed, on the left.
The foot-notes point to parallels in the diction of Keats,
etc., and occasionally describe the peculiarities of the
manuscript.

B. DATE OF COMPOSITION

At first, 1858 or 1857 was suggested as a possible date
for the composition of the manuscript. The watermarks
are here of no use, as is the case with most quarto leaves
used by Swinburne during his University career. The
conjecture 1858 seemed probable, as another manuscript
(First Love) which has the same appearance is also attributed
to this period. But we possess another clue which enables
us to date the manuscript with a fair degree of certainty.

83

--- PAGE 81 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Scrawled off in the blank space at the top of some of the
pages (see p. 3b, etc.) are lines and prose Speeches from the
ast play which Swinburne composed at Oxford, The Loyal
Servant: the names of the characters and the identity of the
words make this quite clear. The Loyal Servant, accord-
ing to Mr. Wise’s verdict, was composed in the winter
of 1859-60.3

And as the jottings on the pages of the manuscript all
refer to one of the first scenes of the first Act, one can safely
assert that Swinburne had just finished his imitation of
Keats when he began to write his play at the close of 1859
or the beginning of 1860. He was then 22 years of age.?

C. THE POEM PROBABLY MEANT AS A PROSODIC EXERCISE

Swinburne’s Hyperion (as it may conveniently—though
somewhat inaccurately—be called) is not, as one might be
tempted to describe it, an attempt at continuing and finish-
ing Keats’s poem. ‘The subject treated is substantially the
same—though with important minor differences—and the
diction is so clearly based upon that of Keats that one could
not hesitate a single second in detecting the relationship,

1 have no doubt that Mr. Wise is absolutely right on this point. But
in that case, of course, the play cannot have been composed ‘soon after
Swinburne left college’, as Swinburne was still residing at Oxford in the
spring of 1860. See 4 Swinburne Library. The Loyal Servant (1859-60).

2 Swinburne must have finished or interrupted his imitation of Hyperion
when he went to Navestock in January, 1860. Stubbs then began to coach
him for his degree, and, although he found means to write off his poem on
the Death of Sir Fohn Franklin ‘at two seatings’, he had not much leisure
for poetry. (See my Feunesse de Swinburne, Chapter IV: Oxford.)

84

--- PAGE 82 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

even though the name of Zeus were changed to that of
Mazzini or Victor Hugo, and that of Napoleon III sub-
stituted for Saturn or Porphyrion. But Swinburne simply
retells in a somewhat different manner what Keats had more
amply developed, and he does not carry the story much
further than where Keats broke off. Swinburne is no
Chapman to Keats’s Marlowe, and—tempting though the
conjecture might be—this is no case of a younger poetic
genius trying to surpass one of his elders by a bold attempt
at finishing off a fragment of recognized beauty on the same
scale and with the same felicity of hand. In fact there pre-
vails some mystery as to what was Swinburne’s purpose when
he undertook to retell a story which had already been told
twice by Keats. True, Swinburne may not have known ‘The
Fall of Hyperion’; but he probably knew it; for it had been
published by R. Monckton-Milnes in 1857, and though the
book was scarce and intended for private circulation only,
Swinburne might very well have seen it somewhere at
Oxford. Then why should Swinburne begin his poem in
medias res with what is professedly the 18th line and number
the lines erroneously at the end of the first book? One
shudders at the thought that Swinburne prompted by some
evil spirit and the consciousness of his own powers, might
have conceived this poem as a supreme mystification—in the
hope of passing it upon the literary world as a third draft
or recast of Keats’s much rewritten Hyperion—miraculously
preserved in some unexplained manner. Fortunately the
truth is likely to be of a purer and simpler nature. We
know that Swinburne was at this period (1857-60) under-
going various literary influences. Far from being inspired
by the pride and self-reliance of genius, he had serious

85

--- PAGE 83 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

doubts about his own powers! He was decided anyhow
not to take any risks and, before he would resolutely launch
on the sea of some great original work, to learn patiently his
business as a poet, gain all he could from the study and sus-
tained imitation of recognized models, and perhaps prove to
himself that he could equal or surpass them in their own
field. Many of these imitations or prosodic exercises are
still extant; we may mention, among others, his imitations
from: the Elizabethan dramatists, the Sonnets of Shake-
speare, Browning’s Men and Women, ‘Tennyson’s In
Memoriam, Arnold’s Empedocles, the old Scottish Ballads,
the poems of Morris and Rossetti, Shelley’s lyrical poems,
Baudelaire, and, in prose, Boccaccio, the old French
Chroniclers, Balzac, etc., etc. Most of these exercises
were conceived and executed in a very modest and matter-
of-fact spirit—merely to acquire practice, art and facility.
It is, therefore, highly probable that Swinburne’s attention
Was called to Hyperion by Monckton-Milnes’s publication
of the alleged ‘first version’, and that he was stung into
emulation by the instance afforded by Keats himself. With
the two versions in front of him, he deliberately set to repro-
duce Keats’s style in its highest form, possibly with the
secret hope of improving upon it. ‘Swinburne’s Hyperion’
is, therefore, one of the many imitations on which he was then
engaged. Let us not forget that the poem was written in a
student’s notebook. It is now high time for us to examine

1 In reperusing my cantos [Queen Yseu/t] 1 think they are too imperfect,
feeble and unfinished to publish for a year or two. A thorough rewriting
would be good for some of them to prevent a monotony of tone... They
(Morris, etc.] all, however, praise the poem far more than I (seriously speak-
ing) believe it deserves.’ (Letter to Nichol, December 13th, 1857.)

86

--- PAGE 84 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

these students’ notes and find out whether they are worthy
of the master whose golden lectures inspired them.

D. ‘SWINBURNE’S HYPERION’: DICTION AND METRE
1. The imitation of Keats

I do not think that it can be denied that Swinburne’s
experiment was on the whole quite successful from the point
of view of diction and metre. He had recently steeped
himself in Keatsian poetry, and more particularly in
Hyperion, and in this wonderful memory of his there still
lingered phrases and cadences from the poem which he
had selected as a model.

This is chiefly noticeable from the point of view of the
vocabulary, and my foot-notes to the poem are the best
commentary on this point. They show that Swinburne has
made use of some words (chiefly adjectives) which are
typically Keatsian, and that some of the most striking phrases
in Hyperion are faithfully reproduced; among these are:
mazy dance, silence pale, primeval, starry dews, joyous, balm,
calm, faint visions, cloudy, god-sophist, serene, sunny, lucent,
slumbrous, unsceptred, bastioned, orbed, thorny, icy, sphered,
Jiery, luxurious, delicious, etc. It is more particularly Keats’s
unrivalled boldness and felicity in coining past-participle
compounds, which seems to have attracted Swinburne;
and he appears to have revelled in this process of word-
formation. Some of his compounds are bodily taken from
Keats: for instance the immortal full-throated, bright-eyed,
etc. Swinburne more commonly uses one part only of the
Keatsian compounds and tacks on to it a new word as
first or second element. This is the case with such com-

87

--- PAGE 85 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

pounds as: shick-Jeaved, balm-breathed, deep-thoughted, rocky-
based, thunder-throated, hard-thoughted. But the imitation is
generally more subtle, and Swinburne creates new com-
pounds according to the rules laid down by the master.
e is generally very successful in his formations, perhaps
too successful; for the obvious delight which he takes in the
experiment blinds him to a certain sense of measure and
proportion, which never forsook Keats entirely and which
remains after all his chief affinity to the spirit of classical art.
Keats, in his Hyperion, which numbers 883 lines, has only 18
past-participle compounds; while Swinburne, in a poem of
507 lines only, manages to cram 27 words of this category.
The point is important, and the comparison between the
compounds of the two poets not lacking in interest.

Keats:
gray-haired low-ebbed
quick-voiced firm-based
self-hid far-foamed
prison-bound golden-feathered
sky-engendered half-glutted
palm-shaded open-eyed
tiger-passioned faint-lipped
lion-thoughted dark-stemmed
spirit-leaved calm-throated.
Swinburne:
jag-toothed balm-breathed — war-vext
cloud-conceived  sunny-bosomed _ cloud-wreathed
sea-blasted self-treated thought-furrowed
cloudy-skirted storm-chafed well-framed

88

--- PAGE 86 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

silence-hallowed _rich-curled hight-battled
far-sphered sea-built rock-fixt
bright-eyed deep-woven thunder-throated
music-tranced war-wrinkled hard-thoughted
full-throated deep-thoughted _lightning-blasted.

The above list is invaluable to a student of Swinburne’s
language, as it shows clearly the origin of a tendency which
was to affect his diction permanently; } in fact some of these
compounds, as for instance the famous thunder-throated
passed into his style—Keats’s words and harmonies
Swinburne will soon forget; but his compounds he will
always remember.

The other compounds (noun + noun; noun + present-
participle) are far less significant: god-sophist, giant-race,
slow-heaving, sin-breathing, calm-travelling recall similar
expressions in Hyperion (gtant-race, lawn-shading, etc.); but
compounds like a//-nurturing, all-distinctive, etc., introduce
a Shelleyan element; the jag-toothed at the beginning of the
poem also seems to owe its origin to Shelley.

From the point of view of metre, it is remarkable how
Swinburne has, in places, contrived to reproduce the slow
or static effects of Keats’s poetry. This he generally obtains
by compounds, by -y, -ies, or -ing, ings terminations, and by
a liberal use of the word ‘calm’. In such passages as:

‘He spoke and calm amid the breathless hush
Grey Saturn rising spake with dreamy looks
Where dim Philosophy slept vision’d faint’

1 See Gunnar Serner’s remarks on Swinburne’s past-participle compounds:

the lists he compiled seemed interminable, and he had great difficulty in
selecting 100 cases as more characteristic. .

89

--- PAGE 87 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

or:
‘So having said, back to his cloudy dreams
Musing he dropt, and ceasing husht the air
That trembled yet melodiously and full
With the calm awful music of his words’

Swinburne has certainly succeeded in curbing the wild
gallop of his verse to the serene dignity of Keats’s prosody.

2. The Miltonic Element

Swinburne’s acute critical sense is one of the most remark-
able features of his genius; an ‘imperfect critic’? he may
well be, but I think that no other real poet has ever possessed
so many of the qualities which tend to make a satisfactory
critic. His chief merit is, of course, his keen sensitiveness
to poetical influences, and he had no difficulty in perceiving
in Keats’s Hyperion a sustained attempt at reproducing
Milton’s style and manner. This he very clearly asserted
in his article on Keats (composed 1882):

‘The triumph of Hyperion is as nearly complete as the
failure of Endymion; yet Keats never gave such proof of a
manly devotion and rational sense of duty to his art as in his
resolution to leave this great poem unfinished . . . on the
solid and reasonable ground that a Miltonic study had some-
thing in its very scheme and nature too artificial, too
studious of a foreign inHuence, to be carried on and carried
out at such length as was implied by his original design.
The faculty of assimilation as distinguished from imitation,
than which there can be nosurer or stronger sign of strong

1 For other instances, see Preface to this volume, p. 13.
2T. S. Eliot: The Sacred Wood.
go

--- PAGE 88 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

and sure original genius, is not more evident in the most
Miltonic passage of the revised Hyperion 1 than in the most
Shakespearian passage of [his] unrevised tragedy.’

Swinburne’s critical sensitiveness was no less keen and
subtle at 22 than it was at 45; keener and subtler it may
well have been Milton’s influence on Hyperion was to
him self-evident, and he realized that through Keats he
would have to imitate Paradise Lost. Hence it is that
Swinburne’s Hyperion supplies us also with a remarkable
pastiche of Milton’s style.

(a) Swinburne and Milton. ‘The references to Milton the
poet are exceedingly scarce in the writings of Swinburne;
and were it not for some disappointing pages in his Short
Notes on English Poets (1880) we should be rather in the dark
as to his real opinion. The fact is, that Swinburne must
have first read Milton at a very early age (probably at Eton,
in the Aldine Poets) and felt at once absolutely and com-
pletely in sympathy with him. For on Milton’s public and
private character he never tired to lavish the most unstinted
praise; he ranked him with Landor, Hugo, and Mazzini;
Milton stood in his eyes for an ideal that he long cherished
—that of republican England; and he would look back with
regret to the days of

‘Milton’s white republic undefiled
That might endure so few fleet years on earth’®

1 Swinburne believed the Fa//of Hyperion to be a first draft. See below.

2 See his attitude to the works of Landor, Browning, Fitzgerald, etc., and
ata still earlier period his judgment on Falconer’s Shipwreck (cf. La Feunesse
de Swinburne, La Vie; ch. III: Eton).

3 Ode on the Centenary of W.8. Landor.

gI

--- PAGE 89 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

One action in Milton’s life struck him as particularly
admirable: the publication of his Sonnet on the Massacres
of Piedmont,

... ‘when death
Shrank and Rome’s bloodhound cowered at Milton’s
breath’

A series of parallels with Dante, Mazzini and Cromwell
reveal a profound admiration for Milton’s personality.
But what Swinburne precisely thought of the poet and the
writer is not so easy to establish. His admiration for
Comus was limited and he defines it

‘the faultless but scentless reproduction of a rose in academic
wax for the admiration and imitation of such craftsmen as
must confine their ambition to the laurels of a college and
the plaudits of a school’?

The pamphlets he disliked, and found ‘zo good sense in
them’? But he gladly acquitted Milton of any charge in
connection with his relentless attacks on the dead king; for
hate is a sacred feeling for Swinburne and ‘ill it would be,
abominable and absurd if the piteous and unpitied end of
[a pontiff or an emperor] were to be held as expiation
sufficient to reverse the branding judgment or silence the
damning voice of history or of poetry’* But for the poet
of the Paradises, for

1 Sonnets on Elizabethan Poets: Epilogue.

2 Age of Shakespeare: ‘Beaumont and Fletcher’.

3 Article on Shelley: Chambers’s Cyclopedia of Literature.
4 Short Notes on English Poets (1880).

92

--- PAGE 90 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS
‘Milton, with crowns from Eden on his brow’!

Swinburne has nothing but praise. The ‘Calvinistic’
theology of the poems does not seem to jar too much upon
his opinions and while depreciating Christianism as a source
of inspiration, he seems to tolerate in Milton what he re-
jects with loathing in Dante. Swinburne must have felt ob-
scurely that, after all, there was in Milton’s theology far
less orthodoxy, and far more of the principle of liberty as
he understood it, than was commonly believed.2 Milton’s
alleged preference for Paradise Regained he understood and
defended; Samson Agonistes he considered as its author’s
masterpiece.

The article on Milton—a review of W. M. Rossetti’s
Lives of Famous Poets—is perfunctory and disappointing;
Swinburne writes too much about the man, and too little
about the works. Yet this must not be taken as implying
any reticence on Swinburne’s part; he felt ‘adoration’ for
Milton’s personality; he was at one with him in the sphere
of political ideals, the religious question was no insuperable
bar, and of course he was highly sensitive to the artistic
beauty of the blank verse which Milton had adopted from
Marlowe Consequently Swinburne had very little to say
about Milton. Perhaps, too, he realized that Milton’s work
was supreme but limited as an artistic achievement, and that
his merits and greatness as a poet were so easy to define and
impossible to deny that little room was left for commentary.

1 Transfiguration (1881) included in Astrophel.

%See D. Saurat, Milton, Man and Thinker, pp. 123, 125 and 181-92;
compare with Swinburne’s On Liberty and Loyalty.

® This was Swinburne’s own theory. See Téree Plays of Shakespeare,
Pp 79 etc,

93

--- PAGE 91 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Yet—if we except Shelley—there is no other English
poet to which Swinburne’s poetic works have a stronger
general likeness. The poem I publish to-day will help to
bear out what has already been often remarked: Milton’s
and Swinburne’s styles have in common their wealth of
rhetoricaleffects and classical constructionsor reminiscences:
their inspirations are conspicuous for their strength and the
amazing violence of their expression. The difference is, of
course, that Milton’s greatest achievements are in blank
verse; and the prosody of Swinburne’s tragedies has nothing
to do with Milton. But Swinburne adopted the metre of
the Hymn on the Nativity in his first Ode to Victor Hugo
(1866); his iambics often recall Milton’s; Lycidas has an
obvious connection with an ‘irregular Ode’ like Ox the
Cliffs; and last, but not least, the Swinburnian sonnet strikes
me as being strictly modelled on Milton. After a few
experiments Swinburne rejected the style of Shakespeare and
of Rossetti. And his great definite achievements in that
form (the sonnets of the Dirae, on Carlyle, and on Russia
—which are masterpieces) are purely Miltonic in their
irregular pauses, the length of the periods which never stops
at the end of quatrains or tercets, but is drawn out to the full
length of the poem, and the large, rhetorical resonance of
their antithetic lines.

(4) Miltonic influence on ‘Swinburne’s Hyperion’. This
influence is glaring to any but a very casual reader; even
after a deep and independent study of Keats’s Hyperion.
We are here only concerned with the diction and the metre.
But numerous parallels are easily supplied.

1 Compare the sonnets on Tetharchodon with Swinburne’s In Sepulcretis
(Post Mortem); On the Massacre in Piedmont with the Dirae, etc.

94

--- PAGE 92 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

The vocabulary offers some striking instances (most of
which are recorded in the foot-notes). It would be difficult
to mistake the origin of such words as: incumbent, ambrosial,
corrosive, stony, grisly, tempestuous, Melibaean, resounding,
etc. And many less characteristic words (majestic, gigantic,
headlong, landskip, tropic, brood, resounding, vainglorious, etc.)
can also be quoted as circumstantial evidence when it is
noted that practically all of them occur in the first two books
of Paradise Lost and are used more or less in the same
manner,

But it is not in the province of vocabulary that Milton’s
influence is most clearly felt; Swinburne knew exactly what
he was to expect from tach of the models he had selected;
he did not come to Milton as to a great master of vocabulary
and verbal harmonies; but as to a lusty wielder of perfect
classical sentences, a recognized authority in the art of
poetic and grammatical structure—for metre as well as
syntax in the case of Milton can scarcely be considered
separately. In this, of course, Swinburne only followed in
the tracks of Keats, but we feel that he followed with more
energy. | Professor de Sélincourt has noted the Miltonic
peculiarities which are reproduced in Keats’s style; most of
these tests can be successfully applied to Swinburne’s poem:

Elliptical construction:

. . and new freedom quafft

Delightful, "such the j joy of pain releast!’ (IL, 180)
‘Nor of his noble wisdom good to him’ (II, 78)
‘Thence godlike life’ (II, 67)

1 For the connection between the theme of Paradise Lost and that of
Swindburne’s Hyperion, see below.

95

--- PAGE 93 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION
also:
‘such the fell power of Tartarus’ (II, 201)—‘tho’ with their
wiser king reluctant’ (II, 210), etc.
Redundancies:
‘this not knowing, that...’ (I, 110)
‘our own words . . . both what we speak or do’ (II, 102)
Classical constructions:

‘what strength ... jars back’ (I, 263)—‘slew and releast
him fettered’ (II, 5 5)—‘thus shamed and grovelling beneath
an infant’s arm’ (II, 103)—‘for such slight cause alleged’
(II, 141)—‘though fallen’ (II, 163)—‘such the joy of pain
released’ (II, 180)—‘whom following we may reign’ (I, 66).

Repetitions: :

‘Thro’ all the circling universe of life

. +. One power ... circles ever’ (I, 78, 80)
‘, .. now choose

Fallen powers, for no other choice is left’ (I, 183)

‘O Titans well ye have devised...

. . . but not enough devised’ (II, 91)

‘Serene, above the murmuring din of earth

Nor else serene nor mighty’ (I, 248)

‘Up thro’ the rich-curled smoke of incenst shrines?
Who bows and trembles at our awful shrines’ (I. 192~3)
Inversions:

stars incumbent, night ambrosial, sudden melody full throated,
alleys... odorous, bolts inaudible, race ancestral, brow

96

--- PAGE 94 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

majestic, pendent fruits ambrosial, lips and exes libidinous, tread
elastic, their wiser king reluctant, etc., etc.

Other more striking similarities, which amount to direct
reminiscences or identity of phrases, are either recorded in
the foot-notes or discussed below.

This impression of a very close and efficient Miltonic
imitation is further strengthened if we consider the metre.
Swinburne has borrowed Milton’s frequent elision of a
syllable when a juxtaposition of vowels occurs:

‘From Bacchus’ bright locks the ivy cluster’d fell.’

This, though common enough in most modern poets, is
exceptional in Keats. Some other elisions! are more
typically Miltonic:

‘Of all the giant race and strongest of limb’

‘With lavish hand out-poured; such the fell power’
‘Reign crowned by war. Ye have heard my sentence gods’
“Yet see I yet a higher and wiser way’

and also the disyllabic pronunciation of such names as
Pentheus, Tityus, and the trisyllabic ‘tempestuous’:

‘Stifled his voice and their tempestuous din’ (II, 75)
just as in Milton:

‘With floods and whirlwinds of tempestuous fire.’
: (Paradise Lost, 1, 77)

This practice of apostrophation or occasional use of a

1 The instances which follow are, according to Saintsbury, not so much
cases of ‘elision’ as of introduction of a trisyllabic foot.

97 9

--- PAGE 95 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

trisyllabic foot is quite uncommon in Keats, even in
Hyperion.

As Keats was very consciously following Milton he
refrained from the frequent use of redundant syllables at the
end of lines, a practice which was a feature of his earlier
poems. Yet he broke this self-imposed rule in two or three
very significant instances:

‘Hyperion from the peak loud answered Saturn
... though all the gods
Gave from their hollow throats the name of Saturn’
(Hyperion, II, 380)
and:

‘Die into life, so young Apollo anguish’d’
(Hyperion, III, 130)

But Swinburne adheres strictly to Milton’s principle and the
endings of his lines are conspicuous throughout for their
strength and sonority.

It is, however, in the general structure and movement
of the verse that Swinburne’s greater fidelity to Milton
appears. His pauses are strong and varied, and he succeeds
several times in constructing a purely Miltonic sentence, in
which the sense ‘is drawn out from one verse into another’
so as to form, in Saintsbury’s words, ‘a verse paragraph’.
This, Keats never really achieves, or perhaps cares to achieve.
But Swinburne’s success is obvious or can be made so when
we compare a sentence like:

“... behold
Our brethren here, by us in counsel lost,
Lie undelivered, groaning in their bonds:
98

--- PAGE 96 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

Typhceus here,’ the mightiest Titan, writhes
Upon a bed of thorny pain and fire

And groans from his deep chest reluctant flame
Fruitless; here Tityus the fell vulture tears
Pressing with ponderous bulk the groaning soil;
There Tantalus rackt by devouring thirst

And keen-edged hunger, parches in the stream,
Panting, and views the cool dark wave beneath,
And pendent fruits ambrosial; there another
Tied on the sharp rim of that ragged wheel
That grinds thro’ him to the earth, then jarring whirls
Mangled aloft; and this by newer gods

Done, while we sleep or strive in fruitless war’

with Milton’s:

‘Thus Satan talking to his nearest mate
With head uplift above the wave, and eyes
That sparkling blazed; his other parts besides
Prone on the flood, extended long and large,
Lay floating many a rood, in bulk as huge
As whom the fables name of monstrous size,
Titanian, or earth-born, that warr’d on Jove;
Briareus or Typhon, whom the den

By ancient Tarsus held; or that sea-beast
Leviathan, which God of all his works
Created hugest that swim th’ Ocean stream

So stretch’d out huge in length the archfiend lay
Chain’d on the burning lake’, etc.1
(Paradise Lost, 1, 191, etc.)
1 For further instances, see Preface, p. 14.

99

--- PAGE 97 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

The relation is obvious. And Swinburne, like Milton,
contrives by the mere force of syntax (expressing a logical
sequence of ideas) to inspire his verse with an impulse and
a rapidity of motion which are quite unknown to Keats’s
prosody.

One, in fact, is inclined to wonder whether some passages
in Swinburne’s poem (e.g. II, 179-212) are not even more
Miltonic than anything Milton ever wrote; just as, in other
passages, some features of Keats’s style are unduly exagger-
ated., One thing, however, is certain; Swinburne’s poem
is far more Miltonic than Keats’s Hyperion; the dependence
of the latter poem to Paradise Lost has, I think, been over-
rated (Keats being the first to attach too much importance
to the influence he was conscious of having undergone);
but Swinburne’s Hyperion is perhaps more Miltonic than
Keatsian. And this is after all quite_natural. Having
detected Milton’s influence in Keats’s verse, and having
perhaps exaggerated it, Swinburne thought that by imitat-
ing Milton he would be sure to imitate Keats; instead of
tying to reproduce the former’s style through an imitation
of the latter, he went directly to Milton and borrowed
straight from him some of his most glaring phrases and
constructions. Keats’s task was far simpler; he had to
yield to the spell of Milton's influence which was uncon-
sciously blended with the inner tendencies of his own
genius: But Swinburne had to reconcile two different and
external inspirations, and probably to check his own; the
attempt was far more artificial, and quite naturally he was
led to overdo the manner of his two models. But this was
excellent as a prosodic exercise and rather served than
hindered his purpose. And, moreover, Swinburne has left

100

--- PAGE 98 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

us some passages in which he has achieved the amazing feat
of beating both Keats and Milton at their own game.

3. The Swinburnian element

But of course while trying to mix these two different
colours on his palette, it was impossible for Swinburne to
have completely washed away the tints of his own original
inspiration. And it is particularly interesting to notice
that at this early period, Swinburne had already created a
style and a manner ? and was only waiting until he could be
satisfied that it was good enough for his purpose.

The mark of his individuality appears by glimpses in the
diction of the poem; words like immemorial, unfathomable,
inaudible, petrifying, convulsive, libidinous, etc., are properly
neither Keatsian nor Miltonic and have a distinct Swin-
burnian ring.

On the other hand, the metre of the poem as well as the
structure of the sentences not seldom reveal the hand of a
third poet; in passages when Swinburne is not trying to
reproduce one model in particular, we find that the speed
and rhythm of the metre gradually increases, while a greater
number of short grinding verbs appear as so many sinews
on the contracted limbs of the lines. It is interesting to
compare the following instances with the Keatsian lines
quoted above:

‘a sudden clangour yelled
From all the host, harsh braying, as the roar
Of charging trumpets on the battle’s verge
1 See Preface to this volume.

9 See Ode to Mazxzini (1857) and Temple of Fanus (1857). .
Iol -

--- PAGE 99 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

When shrieks the air with shafts, and clashes round
With clarions’

or:

‘and thus he spoke
With voice to quell the thunder and make shrink
Its bolts inaudible, and hand to hurl
The baffled lightning strong, or dash down towers’, 1

Conclusions

These three elements go to the making of the poem, but
it should be remembered that the first two are by far the
most important, and that on the whole Swinburne’s success
as an imitator is considerable. If we had to attempt a
close determination of the different styles, we might say that
after a Miltonic opening, the poem becomes Keatsian as far
as page 44; pages sa—7a are on the whole Miltonic; 74 and
8a are distinctly in the style of Keats; 82-90 are also chiefly
reminiscent of Keats; and the rest of the poem (104-124)
recalls Milton very closely; while Swinburnian touches can
here and there be noted.

E. ‘SWINBURNE’S HYPERION’: THE INSPIRATION

1. The story
The course of events as described in Swinburne’s Hyperion
can be thus briefly summarized.
Book J.—The poem opens with a description of hell and
the torments experienced by the fallen Titans: Ixion,

” 1 For further instances, see Preface, pp. 15-16.
102

--- PAGE 100 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

Pentheus, etc. [1-31]; Atlas laments their fate and calls
on someone wiser than himself to advise them [32-66].
Saturn’s speech: life and destiny are inseparable and must
be both accepted [67-120]. Oceanus preaches submission
to existing circumstances [121-54]. _Cceus advises war
and is cheered by the Titans [155-92]. The Olympians
are seized with terror in spite of Zeus’ and Pallas’ efforts
[193-315] «1 decoccig she cies

Book IJ.—The Titans are still discussing the situation:
Porphyrion violently attacks Zeus (1-40). Prometheus
unsuccessfully recommends craft and intellectual triumph
(41-80). Rheetus’ speech: he advises the immediate
release of the tortured Titans as a means to increase their
number (81-155). The tormented ones are delivered and
the great army sallies forth in good marching order [156~
212].

2. Keatsian Sources

@) ‘Hyperion’ and its recast. The story is, on the whole,
that of Keats’s Hyperion. It should be noted that it is based
on the fragment printed in 1820, and not at all on the
recast which is known nowadays as The Fall of Hyperion.
This recast was first printed for private circulation by R.
Monckton-Milnes in 18 56, and it is possible that Swinburne
may have seen it in this form; indeed it must have been this
publication which called back Swinburne’s attention to the
poem he had first read at Eton. But the Fa// was then
generally considered as a first draft and this view was held
by critics as late as 1887, when it was exposed as a fallacy
by Sidney Colvin When Swinburne wrote in 1882:

1 See Professor de Sélincourt: Notes on the Fa// of Hyperion.
103

--- PAGE 101 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

‘Fortified and purified as [Hyperion] had been on a first
revision when much introductory allegory and much tenta-
tive effusion of sonorous and superfluous verse had been
rigorously clipped down or pruned away, it could not long
have retained spirit enough to support or inform the
shadowy body of a subject so little charged with tangible
significance,”

it is obvious that he considered the Fa// as a first draft, and
Hyperion asarecast.._ It stands to reason that, in a prosodic
exercise, Swinburne would concentrate his attention on
what he thought to be the later and more polished version
of Keats’s epic. My foot-notes give accordingly very few
references to the Fa//; but I have quoted from it whenever
it seemed to offer a striking parallel, as it is possible that
Swinburne had already seen it.

(6) Swinburne’s and Keats's mythologies compared. If we
compare the first version of Hyperion with that of Swinburne
we find that the outline is on the whole similar: the Titans’
desire to revolt, the conciliatory speeches of Oceanus and
Saturn, Enceladus’ call to arms, and the final decision to
rebel have all their equivalents in Swinburne. But we are
at once struck by surprising differences: (1) First we must
mention the absence of the central figure of Hyperion.
Swinburne might have introduced him later in the poem, but
it seems more probable that he deliberately set him aside.
He does not seem to have realized the vital importance of
Hyperion in Keats’s conception; he was to write in 1882

that the poem ‘could not long have retained spirit to

1 Curiously enough, this sentence has remained uncorrected to this day
through the successive editions of the Encyclopedia Britannica. ‘

104, :

--- PAGE 102 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

support or inform the shadowy body of a subject so little
charged with tangible significance’, He was apparently
Blind to the symbelical meaning of Hyperion’s struggle with
Apollo and the presumed victory of the latter. (2) Swin-
burne carries the story a little further than Keats; for the
concluding lines of his poem show the Titanic army leaving
hell to march against Olympus, while Keats breaks off
before they can take any action. (3) Swinburne, while
preserving many of Keats’s Titans, has completely sup-
ressed the Titanesses. (4) The names of Swinburne’s

itans do not on the whole correspond with those men-
tioned _in Hyperion.

Keats quotes: Saturn, Thea, Hyperion, Czlus, Ixion,
Coeus, Gyges, Briareus, Typhon, Dolor, Porphyrion,
Mnemosyne, Creus, Sapetus, Cottus, Caf, Tellus, Asia,
Enceladus, Atlas, Phorcus, Oceanus, Thetys, Clymene,
Themis and Ops.

Of these Swinburne adopts seven: Atlas, Saturn, Cceus,
Porphyrion, Typhon (or Typhaeus), Oceanus and Themis.
The rest he dismisses and introduces instead: Pen-
theus, Ixion, Prometheus, Rheetus, Tityus, Tantalus,

Sisyphus.

Reats’s classical sources were Chapman’s translations
(from Homer and Hesiod), Ovid, Ronsard and Milton, and
chiefly Lempriére’s dictionary for, if I may differ from
Professor de Sélincourt, I thirfk it obvious that, once he
had chosen his theme, Keats would naturally turn to his
dictionary in order to get the details he wanted and set up
the frame of his story. But Swinburne was not dependent
on Keats for matters of classical scholarship.

105

--- PAGE 103 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

3. Classical Sources

The lists I have quoted make it plain that Swinburne
made use of other sources. ‘These seem to be two passages
from Ovid and Horace: +

Ovid in the Metamorphoses (IV, 445-64) supplies the
names of Tityus, Tantalus, Sisyphus and Ixion, who are
described as Giants and whose tortures are depicted.

Horace (Odes, ITI, 4) gives us a still fuller list including
the unexpected Rhoetus for whose presence among the
Titans Swinburne seems to have no other authority than
this passage:

... ‘Scimus ut impios
Titanas immanemque turmam
Fulmine sustulerit caduco,
Qui terram inertem, qui mare temperat
Ventosum, et urbes, regnaque tristia;
Divosque mortalesque turbas
Imperio regit unus aequo.
Magnun illa terrorem intulerat Jovi
Fidens juventus horrida brachiis,
Fratresque tendentes opaco
Pelion imposuisse Olympo.
Sed quid Typhceus, et validus Mimas
Aut quid minaci Porphyrion statu,
Quid Rheetus evulsisque truncis

1 Swinburne knew, of course, the references in the Odyssey and espe-
cially those in Hesiod’s Theogony. The Poete Greci, which was the
Eton text-book in Swinburne’s days and which the poet knew intimately
has a long extract from the Theogony describing precisely the Titans’ _war
against Zeus (line 725, etc.). But these sources he does not seem to have
used here.

106

--- PAGE 104 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

Enceladus jaculator audax,
Contra sonantem Palladis aegida
Possent ruentes? Hinc avidus stetit

Vulcanus; hinc matrona Juno; et
Nunquam humeris positurus arcum.
Qui rore puro Castaliz lavit
rines solutos, qui Lycie tenet
Dumeta natalemque sylvam,
Delius et Patareus Apollo.
Vis consili expers mole ruit sua:
Vim temperatam di quoque provehunt
In majus; idem odere vires
Omnes nefas animo moventes.
Testis mearum centimanus Gyges
Sententiarum, notus et integrae
Tentator Orion Diane,

Virginea domitus sagitta.
Injecta monstris terra dolet suis,
Meretque partus fulmine luridum

Missos ad Orcum; nec peredit

Impositam celer ignis Atnam:
Incontinentis nec Tityi jecur
Relinquit ales, nequitiae additus

Custos: amatorem trecente

Pirithoum cohibent catenz.’

But Pentheus remains unaccounted for and does not

seem to have ever been reckoned among the Titans.

presence of Agave’s unfortunate victim must be a freak
of Swinburne’s imagination.

Olympian panic is quite in the classical tradition.

107

Pallas’ attitude during the

--- PAGE 105 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION '

4. Miltnic parallels

“It was observed by Keats himself that the theme of
his Hyperion had a great similarity with that of the first
two books of Paradise Lost. But when we compare Swin-
burne’s version with Milton’s poem, what was merely a
general likeness of outline becomes a remarkable parallelism
in structure and detail:

The description of hell at the beginning of the poem
recalls Milton’s in Paradise Lost, 1, 50-81.

The speeches of Atlas, Coeus, Porphyrion and Rheetus
have their parallel in the speech of Moloch (Paradise Lost,
II, 51-105: ‘My sentence is for open war’, etc.).

On the other hand, the words of Saturn, Oceanus and
Prometheus have to a certain extent their counterpart in the
words of Belial (Paradise Lost, 11, 119-225).

The long architectural metaphor at the end of the first
book is inspired from Hyperion, but also reminds one of the
descriptions of Pandemonium:

‘Built like a Temple, where Pilasters round
Were set, and Doric pillars overlaid
With golden architrave.’
(Paradise Lost, 1, 710-30)

The tortured Titans are released from their pains in much
the same way as the fallen angels fly from the surface of the
burning lake at the call of their Prince’s voice (Paradise
Lost, 1, 192-340).

The description of the Titanic army is intensely Miltonic.
It seems to be a mere transposition from Paradise Lost, II,
514, 520, when

108

--- PAGE 106 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

‘of this Session ended they bid cry
With trumpets regal sound the great result’,

and from Paradise Lost, 1, 530-71, when

‘thronging Helms
Appear’d and serried shields in thick array
Of depth immeasurable’.

Finally, the reference to the revolving gates of hell is
almost certainly a reminiscence from Satan’s escape through
the complicity of Sin and Death (Paradise Lost, 11, 871-

89).2

5. The Swinburnian element

It is, perhaps, unfair to give too much attention to the
inner inspiration of a poem which was conceived by Swin-
burne merely as a prosodic exercise. It may be argued that
the form here is everything and that the poet did not give
the slightest thought to the matter of his verse. But I am
strongly tempted to consider that this was not Swinburne’s
attitude.

It has been noted that by discarding Hyperion, Swin-
burne seemed to have lost all the point and significance of
Keats’s poem as expressed in Oceanus’ speech (Hyperion, II,
173-243):

“We fall by course of Nature’s law, not force
Of thunder or of Jove. Great Saturn thou

1 Stvinburne’s Hyperion may also have been vaguely influenced by R. H.
Horne’s Orion (1843), which the poet had read at Eton with great admira-
tion, (See my Jeunesse de Swinburne, Chapter III; Eton.)

109

--- PAGE 107 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Hast sifted well the atom-universe .. .

But] first as thou wast not the first of powers

0 art thou not the last; it cannot be...
As Heaven and Earth are fairer, fairer far
Than Chaos and blank Darkness, though once chiefs;
And as we show beyond that Heaven and Earth
In form and shape compact and beautiful . . .
So on our heels a fresh perfection treads,
A power more strong in beauty, born of us
And fated to excel us, as we pass

In glory that old Darkness...
eee ew we ee fortis the eternal law
That first in beauty should be first in might. *

This remarkable passage which loads the whole of Keats’s
poem with a deep and serene meaning and is a most remark-
able attempt at giving a logical explanation for the old blind
law of Greek fatality, Swinburne did not, or probably would
not, see; this was too purely esthetic for him and he thought
that the subject was ‘too little charged with tangible signific-
ance’,

But we should not be unfair and think that Swinburne has
completely and unconsciously spoilt Keats’s great poem, by
merely preserving the body and missing the subtle soul
which inspires it. In exchange for Keats’s esthetic
philosophy, which he resolutely rejected, Swinburne has
supplied a philosophy of his own which is based on the
Greek idea of inevitable fatality, and on a more original
theory of pantheism. This is clearly expressed in Saturn’s
speech in which is proclaimed the existence of an inmost

1 The italics are mine. =
+B fe}

--- PAGE 108 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

wer which ‘circles through the circling universe’. This
inward will is at once life and destiny, for one cannot be
distinguished from the other, and our own existence is but
a proof of the power of the great will. We should, therefore,
yield to the universal law of change and seek happiness in the
intellectual contemplation of truth.

We may well prefer Keats’s attitude as being simpler and
newer, and above all more poetic in its essence; but we can-
not deny that Swinburne’s attitude is nearer to the Greek
spirit.

The important thing for us is that Swinburne while
reproducing the form of Keats’s poem has not accepted its
philosophy; and that he has substituted a philosophy of his
own, which he was to develop and exaggerate in all his later
works: first, the idea of blind, necessary, irresistible fatality
which he adopted from the Greek models of literature, but
which he made quite his own by the depth and extension
he gave to it; and secondly, the pantheistic tendency
which lies at the root of the poleey of Songs before Sunrise
and many other masterpieces.

But what is of more direct interest still is that this poem,
while supplying early and important instances in which
these ideas occur, shows that they are connected in a way
which might otherwise have remained obscure :\Swinburne’s
fatalism proceeds from his pantheism. It is because we are
part of the ‘informing destiny’ and ‘regent will’ of the world
that we cannot resist its decrees.+ Hence the folly of a
revolt which Swinburne sometimes advocated (cf. Atalanta,
etc.), but which he always condemned from the deeper and

1 See the works of Swinburne, passim. And in particular The Tale of
Balen; also Atalanta and Tristram.

111

--- PAGE 109 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

purely theological point of view (as in Hertha and the Hymn
of Man). Swinburne’s great task will be to attune his
thoughts and passions to those of the natural world as he
understands it. This truth, which he may have learnt from
schylus, he laid to his heart and adopted; and he is
always seen, in his moments of deeper and clearer inspira-
tion, striving to make his mind

‘equal with the seas... 9
And the equal year’s alternatives’.

—_

These lines are borrowed from the Prelude to Songs before
Sunrise, in which is embodied all that is purest and highest
in Swinburne’s thought; but as early as 1859, the poet had
written:

‘Fools are we, this not knowing, that the same
Is Life and Destiny, nor without one
Exists the other regent of itself’.

Conclusions

It has been found that as far as the inspiration is concerned
Swinburne’s debt to Keats is less considerable than in the
case of diction and metre. This was only to be expected
as Swinburne came to Keats as to a master of form, not a
prophet of philosophic truths. The general outline of the
story he borrowed and followed fairly closely, but he sup-
plied many additional details out of his own classical scholar-
ship, and was considerably influenced by the parallelism of
his story with the theme of the first two books of Miltop’s
Paradise Lost. Moreover, Swinburne destroyed the philoso-
phical significance of Keats’s conception by discarding the
figure of Hyperion, but he introduced, quite consciously I.

112

--- PAGE 110 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE AND KEATS

think, a different philosophical tendency based upon his
own theories of pantheism and universal Fatality.

GENERAL CONCLUSION

—— ES ——————

N the course of this study of the relations existing between
[Svinboene and Keats I have encountered many different
problems and reached, I trust, some interesting solutions:

In the first part of this Essay I have shown that Swin-
burne’s admiration for Keats’s genius, though deep and
genuine, was limited and qualified; it has been possible to
explain this attitude by the deep antipathy, physical, senti-
mental and intellectual which separates the two poets and
the consecutive opposition in their artistic theories.

In the second part a close though rapid study of Swin-
burne’s poetry has revealed a clear but very limited strain of
Keatsian influence; its importance is however great, as it
seems, in one of its forms, to have permanently affected the
poet’s diction. And from a more general point of view
there can be no doubt that this early exercise helped
Swinburne in acquiring that grand style or supreme dignity
of diction at which he seems to have been aiming from the
very first and which he so effectually preserved throughout
his poetical career.

It should not, however, be forgotten that our chief, if not
our sole, aim has been to throw light on the poem which we
publish to-day. The third part of this Essay is more
particularly devoted to it, but the whole of the Introduction
has no other purpose.

In this respect, I trust that it has been established that

113 H

--- PAGE 111 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Swinburne’s Hyperion was meant as a prosodic exercise; that
it was attempted in a very practical and deliberate manner
apart from any deep feeling of enthusiasm for the model it
professed to imitate, and that as such it is typical of Swin-
burne’s attitude at a very important stage of the development
of his genius. This exercise, as we have seen, was not
fruitless; for years Swinburne was to remember many of the
things he had learnt from Keats; and some others he was
never to forget.

I want, in conclusion, to insist on the remarkable instance
of conscious, deliberate imitation of a not over-congenial
model afforded by Swinburne’s Hyperion. We are inevit-
ably reminded of another poet’s attitude: Shelley’s kindness
and gift of sympathy prompted him to take in Keats’s

ersonality an interest which Swinburne could never have
elt; but Keats did not reciprocate the feeling and it may be
said that there was little natural affinity between the two
men; yet Shelley was drawn to Keats’s poetry—to whose
defects he must have been particularly sensitive—by an
obscure sense that this poet possessed in the highest degree
the very qualities in which his genius was deficient; he felt
that Keats was ‘more Greek’, more classical, more sensuous,
more purely an artist than he was. And he read his poetry
because it improved him. I suggest that this was also the
case with Swinburne who had so much in common with
Shelley. I do not want to press a parallel which would
prove unfair and inadequate; but when I first saw and read
Swinburne’s Hyperion among Mr. Wise’s manuscripts, I
found myself unexpectedly thinking of the copy of Keats's
Hyperion which was found doubled up in Shelley’s pocket
when his body was washed ashore.

114

--- PAGE 112 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

a

--- PAGE 113 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 114 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

(Page: 1b] (Watermark: ‘Fellows’ white ruled paper
Quarto size: 7} x 6§ inches]

[BOOK I]

Not thus, but with the fiery speed all rent
Shrieks round upon the sharp jag-toothed wheel
The father of the cloud-conceivéd brood. 20
There Pentheus writhes & tears with teeth & nails

[5] The solid ground, to creep & hide his head
Even in the very heart of pain & night;
So sorely sham’d remembrance vexes him
Of that dim evening on Cithceron’s height 25
Where ’mid the lowering glooms & hanging rocks

[10] He couched, to scoff the secrecy of heaven,
And Bacchus flashing thro’ the mazy dance
With torches glanced, & loose curls wreath’d with grapes;
But him swift vengeance rent & the blind hand 30
Of wild Agave, & the hideous glades

[l. 1] Hyperion, 1, 3, 180, 347.

1. 2] ‘jag-toothed’. A favourite word with Shelley: ‘jagged-jawed lions’,
ete.
[1. 3] ‘And Sky-engendered, son of Mysteries’ (Hyperion, 1, 130). The
‘father of the cloud-conceivéd brood’ is Ixion.

il 4] Not mentioned by Keats. Probably suggested by Euripides’ Bac-

chantes.

att 1] Sonnet to G. 4. W., 8: ‘Thou spar’st the flowers in thy mazy
nce’,

(1. 12] Hyperion, 1, 273: ‘But ever and anon the glancing spheres’.

(l. 4-14] It is interesting to compare these early lines with Swinburne’s

117

--- PAGE 115 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

[15] Dew’d with his showering blood & entrails torn.
All these and more, the towering livid air
Of that unmeasur’d cave in earth’s dim womb
Half show’d, half by concealment direr made, 35
As hideous things half seen loom’d from afar.
[20] Here wail’d the Giants, hidden & abased,
Not wholly crush’d, before that second fall
More dreadful, as from height more glorious, when

[Page: 2a] [Watermark: 1849, Quarto size]

Crushed into black eternal sleep they lay, 40
And earth moan’d, taking back her mightiest sons.

[25] _ As the sea-blasted pines, bent bleak & rough,
On some lone shore clouded by screaming mews,
Wail in the wind that tears the desolate heath;
So thro’ the prostrate ranks unanimous ran 45
A trembling moan, that shudder’d into air

later version of the Story of Pentheus as it appears in Tiresias (Songs before
Sunrise):
‘O mountain whereon Gods made chase of Kings,
Cithzron, thou that sawest on Pentheus dead
Fangs of a mother fasten and wax red
And satiate with a son thy swollen springs,
And heardst her cry fright all thine eyries’ nests
Who gave death suck at sanguine-suckling breasts.’
(I. 19] ‘half-seen’, Cancelled reading: ‘unseen’.
[l. 25] Hyperion, I], 116 and 122:
‘There is a roaring in the bleak-grown pines . . .
Such noise is like the roar of bleak-grown pines”
(1. 26] Fad? of Hyperion, I, 105: ‘And clouded all the altar with soft
smoke’.
[l. 28] Hyperion, II, 65: ‘Upon his elbow rais’d, all prostrate else’.
118

--- PAGE 116 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

[jo] And died; & they lay low in silence pale,
Shadows amid a shadowy world, until
Slow heaving his broad bulk, unbent as yet
With weight of stars incumbent, Atlas rose 50
Painfully, unlike the rapid joyous strength

[35] That mov’d him glorying thro’ the exultant heavens;

And with sad words & mourning broke the night:

O fall’n shapes of primal deity,
Dead, crushéd tombs of pale divinity, 55
Sepulchring your old glories! what is here

[40] For us, so glorious once, but ceaseless wail

And clamour of woe, & chains & night & pain?

Lost as we are, & reft of the sweet light,

The joyous balminess of starry dews, 60
That pearl the wan face of maternal night,

[Page: 2b]

[45] The Sun, that from his cloudy-skirted shrine

Fires all the unstarréd sky with circling wheels,
The sweet moon, & the silence-hallowed calm
Of night ambrosial, & the air & seas— 65

[l. 30] Hyperion, II, 356: ‘In pale and silver silence they remained’. For
Keats’s peculiar use of the word ‘pale’, see D. W. Rannie, op. cit. The
word occurs sixty-two times in the poems.

[l. 33] Milton, Paradise Lost, 1, 226: ‘Incumbent on the dusky air’.

[l. 33] Hyperion, Il, 73.

[l. 37] Hyperion, 1, 292: ‘No, though a primeval God’. Swinburne’s
first reading, afterwards cancelled, was ‘primeval’.

(1. 43] Joyous, balm, starry, dews (plural), are all typical of Keats’s
vocabulary.

(l. 47] ‘calm’. A favourite word with Keats: used six times in Hyperion.

(l. 48] Milton, Paradise Lost, 5, 642: ‘When ambrosial night with clouds’,

119

--- PAGE 117 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

These, reft from us, our lowest offspring, man,
[so] As glorified by shame, unworthy war
At hands immortal, & eternal loss,
Enjoy unmov’d; these have we lost; nor these
Alone, but anguished here soothe the dim night
That swathes us round, with moans, & wail, as now,
[ss] Cowering; unworthy of these ancient seats,
Those calm shrines over the far-spheréd world
Where crown’d we sat on immemorial thrones!
Ah me, that we enslav’d should grovel so,
Forgetful how to strive, inglorious, base,
[60] Worthless redemption of our godheads lost!
My soul is bare of counsel; only this
I know, that I am weary of this yoke,
This sharp corrosive shame of fall & death,
And would arouse ye back to Heavenly thoughts,
[65] Worthy your ancient glories; let one speak
Wiser than I, whom following we may reign.

40

75

80

[Page 3a] (Watermark: Edward Smith
Quarto size]

He spoke; & calm amid the breathless hush

(1. 52] ‘unmov’d’. The word is illegible in the manuscript, but ‘un-

mov’d’ is the probable reading.
(1. 56) ‘shrines’. Cancelled reading: ‘thrones’.

(Il. 56] ‘far-sphered’. Fall of Hyperion, 1,249. For the use of the word
‘sphere’ in Keats, and the latter’s probable debt to Chapman, see Professor

de Sélincourt: ‘Appendix on the sources of Keats’s vocabulary’.
[]. 61] Hyperion, I, ror: ‘bare of its great diadem’,
[1.63] Milton, Paradise Lost, I1, 401: ‘these corrosive fires’.
. 67] ‘calm’, See page 4b, note 1, also line 77.
. 67] ‘breathless’, Often used by Keats, but not in Hyperion.
120

--- PAGE 118 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

|Grey Saturn rising spake with dreamy looks, 85
Where dim philosophy slept vision’d faint:
[70] _ Gods, that have died so long in deepening swoon
Thro’ this wild season of dejection,
Swooning from fall to fall, blind & abased,
Thro’ cloud on cloud of sorrow and restless thought 90
Unfathomable, alive to only woe;
[75] Pale sorrows, wrestling with a stronger doom,
Listen, & draw a solemn consolation
From Truth, severe & sad, yet strong & calm.
Thro’ all the circling universe of life 95
One inmost Power, unwearied, never sleeps
[80] But circles ever thro’ the lifeless deep
Life warm & radiant; hence, when bright-eyed Spring
Makes the green buds flush to their sunny core,
The green life gushes thro’ Earth’s parchéd veins, 100
And leaps out glorious into light, and fills
[85] The music-trancéd air & thick-leaved boughs
With sudden melody full-throated; nor

(1. 68] Hyperion, II, 67: ‘Sat gray-haired Saturn, silent as a stone’.

O. 69] Ode on Indolence, 6, 8: ‘And for the day faint visions there is
store’.

[l. 72] Hyperion, II, 152: ‘Even to swooning, why ye, Divinities’.

[l. 75] ‘Pale’. See page 4a, note 4. See page 4b, note 1.

[1. 76] Used seven times in Hyperion.

(l. 77] Hyperion, II, 243: ‘Receive the truth, and let it be your balm’.

(1. 79] Hyperion, III, 65: ‘Unwearied ear of the whole Universe’.

(I. 81] ‘radiant’, A favourite word with Milton.

(1. 81] ‘bright-eyed’. This compound is used by Keats; compare also:
‘fair-eyed’, ‘leaden-eyed’, etc.

]. 85] ‘thick-leaved’. Keats: ‘new-leaved’, ‘legend-leaved’.

[l. 86] Nightingale, I, 10.

121

--- PAGE 119 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Fails the smooth arching field of calmest blue,
Which men call heaven, to rain from airy womb 105

[Page 3b] *

Sweet effluences and radiant; all the clouds

[90] Drop honey & balm-breathed dews from their fleeced skirts,
On the fat earth, that laughs with flowers of light;
And the world smiles out in existence new.
In the red bolted thunder roars & rends 110
This circulating power of self-born life,

[95] And smiles along the smooth, unfurrowed deep,
Shrieks down the whirlwind, mutters in the storm,
Grows with the growth of sunny-bosomed woods;
Thrills the huge void with immortality, 11s
And whirls for ever, changing life with life,

[100] Round the vast orb of being. Herein we lived,
Throned in the unseen sky, or thundered out
In glorious darkness, o’er the trembling world.

1 The top of this page bears written upside down the following passage,
from a speech by Anthonio in the first act of The Loyal Servant (see follow-
ing pages and Introduction):

‘horn beck and a rod of birch; and I will appoint for seconds 2 builders
of raw youth, strippers and whippers by profession, to dub thy pagehood
a knight of the red rod. C. [Cesario} Come boy, be not downcast, go with
me (ex.)’.

‘These fragments should be read in the contrary order to that of the poem:
first fragment: pp. 6a-3b; second fragment: pp. 8a-7b; third fragment:
pp. 12b-9b.

[I. 89] ‘effluences’, Shelley or Milton; not used by Keats.

[I. 89] ‘radiant’, See page 3a, line 81.

[1. 90] Hyperion, 1, 208: ‘slow-breathed melodies’.

[1. 96] ‘storm’. Contracted reading: ‘wind’.

122

--- PAGE 120 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Herein, & thrust by this vast hand of that _ 120
Which men call Time, or Fate, or Chance, or God.
[105] Nameless and unresisted, tho’ unknown
We fell & newer glories took the place
| Of our Supreme; Think ye no inward will,
Self-strong-and self-created, wheels along 125
xistence on its void & fathomless way?
[110] Fools are we, this not knowing, that the same

age 4a} (Watermark: 1846
Quarto size]

Is Life & Destiny, nor without one
Exists the other regent of itself:
More fools indeed, would we now wrestle it down, 130
But yielding in our inward power made strong,
[115] }And smiling down the restless rule of Change;

We shall be kings indeed & stipreme gods,

itting upon calm thrones of Knowledge, strong
In perfect reason and maturéd peace 135
Regal, unmoved, shall we for ever reign.

[r20] And triumph in our being’s perfectness.

So having said, back to his cloudy dreams
Musing he dropt & ceasing husht the air,

[l. 109] Endymion, II, 272.

1*Page. Let me do battle with him, good my lord. C[esario]. What,
for blaspheming thine estate my boy? A[nthonio]. I do accept thy
challenge, and nominate these for the armes; a...’ (see page 3b, note 1).

[l. 117] ‘calm’. See page 2b, line 47; also line 124.

{l. 118] ‘maturéd’. Used by Shelley.

(1. 119] Hyperion, II, 372: ‘Regal his shape majestic’.

(1. 121] ‘cloudy’. Often used by Keats.

(I. 122] ‘dropt’. Cancelled reading: ‘stopt’.

123

--- PAGE 121 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

That trembled yet melodiously & full 140
With the calm awful music of his words.

[125] To whom |Oceanus, with musing brow
Thought-furrowed, rose, & thus with measur’d voice:

Well-framed & ‘hallowed by serenest thought,

As fits our Highest, hath the speech appear’d 145
Of mightiest Saturn; nor to be by us

[130] Unheeded, nor unfruitfully & vain
To moulder in oblivion’s rust, but ye
Or must resolve at once to lay down all

[Page 4b]?

* — VYe have called glories, & to build new thrones 150
f thought in secret places of the heart,
[135] Kings to yourselves, & sever’d from the world;
rame deep counsel for recover’d rule,
Or blindly dash, & break against high fate,
rasping at power; these seem your only helps, 155
f helps so hazardous may wear such name;
[140] Yet see I, yet, a higher & wiser way,
To free ourselves, & crown with glories old.
IStrike not against the rocky-baséd fate,
Dream not beneath it, nurs’d in fancy alone 160
And mystic thoughtsfreign we apart indeed,

Dl. 125] ‘Oceanus’, Hyperion, II, 75, 163, 245, 333-

1 ‘for a rod only and no other exercise, till his age be more riper; marry,
some are rotten alreadie and will never be the better on’t’ (see page 4a,
note 1).

I. 136] Compare with the construction: ‘So the two brothers with their
murdered man’ (Jsabel/a, 27, 1).

{l. 142] Hyperion, II, 138: for my firm-based footstool’.
124

--- PAGE 122 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

[145] Contented with what glory rounds us yet,
To live superior, & divine repose
Quaff, undisturb’d, yet kings where we may rule,
Unscath’d, unperil’d by devouring Time, . 165
Or envious change with fettering serpent twine

[130] | He spoke; & calm with quiet lips, & eyes
Scornful of pain or blind contention,
Sank back the grey god-sophist of the sea,

With serene look of wisdom satisfied, 170
Serene and mute in godlike changelessness.
[Page sa]4 (Watermark: Britannia on Throne

Quarto size]

[rss] But Fons, rising like a shatter’d rock,
With swift & fierce contempt & eyes that gleam’d
Red light & hideous thro’ the livid air,
Sprang up & shouted, with loud voice & hoarse 175
As winds that wrestle with the storm-chafed sea:
[160] Fair speech & measur’d craft, most worthy gods!
Crush’d as we are, fallen, mockt images
Of spurn’d divinity, the fragments lost
[l. 150] See page 2b, line 47.
(I. 152] Compare Hyperion, II, 167-70:
... ‘and the God of the sea
Sophist and sage, from no Athenian grove,
But cogitation in his watery shades,
Arose, with locks not oozy, and began’.
1 An{thonio]. ‘I did once essay’t; and thus by goodly advise, I after much
endurance whipped him into some kind of humanity being a beest fit for...’
(see page 4b, note 1).
(1. 155] ‘Cceus’. Hyperion, II, 19.
[l. 162] Hyperion, I, 12; III, 8.,
125

--- PAGE 123 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

And shatter’d, idols of an older world! 180
Are we cast down beyond all scorn? does Fate

[165] With not a thunder-frown of rouséd wrath

But curvéd smile contemptuous, tread us down,

And pass on careless? Rise, ye ancient gods!

I boast no power of wreathing wily words 185
In serpentine & mazy folds, & winding

[170] A cloudy veil of dull philosophy

About existing woe; are we yet kings?

Gods, thronéd in the deep serene of rule?

No, but fallen shadows in a world of scorn. 190
What loud hymns of our worship here we ring

[175] Up thro’ the rich-curled smoke of incenst shrines?

Who bows & trembles at our awful shrine

[Page 5b] *

With shuddering prayer & adoration prone?

Rise, rise, & seize again your ancient rule! 195
Or would ye die, & in the blind night swathed

[180] Lie cold in senseless immortality,

Not by annihilation wholly crush’d,

[l. 166] Hyperion, 1, 351: ‘Lifted his curved lids’.

{l. 169] ‘serpentine’, Used by Milton.

(1. 169] ‘mazy’. See page rb, line 10.

[l. 170] ‘cloudy’. See page 4a, line 121.

[1.172] Sonnet on Chapman’s Homer: ‘Yet never did I breathe its pure
serene’,

1‘doth drybeate my little wit with flowtes; I would you’ld remember his
chastening, arid hee’ll make a fine witt. Ces[ario] would’st then bring up
a page?” (see page Sa, note 1).

(1. 177] Hyperion, 11, 49, 73, ‘prone’. Swinburne’s cancelled reading
was ‘bow'd’.

[l. 178] ‘rule’. Hyperion, I, 1653 II, 216.

126

--- PAGE 124 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

But dying, as far as gods can die? now choose,
Fallen powers, for no other choice is left.
He ended; & a sudden clangour yell’d
[85] From all the host, harsh braying, as the roar
Of charging trumpets on the battle’s verge
When shrieks the air with shafts, & clashes round
With clarions; nor less terror shook their foes;
As when old earth with windy wrestlings torn
[r90] Cleaves, & the deep void opens on the day,
Shakes cities down & from her womb hurls out
Huge fragments hurtling in the noisy air;
No less a shudder thro’ Olympus ran
Sudden, convulsing all the deities
[r95] With trembling & sick fear; Poseidon quak’d
Pavilion’d with the green vault of his seas,
That kept moan round him for their elder lord;
In the sweet depth of Cyprus’ sunniest glades
Haunted by woodland voices & gleaming shapes,

200

205

210

215

[Page 6a]? (Watermark: Britannia on Throne
Quarto size]

[200] The fear took Cytherea, where she lay,

[l. 186] ‘charging’. Swinburne’s cancelled reading was ‘clashing’.
8 ig

‘verge’. Cancelled reading: ‘edge’.

(I. 187] ‘shrieks’, Cancelled reading: ‘roars’,

[l. 191] ‘down’. Cancelled reading: ‘out’.

[l. 194] Hyperion, I, 262; II, 273 II], 129.

[l. 195] ‘sick’. Hyperion, I, 189; II, 104, 288.

1. 198] Endymion, 1, 693: ‘heaths and sunny glades’.

9 ty) 9. Y 8

1 ‘and cheat the wiselier. Here is a little knave of your lordshippe’s
who [sic] I have tutor’d with verbal correction; but indeed he doth’ (see

page 5b, note 1).
(1. 200] ‘Cytherea’. Endymion, 11, 492; III, 918, 975.
127

--- PAGE 125 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Combing the heavy folds of lucent gold
That in thick tresses on the ivory droopt
Of her veil’d shoulders; not more terror quail’d 220
Her deity, when by the sea-built wall
[205] She fronted Diomedes, and he came
With the tread of a whirlwind on her troops, & shook
Tlion; not less amaz’d she rose & fled,
Scattering her nymphs, & as she mounted fell 225
Flowers, all the children of the sunny earth,
[210] Raining around her thick ambrosial showers,
Till at the feet of Zeus she fell, & hail’d
Her father; he scarce less hereat dismayed;
Hermes, tho’ skilfullest in deep-woven wiles 230
Trembled, & loose in his hand the powerful wand
[215] Slumbrous, lay useless; paler grew the light
Of Artemis’ brow, & brighter Phoebus paus’d,
One white hand resting on the golden strings
Of his hush’d lyre, that under it throbbed yet; 235
Stern Mars, dark-smiling, graspt his hilt, & frown’d,
[220] Blackening the furrows of his war-wrinkled face;
From Bacchus’ bright locks the ivy cluster’d fell;

[l. 201} ‘Combing’. Cancelled reading: ‘Soothing’.

[1 201] ‘lucent’, Hyperion, I, 239: ‘of all my lucent empire’; also:
Paradise Lost, Il, 589.

[l. 205] ‘and’. Cancelled reading: ‘when’.

[I. 210] See page 2b, line 48.

[1. 214] ‘the powerful’. Cancelled reading: ‘his’.

[l. 215] Hyperion, I, 69: ‘thus violate thy slumbrous solitude’,

{l. 215] ‘paler’. See page 2a, line 30.

0. 221] ‘the ivy cluster’d fell’, Cancelled reading: ‘fell the cluster’d
vines’.

128

--- PAGE 126 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION
[Page 6b]
And Pallas only was not pale, but calm
Sat statue-like among the trembling gods; 240
Deep thought lay clear & cloudless on her brow.
[225] Fithen Zeus, with high words vailing hidden fear,
Spake, & the clouds shook into thunder far:
There is no fear; are we as men, or fall’n
Unscepter’d gods, unkingdom’d and abased, 245
That fear should thrill our veins? Reign we not here
[230] Serene among the sunny clouds of Heaven?
If yet gigantic wrath upon the earth
Jairithe impotent, & mutter & toss & threat,
What fear we? are they not by supreme fate 250
Our subjects, & we in our thunder Kings?)
[235] _ He spake threatening, & scorn his proud lip curv’d
Kinglike; yet scarce they whispered scar’d applause.
But queenly Pallas with unruffled look,
As when in Academic groves she met 255
Deep-thoughted Plato, or the reverend head
[240] Of Socrates, or likest when she chid
The wrath of war-vext Mars at Ilion, spake
With slow melodious voice; ‘It is not well

[I. 224] ‘cloudless’. Cancelled reading: ‘serene’.
[l. 228] Hyperion, I, 19: ‘Unsceptred and his realmless eyes were
closed’,

(1. 230] ‘sunny’. See page sb, line 198.
(1. 231] ‘gigantic’. Paradise Lost, XI, 659.
[l. 235] ‘curv’d’. See page sa, line 166.
{l. 237] ‘unruffied’, Cancelled reading: ‘calm-thoughted’.
(1. 239) Lemia, II, 115: ‘high-thoughted’.
(1. 242] ‘melodious’. Hyperion, III, 181.
129 I

--- PAGE 127 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

[Page 72] (Watermark: Britannia on Throne
Quarto size]

That thus we talk loud thunder & weak rule,
nd clothe in lightning our so powerless hands;
[245](For strength is weakness without wisdom, rais’d
By her alone to highest calm of power,
Strong as a mountain’s blue cloud-wreathed head
Serene, above the murmuring din of earth,
Nor else serene nor mighty. ) Thou art king,
[zs0] O Zeus, the thronéd thunder shrines thee round;
Bright brows immortal droop before thy might,
Thy hand is strong with sceptre; men on earth
Mount up to thee their prayers in steaming clouds
f incense, & the reek of slaughter’d herds;
[255] \But thou, God as thou art, must lean thyself
in wisdom’s sceptred hand, to rule indeed,
or king nor god else; & alleging Fate
That, we unmovéd from our awful seats,
Will work her work, thou errest;|not for us
[260] She works, nor we her dim foundations know
Nor ordinances; seizing the swift time
We rule by wisdom and justice unmoved;
Else what strength of command we bring, jars back

[I. 243] ‘rule’, See page sb, line 178.
[l. 244] ‘powerless’. Cancelled reading: ‘unruling’.
[l. 246] ‘calm’. See page 2b, line 47.

260

265

270

275

280

[l. 247] ‘I stood tip-toe’, 140: ‘Walking upon the white clouds wreath’d

and curl’d’,
[l. 248] ‘Serene’. See page 5a, line 172.

[l. 263] Hyperion, 1, 200: ‘When earthquakes jar their battlements and

towers’.

130

--- PAGE 128 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION
Upon ourselves, and hurls us headlong down.
[Page 7b]?
[265] She ended fearless; but no less a death
“ ~ Of stony silence spelled the Olympian crew;
As some worn voyager from shores remote,
Where the calm sun sleeps on the western verge 285
Of utmost sea, slumbring with level rays
[270] Where in the summer sunset ever dream
~~ His woodland race; landing on some lone beach
Thro’ tropic shades of giant verdure wide
And alleys deep, with huge magnolia archt, 290
Odorous, long wanders thro’ the perfum’d eve,
[275] Till in the dewy dusk a city gleams,
Her humbler towers & bastioned walls in night,
But on her topmost pinnacles the sun
Sits, turrets that flame back his western rays 295
From towering gold & domes of diamond-glare;

[1 264] See Hyperion, II, 364. See also Milton, Paradise Lost, 11, 374,
‘hurled headlong to partake with us’.

1 ‘He’s but a foole that will be friends with knavery. Ces[ario]. Call’st
thou thyself a knave? An[tonio]. I make profession on’t, sir’ (see page 8a,
note 1).

[I. 266] ‘Stony’. Common in Milton and Shelley.

[I. 268] ‘the western’, Cancelled reading: ‘his’—for ‘calm’, see page
2b: line 47.

[1. 269] ‘utmost’. Miltonic use.

[l. 272] ‘tropic’. Paradise Lost, X, 675.

[l. 274] ‘Odorous’. Common in Keats.

[l. 275] Hyperion, 1, 264: ‘full six dewy hours’.

[l. 275] ‘city’. Cancelled reading: ‘giant city’.

[l. 276] Hyperion, I, 177: ‘Bastioned with pyramids of glowing gold’.

131

--- PAGE 129 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

[280] With hope amaz’d the inlaid gates he passes
Wide gaping to the twilight landskip dim;
Palace on palace, dome on shining dome,
Rises and arches o’er the dusky streets 300
With bridges of gold & stately statues wrought,
[285] And many a pile of grey magnificence
O’er the broad silent ways, curiously wrought
[Page 82]? (Watermark: Britannia on Throne
Quarto size]
Cornice and buttress, pillars and architrave;
All stony silent as the sleeping times, 305
Unstirred by human breath; he gazes maz’d,
[290] Till him too the cold petrifying night
Clasps & he stands mute in those dusky streets,
A statue among statues, wrought to life;
Nor ever voice breaks the silence of death. 310
No less dead-silent stood the throng amaz’d,
[295] And Fear first trembled thro’ the deep of heaven.
I. 280] ‘inlaid’, Cancelled reading: ‘brazen’.
{l. 281] ‘landskip’. Milton, A//egro, 70.
[l. 285] Fad/ of Hyperion, I, 67: ‘Of grey cathedral, buttressed walls, rent
towers’; and Hyperion, I, 211: ‘That inlet to severe magnificence’.
1 An{thonio). “Twill be the first of wisdom thou hast heard then.
way Dost rayle at me? I would be friends with thee’ (see page gb,
note 1).
[. 287] ‘buttress’, See page 7b, line 285.
{1 287] ‘architrave’. Milton, Paradise Lost, 1,715 (see page gb, note 1).
[l. 288] ‘stony’, See page 7b, line 266,
{l. 291) Lamia, I, 361: ‘Of some arch’d temple-door or dusky colonnade’;
Hyperion II, 56: ‘dusky face’. See also below: Book II, line ro: ‘dusky

(1. 293] This magnificent architectural metaphor is directly, though not
slavishly inspired from the first book of Hyperion, 176-80:

132

--- PAGE 130 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

So PRE REM rpom vy eprom pimL ce Yhough GD

Os. a Derr Ah 6 Prep Racy
Ala. peleirt gut Lhe, hain $05"

vr hy ben e ack, d,

Sle Mord mute ww.

anwoug Lakes, alfé;
Yeon wer vou Lunhei bhe sone of Both. 51

fo Legy heal ple rl gtcoel, award

Le ort Meri. si Vkers chord

% LD porucr i ewil pylores
Le anu Lhe crouch a aoe,

7 hoe i rank wedg
din ih dy Malis llrton bogedl be ;
fall ogi act, £ é fod .
A Lyin bach fro (Lack

py ha

FACSIMILE OF PAGE 14 OF THE ORIGINAL HOLOGRAPH
MANUSCRIPT OF ‘SWINBURNE’S HYPERION’

--- PAGE 131 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 132 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

BOOK II

eanwhile amid their night the Titans cheer’d,
Ket counsel & with deep thought wove their way
‘o light & power renew’d & glories lost.
At length amid the crowd a shape arose,
[s] Huge as some column by convulsive pang
Flung from its base, that o’ergrown with rank weeds,
Lies with its shatter’d blazon; hugest he
Of all the giant race, & strongest of limb,
orphyrion; on his broad brow pride repos’d
[10] Secure, & in each furrow of his dusk cheek

194-195:

217-224:

‘His palace bright
Bastion’d with pyramids of glowing gold,
And touch’d with shade of bronzed obelisks,
Glar’d a blood red through all its thousand courts,
Arches and domes and fiery galleries.’

‘He pac’d away the pleasant hours of ease
With stride colossal, on from hall to hall’

‘From stately nave to nave, from vault to vault; .. .
And diamond-paved lustrous long arcades

Until he reached the great main cupola;

There standing fierce beneath he stampt his foot
And from the basements deep to the high towers
Jarr’d his own golden region.’

Keats and Swinburne are both more Miltonic than Milton.

[l. 9.

(1. 1] Hyperion, I, 150: ‘this cheers our fallen house’.
‘Porphyrion’. Hyperion, II, 20.

[l. ro] ‘Secure’. Cancelled reading: ‘confident’.

133

--- PAGE 133 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

War harbour’d, born with Anger at one birth,
Grim twins, but dearest to that grisly shape

[Page 8b]

Towering with haughty port; & thus he spake
With voice to quell the thunder, & make shrink

[15] Its bolts inaudible, & hand to hurl
The baffled lightning strong, or dash down towers.

Titans, the strongest brood of mighty earth,

Short counsel shall make shortest pain too long;
War, war our subject, war our minister,

[20] Sits dreadfully upon the lowering clouds
Glaring reluctant patience, till at length
With signal given, her red hand may launch
Death; rise & war, & dash down fear & fate,
Mighty to act, not suffer, but revenge.

[25] Destiny shall quake before us, giving way
To our high-battled storm, & we shall reign
Kings by our might, & crush our vaunting foes,
Our puny children, & this rebel Zeus,
A baby tyrant, nurs’d & bred of us,

[so] Puppet of sovereignty, that has caught up
High words of supreme rule, & mimics them
With his mock-action, playing the prime king.
Chief minister of fate & sovereign he
Of us, his race ancestral! struts and mouths,

(1. 12] Milton: ‘grisly spectres’, etc.

1. 17] Keats, Milton, Mammoth brood, giant brood.
. 21] ‘reluctant’. Hyperion, I, 61.

{l. 28] ‘puny’. Hyperion, II, 331.

(1. 34] ‘ancestral’. Jsaded/a, 14, 2.

134

--- PAGE 134 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

[Page 9a] [Watermark: Edward Smith
Quarto size]

[35] With infant courage & ignoble act,

And we before this god of puppets quail!

Back to your thrones in thunder! Titans, back!

Rise, Saturn! war & triumph, godlike war!

And death herald us back unto our thrones.
[40] | So closed his words, hot with the breath of war,
. And measur’d thunder echo’d far applause.

But now the sagest of the fallen gods,

Sagest & deepest skill’d in world-wide lore

Ancestral, & benignest in his might,

[45], The son of Themis, else all-nurturing earth,
Prometheus rose; for not yet his bold hand
Had thro’ the hollow reed to man convey’d,

To blind weak man, the golden light of fire;
Nor had Pandora, blushing perfect grace,

[so] From his wise breast repulst, his brother lur’d
Unwiser, by bland arts & heaven-deckt wiles;
Nor he rock-fixt groan’d to the reddening beak
And curvéd claw of Jove’s strong bird, whom late
Alcides, mightiest among later men,

[55] Slew & releast him fetter’d; but now young

[1.43] ‘lore’. Hyperion, 1, 33; II, 148, 333.

{l. 44] ‘ancestral’. See page 8b, line 34.

Ll. 44] ‘benignest’. Hyperion, I, 108; III, 95.

(1. 45] ‘Themis’. Hyperion, II, 77.

(1. 45] ‘all-nurturing’. Compare Shelley: ‘all-feeding, all-devouring, all-

beholding’, etc.

_{1. 46] ‘Prometheus’. Not mentioned by Keats,

[I. 53] ‘curved’, See page sa, line 166.

135

--- PAGE 135 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Full of deep thought & counsel he stood up
[Page 9b) *
In that grim conclave, & sage speech began
Unfolding slow his universal lore;
Fate, & the mighty all instinctive will,

[60] The mystery that lives in all things, power

PX which eagth lives, as Saturn first had shown;

Then sagen Fate permitting, how to rule,
However, ndt by brutal strength, & force,
Of limb & muscle or thunder-throated war;

[6s] But by deep thought inwov’n and subtlest craft)
Hard to unravel, intellectual might
Strongest of things & best, thence godlike life
And rule primeval; & more subtle & wise,
Deep thro’ the folds of nature’s secrecy

[70] Piercing swift wisdom, & counsel drawing up
Of noble craft;\but they, blind shapes of strength,
Rude & hard-thoughted, helming to all winds,

1‘Cgs[ario}. Sir, let me be acquainted with your wisenesse
You are a goodly tutor for a king.’
(See page roa, note r, etc.)
[l. 57] ‘conclave’. Fall of Hyperion, 1, 50; also Paradise Lost, I, 295.
. §8] ‘lore’. See page ga, line 43.
|. §9] Compare Shelley: ‘all-creative’, etc.
64] ‘or’. Cancelled reading: ‘and’.
{1. 64] ‘thunder-throated’, See page 3a, line 86.
[l. 65] The manuscript is here almost impossible to read; ‘inwov’n’ seems
however the best conjecture.
[]. 68] ‘rule’. See page sb, line 178.
(1. 68) ‘primeval’. See page 2a, line 37.
. 69] ‘folds’. Cancelled reading: ‘depths’.
fl. 72} ‘hard-thoughted’. See page e line 239.
13

--- PAGE 136 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWENBURNE’S HYPERION

But bare of counsel & internal strength,
With storm of scorn & whirlwind ignorance
[75] Stifled his voice, & their tempestuous din
Drove him away, whence evil to themselves,
Nor of his noblest wisdom good to,him,
So slighted is supreme Philosophy )
[Page roa] + (Watermark: 1846
Quarto size]
Wisdom divine & virtue, but itself
[80] Strong, living to itself for glorious ends.
Next to the warlike throng rose high & broad
Of giant bulk & port imperial, one
Not lightning-blasted yet,{Rhcetus, of brow
Majestic; more of counsel, tho’ but shallow
[85] And scatter’d by the blowing breath of fight,
Sat on his brow, than on the broad smooth strength
Of huge Porphyrion’s; neither sage, but this
Of warlike counsel best, small praise, where war
So impotent; and thus far echoing spake
[90] With deeper voice, but not so hoarse & said:
O Titans, well ye have devis’d, & well

[1.73] ‘bare of. See page 2b, line 61.
[l. 74] Sonnet to Homer: ‘giant ignorance’; also Hyperion, I11, 107.
(I. 75] ‘tempestuous’. Milton, Paradise Lost, 1, 77.
1‘Duxz. He who knows

What are his flatterers, honoureth his foes.

Thou shalt take service with me; by and by

Tle hear thee further speak

(Exit)?
(See page rob, note 1.)

(1. 83] ‘Rheetus’, Not mentioned by Keats.
[l. 84] Milton, Paradise Regained, 11, 216; ‘majestic brow’, etc.

137

--- PAGE 137 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Counsell’d, ignoble sloth & dreaming thought
Driving far from ye, & to glorious war
Worthily inclin’d; but not enough devis’d

[95] For perfect rule & conquest, unfulfill’d;
Since those, be sure, who our primeval strength
Have graspt with younger hands, not without power
Establisht, & strong counsel thus sustained;
For who shall say, that by ignoble strength

[100] And puny tyranny vanquisht we fell,
[Page rob] *
Primeval gods, & nature’s mightiest? no;
Else our own words, both what we speak, or do,
Debases us beyond all scorn, thus sham’d
And grovelling beneath an infant arm.

[105] Power then is theirs; but to contend with power
An equal strength requires; whence then to us
This strength, that may renew our glories lost?
This to your judgments would I clearly unfold.
And first, whereas these sophists of deity,

[110] Knitting close words in cloudy mysteries, prate

[]. 95] ‘rule’. See page 5b, line 178.
[1. 96] ‘primeval’. See page 2a, line 37.
{1. 99] ‘ignoble’. Milton, Paradise Lost.
(1. 100] ‘puny’. See page 8b, line 28.
1 ‘Know me already for a sullen rayler
‘Whose bitter breath doth flowte at courtlinesse,
And discontent emblazon’.
(See page r1a, note 1.)
[l. ror] ‘primeval’, See page 2a, line 37.
[1. 109] ‘sophists’. See page 4b, line 152.
(1. r10] ‘cloudy’. See page 4a, line 121; compare the ‘cloudy trophies’
of the Ode to Melancholy.
138

--- PAGE 138 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Of Power or Destiny supreme, that folds
The orbéd world & whirls along its course,
Working to the end all good, & to its end
Calm-travelling; lo, what shatter’d shapes of woe
[115] Here front our eyes, & darken this dim light!
Call ye this Destiny’s wide-reaching work!
Fools, what but tyrant power & present rule
Insufferable, such evils works? behold,
Our brethren here, by us in counsel lost
[120] Lie undeliver’d, groaning in their bonds:
Typhceus here, the mightiest Titan, writhes
Upon a bed of thorny pain & fire,
[Page 11a]? (Watermark: Fellows
Quarto size]
And groans from his deep chest reluctant flame,
Fruitless; here Tityus the fell vulture tears
[125] Pressing with ponderous bulk the groaning soil;
There Tantalus, rackt by devouring thirst
And keen-edged hunger, parches in the stream,
Panting, & views the cool dark wave beneath,

[l. 112] Hyperion, I, 166: ‘Blazing Hyperion on his orbed fire’.

{l. 118] ‘Insufferable’. Shelley, Promecheus, III, I, 137.

{l. 121] “Typhceus’. Not mentioned by Keats.

{I. 122] ‘thorny’. Common in Keats.

1 ‘Wilt dwell within my court? Anth{onio]. Who cannot flatter
A court abhors; these gentlemen of yours, sir’

(See page rrb, note 1.)

[l. 123] ‘reluctant’. See page 8b, line 21.
. 123] ‘fame’. Cancelled reading: ‘fire’.
|. 124] ‘“Tityus’, Not mentioned by Keats.

{l. 126] ‘Tantalus’. Not mentioned by Keats.

139

--- PAGE 139 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

And pendent fruits ambrosial; there another,

[130] Tied on the sharp rim of that jaggéd wheel
That grinds thro’ him to the earth, then jarring whirls
Mangled aloft; & this by newer gods
Done, while we sleep, or strive in fruitless war;
Is this then happiness? this guiding fate?

[135] The work, rather, of short liv’d tyranny
Convulséd now with the last pang of fear,
To prop its perishing rule; nor knows how strength
Hence springs to us against them; loose we these,
Pale victims of a rule so swift to crime,

[140] That in such little space so much hath done
Of evil, & for such slight Cause alledg’d; [sic]
One, that he slew his son to feasting gods,
Type of no gentle sway, & sacrifice
Pleasant to our new tyrants, & for this

[Page rb]?
[145] One anguish by another recompenct;
See at their hands his guerdon; the other too,

(I. 129] ‘pendent’. Fal/ of Hyperion, I, 198, 220; also Milton.
{l. 129} ‘ambrosial’, See page 2b, line 48.
{l. 130] ‘jagged’. See page rb, line 2.
[l. 136] ‘convulséd’. See page sb, line 194.
(I. 139] ‘pale’. See page 2a, line 30.
fl. 142] ‘One’. Tantalus,
1 ‘Fortune not generous; and whoever clung
To his dead hopes that fell to make me duke
I honour as the blood that feeds my lyfe.’
(See page 11a, note 1.)
fl. 145] ‘recompenct’. Paradise Lost, X, 1052; XII, 495.

{l. 146) Ixion. The reference is to the false Juno which Zeus fashioned

with clouds to deceive the unfortunate Titan.
140

--- PAGE 140 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Accus’d that he, with touch audacious, late
Dar’d strive to taint the queen august of heaven
Rather their will’s lost prey, & hapless wreck
[150] Of this upstarted deity’s lips & eyes
Libidinous; fair cause for hideous pain,
Shatter’d for ever in each mangled joint!
These aiding, who have known their tyrannous yoke,
We shall pluck down these upstarts, & again
[155] Reign, crown’d by war. Ye have heard my sentence, gods.
They heard, & they applauded. [Hrebus,
Shook from its darkest depths & all the night
Shudder’d; back Tartarus with reluctant speed
Trembled & shrunk & cast its inmates out;
[160] A groan of thunder shiver’d thro’ the dark:
Moan’d all the shades, & all the gloomy vales
Of Hades felt a sudden thrill of pain.
Such power, tho’ fall’n, was in those early gods,
Not yet by thunder blasted & the bolts
[65] Of Zeus, nor chain’d, tho’ ill they sped in war,
Yet ’scaping, free of fetters & the doom

[Page 122] (Watermark: 1849
Quarto size}

At last pronounct; they rose; & each with step
Not slow, & hand speedy to answer will,
Loos’t all the tortur’d; so the wily words

[170] Of Rhestus counselling war, & arguments vain,

[l. 155] ‘sentence’. Cancelled reading: ‘counsel, gods’.
{1 158) ‘reluctant’, See page 8b, line 21.

141

--- PAGE 141 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Excusing with false glosses blackest sin,

And spreading covert veil of glozing words,
Wrought with them, easily counsell’d to their bane.
Leapt all the impious into sudden joy;

[175] Free of their galling yoke & festering pain,

They triumphed, & in new delight of strength
And satisfied desire of torturous days,
Exulted, running, springing blithe & light
With tread elastic, & new freedom quafft

[180] Delightful, such the joy of pain releast!

Long, long the wither’d throat of Tantalus
With fiery drought inflam’d the waters cold
Of icy Lethe bathed with pleasant draught
Sweeter than Bacchus’ bubbling purple e’er

[185] To wearied reveller, nor brought his soul

[190] Ixion,

Sane pain’s oblivion. Pleasure yet remain’d,
And glad revenge; Pentheus & Tityus there
Free of their pain, fresh thoughts of godless pride,
Pwelling conceive, puft with vainglorious joy.
reed now from the resting wheel,

(I. 171] ‘glosses’. Milton uses the word; Keats also has it once in each
of his plays.

{l. 174] ‘impious’, The word clearly belongs to the vocabulary of
Paradise Lost, although Milton does not use it as a noun; it occurs in Keats,
but not once in Hyperion; this single word would turn Keats’s pagan attitude
into a puritanical one.

I. 182] ‘fiery’. See page rb, line 3.

[l. 183] ‘icy’. Hyperion, I, 201.

{l. 183] ‘bathed with pleasant draught’. Cancelled reading: ‘watered
with sweet draught’.

[l. 189] ‘vainglorious’. Paradise Lost, V1, 384.

[. 190] ‘Ixion’. Hyperion, I, 130.

, 142

--- PAGE 142 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

[Page rab]?
Stretches his limbs, now whole & eas’d of pain,
On the hard earth, to him delicious bed,
With rest more sweet, than what the broider’d couch
Of Melibzan purple lends to kings

[195] On downy plumes luxurious; Sisyphus
Sleeps, & sweet dreams repay his aching toil,
Since now lies still the ever-rolling stone.
All joy’d, all impious, none repented, none
But freed of pain fresh crime began to weave

[200] Fuller destruction drawing on their heads
With lavish hand outpour’d; such the fell power
Of Tartarus, sin-breathing air & foule,
Then war propos’d against the younger gods
Gladly they seis’d, and with resounding note

[205] The brazen trumpets screamed war to the sky.
Standards unfurl’d & clash of bristling arms
Were none; strong in themselves they stood, & war
Devis’d unfearing; then in serried force :
Huge shapes towering, a rocky fence of war

1‘D[uxe]. ‘Thy speech is faire;
And smacks of something nobler than thy having.
I would have such my friends, whose faith unflaw’d’
(See page 11b, note 1.)

{l. 194] ‘Melibaan’. Paradise Lost, II, 242.

{l. 195] ‘luxurious, etc.’. Keatsian vocabulary.

{l. 195] ‘Sisyphus’. Not mentioned by Keats.

[1 198] ‘impious’, See page 12a, line 174.

{l. 202] The compound ‘calm-breathing’ occurs in Keats (Ode to Psyche).
[l. 204] ‘resounding’, Occurs in Milton.

[l. 208] ‘serried’. Paradise Lost, I, 548; VI, 599.

143

--- PAGE 143 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

[210] Against the sun, tho’ with their wiser king
Reluctant, forth they sallied; swung behind
[212] Hell’s gates revolv’d with hideous clangour clos’d,

. 211] ‘reluctant’, See page 8b, line 21.
1,212] ‘revolv’d’. Paradise Lost, VII, 381.

144

--- PAGE 144 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

THE NIGHTINGALE

HE manuscript of this poem was once in the possession
of Mr. T. J. Wise; but I have failed to find any trace of
it in his collection, and the text which follows has been
printed from a typescript which Mr. Wise had had taken
rom the manuscript some years ago. ‘The first page of this
copy contains the 45 lines which I print. The next pages
supply instead of the expected continuation 174 lines of
an obscure mythological poem which deals apparently with
Apollo and Daphne. The typist must have exactly repro-
duced the manuscript which seems to have been made up of
two imperfect poems.
+ In this poem—which cannot be dated with precision but
which belongs to the Oxford period—we see the young
Swinburne no longer apprenticed to Keats but trying to
compete with him with arms of his own choosing. I have
no intention to compare this juvenile effusion with Keats’s
immortal Ode, but it will be allowed that Swinburne’s
attempt in its rough irregularity achieves effects of breath-
less enthusiasm and intensity of passion which, of course,
Keats never aimed at producing.
The poem is, moreover, interesting as an early expression
of Swinburne’s admiration for the Song of the Nightingale
which he identifies with Sappho’s lyrical inspiration? The

1 Swinburne’s enthusiasm for Sappho was not, as H. Nicolson too lightly
asserts, a matter of pure rhetoric. He found in the Sapphic fragments and.,.
tradition a kind of burning, unsatisfied inspiration, which he felt as strongly
akin to his own: Sappho is a kindred spirit (‘As brother and sister were we’).
Many lines in Azactoria are spoken in the poet’s own name:

147

--- PAGE 145 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

association between the two songs (which is based on one of
the sapphic fragments) is constant with Swinburne, and is
frequently referred to, both in prose and verse; but this
curious theory—for it cannot otherwise be termed—finds its
extreme form in the Dedicatory Epistle to the collected Poems
(pp. xx-xxi) and chiefly in the poem Ox the Cliffs (composed
1879—published in Songs of the Springtides).

I am fortunate in being able to quote from an unpublished
letter 1 addressed by Swinburne to Watts-Dunton in 1879,
after the completion of Ox the Cliffs, a passage which throws
light both on Swinburne’s attitude and on the poem I pub-
lish below:

‘[1879] I have a new poem to read you [Ox the Cliffs]
longer (I will not say better, whether I think so or not) than
any (except the ever edifying Dolores) in either of my collec-
tions... I fear there is not over-much hope of a fresh
scandal and consequent “succés de scandale” from a mere
rhapsody just 4 lines short of 400 (oddly enough) on the
song of a nightingale by the sea-side. I don’t think I ever
told you, did I? my anti-Ovidian theory as to the real per-
sonality of that much misrepresented bird—the truth con-
cerning whom dawned upon me one day in my midsummer
school holidays,* when it flashed on me listening quite

‘Alas that neither moon nor snow nor dew
Nor all cold things can purge me wholly through’, etc.
Nor are we to forget that, in his great unpublished novel, he named the
heroine Lesdia.
1 In the collection of T. J. Wise.
2 ‘Sappho—because I have known thee and loved, hast thou
None other answer now?
As brother and sister were we, child and bird,

148

--- PAGE 146 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

THE NIGHTINGALE

suddenly (1) that this was not Philomela (2) in the same
instant who this was. It is no theory, but a fact, as I can
prove by the science of notation.’

The fragment which I print to-day is nothing but the
contemporary—or almost contemporary—record of this
youthful experience.

THE NIGHTINGALE

rr ————

HIRO’ the thick throbbings of her trembling throat,
Half stifled with its music, struggling gush’d
The torrent-tide of song, then free burst out
And in a tempest whirl of melody rush’d
Thro’ the stirred boughs. The young leaves on the trees
Flutter’d, as in a storm, to that harmonious breeze.
It floated now serenely, sweet of breath,
As with full conscious beauty now content,
Now shivered into dim delicious death,
Dash’d down a precipice of music, rent
By the mad stream of song; whirl’d, shook, rang out, spoke,
Stunning the charmed night with long melodies,
Then in a thousand gurgling eddies flew
Of whirlwind sweetness, lost in its own sound,
Since thy first Lesbian word
Flamed on me, and I knew not whence I knew
This was the song that struck my whole soul through,
Pierced my keen spirit of sense with edge more keen,
Even when I knew not,—even ere sooth were seen,—
When thou wast but the tawny sweet-winged thing
Whose cry was but of spring.’
(On the Cliffs (composed 1879)—Songs of the Springtides.)

149

--- PAGE 147 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

As eddying winds of autumn when they blew,

Caught the sere leaves and hurried round and round,
So her rich notes tumultuous panted she, .
Then into fitful peace dropt down harmoniously.
Hark! now they storm again and whirl along
Swift passion; strange, passion should be so sweet!
What stings thee madly into sudden song,

O nightingale? What joy or grief is meet
To father such delight? Some say for ever
Thy wild strain blindly maddens down grief’s passion-river
Others, that with fierce joy intoxicate

Thou variest in sweet labyrinthine maze
A wild delight of thy rich woodland state

Alone among green leaves, where softly plays
Thy trembling wooer, Zephyr; whatsoe’er
No grief or joy of ours was ever yet so fair.

Never but once did mortal fire of passion

Such a fierce sweetness thrill, when she who died
Whirl’d by a storm of love and indignation

From dusk Leucadia’s rock, her poet pride
Mastering wild love, rung out her burning song
To Lemnos’ shades and seas, her laurell’d troop among.
Never was sorrow half so full of joy,

Never was joy so like her sister sorrow;

Yet twins they are, and to the nearing eye

Alike inseparable, so one doth borrow

The other’s eyes to look more beautiful,
And both with mingled voice thy cup of song make full.
Sing on! thou singest as in early times
To Thracian forests in the accursed shade;
Sing on: thou singest as of early crimes. . . .
150

--- PAGE 148 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SONG

--- PAGE 149 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 150 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SONG

———

Tis poem occupies the last three pages ! of two leaves
of white ruled paper, quarto size, measuring 73 x 63
inches; the watermark is ‘Fellows’. ‘The paper is, there-
fore, found to be identical with that of the manuscript of
Swinburne’s Hyperion, and it is highly probable that both
poems were composed at about the same period, ive.
18 59°60.

he inspiration and the diction of this love-song recall
Shelley far more than Keats, and the connection with the
Lines to an Indian air (1 arise from dreams of thee) seems
evident:

‘The wandering airs they faint
On the dark silent stream.

The champak odours fail

Like sweet thoughts in a dream;
The nightingale’s complaint,

It dies upon her heart,

As I must die on thine,

Belovéd as thou art.’

But the metre is reminiscent of the opening and the close of
Keats’s Ode to Sorrow (Endymion, IV, 146, etc.):

‘O sorrow
Why dost borrow
1 The first page supplies a blank verse fragment of about eighteen lines
(‘O thou all-bearing mother’, etc.).
153

--- PAGE 151 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBU-RNE’S HYPERION

The mellow ditties from a mourning tongue?
To give at evening pale
Unto the nightingale

That thou mayst listen the cold dews among?”

The couplet after the gth stanza suggests that the song is
heard by the poet who does not speak in his own name.

SONG

——

LOVE! sole wingéd power,
When is thy dearest hour?
Or in what shapes of dreams best love we thee?
Whisper’d at cool twilight,
Or mid the dews of night,
At moonlight greetings by a summer sea?

The roses, eagerly,
Flush into life, and die
When they have crowned the rich air with their sweetness,
Even so, Belovéd, I
Could be content to die,
Pouring into thy heart my love’s completeness.

Heart, body, soul, I reel
Soon as thy voice I feel
Coming upon mine ears; or step, too light
To hurt the daisy’s head
With any bruising tread,
As thou steal’st on through the enamour’d night.
154

--- PAGE 152 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SONG

My brain swims into fire
My spirit’s fierce desire
Quails in the throbbing cells of my wild heart.
O let me leap to death
Dying, my life to breathe
Upon thy lips, struck thro’ with joy’s sharp dart!

An altar-offering
To Love, supremest king,
When in thy arms crowned with all bliss I lie!
How perfect were delight
If in that perfect light
Of love, my dazzled eyes might shut and die!

O Love, O fiery might,
Our weaker mortal sight
Faints down before thee, all our life turns pale;
And in one sudden throe
Of joy like sharpest woe
The burning spirits wither up and quail.

A sphere of dizzy glare
Earth reels thro’ blinding air
Wavering, and all things stagger in my dazzled sight;
And far and faint above
Beat the bright wings of love
As music trembles thro’ their living light.

I swoon as lilies do
When the sun fires their dew

155

--- PAGE 153 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

And drinks the morning from their folded leaves;
As swoons the acacia flower
Dead o’er the sun-dried bower,
When faint with heat tann’d labourers bind the sheaves.

Then out of that strange light
My soul reels into night,
When thou art gone, and earth turns black and cold;
And in that sudden ill
My heart shrinks sere and chill,
As withered flowers dropt on a barren wold.

The strange voice faded into trembling peace;
Then rose again but sad as funeral harmonies.

And then I cannot see,
For light is gone from me
I am aweary of the earth and sky;
Lying so far above;
Mine only, my own love
I cannot see thee. Pity, let me die!

Die lovely and unseen
Deep in the forest green,
Far from all voices and unpitying eyes!
Even as a wounded fawn
Cowering along the lawn,
Creeps slowly into some lone brake and dies!

156

--- PAGE 154 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

EPICURUS

EEE

--- PAGE 155 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 156 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

EPICURUS

Tae poem occupies the first three pages of two leaves
of white ruled paper, quarto size, bearing the water-
mark: ‘Edwin Smith’; the paper being thus identical with
that of the manuscript of Swinburne’s Hyperion. The lines
seem to be a half-didactic, half-lyrical exposition of Epicurus’
doctrine and is strongly reminiscent of the De Rerum Natura.
It should be noted that Swinburne’s metaphysics are on
the whole similar to those of Lucretius, and this poem,
Epicurean though it may purport to be, is interésting as
an early and violent expression of its author’s life-long
antitheism.

The diction and style are often similar to Keats’s, and the
whole recalls the speech of Oceanus in Swinburne’s Hyperion.
This is borne out by the presence of words like: calm-
throned, lofty-shrined, high-thoughted, serene, bale, while such
lines as:

‘And Memory her quiet evening-star’
or:

‘Begotten of the air on phantasy’
speak for themselves.

EPICURUS
EE
Is is not in the hot and hurrying strife
Of million feet fast thundering to the goal,
Nor in the clamorous triumph shouts which roll
159

--- PAGE 157 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

About the toil and pain, that dwells true life.
Cal-thronéd in the inmost fane of thought,
Quiet and sunny as the summer air
That sleeps on woody glens and mountains bare
Alike, she sits; and there the soul is taught
To know herself, to know and learn of time,
And Hope, the planet smiling on her prime,
And Memory, her quiet evening-star.
Too lofty-shrined for shock of earthly war
‘That thunder-shakes the restless world beneath,
She sits, her head veiled in a cloudy wreath,
Thro’ which no unpurged eyes of dullard earth,
Unhallowed by the soul-light’s inward birth,
May peer; she sits serene, no thunder nears
The crown of scathless laurel that she wears;
Only High Wisdom’s Light Supernal strikes
Her upturned eyes and solemn brows and streaks
With fleckel’d glory the enwoven mist.
Sometimes she bends her wondering ear to list
The tumult and the madness and the moan,
Where man’s armed heel smothers his fellow’s groan
And smiles at hearkening the ancient wail
Float up to the deaf skies its chaunted bale,
From the low valley where blind mortals grope,
Unseeing the white portals bright with hope
And broad and clear, where Wisdom sits supreme,
That shut their dull lids on the clear sunbeam
And look into each other’s face and say,
Is it not dark? and ’tis the full noonday!
She openeth her solemn lips serene,
And calleth evermore, but none come in.

160

--- PAGE 158 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

EPICURUS

O men, clay-children, old earth’s later seed,

Let time out of your generations breed

Wisdom of knowledge, tho’ slow born; let Truth
Renovate your blind age to golden youth, :
Divine, high-thoughted; lo, ye wander far,

Led by the soft light of no guiding-star;

Ye mould fair shapes out of slow brightening dreams,
And gild blank shadows with some faint truth-gleams;
You build hopes, blossoming near youth’s bright skies;
They fail, and straight aloud your vain voice cries
For help upon those fancies! Woe to thee,

Weak man, if groping on life’s blindfold way

Thou cast the reins of journeying away,

And turn soft eyes of hope towards fantasy;

And put the reins into a phantom’s hand;

And say: Now guide me to the Happy Land!

Lo, I am wandered from the fair truth-light,

Guide me to pleasant day from ’wildering night.

O fool, that what he cannot do, he deems

A phantom can—a creature of his dreams,—
Begotten of the air on phantasy!

Doth the wind answer? Doth the sounding sea
Thunder ye back thro’ showers of blinding foam,
‘Your gods are true! their strength your spirit’s home!’
Answers the earth, or stars of holiest light,

Quietly sailing thro’ the quiet night?
Answers the great sun on his fiery flight?
Who bids ye kneel and pray and incense-steam
His bloody shrine from censers that o’erteem?
Who first unlocked the floodgates of that stream
Of Human Life, down which we roll along?

161 L

--- PAGE 159 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SWINBURNE’S HYPERION

Who tells ye of the Gods ye cry on? No,
There is no help but man’s for man below;
And he shall work and triumph and be strong
In wisdom solely by his proper might;

The rest is darkness, though ye call it light.

1 Swinburne has developed in the Pre/ude to Songs before Sunrise a doctrine
which is strictly similar:

‘For what has he whose will sees clear
‘To do with doubt and faith and fear
Swift hopes and slow despondencies? . . .
Him can no God cast down, whom none
Can lift in hope beyond the height
Of Fate and Nature and things done
By the calm rule of might and right. ...
Save his own soul’s light overhead
None leads him and none ever led...
Save his own soul he hath no star,
And sinks, except his own soul guide,
Helmless in middle turn of tide.’

Of course the diction has here reached an excellence which the young
poet of 1860 could not command; but the idea has not changed.

162

--- PAGE 160 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY

A. WORKS ON ENGLISH PROSODY
E. Guest. 4 History of English Rhythms. 1882.
T. S. Osmond. English Verse Structure. London, 1897. Metrical
Rhythm. London, 1905.
Jacob-Schipper. Englische Metrik, Cambridge, rgo1; and Oxford, 1910.
Paul Verrier. Essai sur les principes de la métrique anglaise. 1909.
G. Saintsbury. 4 History of English Prosody. London, 1909.

B. KEATS
(The books marked with a * were in Swinburne’s Library)

1. Works of Keats:

The Poetical Works of Coleridge, Shelley and Keats. Paris, Galignani, 1829.

The Poetical Works of Fokn Keats. Smith’s Standard Library. London,
1840.

The Poetical Works of Fokn Keats, London, Smith, 1841.

The Poetical Works of Fohn Keats. London, Moxon, 1846 (1847).

* Life, Letters and Literary Remains of Fokn Keats. Edited by Richard
Monckton-Milnes. 2 vols. London, Moxon, 1848. [The Fall of
Hyperion is here for the first time mentioned and referred to asa recast.]

* The Poetical Works of Fohn Keats. London, Moxon, 1851.

* The Poetical Works of Fohn Keats. With a Memoir by Richard Monck-
ton-Milnes. London, Moxon, 1854.

Another Version of Keats's ‘Hyperion’. (With an introductory note signed
R. M.-Milnes.) Printed for private circulation. Philobiblon Society.
1856. [The Editor is doubtful whether the poem is first draft or
a recast].

* The Poetical Works of Fohkn Keats. With a Memoir by R. M.-Milnes,
New edition. London, Moxon, 1863.

163

--- PAGE 161 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY

The Poetical Works of Fohn Keats. With a Memoir by Lord Houghton.
Enlarged edition. London, Moxon, 1865.

The Poetical Works of Fokn Keats. With a Memoir by the Right Hon.
Lord Houghton. London, Moxon, 1866.

The Life and Letters of Fohn Keats. By the Right Hon. Lord Houghton.
A new Edition. London, Moxon, 1867. [The Fal/ of Hyperion (en-
titled Hyperion, a Vision) is here reprinted for the first time from the
limited edition of 1856.]

The Poetical Works of Fohn Keats. With a Memoir by Lord Houghton.
London, Moxon, 1871.

The Poetical Works of Fohkn Keats. Edited with a critical Memoir by
W. M. Rossetti. London, Moxon, 1872.

The Poetical Works of Fohn Keats. Edited by W. B. Scott. London,
Routledge, 1873.

The Poetical Works of Fokn Keats. Chronologically arranged and edited
with a Memoir by Lord Houghton, D.C.L., etc. London, G. Bell &
Sons, 1876. [Aldine edition.]

* Letters of Fohn Keats to Fanny Brawne, written in the years MDCCCXIX
and MDCCCXX and now given from the Original Manuscripts.
With Introduction and notes by H. Buxton Forman. London, Reeves
& Turner, 1878. [Printed for private circulation; one of 50
copies.]

The Poetical Works of Fohn Keats. With a Memoir by Lord Houghton.
Second [Aldine] edition. 1879.

* The Poetical Works and other Writings of Fohn Keats. Including poems
and numerous letters not before published. Edited by H. Buxton
Forman. 4 vols. London, Reeves & Turner, 1883.

The Letters of Fohn Keats. Edited by Jno. Gilmer Speed. New York,
Dodd, Mead & Co., 1883.

The Poetical Works of Fokn Keats. Edited by H. Buxton Forman. Lon-
don, Reeves & ‘Turner, 1884.

Letters of Fokn Keats to Fanny Brawne. Edited by H. Buxton Forman.
Second edition, revised and enlarged. London, Reeves & Turner,
1889.

164

--- PAGE 162 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Poetry and Prose by Fohn Keats. Edited by H. Buxton Forman. London,
Reeves & Turner, 1890.

Letters of Fokn Keats to his Family and Friends. Edited by Sidney Colvin.
London, Macmillan, 1891.

* Keats (Fokn): Poems overseen for the Press by F. 8. Ellis. (Kelmscott
Press), 1894.

* The Letters of Fohn Keats. Complete revised edition, edited by H. Buxton
Forman. London, Reeves & Turner, 1895.

* The Poems of Fohn Keats. Edited by G. Thorn Drury and R. Bridges.
1896.

The Poetical Works of Fokn Keats. Edited by H. Buxton Forman. Lon-
don, Reeves & Turner, 1898. Sixth Edition.

The Complete Works of Fokn Keats. In five volumes. Edited by H.
Buxton Forman. Glasgow, Gowans & Gray, 1900-1.

Hyperion: a Facsimile of Keats’s Autograph Manuscript. With Introduction
and notes by Ernest de Sélincourt. Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1905.

* The Poetical Works of Fokn Keats. Edited by H. Buxton Forman, C.B.
Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1906.

The Keats Letters, Papers and other relics. With foreword by Theodore
Watts-Dunton, etc. John Lane Company, 1914. (310 copies only.)

Keats's Poetical Works. Edited by H. Buxton Forman. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1914.

The Poems of Fokn Keats. Edited by E. de Sélincourt. Methuen & Co.,
Ltd., London, 1904, 1907, 1912, 1920.

2. Works on Keats:
By M. Arnold (First Essays in Criticism, 1865). Maurice de Guerin.

By Matthew Arnold. On she Study of Celtic Literature. London, Smith
Elder, 1867.

* Bryan Waller Procter (Barny Cornwall). 4% Autobiographical Fragment
and Biographical Notes. London, G. Bell, 1877.

By W. M. Rossetti. Lives of Famous Poets,, London, Moxon, 1878.
165

--- PAGE 163 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY

The English Poets. Selections with critical introductions by various writers.
London, Macmillan & Co., 1880. 4 vols. [The fourth volume in-
cludes a selection from Keats’s works preceded by Matthew Arnold’s
famous essay.]

By W. M. Rossetti. The Life of Fokn Keats. London, Walter Scott,
1881.

By Sidney Colvin. Keats. (English Men of Letter Series.) London,
Macmillan & Co., 1887, 1920.

J. Texte. Keats et le Néo Hellénisme. Etudes de littérature comparée.
Paris, 1898.

By Charles Wells. Foseph and his Brethren: A Dramatic Poem. With
an Introduction by A. C. Swinburne, and a Note on Rossetti and
Charles Wells by Theodore Watts-Dunton. Henry Frowde: Oxford
University Press (The World’s Classics), 1908.

Lucien Wolff. ohn Keats: Sa vie et son euvre. Paris, Hachette, 1910.
Keats's Treatment of the Heroic Blank Verse. Paris, Hachette, 1910.

F. Olivero. Keats and the Minor Poems of Milton. Englische Studien,
Vol. XLIII. Leipzig, rgr1.

D. W. Rannie. Keats’ Epithets (English Association, Vol. III). 1912.

L.N. Broughton, etc. 4 Concordance to the Poetical Works of Fohn Keats.
Carnegie Lippincott, 1920.

Amy Lowell. Keats. 1925.

John M. Murry. Keats and Shakespeare. London, 1925.
H.W. Garrod. Keats. 1926.

Clarence D. Thorpe. The Mind of Fohn Keats. 1926.

C. SWINBURNE
1. Works of Swinburne:

Swinburne’s published works (Prose and Poetry). Chatto & Windus,
Heinemann, etc.

The Complete Works of A. C. Stoinburne (Bonchurch Edition). 1926, etc.
166

--- PAGE 164 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY

‘The Letters of A.C. Swinburne. (Edited by the late Mrs. D. Leith: Chatto,
1917; by Rickett and Hake: Murray, 1918; by E. Gosse and T. J.
Wise: Heinemann, 1918.)

Manuscripts, Letters and privately printed Works in the Collection of T. J.
Wise.

References to Keats in Swinburne’s works:
Keats and Théophile; Keats and Boileau: (Essay on Th¢ophile, composed
circa 1862. Privately printed in 1915).

Keats and Baudelaire: (review of Baudelaire’s Fleurs du Mal in the Spectator.
September, 1862).

Keats and Burns: (Essay on William Blake, 11: Lyrical Poems; composed
circa 1864, published 1868).

Keats inferior to Shakespeare (Notes on Poems and Reviews. 1866).

Keats’s use of nature (Essay on Byron. 1866).

Parallel with de Guérin (M. Arnold’s New Poems. 1867).

Ode to Melancholy (Notes on Designs of Old Masters at Florence, 1868),
also (Essay on Coleridge, 1869).

Parallel with Shelley (Notes on the text of Shelley. 1869).

Reference to Lamia (Heptalogia. Last Words of a seventh-rate poet. 1880).

Keats and Shakespeare’s Troilus (Study of Shakespeare, III. 1880).

Article on Keats in the Encyclopedia Britannica (composed 1881, published
1882).

Keats’s zstheticism; parallel with Gautier; his much-revised manuscripts;
Keats and Wordsworth in their relation to nature; ranked below
Coleridge and Shelley (Essay on Wordstvorth and Byron. 1884).

Publication of the Brawne letters: (four sonnets entitled Post Mortem. First
published in the Fortnightly Review, January, 1884; reprinted as
In Sepulcretis in A Midsummer Holiday, 1884).

Unmanliness of Coleridge and Keats (review of the Journal of Sir Walter
Scott. 1891).

Keats and John Day (Essay on Fohkn Day. 1897)

167

--- PAGE 165 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY
References to Keats in Swinburne’s Letters, etc.:

Intended article on Keats for Moxon’s Miniature Poets: To Lady Tre-
velyan. March, 1866. Letter to W. M. Rossetti. January 4, 1866
(unpublished).

W. M. Rossetti’s edition of Keats’s Poetical Works: Letter to W. M. Rossetti.
May 23, 1870 (unpublished).

Keats’s beauty as described by Mrs. Proctor: to Lady Swinburne. Novem-
ber 15, 1874.

The Life of A. C. Swinburne, by Edmund Gosse, 1917. Chapter IX—
Personal Characteristicsp—page 269. August 16th, 1876 [an extract
from Edmund Gosse’s private journal is given under that date in
which some interesting dicta of Swinburne on Keats are recorded].

Merit of Lord Houghton’s edition of Keats: to Atheneum. January, 1877.
Keats and Jehannot de Lescurel: to E. Gosse. April, 1877.

Acknowledgments of Forman’s edition of Keats’s Love-Letters: to Buxton
Forman. February 22nd and March rsth, 1878.

Intended Essay on Keats for Ward’s English Poets: to E.Gosse. October
6th, 1879.

Arnold on Keats: to E. Gosse. October roth, 1879.

Encyclopedia Britannica Article completed: to E. Gosse. March, 1881.
Endymion: to Th. Watts. October rsth, 1881.

Tendency to depreciate Keats: to Atheneum. November 13th, 1886.
Keats’s Grave: to Isabel Swinburne. October 14, 1888.

2. Works on Swinburne:

A. Gabrielson. Rime as a criterion of the pronunciation of Swinburne, etc.
1909.

Gunnar Serner. The Language of Swinburne’s Lyrics and Epics. 1910.

Maria Kado. Swinburne’s Vershunst, Berlin. Normannia, rgtt.

Alfred Léhrer. Swinburne als kritiker der Literatur. 1925.

168

--- PAGE 166 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY

D. SWINBURNE AND KEATS

Louis Etienne. Fokn Keats et A.C. Swinburne. Reoue des Deux-Mondes.
15 Mai, 1867.

E. MILTON

J. Bradshaw. 4 Concordance to the Poetical Works of Fokn Milton. Son-
nenschein, 1894.

L. E. Lockwood. 4 Lexicon to the English Poetical Works of Mitton.

R. Bridges. Milton’s Prosody. London, 1893, 1901, 1921.

J. S. Smart. The Sonnets of Milton. Maclehose Jackson, 1921.

R. D. Havens. The Influence of Milton on English Poetry. Harvard
University Press, 1922. (Chapter X for Keats; pp. 541, and 568-9
for Swinburne.)

Swinburne—Works, Prose and Poetry.

[The chief references to Milton are to be found: in the Short Noses
on some English Poets (Miscellanies, ed. 1911, pp. 13-23), in Contem-
poraries of Shakespeare (reference to Comus, p. 151) and in the article
on Shelley in Chambers’s Cyclopedia (reference to the Pamphlets); also
in the poems: Songs efore Sunrise (An Appeal, Eve of Revolution
(stanzas 15-16), Perinde ac Cadaver), Studies in Song (Song for the
Centenary of W. 8. Landor, stanzas 2, 22, 49), Sonnets on English
Dramatic Poets (XXI, Epilogue), Astrophel (Via Dolorosa: Trans-
Siguration), A Channel Passage (Cromwell's statue), Posthumous Poems
(Memorial verses on the death of Karl Blind); a reference to Milton and
his relation to Marlowe will be found in a letter from Swinburne to
John H. Ingram (January 23rd, 1904); see also: Three Plays of Shake-
Speare, p. 79.]

F, SHELLEY, ETC.

F. S, Ellis. Concordance to the Poetical Works of Shelley.
W.H. Hunt. Pre-Raphaelitism. 2 vols. 1913. Second Edition.
D. G. Rossetti. Works. Ellis, rgtt.

169

--- PAGE 167 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY

D.G. Rossetti. Letters on Keats (privately printed by T. J. Wise. 1919).
‘W. M. Rossetti. 4 Memoir of D. G. Rossetti. 1896.

Léonie Villard. Influence of Keats on Tennyson and Rossetti. 1914.

W. Morris. Complete Works. (24 vols.)

J. W. Mackail. Life of W. Morris.

G.B.J. Memorials of Sir Edward Burne-Fones.

W.A. Knight. Memoir of Fohn Nichol.

W. Hardman. 4 Mid-Victorian Pepys (ed. by S. M. Ellis).

George Meredith. esters. Edited by his son. Constable, 1912.

170

--- PAGE 168 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INDEX

EESCHYLUS, 78, 82 n., 112

Agave, 117

Age of Shakespeare, 92

Alcides, 135

Anactoria, 65, 147 n.

Arnold, Matthew, essay on, 31-4

Arnold’s Essay on Keats, 46, 48, 53
Literary criticism, 55, 57

Art for Art’s sake, 56, 77

Artemis, 128

Atalanta, 78, 111 n.

At Eleusis, 65

Atlas, 119

August, 76

Aurora Leigh, 63

Baccuus, 117, 128, 142

Ballad of Life, 75

Ballad of Death, 75

Ballad of Burdens, 76 n.

Ballads: Second Love, Burd Mar-
garet, 61

Balzac, H. de, 86

Bards of Passion and of Mirth, 66

Baudelaire, Charles, 56, 86

Before a Crucifix, 66

Belle Dame sans Merci, La, 47, 66

Beounlf, xiv

Blake, William, Essay on, 3

Boccaccio, G., 86

Brawne, Fanny, letters to, 41-5) 54-5

Browning, Robert, 86

Buchanan, Robert, 30

Burden, Jane, xix

Burne-Jones, Edward, 27

Burne-Jones, Lady, 26, 27

Burns, Robert, 32

Cap AND Betts, Tue, Swinburne’s
criticism of, 40

Century of English Poetry, 34

Chapman, George, 105

Chastelard, 74

Chénier, A., 79

Chorus, 82 n.

Citheeron, 117

Cceus, 125

Coleridge, Essay on, 31, 35

Colvin, Sidney, 103

Comus, 92

Cromwell, O., 92

Cyprus, 127

Cytherea, 127

DANTE, 92

Death of Sir Fohn Franklin, The, 84 0.
Dedicatory Epistle, 148

Diomedes, 128

Dryden, John, 60, 65

Ecuo, 63

Eliot, T. S., 90

Elizabethan dramatists, 86

Elizabethan plays, 60

Encyclopedia Britannica, article in, 40,
46-54

Endymion, 50-1, 67

Epicurus, 159-62

Epipsychidion, xiv

Epistle, 61

Erebus, r4r

Etienne, Louis, 53, 78

Euripides, 69, 79 n.

Eve of St. Agnes, 47

Eve of St. Mark, 47

171

--- PAGE 169 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INDEX
KEATS, JOHN:

Fazer, G. C., xxi
Falconer’s Shipwreck, 91 n.
First Love, 83

Fitzgerald, Edward, gr n.
Forman, H. Buxton, 41-4

GALLAND, René, xxi, 27 n.

Gautier, Théophile, 56

Giants and Gods, 34-5

Gillet, Louis, 79 n.

Gosse, Sir Edmund, xxi, 40, 45, 82
Gray, David, 51 n.

Guérin, Maurice de, 32-3

HADEs, 141

Herbert, Mrs., xix
Hermes, 128

Hertha, 112

Hesiod, 105-6

Homer, ro5-6

Horace, 106

Horne, R., 109 n.
Hugo, Victor, gr

Hunt, W. Holman, 26 n.
Hymn of Man, 112
Hymn on the Nativity, 94
Hyperion, 38, 47

Hyperion in Swinburne’s Poem, 104-5

Swinburne’s Hyperion, 117-44

ILton, 128, 129

Inscriptions on a Pedestal, 66
Isabella, 38, 47, 66

Ixion, 142

Jeunesse DE SWINBURNE, La, xi n.,
48 ny 56 ny 60 ny 79 ny 84 ny

91 Dy 109 ne

Fournal of Sir W. Scott, article on,

44n.

172

and Rossetti, D. G., 26
and Morris, W., 26-7
and Burne-Jones, E., 27
and Ruskin, J., 27
and Meredith, G., 27 n.
and Rossetti, W. M., 28
and Scott, W. B., 28
and Watts-Dunton, Th., 28
and Nichol, J., 28
References to, by Swinburne +
Essay on Théophile, 28-9
Essay for Moxon, 29-30
Essay on Byron, 31
Essay on Arnold, 31-4
Essay on Blake, 31-2
Notes on Poems and Reviews, 32
Notes on the text of Shelley, 35-6
Essay on Wordsworth and Byron,
36 n.
W. M. Rossetti’s Selections, 37-40
Article in Encyclopedia Britannica,
40, 46-54
Criticism of The Cap and Bells, 40
Post Mortem (In Sepulcretis), 41-5
Fournal of Sir Walter Scott, 44 n.
Intended article for Ward’s poets,
45
Lamia, 38, 47
Eve of St. Agnes, 47
Eve of St. Mark, 47
Isabella, 38, 47, 66
Hyperion, 38, 47
Otho the Great, King Stephen, 38, 47
Belle Dame sans Merci, La, 47-8, 66
Odes, 48
Ode to Maia, 39, 48
Sonnets, 48, 66-7
Endymion, 51, 67-8
Meg Merrilies, 39, 66
Lines to Hope, 66

--- PAGE 170 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INDEX

KEATS, JOHN:
References to, by Swinburne:
Ode to Fancy, 66
Bards of Passion and of Mirth, 66
To Some Ladies, 67
Lines written in the Highlands, 67
Ode on Indolence, 75
Ode on a Nightingale, 80
Ode to Sorrow, 153-4
Keatsian lines in Swinburne’s Hyperion,
xiv—xvi, 89-90
King Stephen, 38, 47

LAMIA, 38; 47

Landor, W. S., 91

Laus Veneris, 75

Lemnos, 150

Lempriére, J., 105

Lesbia Brandon, 148 n.

Lethe, 142

Letters, 61

Leucadia, 150

Liberty and Loyalty, On, 93 0.
Lindon, L., 41

Lines to Hope, 66

Lines written in the Highlands, 67
Locrine, 66

Loyal Servant, The, 84
Lucretius, 159

Lycidas, 94

Mar.owe, CRR., 93

Mars, 128, 129

Maud, 63

Mazzini, Giuseppe, 92

Meg Merrilies, 39, 66

Meredith, George, 27 n.

Middleton, Essay on, 35

Millais, 26 n.

Milnes-Monckton, R. (Lord Hough-
ton), 27-8, 78, 85, 103

MILTON, J.: 70, 90, etc., 108, etc.
Comus, 92
Pamphlets, gr
Hymn on the Nativity, 94
Lycidas, 94
Sonnets, 94
Miltonic lines in Swinburne’s Hyperion,
xv-xvi, 98-9
Monomaniac’s Tragedy, 63
Morris, William, 26-7, 61, 86

NICHOL, JOHN, 28

Nicolson, Harold, 52 n.
Nightingale, The, 149-50

Note on Charlotte Bronté, 35
Notes on Poems and Reviews, 32
Notes on the text of Shelley, 35-6
Nympholept, A, 79

OceaNus, 124
Ode :
to Mazxzini, 62
to the Night, 62-3
to Victor Hugo, 94
Keats’s Odes: 48
to Maia, 39, 48
to Fancy, 66
on Indolence, 75
on a Nightingale, 80
to Sorrow, 153-4
Olympus, 127
On the Cliffs, 94) 148
Otho the Great, 38, 47
Ovid, 106

PALACE OF PAN, THE, 79
Pallas, 129

Pan and Thalassius, 79
Pandora, 135

Payne, J. B., 29, 37
Pentheus, 117, 142

173 - oe

--- PAGE 171 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INDEX

Phoebus, 128

Plato, 129

Poems and Ballads, 1866, 37, 75

Pope, Alexander, 60

Porphyrion, 133) 137

Poseidon, 127

Post Mortem (In Sepulcretis), 41-5

Prelude to Songs before Sunrise, 68 n.,
162,

Pre-Raphaelite Poems, 61

Prometheus, 135

QUEEN MoTHER, THE, 74

Rannkz, D. W., 27 n., 67

Rhoetus, 137, 141

Ronsard, Pierre, 105

Rosamond, 74,

Rossetti, Dante Gabriel, xix, 26, 30, 61,
66, 86

Rossetti, William Michael, 28, 29, 31 n.,

93
his Selections from Keats, 38-40
Ruskin, John, 27

Save, D. A. F., MARQUIS DE, 38 n.
St. Dorothy, 65, 76

Saintsbury, George, 98

Sappho, 78, 147-9

Saturn, 121, 135, 136

Saurat, Denis, xxi, 93 n.

Scott, William Bell, 28, 30
Sélincourt, de, E., 70, 77

Serner, Gunnar, 70-3, 89 n.
Shakespeare, W., 86

Shelley, P. B., xx, 36-7, 61, 86, 89, t14,

153
Short ‘Notes on English Poets, 91, 92
Siddal, Lizzie, xix
Sisyphus, 143
Smith, Alexander, 63

Socrates, 129
Song, 154-6
Sonnets, Dirae, on Carlyle, 94
Sophocles, 78
Spenser, Edmund, 75
Stubbs, Bishop W., 84 n.
SWINBURNE, A. C.:
Essay on Théophile, 28-9
Essay on Byron, 29-3
Essay on Keats for Moxon, 29
Essay on Blake, 31-2, 56
Essay on Arnold, 31-4
Notes on Poems and Reviews, 32
Century of English Poetry, A, 34
Essay on Coleridge, 34-35
Note on Charlotte Brontt, 35
Essay on Middleton, 35
Notes on the Text of Shelley, 35-7
Essay on Wordsworth and Byron,
36 n, 56n.
W. M. Rossetti’s Selections, 38-40
Article in Encyclopedia Britannica,
40, 46-54
On The Cap and Bells, 40
Post Mortem (In Sepuleretis), 41-5
Fournal of Sir Walter Scott, The, 44n.
Intended article for Ward’s English
Poets, 45
The Unhappy Revenge, 60
Triumph of Gloriana, The, 60
Elizabethan plays, 60
Ballads: Second Love, Burd Mar-
garet, 61
Pre-Raphaelite verses, 61
Letters, 61
Epistle, 6x
Temple of Fanus, 61-2
Ode to Maxxini, 62
Ode to the Night, 62-3
Echo, 63
Monoms..iac’s Tragedy, The, 63

174

--- PAGE 172 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INDEX

SWINBURNE, A. C.:
Anactoria, 65 .
Tristram, 65, 11 n.
St. Dorothy, 65, 76
Tewo Dreams, The, 65, 76
At Eleusis, 65
Before a Crucifix, 66
Inscriptions on a Pedestal, 66
Locrine, 66
Sonnets, 66-7
Thalassius, 68-9
Prelude to Songs before Sunrise,
68n., 162 n.
Queen Mother, The, 74
Chastelard, 74,
Rosamond, 74
Poems and Ballads, 1866, 37, 75
Ballad of Life, of Death, 75
Laus Veneris, 75
Ballad of Burdens, 76 n.
August, 76
Atalanta, 78, 111 n.
Pan and Thalassius, 79
Nympholept, A, 79
Palace of Pan, The, 79
Vision of Spring in Winter, A, 80-1
First Love, 83
Loyal Servant, The, 84
Death of Sir Sohn Franklin, The, 84n.
Short Notes on English Poets, 91, 92
Age of Shakespeare, The, 92
Article on Shelley, 92
Transfiguration, 93
On Liberty and Loyalty, 93 n.
Ode to Victor Hugo, 94
On the Cliffs, 94, 148
Sonnet, Dirae, on Carlyle, 94
Tale of Balen, 111 n.
Hertha, 112
Hymn of Man, 112
Swwinburne's Hyperion, 117-44

Lesbia Brandon, 148 n.

Nightingale, The, 149-50

Song, 154-6

Epicurus, 159-62

Tiresias, 118 n.

Dedicatory Epistle, 148

Swinburnian lines in Swinburne’s
Hyperion, xvii-xviii, 101-2

TALE OF BALEN, 111 n.

Tantalus, 139, 142

Tartarus, 141, 143

Temple of Fanus, xx, 61-2

Tennyson, Alfred, 86

Thalassius, 68-9

Themis, 135

Théophile, Essay on, 28-9

Tiresias, 118 n.

Tityus, 139

To Some Ladies, 67

Transfiguration, 93

Trevelyan, Lady, 31

Tristram, 65, 111 0.

Triumph of Gloriana, The, 60

Tawo Dreams, The, 65, 76

Typhceus, 139

UnuappPy REVENGE, THE, 60

VILLARD, LfoniE, 25 n., 26 n.

Vision of Spring in Winter, A, 80-1

‘Warp’s ENGLISH PokTs, 45

Watts, G. F., 26 n.

Watts-Dunton, Th., 28, 59, 148

Welby, Thomas Earle, xxi

Wise, Thomas James, xi, xxi, 26, 29,
37) 43 Ney $9 81, 84 Ny 114 147

Wordsworth and Byron, Essay on, 36 ny
55-7

Youn, Sir GEORGE, 25 n.

ZEUS, 128, 130, 134) 141

175

--- PAGE 173 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 174 [BLANK] ---


