PART II 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA 


Epigraphia Birmanica 


BEING 


LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
OF BURMA 


Edited by 
CHAS. DUROISELLE 


Superintendent, Archacological Survey, Burma Circle 


1960 


SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING AND STATIONERY, UNION OF BURMA 
,RANGOON 


CONTENTS 


me aT. eee ice -grinn YAGER 
Mon INSCRIPTIONS Gee ee ie bye ng Ee, Jit  69—168 
General Introduction. Fie wikis’ gf Tue a ak! Ske, 69— 84 
The Mén People and Their History : ee Se! es | 

Effects of Burmese Ri: ‘ : Views: FP 
Historical Position of th: . ede 4 Fins . r *. F2— 73 

Mon Influence or Puriacse Sivilixaon (7% «= 15 73 


The Mon Inscriptions of Upper and Lower Burma wg, SS 6-— 7-74 75 
Linguistic Importance of the Mon Inscription. . 9. 8—9 75— 76 
The Indian Element inthe Inscriptions . . . . ‘10—1i 76— 78 
Alphabet, Spelling, and Transcription ©. « °, «©. 12—18 78— 82 


_ Beginnings of Mon Epigraphical Study . «.. . 19-20 82— 83 
Acknowledgment of Assistance . 1.) 1 ew ee 21 83— 84 
“Section I.—The Early Mén Records 2 1. we eke 84—168 
Introductory Observations | : _" ose 84— 90 
King Kyansittha in Traditional Lesedidsty History . 22-23 84— 85 

_ King Kyansitthain Contemporary Records. « 24-27 85— 88 
Chronology of King Kyansittha and,of His Records . 28—30 88— 90 

The Inscriptions e & 3: 8 ° e e e e 2 el eee 90—168 


No, 1.—The Great Shwezigon Inscripti.n,Pagan .. 31-35 | 90-129 
No. | Il.—Fragmentary ReplicaofNo.I . . . 36—38  129—130 
No. ° I1I.—The Myakan Inscription, Pagan . . . 39-41 = 131-143 


No. IV.—The Alanpagan Inscription, Pagan. .  . 42 143 
No. V.—An Inscription in the Phayre Museum, _ 43. 143—147 
Rangoon. 

No. VI.—The Shwesandaw (i) Inscription, Prome . 44-47 147-152 


No. VIE.—The Shwesandaw (ii) Inscription, Prome . 48-49 = 152—152 
No. VIE. —The Shwesandaw (iii) Inscription, Pie 50—53 153—168 


LIST OF PLATES 
Mon Inscriptions— 


Plate V.—The Great Shwezigon ‘iscsi aie ie &B. facing Page 


Plate VI—~ Do, do. C&D , : 
Plate VII,— ‘Do. do. ; » Bee « “s 105 
Plate VII— - Do. do. .. GeH . = 6G 
Plate IX.—The Myakan Inscription (No. IM) . A&B. 7s 
Plate X.— Do. do. C&D "138 
Fiate XI.—An Inscription in the oe Museum (No. V) (Top Half) ~ 
Plate XII— _ Do. , (Bottom Half) * = 145 
Plate XIII.—The Shwesandaw (i) ee (No. VI) (Top Half) " 149 
Plate XIV.— Do. do, ‘Bottom Half) ” 150 
Plate XV.—The Shwesandaw (iii) Inscription (No, vay Top Half) "157 
Plate XVI.— Do. do. (Bottom Half) ” 162 
ABBREVIATIONS 
B.E.F.E.O. = Bulletin de !’Ecole Francaise J.RAS. = Journal. of the Royal Asiatic 
d’Extreme Orient, ‘Society of Great Britain 
E.I, = Epigraphia Indica. and Ireland. 
LA. = Indian Antiquary. J. Siam §. = Journal of the Siam Society. 
JA. = Journal Asiatique. E.M. = Early Mon... © 

J.A.8.B. = Journal of the Asiatic Society M.M. = Middle (or medieval) Mon. 

of Bengal, L.M. = Later Mén. 

J. Burma z Journal of the Burma ‘tr. = translation, 

Research $.J Research Society, . n = note. 


G-U.B.C.P.0,—No, 2, Dir. of A.S., lata! Ve 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 69 


MON INSCRIPTIONS. 


GENERAL INTRODUCTION.—THE MON PEOPLE AND THEIR HISTORY, 
1.1 The people who call themselves ‘“ Mén.” and who are known to the 
Burmese, and generally to Europeans, as “ Talaing,” are probably the descend- 
ants of a race that settled in Burma earliest of all the races that now inhabit 
the province. They seem to have preserved no traditions of their migration into 
the. country. At the present time they inhabit a small fringe of the coast-line 
of Lower Burma on both sides of the mouth of the Salween River, from some- 
where in the neighbourhood of Pegu to a little to the south of the town of Ye. 
In the Census of 1911 the persons returning themselves as Mén by race numbered 
320,629, of whom however only 179,443 claimed to be Mén in speech. Of this 
latter number 175,127 were returned as living in the Tenasserim division (139,970 
in the Amherst district, where they considerably outnumber the Burmese 
inhabitants, and 34,805 in the That6n district), while in the Pegu division there 
were only 1,960, and in the rest of the province the numbers are negligible. 
Plainly the language is moribund outside of the Amherst and Thatén districts, 
but in these and particularly in the former it still retains considerable vitality, 
though it is carrying on a very unequal contest with the much more important and 
growing official vernacular of the province, Burmese. However, as between 
the Census of 1901 and that of 1911, there has been a reviva} amounting to 
an increase of nearly 25,000 in the number of those who wish to be considered 
Mén in speech; so it would appear, either that the Mé6n-speaking population 
is actually augmenting now or that there has been a recrudescence of national 


1 For convenience of reference the commentary has been divided into numbered paragraphs and these 
will accordingly be referred to by their Arabic numerals. But in the case of the inscriptions, both as regards 
text, translation, and the notes thercon respectively, reference will be made by the serial (Roman) number of 
the inscription, the letter denoting the face (or fragment), and the Arabic number of the particular line, with 
the addition (when necessary) of “tr,” for “ translation” and “n,” for “ note,” 

10 


70 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. I 


self-consciousness in the race, leading it to insist more distinctly on its specific 
differences. This bids fair to postpone indefinitely the extinction of the language 
in Burma, which at one time seemed to be inevitable and imminent.’ 

2. In a remote past, which we cannot precisely date, inasmuch as it precedes 
local recorded history, the area occupied by the Mén people must have been very 
much more extensive than at present. To the northward their linguistic influence 
seems to have penetrated as far as Prome, where a completely different people and 
language were centred.2 To the southward the race seems to have wandered 
very far. There is some reason to believe that at a very'early period they settled 
in Ligor (on the isthmus leading to the Malay Peninsula)’; and as far south as the 
northern border of Johor (the most southern state in the Peninsula) there are 
jungle tribes who to this day use a series of numerals (up to “seven”) which are 
substantially identical with the 11th century Mén numerals.* About the middle 
of that century the Mén area was much reduced by Burmese conquests, 
culminating in the total annexation of the M6n country to the Burmese kingdom of 
Pagan and the settlement of Tavoy and Southern Tenasserim by Burmese, 
who thus cut off the Mén race from their connexion with the more ‘distant 
south. To the kingdom of Pagan they remained annexed (apart from occasional 
revolts of local Burmese governors or casual Tai incursions) until A.D. 1281,5 when 
they again became at least partially independent under the rule of an adventurer, 
probably of Tai origin. He founded a dynasty which rapidly assimilated itself 
to its Mén subjects and by degrees united the bulk of them into a kingdom 
comprising the three provinces of Bassein, Pegu and Martaban, with its capital 
eventually fixed at Pegu. This, the medieval Mén kingdom (as one may 
conveniently style it), was in the clerkly Pali terminology of the time called 


1 Cf. Haswell, Grammatical Notes:and Vocabulary of the Peguan Language (1874), pp. xii, xiii: 
“ The language is gradually going out of use, and the sooner it is supplanted by the Burman the better, yet I 
think it will be a‘ long time before it ceases to be the language in common use in country villages in 
the Amherst district, and near the sea coast of the Martaban district.” Haswell was the first scholar 
who seriously studied the language, and it is rather surprising that he should have expressed a desire for its 
extinction: such an attitude of detachment towards the subject of one’s life’s work is decidedly unusual, 

3 F.R.AS., 1911, p. 380,- See also Phayre, History of Burma (1883), p. 19. 

§ Bastian, Geschichte der Indochinesen (1866), p. 197, presumably basing the statement on native 
traditional history, says that this happened in As6ka’s time. This author’s sources are of very varying 
value, and of course this particular date, as a date, is absolutely worthless. ‘But the tradition may represent 
a real event in some distant past. 

« Compare the forms given in the Glossary with the Peninsular — in the Comparative Vocabulary of 
Skeat and Blagden’s Pagan Races of the Malay Peninsula (1906). It was the connexion with the 
jungle dialects of the Peninsula which impelled me originally to investigate Mén, 

* I follow the commonly received chronology as given in Phayre, op. cit., p. 6§ It agrees with the 
statements of the Mén chronicles (¢.g, p, 122 of the composite collection headed by the Sudhammavatiraja- 
varhsa, Pak Lat, A. Bud, 2453). 


PART I] | MON INSCRIPTIONS "1 


“‘Ramafifiadesa,” a name coined from the ethnic appellation “Rman,”! which is 
the medieval form of the word “ Mén” and appears constantly in inscriptions: 
of the 15th century. The kingdom lasted till A.D. 1540, when it was conquered 
by a Burmese dynasty from Taungu, which soon annexed Upper Burma as 
well. . This event involved the final extinction of Mén political independence. 
Save for a few shortlived revolts and other, mainly local, episodes and for a brief 
and revolutionary interval in the 18th century, when a temporary Mén revival 
threatened to turn the tables and subject Burma to Mén rule, the Méns of 
Burma now remained definitely subject. to the Burmese until the wars of the 
rgth century brought first one great section of them *. and soon afterwards 
‘the remainder ® under British rule. 


EFFECTS OF BURMESE RULE ON THE MON PEOPLE AND LANGUAGE. 


3. One result of Burmese rule, which was often oppressive and became 
particularly severe under the Alompra dynasty. in the 18th and. 19th centuries, 
was the assimilation of a large part of the Mén people to. their Burmese 
conquerors and a BIOECERSIVS dwindling of the area in which the M6n language 
prevailed. ‘ Its use was “strongly discouraged” after A.D..1757 and “ absolutely 
proscribed ” in Pegu from 1826 to 1852. Hence the great preponderance of the 
Méns of the Tenasserim division, where the British Government laid no restrictions 
on the use of the language, though on the other hand they took no active steps to 
encourage it. Another result was the degradation of ‘the spoken language 
from its old position as a national tongue with a literary standard, into the 
‘disintegrated state of a congeries of local ‘dialects, differing almost from village to 
village even in ‘the small area where it still forms a general medium of communica- 
tion. Burmese has largely taken its place as the form of speech of the educated 
and _ influential sections. of the community. The Mén written language has 
remained more uniform than the spoken, but its use is.even more restricted® On 
the other hand the positive influence of the Burmese language on the Mén 
does not appear to have been as great as might have been expected La oe 

? Probably pronounced Rémdn, 7.e, with a short neutral vowel in the first syllable and the accent on the 
final syllable (as usual in Mén words), See ¥, Burma Research Sa + 1914, PP. 59» 60; I91 5, Pp. 27. 

* By the annexation of Tenasserim in A.D, 1826. 

* By the annexation of Pegu and the rest of Lower Burma, 1852, - 


* Census of India, 1911, Vol. IX, Burma, Part I,—Report, p, 208, 


* In 1893, Temple noted that “the Talaing language, though still spoken to a considerable extent, is 
ceasing. to be a literary medium very rapidly; sc much so that it is already extremely difficult to find an 
educated Talaing able to read even modern documents in his native language ” (LA., 1893, Pp. 333 n.). 


72 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


the circumstances. The two languages are fundamentally distinct and uncon- 
nected, and they contrast to a marked degree in phonetics, morphology, and 
syntax. Apart from a certain amount of mutual borrowing of words it does not 
seem that they have greatly modified each other, though it is possible that 
Burmese influence has been a contributory cause in the Mén tendency towards 
monosyllabism (which, however, is capable of another explanation) and that certain 
conventionalities of Burmese orthography have been imitated in medieval and later 
Mén.’ A third consequence of Burmese rule was the emigration at various 
periods® of considerable sections of the Mén population to Siam, where their 
descendants still flourish in large numbers and keep up their ancestral speech and 
customs under the tolerant and sympathetic sway of the Siamese Government. 


HISTORICAL POSITION OF THE M6N INSCRIPTIONS. 


4. The foregoing preliminary observations will have served to pave the 
way towards a clear understanding of the historical position of the Mén 
records that are contained in this collection. Some of them rank among the 
oldest vernacuiar records of Burma,* being approximately coeval with the earliest 
of the Burmese ones. It is true that of the first period of M6n history, which 
terminated in the Burmese conquest of the 11th century, nothing apparently 
remains in the way of inscriptions, though probably some may yet be discovered 
when the work of excavation is systematically undertaken. But the second 
period, the subjection to Pagan, and the third, the time of the medieval Mén 
kingdom, are well represented. They are not, however, illustrated quite in the 
same way by their respective sets of records, for these do not run in precisely 
parallel lines. The earlier ones, though in the Mén language and found in various 


1 On occasions where it may be convenient to use abbreviations for the three main phases in the historic 
evolution of the Mén language (as hereafter described), the following will be used :—E,M.=Early Mén; M.M. 
=. Middle (or medieval) Mén; L.M.= Later Mén (including the modern form of the language), 

2 In some cases Méns were also taken away by the Siamese as prisoners during the wars between 
Burina and Siam, On the whole question of the immigration of the Méns into Siam, see F. Siam S. 
1913, Vol. X, Part 3. . 

$ In the large section of Indo-China in which Indian civilization became dominant it is the genera 
rule that inscriptions in an Indian language (mostly Sanskrit, sometimes Pili, in the extreme south in a few 
cases also Tamil) precede inscriptions in the local vernaculars, In Burma these early Indian inscriptions are, 
however, scarcer than, for instance, in Champa and Camboja, Two Pali inscriptions attributed on 
palaeographical grounds to the 6th century (or thereabouts) have been found at Prome ( F.4., juillet-aoat 1912, 
PP. 121-36 ; juillet-aoft 1913, pp. 193-5). The so-called Pyu inscriptions, in a vernacular of that neighbour- 
hood, seem to be somewhat later, but some of them appear.to be older than any of the hitherto discovered 
Mén records (£./., 1913, Vol, XII, pp, 127-32). It is highly probable that in the early period the ruling 
and educated classes in the several countries of Indo-China were Indian settlers and their locally born 
descendants, by whom from various centres Indian culture was diffused among the ruder native races, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 93. 


parts of Burma, nearly all emanated from the Burmese headquarters at Pagan and 
were in substance Burmese records; they really throw more light on Burmese 
than on Mén conditions. The later ones, belonging to the medieval Mén kingdom, 
with its centre at.Pegu, were found in the really M6n country of Lower Burma, the 
old Ramafifiades’, and are purely Mén records. 


MON INFLUENCE ON BURMESE -CIVILIZATION. 


s. This difference should be borne in mind; but, on the other hand, it must 
not be forgotten ‘that in a sense, apart from the linguistic one, even the Burmese 
records were to a very great extent, and probably more so in-early times than in 
later ones, a reflex'and copy of Mén thought and life. The conquest of the old 
Mén capital of Sadhuim (in Burmese pronounced That6n) was a critical moment in 
Burmese history in the same way that the Roman conquest of Greece was in the 
history of Rome. In each case the conquered nation imparted to the conqueror 
many things which he lacked and which he eagerly accepted. The Burmese took 
‘over from the Méns their form of Buddhism with its Pali canon, their particular 
variety of the Southern Indian alphabet, and certain useful or ornamental arts 
and crafts. Monks, scholars, and skilled artisans were imported in considerable 
numbers from the Mén country? to the Burmese capital, and it is largely due to 
the religious, scholarly and artistic impetus thus given that Burmese civilization, as 
illustrated for example in the temples and inscriptions of Pagan, took its particular 
line and form. That is not to say that the Burmese prior to this period were a 
mere race of savages, any more than were the Romans before they fell under 
glamour of Greek art and literature. But just as Rome became ina great measure 
Hellenized, so the Burmese adopted much from the Méns, and a great deal of 
what is now supposed to be distinctively and characteristically Burmese was in fact 
derived by them from the Méns, who had themselves originally borrowed most of 
it from India or Ceylon. For a brief period and under rather exceptional 
conditions the Mén language seems to have become a favourite vehicle for 
epigraphic records at Pagan, Prome, and elsewhere in Burma, side by side with 
Burmese.” 

* Burmese history goes so far as to attribute the conquest chiefly to the desire of the Burmese king for 
the possession of the Buddhist sacred books, though no doubt his real objects were mainly political, Fora 
definite case of a Mén scholar being imported by a Burmese king (the same who inspired most of our early 
M6n inscriptions), see 7, Burma R.S., 1912, pp.246-8, That was in A.D, 1107, 

* And also, at least in. one case, with the “ Pyu ” of the Prome region (F.R.A.S,, 1911, pp. 305-88), 
In the.same way Khmer (Cambojan) was occasionally used, as late as the middle of thé 14th century, at the 


Tai court of Sukhothai, where it was just.as much a foreign language as Mén was at Pagan (sce Finot, 
Notes d'Epigraphie Indochinoise (1916), p. 254). : 


74 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. t 


THE MON INSCRIPTIONS OF: UPPER AND LOWER BURMA, 


6. This use of Mén was fostered. by the patronage of a Pineal king whose 
reign covers the end of the 11th, and the beginning of the 12th, century; and it is 
to him and to the fortunate circumstance of his having been a great author or 
inspirer of such records (which were largely panegyrics on himself) that we owe 
nearly all the earliest’ Mén inscriptions -yet discovered. Apart from the much 
briefer documents engraved on small votive tablets and on glazed tiles illustrating 
Buddhist legends,? these early records constitute the whole of the material available 
for the study of the Mén language of the 11th and 12th centuries. After. this 
period there is an almost blank interval of about three hundred years. It may be 
that the use of Mén for epigraphic purposes in Upper Burma was dictated mainly 
by the fancy of an individual monarch and practically ceased when that influence 
was no longer operative. Or it may be that as Burmese scholarship developed it 
became more independent, a Burmese national reaction set in, and Mén .ceased to. 
be a fashionable literary medium at the Burmese capital. At any rate, ‘soon after 
the death of their chief royal patron, Mén inscriptions apparently became scarce in 
Upper. Burma : there are only two, not very long or important specimens, in the 
collection, one being a brief record of a danation by a later king and the other, 
which is probably of Mén authorship, commemorating the foundation of a 
provincial monastic building, 

7. The next big group of inscriptions in the collection dates from’ the 1 5th 
century, the high-water mark of the medieval Mén kingdom, and especially from 
the time of the great Mén king Dhammaceti. As already stated, these documents 
were found in the really M6n country of Lower Burma. To that fact, partly on 
account of the “exceedingly rainy * climate of that region and partly by reason of 
the destructive wars which have devastated it, we owe the unfortunate circum- 
stance that these medieval inscriptions. ate often less well preserved than the older 
records that have been left undisturbed in the deserted metropolis of Upper 
Burma. Both sets are, for the most part, temple records, and the temples in both 
cases were dedicated to the same faith, But, as even the most recent experience 
has again taught us, that fact is no safeguard in time of war; and there is reason 

1 Some of the inscriptions on glazed tiles adorning the Ananda pagoda at Pagan were discussed by 
Huber in 8.£.F,2.0., 1911, tome xi, no, 1, and the whole set is now being edited by Professor C, Duroiselle. 
These are of the early period.. Some of the medieval or later ones (also on glazed tiles) have been dealt with 
by myself (F,R8.4.5., 1912, -pp. 680-98, FY. Burma R.S., 1915, pp. 30, 31, 97, 98), and Duroiselle 


(Reports of the Superintendent, Archaeological Survéy, Burma, 1934, 1915), 
3 Jt is thus characterized in the Kalyani inscription, which discusses the point in some detail, 


PART I | MON INSCRIPTIONS 75 


to believe that in Lower Burma, as elsewhere, the destruction of . consecrated 
buildings was often systematic and intentional. Both the early and the medieval 
records are characterized by abundant .expressions of religious sentiment, and both 
were probably as a rule, and perhaps invariably, drafted by. ecclesiastics. But 
there is a marked difference between them. The earlier ones contain a much 
larger element of royal panegyric and’ also introduce, in some cases, many parti- 
culars about the state of the country and people. The picture is, no doubt, some- 
what idealized, but it is drawn with graphic, vivid touches. --Indeed, one or-two of 
these documents have some claim to be considered as pieces of literature and not 
merely as specimens of epigraphy. The-medieval records; on the other hand, 
restrict themselves more to specifically Buddhist matters (such as the incidents of 
Buddha’s life, but including also the local legends or traditions about the introduc- 
tion of the faith into Lower Burma, etc.), and to the details of the pious donations 
or of the construction or restoration of the buildings with which the records are 
connected. From the point of view of their contents they are, therefore, perhaps 
of somewhat less general interest than the older documents, but incidentally they 
sometimes contain items of historical, chronological, or topographical value. 


LINGUISTIC IMPORTANCE OF THE. MON INSCRIPTIONS.” 


8. Owing to the fact that the Mén language, especially in its older forms, is 
at present almost a sealed book to European scholars, the chief. point of interest in 
this collection of records is the language in which they are written. In that 
respect their value is beyond price. Mén is a member of a fairly large but much 
broken down and scattered family of languages, which extends (in detached 
fragments) from the extreme west of the Central Provinces of India through 
Assam and Indo-China right down into the Malay Peninsula. The family is of the 
highest linguistic interest, being very peculiar and characteristic in its structure, 
and apparently constitutes a series of links in a broken chain that formerly 
connected the still more extensive and important Malayo-Polynesian (or Austrone- 
sian) family with its original Asiatic home. Further, be it remembered that of all 
the languages of the scattered Austroasiatic family (as it has been’styled) only 
one other besides Mén, namely Khmer (or Cambojan), possesses literary records 
going back beyond the most recent times.! All the rest are known only in their 

_2 Annamese, though in some way connected, does not appear to be a genuiné member of the family ; 
and Cham, with its very mixed vocabulary, is claimed by some scholars for the Malayo-Polynesian family, 


and at any rate is not-in line with the rest of the Austroasiatic languages but heads a little group of 
its own, 


46 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL I 


modern forms. When these facts are borne in mind, it will be realized how 
important these Mén records are, especially the older ones. From them alone can 
we form anything like an adequate picture of the language in its earlier phases, 
when its structure was still relatively unimpaired and perspicuous : for here too, as 
‘is so often the case in the history of languages, the process of change, both 
phonetic and morphological, has been mainly in the direction of decay; there has 
been a progressive breaking down and obliteration of distinctive features. 

g. The medieval records represent, of course, a transitional stage between the 
early and. the late, or modern, Mé6n, but on the whole they may be said to 
approximate more to the latter than to the former. That is, however, more 
apparent than real, and is due in great part to the fact that the written language 
(like our own) has lagged behind the spoken one. Its orthography does not 
constitute a simple, straightforward system, but an elaborate tangle of conventions, 
complicated of course by the dialectic differentiation referred to in § 3.1 Some 
of these conventions in attempting to link the present with the past have only 
succeeded in falsifying both and producing spellings that never had any phonetic 
basis at all.2_ The medieval records, standing as they do between the early form of 
the language and the modern form, often throw light on both, and with their help 
the whole process of evolution of the M6n language during more than eight 
centuries can now be studied in detail. The fuller illustration of this subject must 
be left to a later stage, and it will suffice to have drawn attention here to its great 
importance from the point of view of linguistic study. 


THE INDIAN ELEMENT IN THE INSCRIPTIONS, 


10. One point worth noting, on account of the general interest attaching to it 
and the historical conclusions to which it may lead, is the Indian element which is 
such a marked feature in these records. Having regard to the fact that the Méns 


1 Cf. F.A., mai-juin 1910, pp. 477-505, in which an attempt is made to explain the phonetics of the 
modern stage of Mén in relation to the spelling. 

2 It is a fundamental defect of Schmidt’s “ Grundziige einer Lautlehre der Mon-Khmer-Sprachen’ 
(Denkschriften der k, Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, phil.-hist, Kl. (1905), Band LI) that it is 
based solely on the modern forms of the languages with which it deals, though specimens of early Khmer 
were available when it was written, Some of its conclusions will have to be revised by the help of the early 
Mé6n records, as pointed out by me in ¥. Burma R.S., 1915, pp. 28-30, Schmidt’s reliance on the 
modern orthography of Mén and Khmer (on behalf of which he breaks a lance with Finot in the introductory 
section of his valuable dissertation) is far more extensive than the case warrants, The spelling of these 
languages has been modified from time to time, so that it is no longer a safe guide to the old sounds, and as 
a clue to the historic development of their phonetics it is just about on a par with modern English 


spelling. 


» 


PART 11 | MON INSCRIPTIONS a 


at some very early period became acquainted with the form of Buddhism which 
uses Pali as its sacred language,’ it is not in the least surprising or remarkable 
that several of the inscriptions contain at the beginning, or the end, or in the 
middle, short Pali sentences testifying to the somewhat pedantic erudition of the 
draftsmen. More important is the considerable number of Indian loanwords in the 
Mén text itself: for these form an integral part of the language and are not merely 
tacked on like the Pali sentences.. They are very common in the early inscrip- 
tions, and many of such loanwords have survived through the medieval into the 
modern form of Mén. A remarkable proportion of these words is of Sanskrit 
origin, not Pali. Sometimes we find mixed forms, partly Sanskrit and partly Pali, | 
and of course also forms that are taken straight from Pali. The Sanskrit forms 
include some of the commonest religious terms, such as dharmma, swar (from 
svarga), and the like. As to the reason for their presence in early Mén, allowance 
must be made for the fact that Brahmans, who are often mentioned in the inscrip- 
tions,” played a great part at all the Indo-Chinese courts, from Burma to Champa. 
Vestiges of Hinduism have been found in Lower Burma, though they are not so 
common as in several other parts of Indo-China. But there is much reason to 
believe that some form of Buddhism using Sanskrit as its sacred language also 
existed there in former times,® just as it did, for example, in Camboja. The fact 
is not without some bearing on the much discussed question of the Sanskrit words 
in Burmese: there seems to be no necessity for the assumption which has been 
made that they must have come through a Chinese channel, in view of the occur- 
rence of words of the same class in Mén. The soundest inference seems to be 
the one drawn by Finot (7.A., /.c.) that Sanskrit and Pali (and the several forms of 
religion with which they are respectively associated) were more or less concurrent 
influences in the Mén country from an early period. Whatever may have been 
the channel or channels through which -he Sanskrit words came in, they are 
present in such numbers that the strength of the influences that introduced them 
must have been considerable and probably extended over a fairly long period. 

11. Other, more superficial, evidences of Indian influence are not wanting in 
our records: in the earlier ones the proper names are Sanskrit, Pali, or mixed ; and 


1 Finot has shown (7.A., juillet-aoht 1912, pp. 121-36; juillet-aoft- 1913, pp. 193-5) that the: 
Vibhaiga and other religious texts in Pali were known at Prome about the 6th-century A.D. As Prome 
is on the Irrawaddy, the presumption is that the Pali canon was introduced there by way of the river route, 
not by some difficult overland track; and consequently that it was known in the Mén. region round the 
mouths of the river before it reached Prome, , 

2 Eg. No.1 G17, 18. 3 See F.A., juillet-aout rgr2, pp, 121+36. 

4 Mahayanist Buddhism from about the 5th century A.D.. But the same learned scholar points out 
that the Hinaydna with a Sanskrit canon also enjoyed a wide diffusion in the Far East, 


II 


¥8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA TVoL. 1 


this persists more or less in the medieya] ones, though here a few other names 
occur which appear to be native. The kings, both Burmese and Mén, seem to 
have indulged in a. double nomenclature: an elaborate Indian name, sometimes of 
stupendous length, was used by them as their royal style, though they -had. shorter 
native names as well, by which (as a rule) they are known in the histories. In the 
inscriptions the Indian style is given the preference, presumably because it sounded 
grander and was the specifically royal name, the other . one being personal. 
Certain conventional phrases based on Indian originals are also sometimes uséd : 
for example, the people in general are styled ‘“‘the four castes,” although there ts 
no real reason to believe that, apart from the Brahmans, who were of foreign 
‘introduction, any real division into castes was recognized in Burma. | 


ALPHABET, SPELLING, AND TRANSCRIPTION. 


12, The alphabet of the inscriptions, like the generality of the so-called native 
alphabets of Indo-China and Indonesia, is manifestly derived from some South - 
Indian type, akin to the old Telugu-Canarese. Its form in the early Mén records 
(as the late Professor Kern pointed out to me) is very nearly identical with that of 
contemporary Javanese inscriptions, It is evident that in the early centuries of 
our era there was constant intercourse between Southern India and the Eastern 
regions to which Indian civilization spread itself, and that the fashions in the 
former country were readily followed in the latter? The identification of the 
various symbols used in the early Mé6n inscriptions and their derivation from their 
Indian prototypes offer no:special difficulties. The Méns discarded some of the 
Indian letters, as they had no use for them; others they used*<only in words of. 
Indian origin. But they also invented two new signs, both labial letters. The 
first of these is really a new letter’ and is found in the. early inscriptions, where.it 
has the shape of a circle with a smaller one inscribed in the ‘centre of it, looking in 
~ fact exactly like their combination zm, except of course.that the ‘latter is super-. 
script whereas the new labial} is on the line. This may have been.based on 
some northern form of 4, and finds its analogue in the so-called Pyu script. ‘The 
sound denoted is in modern Mén described as something between 4 and , ze. a 8 
deprived of sonority, and to me it sounds somewhat nasal and vaguely like w. 
The other labial is simply derived from the combination md, the b here being in a 
subscript form which has been slightly modified in the modern language, where the 

1 Finot (%.A., l.c.)-points out that the alphabet of the Prome Mauriggun plates (now in the British 


Museum and dating from about the 6th century) is practically identical with the Kadamba alphabet of 
‘North Kanara, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 79 


combination, when initial, is treated as a genuine letter (as it has now in fact 
become). It is extremely rare even in modern M&n, and of doubtful existence in 
the earlier phases of the language, and I have adhered to the transcription m0. 

13. The alphabet of early M8n has become in its tum, through the medieval 
stage, the ancestor of the modern Mén alphabet, which is substantially the same 
as the modern Burmese one. In the early stage the letters, though already 
showing a tendency to become circles, or parts of circles, or aggregates of such. 
elements, are still very distinctive and include some complex and beautiful forms.- 
In the medieval period the tendency is towards less distinctiveness: certain of the 
letters and combinations of letters beconie very similar to one another, thereby 
increasing the difficulty of deciphering blurred or otherwise damaged passages. 
As regards the size of the letters, the descriptions of the several records should be 
referred to. Speaking generally it may be said that in the early stage there is 
much variability, the height of the typical letters varying from about an inch to 
three-eighths of an inch as between one inscription and another. The medieval 
ones tend to a more generally uniform scale of about half an inch. These parti- 
culars refer, of course, to the generality of the letters, neglecting all such as by 
_ their special forms project above or below the general limits, and also excluding 
superscript and subscript symbols fram consideration. 

14. As regards the use of the letters, it may be noted that when a word has 
two medial consonants (without an intervening vowel) the matter can be treated in 
two ways: the first consonant receives a vivdma and the second then follows on 
the line ; or the second is written under the first, without any vivdma. The two 
methods are used interchangeably, but the second is preferred. The'letters 7 and 
# are sometimes superscript, the former very frequently, and are then to be read - 
immediately before the letter over which they stand. Superscript letters an 
many of the subscript ones affect special, modified forms. Initial vowels 
have their own proper forms,! but may also be represented by the symbol 
for initial @ with the appropriate auxiliary vowel symbol . added to it. 
These several alternative methods are. not differentiated in my transcription. 
Apart from such formal varieties as these (and a few-others heréafter mentioned) 
and from certain interchanges of cognate’ vowels, early Mén spelling is relatively 
regular and appears to be a genuine attempt, in the main fairly successful, .to 
write phonetically. Its transcription therefore offers few difficulties. Medieval 
Spelling is less genuinely phonetic ; it is partly more’ or less under the influence of 
the early spelling, partly an attempt to meet the phonetic changes that had taken 


! Not, however, @ of the diphthongs. 


80 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vow. t 


place in the meantime. In fact it is on the way to the complexities of the modern | 
system, and consequently the transcription is more remote from the phonetics in 
the medieval records than in the early ones. It is, of course, impossible to repre- 
sent in a literal transcription the modifications which the various sounds have 
undergone in thé course of the historic evolution of the language. An attempt 
will, however, be made hereafter to trace the outlines of these changes. 

15. The system of transcription here adopted for M6n is as follows :-— 


Vowels and Diphthongs. 


a a 4 i i u ai e ai tr) au 
Consonants. 
Velars : k kh gg — gh n 
Palatals : c ch j jh fi 
Cerebrals : t th d dh n 
Dentals : t th d dh n 
Labials : p ph b bh m 
Unclassed: yw r l 
§ S s h ] 
b : 


Excepting the addition of some extra letters, this scheme differs only in one 
particular from the system: of transliterating the Indian alphabet that has won the 
widest international consent. The letter w has been adopted instead of », partly 
because it is the modern representative in Mén (as in almost all the languages of 
Indo-China) of the Indian v, and chiefly because it is used in early M6n to form 
diphthongs and must therefore have had the value of w in that position at any rate, 
as it most probably had in all others. In the Indian sentences that occur in the 
inscriptions (but not in Indian loanwords and proper names found in a Mén 
context) the letter v will be used,.in conformity with Indian spelling.’ 

16. Theoretically, the vowel a is, as in other Indian alphabets, inherent in the 
consonants in general, unless negatived expressly (in one of the ways indicated 
in § 14). It therefore represents no separate symbol save when initial of 
a word or syllable. As a matter of fact the actual sound is not always a, 
and even in the early period it is probable that in svllables preceding the final 
one the inherent sound was really a short neutral vowel (something like the a 
in abide). The symbol @ stands for an inherent « modified by the addition 


1 In other respects, also, the usual Pali spclling will be followed in the Pali passages, 


PART I! ] MON INSCRIPTIONS 81 


of the anusvara symbol in a syllable closed by a velar. This begins to occur 
in the medieval records and the sound denoted is probably an open 0, much 
like our English aw. The diphthongs az and az also do not occur in the early 
stage of the language, though they are of course part of the Indian alphabet 
and are used in medieval and later Mén. In early Mén their place is taken 
(in the words where they subsequently occur) by various diphthongs formed 
with final y and w, respectively. The combination w7, not entered in the 
above scheme because symbolically merely made up of 7 and w, probably 
represented a neutral vowel (something like the one in our words bird, cur) and is 
very rare in early Mén, the vowel in question being therein usually represented 
by some other, almost at random and quite interchangeably (¢.g., a, 2, w, e, et). 
17. The cerebrals (except d and occasionally 7)! and the letters $ and / are 
confined to words of Indian origin (§ to Sanskrit, 7 to Pali words). The letter 
s when subscript in Mén words merely represents s, a usage to be paralleled in 
Javanese, where conjunct s has a forin derived from s. Modern Mén has 
dropped s and s from its alphabet. The peculiar labial 4 has been explained in 
§ 12. The apostrophe (’) represents the symbol for initial @ with the wrdma 
“over it and stands for the glottal check or abrupt ending of a vowel, This use is 
peculiar and un-Indian, but in early Burmese the same device was adopted to 
indicate the abrupt tone in words ending in a vowel. The letters mm and h 
represent symbols (anusvara and visarga, respectively) which the Méns put after 
the diphthongs, not among the consonants. They are properly speaking final 
sounds and of course involve no inherent vowel?; but they are really consonants, 
In early Mén 7 is merely shorthand for mz (final of a word or. syllable) and inter- 
changes freely with it. In medieval Mén m is sometimes superfluously followed 
by a final m, and has no force at all, apparently, in such cases. Later usage has 
adopted it as an abbreviation for (’) and even /, as well as for m. Its use as a 
vowel symbol has already been mentioned. In early Mén & interchanges with h 
in certain words, and the latter is sometimes superfluously added to the former, 
as m to m in the medieval stage. There seems to be no difference in their sounds 
aS consonants, but in the later stages of the language they become definitely 
separated and affect the preceding vowel differently. It will be understood that 
these explanations are merely intended to make the system of transcription 
adopted intelligible, and that other phonetic details will be considered separately, 


1 There is some icason to believe that originally 2 as well and also the aspirated sonants (which occur 
but rarely in Mén roots) were foreign to the language, 
* Naturally (’) has none either, 


82 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vot, 1 


18. A hyphen i is used, (1) at the end‘of a line if a word is not completed. 
there, (2) to separate letters which would otherwise form: one or- other of: 
the abovementioned digraphs (ai, au, wut, and the aspirated consonants), 
(3) between a consonant and a vowel to indicate that the consonant (with-an 
unexpressed a or short neutral vowel) forms a syllable and the written vowel (which 
in the original is in its initial form or attached to an initial a as.a fulcrum) begins 
the next syllable. This device is necessitated by the common habit of writing the 
second of such letters under the first as if. there were no intervening short vowel. 
When the two letters do not fall into one of the above categories, the hyphen has 
not-‘been inserted, but it: will be uriderstood- that, e,¢., in such a combination as ¢d- 
(initial) a short neutral vowel must be read after the #4. Nor has the hyphen been 
used . after m, for by ‘definition the »-must close the syllable that -precedes and 
cannot commence the one that follows. The double hyphen is used to separate 
words which in the original are written in one. This is of decidedly rare occur- 
rence in Mén inscriptions, Square brackets enclose letters or symbols which are 
more or less broken or illegible but capable of certain restoration. When there 
is any reasonable room for doubt, round, brackets are used.» The stops of the 
‘original -have been reproduced. Dots. indicate that something is missing which 
I have been unable to restore. As far as possible the number of missing or quite 
unidentifiable letters has been indicated by allotting one dot to each with’another 
dot if there is believed to have been’a vowel. attached to it; or in the absence 
of any other indications, two dots for the space supposed to be occupied by each 
missing letter-group (akshara). 


BEGINNINGS OF MON EPIGRAPHICAL STUDY, 


19. The first attempt to decipher and interpret. the early Mén inscriptions? 
was made in 1909, when by the help of the Pali and Burmese texts the Mén text 
of the quadrilingual inscription of the Myazedi pagoda of Pagan was published 
(¥.R.A.S., 1909, pp. 1017-52). The reading was tentative in many respects and 
a comparison with some of the other early records caused it to be much amended 
subsequently (1b7d., 1910, pp. 797-812, 1912, pp. 486, 487). It was, there- 
fore, the Myazedi inscription, the only .considerable early Mén record hitherto 
published, that laid the foundation of this course of research, by giving the clue to 
many of the phonetic and morphological factors that characterize the early. stage 

TA few short and not very important medieval or seanvanditvely modern records had previously been 


interpreted : e.g, see /,A., 1893, Pp. 343» 344 (reviewed in F.R.A.S., 1912, pp. 689-98), See also F.A.S,B,, 1836, 
Vol. Me P. 280, and Plate X (facing p. 340), and sbid,, 1838, Vol. VII, Plate facing pp, 294 and 295. 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 83 


of the language. This line of study. has been coptinued since then, in the 
intervals of other work, and the results here published represent the fruit of several 
years of intermittent labour on the materials put at my disposal, and supersede 
what Ihave already published on the subject. . 

20, The difficulties were’manifold. The ink-i -impressions supplied to me were 
often imperfect representations of much weathered and battered originals, which 
of course I have never had an opportunity of seeing. I deduce the imperfections. 
of the-copies from their frequent diversities. The early stage of the language 
was quite unknown to everybady: even an intimate acquaintance with modern 
Mén, had I possessed it, would not have made it ‘at once intelligible. The 
changes wrought by. upwards of eight hundred ‘years are often so radical that 
it is very ‘difficult to recognize quite common words: e.g., one may be excused 
for not seeing at a glance that jiiijuit is the same as the modern dayutn or that 
kandar is the old form of kalaw. When: detected, such cases of correspondence ~ 
had to be further confirmed and definitely established: by discovering the laws of 
phonetic change which they exemplify. Unfortunately some of the old words 
do not recur in the medieval records and seem te have disappeared altogether 
from the modern language. A great many of them are not to be found in the 
only existing vocabulary! and have not been met with in such texts as I have 
_ been able to read. It will therefore be understood that.in such cases, unless the 
meaning or reading was sufficiently determined by the context, or by ‘a comparison 
of several contexts, a considerable element of uncertainty remains, It is only too 
probable that such cases are fairly numerous, byt in: a first attempt imperfections 
of that kind are inevitable. To do full justice to these records would require in 
the editor a number of qualifications that are seldom found united; amongst 
others, a thorough knowledge of Mé6n, Sanskrit and. Pali, much experience in 
Indian epigraphy, great familiarity with Buddhist thought and legend, an intimate 
acquaintance with the local conditions of various ‘parts of Burin&, much leisure and 
a good deal of patience: . _To these, except the last two, I.can lay no claim. But. 
in view of the growing interest taken in the Mén language by scholars-in Burma; 
I venture to hope that the defects of the present work will eventually be amended 
by. their corrections, based on’ wider sources of. information than.-have- been 
available to myself - 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS OF ASSISTANCE. 


m1. Inthe meantime it would not be right to omit here the thanks which 
are due to the numerous friends, critics, and correspondents who have contributed 


4-Haswell, Grammatical Notes and. Vocabulary of the Peguan Language, 2nd ed., 1901, 


84. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. I 


to the production of the work. To Mrs, Bode, and Messrs. F. W. Thomas, 
L. Finot,.and A. Cabaton, I am indebted for some assistance on individual péints 
of reading er interpretation.” Mr. Taw Sein Ko and Professor C. Duroiselle, 
both in their official capacity as officers of the Archaeological Survey Department 
and individually, have been of priceless help. Without their aid and support, and 
that of the department which they represent in Burma, this work could not have 
been produced. To Mr. R. Sewell, Sir Alfred Irvin, and the late M. Auguste 
Barth I am much indebted for assistance towards’ the understanding of the 
chronological details contained in some of the records. In this connexion also 
the late Dr. J. F. Fleet’s criticisms, even when I found myself unable to agree 
with them, have served to draw my attention to points that required further 
investigation or more precise treatment. But most of all, I am bound to single 
out for special mention the assistance of my friend Mr. Robert Halliday, whose 
unique mastery of the Mén language in its modern form, both written and spoken, 
has been of invaluable help at every stage of my work. To all these fellow- 
workers I tender my hearty thanks. 


Section I.—THE EARLY MON RECORDS. 
INTRODUCTORY. OBSERVATIONS, 
King Kyansitthayin Traditional Legendary History. 


22. The main conditions affecting the genesis of the early records having 
‘been summarily stated above, it will now be convenient, before dealing with 
these inscriptions: individually, to mention certain matters. which are common 
ground for most of them. The majority of these early records relate to the 
reign and achievements of the Burmese king Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. 
This was a royal style or title adopted by several monarchs of Burma, but the one 
with whom we are here concerned also bore the more familiar name of Kyansittha 
(or K yanzittha, and other variants). Of him there are more or less legendary 
accounts in Burmese traditional history, which can only be very briefly summarized 
-here, a 
23. According to these tales, Anawrahta (Anuruddha), king of Pagan, who 
subsequently conquered the Mén country. about the middle of the 11th century, 
1 I must also put .on record my obligations to the writings of that very distinguished scholar, Edouard 


Huber, who included a critical acquaintance with Mé6n in his extraordinarily long list of linguistic acquires 
ments and whose premature death is an irreparable loss to Oriental studies. 


PART II | MON INSCRIPTIONS 85 


sent a minister to India some time after his accession to search for an eligible 
princess as an addition to the royal household. The choice fell upon a daughter of 
the king of Vesali, who on the journey to Burma became involved in an intrigue 
with the minister and on her arrival in Burma was secluded in a remote 
village, where she became the mother. of Kyansitth3. Another version of the 
story fathers him on a Naga. Warned by an astrologer, the king (without 
knowing the child’s identity) makes repeated attempts to kill him, because he has 
been led to fear his eventual rivalry and contingent succession to the throne. 
These attempts all fail and ultimately, after hearing that the dreaded event 
foreseen in the stars is not to take place till long after his own death, the king 
appoints Kyansittha, now full-grown, to be one of his chief officers. In that 
capacity he renders valiant and faithful service, until after the conquest of That6n 
he is enthralled by the charms of a Mén princess whom he should have escorted to 
the king: he falls from grace and has to flee from the royal wrath, taking his love 
with him, Thus, a second time, does the Tristari and Isolde morif occur in this 
legend. After having passed through many perils and miraculous adventures, 
Kyansitthaé, after the death of Anawrahta and of his son and successor Sawla, 
returns to expel the usurper who had dethroned and killed the latter; and so 
succeeds to the throne of Burma.’ The story goes on, introducing the strange and 
tragic episode of the Indian prince who came to Pagan as a suitor for the hand of 
Kyansittha’s daughter. But for our purposes it need not be pursued further. 


King Kyanstttha in Contemporary Records. 


_ 24. Contrasted with the wild legends that have gathered round his name, the 
king’s own records are relatively sober and matter of fact documents. As. seen 
through the veil of tradition, he is a fantastic hero of a fairy tale. In his own 
inscriptions, with their strong ecclesiastical flavouring, he is presented as a grave 
and religious, but quite human, monarch, taking a deep interest in the spiritual and 
temporal welfare of his people, and actively contributing thereto by his piety and 
good works, It is true that the records contain legendary matter enough and to 
Spare; but it recedes (as legend usually does) into a still remoter past. And 
though his reign is highly idealized by his courtly draftsmen, and the records teem 
with superlatives, their atmosphere is quite different from that which pervades the 

7 Lam indebted to Professor C, Duroiselle for the legendary account of which the above is the merest 
abstract: it would be worth publishing in full in another place, Bastian (Geschichte der Indochinesen, pp. 36, 


43-7) gives, from Burmese sources, a somewhat similar story. Actual historical information relating to Kyan- 
sitthd seems to be very scanty: Phayre (History of Burma, p, 38) has comparatively little to say about him, 


12 


86 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, I 


traditional story. The supernatural element (as judged by our standards) is not 
indeed altogether excluded’ even from the king’s actual reign: thus natural 
phenomena are represented as being favourably affected by his benign influence 
(ID 53—E1). But inthe primitive and Oriental conception of kingship that is mere 
common form, and it should not blind us to the actuality and realism which is in 
fact the background of these rather florid documents. They. give us quite a vivid 
representation of the life of the people of Burma at this period, wherein the king 
and his court; the monks, Brahmans, chiefs, and commonalty of divers degrees, all 
appear in their turn. On the other hand the events recorded in them are relatively, 
and disappointingly, few. There are.'some vague references to warfare, but no 
definite accounts of actual campaigns. The building of tanks or reservoirs for 
storing water for purposes of irrigation (Nos. III and IV), the repairing ofa temple 
(No. V), and the like, are sometimes made the occasions for the inscription of a 
panegyric. But other records seem to have been made without any such particular 
incentive, merely for the glorification of the king. Of events of wider historic 
interest, the most notable are the mission to India with funds for the rebuilding and 
endowment of the Vajrésana at Bodh Gaya (VIIIA 4-8), being the earliest 
instance, I believe, in which such. an act is recorded of a Burmese: king ; and 
Kyansittha’s friendly intercourse with a .“‘ Coli” prince (zbid., 10-6), who may 
perhaps have been a member of the great. Dravidian Chola dynasty. 

25. The legend which forms the introduction and framework of several of 
these records is of a typically Buddhist complexion, relating as it does the succes- 
sive rebirths of the king and in one of these incargations embodying an alleged 
prophecy by Buddha Sakyamuni as to the monarch’s career. We have the story 
in two versions. In the more extensive, but less detailed, recension, the prophecy 
is preceded by brief statements about three of the king’s still earlier existences. 
In Buddha Kassapa's time he was a wealthy and pious man, apparently living at 
Benares. Next, he was born in the family of the kings of Patna, and eventually 
succeeded to that throne. And, thirdly, he was born in the royal house of the 
Rama dynasty of Oudh and became king there. These preliminary particulars are 
given in Nos. III-V.1. They are followed by the incidents which are common to 
the two recensions (and are embodied, therefore, though with varying elaboration, 
in Nos. I, I], VI-VIII). In the time of Buddha Sakyamoni the future king was, 
a sage named Bisni. Of him Buddha prophesies that in his next human incar- 
nation he is to become the founder of the city of Prome. (Sri Ksetra, Sri Kset, 
or Sisit), and ina subsequent rebirth (after an interval.of bliss in Brahmaloka) king 


1 The first half of No. IV is lost, but.as the remainder agrees very closely with the corresponding 
portion of Ne, III it is a reasonable inference that the inscription as a whole belongs to this group. . 


PART] MON INSCRIPTIONS. 87 


at Pagan (Pokdm or Arimaddanapir). Eventually he is to be reborn in still 
higher spheres and finally to be a Buddha and a saviour of the world. 

26. The less extensive version (particularly as presented in Nos. I and II) 
introduces much wealth of detail into the Bisni episode, which is treated as the 
most important stage in this preparatory course of evolution. In the setting of the 
prophecy (according to this version) the chief dvamatis personae besides Buddha 
himself are Ananda, the great disciple, to whom in the first place the prophecy was 
made, Gawarhpati, who has been styled the patron saint of the Méns,! and who 
appears here as the patron saint of Pagan, Indra, the king of the devas (Mén 
dewatau, Burmese mat), to whom the prophecy i is repeated by Gawampati, and of 
_ course the sage Bisni himself, to whom it is again communicated, twice over, first 
by Gawampati and ‘then by Indra. Minor personages, who are mentioned as 
destined to assist in the foundation of Prome, etc., are Bissukarmma (ViSvakarman, 
the celestial architect) and. a Naga king named Katakarmma (or Katakarmma). 
The story is repeated with much tautology and almost ad nauseam, but these 
repetitions, though wearisome in themselves, have proved of great value from the 
point of view “a lexicography and interpretation by reason of their occasional 
. variations in expression, 

27. In No. VIII. Bissukarmma and the Naga king join w ith Gawarhpati and 
Indra in exhorting Bisnii to accept the great future that is offered to him. This 
is apparently a modification of the less extended version. The more extensive one, 
as contained in Nos, III-V, merely gives the prophecy as delivered to Ananda 
(with some ‘embellishments i in detail, which can often be paralleled almost verbatim 
from other parts of No. 1), but it stops there, It mentions the other personages in 
the prophecy itself ; but they are not introduced as parties to the action. It seems 
hot impossible that. the less extensive, though more elaborate, recension represented 
by Nos. I, I, VI, VII (and probably VIII) is the earlier one. ‘In that case we 
may perhaps plausibly conjecture that the further development of the story 
took place at some time between the date of No. VI (A Bur. 455, A.D. 1093-1094) 
_and the probable date of No. V (A. Bur. 460, A.D. 1098-1099). In No: IX Kyan- 
sittha is introduced as the reigning monarch who takes part in the great ceremonial 
described in that record. This inscription, which is devoted to ‘details of ritual and 
architecture, is in a class by itself, and has no reference to the royal legend. . Nor 
_has the Myazedi inscription (Zp. Birm., pets Ty which records that near the close 

1 This Personality i is interwoven with the ees accounts of the foundation of Thatén, the history of 
which kingdom is put into his mouth in the form of a prophecy in a work that sometimes bears his name for 


a title: see the Suddhammavatirdjdvatnsa, Pak Lat, A. Bud, 2453) and Report of the Superintendent, 
Archaeological Survey, Basis, 1983, P- 23. 


88 ~ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von, I 


of the king’s life, after a reign of 28 years, his sickness occasioned the votive 
dedication by his son and chief minister Rajakumér of a. golden statue of Buddha. 

This pious act was duly carried out with the king’s personal approval; and the. 
inscription records the circumstances in a simple and straightforward manner. The 
remaining inscriptions in this section are apparently subsequent to Kyansittha’s 
reign and have no concern with him. | 


Chronology of King Kyanstttha and of his Records. 


28. The period with which we:are dealing here is really the: dawn. of, Burmese 
history properly so-called, meaning thereby history supported by contemporary 
records and an ascertainable chronology. Prior to the Burmese conquest of That6n 
it may fairly be said that we have nothing but a more or less doubtful tradition ; soon 
after that event the historical inscriptions begin, and from this time onwards they. 
are very numerous in Burma. By far the greater part of them are in Burmese and 
lie outside my scope. ‘But the Mén records here published speak for themselves : 
they are manifestly genuine contemporary documents. That appears plainly from 
the very nature of their contents : royal: panegyrics like these, elaborated in such 
full detail and spread broadcast. over the land with such frequent repetition of the 
same theme, must obviously have been written during the reign and by the order 
of the monarch whose praises they sing. The fact is so self-evident that it would 
be superfluous to mention it had not some doubt been cast uponit. The doubt did 
not arise from any intrinsic considerations, but merely from a question, altogether 
external, as to the origin and antiquity of the. current reckoning of the Buddhist era. 
It was alleged that that era was not used in Ceylon till some time late in the 12th 
century, and. the inference was drawn that it must have been invented in Ceylon 
somewhere about thaf time,’ and could not therefore have been in use in Burma in 

the 11th. It necessarily followed from these premisses that the early Mén records 
could. not be genuinely contemporary, and must have been composed at:a time 
when the king they somewhat fulsomely celebrate. had been dead for nearly a 
century or perhaps even longer; which, in my judgment, is absurd, for the reasons 
already stated.* As the whole basis of the argument was a purely negative one, 
viz. the non-existence at this early date of Sinhalese records embodying the current 
| Buddhist reckoning, the matter could not be satisfactorily pursued any: further at 
the time. No conclusive reason was alleged for the assumption that this mode of 


“L F,R.AS. 1909, PP. 332s 333- 

% The discussion on the subject may be read in %. R, A.S,, 1910, pp. 474-81, 850-60, 1911, pp, 209-17. 
But so far as my own share in it is concerned, it should be read as amended by what is stated here and in 
the.accounts of the several inscriptions contained in this collection, See also F.R,A.S., 1909, pp. 322-56, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 89 


reckoning must have originated in Ceylon, and at a date just prior to the first 
surviving evidence of its existence in that island. And this last point, after having 
been again asserted in 7.R.A.S., 1912, p. 241, was eventually abandoned by its 
author in F.2.A.S., 1912, p. 1113, when it appeared that he had misunderstood 
the import of the Sinhalese evidence.’. As against the concrete evidence of our 
Mén records it is absolutely unarguable. 

29. These records tell us that the king whom they celebrate became king ot 
Pagan after the lapse of 1,628 years® from the Parinirvana (that is, the death) of 
Buddha ; and after a reign of 28 years lay “sick nigh unto death,” so that we 
may fairly assume that his demise followed very soon after. Here, then, we have 
the use of some form of the Buddhist era. But of course this still leaves open the 
loophole :. ‘‘ What was the initial point of the reckoning?” I admit at once that 
on the evidence here published a definite conclusion would be hard to come by. 
But there are at any rate the following indications. Our inscription No. VI was 
composed by the king’s order (so it seems to say) in A. Bur. 455, that is 
A.D. 1093-1094, if the Burmese year is to be taken as an “‘ expired” year. © Inscrip- 
tion No. V contains a date towards the end, in an unfortunately obliterated context, 
which probably indicated the occasion of its composition: the date is A. Bur. 460, 
te. A.D. 1098-1099. - Both documents relate the royal legend, the former in the 
shorter, the latter in the more extended version. These dates therefore must fall 
within the period of the years 1628-56 above referred to. The two dates are 
consistent with the ordinary Buddhist reckoning and would be incompatible with any 
reckoning that did not place its initial point within a very few years of the usual 
one, That is as near as we need go on the evidence contained in these records. 
But it seems sufficient to shift the onus probandi onto the shoulders of anyone who 
may choose to contend that the Buddhist reckoning therein mentioned refers back 
to some other than the conventional starting point. Even if we take the result as 
being merely approximate, it gives us within a possible margin of a few years the 
date of Kyansittha’s reign. If we assume that the reckoning is from the conven- 
tional initial point, his accession must have taken place in A D. 1085-1086 if the 
years are taken as “expired”: and the phraseology used makes this the better 
interpretation. If they are taken as “current” years, the date of his accession 
fell in A.D. 1084-1085. 


1 Geiger, in the Introduction to the Translation of the Mahévarnsa by himself and Mrs, Bode, remarks 
(p. xxviii): “ From the middle of the eleventh century the new era took its rise, being reckoned from the year 
544, and this is still in use.” He scems to prove it as far back as A. Bud, 1590, 

® Or 1,630 years in some passages. This last may be a statement in round numbers, or may possibly 
refer to the date of his actual anointment as king. 


go 3 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von t 


30. Until recently this king’s reign was given in the history books? as 
extending from A.D. 1057 to 1085, and the Mén records -will have borne their 
share in correcting that erroneous chronology to some extent at least. It is no 
part of my task to anticipate here the conclusions which may be drawn from the- ' 
Burmese inscriptions of this period. But it may be permissible to refer to one 
Burmese record in which Kyansittha’s predecessor Sawlii is associated with A. Bur. 
444° and another of Kyansittha himself dated A. Bur. 469°: these two documents 
confirm the general soundness of the rectified chronology.‘ 


THE INSCRIPTIONS. 
No. I. 


THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN. 
‘Descriptive Account. 


31. This inscription is on the whole the most interesting and important of the 
early Mén records. Its great length and the variety of matters with which it deals 
make it a rich mine of linguistic material and it has often served to confirm words 

which were doubtful in some of the other records.. The inscription is noticed (but 
left undeciphered and untranslated) in /uscriptions of Pagan, Pinya, and Ava 
(both Text and Translation), where it figures as No. I (1)-(8). Some extracts 
from it were given in 7.R.A.S.,-1910, pp. 797-812, a few words in F.A., mai-juin 
- 1910, pp. 499-503, and a few more together with another extract in F.A., juillet- 
aoit 1912, pp. 128, 129, and it was referred to in the discussion mentioned in 
§ 28 (note) and in the Reports of the Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, 
Burma, 1910, 1911. The inscription is engraved on two stone columns standing 
within the precincts of the Shwezigén Pagoda at Pagan. Each column has four 
faces, and their dimensions, as reported to me, are as follows :—Southern column : 
height, 9 feet 4 inches; breadth of the two broader faces, 2 feet 5 inches: of the 
narrower faces, 2 feet 14 inches. Nortnern column: height, 8 feet 1 inch; breadth 


1 Phayre, History of Burma, pp. 37-9, 281 3 Cocks, Short History of Burma, pp. 22, 23. 

2 ¥. Burma R.S., 1913, Vol, 111, pp. 84-6. 3 Ibid, 1912, Vol, II, pp. 246-8. 

1 As regards the difficulty arising from insciiptions which would apparently make Kyansittha’s accession 
fall before A.D. 1085, it must be borne in mind that according to the traditional history he was (for some time 
before the death of Sawla) resident at a village called Hti-hlaing (‘Thi-lhuif or Dhi-luif) and styled himself 
lord or king of that place, a title which he seems to have often used even after he had become king at Pagan. 
lence the apparent overlapping of the two reigns of Sawld and Kyansittha, 


PART 11} MON INSCRIPTIONS | 9! 


of the two broader faces, 2 feet 23 inches: of the narrower faces, 2 feet 13 inches. 
I have lettered the faces consecutively A-H. The first (or Southern) column 
having been broken at one corner at the top, the ends of the first 15 lines in Face 
C and the beginnings of the first 14 lines in Face D are lost, but can be replaced 
in part by the aid of the context and of the replica of this record (No. II). The 
text has been determined from four sets of ink-impressions, together with photo- 
graphs of one of the sets, and checked with a set of ink-impressions of No. II, the 
variants contained in the latter (so far as legible) being entered in the notes to the 
text of No. I. 

32. The space actually covered by the lettering of this ‘scption on its 
several faces, as measured on the ink-i -impressions, is as follows :—Southern column : 
Face A, 6 feet 10 inches by 2 feet 2 inches; B, 6 feet 10 inches by 1 foot 1o$ 
inches ; C, 6 feet 10 inches by 2 feet 2 inches; D, 6 feet 11 inches by 1 foot 10} 
inches. Northerncolumn: E, 5 feet 5 inches by 2 feet 2 inches ; F, 5 feet 43 inches 
by 2 feet; G, 5 feet 44 inches by 2 feet 2 inches; H, 5 feet 5 inches by 2 feet } 
inch. On Faces E-H this record is followed by a much shorter one of later date, 
which will be separately dealt with ; and this in its turn, on Face F, by a Burmese. 
inscription transcribed and translated in /zscrtptions of Pagan, Pinya, and Ava. 
The letters of our inscription are well cut and measure about % inch in height.? 
Letter ¢ (which may be selected as a convenient one for purposes of comparison 
between the different inscriptions) is about 3 inch long. The space between the 
lines, in the absence of subscript and superscript letters, is about ? inch.? One 
disconcerting feature of this inscription (which it shares to some extent with some 
of the others, notably Nos. II and VI) is the fact that the surface of the stone seems 
to have been somewhat imperfectly prepared and is affected in a number of places 
by flaws which were there before the record was cut. In such cases the engraver 
has simply cut his lettering up to one edge of the flaw and, skipping over it, has 
resumed his work just beyond the other "edge. This results in irregular spacing, 
which when the part happens to be weathered or otherwise damaged by subsequent 
vicissitudes often makes it very hard to restore the more or less illegible text, 
particularly if the flaw extends to several consecutive lines, as is often the case. 
One is apt to fail at first, to recognize the existence of such an original flaw, unless 
it happens to occur in the middle of a common word whose identity is positively 


1 Here and elsewhere I do not take into account the few letters which nantly project above or below 
the usual level. 

2 It will be understood that there is a certain amount of variability in tase dimensions, partly perhaps 
unintentional, partly caused by the desire of the engraver to adapt his letters to the particular space available. 
The same obsct vation applies to the other inscriptions, 


92 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. ! 


determined by the context. When these conditions are not present, restoration 
becomes more or less conjectural. The presence of original flaws. when material, 
has been indicated in the notes accompanying the text. Irregularity of spacing by 
reason of the presence of subscript letters attached to the line next above is also a 
common and more normal occurrence, and sometimes gives Euabie when the letters 
are not quite clear. 

33. In editing the text of this inscription a somewhat more liberal use has been 
made of square brackets than in the case of the other records. It must not, how- 
ever, be inferred that it is in a worse state of preservation than the rest. Precisely 
the contrary is the case: apart from the loss of the portion already mentioned and 
a certain amount of weathering and other damage, it is in good condition. The 
square brackets have been freely used, first in order to show (negatively) how well 
preserved a great part of it is—there being quite a number of lines where not a 
letter is bracketed—and secondly because, in view of the special lexicographical 
importance of this record, it seemed desirable to indicate exactly which words are 
absolutely. unmistakable as regards their spelling and which are not. 


34. The contents of this inscription are too miscellaneous to be summarized, 
but have been described in general terms in §§ 25, 26. No special object or 
occasion is. recorded as having given rise to the engraving of it, except a desire to 
inform the people at large of its contents: it is in fact a pure panegyric, a sort of 
royal advertisement. An account of the general framework of this record (and most 
of the other inscriptions of King Kyansittha) has been given in §§ 25-7, but in 
view of its great length it may he convenient to give here a sort of Table of Contents 
indicating the several sections into which it may be analysed :— 


A 1-12. Pali exordium, followed by a xzssaya (Pali words explained by a 
Mén paraphrase) of the fact that Buddha Sakyamuni prophesied concerning King 
Kyansittha. 

- A 12-54. The circumstances of the prophecy, made first to Ananda and 
next to Gawathpati; the latter informs Indra of it. — 

A 54—F 1g. After Buddha’s death; Gawampati again goes to Indra and 
expounds the prophecy in full detail. 

F 19-28. Indra replies, accepting the duties imposed on him. 

F 28—G 23. Gawampati.goes to the sage Bisni and communicates the 
prophecy to him, exhorting him to act up to it. 

G 23-39. Bisné replies, accepting the position, and Gawarnpati leaves him. 

G 39—H 17. Indra goes to Bisni and after repeating the substance of the 
prophecy promises his aid and that of the Naga king. 


Birmanica No. I. Votume 1, Peate V. 


THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN. 
B 


" on ee 
be . 


a tae UR Shick 
rainy hh 
RIC UE 


4 


le eh al p23 XS é ‘ 
sSgrpilt +S Ryle ‘ 

: ag prrande Yist: utipre 2. 
~ {abe 
wayaecls, ANS Aes LE 3 8 

bat Ae maa: + Melt hat ABs 

prek Hig him RON bene 
gore if fired Tages ue mW: nity. 


> Fs 

- a ia Vs: any. y whi 0% One? 

. Png } S wd A lehingce 6)8 O78 uae = 
T nate rhe if teakiecy) 


gO te i 


yy eye 


2S 


Oe 
ay, Fey 
en : + 4: 


LAT Wu 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS — “94 


H 18~25. Bisnii replies to Indra.. 
H 25-43. Peroration: all men should know that the. king of whom this 
prophecy was spoken is-the king now reigning. 

38. The proper names contained in this inscription, so far as they are material 
to the story, have been given in §§ 25, 26, and further explanations will be 
found in the notes appended to the translation. The dates contained in it have 
been discussed in §§ 28, 29. They will be found in A 17 and 18,B 5~7, and 
H 34 and 35. Further, in F 14-and 15 there is a statement to the effect that the city 
of Prome shall have been in existence for 1,200 years before (but it does not say 
precisely how long before) King Kyansittha becomes king in Tattades (apparently 
the region in which Pagan is situated). There is no evidence as to the date when 
the inscription itself was engraved except the general nature of its contents and the 
tenour of its peroration; but see § 27. In the translation of this record the 
order of the original has been followed as much as possible, sometimes even at the 
expense of English idiom, with a view to retaining the balance and emphasis of the 
‘original and facilitating comparison between translation and text. 


Text. 
A 


1, 0 [Sri] « na[mo BJu[ddha}ya ¥ namo dhammaya ’ namo > safalghatya] " 
2. 9 angiraso Sakyamuni | sabbebhataoutalenpa ko]: i (sab jbasabtialts 


_ [tam]o [si]- 
3. ho « raja-uppatti(mh)? desayi ti Sak{yam uni eee yan kLy BL 
Buddha ta- 
4. [r]ley Sakyamuni | ki[th] viseso BE [rd]p wises ta[rlJely] (yo) 1 
an[gira]so 
. tarley ma nom ku yiryas sirku i(mu)n.... (kit) v[i]seso (1) h(a)w rip 


. wises tarley g(a)th yo 1 sabbabha[ta]nukampako tarley [ma cha]n smin 
. [ult sat gurhlons sabbasa{ttut]}tamo tarley [ma prely nor ut sa- | 
. [t]-gumlon 1 siho [tarjley ma row -kesarajadisin 1 raja-uppattimh 
. yan kantar gna smi[n]} Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja ma nom pufn] 
pra[j]fia gar(go)- 
. [n] trejas wir] yas pariwar ma kah sak fiah c-3n das pu(m)rey 7 sumoh 
11. [go]h s desayi desesi cin kyak Buddha ta[rJley go[h] desana culoh 


NS 


© 


1 The ss is not in the original. 8 The tis is very doubtful, 


13 


94 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1. 


. tuba(h] lar kantar dirdas g[nja smifi] Si Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 


gumlon gun goh 


. mo’ dey kal y{o] ma kyak Buddha tarley goh culoh tu- 
. bah lar kantar dirdas gna smi Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh | 


no-: 


. m dey moy leh kal kyak Buddha tarley taw dey Jeta- 
- Wanamahawihar .+ ma_strak (tla]Jn (mno)r dhah marmar sasana kyak 


Buddha ta- 


. tley 1 [nJor ma kyak Buddha [ta]rley parini{r}bban « kuli Ini turow 
. klarh pli] cwa[s] cnam': dey dan a 4: 1.yan kantar gna - 


~smin Sri Tri- 


. [bhuwa]nadityadhammaraja goh kyak Buddha tarley fia Ac (c)i (1)? tarley 


ktir 


. k-im + (k]al kyak Buddha tarley ktir k-im goh ci + nor g{njis pan 

. yiryas turow sak deh tit cup Brahmalok deh tin ar 

. boy sma{r] ci-yiryas goh deh ar kirloh ut ti dak (t)yal* s 

. boy * (gna)[n} ‘ cis ut dis pan kah moy laksa koti cak[k]Jawal 

. deh art blah goh ci yiryas goh tin lo[p] mukhawar kyak 

. Buddha tarley kuth : tarle[y] Anan fiac ascar goh Inor yil ki- 

. nta{l] ju[n] kyak Buddha tar[]Je[y] tay | [y]uk suthbup tey sma- 

. firfo}w wo’t ma tirla pa ki[r]-im® wo’ ci + mu het yo ' sa- 

. k het kyak Buddha [t]arley gurhlon sik-im * ci kah sak 1 ro- 

. w goh tarley Anan smafi da 1 goh ma kyak Buddha tarley [gah] 

. [ku] tarley Anan row wo’ « Anan [mJnor ci = [r]isi moy ma i- 

. mo’ Blisna + jnokriddhi! jnok anubhaw ' go’ abhifia msiin | [kJo[m] 
. ku k{oJn ey Gawampati |. ku smin In + ku Bissukarmmadewaput 1 ku. 


Kataka- 


. rmmanagaraja + skandam din moy imo’. Sis(i)t? + blah goh risi Bisni 


gfolh ['] 


1 There seems to be an original flaw after the ois 3. and the reading is conceivably ohé or ¢cé ra, but. 


probably as in the text. 


2 Apparently the reading is fyd/, though segmilegs seems to require kya. 

3 There is an original flaw just before the y. 

4 The reading is very doubtful, though the last letter seems to be #. 

5 There is an apparently original flaw before the 7, The letters # and @ are often used for (or inter- 


changeably with) ¢ and (respectively) in this and other early inscriptions. 


8 The si is the verbal prefix (usually written s or sa, but cf, 1) 6, E 8, 23-4, H_ 16), 
7 Possibly the reading is Sisit. 


pan 0] MON INSCRIPTIONS 95 


34 


50. 
51. 


scuti nor goh : stin ar Brahmalok | scuti. nor ‘Brahmalok goh 1 s{t]lan 


[da]- 


. s dey. dan rA}kimaddanapir ci 1 s[d]an imo’ gna smin Sti Tribhu- 


wanaditya- 


. dhammafr]aja 1 syuk sasana ey t row glo]h ma kyak Buddha tarley gah 


kel 


hfeJt k(i)r-im? goh ku tarley [Ana]n 1 kal [g]oh tarley Gawath[pat]i 
. rmin. abhipray kyak Buddha [t]arl[e]ly » ktir Ino} kyak Buddha tarley 


blah [ci] + dhah 


- Spa prakat abhipray kyak Buddha taney goh [']. t[ajn smaii row wo’ | 


tarla 


. [m]Jnor ci + risi ma imo’ Bisnu goh kom’ ku ey dik deh. skandam din 


Sisit abhi-- 


. pray tarla gah ci cmat=ta 1 cmat Gawampati row ‘goh kurt risi Bisnd 


goh kum da ma skandarh ko- 


. m ku kum + daah goh ci Gawampati beh [4]r surh smin th beh gah row 


wo’! smin de- 


; wataw ! yan abhipray kyak Buddha tarley ci beh dun na antil s yan 


risima 


. imo’ Bisntd ma | jnok riddhi anubhaw [g]oh t kom ku ey ci i deh skandam 


di- 


. h Sisit. 1 dey- kal goh ci ut defy] s sanraf risi-Bis[n]a goh beh byapa- 
. (r] ' risi Bisnt: goh deh skan[d]amh din ‘Sisit gohblah ' scuti [njor goh 


dey din A- 


. timaddanapir 1 deh sdas gna smin Sri Tribhuw anityadhannmarija syuk 


sasana kya- 


. k Buddha tarley: smin dewataw + dey kal sanran gna smin Sri Tribhu- 


wanadi- 


tyadhammaraja goh lah 1 dey sanran pun lah + ku[m] bydpar kel ut: | 


ku ka- 
1 1 row goh kyak Buddha tarley kinkan ku tarley Gawampati  [d]ey 


kal -goh ney Gawarhpati din abhipray kyak Buddha [t]arley na 
antu- 


52. I blah t tarley ewin dhyan tay tin ar Tawatin 1 ut abhip[r]ay [k]yak 


1 The wading may be éir-im, hut a long vowel in an infix is quite abnormal (the sound sepresanted 
being probably a short neutral vowel), and the mark in the ¢ which would convert it intoi is probably 
merely accidental, and not original. 


96 


53: 
. kel smin In blah tarle[y] cis tin Jetawanamahawihar 1 ka phar? 


15. 
16, 


Ty. 
18: 


19. 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vo t 


Buddha tarle[y] ci 1 tarl[e]y Gawampati guran kel smin In « tarley guran 


B 


. lo’ nor goh cit kyak Buddha tarley ar nirbban dey din K[u]si- 
. nar [da]: ka phar? lo[’] nor kyak Buddha tarley nirbban :. tarley Ga-. 
. warhpati taln] ti[n T]awat(i)h® moy leh tin das yan kantir gna smin 


Sr{i] 


' Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja ' tarley kifn]kal [bJoy bistar ku smi- 
. fm In 1 smin [dJewataw kurh rmin da 1 nor. kyak Buddha tarley ar 


ni[r ]bba- 


. n+ kuli moy In(i)m * ee pi [cw]as cnam 1 yan isi ma imo’ Bi- 

. sna goh 1 sdas [g]na smi moy ma imo’ Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 
. dey din Ari[m]addanapir ' [ya}h sasana kyak Buddha tarley ci 1 gna 

. smi Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja gah ma syak 1 yan yas g[nja 

_ smi Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh ci ut jirnok Jambudip muleh 

. deh sprakat | m(i)r(gu)h ® gna [s]min. Sri ee 


go[h].ci ro- 


. w bift]sey-kurmh 4 yan s(i)I(a)dharmma ° dumhi{c] ci gna smin Sri 


Tribhuwanadi- 


. t{y]adhammaraja goh scroh ptaw ' ut dussi{] ma dmas marsa na si{]] 


dumhi- 


.¢ ma dmas marmal goh gna smin Sri [T'}bhuwanddityodbammarsj 


‘glolh 
éplit duol 1 ut kayaduccarit wac(i)duccarit manoduccar it ma 
kah c-ah 1 na s[ijl ma c-ah ma dmas dak gna smi Sri Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhamma- 
raja goh skrac duol! yan dewataw ma din sumbup tely] fiah 
guthloh ma rap cir[ciJn dewataw ma tmiy na bajra 1 row [filjah pu(m)a® 
sanran [kjurh deh spa sanran gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 


1 Or in one word, kaphar, perhaps, 2 See last note. 3 Possibly Tawatin. 4 Possibly lzim. 

6 The vowels may possibly be # and a respectively, and perhaps the g is doubled; but this, though 
normal after v in Indian loanwords, is not usual in native words. 

6 Or in. two words, sila dharmma, or sil dharmma, but there is no vtrdma visible.. The first vowel 
may possibly be ¢, but 7 is normal, 

7 Conceivably waciduccarit, but the other is more correct. : 

8 Possibly pupa or puman, but the text is probably right : cf. B 41. 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 97 


. goh# ut [jjimok ras gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja gfolh [c]i 
. [yan] ku{th Jlac ma dmas jir[l]a goh skah sak wel 1 yan sat[ru] ma 


dmas grip 


. [sJurhturh? gobh ci- s[k]Jah sak 1 deh sbistar row mahasamudra kumh 1 


[y]an pum(i)-* 


. ¢ gna smih Sef Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh ci pras [deh s]dik pifi: 
. dam Arifm]addanapir goh [c]i kal satru burmrik goh deh sp[]}i# 
. | yan mfiah kirkél [pJan ma taw dey dia Arimaddanapir ma [d]as jli- 


y [boy] smaf.gan ma 4r des c-4n gohi na yiryuk dirhat w(i)r® 


. gna smi Srj Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh ci ! [prjas deh ta goh sca- 
. s[t]i{n] dak deh slhim dey din Arimaddanapir ti{n 4] yan rumba- 

. t fah [ma] cak [nJor fiah rumlos gurhlon 1 na [pun]-Ar * 

. [ti]r[t]ay na [mo]ytricit > ma dmas tey + gna smin Sri Tribhuwana- 

. d[iftya[dhJammara{ja] goh sjit duol 1 yan sinmor fiah ma aj[ely 

. [pum]Jas gurhblon 1 na pun-ar tirtiiy na karunaé ma dmas dak 

. sk{rJa[c djuol + smi dewataw ' yan gna smin Sti Tribhuwanadi- 

. tyadha[m]maraja goh ci! [n]a te[y] stim skel pi{n] (t)wan® ku ma- 

. [ha]ja{n] gumhlon 1 na tey jwi skjl kr[iy]a glik. a{nta]k ku [m]fiah 

. guthl[on] sut ma[h]ajan [c]i row kon ma t&[w p]dey cris a- 

. [m]bo t row goh gna smin Sri Tribhuwanddityadhammaraja goh sman 

. me{y] na tirtiy 1 ut mfiah ma (mg)th? gumhl[oJa gna smin Sri Tribhu- 


wan[4] 


- dityadhammaraja goh spa lu-i[n] ' [y]ah mfiah ma [s]ak smo(h) na ji- 
. tku na pan na pumas gna smin Sri T[r}ibhuwanadityadhammaraja goh 


spa (sumo)-§ 


. [h] + yaa dik surhur [t]ris pu(m)a® sanrah guthlon’ma sak tim [tJarla 1 
. gna smin Sri T[f]ibhuwanadityadhammaraja goh sguran kel tar[I]a [1 y]an 
; tarley mahather ‘Moy ma ‘nom sil ma das sarathi dharmma 


44. goh cit gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh s[pa] su[t]i(m)” 
Spa a- 

45. car 1 dey kanta tarley [m]Jaha[th]er Imom sil ma das sarathi 

1 Or susis tusin, 2 Possibly pumi=, 

3 Conceivably wir. 4 Conceivably (but, if so, incorrectly) pin-ar, 

® Irregular spelling : cf. G 41. 6 Conceivably kwa7, but see D 49, 


7 Cf. B 11, where apparently the substantive derived from this adjective (?) accurs; unfortunately the 
reading is doubtful i inboth places, 

8 The reading seems almost certain. 9 Possibly pupa: see B 18. 

10 The final letter may possibly be p. 


98 


46. 


47. 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vot 


dharmjm]a goh kuth 1 ko[m k]Ju tar[lJa ci ey scual 1! sdsa[na] kya[k] 
Buddha ta- 
[r]le[y] 1r[ow] goh ma gna smin Sri Tribbuwanadi ityadhammaraja goh 


s| g jah 


. [1] bna{h] pa [dJuthhic bnah pa d[u}ihic 1 row goh ma gna smin Sti 


Tribhuj wa ]na dityadha- 


. mmaraja goh s[dijndu binton mahajan [gjumion [ult ku kal 1 yan 
. fiah ma [k]sap suth(a)r? 1 na kansap duthhi{c] gna smin Sri Tribhuwana- 


-ditya- 


51. dhammaraja goh s(tu)den kel p[uJmas ! yan hah [mJa piha[r sum ]a- 
52. rei gna s{m|in [Sri] Tribhuw anadityadham{m Jrdja goh s[-Jor piha[r 
| djum- | 
53. hifc] : yan tin! Gr {tiJnrah [s]war ma ‘tmiy. na thar [m]a cin[c]o[n] na 
ra(t] 
54. [na] prajfia ma dma[s} t[e]y gna smin Sri Tnbhuwanadityadhammaraja 
[g]oh 
B 
1. [s]jak po[k k]el ku® (mahajan gumlon) ......... ie niet. eke 
[gna smi]-| | . 
2. h Sti Tribhu{w janadityadham{m Jal raja] (SON) etd: Sa B aie a aes ie aA 
3. [w plumat dey Maha-A[wic](i‘ st)[r](ak) 22. ee 
4. wari yan salk]kar ut fah ma [t](aw dey din Arimaddanapir goh)® 
[gna smi]-: | : | 
3. h Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh sdud.... 1... ee eee me 
Bice Bes ; (ro)- 
6. w gati di[nnal] thar ma A[i}n cincon ku rat (gna) [smin Sri Tribhuwana]- 
7. dityadhammaraja goh sci{n]l[oJh tumbal) 1 kon hwa[t s]m[in} (gurhlon. 


ma nom) 


1 This stop is clearly superfluous and probably due to an error. 
2 Or perhaps suriuz, which seems to be the more usual spelling. 
3 The stone is broken off here and the words following are e conjectural resturations. The same applies 


to the ends of C 2-11. 
4 Or possibly Awict, Awic, or Awe. LM, has Awik, The next word is very doubtful. 


6 ‘This restoration is extremely doubtful. 


VotuME I, Pate VI. 


aphia Birmanica No. |. 
THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN. 


ee a 
Kj PEA Ae Ariel: He! aN | 
gee a oe ‘ By? tebe 
abv HA as ; ) 


Hig 
‘ 
Pg 
ee 
. 
£ 
> 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 99 


8. mirmal.row mirmal pkaw mlir1 ma no[m] cirhay ro{w] (cirhay) [ka]- 
g. ndar smin In ma imo’ Alambusa goh ma stirwil | Ener dan dun }- 
10. poh kon lwiit smi guthlo ma giti na rat ma kal: mofy praka/- 
11, rma dindar tdun buiitafn] fina} [st]l(G)n? tirw@)l4 1 yah gna smin Sri 
(T}r[ibhuwana J- 
12. dityadhammaraja goh s(dm)o[n® d]ey sihasana ma fti[n kindath na] * 
13. thar ma cincon na rat s-anubhaw [c |(i)r[h]ay § [k]irmun « kon [lwit smi}- 
14.4 gumlon [m]a tlaa nfo]r din [djumhpoh [yan] daa Arima[ddanapir4 
15. ma [njom kya[k] Sri goh spa no[m] ku ya(s)°1 smin dewa{ta]- 
16, w '(d]ely k]al [kiran gna smin Sift] Tri[ bh Juwanadityadham[m laraja 
[goh] 
17. yan pnafi [c]- an ma jnok kuth ci ya{I] gabbha tl[aJa + yan nimit ji- 
18. rnah dumhic naksa{t du]rnhic stlin ta gna smin Sri Tribhuw aang: 
_. dhamma-- 
19. ra[ja] goh 1 dey. kup bleh g{nja smin Sri Tribhuw snadityedhalinma’e 


20. [raja [g]oh sd[ak? ksJeh Papeaey [mo]y [m]a nom kfu] p(u)nras° 
[ro]w 

21. kseh [m]a das nor kirk{al]" mat bre[{y] scinleh rch (st }u(th)[b Jah 4 
ro{w t]ne- 


22. [y].ma [t]aw kurh 1 smin dewataw 1 dey kal g[n]a smia Sri Trifbh Juwa- 
23. na(djityadhammaraja goh spa kirmu(n mah ]ajan [gum ]lon ci sgh [na] ra 
‘24. [t mJa kah mfo]y prakar + s[p]kan ran [mJu(k)ut ” [sJu[kh]ay sirpaln] 
25. ma kah moy prakar [ci] deh t[-]Jeh strak gifgifi 1 fyan] kr(a)-” 
26, [y]a [kto]r (m]a [a}di nor r[ap] cifA! rip [jad li[slin [rap] tro- 
27. n[pju[mifi™ rip ‘nag ra[p s](u)[par.* mJa kah [mo]y [prak]ar fiah [t]a 
28. gfojh spkan ran | yan [g]na.smin Si Trifbhjuw anadi[t]ya{dh Jamma- 
FAUT elo} 


1 Possibly stlun, 2 Possibly érrwil. 

8 Looks like sdwo% but can hardly be anything but sdmon. 

4 The ends of C 12-5 are restored from the replica (No. II). 

5 Possibly cirhdy (which would be incorrect). 

® Looks rather like yarsa or yansa (words unknown to me), but probably yas is right. 

7 IL has sduk, 8 The ts is almost certain, but 11 appears to read purey. 

Me This might be piinras (which would be incorrect) ; but II has puzras. 

° Il may read kiréul : the passage is damaged. 1] The m is almost certain, 

12 Looks like muntut, which is impossible, but might be muakut, though I think the superseribed mark 
that might be taken for 4 is accidental. 

13 One would expect kriyd or kiryd, but there is no trace of an ¢ here, 

4 This reading is confirmed by II, where the sea consonant is certainly ms 

18 The reading is almost certain. © 


100 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. ! 


2g. tnas tirtiy [s]irsu{k] u[t AJah [m]a [t}aw dey Jamb[u]di[p? (spu)- 

30. k[k]el nidhi pi [pJrakar (1 na)’ ra{p] ci dey (d)larh * thar rofw p]nan [m]a 

31. (g)ir* rgoh (sc}inloh tu(mh)bah ® 1 smin dewataw 1 de[y kal] gna smin Sri 

32. TrifbhJu[w ja[na]dityadha[mm Jaraja goh skmun [1 ut [b]rfow] guihlon 

33. [cli s[t]afw] dey sil srl[o]s dhar[m]ma snfom puli-[a]r dfu}mhilc 
s](ba)-° 

34. [k]=t()[t]’ han tarla shi deh [s](d)a[s] row go[h u]t [mJahajan [g]u[rh]- 

35- lon dis amb[o’ a]mba lah dis [k]u(th) [cimun® y](o)w® lah dafs] i[m]a- 

36. a [k]a[n]dar lah (dijs kalyana(m](i)t ® sahidy [rju[th]ifols lah dofs] ran 
sko- 

37. [’] kuth [ku}mh [c](i" dfe]h s[c](u)loh ® tubah kel sa[k| sp(u)r[lJak ze 
smi(c) ci- 

38. r[-ah] (deh)*1 [y]ah [gn]a smifa] Sri Tribhuwanadityadha[mm ]araja 
g[m]oh go(h)- 

39. h u[t. dey] Ja[m]budi[p fAlah gufrhlo]n scu[mJat [na t]r[e]jas 1 de- 

40 fy] prasad ma sa[d]is [ro]w [Wejayanta pr]asad ma sga(p)"* lh(i)[n}* ma 

4%. das] muku[t] rat din Ari[m]Jaddana[p]o[r s](d)iin” (r)i[nd]ak” pir[p]if 
kir[m Jun 

42. ut b[rjow ma [taw] dey [d]an Arimaddanapi[r golh deh t-eh 

43. [s]fiac.swas [slathpa[t] rap gna smi (S]}r[i] Tribhnwanadi{t]yadhamma- 
raja deh 

- 44. [s](t)[&]w dey cnis (rac c)[ro]k (p)[4](A pa)n ® yan swas sa{ th Jpat [ma] ro- 
45. [w] w{o]’ efi djafh pa -plu[n t]lar (da)® [goh-ma go’] deh p Ls}ehfi 

[k]sah ro- 


1 The conceivable alternatives are: for the pa y, and for the uv either ¢ or ui, : 
2 What I have read 1 2a looks rather like sa. ~ 3 The d is almost certain, 
4 Looks rather like iv, but gtr is almost certainly right. 5 The tis is practically certain. 
6 The reading is very doubtful here; for there are possible alternatives »: or c, or it may be an 
accidental mark, or conceal a u ; a dot over the s may be accidental or stand for mm. Inthe last case the k 
in the next line would have to be the initial of the following, not the final of this, 


7 Possibly the vowel is 4. 8 Or in two words, cf mun, 
9 Conceivably the reading may be #aydw, or (as the virdma is not certain) yowa. 
10 The last vowel may conceivably be i. _ 1! Apparently cé, which is properly spelt ci. 


12 The first vowel may conceivably (but improbably, and certainly wrongly) be #/. 

13 The first vowel may perhaps be 2, which would be wrong, 

14 There seems to be a trace of an e here, but the rest is entirely blurred ; the restoration is purely con: 
jectural and very likely quite wrong. At the end there is a mark which might be the trace of a vivdma, in 
which case the restoration is of course untenable, though we might read deh or dekh. 

15 The virama is not clear. 16 Possibly [hiz, 17 The reading is almost certain. 

18 Almost certain, though the initial might conceivably be ¢. 

19 The four preceding words are rather damaged and the reading is doubtful; but it makes good sense 
and is probably right, 20 What I have read da may be merely a stop. 


PART 11] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS 101 


46. [w] goh ci deh sgifngia alr [1 ult [mahajan] gumhlon [cli [st]aw 

47. dey dindu bi{nto]n gna smin Sr[f] Trifbh]uwanadit[y Ja[dh]am[m ]ar[aj]a 
yan gna 

48. smin Sri Tri[bh]u[w]anadityadhammara[jja (dJah [s](d)ak fiah [m]a 
s[djas sumoh sturh- 

49. [blah row di{nna]l thar t(a)? ma[ha]jan gurhlon 1 yan [d]an A- 

50. ri[mJaddanapiir row[m]Ja ... . .? tak (na) ®[tn]a[k birsey pjan rgoh 

51. [d]a gna smih Sr{i] Tr[i]bhuwanadityadha[mm]a[raja] gfo]h [s]pa 
(r)u(b)[i]n *1 yan 

52. k[o]n smin gurhlon ci. .® [sa]m[pat m]a [tin]t{en] deh s[I]h[i]a de- 

53. y din Ari[m]addanapiir 1 (yan) ® [g]u[ thir [g]um[lojn ma [I]m{o}- 

54. [m] sil dey [ka] [satru] ? (buthr)a[k]® goh p[l]ifi [m]a sak 


D 


beeee eee ee ey. 09 [b]har kuth kum + [nJa wlir] gna s[m]ia [Sri 
T |ri{bhuwa]- 

2. [nddityadhammaraja] goh # [d]eh scow tin [d]e[y biJhar [kum ku]mh 

Bee eee eee ee eo ol goh sp(u)nd(i)k @ pu(m)pif ™ [s](i)l* 1 yan ras 

4. (twaf gurhlo)a* ma lifi gna smin Sri Tribhuwa{n]adityadhamma- 

5. [raja] (goh) [s]tiin kafnd]atm thif{c] nor 'tumlar wel 1 [y]a[n dijjn A- 


1 Conceivably tz or tna, but see C 18. 

2 At this point there is a blurred space (measuring about three lettersof the original). It is possible 
that there was here some short word (such as deh), but more likely it is an original flaw in the stone, which 
appears to extend through the next two lines (between nd and di and cf and satis, respectively, though its 
extension to the second line is not certain, and if there was in C 50 a letter with a tail, such as the d is deh, 
or a subscript letter, the flaw need not have been an original one). 

3 Looks like ca. | 

4 The dot in the d is probably accidental, the shape of the letter not being quite circular enough for a 4. 
Conceivably (but improbably) the initial might be d. 

® This space is occupied by a blur which may conceal some short word like x. Or it might conceivably 
have been na followed by an original flaw ; or something else. 

‘ 8 A mark after ya# looking like a stop throws some doubt on the reading but may have been an original 
aw, 

_ 7 There is either an original flaw between sa and tru, or (less probably) we must read some short word 

like da before satru, 

8 The first syllable is se badly blurred as to be quite uncertain, but cf. B24 and E35. The mak 
taken for si may be accidental, Conceivably (but improbably) we might read d instead of ». 

3 The stone is broken off and the beginnings of the lines, down to D 14 inclusive, are imperfect and the 
restorations conjectural, 

10 There is a mark here, which is probably an yz, and possibly we might restore the word gurhir, 

11 The first vowel may conceivably (but incorrectly) be @, the second may possibly be #, 

12 The th is doubtful, 13 Possibly si/, 

14 Possibly we should restore twait din: cf. G 31. 


14 


102 
6. 


7 
8, 


9. . 
10. 


Al, 
12. 
13. 
‘14. 
15. . 
16. 
17. 


18, 


19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. 
26: 
27. 


28, 
20. 


30. 
31. 


32. 


-EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ [von t 


frimaddanap]ar goh sisubhi[k] s[kJah [s]alk] u[p]adro[w] 1 ut ma(-) 

(nus ? ma t4)w [dJey da[n] Arimaddanapar. g[oh) ko[m] 

(ku gna)® smia Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammara[j]a syas [n]a. (r]iddhi 
2 dfejh swle]a akusalaka{r]mmapatha cas 1 (sp]a(n]-- 

[dak] pu( th) pifi * [kJusalaka[r]mmapatha cas | yan ma{nJufs} 

[guth]l[o]n dey kal g{nJa smin Sri [T]ribhuwanaditya- - 

[dhamma]raja goh k[m]un deh sjnok [r]iddhi row de[w]a- 

[taw] kuth 1 [y]an din Arimadda(n]a{p]ar [m]a das.[t]ir- 

[t]aLw gna [s]min Sri [T]ribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh 

ci sg(u)[ilr ® tinhir na_ratna tre[y] | yan gna smi- - 

nh St ‘Tribhuwa[n]adityadhammaraja go[h] spr[ath]a[n]a 

[m]ic? sabbafiutafidn ' ut fiah § ma taw dely] 

[di]a Arimadda[n]apir goh kom ku gna smin Sri Tri- 

[bhu]wanadityadhammaraja [sr]jan (th]ifc dey ra{t]na tre- 

y | spa pajaw iey plurey] srlos kyak 


Buddha tar[lJey saddharmma ® [k]u {t]arley sat{ghla [g]urh- 


lon 1 [y]an fiah ma ife]y purey ratna t[rey] 

(m]a [kJujih saddharmma [moly sif[k]o’ k[u] dewata[w] g{urh]-” 
lon ku[th] ci deh s[g]ulafi 1 dewat[i]w gur[lon ci s]gfu)- 

[Jai ku manus wel! dewat[4]w [g]umlon [c]i s[ko]- 

[m] ku manus [d]eh spa [s]anran gna smin. Sri Tri[bhuwa]na- 
di{t]yadhammaraja [g]oh 1 dey. k(aJl kirmu[n] gna smin- 

S(r}i Tribh[u]wa[n]adit[y]Jadha[m]maraja goh | [y]an [d]aa Ari- 
{m]Jaddana[p]ér ma das kantir kyak (§]r[i] c[r]ih[Zy] gfo]h 
[sr](b)in™ [pha] 1 [t}i[nm]a satru gum[lon [cli sa[k s]das kusiw 
(rin 1) u(t] kir[kal] pafn] ma t[w dely da[n] A- : 
ri[m]adda[n api go[h] stg[et] thec sdas u[pa]s kyak Bu- 


1 Another possible restoration is mahdjan, though there seems to be scarcely room for. it. 
® Conjectural but practically certain, 8 Restore kugn or 1 yan, perhaps, 
4 The m is very doubtful indeed. 


5 There is a more or less blurred space here of the size indicated, probably due to a flaw which runs 


through several of the preceding lines ; or possibly there may have been some short word, such as da, 
’ 6 The w seems very doubtful and is not strictly necessary, though quite possible, 
1 There is a flaw here (which may be original), in shape something like du, 
8 Before ma there is another flaw, and the spacing seems to indicate that it is original, 


9 Hefe there is a flaw, of the sizé of about two letters of the original, 
flaw, for it extends to the next line, occupying the space of a letter between 7 and'e, The only alternative 
is to suppose that a word containing a letter with a tail (or a subscript letter) is lost in D-21; 3 but none is 


neeced, and the one which would seem most appropriate, viz. 40m, does not fulfil the conditions, 
10 Conceivably (but most improbably) giris-. 11 Cf. C 51. 


It was probably an original 


PART 11] MON. INSCRIPTIONS ; 103 


33. ddha ta[rley] ku [dhJar[m]ma [s]an[gh]a 1 yah [gn]a smin Sui (T}r[i]- 
34. bhu(w]anadi[ty]adhammaralj]a goh scuti nor dirdas goh 
38. sdiia swas sarh[p]a[t] dewatal w manus ma [jnJok dfe]-. 
36. y rin-ut dirdas [u]t sat ma [a]r [apay] pa- 
37. (n ci] syu[k? nJor apa[y plan goh i ut Wo]k? 
38. [g]umo[n] kom * ku dewat[aw] ma [t]inl(u)m * [dJey 
3g. [slansar ma dials m]a[has]amudra® [m]a * [k]ah safk.c]i{n]ruk 
40. [t}]b[o]k? goh [1] spduk d[e]y saddha[r]mma® ma (dm]a{s] 
4i. [kb]an j[u] ra[no}k stuliin (dey [cnils nirbbin [p]u(m)rey | s[mi]- 
42. n dewa[t]aw | row goh da kya[k] Buddha (t]a[rlJefy m]a « dma- 
43. S [k](a)ntu ® goh byades. gna smin Sri Tribhuwanaditya[ dh ]a[mm]a- 
44. raja [I]Jmom pun gob | [s]mif dlew]altaw] t kurh [m|ifa: well. 
4§. [pih]ar c-en gath 1 [d]ey kal kir[m]un gna smin (Sri [Ir] 
46, bhu[w]a[n]adityadhammaraja [go]h ' ptis [tbjah pkaw sac=chu gurii[lo]- 
47. (h] sglfo}a [ph]ar.t [m]a[nu]s dmuk ma (s]j(i)a” (nJa sgfo} pa[n] (1) gli- 
48. k kurh spkan ra{n] krily]a thar glik k[o]ser sca- - 
49. sit cnak ! suthwat ma ckat % ca twan ku sinl[em] ta 
§0. goh ci (slt(g]in [c]i[t] thec row fiah pju [kJu[th] 1 ut rut(u] 
51. ci sak skuli kal-deh kurh kurh [1]* ut son) gurh- 
52. lon nor dé -kuth kurh. sran_tlin tumway * jurhwi- 
53..n [m]a [kJah [mo]y plrjak[a)e rut ji[r]nok ras 
54. [g]na [s]min Sri [T}ribbuwa[n jadityadhammaraja goh ci klazh ba- 


S- 


gS 


1 Here either IT inserts a short. word, illegible but apparently ending in ¢ or &: it might be ik “to 
take out of”? Or, more probably, the broken letter is merely the A of syuk and thére was a big original 
flaw in the stone, ° " 

2 Between o and & there is an’ original flaw. te seems to read lob, 

3 Here II may have inserted something, now illegible ; possibly ku manus, Or, more probably, there 
was a very big original flaw, 

4 Conceivably, but most improbably, the last vowel may be i, II seems to support the text, 

5 Here, as in the last line, I has a blurred space of the size ‘of three or four letters of the original. 

8 Here the original has what appears to be an original flaw shaped like an vy. If appears to read 
merely ma kah, 

7 Looks rather dike uit bok, but IC has na trace of any 4, 

8 Here again II has a blurred space, of the size of some three or four letters of the original ; 
probably part of the same original flaw that appears to affect the preceding lines. 

9 Possibly, but improbably, Aintz. 

10 The: ‘reading appears to be with 7, but Ut has i i. 

11 This stop is doubtful : it is too close to the g and rather too high up, u is badly damaged here, but 
Seems to have no trace of a stop, and none seems to be needed, 

18 The virdnia is damaged and might conceivably, though improbably, have been an anusvdra. 

13°The stop is quite clear in II. 

14 There may possibly be an #1 before the m, but that would be quite unusual in E.M, spelling, wae as 
Il has nothing of the sort the mark is probably merely accidental. 


104 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. i 
. . 4 


. r c[wla[s l]eh brey s(g]ar [ule [kJu [kal s}r[o’] sd{ ila)k : pif] « 

. [dey] ras [gnJa smi Sri Tribhuw Janad[ity Jadha[mm|ara[jJa goh ci 

. sm[i] dewataw [sglo](n) (c](i)[n ksJeh [pret] (j)[lo]w * [c]lik ba[bJe- 

.’? tyans [kon s}min [k]Jo[n fijah [jnok gurhlo]n ® [yan] 

. [k]ri[ya puwifi deh] t-eh [c]i [th Jar s[rja[fi cjo[m 1] yan mfiah [gu]m- 

. [lon mja [kJah rfb](i)[n * tinrJan ci [d]e[h t-eJh [s]pa tinran (p)irnik ® 

. {ktor cif s[nji [deh t-eh ci skumir k]u [cl]a{k] com 1 gna sm{[ija [Sri] 

. [Tribhuw]a[n ]ad{ityJafdhjafmm]a[ra]ja glo]h [ci] sisugih fiah gu[rhjlon 

. (sa){n]® (ar)[i](y) [durnpoh prja{k]ar s[c]uroh kel dharmma ma [d]mas 

. [p]k[a]w spa [m]al na sil [m]a d[m]as [m]i[rm]al ' sm[iJa de[w]a[taw] 
dap 

11. tnefy k |a{l gnja [sm]in Sri { Tr]i{bhu ]wanadityadhammaraja goh di- 

12. ;ndu bi]nton ma[hajjan [g]uml[on] » [y]Ja[n binrju anumodana b[i]- 

13. n{ru tirhin] kirsah binru sadhu[kar mja [m]ah[&]jan guml[ojh spa? [ci] 

14. [row b]inru [b]re[y] jurn[nok dey] kal tirdey [b](i)r[t]am* k[urm] 

15. 1[mJahaljlan gum[l]on sgfii ‘stcar[it lJum[b]ac ma [dmlJals krliya 

16, [dumhic] s[l]hin dey sad[dhJar[mm]a1[y]Ja{n] fiah ma [an diiat]. gum- 

[lo)- 

17. [n ci [st](G)[n]° glo[m d]jfia[t] fiah ma linlas [gumlon] deh stir 

18. (bno)['] + fah [ma j[rlaly guriljon skro[’ wel 1] fiah ma a(n] - 

19. [yi]ryuk dirhat [g]umllo]h snom yiryu[k] d[ijr[hjat + [yJan Aah 

20. [m]a [k]ah [j]ik pta[m gu]mlon [c]i spupifi (pu)[nd]ay ™ juram [n]a sro- 

21.’ sro’ yow™ [m]a [k]ah [moly pra[k]a[r] « j[ap] j[4](p)* shi fah ta 

22. goh sisgih [ph]a[r nla rat « yan bro[w pj]u ma du[k] ma syo’ tumba- 

23. [y] lami gum[loJé ku{r] na gir[go] [A]as [m]a [glo]a deh t-eh si- 


00 won AM DRO BW 


peal 


1 Conceivably, but improbably, sditk. 

3 The reading is probably jlow as in E 24, not glow, though the latter is conceivable. 

3 There are marks here which might be traces of a stop (or a short particle); but this would make the 
spacing very cramped, and probably they are merely accidental. 

4 Conceivably (but improbably) rdin. Cf. C 51, D 30, 6 The initial may conceivably be m or s. 

6 Between sa and # there is an original haw shaped something like rw, 

7 A mark here, which at first inclined me to read spd, is almost certainly accidental. 

8 Apparently the original reads dirtarh, but the proper spelling is certainly dcrtavs, 9 Or stun. 

. 10 The reading is extremely doubtful, all the impressions being bad here and the stone apparently 
damaged. The initial might be 2 or 7, and the subscript 7 or. x. That there is a subscript letter is shown 
by the space between yi and vyuk in the-next line, - 11 Conceivably (but improbably) pindity, 

12 The vivdma is broken and might have been an anusvdra, but the reading seems certain. 
13 The word looks like jam, but either the m is a mistake for p or the cross bar is accidental or 
was added later by some defacer. 


pigraphia_Dirmantca No. I. Votume I, Prats VIL. 


THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA, PAGAN. 


oe 
ep 


bree, sik 
x pee tk GEQY ae 
Pe <4 crags + yng ye, ed 


134 oh pacing rene 


a Aig a serun ; 
iio ks re oh: Sa f 


ig? ea G 4 samt Bence 2c6te 
pun ife caneek atin é U: one 
lO AUES) 1 Terai 6 £31 05 20 ‘i i 
Yars $0 Y BALERS Wes Sere 
OU bn wc ex! sens G49 on bee Yh 
Qh mn as welt 8 no noes B 
(ee ay a ASE MQUE LD? 
Fejjoe mi LG aac é = 
AAS etal ouitt Lemay acm aly 


~My oh 


SRG Mh 


aaa 8 


4 
t a 
¥ " ~. ‘ a 
Rita) % ; ee 2 aN} de ae 
» ” Ra, | { . 
mans Ol ee Soe. pee Sas 
7 , + ves re a >, 
tt Sine rn ea ; ™ a ‘ 
Y tat NS . ~} aon ; 5 
My ~, v Vee ye dr ‘ Ass 


2a 
watery ein 
ae 


eo 


i. Bull? ‘lst 

is ee apa 

o Wiss gic aac) apis oy. 
Bes a8 


aD 


tie = 
ieee Sy 


rm 
2, 


y 


mah grt eralea 8 @ A aio eh | 
the SAU ACHEY, ee gre TI 2 EI | 
BA Sears meeLyUs (Qmrasagy py aor 
| Ae MENS Sen (aucnp Mige! | 
' Pett nate ens CCR not pt Oe : 
fe Sues fla a ee tao 4 
Ca Bidicam,’ me A (rato “OBIy Ae 8, 


7) s > 
iLiad ak aE 
Ron Lqpaurigny « : WIG $1 
ee HE ae . GH DE 
Ae: sbiasacieg 4 
eIR\aiat ote y pares ae 
1} Dyan 2 Bic 
ae BAY rae we 
Moe seeing jeu Teal bs sisi ate Me aN + 
winch i UC taf sateg pe hive A: : oi No6y2* Thea es are * 
ates 4 aa Pree al nb OMgeAG. OV; ph bk ce nivied 4 
Wn ey eS) oe eas ueal US RY ss ftpeers 6s B ORTH 
BH ye swaeige UNG 2 bina a AIC Syt 43 4 
Vb ig Lf it a A. pik, faza cei Gc tics ieee . 
: sieuleug ths ahi an peo) % 
OT SESIC gb" AY HI 
Neier ach: 8 pn g: et 
igang Bea uisig i. gycte 
: a Gis2U oT 
i: egeccd ue HEM VI HB CAG) De 


95% Mi 5-3 
ehigintarnbea A 9 2f 


SS } 


@ 
) 


weapon pa 
i — 
rs 


Ss oO Sur 
SOU Wie ed nQ> 
to 
> 
mf Ba = Ag 
Seas 


“ RcaWa cas 
Gitte CGMS 3 


PART 1] MON INSCRIPTIONS — 105 


24. s[g]ih # fiah ma an d[i]k sglon dik» [fiJah maan jlo[w] c[i sg]lon [jjlow 

25. 1 yan dharmma tiltol [k](i:[k]al? pan stge[t] thie] + ut fiah ma 

26, [t]aw dey ras g{nja [s]mf[i]a S[r]i Tri[bhu[wan{a]dityadhammaraja goh 
skah 

27. sak bhey skah [s]a[k] upadrow : [u]t fiah [d]an Ari[m]addanapir. 

28. kom ku gna smin Sr[i] Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh ci sjlin a- 

29. yak ' [y]an [gu]rmir pand[i]t gumlon [m]a fiac tirtiiy rinli- 

30. fi dum[h]ic s[u]m[ulr [te goh [m]a [dm]as mat g[n]a smi Sri T[r]ibhu- 
wanaditya- 

31. dhammara[jja goh bars yan [mfiJahma [nJom kirk(&)[]? gu}mlon [m]a 
s[t ]ri- 

32. [wil] g]na [smin] Sri Tribh[u]wana[d]ityadhammaraja goh 1 yan Hong 

33. twas [m]a [gon] ma kah [mo]y.In(i)m ® g[irlJons [yan ras jana[p Jad * 

34. gna smin Sri Tribhuwa[na]dityadhammaraja g[oh m]a [fjah surhur® 
{ gjurnlo- 

35. (n) b(uru)[k]* lah dain ra[s] smin [c}-an [I]ah deh spa lukow [t]e- 

36.. Ly t]aly] sj(i)n? kel [kJu gna smif Sri Tribhuwanadityddhammaraja 1 

37. yan [gna] smi[A Sr] T[r]i[bhu }wa[najdityadha[mm]araja [go]h stball] 
til- 

38. [tol] smifn p]ora[n glum[ljo[m] + nor mukha[w]ar gna smin Sri 

39. Tr[i}bhuwanadityadha[mm]araja [gloh abhipr[ay] ma (kc)um® ku 
dharmma 

40. [com mla stit » [y]an fiah [m]a | pla dik mfiah [gumlo]a ci staw 

41. dey s[ijl' ya[n p]raj[fi]a [m]a imo? sJa[rJa[s]wa[ti] glo]h staw de- 

42. [y] m[ukh]a[w]ar [gn]a [s]mi[a Sri Tribhuw Janadityadha[mm Jar[a Jja 
goh u- 

43. [t ku k]al1 smin dewa[taw]: [d]ey diff Arji{mJaddanapir ma 


F 


1. [Imom ky ]a{k Sri crihay gojh [yan ki]... .2[mJa [ed](ah) ” [nor] 
2. (d)(ila]n [bu (rh) [hok] goh g[nJa s[ min Shi Tri]bhu[w Ja[nadity Ja[dh]Ja 


1 Perhaps éivkal, as it should be. 2 Very possibly kirkzl, 3 Perhaps Iai. ; 

* Possibly janapada, for the virdma is not certainly visible. However, the L.M, form is janah pruid 
in the Mén Akkharavidhdna of the Absidhinappadipita (Pak Lat, A. Bud. 2453). 

5 Perhaps susnir, 8 Possibly durité, 7 Possibly sjin. 

8 The first letter might be ¢; the second may be m. 

3 The illegible word appears to have two medial consonants and may endiny =, it looks rather like 
Rintir, which seems unsuitable here, 10 Almost certain. 


106: EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. 1 


3. [mmJafraj ja [gob]. sd[i]ndu 1s 1 smi[n] de[w]ata[w row) goh [yo] 
: fut] d[e]y sanran? gna smi[n Sri] Tribhuwa{na }dift]ya{ dh Ja[mm Jara- 
5. ja goh dia{h] spunyak pumas ku[rm] ci [pr]a{n]a{n-prja[nJa[n] e[y] 
6. pi{h]ar kel ku* kurh or °-kurh [mirn](a)s ‘ [IJa{h wit] 1 [sm]i[a de]- 
7. [w]a[ta]w® ta gna smia Sri Tribhuwa[n Jadit[y Ja{dh]Ja[mm]a{rajja [goh]- 
8. k[om] ku pa{rjisat ku[m] crloJh [ptaw j]()[rhan]® + [kal] (m)[no}- 
g. [r c]i rfow] kal (t]ufml]a{r kJurh [k]uth [p]a [sumoh]?: [smin] dewa[ta]- 
10. [w kurh] kok Ka[t]aka[rmm]Janaga[raj]a [ci kurn gah ro]w [wo]- 
ii. ty y he smin nag(a) ® jumnfo]k® [w](i)r («)" jlum]n[ok rJid(ahy]i 
[anu 
12. bhaw [tiJrla drabya tirta[w k]ya[k sri] + d[nja{h st}u{n]? tlumi s]a[sa]- 
13. [nJa — Buddha tarle[y] c(i) [kJurh [p]a [bi](r)[bo]y * [p]iha[r 
tarle | 
14. [y Gjawarmpa[t]i + yan din [S}i[sit go}h or taw I[n](irh)* [b]a[r] - 
15. [kljarh [c]na[m] ' blah goh kal gna smin Sri Tribhuwanadi[ty]a[dh]a- 
[mm]a- 
16. [raj]a s[p]a kirmun dey Taltt]ades 1 rut] ras ‘g{nla smin [Sri] 
17. [Tribhu}wa[n]a[d]ityadham{m araja [d]ey turnwin [lurnb]a(h) efi] row | 
18, et ch[u] gurhloh ma tin kjum sp[u]nduk * [pu](rm)[p]ifi ” 
ke [I]t 
1g. tar[l]e[y]® Gawarm{p]ati (gah ku [s]min In ro[w] gfo}hs {kal] 


1 ILhas sénvan, 2 Conceivably kuti. 

3 There is a faint mark here which might be taken fora stop, but is certainly not one: it would make 
the spacing too cramped, II (which, lrowever, is by no means seal here) has nothing, and: a stop would be 
out of place syntactically. 

4 There is a faint mark here which.may be the trace of an e, making the word mirnes, but it is probably 
accidental. The spacing can be accounted for bythe long tail of the « in kum of F 5, 

5 Here begins a long original flaw which extends to F 11 and has caused gaps in the spacing as 
follows : F 7, between té and w; F 8, between £om and ku; Fo, between vo and w; F 10, between um. 
and fot; F 11, between Ad and y. . 

6 Looks like sivhan, but the stroke in the 7 may be accidental. 

7 II, which (as usual) is by no means clear, may perhaps have szmo/. 

8 Il has nig. In our text there is no vivdma visible, but a blur which may perhaps be the remains of 
one. Of course either form is possible (cf, swarga and swar); the modern language writes nade, 

9 [I has jumnok (both times in this line). 

10 The vowel is perhaps doubtful in our text, but 11 has wir distinctly, 

11 After wir our text has a mark which may beastop. But II has nothing here. 
42 [I may have stiin, 

13 A mark across the ¢ is probably accidental, not intended for 3. 

14 There is no y visible in our text, which is. blurred here, but I] seems to’ have a trace of one, 
and the word is elsewhere spelt with one. 

15 A mark here (resembling » with a viréma) must be accidental. 

16 If seems to have spundik, 17 [I] seems to have the sis. 18 1] may have tirley, 


PART 11 ] MON INSCRIPTIONS 107 


20. 
Ql. 
22, 


=m -'S 


23. 
24. 
25. 


26, 


27. 


[go]h [s]min In gah row wo’ [Ib]ac [t]arla ely d](i)k ! (da) * 

[m]a spa [p]u[m]an dey Tattades [go]h [m]a [d]a{s] tir[t]aw [gn]a [smi]- 

[A] Sti Tribhuwanadityadhamma(r]aja ° 1 yan [s]a{t]r(u) * [tinmJa [m]a 
[stl](a)-* 

n ey [k]u[th] da [ma spd{o]w duo[!] :[ya]n® a(ta)s di[h goh]? 

[m]a [sg](@)[t] * ar ey [k]urh ma spa. [prak]a{t tin]: uft defy] 

sanrah gna sm|in Sri T]ribhu(w]a{nad]i{tyadh]Jammar[alja ° [g]oh ci e[y] 

kurh da ma sbyapar u[t kJ ka[l] « [ely ske[!] wa[r] (wel) 

[t]na[s zu Jonat gna _smin Sri Tri]bhu{w]a(n]a[djit[y Jadhammaraja ,ma 
ta]- 


. w dey dharmma goh ' ro[w goJh gna [s]m[i]A I[n] dan [b]lah ” {tJa[rle]- 
. y [GJawampati cis tin [h]Ja[n mJa[nu|ssalok 1! [ar surh risi] 

. [mJa [im]o{’ BiJsni dumon tarl[e]y risi Bis|nd goh] deLy a]- 

|. [s s]urbli[n tay] gah [row wo'] 1 [beJh ci [s]k[o’ kom ku] 

. [ely ku [smija” [In kju [K]Ja[t]afkJa[rmm]a[n]a[g]ara{jJa [ku Bissuk]a- 


[rmmade]- 


. [wapurta * s]kanda[m] di[h m]a [imo] Si(sit] 1 [mno]r-{n]or [goh de]- 
. fy T]a[t]tade[s djely daja [ArJimadda[n]a[pa]r ta[rley sdas] 
. [gna [smin] Sri Tri[bhJu[w]a[n]a[d]it[y ladhaf{mm]a[r]a[jJa (bl]a(h) ci 


{s]y(u)k * [sasa]- 


. {nJa [ky]ak Bu[d]dha [t]arle[y] 1 rfow gojh [m]Ja™ [k]y[ak Buddh]a 


[tja[rle]- 


. y (bly[a]defs] ta[rley 8 4] dnah gfo]h c(i)” ey ac haf{n t]a[rle]- 
. y ttarle[y] da[n” rijr-a[c ey] da lak pa [e}it [c-Ja[n + yal- 
. [A] sanran jurnnok ma gor] tar[IeLy s}pa c[i nom] | [ya]- 
. nh pumic ma [t]arle[y] mic [ci] jnok + dnah na sdafs] kya[k ci] 


40 

41. tar[l]ey pa sathbhar wel 4 [ut] sa[t gu]rmlon de[h scru]- 
1 Or dik; but If apparently has the i. . 2 I] apparently also has da. 
3.II may have a vivama here, 4 Conceivably satri. 


5 Il has the s#/ quite clear, but its vowel may possibly be z. 

& Looks like yuz, probably by accident, as II shows. 

7 The bracketed words at the ends of F 23-5, 27-30, 33, 35, and 37-9 are confirmed by II. 
8 The vowel maybe xz. II (which is not clear here) probably has 7, 


9 II seems to have a wirdma here. 10° Here II inserts a stop. 

11 [I has no stop here. 12 Conceivably smi. 

13 A mistake for waput, the superscript 7 having been wrongly put for the wi7@ma, See A 32. 
14 Conceivably, but improbably, syié, 15 [[ has ma, 

18 I] seems to have tirley. 17 Conceivably, but improbably, ci. 


18 A small flaw between dé and # is avvarently original, as there is an abnormal space there. 


108 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. I 


42, [k sjumnd(i)[n? p]un [t]a[rlJey cfi] deh-s[d](u)[k? pi] ut pufmi]- 
43. [c](m)un® san dai dnah [g]oh [ci] * tar[lJe[y] r[iJsi [jJumh[nok] d[e]- 


G 


1. y [dlifrda[s pli [pi] I[eh tin] (ci) (tJafrley casiJa [crJihay kfirmu}} 

2, _ [ a (Yalh kdas mJle’ (crilha[y k]i[rm](u)[n]® gfoJh 1 

3. ay] dirda[s pi pi] le[h t]a[n tla[rley] sdas [s]min [dh]ar[m]mara{j]a | 

4. [y kal tarley]° da[s smin dh]ar[mm]a[raj]a [goJh [ci kyak Sri t](a)-7 

5: ge a [phar] ' [de]y [sth]a[n] (ma) ® [t]a[rlJe[y] (kuta)® [ei 

u ft | t1|- 

6. [nm]a sat{ru gumhlon sak] sdafs t]u[taw | t]arlely scinljo[h t](@)[mb jafh] # 

*, a a dfey s]a{r]a[d]a [el 1” mja [t]a[w 1 dey k]a{l} kir[m](a)- 

n® tla- 

8. rle[y cli (yan) ' (swas samp ]at [dey ti jnok wo] ci sad[is] 

9. [row] swas [s]a[th]pa[t swar mleJh [) yan tris] bfrow suth }wa[t] guml[o}]- 
10. [n].ci s[j}li[m] afyuk skJah sak afijely] (gwip)® [we]l 1[m]aha[jJan gum- 
11. [lon] ci s[k]ah sa{k bhey sk]ah [s]ak [up]ad[row] 1 [deJh [sca ® hap] 

c(a)-!” 
12. r[nJa=r[h]a[p® mJa [g]lof[n deh ae 9 sulk ' [dely r[as tar[ley 
[c](i) * [bre]. 


1 Possibly suvndin. 2 Conceivably, but improbably, sdiié. 3 Conceivably pun, but cf. H 17, 

4 Apparently there is an original flaw here, cf the size of a small letter. 

5 Conceivably, but improbably, 4irmiin, 

6 Apparently there is an original flaw here, of the size of a small letter. 7 Possibly tt-. 

8 Between rle and y there is a small original flaw. 

9 The letter is not clear, it might be fa or paris, but the sense seems to require ma. 

10 The reading is very doubtful, but the consonants must be & or ¢, though the vowels may be u and a, 
or u and 2, possibly, 

11 The reading is certainly as given, unless the second stroke of the # is accidental, but the proper 
spelling is tussbah. 

12 Or in cne word, saradakal. 13 Perhaps éirmui, as il seems to haye. 

14 There was here a word of one syllable, ending (app arcntly) i in « (or w?), The first part looks as if it 
might have been ya, /:a or pd, but is broken and very doubtful, 

13 Or cwim ? oF distinctly has the w and seems to have the final p, 

18 There i a mark here which might be taken fora superscript 7, but I] has nething of the sort. 

17 If has cz-, 

18 The » is superscript over the fi and is difficult to justify, either orthographically or morphologically, 
unless due to the y in the preceding word, with which this really forms a sort of compound, 

19 Possibly slhiz, 2 Possibly ci, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 109 


13. [y sg]a{r] klam [b]a[r? cw]as leh tif{n} u[t] ra[s t](i) [jJnok [wo] | 

14. [kJufm] st(ijt* [1 plulndily (ju)rabo] gfuJmf{lo}a ci spifi [ult [nJa 
[drJap [guin]- 

15. {lojn i defy r]a[s tla[rfley c[i ut] Sah [mJa micchad[r]i{s gu]m- 

16. {lo]ii ci [s}das sarhj majdris [ut] * + [ujt gumhir gurhlon [c]i [sduJk 

17. {pif na sil] ku [pla[tipJa{t djumhfic]: [ujt [bjurh[njah gu[mljo[n mJa 


[grJa- 
18. [fh] (b)[e]d® [ci dJeh t-e[h s]puln]d{uk] pu(mh)p[ii]® ut dhar[m]ma 
[b](u)[anjah 7 [1] ut 


1g. [smin curmlo]ii ci sp[-]ar dha[rmm]a w[e]l 1 yan kirk[al pan]® ci deh 

20. [t-ejh s[p]unduk pu(sh)pifi? dha[rm]ma deh t-eh kuth kufth] s uftj d[e]y 
stha- z 

21, 4 ci sabh jaw twos cirmat goh spr[a]ka{t] « [t]arley risi 

22. (yan) [sa]bhaw [t]wos cir[m]a{t gnja smin [dh]a(r)fmm]araja ° [mJa 
[njom kyak 

23. [Sri mja d[mJa[s t]umban (sa)” stl(aya® [go]h spra{k]at (kajl goh 
ri{s |i , 

24. [ma imo’] Bifs]ni gloh nla kirjeh [ci djin [kle[t p](ihalr] . tare 

25. [y Gawarhp la[t](i)ther 1 th{ec] ta[rjley [m]nor ci de[y T]atta[ de]- 

26. [s dey] d{@Ji Ari[m]addana[pa]r [ey k]um (d]Ja-[m]a sda{s g]na [s]min 


[mjoy 
27, [ma imo] Sri Trifbh Jawanaditya[dh]a[mma[r]aja [1] yan jul tey fijah 
Oo eke as * [ci] ey kur [k]urh [m]a stbal 1 sa[sJana kya[k] Buddha [t]arley 
ma di- 


1 There is an original flaw betwecn $4 and ry which affects the two following lines also (between dis 
and y, and dey and ris, respectively), [But part of the wide spacing in dér is due to the subscript l of glo 
in G 1, 

2 Conceivably, but improbably, tz, 3 Conceivably séz#, 

4 The virtma here, probably owing to accidental damage, looks rather like a superscript. But I 
_ know of no word uvta, and the reading «f seems fairly certain. 

Most probably 6 (as in dajra, dihdr), though conceivably it might be a very broad ~. The L.M, 
form is duit. 

8 The ms is extremely doubtful. 7 Conceivably, but improbably, the first vowel may be i. 

8 Accidental damage has made this look like pun, but cf. D 31. 3 The m is very doubtful, 

10 | doubt if there is a superscript 7 at all in this word, but it is usually spelt as above, except when 
part of the king’s name, in which case the form with diamine is used. 

11 Looks like ha, or sé. Probably the latter is right, though the point remains doubtful. 

12 Conceivably, but improbably, st/172. 13 Conceivably, but very improbably, pildr, 

14 Conceivably, but very improbably, Gawarispatitier. 

1s ‘There are traces uf three letters here: the first looks like J, or +, or perhaps s, the second seems to 
have been s, and the last was ¢ or possibly 4. Vowel marks (if any) are doubtful, Probably the lost word, 
or phrase, helped to define the 2a/ in the preceding line. 

15 


110 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. I 


sk a aS * [ci] e[y kJum ma [syuk] : [m]Jaha[jjan gumlon ci [ely s-or [ml]a- 
. [f sil? s]-[o]r p-ar dharmma } brow ma [p-]ar pun-[a]r surhur goh 
. fey s-Jo[r] p-a[r pJun-ar du[mh]ic 1 dlukJup ras [twat déJa * surh- 


. [wat gumlon mia [li]A ey k[urh d]a [m]a [s]tu[n]* pa pra[k]at | [ylafn] 
. (sil](a)dha{rmm]a® [du]mh[i]e ci e[y ku]m [m]a [s-or] cr[oJh p[ta]w ' 


ely] sda- 


.{s tulmfbja{n asla{bh]a [pn]an [ml]a(h]a[jJan [gjumnl[o}n [1] ‘tar[lely 


[ri]si [g]ah 


. [row goh bl]ah tafrle]y Gawa[th ]pa[tijther kom ku tarley 

. [risi Bis]ni jurnnok [go]h sd[ik ® mlik t]ay 7 [ult bly ]ades kyak 

. [Bu]d[dh]a tarley tarley Gawarhpatli] gura[n ke]! blah 1 dhah maha- 

. {jJan gurmh[]]on sgo’ swar nirbban [ci] tarle[y] ar gingifi 

- (dja [mnJor [nor goh [ci] smi{h In clis [nor [T]a{w]atin ar suth 

. [t]arle[y] risi Bis[n@] gah ro[w] wo[’] : tar[ley] risi jurhnok 

. rilddh}i nae [m]a [pla st sm[oJh [h]a[n] fiah rumlos ku 


fiah 


. (tli[nm]a [wel(r)[wlefy]® guthlon. tafrljefy] ci ko[m] ku [t]arle[y] 
. [GJawamhpa[ti ku] ey ku [Bis]sukarmma ku Kataka[rm]managaraja 


(sk ]a[n]da[ rh ] 
H 


. [dala [Sisit t tarle]y [s]ka[ndJa[mh din Sisit] gfo]h [bllah sc[uti] 
. {nor goh mnor dey T]a[tt]ade[s dey dah A]ri[m|a[dd]a- 
. [nJa[pa]r [sd]as [gnJja sm[i]A{m]a [imo} [Sri] Trifbhuw Ja[na]d[i}tLy]a- 


(dh Ja- 


4. [mmlara[j]a ® syuk sa[s]a[n]a [ky]a[k Buddha ta[rley] 1° [dh]Ja[rmm]a li- 


5. 


1 Here again a similar amount of matter has been effaced. The last symbol looks like ¢ or ##, but is 


[fi ci st](a)[n]” pa [pr]a[k]a[t]: dnah s[pundtk ” pu](m)pifi® u[t s]a- 


quite uncertain. 


2 This word is confirmed by II, as are also the bracketed readings at the beginnings of G 31-5, 


3 II has dun. 4 Il has stan, 
5 Asin B 12, there is doubt as to the reading and jester Here II probably has dian 
& Conceivably, but improbably, sdutk, Il has sdik. 7 II puts a stop here, 


8 The doubtful letter might conceivably be d or x, and it is doubtful whether there is a virdma, and 


whether the whole is one word or two. Probably it corresponds with the L.M, wiwas, and. the formation 
is by reduplication together with the infix -rr- (assimilated as to the vowel by reason of the vowel of the root), 
Possibly, however, the first syllable is the Pali verarn and the second the L.M, wat. But this seems less likely, 
9 II seems to have something obliterated here, but it may only be an original flaw, with (perhaps) the 
relative particle ma, 
10 |] has no stop here. 11 Perhaps stun, but IT seems to have stun, 
12 Conceivably, but improbably, spandik, 13 The m is doubtful. 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 113 


6. nran tarley [ci] :[an]tal swa[r] wo[’ ely s[mi]a [In m]a [pk]a- 
4. [fn rjan [k]am baj[rja n[om]1 [b]oy s[mJar wel s[m]Ji[n nag]a? [ma 
8, [jn]ok rif[ddhi] a{nubh]a[w m]a nom kirwa[s] lni[m]* lefh tin] 
_ g. [g]oh [nom] wel 1 dey dis pa{n] ci sm[i]a lo[k]a[pa]- 
10. | pa{n] scr[a]h ptaw pu[m]Jan ' ut parisat kirkal pa{n] 
11. ko[m] ku [sm]ia [m]a ta[w] dey stha[n m]Ja kah [s]ak k[si]-* 
12. w [mun * t]afriJely G]awam[p]alt]ither croh ptaw [ci s]ka[h] sak 
13. bhe[y sklah sak duk [wel] 1 ut tinma sat[r](u)® tarl[e]- 
14. [y] ci[skJah sa|k] upay [prJajfia(aga)® 1 [mno]r [ci t]arlely dely 
15. kal tarley das gna smin Sri Tribhuwa[n| ad(i)tyadhamma[r ]aja ? 
16, goh i [y]an pent guml{o]n sisaimarttha bicdranar * a- 
17. r[t]tha ma jmo’ k(fi)an® ma [r]juh sduk pifi pum(i)c ® [mun san wei | 
18.. dey kal gfo]h ci yan risi juznnok ma i[m]o’ Bi- 
19..snd [g]oh rm{i]i pi{h]a[r smi]h In blah: [m]nor ci daah fac munmar 
20. [s]asana kyak Bud[dh]a tar[l]e[y]"« thec thec smin de[w]a[t]a- 
21. wi tarley Gawampatither ci guran arttha g[oh kJu [ey]! 
22, [ku]m-ci gura[n}? e[y] we[l] 1 row [mJa kum [t]-el iafh] bar (pi]ha- 
23. r 1 row gfoJh k[u](m)” [mnJor [c]i dnah syuk sdsana kyak B[u]ddha ta- 
24. rley ci gor ku bnal: spa [wi]r * lah a[mb]a[y + t]ar[ley].ri- 
25. si gah row goh(k]u In blah s[d]ik gap pumas da #® [yJan [b]ya- 
26, des ma kyak Buddha tarl[e]y by[Ad]Jes kel k{u t](a)r[le]-! 
24. y Anan go[h] lah + yan suzhmafi ma [t]arley Ga[wJam[p]a[ti smi]- 
28. [c] pa | pr]jakat ma tin sma[fi] kyak Buddha tarley ” goh lah 
2g.  kyak Buddha [t]arley [s]oh kel ku tarle[y G]awathpati 
go. [blah | [ojr tar[le[y] Gawarhpati ti{n] kinkan [k]el ku 


1) has nag. 2 IL has lain. 3 Confirmed by II, 
4 {l.has ma. * Possibly, but improbably, satrit. 
8 The a, if there is one, is superscript 7 The t looks like 7. 


8 The reading is quite certain, though the final r is difficult to account for etymologically. 

9 The letter subscript under & is very uncertain: it might, conceivably, be y, s, m, or even n, being 
badly blurred. 0 Conceivably, but improbably, prmic. 

NUT may possibly have térley, 

12 Above the gu there are marks in several of the cstampages (nd also in 11) which might be 
taken for the traces of an avusvdra. But this seems improbable, and the marks are perhaps accidental. 

13 The rs seems somewhat clearer in I], and would appear to be required by the syntax, balancing 
the keris in the preceding clause, . 

14 IT seems to have a stop here. 15 [L has only A single stop here, 

16 LI may have tirley here, and so teonoeivably, but improbably) ‘May our text, 

WIL may have tivley: 

18 A small space here may be due to a. slight original flaw, or conceivi ibly fliers may have been a 
stop, But this seemss. unnecesary and unlikely, 11 having nothing here. 


12 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 1 


31. mith Ijn goh [IJah 1 yan] pihar [m]a ta[rley]? Galw}arpa- 

32. ti ku smin In cis kin{k]a{l] kef{1] ku [t]ar[ley] ri- 

33. [si Bilsna goh lah1? [y]a[n plihar ma (k]yak [B]uddha tarle- 

34. [y g]ah ku tarlel[y] Ana{n] sasa[n]Ja ey kulfij ar 

35- [mJoy lnivh turow k[]am bar ewas dif{fic]am cnam. ya[n] | 

36. ta[rle]y risi [mja i[m]o’ Bisné [go]h sdas smin de-. 

37. Ly dJa{a] Ar[im]addanapir s[d]ia imo’ g(na sm{in] S[r]i Tabhw- 
38. [w]a[nJadityadhafm) at syuk [s| aia ely ma [ky]ak [Bu]-. 

-39. ddha tar[lely. gah goh cli gn]a smin wo’ (kum dja [go]h + [g]um- 
40. ir lal) pan{djift] lain inate lab Aah jno[k g]umlon | 

41. [lah ut lo[k mJahajan guthlo[m lah [ut bnJah o- 

42. [r] gran da ut b[njah or gra[a] das g[n]a smin wo’ k[ujih [dja [golh 
43. [lJah sandeh garh da lah sandeh [glath da lal sandeh gath danon Gi 


rs ranslation. 
A 


Prosperity !* Honour to Buddha! Honour to the Law! Honour to the Church! 
The brilliant Sakyamuni, who has compassion upon all beings, the lion who is the 
most exalted of all. beings, (1. 3)* thus showed forth the origin of the king. 
Sakyamuni bhagava®: the Lord® Buddha Sakyamuni; 1% viseso: of what 
manner’ is the distinctive shape of the Lord? —avigiraso: (I. 5) the Lord who has 
brilliance of body; mun... . (Atv) viseso: of ‘what manner is the distinctive. 
shape of the Lord?® sabbabhtitanukampako; the Lord who loves all beings; 
sabbasattutiamo: the Lord who is exalted beyond all beings; szho: the Lord who 
is like. a maned lion; rdja-uppattim : (1. 9): the origin of King Sti Tribhuwana- 
dityadhammaraja, who has piety,” wisdom, courage, glory, energy, renown (and) 


VID has tirley, . 2 If does noi appear to have’ stop here.. 
3 Sanskrit. What follows, as sie as the middle of A 3, is in Pali (cf. VI 6-9). Then comes a nissaya 
_ of Pali words paraphrased in Mén,_—- ‘1 These references are to the lines.of the text. 


‘6 “ The blessed Sa kyamuni,” or Sakya sage. These words begin the nissaya, 

6 Etymologically tarley is “my lord,” tarla (or tirla) ey, being either « contraction or a mere 
abbreviation thereof ; but-in actual use it is the other way about, tarla being-generally the mode of address 
(A 27) equivalent to our “ my lord,” and tarley the honorific title used “when speaking of the person. 
There are many exceptions, however, ¢.y. F 34, : 

* The meaning and identity of Jhaw (if that be the right reading) are not absolutely certain, but the 
general sense. of the Mor phrase i is determined by its Pali equivalent. 

8 The meaning of gata is undetermined s probably it is a particle. Cf. D 45,.H 43. 

3 Or “religious merit.” Alternatively. it might be possible (following I..M., usage) to take nom pun in 
the sense of “ possesses,”’ thus eliminating “ piety.” But I prefer the other rendering. 


Epigraphia Birmanica 
(a to leat etal 


THE GREAT INSCRIPTION OF THE SHWEZIGON PAGODA 


50 3I2y 


ie Nite 
idee sents 
4 and fatney 


= 
g 
= 4 
a ws 
7% . 
Dates 
eae 
> + 
4 
y* SF 
* 
a 
: 
i 
1 
se, 
7 
t 
4 
wes 
r - 
st is | 
% 


ey 
S Vy per 
bar 6 1D 
re PCGr 
ae 
s) 
, 4 


Sao 
oF 


te att 

it CEN MAT 

Ba rcemhigztceill 
shaun) REA 
es: demimraitérig 


pe mish uri 
edge tere ie TOC 


AS 


Be eae tae Ne 


Race ANF egenry 


oS oy 


yr tha; » 
s. 


No. I. 


ee 


AB crn cobiiis sig Ye 


Sepa Pile ca om om ae 


ie: 1h. meicain| 


ql 
i ae 


VotumME I, Parte VIII. 


» PAGAN. 


if iu 
Ay eee Paes ¢ a 
Cuan sth “ATE al oy 2 
‘nmaulitggy ey Wr deters) aM 
iG} qgnPayns 14.6 
i: cA); ihe uah ag Gane ML Gg) Bsr ac BST 
gucains a uisuam vue BHINECE Rs 
eS tw Yeo mad: LITO 
4 Sie OGliWlE Rio: eu) 3s: MDGS UT 
n> Aptas acnhe: Wedd, aE} 00 
SB ocvuds seco Heng cin ey 
1O@ Ueto RIT UGC Zia 0 AA 
Bic his ry cint 3 ys AIL ea 
HELA IAQ? Ny 9; aes) an ni? 
ene ach) RE? Wangy USC ey 
chun aoc” Wwe Cs CO VU eA 
dispaichten uit ua WeNee Ie oF § 2 if 
Sunnis ie IAG s Owes 
MQGM| FAI Us CANNY AD UT g ® n) U 
dan Feneniaun au 8 BAe mg grr cy. 
WS fie weal Pie weal eocorn bur) 
Borne RRA Ean icra AA on pI WT | 
roe it CAIs fu =hUFe rire MIP Ag SO) lad 
\ eb ae maa us TESST HE Qo m aleny 
‘cpus VAPOR ny Lan 3 45 
Worth y Peet 5 8s Ae, 
dae suai Mie seid 
WHPqyarie Nf OEE 
ave ti er) aaenls 
JIMsUH a mq fe 
esi Heap My Gk; 1s 
BiG gaq iGo ines ate Ani 
emt PIS Ue CIN S04 ae nest re 
HC LC uw AQ yO | 


¥ mr) 


{2 


, Resa 


Ty Hones 


PART 11] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS 113 


pomp,’ who is without a peer’; desay? desesi: the Lord Buddha preached, 
made manifest, (and) showed forth all the coming into being of ne Sri Tribhu- 
wanadityadhammaraja.° 

Therefore, (1.13) at what time didthe Lord Buddha make manifest (and) show 
forth the coming into being of King Sri Tribhuwanddityadhammaraja? It was 
once upon atin e when the Lord Buddha was dwelling in the Jetawanamahawihar,* 
that the Lord Buddha saw® that which was to come (to pass) thereafter ® for 
the advancement, of the Lord Buddha’s religion, (namely) the coming of King | 
Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja in the city of Arimaddanapii,’? when a thousand 
six hundred and thirty years should have clapsed after the Lord Buddha’s attaining 
Parinirvana.’ (And consequently) the Lord (I. 20) smiled. 

When the Lord Buddha thus smiled, from his four eyeteeth rays of six colours 
issued forth (and) went up as far as Brahmalok °; (while) down below the rays 
penetrated ” all earth, water, (and) air; (I. 23) across” all the four quarters of more 
than a thousand. million™ universes they went; and then the rays entered the Lord 
Buddha’s mouth. again. The Lord Anan,” seeing this miracle, bowed down (and) 
put on his head (I. 26) the soles of the Lord Buddha’s feet, (and then) lifting his 
joined hands ™ questioned (him) thus: “ What reason (was there) that my lord 
smiled thus?) (For) without reason Buddhas do not sinile:’ Thus (1/29) did the 
Lord Anan ask. | 


~ 1 Or (and) the fame of pomp,” taking yas paviwiir together. 
- 2 Literally ‘‘ who lacks others exalted eqitally ” (possibly “ who lacks superiors and equals”), 
3 At this point the preliminary part’or introduction ends, if we trinslate gin goh by “ therefore,” 
It is conceivable, however, that the words might be taken to mean “ (: ang) his virtues” ’ or “ (and) the benefits 
(ie, accruing from the king’s accession),” and-in that case “ all’ (or “am my ”) might go with it, though the 
“order would be unusual. VI 5 rather supports this interpretation, which i is favoured by Duroiselle, 
4 The great Jetavana monastery, 
» By virtue .of the supernatural power which. Buddhas have of seeing into the Finiee: etc, Cf. lil 
B 3-4; «ind with the whole passige down to I A 37 (2s well as some subsequent parts of: the inscription) , 
cf. HI] A 27—C 26 and VI g—end, 
6 The-meaning of mnor_ is inferred from ‘the rags: ages wheie it ‘occurs, Seperialy F 8-9. The others 
(A 30, 40, F 33, G 2, 25, 39, H 14, 23) are not so definite. 


7 Pagan, 
8 It has been found necessiry to transpose t!.> * ordder very drastically afte Fetawanamahdwihar. In 
the original the order of the clauses is: (1) “that which should come to pass for the advancement » (lit, 


“ increase ”), etc,, (2) “from the Lord Buddha’s attining,” etc, (3) “elapsed 1030 years,” (4) “in the. 
city,” etc,, (5) “ the coming of King §.T, did the 1 ord Buddha see,” Parinirvaga was’ attained by 
Buddha at his death. ® Brahmalo!a, the higher heavens, 

10 The meaning of kirloh is not absolutely determined : forms with the infix <¢r- are usually substantive, 

“The partly illegible expression in the text is conjecturally restored, _ 

12 Thave taken laksa and kof in their L.M, values. If the Indian values be taken, the feauili is a 
million millions. — - 13 Ananda, a leading disciple of Buddha. 

1 Or the passige may mean that Ananda bowed down and “lifted up the soles of the Lord Buddha’s. 
feet and bearing them up on his hinds joined together,” cte But cf. HIB ara, VI 14. 


Lig EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vo1. 1 


Thereupon the Lord’ Buddha spake (I. 30) to the Lord Anan thus: “ Anan, 
hereafter a sage named Bisnii,’ great in supernatural power, great in glory, 
possessing the five transcendental faculties, together with my son Gawampati, 
and King In,* and Bissukarmmadewaput,? and Katakarmmanagaraja, shall build 
a city called Sisit. After that, the sage Bisnia, (1. 34) departing® from thence, 
shall go up to Brahmalok; (and) departing from Brahmalok, shall come to 
be® in the city of Arimaddanapir, (and) shall bear the name of King Sri 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (and) shall uphold? my religion.” Thus did the 
Lord Buddha tell (I. 37) the reason of that smile to the Lord Anan. 

At that time the Lord Gawarmpati, hearing the explanation of the Lord 
Buddha, did obeisance to the Lord Buddha; and then, in order to elucidate the 
Lord Buddha's statement, questioned (him) thus: ‘ My lord, (1. 40) did my lord 
truly ® say that hereafter a sage named Bisna together with me should build the 
‘ city of Sisit ?’ 

“ Truly, Gawampati, thus (itis). The sage Bisni ® shall build (it), together (1. 
42) with thee.” Therefore, Gawampati, go thou to King In, (and) speak thou thus : 
‘O king of devas! Receive with deference ™ the saying of the Lord Buddha : (to 
wit, that) the sage named Bisné, who is great in supernatural power (and) glory, 
together with me shall build the city (I. 45) of Sisit. At that time, in all the (good) 
works of the sage Bisni do thou bestir thyself! After the sage Bisnit has built the 
city of Sisit, he shall depart from thence (and) in the city of Arimaddanapir he 
shall become King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (and) shall uphold ™ the 


1 As to Bisnié and the other personages mentioned, sec §§ 25-6. 

2 Indra, The title sui is very elastic, being applied to gods (eg. the sun god, L.M. smta taat), 
kings, provincial governors and even subordinate officials, and in deferential address to private individuals. 
Indra, of course, 2s king of the devas has a good claim to it, .. 3 Le, “Putra, 

4 Prome: apparently we must take the name to be a vernacularized: form of §ri Ksetra, which 
occurs in the parallel passage VI 20, while III C 6 hus the intermediate form Sri Xset, } 

* By death and rebirth, : 

6 ‘That is, come into being, existence, as king of Burma. 

* Or “uplift”; cf. A 26,D 37. Some of the other inscriptions have stbal, e.g. III B 2g. ta L.M. 
usage, however, yuit dusk often means “ to reverence.” : 

8 The sense of td is undetermined ; I think it is probably a particle with interrogative force, like L.M 
ha.- Strange as it may seem, Gawampati is apparently made to ask the buddha (not, as might have ria 
expected, whether the asker had correctly understood the Buddha’s statement but) whether the Buddha’s 
statement is true. . However, the other interpretation (‘‘is it a fact that my lord said” ., .) is also 
possible and may be the right one after all, ; os 

4 Lit. “(It is) the sage BisnG who shall”; the da ma serving to emphasize the subject. 

10 {t would seem that Artis here does duty for a personal pronoun. Cf. A 49, B 3,19, D 44,F 6,1 
13, H 22. ; dh as ail ti 

1 Conjectural; the meaning of anf1/ inthis connexion is undetermined, Cf. A 51. Duroiselle suggests 
that it stands for “head” here: tu receive the message of a superior on one’s head is Sean. a 
Uricntal plirase for respectful deference, 1 2 Cf A 36n. ere 


PART II] MON INSCRIPTIONS 115 


religion of (1. 48) the Lord Buddha. O king of devas! In the time of the 
(good) works of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, and in works of piety, do 
thou bestir thyself at all times!’ ” 

(1. 50) Thus did the Lord Buddha instruct the Lord Gawampati. At that 
time the Lord. Gawampati received the saying of the Lord Buddha with 
deference,’ and my lord,’ having practised Dhy4n,* went up to Tawatin*; (and) 
the Lord Gawarmpati expounded all the saying of the Lord Buddha to King In. 
My lord having expounded (it) (I. 54) to King In, my lord came down to the 


Jetawanamahawihar. Some considerable 


B 
time® after this, the Lord Buddha went to Nirvana in the city of Kusinar.2 Some 
considerable time after the Lord Buddha (had achieved) Nirvana,’ the Lord 
Gawampati (1. 3) went up to Tawatin once more, (and) of the coming of King 
Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja my lord informed King In in full detail :-— 

‘OQ king of devas, hearthou! When one thousand six hundred and thirty 
years have elapsed after the Lord Buddha's going to Nirvana, the sage named Bisna 
(1. 7) shall become a king named Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja in the city of 
Arimaddanapir ; (and) King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall uphold ® the reli- 
gion of the Lord Buddha. The renown of (I. 10) King Sri Tribhuwanadityadham- 
maraja shall become celebrated throughout the whole expanse of Jambudip®; the - 
hardness of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja (shall be) like iron. The true 
principles of morality King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall maintain.” 
All vice, which is even as a stench, with true morality, which is even as a perfume, 


1Cf. A 43n. “ Gawampati. 

8 Taking cwin to represent I..M.swuin, If it represents L,M. cuin, the meaning would be “ having 
become perfect in’? Dhy4na (the latter being the high form of trance whereby supernatural powers are 
acquired). I prefer the first interpretation. _ 4 Indra’s heaven, ‘favatimsa, 

5 Apparently a fairly long time is implied, but the phrase is not at all definite. Cf. B 2. 

8. Kusinara. 

7 Here ntrbban is used verbally, and possibly it should be similarly rendered in the preceding line, i.e. 
“went to achieve Nirvana in the city of K.’ But this seems improbable: see B 5. The reference, of 
Course, is to Buddha’s death and in this use the word is equivalent to the pavinirbbdn of A 17. 

8 Cf. A 36 n. 

9 Jambudipa, the southern continent of the inhabited world, including (iuter alia) India and Indo- 
China, but no doubt used here quite indefinitely. 

10 Possibly this sentence is to be taken as part of the king’s fame, 7.e. that it shall be said of him that 
he is as hard as iron. And perhaps it is to be read closely with what follows, 7.2. his hardness consists in 
his Persistency in maintaining virtue and true religion; but the point does not seem quite certain, 

1 Reading siladkarmma, for which, however, I have found no authority. If we read sil (or sila) 
dharmma, the meaning would be “ morality (and) the Good Law” (f.¢, the true faith of Buddha). Cf. G 33. 

12 Or, perhaps, “ establish,” or “ practise,” “ observe,” etc. 


116 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, 1 


shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja (I. 15) utterly blot out, All sin in deed, 
sin in word, (and) sin in thought, that are beyond cleansing,’ with pure morality,’ 
which is even as water, shall King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja wash away. 

“ The devas who receive the joined hands of (I. 18) all men,’ who hold 
celestial sceptres* made of dazra,® like the executors of thy (good) works they 
shall execute the (good) works of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. The 
whole realm of King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja (1. 21) shall be altogether ° 
free from robbers, who are even as thorns, (and) free from all? enemies, who are 
even as a forest It shall be wide as the ocean also. The desires of King Sri 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall quickly be fulfilled.? (1. 24) The city of Arimad- 
danapiir, when enemies afflict ® {her), she™ shall suppress them. -The men of the 
four castes that dwell inthe city of Arimaddanapiir, who are (taken as) captives 


1 Or “which need cleansing,” or “ which are unclean ’’? 2 Or “ with virtue, which cleanses ” ? 

3 The meaning is not absolutely certain, but I take it to be that the devas receive the reverent suppli¢ 
cations of men: cf. A 26 for an illustration of what is implied by sumbup tey, Duroiselle prefers another 
‘interpretation of dun, viz. “ The devas with” (lit. “ who hold their”) “joined hands raised (in worship),” 
taking fiah zumlog as referring to dewataw. ; 

4 Lit. “ devas’ staves,” See the next-note. a Sty 

5 The word may mean “thunderbolt,” ‘‘ adamant,” “‘ diamond,” or according to Haswell (L.M, bus#) 
“emerald.” It is the Sanskrit vajva. Possibly, however, the passave should be construed thus: “ devas 
who receive the joined hands of all men” (or alternatively as in B 18n.), “ (devas) who hold staves, devas 
who are armed with the vajra”’ (a kind of celestial sceptre), The absence of dewatdw in the second of 
these relative clauses makes this interpretation less probable, even if ¢miy can be taken to mean “ armed.” 
On the other interpretation, ¢miiy may mean that the staves or sceptres are headed or tipped with bajra (in 
one or other of its possible senses). a 

6 The precise force of wel is undetermined but it seenis to be a particle giving emphasis: cf, D 5, 25, 44, 
E 18, F 26,41, Gro, 19, H 7, 0, 13, 17, 22. 

7 The meaning of surntum is not absolutely determined: perhaps it is connected with L.M. stuzm and 
we should leave out ‘all’? and insert “ thick ” before “ forest.” If the meaning is “ thick,” we must read 
sumtusn ; if it is “all,” probably we should read susis tum, 

8 The preceding sentences have been rendered on the footing that. “realm” is the grammatical 
subject, But this involvcs the position of the object between the subject and the verb, which is not normal 
and is not the case elsewhere with tat saé: see A io, D 6, E 2u-7, Gto, 11, H 12-4. On the other 
hand, it seems hardly consistent with these, passages to treat the verb as intransitive and translate: 
“throughout the whole realm of King S.T., robbers... . . shall be raltogether absent, enemies ,..... 
shall be lacking.” Perhaps the order is determined Ly the presence of the relative clauses, 

° Or, perhaps, “ it (i.e. the realm) shall quickly fulfil the wishes of King §.T.”; cf. F 42, (But in 
L.M, the verb appears to be intransitive.) One might also translate: ‘ King §.T, shall quickly fulfil his 
desires,” fcr though the pronoun deh (L.M. de’) is not apparently used of royalty in L.M.,, it is sometimes 
applied to Kyansittha in these inscriptions (e.g. VI 29, 31). - 

10 Or “ damage,” “ravage.” There is some doubt as to the precise force of Burisrik. CEC 54. E35. 
It may be an adjectival (participialJ form, so that the literal rendering would be “in times of ravaging 
foes.’ Seethe next note. , 

11 As to the pronoun, see the last note but one for the reason why I have not translated: “he (t.e. the 
king) shall suppress them.” It seems to be theoretically possible to interpret the line in quite another way 
viz. “ when ravaging foes destroy the city of A.,” running on the next sentence, “the men,” etc. But it is” 
rather unlikely that such a contingency would he admitted as even possible, unless we assume that it 
took place before the king’s accession. 


PART 1] ‘MON INSCRIPTIONS 7 


downstream, (and) who go? to other countries,? by (virtue of) the strength, power 
(and) energy (I. 27) of King Sti Tribhuw anadityadhammaraja quickly shall they 
return upstream, shall they take (their) pleasure in the city of Arimaddanapirr again. 

“The tears of those who are severed from all? (their) trusty friends,‘ by a 
course (1. 30) of benefits, by loving kindness which is even as a hand, shall King 
Sti Tribhuw anddityadhammaraja wipe away. The nasal mucus of all who are sick 
at heart, by a course of benefits, by compassion which is even as water, (I. 33) 
shall (he) wash away. O king of devas! King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 
with (his) right hand shall eve boiled rice (and) bread to all the people, with (his) © 
left hand shall:give ornaments ° (and) wearing apparel to all men.6 All the people 
(shall -be) like a child’ that is in (its) mother’s bosom. Thus shall King Sti 
‘Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja keep w atch (I. 38) and ward with benefits? 

“ All‘men who are harsh,’ King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall make 
gentle.” Menwho are not equal ™ (to the rest) in body, in speech," (or) in spirit, ~ 
King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall make (them) equal.”. (1. 41) Wicked 

-male slaves, doers of all™ (sorts of) deeds that their masters know not of, 
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall report to their masters. A. Lord 
Mahather,” who possesses virtue, who is the charioteer of the Law, King Sri 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall make > . .. . ,® shall make (him) his spiritual 
teacher. (1. 45) In the presence of the Lord Mahather, abounding in” virtue, who 
is the charioteer of the Law also, ‘ Together with my- lord will I cleanse the religion 
of the Lord Buddha,’ thus shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja say. (I. 48) 
‘Do good! Do good !’: thus shall King Sti pebhavanadtyadhotmnatsp teach 
all the people at all times. 


1 Conceivably, ‘ down the river, which goes.” 2 Or “ districts.” 
3 Perhaps “ all” goes with “ those,” not with “ friends,” 
4 The precise meaning of rutistos is undetermined, but cf, C 36, G41. It seems to be related to srlos 
- (C33,D a0). 
_ 8 Perhaps not necessarily “ ornaments ” but just “articles ” (of wearing apparel), 
6 In the general.sense, not necessarily excluding women and children. 
7 Or “ children,” though there isno plural particlehere, © §& That is, with beneficial effect. 
9 Meaning not strictly determined: cf. A 11. - 10 Meaning conjectural, 

1] If the reading is right, it would seem to bear thisinterpretation, The idea seems to be that those who 
-are below the average standard of the community areto be brought up toit, Or perhaps the meaning may 
be that men, who do not agree (or are not in harmony with) their fellows, shall be made to agree: cf. C 48. 

12 Lit. “ mouth”: the threefold division is the same in principle as in B 45, 

13 See last note but one. | 

14 I take “all ’ with “ deeds ” rather than with “ slaves” because of its being immediately followed by 
the relative clause. 15 A leading monk, 

18 Possibly the doubtful. word is connected with stim, ‘the right (side), and bears the figurative 
meaning that the Chief Monk is to be the king’s right-hand man, as it were. But this seems very doubtful 
and even the reading is not quite certain. 

17 Cf, C 53-4, D 44, 1. The sense is inferred from the context. 


16 


118 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


“Those who intend evil, with good intent shall King Sri Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja sotten their hearts.1_ Those who speak evil, (I. 52) King Sti Tribhu- 
wanadityadhammaraja shall exhort to speak good. The bar of the gate of Heaven, 
which is made of gold, which is adorned with gems, (I. 54) by wisdom, which is even 
as a hand, shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja | 


Cc 


draw open for (all mankind*?)............. King Sri Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja....... co 4 bole oon wa ew « $e frein Mahs-Awici". « » « 
eee ee (1.4)... The offerings* of all those that (dwell in the city of 
Arimaddanapir ?) King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammar&ja shall sustain'..... 
weeeeeeeeeaee (like ?) the appearance of a golden mirror that is set 
with gems, King Sri T ibhuwanadityadhammaraja shall shine brightly 

‘The maiden daughters (of many princes, having ?) (I. 8) fragrance like the 
fragrance of jasmine flowers, (and) having splendour Jike (the splendour ?) of the 
spouse of King In, who is named Alambusi, (they)® shall attend (him). (From 
seven cities7?) the maiden daughters of many princes, adorned with gems of divers 
kinds (I. 11) (and) holding ® white umbrellas, shall come to attend (him). King Sri 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall be seated on a throne made of gold (and) 
adorned with gems, (and) shall enjoy the splendour of royalty.2 The maiden 
daughters of many princes, coming from seven cities, the city of Arimaddanapar, 
which is glorious, shall endow (them) with renown.” 

“© king of devas! (1. 16) In the time of the reign of King Si Tribhuwana- 
dityadhammaraja, if another ™ great army should come, a good omen of victory,-an 
auspicious constellation, shall come before ® King Sti Tribhuwanadity adhammaraja. 


1 The original has the same word as in B 4o, where it is rendered “ spirit,” 

2 Conjectural restoration, as are the words in brackets with queries in the following lines, Cf, HI 
C 18-20, VI 30-1, ; 

8 Or “ Awic,” #,e. Avic#, one of the hot hells, L.M. Awsk. 4 Or “ festivals,” or “ hospitality.’ 

5 Apparently the suggestion is that the king is to bear the expenses, but in the mutilated «tate of the 
context the meaning must remain doubtful, 

6 Or“ who,” But in that case thereis an anacoluthon, there oeing then no principal verb, Thesame 
is true of the next sentence. 

7 Or “countries,” Perhaps one ought to prefix “the,” as these seven localities seem to represent 
some conventional group cf. C 14), but I am unable to place them definitely. 

8 Or “shaded by”? 9 Or “sovereignty”; lit, “reign.” 

10 This seems to be the meaning: it is more reasonable to assume that the metropolis confers social 
distinction on these provincial ladies than the converse, and-it would be rather abnormal to put the object 
between the subject and the verb, 7 

11 That is “ foreign” or “ hostile.” 

12 Conjectural : this is perhaps the root of éinta (L.M. gata), Cf. C 49, F 7. 


PART 11] | MON INSCRIPTIONS » 2 119 


In time of war King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall ride upon a noble steed 
that has swiftness even as (I. 21) the steeds that are of the breed of the clouds,? 
(and) shall fight (and) shall shine like the noonday ? sun. — 

“OQ king of devas! At the time when King Sri. Tribhuwanddityadhammaraja 
shall bear sway, all the people shall be. adorned with gems (1. 24) of divers kinds ; 
they shall go about, wearing diadems,®? sukh#y* (and) loincloths® of divers 
kinds. Ear-ornaments, for example in the shape of elephants, lions, troz pumin,® 
Nagas, Garudas,’ of divers kinds, shall they wear. King Sri Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja, (I. 29) for the sake of the advantage ana happiness of all that dwell 
in Jambudip, shall . . . .® treasures of three kinds, with ® images ™ in a golden 
reliquary, like a candle ” that glows; so shall (it) brightly shine. 

“QO king of devas! At the time when King Sri (1. 32) Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhamuiaraja shall reigu, all women shall be steadfast in virtue, shall trust” in the 
Law, shall be of good conduct, (and) shall (obediently) follow ® their lords *: 
thus shall they be All the people, be it the faults’ of ® mother or father, 
nephew or brother-in-law,” husband (1. 36) or wife, good friend or trusty ™® 
companion, or the faults of one another, they shall openly declare (them), shall 
not conceal (them), (and) shall desire their purgation.” 

1 Evidently some kind of supernatural horse is referred to; possibly the horses of the sun god are the 
starting point of the idea, It is not unlikely that in Sudhammavatirdjdvamsa, p. 10, 1,13, we finda 


corruption of the term in the phrase kh yeh rat uti gaku ma prat prat, 
e e Conjectural: lit. “the sun that stands’ (z,¢. straight overhead at noon); cf. L.M. tzai éatau, 
eg 

8 Though the royal word (mukut) is used, the reference is presumably merely to the turban or scarf 
wound round the head. 

# An unidentified article of clothing. 

_ § Probably stands for the long skirt, the principal garment of both sexes. 

6 Unidentified. 

7 Monstrous supernatural birds, the deadly enemies of the Nagas, 

8 The reading being doubtful, it is not clear whether the king is to discover the treasures or deposit 


them. 9 Reading doubtful. 
10 Or “ an image.” Wt Possibly “ lamp.” 
12 Conjectural: cf, D 20 and B 29 n. 13 Reading and meaning doubtful. 
It Lit, “house lord(s),’’ z.¢. husbands. 15 Or “sins” or “ offences,” 


18 Conceivably the passage might refer to offences committed against, or in respect of, these various 
relatives and friends. But this seems improbable, as there would be no particular point in the offender 
Teporting himself, when it was always open tothe injured party to complain. . The sense seems to be that 
the duty of reporting ‘offences is paramount, even overriding the claims of family and friendship, and that 
this fact was recognized in practice. 

17 Both words doubtful, If correct, they may include the other sex also. 

18 Cf. B 29. 

19 Meaning somewhat doubtful, but the word appears to be. the verbal noun formed from c-ah, 


“clean,” cuak,"' to clean.” 


120 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ———s[vo. 


“ The brave King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (1. 39) in the whole of. 
Jambudip all men shall glorify’ (him). In a pavilion*® that is like unto Weja- 
yanta,® a pavilion that shall be fit for delights, that is the jewelled crown of the city of 
Arimaddanapir, (he) shall enjoy the fulness of (his) reign.‘ (1. 42) All the women 
who dwell in the city of Arimaddanapir, (when) they see the grandeur (and) magni- 
ficence of form of King Sri Trishuwanadityadhammaraja, (as) they stand by the 
river shore,® (or) on highways, (or) at crossroads,® (they shall say): ‘Such 
grandeur (and) magnificence as (I. 45) this (is) because of doing pious deeds in the 
past!’: thus shall they be able to go about praising (him).’ 

‘All the people shall be steadfast (1. 47) in the teaching of King Sri 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. King ‘Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, in order 
to attach (to himself) those that shall be like (him),® shall shine like a golden 
mirror in the presence® of all the people. The city of Arimaddanapir, as if 
fastened down with four stakes of iron, so (I. 51) shall King Sti Tribhuwana- 
dityadhammaraja make (it) firm. All the princes, (with?)....... magni- 
ficence,” they shall delight in the city of Arimaddanapiir. All monks, who abound 
(1. 54) in virtue, (who ?) at the time when ravaging ™ foes destroy (are ?) without 


1 The sense of scumat na trejas is doubtful. Primarily emat means “true,” and cumat should mean 
something like “to recognize as the truth”: Haswell’s L.M. cmat, “to discern,”” seems to be somewhat in 
point here. Perhaps the whole sentence means that the people unanimously recognize and do homage to the 
king’s bravery. In that case the first clause should be read “ That King S.T. is brave,” perhaps, though 
the order would be rather queer. It has been suggested that the king is the subject and scumat means that 
he is to judge the people: but that also involves an abnormal order, 

~ 2 The word prasid seems to be applicable to structures of several kinds, platforms, towers, palaces, etc, 
1 use “ pavilion” asa non-committal word. . 
_» 3 A nameofIndra’s palace. Curiously enough, in Burmese it is applied toa graduated roof: (Judson, 
Burmese-English Dictionary (1893), $.v-). a . 

+ That is, shall fully accomplish his reign and enjoy to the full the splendour of royalty. Or, conceiv- 
ably, it means that “ he shall receive,” by the ceremony of anointment, “ the plenitude of royal power and 
glory”: cf. IC 10-4, VI 27-9. 

® More specifically the tanding-place, quay, or ghaut, The same word, in the sense of “ haven, 
landing-place,” is applied figuratively to Nirvana in D 41. 

6 In thetown, where one street crosses another, 

7 While the general sense is certain, there may be some doubt as to the precise construction. In 
particular, it might be possible to take ma go’ with what precedes, meaning “ on account of former good 
deeds, which (the king) was able to do,” or “succeeded in doing.” Thenext few words might perhaps be 
rendered alternatively : ‘‘ thus shall they praise him (and) go their ways,” . In any case the reference is at. 
any rate, inter alia, to meritorious acts performed in previous incarnations of the king. 

8 The meaning is not quite certain, and for sdaé it may be possible to read sjak, “* draw, attract.” 
Conceivably the idea is that the king endeavours to induce other people in general to become like himself or 
be in spiritual harmony with himself, but I find some difficulty in getting that sense out of the words. 
Cf.B 39 1. CEC 18. : a : ) 

10 Lit. “ children of kings,” or “of princes.” It may refer to a wider class than the actual royal family : 
see A 327, Sanat 

11 The preposition is doubtful, the epithet ¢#intez undetermined, and for “ magnificence ” 
substitute “ prosperity, success, welfare, affluence,” etc, 12 See B 24, 


one might 


PART 11] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS | 121 
D 


(bane ewe eee 1 monasteries also, by (virtue of) the energy of King 
$i ‘Tebtidnpantidityad bar mardja, they shall return again to the monasteries. 
(1. 3) (All ?) the (monks ?) shall fulfil the precepts of morality. (All?) country 
(districts and villages ?) which were ruined, King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 
shall build up finer than ever before. The city of (1. 6) Arimaddanapir shall have 
plenty, shall be exempt from calamity. All (men who dwell ?) in the city of 
_Arimaddanapiir, together with King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, shall shine 
with supernatural power (1. 9) (too?): they shall avoid the ten ways of sinful 
action, they shall fulfil the ten ways of meritorious action. All men, in the time — 
when King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja is reigning, they shall be great in 
supernatural power like devas also. The city of Arimaddanapir, which is the 
dwelling-place of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (i. 15) shall glow (and). 
glitter with the Precious Gems.’ King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja shall 
pray desiring omniscience., 

‘ All those who dwell in (I. 18) the city of Arimaddanapir, together with King 
Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, shall seugat worthily ° in the Precious Gems, 
shall worship, revere, (and) put their trust in‘ the Lord (1. 21) Buddha, the Good 
Law, and all the lords of the Church. Those who revere the Precious Gems, who are 
zealous for the Good Law, (in) one fellowship with all the devas shall they converse : 
all the devas shall indeed® converse (I. 25) with men; all the devas shall unite 
together with men, they shall execute the (good) w sitles of King Sti Tribhuwan- 
adityadhammaraja.® _In the’ time of the reign of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadham- 
-maraja, the city of Arimaddanapiir, which is the source of honour (and) splendour, 
(]. 30) shall be very 7 firm: all (its) enemies shall fail to shake (it). All the four 
castes that dwell in the city of Arimaddanapir shall practise righteousness, shall — 
be disciples of the Lord Buddha, the Law, and the Church. 

“ (When) King Sri Tribhuwanddityadhammaraja shall depart from that 
(state of) existence, (I. 35) (he) shall enjoy great prosperity and magnificence (in 

The beginnings of D 1-14 are broken off, and when possible conjecturally restored ; hence this gap. 
The idea is that the monks have been forced by a raid or invasion to leave their monasteries. 

2 The three elements of the Buddhist ‘Triad : Buddha, the Law, and the Church. 

3 It is notcertain that thie, “ good,” “ worthy,” tetains any definite force in this expression, which 
may simply mean “to take pleasure in,” like L.M. sju2 sduit, which may perhaps bea corruption or slightly 
variant form of it (though it must be remembered that sd¢utk by itself has the same meaning). 

4 Cf. Bag n., C 33. 6 Cf. Barn, 


6 The import plainly is that the devas are to unite with men in carrying out the king’s pious plans : cf, 
B 17-20, 7 The exact force of phar is not determined, but cf. D 47, E 22, Gr, 


‘122 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vot, | 


the states) of deva (and) man,? (and) in: his final existence (he) shall raise out of 
the four Apay? all those that are going (in)* the four Apay. All the world, 
together with the devas, that are immersed ® in (J. 39) Sansar,® which is even 
as an ocean that is devoid of shelter (or) place of refuge,’ shall (he) lift into’ 
the Good Law, which is even as a great ship, (and) shall bring (them) to the 
haven of exalted Nirvana.® 

“O king: (I. 42) of devas! Thus did the Lord Buddha, who is even as the 
_moon,° prophesy (concerning) King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, abounding 
in piety. O king of devas! Hear thou also (1. 45) another saying”! Inthe time of 
the reign of ‘King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja all (manner of) fungi, sprouts," 
flowers, (and) fruits of trees, shall be very plentiful. Even poor people, who 
had ® difficulty in getting food“ (and) clothes, shall wear golden ornaments (and) 
handsome clothes, (and) shall enjoy (them) fittingly.% Children who are learning 
to eat bread with their fingernails, (I. 50) shall maintain a worthy spirit "” just 
like older persons. : At all seasons, without (any intervening) lapse of time, both - 
they, and all the princes from the cities * also, shall bring® presents (and) gifts of 
divers.kinds. Throughout the whole realm (I. 54) of King Si Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja, rain shall fall 


E 
an hundred (and) twenty times.” At all times rice (plants) shall be full (in the ear). 
(1. 2) In the realm of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, O king of devas, 
1 Or, possibly, “ shall enjoy prosperity (and) magnificence as a:'deva and as a great man.” But with 


this whole passage generally cf, III C 20-1, V 43, VI 3t. 
2 Apaya, being four undesirable forms of heing, viz. as an asiva (a kind of demon or Titan), i in hell, 


as a preta (ghost), and as a beast, Or “ta.” + Or “ worlds,” or “ people.” 
~ 6 Or“ submerged,” or “ sinking.” 6 ,Sarhsara, the state of continuous transmigration and rebirth, 
7 The rendering “shelter... .. refuge” is conjectural, 8 Or “ the exalted haven of N.” 


9 Except as a continuation of the above marine simile, the appositeness of this comparison is not 
obvious to me, 

10 As to kusn, see A 42 n., as to wel, B 21 n,, asto gam, A6n. The general sense of pihdy is determined 
by Bsr. It also occurs in F 6, 13, H 19, 23, 31, 33, in some of which contexts it may conveniently be 
rendered by “ message,” as it might be here also. 

11 Especially edible bamboo-shoots, no doubt. 2 Cf, D 30 n. 

13 The rendering is conjectural: possibly the meaning is “ few men shall have any difficulty i in getting.” 
It turns on the meaning of dmuk and the force of the prefix s- (if it is a prefix in sjiz), 

14 Lit, “ boiled rice,” but often used to cover food generally. | !° The meaning of enaé is doobsfall 

16 The translation 1s conjectural. and seems on the face of it improbable. The doubtful words are ckat 

ind sinlem. 

17 That is, goodness of heart and a proper mental attitude generally, 

18 Presumably this refers to the inhabitants of Pagan in general. 

19 Or “ countries’: the reference is, no doubt, to provincial governors, vassal princes, etc. 

20 Or “come bringing ”: the presents are for the king. *1 That is, in each year or rainy season. 


PART I! ] MON INSCRIPTIONS 123 


there shall be plenty of elephants, horses, buffaloes, cattle, pigs, goats, (and) fowls. 
All the children of princes, the children of chiefs,’ their playthings (shall be of) 
gold (and) silver only. 

“AH men (1. 6) who (wish to) increase (the) security ? of their doors shall 
make doors (of) . . ..° Their roof-ridges shall (they) roof with bronze ‘ only. 
King Sti Tiibinwant dityadhanwmatsia shall enrich them all. (I. g) The San Ariy 
of seven degrees ® shall shower down® the Law, which is even as a flower, shall 
make a fragrance’ with virtue, which is even as a perfume. O king of devas ! 
Every day when King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja gives instruction to all the 
‘people, the sounds of approval, the (1. 13) sounds of praise, the sounds of applause, 
which all the people shall make, (shall be) like the sound of a great rainstorm in | 
the middle of the night. ~All the people shall be adorned with good deeds; the 
lumbac,? who are even as the ornaments of righteousness, shall delight in the 
Good Law.” 

‘All those who lacked relatives,” (1. 17) shall have plenty of relatives. All 
those who were lazy, they shall be diligent.” All those who were lean shall become 
quite ® fat. All those who lacked (1. 19) strength (and) vigour, shall have strength 
(and) vigour. All those who excel in ploughing (and) planting, shall fill (their) 
barns (and) granaries with rice (and) millet ™* of divers kinds. All their houses 
shall be very * rich in gems. Even all poor old women, who sell pots (and) (1. 23) 
potlids,’* by getting good prices (for their wares) they shall become rich. Those 
who lacked slaves shall have plenty of slaves. Those who lacked cattle shall 
have plenty of cattle. The families of the four castes shall observe the Law 


a Conceivably, “the children of the king, the children of all the great men.” 

2 The meaning seems:doubtful : literally the words seem to mean “ who exceed security,” 

3 Unidentified; presumably doors of some particular type; but there is some doubt both as to eedios 
and meaning. 

4 Or “brass”: some mixed metal, wherein copper is an ingredient. 

8 Ariya Ghee those members of the Church who have entered upon the fourfold path of eight 
degrees leading to Nirvana, the degrees here are seven because as soon as the eighth station is reached 
the perfected saint is absorbed in Nirvana and no longer available for earthly tasks. 

6 Doubtful, possibly “maintain,” or ‘‘establish,” cf. scroh ptaw, B13 n. But in Sudhammavatiraja- 
vasnsa, p, 43, |, 21-2, I find: slep pitakat pi glaai crah pkau kusuiw, Cf. also II C 21-2, 

7 Lit. “shall make fragrant,” no object being expressed. Conceivably the subject may be the “ flower,” 
but then one would expect to see a relative particle after it. 8 Cf. II C 22-4, VILL A 24-5. 

2 Doubtfully identified with L. M. lamdt, “one of a religious order inferior to the monks, or priests” 
(Haswell, ‘s,v.). 

10 Conceivably the rendering should be: “with the geod deeds (appropriate to the) lumbdc, which” (or 
“who ”) “ are like ornaments of virtue, and (they) shall delight,” etc. 

11 L,M. dafiat. But the word might possibly be connected rather with (g#t) gat, and mean “ ornaments,” 

18 Reading and meaning both doubtful. ; 13 Cf, Bain, 

14 Or grain of some other kind, possibly “ barley.” - LB Cf D30n. 

16 Perhaps, “ Even poor old women who sell all (sorts of) pots (and) potlids” (or “ cups, “ig L.M. lami). 


124 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL. ! 


aright. All those who (I. 26) dwell in the realm of King Sti Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja shall be exempt from calamity, exempt from misfortune All those 
of the city of Arimaddanapfr, together with King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, 
shall have length of life. 

‘All monks (and) scholars, who see the benefit (and) detrimenit (I. 30) " 
good (and) evil (respectively), shall? be even as the two eyes of King 
Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. All men who are of (good) family shall Seal 
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. Everyone that is brave, who are more - 
than one thousand in number, whether it be the realm (and) country (1. 34) of 
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja that. any -evil men (shall have) ravaged,* 
or the city (and) realm of some other king, they shall take (it) in hand® and shall 
offer it to King Sri Tes hiniase byalibamtiaey. (1. 37) King Sri Tribhuwan- 
adityadhammaraja shall keep up the succession‘ of all the kings of old. From 
the mouth of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja only decrees which are quite 
in agreement with the Law shall issue. All those who caused pain? to (other) 
people shall become steadfast (I. 41) in virtue. The wisdom called eloquence 
shall dwell in the mouth of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja at all times. 
O king of devas! In the city of Arimaddanapir, 


F 


abounding in glory (and) splendour, a....... ® which is far removed from 
® shall King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja teach. 

‘'O king of devas, thus (shall it be)! (1. 4)-In order to lift‘up thy heart in 
(the execution of) all the (good) works of King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, 
Iam ...-... speaking to thee”; do thou remember, do not forget, O king 
of devas, in the (poems of * King Sti Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja (1,8) and 


1T het text has the relative particle ma, “who,” before the predicate, but if that is pressed: there is no. 
predicate at all, The same applies to the next sentence, Cf,C gn. 
2 Cf. B 24 n., C 54. 
3 The precise meaning is somewhat doubtful, though the general purport is plain. 
4 Meaning, presumably, that he is to carry on their time-honoured traditions, It might, however, be 
possible to interpret it as meaning that the king would support all the ancient families of his vassal princes. 
5 Conjectural rendering. 6 As tothe second ma, see E 30n, 
7 Or“ sorrow.” But there is some doubt as to the meaning generally, The “all” might go with the 
' “people,” and the force of pa dii# is not absolutely determined, 
8 An illegible word beginning with At. 9 The meaning dilan burishob j is undetermined. 
10 Or “ may it be.” But the interpretation of the whole of this passage is rather doubtful, 
11 The sense of pranaz is undetermined : it may be an adverb, with some meaning like “ — * 
4a Ch A qzn, 13 Cf.C 18n. 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 125 


the Assembly,’ do thou practise * loving kindness. In time to. come as in times 
past, do thou the same.® 

“O king of devas! (I. 10) Do thou call Katakarmmanagaraja, do thou speak 
thus: ‘O king of Nagas, great in strength,‘ great in supernatural power (and) 
glory, lord of the treasures of the abode of splendour!® In order to establish 
anew the religion (1. 13) of the Lord Buddha, do thou act in accordance with 
the saying of the Lord Gawampati. The city of Sisit is to stand for a thousand 
(and) two hundred years; (and) after that, when King Sti Tribhuwanaditya- 
dhammaraja (1. 16) shall bear sway in Tattades,’ thou shalt cause the whole realm 
of King Sri Tnbhuwanadityadhammaraja to be completely within an enclosure of 
well being,® like rising saplings of trees!’”’® (I. 19) The Lord Gawampati spake 
to King In in such wise. 

Then did King Inspeak thus: “...... 10 my lord, I (am he)-(l. 21) that shall 
keep watch over Tattades, which is the abode of King Sti Tribhuwanadityadham- 
maraja. All enemies who shall come, I too shall drive them away. If the fame of 
the city be eclipsed," I too shall make it bright again. In all (1. 25) the (good) 
works of King Sri Tribhuwanadityadharhmaraja, I too shall bestir myself at all times. 
I shall indeed ® grant a boon for the sake of the advancement ® of King Sri Tribhu- 
wanadityadhammaraja, who is.steadfast in the Law.” 

When King In had thus received (him), the Lord (1. 29) Gawampati came down 
again to the world of men, (and) went to the sage named Bisnii, (and) having set my 
lord the sage Bisni on a high seat, spake (to him) thus: ‘‘ Thou, in company with 
(1.32) me and King In, and Katakarmmanagaraja, and Bissukarmmadewaput, 
shalt build a city called Sisit; (and) thereafter, in Tattades, in the city of 


! No doubt, at any rate primarily, the Buddhist monkhood. 

2Cf.B13n, For “do thou” one might, perhaps, put “ to,” 

8 That is,‘ act in the future as you did in the past”; Indra is represented as having always played 
the part of guardian angel in human affairs, and is exhorted to continue doing so in this particular case. 

4 Or “energy”; but “strength ” seems more appropriate here. 

5 Presumably this refers to the Nagas being the guardians of subterranean treasures. 

6 Or “ let ” (or “ may ”’) “ the city of S. stand” (Or “ last ’’), etc. 

7 Apparently this represents Upper Burma or at least the eae thereof in which Pagan stands, 

8 Or “happiness.” 

9 The precise sense of this sentence is doubtful. Perhaps it means “ make the whole realm .... to 
develop to perfection in an enclosure,” etc., “like the sprouting shoots of trees,” Whether the simile has 
any reference to the protection of saplings by surrounding them with a sort of small temporary fence, I am 
not sure, but it seems-possible, and the protection to be given by the Naga king to the young, growing 
kingdom may be conceived to be analegous. 

10° The meaning of lbde is undetermined. 

11 Lit. “be. interrupted,” or perhaps “be cut off,” For “bright” we might put “ manifest” or 
“ celebrated,” which would be more literal. ; 

12 Reading doubtful, and as to the meaning cf. B at n. 13 Lit, “ increase.” 


17 


126 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou. 1 


Avinaddcnaptr my lord . shall be? (Ll. 35) King: Sri Tribhuwanddityadhammaraja, 
and shall uphold * the religion. of the Lord Buddha. Thus did the Lord Buddha 
prophesy (concerning) my lord. | een 

‘Therefore? do I ask of my lord, (that) my lord receive- my petition (and) be 
not of another ‘mind. - (1. 39) There is a great work which it is good, that my lord 
should do. The desire that my lord desires is great : in order to become a Buddha, 
let my lord prepare indeed.® All beings shall shelter (in the) (1. 42) shade of the 
merit ® of my lord, they shall fulfil all the desires of the Church. : Therefore, my 
lord, great sage, in — 


G : 


thy third existence, my lord, (do thou) enjoy the splendour of royalty. My lord, 
do not abhor the splendour of royalty. - Hereatter, (1. 3) in thy third existence, my 
lord shall become a king of the Law.? At the time. when my lord is a king of the 
Law, the glory of my lord shall be very 1 great. In the place which my lord 
(shall face ?), all foes shall fail (to make a stand?)." My: lord shall shine 
brightly (1. 7) like the noonday sun in autumn.” In the time of my lord’s reign, 

8 the grandeur, (and) magnificence * of this great earth ® shall be like (1. 9) 
the arated (and) magnificence of heaven entirely.” 

“ All men, women, (and) children shall have length. of life, shall be free from 
sickness. . .. . . .!7 altogether.’® All the people shall be exempt from calamity, 
exempt from snistorune: They shall eat plenty of food, they shall enjoy happiness, 
Inthe realm of my lord, rain (1. 13) shall fall an hundred (and) ‘twenty times,” (and) 
all the sap of this great earth also shall come forth, all barns (and) granaries shall be 


'Y Or “become.” . 2ChA 36 n. 
3 Possibly, ‘for the sake of this do | make a request of my lord; my lord, | receive.my petition ” (or 
request ’’). 4 That is, “adverse,” “ unfavourable,” 
8 Cf.B 21n, Apparently the general meaning of the preceding i is: “ You have set yourself a lofty aim 
(i.e. Buddhahood), and must make every effort to attain it.’ 6 Or * piety.” 
7 There is some doubt as to the meaning: mun usually means “ from,” or “by ” (with the agent), 
-is conceivable that here (and in H 17) it represents munt, “the Sage,” i.e. Buddha, in. which case ns 
rendering would be “the desires of the Sage and the Church.” 8 Cf. Cig 0, 
9. That is,a legitimate and orthodox Buddhist king. ~ 0 CE D300, 
11 Both the bracketed verbs in this passage are somewhat doubtful as regards their meaning, and even 
the reading of the first one is by no means certain. 
12 Or, perhaps, ‘like the sun at the season when it is in the meridian,” te, '* noon,” It.appears ‘that 
savada sometimes means “season.” in general, Cf, C 22 n. 
13 The illegible word is, probably only a particle not affecting the sense. 
13 Or “ prosperity (and) welfare.” 
15 hat is, the earth ; the phrase is common in L.M, 
16 Apparently wleh (like mule in B ro) merely adds ainieata: 
17 Reading and meaning of gwif are doubtful. 18 Cf. Baton, 1 Cf. D 54, 


PART HW] MON INSCRIPTIONS maLy, 


full of all (manner of) goods.’ In the realm of my lord al those who were heretical: 
shall become orthodox entirely. All the monks shall be full of virtue and good 
conduct. . All the Brahmans, who know the Vedas, they shall fulfil all the Brahman 
law: All (1. 19) the princes ? shall carry out the daw altogether.® The four castes. 
they shall fulfil their law also.* In all places the essence of the preaching of truth 
shall be (made) manifest, ‘O my lord sage, (1, 22) the essence of the preaching of 
truth shall come to be.(made) manifest by a king of the Law, who is glorious, who is 
even as the leader of a caravan.’ ® | 

Then the sage (I. 24) named Bisni' zealously received the saying of the Lord 
Thera Gawampati, (and said): “ (It is) well, my lord! Hereafter, in Tattades, in the - 
city of Arimaddanapir, (it is) I that shall become a king (1. 27) named Sri Tribhu- 
wanadityadhammaraja. The feet (and) hands of those Fae) oda Laas sete’ © Lalso 
will support. The'religion of the Lord Buddha, that .. - .,? | also shall uphold. 
All the people shall I exhort to keep (the precepts of) virtue, exhort to carry out the 
Law. Women who carry on. evil conduct (1..31) shall I exhort’ to ‘carry on good 
conduct. All chiefs of country (districts), villages, (and) small towns, that are 
decayed,® I also shal} make famous. The true principles of morality I also shall 
exhort (them) to maintain." I-shall be (I. 34) the chief bull” (of the herd), the 
candle” of all the people!” 

My lord the sage having spoken (1. 35) thus, the Lord Thera Gawampati and 
my lord the great sage.Bisna were well pleased *; and the Lord Gawampati, having 
expounded all the prophecy of the Lord Buddha, to the end that all mankind 
might attain to the heaven of Nirvana, my lord went his ways. 

_ Thereafter, King In came down from Tawatin, (and) went to (1. 40) my lord 
the sage Bisnd, (and) spake thus : ‘ My lord sage, great in supernatural power (and) 


1 Cf. E 20, . 2 Ch, A 320, 3 Cf. Bat n, 

4 That is, the law applicable tothem. Or perhaps the sentence might be construed: “ they shall fulfil 
the law, they also.” 

® The rendering offers difficulties. Lit. the sentence apparently means “ the essence,” etc., “ of aking,” 
etc., “shall come (and) be manifest.” The meaning of tusisbae and sd (if rightly so read) could not be 
definitely determined. Cf.G 34. 

8 illegible: perhaps we may supply “are weak,” or the like, 

7 Hlegible : perhaps “is decayed,” or the like. Cf. H 4-5. 8 Cf. A 30n, 

9 Or “ruined,” or perhaps merely “obscure,” Apparently it must be construed grammatically with 
“chiefs,” though it really refers to the condition of their districts, 

10 Or “ morality and the Good Law,” as in B 12, 1 Cf, B 13. 

12 As to the doubtful word turivban, cf. G 23. 

13 That is, the light of the world, But it is conceivable that pd may represent L.M. pad, in which 
case the meaning w ould be “the chief bull of the pasture of all mankind.” 

14 Or “the Lord T.G, was well pleased with my lord the great sage B,”’ 


128 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vo. 1 


glory, who hast? loving kindness equally towards all, both those that are trusty * 
and those that are hostile! My lord, together with the Lord (I. 43) Gawathpati, 
and me, and Bissukarmma, and Katakarmmanagaraja, shall build 


H 


the city of Sisit. My lord, after building the city of Sisit, shall depart (1. 2) from 
thence, (and) thereafter, in Tattades, in the . city of Arimaddanapiir, shall" become 
a king named Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, (and) shall uphold * the religion of 
the Lord Buddha. The Law (when it is) decayed,‘ shalt (thou) make manifest.® 
In order to carry out fully all the (good) works (1. 6).of my: lord, ‘up in Heaven am 
1° King In, who wield the vajra.7?’ Down below is® the Naga king, who is great 
in supernatural power (and) glory, who has coils a thousand fold. In the four 
quarters the four kings guarding the world® shall keep” (their) watch. All the 
assembly of the four castes (1. 11) together with the princes" who dwell in the 
place that cannot be shaken, by reason™ that the Lord Thera Gawarhpati 
maintains * (it), shall be exempt from calamity, exempt from sorrow altogether.’* 
All the enemies of my lord shall be lacking in cunning devices. 

“ Hereafter, my lord, in (1. 15) the time (when) my lord is King Sri Tribhu- 
wanadityadhammaraja, all scholars shall consider (and) investigate * matters that 
are firm™ (and) secure,” that are deep, (and) shall fulfil the desires of the 
Church * entirely.” (1.18) Then the great sage named Bisni, having heard 
the saying of King In, to the end that thereafter (he) might see the advance- 
ment of the religion of the Lord Buddha,” (said): “Right well, O king of devas | 
The.Lord Thera annie aie has expounded that matter to me™; (1. 22) and thou: 


1 Or “dost exercize” : it seems likely that pa implies more than a merely static condition of mind, 
. 8Cf,B2gn. It would almost seem from this passage that rurmlos means “‘friendly,” in which case 
srlos (C 33, D 20) would probably mean “shall love.” ~ . 3 Cf, A36n. 4 Or “obscured,” 

5 Or “famous,” or simply “clear,” #.¢e, he shall expound and explain it, when it has ceased to be 
properly understood and exactly followed, 

6 It seems not quite certain whether wo’ goes with swar or with ey: the objection to the former 
construction is that this conversation is taking place on earth, and wo’ seems inappropriate, If it can be 
taken with ey, the meaning would be “I here,” ¢.e, “1, whom you see here at present.” 

_7 Lit, the “ dajra weapon”: cf. B 18 n, ’ 8 Asto the supposed force of wel, cf, B 21 n, 
9 Mythical, not human, kings, known as the four mahdrajas. 10 Cf. B 130. 
Or “ the king.” 12 Or following the alternative text of II, ‘“ which the Lord T.G, maintains,” 

18 Cf, B13 n. 11 Cf, Barn. 15 Or “shall be competent to investigate,” 

15 So literally: presumably it here means “ important.” 

17 Reading and meaning doubtful : either it is another adjective going with jmo’, “ firm,” or a noun. 

WCE. Fazn - 19 Cf,B 21 n, 0 Cf, F 27 n. 

21 Possibly the speech begins at mnor: “ ‘To the end that I may see hereafter the advancement,” etc. 

2 Conceivably thec thee is used adverbially ; “ Right well, O king of devas, did the Lord T.G, expound,” 
etc. But this seems less probable. The words are equivalent to the Pali sddhu, sadhu: cf, G a5 supra and 
Myazedi 17. , . 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS. 129 


too’ hast expounded (it). Even as ye- two say, so too hereafter, in order 
‘to uphold* the religion of the. Lord Buddha, (it were) good that thou put 
forth (thy) strength: be not negligent!” * My lord the sage, having spoken 
thus to King In, was well pleased in spirit. 

The prophecy that the Lord Buddha prophesied to the Lord (l 27) Anan, che 
question that the Lord’ Gawaiiipati desired to have explained, which he asked the Lord 
Buddha, (and whereof) the Lord Buddha gave the answer to the Lord Gawarhpati, 
urging the Lord Gawampati to go up (and) inform (I. 31) King In (of it), the saying 
that the Lord Gawampati (and) King In came down (and) told to my lord the sage 
Bisni, the saying that the Lord Buddha (1.34) spake to the Lord Anan (saying) : 
‘When my religion shall have gone on for one thousand six hundred (and) twenty- 
eight years, my lord the sage named Bisni shall become king in (1. 37) the city of 
Arimaddanapir, (and) shall bear the name of King Sri Tnbhuwanadityadhamma- 
raja, (and) shall uphold * my religion ”—he of whom the Lord Buddha spake, (verily) 
this (present) king is he. Monks, scholars, Brahmans, all chiefs, (I. 41) all the 
world of mankind, may you. all understand,® may you all understand, (that) this 
king is he. Doubt not! Doubt not! Dou not ! ® 


No. II. | 
A FRAGMENTARY REPLICA OF No, I. 
Descriptive Account. 


36. This record is apparently engraved on two stones, which are now in the 
Pagan Museum and are numbered 4 and’ 5 respectively in Section I of the 
Catalogue (1906). Their original location was about 50 feet east of the Tharaba 
(Sarabha) Gate, Pagan. -One set of ink-impressions, consisting of seven pieces, 
was supplied to me, together with photographs of the impressions. Each of the 
stones presumably has four inscribed faces, but of the first stone (No. 5 in the 
Catalogue) the impressions of only three faces were sent; from which it would 
seem to follow that the first face of that stone is illegible. The stones are evidently 
remnants of what were originally two columns: about two-thirds of the original 
record have been lost altogether, and the remainder on these seven faces is much 
damaged and in a poor state of preservation. The dimensions of the stones and 

1 Cf, A 42n., Barn. 2 Cf, A 36 n. 
3 The general effect of this rather obscure passage seems to be an echortation to Indra to take active 
steps to carry out the intent of the two messages, his own and Gawampati’s. It is possible that the clause 


at the end is also to be read as dependent on the principal clause : ‘ (and) be not negligent.” 
4 Cf. A 36n. 8 Cf. IT D 14, V 49-51. 6 As to gam, ch A6 nz 


“130 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


other details tia in the Catalogue are as follows :—No. 5, height 4 ft. $in.; 
breadth 2 ft. 5 in.;. number of lines on the’ obverse face (which face this is, is not 
clear to me) 17, on the remaining faces 26. . No. 4, height 3 ft.; breadth 2 ft. 9 in. 
number of lines on the obverse face (unidentified) 24, on the remaining faces 59. 
These particulars. do not tally quite precisely. with those of thé impressions, which 
are somewhat unsatisfactory in some respects ; but the point is not very material. 
The space covered by lettering as measured on the impressions is as follows :— 
Face A (no impression supplied); B, height 1 ft. 10§ in, breadth 2 ft. $in.; C,’ 
height 2 ft., breadth 2 ft..3 in.; D, height 1 ft. 10 in,, breadth 2 fiz; H, REE 9 it. 
2+ in., breath 1 ft, 104 in. larwicying amount, some 6 in., being Jproken off at the 
ends of the lines); F, height 1 ft. 10 in., breadth 1 ft. 2 in. tapering down to 5 in. 
(the stone being apparently broken off at the beginnings of the lines); G, height 
2 ft. 7} in., breadth 2 ft. 6 in.; H, height 2 ft. 32 in., breadth 1 ft. 102 in. Faces 
A-D correspond with the stone numbered 5 ; E-H with the one numbered 4 in 
the Catalogue.- In a general way the letters resemble those of No. I. They 
measure about # in. in height, and letter ¢ ‘about the same, to 1 in., in length. The 
space between the lines, in the absence. of subscript and superscript letters, 1S also 
about the same, though rather variable. ; : 

. 37. The variants between this inscription and No. I feo far as they- could be 
ascertained) having been given in the notes on the text of No. I, it will suffice to 
give here a concordance of the two texts, with an indication of the first and last 
words discernible .(though not necessarily completely legible) on each of the seven 
faces or fragments of No. II of which impressions are available :-— _ 


No, /1. No. I. 
Face A (no i impression supplied). 
B 15 ll. (firwil-. .. sphan) we HS Eee 
C 16 ll. (upas ... moy) ae D 32-83, 
D 15 I. (gua ..-. ma) . F 2-18. 
E 18 Il. (kum ... sdas) o; 2 pag. 
F 14 ll. (and one quite illegible line) 
(tarley ...deht-eh)  .«. G 6-20 | 

G ai ll. (stl... .satru) we G 30—H 13 
H i8 ll. (goh ... smn). ws -H 19-37 


38. The only importance of this inscription lies in the fact that it has served - 
in certain cases to restore or confirm words that were lost or doubtful in No. I. 
These have been indicated in the notes on the text of the latter, 


PARTI] MON INSCRIPTIONS © 131 


No. HY. 
THE MYAKAN (OR MYAGAN) INSCRIPTION OF MYANPAGAN, PAGAN, 
-Descriptive Account, 


39. This inscription (with the two following) was referred to in paras, 45-6 
of the Report of the Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, Burma, 1912. 
It is on the bank. of the Myakan lake at the foot of the hill known as 
‘Taywindaung and is engraved on the four faces of a stone column, the 
dimensions of which (as communicated to me by Professor Duroiselle) are as 
follows :—height, 4 ft. 1 in.; breadth of the two broader faces, 1 ft. 8 in. of 
the narrower faces, 1 ft. 4 in. Three sets of ink-impressions were sent to me, 
together with photographs of one of the sets.. The space covered by the 
lettering, as measured on the impressions, is as follows :—Face A, 3 ft. byt ft. 
5a in.; B, 2 ft. 11 in, by 1 ft. 1 in.; C, 3 ft. by 1 ft. 53 in.; D, 1 ft. 9 in. by 1 ft. 
2in. The letters resemble those sf the preceding inscriptions in their general type 
and character, but are’ smaller: they measure about 3 in. in height, and letter 
¢ about # in. in length. The ‘normal space between the lines is about 3in: The 
inscription is a good deal damaged, and on the whole is in an indifferent state of 
preservation. A large piece of the surface ‘of Face A (affecting II. 19-23) has 
been destroyed, and the top and bottom of this face as well as some parts of Faces 
B and C are so blurred as to be practically illegible. The column has also been 
broken off at one corner at the top, so that the ends of Il. 1-5 of Face B and 
the beginnings of Il. 1-7 of Face C. are lost. ‘ But most of the missing text has 
been restored by the help of inscriptions Nos. [V and V, which are on similar lines. 

‘40, The occasion for the making of No. III was the digging of a tank or 
reservoir for the purpose — of storing water for irrigation, by order of . King 
Kyansittha. The name given by him to the tank is stated in D 11-2, but the 
reading is not quite eae The greater part of the inscription is, however, taken 
up by a statement of the Kyansittha legend, in its more extensive form as outlined 
in §§ 25, 27. The proper names of the persons mentioned in it have been given in 
§ 26. The lengthened form of the’ king’s name in D 6-8 should be noted: : 
Apart from the lexicographical material contained i in this record and from its variant 
version of the royal legend, the chief point of interest in it is its insistence on the , 
king’s care for the temporal welfare of his people (C 27—D 6). Itis not, perhaps; 
either unreasonable or uncharitable to assume that considerations affecting the royal 
revenue contributed in some degree to the stimulation of such laudable aims ; but 


132 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — {vont 


there is no reason to doubt the genuine existence of the ethical and religious 
motives to which the king ascribes his action. Further, there is a brief ‘statement | 
of his anointment (C 11-4) and of the issue by him of a revised edition of the 
Buddhist Scriptures (C15). The inscription begins (A 1-6) and ends (D 15-4). with 
Pali passages, but the one at the beginning is almost illegible. The dates mentioned 
are, first, the date of the foundation of Prome (here called Sri Kset) in the year of 
Buddha’s Nirvana (C 3-6), of course a purely legendary date; and, secondly, the 
Buddhist year 1630 with reference to the king (C g~-11),. as to which see §§ 28-9. 
Of the date of the inscription itself there is no further evidence save what has been | 
indicated in § 27. | 

. 41. No. IV represents a fragmentary repetition of the text of this record made 
for use on another, similar, occasion. The first part of No. V also runs closely 
parallel to these two. The variants exhibited by No. 1V and the first part of 
No. V are given in the notes appended to the text of No. III. 


Text. 

A 
1, [0 éti u namo] talssa eee a[rahato samnseambuediiay: 
2. [ssa 10 0] uppatti(h@) ......... Nee ee Oe ee a oe 
3... (ta) ee te ih fee ee ee eo ARBE sca ee eas 
AAG nh eens, MS ee aoa a uppa(tti dhammarajassa) . . 
Boh aé pa ee ae. ee ||) ee ee ee 
Oe ere ee ee eee eee ee ee pati (1 0 0 dey) 


7. kal dytdk ... (w) (bar cwas Inim cnam] kyek Buddha ti- 

8. rley Kasspa ur das dey lok wo’ blahh tirley — : 

g. nisrey [da]i* Baranasi-(da goh® ma) tirley taw han Isipata- 
1o, namigadawanamahawihar « kal goh ‘ tirla poy [gna smi]- 
11.  dha(r)mmaraja® wo’ das fiah su(mh)gihh ma nom drap dificam [c]wa- 
12. {s] koti girlon ® blah? kul da[n] man s(i)l® pa pun ka{h mo]- 
13. y prakar 0° dey sas kyek ” Buddha tirley Kassapa go[h]” 
14. taw bak bnat dy(a)k ® blah » cuti’ ® nor [g]ofh]* tlun da[s] 


1 Stic, for Kassapa, 2 Or dun, About here V begins to be legible. . ? V has gokh. 


4 V has gohh. 5 The y is doubtful both here and in V. 6 V has girlun. 
7 V inserts n, 8 The vowel may be ¢ both here and in V, 9 V has no stop here. 
10 V probably has £ya&. 1! V has gokh, ° 12 Or ayuk, 


'3'V has cute, 14 V has gokh, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 133. 


ts. han [kir]k(a)l’ smin de[y duJa Pataliputtana[g](i)[r]? » kal 

16. goh® p[n]ja[fi] paracak jurhnok [moy] de[h] ‘ ktir das [1 pnafi] 

17. [goh * ku]m tirla ® poy [gna] smin dha(r)[mm Jaraja ma &r das [smi}n [Pata]- 

18. [liputtanag](i)[r?7 goh® kuya] .(i)r w(i)[ses] blah® psuk [u]t maha{ja]- 

19. [n gumlujn ® blah(h) [kul dan man] s(i)l" pa pufn] ma ka[h.moy] 

20. [prakar p-ar das rajadha](r)[mma™ cas t](u)y™» taw bak [bnat 4]- 

21. [yuk] blah « [cut}i [nJo[r goh™ tlun da]s han kirk(a)l* smin Ra- 

22. m [dev [d](a)n® [Ayodh](apar” 0) [ka]l gofh ® kum] ci [pnaa p]a[r]a- 

23. cak ju[rhno]k [tl]in . . 19 (d](a)[m ® Ayodhapir we]! *« [pnafi goh]™ 

24. kuth™ tirla™ [poy gna smin dha](r)[mmaraja ma das han] kirk(a)[l® 
smin | 

25. [Ram goh * kuya] .(i)[r w](i)[ses blah ®? psuk ut mahajan gumh]- 

26. [lon] * « kul [dan mJjan s(i)[] ® pa pun kah moy prakar t](@)- 

27. [y taw bak bnat ayik] ® bla{h » cuti nor] go[h® dey] 

28. [kal kintir tirla poy kyek * Sakyamuni ® das risi Bisni] 

29. [ma nom * riddh](yanubhaw ma) [go’ a](bhifian * msun® ma taw hantul) * | 


B 
1... 38... . . [srefi] (ma imo’ Kelasaparwwa)- 
2, [tau kal goh ® kyek “ Buddha ti](rley Sakya)-: 


1 Perhaps éirkul, both here and in V. 
2 V has Pataliputtanagar (the vowel of the last syllable is not certain in either text). 


3 V possibly has gohh kum. 4 V has dekh, 5 V has gohh. §& V has #trla’. 
7 V has Pétaliputtanagar (though the vowel of the last syllable is not quite certain in either text). 
8 Vhas gohh, 9% V inserts i here. 1°-V possibly has. gumliz. 1 V has sil. 

13°V has ty. = 14 V has gokh. 


12 V perhaps has rajadhamma, 
15 V probably has kirkul. 16 Or dun. V has dun. 
1" V apparently has Ayudhyapir (which is followed by 1), but the spelling of the third syllable is 


doubtful in both texts. Here in [1] a large piece of the surface of the stone has perished, affecting the 
middle portions of A 19-23 (which have been restored by the help of V 12-4), and from the amount of space 
available here it would seem that there may have been a short word (e.g. wel) after Ayodhapur. 

18 VY has golvit. 1) A word of one syllable, probably ending in r or n. 2 Ordun. . 

21. V omitswel. 2 Vihasgohh, % V omits huss, 23 V perhaps has farla. 


25 V probably has Airtul. *8'V has gohh. 27 V insertsn. 8 V has gurislun blah, 
29 Orsi]. V perhapshas sithere, °° Or dywk. V probably hasdyuk, 3! V has gohkh. 
32 Vor tirla poy kyek, V apparently has dirdas kyd? Buddha tirley. ‘3: V has Sakyamuni w. 


34 Instead of nom V has snot. 33 VY has ablitdn, 38 Or mstin, as V seems to have. 

37 Or hantil.as V has. The last part of this line (in round brackets) is quite illegible in II] and has 
been restored from V. The same applies to the ends of B 1-6, 

33 The first illegible word is apparently a monosyllable ; it seems toend in s and may hegin with ¢ or &. 
In the next word it is likely that the vowel.of the first syllable is / and the initial consonant may beh. But 
it seems very uncertain, 

2 Or Kelasaparbbata (or °pabbata): the word is not very legible in V. 

® V has gohh, 41 V has kydt. 

1§ 


134 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL. 1 


ee (j)i(rku ar® afia)- 

4. tasa[fian * tir]l[ey fac) risi (Bisnii ma sda)- 

5. s smin dha(r)[mmJaraja [dey dan]* Ari{m]a{ddanJap(ar ma) 
6. [stbal] sa{sana tirley ci » tirlje[y] sdi(k) 

7. [glap p[umas' tirley] ktif[r k-im] » kal gofh]°® 

8. [nor gnis tirley pan « yiryas pan] (ima })i- 

g. (rnok lah pan) (al? ma nom} [s]e[k]® t{urow | 

10. [turow goh]®« deh” [kurh] (par) " [ut (r)[Iarh ® ca[kk]a[wal- 
11, 1® tuy « [y]ir[yas ba]r goh* deh» dre(p] ti- 

12. [n cup Brahm]alok [mleh]”* « yirya[s] bar 

13. (ci) [de]h ” [drep cis cup] Aw(i)[c Jimahanara- 

14. k®{mlleh « ro[w gojh” da ut yiryas 

15. turow sa[k goh™ de]h™ dre{p a]r p(i)a- 

16. (')® [ut dis cas blah “ »] tun I[o]p tu[n] * 

17, [han mukh]a(p)at ® kyek *” Buddha [t irley * ka- 

18. 1 goh ® [t}irley Anan™ falc] ginr[ujn® [ky ]Je- 

19. k *® [Bu]ddha * [tijrley * (ma sum) * a[sc]ar [m]a no[m] 
ao. ku p[rjati[ha]r ma ro[w] goh * k[t]ir ascar [pa] 

21. li(n)[njor ® [kirjjih * blah » (.u)[t® kbjon klo[a “ sur]- 
22. [bip“ tey mey mukh]a(p)at “ kye[k “ Buddha ti]- 
23. [rlJe[y m]Ja row [d]innal “ [thar] blah “ « smafi het 


S) 


1'V has Sakyamuni n. The preceding words are practically illegible in both texts. 
'S Or perhaps °fan it. V has °fidz 11. In the PAli original of this loanword the #’s would be doubled, 
but there is no trace of that here. 


4 Or dud: the reading of both texts is doubtful. 5 V has gap=pumas, & V has gokh, 

7 V inserts #. The preceding words are very doubtful in both texts. 8 V has sak. 

9 V has gobh. 10 V probably has dekh, 

11 V seems to have par, but both texts are obscure here, 13 Or perhaps dlam, 
13: V has cakkawdl, 14 V has gokh, 15 'V has dekh. 16 V has mlehh, 


17 V is quite illegible here, but probably has dekh; 
18 The second vowel in this word should be 7, but might be read ¢ in both texts. 19 'V has mlehh, 


2 V has gokh, 21 'V has gokh, #2 V probably has dekh. 

23 The reading of this word is doubtful in both texts. , 24 V has dlahh, 

35 Apparently this is the right reading: cf. VIII A 8. : . 

26 A reading mukhamat is conceivable. ‘87 'V has kya. #3 'V inserts | here. 
2 V has gohki:, 0 Vv probably has Ananda. % V has éir-im, 32 V has kydk. 

33 V omits Buddha. 34 'V inserts», 35 The reading is very doubtful in both texts. 
36 V has gohkh i. 37 V seems to have linnor, and perhaps inserts ku after it, 


8 Yy probably has divjihh : at any rate the final letter is i. 

89 It is doubtful whether the reading is uf or whether there is some initial consonant (and, if so, which). 

‘© Professor Duroiselle suggests klow, answering to LL.M, kluiw, “to bend the knee,” but 4/o4 seems 
certain in 111 and at least probable in V, 

43 V has sumbup, 42 See B17, 43 V has kyak, 44V has dinnal. 

.45 V_ probably has d/ahh. 


Fpigraphia Birmanica No. III. Votume I, Pirate IX. 
(a naa rabid 
THE MYAKAN INSCRIPTION OF MYANPAGAN, PAGAN. 


ig " Cetnan 

; a is - 
Paty OB: a at tao sg] ie 

e pres MAO 1 Ti ee, Me buried Soe 
AIO ~ mid 


b 
“*S | 


oe 


ed a 


rage Wego’ 
PEs 2 ai " oe mn, 


sor, 3 hig "BY 2 ti 
oy tour fil gare the mC te 
* 
ay kre is fase. 


: Tran; ay Matt 


7 
as 


ana Ald. cee 


: ne ae. on Fs 


Sh 
ACs eV} 
°° Ak 


97D! au 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 135 


24, kir-i[m? ky Je[k] * Buddha tirley row wo’® 

25. tirla ‘ 4kah sak he]t ci kyek® Buddha ti- 

26. rifey] gurm[IJun sa{k] tirla® grun? [] mu® he[t] 

27, (man) ® [t]irla’ ” [gru]a” y[o « h]ay Anan™ d[hab]™ 

28, [ey fide ri]s[i] Bifsn](a) [ma jno]k riddh(i)* ma sda(s] 

29. s[m]in dha(r)mmaraj(a) ® ma st(b]al sdsan(a)” e[y] da g[oh] * 


Cc 


1, (ma ey grun® » kyek® Buddha tirley gah ro)w (goh)” 
2. (blah™ tirley kinkal krim kintir * smin dharmmaraja ™ ku) 
3. (tirley Anan ® row wo’ **u hay Anan™ dey) [c]nam ma 
4. (ey snirbban goh ® risi Bisnai ” ku.kon) [ey] Ga{w]atmhpa{t]i” k[uy. 
5. (smi In™ ku Bissukarmma™ ku Katakarmma)[nagaraja]° s[k]indarh 
| d(u)h * 

6. (moy ma imo’) [Sri Ks]e[t blah * scu’ti]® nor goh” s[- -|a[r] 

7. (das de)[y BrJjahmalok » [kal goJh * [ut dje[wataw] 

8. [gurn]l[un * sniman] or cis das smin dha(r)mmaraja * [d]ely ti jnok] 

g. wo’ s mu ® kal [ma d]eh “ scis das'yo « nor  [m]a ey [sni]- 
10, [rbban “ In](i)[m ” tujrow klamh pi c[w]as [cnam] ® dey kal g[o]h ” de[h] © 


1V has &ir-im, 2 V has kydk. 3 V inserts 1. 

4V hastarla. IV begins at this point with ’ dah, and must therefore have read #irla’ or tarla’ . 

5 V-has kyak, 6 IV probably has ¢arla, or tirla: V probably tarla’, 

7.V probably has é-im, certainly not gruz. 8 IV and V have mo’, 

9 The reading is doubtful in all-the texts, Corceivably ma da might be read, 10 V has tarla. 
11 V has é-im. 12 V has Ananda, 13 V has dzahkh, 4 V has Bisnai, 


16 In IIL no final z is visible, but V has it clearly, IV-is quite illegible here. 

16 Possibly there is a virdma and we should read °vaj. IV and V are illegible here. 

17 Or perhaps sdsand ; but [V and V have sdsana, 18 V has gohh, 1 V has &-im,  V has hyde, 

31 V has gohh, The words in round brackets in C 1-7 are adapted from IV,-as UI is broken oif ‘ere. 

22.V has blakh, °3 V insertsgnahere. 4 IV may have dharmmarij, V possibly dhammcrdja. 

9% Y has Ananda. °6 Forrowwo' Vhasrwo’”, * V has Ananda. % V has goh. 

2 V inserts 3. £0 V inserts 4. 1 V «has Indra t. 32 V inserts 1. 

$3 IV appears to have Katatarmmanagardja or °rdj (perhaps). V inserts | after the name, 

3§ Or perhaps ¢@% both here andin IV, V has dia: 85 IV and V insert ti here. 

38 JV and V have scuté. It is just possible that in II] we should also read scuti: the text is badly 
blurred here. 37 V has gohh. -38'V has gohh. 

39 There is a small blurred space here, which at first led me to conjecture that it concealed some 
short word such as /ok; but as 1V and V have nothing, i it is probably merely accidental! or perhaps the result 
of an original flaw. 

4 }V has gurnlox, 11 [V probably has dharmmaray, V probably dhammaraja. #2 °V has ft’. 

43 1V has mo’, WV has dekh, 45 V inserts kal. 16 V has nirbban. 

47 1V has late, V litm (or possibly /aim), 48 TV (and probably V) inserts 4. 49 V has gokh. 

86 1V has deh, V deli, In IE there is a small unexplained space after the word, as in C 7. 


136 - EPIGRAPHIA: BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


11, sdas smin chammmara)s 1fdey] d(u)n? [Arima]dda{n]apirr * hantél ‘ [pai 
capra|- 

12. sat® [ma gii]i’ ® [nJa s[n?’ ” clac ® d[nje[n ° bar cwas dji[ficam] ha[nta]l 
ra[ta]- 

13. [na]si[Aghasana ma] fin las [na tmo]’ (s]ak * stim s[g]o’ [muddh ]abhi- 

14. sek [nJa indrabhisek « sd(u)A” imo’ gna smih Sri Tri[bhu}wa[nadi]- 

15. tyadhammaraja ” « scua[h] tug(u)r ® sis(a)1 * kindavh ** [u]t [piltak trey ™ 

16. (skink[a]1 b](u)[ru}’” [dhJa{rmm]a™ d[m]as phath singir® osk[ultir ut 

 maha- 

17. jan gunn ® [ma lhija * abay ™ staw Achy u |posa[th Jas(i)[1] * ut 

18. [ku] kal »* spu[k] ® tinlar * tinra{n *” s|war [ma tm](u)Ly * nja [th]ar ma | 

19. yas ma fin lak (nJa {rJa[t ® du]mpohh ® pi(r)kar ® blah ® splop 

20, mahaja[n g]uthluh * defy sw]a(rg)a * «® [slu’ho’] ® apa- 

21. y pan™ s[clu’rohh ® kul [pk]a[w dh]a[rmm]a (dey] kdip * maha- 

22. [jJan [gu]mf[lujn * » [kal] gna smin dharmmaraja “’ goh “ [tos] dha- 

23. [rmma ci]«® y[a]n “ bi[nrju’ sadhufka |r [fa]h *® ourh(lun “ row] bi[nru] “ 

24. brey rin-ut * c{njam kum ® {#] goh © [d]a min kyek * B[u]- 


1V has dhayminaraja, In 1V the first part of the word is blurred, but it probably ends °va7. 
3 In 1V the vowel may also be either short or long ; but V has div, 3 V inserts 4 here. 
- 4 V has antal. 5 1V and V have paticaprasad, (In 1V the vivdma is not clear,) 
8 IV has gai. 7 V has siz, 8 IV has elec, V either cite or perhaps clac, 
3 IV appears to have dizdi or dizen, V probably dzan, 10 IV has sek. 
11 Conceivably sdiz. The vowel is doubtful in IV and V also, though probably zw. 
12 IV probably has °ydj. V may have Tribhi°, 13 Perhaps tugiir, IV has tugur, V tugar. 
14 Perhaps sisul, as 1V apparently has, V has sist/, 1> 'V inserts thal. 
16 1V and V insert | after ¢vey. 17 1V has baru or perhaps buru, V probably buriu. 
18 [Vand V insert ma, which is needed here. 
19 V has what looks like sigir, but there may be a superscript nz, making stngir, %1V has gumlon, 
21 Vhas lhi (or possibly Jh¢z=, with an effaced superscript 2 over the next word ; but I can see no trace 
of it). “3 [V and V here insert \.. ’ 23 Perhaps ‘sil. IV is doubtful, V has °sil. 
21 1V omits 0. Vv appeass to have ma sjak (or spat, or ma puk, or sapuk) lupok.. 
23 LV probably has ¢enlur, % LV and V have tinvaz, which is the usual spelling. 
23 1V appears to have tmuy. In V the vowel is not clear. 2 V has ratava. % IV has dumpok. 
31 [V and V have prakar, the usual spelling. 
32 V here inserts something which looks like 1 nia sdas ma, but being near the end of the line the 


passage is not very legible,. 33: IV has gumlon. 
%4 The reading is almost certain, though in some of the impressions it looks rather like swar.da. IV 
simply has swar, V swarga. 36 V inserts wa here. 3¢ 1V and V have sluno’”, 37 V here inserts t. 
38 1V has seuvoh, V scurokh. 3) In V the p looks very like m. 10 TV has gumlon, 
41 1V apparently has dharmmara] (certainly dharmma’), V probably ahanarass. 
42 V has gol. 33 TV omits I. bs 
_ 44 The yar looks like yu, but the extra mark is probably accidental: 1V and V have ya, the usual 
spelling. 16 V has mahdjan instead of fah, 6 [V-has gurmlon. 
47 There seems to be no room here for a final ’, but IV and V have dimru’. 48 For rineut V has tam, 
3) V apparently has us, and perhaps omits the Ile 50 V has gokh. 


51 V has mun, LV mun or possibly man. 58 -V has Ayak. 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 137 


25. [ddha] tirle[y' by]ades*? kintir g[nja smin statin bia{ ya ku 
ti[rJley 

26, [Anan]‘ s row m/(i)n® kyek * [Buddha [tirJley [bya]des goh? 

27. [tlun] das ut’ mlehs® [y]an g{n]a [smin dha](r)[mml]araja® ma [go’ 
bya]- 

28. [des nJor kyek Buddha tirley ma j[nJo{k me]tta [karu]- 

2g. na dey [sla(rww)a[s]a(tt]a . .1.% [« daah sja(rww)a[satta " gurh]lon 


D 


1, [sgo]’ suk sey subhik [sk]ah byil b(fa) ? — 
2. jap jap sthan ma kah sak dek [m]a kah 

3. sak ti’ bha ma [k]ah sak t[wi]l w[i]r « (ti]- 

4. tla® poy gna smin dha(r)mmara{j](a)** tbi[n] kLul dje- 

5. [k ki}r*® k{ujl [kJumbar®* [pda]s kul t? bha” 

6. tw[ill ® wir « [kJa[l] go[h dja ma g{nJa smin [S]r[f] T[rji- 
7. bhuwanadityadha[m]marajarajadhirajaparamiswa- 

8, rabala[c]a{kkr]awar ® [pum]rey [m]a pa [ya] ku [c]ia [jma]- 
g. (r] ® bintan # (m)a™ go[’] bya{des] nor ky[e]k © 
10. Buddha [t]irley sa(rww)al[fiu * bodhi]sat # k(i)[r]™ 

11, [kJumbar * wo’ blah ® k{ul] imo’ [M Jahari- 


1 V possibly has tarley. 


2 V inserts {| here. 3 IV probably has dhavmmaray, V perhaps dhammardja, : 
4 V has Ananda. 5 V has mun, IV apparently also, & V has éyak, 7 V has gohh. 
8 At this point V diverges entircly from III and IV. * IV probably has dharmmardj. 


10 Or sarbba’ or sabba’, 1V appears to have saywwa’ and after °satta it would seem (perhaps) to read 
nikdy, which would form a compound with what precedes (asin III D 13). But that cannot be the reading 
of III, Possibly it has °wal(a), or *bal(a). 

It Here also sarbba’ or sabba’ is possible, but 1V probably has sarwwa? again, A compound word, 
part Sanskrit and part Pali, is not an uncommon phenomenon in these Mén texts. 

12 The reading seems nearly certain. IV has dara il, but there is no room for that here. 

13 IV has tila’. 

14 There is possibly a virdma here (making °raj), but not in IV, which appears to have dharmmaraya. 

18 [V possibly has 4ir here. 18 1V has éusnbar. 7 LV has bia’. 

18 In IV the-vowel of tal is quite clear. 

19 [V may perhaps have Tridhawan®. Neither in If] nor in 1V is any ‘virama visible over the r of 
*iswara’, but V 42 has ‘iswar. In III the c of °cakkra@ looks as if it had another ¢ subscript under it, but 
this does not appear in ]1V or V._ IV probably has simply °cakra® (the «is certain) ; V 42 °cakkra’, : 

2 There may be a doubt as to the length of the vowel in jmzv, but that appears to be the reading of IV. 

21: 1V has dbumtd. 

2 The actual reading appears to be pa, nocross-bar being visible, but that is certainly wrong, and [V 
has ma. 

23 Or sarbba® or sabba®. 1V is also doubtful liere. I see no trace of any doubling of the #i. 

34 Both Ill and 1V seem to have 4ir, 25 1V has kussbadr. 26 LV has tuy (or ty) instead of blak, 


138 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. 1 


12. tbban[L]ak Ch(u)[y]? (Kh)i? (R)i[y ° tnJas [na] * tirtuly ® u]- 
13. t [m]anus(sa) ® satta[ni]kay (kid)em 7 surh(n)en 

14. gumlon »® ult] b[nJah sadh[uljan gurhlun ® or gr(a)- 

15. A! 0 o « (njama[dh]eyyavasen’-e[v]a silale- 

16. kha ’ya{m]=uttama (ta)pi[t]a " dhammarajena ma- 

17. hapufiamatiddhina” ti 10 4 © 


Translation. 


A 


Prosperity! Honour to the Blessed One, the Saint, the Truly Omniscient ! 


Tie one ior the mise of ie Loe t) sx os ha te ee oo ao ee ee 
(l.4)........... the origin (of the king of the Law ?) . ie ee has 


13 


ee geet © sw @ & S «242484 8 © 2 &§ 2. wb FS eeetee e¢ @ @ es e208 © @ 


At (1. 7) the dinni when life (lasted ?)* for twenty chanudind years the Loti 
Buddha Kassapa came into existence in this world and my lord found a resting 
place at the city of Benares and then dwelt in the Isipatanamigadawanamahawihar.* 
At that time our lord (1. 11) this (present) king of the Law * was a wealthy man 
who had property amounting to eighty fotz’s." He made offerings, observed (the 


1 Or possibly Chday, which seems unlikely. 2 The initial consonant is somewhat doubtful. 

3 The initial consonant might possibly be N or D, It is also possible that these two syllables form one 
word ; in fact until it is ascertained whether this part of the proper name consists of Burmese words, much of 
it must remain dubious, It does not appear to be Mén in any case. IV hasa different name here, which 
(after Mahanirbban) apparently readsd... giilik . (or °ka or °&). I cannot restore or explain it. 

4 IV probably has ¢aas=na, 5 IV probably has tiytiy. | § IV has manus or perhaps manus. 

7 IV seems to read kidem: also, but in both texts there is a subscript sign rather like u, curved to the left, 
quite distinct in III but by no meanscertain inIV, where the mark may be merely accidental. This mark 
is hard to explain, It might be an irregular way of writing kiduem, but if there is such a word I have not 
succeeded in tracing it elsewhere. One is temptedtoread éritcem, which would make. tolerable sense, but I 
find no jic written in this fashion, Conceivably the initial might be ¢, but & seems more probable, and 
possibly (but improbably) one might read # instead of i. These uncertainties also throw doubt on the identity 
of the next word. 


8 IV omits i. _ * Whas guslon. 10 1V has grair, the usual and correct spelling. 
11 Or possibly ¢hapstd. 1V may have one or other of these readings, or possibly ¢hapita. It should be 
thapita. 


13 [V has mahdppuiia’, unless the extra stroke is accidental, The i should be doubled, but there is no 
trace of doubling visible in our texts, 

13 This Pali exordium was evidently on the lines of I A 2-3, but somewhat longer. So much of it is 
illegible that it has not been considered possible to make a Satisfactory conjectural restoration, 

14 There is an illegible word here, but the general sense is clear, the reference being to the period in which 
the normal duration of human life, according to Buddhist ideas, extended to the length mentioned, CE, 
F.R.AS.y 1914, Pe 678, 

15 The great monastery of the deer park of Isipatana, near Benares, 16 See lG3trn 

17 In Indian reckoning a kofi is ten millions, but L.M. kurt is only a hundred thousand, The point is not 
very material, particularly as the value of ihe unit is not specified. 1 imagine that the kdrsépana may be the 


one implied. 


THE MYAKAN INSCRIPTION OF MYANPAGAN, PAGAN. 


ae — go gins Mee: 


‘ 
: i € mY 
, \ 
” . 7 . . 4 


ov & "> 
Fe a Anwgy 6 4 
pial Y 


PR 
Rae 
fetes Awe AM 
gfe vee 34 zig? snl , 
ay fh a] Gras ycioyes 9 

peltass es Pauiy fi i OE ands Rc CRI $< 
 eonaaeeege Th Sina . wyt vier 143 ies Oe ee ‘OF 
geese Peek gon. nN geaah oi “fhe EE LaUy eS LSE OS a) 4 
ae SoG ake Eulcal 46h9 ure HA LY PONG GCs on f RO ITIVE x! +5 
nai ys Fasc n3e Ti feel): AOE S ea aD pe a on ee te | | 


x: rahi ‘ : ee ; 
pee ak al pert ie on jal io 4. 1d 
te raters art ns oe ieee oe 


cee tet ae if 


© uih 


Bases tgs ol sakes oO 
oG,°) ees seamen | 
TEMA LIOME ON Me MCHC tig 
ri: 
Shem! yor ss IQS HY 
a mse Dro} ; 
at ints GoRe one. 


No. III. VoLtuME I, PLaTe X. 


10 


ry 


16 


PART I1] MON INSCRIPTIONS 139 


precepts of) virtue,’ did pious deeds of divers kinds under the dispensation® of the 
Lord Buddha Kassapa (1. 14) (and) having lived to the term of his life (he) departed 
from thence (and) came into existence in a family of kings * in the city of Patna. 

At that time a great hostile army arose: that army our lord the king of the 
Law, who had come to be King of Patna, defeated (signally.?)*; and then, after 
giving happiness to all the people, making offerings, observing (the precepts of) 
virtue, doing pious deeds of divers (I. 20) kinds, (and) carrying out the ten duties of 
a king, and after living to the term of his life, (he) departed from thence (and) came 
into existence in the family of King Rama in the city of Oude. 

At that time, too, a great hostile army came to...... ° the city of 
Oude. That army (I. 24) our lord the king of the Law, who was (then) of the 
family of King Rama, defeated (signally ?),® and then, after giving happiness to 
all the people, making offerings, observing (the precepts of) virtue, doing pious 
deeds of divers kinds, (I. 27) (and) after having lived to the term of his life, (he) 
departed from thence; (and).in the time of the coming of our lord the Buddha — 
Sakyamuni’ he was ® the sage Bisnt, who had® supernatural power (and) glory, 
who possessed ” the five transcendental faculties, who dwelt upon 


B 


a silver (mountain ?)" named Kelasaparwwata. 
At that time the Lord Buddha Sakyamuni”™ (directed his mind to ?)’* the 
perception of things unknown, (and) my lord saw the sage Bisni, who was to 


‘1 That is, he kept the ethical commandments of religion. 
2 Lit, “ in the religion ” (or “ ordinance”), V has no stop before this clause.but it might perhaps be 


read with what follows, i.e, (and) having lived to the term of his life under the st a ai of the Lord 
Buddha Kassapa,” etc,, though this seems less likely, 

8 Or “in the family of the king,” #.e, the local royal family, which is what i is meant in any case, There: 
is no plural particle to smif, but M6n words are in their nature indeterminate as regards number. 

4 The reading is doubtful and the rendering conjectural. 

5 The doubtful word in the text may be a preposition meaning “ to,” or alternatively a vetb probably 
meaning “to attack,” or something of that kind, Either way the general sense of the passage is plain, 

6 See A 18 n. 

7 V, perhaps, “ the coming into existence of the Lord Buddha Sakyamuni.” 
8 Or “ became,” #.¢, “ came into existence as.” 
3 V has “ who was great in.’ 10 Or “ acquired,” 

11 There is an illegible word or two here, but the sense must have been pretty much as given, The moun- 
tain referred to is Kailasa, a more or Jess legendary peak in the Himalayas, also known as Rajatadri, 
“ silver mountain.’ The fact of Bisni’s residence there is not mentioned in the other group of inscriptions 
concerned with him, but for Buddha’s prophecy to Ananda seelAr 5-37 and VI 9-end, 

12 V has Sakyamunt. 

18 The words thus rendered are almost illegible aad very doubtful, but the general sense must be some- 


thing of the kind, 


140 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


become (I. 5) a? king of the Law in the city of Arimaddanapir, (and) who would 
uphold my lord’s religion: my lord was pleased (and) happy, (and) my lord smiled. 

At that time (I. 8) from my lord’s four eyeteeth four rays (whose size extended 
to four 7a/’s?),? (and) which each® had six colours, they ‘ (flew ?)® throughout 
(the expanse of ?)* the universe. Two of the rays went coursing (I. 12) right? up 
to Brahmalok, (the other) two rays went coursing right down to Awicimahanarak.® 
Thus did all those six-coloured rays go coursing (and) (travelling ?)® (1. 16) to 
all the ten” cardinal points, and then entered the Lord Buddha’s mouth ™ again. 

At that time the Lord Ananda” saw the laughter ® of (1. 19) the Lord. Buddha 
which (was accompanied by ?) “such a wondrous miracle, (and he) marvelled (and) 
zealously did obeisance," (with bended ?) * knees (and) joined hands, (and) looking 
upon the face of the Lord Buddha, which was like a golden mirror, (he) enquired 
the reason (I. 24) of the Lord Buddha’s smile in this wise :— 

“Lord of heaven!?” Without cause Buddhas do not laugh": what reason 
(was there) that * my lord laughed”?” “O Ananda, (it was) because (I. 28) I 


1 Or possibly “ the,” and so elsewhere where the phrase occurs,eg, B 29,C 11, There is no material 
difference, it is only a question of how much stress is to be laid on the fact that it is the actually reigning 
monarch that is being referred to. In the absence of any demonstrative I prefer the rendering with the 
indefinite article, Contrast A 11, where the reference is definitely emphasized by a demonstrative. 

2 The reading is doubtful and the translation somewhat conjectural. It may be doubted whether it 
does not involve a rather strained use of the relative particle ma, The word rather doubtfully read tal has 
been conjecturally identified with L,M. ta, “a measure of length equal to seven cubits,” the cubit being 18 
inches, so that the ¢@ would be 34 yards. The weak point of the identification is that Burmese also has the 
Word: unless, therefore, Burmese has borrowed it from Mén, we are hardly entitled to assume the identity 
of tal with ta, even supposing the former to be the reading of our text. However, I can suggest nothing 
better, It is to be supposed that the rays of light are regarded as broadening out to this size when they 
issued from Buddha’s mouth: in length they were practically without limit. 

3 The distributive seems to be indicated by the doubling of the numeral. 

} The pleonastic pronoun is in the original. 5 Doubtful reading, 

6 There is some slight doubt as to the reading and the identity of the word, but I incline to the view 
that it is to be considered the same as L.M. alum, The words in brackets are not intended to do more 
than emphasize the sense of completeness, 7 Limagine this to be the emphatic force of the particle mleh, 

8 The great hell Avici, the lowest of the eight hot hells, * Reading somewhat doubtful, but probable, 

10 No doubt the usual eight together with the zenith and nadir, 

11 Though there may be some doubt as to the reading, there is none as to the meaning. Cf, 1 A 24, 
VI 13. 

12 11] and IV (so far as extant) use the abbreviated form Ayan, but V consistently uses Ananda, 
These abbreviations of proper names and loanwords are characteristically Indo-Chinese, but at this early 
period they seem to have been somewhat irregularly used; they alternated with the fuller, Indian, forms, 

13 In V. “smile.” M The reading is doubtful and the rendering conjectural, 

15 The criginal word appears to be a substantive used adjectivally, as it were “ obeisance of zeal,’’ 
that is “ zeal- is obeisance,” but it is more coyvenient to render it by an adverb. Cf. 1G 24, 

1© The reading is somewhat doubtful, but the general sense is plain. 

17 At this point begins the extant portion of IV, but its variants seldom affect the translation, 

18 V seems to have “smile,’’ as has J A 28, 

19 Or “ what (was) the reason that.’’ A slight doubt as to the reading here does not affect the sense. 

20 V has “smiled,” 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 141 


saw the sage Bisni, who is great in supernatural power, who is to become a 
king of the Law, who will uphold my religion: that (was) 


Cc 


why I laughed?” The Lord Buddha having spoken thus, my lord related the 
origin of the king ofthe Law to (1. 3) the Lord Ananda in this wise :— 

“© Ananda, in the year when I shall achieve Nirvana* the sage Bisni, 
together with my son Gawarhpati, and King Indra,° and Bissukarmma, and Kata- 


karmmanagaraja,* shall build a city (1,6) called Sri Kset,S and after that (he)® 


napar. Upon a paficaprasada ® (|. 12) adorned with twenty-eight royal chambers, 
on a jewelled throne inlaid with stone of azure hue, (he) shall receive the anointing 
of the head with Indra’s anointment.’® (He) shall bear the name (of) 
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja. (He) shall purify (and) make straight, 
write down (and) establish" all the Holy Scriptures. (1. 16) (He) shall proclaim * 
(and) voice ® the Law, which” is even as.a resounding * drum. (He) shall arouse 
all the people that are slumbering carelessly.* (He) shall stand steadfast in the 
observance of the commandments at all times. 


1 V has “ smiled.” 2 This date does not occur in the corresponding passage I A 30-3. 

3 III and IV use the usual abbreviated form Jn, V has Jndra. 4 IV has Kata’. 

6 An abbreviated form of Svi Ksetra, the old name of Prome: for another variant see 1 A 33. VI 20 
has the fullform. ¢/e, BisnG, 7 Lit. “to-be.’ 8 Merely the idiomatic Mén way of saying “‘on earth,” 

‘9 A temporary structure specially built for the ceremony of anointment and consisting of a central 
pavilion surrounded by four others. The word (under the form panchapérsada) is still used in Malay for 
the pavilion constructed to serve as a place for the ceremonial ablutions performed after a royal wedding. 

10 | imagine this does not denote any additional ceremony but rather. the supernatural grace conferred 
by the-solemn anointment: in the chronicles Indra is represented as taking part in the anointment of some 
of the kings, 

1 That is to say, he is to issue a revised edition of the Buddhist Canon, Cf, VII1 A 3. Vadds 
“ (and) shall uphold ” to the other verbs. 12 Or impart,” 

13 The meaning is not absolutely certain, though the simile supports it. The idea is that the king 
makes the Law vocal, causes it to be heard, 

14 This particle is in 1V and V, though not.in III, It seems-necessary to the sense. 

15 The precise meaning is not determined. , 

16 There are two words, identical in form in L.M., one meaning “to sleep”? and the other “to delight 
in,” I prefer the former here, but conceivably one might interpret the passage as meaning “who delight 
in carelessness,” Further, it is not absolutely certain that “carelessness” is the correct equivalent of abdy, 

17 Conceivably we might read “to” instead of “he shall”? and treat what follows as dependent upon 
the preceding sentence: no pronoun is expressed. On the other hand IV and V insert a stop, which tends 
rather against such an interpretation, 


19 


142 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [ VOL. 1 


(He) shall? open the bar of the gate of Heaven, which is made of gold 
that shines, which is set with gems of seven kinds; and? shall bring (1. 20) all man- 
kind into Heaven. (He) shall empty the four Apay,® (he) shall drop drown‘ the 
flower of the Law upon the heads of all mankind. When the king of the Law 
shall preach the Law, the sounds of applause of all men ° (shall be) like the sound 
(1. 24) of a rainstorm (at) the end® of the year.” Thus by the Lord Buddha was 
foretold the origin of the king of the Law to the Lord Ananda. 

As by the Lord Buddha was foretold, (so) (1. 27) has all come to pass.’ 
The king of the Law, who was foretold by the Lord Buddha, who’ is great in love 
(and) compassion towards ........ .° all beings,—to the end that all beings 


D 


may obtain happiness, bliss, (and) plenty, (and) be free from famine of tillage,’’—(in) 
every place that lacks water, lacks (1. 3) arable land, lacks strenuous cultivation,” 
our- lord the king of the Law dams ™ the pete digs a tank, (and thus) creates 
arable land (and) (I. 6) strenuous cultivation.” 

At the time when King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammarajarajadhirajaparamis- 
warabalacakkrawar,“ the exalted, who rides upon a male white elephant, who 
was foretold by the Lord (1. 10) Buddha, the omniscient (one), the Bodhisatva,™ 
had dug this tank, he gave (it) the name of Mahanirbban Lak Chuy Khi Riy,” 


1 V perhaps has “shall draw open.” Cf.1C 1, VI 30. : 

2 V perhaps has “and shall be (he) that shall,’ etc, 3 See 1D 37 n., VI 31. 

4 Or perhaps “shall set,” Chl Egon, 5 V has “all the people,” 6 V has “ beginning,” 

7. At this point ends the agreement of V with III and IV, 8 The antecedent isthe king. 

9 The missing part probably meant “the host of ” (in IV ‘the collection of ”). Cf. D 13. 

10 The rendering is not quite certain, 11 The rendering is conjectural, 

12 The rendering is more or less conjectural. If the word téz” has been rightly understood, the text 
literally says ‘ dams (and) gives” (just as it says “ digs (and) gives” in the next line). But possibly the 
phrase might be taken to mean “ permanently secures,” 7.e., “ secures a permanent supply ” of water. 

13 Rendering conjectural, as above, 

14 For the variants of this name, see note to ID 8 of the text. The additions, over and above the usual 
name of the king in C 14-5 and in his inscriptions generally, mean “supreme king of kings, overlord, 
mighty universal monarch,” 

15 These descriptions must, I think, be taken as applicable to the king (in anticipation of his eventual 
achievement of Buddhahood), not to Buddha. The ascription of the qualities of a Buddha to a reigning 
sovereign is common in Buddhist countries. The ceremonial address “Living Buddha” is used in the 
Mén chronicles towards Mén kings, just as it was recently in China with reference to the Dowager 
Empress. Cf. V 43. 

18 Fo~ other possible readings of this name and for the name given to the tank celebrated in IV, see the 
note to D 12 of the text, 


PART I! ] MON INSCRIPTIONS 143 


(to be) for the benefit of all (1. 13) mankind, the congregation of beings, (and) all 
er ea re atten ear ae 2 May all you good men understand.* 

_ This excellent inscription was erected by the greatly meritorious, wise and. 
powerful King of the Law.’ 


-No. IV. 
AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT ALANPAGAN, PAGAN. 
Descriptive Account. 


42. Like the preceding, this inscription records the digging of a tank by order 
of. King Kyansittha, but evidently it was a different tank, for it bore a different 
name (see IIT D12n.). Inall other respects No. IV, so far as it is preserved, is — 
substantially a copy of No. III, and the variants that occur have been given in the 
notes to the text of the latter. One set of ink-impressions, consisting of two 
pieces, was supplied to me, together with a photograph of them. In any event 
the first half of the original record is missing and the remainder is a good deal 
damaged in several places and is on the whole in an indifferent state of preser- 
vation, pretty much like No. II]. The space covered by lettering, as measured 
on the impressions, is as follows :—Piece A, height 3 ft. 4-in., breadth 1 ft. 7 in.; 
B, height 2 ft. 4 in., breadth 1 ft. 13 in. The letters resemble in shape and size 
those of No. III, and the line-spacing is similar. Piece A contains 32 lines and 
begins :—’ (being doubtless the last letter of ¢zvla@’ or tarla’) dkah (= III B 25); 
and ends :—tirley byddes (= III C 26). Piece B contains 22 lines and begins: 
—goh tlun (= III C 26-7); and ends at the end of the record, corresponding 
with the end of II] D. This inscription has served to restore or- confirm certain 
words that were lost or doubtful in the preceding one. | 


‘No. Vv. 
AN INSCRIPTION IN THE PHAYRE MUSEUM, RANGOON. 
Deserirptive Account. 


43- This inscription is engraved on one face of a large stone (apparently a 
slab), the lettering being enclosed within a bordering line which at the top forms 
a flat curve, like a Tudor arch without a point to it. The original location of this 


1 .am unable to suggest « rendering for the two words at the end of D 13 unless the first one can be 
read kivicem, in which case the phrase would perhaps mean “ winged birds,” But even if this reading is 
permissible, which seems more than doubtful, there is little a deta’ in this mention of birds after and 
apart from the whole collection of sentient creatures. 2 Cf, 1 H 4-12, V 49-51. 

3. For the rendering of this last paragraph (which is in Pali) | am indebted to Professor C, Duroiselle, 


144 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL..1 


record is unknown to me. Apparently it originally contained about 55 lines, 
possibly’ more ; but of the first five (corresponding with IITA 1-9) hardly anything 
is legible, and nothing after |. 55, which may however have been the last line. . 
The ends of most of the lines are also seriously damaged. But a good part of 
the lettering is in a pretty fair state of preservation, rather better than that of the 
two preceding inscriptions, Two ink-impressions were supplied to me, together 
with a photograph of one of them. The space covered by lettering, as measured 
on the impressions, is as follows :—height, 6 ft. 2 in.; extreme breadth, 2 ft. 
11 in. The letters resemble in shape those of No. III and are very nearly of. 
the same size; if anything, they are slightly smaller and perhaps a little more 
delicately cut, but that may bé due to the stone being of a different.kind. The 
normal line-spacing is the same asin No. III]. Down to ut mlehu in |. 42 (corre- 
sponding with III C 27), No. V is almost acopy of No. III, but at that point it 
entirely diverges from it. Accordingly it has not been considered necessary to 
give here the text or translation of ll. 1-41, as the variants occurring therein have 
been entered in the notes appended to No, III. Subject to slight variations, 
the proper names also are identical with those contained in the latter. inscription. 
No. V records the restoration by King Kyansittha of a pagoda styled (appar- 
efitly) Kyak Talan. It seems probable that: this pagoda was somewhere in the. 
Mén country of Lower Burma, but inthe absence of information as to the place 
where the inscription was found I am unable to say anything positive about it. A> 
date in Il. 51-2 is probably either the date of the commencement or completion of 
the work of restoration, or else it may be the date on which the order was issued 
for the engraving of the inscription. It appears to correspond with Friday, 16th 
April 1098; the year number is- in figures and of the Burmese common era. 
Another date in |. 54, which may be the actual date of the setting up of the 
inscription, is unfortunately too much mutilated to admit of determination. The 
bearing of the former date has been pointed out in §§ 27, 29. Apart from 
these particulars and a few new words, the chief importance of this inscription 
lies in the fact that it has served in certain cases to restore or confirm words that 
were lost or doubtful in No. III. 


Text. 
(The text of Il. 1-41 is identical with that of III] A 1—C 26 save for the 
variants given in the notes appended to the latter.) 
42. gobh tluh das ut mleh « yan gna smin Sri Tribhiwanadityadhammaraja- 
rajadhirajaparamiswar balacakkrawar pumrey «(ma pa yan ku] 


Epigraphia Birmanica No. V. Votume I, 


to 


10 


AN INSCRIPTION IN THE PHAYRE MUSEUM, RANGOON. 


(TOP HALF ) 


i hee gy Ma a f 
A Pe Seinen 

bee C a iE ec eihins - 
Rig Jee wh ¢ fai 


Fd aa gnegy Hophsnioiieg eA) ety: “ope . 

‘ ah BP, ne oe 

hey Tee b RD gre ag mag OK diary ays see wi 
OM on : Ae rt i Fee Gk RP os ie 
a a4 MeO) Cuetiouare gy Phy eth en, 44 

Tal ee Fattiognern, 

ats Ai iy; Bod Gin Ko: pani The 

Sop ‘é. 

ane TE fi) pidge A ig Tt a 

ae se uy, fin: en Se 


re.Y 


i} - i Ss bi i 
had pone mae @ Fr ae mh ee 
RS Qi re Wd PAQet urea wa ab AS ms awe ie 


‘¥ Tes: dhs Hee _anChitent, a Big Myre ier Gabe 
yay 


AMS by | Sah “Agana Fi TAN tage fw dis 
55 Se) Face Serna i a oa eee gute Pca One: ee 


a 


: Ra =e i rw 3 M 2 
a A PA a fink poe ae ee ate 5” * Piske: 
Shs y ee od grins copy am fle y Sig 


ae Lo Bsactrny i 2 re Re E xekd 


Prate XI. 


190. 
12 


14 


16 
18 


20 


fa 
26 


28 


Epigravhia Birmanica No. V. Votume I, Prate XIl- 


AN INSCRIPTION IN THE PHAYRE MUSEUM, RANGOON. 
(BOTTOM HALF) 


30 Pages Ses | a 
rs 4, frases Pent tee st Sas ve 4 ¢: 
32 ee an! ers: Eigppee: ATE. 
34 aa Line ae =a thy reat mY 
36 ied fcc ip ta ede 
rare Yee -% Tig peat ye B a ¢ © at 
38 ae YQ het ess HRC th rye hacia fk iq 
ae 4c Qui hy io By iingg ns 7} agi meade: 
+ 
40 Zbeo aie eel ‘p 
7 = Jan 
patent gon ge aS an i 
42 s/t AGC afi} Snostenanire . arabes 
ae LE Qi on cur ee De ys SU mH) 
h . a le oN 
44 ff Lat WAMU HS Naiyen Gm Rimi a bie <i i 


J ahukuinPocrg sui te teal ty an core 


46 ase es US ee onetime: 
: Papel neintoalt te nigl 0 Asie. 
48 ! Qi Stott iy maleaQilyd a1iaony Es 
ee AoA ead MEY ad? Sesunf fe Tid « 
ae SE SiNswemAC neh dcr pin o's oy. 
eee. een fo Sheets eo Sacer 
52 i Kiger Eo wat ye PPE Pd Eins S eae 
4 fe 4 TE eae eee: fe, Phd O85: as 
54 a4 : 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 145 


43. cin buntan « sarwwafiu bodhisatta ma cmat sdas kyak ma prak nuk ut 
sakala safta gumlun « ma jnok metta karuna [u]- | 

44. t dey sakala satta gumlun ut ku kal» matbal sdsana kyak Buddha tirley 

| 0 ma prey ut nor smin c-4n ma... [u]- 

45. t dis pan sak rimban ka sak smis ma nom prafid trejas puthrey mun 
smin c-an ka das bircas « ma nom ylas]...<:.... 

46, ut sakala Jambudip « ma go’ byades nor kyak Buddha tirley « ma das 
tarla’ din ATE nAgOS nie wna ae 

47. n ceti Kyak Tal(a)h wo’ « ma. rah rlak dnah na sdas namadhey yas 
gir(n)at (t)ilbok ut lok k(u mahajan gurh)-. 

48. (lu)n boy kal (m)a lo’ or tin nawakarmma dak g(i)w? tumi. rbin thic 
jnok nor tlar.... blah or busac]. . | 

49. sut bnab riahisjan gumlun gurhir baranak pandit ......-< ® sadhujan 
guthlun or gra[n] (da) #{wo’ k](urh das sm)i(n)* 

50. dharmmaraja ma go’ byades nor kyak Buddha tarley » ma sdas kyak 


51. n lah pa sandihh ode [da] a1 dey kal sakaraja® 460 goh than ....... 


52> ‘fata ae q ‘they faktahwacl 3 thasta naksatra * nadi [tmin]...... 


@eeeeeee eee se evoerse stoves 


Translation.. 


(For the translation of Il. 1-41 and the first five words of |. 42, see II] A :— 
C 27, subject to the variants in the notes, ending at “ has all come to pass.”’) 


1 Or giw, 

2 There is a word kere that looks like picha. Wy (or'mi°), but it comes just on a spot where two sheets 
(in both impressions) are joined and I cannot be sure of it. 

8 Of these words éurn is very doubtful, but the rest seem probable enough, though little of them islegible, 

4 Probably we should supply heré some words like ma apritk nuk sakela satta gumlue, 

6 There may be a vivdma, possibly. 


146 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, |! 


King Sri Tribhawanadityadhammarajarajadhirajaparamiswar,) the exalted 
mighty universal monarch, who rides upon (1. 43) a white elephant, the omni- 
scient (one), the Bodhisatva, who shail verily. become a Buddha that saves (and) 
redeems all beings, who is great in love (and) compassion for all beings at all 
times, who upholds the religion of the Lord Buddha, who is exalted above all 
other kings that (dwell in?) all (1: 45) the four quarters? without. ..... ;° 
without * exception, who has wisdom (and). splendour exceeding other kings 


....,' who has renown.... - (throughout ?) the whole 
of laiabiaipe who was foretold by the ion Buddha, who is lord of the 
city of Arimaddanaptr........: (L 47), this pagoda of Kyak Talan,? which 


was in ruins, in order that it might become a name of renown (and) a (place of 
refuge ?)® of all the world and all mankind® for a long time, (he) caused 
workmen to build (and) encase (it) afresh ay and fairly, bigger than before ™ 
...., (and) had (it) dedicated... .... 

(1. 49) May all you people in general, rakes Brahmins, scholars,....., 
. , » all good men, understand that this is indeed the king of the Law who was 


’ 


foretold by the Lord Buddha, who is to become a true Buddha. ......... 


BO hae ar tara te :* (1.51) doubt (it) not !* 

In ihe time of (the year) 460 of the common era, .... 2. ee 
.... J8 (of the) month Besakha, the day (being a) Eniday, Hasta 7 (being) 
the lunar mansion, at four MOAT PLECISELY x Sac raed eh aes ete ee 


1 See WD 8tr.n. With the whole passage (to I, 46) cf. III C 27-9, D 6-10. 

2 The four cardinal points of the compass, and the regions situated in those several directions. 

3 The sense of rimbdiz is undetermined, + The sense of 4a sak is not quite certain, 

5 The meaning of éa das bircds is undetermined. 6 See 1B totr. n, 

7 It was, apparently, a caitya (stupa) called by that name, The word &ydé is applied i in L.M. to. 
Buddha, images of Buddha, ‘Buddhist religious edifices, particularly of this description, eminent personages, 
"and objects of veneration in general. It is even used respectfully i in the sense of “ Sir’? in conversation. 

8 The meaning and reading of girndt tiltok are not quite certain. 

9 The last three words.are not quite certain but seem almost a necessary restoration of the more or less 
obliterated text. 

10 This resumes the subject, z.¢, the king, who has been described with so many epithets in ll. 42-6, 

11 After repairing and strengthening what remained of the old structure, the king caused it to be 
covered externally with an additional layer of fresh material. This was a frequent practice i in Burma: 
many. of the existing pagodas have grown by successive acts of encasing’ to their present size from much 
smaller nuclei. 13 The reading is somewhat doubtful here, 

13 There is a partly illegible word here, the sense of which is undetermined. 

11 The illegible phrase probably read much as inl. 43: “ that redeems and saves all mankind.” 


1s ChIH 43. | 
16 The obliterated passage contained, inter alia, the statement of the lunar date, which was probably 
the 13th of the waxing moon in the lunar month Vaisakha. 17 Properly Hasta. 


138 One nddi is 24 minutes.. Apparently the statement in the text means 96 minutes after sunrise on the 
day in question. As to the date, sce § 43. 


PART II MON INSCRIPTIONS 147 


ete elses SS) arate ena Ba, ee a Ss this writing 

C26 A) aia ida ane ee ee Bk ee Ustarabhadrapada (being) the lunar man- 

SIGHS. 3G Mosihe d, jain kee he Poe ieee, Wm ee ae ee oe ae eta ed 

Cl Be Yi ghee. he a hata a ee Ga unig be al an EN el, oe Te set Up * 4a 'y 2s 
No. VI. 


AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME. 
Descriptive Account. 


44. This inscription is only a fragment of what must have been originally a 
very much longer record. It seems not impossible that it represents the beginning 
of the record of which No. VIII is a subsequent portion ; and it is almost certain 
that it was framed on the same lines as No. VII, for it agrees with the latter 
almost verbatim, so far.as it extends and so far as No. VII can be read at all. 
Unfortunately very little of No. VII is legible. What remains of No. VI 
is engraved on one face of a large stone slab, which has apparently been 
broken about the middle into two pieces. In a good: many places. the 
surface of the stone has also been seriously damaged, so-that many letters 
are lost or quite illegible. But those that remain are clearly cut and well preserved 
onthe whole. Two ink-impressions were supplied to me, together with a photo- 
grar’ of one of them. One of the two impressions has the two fragments 
separate: the space occupied upon them by the lettering is in the case of the 
upper fragment 3 ft- 7 in. in height by about 2 ft. 8 in. in breadth, the actual 
length of the lines being variable to the extent of an inch or so. The lower 
fragment, so far as occupied by lettering, is 2 ft. 6 in. in height and about 2 ft. 
6 in. in breadth, the lines being Kere a trifle shorter than they are above. 
Inthe other impression the two fragments have been roughly pieced together, 
with some allowance for what is missing between them, and the total height thus 
arrived at is about 6 ft. 4 in.; which is probably a fairly good approximation to 
the dimensions of the original. The letters resemble in general style and shape 


1 Presumably the reference is to the inscription itself, 
2 Probably this refers to the date on which the inscription was actually set up, 


148 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1 


those of the preceding inscriptions but are very much larger : they measure about 
1 in. in height, letter'¢ is about 1 in. long, and the normal interlinear space 
is about 12 in. 

45. By the help of the other records it has been possible to restore a good 
many of the missing portions of this fragmentary inscription, Its general purport 
is to give the. Kyansittha legend in the less extended version (see $§ 25, 26). 
No special reason is given for the erection of the record save the king’s own order 
that this panegyric. should be engraved for general information (Il. 4-5). The 
inscription has been briefly referred to in my second paper on the Myazedi Record 
(F¥.R.A.S., 1910, pp. 797-812), and likewise in the Report of the Superintendent, 
Archaeological Survey, Burma (1911), pp. 19-20, where a translation of a small 
part of it appears. It was also mentioned in the-discussion summarized in § 28. 
But owing to the imperfect state of the only impression at that time available, the 
date in ll. 2-4 was wrongly read, a serious mistake being made in the year number, 
which is in figures.’ As to this there can, however, be no doubt whatever that 
it is the year 455 of the common Burmese -era, which therefore falls within the 
period of Kyansittha’s reign (§ 29). A further error was made in taking the 
word Mrigastras.(l. 2) forthe name of a lunar month: it is practically certain 
that it here stands for a year-name of the Burmese 12-year cycle. The date falls 
within the waxing half of a month which is probably to be read Svéwan (this 
seems to be at any rate a possible reading of the almost illegible corresponding 
passage in No. VII), and there is no doubt as to the weekday and naksatra. 
‘It seems possible, though not absolutely certain, that the date when the king 
gave the order for the engraving of this record was June 3rd, A.D. 1093, but the 
precise day is not really very material from our present point of view, for there 
can be no serious doubt that the inscription is genuine and contemporary. 

46. Apart from its date, No. VI adds little to the information given by the 
previous documents, except its insistence (Il. 23-5) on the king’s pedigree, both 
paternal and maternal: Professor Duroiselle has suggested that this is not 
without significance ‘in view of the doubts cast upon Kyansittha’s paternity in 
popular tradition (§ 23). No. VIII ¢B 16) also fefers to the king’s descent, 
though there the mention occurs in a Pali passage. Paternally he claimed to be 
of the Solar race, thus asserting his legitimate descent from the Burmese royal line, 
which is the point whereon the legendary stories throw some doubt.? For the rest, 
No. VI presents parallels with the inscriptions already given. The proper names 


1 F.R.A,S,, 1910, pp. 853-6. 2 As tothis point, see § 52 (and note). 


ita Birmanica No. VI. Votume I, Prare XIII. 


AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME. 
(TOP HALF) 


malt a Pe _# sO. 


6 i Sia heino ug wt) P 
fine bang Nowk May 

8 O1o«¢ W S 
leas Brea : 


7% ’ Se ’ ~ 4 [ 

1. oe t § ee: bi~ Same 
+ SeFocces gamrucn Oh Me abt 

re oe syicaleu mn ; ee 4 ‘ 14 
y iD 
‘ “aft Gepeaguicrlaag : 

16 As roniuienaa cng fs ig ie | 16 


¢«. , 
yu = CUTTi Kasam $d yz! 
fl , emit wide vn 4 

oe ee gee arcu | 
Kee 


laa t 18 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 149 


are the same as elsewhere (§ 26), subject to some slight differences in 
spelling and to the fact that Pagan is mentioned by its native name (Pokém) as 
well as by its Pali title (4vimaddanapar). The inscription contains two short 
Pali passages (ll. 1, 6-g) and in]. 22 the date A. Bud. 1630 (see $§ 28, 29). 

47. The variants found in No. VII, so far as legible, have been given in the 
notes appended to No. VI. 


Text. 


(« Sri t) [namo] tassa [bh]agavato arahato sarnmasarmbu[ddhassa | 
(u dey) kal saka[raj](a cnam)! 455.0 mrigasiras*... .. > [mi]- 
rmok ‘ ki[ntu] (srdwan ®«) they sukrawar ® » uttarapha[lg]u[ni_na]- 
[ksatra » kanya” lagna « smin dharmmaraja myil abhipray or (sil) ® 
[lar * girlJun guna ” jirku ma da(s na”) s-or miiah ® gurhlun [gran] ® 
(10+) [Sri ©0 « najmo Buddha[ya] » namo dhammaya « namo 
[sanghaya]" » o [i an]giraso Sakyamu(ni)™ sabbasattanukampa- 
[ko »]® sabbasattuttamio ” siho ® 1” rajuppattim * desa[yi]™ 

[ti] « o «nom dey moy [He[h kal]™ kyak Buddha ta(rl]e- 

[y] taw de[y] Jeta[wana]mah{awihar 1] kyak [BJu[ddha] ta[rl]e- 

. y ktir k-im 1 [k]al goh nor gnis tarley ® yi{ryas] 

12. turow [sak deJh tit dr...... blah deh (tun lop) * 

13. dey mukhawar tarley kum: kal goh t[arley Ananda] 

14, [fiac] ascar goh yuk ku surhbup tey smafi gruff]... 

15. ... kyak Buddha tarley goh * | kal goh kyak Buddha [tarle]- 

16. [y gah]* ku tarley Ananda row * wo’ | Ananda [mnor ci ri}- 


99 PA ANARYD » 


— 
oe) 


1 Probable in VII. 2 VII may have ‘g?°, 

3 After a short illegible word VII apparently has 11 which is probably followed by the lunar date in a 
figure. But the passage is badly blurred. 

4 Certain in VII. © Probable in VII, 6 Or °#2°. 

7 Certain in VII. 8 Probable in VII, 9 Certainin VII. 

10 Between gu and x there is an original aw. There is no virdma over the nin VI and it is doubtful 

in VII. 
- 11 Possibly one might read da san or das da (or, improbably, das 1). 


12 After mriah there is an original flaw, | 13 Certain in VII. 

14 VII omits the whole of 1.6 and the first word of I. 7. 

15 Or °ni t. VIl apparently has °n7 1, 16 Vil has. 

17 Between 6ba and sa there is an original flaw, 18 VII may have stho. 19 Vil hash 

2 There is no virdma visible. 21 VII seems to have °yi. 22 Certain in VII. 


23 Between y and yi there is an original flaw. VII seems to have tirley. 
24 Doubtful, but probable, both in VI and VII, Cf. 1 A 24, II] A 16. 
2 VII has goh, % Certain in VII. 2 There is an original flaw here, 
20 


150 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1 


17. si[m]Joy ma imo’ Bi[s]n@ ma go’ abhifia[n’ ms](u)[n? goJh ° [1] 

18, [kom] ku kon ey Gawari[p]ati 1 ku smin Int ku [Bijssu[karmma]- 

19. d[e]wa[put 1 ku Kataka}r[mmanaga raja‘! skindam dan moy [ma] 

20. [imo’ Sri] K[s]etra blah cit risi Bisnt goh scu[ti nor] (dirda)- 

21. (s)*®[golh deh stin das dey Brahmalok kal saisana ey 

22. [tlin cup] moy lhim turow klam pi cwas cnam cit deh scuti cis [no}- 

23. [r] Brahmalok deh stlia das nor ti{I]tol wansa bar | amba [go]h [da]- 

24. [s| nor [ad ]iccawansa | ambo’ goh [das no]r wansa (kur) . . 6 ma ta[w] 

25. pdey (b)....7 d(a@)fi® i de[h® sd]as smin dha(r)mmaraja dey din 
Po[k]am=ma [i]- | 

26, [mo]’ Arimad[danapir]......%(m)™ tarley arahan gumlunt ut [ku] 

24. [pn]afi [ca]tu(ranga) .... (jifijun) paficaprasat | de[y] an(ti)l * (si)- 

a Bask ena * (na) [ratna] purhrey gurmlun 1 sgo’ [muddh]abhi- 


ee eae . (As) tmo’ | [deh syu |k [s]as[ana ey 1 deh]... 
Bie tied hase “fetal lupok tinlir tinrah s|]warga ma tmay [na cat 
eee, © > Gen) [sakala sa](twa gurhlun) 1 [deh sluno} ut [apey] 
32. (pant) [sdas smin] (dharmmaraja)..... ey eae eves at? (oath 
lun) 
33, 34. (Illegible.) 
Translation. 


Prosperity! Honour to the Blessed One, the Saint, the Truly Omniscient ! 
In the time of the year 455 of the common era, (being a). Mrigasiras 
eas ....(on the....th) of (1.3) the waxing (half) of the. month of 


vil may have °7. 3 Or msiin. 3 VII probably has goh. 

4 The parts in square brackets in the first half of this line have been restored from VII with the help 
of the other inscriptions. It is here (and in the second half of |. 20) that the break in VI occurs (§ 44). 

§ It is very doubtful whether dirdas should be supplied : on the one hand, VI has a lot of space to 
spare at the end of I. 20; on the other, the word is not in VII and the spare space may be due merely to the 
presence of the group of subscript letters in skindam diz just above. 

8 It is not clear whether what precedes is one word or two: it looks rather like .Aumbdy (or tuthbdy) 
but. the last half is very doubtful: Possibly it represents the proper name of the family of the king’s mother, 
in which case I am unable to identify it. If it is a descriptive, I cannot attach a meaning to it. 

7 The missing word may be monosyllabic or dissyllabic, The final seems to be 2. 

8 Or possibly dui. 3 There is perhaps an original flaw here. 

10 There may be an original flaw here, so that it is impossible to say exactly how much is missing. 
ii This final letter may possibly be p, Over the preceding unidentifiable consonant there is a mark 
which may be a superscript 7. _ 12 Or antul, perhaps. 
13 The restoration of si- at the end of L, 27 is conjectural, but probable: cf. 1C 12, HEC 13. 
14 The misging words must have been something like ma Ain lak or ma cincon. | 
18 Probably one should supply something like ma nuk prak sarwwasatwa, Cf. V 43. 


phia Birmanica No, VI. Votume I, Pate XIV. 


AN INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME. 
(BOTTOM HALF) 


4 2 ane = > 


20 | aot 


: 26 
28 
30 


32 


PART It] | MON INSCRIPTIONS 151 


(Srawan P), the day (being a) Friday, Uttaraphalguni (being) the lunar mansion, 
(and) Virgo (being) on the eastern horizon, the king of the Law? issued*® an 
order to write down the full number of his virtues so that all men might under- 
stand (them). | 

Prosperity! Honour to Buddha! Honour tothe Law! Honour (1. 7) to the 
Church!* The brilliant Sakyamuni, who has compassion upon all beings, 
the lion who is the most exalted of all beings, thus showed forth the origin of the 
king 5 

It was once upon a time when the Lerd Buddha was dwelling in the 
Jetawanamahawihar,® (that) the Lord Buddha (I. 11) smiled. At that time, 
from my lord’s eyeteeth rays of six colours issued forth (and) went...... ia 
and then they (entered ?) my lord’s mouth again. At that time the Lord Ananda, 
(1. 14) seeing this miracle, raised and joined his hands,’ (and) asked (about) the 
laughter. . .. . of the Lord Buddha. 


Then the Lord Buddha spake to the Lord Ananda thus: “ Ananda, hereafter 
a sage named Bisni, possessing the five transcendental faculties, (1. 18) together 
with my son Gawarpati, and King In, and Bissukarmmadewaput, and Kata- 
karmmanagaraja, shall build a city called Sri Ksetra; and after that, the sage 
Bisnii shall depart from that state of a he (Il. 21) shall go up into 
existence in Brahmalok. 

“ When my religion shall have attained one thousand six hundred and thirty 
years, he shall depart from Brahmalok; he shall come into existence {as the 
scion) of two families: his father shall be (1. 24) of the Solar line, his mother of a 
..... family that dwells within. ..... .. (of) bamboo.? He shall become 
king of the Law in the city of Pokam, that is (otherwise) named Arimaddanapir 


1 Cf,1G3trn, ILA ws, 2 The rendering is inferred from the context. 

3 This rendering conveys the sense and purport of the original, but rather evades its difficulties. It is 
not quite clear to me whether ma refers to guna or abhipray. If one should read san, presumably the 
meaning would be somewhat emphasized (“his excellent virtues”), but otherwise much the same. {[t is 
possible to interpret giza as “‘ good deeds,” rather than “ good qualities” merely; but that change would not 
seriously affect the sense, 

+ VII omits these ejaculations, * ChIA 2-3. 

6 See l A 16 tr.n., and for the passage generally cf, 1 A 13-36, II! B 2—C 26. 

7 In respectful address, venerating Buddha. Cf. I A 26, III B 21-22, 

8 VII merely has “ from thence,” and perhaps that is also the reading of VI. 

* It is unfortunate that the passage relating to the king’s maternal descent is blurred. From VIII B 16 
it appears that.she was of the Vilva line, so named from a certain fruit of that name (L.M. 27, * Bengal 
quince’), The reference to “ bamboo” here is obscure, and even the rendering may be doubtful. Can 
there have been some confusion in the draftsman’s mind between beluva (the 07 fruit) and venu, velu, 
“bamboo”? It seems hardly likely ; but I can offer no definite explanation of the passage. 


152 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. 1 


ere a ee all the Saints } together with all (I. 27) the army, of the four arms,” 

© (the pillars ?) of (his) paicaprasada,' Upon a throne (adorned 
with 2) all (sorts of) noble gems, he shall receive the anointing of the head 
oe ee ee ew eee oe « (2 Seat Of ?) stone.© He shall uphold ® my religion. He 
eee eae SS ee shall draw open the bar of the gate of Heaven, which 
is made of gems (I.31)....... . (for ?) all (manner of) beings. He shall 
empty all the (four?) Apay.? He shall be aking (of the Law, who shall redeem 
and save all beings ?).” | 


No. VII. 


ANOTHER INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, 
PROME. 


Descriptive Account. 


48. This inscription is engraved on one side of a large stone slab. One 
ink-impression of it was sent to me, but no photograph. The spacé formerly 
occupied by lettering on the stone, as measured on the impression, is 5 ft. 
1 in. in height by 3ft. 11 in. in breadth; the letters are in shape like those of 
the preceding records, their normal height is about 2 in., letter ¢ is about ? in. 
broad, and the interlinear space is normally 1 in. The fsseripicn is in a most 
deplorable condition and would hardly be legible at all if it were not for the 
help afforded by No. VI and the other records. The first dozen lines or so 
are more or less decipherable with that help, but even these are badly weathered 
and damaged, while below them the whole central part of the inscription 2ppears 
to have flaked off and has perished irretrievably. [n this part only the beginnings 
of some of the lines and the ends of a few are dimly discernible and towards the 
bottom nothing whatever can be read, except perhaps here and there an isolated 
and doubtfully decipherable letter or two, What is legible of this record agrees 
substantially with the text of No. VI so far as the latter extends; the few trifling 
variants have been given in the notes appended to the latter text. Of the 


1 That is, the Buddhist monks, 

2 The reading is doubtful but probable ; if correct, it referstothe traditional four divisions of an Indian 
army (horse, foot, elephants, and chariots, as exemplified in the old form of chess, the original war game), 

3 The gap here and in the preceding line makes it impossible to give acontinuous rendering, but it 
seems likely that the meaning of the passage is that the clergy and the army are to be the supports of the 
king’s throne, figuratively speaking. + See ll] Crrtr.n. 

5 Owing to the lacuna, it is not clear whether this refers to the same stone as III C 13, but it seems 
likely, [t would appear that in the ceremony of anointment the king sat upon a special stone, 

6 See 1 A 36 tr. n. 7 Cf, 1 D 37, 111-C 20-1. 

8 Conjectural: cf. V 43. Then follow two quite illegible lines, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS | 153 


remainder no continuous restoration can be attempted. Lines 1-13 cover the 
same ground as Il, 1-30 of No. VI to the word Jupok (inclusive). The legible 
portions of the rest are as follows (doubtful parts being in parentheses) :— 

14. tinlir tinran swarga ma tmiy na (rat), “ the bar of the gate of Heaven, 
which is made of gews”; u(16)¢ mahdjan gumlun, “all the people” (or “all 


mankind”); 17. ...1 wf, “all”; 18 .... (wom), “is” (or “ was”); 20 
(x moy), “one”; 21. (’ dey dan Arimaddanapir), ‘in the city. of Pagan”; 23. 
(.n gohs@....), “that... ."; (end) ...%..;24... (dey rajasthan), 


“in the palace”; 25, (end)... . skak sak upadrow| sgir (26) tinhir na Buddha - 
(dharmma sangha), ‘shall be frée from calamity ; shall shine with (the grace 


of) Buddha, the Law, and the Church ”; i a ee . 4. + (vatna trey), “the 
Precious Gems”; 28. (towards the end) mrbbdn....... Cl) rea eer 
. | row goh (29) (Ayah Buddha), ‘Nirvana. .... HAVER? so -0 5. eel . Thus, 


did the Lord Buddha” (presumably we should add “ prophesy,” in which case 
this would be the end of the Buddha’s prophecy concerning the king in this version, 
corresponding generally with I A 36 and [II C 24);' 29. (near the end) (ma 


das smin ps iol. ee ae ee , “ who is a.king of the Law ”; 31. 
(end)... - (didap) . ee bday ; 93-(end) ....3. (gurlun) smth (tin), 
CAND ss eels Os princes come.’ “lines 34-8 are altogether illegible. 


40; Apart from a few words near the beginning which have helped to fill 
up gaps in the text of No. VI, No. VII owing to its bad state of preservation has 
been entirely useless for my purpose. 


No. VIII. 


A THIRD INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE ‘SHWESANDAW Pacopa, 
PROME, 


Descriptive Account. 

_ 30. Next to the great Shwezigén inscription (No. 1), this is perhaps the most 
interesting of the early records and it is much to be regretted that it has only 
come down to us in its present fragmentary and dilapidated condition, An ink- 
impression of it was sent to me. several years ago at the same time as one of 
No. VI and before I had become acquainted with No. VII :. consequently No. VIII 
has been previously mentioned as the second of the Shwesandaw inscriptions and 
is thus referred to in several Reports of the Superintendent, Archaeological 
Survey, Burma (viz. 1911, p.20; 1912, p. 15; 1916, pp. 21-2), and in ¥.£.4.8., 


154 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von 1 


1910, pp. 796-812. The inscription is engraved .on both sides of a large stone 
slab, but the beginning is missing and must have been on some other stone 
(conceivably it is No. V1); and the end, if it is on our stone (which is doubtful) is 
unfortunately quite illegible. It is not even absolutely certain which of the two 
faces precedes the other: the ends of both are more or less obliterated and there- 
fore their connexion is by-no means clear. However, | am disposed to think 
that what I have called Face A precedes the other face. The former is the 
better preserved, though much is lost, especially the beginnings of several of the 
earlier lines. Face B is throughout in a deplorably bad state and becomes 
absolutely undecipherable towards the end. Two sets of ink-impressions of this 
record were sent to me, together with photographs of one set: The lettering on 
both faces is bordered as in No. V by a line, which in this case also forms a flat 
curve at the top of the inscription. The space covered by lettering on either 
face is in height 4 ft. 1 in., in extreme breadth 4 ft. The letters do not differ in 
shape materially from those of the preceding inscriptions, their normal height is 
 in., letter fis Zin. to % in. in length, and the interlinear space is 1 in. 


51. From what remains of this inscription it may be presumed that it belonged 
to the group of records which represent the less extensive version of the 
Kyansittha legend. Buddha’s prophecy is mentioned in B 14, in B 22 Gawarhpati 
is made to exhort Bisni, while in B 24 Indra, accompanied by the celestial archi- 
tect and the Naga king, invites the sage to take up the burden of his glorious 
destiny. In this detail the record differs from the preceding ones: nothing is said 
elsewhere of Indra being accompanied on this occasion by these two minor 
personages. But the chief interest. of the inscription lies elsewhere, namely in 
the enumeration of King Kyansittha’s achievements as king at Pagan. Herein 
are to be specially noted the erection of a building, presumably of a- sacred 
character (A 1-2), the revision of the Buddhist Canon (A 3), the mission to India 
with funds for the restoration and endowment of the temple at Bodh Gaya (A 4-8: 
and see § 24), liberality to the monks (A 8-9), relations with other princes and 
in particular with a certain “ Coli” prince (§ 24), whom the king claims to have 
converted to Buddhism (A 10-4) and whoinreturn appears to have come to do 
obeisance in great state, bringing (as it would seem) a number of magnificent 
presents and one of his daughters for the king’s acceptance (A 15-6). This episode 
is followed in the record by details of the offerings made by the people of Pagan 
and its neighbourhood on festive occasions of a religious character, and stress is laid 
here (as in some of the other inscriptions) on the fact that the king himself delivered 


PART II} MON INSCRIPTIONS 155 


didactic addresses to his subjects, who appreciated them highly (A 24- 5: c. TE 
10¢4, II] C-22-4). The greater part of the remainder of the record appears to deal 
with religious festivals, but much of it is unfortunately almost illegible. In B 2-5 
there is an interesting passage illustrating, as it would appear, the Buddhist 
doctrine of kindness to animals. Much of it is undecipherable, but it seems that 
certain birds were the objects of the king’s special favour and enjoyed his protec- 
tion, while from B 8-9 it may be inferred that animals in general were secured 
generous treatment and somie provision of food. A strong tinge of ethical and 
religious sentiment pervades the inscription, blending curiously with the monarch’s 
laudation of himself and his performances. 
52. In B 15~21 there is a set of Pali versés, in thé celine nd interpretation 
of which Professor Duroiselle has been kind enough to give me his valuable. 
assistance. They amount to a brief panegyric on the king and specially mention 
his paternal and maternal descent (cf. VI 23-5 and § 46). In explanation of the 
epithet of the king’s mother, referring to her ancestry, Duroiselle sent me the 
following abstract of the Burmese legend on the subject :—‘‘ King Anoratha was 
not féeling satisfied with only the mother of Sawlu as his Chief Queen, so he sent 
a minister to Vesali, the modern Besarh in India. Now the king of Vesali had 
seven daughters ; the eldest became a nun. . One day, she planted a di/va tree; in 
due course it hore fruits, one of which was as big as a Pegu j jar. A girl was born 
from it, whom the nun made over to the king ; the latter called the child Ruciya- 
pabhavati. He gave her in marriage to the upartija (whether the latter was his 
brother or his son is not made clear).! From this union was born’a child who 
was named Paficakalyani. It was Paficakalyani whom Anoratha’s minister asked 
or” (on his royal master’s behalf). The rest of the story, in a slightly variant 
version, has. been briefly abstracted in § 23. It only remains to be noted 
that there are various little differences in detail between the two, which however 
are not material to our purpose. Students of folklore will.be familiar with the 
theme of the birth of a child from a-vegetable substance (a few instances of which 
have been collected inthe Notes to Winstedt and Blagden’s Malay Reader (1917), 
pp. 182-3). It is a widespread legend and jis probably of totemistic origin: 
families took their names from particular plants, held them in reverence, and 
imagined themselves to be ‘descended from them. ‘It is, no doubt, possible that 
the legend of this particular miraculous birth was invented, as Duroiselle suggests, 
by King Kyansittha himself in order that in spite of the doubts cast on his 


1 Apparently he was alleged to be the son: see the Report? cited in the following note. 


156 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1 


paternity he might still be considered as a man of no common birth. But to me 
that sounds a less probable explanation. . Duroiselle adds that it is clear from his 
stone portrait in the Ananda temple that he was not a pure Burman; and there 
seems, therefore, no reason to doubt that he had an Indian mother, whoever his 
father may have been.’ 

53. It does not appear from what is left of this record whether it was made 
to commemorate any special occasion or was merely a royal panegyric engraved 
for general information. Nor is there any precise evidence as to its date. The 
proper names call for no particular remark. From the linguistic point of view 
the record is not without: value, as it contributes a few interesting forms; but its 
dilapidated condition has very seriously impaired -its utility in that respect. It 
concludes the important group of inscriptions which embody the royal legend of 
Kyansittha. 


Text. 


A 


,. . (smin) [Sri] Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja goh pa tiy da goh ma 

fin kindarh Nirbbana(m)élabajr(apa)r(yamahawihar) 

Dore eaia! i re ee ee ee ‘dey sthan Jayabhami ma taw boy esan din 
Poks[m]-ma imo’ [Arimad ]da[nap Jar! goh ci smi [c-an] 

3. [sak das smoh] (kur) ® [1 blah] goh ya pitak trey pi wo’ ma lif dindan 
{ar goh! fiijn [t ]i[n] pko(m * jurnwan)® [cu]ah t[n] 1 (goh ci) | 

4. [smin c-an sak das] smoh kurh i blah goh yah kyak trey Sri Bajras (pi) 
tr(u)k bla(n) ® p[l ii (mJan smin [c-An] k ...s7... ika® goh (1 smin) 


1 The chronicles of Arakan, however, appear to prove that the Vesali in question was in that country, 
not in India proper, and that if Kyansittha had Indian blood in his veins he derived it indirectly, through 
an Arakanese mother ; .and, further, that the scandal as to his doubtful legitimacy has no historical founda- 
tion (Report of the Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, Burma, 1918, paras. 39, 40). 

2 The last part of this proper name is very doubtful, wihkar being entirely conjectural. 

3 This phrase is conjecturally restored on the strength of the other passages where it is clearly legible. 
The only real doubt is as to the particle kv, which may not be needed if the phrase occurs hére for the 
first time. 

4 The final letter might be /. 

5 Very doubtful, though it seems a tenable reading. 

6 The reading is doubtful, the word looks rather like blah, which can hardly be right here. 

7 Looks like adas, Cf..V 45. 

& Looks like patiéd, though the first consonant might be m and the second possibly ch. 


igraphia Birmanica No. VIII. Voctume 1, Pate XV. 


A THIRD INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME. 


“PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 157 


5. [Sri ‘Tribhuwanadi |tyadhammaraja ‘goh ket ra[tnja ma kah moy ee 
p(u)ndon? kbaa (ar) or kindamh [t]rey Sri Bajras b{Iah [1] ra[A] . 
6... .. (kir kurmba)r? 1 (k)inda(p)? t[i bra’ 1 [k]i[n]darm [t]imbin 1 or con 
-_pnan edow sak k(u)I1* plit 1 kil pha[rn] klo’ (twija tw[i]k jfijajeh [rinleh] 
khis (tin nor)5 | 

7. (tlar®1 goh ci) [smi}i c[-an| sa[k] das [s]moh [k Juri blah goh yan maha- 
(w)a(tth)u? ma smih Dharmmasok kindarh ma Leiorel) rlim aut 
ta] goh 18min Sri Tri[bh Jul wanadi}- | 

8. [tyadhammaraja] gol t(u)n ® kindarh tumi t(i)n? khis nor tlar goh ci smin 

c-an sak das smoh kum blah [gol] u ut tarley eaipha ma taw dey (dia 
Ari)- 

g. (maddanapir goh)” (smi]n Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja [gol] pureh 4 
na paccey pan prakar dida[p] dl’ | gol ci smin c-4h sak das smoh 
kum [b]lah (go)- | 

10. (h)® . tae eee ee 22 [man] smih gurblin ran tlan ci s(b)ak ¥ 
ee a ‘drwifl 7 kal] goh [sm]in Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja 
rmin smin Co[l]i deh cup (P)o- - : 

ges tiiy da)* [1] goh ma smif bicarana mey wie] nor [ra]tna [pi] wo’ 
{ci] snom ¢-4n moy [da] ma sda{s] kil si[r]s(t) )k 7 jurhnok [de]y lo[k] 
ae 

12. (lok) . gcd (nJirbban ku. sat{wa] g gunman ci kah sa[k] 1 yan ratna. 
pi wo’ com ma das kili[go]h ma smia (sal gun Blulddharatin}ay 
dha[r]mmaratna | sa[ngha|lrat{na] (dey) | 


1 Possibly (but in that case incorrectly) pando. 

2 Merely conjectural and quite probably wrong, though the final consonant seems to be’ certain. There 
isa great difficulty about restoring the effaced beginnings and ends of these lines because in this part of 
the inscription the bordering line is not.visible, so that as it is a curve here one ‘cannot be sure how much_ 
space is to be allowed for, 


3 Conjectural, possibly bivdap ; kindem seems improbable 4 Or (less correctly) £i/. 

® These two words are somewhat conjectural. ; 8 Merely conjectural. 

1 Or makddhitu (perhaps written mahddhétthu), which seems about.equally probable, 

8 Conceivably tén, The initial consonant is also damaged, - 9 Almost certainly tam, not fun, 


10 The. preceding words (in parentheses) are merely conjectural. 
1 Or putareh, There is a-mark which may stand forthe avusvdva or may be the result of subse- 
quent damage. 12 Merely conjectural. 
13 { cannot’ restore the last of these missing words, the medial consonant appears to be a subscript 
& (or #), the final either v or’, The passage probably refers to delegations from vassal or foreign princes. 
14 Probable, though it might possibly be read sjaé. 
15 |.uoks like bait, probably on account of subsequent damage. 
18 Purely conjectural, 17 Conceivably, but improbably, strsu, 18 Conjectural. 
19 whe missing words (of which the last appears to end i in 2 of w) probably meant something like 
“ give. 
2! 


158 | _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vo. 1 


13. (sla tha)r? [na].(dak)® [hingu]]* tay [1] smin pundon ar kil ku smin Colit 
smin Coli ku ut bal (dJe[h] rmi[A] gun Buddha iaiertat)oue sa[n]eha 
[man smin [Sri-Tribhuwa] | 
14. [nadityadhammaraja pundon] go[h c]i [i] dfe]k dufull. ewalp mJic[cha }- 
dris deh cap: boy sah ele miuleh t {deh isc. a goh deh 
i Baits gap~pulmas] (i) | 
ihe ial oath ee a athe [bitan bey fk] kal[plablrjiksa rma: t{maly na 
" gattaratria © ku ko[n] lw[at] deh kum moy ma duk tps ku rap] ku 
[k]irya [m]a-ka{h moy] | : 
: [prakar ma dindar ku tdun bhofmjan [t]dua (may (r)inraa? ‘mayar 
{m]a fin] la[k] na sattaratna 1 tli[n pa. pjajaw smin Sti (T}ei[bhu}- ) 
_ wanadit[y Jadhammari[ja] | goh [c]i [smin c-an] | 
. [sak das] g[o’ smoh k]um ul gfoh] ya[n pja[jaw] fiah dan [Ala(h] ras **. 
 fiah grfip® g]uml(u)[® boy samarttha]” fah ta Lg}oh kum kurh 1 
nom [m]a [pa}jaw td(u)a™ [tha]r (tdun sra)-* | 
. [fi bitan thar dinday thlar (na) [tinl]a[y th]ar pnik rihjalr als(thjar (thar — 
[d]indap jun thar sinlufk] jul] thar si(nd)i® 4 thar Elon [jnju ([th]ar . 
: ui [jadisin thar chu k:lpabriksa] °. | 
1g.-. . . [prasa](d1) [rip ciji rip [mfijah [Jap] dewatha rip ki[n]dok [m]a 
: “kal mo[y] pf{rja[k]ar ma [deJh kindarh na thar ma deh cificon na 
: ratna dumpohi [g]lua [pha]r ma (fiah) 2. 2s. | 
go: .. (pa) [pajaw] 1 [ul gloh p[n]aa dula{i: pk]Aw thar Kiet tfrhim] * 
|  ietblar [Haim didap’ kal oe Bia alk] sirgut [nJan ruft] goh 
| [tdun pkaw] tdun [glil(k) ya 
ae (cas) [tap] (cir) e(u)p mursiin Felake' hs kil Jat tap k[lath aera 
_) .. moy tap ci glun phar wel [mJan fia(h] | pa Lass E ka[] gloh c(i} 
| [jmar] gurhl(u)h” elk]e[m] (ku)"* Se ee 


wes od 


ioe) 


1 The Dred preceding words beter the letter v) are ail and very doubtful. 

2 Conjectural; but it seems probable, the final looks like & (but asi be ¢, or something else). 

3 Possibly hangul, The form is rather doubtful. 

§ The final seems certain, but the rest might be read ha, tha, tay 0 or ca; and there are other possibili- 
ties. 

5 The last few letters of this illegible part may be # bley, but’ even these are doubtful. 

6 A small circle over the ¢t is assumed to be not original; but if it is we must read sattam ratna, 
aebere appears to be no such circle over the word in the next line, 


7 Possibly dinrun, 8 Conceivably, but improhbably, grusp. 9 Possibly gumlin, 
10 The + is extremely doubtful. 1 Possibly td:i2. 12 Purely conjectural, 
18 The middle consonants may conceivably (though improbably) be 22 or rz, 
14 Conceivably lirnim., 15 Very doubtful. 


16 Very doubtful. The initial looks as if it might be ch. 
17 Possibly gumliiz, 18 The & might bez. The next letter after this syllable looks like 4 or p. 


PART It] MON INSCRIPTIONS 189 


Ce ee, [pkaw] (du) . .....[h? t]lua pa paijaw smin 1 kseh ci 
$a | ya] row rip fda guml(u)n * lah rip pee dewataw. 
Be * Jah [m]anus [gum]lua [ki}nda[rm don] ‘ : | 

O8. ov aw 28 (deh lop]® ri[nle]h jifijeh pa pajaw smin t.[ul got) y yan. 


row iifich cei [m]a [das ja[p] dan j jap ras jap] twai jap fiah 
[grip] (gumn)- 

24. (lun) [1 deh]... .7 [tlun rinleh jifijjeh pa pijaw smin dida[p kal ‘kal 
smi[n dijnd(u)* bi{ntjon mahajan guml(u)h * (na) krLujmn dhar[mm]a 
cil yan Hein ses mahaja- 

2s. [n gurhlun]. Pa pnan pkaw [binka] ci row 
brey ‘atk: ma gir [leJurh [sak] sirgi[t] nani [ylanh fiah ma pijaw 
ki(ry)a " (thar) [sr](afi glun)® 

26. (phar wel) ™ [1 jifijeh rinleh bulah sJat ® [m]Ja [nom yumyum] ci[r]cas 
bi[rha]r cwa{s kirlarn] li[rnim * mJa jin= =p(a)n” ku s[m]ia ci glufn] 
phar 1 [yan m]anus lah sa[t]*® (c-an) 


am, Ua wie det oc oe oes 28 [smin cut] dak kil dafn yurhyum] el 
kal ci glun phar | kah moy lh(i)m* kah bar In(i)m * [sak] go’ na 
-_(slros) ee are 

Bg ge a ey, So : Ss [goK(h | yan) row pun=dan frst smin [pa _ 


baal kyak lah Uiileta ceti lah kindarh bihar lah kir kurnbar lah til 
_ afram lah] (deh) ®. 
i. ae ee ee “a sail satwa gu(mlu)a % of tit [blab] no[r sans]ar 
calm] ul goh jap d[aja lisp ras jap eral jap] (fah grip) * 


1 Looks like an, 3 The last of “we missing words may be Hah, or possibly rinleh. 
3 Conceivably gumlii2, 1 Looks rather.like doi, but the marks underneath may be accidental. 
5 The first of these missing syllables looks rather like rap, but this is very doubtful and the rest is 


obscure. 


6 Looks like vamldp or rilip, but probably lopisright. 7 Possibly one might restore lop here, 

8 Perhaps dindi, 9 Perhaps gumlin. 

10 Doubtful, but I can suggest no suitable alternative. ‘ 

11 The obscure passage probably began with ma pijaw. 1% Almost certain, 13 Quite conjectural, 


11 The two preceding words are not quite certain. 

15 Possibly satwa (which one would ExpME)S ; but there Seeins to be a v#rima and perhaps the marks 
under the ¢.are merely accidental. 

16 Conceivably lirzim. 17 Perhaps atl 18 Or satwa, 

19 The preceding words are very doubtful. ‘0 Perhaps (but improbably) inim. 

21 The ! and the final s are particularly doubtful. 

22 Somewhere near the end of the last line one would expect girl, or the like, but I cannot fill up 
the blank. 23 Extremely doubtful. 

21 Doubtful: the spelling is unusual, and —- there is'a mark over the gu which may stand for the 
anusvara, but it may on the other hand be merely accidental. 

%s Conjectura!, 


1G: EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 2 Fwoter” 


Ro, (ottmliit) key sere k i wh ae a (d)[on ti] ....° kraw “ise ificim 
ambo’ amba’ pa] pun kil da[n man sil sak] - ambay) eae arr es e 


B 
(or kraw® ' majan) gol ur [sgo’ si Jr{sak dey lok prt ice on . 


Be (nisbban)* oe fah kraw aa] kal (ovo")® [ia} . aes a 
d[njah d[irha}t [m]e[trici}t ee ee ear gee 
3.-OJ...-. 2..." [gjufrhtun boy] rac boy ira boy] afjasthan] ci 
[sak deh] d[ow] (fiah)™ 2... 2.) 

Bike a Pe MCI SQ) Pattee) ci { dje[h MOnE : d[a}n_ taw han n ginrop 
ne ce [smi]a snr plolt t]aw [na] te[y] we(| kirlo’)® . .. . (ti)- 
a‘ [go]h smin kil . forte . (im)o’ ® kificem dharmma | ul goh 


of fiah gumhlun] lofp tlulb blok [pk](aw dirkas)” .. ’ 
6... (rmin)” [binru phjam (s- a a. (goh™ mirmoy my kos. bial og 
_ (mirmoy) re ee alge y dJe(h] (drep WAR ses aches 23 


| 7. [blah] (ak ah na taw) a8 5 [int smin | k]a[l sma ‘cut dak k{las] thar : 
ty [deh]. ® ar [kJo[m] k[u| pkaw (thar “ fiaty goh tiy)® ... 


F Quite conjectural, except for the’final letter, which seems pretty certain.” 
2 The last of the missing syllables looks like ka or ta, 
3 The last of the missing syllables may be fick, 
4 Not certain, but: probable, 
5 The first two words arc extremely doubtful, except the second +, 
8 Very doubtful. 7 Extremely doubtful. 
8 The demonstrative seems uncalled for and I doubt the reading. Possibly it should be eos ' 
‘9 Possibly we should read Fp, but I cannot restore the rest of the passage.” 
10 Possibly the first of the missing words is kiticem. 


1! Very doubtful, © =. 12: The vowel is very doubtful. 

13 The vowel is- doubtful, |The next letter seems to bé A, but is also sieeueis doubtful. 
44 Or tlun. © 

15 Very doubtful. The word looks like tadez, or £adei. 16 Very doubtful, 


17 The beginning of this word (at the end of the preceding line) is conjectural and seems very doubtful, 
. 18 Possibly po’, Buti imo’ seems more likely. 

Very doubtful. as. 2% Doubtful. 

21 Possibly pear.” oe. 22 Very doubtful. 

23 Not quite certaiti, but probable, The same applies to the subsequent numerals. ‘The short 

legible words following the second pair must be words of distance. presumably. 

24 Conceivably prép, but drep seems right. 

.25. The four. preceding. words are more or less conjectural. 

26 The missing word seems to end in df or.aé, But even the preceding word is father. doubtful. 

27 Very doubtful, 8 The Tast three words are extremely doubtful, 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 161 


8. (ca eli 2 2 wat . [ely(@)[ay . oi jap)? (dijda[p they smih myi]! 
[a]bhipray Uk] basi gurila)a (t)i(rmaw)® [sat=tiracchan] (ci) ® 
g. (sadik curtiay? ars woe ce LEE -das] ~ Mag ee ..[k] (ci 1 ut) [goh 
smin k]il (anufiap ® kil) pan ci ee imo[’ dharmma]. . 


Late sw wee OU ed eee Se we RAY we & ~ [pkaw dipkas | ne « = 
foppail guroluln ci deh pkaw sak idyay ™-nor antul pkaw|. :. .. 

tt, [deh]... ice ele ee oie eee. 2h (tnar)® [diticam] OST ns es 
(tnar)"® a tain agt (1) [ue (chu ® dus). va 28 [gurblual (ci)? 
[deh pkaw] . a ae as ee, 

1Best ie a's eg ao pla ie ne nee . (nom) [ku] (mirmal) 
_ [sace= =chu ta sar ‘rom tn ioe ras S (mal mnip=pate™® | a ee 
TAR EC ies a ee 


ot i a Ce ee: S * 8 . « Ys « 


. 29 [oja ras tli ilnok: deh» a das kal ine (¢irdas) Font $1 
--Tribhuwanadi} ies 
14. [tyadhammaraja man kyak Buddha tarley byades la UF . "Tsmia} 
| ‘c-an [sak] das sae ao [dey dun Pokam=ma a Arima]- 


1 The pressifing looks hed ca lib, which seems jniprobablé. 

“a Quite doubtful, 8 Looks like bi2, which ‘may. ‘be intended. . 4. Bethanag gumlin, 

5 Very doubtful. . ‘The initial may be, the supposed: m fay be. an. accidental -mark, and even the 7 
might be d, 
te Doubtful ; and if correct, perhaps only the beginning of a word 

“T These two words are very doubtful. ~ 

~ 8 Rather conjectural. The first two syllables might be roel dan only ove is no vtrama, 
9. ‘Presumably dhaymma is only the first element’of some compound word,. 

10. Extremely doubtful. 1 ‘€onceivably piryam t.. Or the m.might be ap. 

7 12 Possibly the last. of the missing words is dumpok (which would be an unusual but quite possible 
spelling). 

13 This ‘word, though apparently occurring thrice i in this line, remains somewhat doubtful. 

14 In view of dificam, and the possible reading drimpoh, in this line, one is tempted to assume here the 
equivalent of “nine” (L.M. dacit), Unfortunately the E.M. form of this numeral does not appear in any of 
the preceding inscriptions, and the word here is not ‘legible. Tt might conceivably be read cieuc, which 
‘seems an unlikely form, | . 

15 Very doubtful, Possibly, though less probably, xa. 

16 Probably this stands for c-ii7, IT Very doubtful, 

18 The last letter i is not quite certain and therefore doubt also attaches to the stop that is Supposed to 
follow. 

19 In the missing part a few letters are more or less doubtfully decipherable, but as ier do not form 
recognizable words one cannot be guite sure of them, 

% It is doubtful whether there is anything here, even a stop: the space might be accounted for by the 
tail of theo in oj@, above. But possibly some short word like ma should be read. 

al Conceivably one might read ma das, perhaps as ded by a stop. 


G2. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ; [VoL t 


15. [ddanapir goh] (ni)d(an) fi(in)’ ..... [row wo’ « o] «* bly}a[kato 
dhammarajejna 1 [satthu]na teas iyo Sri Tribhuvana- 
dityadhammara}- 

16, [ja ti ndmalko » o » (v)e[lubabbannaja* mata | pits adiccavansajo 1] 
_dvifhi vanse|hi[nibhito 1 dhammaraja]‘........ (won) ® 
19... ses » [pufifio: dinamhi balava]® ...:.....4.. +7 ()® [ananta- 
bhogasarmpujnno 1 [kotthagara anappako] » o uw [tejaJsi.... 

moa ee A ve ewe 

18... .... [yaso | sarfifiamarajadhammesu | appam Jatto Aastha 


Ts os + cat Jursaigahadhammehi pl tavaris CaM wa nO) o> 
JH 


19. ss e's oe (I) [ratanattayamamako tor}. e.... [deva] eee 
[| pajasakkara] . ..... [no 1 sarhpunno raja-iddhihi 1]... ...... 


OO; sex ¥ (0 wo [EMA! Ss ce pete a i oa . . [naradhipo 
o» Arimaddanasanjkh[ate | Pokame nagaruttame!] ........ 


ie Sako ee = 


eo eh REE eS Ae oe LEDS AeA are | a 
. vee te 1 De + be SO Som [i ee" 


MGS octets « (k)[ind](am din)” ...... (blah tirley) Gaivarhpati 
gah ku risi, Bisnt row wo’ 1 ma man kyak Buddha’ byades Raley 


4 


23. (smin thecmnaialle oa: ci cmat] (da tirley sacea) ® [yo 1] alton) " 
[kurn ci dah hues (ea). aid sakala .satwa gumlun] (ar | 
wirbban) Fe a3. y ex : . 


! These two words seem somewhat doubtful, 
2 At this point begins a set of. Pali sloka verses for the reading and interpretation of which (so far 
as it is at all possible) | am very much indebted to Professor Duroiselle, . 
3 Duroiselle reads . be/uvabbannaja, 4 The next two syllables might be maka. 
5 Quite illegibie, but inserted on the analogy of the other verses where it occurs. 
6 The preceding words are so read by Duroiselle; personally I am unable to recognize them, 
7 Somewhere in this obliterated passage Durciselle reads me syllable no, 
8 The stop is doubtful, but seems te be required, 
¥ Here too a stop seems to be required, though none is adiually visible. The first part of the preceding 
obliterated passage looks like fidzassa. ; 
10 Duroiselle explains this as being for razijeti. 
11 Somewhere in the obliterated passage Duroiselle reads so sada, 1 cannot find it in my impressions 
and do not know whether it comes directly after raijati or in the next verse, 
12 End of the Pali verses, 13 Very doubtful. 1) Perhaps we should read sdas, 
15 Very doubtful. . 16 Conjectural, 1 Almost certain, 18 Very doubtful. 


yraphia Birmanica No. VIII. Votume I, Prate XVI. 


A THIRD INSCRIPTION FOUND AT THE SHWESANDAW PAGODA, PROME. 


Gs Gan a or: 


SOV 


= = 


Ps Ay - 
ethan mish 


é 


aie * 
f Y ver enatia 
Soi Sia Lee 
i . } ene vite 
% gh Gti 


yoac cages Sei x 
mete pea prr@en eater 

OT a eS 

ence: Pier ete itelh a Phe na ®. 


eat oP ppoctien Ry 


e 7 eo = <," 
.: pu = agi ce iA 
‘ i per Nar 


MN 


ee ee eee 


PART 11] _ MON INSCRIPTIONS 163 


24.. (ktir dharmimaraja) ... .’ (pi) [dirdas daij....... [ti]. 
we eee ee ee ee « [kal goh smin In 1 Bissukarmmadewaput | 
Katakarmmanagaraja | * 

25. (tin yuk) [sumbup tey] (Imor)....... .% (1) [kal goh risi Bisnd] 
(rmi)[h niman goh PAN) (haw ce ee ks Re OR ww ed ‘ 


ee (t) [kal] (ma kydk) 0... ee ee eee eee ees 


eee e?##e 8# © © « @¢#e @© © @ @ © # @ # @ * ®@® @ «© © @ © © © » @' @ @ © #& @ 


Mae ee ee is ', (Nothing more is certainly decipherable 
in this line.) 
a8........... (ci) [smin] .... (The rest is quite uncertain.) 
29, 30. (Nothing legible ; it is not clear how many lines there were originally.) 


Translation. 
A 
: . King Sri Teepe yea area made® (and) then (he) built 
the Nizbbanam@labajraparya (?)- (monastery ?)® «=. 2... 24. .:... on the site 


(named) Jayabhiimi, which is to the north-east of the city of Pagan, that is 
styled Arimaddanapir. In that respect (too ?) no other king (I. 3) is like (him). 
Thereafter, the three holy Pitakas,? which had become obscured, (he) proceeded - 
to collect (and) .purify.2 In that respect, too, no other ming | 1S like (him). There- 
after, (for) the holy temple of Sti Bajras,°® (of) three ). ork ee -(?), ® (which had 


1 Gaiety doubtful. Instead of dharmma?® it is possible that we ‘aught to read das; the word left 
blank may perhaps be /oé, the last letter is probably a & in any case. 

2 These names, which are only partly legible here, can be safely restored by: the help of the preceding 
inscriptions. 

3 Possibly we should restore Sate or yak followed by some short word. The appearance of the text 
rather favours the latter supposition; but it is not clear to me that this request to Bisnii was made in the 
presence of Buddha, to whom the word kydk would be most applicable, though it might. possibly be taken in 
a more general sense. 

_ 4 In this long obliterated passage only a few letters are doubtfully legible, making no recognizable 
words and therefore quite uncertain. The same remark applies to Il. 26-8. 

5 Or “ K.S.T. did ” (whatever was mentioned in the preceding, missing, portion of the text) “ (and) 
thereupon built,” etc. 

© Or temple ”*? See the text and note thereon. 7 The Buddhist Canon. 

8 That is, he caused to be made a revised edition, in view of omissions and corruptions that had 
occurred in the text, or of portions having become so scarce as not to be generally available. Probably the 
former is meant : cf. WIC 15. 

9 The Vajrasana, built on the traditional site where Buddha ee enlightenment, at Bodh Gaya, 

10 The reading is doubtful here: see the text, 


164 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


been) destroyed by other kings ............ (?),) King Sri Tribhuwana- 
dityadhammaraja got (together) jewels of divers kinds (and) sent (them in) a ship 
with intent to build up the holy (temple) of Sri Bajras, to buy (land?) (1. 6)... 


, (to dig a tank ?),? to irrigate (?)° arable land, to make dams,’ in order to burn 
6 


tapers that should never be allowed to go out, to present drums, ........, 
xylophones,® singing (and) dancing, finer (than before ?).” In that respect, too, 
no other king is like (him). Thereafter, the great buildings which King Dharm- 
masok ® built, which (were) old (and) in ruins, King Sti Tribhuw 4nadityadham- 
maraja proceeded to build anew, (making them) finer than before. In that 
respect, too, no other king is like (him). 

Thereafter, all the lords of the Church who dwelt in (the city (1.9) of 
-Arimaddanapir ?)® King Sri oe HbEH Nanadity chamnays presented with” the 
four necessaries " on every occasion.” In that respect, too, no other king is like 
(him). | Thereafter, (many persons... . ?)® from all the princes “ came into 
his presence to attend (him). At that time King Sri Tribhuwan adityadhammaraja 
heard that a Coli prince had arrived (at Pagan ?).” Thereupon the king 
bethought him that apart from the Three Gems there is no other single thing that 
could give great happiness in (this) world {or in the worlds beyond (1. 12), or 
confer ?)'® Nirvana upon all beings: the Three Gems alone can give it. 


1 The reading is doubtful. . 2 "sGonjectaral: 

3 Doubtful ; perhaps, though improbably, “to make.” , 

4ore aimbanliments!? surrounding the several fields, as in the cultivation of rice on irrigated land. 
The evident intent was to create a pertnanent endowment of landed property from the rents or profits of 
which certain of the temple expenses should be defrayed. 

5 The sense of £lo’ is undetermired,* It may be the specific name of some particular type of drum, or 
of some other kind of musical instrument 

© Or “dulcimers”: see Haswell, s.v, fwia teuié, But possibly the term may have been used 
forinerly. for any musical instrument of percussion of a more or less analogous nature. 

* Conjectural, but probable. 

8 Probably the reference isto the great Asoka and the Bodh Gaya temple. But it is arguable that 

‘blah gohk indicates a transition to another subject matter and that the reference is to the legendary King 
Dhammiasoka of Thatén (cf. Sudhammavatirdjavamssa, pp. 13, 48, 110, segq.). 9 Conjectural. 

10 Meaning conjectural, inferred from the context, 

11 Shelter, robes, food, and medicine, the four requisites for a Buddhist monk. 

12 Meaning conjectural. 

“13 Conjectural : there is a lacuna here. Perhaps the reference is to diplomatic inissions only, but it may 

include the coming of private adventurers attracted by the splendour of the king’s court, 

14 Either foreign or vassal princes, or both, 415 Or “to follow in his teain’”’: cf. 1 Cg, tr 

18 Or “the” There is nothing to determine the identity of this prmce, and nothing but the resem- 
blance of his designation to connect him with the great contemporary Dravidian dynasty, of which he may 
have been a member and which at a sligbtly earlier period appears to have extended its warlike expedi- 
tions to the Further East, as recorded in the great Tanjore inscription, 

17 Conjectural, but probable, restoration, 

18 Conjectural restoration. 


PART I] ‘MON INSCRIPTIONS 168 


Then the king wrote of the grace of the Buddharatna, Dharmmaratna, (and) 
-Sangharatna’ (upon a leaf of gold with vermilion ink ?),? the king sent it to the Colf 
prince. The Coli prince, with all his array, hearing of the grace of Buddha, the 
Law, (and) the Church, from King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja’s sending 
(word of it to him), he cast off his adhesion to false doctrine, (and) he adhered 
straightway. to the true dectne; he saw...... ,® he was pleased (and) happy. 
Sak tees (1.15) .. “ (of pearls ?), an awning® of pearls, 
a ialvarles tree ° badomied with the seven (kinds of) jewels,’ together with a virgin 
daughter of his who was perfect in form and with ornaments of divers kinds, who. 
was shaded by a white umbrella, a peacock ® umbrella, a peacock*®..... ae 
set with the seven (kinds of) jewels, (he) came to offer to King Sri Tribhuwana- 
dityadhammaraja. That, too, other kings (1.17) have not got the like of. — 

| Then (?) (there). made offerings all the people of the city, of the country, 
(and) of the jungle, according to their several means also. (Some) there weré. 
that offered golden umbrellas, (silver umbrellas ?), golden. awnings (?), golden 
dinddy™ with golden tracery (?), golden fans, golden mats(?), golden sandals, . 
golden greaves, golden. ...... . ,@ golden paddles (?), golden ‘statues of lions, 
kalpavrhsa trees, 2.255. . (lL. 3) (for the ?) palace, statues of elephants, statues - 
of men, statues of gods, statues of demons, of divers kinds, which they made of gold, 
which they adorned with the seven ae of) jewels, in great quantities which 
(they brought ?) (and) offered ; . 2? altar candles, golden flowers, by the 
hundred, by the thousand, _ by the” two thousand, (at) every time, every month, 


without ceasing ...:.;’. . . . umbrellas of flowers, umbrellas of cloth (2), .. . 


1 Thati is, the excellence of the three: members of the Buddhist Triad, and the benefits té be derived. 
from.them. : 

2 Conjectural and extremely doubtful, though royal letters were sometimes written thus. The modern’ _ 

word for “ vermilion ” is 7@%z au, and conceivably there may be some connexion between the last syllable of 


this and the uncertain word in the text. 3 Reading and meaning undetermined, — 
4 This missing part probably contained a statement that the prince came to the king: bringing the 
gifts enumerated in what follows. 5 Somewhat doubtful interpretation, 


6 The earthly image or counterpart of a miraculous | heavenly tree, bearing all manner. of desirable ; 
‘gifts, like our Christmas trees. 

7 There are two distinct categories of seven precious things. Presumably the one here. referred to is 
the list comprising gold, silver, lapis lazuli, crystal, ruby, amber (or coral, diamond, or emerald), and 
agate (?). (The interpretations of the Indian names seem to differ in different authorities.) . 

- 8 Probable, but not quite certain, interpretation. 
9 The meaning of rinrun (or dinrun) is undetermined, _ 
‘10 The sense of «/ is undetermined, it may be an adverb. 11 Meaning undetermined. 
‘12 The meaning of sindz is undetermined, nor is the reading quite certain, and the interpretation. of the 
words to which queries have been appended is also somewhat in doubt. 
13 The meaning of wl is undetermined. 14 The sense of maz is undetermined. 
15 The sense of wu? is undetermined. 
22 


166 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ voL. 1 


(1. 21) (ten-fold, even unto?) fifty-fold, an hundred-fold, an hundred-and-eleven- 
fold, in great quantities... .. 1 offered by them. At that time all the full-grown 
elephants pickedup ...... HOWGYS «i + w 5 (and) came (and) offered (them ?) 
to the king. The horses danced. In the semblance of all (manner of) creatures, 
of all (sorts of) demons and gods, all-the people (made a ceremonial dance?)*... . 
(1.23) . 2... . they (entered?) dancing (and) singing, to do obeisance to® the 
king . .,. . .*. in the fashion of singing (and) dancing of every city, every country 
district, every village, (and) of all the jungle folk, they (would enter ?) (and) come 
dancing (and) singing, to do obeisance* to the king every time. When the king 
instructed -all the.people (by ?) declaring the Law, the applause of all (I. 25) the 


people (who offered?)...... _. . candles, flowers, parched rice, (was) like a great 
(shower of) rain that falls without ceasing re Paes ® Those who offered (golden 
and silver ?) ornaments (in great quantities. . Sam a Ely sang (and) danced, released 


living creatures, by tens, scores, hundreds, thousands, which they presented as 
pious gifts (?) to the king in great quantities. Whether men, or (other) creatures 
{Il 27) (that they offered... .. . .?), the king poured out water (and) gave the 
living offerings every time, in great quantities, pa a thousand, exceeding two. 
thousand, not to be (numbered ?) . bas . like the pious gifts that the king 
made, either in consecrating Boildha-statries# or in building pagodas, or building 
monasteries, or digging tanks, or planting groves,........ BQ) ons nace a’s (he 
did these things ?) only in order that all beings might escape out of Samsara ®..... » 
that every city, every country district, every village, all the jungle folk....... 
hereafter might feed mother (and) father, do meritorious deeds, give pious gifts, 
keep the (ethical) commandments, (and) be not (neglectful ?)....... : 


B 


(that hereafter?) all (mankind?) might obtain happiness: in this world (and) 
in the worlds beyond (until: they arrived ...... in Nirvana ?), that those 


1 The sense of wel is undetermined. 

2 The doubtful: word looks like do“, which in LM. denotes the kind of mediums who are the chief 
assistants in the kalok dance ( Halliday, The Talaings, p. 100). But the reading and interpretation are very 
doubtful, though plainly some sort of ceremonial dance is referred to. 

3 Or “to make offerings to,” as before. 4 The sense of wl is undetermined. 

5 Or “to make offerings.” 6 The sense of dz is undetermined, 

7 The reading is doubtful here, and the sense of wel undetermined, 

8 The word kyak is very vague, but this interpretation seems appropriate here, 

9 The continual round of existence, by birth and rebirth. 

10 The sense of ul is undetermined. 


PART 11] MON INSCRIPTIONS 167 


hereafter at all times should (obtain i, a) a ee Because (of) the power 
of loving kindness... ..... (3). ... . « . all (birds ?) on the high roads, in 
the lanes, at the royal residence,! (did)? ‘not flee,...... (cages ?), they 
came (and) alighted on the roof (of . .?), the — stroked (them) with 
HIS) BARES ivi Sy on be BPs &, 0 2 oe the ng PAVE woe es -, (the name of ?) Birds 
of Dharma....* when all the people entered presenting (waterlily ?) flowers 
sbce mma wee (hearing?) the sound of drums ais went?) ...-.... (from) a 
distance of one fos, two kos,* (one?)....,(two?)...., (they went running ?) 
errr se ee (1. 7) Then (they _ were ?) in the presence of the king, when the 
king had poured out water cep) golden vessels, they went (and)..... with (their 
golden?) Howerss:< «i's 00.0% keuwe eds COME hue k s every day the king issued 
an order to the whole host Pues Senate , animals’... «..-.. (9) (happy ?) 
Rec git kr ae . the king gave orders to give bailed rice every shits 
sailed TIAEUEE og Hes chad wk 4.26 OES Ge es Eee * waterlily flowers . aie 
all (sorts of) lotus, they flowered (?) out of time (?). From above, flowers........ 
MT fies 5k ax v's de oa eee ae (SOVEUD) «5 6 og GUE a face sy as PT te 
they flowered (?). All (trees and bamboos ?) . flowered (2) ons so ciaa ou 
ee Te ee (had ?) fragrance, fruits of t trees had a pleasing (?) sap (and) 
SAVOUE. (wx nae be 4 oho sees sas 6 NORM secon: ahha ete Wwe i ah eee Sa sere the 
sap (and) savour of the great earth ® arose at the time of the coming (to be ?) of 
King Sri Tribhuwanadityadhammaraja, foretold by the Lord Buddha. No other 
king is like eines: . ... inthe city of Pagan, styled (].15) Arimaddanapir.... . i 
.in this wise :— ) | 

It was foretold by the King of the Law, the Teacher, that the noble King 
named Sri Tribhuvanadityadhammaraja, 

- His mother (being) born of the Vilva line, his father of the Solar race, 
issued from (these) two races, 

CA SBAE YS 5c xcs ws ;a king of the Law,.-...<... (L 17) rer ‘gioes 
in alms-giving, powerful,...... possessed of immense wealth (and) 
of storehouses not a few. ; 

1 Either the palace or the capital generalty. 

2 The whole of this passage, and most of Face B, can only be partially read. Apparently the reference 
is to kindness towards animals, especially birds. 

3 The sense of u/ is undetermined. 4 A measureof length 

5 Probably this passage of which the beginning is untertunately illegible refers to the exceptional 
natural phenomena that heralded the accession (or perhaps the birth) of the king. That much seems clear 
from I. 13, but as so much of it is illegible it is not certain where the new paragraph should really be made 


to begin. 6 That is, the earth, The vse of the epithet is a Mén idiom. 
7 The following paragraph is in Pali verse. 


DS 4AR5 


6&3 E65 
Von. 4 168 —e EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1 
PL. 2, | In majesty snaidey Cease weeeaee glorious, in selictescaint (and) kingly 


| duties diligent (and) discerning, 
By (the practice of) the four laws (of popularity), he shall (always ?) 


rejoice the people 2... 1.2: ewes naevewes Ale 19) pigteis Pe tia 
devotedly attached to the Three Gens: . 

Gawd . the gods ............ sacrifices ......... full of royal 

might 5.8) Satie, Hie ane onsle areaers .. oe. the king, 

In the excellent city of Pavan, styled Arimaddana, ieee antes as 

ne ene (0 2» eee ee ee a arg e iecs: ae eee hee 

ee eee ee re Te . his - own. virtue .... COR ee HAS ORC 4 8 OS Hee 

= 1 
. (built the cig ?). "(The Lord. ?) Gawampati spake to the sage 


Bisna i in this wise :— “ What by the. Lord Buddha was foretold, that my lord 
(should become ?) (I. 23) (a king ‘of the Law ?), is true, my lord, (indeed ?). 
(Hereafter ?) in order that- my lord (may. act ?).(for) the benefit of all (manner, of) 
beings (on their way to Nirvina?) ........ (my lord must become a king of 
the Law . ... . in three ?) (stages of) existence.”*........4. 6 bafta Maui maa ote 
Then King ‘int Bissukarmmadewaput, (and) Reckaramanzahs (I. 25) lifted 


up their joined hands (and made. obeisance to ?).. ..! Then the sage Bisna, 


hearing: thats mVvitation; @aida0 oir xe a eeu aes ware wanes When the Lord 
Suu ee ee er re oe ee a 
| eee Siu wake oedine ees kine eats 


1 End of the Pali verses. 
- % So much of the text is iNtegible that the precise interpretation is very doubtful, Perhaps we should 
_ interpret that in his third earthly existence the sage is to be a reigning monarch. It is of course impossible 
to say precisely where Gawarhpati’s speech ends, 
3.Indra, For the other names, see §§ 26, 27, 51. . 
4 [tis not clear to whom they made obeisance ; one would assume it wasto the sage, but see tie note on 
the text. 
6 That is, the request made to him that. he should undertake the duties of royalty, and ultimately of 


Buddhahood, 


RESEARCH COLLECTIONS 
East-Wes} Center 


Honolulu, Hawaii 


Volume Part I | 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA 


BEING 


LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
_ OF BURMA _ | 


EDITED BY 


CHAS. DUROISELLE 


SUPERINTENDENT, ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY, BURMA CIRCLE 


THE TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. 


By CHAS. DUROISELLE 


t 


RANGOON — 
SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING, BURMA 
1961 | 


Price K 4.60 


~ LIST OF AGENTS FOR THE-SALE OF THE GOVERNMENT OF 


bawt 


THE UNION OF BURMA PUBLICATIONS 


IN BURMA 


_ City Boox Cius, 98, Phayre Street, Rangoon 
. New Licut oF Burma Press, 58. Komin Kochin Road, Rangoon. 


. PROPRIETOR, THU-DiiAMA-WaDI PRESS, 55-56, Tsee Kai. Maung” 


Khine Street, Rangoon. 


. PROPRIEFOR, .BURMA News AGENCY, 1335, Anawrahta ‘Street, 


Rangoon. 


. MANAGER, BuRMA Book Co., 62, Barr Street, Rangoon. 
- Burma Ebucationat Book Suop, 551-3, Merchant Street, Rangoon. 
. ManaGer, UNION PUBLISHING House, 93, Be" " - Block, Bogyoke 


Market, Rangoon. 


. SECRETARY PEOPLE’S LITERATURE COMMITTEE AND House, 546, 


Merchant Street, Rangoon. 


. Tat BURMA TRANSLATION SocieTy, Merchant Street, Rangoon. 
. Messrs. K. Bin Hoon & Sons, Nyaunglebin, Pegu District. 
. U Lu GaLz, GOVERNMENT Law Book AGENT, 34th Road, Nyaung- 


zindan Quarter, Mandalay. 


..U Kyaw Zan, THE NATIONAL Book DEP6T AND STATIONERY SuepLy 


aed — GOSOme: Zegyo, Mandalay. 


‘ln INDIA 


. MESSRS. Fisanmeiess Lrp., Post Box No. 3H, Madras (India). 
. Messrs. THACKER. Spink & Co. (1933), Ltp., P.O. Box No. 54, 


3. Esplanade East, Calcutta (West Bengal). 


PREFACE 


THE Ananda temple at Pagan, the erection of which was completed in 
1090,’ is not only probably the most graceful structure of its kind in Burma, 
but for the profusion and, from the artistic and philological standpoint, the 
importance of its ornamentation, the most important monument in this Province, 
In the interior, besides very numerous statues of the Buddha in several 
attitudes, there is represented, in a long series of stone sculptures, the life of 
the Master from his decision in the Tusita heaven to be reborn in the bosom 
of Queen Maya to his parinirvana.® On the exterior, the walls and terraces 
are practically covered with glazed plaques. On one half of the basement 
these plaques represent the assault of Mara with his legions of dreadful 
Warriors onthe Blessed One seated under the Bodhi tree, and their ignominious 
defeat the other half representing the apotheosis of the Buddha after his 
victory in a long procession of the hosts of the gods, All these contain a 
short legend in old Talaing. But these scenes are not peculiar to the 
Ananda ; four hundred years later, they similarly, in magnificent glazed plaques, 
adorned the walls of the Shwegugyi and Ajapala pagodas at Pegu®; perhaps 
the inspiration was derived from the Ananda: The anterior existences of the 
Buddha, that is, the: 547 jétazas, adorn the first and second roofs and the 
three terraces above. These representations of the jatakas, one story to one 
plaque, are’ also not peculiar to the Ananda, for they are found on several 
‘other payodas and temples at: Pagan as well as on some other monuments 1m 
Burma.‘ The great feature, however, in this temple is, that the last ten 
longer stories of the collection, from Migapakkha Jataka to Vessantara Jataka 
(Nos, 538-547), are illustrated each in a series of plaques, the total number 
aggregating to 389; these plaques occupy part of the second roof and the 
three receding terraces above it. This feature is, I think, unique, for, so far 
as I have been able to ascertain, on no other monument in the Buddhis: 


1 See Duroiselle’s “Stone Sculptures in the Ananda Temple at Pagan” in Archasologica; 
Survey of I, tia, Annual Report for 1913-14, pp. 64-65. 

2 These sculptures are reproduced and described in the paper mentioned in above footnote. 

8 See my Annu! Report for 1914, pp. t2-14 and Plate V. 

$ Duroiselle’s “ Pictorial Representations of Tatakasin Burma,” in A.S.J, for 1912-13, pp. 89 #7: 


( iv ) 


world are these ten stories illustrated in so large a number of separate scenes ; 
at the bottom of each plaque is a short legend in Talaing briefly indicative of 
the episode above it. It is those legends which are deciphered and explained 
in the present work, | 

Whenever the glaze or the plaque itself is not spoiled, the decipherment 
of these inscriptions’ does not generally present any unusual difficulty ; unfor- 
tunately, a pretty large number of plaques have been badly disfigured, thus 
rendering sometimes the identification of the figures, sometimes the reading of 
the legend and often both, difficult. The plaques around the two uppermost 
terraces have particularly suffered. This disfigurement is due to the frequent 
use of whitewash and the method of its application; it is taken in buckets to 
the top of the temple, and the buckets are tilted over; the liquid, flowing 
dow:. on every side, penetrates the shallow recesses in which the plaques are 
fitted and flows over the latter, filling in details which were formerly perfectly 
distinct ; the glaze often cracks and flakes off under the action of the lime, 
thus obiiterating letters or part-of them. Where this has not happened, the 
layers of whitewash make the deciphering of a number of legends 2 task of 
no little difficulty sometimes. Several means have been resorted to--on the 
advice of experts in Burma and India—in order to clean and restore these 
plaques; but noné was really successful, for most often, notwithstanding the 
care taken, the glaze came off with the lime. To ask the trustees to desist 
from whitewashing the building would be useless, for, in the eyes of the people, 
the beau ideal of their monuments consists in their spotless whiteness. Steps 
have been taken, however, to induce them to use a less primitive and harmful 
method, so as to saye these beautiful specimens of a now practically forgotten 
art, The harm already done is but too apparent in the plates which form the 
second part of this work; a comparison between some of the old photographs 
(now unfortunately unfit for reproduction, and the negatives of which have 
now also spoiled) and some of the new ones, evidences clearly how much 
these plaques have deteriorated in the course of a few years. 

The total number of the jataka stories illustrated amounts to 547; the 
same number as in the Pali recension preserved in Ceylon and known to all 
countries professing. Southern Buddhism; this shows it was this reve sion 
which was followed for the plaques on the Ananda.’ The order of the 

1 The actual aumber in the Singhalese, Talaing, Burmese and other editions is 547 ; but the 


traditional number is gso. The terracotta plaques at the Petleik pagoda, Pagan, illustrate 550 
steriee, The letterpress on these plaques is being written, 


Cv 


shorter stories up to No. 537 included strictly follows that Pali Jataka as 
edited by Fausboll (Vols, I~V), although the names here and there may 
slightly differ. But the traditional order of the Mah4nipata or the collection 
of the last ten long stories (Vol. VI of Fausboll) is not quite the same, as 
shown below :— 


Order on the Ananda, Traditional order. 
1. Migapakkha. 1, Lbid, 

2, Mahajanaka. “2. Ibid. 

3. Sama, 3. lbid. 

4. Nimi, 4. Lbid. 

5. Maha-Ummagga. 5. Khandahila, 

6. Khandahila. 6. Bhiridatta. 

7. Bhiridatta, 7. Mahanaradakassapa, 
8. Mahanaradakassapa. 8. Vidura, 

g. Vidhura.__ g. Maha-Ummagga. 
10, Vessantara. 10. /bid, 


It is not clear why the traditional order of these ten jatakas has not been 
followed ; this is certainly not due to a difference of school, as might perhaps 
at first be thought, because: all the Talaing and Burmese editions have 
always followed the traditional order of the Singhalese collection. I think 
it is to be attributed merely to a lack of strict supervision on the part 
of the Talaing monks in charge of this portion of the work; the more 
so as the plaques of the. stories are serially numbered in proper sequence; 
and the order on the Ananda does not, either, follow the traditional order 
of the Ten. Pdramita, or the Ten Perfections illustrated by these jatakas, 
There are other evidences of a certain Jack of attention which are in each 
case noticed in the body of the work. For instance, a good number of 
plaques, though rightly numbered, have been put in the wrong place, thus 
spoiling the regular order of the episodes in a story; I have placed most 
of these in their proper sequence; others, again, are wrongly numbered 
though in their right place, and not a few bear the same number. In the 
legends themselves a few mistakes, due also to inattention, are found, as, 
for instance,-the dropping of a final consonant. . 

The jataka stories embodying, as they do, their moral and ethical 
teachings in the form of charming tales and fables, were one of the most 


(wi) 
potent means for pressing the claims of Buddhism among the peoples ot Indo- 
China; they have left a deep impression wherever the religion has become 
established. This is true of all the jatakas, but especially of the last ten long 
ones; and the most prized and read among these ten are: Sima, Mahajanaka, 
Mahosadha (Maha-Ummagga) and Vessantara; they have been translated in 
prose and verse, and turned into theatrical plays in the case of Vessantara. 
This predilection explains the great prominence given to these ten stories in 
the plaques of the Ananda, for, while the lesser jatakas have only one 
plaque to each, these ten are illustrated by 389. In Burma, they form the 
subject of a voluminous literature, both in Talaing and in Burmese. | 

In Talaing, the jataka literature may be classed under four principal 
heads :— | 

1. Translations in verse, 805 (lik). 

2. Missaya, or word for word translation; there are two kinds of 
these, called $5 (nam) and ($3 (traai), according as the 
explanation of the text is longer or shorter. : 

3. Abridgements in prose of the texts (skern); theré are two 
recensions of these; in the one, there are embodied copious 
extracts from the text, translated and explained n7ssaya fashion ; 
the other is in pure Talaing. 

4. Complete translations in prose without ‘any abridgement (slapat). 


Thousands of copies of the Ten Great Jatakas (Mahanipata) under the 
above four divisions, are preserved in the monasteries of Lower Burma, ard 
are a testimony to the great popularity of these tales. When, over a decade 
ago, a list of Talaing works in monasteries was compiled on behalf of the 
Educational Syndicate of Burma, 927 copies of the Ten Great Jatakas were 
found in about thirty monasteries round about Moulmein; classified according 
to the four divisions given above it is found that: 65 copies are in. verse 
0805); 46 are mzissayas; 247, abridgements (skem), and 569 copies are 
unabridged translations. Lists taken in other monasteries will probably yield 
some similar result. These jatakas alone offer a splendid material for the 
compilation of a Talaing dictionary ; and when to them is added the trans- 
lation of numerous Pali works, such as the Vinaya, the Dhammapada 
Commentary, etc., etc,, it will be seen what a rich mine there is for workers 
in this comparatively new field of philology to draw from.’ 


1 The author has collected several thousands of new words from these Jatakas and a few other works, 


( vii ) 

In deciphering the legends on these plaques | had at my disposal an 
almost complete set of estampages taken many years ago;. these have been 
generally very useful, though a good percentage of them were very difficult to 
read, either owing to the bad state of the plaques themselves. or to—in not a 
few cases—the indifferent way in which they had been taken; besides, I -had 
a set of photographs, such as they may be seen in the album of plates. I 
had also the advantage, from time to time, of being on the spot and examining 
the plaques themselves in doubtful cases. Notwithstanding all this, a. few 
legends have presented difficulty in deciphering, as might well be expected, but 
I hope they have been deciphered correctly. The translation presented but 
few difficulties, for, besides the scenes on the plaques which, in many 
cases, speak for themselves, I had naturally the Pali text to fall back 
upon, as well as translations in modern Talaing and also those in Burmese of 
these jatakas, which all helped me in fixing the meaning of old words long 
fallen into disuse or whose- phonetic changes had made practically unrecog- 
nizable, However, several words still remain a crux, as will be seen in 
Appendix B, = 7 

It was my intention to include in Appendix C-1, only such words and 
forms as are not to be found in Haswell’s Vocabulary ; but on further consi- 
deration, on the advice of several friends, I have also included in it words 
which are in Haswell’s, so as to make this Appendix, so far as it goes, 
complete in itself. In transcribing into modern Talaing characters a few old 
words, sometimes:a superscript letter has been placed. before the one below it, 
owing to difficulties in casting the types. 

I beg to acknowledge here, with thankfulness, my indebtedness to Mr. 
C. O. Blagden, whose ripe scholarship and ever-ready help have always been 
placed at my disposal; and also to Mr. R. Halliday, whose thorough — 
knowledge of literary Talaing has been very helpful. My best thanks are also 
due to Mr. R, W. Bishop, Superintendent, and Mr. R. Baillie, Deputy 
Superintendent, Government Printing, Burma, for the interest they took in this 
work and for the beautiful get-up of the volume. 


‘CHAS. DUROISELLE, 
Superintendent, Archasological Survey, Burma, 


MRoBAuNG, soth December 1920, 


CONTENTS 


PAGES 
ABBREVIATIONS ‘si 33 ie is sae il 
REMARK a ee de ibe si 98 ies xill 
CORRECTIONS. .., ee ves 53 ie ee XV 
1. Mégapakkha re Jataka, Nos.  1— 37 a I— 12 
2 Mahajanaka - *s ‘4 38— 82 si 12— 28 
3. Sdma “ae roe 9 83—101 29— 34 
4 Nim +3 192-—114 35—- 38 
5 Maha- ees . ¥35—-209 38— 76 
6. Khandahala ‘< 210—~218 78— 79 
7, Bhiridatta rr 219—230 80— 88 
8. Mah&naradakassapa «, js 240-241 88— 89 
g. Vidhura she i 34 2—265 89— .99 
to, Vessantara i 266—389 | TOO——141 
APPENDIX A.—List of the words in the Legends bis ae 143-155 
APPENDIX B,—Additional remarks on a few words... .  - 184-152 
APPENDIX C-1.—List of the modern Talaing words found in the 
explanations of the Legends... cd sac ws : 1632038 


APPENDIX C-2,—List of words under which grammatical explana- 
tions not in Haswell are given in Appendix C-1 1 209-210 


A.V. 


B. . 


B.E.F.E.O. 


Dhe. 


Dhd. Atth. 


| Dh. Dip., Dhm. 


Gpi. 


gee 


oes. 


090 


66e | 


Dip. «.. 


ABBREVIATIONS 


vee Akkharavidhana ee neeeiatie printed at Patlak, 


Siam. 


ee Burmese. 


. Bulletin de ?’Ecole Frangaise d’Extréme-Orient. 


... Dhammaceti Mahapitakadhara ; printed at Patiak, Siam. 


.. Dhammapada_ Afthakatha ; Pali Texts and sae 
editions. 
- Prakuih Dhammadipani : Rangoon, 
«. Slapat Gaceth pi rof au ; manuscript. 
The Jataka, edited by Fausboll, Vok. VI. 
ae . Navakovada-vinayakatha ; ; printed at Paklat. 
.. Modern Talaing. 
. Lik Bodhisat' Cah; printed at Patlak. 
.. O. Stevens’ English- Talaing Dictionary ; Rangoon, 
— 1896. | on | 
. Old Talaing. 
Pali. . 
ses! ‘Pali-Talaing Dictionary ; masiuscript. 
.« Skera Jat, Bhitidat = Bhiridattajataka ; manuscript. 
ww. Skem Jat Candakumma = = Khandahalajataka ; manu- 
script. 
Skem Jat Mahajanak = = - Mahajanakajataka ; Manuscripts 


ee, Sanskrit. 


—Sketh Jat Mahosadha = = Mahi-Ummaggajtaka manu. 
script. 
' Skem Jat Smia Naaimi = Nimijataka ;. manuscript, 


| - Skemh Jat Bruim Nardda = mee ane ears 


manuscript 


we Sketh. Jat Suvannasarh — Samajataka ; inanuseript 


Skerh Jat Temi = Migapakkhajataka ; manuscript. 
... Sudhammavati Gavampati Rajadhiraj; Paklat. 

Skemh Jat Vesantaw = Vessantarajataka ; manuscript. 
A Skerh Jat Vidhira = Vidhurapanditajataka ; manuscript, 
.. Uposakoyadakatha ; printed at Paklat. 


REMAR< 


The number on the left of each legend is the serial number of the plaque 
for easy cross-reference; that on the right is the number on the plaque itself, 
The numbers in smaller types after the translation of each legend refer by 
page and line to Volume VI of Fausboll’s edition of the Jataka. 


CORRECTIONS 


For 


(his disciples) ” 
oo, Patt Ip, 4 
we 


+f OS 


Part A; p. 22 
. Punnaka 
ono 


ae: dandas 


Bar 
Skt. s 


: pureh 


coe COQ 

Bene: makes 4 

89> +e Golooleo. 
Bi ww: form 
99 one 098 


oa Qs 


Read 


. {his)-disciples 


Part I, p. 56 


“Win 


fo ke) 
Part II, p. 94 - 
Punnata ey 


Me 
via dandas : 


Bar 


wae: Skt. s 
; QOH. 
.. pureb 
2° caged 


+. makes a 
aa. gSolf a 
vee GOla0}eo 
wee - from 
on 8 
veo OQ 


mg 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 
1.—MOGAPAKKHA-JATAKA 


‘HIS jataka has always: been. known in: Burma under the shorter and 
popular name of Zemt-sat (= Temiya-jataka), after the name of the hero 
inthe story. The. first plaque in. the series of 37 illustrating it is the _ 538th 
on the Ananda temple, corresponding with the number given to this story in 
Fausboll’s edition of the_ ‘“ Jataka” (Vol, VI), thus showing that inthe 
pictorial representations of these old stories the artists of the Ananda followed 
strictly the Singhalese recension as. polenta and Srraneee by the Buddha- 
ghosa school. : 

Prince Temiya, actuated. bj the fea af hell and on the advice . a 
goddess, pretends to be dumb and a cripple; during sixteen years, many 
devices are resorted to to try and ascertain whether he is really so, but all 
fail. At last, his father orders him to. be buried; he then moves and talks 
for the first time and discourses on religious topics to the astounded charioteer. 
He leaves the world, becomes an ascetic, and is followed by his father. 


1, @§ $o$ seo8—990. 
In niman. Temi—538 
Indra invites. Temiya (to be reborn as a-man)—z2. 9 


~The king of Benareshad no children. At the instigation of his. people 
who did not wish to see his line extinguished, he prays for a son. ' Candadevi, 
the chief queen, a'lady of eminent piety, prays ardently for the boon of a male 
child. . Indra’s seat in the Tavatirnsa heaven becomes hot, and on ascertain- 
ing the cause, at once casts about for a suitable son'for her. The Bodhisatta, 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vot. 1 


or future Buddha, after a reign of twenty years in Benares, had béen. reborr. 
in hell. and ‘from thence in the ‘Tavatirnsa heaven; Indra goes te. him and 
invites him to be reborn as 2 mani in the bosom of Candadevi, He accepts. ; 
. Niman,: from the Pali nimantett, is still currently used in modern - 
literature; of, soch, ba maw, Dhe.i-1443 3; for a similar change of » tod 
cf. 8S, Imit= $85, nimit (P. nimitta), to create; co§, lara? =.. 
3888, narui: (and scops8, naro’), Sudh. 22, 8, .S.B. &. 20, to cry, cry” 
out; = lamit bdah,: Sndh. 13. 5 = $Bobx08, nimit bdah, te 
create, make; “4938 "Tmow, U:O.R. rs. 10 = soo08, namow, AV. 
129, to incline to, towards or ‘downwards. — 


a emd-—906. 
“Patisan, Temi—s3¢ 
Conception, a. Temiya—s rAd 


‘Patisan, from P. pafisandhi. 


‘This plaque. ‘is: ‘missing,’ but from: the sequence it no doubt repre- 
e: ‘the birth of Temiya, and the legend was either “ parisut' ‘Temi (of. 
No. &4). or “Temi, tit ner gar"! (of No. 39). 


ue of oeesss eob—9g oo 
Pe hime’ Temi—gaz 
| (His: father). gives (eb the name of Temiya—3. 


Pa'= the Méd. ©, pz, te do, make; in Old Mén of the. a inscrip- 
tions:and in these Reale: plaques, a final 9? (’) is. often superadded to somc. 
words, which are found sometimes with.and. sometimes - without it; the follow- 
ing are a few emarepiee himo’, him. L (modern) ; © #14, sii’; sacchu, 
sacchu’; tuno’, Inu: (modern) ; mi, m0’;. tirla, tirla’; gili, ‘gfir 
gufii, gufi?; kinta, kinta’;’ambo, ambo’; ne siru nican 
The same expression i¢ found on two other plaques : himo’ Mahos. 
(Nc. r19) and pa imo’ Wesantar. (No. | 768). ee hk is similarly 
often superadded, which will be noticed in its proper place. Himo’, a 
name, is equivalent to the ‘modern &y, himu} other old-forms are imo’ 
and yimo’, with which compare the modern @j,_ y mu, 03122, ymu ymé 


parti] TALAING PEAQUES ON THE ANANDA 5 


Se ee oe Qgd— 5) 
a Zal aaa: ‘kumlac—342 
When:they..bring the: thieyes-—3. °22 


As Temiya was one month old, and the king his father was holding him 
on his. lap, four robbers were. brought. in, ‘vhom the king condemned to | 
atrocious punishment. | Temiya calls back-.to mind his suffering } in hell, and 
perceiving, from his past experience and the’ verdict. of his father, that kingship 
ig inseparable from cruel deeds“ leading ‘to hell; he becomes alarmed and 
bitterly regrets his having: been: born on the steps ‘of’ a ‘throne. 


Kal, when,. while, from. P.. dla, RA, to. convey, bring, carry, is a 
variant of raa, which forms. ‘the second part of. 4&9, pkaa raa, which 
generally translates, in ‘missayas, the. Pali athéreti. [t is also sometimes found _ 
written, in modern literature, a9, refaj-as at S.B. 17. 9, and in 2809/6, - 
sea tlua, “to convey and: come,” t.e, to ting Dh.. Dip,. 23. 19, though 
the proper form, 4&9)6, raa tlua. (= Q.T.), is much: more frequent; ofde 
A:V. 31, where it translates. ‘the’ P. dutta and Sbhcia; A.V. 121 = dhéranz; 
Dh, Dip. 299. 2 = Dh. Atth. 492, dharati, acne thief; M.T. caged, 
kamlat, ‘from 0308, klat, to. steal. | , 


. 6, 3300095 6005. ex8—y $9 
Dewataw wet Temi-~5 43 
‘The goddess. instructs Temiya—4. 1 


On the morrow,. while. hie was “ying. under a white. ambrella and thinking . 
gloomily over the previous day’s ‘occurrence, the goddess residing in the 
umbrella. appears to him and shows him: the way to escape hell: she instructs 
him to pretend to be deaf, dumb,‘ and a cripple ; he would thus avoid 
becoming king and thereby escape - the possibility, through harsh senténces | 
passed on lawless persons, of returning to’ hell. He agrees” to do so,’ The 
parents, for sixteen years, subject him to many tests in order to ascertain 
whether he was really born: 0. This: explains" the following plaques. 

Dewataw = = P, devata. Wet, ‘to instruct ; the plaque i is a little spoiled 
in the middle - of the inscription, sO ‘that it is not clear whether the verb 


4 _. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vow 1 


should be read ret, det or wet; the final # is however quite clear and 
the middle. consonant looks likey; but the formation of the letter’ is 
defective, and on the whole looks more’ like a misformed O (w),: which 
.has been spoiled by whitewash. Wet is found under the form wec on 
plaque No. 23. Ret or det’ has not yet been found anywhere else either 
in inscriptions or modern literature. - 


7. 89808—95 
| Khirawimahsa—544_ 
The trial with milk—s. 1-20. 


-Temiya is, from time to time, kept the whole day without being: given 
milk, to see if he would cry and ask for it, but, fitm in his pice he 
neither moves ‘nor utters. a sound. S . 

Both words .are Pali, £hira, milk, and vimansa, trial ; final @ is very 
faint: and. seems to have been spoilt by whitewash. . 


a sispitetuit va: 
Piwakhajjanawimassana—s45 
The trial with cakes—s. 20-28 


g. 8005 02 29 }—996 
Bibat ku sacchu—546 | 
They try (Temiya) with fraits—s. 28 


‘Bibat = MT. eed, babat, ‘measure ; . to. measure, take the measure . 
of ; hence, to try, test; of. obed, cambat to try, test, in which the first: 
word is the Burmese o8:, cam’; also ecko, bat. knat, Dh. Dip. 29. 18, 
to measure, compute, estimate; ed§E, bat pruif, Dh. Dip. 30. 44, to 
measure oneself with, vie, contend, in which the word {§§, pruia, is also a 
loanword from Burmese ; edys, bat bnat, A.V. 144, 147, to measure, 
gauge, size up, in all of which the original meaning of 05, bat, is well 


brought out. Sacchu = sac chu, fruit; Blagden tells me that sac. 


paRT1}  TALAING PLAQUES ON. THE ANANDA § 


(fruit) is found in his Inscription No. Se see also plaque No. 330; the 
M.T. is sat, ood: 


10, BoosvsoggmBood3— 961 
Kilabhandakawimafsana—547 
The trial. with toys—6. 3 
Kila, for kija. 


II, scpap80od8s—y oo 
~Bhojanawimafhsana—s48 
The trial with food—6. 6 


12, This plaque is missing; in the regular order of the tests, it must 
_- have represented the trial by fire. 


13. 8005 oy £8 — a0 
_Bibat ku cik—s50° 
They try (Temiya) with elephants—6.. 18. 


Cth, elephant, variant ‘of cin. No number appears on this plaque | 
which is No. 550. in the regular order’ of the series. — 


14, 8005.03 Gi—990 
Bibat ku. jrum—s5r - 
_ They try (Temiya) with *sniakes—6, 26 


6 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA. _ tvon.-it 


15, c0g8008s—99 
Samajjawimaasana-—332 
The test of the mime—y. 2 


16, 8005.cy agxd—y99 
Bibat ku sn3k—353 
They try (Temiya) with a sword—y, 7 


17:, 8005 04 oB—399 
Bibat teu sah~3534 
They try (Temiya) with .soneches—7, 19 


Sak, from P. seAAa. 


“18, 8005 fog 3}—099 
Bibat (ku phash)—335, 
They try (Temiya) with drums—7. 23 
The right- rant side of the plaque has been droken and ‘ost and its 
place filled in with cement, half the legend hazing thus disappeared; in 
the sequence of the tests, it represents that with drums,-and I have there- 
fore restored the word for drim, pham = M.T.; it recurs frequently. in 
the inscriptions of King. K yanzittha, at Pagan, which describe the ceremonies 
at the building of his palace. 


19, 3905 02 goE—99¢ 
Bibat ku pnan—556 
They ty (Temiya) with lamps—y, 24 


Pnaf has a variatt' pne. 


PART 1] TALAING’ PLAQUES ‘ON THE ‘AN ANDA | 7 


20: “Be0S"t ‘og CofsoSug'9 7 


. Bibat kv ‘taiiglay—sey * 
They. sey, (Temiya). with molasses—2. 


The modern literary form. Of. taaglaysi 4S <osbega, tanklaai, and ‘the 
colloquial coo0s, tanldai, With. elision .. of. :.43 tha ~ Burmese... is. WER, 
taflai : _ 


 Bibat: ku hadak—558° 
They try (Temiya)’ with filth—6. er 


Hadak, filth, foeces = colloquial Bigo08, hidak, the literary form 
beitig Boos, snidak = “house-water,” that is, -water-closet, a privy ; but 
it means also, excrement, filth; vide - AN. 39 = = P, ukkéra, Dh. Dip. II4. 
ze = P. uecéra, and the eorraapaading | passage of the story in Pah (VI. &. 
6} = asucijiguccha aka. Inthe word’ hadak, the medial consonant . 
appears. tc have been spoilt originally when fusing the glaze and. later by 
whitewash, so that | am not quite spre‘ whether it ‘is really a d, though this 
letter is required here’ on stymclog ae ground, the oldest documents we 
possess writing always the word “water,” _ which -enters into this compounc | 
snidék (collg. hidak) with a d (9298, Qs, dak,. dek); as it stands 
now, however, the letter looks as if it were 7% of du, “which. “would. give. us 
haruk or. baduk; in which ruk might perhaps be compared, with i035, 
duk = “ wet,” which would scarcely convey the meaning intended. Basing 
myself, .however, on the constant usage of old and. modern documents, I 
have adopted the reading d; but the absence of long @ after @ remains to 
be explained; the word should read hadak; it is probable the long @ has 
been dropped through inadvertence ; similar cases are not quite. rare in these 
plaques, and will be noticed in their own places. Moreover, i in. the series of 
the “tests,” this one comes exactly at the place it occupies in the Pali, 
between Nos. 55% and 559). thus leaving no doubt as to the sense. of 
hadak. . 


8 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA {vou 


22, mog8o8y—9 96 
Kapallawimansana—559° 
~The test: with fire-pans—8. 18 


23. eagoad sg opf& e2b-—9¢0 
Abo’ aba tlun wec—560 - 
(Temiya’s) mother and father come and remonstrate (with him)—8. 24 


Abo’, mother, is- confirmed by a number of plaques, see Index A; 
so. also aba, father. The Burmese and Talaings, when coupling nouns 
or pronouns denoting one the masculine and the other the feminine, always 
place the feminine first ; this practice is, I think, pretty general in Indo-China 
and seems to be due to the influence of Pali, Tlun = M.T. 99/6 klua, 
but it is still in use in compound verbs, see note on raf, plaque No. 5. 
Wee = M.T. cood, wet; see No. 6.. 


24, -p2gaBoodp— Co 
Natakawimafsana—s61 
The trial with nautches—9. 6 


2 5. on8§, coo8— 6G J 
- Kumin Temi—562 
They make Temiya king—1o, 16 


_ All these ‘tests, spreading over a period of sixteen years, having failed 
to ‘elicit. from Temiya the least sign’ of intelligence and to procure the least 
gleam: ‘of hope that he was not a useless cripple, his father, at the instigation 
of -the- -goothsayers, decides ‘to. have him. ‘buried. in the common. cemetery. 
Candadevi, frightened - for: her, child,: asks ‘her husband to make him king; he 
refuses ; at. last, .after. many. -pressing:- entreaties, he consents-that he should 
rule for seven days. - During. that week, his mother, who feels he is not.a 
cripple, begs of him.to show himself in his: true light; but Temiya, horrified 
by the fear of hell, remains steadfast in his resolution, and she fails. 

“Kumin, accession to the tHrone, rule, to make (some one) king, ‘to 
enthrone {vide plaques Nos. 206, 217); ¢f. kirmin (plaque No. 229), 


PART I] -TALAING PLAQUES UN THE ANANDA 9 


royalty, kingship: and the M.T. o§§, kmin, in BSai8 Biss kmindua 
kduinbtaa, U.O.K. 39. 5;. BSREGIE, kmin kduinbtan, S.M. 10. 
17; $$3$, kminnan, U.O.K. 39. 13. . 
26, 20298 078 emos— 4 G0 
‘Sarathi tlun ket—563 


The charioteer comes to take away (Temiya)—11. 8 


The supreme test, that of kingship, having failed, the royal charioteer 
comes to execute the img order, for T emiya’s burial. 


27. a5 0808 en8—969 
_ Rin tit Temi—s564 
(The charioteer) conveys away Temiya—r1. 17 
Rin, to lead, convey; the rere tit, to go out, after another verb, has 
sometimes the sense of waut, away.” . 


28. e208 8 o0§ B98 
Kal scis han ti—565 
(Temiya) descending on to the ground—12. 4 
| “The charioteer leaves the - city with the : cart conveying the prince; 
having decided on a spot, he begins to dig a grave. Not having moved for 
sixteen years, Temiya doubts whether. he has still the control of his limbs 
_and gets down from the chariot to ascertain, — 


Scis = MT. oBe8, scih; “ gog08, sceh, and 808, cih, coo, ceh,. 
to go down. Han, in, to, at, ON; a. variant. is hin’ (vide Index A). 


29. ‘tas BGinad—9 CG 
Bibat dirhat—566 
He tries his strength—12. 6 


Then, thinking the charioteer, in the execution of his orders, might use 
violence against him, Temiya, to try his strength, seizes the hinder part of 
the chariot, and lifts it up as a bi 


= EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von 


Dirhat = MT (S0008, drahat, and s§c05, darhat, S.J. 67; 
the latter form is nearer the old ono . 


ZO, 22290 6o08 Bd—964 
Kal Temi gfi’—567 

Temiya is being adorned—12. 17 
At that moment, Sakka’s seat, becomes iiacointeeianis: and, ascer- 
taining the cause of it, perceives that the prince desires to be adorned ; 

he sends Vissakamma, the heavenly artist, to adorn him. 
Ga? = MAT. g, giii, to adorn; for final @ (’), see note on pa, 
plaque 4. | 


31. 99098 099q08—9 60 
Sma sarathi—568: 


He questions the charioteer—12. 19 


He asks him why he is in such a hurry to dig a grave and for whom 
it is intended ;. the charioteer at first -answers without looking up, but at last 
he recognizes. who speaks to him, and is delighted,. 


32, 02403 6028 —9G@ 
Sarathi kfia cow—569 
The charioteer invites (Temiya) to return (home)—1 5. 


Kita, besides the meaning given in Haswell’s, means also ‘‘to invite 
cf. Dh. Dip. 94. 12—c8o9$ 828 B48 o> aged coo —"the king, sexirous 
of inviting the Buddha up te’ the house”; there is a form g9, fiha, which 
points out to a form §, sfa, through ®, kfia, at N.V.K. 4. 13-—8096003 
Ge gj Saar2033 mag 0968 33 posEBo08n0n§)& bop \Sepo§ ogscossr6032——"' When a 
- monk is going to build a large monastery with (the help of) a layman for 
himself to stay in, he must first invite. the clergy to come and show them 
the site. ” 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA oe 


33. (Pe@> g$ 8} cago85 sg—9 70 
| Raja pcan hin abo’ aba—570 | . 
The king (= Temiya) sends a message to his mother and father—19. 4 


. Pcan=M.T. g§, phyan, not now used by ‘itself but frequent enough 
in the doublet &$qy§,; bkan phyan. For the equation pean = 4, 
phyan, G& pcun = qif, phyun; p (pa) cih = @o5, phyih 
(= oq5); p(pa) cen = cy’, phyen; p (pa) cin = Q§, phyin; 
pacap = 45, phyap; pacot = cypod, phyot, etc.; similarly, # (p a) 
+ initial <0, s, become yg, phy—pasaw = .cqps, phyow; pasun = 
qi; phyun; pasuin=q@§, phyuin; pasuik = @oS, phyuik. But 
pcan under the form eo§, bacan, is. found in literary Talaing, see S.J. 
folio e—8&eo$ of—‘‘hearing the message”; L.B.C. 45. 2—2059 vo$oo$ 
—“ (the Buddha) having thus left his message -(or instructions).” 


34. M208 ‘eped 8§—)19 
Kal raja ma ’ir—571 
When the king leaves the world—21. 8 


Temiya’s mind was inclined towards the quiet happy life of an ascetic ; 
again, Sakka’s séat becomes hot, and having ascertained the cause, he 
sends down Vissakamma, who builds a hermitage and arranges everything 
necessary for a hermit. Then the prince exchanges his royal clothes for the 
bark garments and black antelope-skin of the ascetic and enjoys the spiritual 
bliss of the recluse’s life. | , 

Tr, without a (92) used as a fulcrum, is found in two other plaques, 
written ir (Nos. 71, 114) and again ‘ir with the fulcrum (No. 327). This 
verb, so far as I am ‘aware, has fallen into oblivion and has no corresponding 
form now; it means “‘to leave the world, to become a recluse or monk,” 
and answers to the Pali pabdajati; the word for monk, gam-’i (08), which 
we find in the inscriptions of the 15th century is derived from this verb; the 
older (11th century) form, gum-ir, has preserved the verb intact. The 
modern form is gamhi (09), often found written khamhi (08). 


12 i EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL it 


35> 9000s 09 go 
| Gulafi ku smin—572 
He converses with the king (his father)—22. 247 — 

The king has come to the hermitage with an immense retinue to see 
his son in the plenitude of his bodily strength, and they have a long’ conver- 
sation together. | | 

Gulafi, to converse: conversation = M.T. aco2§, gala a 


36. S$o, G08 ogo00-—9 1p 
| Dindu risi twas—573 _ 
Instructing the hermits (his disciples) —29. 13. 

_ Temiya’s father and mother, their respective retinues ‘and a large con- 
course of citizens follow the prince’s example... A vast hermitage is built for 
them. The Bodhisatta, who knows their inmost thoughts, instructs and. 
admonishes them each according to his needs. 

Dindu, to instruct, I do not know of any modern equivalent for this 
word, unless it be dalo’ (as09288) 5. the interchange of @ and / is very 
frequent, above all when initial ; ‘the equivalence of u-and o (and a) is also 
frequent. Twas = M.T. ORF, twah.- 


37. 200905 og YE—9 9 
Tos dharmma ku smifi—574 : 
(Temiya) peaches the Law to the (three)’ kings—29. aiff 


The king of a_ neighbouring. country - comes. to invade Kasi and ‘rules in 
Benares. But Temiya goes to meet him, sits in the air and teaches him the 
Law; the invading king becomes an ascetic; exactly the same thing happens 


to two other kings, | 
Dharmma, the Law, direct from the Sanskrit. 


TI.—MAHAJANAKA-JATAKA 
The king of Mithila has two sons; when he dies, the elder becomes 
king and the younger viceroy. The younger brother is then wrongfully 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 13 


accused and suspected and thrown into ‘jail; he escapes, raises an army and 
kills his brother in battle. The king’s chief queen, who is enceinte, flees 
from Mithila; she brings forth a son, who is brought up in ignorance of his 
father. At last, learning who his father was, he resolves to regain the king- 
dom and goes to sea as a merchant to make a certain.:amount of money to 
help him in his design. The ship founders. A goddess carries him to his 
father’s kingdom, where, after answering many riddles, he becomes king, 
and marries his uncle’s daughter. At last; he becomes an ascetic, and his 
wife follows him on his way. to the wilderness. 


Janak patisan—575 0° 


Janaka_ is conceived. | 


39, p03 Bod e394 0 —916 
 Janak tit nor gar—s76 | 
Janaka comes out from the womb—-33, 11 


Nor = MT. a, nt, from; gar, from the Skt. gardha = M.T. 08, 
gaw, also written sol, gow, Dh. Dip. 57. 24, 62. 8. 


40. 03.865. 02 o5005-+ 941 
Janak wifi ku samwat—577. 
Janaka plays with the children—33. 13 _ 


Wifi, to playr= M.T. co&, wen; sarnwat, child, a variant. is 
sumwat = M.T. coood, samat. ; : 


41. @03 99905 esgoaS— 90 _ 
jJanak smafi abo’—578 
_Janaka questions his mother—33. 18 


Mahajanaka’s playmates, when angry with him, used to call him 
“ widow’s. son” ; he wants to know whose son he is, and asks his mother. 


14 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ Vou. 


A2, apo g$ o8$ esg0s5—9 1 
_. Janak mun hin abo’—579 
-Janaka informs his mother (he will go trading) —34. 3 


Mun _ means:: to tell, inform, apprise, notify, of. Nos. 90, 183, 203, 
213, 225; and muna s, Nos. 279, 283. Hin, a variant of han, “in, at, 
on, to.” 


43. 2200 (Go— 906 
Kala bram—586 
7 W — (the boat) founders yi 3 


| The serial number on this. plaque i is a good example of the. carelessness 
or oversights to be detected in a certain number of legends in these plaques. 
According to the events of the story. which precede and follow it, this 
plaque is here. in its: right place;.the copyist, however, has inadvertently 
written 586 for 580. 


44 = No. 581, missing) 


45. 6300095 eus00S— 90) - 
Dewataw yok—582 _ 
The goddess. carries (Janaka) in her arms—37. 14 


Manimekhala, a goddess, has for duty to watch over the ocean and 
rescue from death all virtuous’ shipwrecked persons. She sees: Mahajanaka 
‘manfully swimming in the sea; she comes and listens with delight to his 
‘reflections on the virtue of energy. She ‘then catties him in her arms to 
| Mithila, and lays him on a. ceremonial : stone in a mango grove. . Meanwhile 
his uncle the king had died, leaving no male issue, but only a daughter. 
While casting about for a successdr, thé royal chaplain, followed by. the 
grandees of the kingdom.and a vast ‘army, comes to the stone slab on 
which Mahajanaka is lying. asleep. - After several trials to test his mettle, 


i The plaque was found subsequently, spoiled. The original legend had disappeared, and one in 
modern Burmese, “ King Janaka is swimming,” has been substituted, 


PART1]  TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA “1S 


he examines the marks on the soles of his feet and ascertains he is a 
great. man, : ; ae 

Yok, to lift up, carry in the : arms, is the modern 080, vik but’. 
the: old spelling is still occasionally found, for instance at. Dhe. 15%. 26. 


46, e608 cogg$ apad-—900 
-Mey iaksan Janak—583 
The chaplain examines Janaka’s marks—39. 30 


Mey, to lok = M.T. 3, mwai, which is, now-a-days, not used by 
itself, but after a few other verbs of cognate meaning, e.g., §3, hi mwati;. 
695953, hew mlak.. ‘mwai; 483, rah mwai; 83, shi mwai; 
00053, camat mwai, etc. The Prakuih Dhammadipani_ uses 
regularly the form 3, mai, which is nearer to the old form. As a verb 
used by itself I have found 3, mwai, only oncé, at A.V. 19, goR 
pwa ma mwai= P, apekkhé..Laksan, a aac direct from Skt. 
laksan or laksana; it is found written also: lakyan  (coag$) ° (pron. 
laksan), and laksan; the P. form, lakkhana (coogons), is also frequent. 


47. socieooo apS—gog 
Abhiselcha Janak—584_ ae 
’ The anointment (as king) of Janaka—4o, 6 7 : 
The. chaplain, having recognized all the marks of | sprniness on Janaka, 
the latter is forthwith consecrated king. | 


Abhisekha, for abhiseka;. the most ‘common modern form is — 
ccoos; pasek, A.V. a Sudh. 10, 22: giloccoaitobyo—" Indfa_conse- 
crated the young man”; osooodvans, pasek pasaw, is another frequent 
expression, S.J. (A) 75: 9 33058 $005 ‘ocoooSvnd of — having made him 
king, consecrate him (as such).” I have not yet met vsoociooS, pasek 
PaAsaw, in the sense of “ blessedness” as recorded in Haswell’s. 


48, @9o8 ecood 9[E—909, 
> Janak lop dui—s85 
Janaka enters the (capital) city—40. 8 


16 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vol 1 


49. 8S a0$ 02 o«S—goe 
Kil sthan ku gahak—586 
/(Janaka) assigns their places to the officials of. state—4o. 9 


Kil = M.T. §, kuiw. Sthan, from Skt. sthéna. Gahak, P. 
gahaka = “a police officer,”. but here it is question of the officials, , civil 
at cane from the generalissimo downwards, and it means, therefore, 

“officials of state.” A defect in the glaze of the plaque makes final & of 
hak in gahak appear like ¢ in the photograph, There is no doubt that 
Gahak is meant here. . 


50. Qoy203 eA qed—901 
_  . Gnakya&k or khut—587 
The queen sends (a man) to call (Janaka), o 
The queen causes (Janaka) to be ei II 


The princess, daughter of ‘the late king, has been wooed by the highest 
officials in the kingdom; but owing to their fawning beheviour and hurry, 
she has rejected them all; she now wants to see how Mahajanaka will 
act, and sends for him. _ 3 

Or has three meanings: (i) to send, (ii) to cause to, make to, and 
(iii) it.is used in a precative sense. It is curious that in all these senses 
it corresponds | exactly to the Burmese word. ce (ce) which denotes the 
causative, the optative-precative, and which, when used independently of 
any other verb ‘and by itself, also means “to send.” (i) The first meaning 
is found in the legend on the present. plaque, if we consider the 
corresponding passage in the Pali (Fausboll, VI. 40): rajadhita 
purisarn Anapesi, “ gaccha, rajanarh upasankamitva vadehi: Sivalidevi tar 
pakkosati ti”—" the: princess ordered a man, ‘Ge; tell the king: Princess 
Sivali: summons you.’” It is true that the short legends in these plaques 
“are not translations of the corresponding passages in the Pali stories but 
are merely indicative and briefly. explanatory of the scenes represerited 
above them, so that the legend under discussion might as well ve 
translated: “the queen causes (Janaka) to be summoned.” (ii) The second 
meaning is found. in plaque No. 211, in the Candakumara-jataka, smin 
or bicar, ‘the king causes him (makes him) to investigate the cases.” 
Here, it is used as a kind of auxiliary verb, in the same sense and in the 
same manner as && kuiw, is used in the modern language. This 


PART 1] ‘TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 7 


meaning | had deduced from some of the uses of tms word in its present 
form, ¢y>5, p-’ow (with prefix. _p); two Talaing monks, to whom I submitted 
this. inscription in Candakumara, translated it. in Burmese, independently, 
in exactly the same words: “man® safi tara® kui churh® phrat. ce i’ 

(oSt0098 coapes§ o§:(GoSsod}) —" the king causes (him) to decide cases”; and 
the Talaing version of this jataka (Skem Candakumi, fol. ku) has: 

Bchogogg>. GopicBogoo8 cog gor 9, in which §, kuiw, ‘as just pointed out, 
has the meaning of the old or. (ii) The third, or precative force, i is found 
twice in the Talaing face of the Myazedi inscription pillar.’ Line 29 reads : 

sinranh e(’ = ey) wo’ or das het ku gwo sarwwafiutafian, 
“Tet (may = or) this deed of mine be the - cause (for me) to obtain’ 
omnisciencé”; in the corresponding passage of the Burmese face, line 35, 
for the Talaing or. das, “let (it) be, may (it) be,” we have: phlac 
ciy teh (Modern Burmese = phrac ce taf) where ce, as explained 
atthe beginning, of this nole, -haS a. précatiye: sense. The modern. 
equivalent of sinran in the above’ sentence, which had nol yet been 
found when Mr.. Blagden first: published the Talaing face of the Myazedi 


is inscription, has now been ascertained beyond doubt. It is 096, -sarqn; 


with loss of the infix i, reducer enough occurrence; it is found at 
‘SB, 1g: ooqfl8, sarah pap; “a deed of evil” = aoapB0l§, $aram 
pap; S.B. 25: goog 0l8, pwa saran pap, 9, pwa being a synonym. 
of o98 sarah; at Dh. Dip. 241. 3, we find it - followed. by three 
"synonymous words. which practically explain it: .coqé Bg. g coSon.. It is 
also found written caran (096), the consonants s and.c¢ being a 
interchanged, A.V. 96 under jamma,. 116 under dighnasutta ; Dh. Dip. 37. 6 
ogSodaqo3S, caran dhaw kusuiw, “an act of merit.” In line , 
the same inscription : yan. fiirfiac kyek. trey Mettey lah or 
deh go’—‘may (= or) he -not get. sight of the blessed - Buddha 
Metteyya:” “Here lah. isan emphatic negative, ‘still more; intensified 
in the modern. reduplication corcos, lah Tah = not at all (of. Burmese 
contcost, 13° 12%); or is. again: rendered: in the. Burmese’ face, line’ 39, 
by 865, ciy. fmodetn = co, ce), which is ‘the precative, and the phrase, 
lah or deh £0; “let him (may he) not get,’ by the Burmese, 
a pha ra eiy,. in which @ before phu is the old Burmese negative, 
long fallen. into. disuse, but still current | “among some Lolo tribes. 


1 Epigraphia Birnanica, Vol. I, Part I, p. 4. 


18 EPIGRAPHIA. BIRMANICA _ ‘von. 11 


Or is found. in M.T, with the ‘prefix ~, ph (0, ©), and with the 
meanings of (i) -“ to send, despatch, order,” (ii) to cause to, ‘incite to, . 
urge; ‘the precative. sense seems to have fallen into disuse. - A.V. 93, 
00 0 6g Secfo5 = P. codana; A.V. 130, 00 © 6g28 = 'P. miyojana; U.O.K. 
33. 14, og256 oSosqgo—"" to. cause lust, incite to‘ lust”; Dhm. Dip. 173. 24, 
69068 03 6g 2San300§ ogdsra2§q—'the devas “caused the fish inadvertently to 
enter the net”; S.J. (A) -fol. £2, 695§05, -‘“he sent.a man”; Dh, Dip. 96. 
6, eg rBoocnchanagoh-—"" he despatched | (some one). to enguire’ ny Sudh. 21. 19, 
G25 cgengSaoqdarc9sorGc00836—="' he ‘caused the hunter to. go with two warriors 
to bring him. , 

* 7s corresponds in meaning with. the Khmer oy, with ‘which it is 
perhaps related. J. Guesdon, in -his “ Dictionnaire . cambodgien-frangais,” 
p. 76, defines: it: “oy—donner,-.accorder ; pour, afin de—indique l'impératif, 
Je causatif, i aioe . Lower below, -he gives the example: “oy hau, 
faire. appeler” = to cause to call, aud BE. Aymonier ‘“Pretionnaire 
khmer-frangafs,*- p. 47, ui —donmer ; pour, afin de; 4 = signe du dati€ ; 
que; faire. Indique le consatt, le mode sis a le mode optatif.” 


si. e305, BS Grant —s00, 
J anak tin ‘prasid—ses8 | 
Janaka (holding the princess’ S hand). ascends, the palace—4o. 21 


Tin = M. T: 8S, twin, Prasad, a building with superposed roofs ; 
hence, a palace, from Skt. praséda ; the modern form: is G200005, pras at, 
- for soft consonants are not suffered as finals. The pure-modern Talaing word: 
for prasad is 0g (S@gaod8, tnua krakat, very frequent’ in. the literature. 
_ It is found in the Shwezigén Bell-inseription (A.D. 1557) written of conSHanc8, 
shi kanuf kragat. 


52. aacS apd ap%8—g0¢ 
Kal Janak smafi—s89 
When Janaka enquires—4o. 23 


; Mahajanaka enquires. whether the late. king had left any instructions. 
His instructions were: the kingdom should be given: to him who could we. 


“PART 1 1 ‘TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 7 19 


the. eon of ahioces Sivali and. answer some “difficult riddles propounded by 
the late king himself. All this Mahajanaka did without difficulty. 


he, “BS. gxSBRecoo8—y go - 
Kil cnéykinlofi—sgo_ 
~ (Janaka) gives: his (gold) pin ‘to, the queen—so. 30 


me naykinioa is an ornamental pin’ ‘to keep the hair or the headdress. 
in 1 place ; the Burmese version of the. same stories wherein this. word is 
found renders it by 05 (cham ‘-kyan)” and BicogoEayé (a° shyon kyan), both 
of which mean an ornamental. hairpin. The modern. forms of the word are. 
grog,” cndai Anan; gd0o$6, - cndai kanhdaa; goof, cnaais i 
-anhan; opis, tnaai khnaa; apag6, snaai kn Aa; ag 36, snaai_ 
khnan; in which the medial Z and the / in.cnaat kinlo n have been 
-lost; the equivalence -of e—& (on) and- eS (3m) is. not ‘infrequent, of. 
apcilieeas, ayoh ala, S.B. 27. 1, and sooté&socc, aya ala, more | 
common ; 6998," gloa, S.J. (B) 36; and the more common $6 glaa. In | 
the passages where. this ‘word is found it regularly translates the Pali sez, a 
‘pin, a needle; the passage in Mahajanaka to which the present plaque refers - 
reads . (Fausboll VI. 40. 30): “ sisato. suvannasiicirh . niharitva Sivalideviya: é 
_hatthe adasi,” which the modern Talaing version . translates very | Closely . : 
“gcBiSaeQagro§So05 P,05380} JadQayS oBockoQuiSofq. “Cudai kinlon is also found in 
plaque No. 321 of the Vessantara-jataka ; ; the. Pali (VI. 519. 23) has: 
‘ tassa. suvanpasiicirh datva,” “ he gave the hunter’ a golden | ornamental — 


: hairpin,” which is put ‘in the modern version : + don ;EaoSyoo!Sa0cBafoqagun At 


AV. 92. the meaning of ro3s is given as % ‘ cti]amani” “= a crest jewel, 


which is no. doubt .a. slip; the exact meaning as i pin, needle ” is borne out 
i by ‘the first member of. the word, Q>, cnadai, snaai, which by _ itself 


means . a’ “pin, a, needle, something long cused in, keeping something | in its 
proper ‘place, such as for instance a wheel, GS, AY. 194, rathagutt?, and 39, 

ant = 0gdq03§03, snaai-muh ri kwi =a linchpin ; and-in this sense ‘is 
equivalent to the Burmese oy (kyan) in the two expressions given above, 
and’ which reappears in cafcofoye (kan? lan? kyan), a bolt. Moreover, the 
true Talaing expression for a . ies diadem ip @Q Imu; AV. 92, 

hla ” = agjoa0d coog B/S ccoda:, “a ciifa means. - also a crest (gj) tied 


20 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA. [ VoL. ir. 


(placed) on the. head.” P. W. ‘Schmidt in his “ Buch des R&g’4wan, der 
Kénigsgeschichte’’ (a9008 cpolo& ‘aecnS “eop8),} page 74, has quite mis- 
understood the word; he translates kndf in sndai knda as “ chair,” 
a meaning. it has not 5 this. means the rafters which support the planks. 
of a floor. 


54-57 = Plaques 591-94, missing. 


58, ‘The inscription on this ‘Plaque: is completely ‘spoilt,. only the first 
“letter uy, and the last S, being eo as: well as the number 595. 


59. gé Bos os 9¢6 
Smit tit nyyan—596, 
The king goes out to his pleasaunce—44. 17 


Uy yan = PL uyydne }. ‘a form from the Skt., udyan, is also met with. 


60.. e905 e005 (63/055 —9 e4 
Janak mey truk—597 
Janaka looks at the mango (trees)—44. 18 
The king coniing to the gate of his pleasaunce looks at two mango trees, 
one of which is laden with sweet fruits, the other bearing no fruit at all. He 
plucks one fruit and eats it, ‘intending to eat more on his return. But as he 
passés into the garden, everybody in his’ retinue plucks and eats fruits, and. 


‘those who do not get any strip off the leaves and break the branches, leaving 
the beautiful tree all broken. 


61. e305 E95 GjS—yeo 
Janak fac truk—598 
. Janaka sees the mango (tree) —44. 28 


On his return, Mahajanaka perceives the mango tree all battered and 
_ broken; on enquiry, he learns it is on account of its fruit, and that the other 


i Published in the Sitsungsberichte der Kais. _ Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, Band CLI, 1906, 


PART 1] | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA a 


tree near by, having no-fruit, has not been molested. This makes him. ponder. 
“ This kingdom of mine,” muses he, “js like the fruitful tree; it invites ruin 
and desolation ; the ascetic life, on the other hand,- is like the barren tree, 
nobody disturbs it; for the ascetic possesses no riches; why should | not be 
like the barren tree?”. And he resolves then and there to become an 
ascetic. This decision explains the plaques which follow. 

Nac = M.T, go5, fiat, to see. 


62, YE a905 Bim§—yee 
Smin Janak kinkan—s99 
King Janaka instructs. (the. generalissimo)—45. 7 


As-he intends living the life - of a recluse in his. palace, he -gives 
instructions to the: -generalissimo. that none but two servants should be allowed | 
to see him, and that he, the general-in-chief, should mgs on the affairs ‘of 
state in conjunction with the high officials, 

_Kinkan, «to instruct’ = M.T. 0008, . BARNS variants are kiak al, 
_kinkal, kifkan.- 


63. GE spo cyecled—Goo 
— Smin Janak luno’—6o00° 


King Janaka- lives ‘in retirement—52. 19: 


‘Luo’, ‘to be- retired, solitary, lonely, = M.T.. ly Inu ; r for the fined. 
8 (’), see. note on pa, plaque No. 4 3 | 


64. 9F B§evE Bo8S—¢oo 
-Raf birbeh sikil—6or | 


They kid, two attendants) bring the alms- bonit (and) give it 
. (to ie cs Pe 22 


Ran, see note on ran, plaque 5. Sikil, “to give,” it is. the verb - 
kil. = M.T. 096, kuivw, 4 to. give,” ‘with prefix si: = M.T. 9, Sa, and. se 
This | prefix is also found. in the Nyauhg-U Shwezigén- saerpuan,” line 28, | 


2 Edited’ by c. 0, Blagde, Epigrophia Birmanica Vol. I, Part I, p. 22 fi 


22 _EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA. [ VoL. it 


“in the word sik-im, to: -smile;”” in the passage: ma tirla pa kir- 
‘im: wo'cii, ma. het yo; sak:-het kyak buddha tarley gumlon 
sik*im’ ci kah’ sak; ‘which ‘means: ‘“ What is the. reason. that my lord. 
smiles ‘thus? Without reason the lord Buddhas do not smile.’ ” This prefix 
09, 's (a), is frequent in modern literary Talaing; the old form. si, however, 
has not been lost, and it is still found written’8, si, but it is far less 
frequent than sa (s). Here are. a few examples { have gleaned in the 
course of my reading; it will be remarked that, in each example, this — 
prefix denotes the future tenses -S.M. 13: QR ogped 08805 $08 oBoogu $oage5 

§o0z caoo§ 03 optaBu.0dd805 Be Bevo —'* Sire, my father is with child, it is. now 
‘ ten months, ‘he has not yet brought forth, and I know -not (whether) he will 

die”; S.M.21, Oop spazsanom PBoh3q—" Sire, only to-morrow shedl we: answer 

_ this ”; the next twa.ekamplas are interesting because, in the same passage — 
in two: different manuseripts, one form is written with 08, si, in one, and 
with oo .(s) in the other: manuscript ; _ S.M. (A) fol. gha, BSnogcSagood yd 
~ endSagotaoSac§, 0386038. 238.0b BecooSop2q25, and S.M. (B) fol. &ha, BSagcdagaod 
Q lord aqckcofach oA9E03§ S805 69305 aq" Sire, | shold take away: the 
thieves’ and daegits who are -in, prison in chains and irons.’ Similarly, in the | 
following passage, S. M. (A) has the. full prefix 8 and. (B). the attenuated 
co Garey 803059 QeQrc5o3 F8ado80§ (a9§)s: qe" Sire, if we do get a big or 


small (piece of the “sand-rope), seeing it, we shall (be able to) twist (such 


a.rope).” These’last two examples are sufficient to show that 08 and 0 are. 
the same prefix.. The following are examples of 9 ies the future, ° 
picked out of a large number: Dhm. Dip. 159. 16, 90xg - + gr§8g>q— 

“to-day... he wzél enter -parinirvana,” the: corresponding | passage in Pali_ 
‘(Dhp.’ Atth.. 384) reads: “alf'eva . parintbbayissat, Sudh. 29,9, 31§cogo3| 
- QH{BeoScloSe 05355 aah — "i in’. this” _place—prophesied the Omniscient. one— 
well: dwell «a . tooth-relic’ of mine.” Gpi. 9. 12, - coSaficBoo: bo 2d00GoSeao05e.. 

aoSq—"* let him first ‘return to-morrow, I wif. pluck all (his feathers).” 
Dhm. Dip. 27.12, BBosooyD ‘engengyrcoySoGsoed8sbogq—" that I wish to 
devour you is not the fact, I shall: eat only rice and. meat.” ot 
fol. 24, ° cabBopRgec pofacqe5a05 hq —"* if my ‘mother does not - tell . | 
(about my father), 1+ shaél bite off her nipple, » Dhm. Dip. 18. ie 
90080} 39328] 5ag&0 caodggrq 8—“ having. got the gold, I shall go on board 
ship with the others, mother.” S.Jv 6, 15, olq§§sdgg>0QoS9GSo08[Soiu o8§ _ 
QlSzlod>GsoggrAScor05q8—“‘ Mother, if you have (property with you) I'-shall go 


PART 1} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA. 23 


trading and, ‘having : got plenty of ‘property, 1 shall go and take the - 
‘kingdom which is my father’s portion.” — | 
_>* But 8 and oo do ‘not always denote the future, sh in most passages 
where they occur they do not seem to add anything to the sense of the - 
verb; at least, Ihave as yet not been able to distinguish any other 
connotation but that of the future in a good many cases, except perhaps. 
that, in a very few. passages, this prefix (probably from tke old form a, 
see plaque No. 85). appears to possess a causative force, or active 
_sense ‘in that it seems to turn neuter verbs into active. But the examples I 
have as yet collected are perhaps too few to’ formulate a rule upon. How- 
ever I - give them here, hoping that Talaing scholars, just now unfortunately 
so few, may add to them from: their own notes: 

. Sudh, 14, 10, 99009) oacqdSso001§ 638 0313 6OQ0}68 cocBoSeoafefc} oa 
| Sete eapo$cGo} c@S6co2q—" Atappa became king near the: Asah forest. 
Now, a woman, having got a gada, put to sleep her child in it, and covering 
him with another. .one-ran away”; the meaning of 0305, tik, is, to ‘sleep, 
and x80, satik, here = ‘put to sleep. ._ 

SB. 9, ea02$G08§ - Bi$aw> g31[Goos2050} 0 sa cbiaae offcoB§eGosoc$§6q—the 
corresponding Pali (Fausb. VI. 167. 11), of which the Talaing is an exact 
translation, reads : Rajadhitararh | pasidam aropetva aladkatadibbasayane — 
 ntpayjepesum, “The princess. was taken up into the palace and made to lie 
_ on an ornamented divine couch”; here 835, stik, answers to the causal ~ 
ni dey 

GONG (A) 63, geqBcBocBocerBoob6ch OB guocaBojcoorSqo20}— Queen Sivali 
os "wept, and being unable to make him go back”—the Pali here has nivattesi, 
_a_causal, verb; S.J..(B) in the: same’ passage reads, AeQooss08, kuiw smia 
‘kalea, ‘in which Hy kK uiw,: is. one a of the A ve causal plxillary verbs. 


“Ge. osc8 iS th J 
Smia Janak kis—602 
pu shaves. (his hair and beard) -—52, 23 | 
Kas = = M.T. of, kah, to shave. 


: 
A gada is a broad covering made of leaves, somewhat concave, ~pnich protects the head, 


should id back d to the kn fi 
rien ers and back down to , nees, from sun or rain -the Burmese for this is Ratu, pronounced 


a4 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA {vou 1 


66, a308 BS p08, B—Goe 
| Janak cis nor shi—609 
-Janaka descends from:(his) house—53. 3 
Cis = = MT. 8, ceh; the form 85, ih, intermediate between the 

old Talaing cis and the modern.ceh is, however, frequent enough, for 
instance at. Sudh. g. 9, 24.12; Dhe. 153: 4; similarly, there is an inter- 
“mediate form, @o5, phyih, at Sudh. 21. 17, 24. 1, which points to an old 
form phyis (= o8s5, see note on pcan, plaque 33), the more common 
modern form oe oyc5, phyeh. 


67- 70, Four plaques are missing here, © ‘that is, up to .No. eae 
ineluded, since plaque 71 bears’ wrongly 602 instead of 603.. The plaque 
‘bearing No. 608 which, in the regular order of the episodes, comes lower: 
down, has been so numbered by mistake, but it is in its right place on the 


Ananda. | 
71, BE e908 © F§—Go) - 


Smii Janak ma ir—602 
_ Janaka leaves the world—52, 24-29 


This plaque bears No. 602 ‘like serial No. 65. For ir,. see plaque 
340 _ 


72. -gsayd B&—Goo 
Gnakyek ptin—610 
The queens beat (their: breasts) —53. 9 
The chief . queen, not - having seen | the king for a long time, goes. 
up to his room followed by the lesser queens; .they meet him on the 
stairs, going down clad in the garb of a recluse, but do not recognize 


him. They soon perceive, however, that ‘it was none but. himself; they 
follow. and come up with him in the palace yard ; they dishevel their hair 


‘and beat: their breasts. 


PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON: THE.‘ANANDA 25 


The verb ptin is somewhat spoiled in the plaque; the 7, though 
visible, is very faint; but this word is very clear in thé estampage. The 
Pali here (VI. 53. 9) has the verb sa@tsumbhat, to beat,-which is no doubt 
the meaning of pti; in the photograph, two queens, representing as usual 
a very large number, are shown dishevelling their hair and beating their 
breasts. There is an adverb, G6 38 tintin, used only in the expression 
BEBEOREIES, “to beat the breast” in sorrow, which is probably connected 
with the old ptin; 8&6 oS seems to be imitative of the sound made when 
striking the breast, perhaps ptifi also implies this idea. Perhaps the word is 
stint; the meaning would be the same; but I think the letter is really a 9. 

Gaalyel. a variant of gnakyak; cf O.T. dak and dek,. 
water; pnda and pne®, candle, lamp.. | 


73. QS0YOS EYE: 0 0R4—-Gd0 
- Gnakyete tubah ‘ma tur—621 
The queen shows’ (Janaka)’ the” (town) *burning—sq. 10 


Sivalidevi and the lesser queens follow Mahajanaka step by step, trying 
to. make him:: change: his .mind; the. queén. tries several: -expedients for this 
purpose; but in vain. - Here she has. ordered: some: old: houses to be: set: on 
fire, to make him believe MithilS is burning and thus induce him to retrace 
his steps. 

Tubah = M.T. 8, thbah, ‘to show; tur, to burn = M.T. 0g, t d, 
with loss of the final consonantiand the lengthening:’of the vowel by compen- 
sation; cf. kwil = ,. éwZiy skamir.=. of kami. 

There are two plaques numbered 611: _ the present. one,.and another 
lower down. | | 


74, 2908 Bod B—Go; 
Fanak. crit: ti—622 
. Janaka draws a line on the ground-=s6, 2 


To prevent the queen from following him further, the king draws a line 
across the road and threatens with dire punishment anyone who dares cross 
it; he then proceeds on his way. The queen, in her sorrow, rolls herself 
on the ground and thus “breaks the line,” and the pursuit begins anew. 


4 


26 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [ VoL. 1 


Crit, to draw a line, is still in use: Dhm. Dip. 68. 21, 38 ccosd oo8od5 
9o5po5—"' like drawing a line in water with a stick”; S.J. (A) 66, saq$aj$cogé 
cof GoGdcoig— “the king drew a line across the road with his bamboo staff”; 
a form ©§5, caPic, is also found at A.V. 42—udaranhga = o85953g—"a fold. 
of the skin of the belly”; here it is a noun meaning a line, a fold; 0§05 is the 
literary word; the more common expression is coq03, 0495, sarak, carak. 
The Talaing version of the Mahajanaka-jataka, ms. (B), uses the word 0993, 
S.J. (B) 66, 309} se$szcod Gggsot0qo8en5 8s928ee5—" with his staff, he drew a line 
on the ground of the main road.” Both forms are used together in the sense 
of a line, ibid: o@§od09)F y$ oRoSoqoich SgagSucdenjo} qcgoroj—‘and (9$) the 
people, saying ‘the queen has obliterated the king’s line... ’” 

Again another plaque, the one bearing the legend, ¢(g05 aso8 o (8, 
which comes further on, bears the number 6:2. 


7§. a6 8g, 92q8—Goo 
Doi dindu N&rad—6o8 | 
(Janaka) receives the instruction of Narada—=56, 22 


Narada, a hermit, seeing the plight of Janaka, and wishing to strengthen . 
his resolution, comes through the sky and instructs him, 


76. 3|€ 831 Sal-—Gog 
Dak dindu Mizi—6og | 
He receives the exhortation of Miga—sg. 1 
Another hermit, by name Migajina, likewise exhorts him. 
The upper part of this plaque has disappeared; there remains only the 
legend. 


77, @905 ead gi3—Gs0 
Janak ket pcun—6re 
. , Janaka takes the meat—63. 5 


A dog runs away with a piece of meat ; coming near Mahajanaka, he 
drops it through fright, and the king picks it up for his meal. 
Pcun, meat = M.T. qi$, phywn; see note on pcan, No. 33. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA ay 


78, @po3 0960295. gi$—Ga9 
Janak. lukow pcun—6ir ~ 
Janaka breaks the (piece of) meat (and puts it in his bowl)—63. 5-6 


Lukow: this, I think, means “to break”; the Pali does not mention 
this action, it says: Vamsakhandam adéya puichttod patte katod .. . partbhurjt 
(VI. 63. 5-6), “He took the piece of meat, wiped it, put it in his alms- 
bowl. . . and ate it.” The modern word for “to wipe” is $05, juit, the 
Khmer has chut (Aymonier), and! know of no other word approaching the _ 

form lukow, which means to wipe. The photograph, however, is helpful 
here. Mahajanaka is represented as breaking a long piece of meat and putting 
it in his alms-bowl. There is a-verb, oS, kaw, meaning to break, and lukow 
is the same word with the prefix / (uw); this verbal prefix / is still common in 
the modern language: 6d, lagam (= 6], gm), to go, walk, S.J. (B) 6s, 
#1§coda0qo5 codlacz0}—="then, having gone part of the way”; 95, Ipak 
(= ol, pak), to halve, tear or cut open, S.B. 25. 27, éabog5ca}g95§—" he 
(the suparma) pecked and tore open the naga’s belly’; co§o5, lapuik (= 
405, puik), to tear out, uproot, S.B. 15. 25, S.M. & 7; 0805, labuit (= 
05, buit), to fling,. cast, S.B. te. 22; o}05, Ipak (605, pak), to open, 
As far as I have been able to judge, this prefix adds nothing to the original 
sense of the verb; it is probably to be distinguished from the prefix co, la, 
_ which forms nouns from verbs, unless, indeed, these nouns in co be used 
again as verbs, for there is practically no difference made between noun and 
-verb, the same word. being used as one or the other. Lukow = lakow 
= kow = kaw (modem); the equivalence of medial o and a is very 
‘common, . p 8 a 


79, eogeS aged o gi$-—Go; 
Trey Janak ca pcun—6r2 
The Lord Janaka eats the meat—63. 6 


Trey = M.T. @, trai, excellent, blessed. As a substantive = 
lord; of trey sangha, “lords of the Church” = monks (Blagden). | 


28 re -—PIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA “= [ von. it 


80. 9002S ap cdooS—-Go9 
Gulai ku samwat—613 
(Janaka) converses with the child—64. 18 


On the road, they meet a little girl playing; on one wrist she wears 
only one bracelet and two on the other; these two, being together, jingle. 
Janaka thinks there: is there ‘a good lesson for Sivali, and hopes ‘the girl will 
be clever enough to see it. too, He-asks her. the reason of. the jingling; 
the child tells. him, and. adds. that the jar. is. owing. to ie second bracelet:; 
on the. other arm..the only: one . bracelet - does ‘Not, Jar; ’ says..she,. {if 
you desire to. be ‘happy,. live. alone.” . The king. and. “queen. a take separate 
roads ; - but .the latter,. unable: to. control cher: grief, -again follows. ‘him ..and 
enters. the town. of .Thiina. ‘with. him, 


81... 0903: 9998. od-—-G 99. 
Janak fac kam—614: 
Janaka’ sees “the arrow—66, 5 


They come upon. a. fletcher, who. Js making an. arrow. straight; by . looking 
along | it with one -eye, closing the other. . With; the same. intention . .as with 
the child,, Janaka asks him why he does that. The ‘other.- answers : that 
looking with two eyes at, an arrow. really spoils, the. straight ‘ai of the sight, 
and that, if he, Janaka, wants: to be happy, he: should live alone. 

Kam =  M. T., _ arrow. 


82, e308 20008 7 
Janak lop grip—614 
Janaka enters the forest--68. 7 


The queen still follows him; at last she swoons, and he enters into a 
forest near by, and cannot be followed again. Sivali returns to the capital, 
and there becomes a recluse in the mango-grove. 

| Grip forest = M.T. 68, gruip; ef cip = 9, cup, to arrive, 
and tin = o§, tuin, to go up. 


It will be remarked that this. and the previous ‘plaque are both num- 
_bered 614. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES. ON THE ANANDA 49 


II], —SAMA-JATAKA 


This jataka is better known among the Burmese as Suvanna- 
shyam-jat; it will be remarked that they have preserved the Sanskrit 
form! almost intact, the Pali being sima; in the~Ananda plaques, the 
word is written syam, which is’ still nearer the Sanskrit (¢yama); the 
modern ‘Talaings call it jat-sam, following the Pali form. 


_Two persons, husband and wife, become ascetics; she conceives a son 
‘miraculously, who -is,.called Suvannasima. Both parents become 
blind, and. Sama. looks after, them. . One day a king | comes hunting and 
shoots him with an. arrow. -The king: attends regretfully upon the parents; 
Ss: Am a. is miraculously healed and both his parents recover their sight. . 


_.Patisan Syam—6i5 - 
Conception of Cyama—73, 29 


Parisut Syam—616— 
Birth _ of Cyama—74. r 


- Parisut, bringing forth, from Skt: prasdéi. 


85, -qGoqdod oy95—G97 
_ Phum sutik. Syam—617 
They (his parents) bathe and put Cyama to sleep—74. 4 


Phim = M.T. 4, phurn, to bathe (some one); this form is 
probably due to the -assimilation of 0, pa(p), which forms causal and 


1 Burmese og, shy, almost always represents the Sanskrit '¢7; ‘¢f, ogegq ™ pastva, 


30 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL. 11 


active verbs, with a following , 4: 06 = §; so, ood, pahap = of, 
phap, to feed; 25, hap = to eat; oof, pahuai = 4 phuai, to 
mix; oj}, huai = to be mixed. Sutik, to put to sleep; on the force of 
prefix s(u), wide note on Sikil, No. 64. Whether the old prefixes sz and 
su are to be treated as being different, the first denoting more particularly 
the future and the latter an active or causal sense, it is impossible to 
determine now, for we have too few examples of verbs with su prefixed 
in this sense; to decide such points many more clear examples are 
needed; whereas the old prefix 08, si, and its attenuated form 99, s, 
are common ‘enough in the modern language. oq, su, has not, so far as 
I am aware, yet been found, except in its attenuated form, 2, s. The 
lengthening of a medial vowel, as Zz, in this word sutik, was common 
enough: skir, to dig, and skir; glik, a- loin-cloth, and gliki 
cin, an elephant, and cin; din, a city, and dun; tiy, the sign 
of the past, and tuy; phdmm in the present plaque and phum in 

the next (86). 7 | 


86, 290§ 95 oqG25—Go0 
Supar phum Syam—618 
The suparnas bathe Cyama—74. 8 


After his parents have bathed him, the suparnas take him to their cave, 
bathe him, take him to the top of a mountain and make on his forehead 
the sectarial marks. 


Supar, from the Skt. suparna = M.T. 2008, sapaw, S.B. 20; 
A.V. 81 = garuja. The word kinnara, used in the Pali (VI. 74. 3) 
instead of suparna (P. supanna), has become in M.T. 35, kanaw. 


87, agaS Beouos SoS—¢og 
Syam titey ptit—6r9 
Cyama leads (his parents) out (of their shelter)—75. 6 


His parents take shelter from the rain among the roots of a tree, but a 
snake living there in an antshill becomes angry and emits a poisonous 


PART 1] ©  TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 31 


breath; both become blind. At last Cyama finds them; hé holds a long 
pole out to them, of which they seize the end, and he leads them out of 
their shelter. 


Titey = MT. oo, thatai, more often written 3%, datai, which 
means, to take along with one, by holding the hand, as for instance a child, 
or an animal with a rope, or a blind man by holding the end of his stick 
(as is the case in this plaque), etc.; od seems to be the colloquial, and 
so the literary, form. Here are a few examples: Dh. Dip. 94. 4— 
ad@emoSsoo2$o}—" she took away her child, holding him by the hand”; Dhce. 
148. 15—pd§Q3$ o acdgayS gar202— “like Indra leading his queen Sujata by 
the hand,” S.V. fol. kha, of . . . s@a@sao0d acoapelas Richa —" Madd... 
taking her two children by the hand, ascended the. cart.” 


Ptit, to cause to come out = M.T.; for the long medial #, see 
sutik, No. 85. 


88. ars05 9q05 08$ eqaad—Gyo 
Kal Sy&m tin tmo’--623 
As Gyama goes up the mountain—75. 23 


Gyama goes, followed by a band of sinnaras, to gather fruit in the 
mountain for. his parents. 


On the Ananda, this plaque is wrongly placed, as well as wrongly 
numbered 623; it should be numbered 620 according to the course of the . 


events in the story; I have here placed it in its proper sequence. 


89, ogo5 8§Go5 639085 sg—e@yo 
Syam pinrih abo’ aba—62o0 | 


Cyama ministers to his parents—75. 28 


Coming back from the mountain, he makes it his duty to wash their 
feet, warm their cold limbs and give them the friits he has brought back. 


32 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 


Pinrih, to minister to, attend on, take care of; I know of no modern 
form of this word; it corresponds to the P. pativyjaggatt. 


go. oy28 9$ coped FS—¢ yo 
Syam mun slop grip—621 
Cy4ma informs (his parents) he is going to enter the forest—76. 5 


He informs his parents he is going into the forest to bathe and fetch 


water. | 
Slop: the prefix s here denotes the future, the immediate future. 


QI, ogoS |ec008 S—6 5) 
Syim lop grip—622 
Gyama enters ie forest—76. 6 


He goes to che bathing place i in the forest followed by two tame deer. 


92, M25 ogaS_opa5 990d —@ yg. 
Kal Syam tuk d2k-—624 
As Gyama i ig ition: water—76. 22 


Plaque 88,. as has. been said, IS: wrongly numbered 62%. 


93. m8 GE of oypdS—Gy9 
Kai smi pafi Syam—625 
The king shooting Cyama—76, -24 
King Piliyakkha is hunting; while Cyama is drawing water, he shoots 
him with a poisoned arrow which goes through his body. 
Pafi = M.T. vf, pan, to shoot, with a bow. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 33 


94. BE goood og 032S—Gj 6 
Smin gulaii ku Syam—626 
The king converses with Cyama—77. 14 f 
Piliyakkha runs-to. Cyama, and a conversation follows; the king, 
touched by the virtue and meekness of Cyadma and his devotion to his 


parents, promises that after his death—for the boy’s wound is deadly— 
he will himself look after his parents in the forest as if they were his own. 


95. 80008 cooS— 654 
Pilayak yam—627 
Piliyakkha weeps—82. 25 


Then the usual signs of approaching dissolution make: theit appeatance, 
and King Piliyakkha, thinking Cyama dead, weeps bitterly. 


96. S8c00005 gaxd—G yo 
 Pilayak pujaw—628 | 
Piliyakkha does homage (to Cyama)—84. 26 
He offers flowers to the body, sprinkles water on it, and goes, taking — 
with him the jar from which he had sprinkled the water. 
Pujaw, for pijaw = M.T. gf, pijau, from the P. paya, an 
offering, to offer. A small dot on pu appears to make the reading pum- 
jaw, but it is only a defect in the glaze. 


97. acd BE gE gE oqd—aye 
Kal smin ran pyunh Syam—629 
When the king brings (the parents) and shows (them) Cyima—go, 3 
For ran, see No. 64, and also ran, No.5. Pyun, to show = M.T. 
@1§, pfiua; this word is found also in plaques 199 ‘and 316. 
5 


34 EPIGRAPHIA ‘BIRMANICA [ VoL. 1 


98. 629005 9g 028 0095—¢90 
_ Abo’ aba Syam yam—63o | 
The mother and father of Cyama weep—go. 5 


99. © cogo3§u0r—Goo 
Pa saccakirya—631 
(They) make an act of asseveration—gt..12 


Then the mother, the father, and a goddess, each in turn make a 
solemn act of asseveration, so as to counteract the effects of the poison and 
thus snatch Cyama from death. 


TOO, M05 aS cmd5—Go/J 
Kal Syam kew—632 
Then Cyama (rises) bright (again)—92. 25 

The act of asseveration produces (as it always does when truthfully 
made) its effects, and Cyama rises fair and strong as before; both parents 
recover their sight, Every one is happy, and the king, reverentially saluting 
Cyama, returns to Benares. 

Kew = M.T. cod, kew,. to be bright, clear, beautiful; happy; it 
answers here to the P. salyénadassana; in common parlance, they have 
an expression, qoSco25, muk kew, which means “to have a bright, happy 
face.” 


FOI, SE GoQr’, og2d-—Go0 
Smit Igor Syam—633 
The king reverentially salutes Gyama—o4. 7 


Lhor = M.T, ess, lnow. 


PARTI] | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 38 


1V.-—NIMI-JATAKA 


Nimi is a very holy king, ruling in Videha.: Sakka sends his charioteer, 
Matali, to fetch him and show him round all the heavenly mansions. and the 
hells. After reaching a great old age, his barber shows him his first grey 
hair; then the king renounces the world and becomes an ascetic. . 


The Pali has the form Nem# once only, at page 96. 24, and has 
regularly imi: everywhere else. The. Talaings and Burmese havé adopted 
the form Memt. . 


102, 103, corresponding to Nos. 634 and 635 and probably cepre- 
senting the conception and birth of Nimi, are missing. 


¥O4. 6005 com} cs8—G a 
Mey laksan Nemi—636 
(The fortune-tellers) look at Nimi’s (bodily) signs—g6. 20 


105. mos 638 BI—C0r 
Kal Nemi kmin—637 
When Nimi is ruling—96. 27 


Nimi’s. father becomes a hermit in his mango-grove and makes over the 
cares off the kingdom’ to his son, who becomes king. 


106. 308 e93—Co0 
in smafi Nemi—632 
Indra-is questioned by Nimi—98. 3 


A. doubt arises in Nimi’s mind as to whether almsegiving or a retired 
holy life is better. Sakka, wishing to solve the doubt, comes into the 
presence of Nimi, and, on being questioned by him, answers that a secluded 
ascetic life is better than alms-giving. 

Sma = MT. ap§, smn, here used in a passive sense, cf. No, 298, 


36 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vo. it 


107, 0208 $o§ «s8—Go¢ 
Matali niman Nemi—639 
‘Matali invites Nimi (to get into the chariot)—103. 29 


The gods in the Tavatirhsa heaven become desirous of beholding so 
pious a king, and ask Sakka to bring him to the heavenly abodes. Sakka 
sends his charioteer Matali to fetch him. M4&tali invites Nimi to come 
into the heavenly chariot. . 


108, 20008 99095 co$ecqpS5—Ggo 
Matali smafi tanrow—64o 
Matali asks which way (Nimi wishes to go)—104. 19 


Matali then asks the king which road he desires to take first: that of 
the hells or that of the heavens? Nimi replies he will visit the hells first. 

Tanrow = M.T. od, tarau, a road, way; a variant is tinrow; 
another variant, cinrow, is. found in Pagan -Talaing Inscriptions; 
the equivalence, in Talaing, of the palatals and dentals surd (aspirate and 
unaspirate) is very frequent; cf proqd, clah cardai, 093, tlah 
caradai, majesty, glory, magnificence, pomp; beauty, grace, charm; 
9238, cmadai cmin, ogd$§, tmaai jmin, a present, gift; osos5, 
ca-a’, cososd, tha-a’, and also oo, ta, to vomit; of$, canhin, of$§, 
tanin, to carry (on the shoulder); og:, camlah, oog:, tamlah, free, 
not enslaved; §, cuiw, §, -duiw, up to, until; %, jwi, 8, dwi, the 
left (side); @95, jaram, sep; daram, and oS, dharam, a granary. 


109, 638 8§ sqaS—Ggo 
Nemi bir narak—641 


Nimi looks at hell—105. 29 


Bir = M.T, 4, buiw 


PART. 1 ] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 37 


110, 678 8§ 800§ 02§—69J 
Nemi bir wiman swar—642 
Nimi looks at the heavenly mansion (of the goddess Birani)—117. 2 


A defect in the glaze makes mz look like mi. 


111, $8 Qooog8, 2Q gi—SG0 
Nimi gulafi ku In—643 


Nimi converses with Indra—127. 30 


The dot which appears to be on the gu of gulafi is only a defect in 
the glaze of the plaque. 


“12, 638 83, poxs—Ggg 
Nemi dindu fiah—644 
Nimi instructs (his) ‘people (in the practice of the Law)—128, 30 


Nah, besides the meaning “he, she,” given in Haswell’s, also means, 
first, a person, as in the expressions gosee5, fiah jnok, “a great person,” 
a chief; o:5S fiah gman, “a person of courage,” a warrior;  pot9j6, 
fiah dun, “a person of the city,” a citizen, etc.; second, the people, as 
in opeot, tlafiah, “the lord of the people,” the king; in the passage 
corresponding to this plaque the Pali has mahéjano (VI. 128.27); third, it 
is also used -as an interrogative = Who? what? which? Sudh. 9. 13, 
e103 03/5 ge.pes—" Who is this little girl, sir?”; Sudh. 28. 2, goss008 06 005§ 
cop—" What were those sixteen wonders ?”; S.B. 12, 07899:9ecep— Who 
are you, sir?”; S.J. 5, g9s§e§es>ecqp— Who is my father? ”, 


113. $8 coed SBcodss—eoy 
Nimi mey sinko’—645 
Nimr sées (his) grey hair—128, 31 


As with his father, so also with Nimi; his barber perceives the first 
grey hair and shows it to him. 


38 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA you. it 


114, BE e983 o eG{—eoe 
- Smih Nemi ma ir—646 
King Nimii leaving the world—129. 3 


Then, following his father’s example, Nimi enters upon an ascetic life. 


For ir, see No. 34. 


Vi~—MAHA-UMMAGGA-JATAKA 


The king of Videha has. four wise men, so self-styled; there appears 
Mahosadha, the Bodhisatta, a fifth and real wise man. Then follows a bout 
of wit between Mahosadha-and the four others, the latter never being able 
to give the right answers to numerous problems and knotty questions, the 


former invariably succeeding. The four false wise men try in many ways to 


undo Mahosadha, but he finally triumphs over them. 


_ This story, which is very popular, is not known among the Buriese by 
the name of ‘ Mahd-ummagga,” but as “ Mahosadha-jat,”. ”. after the name 


of the hero; the Talaings call it ‘‘ jat-Mahos.” 


115, 0f00$, ocur205— G91 
Patisan Mahos—647 
Conception of Mahosadha—33o. 5 


116, 080905 escosxds — ego 
 Parisut Mahos—648 _ 
Birth of Mahosadha—338. 7 


GU ee mood 8 0305 B$o058—Gge 
- K&l In kil kin-uy—649 
When Indra gives the medicinal herb -(to Mahosadha)—341. 1: 
Sakka, desiring to make it known to the world that the Bodhisatta 


Was 


born among men, came and placed a medicinal he etb.in the baby'e hand: 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 39 


this medicine cured instantly all sorts of diseases; the child was therefore 
called Mahosadha, “ He ofthe: great medicine.” 
Kin-uy = MT. 03j, ga+u-uai, and 08, ga-’uai, medicine. 


118, 0600908 0805 HA$g05—@go 
Mahos kil kin-uy—651 
MMahosadha gives the medicine (to his mother)—331. 16 


This piaque is wrongly numbered 651, instead of 650. 


Z1Q, © Beooss oevosd— G90 
Pa himo” Mahos—65:. 
The naming of Mahosadha—3 32. 1 


120, 0600205 6808: oB§iu02—G 9 y 
| Mahos kil kiryi—652 
Mahosadha gives ornaments (to the thousand children) —332. 9 


One thousand boys are found to have been born at the same time as 
Mahosadha, and the father of the latter resolves they should be his son’s- 
attendants.. A festival is celebrated for them, at which they are given 
ornaments. | 

Kiry 4, from the Pali 4¢r#y@, and kriyd; -but in Talaing, as well as 
in Burmese, this word has acquired the meaning of: articles of dress, orna- 
ments, utensils, tools. 


121, 0600008 B§ 02 gocS—Gqo 
Mahos wifi ku puwak—69§3: 
Mahosadha plays with (his) companions——332. 10 
Puwak, a companion; a follower, attendant = M.T. 905, bwak; cf. 


Dhm. Dip. 28. 12, @¢8 sog5a(Gcducosec 59, ogdSaog.— he subdued the fierce 
demon,.and the demon became his attendant.” It is also found written 9005, 


40 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, 11 


bhawak, at S.B. 18 = coooiiod, bhawak knak, a follower, retinue, 
and corresponds, in the Pali of the same story, to partvdra (Fausb. VI. 186. 
10); cody, bhawak krau, is again found at S.B. 27. This word is 
derived from the verb 05, bak, to follow; cf .also’ M.T. ce5, bok, a 
follower. 


122, 615 scood G5—Gy¢ 
Dow lop jrap—654 


(Mahosadha’s companions). run to enter the rest-house—332, 15 


Mahosadha is now seven years of age. While playing with his com- 
panions, an unseasonable rainstorm bursts forth; he, uncommonly strong, runs 
and enters a rest-house; the other children follow him, tumbling and bruising 
their limbs. 

Dow, to run = M.T, 6, dau; jrap = M.T., a hall built on the 
roadside for the convenience of travellers, a rest-house; of. the Burmese : 
a95, jarap. — 


123, 0600205 oBcS w§—eg9 
-Mahos kil thar—655 
Mahosadha gives the gold (to the carpenter to build a hall)—332. 22 
Mahosadha, considering that his thousand companions, while at play, 
suffered from the heat in summer and from the rains in the. rainy season, 


decides to build a hall; he tells the boys to bring each a coin and, having 
called a master carpenter makes the money over to him, 


Thar, gold = M.T. 0, thaw. 


124, 0600205 Bs* (GS—Gq 6 
Mahos kindain jrap—656 
Mahosagha builds the rest-house—333. 5 
He is not pleased with the’carpenter’s plan; so, he himself designs a. 


plan, in which were separate rooms for all sorts and conditions of people, 
and superintends the construction of it, 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 4! 
Kindam, to build = M.T. o§ kanham. It means also “to do, 


make”; S.J. 84, o§cogo’$|—" he- made, that is, picked up, a quarrel”; 
e035, to make (write) a book. 


125. 600005 cfg’ 00§ — 694 
-Mahos kindam kathbar—657 
‘Mahosadha constructs a tank—333. 17 
He finds the splendid rest-house not quite complete yet, and has a tank, 
with many bends and a hundred bathing-places constructed. 


Kambar, ‘a tank = M.T. og, kma. The dropping of final 7 is 
oo, 4; bar = el, ba; if. the vowel before it is short, it 


frequent; 4r = i 
is lengthened by compensation: skamir = 8, kami 


126, 0su205 802§ — G90 
-Mahos bicar—658 | 
Mahosadha decides cases—393. 2 5 
Seated in the rest-house, Mahosadha used to decide the cases of all who 


came to him. — | 
Bicar, to decide cases, investigate; investigation, case, from -Pali 


vicareti. 


127, o60x5 09905 gi$—Co¢ 
~Mahos suruh pcun—659 
Mahosadha causes the (piece of) meat to fall—334. 22 via 


A hawk carries off a piece of meat; Mahosadha utters a powerful shout 


which seems to go through and through the hawk which, in its fright, lets 
| 6 


42 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 


go the meat; Mahosadha follows its shadow as it is falling and receives ‘it 
in his hand. | | . 

Suruh, to fall, or cause to fall off = M.T. o§05, saruih, to fall. 
off, drop down, as fruits or leaves: it is used colloquially : oga8 ) 03053 § 99 
soodagasgoo} GafoSccobus8—'' I know not why, this year, all the fruits fall off 
in my garden.” 


128, 800§ 6g28-—GGo 
: Bicar jlow—660 
The case of the cattle—335. 8F 


A man steals another’s cattle; they quarrel; both are brought betore 
Mahosadha. He asks each what he feeds the cattle on. ‘On rice gruel, 
kidney beans and sesame flour,” says the thief. “I could afford to feed” 
them only on grass,” says the real owner. Mahosadha has the cattle given 
panic seeds, the animals vomit grass, and the case is thus decided. 


Jlow, cattle = M.T. §, glau. 


129, 800§ 0&8—G@o 
' Bicar ganthi—661 | 
The case of the necklace of thread-—335. 37 


A woman had tied together some threads of different colours into a. 
necklace. One day, she goes to bathe; while she is. in the water,-a young 
woman looks at the necklace, asks permission to try it on her neck, and runs’ 
away with it. The other follows in pursuit and overtakes her. They are 
brought before Mahosadha. He asks the thief what she perfumes her 
necklace with. ‘“ With a compound of all scents,” says:she. _ But the owner 
says she is poor and uses only gryangu flowers. The young sage has the 
necklace placed in a vessel of water; an expert in perfumes is then called 
in-and asked for his opinion. ‘ This water smells of pzyangu,” says he, and 
this settles the case. | | | 

Ganthi, for Pali gantht. 


PART 1} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 43 


130, 800§ scooxcS—6G) 
Bicar tol—662 
The case of the cotton thread—336. 21 # 


A woman watching cotton fields one day makes a ball of.’ fine thread. 
“While going home she gets into the tank by the rest-house ‘to bathe; 
another woman sees the ball and runs away with it. _Mahosadha asks thie 
thief what she has placed inside the ball to roll the thread on.- -" A cotton 
seed,” says the thief. The true owner replies she has put in a timbaru seed. 
Mahosadha untwists the ball and produces the ¢iméaru_ seed. | 


Tol; cotton = M.T. cooodi 


131, 8006 soo}—¢Go 
Bicar kon—-663 
_ The cast ‘of the child—336. 31 7 

A woman bathes her: little son in the tank ; “she then places him on her 
clothes and herself takes a bath. An ogress - -comes,. takes up the child, ‘and 
flees. Mahosadha draws a line on ‘the ground, places. the child on it, and 
bids: the two women ‘pull, one by the head, the other by ‘the feet, saying 
‘that the child would. be given to who. pilled “fardest. At. the . first cry 
of the baby, its mother lets go: in anguish. © The Spectators agree with the 
sage that.she who cannot bear. to see the. child’ suffer ‘is the mother, and 
her son. is given back to her. 


192.3 anno Bong (B3§—G6o. 
Kal bicar kindar—664 
Deciding the case of-the wife—337. 16 f 


A dwarf marries. One day, he and his wife set out on a journey to 
visit her parents. They come to a shallow pond; thinking it very deep, they ° 


44 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


are afraid to cross. A poor man chancing that way tells. them he can cross 
it; he first. takes the wife across, and, in:the middle of the pond, makes her 
promise to be his’ wife; she accepts. The dwarf runs after them, and the 
noise of the dispute attracts the attention of Mahosadha, who decides whose 
wife the woman is and hands her back to the husband. 

Kindar, wife; the modern form is o0«08, kalaw. I have not yet met 
with this word. anywhere but in A.V., where it occurs frequently: p. 114= 
dara; 136 = pajépati ; 156 = piyd; 171 = bhartyd; 87 = gharani; etc. 


133. 0600205 Boog ofcdS—ee 
Mahos bicar kwil—665 
Mahosadha decides (the case of) the cart—338. 21 F 


Sakka, the king of the gods, desirous of making patent to all .the 
wisdom of the sage, drives away. the cart of a man. The latter follows in 
pursuit. Mahosadha, at certain signs, recognizes Sakka, and easily decides 
the case as to who the true owner is, 


Kwil = 'M.T. o, k wi. 


134, sonmoggo— 666 
Dandakapanha—666 
The riddle ofthe pole—339. 11 f 


The enemies of Mahosadha, hoping to lose him in the esteem of the 
king, put their heads together and invent some puzzles which, they thought, 
he could not solve, The first was that of the pole. They procured an 
acacia pole and had it finely smoothed by a turner. They then sent word to 
the villagers that, if they could not make out the root from the top of the 
pole, they would be heavily fined. They repaired to the sage. He tied a 
string right in the middle of the pole and, holding the string, softly set down 
the pole on the surface of the water ; the root, being heavier, sank deeper 
.than the top. Thus he solved the riddle. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 45 


135. o205 8028 oBS5—ee4 
Kal bicar kdip—667 
‘Deciding the case ‘of the heads—339. 29 # 


Next came the case of the skulls. Two skulls, that of a man and that 
of a woman,- were sent to the’ villagers, asking them to point out which 
was which, under penalty of a fine. The sage solved the riddle by pointing 
out that, whereas the Sutures in a woman’s head are crooked, those in a 
man’s are straight. 

Kdip, the head = M.T. §, kduip; with kdip the modern 
literary form ofS, knip, may. be compared. . | 


136, s0c80p00—G Go 
Ahipafifia—668 
The riddle of the snake—339. 347 
Two snakes were then. brought ; they had to distinguish the male 


from the female. The sage solved the problem by pointing out that the 
tail of the male snake is thick, that of the female thin, etc. 


Pafifia, a mistake for pafiha; the plaque shows no sign of the 
subscript A. 


137. QgBigoep—S Ge 
_Kukkutapafiha—669 
The riddle of the cock—340. 1 f 


‘The villagers were ordered-to. vaid in a white bull with ‘horns on his 
legs and a hump on his head, which regularly gives out his voice three times. 
Mahosadha showed this to be a cock, which has’ horns .on his feet, that is 
the spurs, and a hump on his head, that is the crest, and he gives voice 
three times a day. 


46 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 11 


138, oaBop>—G10 
Manipaithi—67o 
‘The riddle of the gem—340. wid 


-The gem given by Sakka to King Kusa. was contorted in eight places.) 
Its thread was. broken, and_ owing to these contortions no one could take 
out the old thread and put in a new,one.. The villagers weré given the 
task of putting in a new thread, The sage smeared the jewel with honey, 
also one end of a' new thread of wool which he inserted a little way into 
the hole; he then placed the jewel’ where there were ants.’ The ants: ate 
the old thread and pulled through the new one. 


139, eccoxdS So0§ g0000-—G 1.9 
- Mahos bicar usabha—671 
Mahosadha decides the case of the bull—340. 18 


‘The royal bull having been well fed up, so that his belly swelled, was 
smeared with turmeric, The villagers were sent this bull z# caéf and told, by 
royal order, to deliver him. The sage instructs aman. The latter goes to 
the palace lamenting loudly. On being asked by the king the cause of his, 
laments, he answers that his‘father is in labour and cannot bring forth. The 
king perceives the cleverness of the: counter-riddle and-is pleased. 


140. OJspogp—+GrJ 
Odanapafiha—672 
The puzzle of the rice—340. 357 


Une day the villagers are asked to send to the palace boiled rice cooked 
under eight apparently impossible conditions, such as: without rice, without 
water, without fire, etc. As usual, the sage solves the puzzle most easily, 


1 For this translation, more in keeping with the text than that of the Cambridge translation of 
the Jataka, see N. Peri’s “‘ Un conte hindou au Japon,” B.E.F,£.0., Vol. XV, No. 3, page 5, footnote, 
At the end of the same paper have been reproduced plaques Nos, 34, the riddle of the pole; 136, the 
riddle of the snake, and 138, the riddle of the gem. . 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 4] 


141. ologooopg2— 42 
Valukapafiha—673 
The puzzle of the sand (rope) —341. 10 fF 


The villagers were sent word that the rope.of the — swing being 
broken ‘they must procure a new one, made of sand. The sage again got 
the villagers out of difficulty by a counter-request. He sent a deputation to 
the king, to ask him fora small piece of the old sand rope, so that the new 
one might. be made of the same size. 


142. cocoaMUpHI—F1g¢- 
Talakapafiha—674 
The puzzle of the tank—341. 22 7 


The villagers are told the king desires they should send him .a new tank 
covered with lilies... Mahosadha again thinks of a counter-quip. -He sends to 
‘the palace men soaking wet, with their bodies covered with miud. On being 
asked what they want, they answer to the king that they had caught a tank 
‘in the forest, but when she saw the city she was frightened and ran away ; 
they then ask for the old tank to help. them: bring in the.new one. 


‘Talaka, instead of ta | aka’ (Skt. tadaka). 


£43. Qoyrrogne—419 
- Uyyanapaitha—675 
The: puzzle ‘of the -Patk—34a. 4 F 


The dfllsgars are requested to send the king a-new park filled with’ trees 
and flowers, the one he had being old. This request is met, as above, by 
another request. a oa 

Uyyana, park : this is the full Pali form; there is an abbreviated 
form, goop$, uyydn; there are found also two abbreviated forms from 


48 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 


the Sanskrit udy@nua— pao, udy 4, in the Bliridatia-jataka, plaque No. 224, 
and 9942, udyan, at S.B. 10 and S.M, 19. 


144. ofoo{gogs—¢r6 
Gadrabhaprasna—676 
The question of the ass—342. 7 f 


Mahosadha is called to the palace to assume office; he takes his father 
with him. Both arrange beforehand that, when in presence of the king, the. 
father, rising from his place, would ask the sage to take it: a serious 
breach of etiquette on the part of a son. When they perceive what has 
happened the four ministers laugh and call Mahosadha a fool; the king 
expresses his discontent. The sage then asks whether the sire is. always. 
greater than the son. “So it is,” says the king; Mahosadha has then an _ 
ass brought in, and asks whether, in the event of the ass getting a mule 
colt out of a thoroughbred mare of Sind, the colt would be more valuable, 
or the ass? The answer is, the colt. The sage thereby shows that he, 
through his wisdom, is greater than his father. | 

Prasna, from the Skt. pragna, the palatal sibilant being changed 
into the dental. .There were both the Pali and the Sanskrit forms for the: 
same word. There are examples of this dual borrowing in the literary 
language. 


—145,.. 0609905 .60Q9§ sog—G11 
‘Mahos laor amba—677 
Mahosadha salutes ‘his father— 342. a8 

When. called to the palace, together with his father, to assume, office, 
the sage salutes him, and instructs him to give up his seat to him in 
the presence of the king. 

This plaque should come before the previous one, for those instructions 
to‘his father take place before they, go to the palace and therefore before 
the episode of the ass depicted in plaque 144. 

Amba, father; there is also.a form, aba, more common. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 49 


146, 60205 wcBo—G1o 
Ket manika—678 
Taking the jewel-—344. 28 7 


In a crow’s nest on a palm-tree on the shore of a lake, there was a 
jewel. The reflexion of the jewel was seen in the lake, and it was thought 
the jewel was at the bottom. The lake was emptied of its water twice, but 
the precious stone could not be obtained.: The sage is appealed to and 
easily finds it. . | 


147. maanmvp7—G 1G 
Kakandakapafiha—679 
|The « case of the chameleon—345. 29 f 


The king went, riding on his elephant, with the sage to the park; a 
chameleon, which was on the gate, came down and crouched before the king. 
On enquiry, the sage explains it was paying its respects to the king; the 
king, pleased, orders that a half-anna’s worth of meat should be daily given 
to it. On a fast day, the servant, unable to procure meat, tied the half 
anna on the chameleon’s neck, and it became very proud of its wealth, so 
that, when the king again passed that way, it took no notice of him. The 
sage again explains to the astonished king. 


Y 48. SE orrcomcBospp9—Goo0 | 
| Sirikalakandipaftho—680 _ 
The case of good and bad luck—347. 4 f 


A man very” unlucky (kalakanni) marries a very ‘lucky (siri) girl, and 
owing to the man’s bad luck and. dispositions the. marriage is not consum- 
mated. While on a journey he abandons her. - The king meets her and she 
becomes queen. The king, one day, refuses to believe that a man could 


7 


so EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — [ voi. 1 


abandon such a beauty; one of the four ministers says he does not believe 
any man could do so; but the sage says he believes it; the two could not 
mate, even as good luck and evil luck cannot meet together, 


Kalakandi, wrongly for kalakanni. 


£49, Scnve927—-Gao 
‘Mindapafiha—681 
The question of the ram—349. 19 f 


The king one day saw a ram and a dog which had made friends.’ The 
ram brought meat for the dog from the kitchen, and the dog grass for the 
ram from the stables. He puts this occurrence in the form of a question to 
the four ministers and to the sage, saying: ‘Two natural enemies have 
become so friendly as to be inseparable. What is the reason of it?” 
Naturally, the four ministers fail to answer, and the sage solves the question, 
to the king’s delight. 

Minda, wrongly for menda. 


150, gecor$ odsoS o§ —Coy 
Buton pandit pan—682 
(He) instructs the four pandits—353. 6 


The four ministers were nonplussed when the king. put to them the 
“question of the ram,” and could find no solution. The sage has already 
found it, and, full of pity for the four pandits, whom the king had threatened 
with banishment should they fail, he makes them sit below him in the attitude 
of pupils listening to their teacher’s instructions, and teaches to each one 
stanza which, though coming very near the solution, yet does not entirely 
solve the question, and thus saves them from disgrace. 

Buton, to instruct = M.T. cg2$, bton; there is also a variant, 8cao§, 


binton. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 58 


E51, SQogocap2—Gag 
Sirimandapafho—683 
(The king putting tc the five) the question of the Rich 
and the Wise—356. 8 


On the m cof manda, the glaze has flaked off, making it appear as 
m 3. 


1§2, ocoosa8 eooseS (Gag2-—Cag 
Mahos soh prasna—634 


Mahosadha answers the question (of the Rich and the 
Wise) —356. 8 = 


The king having put toe the five pandits the question of the Wise and 
the Rich: which is the better?, the four ministers opine for the rich man, _ 
but the sage conclusively proves that the wise is the better man. The king 
overwhelms him with gifts. 


Soh, to answer, solve = M.T. 2905, sah. 


1§3, 0602905 99995—Go9 
Wahos smai—68s5 
Mahosadha asks (Amara whether she is married, etc.)—364.. 18 


The sage is now sixteen, and queen Udumbara wishes to look out for a 
wife for him; but he prefers to go in search of one by himself. So he sets 
out: disguised as a tailor, He meets Amara, the beautiful, wise and lucky 
daughter of a once rich family.. She was carrying rice-gruel to her father 
working in his field. They both fall in love at sight. To test her wisdom, 
he resolves to ask her questions by gestures. So he clenches ‘his fist, 
meaning “Have you a husband?” and in answer she spreads out her hand, 
meaning “I haye not.” 


52 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 11 


154. ©600005 © oo79q—GoG 


Mahos ca yagu—686 
Mahosadha eats the rice-gruel—g65. 


Amara offers him some rice-gruel, which he accepts. He then goes to 
her house by the way indicated by ‘her in a riddle. | 


155. 600005 805 JoS—¢oy 
Mahos sjifi glik—687_ 
_Mahosadha stitches clothes—366. 7 # 


He reaches the house and meets with Amara’s mother. Knowing they’ 
were poor, he resolves to. help them; so, first, he mends for nothing their. 
old clothes, then those of the villagers, and in one day makes one thousand 
coins, 

Sjifi, to sew, stitch = M.T. 086, sjin, 8. jin; of & jmin, sewing, 
stitching, couture, and 9236 sma jmif, a tailor; sjif corresponds to 
the Pali stbbatz, “To mend” is, properly, ys5 or cyosS, bla’ or blo’. 


156, e305 o& ©60090S —Gn0 
Krow jun Mahos—688 
(Amara) washes Mahosadha’s feet—366. 26 


In the evening, when Amara comes back, she washes her: ‘parents’ and 
the sage’s feet. 


Krow, to wash = M.T. = krau. fiers MT. as, juin; 
see under plaque No. 82, ee | 
1s, 600209 snobs gE— Gog 
Mahos let pun—689 | 
oy smears the boiled rice (on Amara’s head and body)—367. 8 


The sage a a few days in the house to test Amara’s temper. For 
instance, he gives her rice to cook; one part of it she boils, with the other 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 83 


she makes gruel, and with the third a cake, The sage’ finds them delicious, 
but to test her, he makes a mixture ofthe three and ‘rubs it on her head 
and body. She does not in the least get angry. 


158. oeo208 BS g/$—¢ eo 
| Mahos kil gnun—690 
Mahosadha gives (Amara) a loin-cloth—367. 13 
After a few days, the sage gives Amara’s parents the money he had 


brought with him and that which he had earned by stitching;. to Amara he 
gives a petticoat and tells her to follow him. to town.. 


Gnun = M.T. 8§, gnin, a woman’s loin-cloth, a petticoat; of ab. 
kmun, to reign, a variant of o$§, k min. 


159. scone ef cooS—G¢o 
Mahos mun cow—691 
Mahosadha informs (that he is about) to return (home) —367. 1 


The sage, having asked Amara to follow him, comforts her parents and 
takes leave. 


Cow, to return = = M.T. $6, cau. 


160, 9609205 SeoS—Ge@) 
Mahos bibat—692 ; 
Mahosadha tests (Amara’ S chastity) —367. 17 | 


Arrived in town, in order to test her virtue, he tells her to waitin the 
gate-keeper’s house,. goes home and sends some of his men, with a thousand 
coins, to tempt her; thrice she refuses. Then he has her dragged before 
him clad’ in. his cereniohi dress, and she does not recognize him, But 
she still refuses. He is convinced of her ‘chastity. 


54 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [eroi.. HE 


165, os000 0 odw-—Elo 
Mahos pa mafigala—é93 
Mahosadha marries—~368. 7 


The next day Mahosadha brings the girl to the palace and marries her 
amid great rejoicing. 

Pa mangala, to perform a religious ceremony, especially the 
ceremony of marriage; the expression is still used in common parlance; the 
Burmese have the same expression: dco2QoopS (mangala pru safi). It is 
the equivalent of the Pali mangalam karoti, to perform a ceremony, hold 
a festival, which is often used in the jataka in the sense of “to marry.” 


162, 6ecn205 0096 09$--Ee¢ 


Mahos taw man—fo4 
‘Mahosadha lives as a potter-—-369. 27 


The four ministers, wishing to undo the Bodhisatia, steal from the 
king his golden slippers,.a gem from the crest, his robe and his neckiace, 
which they sent surreptitiously to the sage’s house. They are received by 
Amara, who carefully motes down the day on which, and the persons by 
whom, they were brought. The ministers induce the king to put-on these 
things and they cannot be found. They then accuse Mahosadha of theft. 
The latter comes to the palace to explain; the king refuses to see him. 
The sage, afraid, consults with his wife, exenpes from the town and goes 
to live at a potter’s house. 

Taw = M.T. 0, tau, properly means: to dwell, reside, live in or at, 
to be (in a place), ete.; sSec5@&B8acpa—" the nagas who dwell at the foct 
of Mt, Sineru,” S.B. 7; 2000928 §&59gS—" a white bull (whose) horns 
are on his feet,” S.M. a2; sgilooseqp—" where are the flowers?” Dhd. 93. 
‘These meanings are not catered in Haswell’s, who, moreover, on page 35, 
gives it as a “‘euphonic affix”; placed after another verb it shows that an 
action or state is going on, and the example he gives—vormesGoockSasq— 
literally means: (the light) is or was shining. 


PART !] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 55. 


Man, a potter; the modern form is cooo§, laman, by means of 
prefix 1a; man now means: to make pots. This legend might have been 
transiated: “ Mahos lives at a potter's.” The Skem here reads: 4$s0300c0g0$ 
-—“he fled and waited upon a potter,” that.is, took service at a potter’s. 


163, GO§ OcC92D—=G Eg 
Wen Mahos—é6¢5 
(The courtiers) go about (looking for) Mahosadha—g72, 11 f 


The deity that resided in the royal umbrella, not hearing any: more the 
voice of the sage, and finding out what had happened, resolves to bring 
him back. She puts riddles to the king, who asks his four ministers, but 
they cannot solve them. The devaté then repeats the Firefly riddle, threat- 
ening the king with death if he does not solve it. The king, terrified, sends 
four courtiers, with presents, to find out Mahosadha and bring him back. 


For wen, Haswell gives one meaning only: to play. But it means 
also: to go about, wander, roam.; to go to; to visit ; BD Gods09608 3 358.05 08070 
—‘j'll go first to my house,” Sudh. 3. Be cniBeobo5>—" come and’ visit. 
us, it is not far.” The plaque represents the courtier bes has found him, 
after going about looking for him, and offering him the king’s presents, 
Besides the meanings above given, wen has also the following, not in 
Haswell’s:—(a) to avoid, eschew ; egreso&c03—"‘ people (should) avoid him,” 
Dhd. 239. 18; svogco&eo} gqffoS— who does not eschew bad deeds,” -Dhd. 
54.3; (8) in vain, to no purpose, for nothing ; $B vonoseoBahieo8 pate0o—" having 
amassed property, shall I give it for nothing to people?”, Gpi. 14. 


With wen = to go about, roam, compare cof, gen. 


164, op4& Gp24, O28 —G EG 
Tlun nor man—696 
Coming from the potter's—374. 9 
The courtier explains his mission to Mahosadha, who accompanies him 
to the town. 
Tluf, to come = M.T. o9)§, klua; there is a variant, <)&, tlia. 


56 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [ voOL. 1 


165, 00005 oSSoop9S— G67. 
-- Soh simmafi—697 | | 
(Mahosadha) answers the (king's) questions—374. 19 


The king receives him kindly and, to test his loyalty, puts him a 
number of questions; he then asks him to solve the four riddles put to him 
by the goddess, having first got down from his throne and made the sage 
take his place, as a mark of deep respect for his learning. The umbrella- 
goddess, delighted, gives the sage a casket full of the seven precious things. 
In the plaque, the casket is represented twice; first, in the hands of the 
goddess, as she is giving it, and then in the hands of Mahosadha.._ 

Simmafi, a question = M.T. 8, sman; ago 38 305 9 o[8359—"'a 
question arose in the naga-city,’ S.B. 11. There are two variants: 


summafi and sumaii. 


166, p08 0§ o2|& a92095—Geo 
Nah pan tluh smai—tg8 | 
The four come to ask (questions to Mahosadha to entrap him)—378. 22 7 


_ The four ministers, vexed at the return to favour of Mahosadha, resolve 
again to undo him. They go to his house and ask him, “ To whom is it ght 
to tell a secret?” He answered, “ One should tell his secret to no one,’ 
They return to the king and denounce the sage as a traitor, telling what he 
thinks about secrets. For not to tell a secret to the king is treason. 


167, YS 925 qood—-ee 
“Smif smafi rahas—699__ 
The king asks (Mahosadha concerning) secrets—379. 29 f 


The sage is called to the palace and, before the other four; is asked by 
the king to whom secrets should be told. Mahosadha maintains that to tell 
a secret is bad; that none should be told until it is no more a secret. The 
king is displeased’ at this answer, and the sage perceives that he has been 


PART 1] | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 57 


entrapped by his enemies. He becomes uneasy and resolves to know the 
ministers’ secrets that very day. | 


Rahas, a secret; Pali rahassa. 


168, egl& Belg0S s$oS— 00 
Dmon kinrom danih—7o0 
(Mahosadha) is under the trough—381. 23 7 | 


The king, believing .Mahosadha a traitor, becomes anxious. He asks 
the four ministers what ought to be done; they answer he must be killed. 
The king gives them his own sword and bids them kill him at the door in 
the morning. Every day, on leaving the palace, these four were in the. habit 
‘of sitting on a trough_at the palace gate and talking about their plans. 
The sage gets under the trough, and there learns of his projected murder, as 
well as the several secrets of his enemies. . 

Dmon, to dwell, remain = M.T. §& dmdaa; kinrom, ‘under ; .the 
equivalent of this word, which would probably be s{egoS, I have not yet 
found in the literary language; it is also not colloquial. But modern Cam- 
bodian has it: krom = en bas (Aymonier, Dictionnaire Frangais-Cambodien). 
It is found as karom_ in. the Khmer- inscription of Vat Prah Keo, 1283 
A.D.i—danih, a trough = M.T: 05, dnih, -and cope’, tneh; dnih 
is properly a dry measure = doni := Skt. droni, which means also a 
trough for feeding cattle. The Skem has cog5a08§, tneh-amuin = a 
trough; amuin and amuin is a dry measure, and also a trough ; 
the Pali in this passage has bhattammana and. ammana (Vol. VI. 381. 23, 
25). 7 : 


169+ oaBos ogg, ecoox08—100 
Pandit su-er Mahos—7or 
The (four) pandits: look for Mahosadha—38s, 22 f 
Early next morning, the four pandits, armed with swords and posted at 
the gate, awaited with expectancy the coming of the sage. But they did not 


1G, Ceed’s, Documents sur la dynastie de Sukhodaya, p, 18, B.E.F.E.0., Vol, XVI, No, 2 
| 8 


58 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VvoL. I. 


see him; for the queen had sent him word of.the others’ treachery, and 
bade him come well attended. So he did, and the plan of his enemies 
failed. The king received him well and was convinced he was no traitor. 
Then the sage tells the king the secrets of the four ministers, which he 
had surprised under.the trough. The king, incensed, throws them in jail, 
and orders them to be impaled outside the city. Mahosadha pleads for 
them, and the king gives them to him as slaves; he immediately frees them 
and begs of the king to reinstate them in their positions. The king agrees. 
Su-er: this reading is quite clear in the estampage and in the photo- 
graph; the plaque itself, which I have examined, leaves no doubt as to its 
being correct. Taking the scene depicted on the plaque together with the 
text, the meaning of su-ér is, I think, clear, and means; to look with 
expectation. I have not found any corresponding form in the modern 
language. There is a word, oog8, shew, which means: ‘to look, look at, 
look for; this may perhaps be the modern form (?), with the usual elision 
of the vowel « and the insertion of # to facilitate the pronunciation. - But I 
do not feel quite confident of this equivalence, for the simple forms <¢6, &, 
fiew, fi, are also found. The Skem has the word 4§,;rdf, to look, Qy/§ 
o950§s00209§$1203 §ao020$08 poso$Bh$4SsS05q— the king gave his sword to the 
_pandit Senaka. In the morning, all the four pandits were looking for him.” The 
scene depicted is when the plot has failed and Mahosadha has entered the 
_king’s room, which the four ministers also entered; unless we take it that 
two scenes are represented—one which shows the ministers. waiting for the 
sage at the gate: the swords which they are holding seem to corroborate 
this ; the other, the sage in conversation with the king. In the next plaque, 
without their weapons, they are sitting in the royal room in humble posture.. 


170, 060090 gco2: po: o$ —10) 
Mahos bulah fiah pan—7o2 
Mahosadha sets free the four persons—389. 17 £ 
The: scene depicts the ministers being given as slaves to the ‘Sage, who 
sets them free. | . 


Bulah = M.T. .ecos, balah, to set free, to let go. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 59 


171, 0600905 8egoé o89j2—209 
Mahos pindon kirya—7o3 
Mahosadha sends presents (to the 101 kings)—390. 17 # 


Now, Mahosadha’s power became paramount and he practically governea 
the kingdom. To be ready for any eventuality, he had the capital strongly 
fortified; large water-tanks were built, and vast quantities of grains 
gathered. Along the ramparts and between the watch-towers, he dug three 
moats—a water-moat, a mud-moat and a dry moat. ‘He sent men with 
valuable presents to the 101 kings at their capitals, bidding them take 
service at their courts and report regularly on their doings and plans. 

Pindon, to send = M.T. oS, palan, after elision of the infix 
-in; the letters / and'd (dh, t, th) are often used interchangeably ; modern 
Talaing offers many examples of this; cf cod, lalam, and cos, 
ladam, to quiet, appease.-- Medial -zd- regularly becomes /, 


172, 0600205 8eg0€ ogo05— og 
7 Mahos pindon tnak—7o4 
Mahosadha sends (his) parrot—390. 24 # 


At that time, Sankhapala, king of Ekabala was assembling a large 
army. Mahosadha’s spy sent news, adding he could not find out the reason 
of it. Then the sage sent a parrot to find out the truth and report. 

Taak, a parrot = M.T. cocgos, tanhek. For the change of: vowels- 
of. kyak-and kyek, in Blagden’s Talaing Inscriptions. The form tnek 
occurs also'a few plaques below (No. 181). 


173. cg270d Q& SRE— og 
Taak ran pinrih—7o5 
The parrot brings news 
The parrot, having ascertained what was going on at Ekabala, flew to 


all the capitals of India to listen to what was afoot; he thus came to 
Uttarapaficala, the capital city of Kampilla, whose king’ was Cilani- 


60 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ Voc. 11 


Brahmadatta. Kevatta, the chaplain of Cilani, took the latter into the park, 
so that nobody might hear their conversation, and then prevailed upon him 
to conquer all India with his mighty army. The parrot, which was perched 
on the tree above the king, heard the conversation, went back to Mahosadha 
‘and feported to him: there was danger from no other king but Cilani. In 
the plaque, the parrot is seen on the right shoulder of the sage. 

Raf, see note on raf (plaque No. 5). There is no virama on the # 
of ran. Pinrin, news = M.T. o8§ paruif; this word has another 
meaning which has not been noted by Haswell; it may often be translated 
by “about, concerning.” Ex, , poggrogisr BeaooSoGEgo5aq o5ac00§ a9 2992005g03 — 
“the wise, thus knowing shout (that is, the evil consequences of) the sin of 
stealing another’s wife... ,” Dhd. 357. 8; “ CQ EaBadoooSaSc8Gag2$.a9159$acor— 
“they conversed about sulieving and happiness,” S.B. 27; 8338. ... 
086 2S095B-Gocraf$oig— King Nemi ... discoursed to the people about 
Tavatirhsa,” S.N, 2. 


174., This plaque, No. 706 of the series, is missing, 


175. cco opopS YE—101 
Maho smafi.smin—707 
Mahosadha is asked by the king’ (how Mithila shall be delivered from 
its enemies) —396. 23 


It is well he has fortified the capital, for Ciilani, king of Paficala, has 
conquered all India, added the armies of 101 kings to his own and is now 
marching on Mithila, The sage is made aware of all this by his parrot 
and his spies; he alone knows. Vast quantities of food, and water. are 
brought : ‘into thé city and numerous warriors called in. King Ciilani arrives. 
He wants to poison the 101 kings, his vassals; but his plan is defeated by 
Mahosadha. Then Cilani prepares to storm. the city. -.The four wiseacres 
hear the noise, and are nonplussed, for they. know nothing; King Vedeha, 
too, raves with fright. He sends for the sage and asks him how Mithila 
can be ‘freed from his enemy. Mahosadha encourages him and unfolds 
part of his plans, | | 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 61 


The s in Mahos has been omitted by inadvertence. As it runs, this 
legend might be read ‘“ Mahosadha questions the king ”; but it is the king 
who asks the questions and not Mahosadha. The verb smafi is used 
in a passive sense; cf. No. 106. 


176, 9609205 coc 295—100. 
Mahos tal. pkaw—708. 
. Mahosadha is planting the flower—gor. 3 f 


King Ciilaniihad conquered all the kingdoms of India, except that of 
Mithila, where reigned King Vedeha. Kevatta, his’ ‘chaplain, knowing the wit 
of Mahosadha would defeat’ all their endeavours, tries to dissuade Cilani from 
attacking this small kingdom. — But Cilani does not listen and lays siege to. 
the capital, It was hoped to reduce it by water-famine, for it was thought 
the city had its water-supply outside; in reality, it was well stocked with 
water. To discourage the enemy, Mahosadha procured bamboo poles sixty 
cubits long, had them split in two, got the knots removed to <allow the flow 
of water, had them joined again, covered with leather and smeared with mud. 
‘He sent for the soil and lily-seed which had been brought from the 
Himalayas by some hermits; he planted the seed in the mud on the edge 
of a tank, placed the bamboo ‘over the seed, and filled it with water. In 
_one night, the seed grew up and flowered, rising a fathom above the top of. 
the bamboo. The flower with this extraordinarily long’ stalk was sent to 
Ciilani, who knew he could not reduce the city by cutting off the water. 


Tal, to plant = M.T. o§8, tuiw; an old final / is, in the latter 
language, ‘either dropped or changed. to final w; cf. gil, to be sick = M.T. 8, 
gi; kintal, surface = M.T. om, gata; ‘tak cotton = M.T. cm28, tow; 
bal, army = M.T. &%, buiw. Tal translates the Pali ropeti in the text 
(p. 40%. 6). 

Pkaw, a flower = MT. g, pkau.. ee one “Sau, wrongly 
entered in Haswell as “a carver in: wood,” also means “ flower”; it is 


often found in writings. with the infix '7, & {3s, pkausesrau. 


62 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


177. 0609209 o8 6398 9)5—0¢ 
‘Mahos ti nor dun—7o9 
Mahosadha leaves the city—403. 31 f 


Mahosadha, surrounded by one thousand warriors, his former playmates, 
leaves the city to fight the “Battle of the Law” with Kevatta. 
Ti, for tit, by inadvertence, to go out = M.T. Nor, see plaque 39. 


178, o600905 0 Se0905— 900 
Mahos pa dhammayut—7I0 
Mahosadha fights the Battle of the- Law—404. 27 


Many means were resorted to to subdue the city, but in vain. At last, 
Kevatta said to Cilani, “ There is a way: I shall invite Mahosadha to fight 
the Battle of the Law; it is thus: the two sages of the two kings shall 
meet at one place, and the one who salutes the other. first shall be 
vanquished. I am the older, so Mahosadha will salute me, for he has never 
heard of this battle. And we shall thus conquer the city.” But Mahosadha 
had. The sage was accordingly invited. Before leaving the city, as depicted 
on the preceding plaque, he asks king Vedeha for the gem contorted in 
eight places (see plaque 138) in order to conquer Kevatta with it. The 
two wise men meet. . Mahosadha offers the gem to Kevatta, who takes it, 
but it slips from bis hand, and in his greed he stoops down at the other’s 
feet to get it back. The sage presses him down to prevent him rising, 
saying: “Do not, O teacher, make obeisance to me, for I am younger 
than you!” Ciilani with his army, seeing what had happened, fled. 

- Dhammayut, the “Battle of the Law,” as explained above, is the Pali 
dhammayuddha. Owing to whitewash, the legend in the photograph is not 
quite clear, but the plaque itself is quite legible. 


179, soD0g3 o|§ 93998—199 
Kevatta tlua smafi—7rr 
Kevatta comes and asks (for Mahosadha)—413. 13 
Cilani had now been one year in his capital of Uttarapaficala. Keyatta, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 63 


his chaplain, cannot get over his ignominious defeat. He elaborates a plan 
to entice the king of Mithila and Mahosadha tq Uttarapaficala and do away 
with them. This plan consisted in so praising the charms of Princess 
Paficalacandi, Cilani’s daughter, to the king of Mithila, that the latter would 
be mad with desire; Kevatta then would go to Mithila and fix a day for 
the king to come and fetch the princess. The plan is put into execution. 
Kevatta arrives at Mithila and sees the king, who falls in his trap. The 
king, glad of this apparent reconciliation between himself and Ciilani, desires 
his wise man also to be reconciled to Kevatta, and sends the latter to 
Mahosadha for that purpose; But Mahosadha deigns not to speak with 
Kevatta, for he is sure he has come for some foul purpose; so he closets 
himself in his room and bids his men prevent Kevatta approaching, 
Kevatta comes and asks for. Mahosadha, but he is prevented from seeing 
him. 


180. BE gS aQ ocoord8—10) 
Smin mdac ku Mahos—712 | 
The king is angry with Mahosadha—417. 16 


Meanwhile, the king had asked his other four wise men what they 
thought of Cilani’s offer of his daughter; they all answered he ought to - 
proceed to Uttarapaficala. Mahosadha, after Kevatta’s departure, goes to_ 
the palace; the king asks him also his opinion, and the Sage answers, in 
strong language, that he ought not to go. The king becomes very angry, 
and Mahosadha, always prudent, takes his leave and returns home. 


Mdac means “to be angry,” and is no doubt a form of go, pnat, 
which appears also as ocan205, panot, and a form cand, panat, is quite 
regularly possible; Halliday tells me he. has found the form oa, manat; 
d and ~-are phonetically. closely related, though I have not met with 
any other example of their being’ thus interchanged.: The plaque represents | 
Mahosadha fleeing before the ‘king’s anger, and confirms the meaning of 
mdac as given above; it is confirmed also indirectly by the next plaque, 
for the instructions to the parrot come, ‘in the text, immediately after the 
sage’s departure from the king’s presence. The three estampages taken at 
different times leave no doubt as to the reading. 


64 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


181, 0600905 cBo3$ 93 eogad—r90 
Mahos kifikan ku thek—713 
Mahosadha instructs his parrot—418. 22 


Mahosadha resolves to find out the true meaning of Kevatta’s mission. 
So he instructs his parrot to go to Cilani’s palace, make friends with his 
minah bird which knows all his secrets, pump her out and come back and 
report. 

Kinkan, see plaque 62, Thek, see plaque 172. 


182, ogo08 6098 6704 99908m2—1 9g 
Tnaak cow nor salika—714 
The parrot returns from the minah bird—g25. 16 7 


The parrot goes as directed, makes love to the minah, and learns from 
her that the real intention of Cilani is to kill the king and. Mahosadha; 
then he leaves the minah, comes back and makes his report. 


183. 200208 a§ » 9924 —199 
Mahos mun na s-ar—715 | 
Mahosadha tells (the king) that he is going (to Uttarapaficala)—426, 27 


Mahosadha, having ascertained the’ true state of affairs, goes to the 
palace and, knowing the king was bent upon going to Uttarapaficala, the 
_ Capital -of Cilani, to marry the latter’s daughter, evolves a plan in his mind, 
by which-the king was to get his heart’s desire, come back to Mithila 
happily and see the disgrace of his enemies. But he must go there first, 
and he tells the king of his intention. Leave to go is graciously granted. 

The last part. of the legend in the photograph is difficult. to read 
rightly, some of the letters having been somewhat spoiled, and I was able 
to decipher it correctly only’ on examining the plaque itself. 

Mun, to tell, inform, apprize, notify, see plaque 42. Na has not here 
the meaning of “by means of” given it in Haswell; but it is equivalent 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON’ THE. ANANDA 65 


to o3$,.tnah na,.a conjunction meaning “that”; -it is also equivalent to 
the Pali attham, atthdya, “for, for the purpose of, for the sake of,” 
when before nouns, and to the Pali infinitive ws before verbs; the s in 
s-ar (M.T. go, s-a) indicates the: future (see plaque 64); na s-ars 
“that (he) will go”; the Pali has -herée aha gacchémi (= gacchissami) 
pure, “I will go beforehand,” which the ‘Skem literally translates, © 805 
 gpoogat Or s-ar may be taken as a noun, “ going,” and the legend be 
translated: “he tells (the king) for going,” that is, “begs (the favour of). 
going.” The following are examples of o3$ used before nouns :—soa0%ca§o} 
$ Sqpolo8 ogSsa29[& epar(fudq—“‘ the thera Assaji.entered the city of Rajagriha 
for alms,”‘ Dhd. 226. 21. ee Ne mother, for the sake 
of (her) son... ,” Dhd. 18. 8. 


184, sooo 9/6 eae 
— Lop dua Pathcal—716 
(Mahosadha) enters the city of Paficala—428. 1 


Mahosadha, with a great army of artisans and labourers, sets forth on. 
his journey; at every league he builds: a village, and puts a courtier in charge 
with instruction to have horses and elephants ready against the king’s return, 
to convey him speedily to Mithila. At ‘the Ganges, he—crosses over and, 
from the place of landing, . measuring the distances says: “This is half a 
league, here. shall be built the great tunnel; in this spot’ shall be a town for 
our king to’ dwell in; and from this place to the palace, that is a mile, shall 
be the small: tunnel. ” ‘All these were to be built for the safety of the king. 
He then entered the city. 

Lop, to enter = M T.. 098, up. “The form lop is also very ss 
in literary Talaing. P athe a] = Uttarapaficala, 


185. qoored 0 YE go8—r07 
‘Gulafi ku smia Cilani—717 
(Mahosadha) converses with king Cillani—428. 10 ¢ 
Mahosadha is well received by Cilani; they converse together; the 
sage tells him of his intention to build a palace for his king to dwell in, and 


permission to do so is granted. 
9 


66 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou u 


186, oc00205 BZ oQul§—oo0 
Mahos kindam supan—718 
Mahosadha fixes the stairs (firmly)—428. 29 


After his conversation with Cilani, Mahosadha, bent upon the perfect 
safety of his king, begins to carry out his plans. Standing at the foot of the 
stairs in Cilani’s palace, he thought that the entrance to the little tunnel 
should be there; he had obtained permission to do anything he wanted, He 
was afraid the stairs would come down while digging the tunnel. He told 
Cilani he had remarked a defect in the stairs, and, under pretence of 
remedying it, takes the stairs down, builds a strong wooden platform where 
the mouth of the passage was to be, and thereon fixes firmly the stairs. 


Kindam, properly “to build” (see plaque 124), and here, by 
extension, “to repair, fix,” etc. Supan = Pali sopd@ma, stairs, staircase, 


ladder. 


187, ea05 8 639935 BE—109¢ 
Ket sni abo’ smin—7I9 
(They) take the king’s mother’s house—429. 16 # 


King Cailani tells Mahosadha that he may build a palace for his king in 
the city; but the sage wishes to build it on the spot he had previously 
chosen outside the city. However, he seems to acquiesce, but tells the king 
that the owners of the houses he may choose to pull down will come and 
make endless complaints; to allow him, therefore, to post. his own men at 
proper spots so that no one should come into the presence of the king and 
trouble him. Cilani agrees. He chooses first the house of the queen- 
mother, and sends his men there ordering them to take possession and do as 
if they were about to pull it down. The queen-mother is angered, but 
1S prevented from complaining to the king; she gives a heavy bribe to be 
left in peace, and her silence is thus secured, being afraid of the ridicule of 
paying heavily to stay in her own house. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 67 


188, e005 os emoos—1 Jc 


Ket shi Kewat—720 
(Mahosadha) takes Kevatta’s house—430. 15 7 


Kevatta is treated similarly to the queen, and has also to pay a 
hundred thousand pieces. 


189. 600095 62928 os) BE—1 yo 
Mahos slop shi smin—721 
Mahosadha enters the king’s house—~430. 20 


He thus makes a semblance of seizing many houses in all quarters of 
the city, and receives a bribe at each, for the people thought all this was 
taking place by royal order. Then he-returns to Cilani’s palace. 


Slop, to enter = lop with prefix s (vzde plaque 64). 


190, 0600905 o3§ go08&—1) J 
Mahos kir uman—722 
Mahosadha digs the tuinel—~431. 17 7 


Mahosadha tells the king that the citizens are ready enough to give up 
their houses, but when they are about to be demolished they are stricken 
with grief; he does not want to be the cause of such legitimate grief. And 
he goes on to say it would be better to build the’ palace’ outside the city, 
and that he has found a convenient spot. The king agrees. That no one 
might see what was going on, he asks the king to forbid all citizens to go 
near that spot, for, says he, there might be a quarrel; the king again agrees, 
Then Mahosadha goes to the chosen spot and sets about building the great 
tunnel for his king’s flight. One entrance to the tunnel was on the Ganges ; 
on the other side of which he built a large village, with elephants and horses 
in readiness; the other entrance was in the city itself well dissimulated. 


68 -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. u 


Kir, todig’= M. T Bi, kwuiw; some words with the infix D, igen 
properly forms nouns, are used as verbs; it must be remembered that, 
Mén, the distinction. between noun and eth is, to a great extent, vague 
and indefinite, the same word being either the one or the other. The old 
word kir would regularly give a modern form *of, kuiw (cf jin = M.T. 
S$, juin; tin = §, tuin, etc.), which, if extant, has not yet been 
found. There is, however, the form with the infix w, oj, kwuiw, a spade 
(Schmidt, 68. 8; 72.3), also found written of, ‘t wuiw, which is again used 
as a verb: BeSoasoh af s22002q qo coGogaza ASoon§ ayo ar 95 oYod oSfioBi so} 
qiSGS—" owing to having been seven days with but little food, at that 
moment, fierce gases arose within. her stomach -which dug: (that is, cut, 
slashed) her heart,” Dhd. 160.. 2; sgl&o0Se]jaSo§, AoSofsl§—" tore and dug out 
both his eyes and gave them in alms,” Dhd. 33. 26. o8| means (1) to dig, 
dig into, dig out; hence, (2) to stir, disturb, and (3) to slash, cut; literally 
= to spade. Here are a few examples. of nouns in w_ used. ‘ago .as 
verbs: $8o0603|§o)—"the treasure which is at’the rising of the sun” (#.e. to 
the east; the. Pali being surtyuggamane nidhi), S.J.; gojock{§—“as the sun 
was rising,” S.M.; from §, tuin, to rise, ascend, ajo5, twut, weaving ; 
to weave, S.B., from 0705, tut, to weave, N.V.K. If. 7; there is also 09(05, 
tmut, weaving, N.V.K. If. 10, ¢ogo58i5, swek jwuiw, a quarrel; to 
quarrel, A.V. 60, from coooS$5, sek juivw. 

Uman is the Pali ummagga,.a tunnel; .there are two other variants, 
umanh and ummaan. 


TQT, 0go3 BY g[& 09 coor — J9- 
Waddhaki jin dlun ku Mahas—723 
The shipwrights make over the ships to Mahosadha—432. 27 
It will be remembered that, before setting out from Mithila, Mahosadha 
gave orders for ships to be built. Three hundred shipwrights having 
built three hundred ships and loaded them, brought them down and made 
them over to the sage. 
Mahas is a mistake for Mahos. 


PART I] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 69 


Waddhaki = the Pali vaddhaki, carpenter. Jin, .to give, give 
over, grant, confer = M.T. §§, juin; with: this word compare 4, 
phyuin, to hand over, deliver = oo§$, pasuin, ibd. The aspirate q, 
phy, is often the result of 0, p + 0,5; eg. gS, phyaw, to put down = 
of, pasaw; gs phyuf, to give to drink = om; G5, phyuik, to 
render or make happy = oofo5, pasuik. Cf. plaque 33. | 


192, ©600905 BegrE co&—r1y 9 
‘Mahos pindon weh—724 
Mahosadha sends (the boats) out of the way—432. 30 


Then the sage, not wishing in any ‘way to arouse suspicion, sends the 
shipwrights to put the boats away in a secluded place. 


Wen, to avoid, esthew, keep out’ of the way; see plaque 163. 


193. 0600905 ol& BE— 7) 5 
-Mahos wah smia—725 
Mahosadha goes out to, meet the king (Vedeha)—433. 18 


The new city for the use ‘of his king, the big and the small tunnels and 
everything else being ready,-Mahosadha goes to meet King Vedeha who has 
arrived at the Ganges. 

Waa, to go out to meet, the fuller forms being 83/6, waadua, 
ol&a(So\§, wah du tlun, 


194. YE 99295 ecoorx05—1 jG 
Smin smafi Mahos—726 | 
The king (Vedeha) asks Mahosadha—g42. 9 


He takes King Vedeha to the newly built city. King Calani agrees to 
give his daughter, to Vedeha this.very:day;. but in reality he sends word to 
array his mighty legions in order to ‘surround Vedeha and kill him. 
Meanwhile, Mahosadha has tricked Cilani’s mother, his consort, son and 


70 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA von. 1 


daughter through the tunnel into a safe place. Vedeha, impatient with the 
apparent delay of the princess’s arrival, looks out of a window, and is 
terrified at the sight of Calani’s innumerable army surrounding the city. He 
naturally thinks this is due to a lack of prudence on the part of Mahosadha. 
He first asks his four wise men how they could get him out of this danger; 
they are at a loss. Then, lamenting, he asks Mahosadha, who answers 
there is nothing to fear. 


195. god gob oy YE BB—rI1 
Pubar umaa ku smih Widih—727 
He shows the tunnel to King Vedeha—433. 33 & 


Vedeha was comforted. Mahosadha ordered the door of the tunnel to 
be thrown open, when its magnificence appeared in a blaze of light. The 
king and the ministers enter the tunnel. 


Pubar, to show, exhibit; pu is a variant of the causal prefix pa, often 
written ba (cf. su= sa, page 23), M.T. is of, babuiw; caoo$oQydocgr5 
yoSgoor GloleBddconeGegpqs—“‘ when the young princes who were clever in 
wrestling came out and showed the king a fight,’ Dhe. 150. 17; 3ledocBag2 
§G0dq Blo Big FZ ogodqucel 8oocheGags0g|§o3—“‘ the Bodhisatta having shown to 
the people that the extremity (of the pole) which sank first (in the water) 
was the root, and the one which sank after, the tip,...,”’ S.M. 11; 
0gsg§Qgcguccoed oF po:—‘ this brahmin to-day has shown him (the snake) 
to the people and made him dance,” S.B. 19. 


196, 0805 692% QgE—rJo 
Tit nor umman—728 


(Vedeha) comes out from the tunnei—445. .18 


When, through the tunnel, the king and his ministers come to the place 
where Ctjani’s family are kept, the latter shriek in fear. Cilani hears and is 
puzzled, but keeps quiet for fear of being laughed at at the very thought his 
family were prisoners. Mahosadha sets Princess Paficalacandi upon a heap of 
treasure, sprinkles her according to the ceremonial of marriage and makes 


PART | | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 71 


her over to the king as one of his queens. The place they were in was 
near the Ganges. The ships are brought, and Vedeha, coming forth from the 
tunnel, goes aboard ship taking his new queen, with her mother and brother 
and C@lani’s queen, as prisoners. Mahosadha remains behind to bring back 
intact his master’s army. 


197, B$m$ og BE 88S—r yo 
Kinkan ku smin Widih—728 
(Mahosadha) instructs King Vedeha 


As the king is going to embark, the sage instructs him, asking him to 
treat properly his hostages. © 


This and. the preceding plaque again bear the same number. 


198, qeosp8 ag ea~aS—1 Je 
Gulafi ku Culani—729 | 
(Mahosadha) converses with (king) Cilanim451. 5 7 


In due course, Vedeha arrives at Mithila, his capital. The sage then 
goes back to the tunnel, buries his sword in the sand at the door and enters 
the city, where he, takes a much-needed rest. At dawn, Calani orders his 
armies to approach the city and utters dreadful threats to awe Vedeha. But 
Mahosadha shows himself, magnificently adorned, and, in conversation with 
him, makes Cilani know that his plans have been foiled. 


199. gle GO20S goy2085 3924 —~190 
Pyun boy gnakyak a4r—730 
(Mahosadha) shows (Cilani) the way (his) queen is gone—456. 17 


Cilani becomes furious, and orders the sage to be put to death; 
Mahosadha points out to him that any harm which befalls him will also 
befall his wife, mother and son; to the astonished king the sage reveals 
that they are in the hands of Vedeha. Then in safety on the upper 
Storey of the house, Mahosadha points.out, in a number of stanzas, the 


72 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


way the beautiful queen is gone; thus while praising the beauty of the queen 
and making the king long for her, preventing him effectually from ordering 
any violence to be done to himself, through fear of the possible revenge 
which might be wreaked on his wife. 
| Pyuai translates the Pali (VI. 456. 17) acikhhana, from acikkhatt, to 
show = Mod. T. &§, pfiun. | 

-_Boy = M.T. 3, bwai; this word is used in many senses, to form 
adverbs and adverbial expressions, and as a preposition with the meanings of: 
by, to, towards, from, as, about; in this plaque it is indicative of direction : 
-boy 4r, the way she went, and renders the Pali (VI. 456. 19) tto gata ; it 
is also used in M.T. to form adverbs of direction: 3903, against, 3o5eo5an | 
%aorayo—" throwing dust against the wind,” Dhd. 172. 27; 3ecosoecpof— 
“straight or directly towards.” The: following are a few examples of its 
uses : i aaa aie ga know -me.as “Narada,” S.J. 70; 38988ao5— 
“by us it was heard... ,” S.B. 1; Becoancelwooqog9S—" by his common 
appellation,” Dhd. 29. 1; Qs2c§oi5—‘of .one’s own accord,” Dhd. 578. 20; 
Yooys—“'in detail, in full, 7 extenso,” S.B. 24; o§ —t righteously,” Sudh. 7, 
4; 3005, “suitable, fit, proper” (from eo, “to follow ev = anukilya ; 
88\05—in circumference,” Dhd. 60. 11, and many others not recorded in 
Haswell. The forms 0%, 0%, babwai, babai, are also frequently -found ; 
€x., &8 Gogd—"‘ in due course, in regular order,” Sudh. 24. 25, Ja. VI, 179. 
6 = anupubbena ; e05—" righteous, righteously,” Dhd. 236. 16, ‘It is also 
found reduplicated: 33ccg§—‘' in due ' course.” 


200. geo o§ Qoé—199 
-Ciilani bar umah—731. 
(King) Ciilani looks at the tunnel—459. 1 


When Matioeadha having thus praised his queen to Cilani, the latter 
longs for her and his children and thinks: . “The sage alone can give me 
back. wife and children,” the sage tells: the king that his mother, wife and 
son will be given back to him, the only condition is ‘his (Mahosadha’s) 
return. The king now wonders how it is that, the new city being closely 
invested, his family could have been taken away from his own palace’ without. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 74 


anybody having been aware of it. Mahosadha mentions the tunnels, and 
shows. them to him. 
Bar, to look, look at = M.T. §, buiw. 


1. 8008 8g cod oq BE—10) 
Bibat dirhat ku smin—y32 
(Mahosadha) measures strength with the king—460. 10 


Mahosadha shows the king the marvels of-the tunnel, its one hundred 
and. one bed chambers, etc:; there was a mechanism by which the door of 
one being opened, all opened, or being closed, all-closed. Having visited the 
tunnel, the king comes out, and immediately the sage ‘had all the doors 
closed, shutting in all _the king’s attendants. Then Mahosadha takes the 
sword he had the day before hidden i in the sand at.the gate, leaps eighteen 
cubits in the air and, seizing the king’s arm: ‘“ Whose, Sire, are all the 
kingdoms of India?” “They are yours, my dear sir! Do spare me!” 
Then the sage comforts the king, and both strike up a sincere friendship. 


Bibat, see plaque 9; dirhat, see plaque 29. 


(202, BE o7 gerd (B§00r2—100 
Smin klam pujaw kirya—733 | | 
The hundred kings offer ornaments (to Mahosadha)—461. 17 


Mahosadha opens the tunnel’s door, and the one hundred and one kings 
come out. They address the sage: “ Wise sir, you have saved our life; had 
we stayed in a little longer we would have died.” The sage explains this 
was not the first time, he had already done so when he had all the 
vessels in which was poisoned dtink broken, and by which Cialani, on the 
advice of Kevatta, had tried to do away with them. Cilani begs pardon of 
the kings, which they gladly grant, and they, full of gratitude, present many 
ornaments to the sage. 

Pujaw, for paijaw= M. T. gf, piijau, to offer or present something 


in token of homage or honour or worship ; Pali, pi7a. 
10 


74 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vou. 1. 


203. BE gq} ecvor08— 109 
Smin pumun Mahos—734 
The king invites. Mahosadha (to stay at his court)—461. 25 


The king, desirous of keeping such an eminent man at his: court, offers 
the sage much honour and wealth if he consents not to go back to Vedeha. 
Mahosadha thankfully declines. 

-Pumun, to invite; beg, entreat; I-am not sure of the exact modern 
Talaing for this word ; but: perhaps ibe word oo§, ga’man, to invite, which 
I have not yet found in the literature but which is colloquial, may be com- 
pared with it. There. is a word, mun, met. with several times in. these 
‘plaques with the meaning: to tell, inform, apprize (see_plaque 42), which 
means also “to entreat” in plaque 213; pumun- is no doubt related to it: 


204, 0600905 008 9)8—1929 
Mahos cow duh—735 
Mahosadha returns to the city (of Mithila)—463..10 # 


Mahosadha promises the king to send back immediately his mother, his 
queen and his son, and ‘Teturns: to Mithila with great wealth. 


205, ocx SegoS s02—106 
Mahos pindon co—736 
Mahosadha sends back (Calan? ’s family)—465. 4 # 

He arrives at Mithila and is received amidst great rejoicings ; then he 
tells King Vedeha it is time to send back the three hostages. They are 
accordingly sent back. Calani, learning of the great hospitality. and honour 
that had been shown. them, sends Vedeha a rich present, and both. kings 


become’ great friends. 
Co, for cow, to return = M.T. 6, cau. 


. 206 0383 corn $ ogé 8ea—191 
Kumin kon smin Wideh—737 
They énthrone the son of King. Vedeha—466. 19 f 


Paficalacandi, the daughter of Calan, was much loved of King Vedeha. 
She bore him a son; in his tenth year the king died. The sage, raising 


PARTI]. TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 75 


over him a white umbrella, instals the young prince on the throne, and begs 
leave to visit the young king's grandfather Cilani. 
Kumin, ¢f. plaque 25. 


207. 09918 99295 ocvo20S— 90 
Paribbac smafi Mahos—738 
A female ascetic asks Mahosadha (by gestures, why he does not 
become an ascetic)—467. 21 

Ciilani receives him with great pomp, and the sage takes service under 
him according to a former promise. The queen, however, disliked Mahosadha | 
owing to his having separated her from the king ten years before, and she 
sets some of her ladies to watch him closely in order to catch him tripping 
and lose him in the esteem of the king. Now, a female -ascetic regularly 
‘took her. meals at the palace ; ; she had never seen Mahosadha, but had heard 
- of his- wisdom; he, likewise, had never seen her, but knew she came to the 
palace. One day they: met in the. courtyard of the palace. He saluted her. 
Then, to test his cleverness, she asked him questions by signs: ‘“ Does the 
king treat you well?” “ No, the king is very tight-fisted.” Then she puts. 
her hand to her. head, showing the peculiar coiffiire of ascetics, meaning— 
“Tf you are dispinaned, why do you not become. an ascetic? ”"—and the 
sage answers by showing his stomach, meaning—"‘ It is impossible, because 
I have many to support.” | 

Paribbac = Pali paribbajikd, a female ascetic. 


208: eeco20S 99095 of 9s85—19¢ 
- Mahos -smafi paribbac—739 
Mahosadha ‘asks the female ascetic (to find out the king’s mind) —469. 6 7 


The queen’s ladies have seen the strange’ conversation and, misinter- 
preting it, report to- the king that Mahosadha and the ascetic are plotting to 
take his life. The king: questions the ascetic, who explains the true Meaning 
of the signs, and Cilani, delighted, appoints Mahosadha generalissimo. Maho- 
sadha, surprised at the honour, reflects that kings often do such things when 
they intend slaying one; so, in order to know how things stand, he pays her 
a visit and asks her to find out- for him the’ king’ s‘mind. She does so witl 
great cleverness, and finds out-that the king is really very fond of Mahosadha. 


76 ' EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { von. th 


209, p02 © ay S08 o GogrG§—1g0 
Nah ma kya bicar ma lior—740 
The persons who have lost the case salute reverentially (Mahosadha) 


Although this plaque bears the number 740, it is certainly in the wrong 
place; it ought to have come after one of the numerous cases tried by 
Mahosadha in the earlier part of this story. As, however, at the end of all 
these cases, the two parties make obeisance to the sage, it is impossible to 
say to which of these this plaque belongs. 

Kya = MLT., to lose; the # subscript under 7 in Inor is invisible 
in the photograph, but quite legible on the’ plaque. 


VI—KHANDAHALA-JATAKA. 


This story is popularly known in’ Burma as Candakumara, from 
the name of the’ hero. Candakumara is the son of the king of Benares 
and is viceroy. The brahmin Khandahila is the royal chaplain, he is also a 
judge partial and corrupt. A suitor, dissatisfied with Khandahala’s verdict, 
complains to the viceroy; .Candakumara decides the case most cleverly 
and to the satisfaction of the people, and the king appoints him gi 
The brahmin resolves to take revenge on Candakumara. One morning, i 
his sleep, the king sees the splendours of the heaven of the Thirty-three 
Gods, and wishing to go there, he asks - his chaplain the way thereto. 
Khandahala answers the only way was to sacrifice his queens and his 
children, The foolish king orders the sacrifice. After many. touching scenes, 
Sakka rescues Candakumara and the other innocent victims. 


210, 0909024, 0095 802§—r99 
Candakumar taw bicar—741 
_ Candakumra is deciding the Cas€—131, 21 
Khandahala, wicked chaplain and false judge, having decided a case 
wrongly, the wronged suitor complains to Candakumara; the jatter takes him 


to the court, tries the case and gives an equitable verdict, to the loud 
applause of the people. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA : OF 


211, §& 694 8024§—19) 
Smin or bicar—z742 
The king causes him to try (cases) or 
(The king appoints Candakumara as judge)—131. 27 


Hearing the loud noise, the king enquires what it means, and learning 
of his son’s success at law, gives him the office of judge and tells him that, 
henceforth, he is to investigate all suits. 

Or, for this’ word see No. 50, in which the present algae is discussed. 
Bicar here is used as'a verb: to investigate cases, to judge. 


212, 4& og|& ogoq00§—199 
Ran tlun Candakumar—743 
They bring Candakumara (to the king)—134. 21 


The king proclaims he has decided, in order to gain heaven, to sacrifice 
his children and his wives. He then orders his men to bring Candakumara 
and his four brothers. They first bring the prince to the king and then the 
others, and make them sit together. 

Ran tlua, to bring; for this word see under ran in plaque 5. The 
plaque shows the king in a pavilion; the figure in the upper row, on the 
right, near the pavilion, is Candakumara; he is arguing with the king; the 
four others are his brothers. 


213. 0gooo§ a—199 
Candakumar mun—744_— 
‘Candakumara entreats (his father)—138. 8 # 


Candakumira’s sisters and the queens are also brought before the king. 
The people immediately go to the king’s father and mother, who come to 
remonstrate with their son, but in vain. Then Candakumara, understanding 
‘that he alone is the object of Khandahala’s hatred, and that all the others 
have been dragged in merely to hide his’ real purpose and not to rouse 
Suspicion, entreats his father to spare their lives. 


78 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ~~ [von n 


Mun, to entreat, beg, supplicate, answers to the Pali yacatt ig: 
138. 8); of. pumun, plaque 203. - Mun _ has already been mét with the 
meaning—to inform, tell, apprize; see plaque 42. In the plaque, the figure 
behind ,Candakumiara represents all the other persons. 


214. ogoQorg Bod$—i¢ 9 
Candakuméar kinkan—7450 
Candakumara bids (his wives to implore the king)—142. 18 # 


The king, deeply moved, renounces his sacrifice ahd sets free all his 
family. But Khandahala, hearing of this, reproaches the king with his 
weakness, and the poor victims are again captured; the same thing happens: 
once again, and Candakumira, unable to mollify the king, bids his wives to 
implore him in their turn. | 

‘Kinkan, to instruct, give directions, bid; see plaque 62. One only of 
the wives is ‘Tepresented in the plaque, which is not numbered, probably. by 
inadvertence, for there is room enough to do so. 


215. eglS GE wd— 96 
Dmon jrah yac—746 
Candakumara is near the sacrificial pit—154. 21 f 


All the supplication of the several members of his family could not, 
owing to the wicked brahmin’s influence, deter the king from his purpose. 
The prince is taken to the. sacrificial pit; all the victims. following. Canda, 
his principal queen, was. by his side weeping. All the’ preparations being 
finished, the prince was brought .and placed near the sacrificial pit with his 
head bent forward. | _ Khandahala raised the sword saying, “Now will F cut | 
his neck!” : 

-The inscription on the photograph is difficult to read, but it is quite 
clear on the plaque and the*estampage.e Dmon = M.T. 88, dma, to 
dwell, remain in a place; Jran = M.T. ae9€, jaref, presence, in the 
presence of, near. The nimbus round the head of Candakumara indicates he 
is the future Buddha; between him and Khandahala is seen the sacrificial 
fire; the woman on the left is Queen: Canda,;.Candakumara’s chief queen. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES. ON. THE ANANDA "9 


216, 903 805 manoor70S — 719 
Nah khil Kandahal—747 
The people rush at Khandahila (to kill him)—155. 22 


At that moment, Queen Candi makes a solemn act of asseveration. 
‘Hearing it, Sakka comes down from the heavens brandishing a blazing mass 
of iron, and frightens the king and his ministers, who immediately set all-the 
victims free. The people rush at Khandahala with stones, sticks, etc., and 
kill him. ~ 

Nah, here = the people, see plaque 112. Khil =. modern colloquial 
§, khuiw, not in Haswell's, which means, to rush at, in anger: g§o9{S0o03 
®§gasq—' the fellow (g) who rushed at me to strike me is this fellow.” -I 
have not yet found this_word in literary Talaing. The figure seated on the 
right is Candakumara; between him and the others is the sacrificial fire. 


217. QB} ogogor—290 
Kumin Candakumar—748 
_Enthroning Candakumira 


Having killed Khandahala the people made the king an outcast, and 
forbade him ever to enter the city. All the requisites for coronation were 
brought and Candakumara was anointed king. Candakumira is séated under 
the royal white umbrella; in front is a brahmin pouring the lustral water 
from a conch. 


218, 030702 03$ 03§—r9¢ 
Candakumar tin swar—749_ 
Candakumara ascends to heaven—157. 16 
After a righteous reign, Candakumara went to heaven. 
Tin, to ascend, see plaque 51; Swar, see plaque 11o. 


80. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VOL 


VII.—BHORIDATTA=JATAKA. 


The king of Benares, perceiving the growing might of his son, who is 
the viceroy, banishes him. The prince becomes an ascetic; he is seduced 
by a Naga-woman and has two children by her, a boy anda girl. In course 
of time he becomes king and his daughter is married to Dhatarattha, the 
king of the Nagas, to whom she bears four sons, one being Bhiiridatta, the 
future Buddha. Bhiridatta is caught by a snake-charmer, who takes him 
from place to place making him dance before the people; one of his 
brothers and his sister, the latter taking the form of a frog, go about looking 
for him and at last rescue him after many incidents. 


219, vd3a0$ o9%s05— 190 
Patisan Bhuridat—750. 
Conception of Bhiridatta—167. 30 


Patisan, for patisan = patisandh#, conception. 


220, 84805 09%sc3—190 
Dirdas. Bhtridat—751 
Birth of Bhiridat—167._ 30 


Dirdas = M.T, 9905, dadah, the being born, the entering into a new 
state of existence, from the root dias (M.T. dah), to be, to become. 


221, ©8$ op890S—19) 
Kumin Bhiridat—752 
Enthroning Bhiridatta—168, 17 
When Bhiridatta attained the age of discretion, his father Dhbatarattha 


gave him a kingdom; his three brothers similarly each received one. The 
plaque is not numbered. 


222, Plaque No. 753 is missing. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES.ON THE ANANDA 81 


223. 038305 e002 of0095 gi$—-195 
Bhiiridat soh summa In—754 
Bhiridatta answers Indra’s question 


Bhiridatta goes to the world of gods to wait upon Indra; the latter was 
propounding a. question which no god could answer; Bhiridatta alone can 
answer it. — . 

Soh, to answer, a variant of soh (plaque 152). Summaf, a ques- 
tion; variants are sumafi and simman, from smafi, to ask, question; 
the M.T. sman is both a verb and a noun: - 99283 G $9 9i8359—“‘a question 
arose in the Naga-city,” S.B. ut. In, generally In, the god Indra. 


2.24.-098905 o& 0805 oof pgo—r199 
Bhiridat man sil han udya—755 
Bhiridatta observes the sz/as in the garden—169. 11 


Having seen. the splendours of the heaven of the gods, Bhiiridatta, dis- 
gusted with his present existence as a naga, resolves-to gain heaven by the 
fulfilment of the’ observances (sila) and by fast; he informs his parents of his 
intention; they agree, provided he practises his religious exercises within the 
Naga eatin, owing to the many dangers to nagas outside; he then keeps the 
uposatha fast in the gardens. 

Sil, the Buddhist precepts, Pali sz/a, M.T. 38, si. Han, in,’ see 
plaque 28; udyda, garden, see plaque 143. Following strictly the text this 
plaque should have come after the next. Unnumbered. | 


225. 9§ ol§ sg 9904 08 Sad—r9¢ 
Mun pan aba s-ar man sil—756 
(Bhiridatta) asks his father leave to go and observe the sz/as—1s69. 6 

See the explanations under No. 224, before which this plaque should 
have come. 

Aba, father, see Nos. 23, 33; S-4r, will go, see No. 183. Mun pan 
is a compound verb meaning, “‘to beg leave respectfully”; mun has been 

is 


82 __- EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 7 (vou. 11 


seen already, plaques 42, 213; pan means “to ask leave or permission to 
do something”; with this may be compared the Burmese o§, pan; pan 
having exactly the same meaning, and the full expression, mun pan, to 
the Burmese o$ 92, pan kra®. Pan, which is still colloquial, is often 
used in the expression pan akhofn, to ask leave (akhon); cf. Burmese 
sogG0$, akhwanh pan; we find also the expression so.05ol§, at pan, at 
A.V., p. 33 under aydcana == gosrdSel$aocol§ = asking permission. This 
plaque is not numbered, 


226, og&s05 Bo8$ og Bg§—2191 
Bhiridat kinkan ku kindar—757 
Bhiridatta instructs his wife—169. 15 £ 


But, as he is observing the fast, the Naga maidens attend upon him: 
with music and song, disturbing him; so he resolves to go elsewhere. In 
the fear of his parents preventing him doing so, he tells them nothing; but 
calling his wife, he gives her some instructions—“I will go to the world of 
men,” says he, “there, on the bank of the Jumna, is a banyan tree and near 
it an ant-hill; on the ant-hill shall I coil myself and observe the fast. When 
the night is over, at dawn, send your women with music,.to take me back 
to the Naga world.” Thus, every day at dawn, did the Naga maidens fetch 
him from the haunts of men, for a long time. 


Kinkan, see plaque 62. Kindar, see plaque 132. ‘Plaque unnume. 
bered. 


227. 9005 qos RQ G—190 
Bhiridat qulafi ku bumnah—758 
ene converses with the brahmin—173, 1 ff 


. At that time, near ‘Benares: there fired a brahmin hunter. One day, 

with his son Somadatta he arrives near the ant-hill where Bhiiridatta observed 
his fast. He kills a deer, but as it is already evening, father and son go up 
in the. banyan tree. Early next morning, the brahmin hears the Naga 
maidens sing to the Naga prince who has assumed the human form. The 
brahmin asks him who he i is, and Bhiridatta tells. him. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 83 


Bumnah, a brahmin = M.T. eg3, bamnah; there is also another 
modern form, gt, bnab, not in Haswell: co2c0§ co2800g39) onggroc$oS$aiq— 
“at that time, the’ Bodhisatta was reborn in an exalted brahmin family, Dhd.. 
Go. 27; gi{goE8SoS 0} 603,E4—“ the brahmin woman heard the Law and came 
back (home),” Dhd. 95. 15. There is another old variant, bimnah, 
plaques 275, 309. Plaque unnumbered. 


228, ogé|goo 6009 92060098—19 ¢ 
Bhiridat lop nagabhow—759 
Bhiridatta enters the Naga world—172. 23 


But Bhiridatta now reflects—‘ This brahmin, who looks cruel and fierce, 
might betray me to a snake-charmer, and‘thus prevent my observance of the 
fast”; so he promises him great honour and wealth and induces him to 
dwell in the Naga country, for, during his sojourn there, there would be no 
danger of his betraying him. The brahmin accepts, and Bhuadae taking 
father and son, enters into the Naga world. . 


Bhow, a dwelling; hence, region, world: = M.T. 96, hee: from Pali 
bhavana, bhuvana; A.V. 13, adhobhuvana = 9Q&320%6u 


Lop, to enter = M.T, 09, lup. Plaque unnumbered. 


229, BcS BES} op o—1G0 
Kil kirmin ku bumnah—760 
(Bhiridatta) confers regal glory on the brahmin—173. 24 


In the Naga worlds ‘Bhiridatta confers on the brahmin and his son all 
the enjoyment and splendour of a regal state, so as to: keep them away 
from the haunts of men. Meanwhile, he goes as usual to the ant-hill to 
perform his religious exercises. 

Kil, to confer, see plaque 49. Kirmin, royalty, regal state; here is 
not to be .taken in the strict sense of ‘‘sovereignty,” but in that of the 
enjoyment, magnificence, splendour, wealth, etc., belonging to royalty, whether 
earthly or divine. The Pali has (172, 24) dibbasampattir; the Burmese 
version translates this by 9o50p8:85, nat caficim =. sempatt/. The Talaing 
version has; 280008 3809 9§coa$ seeds 8Saqe9:—" the Bodhisatta conferred 


84 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vo. 11 


upon the brahmin wealth and honour,” in which 98§0o2$ asovod is the 
equivalent of sampatti. Kirmin corresponds to the M.T. o§§, kmin, 
which means “government, rule, regal state, sovereignty”; also “ kingdom, 
country.” Cf. Aus2n, plaque 25. The inscription is somewhat spoiled; the 
virama on the y and 2 of kirmin is no more visible, as well as the left- 
hand half of the #. Plaque unnumbered. 


230. 298508 o8c5.ca8 a S9:—1¢9 
Bhiridat kil mani ku bumnah—761 
Bhiridatta gives the jewel to the brahmin—r75. 61 


After a stay of a year in the Naga world, the brahmin gets tired, and 
wants to go back to see his wife and friends. Bhiridatta tries in vain to 
keep him back. At last, so that, through greed, the brahmin may not 
show his place of retirement on the ant-hill to a snake-charmer, he gives 
him a jewel which grants all one’s wishes, and promises him more wealth 
whenever he chooses to come and see him. The brahmin, however, desiring 
to become also an ascetic, dues not accept the gem. -Plaque unnumbered. 


231, soc$eou8 p28 o98c05—1 6 J 
Alambiay fiic Bhiridat—762 
Alambayana sees Bhiridatta—184. 1 # 


Alambayana, a poor brahmin full of debts, runs away from Benares and 
lives. with an ascetic to whom he renders many little services. The ascetic, 
well pleased, gives him a spell which renders the most deadly snakes 
inoffensive. Alambayana goes on his way repeating the spell, and- thus 
arrives on the bank of the Jumna, A thousand Naga youths who waited on 
Bhiridatta had brought out from the Naga regions the magnificent gem 
granting all desires, and had placed it on a mound of sand. As Alambayana 
reaches this spot reciting his spell, the Nagas run away terrified, forgetting 
the gem, and he picks it up and goes on his way. He is met by the 
-brahmin and his son who were ahunting. The brahmin at once recognizes 
the gem, and, in order to possess himself of it, ‘tries to convince the other 
that it is very unlucky; but in vain. At last, he shows to him Bhiridatta 


“PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 85 


coiled on his ant-hill. Bhiridatta sees Alambayana, now snake-charmer by 
means of his spell, and resolves not to defend himself, whatever the latter 
does to him. Alambayana seizes Bhiridatta. The brahmin hunter asks 
again for the gem, which Alambayana gives him, not knowing ats value. 
But the gem falls down, and through | the ground goes back to the Naga 
world. 

Alathbay, an abbreviation of Alambayana; it is- now written socogo, 
alambdai, and means “a snake-charmer”; the Burmese have also the 
same word, socogoS, alambay, with the same meaning. Nac, see plaque 
61. Plaque unnumbered. 


232, s2osewS aS o78s0S5—1 60 
Alambay jak Bhiridat—763 
Alambayana pulls Bhiridatta. (by the tail)—185. 3 


Alambayana anoints ‘himself. agin divine drugs, recites the spell, goes 
up to Bhiridatta and pulls him by the tail; he then opens his mouth, spits 
into it a drug he has chewed, spreads oy on the ground and pounds him, 
breaking his bones. Through all these sufferings Bhiiridatta keeps his 
temper. Alambayana puts him in a basket he has prepared, and goes 
away. 

_ Jak = M.T,, to pull. The photograph shows Bhiridatta coiled round 
the ant-hill and the snake-charmer pulling him. Plaque unnumbered. 


233. 3008635 gqécoz: 074s805-—7 eg 
Alambay raleh Bh[i]ridat—764 
Alambayana makes Bhiridatta dance—185. 19 7 


‘He goes into a village and calls out all those who wish to see the 
snake dance; he makes Bhiiridatta. do a variety of tricks. The future 
Buddha hele it would be better to please the crowd, so that Alambayana, 
having received plenty of money, might be satisfied and let him go; and he 
does all he is bidden. Plaque unnumbered. 

Raleh, to make dance, as snakes, bears, marionnettes, etc.; the M.T. 
is oco§, pa leh; U.O.K. 42. 8 7, referring to Bhiridatta, says: $§¢6c0005 


86 ) EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL, i 


em20ec0§ 35 G59 EqroFi cogeB orccdgo5—“' and although he took him to and made 
him dancé in every town, he (Bhiridatta) did not. speak in anger.” Raleh 
is the causal of leh, M.T. co§, leh, to dance; compare with rinleh, 
dancing, in Blagden’s inscriptions. Plaque unnumbered. 


234. socdoeroS o& o7|F 85 BE—1e9 
Alambay ran tlun cip smin—765 
Alambayana carrying (the snake) arrives (in) the king(’s presence) 
—191 17 


But Alambayana is not satisfied with the money he has ‘received in that 
village, and, thinking what a fortune it is in. his power to make, he goes 
from village to village carrying Bhiridatta in a bejewelled basket and, 
reaching Benares, invites the king to come and see the snake play. Now, 
when it was known in Bhiridatta’s family that he had disappeared, there 
was great anxiety and sorrow, His three brothers go in the world of 
men in different directions in search of him. His elder brother, Sudassana, 
in the garb of an ascetic arid accompanied by his young sister hiding in his 
hair in the form of a frog, comes to the ant-hill and, seeing traces of blood, 
knows that his brother has been caught by a snake-charmer. He follows 
Alambayana’s. track, and arrives at Benares at the moment when the 
snake-charmer, in the midst of the spectators, a seat having been prepared 
for the king, sends his message to the latter. Alambayana calls out 
Bhiridatta who, on recognizing his brother in the crowd, goes up to him, 
places his head on his feet and weeps. | 

Ranh tlun, see plaque 5- Cip, to reach, arrive = M.T. 85, cuip, 
see plaque 82. Plaque unnumbered: - ER 

235. 098305 $825 gS o$5—166 
Bhiridat nimit rup manis—766 
Bhiridatta assumes the human form—196. 15 
Alambayana thinks the snake has bitten the ascetic and offers an antidote; 


Sudassana answers he does not fear snakes, and that he can set against this 
one a small frog who can conquer him. The stake is five thousand pieces, 


PART | | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 87 


The challenge is accepted. Sudassana goes to the king to borrow the five 
thousand, and the king comes to see the wonderful fight between a frog and 
a snake. The frog throws out three drops of fearful poison, which makes the 
snake-charmer become a white leper, and he sets the snake free. On this, 
Bhiridatta assumes the human form; so does his sister, and all. three stand 
near the king. 

Nimit, to create, perhaps from the Pali nimminat? through 2immitta ; 
but compare also M.T. 805, |mit, with the same meaning (see also under 
plaque 1); 819 ag" cosQg§oroSo$agteSi sd$co8odyoscoSa— at that place, Indra 
created a square flat stone of ten cubits,” Sudh. 13. 5; 9/8 q ognad o$ 51988 
co8oSco803—“‘and from the time Indra created the city of Suvannabhumi 
...? Nimit is still used in M.T..in the compound $805 go5, nimit 
bdah. Rup, form; image, statue = M.T. Manis, man, Pali 
manussa. Plaque unnumbered. 


236, BE BS o4o05—164 
Smin tim Bhuridat—767 
The king recognizes Bhiridatta—i96. 19 


Sudassana then asks the king whether he knows them, and he says no. 
Sudassana tells him they are the children of Samuddaja, his, own sister, who 
was given in marriage to Dhatarattha, the Naga king. The king then 
recognizes them, and kisses them weeping. 

Tim, to know = = M.T. In the plaque the upper part of the king’s body 
is broken off; the posture of Sudassana shows he is being kissed by the 
king; Bharidatta is recognized by the cobra hood behind his head; their 
sister is not represented. Plaque unnumbered. 


i og§a05. cooS 99060095 —7 Go 
Bhiridat cow nagabhow—768 
Bhiridatta returns to the Naga world—197. 8 
All three stay. some time with their uncle the king; as his mother longs: 
to see Bhiiridatta again, they beg leave to go back, and it being granted 


Bhiridatta goes back to the Naga world with his brother and sister. 
Cow, see plaque 159; bhow, see plaque 228. Plaque unnumbered. 


88 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL.u 


238. 298305 88 pone0005—16¢. 
Bhiridat cip nagabhow—769 
Bhiridatta arrives in the Naga world—197. 9 
When Bhiridatta arrived in the Naga city, being tired and faint with his 


month’s residence in the snake-charmer’s basket, he took to a sickebed ; 
an immense number of Nagas came to visit him. | 


- 239, 228808 qcoed 09 48—120 
Bhuridat gulafi ku risi—77o 
Bhiridatta converses with the hermit—217. 22 f 


Bhiridatta having recovered from his illness goes to visit his grandfather, 
who lives as an ascetic, in his hermitage, and has edifying conversations with 
him. When he died, he went to heaven with a host of Nagas. Plaque 
‘unnumbered. 


VIII.—MAHANARADAKASSAPA-JATAKA. 


The king of Videha is much given to pleasure; he asks an ascetic the 
various paths of moral duties; his daughter, a very virtuous princess, tries her 
best to make him abandon his heretical beliefs; this end is at last effected 
with the future Buddha’s help, the Great Brahma Narada, disguised as an’ 
ascetic. | 


240, 408 324 qooopd 02 o8&—119 
‘Risi Nar gulafi ku smia—771 

The hermit Narada converses with the king—242. 25 f 
The Great Brahma Narada, seeing the endeavours of the princess to 
make her father abandon heretical views, resolves to come down from his 
heaven to help her convert the king to the true path. He takes the guise 
of an ascetic; the king, seeing him, comes down from his throne and makes 

him obeisance. In the ensuing conversation, the king is converted. 


PART 1 | ' TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 89 


241, {08 304 9094 @log}ecord— 15 
Risi Nar ar Bra(hma)lok—772 
The: hermit Narada goes (back) to the Brahma world—255. 2 


‘Narada, having converted the king, goes back to the Brahma ee 


" Braluk for brahmaloka; the meaning is made. clear by the 
plaque; it represents the Great Brahma Narada going back to his heaven, on 
a cloud; in all the Pagan plaqués, deities going up or down from their heaven 
are shown on a cloud which represents the air; below is the king and 
behind him his daughter. The two letters og, hma, have not been left out 
by inadvertence, but because the inscription was too long for the plaque. 
The right comprehension of the word was left. to the pious reader who, 
knowing well the stories (and all these stories are perfectly known), could not 
fail to identify at once the clipped word bra for brahma, the last word 
lok helping him in this. Moreover, the expression “ brahmaloka”’ had 
already, for several centuries, been thoroughly familiar to the Talaings. 
Plaque unnumbered. There are only two plaques. to illustrate this jataka ; 
the reason no doubt is that the story consists mostly of conversations, and 
contains very little action. 


IX.—VIDHURA PANDITA-JATAKA, 


The king reigning ‘at Indapatta, the capital of the Kuru kingdom, is a 
great gambler at dice;...the future Buddha, the wise Vidhura, was his min- 
ister, who gave him advice and instructions in temporal and religious matters. 
One day, the king, who had ‘gone into his garden to practise meditation, 
met there. Sakka, the king of the gods, Varuna, the Naga king), and Supanna, 
the king of the Garudas, come for the same purpose. A discussion arises 
among them as to which is the most virtuous; unable to agree on this point, 
they ask the opinion of Vidhura, who shows them that all four are equal in 
virtue. All go back home. The Naga queen, on hearing Vidhura’s praise 
from the king’s lips, conceives a: strong desire to have the wise man’s heart 
(for the expression of this desire, she knows, is the only means by which ,she 


can manage to have him brought before her, and thus enjoy- his pious 
| 12 


90 EPIGRAPHIA -BIRMANICA [voL, 


discourses). But he cannot do that; he seeks his daughter and tells her that 
if her mother does-not get Vidhura’s heart, she will die. The daughter makes 
it known that, ‘whoever will bring the wise minister’s heart, will become. her 
husband; -Punnaka, the Yakkha general, offers himself. Punnaka goes to 
Indapatta, defeats the king at dice and claims Vidhura as his price. In many 
ways does Punnaka try to kill Vidhura, but in vain. At last, Vidhura asks 
him what he wants, and, on being told, the’ wise man wins over Punnaka 
and goes to the Naga world, where no harm is done him. All the plaques 
in this story are unnumbered. 


242, 88§ coor aj028- §$E—170 
Widhir soh summ2i smin—773 
Vidhura. answers the question of the (four) kings—260. 27 


The four. kings, as told in the synopsis, call Vidhura and ask him which 
is the most-virtuous ; h¢ answers they are equal. 


Widhir = Vidhura; for soh and summdifi, see plaque 223. 


243. BE 02 gGanored 9928—15 
Smih ku Purnayak smafi—774 
The king and Punnaka the, Yakkha ask -(Vidhura)—284, 16 


Punnaka having volunteered to get the heart of Vidhura goes to Inda- 
patta, and having defeated the king at dice, claims the wise man. But the 
king is displeased, because he does not like to part from him, and explains 
that Vidhura is to him like Jife itself, and no“ slave. Punyaka, to avoid con- 
troversy, decides that both should go to the court of justice where Vidhura 
is deciding cases; Punpaka asks him whether he is the king’s kinsman or 
slave. — 


Purna = Punnaka; it will be remarked the sibwviatinn is, not from 
the Pali Punnaka, but from the Sanskrit Purnaka. Yak, a. yakkha. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA gt 


244. BEo0508 off og SE—119 
Kinkal dhar ku smia—775 
(Vidhura) explains the Law to the king—286. 18 f 
Vidhura answers that he is only the servant of the king; the latter has 
now to give him up to the Yakkha. Reflecting, however, that he would 
probably never hear anymore his wise advices, the king asks Vidhura to 
explain to him the right mode of living for a householder. The sage 
complies. | 
Kiakal, to instruct, to inform, to explain; there.is a variant, kinkan, 
at plaque 62.: Dhar, the Buddhist Moral Law, from. the Sanskrit form 
dharma, M.T. o%, dhaw, from dhar; the Pali form, dhamma, is found 
‘on plaque 178 as dhathma;. and the Sanskrit dharmma_ on plaque 
37.. In the photograph, the person on the raised seat is Penne 


245. GE BS 88§—176 
Smih kil Widhir—776 
The king hands over Vidhura—285. 31 


_ The king, ‘saying “If he be a oat) ‘take him,” hands Vidhura over: to 
Punnaka. 


e128 


246, 88§ 9& cod ggRoocS—q11 
Widhir rah cow Punnayak—777 
Vidhura takes Punnaka the ‘Yakkha and goes back (to his home) 
——288. 29 


Vidhura asks Punnaka to allow him. to go home for three days so that. 
‘he may give instructions to his sons, and offers him to lodge at his house 
for that time; Punnaka accepts, and the wise man, returning home, takes 
him with fide 

Ranh, to convey, bring; see plaque ee ‘Punna, we have now the 
Pali form. 


92 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vot. 1 


247. 884 905 qggooeS—qr0 
Widhir khut Punnayak—778 


Vidhura (having) called Pupna Yakkha (to his home setties him comfortably) 
. —289. 18 # 


Vidhura, having called home the Yakkha, treats him most hospitably 
and gives him five hundred female attendants. In the photograph Vidhura 
is seen on the right, and Punna Yakkha on the left, on a higher seat, being 
the guest; between them is a woman representing the five hundred 
attendants. 7 | . . 

K hut,’ to call; to name; is still used in the literary language: Sudh. 
45. 15, 0g |spar0gegs3$q050}——" Indra called (the bow) ‘Rajadhanudhamma’”; 
S.M.° 5, se28a008 of05 «93 oc8c5 adi$qr oevor00e 905 co ay) copS—" owing to the 
Bodhisatta grasping’ and’ bringing out (at his birth) a medicine, he was 
called Mahosadha.” Another frequent expression is qo5d, khut khau, 
Dhd. 370. 7, 38055 RQ coor$[agQu paco o702q 992 Qo53 coSugiqg—" she obtained and’ 
brought forth a son; they called him Udayakumara.”. With khau in khut 
khau ef. the Burmese col (kho’), to call, 


248, 600205 speocox8—1 76 
| ; Tos rajavasati—779 
He expounds the rules for courtiers to obtain honours at the 
court—292, 10 # 
He then assembles. his family and sleltvets ta tech a rellefons discourse. 


_ Afterwards he expounds to his kindred, to his friends and enemies, how to 
obtain honours at the court. 


Rajavasati is explained in the Pali text (p. 292. 6) as: Yasapa- 
tilébhakévranam. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES. ON THE ANANDA 93 


249. 88§ qcorS > 9924§—100 
.Widhir gulafi na s-ar—780 
Vidhura tells (Punna the Yakkha) he is ready to go (with him) 
—300. 20 f 


Having thus admonished everybody, taken leave of the king and settled 
his family affairs, Vidhura announces to the Yakkha he is now Teady to 
proceed with him whither he desires. _ 

Gulafi here means, “to tell, to announce.” For the phrase na s-4r, 
see plaque 183. 


250. ygpoodS BF so0§ 88§— 00 
Punnayak rin ar Widhir—781 
Punna the Yakkha carries away Vidhura—go2. 23 


Punna the Yakkha mounts his horse who, like a man, is endowed with 
reason, and tells the Bodhisatta, if he is not afraid, to seize the horse’s tail, 
Vidhura answers he knows no fear, and cannot see what harm could befall 
him, since he has done nobody evil by act, word or thought. Having girt 
his robe tightly round his loins, he grasps the tail with both hands and. 
presses his feet against the animal’s thighs. Punnaka springs forth into the 
sky, carrying away the sage. . 

Rin, see plaque 27. Ar, after another verb, often has the sense of 
“away, off.” 


251, 889 0098 Qe25—10 J 
Widhir taw gulai—782 
Vidhura is conversing (with the Yakkha)—306. 5f 


This slave is in the wrong place; it should come after No, 256. After 
having gone through all the attempts, described in the following plaques, of 
Punnaka to take his life, the sage asks himself what reason could the 
Yakkha possibly have to be so intent on his destruction. On being asked, 
the Yakkha answers he wants his heart, for it is the price of the Naga 
maiden. 


94 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vow. i 


252. QgRod gB5— 09 
Punnayak buhic—783 
Punnaka (tries to) frighten (Vidhura)—305. 3 


Punnaka carries the Bodhisatta on the summit of the Black Mountain, 
and reflects that to get his heart and obtain the Naga princess, he must kill 
him; but again he thinks it would be better, rather than kill him with his 
own hands, to kill him by fright, by showing him dreadful shapes. He 
assumes the form of a lion ready to devour him, but the sage shows not the 
least sign of alarm. 

Buhic, to fear, to frighten = M.T. ecoos, bahek; cf. e008, phek. 


253. ggRoo05 go BE—rog 
Punnayak pdas cin—784 


Punnaka creates an elephant—3o5. 7 


Then the Yakkha comes in the shape of a large furious elephant 
threatening him with his tusks, but. Vidhura shows no fear. 


_ Pdas, to cause to be or become, to make, create = M.T. v305, 0§, gos, 
-padah, badah,.bdah.. 


254. 9930005 Se0cS— og 
Punnayak bibat—785 
Pupnaka tests (the steadfastness of Vidhura by means of a snake) 
 , ERS: 2 

Punnaka assumes the. appearance of an enormous snake, coils himself 
round the sage, spreading his hood over him; but no sign of tremor does” 
Vidhura betray. 

Bibat,. see plaque 9. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 95 


255. qegroos gd of5—106 
Pun[njayak pkak kdip—786 
Punnaka turns (Vidhura) upside down (and flings. him into the shy) 
—~395-. 27 


Pumnaka tries several other means to kill Vidhura, but he fails; he | 
resolves then tv kill him with his own hands; ‘he seizes him by the feet, 
turns him head downwards and flings him in space. 

Pkak, to turn over, upset, turn upside down; with this word may be 
compared the M.T. exad, aco’, batak, gatak, “upside down, topsy-turvy, 
and condecoo, Jakbatak, having the same meaning. The gutturals and 
Jabials often interchange. Pkak kdip, to turn ‘somebody or something 
upside down, head downwards; for kdip see plaque 135. 


256, -gggoodd 995 6Q2—101 
Punnayak dudac tmo—787 
Punraka whirls (Vidhura) round—305. 27 


This plaque is to be read together with the preceding one, for both 
‘Tepresent the same occurrence: the “Yakkha whirling the sage round with his 
head downwards, as he is about to fling him away. 


Dudac, to whirl, to-turn round, to spin; there is a colloquial word, : 
coofo5, thadit, having the same meaning which may be compared with 
dudac, although, regularly, we would expect thadat. 


Tmo, to.turn round and round; over and over, to twirl, whirl, spin = 
M.T. 8 and cooS, tmaw and tamaw--S.J. (A) fol. 4, deol c0§00g50$ 005 
395 ce>Ba008 eco2e0u8s020}—'" the. Bodhisatta in. appearance) like unto a 
jewel, was rolling and iia on. the ‘waves ”;* S.J. (B) 66, gay5 .... coo205 
con203506q —' the queen ...; fell and. rolled per and over,”’ Cf. ales @¢009, 
b ato, reund and round, over and over;: G0020G00, - -lobato, to turn said 
and round, over and’ over. The equivalence of c—> and §, .is - not 
unfrequent. ° 


96 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. Il 


257. QgR0003 og995— 1.00 
Punnayak smafi—788 
Punnaka asks (Vidhura to teach him the laws of good men)—309. 8 # 


While thus being held head downwards and whirled round’ and on. the 

point of being hurled into space, Vidhura reflects that there must be a 
mistake somewhere, for what connexion is there between his heart and the 
maiden? And in fact, here it must be borne in mind that the Naga queen 
had asked for his heart in the hope that he might be brought to her alive 
and she might have the privilege of listening to his pious discourses.- To 
gain time, he tells the Yakkha to set him on his legs on the mountain, so 
that he may expound to him the laws of good men. Punnaka agrees, sets 
him on his feet, and then asks him to tell him these good laws, 
In the photograph, the upper # alone is visible with, on the right hand, 
a faint trace of the lower 7; the glaze has flaked off in this place, but the 
traces of the subscript: ~ are clearly visible on the brick. Similarly, the 
virima on the 4, which is quite distinct on the plaque, does not appear in 
the photograph. | 


258, 88§ amrS of —104 
| Widhir tos dhar—789 
Vidhura preaches the Law (to Punnaka)—3o9. 30 


The Bodhisatta then preaches to the Yakkha the fovr rules of good 
men; the Yakkha is touched and. repents his murderous attempts for the 
sake merely of a: woman, and. resolves to lose her rather than harm the sage. 

Tos, to preach: = M,T. 03, twah; the primary meaning of this. word 
appears to be simply: to say, to speak; and is frequent in this sense in 
the literature. Tos dhar = M.T. $65, twah dhaw, means literally : 
to speak the Law. Cf. the expressions: o§86, twah pmin, “to say and 
cause to hear” = to preach, A.V. 118.= desanda; op08, twah gah, a 
very frequent expression equivalent to the English “that is, to wit”; Dhd. 
373- 3, QercoasBadcoin gs0{og FoqrStoojorsodgqan ocegia oo2080038 S—in times past, 
between three kingdoms, to wit, the kingdom of Anga, the kingdom of 
Magadha and the kingdom of Kasi.” | 


PART 1! ] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA . 


259. Qapoood o& 85 s05—¢0 
Punnayak ran cip nag—79o 
Punnaka conveys (Vidhura) to the Naga (country)—313. 22 # 


Having made this praiseworthy resolution, the Yakkha offers Vidhura to 
take him back to his home; but the sage requests to be taken to the Naga 
country, and Punnaka conveys him thither. 

Ran, see plaque 5. Cip, to arrive = M.T. §5, cuip, and both 
together ram cip = to carry or convey to. The personage on the left 
of the photograph is the Naga king on his throne; on the right is Vidhura, 
distinguished by a nimbus, and in the middle is the Yakkha. 


260, 600205 ‘of a SE 326— 0 
Tos dhar ku smin nag—791 
(Vidhura) preaches the Law to the Naga king—314. 30 # 


Punnaka having conveyed the sage to the serpent world, the latter has 
a conversation with the Naga king during which he expounds to him edifying 
maxims, On the Ananda, this plaque comes after the following one 
(No, 261). 


61, BE 906 A$ ecosd Bae) 
Smifi nag rin lop sni—792 
The Naga king introduces (Vidhura) in his house—319. 4 


A long conversation takes place between the king and the sage, and the 
latter preaches the Law to the king; the king, delighted, takes Vidhura by 
the hand and leads him into the Naga queen’s presence. 

Rin, see plaques 27, 250; Rin lop = to lead and enter, that is, to 


introduce into. 
13 


98 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 1 


262. gggoocS o& o$—1e0 
| Punnayak ran tun—793 
Punnaka carries (Vidhura) back (to the world of men)—323. 23 -£ 


The Bodhisatta preaches the Law to the Naga queen, whose desire 
to see the sage is gratified. The Naga princess becomes the wife of Pun- 
naka. The latter, delighted at the turn of affairs, offers a magnificent jewel 
to Vidhura, places him on his horse and, from the depths of the Naga 
world, carries him up back to the haunts of men, in the capital of the 
Kurus. 


Tun might appear from the context to = M.T. 8, tuin, to go up, 
ascend and, prepositionally, up, up to, and as a variant of tin (plaque 51) ;. 
so that rah tun would mean, to carry up, upwards. The Talaing version, 
at this passage, reads: ggRoo.. . sadcdoSga}uojop oggopd&o3$B adeqaoqudogéB /§ 
opopo2q1—“ Punnaka ... saddled his horse (and said), O! sage, mount the 
horse with me, I will convey_thee up (to the world of men)”; in which 
Gig, ptuin, would be the causal of tun. . But there is wiezs a modern 
word, o9§, tun, which is frequent with Eis meanings of—and, and then; 
now... again, back, in return; and is also used as an emphatic suffix, 
untranslatable in English, which lays particular stress on the word or words: 
preceding it. Inthis plaque, tun has the meanings of “again, back,” and 
ran tun means “conveyed him again or back”; and this is no doubt 
the right translation. I may notice here another use of the modern o9$, very’ 
frequent in the literature; it is used as a verbal suffix to show- that, 
whatever the verb denotes, refers to another person or abject: coxc§c$ 
HBGorScooa8soa0} 1 guropddecpayohchfudBo5 928 [YoorEa5—" then, the prince followed | 
(her) into the hut and aeket, ‘Who art thou?’ (She answered) ‘I am a 
Nagi, Sir.” | 


263. 88§ 805 o$oS—re¢ 
Widhir kil manik—794 
Vidhura gives the jewel (to the king)—327. 10 


Punnaka takes back the sage to Indapatta and sets him down before the 
door of. the Hall of Truth, wherein the king, who had been warned in a 


PART 1]. TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 99 


dream of the sage’s return, was awaiting him in great pomp. Punnaka goes 
back to his celestial abode. Vidhura explains to the king all that has 
befallen him, and presents him with the gem given him by the Yakkha. 


Manik, a gem, from Pali mantka. 


264, 025 RaS—1¢9 
Cow sni’—795 
(Vidhura) returns home 


'Vidhura theri returns to his home. There are great rejoicings for one 
month in the city. At his death, the sage is reborn in heaven. The 
mention of his going back home is not in the text nor in the Skem, but 
must of course .be taken as a matter of course. ; a 

This inscription has suffered from whitewash ; the lower portion of the 
¢ (oc) has disappeared.. In the photograph, the subscript ” in shi’ is 
almost invisible, but apparent-on the plaque. Si’, see plaque 274. The 
woman following him is no doubt his wife. 


265. 886 <glé 8} FH [a5}--re¢ 
Widhir dmon hin sni(’P)—796 
Vidhura is at home (receiving gifts)—328. 31 # 


Then the Bodhisatta, in his home, receives the visit of the queens, the 
princes, brahmins, merchants, etc., who bring him many gifts of food and 
drink. At his death, he was reborn in heaven. 
 Dmof, see plaques 168, 215. Hin, in, at, to; there is a variant, 
han (plaque 28). I had at first taken the character after the word sni to 
be bja, but a close examination of the plaque, which is somewhat spoiled 
at that place, showed that the. letter must have been a’ (s5), and that we 
have to read, as in the preceding plaque, say’. 


100 -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, 1 


X.—VESSANTARA:JATAKA. 


This is the most popular jataka, not only in Burma, but in the East 
generally. Prince Vessahtara is very liberal and much devoted to giving 
alms and gifts. One day, he gives to four brahmans an elephant much 
valued by the citizens owing to his magical powers. The citizens force 
the king to banish him; he retires with his wife and his two children 
to the Vindhya Mountains. The prince gives away in alms his wife and 
children. They are at last, after many vicissitudes, happily reunited. All 
the plaques of this story are unnumbered and, generally speaking, their 
inscriptions have suffered more than those of the other jatakas and present, 
consequently, more difficulties, and in some cases more incertitude, in 
reading. 


266, o§00} 600g §—161 
Patisan Wesantar—797__ 
Conception of Vessantara—484. 35 


In times past, in the kingdom of Sivi, there was a king, Sivi by name, 
who ruled in his capital of Jetuttara, To him was born a son, whom he 
called Safijaya; sixty thousand devas were conceived at the same time in 
the families of sixty thousand courtiers. Queen Phusati, the mother, when 
her time was near, desired to visit the city, and the king had everything 
arranged for this visit. When Queen Phusati reached the middle of the 
Vessa Street (the Merchants’ Street), the pains of labour came over her. A 
lying-in chamber was erected then and there, and therein the Bodhisatta 
was born; on that account he was called Vessantara. 


The x in Wesantar is scarcely visible. 


267, c028 c§ 9 ad sl$— reo 
Ac thar na skil dan—798 
(Vessantara) asks for gold to give alms—485. 14 
As soon as he was born, Vessantara ‘held out his hand to his mother, 
saying, ‘‘Mother, I wish to give alms. Have you anything?” Phusati 
placed in his hand a purse containing one thousand coins to satisfy this first 
craving for almsgiving. 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 101 


Ac, to ask = M.T. soo, at. Na skil, cf. No. 183 and see 
plaque 64, where the prefix si = s(a) is discussed. Dan, from the Pali: 
dana, alms, almsgiving. 


268, 0 QG0285 SODHA—1¢@ 
Pa imo’ Wesantar—799 
They give him the name Vessantara—485. 17 


Owing to his having been born in the Vessa Street, they give him the 
name Vessantara. See explanations under No. 266. 

Imo’, a name; ¢f himo’, plaque 4; pa imo’, to give a name, to 
name. 


269. BS 63285 8§3$—000 
Kil abo’ minmin—80o 
The father gives nurses to Vessantara—485. 25 


The king carefully chose sixty-four nurses, all free from the defects of 
ordinary nurses, for the care of the child. [t must be remarked, for he plays 
subsequently a great réle in the story, that a purely white elephant was 
brought, on Vessantara’s birthday, into the royal stables by his mother, who 
came flying through the sky. 

Minmin, a nurse, an ayah (Anglo-Indian); there are two modern 
forms, 88§ and o8$, mimin and mamin, of which the second has lost 
the infix -2z- altogether, and the first, the infixal nasalization; at A.V. 44, 
88§ = upamatu, and at 121, o8§ — dhatt, Co. a a folio ki, [¥ 8 8§ Gs 
QofoSgo<ce28o00xqg—" the king caused sixty-four nurses to look after and 
feed the Bodhisatta”; S.V. folio &&, 805 009)/8c002$0008 Gcor$§dlosn 88§e) 
% go BegSo¥9 ggao2 cul8aoodqg—“ the king rejected (such nurses as had) the 
defect of being too tall or too short, etc., and appointed two hundred and 
forty nurses to take care of the Bodhisatta.”. There are several other words 
meaning ‘““2 nurse”: 88, mini, 5. Nr. II, emoh(g aS 4 9 08 of 83 o3q— 


102 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. tl 


“ (his) daughter thus said to (her) nurses”; 89, mitah (colloquial); 
esof and e009, bamautah and bamatah, mostly in compound forms; 
A.V. 44, 800%9, mibamatah = upamatu; S.V. folio ka, 88$ed6, 
mimin bamautah; goo, baigama, at Sudh. 14. 17. In this expres- 
sions, 02, 902 and. mean ‘“‘to suckle an infant.” The photograph seems 
to read “‘sinsin”; the estampages, however, though much blurred at. that 
place, have “minmin”; the plaque itself leaves no doubt as to the 
correctness of the latter reading. 


270, BE BS Billo v5—o00 
Smin kil kirya h—8o1 
The king gives (Vessantara) an ornament—485. 29 


The king gets a necklace worth. a hundred thousand pieces of money 
made, and gives it to his son. 

Kirya h, this reading, perfectly clear, is also found on plaques 295 and 
387; the virama over the / is quite distinct, although, in the present plaque, 
it has been somewhat spoiled by whitewash. I had at first been tempted to 
read Airyapd as equivalent to £tryaba, which would have made perfect sense, 
for 4try@b@ would. have answered to the. modern word (§oo2e2, kriy aba; 
which has. exactly the same meaning as kirya, so often found in old 
‘Talaing inscriptions; («002 is found at U.O.K. 33. 3, Dhc. 88. 9, A.V. 43 
= upakarana, and 73, under ona. That kiryah has exactly the same 
sense as kiryd is clear. from the numerous plaques in which the form 
kirya occurs with the same meaning, and kiryah is never found in the 
Pagan Talaing Inscriptions edited-by Mr. Blagden. The final 4 has nothing 
to do with a change in the pronunciation of @ in kirya; it is added (only 
three or four times) when the word kirya ends the legend, and never in 
the middle of it. This leads me to suppose that this #4 is a device to fill 
up, on the right hand, the space left blank by the shortness of the 
inscription; it is true we should rather expect the more common two dandas 
(");. but the supposition is confirmed by maddih, for maddi, in 
plaque 288, and a few others, the common reading being of course maddi. 


PART | } TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 103 


271, 3 Bod al$ Bplo—oo) 
Aja kil dan kiryia—802 


The wise (in which Vessantara) gave-the ornaments (to his nurses) 
—486. 1 


The Bodhisatta was four or five years of age when he received this 
necklace; he took it off.and gave it to his nurses. A second necklace was 
made for him, which again ‘he gave the nurses; and it went on like this nine 
times. 

Aja, way, wise, representation, illustration, etc.; as an adjective = like. 
It is still in common use.. It is rather spoiled and not quite clear on this 
plaque, but it is clearer in the next and perfectly clear in plaque 280, 


272,  vd60039 sl$—oo9 
Aja passena dan—803 
Representing (Vessantara) thinking of (more exacting) almsgiving 
—486. 5 f 


When he was eight years old, the child, seated on his couch, thinks that 
the alms he has given up to then are of but little value, being all external 
to his own person, and with all his heart he longs to give such things as 
will require great stoicism on his part, such as his eyes, his heart, his flesh, 
etc. | | ) 

Passena, I am not absolutely sure of this reading, but it-may be 
the right one, the more so as it agrees in sense with the text. Passena 
= the modern ooSog2, bahsna, to think of, remember, long for, and answers 
to the Pali (486. 11), ¢ass’ evam sabhavam sarasacittam cintentassa 
It is true we should expect bassana instead of passena, but the 
labials, surd and sonant are often interchanged, and sena may perhaps be 
an older form of snd. I was first inclined to the reading pa sasana 
dan, “he makes an offering to the religion”;, but this does fit neither the. 
text nor the context, for sésanadéna means ‘giving up one’s son to the 
religion,’ that is, making him a novice; and this was not the case, of 
course, with Vessantara, Perhaps have we to read, after all, pah sasana 


104 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | [vol 


dan = “he thinks of (more exacting) almsgiving to the religion,” if the 
dot on the pah after the first word is not merely, as it appears to be, a 
defect in the glaze, like the other two in the middle of the inscription, right 
under the prince’s seat; in which case pah would be the modern bah. 


273, GODSd, 005 of 31$—oog 
Wesantar may sni dan—8o04 
Vessantara looks at the alms-halls—487. 5 


When Vessantara was sixteen, his father, desiring to make him king, 
chose the beautiful Maddi, the young man’s first cousin, for his wife; after 
his marriage, Vessantara, having been entrusted with the government of the 
kingdom, gave abundant alms, six hundred thousand pieces of money every 
day. After a time, he had a son, who was called Jali, then a daughter 
whom they named Kanhajina. Six alms-booths had been built in the city, 
and the Bodhisatta used to visit them every month mounted on his precious 
white elephant. 

May, the same as mey; the form mey is frequent in some modern 


works; see No. 46. 


274, 6000S4 6025 s5—009 
Wesantar cow sni’—805 
Vessantara returns home—487 


Vessantara returns home after his monthly visit to the alms-halls. 


275, 8832 3008 8S—oo0G 
Bimnah ac cin—806 
The brahmins ask for the elephant—488. 4 
At that time, in the kingdom of Kalinga, there was a famine consequent 


on a drought, and men had to rob to live. The people complained to the 
king; the latter, by the strict observance of the precept and the fast days, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 108 


endeavoured to bring on rain, but did not succeed. He made known his 
failure to the citizens, who told him—" Well, Sir, in this case, there is only 
one thing te do; King Vessantara, in the kingdom of Sivi, is greatly devoted 
to alms-giving; he has a white elephant who, wherever he goes, causes the 
rain to fall. Send brahmins, let them ask for that elephant and bring him 
back.” The king did so. The brahmins went to Jetuttara and, stationing 
themselves near the alms-hall at the southern gate, asked for the elephant 
as Vessantara was passing. 

Bimnah, a brahmin = M.T. eg:3, bamnah; there is a_ variant, 
bumhnah, at plaque 227. 


276, Goo7g,§ 805 4326 8E—00 7 
Wesantar cis nor cii—2807 
Vessantara Gets down from the elephant—488. 1 


On hearing the request of the brahmins, Vessantara is delighted, accedes 
to their request and descends from the elephant. 
Cis, see plaque 66. 


(277, BS 929 BE 8a06—n00 
Kil na cin bintan-—808 
(Vessantara) gives away the white elepbhant—-488. 14 


The king, having descended from the white elephant, gives him to the 
brahmins. This inscription has suffered somewhat. The lower stroke of the x 
of na has been spoiled a and cannot be seen in the photograph. The more 
common modern form of this word is a2, n&, but the form 39, n4, is also 
found very frequently. | The original meaning of a2 is “to take to, take 
away, carry (away), to send; to lay or connect, as water pipes, the rails of 
a railway, a telegraph line, etc.,” as may be seen from the following 
examples: seaScoSgcn20g4ag5q—" he took a gold tray to the Buddha and 
offered it to him,’ Such. 32. 4; 90 oo00288 cox0§dicd codq— he sent five 
hundred coins to the house of his younger brother,” Dhd. 274. 26; at 
AV. 42 we have udahdraka, “one who makes small canals for irrigating 
rice-fields”” =: gosounrgSezcocal6, and at p. 133, nettika = udahadraka— 
Bios> eSahoo colS ; cdxGS = literally, “to carry the head towards,” that 1s, 

14 


106 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. 


to face towards, [693 905 Qasoc&coogiqs $905§ sans.85q——" in whichever place is 
the thera Assaji, towards that place I face,” Dhd. 229. 8; cmogiS = Jit, 
‘to cause to go and arrive at,” that is, to lead to, convey to, take to; to 
send: ecm2§)So9$gl—“ which leads to Nirvana,” Dhd. 9. 2. Avery frequent 
Meaning derived from those given above is that of “away,” as in the 
English expressions, ‘to put away, give away, go away,” etc.; this would 
give the meaning of na in kil na, ‘‘to give away,” in the present plaque. 

Bintaa, white = M.T. go6, btan; the over the ¢ is doubtful, 
though there seems to be traces of it on the plaque; two variants of this 
word are biftea and bumten. 


278, Gooa§ 805 sl$—ooe 
Wesantar sik dan—8o09 
Vessantara is pleased with his gift—488. 13 


The reading sik is quite clear on the plaque, but it is evidently a mis- 
take for sdik, to be pleased, to delight in, which is in accord with the 
context; it translates the Pali céga@dhimanaso (488.13). Sik (805) in the 
modern language has only two meanings so far as I am aware: Ist, “Why? 
For what reason? How?”, o§¢908 8059 sa0§g|Eqeageco€g|aSso2§q—" O, Rishi! 
why would the whole country be destroyed?”, S.B. 23. 21; Sgsecpso0208— 
“How do you say, ministers?”, S.J. (B) 28, in which 8g, siggah = 
&odes, sikgah, by assimilation. 2nd—the second meaning | have not. yet 
found in books, but it is used colloquially = ‘to put into, cram, stuff, 
compress,” 9§d§o8oafo9Goig8—“ please put cotton into my mattress”; 09§ 
oo8of (§9adsg35—" if one eats too much (crams food in) one gets sick.” 
Neither of these two meanings: can fit the context. 


279. [E92 024& g305—oo00 
Katta tlun munas—8io 
The agent comes and informs (Vessantara of what is happening) 
| —491. 28 : j 


When the citizens of Jetuttara heard that Vessantara had given away 
the white elephant to foreign brahmins, they became angry; they went to 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 107 


Vessantara’s father and told him his son had no right to give away such a 
precious animal, the national property, They go on to say they do not want 
such a king and that he must leave the country and go into banishment in 
the Vindhya Mountains. The weak-minded father, instead of endeavouring to 
appease the citizens, in a moment of fright, gives way to them. He calls 
an agent and sends him to Vessantara; the agent goes to the king and 
informs him of the state of things. 

Katta, Pali, a doer, one who. does or performs, an agent; this is the 
word used in the text. Munas, to tell, inform; cf mun, Nos. 42, 213, 
munpan, No, 225, and pumun, No. 203. 


280, 8 802§ ecordl$—ov0 
Aja bicar mahadan—81I . 
Showing (Vessantara) arranging for the great offering—494. 9 


Vessantara does not, of course, recognize the people’s right to circum- 
scribe his alms; however, he bows to the will of the people so far as he is 
personally concerned. He only asked to be granted one day’s delay in order 
to be able to give the Great Offering, which consisted in giving away seven 
hundred each of everything, elephants, horses, chariots, virgins, slaves, etc. 


Aja, see plaque 271. ‘Bicdr, here “to arrange, prepare.” 


281, 6005008 o§ qco298—no) 
Wesamtar Maddi gulai—812 
Vessantara and Maddi converse—494. 10 f 


Vessantara then goes to Queen Maddi’s apartments and tells her the 
turn affairs have taken. He breaks to her the news that on the day after 
the morrow he will start for the Vindhyas, and makes her understand it wil 
be better for him to go alone; . but Maddi, loving and dutiful, will not hear 
of the proposal, and resolves to accompany him with the two children. 


108 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. u 


282, goqnas oF cood—oo9 
Gnakyak tlun mey—813 
Queen (Phusati) comes to see (Vessantara)—498., 12 
Queen Phusati, Vessantara’s mother, wants to know what Vessantara 
intends doing, whether he will go in exile or not. She goes to see her son 


who is in Maddi’s apartments, and on nearing the door, hearing their 
resolve, she is overcome with sorrow, but tries to console them. 


Mey, see plaques 46, 273. 


283, 02992 QF ge08— 0g 
Katta tluh munas—814 


An official comes to inform (Vessantara that the Great Offering is ready) 
—503. 28 


284, Soodg§ BS sl§ w§—oo9 
Wesantar kil dan thar—815 
Vessantara gives gold in alms—~so4. 1 # 
The Bodhisatta then goes into the city, where the offerings have been 
prepared, and gives golden ornaments and utensils to all comers. 
Thar, see. No, 123. 


285. Soa 9924 0} sog—oos 
Wissantar s-dr han amba—816 
Vessantara goes to his father-—gos. 8 
Evening fell even while the Bodhisatta was giving alms; he then 


returned to the palace, to see his father and mother, before departing in 
the morning, 


PART 1} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 109 


This inscription is very much spoiled; fortunately three estampages of it 
were taken at different times, and they show how rapidly in some cases these 
plaques deteriorate; by their means, I have been able to reconstruct the 
legend as above. | | | 


For s-ar, see plaques Nos. 183. 


286, coos § op& SS sg—007 
Wesantar tlun sip aba—8z7 
Vessantara comes and attends respectfully on his father—so5. 10 


Having come in the presence of his parents, he comes to his father and 
attends respectfully on him. . 


Sip, to attend respectfully on,-as a child on his ‘parents, a courtier on 
the king, etc.; it generally translates the Pali sevatz; the M.T. is 5 95 
sipglip; -A.V. 255, 00908585 = sevana, “attending on.” 


287. o2[& 00$ e9g985—090 
Tlun han abo’—818 


He comes to his mother—505. 28 


Having announced to his father his determination, in accordance with 
the wishes of the people, to retire to the Vindhya Mountains, he turns and 
comes to his mother, and begs her permission to leave the world. 


288, Qoo25 03 of o5—o0¢@ 
Gulaf ku Maddi h—819 
(The old king) converses with Maddi—so06. 16 # 


His mother gives him leave to go, but. entreats him not to take Maddf 
with him; Vessantara answers he does not in any way intend to make her 
follow him, that she is perfectly free to go or stay back. Then the king, 
his father, in a long conversation with Maddi, tries to persuade her to remain 
behind; but she refuses and decides to follow her husband, 


For the # after Maddi, see plaque 270. 


110 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, 11 


289, (soaog)§ 0Q00 o805—oJo 
(Wesanta)r kuta tit—820 
Vessantara turns to depart—510. 21 


This is not actually expressed in the text; it probably refers to Ves- 
santara turning back after taking leave of his parents and leaving (0805) the 
apartment. . Only the + in Wesantar remains, the rest having been 
broken off; the rest of the inscription is quite clear, 

Kuta, I think, is the M.T. 00, gata (kuta = kata = gata), 
to turn, turn round, turn to, turn back; kuta tit, “to turn round and go 
out,” that is, to take one’s leave, This is confirmed by the plaque, which 
represents Vessantara leaving the palace. co is both colloquial and literary, 
Ger8o0g}00986015 J80} n acagos} occorsepo9 JoSagSayo—‘‘ the Bodhisatta, having been 
freed from his mother’s bosom (= on being born), turned his face due 
north,” Dhd. 62. 11; sv280g3 9 colS 488. gag a8] 380} aco Bodyadog:— the Bodhi- 
satta, sitting cross-legged in his mother’s bosom, turned his face towards 
the outside,’ Dhd. 62. 6. 


290, 2 GF a6 oBS—ojo 
Nah ran tluh kwil—82r 
They bring a carriage—510. 22 
A magnificent carriage drawn by four horses of Sindh is brought round 
at the gate of the palace. 


Kwil, see variant k wil, No. 133. 


291, Of OQ |em2} 9105 O72 —9J J 
Maddi ku kon duk tlar—822 | 
Maddi, with the children, mounts (the. carriage) before (Vessantara) 
—510. 25 
Then Maddi having made obeisance to her parents-in-law, and bidden 
farewell to the ladies of the palace, goes before Vessantara and mounts first 
the carriage. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON ‘THE ANANDA int 


Duk = M.T. 805, duik, to mount or ride a horse, to mount or 
travel in a carriage. Tlar, before (in time), first; there are two variants 
in the Pagan Inscriptions, tumlar and tumlar, In the 15th century, 
on the glazed plaques of Pegu, we find this word as t14, in which the final 
ry, as well as the infix, have already been lost; the M.T. is 092, kla. 


292. Boog, 0805 sax§—oj0 
Wissantar tit 4r—823 
Vessantara goes away (to the Vindhyas)—5s11. 4 


Then Vessantara takes his place in the carriage and sets out for the 
Vindhya Mountains. His mother caused two carts, full of precious things, 
to follow the carriage,-so that her son’ might give alms on the way; all 
these, and even the ornaments he was wearing on his person, he distributed 
on his way through the city. | 


293. OF 92924 O002@}-—OJG 
Man nanar mahajan—824 
(? ‘He addresses or admonishes the crowd while going—511. 14) 


The estampages and the plaque leave no doubt as to the reading given 
above; the place of the plaque between Nos. 292 and 294 leaves likewise 
no doubt as to the episode it refers to; it corresponds to the Pali (51%. 
14), evan Mahasatte mahajane Gmantetvé “appamatia danddini pufiiant 
havotha”’ tt tesam ovddak ca datoé . .. 1 do not, however, exactly know 
what the words man.nanar mean; but I think it probable the meaning 
is as follows: Man, to give advice, to advise, from the Pali mantetz'; 
there is already a word man from the same Pali word in its sense of 
“to repeat sacred texts, to recite mantras, to consecrate by means of 
mantras,” etc.; mandar may possibly be an adverb from the verb na, 
to go (see, plaque 277), meaning, “‘in going, while going”; perhaps also, 
but I doubt. it on account of the final ry, it may be the Pali zé@né, “ various, 
in many ways,” etc. 


t12 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA C von. 1 


294. 32 Segoé ofoS el§—oj5 
| Aba pindon kwil bar—825 
(Vessantara’s) mother sends (him) two carts (filled with ornaments) 
—51r. 16 


As, after admonishing the people, he was going on his way, his mother 
sent him, for-distribution, two carts filled with ornaments and precious things. 


Aba, this refers to Queen Phusati and therefore means “ mother”; 


up to this plaque it has been found regularly with the meaning of ‘‘father”; 
see plaques 23, 145. Bar, 2 (two) = M.T. », bd.. 


295. comad o8c5 Boor cS—oyG 
Wesantar kil kirya h—826 
Vessantara gives the ornaments—511. 18 # 


Then Vessantara gave, not only all the ornaments contained in the two 
carts, but even those he was wearing on his own person. 


296, 8a00a§ bcd sl$ qoS—osy 
Wissantar kil dan rat—827 
Vessantara gives in alms -the precious things—511. 18 
This almsgiving refers to the precious things, seven kinds of them 
(sattaratana), which were sent along with the ornaments. 


Rat, precious thing, precious stone, jewel, from Pali retana. 


297. 8000 9,6 85 o9$ 9,E—ojo 
- Wissantar bir tun dun—8&28 
Vessantara looks back at the city—511 


Having given away all that his mother had sent him, he went on his 
way and left the city; he then became desirous of bcholding the city once 
more, and he turned round to look upon it, The earth under his chariot, by 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 113 


a miracle, was cleti asunder, and, revolving, brought the chariot round to 
face the city; and there were earthquakes and other wonders, 

Bir, to look; a variant is bar (plaque 200); cf. also the causal 
pubar, plaque i195. Tun, back, again = M.T. bir tun, to look 
back. See also plaque 262. 


298, soog§ &c8oS af—oje 
Wesantar jilik tun—829 


Vessantara drives on again—512. 2 


Having looked at the city, he turns towards the sixty thousand courtiers 
who were born on the same day as he, and towards the people, who had 
so far accompanied him, and makes them turn back. Then, driving on 
again, he says to Maddi, “See, Lady, if any mendicant is coming behind”; 
and he drives on again. ~ 

Jilik, to drive; there are two modern colloquial forms of this word, 
ooo and oo§oS, kaluik and caluik = to drive. A very common word 
is oo5, jak; another is 05, caw, very common in the literature: o&3305 
ogiSo8—"'a young man came driving a cart,” S.M.g; 0503) c}gacogosfSe 
oya05 com 38§5—“ he (Indra) came on driving a cart in front of the rest- 
house wherein the queen was seated,” S.J. 3; A.V. 130, x#yd@maka, a driver. 
= poro0Sd3; A.V. 184, Matals, the deva who drives Indra’s cart = saoo$ca0 
a0Se$1 The Talaing version in this place has aoSe8, jak caw, to 
drive. Qcoogs . . . aoseSsoo3q— King Vessantara . . . drove on.” 


299, 0098 <fg5 e025 cpe2—ooo 
Yac drep boy raja—830 
The mendicants run towards the king—512. 8 

Maddi sat down watching. Now, four brahmins had come too late to 
be present at the last distribution of gifts; they ascertained the direction 
the Bodhisatta had taken and followed up. Maddi took them to the king, 
who had remained in the chariot. 

Yac, a Leggar, Pali ydcaka. Drep, to run = M.T. For boy see 


Plaque 199. 
15 


114 EPIGRAPHIA -BIRMANICA [ voL, 11 


300, soma BS al§ GQQBI—O99 | 
Wesantar kil dan ‘kseh—831 


Vessantara gives the horses-in. alms—g12, 10 


On coming up, the brahmins ask Vessantara for the horses and he at 
once gives them up. 


Kseh, a horse= M.T. oqo, khyeh (pron. cheh). LI had at first 
thought this was to be read kseh, but this word appears in three other 
plaques round the base of the Ananda and twice in the Shwezigé6n inscription 
(lines 128, 129), in which the reading is clearly ks; moreover, for the 
sound sh = Skt. s, they use in Talaing the letter ©. The group 4s seems 
to correspond in M.T. to.q, 44y (pron. ch, in “church”); cf, for instance, 
cong (i), kasd (ksi), M.T. gq, khy@ (pron. chia), to write; cod 
(§), kasau (ksau) = M.T. 4, khyau, an oath, a curse; 08 (9), 
kasi (ksi) = M.T. 4, khyi, to shake, quake, tremble. There is a 
variant; ksehh; in the plaque, after kseh, there appears to be a letter, 
but so much damaged as to make it very doubtful what it is, if it is a letter 
at all. 


30T. go © a3 ofcS—og) 
Raman ma jak kwil—832 
The red deer drawing the chariot—s12. 15 


After the gift of the horses, the travellers were stranded on the road ; 
zat that moment, four gods, seeing their plight, took the form of red deer 
and drew the chariot. 

Raman, a red deer = M.T. 0, mah; with ramaa compare the 


Burmese 0906, samanh. 


302, 8S al§$ o8S—oo9 
Kil dan kwil—833 
He gives away the chariot—512. 22 


A while afterwards, a brahmin comes up and asks Vessantara for the: 
gift of the chariot; this also he gives without hesitation. 


PART ‘1 ] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 116 


303. S000 8) 6co2S (§S—oo¢ 
Wesantar lop grip—834 


Vessantara enters the forest—513 


So soon as the chariot was given away, the four deer disappeared, and 
Vessantara and his wife were obliged to go on foot; the former carried little 
prince Jali and Maddi carried _Kanhajina; and thus they entered the forest. 
That they entered the forest is not expressed in this connexion in the Pali. | 


Grip, forest, see plaque 82. 


304. 2920 o8$eep5—oo9 
Sman tinrow—835 — 
They ask the way—513. 11 
Whenever they. met anyone, they asked the way to the Vindhya 
Mountains; all these travellers were much touched on beholding them, and 
answered, “ Long, still long is the way!” 
Tinrow, road, way, a variant of tanrow (see plaque 108). 


305, ©05 Bod 99.9, 155 —09@ 
Bas kil sacchu’—836 
They pluck and give fruits (to the children)—513. 19 
As they were thus going, the two. children were clamouring for the 
beautiful fruits growing on the trees. By the power of the Bodhisatta, the 
fruit-laden branches bowed down of their own accord within reach, and they 
plucked the ripest and gave them to the children. 
Bas, to pluck = M,T. 009, bah. .Sacchu’, a variant of sacchu, 
plaque 9. . | 


116 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ vow. 0 


306, 85 cQ0g83—o001 
Cip Suvannagiri—837 
They arrive at the Suvannagiri Mountain—514, 1 


Suvanna, for Suvanna. 


307. §29493-—0p0 
Kuntimaranadi—838 
(They arrive at) the Kontimara River—514. 2 


Leaving the Suvanna Mount, which is five yojanas away from Jetuttara, 
they arrive at the river Kontimara, which is five yojanas still further, 


Kuntimara, the Pali has Kontiméra. 


308, 85 soqgo84—o9¢@ 
Cip Arafifiagiri—8a9 
They come to the Arafijara Mount—514. 3 


309. 022 853:—og0 
Twail bimnah—38 40 
(They arrive at) the brahmin village—514 


Leaving the Arafijara Mount, another five leagues bring them to the 
brahmin village of Dunnivittha. 

Twai, village = M.T. op$ and ogo$, twan and kwan. Bimnah, 
a brahmin = M.T. eg:, bamnah; there is a variant, bumnah (plaque 
227). 


PART 1 | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 117 


310, 020200 98§—oago 
Matula nagir—841 
(They arrive at Vessantara’s) uncle’s city—514. 6 


Ten leagues further, they arrive at the city of the Bodhisatta’s uncle: 
its distance from Jetuttara was thirty leagues .(yojanas). 


Nagir, the Pali nagara, city = M.T. 3085, naguiw, Dhd. 63. 6. 


311, e328 egos (d—o¢ J 
| Dmon pdey jrap—842 
They stay in a rest-house (near the city)—514. 16 


They did riot enter the city but entered and sat in a rest-house situated 
outside the city. Maddi, the dutiful wife, wipes the dust from her husband’s 
feet and shampoos them. 

Dmon, see plaques 215, 265. Pdey, n=M.T. 9, pdai. 


312, This legend is practically illegible. The scene represents Maddi 
with her children, when, having shampooed Vessantara’s feet, she stands 
outside the rest-house, well within sight of people, with the intention of 
announcing Vessantara’s arrival (Pali, VI 514. 17-18). There is a somewhat 
spoiled, but still clear enough, dz on the. left hand, with, before it, some 
traces of a letter which may have been ma; the name Maddi in this 
connexion is probable enough. The last letter on the right is s, with before 
it, and separated from it by two doubtful letters, what lookslike (?) stn, min 
or b2n. 


313. o§ oorS—og¢ 
| Maddi gulan—844 | 
Maddi converses (with the women of Ceta)—514. 19-25 


The women going in and out of the city of Ceta, seeing the queen 
outside the rest-house, come and surround her and ask her about herself; 


118 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA {von 11 


Maddi tells them; and the women deplore her fate. The Pali says nothing 
about Maddi telling the women what has happened. ‘and the fatigue of the 
journey.. .It is, however,:in the Burmese version. (Hanthawaddy Press, 
Rangoon, 1903, p. 64); the. Talaing version’ merely says that the women 
asked her about herself, but her-answer ‘is not recorded, though, of course, 
it must have been given: Qoorcoach [Fogg S08 SocBoSaccoSabGi p9205gaySa} » ogegé 
33> off geqSa} nf GoGo5 ops aqoSqr— the women of the city who were going in 
and ‘coming out, seeing the queen, surrounded her. and asked her about 
herself, then they exclaimed (‘O, the tender lady ! 1? ete.);” S.V. 23. 


314. P2095 C&—og9 
Nah taw mah—845 
They are keeping watch (on the king and queen)—517. 26 


They then have abundant food brought, make the rest-house comfortable 
and, surrounding it, keep watch. This plaque should properly come after the 
next. 

The lower part of the right-hand half of the # (oc) ‘in taw is spoiled, 
and at first sight the word looks.as if it were oS (kew). An examination 
-of the plaque shows that the glaze has slightly peeled off. 

Man, to keep, to watch = M.T. | 


315. qoooa5 2 BE—og6 
Gulai ku smin—8 46 
(Vessantara) converses with the princes—s15. 5 & 


Then the people go and inform the king, Vessantara’s uncle, of their 
arrival, and sixty thousand princes come to see him, lamenting. To induce 
him not to proceed to the Vindhyas, they offer him the kingdom of Ceta; 
he refuses. , This should have come before the preceding plaque. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 119 


316, BE gS Begr—ogr 
Smin pyun tinro—8&47. | 
The princes show the way (to Vessantara)—318. 


~ They stay one day and one night in the rest-house, and early in the 
morning resume their journey; the sixty thousand princes accompany them 
for fifteen leagues; then, at the entrance to the forest, they stand and care- 
fully point out his way to the Bodhisatta. 


Pyuf, to show, see plaque 97; Tinro, for tinrow; the iecend as 
it is fills the plaque, and there is no room for the final w; see plaques 304 
and 108: | 


317. 85 og0209—O0gG0 
Cip Gandhamadana—848 
‘They arrive at the Gandhamadana Mountain—519. 1 


The princes, in order to prevent. any danger from befalling the travellers, 
order one of their men, very skilful in woodcraft, to follow them and keep 
a careful. watch; they then go back. The royal exiles, continuing their 
journey, arrive at Mount Gandhamadana. | 


318, cyecpS eqrss—oge 
Kurow tmo’—849 . 
Turning his back on the (Gandhamadana) Mount—519. 20 


- Leaving the Gandhamadana behind, Vessantara goes on his way. 

Kurow, turn the back on = M.T. 4, karau, which is used collo- 
quially in this sense: vzao4 g&o:0§3>—"do_ not be turning your back on 
me.” Tmo’,,a rock, a rocky hill, mountain. = M.T, ogs8, tma’. 


120 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von, 1 


319, 85 cogeoo§—o90 
Cip Wepulapar—85o0 
They arrive at the Vipula Mountain—519. 21 


Par, a mountain, from the Sanskrit parvata; the modern form, 6, 
paw, is very frequent in books after names of mountains. 


320, 69209099 38—099 
Ketumaranadi—-851 
(They rest near the) Ketum. River—519, 21 


Passing by the foot of the Vipula Mount, they come to the banks of 
the river Ketumati, where they rest and take a meal prepared by the 
forester who accompanies them. 


321, Bod goodc8e a08-—09 J 
Kil cnaykinlon—852 . 
They give (their guide) a (golden) hairpin 
In acknowledgment of the forcster’s services they present him with a _ 
golden hairpin. 
For cnaykinlon, see plaque 53. 


322, Q35 eGedSo95—og9 
[G]ja’ jreysum—2853 
Sitting under the banyan tree—519. 24 


After his meal, Vessantara, full of peace, crosses the river Ketumati 
and seats under a banyan tree. 

Gja’, to seat = M.T. Jreysum, a banyan tree = M.T. Qo}, jrai- 
surh, Sudh. 2. 21. The Bodhi tree under which Gautama attained Omni- 
science is called cS, jrai thaw, A.V. 28 = assattha; &goe8, jraimha- 
budh, A.V. 267d, and qee28 oof, chu bodhi paluih, A.V. 167. In 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 12! 


the last expression, ‘0c§o5 means the circle in the centre of Jambudipa, around 
the Bodhi tree; U.O.K., 45. 17, ee280o0cfo5s 


(323. 88 ~2080§—ag¢ 
 Cip Nalipar—854 


Then he moves on and comes to the mount Nalika—srg. 26 


324. 85 goc8$—o9 9 
Cip Mucalin—855 
He arrives at the Mucalinda Lake—519. 26 


325, 85 oogq05 sapQg—096 
Cip caturas anca—856 
He arrives at the square lake—519. 29 


They passed along the bank of the Mucalinda Lake and, following the 
course of the stream which flowed from the ARE, they arrive at the 
square lake. 

Caturas, square, from the Pali caturassa. _ Afica, a lake; I have 
net found any modern. equivalent. 


326. BS so009080}—09 7 
Cip assamapit—857 
He arrives at the hermitage—520. 10 


Now Indra, perceiving from his heaven what was happening, called the 
architect of the gods, Vigvakarma, and told him to go to the Vindhyas, and 
there build a hermitage in a pleasant spot. Vi¢vakarma builds two retreats, 
one for Vessantara and one for Maddi, and keeps there ready all that is 
necessary for hermits. He then writes an inscription: “This is for him who 
wishes to become a hermit”; he drives away from the spot: all inhuman 
creatures and loud-voiced beasts and birds, and goes his way. The Bodhi- 


satta, following a path, arrives at the hermitage. 
“46. 


122 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


Assamapit, hermitage, from the Pali assamapada; M.T. s0ago905, 
asmapuit, A.V. 28, — | _ 


327. op@o ear © o8§—o90 
Raja: lop ma ’ir—858 
‘The king enters (the hermitage), becoming a hermit—s20. 11 ff 


On seeing the inscription, Vessantara understands that the hermitage has” 
been prepared by Indra; he goes in and dons the garb of a hermit which 
was there ready. 


‘Ir, to leave the world, see plaque 34. 


328, 0805 epo§ 0G p2020S—0 9g 
Tit nor parnasal—859 . 
(Vessantara) goes out. from the hermitage—520. 14 


Then he goes out from the hermitage with the calm of a Pacceka 
Buddha, and approaches his family. Maddi falls weeping at his feet. 

Parnasal, a hut made of leaves, a hermitage, from the Sanskrit 
parnacala@; in M.T. the form goo, from Pali pannasé/é, is found, S.B. 1 | 


329. 08 ecorS (8S—oGo 
Maddi lop grip—860 
Maddi enters the forest—521, 1 


Maddi, her emotion over, ‘goes in her hermitage and assumés the ascetic 
garb, She asks as a favour to go herself in search of fruits and roots, and 
he asks her, now they are ascetics, not to come to his hut unseasonably. 
Now, by the power of the Bodhisatta’s compassion, all the wild animals 
within a large radius were full of compassion also and did no harm to 
one another. Daily, at dawn, Maddi fetches water, sweeps the hermitage 
and, leaving the two children in the father’s care, enters the forest in quest 
of roots and fruits, 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 123 


330, © abaq85—0Go 
Ca sacchu’—861 
They eat the fruits—521. 4 


In the evening, she returns, and, having bathed the children, they all 
four sit down and eat the fruits she has brought. 


331. O§ e028 v§ s0000S—o6 } 
Maddi lop parnasal—862 
Maddi enters her hermitage—521. 5 


The meal over, the “queen takes the two children, and retires to her hut. 
Thus did they live for seven months. 


332. 88 9925 @6 op\[S] 09 
Cimi fiac Juc tlu[A]—863 
(Vessantara) looks expectantly and sees Jajaka coming—s41, 20 


Now, in Kalinga, there lives a brahmin named Jijaka; he is married to 
a young wife. She wants two slaves to do the rougher house-work. jijaka 
has heard of Vessantara and of his readiness to give, so he resolves to go 
to him and ask him for his two children. After many adventures, he comes 
near the hermitage, but being afraid Maddi would prevent the gift of her 
two children, he waits till she has gone to the forest for fruits. During the 
night Maddi is visited by a dreadful premonitory dream, and she runs to 
the Bodhisatta’s hut to tell him of it. At once, he understands some one 
is coming to ask for the children, and rejoices; but he does not tell her the 
meaning of the dream; he consoles her, telling her not to believe in dreams. 
Then, early in the morning, as usual, she makes over the children to Vessan- 
tara and goes into the forest. Jijaka comes up the footpath leading to the 
hermitage, and the Bodhisatta sits down, eagerly watching the way by 


124 _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. 


which he would come; and as he looks forward expectantly he sees Jijaka 
coming. . 

Cimi, to look forward, to look to expectantly = M.T. ©8, cami; the 
Talaing version, at this passage, has: 6280005 20319&g9j, 03208083 @g2003/Sq— 
“the Bodhisatta sat cross-legged on a flat stone and looked forward to the 
brahmin coming”; Sudh. 19. 25, 3la$ o3)&008 9205 aS {G3 cog B/S of 8—" the 
“people of the place, looking expectantly, saw the Blessed Buddha (standing) 
on the summit of the hill.” Haswell has the form 8, lami. Juc = 
Jijaka. The plaque is somewhat spoiled, and the estampage and photograph 
would have been of little avail without the plaque-itself; in cimi, there are 
only faint traces of the ¢ and of the z In tluf, only faint traces of lua 
are still to be seen. | | 


333. @203 olE—oGg 
jali wan—864 
Jali goes to meet (Jijaka)—542. 4 
On seeing Jijaka, Vessantara is delighted, for now he will be able to 
give something to some one, which he has not done for seven months; he 


calls out to him to approach; then he tells his little son Jali to go and meet 
him, The little prince obeys. 


Wan, see plaque 193. 


334. Bd @oci—oG9 
Buhic Jali—865 
(Jajaka) frightens Jali—542. 6 

As the boy approaches him, offering to relieve him of -his luggage, 
Jijaka thinks, “This surely must be Vessantara’s. son;- from the very first 
I must speak harsh words to him.” So he snaps his fingers, bawling out, 
“Get away! Get away!” 

Buhic, see plaque 252. 


PART 1 | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 125 


335. e200 o902§ op§—oGe 
- Jali kumar tun—866 _ 
Prince Jali returns (near his father)—g42. 7 


Jali returns to his father’s side and, looking at the brahmin, perceives in 
him all the signs of a low, cruel man. 

Tun, .see plaque 262; here it is used as-a verb, to return; of. further 
this sense in the expression om@$os2, patun paa, an exchange of friendly 
greetings = Pali pat‘santh@ra; this expression is found at Dhd. 63. 13 and 
226, 27. The text has (542. 7) agantod, * having returned.” 


336. qrored oy go—06y 
~ Guléi ku Juc—867 


(Vessantara) conversing with Jijaka—s542. 11 


The brahmin then comes up to the Bodhisatta and the latter converses 
with him; he asks him on what business he is come and Jijaka answers he 
has come to ask for his two children. Vessantara agrees to give them, but 
asks him to wait for Maddi, so that she may see them once more; this 
Jajaka flatly refuses. Then Vessantara asks him, before taking the children 
to his village, to show them to their grandfather at Jetuttara, but this 
request again is declined, for the brahmin is afraid of the old. king’s ire. 


337. 0205 Ww} coy2x—oGo 
Bat han tyoh—&8 
(The two. children) hide in a clump (of bushes)—545. 13 


The two children, hearing the crue] words of the brahmin. flee and hide 
in a clump of bushes. — 

Bat, to hide; I have found yet no modern equivalent of this word; 
the sense of “to hide” is clear from the context and the scene depicted 
on the plaque; in the text, it answers to the Pali wzltya#, Han, see 


126 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vow it 


plaque 28. Tyoh, a clump, of trees, of bushes, etc.; this word appears 
again. in plaque 356, where it is applied to a clump of flower bushes, t yoh 
pkaw. Of this-also I have found no modern form equivalent. 


338. 0005... , —0G@ 
Samwat ... . —869 
The children 


This inscription is very badly weathered; the first word seems te be 
samwat, children. The last letter is ¢, and that before it seems to be 4; 


the letter before the @ is very indistinct; it may have been 6, thus giving 
us bat, as in the preceding plaque. 


339. @oc8 09026 B$-—-o10 
_ ‘Jali kumar tin—870 
Prince Jali comes up (from the square lake)—546. 11 


From the clump of bushes they run to the square lake and, getting into 
the water, they stand concealed with lily leaves over their heads. Jijaka, 
not seeing them, gets into a temper, and accuses Vessantara of’ having’ 
made them a sign to run away. Vessantara tells him he will fetch them 
back; then, following their footprints, he comes to the square lake; he calls 
out to Jali, ‘‘Come, my boy, come,” and the prince, fearful of disobeying 
his father, comes up from the lake. — 

Tin, to ascend, go up, come up; M.T. = o§§, tuin. 


340. [08]$ 6928 e0§—o0 
[Tijn nor kambar—871 
(KkKanha) comes up from the lake—5 46, 21 
He also calls out to little princess Kanha, who likewise comes up from 
her hiding place and, clasping her father’s feet, weeps, 


Kathbdr, see plaque 125. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON. THE ANANDA 127 


41. BS sl$ emo$—ory 
Kil din kon—872. 
(Vessantara) gives.in alms his (own) children (to Jajaka)—547. 12 


Vessantara explains to the children that he gives them in order to obtain 
the highest fulfilment of the virtue of almsgiving, and so may, in a next 
existence, attair. Omniscience. He then fixes a price on each; if Jali 
wishes to become free, he must pay one thousand “pieces of gold; as for 
Kanha, she will have to give a hundred slaves, male and female, a hundred 
horses, elephants, etc., and takes them back to the hermitage. He takes a 
waterepot, and, consecrating his gift by pouring out the water, gives in alms 
his children to the brahmin. | 


342. PS oy goi—orp 
Juj kdai juk—873 
Jiijaka bites off a creeper—g548, 3 


Having made his gift, Vessantara, joyful, . stands looking upon his 
children; meanwhile, Jijaka bites off a creeper to tie them with. 

K dafi, to bite, bite off; I have not found an equivalent’ modern form; 
in the plaque, Jajaka is depicted as biting off a creeper; the ¢ is somewhat. 
spoiled, but the plaque shows traces of the lower stroke. Juk = M.T.; 
Haswell gives only the meaning of “rope,” but Stevens, under “ Creeper,” 
has: ogq5,-@o5 85, tnamjuk, jukgruip; a rope is Properly 0 ceo205, 
juk lot, Sudh. 22. 16. 


343. G5 303 O83 sos§—org 
Jac dak rin ar—874 
Jajake binds and takes away (the children)—548. 4. 

Wik ; the creeper he has bitten off, the brahmin binds jali’s right hand 
to Kamnha’s left and, beating them with the ends of the ctéeper, takes them 
away. The reading jac with long %, which is indistinct in this plaque and 
the preceding one, is quite clear in the estampages. 


128 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA  - [von 1 


344. B§er205 |ealoS—or9 
Kinkal dos—875 
Vessantara subdues his anger—552. 21 ff 


Blood runs down their bodies; in a rugged place the brahmin stumbies, 
and the children slipping off their tiny hands from their bonds -run weeping 
to their father; but the brahmin follows up and drives them away. 
Vessantara’s heart is filled with sorrow, and he retires to his hut where he 
weeps bitterly. At the thought of the unmerciful beatings they were 
suffering, his anger rises, and he resolves to pursue the brahmin, kill him 
and bring back the children. But he thinks better of it and does not do so. 

Kinkal, a variant of kinkan, No. 62; Jit, ‘to instruct one’s 
anger,” that is, to reason it away, to master it, subdue it. Dos = Pali 
dosa, 


345. Ge stS—o7G 
juj dak—876 
Jajaka binds (again the children)—-554. 5 
Meanwhile the children were being taken away by Jijaka. In a rough 
place the latter again falls down, and the children: make another bid for 


freedom. But.the brahmin follows them in a vile temper and binds them up 
again. 


346. g8 8S co2§—011 
_ Juc rin ar—877 
_Jajaka takes away (the children again)—554. 8 


And then he again takes them back with him. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 129 


347. a728§ &c8oS—oyo 
Kanhajin jilit—878 
Kanhajina looks back (at her father)—554. 9 


As they are being led. away, Kanha turns back, looks at her father and 
laments pitifully. 
Jilit, to turn back, to look back = M.T. 805, glit: I have not yet 
_ found this word in the-literature, but it is used colloquially in the expression 
6¢8305, mew glit = to. look back; the Pali has svatditvd olokenti, 
“turning back and looking” (at her father), and the Skem, p. 118, coagags 
ooco0é G&h— Kaphajing turned back (coc008) and looked at the king.” 


348, soaa§ voxS—o1¢ 
‘Wesantar yam—879 
Vessantara weeps—554. 24 


On hearing his daughter’s lamentations, Vessantara’s heart wells up with 
emotion and sorrow, and he weeps bitterly. 


349. Bo sl$ goS—ooo 
| Kil dan buy—88o 
Vessantara gives . . .. (?)—554 


I cannot make out the meaning of the word» biy. The plaque has 
somewhat weathered in this place, and though, in it, the letter looks like a 
b, it may have been originally a ¢; if so, we should read: kil dan tay, 
tiy being the suffix. of the past ee and translate: ‘“(Vessantara) after 
he had given in alms (his children): The plaque represents him seated in 
front of his hermitage ;. and this would tally with the text, which says that. 
after his fit of weeping, he reasoned with himself that he should not give 
way to this earthly affection, but should be calm, and sat still as usual. 
From .the episode of his -weeping to that-of the appearance of the lions in. 
Maddi’s path, there is made mention of no gift of his which could be 
represented by the word biy.. | 
17 


130 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, 1 


350. e808 sch—ooo 
Jadisin dal—88r1 
The lion bars (Maddi’s path)—556. 30 


While being dragged away, the little princess continues her lamentations, 
which move the hearts of the deities, who reflect that, if Maddi arrived at 
the hermitage at the usual time, she would immediately go in search of 
her children and thus get into great trouble. So, to keep her back until the 
setting of the sun, they instruct three of the gods to assume the form of a 
lion, a tiger and a leopard, and to obstruct her way till sunset. They do so. 

Jadisin, lio = M.T. @28o9§ jadisuin; cf Cambodian, song 
(Aymonier). Dal, to shut, obstruct, bar = M.T. 38, daw. 


351. of 09995 6m2$—00) 
Maddi sman kon—882 
Maddi enquires about her children—s60. 30 ff 


Maddi, perceiving the wild beasts in her path, is terrified and dares not 
proceed; she remembers the bad dream she has had (plaque 332), and 
becomes convinced something dreadful has happened. At sunset, the gods 
disappear and Maddi proceeds on her way to the hermitage. She does 
not perceive her children as usual, and comes up to Vessantara, who is 
sitting in silence; she enquires of him about the children. 


352. of 88 c@gE—on9 
Maddi cip kren—883 
Maddi comes up to the cugenia tree—564. 5 


To all her enquiries and lamentations, Vessantara does not answer, and 
he keeps his ominous silence. Then, in the moonlight, she seeks her 
children in all the places where they used to play, and thus comes to the 
cluster of eugenia trees, which was one of these, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 131 


353+ 08 95 &E—ong 
Maddi cup krun—884 
Maddi arrives at the river—s64. 9 


Cup = cip, to arrive. 


354. of 08§ q9235—009 
Maddi tin tmo’—885 
Maddi ascends the hill—564. 11 
She goes up the hill where the chidren used to eat fruit and pluck 
flowers. 
355. of 85 8& 6QQ:—00G 
Maddi cip cin kseh—886 
Maddi comes upon the (toy) elephants and horses—564. 15 


In her ramblings she comes upon the children’s toys. - 


356. of 85 soya: o15—004 
Maddi cip tyoh pkaw—887 
Maddi arrives at the clump of flower-trees—564. 25 
She then comes to a clump of flowering plants and looks here and there 
for her children. 
Tyoh, see plaque 337. Pkaw,: see plaque 176, 


cLve of 8S s2p3—000 
Maddi cip anca—888 
Maddi comes to the lakes—564. 29 


She comes to the lakes covered with lotuses, near which the prince and 
princess used to play. 


132 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 11 


Afica, a lake = Pali potkharanz; see plaque 325. This plaque, on 
the Ananda; is wrongly placed after the one which follows (358). 


358. oycepS co205 epar—one 
Kurow boy raja—889 
(Maddi) goes back. to the king—565. 2 


But she can see the children nowhere. She then returns. to. the 
hermitage, wherein she finds Vessantara with his face cast down; she 
addresses him; he does not answer. A second and a third time, receiving 
no answer, she wanders into the night. 7 

Kurow, to return, go back, see plaque 318. Boy, to, towards, see 
plaque 199. ‘ihe word raja is not fully clear in the photograph, being 
somewhat spoiled on the plaque itself, but a careful examination of the latter 
shows it to be raja. 


359. o§ 600208 SoS—o¢o 
‘Maddi lot plit—890 
Maddi falls and swoons—566, 8 


Having come back for the third time and still unable to obtain .any 
information from Vessantara, the distracted ‘mother falls down upon the 
‘ground in a swoon. | 

Lot, to fall = M.T. Plit here means ‘‘to swoon”; the M.T. is 
$105, pluit, to become extingutshed. 


360, 609909 goooch—0¢0 - 
Yok rusal—89r 
(Vessantara) raises (Maddi’s head) and lays (it on his lap) . 
Vessantara believes her dead; he feels her heart and, perceiving she is 
still alive, fetches a pitcher of water, raises her head, and lays it on his lap. 


-Yok, raise, lift up; the more modern form is ofo5, yuik, but the form 
exo, vok, is also found, for instance, at Dhe. 151. 26. Rusal, to lay, | 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES.ON THE ANANDA 133 


place, put; it is found also in Blagden’s Pagan Inscriptions. There is a 
variant, lusal, also in the Pagan Inscriptions, and also, in the same 
inscriptions, a form, sal, to which answers the modern colloquial o>, sa. 


361, Songg 002 9005—o@J 
Wissantar sah dak—892 


-Vessantara pours water (on Maddi’s tace)—566. 23 


He pours water from the pitcher on her face, to make. her regain her 
consciousness. | 

Sah, to pour = M.T. 5, suih, occasionally found written co23, 
soh; Dhd. 485. 5, $g2$R 805 c0c305 SoSooho8 6agosee5 oo—‘only Nirvana, 
quenching the eleven fires (eleven passions), is exceedingly cool”; in which 
oS =. to pour and ocfoS = to put out, extinguish. Another modern form 
is o805, caruih, with infix 7. In the Su-daung-bye Inscription, 15th 
century, is found the form eod205, sroh, line 19—306900320§ 0/805 QOQUdg3 
(Goddce5 330509933508 ood (09205 vogadeagss 04 Beascs a8aho8S B0$y0d a0$coo ao0503Se 
cnodys ogcSacg&org codogoS— ‘with the great rain, that is, of the Law.of the 
virtuous of the four continents, he poured down and extinguished the - 
fire that destroys the world, that is, all the passions in man.” 

Between this and next plaque comes No. 375, which has been misplaced 
on the Ananda. 


362, 0§ co4s02392—0¢9? 
Maddi anumodana—893 


Maddi rejoices (at Vessantara having given away the children) 
—507. 22 


‘He then sprinkles her face with water and she comes back to con- 
sciousness; he explains he has given the children away, and did not tell her 
for fear of causing her pain. He consoles her, assuring her they would get . 
back the’ children, alive and well Maddi then rejoices in his gilt 


134 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA { vow. 11 


363. 8592 0 |F-—08g 
Bimnah tlun—8&94 
(Sakka, disguised as) a brahmin comes——568. 30 

Now, Sakka, in his heaven, thought, “ Vessantara has given his children 
in alms yesterday; now, another low creature may come and ask him for his 
wife, and he would be left helpless and destitute. I will take the form of a 
brahmin and ask for Maddi; he will thus attain the height of perfection ; 
having then made it a condition that she is not to be given to any one 
else, I wil! give her back.” And so, at dawn, disguised as a brahmin, 
Sakka comes to the hermitage. Most of the lower portion of the / in tlun 
has disappeared. — 


364, Bod sl Bgg—oes 
Kil dan kindar—895 
(Vessantara) gives his-wife in alms—370. 4 
Sakka asks for Maddi, and Vessantara, pouring water from a pitcher in 
ratification of his gift, gives his wife to him. 


Kindar, see plaque 132. 


365. 96 olf o3g§—oes 
Dun dan kindar—896 


(Sakka) receives the wife of Vessantara in alms—570, 4 # 


366. Bod. op$ o§—o0e7 
Kil tun Maddi—897 
(Sakka) gives back Maddi—572. 1 
Vessantara looks at his wife’s face to see how she takes his gift of her; 


she is perfectly calm; Sakka then praiscs her and gives her back to the 
Bodhisatta. 


PART 1 | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 135 


367. 2} qooopd—o¢o 
In gulai—898 
Indra converses (with Vessantara)—572. 1 f 
A conversation then goes on between Sakka and the Bodhisatta; the 
former reveals. his identity and asks Vessantara to choose any eight boons, 
and that he would grant them to him. The latter asks them; the first and 


most important for the story is, that his father may become reconciled, soon 
recall him, and set him again on the throne. 


368, @} e025 s024—0@@ 
— . In cow ar—8g99 
Indra goes back (to his heaven)—573. 18 


Sakka assures him that they all will be soon reunited to his father and 
goes back to his own place. 


369. 5 gBo5 B} ag—eoo 
Juc stik hin chu—geo 
Jajaka sleeps on a tree—$73. 29 _ 
Maddi and Vessantara lived happily in the hermitage. Meanwhile, 
Jajaka travelled with the children, over whom the gods watched carefully. 
In the evening, when the sun went down, he used to tie up the children and 


make them sleep on the ground; himself, however, frightened of wild beasts, 
would get up on a tree and sit in a fork of the branches. 


370, 8485 SE[ag? . . Jeo 
Cirmil smin (aba? . . P)—9go! 


(Vessantara) looks out for (his father) the king-—582, 10 


The gods, guiding Jijaka’s footsteps, made him come to the capital, 
Jetuttara, instead of to his own place in the kingdom of Kalinga, and 


136 +. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VvoL. 1 


brought him into the palace courtyard. The old king, Vessantara’s father, 
perceives the children and has them brought to him. The young Jali 
explains how they came to be with Jijaka. The grandfather pays the. 
‘brahmin the price set upon each child by Vessantara; Jijaka dies of an 
indigestion. The grandfather gathers a large army to accompany him to 
the Vindhyas in order to bring back the Bodhisatta and Maddi. As they 
near the Vindhyas, Vessantara hears the great noise made by the large 
army and, together with Maddi, ascends a hill and looks out. 

’ Cirmil, to look towards, to. look forward to, is a variant of cimi 
(plaque 332); there remains only faint traces of the 2 over the m. The 
last two words after smin are practically illegible; the first, however, I 
take to be aba, father, but this is only a conjecture; perhaps it is 
amba = father. 


371. YE op\F B5—eo) 
Smin tlun cip—go2 
The king (Vessantara’s father) arrives—583. 15 7 

On beholding. the army, Vessantara, not knowing whose it might be, 
becomes anxious; but-Maddi convinces him it can only be his father’s; then 
he goes back with her and-sits before his hut.. Vessantara’s father having 
arrived, calls Queen. ‘Phusati and explains that, if. they go all together, 
Vessantara and Maddi might receive a shock. “Pll-go first,’ says he; 
‘““when.vou think that, after a few moments, the first emotion has_ subsided, 
follow up. 

The min Smif’ is no more visible a defect in the ‘giaze. in’ the 
middle. of the ‘letter % makes’ it: look ‘ike -+: 


372. BE aE BS cams—eoo 
Smin tlun hin kon—903 — 


The king comes up to his son— 583. 25 


The king mounts his elephant and comes up to his son. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 134 


373. S0dH4 saQrxd 39—¢O>G 
Wesantar Inor aba—9o4 
Vessantara salutes his father—584. 1 


374. 909905 op|F BS—eog 
Gnakyak tlun cip—go5 


The queen (Phusati) arrives—585. 30 


Touching greetings are exchanged; the old king tells them he has 
brought with him the two children, well and sound. And then Queen Phusati, 
feeling the first emotion must by now be assuaged, comes to her son. 


Gnakyak, queen = M.T.; cf. the variant gnakyek, plaque 72. 


375. aE, 009 gave—¢ 0G 
Smin pat cului—go6 
The king (Vessantara) chafes (Maddi’s) head—566. 22 


Tais plaque is altogether in the wrong place; it should come after 
No. 361. It refers to the- episode when Maddi, after a fruitless search for 
her children, falls in a swoon and Vessantara, placing her peas on his lap, 
pours water on her and chafes her face. 

Pat, to press with the hand, squeeze, shampoo, chafe = M.T. Culufa, 
the head; the final # is somewhat spoiled, and could be taken for an x. 
Strange enough the Sem in this place, p. 64, has exactly the same words : 
BEood qagé gogS—"' the king chafed the head of the queen.” This word is 
found also under the form o@&, caluft. There is another literary form, 
oy 6 samlun, with m infix; ¢ and s are often interchanged. With the 
legend on this plaque compare Sudh. 13. 21, $0393) og5{6} cosolsd ag /§— the 
Blessed Buddha stroked (dct. pressed) his head with his right: hand.” 

18 


138 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von 


376. sper |GoQrg gQoyra5—¢or 
Raja lor gnakyak—oo7 
The king salutes the queen (his mother)—586. 5 


When they see their mother approaching, Vessantara and Maddi salute 
_her respectfully. On the plaque can be séen pretty clearly the traces of the 
first two words, which are barely legible on the photograph. 


377. ear§ opj& BS cegos5— 00 
Kon tlua hin abo’—908 
The children come to-their mother—586. 8 


The two children, perceiving their mother, come running to her, 
weeping. 


378. of 99 6a22$ s2000S—¢0¢ 
Maddi ku kon lot—gog : 
Maddi falls (on the ground) with her children—586. 29 


Sakka, from his heaven, perceives that the six royal personages have 
fallen on the ground in a swoon and that there is no one to sprinkle water 
5 . . ¥ 
on them; so he causes a wonderful ‘shower to fall, in which only those who 
desired to be wet were wet. 


379. Gomsd qrr%d— too 
Wesantar gulafi—oro. 
Vessantara converses (with his father)—587. 18 


The shower brings back the six royal persons to their senses. The sixty 
thousand courtiers and the people approach, and the people call upon 
Vessantara and Maddi to ascend the throne again. Vessantara addresses 
his father, ‘You and the people have banished me, who was ruling right- 
eously.” His father acknowledges his and his people’s fault, and Vessantara 
consents to become king again. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 139 


380, soma § ekS Ga5—¢oo 
Wesantar bas glik—grr 
Vessantara changes his dress—588. 7 


Then, the sixty thousand courtiers born on the same day as himself 
ask him to throw aside his ascetic garb. Vessantara enters the hut and 


changes his dress. 
Bas, to.change == M.T.; os, bah. 


381, e0QrG ogooscdS—e¢o 
Lhor pannasal—912 
(Vessantara) salutes reverentially the hermitage—388, 10 
Having ehanged his dress, he comes out of the hut and, remembering 
that, therein, he had lived the ascetic life for nine months and attained to 


the summit of perfection in’ almsgiving, he salutes it reverentially, walking 
thrice round it with his right towards it, and falls prostrate before it. 


382. 8eco08 soaaii—eoo 
Bisek Wesantar—9r3 
They consecrate Vessantara (king)—588. 13 
They then: pour over him the water of consecration and make him king. 


Bisek:. coronation; to consecrate king by pouring water on the head 
= Pali abhiseka, M.T. ocooof, pasek, sometimes found as oofos, pasuik; 


also ocooeS od, pasek pasaw. 


383. 8eo008 o§—eog 
Bisek Maddi—9t4 
They consecrate Maddi (as queen)—588. 23 


Maddi also is bathed and adorned and anointed queen. 


140 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. li 


384. of 9[05 BE—¢og 
Maddi duk cin—gt5 
Maddi mounts her elephant—sg. 6 


After the coronation, Maddi mounts an elephant; Vessantara was on 
another; in great pomp they leave the hermitage and proceed to the camp. 


385. BoS es0§ (BS—eoe 
Tit nor grip—9i6 
They go out of the wilderness—592. 4 
The royal family, the courtiers and the army amused themselves with 


sports in the wilderness for a month, after which time they left it and went 
to the city of Jetuttara. 


386. sooag egl (Gooo2[8]— or 
- Wesantar dmof prasa[d]—or7 
-Vessantara dwells in his palace—sg2. 27 
They travelled the distance of sixty leagues in two months. Vessantara 


enters the capital, decorated in’ his honour, and ascends his palace, where he 
dwells ever happy till his death. 


The story of Vessantara ends with this plaque. The three plaques 
which follow have been put in the wrong place on the Ananda. 


387, Bed oBflo v5 —eoo 
Kil kirya h—918 
(Vessantara) gives ornaments 


This plaque should have come among ‘those illustrating the first part of 
’ the -story. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 141 


388, vcdqo0d BagS—¢oe 
Balrat kintaran—org 


I have not been able to read this plaque at all, torn as it is from its 
context. According to the phonetic changes which have taken place from 
the old to the modern language, the first word, balrat, might be now, 
bawrat, or buiwrat; I cannot fix a meaning on any of these. 
In the Pagan Talaing Inscriptions, there is a word, tinrafa, which means, 
I think, ‘door,’ the modern form being o@§, taran, also pronounced 
karan; perhaps kintaran means a door? Supposing this to be correct, 
‘balrat would probably mean ‘to knock,” and the legend would then be 
read, ‘“ {(Maddi) knocks at the door (of Vessantara’s hut),” and would refer 
to the episode when, after her dreadful dream, Maddi gets up and knocks 
at her husband’s door te ask lim the meaning of her dream; but the modern 
word for “to knock” is 90905, cogo5, and o$05, khadak, thadak, and 
phaddak, and I do not see the relation of balrat with these forms. The 
above is all conjecture. ji 


389, comand BS... . —eJO 
Wesantar tin... .—920 


Vessantara ascends . 


This plaque is badly broken and one or two words are missing; all the 
personages have disappeared,-except one, a man seated: this is probably 
Vessantara. Perhaps this plaque was intended to illustrate the Bodhisatta 
ascending his palace after his return from the Vindhyas, and in that case 
should come before No. 386. The difficulty is that Vessantara—if it be he 
—is represented seated. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 145 


APPENDIX A 
Alphabetical List of the words in the Legends of the Ananda Plaques. 


N.B.—Each word is given first in transliteration, and then ‘in the Talaing 
characters; the meaning follows; the numbers indicate the plaques in which 
the word is found; last follows the modern equivalent, in native characters 
and in transliteration. A point of interrogation '(?) indicates that the word 
has fallen into oblivion and has no modern equivalent, or, if any, I have not 
been able to trace it in the literature. When the old form and the modern 
form are exactly the same, the formula ‘ = M.T.”’ (is the same ‘as modern 
Talaing) is used. 


Aja, 33, way, wise, manner, representation, illustration, 271, 272, 280; = 
M.T. This word, in the plaques, might be read’ r4ja; but in the 
first two instances he was only a small boy of five and eight years 
of age, and not yet 1r4j4. 

Afica, s09g, a lake, 325, 357; 00, laca. 

Anumodan4, 30902932, to rejoice in, 362; Pals. 

Aba, -9, father, 23, 33, 98, 225, etc.; (?). 

A bo’, sapos5, mother, 23, 33, 41, ete. ; (?). 

Abo’ aba, esposSgp, parents, 89. 

Abhisekha, s008co09, consecrating as king by pouring water, coronation, 
to consecrate as king, 47; 0¢005, pasek. 

Amba, 2, father, 145, 285; vtde aba. 

Arafifia, soqoo, 308; this is probably an error for Arafija = 
Arafijara; Fal. 

Alambay, socesd, a snake-charmer, 231, 232, 233, 234; so00gd, alam- 
baai; from Pali, Alambayana. . 

Assamapit, svooo3S, a hermitage, 326; soaj005, asmapuit; from 
Pali, assainapada. 

‘Ahi, 9008, a snake, 136; /é/. 

Ac, 2025, to ask, to beg, 267, 2753 30205, at 

ir 329, to go, 199, 241, 250, etc.; %2, 4. 


144 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VvoL. 1 


Imo’, gcoo%, a name, 268; cf. himo’ (plaque 4); gq, imu; cf. Senoi, 
imo, imi; Khmer, }hmoh., 

In, 9§, the god Indra, 1, 106, 118,117, etc.; = M.T. and also 338, ’In, 

Tr, 38, to leave the world, to become a recluse or a monk, 327; (?); it 
answers to the Pé/z, pabbajati. 

In, ef$, the god-Indra, 223; wide In. 

Ir, of4, 71, 114; vide ’ir. 

Ir, 384, 34; vide ir and ’ir. 

Udya, eg, a garden, a pleasance, 224; Q9 28, udyan; from Sanskrit 
udyana, Cf. uyyan, uyy4na, 

Uman, 906, a tunnel, 195, 200; = M.T 

Uman, go26, 190; = uman., 

Umman, eg& 196; = uman. 

Uyyan, gogp$, a garden, pleasance; 59; from Pals, uyyana. Cf. udya. 

Uyyana, 9oQps, 143 = uyydn. 

Usabha; Qx0, a bull, 139; Pals. 

Odana, 933, cooked rice, food, 140; Palz. 

Or, £94, to send, to cause to, make to, 30, 2113 ogJss, p-’ow. 

Kakandaka, cosogpo, a chameleon, 147; Péls. 

K fia, &, to invite, 32; = M.T., which has also the form a9, fiha. The 4 
in fiha mav be due to the desire of preserving the notation of the 
proper vowel sound, that is @ and not ea; there are numerous 
examples of this use of /. - 

Katta, ocg32, one who does or performs, an agent, 279, 283; Pals. 

Kapalla, oougg, fire-pan, 22; Pals. 

Iv al, 20208, time, when, while, 5, 28, 52, etc.; /@/r, kala. 

Kiald, msco = ood, 29, 

Kas, oo05, to shave, 65; oo, kah. 

Kin-uy, $05, medicine, 117. 118; o3{ and o92, ga-uuai and ga- 
‘ual. 

Kinkan, 08033, to instruct, inform, explain, 181, 214, 226; oo8 gagan. 
Cf. kinkan. 

Kinkal, ®ehodS = kifikan, 244: cf. kinkal. 

Kinkan, c§$oo§ = kinkan, 62, 197. 

Kinkal, &8$o0008 = kinkan. 344; cf kinka.. 

Kinta, ca, before, in front, 388; a variant of kanta; 0209, gata, 

Kindam, 8g, to do, make, build, 124, 186; 3. kanhath. 


PART-t] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 148 


Kindar, &g4, a wife, 132, 226, 364, 365; cod, kalaw. 

Kir, 4, to dig, 190; Bl Bl, kwuiw, twulw, with infix W, 

Kirmin, 8§8$,  regal’state, ‘the magnificence and | enjoyment of such a 
state, 329; 88, ferris, 

Kiry&, Sep, articles of dress, ornaments, 120, 178, 270, 271, 387, etc.; 
(Sogo, kriyya; from Pals, kiriya, kriya. 3 

Kil, 80S, to give, bestow, 158, 229, 230, 245, ete. ; 5 8, kuiw. 

Kinrom, e(§5, under, 168; (?) ; this points tod “ert, *krom, not met 
with, but: compare Khmer, karom. 

Kilabhandaka, Bc03c0gpo, toy, 10; Pay, for kila . 

K u, 0, with, and, to,-9, 13; 16, 35, 37 40, ete; = M.T. 

Kukkuta, gig, a cock, 137; Pals. 

Kuta, ogo, to turn, turn round, turn back, 289; 0%, gata. The 1sth_ 
century Talaing is also ooo. 

Kivhtimara, oQooq, the-river Kontimara, 307. 

Kumlac, 0998, thief, 5; ogo, kamlat. 

Kum 4r, e4, a prince, 335, 339, etc.; Pali, kumara. 

Kumin, 8§, accession to the throne, and as verb, to make. king, 
enthronize, "25, 206, 217, 221. Cf. Kirmun and kirmin, and 
the modern of§, kmiin. 

Kurow, cqsop5, to tirn the back on; to“retutn,’ go. back, 318, 358; ood, 
karau. | 

Ket, coooS, to take, 26, 77, 146, etc. ; oag! Mts 

Kew, 008, bright, clear, beautiful, happy, 100; = M.T. 

Kewat, Kewatta, cooooS, coo, name of a person, 188, 179, Pals, 
Kevatta. 

Kon, coo$, son, child, 131, 206, 291, 341, ete.; = M.T. 

Kath, 0, an arrow, 81; = M.T. | 

Kamb4r, 0004, a tank, pond, 125, 340; 997, km. 

Kdahi, 35, to bite, bite off, 342; (?). 

K dip, 8, the head, 135, 255; % 5, kduip. 

K min, o§§, to rule, reign, 105; = M.T. | 

Krua, @§, river, 353 = MT. 

Kren, ogg, the eugenia tree, 352; = M7 ¥. 

K row, e>6, to wash, 156; , krau. 

K lam, 63, one hundred, 202; = M.T. 

K wil, ‘A308, cart, carriage, 133» gol ; B, kwi, 


146 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL, 1 


K wil, 805, a variant of kwil, 290, 294, 302. 

K-seh, egg, a horse, 300, 355; sqod, khyeh. 

Khil, 805, to rush at in anger, to assault, 216; 3, khuiw. 

Khira, 89, milk, 7; Pals. | 

K hut, 905, to call, to name, 50, 247; = M.T. 

Gja’, 335, to sit, 322; = M.T. 

Giii’, 838, to adorn, to be adorned, 30; 8, gai. 

Gadrabha, ogo, a donkey, 144; Pal. 

Ganthi, 0%, a knot; here a necklace of threads, 129; for Pals. ganthi. 

Gandhamadana, ioe name of a mountain, 317; Pal. 

Gar, o§, the womb, 29; 05 and solS, gaw and gow; from Sanskrit, 
garbha. - 

Gahak, ooood, an official, an officer, 49; Palt, gahaka. 

Giri, 88, a mountain, 308; Pals. . 

Gulafi, qcooa5, to converse, speak, talk, 35; 80, 94, 111, 185, etc.; the. 
modern ocoo$, galan, is regularly used as a noun, meaning: word, 
- speech, conversation. 

Gnakyak, goy0S, queen, 50, 199, 282, 374, 376; = M.T. 

Gnakyek, gcoyo5, a variant of gnakyak, 72. 

Gnun, gi§, a woman’s loincloth, 158; §$, gnin. 

Grip, QS, forest, wood, wilderness, 82, 90, 91, 303, etc.; @5, gruip. 

Giik, 905, loincloth (in general), 155, 380; = M.T. 

Ca, ©, to-eat, 79, 154, 330; = M.T. 

Caturas, -00q08, having four sides, square, 325; Pé/t, caturassa. 

Cin, 8€, elephant, 275, 276, etc.; = M.T. 

Cin, 88, a variant of cif, 13, 253. 

Cip, 85, to arrive, arrive at, come to, 306, 317, 319, 323, ete.; 985, cuip.. 
Cf. the variant cup. — x 

Cimi, 88, to look forward, to look to expectantly, 332; 08 camt. 
Haswell has «8, lami, 

Cirmil, 848c5, a variant of cimi, 370.7 

Cis, 898, to descend, go down, 66, 276; 825 and coo5, cih and ceh. 

Cup, 9, to arrive, 353; a variant of cip, 4.2. 

Culun, 9S, the head, 375; 0g and -oogiS, calunh and samlun. 

Cow, ¢008, to return, go back, 32, 182, 204, 237, ete.; 6 cau. 

Cnaykinlon, gocdoi$ecooS, an ornamental pin used to keep the hair or 
headdress in place, 321; the modern forms are several: 93036 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA _ 147 


cndaikndnh, gdo%, cnadaikanhanh, 9308 cndaisanhah, 
ogd38, tndaikhnda, ogdc3&, sndaiknds, ogd0iS, snaaik- 
hanhaa, a 

Cnaykinloa, goodBheons&, a variant i last word, 53. 

Crit, FS, to draw a line; to draw a line by scratching, 74; ©§8§ and ©So3 
caric and carit; another modern word of the same meaning 
is, o0903, ogo, sarak, carak, and the compound, o§05 cao}, 
carit carak. | 

Chu, 9, a tree, a plant, 369; = M.T. 

Chu’, 038, same as chu, 305, 330. 

Jak, a3, to pull, draw, 232, 301; = M.T. 

Janak, os, King Mahajanaka, 38, 62, etc. 

Jadisin, o28088, lion, 350; o09996, jadisuin. Cf Cambodian, son. 

Jali, aoc8, name of a prince, 333, etc. 

Jilik, 8808, to drive, 298; oc$o5, oco§oS, caluik, kaluik, 

Jilit, @o805, to turn back and look, to look back, 347; the modern collo- 
quial, $05, glit, is found in the expression ¢¢5§05, nhewglit, to 
look back. 

Juc, 5, the brahmin Jijaka, 332, ete. 

Jic, o5, Jajaka, 343. 

Jaj, gS, Jajaka, 342, 345. 

Jun, 8, the feet, 156; $8 juin. 

Jran, @§&, presence, in the presence of, near, 215; a@s9§ jaren. 

Jrap, @§S, a hall built on the roadside for the convenience of travellers, 
a rest-house, 122, 124, 311; = M.T. 

Jrum, @{, a snake, 14; = M.T. 

Jreysum, cfgoSeaS, a banyan tree; 322; God, jraisum, 

Jlow, cg25, cattle, 128; §, glau. a | : 

Nac, 9025, to see, G1, 81, 231, 332; esos, fia t. 

Nah, 993, a person, the people, 112, 166, 170, 209, ete.; = MT. 

Dak, 9205, water, 92, 361; == M.T. Ce 

Duk, 999, to mount or ride a horse, ete., to go in a catriage, 2gt, 384: 
815, duik. 

Dun, 9, city, town, 48, 177, 204, 297; = M.T. | 

Tanglay, cSsc5, molasses, 20; oS093, tanklaai, Ch Burmese, 0086, 
tanlai. 


148 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL, 1 


Tanrow, ofcee5, road, way, 108; oof, tarau; see variant tinrowi 
there is a variant, cinrow, in the Pagan Talaing Inscriptions. 

‘Tal, ood, to plant, 176; 5, tuiw. 

Talaka, cocoom, tank, pond, 142; for Pals. talaka. 

Taw, cod, to dwell, live (in or at), to be (in a place), to be (doing some- 
thing), 162, 210, 251, 384; 8, tau. 

Ti, 8, the earth, ground, 28, 74, 177; = M.T. 

Tit, 0805, to. go out; also: away, off; 27, 39, 59, ete.; = M.T. 

Titey, c8cooo5, to take along with one, by holding the hand, as a child, or 
an animal with a rope; or a blind man by holding one end of his 
stick, etc., 87; sc and ood, datai and thatai. 

Tit, 05, a variant of tit, 385. . 

Tin, 08§, to ascend, go up, 51, 88, 218, etc.; 09§, tuin. 

Tinrow, S§cop5, road, way, 304, 316; of, tarau. Cf. tanrow. 

Tim, 85, to know, recognize, 236; = M.T. 

Tuk, 035, to draw water, 92; = M.T. 

Tun, 9, to return, give back; return, come or go back to; back, again, 

262, 297, 298, 335, 366; = M.T. | 

-Tur, 4, to burn, be burning, 73; 0, ta, 

Tubah, ces, to show, 73; —:, thbah. 

Tol, sooscd, cotton, 130; sod, tow. 4 

Tos, soos05, to preach, 37, 248, 258, 260; 03, twah. 

Taak, ogo5, a parrot, 172, 173, 182; a variant of thek. 

Thek, cogos, a parrot, 181; costs, vanek. 

Tmo, sogo, to turn round and round, over and over, .to tell. whirl, spin, 
256; 095, tmaw. 

T mo’, ¢9g298, a rock, rocky hill, 88, 318, 3545-098, tmal. | 

T yok, coys, a clump of trees, of bushes, etc. ; -.337;. 3505: (2). 

Truk, 03, mango, 60, 61; Qo, -kruk. 

Trey, o@5, excellent, blessed, Jord, 79}. oo trai, 

Tlar, ong, before, first, 291 ; 099, kl ax - 

Tlua, 6, to come, 23, 26, 164, 166, ete.; o3j& and also /§ klun 
and tlua. | 

Twafi, ogp5, village, 309; 0og9$, ogo$, twin, kw4n. 

Twas, 9295, a disciple, 36; og, twah. 

Thar,. 4, gold, 123, 267, 284; 05, thaw. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 149 


Dak, 2%, to tie, bind, 343, 345; = M.T. 

Dandaka, sgpoo, stick, pole, 134; Pals. 

Danih, 9905, properly = a dry measure; a. trough shaped like a canoe, 
as used in the East, 168; §o5 and cog, dnih and tneh, CF. 
tHe Pali, doni. 

Dal, 309, to shut, »bstruct, bar, 350; 36, daw. 

Dan, 91§, alms, almsgiving, 267, 271, 272, etc.; = M.T.; Pah, dana. 

Dindu, 8gj, to instruct, 36, 75, 112; 9600035, dalo’. 

Dirdas, 84905, the being born, the entering into a new state of existence, 
220; 930, dadah. 

Dirhat, 840005, strength, 29, 201; (005, agc005, drahat and darhat. 

Dun, 96, to receive, 75, 365; =. M.T. 

Dudac, 495, to whirl, turn round, spin, 256; ? 85, thadit. 

Dewatdw, ¢s00025, a god, 6, 45; o3066, devatau; Pah, devata. 

Dow, oal8, to run, flee, 122; $, dau. 

Dos, ¢olo5, anger, 344; Pali, dosa. 

Dmoan, ogl§ to dwell, remain, 168, 215, 265, etc.; 36 dman. 

Drep, ¢§5, to run, 299; = M.T. 

Diun, 3§ a boat, 191; Qf glun. 

Dhar, 04, the Law, Buddhis: Law, 244, 258, 260; 06, dhaw; Sansértt, 
dharma. 

Dharmma, 4g, same as dhar, 37. 

Dhammayut, 600905, the Battle of the Law; for full explanation see 
under No. 178; Pals, dhammayuddha. 

Na, ¢, with, by, 183, 249, 267; = M.T. | 

Nagir, 884, a town, city, 310; 929, nadguiw; Pals, nagara. 

Nadi, 38, river, 307, 320; Pals. ie 

Narak, 9999, hell; 109; Pali, naraka: 

N.4,- $2,:,away, 277; "for full: explanations ‘see under’ this number’; ;oo>’ and 
$2, Ra and na. 

N&g, . 925, a naga, serpent, . 259;”,260, 261535, nak; Pals, naga, - 

Naga, $20, same as nag, 237, 238.: 

Nagabhow, 2030098, the mansion or world of the nagas, 237, 238; 320 
.%, nagabhau. 

Nataka, 9290, a nautch, 24; Pale. 

Nar, $24, the hermit Narada, 240, 241. 

Narad, 9295, the hermit Narada; 75. 


150 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VvoL. 1 


Nali, 3208, the mountain Nalika, 323. 

Niman, 80§, to invite, 1, 107; = M.T. 

Nimit, $805, to create, 235; $805, QoS, nimit, I mit. 

Nor, ¢$29, from, 39, 66, 164, 177, ete.; Q ni. 

Pa, o, to do, make, 99, 119, 161, 178, 268; = M.T. Cf. the variant pa’. 

Pkak, 95, to turn over, upside down, upset, 255; 005, occ), batak, 
gatak. 

Pkaw, ld, flower, 176, 356; L tat, _ 

Pecan, g$, to send or leave a message or instructions, 33; %o$ and q$, 
bacan and phyan; for the latter form see plaque No. 33. 

Peun, gi$, meat, flesh, 77, 78, 79. 127; qi8,* phyun (see plaque No. 33). 

Pafi, oes, to shoot with a bow, etc., 93; o§$, pan. 

Pafifia, ogo0, question, riddle, erobletk 136, wrongly written for agp, 
pafiha = M.T.; Padé, pafiha. CA prasna. 

Pafiha, ogg, vide pafifia, 134, 137, 138, etc. 

Pafiho, os992, same as pafihd, 148. 

Patisan, o820$, conception, 2, 38, 83, t1g; 0808, patisandhi = Pali, 

Pandit, og8o5, a pandit, a clever and wise man, a scholar, 169; Pal, 
pandita. 

Pat, oo5, to press with the hand, to squeeze; to shampoo, chafe, 375; 
= M.T. 

Ptin, &&, to beat the breast, in sorrow, etc., 72; connected with the 
modern adverb o8&085, tintin, 

Ptit, 308, to cause to come out, 87; SoS, ptit; tit is a variant of tit 
(7.0). 

Pdas, yos, to cause to be or become, to aes create, 253; go, bdah. 

Pan, 0o§, four, 150, 166, 170; = M.T. 

Pannasal, ogoos0S, 381; Pa, pannasala; see parnasal. 

Par, 04, mountain; used only after proper names of mountains; 319, 323; 

: 05, paw; from Sanskrit, parvata, 

Parnasadl, of $0208, a hut made of leaves, a hermitage, 328, 331, from 
the Sansrit, parnacala; the modern form, ogx>. pannasa, is 
from the Pali, pannasala, 

Paribbac, o&g28, an ascetic, here = a female ascetic, 207, 208; 09g908, 
0888, paribbat, paribuit; Fal, paribbajika, 

Parisut, ooge5, birth, the bringing forth, 84, 116; = M.T.; Sanskrst, 
prasiiti. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 151 


Passena, oodcoos>, to think of, remember, long for, 272; eo5ajo, bah 
sna, but see note under plaque No. 272. 

Pan, olf, to ask leave, ask permission, beg, 225; = M.T. Cf. Burmese, . 
of, pan, . 

Pindon, 8cg28, to send, 171, 172, 192, 205, 294; ocd&, palan. 

Pinria, S&S, news, 173; 086, paruin. 

Pinrih, 8$8cS, to minister to, take care of, attend on, 89; (?); corre- 
sponds to Pa/t, patijaggati. | 

Pilayak, 8cox, King Piliyakkha, 96. 

Pilayak, 8gc005, 72./., 95. 

Pua, 46, rice, 157; = M.T. 

Pujdw, 9005, to offer something as an homage, to do homage, on 202 5 

| gs, pujau. 

~Puunayak, qggeos, the Yakkha Yunna, 246, 247, etc.; this form is from 
the Pali, Cf. purna. 

Pubar, ge, to show, exhibit,.195; a causal: pu + bar (q.v.); of, of, 
pabuiw, babuiw. 

Pumun, gq, to invite, to beg, entreat, 203: related to the colloquial 
oo§, gaman. 

Purna, g§qo, Purna the Yakkha, 243; this is the Sanskrit form. Cf, 
punnayak, 

Puwak, qooS, a companion, a follower, 121; god, c00c5, bwak, bhawak. 

Piwakhajja, goog, cakes, 8; Pélt, piivakhajja, See Appendix B, No. 8. 

Pameceal, 6020, Uttarapafcdla, 184. Me 

Pa’, 03, to do, make, 4; a variant of pa. 

Pdey, cyod, in, into; 311; 9, pdai. 

Pnan, 9/8, lamp, candle, 19; = M.T. 

Pyun, qgi§, to show, 97,.316; 16 pfiun. 

Prasna, (032, a question, problém, riddle, 144, 152; Sanskrit, pragna. 
Cf. pafiha, 

Prasad, (G:0025, a building with superposed roofs, a palace, 51, 386; 

: Qr00205, prasat; Sanskrit, prasada. , 

Plit, ScS, to swoon, 359; the M.T. 85, pluit = to become extin- 
guished. 

Phum, 98, to bathe, 86; = M.T. 

Phim, ¢, 85; a variant of phum 

Pham, 6, a drum, 18; = M.1. 


152. EPIGRAPHIA: BIRMANICA ~ [ won. M: 


Balrat,: ecSgo5, ?. 388... See Index B; No.. 388: 

Bar, eq, to look, 200; §, buiw; see. variant, bir. 

Bat, elo, to hide, 337; (2); it answers to the Pal, niliyati) The Hok- 
kien dialect, for to hide, conceal, has bat; the Amoy - dialect, 
bat; in Annamese,-mat.. _ | 

Bicdr, 8024, to investigate, decide cases; .a.case (at law); to .arrange; 
126, 128, 192, 210, etc.;; Pali, vicareti.’ 

Bintan, 8325, white, 277; gs, btan. 

Bimnah, 8g:, a Lrahmin, 275, 309, 363;' eg; bamnah. Cf. the variant” 
burinah, and with this the Burmese, qgp>,, puna’. a 

Bir, 8&4, to look, 109, 297; ¢, buiw. Cf. bar... 

Birben, 8{6e6, the begging-bowl of a monk, 64; vce, ba Beat 

Bisek, 8c0005, to consecrate king by pouring water on ‘the: head, 4382, 

383; osoo05, pasek, 

Bibat, 8005, to try, test; 9, 13, 160, 201%, 254;° e6oS, babat. 

Buton,: qac2$, to: teach, instruct, ‘150; ogo$, btorn. 

Bul&h, ¢com, to set free, let go, 170; exe, balah:- 

Buhic, 9085, to: fear,. to frighten, 252, 334; osco05, bahek, and -cood (a 
contraction of ecco), phek. 

‘Bumnah,:-638,:a brahimin, ‘ 227, 229;..230, -a° variant, of: bimnah;: &Qs, 
bamnah. Cf. Burmese, yq@p>:, punna, 

Bay, go5,°(?); see under 349. Perhaps it is tiy, o305e' 

Boy, se205, by, to, towards, from, about, 199, 299, 358;°3, bwai. 

Bhiridat, 08008, the Bodhisattva Bhiridatta, 219, etc. 

Bhojana, so02@3, food, 11, sm2$$, bhojuin; Pale. 

Bhow, coo25, mansion, world, 288; <6, bhau.- 

Bram, (5, to capsize, as a boat, 43; = M.T. | 

Bralok, (coor, a contraction of brahmaloka, 241. 

Ma, ¢, a particle which may be translated by “who, which, where”; some- 
times, perhaps, also by a present participle; 34, 71, 73, 184, 302, 
etc.; the modern is used also somewhat differently. 

Man, o&, to keep, watch, observe, 224, 225; 22 M.T. _ 

Mad gala, e&co, a religious ceremony; marriage, 161; = M.T.; Pais, 

Mani, %o8, a precious stone, jewel, 138, 230; Pal. 

Manika, cc8o, same as mani, 146. Cf. manik. 

Man, 0°$, to advise, give advice; see No. 293. 

Manik, o$%, same as manixa, 263; = M.T.: 


PART 1]. -TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA re 


Manis, o¥S, a man, 235; BS, mnih; “from Pali, manussa. 

‘May, 005, to look, 273; see under mey. oe : 

Maha, oc, great, large, 280, 293 ; ®, mha, pronounced both mha@ and 
mahé. aoe . 

Mahajan, oma, the people, 293; = M.T.; Paki, ‘mahajana. 

Mahos, occorS, the Bodhisattva Mahosadha, 115, etc.; now written GLO? 
090 in full, and go5ooo, Mhuhsadha. 

Matula, o2oj0, uncle, g10; Pali. | _ 

Man, ¢2§, a potter, 162, 164; co2§, laman; o2§ is now used only as a 
verb = to make pots. a ci | 

Miga4, 80), name of a hermit; Migajina, 76. 

Minda, 8g, a goat, 149, for Palt, menda. 

Minmin, 8§8§, a nurse, 269; 88§$ and ooh, mimin and mamin. 

Mucalin, 9oo8$, the lake Mucalinda,. 324. 

Mun, 4§, to tell, inform, apprise, notify, 42, 90, 159, afa, a3. to 
entreat, supplicate; (?); see munas, pumun, munpan, pan. 

Mun pan, q§ ol§, to beg leave respectfully, 225; mun seems to have 
fallen into oblivion; pan: (g.v.) is still used colloquially, 

Munas, 4905, to tell, inform, 279, 283; (?); see mun. 

Mey, eooS, to ‘look, 46, 60, 104, etc.; 5 and 3, mai and mwai; the 
ater form is more commonly used. See may.. 

Mdac, 5, to be angry; of M.T., omod, manat; vide coe No. 180. 

Yac, oo, a sacrifice, 215; 0005, yat; Pal, yaja.. 

Yagu, coq, rice-gruel, 154; = M.T.; Pad. - 

Yac, cood, a beggar, 2995. Pal, oe this word is now weed in its full 

form, oo2e00, as in Burmese. 

Yam, 25, to weep, cry, 95; 98, 348; = M.T. | 

Yok, coos, to lift up, to carry in the arms, 45, 360; 99S, coor, yuik, 
yok; the first form 1s the more common. 

Ran, 9&, to convey, carry, bring, 64, 173, 246, 259; not now used by 
itself, but in composition. See ran. 

Rah, 98, shed, booth, hut, a building of any sot, ae a variant of 

rua; @ and 88 rum and ruin. | 

Rantlun, gS “to carry and come,” to bring, 290; = M.T. See. 
plaque No. 5. , : | 

Rat, 05, precious stones, precious things, ie = M.T.; Pal, ratana., 

Ramah, 908, red deer, gor: o& man. Cf Burmese, sont, saman, 

20 . 


154 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA | | [VoL 11 


Raleh, qscoz, to cause to ieee, 233; 000d, paleh. 

Rahas, 0005, a secret, 167; Par, rahassa. 

Rajawasati, spooc3, rules for courtiers to obtain honours at court, 
248; Pals. | 

R&ja, cpa, king, 33, 34, etc.; Pal. 

Ran, 6, to carry, convey, 5, a varidnt of ran. See raftlua. 

Rin, 9§, to lead away, take along With one, convey, 27, 250, 261, 343, 
346 ;- (?). 

Risi, 408, a hermit, a rishi, 36, 239, etc.; = M.T.; Sasshrtt, rsi. 

Rup, 95, form, appearance, 235; = M.T.; Pals, ripa. 

Rusl, qoooct,.to lay, place, put, 360; 002, sa, wide plaque No. 360. 

Laksan, og§, marks, signs, 46, 104; coodoo$, laksan, and coo, 
lakyan (pronounced /agsan). 

Lufiow, cgcclss, to be retired, solitary, lonely, 63; al, lfu. 

Lukow, o¢0028, to break, 78; «5, kaw. 

Let, ccoo5, to smear, 157; = M.T. 

Lot, ccos05, to fall, 359, 378; = M.T. 

Lop, eco, to enter, 48, 82, 91, 122, ete.; 095, scord, lup, lop;.the first 
form is the more common. 

Laor, sogog, to salute respectfully, make obeisance, 101, 145, 373, ete.; 
ooQ05, Ihow. | 

Waddhaki, oge8, a carpenter, 191; Pat. 

W'an; ol§, to -go out to meet, 193, 333; now used only in the compounds, 
having the same meaning, ol&9,8, ol€3,§)§, wan dua, waa dua 
tlun. 

Waluka, olegoo, sand, 141; Pals, valuka. 

_ Wifi, 8:8, to play, 40, 121; co&, wen. . 

Widih, Width, and Wideh, 8305, 83:, 8cov3, King Vedeha, 197, 195, 

* 206, ° 

Widhir, 88§, the Bodhisattva Vidhira, — 245, .etc. 

Wimafisa, 8008, trial, 7; Pali, vimathsa. 

Wimansana, 8008s, taal. investigation, 8; Pélz, vimarnsana. 

_ Wiman, 800§, mansion, 110; 809, Sod, wiman, Iwiman; Péh, 
vimana. | 

Wissantar, 80044, King Vessantara, 285, 292. 

Wen, cof, to go about, wander, roam; to go to; to visit, 163, 192; = 
M.T. See under plaque No, 163. | | 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 155 


Wec, 605, to admonish, instruct, 23; coo, wet. 

Wepula, soyco, the Vipula Mountain, 319. 

Wesantar, Wesamtar, King Vessantara, 266, 281. 

S (a), si, su, 0, 8, 033 on these prefixes, which denote the future and 

. the causal, see plaques Nos. 64 and 8s. | 

Skil, 05, to give, will give, 267; gi, skuiw. Cf. sikil. . 

Sah, 006, a conch, 17; still used in the compound, magos, kanusaf, 

owen Pali, sahkha. 

Scis, g05, to descend, go down, 28 ; .ofo5, sogod, scih, sceh, Vide cis. 

Saccakirya, oogcéddoa, an act of asseveration, 99; = M.T.; Pali, 
saccakiriya. 

Sacchu, og}, a fruit, 9; osoban, og, satchu, sacchu. 

Sacchu’, 29)%, 30s, 330; a variant of sacchu. 

Sjifi, SB, to sew, stitch, 155; &, &&, sjin, jin. 

Stik, 9§5, to sleep, 369; 995, Bo5, stik, tik. 

Sthan, g$, a place, 49; oo$, than; Sanshrtt, sthana. 

Samajja, og, a mime, 15; Pals. 

Sarathi, oooq08, a driver, coachman, 26, 31; Pals. 

~Salika, oorc8002, the minah bird, 182; Pali. 

Sik, 0805, an error for sdik, g.v. 

Sikil, 8B, to give, 64; Bi, skuiw. : 

Sitko’, Scoioé, a grey hair, 113; -coo8o08, sok ka’, in which sok = 
hair, and ka’ = Old Talaing sifko’ (prefix s and infix 7x). 

Sip,. 88, :to attend respectfully on, 286; £695, sip glip. 

Simmafi, 850298, a question, 165; 23, sman. Cf: the variant 
summ aii. : a 

Sil, 8c, = sil, 225. | | 

Sil, 808, the Buddhist precepts, 224; 28, si; Péli, sila. 

Su-er, «64, to look, look at in expectation, 169; ? 

Sutik, cqc&@o5, to put to sleep, 85; oS, stik. 

Supar, od, the garula bird, 86; c005, sapaw; Sanskrit, suparna. 

Sup4n, ol§, stairs, ladder, 186; Palt, sopana. 

Suruh, qo, to fall, cause to fall, 127; 208 65, saruih. 

Summaii, 032293, a question, 223, 242; 923, sman, Cy/. the variant 
simmafi. . — 

Soh, coo205, to answer, solve, 152, 165; 9900, sah. 

Soh, coor, a variant of soh, 223, 242, — 


156 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


~S-4r,. gq, to go,. will go, about to go, 183, 225, 249) 28s. Cf. plaque 
No. 64. , 
Samwat, od005, a child, 40, 80, nant 00005, samat. 

Sah, o8, to pour, 361; sie 620905, suih, soh. 

Snak, 9005, a sword, io: =. MT 

Sai, 08, house, 66, 187, 188, etc.; = “MT. 

Sar, 83, a variant of shi, 264, 274. 

Sdik, ofo3, to be pleased, take pleasure- in, 278, where it iS, by inadver- 


tence, written sik; = M.T. 
Smafi, 9295, to ask, to question, inquire, 31, 41, 52, s ete:; 9928, 
smdn, 


Smin, ¥&, king, prince, 35, "37,-59,. ete. == M.T. 

Sy4m, 9yp5,-the Bodhisattva Cyama, i's Sanskrit, — 

Slop, 25, to enter, will enter, about to enter, 90, 189; [5 and ¢a99S, 
: slup -and -slop. . 

Swar, 4, heaven, 110, 218; 095, swaw; Sanskrit, svarga, . 

Han, of, in, at, on, to, ,28, 224, 285, Se, 337. Cf. hin, 

Hadak, ogo, filth, foeces; 21. Cf. colloquial, Oe hidak, and the 

literary Feats, of 9205, shidak. 

Himo’, 8cors8, a name, 4, 119; 84, himu. Cf. variant imo’, 

Hin, 03}, in, at, on, to, 33, 42, 265, 369, 372, 377. Cf% han. 

Bas, ©05, to pluck, as flowers, fruits, 305; 005, bah. 

Bar, el§, two, 294; ol, ba. 

Bas, elo, to change, 380; o, bah. 


PART 1]. | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 187 


APPENDIX B. 
Additional remarks on a Sew words. 


It was but to be expected that, even with the help of the Jatakas i in 
Pali, Talaing and Burmese, some words and expressions in these plaques — 
would present some difficulty either in fixing their meaning or in tracing 
their modern equivalents ; these words have been, on the’ whole, few.. I sent 
a list of them to my learned friends, the well-known Talaing scholars, Mr. 

C. O, Blagden and Rev. R. Halliday, asking their opinions. Their learning 
has proved very useful, and my thanks are due to them for their ever-ready 
help. A few of their suggestions have been noted in the body of the 
work and duly acknowledged. But others could not be so included as. the 
book was in final proof and practically ready to be ahaee off; these are 
given and discussed below. ey 

No. 8 (p. 4)—-Pawakhajjanawimafsana; I had first written. 
this piwakhajja na wimafsana; but, as Blagden | makes me remark,.. 


na cannot here be taken as the Talaing preposition; the other two words _ 


would have to change places; this is true, and the ‘whole expression .must 
therefore be written as a compound, im one word. But the form khajjana_ 
exists neither in Pali-nor in Sanskrit. The na between the two words 
is probably an error of the scribe. The reader will have remarked: that 
errors, due perhaps to. inattention of the workmen in copying; have been - 
noted in several places, Some examples of such errors occur in the- 
Burmese face of the Myazedi inscription pillar.’ 

No. 21 (p. 7)—Hadak. Blagden remarks:—“The modern form 
shidak may be ‘popular etymology.’ It must be, if the 11th century 
hadak is to be equated with the modern hid&k, for there is no reason’ 
to suppose that sfi was pronounced like ha or hi at that early date.” 
In this’ case, the difficulty is to find the modern equivalent of hadak, for. 
there can be no doubt as to its meaning, which is exactly that of the | 
literary aeieae and its corresponding colloquial hidak. 


1 Epigraphia Biymanica, Vol, 1, Part Ee 


158 _.. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ [ vou. 


No. 36 (p. 12)—Dindu. Blagden and Halliday confirm the equation 
dindu = dalo’; the change of medial wd to medial / is frequent and 
regular, eg., kandar = kalaw; dindin = dalif. 

'. No. 78 (p. 27)—Lukow. I take this word to mean “to break” and 
refer it to the modern kaw, Blagden says that it seems to mean “to 
take,” and refers to a word |wkow in his inscription | E, line 35.’ But if 
it means ‘‘to take” then the plaques repeat themselves, for the previous 
plaque, No. 77, reads: Janak ket pcun, “ Janaka takes (ket) the meat.” 
So that it is clear that, in so far at least as this plaque is concerned, 
lukow does not mean “to take”; ‘as explained under No. 78, Janaka is 
represented in the act of breaking a long piece of meat and putting it in 
his almsbowl. I am not sure of the exact meaning of lukow in 
inscription I E, 35; but the sense of the whole phrase, spa lukow 
tey, is quite clear, and in this context means: ‘to make subordinate, 
bring into subjection, subdue, confiscate, ete.’; lukow tey is a compound 
as is shown by the verb spa, “to do, to make,” preceding. it, and 
lukow therefore is a verb used substantively, as. is so often the case in 
Mén. It may be: comnpared with another word of similar import, skem, 


which means “to grasp, seize, clinch”; skem tai, “to clinch in the 
hand, grasp with the hand,” and as a noun ‘‘grasping with the hand, 
hence power, control”; and plop skem tai = to bring within one’s 


grasp, under one’s control, to confiscate; the underlying idea in lukow 
“tey-is probably somewhat .cognate in sense. The several modes of the 
same action are most often expressed by different words, and though in 
spa lukow tey, lukow may mean “to take,” we do not know to 
which mode of “taking.” it refers. But our plaque does not mean. ‘‘ Janaka 
‘ takes (lukow) the meat,” for this has been’ said in the previous plaques : 
‘Janak ket pcun. 


No, 89 (p. 31)—Pinrih, The modern form of this word has not been 
found as yet. Halliday proposes, Safruih (20605); but the reading of 
the plaque is clear, the first letter is ; safruih means generally: “to 
help, aid; give aid” spiritually - and materially, and is from the Sanskrit 
safgraha, Pinrih renders the Pali patijaggati in the corresponding’ 
passage = to tend, minister to, look after. As Blagden remarks, pinrih 
would regularly become, in modern Taiaing, paruih or baruih (0865, 
o§o5) ; but this word, if extant, has not yet been found in this sense. I am 


‘1 Epigraphia Dirmandoa, Vol. I, Part II,'p. 105, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 159 


inclined to think pinrih and safruih are not ‘connected. Blagden 
refers. to a word, pureh, found in his inscription No. VIII, line 9,’ which 
means “to give to, provide things to,” in the passage, blahgoh ut 


tarley sangha... smin Sr. goh pureh na paccey pan= 
“Thereafter, all the lords of the Church ... King Sri Tribhuvanaditya- 
dhammaraja presented with the four necessaries.’ Pureh would probably 


become, in modern Talaing, pareh. Pinrih and pureh may perhaps 
be etymologically related. | | | 


No. 106 (p. 35)—In smafi Nemi. As it is Nemi who puts ‘che 
question one should have expected the words to be reversed and the 
sentence to run: Nemi smafi In. But there is another legend similarly 
constructed at No. 175 (p. 60), Maho smafi smin, in which we should: 
expect Maho and smin to change places. This construction may be 
explained in two ways. First, the verb smafi may be taken as used in 
a passive sense; or, if it be active, the word before it is its object, for it is 
not an absolute rule for the sbiect to come only after the verb; it is true 
that, when it comes. before, whether it be a single word or a whole sentence, 
it is indicated by the-word gah, which’ may have been left out in a pithy 
legend which is merely indicative. of the scene depicted above it. To the 
people, who knew these stories perfectly, such a sentence presented no 
difficulty of interpretation. Or then it may be, but I do not think so, that 
the scribe muddled these two sentences and put the cart before the horse. 

No. 169 (p. 57)—Su- -er, There is no doubt about the meaning of this 
word as gathered from the interconnection of the scenes and from the story 
itself. 1 have doubtfully suggested that its modern equivalent might 
perhaps be sfiew (p.- 58); Halliday and Blagden are also very doubtful 
about it; the difficulty, if it be shew, is to explain the #. Regularly, this 
word would become’in M.T. s-’ew (c935) 

No. 272 (p. 193)—Passena. On further examination of the plaque, 
the reading appears to me to be really passena, which I think we must, 
for the present, accept as the equivalent of the modern bahsna; the 
scene on the plaque and the context require this word, or one with a 
cognate meaning. 1 know of no Pali word with a meaning approaching that 
of bahsna from which passena could be derived, ‘Bladen refers to a 
note of Huber in B.Z.F.£.0., 1913, No. 7. Pp». #2, in which ‘he derives 


1 Epigraphia Birmanica, Vol I, Part Il, p. 257. 


160 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. (11 


_bahsna_ from Pali vasand, adding that, if such be the case, it seems 
unlikely that the same word would appear in the 1ith century as ‘:passend; 
this is of course not impossible. But it is remarkable that the Talaings 
should use the word vasana unchanged with its meaning of “an inclination 
or liking. for something, produced by the ‘impression unconsciously left on 
the mind by goad or bad deeds performed in previous existences,’ and 
should have “ Talainized” it for its meaning of “thinking of, longing for.” 
This process is not impossible, but so a as I remember, I have not come 
Across another example. 

No. 298. (p. 113)—Jilik. The photograph seems to read jilirka, 
wbut this is due to a flake in the glaze. , 

No. 342 (p. 127)—Kdafi. This in M.T. would become kdan or 
tdan, forms which have not been found. Halliday sends the following note 
about juk lot (Sudh, 2%. 16) quoted as example under this word:— 
“Juk lot is commonly applied to ‘drawn wire’; lot being a ‘draw 
plate’ ; ae means a ‘thong.’ _In the passage you quote from 
Sudh. 21.16, the ,;word snam is no doubt understood, and there is 
particular lentes to its work of keeping the skin (snam) tight.” 


No. 293 (p. 111)—Nanar. This word-is-a real crux: I do not 
understand it I transcribe here Mr. Halliday’s note:—‘‘ This is a real 
difficulty. I do not think that nanar can be translated ‘going’; na 
(sometimes na, especially in composition} means ‘taking, bearing or con- 
veying’ in some fashion away from the speaker, Nor do I think that nana 
fits very well; ar seems to be used in the inscriptions-regularly for 4, ‘to 
go.’ But there is a nar also which I think often represents na, It is, 
however, apparently also used in another than its verbal sense, as for instance 
in the expression han nar, This expression seems to correspond to the 
‘han nek of the Pagan inscriptions, which I take to refer to the deference 
paid to the cult of the naga or dragon in house-building. Na very 
probably = na as above defined and nar may be Blagden’s nar of the 
inscriptions. Man no doubt = *mantetz.” 

No. 325 (p. 121)—Afica. This, Blagden tells me, is certainly from 
laca; cf. antal = modern latd.. | 

No. 388. (p. 141)—Balrat kinta raf. The expression balrat here 


is also a crux.. All I have said as to its meaning under this number is 
conjecture. The difficulty arises from the fact that this plaque is not in its 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 163 


proper place; one is not even sure if it belong to the story of Vessantara 
rather than to another, Th sequence of events being lost and therefore 
also the context, makes a crux of a word which, otherwise, might have 
presented no greater: difficulty in fixing its meaning than a few others in 
these plaques. ,f had suggested also that balrat, read as two words, 
might mean, ‘to heap jewels or precious stones (= rat = ratana)”; bal 
ith the meaning ‘to heap” has not yet been met with in old Mén 
tee the modern word is baw, but this form could be derived from 
an old *bar as weli as from bal. Kintaran, I then suggested, might 
mean ‘‘to bring before.” All this was not very satisfactory; so far as I 
remember, there is no episode in these Ten Jatakas which could be 
referred to a woman bringing geins before some building or other. More- 
over, besides’ there being no indication of precious stones in the plaque, the 
woman is depicted in the usual attitude of oriental salutation. I transcribi: 
the notes from Mr. Blagden and Mr. Halliday; they both have given ths 
same meaning to kinta ran, and I agree with them; but balrat ‘s 
still doubtful. Blagden writes:—'‘I take kinta raf as two words = before 
(in front of) the shed or hut. Raf seems to mean any sort of shed, big 
or small; Kinta is quite common for gata, ‘in front of,’ Balrat 
certainly might mean ‘heaping gems,’ though | have not met bal in this 
sense in the old inscriptions, but only in the sense of bala, ‘army.’ In 
view of my interpretation of kinta raf, I do not think it can mean ‘to 
knock,’ and I feel quite sure that tinran, ‘door,’ does not come into 
the question here at all.” Halliday writes:—“1I do not think’ kintaraa 
can be identified with taran (door), but I feel sure it is the same 
expression with variant spellirg as Blagden has in inscription No. IX G, 
line 48.1 [I take kinta ran and kanta raf to represent modern 
muk raf, ‘porch, as in Haswell, but also ‘hall of audience, hall of 
justice,’ as in muk ran smin. I take ran to be a variant of run? 
and ruif, applied to a building of any kind almost (ruf pannasa is 
given as a translation of pannasdla). The clause in the inscription is 
clear: goh ma dmof tau kanta rah = ‘when they stood (or 
remained) at the portico (or the audience hall)” Balrat is another matter. 
From your description of the plaque it seems to me that words describing 
the woman’s act of reverence are required here, As I was discussing your 


1 This inscription is in —, and will form Part I of Vol, Ill of the Epigraphia Birmanica: 
2 With this cf Burmese, rum, a shed, booth, godown, and ru m3, hall of justice. 


21 


162 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VOL. It 


phrase with the upfayyhdat (upajjhaya), there was a man taking leave of 
him. It was the action of the woman in the plate. They describe it as 
kala’ aca It might perhaps. be balrat has some such significance. I 
think it might be read bawrat, but how to give it the required meaning 
I do not know, Bal might be the Pali da/7, as in baw smut, ‘to make 
offerings to the spirits’;-rat might refer to the (three) gems.” 
The meaning of kinta raft as given in these two notes seems to be 
the most probable one, But balrat is still obscure, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 163 


APPENDIX C-1. 


Below will be found all the modern Talaing words given in the explana: 
tions of the plaques in illustrations of the Old Talaing words; I have also 
included the words contained in the sentences quoted from modern works. 
In the following list, words marked with an asterisk (*) are new words and 
are not in Haswell; those marked with a dagger (+) have been given by 
Haswell, but [ have registered under them new meanings besides those given 
by Haswell. Those that have not any mark are the same as in Haswell. | 
have sometimes marked with the dagger such words as appear in Haswell 
under another form, but whose meaning is the same. 


sofogo, akra, interval, space peuaeany between ; 930692, between. Cy, 
Burmese, 3092s, akra®, 
* a5, Afga, name of a country in India, the present districts of Monghyr 
and Bhagalpur in Northern Bengal. 
285, akhin, time. Cf Burmese, ¥$, ak hyin. 
sosol& akhon, permission, leave. Cf. B., 3098, akhwani. 
g002, aca, a teacher, a master. /a/z, Acariya. 
-* gom, aja, manner, wise, way, illustration. 
ax8e5, atik, past time, in time past, of yore, formerly. alt, atita, atite, 
Cf. Burmese, 20808, atit. 
soBeicod, atikte’, same as sac8o5u 
soo§S, atuih, according to; secfSegoo>, according to the usual way, to 
custom, Dhd, 2%. 9; 30098 SoSaoq, at one’s wish or desire, at one’s 
leisure, S.J..20. Cf. Burm,, s0c3&s 
so8ylo5, adhippay, meaning, sense. /é/i, adhippaya. 
sod, amdai, the flesh of beasts, meat, game, venison, Dhd. 26. 16 
354. 15.. Cf. B,, 305, amal. 
* 30805, amuin, a dry measure equal to eleven dronas (o7de §v5), A.V. 
268; a trough for feeding cattle, S.M. 37. 
soy, amhu, a case in a court of law, A.V. 192 = yutti, Cf B., sog 
gocuov§socos, ayon ala, appearance, likeness, S.B. 27. 


* ** 


164 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1 


% 


so0S$s0002, ayafi ala, appearance, likeness, Dhd. 148. 9, 4; (S8oo0#a0088 
socorcag2§ca00$——"‘like in appearance unto a god.”’ 

wo8§, arhuin, the dawn, break of day. Pali, aruna. 

socogd, alambaai, a snake-charmer. Pas, alambayana, S, Vid. 20. Cf. 
B., socog, alambai. 

3009, alum, whole, all, the whole, throughout, throughout the whole, Cf. 
B., socgs, alum’, . 

30095, aluik, one’s own accord, of one’s own uccord; as according 
as; owing to, Sudh. 27. 18, 34. 3; Dhd. 240. 16. Cf. B., socQobn 


* 2d, 8, awai, age, any time of life. /d@/7, vaya. 


* ssooods, asanhka, doubt, incertitude, misgiving; also ooodon Px é#, asanka. 
* sooc8, asaw, wonderful, extraordinary, marvellous; a wonderful thing, a 


a 


“ wonder, a marvel; os0008, to wonder; v0$s0008, to be wondering, 
to wonder, Sudh. 26.5. Sé¢. dccarya. 
soot, Asah, name of a forest. | 
z09, 4, to go; after another verb has often the meaning of. becoming 
. , turning (into)... ” x. $s02, dah 4, to becon.2; oB&z00, 
tlim a, to become lost; gjso>, ska’ 4, to turn grey (of ‘he hair); 
og[se2, Iu a, to become empty. 
30005, at, to ask, beg. | 
soooSul§, at pan, to ask, beg, implore. Vide ol$n 


/ gon000q, Ahara, food; from Pali; Haswell has s000209q, ahara. 


338, 'In,.the god Indra. Cf shu 

s, ai, I. : 

285, ’ai-dik, “I—slave,” a respectful form-of the pronoun I. 

coos, ’on, few, small in quantity, little; to be few or have little, often 
followed by of (with); ¢as2$ofsos000q—" having had (but) little food.” 

agjo5, ‘uit, to be exhausted, finished, expended; hence: all, entire, whole ; 
used also as a sign of the plural. 

o§oS03, ‘uit-suim, all, entire, the whole. Vide ofn The Burmese 
go§, ussurh, with assimilation, is a loanword from the Talaing, 


6, ‘au, a respectful term of address = Sir, Madam, your Majesty, etc., 


and is always placed last in the sentence. 

geod, ite’, there, yonder; ‘this,’ in this sense it 1s placed after the 
noun; you (polite and honorific); geooE God aqs> gc03 o9q—" will 
you please help me?”, Dhd, 297. 1 


* mo, imu, name; named, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 165 


. 83, iwwa’, this. 
gos isi, a hermit. Sanshrit, rsi. Vide §o8u 
290, up uh, the Buddhist fast day, the sabbath. Pd@/s, uposatha. 
gos, upah> a devout Buddhist layman. P4é@/i, upasaka. 
ogooo, uppaka, to take care of, look after. Pal, upakara. 
* 506 uman, a tunnel. Pa/:, ummanga. 
cooopos, ekarat, a king. Pals, ekaraja. 
aooe, usabha, a bull, Pals. 
oo, ka, a fish. 

*& kiia, to invite. Cf ogi, a very polite and reverential form of the 
imperative ; ofo8009§n Booeo ogScqo98so805—" O, Lord, be pleased to 
listen to my good deeds,” Dhd. 160. 28. 

+t Bi, 818 ktuiw, to rise, arise, rise up; to awake seme one, rouse; ogi, 
eooo§q—‘‘he did not rouse his son,” S.B. 12, equivalent to the Pass, 
pabodheti. 

+ 189, 8§, ktuiw dah, to happen, take place; to be born, be reborn; 
cco feBto-S9ha—" a daughter again was born,” S.B. 4 F15R5— 

‘was reborn (as) a human being,” Sudh. 9. 5. 

* 0038, kanaw, a kinnara, a kind of demi-god, half-man half-bird; there is 

also a form (rare), o034, kanar. Pai, kinnara. 

o3S6g008, kanunkragat, a building with superposed roofs and a finial, 

a palace, a prasdda; this word is found in the Nyaung-U Bell- 
inscription; 16th century. The modern form is 0g|8@g0008, g.2. | 

oo}, kanhan, to build; to do, to make; oo}G@-805, kanhamh prakuih, vo 

make a_ book, write a book ; onkcog5Gt, kanham swekjwuiw, 

s to pick up a quarrel, to quaitel. 

* 8, kami, roof, covering; to roof, A.V. 263 = chandana, covering, root; 
A.V. 94 = chadita, covered, roofed, 

oogos, kamlat, a thief. 

* oof, kar, a period or revolution of the world, a cycle, the world. 
Sanshril, kalpa ; this form, very rare, ‘I found only in the Nyaiing-U 
Bell-inscription (16th century), and is, I am inclined: to think, not 
founded on false etymology, but rather shows that final y was: ri 
that time pronounced, or nearly pronounced, as finkl’§;-aw = cS 
form ooo, kal, is sometimes found, A.V. 16. 56;. Hie modern: Ea 
is 008, kaw, from -cocSu 

+ 4, karau, afterwards; to turn one’s back on, turn round; to turn the 


back on in contempt. Vide (ef 


* 


+ 


166 - EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von u 


oofet, karau cah, to turn the back. ‘ Vide fox 

* op008, kalaw, a wife; I have as yet found this word only in A.V.. 
under: dara, gharani, jaya, Jari, bhariya, etc.; the’Old Talaing is 
kindar, 

¢ osccoS kalef, to return; _— used also as a verbal auxiliary in the 
sense of: back, backwards, behind; back, again, ane, m return; 
ef go9§ coccoSg5—" and again, did he consider... ,”~ S.V., folio 
ghau; (9Squ coG08d080} 0 Sbacoicpacccabsabaghiaiq—" vonteue: does 
not keep the Law, the Law, in return, does not keep him,” Dhmd. 
172. 1; po&q§oz<a! coscdgoSafoos o}n qScq0053258005an2%s0203203 1 BoS0894 
omec0§o |Sasqotaogof—"‘ like the dust which an irascibie man, angry 
with another, seizes and throws (in his face), it goes against the 
-wind and comes back to himself,’ Dhd. 172. 26, 

* cosSdS, kalen raf, to look back, look backwards. 

oos005, kalok, a demon, evil spirit. 

* ooogo5, kaluik, to drive. Vide ocSo5u 

* coo§cS& kaluiwlif, a fire-fly. 

* mod, kal; vide under a §.. Cf oobi 

m8, kaw; vide under oogu 

* oo0005, kasap, coin, money. Pali, kahapana; BBooo0r8 Ag ®Bakacpss—" how 
many coins will you give me, Sir?”, Sudh. 3. 9. 

_ 08, kasi, to shake, tremble. CA fu 

_ oo9, kasi, to write, to paint. Cf. qin 

moc, kala, time; when, Pé/i; Qoovc0, at that time; oor00§, at that 
time; now, at that time.. ps 

«@, ku, denotes the instrumental, with, by means of; the dative, to. Cf. 
off 

«9of8, kusuiw, merit, meritorious act. Pal, kusala. 

+ cmoS, ket, to take; much used as an expletive implying that the action 
expressed by the verb is done with reference to the doer only, it is 
therefore the opposite of o§$, ¢.z. 

coosdan>, ket na, to take away, carry away. 

t+ eoor$, kon, child; children, son; young of an animal; the so itd of a 
craft or profession; an inhabitant of; caoo§ol$, “zt, “son of the 
army’ = a soldier; ¢eoo2$og°$, Zitz. ‘son of the village” = villager; 
sorsoié, ‘son of the city” = citizen; denotes anything small; 
soor$ (5, a small rest-house; s0o2$¢305, small gravel. 


PART I | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 167 


* copogea00s, kon devatau, “son of the gods’ = a god; a literal trans- 

lation of the Pa/z, devaputta. : 
sooos¥, kon brau, a female child, daughter. | 

* coogf¥o8, kon brau ‘smin; also coo$8(¥, kon smif brau 

| (Haswell). | | 

conr§8, kon-smin, son of a king, prince. 

cono§oyd, kon smin bladai, a young prince. 

cos09, komh-ku, together, together with; the abbreviated form is ¢«99, 

c0q25i . e008, koth, by itself means: to gather together, collect, | 
assemble. | 

cog3, komku; see above. 

8, kuim, and; also; with. 

+ ofic88, kuiw, to give; as a verbal auxiliary, to cause to; ofs02, caused 
(him) to go, sent him; of 38,0503, caused (her) to mount the 
carriage; == let, 005§09§o8q, and let it be so, S.B. 17; with; to. 

* ofiooo, kuiw 4, to cause to go, to send. 

* ofcl§, kuiw dan, to give alms. 

+ 315, kduip, the head: summit, “top; S03, kduip tma’, the summit. 
of a mountain. 

86 kduin, an umbrella. 

* BIES?E, kduin btan, the white umbrella, the ensign of royalty ; hence 
it denotes the king himself ; wdde9@ige so0v0}Q0B[Em28ogeng EPud3/Sa96s 
coo§—“if that drum was “sounded, all the ro1 kings had to come and 
bow their heads to him,” Sudh. 23. 17; it is then used as a numeral 
sufix denoting kings as well as the countries over which they rule; 
Benosro5081&g309/5.e08—" all the eight kings,” Sudh. 38. 16;. ssogqs 
09308;S 260005 09 olodoloS§g—‘all the tor countries were without 
quarrels, they were at one” (= united, $3), Sudh. 40. 10. 

* oS, knat, end, extremity; last, final; cgoSooo, knat bhawa, the last 
existence, that is, the one in which one attains nirvana, Dhd. 17. 16. 

* mods, knat tau, last, final; at last, at the end, in the end, in fine; 
after, afterwards ; pooorgoSdo-—""in (his) last existence,” Dhd. 60. 23; 
apoSdr0p 353505 8—" may, in the end, my lord become the Buddha!”, 
‘S.M. g. 6; —966809(80} 070565 accoraqpo§escoqra$co0S—" going about, 
came at last straight to the Mén country,” Sudh. 29. 2. C/. ff om 

* 85, knip, the head; also: division or part of an army; gl$o$o35—‘‘an 
army in its fourfold division: infantry, cavalry, elephants, chariot- 
eers,” S.J. (A), folio Ze. Also cog5, N.V.K, 3. 8. 


* 


168 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ von. 1 


-* of$, kmin, to govern, rule; &98$ jo ogd0h3— the king having ruled 28 
years,’ Myazedi Inscription; government, rule; kingdom, country ; 
B$qs0$od003008)0/§ oc8Ba(BYooogg “in Hanthawaddy, the Mén country, 
in the city called Trihakumba (Rangoon),” Sudh. 34. 24. 

* o8$9i§, kmin dus, “ government or rule of the city’’; hence, sovereignty, 
government; country, kingdom; o8$9,§ 8|Ss2—the kingdom, the 
country, U.O.K. 39. 5, 7, Cf BSgoi at S.B. I. 19 = Pali, 
rajjamh = sovereignty, government ; kingdom, country ; Scodse0de0) 
oB$oS3—“‘ he, having given up the sovereignty, or government, or 
kingdom,” S.B. 24. 31; the corresponding Pa@/s (Jataka. VI. 197. 1) 
is: rajjarh pahaya; oB$9|& sooggdoo gA—"‘the kingdom of Ayuthya”; 
S.T. 5 = royal state, royal power, etc. 

oy, kya, the wind; gas. 

* cqongooS, kya jamkat, a strong, fierce wind, or gas. Vide a 9>050 

.. 8, kyak, a god; a pagoda, a temple; a respectful term of address 
used in speaking to a superior. 

* 0953, kyak trai, the Blessed Buddha. Vide (a) 

* (05, krik, the cotton tree = Pali, simbali. 

* (Yoooe2, kriyaba, utensils, furniture, appendages; articles of dress or 
ornaments. 

—* cogod, kreh, gravel. 

CF, krau, wde af; Gor = oofes, gv. 
* (fH, krau tai, after, after i then. Cf. o3o5an 
* Gf 8, krau wwa’, after. this. 

06, klaa, to be angular; an angle, a corner. 

* 07808, kla dhaw, “a straight angle,” that is, a right angle; o§$o3&08, 
having four right angles, square ; 030033§8cooSu$apS058—" a square, flat 
stone of ten cubits on each side,’ Sudh. 13. 5. 

005, klat, to steal. Vide cogoS: 
0933, kla’, a garden: 

Tt o>, kla, before; as a verbal auxiliary, often means, more, again, and in 
this sense corresponds to the Burmese suffix 8s, a (pron. like 
the French oz with a slight sound of the 2); 8 &&032q—O, king, 
stay more (that is stay on), do not yo just yet, DBs Je AGL 

8g, kli gwa’, to get, obtain. 
ois, klun, to come; often written )§ tlun. 

t co}, kle’, to be lost; to abandon a place to go to another, to leave ; ¢oj 

sd]o}—" having left Tavoy,” Sudh. 35: 13; ¢09 $0} —~" having left 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 169 


that place,” i#, “having left from. there,” : ‘Sudh. 26i' 20, As’ a 
verbal auxiliary, makes a. neuter verb: active; 00, gawa, to be 
ashamed; 0c}, to make ashamed, put to shame; 9384008§ cao2$ 
&(J oocajq—" In like manner, the Princess put (the other officials) 
to. shame,” S.J. (A), folio 4e;-it is also much used after active 
or transitive verbs as an expletive 30085, to cause to be destroyed, 
to rout; 09 eco05 cojgl$oo—“he routed Mara’s army,” Dhd. 35. 15: 
og$, kwan, a village; also. op$,.tw4n. | 
&, kwi, a chariot, carriage. 
co}, kweh, truly, indeed; Haswell, by a slip, has entered it as ORS, 
kwe’. 
* BS, kwuin, to rise, arise, ascend; rising, a going up, ascent; from §, 
g.v. Cf. Bsr | 
* ofS, kwuin thai, the rising of the sun, sunrise.. 
Bi, 95, kwuiw, a spade; the Old Talaing is 8§, kir, to dig, and this 
would give a modern form, of, kuiw, which I have not found; 
but. compare: next word. . 
* fi, Bi5,. kwuiw, to dig, dig into, dig out; to ‘stir, disturb; cut, slash, | 
tatllader, in this last sense corresponds, to Pali, santatz; HoBeaoo§ 
essocaaqcqaSoo§ og BPounBagoagrcS) GoGoF Fo Sap qiSGS—" having ‘had 
but little food for seven days, at that instant, fierce gases arose in 
her stomach and stirred or. disturbed, or slashed, her heart,” - Dhd. 
160. 2. The derivation is the same as of, a spade. Vide Blu. 
og, . k baa, a boat, ship. 
‘$00, khaca, to wait upon respectfully, pay respect to, attend upon; pay 
court to; Haswell’s entry, “to be a dependant,” is. not quite to the 
point. Cf. Burmese, oo: 
‘oa, khana, a short time, a moment; o0p§, at that moment; also found 
- written 093, kanha, as at. Sudh. 17. 20, 22. 26. Pali. See G$oans 
ol, kha, when.- Cf. Burmese, oln See. olen 
* ol, kha, if, indeed if; in this sense, is sometimes followed by gt, mgah 
(= ma gah); olc$)Q)$o9a38a000200—" if compared with the stars in 
‘the.sky . .. ,” Dhd. 33. 26; QoS(goq$roloQai§Qodqjg:—" now, a woman, 
if she wishes to become a man... ,” Dhd. 324. 15; 9loogao0d 
‘cojgiif he do.not ask pardon : . .,” Dhd. 17. 30. 
* olq, kha ra, when; if, indeed if; the q after i is slightly emphatic ; pais 
{e}a0§05 8) s0298—" when the - Blessed Buddha rose and went. ..,” 
Sudh, -13. 16:: 
23 


170 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. 11 


90, khut, to call, to name, _ 

* 0056, khut khau, to call, name. 

* goSco8, khut law, to call, name ; 905c080g |, ibid. Vide oof, opj1 

* §, khuiw, to rush at_ in anger, to assazlt. The Old Talaing is 9608, 
khil. 

aceoso0S, khadof mat, the eye-ball; Haswell, 069280081 

* 865, khnik, powder, dust. 

* 80508, khnik ti, dust. 

t 8, khmi, a Buddhist monk; often found written 08, ‘gamhi,. which is 
more in accordance with the Old Talaing gurm-ir (11th cent.), 
and the medieval, o8, gam-’i (15th, 16th cent.). 

t 95, khyap, to reflect, consider; to intend, contrive ; from a form, e008, 


995, kasap, ksap. Cf. ¥, ail edu 
€, khyi, to tremble, shake; from:a form, 0098, 98, eet ksi. 


t+ a khyd, to write, to paint; from a form, 909, Oil, kas, ksi. 
cj, khyeh, a horse; from a form; og, kseh. 
* coSf, khyeh erard Waa a thorough-bred horse of Sindh. . Vide o8§« 
Wo, khyuit, to die. Cf 0908, gacuit, to kill, and ofj05, gamcuit, 
death. 
G$oor, khyuin khana, a moment, an instant ; Hasw. = Sogn Vide 
DOI 


om§, gakan,.to instruct, give instructions, to direct. The Old Talaing is 
- Bod§, B§ooh, kinkan, kinkan. Vide eo§, q$u . 
oooh, gakan phyan = ooogs 
osmd, gakom, .a collective body, community, company ; an assemblage, 
collection, mass. Vide under.. coodoquosaisonS, gakom sok, “a 
mass of hair” = a chignon, 
osg&, gafien, to go from place to place, itinerate, go about; BBod03¢8 
gp§o5c0880r0}-—" (the Buddha) having said, we shall descend and 
go about prophesying.” 
d, gja’, to sit. 
* 8, gfii, adorned, decorated ; to adorn ; an ornament. 
“00d, gata, to turn, turn ae ‘turn feeatien. the Old Talaing is 40, 
kuta; 15th century inscriptions have oods 
* omges, gata muk, to turn the face towards ;' as adverb, facing, towards, 
in front; ocgod ofecsso$o}n co280008 as09—" turning his face towards 
the Himalayas, the Bodhisattva went on his way,” S.J. 66; ocogo 


* 


+ 


% 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 171 


(= dds) god goSaq Sqyo—'* turned his face fowatis the north,” S.J. 
40; cogoiQ— (with) face turned towards the king, in front of the 
king, before the king,” Sudb. 28. 12. 

t ccood, gatak, to turn over, upside down, upset; Old Talaing, #05, 
pkak. Cf. Haswell, oco25c§, to tumble; Vide ecooSu 

ocoS, gatew, to cry aloud. 

ocoofejt, gatew krab, to cry aloud, screech, scream. 

osco&os, gatew yam, to weep. 

008, garam to beat, to strike (the breast). 

00805, gatuim sruih, to beat the breast. 

09, gadd, a covering made of leaves to protect the head, shoulder- 
and back, from sun‘or rain; it covers the head and back, falling 
down to the hamstrings. Cf. Burmese, 0, katt (pron, adi). 

* oo§, gaman, to invite. 

* 002, gama, to suckle. Cf. 209, ecedd, of, & 

os, game, to suckle. 

* of, gam-'i, a monk ; ‘this is the medieval form, the old form = gum- 
ir, and the modern form, 08, gamhi, often found written 3, 9.v. 

o§|§ gamluin, many; from 9/6, 9.v., often used as a sign of the plural. 

08, gaw, the womb; foetus, embryo. From the Sanskrit, garbha;. 916 

08, “heaviness of the womb,” grossesse; to be pregnant, G, pi. II.. 

3. Sometimes. written. ool8, Cf. Haswell, 088, 506 Also found 
written. 04, sometimes, | a, 

* 084, paw gnau, embryo, foetus; [¥gj oJoSg—‘'a woman who has an 

embryo,” a woman with child, A.V. 32 (Apannasatta) ; oo0Seco$oggg 

—a being in (whose) womb dwells a foetus,” a woman with child, 

A.V. 59 ‘(kalala); here, of, gar, is the old form found on the 

Ananda plaques, but also found sometimes so written in manu- 


Soko en 


* 


scripts. | | -- | ; 
t 008, 5, gah, that ; also a sign.of. the accusative case before the verb; 
‘Git is often. emphatic, laying | a stress on the word or phrase which — 
precedes it; in its meaning of “that,” it sometimes precedes the 
noun cased of following it; §9§—that deed, S.J. (A), ‘folio hu; : 
here, the first § = that, the os is emphatic = indeed, or some. 
such expression according to the context,; §go.00§—that bull, S.M. 
19; first § = that, second § = accusative case, As an emphatic | 


172  EPIGRAPHIA. BIRMANICA [ vow. 1 


particle = the Burmese, oo, k4°; very. often ‘it is sitnply indicative 
of the subject, and is equivalent to the nominative: case. 
tT OBL, ga-uui, medicine; cf. Haswell, 08, 2 a ais: in. both cases, the 2 
a u, and the so, @, are used as Solera 
col6, gow; see 08, which is the correct spelling. 
col8g, gow gnau = 08¢1 - 
a8, gah, to say, speak ; to mean, 
§&, guia, to take. | 
* 8638 guif nan, to bring, bring along with one, | 
- 9%5,, gnakyak, ‘a. queen. te | 
g, gnau, the womb, abdomen. Cf. 08, colts 
* go5, gndk, the hood. of a cobra; a spoon, a ladle, - 
* 68, gman, daring, brave; the being brave, courage, gallantry. 
* B05, glit, to tir back itl look, to look back, in the expression. 6953.05 
es (g.2.) ;. the Old Talaing =. 8088, jilit. 
+ <938, gloa, a road; Haswell, 9&- 
* 6908, glon, a palace, in the: Nyaung-U Hic dusetetion: Dhe. 343. hy 
; 144. 16. 
* coos, gloa’ jnlok, a main road. 
+ 908, glak, to pull out, tear out from, o&. meaning given by Haswell. 
98, gla, road. Vide e936 ‘ 
§§, gluia, many, much; to be Wiany or much. Vide o8& v4 
8628 gluia gluis, a iit lfcalion of aes much; mary: - often abbre- 
_ -viated to 886, gluia a, — 


e 


> 


of 3, gwa’,. to get, to. obtain, to have; as a verbal. auxiliary it means, © 
according to the: context : "permission, power, opportunity ; with a 
negative, 09,433, means: may not, shall not, can not. It also. 
‘means: -First—to get (to),-come to, arrive ; ‘BSE oBBqcovbars|Garogs - 
BREcoo0goeBq—"* they arrived at the Vipula mountain, and again going 
thence,-came to the river Ketumati,”. $.V., folio #hak ; [Fo5§ gooGog 
sochEogoroeatsoaqSaocpSylS— “those females, having arrived at ‘seven 
.. days (that is, after seven days), were, according to the usual way, 
obliged to go (to hell) to suffer for their sins,” Dhd. 2%. 9 (they 
were pretas, whose karma made them enjoy bliss for seven days 
_ and torments for seven days in regular succession). Second—to take 
with one, take along with one ; co28o008coniagqnogo9$ahs goaySofoorelo§§ 


PARTI] © TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 193 


coonegajqe=“‘the Bodhisattva, being startled and frightened, took 
Queen Maddi with him and both went up the mountain,” S.V., folio 
nak. Note the idiomatic. expressions, -¢q and 935q = very well all 
right! very good! ; Qqeoo2eag3080} —" Somadatta said, ‘Very well!’”, 
AS oe 
* 9, gaSq, gwa’ ra, gwa’ dmaf ra; see under 4, :in fine, 
+ {, ai, to look, look : at, look for; Haswell’s entry, ‘to seek, seek for, 
- only used in seeking lice ,” is too restricted... Cf. gS 
* &>, hi mwai, to look, look ‘at, look for; see 3, 3 
@¢o3;. ek, a tooth, 
* cgS, few, same as {; sdRo08$egSo—"" a nagt came up to look for food,” 
~ Sudh; 34. 3. 
-* 68905, few glit, to turn-round to look, to look back. . Vide Bode. 
* cg50, hew ca, “to search and eat,” to look for food, as animals. 
* 696953, few mfak mwai, to look, look at. Vide 95yu 
©, Ca,: to eat. 
t of$, cain, to carry on the shoulder; Haswell, cof$s.Old Talaing, 
 cifgin. | 7 poe 
¢ 0058, camat, to discern; to place, fix, mark, settle, determine, distin- 
guish; to examine, investigate. Also goSs 
00053, camat mwai, to examine, investigate. See godge 
08, cami, to look towards, look forward to. . Haswell, oo8 
089005, cami fidt, to look towards and see.- 
o8§5, cami rah = 08 
oy:, camlah, free, not in servitude, to be free, Cf. cogn 
0905, carak, to scratch, draw a line; a mark or line so made. Cy. 
02905, colloquial == coqoin Vide 088, o8c5s 
* oof, carat, deed, act; oqSoSoqgo%S—a meritorious act, Dhd. 37. 6. Vide 
| ooa 8, once Su 
* 085, caric, a form of 805 (g.2.), which,- up to’ now, I have met with 
- only in? A.V. 
—® 0805, carit, to scratch, draw a line; a line or mark so made, a fold, as 
of the skin. Vide oq05, 088, cogadh 
# o8cS0q05, carit carak = o§oSi 
® o09& calua, the head. Cf. qc08,. soyi&u 
* 00965, caluik, to drive, a cart, etc; the Old Talaing is 80805; jilik; 
Also written ooQobs 


s- * * * # 


174, EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL. It 


* 68, caw, to drive, a cart, etc, 
§, cah, ten. | 
de05, cam bat, to test, try. | | 

id 02088, ca-a’, to vomit, spit out. Vide ~, cososii 

* 0205, cat, to bind, bind about, bind around, -as the ribs of a cask; to 
tie, bind, fetter; ofo2050@ Sof osfoS cogfqg—“ caused him to be bound 
in irons for the whole of ‘his life,” G. pi. 6. Vide 28 o205n 

0386 camguif, a fetter. See oo8& 

* 809:, ci klah, to be clear; clear, evident, manifest; | clever, learned, 
wise; sharp, skilful. | 

t 905, cut, to put in, put ‘into, put’ on, as a glove or shoe ; q%as$, to put - 
into chains, imprison, Dhd. 12; 905, 918, to inflict’ a punishment 
(put a punishment on), 31§ sel be written ‘sa5; as a verbal 
auxiliary, implies: accident, fault, carelessness, hapiees to, unfor- 
turfately ; coosoSee$; touched him accidentally, happened ‘to touch 
him, S.B. 10. 21;. 38c8c5qo5—‘‘the naga happened to bite him,” 
S.B. 22. 13; in se sense it is sometimes reduplicated, 905905, and 
has the same, force as St, 33908, 9.0. 

* gcgS, culua, the, head. “Vide oo98, 009/81 oe 

* co&, cen, to slant, incline, be on one side; to decline, as the sun, after 

noon is past and in the evnaine. 
‘: cau, to return. 

t §y$, cuiw bdan, to be concealed, obscure, not clear, not apparent, not. 
readily understood; indistinctness, unclearness; to screen from view, 

| shut out; cf. Haswell under §o3$u 

<@, Cab, the back. . 

t §, cuiw, to, up to, till; often followed by of. Cf. fe | 

t 2, cna, food; forms many compounds, as goocd, cna tarem, excre- 

“ment = “old food?’ A.V. 39 {ukkara) ; -ggo5,-cna pmat, fuel = 
“food of fire,” -A.V. 37 (idhuma), ‘etc, Haswell has only cap, go, . 
but O. St. has entered @g by itself. - 

* 93, cndai, a linch-pin, a peg, A.V. 30 (ani). 

* gda03§ cndai kanh&f, an ornamental pin used to keep the ‘hair or 
headdress in place; for references see under. 032036. Other. forms 
are 9d036, Qdoo0h5, 02338, agd03&: 

* pd38 cnadai kna A; see above. 


‘PART I] ‘TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 175 


* 930036, cnaai sanhan; see above. | 

tT spo$ogs, cn on thbah, to show, point out; Haswell, os$ogea 

* 93, cma ai, a present, gift, bribe, tribute; also 3, coed, cogdr 

* 9088, cmaai cmin = gd. Vide open | 

* 99d, clah caradai, majesty, glory, magnificence ; pomp; beauty.; 

grace, charm; graceful deportment. C/. os20qdu 

+ 2, cwa’, a part, portion; class, category, kind. 

+t 2%, cha, only; whatever, all; after a number = fold; 0jcocGoocepS—“ even 
a hundred fold, a thousand fold,’ S.B. 7. Reduplicated, soc = all, 
everything’; socof§ccooSg—“ took all that was given,” G. pi. 9. 

+ x, chu, wood, timber; a tree. 

* xovo8odjoS, chu bodhi paluih, the sacred banyan treé, the Bo tree 
under which the Buddha attained: omniscience. Vide oc§oc 

* coo, coo8, che, chew, to find, meet with;- also §, chuiw, as: Haswell, 

t Soigos, chuik bdak.. Haswell has, “to approach, to. draw near,” but 
I have not yet-met this word with this meaning, except in’ a trans- 
lation. of the gospels; though in colloquial it means, ‘to take 
refuge in,” ‘in the literature, it has always and only the meaning: 
to be clever, versed in; intelligent, sharp, skilful. 


o§, chuiw, same as coon 
a0, jak, to draw, pull, drag. 
‘* go508, jak caw, .to drive. 
ta, jaku, the body, : ‘self, person ; Ravcg—"! one body,” by oneself, alone, 
BB. 2. - | | . 
* of, jan, people, the people, man, a person; P@/t, jana. Vide goa$u 
t acs5, janok, great, large ; to make big, enlarge, swell out ; acsSa0qy:G05 
cgo:—“‘ he said, ‘ Swell out your body, spread your hoed, ey ae. Bae 
Vide ogi 
* ogo, jamk at, rough, hard, violent, severe j_ from 99205,. to be harsh, 
_ rough, violent, ete., with # infix. 
ac@é, jaren, in the presence of, near. , 
* ages, jareh, a-chain, an iron chain; fetters, handcuffs. Cf. O.St., 
o6qo5, chain. . 
o>, 14, a net; net-work, lace; of. Burmese go, jha. 
&§, jin, to sew, stitch. Vide $8, 23& 
® ofc008, jaw lagaw, a duct, a small canal which conveys spring or hill 
water into rice-fields. Also a8cocol8 and oaconf Haswell, car026 


176. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von. 11 


t 8&, juig, the leg including the foot; the foot ; base, bottom, foot. 
t $6, juia, to confer, grant, give. Vide GS 
og5, bs ok, great, big, large; a chief, head, tester aglogst—a’ village’ 
 headman, A.V. 82 (gamajetthaka). Vide ocs5u 
dQ. jai, far; to be far, ode. 
gt, jnah, to conquer, overcome. | er 
g25, jmp, every; goSaago5—01—" every ] and every he”. = all, every. 
body, Dhd. 55. 8. 
* $& jmifi, sewing, stitching; from && 
@5, jrap,.a hall on the roadside for .the convenience . of travellers, a 
_ rest-house. Cf, Burmese, 095 (pron. sa-yat), properly a9 Su 
@, jrai, the banyan tree, of which there are several species. - 
* 0S, jrai thaw, -“the golden banyan” = the Bo tree. 
. 9298, jrai mha budh, “the banyan of the Great Knowledge i 
(mahabodhi, or, perhaps, -mahabuddhi) = the Bo tree. 
* §oj, jrai sum = 
gooeS, fit, to see, perceive. | 

+ &, fii, a supplicatory particle, often to be translated by “ Wh scniged in 
conjunction with. of (of ... 8) = “may, let . “It is alee 
used as a sign of the saben omrs§dooqf 8—" I ‘will heir this 
statement”; cogsofp8 = Pais, vittarissami, Dhd.- 35. 27 ; ée0S8x 
S8—"T'll test my mother,” S.B.10; 2% ofal$ S—“I shall give 
alms,” Dhd. 98..1 = Pali, dassami. 

+ 2§, fidn, as; so as...,-so that..., in order to'...; in order 
that...; has often the sense of the imperative, and may be 
translated by “let (me, you, us),” or “do... ,” in which case 
it is often followed by 9; ed88o9og$00g]—"so that his parents’ may 
have faith,” Dhd. 28. 27; 93809§ 8,050} 0% wooq—" do (you) get up 
and sit down in the carriage,” S.J. 4;  oGo&yd_350q5 09/S4—"' young 
man, do (you) come in,’ Dhd. 26. 26. Cf. the following compound 
expressions :—p984—"‘like the manner of” = like, as $.B. 9; . 988 
soom00q—"' like. the manner of” = like, as A. . 198 (under rocana) 
(se20009 is Pali); 38gs, like, see agm pos sog8—" like the . manner. 
of” = like, as, as if, S.B. 24; SS. 17. 

¢ @:, fiah, he, ae often answers to the French; om; a person, the people ; 
gor... oop, GIG. ... cop—who is ... .? wikb or what ‘is, are 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 147 


.P, porgod¥gecpas—“‘ who is this little girl, Sir?”, Sudh, 9.13; 
ese 96 ooS§cq.—'‘ what were those sixteen wonders?”, Sudh. 
28. 2; pos8p0: 5 9§ecp—“ what are these four classes of persons?” 
S:B. 8. opsopos§ecp—"' who are you?”, S.B./ 12-3 901038cee—"' who 
are they ?”, wns 27. 
* 00:95, fiah gman, -“a person of courage,” a brave, a warrior. 
* oorié, fiah dua, ia person of the city,” citizen. 
* 59, fiha, to invite. Vide Bu 
95, dak, water. 
* QSacococal6, dak jalagow = abcc08, ¢.v. 
9i§, dun, town, city; country, kingdom, 
* 96098; dun swaw, the heavenly city or country, heaven, svarga. 
+t 3, deh, he, she, it. Not sg93, as Haswell. 
8\65,-duik, to ride, drive. 
+t ao, na, to go, to send, away, off; for full explanations and meanings see 
under plaque 277. Sometimes also written $2, na, in composition. 
* cooo85, na knip, to face towards, see under plaque 277. 
* ooogi5, na beuip,. to lead to, cofivey to, see under plaque 277. 
ad, na’, this. 
c8, nim, yet, still; a sign of the future. -See ¢326 non. 
*o, ta, to vomit. Vide 02038, cososti | 
cooS, tak, to strike, beat; oooSdao$3S—to. beat the drum and walk the 
gong” = to proclaim, by. beat of drum and gong, G. pi. 3. | 
* wosofod, tak suih, to beat one’s breast, in sorrow, wonder, -ete,, Dhd, - 
12. 8, | 
gg, tka’, an island, content. 
* oo$093, tahklaai, molasses. treacle ; see next. 
o$cod, tanlaai, molasses, treacle; this word is: collequial; 008033, 
literary. Cf. Burmese, 88, tanlai, 
of$,; tamin; see of$u 
¢ coag2, tanha, passion, lust; Haswell, oo321 Pé/s, tanha. 
+ o§, ‘tan, to be valid, have validity; to dwell, abide, remain; as a: verbal 
auxiliary, it expresses: propriety, suitability, tness; possible, may ; 
C$QcBi cofgogor2—is it proper to speak and to act (so)?, U.O.K. 
44. 8; 00300$9q—it cannot be, it may not be, S.J. 4.. Cf. B., oof 
* o08, 098, tamaw, tmaw, rolling over and over, round and round. 


33 


178° EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


* \*.. 


cogs, tamlah; see ogw 


oogd, tamhaal; see g>di, also good! 
cogda8§, tamhaai jamin, a’present, gift, offering, bribe, tribute. 


- gesd, tare mh, old, not new. — 
ood; tarau, journey, way, road, 


® 


ra ‘ 


cat, tarah, to expand, sapaund give in details; ‘to ‘scatter, spread ; 


e strew. 


coo8, tasin, fetters, manacles ; Dhd. 64. 14—o005gj co08&go5 cBBi cogignetod 


soo—" beings with fetters become: free.” Vide o28&u 

ooo8eS, tasuik, happiness; comfortable; luxuriant ; Haswell's entry, “the 
place or state of. ie saa is not to the point, -a3d'c008aS—a 
comfortable seat, G, pi. 

§, ooo, tah, the breast, "hides 


3, ta’, ional the plural.. Cf Burmese, o8, tui’. (pron, do!). 
03, tarh, the beginning; near part, presence, at; the original amount of 


money, capital, stock in trade ; the. profits accruing from it being . 0%, 
parai; o3l—'‘the place of the beginning,” - source, Dhd, 574. 25; 
03g, capital,” A.V. 153 (under pabhata); 05305, capital, stock in 
trade, G. pi. 3; 089 5038 [Sroda0$ 0g 50$—" the capital being large, the 
profits are large; (if) small, the profits are small,” G.. pi. 13. 

BEBE, . tin. tin, an adverb, imitative of the sound -made when striking 
one’s breast. 


BEBEOoREH |S, tintin gatuim-sruih, to beat one’s breast ‘an ‘sorrow. 


805, tit, to go out. After another verb often means: away, out, off, 

3, tim, to know. : ie 

Seoo05, tim ket, to know, perceive. 

oBco, tila, lord, ISStES, setgneur; also co, ~, cocon 

Boo8$, tila puin, “a lord of merit or glory,” a monk, Vide op, 

og§, tun, again, back, in return; to return; now... ,.and now... 3 
it is also used as an emphatic particle: not’ exactly translatable in 
English, which lays a particular stress on the word.or words which 
precede it: 99 ssQco00200003098—" now, the holy disciples, ... .  ,” 
Dhd, 237. 16; Qso§og3oqg$—“ and now, the king of Arimandana (for 
Arimaddana = Pagan) ...°, the reference i is to King Anorata, Dhe. 
IZ. 26; . 0905 coragr098—“ he uplifted religion again, that is, he 
promoted the true religion,” Dhc. 13. 3; gas20 a9 ,c5go98—“' now, at 
that time... ,” Dhd. 117. 27, here it is emphatic, ogjo5 = now. © 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 179 


t 095, tup, like, resembling; to be like, .be. similar, to resemble. 

*- 05, tuy, the ancient. and medieval way of writing o}; > (ai) is the 
modern symbol of 0, y.- 

+ o, tual, the sign of the past tense j- it is also a connective particle, 
connecting two sentences, and ‘is thus similar in use to the. Pali 
gerundive vd; at the beginning of a sentence, it. means: then, 
after this or that, /¢, “this being finished,” and is. ‘probably an 
abbreviation for ojo, “having finished”; it has. ‘sometimes to be 
translated as a conditional : o5c8 Qooqto}sogooco> God08 }9—" if you 
wish to know (the story) 7 extenso, look up that. “commentary,” 
Dhd. 235.4. ..The original meaning of the word is: to be finished, 
be over, be slapecd be past;  c0200 oojcos—in times past, Sudh. 
10. 9; c§ goov00 eoicos—the: thera, in times past, Dhd. 108. 
133 “BgoasoSoo}cos§—the king - Mahajanaka of that time, /:#. = who 
is past, S.J.-88; cjccs—formerly, of yore, in olden times; 03003005. 
bo} codon ROB, co$ oospSol5 — O, demouy because, : in: the past,. you 


haye. committed: evil deeds... ,”° Dhd. 27..21; the following 
expression. is much used at the end. of sections and chapters: 
ojcogq—"* this (g)' so much. (9). is finished (o})” = this section, 


or chapter, is finished, finis. See qi 
cod, te’, that. 
o>, tai, the hand; finger, _ 
O83i, tai stu th, the right hand. | 
* cooxcsp, toro, straight in front, ‘straight ahead, right, Opposite; also. o9, 
with which of. Burmese, ogqieaconsepag, ibid. |  < 
cco3, tot, to cook, to boil.” | | 
™ 06, tau, to. dwell, reside, live ; to. be (in, a place), remain; after. another 
verb, it. i8.not only euphonic, as says Haswell, but. it-shows also — 
that what is°expressed by. the verb is going on; _ it is. always. easy: 
to judge. from the. context whether . it is. merely euphonic or a-conti- 
nuative auxiliary,.thus: 00506 does not. mean only .“‘ he. called,” but. 
“he was calling,” 350059508 ¢opoS—" the nagas who. dwelt. ae the. 
foot of Mount Sineru,” S.B. 7; : 3053050003 03009 cepS—"' this. man is 
on the palm tree,” S.M, 18; " Sgzlodcop—"* in what, place (where) 
are the flowers?”, Dhd. 93. 27. 
‘{ of$, tuin, to ascend, go up; used as an expletive. it: shows that whatever 
the verb denotes, refers to another. person or object ; -9g2809$[¢-—he 
asked the woman. | 


180 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


oj, thai, the sun; a day. 
o3, tnamh, a tree; a plant. 

*.o205, tnah, other, different. 

t 028, 02053, tnah na, for; for the purpose of; for the sake of; to, in 
order to = the infinitive. : 

* 023, tn dai, linch-pin, Vide 93, ogdu 

* 92d396 tnaai khnanh = gooojé, gz. 

&, tnim, to sink, sink down. - Haswell, coa8s 

* copoS, tneh, a trough, for animals to feed. in; in the East, it is most 
often made in the shape of a. boat; a grain measure; also written 
conods Vide godu 

* copodao8§, tneh amuin, same as precedent. Vide ao§abu 

* o2§, tnun, sprout of a plant or tree;. top, summit, pinnacle, finial; also 

i$; Of. Haswell, coagé; see next word. 

* on{8(G30008, tnua krakat, a building with superposed roofs and a finial; 
a palace; qo5Grco208qoSi03) § (Ggo0053098—magnificent houses, magni- 
ficent pavilions, decorated heavenly palaces, Dhd. If. 30 = Dhd. 
269. 4; it is sometimies preceded by 8, dQog(S{egoo0S, Dhd. 204. 8; 

the bell-inscription (16th cent.) at Nyaung-U_ has og&(egookn 

+ o3, tma, a stone, rock; a rocky hill. 

* oScos, tma’ lah, a flat. stone. 

* opd$$, tmaai Jmin; see gd$§, ogd, etc. 

— * 0305, tmut, weaving, from oqo5, tut, to weave. Vide ogioSs 

(qj, truh, a male, a man; used as the’ ‘sign of the masculine. 

. ey Psi, excellent ; blessed ; lord. | 

“op, o000, tla, tala, owner, lord, master. Vide Beco. Old Talaing, tirla. 

7 ope, you, Sir. 

* oor, tla fia, “ he toed of the wer. " =a king: 

* opesloo, tla dosa, “a lord. of anger” = an irascible, choleric person. 

* / ©2089, tha. paehE. a master of ene. y a a learned. man, ‘scholar, 
pandit.. 

8§, tlia, to err, miss the way, get lost, be lost. tenia ft 

* op, tlah, free, not in bondage. Vide ogre. 3 

* opoda, tlah caraai;. see _ptogar | 

* f, 008, twi, tawi, £e surround, Dhd, 224: 24. 

* BE, twi bwuif, to surround; also BRE, eG 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 181 


* oi, twut, weaving, to weave. Vide ogiodn — 

* BS, twuin, the going up, rising, rise ; irom of$ Vide kwuin. 

* fi, twuiw = % G.V. . 7e, 

* fi, twuiw, giving;-from of; ° ‘also Bla 

* of, twah, to say, speak; ‘preach. | | 

* of03, twahgah, to mean ‘to term, call; be termed, -be ‘called. 

* 0335, twah pmif, to preach. | 

009, thapah, seven.  °  ; 

«6 thaw, gold ; golden. , 

ool, thaw4ai, to sit in a cross- legged posture, on the ine, in | oriental 
fashion; statues of the Buddha.are so; seated ; also = the lap when 
seated iri oriental fashion ; goog} cog $B 5c eJohc88 s00q—" placing his — 
head on his wife’s lap, he went to; sleepy” Dhd. 298. 13; also 
written 09>, el 

cos, tha- -a’, to ° vomit. Vide 003038, 032981 

9296, th-'aa, a site, for. building. | 

coo, the, a monk, of at least ten years’. Standing, | Pali, thera. 

coo, thew = coo . 

-¢®, theai, angry; to be angry; _anger.. , 

caged, theai pnat = ce. . Vide goSu | | 
¢ c3, tho’, to cast away, forsake; give up, reject. 

Bt, thbah, to show, Point: Out ;. com | 

3%, dak, to tie, bind. 
a2, daka, a layman. Pali, dayaka: 

acgoS, dakut, a_ piece, fragment ; ~part,\ ‘portion ; half (of time - or 

distancé) ; 00420905, part or half, of the way. 


* 


e 4 KH & 


~~ 


. , ges, ; dget, to observe, to do, to perform ; teninateel deed, | 
ia off, da guin, to observe the fasteday (ex) to observe: the Buddhist. 
7 virtues, | , 


aay 903, dacath,. eight.” oh ce : 


x 


aq, dacun, a stick, a staff to. lean upon. Haswell, gh 

308, dacah, to. oppose, go: against, as the . wind, the tide, etc. . CG. os, 
ibid, 

999009, dafifia Chale: to the ‘atraid, ‘he: ‘anxious. 

304, datuai, benefit, advantage, profit ; end: ‘conclusion ; to doze, ‘nod. 

303 Gso26, datuai mramow, benefit, advantage, profit. 


* 


ee 


182 . EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 


* 2%, datai, to take along with one, by. holding:the: hand, as a child, or 
the end of the stick of a blind man, or the chain of a dog, ete. 
i 306, datau, to stand; an abode, dwelling; 0305, to dwell, S.B. 1, Sudh. 
3. 21. See od 2 
+ 9905, 3, dadah, being, the being born or reborn; state ; circumstance - 
to be, to become. 
¢ 9905, daduik, misery, suffering; poor, miserable. 
ao5, damruih, violent, harsh, wicked. 
s9, damla, a robber, dacoit; ogi 
* agoo08, ago5, darhat, strength. Cf. oood = ccodu 
t sco, dalan, a tray, on which offerings are placed for monks or the 
Buddha. | 
¢ 98, daw, to shut;. the centre, middle. 
9d], Daw4dai, the town of Tavoy; also written ood! 
¢ 905, dah, to be, to become; to be reborn; used as a. verbal auxiliary 
implies : feasibility, _ possibility, that can be done, of. which there 
is a ‘possibility, may be translated by “can”; 95 m§ag&s eS fo 
—could not drink water, could not eat rice, Dhd, 12. 9; in this 
sense is equivalent to the Burmese, 5, phrac, when used as an 
auxiliary. § and §q, used at the beginning of a sentence, ° or 
phrase, gives it a conditional force = if, if it be that, if it happens 
or turns out that, it being... , etc., according to the context; 
BcBol potogeBBicBoscnaticReaGafforqSqonsdacooSfeo§asoas8 Gene —* we told 
other persons it (a fish) was (worth) 1,000 rupees and seven. 
annas; if you take it, we shall take (only) seven rupees,” Dhd, 
173. 30; 89902306 Goooor8ago3—" if they sold that fish to. others 
one thousand bia! ” Dhd. 174. 3 
* $35, ‘dah’ mnih, “to become a man,” to be born, reborn, : 
* 33, dah mwai, “to be one with et to agree, tally ; ol&agoS[¥o9soloul 
co§$g—" the girl's: word, or statement, tallied with ‘Godapila’s,” 
S.M. 9.- 
* Bo dal ya i, tobe univell, sick. 
* $500, dah 4, to become. 
t 34, dah, a verbal. auxiliary ; placed before the verb, implies necessity, 
‘and may be translated by must; but when placed after the verb, 
it implies: inadvertence, satel, fault, mistake, unexpectedness, 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA — 184 


accident, etc.; 302 ac0910g2033—" ‘they went, and unexpectedly came 
upon. a lake,” S.B. 14; Soro} 8938 903-—“‘ he came (dit. he found) 
by chance across a fig tree,” S.M. 19; s30dhoisg,28anr0Ga9Sas02§q 
—“the devas causéd the fish to enter. the net inadvertently,” Dhd. 
173. 24. Vide qodu. 
_alf,. dan, alms-giving. Pais, dana. 
85, dip, heavenly, celestial: Pali, dibba.- | | 
qofos, ducaruit, an evil deed, bad action. Pali, ducearita. 
_a$, dun, bamboo. 


95, duh, .sin,. evil, offence. 
63006, devatau, a’ god, a deva, devata. 
cao, desa, a place. Pali, 

* csoog:, desa rah, country. Vide qm , 

E0092, 63939, desana, desna, religious discourse, preaching, sermon, 
Pali, | 

* caoogs0, desana. dhar = caogo, Vide ofn 

8, de’, younger brother or. sister. | te 
6, dau, to flee, run away; $209, ibid. 
+ §, duiw, to, up to, till; §3, up to this, this much; czogor0d8§g— 
“the wise, knowing this much’... ,’” G, ph. 3, , 
t 305), duih, .a point of the compass, region, oleae! direction; aside; 39S 
—one side, Dhd. 378; eoSel§o5—"" eyes two sides,” - both eyes, 
AN. 17° (andha); .9053$05—“face one side,” one face, one side ; 
goel§o5—the two faces: or sides; A.V. 68 (under kuttaka, written 
duis); grel§oS—both shoulders, Dhd. 17. 21. Pali, desa. 

* GoSag80q, duih smaw ky4, the-north. 

t 3, dnaai, place; office, place; hence in some contexts = inheritance ; 
itis also used in the sense of: whatever, whoever ; 31805 g&95 aobeg$ 
—whatever you desire : tice, water, gold, silver, S.B. 14; 31805538. 
—all that you wish, S.B. 15; see s40503 n 313) 8Sco008q—whatever 
they took, Dhd. 299. 4;. 3)29%—-whatever person, whoever, S.J. 
(A), folio. he. 

* 905, dnih = cogod, ¢.v. 
+ a6, dma, to remain, dwell, live; also used as an auxiliary denoting that 
_the.action is being done, is going on. 
@8, dran, a tusk; ahorn, Cf. Haswell, @& 


184 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [voL. 1 


68, drap, . property, wealth, substance. ~ Sanskrit, dfavya. 
eg5, drep,‘to run, 

* 6956, drep dau, to run away, flee. See $1. 

695, dlo’, to instruct, teach; accod: 
egicg.§, dlo’ bton =. cgin- 

8, dwi,. the left side; Qu 

— 0god>, dhammata, the usual way, the usual order of things, custom, 

| usage, habit ; nature. - Pa/s. 

+. °%, dhaw, the Law, ‘the Buddhist Law, doctrine, religion; written ¢4 in 
old and medieval. Talaing. Sanskrit, dharma. 

08, dhaw, to be straight, direct from- one point to another; straight, 
_- direct, fight, 

olds, dhat, a ‘telic. Pali, dhatu. 

$, na, by, by means of, with; 309, itd. 

t 3& nan, to bring; i is used also like the Burmese verbal particle 3, khavi’, 
that’ is, it implies that the action which- the verb expresses - is 
followed by going away from. the place where’ the action. has taken 
place; it also, I think, refers to an action just past; it is also 
sometimes merely expletive. 

® 36096, namow, .to bend, bend towards, bend. down, incline to in mind ; 
also $08, o0998: | 

. scops8, naro’, to cry, cry out, bawl, howl, scream; also 3&6, coQ ai 

$2, nd, sometimes found so written instead of a>, g.v:, mostly in com- 
~. position, - 

33, nak, a serpent, the cobra; a:naga or dragon, a species of demi-god. 
= Pali, naga. 38, a nagi or female naga. | 

* 309, ndguiw, a town, city. Pali, nagara, 

338, Naaimi, King Nimi or Nemi. . 
$8, nidhi, treasure, Péli, Wrongly given as $8 by’ ‘Haswell. 
$gl$, nibbdn, nirvana. 

* 3o§, niman, to invite. . | 

* 9805, nimit, to create, make. Cf. Pali, nimitta. Vide -305.. Most often 

- used in the following couplet : 

* 3805405, nimit bdah; to create, make. | 

3, ni, from; than; 8:9, from there, from that place, thence. 

* cs08, cas, non, nof, a particle indicative of the future, Cf. Haswell 

under ecps&: 


PARC @] TALAING PLAQUES GN. THE ANANDA 68s 
3, nwath, to bs, to have; also $j, num, mostly after prefixes oo and on 
7 ve, pa, ta do, make; to cause, in this sense it is widely used as a causal 
prefix in the forms: pa, ~, da and é. [t is an interrogative = why? 

low ?; osgoogoSup3&Fsep—"' how are the Paccekabuddhas?”, «:.J. 40. 


it is also a prohibitive = do not, and probably an abbreviation of 
oF, giod0a32$q—-do not ask!,. S.J. (A), folio fe; o§05—don’t forget, 
i, Pl. 7 | 


* co8, pak, to throw, fling (water, dust, etc.). Cf. Burm., ood 

* e005, pkah ram, to bear, carry, wear: to carry out, perform, fulfil; to 
rule, govern; in word fur word translations, it. very often translates 
Pali ahérett ; saQ&g&co8 consa$ cg 2J— who wears the - 32 great 
characteristics,’ Dhd. 30. 25; @3&qSco8q ogiqeo——"' fulfilled the two. 
gandhuras,” L.B, 2. 1; ogéqSooSgo3-—-carrying a spear. 

* ¢, pkau, a flower. Haswell enters this word only as “ 4{oc02$, garland,” 


but has the entry o5 (colloguial’. To open, as a flower, to blossom, 
to flower; sqooch—a flowering tree, A.V, 164 (phulla). 
* do, pkau sau, a-flower. Haswell’s entry, ‘ ooSa5, a carver’in wood,” 
I have not met’ with, the usual expression is gos;05 fn 
oS, pkau srau = bet, with y infix. : 
pa kom, to bring together, collect, gather, bsed, amass ; 4So¢003 
coiienties coo—“‘ having amassed property, shall I give it br nothing 
to. thew?” G. pr. 14.- 
o§86, pan min, to hear, listen to: Haswell, o&$& 
+ og, pafifiap, a name, appellation, term; to name, call, term; to prepare ; 
Pali, pafifiapeti. : 
opo>, patina, wisdom, intelligence, knowledge. Pa/z, 
vo5, pat, to press with the hand, squeeze. Vide cosuloSu 
t+ g§, o@§, ptan, patan, to build; to raise, exalt : to make firm, stable, 
unwavering ; to restrain, control. (of the mind, feclings, etc.); to 
establish; to appoint to an office ; aygrapomg saa v0o§co609q— 
‘fT will exalt you to the state of chief queen,” Sudh, 2-4. 22; goy 
. 033,98c08.H99o3 goSqa03—"'the queen, being unable to control 
. her rel, * S.J, 6& | 
t & ptam, to begin, begin with; et cetera, and’ so forth, and ‘the like. 
Vide dn a a. _ 
* 5, ptath, to fulfil, practise. 


% 
@ 


Tt ane 


24 


186 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von 1 


t &,. ptit, to take out, put out, put forth; QoSgoooS— to. put forth 


- strength,” to endeavour, strive, A.V. 47 (ussuka) ; §SolE—" to put 
_ forth words,” to utter, express, say, S.B. 9, S.J. 7. 


Pig patisanti, conception, rebirth. Pal, patisandhi. 


t 


* oo§osos,, patun pa- a, friendly. greeting, exchange of friendly prestige 
agreeable ae in translations, always readers the Pali pat? 
santhéva; Bocor$ ocosos ofoogoq—exchanged friendly greetings, 

Dhd. 226. 27. 

00}, patum, to let fall, drop, throw down. 

oo, patuik, generally written ec$o5, g.v. 

Hr, oQ$, ptuin, patuin, to raise up, put. up, lift up; ‘to put up,” 
present, offer, from a inferior to a superior; ofcco3oc3$q&, “let ye 
cook and put up rice,’ S.M. 13; Qcdoar Bi$o9G— every - day, he 
had to present (flowers) to the. king,’ Dhd. 92. 21. 


o§ pan, four. 
ofoy&, pan klan, having four angles, square. 


ogo, pannasa, the hut of a hermit, made of branches and- leaves, a 
hermitage. Pai, pannasala. 

030%, pa.datau, to dwell, sojourn, live. ‘Vide 305 and 06: 

ogf, pa piijau, to offer, present, in a religious sense. Vide gh 

of, pa buiw, generally written eG, 9.0. 


ogeéoof, pa-bwak karau, “to make a follower, ” that is, to become or 


be, someone's follower, Dhd. 28,12. Vide goSoo{u 
0005, 908, pamat, pmat, fire, also 9995, ecg 205i 
go58e, sacred fire; sacrificial fire, A.V. 36 (ahavaniya). 


—o88gl$, p&rinibban, parinirvana. Pali, parinibbana. 
03, parai, excellence; profit, benefit, advantage; before-a number = 


more. than, over, above. From 8, to gain; to be excellent, noble. 

o8§ paruin, tidings, news; from this meaning it has also come to 
mean: what pertains to, what is connected with, and may be trans- 
lated by, “about, concerning, as regards” ; opopgrcoor090,$0§)EucBan008 
0G EqoSagoc.02$00g>908 ooSgoij— ‘the wise, thus knowing about (that is, 
the evil consequences of) the sin of stealing another's wife... ,” 
Dhd. 357. 8; cSarcqucgodeBo8coah ang GGosqrogofoGq—"he told the 
king, in detail, all about his practising the sz/as,” S.B. 28. 


‘occof, paleh, to make dance, as marionettes, ‘snakes, monkeys, etc. 


oc, paluit, to put out, extinguish. 


* 


PART 1} TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA | 187° 


08S, paluin, ‘to destioy. 

* oo, paluih, the circle around the Bo tree, in the centre of Jambu- 

dipa. 

* 08, paw, a mountain; used only after the names. of mountains. | Sanskrit, 

parvata. 

t 0°, pawa, a deed, act, action; work; vocation; from’ 0; by infix w. It 

is often used followed by 9, to ean abstract nouns. .Also gi 

* ycooos, pasek, to pour water in the act of consecrating king, to anoint. 

Pals, abhiseka. Sometimes written o8ofn 

* ucooosuand, pasek pase same as ocoox%; the meaning given by 

. Haswell, “happiness,” is wrong, I think, | Dae ob 

00805, pasuik, same as osoo05n oO 

oo§§, pasuin, to make over, hand. over, deliver, commit. Cf. gf, Bu 

o8, pa smif, “to make king,” that. is, to. become -king; to rule. 

‘ol&, paa, the mouth; word, statement, speech, discourse ; eaHIATOBMES 

98+ and each spoke only one word,” ‘Dhd. 3575 7. 

olf, pan, to ask respectfully, to beg, entreat. of. Burmese, 08, pan. 

 ol$socol§, pan akhon, to beg leave, ask permission. . 

ol, paai, to reject, put aside. Cf. ‘Burmese, 065, pay (pron. pe); to 
leave, go from, depart from ;> lsi§yso}—" having again departed 
from thence ... . ,’ Schmidt, 88. 2, | 

Sg0le5, pindapat, food given in alms to monks. “Pali, pindapata, 

g& pun, cooked rice. oe 

g$, pun, to rebel, Cf. Burmese, 4S 

* of, piguiw,.a person, individual. Pals, puggala. 

gf, piijau, an offering, to the Buddha, the monks, or a temple ; to 

| make such an offering. Pali, paja. | 

* coos, pek, to be destroyed, done for, ruined, routed. Ch. Bare, qo, 

pyak (pron. pyéz). 

t % puin, property, wealth, possession; glory, dignity, in the expression | 
~ BeoS$, g.v. Cf. the same meaning of the Burmese,” =$, bhun’ - 
(pron. phon), in the expression, 09$:8:, bhun®? kri®? = 8o08$, 
both from the Pali pusiia, whose meaning, as is the case also” | 
with some other words, has been extended. 

§$co0§, puin han, same as 88 

t d05, pak, to open; expound, explain, 


re ee 


+ € 


188 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA fVOL. i 


T sy25, p-’ow, to send, despatch, order; to ‘cause to, incite to, urge; 
persuade, induce. For full explanations see under Old Talaing cr, 
plaque 50. Often also written oga&u. 

* carSeogo5, p-’ow batuik, to incite to, urge, persuade, induce. 

* cmr805, es to incite, urge, persuade; to cause to. 

§, puiai, we; 8805, we (respectful), . 

9, pdai, in, ac into; anciently written, 90, pday, and syed, pdey. 
ge, pdai Itt, on, upon; geoop: 

gos, pnat, anger, angry, to be angry. Haswell, ees Vide o&: 
gt, pnah, the shoulder, 

t 80, pmik, wish, desire; sense, meaning of a word or passage; opinion, 
view ; So08coc8usnlooo—‘'this (is) the meaning of the third verse,’ 
Dhd. 355. 25. 

¢ g#905, pyah duih, to foretell, declare beforehand, prophesy; a prophecy ; 
s0cp2$0053 20g90.4)8 §.Sec Booags/Sa$u50083—" with such words did the 
Omniscient one prophesy on the summit of Mount Hamsagiri,” 
Sudh, 28..23. Haswell, “ ooge§o3, revelation.” Cf Sanskrit, vyadic. 

* @ 00005, prasat, a building. with superposed roofs, a. terraced EOE; 
palace. Sanshrit, prasada. 

+ 9$, plan, to turn, turn back, turn over; and; a$cdo§8[EySo8oSoqaSeBSaay5o 
Beajo} qsdor0}—“ and the people, saying, ‘the queen has obliterated . 
the king’s line... .’” S.J. 66;- again, anew. C/ Burmese, oo, 
lan, and §§, pran (pron, yea) 

t Q$oo:, plan gatah, to turn round; to change, alter, change from bad 
to worse, go wrong;. to oppose, retaliate; to speak in -return, as 
in conversation; 008 y$ooor§—“ he is subject to change (his mind, 

_ dispositions, etc.),”’ Dhd..40. 19. . 
og& plen, to destroy, ruin, blot out. 
y&, pla, to convey or conduct, to take to (a person or a place); 
vod&u. 
yt, plah, to spread, spread out 
Q, PWa, same aS 00, g.vU. 
g$, phun, a mattress.. 

* of, phun sdi, a mattress, S.V,, folio Aham, Dhd. 30. 4 

coos, phek, to fear. Vide esx, of which ceo is a contracted form, 

* 6 phau, with, together with. Cf Haswell, ol 


x 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 189 


6, phamm, a drum. 
ego5, ph-'ow, same as sgl8, 7.v. 

® oagoS, pha-’urt, “to cause to end, make an end of,” to put an end to, 
to end; to spend, waste, squander; to be ended, spent, finished ; 
op seadoScoonnSo—“ in order to put an end to his doubts,” Sudh. 24. 
19; 9860) ovaGod of ogsooc§cS$§—" like the. sun puttiag an end to the 
brightness of the : firefly,” S.M, 1; goasx$o00Sec$8 Sea903 anpao8Eos200 

—“the going to look at dances, wasting (one’s) time,” Dhd. 238. 
26. 

* q, phy; this combination is often the boas of the assimilation of a 
labial, 0, 6, with a following sibilant 2 or palatal ©. Cf. the words » 
below. 

* g$, phyan, to instruct, give instructions, direct (how to act, etc.); to 
send or leave a message; it is used generally in the couplet, ono 
9, from oc$, Old Talaing, ¢$, pcan. In the fellowing, it is used. 
alone: a3sur8o008 GoSs.0 asqbongo}s coco& acorsysg Goaaey —* then, 
the future Buddia went unto his father’s presence and told him 
according to his instructions,’ S, Vidh. 292. 

* 95, phyap, to think, reflect, design, intend; from oo08, kasap; here 
the gq is the result of the assimilation ok the guttural oo with the 
sibiiant oc: 

* gS, phyap, to put together, join, connect, unite, from ocd; 05 = to 
adjoin, be adjoining. : 

* good, phyadk, to. break, tear; hence, it means: “to cause the day to 
break,” that is, to wait for the dawn or until dawn; agSéqooda08Sog 
o§c5—“the Buddha used. to go back and -vait for the dawn, in the 
Middle . Country (majjhimadesa),” Sudh. 13. 10; from 03; 05, 
cak = to tear, to rend; there 1s a colloquial nee ey oh 05, 
‘the day breaks.” 

* @§, phyin, to cook; from o8§; 8§ = to be cooked. 

* Go5, phyih, “to cause to come down,” to put down, throw down; form 
e805; B05 = to come down, descend. 

yi&, phyuan, “to cause to drink,” give to drink; from oS; o9&, to 
drink. 
qgi$, phyun, flesh, meat; from gi (Old Talaing). 
* g$Go5, phyun gruih, the heart. 


190 : EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [von 


fT sy, phyea, to turn aside, torn away; to set on one side, or obliquely, — 
or on the slant, to slant. something’ towards ; wood E§cyS g& —“ he 
looked obliquely, with only one eye,” S.J. 82; from oco&, og&; 
co&, to be. slanting or oblique, incline or be on one side; may also. 
be. from oc0&; see gS = oS, above. 
* G05, phyuik, to cereals or make happy; from 905; see Sods 
= B, phyuin, to make over, hand over, deliver; from o9$ (A.V. 134, 
: under 2yd@sa). 
ood, bak, to follow. 
end, bakap, to turn over, upside down. 
* eo$, bacan, to instruct, direct, commission; to send or leave a 
message, Vide iu 
" eogfoo§; bacan gakan, same as oo$i 
8S, bcuip, to cause to arrive, to conduct, convey to. Vide anr§ou 
eoo0S, batak, same as .00d05; ¢.v. aes 
* 8105, btuik, to incite, instigate, induce to; to urge, stimulate; request 
, to; to attack; ‘to fight, contend. Cf. Burmese, ofo5, tuik. : 
* Zi degls, btuik p-’ow, same as M05, first meanings. Vide cgi, 
680 
cys, bton, to teach, instruct. Vide coin 
+ go5, bdah, to cause to be, to make, to create; Haswell, oft gos, is more 
0h common. | | 
Zi vié, bdun, to cause to receive, to hand, to pass; to give, bestow. 
* ecoods, bapek, to cause to be destroyed, to ruin, destroy; to rout, put 
to flight. Vide cody 
* #3, babai, same as 3, g.v. 
* o§, ba buiw, “to cause to Icok at,” to show. 
, 03065, babnik, to trade. Vid¢ 805: 
* 03, babwai, same as 3, q.2. ; } 
* excogS, babwai.lwen, in due course, in regular course, in regular 
order, successively. Vide 93sog&n : ee , 
es), bama, to suckle. Cf. 002, esedd, &, edi 
o9209, bama tah, same as ooo 
wg bamey, to suckle. 
» bamau, to suckle. 
pe bamau tah, to suckle. 
eg:, bamnah, a brahmin, probably from Sanskrit, brahmana. Vide gz 


x & &F & 


PARTI] | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 191 


* 086, 85, bawuih, bwuin, to surround ; cf. Haswell in 3 iS Cf. 
_ Burmese,..9&:, “wuin? (pron, wain’). | 
* ee bahek, fear; to fear; to frighten; 060 9, cogooo5i 
* eed, babat, a’ ‘measure; to measure. Cf. Haswell in ¢og205 ee08, a 
“measure; 93808... aozoJeoo5—“ the great ocean... which is 
measureless,” ae (A),. folio ku. Vide oo5i acts 
va, Buddha, the Buddha; in some compounds, abbreviated to. 08, 
budh: ice o 
* ce5, bok, a companion, companions; follower, “partisan ;. tribe, clan; 
class, kind;  o§ cBjo§ cod 89288038" some ‘persons, who- were 
_ followers of the heretics,” Dhd. 159. 18; ¢gg:§§o§ce5q—‘‘ (of) what 
is termed ‘ Buddha,’ there are four sede! Dhd. 34. 12... Cf. goSu 
* geo8cooc§os, bodhiyapaluih, the spot around the Bo tree, Vide oo§ody _ 
t 95, bnat, measute, scale, standard ; size, extent, quantity, the exact 
quantity; the derived meanings are:. about (so much, ‘so big, etc.) ; 
so (much, long, etc.);-it is equivalent to the Pali, matta and mattam, 
at the end of compounds; ccobgodel8oj—‘‘during the measure of 
two or three days, to the extent of two or three days” = for two 
or three days, Sudh.- 4. 21; BgoSq$oor—“ knowing the measure or 
extent or standard, of others virtues,” Dhd. 59 73 g08 por 8—" the 
quantity of 1,000 persons,’ one thousand persons, S.B. 16; 9080 
_ .8&3—“ the extent or measure, of so much,”: this much, so much, 
about so much, Dhd. 299. 11, equivalent to Pali: ettaka’ (Dham- 
mapadaatthakatha, 293) ; a the measure ‘of that,” that much, 
so much,. about so much,” Dhd. 48. 5; $igoSoacg—* more than (9) 
the old measure,” more than bafore, much more, S.J. (A) 37. The 
form goS, cnat, is also found at Sudh. 28. t5. . 
gc, bnuh, a spear. ¢go05u 
805, bnik, merchandise, goods. 
g:, bnah, a brahmin. g:{¥, a brahmini, brahmin woman. Cf, eg 
* (5, bray, rain; this is a 16th century form; the modern form is @u 
+ @, bru, to make a noise, to sound; to resound, be sounded, etc. 
{¥, brau, a woman. | 
_* (Soos9/§, brau fiah dun, “a woman of the city,” a citizeness. 
* (¥88§, brau mimin, a nurse, Vide 8881 
yd, blaai, young; a young man. 


192 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA ENOL, Ht 


¢ 3)05, bluik, to sink; to destroy; be destroyed. 


mp 


we EF op 


we RO 


Pa 


ge3, bwak, a follower, the follower of a person of rank; from #95, by w 
infix. Haswell, cooodn . . 

paBoos, bwak kar2u, same as ¢odi 

>, bwai; for full explanations see plaque tog. Cf. v, eb, BQu 

Rosas, bwai tarah, in cetail, in full, 7 EXPenss, 

Go0:; bwai dacah, against (the wind, water, etc.}. 

Ea01p0, wal i poe kya, against the wind. 

2803, bwai daih, toward, towards (the east ete.}. 

a06, Owai dhaw, snaar se to the Law,” rig tieousiy 

2, bwai bwai, same as 

BycegS, bwai bwai lweh, same as ehsacSs 


aioe bwuik, .in circumference; 0, @ circumference. C7 
Haswell, oo805, circumference. 


* 893, bwal euhah outside, without (direction’, . 
Sac0§05, bwai aluik, accordingly, owing to, of one’s own accord, Vide 


4 ae 
ww 


% 
™ 


3 


seotodu 


bhava, a state of existence, existence. 


Shaw.ak, follower. Vide godu 


, dha, monastery. f@/1, vihara. 
%$, bhau, existence, state of existence; dwelling, world. Paz, bhava. 
0, ma, first—a verbal assertive particle corresponding to the Burmese, 


oop; in this sense the sentence is generally ended by q or sq, two 
emphatic assertive particles; but itis also often used by itself; 
2989 8aa28605008-—"! thus (as shown above) the sub-commentary explains 
it), hd. Ba. 2s oy)... oof BofgosedeosaG Sea$08 gqodhquogoSar08 
mGaodaqSc}o03—" the Blassed Buddha . . . with reference to the laymen 
who observed the nig beanie and the sabbath, told the Bhiri- 
datta-jataka,” S.B. 1; the first o before 59§ = “who.” do)Soon3c00$9 
§ Goo mySeho8 8 ooh yee ae only in the city of Safikassa, do the 
Blessed Buddhas come down from Tavatirhsa,” Dhd. 63. 6; 309 
vpgefogolaazco.gu cdcgdego§ spohogs gocos$—" in. this fifth instruction, 
he taught (this) one statement,’ U.O.i<. 23. 9. In interrogative 


‘sentences, the sentence ends with cop, the interrogative particle, and 


© remains equivalent to the. Burmese, 299, in its abbreviated form 
before the interrogative particles coor and 3953; that is, o . . . cop 
== Burmese, . . . 206003, . . . oosabs; gojodgscte cyOSeep—" why are 


PARTI]. | TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 193 


you fleeing ?”, ‘Sudh. 14.14; @sllozd>007|Seep35— where, Sir, do you 
come from?”, Sudh. g. 3. ©, as an.assertive, is most often used with 
-g.and ccp&, two emphatic assertive particles closing sentences, which : 
are the equivalents of the Burmese, cogS: and co05, so thato.:. q, 
'o,.. 6S = Burmese, .. , cocog§s, .. « 200008 ; Ba9r0504 corSaon23008)8 
soobQodfogeaqnaffe—“ the king,. seeing (this), gave many gifts to 
‘those four warriors,” Sudh. 23. 4; ° cgocped og 05[Ygo§8soq—* O, king,: 
this little girl was my mother,” Sudh. 9. 14; oScosaaSofcoroGSooscep& 
—‘people praise: patience,” U:0.K. 44. 6; Qod§ddoa109/§ cop&E—" for 
this reason I_had.to come,” :Sudh. 9. 6. ‘Bicond it is a’ participial 
particle ; it forms participial nouns ; og3:, the purifying, purification 
= Pali, vodanath, P.T.; ©935q3j, the being righteous, righteousness, - 
“6, St.; - aGogodeo08, - the ees: Fay abusing, -P.T.; of§& B, ‘the. making 
known, informing, P.T. ; 9} oc805,° at the time af going cut, when 
he or I went. out; oe in the ‘going, while ‘going ; “syoqd oog/§ BS 
‘from Buddha’s arriving,” Sudh. 1g. 7. [tis also much used as-a 
‘connective particle, and is nearly equivalent 1 to a relative: who, which, 
that ;oloSeoScooBuce BooSaa—" the. relic resting. in the Mahiyadgana 
cetiya,” Sudh. g. 4; REcoeBo8oc8—" according to the words which. 
our lord (Gavathpati) spoke,’ Sudh. g. 11; BaleGcdoo§—" earth of 
“the place which the rhinoceros ate,” that is, earth from the place 
where. the rhinoceros ate, Sudh. ‘fo. 16; . eQ80 ood§jeo:—“ a person 
~ who eats the debts of others,” that is, one who lives. by. borrowing, 
A.V. 12 (adhamanna) ;  sooo$ 63006 008 Bas —". the deva. who drives 
‘Indra’s chariot,” A.V. sed (Matali) ; aa0§5iRo80q1—" having reached 
the age which is clever,” or, ‘of cleverness = the age of reason, Dhd. 
145. 17; _ cogenjorporaS off EcBsnooSea0g3/§y$—“. Omniscience, which 
‘grasps (everything) without indistinctness (= thoroughly),”. Dhd. 
_ 30. 24. From some of the above examples it will be seen that. o 
may also often be translated by a present participle.  From_ its: 
- quasi-relative use, © is also used.to form adjectives; words such as 
‘the following are often. met with in the dictionaries :—oe0jo5, wet;. 
of, excellent ; RE, many. 5 ose5, great, large; o9§, firm, steady. ° 
-_ 9, ma, father. is er 3 i . 
* 0, ma, you, your, Sir; also: fellow, “chap”; Gs00070Sao26ep—" why, Sir, 
do you steal my: cattle?”, S.M. 43. Gos Fd BoS§acos 07. 5a02—"' the 
owner of the bullocks said, ‘that fellow . has ‘stolen away my 


a5 


194 | EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ [vou i 


t 


* 


% 


* 


Saat ad 


bullocks,’ ” SM. 4; $0g— this cattle of yours,” S.M. 4; o§en 028% 
", —you, fellow! this hen... ,” S.M. 8 Cf. ga 
gi, fe ah ‘piepery: ‘ma gah, if, used by itself at the end of the 
clause, and also in conjunction with 008 or co8q, 008 being placed at 
the beginning and gs at the end of the clause (wide 05); it means 
also literally; called, named; hence = to wit, namely; cogoo8g 
003—“ Sudhammayati, to wit: Sadhuim (Thatén),” . Sudh. Iz. 16; 
god 0898 agigs ayScop— why did he receive the name, to wit, 
‘Buddha?’”, Dhd. 30. 7; it is also used emphatically, to lay a 
stress on ‘the preceding word; ojopsdaqé[o} gaqeolocogecg|S 9/§8p8 o8coa 
—‘Sir, will the Buddha’ Maha-Gotama come to our city?”, Sudh. 


12. 25. 
gg, mgah wwa’, what is termed ...., what is called, in regard 
to ..., is often’ strongly emphatic and need not be actually 


translated ; s00lge Grac§eooSanagolguicogiyrasscobyhofSsc02$q—" in regard 
te hell, if once one as (into it), very difficult it is to get free 
again,” U.O.K. 14. 

a8, mgah gah, ‘same. as e. These two expressions are equivalent to 
the Burmese, .cqoogpoon, hii safi ka® 

offo§05, Majjhimaduih, Majjhimadesa, or the Central Region, the 

: region in India where the Buddha’s mission was accomplished. 

06, maf, to wait; to watch over, take care of; to observe. 

o& maf, the red deer. Cf; Burmese, 98 saman; Old Talaing,. ae8, 
raman, | _ 

e693, mah blaai, a young man. Vide y> | | 

0&3, mafi mai, to watch over, take care of. Vide du 

08%, mah mwai,: same as o&dr | 

005, mat, the eye. 


-eaoS, manat, to be angry; see mdac, plaque No, 180, 


oojo, ma twah gah, literally = “said,” that is' to say, to wit, as 
fallcie corresponds to the Burmese, cyoocop§n accom gi$ora09$ (goo o 
oRor caogggest ascoaoe2, ete.—''the hosts of Mara are five-fold, as 
follows: Mara the god, passions, etc.” 

00382, ma. twah pegah, same as’ 20301; this expression is found in 

~ Inscriptions of the 15th and 16th centuries. : 

o§, man, M6n, the M6n or Talaings ; also found written eed and coo$n 

ocpos, marat = ocph = maharaja, great king, king, your Majesty. Cf. 
Haswell, 092051 


PARTI] | -TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 195 


—0$, masun, five. a ; 
* ccoval, mahajan, the people. .Pa/i, mahajana. 
eo, ma, Mara. _ | one | 
- o2, ma, to suckle. Vide 02, ced, di | . _ | 
* oo, ma, a particle meaning: as. to.., as te». . it is as follows, with 
regard to... , as regards... , concerning . . . ; this is probably 
a loanword (fei the Burmese, 92; mha, anil is often found so: 
written; s08gloSg2—" as to the meaning it is as follows,”. Dhd. Io. 9; 
a8gloSe2, Dhd. 302. 28; s8gldoloogoo—“‘the meaning of this 
stanza is as follows,” S.J.-15.- It also shows a present contingency — 
with reference to the future, and is conditional and emphatic; it 
corresponds to the Burmese, og&oo2:, qoors,, lhyan ka’*, ma kai; 
_ opode§osBoo—" if you wish to know,” Sudh. 27. 8. | 
+ 8, mi, mother; it is also used as a term of euttee to women: madam, 
| ladies, miss. 7 | 
8§, min, to hear. | 
8§, mi, harpoon. Cf. Burmese, 9, m hin’, 
Ft Ba 288, micchaditthi, having false views, ‘heretieal, a heretic. © 
* 805, mit, a friend. Pad, mittam. 
* 89, mitah, a nurse, | 
* 83° mini, a-nurse; a maid. _ 
* 88§, mimin, a nurse; an ayah. 
* 88§edj, mimin bamau tah, a nurse. 
* 80009,-mi bama tah, a nurse’ 
* Beéoj, mi bamau tah, a nurse. sg” on 3 
+9, muk, the face; hence: in froiit, RelOees -at; also, one side (of 
| a flat thing). Cf. Pali, mukna.. 
* gadeno8, nuk kew, to have a bright, pleasant, feed see 
- gogol, mukkhaw4, the face, countenance. Cf. Pali, mukha. 
t 905, the end, of anything ; nose; aiso cosoh) 
@ ma, an interrogative, what?, the sentence ending with oe wh. 
cep, wherefrom . . . ?;) gil... cop, in what place,:-.. ?; ¢ 
. ap, how much. .°. ?, iss written o8 and 98 
* 3, oer . look, look at, behold the more’ common form now is 3; 
| itis not generally used as a.verb by itself, but as the second member 
of compounds, after verbs of “looking, considering, thinking, are , 
anne care of, sete, : aie much like the Burmese, (9, ' krafi 


106. _.:.. EPIGRAPHIA’ BIRMANICA’ [VvoL: 1 


* d, mai, to have, possess ; generally not used. by itself, Hii with te 
negative co = 3.(y.v.); vide 
* 3, mai, one; the common form. is a SGiaLt os" tke ‘a man 
with (only) one eye,” . Dhd.’. 54. 
6&, maf, a gong; cf. Burmese, cor, moa. 
-g:, mah, without, otitside. | 
§08,, mnih, a man, sometimes found written 308, mnis. /é/z, manussa. 
* SoSo0g05, mnih.kamlat,: “man-thief,” a thief. Se 
gil, mnum, who has, which has, having; an abbreviation. of o{ug[ode3, et 
- cetera, and so forth, and other . . . ;: ogg g[ccd.f en o88gh—flowers, 
fried grain (eo) and other. ching prope ees — ie for oblation, 
A.V..6 (aggha), 
g?, mnah, thou, you. 
(G08, mramaw, fragrance, perfume. 
* (08, mramaw, benefit, profit, advantage ; (j¢028. Vide sou 
* 953, mlak mwai, to look, look at, Cf. Haswell, gSoo5u 


+ 3,-mwai, to look, look at; one, 1. “See-under 8; only, aloné ; cur8a008g0 
§o$c050928258q—“ only the Bodhisattva could answer their questions,” 
S.B. 113. comegg—he alone, S. B. ig; -as for; .': 3 Baas for 
me, S.B. 12. 


* & mwai, to have, possess ; not used by itself in this Sense ; but only in 
the négative: co}, oggn Vide &, cQu 

“* go, mha, same as 09, third, g.v. ; 

g2Qo5, mha smit, the great ocean the sea, Pali, mahasamudda, 

* oo, yaw, if; stands at the beginning of the clause ; it is often followed 
“by the ‘slightly emphatic 9, -@8q ; and in ‘this form,” has been 
registered by Haswell; it’ is’ often reinforced by’ the other condi- 
tional, gt, which comes at (he énd of the clause, thus giving oS 

prior Sq 2... gt; wd§oos§—very well, Zt, “if it be like 
that, ” equivalent to the Pali tena im, Dhd. 160.. 23; this expres- 
“* sion is’ very frequent: 

* /-e9c00005, yassapat, fame, renown, honour, bajoyment, ° bliss. Probably 
from Pali, yassa, patti: - : 

* 00, ies if; its uses are like those of oS, so that we have 059, ood 

: - 8, wodq . g, 
‘Oo; yal tiviess; sicknéss'; ‘to be ill. Generally siictiued to. names of 
~ °. ‘sicknesses, as &o}, inflammation ; Qos, a swelling, ete. © ~ 


PART i] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 107 


* DoS, yai- pimah, grief ; sorrow, - 
“+ 200205, yok, to raise, lift up, promote, exalt ; the more common form is 
ar 
+ cooocksal, 'yok dok, same as GO0305 ; osagndBoo§§ovas Seal! he ‘promoted 
the Lord’s religion,” Dhc, 151. 26; the more common form is oo5 
Boi 
¢ oo, yah, to shine, give light ; to-morrow, at “dawn ; . canfeooo 8S sor0§ 
“at dawn, all the four pandits,” S. M. 30.5 
008, yah, an emphatic ‘closing particle ; o§cBcooa0c8co1—she, ‘swooned, SJ. 
| 155, 8 Sooo} qoor—" our king has become a monk,” S.J. (A) 61; it 
is somewhat akin to q and ¢cpS (7.2), but is more emphatic. 
cora0, yah gata, the morrow. Vide oo 
‘805 and o§oS§o5, yuik and yuik. duik, same as. ‘eos8; “eooSes, Gd. 
ol, ymu, a name 
* oojcgo, ymu yma, a name. 


b, ya, any, whatever, who or what... soever. a 
03, ywa', yes; sign of the vocative = 0! as. used in addressing ‘persons, 
“0, king, etc. ” : 


t a, ra, an assertive closing particle ; ‘it often stands instead of the rere 
““to be”; 2§8q—'I am the king” ;. epoBaocdgasgcRa5q— Sirs, 
. this jewel is-my (jewel),” Sudh. 19. 3; .it is a sign of the impera= 
tive; it is also slightly emphatic, and is often used in the middle of 
a senience laying a stress on what precedes, but not closing the 
sense of. the whole sentence as it does when used as an assertive 
closing particle ; — a36000$0 8cBqo58 098 a050988qn_oo.co08 coo—'' my. son 
Bhiridatta gave us this jewel, is it not?”, S.B. 23; Goda$Zotghogé 
: a0 209 §qiooo0q/E |aaggec4 0{qa—"‘ because he.-was. born on the-.shore of 
the sea, they gave him the name of ‘Sagara-Brahmadatta, ” SB. 4, 
the same slightly emphatic stress. is found in such frequent expres- 
sions as voSq, if; o3q, if;  olg, if; -when;- mae if, indeed’ if, 
although, etc. | 
+ 995, rat, a precious thing,.a precious stone, a jewel; as an adjective, 
magnificent, splendid. | | at 
*  spanr{od, kajagruih, the city of Rajagaha (Pali); es the Sanskrit, 
Rajagrha. : . | 
* 88, risi, an anchorite, Sansfrit, rsi. 


198 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA — [vou. 11 


+ 98, rufa, shed, booth, ats building ; of. Burm., ‘ ruth, shed, booth, 
godown; 4, rum’, court-house. | 
* oo, ref, to carry, convey; wear. . 
* cq&o/$, rea tlun, .to bring, Ut. “to carry and come? 
ep, ro, the sign of the indirect question, Area: an answer. other than 
“yes” or “no.” Vide con 
¥ eopS,-rof, a sign of the future; it is used also in all the senses of =) 
(g.v.), except, perhaps, the last. 
* 4, rau, way, manner, fashion, wise; 49, in this manner, thus; like, as; 
{8oqg4—rlike the earth, Dhd. 54. 25; 4{c2086—like Tavatiina, 
Dhd. 16. 7; at U.O.K. 35. 10, it translates the Pass, yatha, 
g, rdf, to look, look at, behold. 
* 96, ran mwai, to take care of; to look, look at, behold: 
qt, rah, the country; a country ; kingdom. 
G6, ruin = g& 
805, ruih, every ; 90805, dd. 
cood},, lak pluai, hitting with the fists, boxing. 
codecs, lak batak, upside down, 
* cooy$, lak yan (pron. laksan), a mark, sign, characteristic. Sanskrit, 
laksana. 
* codl, lagam, to step, go, walk. 
og, coo, Ica, laca, a lake, 
00g, gat, lata, Ita, above, over, upon. ~ 
co9S, ladath, ladam, to pacify, calm, quiet; subdue; eeateea 
* @FemarsmareBanseodqic} 6A5q)5—" one day, the districts rebelled ; the 
minister went, pacified them and returned to the capital, ” Dhd.. 
159. 5. 
o§, lan, to go. about, wander, itinerate ; - ceo baBq—" ‘he caused the 
gong to go about,” he proclaimed by beat of gong, S.B. 10 = Ja 
VI, 167. 23, bherirh’ carapesi. 
_ &, Ipa, do not, don’t ; often abbreviated to ‘on 
00, lapah, a wave. 
095, 1 pik, to divide lengthwise, to halve ;. to tear or cut open. 
co§o, lapuik,. to be torn out, uprooted; to tear out, tear off, -root out. 
cofo5, la buit, to cast, throw, fling. C/. Haswell . = “a stone’s throw. ‘si 
coo$, laman, ‘to invite. Cf. oofs 
* oo805, fod, lamit, Imit, to create. Vide $BcSe 


* + 


* 008, 


“ 


ee He * 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 199 


a 


* 


+ 


* 


*x 


co8o5y08, lamit bdah, to create; Vide B8o5gosn 
cogé, lamnafh, breadth, width; across, crosswise, athwart. 
covo05, layat, to touch; strike: 
co§35, larui’, to cry, screech, scream. Vide 3998, sccpou | 
coed, cocoS, lalarh, lalam, to be appeased, soothed, quiet, settled; to 
cease. Vide cadn 
co, law, to put, to place, keep, settle; it is not altogether, as Haswell 
has it, ‘a euphonic suffix”; it is vefy often used as an auxiliary 
after an active verb, though it is very difficult to make its exact 
meaning perfectly understood ; ‘this will, however, become clear to 
persons acquainted with Burmese, when | say that it corresponds 
exactly to the Burmese verb com, tha®, when similarly used. It 
seems to imply that the action expressed by the preceding verb has 
been done, and that, in so far, it is settled; the following literal 
translations may perhaps help in catching the idea: wood, “he 
noted (in his mind) and epi”; 88c08—“we heard and kept”; 
ag2$ coS—"he asked (about something) and kept”; 098 ago ce 
co§— the good deeds which you have done and kept.” 
law kuiw, let; coS0¥§q—let it be !; coSc$cow:6092—let him first go 
back to-morrow, G. pi. g; QoSso20}g2g3/$Qa0d10§$§cof0§q—having died, 
let him be reborn in the four hells!, Dhd. 18.2. Let alone, don’t 
mention ; gRagiSohg coSo¥q—let alone this continent of Jambudipa 
(implying : not only in this continent of Jamheeips: but even also 
in the other three), S.J. 25. 
cosaoS, la-’eh, patience, long- suffering ; ees | thid. Khanti, Pak. 
coo, lap, gain, receipts; gift. Pai, labha. | 


089 


co2S00002, lap sak, a present, gift. Pdé/s, labha, sakhara. 


Scr, liyah, the morrow. 

oqo5, lukau, during. | 

695, lup, to enter, go in. Cf. coords | | 

coo, le, also, and. C/ Burmese, oopds, 1a fi” (pron. é°, and in colloquial, © 
18). Vide coo8s 

cof, lef, to be destroyed, lost; effaced. 

ac0&8105, lef bluik, to be destroyed, lost, obliterated. — 

e005, lep, to be skilled in, know, understand ; to-be accustomed to. 

coo8, lew. also, and; scon 


200 _. EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [VoL 1 


ceoss, ccd, le’, a stick, staff. . — 

6009, lo, to roll over and over. , 

¢ ccoom, loka, the world;. the people; pertaining to the world; worldly. 
Pali. | | a 

* ccoomsolooog, loka wohdra, a common or colloquial expression, as used 

by the people at large. Pal7. | | 

coor, lot, to fall down. _ 

~gcor0008, to roll over and over, round and round. Vide 0008, ogdu — 

stor, lon,.to go beyond; to exceed ; hence: very, very much, 

. _ extremely. C7, Burmese, 098, Iwan; 11th century Burmese also 
Wrote ccorys . 
t oe lop, to enter, 6 ‘in. Vide oo&u. 
lah, ‘flat. 

t “85, luik, to come up, rise, arise, appear. 

* God ghi8, liik ktuiw, to come up, arise, appear, originate. 

* oGoScor, luik lau, same as oQodu . 

of, ‘lmim, one thousand. 

+ og, liu, to be lonely, solitary; to have eee bé enipty-handed, be 
empty; be deprived of, be without; 09 ccgiso2giS—“'a body: 
become lonely of its head,” Jepaved of its head, A.V. 57 
(kabandha); cegi—empty-handed, L.B.C. 28. 14; — 9[SogSc08053 

“ qoSoq|so0q—"' Tavatirnsa was full, and hell became empty,” S.M. 2; 
-G. pi. 4 has the couplet, ogjoa$, with the same meanings. 

&, lauiw, some. 

0, Ima, a hunter. 

* 805, Imit, to create. Cf. $808 ) 

* GoSyo, Imit bdah, to create. Cf, $8oSyotr 

* coi, |mu, a crest, diadem. 

-* 60398, Imow, to incline, bend, stoop; to incline in mind, feel inclined to, 

Of. 30028: 

+ cogs, coor, lyah, layah, light; ray; sunbeam; from oo:, to shine. 

* co Iwen, regular, successive, in succession;. order, sequence, regular 
order. Cf. Haswell, oo, §cogéu 

ol, wa, time; one time, three times, etc.; of; Sl, many times, repeatedly, 

+ olodoleS, wat gat, very difficult; a quarrel; to quarrel; ‘dispute; 00SoloS 

oloSofcogoo(—"' picked up a quarrel with the Buddha,” Sudh. 66, 14. 


® 


+ 


PART 1] | TALAING PLAQUES: ON THE ANANDA 201 


* 8995, wiskaw, the fig tree. Cf Haswell, 8: 
cof, wen, to play; to gamble, | 

* coS, wen, to avoid, eschew; hence: to except ;. yoQcoSeo} ggoQoS—" the 
avoiding of eyil deeds,” Dhd. 54. 3. Bathe 4, 

* cof, wen, to go about, wander, roam; to ramble, go for a walk; to go 
to; to visit;  BBoSao2c0&QaBo5fLog>—"1 will first go home,” 

Sudh. 3. 18; 07j&0&§}—“ come and visit us, it is not far,” S.B. 

25: | 

* co&, wef, in vain, to no purpose, for. nothing; (gSecao5008 oficoBp9t003. 
—‘‘having amassed property, shall I give-it for nothing to them?”, 
G. pi. 14. a. 

* coosd, Wesantaw, King Vessantara. 

+ 805, wuit, to forget; to swoon. 


+ 9, wwa’, this; can often be translated by ‘“the”; is often simply a sign 

| of the nominative case. 

* o0, sa, as a verbal prefix, very often denotes, fist, the future, for exam- 
ples see under plaques 64 and 85; it séems to be an attenuation ‘of 
the old prefix o&; s(a) is also used on the Ananda plaques and 
Pagan inscriptions with a future sense, and is very common. in 
the modern literary language, in which we find also the form 48, 
si. Second—It has also sometimes a causal sense (O.T. «), for 
instance, g§o5, ‘‘ cause to sleep,” to put asleep; 3, “to cause to 
know,” to make known, tell, inform’; og, “to cause to do or make”; 
agsoo§, “to cause to return,’ to send back, ete: Third—Very 
often, it does not appear, from the context, to have any particular 
force or sense; 69, kerh, to hold, or 9g}; 02, to say, or og; 80, 
to descend, or o§o5; &§, to sew, or &; 805, to sleep, or od; a4, 
must, or ogt; 005, to press, squeeze; shampoo, or 2905, also cocoled, 
etc, It is the context alone, therefore, which reveals. the future, 
causal or mere accretion; in word. for word translations from the 
Pali, this prefix, 0, 08, is most frequently used: to render a Pali 
future, and o (= <4) often a causative verb. Fourth—In many 
words, it is not a prefix, but- an integral part of the word, in which 
cases the oo has, in colloquial, become oo, -h, or been dropped 
altogether: 22, house (collq. 03), with the further loss of ¢; <8, to 


- 26 


208 -EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA. ~ fvon. 1 


take sieasires in, be happy, sleep (collq, <8) ; 2 copper (collq. 
ch); 93, a leaf (collq.:og).? 
0005, sak, to be without, be destitute, of, almost always followed by © 
(with) = ov0%09, osBlu 
t agseoS, skalen, to cause to ‘return. or go back. - 
* 3, ska’, grey (of the hair); used only in the compound ; soo5g}, grey hair. 
+ 05, skit, to bite, will bite. Cf Burmese, o§o5, kuik (pron. £a??). 
t og305, sket, to take, will take. . 
tt og% sketh, to grasp, take in the hand, clinch ; colloquial, cS, kem,- 
tt cgi, sketh tai, to grasp; grasp, grip; power, influence, control; §§ 
caor§ oqSsoreqioeG0GoS§—" although the son 1 had gone into the power 
of death,” Dhd. 12. 8. . 
tt og (08, ‘sgut, to be cut, cut of ; to. cease, come to an end; to be scarce; 
what is cut, cut off = an interval to judge, sentence, condemn to, 
‘pass a verdict. - | 
it op 8ago08, sgut sw&t, to be cut; to cut; be scarce ; to decide or 
settle a question, a doubt,. a‘case at law. we 
ops, sgah, to say. 
t 009, sagwa’, to get, obtain. See ander Qu cogin 
oS san, a monk the monks as a body, the clergy ; an abbreviation at 
next. 
* ‘cond, saaaha the clergy. Pali 
. 085, safiruih, to help, aid, assist, as a king a subject; or a monk a 
: layman, in accepting an offering of food, etc., so that he (the layman) 
may acquire merit thereby ; BO cp tess S008 BoSeg 1g Bory —! the king, | 
saying, ‘I will assist: this pannnin ” Dhd. 96. 13 ;. ecocor§$o8 . 
9h 99RIRGOASABaERS Seaqr—" the thera ‘Sariputra (saying), on 
person shall I assist to-day ?’”, Dhd. 96.24. From the Sansé&rit, 
sahgraha. Cf, Burmese, 2," sangruih. . . 
+ 03, sca, to eat, will eat. | | 
+ 805, scih, to descend, go down; ‘will descend. 
" + Gogod, see hi, same as oQosn eS 
+ fé, sjit, to sew. 
1 Under this letter, Oo “ayards which, in Haswell, do not appea'-wich the prefix 00, but wide 
the simple form only, are marked. with a dagger (t) ; those that are not registered at all are marked 


- as before with an asterisk (*)5 and those that appear. in Haswell with the prefix, or under which 
T have registered new meanings, are marked with two daggers... 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 203 


0008, sat, a fruit; to bear fruit. 
o00S, sat, a living being. Pda@/z, satta. 

* oooh, sat chu, a fruit; also, wg), sacchu. 

tt 833, stan, to dwell, abide, remain; to be worth, to cost; a worm, 
caterpillar. : 

_ p08, stik, to lie down, sleep; put to sleep. 
83], stu, the right, as opposed to the left; sometimes also, oy, tur. 
* Bicd, stuit, very, very much, exceeding, exceedingly. 
%:, sdah, must, obliged to; will have to. 

Tt ogl, saddha, faith;- kindly feeling ; to have faith; to ‘hee 8 kindly 
feeling, Palz, 
oo$co2§, santhan, form, the human form, oe person, Pali, etic 

+ 0, spa, to do, make; will do; cause to do. 

* sod, Sapaw, a garuda beutind, suparna; Old Talaing, supar. 

tt cosvlo5, sapot, to. press gently with the hand; to press; squeeze; 
shampoo,’ massage. Vide oodn | 

t 0805, sapuik, to’ pull out, tear out; will pull out. 

—* cog8o5, sapparuih, a good, virtuous man. /a/z, sappurisa. 

* of8o5, sapruih ‘(rth century) = aogQod | 

* conS sabhamn, a festival; cf. Burmese,. o0c0&% 

* ooooSec§, sabhan leh, a nautch. | 

0099, sambh§&, consort, ‘husband or wife. 

tt a2005q00, samahratha,. to be able, be capable of, competent to. “ to 
can.’ Sanskrit, samartha. I have not yet met with the meaning 
given by Haswell, “to consult together, to reason together.” 

* oo08, O98, samah, smah, like, the same, as, as if * 

* o918, samlua, high; something high; “yRBcooqanglSacnSoohoogyBBog 8— 
“some went up on something high. and threw .themselves down cn 
harpoons ‘and swords,” Dhe. 150. 23; $4 §ooge9] 30285 ogoog ER— 

“thence, the Buddha arrived at a high hill,” Sudh, AT. 19. 

* osgié, samluf, the head. Vide oc, goc&u 

oo§, sar, medicine; physician. Vide oof — : 

* oo9°5, sarak, to scratch, as a match; to scratah, with a style, stick, etc., 
to draw a line. Hasivell, oq08, Cf. oacti 

* ooo, sara, a deed, act, work. Vide ~ oocp5s, the ae /Talaing i 1S 
sinran. 


* 


of _ EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA = [VoL 


* woGcl8, sarah pap, an evil deed, an act of demerit. Vide oocpdal&: 

| Pali, papa, evil, bad. | 

* ooopS, saram, same as oog&u 

+t copSolS, sardm pap, same as ooqEold: 

* 93, sardai, a soldier, warrior, A.V. 192 (yodha) ; 09303, a warrior 
fighting from a chariot, A.V. 194 (rathanika). Cf. Burmese, 4, 
sirai. | te 

* 90805, saruith, to fall, fall off; fall down, as fruits or leaves from trees. 

208, saw, low; to be low, not high, 

* 5, saw, medicine, . drug; physician, doctor; 002 §, “a master of 
medicine,” a physician, A.V. 106 (tikicchaka) ; 0084/9, an old (41) 
physician, Dhd. 72. 6; . cog2$<08, to practise as a doctor; to 
doctor; to physic, Dhd. 172. 7 i 7 

t7 <§, ocd, sah, to untie; to answer. 

20093, sahaai, a4 companion, friend, Pa@/z, sahaya. 
3, $-a, to go; will go. 

tt g, s-ah, to be clear, be clean; to cleanse; to purify. 

* 299, $4, to ‘lay, put, place. 

tt 08, sak, colour; form, appearance; kind, category. 

0059, sak gah, “that kind,” lke that, thus. 
oS, sik wwa’, “this kind,” like this, thus. 

* 8-3, sik, why? for what reason? how? what? generally followed by 
0, 9 or of; S2ko8 008§ cap how doing (= how) did we get 
this (king) ?, S.J. 6:. 

* 8.5, sik, to stuff, cram, compress, make compact. Cf. Burmese, 086, 

sip (pron. the’&). | 

&e:, siggah, what do you say?- how do you say? SoS 3 e3, with 
assimilation 

og, sindhau, belonging to Sind, of Sind; a horse of Sindh; these horses 
were very much prized in ancient India, Pali, indore cgobf, 
a horse of Sindh. 

_* £586, sip glip, to attend respectfully on. 

* o8, si, a prefix denoting the future; see under oo: 

—™* eagles, sujjat, a jataka story; an assimilation of cgodac0o5 = Pals, 

sutta, discourse, and jataka. 

* soodaoos, sut Jat, see last. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 205 


* cof, seh, true; to be true, Dhd. 362. 10, L.B. 28. 14 
co5, sok, the hair of the head, | 
* codg3, sok ska’, grey hair; cooSosr 
* coon, soh, to pour; the more. common form is $5; 15th century 
inscriptions have sgoc5, sroh, and the modern oa is very 
near it: o§05, caruih, both with ~ infix. 
tt So, suik, happiness, well-being; to be easy, happy, douiforishlas Boao 
esnlicdegi bcd apd 4 friend who is the same in happiness, the 
same in trouble,” a friend in need, a friend indeed. Cf. Haswell 
under 805. Vide Goducoc$o5, is the same word with.oo (Old Talaing 
probably 84 or 84), prefix; 05 =. Pals, -sukha. 
—* 88, suin, to build; also with ry infix, (§8\6;- also written e928, Dhc. 
149. 13. 
* o8§ suin, the pandit Senaka. 
tt 93, suim, with; often joined to a verb by 9, when it forms adverbs 
which may often be translated by ‘‘while ... , tout en... ." & 
8 o§og coog a oe king even ‘teosby while sitting on the 
- elephant’s back... ,” S.J. 37. 
03, suim, all, whole. | 
* o8o5) suih, to pour. Vide cooovdu 
* 805, suih, the chest, breast. Haswell, £8105, sruih, with 7 infix. 
* Qodocfos, suih paluit, to extinguish, put out by pouring water; this 
expression is often used metaphorically. | 
8, sni, house; colloquial, 8v | 
* Rog §ogovos, shi tnunh krakat, a house with superposed roofs sur- 
mounted by a spire, palace; also the harem, seraglio. The 
Shwezigén Bell-inscription (16th cent.) reads: Qoo38GiocS: 
* ooo, shi cat, a place of confinement, jail; collg, 80205; see orodu 
tt Q25, sai dak, water-closet, privy; foeces, excrement; collq. 295 
tt -2, shi, tolook, look at; look for; to look askance, sideways; collq. §, 
hi; the form ¢{ is also found, Vide 2,8, os 
<&d,. shi mai, to look, look at. Vide ou 
&3, shi mwai, same as 40. Vede 
Gogh, shew, same as %; collq. ogi 
09, sna, the French-horn; a squirrel. 
36§05, sna krik, cotton, Vide (ods. 


+ &* F F ¥ 


206 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [vou 1 


09>, sna, the small square piece of leather or mat which the monks used 
to carry with them to sit upon, a seat. 

999, sna, the prefix o> + 32, more commonly written cm> (7.2.).. 

035, snak, a sword. — 

039, - snam, a year; 9d. 

993, snadai, a linchpin Vide 93, opdn 


* oda086, snaal kanhan;. ogd036, ogdoZS, 03536, for all these see gd 


ogdqod§o3, sndai muh ri kwi, “the linchpin at the end of the axle 
of a cart,” simply, a linchpin. © 
9305, o005, smat, samat, small, young; a child’ 


9 05fg, smat brau, a young woman, a girl: 


ao, smah, to be. the same, be equal to, be the same as. 
298, smaw, under. 
3602, smaw ky a, the north. 


<; sma, a craftsman, a worker in, one skilful in any craft or art; not 


_used.alone, but. placed before the word descriptive of the craft ; 

also written, g>. Cf. Burmese, 023, sama’. 

9266, sma jmin, “one skilful in’ stitching,” a tailor. 

992§, sm4n,. to ask (about something), enquire; a question, enquiry, 

232$.29 03, sman smuk, same as og2§u 

§o5, smik;. to wish, desire; colloquial, 8%, mik, 

§oig, smik gwa’, “to desire to obtain,” to wish, desire; also used for 
the infinitive: to, in order to; colloguial, 854, mikgwa’, 

8o5, s mit; to dedicate ; to stroke, touch.. 


' 8, smin, a king; prince; governor. 


- 


* 


9988, smin ’In, “King Indra,” the god he 
6g§, sran, shore, bank. Also o0& and i ? 
6§$, sran, silver; money. cov 

305, srit, a rhinoceros. o8cbs. — 

c(aj203, sroh, to pour. Vide coor, ofstu 


fice, sruih, the chest, breast, -o9c5. 


286, -slin, to. delight in, be happy; sleep; .collg. o8& 

a6, slun, high, exalted; to be-high; ajj&a2, to-raise. 

298, sla hy ‘to make’ free, cause to be. free,” to [ree ;. be free, vacant, 
unoccupied ; to bring forth; to be born. ae. 


PART 1] TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 207 


* opta8 4, slah gaw gnau, to bring forth, 
0905, swat, -smail; to be small. Cf. agoSu . 
06, swaw, Indra’s heaven, Tavatirnsa. Sét. svarga. 
* cogoShi8, swek jwuiw, quarrel; to quarrel; = coooSZ6 ivith w infix, 
o, ha, negative particle, no, not. ou 
wo, hat, a cubit, 18 inches. ) ze 
* 3, hmai (properly-ha mai), there is no, , there is not ; a + mai, 
gv. Ris also met with; see 3 
.0o2, ha, sign of the direct question, requiring a 

; answer. - 

* B05, hi dak, see and fot , B .. 

* 89, himu, named, called; to name, call; cooo$YRZecBqaq;q9§8—“‘'a daughter 
called Uttara,” Dhd. 296. 10; 9S %oc8q8g3;—“‘ a city named: Mithila.” 

- ¢¢ coé, heh, an emphatic particle laying stress. on the word, or clause, 
preceding it; cto&, even I, I myself. 

Tt 805, huit, ‘cause, reason; because; matter; circumstances ; result = 
fruit, benefit; old and medieval language, soo05, Pali, hetu; go%8 

. 6p—for what reason? why? c§oSg—for this reason ; odio 
—with reference to. 

* 3§, huin, often abbreviated to §, 2; this word denotes the accusative . 
case, or object. It is eesnealy used in word for word translations 
from the Pali, being placed before the Talaing word which translates 
a Pali accusative. But it is used also in current Talaing, where it 
denotes the ‘object, especially when it cames before the verb, being 
similar in this to §; wQ$sceacSeog;0S09208—" the minister who decided 
cases” =the judge, S.J, (a), folio Aha; 08(Eo9ol §acos$s2000593 
S&o}—‘‘ the king, repeatedly hearing the statement of the minister,” _ 
S.J. (a), folio 4a. | 

cB, huim, to speak, say. 
Sor, huim gah, to say. 

- &%, huim juim, to say, speak, tell. 

o8, hwa’, negative particle, no, not. .©, ha, 

_ tt 005, bat, a measure; to measure; try, test. 

* eoSgoS, bat bnat, measure, extent, dimension; to measure, 

* 02503208, bat knat, to measure, estimate. compute ; also agoSapo05w 

* e585, bat pruin, ‘o measure, measure strength with, vie. 

t “, ban, to braid. 


a: ‘or a “fo” for 


a EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA _ [voL. It 


, ba,. two. 
- bai, one anna, one-sixteenth of a rupee. Cf. Burmese, 0, pal. | 
* et bak, to hoe; to spin, as a top; to peck, as a bird. Cf. Burmese, 


colod, pok, e: | | 
tt 85, buin, though, although; it begins the clause; often o3 is used in 
_ Conjunction with it; 8$ . . . ou . | 


908, buih, cool, cold; to be we] cold. 
+t 9, ba, you (disrespectful); it; fellow; gad, ba ma’, this fellow. 
4, bai, an elder sister. | | aie | 
t goo, bai gama, a nurse. Vide oon. 


PART 1] 


TALAING PLAQUES ON THE ANANDA 


209 


APPENDIX C-2.. 


Under the words which follow, is, in the vocabulary, given grammatical 


information for the most part not in Haswell’s 


‘‘ Grammatical Notes.” The 


words are arranged alphabetically for easy reference. 


go>, used as a verbal auxiliary. 

god, adverb, pronoun. 

§B, a polite form of the imperative. 

oocoo$, verbal auxiliary. 

coooS, expletive. — 

of, verbal auxiliary. 

E26, as a numerat suffix. 

eg>, verbal auxiliary. 

Gj, verbal auxiliary. 

ol, olq, conjunction. 

8, demonstrative pronoun ; accusative 
case before the verb; an emphatic 
article ; nominative ee 

3, verbal auxiliary. 

qo5, verbal auxiliary.. 

@, numeral suffix. 

es, used as an imperative. 

pot, as an interrogative. 

ap, verbal auxiliary. 

o2§, emphatic particle. 

o}, the past tense; a connective = 
Pali, tva; a conjunction; condi- 
tional, —— 

.0$, verbal auxiliary. 

8§, verbal auxiliary. 

933, infinitive. 

§, verbal auxiliary. | 

os, verbal auxiliary; first, before the 
verb; second, after the verb. 


#6, verbal auxiliary. 

#6, verbal auxiliary. 

6906, future. | 

o (e), causal verbal auxiliary; inter- 
rogative; prohibitory. 

o8&, preposition. ‘ 


_ 00, gy, abstract nouns. 
9, forms adverbs. 


o, assertive particle ; participial parti- 
cle; quasi-relative particle ; forms 
adjectives 

©, pronoun; you; Sir. 

g!, conjunction; to wit; emphatic. 

g3Q, conjunction ; -emphatic, 

gt§, same as grgi 

oogos, adverb. | 

oojgs (15th century) = coja 

o>, explanatory - particle. 

%, verbal auxiliary. 


'%, verbal auxiliary; adjective; adverb. 
go om ) 


008, 0089, co8 . . . gt, conjunction. 


_ cos, emphatic cerininal particle. 


9, assertive particle ; imperative ; 

slightly emphatic in the middle of 

a sentence, and after conjunctions 
-and adverbs. 


eopS =-ar 


~~ g adjective ; adverb. 


27. 


210 EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA [ VoL, I 


co8, verbal auxiliary. 08 = oon 
coo, 008, conjunction, adverb. o§, forms adverbs. 
6, article, “ the’; nominative case. e206, emphatic after a noun or a 
so, verbal prefix, future; causative ; clause. 
without special force. o8§, $, accusative. 


c8e3, what? why? how? 


PART gf TALAING PLAQUES GN. THE ANANDA 185 
%, nwath, to b, to have; also $i, num, mostly after prefixes co and on 
¢ co, pa, ta do, make; to cause, in this sense it is widely used as a causal 
prefix in the forms: fa, ~, da and 4 {t is an interrogative = why? 

low P; osgoogodup389scp—" how are the Paccekabuddhas?”, .:.J. 40. 


it is also a prohibitive = do not, and. probably an abbreviation of 
oy, gicdoa32$q—~do not ask!,. S.J. (A), folio fe; o§805—don't forget, 
G. pl. 7. 


* oo8, pak, to throw, fling (water, dust, etc.), Cf. Burm., ooSn 

“stcS pkanh rag, to bear, carry, wear; to carry out, perform, fulfil; to 
rule, govern; in word for word translations, it: very often translates 
Pali dhé@ret?#; 06896008 cooioo§$ co QI—'‘ who wears the 32 great 
characteristics,” Dhd. 30. 25; @&q&co8q ogiqeo—-"‘ fulfilled the two 
gandhuras,” L.B. 2, 1; og&qScoSgoS-—carrying a spear. 

o&, pkau, a flower, Haswell enters this word only as ‘‘ ({ae00$, garland,” 


but has the entry o (colloquial!. To open, as a flower, to blossom, 
to flower; cqvocs—a flowering tree, A.V. 164 (phiulla). 
* go, pkau sau, a flower. Haswell’s entry, ‘‘ooba5, a carver’in wood,” 
I have not met’ with, the usual expression is et 05 659 | 
* a(S, pkau srau = last, with » infix. | 
t osood, pa kom, to bring together, collect, gather, Bod amass ; 4Suco03 
coSofcoSeorw02—"' having amassed property, shall I give it a nothing 
to.them?”, G. pi. 14. 
o$8§ pan mif, to hear, listen to: Haswell, o&3& _ 
pod, pafifia p, a name, appellation, term; to name, call, term; to prepare; 
Pali, pafifiapett. 3 
cpoo, pafifia, wisdom, intelligence, knowledge. Paiz. 
vo, pat, to press with the hand, squeeze. Vide oosolodu_ 
¢ g§, ooo§, ptan, patan, to build; to raise, exalt ; to make firm, ns 
unwavering; to restrain, controle (of the mind, feelings, etc:) ; 
establish; to appoint to an office ; Pie mae ene ee 
“i will exalt you to the state of chief queen,” Sudh, 2-4. 22; goy 
» 033,08 008.099 23 Qodqoooi —“‘ the queen, being unable to control 
her erick "1200: | 
&, ptam, to begin, begin with; et cetera, and’ so forth, and the like. 
Vide Bi | | 2 | 
&, ptath, to fulfil, practise. 


-- 


a 


*. 


24 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA (VOL, i 


3)05, cluik, fo sink; to destroy; be cio 


bwak, a follower, the follower of a person ef rank; from 405, by 2 
infix. Haswell, coocdi . 


* poof, bwak karau, same as godn 
bwai; for fuil explanations see plaque 199. Cf. 9%, ©2, 3Qu 


ATE 


cn °C 
oo ¥F 
ne 


Ne 


DWai Owal, Sainme as gi 


1 : . ms ~ = 4 Ae AAAS, 
ogc, bwai bwai lwem, same as egeoQ5u 


(7) 


co 


A Aa UR CI RR eg ae 


CW ay ay 


‘Ss 


, bwat taradk, in cetail, in full, e2 extenss, 
er dacah, against (the wind, water, etc.}. 


ry so Be ie a OR 
20109 bwai dacah £¥@, age nst the wind. 
$3 % sae eye = 4 
Bwai dath, to sa towards {the east, north, etc.}. 
byai dhaw, “according to the Law,” tustiy, mehteousiy 


~ 
ne 


dwai bwuik, .in circumference; §& 
Haswell, oof, circumference. 
bwai mfiah, outside, without (direction). 


oo, 2@ circumference. Cf 


Rac0§05, bwai aluik, accordingly, owing to, of one’s own accord. Vide 


sp0tadu 

bhava, a state of existence, existence. 
, shawak, follower. Vide godn 

a6. monastery. Pa/1, vihara. 


2%. bhau, existence, state of existence; dwelling, world. Plz, bhava. 
oe, ma, first—a verbal assertive particle corresponding to the Burmese, 


o295; in this sense the sentence is generally ended by q or scp&, two 
emphatic assertive particles; but itis also often used by itself; 
2059 foo205o05c08-—" thus (as shown above) the sub-commentary explains 
(it},” Dhd. 32, 2; mg50) .., oof BR gozo5eq20$ | EesGh08 gqoS$quaqoSao05 

mGsoSaqSa}oos—" the Blessed Buddha. . . with reference to the laymen 
shes observed the aa ees and the sabbath, told the Bhiri- 
datta-jataka,” S.B. 1; the first o before 59§ = “who.” daiSoonSo0039 
§ YovoEu ag Se308)§ oc! joe only in the city of Safikassa, do the 
Blessed Buddhas come down from TAvatithsa,” Dhd. 63. 6; 9 
apgelogelanzon2gu odiegdem 2§ sprhags gocos$.—“ in this fifth instruction; 
he taught (this) one statement,” U.O.ix. 23. 9. In interrogative 
 gentences, the sentence ends with cop, the interrogative particle, and 
® remains equivalent to the Burmese, 2095, in its abbreviated form 
before the interrogative particles cco> and 395:; that is, o . . . ecp 
== Burmese, . . . 206003, . . . cosadi; gotoSgrote cfgSScqp—" why are 


VOLUME Il PART Il 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA 


Epigraphia Birmanica 


LITHIGC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
OF BURMA 


Edited by 
CHAS. DUROISELLE 


Superintendent, Archaeological Survey. Burma Circle 


The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda Plates 


By CHAS, DUROISELLE 


(Reprint—1962) 


«1962 


SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING AND STATIONERY, RANGOON 


LIST OF AGENTS FROM WHOM GOVERNMENT OF BURMA 
PUBLICATIONS ARE AVAILABLE 


In BuRMA 


1. Crry Book Cius, 98, Phayre Street, Rangoon. 

2. PROPRIETOR, THu-DHama-Wavi PRESS, 55-56, Tees Kai Maung Khine Street,- 
angoon 

3. Propricror, Burma News Acency, 135, Anawrahta Street, Rangoon. 


4. §.P.C.K. (Burma) Ltp., 549, Merchant Street, Rangoon. 
§. ‘MANAGER, UNION PusuisHING House, 94,°C” Block, Bogyoke Market, 


Rangoo 
6. Tae SECRETARY, PEOPLE'S LATERATURE COMMITTEE AND House, 546, Merchant 
‘Street, Rangoon. 
4. THE Burma TRANSLATION Society, 520, Merchant Street, Rangoon. 
8. Messrs. K. Brn Hoon & Sons, Nyaungicbin, Pegu District. : 
U_Lu Gazz, ae MENT Law Boox AGENT, 34th Road, Nyaungzindan 


. Tue NaTionaL Boox DEPOT AND STATIONERY SurpLy House, North Godown, 
Zegyo,. Mand 
11. KNOWLEDGE Boon House, 130, Bogyoke Street, Rangoon. 
ra. AvA Hovsg, 232, Sule Pagoda Road, Rangoon. 
13. 5. K. Dey, Book Surpiicn & News AGENTS (In Strand Hotel), 92, ‘Strand 
Road, Rangoon. 
14. AGAWALL Booxsuor, Lanmadaw, Myitkyina. 
15. Sawg Ou Daunc Sores, Book Se.ters & Stationers, No. 267, South Bogyoke 
Road, Moulmein. 
16. U AUNO Tin, Your STATIONERY Stores, Main. Road, Thaton. 
17. U Maunc GyI, ‘Aunc BEoTHER Book Starz, Minmu Road, Monywa. 
r8. SHwenintHa Storzs, Bogyoke Road, Lashio, N.S.S.. 
19. = Cc. BaRva, PROPRIETOR, NATIONAL STORES, No. 16-17, Zegyaung Road, 
asaein. 
zo. Daw Avg Kyi, No. 42—44 (in Bazear) Book Stall, Maungmya. 
Zi. Dopama U ° "THEN, PROPRIETOR, Dosama Book STALL, Na. 6, Bogyoke Street, 
enza 
22. SMART AND MOookerpuM, No. 221, Sule Pagoda Road, Rangoon. 
23. Daw Kyi Kyr Sixt, Stationery Mart, Bo Aung Road (E-Road), ), Pyinmana. 
24, Zwe Lirerary Bowsr, No..195 (B-1), 33rd Street, Rangoon. 
25. B. ‘B. Bower, News Bupaa Boos STALL, 28-27; Merchant Street, Bassein. 


In INDIA 


1. Messrs. HicGINsoTHaMs Ltp., Post Box No. 311, Madras (India). 
2. Messxs..- sue (Wer Bans (1933) Ltp., Post Box No. 54—3, Esplanade, 


East Calcutta (West 


ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF BURMA 


Epigraphia Birmanica 


LITHIC AND OTHER INSCRIPTIONS 
OF BURMA 


Edited by 


CHAS. DUROISELLE 
Superintendent, Archaeological Survey, Burma Circle 


The Talaing Plaques on the Ananda Plates 


By CHAS. DUROISELLE 


(REPRINT—1962) 


1962 


SUPERINTENDENT, GOVERNMENT PRINTING :ANO STATIONERY, RANGOON 


‘ico—K 4:60 ] 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA 


PREFACE 


For greater ease of reference and study, these plates have been published in 
a separate volume; this plan was preferable to that of having them inter- 
spersed in the text, where it would have~ been impossible, in most cases, to 
make them face the legends referring to them, Fronting each plate are 
short explanations, the first part of which is merely indicative of the episodes 
illustrated in the photographs; then follows a brief description, or rather 
indication, of the personages or objects in the photographs wheneyer necessary, 
for many of these scenes are quite clear by themselves. These ‘explanations 
and those in Part I are complementary to one another. 

Neither in Part I nor here have I touched on the technique of these 
plaques ; this subject will be discussed, together with the history of the intro- 
duction of glaze into Burma, in the preface to the “ Terra-cotta Plagues on 
the Petleik Pagoda, Pagan,” which illustrate the 550 Jatakas, and the letter- 
press of which is now in hand. I would, here merely observe that even-a 
cursory examination of all the sculptures and plaques of the Ananda reveals 
the fact that they all have been done by {ndian artists, mostly Indians from 
the south: the cast of countenance, the dresses—especially of gods, kings 
and queens—the headdresses, ornaments, ¢tc., etc., as well as the fechnique, 
are Indian. The epigraphs of that period fake it clear that Indians were 
then numerous at Pagan, Evidences are not ‘lacking, however, to show that 
these artists, especially in so far as the cast of the scenes was concerned, 
were guided and supervised by Talaings, no doubt monks: the clearest of 
these evidences consists of the short legends in Talaing at the bottom of the 
plaques. So that, in these plaques we behold cormbined the cultural influence 
of two distinct nations at the Burmese capital; nations whose civilization was 
much older than that of the Burmese, and-to’ whom the latter almost entirely 
owe their culture.’ 


CHAS, DUROISELLE, 
MANDALAY, 16th Fanuary 1931. 


1 In this connection, see my paper, “ Pictorial Representations of Jatakas in Burma,” in Archago- 
fogical Survey of India, Annual Report for tg1a-13, pp. 87-89. 


INDEX 


TO 


EPIGRAPHIA BIRMANICA, 