# EXTRACTED TEXT: 1921-pe-maung-tin-the-expositor-atthasalini-vol2.pdf
# Total Pages: 276 | Source: Archive.org india.history.resource.117498
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---

Buci/Exp^
L 4-87O4J
     

--- PAGE 2 ---

©© THE
I ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BOMBAY 
I Town Hall, Bombay.
Digitized with financial assistance from
on 11 March, 2020
Shri Brihad Bhartiya Samaj
     

--- PAGE 3 ---

Pali <!Ccxt &o(tet9
Translation Series, No. 9 
(Extra Subscription)
|rkE EXPOSITOR
(ATTHASALINI)
BUDDHAGHOSA’S 
COMMENTARY ON THE DHAMMASANGANi 
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE ABHI- 
DHAMMA PITAKA
VOL. II.
48764
TRANSLATED BY
MAUNG TIN, M.A.
PROFESSOR OF PaXI AT THB COLLEGE, RANGOON
edited and revised by
MRS. RHYS DAVIDS, D.Litt., M.A
XonOon
PUBLISHED FOR THE PALI TEXT SOCIETY 
BY ‘
HE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, AMEN'CORNER, E.C.
AND AT
NEW YORK, TORONTO, MELBOURNE, AND BOMBAY
1921
     

--- PAGE 4 ---

     

--- PAGE 5 ---

CONTENTS
BOOK II.—RISINGS OF CONSCIOUSNESS—Continued
PAET VlII.—DISCOURSE ON THE TRANSCENDENTAL
CHAPTBR PAGE
I. THE FIRST PATH - - 289
n. THE SECOND PATH - - - - 319
ni. THE THIRD AND FOURTH PATHS - - - 320
PART IX.—DISCOURSE ON IMMORAL CONSCIOUSNESS
I. DISCOURSE ON THE SECTION OP THE SUMMARY OF 
STATES - - -
U. THE FIRST TYPE OF IMMORAL CONSCIOUSNESS
III. THE SECOND AND FOLLOWING TYPES OF CONSCIOUS­
NESS ------
330
336
339
PART X.—DISCOURSE ON UNMORAL CONSCIOUSNESS
I. DUALITY IN AWARENESS OP MIND 348
II. DISCOURSE ON THE MORAL RESULT OF THE SENSUOUS 
REALM ------ 352
III. DISCOURSE ON RESULTANTS IN THE REALM OP AT­
TENUATED MATTER AND IN THE IMMATERIAL 
REALM
IV. DISCOURSE ON TRANSCENDENTAL RESULT
V. DISCOURSE ON IMMORAL RESULT
379
380
384
VI, THE ELEMENT 
SCIOUSNESS
OF INOPERATIVE SENSE-MIND CON-
VII, CONCLUSION
385
386
iii
     

--- PAGE 6 ---

iv Contents
BOOK III.—MATERIAL QUALITIES (RUPA)
PAET I
CUAPTRK
I. MATTER AS UNMORAL
n. THE FOUR GREAT ESSENTIALS
ni. DERIVED MATERIAL QUALITIES
PAGE
390
392
402
PART II.*—DISCOURSE ON TfiEE CHAPTER OF THE 
SUMMARY
I. THE TRIPLETS
n. COUPLETS AND OTHER GROUPS
446
466
BOOK IV.—DISCOURSE ON THE COMMENTA-
RIAL CHAPTER - 519
♦ Wrongly printed Part IV.
INDEX I. - - - 543
INDEX II. - - - - 546
INDEX in. - - - 551
INDEX IV. - - - - 555
CORRIGENDA - - - - 556
     

--- PAGE 7 ---

THE EXPOSITOR
(ATTHASALJN/)
II
PART VIII-DISCOURSE ON THE 
TRANSCENDENTAL!
CHAPTER I
. THE FIRST PATH
I I
lie Having thus shown the moral consciousness productive of 
prosperity in the three forms of rebirth, now to show the 
transcendental moral consciousness for the transcending of all 
rebirth,2 again a beginning is made with ‘ which are the 
states that are moral ?’®
Herein in what sense is it' transcendental ’ ? [214] Because 
it crosses the world, it crosses over the world, passing beyond 
the world it stands overpowering it.
' He cultivates^ the Jhana ’ means he evolves, produces, 
develops the ecstatic Jhana of one momentary flash of con­
sciousness.
Because it goes forth from the world, from the round of 
rebirths, this Jhana is called ' going out.’ Or, a person goes 
forth by means of it; hence it is called ‘ going out.’ The
Lit., supramundane (lokuliara), B.P.E. 82 : ‘ engaged upon the 
higher ideal.’
® Bkava--, forms of rebirth—lit., [re-]becoining.
’ Dhs. § 277.
« Bhaveti. Cf. above, p. 217.
«• 289 1
     

--- PAGE 8 ---

290 Risings oj Consciousness
person who is endowed with that, comprehending (the Tact 
of) III goes forth, abandoning the cause (of Ill) goes forth, 
realizing the (Fact of) cessation goes forth, evolvdng the Path 
goes forth.
Again, this is not like that which is known as ‘ leading to 
accumulation,’’^ which heaps up and increases decease and ’ 
rebirth in the round of rebirths by the moral consciousness 
of the three planes of existence. But this is even as, when 
one man having heaped up a stockade eighteen cubits high, 
another man taking a large hammer were to gO ,on knocking 
down and demolishing what had been heaped up. So it sets 
about pulling down and demolishing decease and rebirth 
heaped up by the three-planed moral consciousness, by 
bringing about a deficiency in the causes thereof; hence it 
is ' leading to dispersion for the putting away of [wrong] 
views.’
•7 In the phrase ' for the putting away of [wirong] views,’ 
views are called ‘ view-gone-things,’just as we say ‘muck-gone■ 
thing,’ ‘ dung-gone-thing,’ for muck, dung, etc.® Or, from 
being included among the sixty-two false views, they tjo to 
be included among ‘ the views ’—hence ‘ view-gone-things.’ 
Or, the course of these states is the course of the view—hence 
the term. Similar in course and procedure to the view is the 
meaning. AATiich are they ? (The theory of individuality),® 
doubt, practice of mere rite and ritual, and the immoral states 
of lust, hate, and delusion leading to perdition, together with 
the associated states. It is they that are said to be similar 
in course to [false] views from the nature of their procedure 
till the evolution of the First Path. Thus the sixty-two 
false views and also these immoral states are ‘ view-goUe- 
things.’ ...
Of these view-gone-things, ‘ for the putting away ’ means in 
order to remove by extirpation.
ihi* ‘ The first ’ is [in order] of counting, and also the first to 
be called up.
Cf. above, p. 67 /.
* The sufiSx ‘ gatani ’ has no meaning.—Tr. 3 Pyi omits.
     

--- PAGE 9 ---

‘ Path '-Consciousness 291
'Stage’ —in such pltra^es as ‘of the.luicovered
bhumi' the great earth is galled bliumi; in SuCh phrases as 
‘ in the pleasurable bliumi in the reahr. of sense-desire ’ a state 
of consciousness is called bhumi. But here the fruition of 
fhe religious life is intended; it is called bhumi because it is the 
ground (or soil) for associated states, which are dependent on 
it. Or it is so called because, although it transcends the 
world, it itself arises, unlike Nibbana, the unmaliifested. 
‘ For the attainment ’ of that First Stage should be under­
stood to mean-for the winning, the getting of the first Fruition 
of the religious life called the Fruition of Stream-winning. 
[215] ‘ Aloof from ’ means separated by way of extirpation, 
being without. »
- Now although the transcendental Jhana is not accomplished 
without progress, yet out of a desire not only to [state but to] 
emphasize here that it goes with progress, [the Buddha,] 
abandoning the simple formula referred to ‘ painful progress, 
sluggish intuition,’ etc.’- AVhere that person who, in discarding 
the lower nature from the outset, does so with pain, by 
external aid, or instigation, and with fatigue, progress is 
painful. And he who, having discarded the lower nature, 
in living the life of insight, attains to the manifestation of the 
Path only after a long time, intuition is sluggish. Thus, any 
unspecified occasion (when.the lower nature is discarded) is 
known as of painful progress and sluggish intuition. Of 
which occasion do they approve ? That occasion when the 
lower nature which revives after having been discarded once, 
and twice, on the third occasion remains discarded, and is 
brought to complete severance by means of the Path—of 
that they approve. It has been given the name of painful 
progress and sluggish intuition. With so much the matter 
is clear. Therefore the explanation here should be understood 
from the beginning thus:
That person, who, in comprehending the four Great Pri­
maries [or Essentials], comprehends derived matter, compre­
hends the immaterial, but in comprehending the material
* Ct. above, p. 242/• ® According to the Teachers.
     

--- PAGE 10 ---

292 Risings of Consciousness
and the immaterial, is able to do so with pain, difficulty and 
fatigue—to him progress is painful. And to him who has 
comprehended the material and the immaterial in his life of 
insight, if there be sluggishness in the manifestion of the Path, 
intuition is sluggish. He who having comprehended (without 
difficulty) the material and the immaterial in determining 
[the complex of] mind-matter, does so with pain, difficulty 
and fatigue, and who, having so determined that [complex], 
in living the life of insight, is able to produce the Path only 
after a long time, is of painful progress and sluggish intuition. 
Anqther man who, having determined the [complex of] 
mind-matter in comprehending the causal relations, does so 
being fatigued with pain and difficulty, and who, having 
comprehended the causal relations in living the life of insight, 
produces the Path only after a long time, [216] is also of painful 
progress and sluggish intuition.
Another man who, having comprehended the causal rela­
tions, in penetrating the characteristic signs (of impermanence, 
etc.) does so fatigued, with pain and difficulty, and who, living 
the life of insight, has penetrated the characteristic signs, 
produces the Path only after a long time, also shows painful 
progress and sluggish intuition. Another man who, having 
penetrated the characteristic signs—his insight being sharp, 
valiant, clear, transporting—in laying hold of the uprisen 
desire for insight, does so fatigued with pain and difficulty, 
and who, having laid hold of that desire, lives the life of 
insight, but produces the Path only after a long time, also 
shows painful progress and sluggish intuition. They,’^ approv­
ing of this section, have given it the name of painful progress 
and sluggish intuition. In this way should the following 
three stages of progress be understood.
/oV In the list 'contact, etc.,’ four terms;—‘the controlling 
faculty of believing " I shall come to know the unknown,” 
right speech, right action, right livelihood ’—are extra,^ The 
terms ‘ path-factor,’^ etc., also are extra, occurring in the
1 The Teachers. « Cf. § 277, n. 2.
’ Dhs. § 283. B.P.E.: ‘ Path component.’
     

--- PAGE 11 ---

‘ Path ^-Consciousness 293
sections of the Exposition and in the expositions of ‘ initial 
application of mind,’ etc. ^he rest are all as said above.!- 
But the state of being transcendental by way of ' stages ’ 
(or planes) is here a distinctive feature.
Of them the faculty of believing * I shall come to know 
the unknown ’^is the controlling faculty which has arisen, by 
means of former reflection, in one who practises accordingly, 
‘ I shall know the unknown deathless path, the doctrine of 
the Four Truths, in the continual stream of becoming, of 
unknown beginning.’ Its characteristic, etc., should be 
known by the method given above in the controlling faculty 
of understanding.^
‘ Right speech ’ is beautiful or praiseworthy speech, a name 
for abstinence from wrong speech by the complete severance 
of misconduct in speech. It has comprehension'* as its 
characteristic, abstaining (from ^vrong speech) as its function, 
the putting away of wrong speech as its manifestation.
‘ Right action ’ is beautiful or praiseworthy action, a name 
for abstinence from life-taking, and so on, by the complete 
severance of wrong action. Its characteristic is the production 
of, or striving after, or the rousing of associated states for 
good action, its function is abstinence (from wrong action), its 
manifestation is the puttiijg away of wrong action.
‘ Right livelihood ’ is beautiful or praiseworthy livelihood, 
a name for abstinence from wrong livelihood. It has puri­
fication® as its characteristic, suitable maintenance of life
[217] as its function, the putting away of -wrong livelihood as 
its manifestation. Or, the characteristic, etc., here are to be 
understood by what has been said on the three abstinences.®
Thus, by -virtue of these three states the Path mentioned 
above as fivefold should here be understood as the eightfold 
Path. The absence [of these Path-factors], and likewise the 
absence of pity and sympathy among the ‘ Or-whatever-
, Cf. above, p. 142/. ® Dhs. § 296.
® Cf. above, p. 161.
* I.e., of associated states, or of the listener.
* /.€., of the living being, of associated states, or of life.
* See above, p. 174 /.
     

--- PAGE 12 ---

294 Risinys of Consciousness
states,’ should be noted, for those three factors occur in the 
text here, and pity and sympathy have a being for object, 
whereas these transcendental states have Nibbana for object; 
hence those two are not included here. So far for the dis- 
tinctive meaning in the section of the Summary. In the 
'section of the Exposition the terms ‘ Path-factor ’ and ‘ Path- 
included ’ mean respectively ‘ a jjortion of the Path,’ and 
included in, connected with, the Path as a thing included in 
the forest is forest-included.
In ‘ rapture as a factor of perfect wisdom (or of full enlighten­
ment) ’2 the expression means that rapture is the factor of 
perfect wisdom. Herein, ‘ factor of wisdom ’ ihodlii} may also 
be taken to mean factor of one who has wisdom (6odZi7, or who 
is enlightened). The Ariyan disciple is enlightened by means 
of the harmony of the seven constituent states of mindfulness, 
investigation of the Law, energy, rapture, repose, concentra­
tion and equanimity. This arises at the moment [when 
we experience] supramundane things, and is opposed to 
the ’ various perils of mental contraction and distraction, 
fixity and*struggle, indulgence in sensual pleasures and devo­
tion to self-torture, and addiction to the speculations of anni­
hilation and eternalism, etc. It is this harmony of states, 
at the moment when the transcendental state arises, that is 
called bbdiii (enlightenment, knowledge). And the verb 
bujjhali (to be awake, enlightened, to know) implies a rising 
from the slumber of the continuum of the lower nature, or a 
penetrating the Ariyan Truths, or a realizing Nibbana, The 
factor of such bodhi., called the harmony of states, is ‘ the 
Wisdom-factor,’ like Jhana-factor, Path-factor, etc. The 
Ariyan disciple who is enlightened by means'of such harmony 
of states as has been described is said to have bodhi. The 
potential parts of this bodhi are ' factors of wisdom (or en­
lightenment),’ like the factors of an army, or of a chariot. 
Hence the Commentarial Teachers have said: ‘ Wisdom­
factors are the [potential] parts of a person who is being 
enlightened,’
1 Ibid. Dks. § 285.
     

--- PAGE 13 ---

‘ Path ^-Conscioii^ness 295
Further, iu what sense are they Wisdom-factors ? Because 
they conduce to enlightenment, because they are enlightened,
[218] because they are fittingly enlightened, because they are 
penetratively enlightened, because they are rightly en­
lightened. Thus by this analytic method also may the 
meaning of ‘ Wisdom-factor ’ be known.
Again, ' factor of perfect wisdom ’ is a praiseworthy or 
beautiful factor of wisdom, ibid ‘ rapture as a factor of 
perfect wisdom ’ means that rapture itself is a factor of perfect 
wisdom. In the expositions of one-pointedness of mind, etc.,^ 
where the term occurs the meaning is to be understood in 
the same way.
Of those states means, of those states of the Four Truths 
which at that time become intuited. ‘ That are unknown ’ 
means, although these states (the Four Truths) are now known 
by means of the First Path, yet, as a man having come to a 
monastery where he has never been before, and being seated 
in, the middle of it would say with reference to his not having 
gone there before, * I have come to a place I have never been 
to,’ and being decorated with flowers that he has never before 
'been decorated with, and being dressed iu a dress that he has 
never before worn, and having eaten a meal that he has never 
"before enjoyed would say,*with reference to his new experi­
ences, ‘ I have* eaten a meal not enjoyed before,’ and so 
on; so here also, because these states had never before come 
into tills given person’s experience, therefore the word 
‘ unknown ’ is said. And the same with [the equivalents] 
‘ undiscerned,’ etc.
Of these terms,' undiscerned ’ means ‘ not discerned before 
this with the eye of -wisdom ’; ‘ unattained ’ means ‘ not 
attained in the sense of access ’;' not understood ’ means' not 
made clear by knowledge or insight ’; ‘ unrealized ’ means 
‘ not brought right before the eyes.’
‘ For the realization ’ means ‘ for the purpose of bringing 
right before the eyes.’ And as the full construction is made 
with this word, so ought it to be carried out -with the others—
     

--- PAGE 14 ---

296 Risings of Consciousness
namely, for the purpose of knowing the unknown, of discerning 
the tindiscemed, of attaining the unattained, of understanding 
what is not understood.
• In ‘ from the fourfold misconduct of speech,’^ speech should 
be known as vocal intimation. Conduct spoiled by any of 
the three faults (lust, hate, delusion) is misconduct. Mis­
conduct produced from, or accomplished by speech is mis­
conduct of speech. ‘ Avoidance ’ {arati) means one delights- 
in being away from this fourfold misconduct of speech. 
‘ Abstinence ’ {virati) means one delights' in being without 
them. ‘ Renouncement ’ {pativirati) means, being turned 
away from them, one delights in being without them. Or we 
may see in each prefix an added emphasis. The whole three 
are synonyms for refraining. ‘ Abstention ’ (veramam) 
means it kills, destroys enmity. This also is a synonym for 
refraining.
[219] Moreover, one speaking falsehood, etc., by any 
volition is said to commit misconduct of speech. When the 
abstinence belonging to this supramundane Path has arisen, 
it does not allow the commission of such an act, it cuts ofi the 
course of action («.e., volition), hence the term ' to leave un­
committed.’ Similarly it does not allow the doing of such 
an act, it cuts off the course of action, hence ‘ to leave undone.’ 
And he who commits the fourfold misconduct of speech by 
any volition is siid to transgress. When the abstinence 
belonging to this supramundane Path has arisen, it does not 
allow such transgression, hence ‘ non-transgression.’ ‘ Non­
trespassing the boundary {anatiltkamo vda} ’—in such 
passages as ‘ at that vda means ‘ time.’ In ‘ he lives
at Uruvela,’® vela means ‘ heap,’ [namely, of sand (mtoJJ. In 
‘ being steady by nature he does not pass beyond the bwtn- 
Aary,’"^ vda means ‘ boundary.’ Here also it means ' boun­
dary.’ The fourfold good conduct of speech is intended to 
be the boundary, because it is not to be trespassed. So he 
who commits the fourfold misconduct of speech by any 
volition is said to trespass over the boundary. When the
? SainyuUa i. 76, § 6 passim.
* Not traced.
     

--- PAGE 15 ---

297‘ Path ^-Consciousness
abstinence belonging to this supramundane Path has arisen, 
it does not allow (this volition) to trespass over the boundary 
—hence ' notto trespass over the boundary.’ Or, rdd means 
it destroys {rddyati). AA’hat does it destroy ? The fourfold 
misconduct of speech, from destroying which it is called rdd. 
And anaiilkamo means it does not get beyond a person’s 
prosperity and happiness. Thus is the meaning to be under­
stood by these two words. Finally,' to destroy the causeway,’ 
that is ‘ he breaks down the causeway.’ The meaning is that 
it destroys the base, the cause of the fourfold misconduct of 
speech; for that condition is here intended by causeway. This 
is the definition of the word:—the condition, such as lust, etc., 
of the fourfold misconduct of speech ties, makes a person to be 
bound in the round of rebirths—Whence ‘ cause-way-breaking,’ 
».e., abstinence which breaks up misconduct in speech More­
over, this abstinence called right speech is obtained in a 
variety of conscious experience previous to the Path; for by 
one thdught one abstains from speaking falsehood, by another 
from calumnious speech, etc. But it i^ obtained in one 
conscious experience at the moment of the supramundane 
Path; for there arises only one abstinence cutting off the base 
of the fourfold volition of misconduct of speech and fulfilling 
the Path-factor. ‘ From misconduct of body ’ means from 
evil practices such as life-taking, etc., produced on account of, 
or accomplished by the body. The remainder is to be under­
stood by the previous method.
And this abstinence called right action^ is obtained in a 
variety of conscious experience previous to the Path; for by 
one thought [220] one abstains from life-taking, by another 
from theft and wrong behaviour. But it is obtained in one 
conscious experience at the moment of the supramundane 
Path; for thqre arises only one abstinence cutting off the base 
of the threefold volition of misconduct of body and fulfilling 
the Path-factor.
^7^ ‘ respect to the ‘ leaving undone ’ in the exposition of
The word-play here cannot be reproduced in English. Setu— 
dyke, or causeway, or ‘bund’—is made a derivative from Sin, to 
bind.—Ed. Dhs. 300.
     

--- PAGE 16 ---

298 Risings of Consciousness
right livelihood^ ©ne maintaining a WTong livelihood by any, 
volition is said to be continuing the practice (of wrong liveli­
hood). But when the abstinence belonging to this supra­
mundane Path has arisen it doe.s not allow (this volition) to 
keep up the practice; hence ‘ leaving undone.’ In this way 
the construction should be understood. And there is no such 
separate thing as ‘ livelihood.' It is understood, together 
with speech and action, from being part and parcel of them. 
But by way of a constant dependence on the four requisites,^ 
it has been taken out from them and to taught. This being so, 
right livelihood has no [separate] function of its own, and 
does not complete the eight path-factors [by any new in­
crement]. "Wherefore it behoves thi.s method to make a 
‘ function ’ for ‘ right livelihood,’ and to let the eight path­
factors be completed. For livelihood, in failing, fails at the 
doors of body and speech; it cannot fail at the mind-door. 
In succeeding, it succeeds at these two doors; it cannot succeed 
at the mind-door. And transgression at the body-door is, or 
is not conditioned’by liveliliood. Likewise at the vocal door. 
In this respect, kings and ministers, addicted to amusement 
and displaying their bravery, indulge in deer-hunting, or 
highway robbery, or adultery. This is an immoral act of 
body; abstinence therefrom is right action. Whatever fourfold 
misconduct of speech people commit that is not conditioned 
by livelihood is an immoral act of speech; abstinence there­
from is right speech. And for the sake of livelihood, whatever 
creatures hunters, fishermen, etc., may kill, whatever theft 
people may commit, however they may wrongly behave 
themselves (in sensual pleasures)—this is known as wrong live- 
. lihood; abstinence therefrom is known as right .livelihood.
After taking a bribe, whatever lies they may speak, whatever 
calumnious speech they may utter, harsh speech, or frivolous 
• talk—this is known as wrong livelihood; abstinence there­
by* from is known as right livelihood. And Mahasiva the Elder 
has said: ‘Transgression in the doors of body and speech.
1 Dlis. § 301.
2 The four life-necessaries for the religieux—food, clothing, lodging, 
medicine.'—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 17 ---

^PatU ^-Consciousness 299
[221] whether conditioned or not by livelihood, is counted as 
an immoral act of body and of .speech. Abstinence therefrom 
is said to betight action and right speech.’ When the pupils 
asked, ‘ AATiere does livelihood come in?’ he replied, 'The 
enjoyment of the four requisites, which have been produced 
in dependence upon the threefold hypocrisy’ is livelihood.’ 
But this is the height of wrong livelihood, abstinence from 
which is known as right livelihood. This right livelihood is 
obtainable in the various conscious experiences previous to 
the Path. For by one conscious experience one abstains from 
the transgression in the door of body; by another, from that 
in the door of speech. But it is obtained in one moment of 
consciousness at the moment of the transcendental path; for 
then there arises only one abstinence, cutting off the base of 
the volition of wickedness called uTong livelihood, produced 
by way of the seven courses of action^ in the doors of body 
and of speech, and fulfilling the path-factor. This is the 
distinction in the Section of the exposition.
Among the controlling faculties the faculty of believing, 
‘ I shall come to know the imknown,’ and among the path­
factors right speech, etc., are additions. Through these 
[additions] nine controlling faculties and the [full] Eightfold 
Path are declared in the section of the Summary.®
The section of ‘ Emptiness ’ retains its original form.'* 
So far the Progress formula is different. Farther on the 
teaching is divided into the Emptiness formula, the Empty- 
Progress, the ‘ Unhankered-after ’ and the Uuhankered-after 
Progress.® Of these. Empty is the name of the supramundane 
Path, given for the three reasons: of arrival, of its O5vn merits 
and of the object. How ? In the Order a bhikkhu, being
* The threefold hypocrisy produced by evil desires is (o) wearing of 
coarse raiment, boasting of one’s saintly qualities, behaving as though 
one had attained holiness.—JSika.
2 Misconduct, threefold by act, fourfold by speech.
® Dhs. § 337; B.P.E. § 337a. I.e., one more faculty in addition to 
those named in §§ 58, 74.
lb. §§ 344, 345; cf. §§ 132-4.5 (title), where the P.T.S. ed. apparently 
omits the word sunnatain. s 344-57.
     

--- PAGE 18 ---

300 Risings of Consciousness 
convinced of the non-existence of an absolute soul, views com­
plexes as soulle^. But because, by merely viewing them as 
soulless, the genesis of the Path is not obtained, it behoves 
him to view them also as impermanent and as ill, therefore he 
practises the contemplation of the threefold discernment of 
impermanence, ill and soullessness. Still his insight leading 
to emergence’^ views the complexes of the three planes, as 
Empty. This insight is known as Emptiness. Standing iu 
the place of ‘ that which tends to arrive,’ it gives the name of 
Emptiness to its own path. Thus the Path gets the name of 
Emptiness because [this concept tends to] arrive.
And because the path is void of lust, etc., therefore it gets 
the name of Emptiness by means of its own merits. Nibbana .*• 
also, from being void of lust, etc., is called Emptiness. Be­
cause it arises with Nibbana for object the Path gets the name 
of Emptiness from its object. [222] Of these three reasons 
it gets its name from its own merits, and also from the object 
by means of the Suttanta or explanatory method of teaching. 
Abhidhamma discourse is teaching without such a method. 
Therefore, here ‘ Emptiness ’ gets its name, not from its own 
merits, nor from the object, but from the fact of its arrival; 
for arrival is the principal and is twofold: of insight, of the 
Path. Of these, the insight-arrival is the principal where the 
Path has arrived; the Path-arrival is the principal where 
fruition has arrived. Here, owing to the arrival of the Path, 
the insight-arrival is the principal.
In ‘ the Undesired,’® ‘ undesired ’ is a name of the Path,
1 The insight which views conditioned things with indifference. 
It occurs together with the stage called adaptation (anuloma), and is 
called insight leading to transcendence. Because it views conditioned 
things as empty, it is called ‘ emptiness ’ (sunnata). Because it views 
them as ill, or because in it craving is dried up, it is called undesired, 
unhankered after.—Tika.
The word transcend-ence, henceforward occurring frequently,- is lit., 
standing up away from; v-utthati—i.e., rising from. It is translated 
‘ transcending,’ or ‘ emerging from.’—Ed.
® Some read dhuvam: ‘certain,’ ‘assured,’ for dhuram: ‘principal.’
® Dh8. § 351. B.P.E.: ‘ unhankered after.’ Cf. Compendium hr., § 9. 
Apanihita is from (a)pra-ni-dha: ‘not to lay down toward.’ Not 
aimed at, or aspired to. Cf. A. i. 8; 8. iv. 302.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 19 ---

‘ Path ^-Consciousness 301
which gets it for three reasons. How ? Here a bhikkhu, 
being convinced from the beginning of the Truth of ill, views 
complexes as ill. But because, by merely viewing them as 
ill, the emergence of the Path is not obtained, it behoves him 
to view them also as impermanent and selfless, therefore he 
practises the contemplation of the threefold discernment as 
impermanent, ill and selfless. Still his insight leading to 
emergence dries up, destroys and relinquishes the desire for 
the complexes of the three planes. This insight is known as 
‘ the undesired.’ Standing in the place of that which tends 
to arrive, it gives the name of Undesired to its own Path. 
Thus the Path gets its name of Undesired because the concept 
tends to arrive. And because, in the Path, the desire of lust, 
hate and delusion does not exist, therefore it gets the name 
of Undesired by means of its own merits. Nibbana also, 
from the absence of those desires, is called the Undesired. 
From arising with Nibbana as its object, the Path gets the 
name of Undesired. Of these three reasons, etc. (continue 
as in preceding paragraph).
. [223] To the objection:—but are not ’ Emptiness, Signless, 
IJJndesired* three names of the Path ? As the Buddha has ■ 
said, ‘ Bhiltkhus, there are three Deliverances: that of Empti- 
ness, of the Signless, of the Undesired.Why of the three 
are the two taken here, and not the Signless ?—we reply:— 
From the absence of the arrival. For the insight of the 
‘ Signless ’ is not able by itself to stand in the place of arrival 
and to give the name to its own path. Nevertheless, the 
Buddha Supreme declared the insight of the ‘ Signless ’ to 
his own son, Rahula the Elder:
Study the signless, and abandon pride’s 
Deep-hidden bias ; so by conquering 
Thy pride tlioit nuiycst know tranquillity.^
For insight severs the signs of permanence, stability, bliss, 
self.2 Hence it is spoken of as the Signless. Yet, although
1 Pts. ii. 35.
2 Ascribed to Abhirupananda. Pss. of the Sisters, ver. 20, and to
Ananda addressing Vangisa, Pss. of the Brethren, ver. 1226. But 
cf. S. iii. 135/.; A. ii. 165.—Ed. ® Reading attanimittaiji.
     

--- PAGE 20 ---

302 Risings of Consciousness
it .severs the sign, it itself frequent.s states which are signs; 
thus it occurs with the sign. Therefore it itself is not able 
to stand at the place of arrival and give the name to its own 
path.
A further view: The Abhidhamma is the teaching of things 
in the ultimate sense. And in-the ultimate sense there is a 
deficiency in the conditions producing the Signless Path. 
How ? The deliverance called Signless has been declared by 
way of the discernment of impermanence. And by means of 
that deliverance the controying faculty of faith is excessive. 
Owing to its not being a Path-factor, it is not able, in the 
ultimate sense, to give the name to its own path. Of the 
other two, the deliverance called ‘ empty ’ has been declared 
by way of the discernment of soullessness, and the deliverance 
called ‘ undesired ’ has been declared by way of the discern­
ment of ill. Of them, by means of the deliverance called 
' Qva-iAy’ the controlling faculty of understanding is excessive; 
by means of the deliverance called ‘ undesired ’ the con­
trolling fafeulty of concentration is excessive. These controlling 
faculties, being factors of the Ariyan Path,^ are able in the 
ultimate sense to give the name to their own paths. In 
other words, in the triplet of the object of the Path,^ also, in 
the classification of the states as the dominant influence of 
the Path, because desire-to-do and consciousness, at the time 
of their being dominant influences, are not Path-factors, the 
state of their being dominant influences of the Path is not 
stated. Thus should this be understood.- This is the 
decision of the opinion of a certain teacher apart from the 
Commentary.
[224] Thus in all respects the insight of ‘ the Signless ’ is 
not able by itself, standing at the place of arrival, to give a 
name to its own Path; hence a Path of the ‘ Signless ' has not 
,« 6 been included. But some have said that such a Path, although 
’ it does not get the name from its arrival, gets it, by the 
Suttanta expositions, from its own merits and from its object. 
They should be refuted thus:—If the ‘ Signless path ’ gets its
1 Dks. §§ 1031-3.
     

--- PAGE 21 ---

■ Path '-Consciousness 303
name from its own merits and from the object, then the 
Empty and the Undesired paths also should here, in the 
Abhidhannna, get their names from their own merits and 
from their object?. But they do not. And why ? Because 
this [sort of] path gets its name for two reasons:—from its 
essential property and from opposing; in other words, from 
its intrinsic nature and because of something rejected. Now 
the paths called Empty and Undesired get their names from 
their own intrinsic natures and from opposing. They are void 
of lust, etc., and without the desires springing from lust, etc.; 
thus they get their names from their own intrinsic nature. 
AAd Emptiness is opposed to the (false) conviction of the 
soul and the Undesired to desire; thus they get the name 
from opposing. But the Signless Path, owing to the absence 
of the signs, etc., of lust, of permanence, gets its name from 
its intrinsic nature, but not from opposing; for it is not 
opposed ^0 the discernment of impermanence, which has the 
signs of the complexes as its object, and which stands in con­
formity to it; thus in all respects, by Abhidhamma exposition, 
.there is no Signless Path. But by the Suttanta exposition it 
is brought out and shown. For on any given occasion there 
is the emergence of the Path, the three characteristic signs^ 
present themselves, as if by a single act of ‘ adverting.’ 
There is no simultaneous presentation of the three, yet it is 
said so, to show when the station of religious exercise is 
manifested. Indeed, from the outset, let there be anywhere 
a conviction [of the mind], then insight making for emergence, 
as it emerges, gives the nanie of its own path to whatever sign 
it has grasped, placing it at the point of arrival by just 
that sign. How ? Because of the disposition here or there 
respecting any one of the three Signs, the rule is that the other 
two Signs are seen also, for when one Sign alone is seen, there 
is no emergence of the path. Hence the bhikkhu [225] who 
is convinced as to impermanence, emerges not solely- as to 
that, but also as to the other two; similarly if he start with 
either of these two.
i Impermanence, ill, soullessness.
     

--- PAGE 22 ---

304 Risings of Consciousness
Of the three Paths, the Path of one emerging by means of 
impermanence is the Signless; that of one emerging by means 
of ill is the Ijndesired; that of one emerging by means of soid- 
lessness is the Empty. Thus by the Suttanta expositions’^ it 
has been brought out and shown. But (to object:) what has 
insight leading to emergence for its object V The three 
characteristics. What is called a characteristic is the same 
as a concept, and is not a state that can be said to be limited 
or sublime, etc. And w'hoso discerns the three characteristics 
as impermanence, ill, soullessness^ to him the five aggregates 
become like a corpse tied to his necTc. Knowledge, having 
the complexes as its object, emerges from them. So a bhikkhu, 
desirous of buying a bowl, might see one brought by a bowl- 
'^merchant, and glad and delighted would think, ‘ I will take 
it.’ On examining it he might see holes, whereupon he loses 
all attachment, not for the holes, but for the bowl. Similarly, 
noting the three characteristics [the student] has no further 
attachment for conditioned things. He transcends any such 
thing by means of knowledge, having such thing as object.
The simile of the robe may be similarly applied.
Thus the Blessed One, in classifying transcendental jhana, 
brought out the two methods of the fourfold and fivefold 
jhana in the ' progress ’ formula, as w'ell as progress in the 
[idea of] emptiness and the' undesired ’ in those corresponding 
formulas respectively. Why did he so bring them out ? To 
meet individual inclinations and to adorn his discourse, both 
of which reasons are to be understood as stated above. So 
in the words ‘ he cultivates transcendental jhana’^ we find the 
two methods, by w^ay of fourfold and fivefold jhana, in the 
‘ progress' formula, as also in the rest. Thus in all the five 
portions ten methods have been classified. Hereon the 
following is the special [comment]:—
Subjective and objective with respect 
To matter, th’ immaterial, the five. 
The interchange of factors eight and seven, 
The sign, the progress, the chief influence.
’ Pfe. ii., Vimokkhakatha, esp. p. 64. 2 277 ff.
     

--- PAGE 23 ---

‘ Path ^-Consciousness 305
Namely, iu the transcendental Path, being convinced of 
one’s own person one transcends it [226]; being so convinced 
one transcends that which is objective; being convinced of the 
objective one transcends that; being convinced of matter one 
transcends that; so convinced one transcends the immaterial; 
being convinced of the immaterial one transcends that; being 
so convinced, one transcends matter. At one stroke one 
transcends the five aggregates. As to ‘ the interchange of 
factors eight and seven,’ this Path is both eightfold and seven­
fold; the Factors of Wisdom also are seven or six; jhana is 
fivefold, four- three-, or twofold;—thus should the mutability 
of factors eight, seven, etc., be understood. And as to * the 
sign, the progress, the chief influence,’ ‘ sign ’ is that which is 
transcended; the other terms refer to the steadiness or un­
steadiness of progress, and to the dominant influence.
, As regards the sentence—‘ being convinced of his own person 
he transcends it ’—^this refers to one who from the outset is, 
subjectively convinced as to the five aggregates, and being so 
convinced considers them as impermanent, liable to suffering, 
void of soul. But inasmuch as by this purely subjective view 
there is no emergence of the Path, and it behoves him to 
consider also that which is objective, he considers the aggre­
gates of another person, and so, wdth regard to things not 
affecting his own desires, he considers them also as imper­
manent, etc. Now he contemplates his subjective self, now' 
that which is objective. AVhen he thus contemplates his own 
person, his insight unites with the Path. And so, being 
convinced as to his own person, he transcends it. But if his 
insight unites with the Path when he is contemplating the 
objective, then he is convinced as to the subjective and 
transcends the objective. Similarly when he is convinced 
as to an objective personality and transcends both it and his 
own personality.
^6 Another man from the outset is convinced of matter and, 
being so convinced, defines elemental matter and derived 
matter, and views them as impermanent, etc. But be­
cause by just this formulated view of matter there is no 
emergence of the path, and it behoves him to view the im- 
it. 2
     

--- PAGE 24 ---

306 Risings oj Consciousness
material as well, therefore [227] he defines feeling, perception, 
mental C0|efficients, consciousness, which have arisen by 
making matter the object, saying ‘ This is not material,’ and 
views them as impermanent, etc. Now he contemplates 
matter, and now non-matter. When he thus contemplates 
■matter, his insight unites with the Path. So being convinced 
of matter he is said to emerge therefrom. If; on the other 
hand, when he contemplates non-matter, his insight unites 
with the Path, he is said to be convinced of matter and to 
transcend non-matter. And the same with his being con­
vinced of non-matter and transcending both that and matter. 
‘ Whatever has the nature of coming to be, has the nature 
of passing away —thus being convinced at the time of trans­
cending, he is known to transcend at one stroke the five 
aggregates.
This is the insight of a bhikkhu of sharp insight and great 
k w understanding. As if folk were to offer a man aching with 
himger a bowl full of food of divers excellent tastes and put 
a lump of ordure in the middle. And he were to scrape the 
curry .with his hand, and seeing the lump were to ask, ' What 
is this V and on being told, would not have any inclination 
for the food or the bowl, saying, ‘ Fie 1 Fie 1 take it away,’ 
so should the ^.pplication of this simile be understood. As the 
time of rejoicihg oh seeing the bowl full of food, so is the time 
when the bhikkhu, then a foolish average man, grasps the 
five aggregates as ‘ I am the five aggregates; mine are they.’ 
As the time of seeing the liunp of ordure, so is the time of 
noting the three characteristics. As the time of having no 
inclination for the food or the bowl is the time when the 
bhikkhu of sharp insight and great understanding tran­
scends at one stroke the five aggregates, saying, ‘ What­
ever has the nature of coming to be has the nature of 
passing away.’
As regards
* The inierchange o/ factors eight and seven.
* Vinaya Texts i. 97. § 29.
     

--- PAGE 25 ---

‘ Path '-Consciousness 307
it should be understood iu accordance with the change of 
factors classified above. For the insight of indifference to 
conditioned things fixes the distinction amoing the wisdom­
factors, the Path-factorSj and the Jhana-factors of the Ariyan 
Path. But some Elders say that the basic jhana does so; 
others say that the aggregates which are the objects of insight 
do so; others say that individual inclination does so. Con­
cerning these doctrines it should be understood that this 
previous insight leading to transcendence, also called indiffer­
ence to conditioned things, fixes that distinction.
Here is the discourse in regular succession: The Path arisen in 
one of dry insight^- [228] by the fixing as insight, and the Path 
arisen without making a base of the Jhana of one who has 
acquired the attainment, and the Path produced by making 
a base of the First Jhana‘and contemplating particular con­
ditioned things (i.e., other than the basic Jhana) are of the 
First Jhana. In all of them there are seven Wisdom-factors, 
eight Path-factors, five Jhana-factors. Their previous insight 
is accompanied by joy and by indifference and, at the time 
of emerging after attaining to the state of indifference to 
.conditioned things, is accompanied by joy only. In the five­
fold method, in the Paths produced by making a base of the 
Second, Third, Fourth Jhanas, the jhana in due' course has 
four, three, two factors. But in all the Paths there are seven 
Path-factors, in the Fourth jhana six Wisdom-factors. This 
distinction is due to the fixing of the basic jhana and of insight, 
for their previous insight is accompanied by joy and indiffer­
ence, but the insight leading to transcendence is accompanied 
by joy only. But in the Path produced by making the Fifth 
Jhana the basis by way of indifference and one-pointedness 
of mind, there are two Jhana-factors; the Wisdom-factors 
and Path-factors are six and seven respectively. This dis­
tinction also is due to the double fixing (of basic jhana and of 
insight). In this method the previous insight is accompanied 
by joy and indifference; that leading to transcendence is 
accompanied by indifference only. And the same'with the
* Of. Compendium, pp. 55, 75.
     

--- PAGE 26 ---

308 Risings of Consciousness
Path produced by maldng the immaterial Jhanas the basis. 
Thus the attainment, emerging in proximity to the Path 
produced by contemplating any conditioned things whatever 
after emerging from the basic jhana, makes the Path similar 
to itself, as the colour of the ground is similar to that of the 
iguana.
In the second doctrine of the Elders, the Path produced by 
emerging from any attainment, and contemplating any states 
of attainment, is similar to that attainment—^that is, to the 
contemplated attainment. But if.we contemplate states of 
the sensuous sphere, we are in the First Jhana. Here also 
the fixing as insight is to be understood by the method stated. 
>2- '  [229] In the third doctrine of the Elders, the Path produced
by contemplating any jhana states, when any jhana is made 
the basis, in accordance with one’s wish: ‘ 0 if I could attain to 
the Path with seven factors, with eight factors!’ resembles 
that particular jhana. Yet without the basic jhana, or the 
contemplated jhana, the resemblance thereto is not accom­
plished by the mere wish. This meaning is intended to be 
shown by the Nandalcovada Sulla?- For there it is said:— 
' Bhikkhus, as on the fifteenth, the Sabbath day, people have 
no doubt, no misgivings whether the moon will be deficient 
or full, but are quite sure that it will be full, so, bhikkhus, 
those bhikkhunis are delighted at Nandaka’s sermon on the 
Law, and' have their intentions fulfilled. Bhikkhus, of those 
five hundred bhikkhimis, even she who is the most backward 
is a “ Stream-winner,” not liable to suffer in purgatory, assured, 
and bound for enlightenment.’ For among them she who 
has in her the sufficient cause of the fruition of Stream-winning, 
has her intentions fulfilled by just that fruition; and so for 
the three higher fruitions.^ Thus the path produced by 
contemplating any jhana states, making any jhana the basis 
in accordance with one’s wish, resembles that jhana.
Yet without the basic jhana or the contemplated jhana the 
resemblance thereto is not accomplished by the mere wish. 
Here also the fixing of insight is to be understood by the said
Majjhima iii. 270/., esp. 277.
® Of once-retuniing, never-returning, Arahantship
     

--- PAGE 27 ---

' Patli'‘-Conscioiisness 309
method. To the Elder Tipitaka-Culaiiaga/ holder of the 
doctrine [that the basic jhana alone fixes it], his pupils said, 
‘ Reverend sir, let the basic jhana, where it is present, fix 
it [as you say]. But where it is absent—that is, in the im­
material existence—what fixes it?’ 'There also the basic 
jhana fixes it, my friends. For the bhikkhu who has attained 
the eight attainments makes a basis of the First Jhana, 
produces the Path and Fruition of Stream-winning, does not 
fall away from the jhana, and when his hour comes is reborn in 
the immaterial worlds. Emerging from the attainment of the 
Fruition of Stream-winning of the First Jhana, he establishes 
insight and produces the upper three Paths and Fruitions. 
These are only of the First Jhana; the same is true for the 
Paths and Fruitions of the Second Jhana,*etc. [230] In the 
immaterial consciousness^ there arise the threefold, fourfold 
Jhanas, which are transcendental, not worldly. So, my 
friends, there also the basic jhana fixes it.’ ‘ Reverend sir, 
the question has been well explained.’
f^^The Elder Mahadatta, resident at Moravapi, held the 
doctrine that aggregates, which are the objects of insight, fix 
it, in that the Path, which emerges after contemplating any 
aggregate, resembles that aggregate. His pupils said to him; 
‘ Reverend sir, in your doctrine a flaw appears. According to 
it the bhikkhu who has emerged after contemplating matter, 
would have a Path resembling matter and undeclared.® He 
who has transcended, after comprehending rightly the sphere 
of neither perception nor non-perception, would have a Path 
resembling that, and have attained to the state of that sphere.’ 
‘ Friends, it is not so; for the transcendental Path is never 
known not to attain ecstasy. Hence one who has transcended, 
after contemplating, matter has a Path of eight factors accom-
* This name means ‘ Little-wonderman knowing by heart the 
Three Pi takas.’ See below, p. 354. The name may have served to 
distinguish him from the Culanaga, who accompanied' Mahinda to 
Ceylon. Samantapasadilca, p. 313.—Ed.
* I.e., consciousness such as he would have in the Arupa worlds. 
—Ed.
® Avyalcata. 7.e., unmoral.
     

--- PAGE 28 ---

.310 Risings of Consciousness
panied by joy; he who also has transcended, after contemplat­
ing, the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception has 
no Path resembling that sphere in every respect, but has a 
Path of seven factors accompanied by indifference.’ 
r [Students] quoted the doctrine of the Elder Tipitaka- 
Culabhaya, that personal inclination fixed it, and told it to 
the Elder Tipitaka-Culanaga. He replied: ' Whoso has the 
basic jhana can let personal inclination fix it for him; but whoso 
has it not, what inclination can avail to fix it for "him ? It 
would be like one who looks for interest when he has no 
capital.’^ They told that utterance to the Elder Tipitaka- 
Culabhaya, who replied: ‘ Friends, that doctrine of mine that 
the personal inclination fixes it, was said with reference to 
one possessed of the basic jhana.’ As it has been understood 
with reference to one possessed of the basic jhana, so should 
it be understood with reference to one possessed of the con­
templated jhana. For the path produced in him who, emerg­
ing from the Fifth Jhana, is contemplating the First Jhana,etc., 
becomes, in the doctrine of the first Elder, of the First Jhana, 
ando'ftheFirst Jhana and the restin the doctrine of the second 
Elder. Thus the two doctrines oppose each other. Inthethird 
doctrine itbecomesof whatever jhana among the Jhanas is de­
sired; thus those two doctrines do not clash with this, and the 
inclination is beneficial. The three Elders, then, were clever, 
experienced', and full of intelligence. [231] On that account 
the teachers have made a text of their doctrines. In this com­
mentary j ust the meaning in point has been brought out, And it 
has been shown that only insight fixes the three doctrines.
Now as regards
The sign, the progress, the chiej influence,
at the time of the production of the Path, since there is ‘ a 
change of factors,’ whence does adoption^ rise, and whence 
the Path ? Adoption emerges frqm the sign (i.e., the object
1 For Nibbanassa read nidikanassa . . . (P.T.S. ed.)—JSd.
* Ootrabhu, or ‘ becoming kin ’—^namely, to the spiritual conscious­
ness of Buddhas and their elect followers, the moment preceding 
Jhana-ecstasy. Cf. Compe.ndium„ p. 215.—Tr.
     

--- PAGE 29 ---

‘ Path ^-Consciousness 311
of insight), and is not able to cut ofi the process (of states in 
the round of re-births); for it emerges from one side. The 
Path emerges from the sign, and cuts ofi the process; for it 
emerges from both sides. This is the manner of their pro­
duction:—On whatever occasion there is emergence of the 
Path, on that occasion the adaptation^ is not once, nor for the 
fifth time. For adaptation at the first occurrence does not 
get the causal relation called ‘ repetition.’ At the fifth time, 
owing to its nearness to the life-continuum, it trembles,for 
at the fifth time the apperception is known to have fallen (in 
strength).® Hence it is neither at the first nor the fifth time. 
But to one of great understanding there are two adapta­
tions, thirdly, adoption, fourthly. Path-consciousness, [then] 
three fruitional consciousnesses, after which comes the lapse 
into the (subconscious) life-continuum. To one of medium 
understanding there are three adaptations, [then] (4) adoption, 
(5) path-consciousness, [then] two fruitional [movements of] 
consciousness, after which is the lapse into the life-con­
tinuum. To one of inferior understanding there are four adap­
tations, then (5) adoption, then (6) Path-consciousness, then 
(7) fruitional consciousness, after which is the lapse into the 
life-continuum. Of these three persons (the emergence of the 
Path) ought to be said concerning the person of medium under­
standing and not concerning persons of great, or of inferior 
understanding. For on whatever occasion there is emergence 
of the path, on that occasion the element of mind-consciousness, 
inoperative, unconditional and accompanied by indifference, 
becomes ‘ adverting ’ of the mind-door, and makes the 
aggregates of the field of insight its object, setting the life­
continuum in motion. Taking the aggregates taken by that 
adverting, there immediately arises the first insight of adap­
tation with apperception. This occurs among those aggre­
gates as impermanent, ill or soulless, [232] dispels the gross 
darkness covering the Four Truths and ceases, revealing the
Anuloma, the stage preceding ‘ adoption.’
® And so is unable to be the cause of ‘ adoption.’—Tilca, 
® Just as a man’s strength fails in old age.
     

--- PAGE 30 ---

312 Risings of Consciousness
more clearly the three characteristics. Immediately after­
wards arises the second adaptation. Of these two, the first 
is devoid of the causal relation of repetition, and renders 
service to the second, which is sharp, valiant, clear, and which, 
occurring even in that object (of the field of insight) in that 
manner {i.e., of being impermanent, ill, soulless), dispels the 
darkness of medium density covering the Four Truths and 
revealing all the more clearly the three characteristics, ceases. 
Immediately afterwards arises the third adaptation, to which 
the second renders service. Froiii its acquirement of the 
causal relation of repetition, it is sharp, valiant, clear, occurs 
in that object in that manner, completely dispels the residuum 
of darkness of slight density covering the Four Truths, reveals 
all the more clearly the three characteristics and ceases. So 
when, by the three adaptations the darkness covering the 
Truths is dispelled, there immediately arises the insight of 
adoption making Nibbana its object.’^
Here is an illustration; They say a certain man who had. 
eyes to see, went forth at night saying, ' I will observe the 
conjunction of the stars,’ and looked up to see the moon, which 
from being covered-by clouds did not appear to him. Then 
a wind came and dispersed the densest clouds, another wind 
the lighter clouds and a third wind the thinnest of the clouds; 
so that he saw the moon in the sky clear of clouds and observed 
the conjunction of the stars. Herein, the darkness of our 
lower nature, dense, thick, medium, thin, covering the Truths, 
is like the three clouds; the three kinds of adaptation-con­
sciousness are like the three winds; the insight of adoption is 
like the seeing man; Nibbana is like the moon; the dispelling 
of the darkness covering the Truths by each adaptation­
consciousness is like the dispersing of the three clouds one by 
one by the winds; [233] the making of pure Nibbana the object 
of the insight of adoption when the darkness covering the 
facts disperses is like the seeing by the man of the pure moon 
in the sky clear of clouds. As the three winds are able only 
to disperse the clouds covering the moon and not to see the
* Compendium, loo. cit.
     

--- PAGE 31 ---

‘ Palli ^-Consciousness 313
moon, SO the adaptations are able only to dispel the darkness 
covering the Truths, and not to make Nibbana the object. 
As the man is able to see the moon, but not to disperse the 
clouds; so the insight of adoption is able to make Nibbana the 
object, but not to dispel the darkness of our lower nature. 
Thus adaptation has conditioned things for its object and 
adoption has Nibbana for its object.
For were adoption to take the object taken by adaptation, 
a subsequent adaptation would follow it;^ and so there would 
not be just the rise of the Path. But the insight of adoption, 
not taking the object of adaptation, does not allow the repro­
duction of adaptation. And although it itself is not adverting, 
it stands at the place of the adverting consciousness and, as 
though giving a sign to the Path, ‘ Arise thus !’ ceases. And 
the Path, not letting go the sign given, follows it without a 
break, and arises piercing and bursting the mass of greed, 
hate and delusion never before pierced and burst.
Here is an illustration: They say an archer had a hundred 
planks placed at a height of one hundred bowlengths, and 
wrapping his face with a cloth fixed an arrow and stood 
in a car. Another man rolled the car, and when the planlo 
came facing the archer, made a sign with a stick. . The 
archer, not letting go the sign of the stick, shot the arrow 
and pierced the planks. Herein the insight of adoption is like 
the sign .of the stick; the insight of the Path is like the archer; 
The maldng Nibbana the object and the piercing and burst­
ing of the mass of greed, hate and delusion, never before 
pierced and burst, by the insight of the Path at the sign given 
by the insight of adoption, is like the archer’s piercing the 
planks by not letting go the sign of the stick.^
[234] This bursting of the mass of greed, etc., is also called 
the complete destruction of the causeway, the extirpation of 
the groimd that had been got. Indeed, the Path has only one 
function:—to reject latent evil tendencies.® In rejecting
1 Namely, by our lower nature for rebirth. ‘ Adoption ’ (gotrabhu) 
will have become ‘ adaptation ’ (anuloma).—Tr. .
* Fis. Magga, p. 674.
® The seven anusaya’s. CowpeJidhew, p. 176.—Tr.
     

--- PAGE 32 ---

314 Risings oj Consciousness 
latent tendencies one is said to emerge from the (five aggregates 
as) sign and to cut ofi their proceeding. The sign is the sign 
of matter, feeling, perception, mental co-eflicients, conscious­
ness ; the process is the continual round of these five aggregates 
and is twofold: grasped at, not grasped at. Of these two, 
the teachers, saying that the shadow of the emergence of 
the path from the process not grasped at was seen, afiumed 
that it emerged from such an occurrence.
By the path of stream-winning five kinds of consciousness— 
four associated with false views and one^iccompanied by doubt 
—are put away. These five kinds of consciousness produce 
matter, which is called the material aggregate not grasped at, 
they themselves being called the conscious aggregate; feeling, 
perception, and mental co-efficients associated with them are 
called the three immaterial aggregates. Concerning these, 
if the path of stream-winning were not cultivated by the 
stream-winner, these five kinds of consciousness would break 
out among the six objects of sense. But the path of stream­
winning preventing this, and destroying the causew'ay so 
that it cannot arise again, is said to emerge from the ‘ not 
grasped at.’
By the path of Once-returning six kinds of consciousness, 
four dissociated from false views, two accompanied by grief—' 
namely, gross sense-desire and ill-will—are put away. By the 
path of NeVCr-returning the same six kinds—namely, subtler 
sense-desire and ill-will—are put away. By the path of 
Arahantship, five kinds of immoral consciousness—four disso­
ciated from views and one accompanied by distraction—are 
put away. In this, if those three paths were not cultivated 
by Ariyans, these kinds of immoral consciousness would break 
out among the six objects of sense. But the three paths 
preventing this, and destroying the causeway so that it cannot 
emerge again, were said to emerge from the ‘ not grasped at.’
The teachers also said, that when the shadow of the emerging 
from the process grasped at was seen, [235] it emerged from 
such process. For if the stream-winner were not to cultivate 
the path of stream-winning, the process of the aggregates 
grasped at would go on in the continual stream of becoming
     

--- PAGE 33 ---

315
C
1
t
‘ Path '-Consciousness
the beginning whereof is unknown prior to seven rebirths. 
♦And wliy ? Because of the existence of the conditions of the 
process. But in point of fact the path of stream-winning 
arising severs these five corruptions—^three fetters, latent 
bias of wTong view, latent bias of doubt. Now (that the path 
of stream-winning has arisen), whence for the stream-winner 
could the process of the aggregates grasped at go on in that 
continual stream of becoming the beginning whereof is mi- 
known prior to seven rebirths ?* So the path of stream­
winning bringing about the discontinuity of the aggregates 
grasped at is said to emerge from the ‘ grasped at.’
If the Once-returner were not to cultivate the path of Once- 
returning, the process of the ‘ grasped at ’ would go on in the 
five rebirths, after the next two. And why ? Because of the 
existence of the conditions of the procedure. But in point 
of fact the path of Once-returning arising severs these four 
corruptions: gross fetters of sense-desires and of aversion, gross 
latent bias of sense-desires and gross latent bias of aversion; 
Now (that the path of Once-returning has risen), whence for 
the Once-returner could the process of the aggregates grasped 
at go on in five existences excepting two ? So the path of 
Once-returning bringing about the discontinuity of the 
aggregates grasped at is said to emerge from the ‘ grasped at.’
If the Never-returner were not to cultivate the path of 
Never-returning, the process of the aggregates grasped at 
would go on in the second existence after the next. And why ? 
Because of the existence of the conditions of the process. But 
in point of fact the path of Never-returning arising severs 
these four corruptions:—the subtle fetters of sense-desires 
and of aversion, the subtle latent bias of sense-desire, the 
subtle latent bias of aversion. Now (that the path of Never- 
returning has arisen), whence for the Never-returner could 
the process of the aggregates grasped at go on in the next 
rebirth save one ? So the path of Never-returning bringing 
about the discontinuity of the aggregates grasped at is said 
to rise from that which is ‘ grasped at.’
If the Arahant were not to cultivate the path of Arahant-
♦—♦ Omitted in P.T.S. ed.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 34 ---

316 Risings of Consciousness
ship, the process of the aggregates grasped at would go on in 
material and immaterial existences. And why ? Because of 
the existence of the conditions of the process. But in point of 
fact the path of Arahantship arising severs these eight corrup­
tions :—lust of material existence, lust of immaterial existence, 
conceit, distraction, ignorance, the latent bias of conceit, the 
latent bias of lust of existence, the latent bias of ignorance. 
Now (that the path of Arahantship has arisen), whence for the 
Arahant could the process of the aggregates grasped at go on 
in a new existence ? So the path of Arahantship [236] bring­
ing about the discontinuity of the aggregates grasped at is 
said to emerge from the ' grasped at.’ And of these the 
» path of Stream-winning emerges from existence in purgatory, 
the Path of Once-returning emerges from one portion of the 
happy tendency of sensuous existence, the path of never- 
returning emerges from sensuous existence, the path of 
Arahantship emerges from material and immaterial existences, 
also from all existences. So say the teachers. And this is 
the text for the elucidation of this meaning (i.e., of emergence 
from the process of the ‘ grasped at ’).
It is owing to the cessation of constructive consciousness^ 
by the insight belonging to the Path of Stream-winning that 
whatever mind and matter may have arisen in the continual 
stream of becoming, the begirming whereof is unknown prior to 
seven rebirth's, they cease, are suppressed, terminated, calmed 
in that Path. It is owing to the cessation of constructive con­
sciousness by the insight belonging to the Path of Once-return­
ing that whatever nund and matter may have arisen in the 
last five existences save two, they cease, are suppressed, 
terminated, calmed in that Path. It is owing to the cessation 
of constructive consciousness by the insight belonging to the 
Path of Never-returning that whatever mind and matter may 
have arisen in the two last existences save one, they cease, 
are suppressed, terminated, calmed in that Path. It is owing 
to the cessation of constructive consciousness by the insight
1 Which gives result in purgatory and in happy tendencies beyond 
the seventh rebirth.—Tr.
     

--- PAGE 35 ---

‘ Path '-Consciousness 317
belonging to the Path of Arahantship that whatever mind 
and matter may have arisen in the material or immaterial 
element, they cease, are suppressed, terminated, calmed in that 
Path.' This is the text. But, together with the cessation of 
the last consciousness of the Aiahant who has entered on the 
utter passing away without leaving any residue of life, under­
standing, mindfulness, mind and matter cease, are suppressed, 
terminated, calmed. So far is the decision regarding the sign. 
kO As regards ‘ the progress, the chief influence,' does the pro­
gress waver or not ? It wavers. To expand: the four paths for 
the Tathagata and Sariputta the Elder were of easy progress 
and quick intuition. The first path of Slahamoggallana the 
Elder was of easy progress and quick intuition, the upper three* 
paths were of painful progress but quick intuition. And why ? 
From oppression by drowsiness. They say that the supreme 
^Buddha looked after the Elder, as though he were a child, 
for seven days; and one day the Elder sat dosing. Then the 
teacher said, ‘ Moggallana, Moggallana, are you sleepy with 
heavy eyelids, brahmin ?’ The progress of a disciple who had 
attained to such superknowlcdge wavered. [237] Will not, 
then, the progress of others waver ? Verily, of one bhikkhu, 
the four paths are of painful progress and sluggish intuition, 
of another are of painful progress and quick intuition, of 
another they are of easy progress and sluggish intuition, of 
another, of easy progress and quick intuition. Of some one 
the first path js of painful progress and sluggish intuition, the 
second path is of painful progress and quick intuition, the 
third path is of easy progress and sluggish intuition, the 
I fourth path is of easy progress and quick intuition. And the 
dominant influence wavers like the progress. For, of one 
bhikkhu the four paths are dominated by desire-to-do, of 
another by energy, of another by consciousness, of another 
by investigation. And of one the first path is dominated 
by. desire-to-do, the second by energy, the third by con­
sciousness, the fourth by investigation.’
1 The text here has Pakinnakakaiha nitthitii (end of the discourse 
on particulars), but it is not obvious where this discourse begins.
     

--- PAGE 36 ---

318 Bisings of Consciousness.
Now’- becau.se, in cultivating the transcendental moral 
consciousness [the student] cultivates not merely the Jhana, 
in the sense of closely examining the object, but also the path 
in the sense of escape from the round of rebirths, the applica­
tion in mindfulness in the sense of having the mental object 
present, the supreme efforts in the sense of making effort, the 
bases of supernormal potency in the sense of accomplishing, 
the controlling faculty in the sense of dominant influence, the 
strength in the sense of not shaking, the factor of wisdom in 
the sense of being enlightened, the fact in the sense of being 
true, the calm in the sense of non-distraction, the idea in the 
sense of emptiness, the aggregate in the sense of a group, the 
sense-organ in the sense of exerting, the element in the sense 
of emptiness, intrinsic nature, and absence of a living entity, 
the nutriment in the sense of causal relation, the contact in 
the sense of touching, the feeling in the sense of experiencing, 
the perception in the sense of noting, the volition in the sense 
of co-ordinating, the consciousness in the sense of cognizing, 
therefore, in order to explain these nineteen terms, a beginning 
is once more made with, ‘ which are the states that are moral ?’* 
So with the meaning; ‘ he cultivates this also, he cultivates 
that also,’ twenty methods have been showij by way of 
personal inclination and of adorning the discourse. To 
expand: In the company of devas seated to listen to the Law, 
[238] whichever devas know in the course of the preaching the 
spiritual in the sense of closely examining the object, to them 
in a fitting manner it has been preached as Jhana . . . those 
devas who know, in the course of the preaching, consciousness 
in the sense of cognizing, to them in a fitting maimer it has 
been preached as consciousness. This is personal inclination.
Furthermore, the supreme Buddha, on account of his true 
enlightenment and because of his ten powers, four groimds of 
confidence, four analyses, six kinds of special knowledge, can 
fix and preach the discourse as he wishes. If he so desires,
* Some read vibhav-ento, -eti, for bhav-ento, -eti, thus altering the 
meaning into ‘ Now because, in explaining transcendental moral con­
sciousness, the teacher explained,’ etc.—Tr.
2 Dhs. § 358.
     

--- PAGE 37 ---

‘ Path '-Consciousness 319
he can preach it as the transcendental Jhana in the sense of 
closely Examining the object, as the transcendental Path in 
the sense of escape ... as the transcendental consciousness 
in the sense of cognizing. Of them, as where the transcen­
dental Jhana is described, ten methods have been classified, 
so with the Path, etc. Thus in twenty places two hundred 
methods have been classified.
Now, in order to show the classification of the dominant 
infiuence once more a beginning is made ndth ‘ which are the 
states that are moral wherein the transcendental Jliana 
produced by making desire-to-act the principal, the chief, 
the forerunner is kno5vn as dominated by desire-to-act. And 
the same with the rest. Thus in the preceding formulated 
method there are two hundred methods, and there are two 
hundred each in those dominated by desire-to-act, etc. Thus 
the king of the Law has shown the First Path in classifying 
it by a thousand methods.
End 0/ the First Path.
CHAPTER n
THE SECOND PATH•
Now, in order to show the Second Path, and so on, again a 
beginning is made with ' which are the states that are moral ?
Herein ‘ for the diminution of sense-desire and ill-will ’ means 
in order to diminish the strength of these corruptions. Here 
the diminution should be understood to take place in two 
ways: by occasional production and by feebleness in breaking 
out. For to the Once-returner the lower nature does not 
arise frequently as in the majority who follow the round of 
rebirths. It arises occasionally like the sparse blades of grass 
in an imperfectly mown field. And when it does arise it does 
not arise crushing, spreading, covering, [239] making darkness, 
as in the case of the people who follow the round of rebirths.
1 Dhs. §§ 359-r»t. * lb. § 362.
     

--- PAGE 38 ---

320 Risings of Consciousness
But being put away by the two Paths, it becomes very weak 
and is attenuated in form like a film of cloud and a fly’s wing. 
Some Elders say on this point, ‘ to the Once-returner the lower 
nature arises thick and strong, although it may only arise 
after a long interval. For verily, he has sous and daughters.’ 
This saying is not material. For sons and daughters are due 
to the mere exercise of bodily functions. But the lower 
nature, being put away by the two paths, lacks strength. 
Hence the diminution of the Once-returner’s lower nature 
should be understood as due to the two reasons of occasional 
production and feebleness of power, ' Of the second ’ is 
second by way of calculation and of the second production. 
' For the attainment of the stage ’ means for the purpose of 
getting the fruition of religious life. And so for the Tliird 
and the Fourth Paths. IVe shall speak only of what is 
specially distinctive. ‘ The controlling faculty of perfected 
knowledge’ is the knowing controlling faculty, said to be 
that controlling faculty which knows, without passing beyond 
the limit of knowledge made by the first Path, the four 
facts known by that Path.
In the section of the exposition also its meaning is to be , 
understood in the same way. In the section of the groups 
also, together with it are nine controlling faculties. The rest 
is to be understood by the previous method.
CHAPTER III
THE THIRD AND FOURTH PATHS
In the Third Paty ' for the complete putting away ’ means 
for the purpose of entirely putting away those ‘ Fetters ’ which 
have been diminished by the path of Once-returning.
In the Fourth Path^ ‘ for the complete putting away of lust 
for the material, for the immaterial, conceit, distraction, 
ignorance ’ means for the purpose of entirely putting away 
these five upper ‘ Fetters.’ Of these, lust for the material is
1 Dhs. § 363. 2 76. § 364.
     

--- PAGE 39 ---

The Third and Fourth Paths 321
for material existence. Lust for the iin- 
lust and desire for immaterial existence.
lust and desire 
material means 
Conceit is that whiph is killed by the Path of Arahantship. 
[240] So are distraction and ignorance. In these two Paths 
also the ninth controlling faculty is perfected knowledge.^
In all the paths, by the due order of terms, there are alto­
gether sixty terms. With the four absolute factors they 
make sixty-four. Undivided they are thirty-three. The 
sections of the groups and ‘ Emptiness ’ remain the same. And 
there are one thousand methods in each of these in the second 
Path, etc., as in the first. Thus the king of the Law has 
shown the four Paths classifying them by four thousand 
methods.
In the Saccaviblianga^ transcendental points of sixty thou­
sand methods have been set down by way of these four Paths 
(or these one thousand methods), so also there have been set 
down similar points of twenty thousand methods in the 
SatipaUliana Viblianga, of twenty thousand methods in the 
Sammappadliaiia Viblianga, of thirty-two thousand methods 
iu the Iddliippdda Viblianga, of thirty-two thousand methods 
in the Baijliaiiga Viblianga, or twenty-eight thousand methods 
in the Maggavibliahga. But in the Dliammasanganl four 
thousand methods in the four Paths have been set down. Out 
of the four paths in the first Path of the first Jhana eight 
factors have been classified. Likewise in the second, etc.
In the first Path right view abandons wrong view; hence 
it, with right intention, etc,, should be understood in the 
sense of abandoning the opposite. This being so, because the 
J sixty-two heresies^ have been abandoned by the first Path, 
there would be no heresy to be abandoned by the three higher 
Paths. How, then, can right view be mentioned in them 
As whether there is poison or not, an antidote is called anti­
dote; so whether there is wrong view or not, right view is 
called right view. If this were so, right view would be a mere
>• B-P.E. § 364a. Cf. Iti-vuUalca, p. 53.
2 Viblianga, ch. iv., vii.-xi. ’ Described in Dialogues, i. 27-55.
* Reading katham for katam.
II. 3
     

--- PAGE 40 ---

322 Risings of Consciousness
name and have no function in the three higher Paths, and the 
path-factors would not be fulfilled; hence it is proper that 
right view be made to have its function and the path-factors 
be fulfilled. But in the three higher Paths right view should 
be shown to have its function by fixing according to what is 
obtainable. To expand; There is a certain conceit to be killed 
by the three higher Paths. It has its locus in heresy. Bight 
view abandons that conceit. Hence it is right view. For in 
the path of Stream-winning right view abandons wrong view. 
Moreover, the Stream-winner has a conceit which is to be 
killed by the path of Once-returning, and which has its locus 
in heresy. Right view abandons that conceit. Hence it is 
right view. Only the Stream-winner has an intention which 
is co-existent with seven [of the twelve] kinds of immoral 
consciousness,^ by which there take place movements of the 
vocal organs, of the physical limbs, enjoyment of the requi­
sites, [241] the co-existent® endeavour, the intrinsic nature of 
immindfulness, the co-existent® one-pointedness of mind. 
These states [beginning with intention] are called wrong 
intention, etc. In the Path of Once-returning right intention', 
etc., are so called by the putting aw'ay of those states, wrong 
intention, etc. So, in the Path of Once-returning,^ the eight 
factors of the Path come by performing their own functions.
The Once-returner has a conceit which has to be killed by 
the path of Never-returning, and which has its locus in heresy. 
Only to the Once-returner intention, etc., as co-existent with 
seven kinds of immoral consciousness [are known as wrong 
intention, etc.]. By the putting away of these the performance 
of their ow’n functions by the eight factors in the path of 
Never-returning should be understood.
The Never-returner has a conceit which has to be killed by 
the path of Arahantship and which has its locus in heresy. 
But intention, etc., co-existent with five kinds of immoral 
consciousness,^ which only the Never-returner has, are known
1 Read: satta akusala .., Namely, four kinds dissociated from false 
views, two rooted in hate, and one connected with distraction.—-Tr.
® Co-existent with those seven kinds.—Pyi.
3 Namely, four dissociated from false views and distraction.—Pi/h-
     

--- PAGE 41 ---

The Third and Fourth Paths 323
as wrong intention, etc. By the putting away of these wrong 
states, the performance of their own functions by the eight 
factors in the path of Arahant.ship should be understood.
JThe first out of the four Paths discerns the Four Truths, 
which are also discerned by the three higher Paths. The latter 
do not discern anything not discerned by the first. This dis­
course is one generally accepted among the teachers. But 
the sectary^ says, that in them one does see what has not been 
discerned by the first Path. He should be asked, ' Which 
controlling faculty in the first Path do you single out [as 
functioning herein] ?’ If he knows, he will reply, ‘ The con­
trolling faculty of believing, " I shall come to know the un- 
IvTiown.” And when he is asked, ‘ AATiich controlling 
faculty in the three higher Paths will you classify ?’ he will 
reply, ‘ The controlling faculty of perfected knowledge.’^ He 
should be told, ‘ If one sees something which has not been 
discerned by the first Path, you must classify the controlling 
faculty of believing, “ I shall come to know the unknown” 
[which is peculiar to the First Path], under the three higher 
Paths also, so that it may meet the question.' He would 
again ask, ‘ Does another path put away other corruptions, 
or those already put away ?’ When he is told, ‘ Another path 
puts away other corruptions,’ he says further, ' If another 
path puts away other corruptions not yet put away, then one 
also [by it] sees Truths unseen by the first Path.’ He should 
be asked, ‘ How many Truths are there ? ’ If he knows, he will 
answer, ‘ Four.’ He should be told, ‘ In your doctrine sixteen 
” truths ” would arise. You see truths unseen even by the 
Buddhas. You are a seer of many “ truths.” Do not take 
such a view. There is nothing new in seeing the Truths. But 
one puts away corruptions not yet put away.’
•> 'V [242] In this matter of nothing being new in seeing the 
Truths, the simile of the basket has been taken:—They say 
that a certain man kept four treasure-baskets in a grand 
treasure-room. At night some business in connection with them 
arising, he opened the door, lit a lamp and, when the darkness
1 Vitan (lavadins. Cf. Dialogues i. 14, n. 3; 167/; awda6oie, 6, n. 3.
’ Dhs. § 296. jl6o«e, p. 295. » S(5e above, p. 320.
     

--- PAGE 42 ---

324 Risings of Consciousness
was dispersed by the lamp and the baskets were visible, he 
I did the business, shut the door and went away, and darkness 
was spread abroad again. A second time and a third time 
he did likewise. When, for the fourth time, the door was 
opened and he was looking to find the baskets invisible in the 
darkness, behold ! the sun arose. "When through the bright­
ness of the sun the darkness disappeared, he did his business 
with the baskets and went away. In this simile the four 
baskets are like the four Truths; the time of the opening of 
the door for some business with them is like the time of the 
putting forth of insight for the Path of Stream-winning; the 
darkness is like the obscurity covering the Truths; the light 
of the lamp is the light of the Path of Stream-winning; the 
manifestation of the baskets to the men on the disappearance 
of the darkness is like the manifestation of the Truths to the 
insight of the Path. And the Truths manifested to the 
insight of the Path are manifested to the person endowed with 
the Path. The time of his going.away after doing his business 
with the baskets is like the time of cessation of the Path of 
Stream-winning after it has done its part in putting away 
corruptions. The spreading of darkness again is like the 
obscurity yet covering the Truths and to be killed by the 
three higher Paths. On the second occasion the time of the 
opening of the door is like the time of putting forth insight'of 
the Path of Once-returning; the light of the lamp is like that 
of the Path of Once-returning; the time of departure after 
doing the business of the baskets is like the time of cessation 
of the Path of Once-returning after it has done its part in 
putting away the corruptions; the spreading of darkness 
again is like the obscurity still covering the Truths and to be 
killed by the two higher Paths. On the third occasion the 
time of opening the door is like the time of putting forth 
insight of the Path of Never-returning; the light of the lamp 
is like that of the Path of Never-returning; the time of depar­
ture after doing the business of the baskets is like the time 
of cessation of the Path of Never-returning after it has done 
its part in putting away the corruptions; the spreading of 
darkness again is like the obscurity covering the Truths and
     

--- PAGE 43 ---

325The Third and Fourth Paths
to be killed by the higher Path of Arahantship. On the fourth 
occasion the time of opening the door is like the time of putting 
forth the insight of the Path of Arahantship; thfi iising of the 
sun is like the production of the Path of Arahantship; the 
disappearance of darkness is like the dispelling of the obscurity 
covering the Truths by the Path of Arahantship; [243] the 
manifestation of the baskets to the man at the disappearance of 
darkness is like the manifestation of the Pour Truths to the 
insight of the Path of Arahantship; and the Truths manifested 
to the insight are manifested to the person; the time of 
departure after the business with the baskets is like the casting 
ofi of all the corruptions by the Path of Arahantship; the 
time of the occurrence of light since simrise is like the non­
obscurity of the darkness covering the Truths since the 
production of the Path of Arahantship. So far the sinoile 
shows that nothing new is added after the Truths are seen. 
For the three higher Paths discern in them only what has 
been discerned (by the first Path).
As regards ‘ another Path puts away other corruptions,’ the 
’ simile of the soap has been taken:—A certain man gave dirty 
clothes to the washerman, who applied the three kinds of 
f soap consisting of saline soil, potash and dung powder. When 
J he had ascertained that these alkalines were dissolved, he 
washed the clothes in the water and removed the grossest dirt. 
Then knowing them to be not yet altogether cleansed, he 
applied the three soaps a second time, washed them in the water 
and removed the finer dirt. Then knowing them to be still 
not altogether clean, he applied the soaps for the third time, 
washed them in the water and removed the finest dirt. Then 
knowing them to be not yet altogether cleansed, he applied 
the soaps for the fourth time, washed them in the water, 
removed all the dirt from within their texture, and retmmed 
them to the owner, who put them in a scented chest and wore 
them at will. Here the dirty clothes are like the mind follow­
ing after the corruptions; the time of applying the three kinds 
of soap is like the time of producing work in the threefold dis­
cernment; the removal of the grossest dirt after the washing 
is the casting off of five corruptions by the Path oi Stream-
     

--- PAGE 44 ---

326 Risings of Consciousness
winning. The re-application of the soaps for the second time 
is the procedure of work in the threefold discernment which 
knows the mind to be not yet altogether cleansed; the removal 
of the finer dirt than in the first case is like the casting ofi of 
the pair of gross ' Fetters ’ by the path of Once-returning; the 
re-application of the three soaps when it is known that the 
clothes are not yet [244] altogether cleansed, is like the pro­
cedure of work in the threefold discernment which knows the 
mind to be nof yet altogether cleansed; the removal of the 
still finei; dirt is like the casting off of the pair of subtle 
‘ Fetters ’ by the Path of Never-returning. The re-application 
of the soaps when it is known that the clothes are not yet 
altogether cleansed is like the procedure of work in the three­
fold discernment which knows that the mind is not yet alto­
gether cleansed; the removal of dirt from within the texture 
by a subsequent washing is like the casting off of the eight 
corruptions by the Path of Arahantship; the wearing at any 
desired moment of the clean clothes resembling silver plates 
and kept in a scented chest, is the living at any desired moment 
of the life of fruitional attainment by the cleansed mind purged 
of the' intoxicants.’ Thus runs the simile. ‘ Friends, as the 
garment is old and dirty, and the owners gave it to the washer­
man, who kneaded and soaked it in the three kinds of soap: 
consisting of saline earth, potash and dimg powder, and washed 
it in clean yvater; although it became clean, exceedingly 
clean, a very subtle smell of salt earth, or potash, or dung 
powder remained unremoved in it; the washerman returned 
it to the owner, who kept it in a chest perfumed with scent; 
and the subtle residuum of the smell of salt earth, or potash, 
or dung powder was completely removed—so, friends, 
although the Ariyan disciple has put away the five lower 
“ Fetters,” there is in him a subtle residuum from among the 
five grasping aggregates of the conceit of “ I am,” of the 
desire^ for " I am,” of the latent bias of “ I am.” Subse­
quently he lives in the discernment of the rise and fall of the
J- According to the Tlka ‘ desire’ {cliando) here=craving (Zai^Aa), 
and the latent bias is in the form of craving and of conceit.
® Saijiyutta iii. 131.
     

--- PAGE 45 ---

The Third and Fourth Paths 327
five grasping aggregates. And to him who so lives discerning 
that ‘ these are material qualities,’ ‘ this is the origin of 
them,’ ' this is the end of them,’ ' this is feeling ’ . . . ' this 
is perception ’ . . . ‘ these are mental co-efficieiits ’ . .. ‘ this is 
consciousness,’ ' this is the origin of consciousness,’ ' this 
is the end of consciousness,’ that subtle residuum, which is 
his from among the five grasping aggregates of the conceit 
of ' I am,’ of the craving for ' I am,’ of the latent bias of 
craving and conceit of * I am ’ is completely removed. 
[245] Of the four Paths the Path of Stream-winning has put 
away, by way of factors of consciousness, five immoral kinds 
of consciousness, together with the evil states arising; the 
Path of Once-returning has? diminished, by way of factors of 
consciousness, two classes of consciousness accompanied by 
. grief, together with the evil states arising; the Path of Never- 
returning has put away the same two kinds of consciousness 
together with the associated states; the Path of Arahantship 
has put away, by way of factors of consciousness, five kinds of 
immoral consciousness together with the evil states arising. 
From the.time when these two kinds of immoral consciousness 
are put away there is no such thing as a corruption which may 
arise a^ain in the Arahant by way of a factor of consciousness.
Here is an illustration:—They say a great king placed guards 
at the frontier country and lived at the capital in the enjoyment 
of kingship. »,/fiien the frontier country rose in rebellion. At 
that time a dozen robber chiefs together with many thousands 
of men plundered the kingdom. Ofiicials from the frontier 
country sent word to the king;—‘ Yom; Majesty, the frontier 
country has risen.’ The king sent back a message, ‘ Catch 
the robbers without hesitating. I will reward your work.’ 
At the first engagement the official forces killed five robber­
chiefs together with many thousands of men. The remaining 
seven took each his o^vn followers and entered the moimtains. 
The officials informed the king of the occurrence. The king 
sent them treasure, saying, ‘ I will reward your work; catch the 
robbers.’ At the second engagement the ministers defeated 
two robber-chiefs and reduced the strength of their followers, 
who all fled and entered the mountains. The king was
     

--- PAGE 46 ---

328 Risings of Consciousness
informed of that occurrence and again sent them treasure, 
saying, 'Catch them without delay!’ At the third engage­
ment the official forces killed the two chiefs together with their 
companions, and informed the king of the occurrence. Again 
the king sent them treasure, saying, ‘ Catch the remainder 
without delay.’ At the fourth engagement the official 
forces Idlled the five chiefs with their followers. There was 
no one going by the name of a robber after the death of those 
twelve chiefs. The districts were secure from danger and the 
people lived dancing their children on their breast so to speak. 
And the king surrounded by the victorious heroes [246] enjoyed 
great glory in a magnificent palace. Here the great king 
is like the King of the Law; the officials living in the frontier 
country are like the religious aspirants; the twelve robber­
chiefs are like the twelve kinds of immoral consciousness;’- 
their many thousands of companions are like the evil states 
arising by way of the factors of consciousness; the time of 
information of the revolt of the frontier country is like the 
time of telling the teacher when the corruptions arise with 
reference to an object:—‘ Reverend sir, in me corruptions 
have arisen ’; the giving of treasure with the message, ‘ Catch 
the thieves without delay!’ is like the announcement 
of a station of religious exercise by the King of the Law: 
‘ Bhikkhu, put down the corruptions ’; the time of killing the 
five robber-chiefs with their followers is like putting away the 
five kinds of immoral consciousness with their associates by 
the Path of Stream-winning; the renewed reporting of pro­
cedure to the king is like telling the supreme Buddha the merits 
acquired; the giving again of treasure, saying, ‘ Catch the rest,’ 
is like the announcement of the insight of the Path of Once- 
returning by the Blessed One; the reduction of the'strength 
of the two robber-chiefs with their followers at the second 
engagement is like the diminution of the two kinds of con­
sciousness of melancholy with their associates by the Path 
of Once-returning; the renewed reporting of procedure to 
the king is like telling the Teacher the merits acquired; the
1 See below, Part IX.
     

--- PAGE 47 ---

The Third and Fourth Paths 329
giving again of treasure, saying, * Catch the thieves without 
delay,' is like the announcement of the insight of the Path 
of Never-returning by the Blessed One; the killing of the two 
robber-chiefs with their followers at the third engagement 
is like putting away the two kinds of consciousness with their 
associates by the Path of Never-returning; the.renewed 
reporting of procedure to the king is like telling the Tathagata 
the merits acquired; the giving again of treasure, saying, ‘ Catch 
them without delay,’ is like the announcement of the 
insight of the Path of Arahantship by the Blessed One; the 
time of security of the district after the destruction of the five 
robber-chiefs with their followers at the fourth engagement 
is like the impossibility of an immoral state arising again by 
way of a factor of consciousness after the putting away of the 
twelve kinds of immoral consciousness, when the remaining 
five kinds of immoral consciousness with their associates are 
put away by the Path of Arahantship; the enjoyment of great 
glory in a magnificent palace by the king surrounded by the 
victorious heroes is like [247] the enjoyment of the bliss of 
whichever of the three kinds of fruitional attainment he prefers 
—the ‘ Emptiness,’ the ' Signless,’ the ‘ Undesired ’—by the 
King of the Law surrounded by the Arahants.
Here ends the Exposition of the term ‘ moral consciousness.'
     

--- PAGE 48 ---

P4BT IX-DISCOURSE ON IMMORAL
CONSCIOUSNESS
CHAPTER I
DISCOURSE ON THE SECTION OF THE SU5DIARY 
OF STATES "
Now in order to show the classification of the term ‘ immoral 
state ’ a beginning has been made with, ‘ Which are the states 
that are immoral Herein the different sections of the 
determination of states, etc., and the decision of the meanings 
of terms already mentioned above are to be imderstood in the 
way given above. And we shall explain just what is special 
here and there to this discourse.
Herein, in the determination of the occasion, because there 
is no series of planes of the immoral as there is of the moral, 
therefore this immoral consciousness, though it certainly is 
of the realm of sense, is not said to be so.^ As regards the 
phrase ' associated with opinions,’ dittTii (opinions) is the same 
as ditthi-gatami, like gulliagatam^ mutlagatam, etc. Or, from 
there being no species to be understood, it is simply ‘ opinions,’ 
and ditthigalasampayullann, means simply associated with 
opinions (or views). The origin of this wrong view called ditthi- 
gata should be known to be due to these reasons:—the hearing 
of evil doctrine, evil friendship, the desire not to see Ariyans, 
unsystematic thought; in other words; of those doctrines 
which are associated with erroneous views, such hearing being 
preceded by much vain imagining, by a want of centrality 
of mind and a lack of scrutiny; evil friendship said to be the 
companionship with evil friends who have failed in the true 
doctrine; the desire not to see Ariyans such as the Buddhas 
and good men; unskilfulness in the Ariyan Law of different
1 Dhs. § 305. ® Following the M. reading in P.T.S. ed.—Ed.
330
     

--- PAGE 49 ---

Immoral Consciousness 331
kinds, .such as the four applications of mindfulness, etc.; the 
absence of discipline or the destruction of restraint with respect 
to the Ariyan Law (divided into the restraint taught in the 
Patimokkha, the controlling faculties, niindfidness, knowledge, 
elimination) and the doctrine of good men; and addiction to 
tumultuous festivities by means of unsystematic thought de­
veloped by the foregoing reasons. That this consciousness is 
automatic should be considered in the way mentioned above.’-
[248] In the section of the summary of states,‘ contact ’ is 
co-existent with an immoral consciousness. And the same 
with ‘ feeling,’ etc. Thus their being immoral is what alone 
distinguishes them from the former states.
The ‘one-pointedness of mind’ is the steadiness of mind 
free from distraction when taking life, etc. Indeed, men con­
centrating the mind are not distracted and let fall unerring 
weapons on the bodies of creatures. Being well concentrated 
they steal others’ property. With mind [governed by] a single 
function they fall into ^v^ong behaviour. So there is one- 
pointedness of mind in the occurrence ot immorality.
' Wrong view ’ is untrue view; or, from being held amiss, 
a false view is a wrong view. A view loathed by the wise as 
bringing disadvantage is also a wrong view. And the same 
with ' WTong intention,’ etc. Further, by it associated states 
see wrongly, or itself sees WTCongly; or it is the mere act of 
wrong seeing—thus it is rnrong view. It has unwise conviction 
as characteristic; perversion as fimction; wrong conviction as 
manifestation; the desire not to see the Ariyans as proximate 
cause. It should be regarded as the highest fault. In ‘ wrong 
intention,’ etc., only the term ‘ wnrong ’ is distinctive. The 
remainder should be understood in the same way as under the 
head of moral consciousness.
• As regards “ the strength called unconscientiousness, strength
called fearlessness of blame,’ the meaning of ‘ strength ’ will 
be made plain in the section of the exposition. And in the 
others, ‘ unconscientious ’ means that it is not modest, or does 
not abominate; the state of immodesty or of not abominating is
1 Pp. 207; also 102; 215. Dlis. § 365.
     

--- PAGE 50 ---

332 Risings of Consciousness
unconscientiousness. No fear of blame is fearlessness of blame. 
Of them uncpnscientiousness has the characteristic of not 
abominating misconduct of the body, etc., or of absence of 
shame. Fearlessness of blame has the characteristic of not 
being diffident on account of misconduct of the body, etc., 
or of absence of confusion. Unconscientiousness as a strength 
is strength of unconscientiousness. Recklessness of blame as a 
strength is strength of recklessness of blame. This is the 
meaning in abstract. The detailed account is to be under­
stood as opposed to what has been said above.’- •
By it associated states lust, or itself lusts, or the mere act 
of lusting—[249] such is ‘ greed ’ (or lust). By it associated 
states are deluded, or itself is deluded, or just the being deluded 
—this is ‘ delusion.’ Of them, greed has the characteristic 
of grasping the object like sticky lime; the function of clinging 
like a piece of flesh thrown into a hot pan; the manifestation 
of not letting go like a taint of lampblack; the proximate 
cause of viewing the fetter-like states as enjoyment. Growing 
into a river of craving, it takes away beings to purgatory as a 
river of swift current carries any object fallen into it to the 
great ocean. Thus it should be regarded.
‘ Delusion ’ has the characteristic of blindness or opposition 
to knowledge; the essence of non-penetration, or the function 
of covering the intrinsic nature of the object; the manifesta­
tion of being Opposed to right conduct or causing blindness; 
the proximate cause of unwise attention; and should be 
regarded as the root of all immoralities.
By it they covet, or itself covets, or the mere coveting— 
this is ‘ covetousness.’ Ip has the characteristic of a desire 
to make others’ prosperity one’s own; the function of seeking 
with such desire; the manifestation of gazing at others* 
prosperity; the proximate cause of a great fancy for others’ 
prosperity. Indeed, it appears only as gazing at the prosperity 
of others, and arises when there is a great fancy for the same. 
It should be regarded as the outstretched hand of the mind 
for others’ prosperity.
’ Cf. p. 198.
     

--- PAGE 51 ---

Immoral Consciousness 333
1)1 ‘ there is calm,’ etc., calm is due to the suppression of 
distraction in other objects. It lifts or supports the mind 
in the occurrence of immorality—this is ‘ support.’ ' Non- 
distrhction ’ means it is not distracted.
In this consciousness faith, mindfulness, wisdom and the 
six pairs have not been taken. And why ? There is no faith 
in an unbelieving mind, therefore that has not been taken. 
MTiat! Do men of false opinions not believe iu their own 
teachers? They do. But that is not faith; it is a mere 
acquiescence in words; in the real sense it is either indiscrimi­
nation (that is, delusion) [250] or opinion. And there is no 
mindfulness in a mind unguarded by mindfulness, therefore 
that has not been taken. What 1 Do men of false opinions 
not remember an act done by themselves ? They do. But 
that is not mindfulness. The procedure of immoral con­
sciousness is due to such mere mode of remembering. There­
fore mindfulness has not been taken. Then why is it said, 
' wrong mindfulness ’ in the Sutta In the Sutta the dis­
course is made by the explanatory method so as to complete 
the ‘ Wrong Path ’ and the notion ‘ wongness,’ because of 
the immoral aggregates being exempt from and opposed to 
mindfulness. But in the absolute method (of Abhidhamma) 
in immoral consciousness there is no mindfulness; therefore 
it has not been taken. And in the consciousness causing 
blindness and folly there is no wisdom, therefore that has not 
been taken. Is there no deceptive knowledge in' men of 
false opinions ? There is. But it is not knowledge; it is 
trickery {mdyd), which in the real sense is craving. , Moreover, 
this consciousness is connected' with torment, slow, heavy, 
rough, stifi, unwieldy, unhealthy, bent and crooked. Hence 
faith and the six pairs [repose of mind and of mental factors] 
have not been taken.
Having by so many terms in due order shown the thirty-two 
terms established in the text as factors of consciousness, now 
to show the ‘ or-whatever ’ states, he said ‘ or-whatever states 
on that occasion.’ Herein the meaning is to be understood
* E.g., Digha iii. 254, 287, etc.; Majjhima i. 118, iii. 77, etc., etc.
     

--- PAGE 52 ---

334 Risings of Consciousness
thus;—in all immoral consciousness are ten states, to wit: 
desire-to-do, resolve, attention ,conceit, envy, meanness, sloth 
and torpor, flurry and worry, wliich come in the Sutta, appear 
in Sutta passages. These states are spoken of in the Com­
mentary as * or-whatever ’ states. But in this consciousness 
desire-to-do, resolve, attention and excitement—these four 
states called ‘the unfailing factors ’ are the ‘ or-whatcver,’ of 
which the first three should be understood iu the way given 
above. There they are moral; here immoral. Moreover, the 
other state is the state of the excited mind—hence excitement 
or flurry. It has mental excitement as characteristic like wind- 
tossed water; wavering as function, like a flag waving in the 
wind; whirling as manifestation like scattered ashes struck by 
a stone; unsystematic thought owing to mental excitement as 
proximate cause; and it should be regarded as mental distrac­
tion over an object of excitement. Thus there are in all 
thirty-six terms of states [251] in this section of the suinniary 
of states—thirty-two beginning with contact and the four-' or- 
whatevers.’ Leaving out the four unfailing factors only 
thirty-two come in the text; but here by taking what has not 
been taken, the fivefold contact-group, initial application, 
sustained application, zest, one-pointedness of • mind, con­
trolling faculty of energy, controlling faculty of vitality, 
wrong views, strengths: unconscientiousness and fearlessness 
of blame, greed, delusion—^thus there are sixteen states.
• Of these sixteen states seven occur under a single category, 
nineoccur under different categories. Which arc the seven ?— 
contact, perception,- volition, sustained application of mind, 
ze^t, life-controlling faculty, delusion—thdse seven states occur 
under a single category. Feeling, consciousness, initial 
application of mind, one-pointedness of mind, e.^ergy-con- 
trolling faculty, wrong view, strength of unconscientiousness, 
strength of fearlessness of blame and greed—these nine states 
occur under different categories. Of .them, six states are 
referred to two categories, one to three, one to four, one to 
six categories. And how ? Consciousness, initial application 
of mind, ■wrong'view, the ‘ strengths ’; unconscientiousness and 
fearlessness of blame, and greed—^these six are referred to two
     

--- PAGE 53 ---

Immoral Consciousness 335
categories. To expandFirst: consciousness by way of the 
fivefold contact-group is called consciousness; by way of the 
controlling faculties it is called controlling faculty of inind. 
Initial application of mind by way of jhana-factors js called 
initial application of mind, by way of the Path-factors is called 
wrong intention. Wrong view is called so in the Path-factors 
and courses of action. The ‘ strength ’: imconscientiousness, 
is Called so by way of the ‘ strengths,’ and uncQuscientious- 
ncss by way of ‘world-destroying pair.’ And the same with 
fearlessness of blame also. Greed is called so by way of the 
pair of conditions, and covetousness by way of the course of 
action. Thus these six are referred to two categories. And 
feeling is caUed so by way of the fivefold contact-group, bliss 
by way of jhana-factors, and the controlling faculty of joy by 
way of-the'controlling faculties—^thus one state is referred 
to three categories. And energy is called the controlling 
faculty of energy by way of the controlling faculties, wrong . 
endcavoiu? by way of the Path-factors, ' strength ’ of energy 
by way of the ‘ strengths,' and support by way of the Final 
Pairs^—^thus one state is referred to foiu: categories. And 
concentration is called one-pointedness of mind by way of 
jhana-factors, concentration-controlbng faculty by way of 
the controlling faculties, wrong concentration by way of the 
Path-factors: the ‘strength’: concentration by way of the 
‘ strengths,’ [252] cabn by way.of the Final Pairs by virtue of 
the uiiitary method in the second couplet,^ and non-distraction •
, in the third—^thus one state is classified iu six places. All these 
states form nine groups by virtue of the fivefold contact-group, 
jhana-factor, controlling faculty, strength. Path-factor, root; 
course of action, world-destroying factor. Final Pairs. AlTiat 
ought to have been said in the section of the outlihe'of states 
has been said in the exposition of the first moral consciousness. 
End of the Discourse on the Section of the Outline of States.
1 Dhs. §§ 1254/.
» Cf. Dhs. § 1355/.; §§ 54, 57. B-P-E.: * composure ’ and ‘ balance,’
     

--- PAGE 54 ---

336 Risings of Consciousness
CHAPTER II
the FIRsh? TYPE OF lADIORAL CONSCIOUSNESS
In the section of the exposition/ in the exposition of one- 
pointedness of mind, the double expression, ‘ solidity and 
steadfastness,’ is sjmonymous with stability. But that 
expression which has been said in the exposition of moral 
consciousnes*s, to wit, ‘ It stands having dived and entered 
into the object,does not count here. True, in the immoral 
consciousness, it ha.s been shown above that the one-pointed­
ness of mind present is weak. Such meaning as non-scattering 
is the opposite of scattering, produced by way of distraction 
and perplexity is not obtained here. But that which does not 
disperse co-existent states is non-scattering; that which is 
not distracted is non-distraction; by way of the immoral one- 
pointedness of mind the state of mind is non-scattering. It does 
not tremble through the co-existent states—this is strength 
of concentration. Because the concentrating or fixing on the 
object is perverted, the concentration is false. Thus the 
meaning should here be understood.
In the exposition of the controlling faculty of energy® the 
method given above—namely, ‘ striving in expelling lust — 
is not obtained here. Only in the sense of not trembling 
because of the co-existent states is the ‘ strength ’ called 
energy to be understood.
In the exposition of wrong views® in the sense of not viewing 
justly, such views are called dittkigala {gone to views}, from 
being included in the sixty-two heretical views.® The mean ing 
of this word ha.s been discussed above. Just ‘ opinion ’ as 
being something difficult to get beyond is meant by ‘ view as 
jungle,’ like a jungle of grass, of forest, of mountain. Just 
‘ opinion ’ as being something dangerous and fearsome is 
meant by ‘ view as wilderness,’ like a wilderness infested by 
thieves and wild beasts, of sand, waterless, without food. As 
something crushing or boring through the right view and being
1 Dha. § 375.
< Cf. p. 193.
3 Ih. § 376.
* Cf. above, p. 321.
     

--- PAGE 55 ---

337The First Type
contrary to it is meant by ' opinion as a disorder.’ For 
wrong views when they arise pierce right views, and go counter 
to them. The changing and wavering of views from the hold­
ing at one time the Eternalistic, and at another time the Anni- 
hilationistic standpoint is meant by 'opinion as a scuffling.’ 
A man of opinions is not able to stand by one view, follows at 
one time the Eternalistic and at another time the Annihila- 
tionistic view. Opinion as holding captive is meant by ‘ fetter ’ 
in the term ‘ opinion as a fetter.’ It seizes the object firmly 
as crocodiles, etc., seize a man—thus it is called ‘ grij) ’; and 
' fixity,’ because it establishes itself. For a false view or 
opinion from the strength of its procedure establishe.s itself 
aiid seizes. By way of permanence, etc., it convinces—hence 
the term ‘conviction’ (or ‘tendency’). Passing over the 
intrinsic nature of things, it considers them perversely, as 
permanent, etc.-—this is ‘ perversion.’ It is a vile path, 
because it brings disadvantage; or, it is the way to vile places 
of suffering—hence the term ‘ by-path.’ From being not the 
jight path, it is a ‘ wrong path.’ For just as one who is gone 
astray, although he holds that this is the path to such a village, 
does not arrive at the village, so a man of false opinions, 
although he holds that this is the path to a happy destiny, 
cannot get there; hence from being not the right path it is a 
wrong path. From its false nature it is wrongness. (Just 
as people may appear to be crossing at the ferry), fools fre­
quently cross over at an opinion or view from their merely 
wandering to and. fro at it—thus it is a ‘ ford.’ It is a 
ford, an abode of disadvantages—thus it is a ‘ fording-place ’ 
{tiltliayalana), or in the sense of the birth-place, dwelling-place 
(o^atona) of heretics {titlha) it is tiuJiuyatatva. That state 
or intrinsic nature which is an inverted grasp is vipariyesa- 
(jalia; or it is grasp {gaha) on account of the object being 
inverted; thus it is vipariyesagalia. Perverted grasp is the 
meaning.
In the expositions of unconscientiousness and recklessness 
of blame, the meaning is to be understood contrary.to what has 
been said in conscientiousness, and fear of blame. And the 
‘ strength ’ called unconscientiousness-with-recklessness of 
n. 4
     

--- PAGE 56 ---

338 Risings of Consciousness
blame is to be understood in the sense of not trembling because 
of co-existent states.
In the expohitions of greed and delusion/ ‘ greed ’ means 
' is greedy.’ ‘ Being greedy ’ is the mode of greed; ‘ greedy ’ is 
consciousness associated with greed, or a person with such con­
sciousness; ‘greediness’ is the state of the greedy mind or 
person. ‘ Infatuation ’ is excessive lust. ‘ Being infatuated ’ 
refer.s to its mode. ‘ Infatuation ’ is the state of an infatuated 
mind or person. ‘ Covetousness ’ means coveting. It has 
been explained under ‘ greed.’ [2.54] ‘ Immoral root ’ means 
immoral plus root, root of immoral things.
‘ Lack of knowdedge ’ and ‘ of vision ’ is the opposite of know­
ledge and vision. ‘ Lack of comprehension ’ means the not 
getting at, not coming up to things when confronted with 
them. Co-ordination of things^ is judgment; ‘ want of judg­
ment ’ is the opposite; ‘ lack of enlightenment ’ is the not 
connecting them with impermanence, ill, soullessness; per­
ceiving in an unreal, distorted way is also ‘ lack of enlighten­
ment.’ ‘ Lack of penetration ’ is not penetrating the doctrine 
of the ‘ Four Truths.’ ‘ Lack of grasp ’ is the not compre­
hending even a single fact of external experience under the 
general law of impermanence, etc. Does not probe into a 
matter—this is ‘ lack of thorough grasp.’ Does not contem­
plate impartially (evenly)—this is ‘ lack of impartial regard.’® 
Does not take_ a view based on the nature of things—this is 
‘ non-reflection.’ There is. not one single act among moral 
and immoral acts that this delusion visualizes, owing to its 
perverting and failing to comprehend the intrinsic nature— 
this is ‘ non-visualization.’^ Or, such delusion cannot itself 
perform the visualization of any such action—this is 
non-visualization. That delusion destructive of the pure 
continuity of consciousness, which by its absence vfould remain 
pmre and cleansed, is ‘ destructive of purity.’ The state of
1 Dhs. §§ 389, 390.
® Lit. perceiving things as fit {anurupato . . . anubodho; sic lege).
8 Lit. of even regard.
* Lit. [absence of] work of bringing before the eyes.
     

--- PAGE 57 ---

339Remainiitg Types
being foolish is ‘ folly.’ Is deluded—tliis is ' delusion.’ 
Excessive delusion is ‘ vagueness.’ That which is deluded all 
round is ‘ obfuscation.’ What is not knowledge by being 
opposed to it is ' ignorance.’ The meanings of the next words, 
‘ flood,’ ‘ bond,’ have been given. Continually lies latent in 
the sense of being firmly fixed—this is ' bias.’ Besets and 
subjugates the mind—this is ‘ bursting forth.’’- Cannot go 
in the direction of benefit owing to not acquiring benefit; it 
lags—this is a ‘ barrier ’; it limps is the meaning. Or in the 
^nse of being difficult to open or lift it is a bar. For as an 
iron bar called maliapalvjlin is difficult to lift, so is this delusion 
like the bar; hence a ' bar.’ The rest is clear in meaning.
. [255] The sections of the Summary and Emptiness are to 
be understood in sense by the method given above.
End of the First Kind of Immoral Coiisdausness.
CHAPTER ni
THE SECOND AND FOLLOWING TYPES OF 
CONSCIOUSNESS
In the second class of consciousness,the expression ' with 
external aid is the only variant. The meaning of that also 
has been discussed above. But further, although [as in the 
first class] this consciousness arises in one who with joy lets 
his sense-experience evoke greed, and who [erroneously]regards 
such notions as ‘ a being,’ ‘ a person ’ [as something ultimately 
true], yet inasmuch as it may also arise ' through external aid ’ 
—t.e., be deliberately, methodically [brought about]—at such a 
time this class of consciousness is to be understood as coming 
^to pass. Thus, when the son of a noble family asks in marriage 
/a maiden of heretical-views, and they will not give her, saying, 
1 ‘ You have dilierent views,’ other relatives cause them to give 
her to him, opposing them by saying, ' This [young man] will 
do whatever work you do.’ And in company’ with these
1 Cf. Points of Controversy, p. 288 (pariyu/thanaiii}.
Dhs. § 399- ’ B.P.E.; ‘ prompted by a conscious motive.’
     

--- PAGE 58 ---

340 Risings of Consciousness 
heretical people, he goes to the heretics, and at first there is 
only a difference of opinion, but as time goe.s on, the doings 
of these heretics become acceptable, and he accepts the 
heretical views, saying, ‘ They are pleasing to me.’
Moreover, in this class, among the ' or-whatever ’ states, 
sloth and torpor are additional features. Of these the one is 
the state of being slothful, the other is the state of being 
torpid. Absence of striving, difficulty through inability, is the 
meaning. The compound ‘ sloth-torpor ’ is sloth plus torpor; 
of which sloth has the absence of, or opposition to striving 
as characteristic, destruction of energy as function, sinking 
of associated states as manifestation; torpor has unwieldiness as 
characteristic, closing the doors of conscioashess as function, 
shrinking in taking the object, or drowsiness as manifestation; 
and both have unsystematic thought, in not arousing oneself 
from discontent^ and laziness [or indulgence], as proximate 
cause.
End of the Second Type of Consciousness.
The Third class of consciousness atises in one who with 
joy lets his sense-experience evoke greed, who does not 
[erroneously] regard such notions as ‘ a being,’ ‘ a person ’ 
[as something ultimately true], who goes to look at cock-^ 
fights, wrestling, boxing, dancing, theatres, etc., or is devoted ’ 
to [256] listening to pleasant sounds, and so on [for the 
other senses]. Here there are five factors unfailing^ to­
gether with conceit. Herein conceit is fancying (deeming, 
vain imagining). It has haughtiness as characteristic, self- 
praise as function, desire to [advertise self like] a banner as 
manifestation, greed dissociated from opinionaXiveness as 
proximate cause, and should be regarded as [a form of] lunacy.
End of the Third Type of Consciousness,
1 Reading oddhanarasam. Onahanarasatn would mean ‘binding of 
associated states.’—Tr.
* Namely, in quiet settlements, calm, insight, etc__ Pyi.
® See above, p. 334.
     

--- PAGE 59 ---

Rentjctininy Typ&s 341
"When at the above-mentioned places (cock-fights and so on) 
^people spit on one’s head, scatter the dust off their feet, then 
in those who, to avoid the spittle and dust, strenuously look 
td themselves at intervals, as well as in those who look through 
this and that aperture when a royal procession goes forth or 
a festive party moves along, this fourth consciousness arises. 
In it are seven [of the ten] ‘ or-whatevers,’’^ together with sloth 
and torpor. In both this class and the next wrong view is 
wanting. Excepting this the enumeration of states is to be 
imderstood by the other classes.
End oj llie Fourth Type oj Consciousness.
The fifth class arises in one who being neutral as to feeling 
lets his sense experience evoke greed, and who [erroneously] 
regards such notions as ‘ a being,’ ‘ a person,’ etc., as ultimately 
true. In it indifferent feeling is in place of joy; zest is wanting. 
All the rest is like the first class of consciousness.
End of the Fifth Type of Consciousness.
The sixth, seventh, eighth classes of consciousness are to be 
understood in the same way as the second, third and fourth 
by changing the feeling and leaving out zest.
In these eight classes of consciousness, accompanied by 
greed, two dominant influences of co-existence and of object 
are to be understood.
The ninth class arises in one who with gloom lets his sense­
experience evoke aversion. In the determination of the 
occasion of this consciousness, ‘ gloomy ’ refers to a mind 
depraved by hate, or a mind contemptible through having 
base feeling. The state of such a mind is gloom (or morose­
ness). ' Accompanied by gloom ’ means morose.^ It im- . 
pinges on the object without affection—this is aversion.
See above,* p. 334.
     

--- PAGE 60 ---

342 Rising;, of Consciousness
.Associated with aversion ’ means accompanied thereby. 
[257] In the summary of states, in three places, morose 
[or gloomy] feeling of grief occurs where the meaning of the 
term feeling has been explained; likewise the terms painful 
and gloomy.
With reference to characteristics, etc., gloom has the 
experiencing of an undesirable object as characteristic, making 
use of the undesirable in this or that manner as function, mental 
ailing as manifestation, and assuredly the heart-basis as 
proximate cause.
Hate and ill-will have been discussed in connection with 
roots and courses of action, just as greed and covetousness have 
been mentioned in the first class of consciousness. ‘ Hate ’ 
may be defined as' by it [associated states] offend [the object],’ 
or ‘ itself is offensive,’ or as mere offending. It has flying into 
anger or churlishness as characteristic, like a smitten snake; 
spreading of itself, or writhing as when poison takes effect,' 
as function; or, burning that on which it depends’- as function, 
like a jungle-fire; offending or injuring as manifestation, like 
a foe who has got his chance; having the grounds of vexation 
as proximate cause, like urine mixed wdth poison.
By it the mind reaches the putrid state;—this is ‘ malignity, 
or, it ruins the practice of the Vinaya, the attainment of beauty, 
of benefit, of bliss, etc.—this is ill-will. In meaning it is 
just doso (the preceding terra).
, And in this ninth kind of consciousness are twenty-nine • 
terms in order due, making fourteen by taking what has not 
been taken. By virtue of them the difference between the 
groups, classifiable and unclassifiable, is to be understood.
Of the ‘ or-whatevers,’ desire-to-do, resolve, attention and 
distraction are constant. But these arise as groups of five 
with the presence of one or other of the three;—envy, meanness 
and worry. These three are thus known as inconstant ‘ or- 
whatever ’ states. Of these ‘ envy ’ is that which envies.’ 
It has the characteristic of envying, of not enduring the
* The heart or physical base {Jiodaya-vatth'n}—Pyi. 
’ /)/(«. §410, 3/6. §1121
     

--- PAGE 61 ---

343Remaining Types 
prosperity of others, the function of taking no delight in such 
prosperity, the manifestation of turning one’s face from such 
prosperity, the proximate cause being such prosperity; and it 
should be regarded as a fetter.
' Meanness is the state of being mean. It has, as charac­
teristic, the concealing of one’s property, either attained or 
about to be attained; the not enduring the sharing of one’s 
property in common with others, as function; the shrinking 
from such sharing, or niggardliness or sour feeling* [258] 
as manifestation; one’s o\vn property as proximate cause; and 
it should be regarded as mental ugliness.
A contemptible act is kukata ; the state of [a displeased 
mind, produced by making] such an act [its object] is ‘ worry ’ 
{kukkucca}.^ It has repentance as characteristic, sorrow at 
deeds of commission and omission as function, regret as 
manifestation, deeds of commission and omission as proximate 
cause, and it should be regarded as a state of bondage.
So much of what is distinctive is there in the section of the 
outline.
In the exposition of feeling,^ in the section of the exposition, 
‘ unhappy ’ should be known as the opposite of happy.
In the exposition of hate,^ that wliich offends or hates is 
‘ hate.’ ‘ Hating ’ is the act or mode of offending. ‘ Hatred ’ 
is the state of the offending mind or person. Offence in the 
sense of forsaking nature® is' disordered temper.' ‘ Upsetting ’ 
is the act or mode of such offending. That which opposes is 
* opposition.’ That which opposes repeatedly is * hostility.’ 
This is said of the mode of the opposing or hostile [person or 
mind]. The rough, hard-hearted person is ' churlish.’ The 
state of such an one is ' churlishness.’ On account of this fault 
not a word is well-chosen, but is ill-spoken, not completed— 
this is ' abruptness.’ In anger there is no finished speech, 
or even if speech during anger is so, it is without measure. 
For asuropa others read assuropa ‘ dropping tears,’ because 
of tears being shed. This view is not reasonable, because a
1 Dfts. § 1122. * Katul-ancukala.
2 Cf. B.P.E., p. 312. n. 4. » Dhs. § 413.
« 76. § 418. * Pakalibhavo,
     

--- PAGE 62 ---

344 Risings of Consciousness
happy person may also shed tears. As to the term an- 
allamanatd, there i.s no mentality of self because of opposition 
to mentality of self, as explained above. But because this 
is of the mind only, and not of a being,* therefore it has been 
said to be ‘ of the mind.’ Here, a.s well as in the sections of 
the Compendium and Emptiness, the remainder should be 
understood by the method given above.
J’HE Tenth Type of Consciousness.
The tenth, because it is induced ‘ by external aid,’ arises 
in one urged by others, one who remembers the offence of 
another, one who by himself keeps remembering others' 
offences and gets angry. In this class of consciousness also 
are twenty-nine terms in order due; but they make fourteen 
terms by taking what has not been taken. And in the ‘ or- 
whatevers ’ sloth and torpor also are obtained. Therefore 
in this consciousness are these six;—to wit, four unfailing 
factors and sloth and torpor, without envy, meanness and 
worry. At the time when envy, etc., arise, seven ' or-what- 
evers ’ at any one moment arise together with one or other 
among them. All that remains in all the sections is just like 
the ninth kind of consciousness. But in these two kinds of 
consciousness where dejection is a factor, [259] only the co­
existent dominance is obtained; object-dominance is not 
obtained,2 for anger does not care or have respect for anything.
The Eleventh Type of Consciousnes.8.
The eleventh kind of consciousness arises when misgiving 
is aroused in one who as to feeling is indifferent with regard to 
the six objects of sense. In determining the occasion of tliis 
sort of consciousness, we find a new phrase:—‘ associated with 
doubt.In the outline of states only the expression, ‘ there 
is doubt,’ is distinctive. Here doubt means exclusion from 
the cure* [of knowledge]. Or, one investigating the intrinsic 
nature by means of it suffers pain and fatigue (kicchati)—thus 
it is doubt. It has shifting about as characteristic, mental
* Satto, ultimate persistent entity, soul. ' * See above, p. 284.
* Dhs. §§ 422-25. Oikiccha, omitted in P.T.S. cd.
     

--- PAGE 63 ---

3457?e»2atmw/7 Types 
wavering as function, indecision or ruicertainty in grasp as 
manifestation, unsystematic thought as proximate cause, and 
it shpuld be regarded as a danger to attainment.
There are twenty-three terms in order due in this conscious­
ness; by taking what has not been taken they make fourteen. 
By way of them the determination of the groups classifiable 
and unclassifiable is to be understood. These two, attention 
and distraction, are the only ‘ or-whatevers.'
In the exposition of’one-pointedneSs of niind,^ because this 
distraction ’ is weak, and because, in the eleventh class, there 
is just a mere static instant^ of the mind, therefore without 
saying ‘ solidity,’ etc., just one term—' stability of mind ’— 
is stated. On this account, in the section of the outline also, 
‘ the controlling faculty of concentration,’ etc., are not given.
In the exposition of perplexity or doubt, ‘ doubt ’ (kaiikhd) 
is the act of doubting. A previous doubt is said to induce a 
subsequent doubt; or the term is one of manner or mode. 
Consciousness imbued with doubt is ‘ dubious ’ from the 
arising of doubt, and of such the state is ' dubiety.’ Puzzle­
ment is ‘ not intelligence. ’® ‘ Perplexity ’ has been explained.
In the sense of wavering already given it sways to and fro— 
‘ swaying between two.’ Because of hindering attainment it 
is like a path branching in two—a ‘ double path.’ ‘ Fluctua­
tion ’ is the inability to establish anything in one mode, thus, 
‘ Is this state permanent, or is it impermanent ? ’ [260] Because 
of the inability to * comprehend,’ there is ‘ uncertainty of 
grasp.’ ‘ Evasion ’ is the being unable to decide, receding from 
the object. ‘ Hesitation ’ is the being unable to plunge in. ‘ Not 
plunging in ’ is the inability to plunge right in. ‘ Mental rigid­
ity ’ is the inability to proceed as deciding respecting the object. 
Stiffness is the meaning. For perplexity having arisen makes 
the mind stiff. But because on arising it takes the object 
and, so to speak, scratches the mind, therefore it is called 
‘ mental scarifying.’ The rest in all the sections is evident.
1 Dhs. § 424.
* Some read idaiii cittaili dubbalam, ettlia pavatti thitimattam eva, 
' this consciousness is weak and there is just the mere static procedure.’ 
3 Bead Vimati ti na niati.
     

--- PAGE 64 ---

346 Risings of Consciousness
The Twelfth Type op Consciousness.
In the determination of the occasion of the twelfth kind the 
pltrase ‘ associated with distraction occurs. This sort of 
consciousness—namely, being hedonically neutral as to sense 
■—^becomes distracted. In the ' summary of states ’ distraction 
here comes in place of perplexity (or doubt). In the order of 
terms there are twenty-eight terms, which make fourteen by 
adding what has not been taken. It is through these that 
the arrangement of the groups, classifiable and unclassifiable, 
is to be understood. Two ' or-whatevers ’ are present:— 
resolve and attention.
In theexposition of 'distraction,'® in the Exposition .section, 
‘ of mind ’ means excluding a being or a man (as ultimate 
entity). ‘ Distraction ’ is the mode of mind when excited, 
flurried. ‘ Disquietude ’ is unquiet. ‘ Agitation ’ is a throw­
ing about of mind. ‘ Turmoil of mind ’ is a reeling condition 
like the swaying of a moving vehicle, or an ox, etc. By this 
expression fluctuating about one object only i.s intended; for 
distraction wavers as to one object, doubt as to various objects. 
The rest in all the sections should be understood by the method 
above given.
Now in these two classes of consciousness, this is the specific 
distinction. On being asked, ' How many kinds of con­
sciousness roll ofi from an object V these two,' associated with 
distraction ’ and ' accompanied by doubt,’ should be stated. 
Of these the latter [261] invariably rolls off; the former, when 
it has obtained a footing in the acquirement of resolve, rolls 
off at stages. Just as if two stones, one round and the other 
rectangular, were to roll down an inclination, the romid stone ' 
would roll down right away, the rectangular stone would roll 
with intervals of stopping, so should the application of this 
simile be understood.
In all these twelve classes of consciousness the classification 
of 'low,’ etc.,® has not been brought out, because all of them
I Dhs. § 427. 3 Cf. above, p- 284.
     

--- PAGE 65 ---

347Remaining Types
are low. The dominant influence^ of co-existence, although 
obtainable, has not been brought out, because the method 
has already been shown above. But in these twelve, owing 
to the absence of knowledge, there is no such thing as the 
dominance of investigation. In the last two classes a different 
dominant influence (from that of investigation) might have 
been brought out, but it (i.e., that of co-existence) is also 
absent, because it does not arise with any co-existent state 
as the principal in desire-to-act, etc., and because of the 
.inhibition in the Pailliana. But when action is put forth by 
these twelve classes of immoral consciousness, excepting the 
one accompanied by distraction, the remaining eleven involve 
rebirth. When the kind that is accompanied by doubt, 
being weak and without obtaining resolve, involves rebirth, 
why does not the one accompanied by distraction, which is 
strong and has obtained resolve, do so ? Because of its not 
being a state ‘ removable by the path of insight.’^ Did it 
carry rebirth, it would come in the division named ‘ removable 
by the path of insight.’ (But it does not so come), hence, 
excepting it, the remaining eleven involve rebirth. Moreover 
when action is put forth by any of the eleven, there is rebirth 
in the four places of suffering by that volition, and rebirth is 
got by the unconditioned element of mind-cognition accom­
panied by indifference as an immoral result. And there would 
also be a getting of rebirth in the four places of suffering by 
the kind of consciousness accompanied by distraction. If 
so, there should then be removal by the path of insight. But 
because there is to this kind of consciousness no getting of 
rebirth in purgatory, therefore it does not come in that 
Division.
End of the explanation of the expression. Immoral States.
* Cf. above, p. 284. 2 Cf. p. 57.
     

--- PAGE 66 ---

PART X—DISCOURSE ON UNMORAL 
CONSCIOUSNESS
CHAPTER I
DUALITY IN AWARENESS OF MIND
Now the analysis and exposition of the term ‘ unmoral ’ begins 
at the question, ‘ VTiich are the states that are unmoral ?’’■ 
Unmoral [consciousness] is then shown as fourfold—namely, 
withrespect to result, inoperativeaction,matter and Nibbana’. 
That question is stated to show resultant unmoral conscious­
ness, the moral result in that, the limited result in that, the 
unconditioned element in that,’’ as well as the fivefold sense­
awareness therein,2 and visual awareness by ‘ door ’-process 
therein. [262] And the statement; ‘ . because moral
kamma has been mrought on the sensuous plane . . .’ is to 
show genesis in that (visual awareness) by kammas specifically 
caused, thus excluding reference to such general conditions as 
‘ door,’' object,’ etc.
Here ‘. . . has been-wrought ’ refers to the act as a cause; 
‘ has been stored up’ refers tothe heapingup,thedevelopment,* 
as cause. ‘ Visual awareness ’ is cognition by sight as a cause, 
or cognition proceeding from, or seated in the eye. This holds 
for the other senses. In visual awareness, the ‘ characteristic ’ 
is being aware of a visible object by dependence upon the sense 
of sight, the' function ’ is the taking as object merely the visible 
form, the ‘ manifestation ’ is the state of confronting the visible 
object, the ' proximate cause ’ is the disappearance of the in­
operative element of ‘ mind ’ with regard to the visible object. 
The other modes of sense-awareness may be similarly defined. 
Here taken in order are ten terms, or, by omitting what has 
already been taken, seven. Of the seven; two only are classi­
fiable. Of these, consciousness is classified with respect to two
* Dhs. § 431. ® Clauses omitted in P.T.S. ed. * Upacitatta.
348
     

--- PAGE 67 ---

Untnoral Con^sciousness 349
occasions—namely, by way of the fivefold contact-grouj) and 
of controlling faculty; feeling with respect to three occasiona 
—by way of the fivefold contact-group, of Jhana-factor and 
of controlling faculty. Of groups also there are these,three; 
there is only one ‘ or-whatever ’—^to wit, attention.
^9^ section of the Exposition, visual awareness as ‘ clear
18 said with reference to basis.' For consciousness, when moral, 
is knovra to be clear by its own purity, when immoral, by the 
results in the life-continuum, and when resultant, by the 
clearness of the basis.
In the exposition of one-pointedness of nund,^ ‘ stability 
of thought ’—thus much of the term is stated. For this 
consciousness also is weak; in it just the static instant is 
obtained; it is not able to reach solidity, steadfastness.
In the section of the Summary, the .Thana-factors and Path­
factors have not been brought out, because the Jhana is con­
summated by 3 initial application of mind and the Path is con- 
summated by a moral condition. Originally without con­
scious initial application the Jhana-factor is not obtained, 
neither, in consciousness morally unconditioned, are the 
• Path-factors obtained. [263] Therefore in this kind of con­
sciousness neither of these factors has been brought out. In 
it has been classified the fourfold aggregate of mental 
co-efficients (contact, volition, one-pointedness of mind, life­
controlling faculty). The section of Emptiness is clear’ as to 
its meaning.^ The expositions of auditory 'awareness, etc., 
should be understood in the same way.
Indifference has been assigned to any cognition by \vay of 
f sense; but pleasure, only to the sense of touch. Herein is 
this distinction, which should be understood with reference to 
impact. In the four doors—eye, ear, nose, tongue—only de­
rived matter strikesor impinges on derived matter. When this 
takes place, the resisting friction is not strong; there is just 
the mere touch, as when four lumps of cotton placed on four 
anvils are struck by cotton lumps. Feeling takes up the
1 Dhs. § 436. ® Ib. § 438.
® “Pacchiinakarii. Some read ’pamanara, ‘ iiieasiired by.’ 
* Or remains the same.
     

--- PAGE 68 ---

350 Risings of Consciousness
middle (neutral) position. But in the door of the bodily 
surface the external great essential itself as the object strikes 
the internal sentient organism and impinges on the [internal] 
great essentials which are the cause of [internal] sensory 
stimulation. A.s when the cotton lump, placed on top of the 
anvils, is struck with a hammer, the haimner breaks through 
the cotton and ‘ takes ’ the anvil, and the friction is strong, 
so the friction of the impact is strong.’- With reference to 
a desirable object, intimation by act arises, accompanied 
by pleasure; with reference to an undesirable object, it is 
1 , accompanied by pain. And the basis',' door, object of these 
’ five classes of consciousness are constant. In the fivefold 
cognition of sense there is no such thing a.s the shifting of the 
basis, etc. For the moral resultant, visual cognition, making 
the sensitive eye the basis, and accomplishing the function 
of seeing visible objects sprung from four causes and desirable 
or fairly desirable, stands at the eye-door and becomes a 
‘ result.’ The auditory and other cognitions, making the 
sensitive ear, etc., the basis, and accomplishing the function 
of hearing, smelling, tasting or touching, in sounds, etc., 
desirable or fairly desirable, stand at the ear-door, etc., and 
become results. But of these objects sound springs from two 
causes (thought and the caloric order).
In the exposition of the mind-element,^ mind, in the sense 
^of intrinsic nature, emptiness, absence of a living entity, 
and element make up this compound. It has the characteristic 
of knowing visible or other objects immediately after visual 
or other cognition respectively, the function of receiving 
visible and other objects, the manife.station of the state of 
such reception, the proximate cause of the absence of visual 
and other cognition. [264] Here, in the section of the outline 
of states, are twelve terms; by talcing what has not been taken 
there are nine, of which seven are unclassifiable, two classi­
fiable. Resolve and attention are the two ‘ or-whatevers.’ 
The exposition of initial application of mind defines it as a 
\ setting on to the object. But because the consciousness in
1 Cf. Co^np. of Phil. 231 /. 2 Dhs. §§ 455 ff.
     

--- PAGE 69 ---

351Unmoral Conscioasness 
question is neither moral nor immoral, therefore it is not said 
to be ‘ right intention, or wrong intention.’ In the section 
of the Summary, the Jhana-factor, although obtainable, has 
fallen into the stream of the fivefold sense-cognition; hence it 
has not been brought out. And the Path-factor is not even 
obtained.’- The section of Emptiness is evident. The basis 
of this consciousness is constant and is the heart-basis. The 
door and object are not constants. Of these, though the door 
and the object may be shifted, yet the locus is one; for this 
consciousness has receptiveness for fimction^—namely, in the 
five objects at the five doors—where, after being receptive, it 
becomes a result. IVlien visual and other cognitions of moral 
results cease, it receives those visible and other objects which 
have reached their loci, and been produced immediately after 
the cognitions.
I, In theexpositions of the element of mind-cognition^the term, 
rapture, in the first element of mind-cognition is an additional 
feature. Peeling also is joyful feeling. Because this first 
element arises only with respect to a desirable object therefore 
it is joyful feeling. The second element arises with respect 
to a desirable neutral object, therefore in it is indifferent 
feeling. The terms are the same as those in the exposition 
of the mind-element. In both, because the elements of mind­
cognition have fallen into the stream of the fivefold sense­
cognition, the Jhana-factors have not been brought out, nor 
have the Path-factors, because they are unobtainable. The 
remainder in all the sections should be understood by the 
method given above. But as to characteristics, etc., this 
twofold element of mind-cognition with unconditional 
resultant has the characteristic of knowing the six sense­
objects, the function of receptiveness, etc., the manifestation 
of such a state of receiving, etc., the proximate cansi of the 
heart-basis.
Of the two elements, the first becomes a result on two 
occasions:—when this resultant mind-element, coming imme-
•1 Reading, for pana, pi na.
3 Vhs. §§ 469 ff.
3 Reading ckani, sauipati°.
‘ Ib. § 455.
     

--- PAGE 70 ---

352 Risings of Consciotisnsss
diately after such sense-cognition as is a moral resultant in the 
five doors, and receiving the object of such cognition, ceases, 
it stands in the five doors and becomes a result, accomplishing 
the act of receiving with respect to that very object. And it 
becomes a result as the registration (or retention) with respect 
to a vivid object at the six doors. [265] How ? WTien a boat 
goes across a fierce current, the water i.s cleft and follows the 
boat a little distance, and then goes along with the current. 
So when at the six doors the vivid object, being deceitful, 
presents itself, apperception takes place; after this happens, 
there comes the turn for the subconscious life-continuum. 
But this consciousness, not allowing this turn, seizes the object 
which was seized by apperception, arises in the first or second 
conscious interval, and descends even into the life-continuum. 
Or similarly, when a herd of cattle cross a stream—so the 
simile might be expanded. Thus this element of mind­
cognition, from seizing that object seized by apperception, 
results in an act of registration.
And the second becomes a result on five occasions. How ? 
At the time when the blind, the deaf, the foolish, the mad, 
a hermaphrodite, or a neuter takes conception in the world 
of men, such consciousness takes effect as conception; after 
that as long as such a person lives, it takes effect as life­
continuum ; in the fivefold-object-process with respect to the 
moderately desirable, it takes effect as receiving, in a vivid 
object at the six doors, at the moment of death, registration 
and decease respectively. Thus it results on five occasions.
End of the Twofold element' of mind-coynilion.
CHAPTER II
DISCOURSE ON THE MORAL RESULT OF THE 
SENSUOUS REALM
Now to show the eight main kinds of resultant consciousness, 
once inore a beginning is made with,' MTiich are the states 
that are unmoral?’^ Herein, since the method has already
1 Dhs. § -198.
     

--- PAGE 71 ---

Unmoral Consciousness 353
been given in the text, all the sections have been abridged. 
Their meaning should be understood by the method given 
above. But herein, to show such distinctions as there are, 
it i.s stated that ‘ the absence of greed is an unmoral root.’ As 
to such terms as are not stated, they should be understood 
thus: the divisions into door of kamma, course of kamma, 
basis of meritorious act^, described under the moralities of 
the sensuous realm, do not obtain here. And why ? Because 
here we deal with consciousness where there is no production 
of intimation, no giving of result, no arising as a meritorious 
act, such as charity, etc. [266] Among the ‘ or-whatevers,’ 
the pity and sympathy given above are not among the 
results, owing to their having a being as object. For the 
results of consciousness in the sensuous realm are really 
concerned with limited objects. And it is not only pity and 
sympathy that are here absent, the ‘ abstinences ’ are also 
absent. For, of course, the five precepts are [not unmoral, 
but] moral.
Here also the arrangement of classes of consciousness as 
automatic and non-automatic by means of moral thought and 
difierent causes should be understood as obtaining. The 
result of automatic moral consciousness is automatic, but 
of non-automatic moral consciousness, it is non-automatic. 
Moreover, that result which arises from such causes as potent 
objects is automatic; the other arisen from such other causes 
as weak objects is non-automatic. In the division also into 
low, etc., these units of resultant consciousness are not known 
as ‘ low,’ ‘ medium,’ ‘ exalted,’ because they are not accom­
plished as such by desire-to-do or other dominant influence.^ 
But the result of low moral consciousness is low, that of 
medium moral consciousness is medium, and that of exalted 
moral consciousness is exalted. Here there are no dominant 
influences. And why ? Because they are unfit, to be produced 
with desire-to-do, etc., as the principal. All the remainder 
is as ha.s been said in the eight classes of moral consciousness.
Sts Now we have to understand the occasion when the results
* See above, pp. 209
n.
2 P. 284.
s
     

--- PAGE 72 ---

354 Bisings oj Consciov-^ni.i^s
of these eight main classes of re.sultant consciousness take 
effect. This is'on four occasions:—conception, life-continuum, 
decease, registration. .How ?. They take effect as conception 
in the, case of meritorious, twice-conditioned, or thrice- 
conditioned persons among men and devas of the sensuous 
realm/^ Next, subsequent to conception, they become the life­
continuum for sixty, eighty, or even an incalculable number 
of years, for the whole life-cycle; thirdly, registration at the 
six doors in the case of a vivid object; and lastly, decease at 
the moment of death. Thus on four occasions they take 
effect.
All those who are about to be Buddhas, at the time of taking 
their last conception, do so by means of the great units of re­
sultant consciousness, accompanied by joy, thrice-conditioned 
and automatic. And that conception-consciousness is the 
result of a prior consciousness of love. But [in their case] the 
incalculably long lifetime [conferred] in that conception is 
reversed as to time. Mahasiva the Elder said; ‘ Consciousness 
accompanied by indifference is stronger than that which is 
accompanied by joy; it is by the former that Bodhisats take 
conception; conceived by that, they have noble aspirations, 
they do not hanker even after celestial objects^ they are like 
Tipitaka-Culanaga the Elder and others? [267] But the 
Great Commentary, rejecting this view, thus, ‘ This idea is 
merely the Elder's fancy,’ goes on to say: ‘ The beneficent 
work of omniscient Bodhisats is powerful therefore Bodhisats 
take conception by a consciousness, which in its early phase 
was love, was a moral resultant of experience in the world of 
sense, is accompanied by joy, is thrice-conditioned and 
automatic.’
Now a table of contents should be drawn up for the discourse 
of elucidating results. So far the Elder Tipitaka-Culanaga has 
said: ‘ By one moral volition sixteen kiiids of resultant con- 
sciousness arise. In this (by virtue of twice-conditioned con- 
wptlon') there are flie twelve kinds^ of results, and (by virtue 
of unconditioned conception) the eightfold unconditioned
I Cf. Jalaka i. 172.—Ed. 2 Maggo.
     

--- PAGE 73 ---

Un moral Cons do usness 355
re.Milt.’ But Maliadatta the Elder, [known as] ^loravapi* 
visin/ has said: 'By one inoral volition arise twelve 
kinds of resultant consciousness. In this (by virtue of the 
twice-conditioned conception) are the ten kinds- of results, 
and, by virtue of unconditioned conception, the eightfold 
unconditioned result.’ Elder Tipitaka-Mahadhanimarakkhita 
said, ‘ By one moral volition arise ten kinds of resultant 
consciousness. In this, by virtue of unconditioned conception, 
there is the eightfold unconditioned result.’ On this occasion 
they took up the ‘ Saketa query.’ In Saketa the devotees, 
* assembled in hall, raised the query:—‘ AATien by one volition 
kamma is put forth, is there one conception'only, or different 
conceptions Being unable to decide it, they went and 
asked the Abhidhainina Elders, who convinced them by saying, 
‘ Just as from one mango seed only one sprout issues forth, 
so there is only one conception.’ Then one day they raised 
the query thus:—‘When kamma is put forth by different 
volitions, are there different conceptions® or is there one only ? ’ 
And being unable to decide it they asked the Elders, who con­
vinced them by saying, ‘ Just as when many mango seeds are 
sown, manvsprouts issue forth, so are there many conceptions.’ 
tA. Furthermore, on this occasion there was drawn up what is 
known a.s the declaration of [karmic] preponderance. Namely: 
—these [reborn] beings abound in greed, hate and delusion, 
as well a.s in the severally opposite tendencies. [Let us call the 
former (r. IC D; the latter </, h. d.—Ed.'\ Now what determines 
the abundance ? Previous conditions. Variation is deter­
mined just at the moment when kamma is exerted. How so ? 
When, at such a moment, G only in the kamma is strong, 
y is weak, li and d are strong, H, D are weak, then the weak g 
is unable to cancel^ the strong G, but h, d, being strong, [268] 
are able to cancel H, D. Hence the being, born through con­
ception given by such kamma, is of strong appetites, of 
sanguine® habit, good tempered, intelligent and keen as 
adamant in wit.
“ Maggo.Dweller at the Peacock's Pond.
® Z.e., of lixing beings in rebirth.—Ed.
■* fjit. possess (pari^tfrfdZiiwz). ® Lit. happj going (i.«i7ia-sjZo). •
     

--- PAGE 74 ---

356 Risings of Consciousness
If, on the other hand, when kamma is put forth, both (?, H 
are strong, and g, h are weak, d is strong, D is weak, then by 
the foregoing method the resultant being has strong appetites 
and dislikes, but is intelligent and keen as adamant in wit, 
as was Elder Dattabhaya. When GftP are strong, and the 
rest weak, the resultant, by the preceding method, is lustful, 
dull, but is amiable and gentle of disposition. Furthermore, 
when G', H, D, at that moment, are strong, the rest 9, /i, d weak, 
by the foregoing method, the resultant is strong in appetites 
, and dislikes, and is dull in intelligence.. Again, when, at that 
moment, g, E, D are strong, G, h, d weak, he will be fairly 
free from lust, and not carried away even by the sight of 
divine objects, but he will be full of enmity and dull of in-i 
telligence. Again, wlien Zz, D at that moment are strong, 
and the rest weak, he, by the foregoing method, will be 
greedy and amiable, but dull. Again, when g, S', d are 
strong, and the rest weak, he, by the foregoing method, will 
be not greedy or intelligent, and full of dislikes. Finally, 
when g, h, d, at that moment, are strong, and G, D are weak, 
the resultant being will be disinterested, amiable and wise 
as was Elder Maha-Sangharakkhita.
p Furthermore on that occasion the declaration as to root­
conditions was drawn up^:—Thrice-conditioned kamma gives 
a result which may be thrice-conditioned, twice-conditioned, 
or unconditioned. Twice-conditioned kamma does not give 
thrice-conditioned result, but gives the others. By thrice- 
conditioned kamma conception may be thrice-conditioned, 
or twice-conditioned, but not unconditioned; by twice- 
conditioned kamma, it may be twice-conditioned or imcon- 
ditioned, but not thrice-conditioned. Automatic moral con­
sciousness gives a result which may be autonifitic^ or non- 
automatic. [269] Non-automatic moral consciousness gives 
a result which may be non-automatic or automatic. Feeling 
must vary according to the object. Registration must be 
determined by apperception.^
The reader is reminded that ‘ root-conditions ’ refer to the fore, 
going six: G, H, D, g, h, d.—Ed,
® See above, p. 353 ; cf. 373. 3 ggg Compendium, p. 126/.
     

--- PAGE 75 ---

Unmoral Gonscioiisness 357
3, Now in the doctrine of this and that Elder, sixteen kinds 
(of results), etc,, should be understood.
To expand: In the case of a being who has taken conception 
by the first main class of resultant consciousness, similar to the 
first class of sensuous moral consciousness, and, after issuing 
from the womb, has become able to acquire a certain status 
of restraint and non-restraint, when a desired object has 
presented itself at the door of his eye, and before the adverting 
door-consciousness has affected the subconscious life-con­
tinuum, there is no measure of the object and its passing. 
Why is it thus ? Because of the weakness of the object. 
This is one of the occasions without effect.
Again,.when adverting by the five doors does agitate the life­
continuum, but has not yet reached determination, it persists 
in the interval, visually cognizing, or receiving, or examining, 
and it is impossible that it should turn back. Reaching deter­
mination, one or two moments of consciousness aris(> then, 
getting the causal relation of repetition, and persisting as 
apperception, it again lapses into subconsciousness. This 
act of perception is also of the kind where the object is weak, 
and is obtained when we say, ‘ It was as if I saw,’ or ‘ I heard.’ 
This is another occasion without effect.
Again, when another person attending on occasion of sense 
agitates mysubconscious life-continuum, processes of cognition 
arise,’- apperception takes place. But whereas registration 
should occur at the conclusion of apperception, before registra­
tion arises, apperception lapses into the subconscious life­
continuum. To illustrate this:—Just as in constructing an 
embankment in the river, and in directing the water to a great 
channel, the water first flows over and fills the fields on both 
,sides of the bank and flooding, runs along crab-passages, etc., 
then flows into the full river, so herein. The time when the 
water flows [only] in the river [270] is like that of the pro­
ceeding of the subconscious life-continuum. The time of 
constructing the embankment is like that of the adverting 
by a sense-door agitating the life-continuum. The time of
* Lit. processed cognitions (vithicitliini).
     

--- PAGE 76 ---

858 Piisings of Consciousness
water flowing into the great channel is the occurrence of the 
process of perception. The filling of the fields on both sides 
of the bank is like apperception. The flowing back of the 
water into the river after running along crab-passages, etc., 
is the relapse into the life-continuum after apperception 
has taken place, before registration arises. Thus there is no 
means of computing the act of consciousness descending into 
the life-continuum. This consciousness is also of the kind 
described owing to the weakness of the object. It is the third 
occasion without effect.
S’ But now, if a vivid object is presented, visual or other 
cognitions arise when adverting by the five doors agitates the 
life-continuum, and a unit of the first kind of moral conscious­
ness of the sensuous realm becomes apperception at the stage 
of apperception, and coming into play six or seven times, gives 
the turn to registration, then this registration being at the 
same time established, the main type of resulta nt consciousness, 
similar to that unit of moral consciousness, is established. 
This resultant consciousness gets two names:—‘ root of life­
continuum,’ from its resemblance to conception-consciousness, 
and ‘registration,’ because [like the act of registration] it 
seizes the object which was seized by the apperception.
On this occasion four kinds of resultant consciousness;— 
visual cognition, reception, examination, registration—are 
counted as results. And when the second class of moral 
consciousness becomes apperception, then the second kind 
of resultant consciousness resembling it is established as 
registration. This second kind of resultant, consciousness, 
in that it does not resemble conception-consciousness, gets 
two names:—‘ adventitious life-continuum ’ and'registration ’ 
—by the former method. Together with it the four preceding 
kinds of [resultant] consciousness make five. And when the 
third class of moral consciousness becomes apperception, then 
the third kind of resultant consciousness resembling it stands 
" as registration. By the said method this consciousness gets 
two pames:—‘ adventitious life-continuum ’ and' registration.' 
Together with it the preceding five kinds of consciousness 
make six. And when the fourth class of moral conscious-
     

--- PAGE 77 ---

Unmoral Consciousness 359
ness becomes apperception, then the fourth kind of resultant 
consciousness resetnbling it stands as registration. This 
consciousness by the said method gets the same two names. 
[271] Together with it the preceding six kinds of consciousness 
make seven.
Next, when at the eye-door a moderately desirable object 
is presented, in that object also by the said method three 
ineffective occasions may happen. But because [in this case] 
feeling is interchangeable with the object, therefore over that 
object there is examination accompanied by indifference. At 
the conclusion of any of the four main classes of moral apper­
ceptions, accompanied by indifference, each of the correspond­
ing four main kinds of resultant consciousness accompanied 
by indifference stands as registration. And these four kinds 
of consciousness by the said method get two names:—‘ adven­
titious life-continunm ’ and ‘registration,’—and are called 
the posterior life-continuum. Thus these five kinds of con­
sciousness together with the preceding seven make twelve. 
T So there are twelve at the eye-door and in each of the other 
doors of ear, etc., making fully sixty kinds of resultant con­
sciousness [having respect to each sense]. by one volition, 
when kamma is put forth, full sixty kinds of consciousness can 
arise. However, by taking only what has not been taken, 
twelve in the eye-door and the four cognitions—auditory, 
o[factory, gustatory and tactile—make sixteen.
this connection thd [consulting Elders] adopted the 
parable of the mango:—A certain man with his head covered 
wen\ to sleep at the foot of a fruiting mango-tree. Then a ripe- 
mango loosened from the stajk fell to the ground, grazing his 
ear. Awakened by that sound, he opened his eyes and looked; • 
then stretching out his hand he took the fruit, squeezed 
it, snrelt it, and ate it. Herein, the time of his sleeping at the 
foot of the mango-tree is as when we are subconsciously alive; 
the instant of the ripe mango falling from its stalk grazing 
his ear is like the instant of the object striking the sentient 
organism; the time of awaking through the sound is like that 
of adverting by the five doors agitating the subconscious life- 
’continuum; the time of the man’s opening his eyes and looking
     

--- PAGE 78 ---

360 Risings of Consciousness
is like that of accomplishing the function of seeing through 
visual cognition; the time of stretching out his hand and taking 
the mango is as that of the resultant mind-element receiving 
the object; the time of taking it and squeezing it is as that of 
the resultant element of mind-cognition examining the object; 
the time of smelling it is as that of the inoperative element of 
mind-cognition determining the object; [272] the time of 
eating it is as that of apperception enjoying the taste of the 
object. What does this simile signify ? The function of the 
object striking the sentient organism. AMien this happens 
there is the function of adverting by the five doors just agitating 
the life-continuum, the function of just the seeing by visual 
cognition, of just the receiving of the object by the resultant 
mind-element, of just the examining of the object by the 
resultant element of mind-cognition, of just the determining 
of the object by the inoperative element of mind-cognition. 
But verily only the apperception enjoys the taste of the object. 
This is what it signifies. And in the production of this con­
sciousness there is no doer or instigator saying, ‘ Be thou 
life-continuum, be thou adverting, be thou the vision, be 
thou the reception, be thou the examination, be thou the 
determination, be thou apperception.’
Once more: on that occasion they adopted the fivefold 
order [of the cosmos];—Germinal, Caloric, Moral, Natural- 
phenomenal, Psychical.^ Of these, the Germinal order [reveals] 
a giving of this and that similar modes of fruition to this or 
that seed, as in the gram’s top shoots sprouting to the north, 
the southern creeper growing round a tree from the right, the 
sunflower’s facing the sun, the Maluva creeper growing towards 
a tree, the holes occurring in the top of the cocoanut.
The Caloric order is the simultaneous blossoming, fructify­
ing and sprouting of such and such trees at such and such 
seasons.
Thrice-conditioned kamma gives thrice-conditioned, twice- 
conditioned, unconditioned result; twice-conditioned kamma
1 Cf. the editor’s Buddhism (1912), p. 118 /. (I regret I overlooked 
this interesting historical reference.) Cf. also Ledi Sayadaw’s discus­
sion in ‘ Expositions,’ BuddhistSeviac, London, 1916. Ed.
     

--- PAGE 79 ---

Unmoral Conficiousness 361
gives twice-conditioned, unconditioned result, not thrice- 
conditioned result—this giving of suitable results by various 
l(anunas is the Moral Order. zVnd there is another moral 
order according as the result resembles the kamnla. To show 
this meaning they tell the story:—In the time of the supreme 
Buddha a village near the gate of Savatthi was burnt down, 
a blazing wisp of hay therefrom rose up and caught the neck 
of a crow flying in the sky. The crow, screeching, fell to the 
ground and died. In the ocean, too, a certain ship got aground. 
They, not seeing any obstruction from below, cast lots; the 
^flilucky number fell into the hand of the captain’s wife. They 
then said; ' Owing to one woman let not all perish; we must 
throw her into the water.’ . The captain, saying ‘ I cannot 
bear to see her floating in the water,’ tied a pot of sand to her 
neck and had her thrown. At that moment the ship moved 
off like an arrow shot from a bow. A certain bhikkhu lived 
a cave. A huge mountain peak fell and closed up the 
entrance. On the seventh day of itself it moved away.
5^ They told these three stories together to the perfect 
Buddha, as he sat in the Jetavana preaching the Doctrine. 
The Teacher said, ‘ This kamma was not the work of others; 
it was done by the crow itself,’ etc., and he showed the related 
past:—The crow in a previous existence was a man, who, 
being unable to tame a vicious ox, tied a bundle of straw to its 
neck and set it on fire, and the ox died. Now that action did 
not allow the crow to escape [even though] he flew into the sky. 
That woman in a previous existence was also a woman. A 
dog was devoted to her, and when she went to the forest 
went and came back with her. Slen scoffed at her with; ‘ There 
^oes our dog-mistress.’^ She felt ashamed and, being unable 
^to restrain the dog, tied a pot of sand to its neck and threw it 
into the water. That action did not allow the woman to 
escape in mid-ocean. That bhikkhu in a previous existence 
was a cowherd. When an iguana entered a hole hd closed 
the entrance by a handful of broken twigs, and on the seventh 
day himself came and opened it. The iguana came out
’ Luddliikfi. Pi/i reads luddako, ‘ huntcr-dog.’ 
O Wr» - Cm - tX • M •
     

--- PAGE 80 ---

362 Risings cf Consciousness
trembling. Through pity he spared its life. That action 
did not allow that bhikkhu to escape even when he had entered 
a mountain cave and sat there. Thus connecting these thr(;e 
stories he spoke this verse:—
SuL to the sky nor to mid-ocean^ nor 
[274] By hieing him to any cavern of the hills. 
Nor is there any spot in all the earth 
Where he could stand so that he might escape 
From deed of wickedness that he had wrought.^
Thi.s also is known as the Moral Order.
Other such stories might also he told.
Bodhisats taking conception, being born of a mother, 
their final enlightenment, as Tathagata turning the wheel of 
Dhamma, the surrender of life and utter passing away;—the 
world-earthquake at each is of the Dhamma-Order.
And when an object strikes the sentient organism there is 
no doer or instigator to say, ‘ Be thou adverting,’ etc. From 
the time the object strikes the sentient organism; each accord­
ing to its own nature adverting, by the five doors agitates the 
life-continuum-, visual cognition accomplishes the function of 
seeing, the resultant mind-element accomplishes the function 
of receiving, the resultant mind-cognition-element that of 
examining, the inoperative mind-cognition-element that of 
determining, lipperception enjoys the taste of the object:—-all 
this is understood as the Psychical Order.
iS When, by thrice-conditioned and non-autoriiatic moral 
consciousness, and also by automatic or non-automatic moral 
consciousness accompanied by indifference kamma is wrought, 
and similar resultant consciousness comes in the re-conception 
obtained, the same method holds good. But in tiie two classes 
of consciousness accompanied by indifference, procedure, 
having first been shown by way of a fairly desirable object, 
should'afterwards be shown by way of a desirable object. 
Thus in each door are twelve, making sixty in all. By taking 
what has not been taken sixteen kinds of resultant conscious­
ness arise.
1 Dhp. 127.
     

--- PAGE 81 ---

Unmoral Con^cioa^ne^s 363
In this connection they took the simile of the five machines 
for squeezing sugar-cane. Suppose, they said, that when 
sugar-cane is squeezed, eleven mechanics come out from one 
village, and seeing a plantation, know that it is ripe. Going 
up to the owner they announced that [275] they were mechanics 
for squeezing sugar-cane. He said, ‘ I am just looking for 
you,’ and took them to the sugar-cane shed. There the 
eleven set up the machine and said, ‘ We are eleven; we ought 
to get another man; hire one.’ The owner replied, ‘ I will 
be your mate,’ entered the hut and became their mate. When 
each had done his work, when he who boiled the molasses 
had boiled the cane-juice, and it had been rolled into balls, and' 
the owner after weighing it had given to each, and each had 
taken his due, and they had made over the shed to the owner, 
and in’this way had done their work in four other sheds, they 
departed.
0^ Now the five machines in the five huts are like the five 
sentient organs; the five plantations are the five kinds bf 
objects. The eleven itinerant mechanics are the eleven kinds 
of resultant consciousness; the five owners of plantations are 
the five classes of sense-cognition; the time of the collaboration 
of the twelve men, inclusive of the owner in the first hut and 
the taking by each of his due, corresponds to the eleven kinds 
of resultant consciousness working in union with visual 
cognition, and accomplishing each its own function with regard 
to the visible object at the eye-door; the time of the owner’s 
taking over the shed corresponds to the door of visual cognition . 
not being transferred. The collaboration of the twelve men 
in the second, third, fourth, fifth sheds, and each, taking his 
due, corresponds to the eleven kinds of resultant consciousness 
working in union with other sense-cognitions,. and each 
accomplishing its function with regard to the other kinds of 
sense-object at the respective doors. To this extent is re­
conception thrice conditioned by kamma .which has three 
conditions. The foregoing covers also all twice-conditioned 
re-conception due to similar kamma.
We will now take kamma which was conditioned by two 
‘ roots ’ only. This results in re-conception conditioned by
     

--- PAGE 82 ---

364 riisiiirjs of Conscio(if>nc<-<
two ‘ roots.’ When kaniina is wrought by double-rooted 
consciousnet'S which is accompanied by joy and is automatic, 
in the case of one who has taken re-conception by means of the 
similar doubly-conditioned resultant consciousness, [27G] those 
three ineffectual occasions may arise at the eye-door, by the 
said method, when a desirable object is presented. At the 
conclusion of a unit of twice-conditioned, automatic apper­
ception accompanied by joy, arises registration resembling 
it and termed ‘ sub-consciousness of conditions.’ But if 
apperception is not automatic, the registering is termed 
‘ adventitious sub-consciousness.’ After either of the apper­
ceptions which are accompanied by indifference concerning 
a fairly desirable object arise two moments of registration 
. resembling them. Here, making eight at each door, are full 
forty kinds of consciousness. But by taking what has not 
been taken, eight at the eye-door with the four cognitions by 
way of ear, etc., make twelve. Thus by one volition, when 
kamma is wrought, there arise twelve kinds of resultant con­
sciousness. The mango simile and the discourse on the 
fivefold order are as before.
The same method should be applied in the case of one who 
has taken re-conception by the resultant consciousness 
resembling the remaining three kinds of consciousness which 
have two roots. But on this occasion, in the parable of the 
sugar-cane-press, seven mechanics are desired. When by the 
seven the press is set up, it is to be understood that the owner 
makes the eighth, in accordance with what has been said. 
To this extent is re-conception twice-conditioned by kamma, 
which ha.s two conditions (or roots).
Q Next thediscourse on re-conception which is without ‘roots. 
When kamma is wrought by one or other of -the four twice- 
conditioned kinds of moral consciousness, it is not right to say 
that in the case of one who has obtained re-conception by 
consciousness, which is a moral resultant, is accompanied by 
indifference and sense-mind cognition without root-conditions, 
his re-conception will be like that kamma. As a matter of 
fact, the kamma is twice-conditioned, the re-conception is 
unconditioned by roots.
     

--- PAGE 83 ---

Unmoral Consciousness 365
When a moderately desirable object is presented at the eye­
door of a grown-up being, the [possibility of the] three in­
effectual occasions should be understood by the foregoing 
method. But at the conclusion of any apperception among 
the four kinds of twice-conditioned moral consciousness, the 
unconditioned consciousness persists as registration and gets 
two names:—root-subconsciousness and registration. Thus 
here in the eye-door, visual cognition as well as reception is 
accompanied by indifference. Examination also and regis­
tration are accompanied by indifference. Hence, not taking 
one out of these two, there are reckoned three kinds of con­
sciousness. And in the desirable object examination and 
registration are accompanied by joy. Taking one of these 
two, the three foregoing kinds of consciousness make four. 
Thus, making fours in the five doors when kamma is exerted 
by one volition, there arise twenty kin^s of resultant conscious­
ness. [277] Nevertheless, by taking what has not been taken, 
the four kinds of consciousness at the eye-door with the four 
cognitions of the other senses make eight. This is called the 
miconditioned set of eight. It is experienced among mankind, 
and is a process obtainable among the four planes of suffering. 
Indeed, when Mahamoggallana the Elder created a lotus in pur­
gatory, and, seated in the pericarp, gave a religious discourse 
to the denizens of pmrgatory, in them as they looked at the 
Elder arose such visual cognition as was a moral resultant; 
as they listened to his voice, they had such auditory cognition 
as was a moral resultant; when they smelt the odour of his 
robe, as the Elder was going away after sitting for the midday 
rest in the sandalwood forest, there arose in them olfactory 
cognition which was a moral resultant; at the time of giving 
water, after he had caused rain to fall to quench the purgatorial 
fire, there arose gustatory cognition which was a moral resul­
tant; at the production of a softly wafting breeze there arose 
tactile cognition, which was a moral resultant. Thus the 
unconditioned set of eight:—five, kinds of sense-consciousness, 
one [phase of] reception, two examinations-^is obtained. Ee- 
conception in the case of serpents^ Supanna birds, Betas who 
have pavilions, is by immoral result, but in the process moral
     

--- PAGE 84 ---

366 Risings of Consciousness
result is given. So it is with the state-elephants, horses, etc., 
o£ a universal monarch.
Thus far the path of di.scour.«e on moral apperception 
regarding desirable and moderately desirable objects.
When, in respect of a desirable object, the four kinds of 
immoral consciousness which are accompanied by joy have 
reached apperception, then there is registration, which i.s con- 
8ciousne.ss without roots, accompanied by joy, and is a moral 
resultant. When, in respect of a moderately desirable object, 
these four, associated with greed and accompanied by in­
difference, hav^e apperceived, then there is registration which 
is consciousness without roots, accompanied by indifference, 
and is a moral resultant.
And what has been said as to registration being necessarily 
determined by apperception should be understood to have 
been said with reference to moral consciousness. WTiich , 
registration arises (when it does arise) immediately after an 
apperception which is accompanied by melancholy ? Con­
sciousness of the element of sense-mind-cognition, which is 
an immoral resultant and unconditioned. Which state fixes 
this apperception as moral or immoral ? [The phase of] 
adverting, and also that of determining. Indeed, when the 
adverting and the determining are wisely and methodically 
done, the appercejition is unlikely to be immoral, and [278] vice 
versa.
In the case of a desirable object contemplated by the subject 
with misgiving and excitement, what sort of registration is 
there ? Whether he feels misgiving and excitement, or not, 
registration, in the case of a desirable object, is just moral 
resultant consciousness, without roots and joyful: in the 
case of a moderately desirable object it is the same, but 
accompanied by indifference instead of joy.
The exposition here given in outline is called the Theory of 
Alaha-Dhammarakkhita the Elder. When, namely, appercep­
tion accompanied by joy takes place, five moments of regis­
tration, and when it is accompanied by indifference, six 
moments of registration should be sought.
Now suppose that one who was reborn with a joyous
     

--- PAGE 85 ---

Unmoral Consciousness .367
nature produces Jhana, but in the process is careless and 
loses it. Reflection brings the thought:—‘Lost for me are 
the excellent conditions 1’ And through remorse melancholy 
arises. What registration does he get ? For in the Patthana, 
it i.s forbidden [to posit] melancholy immediately after joy, 
and the converse. Should we not also find, in that book, that 
when there has been apperception concerning a sublime state 
of consciousness, it is also forbiden [to posit] registration?
There arises an clement of sense-mind-cognition which is 
unconditioned, accompanied by indifference, and a resultant 
either moral or immoral. What adverting has such a state ? 
It has no adverting function any more than there is one in the 
subconscious continuum. Granted that such advertings arise 
from tendency, habit or practice,^ how does such sense-mind- 
cognition arise ? Just as in the following psychic attainments: 
—^the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception when 
it is in the causal relation of contiguity to trance, the con­
sciousness in one who has emerged from trance, of fruition 
attained, the consciousness of the Ariyan Path, consciousness 
of fruition after a path—these states arise albeit there is no 
tendency, habit, or practice, even so such sense-mind-cognition 
may arise without them ek her. For consciousness may arise 
without adverting, but not without object. If so, which then 
is the object of that element of sense-mind-cognition ? One 
or other of the limited states, such as visible objects, etc. For 
of these states, whatever object is presented, at whatever time, 
this consciousness arises referring to that object.
Now [279] to illustrate all these kinds of consciousness, there 
^is this special illustrative method:—Cob-web, door-keeper, 
village child, mango, sugar-cane squeezing, born-blind and 
cripple, object-seizing, suflicing condition, purpose.
Among these .' cob-web ’ should be understood thus:—A 
certain highway spider (which waits in the path of insects)- 
spreads his web in five places, makes his net, and sleeps in the 
middle of it. When an insect, grasshopper or fly comes in 
contact with the web spread in the first place, he bestirs
* See the exposition of natural psychic law in Jililinda i. sy, with the 
same tjrms —Erl. 2 Thus the Yojaiia.
     

--- PAGE 86 ---

368 Risings o/ Consciousness
himself from hi.s bed, comes out, goes along the web, kills the 
insect, drinkfe its marrow, again returns to the web and sleeps. 
He does likewise when the webs in the second place, etc., are 
7 touched. Herein like the webs spread in five places are the 
five sentient organs: like the spider sleeping in .the middle is 
consciousness; like the moment when the web is touched by 
the insect, etc., is the moment when the sentient organism is 
struck by the object; like the stirring of the spider sleeping 
in the middle is the adverting by the five doors setting life­
continuum in motion after the object which has struck the 
sentient organ has been seized; like the passage along the web 
is the occurrence of the cognitive process; like the drinking 
of the marrow after piercing the head is the time when apper­
ception takes place in the object; like the sleep in the middle 
after his return is the procedure of consciousness depending 
on the heart-basis. What does this parable signify ? That 
when an object strikes the sentient organism, the unit of 
consciousness depending on the physical basis of the heart 
arises before the unit depending on the sentient basis. This 
is what it signifies; and this also:—Each object reaches the 
avenue of thought by two doors.^
1 u Door-keeper ’ should be understood thus:—A certain king, 
I ‘went to bed and fell asleep. His attendant sat shampooing 
his feet; a deaf door-keeper stood at the door. Three guards 
stood in a'row. Then a certain man resident at a'border 
village, bringing a present, came and knocked at the door. The 
deaf door-keeper did not hear the sound. He who shampooed 
the king’s feet gave a sign, by which the door-keeper opened the 
door and looked. The first guard took the present and handed 
it to the second guard, who gave it to the third, who in turn 
[ 2* offered it to the king. The king partook of it. [280] Herein
apperception should be regarded as the king; adverting as 
he who shampooed the feet; visual cognition as the blind 
door-keeper; the three phases of thought-process beginning 
with reception as the three guards; the striking of the sentient 
organism by the object as the knocking at the door by the
1 External sense and sense-mind.
     

--- PAGE 87 ---

Unmoral Consciousness 369
resident of the border village who brought the present; the 
adverting by the five doors, setting life-continuum in motion, 
as the giving of the sign by him who shampooed the feet; the 
tinfe of visual cognition accomplishing the functiqn of sight ' 
with respect to object as the time of opening the door by the 
deaf door-keeper at the given sign; the resultant mind-element 
receiving the object as the taking of the present by the first 
guard; the resultant element of mind-cognition examining the 
object as the first guard giving it to the second; the element 
of inoperative mind-cognition determining the object as the 
second giving it to the third; the making over to apperception 
by determination as the third offering it to the^king; apper­
ception enjoying the essential property of the object as the 
king enjoying it. What does this parable signify ? Just 
the functions of object striking the sentient organism; of the 
five-door-adverting setting the life-continuum in motion; 
of visual cognition, etc., seeing, receiving, examining, deter­
mining. But verily only apperception enjoys the essential 
property of the object.
‘ Village child ’ should be understood thus:—Many village 
lads w^ere playing with dust in the middle of the road. A coin 
hit the hand of one of them. ‘ What is this that has hit 
my hand ?’ he said. Then one boy said,' It is a white thing.’ 
Another grasped it firmly together with the dust; another 
said, ' It’s broad and square.’ Another said, ‘ This is a 
kahapana’^.’ Then he took it and gave it to his mother, who 
used it in some [jewellery] work. Herein, like the many boys 
playing and sitting in the middle of the road, is the procedure 
of the subconscious life-continuum; like the coin striking the 
hand is the object striking the sentient organism; like the 
asking, ‘ What is this ?’ is the five-door-adverting setting the 
life-continuum in motion after seizing the object; like the 
saying, ‘ It is white,’ is the visual cognition accomplishing the 
function of seeing; like.the grasping it firmly together with 
the dust is the [281] resultant mind-element receiving the 
object; like the saying, ‘ It’s a broad square thing,’ is the
On the kahapana, a square coin, see J.R.A.S., 1901, 877 /•; 
Rhys-Davids, Buddhist India, 100.—Ed-
n.
     

--- PAGE 88 ---

370 Risings oj Consciousness
resultant mind-cognition-element examining the object; like 
the saying, ‘ This is a kahapana,’ is the inoperative mind­
cognition-element determining the object; like the mother 
making it into some jewellery is apperception enjoying the 
essential property of the object. ‘ What does this simile 
signify ?’ The five-door-adverting sets the life-continuum 
in motion without seeing it; the resultant mind-element 
receives it without seeing it; the resultant mind-cognition- 
element examines it without seeing it; the inoperative mind­
cognition-element determines it without seeing it; appercep­
tion enjoys the essential property of the object without seeing 
it. But verily only visual cognition accomplishes the function 
of seeing. This is what it signifies.
' Mango, sugar-cane-squeezing ’—this refers to the mango­
parable and that of the owner of the sugar-cane shed parable 
told above (pp. 359, 363).
‘ Born-blind and cripple ’ should be understood thus:—Both* 
of them sat-in a hall at the city-gate. The cripple said, ‘ Oh, 
blind, one, why do you get shrivelled up by frequenting this 
place ? In such and such another place there’s plenty of food, 
plenty of drink. Does it not behove you to go there and live 
in ease ?' ‘ You have been the first to tell me so. Is it not 
up to you to go there and live in ease V 'I have no legs to 
go with.’ ' Nor have I eyes to see.’ ' If so, there are your legs 
and my eyes.’ And both agreed, saying,‘All right.’ The blind 
made the cripple mount his shoulder where the latter sat, 
putting his left arm round the other’s head, and with his right 
hand marking the road: ‘ In this place a root stands blocking 
the way. In this place is a rock. Give up the left and take 
the right-hand path. Give up the right and take the left.’ 
^hus, by the association both of the blind-man’s legs and the 
cripple’s eyes, they went to the place they wanted and lived 
in ease. Herein,’like the blind man is the material body; 
like the cripple is the immaterial body; like the want of 
preparedness on the part of the blind to go without the cripple 
to another place [282] is the inability of matter to take, seize, 
vibrate without the immaterial. Like the want of pre­
paredness to go to another place on the part of the cripple
     

--- PAGE 89 ---

Unmoral Consciousness 371
without the blind man is the non-inability of the immaterial, 
where life is conditioned by the five aggregates, to proceed 
without matter. Like the going to the desired place by the 
association of both and their living in ease is the manifestation 
of procedure in all functions by the mutual association of 
material and immaterial phenomena. Thus this problem is 
stated with reference to the fivefold aggregate.’-
‘ Object-seizing ’ should be understood thus:—The eye seizes 
the visible object; the ear seizes audible objects, and so on.
' Sufficing condition, result’ should be understood thus:— 
Because of a sufficing condition and because of result or motive. 
Of these, given four conditions—to wit, the -visual organ 
unimpaired, access of visible objects to the line of vision, 
dependence on light, and attention—then visual cognition 
arises with its concomitant phenomena. For instance, the eye 
of a dead man is ‘ impaired.’ The sight of a living man, which. 
is extinguished or impeded by bile, phlegm or blood, being 
unable to cause visual cognition, is said to be impaired; that 
which can be such a cause is unimpaired. So for the ear, 
etc. And although the eye may not be impaired, yet when 
externally the object does not come into the line of vision, 
visual cognition does not arise. And although that object 
may come into the line of vision, when there is no basis^ of 
light visual cognition does not arise. And although there may 
be light, yet when the five-door-adverting does not agitate 
the life-continuum, visual cognition does not arise; it arises 
only when the life-oontinuum is agitated.. Visual cognition 
thus arising arises together with the associated states. Thus 
given these four conditions visual cognition arises.
Given the same four conditions, and substituting space for 
light and sounds for visible objects, auditory cognition arisc^ 
together with its associated states. Herein, ‘ dependence on 
space ’ means that auditory cognition arises only when this 
dependence is obtained; it cannot arise without it. Indeed, 
it cannot arisd in one who has the aural orifice clRsed. The
’ Visuddhi-Magga, p. 596.
’ Or medium (sannissaya).—Ed. Cf. M. i, 190.
     

--- PAGE 90 ---

372 Risings of Consciousness
rest is to he understood by the foregoing method. And so 
also in the following cognitions. We shall speak of just what 
is special to each sense.
The same four conditions are necessary for the arising of 
olfactory cognition, substituting the element of mobility 
for that of space. [283] Here ‘ dependence on the element 
of mobility ’ means that olfactory cognition arises only when 
this element enters the nostril, and cannot arise without itr.»
The same four conditions are necessary for the arising of 
gustatory cognition, substituting -the element of cohesion 
(or moisture) for that of mobility. Here, ‘ dependence on 
the element of cohesion’ means that gustatory cognition 
arises only when this element wetting the tongue is obtained; 
it does not arise without it. Indeed, it does not arise in 
those whose tongue is dry, nven though dried food be placed 
on the tongue.
The same four conditions are necessary for the arising of 
tactile cognition, but ‘ element of extension ’ must be substi­
tuted for that of cohesion. Here ‘ dependence on the element 
of extension ’ means that tactile cognition arises only when 
dependence on this element as a condition of tactile sensitivity 
is obtained; it does not arise without it. Indeed, in the door 
of touch, externally the ‘ great Essential’^ as object stimulates 
the internal sensitive surface, and impinges on the great 
essentials [composing it] which are the causes of its sensitivity.
The same four conditions are necessary for the arising of 
sense-mind2 cognition, but 'dependence on the heart-basis’ 
must be substituted for ‘ element of extension.’ Here 
‘ sense-mind ’ is the consciousness of the [subconscious] life­
continuum. When it ceases, or when it is weakened, it cannot 
cause ‘ adverting ’ and is said to be impaired. When un­
impaired, it can cause adverting. ' Access of cognizable things 
to the line [of sense-mind]’ means access of such as objects 
of thought. ' Dependence on the heart-basis ’ means that 
thought arises only when such dependence is obtained and 
cannot arise without it. This problem also is stated as refer-
* See below. Book II, Ch. II. 2 Mano,
     

--- PAGE 91 ---

373Unmoral Conscioiisness
ring to [life as conditioned by] the fivefold aggregate. ‘ Atten­
tion ’ as one of the conditions means that it arises only when 
the element of inoperative mind-cognition sets the life-con­
tinuum in motion. So far this is the exposition of the term 
‘ sufficing condition.’
t’ih ‘ Purpose ’ is to be understood thus: Eye is for the purpose 
or function of seeing, ear of hearing, nose of smelling, tongue 
of tasting, bodily surface of touching, [284] mind of cognizing. 
The eye’s seeing is its purpose [or aim]. This is accomplished 
by that. So with the other senses [and the seiisoriuin or sense­
mind]. Thus far, in the doctrine of Tipitaka-Culanaga the 
Elder,the sixteenfold scheme is finished, together with the 
twelvefold scheme and the unconditioned set of eight.
Now the doctrine of Moravapivasi-Mahadatta the Elder 
is a discourse on the twelvefold scheme, wherein the Saketa 
query, the declarations of abundance and of conditions are 
evident. But this Elder, seeing a flaw in the theory of 
automatic moral kamma giving non-automatic result, says 
that automatic moral kamma gives only automatic result, 
not non-automatic, and that non-automatic kamma gives only 
non-automatic result, not automatic. And this Elder does 
not speak of fijdng consciousness by apperception, but of 
fixing feeling by object. On that account iu his doctrine, in 
bringing out result, there is obtained what is called the twelve­
fold scheme, wherein are included the tenfold scheme and the 
unconditioned set of eight.
In the twelvefold scheme this is the method:—Let kamma be 
exerted by a consciousness that’s accompanied by joy, thrice- 
conditioned^ and automatic, in an adult who has taken re-con­
ception by means of the resultant similar to that consciousness. 
Then, when a desirable object reaches the line of vision in the 
eye-door, there arises one of the three ineffectual occasions 
described above. In his case, supposing his consciousness be 
one of thirteen kinds:—four that are moral accompanied by 
joy, four that are immoral, five that are inoperative—then, 
when registration supervenes after apperception, a [phase of]
1 See above, p. 354/. ’ I.e., having three ‘roots.’
     

--- PAGE 92 ---

374 Risings of Consciousness 
consciousness becomes established which is accompanied by 
joy, is automatic, and has three root-conditions, or two. 
Thus, when he is seeing, his [units of] consciousness may be 
reckoned as five:—three of visual cognition,two of registration.
Assuming that feeling changes with the object, there arises 
in him one or other of the twelve kinds of consciousnes.s which 
are accompanied by indifierence—^namely, four that are moral, 
four inunoral, and four inoperative. This consciousness arises 
after apperception as registration—a registration which is 
resultant, accompanied by indifference, is automatic, and has 
three, or only two root-conditions. Thus, when he is seeing, 
his units of consciousness may now be reckoned as three:— 
an examining accompanied by indifference and these two 
[forms of] registration. These with the foregoing five make 
[285] eight. As many are reckoned in each of the other four 
senses. Hence when kamma is exerted by one volition full 
forty kinds of consciousness may arise. But by taking what 
has not been taken there are'twelve:—eight in the eye-door 
and the other four cognitions, auditory, etc.
Here in the discourse on the twelvefold resultant, the 
remarks on ‘ subconsciousness of conditions ’ and ‘adventitious 
subconsciousness,’^ the mango-parable,^ and the discourse 
on the ‘ fivefold cosmic order,’’ are to be understood in the 
same way. When kamma is exerted by consciousness which is 
accompanied by joy, thrice-conditioned, non-automatic and 
moral, and also by consciousness which is accompanied by in­
difference, thrice-conditioned, automatic and non-automatic, 
the same method is to be understood. And the press-parable^ 
on this occasion is evident.
So far the occasion:—‘ thrice-conditioned conception takes 
place by thrice-conditioned kamma’ has.been discussed. 
And the occasion:—‘ twice-conditioned conception takes place 
by thrice-conditioned kamma ’ remains inexplicit.
Now comes the discourse that by twice-conditioned kamma 
arises twice-conditioned re-conception. To expand: Suppose 
kamma is exerted by consciousness, accompanied by joy, twice -
1 See p. 358, ’ See p. 359.
8 See p. 360. * See p. 363.
     

--- PAGE 93 ---

Unmoral Conscioiiftness 375
conditioned, automatic, in an adult who has taken re-concep­
tion by a resultant similar to that consciousness. When at the 
eye-door a desirable object is presented there may be those 
three ineffectual occasions after the said fashion. But in 
twice-conditioned consciousness there is no work of apper­
ception. Therefore one or other of these eight kinds of 
consciousness:—four that are moral accompanied by joy, 
four that are immoral, at the conclusion of apperception, 
arises as registration, which is twice-conditioned, accompanied 
by joy, and automatic. Thus iu him four kinds of conscious­
ness:—the three phases of cognition (visual, etc.) and this 
phase of registration—are reckoned.
And one or other of the eight—foiu’, namely, which are 
accompanied by indifference and are moral, concerning a 
moderately desirable object, and four which are immoral, at 
the conclusion of apperception—^becomes registration which is 
twice-conditioned, accompanied by indifference and automatic. 
Thus in him two kinds of consciousness:—examining, accom­
panied by indifference, and this registration are reckoned. 
These, together with the foregoing four, make six. In each 
of the other doors are also six. Thus when kamma is exerted 
by one volition, there arise full thirty kinds of consciousness. 
But by taking what has not been taken there are ten:—six eye­
door and the other four sense-cognitions. The mango-parable 
and the discourse on the fivefold cosmic order are evident. 
And the cane-press parable on this occasion does not obtain, 
and therefore is not given. [286] When kamma is exerted by 
consciousness which is accompanied by joy, is twice-con­
ditioned, non-automatic and is moral, or is accompanied by 
indifference, is twice-conditioned, and either automatic or 
non-automatic, the same method is to be understood.
We have how discussed the case when ‘ twice-conditioned 
.conception takes'place by twice-conditioned kamma.’ And the 
occasion:—‘ unconditioned conception takes place ’—is to be 
understood thus:—When kamma is exerted by the four kinds 
of consciousness which are dissociated from knowledge as 
moral, and when re-conception has been got in which the 
element of mind-cognition is moral, resultant, unconditioned
     

--- PAGE 94 ---

376 Risings of Consciousness
and accompanied by indifference, it should not be said 
that re-conception is similar to the kamma. Speaking by the 
said method, and beginning w-ith this phrase:—' by the four 
kinds of consciousness dissociated from knowledge as moral,’ 
—the consciousness which arises concerning a desirable, and 
concerning a moderately desirable object should be understood. 
In this Elder’s doctrine, namely, mass-apperception^ takes 
place. The remaining discourse:—‘ which state fixes this 
apperception for purposes of morality and immorality 
—should all be understood by the method given above.
With this, in the doctrine of Mofavapivasi-Mahadatta the 
Elder, the discourse of the twelvefold resultant scheme finishes, 
together with the tenfold scheme and the unconditioned set 
of eight.
. • Now, in the doctrine of Mahadhammarakkhita the Elder, 
the discourse is on the tenfold scheme, wherein the Saketa 
query and the declaration of preponderance^ arc evident. But 
in the statement of conditions this is special:—Thrice-con­
ditioned kamma gives thrice-conditioned result, and twice- 
conditioned result and unconditioned result. Twice-condi­
tioned kamma does not give the thrice-conditioned result, 
but gives the others. By thrice-conditioned kanmia con­
ception is thrice-conditioned and also twice-conditioned, 
not unconditioned. By twice-conditioned kamma concep­
tion is twice-conditioned and unconditioned, not thrice- 
conditioned. Automatic kamma gives automatic result, not 
non-automatic; and non-automatic kamma gives non- 
automatic result, not automatic. Feeling shoxdd be [con­
sidered as] changed with object; apperception takes place 
in masses. From the beginning units of consciousness are 
to be spoken of.
1^’J. Wherein this is the method:—An individual exerts kamma 
by the first class of moral consciousness, takes re-conception 
only by the first kind of resultant consciousness. This re­
conception is similar to the previous kamma. To the adult.
1 Pindajavanam. 1 Unanalyzed, unclassified thought.—Tr. 
» See above, p. 366. ® See above, p. 355.
     

--- PAGE 95 ---

Unmoral Consciousness
when a desirable object is presented at the eye-door, three 
■ ineffectual occasions by the said method may arise. Then to 
him one or other of the thirteen [287] apperceptions, accom­
panied by joy mentioned above, becomes at the conclusion 
of apperception the first kind of resultant consciousness, being 
registration which goes imder the two names of ‘ subconscious­
ness of conditions’ and 'registration.’ Thus to him four kinds 
of consciousnessthe three cognitions (visual, etc.) and'this 
registration—are thus reckoned. In a moderately desirable 
object, one or other of the twelve apperceptions accompanied 
by indifference by the above-said method becomes established, 
at the conclusion of apperception, as a registration-conscious­
ness, accompanied by indifference, thrice-conditioned, and 
automatic. This also goes under the names of ‘ adventitious 
life-continuum ’ and ‘ registration.’ Thus to him two units'of 
consciousness:—examining accompanied by indifference and 
this registration—are reckoned. These two, together with the 
foregoing four, make six. Thus, when kamma is exerted by 
one volition in the five doors, full thirty kinds of consciousness 
arise. But by taking what has not been taken there are 
ten:—six iu the eye-door and the four cognitions, auditory, etc. 
The mango-parable and the discourse on the cosmic orders are 
G evident. Likewise, though kamma is exerted by the second, 
third, fourth classes of moral ccnsciousness, there are only so 
many kinds of resultant consciousness. Also when kamma is 
exerted by the four classes of consciousness which are accom­
panied by indifference, the same method should be understood. 
But in the latter pase, first the moderately desirable object 
should be shown,afterwards feeling should be changed with the 
[changes in the] desirable object. The mango-parable and the 
discourse on the cosmic orders are evident. The cane-press- 
parable is not obtained. In moral consciousness, beginning 
with, ' when kamma is exerted by any of the four classes 
which are dissociated from knowledge,’ all should be expanded 
and the unconditioned set of eight be stated. Thus far, in 
. the doctrine of Mahadhammarakkhita the Elder, the tenfold 
scheme finishes together with the unconditioned set of eight.
But of these three Elders whose doctrine should be accepted?
     

--- PAGE 96 ---

378 Risings of Consciousness
Not anyone’s unreservedly. But in the doctrine of 'all of 
them what i^ fitting should be accepted. In the first doctrine 
the automatic and non-automatic arrangement is intended to 
serve a di\dsion in causa] relations. Therefore by taking in it 
the non-automatic result which has arisen through weak con­
ditions of automatic moral consciousness, and the automatic 
result which has arisen through strong conditions of non- 
automatic moral consciousness, leaving out the obtainable 
inoperative apperceptions, and fixing (o) the registration by 
means of moral apperception and registration, and (6) feeling 
by means of the object, [288] the sixteenfold scheme has been 
drawn up for the use of probationers and average persons. 
And at the conclusion of immoral apperception, that registra­
tion which is an unconditioned result has been shown in that 
doctrine, but not in the two others. Therefore that uncon­
ditioned registration included in it and the conditioned resul­
tant included in the other, two—all this is obtained here also, ■ 
wherein this is the method;—When in the intervals of moj al 
apperceptions immoral apperception takes place, then the 
conditioned registration at its conclusion, being similar to the 
apperception practised at the conclusion of the moral con­
sciousness, is fitting. When immoral apperception takes place 
uninterruptedly, then the registration which is without root­
conditions is fitting. Thus piuch of what is fitting in the 
first doctrine should be taken.
But in the second doctrine, the automatic and non-auto­
matic arrangement is intended on moral grounds. For this 
reason, taking the automatic resultant of automatic moral 
consciousness, and the non-automatic resultant of non- 
automatic moral consciousness, without fixing registration by 
apperception, [we should consider] the entire twelvefold scheme 
as stated with reference to the total apperception worthy of 
arising in probationers, adepts, and average persons. And in 
' it, at the conclusion of thrice-conditioned apperception, thrice- 
conditioned registration is fitting; at the conclusion of twice- 
conditioned apperception, twice-conditioned registration is 
fitting; at the conclusion of unconditioned apperception, 
unconditioned registration is fitting. Nevertheless, it has not
     

--- PAGE 97 ---

Unmoral Consciousness 379
been drawn up as classifying them. Thus in the second 
doctrine what is fitting should be accepted.
In the third doctrine also the automatic and nou-auto- 
ihatic arrangement on moral grounds only is intended. But 
because of the expression, ‘ thrice-conditioned kamma yields 
results thrice-conditioned, twice-conditioned, and uncon­
ditioned;^ twice-conditioned kamma yields results twice- 
conditioned and unconditioned,’ in one who has taken auto­
matic, thrice-conditioned re-conception, registration should be 
also automatic and tw’ice-conditioned. Without showing this, 
the registration has been shown as similar to the condition 
(of productive kamma). The mention of this registration does 
not fit in with the foregoing view of the statement of the 
producing condition. [That expression was said by the Elder] 
only for the purpose of setting forth the tenfold scheme. 
However, the other (automatic, twice-conditioned registration) 
should also be obtained. Thus in the third doctrine also what 
is fitting should be accepted.
And all this and all the discourse on registration is said with 
reference to the results of kamma as productive of re-concep­
tion. However, because of the expression [in the Patthana], 
‘ conditioned life-continuum is in the causal relation of con­
tiguity to unconditioned life-continuum,’ registration which 
is conditioned resultant arises also in one* who lias taken un­
conditioned re-conception by means of manifold kamma* 
The order of its arising will be evident in the Pattliana.
End 0/ the Discoxtrse on Moral Resultants in the Realm of 
Sense-Experience.
[289] CHAPTER III
DISCOURSE ON RESULTANTS IN THE REALM OF 
ATTENUATED MATTER AND IN THE IMMATERIAL 
REALM
Now to show the resultant of the material and immaterial 
realms, once more a beginning is made with ‘ which are the 
states that are unmoral
* I.e., without ‘ roots’ (hetu)
     

--- PAGE 98 ---

380 liisings of Consciousne.ss
Herein, because the resultant of the sensuous realm is both 
like and unlike its own moral consciousness, therefore it has 
not been classified as simply a sequel similar to that moral 
consciousness. But in the case of these two realms—of Rupa 
and Arupa—the results of kamma are like the moral con­
sciousness in each, just as the shadows of elephants, horses, 
mountains, etc., resemble these. Therefore it has been 
classified on this principle. Again, kamma of the sensuous 
realm gives result at one time or another; but the kamma of 
the Rupa and Arupa realms, being unobstructed, gives result 
in the second individuality. Therefore it has been classified 
as having a similar sequel to the moral consciousness [which 
caused it]. The rest should be understood by the methods 
given under ‘ moral consciousness.’ But this is special:—In 
the divisions into progress, etc., and the state of being low, 
exalted, or medium, resultants should be understood as coming 
by jhana. Moreover, under ' predominant influences 
these conscious resultants being unproducible are not taken 
in that connection.
End of the Discourse on Resultants in the Realm of 
Attenuated Matter and the Immaterial Realm.
CHAPTER IV
DISCOURSE ON TRAN SCEND ENT AL^ RESULT
Tbansoendental results, because they resemble the causal 
transcendental moral consciousness, have also been classified 
as having a similar course to morality. And because the 
moral consciousness on all three planes stores up and increases 
the round of births by means of decease and conception, there­
fore concerning it ‘ having been wrought and"§tored up is 
said. But the transcendental disperses what has been stored 
up; of itself it pulls down what through decease and rebirth 
has been piled up. Hence here ' having been worked and 
cultivated ’ has been said, instead of ‘ having been wrought 
and stored up.’
1 gge p. 284. 2 Dhs. § 505. Cf. above, p. 289/. » DJis. § 431.
     

--- PAGE 99 ---

Transcendental Resultants 381
In the ‘ Void,’ etc., the Path gets this name for three reasons, 
—by way of attainment, of one’s merits, of the object. This 
expression has been expanded above under the subject-head 
ol ‘ moral consciousness.’^ Of the three reasons, the name is 
obtained ' by way of one’s merits ’ and also ‘ of the object' 
in the Suttanta explanations. For this kind of teaching is 
explanatory. But Abhidhamma discourse is teaching without 
explanation. Therefore in the Abhidhamma the name is 
not obtained because of one’s merits and of the object, but 
only by way of attainment.
Now attainment is certain, and is twofold: insight-arrival 
and Path-arrival, Of these two, where the path has been 
reached, insight-arrival is certain; [290] where its Fruition 
has been reached. Path-arrival is certain, as has been said 
above. We are now dealing with the occasion of the attain­
ment of fruition, hence that the attainment of the Path is 
certain must here be taken as understood.
It is said also that this Path as attainment gets the name of 
the Void or Empty, and is called the Signless and the Undesired 
because of its own merits and of the object. Therefore itself 
occupying the goal of Path-arrival, it gives the three names 
to its own fruition. How ? This Path called Emptiness, which 
has got its name by means of just the fact of arrival, itself 
occupies the place of arrival, and gives the name to its own 
fruition—namely, ' Emptiness.’ The empty, signless Path 
itself occupies the goal of arrival, and in giving the name to its 
own fruition, gives the name ‘ Signless.’ The empty, undesired 
path itself occupies the goal of arrival and in giving the name 
to its own fruition gives ’ the Signless.’ And these three 
names are obtained, in this way, wuth respect to fruitional 
consciousness only, immediately after the Path, and not when 
attainment of fruition is subsequently resorted to. And 
subsequently it is possible to discern by the tlireefold insight 
of impermanence, suffering and no soul. Then in that person, 
by virtue of much insight arisen, come to pass the three 
fruitions called the Signless, the Undesired and Emptiness.
‘ Seo p. 206.
     

--- PAGE 100 ---

382 Risings oj Consciousness
And of tlieui tho.se kinds of Icnowledge, .such as insight into 
impermanence, with conditioned things for object, are called 
the knowledges of adoption.^ And that which was said on 
the ‘ empty ’ Path should be understood as obtaining on the 
' undesired ’ Path also. This Path which has also got its 
name only by means of just the fact of arrival, Itself occupies 
■ the goal of arrival, and in giving the name to its own fruition 
gives ‘the Undesired.’ The undesired, signless Path itself 
occupies the goal of arrival and . . . gives ' the Signless.’ 
The xmdesired empty Path similarly gives ‘ Emptiness.’ And 
these three names are obtained in this way only at fruitional 
consciousness immediately after the Path, and not when 
attainment of fruition is subsequently resorted to. Thus 
in this exposition of resultants, the kinds of resultant con­
sciousness are to be taken as treble those of the [causal] 
moral consciousness.
But whereas moral activities of the three planes are not 
able to make their own results get a dominant influence, 
transcendental moral activities can do this. And why ? 
In the former the time of putting forth activities is different 
from the time for yielding result. On this account they are 
not able to make their own results get a dominant influence. 
But transcendental activities, before the faith, energy, mind­
fulness, concentration, and wisdom which occur in the trans­
cendental Path have ceased, get the result immediately after 
the Path without fail and without opposition. For this reason 
they are able to make their results get a dominant influence. 
Just as where a small fire has sprung up, th^ creation of heat 
comes to an end as soon as the fire has been extinguished, and 
nothing else is wanted; and just as when a big blazing mass of 
fire set round with dried cow-dung is extinguished, the creation 
of heat does not come at once to an end; so in the three-plane 
moral activities the kamma-moment is as different from the 
resultant moment as is the extinction of the fire and the heat 
in the case of the small fire. Therefore it is not able to make 
its own result get a dominant influence. But in transcen-
See above, p. 310, n. 2. Pyi reads ‘adaptation.’
     

--- PAGE 101 ---

Transcendental liesuitants 383
dental activities, before faith, etc., have ceased, fruition 
arises immediately after the path. Therefore it causes its 
own result to get a dominant influence. For this reason the 
Ancients have said, ' Except in the transcendental, there 
is no dominant influence iu the resultant.’
In the exposition of the Fourth Fruition, ‘ the controlling 
faculty of one of perfected knowledge refers to that of 
[the saint] whose knowledge has been perfected, and has 
performed its function in respect of the Four Truths. Or it 
is a controlling faculty through the accomplishing of control 
within the states of consciousness that arise, possessed by those 
who have perfected knowledge, those, namely, who have com­
pleted what was to be done in the matter of the Four Truths, 
who have come to know, who have penetrated the Four 
Truths. [292] In the section of the exposition of the expres­
sion, ‘ of those of perfected knowledge,’ means, of those who 
having come to know [so] endure. ‘ States mean inner 
[subjective] associated states. ' Perfected knowledge’ means 
having come to know.® ‘ Insight, understanding ’ and so on 
have already been explained. ' Path-factor, Path-included ’ 
=the factor of the,Path arising in fruition and included 
in that Path.
There is something else to be said. In this transcendental 
result this is distinctive:—One of these three controlling 
faculties goes to one objective, one goes to six objectives, one 
goes to one objective. .To expand: The faculty of believing ' I 
shall come to know the unknown’ goes to one objective, viz., 
the Path of Stream-winning. The faculty of perfected know­
ledge goes to six objectives: the three lower Fruitions and the 
three higher Paths. The faculty of a person of perfected 
knowledge goes to one objective—viz., the fruition of Arahant­
ship. In all, the paths and fruitions amount to eight [multiply- 
ing]eight controlling faculties. Thus sixty-four transcendental
* Dhs. § 555. The ‘ section ’ referred to just below is the answer 
to the question.
’ In B.P.E., § 555, for ‘ doctrines’ read states.
® A-j&nana. Janana means ‘coming to know.’ Cf. corinaitre and 
savoir; we have no such equivalents.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 102 ---

384 Risings of Consciousness
controlling faculties have been accounted for. But textually* 
Paths and Fruits arc multiplied by nine, making seventy-two 
controlling faculties. ‘ Path-factor ’ is said with reference 
to the Path and also to Fruition. So also is the term ' factor 
of Enlightenment.’ ‘ Avoidance, abstinence' refer to the 
moment when the Path is realized, and the moment when 
Fruition is realized. ‘ Path ’ means just ‘ being in the Path,’ 
but fruition is so named with reference to the Path.^ It is 
proper to say that a factor of fruition is included in fruition. 
In the Path the condition of one about to be enlightened as to 
the four Facts is the factor of Enlightenment. In the Fruition 
it is the condition of one who has known the four Facts. In 
the Path avoidance and abstinence are so called by virtue of 
[the exercise of] avoiding and abstaining. In the Fruition 
they are so called by virtue of having avoided, having 
abstained.
End of the Discourse on Transcendental Result.
CHAPTER V
DISCOURSE ON IMMORAL RESULT
These seven kinds of consciousness when they constitute im­
moral results—namely, visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, 
and tactile cognitions, one sense-mind-element and one sense- 
mind-cognition-element, by text and in sense—resemble the 
corresponding kinds of moral resultant consciousness described 
above. The latter, of course, have moral kamma for cause;, 
the immoral resultants haVe immoral kamma for cause. And 
the former arise concerning desirable and moderately desirable 
objects, the latter concerning undesirable and moderately 
.undesirable objects. In the former tactile cognition is accom­
panied by pleasure, in the latter it is accompanied by pain. 
[293]In theformer.the element of mind-cognition,accompanied
1 Palito.
2 I.e., because of resembling the path {Tika).
     

--- PAGE 103 ---

Transcendental Resultants 385
by indifference causing rebirth among men of one born blind, 
yields re.sult on five occasions. But here in the latter conscious­
ness, when kamma is exerted by the elevenfold immoral 
consciousness, it causes re-conception in the foui; spheres of 
evil doom,’^ making either kamma, kamma-symbol, or ten­
dency-symbol the object, and gives result. Starting from 
the occasion of the second consciousness, it becomes (1) life­
continuum while life lasts, (2, 3) examination in the five 
thought-processes with undesirable and moderately unde­
sirable objects, (4) registration in the six doors when the 
object is vivid, and (5) decease at the time of death. Thus it 
gives result on five occasions.
End of Ute Discourse on Immoral Result.
CHAPTER VI
THE ELEMENT OF INOPERATIVE SENSE-MIND 
CONSCIOUSNESS
0 Now to show by classifying unmoral consciousness [called] 
‘ inoperative,’ a beginning is once more made with ‘ which 
are the states that are unmoral ? Here ‘ inoperative ’ means 
the mere acting or doing of a function. In all inoperative 
consciousness that which has not attained the apperceptional 
state is fruitless like a plant with a wind-snapped flower; that 
which has reached the apperceptional state is fruitless like 
the flower of an uprooted tree. Nevertheless, because of 
procedure in accomplishing this and that function, there is . 
the mere doing, hence [the activity] is called ‘ inoperative.’®. 
The phrase ' neither moral nor immoral,'-etc., means that, 
owing to the absence of the moral condition called the moral 
root, it is not moral; owing to the absence of the immoral 
condition called the immoral toot, it is nofimmoral. Owing 
to the absence of moral and immoral causes of wise and unwise 
attention, it is said to be neither moral nor immoral. Owing '
* Purgatory, Asuras, Betas, and animals.
* Dha. § 566. Cf. Compendium, p. 149 f. 
Or ineffectual.—Ed.
n.
     

--- PAGE 104 ---

386 liisings of Consciousness 
to the absence of the productive condition called moral and 
immoral, it is not result of kamma.
In the exposition of one-pointedness of mind/ here the mere 
static procedure is obtained. In these seventeen modes of 
consciousness, the five cognitions as moral and as unmoral, 
the three mind-elements, the three mind-cognition elements, 
consciousness accompanied by perplexity, [the terms] solidity, 
steadfastness, etc., are not obtained because of weakness. 
Excepting the occasion of its genesis, elsewhere all the rest 
should be understood by the method given in the exposition 
of the resultant mind-element.^ [294] Namely, that resultant 
consciousness arises immediately after the five cognitions. 
But this inoperative consciousness arises before all thought­
processes, when the thought-process arises on occasion of an 
object in the five doors. How ? In the eye-door among 
desirable, moderately desirable, undesirable, moderately 
undesirable objects, when any one visible object strikes the 
sentient organism, it seizes this and that object and arises as 
the precursor by virtue of adverting and setting the life­
continuum in motion. In the ear-door, etc., the same method 
should be understood.
End of ike Element of Inoperative Sense-Mind 
Consciousness.
CHAPTER VII 
CONCLUSION
The element of mind-cognition arising . . . accompanied 
by joy means that this consciousness is the special property 
of one purged of the ‘ Intoxicants,’ is not shared in common 
with others, and is obtainable in the six doors. To expand: 
In the eye-door seeing a suitable place for religious application, 
the Arahant is joyful at this thought. In the ear-door he 
becomes joyful at this kind of thought:—‘ when they, being
® Sea above!, p. 358. « Dhs. § 576.
     

--- PAGE 105 ---

387Conclusion
.seized by excessive greed, are making a great noise in the 
. market-place, such frivolous craving of lust have I put away.’ 
In the door of smell, joy arises when he is offering odours and 
flowers at a shrine. In the door of taste, joy arises when, after 
acquiring savoury alms and distributing them, he partakes of 
them and thinks: 'Surely I have fulfilled the duties of 
courtesy !’ In the door of tactile activities joy arises at the 
consciousness, ‘ Surely I have completed the minor duties !’ 
So far it is thus obtained in the five doors.
Moreover, in the mind-door joy arises with reference to past 
and future objects. For instance:—reflecting on the reason 
of some act done in the time of the lad Jotipala,^ of the King 
MakhMeva,2 of the ascetic Kanha^ and others, the Tathagata 
manifested a smile. And that reflection is a function of the 
knowledge of former existence and of omniscience, at the 
conclusion of the practice of which this laughter-producing 
consciousness arises. The Tathagata smiled at the thought:— 
‘ iu future Tantissara the silent Buddha, Mudinga [295] the 
silent Buddha will arise.’ That reflection is the function of 
the knowledge of the future and of omniscience, at the con­
clusion of the practice of which the laughter-producing con­
sciousness arises. And in the section of the exposition of such 
consciousness, ‘ one-pointedness of mind ’ should be brought 
and placed as the ‘ strength ’ of concentration, because it is 
stronger than the other/kinds of consciousness without root 
conditions. Energy also should be placed as the ‘ strength ’ of 
energy. But in the section of the outline, because the 
‘ strengths ’ of concentration and energy do not occur, the 
pair are not called ‘ strengths ’ in the sense of completion or 
fulness of strength.^ And because this consciousness is neither 
moral nor immoral, therefore it has not been placed as 
‘ strength.’ And because it certainly is not strength, therefore 
in the section of the Summary also it has not been said ‘ there 
are two strengths.’ In the exposition of the unconditioned^
1 M. ii. 45. « lb. 14. ® Jat. iv. 6/.
* Because of the absence of root to the unconditioned consciousness, 
there is no firmness or stability; hence the strength is not complete. 
—Tlka. ® /.e., without ‘ roots.’ Borne read ‘ conditioned.’
     

--- PAGE 106 ---

388 Risings of Consciousness
mind-cognition-element accompanied by joy, all the rest 
should be understood by the said method.
In the phrase' accompanied by indifference,this.conscious- 
ness (of adverting at the mind-door) is common to all beings 
in the three planes who are endowed with mind. In such it 
cannot fail to arise. It must arise. And in arising there is 
determination in the five doors, adverting in mind-door. And 
the six kind.s of knowledge not so held in common seize the 
very object seized by this consciousness. It is called the 
' great elephant.’ There is no object it does not seize. Which 
is that consciousness which, not being omniscience, is seized 
by omniscience ? This consciousness. Of it the rest Should be 
understood by the method given in the foregoing consciousness. 
There, however, from there being rapture the aggregate of 
the mental co-efficients has been classified as ninefold. Here 
from being without rapture the aggregate of the mental 
co-efficients has been classified as eightfold.
Now because the eight main types of consciousness arise as 
moral in [a saint] purged of the ‘ Intoxicants,’ whatever kinds 
of inoperative consciousne.s3 are produced should therefore 
be understood by the method given in the exposition of 
moral consciousness. Here laughter-producing consciousness 
should be placed and included. How many are these ? 
Thirteen. For average persons laugh at eight kinds of con­
sciousness accompanied by joy: four moral, and four immoral. 
Probationers laugh at six kinds of consciousness: four moral 
accompanied by joy, and two immoral dissociated from error 
, and accompanied by joy. Arahants laugh at five accom- 
• panied by joy, and inoperative.
[296] In the expositions of inoperative consciousness in the 
Rupa and Arupa realms,^ the phrase ‘ easeful living under 
present conditions ’ means the mere happy living in this very 
individuality, in the present. For the Arahant, any attain­
ment vzon while he is yet at the stage of the average man is 
of moral [value] while he is winning it and inoperative w’hen 
it is won. When he becomes Arahant, that attainment be-
2 Dhs. §§ 577-82.
     

--- PAGE 107 ---

Conclusion 389
conies inoperative only. All the rest should be understood 
by the method given in the exposition of moral consciousness, 
because of the resemblance to such consciousness.H
End (.J the Discourse of the Book on Risings of Conscious­
ness, in the ‘ Expositor,' the Commentary on the Com­
pendium of States of Consciousness.
     

--- PAGE 108 ---

BOOK II
MATERIAL QUALITIES (RUPA)
CHAPTER t
MATTER AS UNMORAL
With the foregoing completion of the comments on conscious 
states the subject of the Unmoral is still unfinished. Once 
more comes the question; ‘ Which are the states that are 
unmoral?’^—the object being now a classification of a section 
on the ‘ material ’ [in consciousness]. Under genesis of 
consciousness above, the unmoral as resultant consciousness 
and as inoperative consciousness has been exhaustively 
classified. The ‘ unmorals ’ which are material, and the 
‘ unmorals ’ which are Nibbana have not been classified. It 
was to show these that he grouped the unmoral under four 
heads, and began by speaking of (1) ‘ the resultants of moral 
and immoral states.’
The foregoing ‘ moral and immoral states ’ all belong to 
the four planes; so far then the unmoral as resultant has been 
delimitated by the two terms ‘ moral resultant ’ and ‘ immoral 
resultant.’ But because the whole of that ‘ unmoral as resul­
tant ’ is either of the sensuous sphere, or of one of the other 
spheres, therefore it has been set forth as included in [the 
consciousness of] the given sphere by the method adopted 
in each case. But again, because as consciousness it i.s 
[definable as] one or other of the four mental aggregates,, 
therefore it is shown as comprised under these. Yet a^ain, 
besides these three methods:—moral-immoral consciousness, 
plane [or sphere] of consciousness and associated aggregates—
     

--- PAGE 109 ---

As Unmoral 391
he showed the unmoral as inoperative [297] iu the terms 
‘ those states which are inoperative.’ Here the three planes 
and the four aggregates might have been alluded to. But 
these were dealt with in what had preceded. I,n this way 
the treatment has been arranged.
Now in showing forth the unmoral that is yet to be classified, 
he said, ‘ all matter and unconditioned element,’ etc. Herein, 
by the term ‘ all matter ’ twenty-five material qualities and 
ninety-six material species have been taken without remainder. 
By the expression ‘ and unconditioned element ’ nothing 
but Nibbana has been designated. By thus much the term 
‘ unmoral state ’ is completely accounted for.
     

--- PAGE 110 ---

CHAPTER 11
THE FOUR Great essentials
Why has the expression, ‘ In this connection what is “ all 
-matter ” V been chosen ? In the preceding chapters the un­
moral as matter has been mentioned only in the abstract. 
Now to classify and show it in detail-by way of sets of one and 
more up to eleven this expression has been chosen. The 
meaning is:—in the two terms given: ‘ all matter ’ and ‘ un­
conditioned element,’ what is the former ? In showing this 
he named the four great essentials, etc. Here four is 'the 
numerical limit precluding more or less than four.
The word ‘ and ’ has the sense of inclusion by which the 
four great essentials are not the only material things; there 
are others. Thus it includes derived matter. The ‘ great 
essentials ’ or ‘ phenomena ’ are so-called for such reasons 
as the manifestation of their greatness. For they are called 
‘ great essentials ’ [or primaries] because of the manifestation 
of their greatness, because of the illusory resemblances they 
show in phenomena, the immensity of their maintenance 
{pariharo), the immensity of their metamorphoses, their vast 
elementality. Of these terms the first means that they are 
manifested as vast in a continuity that is ‘ grasped at ’ and 
in a continuity that is ‘ not grasped at.’ The continuity ‘ not 
grasped at ’ should thus be”understood:—
One world-system in length and breadth is 1203,450 yojanas.^ 
[298] Thirly-six hundred thousand, yojanas.
Ten thousand, fijty, and three hundred make
The world's whole round, wherein lies this our earth.
In thickness four and twenty naliutas.^ 
In thickness eight and forty nahutas^
‘ The yojana itself is a disputed quantity. In the oldest books it 
seems to have been between seven and eight miles.—Ed.
Nahuta = 10,000, here, presumably, ‘ of yojanas.’
392
     

--- PAGE 111 ---

The, Four Great Essentials 393
The wind-girt water flows, and the wind climbs
For six and ninety myriad yojanas
Unto the lower cdther. Even thus
Is told the measure oj the Universe. 
Sitieru, highest of the mountain peaks. 
Sinks four and eighty thousand yojaiuis 
In the great deep, and to that height ascends.
To half this measure sink and rise these seven
In due succession named:—Yugaiulhara, 
And Isadhara, Karavlka Range, 
Sudassana, and Mount Nemindhara, 
Vinalaka, and Assakanna's mass.
These seven celestial ranges, beautified 
With many gems, compass Sineru round.
There dwell Great Regents, Yakkhas, deities. 
Himdvd stands five hundred yojanas
In height {three thousand are its length and breadth), 
Crowned ivith its four and eighty thousand peaks. 
This island Jambudnpa has been named 
After the Jambu tree, which others name 
Kdga, whose trunk is fifteen yojanas
In girth. The trunk and the outspreading arms 
Are fifty yojanas in length. It shades 
A hundred; and a hundred is its height.
And the dimensions of the Jambu are the dimensions of the 
variegated trumpet-flower of the Asuras, the silk-cotton tree 
of the Garulas, the kadamba tree of Aparayoga, the wish­
yielding tree of the Uttarakurus, the acacia of Pubbavideha, 
and the coral tree in Tavatimsa.
[299] Hence the Ancients said:—
Kadaniba, and devas Pdricclialtaka,
Pdtali, Kappa, Jambu, Simbali,
Sirisa s&venth.
The great loorli's rocky rim sinks in the deep 
Eighly-two thousand yojanas, its height 
Identical, endrdi'tig the whole world.
     

--- PAGE 112 ---

394 Material Qualities
In continuity ‘ grasped-at,’^ such material forms as the bodies, 
of fish, turtle, deva, demon, etc., are big in appearance. As 
it wa.s said by the Blessed One:—‘ Bhikkhus, in the great ocean 
are creatures one hundred yojanas in size.’^
‘ From illusory resemblance in phenomena ’ means, just as 
the juggler shows water which is not a gem as a gem, a stone . 
which is not gold as gold, and himself not being an ogre,''’’ 
nor a bird, as ogre or as bird, so these forms, not being indigo, 
may appear as indigo-coloured derived matter, not being yellow, 
nor red, nor white, as derived matter..of these colours. Thus 
because of their illusory resemblances to the juggler’s counter­
feiting are they called ‘ great phenomena.’ As such great 
essentials of Yakkhas and the like who seize any being are not 
found inside that being, nor outside, but just exist in depen­
dence upon him, so these material forms are not found standing 
mutually inside or outside; they just exist depending one on 
the other. Thus because they have unimaginable footing, 
and resemble the counterfeiting of phenomena by Yakkhas, 
etc., they are called ‘ great phenomena.’
Again, the great essentials are like ogresses. As these 
by seductive transformations of their external appearance,, 
and hiding their own fearfulness, deceive people, so they, 
by means of lovely skin and complexion in the bodies of women, 
men, etc., and of lovely contour of limbs, big and small, and of 
lovely gestures of hands, feet, fingers, eyebrows, hiding their 
own various intrinsic characteristics of harshness, and so 
on, deceive fools and do not allow them to see their real nature. 
Thus owing also to their similarity to the illusory phenomena 
of ogresses in counterfeiting, they are ‘ great phenomena.’
[.300] ‘ From maintenance ’’means, because they are main­
tained by ^eat or many causes. These material forms, 
namely, from being daily maintained occur as essentials 
through d.bundance of food, covering, etc.; hence the name.
‘ From the immensity of their metamorphoses ’ means, be­
cause of the great changes [undergone by] the elements in. 
material forms ‘ grasped-at ’ as w'ell as not ‘ grasped-at.’
1 Below, p. 437, n. 1. » Vin. Texts, ui, 302. » I.e., Yakkha.
     

--- PAGE 113 ---

The Four Great Essentials 395
Of these the vastness of the change in the underived is mani­
fested at the destruction of a world-cycle; that of the derived 
is manifested when the elements are disturbed.
If'hen heui consumes this world, the f,ame oj ^re 
Leaps upward even to the Brahma world. 
When awjry waters whelm the universe, 
The whole world of ten myriad kotis falls. 
When perturbation of the element 
Of motion overwhelms the universe. 
The ivhole world of ten myriad kotis falls. 
As bodies that the katthamukha bites 
Stiffen, so bodies ft-om the tottering 
Of the e^ciension-element, groxo stiff 
J.S though they entered katthamukha’s mouth. 
As bodies that the putimukha bites. 
Groiv putrid, bodies from the tottering 
Of the cohesion element will rot 
As though they entered putimukha’s mouth. 
As bodies that the aggimukha bites 
Grow hot, so bodies from the tottering 
Of the heat-element wax also hot 
As thoiigh they entered Aggimukha’s mouth. 
As bodies that the satthamukha bites 
Are cut up, bodies from the tottering 
Of the element of motion are cut up 
As though they entered satthamukha’s mouth.
Such mighty changes are implied in the name ‘ great 
essentials ’ or phenomena.
‘Because of the vastness of 'their “becoming”.’;—that 
is, these [elemental forms], as existing, require mighty effort 
to cope with them, and on this account are called Great Essen­
tials. For such reasons are they called ‘ great essentials.’
X'V ‘ The derivative matter of the four great essentials ’—here 
the possessive case is in the sense of the ablative. The mean­
ing is, matter which has proceeded in dependence, on,’is derived 
from, has not let go the four great essentials. This is what is 
called ‘ all matter,’ and comprises four great essentials, and
     

--- PAGE 114 ---

396 Material Qualities 
twenty-three derived material things shown in due order. 
Thus this (Scheme of twenty-seven kinds, constitutes ‘ all 
matter.’
[301] Now to show that matter in detail, he said, ‘ all matter 
is not a condition,’ etc., laying down the table of contents by 
means of unitary, and so on, up to elevenfold compendia. 
Herein to the term ‘ all matter ’ should be applied all the terms, 
thus: ‘ All matter Ls not-a-condition, all matter is uncondi­
tioned-’^ And all these forty-three terms, beginning with 
‘ not-a-condition,’ are shown Jjriefly. Of them forty terms 
have been placed in due order by taking them from the Table 
of Content!?; at the conclusion there are three terms not from 
the Table of Contents. Thus so far in the first compendium 
a specification of the Text should alone be understood. And so 
also in the second compendium, etc.
Now in the second there are one hundred and four couplets, 
of which fourteen, stated at the outset as ‘ there is matter 
derived, there is matter underived,’2are known as special cases, 
from the absence of mutual connection. The following 
Uventy-five couplets, beginning with ‘ There is matter which 
is the basis of eye-contact,’ are called basis-couplets, because 
they proceed by investigating what is basis and what is not. 
Following them, twenty-five couplets, beginning with ‘ There 
is matter which is the object of eye-conta<jt,’ are called object­
couplets, because they proceed by investigating what is object 
and what is not. Following them, ten couplets, beginning with 
‘ There is matter which is the organ of eye,’ are called sense­
organ couplets because they arise by investigating what is 
organ and what not. Followung them, ten couplets, beginning 
with ‘ There is matter.which is the element of eye,’ are called 
element-couplets, because they proceed by investigating 
what is element and what is not. Following them, eight couplets, 
beginning with ‘ There is matter which is the controlling 
faculty of eye,’ are called controlling faculty-couplets, because 
they proceed ‘by investigating what is controlling-faculty 
and what is not. Following them, twelve couplets, beginning
/.e., without the 6 hetu’s (p. 61 /.). « Dhs. § 585.
     

--- PAGE 115 ---

The Four Great Essentials 397
with ‘ There is matter which is body-intimation,’ are called 
refined matter-couplets, because they proceed by investigating 
what is refined and what is unrefined matter. This is the 
specification of the Text in the second compendium.
In the third compendium' are one hundred and three 
triplets. Here connecting one personal couplet, from among 
fourteen particular couplets given in the second compendium, 
with the remaining thirteen, we find thirteen special triplets 
laid down by the method beginning with, ‘ That which is 
personal matter is derived, that which is external matter 
[302] is derived and not derived.’ Subsequently, connecting 
that personal couplet with the remaining couplets, the remain­
ing triplets have been laid down by the method beginning 
with, ‘ That which is external matter is not the basis of eye­
contact, that which is personal matter is the basis and not the 
basis of eye-contact.’ Their names and number should be 
understood by virtue of basis-couplets, etc. This is the 
specification of the Text in the third compendium.
In the fourth compendium^ are twenty-two quadruplets. 
With the exception of the last all these have been stated by 
taking into account the tabulated qualities of matter in con­
nection \vith:—‘ There is matter that is derived ... is 
underived.’ How ? By taking, in the twofold compendium, 
each of whatever three couplets there are from the beginning 
among particular couplets and connecting it with five and 
five couplets by the method beginning with, ‘ That matter 
which is derived is “ grasped at ” and not " grasped at,” ’ 
fifteen quadruplets have been laid down at first, having their 
root in those three couplets. Now because the fourth couplet 
about matter as ‘ visible ’ is not connected, in the absence of 
sense, of serial order, of emphasis, with the following couplets 
by the method beginning ‘ That matter which is visible is 
reacting, non-reacting,’ or with the preceding couplets by the 
method beginning with ‘ It is derived, underived ’;—owing to 
the absence of sense thus ‘ It is not that the visible is un- 
impinging or underived’; owing to the absence of serial
     

--- PAGE 116 ---

398 Material Qualities
order thus, ‘ the visible is grasped at aud not grasped at ’; 
owing to the absence of emphasis (all the couplets are con­
nected onl]f with the following couplets), this is the serial 
order here. With the preceding couplets it is absent. When 
there is the absence of what is ‘ grasped at ’ and not ‘ grasped 
at,’ the absence of serial order does not matter; hence one 
should say that the construction should be with the ‘ grasped 
at,’ etc.; it should not be made ow’ing to the absence of dis­
tinction. Indeed the terms ‘ grasped at,’ etc., have been 
coimected with this visible couplet. In that construction, when 
it is said, ‘ Either the “ grasped at ’’"is visible, or the visible 
is “ grasped at,” ’ there is no distinction. Therefore without 
contemplating that fourth couplet and connecting each two 
couplets, which are connected by the method beginning with 
‘ That matter which is impinging is a controlling faculty, not 
a controlling faculty; that matter which is non-impinging 
is a controlling faculty, not a controlling faculty,’ together 
with the three following couplets beginning with [30.3] ‘ There 
is matter impinging,’ six quadruplets have been laid dowm.
And as this fourth couplet does not undergo connection, 
so also the initial couplet is not connected with it. Why ? 
Because. underived matter is invisible. To expand: This 
initial couplet being connected with the fourth:—‘ That matter 
which is not derived is visible, invisible’—does not undergo 
connection. .Therefore passing over that fourth couplet, 
it has been connected with the fifth. So whichever couplet 
is connected with any other couplet, it should be understood 
that it does not undergo connection. Such is the specification 
of the Text in the fourth compendium. ,
0^ . The seven following compendia, beginning w’ith the five­
fold, are not mutually mixed. Such should be considered 
as the specification of the Text in the entire table of contents.
Now to classify and show the meaning of that Table of 
Contents, the beginning is ‘ no matter is a condition.’^ 
But why herein has the question not been put:—‘ what is 
that “ all matter ” not any of which is a condition?’ Because
i Helu, Dhs. § 595. I.e., the 6 hetus are immaterial.—Ed-
     

--- PAGE 117 ---

The Four Great Essentials 399
the subject is not divided. In such couplets, etc., as, ‘ there 
is derived matter; there is not derived matter,’ there is partial 
inclusion, but here there is not such distinction as ‘ contlition, 
npt condition ’ and ‘ conditioned, unconditioned.’ Therefore 
the classification has been made without a query. And the 
meaning is: ‘ all ’—that is, without remainder; ‘ matter ’:— 
that is, the word which shows, expresses, names, characterizes 
the state of being affected by external objects; ‘ not any 
■condition ’:—that is, an expression indicating the emphatic 
rejection^ of the condition.2
Herein condition is fourfold:—root-condition, causal con- 
ffition, chief condition, common condition. Of these, that 
which includes the ‘ three moral conditions, three immoral 
•conditions, three unmoral conditions ’ is root-condition. 
‘ Now, bhikkhu, the four great essentials are the condition, 
the cause in the designation of the material aggregate ’« 
—here we have lietu (condition) in the general sense of causal 
relation (paccaya). In the following phrases Jictu means 
■chief condition:—a desirable object is the chief (thing) in 
a good residt, an undesirable object in a bad result.’ As he 
.said:—[30i] ‘ He understands as it really has come to be, 
{namely,] as to occasion and condition, the result of the 
acquiring of kamma, past, future, and present.’*
‘ This is the condition, this is the cause of kamma-activities,® 
to wit, ignorance ’;®—here ignorance, being the common 
condition of those activities, distributes the causal state, 
and this is lietu as ‘ condition held in common.’ As the cause 
of both what is sweet and what is bitter is an essential property 
of the extended and the cohesive, so the condition of both 
good and bad kammic activities is ignorance. In this place 
the interpretation of lietu is root-condition. Having thus 
fixed the import of the conditioned state of matter laid down 
in the Table of Contents as, ‘ states which are conditions,
* ReaYl savadharana- for sadharana-.
* I.e., & hetu, oi ‘ spring of conduct,’ moral or immoral.—Ed.
3 5. iii. 101. * -S. V. 304; A. iii. 417.
8 Satikhard. ® <3. ii., 1 jjf.
     

--- PAGE 118 ---

400 Material Qualifieft
states which are not conditions,’^ he now says ‘ not any 
condition,’ rejecting such a state. In this way, in all the terms, 
the statements as to rejection and non-rejection should be 
understood.^ And the definition of all the terms has been 
given in the commentary on the Table of Contents.’
‘ Related to a cause ’ means; matter sprung from kamma is 
caused by kamma, that sprung from nutriments, etc., is caused 
by nutriments, etc. Thus by virtue of the said four causes 
of matter should the meaning be understood.
‘ Just matter’* rejects the immaterial state referred to in 
the table of contents® as ‘ material states, immaterial states.’ 
‘ Arisen by means of the six modes of [sense-] cognition ’ 
means that only matter as now present should be understood 
by means of all the six modes of cognition. That is fixed 
by the cognition of the five senses, but these cognitions do 
not cognize the past and the future; only sense-mind-cognition 
does that; it falls into the stream of the fivefold cognition 
and goes along with it. It is impermanent in that it becomes 
and perishes; it is overpowered by old age because of its having 
such nature; or, because in the material body old age is evident, 
therefore it is said to be ‘ overpowered by old age.’®
‘ Compendium of matter under a single aspect’’:—the word 
aspect (vidha) is found affixed to the terms conceit, appearance, 
portion. ‘ Conc&it at the thought, “ I am the better man ” 
‘ conceit at the thought, “ I am equal,” ’ etc.®—thus vidha is a 
mode of conceit. ‘ What sort of a person do they call virtuous, 
wise V etc.—here.w'd/ja means the apparent. [.305] For of the 
term, ‘ what sort,’ the meaning is ‘ what is he like V The 
basis of knowledge as one portion,’ etc.®—here vidha means 
portion. Here also aspect means portion.
The. word ‘ compendium ’ (sangaha) also is fourfold by way 
of co-birth, similar birthplace, similar work and calculation. 
In the passages:—‘ May all princes come, all priests come, 
all merchants come, all workmen come !’i® and ‘ Visakha, these
‘ Dhs., p, 2.
t B.P.E., p. 168, n. 4.
* Ib. § 595. * Above, p. 61 /.
® Dhs.,p.Z,l.3. • lb. § 584 (end).
’ B.P.E.: * category of Form considered by way of single attributes.’ 
* Dhs. § 1116. ® Vibh. 306 /. ‘® Not traced.
     

--- PAGE 119 ---

The Four Great Essentials 401
three .states: right speech, right work, right livelihood are 
comprised in the aggregate of virtue’^;—such compen­
dium is comprising under similarity in kind. In the 
following all are comprised as one in origin as though it 
were said, ‘ Let all of one kind come! Let all people of 
Kosala, of Magadha, of Bharukaccha come!’ and ‘ Visakha, 
these three states: right endeavour, right mindfulness, right 
concentration are comprised in the merit of concentra­
tion. ’2 Thus this compendium means similarity in source, 
as though it were said, ‘ Let all men bred in one place come.’ 
In the following:—* Let all elephant-riders, horsemen, 
charioteers, come!’ and ‘Visakha, these two states: right 
view, right intention are comprised' under the aggregate of 
wisdom,’®—this is compendium as work. And all these are 
classed together on account of their OAvn work. In the 
following:—‘ Under what reckoned aggregate does the organ 
of sight go ? That of the material aggregate. Verily it is so. 
AVherefore, indeed, dear sir, the organ of sight is comprised 
under the material aggregate ’•*—here compendium is a sum­
mary. The meaning is, reckoning matter by one specimen. 
And the same everywhere.
*• Majjhima N. i. SOI. * Ib. ® Ib.
Not traced. The diction is that of the Kathavatthu (Points of 
Controversy'}. The matter is the subject of DludukUha^ cf. i., § 17.—Ed.
48704
     

--- PAGE 120 ---

CHAPTER in
DERIVED RIATERIAL QUALITIES
Now in the twofold and following compendia^ he said, ‘ AVliat 
is the material quality that is derived V and so forth; thus 
showing the term-analysis preceded by the query, because 
distinctions were revealed, viz.: ‘ Jhere is matter derived . . . 
not derived.’ Here ‘ derived ’ i.s ‘ it grasps.’^ The meaning is; 
grasping the great essentials, not letting go,® such (derived 
forms) proceed in dependence upon them.
[30G] Now in showing that [derived matter] according to 
its variety, he said, ‘ Organ of sight, etc.’ Having thus briefly 
pointed out derived matter under twenty-three aspects, and 
then in showing it at length, he said, ‘ What is that matter 
which is organ of sight V* wherein ‘ eye’ is twofold:—eye of 
flesh and eye of insight. Of these eye of insight is fivefold 
according to this division;—Buddha eye, all-seeing eye, eye 
of knowledge, clairvoyant eye, and eye of the Dhamma. Of 
these, the passage:—‘ Bhikkhus, in surveying the world with 
the eye of a Buddha, I saw beings with but little dust of corrup­
tion in their eyes . . . beings docile and indocile,’® refers to 
the ‘ Biiddha eye.’ ‘ Omniscience is called the all-seeing eye ’® 
—this is the'all-seeing eye. ‘ Vision arose, knowledge arose — 
this is the eye of knowledge. ‘ Bhikkhus, with clarified spiritual 
eye indeed I saw ’8—this is the psychic eye. ‘ In that very 
seat, the pure, unstained eye of the Dhamma arose ’®—‘ this 
is the Dhamma eye, comprising the first three Paths.
Again, the eye of the flesh is twofold:-viz., as compound
Dks. § 596. * Burm. text: upadayati.
' ® Read in P.T.S. ed. amuncitva. Cf. above, p. 395.
‘ Dhs. §§ 597-600.
® SI. i. 169; cf. Dialogues ii. 32 ; Kindred Sayings i. 174; Ffnaya 
Texts i. 88.
® Not traced. Dialogues ii. 26.
* Cf. Dialogues i. 95.
8 S. ii. 213.
402
     

--- PAGE 121 ---

403Derived Material Qualities
organ and as sentient organ. Of these, a lump of flesh 
is situated in the cavity of the eye, bound by the bone of the 
cavity of the eye below, by the bone of the brow above, by 
the eye-peaks on both sides, by the brain inside, by the eye­
lashes outside. It has fourteen constituents: briefly, the 
four elements, colour, odour, taste, nutritive essence, colloca­
tion, appearance, life, natiure, sensitive skin, sentient eye. 
In detail, there are the four elements and the following six 
which depend on them:—colour, odour, taste, nutritive 
essence, appearance, and collocation. These ten, in that they 
spring from four causes, make forty. Four, to wit, life, nature, 
sensitive skin, sentient eye, spring solely from kamma. 
Thu.s [.307] these forty-four material qualities make forty-four 
constituents. Although the world perceives the eye a.s white, 
as [of a certain] bigness, extension, width, they do not know 
the real sentient eye, but only the physical basis thereof. 
That lump of flesh situated in the cavity of the eye is bound 
to the brain by sinewy threads. Therein are white, black, 
red, extension, cohesion, heat, and mobility. The eye is white 
from the abundance of phlegm, black from that of bile, red 
from that of blood, rigid from that of the element of extension, 
fluid from that of cohesion, hot from that of heat, and oscillat­
ing from that of mobility. Such is the compound organ of 
the eye. And that sentient organ situated in and bound to 
it is called the sentient eye as derived from the four great 
essentials. In’^ the circle of vision where arise images of the 
bodies of men standing, right in front, in the middle of the 
black disc surrounded by white circles of the constituent 
organism, it [the sentient organ] permeates the ocular 
membranes as sprinkled oil permeates seven cotton wicks. 
And it is served by the four elements doing the functions of 
sustaining, binding, maturing, and vibrating, just as a princely 
boy is tended by four nurses doing the functions of holding, 
bathing, dressing and fanning him. And being upheld by the 
caloric order, by thought and nutriment, and guarded by life 
and attended by colour, odour, taste, etc.j the organ, no
Visuddhi Magga, p. 445.
     

--- PAGE 122 ---

404 Material Qualities
bigger in size than the head of a louse, stands duly fulfilling 
the nature of the basis and the door of visual cognition, etc. 
As it has ^een said by the ‘ General of the Dhamma ’;—
That orfjan of the visual sense, by which 
Objects are apprehended, is a small 
And subtle thing, and like a louse’s liead.^ »
The term cakkhdyatanam means ‘ sense of sight.In the 
•phrase ‘ that eye which is the sentient organ derived from 
the four great essentials,’ the possessive case is used in the 
sense of purpose. The sentient organ arises grasping the four 
great essentials is the meaning. By this expression he takes 
only the sentient organ and rejects the remaining \’isual 
organism. But in the Indriyagocard Sutta^ the sentient organ 
arising as derived from one great essential, [.308] which is the 
element of extension, is well upheld by the other three 
great essentials: cohesion, heat, and mobility. In the 
CaluparivaUa Sutta'* the sentient organ arising as derived 
from the two great essentials of the elements of extension 
and of cohesion, is well upheld by the two great essentials 
of heat and mobility. These two payings have been made 
by way of explanation, and this Suttanta-like discourse is 
an explanatory teaching. The sentient organ arising as 
derived from the four great essentials is true of any one and 
also of any two of them. In this way is the teaching in the 
two Suttas. But the Abhidhamma is teaching without 
explanation. Therefore it is here said, ‘the sentient organ 
derived from the four great essentials.’
Because it is grasped by foohsh folk, as ‘ this body or this 
collection of the five aggregates is my self,' therefore both the 
bodily frame and the fivefold aggregate is called ‘ self-state * 
{attabhdva, i.e., personality). -
‘ Included in personality ’ is comprised in and depending 
on just that.
‘ Invisible ’:—what cannot be seen by •visual cognition.
‘ Reacting ’:—^reaction, friction is here produced.
* Not traced. Dhs. § 597.
® No such named Sutta as this is known. * 1S. iii. 59; cf. 5. ii, 103.
     

--- PAGE 123 ---

405Derived Material Qualities
•>0 ‘By which,’ etc.:—that is to say, in brief, this eye by which as 
cause a given person ‘ has’ in the past ‘ seen’ the visible object 
specified, or, now proceeding, ‘ sees ’ it, or in future ‘ will see ’ it. 
If the eye be intact, he ‘ may see ’ such visible object as comes ' 
into focus, or he ‘ may have seen ’ a past object with a sight that 
is past. He sees a present thing by a present [eye]; he will see 
a future thing by a future [eye]. If the given object come 
into the focus of the eye, he ‘ may see ’ it by the eye;—here the 
phrase is conditional.
* Moreover this is sight,’ refers to direction of vision.
‘ And this is visual sense,’ refers to source and collocation.
‘ And this is visual element,’ refers to emptiness of essence, 
of entity.
‘ And this is controlling faculty of sight,’ refers to the setting 
up of control as an essential characteristic in vision.
‘ And this is a world,’ refers to its transience, perishableness.
‘ And this is a door,’ refers to its being an entry.
*■ And this is ocean ’—because it cannot be filled.
‘ And this is lucent ’—because it is very pure.
‘ And this is a field,’ refers to origin of contact, etc.
* And this is a basis,’ refers to its fixed seat. It guides the 
subject showing what is level and not level—this is meant 
by the term ‘ guide,’ and in that sense also it is ‘ guidance.’
[309] ‘ And this is the hither shore,’ refers to its being 
included in individuality.^
‘ And this is an empty village,’ refers to its being common 
to many and to the absence of a possessor.^
iV So far.by joining these fourteen epithets beginning with 
‘ moreover this is sight,’ with the four terms beginning with 
‘ he has seen,’ the four methods of specification have been 
expounded. How ? ‘ By that eye invisible and reacting
he has seen a thing visible and reacting. And this is sight— 
and this is empty village ’—such visible thing is the visual 
sense. This is one method. So should the rest be understood.
Now because a visible object strikes the sentient visual organ 
even when there is no desire to see, as when lightning flashes,
/.e., existence in the three planes. a iv. 174.
     

--- PAGE 124 ---

406 Material Qualities
etc., therefore to show that mode the second section of the 
expositiJn was begun. Here ‘ on which eye means, on the 
eye which is in the locative case, ‘ visible object ’ being in the 
nominative case. ‘ Has impinged ’ show!? the meaning of 
the past, ‘ impinges ’ that of the present, ‘ will impinge ’ that 
of the future, ‘ may impinge ’ that of possibility. To expand:— 
Past object impinges on past eye, present object on present 
eye, future object on future eye; should that object reach 
the avenue of eye, it would impinge on the eye:—this is the 
meaning of possibility. But in -reality only in striking the 
sentient organ is the visible object said to impinge. Here 
also, according to the foregoing method, four methods of 
specifying should be understood.
Now to show the case of one who by his own wish has 
brought the eye close to a visible object with a desire to see, 
so that eye impinges on object, the third section of the exposi­
tion was begun. Its meaning is clear. Now here the eye in , 
receiving the object i.s said to ‘ impinge on it.’- Here also 
by the foregoing method the four methods of specifying 
should be understood.
[310] In what follows, ten sections in all are shown, five 
by way of showing the arising of the five modes of sense­
contact, and five by way of showing the arising as in connec­
tion wdth their objects.
In these sections ‘ depending on eye means, making eye 
the cause. ‘ Concerning,a visible object ’ means, on account 
of,^ relating to, because of, a visible object. By this is shown 
the correlation of visible object, namely, contact, etc., having 
the basis in the sentient organ, and being related to it by 
‘ priority ’; also what is included under ‘ process of apperception 
through the door of the eye ’ is related tCr it by ‘ object as 
dominant ’ and ‘ object as sufficient cause.’®
1 Dhs. § 598. 2 Dhs. § 599. • Dhs. § 600.
Lit. ‘ having arrived at ’; agamma, the other synonyms being 
arabbha, sandhaya, paficca.—Ed.
® ‘ Priority,’ mode.s of ‘ object,’ ‘ dominance,’ ‘ sufficient cause ’ consti­
tute the tenth, second, third and ninth of the twenty-four relations 
between things taught in the Patthana. Cf. Compendium, p. 192/.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 125 ---

4xyjDerived Material Qualities
In the other five sections the term rupdranimauo'- means 
that [mind] has a visible thing as its object, correlation being 
shown merely by the relation of ‘ object.’ The fourfold 
method of specifying should be understood in these ten 
sections, as in the foregoing three sections.
Thus thirteen sections of exposition have been shown, to 
wit, the preceding three to show in various ways that the eye, 
which has been brought out in the question ‘ AVhat is that 
matter which is the organ of sight V- is this sort of 
state, and these ten. And in each of them, because four 
methods of specifying are obtained, they have been shown as 
elaborated into fifty-two methods (13 x 4). And the same 
with the following expositions also. Here only their specific 
cbfferences are to be considered.
Sotam means hearing^ (or ear). In the interior of the 
compound organ of the interior of the ear, at a spot shaped 
like a finger-ring and fringed by tender, tawny hairs, tended by 
the elements of which the different kinds have been mentioned, 
sustained by the caloric order, by mind, by nutriment, guarded 
by life,** attended by colour, etc., it stands duly fulfilling the 
nature of the basis and door of auditory cognition, etc.
Glianam is smelling.® In the interior of the compound 
organ of the nose, at a spot shaped like a goat’s hoof, tended, 
supported, guarded, attended [as aforesaid], [311] it stands 
duly fulfiUing the nature of the basis and door of olfactory 
cognition, etc.
‘ Tongue ’® is so called in the sense of tasting flavours? 
Above the middle of the compound organ of the tongue, at 
a spot shaped like the upper part of a torn lotus leaf, it stands 
duly fulfilling the nature of the basis and door of gustatory 
cognition, etc,
1 This is in a section of the text of the Dhammasanyani omitted 
in the P.T.S. ed. § 600, just before cakickuM p’eiam. The ten sections 
in the one § 600 are brought out in B.P.E., p. 177 /•—Ed.
2 Dhs: § 597.. ’ Dhs. § 601.
* Ayuna. I.e., jivitindriyaip.—Pyi-
s Dhs. § 605. • E>Jis. § 609.
’’ Sayana may also mean ‘ being pleasant.’—Tr,
     

--- PAGE 126 ---

408 Material Qualities
But in this body, wherever there is a matter grasped at the 
‘ body as field of touch everywhere becomes [the object of] 
service, shstenance, protection, attendance, as said above. 
Like oil diffusing over cotton-rag, it stands duly fulfilling the 
nature of basis and of door of bodily cognition, etc.
What has been said is special [to the sense in question]- 
L The rest of the text and the meaning should be understood by 
the method given in the exposition of sight. For here the 
terms ‘ ear,’ etc., are simply substituted for the term ‘ eye ’; the 
terms ‘sound,’ etc., for the term ‘visible object’; the terms 
‘ has heard,’ etc., for the terms ‘ has seen,’ etc. Owing to 
the absence of this pair of terms, ‘ guide, guidance,’ there are 
[only] twelve sets of similes. The rest everywhere is as has 
been said.
It may be objected that if in this body, wherever there is 
matter grasped at, the tactile sense stands everywhere like 
oil in cotton-rag, then there will be a mixing of charac­
teristics.
Nay, there would be no such thing. MTiy ? Because 
of the absence of any other species of object. But, it may 
be said, even if this is so, the tactile sense would not ‘ stand 
everywhere.’ True, in the ultimate (or metaphysical) sense 
it is not everywhere. But the expression (gtands everywhere) 
is used because it is impossible to set forth the variety in the 
tactile sense by breaking it up. It is impossible to separate 
tastes, etc., of material things like particles of sand, and so 
they are said to be mutually diffused; ultimately, too, there 
is no taste ‘ in ’ material things (if there were, there would be 
a ‘ .taste-seizing ’ whenever there was a sight-seizing). Even 
so the tactile sense is not everywhere in an ultimate sense; 
and it is not absent because of the impossibility of break­
ing it up. Hence it is that no mixing of characteristics comes 
to pass.
[312] Moreover, the determining of characteristics, etc., 
prevents such mixing. For the eye has the characteristic
1 Dhs. § 613. Kayo (body) does duty also for ‘ sense-organ of touch,’ 
or ‘ skin-sensibility.’
     

--- PAGE 127 ---

409Derived Material Qualities
of sentience for phenomena^ worthy of directly impinging 
on the object, or of sentience sprung from action caused a 
desire to see the object. It has the function of drawing con­
sciousness towards the objects; it has the localizing of visual 
cognition as its manifestation; it has the being produced by 
action caused by a desire to see as proximate cause. The ear 
has the characteristic of sentience for phenomena worthy of 
directly impinging on sounds, or of sentience sprung from 
action caused by a'desire to heat sounds; it has the function 
of drawing consciousness towards sounds; it has the localizing 
of auditory cognition as its manifestation; and it has a 
proximate cause as above. The nose and the tongue (or 
smell and taste), and lastly the body or tactile sense may be 
analogously defined.
1^ But some say that eye is a sentient surface for phenomena 
having excess of heat; that ear, nose, tongue are sentient 
surfaces for phenomena having excess of mobility, extension, 
cohesion; that body is a sentient surface for all phenomena. 
Others, again, in the case of the last four senses, assign sentience 
as follows:—space-element, mobility, cohesion, extension.
Such persons should be asked: Adduce your Sutta ! Surely 
they wiU never find such a Sutta.
But some of these give as their reason that object-seizing is 
aided by visible objects which are qualities of heat,® so for the 
other senses. They should be answered:—
‘ Who has said [313] that visible objects are qualities of 
heat, and so on ?’ Nay, it is not permissible to sa/, of indi­
visible phenomena, this is a quality of that. Should they 
say: ‘ Just as you assigned the functions of sustaining, etc., 
on the part of extension, etc., owing to the excess of this and 
that phenomenon among the various supports,® so .should'you .. 
agree to this expression, “ visible objects, etc., are qualities
1 Bhutappasado. The T'lka understands by ’bliiita-, mahabliiita. See 
also below, p. 410.—Tr.
2 For instance, light as a quality of lamp-fire aids the seizing of the 
visible object by the eye; sound as a quality of- mobility aids the 
seizing of the audible object by the ear, etc.—Tr.
® I.e., the material objects sprung from the four elements.—Tr.
1
     

--- PAGE 128 ---

410 Material Qualities
of element.s ” from .seeing the e.xccs.s in visible and other sense­
objects when in those supports there is preponderance of 
heat,’^ elc.
They should he answered thus:—If the smell in cotton with 
a preponderance of extension is greater than that of liquor 
fermented with a preponderance of cohesion, and if the colour 
of cold water be inferior to that of hot water with an excess 
of heat—if these were so, avc should agree to your expression. 
But since the.se two instance.s cannot happen, therefore you 
should give up the special reasoning regarding those phenomena 
which are bases. As in one group, although there is no dis­
tinction of phenomena, the tastes of visible and other objects 
are unlike each other, so even though there is no other special 
reason, the visual and other sentient organs are unlike each 
other. AVhat is that reason which is not mutually common 1 
The reason of the distinction among the senses is just kamma. 
Therefore from the difference of kamma, and not from that of 
phenomena, the difference in these is to be understood. For 
if phenomena were different [in kind], there would be no sentient 
organ. Hence the ancient [thinkers] said; ‘ The sentient organ 
is [sentient] of phenomena similar [to itself], not of dissimilar.’^ 
mV And so among these sentient organs, because they are 
distinct and because of the differences of kamma, eye and 
ear seize the object before they have come into physical 
contact 5vith it. This is because consciousness arises in an 
object which does not adhere to its own basis.® Nose, tongue, 
and tactile sense seize their object while in physical contact 
with themselves. This is because consciousness arises in 
objects which adhere to their own basis. But in the Commen­
tary the object is said to have attained [contact] because it 
has reached the ‘ sense-avenue.’ The colomr of the discs, 
of the moon and sun situated above forty-two thousand 
yojanas away strikes the sentient visual organ. That colour,"
‘ Such as the blazing and dazzling colour of fire, audible sound of 
wind, good taste in earth, sweet taste in water.’
Cf. the Greek theorem; Knowledge is of like,by like, e.g., in 
Aristotle’s De Anima i. 2. 5. *
® Xamelv., one of the great essentials.—Pyi-
     

--- PAGE 129 ---

411Derived Material Qualities
although it appears to be far, is known to be in physical 
contact. Because it has such a range, the eye is said to have 
attained range-contact. The changes in the body of men 
cutting down trees at a distance and of washermen washing 
clothes appears as far off. But .sound striking the sentient 
ear by an elemental series is [relatively] slow of ascertainment.
[.314] Although [in the Commentary] it is said that ‘ the object 
is said to be in physical contact because it has reached the 
sense-avenue,’ yet the colour of the disc of the moon, etc., 
appears as not in physical contact^ and at a distance. 
And if sound also should come slowly, having arisen from far, 
it should be heard after some time. Coming by serial impact 
and striking the sentient organ of the ear, its direction might 
not be evident. Hence eye and ear have an object not in 
physical contact, and are like the snake, etc. As a snake takes 
no delight outside [its range] in places which have been scoured 
and swept, but is delighted when, at resting time, it has entered 
a place of refuse, a lair of grass and leaves, an ant-hill, and 
secures mental quietude, so also the eye prefers broken-up 
effects. It does not delight in burnished, gilded walls and 
the like, it does not even wish to look at them, but it delights 
in [surfaces] variegated with pictures and beautified with 
flowers and creepers, etc. Indeed, in such places, when the 
eye does not suffice, folk wanting to look open mouths as well. 
Again, the crocodile- going out, does not see what there is to 
seize, but goes after food with eyes shut. But when it has 
dived into the water a hundred fathoms deep and entered 
its den and laid itself down, then its mind becomes quieted 
and it sleeps at ease. So, too, [the sense of] hearing desires 
a ‘ den ’; it entertains a wish for the cavity of the ear which is 
dependent on space. The space in the ear-cavity is the cause 
of hearing a sound. And open space also is operative when 
{a bhikkhu] is reciting within [a cave]. The sound does not 
break through the roof of the cave and come out, but going 
out by the doors and windows strikes the sensitive ear in an
‘ Read asampatto in P.T.S. ed.
Siunsumaro, usually rendered erocodile.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 130 ---

412
7-
5
Material Qualities
elemental series. Immediately, then, those seated at the back 
of the cave know that .so-and-.so is reciting If such be the 
case,—it may be said—then there is physical contact [with 
object]. But has this ear such an object ? Yes, it has. If 
so (the objection is) when drums, etc., are struck from far there 
should be no knowledge that the sound is distant. But there 
is such knowledge. For when the sensitive ear is struck by 
sound, there is such and such a variety of knowledge as— 
distant sound, near sound, sound from the further bank, sound 
from the hither bank. Such knowledge is natural law. What 
is this natural law ? AVherever there is a cavity, [315] from 
that conies hearing, like the seeing of the (distant) moon 
and sun, etc. Such is the absence of physical contact in hearing.
The bird does not delight in a tree or the ground, but when 
it rises into the sky and goes beyond a stone’s throw or two, 
it gets a feeling of security. So also the nose desires space, 
and has for object odour dependent on wind.’^ Indeed, 
cattle at the first showers of rain keep smelling at the earth, 
and turning up their muzzles to the sky breathe in the wind. 
And when a fragrant lump is taken in the fingers and smelt 
no smell is got when breath is not inhaled. Again, a dog in 
wandering about does not see a safe place, but is harassed by 
the throwing of stones, etc. But when it enters the village 
and scratches up ash at an oven-door and hes down, it finds 
ease—sb is it with the tongue. This, too, desires ‘ a village ’ 
and has for object the taste dependent on the watery element. 
Thus even when a bhikkhu’s duties have been done during 
the three^ watches of the night, and he early in the morning, 
taking bowl and robe, has to enter the village, he is not able to 
discern the taste of dry food unwetted by the sahva.
Again, the jackal does not find delight in- roaming about 
till it eats human flesh at the cemetery for non-cremation, and 
lying down it gets ease. So the tactile sense also desires
1 Wind which takes the odour is the sufficing condition, yet by 
common usage the odour is called the sufficing condition of ^[the 
sensed] wind.—Tika.
P.T.S. ed.; read ti-yama° for niydma°.
     

--- PAGE 131 ---

413Derived Material Qualities 
matter grasped at, and takes a tangible object dependent 
on the extension element. Thus, persons getting no other 
matter ‘grasped at,’ will when lying down put the head on 
the palm of the hands. Internal and external extension 
is the cause of the tactile sense seizing the object. Thus it 
is not possible to know the hardness or softness of a bed well 
spread out or of fruits placed in the hand without sitting down 
on the one or pressing the other. Hence internal and external 
e,\tension is the cause in the tactile cognition of the tactile 
organ. .
Of these senses, too, [as in sight and hearing] specifying of 
characteristics, etc.,^ reveals an absence of intermixture. 
For the characteristic, function, manifestation, proximate 
cause, desired object, and bases of the sentient visual organ 
are different [31G] from those of the other sentient organs, 
hence the senses are not mixed. And, further, these similes 
illustrate the absence of intermixture;—just as although 
the shadow of uplifted banners of five colours seems to be 
blended in one, yet the shadow of each does not mix 
with that of the others; as although, when a lamp that is 
lit, has a cotton wick of five colours, the flame seems to be 
blended in one, yet the individual flame of the fibre of each 
cotton does not mix with that of the other, so these five 
organs, although they meet in one individuality, yet do not 
mix with each other. Not only they but also the remaining 
material objects, etc., are pnmixed. For in this body are, 
three portions: lower body, middle body, upper.body. Of 
these, from the navel downwards is the lower body, in which 
are forty-four material qualities; body-decad, sex-decad,^ 
eight material things sprung from nutriment, eight from the 
caloric order and eight from mind. From the navel upward 
tiU the wind-pipe is the middle body in which are fifty-four 
material qualities: body-decad, sex-decad, basis-decad, three 
sets of eight sprung from nutriment, etc. From the wind­
pipe upward is the upper body wherein are eighty-four
* See above, p. 405.
® On ‘ decads,’ see Compendium, pp. 164, 250 /•
     

--- PAGE 132 ---

414 Material Qualities
material qualities: eye-decad, ear-decad, nose-decad, tonguc- 
decad, topch-decad, sex-decad, the three sets of eight sprung 
from nutriment, etc. Among these, this decad, to wit, the 
four great essentials as causes of the sentient organ, together 
with colour, odour, taste, nutritive essence, life-controlling 
faculty, the sentient organ is called the eye-decad by virtue 
of its absolutely indivisible pre-determined material qualities. 
The remaining decads are to be understood iu the same way. 
Among them the material qualities in the lower body do 
not mix with those in the middle and upper bodies; and the 
material qualities in the remaining two bodies do not mix 
with those in the lower. As although at eventide the shadows 
of the mountain and of trees seem to be one yet they are 
mutually unmixed, so although in these three parts of the 
[same] body, the forty-four, fifty-four, and eighty-four material 
qualitie.s appear as one, they are mutually unmixed.
, In the exposition of ‘ visible object colour is just ‘ coloured 
appearance ’; or it shines—hence appearance. ‘ Evident 
to visual cognition ’ i.‘? the meaning [317] of the compound 
term. ‘Visible’ is [literally] co-vision; the meaning is, it is 
to be seen by visual cognition. ‘ Reacting ’ is [literally] 
co-reaction; the meaning is, producing the friction of impact. 
Among blue-or-green things,etc., the colour of ‘ bllie-or-green ’ 
(w7Za) is like the clitoria, ‘ yellow ’ is like the bauhinia, ‘ red ’ 
is like the bandhujivaka, ‘white’ is like the morning star, 
‘ black ’ is' like burnt coal, ‘ crimson ’ is hke the sindhu-vara, 
kanavira flowers. In the Culahamsa Jataka® liari is used for 
golden:—‘ O Sumukha, thou golden-coloured one, depart
1 Dhs. § 617.
2 On this curious colour-blindness in Indian-vision, see B.P.E., 
p. 62, n. 1. Dr. Edridge Green, author of Cdour-blindness and Odour - 
perception, would call such vision tetrachromic (seeing but four colours 
in the spectrum). It regards ‘ blue as a greenish-violet, and calls it 
violet or green, according to its proximity to one of these colours.’ 
See Strand Magazine, Dec., 1909: ‘ Colour-blindness and its Dangers.’ 
—Ed.
® Called (in the Fausboll edition) Mahavamsa Jataka (v. 359, 89), 
which follows the Culahamsa.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 133 ---

415Derived Material Qualities
if thou wilt.’ But iu what follows jaiarupa is reudered by 
golden, hence here hari is dark green. These seven ternrs 
of colour have been pointed out merely with respect to their 
nature, without taking into account the substance itself. 
Harivaniia is the colour of a dark-green leaf. Anibahkura- 
vtinna is like the colour of a mango-shoot. These two terms 
have been pointed out by taking into account the substance.
The twelve terms beginning with ‘ long ’ have been pointed 
■out by common usage. This is accomplished by reference and 
by juxtaposition. For the terms ‘ long,’ etc., are accomplished 
by mutual reference. The terms ‘ circular,’ eto-, are accom­
plished by juxtaposition. Among them with reference to what 
is short, ‘ long ’ is so-called as being higher than that; ‘ short ’ 
is so-called as being lower than ‘ long.’ With reference to 
what is big, a thing smaller than that is ‘ little,’ with reference 
to which a greater thing is ‘ big.’ ‘ Circular ’ is shaped like a 
wheel; ‘oval’ like an egg. ‘Square’ is bmmded by four 
sides. And the same should be understood with six sides, etc. 
‘ Sloping ’ (low-lying) is bent down, ‘ high-lying’ (upland) is 
raised up. Among these expressions, because it is possible to 
know ‘ long,’ etc., also by touch, but not ‘ blue-green,’ etc., 
therefore in reality ‘ long ’ is not directly^ a visible object, neither 
is ‘ short,’ and similar terms. What we call ‘ long,’ ‘ short ’ is 
relative to (dependent on) this or that, has such and such a 
position, and it is to be rmderstood here as mentioned in 
accordance with this or that conventional usage.
The pair of terms ‘shady’ and ‘glowing’ have been 
mutually divided. ‘ Light ’ and ‘ dim ’ likewise. ‘ Cloudy,’ 
‘ frosty,’ ‘ smoky,’ ‘ dusty ’ are shown as [referring to] four 
substances. Of these abblid is cloudy, mahikd is snow or 
frost. By these four terms the colours of clouds, etc., have been 
shown. By ‘ like the disc of the moon in colour,’ etc., the 
radiant [318] colours of the moon, etc., have been shown; their 
difference as objects should be understood thus: Made of 
gold, roofed with silver, forty-nine yojanas in length and 
breadth, the moon is the mansion of the moon god. Made
1 Na nippdriyayena. Or, ‘ is only figuratively. . • •’—Ed-
     

--- PAGE 134 ---

416 Material Qualities
of gold, roofed with crystal fifty yojanas in length and breadth, 
the sun is the mansion of the sun god. The mansions of 
various gods are made of the seven geni.s, and are seven, eight, 
ten, twelve yojanas in length and breadth. These are the 
constellations. Of these the moon is below, the sun is above. 
Between the two is one yojana. From the lower edge of the 
moon to the upper end of the sun is one hundred yojanas. 
The constellations of the stars march on both sides. The 
moon is sluggish in his course, the sun is quick, the constella-. 
tions are the fastest of all. At times they are in front, at 
times behind the moon and the sun.
‘ Mirror ’ is a disc made of copper. ‘ Gem ’ means, all the 
various gems except the cat’s eye, as jolirasa, etc. ‘ Shell ’ is of 
the ocean. ‘ Pearl ’ is ocean and other pearls. ‘ Cat’s eye ’ 
is a jewel of the bamboo colour. Jalarupa is ‘ gold ’ of the 
colour of the ^Master’s complexion. For the Master has a 
golden complexion, for which suvcinna (literally, ‘ fine colour ’) 
is also used. ‘Silver’ stands for the coin (or kahapana) 
Mdsalvis of copper, wood, lac are in common use and are all 
included here. By the expression ‘ or whatever other,’ 
excepting the visible object enumerated in the Text, all 
remaining objects of different colours, such as cups or shutters, 
rough cloth, mildew, etc., are included.
Thus all visible objects, though of different sorts, such as 
blue-green, etc., are not specifically divided as regards their 
characteristics, etc. For all this matter has the characteristic 
of striking the eye, the function or property of being in the 
relation of object to visual’ cognition, the manifestation of 
being the field of visual cognition, the proximate cause of the 
four great essentials. Likewise all derived matter has the 
four great essentials as proximate cause. But where (in 
other sense-cognition, etc.) there are different features, of that 
we shall speak. 'V^’^here there are none the method used in 
the exposition of sight should be understood. [319] The 
difference is simply that there the exposition begins with sight, 
here it begins with’ visible object. And there there are four-
I
*• See above, p. 369, n. A kahapana might be of any metal.
     

--- PAGE 135 ---

417Derived Material Qualities
teen similes beginning with ‘ it is eye ’; here there are three 
beginning with ‘ it is matter.’ The rest is the same. For as 
thirteen sections have been said to specify the eye by elaborat­
ing them in four methods, here they are also given.
In the exposition of sound/ ‘ sound of drum ’ i.s the sound of 
big drums. The other three terms denote sounds of tabors, 
conches, and tom-toms. ‘ Song-sound ’ is sound of singing. 
f 3Iusical sound ’ includes all other sounds of stringed instru­
ments, such as the lute, etc. ‘ Sound of cymbals ’ is the sound 
of copper and wooden clappers. ‘ Manual sound ’ is the 
sound of clapping hands. ‘ Noise'of people ’ is the sound of 
the incoherent articulations of an assembled multitude. 
‘ Sound of concussion of things ’ is the sound of trees rubbing 
against each other; of bells and gongs. Wind-sound is that 
of blowing -wind; water-sound is that of water flowing or 
driven by wind; ‘ human sound ’ is that of men talking, etc.; 
and all such sound except this is ‘ non-human sound.’-
By this last pair of terms all sounds are exhausted. Never- 
thelesis sound not mentioned in the Text and produced by 
splitting bamboos, tearing cloth, etc., is included under the 
category of ‘ or whatever. . . .’
Although sounds have been distinguished [in the Text] as, 
c.g., of a big drum, they have not been differentiated as regards 
salient characteristics, etc. As to these, all sounds have the 
characteristic of striking the ear, the function-and-property 
of being the object of auditory cognition, the manifestation 
of being the field or object of auditory cognition. The rest 
should be understood by the method used in the exposition 
of sight. Here also the thirteen sections elaborated in the 
four methods are given. Their meaning may be known by 
the first exposition. Hence it is not expanded.
In the exposition of the field of odours,® ‘ odour of roots ’ 
is odour produced by any root. And the same with ‘ odour
1 P/iS. §§ 621-24.
2 Amanussa may mean infra-human beings, as in Mil., p. 207, where 
they are opposed to devata (spirits, gods). Here, however, they are 
used in a more general sense as logical contradictories.—Ed.
3 Dhs. §§ 625-28. ‘
n. 9
     

--- PAGE 136 ---

418 Material Qualities
of .sap,’ etc. Odour of vegetables, etc., uncooked or badly 
cooked, i.s ‘raw odour’; that of fish, .shell-fish, rotten flesh, 
■stale blitter, etc., is ‘putrid odour.’ [.320] ‘Plea.sant odour’ 
is de.sirable smell. ‘ Unjileasant odour ’ is undesirable .smell.
By these two last terms all odours are ex'hausted. Never­
theless all odours not mentioned in the Te.vt, such as that of 
mildew, cloth, etc., are included under the category of the 
‘ or whatever. . . .’
Though odours have been distinguished by such classe.s as 
odour of roots, etc., they have not been differentiated as regards 
salient characteristics, etc. As to these, all odours have the 
characteristic of striking the sense of smell, the property of 
being the object of olfactory cognition, the manifestation of 
being the field of the same. The rest should be understood by 
the method used in the exposition of sight. Here also are given 
the thirteen sections elaborated in fifty-two methods. Their 
meaning is evident.
• In the exposition of objects of taste,‘ taste of roots ’ is 
taste produced by any root. And the same with ‘ taste of 
stems,’ etc. ‘ Sour ’ tastes' are buttermilk, etc. • ‘ Sweet ’ 
is really ghee from cow’s milk, etc., but honey is connected 
with astringency and after standing long becomes astringent. 
Raw sugar is connected with dlkaline and after standing long 
becomes alkaline. But butter after standing long, although 
it loses colour and smell, does not lose its taste, hence it only 
is genuinely sweet. ‘ Bitter ’ is as nimb leaves, etc.; ‘ pungent * 
is as ginger, pepper; ‘ saline ’ is as sea-salt; ‘ alkaline ’ is as 
a brinjal sprout or tender fruit. ‘Acrid’ is as the jujube;
‘ astringent ’ is as myrobalan, etc. AU these tastes involve 
reference to the substance,but here it is to be understood 
that, by the names ‘ sour,’ etc., a sapid object has this or that 
substance.2 ‘Nice’ is desirable taste; ‘nauseous’ is un­
desirable taste. By these two expressions aU tastes are ex­
hausted. Nevertheless, those not included in the text, such 
as those of a stone, a waU, a cloth, etc., are included under the 
category of the ‘ or whatever. . . .
‘ Dha. §§ 629-32. * Or base (vatthu).
     

--- PAGE 137 ---

419Derived Material Qualities
And though it is distinguished under these classes, yet the 
object of taste has not been differentiated as regards sahent- 
characteristic, etc. As to that, all tastes have the character­
istic of striking the tongue,^ the property of being the object 
of gustatory cognition, the manifestation of being the field 
of the same. The rest should be understood by the method 
used in the exposition of sight. [321] Here, also, as there the 
thirteen .sections elaborated in fifty-two methods are given.
In the exposition of the feminine coutrolhng faculty,
‘ that which ’ is an expression showing the reason. The mean­
ing here is:—‘by whatever cause a woman has feminine 
features,’ etc., where ‘feature’ is shape. To expand: The 
shape of a woman’s hands, feet, neck, breast, etc., is not hke 
that of a man’s. The female lower body is broad, the upper 
body is less broad. The hands and feet are small, the mouth 
is small. ‘Mark’ is recognizable sign. The female breast 
is prominent. The face is without beard or moustache. 
The dressing of the hair, the wearing of the clothes are also 
unlike those of a man. ‘ Occupation ’ is action. Thus in 
jyouth women play with tiny shallow baskets, pestles and 
^mortars, variegated dolls, and weave string with clay-fibre.
‘ Deportment ’ is mode of going or gait, etc. Thus there is 
a want of assertion in women’s walking, standing, lying down, 
sitting, eating, swallowing. Indeed when a man of that 
description is seen, folk say, ‘He walks, stands, etc., likeji 
woman.’ ‘Feminine in condition and being’—these two 
have one meaning: the nature of woman, which is born of 
kamma and produced at the instant of conception. But 
feminine features, etc., are not the female controlling faculty; 
they are produced in course of process because of that 
Acuity. AVhen there is seed the tree grows because of the 
seed, and is replete with branch and twig and stands filling 
the sky; so when there is the feminine controlling faculty 
called femininity, feminine features, etc., come to be. The 
feminine controlhng faculty should be regarded as the seed; as
’■ Cf. Vis. ilagga, pp. 446, 447. There, too, the palate plays no 
part in the organ of taste.
» Dhs. § 633.
     

--- PAGE 138 ---

420 2Iaterial Qualities
the tree stands growing and filling the sky because of the seed, so 
the fepiinine features, etc., arise iu course of procedure because 
of that faculty. Herein the controlling faculty is not known 
by visual cognition but only by mind-cognition. But 
feminine features, etc., are known by visual as well as by 
mind-cognition. ‘ This is that matter which is the feminine 
controlling faculty’ means ‘such matter is not as the eye­
controlling faculty, etc., are in the male.’ By natural law the 
controlling faculty of a woman is of the woman only.
And the same [.322] with the masculine controlling faculty.^ 
JIasculine features, etc., should be understood as the ojiposite 
of the feminine. For the shape of the hands, feet, neck, 
breast, etc., of a man is unlike the shape of those of a 
woman. For a man’s upper body is broad, the lower body is 
less broad; his hands and feet are large, the face is large, the 
breast-flesh is less full; beard, and moustaches grow. Flair­
dressing and the wearing of clothes are not like those of 
women. In youth they play with chariots and ploughs, etc.', 
make sandbanks and dig ponds. There is assertion in .their 
walking, etc. When a woman is seen taking long strides, etc., 
folk say ‘ she walks like a man.’ The rest is the same as was 
said of the leininine controlfing faculty.
Of these two controlling faculties the feminine has the 
characteristic (of knowing)^ the state of a woman, the function 
of showing ‘ this is woman,’ the manifestation which is the 
cause of femininity in feature, mark, occupation, deportment; 
The masculine controlling faculty has the characteristic of 
{knowing)^ the state of man, the function of showing ‘ this is 
man,’ the manifestation' which is the cause of masculinity 
in feature, etc. Both came into being during the procedure 
of the first inhabitants of this cycle, subsequently they arise 
at conception. Matter coming into being at conception 
fluctuates during procedure and changes its features; and 
matter coming into being during procedure does likewise; as 
has been said: ‘ At that time in a certain bhikkhu the features 
of a woman were revealed; at that time in a certain female
2 So Tikd.
     

--- PAGE 139 ---

421Derived Material Qualities
bhikkhu the features of a man were revealed.’^ _C)f the two, the 
jnasc^ne sex is superior, the feminine is inferior. Therefore 
the former disappears through grossly immoral conduct; the 
latter may be brought about by weak morality. But in 
disappearing, the latter does so by weak immorality, the 
former may be brought about by strong morality. Thus both 
disappear through immorality and may be brought about by 
morality.
Does a hermaphrodite possess one controlling faculty or 
two ? One, and that is feminine to a female hermaphrodite 
and masculine to a male hermaphrodite. This being so, 
there should be no existence of the latter sort of hermaph­
rodite. For the female controlling faculty is said to be 
the reason of the characteristic-mark {vyanjana).^ Then 
has the male hermaphrodite no controlling faculty ? Jn 
such the female controlling faculty is not the reason of the 
characteristic-mark, [323] because of its invariable absence. 
For when in a female hermaphrodite a lustful thought for a 
woman arises, then the masculine characteristic-mark is mani­
fested, and the feminine characteristic-mark is hidden and 
concealed; and vice versa. And if in such people the con­
trolling faculty was the cause of the latter characteristic­
mark, then always there would be a persistence of both charac­
teristic-marks. But in reality there is no such persistence 
Hence it is to be understood that in a hermaphrodite the 
controlling faculty is not the reason for the characteristic- 
mark. (What then is the reason ?)—Lustful thought, friend 
of (past) kamma, is the reason. And because there is only 
the one controlling faculty in a hermaphrodite, therefore the 
female hermaphrodite herself becomes pregnant and causes 
,^nother to become pregnant; the male hermaphrodite causes 
^another to become pregnant but himself does not become so.
In the exposition of the controlling faculty of hfe,^ what 
should be said has already been said above uiider the immaterial 
controlling faculty of life.^ There it was simply said ‘ that
Not traced. 
» Dh^. § 635.
2 Such as features and marks.—Tr.
* See above p. 197. Dhs. § 19.
     

--- PAGE 140 ---

422 Material Qualities
which is of those immaterial states ’:—here, because of the 
material nature of the faculty, the only textual difference is 
‘ that which is of those material states.’ And its character­
istic, etc., should be understood thus:'The controlling faculty 
of life has the characteristic of watching over co-existent 
material objects, their procedure as function, their persistence 
as manifestation, the thing which ought to be maintained as 
proximate cause.
In the exposition of body-intimation, * here intimation in 
the first place is the making knomi one’s own state by [overt] 
bodily action, both by animals to men and by men to animals, 
in accordance with a [certain] disposition of the body; thus that 
state by which such a disposition is made known. Itself inti­
mates in the same way, or again, by such a disposition one’s 
self is made knowm—this also is intimation. The kind of ■ 
intimation called body-intimation is the agitating of the body 
recognized in such sayings as ‘ self-restraint in action is 
excellent.’ A meaning is made kno^vn by bodily gestures,, 
and thus one’s self is made known.
In the words ‘ o'f a moral thought,’ etc., reference is made 
to the nine kinds of moral consciousness:—eight of the sensuous 
realm and one concerning super-knowledge; ‘ or of an immoral 
thought’ by means of the twelve kinds of immoral con­
sciousness; ‘ or of an unmoral thought ’ by means ot the eleven 
kinds of inoperative consciousness: eight great inoperative, 
two limited inoperative, one sensuous inoperative which has 
attained .to super-knowledge. Other kinds of consciousness 
than these do not produce intimation. [324] But there is 
intimation by means of not more than these kinds to pro­
bationers, adepts, and average persons. Thus by way of these 
three terms, moral, immoral, unmoral, etc., intimation has 
been shown as a causal condition.
Now to show such intimation by means of six terms as result 
the Text goes on:—‘ of one advancing.’ Because advancing 
and other acts arise by virtue of intimation, they are called 
results of intimation. Of these, ‘ of one advancing ’ is of
1 Dlia. § 636.
     

--- PAGE 141 ---

423Derived JIatcrial Qualities
one carrying the body forward; ‘of one receding’ is of one 
bringing the body backward; ‘of one looking ahead’ is of 
one looking straight; ‘of one glancing around’ is of one 
looking sideways here and there; ‘of one retracting an arm’ 
is of one bending in the joints; ‘ of one stretching it out ’ 
is of one stretching out the joints.
Now to show intimation by means of six terms in.its in­
trinsic nature the Text goes on:—kaijassa thaniblunta; wherein 
kai/assa is, ' of the body.’ Thambliand is stiffening, making 
stiff the body. Increasing it by the preposition, he said, 
sntilhambliand ; this may mean a stiffening of greater .strength. 
SnnlhautbliilaiUi is the state of a well-stiffened body. Next, 
I'inntUl i is intimation; vinndpaMt is the act or mode of intimal - 
inc. The state of being intimated is vinndpilatlam. AnAdhing 
here to be added has been said above iu the discourse on 
Doors.
Likewise in speech-intimation-. But the meaning of the 
term ‘ speech-uitimation,’ and of the terms in the exposition,' 
has not been stated in the discourse on Doors, and should be 
understood thus:—those who make known their own state by 
speech—including men with animals and animals with men— 
this state is made known in accordance udth a [certain] dis­
position of speech. Grasping the significance of words, oneself 
is intimated^—thus it is intimation. The kind of intimation 
called speech-intimating is an agitating of the voice recognized 
in such sayings as ‘ self-restraint in speech is excellent,’ etc. 
It is a way of intimating one’s intention by the sound of 
speech. Again, from intimating oneself in this way intimation 
, is made by means of speech. In ‘ speech,’ ‘ voice,’ etc., the 
.sound which is uttered by a person is ‘ voice ’; ‘ speech ’ is 
that which is uttered, emitted. ‘ Utterance ’ is a significant 
sentence. It is that sentence which is the means of expression 
of those desirous to know and to make known. That which 
is uttered is ‘ enunciation.’ ‘ Noise ’ is that which is sounded. 
‘ Work or act ’ is that which is done. ‘ Noise-work ’ is making 
noise. Noise made in various ways [325] is the meaning.
     

--- PAGE 142 ---

424 Material Qualities
Articulate speech ’ is special forms of speech, which is no 
mere jangle, but is speech with a specified signification; 
or vocal utterance so divided as to convey a meaning. 
The word ‘ speech ’ has been shown by means of all these 
terms.
Now to show that intimation intrinsically, in three modes, 
by virtue of the terms ‘ intimation,’ etc. (their meaning having 
been given above), and by joining them with that ‘speech,’ 
it is said ‘ that intimation by that speech,’ etc. The meaning 
is plain from what has been said above.
Now among modes of consciousness producing intimation 
for the purpose of not causing delusion, thirty-two, twenty-six, 
nineteen, and sixteen should be understood as particularized. 
Thirty-two modes of consciousness cause material qualitie.s 
to arise, and strengthen the postures and give birth to the 
twofold intimation. Twenty-six modes of consciousness 
do not givfe birth to intimation only, but make the other two 
[processes also]. Nineteen modes of consciousness produce 
only matter, and do not make the other two. Sixteen modes 
of consciousness do not make any one of the three. Of all 
these modes of consciousness, thirty-two are the eight 
moral type.8 analyzed above and the twelve immoral from the 
sensuous realm, ten from those that are inoperative, the con­
sciousness of super-knowledge in probationers and average 
persons, and that of [saints] purged of the intoxicants. The 
twenty-six are five moral types, and five inoperative from the 
material realm, four moral and four inoperative from the 
immaterial realm, the four [stages of] path-consciousness, the 
four of fruitional consciousness. The nineteen are eleven 
from the sensuous moral resultants, two from the immoral 
resultants, inoperative mind-element from inoperative con­
sciousness, five modes of resultant consciousness from the 
material realm. The sixteen are the ten cognitions, the re­
birth-consciousness of all beings, decease-consciousness of 
[saints] purged of the intoxicants, four immaterial resultants. 
Thus these sixteen thoughts are not effective in either matter, 
posture, or intimation. Many other thoughts in the im­
material sphere do not produce matter from having failed to
     

--- PAGE 143 ---

425Derived 2Iatcrial Qualities
got an opportunity, but such as do produce body-intimation 
are speech-intimation.
In the exposition of space-element* ‘ space' is that which is 
not ‘ scratched,’ not scratched off, which is not possible to 
.scratch,cut, or break. With affix ijata (gone-to) the meaning is 
the same, as in khelagata (saliva), etc.; or it may be taken as 
n-kasaijatn, an ‘ unscratched ’ place. ‘ Sky ’ is that which is not 
struck [a-gliam}; not strikable is the meaning. Aghagataui is 
the same. ‘Vacuum’ {vivara) is in the sense of a hole; also 
uivaragatam. By ‘ untouched by the four great essentials ’ 
the unentangled space-element untouched by these is stated. 
And starting wdth its characteristic, space-element has the 
characteristic of delimitating material objects, the function of 
showing their boundaries, the manifestation of showing their 
limits, state of being untouched by the four great essentials 
and of being their holes and openings as manifestation, the 
separated objects as proximate cause. It is that of wliich in 
the separated groups we say ‘ this is above, this is below, this 
is across.’
The following expositions^ of ‘buoyancy of matter,’ etc., 
should be understood by the method given above on ‘ buoyancy 
of thought,’ etc.® But here as to characteristic, etc., buoyancy 
of matter has non-sluggishness as its characteristic, removing 
the heaviness of material objects as its function, quickness 
of change as its manifestation, buoyant matter as its proxi­
mate cause. Next ‘ plasticity of matter ’ has non-rigidity 
as characteristic, removing the rigidity of material objects as 
function, absence of opposition in aU acts due to its own 
plasticity as manifestation, plastic matter as proximate cause. 
‘ Wieldiness of matter ’ has workableness suitable or favourable 
to bodily actions as characteristic, removal of non-workable- 
ness as function, non-weakness as manifestation, workable 
matter as proximate cause.
These three do not* abandon each other. Yet though this 
be so [they are mutually distinguishable]. That change of 
matter which is buoyancy of matter is buoyancy of material
1 D]is. § 638. ’ Dhs. §§ 639-46.
* Supply Ma in P.T.S. ed., p. 326.
• See p. 199 f.
     

--- PAGE 144 ---

426 Material Qualities
objects, non-sluggishness and the special kind of change which 
is as the quick movement of one free from ailment, and is 
produced, from the opposite cause to that perturbation of the 
elements which makes the sluggishness of matter. That 
change of matter which is plasticity of matter is plasticity 
of objects like that of well-pounded leather, is distinguished 
by tractableness, suavity in all special works, and is produced 
from the opposite cause to that perturbation of the elements 
which makes the rigidity of matter. That change of matter 
which is wieldinc&s of matter is •ndeldiness of material objects 
dike that of well-polished gold, is distinguished by suitableness 
for all bodily works, [327] and is produced from the opposite 
cause to the perturbation of the element.s which makes un­
suitableness. Thus their difference should be understood; 
And kamma is not able to make them; only nutriment, 
[thought, and the caloric order]^ can do so. Thus ascetics^ say, 
‘ To-day we have agreeable food; our body is light, plastic, 
wieldy ’; ‘ to-day we have suitable weather ’; ‘ to-day our mind 
i.s one-pointed, our body is light, plastic, and wieldy.’
In the exposition of integration and continuity,® ‘ of organs,’ 
i.e., of ten and a half’* sense-organs of matter, ‘ accumulation ’ is 
production or genesis. ‘That-is the integration of matter’ 
' means, ‘ that accumulation of organs of repeated production.’ 
The meaning is growd;h. ‘ That which is integration of matter 
is the continuity of matter ’ means, ‘ the excess of growth during 
procedure over the growth of material things thus started 
is continuity of matter. The meaning is procedure. ‘ Accu­
mulation’ should be understood as genesis, as when water 
issues from a hole dug in the river bank; integration as growth, 
as when the hole is full of water; continuity as continuous 
proceeding, as when the water overflows. What does this 
exposition signify ? By sense-organ accumulating is implied,
‘ Text has ‘nutriment, etc.’ Yogino. ® Dhs. §§ 642-43.
I.e., five organs of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and five of visible 
object, sound, odour, taste, tangible object, and the sixteen subtle 
material qualities, forming a portion (half) of sixty-nine principles 
which are reckoned as the dhammayatana or organ of the cognizable 
object. See Compendium, p. 184.—Tr.
     

--- PAGE 145 ---

427Derived Material Qualities
and by accumulation sense-organ. Both have been stated.^ 
And what does the mention of both imply ? The accumulation 
integration, production, growth of the four continued material 
things is mentioned. In the real sense both integration and 
continuity arc synonyms of the production of-matter. Yet 
so as to make clear the difference in the mode of production, 
he makes the teaching in the Outline as [distinguishing be­
tween] integration and continuity. Having done so, because 
there is, in a real sense, no difference in these two words, there­
fore in the exposition he said, ‘ That which is accumulation 
of organs is integration of matter,’ ‘ That which is integration 
of matter is continuity of matter.’ That arising of sense 
which is said to be accumulation is called integration of matter; 
further, the subsequent arising of sense is called, in the sense 
of upper growth, integration of matter, and also continuity 
of matter.^ And because both these, integration and continuity, 
are synonyms of the production of matter therefore (of them) 
integration of matter has the characteristic of accumulation, 
the function of making material things rise at the beginning, 
leading them, or the fulness of matter as manifestation, 
integrated matter as proximate cause. Continuity has the 
characteristic of continuous occurrence, the function of linking 
or binding without a break, unbroken series as manifestation, 
matter bound wthout a break as proximate Cause.
In the exposition of decay‘ decay ’ is getting old; 
[328] this indicates its intrinsic nature. The mode of decaying 
is ‘ ageing.’ The three terms beginning with ‘ decrepitude ’ 
indicate function after the lapse of time. The two last, 
‘ shrinkage in life and • maturity of faculties,’ indicate the 
nature o^ decay. The word itself ‘ decay ’ shows what it 
naturally is; hence the exposition states its nature. By the 
word ‘ ageing’ mode is sho\vn; hence this exposition indicates 
the manner of decay. By the word ‘ decrepitude ’ is shown
‘ Also accumulation is the characteristic an<J sense-organ is the 
■possessor of the characteristic. Hence they are relative and mentioned 
together.—
® This, sentence is not in the P.T.S. ed.—Tr. * Dhs. § G44.
     

--- PAGE 146 ---

428 Material Qualities 
the function which is the reason^ for the broken state of teeth, 
nails, etc., in process of time. By ‘ hoariness ’ is shown the 
function which is the reason for the greyness of hair on the 
head and body. By ‘ WTinkles ’ is shown the function which 
is the reason for the wrinkled state in the skin making the 
flesh fade. Hence these three terms indicate the function 
of decay in process of time. By showing these changes decay 
is manifested. As a path taken by water or by fire is clear 
from the broken and scattered state, or from the charred 
state of the grass, the trees, etc., but the path itself is not the 
water or the fire, so the path of decay is clear by decrepitude, 
etc., in teeth and so on. It might be taken with open eyes; 
but decrepitude, etc., are not decay, which, indeed, is not 
[a thing] cognizable by the eye. And decay has been 
shown by the resultant nature known as the very evident 
wasting of life and maturity of the controlling facultie.s of 
sight, etc., iu process of time by these terms:—‘ shrinkage iu 
life and maturity of faculties.’ Hence these two last expres­
sions indicate the resultant nature of this decay. Because the 
life of a being who has reached decay shortens, therefore decay 
is said to be the shrinkage in hfe by a figure of speech. More­
over, the faculties, such as sight, etc., capable of easily seizing 
their own object, however subtle, and which are clear iuxyouth, 
are mature in one who has attained to decay; they are disturbed, 
not distinct, ,and not capable of seizing their own object how­
ever gross. Hence decay is said to be the maturity of faculties 
by a figure of speech. And all this decay so indicated is 
twofold:—evident and hidden. Decay is called evident in 
material states from the sight of brokenness, etc., in teeth 
and so on; it is called hidden in immaterial states from our 
not seeing such change. Again it is twofold as uninterrupted 
and interrupted. Decay is called uninterrupted from the 
difficulty of knowing the distinction in colour, etc., from stage 
to stage, as in the decay of gems, gold, silver, coral, moon, 
sun, etc., of beings in the decade of infancy, etc., of flowers, 
fruits, sprouts, etc., [329] of inanimate.things; decay without
Reading °karana°.
     

--- PAGE 147 ---

429Derived Material Qiialities 
interruption is the meaning. And decay is called interrupted 
when it is easy to know the distinction in colour, etc., from stage 
to stage in the aforesaid things other than gems, gold, silver, 
etc. As to characteristics, etc., the decay of matter has the 
characteristic of maturity of matter; leading (to disruption) 
as function; want of a fresh state, though not devoid of ite 
intrinsic nature, as manifestation, hke rotten paddy; the 
maturing matter as proximate cause.
S' In the exposition of impermanence,^ ‘destruction’ is the 
becoming destroyed; ‘passing away’ is the process of so 
passing; ‘ break-up ’ is dissolving. And because after attaining 
[its own nature], matter undergoes loss, destruction, breaks 
up, therefore it is with respect to that nature that it imder- 
goes destruction, passing away, dissolution. The term being 
increased by the preposition pari-, ‘ break-up ’ is called ‘ total 
dissoliftion ’ {pariblieda). In the sense of not existing after 
having become, it is not permanent, that is, ‘ impermanent.’ 
The state of such matter being impermanent is ‘ imperma­
nence.’ ‘ Disappearance,’ i.e., matter disappears. When it 
has reached death, the material qualities disappear and 
become invisible; not matter only, but all the five aggregates 
disappear. Hence by the impermanence of every one of the 
five aggregates, just this is the characteristic. Fully defined, 
impermanence of matter has the characteristic of complete 
dissolution, the merging of matter as function, destruction and 
evanescence as manifestation, matter undergoing dissolution 
as proximate cause. Above, birth is imphcated and decay 
also; in this place death is implicated. Thus these three states - 
are to beings so constituted like enemies with uplifted swords. 
For as [any] three foes of a man go about seeking for an op­
portunity, and one would say, ‘ Let it be my business to draw 
him out and bring him to the forest,’ the second would say, ‘ Let 
it be my business to strike and fell him to the ground, once he 
is brought to the forest,’ the third would say, ‘ Let it be my 
business from the time of his falhng to the ground till his head 
is cut off with the sword,’ so are these (three stages of life].
     

--- PAGE 148 ---

430 Material Qualities
For birth is like the enemy who draws him to enter the forest; 
because ho has come to birth in this or that place. Decaj' is 
like the enemy who strikes and fells him to earth when he has 
reached the forest, because the aggregates produced are weak, 
dependent on others, lying down on a couch. Death is like 
the enemy who [330] with a sword cuts off the head of him 
when he is fallen to the ground, because the aggregates, 
having attained’to decay, are come to destruction of life.
In the exposition of solid food,^ ‘ solid ’ means it i.s made into 
'an eatable morsel. Food (nutriment) means, it is ‘ taken into.’ 
It is made into a morsel and swallowed down, is the meaning; 
the fetching-hither {(i-hara) of matter. ‘ Boiled rice,’ etc., is said 
to bring out the name by the substance, and again, to show its 
different kinds by the substance. For the nutritive substances 
implied herein are twelve, beginning with boiled rice and 
ending with sjTup. Roots, etc., not mentioned in the Text 
are included in the ‘ or whatever.’ Now in order to show 
these roots, fruits, etc.,.as things eatable, it has been said; 
‘ in whatever region,’ etc. Herein what is to be eaten and 
enjoyed by the mouth is mukhdsiya, what is to be torn by the 
teeth is mkhadatra'ih, to be swallowed by the throat is galaj- 
ihoharaniyavi. Now ‘ stomach-filling ’ is said to show that 
substance by virtue of function. For the substance swallowed,^ 
such as roots and fruits, etc., as well as boiled rice, sour grud^; 
etc., fills the stomach. This is the function of the substance.
By all the foregoing terms nutriment is shown together 
with the substance. Now to show the real nutritive essence 
extracted from the conceptual, the expression ‘ by which 
nutritive essence beings maintain themselves’ is said. Of 
these, which is the function of the substance and which of the 
nutritive essence ? The removal of risk and preservation 
respectively are their functions. For the substance removes 
risk and is not able to preserve. The nutritive essence pre­
serves and is not able to remove risk. Being together, the 
two are able both to preserve and to remove risk. What 
is this risk ? Heat born of kamma. For when there is no 
substance such as boiled rice in the stomach, that heat arises
     

--- PAGE 149 ---

431Derived Material Qualities
aud seizes the stomach-walls and causes the being to cry out 
thus, ‘I am hungry; give me food.’ When it has eaten, the 
heat releases the stomach-walls and seizes the substance. 
Then the person is quieted in mind. For as a hungry demon 
n seizes him who enters the shade of the tree, binds him with
spirit-chai U.S and. rejoicing in his own abode, comes when 
hungry and bite.s him on the head, so that the person cries out 
till tho.se who hear the sound come from various places, saying: 
‘ Here is someone in trouble !’ [331] aud the demon devouring 
everyone that comes rejoices in his own abode, so should the 
application of this simile be understood. For like the hungry 
demon is the heat born of kamma; like the being kept bound 
in spirit-chains is the stomach-wall; like the men who keej) 
coming is the substance of boiled rice, etc.; like the descent 
from the tree aud bite on the head is the release of the sub­
stance and seizure of the stomach-wall by the heat produced 
by kamma; like the bitten man’s cries is the saying, ‘ Give me 
food ’; like the rejoicing oter the abode after tearing and eating 
every man that comes at that alarm is the quietude of mind 
when the stomach-wall is released, and the substance seized 
by the kamma-born.heat.
Herein the nutritive essence in gross substance is weak, 
' in the subtle substance strong. For after eating coarse 
grain, etc., one becomes hungry again after a brief interval. 
But to one who has partaken of butter, etc., food is no 
more welcome for the rest of the day. And here the grossness 
and subtleness should be understood with varying refer­
ence. the^niUrimmt of peafowl is subtle as compared
with that of j?rocodiles. These are said to swallow stones 
and digest themTlTfEeK^tomach; peafowl eat such creatures 
as snakes and scorpions. And the nutriment of hyenas 
is subtle as compared with that of peafowl, for they are 
said to eat horns and bones discarded for three years, and 
. which become soft as bulbs and roots the moment they 
I are wetted by their saliva. The nutriment of elephants 
iJis subtle as compared with that of hyenas, for they eat leaves 
of various trees, etc. More subtle yet.than that is the nutri­
ment of the gayal, the wild ox, deer, etc., which eat the
     

--- PAGE 150 ---

432 Material Qualities
pithless leaves of various trees, etc. More subtle than that is 
the nutriment of cattle, which eat grass, wet and dry. Mort! 
subtle still is the nutriment of hares, more subtle still is that 
of birds, more still that of frontier people, more still that of 
village pensioners, more still that of king.s and ministers, more 
still that of universal monarchs, more still that of earth spirits, 
more still that of the four firmament-guardians, each being more 
subtle than the last, as far as the Yama and Paranimittavasa- 
vatti spirits, [.332] whose nutriment attains perfect subtlety.
As to its characteristic, etc., solid food has the characteristic 
of nutritive essence, the function of fetching matter [to the 
eater], of sustaining matter as its manifestation, of substance 
to be swallowed as proximate cause.
In the exposition of ‘ not derived as derived matter clings 
to, but is not clung to by, another, so this non-derived matter 
not only clings to, but it also is verily clung to.® ‘ The 
tangible ’ is what may be known when touched. The com­
pound term in the Text is ‘ that which is tangible ’ plus 
‘ object of sense.’ The compound terra ‘ cohesion-element 
is that which is ‘ cohesion ’ and ‘ element ’ in the sense of a 
nature which is not entity, is void [of self].
. t Now because three kinds of material things may be touched 
and known, therefore to classify and show them it is said, 
‘Which is that matter which is tangible object?’® (1) The 
element of extension, w’hich has the characteristic of hardness, 
being the fulcrum"* [of co-existent states] as function, receiving 
them as manifestation. (2) The element of heat, which has 
the characteristic of heat, maturing as function, the gift of 
softening [co-existeht states] as manifestation. (3) The element 
of mobility, which has the characteristic of strengthening, 
impelling as function, bringing near and overjis manifestation. 
And the first [named] element, that of cohesion, has trickling 
as characteristic, breeding [of co-existent states] as fimction, 
gathering them together as manifestation. Each of these 
four has the remaining three as its proximate cause. ,
’ Dhs. § 647. • So Pyi reads.
* Or platform
• Dhs. §§ 648-51.
     

--- PAGE 151 ---

433Derived JIaterial Qualities
‘ Hard ’ means rigid, ‘ soft ’ means not rigid. ‘ Biuootli ’ 
means poli.shed, ‘ rough ’ means harsh. ‘ Pleasurable contact ’ 
nieau.s desirable touch causing pleasurable feeling; ‘ painful 
contact ’ means undesirable touch causing painful feeling. 
‘ Heavy ’ means weighty, ‘ light ’ means not heavy. And here 
by means of these terms: ‘ hard, soft, smooth, rough, heavy, 
light,’ the element ‘ extension ’ is analyzed. When this body 
i.s accompanied by the life-controlling faculty, by the element 
of heat, by consciousness, then it becomes lighter, softer, 
[.33.3] more wieldy. In the Text (Sutta) ‘ light ’ and ‘ soft ’ 
concern only the element of extension. But the pair of 
terms: ‘ pleasant contact and painful contact,’ belongs to the 
analysis of the three great essentials, viz.: extension, heat, 
mobility. For whereas the element of extension has a pleas­
urable touch, as well as a painful touch, so also have the 
elements of heat and mobility. To them the element of 
extension with a pleasurable touch, when a lad with soft and 
tender hands sitampoos one’s feet, makes this kind of speech, 
‘ Dear, press on, press on, dear !’ The element of heat with 
a pleasurable touch, when in the cold season someone takes a 
warming-pan and warms one’s limbs, makes this kind of 
speech, ‘ Dear, foment [them]!’ The element of mobility 
with a pleasurable touch, when in the hot season a dutiful 
lad fans us with a fan, makes this kind of speech, ‘ Dear, fan 
away, fan, dear !’ On the other hand, when a lad with hard 
hands presses one’s feet, it is as though the bones would break, 
and he gets told to go away. If the warming-pan were brought 
in the hot season, one would be told to take it away. In the 
oold season if one were fanned by a fan, it would be said, 
‘ Take it away, don’t fan!’ Thus should the pleasurable 
and painful touch of these be understood.
Thirteen sections adorned each with four methods as 
follows:—‘such a tangible, invisible and reacting,’ etc., are 
to be understood by the method given in visible object, etc., 
above. Do these three great essentials reach the avenue 
of the senses simultaneously or severally ? Simultaneously. 
And do they being thus presented strike the sentient body or 
not ? They do. Making them the object, does bodily 
“• 10
     

--- PAGE 152 ---

434 Maierial Qualities
cognition arise at one stroke or not ? It does not. For 
the object becomes such by virtue of deliberate inclination 
or of intrusion. Of these [alternatives] deliberate inclination' 
should be understood thus:—when the bowl i.s filled with food 
and brought, one who takes up a lump and examines whether 
it is hard or soft, is considering only the element of extension, 
though there may be heat as well as mobility present. One. 
who investigates by putting the hand in hot water, is con­
sidering only the element of heat, though extension and 
mobility are present. One who lets the wind beat upon the 
body by opening the window in the hot season, is considering, 
while the wind beats gently and softly, [334] only the element 
of mobility, though extension and heat are present. Thus 
the [mental] object is made by deliberate consideration. But 
he who slips, or knocks his head against a tree, or in eating 
bites on a stone takes as his mental object only the element 
of extension, on account of its intrusiveness, though where he 
slipped, etc., heat and mobility were present. One treading 
on fire makes only the element of heat his object, owing to its 
intrusiveness, although extension and mobility are present 
therein. WTien a strong wind blows striking the ear as if to 
make one deaf, although extension and heat are present there­
in, the element of mobility alone is made the object owing 
to its intrusiveness. The tactile cognition of one who [de­
liberately] makes any element the object of thought does not 
arise at once. The touch of one pierced by a bundle of pins 
is stimulated at once. But wherever the sensitive surface 
is intrusive, there tactile cognition arises, and wherever the 
impact is strong, there it arises first. On bathing a wound 
with a fowl’s feather, a filament may touch the sensitive 
surface, but tactile cognition arises only ...there where the 
sensitive surface is obtruded. And wherever the impact is 
strong, one makes the object by intrusion, and by intrusion 
tactile cognition is said to arise.
But how does the mind shift from an object ? In one of 
two ways:—by one’s wish, or by excess of [a new] object. To 
expand:—one who goes to festivities held in honour of monas­
teries, etc., with the express wish of paying homage to the
     

--- PAGE 153 ---

435Derived Material Qualities
various shrines, to bhikkhus, images, and of seeing the works 
carving aud painting, and when he has paid his respects 
and seen one shrine or image, has a desire to pay homage to, 
’and see another, and goes off. This is shifting by one’s wish. 
And one who stands gazing at a great shrine hke a silver 
mountain peak, when subsequently a full orchestra begins to 
play, releases the visible object and shifts to the audible 
object; when flowers or scents possessing a delightful odour 
are brought, he releases the audible object and shifts to the 
olfactory object. Thus the mind is said to shift owing to 
excess of [a new] object.
[335] In the exposition of the element of cohesion^ ‘ liquid 
is the natural word, whether it be apo or dpagata ; ‘moist’ 
is by way of being fluid, whether it be siTieha or sitichagata. 
‘ Cohesiveness of matter ’ is the cohering condition of the 
essential matter, such as the element of extension, etc. For 
the element of cohesion binds together iron, etc., in masses, 
makes them rigid. Because they are so bound, they are called 
rigid. Similarly in the case of stones, mountains, palm-seeds, 
elephant-tusks, ox-horns, etc. All such things the element 
of cohesion binds, and makes rigid; they are rigid because 
of its binding.
) Is the element of extension the basis of the remaining 
elements by being in contact with them, or not ? In other 
words, does the element of cohesion in binding the remaining 
elements, bind by being in contact, or not ? In the first 
place, the element of extension is the basis of that cohesion 
without being in contact with it; but is the basis of the elements 
of heat and mobility by being in contact with them. But the 
element of cohesion binds the three others without being in 
contact with them. . Otherwise it would be called tangible 
object. And the same is true of the elements of heat and of 
mobility in perforraing their own functions with regard to the 
remaining two'. For the element of heat touches that of
1 Dhs. § 652.
Apo (water, liquid) has in philosophic terminology assumed the 
meaning of bandhanalta, cohesiveness.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 154 ---

436 Material Qualities
extension and cooks it. Yet the latter doe.s not burn by the 
intrinsic natiure of heat. Did it do so, it would be defined 
as having the characteristic of being hot. And the element 
of heat touches that of cohesion and drie.s it up, yet the latter 
does not dry up by the intrinsic nature of heat. Did it do so, 
it would be defined as having the characteristic of being hot. 
And the element of heat touches that of mobility and heats it, 
yet the latter does not become heated by the intrinsic nature 
of heat. Did it do so, it would be defined as having the charac­
teristic of being hot. And the element of niobihty touches 
that of extension and strengthens it, and it doe.s the same to the 
element of heat; [33Gj but it strengthens the element of 
cohesion without being in contact. When a lump of raw sugar 
is made by cooking sugar-cane juice, is the element of cohesion 
rigid or not ? Not rigid. For it has the characteristic of 
flowing, it is the element of extension which has that of hard­
ness. And the deficient cohesion becomes an excessive 
extension. Indeed, it abandons its status of fluidity, but not 
its characteristic [of flowing]. Though the lump of raw sugar 
is reduced or pounded, the element of extension is not pounded. 
Indeed the element has the characteristic of being hard; 
that of cohesion has the characteristic of flowing. And the 
deficient extension becomes excessive cohesion. It abandons 
its status of being in the form of a lump, but not its own 
characteristic. For there is alteration in state (by way of 
deficiency and excess) of the four Great Essentials;^ but there 
is no such thing as alteration of characteristics. The absence 
of such alteration of the characteristic is shown in the AUka~ 
naparikappa Suita : ‘ Verily, Ananda, of the elements of 
extension ... of cohesion, the.se four great essentials might 
alter their characteristic sooner than it were-possible for the 
Ariyan disciple endowed with assured faith in the Buddha to 
alter.’2 For this is the meaning:—Ananda, the element of 
extension with the characteristic of being hard might change
*■ Such as the becoming fluid or soft of the hard molasses and the 
becoming hard of fluids. -
* Anguttara i. 222.
     

--- PAGE 155 ---

437Derived Material Qvalities 
and be called the element of cohesion with the characteristic 
of flowing; but there would be no change in the Ariyan disciple. 
Thus is impossibility of change mentioned in the Sutta.
The meaning of the terms ‘ grasped-at,’^ etc., in the follow­
ing expositions of ‘ matter which is grasped at,’^ should be 
understood by the method given in the discourse on the Table 
of Contents.
The organs of sight, etc., have been treated at length above. 
We shall here speak only of what is distinctive in them. In 
the exposition of the ‘ grasped-at,’ the sense organs are men­
tioned solely from this aspect of ‘ being grasped at.’ Aud 
because objects of sense are also grasped-at, therefore they, 
having been shown' briefly under ‘ or whatever,’ have again 
been expanded by the method beginning udth ‘ matter 
through kamma having been wrought. ’ In this way the mean­
ing in all the ‘ or-whatevers ’ should be understood.
But why, in both expositions, have decay and impermanence 
not been taken as ‘ due to kamma having been wrought,’ and 
‘ not due to kamma having been wrought ’ ? Why are they 
taken only in the expositions of the ‘ not-grasped-at,’ etc.
[337] In ‘ not due to kamma having been vrought,’ matter 
sprung from another cause than kamma has been taken. 
In ‘ due to kamma having been ^vrought ’ only matter sprung 
from kamma has been taken. And these two, decay and 
impermanence, do not arise either from kamma,^ or from 
any other matter-producing cause. Therefore they have not 
been taken. That they do not so arise will be clear later. 
And by such expressions as ‘not-grasped-at,’ etc., both the 
state of springing from kamma, efc., has been rejected, and the 
state of springing from another cause has not been granted. 
Hence in that exposition these two have not been taken.
In the exposition of ‘ sprung from [or originated by] 
consciousness,’® because the pair of terms, ‘ body-intimation, 
speech-intimation,’ appears with reference to phenomena solely
I Upcidinna:—‘issue of grasping,’ B.P.E., p- 201; 323, w. 1. See 
Compendium, p. 159, m. 6.
§§ 653#. Dhs.^G56.
< Points of Controversy, 207 /. s Dhs. § QQ'i.
     

--- PAGE 156 ---

438 Material Qualities
originated by consciousness, therefore it is mentioned here. 
In an ultimate sense, however, only the phenomena on which 
these two intimations depend are originated by consciousness. 
As it is from depending on such phenomena that deeay-and- 
death of impermanent matter is called impermanence, so 
does this twofold intimation become known as ‘ originated by 
consciousness.’
The same method should be understood in the exposition 
of the term ‘ connate with consciousness.’^ Inasmuch as they 
appear as consciousness, therefore this pair of questions has 
been asked. There is, however, not a [genuine] arising 
connate with consciousness as is the case with the phenomena 
and also with feehng, etc.
And the same with ‘ consequent on consciousness.’- In­
asmuch as [such matter] appears as consciousness, therefore 
this pair [of opposites] is so called.
‘ Gross ’3 means thick, that which may be seized by impact 
of the sensitive surface, because it has become the basis and 
the object 'of thought. ‘ Subtle should be understood as 
the contradictory of what has been said.
‘ Remote ’’:—[an object may be] far even though it stand 
near. Thi.s is when there is a difficulty of cognizing, because 
it is not to be seized by way of impact. The other term ‘ near ’ • 
[may apply to an object] though it stand far. This is when 
there is ease of cognizing, because it may be seized by way of 
impact.
The expositions of sight, etc.,® are to be understood at 
length by the method given above.
[338] So far this is what is distinctive in the twofold 
summary’ of matter.
The threefold summary® is clear in meaning.
At the end of the fourfold summary, owing to the absence 
of divisions in the last term in ‘what is seen,’ etc., omitting
B.P.E.:—‘ comes into being together with thought.’
B.P'E. :—‘ consecutive to thought.’
i Dhs. § 676. ® Dhs. § 677.
41. 7 DJis. §§ 663-741. ? Dhs. §§ 742-876.
     

--- PAGE 157 ---

439Derived Material Qualilies
the query from the beginning it is said: ‘ The visible object is 
a thing .seen, the audible object is a thing heard.Herein 
it is possible to see by looking at the visible object with the 
eye—thus it becomes ‘ a thing seen.’ It is possible to cognize 
by hearing sound-organ by the ear—thus it becomes ' a thing 
heard.’ The three fields of odour, taste, and touch, when they 
have been reached by nose, tongue, aud body, become ‘ con­
sidered’ {mitlaiii)- as something to be seized and considered 
in the sense of being known. It is said to be ‘ considered ’ by 
reason of the arising of knowledge when there has been 
contact. Thus it is said also in the Commentary. All matter 
should be known by means of mind-cognition—thus it be­
comes known as ‘ cognized by mind.’
In the exposition of the fivefold compendium® ‘ hard' is rigid. 
Khara (rough) is also Tcliaragata; ‘ harsh ’ is the meaning. 
The other two terms also indicate intrinsic nature. ‘ Personal ’ 
is belonging to self. ‘ External ’ is outside. ‘ Grasped at ’ 
is originated by kamma. Generally, however, only matter 
established in the body is implied. Indeed, whether such 
matter is grasped at, or not, all is known as ‘ grasped-at ’ by 
virtue of being taken, seized, and wrongly handled.
Tejorjala^ is matter with the characteristic of heat (Icjo) 
included in (gala) all kinds of heat or organic energy. Or, 
heat has ‘ gone ’ to the state of heat—hence tejogata. ‘ Scorch­
ing heat ’ (izs/nct) is a mode of heat. Vsmagala is gone to 
such a state of scorching heat, and is the name for the mode 
of scorching heat. Usuuia is strong heat. That which has 
gone to such a state is iisuniagata. ‘ Mobility is going 
without stopping. Mobility having gone to such a state is 
vdyogata. ‘ Inflation ’ is the firm state of matter like that of 
the lotus stalk, leather-bag, etc., when fiUed with air.
[339] Owing to the absence of the differentiation of the 
concluding term of the three compendia beginning with 
the si.xfold, the exposition has been made without putting the 
query from the outset. Herein ‘ possible to know by visual
* Mutam: ‘imagined.’ B.P.E., p. 239.
* Dhu. § 964. 5
     

--- PAGE 158 ---

440 Material Qualities
cognition ’ i.s meant by ‘ cognizable by eye.’’ ‘ Cognizable bj’’ 
mind,’ t.e., possible to be known by mind-cognition. It is 
po.ssible io know specifically by the ‘threefold element of 
mind.’- In ‘ all matter,’ this i.s said because there is no 
such thing as any kind of matter not cognizable by the 
element of mind-cognition. Indeed, the Supreme Buddha 
is never known to have missed the right occasion on which to 
use method when he came to Abhidhamma. The right 
occasion to use the method is so-called owing to the absence 
of any kind of matter uncognizable by the element of mind­
cognition. Hence in using the method he said ‘ all matter.’
‘ Pleasurable contact is cause of attainment of pleasurable 
feeling. ‘Painful contact’=cause of attainment of painful 
feeling. In these two expressions this method has been given 
because the tangible object is the condition'’ of pleasure aud 
pain.
And in the ninefold aspect® the method has been given owing 
to the existence of matter called the controlling faculty. 
Owing to such matter being with and without reaction, the 
method has been given under the tenfold aspect.®
In the elevenfold aspect^ ten and a half organs have been 
classified. Their sections of expositions should be understood 
at length by the method given above. The remainder every­
where is clear in meaning.
And in order not to get confused with respect to these 
material forms, this particularization should be considered:— 
Combination, origination, predetermination, conditioning.
. Herein combination is the taking all that matter in groups 
or collectively, amounting to twenty-five; from organ of 
sight down to material food, tangible objects, element of 
cohesion. These together jvith the basic matter make twenty- 
six. [340] There is no matter other than these forms. But 
some® say: There is the material quality of torpor. They
1 Dha. § 967. ® Dhs. § 969. « Dhs. § 970.
* Sabbhavato. (Or, reading sabbbavato)—OAving to the existence 
or manifestation of pleasure and pain having a tangible object.—Tr.
6 Dha. § 971. * Dha. § 974. 7 Dhs. § 978.
® The dAvellers at Abhayagiri.—Pyi.
     

--- PAGE 159 ---

441Derived Material Qualities
should be told after this sort:—‘ Surely you are the Sage, the 
Buddha Supreme, in whom are no hindrances!’ aud checked 
tlxus: ‘There is no such thing.’ Others .say that there are 
"twenty-seven kinds of material things with the material 
quality of power, twenty-eight with that of collocation, 
twenty-nine with that of birth, or up to thirty with that of 
disease. These teachers should be refuted by the non-exist­
ence of these [added material qualities] being shown iu turn. 
AVheu the element of mobility is taken, the material quality 
of power is taken also; there is no other. The material 
quality of collocation is taken with the element of cohesion, 
that of birth with integration and continuity, that of .disease 
with decay and impermanence; there is no other. Diseases 
of the ear and so forth are. merely an element originated by 
misfitting causes; no other disease is present. Hence col­
lectively there are only twenty-six material qualities.’-
‘ Origination.’ How many qualities of matter have how many 
origins ? Ten material qualities have one origin, one has two 
origins, three have three origins, nine have four, two have none. 
Of these, eight, viz.; sentient organ of sight down to the life­
controlling faculty verily have their origin in kamma. The 
pair called body-and speech-intimation verilj'- originate from 
consciousness. Thus ten have a single origin. Sound [object 
of hearing] originating from the caloric [i.e., physical] order 
and consciousness is the one which has two origins. Among 
sounds, unintelligible sounds originate from the caloric order, 
intelligible sounds originate from consciousness. Three 
material quahties:—buoyancy, pliancy, wieldiness originate 
from the caloric order, consciousness and nutriment. Thus 
three have three origins. The rest of the nine originate both 
from these three sources and from kamma. Thus nine have 
four sources. And decay and impermanence do not originate 
from any one of these four sources, and thus are the two which 
have no origin. And why ? Because they are not born. 
.Verily they are not born. And why? Because of the 
maturity and breaking-up of that matter which has been
1 Cf. Compendium, pt. vi.
     

--- PAGE 160 ---

442 Material Qualities
produced, for all that is material or immaterial' which has 
arisen breaks up. [-341] Verily this is to be accepted. For 
there is no thing arisen, material or immaterial, which does 
not undergo los.s. But as long as it does not break up, there is 
a process of maturity; hence the expression, ‘ because of the 
ripening and dissolution of that matter which has been 
produced,’ is accomplished. And if these [two material 
qualities] were produced, they would also mature and break 
up. Maturity does not mature, breaking-up is not broken 
up. Hence because of the maturing and breaking up of 
matter which has been produced, this pair of material qualities 
has not been produced.
Here this objection might be raised:—^As in the expositions 
beginning with ‘ from kamma having been wrought,’ by the 
expression, ‘ integration of matter, continuity of matter,’ 
the expression ‘ birth is born ’ has been accepted, so 'the 
expression, ‘let maturity mature, let breaking-up break up,’ 
ought to have been accepted. (Reply):—In those expositions, 
‘ birth is born,’ etc., has not been accepted However, what­
ever states come into birth through kamma, etc., because 
of their having been reborn,^ the common phrase of birth being 
the cause of such states has been granted. But in the ultimate 
sense birth does not come into being. To one who is being 
born, the mere [fact of] rebirth comes into being.
Here the objection might be raised:—‘ Just as birth acquires 
*the common usage of being called both the cause of rebirth 
of these states and rebirth, so maturity and breaking-up also 
acquire those names by common usage. But then it should 
also be granted that this pair of material qualities has kamma, 
etc., for origin.’ (Reply) Maturity and breaking-up do not 
get that common usage. And why ? From their absence 
at the moment when the productive cause is powerful. 
For there is pdwer to productive causes only at the 
moment of the production of a state to be produced; none 
subsequent to that. And birth appearing at the moment 
of states about to undergo rebirth by means of productive
Abhinibbatti:—B.P.E., p. 271, ‘re-created.’
     

--- PAGE 161 ---

443Derived Material Qualities
causes, acquires by common usage the name both of being 
their causes aud of being rebirth, birth being present at that 
moment. The other pair (decay and impermanence) being 
.absent at that moment, fsuch common usage is not acquired], 
it may not be said that they come into being. Should you 
imagine that this pair does come into being from the statement, 
‘ Bhikkhus, decay and death are impermanent, conditioned, 
arisen from a cause,it is not so. In the Sutta the teaching is 
explanatory. For in this passage the pair has been said to 
be dependent in origination by way of explanation, because 
of the decay and death of states which are of dependent 
origination. ‘ If so, the three:— [birth, decay, “death]—not 
coming into being [342] are, like the hare’s-horn, non-existent, 
^hus they are permanent like Nibbana ’—is not the case,
because they happen bound up with the bases. For 
when the bases appear—extension and the rest—^the trio 
(birth, etc.) is revealed. Hence it cannot be said that these 
three are not. They are. They are also revealed in the 
absence of the bases. Hence they are not permanent. And it 
was in order to prevent a wrong ponviction that this was said: 
Bhikkhus, decay and death are impermanent, conditioned, 
arisen from a cause.’ Thus by such and other methods 
[we show that] these two quahties of matter have not Sprung 
from any source.
Moreover, the word ‘ origin ’ has different implications. 
In the Table of Contents we have matter (1) born of kamma, 
(2) caused by kamma, (3) originating in the caloric order 
caused by kamma, (4) originating in nutriment, (5) caused 
by nutriment, (6) originating in the caloric, order caused by 
nutriment, (7) originating in the caloric order, (8) caused by the 
caloric order, (9) originating in the caloric order caused by the 
caloric order, (10) originating in consciousness, (11) caused by 
consciousness, (12) originating in the caloric order caused by 
consciousness. Of these the eightfold matter beginning with 
the visual organ together with the heart-basis is matter born of 
kamma (1). Hair, beard, elephant-tusk, horse-tail, yak’s tail— 
such matter is caused by kamma (2). The Wheel-treasure,^ the
1 5. ii., 26.J
2 Dialogues ii. 202/.
     

--- PAGE 162 ---

444 Material Qualities
mansions and gardens of devas, are matter originating in the 
caloric order and kamma (3). The formula of eight originating 
from nutriment refers to matter originating in nutriment (4). 
Material food is the cause of two* continuities of matter, 
of that originated by nutriment and of that which is grasped 
at. Being the producer of the first, it is a cause; being the 
guardian of matter born of kamma, it is a cause. This matter 
born of kamma watched over by nutriment is known as matter 
caused by nutriment (5). To one who lives on disagreeable 
food and goes about in the sun arise freckles, moles, leprosy, 
etc., which originate from the caloric order caused by nutri­
ment (6). The formula of eight originating in the caloric 
order is called so (7). The caloric order present in this group 
produces another eightfold group, said to be caused by the 
caloric order (8). [343] The caloric order present in this other 
eightfold group produces stiU another eightfold group, originat­
ing in the caloric order which is caused by caloric order (9). 
Thus the caloric order is able to impinge on three con­
tinuities of matter, but not more. It is proper to disclose 
this meaning also by what is not grasped at. Clouds are said to 
. originate in the caloric order. Torrents of rain are said to be 
caused by the caloric order. And when rain falls, seeds grow, 
earth sends out odour, mountains appear blue-green, the ocean 
increases:—such matter is said to originate in the caloric order 
caused by the caloric order (9). The formula of the eight­
fold group originating in consciousness is said to ‘ originate 
in consciousness’ (10). This material body of pre-existence 
defined thus, ‘ posterior mental states and mentals are in the 
relation of posteriority to this prior body,’ is caused by con­
sciousness (11). In the sky, in the firmament, he depicts 
an elephant, a horse, a chariot, various army forces:—th.is- 
‘ originates in the caloric order caused by consciousness ’ (12).
‘ Predetermined.’ Fifteen material qualities are called 
predetermined, ten are unpredetermined. If there were
Parinipphannan ti. This term is stated thus as if it were in the 
text; but it is not in the P.T.S. ed. The translator, now in England, 
has not access to the Burm. text. In a dual (positive, negative) 
list of material attributes in the Visuddhi-Magga, p. 450, Buddhaghosa 
includes this pair of terms. Cf. Points of Controversy, pp. 368,396.—Ed~
     

--- PAGE 163 ---

445Derived Material Qualities 
unpredetermiued material qualities, they would be called 
unconditioned. And the bodily change of these determined 
material qualities is called body-intimation; change in speech 
is speech-intimation. Space - element is [any] opening or 
cavity. Buoyancy is lightness; plasticity is softness; wieldi- 
ness is workableness; integration is coming into being; 
continuity is a proceeding; decay is mode of wearing out; 
impermanence is process of having become [then] not being. 
Thus all matter is ‘ predetermined and conditioned.’
End of the elucidation of the ehajyter on Material Qualities, 
in the Ex2)ositor, the Coininentari/ on the Summary of States.
     

--- PAGE 164 ---

PART IV—DISCOURSE ON THE CHAPTER 
OF THE SUMMARY
CHAPTER I
THE TRIPLETS
Hitherto the ‘ moral triplet ’ has been expanded by the 
word-classifying method of all states, moral and so on. And 
because that method also holds good in the remaining triplets 
and couplets—for as here, in the moral triplet, it has been 
noted by the wise, so it is possible for the wise to note it in all 
the triplets and couplets in serial order thus, ‘ AVhich are the 
states associated with a pleasurable feeling ? [344] These are 
the states associated with a pleasurable feeling ’—therefore, 
the detailed teaching being omitted in order to show the 
classification of states in all the triplets and couplets by another 
method neither too concise nor too detailed, the chapter on 
the Summary beginning with, ‘ VTiich are the states that are 
moral has been begun. The chapter on the states of con­
sciousness is a detailed discourse; that on the commentary is 
a concise discourse. But the chapter on the summary, concise 
with reference to that of the states of consciousness, is detailed 
with reference to that of the commentary. Hence it is of the 
nature of being neither too concise nor too detailed. It should 
be known as the chapter on the Summary, because it leaves 
out the detailed discourse, as well as for the reason mentioned 
above (in the Introductory Discourse).- For it has been said:—
It summarizes roots aud aggregates.
And ‘ doors,' plaries of existence, meaning, text, 
Name, sex—and therefore is called Summary.
This chapter, namely, on the Summary is taught by summar­
izing (a) roots by the method beginning with ‘ The three moral
1 Dhs. § 981. « P. 9.
446
     

--- PAGE 165 ---

447The Triplets
roots,’* (b) aggregates by' the method bcgiuuiug with ‘ Th jt 
is the associated aggregate of feeling,’ (r) doors by the method 
beginning with ‘ Bodily kamma originating from it.’ Kamma 
arisen in the body-door is called body-kamma. It has been 
shown by summarizing planes of existence by the method 
beginning with ‘ iu a pleasurable soil [or plane] in the sensuous 
realm.’2 And from being shown here and there by way of 
meaning, text, name, and se.x (or form), it is shown by summariz­
ing meaning, etc. There, in the exposition of moral conscious­
ness,® in the first place, the word ‘ three ’ limits the calcula­
tion. States which are moral and roots are moral roots, or, 
they are roots in the sense of rendering service by being the 
condition, source, production, origin, and birth of moral 
states; hence ‘ moral roots.’ Thus, having shown them by way 
ol meaning'* (or intrinsic nature),® now to show them by way 
of their [specific] names, he has said, ‘ non-greed, non-hate, 
non-delusion.’ Because thus far there is nothing moral 
freed from a root, therefore by bringing all the four-planed 
moral [consciousness] under the three roots the King of the 
Law has shown this.
[345] ‘ That is associated ’;—that is, associated with non­
greed, etc. Here, in the aggregate of the mental co-efiiclents® 
associated with non-greed are also counted non-hate and non­
delusion. With the remaining two in [similar] association also, 
the same method should be understood. The King of the 
Law has shown this by exhausting again the four-planed 
moral consciousness in association with the associated fourth 
aggregate.
‘ That is originated,’ i.e., originating in non-greed, etc. 
In this way also the King of the Law has shown this by 
exhausting even that four-planed moral consciousness in 
connection with the three doors of action. Thus far moral 
consciousness has been shown by being exhausted in three 
respects.
For immoral consciousness'also the same method should be ______________________________________________
1 DHs. § 981. 2 Qhs. § 984. » Dhs. § 981.
* Phfilaiiha.—Tiled. ® Sabhdvattha.—Anutikd. '
® The fourth, or Sankharakkhandha.
     

--- PAGE 166 ---

448 The Summary
understood. Indeed., of the twelve types of immoral con­
sciousness nOt one is free from a root. The King of the Law 
has shown thi.s by exhausting it by means of the root.
There is no immorality above that a.ssociated fourth aggre­
gate. Hence the King of the Law has shown by exhausting 
those twelve types of immoral consciousness only by way of 
the fourth, aggregate.
But because the procedure of those classes of immoral 
consciousness is by way of bodily, vocal, and mental action, 
therefore the King of the Law has shmvn them exhaustively 
by way of those doors of action.
Moreover, here, in the exposition of immoral consciousness,^ 
the passage ‘ corruptions which are united therewith ’ should 
be understood thus:—‘ united’ means persisting in one con­
sciousness or person. That which persists in one consciousness 
is called ‘ united in co-existence,’ that which persists in one 
person is called ‘ united in removal.’ It persists with greed, 
etc., hence is called rmited therewith; or, it is called united 
because it persists in one consciousness together with another 
state, such as contact (other than greed, etc.), shown in various 
passages.
Of these, union in co-existence is implied in the following 
passages:—‘ which are the states that are corrupt and corrupt­
ing ?’ in the corrupt and corruptible triplet ‘ which are the 
states that are base V in the base or low triplet ‘ which ate 
the states that are moral?’ in this moral triplet; [346] ‘ which 
are the states that are corrupt ?’ etc., in the corruption group 
‘ which are the states that are harmful ?’ in the harmful 
couplet.®
And union in removal comes in the following passages:— 
‘ these are the three fetters—corruptions ’ in the triplet of 
‘ removable-by-insight ’ ;• again, ‘ these three—corruptions ’ 
in the triplet of ‘ having-root-conditions-removable-by- 
insight ’also ‘ the three fetters — have root conditions 
removable by insight ’ in the same triplet; and ‘ herein which
     

--- PAGE 167 ---

449The Triplets
are—the corruptions V in the Fih/mjig'a chapter on the 
‘ Right Efforts.’^
The exposition of the term ‘ unmoral is clear in meaning. 
In this triplet [teachers have] said that three characteristics, 
three concepts, space obtained by separating the device,’ 
open space, object of nothingness, attainment of cessation 
are not obtained.
In the exposition of the triplet of feeling^, in ‘ pleasurable 
soil,’® pleasurable feeling is called pleasiuable soil in the same 
way as soils are called red or coppery and black. As when we 
say sugar-soil, rice-soil, we mean the localities where sugar 
and rice thrive, such consciousness as is an occasion for the 
arising of pleasure is called ‘ pleasurable soil.’ That sort of 
consciousness is here imphed. And because that feehng arises 
in the sensuous realm as well as in the other two realms of 
life, [347] to show its specific kind it is said, ‘ in the sensuous 
realm,’ etc. ‘The pleasurable feeling itself excepted’:—i.e., 
excepting that pleasurable feehng which is in the pleasurable 
‘ soil.’ ‘ Associated therewith,’ i.e., associated with that 
excepted pleasurable feehng. In the remaining pair of 
terms also the meaning should be understood in the same way.
In this triplet we get neither all three feehngs, nor anjrthing 
material, nor Nibbana. For this triplet is said to be free from 
these four features which are not got in the moral triplet.
Now in the f oho wing triplets and couplets what might have 
been said by way of text and meaning, aU in the order of the 
terms, has been said in the discourse on the Table of Contents 
and in the exposition of moral and other consciousness. 
But wherever there is any specific difference, we shall speak of 
just that.
In those triplets. and couplets, taking first the resultant 
triplet,® although material [resultant] states as well as imma­
terial states have their origin in action {kamma), yet they, 
from being without an object, are not like that action. But
1 Vibhanga, p. 209.
3 Kasina. See above, p. 248.
s B.P.E., p. 252, n. 1.
II.
     

--- PAGE 168 ---

450 The Summary
immaterial [resultant] states which have a mental object, 
because they resemble the action, have been likened, as 
results, to fruit which resembles the seed. MTien rice seed is 
sown, the shoot, leaves, etc., although coming out are not 
called rice fruit, but when the rice ear is ripe, mature, then 
the rice which is like the seed is called rice fruit. And the 
shoot, leaves, etc., are said to be produced from, born of, the 
seed. Similarly it is ^tting to call matter ‘ kamma ’-born 
or ‘ grasped-at.’
In the triplet on ‘ grasped at,’^ although the body and mind 
in [the personality of] saints may cause others to grasp at [things 
desired], as when it is said, ‘ Our senior uncle, the Elder!’ 
‘Our junior uncle, the Elder!’ still a saint has not himself 
seized, or wrongly handled, or grasped at the Paths, the Fruits 
or Nibbana. As a heated iron ball is not the cause of flies 
sitting thereon, so the plenitude of spiritual heat in Path, 
Fruit, Nibbana is not the cause of anyone else seizing through 
[his o\vn] craving, conceit, or wrong views.
Hence it has been said, ‘ These are the states which are 
neither grasped at, nor favourable to grasping.’ And the 
same with those which are neither corrupt nor corruptible.
Those states, because they do not occur in the moral 
triplet, together with the sustained application of mind, 
which is co-existent with the initial application, do not occur 
in the triplet of initial application of mind.®
[348] In the triplet of the ‘rapture-accompanied,’'* rapture, 
pleasure, indifference, giving their nature to the states co­
existent with themselves, themselves become regressive.® In 
this triplet, states of consciousness accompanied by grief, 
bodily cognition accompanied by pain, indifferent feeling, 
matter, Nibbana—nothing of aU these is obtained. For this 
triplet is said to be free from the content not occurring in the 
moral triplet and these five features.
In the triplet, ‘ removable-by-insight,’® ‘fetters ’ are bonds; 
‘ theory of individuality ’ is a view arising with respect to the
2 Dhs. § 995. ’ Dhs. §§ 996-97.
® Pitthiva^taka. * Dhs. § 1002.
     

--- PAGE 169 ---

451The Triplets
body in the sense of existing, and called the fivefold aggregate, 
or, itself appearing as the view arising with respect to that body.
■ That it is possible to purify by (mere) rules, that it is possible 
to purify by (mere) rites, that it is possible to pmrify by rule 
and ritual:—observance thus taken is called ‘ wrroug observ­
ance (or handling) of mere rule and ritual.’ ‘Here’^ is an 
indeclinable, signifying place. Sometimes it is said to refer to 
the world, as when [the Buddha] said, ‘ Here in the world the 
Tathagata appears.Sometimes it is said to refer to the 
dispensation or religion, as when he said, ‘ In just this 
dispensation the first monk, the second monk. . . .’’ Some­
times it is used to refer to a place, as when [the Buddha] 
said:—
‘ Here as 1 stood a deva, 1 obtained
Another life, as thou, good sir, shoiddst know.'’'
Sometimes it is used merely to fill up a half-line, as when he 
said, ‘ Here as I ate, bhikkhus, I was not prevented.’®
Here it is used for the world.
In ‘ ignorant average man,’ ‘ ignorant ’ shordd be known as 
‘ owing to the absence of access to the Scriptures, and of the 
higher attainment of the Path and Fruition.’ For to whom­
soever; otving to the absence of learning by heart, catechism 
thereon and deduction therefrom regarding the aggregates, 
elements, sense-organs, the causal mode, the application of 
mindfulness, etc., there is no attainment of that learning which 
represses opinionativeness, nor any access, owing to the non­
attainment of what should be attained by conduct, such a 
person, from the absence of such access and such attainment, 
should be known as ‘ ignorant ’;—
One of the ‘ manyfolk' is he who brings about 
A mxiltif^icity of things, 'mid mmyfolk engulfed.^
[349] For he who is ignorant is called [‘ average ’ or]
* Digha i. 62, etc. '
Cf. ib; n. 1» Dlglia ii. 151; Points of Controversy.
6 Not traced. Br. text reads apav&rito. Tr.
■ > DJi^. § 1003.
® ^wgMftoro ii. 238.
* Not traced.
® Sumangala-Vilasini. i. 59.
     

--- PAGE 170 ---

452 The Summary
‘ common ’ for such reasons as the production of corruptions, 
many and of various sorts, as has been said: ‘ He produces 
many corruptions: they have many views of individuality 
unremoved; they look to the face of many teachers; they have 
not got clear of all tendencies; they construct many and various 
complexities; they are home along by many and various 
floods; they are anxious with many and various anxieties; 
they burn with many and various heart-burnings; with the 
manifold five desires of sense they are enamoured, swallowed 
up, cleaving to, attached to, hung -up on them, hanging from 
them, obstructed by them; by the various five hindrances 
they are enwrapped, muffled up, stifled, closed in, covered up, 
cramped; or from being engulfed among persons, passing the 
bounds of calculation, of low practices [or principles] turned 
away from the Ariyan Law—such are “ common.” ’ Or 
counted as ‘ separated from,’ ‘ unmixed with ’ the Ariyan 
folk possessed of the quahties of virtue, learning, etc.—thus 
‘ average.’ By these two terms the ‘ ignorant average ’ 
man [is denoted]:—
The Buddha, kinsman of the sun, hath seen, 
In common folk two species: one is blind. 
The other dass is good at hearth
Thus two sorts of average men have been named, of whom 
the blind average man is here meant:—‘ Who perceives not 
the Ariyans.’ From being far (dra) from the corruptions, not 
urging (iriya) the world to behave to unbeneficial purpose, 
urging beneficial behaviour, worthy of being resorted to by the 
world of men and devas:—Buddhassi, lent Buddhas, Buddhas’ 
disciples—are they called ‘ Ariyans.’^ Or, only the Buddhas 
herein are Ariyans. As has been said: ‘ Bhikkhus, in the world 
of men and devas the Tathagata is the Ariyan.’®
‘ Good men ’=silent Buddhas, Tathagatas, disciples. Be-
8umangala-Vil&sini i. 59.
* The commentarial word-play here is untranslatable. It pieces 
Ariya out oh ara, far, iriya, urging, etc. Cf. iv. 145:
ilajjhima i. 280.
® Not traced.
     

--- PAGE 171 ---

453
For 
silent
and a
T7ze Triplets
cause they from being yoked with transcendental virtues are 
lovely men, therefore are they ‘ good men.’ [350] Or, all of 
them are said to be twofold: Ariyans and good, men. 
Buddhas are both Ariyans and good men; so also 
Buddhas and Buddhas’ disciples; as it is said:—
‘ He of a grateful heart, of cultured mind, 
Firm in devotion, and a virtuous friend, 
Who carefully doth tend the many needs 
Of them that ail, is called by mortals “ good.”
Indeed, by so much of the text: ‘ Firm in devotion, 
virtuous friend ’ is the Buddhas’ disciple declared; by ‘ grate­
ful, etc.,’ are the silent Buddhas and Buddhas declared. Now 
that person, who is not used to perceiving these Ariyans, and 
does not consider it right to do so, should be known as ‘ one 
who perceives not the Ariyans.’ And there are two kinds: 
he who does not perceive them by the eye, and he who does 
not perceive them by insight. ' Of them the latter is here 
meant. Ariyans are both seen and not seen when the 
carnal or the psychic eye merely seizes on outward complexion, 
and is unable to take Ariyanship as object. Dogs and jackals, 
etc., see Ariyans by the eye, but are not perceivers of the 
Ariyans.
Hereon this story:—One who left the world in his old age, 
who was a supporter of an Elder, purged of the intoxicants, 
resident at Mount Cittala, while walking about for alms one 
■ day with the Elder, carrying the Elder’s bowl and robe 
behind him, asked, ‘ Sir, what are the Ariyans like ?’ The 
Elder said: ‘ Friend, even though in this religion some old man 
goes about together with the Ariyans, taking their bowl and 
robe, and does the greater and lesser duties towards them, 
he does not know them. Friend, Ariyans are. difficult to 
know.’ Though this was said, he did not understand the 
hint. Therefore seeing is not by the eye but by insight, as 
he said: ‘ Vakkali, what good to thee is this [my] visible 
foul body ? Verily, Vakkali, he who sees the Law sees me.’’
1 Samyulta iii. 1'20; Pss. o/ the Brethren, p. 198.
     

--- PAGE 172 ---

454 The Summarij
Hence not seeing the characteristic signs of impermanence, etc., 
seen by the Ariyans with insight, not arriving at the Law 
arrived at by the Ariyans, not seeing Ariyanship or the states 
which bring about Ariyanship, he, though he sees by the eye, 
should be kno^vn ‘ to perceive' not the Ariyans.’
[351] ‘ AVho comprehends not the Ariyan doctrines ’:— 
is unskilled in the Ariyan doctrines such as the different 
kinds of application of mindfulness, etc.
‘ Who is not trained according to the Ariyan doctrines.’ 
Discipline here is twofold; each of which is fivefold. Owing 
to the absence of that discipline this average man is called 
‘ untrained.’ For this discipline is twofold, of restraint, 
namely, and of ehmination, each of which is fivefold. 
Discipline of restraint is fivefold thus:—restraint by virtue, 
mindfulness, insight, patience, and effort. Disciphne of 
elimination is fivefold thus:—elimination of the factor iu 
question, discarding, extirpating, composure, escape. With 
these one is filled, replete, endowed with this Patimokkha 
restraint—this is restraint by virtue. One guards the eye­
controlling - faculty, arrives at restraint in the sight­
controlling-faculty—this is restraint by mindfulness.
The currents flouring in the world, 0 Ajita,
Said the Exalted One, these may
By mindjulness be checked, this the restraint 1 teach,
By insight -they may be shut in^—
this is restraint by insight. Endurance of cold and heat.— 
this is restraint by patience. Not consenting to the uprisen ' 
lustful thought—this is restraint by effort. And all this 
restraint is called restraint and discipline, from the restraining 
and eliminating of bodily misconduct, etc., which ought to be 
restrained and eliminated by each for himself. So far should 
the discipline of restraint be imderstood to be fivefold.
And owing to opposition among the different kinds of 
insights and knowledges, such as the distinction of mind 
from matter, there is elimination of this and that disad-
* SutUt-Nipata, ver. 1035.
     

--- PAGE 173 ---

455The Triplets
vantage by means of this and that insight and knowledge like 
the removal of darkness by lamplight. Elimination, namely, 
of the theory of individuality by means of determining mind 
and matter, [352] of the views as to what are not conditions, 
and what are uneven conditions by means of insight grasping 
the cause, of the doubtful state by means of insight trans­
cending doubt subsequent to the preceding insight, of such 
attachment to a view as I, mine, by means of insight contem­
plating the group of mind and matter, of imagining what is 
not the path to be the path by means of determining the right 
path and the wTong path, of the annihilationistic view by means 
of discernment of genesis, of the eternalistic view by means of 
discernment of transience, of imagining no danger in danger 
by means of discernment of peril, of the perception of infatua­
tion by means of the discernment of evil, of the perception 
of delight by means of insight into disgust, of the desire not 
to be free by means of knowledge of a desire to be free, of want 
of indifference by means of knowledge of indifference, of 
opposition in causal genesis^ and in Nibbana by adaptation, 
of the signs of things-in-the-making by adoption—this is 
elimination of the factor in question. And that elimination, 
like smiting away weeds on the water’s surface with a pot,^ 
of these and those hindrances, etc., by way of hindering their 
procedure by means of concentration in the different kinds 
of access, this is known as elimination by discarding. Elimi­
nation by means of the certain non-occurrence of the group 
of corruptions belonging to the ‘ uprising ’ [of Ill]® and spoken 
of in this way, ‘ for the sake of eliminating [wrong] views in one’s 
own life-continuum’ on the part of one who is in this or that 
Path, cultivating the four Ariyan Paths, is called elimination by 
the removal called extirpation. That tranquillizing the lower 
nature at the moment of Fruition is called elimination by com­
posure. That Nibbana which has eliminated all conditioned 
things owing to detachment from all conditioned things is 
called elimination by escape.
I Dhammat(hiti. Cf. Poiitts 0/ Cotiiroversy, p. 386 /. 
® Cf. Childers’ Dictionary sm6 v. Vikkhambanam.—Ed.
® Samudayapakkhikassa. Cf. the second Ariyan ‘ Truth.’—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 174 ---

456 The Summary
And because all this is called elimination in the sense of 
giving-up, and discipline in the sense of suppressing, therefore 
it is called elimination-discipline. Or, all this is so called 
from the production of this and that discipline in one who 
eliminates this and that. Thus it should be understood under 
five heads. Thus because it, in brief twofold and analysed 
as tenfold, does not exist in an ignorant average man, because 
he breaks down restraint and does not eliminate what should 
be eliminated, therefore from the absence of such disciphne 
such an one is called ‘ untrained.’
[353] And the same method is to be understood in ‘ who 
perceives not good men, who comprehends not, nor is trained 
according to the doctrine of good men.’ For there is no 
difference in meaning, as it has been said:—‘ Whatever Ariyans 
there are, are called good men; whatever good men there are, 
are called Ariyans. Whatever is the doctrine of Ariyans is the 
doctrine of good men; whatever is the doctrine of good men is 
the doctrine of Ariyans. Whatever Ariyan disciplines there are, 
are the disciplines of good men; whatever disciplines of good 
men there are, are disciplines of Ariyans. Ariyans and good 
men, doctrines of Ariyans and doctrines of good men, disci­
plines of Ariyans and disciplines of good men—they are 
mutually interchangeable, they are one, of one meaning, 
identical, partake of an identical nature, correspond in sense, 
and each is even the other.’*
Regarding ‘ He views material qualities as the self — 
here in this world someone looks upon material qualities 
as the self: ‘ That which is corporeal is I, I am that matter.’ 
Thus he looks upon matter and self not as two. As he views 
the flame and the colour as one, ‘ That which is the flame 
of a burning oil-lamp is the colour, that whiclris the colour 
is the flame,’ so here he views matter as the self, owing to wrong 
views. ‘ Or the self to be possessed of matter ’;—taking the 
immaterial to, be the self, he views it as having matter, as a 
tree has a shadow. ‘ Or matter in the self ’:—taking the
Not traced.
® Cf. B.P.E., p. 259, for the different renderings of this and the follow­
ing phrases in this paragraph.
     

--- PAGE 175 ---

457The Triplets 
immaterial to be the self, he views matter as in the self, like 
scent in a flower. ‘ Or the self in matter ’:—taking the, 
immaterial to be the self, he sees the self as in matter, like a 
gem in a casket. And the same with feehng, et«.^
Hereby ‘ he views matter as the self,’ bare matter only 
has been spoken of as the self. In these seven places: viz., 
‘ he views the self as possessed of matter, or matter as in the 
self, or the self as in matter, feehng, perception, complexes, 
consciousness as the self,’ the immaterial has been spoken’of 
as the self.
[354] In twelve places by way of threes in the four aggregates, 
viz., ‘ or the self as having feehng, or feehng as in the self, or 
the self as in feehng,’ mixed matter and non-matter have 
been spoken of as the self. In five places: ‘ he views matter 
as the self, feehng, perception, complexes, consciousness as 
the self,’ the annihilationistic view is stated. Thus here are 
fifteen views concerning being and five concerning non-being. 
All of them are to be considered as blocking the way to the 
Path, as not blocking the way to happy rebirth, and as that 
which is to be slain by the First Path.
‘ He doubts the Teacher,that is, as regards the Teacher’s 
body, or quahties, or both. In doubting that body he doubts:— 
‘ Is there, or is there not a [human] body adorned with the 
thirty-two excellent characteristic signs ?’ In doubting those 
qualities, he doubts:—‘ Is there, or is there not omniscience 
capable of knowing the past, present, and future V In 
doubting both, he doubts:—‘ Is there, or is there not a Buddha 
who is endowed with the colouring of eighty minor signs and 
a halo' of glory, who has penetrated omniscience, is capable 
of knowing all knowable things, and who is the world-saviour ?’ 
Thus, because of his doubting the Buddha’s personality and 
quahties he is said to doubt both. ‘ Is perplexed ’:—being 
unable to decide as to the object of thought, he wearies, he 
suffers. ‘ Is not resolved’:—he does not get decision as to 
the object. ‘Is not calm’:—he is not able to free the mind
1 with the other four constituent factors of personality, 
» DTis. § 1004.
     

--- PAGE 176 ---

458 The Summary
' from perturbation and calm it, and is not calm regarding 
qualities. *
In ‘ he doubts the doctrine,’ etc., he is said to doubt the» 
doctrine thus > ‘ Are there, or are there not the four Ariyan 
Paths which eliminate the lower nature, the four Fruitions 
of the religious life, which tranquillize the lower nature ? 
Is there, or is there not the great deathless Nibbana, relatecR 
by way of object to the Paths, and Fruition V as well as, 
‘ Does the doctrine lead out of the round of births or not ?’
[355] He is said to doubt the Order thus: ‘Four persons'in 
the Paths, four in the Fruitions—these are that treasure 
which is the Order; do they exist, or not V also, ‘ Is this Order 
well-behaved or ill-behaved?’ also, ‘ Is there, or is there not 
any resulting fruit of a gift to the Order ?’
He is said to doubt the Training thus: ‘ Are there the three 
stages of training, or not
‘ The past ’:—past aggregate, element, sense-organ. ‘ The 
future ’ are the corresponding future [states of consciousness]. 
Of these, regarding past aggregates, etc., he is said to doubt the 
past thus: ‘ Have there been, or not these past aggregates ? ’ etc. 
Regarding those of the future he is said to doubt the future 
thus: ‘Are there any, or are there not any in the future ?’ 
In doubting ‘ both,’ he is said to doubt the past and the future.
In doubting thus: ‘Is there, or is there not the round of 
the twelve causes ?’ he is said to doubt these causally generated 
states. Herein the word-definition is: ‘The causes of these 
states, decay and death, etc., are specifically assignable 
causes.’ ‘ Specifically assignable causality ’ is the state of such 
assignable causes. The two expressions are identical, and are 
synonyms here of birth, etc. Birth and the rest of the series 
are-said to be causally generated in the sense come to pass 
because of; in consequence of.’ Or, he doubts the specifically 
assignable causation of states which are causally generated.
‘ By mere rule of morality ’:—by ascetic habits called/' 
‘ bovine,’ .eto.^ ‘ By ritual,’ i.e., by ascetic conduct called
. 1 Cf. P.T.S. ed., p. 354, n. 10.
® Angultara i. 236/.; Editor’s Buddhism, 1912, ch. viii.
® Cf. p. 260,n. 4. Dialoguesiii. li f.
9
     

--- PAGE 177 ---

459The Triplets
‘ bovine,’ etc. ‘ By rule and ritual’:—by both. ‘ Purity’ is 
purity from corruption, or Nibbuna as the ultimate purity.
" ‘ United therewith, here chiefly the corruptions as collec­
tively eliminable.2 And the Text accepts two;—the corrup­
tions of dogmatism and perplexity. The other eight:—greed, 
hate, delusion, conceit, sloth, excitement, shamelessness, 
fearlessness of blame, which are not included should be 
referred to and explained. For here when dogmatism and 
perplexity are removed, all the eight beginning with greed, 
which lead to purgatory and being united in elimination, 
are eliminated. And union in co-existence should be brought 
out and explained. [356] Thus, five kinds of consciousness:— 
four accompanied by dogmatism and one accompanied by 
perplexity—are removed by the [first, or] stream-winning 
Path; Of these, when the two kinds of automatic conscious­
ness of dogmatism are eliminated, these corruptions, viz., 
greed, delusion, excitement, shamelessness,*recklessness, which 
are co-existent therewith are removed by means of such 
union in co-existence. The remaining corruptions of dog­
matism and of perplexity are removed by means of union 
in elimination. And when the modes of non-automatic 
consciousness associated with dogmatism are eliminated, these 
corruptions, viz., greed, delusion, sloth, excitement, shameless­
ness, recklessness, co-existent theremth, are eliminated by 
means of union in co-existence. The remaining corruptions 
of dogmatism and of perplexity are eliminated by means of 
union in elimination. So union in co-existence is obtained 
only in union in elimination. This they [the teachers] have 
brought out and explained.
‘ Associated thereioith ’:—associated with those eight united 
corruptions. Or, this should be shown as association with 
each corruption separately, as with ‘ that greed,’* with, ‘ that 
hate.’ Of them, when greed is taken, this group of.corruptions, 
the aggregate of mental co-efficients, viz.: deljision, conceit, 
sloth, excitement, shamelessness, recklessness, is'called ^eed-^ ■ , ■ • ___ ___ „ .•
1 Dhs. § 1006.
® I.e., Corruptions established as removable in a single individual. 
—Tr.
     

--- PAGE 178 ---

460 The Summary
associated. AATien hate is taken, this group of corruptions, 
viz.: delusion, sloth, excitement, shamelessness, recklessness, 
is called hate-associated. "When delusion is taken, this group 
of corruptions, viz.: greed, hate, conceit, sloth, excitement, 
shamelessness, recklessness, is called delusion-associated. 
AVhen conceit is taken, this group of corruptions co-risen 
therewith, viz., greed, delusion, sloth, excitement, shameless­
ness, recklessness is called conceit-associated. In this way 
the state associated with ‘ that sloth,’ ‘ that excitement,* 
‘ that shamelessness,’ ‘ that recklessness ’ is said to be' asso­
ciated therewith. Thus should the connection be made.
‘ Originated thereby ’ means sprung from, or originated by 
‘ that greed ’ . . . ‘ that recklessness.’
In ‘ these are the states eliminable by insight ’ the Stream­
winning Path is called ‘ insight,’ by which they should be 
put away—such is the meaning. But why is the Path known 
as insight ? Because in it Nibbana is first seen. But does not 
‘ Adoption ’ see it first of all ? [357] It does. But having seen 
it, one does not do what is necessary in the elimination of the 
Fetters, hence it should not be said that ‘ it sees.’ A man of 
the provinces, although he may have seen the king at some 
place, says: ‘ Neither to-day have I seen the king,’ because he 
has not offered his presents, nor accomplished his business. 
This is an illustration. •
‘ The remaining greed ’ is what remains from that which 
has been put away by insight. And the same with hate and 
delusion, etc. For it is by insight only that those which lead 
to purgatory are put away. It is to show about the other 
[corruptions] that this: ‘the remaining greed,’ etc., has been 
said. ‘ United,’ etc., refers to the five^ corruptions united by 
association with, as well as by elimination ot, those three 
corruptions adopted in the text.
‘ Neither by insight nor by culture is said with reference 
to the fact that [certain things] are not to be put away by this 
or that Path, as are the Fetters, etc. That elimination of
:-------------------------------------------------------------------- »-■ -
‘ Conceit, sloth, excitement, shamelessness, recklessness.—Tr.
® Dhs. § 1008.
     

--- PAGE 179 ---

461TJie Triplets 
moral, immoral, and unmoral [kamma] whicli was admitted 
[above] in such dicta as ‘ whatever mind-and-body may have 
hrisen in the ageless round of rebirth, save in the seven [last] 
lives,^ here cease to be,’‘^ by the insight of the First Path, by 
the cessation of that consciousness which prepares [new birth], 
—that eUmination [we repeat] is to be understood as said with 
respect to this explanation, namely, that because of those 
Paths not being cultivated, such [personaUties] as might 
arise are eliminated because of the eUmination of corruptions 
having sufficing conditions [in the past eventually bringing 
about that eUmination].
In the triplet of ‘ having root-conditions removable by 
insight,’® having concluded that these are the states which 
have root-conditions removable by insight, again the expres­
sion ‘ three Fetters,’ etc., is said in order to show, after pointing 
out what is to be eliminated, the conditions and states with 
conditions by a state of union. Although in the expression 
‘ with conditions removable ’ these states are comprehended, 
viz., ‘ Among these conditions to be removed by insight 
delusion accompanied by greed is conditional with it; 
delusion accompanied by hate is conditional with it; and 
greed, hate are conditional with delusion,’ yet delusion 
accompanied by perplexity, owing to the absence of another 
associated condition, is caUed just condition, and it is 
not accompanied by a condition. It is to show the 
eUmination of this delusion that the above expression has 
been said.
[358] In the second answer, to show the eUmination of 
delusion accompanied by excitement, ‘ these are the states 
having root-conditions to be removed by culture has 
been said. For delusion makes states associated with itself 
‘ coconditional ’ and becomes regressive.® Owing to the
*■ Cf. Points of Controversy, p. 77, n. 3; 268, 271.
Cf. Dialoffues i. 283, and cf. above p. 316; also Visuddhi Magga, 
&l‘^f- On p. 316, for ‘the beginning whereof is unknoAvn, prior to 
seven rebirths,’ read as above.—Ed.
« Dhs. § 1009.
6 Pitthivattako. See. p. 450,
* Dhs. § 1011.
     

--- PAGE 180 ---

462 TAe Summary
absence of another associated condition like ‘ delusion accom­
panied perplexity,’ delusion is not included in the expres­
sion ‘ condition to be removed.’
In the third answer, ‘ all other states good,, etc.’ the immoral 
has been included for the purpose of including delu.«ion 
accompanied by perplexity and distraction, so these delusions, 
from the absence of the associated condition, are not called 
‘ having root-conditions to be removed.’
In the triplet ‘ with limited objects ‘ with reference to ’ 
means having made a mental object. For whether they are 
themselves limited or sublime, the states arisen, by making 
limited states the object, are ‘ with hmited objects ’; those 
arisen by taking sublime objects are ‘with sublime objects’; 
those arisen by taking immeasurable objects are ‘ with 
immeasurable objects.’ But these last are also limited and 
sublime as well as immeasurable.
In the triplet on wrongfulness, ‘ immediate means giving 
results without intervening [time]. This is an equivalent 
term for such acts as matricide, etc. Indeed, when one such 
act is done, another act is not able, by ejecting it, to find 
opportunity for its own result. For even the action of one 
who all his lifetime gives the four requisites to the Order, 
with the Buddha as the head, lodged to its full capacity in 
a monastery which he may have caused to be built, with golden 
shrines of the size of Mount Meru and jewelled walls as ample as 
a world-system, cannot inhibit the [immediate] result of tliesd 
acts. ‘ And that wrong view which is assured ’: i.e., one or other 
of the assuredly wrong views of those who do not believe in 
cause, deny the efficacy of action, axe nihilists. The person 
who has adopted and maintains them even a hundred or 
a thousand Buddhas are not able to enlighten.
In the triplet of ‘ with the Path as mental object,’’ ‘ in 
connection with the Ariyan Path,’ means making the 
transcendental Path the mental object. And these states 
with the Path as object may be either limited or sublime.
[359] In the exposition of ‘ conditioned by the Path,’^ by
i Dhs. § 1022. ® § 1028. Cf. Points of Controversy, pp. 268,274. •
• Dhs. § 1031. * § 1032.
     

--- PAGE 181 ---

463The Triplets
the first formula the state of aggregates as accompanied by 
conditions is shown, the aggregates being associated with the 
Path by means of condition in the sense of causal relation? 
By the second formula is shown the state of being accompanied 
by conditions of the remaining Paths, the condition being called 
right .views and being the Path itself. By the third formula 
is shown the state of being accompanied by conditions, the 
state, namely, of right views got by means of conditions 
arisen in the Path.
‘ Making the dominant influence means making the object 
of thought the dominant influence. And verily such states are 
limited. For the dominant influence of the mental object is 
obtained at the time when Ariyan disciples attaching impor­
tance to their own Path reflect on it. But although the Ariyan 
disciple reflects on and gives importance to another person’s 
Path by means of his knowledge of the thoughts of another, 
he does not attach the same importance to it as to the Path 
attained by himself. Does he attach importance or not to the 
Path of the Tathagata after seeing him do the Twin Miracle ? 
He does, but not as if it were to his own Path. And the 
same meaning is to be understood in, ‘ The saint attaches 
importance to no state except the Path, Fruition and Nibbana.’ 
‘ With investigation as the dominant influence ’:—this is 
said to show the co-existent influence. For to one who, 
cultivating the Path, makes conation the chief, conation is 
called the dominant influence and not the Path. The remain­
ing states also are said to have conation and not the Path as 
the dominant influence; and the same with sense-conscious­
ness also. But to one who in cultivating the Path makes 
investigation the chief, investigation as well as the Path 
is the dominant influence. The remaining states are said to 
have the Path as the dominant influence. And the same with 
energy also.
■In the exposition of the ‘ arisen ’ triplet®: ‘ are born ’ means 
‘ come to be ’ Such terms as ' become ’ are synonyms,
1 Paccay’atthena hetuna. ‘ Condition,’ as always, refers to the six 
‘ springs of action.’ See next chapter.—Ed.
t Dhs. § 1034. ® Dhs. § 1035.
     

--- PAGE 182 ---

464 The Summary
all meaning ‘ having got an intrinsic nature.’ For the states 
which are said to be ' born ’ are said to ‘ have become ’ 
from attaining an intrinsic nature, ‘ have been gotten ’ from 
union with a cause, ‘ have attained renewed existence ’ from 
having attained to the characteristics of such. Increasing 
the term by the preposition {abhi} they are • said to ‘ have 
fully attained rebirth.’ ‘ Made manifest ’ is being made 
evident. [360] ‘ Have arisen,’ i.e., from the past uprisen. 
Increasing the term by the preposition sam, they are said 
to be ‘ ever coming to pass.’ ‘ Have uprisen,’ i.e., in the 
sense of coming to be, they persist ‘ upward.’ ‘ Have super­
vened,’ i.e., they have happened owing to union with causes. 
The reason in the repetition of ‘ have arisen ’ should be under­
stood by the said method. ‘ Included among things that have 
arisen ’ means counted as a portion of those arisen states. 
‘ Matter, feeling, perception, complexes, consciousness ’—thi.s 
signifies the intrinsic nature of these arisen states. The 
exposition in the second reply of ‘ not arisen ’ should be 
understood as the negating of the foregoing. The exposition 
of the third reply is clear in meaning.
And this triplet has been shown to be complete by virtue 
of the two times (past and future). Indeed the ripening of 
kamma which has got its opportunity is twofold:—that which 
has ‘reached the moment’ and that which has not. The 
first is said to ‘ have arisen ’; the second may arise immedi­
ately after the thought [which is the kamma], or not till the 
expiration of a hundred thousand ages. But owing to its 
having an enduring causal relation, it is not non-existent, but 
has become [a series of] potentially arising states. As he said: 
—‘ Granted, Potthapada, that there is an incorporeal “ soul ” 
compact of ideas, even then for this person fiis arisen ideas 
are no longer the same when they cease.’^ Thus here, when
I Digha i. 187; Dialogues i. 253. I venture to think the translation 
has missed the meaning of anna . . . anna (cf. Latin alter . . . alter)-, 
also Samyutta ii. 20, 95. On ‘ potentially arising,’ cf. 60: ‘ bound 
to arise’ (uppadino). B.P.E., p. 270, n. 4; Points oj Controversy, 
p. 242, where the old terminology also seems to need the scientific 
mot juste.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 183 ---

465The Triplets
during life in this sensuous realm consciousness concerning 
the immaterial plane arises, although the original subcon­
scious continuum ceases, yet, when [in its turn] that [higher] 
consciousness ceases, the latter tvill certainly arise. Thus 
the self, if reckoned as incorporeal, is not counted as non­
existent, but is become a potential [series of] states. In this 
way the results of kamma are twofold.
Now if all moral and immoral kamma which haveJ been 
put forth were to give a result, there would be no opportunity 
for any other state. But such kamma is twofold:—its result 
is either a constant or not. The five kinds of kamma having 
immediate result,^ the eight Attainments, the four Ariyan 
Paths:—such kamma is said to have a constant result. 
[361] And the result is either instantaneous, or not. In the 
former case it is said to have ‘ arisen ’; in the latter not arisen. 
.AlTiether the ripening of that twofold kamma arise immediately 
after the [kamma-] thought, or at the expiration of a hundred 
thousand cycles, it is not said to be non-arisen because of 
the meaning of a constant causal relation; it is known as 
potentially ‘ arising states.’ The Path of Metteyya, the future 
Buddha, is said to be non-arisen; its Fruition to be ‘ poten­
tially arising states.’
In the exposition of the ‘ past ’ triplet," ‘ past ’ means having 
got beyond the three moments.^ ‘ Ceased,’ i.e., has reached 
cessation. ‘ Dissolved,’ i.e., gone to destruction, departed. 
‘ Changed,’ i.e., transformed by abandoning the original 
nature. ‘ Terminated ’ means gone to the term called ces­
sation. The term ‘ exterminated ’ has been reinforced by the 
prefix abhi. ‘ Dissolved after having arisen,’ i.e., departed 
after having come to be. The reason for the repetition of the 
word ‘ past ’ has been given above. In the following terms 
[‘ future,’ etc.] the same method is to be understood. * In­
cluded among things that are past,’ i.e., reckoned to be a 
portion of the past. Which are these past states ? ‘ Matter,
1 See p. 402, n. 2. « Dhs. § 1038.
■3 Viz., genesis, ‘stasis’ and passing away. Cf. Anrjidlara i. 132; 
Po/mM o/ Controfoersy, p. 374.—Ed.
11. 12
     

--- PAGE 184 ---

I
466 The Summary
feeling, perception, complexes, consciousness.’ And the 
same with the terms ‘ future,’ etc.
In the exposition of the triplet of ‘ with the past as object 
of thought’^:—in the passage ‘ with reference to past states,’ 
only limited and sublime states should be understood. For 
these arise concerning the past.
In the exposition of the ‘ personal ’ triplet®:—by the pair of 
terms, ‘ for these or for those [beings],’ all beings are comprised. 
Both ‘ personal ’ and ‘ self-referable ’ are synonyms of one’s 
own personality. ‘One’s own,^ i.e., become of one’s self. 
‘ Individual,’ i.e., belonging to each person severally. 
‘Grasped at,’ i.e., established in the bodies of beings. They 
may, indeed, be born of kamma, or not. But by virtue of 
grasping, seizure, wrong handling, ‘ grasped at ’ is here said. 
‘For other beings,’® i.e., for all remaining beings excepting 
one’s self. ‘ For other persons ’ is merely its synonym. The 
rest is even as has been said above. ‘ Both those,’'^i.e., both 
[personal and external].®
In the first term of ‘ having the personal as object of 
thought,’® limited and sublime states should be understood. 
[.362] In the second, immeasurable states should also be 
understood. In the third, only the hmited and sublime 
should be understood. But the immeasurable do not make 
at one time the external, at another time the personal their 
object.
The exposition of the triplet of ‘ visible states ’ is clear.
CHAPTER II
COUPLETS AND OTHER GROUPS
Among the coupled [propositions], in the exposition of 
‘ absence of hate ’’‘ having love ’® is exercising love, ‘ loving ’ 
is the method of exercising love; ‘ lovingness ’ is tire state
     

--- PAGE 185 ---

467J?oof-Co zuZ i O its 
of heart which is endowed with love, is productive of love.^ 
‘ Tender care,’ i.e., watchful, meaning ‘ one protects.’ Tenderly 
Cfiring is the method of such care. ' Tender carefulness ’ is 
the state of tenderly caring. ‘ Beneficence ’ is seeking [to 
do] good. ‘ Compassion ’ is exercising compassion. And by 
all these terms that love, too, which [in Jhana] has reached 
access and ecstasy is included. By the remaining terms 
absence of hate that is either worldly or transcendental is 
described.
In the exposition of absence of delusion®;—‘ insight® into Ill ’ 
means insight into the Fact of Ill. And the same with ‘ the 
origin of Ill,’ etc. And of these, ‘ insight into Ill ’ occurs in 
hearing, contemplation, intuition, and reflection. Likewise 
‘ origin of Ill.’ But ‘ insight into cessation ’ occurs only in 
hearing, intuition, and reflection. Likewise ‘ insight into the 
AVay.’^ ‘Former things,’ i.e., in the past portion; ‘latter 
things,’ i.e., in the future portion; ‘former and latter,’ i.e., in 
both. ‘ The assignable causation of states causally generated ’ 
means—this is the cause; that is the efiect;® depending on this 
cause that result has been produced. Thus it is insight into 
causes and effects.
Next, in the exposition of ‘ greed,’® the following is the 
meaning of terms not hitherto mentioned.
‘ Passion ’ is the exercise of lusting. ‘ Infatuation ’ has 
the sense of strongly lusting. ‘ Seduction ’ is the repeatedly 
leading beings in the fields of sense. ‘ Compliance ’ is to 
comply with, i.e., following after one’s desires. ‘Delight’ 
[refers to this, that] by greed beings in any existence feel 
delight, or greed itself is a delighting in. In ‘ passionate 
deUght ’ we get the first term combined wdth delight. Craving 
once arisen as to an object is ‘delight’; arisen repeatedly, 
it is ‘ passionate delight.’ ‘ Infatuation of mind ’ means that 
the term described above is not of a permanent being, but only 
of consciousness. ‘ AVanting ’ means that by greed objects
1 Br. ed. reads mettaya ayitassa.—Tr. 
® Nanam. B.P.E.'.—knowledge.
* Patipada. Cf. the Fourth ‘ Truth.’
5 See, in P.T.S. ed. (p. 362), n. 13.
• Dhs. § 1057.
     

--- PAGE 186 ---

468 The Summary
are wished for. ‘ Languishing ’ means that, through the 
strength of the lower nature, creatures languish with greed. 
‘ Devouring ’ is to grasp by swallowing and finishing. ‘ Greedi­
ness ’ means that by greed beings become greedy, practise 
greed. Or greediness has the sense of ‘ thickness,’ as we speak 
of a forest being thick (or dense). The next term is [the 
same] increased by the prefix 'pali-, or it may mean omni­
vorous^ greediness. ‘ Cleaving ’ means that by greed one 
clings, or hangs on to. Greed is ‘ slough ’ in the sense of 
submerging, ‘ longing ’ in the sense of drawing towards. As it 
is said ‘ longing draws this man to and fro for rebirth in this 
or that plane.’ ‘Illusion’” means deception. ‘Genitrix’— 
because greed gives birth to beings in the round of life renewed. 
As it is said:—
Desire begets a man; Tiis mind a-xvandering goes.
‘ Progenitrix,’ [the prefix san- indicating greed’s] enchaining 
Isamyojamana] beings in that round by suffering. ‘Seam­
stress ’ as sewing, for as a tailor sews cloth to cloth, so greed 
sews, stitches beings in that round by way of decease and 
re-conception; hence seamstress is said with the meaning of 
sewing. ‘ She who ensnares,’ i.e., craving has a net of manifold 
sense-experience, or a net quivering and far-fixed. ‘ Flowdng 
stream,’ as drawing along by a swift current, or as^ wetness. 
For it is said:—
Joys wet and viscid come to sons oj men.^
Both [adjectives] are here meant.
‘ Visaltilid'“^ is spread out, diffused, extensive, compelling, 
deceptive, misleading, poison-bearing, poison-rooted, poison-
i Lit. greediness in every respect.
* Maya. B.P.E.: ‘trickery’ (because in the Suttas the word occurs 
usually in connection with the conjurer’s craft).—Ed.
® Dhammapada, ver. 341.
* This word was apparently a crux to the Commentator. He usually 
connects it either with saj, satta, to cling to, clung, or with visa, poison. 
Cf. Kindred Sayings i. 2, n. 6. Here he adduces other sources with a 
brave and generous disregard of sound etymology, his mind intent 
only on a constraining exegesis.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 187 ---

Root-Conditions 469 
fruited, poison-enjoying, permeates; or, that craving is spread 
out, e.xtended over sights, sounds, odours, tastes, tangibles, 
ideas, over family, over a multitude. The word ‘ thread ’ refers 
to loss and disaster as if [greed] were a string securing fish- 
baskets.* As it is said:—‘ The thread, bhikkhus, is an allegory 
of passionate delight.* Diffused ’ means spread out over 
objects of sense. ‘ She who urges,’ t.o., greed makes beings 
toil to get this and that. ‘Consort,’ i.e., as a comrade, greed 
suffers us not to pine; she does not suffer beings to pine on the 
round of life renewed; wherever they are reborn she, like a dear 
companion, fills them with pleasiure. AVherefore it is said:—
The man mated with craving wanders long 
Through life and death, nor does he get beyond 
His travels thus—reborn then otherwise.^
‘ Aiming ’ is setting [the mind] upon. ‘ Guiding to rebirth,’ 
i.e,, the rope to rebirth; for by greed, as cattle bound at the 
neck by a rope, beings are led whithersoever it desires. 
‘ A forest ’—in that greed wins its way to, haunts,, remains 
stuck in, this or that object. Or as begging."* ‘ Jungle,’ 
which [in Pali] is the same Avith an extra syllable.® Or whereas 
a forest is likened to strong craving as being a jungle where 
obnoxious trees® have grown up, vanatha means, as dense 
undergrowth, a yet stronger craving. As it is said:—
Cut ye the forest', brethren, not the tree, 
Peril and fear are from the forest born. 
Cutting' away forest and undergrowth. 
So shall ye be [free and] dis-forested.'^
‘ Intimacy ’ is consorting with,® meaning intercourse. [365] Of 
the two kinds, intimacy of natural desire and of [fraternal]
* Not traced.* So Tika. Cf. .our ‘ lobster pots.’
® Sulla Nipata, ver. 740.
* This is so unintelligible, that the v. I. ydti, ‘going,’ is possibly 
right.—Ed.
fi Fana, vanatha.
* The Bunn. MSS. read dukkhanam for rukkhanam.
1 Dhammapada, ver. 283.
8 In Pali one term with different inflections.
     

--- PAGE 188 ---

470 The Summary
love, the former is here meant. ‘ Fondness ’ is attachment. 
‘ Longing for ’ is the exercise of taking up [one’s heart's] 
abode. And this, too, is said:—‘ Thine, 0 king, are tho.se 
four and eighty thousand cities, the chief of which is the 
royal city of Kusavati. For these, 0 king, let desire awaken ! 
Quicken thy longing after hfe l’’^ That is, make [them thy 
heart’s] abode. ‘ Connection,’ as of kindred, i.e., greed con­
nects us wdth individual objects of thought, or is individually 
akin in the sense of a relative, for in the sense of a constant 
dependence there is no relative to equal craving. ‘ Appetite,’ 
i.e., from [greed’s] consumption”' of the mind’s objects, meaning 
both a spreading itself over them and partaking of them with­
out gaining satisfaction. ‘ Wanting ’ signifies the function, 
‘ cupidity ’ the corresponding state.
Now to show the objective of that craving the following 
nine terms have been said, wherein taking the meaning of 
asa to be ‘ appetite,’ we get yearning for visible and other 
objects. Of these the first five refer to pleasures of sense, 
the sixth refers to greed for the ‘ requisites,and is said 
especially for recluses. The three following terms refer to 
the bases of a layman’s insatiableness. For to them there 
is nothing more dear than wealth, sons, life.
‘ This belongs to me, this is mine,’ ‘ such a man has given me 
this, this has not been given me ’—thus greed makes [people] 
mutter, hence ‘ mumbhng ’ {jappa), and the following two 
terms increased by means of the prefixes. Following these, 
begun so as to classify thd next two by a difierent way, ‘ mum­
bling ’ is again said, followed by the ‘ act of muttering ’ 
and the ‘ state of muttering.’ ‘ Self-indulgent ’ means a 
repeated plundering, hauling along in the ^elds of sense, 
followed by [inflections signifying] self-indidgence, self­
indulging, state of one who is given to self-indulgence.
5^ ‘ Fluster ’ is the name of that craving by means of which
people go about agitated in places where anything is to be
’■ Dialogues i. 223 /. * Asa, asana to.
® Parikkhara; the recluse’s necessities, food, lodging, clothing, 
medicines.-~^rr.
     

--- PAGE 189 ---

Root-Conditions 471
gained, like dogs wagging their tails. Greed is keenly desirous 
of what is agreeable, i.e., of objects, the state of being such is 
‘keen desire.’ [.366] Passion for what is improper, such as 
for a mother, or aunt, etc., is ‘ incestuous passion.’ Greed 
which is strong, although arisen concerning what is proper, 
is ‘lawless greed.’ Or, from such expressions as ‘passion,’ 
‘ lawless,'^ whether proper or not, the lustful desire arisen is 
called ‘ incestuous passion ’ in the sense of being unrighteous, 
and ‘ lawless greed ’ in the sense of being irregular. ‘ Hanker­
ing-after,’ i.e., desiring objects. Such an act is a ‘hungering.’ 
‘ Entreating ’ is a wishing for things. ‘ Envying ’ is the act 
of envying. Earnest entreating is ‘ imploring.’
Craving for the pleasures of the five senses is ‘ sensuous 
craving.’ ‘ Craving for rebirth ’ is ‘ craving for existence, 
material and immaterial.’’ ‘ Craving for non-existence ’ is 
desire not to be reborn, called the annihilationistic view. 
‘ Craving for material form ’ is craving for a purely material 
existence. ‘ Craving for the immaterial ’ is craving for 
immaterial existence. ‘ Passion for opinions ’ is accompanied 
by the annihilationistic view.® ‘ Craving for cessation ’ is 
craving for the annihilationistic view. Craving for sights 
is craving for things seen. And so on for sounds, odours, etc.
The meaning of ‘ flood,’ etc., has been discussed.® ' As 
‘ obstruction ’ greed blocks the moral states. As covering 
[them] it is [called] ‘ covering.’** As ‘ bondage,’ it binds beings 
in the round of births. Approaching the mind greed corrupts 
it, makes it corrupt, and so is ‘ depravity.’ As ‘ latent bias ’ 
greed lies chronically in us as a strong [tendency]. As 
‘ obsession ’ greed- breaks forth as it arises in the mind.® 
It seizes on the turn of good [conduct] by not suffering it
* ‘ Rebirth,’ ‘ existence,’ is bhava, lit. becoming.—Ed.
® We should have expected to find here the opposite, namely, eternal­
istic view.—Ed.
® See above, p. 65.
* The renderings ‘ counterfeiting ’ and B.P.E.,p. 281,are not tenable. 
—Ed.
s Pariyutthana. Cf. Points of Controversy, p. 288. S. Z. Aung’s 
rendering ‘ obsession ’ is not a sulficiently aggressive term, but must 
serve.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 190 ---

472 The Summary
to arise—such is the meaning. In ‘ Thieves plundered the 
wayfarer, drunkards plundered the wayfarer,’ etc., it is 
implied that they seized the way.’ So here also ‘ obsession ’ 
is to be understood in the sense of taking possession.
[Greed is] like a ‘ creeper ’ in the sense of enveloping. 
Where also it comes as, •
‘ The creeper rears itself, and stands erect.'^
this craving is spoken of as a creeper. [Next] as ‘ avarice,’ 
because it wants divers things; as the ‘ root of ill,’ that is, 
of the ills of life renewed in rebirth; ‘ source of ill ’ refers also 
to those ills; so does ‘ production of ill.’
[Greed is as] a snare, because it binds. ‘ Mara-snare ’ is 
the snare [used by] Mara. It is as a fish-hook, because it is 
hard to disgorge, and it is the fish-hook [used by] Mara. It 
is ‘ Mara’s domain,’ because, overcome by it, beings cannot 
get past it; Mara assumes authority over them. [367] It is 
a ‘ stream in the sense of flowing, a ‘ leash,’ because by 
craving beings are firmly bound and led, as dogs are whither 
you will; and as hard to fill, craving is even as the ‘ ocean.’
In the exposition of hate®:—‘ he has done me harm,’ i.e., has 
worked my disadvantage.^ In this way the meaning in all this 
[group of] terms is to be understood. ‘ Or when vexation 
(springs up) groundlessly’ means anger without reason; for 
example, someone gets angry saying * it rains too much,’ ‘ it 
does not rain,’ ‘ the sun shines too much,’ ‘ it does not shine ’; 
gets angry when the wind blows, when it does not blow, gets 
angry at being unable to sweep away the Bodhi leaves, at being 
unable to put on his robe; he gets angry with the wind, in 
slipping he gets angry with a tree-stump—m such connection 
is the expression said. And on nine of the ten opcasions men­
tioned above fin the text], because they concern people, each is 
divisible into [harm or benefit] of thought, word, and deed. 
But the unreasonable vexation, arising concerning things is
DJuimmapada, ver. 340.
’ The Br. text reads aanriana.
• Dhs. § 1060.
* Avaddhim me akasi, ‘ he has wrought me dis-growth.’—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 191 ---

Root-Conditions 473
not so divisible. ‘ Ve.xation of spirit ’ is mental vexation. 
More strong than that is ‘ resentment.* ‘ Repugnance ’ is 
the exercise of resistance. ‘ Hostility,’ that of opposing. 
‘ Ill-temper ’ is getting angry. In ‘ irritation,’ ‘ indignation,’ 
the terms are intensified by means of the prefixes (pa, sam) 
‘Hate’ is offending (or spoiling). In ‘ antipathy,’ ‘ abhorrence,’ 
the terms are increased by means of the prefixes. ‘ Mental 
disorder ’ means upsetting of mind. ‘ Detestation ’ is [hate] 
corrupting the mind as it arises. ‘ Anger ’ is the getting 
angry. The mode of getting angry is ‘ fuming.’ The state of 
one angry is ‘ wrath.’ Now to show the aforesaid method 
‘ hate, hating,’ etc., were said in the exposition of immoral 
consciousness.^ Hence in what is here said of hate, ‘ all 
such ’ states as have been described as ‘ vexation of mind ’ 
do\vn to ‘ wrath,’ whatever state was said above in the 
former method on ‘ hate, hating,’ etc.—were said to be hate. 
In this way is the connection here to be made. For by doing 
so the fault of repetition is avoided.
[368] The exposition of delusion^ should be understood iu 
the opposite way to what has been said in that of non-delusion, 
and in every respect will be made plain in the commentary 
on the VibJianga.^ '
‘ States which by those [six condition-] states have [one or 
more of] them as concomitants,’"’ that is, whatever other 
states, whether they are themselves among the six, or not, 
these are ‘ conditioned ’ (sahetukd}. So for the contradictory 
term, ‘ unconditioned.’ Here ‘ condition ’ is just condition. 
AVhere two or where three conditions arise together, the term 
‘ condition ’ applies. But where' delusion accompanied by 
perplexity and distraction arises, the condition-state (delusion) 
is itself unaccompanied by other conditions (ahetuko). So also 
for the exposition of the couplet of states ‘ associated with a 
condition.’®
I Seep. 336. « Dhs.^ 1061.
® The iSommoAo-Finofiawi. A first edition of this work in Roman 
letter is shortly to be issued by the Pali Text Society. ,
* Dhs. § 1073-74. Cf. above, p. 61 f. « Dhs. § 1095.
     

--- PAGE 192 ---

474 T/ie Summary
In the exposition of the couplet on conditioned [states]/ the 
phrase ‘ that state which is [not causally related], just that 
state . . .’2 and which refers to the ‘ unconditioned element ’ 
mentioned in the previous couplet, is used in the singular 
number. But in that previous couplet, because the question 
is set forth in the plural, the answer follows the lead given by 
the question and is also given in the plural:—‘ these states are 
not causally related.’® This applies also to the following 
answer:—‘ these are the states that are visible.’^
In the exposition of the couplet of ‘ cognizable in one way 
. . . ‘ cognizable by sight’ means to be known by the visual 
sense. And the same also with the rest of the terms. And 
herein ‘ cognizable in one way ’ means to be known either by 
the visual or by the auditory sense. ‘ Not cognizable in 
another way ’ means not to be known either by visual or 
auditory sense. This being so, inasmuch as it was said above, 
in the Table of Contents, that the couplet is formed owing 
to the difference in the meaning of the two terms, the couplet 
does not take the form:—‘ those states that are cognizable 
by sight are not cognizable by hearing.’ But taking the 
meaning to be that visible objects are cognizable by sight, but 
sounds are not, this single couplet takes this form:—‘ Those 
states that are cognizable by sight are not cognizable by 
hearing; conversely, states that are cognizable by hearing 
are not cognizable by sight.’ Thus making the couplets four 
by four with each [of the five] controlling sense-faculties 
as basis, a set of twenty couplets is to be rmderstood.
[369] What then ? is there no such specific cognizing by 
the sensus communis {mano) ? Is it on that account that 
there is not a couplet concerning this ? There is such cog­
nizing, but it is left implicit, there being here no complete 
specification. For there is no complete specification as to 
what is not cognizable by sight. So in the case of ‘ mind ’- 
cognition, there is here no couplet because there is no [explicit]
‘ Dhs. § 1085.
’ D>. § 1086. The translation {B.P.E,) does not quite reproduce the 
®“iphasis in this one reply.
* Dhs. § 1084. * « Ih. § 1087. » n. § 1095.
     

--- PAGE 193 ---

The Intoxicants 475
specification. Nevertheless, it is meant that there are things 
cognizable in one way, not in another way, by mind-cognition, 
ifence, though this is not stated, it should bei understood 
according to what is obtained [in consciousness].
So far only states of the sensuous plane are cognizable by 
some and not by other states of the sensuous plane, as amount­
ing to mind-cognition. States of the plane of attenuated 
matter and others also are cognizable by some, and not by 
other states of the sensuous plane. Even states of the 
sensuous plane are cognizable by some and not by other 
states of the plane of attenuated matter also; by means of 
which even states of the plane of attenuated matter and 
others also are cognizable in some cases and not in others. 
But states of the sensuous plane, of that of attenuated matter, 
of the Unincluded are not cognizable by states of the im­
material plane. And states of the immaterial plane are cog­
nizable by some and not by other states of the immaterial 
plane, of which even some are cognizable and others are not 
by means of states of the immaterial plane. States of the 
sensuous plane and others are not cognizable by the Unincluded. 
Again [states of] the Unincluded, from being not cognizable, 
by Nibbana, are cognizable by some and not by other states 
of the Unincluded. And of these, from being not cognizable 
by Path and Fruition, Some are cognizable and others are not 
cognizable by the Unincluded. Thus it should be known by 
virtue of what is obtained [in conscious experience].^
In the exposition of the Intoxicants, the lust of the five 
pleasures of sense is called the ‘ intoxicant of sensuahty.’ 
Passionate desire for fife in a heaven of attenuated matter, - 
and of immaterial existence, longing for Jhana, lust co­
existent with an eternahstic view are called the ‘ intoxicant 
of rebirth,’ as being desire apphed to rebirth. The sixty-two 
heresies are known as the ‘ intoxicant of views.’ Lack of 
knowledge regarding eight points® is the intoxicant of ignorance.
i The P.T.S. ed. does not contain this sentence.
* Dhs. § 1096. Asava. See above, p. 48.
3 Namely, the Four Truths, the past, the future, or both, aind causal 
genesis.
     

--- PAGE 194 ---

476 The Summary
In order to prevent confusion, the Intoxicants, as they 
occur here and there [in the Canon], should be considered 
under one or more heads. Thu.s as to their meaning they are 
as one in the sense of ‘ long fermentation.’ In the Vinaya’ 
two heads are accepted:—the restraint of intoxicants in 
the present hfe, destruction of them in future lives. In the 
Suttanta, there is first a threefold division:—e.g., in the 
Salayatana Sutta-:—‘ There are these three intoxicants, 
friend—sensuality, rebirth, ignorance.’ Then a fivefold 
division in the Nibbedhika Sutta®:—‘ Bhikkhus, there are 
intoxicants leading to purgatory, [370] to the animal kingdom, 
to the Beta kingdom, to human life, to celestial life.’ In the 
Ahuneyya Sutta^ there are six categories:—‘ Bhikkhus, there 
are intoxicants to be eliminated by restraint, by habit, .by 
endurance, by avoidance, by suppression, by culture.’ In the 
Sabbasava Sutta® these six with the addition of ‘ eliminated 
by insight ’ make seven. But here they are presented as four. 
And the definition of them is as follows:—desires belonging 
to sense plus ‘ intoxicant ’ make ‘ sensuality-intoxicant.’
The intoxicant concerned with Rupa and Arupa rebirth, 
dual as due to [previous] kamma and [subsequent] happening, 
is rebirth-intoxicant. The opinion-intoxicant is just opinions. 
The ignorance-intoxicant is just ignorance.
‘ Concerning desires,’® i.e., the desires of the five senses. 
‘ Sensual desire ’ is desire so called, not [just] conation, or 
righteous desire. ‘Sensual passion,’ i.e.,- sense-desire as 
just desiring and lusting after. ‘ Sensual delight,’ i.e., sense­
desire as just desiring and delighting in. And understanding 
sense-desire thus in all the terms, we get, besides, craving, 
fondness, fever in the sense of burning, languishing, rapacity 
in the sense of swallowing, consummating. ‘‘This is called,’ 
namely, the sensuality-intoxicant analyzed in eight terms.
‘ Concerning rebirths ‘ desire for rebirth ’ is desire which
*, Vinaya iii. 21; v. 143,223.
Sa,Myuttavr.25Q', cf. Sammaditthi Sutta, Jf. i. 56; .4. i. 167. 
’ -4. iu. 410,414. * Ibid. 381- ® M. i. 7/.
® l>hs. § 1097. 7 DJia. § 1098.
     

--- PAGE 195 ---

The Intoxicants 477
arises by way of aspiring to rebirth in Rupa and Arupa forms 
of life. By this method the other terms should be imderstood. 
> That ‘ the world is eternal ’ is the view held in ten ways 
to be the ‘ Eternalistic view.’ Here it is held that the five 
aggregates are ‘the world,’ and that this world is eternal, 
everlasting, is for all times. [371] ‘ Not eternal ’ is the view 
arising as the ‘ Annihilationistic view ’ of one who holds that 
this same world is anjiihilated, perishes. ‘Finite’ belongs 
to the theory that ‘ the world is finite,’ held by one who 
judges, that the states of consciousness such as he would 
get on the plane of attenuated matter, or that of immaterial 
life, and has now got within a limited Jhana-device^—one the 
size of a winnowing basket or shallow cup—are ‘ the world,’ a 
world finite by the hmits of the device. This finite view is both 
Eternalistic and Annihilationistic. The theory that ‘ the world 
is infinite,’ is that of one who holds that the states of conscious­
ness such as he would get on the plane of attenuated matter, 
or that of immaterial life, and has now got through taking 
a very ample device and attained to the symbol in that device, 
are ‘ the world,’ a world that is endless according to the limits 
of the device. This is both Eternalistic and Annihilaticmistic
That ‘ the living soul is the same as the body ’ is the theory 
held on Annihilationistic lines that since the soul belongs 
to a merely dissoluble body, it is annihilated when the body 
is annihilated. In the next clause, since the soul is held to 
be other than the body, when the body is annihilated, the soul 
is not annihilated, is a theory on Eternahstic lines.
In the four following views about the Tathagata, the first, 
that he as a permanent entity® is [reborn] after death is 
Eternalistic; the second, that he is not [reborn] is Annihila­
tionistic; the third, of one who holdsi he both is and is not, 
is semi-Eternahstic; the fourth, of one who holds he neither is 
nor is not, is the Eehwriggling theory.®
These are ‘ the states that are the intoxicants,’ thus making
*• See above, p. 248 /.
2 Satto. Cf. Points of Controversy.
3 See Dialogries i. 40.
     

--- PAGE 196 ---

478 The, Summary
that of sensuality and of rebirth one as modes of lusting,^— 
the intoxicants are three states in brief and four when expanded.
But—[it may be asked]—is the passionate desire which 
arises for a mansion, a wish-yielding tree, ornaments, etc., just 
an intoxicant of sensuality or not ? It is not. And why ?— 
because lust of the five senses is put away of the brahma-devas 
here, i.e., in this plane of desire. Now that passionate desire, 
when it is ranked in the Condition-group,^ is known as ‘ the con­
dition that is greed ’; when it is ranked in the Knot-^oup^ 
it is known as the ‘bodily knot of covetousness’; in the 
Corruption-group'* it is known as ‘ the corruption that is 
greed.’ But is passionate desire when co-existent wdth 
dogmatism known as the intoxication of sensuality, or not ? 
It is not. It is called the lust of dogmatism. Thus it is 
said: ‘ Gifts made to a person lusting with the lust of dogmat­
ism are not of much fruit, [372] nor of great advantage.’®
Moreover, it is proper to take these drugs or intoxicants 
in the order of the Corruptions as well as that of the Paths. 
In the order of the Corruptions, the intoxicant of sensuality 
is eliminated by the [third] Path of Never-returning, that of 
rebirth by the Path of Arahantship, that of dogmatism by the 
Stream-winning Path, that of ignorance by the Path of 
Arahantship. In the order of the Paths, the intoxicant of 
dogmatism is put away by the Stream-winning Path, that 
of sensuahty by the Never-returning Path, that of rebirth and 
of ignorance by the Path of Arahantship.
• <
Among the Fetters in the exposition of ‘ conceit,’® ‘ conceit 
at the thought—I am the better man ’ is the conceit arising 
thus: In the scale of perfection I am the better man. ‘ Con­
ceit at the thought—I am as good as they ’-is the conceit 
arising thus: In the sense of equality I am as good. ‘ Con­
ceit at the thought—I am inferior ’ is the conceit arising thus: 
In the sense of baseness I am inferior. Thus these three kinds 
of conceit of superiority, equahty, inferiority arise in three 
sorts of men. For in the superior man the three may arise:—
Br. text; of ‘ becoming.’ 2 p_ 474. 3 p. 64/.
* I*- 55. 8 traced. • Dhs. § 1116.
     

--- PAGE 197 ---

The Fetters 479
I am superior, equal, inferior. Likewise in the equal and the 
inferior man. In the superior man the conceit of superiority 
is alone a real conceit, the others are not real. In the equal 
man the conceit of equahty, in the inferior man the conceit 
of inferiority is alone real. "WTiat does this signify ? That 
in one man the three kinds of conceit may arise. But in 
the KliuddakavalUiu Viblianga, in the classification of the first 
conceit,^ it is said that one conceit occurs in three men.
' ‘ Conceit,’ ‘ overweening,’ and ‘ conceitedness ’ signify
mode and state. ‘ Loftiness ’ is in the sense of rising upwards 
or of springing over others. ‘ Haughtiness,’ i.e., in whom 
conceit arises, him it lifts up, keeps upraised. ‘ Flaunting 
' a flag ’ is in the sense of swelling above others. ‘ Assumption ’ 
means uplifting; conceit favours the mind all round. Of 
many flags the flag which rises above others is called a banner. 
So conceit arising repeatedly in the sense of excelling with 
reference to subsequent conceits is like a banner. That mind 
which desires the banner is said to be desirous of the banner 
{i.e., self-advertisement). Such a state is ' desire for self- 
advertisement.’ And that is of the heart, not of a rea^ self; 
hence ‘ desire of the heart for self-advertisement.’ Indeed, 
the heart associated with conceit wants a banner, and its 
state is reckoned as banner-conceit.
[373] In the exposition of envy,’^ ‘ envy at the gains, honour, 
reverence, afiection, salutation, worship accruing to others ’ 
is that envy which has the characteristic of not enduring, or 
of grumbhng at, the prosperity of others, saying concerning 
others’ gains, etc., ‘ What is the use to these people of aUthis ?’ 
etc. Herein ‘ gains ’ is attainment of the [recluse’s] four 
requisites, such as robes, etc. Verily the envious person 
cannot endure that gain should be acquired by others, saying, 
‘What use to this man is this?’ ‘Honour’ is the getting 
of these well-made and fine requisites. ‘ Reverence ’ is the 
act of making reverence. ‘ Regard ’ is the act of loving 
by the mind. ‘ Salutation ’ is the saluting with the fivefold
I Vihhanga, p. 353 /. The text does not seem exactly to support 
Buddhaghosa.
3 D/w. § 1121.
     

--- PAGE 198 ---

480 The Summary
contact.^ ‘ Wor^p ’ is worship with scent, flowers, etc. ‘ Envy ’ 
is the act of en'vying. The mode of envy is called ‘ envying.’ 
The state of one envying is ‘enviousness.’ ‘Jealousy,’ etc., 
are synonyms of envy. And the gruinbhng characteristic 
of this envy is to be understood of both householders and 
recluses. For instance, suppose that a certain householder 
by depending on his own work as this or that means of liveh- 
hood, such as ploughing, merchandise, etc., gets a splendid 
conveyance or vehicle, etc., or a gem. Another man not 
wishing such gain to him is not pleased. He thinks, ‘ When 
will he dechne from this prosperity and walk about a pauper ?’ 
and if for a certain reason the other does decline from that 
prosperity he is pleased. A certain recluse also being envious 
at seeing the acquirement of gain, etc., arising from general 
knowledge, scriptural scholarship, etc., thinks, ‘ When will this 
man decline in these acquirements?’ etc., and when he sees 
him, for some reason, decline, then he is glad. Thus envy 
should be understood to have the characteristic of grumbling 
at the prosperity of others.
In the exposition of meanness,’^ ‘ five meannesses,’ to wit: 
‘ meanness as regards dwelling,’ eto., have been said to show 
meanness as regards a substance. Herein meanness in a 
monastery is an instance of the first kind. Similarly with the 
rest of the terms. The whole monastery, a ceU, a single room,^ 
and night and day chambers are called dwellings. Those 
hving in such five at ’ease, get the requisites. A certain 
bhikkhu does not desire the coming there of a certain dutiful 
and amiable bhikkhu, and thinks, ‘ Now that he has come 
[374] may he go away quickly!’ This is called^ ‘ meanness in a^ 
monastery.’ But it is not so in one who is adverse to the 
arrival there of quarrelsome recluses.
‘ As regards family ’—family, i.e., of servitors as well as of 
relatives. To one not desiring the approach of another to
Touching the ground with knees, hands, forehead.
® Dhs. § 1122. Meanness {macchariyam) is translated avarice in 
Analogues of the Buddha ii. 55. Buddhaghosa’s remarks in the corre­
sponding Commentary may be consulted. (Sum. Vil. on Maha, 
^idana Sta.)
     

--- PAGE 199 ---

The Fetters 481
that family is ‘ meanness as regards family.’ But it is not 
so if one does not desire the approach of a bad person. For 
he’,' the evil recluse, so behaves as to upset the faith of those 
families. ‘ Meanness ’ lies in not desiring the approach there 
of the bhikkhu capable of guarding their faith.
‘ Gains ’ is the getting of the four requisites. There is mean­
ness as regards gains to one who thinks, “ May he not get it,” 
even when it is a virtuous person who gets it. But in the case 
of a [bhilckhu] who is seen to ruin a gift given in faith, to spoil 
it by not making use of it, or by making a bad use of it, not 
to give it to another even when it is about to go rotten [by 
keeping], there is no meanness in [a giver] who thinks,' If only 
this [bhikkhu] may not get it, a virtuous [bhikkhu] might get 
it and enjoy it.’
‘ Reputation ’ refers to personal beauty as well as praise 
of merits. Here the person who is mean as to beauty of body, 
wishes not to hear it said that another is worthy of faith and 
beautiful. One who is mean as to praise of merits does not 
wish to have [another’s] praises simg on Account of his virtue, 
ascetic practice, progress, or behaviour.
‘ As regards doctrine,’ i.e., doctrine of learning and of 
intuition. Of these, Ariyan disciples are not mean as regards 
doctrine to be intuited; they desire that intuition for 
the world, including devas, of doctrines they themselves have 
intuited. Their desire is, ‘ May others come to know that 
intuition.’ But ‘ nieanness as_jegards doctrine ’ occurs only, 
in respect of textual doctrine. A person endowed with it 
wishes not to let another know what secret text or commen- 
tarial tradition he may know. But he who does not impart 
it, out of regard for the doctrine, by taking the person into 
account, or out of regard for the person by taking the doctrine 
into account, is not mean as regards the doctrine. In the 
former case the person so considered is frivolous; sometimes 
it is a recluse, sometimes a brahmin [375], sometimes a Jain. 
Indeed, the' bhikkhu who thinks, ‘ This person breaks the 
traditional text, the abstruse, subtle, special doctrine, and will 
confuse it,’ and imparts it not, acts out of regard for the 
doctrine by taking the person into account. And he who
n. 13
     

--- PAGE 200 ---

482 The Summary
thinks, ‘ This doctrine is abstruse, subtle. If this person were 
to acquire it he would perish by making a [false] confession 
of gnosis,^ and revealing himself,’ and imparts it not, acts out 
of regard for the person by taking the doctrine into account. 
But he who thinks, ‘ If this one were to acquire this doctrine, 
he would be able to destroy our behef,’ and imparts it not, is 
he who is said to be mean as regards the doctrine.
Among these five meannesses, through meanness, in the 
first place, as regards a monastery, one becomes a demonaf 
or a Peta, and walks about hfting on to his head the rubbish' 
of that very monastery. Next, one who, seeing his own family 
making gifts, etc., to others, is mean as to family, and thinlcs, 
‘ Ruined, alas! is this family of mine ’—such an one spits blood 
from the mouth, dysentery sets in, and his intestines broken 
into bits come out. Through meanness as regards gains 
belonging to the Order or to a Chapter, and through using it 
as though it was meant for individuals, one is born as a demon, 
or a Peta, or a boa-constrictor. Through meanness as regards 
personal beauty and -praise of merits and doctrine of learning, 
one who extols his own praises and not those of others; who 
mentions this and that fault of anyone saying, ‘ What praise 
does he deserve ?’ and does not impart any doctrine of learning 
to him, becomes ugly, or has a mouth dripping with saliva. 
Further, owing to the [first, or] monastery-meanness, one is 
tormented in an iron house. Owing to family-meanness one 
gets httle gain. Owing to meanness over gains one is reborn 
in the dung-purgatory. Owing to meanness as to reputation 
one is reborn without beauty or reputation. Owing to mean­
ness as to doctrine one is born in the hot-ash purgatory.
‘ Stinginess ’ is the expression of meanness. ‘ Avariciousness ’ 
is the act or mode of being mean. ‘ Mean sprit ’ is the state of 
one endowed with stinginess. ‘Let it be for me only and not 
for another!’—thus wishing not to difiuse all one’s own 
acquisitions one is ‘ close.’® The state of such an one is
1 Anna, Arahantship. Read elamukho.—Tr,
3 Byapitum aniccho ti viviccho; byapitum icchati ti viccho; na 
viccho ti viviccho.—Tlka.
     

--- PAGE 201 ---

The Fetters 483
avarice,’ a synonym for a soft meanness, [37B] An ignoble 
person is churlish. His state is ‘ ignobleness,’ a name for 
hard stinginess. Verily, a person endowed with it hinders 
another from giving to others. And this also has been said,
‘ Malicious, miserly, ignoble, wrong . . . 
Such men hinder the feeding of the poor . .
A ‘ niggardly ’ person seeing mendicants causes his mind to 
shrink as by sourness. His state is ‘ niggardliness.’ Another 
way:—‘ niggardliness ’ is a ‘ spoon-feeding.’ For when 
the pot is full to the brim, one takes food from it by a 
spoon with the edge bent on all sides; it is not possible to 
get a spoonful; so is the mind of a mean person bent in. 
When it is bent in, the body also is bent in, recedes, is not 
diffused—thus stinginess is said to be niggardliness.
‘ Lack of generosity of heart ’ is the state of a mind which is 
shut and gripped, so that it is not stretched out the mode of 
making gifts, etc., in doing service to others. But because 
the mean person wishes not to give to others what belongs 
to himself, and wishes to take what belongs to others, there­
fore this meanness should be understood to have the character­
istic of hiding or seizing one’s own property, occurring thus: 
‘ May it be for me and not for another!’ The rest in this 
group is clear in meaning.
It is projier to take these Fetters in the order of the Corrup­
tions, as well as of the Paths. In the order of the Cor­
ruptions the Fetters of sensuality and of aversion are put 
away by the Never-returners’ Path; the Fetter of conceit, 
by the Path of Arahantship; dogmatism, perplexity, observance 
of mere rule and ritual by the Stream-winners’ Path; the 
Fetter of lust for existence by the Path of Arahantship; envy 
and meanness by the Stream-winners’ Path; ignorance by 
the Path of Arahantship. In the order of the Paths, dogmatism, 
perplexity, observance of mere rule and ritual, envy and 
meanness are put away by the Stream-winners’ Path; [377] 
sensuahty and aversion by the Never-returners’ Path; conceit, 
lust for existence and ignorance by the Path of Arahantship.
* Kindred Sayings, i, 120,11. 2, 3, 7. ® Cf. Vis. Mag., p. 656.
     

--- PAGE 202 ---

484 The Summary
In the ‘ Knot-groupthe ‘bodily Knot’ fastens the 
mentai organism^ in the round of births by way of decease 
and rebirth. The ‘ disposition to dogmatize ’ is thus:— 
rejecting the word of the Omniscient, he disposes his heart 
in this way:—The world is eternal; this is true, the other is 
absurd. But because there is a difference between covetous­
ness and sensuality, therefore in the word-classification 
of the physical Knot of covetousness, instead of saying, ‘ That 
sensual desire, that sensual lust concerning the pleasures of 
sense,’® ‘ That lust, that infatuation ’ was said. By means of 
this, that which has been said above as ‘ lust of desire which 
arises for Brahma’.s mansions, etc., is not the drug of 
sensuality, but under the Knot-group it is the physical Knot 
of covetousness,’^ was rightly said. And the same in the 
following CorrUption-group.
‘Excepting the perversion of mere rule and ritual,’® i.e., 
because one does not dispose the heart in this wise: ‘ This 
observance of rule and ritual is true,’ but only as ‘ purity 
through rules of morality,’ therefore rejecting it too as a wong 
view, he said, ‘ excepting,’ etc.
In the exposition of sloth and torpor® of the Hindrance- 
group ‘ mental indisposition ’ is sickness of mind. For one 
who is sick is said to be indisposed. It is also said in the 
Vinaya, ‘ I am not indisposed, Sir.’'^ ‘ Unwieldiness ’ is the 
mode of unwieldiness called sickness of mind. ‘ Adhering ’ 
is the mode of hanging downwards. The consciousness, 
namely, when unable to strengthen the postures, hangs hke a 
bat from a tree and hke a pot of raw sugar hung to a peg. It is 
with reference to that mode of consciousness that ‘ adhering ’ 
is said. The second term has been increased by the prefix 
' sam.’ ‘ Clinging,’ i.e., constricted by non-expansion. The 
other two signify mode and state. ‘ Sloth ’® is density with-
1 Dhs. § 1135.
2 Kayam, the ‘ group ’ composing the individual.
® As in the Intoxicant ‘ sensuality.’ Dhs. § 1097.
< Dhs. § 758. 6 Dhs. § 1139. « Dhs. § 1156.
’ Not traced. 8 Thina—B.P.^;. ‘ stolidity.’
     

--- PAGE 203 ---

The Hindrances 485
out expansion like that of a lump of butter. ‘ Stiffening ’ 
signifies mode. The state of that is ‘ rigidity,’ that is to say, 
i.s rigidity by way of non-expanding.
[378] ‘ Of mental factors,’^ i.e., of the tliree mental aggre­
gates. ‘Indisposition, unwieldiness’:—this pair has been 
mentioned just above. ‘ Shrouding ’ means it covers up 
the mental aggregate as the cloud covers up the sky. ‘ En­
veloping ’ is covering all round. ‘ Barricading within ’ is it 
obstructs within. To explain: As when a town is taken men 
shut within are unable to go out, so states shut in by torpor 
are unable to issue forth by way of diffusion; hence the phrase. 
‘ Torpor ’ means it oppresses, i.e., it injures by means of 
unwieldiness. ‘ Sleep ’ is that whereby we go to sleep. 
‘ Drowsiness ’ makes bhnking of the eyelashes, etc. ‘ Slum­
bering, somnolence ’—these two terms signify mode and state. 
And the reason of the repetition of that term ‘ sleep ’ preceding 
.them has been explained. ‘ This is called the Hindrance of 
sloth and torpor ’:—uniting ‘ this is sloth ’ and ‘ this is torpor,’ 
the Hindrance of sloth-torpor is given in the sense of obstruct­
ing. That Hindrance of sloth-torpor, which generally rises 
before and after the sleep of probationers and average men, 
is completely cut off by the Path of Arahantship. But there 
is a lapse into the [subconscious] life-continuum (in fatigue) 
owing to the weakness of the sentient body in Arahants.- 
AVhen this arises unmixed [with thought-process], they sleep. 
This rest is called their slumber.
Hence it was said by the Blessed One, ‘ Aggivessana, I 
recollect spreading the fourfold robe in the last month of the 
hot season and going off to sleep, mindful and understanding.
* In B.P.E. ‘of sense.’ Dhs. § 1157. The three are ‘feeling, 
perception, and activities ’ {sankhdrd).—Ed.
2 Karaja -kayapasado. It is also explained as the ‘constituted 
body ’ (sasanibharakaya); or ‘ body born of becoming ’ (karo ti satte 
nibbattetiti karaih; karato jato karajo. JHadhusdratthadipanl). The 
Commentary on Digha JSUkdya II. takes it to mean the ‘body derived 
from the four great essentials while the Yojand gives the last mean­
ing in Madhwdradlpani. The rendering by ‘ frail body ’ in B.P.E, > 
p. 213, n. 2, is wrong.—Tr.
     

--- PAGE 204 ---

486 The Summary
lying on my right side.’‘ And such weakness of the sentient 
body is not to be killed by the Paths; it is obtained both 
when grasped-at and when not grasped-at. In the former 
case, it is obtained when the saint has gone a long journey, 
or is fatigued after doing some other work. In the latter case, 
it is obtained in leaves and flowers. For the leaves of some 
trees spread by means of the sim’s heat and contract at night. 
Lotus flowers, etc., bloom by the sun’s heat and contract again 
at night. [379] But this torpor does not arise in Arahants 
on account of any immorality.
Here the objection might be raised:—‘ Torpor is not immoral. 
Why ? It is due to matter. For matter is unmoral, and this 
torpor is a material quality. Therefore herein the word kdya 
should be [mentally] used as “ indisposition, unwieldiness of 
body. ” ’ If this torpor were matter merely by saying ‘ of 
kaya,’ then states also which are repose, etc., of kdya would 
be material.^
[In the passage], ‘ he experiences bliss by kdya, realizes 
the, ultimate truth by kdya,' experience of bliss and realization 
of the ultimate truth would also be by means of the material 
body. Therefore (owing to the phrase ‘ of kdya' not deter­
mining matter) it should not be said that matter is torpor. 
Here in ‘ indisposition of kdya ’ kdya means the mental kdya. 
If so, thqn why is ‘ sleep, drowsiness ’ said ?—for the mental 
kaya does not sleep, does not blink the eyelids. \ This pair 
of words has been said as being the result or fruit of 
that torpor, just as the sexes, etc., are the results of the con- 
troUing faculties of femininity and masculinity. For as these 
sexual forms, etc., such as femininity, etc., are given as the result 
of the feminine controlling faculty, so sleep, drowsiness, are 
given as results of the torpor, called sickness, of this mental 
kdya. Indeed when there is torpor,, there is also sleep and 
so on; thus by a figure of speech torpor, though immaterial, 
has been described as ‘ sleep, drowsiness, slumbering, somno-
‘ Majjhima i. 249.
The point lies in the twofold meaning of kdya : body and the three 
mental factors. (Cf. preceding page).,—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 205 ---

The Hindrances 487
lonce ’—drowsiness as causing the movement of eyelids, etc. 
Thus by this word-definition also, this meaning (of torpor 
being immaterial) has been accomplished. Thus torpor 
is not a material quality.
The immaterial nature of torpor has also been shown by 
‘ shrouding,’ etc. Indeed matter is not the ‘ shrouding, 
enveloping, barricading within ’ of the mental kaya. ‘ But 
is not torpor material for this very reason ? For that which 
is non-matter cannot be shrouded,’ etc. If the shrouding, etc., 
of matter were accomplished, and not of non-matter, then 
(especially as the obstruction of matter is seen in binding 
bridges, etc.), there would be no obstruction of non-matter. 
Accordingly, just as immaterial states, such as sensual desire, 
etc., are called Hindrances in the sense of obstructing, so the 
shrouding, etc., of torpor also should be understood in the 
sense of shrouding, etc. Again, because of the expression: 
‘ by removing the five Hindrances which cause the weakening 
of knowledge and corrupt the mind,’’^ torpor is immaterial. 
[380] For matter is not the corrupter of mind, nor the weakener 
of intellect. Why is it not so ? Has it not been said, 
* Bhildrhus, there are some recluses and brahmins who drink 
liquor, drink spirituous drink, do not refrain from liquor and 
)*{drink. Bhikkhus, this drinking habit of recluses and brahmins 
is the first corruption.’^ Further it has been said, ‘ House­
holder, these are the six dangers from being addicted to 
wantonness in liquor and strong drink:—present loss of wealth, 
increase of quarrels, cause of diseases, production of iU-fame, 
indecent exposure, weakening of wisdom, making the sixth 
basis.’3 This meaning is self-evident and accomplished 
manifestly. Because when spirituous drink goes to the 
stomach the mind is corrupted, wisdom is weakened, therefore 
like drink torpor also may corrupt the mind and weaken 
wisdom.
But spirituous drink is not the corruption itself from merely 
signifying the cause. For were it so then it would be indicated 
in such expositions of corruption as, ‘ By removing these five
r Samyutta v. 160. ® Anyuttara ii. 53. ® Dig]ia iii. 182.
     

--- PAGE 206 ---

488 The Summary
Hindrances which corrupt the mind ’; or ‘ Bhikkhus, likewise 
there are these five corrupters of mind by which the corrupted 
mind is not plastic, not wieldy, not brilliant, not altogether 
radiant, and not concentrated on the destruction of the 
Intoxicants. Which are the five 1 Sensual desire is the 
corrupter of mind or, ‘ Bhikkhus, which is the corruption 
of mind ? Covetousness, lawless greed, is the corruption of 
mind.’“ And because when liquor is drunk, corruptions arise,' 
corrupting mind and weakening wisdom, therefore from being 
the cause of corruption and signifjdng such, liquor is said to 
be so.
But torpor itself is the corrupting of mind and weakening 
of wisdom. Therefore it is not a material thing. This is 
endorsed by the mention of association. For it is said: ‘ The 
hindrance of sloth-and-torpor is a hindrance associated with 
the hindrance of ignorance.’® Hence from the mention of 
association torpor is not a material thing, for matter is not 
reckoned as an ‘ associate’ [381]. Taking this as stating what 
is elicited (by reckoning), we may take this also:—just ns it 
is said that we see shell-fish, gravel, potsherds, a shoal of fish 
stationary or moving—the gravel and potsherds stationary, 
the rest doing both—so here torpor is stated as a hindrance 
only, sloth as both hindrance and associate. And combining 
the two ,9ases, ‘ both hindrance and hindrance-cum-associate ’ 
is stated according as each obtains reckoning.
But [it may be objected] torpor is stationary, it does not 
move. And being only a hindrance, not an associate, it is 
only a material thing.
[If it be so, it is not] because you have established its 
materiality. That the gravel and potsherds are stationary 
is a fact not created by the Sutta' Hence in the passage 
quoted, let the meaning be as you say, nevertheless it does not 
prove that torpor is a material thing. You cannot establish 
its materiality by that Sutta. Our conclusion holds good, 
because you have not established the materiality of torpor 
by what is therein stated to happen. Nay, more:—take the
* AriguUara iii. 16; S. v. 92. * Cf. A. ii. 67. a Dhs. § 1170.
     

--- PAGE 207 ---

489The Hindrances 
passage ‘ from being abandoned,’ etc. in the Vibhauga: it is 
said:—(he dwells) as one from whom sloth and torpor have 
departed, that is, inasmuch as they have been abandoned, 
cast out, there has been a freeing from, elimination of, disen­
gaging, complete extricating from. . . . This consciousness 
in respect of this sloth and torpor he cleanses, purifies, wholly 
purifies, releases, delivers, wholly delivers from^ ... all this 
is said because of the casting out. And it is not said with 
respect to anything material, hence on this account also torpor 
is not a material quality.
[But, it may be objected], from the passage about the not 
coming to pass of [the torpor] born of mind—[you have not 
established your thesis], for torpor is threefold:—mind-born, 
heat-born, food-born. In the Vibhanga it is stated that, with the 
different kinds of Jhana-consciousness, there is a not coming 
to pass of the torpor that is mind-born. Its immaterialitjj is 
therefore not established. Torpor is just a material thing.
Nay, it is the materiahty that' is not established. If it 
were, we should get it stated [in the Vibhanga] that there is 
a non-becoming of mind-born torpor. Just this is not estab­
lished, and torpor is not a material thing. Nay, more:— 
take the expression ‘ elimination.’ It was said by the Blessed 
One:—‘ By eliminating six states, bhilckhus, one is competent 
[382] to dwell in the attainment of First Jhana. Which are 
the six? Sensuous desire, ill-will, sloth and torpor, excitement, 
worry .2 He has well seen by right insight the evil in sense 
desires. Eliminating these five hindrances he will come to know 
by strong insight his own good. Although the ehmination of 
torpor is mentioned, material qualities are not [included as] 
that which is to be eliminated. As he said:—‘ The material 
aggregate [of personality] is to be understood, comprehended, 
not to be eliminated, not to be developed.’® From these 
passages on elimination also torpor is immaterial.
[But, it may be objected], texts about elimination refer to 
both immaterial and material things, for instance, ‘ Material 
qualities, bhikkhus, are not yourself. Put them away.’^
1 Vibh. p. 254.
3 Cf. -Sr. iii. 26, etc.
3 Anguttara iii. 4,50'
Ib. .33
     

--- PAGE 208 ---

490 The Summary
Here elimination is mentioned of material things as well, 
hence the reason alleged is not vaUd.
Nay, it is not invalid by the context. For in this Sutta, 
where it is said:—‘ The elimination and repression, bhikkhus, of 
passionate desire for things material —that Is the eUmination 
here [meant],—the eUmination of passionate desire is spoken 
of as the eUmination of matter. Such is the language used 
in such phrases as ‘ not having eliminated six states ’; ‘ having 
eUminated the five Hindrances—such is the putting away 
that is meant. And thus by [this’ and] other contexts, torpor 
is not a material thing. Hence the language used in such 
Suttas as ‘ he having eUminated these five Hindrances . . . 
the things that defile the mind,’ etc.—by these and other 
Suttas, it is shown that torpor is not a material thing.
Likewise ‘ states, bhikkhus, which are obstructions, hin­
drances, overwhelming the mind, weakening insight are five. 
VTiich are the five ? Sensual desire . . . sloth and torpor 
are the obstructions, hindrances, overwhelming the mind, 
weakening insight ’;® again:—‘ Bhikkhus, the hindrance of sloth 
and torpor brings about darkness, bUndness of vision, lack 
of knowledge, cessation of insight, having its part in adversity,^ 
not leading to Nibbana again;—‘ Brahnein, when he lives
with mind possessed by, oppressed by sloth and torpor.® . . 
Again:—‘Bhikkhus, in one not thinking systematically 
unrisen sensual desire arises . . . [383] unrisen sloth-and- 
torpor arises.’ . . .’ Again'—‘Bhikkhus, what are the five 
hindrances but a sheer heap of immoraUty ’®—thus such various 
Suttas have been said exposing the immateriaUty of torpor.
And because it is immaterial therefore it arises with respect 
to things inimaterial. Thus it is said in the Great Book of 
the Patthana:—‘ A state of hindrance arises because of 
a[nother] state of hindrance not in a causal relation to what has 
gone before.’ AU that is said in the Vibhanga with respect
Anguttara iii. 64.‘ S. iii. 28, etc.
® Ibid., p. 63; Sainyutta v. 96.
* In the Dukkha of the round of rebirth.—Tikd.
® Cf. Majjhima i. 115. « Cf. p. 433 f.
’’ 8amyutta v. 93. ® Angtdlara iii. 65.
     

--- PAGE 209 ---

491The Hindrances
to consciousness of things immaterial being hindered should be 
expanded by that [formula];—because of the hindrance of 
sensuous desire come the hindrances of sloth-torpor^ distraction, 
ignorance.’ Therefore the conclusion here to be arrived at 
is that torpor is not a material thing.
In the exposition of worry,- ‘ Thinking what is lawful 
concerning something that is unlawful ’ is said to explain 
worry from the root. By thus imagining an improper thing 
to be proper, when transgression is committed, when offence 
against something is done, in one who recollecting it regrets, 
■ I have done badly,’ worry arises by way of after-regret. 
Therefore it is to show it from the root that the clause was said. 
Herein if anyone eats unlawful food imagining it to be lawful, 
Autisuitable flesh imagining it to be suitable, bear’s flesh to be 
pork, or leopard’s flesh to be venison, eats at a late hour 
imagining he is in time, eats after the Pavarana, thinking it is 
not past, eats when dust falls into the bowl imagining that he 
has got alms, he thus transgresses by imagining what is lawful 
in something that is unla^vful. And he who eats pork 
thinking it to be bear’s flesh, in time thinking it to be 
behind time, transgresses ‘ imagining what is unlawful in 
something that is lawful.’ And he- who does any faultless 
thing thinking it to be faulty, and does a fault thinking it 
to be faultless, and who imagines fault in a faultless thing, 
and faultlessness in a fault, commits a transgression. And 
because this worry arises by imagining, when transgression 
is committed, no fault in faultlessness thus, ‘ Alas ! I have 
not done well, I have not worked merit, not made a shelter 
from fear; I have done evil, a barbarous act, a wicked act,’® 
therefore permitting another root or basis of it, [the text] says, 
‘ all this sort . . .’ [384] wherein the meaning of the term 
‘ worry ’ is given. The mode of worrying is ‘ fidgeting.’ 
The state of one being with worry is ‘ over-scrupulousness.’ 
In the phrase ‘ reproach of conscience,’'* ‘ reproach ’ is the 
approach of the mind towards what is done and undone, faulty
1 Cf. Vibh., pp. 199, 398. 2 Dhs. § 1160.
3 Cf. AnguUara ii. 174.
< Cetaso :=of mind, the original English use of the word.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 210 ---

492 The Summary
and faultless. And because one does not [Z.e., cannot] undo 
evil done, or do the good left undone, therefore the returning 
approach [of conscience] to such things is ugly and weary, 
or ‘ re-proach.’ It is of the conscience, not of a being—to 
intimate this, ‘ reproach of conscience ’ has been said. This 
is its intrinsic nature. And reproach in arising scales the mind, 
as the point of an awl does a metal bowl; hence ‘ mental 
scarifying ’ has been said. This signifies function.
But that worry which comes in scruples of discipline as, 
‘ Then the venerable Sariputta did not accept it on account 
of the scruple that the daily food for guests living in a rest­
house had been declined by the Buddha is not a hindrance. 
True, there is no such burning regret to the saint as ‘ By me 
this evil has been done.’ But this worry which resembles a 
hindrance and is called investigation in this wise, ‘ Is this 
proper, or not proper ?’ is known as worry respecting discipline.
In the exposition of the expression, ‘ Which are states that 
are hindrances and associated with hindrances sloth and 
torpor do not put away each other. Hence, ‘ Sloth and torpor 
are themselves hindrances and associated with the hindrance 
of ignorance ’ has been said without making a [special] 
division. And whereas there may be distra'ction with worry, 
this being absent, therefore the two have been spoken of in 
separate divisions. And any hindrance which does not come 
into association with any other hindrance is to be understood 
as not joined.
Now it is proper to take these hindrances in their order as 
corruptions and also in the order of the Paths. In the former 
case sensual desire and ill-wiU are eliminated by the Never- 
returning Path, sloth and torpor and distraction by the Path 
of Arahantship, worry and perplexity by the Stream-winning 
Path, ignorance by the Path of Arahantship. In the latter 
case, worry and perplexity are eliminated by the Stream­
winning Path, sensual desire and iU-will by the Never-returning 
Path, sloth and torpor, distraction and ignorance by the Path 
of Arahantship.
' Vin. IV, 70. 2 Dhs. § 1170. Vinaya iv. 70.
     

--- PAGE 211 ---

493Grasping
[385] In the Reversion group the plural number in ‘ except­
ing those states ’* has been made to be consistent with the 
question ‘ AVhich are the states V
In the exposition of Grasping," ‘ sensual grasping,’ which 
is both sensuality and grasping, means a clinging to sensuality 
as a basis. ‘ Grasping ’ is a catching hold strongly, the 
prefix in the word^ having the meaning of ‘ strong,’ as in 
‘despair,’ ‘denounced.’ The same holds good in the com­
pound ‘ opinion-grasping,’ i.e., clutching hold of an opinion 
(or ‘ view ’). In such views as ‘ the self is eternal,’ ‘ the world 
is eternal,’ the later opinion is clutching hold of the former 
opinion. So also in rule-aud.ritual-grasping:—there is a 
clutching hold of such. Conforming to bovine habits and 
bovine usages'* as means of purification is itself such a mode of 
grasping. Similarly [in the fourth mode]:—‘ theory ’ is a 
way of declaring; by that there is grasping. AATiat do they 
declare or grasp ? The self (or soul). Thus ‘ theory-of-self- 
graspiug ’ is a grasping which is a declaring about self. Or 
merely a gi-asping at the word ‘ self.’®
[Reverting to the first of the four modes,®] in ‘ that sensual 
desire . . . concerning sensual pleasures,’ sensual pleasures 
are taken here as just only desires located in objects of the 
senses. Hence that the first of' the ‘ Four Graspings ’ is 
sensuous desire concerning objects of sense is something 
actualized even in the Never-Returner, but in him there is 
never any sensuous lust based thereon.-
In the exposition of ‘ opinion-grasping,’® the phrase ‘ there 
is no such thing as alms ’ means that, whereas we know one 
can give anything to anybody, one grasps the idea that there 
is no fruit, no result from what is given. A similar meaning 
attaches to the phrases about a great ‘ sacrifice ’ and an 
‘ offering.’ We know that there may be offerings by invita-
‘ Dha. § 1176. 8 Dhs. §§ 1213-17.
® Vpa in upadanam; so wpayasa, upakuttha.—Tr.
See above, § 1005.
® Unable to find the meaning of ‘ self,’ they look upon the mere word 
as the self.—Tikd. ’ Dhs. § 1215.
     

--- PAGE 212 ---

494 The Summary
tion, to guests, and in marriage-ceremonies, but the opinion 
here is that there is no fruit, no result to such. In the 
phrase ‘ of good or bad deeds,’ the ten courses of moral action 
and the ten courses of immoral action are respectively meant. 
[386] One knows that they exist, but takes it that they yield 
no fruit, no result. ‘ There is no such thing as this world,’ 
i.e., being mentally established in the next world he takes it 
that there is no present world. ‘ There is no such thing as 
the next world,’ i.e., being mentally established in this world 
he takes it that there is no next world. ‘ There is no such thing 
as mother or father,’ i.e., he knows the existence of mothers 
and fathers, and takes it that there is no fruit, no ripening on 
account of anything done to them. ‘ There are no such beings 
as spring into birth without parents,’ i.e., he takes it that there 
are no beings who after decease are reborn. ‘ Righteous 
and well-behaved,’^ i.e., he takes it that there are in the world 
no righteous recluses and brahmins who have observed 
practice suitable [for Nibbana]. ‘ Who having understood 
and. realized, by themselves alone, both this world and the 
next, make known the same,’ i.e., he takes it that there is no 
omniscient Buddha who, Imowing this world and the next 
by his own special insight, is able to make them known.
It is proper to take these G'raspings in due order as Corrup­
tions and of the Paths. In the former case sensual grasping 
is put away by the four Paths, the remaining three by the 
Stream-winning Path. In the latter case aU but the first 
are put away by the Stream-winning Path, sensual grasping 
by the Four Paths.
01. In the exposition of the Corruptions, these are just bases 
[seats] of corruption, In other words, persons who have not 
destroyed the Asavas, because they are established in greed, 
hate, and dulness, live in corruption, the corruptions being
B.P.E.; ‘ who have reached the highest point, who have attained 
the height.’
* Dhs. § 1229. On this almost untranslatable word, see B.P.E., 
p. 327 n. The following sentence is a very strained specimen of exegetic 
etymology, also unreproducible.—Ed,
     

--- PAGE 213 ---

495Corruptions
the bases of persons so established. Because here those 
corruptions also, which arise by means of such causal relations 
as contiguity, are said to live (or dwell), therefpre they are 
the dwelling-places of [present] corruptions. Of these ten 
Corruptions the first ‘ greed ’ has been set forth in over a 
hundred terms in the groups entitled Conditions^ (‘ AVhat is 
greed ? That which is lust, infatuation, etc.’). Knots, and 
in this section. In the groups of Intoxicants, Fetters, Floods,^ 
Yokes,2 Hindrances, Graspings, it has been shown in sets of 
eight terms. Sho^vn in such detail it may be taken as com­
pleted. [387] Of those groups, in those of Conditions, Knots, 
Hindrances, Graspings, Corruptions, craving which is to be 
destroyed by the Four Paths forms one portion. In the 
groups of Intoxicants, Fetters, Floods, Yokes, craving, 
although it is to be destroyed by the Four Paths, forms two 
portions. How ? In the Intoxicants are two portions: 
intoxicant of sensuality, intoxicant of rebirth. In the Fetters 
are two portions: the Fetter of lustful desire, the Fetter of 
lust for rebirth. In the Floods are two portions: the Flood 
of sensuality, the Flood of rebirth. In the Yokes are two 
similar portions.
It is proper to take these bases of corruption in due order 
of Corruptions and of Paths. In the former case greed is 
put away by the Four Paths, hate by the Never-returning 
Path, delusion and conceit by the Path of Arahantship, 
opinion and perplexity by the Stream-winning Path, sloth, etc., 
by the Path of Arahantship. In the latter case, opinion and 
perplexity are put away by the Stream-winning Path, hate 
by the Never-returning Path, the remaining seven by the 
Path of Arahantship.
I- In the exposition of the sensuous realm,® ‘ from beneath ’ 
means by the lower portion. ‘ Waveless deep of woe ’: 
i.e., there is here no interval, no break to the fires, to the beings, 
to painful feeling. And ‘ deep of woe means here there 
is no happiness called ease. Also in the -sense of being void
1 Dhs. §§ 1053 f. esp. 1059; above, 467 /. a 1151 f
3 PAa. § 1280. « Or ‘ purgatoiy > (nirayo).
     

--- PAGE 214 ---

496 . The Summary
of delight. ‘ Starting from,’ t.e., making this deep of woe called 
the waveless the limit. ‘ Above,’ i.e., by the upper portion. 
‘ Parinimmitavasavatti devas ’ are devas usually so designated 
because of wielding authority in sense-desires created by 
others. ‘ Into,’ i.e., keeping within. ‘ Whatever within lies,’ 
i.e., those [states] in this space. ‘ Has there its range,’ i.e., 
because from having come to be sometime, somewhere, others 
also traverse within [these limits], therefore not to comprise 
them, ‘ has there its range ’ is said. By this expression those 
who fare plunged within these limits, who fare, because they 
have come to be constantly and in all parts of this lower 
region by proceeding in essentials and derived qualities from 
the waveless-deep of woe upwards, are included. Have their 
range means that they range about swallowed up in, range 
about in the lower region. ‘ Here included ’:—by this, 
because there are those who, having here their range, also 
have their range elsewhere, but are not there included, there­
fore these also are comprised.
Now to show the natxtre of the things ‘ here included ’ 
[388] as aggregate, void [of noumenon], and cause, he said 
the phrase beginning ‘ [whether it be] khandha’s,’ etc.
In the exposition of the realm of attenuated matter,^ 
the Brahma-world means the ‘ place of Brahma-[devas] ’ called 
the plane of First Jhana. What follows should be understood 
analogously to the previous paragraph. In the clause ‘ of 
one who has attained ’ and the following, Jhana of moral, of 
resultant, and of inoperative thought is to be understood in 
what is said.
In the exposition of the immaterial realm,^ ‘ entrance among 
the devas of the sphere of infinite space ’ means entered into 
that rebirth so. And the same with the second term. The 
rest should be understood analogously to the foregoing.
In the exposition of the ‘ harmful ’ couplet,^ of the three 
immoral roots the delusion that [arises] is harmful and 
associated with greed, and is harmful and associated with
1 Dhs. § 1283 (c). 2 Dhs. § 1285 (e).
® Dhs. § 1294 /. B.P.E.; ‘ concomitant with war.’ Cf. J/, iii. 230 foil.
     

--- PAGE 215 ---

497Suttanta Couplets
hate. But delusion, when it is associated with perplexity 
and distraction, is to be understood as harmful, as tainted, 
because in being eliminated there goes with it the lust and the 
harm that are associated with false opinions, and are called 
lust for rebirth in the spheres of attenuated matter and of 
immateriality.
The Suttanta couplets^ have been specified and specialized 
according to their meaning in the discourse on the Table of 
Contents, aud can be well understood by what was there said. 
Hence the terms will generally be evident in meaning. But 
there i.s just a residuum to be explained.
In the first place, taking the couplet on lightning,suppose 
a man who can see is travelling along, a path on a cloudy 
night. The path is obscured by the darkness. Lightning 
flashes and dispels the dark. In the absence of darkness the 
path becomes clear. This happens on a second journejs and 
again on a third journey. Here like the man who can see 
setting out on the path is the effort of insight put forth by 
i the Ariyan disciple for the Stream-winning Path. Like the 
obliteration of the way in darkness is the darkness covering the 
Truths. Like the moment when lightning flashes and dispels 
the darkness is the inomeht when the light of the Stream-win­
ning Path arises and dispels the darkness covering the Truths. 
Like the manifestation of the way when darkness clears 
[389] is the time of the manifestation of the four Truths to 
the Stream-winning Path; and what is manifest in the Path 
is even manifest to the person who has got it. Like the second 
journey is the effort of insight to get the Once-returning Path. 
Like the obliteration of the way in darkness is the darkness 
covering the Truths. Like the moment of lightning flashing 
the second time and dispelling darkness is the moment of 
the light of the Once-returning Path arising and dispelling the 
darkness covering the Truths. Like the manifestation of the 
way when darkness clears is the time of the manifestation 
of the four Truths to the Once-returning Path. And what is 
manifest in the Path is manifest to the person who has got
Dhs. §§ 1296 /. Above, p. 68.
II.
* lb. § 1298; A. i. 123/.
14
     

--- PAGE 216 ---

498 TAc Summary
it. Like the third journey is the efiort of insight to get the 
Never-returning Path. Like the obliteration of the way in 
darkness is the darkness covering the Truths. Like the 
naoment of lightning flashing the third time and dispelling 
darkness is the moment of the light of the Never-returning 
Path arising and dispeUing the darkness covering the Truths. 
Like the manifestation of the way when darkness clears is the 
time of the manifestation of the four Truths to the Never- 
returning Path. And what is manifest in the Path is manifest 
to the person who has got it.
. But there is no rock or gem that cannot be cut by the 
thunderbolt of Sakka; wherever the thunderbolt falls that 
place is pierced. The thunderbolt in destroying, destroys 
without leaving a remainder. And the path taken by it 
does not regain its original state. So there is no corruption 
that cannot be destroyed by the Path of Arahantship. It 
pierces all corruptions. Like the thimderbolt, in destroying 
the corruptions, it destroys without leaving a remainder. As 
the path taken by the thunderbolt does not return to its 
original state, so there is no such thing as the reproduction 
of the corruptions put away by the Path of Arahantship.
In the exposition of the couplet of ‘ the xool,’^ shamelessness 
and recklessness are manifested in fools; they are also the roots 
of other states of fools. For a shameless and reckless person 
is one who leaves nothing immoral undone. Hence these two 
are taken first and separately. On the ‘ bright side also the 
same method is followed. Likewise, in the following ‘ dark ’ 
couplet.
In the exposition of the couplet of what ‘ conduces to 
remorse,’® ‘ remorse ’ arises from what has been done and 
what has been left undone. [390] Acts of misconduct burn 
from commission: acts of good conduct burn from omission. 
Thus a person feels remorse [lit.: burns] at the thought, ‘ I 
have misconducted myself,’ ‘ I have left undone the right act’; 
‘ I have spoken amiss,’ . . . ‘ I have left undone the right
‘ Dhs. § 1300.
• Dhs. § 1304; ^.i. 49.
     

--- PAGE 217 ---

499Suttanta Couplets
thoughts.’ Similarly with what does not ‘ conduce to re­
morse.’ Thus a person doing good does not feel remorse over 
acts of commission or omission.
t'i- In the e.vposition of the couplet on ‘ equivalents,’^ the phrase 
‘ that which is of these or those states ’ indicates an inclusion 
of aU such states. ‘ Utterance is an uttering, the meaning 
being a predicating. What is it that is predicated ? It is 
I, mine, another, another’s, a person, a state, an individual, 
a man, a youth, Tissa, Datta, a couch, a chair, a mat, a pillow, 
a monastery, a cell, a door, a window—these are various 
ways of predicating. ‘ Designation ’ is rightly making known. 
A\Tiat is designated ? Any of the foregoing terms. ‘ Concept ’ 
means a revealing.” ‘ Current term ’ means what is commonly 
said, to wit, any of the foregoing [classes of] terms.
‘ Name ’^is fourfold:—that given on a special occasion, that 
given in virtue of a personal quality, that given by acclama­
tion, that which has spontaneously arisen. Of these, from being 
chosen and placed by most people among the first world-cycles, 
the name of the king Mahasammata is ‘ name given on -u 
special occasion.’ With reference to this it has been said, 
‘ Verily, Vasettha, “Mahasammata, Mahasammata ”—thus he 
was called by the p’eople, and the first of these names was 
produced.’® [391] The name coming through a quality such 
as Preacher, Ragman, Vinaya-student, Three-pitaka-man, 
Faithful, Believer,—such is ‘ name given in virtue of a personal 
quality.’ The various hundred names of the Tathagata, such 
as the Blessed, the Arahant, the Supremely Enhghtened, etc., 
are also such names. Hence it has been said;
‘ The names won hy the virtues op the Sage 
Cannot be numbered', thou shall teach his natnes 
By thousands Jor his virtues manifold.’
Ib. § 1308. B.P.E.: ‘synonymous.’ Cf. S. iii. Tlf-
Sankha.—B.P.E.: ‘ enumeration.’
® B.P.E.:—‘ expression.’ Pannatti means what the mind both con* 
ceives and renders articulate. Cf. Compendium, p. 264, etc.—Ed.
This and following couplets are from Digha iii. 212/■; Anguitara i. 
83 f.—Ed. iii. 93.
     

--- PAGE 218 ---

500 The Summary
On the name-giving day of a baby-boy, the relatives stand 
round and, having done honour to those worthy of gifts, 
agree to give the name, saying, * His name is so-and-so ’:— 
this is ‘ name given by acclamation.’ A former concept 
tallies with a later concept, a former current term with a 
later one, e.g., the moon in a previous cycle is [what we 
now call] moon; and there were the sun, ocean, earth, moun­
tains in the past;—this is the ‘ name spontaneously arisen.’ 
This fourfold kind of name is only the one term ‘ name.’ 
‘ Denomination ’ is name made. ‘ Name-assigning ’ is name 
established. ‘ Interpretation ’ is name - making. ‘ Dis­
tinctive mark ’ is name showing the meaning, said because 
this name signifies or indicates meaning. ‘ Signification ’*• 
is significant of name.
‘ All states are processes of equivalent nomenclature ’ 
means there is no state which is not such a process. Ope 
state fits in with all states and all states coincide with one 
state. How so ? The concept as ‘ name ’ is that one state 
which fits in with all states in any of the four planes. There 
is no being, nor thing that may not be called by a name. The 
trees also in the forest, the mountains, etc., are the business 
of the country folk. For they, on being asked, ‘ What tree 
is this ?’ say the name they know, as ‘ Qutch,’ ‘ Butea.’ 
Even of the tree the name of which they know not, they say, 
‘ It is the nameless tree.’ And that also stands as the estab­
lished name of that tree.^ And the same with fishes, tor­
toises, etc., in the ocean. The other two couplets are of the 
same meaning as this.
B [392] In the couplet of ‘ name-and-form ’ {i.e., of mind*- 
matter),® ‘name’ (mind) has the sense™of name-making, of 
bending (namana), of causing to bend (namana). Four of the 
aggregates are ‘ name ’ in the sense of name-maldng.^ For
* Abliilapo. B.P.E.: ‘ discourse.’
See B.P.E., p. 341, end of n. 2.
® Dhs. § 1309. Nama-rupam. Cf. Compendium, pp. 192/., 271 /.; 
Bud. Psyclidogy, p. 23. Also Dialogues of the Buddha, i. 86; § 83:— 
‘ bends down. ’ there is abhinin-nameti.
* Rupa (lit. shape, form) is so called because it reveals itself. But 
nama being subtle has to depend on a ‘ name ’ to make itself known; 
hence ‘ making a name.’—Tikd.
     

--- PAGE 219 ---

501Suttanta Couplets 
whereas, from being named by the people, the name of king 
Mahasammata was Mahasammata, and whereas parents 
by' acclamation make a name for their son, ‘ I^efc him be 
called Tissa, Phussa,’ and whereas the name comes in virtue of 
a quahty as Preacher, Viuaya-student, such names as ‘ feeling ’ 
come quite otherwise. Feeling and the other [elements 
of consciousness], like the great earth and other elements, 
make their own name as they arise. MTien they arise their 
name also arises. For no one, when' feeling arises, says; 
‘ Be thou called feeling ’; there is no fimction of name-taking. 
As when the earth appears there is no function of name­
taking:—‘ Be thou called Earth;’ and similarly wth the 
world-systems, with Mt. Meru, the moon, sun, stars,—the name 
is just as it arises, answering to the spontaneously arising 
concept. So, when it arises the name ‘ feeling ’ just arises, 
answering to the spontaneously arising concept. The same 
is true for perceptions and the rest [of mind]. For feeling, 
whether it be in the past, future, or present, is [after all and 
always] just feeling. And so, is perception, so are mental 
activities, so is consciousness. But Nibbana, though it be 
for all time, is always Nibbana/ \ Such is ‘ name ’ in the sense 
of name-making. 'The four aggregates are ‘ name ’ in the 
sense of bending, for they bend toward the object [of thought]. 
In the sense of causing to bend, all [of the foregoing] are 
‘ name.’ For the four aggregates cause one another to bend 
On to the object; and Nibbana bends faultless states .on to itself 
by means of the causal relation of the dominant influence of 
object.
‘ Ignorance and craving for existence ’* have been taken 
to show the growth of the roots of the round of rebirths.
‘ Both the self and world will be —taking the five aggregates 
as the self and the world, there is the ‘Eternalistic view,’^ 
which is laid to heart in the manner of holding that the self 
and the world will reappear. Secondly, the ‘ Annihilationistic 
view is laid to heart in this way, that the self and the world
1 Dhs. §§ 1311-12. 2 Dhs. § 1313.
* Lit. ‘will become.’ * Dhs. § 1310.
     

--- PAGE 220 ---

502 J’/ie Summary
will pot reappear. [393] ‘ Referring to the ultimate past,’^ 
—eighteen such views which come in the Bralimajdla Suttanla^ 
with reference to the past are taken. ‘ Referring to the here­
after ’:—forty-four such views which come in the same 
Suttanta with reference to the future are taken.
In the exposition of ‘ contumacy,’® the phrase ‘ when that 
which is in accordance with the Law has been said ’ means 
that that precept which has been ordained by the Blessed One 
is said to be in accordance with the Law, showing the basis; 
and placing the offence thus, ‘ Thou hast committed this 
offence. Come, show it, rise from it and make amends.’ 
‘ The being surly,’ etc., refers to the work of an obstinate 
person, owing to his retaliation in speech, his want of sub­
missiveness when he is urged. ‘ Fractiousness ’ is the abstract 
form. The other term is just an equivalent. ‘ Contrariness ’ 
is taking the opposite side. A ‘ captious ’ person is one who 
finds it pleasant to take the opposite side. It is an equivalent 
for one who gets pleasure in the thought, ‘ 1 have taken the 
opposite view and as with a cross-bolt have made him 
speechless with a single word !’ ‘ Captiousness ’ is the state
of such an one. ‘ Want of regard ’ is the state of one who does 
not accept advice. ‘ Want of consideration ’ is an equivalent. 
‘ Truculence ’ is a mode of this rejection [of advice]. ‘ Want 
of reverence ’ is a state of disrespect arisen in a habitual 
negation of paying respect where it is owed. ‘ Want of 
deference ’ is a state of habitual negation of showing deference 
to the seniors with whom one hves. ‘ This is called,’ i.e., such 
[an attitude] is called ‘ contumacy ’. . . . Actually what is 
so called is the four aggregates proceeding in this way as the 
[fifth, the] aggregate of activities. -
The answer on ‘ evil friendship,’ etc.,^ is to be taken by the 
same method, for ‘ contumacy,’ ‘ evil friendship,’ and the rest 
are not separate states. [394] ‘ Unbelievers ’ are they that 
have no faith, i.e., no bases of belief such as the Buddha, etc. 
‘ Immoral really means ‘ without morals,’ for morality
* Dhs. § 1319.
* Dhs. § 1325.
* Dus-sild, lit. having bad morality.
Dialogues of the Buddha, i. 27 f; 46/.
* Dhs..^ 1326.
     

--- PAGE 221 ---

503Suttanta Couplets
cannot be bad. ‘ Uneducated ’ means deprived of learning. 
‘ Mean-spirited ’ refers to those who have the five kinds of 
selfishness. ‘ Witless ’ means without inteUigence. ‘ To re­
sort to ’ is to follow after. ‘ To consort with ’ is to follow 
vigorously. ‘ To be taken up with ’ is to follow in every 
respect, the term having been intensified by prefixes. The 
three terms signify just ‘ following.’ ‘ To be devoted to ’ is 
to draw near to, wdth its variant forms:—‘ to be engrossed with ’ 
(with, in Pali, its intensifying prefix), ‘ fondness for,’ ‘ enthu­
siasm for ’ (also intensified, in Pali, by a prefix). ‘ To be 
entangled with ’ is to be well twisted up with such persons 
in body and mind. Inclining to them, bent over to them, 
hanging on them is the meaning.
The exposition of the couplet of gentleness^ should be under­
stood in a sense opposed to the foregoing.
0, ‘The five groups of offences’^:—iu the exposition of 
the Patimolddia Table of Contents these five offences are 
Parajika, Sanghadisesa, Pacittiya, Patidesaniya, Dukkata. 
‘ The seven groups of offences also,’ in the Vinaya-exposition, 
are Parajika, Sanghadisesa, Thullaccaya, Pacittiya, Pati­
desaniya, Dukkata, Dubbhasita. In these five and seven 
offences, a knowledge of their limits with their bases or causes 
is called ‘ skill iu offences.’ Knowledge of the limits of 
emerging from offences, together with the ecclesiastical vote, 
is ‘ skill in restoration from offences.’® ‘ Attainment ’ is 
because of fitness to attain. Skill in attainment^ is insight 
into the stages of ecstasy together with the preamble. The 
existence of insight as to emerging at a fixed time without 
fail [from Jhana] thus, ‘ I will rise when the moon, sun, or 
a star reaches such a position ’ is called ‘ skill in emerging from 
attainment in Jhana.’®
[395] Discriminating knowledge in acquiring, attending to, 
hearing, remembering the eighteen elements is ‘ proficiency 
in the elements.’® Discriminating knowledge in acquiring, 
attending to them is ‘ proficiency in attention.’^ Discrimi-
? Dhs- § 1329; Vin. Texts, i. 1 J.
4 Dlis. § 1331- ' Dlis. § 1332.
7 Dhs. § 1334-
     

--- PAGE 222 ---

504 The. Summary
nating knowledge in acquiring, attending to, hearing, remem­
bering the twelve sense-organs is ‘ skill in sense-organs.’* 
And in these three proficiencies all is proper:—acquiring, 
attention, hearing, contemplation, penetration, reflection. 
The hearing, acquiring, and reflection are worldly; penetration 
is transcendental; contemplation and attention are mi.xed.
‘ From ignorance arises kamma,’ etc.,^ will be plain in the 
Paticcasamuppada Vibhanga.^ But the knowledge which 
knows that, on account of this ignorance as cause, there arises 
this kamma as effect, is ‘ skiU in the Causal Genesis.’ In the 
exposition of ‘ skfll in affirming, in negating causal conjunc­
ture,’'* condition and cause are synonyms of each other. 
The sentient eye making visible matter the object is the 
condition and also the cause of the arising visual cognition. 
The sentient ear and the rest are hkewise the condition and 
cause of auditory and other cognition, as mango seeds, e.g., 
are the condition and cause of mango fruit.
In the second method (the negating of causal conjuncture) 
the words ‘ whatever® states ’ indicate causal states that do 
not fit. The words ‘ of whatever ’® indicate resultant states 
that do not fit. ‘ Not condition, not cause,’ i.e., the sentient 
eye, when a sound is made the object of thought, is not the 
condition, is not the cause of the arising auditory cognition. 
Likewise the sentient ear, etc., are not condition, not cause of 
the remaining cognitions, just as the mango is not the condition, 
not the cause of the production of the palmyra.
In the exposition of ‘upright,’ ‘soft,’’ only the expression 
lowliness of heart ’ is distinctive. Its meaning is: by the 
absence of conceit this person’s heart is lowly; the state of 
such a person is ‘ lowliness of heart.’ The rest has come in 
the word-classification under ‘ rectitude of thought ’® and of 
plasticity of thought.®
In the exposition of patience,® ‘ patience ’ is enduring.
* Dhs. § 1335.
Lil. sankhara. Dhs. § 1336. Cf. Compendium, p. 188, n. 2.
* Vibhanga, p. 135/. 4 Dlis. §§ 1337-38.
* B.P.E.: ‘ certain.’ s Eks. §§ 1339-40.
’ Dhs. § 51. « Dhs. § 45. ’ Dhs. § 1341.
     

--- PAGE 223 ---

505Suitanta Couplets
The mode of being patient is ‘ long-suffering.’ By this state 
they suffer without retaliating. ‘ Complianee ’ is to persist 
without repulsing or opposing. [396] ‘ Absence pf rudeness ’ 
is the state of one who is not rude. ‘ Absence of abruptness,’ 
i.e., from being badly placed or uttered, an ill-spoken word is 
abrupt. By being opposed to it a good word is not abrupt. 
Herein the reason has been shown by a figure of speech. 
‘ Complacency of heart,’ that is, the mentality itself of the 
heart as joyous; just the state of one’s own mind. The state 
of not being charged Avith ill-will is the meaning.^
In the exposition of temperance, ‘ that which is absence 
of excess in deed’ is the threefold bodily good conduct; ‘that 
which is absence of excess in word ’ is the fourfold good conduct 
in speech. By the expression, ‘ in deed and word,’ virtue, 
produced (in these seven ways) at the body-door and the 
speech-door and, Avith livelihood as the eighth, is comprised. 
‘ This is called temperance ’ means that this virtue is called 
temperance from well avoiding evil. Besides, aU moral 
self-restraint ’ means: because not only in deed and word, 
but also in thought evil conduct is practised, therefore it is 
said to show inclusion of virtue in thought.
In the expositibn of amity,® ‘ insolent ’ means, as bosses 
protrude in a decaying or imhealthy tree, so, owing to 
faultiness, ‘ knobs ’ are produced from words of abusing and 
slandering, etc. ‘ Scabrous’ means putrid, like a putrid tree. 
As a putrid tree is scabrous and has trickling, powdery tissue, 
so such speech is scabrous and enters as though piercing the 
ear. ‘ Harsh to others ’ means bitter t? the ears of others, 
not pleasant to their hearts and productive of hate. ‘ Vitu­
perative to others ’ means, as a branch with barbed thorns 
sticks by penetrating into leather, so it sticks to others and 
clings on, hindering those who want to go. ‘Bordering on 
anger ’ means near to anger. ‘ Not conducive to concentra-
* Attamanata. Atta here (cf. Sk. atta) is not ‘ self,’ ‘ own,’ but 
• taken up,’ ‘ uplifted ’; hence the word is literally * exalted-mindedness.’ 
Cf. Dictionary, Pali Text Soc., s.v. Atta, art. 1, But Buddhaghosa’s 
age had lost sight of this first syllable.—Ed.
* Dhs. § 1342. , 3 Dhs. § 1343.
     

--- PAGE 224 ---

506 T/te Summary
tion ’ means all the.se terms not conducive to ecstasy or access 
are synonyms of the words ‘ with hate.’ ‘ By putting away 
such speech,’—this has been said to show that when a man 
persists in not extirpating harsh speech, [397] even his gentle 
words, albeit they occur at intervals, are reckoned harsh. 
Next, hate is noxious (dam)-, amiable speech is innocuous 
(ndd). ‘ Faultless ’ is the meaning, as in the passage,
‘ Faidtless in frame, white-canopied.'^
‘ Pleasant- to the ear,’ that is, from sweetness of diction 
it is pleasant to the ear; it does not produce pain to the ear, 
like the piercing of a needle. And from the sweetness of sense 
and meaning not producing ill-temper in the body, it produces 
affection, And so is called ‘ affectionate.’ That speech which 
appeals to the heart, which enters the mind easily without 
striking, we say ‘goes to the heart.’ ‘Urbane’ speech isf] 
so called because it is full (purna, pori) of good qualities, and 
because it is refined hke well-bred persons, and because it is 
of the town (pura, urban). It means talk of citizens. For 
these use appropriate speech and address fatherly men as 
fathers, and brotherly men as brothers. ‘ Of much-folk- 
sweetness ’ means sweet to many people: ‘ Of much-folk- 
pleasantness ’ means pleasant to many people and making 
for the ^owth of mind. ‘ The speech which there,’ that is, 
in that person, ‘ is gentle,’ i.e., polished, ‘ friendly,’ that is, 
soft, ‘ smooth,’ that is, not harsh.
In the exposition of courtesy,^ ‘ carnaP courtesy ’ is the 
closing, covering up, by means of bodily needs, the gap which 
might exist between oneself and others owing to those needs 
not getting satisfied. ‘ Spiritual courtesy ’ is the closing, 
covering up, by means of the Doctrine, the gap which might 
exist between oneself and others owing to those needs not 
getting satisfied. ‘ He is courteous,’ that is, he closes these 
two gaps in the world; shows courtesy by the twofold courtesy. 
To be courteous is to leave no [such] interval. The following
’ Uddna yii. 5. Dhs. I 134:4.
* Amisena. Cf. the Christian: ‘ minister to them in carnal things.' 
(Rom. XV. 27).
     

--- PAGE 225 ---

507Suttanta Couplets
discourse explains from the beginning;—‘ A courteous 
bhikkhu, on seeing a guest arrive, should meet him [398] and 
take his bowl and robe, offer him a seat, fan him, with palmyra 
leaf, wash bis feet, rub him ndth oil; if there be butter and 
syrup he should give him medicine, offer him water, scour 
the monastery—thus in one part is carnal courtesy shown. 
Moreover, at eventide—if there be no junior come to pay his 
respects—the bhikkhu should go to the presence of his guest, 
sit there and, without asking him irrelevant things, question 
him on relevant things. He should not ask ‘ "What texts do 
you recite V but should ask ‘ What scriptural text do your 
teacher and spiritual adviser use ?’ and should question him 
on points within his capacities. Should the guest be able to 
answer, well and good; if not, he himself should give the 
reply. Thus in one part is spiritual courtesy shown. If the 
guest stays with him, he should always take him when going 
his rounds for alms; should he desire to depart, the next day 
the bhikkhu should take him to a spot which is a favourable 
point of departure, and having gone about in one village 
for alms should send him off. But if on the other hand the 
bhikkhus have been invited, he should go taking the guest, 
if willing, with him. If he desires not to go, saying such a 
place is not suitable for him, the bhikkhu should send the rest 
of the bhikkhus, and with him go for alms; and should give 
him the carnal things he himself has obtained:—thus is 
carnal courtesy shown. To whom should the bhikkhu 
courteous in carnal needs give what he has gained for himself ? 
So far, to the guest. If there be one sick, or one who has not 
observed Lent, to him also he should give; and also to his 
teachers and spiritual advisers, also to one who holds his 
belongings, such as the robe. And the bhikkhu who is ful­
filling the precepts should give, beginning from the Elder’s 
seat, his carnal gains every time they are brought, even for 
a hundred or thousand .times. But the courteous bhikkhu 
should give to him, who has not obtained^ his carnal needs.
1 Reading aladdham. With the foregoing cf. Vin. Texts iii. 272 /■, 
esp. p. 281 /.
     

--- PAGE 226 ---

508 The Summary
On going outside a village and seeing an old or helpless bhikkhu 
or bhikkhuni he should also give to such an one.
Hereon there is this .story; It is said that, just when the 
village of Guttasala had been destroyed by bandits, a woman 
Arahant, emerging from trance and, making a young bhik­
khuni carry her baggage, was going along the road together 
with the people. AATien at noon they reached the village-gate 
of Nakulanagara [399] .she sat down at the foot of a tree. 
Just then the Elder, Mahanaga, of Kalavallimandapa, after 
going about Nakulanagara village for alms, as he was coming 
out, saw the sister and offered her a meal. She answered, 
‘ I have no bowl.’ He said, ‘ Use this,’ and gave the food with 
his bowl. She having partaken of the meal, washed the bowl 
and gave it to the Elder, saying, ‘ To-day, dear Sir, you will 
be tired with begging for alms. But from to-day there wll be 
no fatigue to you on account of alms-begging.’ And thence­
forward never was there to the Elder aivalms worth less than 
a kahapana. This is carnal courtesy. Showing this courtesy]" 
the bhikkhu, with a view to giving help, should speak on the 
stations of rehgious exercise to that bhikkhu, cause the text 
to be recited, dispel worry, perform his present duties, give 
the abbhana, vuUhdna, mdnaita, parivdsd,^ ordain him who is 
worthy of ordination, give the full ordination to a worthy one. 
And it is fit to get a resolution of the Order^ to a sister also, 
should she desire ordination of him. This is spiritual courtesy. 
The bhikkhu courteous in these two ways gains that which he 
had not, establishes that which has arisen, and guards his own 
life on any perilous occasion, hke the Elder who, taking the bowl 
which he got from king Coranaga® by the rim, scattered the 
food by [shaking] the bowl. But in gaining that which he 
had not, the story of king Mahanaga^ should be told. He, 
travelhng from Ceylon to the Indian shore, obtaining favour 
from the presence of one Elder and coming back, was estab-
* For these different kinds of probation and penance, see Vinaya 
Texts ii. 397 ff.—Ed.
* Kaminavaca 3 Jilahdvamsa xxxiv. 11.
* Ib. xxxiii. 45. But neither story is given. In the former 
presumably there was poison in the bowl.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 227 ---

509Suttanta Couplets
lished in the kingdom and made a great gift of medicine in 
Setambahgana as long as he lived. In the matter of estab­
lishing what has arisen, the story of thieves,who did not 
plunder the sacred property in Mount Cetiya because of the 
courtesy they were shown at the hands of Dighabhanaka 
Abhaj’a the Elder should be told.
n\ ’ In the exposition of ‘ ha^dng the doors of the controlling 
faculties unguarded,’^ the phrase ‘ sees an object with the eye ’ 
means, he sees visible matter by visual cognition which has 
got the name of eye by way of the cause and is able to see 
matter. [400] But the Ancients say:—Eye does not see 
matter. And why ? Because it is not consciousness. Con­
sciousness cannot ^ee matter, and why ? Because it is not 
eye. But by the impact of object with door, one sees by con­
sciousness with the sentient organism as the physical basis. 
And such discourse is said to be supported by its components, 
as in the phrase ‘ he pierces by a bow,’ etc. Hence ‘ seeing 
matter by visual cognition ’ is the meaning.
‘ Grasps the general appearance,’ i.e., grasps by way of 
lusting desire a sign such as is of the male, or female, pleasant, 
etc., and which is the basis of corruption. The stand is taken 
not merely on what is seen.
‘ Grasps the details,’ i.e., takes the various modes of hands 
and feet, of smihng, laughing, speaking, looking straight ahead, 
looking askance, which have earned the name of ‘ details ’ 
from the manifesting, the revealing of the lower nature.
In ‘ that which might give occasion,’ for whatever reason, 
from whatever conditions of not restraining the controlling 
faculty of sight, it being not shut by the door-leaf of mind­
fulness, ‘ those states,’ such as covetousness, always ‘ follow,’ 
i.e., chase, overwhelm the person ‘ who lives ’ with the ‘ con­
trolling faculty of sight unguarded.’
‘ He does not set himself to restrain that,’ i.e., does not 
practise in order to shut the controlling faculty of sight with 
the door-leaf of mindfulness. And such a person is said ‘ not 
to keep watch over his controlling-faculty of sight. ’
     

--- PAGE 228 ---

510 The Summary
Now ^in the controlling faculty itself, there is neither 
restraint nor non-restraint, for neither mindfulness nor lapse 
of it depends on the sentient eye. Moreover, when the visible 
object reaches the avenue of sight, then, after two pulsations 
of the subconscious continuum, consciousness adverting to 
the five doors functions and ceases, after which visual cog­
nition functions and ceases. After this receptive conscious­
ness arises effecting the function of receiving and ceases. 
[401] After this examining consciousness arises accomplishing 
the function of examination and ceases. After this mind-door­
adverting consciousness arises accomplishing the function of 
determination and ceases. Immediately after this appercep­
tion takes place. Herein during subconscious life-continuum 
there is neither restraint nor non-restraint. At one time or 
another of the advertings there is neither restraint nor non- 
restraint. But at the moment of apperception there arises 
either wickedness, forgetfulness, lack of knowledge, of patience 
or idleness, and there is non-restraint. Nevertheless such non- 
restaraint is called that of the controlling faculty of sight. 
And why ? Because at that apperceptional moment in the 
existence of non-restraint, the door also is unguarded, the 
subconscious continuum also is unguarded, and so also are 
the thought-processes, such' as adverting. As, when the four 
gates of a city are not closed, though the doors of houses, 
arches, chambers within are well closed, all treasme in the 
interior of the city is unprotected, unguarded—for thieves 
entering by the city-gate may do as they please—so when 
wickedness and so on arise at apperception when there is non- 
restraint, the door at the apperceptional moment is unguarded, 
so also is the subconscious continuum, and so-are the thought­
processes such as adverting.
And the same is true with ‘ he hears a sound with the ear,’ etc.
‘ That which is of these,’ i.e., that non-guarding, non-protect­
ing, non-watching, non-restraint, non-shutting, non-closing of 
these six controlling faculties of one not having restraint, i-s 
the meaning.
llH exposition of immoderation in diet? ‘ someone
1 Dhs. § 1346.
     

--- PAGE 229 ---

511Suttanta CoicpUts
here’ means someone in this world of beings; ‘through 
carelessness,’ i.e., not knowing, not considering by means of 
reflecting knowledge; ‘ unwisely,’ i.e., without reason; ‘ food,’ 
i.e., e. thing to be swallowed, such as eatables, etc. ‘ Takes,’ 
i.e., eats, swallows. ‘For sport,’etc.:—this has been said 
to show the absence of method, for he who eats without 
method takes food for sport, intoxication, personal decoration, 
beautification.. For the sake of escape from the round of 
births by food he does not eat.
‘ That which is his insatiableness,’ etc., i.e., the discontent, 
the dissatisfaction there is in this unwise eating of food. 
[402] ‘ Immoderation ’ is a state of being immoderate, not 
knowing the limit called measure. ‘ This is called,’ i.e., tint 
practice which arises by way of eating without consideration 
is called ‘ immoderation in food.’
In the exposition of ‘ having the doors of the controlling 
faculties guarded ‘ with the eye ’ is to be understood by 
the above-said method. ‘ Does not grasp the general appear­
ance,’ i.e., does not seize by way of lusting desire the sign as 
described above. So also should the remaining terms be 
understood by opposition to the said method. And as has 
been said above—•' but at the moment of apperception there 
arises either wickedness ... so are the thought-processes such 
as adverting,’2 so here also it is said (substituting virtue, etc., 
Jor wickedness, etc., and the positive Jor the negative).
And the same in ‘ he hears a sound with the ear,’ etc.
I» In the exposition of moderation in diet,® ‘ takes food with 
reflection and judgment ’ means eats food with consideration, 
knowingly, by means of reflecting knowledge.
Now to show that consideration or reason, ‘ not for sport,’ 
etc., has been said. Herein ‘ not for sport’ means that he 
eats not for sport. Of such people, actors, acrobats, etc., are^ 
said to eat for sport. Indeed they search for and eat un­
righteously and unjustly whatever food is favourable to such 
sport as dancing, singing, composing songs, eulogizing. But 
the bhikkhu does not eat so. [403] ‘ Not for intoxication ’
1 Dhs. § 1347. See p. 610.
     

--- PAGE 230 ---

512 The Summary
means that he eats not to swell his pride and manhood. Of 
such people, kings and kings’ ministers are known to eat for 
intoxication. Indeed these eat lumps of tasty food or excellent 
food to swell their pride and manhood. But the bhikkhu 
does not eat so. ‘ Not for personal charm ’ means he eats 
not for bodily decoration. Of such people, women such as are 
courtezans, who live by physical beauty, and court ladies 
drink ghee and molasses and eat smooth, soft, sweet food:— 
‘ thus our finger-joints will be well shaped and our bodily 
complexion clear,’—so they eat. But not so the bhikkhu. 
‘Not for beautifying’ means that he eats not for growth of 
flesh in the body. Of such people, wrestlers and boxers, etc.,’ 
make the body stout by exceedingly smooth fish, meat, etc.: 
‘ thus our flesh will be filled out, adequate to bear blows,’— 
so they eat. But not so the bhikkhu.
‘ So as to sufiflce ’ signifies the limit of the result of taking 
food. ‘ For the sustenance of this body ’ means he eats to 
keep this sentient body^ going, dependent as it is on the four 
great essentials. This is the motive of the bhikkhu in eating 
food, is the meaning. ‘ For the preservation of ’ means he 
eats for the preservation of the life-controlling faculty. In 
‘ for allaying the pangs of hunger,’ from not having eaten, 
the hunger which arises is called ‘ pang.’ He eats for the 
allaying, the calming of that. In ‘ for aiding the practice 
of the higher life,’ ‘ the higher hfe ’ comprises the three 
precepts and all instructions. He eats for the purpose of the 
glorifying or upholding of that. ‘ Thus ’ signifies or indicates 
the reason. ‘ For this reason ’ is the meaning.
In ‘ I shall subdue the old feeling,’ the arisen feehng due to 
not eating is called the ‘ old feehng.’ He.eats so that he will 
expel such feeling. In ‘ I shall cause no new feehng to arise,’ 
the feehng arising from over-eating is called ‘ the new feeling.’ 
He eats so that he wiU not produce it. Or, the feehng arising 
from having eaten is called the new feehng. [404] He eats 
so that he will not produce it.
Karajakaya. See p. 485, n. 1.
2 I.e., learning, attainment, penetration.
     

--- PAGE 231 ---

513Suttanta Couplets
‘ And maintenance shall be mine,’ i.e., there will be pre­
servation. In ‘ faultlessness also and comfort,’ there is faulty 
ekting and there is faultless eating; wherein, all that is 
unrighteous seeking, unrighteous accepting, unrighteous enjoy­
ing is known as faulty; but seeking righteously, accepting 
righteously, eating with reflections;—all this is known as 
faultless. Someone makes himself faulty in the partaking 
of a faultless thing, saying; ‘I have obtained it,’ he eats to 
excess, and being unable to digest it suffers from vomiting 
and purging, so that the bhikkhus in the whole monastery 
fall to exerting themselves in succouring bis body and in 
seeking medicine. AVhen asked, ‘ AVhat is the matter V they 
reply, ‘ It i.s the swollen stomach of so-and-so,’ etc., and they 
blame aud censure him:—‘ This bhikkhu is of this nature at all 
times; he knows not the capacity of his stomach; he commits 
a fault where there should be no fault.’ Without doing such 
things, [the good man] eats so that there will be nd fault.
As to the term ‘ comfort,’ there is comfort and there is 
discomfort. , The eating of these five brahmins produces 
discomfort, namely, of the ‘ bfted-by-hand-er,’ the ‘ enough- 
for-the-loincloth-er,’ the ‘ there-gyrator,’ the ‘ crowpecked 
one,’ the ‘ meal-vomiter.’ Of these, the first eating much 
cannot rise by himself, and says, ‘ Take my band ’; the second 
has his stomach so swollen that even standing he cannot wrap 
his loincloth; the third rolls about where he ate unable to rise; 
the fourth stuffs his mouth so fuU that crows can peck at it; 
the fifth can no more fill his mouth, but vomits then and there. 
When all this is not done [the good man] takes food so that 
there will be comfort. Comfort is to have a relaxed stomach 
after four or five mouthfuls. For when so much only is eaten 
and water drunk, the four postures may go on with ease. 
Hence the GeneraUssimo of the Dhamma said:—■
[405] Hath he but eaten mouthftds four or five, 
Let him drink water—tiere is sure enough 
Refreshmentfor a bhikkhu filled ivilh seal.^
II.
• Psalms of the Brethren, ver. 983.
15
     

--- PAGE 232 ---

514 The. Summary
Now in this place the items should be collected, for each 
of these is one:—‘ not for sport,’ ‘ not for intoxication,’ ‘ not 
for personal charm,’ ‘ not for beautifying,’ ‘ so as to sufBce 
for the sustenance and preservation of this body,’ ‘ for the 
allaying of the pangs of hunger and aiding the practice of the 
holy life,’ ‘ I shall subdue the old feeling and cause no new 
feeling to arise,’ ‘ and maintenance shall be mine.’ ‘ Fault-: 
lessness also and comfort ’—herein is the advantage of taking 
food. But Mahasiva the Elder says: ‘ The first four items are 
called Rejection, and next them' the other eight items should 
be grouped.’ Here each of these is one;—‘ so as to suffice 
for the sustenance of this body,’ ‘ for its preservation,’ ‘ for 
the allaying of the pangs of hunger,’ ‘ for aiding the practice 
of the holy life,’ ‘ I shall subdue the old feeling,’ ‘ I shall cause 
no new feeling to arise,’ ‘ and maintenance shall be mine,’ 
‘ faultlessness also.’ And ‘ comfortable living ’ is the advan­
tage given by taking food. Thus he whose eating is charac-' 
terized by the eight items is called knower of measure in food. 
‘ This is called,’ i.e., the partaking of food with reflection 
arising as the knowing what is fit, and measure in search, 
acceptance, and enjoyment is called ‘ moderation in diet.'
In the exposition of forgetfulness,^ ‘ unmindfulness ’ is the 
four [mental] aggregates as devoid of mindfulness. ‘ Lapse 
of memory, non-recollection ’:—these have been enhanced 
by means of the prefixes. ‘ Non-remembrance ’ is the 
[mental] mode of not remembering; ‘ not bearing in mind ’ 
is inability to bear in mind; for the person endowed therewith 
has not arrived at noting well, is not fit to commit to memory. 
‘ Superficiality ’ means floating in the object like gourd-skins 
in water. ‘ Obhvion ’ is ruined, muddled memory. Indeed, 
the person endowed therewith is hke a crow [gazing with eyes 
fixed] on food, a jackal intent on flesh.
In the exposition of ‘ culture-strength,’^ ‘ of moral states ’ 
[106] refers to the (thirty-seven) factors of wisdom. * Pur­
suing ’ means initial pursuit. ‘ Cultivating ’ means growth 
or development. ‘ Multiplying ’ means repeated action.
2 Anu-ssati, pati-ssati.
     

--- PAGE 233 ---

515Suitanta Couplets
The exposition of moral failure^ should be understood as 
opposed to that of temperance. The exposition of theoretic 
fallacy^ should be understood as opposed to that of progress 
in theories® (opinions or views), and this should be under­
stood as opposed to that of grasping after theories.
Though the exposition of purity in morals® is the same as 
that of progress in morals, yet in the latter the morality of 
Patimokkha restraint leading to purity has been mentioned. 
Here, in the former, morality or \Trtue arrived at purity 
has been mentioned. And by these six couplets of mindful­
ness aud comprehension, the strengths of reflection and of 
culture, calm and insight, mark of calm and of support, 
support and non-distraction, moral progress and progress in 
theory,® worldly and transcendental states of the four planes 
have been mentioned.
UtS In the exposition of purity in theory’ ‘ knowledge of the 
specific nature of kamma ’ means the knowledge that this 
moral kamma is one’s own, that immoral kamma is not one’s 
own. Of these, all immoral kamma, whether done by oneself 
or another, is not one’s own; and why ? Because of its 
destroying good and producing disadvantage. But moral 
kamma, because it destroys disadvantage and produces 
advantage, is called one’s own. Herein, just as a man of 
means and money, when on a long journey festivals are pro­
claimed in village or township, does not think; ‘ I am a visitor,; 
by whose help can I enjoy the festival?’ but'enjoys himself 
just as he pleases, and comes through any difficulty with ease, 
so these beings, relying on the knowledge as to their own 
kamma, put forth much action conducive to rebirth, enjoy 
happiness through happiness,® and attain Arahantship in 
countless numbers.
[107] ‘ Knowledge in due order of the Truths ”* is the know-
1 Dhs. § 1361. a Dhs. § 1382. » Dhs. § 1364. * JJ/t.s. § 1215.
6 Dhs. § 1365. • Dhs. §§ 1351-60, 1363-64. ’ § 1366.
* Sukhena sukham. Cf. Pss. of the Brethren, ver. 220: This happi­
ness by happy leays is won, as different from the ascetic theory, ver. 63; 
Majjliima i. 93 ‘ happiness is got through suffering.’—Ed.
» Dhs. § 1366.
     

--- PAGE 234 ---

516 7’Ae Summary
ledge of insight into that order. ‘ Knowledge of him who 
holds the Path ’ is insight into the Path and Fruition.
In the exposition of the expression ‘ now purity in theory ’ 
by the terras ‘ that science,’ etc., the four insights above, 
such as knowledge that karama is one’s own, have been 
classified. In the exposition of the expression ‘ and as the 
effort of him who holds certain views,’ the energy signified 
by the expression ‘ that inception of mental energy,’ etc., 
is similar in course to understanding. And understanding 
should be understood as worldly on worldly occasions and as 
transcendental on transcendental occasions.
5 In the exposition of the couplet of agitation, ‘ dread of 
birth ’ is the knowledge established by seeing birth as perilous. 
And the same in ‘ dread of old age and death,’ etc. Seeing 
birth, decay, sickness, and death as perilous by means of the 
phrase, ‘ of bad (states) not yet arisen,’ describes the reasonable 
effort of one desirous of escaping from birth, etc. And the 
meaning of the word-analysis will be plain in the Commentary 
on the VibhatKja.^
In the exposition of ‘ And discontent in moral states,’^ 
‘ further longing ’ is longing for special excellence. Some­
one in this world gives first a meal for a- party, a meal by 
tickets, requisites for the Sabbath and for select individuals. 
Not satisfied with this, he again gives the ‘ principal meal,’® a 
meal by tickets, a meal for the clergy, robes for Lent, builds 
a monastery, offers the four requisites. Not satisfied there­
with, he takes the refuges, observes the five precepts, etc. 
Dissatisfied therewith, he becomes a monk and acquires one 
Nikaya, two Nikayas, the three Pitakas, the Buddha’s Word,”* 
develops the eight attainments, increas_es insight, acquires 
Arahantship. When Arahantship is won then comes the 
Great Content. Thus ‘ further longing ’ is longing for special 
excellence up to Arahantship.
* Sammoha-Vinodani. The Pali Text Society is about to publish 
the text.—Ed.
* Dhs. § 1367
® Meal taken at a particular house by special invitation.—Tr.
* Cf. above, p. 32, where ‘ words ’ is lit.: ‘ word.’—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 235 ---

Suttanta Couplets 517
MO In the exposition of the expression, the phrase ‘ And the not 
shrinking back in the effort ’ means that one who is slack 
in cultivating the higher moral states in wayside monasteries 
is said to shrink, recede, step back from such effort; 
[408] therefore to show that method, ‘ that which is of moral 
states,’ etc., has been said. Herein ‘ thorough performance ’ 
is thorough work in doing moral deeds; ‘ persevering per­
formance ’ is incessant work; ‘unresting’ is work without 
break and without stopping; ‘absence of stagnation’ is ab­
sence of stagnated hfe or occurrence; ‘ unfaltering conation ’ 
is not laying down the will for good; ‘ unflinching endurance ’ 
is not laying down the burden in the work for good.
In ‘ reminiscent knowledge of one’s former living,’ ‘ former 
lives ’ are aggregates which have happened, and things 
[such as garments, village, carriage, etc.] belonging to the 
aggregates. ‘ Reminiscent of one’s former lives ’ is that 
which keeps remembering such former lives. The knowledge 
associated with such is ‘ reminiscent knowledge of one’s 
former lives.’ The knowledge which pierces the darkness 
covering the aggregates of past existences is vijjd^ (wisdom). 
Piercing that darkness it makes the past aggregates plain, 
manifest—hence m^ja is used in the sense of making plain.
‘ Knowledge of decease-rebirth ’ is knowledge both of 
decease and of rebirth. This also pierces the darkness cover­
ing the decease and reconception of beings and is vijja. 
Piercing that darkness it makes plain the decease and recon­
ception of beings—hence vijjd hete also is used in the sense of 
making plain.
‘ Knowledge in the loss of the Intoxicants (or Drugs) ’ is 
knowledge at the Ariyan Path-moment of the loss of all 
corruptions. This also pierces the darkness covering the 
Four Truths and is vijjd. Piercing that darkness it makes 
plain the Four Truths—hence vijjd here also is used in the 
sense of maldng plain.
IQm [409] In ‘ freedom of thought and Nibbana ’:—in the sense 
*of being set free on to the object, and of being well freed from
1 A word-play on vidy- (to know) and vijjhati, to pierce__ Ed.
     

--- PAGE 236 ---

518 The Summary
opposed states, the eight attainments are known as ‘ freedom 
of thought.’ Or Nibbana [is so-called] because it is gone away 
from that jungle {vdnam) called craving. In 
the eight attainments and Nibbana, the former are called 
‘ freedom ’ because they are free from the self-discarded lower 
nature; the latter is freedom because of the final release from 
the lower nature.
Jo ‘ Knowledge of him who holds the path ’ is the Fourfold 
Path-knowledge. ‘ Knowledge.of him who holds the Fruition ’ 
is the fourfold fruitional knowledge. Of them, the First 
Path-knowledge when it arises causes the loss, cessation, 
suppression, and tranquillization of the five corruption.®; 
hence it is known as ‘ knowledge as to loss.’ The Second 
when it arises causes the loss, etc., of the four corruptions; 
hence it is known as ‘ knowledge as to loss.’ And the Tlrird 
likewise. The Fourth when it arises causes the loss, etc,, 
of the eight corruptions; hence it is ‘ knowledge as to loss.’ 
And the fruitional knowledge of the various paths, arising 
at the end of the loss, cessation, suppression, tranquillization, 
non-production, and non-arising of the various corruptions, 
is known as ‘ knowledge of non-reproduction.’
End of the explanation of the Chapter of the Summary in the 
Expositor, the Commentary on the Compendium of States.
     

--- PAGE 237 ---

BOOK IV
DISCOURSE ON THE COMMENTARIAL CHAPTER
Now has arrived the turn of explaining the Cominentarial 
Chapter placed immediately after the chapter of the Summary. 
But why has this chapter come to be called Commentarial ? 
Because it is established by elucidating the meaning of the 
three Pitakas, the Buddha’s Word. ' For the special doctrine 
which does not come in the three Pitakas, being defined and 
determined by the Commentarial Chapter, becomes well 
determined. It behoves the Abhidhamma student who 
cannot note the method of procedure in the entire Abhidhamma 
Pitaka, the framing of queries, and the numerical series in 
the Great Book^ to compare or bring them together from the 
Commentarial Chapter only.
[410] Whence is its origin ? In Sariputta the Elder. For 
Sariputta spoke it and gave it to a pupil of his, who was 
unable to remember the elucidation in the chapter of the 
Summary. However, this account has been rejected in the 
Great \ Commentary, and the following account has been 
given:—What is known as Abhidhamma is not the province 
nor the sphere of a disciple; it is the province, the sphere of 
the Buddhas.' And the Generahssimo of the Dhamma, being 
questioned by a fellow-student, took him to the Teacher’s 
presence and told him. The Buddha uttered the Commentarial 
Chapter and gave it to that bhikkhu. How ? The Blessed 
One asked him, ‘ What states are moral ?’ That is to say 
which do you mark as moral states ? Then the student 
remaining silent, he said, ‘ Have not I, in the method, " Which 
states are moral ? "When a moral thought of the sensuous 
realm arises . . .,” shown moral consciousness as divided
‘ Patthdna.
519
     

--- PAGE 238 ---

520 Commentarial Chapter
into planes All that moral consciousness in the four 
planes he arranged point by point, group by group, cluster 
by cluster by that method; these are the moral states, etc., 
and gave it to him showing moral states, etc., by way of 
elucidation.
Herein ‘ in the four planes ’ means in the sensuous, material, 
immaterial realms and the unincluded. ‘ Moral ’:—i.e., such 
as the various kinds of contact, etc.—‘ these are the moral 
states,’ all these states, such as contact, etc., named in these 
planes are moral.
But owing to the absence of division qua plane of immorali­
ties, the Blessed One said, ‘ twelve states of immoral conscious­
ness wherein ‘ states ’ • means risings. And this word 
' consciousness ’ is the chief in the discourse. For, as when it 
is said, the king is come, the coming also of ministers, etc., 
is implied, so when ‘state of consciousness’ is said, states 
associated therewith also are implied. Hence it should be 
understood that in all places, consciousness together with the 
associated states has been taken by the expression ‘ state of 
consciousness. ’
The meaning of aU the following triplet and couplet classi­
fiable terms such as ‘ results in the four planes, ” and the non­
definition of pleasure, etc., in the feeling triplet, etc., should 
be tested by the meaning of the Text by the said method 
and understood. [411] But we shall speak only of what is 
distinctive.
• Among the triplets,^ first in that of the ‘ limited object,’* 
there are these twenty-five states of consciousness which have 
limited objects;—
(1-10) The phrase ‘ all is result of the sensuous realm ’ refers 
to the twice-five cognitions which arise in dependence on the 
five organs of [special] sense concerning the five varieties of 
sense-objects. They proceed only by natural law® and are 
divisible into the desired and the undesired.
(11, 12) Two mind-elements, the results of good and of bad
‘ Ms. § 1368. 2 Dhs. § 1369. 3 Dhs. S 1370.
‘ Dhs. §§ 1368-1423. fi Dhs. § 1400. « Niyamena, uiyamato.
     

--- PAGE 239 ---

521Commentarial Chapter 
conduct severally, arise in dependence on the heart-basis, 
concerning the five varieties of sense-objects. They proceed 
by natural law immediately after visual and other sense 
cognition.
(13) The element of mind-cognition, having no root-condi­
tions, being a result of good conduct and accompanied by joy, 
proceeds by way of examination in the fi.ve doors, and by way 
of registration, in the six doors. It arises by natural law 
concerning the six varieties of limited objects, namely, sights, 
sounds, etc.
(14,15) The two elements of mind-cognition having no root­
conditions, being the results of good and bad conduct severally, 
and accompanied by neutral feeling, arise by way of examina­
tion in the five doors and by way of registration in the six 
doors. They arise by natural law concerning the six varieties 
of limited objects of sense. Proceeding by way of rebirth 
they have as mental object limited kamma, kamma-symbol, 
or tendency-symbol;^ during life they proceed by way of the 
.subconscious continuum, and at its end by way of decease 
they have just this as mental object.
(16-23) Eight risings of consciousness, results and with 
root-conditions, arise by the aforesaid method concerning 
limited things only, by way of registration and by way of 
rebirth, subconscious continuum, and decease.
(24) Inoperative^ mind-element arises in the five doors 
concerning the five varieties of sense-objects.
(25) .Inoperative element of mind-cognition, accompanied 
l>y 3oy> and without-root-conditions arises in the six doors 
concerning such limited objects of sense as are present, and 
also in the mind-door concerning such as are past and future, 
making a mode of happiness for Arahants. Such are the 
twenty-five.
S The states of the spheres of infinite consciousness and of 
neither perception nor non-perception, because they arise 
by making as object an attainment higher than themselves,
* Cf. Compendium, p. 149/. (a, 5, g). 
’ See p. 385.
     

--- PAGE 240 ---

522 Commentarial Chapter
take ‘sublime objects.’^ [412] Path states and Fruition states, 
from having Nibbana as object, take an ‘ immeasurable 
object.’^ Eight states of consciousness dissociated from 
knowledge, four being moral, four inoperative, occurring to 
probationers, average persons, and Arahants, concerning such 
matters of sense-experience as careless^ giving, reflection, 
hearing of the Dhamma, take at the time of occurrence 
limited objects; at the time of considering the first Jhana, etc., 
when they are exceedingly fit for practice, they take sublime 
objects; at the time of considering the concepts such as the 
device-symbol, etc., they take an imdefinable object. Four 
states of consciousness associated with views as immoral 
take limited objects at the time when perverting [the truth] 
there is a being pleased with and delighted at the fifty-five 
states of sense-experience as implying a ‘ being ’ [or fixed 
entity]. In this way are they sublime in object at the time of 
occurrence by making the twenty-seven sublime objects the 
object. And some time they may have undefinablc objects 
as at the time of occurrence with conceptual states as objects. 
The state of being limited, sublime, undefinable in object 
should be knoAvn as of states which, when they occur, are 
dissociated from views by virtue of one’s being merely pleased 
with and delighted at those said states, [hmited, sublime, and 
conceptual] as object; of states associf^ted with aversion by 
virtue of grief; of states associated with doubt by virtue of 
not arriving at decision; of states accompanied by distraction 
by virtue of want of balance and calm. And of those [twenty 
kinds of consciousness] no state is able to arise making trans­
cendental states the object; hence they do not have im­
measurable objects.
Fight states of consciousness associated with knowledge, 
four being moral, four inoperative, have at the time of occur­
rence limited, sublime, and undefinable objects, by making as 
their object those aforesaid matters of sense-experience— 
a careless gift, reflection, hearing of the Dhamma on the part
I
‘ n/w. § 1407. « DU. § 1408.
* Asakkaeca, since saints have calmed all anxiety, all care.—Tila.
     

--- PAGE 241 ---

523Commentarial Chapter 
of probationers, average persons, and Arahauts. But the state 
of having an immeasurable object of those eight kinds of con­
sciousness associated with knowledge shoidd be understood 
at the stage of adoption [in Jhana], and when considering 
the transcendental state.
But that Fourth Jhana of Eupa-consciousness, as moral 
and inoperative, is of twelve modes, as follows:—(1) every­
where a vantage-point; (2) space-device; (3) light device; 
(4) divine states; (5) respiration; [413] (0) varieties of potency; 
(7) supernormal hearing; (8) thought-reading; (9) knowledge 
of destiny according to kamma; (10) supernormal sight; 
(11) reminiscence of former lives; (12) knowledge of the future. 
Of these (1) is Fourth Jhana in the eight ‘ devices.’ For 
inasmuch as Fourth Jhana is the vantage-point for insight, 
superknowledge, cessation, the round of rebirth, it is called 
everywhere a vantage-point. (2) and (3) are vantage-points 
for insight, superknowledge, and round of rebirth, not for 
cessation. (4) and (5) are vantage-points for insight and the 
round of rebirths, but not for superknowledge or cessation.
In this connection the following are said to have an un­
definable state as object:—tenfold device-Jhana because it 
arises with the device-concept as its object; the divine states 
of Fourth Jhana because they arise with the conception of 
a person as object; and breathing-exercise in Fourth Jhana 
because it arises with a symbol as object.
The modes of potency of the Fourth Jhana have hmited 
and subhme states as objects. How ? When one makes the 
body dependent on the mind, being desirous of going by 
means of an invisible body, the potency bends the body by 
the power of mind, inserts, places it in the sublime conscious­
ness; then there is an object of mind obtained by exercise— 
thus there is a limited object, because the material body is 
the object. When one makes mind dependent on the body, 
being desirous of going by means of a visible body, the potency 
bends mind by the power of body, inserts, places the basic 
jhana-consciousness in the material body; then the object of 
mind is obtained by exercise—thus from being the object 
of the subhme consciousness it has a sublime object.
     

--- PAGE 242 ---

524 Commenlarial Chapter
Supefnormal hearing of the Fourth Jhana is certainly 
limited in object because it arises with sound as object.
Knowledge of others’ thoughts has the limited, sublime, 
immeasurable for object. How ? [414] .It has a limited 
object at the time of one’s kno^ving the sense-realm thoughts 
of others, a sublime object at the time of knowing thoughts 
of the Rupa and Arupa realms, and an immeasurable object 
at the time of knowing the Path and Fruition. And here 
among average persons, etc., the average man does not know 
the Stream-winner’s thoughts, the Stream-winner does not 
know the Once-returner’s thoughts—and so on up to the 
Arahant, who knows the thoughts of all beings. The person 
knows the thoughts of a lower person. Thus should thi.s 
distinction be imderstood.
Knowledge of the destiny of one’s actions has a limited 
object at the time of knowing action of the sensuous realm, 
and a sublime object at the time of kno-wing action of the 
Rupa and Arupa realms.
Supernormal vision verily has a limited object from having 
a material object.
Reminiscent knowledge of one’s former lives has limited, 
sublime, immeasurable, undefinable objects. How ? It has 
a limited object at the time of recollecting the aggregates 
of the s6nsuous realm, a sublime object at the time of recol­
lecting aggregates of the Rupa and Arupa realms, an immeasur­
able object at the time of recollecting the Path cultivated 
and the Fruition realized by self or others in the past. ‘ The 
Buddhas in the past cultivated the Path, realized the Fruition, 
and entered Parinibbana by the element of Nibbana ’—here also 
is an immeasurable object from reflecting on-the Path, Fruition, 
and Nibbana of the Buddhas who have cut off the round of 
rebirths. It has an undefinable object when one is recollecting 
such things as name, family, earth, sign, etc., in this way;— 
‘ In the past there was the Buddha Vipassi; [415] he had the 
city Bandhumati. His father was Iring Bandhuma, his 
mother was Bandhumati,’ and so on.^
* Cf. Dialogues of the Buddha ii. 13/- [Bigha ii. 6/.).
     

--- PAGE 243 ---

525Commentarial Chapter
And the same with knowledge of the future. It has a 
limited object at the time of knowing, e.g., ‘ in future this 
'man will be born in the sensuous realm,’ and a sublime object 
at the time of lenowing ‘ he will be born in the Rupa or Arujia 
realm,’ and an immeasurable object at the time of knowing 
‘ he will cultivate the Path, reahze the Fruition, enter Parinib- 
bana by the element of Nibbana,’ and an undefinable object at 
the time of knowing name aud family in this way;—in future 
there will be the Buddha Metteyya, his father will be the 
Brahmin Subrahma, and his mother will be the Brahman! 
Brahma vati.^
The Arupa realm and loss of the Intoxicants in Fourth 
Jhana are to be discussed as they come in the Text.
Mind-door-adverting accompanied by indifference is the 
precursor of all these classes of moral, immoral, and inoperative 
consciousness; its variety of objects should be understood 
by the method given iu such consciousness. But it certainly 
has a hmited object at occurrence by virtue of determination 
being in the five doors. ‘ Three- and four-fold Jhana of the 
Rupa realm,’2 etc., have undefinable objects owing to their 
occurring with the undefinable as limited, etc., for their object. 
For here Rupa i'ealms arise in connection with the earth- 
device, etc.; the sphere of infinite space arises in connection 
with space separated from any one of the nine devices, and 
the sphere of nothingness arises in connection with the 
separation of Arupa consciousness.
In the triplet of Path-object^ the eight risings of conscious­
ness associated with knowledge described at the beginning 
[of this work] have the Path for object when probationers 
and adepts are themselves reflecting on the Path penetrated. 
But owing to not being co-existent with the Path they are not 
conditioned by it; they are dominantly influenced by the Path 
by virtue of object-dominance when they are reflecting while 
paying regard to the Path as penetrated by themselves. 
They should not be said to have the Path for object and for
1 Cf. Andgatavain^a, ver. 96. JPTS, 1886, 50.
« Dhs. § 1408.
3 Dhs. § 1415. To be divided under three heads (in P.T.S. edition).
     

--- PAGE 244 ---

526 Commentarial Chapter
dominant influence when making any other states than the 
Path the object of their thought. ‘ The Four Ariyan Paths ’ 
are certainly ‘ conditioned by the Path ’ owing to the existence 
of condition associated Avith the Path and called the Path. 
They are ‘ dominantly influenced by the Path ’ sometimes by 
means of the dominant influence of co-existence at the time 
of cultivating the Path, energy [416] or investigation being 
made the chief; but they should not be said to be sometime 
dominantly influenced by the Path at the time of making any 
other unspecified state in conational consciousness the chief- 
The nine Jhanas, beginning with that which is everywhere 
a vantage-point in the twelve kinds of the Fourth Jhana 
of the Rupa realm, have not the Path for object, neither for 
condition nor for dominant influence. Knowledge of the 
thoughts of others, of one’s former fives, of the future in the 
Fourth Jhana has the Path for object at the time' of knowing 
the Path-consciousness of the Ariyans; but from .not being 
co-existent with the Path it is not conditioned by it, and from 
not arising out of regard for the Path, it iS" not dominantly 
influenced by it. And why"? Does such .knowledge have no 
regard for the Path ? Nay, it is because of their being sublime. 
For all the world have regard for the king; but his parents 
do not have regard. For they do not rise from their seat on 
seeing him, do not raise'their hands in homage; they call him 
just as when he was young. So these three kinds of knowledge, 
because "they themselve^ are sublime, have- no regard for 
the Path. The mind-door-adverting consciousness has the 
Path for object from being the precursor of reflection at the 
time of reflecting on the Path of Ariyans; but from being not 
co-existent with it, it is not conditioned by. the Path, and from 
not arising out of regard for it, it is not dominantly influenced 
by the Path. Why does it not have regard ? Because it 
has itself no condition, being base and foolish. Thus the whole 
world has regard for the king, yet retainers, such as his hunch­
backs, dwarfs, and servants,- from their own want of knowledge 
do not have regard like clever men. So this consciousness, 
because itself has no condition, and is base and foolish, has 
no regard for the Path. Moral thoughts, etc., dissociated
     

--- PAGE 245 ---

527Commentarial Chapter
from knowledge, being void of knowledge, and having the 
transcendental state for object, do not get to the state of 
having the Path for object, etc.; they have only the unde­
finable for object.
[417] In the triplet of the past object^ the states of the 
sphere of infinite consciousness and that of neither perception 
nor non-perception, because they arise with the past attainment 
above for object certainly have the past only for object. 
‘ There are no future objects without connection ’ means that 
assuredly an individual or separate consciousness is never 
known to have a future object. But sitrely, it may be said, 
does not knowledge for the future have a future object, and 
does not knowledge of others’ thoughts arise with a future 
object ? They certainly do. But this knowledge of the 
future and of others’ thoughts is never known as one separate 
consciousness; but, being taken with the Fourth Jhana of the 
Rupa realm, is mixed with other sublime thoughts. Hence 
it has been said, ‘ there are no future objects without con­
nection.’ Ten cognitions, three mind-elements, from arising 
about present sense-objects, etc., are kno^vn ‘ to have present 
objects.’^
In the term ‘ ten states of consciousness,’ in the first place, 
eight have past objects when they occur with reference to 
kamma or a kamma-symbol at the time of taking conception 
among devas or men. And the same is true for the time 
of subconscious continuum and of decease also. But they 
take present objects at the time of taking conception with 
reference to the tendency-symbol, and subsequently at the 
time of subconscious continuum. Likewise when they occur 
by way of registration at the five doors. But they take past, 
future, or present objects when arising with reference to the 
object of apperceptions, which in the mind-door are past, 
future, or present objects. And the same with the element 
of mind-cognition which is a moral- resultant, without root­
conditions, and is accompanied by indifference. This is the 
case in the conception of such as are born-blind among men;
» Dhs. §§ 1417-19.
     

--- PAGE 246 ---

528 Commentarial Chapter
it ha? a present object by way of examining at the five doors 
also. This is the specific distinction here.
But examining accompanied by joy has a present object 
by way of examining and registration at the five doors, and 
hke the conditioned resultant has past, future, and present 
objects by virtue of registration at the mind-door. But 
examining with an immoral resultant, and accompanied by 
indifference, is similar in course to examining which is a moral 
resultant, and is accompanied by indifference. [418] For 
the former only arises to denizens of purgatory by way of 
rebirth, subconscious continuum, decease. This is the 
specific distinction here. The mind-door adverting, accom­
panied by joy, has a present object making laughter at the 
five sense-doors of Arahants, and has past, future, and 
present objects when occurring by virtue of causing laughter 
with reference to states differentiated as past, etc.
In the phrase ‘ sensuous moral consciousness,’ etc., so far 
four states of consciousness associated with knowledge^ have, 
as moral, past, future, and present objects for probationers 
and average persons whpn these are contemplating the 
different kinds of past things such as aggregates, elements, 
sense-organs, and have undefinable objects at the moment 
when concepts and Nibbana are contemplated. And the 
same is true with states dissociated from knowledge. For 
there is no consideration of the Path, Fruition, and Nibbana by 
them. This is the specific distinction.
In the phrase ‘ four risings of consciousness associated with 
opinions,’^ such states, as immoral, have past, present, future 
objects when taking pleasure and delight in, and perversely 
grasping such things, past, present, future, as aggregates, 
elements, sense-organs. They have undefinable objects when 
one takes pleasure and dehght in, and perversely grasps the 
term-and-concept of ‘ person.’ This is true also of risings 
dissociated wdth opinions; for it is not merely they which 
perversely seize.
The ‘ two risings of consciousness associated with aversion
2 Dhs. § 1412. ’ Ib.
     

--- PAGE 247 ---

529Commeniarial Chapter 
have past, present, future objects in the case of persons grieved 
about things in time, and undefinable objects in the case of 
persons who are grieved about term-and-concept of such 
objects-in-time.
The phrases, ‘ associated \nth doubt,’ and ‘ ndth distraction,’^ 
have past, futiure, present objects at occurrence owing to 
their not ha\’ing reached decision in those states, and owing 
to e.xciteinent. The eight risings of consciousness with root- 
conditions, as inoperative, are similar in course to moral states 
of consciousness. Mind-door-adverting accompanied by in­
difference has a present object at occurrence by way of deter­
mining, [419] and past, future, present, undefinable objects 
at the time of being the precursor to apperceptions having 
past, future, present objects; it has term-and-concept and 
Nibbana as object in the mind-door.
These five^ viz., that which is the basis of all, space-device, 
light-device, divine states, respiration-exercise, in the Jhana 
of the Rupa realm, different kinds of which have been men­
tioned, have an undefinable object. Variety of potency of 
the Fourth Jhana has a past object because of its arising with 
reference to the past basic Jhana-consciousness for one who 
bends his mind by means of the body.
There is a future object to those who are resolving on a 
future thing, as in the case of such elders as Mahakassapa 
on disposing of the Buddha’s relics. For Mahakassapa 
the Elder in depositing the Buddha’s relics made a resolve, 
* For two hundred and eighteen years to come may these 
perfumes not dry up, these flowers not fade, these lamps not 
go out ’ and all happened accordingly. Assagutta the Elder,® 
seeing the clergy at the Vattaniya r^ionastery eating dry food 
without curry, resolved: ‘ Daily may the pond before meals be 
tasty as milk curds ’; and it became as the taste of curds before 
meals and natural after meals. And there is a present object 
which arises with reference to the body, at the time of going 
by an invisible body making it dependent on the mind, [or 
of showing any other miracle].^
II.
1 I>As.§14U. 
® Cf. Milinda i. H.
* Cf. Dialogues ii. 185.
* P.T.S. ed. omits.
16
     

--- PAGE 248 ---

530 Commentarial Chapter
Supernormal hearing of the Fourth Jhana has a present 
object when it arises with reference to an actual sound. 
Knowledge of others’ thoughts of the Fourth Jhana has past 
and future objects for one who knows the thoughts of others 
within seven days in the past, within seven days in the future, 
but is unable to know them when seven days expire, because 
such knowledge of others’ thoughts after seven days is the 
province of knowledge of the past and of the future. And it 
has a present object at the time of knowing the present.
[420] This present is threefold: momentary, continuous, 
durational. Of these, that kind of state which has reached 
genesis, development, and disruption is the momentary present. 
That which is included in one or two continuous intervals 
is the continuous present. This is when an object does not 
at first become evident to one who goes to the light after having 
sat in darkness. The [material or immateriaV] continuity 
which occurs until it becomes manifest shordd be understood 
as one, or two continuous intervals. Matter also is not manifest 
at once to one who enters a room after having walked in the 
light. The [material or immateriaP] continuity which occurs 
until that is manifest should be known as one or two con­
tinuous intervals. And to one who stands afar, and who 
nevertheless sees the change in the hands of dyers, and in the 
reverberation of beUs, drums, etc., the [material or immateriaP] 
continuity which occurs until the sound is heard should be 
known as one or two continuous intervals. So say the 
reciters of the Majjhima-Nikaya.
But the reciters of the Samyutta-Nikaya, saying that 
there are two distinct continuities:—(1) the material continuity 
is when the ripples of the, water stepped .into by one crossing 
to the bank have not settled down, or when, after a journey 
the heat of the body has not subsided, or when to one coming 
out of the glare into a room, the gloom is not yet dispelled, 
or when after being occupied with religious exercise in a room, 
one looks out of the window during the day and the quivering 
of the eyes has not subsided, but (2) the two or three appercep-
* P.T.S. ed. omits.
     

--- PAGE 249 ---

531Commentarial Chapter 
tive intervals are immaterial continuity—maintain that both 
are a continuous present.
And the kind of state limited by one existence is called the 
durational present, concerning which it was said [by the 
Blessed One] in the Bhaddekaratta Sutta;—‘ Friend, the mind 
and associated ideas that there are, are both called present; 
in just that “ present,” consciousness is bound with passionate 
desire. Because of consciousness being so boxmd, mind takes 
delight in the present. So delighting it is drawn into present 
things.’^ [421] The continuous present is accepted iu the 
Commentaries; the durational present, in the Suttas. Of the 
three presents some say that the momentary present is the 
object of knowledge of others’ thoughts. Why ? Because 
in a person with potency and another person a thought will 
arise simultaneously.
And this is the simile;—just as a handful of flowers is thrown 
into the air, one flower-cluster is sure to pierce another, stalk 
by stalk, so I know another’s mind. Thus when people’s 
minds are considered as a group, mind of one is sure to be 
pierced by another mind at the moment of genesis, develop­
ment, or disruption. But this has been rejected in the 
Commentaries as improper, owing to the absence of co­
incidence in both minds by which one reflects and knows when 
reflecting even for a himdred and a thousand years, and owing 
to faultiness in reaching the state of a variety of objects.
And the continuous and the durational present should be 
known as the object of knowledge of others’ thoughts. Of these 
two, aU that consciousness which is another person’s at the 
time of having the measure of two or three apperceptional 
processes by virtue of the past and future from the existing 
apperceptional process is called the continuous present.
The saying in the Commentary, that present time shopld 
be shown by means of an apperceptional interval has been 
well said. Wherein this is the explanation; a person of 
potency desirous of knowing andther’s mind reflects. The 
mind-door-adverting consciousness, making the momentary
*■ Majjhima iii. 197.
     

--- PAGE 250 ---

532 Commentarial Chapter
present its object together with the other’s mind, ceases. 
Subsequently there takes place four or five apperceptions, 
the last of which is the potency-consciousness.^ The remaining 
[third and fourth apperceptions] are of sensuous-realm con­
sciousness. Of all these that which has ceased is the object, 
but the others have not different objects; and why ? Because 
they have a present object by virtue of present time. When 
there is oneness of object, of all apperceptions the potency­
consciousness knows the mind of another, but the others do 
not. As in the eye-door visual cognition only sees the visible 
object and other cognition, such as adverting does not see it, 
so this knowledge of others’ thoughts has a present thought 
by virtue of continuous present and present time. [422] Or, 
because the continuous present also falls into present time 
only, therefore by virtue of present time only this knowledge 
of others’ thoughts should be known as having a present 
object.
Knowledge of one’s former lives of the Fourth Jhana has 
an undefinable object in the recollection of name and family, 
and in the consideration of Nibbana and symbol; it has a past 
object in the remaining time. Knowledge of the destiny 
of one’s actions of the Fourth Jhana has a past object. There­
in although knowledge of former hves and of others’ thoughts 
also have past objects, yet of them the past aggregates of the 
former hves and name and family which are bound with the 
aggregates are not kno^vm. as object. Indeed, this knowledge 
of former hves in these past aggregates and states bound 
therewith is similar in course tp omniscience. And of the 
other knowledge the thought past the hmit of seven days is 
the object. For it does not know another aggregate or 
what is bound with aggregate. But it is said to have the 
Path for object by way of explanation from having as object 
the mind associated with the Path. And only the past 
vohtion of knowledge of the destiny of one’s actions is the 
object. This should be known as the specific distinction. 
This herein is the method of the Commentary. Yet because it
^-e., Rupa-consciousness.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 251 ---

533Commentarial Chapter
is said in the Pattliana: ‘ The moral aggregates are the cause by 
way of object; causal relation of the knowledge of the varieties 
of potency, of others’ thoughts, of former lives, of the destiny 
of actions, of the- future,’ therefore the four aggregates are the 
object of knowledge of others’ thoughts and of the destiny 
of actions. There also of this last knowledge moralities and 
immoralities are the object.
Supernormal vision of the Fourth Jhana has a present 
object from having for object an actual form or colour.
Knowledge of the future of the Fourth Jhana has a future 
object, and indeed in the future aggregate and aggregate­
bound is sunilar in course to omniscient-like knowledge of 
former lives. Of them although knowledge of others’ thoughts 
has a future object, it makes only the thought arising within 
seven days the object. [423] This knowledge of the future 
takes for object the arising thought, aggregates, states bound 
with aggregates, for one hundred thousand cosmic periods in 
the future.
The ‘ threefold and fourfold Jhana of the Rupa realm,’ 
because they do not arise with reference to even a single thing 
in the past, future, or present, have verily an undefinable 
object.
In the ‘ personal ’ triplet,- as that state which is bound to the 
controlling faculty is subjective-personal, even though, in 
another person’s continuity it would be called external, so the 
[given] state is not in any way pergonal when not bound to the 
controlling faculty and external to matter and to Nibbana. 
Hence it is said to be external because there is no way of 
explaining it as subjective-personal, and not because the sub­
jective-personal just does not come to pass. And in this 
triplet of the ‘ personal object,’^ it is with reference to just 
this not coming to pass of the subjective-personal that the 
state of having an external object is mentioned. The phrase 
‘ the sphere of nothingness has an undefinable and also a 
personal object ’■* i.s said without acquiescence in the personal.
‘ Dhs. § 1418. ® Or ‘subjective,’ etc., triplet. DJis. § 1419,
3 76. * Dhs. § 1420.
     

--- PAGE 252 ---

534 Comme.ntarial Chapter
external, or personal-external state of the object of the sphere 
of nothingness merely because the personal state has ceased. 
Therein not only the Jhana of the sphere of nothingness has an 
undefinable object, but also its adverting,.its access-thoughts, 
its object-reconsidering thoughts, its immoral thoughts, 
proceeding by way of enjoying its object, have undefinable 
objects. But all these are named along with it, hence they 
have not been taken separately. How, then, are they taken ? 
This sphere of nothingness, and that consciousness which, as its 
precursor, arises and proceeds by way of adverting, access, etc., 
should have one object together with it. All that conscious­
ness is said to have an undefinable object, because [firstly] the 
undefinable state of the object is granted by such a method as 
this; * Sometimes these risings of consciousness said, in the 
triplet of the “ past object,” to be the moral consciousness 
in the realm of sense, the immoral consciousness, the nine, 
states of consciousness as inoperative, the fourth Jhana of 
the Rupa realm may not be said to have even a past object,’ 
and [secondly] because it is explicitly stated thus: ‘ Of the 
sphere of nothingness the sphere itself, the four unincluded 
Paths and the four Fruitions—these states have an undefinable 
past object.’
[424] Now because the undefinableness of the object of the 
moral fconsciousness in the realm of sense, etc., has been 
mentioned above in the triplet of the ‘ past object with 
reference to their having one object together with the sphere 
of nothingness, therefore this last Jhana, though spoken of in 
the triplet of the personal object as single, shows, here also, 
the undefinableness of the object of the moral consciousness 
in the realm of sense, etc.^ For, is there any obstacle to these 
states of consciousness, which have one object, together with 
that Jhana, in having an undefinable object ? It is in this 
way, when this Jhana is mentioned, that the adverting and 
other states are implied.
The rest herein is plain in meaning from the Pah. But in 
the classification according to object, these [two]] Jhana-
2 Dhs. § 1419.
     

--- PAGE 253 ---

535Commentarial Chapter 
spheres:, iiifinite consciousness and neither perception nor 
non-perception, should be considered as having a personal 
object because they proceed as moral, resultant, inoperative, 
with reference to the [next] lower attainment of the six 
geneses of consciousness, bound up with their own continuity.
Among them the inoperative sphere of infinite space is the 
object only of the inoperative sphere of infinite consciousness 
and not of the other [moral, resultanf sphere of infinite con­
sciousness]. A\Tiy ? Because of the absence of a moral 
resultant sphere of infinite consciousness to one endowed 
with the inoperative sphere of infinite space. But the moral 
sphere of infinite space is the object of the threefold sphere of 
infinite consciousness, moral, resultant, and inoperative. 
And why ? Because of the arising and becoming of the three­
fold sphere of infinite consciousness above that of the infinite 
space of one who has produced it. And the resultant sphere 
of infinite space is not the object of any thought of the sphere 
of infinite consciousness; and why ? Because of the thought 
not being brought forward after 'rising from the resultant. 
And the same with making the sphere of nothingness, moral 
and inoperative the object of that of neither perception nor 
non-perception.
AU the threefold and fourfold Jhanas of the Rupa realm, etc., 
should be considered as having an external object, because 
they proceed with reference to external earth and other 
‘ devices ’ {kasina} external to the subjective-personal. In 
connection with the passage ‘ aU sensuous, moral, immoral, 
unmoral states, the Fourth Jhana of the Rupa-realm’^ . . . 
four states of consciousness associated with knowledge as 
moral, have personal objects for one who is reflecting on his 
own body and mind,^ external objects for one who is reflecting 
on another’s body and mind, or is reflecting on concepts and 
Nibbana, and subjective-external objects for one who is 
reflecting on both. The same method should be understood 
in the case of states of consciousness dissociated with know­
ledge. In none of these is there reflection on Nibbana [425].
s Khandhadini, lit. aggregates, etc.
     

--- PAGE 254 ---

536 Commentarial Chapter
Four risings of consciousness associated with dogmatism 
as immoral have personal objects when [the conscious sub­
ject] is enjoying, taking delight in, and wrongly handling 
[the idea of] his own body and mind, external objects when 
[the idea of] body and mind of another are so enjoyed, etc.; 
or matter, ‘ device,’ etc., not bound up with the controlling 
faculty; and subjective-external objects when enjoying, etc., 
both. And the same method should be understood when the 
.states of consciousness are dissociated wfth dogmatism. 
For here there is no ^VTong handling.
‘ Two states associated with aversion have personal 
objects when the subject is depressed about his own body 
and mind, external objects when depressed about another’s 
body and mind, or matter, concepts, etc., not bound up with 
controlling faculty, and subjective-external objects when 
depressed about both.
‘ States associated with perplexity and excitement 
should be considered as having a personal object; proceeding 
by way of doubting and wavering among those different kinds 
already mentioned.
Thirteen risings of consciousness, to wit, twice five [sense-] 
cognitions and three mental elements, have a personal object 
when proceeding with reference to their own material quah- 
ties, etc., and an external object when the qualities of another 
are concerned, and a subjective-external object when con­
cerned with both. The element of mind-cognition without 
root-conditions and accompanied by joy has a personal object 
when proceeding with reference to its own five material states, 
etc., by examining, registration at the five doors and to other 
personal sensuous states by way of registration at the mind­
door; it has an external object when proceeding with reference 
to the states of another person, and a subjective-personal 
object when referring to both. The same is vaUd for the 
twofold element of mind-cognition without root-conditions, 
a resultant and accompanied by indifference. It is only these 
[two classes of consciousness] which proceed in happy destiny
2 Dhs. § 1426.
     

--- PAGE 255 ---

537Commentarial Chapter 
and evil destiny by way of reconception, subconscious con­
tinuum, ancT decease • in actions classed as personal, etc. 
I'he eight main classes of resultant consciousness are similar 
in coiurse to these two, but do not proceed solely as examining; 
they proceed in a happy rebirth by reconception, subconscious 
continuum, and decease.
Inoperative consciousness without root-conditions accom­
panied by joy has a personal object when so proceeding as to 
cause mirth in ‘connection with the subject’s own material 
qualities, etc., at the five sense-doors, [426] an external object 
when proceeding similarly in connection with those of another; 
further, it has a personal object when proceeding so as to cause 
mirth in the Tathagata in connection with his own kamma, 
such as his actions when he was the youth Jotipala, the king 
jMakhadeva, the ascetic Kaiiha,^ an external object when pro­
ceeding in connection with such actions as those of the queen 
Malhka,2 the minister Santati,® the flower-seller Sumana,"* 
and a subjective-external object when proceeding in both 
such connections.
The element of mind-cognition without root-conditions, 
inoperative and accompanied by indifference, has a personal 
object when proceeding as determining at the five doors, 
and as adverting at the mind-door. The eight main classes 
of inoperative consciousness are similar in the above-named 
respect to the moral consciousness. But only these eight 
arise in Arahants; the moral eight arise in probationers and 
average persons. To this extent is there any difference.
The five Jhanas, having in the way above-stated a vantage­
point everywhere in Fourth Jhana, come also into this triplet, 
for in device, concept, symbol they have external objects.
The variety of potency of the Fourth Jhana has a personal 
object because it makes one’s own body and mind the object 
at the time of bending the mind by body, or body by mind, 
and at the time of itself creating fqrms such as a child’s; has 
an external object at the time of manifesting externally
I-................... - - ...... - ----- —«—— —
a Jataka, No. 415.
* Jb. ii. 40 /.
‘ See on all three above, p. 387.
• DJiammapada Commentary, iii. 78 /.
     

--- PAGE 256 ---

538 CommenUirial Chapter
elepl^ants and horses and the like; and has a subjective-external 
object at procedure, sometimes personal, sometimes external. 
Supernormal hearing of the Fourth Jhana has a personal object 
at the time of hearing its own internal sound and an external 
object at the time of hearing the sound of others, and a 
subjective-external object by way of (combining) both. 
ELnowledge of others’ thoughts of the Fourth Jhana has an 
external object because it has others’ thoughts for object; 
but there is no need for it to know its own thought. Know­
ledge of one’s former hves of the Fourth Jhana has a personal 
object when there is a recollecting of one’s own individuality,^ 
an external object when another’s individuahty is remembered, 
or matter not bound up with controlUng faculty or the three 
concepts, and a subjective-external object when remembering 
in both ways.
[427] Supernormal sight in Fourth Jhana has a personal 
object when anything is seen inwardly, an external object 
when seeing in the ordinary way, and a subjective-external 
object when seeing in both ways.
Awareness of the future in Fourth Jhana has a personal 
object when there is a recollecting of one’s own future in­
dividuality, an external object when another’s future in­
dividuality is recollected, or matter not bound up with con­
trolling faculty, and a subjective-external object when recol­
lecting in both ways.
The reason why the sphere of nothingness has an undefinable 
object has been dealt with above.
In the exposition of the root-condition group, the root­
conditions are first shown: ‘ There are three moral condi­
tions’; then their genesis is shown; ‘ They arise in the four 
moral planes.’ In this way the explaining of the other groups 
should be understood.
In ‘ where two or three intoxicants arise together the co­
origin of the Intoxicants in three ways should be understood. 
Therein, the Intoxicant of sensuality arises in one state of
Khandha
’ Dhs. § 1448.
2 Dhs. § 1424.
     

--- PAGE 257 ---

539Commentarial Chapter 
consciousness in two ways: by virtue of ignorance in the four 
dissociated from views, and, together with the Intoxicants 
of views and of ignorance, in those associated with views. 
The Intoxicant of existence arises in one state of consciousness 
in one way: together with the Intoxicant of ignorance in the 
four dissociated from views. And as in this expression the 
co-origin of Intoxicants is understood, so in ‘ where two or 
three Fetters arise together ’ the co-origin of Fetters may be 
tenfold.
Herein, ‘ sensual lust arises in one state of consciousness 
in four ways; ‘ aversion ’ in three ways; ‘ conceit ’ in one way; 
‘ doubt, and lust for existence ’ arise in one state of conscious­
ness likewise in one way. How ? Sensual lust arises in one 
state of consciousness in four ways—udth the Fetters of con­
ceit and of ignorance, of views and of ignorance, of observance 
of rule and ritual and of ignorance, and of ignorance alone. 
Aversion arises in one state of consciousness in three ways,— 
with the Fetters of envy and of ignorance, of meanness and 
of ignorance, of ignorance alone. Conceit arises in one state 
of consciousness in one way with the Fetters of lust for exist­
ence and of ignorance. [428] And doubt also; for it arises 
with the Fetter of ignorance. And the same with lust for 
existence. Thus here two or three fetters arise together in 
one state of consciousness.
And in the Hindrance-group^ also in that expression which 
has been said thus, ‘ where two or three Hindrances arise 
together ’ the co-origin of Hindrances in eight ways should be 
understood. For among them ‘ sensual desire ’ arises in one 
state of consciousness in two ways, ‘ ill-will ’ in four ways, 
‘ excitement ’ in one way, ‘ doubt ’ also in one way. How ? 
Sensual desire arises in one state of consciousness in two ways, 
with the Hindrances of excitement and of ignorance in classes 
of automatic consciousness and with the Hindrances of sloth­
torpor, of excitement, and of ignorance in voluntary con­
sciousness.
Why was ‘ two or three ’ said by way of the above classifica-
     

--- PAGE 258 ---

540 Commentarial Chapter
tioi^ ? Because it is possible for even four Hindrances to 
arise together in one state of consciousness. ‘ Ill-will ’ arises 
in one state of consciousness in four ways,—with the 
Hindrances of excitement and of ignorance in automatic 
consciousness; of sloth-torpor, of excitement and of ignorance 
in non-automatic consciousness; of excitement, of worry, and of 
ignorance in automatic; and of sloth-torpor, of excitement, 
of worry, and of ignorance in uon-automatic consciousness. 
And ‘ excitement ’ arises in one way with merely the Hindrance 
of ignorance. ‘ Doubt ’ arises together with the Hindrances 
of excitement and of ignorance.
In the Corruption-group,^ in the expression ‘ where two or 
three Corruptions arise together,’ in various places two or 
three Corruptions arise together with other Corruptions. 
Why ? Because of the non-production of just two or three 
Corruptions in a single state of consciousness. Herein the co­
origin of the Corruptions is in ten ways. Tor among them 
‘ greed ’ arises in one state of consciousness in six ways, 
‘ aversion ’ in two ways, ‘ delusion ’ also in two ways. How ? 
Greed arises in one state of consciousness in six ways,—with 
delusion, excitement, shamelessness, recklessness of blame in 
automatic consciousness and in that dissociated from views; 
with delusion, sloth, excitement, shamelessness, fearlessness 
of blame in the non-automatic; with,delusion, conceit, excite­
ment, shamelessness, fearlessness of blame in the automatic; 
with delusion, conceit, sloth, excitement, shamelessness, 
fearlessness of blame in the non-automatic; with delusion, 
excitement, dogmatism, shamelessness, recklessness of blame 
in the consciousness associated with dogmatism and auto­
matic; and with delusion, dogmatism, sloth, excitement, 
shamelessness, recklessness of blame in the non-automatic. 
And ‘ aversion ’ arises in two ways with delusion, excitement, 
shamelessness, recklessness of blame in the automatic; 
and with delusion, sloth, excitement, shamelessness, reckless­
ness of blame in the non-automatic. And ‘ delusion ’ arises 
in two ways with doubt, excitement, shamelessness, reckless-
     

--- PAGE 259 ---

541Commentarial Chapter
ness of blame in the doubt-associated; and with excitement, 
shamelessness, recklessness of blame in the excitement- 
associated. The rest everywhere is evident in meaning.
End of the explanation of the Commentarial Chapter of the 
Expositor, the Commentary on the Compendium of States.
Hither the Master of the world attained 
Expounding the fair Dhammasahgani, 
Dividing it according to the names:— 
Mind, Matter, Exposition, Summary. 
But the interpreting thereof, which I 
Began by comprehension of the Truths 
Of Abhidhamma, is completed now 
And is by name called AtthasalinI, 
Revealing truths not incompatible.
Through the same merit which I have attained, 
Who fashioned it in nine and thirty texts 
Of recitations, that the holy Law 
May long abide, let all men understand 
The Law that bringeth blessing by the grade 
Of the Laiz’s King, and let them thus attain 
Thro’ pure and happy life Nibbana’s bliss 
Ineffable, from tears and sorrow free.
Forfever may the Law abide, by all 
Revered ! May rain in its due season fall ’ 
As good kings guarded all mankind of old, 
May the king guard mankind as his own son !
This Commentary, called the Expositor on the Compendium 
OP States, was made by the Elder, in whom are grouped to­
gether the immaeulaie and gentle virtues of precept and conduct, 
adorned by pure atid exalted faith, understanding and energy, 
wlu) is capable of diving into the depths of his own and other 
doctrines, endowed with keen intellect, replete with the ability 
of unhindered knowledge in the Teacher's religion,—the which 
is divided into three Pitakas, together with the commentaries,—
     

--- PAGE 260 ---

542 Commentarial Chapter
a gr^t grammarian, gifted with sweetness of speech, full of 
the virtues of sweetness, nobleness, issuing from the bliss born of 
the perfection of his acts, an unerring speaker like Sakka's 
thunderbolt not missing its mark, most excellent of speakers, 
a great poet, who is the ornament of the lineage of Elders resident 
at the Great Minster who are lamps in the lineage of the Elders, 
of well-established intelligence in the Law surpassing human 
law, and who is attended by analytical knowledge and adorned 
with such virtues as the sixfold super-hiowledge, whose wisdom 
is very extensive and pure, who bears the name Buddhaghosa 
given him by the Elders.
While Buddha, the great name of the great Sage, 
Pure-minded world-chief, in the world abides. 
So long may this book live and show the way 
Of wisdom's purity to noble sons 
Who seek for liberation from the world.
By grace of this, the book I wrote. 
Into Mdteyya's presence am I come. 
Within the Refuges established
Upon the Sasana 1 take my stand.
■ May mother, father, teachers, they who wish me well 
And they who do not, give me happy thanks 
And long safeguard the merit 1 have won R
May there be success !
May there be welfare !
These last seven lines are not in the Burmese texts, but are in the 
P.T.S. edition, presumably transcribed from the three Sinhalese MSS. 
Used by the editor. The allusion to Metteyya, as associated by a 
prophetic utterance with Buddhaghosa in the future (see Buddhagho- 
suppatti, p. 66) is of interest, and may be compared with the similar 
envoi at the end of the Visuddhi Magga. It is quite possible that we 
have here the ’author’s coda to his book, so I have translated and 
inserted the lines. (The last two sentences are probably additions 
by a scribe.)—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 261 ---

INDEX
I—PROPER NAMES
Abbhpta, 33 
Abhidhamma, 2, 3, 14, 21, 23, 26, 
35, 37, 38, 519
seven books of, 5, 23 
taZroducZimi to, 40, 43/. 
definition of, 4, 24 
Abhivinaya, 25 
Aciravati, 188 
Aggimukha, 393 
Aggivessana, 485 
Ahuneyj'a Sutta, 476 
Ajita, 454 
Akanittha, 213 
Alara Kalama, 43,44, 271 
Ananda, 2, 19, 34,42, 60,117, 436 
Ancients, 112, 147, 393, 410, 509 Aiigas, nine, 22 
Anguttara-NikSya, 12, 19, 23, 32 
Annakondniina, 44 " 
Anoma, 43 
Anotatta, lake, 2, 20 
Apadana, 23 
Apannaka Jataka, 33 
Aparayoga, 393 
Ariyapariyesana Sutta. 44 
Ariyas, 37, 137, 234, 452 
Agalhi, 44 
Assagutta, 529 
Assakanna, 393 
Asuras, 393 
Atharvaveda, 122 
Atthanaparikappa Sutta, 436 
Atthasalini, 541 
Avici, 82
Bahitika Sutta, 84 
Bandhujivaka flower, VI 
Bandhumati, 524 
Bhaddaji, 40 
Bhaddanama, 41 
Bhaddekaratta Sutta, 531 
Bharata’s, 135
Bharukaccha, 401 
Brahma, IS, 74, 262 
Great, 213 
voice. 7
Brahmajala Sutta, 23, 32, 502
Brahmavati, 525
Brazen Palace, 39
Buddha, 1/., 7, 12, 20, 41, 42. 43, 
542
word of, 6, 32 
Ats first and last words, 22 
Buddhagbosa, 2, 542 
Buddhavamsa, 23
Cakkana, 136
Cariya Pitaka, 23
Catuparivatta Sutta, 404 
Central Park. 38
Cetiva Jit., 509
Ceylon, 3, 41, 136, 508
Channa, 43 
Church: 2
Cikkhalika princes, 32
Cittala Jit., 453
Cittapariyadana Sutta, 23, 32 
Commentary, ancient, 2, 149, 151, 
156, 302, 410
Great, 5, 105. 109, 115, 142, 
161, 209, 213 n., 354, 519
Nikaya, 252-3 
Commentaries, 113, 115, 131, 142, 
224. 531
Coranaga, 508
Cfilahamsa Jataka, 414 
Cuilavedalla Sutta, 33
Dabba jrasa, 122
Dalhadhanuggaha Sutta, 80 
Dasaka, 40
Dasuttara Suttanta, 12
Datta, 116, 499
Dattabhaya, 356
De&r Park, 44
543
     

--- PAGE 262 ---

5^ Index
Dhamma (Suttas). 3
■profundity of, 44
see Law
Dhammapada, 22. 23, 32, 33, 37 
Dhammasafigani, 5, 8, 9, 16, 23, 
46, 49, 321
contents of, 46 
Dhammiya, 40 
Dhatukatha, 5; contents of, 10 
Digha-Nikaya, 6, 12, 19, 23, 32 
(definition), 201, 211, 257
“bhanaka-Abhaya, 509 
Dipankara, 40, 41, 44 
Dubbhasita, 503 
Duka-Nipata, 12 
Dukkata, 603 
Dutthagamani Abhaya, 105
Eka-Nipata, 12
Ganges, 186. 188 
Garulas, 393
Gatha, 33
Ge^a, 33,49
Girikapcjaka, 153 
Godhavari, 186 
Gosingasala forest, 36 
Gotama. 217
Great Enlightenment, 38 
Forest, 43 
Minster, 3, 642 
Regents, 393 
Renunciation, 43 
Shrine, 153
GuttasaJa, 508
Himava, 393
Iddhiya, 41
India, 41
Indriyagocara Sutta, 404
Isadhara, 303
Isipatana, 44
Itivuttaka, 23, 33
Jambu, °dipa, 393
Jataka, 23, 33, 37, 40, 84
Jetavana, 361
Jencel House, 40
Jewels, Three, 2
Jotipala, 387, 537
Radamba, 393
Kakusandha, 89
Kala, 43
Kalavalli-niandapa, 508
Kalavalliya, 215
Kaijda, 16 
Kapha, 387, 537 
Kantbaka. 43 
Kappa. 393 
Karavika, 393 
Kasi, 44
Kassapa, Buddha, 21 
Kathavatthu, 5, 6. 8, 11, 54 
Katthamukha, 393 
Khandha, 124
Khandhas, 33; eighty-Jour thou­
sand, 22; twenty-two, 23
Kbuddaka-Nikava, 23; contents of, 
32
-Fatha, 23, 32 
Kisagotami, 42 
Kosala, 401 
Kosiyaputta, 40 
Kulumpa Sutta, 120 
Kusa grass, 50 
Kusavati, 470
Law (Dhamma), 2,18,19, 20, 22
Madhupipdika Suttanta, 6 
Madira, 63
Magadha, 43; 401 
MahSbrahmas, 44 
MahSdatta, 309, 355 
DIahadhammahadaya, 5 
Mabadhammarakkhita, 366, 376-7 
Mahadhatukatha, 5 
Mahagatigamiya Tissa, 14 
Mahagosinga Sutta, 36 
Mahakaccana, 7, 8 
Mahakassapa, 2, 34, 35, 529 
Mahali. 53
Mah&naga,508 
Mahaniddesa, 217 
Mahapunnama Sutta, 33 
Maharohanagutta, 251 
Mahasakuludayi Sutta, 249 
Mahasammata, 499, 501 
Mahasangharakkbita, 356 
Mahasiva, 354, 514 ■ 
Mahatissa, 153 
Mahavedaila Sutta, 33 
Mahi, 188 
Mahinda, 2, 41 
Majjhima-Nikaya, 19, 23, 530; 
contents of, 32
Makhadeva, 387, 637 
Mallika, 76, 537 
Mana, 76
Maiigala Sutta, 33 
Manosila, 20
     

--- PAGE 263 ---

Index 545
hlara, 22, 43, 74, 472
Matika, 23
Meru, 213, 462, 501
'Mettej’ya, 465, 525, 542
Missaka, 251 n.
Mitta, 116
Moggallana, 37; Maha”, 36, 307, 
365
Moravapi, 309; “Mahadatta, 373-6
Mucalinda, 44
Mudihga, 387
Mulapariyaya Sutta, 23, 32
Mundika, 76
NagOu 393; creaper, 20
Nagasena, 149,151, 167, 159,162, 
18S
Nakulanagara, 508
Nalaka Sutta, 33
Nandakovada Sutta, 308
Nandana, 63
Nemindhara, 393
Neranjara, 43
Nibbana, 22, 63, 66, 58, 191, 204, 
291,300,312,391,450,455,501
Nibbedhika Sutta, 476
Niddesa, 23, 33
Nikavas, definition of, 32; Four, 
32; Five, 22, 31, 35
Nimmanarati, 18
Oghatarana Sutta-' 23, 32
Pabbajja Sutta, 44
Pacittiya, 503
Padesavihara Sutta, 38/.
Pali Text, 224
Pandava, 43 
Panidukambala, 1, 19, 40,45 
Parajika, 23, 503 
Paranimmitavasavatti, 18,82,496 
Paricchattaka, 1, 19, 40, 45, 393 
Parinibbana, 5, 22
Pari vara, 23, 33 
Pataliputta, 16, 118 
Patidesaniya, 503
Patimokkha, 23, 210, 224, 242, 
331, 503
Patisambhidamagga, 23, 256 
Pattharia, or the Great Book, 5,21, 
78, 115, 116, 285, 347, 
367, 379, 490, 519, 533 
divisions of, 11 
points in, 11 
twenty-four universal methods 
of, 13,15,78
' II.
Peta, 168, 365, 476, 482
Pe^akopadesa, 221
Petavattliu, 23
Phussa, 501
Pitaka, Abhidhamma, 23, 
Sutta, 23, 27; Vinaya, 23, 
27, 36, 484
Pitakas, three, 19, 22, 26, 
study of, 29, 30, 31
Piyadassi, 40
Piyajali, 40
Piyapala, 40
Poiiika princes, 32
Po^thapada, 464
Pubba\’ideha, 393 
Puggalapafinatti, 5, 10 
Punnakasettlii, 215
Pm^avallika, 153
Pure Abodes, 18
Putimukha, 393
27;
24,
27;
Kahula Bliadda, 42
Rajagaha, 37, 43
Rajayatana, 44
Rakkhita, 251
Ratana Sutta, 33
Regents of the IKorW, 18, 20
Rehearsal—first Council, 2, 34 
—Three Councils, 87,120,122
Sabbasava Sutta, 476
Sahaiupati, 44
Sakata, 366
Sakka, 493, 542
Sakkapanha Sutta, 33'
Sakya, 42
Sal trees, 22
Sal aya tana Sutta, 476
Samantapasadika, 129,130 
Sambala, 41
Samiddhi, 118
Sammaditthi Sutta, 33
Sammohavinodani, 473 n., 516 n. 
Samyutta-Nikaya, 19, 23, 32, 80, 
530
Devata, 32
Sandeha, 40
Sanghadisesa, 503
Sanghamitta, 102
Sangiti Suttanta, 12 
Sankharabhajaniya Sutta, 33 
Sankharupapatti Sutta, 217 
Santusita, 41
Sarabhu, 188
Sariputta, 2, 12, 20, 21, 34, 36, 
40, 162, 217, 317, 492, 519
17
     

--- PAGE 264 ---

546 Index
.Satthamukha, 393 
Savatttu, 20, 361 
Sayana, 407 n, 
Senani, 43 
Setarabahgana, 509 
Siddhattha, 16 
Siggava, 40 
Simbali, 393 
Slneru, 35, 393 
Sirisa, 393 
Sita, 135 
Siva, 124 
Sobhita, 40 
Sonaka, 40 
Sotthiya, 43 
Subrabma, 525 
Sudassana, 393 
Sujata, 43 
Sumana, flower-seller, 215, 537 
Sumanadeva, thera, 39 
Sumukha, 414 
Supapna, 365
Sutta, 3, 23, 24, 26, 33, 49 
Sutta-nipata, 23, 33, 37
Tambapajini, 3 
Tantissara, 387
Tathagata, 7, 19, 33. 242, 317, 
387, 451, 463, 499, 637
Tavatimsa, 18, 19, 20, 40,45, 393 
Theramibatthala, 251 
Thera-theri-gatha, 23, 33
Thirty-three (devas), 1 
Thullaccaya, 503 
Timiratipingala, 17 
Tipitaka-culabhaya, 310 
culanaga, 309-10,354, 373 
Mahadhammarakkhita, 365 
Tissa, 116, 499, 501; Moggali’s 
son, 5, 68; °bhuti, 38
Tusita, 18, 41, 42, 44
Tuvataka Sutta, 33
Twin Miraele, 1, 16, 21, 38, 463
Udana, 23, 33
Udayi, 217
Uddaka, 43, 44
Upaka, 44 
Uposathakkhandha Sutta, 122 
Uruvela, 296
Uttarakuru, 20, 293 
Uttaravaddhamana jilt., lyi 
Uttiya, 41
Vakkali, 453 
Vasetthi, 499
Vattakalaka, 153 
Vedalla, 33
Vehapphala, 18 
Veyyakarana, 33
Vibhanga, 5, 9, 10. 23, 217-219, 
222, 226, 238, 270, 271, 277, 
449, 473; Bhikkhuni, 36; Boj- 
jhanga, 100,101,321; Dhamma- 
hadaya, 5; indriya, 4, 235; 
iddhipada, 321; Khuddaka- 
vatthu, 478; Magga, 321; Pa- 
ticcasamuppoda, 604; Sacc<i, 
321; Satipatthana, 321
Videhi dame, 2 
Vimariavatthu, 23 
Vinaya, 23, 24, 26, 36, 90
Vipassi, 524
Visakha, 40,43, 401 
Vissakamma, 42
Visudatta, 40 >■
Visuddhimagga, 3, 224, 245, 249, 
250, 251, 254, 255, 257, 265
Vitan(Ja school, 5
TFisdowi Tree, 14, 16, 21, 38, 40,
41, 43
Yakkhas, 393
Yama, 18
Yamaka, 5,11
Yugandhara, 1, 393 .
II.—MAIN WORDS AND SUBJECTS
Absolute {appaccaya), 63 
Abstention, 295 
Abstinence, 136, 204, 296 
Abuse, 132
Access jhana, 242
Accompanied, 92
Accumulation {acayo}, SI, 
426
290,
Acquisition, 77
Act of body, speech, and thought, 
112,139
threefold basis of meri­
torious, 106
Action, ten courses of immoral,
128,134; doors of, 106,109
Adaptation, 311
     

--- PAGE 265 ---

Index 547
Adoption, 56, 310,460 
Adverting, 145, 175, 311
Aggregates. 4, 9, 38, 187 
Agitation, 72
Aloof <291 
Amity, 71
Analyses, four, 4, 30 
Animal kingdom, 88 
Annihilation, 70,337,457, 476 
Apperception, 99,110
Application of mind, initial, 55, 
56, 122, 151, 152, 227 
sustained, 55, 56, 152, 
227 
of mindfulness, 4, 39
Appropriate, 184 
Arahantship, 30, 58, 243 
Ardour, 193 
Arisen (uppanna), 60, 88, 
464
Assembly, 76 
Associated, 54 
Assurance, 19 
Attainment, 72 
Attention, 175 
Average, 452 
Avoidance, 296
9(|,
I, 71, 173Balance (avikkhepa).
Beautiful, 253
Black, 69
Blame, fear of, 164, 171
Bliss (ease), 154/.
Body, fourfold, 109; three parts, 
413; intimation, 110, 422
Bonds, 47
Brahmins, five kinds, 513
Breadth, 195
Buoyancy, 199, 425
Burning, 69
Calm, 71, 173, 191
Carelessness of blame, reckless-
• ness (anottappa), 70
Causal Genesis, 4, 39
Relation, 78
Causeway, 297
Certain {niyata), 61
Cessation, 30, 465
Changed, 465
Characteristic, 84, 182
Charity, 209
Coefficients (sankhara), 11
Cohesion, 435
Co-intoxicant (sasov(i)i 64
Common, 452
Compassion, 467
Comprehension, 71, 173, 196, 233 
Conceit, 478
Concentration, 30, 156, 161, 191, 
217; three kinds of, 240
Condition, 78, 81
Conditional, conditioned {sah^- 
tiika}, 62, 63
Confidence, 191
Confidences, four, 43 
Connate, 66
Conscientiousness (sense of blame), 
164, 171, 177, 198
Consciousness (cilia), 65, 84/., 91, 
149. 162, 185, 187; (inano), 91; 
(viniia'iia), 187; apperceptive, 
128; automatic, 94; receptive, 
127; constructive, 310; sum­
maries of, 8
Contact, 12, 16, 126, 143/., 180, 
182; six doors of, 127; fivefold,' 
96 n. 2
Control, 27
Corpse, kinds of, 264
Corrupt, corruptible, corrupting, 
55
Corruptions (kilcsa), 4, 48, 495 
Cosmogony (bhummanlara), 5,122 
Co-ulterior (sa-uttara),
Courtesy, 506
Covetousness, 133, 134, 135, 332 
Culture (bkavana), 57, 210 
Cumulation (caya), 58
Decades, 413
Declaration of Preponderance, 
355, 376
Deflection, 202 
Deliverances, 255 
Delusion, 332
Depravity, 72 
Derived (upada), 66, 402 
Desire (chanda), 175
Destiny, 87
Device, ten kinds of (Jhana), 223, 
248
Dhamma, profundity of, 44; true 
preachers of, 37
Differentiation, 195 
Discernment, 195 
Discrimination, 195
Dispersion (apacaya), 58 
Dissolved, 465
Divine States, 257 /.; why so 
called, 262
Doctrine (dhamma), 28, 35
     

--- PAGE 266 ---

548 Index
Dominant, influence, 463
Doors, 6f action, 109; of sense, 126
Doubt, 457
Frivolous talk, 132,133
Function, 84, 182
Future, 60, 78
392,
Ear, 407
Eel-wriggling, 477 
Efforts, four supreme, 182 «. 
Elation, 190
Elements, eighteen, 4 
Elimination, 77 
Emancipation, 72 
Emptiness, 299, 300 
Endeavour, 193 
Energy, 159 
Envy, 479 
Equanimity, 176, 259 
Erudition, 195 
Essential property, 84 
Essentials, four, 66, 291, 
436
Etemalism, 70,337,476, 501 
Etymology, 69
Exalted (efeodi), 226; (panito), 59, 
284
Examination, 189,195 
Excitement (flurry), 173, 191 
Exertion, 193Existence, craving for, 70 
Exposition (desana), 28, 29; 
(veyydlcarand), 33
Expressions, 69 
Extension, 147, n. 2 
External {bdhiddha, bahi), 
(hahira), 66
Eye, 402-3
61;
Faith, 157, 158, 191
False {miccha), 59 
Falsehood, conscious, 123 
Fear of blame, 165, 198 
Feeling, 54, 145
Felicity, 189
Femininity, 419
Fetters, 47, 64, 320
Pinal couplets, 48
Finite (pam&na), 58
Finity, 70
Fitness, 200
Fixatiea. 189
Floods, 40,47, 65 
Fluster,-470
Focussing, 189
Food, 430
Foolish, 68
■Eprtitude, 193
Foul, ten bases of the, 264
Gift, of colour, 105 
four purities of, 214
Good conduct, 139 
Goodwill, 171, 199 
Grasped, 55,109
Grasping, 47, 66
Greed, 332
Gross, 438
Group, 78, 81
•Guide. 196
Happened, 464
Happ5S 184
Harm, °ful, “less, 67
Harmony in antecedents, 76. 79 
Heart, 185
Heresies, sixty-two, 27 
Hermaphrodite, 421 
Hindrances, 47, 65, 219 
Homage, fivefold, 96 «.
Ignorance, 64, 70, 451; belonging
to, 68
Ill-will, 133-5
Immeasurable, 247, 252; the
Four, 262/,
Immediate, 462
Immoral action' ten courses of,
128, 134
. Impermanence, 429 
Incitement, 196 
Incomparable {an-ntlara), QI 
Indifference, hedonic {iipelcha).
56; ten kinds of, 230
Infinite (appamand), 58; four, 213
Infinitudes, four, 4 
Infinity, 70 
Inoperative, 385 
Insight (dassana), 56, 57, 460;
(nona), 467; (vipassand), 71, 
173; 196
Intemperance, 71
Intention, 189
Intermediate couplets. Lesser and
Greater, 47
Internal {ajjhaltika), 66 
Intimation, 110-2 
Intoxicant (dsava), 47, 55, 63
Intuition (patiredZio), 29 
Investigation, 189 
Invisible, 61, 404 
Irreversible {avipanta), 28, 29
     

--- PAGE 267 ---

Index 549
Jhana, 216, 222; basic, 308 
Joyous, 162
Kamma, 37, 88, 116; variety of, 
86; three forms of, 117; four­
fold, 118
Knots, 47, 64
Knowledge (vijja), three kinds of, 
30; super® (tdihinna), 30
Latent bias, 326 
Laughter, 387 
Leading out, 67 
Letter, 181
Life (jtvila), 163,198,421; (pana), 
128
-taking, 121, 128, 134, 135; 
five factors and six means 
of, 129
-continuum, 185 
Lightning-like, 68 
Limited (paritta), 58,247, 252 
Love, 258, 466-7 
Low (Kina), 59, 285 
Lusty maids, 114 
Lying, 131
Man, 86, 88 
Manifestation, 84 
Masculinity, 420 
Mass, 78
Material (rupi); iin®, 63 
Matter, 8, 69
Meaning (attha),‘28 
Meanness, 480 
Medium (majjhitna), 59 
Mental, 184
action, 185
adjustment, 189
properties, 65
successors, 66
Merit, sharing of, 210; striving 
after, 214
Meritorious acts, ten bases of, 209 
Merriment, 189
Mildness, 71
Mind (citta), 88, 90, 91; (mana), 
95, 116, 162, 185, 186; (ndtna), 
69, 162
Mindfulness, 71, 160, 173, 194, 
233
Mirth, 189
Moment, ninth, 77, 80
Moral, 51, 52, 75; good, 84; 
action, ten courses of, 136
Name, 181, 499
Negligible, 120, 122,124,125
Nibbana, 28, 56, 67, 72, 138, 518 
Niggardliness, 483
Non-becoming, 70 
Non-comprehension, 71 
Non-condition (na Ae/it), 61 
Non-covetousness, 171
Non-grasping, 66 
Non-intoxicant {aiMsava), 63 
Non-obliviousness, 195 
Non-restraint, eightfold, 127 
Non-superficiality, 194
Nose, 407
Nutriment, 203
Object of the senses, 95
Objective {sarammana), 65
Obliviousness, 71
Observations, five great, 42
Occasion (thana), 71; (samaya), 
76
Occurrence, 197
Oceans, four great, 13
Odour, 417
Offences, 70
Omniscience, 15,16,17
One-pointedness of mind, 156, 
190, 331
Onward effort, 193
Opinion, 76; rectified, 211
Opportunity, 76
Opposition, 182
Order, fivefold, 360
Origin, 66
Origination, 441
‘Or whatever,’ 174, 225, 417
Painting, art of, 85
Passionate delight, 467
Past, 60,78,465
Patience, 71
Path, 7. 56, 59, 119, 204, 314, 
315, 460; eightfold, 4
Penetration (pativedha), 28, 77
Perception, 146,’ 184, 279
Perfection, 72
Persistence, 197
Personal (ajjhalta), 60 f, 466
Persons, four, 31
Pity, 176, 259
Plane, 89
Plasticity, 200,425
Poise, 191
Positions of mastery, 252
Potency, 4; tenfold, 121; in
Atharvaveda, 122; of trans­
formation, 250
     

--- PAGE 268 ---

550 Index
Powers, fen, 43
Preamble, 251, 256
Precepts, five, 4; (viaesa), 23
Predetermined, 444
Prefix, 181
Present, 60, 530
Principles (uiridAd), 23
Process, 314
Proficiency, 70, 195
Profundity, fourfold, 28
Progress, 198; fourfold, 218, 244-6 
. Proximate cause, 84
Purgatories, 53
Purity, 72, 262, 459; precepts of, 
■ 201. See Gift.
Questions, five kinds of, 73, 74
Rapture (zest), 153,154, 222 
Rays, Buddha’s, 17,18 
Reacting, 61, 404, 414 
Recollection, 194
Rectitude, 200
Reflection, 195
Refuge formula, 36, 542 
Registration, 352, 358
Relative {aappaccaya), 63 
Remembrance, 194 
Renouncement, 296 
Representative process, 96; illus­
trations of, 97
Research, 195
Resolution, 175 
Respect, 210
Restrainti eightfold, 128; and
control (samvarasamvara), 
Results, 54
Reversed, reversing, perverting, 
65
Reversion (perversion), 47,65,492 
Riddance, threefold, 27 
Rule and ritual, 458 
Rupa-world, 25
Sagacity, 196
SaqisSra, 13
Scattering, 191
Season, 76
Sense, avenue, 410
Sense-desires, 219 >
Sense-organs, twelve, 4, 186
Sensuous, 82, 83; universe, 82
Signless, 301
Slander, 132
Solidity, 190
Soul, theory of, 6
Sound,417
Space-element, 425
Speech, 114; harsh, 132; inti­
mation by, 115, 423; lying, 
131
Stability, 190
Stage, 291
State, 60-2, 75
Steadfastness, 190
Strength, 164, 205
Striving, 193
Studentship, 58
Suavity, 70, 200
Subjective {ajjhatta), 225; (and- 
rammana), 65; (niyalcajjhatta), 
60
Sublime (mahaygala), 58
Subsistence, 197
Subtlety, 195-
Summary, 9
Support, 71
Surliness, 70
Suttantika couplets. 48
Sympathy, 176, 258-9 
Synonymous, 69
Taste, 418
Temperance, 71
Thanksgiving, 211
Theft, 130,134-5
Thought, quickness of, 81; accom­
plished by virtue, culture, 
charity, 102
Thrice-conditioned, 180
Thunderbolt, resembling, 68 
Time, 78
Tongue, 407
Torpor, 489
Tortoise, blind, 80
Touch, 180
Training, threefold (aikkha), '2'1
Tranquillity, 171, 199, 301
Tranquillizing, 225 
Transcendental (loknUtara), 63 
Transgression (ajjhacdra}, 21 
Triplet, moral, 47, 73; of feeling, 
39, 47,56
True, 69
Trust, 191
Truth, act of, 137
Truths, four, 4, 39, 323
Twist, 202
Ugly, 253
Ulterior {uttara), 63, 67
Uncertain (aniyata), 67
     

--- PAGE 269 ---

Index 551
Unconscientiousness (ahirikS,), Id 
Undorived (ttHpada), 66 
Understanding (paniid). 30, 
161, 162, 195, 196, 217 
Undesired, 300 
Uniform {niyaia), 59- 
Unincluded, 67 
Unitary method, 5 
Unthinkables, four, 31 
Untrained, 4M 
Uplift (poffffd/ia), 173 
Uprightness, 71
Vibration, 152 
Vigour, 193 
Visible {sanidassa7ia), 61, 414 
Visible object, 95, 99, 256 
Void, 206
92,
Volition, 117, 128, 147, 210; and 
kamma, 117
Wheels, four, 77, 80
White, 69
Wieldiness, 200, 425
Wisdom (6Aiir*),*101; (vijja), 68, 
72; seven factors of (6orf/ii), 295 
Wise, 68
Woman, 86, 88; married and un­
married, 130
World, worldly, 63
Worry, 491
Wrong conduct, 130, 134, 135
Yoke, 65
Zeal, 193
Zest (pi/i), 56, 100, 153
• III.—PALI WORDS DEFINED OR DISCUSSED
Akusala, 50
Agha, aghagatain, 425
Ajjhatta, 60, 225 
Aniiatha, 203 n. 
Alina, 481 
Anhana,259 re.
Ati-, “chattaip, "deva, °dhaja, 
“brahma, “rajakumara, 4 
Attanimittam, 301 re.
Attabhava, 61, re. 1, 404 re, 
Attamanata, 190,505 re. 
Atta, 61 re.
Attha, 28 
Adinnadana, 129 
Adukkha-m-asukha, 64 
Adhamma, 49 » 
Adhikaranasamatha, 191 re. 
Adhimuccana, 255 
Anatikkama, 296-7 
Anattamanata, 344 
Anatthassa, 455 
Anu-upa-vicara, 189 
Anuggahana, 165 re.
Anupekkhata, 189 
Anubhavana, 145 
Anumajjana, 152 re.
Amdoma, 300 re., 311 re. 
Anusandhi, 34 re.
Anusaya, 313 re. 
Antaram, 14 re.
Anto, 256
Appapihita, 300 re.
JLl>l>oKS.i41£S, 1, 120 12«), W.  2
Abbha, 415 
Abbhana,508 
Abbhuta, 33 
Abhi-, 3/., 24 
Abhikkanta, 3, 25 n. 
Abhiiina, 244, «. 3 
Abbinnata, 24 n. 
Abhidhamma, 24 
Abhinibbatti, 442 n. 
Abhippasada, 192 
Abhibhayatana, 252 ?i. 
Abhibhu, 252 w. 
Abhilakkhita, 25 n. 
Abbisamaya, 28 n., 76 
Amanussa, 417 n. 
Ambankuravanna, 415 
Arupa, 269 
Arupavacara, 67 
Alobha, 167 n. 
Avyakata, 50, 309 n. 
Asaipsappana, 175 
Asakkacca, 522 n. 
Aaankhariyabhava, 94 re. 
Asuropa, 343
Ahetuka, 473
k; 63, 189Aka<J^aa»» 189 re.
^gamma, 40o
Spatha, 97 re-
Apo, 435
     

--- PAGE 270 ---

552 Index
Abhuiita, 100 n.
Ayatona,, 186, 203, 252 n., 337 
Ayu, 197 n.
Arati. 296
Arabhatha, Arabhanti, Arambha, 
. 102/.
Avnso, 44 n.
Asayaposana, 220 n.
55, 63, 64 
Asa, 470 
Ahara, 430
Iti, 6 n.
Itthindriya, 192 
Indriya, 157
Udana, 33
Udeti, 226
Uddana, 34
Upacitatta, the storing up, heap­
ing, developing is both a growth 
of its own result and the pre­
vention of the result of other 
karma.—fika,
Upadaniya, 55
Upadayati, 402 w. 
UpaxLlinnakakaya, 109 n., 437 
Upadinnupadaniya, 55 
Upadiyanti, 66 n.
Upekkhasahagata, 208 
Uppanna, 88, 90, 222 n.
Uru, 296
Usuma, usma, 439
Chand, 151 m.
Ekodi, 226 
Elam, 506 
Eva, 218,219
Oja, 110
Kahkha, 345
Katukancukata: katuka = asa- 
dattho, dukkhattho; ancuka- 
saddo gatyattho.—JfadAiwdro. 
Or, katecehu = spoon -t- anon: 
ancati, ‘ to offer,’ hence a mere 
spoon-offering.
Katama, 184
Kamma, 88, 465 
Kamma-nflatta, “nnabhava, 200 
Kammavaca, 508 n.
Karaja, 485 n.
Karuria, 258 n,
Kasiria, 249, n. 1, 635
Kahapana, 369 416 n.
Kamavacara, 67 
Kava, 61 n., 17?, 176,199, 408
483 n., 486 
Kicchati, 344 
Kiriya, 8 n. 
Kilesa, 4, 219 n, 
Kukata, 343 
Kukkucca, 343 
Kusala, 48,49,50, 83
Khandha, 186; °aduu, 535 n.
Khara, 439
Khelagata, 425
Gata, 290 n., 425, 439 
Gantha, 47 n.
Galajjhoharaniya, 430
Ga,thS>, 33
Gaha, 337
Guna, 129
Guthagata, 330
Geyya, 33
Gotrabhu, 56 n., 310 n.
Ghana, 407
Caraija, 85 n. 
Caro, 189 
Ci to, 85
Citta, 84,162, 172, 177, 185
Cittekaggata, 156
Citra, 85
Cinoti, 84
Cetana, 185, n. 2.
Cetasika, 65 n., 146,184 
Cetaso, 226, 491 n. 
Cetosamphassaja, 184 
Chanda, 225 n., 326 n.
Jappa, 470
Javana, Q9n., 110 
Jatarupa, 415-6 
Janam, 7, n. 2 
Jivitindiiya. 129 n. 
Jotirasa, 416
Nanavippayutta, 208
Thana, 149, 213 n.
Takka, 69,188; takkana, 189 n, 
Tacchati, 185 ».
Tajja, 1^, 187
Tanha, 326 n.
Tatramajjhattata, 176 w, 
Tatha, 203 «.
     

--- PAGE 271 ---

Index 553
Tad-anudhammata, 246 n.
Tittha, “ayatana, 337
Tidasalaya, 1 n. 
'Tidivokkama, 38 n.
Tcjogata, 439
Thambhana, 123
Thavariya, 148 w. 
Tliina, 484 m.
Thullakumarigocara, 201 n
I
Ditthi, 330; °gata, 336
Dukkata, 123 
Dukklia, 53
Dussila, 502 m.
Desana, 28
Desetva naj'ato, 2, n. 2
Devayntana, 186
Doso, 342
49.Dhamma, 5, 7 21 n., 28,
50, 63, n. 6, 218; “^thiti, 455 n 
Dhatu, 187
Namana, 500
Namanti, 69 
Nama, 69, 500 «.
Namarupa, 149
Nikaya, 32; “antaram, 3, n. 2
Nikkhepa, 9 n.
Nikhilena, 15 n.
Nidana, 6 n., 34 ' '
Nipata, 34
Nibbuto, 170, n, 1
Niyaka, 225 n.
Niyamattho, 218 », 
Niyamena, 520 n.
Nirayo, 495 »i.
Niruttipatha, 69
Nissayakamma, 37 n,
Nila, 414
Nela, 506
Pa-, 189
Pakati bhava, 343 n.
Paggaha, 71 n.
Paccatta, 225 w.
Paccaya, 399 
Paccupatthana, 84 
Pajanati, 161
Pannatti, 499 n.; “paths, 69 
Panna, 161
DaunSdosaka, 101 n. 
Paiinasa, 34 
Patitthana, 432 
Patipada, 467 ji.
Patipassaddhi, 199 
Patipassambhana, 199 
Pati\-irati, 296 
Pativedha, 28, 81 n. 
Patihanaiia, 61 
Papdakagocara, 201 », 
Padatthana, 84 
Padesa, 39 n. 
ParSmasa. 47 n. 
Parikassati, 91 n. 
Parikkhara, 470 n. 
Parinipphanna, 444 n. 
Paribhavana, 217 
Paribheda, 429 
Parij’adatum, 355 n. 
Pariyutthaiia, 471 7i. 
ParivasS, 508 
Parihara, 392 
Pali-, 468 
Passam, 7, ?i. 2 
Pacittiya, 123 n. 
Papagaragocara, 201 Ji, 
Palito, 384 ?i, 
Pitaka, 25, 26 
Pipdajavana, 376 «. 
Piti, 153, n. 1 
Pitisukham, 222 
Purna, pura, pori, 506 
Pej^ala, 34
Fhalattha, Hl n.
Phassa, 183, 187; “phusana, 181
Phusana, 180,183
Bala, 164; “ppattam, 156 
Bujjhati, 294
Bodhi, 294
Brahma, 7 n., 258
Bhava, 289 n., 471 
Bhavaiiga, 185 n.
Bhapavara, 8 n.
Bhava, 206 n.
Bhavana, 217 
Bhaveti, 218, 289 «. 
Bhikkhunigocara, 201 n, 
Bhuta, 409 «.
Bhumi,291
Bhuri, 101 n., 195 
Bhedakaravatthu, 37 n.
Magga, 216,' 354 w,
Mappa, 132 n.
Maddavata, 200 n.
Mano, 162, 177, 185, 186, 187;
“gahanain, 186 n.
Mamma,'132 n.
     

--- PAGE 272 ---

554 Index
Mahapaligha, 339
Mahaliodhinidano, 38 n. 
Mahika, 413
Maliisa, 83 
jllanatta* 508
Manasa, 185
Maya, 333, 468 Jl.
Masaka, 416 
Mukhadana, 19 n.
Mukhasiya, 430
Mutam, 439
Muttagata, 330
Mudita, 200, n. 2, 258
Metta, 258
Modana, 189
Yaip, 184
Yapanft, 197
Rana, 67, n. 4
Rasa, 84 
Rajabhiraja, 23 n. 
Rajaj'atana, 44 ».
Rupa, 67 w., 92,150. 255, 500
°jhana, 255; °sanna, 269 
Ruparammana, 407 
Rupavacara, 67, 216 n., 264 m. 
Rupi, 89 255
Lakkhana, 84
Lujjana, 63 
Luddhika, 361 n,
Loka, 63 
Lokiya, 63 m.
Lokuttara, 8 n., 289 n.
Vakka,185
Vagga, »4
Vaccba, 83
Vanatha, 469
Vanam, 518
Vayog’ata, 439
Vasudeva, 186 
Vikkhambhana, 455 a. 
Vikhadana, 430 
Vicaya. 195
Vijja, 72, 517; “mayiddhi, 122
Vinnatti, vinnapana, vinnapitat- 
ta, 423
Vinnana, 186-7; °anca, °ananca, 
Z75
Vitakka, 69,188,189 n.
Vidhavagocara, 201
Vinaya, 23
Vipariyesagaha, 337 
Vipakadhamma, 34 n.
I Vipaka-bhava, -sabhava, 55 n, 
VipphSra, 152 n. 
Vibhavaditthi, 70 n. 
Vibhavana, 217 
Virati, 296 
Viriya, 158,193; “arambha, 192-3 
• Vi vara, 425' 
Visakkati, 468 ». 
Visankbara, 22 n. 
Visakaritaka. 273 
Visattika, 468 
Visada, 238 n. 
Viharati. 223 n. 
Vitbicittani, 357 n. 
Vuttbana, 508 
Vedana, 53,184 n.
Vedalla, 34 
Veyyakarana, 33 
Veramani, 296 
Vela, 296 
Velayati, 297 
Vesiyagocara, 201 n.
Vyanjana, 421
Sainsattha. 93
Samsara, 13
Sahkappa, 69, 189
Sankhata, a°, 63 w.
Sankha, 499 n.
Sankhara, 11 jz., 69, 207, 399 n.,
485 n.; “kkhajidha, 447 n. 
Sangaha, 202 Hi 
Sanjanana, 146, 183 
Sanjanitatta, 185 
Sanna, 146, 183 
Sati, 159 
Satta, 344 n. 
Saddha, 157 
Santati, 76 n.
Santhamhhana, santhambhitatta, 
423
Sabbasamayikaparisaya, 35 n. 
Sabbhavato, 440 m.
Sabhavattba, 447 w. 
Sabhavapada, 180 n., 185 ni 
Sa.iaa,ya,, 76, 82, 193 
Samapatti, 230 n.
Samarambha, 193
Sampattiya, 198
Sampada, 72 n.
Samphusana, samphusitatta, 180, 
181, 183
Sambhavana, 217 
Samma, 163 n.
Samyutta, 34
Samyojaniya, 64
     

--- PAGE 273 ---

Index 555
aSaranata, 194 ,
Sarirasabhava - vipatti - vasena, 
266 n.
Savasa, 81 n.
iSavibhattika, 177 
Sasaiikharena, 207
Sahagata, 92, 209
Sahetuka, 473
>SSta. 184
Sanika, 16 n.
Sineha, 435
Sila, 102 n.
Su-,71
Sumsumara, 411 n.
Sukha, 62, 154 n., 184 n.
Sukhena sukliam, 616 h. 
Sutta, 24, 35 •
Suddhika, 248 n.
Sumano, 162 
Suvanna,416
Settha, 262 
Setu, 297 n.
Sotam, 407
Hadayavatthu, 342 n. 
Hari, 414 
Hiri\’itabbena, 198 
Hetu, 62, 76, 399 
Hetu dhamma, 61 *
IV.—CHIEF SIMILES
BuNDFOLDED archer, 313
Blind tortoise, 80 
Bom-blind and cripple, 370
Cobweb, 367
Conjunction of stars, 312 
Crow flying in sky, woman 
mid-ocean, bhikkhu in cave, 361
in
Dealer in molasses, 273
Door-keeper, 368
Embankment in river, 357
Enemies with swords, 429
Four garments, 281
Four-storeyed palace, 281
Frontier country in revolt, 327
King and artisaps, 179
King and craftsmen, 277
Mango, 359
Minister’s son, 241
Oil for besmearing bowls, 279
Pavilion in unclean place, 282 
Robe, 304
Soap, 325
Sugar-cane machine, 363
Traveller, 497
Treasure-baskets, 323
Village child, 369
Hungry demon, 431
Hungry man, 306
Water in one’s path, 279
Woman arahant, 608
* In the Indexes we acknowledge with pleasure the land assistance 
voluntarily rendered by Mrs. A. Batuwantudave, of Colombo.—Ed.
     

--- PAGE 274 ---

556 Corrigendof, etc.
CORRIGENDA, Etc.
.(Add to Corrigenda, Vol. I.: Page 32, line 4 from bottom read 
fifteen /or fourteen.)
Page 299, note 1 delete (a).
Page 371, line 1 deZete non-.
Page 395, line 15 ddete full stop.
,, lineJ.8 insert full stop/or comma.
Page 452, line 5from below read Buddhas, silent for Buddhassi. lent. 
Page 470, ddete asterisk /o Asa.
»SUITiU> IK OKKAT BKITAIN BI BILUMO AKO SUKB, LTD., OUlLOrOBO AKO XSUBR.
     

--- PAGE 275 ---

iiiiiiii mill Hill III
00048704
Digitized with financial assistance from
on 11 March, 2020
Shri Brihad Bhartiya Samaj
     

--- PAGE 276 ---

     

