we sihe 


ALS at 


-¢ a’ 
“ 


? 


7 
a 


(SOA S 


4 


. 


4" 


+ 
*, 
/ 


Pee eud tr 
=e) o - 


- 
sae ee 

+ ee.* Ore * ot 
=< v< 


, PE 1 


i 


‘ 
t 
A 
a) 
: 


Pa on nS en ee 
° -~ 


mm, 


eet ii ‘ 
fia 35) 
Nt i 
a a 


oe 


THE,PATH OF PURITY 


= ; / 
PALI TEXT ‘SOCIETY 
Translation Series é . 
(Extra Subscription : this is now fixed at 10s. per angtyn) as 
VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED: i ar 


i : al{s OF THE 
1. Psalms of the Early Buddhists, Part I., Psa. OF I 
Sisters, translated from the Thexi-gatha. By. Mrs. Rhys*Davids, 
D.Litt, M.A. Fellow of University College; -Indon. 1909. 
Price 10s. net, é Oe 


2. Compendium of Pififsophy, being a translation of the 
Abhidhammattha-sangaha, Wy Shwe Zan Aung, B.A. ° Revised 
and edited by Mrs. Rhys Davids.* 2910. | Price 10%. net. 


3. The Mahavamsa; or,.'The Great Chronicle of" Ceylon. 
Translated into English ky Wilhelm Geiger, Ph.D., Professor of 
Indogermanic Philology at Munich University ; “ assjsted by 
Mabel Haynes Bode, Ph.D. 1912. Pricg 10s. net. ® 


4. Psalms of the Early Buddhists, Part IL, Psarms or tHe 
Breruren, translated from the Theragatha, with excerpts fram 
the unpublished Commentary by Dhammapala. By Mrs. Rhys~ 
Davids. 1913. Price 10s. net. e 


5. Points of Controversy, or Subjects of Discourse, tranglated 


from the Katha- Vatthu, with notes from the Commentary? ByO 
Shwe Zan Aung and Mrs. Rhys Davids. 1915. Price 10s. net. 


_ 6. Manual of a Mystic, translated from the anony 
Singhalese MS., published (PTS, 1896) as 4A \¥% 
Manual, by F.L. Wood ward, M.A., Principal of 
Galle. 1916. Price 105:.net., 


%, The Book of the Kindred Sayi S5 being a trans, 
lation of Samyutta Nikdya, I. Bulk 8. Rhys Davids, 1917. 


Price 10s. net. 

8. The Expositor, Vol. I., being a tr 
Pp- 1-213 PYS €d. By 
10s. net, 


9. The Expositor, Vol. IL., 
Pp. 214 to end 
10s. net. 


10. The Book of the Kindred Sayings, IL., 


lation of Sa TY Wt NUL 
Price 10s. a a Niktiya, II. By Mrs, Rhys 


Pali- 
vachara’s 
inda College, 


anslation of the Atthasalinz 
Maung Tin, M.A. 1990," Price , 


o 


P, being a translation of the Atthasalint 
PTS ed. By Maung Tin, M.A, 1921. Price 


a : 
being a trans- 
Davids. 1922, 


\eF ‘ 


ow’ 


Ra. 


x : 


“Pali Cext Society 


9 TRANSLATION SEriEs, No, 11 A 
(xrra Supscrrprron) 


at, THE C 
PATH. OF PURITY 


BEING 
A TRANSLATION OF® 


BUMDHAGHOSA’S VISUDDHIMAGGA 
By “ee 


> 


BY 


PE MAUNG TIN 


TRANSLATOR OF THE ‘* ATTHASALINI” 


9%, 


a PART. 1. 2 
OF VIRTUE (OR MORALS) 
' KCC 
TANI 
Me 
* PUBLISHED FOR rin aes aa SOCIETY 


BY 

THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, AMEN CORNER, E.C. 
o AND Ar : 
NEW YORK, TORONTO, MELBOURNE, AND BOMBAY 


P~*REF ACE 


THE present volume is a translation of the first part of 
Buddhaghosys Visuddhimagga,%the famous treatise which was, 
as 18 believed, written in Ceylon in the beginning of the fifth 
century A.D. Professor Lanman,.of Harvard University 
published an admirable analysisgof this first part in the 
American Agadtmy of Artsaand Sciences, vol. xlix, No. 3, 
August, 6913. Synce then ten years have passed by without 
our seeing the’ long-hoped-for American editioneof the text or 
its tefGSlation. The Pali Text Society, which all along felt 
the-née@ of a European edition of this work, could wait no 
® onger, and recatily brought out their own edition of the text. 

w So, on the assurance of the editor, Mrs. Rhys Davids, that she 
© - Saw no prospect of an American translation, I submitted my 
translation to the Pali Text Society. As has been explained 
in the Editorial Note to my translation of the Aftthasalin’, 
if d liad not entertained from year to year good hopes of 
seeing Professor Lanman’s edition and translation, I would 
have taken up,*six years ago, the translation of the 
Visuddhimagga instead of the Aithasalinz. 

Ine the Afterword to her scholarly edition of the 
Visuddhimagga,eMrs. Rhys Davids has’ said what she had to 
say*about the book and its author. I especially appreciate 
her useful list of quotations in the book from canonical and 
other works. I will here touch upon just one point. The 
a Visuddhimagga makes reference (see Index) to the Commen- 
oy . ie tarier on the Anguttara, Majjhima, and? Samyutta. To 

a ieee -’ i » those unacquainted with the history of the Commentaries it 

would thus seem that the Visuddhimagga was written later 

than these Commentaries. But, on the other hand, it is 

quoted by just these Commentaries on the Nikayas as well as 

e 7 by the Sam€ntapasidiki and Atthasalini, and is therefore 
earlier than these works. For instance, the Majjhima Com- 

; mentary, which is being edited for the Pali Text Society by 

4 Professor James H. Weods, refers to it by name. When, 
= ° : st therefore, the Visuddhimagga in its turn refers to the Majjhima 

iy : 


i r o 4 J ~% 


— 


vi Preface . 


ame, the explanation may well be that the 


Commentary by n gt tm alaan 


reference is not to the Majjhima Co 


Aan Nee 
written by Buddhaghosa, but to the original Ceylonese Com 


hich he later made his redaction. | Insthe 
which is ee 


igha 


mentary from W nt En 

noalavilasint also (1, 987); 
ae on the Digha Nikaya, he refers to the Pe 
Commentary—that is, to th riginal Ceylonese Cémmen ary 
he was recasting, or at Jeast consulting. ‘The opts) ane) e 
said of the other reference in the Visuddhimagga to the Com- 
mentaries on the Anguttara ang°Samyutta.» And we know 
that there were these original Ceylonese Commentaries and 
also the ‘ Poranas ‘on which Bud@haghosa basetl his writings. 
This explanation may account for the close similarity, which, 
as M. Nagai has pointed out in the Journal of the Rgti Text 
Society, 1917-19, exists between the V isuddhimagga and the 
Vimuttimagga, a work by another. writer. I would not, 


however, go to the extent of saying, as does M. Nagai,thatthes® . 


two works ‘ are one and the same work appearing in different 


Se 
attire,’ Considering that the doctrines, called the Buddha’s Yer j 


Word, have been preserved through the centuries by a dingo 
teachers, whose aim is consistency in doctrinal mere ion 
rather than originality in striking out né&w paths; may 
regard the Visuddhimagga and the Vimutti as more 
or less independent ‘works, written by mex, Who belonged to 
the same school of thought—namel orthodox school at 
Anuradhapura. Final decision, Se oe be postponed 
until we know more of Buddha¥ltosa’s writings and the works 
to which he refers, 

I have consulted with beffefit the Burmese transldtion 
(Rangoon, 1914 by Pyi Sayadaw. And in the footnotes I 
have made occasional quotations from such works on the 
Visuddhimagga as the Mahatika by Dhammapala of Ceylon 
and the Ganthi by Saddhammajotipila of Burma. My 
thanks are due to Bhikkhu Silacara, who was kind enough 
to go over my first draft translation of Chapter I; arid to 
a lien for her kind help in reading the proofs 

> een Interest she has taken in the translation. 


Exeter Cottecy, Oxrorp, ° PE MAUNG TIN, 
Deeinber 10, 1922, 


Made esse, 


Psst na 5 


CONTENTS 


PREFACE - - - - - ov 

~ F 

INTRODUCTORY Discounsn \ - > fee ay 
CHAPTER ® 

[. Exposition oF VIRTUE - - °. - 8-65 

" "1. wHer is virtuh,?, - -. . ses 

2. IN WHAT SENSE IS IT VIRTUE Ee 2 9 


e 
GENERAL DiscoursE > z rs 


- 66 

1. THE R®FUSE-RAGMAN’S PRACTICE - - 70 

2. THE THREE-ROBER’S PRACTICE - - 7 

e 3. THE ALMSMAN’S PRACTICE -~ - - 74 
4, THE €OUSE-TO-HOUSE-GOER’S PRACTICE - 6 

: 5. THE ONE-SESSIONER’S PRACTICE - - 78 
6. THE BOWL-FOODER’S PRACTICE - - ~ 79 

: 7. THE AFTERFOOD-REFUSER’S PRACTICE - 81 
8. THE FORESTER’S PRAOTIOR - ~*~ - - 81 

* 9. THE TREE-ROOTMAN’S PRACTICE’ ”. - 84 
10. THE OPEN-SPACER’S PRAOTICE | - - 86 

ll. THE BURNING-GROUNDER’S PRACTICE - (87 

° 12. THE ANY-BEDDER’S PRACTICE - - 89 
~ 3s THE SITTING-MAN’S PRACTICE - - 90 
Or Ascetic AND OTHER TERMS AS MorAL Triap - 91 
Or Ascetic AND OTHER TeRMS AS DIFFERENTIATED 92 
In GRoupPs AND IN Derarn - - - 93 


es 


oe e. PROXIMATE CAUSE’? - - - 10 
N 4, WHAT ARE ITS ADVANTAGES ? - = 1H 
5. HOW MANY KINDS OF IT ARE THERE 2 - 42 
3 6. WHAT IS ITS CORRUPTION 2? - - - O57 
7. WHAT ITS PURIFICATION 2? - - - OT 

4 ° 
IJ. Exposition or THE Ascetic Practices - 66-95 


i) z + 
WHhaT ARE ITS CHARACTERISTI€S, ITS 
ESSENCE, ITS MANIFESTATION, ITS 


vii 


xO 


‘THE PATH OF PURITY 


Honour bé to Him, the Blessed, the Saint, the 
Buddha Supreme 


° INTBODUCTE RY DISCOURSE 


orn. man disereet, on virtue planted “firm, 
wr? In intellect and intuition trained ; 


\V The brother ardent and discriminant : 


Lis he maj fxom this tangle disembroil.”” 


” Thus it was spoken. And why was it thus spoken? 

It is said that to the Blessed One then staying at Savatthi 
there came one night a certain deva who, in order to have his 
doubt removed, asked this question :— 


* Tangle®within, without, lo! in the toils 
Entangled is the race of sentient things. 
e Hence would I tsk thee, Gotama, of this : 
Who #s°t can from this tangte disembroil 2” 


And this briefly is the meaning. By “tangle” is meant 
the net of craving. For craving is like the tangle of the 
network of branches of bambod-bushes and the like, in the 
sense of an intertwisting, because it arises below and above 


«repeatedly in connection with such objects as visible things. 


And it is said to be ** Tangle within, without,” from the fact 
of its arising within one’s own and others’ individualities 
ard what thereto appertains, in the organs subjective and 
objective. M@nkind is entangled in such a tangle. Just as 
bamboos and the like are entangled by such tangles as bamboo- 
bushes,” so all mankind, known as the various classes of 


1 Kindred Sayings I, 20. ? Read velugumbajatjdihi. 
I. . 1 


aT . 
2 The Path of Purity a 
sentient bet 
tangle of craving 
such entanglemen 


«this is the meaning. [2] An@® because of 
nt, the meaning of, “‘ Hence would I agk ‘thee, . 
f this,” is to be understood thus:—Therefore I wask 
Soe ss sie Blessed One by his family name, ¢rotama. 
thee, addressing angle disembroil?”” means: Who is 


‘ an from this té ; 
“i pincers this tangh which has thus*entangled the 
able = 


’) n ents q1 7 5 
sae ace the ®B&ssed One, walking in unobstructed 
U 


ra of devas, the Sakka of 

dg of all things, the eva fo) 
oe ae Brahma of Erne, confident with. the Four 
Confidences, bearer of the Tenféld Strength, *endowed with 
unimpeded knowledge and the all-seeing eye, spake this 


stanza In answer :— . @ 
“ The man discreet, on virtue plawted firm, 
In intellect and intuition trained ; 
The brother ardent and discriminant : 
Tis he may from this tangle disénbrotl.” an 
’ In setting forth, according to the truth, . Pp 
The meaning of the stanza of the Sage, O 
, 


Fre tine 


Which treats of virtue and such ofher 
: I will expound the Path of Purity.\ 
Which rests on the strict EAS Ke devout e 
Dwellers at the Great J] Bee Xe 
Purest decisions, g ng even those 
Who never may attain to purity 
For all their striving, though they seek it here, _ 
j Not knowing aright he Path of Purity, 
W hicl®holds all virtue, and is straight and safe, 
Though they to ordination have attained, . 
Hard to attain in the Great Conqueror’s realm. 
Devout men, whose desire is purity, .. 
Attend ye to the things that I relate. ig © 
Here, by ‘ 


. 


“Purity” is meant Nibbana, which is free from 
f all ta taints and exceedingly pure. The way to this purity ig 


oO 


i 
Or threefold conditions, viz. the Ee of sense, vite world of form, 
and the werld of the formless. 


are entangled, enmeshed, embroiled, in that - 
ngs, e 


j 
i 
: 
xO 
ox 
S 


P Introd: uctor, y Discourse 3 


- the “ Path of Purity. 2 The means of its acquisition is called 
the “Pathe” I am going to speak of that Path of Purity, 
Js the meaning. This Path of Purity has been set forth in 
“terms of cnnplle insight inesome places thus:— 


* All things conditioned are impermanent ; 
Lhe which who understandeth, holdeth Ill 
In scorn. This is the fgth of purity ; 7’ 


[3] in terms of Jhana-insight in othgreplaces thus :— 


wees Te [row Nibbana bs snot far in whom 
* Appear J hana and insight; sat 


in termsof\kainma and so forth j in some places hus :-— 


Nes Good will, and wisdom, mind bi y method trained, 
\V © The highest gonduct on good morals based :— 
This maketh mortals pure, not rank nor wealth ; 3 


fo terms of virtue and the like in other places thus:— 


“ He that in irtuous habit never fails, 
. Hath insight, can to mystic rapture win, 
© ~ Who stirs up effort, puts forth all his strength, 
’Tis he cag. cross the flood so hard to pass ;”°4 


in terms of the application of mindfulness and so forth in 
some splaces thus:—‘‘ This single way, this path, brethren, 
is for the purifyeation of beings . . , for the realization of 
Nibbana, to wit: the Four Applications of Mindfulness.’’ 

And the same with the Supreme Efforts and so forth. 
But here in the Blessed One’s reply it has been set forth in 
terms of virtue and so forth. * 

Thereon (i.¢., on the Blessed One’s star%a) this is the 
« brief comment :— 

“On virtue planted firm,” means, being established. in 
virfue. And here in this phrase one who is even now engaged 
in fulfilling virtue is said to be established in virtue. Hence 
the meaning ‘here is, being established in virtue by fulfilling 


1 Dhammapada 277. 2 1b. 372. 
3 Kindred Sayings I, 46. 4 Ib. 76. 
5 Digha Nikaya ii, 290; Dialogues of the Buddha ii, 327. 


The Path of Purity 


4 


» means, the sentient being. ‘‘ Discreet” 
tee he a f sdom born of kamme associated 
wise by means oF W ISC Ta es, ce 
(in the womb) attende ye e. hree | 

cenea ‘1p intellect andeintuition trained,”’ means 

Soc oe niration and insight; for here concesitration 
aes ace the head of, intellect (or mind), and iftsight 
Ba) a ee aE intuition (@r wisdom). “ Aftlent ’” means 
under us : nae . cy is calle ardour in the sense of causing 
SE a conmetely burnt up. He who possesses 
the corruptions to be comple y ; SAW ices 
itis ardent. In” discriminant, , Wisdom 18 called iscr niina- 
tion. Endowed therewith, is the meaning. By tus word 
“ discriminant,” is indicated preserving wiscdonr, 

In this answer wisdém comes three times. First there is 
mother-wit, second there is insight-wisdom, and Heer lke: 
is preserving wisdom, maintaining all functions.” He sees 
danger in the stream of existence—+this ie the brother 4 
(bhikkhu). “‘"Tis he may from this tangle disembroil 
means: [4] Just as a man standing on she ground may lift 
up a‘well-sharpened sword and clear away (disentangle 
big bamboo-bush, so may the brother endowed with ee 
states, to wit: this virtue and this concentratio set. forth 
under the heading of mind, and this threefold om, and 
this ardour, and stagding on the ground 3) wéhe, lift up, by 
means of the hand of preserving Wisdom upported Igy the 
strength of energy, the sword of in Wrisdofn well sharpened 
on the stone of CREE 8S d cleat away, cleave that 
entire tangle of craving which*keeps falling into the continuity 
of his own aggregates. Andeindeed he clears that tangle 
at the moment gf his attainment of the Path. At the moment 
of Fruition he, having cleared the tangle, is worthy of the best 
gifts in heaven and earth. Hence has the Blessed One said :— 


means, : 
with conception 


” The man discreet, on virtue planted firm, 
In intellect and intuition trained ; 
The brother ardent and discriminant : ® 
‘Tis he may from this tangle disembroil.” 


: Viz. The absence of greed, of hate, of delusion. 
Such as acquiring the subjects of meditation, making frequent 
questionings and being strenuous in culture, 


of 


2 


1 
} 
x, 
?- 
f 
t 
t 
q 


Armee 
e 


x 
+ deen ial 


Neeritet merremarteey mgt 


° Introductory Discourse D 


* What is.meant therein is, that there remains nothing for 
“the man” to do in regard to that wisdom by means of 
= « which-he is said to be “ discreet,” for his wisdom has been 
made perfect in virtue ofkamma done in a previous existence. 
And in’ “ardent and discriminant’ it is meant that he is to 
be persevering by means of the said energy, and compre- 
hending by means of wisdom; and establishing himself in 
Virtue, cultivate calm and insight indicated "by way of 
intellect (or mind) and intuition§ (or wisdom). Here, thus, 
the Blessed, Orte has set fork this Path, of Purity under the 
heads ofevirtue, concentration, and wisdom. 
Ron ed far have been set forth the thrgefold training, 
the on happy in its three stages$! the sufficing condition 
soe threefold knowledge* and so forth, the avoidance of the 
\. ro extremes and the practice of the middle course, the means 
of escaping states of Woe and so forth, the rejection of the 
corruptions in three ways, the opposition to transgression and 
so forth, the cleansing from the three corruptions, and the 
instrumentality necessary to Stream-winning and so fofth. 
flow so? Here by virtue is indicated the training in the 
higher virtue; by concentration, the training in the higher 
thought; and by wisdom, the training in the higher wisdom. 
And by virtue is indicated the happiness of the religion in 
its beginning. for, from such expressions as: ‘‘ What is the 
_ beginning of moral states? The virttce of great purity,”* and 
“the refraining from all evil,”* it is evident that virtue is the 
beginning of the religion. And since it bears such merit as 
absence of remorse, it is happy. 
By goncentration is indicated the happinegs of the religion 


*, in its progress. [5] For, from such expressions as: ‘“‘ the 
oO bea > 


fulfilment of morality,’* and so on, it is evident that concen- 
tration is in the middle of the religion. And since it bears such 
merit as the various kinds of supra-normal power, it is happy. 

By wisdora is indicated the happiness of the religion in its 


1 Its beginning, progress, and end. 

* Knowledge of former existences, the passing away and reappearing 
of beings, and the destruction of the intoxicants. 

3 Samyutta v, 143. 4 Dhammapade@ 183. 


oe 


6 The Path of Purity 
consummation. For, from the expression, ** the cheanenny of 
one’s mind, . . . this is the religion of the Buddhas,” we see 


ek ie Be 
the superiority of wisdom, and that it 1s the eee tes. 2 
ae ‘ SOIR Le ori ats San: 
the religion. And since 1t maintains ts natura ; 2 
affected amid desirable and undesirable things, 1t 1s happy. 
As it has been said :— 


“ As wind a massy rock doth never move, ai . 
So neither praise nae dispraise moves the wise. 


Similarly, in virtue is set forth*the sufficing condition of 
endowment with the Threefold Knowledge. , For, depending 
on the attainment of virtue one attains to the Threefold 
Knowledge, and not to fnything higher. In concen eaaCe is 
set forth the sufficing condition of endowment with the sixfold 
Superknowledge.? For, depending on th® fulfilment of con- 
centration one attains to the Sixfold Superknowledge, and not 


ce 


to anything higher. And in wisdom is set forth the sufficing ~ 


condition of the various kinds of analysis. For, depending 
on thé attainment of wisdom and on no other ground, one 
attains to the Four Analyses. ; 

By virtue also is indicated the avoiding of the ex 


devotion to the pleasures of sensuality; by conce on the 
avoiding of the extreme of self-mortification a y wisdom 
ce 


the practising of the middle course. 
Similarly in virtue is sét forth the 1 of transcending the 
states of woe; in pe AES ans of transcending the 
elements of sensuality; and in wisdom the means of transcend- 
ing all existences. © 3 
Again, by virtye is set forth the rejection of the corruptions 
by way of partial rejection;® by concentration, that by way of 


1 Dhammapada 183. 2 Ib. 81. 

* Super-normal power of (1) manipulating the physical form, 
(2) clairaudience far and near, (3) knowing others’ thoughts, 
(4) remembering former existences, (5) clairvoyance far and pear, 
(6) knowing how to bring the intoxicants to an end. s 

* Analysis of things, causes, terms, and the knowing process. 

° Tadangappahana : ‘ rejection by parts,’ rejection of various parts 
of immorality by various parts of morality, as darkness by the light of 
a lamp. Translated as ‘elimination of the factor in. question’ in 
Expositor 4504. : 


S 
\e2 


O 
et 


Z Introductory Discourse i 


8 e 
- discarding; and by wisdom, that by way of extermina- 


a 


tion. ° 

Again, by virtue is set forth opposition to actual deeds of 
‘the corruptions; by congentration, opposition to their up- 
rising; by wisdom, opposition to their latent tendency. 

[6] Again, by virtue is set forth the cleansing of the cor- 
ruption of misconduct; by concentration, cleansing of the 
corruption of craving; by wisdorf, cleansing of the: corruption 
of views. on é 

Again, by virtyie is set forth the instrumentality for Stream- 
winning” and Once-returning;” by concéntration, that for 
Never-returning; and by Wisdom, that for Sanctity. For 
the Str med is said to be a fulfiller of vfrtue; likewise 
the é-returner. But the Never-returner is said to be a 
Maller of concentrati@n; and the Saint a fulfiller of wisdom. 

Thus in so far are “set forth these nine triads, to wit; the 
Threefold Training, the religion happy in its three stages, the 
sufficing condition of the Threefold Knowledge and so forth, 
the avoidance of the two extremes and the practice of the 
midglle course, the means of transcending the states of woe 
and so forth, the rejection of the corruptions in three ways, 
the opposition to fransgression and so forth, the cleansing of 
the three corruptions, the instrumentality for Stream-winning 
and se forth, and such other triads as those of merits. 

This is the Introductory Discourse. » 

> 


CHAPTER I P 
EXPOSITION OF VIRTUE 


Txus this Path of Purity, albeit set forth under the heads 
of virtue, corfeentration,§ and wisdom, including various 
merits, has been expounded. ¥ery briefly indeed. . Conse- 
quently it may not be sufficiently yseful to all; and so, in order 
to make it knpwn in detail, the following questions are asked, 
beginning with the subject of virtue :— F 

1. What is virtue?! 2.In what sense is it evirtue ? 


its proximate cause? 4. WhatareitS advantages? 5. How 
many kinds of virtue are there? 6. What is its corruption ? 


7. And what its purification ? 


of 
And these are the answers:— as NS 
<O 


1. What is virtue? , 
Such states as the volition of one who abstaing febin life- 
taking and so forth, or of one who fulfils his ee For, : 
this has been said in the Patisanibhidam goa,” “ What is 
virtue? Volition is vértue; mental perties are virtue; j 
restraint [7] is virtue ; nowtregasiertvon “is virlue;’ wherein | 
the volition which is virtue is that of one who abstains from { 
life-taking and so forth, or of,one who fulfils his set duties; ; 
and the mental properties which are virtue are the abstinence | 


of one who abstains from life-taking and so forth. Further, 
the volition which is virtue is that of the seven courses of 
action of one who forsakes life-taking, and so on; the mental 
properties which are virtue are such states as non-covetolis- 


——— ee 
1 Sila is moral habit, habitual good conduct. Cf. Pss. of the Brethren, 
p. 269, n. 2. It was the very essence of the Founder’s gospel. or 
his Order it became the basis of doctrine, and elaborated into what we 
understand by virtue. 
, 2 i, 44, 


} 
: 
3. What are its characteristics, its essence, its manifestation, x 


. I.—Exzposition of Virtue 9 
. e 


ness, goodwill, right views expressed in this manner: “ Putting 
away covétousness he lives by thought free from covetous. 
ness.”, In “restraint is virtue,” restraint should be under- 
stood as fivefold:! by intans of the Patimokkha, of mindful- 
ness, df knowledge, of patience, of energy. Of these, ‘‘ He is 
endotved, fulfilled with this restraint according to the Patimokskkha?2 
—this is Patimoklha-restraint. “ He keeps watch over the 
controlling faculty of sight, attdins to the restraint of the con- 
trolling faculty of sight,’?—this is@afndfulness-restraint. 


e 
“ The currents flowin® In the world OA puta, 
"Said theEzalted Qne, these may 
By mindfulness be checked, thys the res@aint I leach, 
a? By insight they may be shut in.??4 


e 

\ eis is ‘knowledg-restraint in which (knowledge in) the 
(right) use of the (fotir) requisites also is included. “ One 
endures cold and heat”°—in such expressions it is patience- 
restraint. “‘ One dees not consent to the uprisen lustful thought ’”® 
—in such expressions it is energy-restraint, in which” purity 
ofslivelihood also is included. Thus this Fivefold Restraint 
as well as the gestraint which noble youths dreading sin 
exercise in regard to anything that falls in their way should 
be understood as restraint-virtue. ‘“éNon-transgression is 
virtfle,” means the absence of bodily and vocal transgression 
in one practised in virtue. This so*far is the answer to the 
question, ‘‘ What is virtue 2?” 

[8] Passing to the remaining questions: 

. a 

2. In what sense is it virtue ? a 

It is virtue in the sense of being virtuous (or moral). ~And 
what is this? The being virtuous, is the right placing 
together (of bodily and vocal actions). The meaning is that 
because one is highly virtuous, one’s bodily actions and so on 
are not disgipated. Or it means, supporting. The being a 


! See also Hapositor 454, where ‘ restraint by virtue’ is synonymous 
with Patimokkha-restraint. 5 ee x 

* Vibhanga 246. 3 Digha i, 70. 4 Sutta Nipata Os 

5 Majjhima i, 10. 8 7b. 11. * 


10 The Path of Purity ‘ 


support of moral states by way of eae pane 
Indeed those who are skilful in the significa 

his double meaning. But others 

“Jt is virtue’ in the 

being cool (sta).” 


meaning. 
of words here understand t 
set forth the meaning in such ways ‘as: 
sense of being the head (sire), in the sense of 


its essence, its 


3. Now: What are its characteristics, 
manifestatioh, its proximate cfiuse ? 


e a _ 
So has it beenl divided, and its mark on 
Is virtue, even as vieibility* Pe 
3 é , 
The mark of objects ls. . 


mark of the 
and sé on, 
Beyond 
by way 


and otf 


For just as ‘visibility: is the characteristic 
different varieties of form such as indigo, yellow, 
because albeit of such various kinds they do not go 
visibility, so what has been said about,béing virtuous 
of the right placing of bodily actions and so forth, 
the establishment of moral states, is the gharacteristic mark 
of the different varieties of virtue such as volition and so on, 
because, notwithstanding its various kinds, it does not go 
beyond right placing and establishment. And concerning 
virtue, as possessing such a characteristic, thif has been said :— 


Her actwre property or essence lies 


3 : O 
In excellence and war against all sin. 
e 


Therefore this virtue possesses the essence, in the sense 
of function, of destroying wickedness; and has the essence, 
in the sense of property, of faultlessness. For when the 
characteristics and so on are mentioned, essence is said” to 
be either functiorf or property. : 


It manifests itself as purity; 
lts proximate cause is the sense of shame 
And dread of blame (for so the wise give praise). 


[9] This virtue has, as its manifestation, puritye said to be 
purity of body, of speech, and of mind. It is considered to 


. Read sanidassanattara—perception of form, that is, perception of 
objects through the visual sense, is, for all that sense by itself can tell us, 
perception ofevarious colour-areas and nothing more. 


¢ 


° 


. 


Bis Sister ae ee Rep a et tS a NO si at a nF Nt et ep a 


a 


s 


o . 


—— 


7 
Krishna chandra college central Library 


° Il.—Expositi Tart: 
; position of Virtue 


- manifest itself as purity. Sense of Shame and dread of blame 
are extolled by the wise as its proximate cause, which means 
: : : 
immediate reason. For in the presence of sen: 
: ss : *. se of 
and dread of blame, virtue arises and establishes itself: i 
s- x Z : : 
absence it does not arise nor establish itself 
e A . ‘ 5 
be understood its characteristic, essence 
proximate cause. 
e . 


shame 
n their 
Thus are to 
» Manifestation, and 


4, What are its advantages ? Toe “ 

The*acquirenent of vartous qualities such 
remorse. , For it has been said, 2 Ananda, ee ee 
absence of remorse for benefit and advantage.” Further 
‘* Householders, five are the advantages of the fulfilment of wate 
obtainted by the virtuous. What are these five advantages? In 
this world, householders, one virtuous, endowed with virtue, 
acquires much wealth chiefly owing to the effect of non-negligence. 
This is the first advantage of the fulfilment of virtue by the 
virtuous. Again, heuseholders, of one virtuous, endowed with 
virtyie, a good report is noised abroad. This is the second 
advantage of the fulfilment of virtue by the virtuous. Again, 
householders, to whatsoever assembly one virtuous, endowed with 
virtue, goes, he enters boldly and unperturbed, whether it be an 
assembly of princes, an assembly of brahiyins, an assembly of 
laymen, or an assembly of monks. This is the third advantage 
of the fulfilment df virtue by the virtuows. Again, householders, 


» one virtuous, endowed with virtue, dies undeluded. This is 


the fourth advantage of the fulfilment of virtue by the virtuous. 
Again, householders, one virtuaus, endowed with virtue, on the 
dissolution of the body after death, reaches a happy destiny, 


2 heavenly world. This is the fifth advantage of the fulfilment 


392 


of virtue by the virtuous. 

Furthermore; ‘‘ Brethren, should a brother desire to be dear 
and precious to, respected and honoured by his fellow-monks, 
he should fulgl the virtues.”*®—In such wise have the various 
advantages of virtue, beginning with loveableness and 
preciousness and ending in the destruction of the intoxicants, 
been mentioned. Thus various qualities such as absence 


ieleamaie® 3 Majjkima i, 33. 


* Anguttara v, 1. 2 Digha ii, 86. 


° 


——_— a. 


i 


Krishna chandra college central Library 


1 2s: 
® 1.— Exposition of Virtue 
fs Z 


12 The Path of Purity c 


ages of virtue. [10] More- 


‘ 13 
py the world, or by the Law? (triad 2); as misconst 
: misconstrued, or tranquillized (triad 3); as aie not 
: é 3 GX 
or doupttful (triad 4); as probationary, ad ent a: ee 
patjonaty nor adept (triad 5). ? ALhEL pro- 


of remorse constitute the advant 


OveL 


> 
tO A 


The true religion gives to noble sons 


rea 


* = = nS z m 
H No other stay than virtue. Who can tell . (iv) Pt is of four kinds as partaki ' 
et ott 2 N is s partaking of deteriorati 
The limit of her power ? Not Ganga stream . stability of speciality, or of penetrati 5 deterioration, of 
= + = . C = c ? = 2 rat1lo - 5 jE : 
Nor Yamuna nor babbling Sarabhi, ° a eRe ee EOS (tetrad 1); likewise A 
= : = = : as concerning rethren, concerning the sisters : 
Nor Aciravati nor Mahi y flood, : ne ong] ‘ s Sisters, concerning 
a ; = novices, or concerning laymen (tetrad 2); as nat 5 
Can purify on earth,the taints of men. vactice, fixed law, or the fruit of § +); as natural, customary 
ye ’ s AL AW, : Or 7 
But virtue’s water ean*remove the stain Lae Pp dag 4 | aes ee ve) orfher condations (tetrad 3); 
and ‘ag restraint according to.the Patimokkha, restraint of the 


Of all things livng. Necleleces or pearl,” * 
Rain-bearing breezes, yellow gandalwoed, h 
Gems, nor soft rays of moonlight can destroy 
Heart-burnings of a creature. She alone— oa 
Virtue—well-guarded, noble, cool, ayails. © 
What scent else blows with and agaist the wind ? 


controlling faculties, BN yaa IRcltiNonet, om eames al a 
the requisites {tetrad 4). y with 

(v) It is of five kinds as limited precepts of purity unlimited 
precepts of purity, completed precepts of purity, precepts of 
juny ek misconstMied, or tranquillized precepts of purity 
according to what has been said in the Putencnbhias 


ee aE en er er Sic F ; 
: ; NII an — 
3 ‘. 


What stairway leads like her to heaven’s gate ¢ m i a rkews an 

What door into Nibbana’s city opes ? (Gene ee meee 7 rejection, abstention, volition, restraint, 

The Sage whose virtue is his ornament or non-transgressio% (pentad 2). || 
i Qf these, 4 


Gutshines the pomp and pearls of jewelled kings. . 
In virtuous men! virtue destroys self-blame, 
Begetting joy and praise. Thus shoulé be known 
The sum of all the discourse on the power was 
Of virtue, root 8f merits, slayer ef faults. ‘ 


&) In the onefold portion (monad 1) the meaning is to be 
understood as has been said above.? 

(ii) In the twofold portion (dyad 1) the fulfilling of the 
precepts enacted by the Blessed One thusg “This ought to be 
practised,”’ is a positive ‘rule of conduct; the non-doing of 


ee 


Now this is the answef to— 1 e what has been prohibited as, ‘‘ This ovght not to be practised,” 
5. How many kinds of it are there ? . + is a negative rule Of conduct. Here is the word-definition: 
(i) All this virtue is of one kind through its characteristic 1 by having fulfilled the precepts those who are endowed sith 
of being virtuous (monadi.). ¢ - / a precept are practised in it—‘ positive rule of conduct.’ 
(ii) It is of two kinds as positive or negative rules of { By means of it they avoid, guard against, a prohibition— 
conduet (dyad 1); likewise as the minor or the major precepts”: J+ 4. or negative tule of conduct.’ “Of tteee ae, the former is 
(dyad 2); as abstinence or non-abstinence (dyad 3); as inter- & accomplished by the effort of faith, the latter by faith. Thus 
ested or disinterested (dyad 4); as practised for a limited it is twofold as positive and neentice rules of conduct. 
period of life or until the end of life (dyad 5); as violable’ or ‘In the second dyad eects precept means the highest | 
inviolable (dyad 6); as worldly or transcendentale(dyad 7). precept. ‘Specialized’ is just special. Or, what is enacted 
fll] (iii) It is of three kinds as inferior, middling or with reference to a special precept is the ‘ specialized precept,” 


superior (triad 1); likewise as i i . ‘ : : S 
se eae) ab dominantly influenced by self, a synonym for the precept which remaims over from the set 


2 PLY 


; Note the plural form yatino instead of yatayo. 
% Or, the specialized or fundamental precepts. MOT REN 


e 


14 The Path of ‘Purity > 


° ° 
of eight precepts of which pure livelihood is the eighth - 
‘The fundamental precept’ is the foundation of the exalted 
practice of the Path; and is a synonym for the set of eight _ 
precepts of which pure livelihood i8 the eighth. This set of 

a eight is the foundation of the Path, because it ought to be in 
i purified practice previous to the Path. Hence (the Butldha) 
has said: “‘ Previously his bodily action, his vocal action, his 

livelihood have been well purififl.”? Or, what has been declared 
to be the minoz and lesSer, precepts, [12] is the “ minor pre- | 
cept.” The remainder is the, “ major precept.” Or, that 
which is included in both the Vibhanga’s,* is the “‘ major 
precept’; that which is included *in the Khandhaka* duties 
is the “ minor’ precept.* The former is perfected by perfec- 
tion in the latter. Hence (the Buddha) has said: “ Brethren, 
i it is impossible that a brother without falfilling thé law of the 
minor precept, should fulfil the law of “the major precept.”® 
Thus it is twofold, as minor and major precepts (or specialized” 
and fundamental). ~ 

In the third dyad, the mere abstention from life-taking 
and so on, is the virtue of abstinence. The remaining volitéon 
and so on, is the virtue of non-abstinence. Thus it is twofold 
as abstinence and non-abstinence. . ,, 

In the fourth dyad ‘ interested’ means that there are two 
inducements: the inducement of craving and the inducement of 
views. Of these two that which arises from a®desire to attain 
(a blissful) existence thus: ““ By means J this virtue I shall - 
become a deva or a certain deva,’””° is the inducement of craving. 
That which arises from pure views thus: “ By means of. this 
virtue there will be purity,” is the inducement of views. And 
there is the transcendental virtue, and there is the worldly . m 
virtue which is a constituent of this—these constitute the 


1 Viz. the purified actions, three of deed and f 2eC yur 
livelihood. Cf. Expositor 505. pee ae: sr ae 
? Cf. Anguttara iii, 124 f. 
* I.e. precepts for the brethren and the sister i i 
ies it r s as laid down in the 
HS, Vinaya Texts i (Sacred Books of the East). i 
: Z.e. in the Mahavagga and Cullavagga, Ib. i, ii, iii, 
Anguttara iti, 14, ® Tb. iv, 461, 7 Dhammasangani 1005 


x 


Krishna chandra college central Library 


* time-limit is “ for a limit¢d period of life.” That which arises 


A . ye % 

° 1.—L position of Virtue is 
, 
| « disinterested virtue.” Thus it is twofold, as interested and 
se disinteresttd. . fag. | 
} In the fifth dyad the virtue which is practised within a 
i : 
{: 


sO jong*as it is practised during a life-time is ‘ until the end of 

life.’ * Thus it is twofold, as practised for a limited period of 
ie life, and until the end of life. 

 .In the sixth dyad that whiéh is limited by present gain, 

pomp, relatives, limbs and life,.i# known. as “ violable.” 

What‘is contrary to that is » inviolable.” And this has been 

said in’the Patisambhida:+ *° What is*that virtue which is 

violable? There “is virtue® violable by gain, there is virtue 

violable by pomp, there is virtue violable by relatives, there is 

virtue violable by limbs, there is virtue violable by life. What is 

that virtue which is @olable by gain? Some one in the world 

on account of, by reason of, for the sake of gain transgresses any 

‘precept that may have been observed. Such [13] 2s the virtue 

that is violable by gain.’ In this way the others also should be 

= expanded. In the answers concerning the inviolable, also, it 

hae been said:2 “ What is that virtue which is not violable by 

gain? In this world, on account of, by reason of, for the sake of 

gain, q certain person does not give rise even lo a thought of 

re transgressing any precept that may have lgen observed. How, 

then, will he transgress it 2 Such virtue is not violable by gain.” 

In this way alsd the others should be expanded. Thus it is 

- twofold, as violable &nd as inviolable. 
In the seventh dyad all virtue which is accompanied by 
(or the object of) the intoxicants is “ worldly ”; that Te 
is not accompanied by the intoxicants is “ transcendental. 


; oe ROE 
. ,00f these two worldly virtue brings about distinction In present 


~~ life, and is a constituent part of the escape from existence. 
As has been said? “ Discipline is for the purpose of Testratni, 
which is for the purpose of absence of remorse, which ae 
the purpose of gladness, which is for the purpose of rapture, a 5 : 
is for the purpose of repose, which is for the purpose a ie 
which is for the purpose of concentration, which is for the purpose 
sO ei Mats 
3 Vinayav, 164. 


SATIRE Sa ieectie 


z 1 i, 43. 2 7b. i, 44. 


16 The Path of Purity a 


of knowing and seeing the truth, e pu - 
disgust, which is for the purpose of dispassivon, which 2s for 
purpose of emancipation, which is for the purpose of eae P 
seeing emancipation, which is forthe purpose of dirthless 
Parinibbana.' i ies 
Discipline), for such purpose is the consullation, for such pur se 
is the groundwork, for such purpose is the attentiveness, namely, 
ancipiation ind ‘devoid rasping.” Transcen- 
the emancipation of the mind devore of grasping. 
dental virtue baings abdyt escape from existence, and is the 
Thus it is twofdld, as 
® . 


For such purpose is the discourse Yon the 


ground of retrospective knowledge. 
worldly and transcendental. P re Sat hi 
(iii) Among the triads: In the first triad, that virtue which 
arises through inferior conation, consciousness, energy, OF 
investigation, is “‘ inferior”; that through middling couation 
and so on is “ middling”; that through Superior conation and 
so on is ‘superior.’ Or, that whieh is practised from a 
desire for pomp is “ inferior ”; that for a meritorious result is” 
“middling” ; that which is practised in connection with Ariyan- 
ship,* thus: “ This is what ought to be done,’’? is “* superiqr.” 
Or, virtue corrupted by exalting self and disparaging others, 
thus: “I am possessed of virtue; but these other brethren are 
wicked and evil in nature,” is “ inferior %. worldly ,virtue 
uncorrupted is ‘emiddling”; transcendental virtue is 
“superior.” Or, that virtue which arises for the saRe of 
wealth and property by: way of craving is ‘inferior’; that 


for the sake of self-emancipation is “ middling”; while that - 


virtue of the perfections which arises for the sake of the 
emancipation of all beings, is ‘é superior.’’ Thus, it is three- 
fold as inferior, middling, and superior. 


In the second triad that virtue which arises out of self- &.,° 


respect, having regard for self, and from a desire to put 
away what is improper for self, [14] is ‘‘ dominantly influenced 


1 Anupadaparinibbana, i.e. entrance into Nibbana wh¥ch, not grasp- 
ing after anything, leaves no material form behind and does not give 
rise to rebirth. 

2 On the definition of Ariyan see La positor 452. 

* The Tika reads: in connection with Ariyanship out of a loathing 
for evil: ‘ How shall one like me do such evil 7’ 


a 


which is for the purpose Ofte 


:) 


fi) 
og 


ary 


9 I.—Exposjtion of Virtue 1% 


_ by self.” That which arises out of respect for the world, 


having regard for the world, and from a desire to avoid accusa- 
tion by*the world, is “‘ dominantly influenced by the world.” 
That which arises out of respect for the Law, having regard 
for the Law, and from a desire to honour the greatness of 
the Law, is ‘‘ dominantly influenced by the Law.” Thus it is 
threefold as dominantly influencad by self, and so on. 

In the third triad that virtue which in the dyads (dyad 4): 
was said to be interested,” is ‘ migconstrued ’ through the 
misconstyuction ‘of craving arelviews. That virtue which is 
a constituent part, of the path of a good average person and 
which is associated with the path of the prebationers, is 
“not misconstrued.’ That which is associated with the fruition 
of probation and adeptship is “tranquillized.” Thus it is 
threefold as misconstrued and so on. 

, in the fourth triad that virtue which is fulfilled without 
committing an offence or by atoning for an offence committed, 
is “ pure ”’; the virtue of one who has not atoned for an offence 
comfnitted is ““impure”’; the virtue of one who has doubts 
regatding the object, the offence, or the transgression, is known 
as “doubtful.”” @f these, the religious meditator should 
purify the impure virtue; and when there is doubt, it should 
be dispelled by not transgressing against thé object. So will it 
be pleasant for him. Thus it is threefold as pure, and so on. 

In the fifth triad yirtue associated with the four Ariyan 

* Paths and the three fruitions of monkhood is ‘‘ probationary ”’; 
that which is associated with the fruition of sanctity is 
“ adept’; the rest is ‘‘ neither probationary nor adept.” . Thus 
it is threefold as probationary, and soon. But wirtue is spoken 


+.s¢f as simply the natural dispositions of the various beings in the 


world, so that, as referring to their virtue, one speaks of a 
man who has a disposition for ease, of one who has a dis- 
position for ill, of one who has a disposition for quarrels, of 
‘one who has adlisposition for beautification; thus, therefore, in 
the Patisambhida! there are three kinds of virtue: moral, im- 
moral, and unmoral. Henceit is said to be threefold, as moral, 


1 j, 44, 


Krishna chandra college central Libr 


Le A 


1 The Path of Purity 


mmoral virtue does not correspond ~ 
irtue which is meant here, 
ught in here. Sience the 
tood in accordance with 


and soon. Of these three, i 
to any of the characteristics of the v 
therefore this triad has not been bro 
division of the triads is to be undérs 
the method here given. : 
(iv) In the first of the tetrads:— 
Who serveth here tae wicked, not the good, 
Seeth no injury to anything, 
Because he is unwise. £15] Full of wrong thoughts, 
He heeds not the controlling faculties, “ 
And all his virtue to cortuption turns, 
Wh is content with his own virtue won, 
Nor will bestir him to apply his mind 
In stations of religious exercise, 
Pleased with his virtue, seekiig nothing higher,— 
This brother’s virtue turns to stagnancy. 
The virtuous, seeking fixity of thought,— 
His virtue to pre-eminence is turned. 
Dissatisfied, wrapped in world-weariness,— - < 
This brother’s virtue is to insight turned. 


na 


Thus it is fourfold as partaking of deterioration, and so on. 
In the second ¢etrad there are precepts enacted for the 
brethren, who should keep them separate from those éoacted 


for the sisters. ‘This‘is virtue “ concerning the brethren.” 
There are precepts enacted for the sisters, who should keep 
them separate from those enacted for the brethren. This is 
virtue “‘ concerning the sisters”, The ten precepts for novices 
male and female constitute virtue “ concerning novices.” 


There are five precepts—ten if possible—for the constant . 


practice of lay-disciples, male and female. Eight are by way 
of duties for the sacred day. These constitute virtue “ cor- 
cerning laymen.” Thus it is fourfold as concerning” the 
brethren, and so on. - : 

In the third tetrad non-transgression by men of Uttara- 
kurv? is “ natural” virtue. The regulated conduct of various 
people according to family customs, localities, beliefs, i 


1 One of the ‘ four Great Islands.’ 


ary 


® I.—Eaup osition of Virtue 19 


virtue “ as customary practice.” The virtue of the h 
of the future Buddha, declared thus: ‘“‘ This is a Peay i 
Ananda, that when the future Buddha descended into ae th ai 
womb. she had no thouglt connected with lust for te esi - 
virtue * as fixed law.” The virtue of such pure ine z 
Mahakassapa, and others, and of the future Buddha i (aes 
births, is virtue “as the fruit gf former condition: > Thus 
it is fourfold as natural, and so on. a 
, In oe fourth tetrad, (a) that virtue which ha& been declared 
BY t : ie one thus: * flere (om thig religion) a brother 
es, being restrained by the restraint of the Patimokkha, i 
possessed of good behaviour and lawful resort, sges da Aan 
the smallest faults, trains himself in thé pete of ihe ss - 
cepts 5 this is virtue ‘‘ as restraint according to the Dae 
mokkha.”” (b) Virtjie “as restraint of the contr ling 
faculties,” is that virtue Which has been declared thus: “‘ Wh < 
he sees an object with his eye, [16] he is not errand b a 
general appearance or the details of it. He sets himself as 
restrain that which might give occasion for immoral a A 
covousness, and grief to flow in over him while he dwells - 
restrained as to tha faculty of sight. He keeps watch ove: his 
faculty of sight, and he attains to mastery over it. And 7 in 
like manner, when he hearg a sound with Its ear ie smell a 
odour with his nose, or tastes a flavour with his ‘angie 2 feels 
a touch with his body, or cognizes an idea with his mind Tis as not 
entranced by the general appearance or the details a at i 
sets himself to restrain that which might give occasion for catioil 


‘ 


_ states» covetousness, and grief to flow in over him while he dwells 


unrestrained as to the faculty of mind. He kgeps watch over 


os gris mental (representative) faculty, and he attains to mastery 


nor of 223 . 
. over it. (c) The abstinence from wrong livelihood arisen by 


way. of evil states, such as the transgression of the six precepts 
enacted for the sake of livelihood, and as “ trickery comes 
talk (about self and donors), insinuation (in Shaniain ) 
crushing slander, hungering to add gain to gain,” is vitae 
“as purity of livelihood.” (d) The use of the four requisites 


2 Vibhanga 244. 
Cf. Dialogues of the Buddha i, 15. 


1 Majjhima iii, 121. 


3 2; ae 
- 4 Vibhanga 345. Digha i, 70. 


{ 


c 


20 


after pure reflection set forth after this manner: ‘* He accepts ~ 
the robe wisely reflecting that it is only for the warding off of 
cold,” is known as virtue “ connected with the requisites.” _ 

5 (iv, a). Virtue as restraint according to the Patimokkha. 

Herein (i.e. dealing with the four kinds of the fourth tetrad) 
this is the deciding discourse together with the word-by-word 
comment from the beginning: “Here” means, “in this 
religion.” ““‘ Brother ” is ason of respectable family, who from 
faith becomes: a monk, in the customary way, because of 
his viewing danger in the stregni of existenee, or of Wéaring 
torn shattered rags, and so forth. In “ being restrained by 
the restraint of the Patimokkha,” ‘“ PatimOkkha” is the 
virtue of the precepts." It delivers, releases him who guards it, 
observes it, from the ills of the states of woe and sq. forth— 
hence it is called “Patimokkha.”“ The restraining is 
“restraint,” a name for non-transgression, bodily and vocal. 
“The restraint of the Patimokkha” means that the Pati- 
mokkha itself is the restraint. ‘‘ Being restrained by the 
restfaint of the Patimokkha ” means, to be restrained by-that 
Patimokkha-restraint. Attained to, endowed with, is® the 
meaning. “ Lives” means comports himself. 

[17] The meaning of, “is possessed of good behavjour and 
lawful resort,” and, so on, is to be understood in the way that 
comes in the Pali text.2 For this has been said: “He is 
possessed of good behaviour and lawful resort. There is good 


The Path of Purity r 


. 
behaviour and there is misbehaviour. Of these what is misbe- “ 


haviour? Bodily transgression, vocal transgression, bodily- 

and-vocal transgression, thise is called misbehaviour. All 

wickedness also is misbehaviour. A certain member of the 

Order here obtains his livelihood by a gift of bamboos, of 

leaves, of flowers, or fruits, or bath-powder, or tooth-sticks, by ; 
fawning, by bean-curry talk, by nurture (of supporters’ chil- 

dren), by carrying messages on foot, or by any other means of 
wrong livelihood loathed by the Buddhas. This is’ called 

misbehaviour. 


1 Majjhimai,10. Theremaining portion of this quotation is brought 
out and commented on in p. 36 /f, 


2 Vibhanga 246. 


Ce 


>) 


9 


) 


Krishna chandra college central Libra 


3 


> 
2 TRL ALEC ARN OTT OC ET TO A OTT 


fi 


Ee Se 


ca 
% 


} 


‘bodily and vocal. 


EY I.—Exzposjtion of Virtue 


21 


“ And what,is good behaviour ? Bodily non-transgression, 
vocal non-transgression, bodily-and-vocal non-transgression— 
this is called good behaviour. All virtue-restraint also is good 
behaviour. A certain me*nber of the Order here does not obtain 
his livelihood by a gift of bamboos . . . loathed by the Buddhas. 
This is called good behaviour. As regards lawful resort—there 
ts lawful resort, and there is unlawful resort. Of these, what 
is’ unlawful resort? A certain member of the Order here 
resorts (for alms) to a harlot, a wido, an old maid, a eunuch, 
a nun, or, a liqudr shop; agains’ the precepts, he associates after 
the manner of laymen, with kings, ministers, heretical teachers, 
and their disciples; serves, follows, attends on famikes of faithless 
unbelyevers, who abuse and censure the brethren and sisters, 
the lay-disciples male and female, not wishing their good, benefit, 
comfort or security (frem the burden of ill). [18] This is called 
unlawful resort. And what is lawful resoxt? A certain 
member of the Order here does not resort to a harlot . . . does 
not associate after the manner of laymen, against the precepts, 
with kings . . . serves, follows, attends on faithful families 
of Believers who are welling springs (for the benefit of monks), 
who love the shining of yellow robes and the odour of sanctity, 
and wh® desire the good, benefit, comfort, and security of the 
brethren and sisters, of she lay-disciples*® male and female. 
This is called lawful resort. Lhus being full of, fulfilled with, 
arrived at, attained te possessed of, fully possessed of, endowed 
with such good behaviour and such lawful resort, one is said 
to be“ possessed of good behaviour and lawful resort.”? 

Further, “ good behaviour and lawful resort” here should 
be understood also in this way: For misbehaviour is twofold, 

Of these what is bodily misbehaviour ? 

* A certain member of the Order here, having gone to an 
assembly of the Order, stands and sits rudely brushing against 
the senior brethren; stands and sits in front; sits on a high 
seat; sits with his head covered; speaks while standing and 
while stretching out his arm; walks up and down with sandals 
on while the senior brethren walk without sandals; walks 
above while they walk below; walks on the promenade while 
they walk on the ground; stands and sits pushirig himself 


he 


wea 
r Agee it qa 04 ere 


72 
: 
Eins 
por 
= 
ay 
7 E 
4 


Krishna chandra college central Library 


Pa 


22 The Path of Purity ¢ 


close to the senior brethren; withholds seats from the new “ 
brethren; without the permission of the senior brethren 
throws down fire-wood in the fire-shed and shuts its door; 
goes down to the bathing-place brushing against the senior 
brethren and before them; takes a bath brushing against them 
and before them; comes up brushing against them and before 
them; enters among houses brushing against them and before 
them; departing from their side goes in front of them; enters 
abruptly into ‘the secre’ and “private rooms of respectable 
people, where their women ar@ daughters are sitting down, 
and strokes the head of a child. This is.called bodily mis- 
behaviour. ; . 

And what is vocal misbehaviour ? A certain member pf the 
Order here goes to an assembly of the Order, and without ask- 
ing leave of the senior brethren rudely speaks on the Law, 
answers a question and expounds the Patimokkha; speaks 
while standing, [19] and while stretching out his arm; goes 
among houses, and says to a woman or a girl: “ Madam 
so-and-so, of such and such a family, what is there to* eat 
and drink? Is there rice-gruel? Is there food? Is there 
something to eat? What shall we drink? What shall we 
eat? Of what shall we partake? What will you give me?” 
Thus he chatters. This is called vocal misbehaviour. Good 
behaviour should be understood as its opposite. Further- 
more, a brother is respectful, obedient, possessed of a sense of 
shame and dread of blame, wears his inner and outer robes 
properly, is distinguished by his gracious manner of advancing, 
of retreating, of looking ahead, ‘of looking sideways, of bending 
and stretching ;his limbs, keeps his eyes lowered, is possessed 
of good deportment, keeps a guarded door as respects hiss 5 
controlling faculties, is moderate in food, devoted to keeping 
awake, endowed with mindfulness and comprehension, free 
from desires, contented, strenuously energetic, a respectful 
observer of the minor precepts, and full of regard for worthy 
things. This is called good behaviour. So far it should be 
understood. ? 

Lawful resort is of three kinds: as a sufficing condition, 
as a guardian, and asa bond. Of these what is lawful resort 


c ° 


\ 


‘ 1.—Ezposition of Virtue 23 


- as a sufficing condition ? ‘A good friend endowed with the 

- qualities of the ten subjects of discourse, owing to whom one 

hears what has not hitherto been heard, purifies what has been 

‘heard, gets beyond one’s doubts, rectifies one’s views and 

composes one’s mind; or under whose training one increases 

in fafth, virtue, learning, self-sacrifice, wisdom, is called 
lawful resort as a sufficing condition. 

-What is lawful resort as a*guardian? A brother here, 
on entering among the houses of a yellage ang walking along 
the stteets, goes lowering this eyes, looking before him not 
furtheg than the distance of *a plough, afid is well-restrained. 
He doés:not go Tooking af an elephant, a horse, a chariot, 
a pedestrian, a woman, or a man. He does ot go looking 
above, down, or in different directions. This is called lawful 
resort as a guardian. ® 

What is lawful resorteas a bond? The four applications of 
tnindfulness! wherein the mind is bound. For this has been 
said by the Blessed One: “ Brethren, what is the lawful resort 
of ¢ brother, his paternal province ? It is the four applications 
of emindfulness.”? This is called lawful resort as a bond. 
Thus being full of . . . endowed with such good behaviour 
and layvful resort? one is said to be “ possessed of good be- 
haviour and lawful resort.” . 

[20] “Sees danger in the smalJest faults”—is in the habit 
of seeing dangér in the various kinds of the smallest faults, 
such as are uninténtional, committed in the course of his 
training, produced by immoral states of consciousness. 

“Trains himself in the gbservance of the precepts ”— 
trains himself by observing all that ought to be observed in 

. «the precepts. And here by so much of fhe text “ being 
“ yestrained by the restraint of the Patimokkha,” the virtue of 
the Patimokkha-restraint is indicated by the exposition, 
determined by the person. But all beginning with “is 
possessed of good behaviour and lawful resort” should be 
understood to have been said to indicate that practice which 
arises for any one who practises it. 


1 J,e, as regards the body, feelings, thought, and states. 
2 Sanyulta v, 148... ; . 


24 The Path of Purity ‘ 


s 
5 (iv, 6). Virtue as restraint of the Controlling Faculties. 
In virtue as restraint of the Controlling Factlties which 

has been shown in this way, “‘ when he sees an object with his 

eye,” and so on (p. 19), “He” is a brother established in 
virtue which is of the Patimokkha-restraint. 

‘“‘ When (he) sees an object with his eye,’—when lie sees 
an object by means of visual cognition commonly called the 
eye as instrument, and capable of seeing an object. But the 
Ancients have said: “ The eye does not see the object in the 


‘absence of the ‘mind. The ni ind does not see the object in 


the absence of the eye. But one sees by the mind With the 
sentient eye as basis, when an impact takes place between 
the door (of fae eye) and the object.” Nevertheless, such a 
discourse as the present one really refers to the constftuent 
parts of sight in the same sense as evhen one ‘says, “ He 
oe with a bow,” and so forth. Theréfore the meaning ner 

“* when he sees an object by visual cognition.’ 

“Ts not entranced by the general appearance,’’—does not 
seize.the general appearance as furnishing a basis for corrup- 
tion, such as the general appearance of a woman, a man, or of 
any desirable form, and so on. He stops at what is actually 
seen. ‘Is not entranced by the details “of it,’—does not 
seize the different modes of hand, foot, smiling, laughing, 
speaking, looking ahead, looking ‘sideways, and so forth, 
which have obtained the common name of “ details” by 
reason of repeated expression as a manifestation of the 
corruptions. He seizes only what appears (as the abominable 
thirty-two parts) in the body, Jike Mahatissa the Elder, who 
lived at Mount Cetiya. It is said that a certain daughter-in- 
law, having broken with her husband and having well beauti- 
fied and dressed herself like a celestial nymph, left Anuradha- 
pura betimes, and, while going to the home of her relatives, 
saw on the way the Elder, who was coming to Anuradhapura 
from Mount Cetiya for the sake of alms, and with corrupt 
thoughts [21] laughed aloud. The Elder, wondering what it 
was, looked up, and acquiring the perception of the foul 
in her teeth (-bones), attained Sanctity. Hence it has been 


said :— 
a 


&° 


c 


Krishna chandra college central Library 


, 
$ 7 
oa a a RES SEP 
- 
. 


pape Lee RR A I 


SN A AS EO LCOLI OL TE OCOD 


. I.—Exposition of Virtue 25 


Cd 
“ Those bones, her teeth, he saw, and called to mind 
His first perception. Even where he stood 
. The Elder thus attained to Sanctity.” 


And’ the husband, following the same road, saw the Elder 
and eaquired: “ Perhaps Your Reverence has met a certain 
lady 2?” The Elder replied :-— 

es 
“T know not whether man or woman passed. 
_A certain lump of bones weft by this’way.” 


In * “which Binne give oceasion,’ ’ and ‘soon, these states 
such as covetousnéss and so forth might flow in over, might 
pursue this person who dwells with the door of his sight open 
withobt shutting the faculty of sight by the door-leaf of mind- 
fulness On account of "by reason of, whatsoever non-restraint 
of the faculty of sight: * He sets himself to restrain that,” — 
séts himself to shut his faculty of sight by the door-leaf of 
mindfulness, Only he who is practising thus is said “ to keep 
watgh over his faculty of sight and to attain to mastery Dver 
it,” ewhereby, if there is neither restraint nor non-restraint in 
the faculty of sight, it is because there arises neither mindful- 


' ness nr forgetfulness with reference to the sentient eye. 


But indeed, when a visible object enters the avenue of sight, 
then, on the cessation of the subconsciousness after arising 
two or three tithes, the inoperative* mind-element (or, the 
five-door-adverting) “arises, accomplishing the -function of 
adverting, and then ceases. Then arise and cease in order, 
the vjsual cognition accomplishing the function of seeing, 
the resultant mind-element accomplishing the function of 
Zeceiving, the resultant element of mind-cognition without 


* root-conditions accomplishing the function of scrutinizing, 


and the inoperative element of mind-cognition without root- ” 
conditions accomplishing the function of determining. 
Immediately, afterwards, apperception takes place. But 
still in these processes there is neither restraint nor non- 
restraint, at the time of subconsciousness, or of any one of the 
processes beginning with adverting. But if at the moment 
of apperception there arises wickedness, forgetfulness, lack 


Krishna chandra college central Library 


_ 


a 


26 The Path of Purity _ 2 

° : e I.—Exposition of Virtue 27 
of knowledge, lack of patience, or laziness, then there is non- - f . 
restraint. Such non-restraint is called “ non-restraint in the 
faculty of sight.” [22] And why? Because when it arises 
the door is unguarded, and so also -the subconscioushess and 
the thought-processes beginning with adverting. Like what? 


Just as although the interior of houses, door-entrances and 4 


. 

“ i 1. wy . ae 
the highest kind of men,! whereby he commits a Parajika 
offence.* For the sake of, on account of livelihood, one acts 
as go-between, and so commits the SanghAdisesa offence. 
Tor the sake of, on account of livelihood, one knowingly 
proclaims (for gain) that a certain brother who lives in one’s 


LA . 
salir Vaiidemeeenertecemiee ge 


chambers, and so forth, may be well closed, yet when the a monastery is a saint, and so comumits the Thullaccaya offences. e 
four doors’ in a town are not closed, all treasure within the y- in ae i oe pale of ee he aa a being 
. . : ill, demands for his own benefit and eats delicious food, and 
ar protected, so that thieves entering b ‘ Bear ; 
COE 2 pai a aaa eh “ ~ so commits the Pacittiya offence. ér the salfe of, on account 


a door of the town may do,what they please, sé When 
wickedness and so forth arise at apperception, when non- 
restraint is present thereat, the door is ufiguarded, and 
so also are the subcofsciousness and the thought-processes 
beginning with adverting. But when virtue and so on arise 
at apperception, the door is guardedS,and so also are the 
subconsciousness and the thought-processes beginning with 
adverting. Like what? Just as, although the interior of 
houses and so on may not be closed, yet when the doors 


of livelihood, a sister, not beingdll, demands for her own benefit 
and eats* delicious food, and so commits the Patidesaniya 
offence. For the sake of, on account of livelihood one not being 
ill, dgmands for one’s own benefit, soup or rice,* [23] and so 
commits the Dukkata offence——thus are laid down these six 
precepts in the words, * Of these six precepts, and so on.” 

, Of ‘trickery,’ and so on, this is the Pali text:4 ‘ What here 
is “trickery?” The adjusting, establishing, regulating, of the 
postures, knitting the brows, the state of knitted brows, trickery, 


ee ee 


of tie town are well closed, all treasure within the towa 1s _ its production and its state on the part of one of evil desires, 
well guarded, well protected, and there is no entrance® for oppressed by desire, who relies upon gain, honour, and fame, in 
thieves through the closed doors of the town, so, when virtue what is called his @cquisition of the requisites and in his round- 
and so forth arise at apperception, the door is guarded and about talk (with a show of wisdom)—this is called “ trickery.” 

so also are the suconsciousness and the thought-processes ‘What here is ‘‘ boastful talk?” Initial talk, boastful talk, 
beginning with adverting. - Hence, although it arises fit the - repeated talk, flatfering talk, very flattering talk, binding speech, 
apperceptional moment, it is said to be restraint in the : a. . encircling speech, prpise, full praise, ‘pleasant speech, fawning, 


faculty of sight. And the same with, ‘‘ when he hears a sound 
with his ear,” andsoon. And thus briefly, virtue as restraint 
of the controlling faculties shotild be understood as possessing 
the characteristic of not being entranced by such outward 
signs and so on in following the corruptions in visible objects—. « 
and so forth. 

5 (iv, c). Virtue as Purity of Livelihood. 

Passing now to virtue as Purity of Livelihood (p. 19), 
spoken of immediately after virtue as restraint of the con- 
trolling faculties:—‘‘ Of the six precepts enacted for the sake 
of livelihood ’? means—for the sake of, on account ef liveli- 

f ; hood, one with evil desires, oppressed by desire, lays claim 
untruly, falsely, to possession of a quality pertaining only to 


bean-curry talk, nurture (of supporters’ children) on the part 
of one of evil desires, oppressed by desire, who relies upon gain, 
honour, and fame—this is called “ boastful talk.” 

‘ What here is “‘ insinuation?” A sign, making a sign, a hint, 
% “giving a hint, roundabout talk, winding speech on the part of 
one of evil desires, oppressed by desire, who relies upon gain, 
honour, and fame—this is called “ insinuation.” 


1 T.e. those‘on the Higher Path to Sanctity. ; 

2 This and the following five are names of offences against the 
Vinaya of a descending degree in seriousness, from the first kind which 
involves immediate and lifelong expulsion from the Order, down to the 


last which only entails reprimand from a senior brother or sister. 
3 Vinaya v, 146. 4 Vibhtnga 352 f. . 


° 


« . 


Bite <i iss“ 


\ 


ns 
j 


iran 


¢ 


vi 


& c 
28 The Path of Purity c 
“What here is “crushing slander?” Abusing, reviling, 
blaming, sarcastically praising (or casting out), sarcastically 
praising much (or totally casting out), ridiculing, much -ridicul~ 
ing, accusing, fully accusing, dealing in dispraise, backbeting 
on the part of one of evil desires, oppressed by desire, wha relies 
upon gain, honour, and fame—this is called “* crushing slander.” 
‘What here is “ hungering te add gain to gain?” The search, 
earnest search, full search, the seeking, earnest seeking, full 
seeking, for one’ fleshly need by means of another fleshly need, 
in such wise as taking what hasbeen obtained in this, place to 
that place and bringing what has beew obtained,in that pkace to this 
place, on the part of one of evil desires, oppressed by destre, 
who relies upon gain, honour, and fame—this is called “ hynger- 
ing to add gain to gain.” ” . ion 
And the meaning of this Pali text is to be understood thus :— 
In the exposition of “trickery,” “ who relies upon gain, 
honour, and fame,” means, relies upon gain, and honour, and 
the report of good repute; desiring is the meaning. [24] “Of 
evil “desires” means, desirous of showing off imagimary 
merits. ‘‘ Oppressed by desire” means, set apart by, “.e. 
oppressed by, desire. After this, because the threefold basis 
of trickery comes in the Mahaniddesa,! as the acquisition of 
the requisites, rourfdabout talk, and depeadence on the four 
postures, therefore, in order‘to set forth this threefold basis, a 
beginning is made with in what is called his acquisition of the 
requisites and so on, where “ basis of trickery that is called his 
acquisition of the requisites ”’ is to be understood as the admira- 
tion of him which causes the preSentation to him of requisites in 
cartloads, since, much as he wants them on account of evil de- 
sire, he refuses the robes and so forth offered to him, as knowing * 
also the householders’ firm faith in him that he shows favour” 
to those who offer excellent robes in divers ways, exclaiming: 
“ Ah! what little desire has our master! He does not want 
to take anything. It would indeed be great gaix to us were 
he to accept a little from us !” 


G 


1 224. 
2 Implying that he accepts the gifts offered not because he wants 
them, but orfly in order that the donors may obtain merit. 


2 « 


© 
¢ 


- 


° 
° 


; I.-—Eaposition of Virtue 29 
i ot 


For it has been said in the Mahaniddesa:1 
“* What is the basis of trickery that is called hi 
th a requasites ? Householders here below invite a 
the four requisites, namely, a robe, alms, dwell; oe 
for the sick; and he, of evil desires, ee ne ee 
he wants them, refuses the robe owing to his desire fon a * 
refuses the alms, the dwelling, the medicine for the sick fe 
he speaks thus: “ What 1s the use of a costly robe to a Pon 2 
It is proper that a monk should peck up rotten rags from a 
graveyard, refuse-heap, or Fray shop-refuse, and make and 
wear his sobe. What is theuse of grand alms toa monk? It 
is proper that *he should maintain life by whatever Rioveels of 
food he has recewed on his begging round. What is the use 
of a cosily dwelling toa monk? It is proper that he should live 
at the foot of a tree or, %nder the open sky. What is the use of 
costly medicine for the sick to a monk? It is proper that he 
Should make medicine out of putrid cow-wrine or bits of myro- 
balan. And accordingly he wears a coarse robe, eats coarse 
food, [25] resorts to a@ coarse dwelling, resorts to coarse medicine 
forethe sick. Him the householders know thus: ‘ This monk 
is of few wants, contented, secluded, set apart from laymen, 
strenuogisly energetic, and ascetic. And so all the more they 
invite him to accept robes, alms, dwelling @nd medicine for the 
sick.* And he says: ‘ Through the presence of three things a 
faithful son of noble family gets much Merit. From the presence 
of faith, of the thing offered, and of those worthy of receiving 
the gift, a faithful son of noble family gets much merit. You 
have indeed faith, and there is the gift, and I am worthy to receive 
it. Were I not to accept it you would be deprived of the oppor- 
alunity of earning merit. I have no need of this gift. However, 
L accept it out of compassion for you.’ And accordingly he 
accepts many robes, much food, many dwellings, much medicine 
for thesick. Such knitting of the eyebrows, state of knitted brows, 
trickery, its production and its state—is known as ‘ the basis of 
trickery that is called his acquisition of the requisites.” 
And the admiration that he excites in various ways by his 
words, which seem to show his attainment of qualities possessed 


1 Loc. cit. 


8 acquisition of 
brother to accept 


ae ares 


{ 
( 


Sarr Shikg 


‘ 


Krishna chandra college central Lib fary 


c 


30 The Path of Purity 7 


by noble men, whereas in truth he is of evil desire, is to be 
known as “the basis of trickery that is called roundabout talk.” 
As has been said :? ° fe 
“ What is the basis of trickery that,is called roundabout tglk ? 
A certain member of the Order here below who is of evil desires, 
oppressed by desire, and wishful of obtaining praise, speaks 
words appertaining to the Ariyan Law, in so doing hoping that 
the people inay praise him. And he speaks thus: ‘ That monk 
who wears such and suck @ robe is a powerful monk. He says: 
« That monk who has such a boyl,‘metal cup, water-filler’, water- 
strainer, key, belt, pair of sandals, is a powerful monk. That 
monk who has such and such a preceptor or tedcher, such and 
such a friend, acquaintance, companion or intimate friend under 
the same preceptor and the same teacher . . . that monk who 
lives in such and such a monastery,” *half-roofed monastery,® 
graduated turret, flat turret, cave, cdvern, hut, gabled house, 
tower, square turret, treasury, service-hall, [26] pavilion, at 
the foot of such and such a tree, is a powerful monk.’ More- 
over, being repeatedly blinded by the dust of evil desire, knitting 
the eyebrows repeatedly, wonderfully tricksome, excessively 
talkative and praised for his words, he ulterg such speech, pro- 
found, hidden, subile, secret, transcendental, connected with the 
Void as, ‘This monk has acquired such and such calm attain- 
ments of the modes of life? Such knitting of the eyebrows, 
state of knitted brows, trickery, its production and state, is spoken 
of as * the basis of trickery that is called roundabout talk.” 

The admiration that he excites by regulating his four 
postures* with a view to getting praise, he being of evil desires 
and oppressed hy desire, is to be understood as the “ basis of 
EE dependent on the postures.” As has been said :> « 

What is the ‘ basis of trickery that is called the postures ?? 
A certain member of the Order here below, being of evil desires, 
oppressed by desire, and hoping to get praise from the péople 


€ 


1 Tb. 226. 
2 Th - ° . . ; 
sci € roof consisting of two sloping parts which meet at the ridge- 
: The Toot being one sloping piece. 
Viz. wadking, standing, sitting, and lying down. 5 1b. 225. 


° 


° 


I.—Exposition of Virtue 31 


8 
e 

* by his actions, ‘adopts an affected style of walking, of lying 
* down, walks, stands, sits, ies down with g resolve to keep up 
appearaaces, walks, stands, sits, ies down, as though he possessed 
concentration, and pretends,to be rapt in trance. Such adjusting 
establishing, and regulating of the postures, knitting of the Biron 
state of knitted brows, trickery, its production and state, 1s known 

as ‘ the basis of trickery that is called the postures.” 

‘In that text (p. 27): “ In what is called his acquisition of the 
requisites ” means, in his acquisition gf the requisites so-called; 
or, ii that which is said to Be his acquisition of the requisites. ’ 
“In his .roundabout talk’? means by speech bordering on 
wisdom. ““Of the postures’? means of the four postures. 
‘* Adjusting ” means initial arrangemené or rever@ntial arrange- 
ment. |“ Establishing” means the mode of arrangement. 
a Regulating ” mean® perfect arrangement; it is said to 
produce faith. ‘Knitting of the brows’ is said to mean by 
way of showing that he is noble and of the first importance,} 
he knits and contracts his brows. His nature is to knit his 

- brows; hence he is known as “ knitting his brows.” «The 
state of one whose nature is to knit his brows is “state of 
knitted brows.” a Trickery ” means wonderfulness. The 
producjng of trickery? is ““ production of trickery.” The state 
of him who works trickery is “ state of trigkery.” 

In® the exposition of “ boastful talk,’ “initial talk” 
means that, on ‘seeing men come to ¢he monastery he begins 
the tall thus: ‘‘ Sirs, for what purpose haye you come? Is it 
to invite the brethren? [27] If so, proceed; I will follow 

* with.my bowl.” Or it mears boastful talk turning upon 
himself which he makes after presenting himself thus: “I am 

+ «Tissa. With me the king is pleased. In me such and such a 
royal high minister is pleased.” “ Boastful talk” means 
boasting in the said manner on enquiry being made (as to a 
good monk). ‘‘ Repeated talk” is good talk given freely 
to hini fromgmong the householders who is afraid the brather 
may not be happy in a particular place. “F lattering talk 
means talk flattering to such a person as a millionaire, a great 


1 Or, ‘is noble and polished’ reading parimatthita for purimatthita. 
2 Or, ‘The manner of him who produces trickery. . 


32 The Path of Purity é 


boat-owner, a lord of great charities. ‘“‘ Very flattering talk ”’ 7 z 


means talk flattering a person on all sides. ‘‘ Binding speech ”’ 
means that he talks thus: “ Lay-disciples, formerly at such 2 
time you used to offer the first fruits. Why do you not offer 
them now?” And he goes on binding and enveloping them 
with his talk until they say, “Sir, we shall offer. We have 
not yet had a chance,” and sqforth. Or, seeing a man holding 
a sugar-cahe in his hand, he asks: “ Lay-disciple, where have 
ye brought it from? “F “oH une sugar-cane field, sir.’ 
“Ts the sugar-cane there swee¢ 2?” ‘Sir, that may be known 
after sucking it.” ‘‘ Lay-disciple, it is not proper .to say, 
give the sugar-cane to the brother.” To him who replies 
thus it is enveloping*speech, which is “ binding speech.” 
Binding repeatedly on all sides is “ encircling speeche’ The 
setting forth with flattery thus: “ This*tamily knows me only. 
If they have anything to give, they’ give it to me only,” i; 
“praise,” said to be “ setting forth.” Here the Telakanda- 
rika! story is to be understood. Praising repeatedly on all 
side¢ is “full praise.” Speaking loving words again and 
again without regard to ae about the truth or ine Law, 
“pleasant speech.” “Fawning” is Jpwliness, jaan: 
= ever lowering oneself. ‘“ Bean-curry talk” bearseresem- 
blance to a curry of beans. As when beans are cooked some 
are not cooked, while the rest are cooked, sg when a certain 
person speaks, some wotds are true, whjle the rest are lies. 
Such a person is said to be a “‘ bean-curry-man.” His state is 
“that of a bean-curry.’ “ Nurture” [28] is the state of nur- 
turing, the act of him who, likt a nurse, nurtures on his hip 
or shoulder the children of families —carries them is the 
meaning. The state of nurturing is ‘ pares . 
In the exposition of “ insinuation ”? “ sign” is any act of body 
and speech Producing a sign to others for the giving of the 
requisites. “Making a sign” is the making of a sign as much 
as to say, ““ Did you get any food ?” on seeing ethers going 
along taking food. “Hint” is speech connected” with the 
ae “Giving a hint” is the production ofea hint 


+ Telakatakagatha ? 


See Journal of the Pali Text Society, 1884, 49 f. 


4 1.— Exposition of Virtue 


thus: On seeing cow-herds tending calves, a member of the 
Order asks’ ‘‘ Are these calves sucking the mother’s milk or 
drinking diluted buttermilk?” ‘‘ They are calves sucking 
fhe moather’s milk, sir,” the cowherds reply. Then he says: 
“They are not milk-sucking calves. If they were milk-sucking 
calves; the brethren also would receive milk.?? And in this 
way he makes the lads inform their parents so that they have 
to offer milk. “‘ Roundabout talk’ is talk bordefing on the 
object wanted. Here the story ofthe brother, frequenter 
of a family, shonld be constlered. It is said that a certain 
brother, ‘a frequenter of a family, enters the house and sits 
down wishing *for food. The lady of the house seeing him; 
and not wishing to give food, says: “here is ‘ho rice,” and 
goes to a neighbour’s house as though to bring rice. Then the 
eeches enters the int@rior of the house, and looking about, 
sees sugar-cane in a doorecorner, molasses in a bowl, flat pieces 
of salt fish in a basket, rice in a pot, butter in a jar, ahd comes 
out and sits down. The lady comes back saying she has not 
obtained any rice. And the brother says: ‘‘ Madam, I already 
save a sign that to-day my alms-begging would not be success- 
ful.” “ What may it be, sir?” “I saw a snake like the 
sugar-cane lying therein the’ door-corner. Looking about 
with the intention of striking it, I saw a stone like the molasses 
kept there in the bowl. Sra theesnake, struck by the stone, 
spread a hood like the flat pieces of salt-fish kept there in the 
basket. The teeth’ of the snake wanting to bite the stone 
were like the rice kept there in the pot. And the saliva mixed 
with poison issuing from its*mouth in its state of anger 
was like the butter kept there in the jar.” Then the house- 
wife, unable to impose upon the bald-pate, presented him with 
the sugar-cane, [29] cooked the rice, and gave everything, 
butter, molasses, fish and all. Thus a talk bordering on 
what one desires is ‘‘ roundabout talk.” ‘‘ Winding speech ”* 
is spéaking, round and round until one gets what is 
wanted. © 

In the exposition of “‘ crushing slander ”’ (p. 28) “ abusing ”’ 


1 Read pitake for patike. - 


Krishna chandra college central Li 


7 


34 The Path of Purity Ps 


is abusing by means of the ten terms? of abuse. 
ing ” is humiliating speech. “ Blaming ” is charging another 
with fault, such as calling him a person without faith, without 
belief. “Casting out” (ukkhepané) is casting out a person 
verbally, saying, “Speak not to him about almsgiving. 
“ Totally casting out” (samukkhepanda) is casting out a person 
by finding a reason, a cause OP allsides. Or, ukkhepanad means 
“ sarcastically praising,” whereby, on seeing a person who 
has not given‘alms a fnonk calls out sarcastically : “Oho! 
what a lord of alms!” Sam ukkhepana is “‘ sarcastically prais- 
ing much,” whereby he calls owt: “ What a great, lord of 
alms!” ‘ Ridiculing”’ is making fun thus: “What a life is 
led by this man who féeds on the seed of kamma lias ae Much 
ridiculing ”’ is making much fun thus: “ What! do you gall this 
man a non-giver, who always gives the éxpression ‘ nothing’ to 
everyone?” “ Accusing.” is charging one with a lack of alms- 
giving or of praiseworthiness. Making charge thus on all 
sides is ‘fully accusing.” “‘ Dealing in dispraise ” means 
that he deals out dispraise of a person from house to house, 
village to village, district to district, thinking that from ‘tear 
of dispraise that person may give him alms. “ Backbiting” 
means that he speaks honeyed words in one’s presence, and 
speaks in dispraisé behind one’s back. And because such a 
speech of one who dares n6ét look another in the face is like 
gnawing the flesh off andther’s back, it is called ‘‘ backbiting.” 
‘This is called crushing slander” means, because it crushes, 
scrapes off another’s merits as unguent is scraped off the body 
with a split bamboo; or becausé it crushes and grinds to powder 
another’s merits like extracting scent from a fragrant substance 
by grinding it; and it (this speech) is also a search after gain; 
therefore it is called “‘ crushing slander.” 

In the exposition of ‘‘hungering to add gain to gain,” 
“ hungering” is tracing out. “ What has been obtained in this 
place” means what has been obtained from this bouse. Ee Ako; 
that place” means to that house. ‘‘Search” is desiring to 


1 [.e. calling a person a thief, a simpleton, a fool, a camel, an ox, an 
ass, a denizen of hell, a brute, and saying to him ‘ There is no salvation. 
for you,’ and ‘ An evil destiny awaits you.’ Dhammapada Comy. iv, 1- 


ec 


 Revil- 


Ww 


rary 


" I.—Exposition of Virtue 35 


get. “‘ Karpest ‘search ” means tracing out. “‘ Full search ” 
means tracing out repeatedly. [30] Here is to be related 
the story of the brother who went giving to the boys of 
variqus>families whatever had been obtained, beginning from 
the first house and getting milk and rice-gruel on the’ way. 
“Seeking” and the others are only synonyms of “ search” 
and soon. Hence “ search” is ‘“gseeking,” ‘“ earnest search ”’ 
is “‘ earnest seeking,” ‘full search” is “ full seeking ”— 
thus is the construction here to be wfiderstooé. Such is the 
meaning of “ trickery ” and SO gp. , 

Now in, “ Of evil states such as” (p. 19, c), by the ex- 
pression “such* as” inclusion should be undergtood of the 
various evil states spoken of in the Br&éhmajala Sulta in this 
way: “ Whereas some monks and Brahmins, while living on food 
provided by the faithful? earn their living by wrong means of 
livelihood, by low arts, such as these: palmistry, divining by 
means of omens and signs, auguries drawn from thunderbolts 
and other celestial portents, prognostication by interpreting 
dreams, fortune-telling from marks on the body, auguries from 
the Warks on cloth gnawed by mice, sacrificing to Agni, offering 
oblations from a spoon.”+ Thus has been indicated this 
“ wrong livelihood by way of evil states such as the trans- 
gression of the six precepts,enacted for the sake of livelihood, 
and as trickery, boastful talk, insinuation, crushing slander, 

hungering to add gajn to gain.” THat abstinence from all 
“such wrong livelihood is ‘“‘ virtue as purity of livelihood,” 
wherein, this is the word-by-word comment: depending on it 
people live—‘ life.” What is that? Effort in the search for 
the requisites, ‘‘ Purity” is the state of being pure. “ Life- 
° purity ” is the purity of life. 
5 (iv, d). Virtue connected with the requisites. 
And immediately after this there is mentioned “ virtue 
connected with the requisites,” wherein “‘ wisely reflecting ” 


means knowing on reflection as to expediency and the right 


path: consftlering is the meaning. The consideration men- 
tioned here in such wise as “ for the warding off of cold,” is 


1 Digha i, 9, 


Si cr iaecntion nn als cane aa ae nn 


~N 


(Krishna chandra college central Lift 


- Pe 
36 The Path of Purity P 
to be understood as ‘‘ wisely reflecting.” Hete “ robe ” means- 
any garment such as the waist-cloth. ‘‘ Accepts” means 
enjoys, wears or puts on. ‘‘ Only for” is [31] an expression 
showing the limit of purpose. * Fer the warding off of cold,’ 
‘and so forth—this is the sole object of the religious medi- 
tator in accepting the robe; there is no other. ‘ Of cold” 
means of the cold arising to any one either internally by the 
disturbance of his*sown elements, or externally by a change 
in the weatker. ‘‘ Far the warding off’’ means for the 
purpose of warding off; for “the purpose of expélling SO 
that sickness may not be produced in his body. Because 
when the body is afflicted with sickness, one becomes 
distracted in mind and cannot wisely strive (for cultute), 
therefore, the Blessed One allowed the use of a robe for the 
» warding off of cold. And the same with all the other words.” 
.» For among them’“ of heat” meaufs of the heat of fire, 4.6.5 
heat produced in @ jungle-fire, and so forth. In ‘‘ of the totich 
of gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, ‘heat, and reptiles,” - gad- 
fliés” are biting flies, also called blind flies. © Mosquitoes a 
are mosquitoes. ‘‘ Wind” is divided into wind charged-with 
dust and wind not charged with dust. “ Heat” is the sun’s 
heat. “Reptiles” are those creatures that creep and move 
about, such as the long-bodied snakes. ‘Their touch is twofold: 
the touch of bite and thectouch of contact; and this froubles 
not him who is seatefl covered with a robe. Hence under 
these circumstances he accepts a robe for the purpose of the” 
warding off of such creatures. The repetition of the expres- 
sion “only for” is to show the limit of a constant purpose. 
For “the cgvering of one’s private parts” is a constant 
purpose. The others are so only at times. Here “ private « 
parts” means the interstice between the legs. Indeed, when 
any of these parts is revealed, the sense of shame is disturbed, 
destroyed: and so because they destroy shame they are*called 
“the private parts.” Hirikopinapaticchadangtthdm means 
for the purpose of covering these private parts. The reading 
is also hirikopinasi paticchadanattham. . 


l Geeurring in Majjhima i, 10, quoted above on p. 20, n. 1. 


¢ 


Zs 


‘ I.—Exposition of Virtue 37 


** Alms ” qneans any food. Any food is called “alms”? 
from its being put into the brother’s bowl in his food-gather- 
ing- Or-“ alms” means the collection of morsels ‘of food. 
It has been said to be the eollection, group of morsels of food, 
obtained from various houses. ‘“‘ Not for sport ” means not 
for purposes of sport like village-boys and so forth; it is said 
to be “indicative of play.” ‘ Nor for intoxication” means 
not’ for a display of pride like boxers and wrestlers and so 
forth; it is said to be “ indicative of tk€ pride of strength and 
the pride of manhood.” [32]es Nor for personal charm ” 
means nqt-for the purpose ef beautifying oneself like court 
people and courtesans and so forth; it is said to be,‘ indicative 
of fulness of limbs, big and small.” “ Nor for beautification ze 
means ngt for the purpose of beautifying oneself like actors 


and dancers and so forth? it is said to be “indicative of clear ~ © 
ness of skin and complexion.” Of these, “Not for sport” \»: 


has béen said in order to remove the suffiting: condition of 
delusion; “‘nor for intoxication”? has been said in order to 
remove the sufficing condition of hate; “nor for personal 
charfh, nor for beautification,” in order to remove the 
sufficing condition of lust; “ not for sport, nor for intoxica- 
tion,” ingorder to prevent the growth of one’s own fetters; 
“nor for personal charm, npr for beautification,” in order to 
prevent the growth of another’s fetters. And by these four 
expressions, rejection of unwise attainment and of devotion 
to a life of pleasure should be understood to have been 
indicated. The expression “only for” has the meaning 
already: given. ‘Of this body” means of this material 
body dependent on the four great primasy elements. 
*““ For the sustenance” means in order to be stable as 
a continuous series. ‘‘ For the preservation” means in 
order. that the procedure (of life-controlling-faculty) may not 
be cut off; or in order that (the body) may last long. He 
accepts alms for the sustenance and preservation of the body 
as the owner of a decayed house props up his house, and a cart- 
man lubrieates (lit. feeds) the axle of his cart; he accepts it, 
not for sport nor for intoxication, nor for personal charm, 


nor for beautification. Furthermore, ‘“‘sustenancé” is a 


° — 


rt 


38 


synonym for life-controlling faculty. 
tenance, preservation of this body ” should so far be under- 
stood to mean for the procedure of the life-controlling 
faculty of this body. “ For the rallaying of the pangs of 
hunger,’—in the sense of inflicting pain, hunger 1s, called 
“pangs,” for the allaying of which he accepts alms, as one 


might accept ointment for 2 wound, or medicine to counter- 
“For aiding the practice 


act heat and cold, and so forth. | 
of the noble life” means in order to uphold the noble life 


of complete instruction in tha Law, and the noble life of the 
Path. Indeed, he accepts alms én order to uphold the noble 
life, practisipg, as he does, for release from the desert of exis- 
tence, by devotion to the three precepts, by means of his 
bodily strength on account of his acceptance of alms, as 
starving parents might eat their chifdren’s flesh in order to 
be able to cross a desert,! as people who desire to cross a river 
rely on a raft, as people who desire to cross the ocean rely on a 
ship. “ Thus IJ shall subdue the old feeling and I shall cause 
no new feeling to arise”’ means [33] he accepts alms giving 
heed thus: “ By this acceptance of alms I shall subdue the old 
feeling of hunger and shall produce no-feeling due to im- 
moderate eating, like one of those brahmins: one who eats 
till he has to be lifted by the hapd, or one who eats till his 
loin-cloth cannot be retained, or one who has to roll where he 


The Path of Purity j 


f GF 
Hence “for the sus- 


eats, or one who eats till a crow pecks from his mouth, or.one — 


who eats till he vomits.” He accepts alms of food as a patient 
takes medicine. Or, it is called “old feeling” because it 
arises in this life-time owing’to unsuitable and unrestricted* 
food on accovsit of old kamma: “‘ destroying its cause by suit- 


able and restricted food, I shall subdue the old feeling.” ; 


And that feeling which will arise in future through the accumu- 
lated kamma of inconsiderate eating in this life-time is called 
“new feeling.” Causing its root not to arise by means of 
considerate eating, I shall produce no new -eeling,—thus 
also is the meaning to be understood. So far*should the 
compendium on considerate eating, the forsaking of devotion 


1 8. ii, $8. 


* Join asappaya lo the following compound in the text. 


- 


. 


. 
; 
. 
| 
| 


t Krishna chandra college central Lirary 


. 


I.—Exposition of Virtue 39 


* to self-torture, ‘and the non-forsaking of righteous bliss be 
understood to have been shown. ‘“ And maintenance shall 
be mine” means he accepts alms, saying: “ By moderate 
eating I shall have the preservation or equalization called 
the longevity of this body in harmony with causes owing to 
the absence of the danger of cutting off the life-controlling 
faculty or of destroying the four postures.” He accepts 
alms of food as a patient of long suffering accepts healing 
medicine. ‘“ Faultlessness also and comfort,” — faultless- 
ness ” ts by avoiding inconfiderate search, acceptance, and 
eating; “comfort” is throygh moderate éating. Or “ fault- 
lessness” is dife to the absence of such faults as discontent, 
dtowsiness, sleepy restlessness, and blame by th? wise, caused 
by unsuitable and immoderate eating. ‘‘ Comfort” is due to 
the production of bodily strength caused by suitable and 
moderate eating. Or, “‘faultlessness ” is due to the forsaking 
of the pleasure of lying down, pleasure of sleeping on the 
side, or the pleasure of torpor, by not eating food to satiety. 
By. accomplishing the harmonizing of the four postures 
threugh eating less than four or five mouthfuls, so that 
‘comfort shall be mine”; thus he accepts alms. Indeed 
it has heen said: 


** Hath he-but eatgn mouthfuls four or five, 
Let him drink water :—here is sure enough 
Refreshment for a brother filled with zeal.” * 


[34] And so far the limiting of purpose and the path of the 
mean should be understood to have been shown. 

“Dwelling” means sleeping place and seat. Wherever 
he sleeps, whether in a monastery or half-roéfed monastery, 


® and so on, that is a sleeping place. Wherever he sits, seats 


himself, that is a seat. The two taken together are called 
“dwelling.” ‘‘For the dispelling of the danger of the 
weather and for the purpose of delighting in solitude” — 
weather ig fhe sense of causing trouble is “ weather-danger.” 
In order that one may dispel the danger of the weather and 


1 Psalms of the Brethren, 983. See also Expositor 511 f. for a similar 
exposition of most of the terms here commented on. a 


on 


. \ 
AT RT a , 


i 
i 
: 
iH 


' Krishna chandra college central Li 


40 The Path of Purity P 
delight jin solitude, that unsuitable weather which causes 
sickness of the body and distraction of mind should be dis- 
pelled: by acceptance of a dwelling: and it has been said that 
it is “ for the purpose of dispelling that weather and ef well- 
being in,living alone.” As, although by the warding off of 
cold and so forth the dispelling of the danger of the weather 
has been indicated, yet the covering of one’s private parts in 
the acceptance of a robe is a constant purpose, while the othérs 
(cold and heat)-are so of}y at times, so here also this has been 
said concerning the constant, dispelling of danger from the 
weather. Or, this weather as degcribed already is just “the 
weather.” And “danger” is twofold: obvious danger and 
hidden danger. Of the two, obvious danger is lions, and 
tigers, and so on; hidden danger is lust, hate, and so on. They 
may cause trouble to one seated in an*open yard, at the foot 
of a tree, and so on, by there being ho guarded door and by 
seeing unsuitable objects, and so on. The brother who accepts 
a dwelling, knowing and reflecting that there such dangers 
canot cause him trouble, is to be understood as accepting 
it after wise reflection, for the purpose of dispelling darfger 
from the weather. os 

In “ the requisite of medicine for the sick,” ‘ for’ ig in the 
sense of counteracting disease: going against is the meaning. 
It is a synonym for anything suitable. ~s Mediciné”’ is 
the work of a doctor, a being permitted by him. Medicine 
which is for the sick is ‘‘ médicine for the sick,” said to be 
anything used by a doctor, such as oil, honey, molasses, and so 
forth, suitable for the sick. Requisite” means a protec- 
tion as in “ surrounded by the seven requisites of a town,” and 
So On; an ornament as in “ the (Ariyan) chariot has the orna- 
ment of purity, the axle of jhana, the wheel of energy,’ * [35] and 
so on; a constituent as in “the monk should carry out whatever 
are the factors of livelihood,’? and so on. Here it is proper 
to take it as constituent and protection. For that, ‘‘ medicine 
for the sick” is protection of life, from its guarding*it, giving 
no opportunity for the production of life-destroying flisease. 


1 Anguttara iv, 106. 2 Samyutta v, 6. 3 Majjhima i, 108. 


= 


Fs 


ary 


en 


. =. % 
I.—Exposition of Virtue Al 


It is also a constituent of life because it is a means of pro- 

longing life. Hence it is called “ requisite.” And go, being 
yoedicire for the sick and a requisite, it is “ requisite of medicine 
for the sick”; and whataver is suitable for the sick and per- 
mitted by the doctor such as oil, honey, molasses, and so forth 

being requisite of medicine for the sick, is said to be the 
constituent or protection of Ife. “Which have arisen ”’ 
nfeans, which have been produced, have become, have been 
born. In “connected with diseades,” “disease”? means 
a disturbance of the elementy, and leprosy, boils, pustules 

and soon, sprung therefrem. <“ Connect vi i » 
means, because it arises from disease. = ee aes 
painful feelings, the immoral resultant? feelings, are intended. 
“ For the freedom from the pain” of those feelings connected 
with diseases means, in order to be free from the suffering; 
that is, he accepts medicine until all that pain is removed. 
Thus in brief this virtue, whose characteristic is judicious use 
of the requisites, should be understood to be. ‘‘ connected 
with the requisites.” And the word-definition is: BecTuse 
beifigs come and go, and live enjoying robes and_so forth, 
relying on these, depending on these, therefore are they called 
“requisites.” ‘“ Connected with the requisites” means con- 
nected with those -requisjtes. Of this fourfold virtue “the 
restraint according to the Patimokkha’’ is to be attained 
by faith, for it is acgomplished by fafth, the enactment of the 
three precepts being beyond the province of disciples, as is 
shown by the Buddha’s rejection of a request to enact these 
precepts. Hence observing b¥ faith completely the precepts 
as enacted, one should be perfect in it (this fougfold restraint), 
regardless even of life. For thus has it been said:— 


[36] “ Be prudent, reverent ; guard thy virtue well, 
‘s . As pheasant guards her egg or yak his tail, 
- Oras a son beloved, or one’s sole eye.” 


And thts also has been said, “So, O king, my disciples do 
not transgress even for the sake of life the precepts which I have 
laid down for them.” And in this sense are to be understood 
the stories told of Elders bound by thieves in a forest. 


> — 


42 The Path of “Purity £ 


Ps 
It is said that in the Himalayan forest thieves, bound an 
Elder with black creepers, and made him lie down. And the 
Elder, as he lay, increased his insight for seven days, and 
attaining the fruition of never-returping, died there and was 
reborn in the Brahma world. get 
Again, in Tambapanni Isle thieves bound an Elder with 
pili creepers and made him elie down. And when a jungle 
fire came on he established insight before the creepers could 
be cut, and died in ¢he extinction of his corruptions.* 
Elder Abhaya, a reciter of, the Digha Nikiya, toming 
with five hundred “brethren saw and cremated the’ Elder's 
body and had a shrine built. Hence others of good family 
also should,—* s ws 


Keeping the Patimokkha pure, let life. oe 
Be yielded up: forsake not virtue’s law 
Enacted by the Master of the world. = 


Even as Patimokkha-restraint is to be attained by faith, 
so by mindfulness is restraint of the controlling faculties to 
be attained; for this is accomplished by mindfulness, because 
covetousness and so forth do not flow from controlling 
faculties that are established by mindfulness. Hence, remem- 
bering the Fire-sermon® preached in this way: ‘‘ Brethren, 
better were an iron wire eheated, molten, burning, ifican- 
descent, aflame, than the faculty of sight ‘grasping details 
and signs in visible objects,” and so on, one should attain it 
well through checking, by means of unremitting mindfulness, 
the seizure by the general appearance of visible objects, and so 
forth, followed by covetousness and other evil states of con- 
sciousness which proceed in the eye-door, and so forth. [37] 
For? when it is not attained, virtue as Patimokkha-restraint 


1 Samasisi—i.e. the head of his corruptions is severed by the Path of 
Sanctity when he died. His death being simultaneous with the 
extinction of his corruptions, he is called jivitasamasis*. When one 
adopts any of the four postures until sanctity is attained andties in that 
posture, one is called iriyapathasamasisi. When one is afflicted with 
a disease, and attaining sanctity dies of that disease, one ‘is called 
rogasamasisi. 

* Samyullé iv, 168. 


3 Read asampadite hi. 


> 


« Krishna chandra college central Library 


| 


eetaeeee 


=~... 
: I.—Ezposition of Virtue 48 
* also does not endure, does not last long, like corn which is not 
well set round with a thickset hedge. And one is harassed by 
those thieves, the corruptions, as a village with open gates by 
t=) 


robbers; and lust penetzates the mind, as rain penetrates a 
house badly roofed. And this has been said:— 


“In sights, sounds, odours, tastes, things tangible 
Guard the controlling faci&ty : for these, ; 
Finding an open and unguarded door, 

. Will vex thee as a village vened by thieves. 


5 oe 
Even as rain enters qn ull-roofed house, 
Lust eitters the uncultivated mind.?? 


~ Bat when this restraint of the controling faculties is 
eg virtue as Patimokkha-restraint also endures, lasts 
long, like corn welleset round with a thickset hedge. And 
one is not harassed by those thieves, the corruptions, as a 
village, well closed by gates, is not harassed by robbers. And 
lust does not penetrate the mind, as rain does not penetrate 
a house well roofed. And this has been said:— "i 


“In sights, sounds, odours, tastes, things tangible, 
Guard the Eontrolling faculty: for these, 
* Finding in thee a closed, well-guarded door, 
e Will shun thee as 4 village shunned by thieves. 


° 
Rain cannot penetrate a well-roofed house, 
Lust cannot penetrate a well-taught mind.” * 


But this is an extreme admonition. The mind, however, is 
flighty. Hence restraint of the controlling faculties is to be 
attained in repelling arisen lust by directing one’s attention 
to the foul, as it was done by the Elder Vangisa when he was 
recently ordained. [38] It is said that seeing a woman, 
lust arose in the Elder but recently ordained, as he was going 
about for alms. Then he said to Elder Ananda: 


With sensual lust I burn, my mind aflame. 
I pray thee, pity have, O Gotama, ; 
And tell me how I may extinguish it.” ae 


* 


1 Dhammapada 13, 1+. 


Krishna chandra college central Library 


- . . i) 
: q 2 Die a} prey e% j | ee 
44 The Path of Purity : f* ‘ 1.—Exposition of. Virtue 2 
mm 7 . 2 c ' : = =~ 45 
The Elder replied :— hs wr [ . ° his respects, géve him his meal of food, and saying to hi 
i é ome . : i 6 66 OG -day “ : a Say. oO 
4 ‘Through wrong perception is thy mind aflame— Sir, to-day ‘ NER 1S no opportunity. eemorow I er 
i Pleasant appearances avoid, for they a . eee virtues, he took the Elder’s bowl, ace omparied 
P| Are full of lust, but cultivate the mind ag him, Be ittle distance, ayd having, together with the queen 
if In things unpleasant, that it may attain - paid his respects, turned back. And the Elder said: “M : 
5 . the king be happy!” whether a EN 


it was the king th : 

respects or the queen. Thus geven days en ie 
brethren said: “Sir, whether it was the king? that “dl 
respects or the queen, why did yougonly says ‘ & that paid 
behappy *?”” The Elder replied: “ Lads, I maar 


To concentration and a single aim. 
Things-in-the-making shalt thou see and know 

Evil as other than thee, as not the self. 

x De Mie. T, en te 4 : 
Slay thé great lu8t. Bugn not repeatedly.”" , , c May the king 


: ; e no difference 
as to the king or the queen.” After seven days the king, 


finding that the Elder was not happy there, let him go, Th 

Felder went back to the great Kurandaka cave. ania aa 
ascended to the promenade. And the deity that lived 
the ironwood tree stood holding a torch. Then the Elder’s 
subject of meditation became exceedingly pure and clear 

And the Elder was glad, saying to himself, “ Why is my gubject 
of meditation so exceedingly clear to-day?” And causin 

the whole mountain to resound, he attained Sanctity tne: 
dittely after the middle watch. And even so should any other 
son of good family desirous also of his own benefit,— : 


And the Elder, repelling his lust, went his way. 

Further, a brother who is fulfilling restraint of the con- 
trolling facultfes, should be like the Elder Cittagutta, whe 
lived in the great Kurandaka cave, and like the Elder Maha- 
mitta, who lived in the great Coraka monastery. ~ ° 

It is said that there was a beautiful painting of the Re- 
nunciation of Seven Buddhas in the great Kurandaka cave? 
And many of the brethren, wandering round the dwellings, 
saw the painting, and said: “Sir, beautiful is the painting.” 
The Elder said, “ Lads, I have lived in the cave for over'sixty 
years and [ did not even know whether the painting existed 
or not. Now I know to-day through you who possess eyes.” 
Thus it is said that for so long the Elder living there never 
lifted his-eyes and looked pp. Arid at the cave-entrénce 
there was a great ironwood tree. But the Elder had never 
looked up‘atit. It is said that he knew that it was in blossom 
when each spring he saw the filaments that fell to the ground. 
The king, hearing of the Elderés virtuous attainments, and 
wishing to pay his respects, sent for him three times. And 
when the Elder*did not come he caused to be shut up the 
breasts of the women in the village who were suckling infants, 
and had his seal put to this order: ‘“‘ As long as the Elder 
does not come, so long these infants must not suck milk.” * 

[39] And the Elder, out of compassion for the infants, went 
to the village. And the king heard of it, and saying to his 
ministers, “Go, I say, and introduce the Elder; I will acquire 
the virtues,” had the Elder brought within the palace, paid 


I 
I 
' ® Let not the eye wander like forest-ape, 
« Or trembling weod-deer, or affrighted child. — 
The eyes should be cast downward: they.should look 
: . The distante of a yoke: he shall not serye ~ ©... 5” 
i 


The eye’s dominion, like a restless ape.” 


A poisonous boil once arofe on the mother of the Elder 
Mahamitta. Her daughter also had been ordgjned among the 
sisters. The mother said to her daughter: “ Girl, go to thy 
brother’s presence. Tell him I am unwell, and bring medicine.” 
The daughter went and told him. The Elder said: “I do not 
kndw how to gather medicinal roots, and so forth, and to 
., prepare megicine. But this medicine will I tell of: since I have 

become monk I have never broken the controlling faculties 

with a mind accompanied by greed and looked at a female 
form. By the virtue of this [40] declaration of truth may 
my mother be relieved. Go, recite this, and shamxpoo the lay- 


1 §, i, 188, Which gives a different order of the lines; Uh. i, 1223 f. 


a” 


pres _ aS eaigkeeon i 


eee ermeey 


ppaeipents 


46 The Path of Purity 
sister’s body.” She went and related the matter, and did as 


instructed. And in that moment the lay-sister’s boil was 
crushed and disappeared like a mass of foam. And she rose 
and uttered these words of joy: ‘“[f the supreme Buddha 
were alive, with his hand like a variegated lattice, would he not 
stroke the head of a brother like my son 2” Hence— 


Another well-born‘youth having become : 
A monk! in the religion, he should stand, 

Like Elder Mitta, in the wise restraint Sor 

Of the controlling faculties. . 


Purity of livelihood should be attained by energy as restraint 
of the controlling faculties is attained by mindfulness: insleed 
it is accomplished by energy, because a man of strgnuous 
energy abandons wrong livelihood. Therefore it is to be 
attained by energetic alms-gathering and so forth, abandoning 
wrong search and unfitting behaviour, and resorting to those 
requisites which are clean in their acquirement, and avoiding 
liké poisonous snakes those that are impure in acquirement. 
Of these, the requisites which a brother, who has not mastefed 
the ascetic practices has obtained from the Order, from a 
chapter of the brethren, and from laymen who are pleased 
with him on account of his religious preaching and so forth, 
are to be known as clean in acquirement. Those obtained by 
alms-gathering and so forth are exceedingly clean in acquire- 
ment. Those which a brother who has mastered his ascetic 
practices has obtained by alms-gathering, and so forth, and 
by his regular observance of thé ascetic practices, from those 
laymen who aze pleased. with him because of his ascetic 
merits, are to be known as clean in acquirement. The 
observance of ascetic practice by one who, when putrid 
sycamore and the four sweet stuffs are sent him for the 
purpose of allaying a disease, eats only the portion of sycamore, 
thinking: “‘ My other fellow-monks will eat the four sweet- 
stuffs,” is “fitting behaviour.” He, indeed, is talled a 
brother of the highest Ariyan race. Whatever robes and 


1 Read pabbajitvana. 


of 


>> 


¢ Krishna chandra college central Liprary 


I ma 


ed a 
* other requysite$ there are, a broth 


‘ I._—Expodition of Virtue AT 
livelihood should not make a sign, eee ine - 
intimation regarding a robe or alms. But 5 a i ~ or 
roundabout talk regarding a dwelling may be Ba = , or 
who has not mastered his ascetic practices. Of re RG 
when one who is preparing the ground for a dwelling is i ; 
by laymen: “ Reverend Sir, what are you doing 2 sine = 

erfabling you to do it?” a reply to this effect, “Nobod 22 - 
any similar reply, is making a signe “ Lay-disciples i r 
do you dwell??? “Tn a grgduated turret, sir ?”” tee 
disciples, a graduated turret is not proper for the brethren.”’! 
Such a dialogue, or any other speech to this effec 
ahint. “The dwelling of the Order of 
—such talk, or any other to that effect, is roundabout talk. 
As regards medicine, all four ways are proper. But is it 
proper or not proper to” use the medicine obtained in these 
four ways when the disease has been allayed? The Vinaya 
scholars say it is proper because the Blessed One has allowed 
it. «But the Suttanta scholars say that it is not proper becatrse’>- 
thoagh' there is no offence, yet the life of austerity is spoilt. 
Whoso, however, though permitted by the Blessed One, does 
not make sign, hint, roundabout talk, intimation, but avoiding 
them by virtue of his merits such as contentment, and so forth, 
when®a mortal disease arises, accepts whatever requisites 
are forthcoming, ‘is galled, ‘ one whe leads an ideally simple 
life,” like Sariputta the Hlder. 

It is told that that senior monk? was at one time living 
with the Elder Mahamoggallifa developing the practice of 
solitude in a certain forest. To him one day there arose a 
wind-disease in the stomach, causing great pain. Late in the 
evening the Elder Mahamoggallina went to attend on the 
senior, and seeing him lying down, enquired concerning the 
matter, saying: ‘‘ Brother, on former occasions how did you get 
comfort ?” ~The Elder replied; ‘“‘ Brother, when I was a i 
layman ney mother mixed together butter, honey, sugar, 
and so forth, and gave me undiluted milk-rice; and that gave 


t, is giving 
*brethren is cramped”: 


1 The punctuation of the Pali Text is incorrect. 
2 Read ayasma for yasma. © 


Krishna chandra college central Libfary 


48 The Path of Purity eo 


me comfort.’’ And the senior said, “ Be it«so, brother. If - 
there be ot in me or in you, perhaps we shall get some 
to-morrow.” And a deva residing in a tree at the end of the 
promenade heard this conversation, and thought: “ To- -Morrow 

I will produce rice for my lord.” And ariediatelyy he went 
to the family that supported the Elder, [42] entered into the . £ 
body of tthe eldest son, and paused him to suffer pain. And i .” 
he showed the means of cure and said to the relatives:* “*If ; : 
you make ready such and such a propazaucn of rice for the 
Elder to-morrow, I will releqse’ him.” Saying, ‘“ You need 
not have told us; we always give alms to the Elders,” they 
prepared the particular kind of rice on the next day. And the 
Elder Maharhoggallina, coming early, said: “ Brother, wil 
I return from alms-gathering stay here,” and entered the 
village. The men rose to meet the Elder, took his bowl, 
and gave him the particular kind of rice, filling the bowl. 
And the Elder showed'signs of going. But they made him eat, 
saying: ‘‘ Eat, sir, we give more,” and filled the bowl. The 

Eider went and offered it, saying: “‘ Now, brother Sariputta, ° “Sie 
eat.” The Elder, seeing it, thought: “The rice is very 
tempting. How has it been obtained?” And when he 
kmew its origin he said: “ Brother Moggallana, the alms 
is not fit to eat.”” And the senior did not entertain such a 
thought as: “‘ He does not eat the alms brought by such ‘as I,” 
but at the words, took hold of the bowl by, the brim, and turned 
it upside down, tilting it on one side. And upon the rice 
being put on the ground, the Elder’s illness disappeared. 
Thenceforward it did not aris€ for forty-five years. And he 
said to Mahamoggallana: ‘“ Brother, even though my entrails 
were to come out and move on the ground, it would be im- .- 

proper to eat rice that was obtained on account of vocal ; 
intimation.” And he uttered this exalted utterance:— _ 


Were I to eat the honey-rice obtained 
Through use of revelation made by speech, 
Then would my livelihood be full of blame. 


— — —ti. 


1 Or, * he said to the assembled relatives concerning the means of 
cure, readifig -nimittam sannipatite hitake aha. 


ey Jy, fa Ay / 
. 1.—Exposition of Virtue 49 


My bowels may gush out and walk, yet ne’er 
For life itself will I break livelihood. 
° My own mind I control, and the wrong search 
* * Avoid, for I desir€é not the wrong search 
- Loathed by the Buddhas. 


[43] And here also the story ef the Elder Ambakhadaka- 
mahatissa, who lived at Ciragumba, should be related. So, 


under all circumstances, ‘g ; 


“The wisé monk, faith-erdained, should purify 
His livelihood, nor think of the wrong search. 


-s&nqd virtue connected with the requisites should be attained 
by wisdom, as purity of livelihood is attained by energy; for 
art 0 8 . . : . 

it is accomplished by wisdom, the wise man being able to see 
the evils and the advantages in the requisites. Hence it is 
to"be attained by abandoning greediness for the requisites 
obtained righteously and justly, and using them only after 


refleetion and with wisdom, according to the rule already 


laid down. 

Here reflection js twofold: as practised at the time of 
obtaining the requisites, and as practised at the time of using 
‘them. fndeed it is.using them blamelessly when oneuses 

deposited robes, and so forth, subsequent to reflection upon 

the elements and‘ upen loathsomeness*at the time when they 
“are got, and likewise after reflection at the time when they are 
used. The latter case furnishes the conclusive decision, for 
one may use them in four ways: as a theft, as a debt, as an 
inheritance, and like a master. Of these, a wjeked person 
> who uses them sitting in the midst of the Order is using them 

“as a theft. A virtuous person who uses them without reflec- 

tion uses them as a debt. Hence one should reflect every time 

the robe is used, and at every morsel of alms received. If one 


_ is not able to do this, then one should reflect four times, 


three times? twice, or once a day, before and after the meal, 
in the first, middle, and last watches of the night.t If sum 


1 Supply ekasmim divase catukkhattum tikkhattum dyikkhattum 
sakim yeva va paccavekkhitabbam, after °yamesu. 
I. 


4 


a: 


Krishna chandra college central Libary 


50 The Path of Purity r 


comes before he has reflected he stands in the position of one 
using them as a debt. 

One should also reflect every time one makes. use of-a 
dwelling. And in accepting and using medicine also, it is 
proper to cherish mindfulness. This being so, there is offence 
if one is-mindful in accepting, and is not mindful in using the 
requisites, But there is no offence if one is mindful in using, 
after being unmindful in accepting them. For purity is 
fourfold: admonition-purity, restraint-purity, search-purity, 
and reflection-puzity. Of tnese, admonition-purity [44] is 
-virtue as restraint according to the Patimokkha, which virtue 
is indeed cadled admonition-purity because one becomes pure 
through listening to an admonition. Restraint-pufity is 
virtue as restraint of the controlling faculties, whieh virtue 
-is indeed called restraint-purity because one becomes pure by 
means of the restraint of mental resolve, saying: ‘‘ I will not 
act thus again.” Search-purity is virtue as purity of liveli- 

_axjood, which virtue is indeed called search-purity because one 

is pure of search in obtaining the requisites righteously and 
justly and abandoning wrong search. Reflection-purity is 
virtue connected with the using of the requisites, which virtue 
is indeed called reflection-purity because one becomes pure by 
reflection as already described. ©n this account it has been 
said that there is no offence if one is min@ful in using,*after 
being unmindful in accepting them.* ° . 

The using of the requisites by the seven probationers is 
known as using them as an jnheritance: for these seven are 
sons of the Blessed One, and so, being heirs to the requisites 
their father’Sproperty, they use them. What! do they use the 
requisites of the Blessed One, or the requisites of laymen ? 3 
Though given by laymen, the requisites are the property of 
the Blessed One, who has allowed them. Therefore it ig to be 
understood that they use the requisites of the Blessed One. 
And on this point the Dhammadayada sutta? ls been borne ° 
out. 


1 This sentence is repeated from the previous page, and so should not 
be marked jn the Pali Text as ‘ Not traced.’ 
2 Majjhima i, 12. 


~*~ 


3 I .— Exposition of Virtue 51 


The using of the requisites by saints purged of the intoxicants 
is known as using them like a master. For saints, having passed 
heyond the slavery of craving, use them like masters. Of 
these four ways, the using them like a master and a an 
inheritance, is suitable for all; not so the using ier as a debt 
to say nothing of the using them as a theft. And that mae 
them after reflection by a virtu®us person, which is cea 
to the using them as a debt, is also called the using them 
like a man freed from debts, Thisis includéd in the usin 

them as an inherttance, becauses virtuous man, being rlSmed 
with the trainjng in the hither virtue, is counted as @ pro- 
bationer. And because among these four ways the using them 
like ® master is the best, therefore a brother who aspires to 
this shguld use them reflecting in accordance with the various 
kinds of reflection adready described, and should attain to 
the virtue connected with them. -So will he be a fulfiller 
of duties. And this has been said — 


[45] “ Hearing the Law preached by the Blessed One, <= 
e ~° The follower, who in wisdom doth excel, 
Should not without reflection use his alms, 
Dwelling, “couch, seat, and water toemone 
~ The dust from off his robe. The brother, like 
as A drop of water on a lotus leaf, 
Is not attached to any of these things, 
Alms, couch, and seat, and water to remove 
The dust from off his robe. Still mindful, he 
Should of compassion tnow the mean in food, 
Hard, savoury, soft, from donors duly got, 
Like growth of flesh in an anointed wound. 
Like eating in the desert a son’s flesh, 
Like lubricating axles, even so, 
» Should one eat food, never infatuate, 
- For preservation.’* 


As regards the fulfilling of this virtue connected with 
the requisites, the story of nephew Sangharakkhita the novice 


1 Sutta Nipata 391, 392. 2 Cf. Samyutta Ui, 98. 


oo me 


a” 


ey 
| 


52 The Path of Purity i 


is to be told. For he rightly reflected and ate.’ As he has” 


said :-— 


ec 


“ Ag I did eat the boiled and well-cooked rice 
The spiritual adviser spake to me: ' 
‘ Novice, burn not thy tongue through unrestraint !’ 
Hearing the spiritual adviser’s words, 
~ « ] suffered agitation. In that place 
Remaining I attsined to sanctity. 
Full of intentions am Llike full moon. * 
Of fifteen days: extinct the intoxicants, 
And re-becoming is not any more. 
[46] Let fim then who desireth loss of ill, rn 
“Think wisely and accept the requisites.” 


c 


@”., 
So it is fourfold by way of virtue as restraint according to 


the Patimokkha, and so forth. e 
Thus is the particular discourse on the Fourfold Purity 


ecaartue. 


(v) In the first pentad of the Fivefold Portion (p. 13) what 
is to be understood as the meaning is, that these are precepts 
for the unordained, and so forth. For “this has been said 
in the Patisambhida:* “ 

“© What are the limited precepts of purity? . They Gre the 
limited precepts of the<unordained. What “are the unlimited 
precepts of purity? They are the unlimited precepts of the 
ordained. What are the completed precepts of purity? They 
are those of good average men, who are applying themselves to the 
state that is moral, who are fulfilling up to the limit the states 


. e . * * 
for probationers, and who have sacrificed their lives regardless . 


of body and life. What are the precepts of purity not miscon- 
strued? They are those of the seven probationers. W hat are 
the tranquillized precepts of purity? They are those of the 
Tathagata’s disciples who are purged of the intoxicants, silent 
Buddhas, Tathagatas, saints, supreme Buddhas.” » Of these, 


the precepts for the unordained, as being limited in number, 


; 1 i, 42f. 


t Krishna chandra college central Library 


I.—Expésition of Virtue 53 


. 
a Cae as “the fimited precepts of purity.” For 
N ine thousand koti’s, nine score koti’s more 
. And fifty hundred thousand, and again } 
Thirty-six (thousand)—are the precepts given T *’ 
In the Vinaya Pitaka by Him, ae i 
The perfect Buddha, and én order shown 
* By the brief rule. ' 


Thus,, though there is a limit in nffmber, [47] yet these are 
said to be “unlihited precepts Sf purity,” referring to the fact 
that one obseyves them without remainder, idl that their 
limit as measured by the standard of gain, pomp, relatives 
limb8, life lies out of sight, like the “precepts kept by the 
Hlder- Amhakhadakamahatissa, who lived at Ciragumba 
Like that senior, so:-* , ' 


9 Wealth should be given.up fora noble lamb; 


One should give up a limb to save a life. 
5 A man should give up limb, wealth, life, and all ae 
e ° To recollect the Law. .— G4" 


Not giving up kjs recollection (of the behaviour) of good 
men thpugh his life was in doubt, he did not transgress the 
precepts, and attained Sanctity mounted on the back of a 
lay disciple throygh the unlimited precepts of purity. As 

_ hasbeen said:— « 5 


“* Not father, mother, kinsman, relative,— 
This boon he does thee for thy virtuousness. 
Producing agitation, pondering 
With wisdom, thou, being mounted on hi? back, 
Hast unto Sanctity attained.” 


The precepts of good average men from ordination are 
free from the dirt (of corruptions), as soon as consciousness 
is produced being exceedingly pure like a well-burnished gem 
and wellarought gold, and are the proximate cause of 
Sanctity. Hence the “completed precepts of purity,” like 
those kept by the Elders Saigharakkhita, uncle and nephew. 


1 koti—ten millions. 


ro A 


Krishna chandra college central Library 


54 The Path of Purity < 


= cr 

It is said that the Order of brethren asked Mahasarigharak- 
khita the Elder, over sixty years old, on his deathbed, about 
his transcendental attainment. The Elder said: “I have no 
transcendental state in me.” Then a young brother who 
ministered to him said: “Sir, men have assembled from a 
circuit of twelve yojanas saying that you have entered complete 
Nibbana: And the people will feel regretful at your death 
as an average man.” “Lad, I never established insight 
with a view to seeing tke Blessed Metteyya. [48] Therefore 
raise me and give me opportupity.” And tké brother raised 
the Elder and went out. And the Elder, as soon as he went, 
attained Sanctity, and gave intimation by snapping his 
fingers. Thé Order assembled and said: “‘ Sir, dying at,sueh 
a death-time you have done a difficult thing in attaining the 
transcendental state.” ‘‘ Friends, this was not ‘difficult to 
do. But I will tell you what is difficult. Friends, since I 
became monk, deed of mine done without mindfulne§gs, 
without understanding, I do not see.” His nephew also 


atiained Sanctity after fifty years. ‘ 


« 
Tf one have little learning, and withal 

No concentration in his doing, men * 

Will blame him both in learning and in deeds. 
If one have little learning, and withal 6 
Much concentration in his doing, men ‘ 

Will praise his deeds, his learning not complete. 
And if one have much learning, and withal 

No concentration in his doing, men 

Will blame his deeds, his learning being convplete. 
And if Gne have much learning, and withal 

Much concentration in his doing, men 

Will praise him both in learning and in deeds. 

The Buddha’s deeply learned follower ° 
Is bearer of thelaw. And he is wise . 
And, as the gold of Jambu, without blame. “ ~ 
Devas praise him, yea, Brahma praiseth him.* 


€ 


‘ 1 Angultara ii, 7. 


c 


a 


ry 


" , by way of views, or those precepts which 


: I.—Exposition of Virtue 


55 
The precepts of bati 
2cepts ODE i 1 
: r ep of probatiorers from not being misconstrued 
are not misconstrued 
Si : rue 
By Ww ae es lust of average men, are to be known as “precepts 
os purity not mis "lik i | 
of purity noi isconstrued,”’ like those of the Elder Tissa, son 
of Kutumbiya. For that senior, desirous of establi 
| tinml ablishing 
; : on . . i 
himself in Sanctity through such precepts, said to his enemies: 


“* Breaking both legs I wjll convince you. Yea 
: I loathe, I am ashamed of death in lust.” - 
[49] So thought I, wisely pondering, and attained 
2 To saycpity what tinfe the dawn arose. 


Another Elger also, being afflicted with disease, was 
unable to feed himself with his hands, and was walloween 
and olling about in his own urine artd excrement. Secing 
him, aertain young man said: “ Alas, how painful are your 
life complexes !” The Elder said to him: “ Lad, if I die now 
I shall get the bliss of ‘heaven. There is no doubt about 
that. But the bliss obtained by breaking this virtue would 
be like the state of layman brought about by renouncing the 
precepts. I shall die even together with my virtue.” Ana 
contemplating that disease as he lay there, he attained 
Sanctity and gave explanation to the Order of brethren in 
these stanzas :-— 


s° A sickness falls upon me. The disease 
. . oe. 
Brings shérp pain and corruption. Very soon 


‘ This body will’ dry up even as a flower 


Wrapped in hot dust. This ailing, putrid corpse, 
Called loveable, being unlpveable, 

Fie on it! impure thing that men deem pure, 

Full of all loathsomenesses ; loveable ? 

To the unseeing, this foul-smelling thing, 
Corruptible, void of all purity, 

Whereby intoxicated, dazed, the world 


Destroys the way by which heaven is attained.” 


Tle precepts of saints and so on are to be known as * tran- 
quillized precepts of purity” from their tranquillizing of all 


1 Jalaka ii, 437. 


| Krishna chandra college central Li 


56 The Path of Purity A 


G 
suffering, and from their complete purity. This is purity of . 


precepts fivefold as limited precepts of purity and so forth. 

In the second pentad (p. 13) what is to be understood as 
the meaning is by way of removing life-taking and so on. 
For it has been said in the Patisdmbhida:1 “ There are five 
kinds of virtue: (1) the rejection of life-taking is virtue, (2) ab- 
stention ws virtue, (3) volition is virtue, (4) restraint is virtue, 
(5) non-transgression is virtue. Virtue is the rejection, of 
theft . . . of wrong conduct in sensual pleasures . . . of false 
speech, calumnious speech, harsh speech, friyolous talk, [50] 
covetousness, ill-witl, wrong viéws. It is the rejection of sensual 
desire by renunciation, ill-will by good-will, sloh and torpor by 
the perceptien of light, flurry by non-distraction, doubt. by 
determination of states, ignorance by knowledge, discontent by 
gladness, the hindrances by the first jhina, initial and stiStained 
applications of mind by the second jhana, rapture by the third 
jhana, ease and ill by the fourth ghana, the perception of matter 
by the attainment of the sphere of space, the perception of variety 
by the perception of aversion, the perception of the sphere of 


“space by the attainment of the sphere of consciousness, the 


perception of the sphere of consciousness by the attainment of 
the sphere of nothingness, the perception of the sphere of nothing- 
ness by the attainment of the sphere of neither perception nor 
non-perception, the perception of Permanence by retrospection 
of impermanence, the perception of ease bf retrospection of 
ill, the perception of the soul by retrospection of soullessness, 
delight by retrospection of disgust, passion by retrospection of 
dispassion, origination by retrespection of cessation, clinging 
by retrospection of forsaking, the perception of density by retrospec- 
tion of loss, r&inforcing by retrospection of decay, the perception 
of constancy by retrospection of change, the sign by retrospection 
of the signless, hankering by retrospection of the unhankered- 
after, conviction by retrospection of emptiness, the clinging to 
and conviction of essence by the higher wisdom of insight into 
states, the conviction of delusion by the knowledge“and discern- 
ment of things as they really are, the conviction of attachment by 


1 j, 46. 


a 


prar 


oe eyo 


=e I.—Exposition of Virtue 57 
x 


retrospectiqn of tribulation? non-reflection by retrospection of 
reflection, the conviction of fetlers by retrospection of escape from 
the round of births, the corruptions occupying the same place 
with views by the path of Stream-winning, the gross corruptions 
by the path of Once-returning, the sublle corruptions by the 
path of Never-returning, all corruptions by ‘the path of Sanc- 
TS virtue is abstention, golition, restraint, non-trans- 
gression im regard to all these things. ‘Such kinds of virtue 
conduce to absence of mental remggse, to gladness, rapture 
tranguallity, 194, practice, culture, development, oGhgarepy 
a hia (of ¢ neentration), fulness, fulfilment, certain inne 
eee cessation, quiet, higher knowledge, Beri ee knowledge,” 
And herein, other than the not ate life-taki 
: rin -taking 

forth *lescribed above to arise, there is aeteele ee at 
is called “rejection.” And because the different tejections 
are [51] the support, in the sense of basis, and also owing to 
their not shaking, the right placing of the different moral 
states, therefore it has been said previously to be virtue in thon 
sense of being virtuous, already mentioned as supporting and 
right placing (p. 2). The other four states are mentioned 
with reference to the procedure and existence of mind as 
abstaifiing from this and that, as refraining from this and that 
as velition associated with both (abstaining and ceetnting) 
and as non-trarsgression on the part of one who does not 
transgress this and that. And their being virtue has been 
mentioned previously. Thus it is fivefold as rejection and 
so forth. : 

So far this is the end of the answers to the questions: What 
1s virtue ? In what sense is it virtue? What are its charac- 
teristics, its essence, its manifestation, its proximate cause ? 
What are its advantages? How many kinds of it are there ? 


6. What is its corruption? 7. What its purification ? 

Ty.whst has been said as “ What is its corruption ? and 
what its purification ?” we say that the state of virtue being 
broken and so forth is its corruption; that its state of being 
unbroken and so forth is its purification, And that state of 


ff 


Te 


Krishna chandra college central Lifrary 


58 The Path of Purity r 


“ 
being broken and so forth is counted as its -breaking con- 
ditioned by gain, pomp, and so on, and the sevenfold assocla- 
tion with sexual feelings. For a man whose pane iy 
the group of the seven offences are broken either at the out- 
set or conclusion, is known as having broken virtue, like a 

And whoso has them broken 


garment frayed at the edges. Ar 5 Rides ee 
in the middle is known as havipg riddled virtue, hke a garme 


with holes in the middle. And whoso has two or three of 
them broken in a series js known as having streaked virtue, 
like a cow the colour of whose body is one or the other among 
black and red colours and so on mixed with O eee dissimilar 
colours, either on the back or on the belly. And whoso has 
them broken Sat different stages is known as having spotted 
virtue, like a cow variegated by dissimilar colours and spots 
at intervals. And so the state of being broken and s@"on is 
due to breaking conditioned by gain and so forth. 
And this is by way of the sevenfold association with sexual 

feelings. For the Blessed One has said . 

~ “ Brahmin, here a? monk or a brahmin is pledged to be chaste 
and does not actually [52] enjoy a woman, but he likes to hawe 
her rub, chafe, bathe, or massage him ; he gs pleased with ut, 
desires it, takes delight init. T his, O brahmin, 2s being broken, 
riddled, streaked, spotted in respect of the holy life. And he, 
O brahmin, is said to practise impure chastity, and to be %sso- 
ciated with the fetter of séxual feelings. And I say that he ws 
not freed from birth, old age, death . . ill. Again, O brahmin, 
here a monk or a brahmin is pledged to be chaste and does not 
actually enjoy a woman, and doe& not like to have her rub, chafe, 
bathe or massage him, but he likes to jest, play, and sport with her ; 
he is pleased with it.... And I say that he 1s not freed 
from birth, old age, death... ill. Again, O brahmin, here 
a monk or a brahmin is pledged to be chaste and does not actually 
enjoy a woman, and does not like to have her rub. . . toryest, 
play and sport with her, but he likes to stare and look ut her ; 
he is pleased with it... . And I say that he is not’ freed_trom 
birth, old age, death... ill. Again, O brahmin, here a monk 


to 


1 Angettara iv, 54. Read ekacco. 


‘\. “m, 


ae 1.—Exposition of Virtue 59 


® 
e 
or a brahn&n is*pledged to be chaste and does not actually enjoy 
a woman, and does not like to have her rub... to jest . . 
to stare and look at her, but he likes to listen to her voice, when 
she daughs, talks, sings, gr cries across a wall or fence ; he is 
pleased with it... . And I say that he is not freed from birth, 
old age, death... ill. Again, O brahmin, here a monk or a 
brahmin is pledged to be chasteeand does not actually enjoy a 


woman, and does not like to have her rub... to jest... 


stare . . . listen to her voice, ... bl he likes to think about 
his former laughs, talks, sportiggs with her,; he is pleased with 
it... ., AndY say that he is not freed from birth, old age, 
death... wl. Again, O brahmin, here a monk or a brahmin 


is“ pledged to be chaste and does not dctually enjoy a woman, 
and does not like to have her rub, . 


6 8D) WOR 6 5 3 GURD 0 oc 
listen to her voice . 


-»- think about his former laughs . . . [53] 
but he likes to see a howseholder or his son enjoying fully the 
pleasures of sense ; he is pleased with it. ... And TI say that 
he is not freed from birth, old age, death. . . ill. Again, O 
brahmin, here a monk or a brahmin is pledged to be chaste ands 
doé not actually enjoy a woman, and does not like to have 
her rub... jest @.. stare... listen... think... see a 
househplder . . . but he likes to practise the holy life in the 
hope, of attaining to a celgstial abode, saying, ‘ By this virtue, 
vow, austerity, og chastity, I shalb become a deva, or one of the 
devas ; he is pleased with it, desires it, takes delight init. This, 
O brahmin, is being broken, riddled, streaked, spotted as regards 
the holy life.’”’ 

Thus the state of being broken, and so forth, should be 
understood to be counted as its breaking gonditioned by 
gain and so forth, and the sevenfold association with sexual 
feelings. 

And the state of being unbroken, and so on, is considered 
as the not breaking of all the precepts, the atoning for those 
to be atoned, the absence! of the fetter of the sevenfold sexual 
feetimys, the not producing of such evil states as anger, hatred, 
hypocxisy, ridicule, envy, meanness, wile, craft, stiffness, 


1 Read bhavena as part of the preceding compofnd. 


, a f 


¢ 


, = 3 . ec 
60 The Path of ‘Purity : 

conceit, excessive conceit, intoxication, rfegligence; 
qualities as moderation of desires, 
Indeed those virtues which have 
ake of gain and so forth, or -which 
h they may have been broken 
, and which have not been 
nger, hatred, 


clamour, 
and the producing of such 
contentment, simple life. 
not been broken for the s 
have been atoned for even thoug 


through the fault of negligence 
the fetter of sexual feelings and a 
or other evil states, are all said to be unbroken, unriddled, 
unstreaked, unspotted. «And they are ‘liberating’ through 


their bringing about liberation;< praised by the prise j through 
‘mot misconstued ” through 


their being praised by the wise; 

being not misconstrued by craving and views; and they are 
conducive to concentfation since they conduce either ‘to 
access concentration or ecstatic concentration. Hence their 
state of being unbroken, and so on, is tp be known as their 
purification. 4 

And that purification is fulfilled in two ways: by seeing tlfe 

evils of the depravity of virtue. and by seeing the advantages 

-of the fulfilment of virtue. [54] Of these, the evils of the 
depravity of virtue should be understood according to the 
Sutta which begins: ‘‘ Brethren, five are the evils of depravity 
of the virtue of a wicked man.”* 

Moreover, a wicked person, on agcount of his wickedness, 
is not liked by devas and men; is not admonished by his 
fellow-monks; is miserablé ‘amidst the scoffings at his wicked- 
ness; feels remorse amidst the praises of the virtuous; is ill 
favoured like a hempen garment on account of his wickedness; 
is in touch with pain inasmuch‘as those who follow his views 
bear the pains of the states of woe for a long time; is of little 
worth inasmuch as he does not produce much fruit to those 
whose gifts he accepts; is difficult of purification like a pit of 
excrement that has been collecting many years; is outside 
os ee ce eae man and of monk) like a vile creeper; 
follows a eater Heat 2 eee i Bae! sae 
aa se ttle; he is ever alarmed like afi cxtmy 

men; 1s not worthy to live with, like some dead body; 
i a 


oppressed by 


1 Anguttara iii, 252, 


Krishna chandra college central Li 


ay 


te —~ ~ e- * 
’ 1:—Exposition of Virtue 61 
monks, even 
as learning, 


is unable to 


is not wotthy *to be reverent . 

though he may be cowed BR zelioxe - 

pny more than a cremation fire by a 

attain- distinction as a blind man is ee 

has no more desire for the Good Law than a ice 
Ve-digger’s 


boy has for kingship; is in pain though he thinks 
: e 


being a partaker of pain as is said j , is happy 

A ° 2 wid in the Fire Di ? 

For in setting forth the visible result of ena, N 
a@aima 


its forms, and the exceedin s 
ae : : g Severgspain which ari ; 
menwith migds giddy with enjoyment of the fine a 
pleasures, ang the pleasugable taste of fie i 
reverence and so forth which result from these sid ae 
ures, 


tlfes which, merely in recollection. j x: 

c Ong , 1s*able to 

burning and the spitting of hot blood, the BL 
as 


said :—t ° 
ec ey Sha. 
; Brethren, do you see this great mass of 
aflame ?” 
** Yea, Lord.” 


fire, burning, ablaze, 


“1 5 
What do you think, O brethren? Which is better: to sit 
. ~ 


or Vie down embracing this great mass of fire, burning, abl 
aflame for to sit owflie down embracing a panels maid, a vans 
min maid, or a maid of the householder class, with soft id 
delicate hands and feet 2” , j ie 
ees ee = ee ay ee he down eek aT a princely 

[55] Painful it is, Lord, to sit or lie down 
embracing a mass of fire.” 

“T tell you, brethren, I declare unto you, brethren, that it is 
better for a wicked man of evil nature, of unclean and hesitating 
conduct, of hidden actions, not a monk but plegged to be one, 
not a holy man but pledged to be one, putrid within, flowing with 
lust, offensive as refuse, to sit or lie down embracing a mass of 
fire. . .. And why? On this account, brethren, he may die 
or suffer mortal pain, but on the dissolution of his body after 
death, at wy) not make him suffer in states of woe, an evil destiny, 
inemefiice of suffering, hell. But, brethren, that a wicked 
man ., . should sit or lie down embracing a princely maid . . . 


1 Ib. iv, 128 (correct the reference on p. 54, n. 8 of the Pali Text 
accordingly), . 


sah onem At at kd 


rn pe tional 


e 


ec 


that indeed is to his disadvantage and pain for a fong time ; 
and on the dissolution of the body after death, he goes to a state 
of woe, to an evil destiny, a place of suffering, hell.” ‘ 

Having thus by the simile of the mass of fire made known 
the pain caused by enjoying the five pleasures connected with 
women, the Blessed One in the same way said :—* 

“ Brethren, which do you think is better: that a strong man 
should twist a strong hair-rope round the shins of both legs and 


’ pull it, rubbing them, so that it cyts the skin, and then the thick 


inner skin, and then the flesh, and then the nerv}s, and then the 
bones, and having cut the bones, remains chafikg the marrow ; 
or that one (the wicked man) should acquiesce in the salutation 
of great princes, great brahmins, or great householders? BretkYen, 
which do you think is better: that a strong man should pierce 
the breast with a sharp spear cleansed in qil ; or that one should 
acquiesce in the obeisance of great ‘princes, great brahmins, 
or great householders? Brethren, which do you think is better : 
that a strong man should cover the body with a heated iron-plate, 
- burning, blazing, flaming ; or that one should use a robe, agift 
of faith from great princes, brahmins, or householders ? Brethfen, 
which do you think [56] is better: that a strovg man should open 
his mouth by means of heated iron tweezers, burning, Rlazing, 
flaming, and throw into it a heated jron ball, burning, blazing, 
flaming, so that it burns the lips, and also the mouth, tongue, 
throat, stomach, and comes out from below together with the 
intestines and the mesentery ; or that one should eat food, a gift 
of faith from great princes, brahmins, or householders ? Brethren, 
which do you think is better : that a strong man should seize one 
by the head or ghoulder and make one sit or lie down on a heated 
iron bed or a chair, burning, blazing, flaming ; or that one should 
use a bed or chair, a gift of faith from great princes, brahmins, 
or householders? Brethren, which do you think is better: 
that a strong man should seize one, feet wpward and head down- 
ward, and throw one into a heated iron pot, burnina, blazing, 
flaming, so that one is cooked giving rise to bubbles, animceeps 
on now coming up, now going down, now going sideways ; or 


‘ 1 1b. 129 f. 


62 The Path of Purity ~~ . 


Krishna chandra college central Library 


a 


* 
* . ‘ ” , 
© [.—aposition of Virtue 
e js 


ry ; , pa 7 
that one should Yuse a dwelling, a gift of faith from great primes 
brahmins, or householders ?” 


. Thus under the similitudes of hairrope, sharp a 
iron plate, iron ball, iron bed, iron chair, iron pot ; 
Blessed One set forth the pain caused by the enjoyrnent of 

salutation, obeisance, robe, food, bed, chair, dwelling (by the ° 
unworthy). . 


Whence can there be true hagpiness to hina 
* Of bro 
SensuaJ pleasure, yielding sharper pain 
Than to embrace a mass of living fire ? 
“= What happiness is there to him*whose virtue 
Hath been depraved, accepting salutation, 
Suffering pain more galling than the pain 
Of flesh tormentéd with strong ropes of hair ? 
* [57] What happiness to one who hath no virtue, 
Accepting the obeisance of the faithful, 
The root-condition of a sharper pain > 
Than pain of piercing spear? Or what to him 
Who knowgth no restraint in use of robes, 
 Vherefor he should be punished long in hell, 
Being bound upon,a blazing iron plate 7 
e Though syeet the food, tosone who hath no virtue 
It is as virulent poison: wherefor he 
Shall mouth in hell a red-hot iron ball. 
Though deemed a joy, the use of bed and chair 
By one who hath no virtue is a pain. 
Wherefore let him be racked long time gp beds 
And blazing chairs of iron. And to him 
Whose virtue is perverted, what delight 
To dwell within a house, a gift of faith 2 
Mid blazing iron vessels should he dwell. 
4 the world-Teacher blameth him for one 
hesitating conduct, passionate, 
evil, putrid within, a rubbish heap. 
Fie on the harmful and destructive life 
Of him who knoweth not restraint, no moxk, 


1 virtue, who goth not forsake 


Krishna chandra college central Library 
= aa e 


° a 
64 The Path of Purity Ae | 3 is 1.—EL£ position of Virtue 65 
ss 4 ‘7 ~ 5D ' 
But wearing a monk’s guise and suffering ~ il = 5 Among the gods, it 1s not hard to gain 
Austerities !! For what to him is life, : By one fulfilled in virtue, if he will. 
Avoided is by the virtuous and good, e The attainment of Nibbana takes away 
As dung by those who would be beautified, —s ° ; ; , Burning untold: his mind seeks after it ; - 
Or corpse. He is not freed from fears; but freed . , Whose virtue is fulfilled. Thus should the wise 
From every hope of bliss. Heaven’s door is closed, . é Show forth the benefits of virtue, root 3 
The way of hell he hath’ taken. Who but he ’ Of all attainments, varioys, multiform. 


isp itiable to the piteous ¢ i Knd so the mind of him who shows them forth trembles at’ 
Be cegeteedl vacaremaeyy tonite Bcects: - e the depravity of virtue, and, inclinés towards its fulfilment. 
Therefore, seeif& the evils of*the depravity of virtue and 


iy orf 
Thus ive knowl are to k2 understood A ; 
Thus by retrospective knowledge are to the advantages*of the fulfilment of virtue as spoken of above, 


the evils of the depravity of virtue. And the advantages 


of the fulfilment of virtue should be taken as the opposite : pre ee ala ee cn Path of Purity eet 
si ne a oe oe - sath under the heads of virtue, concentration, and wisdom 
Further:— t ; | in the stanza, ‘“‘ The man discreet, on virtue planted firm.” 
[58] His virtue pure, his bearing bowl and robe % Thus is ended the first chapter called The Exposition of 
Pleasing, his ordination not unblessed. ‘4 Virtue, in the Path of Purity, composed for the purpose of 
As darkness enters not the sun, so fear y mz gladdening good folk. a 
c Of self-blame enters not that brother’s heart 2 i 
Whose virtue is purified. Asin the sky b 
By the fulfilment of her rays the mooa @ 
Shines, in the wood of his austerities ie 4 . ° . 
By the fulfilment of his virtue,shines bs . e cs F 
The brother. A good brother’s bodily scent 0 , : i. oa ae 
Brings gladness even to gods: what need to tell : : 
His scent of virtue? For it overcomes 
The attainment of all other kinds of scent: : 
Unchecked in all directions it is borne. » 
Deeds tq,the virtuous done, though they be few, 
Are fruitful. Thus the virtuous dispense - - 
Honour and reverence. The intoxicants 
Of the conditioning present do not vex 
The virtuous. The virtuous dig up ; ‘ 
The root of future ills. a. z Paenare 
f Whatever of attainment among men, — Gi 
Whatever of prosperity there be ° 
ee a 6 
i i + Read khatam attanam va hantassa for chatam?®. 
hy 3 - | 
- | ‘, , 
j 
SS rr 


ae RI ETS TT E 


8 RT 


qe 
_— 


} 


\\ % 


[59] CHAPTER IT 
EXPOSITION OF THE ASCETIC PRACTICES 


Now virtue, the different kinds of which have been described, 
is cleansed by means of such qualities as fewness of wishes, 
contentment, and so on.™ Because a religious meditatar who 
has kept his virtue should, tobe proficient inpthose-qualities, 
observe the ascetic practices, therefore we will begim the dis- 
course on the ascetic practices, so that he (who observes thgm) 
may have his virtue washed and purified by the waters of 
such qualities, to wit, fewness of wishes? contentment, aesterity 
of life, solitude, loss of sin, strenyou$ energy, easiness of 
support by others, and may have his vows fulfilled. And.so 
being absolutely pure in conduct through his qualities of 
faultless virtue and ritual, he may be worthy of being estab- 
lished in the three ancient orders of Ariyans and, fourthly, of 
attaining to delight in culture. é 

Thirteen ascetic practices namely have been permitted by 
the Blessed One to be kept by those well-born youths who have 
put away worldly needs of the flesh and who, regardless of 
body or life, are eager to make fitting progress? They are (1) the 
refuse-ragman’s practice, (2) three-rober’s practice, (3) alms- - 
man’s practice, (4) house-to-house-goer’s practice, (5) one- 
sessioner’s practice, (6) bowl-fooder’s practice, (7) afterfood- 
refuser’s practice, (8) forester’s practice, (9) tree-rootman’s 
practice, (10) open-spacer’s practice, (11) burning-grounder’s 
practice, (12) any-bedder’s practice, (13) sitting-man’s practice. 

Therein :— 


As to the meaning, characteristic, 

Observance and directions, grade and breach, 
And eke the benefit of this and that, ~~ =m 
As moral triad, as differentiated, 

In groups and in detail—decision shall 

Be made on these ascetic practices, 

66 


e 


a 


ae 


« Krishna chandra college central Liplry 


= ie Il.—Eaposition of the Ascetic Practices 67 
+. 


[60] Of these, as to the meaning — 

1. A refuse-rag is one which is placed on a refuse-heap in 
such places as a chariot-road, burning-ground, rubbish-heap 
and,so.on, and which, in, the sense of covering-up is like ihe 
heap of dust in them. Or, it gets to a loathsome state like 
the dust—hence refuse-rag; it reaches the loathsome state, 
as, it has been said, refuse-rag peactice means the wearing of a 
refuse-rag so defined. One who has the habit of‘ wearing it 
is a refuse-ragman. The practice} of a refuse-ragman is 
refusé-ragman’s .practice. Pzagtice is said to mean reason. 
Therefore this} practice sliould be regarded as a synonym 
for whatever observance by reason of which one becomes a 
refwse-ragman. ° e 

2. In the same way one who has the habit of wearing the 
threefold robe —namgly, the shoulder-cloak, upper garment, 
and the waist-cloth—is*a three-rober. The practice of a 
tHree-rober is three-rober’s practice. 

3. Alms? is the falling of morsels as food for the flesh. It 
is said to be the falling into the bowl of morsels of food given 
by ®thers. One who gathers alms and seeks it by approaching 
this and that family is an almsman. Or, one whose duty it is 

_ to roam for alms is an alms-roamer, where to roam is to 
wander. Alms-roamer is the same asalmsman. The practice 
of such an one isalmsman’s practice. 

4. A broken series (d@na) is said to be an interruption. 


* An unbroken series (apadana) is without interruption; 


uninterrupted is the meaning. With unbroken series is 
sdpadana (sa-apadana), that is; from house to house without 
interruption. One whose habit it is to go frgm one house 
to ariother in an unbroken series is a house-to-house-goer, 
sapadanacari, which is the same as saipadanacarika.* The 
practice of such an one is house-to-house-goer’s practice. 

5: ‘One-session is food taken at one sitting. One who has 
the habit of taking such food is a one-sessioner. The practice 
of binex’s’one-sessioner’s practice. 

6.: Bowl-food is food that falls into a single bowl, a second 


2 Cf. above, p. 37. 


1 Or, factor (angam). 
3 JT.e, with the addition of the suffix ka. 


_ Krishna chandra college central Lib 3 


68 The Path of ‘Purity i @ 

powl being refused. Now the name bowl-food is given to the 
acceptance of such food. One who has the habit of accepting 
such food is a bowl-fooder. The practice of him 1s bowl- 


fooder’s practice. Aus - 
7. Khalu is a particle with the meaning of denial. [61] 


Food that is got later by one who refuses further offerings 
while eating his first meal" is éalled afterfood. The partaking 
of that afterfood is afterfood-taking. The name, afterfood, 
is given to the taking of sach food. One who has the habit of 
taking afterfood is an afterfooder. Afterfood-refuser 1s one 
who does not take afterfood. It’is a name for one who by 
virtue of his observance refuses additional food. But it is 
said in the (Great) Conimentary: ‘ Khalw is a bird which tékes 
a fruit in its beak, but when that falls down does not take 
another fruit. Such is the man,’ namely éhe afterfood-refuser. 
The practice of such an one is afterfood-refuser’s practice. _ 

g. One who has the habit of dwelling in the forest is a 
forester. ‘The practice of such an one is forester’s practice. 

9. Tree-root is a dwelling at the foot of a tree. One who 
has the habit of dwelling at such a place is a tree-rootnian. 
The practice of a tree-rootman is tree-rootinaan’s practice. 

10, 11. And the same with the practices of the open-spacer 
and the burning-grounder (or charnel-fielder). - 

12. Any-bed is any lodging that is allotted. It is a 
synonym for a dwelling first allotted thus: ‘ This is available 
for you.’ One who has the habit of living in whatever place 
is allotted is an any-bedder. The practice of such an one 
is any-bedder’s practice. ¥2 


13. A sittirg-man is one whose habit it is to refuse to lie | 


down and to live sitting. The practice of such an one is 
sitting-man’s practice. 

All of them are the practices (or factors) of the brother who 
has shaken off the corruptions through the observance of this 
and that practice; or, knowledge, which has acauired the 
common name of shaking-off by reason of its shaking “vt ~he 
corruptions, is the factor for (or reason of) these practices— 
a en Re ie ee fa a 


1 The meaning of pavaritena sata is brought out in these two clauses. 


° 


. 


H.—Eaposition of the Ascetic Practices 69 


e 

hence asc&tic practices (or factors). Or, again, they a 
ascetic because they shake off the hostile corruptions pe! the ; 
are the factors of moral attainment—hence ascetic poahtices: 
So far is the decision to he known from the meaning.1 

And the will to observe is the characteristic of them all 
It is also said (in the Commentary): ‘It is the person that 
observes. Mind and mental roperties are the states by 
which he observes. It is the ascetic practice that is the will 
to observe. It is the physical bagis that is rejected’ And 


all of them hawe the slaying of worldly lust as function, the 


freedom, from sich lust as manifestation, and such Ariyan states 
as fewness of wishes and so on as proximate cause. [62] Thus 
is the decision to be known from the characteristic and so on. 

As to the five topics: their observance, directions, and others,” 
—in the lifetime of fhe Blessed One all the ascetic practices 
had to be observed under‘him; after his decease, under the Chief 
Disciple; he being absent, under a saint purged of the intoxi- 
cants—and so on, under a never-returner—a once-returner—a, 
stréam-winner—a scholar of the three Pitakas—a scholar of 
tw6 Pitakas—a scholar of one Pitaka—a scholar of one Nikaya 
—a, scholar of ong Agama*—a teacher of commentaries—a 
master, of the ascetic practices; and in the absence of this last 
person one should sweep the shrineyard, sit on the hams, and 
observe the pragtices as though uttering them under the 
tuition of the Supreme Buddha. “But it behoves one to 
observe them also by oneself. And here as regards fewness 
of wishes by reason of the ascetic practices, the story of the 
senior of the two brothers, Mlders living on Mount Cetiya, 


should be told.* ° 


This so far is the general discourse. 


1 Dhutanga: from dhu: to shake off. 

2 Soe the verse on p. 66. 

3 kigamassa, meaning the same as the preceding, is omitted by the 
Tika. eos ‘ 

‘eLioriu is said, was one who never lay down, but none knew of it. 
One night as he sat on a bench his brother saw him by lightning-flash 
and askéd if he was practising the habit of the sitting-man. The Elder, 
through fewness of wishes by reason of his ascetic practice, at once lay 
down, but afterwards resumed the habit.—Tika. e 


e 
= 


pajcenehe tity 


Krishna chandra college central Library 


¢ 


70 The Path of ‘Purity : 


¢ 
1. The Refuse-Ragman’s Practice. 


Now we shall set forth the observance, directions, grade, 
breach, and advantage of each in order. aR 

And first, the refuse-ragman’s practice is observed with one or 
other of the two expressions: I refuse a robe given by a house- 
holder; I observe the refusefagman’s practice. So far this 
is the (formula of) observance. And he who observes tlfis 
practice should pick up ane or other of these rags, namely, 
burning-ground-rag, shop-Tago street-rag, rebbish-heap-rag, 
childbirth-rag, bath-rag, pathing-place-rag, aiter-return-rag, 
burnt-rag, cattle-bitten-rag, ant-bitten-rag, mouse-gnawed- 
rag, side-tofh-rag, bérder-torn-rag, flag-rag, oblation-cag, 
monk’s-rag, consecration-rag, psychic-power-rag, road-rag, 
wind-blown-rag, spirit-rag, ocean-Tag. -Tearing the rag he 
should throw away the rotten parts and wash the good parts 
and make a robe of them, and wear it after removing his old 
householder’s robe. 

As to these, burning-ground-rag is a rag cast away in ‘the 
burning-ground. Shop-rag is a rag thrown away at a slfop- 
door. Street-rag is a rag thrown into cthe street from a 
window by those who desire merit. Rubbish-heap-rag is 
[63] a rag thrown away at a rubpish-heap. Childbirth-rag 
is a cloth thrown away after wiping the impurities ot ,the 
womb at childbirth. It fs said that the mother of Tissa the 
minister had the impurities of her womb wiped with a cloth 
worth a hundred coins, and had it thrown on the Talaveli 
Road! in the hope that refuse-ragmen would pick it up; and 
the brethren,took of it just enough for mending purposes.” 
Bath-rag is a rag which sick people® throw away as inauspicious 
when, with the advice of exorcists, they have washed their 
heads and bathed themselves. Bathing-place-rag is a cloth 
thrown away at the river bathing-place. After-return-rag 
is a cloth which men, on their return from the burning-ground, 
throw away after their bath. Burnt-rag is a cloth petinlly 


1 A road in Mahigama and in Anuraidhapura.—Tikd.” 
2 So as to leave some for others. 
2 Read nahapita, as in footnote. 


. 


TI ae Fy 7, o>.e ~ . . 
it. Ezposition bf the Ascetic Practices 71 


bum Bytes Tat ao'nen thow avay Catia 
Ban p v10us, 2.e. Tags bitten by cattle 
by white ants, by mice, torn at the side, and at the Border 
Thal nen thoy yoy. Asgard the lag rags 
é fter planting a banner (at the port); one 
may take it when they get out of sight. That banner planted 
on the battlefield by soldiers @ne may also take, when both 
armies have marched away. Oblation-rag is a ¢loth which 
is wrapped round an anthill and offered to spirits. Monk’s- 
rag is a robe ‘elonging to a brother. Consecration-rag is a 
robe thrown away at the place where the king was ancinted. 
Psychic-power-rag is a robe made by a newly initiated brother.+ 
R@ad-rag is a cloth thrown away (dr fallen)*on the road. 
But gone should wait awhile before picking up that cloth, 
which the owner .dropped through inadvertence. Wind- 
blown-rag is a cloth which, carried by the wind, has fallen 
afar. That also one may take when the owner is not in sight. 
Spirit-rag is a cloth given by devas, like the one given to the 
Elder Anuruddha.? Ocean-rag is a cloth thrown up on to. 
th® land by the waves of the sea. But that robe which is 
given with the expression, ‘ we give it to the Order,’ or that 
which is obtained by monks who go to receive a gift of cloth 
and, alms is not a refuge-rag. As for a robe given by a 
brother, that which is given out of regard for (the ragman’s) 
seniority, or that *which is offered to (the inmates of) a 
monastery is not a refuse-rag. That which is given out of 
regard, not for the ragman’s seniority (but, for the donor’s 
seniority), is a refuse-rag. ‘And here also that robe which, 
having been placed at a brother's feet by dqnors, is offered 
by him into the ragman’s hand, is indeed half pure. That also 
which, having been given into the brother’s hand, is by him 
placed at (the ragman’s) feet is half pure. But that which, 
having been placed at the brother’s feet, is by him given to 
theragman in the same way* is wholly pure. [64] That which, 
Irvine” been placed in the (brother’s) hand, is by him placed 


1 Whibhikkhus, t.e. ‘ Come, brother!’ the oldest formula of admission 
tothe Order. Vinaya iv, 214. 


2 Dhammapada Comy. ii, 173 f. 3 T.e. by placing it at his feet. 


Pe as thet 
is 


72 The Path of Purity E 6 
t a robe.e This knowing 


P 
in the (ragman’s) hand is indeed no 
he refuse-ragman should 


the different kinds of refuse-rags t 
wear his robe. These herein are the directions. < 

Now this is the grade. There are three ragmen:- strict, 
moderate, and soft.’ Of them he who picks up @ Tag thrown. 
ng-ground? is a strict man. He who picks 
laced With the verbal expression: * the 
monk will pick it up’ is a moderate man.? He who accepts 
a rag placed at his feet (hy a monk) is a soft man. And the 
ascetic practice of any of them is broken he moment he 
accepts, through his own wish or through submission to a 
request, a robe given by a householder.* This herein is the 


away in the burni 
up a rag” which was p 


breach. - . er 

Now these are the advantages: The state of his having 
behaved in accordance with the spirityal guidance (of his 
superior) as said thus: ‘He is a monk having a refuse-rag as his 
resource for clothing 25 his establishment in the first order of 
Ariyans; the absence of the trouble of looking after his robe; 
the independence of livelihood; the absence of danger from 
thieves; the absence of the lust for enjoyment; the fitness“ of 
the rag as a monk’s robe; the state of its, being a requisite 
praised by the Buddha as ‘ cheap, easy to get, and fauliless’ ;° 
its delightfulness; the yielding of the fruit of fewness of wishes 
and so forth; the development of right conduc; the institution 


of a precedent for future génerations of monks. 


1 The particle yeva is used in a collective sense to include the other 
twenty-two rags. c 

2 T.e. any of the twenty-three kinds. 

3 But the Visuddhimaggadipani inclines to the view that he is a 
strict man because, in the case of the burning-ground, of the loath- 
someness of the place and, in the case of rags gnawed by mice and so 
forth or burnt by fire, of the discarded nature of the rags themselves. 

4 * Butif he accepts it out of regard for the donor’s faith and with the 
intention of presenting it to another, as Ananda accepted a robe irom 


King Pasenadi for another, there is no breach.’—Ci/atika. “It is 


not proper for a monk to accept a robe which a layman kas placed 
at his feet requesting him to receive it as a special favour, “Suttif 
the donor goes off dropping it with indifference at the monk’s feet 
saying “ He will not take it even when I offer it so,” it is proper to pick 
it up.—Ganthi. 


5 Vinaya i, 383. 6 Angultara ii, 26. 


Krishna chandra college central Library 
c ; f m if 


LIL LDL LL SESS SRE EO A 


. > 2 


,il.—Exposition of the Ascetic Practices 73 


a 

As in the battle shines the mail-clad prince 
So in the routing of the Tempter’s ranks 
Shines the ascetic in a cast-off clout. 

- + The cast-off clot that the world’s Teacher wore 
Rejecting fairest robes of Kasi silk, 
Who will not wear? Let Brethren take delight 
In the old clout befittthg hermit ways 
Remembering their vows. 


This so far ig the setting férth ofthe observance, directions. 


2 
grade, breach, and advantage in the refuse-ragman’s practice. 


" 2. Lhe Three-Rober’s Practice. a 


Next comes the three-rober’s practice observed with one 
or otlfer of the expressions: I refuse a fourth robe;1 I observe 
the three-rober’s practice. [65] He who observes this practice 
should, on getting a new piece of cloth, put it by as long as he 
cannot make it coarse, or cannot find one who knows how 
to eut it, or lacks any of the articles such as a needle. There , 
is no fault in putting it by. But he should not put it by once 
it is dyed. He ould then become a thief of the ascetic 
practice. These are the directions. 

Thefe are also three grades of men here. When the time 
for dyeing comes, the strict man, having first dyed either his 
waist-cloth or upper.garment, should wear the one he has dyed 
and then dye the other. And having put on his upper garment 
he should dye the shoulder-cloak. But he should not put on 
the shoulder-cloak. This is Ifis duty in a village-monastery. 
But in his forest-abode he may wash both ,the garments 
together and dye them. In so doing he should sit in a place 
near enough for him to be able, in case he should see any one, 
to drag the yellow robe and cover himself with it. For the 
moderate man there is in the dyeing hall a yellow dyeing robe 
which he should wear or put on and do the work of dyeing. 
The sofman may wear or put on the robes which are for the 


1 J,e.*for the purpose of wearing either 
It does not refer to a robe thrown over 
missible. See below, p. 74, n- 2. 


as an inner or outer garment. 


the shoulder, which is per- 


apie 


ines 


TT IRS 


oy 
ne 


Sa 
nian CER SS 


— 


sy 


Sepa eal 


e 
e 


f 


The Path of*Purity 


and do the work of dyeing. 


74 


common use of the brethren 
Even a bed-cover! there is proper for him, but he may not take 


it about with him. Nor may he wear off and on a robe which 
is for the common use of the brethren., To one who is obserying 
the three-rober’s practice a yellow shoulder-cloth as a fourth 
piece” is permitted. It must be one span in breadth and three 
cubits?in length. But the monfent a fourth garment is accepted 
by these three men, the ascetic practice is broken. This herein 
is the breach. a 

Now these are the advantages: The brother.who is a three- 
rober is contented with the pody-protecting robe, therefore 
he takes it about with him as a bird carries its wings. And 
such advantages as these are attained: little need of tendaxce; 
the not having to treasure up clothes; lightness in travelling ; 
abandonment of the lust for extra rohes; simplicity of life 
through a limit being set for what ig proper; the yielding of 
fewness of wishes and so forth. ' 


e 


[66] The wise recluse, who wears the threefold robe, 
Forsakes a craving for an extra cloak. 
No other clothes he needs to treasure up; 
He knows what taste contented bliss bestows. 
So he, the good recluse, who loves to roam ‘ 
With his three robes, as flies the bird with wings, « 
Should note with joy the rule concerning robes. 


This is the setting forth of the observance, directions, 
grade, breach, and advantage in the three-rober’s practice. 
ce 


3. The Almsman’s Practice. 


The almsman’s practice also is observed with one or 
other of the expressions: I refuse an excessive amount of food; 
I observe the almsman’s practice. He who observes this 
practice should not accept these fourteen kinds of ‘food, 
namely, food offered to the Order as a whole, to one or more 
particular monks, food given by invitation, by tickéis, fod 


1 A shoulder-cloth (not usually worn as a garment) for self or another, 
used as a bed-sheet in the monastery.—Ttka. 


2 See note * (p. 73). 3 Read ti-hattham. 


; | 
Krishna chandra college central Library 


. 


En Ne BK hh Fal es Oe ek ATT Hit as), = 
at Ne Side tt Oe 


> 
. - 8 


. Tl—EFx nosition | Y \ 
| position of the Ascetic Practices 75 


. 2 sd 
. * given on # day,of the waning or waxing of the month on a 


sacred day, on the first day of the moonli i . 

to guests, to monks about to travel, we ee 
who, minister to the sick, food given in honour of a on t = 
at a principal house, food given by donors in turn = ao 
donors do not use the expression ‘ Partake of Peake, ie 

been offered to the Order,’ bu@ say, ‘ The Order metals 4 
food in our house; may you also partake of it,’ it is proper 
to accept such food. Food obtained from the Order aa 
distributed by 4ickets for purpages! other than the preteen 
of fleshly needs, and food cooked in a monastery are also 
permissible. These are the directions. 

There are also three grades of men here. “Of them the 
strict man accepts food brought both from in front and from 
behind. He gives the bowl to the people who receive it out- 
side their door. He alsb accepts food given after he has sat 
down to eat in the dining-hall? after his almsround. But he 
does not accept food (that has been promised) by sitting for 
it the whole day long. The moderate man accepts food sitting , 
arti waiting for it the whole day; but does not consent to a 
meal for the mormow. The soft man consents to a meal for 
the morrow and also for the day after. The latter two men 
do nov get the bliss of independent life; the strict man gets 
it., “Suppose there is (a sermon en) the lineage of the Ariyans 
in a certain villager The strict man says to the other two: 
‘Friends, let us go to hear the Law.’ One of them replies: 
‘Sir, I have been made to sit for a meal by such and such a 
man;’ and the other says: Sir, I have consented to to-morrow s 
meal offered by a certain man.’ Thus both gf them fail to 
hear the Law. But the strict man goes early for alms and 

of the Law. [67] The moment these three © 
ood for the Order and so on, 
This herein is the breach. 


enjoys the taste 
men accept extra food, such as f 


theit ascetic practice is broken. 
Now these are the advantages: The state of his having 


“behaved in accordance with the spiritual guidance (of his 


superior) as said thus: * He is a monk having morsels of alms 
NN SL CRUSE Senn ar a aca a a 


1 Such as medicinal purposes. 
2 Asanasilayam bhuiijanatt 


haya nisinne—adds tite Culatika. 


76 The Path of Purity ° 


e 
as his resource for food ;”* establishment in thesecohd order of 
Ariyans; independence of livelihood; the state of the food 
being a requisite praised by the Blessed One as * cheap, easy 
to get, and faultless ;"° the state of his having overcome idleness ; 
the purity of livelihood; the fulfilment of his probationary 
conduct; the state of not being nourished by others; the doing 
favour to the poor (donor) ;° fejection of conceit; checking of 
the lust for tasty food; freedom from offence against the 
precepts concerning a megl for geveral monks, a meal subse- 
quent to the acceptance of « previous one? and petsonal 
behaviour; conduct in conformity with few wishes, and so 
forth; development of right conduct; favour to future genera. 


tions.* 
Contented with his lumps of alms, 


And independent in his life, , 
The monk forsakes a lust for food, 
And goes at will to any place. 
His idleness he drives away; 
His livelihood is purified. . 
‘And so the wise should ne’er despise 
The going round to beg for alme. 
For such 
A brother going on his begging round, J 
Supporting self, fot others—him ¢he gods e 
Admire; for he is free from gain and fame. 


This is the setting forth of the observance, directions, 
grade, breach, and advantage ie the almsman’s practice. 


4.¢Lhe House-to-House-Goer’s Practice. 
The practice of the house-to-house-goer also is observed 
with one or other of the expressions: I set aside greedy be- 
haviour in alms-gathering;® I observe the house-to-house- 


goer’s practice. Standing at the village-gate he who observes. 


meer Sere 

1 Vinaya i, 58. 2 Anguttara il, 26. 7 

3 Who is thus not put to the trouble of having to give much. 

4 In providing them with a precedent. 

5 Je. greediness shown in passing over houses from which one does 
not expect to get food, and going to those houses which offer good food. 


Krishna chandra college central Lt 


‘ 
i 


bra ry 


| 


| 
: 


- e 3) 


: P (ee Ron tat : : y e 
| Exposition df the Ascetic Practices 77 


2 29 . 
this Brees shguld see that there is no danger! he is likely to 
meet with. If there be any such danger in the road a 
he should leave that place and go elsewhere oh ; 4 age 
be at the door of a house,or on the road or in the =e a a 
if he gets no alms there he should go away and not aS a ’ 
place as a village. He should not forsake that place in ara 
he has obtained something (aln%). The brother should enter 
tHe village quite early, so that he may have time to leave any 
place | he finds unpleasant and gg, elsewhere. [68] If alms 
be given him i his monasteryR or men meeting him on the 
road take his bowl and givé alms, he should accept it. When 
in his almsround he reaches a village, he should not go past it. 
Whether he gets nothing or something from *that village, 
he should go from one village to another in order. These are 
the directions. 

‘There are also three grades of men here. Of them the strict 
man does not accept food offered before he reaches a house or 
after he has left a house? or food given after he has sat down 
to éat in the dining-hall on return from his almsround. He 
gives up his bowl® at the donor's door. In this ascetic 
practice there is indeed none like the Elder Mahakassapa; 
the occasion on which he gave up his bowl is well known. 

The moderate man accepts food offered either before he 
reaghes a house pr after he has left a house, as well as food 
that is brought after ‘the has sat down to eat in the dining-hall 
on return from his almsround. He also gives up his bowl at 
the donor’s door, but does not sit waiting for food that has been , 
promised. In this respect he is like the strict almsman. The 
soft man sits waiting the whole day for food that has been 
promised. The moment greedy behaviour arises in these 
three men their ascetic practice is broken. This herein is 
the breach. ' 

Now these are the advantages: The being ever fresh* in his 
relations with the families; the being cool like the moon; 

a e Wi Se Ee 


(ee a 


1 Such as an elephant, horse, and other animals. 
2 Of. the almsman’s practice. 


3 So that food may be put into it. 4 J.e. noteéfamiliar. 


. 


° 
F «¢ 


The Path of *Purity 


¢ 


78 
rejection of meanness for the families; impartial favour ;* 
absence of disadvantages that arise to monks who eat together 
with the families?; non-acceptance of invitations; absence of 
wish for a meal to be brought; condugt in conformity with,few 
wishes, and so on. 

In coolness like the moon, and ever fresh, 

And faultless in regard to families, - 

And free from meanness and partiality— 

This brother is athouserto-house-almsman. 

A prudent man, who ‘wishes here on éarth 

To lead an independent life, should look 

With downcast eyes the distance of a yoke, ‘ 

All ereediness of conduct put away, 

And go for alms from house to house. 
‘servance, directions, 
-house-goer’s 


c 


This is the setting forth of the: ob 


grade, breach, and advantage in the~house-to 


practice. 4 


[69] 5. Lhe One-Sessioner’s Practice. _ 
The practice of the one-sessioner also is observed with one 
or other of the expressions: I refuse to eat food at more than 
one sitting; I observe the one-sessioner’s practice. He who 
observes this practice should not “sit at the place resdrved 
for the Elder in the dining‘hall, but find sugh a suitable seat 
as will be available for him. If, before he finishes his meal, 
his teacher or preceptor arrives, he should rise and pay his 
respects. But Tipitaka-Cilabhaya the Elder said: ‘ He should 
keep his seat or his meal.* He who has not finished eating 
may rise and pay his respects, but he may not resume the 
meal.’ These are the directions. 
will not accept more, once he has laid his hand on the food, 
be it little or much.. If men bring butter and so forth saying, 


1 To rich and poor alike. i oy 

2 Or,‘ the absence of evil or fault such as familiarity with the donors’ 
families.’ ; 

3 J.e. keep his seat and finish his meal; or rise up if he has not com- 


menced eating. 


Krishna chandra college central Lib 


There are also three grades of men here: The strict man : 


kary 


e 
. ° ‘The Elder has not eaten anything,’ 


= Il.—Exposition of the Ascetic Practices 79 
( 
he may accept them as 


medicine, not as 
, not as food. The moderate man will accept 
more, 


as long as he has not finished t : 

knoyn.as * limited by food.’ re a zie he is indeed 
as he does not rise up. Inasmuch as he ma eat as jong 
takes the bow! to wash it, he is limited hy tics a eat until he 
ie washes che bowl. And because he may eat ei ers 
up he is limited by his sitting. - But the moment th ’ ia 
men eat food at more than one sitting, the asceti ese t ree 
is pore This, herein is the breath. etic practice 

And these are the advantages: F f 

freedom from bodily ailment, aa i oe ae oe 
corifort, the not committing of offence through ‘hi , 8 ede 
CLEMO food, the repelling of craving for eee food : 2: 
in conformity with feyy wishes, and so on. , conduct 


5 Diseases caused by eating do not harm 
The monk who at one sitting eats his food. 
Not greedy for sweet tastes he does not let 
His work slacken. A monk should gladly take 
Delight in eating so his food, which makes 
For comfortableness and is the source 

e Of joy in purity and simple life. 


This is the settjng forth of the observance, directions, grade, 
breach, and advaatage in the one-sessioner’s practice. 


[70] 6. The Bowl-Fooder’s Practice. 


The practice of the bowl-fooder also is observed with one or 
other of the expressions: I refuse a second bowl; I observe 
the bowl-fooder’s practice. When at the time of drinking 


‘ rice-gruel curry is offered in a vessel, he who observes this 
. practice should first eat the curry or drink the rice-gruel. The 


rice-gruel would become loathsome, if he were to put into it? 
the curry, in which there might be rotted fish? and so on. 
Attd he’ should eat nothing that is loathsome. Therefore 


concerning such curry the above statement was made. But 
ee ee ae ee 


2 Read °maccha’. 


1 Read yaguyam. 


80 The Path of? Purity os 


any honey, sugar, and so forth, which are not loatksome may 
be put into the rice-gruel. He should take just, enough for 
his consumption. He should eat green vegetables, holding’ 


Ki: c them in his hand, or else put them into the bowl. Any other 

8 ' tree-leaves are not permitted, since he has refused a second 

ne : vessel. These are the directions. r 
| 


There are also three grades Cf men here. Except in chewing 
- sugar-cane’ the strict man may not throw away! even such 
things as he cannot eat. He may not eat separating the lumps 
of rice, fish, meat, and ca zes2 The moderate man may eat 
separating them with one hand;che is known as a ‘ hand- 
ascetic.’ And the soft man is known as a ‘ bowl-ascetic.’ 
Whatever he can put into the bowl he may separate with his 
hand or teeth, and eat. The moment these three men accept 
a second vessel, the ascetic practice is broken. This herein 
is the breach. : 
And these are the advantages: The repelling of a cravitig 
for taste of various kinds, the repelling of desire for taste 
_ in more than one bowl, the seeing of the purpose and measure 
of food, the absence of the trouble of carrying various disiies 
and so forth, undistracted eating, conduct in conformity with 


few wishes, and so forth. 
it 


The bowl-food-eater, disciplined enough ' 9 
To delve the roots-of taste-desire, with eyes* 

Of downward gaze, is not distracted by . 
More dishes than his own. With joyful heart 

He bears contentednesg as though it were 

A thing that’s visible. Who else, forsooth, 

Can €at his food as does the bow]-foodman ? 


Tal 


This is the setting forth of the observance, directions, grade, 
breach, and advantage in the bow]-fooder’s practice. 


Z Into a second bowl, which, even for the purpose of receiving such 
things (like fish-bone, grain, and so on), as one does not eat, is not 
permissible. 5 = 

2 Lest he should relish the individual taste of each. 

3 Read “locano, 


¢ 


= 


_ Krishna chandra college central Libfary 


° I1.—Hxposition of the Ascetic Practices 81 
~ s 


(o> Bd 1. The Afterfood-Refuser’s Practice. 


_ The practice of the afterfood-refuser also is observed with 
one or other of the expregsions: I refuse extra food: I observe 
the afterfood-refuser’s practice. Once he has made his vow 
(pavarand), he who observes this practice should not eat 
any more food that may be offered. These are the direc- 
tions. . , 

There are also three grades of mgn here. Because his vow 
applies not to ¢he first almsfoad but to the refusal of more 
food while he is eating it, thetefore the strict man who has made 
his vow does not eat a second almsfood after his first. The 
moderate man finishes the meal on which he Has made his 
vow. But the soft man eats as long as he does not rise up. 
The moment these three men accept and eat after their vow 
any more food that may be offered, the ascetic practice is 
broken. This herein is the breach. 

And these are the advantages: Distance from the offence as 
to extra food, absence of a full stomach, absence of absorption 
in the fleshly needs, absence of search for fresh food, conduct 
in conformity with few wishes, and so on. 


a rhe wise ascetic, who refuses food 
e Additional, knows not the pain of search; 

: He makés no storage of his fleshly needs; 
He suffers not his stomach to be full. 
To shake off faults ascetics should observe 
This practice, which produces qualities 
Such as increased contentment, and is praised 
By Him the Happy One. = 


This is the setting forth of the observance, directions, grade, 
breach, and advantage in the afterfood-refuser’s practice. 


8. The Foresters Practice. 


‘Phe practice of the forester also is observed with one or 
other of, the expressions: I refuse a village-dwelling; I observe 
the forester’s practice. He who observes this practice should 


leave a village-dwelling and be in the forest at dawn. Here 
I. 6 


r 


82 The Path of Purity : ¢ 
a (dwelling in @) village inéluding its 
precincts. A village may consist of one or more houses, may 
or may not have a wall, may be inhabited or uninhabited.? 
Even a caravan that is encamping for more than four months 
is a village. [72] Supposing a walled village has two gate- 
pillars like those of Anuradhapura, an outward stonethrow 
f middle height from between the two pillars 
The Vinaya scholars decide the boundaty 
standard) throw to be the fall of a 
stone, thrown by young mentstretching out their arms in a 
display of strength. But the Suttanta scholars say that the 
boundary is the fall of a stone thrown to drive away & CTOW. 


In a village which has‘no wall a woman, standing at the door 
all, throws water from_a jar; 


of the house which is outermost of 

the place where the water falls is house-precinct; whence a 
stonethrow in the way described above is a village. Another 
stonethrow (from the village) is the village precinct. And in 
the Vinaya explanation a forest is said to be all that is outside 
of village and village-precinct. In the Abhidhamma expléna- 
tion? it is forest when one goes out by the gate pillars. But 
regarding this ascetic practice in the Suttanta explanation 
this is the characteristic measure: a forest-dwelling is at least 
500 bow-lengths (or fathoms) distant. hat distance 18 to be 
measured and fixed by meaas of a drawn standard bow® from 


a village-dwelling is 


of a strong. man O 
is village precinct. 
by taking the characteristie( 


the gate pillars, if the village has a wall, or* from the first stone- | 


throw if the village has no wall, as far as the monastery-wall. 
The Vinaya Commentaries say that if the monastery has 
no wall, the limit of the measure is the first dwelling, dining 
hall, permanent assembly hall, Tree of Wisdom or shrine, 
provided these are far from the monastery, But the Majjhima 
Commentary says that after fixing the precinct of the monastery 
as in the case of the village* the measure is to be made between 
the two stonethrows.® This is the measure to be taken Here. 


1 Or, inhabited by unhuman beings. On the definitions here see 


Vinaya iii, 46. 
2 Vibhanga 251. 
4 J.e, a strone-throw to drive away a crow. 
% One to fix the monastery-precinct and the other the village- 


3 Lit. ‘ master-bow.’ 


precinct. 


Krishna chandra college central Li . 


H .—LExposition of 


the Ascetic Practices 83 


If the village, be so n ; 
lag so near that those i 
hear the votces of the villacers saab a fee oe 
by a straight path on account of eae a aa 
‘ i c oh Obst i 
mis and so on, and if.the natural means 2 —— a 
— a - ae then the measure of 500 bow-lensths is = = 
c y that (watery) path. Whosoey i ae 
and there, so that ee race aes pees uae ee 
a‘thief of the ascetic practice. * ae me 
And if the forester’s 
‘ to pregeptor,or teacher be ill 
ae a medeine cannot be btained in the forest tee 
saa = es ae a, mai to a village-dwelling and cok aie 
m. e sho depart i i 
re hosel p rt in good time, so that at dawn 
place which fulfils the require i 
peaction quirements of his 
fe at aes their illness increases, he should do his duty b 
em and pay no heed “to the puri i i a 
ice ae ae purity of his ascetic practice. 
oy are also three grades of men here: The strict man 
shé : d find the dawn break in the forest at all times. The 
moderate man is allowed to live in the village for the four 
months of rain; the soft man for the four months of winter 
= well. The ascetic practice is not broken, if the dawn 
nae while these *threesmen, having come from the forest 
awe their terms of forest-life, listen to the Law in a village- 
: eee it is. 0b ‘broken though the dawn may break, while 
ey are still on their way back fromthe sermon. But if after 
the preacher has risen up they go to sleep saying ‘ We will lie 
down awhile and then depart,’ and the dawn breaks, or if out 
“ ee a they let the day dawn upon them,in the village 
welling, then the ascetic practice is brok i in 
en. T 
is the breach. pas 
And these are the advantages: The forester-brother who 
attends to the perception of the forest can acquire concentra- 
tion not yet acquired or keep that which has been acquired. 
The teather also is pleased with him, as He has said: ‘ Nagita 
I am, pleased with the forest-life of that brother.” Bepeoren 


td 


1 Anguttara iii, 343. ° 


nt ie ve ET) iNWiegees 


S, 


Krishna chandra college central Livrary ‘ 


ae 
: et E > ° ae 
th ‘ A 0 Purity & 2 4 e. ° ——— A o,e > ‘ e 5 i 
84 The Path of y ’ ' J. Exposition of the Ascetic Practices 85 . : 
objects and so forth do not distract the mind of hini who lives “ - | * day the ascetic, should not remain at the f : 
in a border-dwelling; he is free from fear; he puts away a i _go to some’ other hidden place and on oot of the tree but 4 
craving for life, enjoys the taste of the bliss of solitude; the these three men make a dwelling aa a as eon 
. Can: re 
s practices of the refuse-ragman and gthers are also agreeable. ; an oe practice is brokea. Reciters of the fea tice, a 
f ae juded, solitary, delighting in > ee deed ae the moment they consciously let the day 
‘ ‘ Bee ers 26 his Eofeat Ut Z| pom wnem in a covered dwelling. This herein is the 5 
y A border-dwelling, by his forest- a F breach. 2 
| 4 The monk endears himself unto the ord. N ow these are the advantages: Attainment in accordance 
Alone in forest-lifg, he gets that bliss, , F , with the third requisite as expregsed in, “A monk dependi 
T x 7 hs . r) AG 
Whose taste even gods with Bees oe get. on a dwelling db the foot of a tre ,’1 the possession of rerittites 
ie The refuse-rag he wears ab coat of mail; praised .by the Blessed One thus, ‘ They are trifling,? easily 
heieene ce - t Bet aes a ae d ‘ got, and faultless i the production of the perception of im- 
As weapons.1* At the forest battle-groun permanence by seeing the constant change in tender leaves 
He conquers ere long Mara and his hosts. Bs ij the absence of meanness for a dwelling+ and of deli ght in ee 
So should the wise delight in forest-life. oe intercourse veith tree-deities, conduct in conformity 
ba fie with i 
This is the setting forth of the observance, directions, Ow wishes, and so forth. 
grade, breach, and advantage in the forester’s practice. a Roos Where is the lonely man’s abode, extolled 
« i : - By Buddha best of men as requisite, 
[74] 9. The Tree-Rootman’s Practice. My ‘ | a e And which is equal to the root of tree ? > 


The well-controlléd man, who lives at such 
A lonely place, protected by the gods, 
.- eSubdues all meanness for a dwelling-place. 
| [7] He sees the change that comes o’er tender leaves, 


The practice of the tree-rootman also is observed with one or 
other of the expressions: I refuse a covered dwelling; I gbserve 
the tree-rootman’s practice. He who observes this pra¢tice 
should avoid these trees:-a" tree which grows on the border 
between two countries, a sacred tree, a resinous tree, a fruit | Noel > 
tree, a tree on which bats live, a hollow tree, a tree growing 1 nd fall as sere leaves to the ground. From this 


e 1 i 

in the middle of a monastery. eHe should resort to a tree on | meena cs ses door deine _— 
the oustkirt of a monastery. These are the directions. ‘ TA Geoinion Genet Hie 

There are Iso three grades of men here: The strict man 1s Tha Buddtin’e heritage and home-tt Rae 
not allowed to resort to any tree he pleases and make a clearing ¢ Tio tale delighbin culiire ofits mind: 
underneath it. He may dwell under a tree after removing 
with his foot the fallen leaves. The moderate man is allowed 
to cause those who arrive at the tree to make a clearing. The 
soft man may summon the monastery-lads and ask them to * i 


Which turn from.deep red iiito indigo, 


This is the setting forth of the observance, directions, 
grade, breach, and advantage in the tree-rootman’s practice. 


a ° 


make a clearing, to level it, to scatter sand on it, to make an th DV inayad 5s: 2 As regards care, duty, or tendance. 
enclosure and to fix a door, and may dwell there. Ona feast | 3 Anguttara ii, 26. 

{ 4 On the five kinds of meanness see Hxpositor 480. 

1 Read yudho as part of the preceding compound. .° ° 


. Krishna chandra college central Library ‘ , 


: , ; > a 
86 The Path of ‘Purity e & + * Il.— Exposition .of the Ascetic Practices 87 
be c A G 
c * 42 ment,! the going (at will? i : s 
oe. Be’ coktnnne i SS oe ey directions, conduct in 
10. The Open-Spacer’s Practice. ; ; shes, and so forth. 
5 Y P A As free i ind as i 
The practice of the open-spacer also is observed with one or | . - The a ar Ses iche anelope: 
other of the expressions: I refuse a roof as well as the root of ; _ eS aS ee homeless life 
a tree: I observe the open-spacer’s practice. He who observes eleeth: the open siky, Iiuby thesmoon: 
: = ° A lamp that lights the vault of starry gems. 


this practice may enter the snered house either to listen to é : 7 
the Law or’to do the sacred duties. If the rain falls while ke " 2 ? ee ae he dilives away and takes 
is inside he should not go out in the rain but wait till it ceases. . ight in culture; presently he finds 

The tasteful essencg of his solitude. 


He may enter the dining-hall er the fire-hall te do his duties. ‘° ? 
He and invite the Eiders and brethren in the dining-hall to / pag ap i eae take delight in life 

a meal. As an instructor (of the Pali) or as a pupil he may | ath the opel sky. 

enter a cover€d dwelling. He may cause to be brought instde | . This is the setting forth of the observance, directions, grade, 
bedsteads and stools which are badly kept outside. If the rain breach, and advantage in the open-spacer’s practice. 

falls while he is going along carrying a requisite that bélongs 

to his seniors, he may enter a hall on the way. If he is not Il. The Burning-Grounder’s Practice. 

carrying any such thing, he may not hasten with the intenticn » The practice of the burning-grounder also is observed with 
of entering the hall, but going with his ordinary steps he may a_i . one or other of the expressions: I refuse (to dwell in) a place 
enter and remain till the rain ceases and then depart. These ; *? that is not a burning-ground; I observe the burning-grounder’s 
are the directions which also apply to the tree-rootman. * , , Bractice. He who observes this practice should not dwell im 


There are also three grades of men here: The strict man a place which village-builders fix as burning-ground. For 
may not dwell depending on a tree, mountain, or house. He \ when a dead body has not been burnt on it, the place is not 
should dwell beneath the open sky in a hut made of haves. iW knoyn as burning-ground. It is a burning-ground, though 

ibehas been deserted fer twelve years since a dead body 


The moderate man may dwell depending on trees, mount&ins, 

or houses without entering‘them. For the seft man a cave not | Was burnt thete. But he may. not have there promenades 
covered with a roof, a pavilion of branches, a cloth-cover for \ and pavilions and so forth built, bedsteads and stools arranged, 
a chair, a hut in the field deserted by field-watchers and so ; water and food brought, and live there teaching the Law. 
forth, are permissible. The mofnent these three men enter a This ascetic practice is indeed heavy. Therefore in order to 
roof or beneath a tree to dwell there, [76] the ascetic practice quell any danger that might arise he should tell the Elder of 
is broken. Reciters of the Anguttara Nikaya say that it is . the Order or one connected with the king, and live free from 
broken the moment they consciously let the dawn break upon 4 : if negligence. In walking to and fro he should do so looking 
| 


going to the burning-gro 


Now these are the advantages: The cutting off of the nuisance und also he should leave the main 
road-and go by a side path. 


of an abode, the dispelling of sloth and torpor, worthiness of 
the praise bestowed as, ‘ Like the deer the brethren dive un- \ 
trammelled in their walks, homeless,1 freedom from attach- i 


them in such places. This herein is the breach. | with half-closed eyes at the purning of dead bodies. [77] In 


He should note any object there 


; by daylight, so that it may not appear to him fearful at 
night. Though unhuman beings may roam about uttering 


li , : 
lou cries, he should not throw anything to hit them. He 


1 Samyuttai, 199. Cf. Kindred Sayings I, 253, n. 3. 1 ‘To houses and so forth. 


The Path of Purity : 


P AG 
should not pass a single day withdut going to the burning- 
ground. Reciters of the Anguttara Nikaya tay, that after 


spending the middle watch of the night at the burning-ground ° 


he may depart in the last watch. He should not partake of 
such foodstufis as sesamum, flour, “peas, rice, fish, meat, 
milk, oil, molasses, that are dear to unhuman beings, nor 
take them to the houses of dongrs. These are the directions. 
There are also three grades_of men here: The strict mam 
should dwell where there are continual burning, continual 
smell of dead bodies, and centintal weeping. Ihe moderate 
man may dwell where there is one of these present. The 
soft man may dwell in a place which just fulfils the require- 
ments of a burning-ground as given above. When theee 
three men make their abode in a place which is not burning- 
ground, their ascetic practice is broken. This herein if the 
breach. ae 
Now these are the advantages: Attainment of mindfulness 
regarding death, a life free from negligence, acquirement of 
the outward sign of the foul, dispelling of sensual lust, the 
perpetual seeing of the intrinsic nature of the body, growth ef 
agitation, rejection of the pride of health, overcoming of fear 
and fright, respect paid by unhuman beings, conduct in 


conformity with few wishes, and so forth. , m 
© a 
The faults of negligence, even while he-sleeps, c 


Touch not the burning-ground-recluse, such is 

The power of his mindfulness of death. 

Because so many corpses he beholds, 

His mind is freed from lust’s dominion. 

Great agitation seizes him and leaves 

Him without pride. He makes a right effort 

To win tranquillity. Therefore with heart 
Inclined unto Nibbana follow hard 

The burning-grounder’s practice, which bestows ~ 
Such manifold merits and qualities. | 


rm 


This is the setting forth of the observance, directions, grade 
breach, and advantage in the burning-grounder’s practice: 


2 


Krishna chandra college central Li 


« 


brary 


{I 
it 
| 


| 
| 
i 
lh 


cle LEELA LIE LA LO, 


. 


. ,. : 3 
Il.—L exposition vo ; 
4 : p of the Ascetic Practices gg 
[78] 12. The Any-Bedder’ s Practice, 


The practice of the any-bedder a 
er other of the expressions: [ si - 
regarding dwellings; I* observe Tig a ee 
He who observes this practice should be content with i 
oes is rae to him by the distributor who says Thig 
ig for you.’ e should n aa 
These ss the directions. Sen aa Gases cra aaa 

There are also three grades df mea here: The strict man must 
not ask conceriling a dwelling he has come to,? whether it is 
far or quite near, troubled by unhuman beings, snakes, and so 
on, or whether it is hot or cold. The moderate gnan 5) ask 
such questions, but may not go and examine it. The soft man 
may go and examine it, and if it does not please him he may 
take another. The “moment greedy behaviour in regard to 
dyellings arises in these three men, their ascetic practice is 
broken. This herein is the breach. 

Now these are the advantages: Obeying the advice given, 
as, ‘ One should be content with what one gets, seeking the 
good of one’s fellow-monks, abandonment of thought of what 
is inferior and superior, rejection of approval and disapproval, 
closing the door of covetousness, conduct in conformity with 


fewevishes, and so forth. ° 
s 


lso is observed with one 


v 


Content with what he gets, the any-bed- 

Recluse lies down in careless ease on beds, 

Even though they be of grass. He does not long 
For what is best, is not perturbed because 

Of an inferior bed. To younger monks, 

He shows compassion. So a wise man ought 

To be content with any bed, a rule 

Of constant practice with the Ariyas, 

And by the Bull-sage fittingly extolled. 


This is the setting forth of the observance, directions, grade, 
breach, and advantage in the any-bedder’s practice. 


= sok ee a 
1 Or, he should not make another place for himself. 
2 Or, allotted to him. ; e 


i 3 
.: 
: 
4 
f 


» 
v 


rn 
Ta BP EE 


e ¢ 
13. The Sitting-Man’s Practice. 

The practice of the sitting-man also is observed with one or 
other of the expressions: I refuse to lie down; I observe the 
sitting-man’s practice. He who observes this practice. should 
rise up and walk to and fro for one watch out of the three 
watches of the night, for lying down is the only posture that 
is not permitted to him. Thfse are the directions. 

[79] Thére are also three grades of men here: The strict 
man is not allowed a plank with a back support, or a cushion 
of cloth for squatting on, or ® pandage-cloth.* The moderate 
man may use any one of these thrée. ° The soft man is allowed 
a plank with a back support, a cushion of cloth for squatting 
on, a bandége-cloth, a pillow, a five-limbed seat, a seVen- 
limbed seat. A seat with a back support to lean against is a 
five-limbed seat. A seat with a back support and a hand 
support on either side is a seven-limbed seat. It is said 
that people made such a seat for Milhabhaya the Elder, wko, 
becoming a never-returner, entered parinibbana. Themoment 
these three men accept a bed to lie on, their ascetic practice 
is broken. This herein is the breach. £ 

Now these are the advantages: The cutting off of mental 
bondage described as: ‘ He lives devoted to the pleasure of 
lying down, the pleasure of lying gn one’s side, the fieasure 
of torpor, fitness for application to all subjects of medjta- 


tion, satisfied state of the postures, agreeableness for strenuous 


effort, development of right attainment. 


The monk who sits crqss-legged, keeping straight 
The body, doth disturb the Tempter’s heart. 

He takes no pleasure in the torpid state, 

In lying down, but wakes his energies 

And joyfully sits up, illumining 

The grove of his ascetic practices. 

As bliss and rapture, cleansed of earthly things, 
Reward the monk, so one should steadfastly 
Perform the duty of the sitting man. ‘- 


This is the setting forth of the observance, directions, 
grade, breach, and advantage in the sitting-man’s practice. 
2 Majjhimai, 103. 


1 Or, of turning from side to side. 


c 


Krishna chandra college central LI 


The Path of Purity rae 


brary 
} > 


| 
| 


2 Il.—Exposition > 
* 


of the Ascetic Practices ° 91 


Of Asgetic and Other Terms as Moral Triad 
Now this is the elucidation of the verse (p. 66): 


> ° As moral triad as differentiated 
In groups and in detail—decision shall 
Be made regarding these ascetic practices 
: ; 


- Therein, ‘as moral triad? ¢ : 
pfactices may be moral or ae ee ae Ps ar ‘cial 
average persoys and of saint Quxed of the int A Soape 
There is no ascetic practice that ae genera oe 
; : atisimmoral. But th 
says, an ascetic practi i age 
ag P ce may also be immoral because of the 
saying: ‘ There is a forester of evil desixes, not free from desire. 
We reply that we do not say that one may not dwell wae 
immtral thought in the forest. For whosoever makes his 
abode in the forest is a forester, who may have evil dagen 
er little, or no desire. Because the corruptions are Sficiion 
off through this and that observance, the practices (or factors) 
of, the brother who has shaken them off are called ‘ascetic 
peactices.” Or, knowledge which has obtained the common * 
name of asceticism, because it shakes off the corruptions, is 
the factor of these obseryances—thus ‘ascetic practice’ on 
factgr). Or again,.it has been said that because these observ- 
arf€es shake off the hostile corruptions they are ascetic, and 
they are factors of (moral) attainment—thus ‘ascetic practice.’ 
No one whose observances are® such factors is: known as 
ascetic on account of his immorality. Else we should speak 
of ascetic practices of which the factor is immorality which 
shakes off nothing; and immorality does not shake off greedi- 
ness for robes and other evil states, nor is it a factor of moral 
attainment. Therefore what has been said as, “There is no 
ascetic practice that is immoral,’ is well said. There is no 
ascetic practice in the ultimate sense to those whose ascetic 
practice is freed from the moral triad.* From the shaking off 
af what does this imaginary thing become ascetic practice ? 
They would also fall into opposition with the saying: “ He goes 


es — — 
1 Anguttara iii, 219. 2 Read bhaveyyulu for bhaveyyam. 
3 Because they consider it as a concept. e 


92 The Path of Purity * Gs 


F 2 
on keeping the ascetic duties.’ Therefore their saying should 
not be accepted. : 

This so far is the elucidation by way of the moral ¢riad. 2 


Of Ascetic and Other Terms as Differentiated. 

(1) Ascetic should be understood, (2) ascetic doctrine should 
be understood, (3) ascetic #tates should be understood, 
(4) ascetic “practices should de ‘understood, (5) for whorh 
is the practising of the ascetje practices suitable ?—this 
should be understood. Of these points (1) * ascetic” is a 
person who has shaken off the corruptions, or a state, for the 
shaking off of the corruptions. (2) In ‘ascetic doctrine ’ 
there is one @ho is ascetic and not ascetic preacher, there‘is 
one who is not ascetic but ascetic preacher, there is one who 
is neither ascetic nor ascetic preacher, there is one who is 
both ascetic and ascetic preacher. Of*these he who has shaken 
off his corruptions by means of his ascetic practice, but do&s 
not admonish nor instruct others regarding ascetic practice, 

_is an ascetic but not ascetic preacher, like Bakkula the Eldet;* 
as has been said: ‘ This venerable Bakkula is ascetic not ascetic 
preacher.’ And-whoso [81] has not shaken off his corruptions 
by means of ascetic practice, but just admonishes, instructs 
others regarding it, is not ascetic hut ascetic preacher; like 
Upananda the Elder;? as bas been said: { This venerable 
Upananda Sakyaputta is not an ascetic buteascetic preacher.’ 
Whoso is deficient in both respects like Laludayi® is neither 
ascetic nor ascetic preacher; as has been said: ‘ This venerable 
Laludayt is neither ascetic nor ascetic preacher. Whoso like 
the captain of the Law‘ is fulfilled in both respects is ascetic 
and ascetic preacher; as has been said: ‘ This venerable 
Sariputta is both ascetic and ascetic preacher.’ (3) “ Ascetic 
states should be understood "—these five attendant states of 
the volition of ascetic practice: fewness of wishes, contentment, 
austerity, solitude, desire-for-these-states are known as 
ascetic states from the expression, ‘ depending on fewuess Of 
wishes, and so on.’ Of them fewness of wishes and content- 


1 Cf. Majjhima iii, 124 f. 
3 Cf. Ibi, 123, 446 f. 


2 Of. Jataka ii, 441. 
4 Cf. Theragatha 982 f. 


Krishna chandra college central Lif 


* states pe 
f 


~ Ss 


Bene INANE 


~ @ 
e 


‘ Il.—Ezposition of the Ascetic Pract; 
LCES 


a 93 
ment fall under non-greed: a ; 
; > austerity and golj 
two statess ndn-greed and non-delusion oe the 
- -for-these- 


By me 
Seed td bien gag erat ee 
delusion which covers faults in them, and b ee 
shakes off devotion to the pleasure of ‘nenae eee ee 
resorting to things allowed. By non-delusion arises from 
devouon to self-torture, wRiche arises on sae oe a 
atisterity in ascetic practice, Therefore should th aoe 
be understood as ascetic state’. (4) By acee ee a 
should be understood the thirteen, namely, the pe 
man’s practice . . . sitting-man’s practice, “The ha aes 
sfated as regards their meaning, characteristic os ee 
(5) For whom is the practising of ascetic practice ae 
for one walking in lyst and one walking in delusion, Wh: : ait 
Because the practising of ascetic practice is of anal Be = 
and means a life of austerity; and through painful eee 
lust is calmed, through austerity the delusion of a sap ai 
gont man 1s put away. Or, herein the practising of the 
practices of the forester and of the tree-rootman is suitable 
for one walking in hate, for hate ceases in one dwelling without 
society in the forest or at the foot of a tree. 

Thas is the elucidation of ascetic and other terms as differ- 
enfiated. 


[82] In Groups and in Detail. 

; In groups’ these ascetic practices are eight—three chief 
practices and five unmixed (Separate) practices. Of them the 
practices of the house-to-house-goer, one-sessioner, and open- 
spacer are the three chief practices. For whoso keeps the 
house-to-house-goer’s practice will also keep the almsman’s 
practice. And whoso keeps the one-sessioner’s practice, for 
hinr the practices of the bowl-fooder and afterfood-refuser 
will be easy to keep. Whoso keeps the open-spacer’s practice, 
what eed is there for him to keep the practices of the tree- 
rootman and the any-bedder? Thus these three are the chief 
pracfices. They make eight with these five: practices (ene 
forester, refuse-ragman, three-rober, sitting-man, burning- 


‘They say that which is volition is ascetic practice.’ 


e 
e 


94 The Path of* Purity . 
e 


e r 
grounder. Again, they form four classes: two concerning 


the robe, five concerning the alms, fiv 

ing, one concerning energy. Of these the si 
is one that concerns energy ; the othess are obvious? 
all are of two kinds by way of dependence: twelve depending 
on the requisites, one depending on energy. They are also 
of two kinds as to be resorted *to and as not to be resorted to. 


For they should be resorted to by Him whose subject of meditif- 


tion increases with such resort, byt not by him whose subject 
He whose subject of medita- 


of meditation decreases with it? 4 
tion increases and does not decrefise, whether he resorts to 
them or not, should also resort to them out of compassion for 


tting-man’s practice 
P e 
Again, 


posterity. 
sorted to by him also whose subject of meditation, whether he 
resorts to them or not, does not increase. « Though twofold, as 
to be resorted to and as not to be resorted to, all of them are 
one by way of volition; for ascetic practice as the volition td 
It is also said in the commentaries: 


observe is just one. 


‘In detail’ they are forty-two -—thirteen for brethrén, 
eight for sisters, twelve for novices, seven for female student 
novices, two for lay-disciples male and female. If there were 
a burning-ground fulfilled with the forester’s practice ifgpen 
space, a single brother would. be, able to enjoy all the ascefic 
practices at once. But thé two practites*of the forester and 
the afterfood-refuser are prohibited for sisters by precept; 
[83] and the three ‘practices of the open-spacer, tree-rootman, 
purning-grounder are difficult to carry out, for it is not proper 
for a sister to Jive without a second person, and in such places? 
it is hard to get a second with similar wishes. Even if one 
was obtained, the sister would not be free from a life shared 
with others. This being so, the purpose for which she resorted 
to the ascetic practice would not be fulfilled. So, owing 
to impracticability,’fivé!.of the practices are left out for the 
sisters, and only eight are to be taken. y ‘€ 

Excepting the three-rober’s practice from those mentioned 


1 Q7- on such occasions, under such circumstances. 


e concerning the dwell- _ 


© 


Hor the salfe of habit in future they should be fe- - 


, « : 4. : 
: Krishna chandra college centralesgrary 
2 ne (as 


POR: he RIES 


“ 


_afid understanding in the stanza: 


Il.—Exposition of the Ascetic Practices 


e 
‘ 95 
for the brethren and si : 
sisters, the remainin 

eT, g twelve ar 
Eee ier for fhale novi¢es, and seven for female - is 
For lay- pF eee male and female the two practices of the 
the 


one-sessicer and the bawl-fooder Ui i 
Thus in detail they are forty-two. Ya 


This is the elucidation in groups and in detail 


: e 
aoe AL is told the discdtwse on the ascetic practices to be 
ee or a fulfilment of those qualities, such as fewness 
wishes, conéentment, by megr8 of whi : i 
: ent ; ch there is cl j 
e virtué, the different kinds of which have been Sawatee 
the Path of Purity under the heads of virtue, concentration 


‘ The man discreet on virtue planted firm. 


Thus is ended tHe second cha 

pter called The Expositi 
qf Ascetic Practices, in the Path of Purity, eee ae 
purpose of gladdening good folk. 


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
BILLING AND SONS, LTD., GUILDFORD AND ESHER 


B] 


NN ‘ 


4 
| 
a4 


/ 


5S OE 


{ 


Krishna chandra college central Library 


wf 


b 


