THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

(VARNAMAI.A) 
STUDIES IN TIIE MANIR A-StflASTRA 



BY 

SIR m WOODROFFE 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

( VaknamAlA) 

STUDIES IX THE MANTKA.SHASTRA 




y 



v 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



(VARNAMALA) 

STUDIES IN THE MANTRA-SHASTRA 



1«Y 

SIR JOHN WOODROPFE 



1022 



MADRAS : GANESII & CO. 
LONDON : Ll'ZAC k CO. 




fG«4rJ8B£0 BY M. IU EAMASfcfKfAR OF (lAMfSfitt k CO., 
50 7 ir A.vsc CKKTtY w*EJt, madea*. 

PRINTED BY J. C. GUOS II At TOE fOTTON PRES* 

57. lUlfttKW ROAD, CAXXICJTTA. 




FOREWORD 



This book is an attempt, now made for the first 
time, to explain to an English-knowing reader an un- 
doubtedly difficult subject. T am therefore forcibly 
reminded of the saving. “ Veda fears the man of little 
knowledge, since injury may be received from him” 
( Bibhety alpashrulM Vein miim ayam praha n'shyate). 
It is natural, given this difficulty and the mystery which 
surrounds the subject, that strangers to India should 
have failed to understand Mantra. They need not, how- 
ever, have then (ns some have done) jumped to the 
conclusion that it was “meaningless superstition." This 
is the familiar argument of the lower mind which says 
“what I cannot understand can have no sense at all.” 
Mantra is, it is true, meaningless to those who do not 
know Us meaning. Rut there are others who do, and to 
them it is not “superstition.” ft is because some 
English-educated Indians are as uninstructed in the 
matter as that rather common type of Western to whose 
mental outlook and opinions they mould their own, that 
it was possible to find a distinguished member of this 
class describing Mantra as "meaningless jabber.” Indian 
doclrines and practice have been so long and so 
greatly misunderstood and misrepresented by foreigners, 
that it has always seemed to me a pity that those who 
are oi this Punyabh&mi should, through misapprehen- 
sion. malign without reason anything which is their 
own. This does not mean that they must accept what 
is in fact without worth because it is Indian, but they 
should at least first understand what they condemn as 
worthless. 

When I first entered on a study of tliis Shftstra 1 did 




so in the belief that India did not contain more fools than 
exist amongst other peoples, but had on the contrary 
produced intelligences which (to say the least) were the 
equal of any elsewhere found. Behind the unintelligent 
practice, which doubtless to some extent exists amongst 
the multitude of even- faith, 1 felt sure there must he 
a rational principle since men on the whole do not conti- 
nue throughout the ages to do that which is in itself 
meaningless and is therefore without result. I was not 
disappointed. The Mantra Sh&stra, so far from being 
tightly described as "meaningless superstition" or 
“jabber," is worthy of a close study which when under- 
taken, will disclose elements of value to minds free from 
superstition, of metaphysical bent and subtlc-seeing 
{Silkshmadarshin). A profound doctrine, ingeniously 
though guardedly set forth, is contained in the Tantras 
of the Mantra Sh&stra or Agama. This is an auspicious 
time in which to open out the secrets *of this Ahdydtmiha 
science. For here in this country there lias lieen a 
turn in the tide. The class of Indian who was wont 
to unite with the European critic of liis Motherland in 
misunderstanding and misrepresenting Her thoughts 
and institutions, is, to Her good fortune, gradually dis- 
appearing. Those who are recovering from the dazzle 
produced on its first entrance by an al'eit civilization 
are able to judge aright both its merits and defects as 
also to perceive the truth of the saying of Schiller, "Hold 
to your dear and precious native land; there arc the 
strong roots of your strength (-4«s Vatertand tins Uurc 
schliess dichan. Dasindduslarken \i' unci n dcincr Kraft)." 
Again in the West there is a movement away from the 
Materialism which regarded that alone as real " which 
is gross sensible matter ; and towards that standpoint 
whence it is seen that thought itself is a thing which is 
every whit as real as any external object. Kach is but 




vii 

an aspect of the one conscious Self whence bolli Wind 
and Matter proceed. This Sell or Chit is the Soul ol 
the rniversc. and the universe is Chit which has become 
its own object. Every being therein is Consciousness, 
that is, Chit manifesting as the multiple lorms of Mind 
and Matter which constitute the univeise. This Western 
movement is called by its adherents " New Thought," 
but its basal principles are as old as the Upanishads 
which proclaimed that all was Feeling-Consciousness 
(Chit), and therefore what a man thought, that he became. 
In fact thought counts for more than any material 
means whatever. 1 am not however here entering 
upon a general defence of so immense a subject, for this 
cannot be compassed in a work such as this. In any 
case— and this is what I am concerned to show the 
Mantra Sinistra is nut the mere senseless rubbish it has 
been supposed to be. 

This book is, as the sub-title slates, a Collection of 
Studies in, or Essays upon, particular subjects in the 
Manlra-Shastra, a term which is commonly applied to 
the Tantra-Shistra. It is practically composed of two 
parts. After Chapter i, which deals with the “ Word, " 
Chapters 2-9 treat ul the Principles of the general 
doctrine of Shabda. I am much indebted in the 
preparation uf these Chapters to my friend, Professor 
l'ramathanutha Mukhopadhy&ya. Chapters 10-21 are 
elucidations ol some subjects in the Tantra Shdstra 
which adopts the Mimangsa doctrine of Shabda with 
some modifications to meet its doctrine of Shakti. 
Chapters 22, 26 and 29 deal with the Mantras '* Om " 
and the Gayatri. An understanding uf such terms as 
Shakti, N&da, Hindu, tho Causal Shaktisof the Pranava, 
Hlja-mautras and so forth, is essential for those who 
would understand the Shastra in which they appear. 
Hitherto knowledge of these matters has been confined 




(where it exists at all) to the Gurus and Ssulhukas. 
This does not main tlial my information lias been 
gathered from oral sources only. On the contrary the 
substance of it may be found in the Tantrns. These 
are however generally unknown. The definitions must 
be sought for in many Sh Astras. When found they 
must be explained by the aid of general Sliastric 
knowledge and of Updsakas who possess the tradition 
As regards technical terms I refer my readers to other 
books winch 1 have published, advertised at the end of 
this volume, in particular to "Shakti and Shakta," 
"Serpent Power," and the volumes of the series called 
"the World as Power describing the chief concepts of 
Indian Plrilosopky and Religion. 

Chapters 10-21 and 24 arc reprinted from the Journal 
the Vedanta Kcsari. Chapters 22-23 on "Um" and the 
"Necklace of KAli ’’ appeared in East and West, and 
Chapters 2S-29 on Mantrasddhand and tire " Gdyatrt " 
in the Introduction to my edition of the MahAnirvAna 
Tantra, which is now superseded, as regards the Intro- 
duction. by the fuller account of the Tantras and 
TAntrik ritual given in my volume, “Shakti and 
Shakta", and as regards the Text, by another and 
more correct edition which 1 have in preparation. 
Chapter 30 on the "GAyatri as ail Exercise of Reason- 
ing” is a reprint of a paper read by me before the 
Indian Rationalistic Society at Calcutta, ami has been 
previously published in its Bulletin. Ten ol the paper* 
dealing with general principles were delivered by me 
in 1919 as Extension Lectures at the instance of the 
National Council ol Education, Bengal. 

As I write the concluding lines of tliis Foreword 
hard by the ancient and desolate Temple to tire Sun- 
Lord at KonAraka in Northern Orissa, a continuous 
rolling sound like that ol the Mahainantra is borue to 




IX 



me from afar. I heard the some sound many years 
ago at the I'cnvongchi monastery when some hundred 
Buddhist monks rolled out from the depth of their 
bodies the mantra Om. Their chant then suggested the 
sea. as the sea now suggests the Mantra. Here where 
the sound is heard are green woods, bushes of jasmine, 
cactus in bloom and the rose and yellow of the Karavha 
and Kalika flowers. Travelling however whence it comes 
some two mihs seaward, the' 'eye surveys a wide 
wild waste of land, with here and there sparse clumps 
of Kotaki, stretching from the world-famous Temple of 
the " Lord of the Universe” in the south to the Golra 
jungle on the North. On the Eastern edge the surf 
of the Bengal Ocean iu great waves, marbled with foam 
with creaming crests, whipped into filmy vapour by the 
wind, ceaselessly boats upon a lonely shore. The waves 
jis .ill else are Mantra, for Mantra in its most basal sense 
is the World viewed as and in its aspect of — sound. 
But as I have explained in the Text we must distinguish 
between Natural Name in its pure sense as the sound of 
the constituent forces of a tiling and the sounds made 
by the thing when n produced. All sounds and there- 
fore movements form the "Garland of Letters,” which is 
worn by the Divine Mother, from whose aspect as Om or 
the General Sound [Sdm'mya spauda) of the first creative 
movement all particular sounds and things come. For 
all tilings may he rendered in terms ot sound. The 
Universe is movement. The Letters are the sound 
01 particular movements. These are audible as the 
gross letters which Kftli, t lie Source of all movement, 
wears as n garland round Her neck. I record this note 
on a scene which I have known and enjoyed for many 
years, since T may now he teeing it for the last time. 
If (as I hope not) this lie so, then I bid farewell to my 
old friend the Sftdhu Jagannatha Dilsa and to this place 
ii 




X 



set in all air of magic of which the Kapila Samhita (Ch. 

VI.) says 

Mailreyakhye vane punyc rathayiilrdmaholsavc 
Ye pashyanti tiara bhaktyd tc pa shy anti lauu raveh. 

Konfiraka. w 

32 April, 1932. 




CONTEXTS 



Chapte 

I 


VJk or the Word 






Page 

r 


2 


Anha. Praiyaya and Shabda 






12 


3 


Shabda and Parashabda 




— • 


21 


4 


P.ir.ishahda. Causal Shabda 






3* 


5 


Shakti as Stress 




.... 


4» 


6 


Etcrnallty of Shabda 






48 


7 


Shabda a* language 


•••• 




56 


8 


Natural Name — 


MH 


•»** 


fid 


9 


Vaidika Shabda ... 


.... 


— 


77 


IO 


The Tatlvas 


— 




89 


** 


Shakti, Potency to Create 


•••• 




99 


12 


NAda, the First Produced Movement 


• ». 


.... 


108 


*3 


Bindu or Shakti Ready to Create 


— 


»- 


122 


>4 


Miyi Tattva 


V" 




*35 


15 


The Kanchukas .... 




— 


*46 


16 


Ilangsa 




— 


*55 


*7 


KJma-kaia 




— 


*65 


18 


Tlic Gross Tattva* and their Lords 






*75 


>9 


Causal Shakiis oi the Pranava 




*••• 


*85 


20 


The Kalfe •— — 




MM 


193 


21 


The Garland of Letters or VamamAlA 


— 


• Ml 


201 


22 


“ Om “ — — 


.-4 


MM 


2*4 


23 


The Necklace of Kill 


—m 


«*• 


2X9 


24 


Dhvani 


•- 


.... 


226 


25 


Sun, Moon and Fire 




•— 


335 


26 


Bija Mantra ... — 


— 


•Ml 


239 


27 


Shad-Adhv.Vs 




— 


248 


28 


Mantra-SAdhanA 


•••• 




255 


29 


GAyntri Mantra 


—• 


~~ 


262 


3» 


The Gayatri Mantra as an exerdsc of Reasoning 




265 


3* 


Atma-SadhanJ .... 


— 


Mil 


288 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

(VAKNAMAlA) 

CHAPTER T 

vAk or the word 

The word Vak (in Latin Vox) comes from the root 
Vach which means " to speak." The feminine noun V 4 k 
therefore means literally both voice and the word it utters, 
as also the sound of inanimate objects. It has the same 
sense therefore as Shabda. Artha is meaning or object. 
Pratyava is mental apprehension. All things have a 
threefold sense, supreme (Para), subtle (Sukshma), gross 
(Sthfila). Para Vak is the Causal Stress which, in terms of 
Pratyava, is the Cosmic Ideation (Srishti-kalpana) of 
Ishvara. This is the Divine " Word." But V 4 k is 
also an effect, either subtle or gross. Pashyantl Vak is 
Vak actually going forth as ikshana (Seeing), producing 
or manifesting, as Sukshma Madhyama V&k, or Hiranya- 
garbha Shabda which is the Matrika state_ of Shabda 
as it exists in man prior to its gross manifestation as the 
Varnas in spoken speech (Vaikhari V 4 k). In the Rigveda, 
Sarasvatl (V. 43-11) is called Paviravi 01 daughter of tlie 
Lightning, that is, of the great Vajra which sustains 
the worlds, wltich according to Sayana is Midhyamiki 
Vak. (See Muir O. S. T.— V. 337 ff.) Spoken speech 
(Vaikhari) is manifested to the ear by the gross 
physical sound or Dhvuni produced by the contact of the 




THF. GARLAND OF LETTERS 

vocal organs on the surrounding air by the olforl 
(Pravatna) to speak. In the transcendental quiescent 
Brahman (Paramatmu) or Paramashiva then* is neither 
Shabda (Ashalxla), Artha (Nirvisliaya) nor Pratyaya. 
There is therefore neither name (Nama) nor form (Kiipa). 
In this Infinite Calm there arises a metaphysical Point 
of Stress or Bindu or Ghanibbutn Shakti, which stirs 
forth (Prasarati) as the multiple forces of the universe. 
Tliis energising is tiro cause of. and as Jivatma is, the 
World-experience with its duality ol subject and object. 
This play of Shakti lakes place in the Ether of Conscious- 
ness (Chidakisha) in such a way that the latter is neither 
effaced nor affected when tile second condition ap|*ears, 
which last is that of both Transcendence and Immanence. 
This is creation (Srtsbji) or, more properly, seeming 
development (Parinama), since the English word " crea- 
tion " does not truly express the process. Creation, in 
the Christian sense, excludes the notion that God i* a 
material cause, creation being neither out ol pre-existing 
matter nor out of God’s own substance. Creation also 
involves an absolutely first appearance. With this 
reservation the term “creation 11 is used. More accur- 
ately the Brahman It'clf, in the form of Its Power (Shakti), 
goes forth (Prasarati). This Srishti endures a while 
(Sthiti) that is lor a day of Brahma, u]x»n which there is, 
according to some, a complete dissolution (Malutpralaya). 
Others say that there is no such Malr&pralaya, but that 
there is always existing some universe, though one or 
another may disappear. In Mahapralaya the second 
state is potentially contained in the undifferentiated 
urunanifest Maya Shakti. Shabda- brahman as an UUasa 
oi Shiva sinks as it were into the eternally existing Calm, 
just as the rising wave breaks itself and sinks upon the 
ocean, or as the spray of a fountain falls again into the 
waters which feed it. This notion of lire “ Word " is 







vAk or the word 



very ancient. God " speaks ” the Word and the Thing 
appears. Thus the Hebrew word for Light is " Aur." 
Genesis says. " God said : let there be Light (Aar) and 
there was Light (Aur).” The Divine Word is conceived 
of in the Hebrew Scriptures as having creative power. A 
further stage of thought presents to us the concept of an 
aspect of the Supreme or Person who creates. Thus wc 
have the Supreme and the Logos. Brahman and Shabda- 
brahman. In Greek, Logos means (as docs Aparashabda) 
thought, and the word which denotes the object of thought. 
To Heraclitus, Logos was the Principle underlying the 
universe. (See J. N. Heinze, Die Lehre vom Logos in 
der Griech. Philosophic). To the Stoics it was the 
" World-soul ” the uniting principle of all rational forces 
working in the world. According to Plato, the Logoi 
were super-sensual primal images or patterns (JAti) of 
visible tilings. The Alexandrian Philo, influenced by 
Platonism and other philosophies of Hellenism, combined 
the two conceptions and read into the Old Testament 
and Jewish Theology a Being intermediate between 
It (that is ho oh) and the manifold universe. This inter- 
mediate Being was the Logos According to Philo, Ideas 
moulded Matter. God first produced the intelligible 
world «»f Ideas which are types (Aparaj&li) of the physical 
world- Though in Itself nothing hut the Logos, the latter 
is the author of the ideal world. Just as an architect 
projects in his mind a plan of a town (Polis) and thus 
produces the real town according to the ideal, so God 
acted when He created the world, this Megalopolis 
(Brahm&nda). The Author of the Fourth Gospel took 
up these ideas but gave them expression in such a way 
as to serve Christian theological needs, (See J. Reville, 
La Doctrine du Logos dans la quatriemc Evangile 
ct dans les Aim-res de I’hilon). It has thus been said 
that John’s adoption of the notion was not a mere copy, 

3 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



but a free adaptation of the Philonian I-ogos and a 
christianising of it. According to the Evangelist the 
Logos is a Person who was before creation and Himself 
God. It is the Potency of the Eternal Wisdom proceed- 
ing from the immanifest Godhead for the purpose of 
world-activity and in the world It is the Logos Hndia- 
tlmtos or immanent divine wisdom (See Moeller. Hist. 
Ch. Chnrcli I <)2‘2-»2). The Logos through whom the 
world was created became flesh (Avatflra), that is was 
manifested in man (Vcrbum earn factum est). lie is 
the Son who Ls Jesus Christ, Him who in the heavenly 
pre-existence is called the Logos and after I Its incarna- 
tion the man Jesus who is the Christ, who is neither 
ptophet nor superman but Pfimuvatara of God. Tin* 
Logos is the perfect self-presentation of God in the Son. 
In Jesus there was identity of being with God. The 
fourth Gospel opens grandly, " In the beginning was 
the Word and the Word was with God and the Word 
was God.” These are the very words of Veda. Prujti- 
patir vai idam faft : In the beginning was Brahman. 
Tasya v'ig dvittya asfl ; with whom was Yak or the Word ; 
(She Ls spoken of as second to Him because She is first 
potentially in, and then as Shakti issues from Him) ; 
V6g vai par (imam Brahma ; and the word is Brahman, 
vak is thus a Shakti or Powej of the Brahman which 
is one with the Possessor of Power (Shaktiman). This 
Shakti which was in Him is at the creation with Him, 
and evolves into the form of the Universe whilst still 
remaining what It is — the Supreme Shakti. 

It is always possible that hitman thought may 
develop similarly and yet independently. It is not 
improbable also, seeing the influence of India on the 
West, that the Philouic and Neo-platonic and Johannean 
conceptions were, in part at least, indebted for their 
origin to India. Nevertheless there are, with general 

4 




VAK OR THE WORD 



points of similarity, others of difference, for which accu- 
racy demands attention. Thus the Brahman is the 
material cause of the World which the Christian f.ogos 
is not. For Christianity is dualism. VSk is no Person 
in a Trinity. V&k is Herself the Mother of the Trimftrtti 
who are Bralimi, Vishnu and Rudra. For She is the 
Supreme Shakti, one with Brahman. The full incarnation 
is a concept of Hinduism, yet. in the form of Jiva, Vak 
Ls incarnated not in one historic person only but in all 
men, beings, and things. The Word as Vak became 
flesh, not on one particular date in one p.irticulai place 
and in one particular historic ]>erson. It appeared 
and now appears in the flesh and other forms of matter 
of all limited beings or Jivas, each of whom may through 
Veda directly realise the Brahman whose Shakti is 
the word or Vak. Jesus alone was God in human form. 
Otliers were not, are not and never can become God. 
Vak manifests Herself in every man add is knowable 
and known as She is in Herself— that is Brahman, in 
that spiritual experience which is Veda. 

The universe is the outcome of the Divine Desire 
(Kama) or Will (Ichchhi). Kama on the physical plane 
denotes among other things, sexual desire. In the 
highest sense it is the first creative impulse of the One 
to be many, whereby It begets Itself as all creatures. 
Earthly desire and self-reproduction are but limited 
manifestations of that first impulse. The Divine Will is 
continually and presently working through the individual 
sexual desire for the continued creation of the universe. 
This Divine Kama is eternal and the origin of all things. 
And so Parmenides speaking of li'ros or Love, said 
PrftislOH m> r n rrola thtun nui/saio panlou, (" He devised 
Eros the first of all the Gods ”). This is the Divine Eros 
through whom things .are (See Plato Symp. 5-6). The 
Daughter of Kitina is Vak. The latter as the Divine Will 

5 




TIITC GARLAND OF LETTERS 



speaks the Divine Word upon which the Tiling is. In the 
Atharvaveda (IX-2) Kama is celebrated as a great 
Power superior to all the Divas. The Daughter of 
Kama is named " The Cow which sages call Vak- viral." 
that is Vik in the form of the universe. 

In the "beginning" there was Brahman and with 
It was V&k. In the Veda (Shatapatliu Brahma na 
VT-i-i-S) it is said, " tliis Being (Punishu) Prujapati 
willed ' May I be many ' ' May I be propagated.’ He 
energised (So’shnimyul ui lafXi'ttipyar,i) t Vak was His. 
She was produced from Him (Kdg nut sy, 1 snjya/11) 

and pervaded all which exists." Then 011 the issue of 
V&k, " By his mind he united with Vak (Sh. P. Hr. X. 
6-5-4 i Brih. Ar. Up. Koer p. 50) and thus (Sh. I*. 
Br. VI. 1-2 fl) became pregnant [Carbhi ahhavat)" 
In the K&thaka it is said (XII-5 and XXVIl-i). " Praja- 
pati only was then this [Praj ( 1 f>a/ir vui itl,m dsil ) 
Vdk was a second to Him ( Tasya nig dvitiyd iistl). He 
united with Hei (Tiim- milltuiufm saniuhliimit) and She 
became pregnant [Sd garbham Jdhalta). She went 
out from Him and produced these creatures (SJ asm id 
apAkrftmat s<l irnah />raj,Vi asrijata) and again r. entered 
Him (Sd Prajdpalim mi pHiiah pnh'isiial).” 

Again in the I'unchavimsha Br. (.W-14-2J it is 
similarly said : " PrajApati alone was this universe. He 
had Vflk too as His own, as a Second to Him. 
He thought, ' let me now put forth this Vak. She will 
traverse and pervade all this ' That is the Brahman 
or Shiva first willed to he many and His Shakti, which 
was one with Him, issued as His Word. I lie Union 
of Will and Word was the potency of creation, all things 
being held in undifferentiated mass in the Great Womb 
(Mali&yoni) ol the Mother of all (AmbikA). This Pot- 
ency became. actual as the manifested universe, and at 
its dissolution Shakti, as such universe, re-entered 

f> 




VAK OR THE WORD 



Brahman and remained one with It (Chit.) as Chidrupini. 
Meanwhile She pervades, as immanent Spirit, both 
Mind and Matter which are Its temporal forms. For 
as the Brihadiranyaka l ' unishad says (pp. 50-53, Ed. 
Roer) : 11 By that V&k and that Atm& He created all 
tilings whatsoever, the Vedas. Metres, Sacrifices and 
and all Creatures " (Sd tayd vacha 'tern utmini idam sar- 
vam asrijata yad idam kiacha rich) yajihnshi sdmdni 
cMianddmsi yajnan prajdh pashiin). " First was pro- 
duced the sacred Vaidik science ” (Sh. P. Br. VI. 1-1-S). 
In the Muhabharata Sarasvatl as Vak is called the 
" Mother of the Vedas “ (Shantiparva, V. 1 2. 920) 
and the same is said of Vak in the Taittirlya Br&limana 
(II. S-S-5) where (and in the preceding par. 4) She 
is also said to contain within Herself all worlds and to 
have been sought with Tapas by the Rishis who put 
forth the Vedic Hymns [Rishayo maiilrahriiah). In 
the Bhlshmaparva of the Mahibh&rata (v. 3019J 
Achyuta (Krishna) is said to have produced Sarasvatl 
and the Vedas from His mind ; and in the Vanapai va 
(v. 13,432) the Gayatri is called the Mother of the Vedas, 
for Gayatri I >evi is a form of Vak. Vak is the Mother 
of the Vedas and of all things which their words denote. 
Vak in the form of Veda is Vedatmika Vak (See Sayana 
and other citations given iu Muir O.S.T. I-32511 where, 
as in other volumes, some of the Texts concern- 
ing V&k are collected). The substance of the whole 
world is Vak (Jagal vdttg/naya ), for as previously stated 
the world (Jagat) is Shabdaprabhava. 

The Rigveda (X 125-5) says: "I (Vak) make him 
whom I love formidable, him a Brahmann, him a Rishi, 
him a Sage.” It is this Vak which entered the Rishis and 
has thus made Herself known to men. “ By sacrifice 
they followed the path of Vak and found Her entered 
into the Rishis " (Rigveda, X. 71-3). The Rishis called 

7 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



their Hymns by various names, amongst ollins Vak. 
for they are manifestations of Vak. Vak is one with 
Brahman for Shiva and Shakti are one. In the Itiilm- 
daranyaka Upanishad it is said (Ed. Koer. " Hv 

V 4 k, 0 Monarch, the Brahman is known. Vak is the 
Supreme Brahman " (Vdchaiva santriid Brahma jmiyale 
vi ig vai saw nit paramam Brahma), The Malmhharutu 
(Shintiparva v. i2.g2o}says: “ Behold Snrasvati Mother 
of the Vedas abiding in me ” (Veda it dm mdlaram pashva 
matstham devan Sarasvat/m). She, tliis great Shakti. 
is one with Maheshvara. And so in the Mangulacli.iiann 
prefixed to their Commentaries on the Rile Samhita 
and Taittirlya Samhita by botli Siiyaita and Mndluiva 
it is said : “ I reverence Maheshvaru the hallowed abode of 
sacred knowledge, of whom the. Vedas are the breadlines 
and who from the Vedas formed the whole universe " 
(Yasya niskzasilam veddh yo vedcbhyo 'fthilain jagat, 
Nimame (am ahum vande vidyaBrtham Mahcsltvaram). 
The Taittiriya Brahmana (III-39-1) says that Vak is 
imperishable, the first born of Rita, Mother of the Veda? 
and centre-point of immortality (V&g akshitrant pra- 
Ihaimm yd rilasya vcdiihdm nulla anwilaxya nitbhih). 
The Shatapatha Brahmana says (VI 1. 5-2-21) : " Vak 
is the unborn.” It was from Vfik that the Maker of 
the Universe (Vishvakarmft) produced creatures ( Vdg 
vai ajo v&cho vai prajdh vishvakartnii jajana). Various 
texts associate the Lord of creatures (Prajapati), called 
Pashupati in the Sliaiva Shastra, with His Shakti Vak. 
as to which see Weber, Indische Studien, IX. 477 ti. and 
Muir’s Original Sanskrit Texts, V. 391. 

Sbangkaracharyya (Sutra I-3. 28) quoting ’ By 
His mind He united with V&k,’ says that by this and 
other Texts the Veda in various places declares that 
creation was preceded by the Word from which the 
whole universe of Devas and organic and inorganic 




YAK OR THIS WORD 



eartli-lifo are produced. But it is said that the world 
was produced from Brahman. How then was it pro- 
duced from the Word ? Creation was preceded by the 
Word. He says that when any man is occupied with 
any end which he wishes to accomplish, he first call', 
to mind the word which expresses it and then proceeds 
to effect his purpose. Using this as analogy he says 
that before creation the words of Veda were manifested 
in His mind and afterwards he created the objects which 
resulted from them. Thus the Vaklik text which says 
“ Uttering Blifih (earth) he created the earth (Bimini)” 
and so forth, means that t lie different worlds and the 
beings therein were manifested or created from the word 
" Bhuh " and so forth manifested in His mind. These 
distinctions of " before " and afterwards and so forth 
are VyavahArika. Human analogies arc necessarily 
imperfect. In Islivara as causal body what (as mani- 
fested) is called Pratyaya, Shabda. Artlux are one and 
identical (and therefore, as manifested, co-ordinate) 
though for the purposes of cxi>osition we may say that 
His SnshtikalpanA is a fraction of the Pratyaya which He 
has of his own Anandamaya causal body, and included 
therein the subtle and gross bodies. His Parashabda in- 
volves as effects all Aparashabdas, and His Artha is the first 
stressing mass of Prakriti Shakti in which are. experienced 
all elements (Vikriti) and things which are compounded 
of them. For Ishvara lias direct and immediate appre- 
hension of the thiee bodies, Hiranvagarbha of the second 
and third, and Virat of the third. Para Vak is therefore 
what has been previously spoken of as Parashabda, and 
Vak (simply) as Shabda in its subtle form as Matrika 
(MadliyamA V&k) and gross form (Vaikhari Vak). The 
latter is that of the spoken letters (Varna) of which the 
Mantras are made. There is but one Cause of speech, as 
also of all the things in the universe which it denotes and 
■2 9 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

also, of the mental apprehension (Pratyaya) or "going 
towards” the object of the mind. That cause is the 
Supreme Devi Sarasvati, Mother of the Vedas and of the 
Worlds, manifesting as the name (Kama) and fonn 
(Rupa) which is the Universe. She i> thus the Supreme 
Shakti to whom a title, is given, taken from one of Ha- 
productions, the manifested word or speech. The musical 
instrument (Vini), which Sarasvati holds, denotes all 
sounds (Sliabda) of which She is the Mother. White 
arc Her garments and transparent whiteness is the 
colour of both Akiislui and Buddlti. Her name denotes 
” flow ” or " motion " (Saras). She. is such, in the Su- 
preme sense, as being the activity (Shakli) of the un- 
moving Shiva or Braliman. She is again such as the play 
in the manifested World of the dynamic Shaktis in and 
around the rigid Ether, which appeared at creation with 
the roaiing sound " Hang " and then >tood still as the 
steady framework on, and in. which the whole universe 
flows moves. According to Science. Ether has 
no such imperfections as wc associate with matter. 
It is the property of the latter to grow old, to decay, to 
wear out. Hut such energy as exists in the Ether remains 
unchanged. It is this rigid, unwasting, enduring Ether 
which is Vajra, the hard, stable, lasting, unwasting 
Vajra, the static manifestation of the static Brahman, 
in which the Dynamic Brahman as Sarasvati flows or 
moves. The former is Shunya, the void of space, in which 
all movement takes place. Just as in Brahmanism 
Ak&sha is transferred to the Brahman-idea as Clikl- 
akasha ; so this Ethereal Shunya in Northern Buddhist 
Monism as sTongpa-nyid (Shfinyati) stands for the 
Ultimate beyond all categories (See the Dcmchog-Tantra 
published as the seventh Volume of my " Tantrik Texts,") 
Sarasvati, the Dynamic -Brahman with Her ” consort " 
the static Brulnnan as Draluna, is borne upon the Hangsa 

10 




vAk or the word 



which is no material " bird ” but the natural name of the 
vital function manifesting as the expiring (Hang) and 
inspiring (Sail) breath or PrAnabija in all breathing 
creatures (PrAni). She again is the Divine in the aspect 
as Wisdom and Learning, for She is the Mother of Veda, 
that is of all knowledge touching Bralunan and the 
Universe. She is the Word of which it was bom and 
She exists in that which is the issue of Her great womb 
(Mahayoni). Not therefore idly have men worshipped 
Vale or Sarasvati as the Supreme Power, 



ii 




CHAPTER II 

ARTHA. PRATVAVA AND SHARD A 

The one supieme Consciousness (Clut) which is the 
Changeless Principle of alt experience evolves by, 
and from out, its Power (Shakti), which is both Chit* 
Shakti and Maya-shakti— the duality of subject and ob- 
ject, mind and matter. In Parasamvit or Sachchidananda 
the experience is unitary and devoid of every species of 
duality. 1 have dealt in my book " Shakti and Shakta " 
with the various possible English renderings of the un- 
translatable word Chit which, subject to the reservations 
there made, may be called Feeling-Consciousness or With 
less liability to misunderstanding the Changeless Principle 
of all changing experience. Through the operation of 
Shakti the homogeneous Unity becomes the Many or 
universe of subject and object, mind and matter. The 
Perfect Experience, without ceasing to bo such, involves 
Itself in mind and matter and tints becomes the imperfect 
or limited experience. A- all i> the one Self, this apparent 
dichotomy means that the Self which manifests as a 
limited subject sees (though ii is unaware of it) itself as 
object. 

Chit is without motion (Nishpanria), without action 
(Nishkriya). without mind (Amanah) and without Shabda 
(Ashabda). It is neither subject nor knows any object 
other than Itself as Chidriipini Shakti. Creation com- 
mences by an initial movement or vibration (Spandana) 
in the Cosmic Stufi, as some Western writers call it, 
and which in Indian parlance is Saspanda Prakriti 
Shakti. Just as the nature of Chit or the Shiva aspect 
of Brahman is rest, quiescence, so that of Prakriti is 




ARTHA, I’KATVAYA AND SHABDA 



movement. Prior however to manifestation, that is 
during dissolution (Pralaya) of the universe, Prakriti 
exists in a state of equilibrated energy' (S&myavastha) 
in which there is Sarftpaparinama. It then moves 
(Vjriipaparinania.) This is the first cosmic vibration 
(Spundana) in which the equilibrated energy is released. 

The approximate sound of this movement is the 
Mantra dm. Dualism with all its varieties is thus 
produced. There is thus a bifurcation of Conscious- 
ness into Mind and Matter which therefore constitute 
a parallelism of common origin. The mind as subject 
has apprehension (Pratyaya) of objects (Artha), and 
names those objects by word (Shabda) or language. 
In man Shabda, Artha, and Pratyaya are connected 
but distinct. Like everything else they are three effec- 
tual manifestations of the movement (Spanda) which 
is the common Causal Stress. At the stage of Causal 
Shakti however the three are one ; so that then Shabda = 
Artha — Pratyaya = Spanda, the latter being not, as in 
manifestation, a common denominator but the equiva- 
lent of Shabda, Artha, Pratyaya. The state is one of 
logical unity. Ishvara's Spanda is His Shabda. is 
I lis Artlui. is Ills Pratyaya. Doubtless in projecting 
our standpoint as existence into Divine Being we cannot 
help using the analogy of aspects. And so we speak 
of Chit and the Causal Stress (Shakti), of Shiva and Shakti 
as two aspects and so on. Nevertheless we must not 
understand that there is any distinctness in the midst 
of relationship or even ol unity which expresses our 
idea of aspects. Ultimately the relation of Shabda. 
Artha and Pratyaya is an identical equation and not 
a ratio, that is fraction with a numerator and denomi- 
nator. Whilst on the absolute plane which is the Cos- 
mic Causal body the three are one, there is. on and with 
the manifestation of the subtle body, a divergent des- 

13 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



cent of the three, retaining as they always do their 
mutual connection. The causal aspect is Shabdabrah- 
man, the Stress or Creative Shakti giving rise to motion 
and bodies produced by it which are forms of the subtle 
and gross Shakti. What was a simple stress in quios- 
cent and unaffected consciousness with unitary ex- 
perience becomes bifurcated as mind and matter. It 
is here most important to remember (for it is the key to 
that which follows) that the nature of a process in which 
the One becomes Many involves this : — the essential 
substance (Spirit) of both Mind and Matter remains 
the same, and the Shakti elements and the motion of both 
are similar. Hence they arc mutually connected with 
a natural relation. Feeling and object of feeling arc 
correlated. Thus sensation through the eve and Manas, 
and colour as an object which is perceived, are at base 
the one Atina thus dually manifested. The sensation 
of sight and the colour are both again products of Tcjas 
Tanmatra. The Indriya is Sat t vikings ha of the Apan- 
chikrita "fan mat ra, and the object seen is the Tairm- 
sikangsha of the same: In Sftngkhya, and commonly 
in the Shakta Tantras. both are products of the same 
Ahangk&ra. Sensation and it> object are two aspects 
of one and the same thing. The vibration of the object 
(Artha) and of the Vritti or modification of -mind by 
which apprehension (Piatyava) is had of it arc the same, 
and the natural name (Shabda) of an object (Artha) 
is the sound produced by the forces which constitute it 
There exists all this parallelism because our jx>stulate 
is that mind and matter are but twin aspects of the one 
undivided Self. So when an object (Vishaya, Artha) 
affects the senses (Indriya), being attended to by that 
function of mind which is called Manas, there arises 
in the mind a modification (Vritti) of its 
substance which is an exact counterpart of the external 

r 4 




AKTHA, PKATVAVA AND SHABDA 

object- In passing I may observe that this is a funda- 
mental principle on which all Tan ink SAdhana by way 
of UpSsana rests. By worship and meditation or Japa 
of Mantras the mind is actually shaped into the form ot 
the object of worship and is made pure fur the time being 
through the purity of the object (namely Ishtadevati), 
which is its content. By continual practice (Abhy&sa) 
the mind becomes full of the object to the exclusion ot 
all else, steady in its purity, and does not stray into im- 
purity. So long as mind exists it must have an object 
and the object of SadhanA is to present it with a pure one. 

Before proceeding further it is necessary to have 
clear notions as to the meaning of Mind, Matter, I’ratyaya, 
Shabda and Artha. Everything is " material ” accord- 
ing to the Vedanta which is not Pure Transcendent 
Spirit (Anupahita Chit); Immanent or Upahita Chit 
is that which is associated with mind and matter This 
Chit with UpAdlii is either Para - Shuddlia-sattva- 
prad liana = L'tkrishtopadhi — Samashti, or Apara = 

Malina-sattva-pradMna - Nikristopadhi = Vyashti. In 
each of these there are the three bodies causal 
(K Arana), subtle (Sukshma) or gross (Sthula) This 
Up&dhi is Shakti as Maya or Prakriti Shakti as that 
term is used in AdvaitavAda. As Prakriti Shakti is 
“material" not as being scientific ''matter" but as 
the subtle material cause of all tilings, all its effects 
(Vikriti) are necessarily of the same character as their 
cause and are material. These Vikritis may be divided 
into the two parallel groups of Mind (Antahkarana) and its 
outer instruments or senses (Indriya), and Matter or 
Panchabhuta derived from the more rudimentary forms 
of infra-sensiblc " matter " which are the Pancba Tan- 
mantras. These ate beyond tlie threshold of sensa- 
tion of the ordinary Jiva. 

What then is Mind ? It follows from the above 

*5 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



that it is a manifestation of Shakti or Power in the form 
of force, which is Power translated to the material plane, 
and is as much a material (Bhautika) substance as is 
matter (Bhuta) itself. Thought (for except in Sam Ad hi 
mind is never free of thought) is from the creative stand- 
point a passing thought and matter a lasting thought. 
Matter is a dense and gross form of the more subtle and 
tenuous form of the common Prakriti Shakti. Mind is 
Bhautika because it is according to Vedftnta composed 
of the Sittvik part (SattvikAngshaj of the Tanmatra. 
According to S&ngkhya it is Ahangkari. According to 
Vedanta Mind is not Vibhu that is all-spreading, un- 
limited and indivisible into parts . nor is it Ami or 
atomic that is limited and indivisible into i«irts._ It is 
Madhyama Paiimina, that is limited and divisible into 
pails and thus takes the form of its objects. Mind has 
l«rts in the sense that it is divisible into parts, that 
is one jiart of the mind can attend to one thing and to 
another at one and the same time. As it also takes the 
shape of the object perceived, it spreads or shrinks with it. 
It pervades the whole body whether in the waking (Jagrat) 
or dreaming state (Svapna), but in dorp sleep (Sushupti) 
it is withdrawn as all else into the causal body ami accord- 
ing to one account is then absorbed in the NatU. 

What than is the nature of knowing by the mind ? 
According to the Naiyayikas who hold that the mind is 
atomic (Anu). it does not go forth, or transform itself into 
the shape of the object. JnanaisaGuna of Atma which 
is produced by the association of Mind (Manas) and Atma. 
According to Vedanta Jnana is a transformation 
(Parinama) of the Antahkarana or MTnd which isa Tattva 
of Madhyama Parimana. Jnana is of two kinds, viz., 
JnAna SvarOpa and JnAna Vritti. The former is Brah- 
masvarupa or Perfect Experience or Chit. The latter 
is knowledge of objects or the ordinary worldly 

16 




ARTHA. PRATYAYA AND SHABDA 

imperfect experience. Opinion varies as to the mode of 
operation in the case of the Mind and JnSnavritti. 
According to some light from the eye goes forth. Hence 
the eye is called Tcjas. Mind going forth with the light 
of the eye impinges upon and takes the shape of the 
object. Mind is called " transparent ” (Svachchha) 
because it can take the shape of any object persented to 
it. Atm& is ever illuminating the mind and when there is 
a particular Vritti Atmi illuminates it so that it is present 
to the limited consciousness. 

Knowledge is true or false (Mithya). Right know- 
ledge or Pram4 is defined as Tad vat i tat-prakiiraka- 
jnanam which means apprehension of an object according 
to its true nature, that is, in its own class or Jati. The 
mind not only perceives a particular thing (Vyakti) but 
also the genus or class (Jati) to which it belongs : for this 
Jati is not merely a subjective thing but is inherent 
in the Vyakti as its nature (Prakara) and both are per- 
ceived in right knowing, as when in the case of Ghata 
(jar) its JAti or Ghatatva (jar-ness) is perceived. Where 
however a rope is mistaken for a snake there is Mithya 
Jn&na. The particular rope excites knowledge, but it 
is false knowledge, because through a defect (Dosha) 
in the percipient subject, the rope is not perceived under 
its Jati but under that of a serpent. In short in right 
perception there is true conformity of thought with its 
object. To perceive on the other hand a rope where 
there is Ghatatva is false perception. 

What then is Artha or object (Vishaya) ? This is the 
object which constitutes the mind’s content. Object is 
manifold as the various forms (Rupa) which make the 
universe. It is the '' other ” which the Self as mind 
perceives. These forms are constituted of the five 
Bhfitas — Akasha, Vayu, Tejas, Ap, Prithivi representing 
various densities of Pr&kritic substance. Just as the 
3 J 7 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

mind is a form of motion (Spandana) ol that subs Lance, 
so the Jive Bhutas are five forms of motion of the same 
Prakriti which in the Tantias are symbolised by figures 
denoting the forms of the vibration namely a circle with 
openings (Chhidra) shown as points on it denoting the 
interstitial character of Ak&sha : a circle denoting Vuyu ; 
and a triangle, crescent and cube square denoting Tcjas, 
Ap, and Prithivi respectively. The direction of the 
vibration also varies as being in all directions, at an 
acute angle to the line of the wave (Tiryyag-gnmanashila) 
upwards, downwards and " in the middle ” where the 
forces are equilibrated and matter becomes stationary. 
These again are space-giving, general movement (Chalana- 
para) expansion, contraction, cohesion, stimulating t lie- 
sense of hearing, touch and feel, (not all forms ol contact), 
sight or colour and form, taste, and smell respectively, 
the centres of which in the Pindanda arc the Chakras 
from Vishuddha to Muladlmra. The Blja Mantras 
ol these are Ham, Yam, Ram, Vam, Lam. the meaning of 
which is later explained when dealing with natural name. 
They seem like gibberish to the uninitiated. Hence 
even the common Bengali expression " What Hayavarala 
is this ? ” These Bhfitas derive from the Tanmatra 
commencing with Shabda Tanmatra or infra-sensible 
sound, which by addition of mass becomes Akisha, the 
Guna of which is sensible sound, which generates Vsiyu 
Tanmatra from which comes Vayu Bliuta and so on with 
the rest, though the mode of derivation is not always 
given in the same terms. The substance of it is that 
Bhfita or gross sensible matter is derived from a subtle 
form of the same which is not sensible by the gross ear 
but mentally apprehensible by the Yogi. Hence it is 
said Tam vastuni lanmatradini pratyaksha-vishay&ni (that 
is to Yogis). Object (Vishaya) is thus not limited to the 
gross objects seen by the senses of ordinary men. There 

18 




ARTHA, PRATYAYA AND SHABDA 

are also subtle objects which may be perceived through 
the senses or the mind by the possessor of " Powers ” 
(Siddhi) which are merely extensions of natural faculty. 
These are hidden from ordinary men whose powers vary. 
Some can perceive more than others. By scientific 
instruments we can see (microscope) and hear (micro- 
phone) things beyond the capacity of the highest natural 
power of the senses. Is that the end ? No. because 
as we perfect these auxiliaries of natural instruments 
we sec and hear more. Once the microscope gave only 
a magnification of a few diameters. Now it is of thou- 
sands. At each stage more is known. A point however 
is reached at which " seeing ” takes place not through 
the gross senses but by the mind. Everything may 
be an object which is not the Asangabrahman or Brahtna- 
svarupa that is the Supreme Self or Spirit as It is in 
Itself. This is not known by either sense or mind or by 
any Pramana or instrument of knowledge. Even Shabda 
Pramana or Veda here fails. Because Brahman as It is in 
Itself (SvarOpa) is never an object, being the true nature 
of the cognising Self. As such it is beyond mind and 
speech. The latter can only give an indication (Lakshana) 
of it. Higher objects beyond the reach of the senses 
(Atindriya) are only perceived by the heightened powers 
of the mind of Yogis. Mind, for instance, is Atindriya 
for it cannot be sensed. Yet Yogis can " see/’ that is. 
mentally apprehend the mind of another which becomes 
an object for their apprehension. In such cases his 
mind takes the form of that other, when everything 
which was in the latter mind namely its modification 
(Vrittis) or thoughts are known to him. And so the 
experience of objects becomes more and more subtle 
and inclusive until the state of Supreme Experience 
Itself is attained when there is neither subject nor object. 
This is Brahma-svarflpa. The apprehension or image 

19 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



which one has of an object (Artha) evoked by a word 
(Shabda) is called Pratyaya. The third form of divergent 
descent of the Shabda-brahman, namely Shabda. will be 
the subject of a following chapter. 



20 




CHAPTER III 



ASHABDA AND PARASHABDA 

Indian- doctrine revolves round the two concepts 
of Changelessness and Change. As these propositions 
cannot be logically predicated of the same substance, 
recourse is had to the doctrine of aspects. According 
to this. Brahman as Tt is in Itself (Brahmasvarupa) or 
Shiva does not change, but Brahman as the Power 
(Shakti) from which the world evolves does, as MAyd, 
change. It is perhaps more simple to say that Brahman 
produces and exists as the world without derogation to 
Its own unchanging unity. How this can be is like 
other ultimates inconceivable. But its truth is said to 
rest on two established facts, namely the daily experience 
of the world of the many on the one hand, and the ecstatic 
(Samadhi) experience of the One on the other. Both are 
facts of experience though how they can be so is a mystery. 

When we come to deal with the Mantra-ShSstra the 
same doctrines are expressed in the language of the sub- 
ject with which it is occupied, namely Shabda, of which 
Mantras are forms. Shabda or sound exists only where 
there is motion or Spanda. If there is no Spanda there 
is no Shabda. If there is Shabda there is Spanda. But 
the transcendent Brahman or Chit (Brahmasvarupa) is 
quiescent and changeless. Therefore it is said to be 
without motion (Nishpanda) and without Shabda 
(Ashabda). From out this Chit (for there is but one) 
but without affecting its own changelessness, there arises 
a creative stir or Stress which evolves into the universe. 
This is the work of the active Brahman or ishvara. Just 

2 > 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



as the Parabrahman is Ashabda, Ishvara is Sliabda- 
brahmaii or I'arashabda. As the former is Nishabda, 
the latter, as MAyA Shakti, is with motion (Saspanda). 
Parashabda, Pari VAk or Shabdabrahman arc each names 
for the Brahman as the cause of the man Rested Shabda. 
Parashabda is the causal body of sound. Slinbda- 
tanmatra is the subtle body of sound, and A kasha is the 
gross body of sound which (though a Guna of it) is only 
apprehended through the medium of air, the sound 
waves in which strike tire car. Through the latter and 
mind the sensation of sound is experienced. Sliabda- 
tanmatra is pure natural sound as apprehended by 
Hiranyagarbha or Yogis who share his oxpci ienco. G ross 
sound is of two kinds, namely, Vaidik sound (Shrauta 
sliabda) or approximate natural sound cither primary or 
secondary, and I-aukika Shabda, the sp ccch of the ordinary 
average mortals other than Vaidika Shabda. Taking 
“ cognizance ” to mean “ direct apprehension,” Ishvara 
has cognizance ol all kinds of Sliabda, (Parashabda, 
Shabda TanmAtra, Shrauta Sliabda, Laukika Shabda), 
Hiranyagarbha or Sutratma of tlie last three. Rishis 
ol the last two and ordinary men of the last only. From 
Parashabda or Para Vak therefore procceil in their 
order Shabda-tanmatra, Shrauta Shabda. ami Laukika 
Shabda. 

Dealing nextly with Pratyaya, Artha and Shabda in 
their cosmic and individual aspects, — in the Ishvara stage 
(i.e. in so far as there is the cosmic causal body) Pratyaya 
is the ishvara consciousness of His own body of Bliss 
(Anandamaya) and the cosmic ideation (Srishti-kalpana) 
whereby He projects the world. This Srislili-kalpnnA 
again is the stressing mass of Prakriti or MAyA and Avidya 
shakti.and this is the Parashabda or Pari Vak, involving 
(as the cause involves its effects) the various kinds of 
Apara Shabda including the MAtrikas, Vamas and 

22 




ASHABDA AND PARASHABDA 

Mantras. The approximate representation of the causal 
(Para) Shabda as a whole to tlie Rishi-ear is “Om.” It 
is however to be noted that Ishvara’s whole Pratyaya is 
not Srishti-kalpand. His Artha is the stressing mass 
of Prakriti. It is further to be noted that, in ishvara, 
Pratyaya, Shabda, and Artha are one ami not distinct 
though co- related, as in Hiranyagarbha, Viral and tire 
individual Jiva. What we may call the elements of the 
universe namely the Apanchikrita Bhutas or Tawnitras, 
the Indriyas, Pranas, Antahkarana and Sthftla Bhutas 
are evolved directly by Ishvara as Ishvara. This is 
Bhfltasrishti. 

He then, as Hiranyagarbha, evolves Bhautika- 
Srishti. The dements themselves must be traced directly 
to the causal body, but as Hiranyagarbha he compounds 
them. Hence Hiranyagarbha's Srishti-kalpana refers to 
Bhautika Srishti, that is the compounding of the elements 
which have been already provided by Ishvara as Ishvara. 
Shabda in the Hiranyagarbha aspect is Shabda-tanmStra 
involving the lower or derivative forms. His Artha is 
everything except the Samashti causal body. 

Bhautika Srishti may relate either to Sukshma or 
Sthula elements, the former being everything except 
the latter ; so that theoretically the creative operation 
may be divided between Sutr&tma and Vir&t. But the 
Sh&stra does not in fact contemplate sudi a division. 
Vir«U is Chit associated with the created whole — a natura 
naturata as it were, to borrow Spinoza's term. Causal 
activity does not appear to be extended to this How- 
ever, if \vc provisionally leave the compounding ot the 
Sthula dements to Virikt, then its Pratyaya too may be 
called Srishti-kalpana. His Shabda is various grades of 
sound, gross and subtle, extending to, but not including, 
Shabda-tanmatra. His Artha is everything except the 
Samashti causal and subtle body. 

2 3 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



SQkshma and Sthfila are relative terras and admit ol 
grades ; hence between the limits of Shabda-tanm&trn 
and average gross sounds there will be more and more 
subtle sounds — all apprehended by Hiranyagarbha ; all 
save the Tanmatra being apprehended by Virat as Virat. 
If we define SAkshma as what is of the order ol the 
TanmAtra, then Sthiila is a graded series with Taiuniitra 
as the superior limit. Then Chit associated with this 
whole series of Stlidla is Virat. The latter identifies 
Himself with Samashti SthAIa-Deha. It is however a 
long way from tlic Annamaya Koslia of average pcrcejv 
tion to the Pranamaya Kosha which comes " next " in 
order of fineness and which is a modification (Rajasika) 
of the Tanmfitras. What the Shastra calls Annantaya- 
kosha is therefore really a graded series. The gross body 
is made up of visible cells ; these of microscopic granules ; 
these of still finer corpuscles ; and so on. The five 
Koshas are therefore only five broad landmarks in a series 
consisting of innumerable gradations as are the seven 
colours of the rainbow. Hiranyagarbha and Virat arc 
also the types corresponding cosmically to our experiences 
of certain distinctive forms, in a really innumerable series 
of forms. So that instead of three we may say that there 
are innumerable creative Chit-shaktis. If the numbers 
are given differently there is no essential discrepancy. 
Ishvara, Hiranyagarbha, and Virat are three forms of 
creative manifestation corresponding cosmically to the 
Sushupti, Svapna and Jagrat. Rut the truth-sccrs. as 
compared with the system-makers, salute Him as the 
Many-formcd (Namaste bahurApaya) . Ishvara has direct 
apprehension ol all three collectively, causal, subtle, and 
gross. The cause involves the efiects. As Hiranyagarbha, 
He apprehends directly the* second and third (Svapna 
J&grat), and as Virat he apprehends the third (Jagrat). 

We pass now to the individual (Vyashti) aspect. 

24 




ASHABDA AND PARASHA HD A 



Corresponding with Ishvara and with Maya we have 
PrSjna with Avidyfk. The Pratyaya of Prajna is the 
Vyashti counterpart in Sushupti of the Anandamaya con- 
sciousness which ishvara has of His own causal body. 
Some English writers misunderstand the statement in 
the Upanishad that the Jiva in dreamless sleep is Brahman 
to mean that the experience in slumber is that of Ishvara, 
or of the Supreme Brahman. Of course this is not so, for 
the Prajna’s experience then is associated with Avidyi 
whereas Ishvara’s is free of all Avidyik. The comparison 
is made by way of analogy. For just as in Sushupti the 
Jiva loses the sense of duality, since all objects as separate 
things disappear in slumber, so in Ishvara there is no 
sense of separateness. All things are conceived as in and 
as Himself. The Shabda of PrSjria is Parashabila-Vishesha. 
This is no sound to him but that "part" of the causa! 
stress which is the causal body of the particular Jiva. His 
Artlia is the Vyashti causal body, that is, the temporary 
equilibrium in Sushupti of the Stress which makes the 
Jiva. As in the Samashti experience, Pratyaya, Artha 
and Shabda are one. Sangskaras are latent and all Vrittis 
are withdrawn in to the K&rana-Dcha. The forces of all 
subsequent Jiva-processes are there. Hence the ex- 
perience of this fund of causal energy corresponds to 
Ishvara pratyaya of His causal body. Srishti-kalpani of 
ishvara is not the whole Pratyaya of ishvara. For 
though in Pralaya the former is not there, ishvara has 
Pratyaya still, namely the Anandamaya consciousness of 
His own causal body. The Prajna Pratyaya corresponds 
to this. ' The Shabdic counterpart of this is Para-shabda- 
vishesha while in ishvara it is the Para-shabda whole? 
involving all Vishesbas. The Para-shabda in Jiva is 
no sound. Artha here is, as stated, the Vyashti causal 
body which is the temporary equilibrium of the Stress 
constituting the Jiva. 

4 2 5 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



Passing to Taijasa, corresponding to Hiranyagarbha 
as PrAjna does to Ishvara, his Pratyaya is cxj>ericncc 
of Sukshma Delia or subtle body in sleep (Svapna). His 
Shabda is that which is not expressed by the vocal organ, 
being the mental image of articulate or inarticulate sound 
pushing up in Yoga to the Tanm&tras. His Artha is the 
Vyashti Sukshma Delia. The Pratyaya of the Sukshma 
Deha is either pleasurable or painful. Hiranyagarbha's 
Pratyaya includes two parts, viz., (a) experience of cosmic 
(Samashtirupa) Sukshma elements as well as Sthula ele- 
ments, and ( b ) Srishti-kalpana referring to (hccomiKnmd- 
ing ol these elements already cvolvixl by ishvara. In 
Taijasa there is [aa) experience of the Jugrat-vasanardpa 
Svapna or Vyashti Sukshma Deha but not quite of the 
Jagrat or Vyashti Sthula Delia. (bb) Srislni-kalpanA 
manifesting as a compounding activity as regards various 
dream forms. 

On comparison it is found that the |>arallclism 
between Hiranya and Taijasa is not complete, 
a fact due to an important distinction between 
the two. Ishvara, Hiranyagarbha and Viral are 
Para or Utkrishtopadhi ; the UpAdhi (i.c., Maya 
Shakti) is preponderatingly Sattvika. Hence as regards 
the relative scope of Shabda, Artha, Pratyaya, the 
three aspects may be lepcrsentcd by three concentric 
circles of which ishvara is the outermost and 
Virat the innermost. Hence ishvara’s Pratyaya, 
Artha, and Shabda include those of Hiranyagarbha ; 
those of Hiranyagarbha include those of VirAt. It must 
not be thought that the Shabda, Artha, and Pratyaya 
of Ishvara, Hiranyagarbha, and- Virat are exclusive or 
ejective. The Sattvika character of their limitations 
implies the concentric arrangement of the three circles. 
But Prajna, Taijasa, Vishva have UpAdhis which, though 
SAttvika, are impure and coarse (Malina). Hence practi- 

26 




ASHABDA AN'P PARASHABDA 
cally as regards Shabda, Artha and Pratyaya we have 



in lieu of 




In other words they are practically ejective circles. 
Hence the first’s Pratyaya is practically confined to 
Sushupti, his Artha to the Vyashti causal body and 
Shabda to Parashabda section. Taijasa experiences 
Svapna and Sfikshmadeha, but is practically ignorant of 
Prajna’s state and Vishva’s state. So with Vishva. 
But though their experiences apparently exclude one 
another, the causal unity between them is not in fact 
wanting. 

Taijasa’s Artha is Sukshma-deha- vyashti which con- 
tains the seeds of Jagrat. His Shabda is the subtle form 
of the gross sound. The mental image of a sound be- 
comes apparent or PrStibhSsika sound during the dream- 
state (Svapna) ; higher sounds even may be heard during 

27 






THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



this. The Yogic state is a voluntary refining and deepen' 
mg of this state ; and hence Dliyana is called Yoga-nidr&. 
With the perfecting of the Yogic state one may rise to 
Shabda-tanmatra ; or even in Samadlu to Para-sliabda 
and Ashabda. The former is the cosmic Sushupti and 
the latter the Turlya state from which, when regarded as 
the supreme state, there is no return. 

Of the individual Vishva, corresponding to the cosmic 
or collective Vir&t, Pratyaya is the experience of Vyashti 
Sthula Deha ; Shabda is the gross sounds articulate 
(Varna) or inarticulate (Dhvani) emitted by men, animals 
and natural objects. The Artha is the gross body (Sthula 
Deha) and its processes and the gross environment and its 
processes. The Jagrat Srishtikalpami here manifests as 
feelings of bodily movements caused by Sangskura and 
Ichchha Shakti. But as Virat is rather the created 
(Kaiyya) than the creative (Kdrana) aspect of the whole, 
so is Vishva the Karyya aspect rather than the Kanina 
aspect of the section, that Is the finitized centre of con- 
sciousness or Jiva. The Artha is the gross body and its 
processes together with the environment of that lx>dy and 
its processes. The Shadbas are the sounds emitted by 
the vocal organs of men and animals or otherwise produced 
by natural objects. This is Vaikhari sound which is a 
development from Parashabda, through Pashyanti and 
Madhyamfi sound. Parashabda or Paravak is Hindu. 
Pashyanti is Iksliana or creative thought and action by 
that Bindu which is the causal body of Shabda. From 
this arises the subtle body of Shabda which is Tanmatra 
and Mfitrik^ which evolves into the gross body of sound, 
which is the letters (Varna) uttered by the vocal organs 
which are made up into syllables and words (Pada) and 
then in sentences (Vakya). Mantra, so uttered, is a 
form of the gross body of Shabda. And this applies 
both to Bijas and other Mantras. 

28 




ASHABDA AND. PARASHABDA 

Shabda TanmAtra or Apanchlkrita AkAsha is Apan- 
chikrita Tanmatra. This is sound as such, that is, ideal 
sound or the cognition of sound apart from conditions 
such as ear, brain and other materia! conditions such as 
air, water, earth, whereby sound is transmitted. In the 
case of Shabda Tanmatra, sound is known as an object 
of the higher mind apart from these conditions. Therefore 
Shabda Tanm&tra is Shabda not conditional to varying 
perceptive faculties. It is not sound which is heard by 
this individual or that, on this plane or that ; but it is 
sound as heard by the Absolute Ear and as uttered by the 
Absolute Tongue. It is invariable and Apaurusheya. 
Similarly RApa TanmAtra is form unconditional, as seen 
by the Absolute Eye. By " Absolute Ear ’’ is meant 
the power (Shakti) of apprehending sound in itself or 
as such without subjection to the varying conditions of 
Time, Place, (i.e. Plane) and person. The Stress by 
which a thing is generated and sustained is the basis of all 
the five TanmAtras. 1 1 is Shabda TanmAtra as apprehend- 
ed by the Absolute Ear, Rupa TanmAtra as apprehended 
by tire Absolute Eye, and so on. From the gross stand- 
point Shabda is not the Guna of AkAsha alone. In order 
to be manifested to the human mind and ear sound re- 
quires not only gross Akasha but VAyu and the other 
BhOtas. For the transmission of sound to the limited ear 
there must be a material medium for its transmission 
whether as air, water or solid body. VirSt sound in short 
assumes the existence of the whole material universe. 

To sum up— There is the unmanifest Lord (Avyakta 
Ishvara) and the manifest Lord (Ishvara). Both arc 
Shiva-Shakti because there is never Shiva without Shakti 
nor Shakti without Shiva, whether in creation or dissolu- 
tion. Only in the latter there is nothing but Conscious- 
ness (Shakti being Chidrupini,) and in the former She 
assumes the form of the universe. For this reason the 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



supreme state may be called Shiva-Shakti and the 
manifest state Shakti-Shiva to denote the preponderance 
of the Chit and Mayd aspects respectively. One state is 
motionless (Nishpanda), the other with motion (Saspanda). 
One is soundless (Ashabda), the other manifests as sound 
(Shabda). In one is the Unmani Shakti. in the other the 
Samani Shakti. The manifest ishvara displays itself 
in three forms — causal, subtle, gross. The causal form 
is Parashabda, Paravak, or Shabda -brahman. This is 
Ishvara. The rest is Apariv&k. The subtle form is 
MudhyamS Vak, which is Hiranyagarbha sound, which 
develops into Vir&t Shabda or Vaikhari Vak. The sound 
is accompanied by movement. That of the causal 
body first projecting the manifold universe from out 
itself is general movement or Saminya Spanda, the 
Shabda of which is the Pranava or " Om.” From Om 
all otlier Mantras are derived. Hiranyagarbha Shabda 
is accompanied by special motion (Vishcsha Spanda) 
and Vir&t Shabda is clearly defined movement (Spashta- 
tara Spanda) manifesting in man as articulate speech, 
and therefore as the gross or uttered form of Mantra. 




CHAPTER IV 



PARASHABDA, CAUSAL SHABDA 

Shabda which comes from the root Shabd " to make 
sound " ordinarily means sound in general including 
that of the voice, word, speech and language. It is either 
lettered sound (Varndtmaka shabda) and has a meaning 
(Art lia), that is, it either denotes a thing or connotes the 
attributes and relations of things ; or it is unlettered 
sound and meaningless (at any rate to us) and is mere 
Dhvani (Dhvany4tmaka shabda) such as the sound of a 
rushing torrent, a clap of thunder and so forth. I say 
“ to us ” because every sound may have a meaning for 
Ishavra. This Dhvani arises from the contact of two 
things striking one another. So lettered sound is mani- 
fested through the contact of the vocal organs with the 
outer air. As elsewhere more fully explained, Shabda 
is, and exists as, four Shaktis namely Par&, Pashyantt, 
Madhyami and Vaikhari. These are referred to in con- 
nection with Vfik or Devi Sarasvati, another synonym 
for Shabda. 

Shabda again Is cither immanent in its manifesta- 
tion as sound, or transcendent. The first is threefold : 
(a) From an average point of view it means sound of 
either of these classes as heard by cars and sounds whose 
capacity (Shakti) is that of the normal or average plane, 
(i) From the Yogic point of view it means subtle sound, 
that is, subtle sou nd as apprehended by ears and minds 
which are supernormal and therefore whose Shaktis rise 
above the average plane. But these capacities can be 
greater or less and therefore admit of grades, one person’s 

3i 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

capacity being greater than that of another, just as is the 
case with individuals in the ordinary plane, some of 
whom can hear better thanothers. (c) From the stand- 
point of the " Absolute Ear ’’ that is a capacity to appre- 
hend sound unconditionally such as exists in the case 
of the i>erfect Yogi it means pure sound or Shabda-tan- 
matra. This is apprehended by the perfect Yogi in its 
purity. All these are effects (K&ryya). Transcendent 
Shabda means creative movement or Causal Stress itself, 
that is, it is not, the effect or manifestation (i.e. sound) 
to either the relative ear (a and b) or the “absolute ear” (c) 
but the cause (K&rana) or Manifesting Fact itself. 
This in the Shastra is Shabda-brahman, that is, the source 
of all Shabda or name (Nama) and of all form (Rupa), 
the universe being “ Name and form ” ( N'amarupfitmaka). 
Thus we rise step by step starting from average experi- 
ence to supreme experience ; from projections and mani- 
festations to the Thing Itself which is Causal Stress or 
Shabda-brahman. The term Shabda is throughout re- 
tained, though the connotations enlarge and deepen as wo 
proceed upwards. This is in conformity with the concrete 
way in which Hindu thought has developed and by whicli 
the all-pervading and all-manifesting power of the Divine 
Shakti is shown. In teaching, it is the Arundhatl- 
darshananyaya, according to which a husband shows 
(or rather used to show— for, is Arundhati sought now ?) 
his ncwly-wcdded wife the tiny star Arundhati, emblem 
of constant chastity, by drawing her attention first to 
some neighbouring big star. “ You see this, now look 
to the left you see this, well next to it you see Arundhati.” 
So a Guru deals with his disciple (Shishya) in a way 
suitable to the latter's intelligence. He cannot learn 
what is the highest all at once. He must make his way 
upward to it. "Brahman is this; no it is that; no it 
is this ; " and so on until the highest notion of It is 

32 




ASHABDA AND PARASHABDA 

capable of being given. Thus the Guru in Shruti says 
" Annam Brahma," that is Brahman is the food wliich 
the disciple eats as also matter generally. Then as the 
latter's knowledge deepens, the Gum changes the conno- 
tation of the word Brahman but retains the term itself. 
The disciple then consecutively learns that Life is 
Brahman (PrSnAh Brahma), Intelligence is Brahman 
(Vijnanam Brahma) and finally Bliss is Brahman (Anand- 
am Brahma) where at last experience rests. Here there 
are five connotations of " Brahman,” each more compre- 
hensive and deeper than the foregoing, gradually evolved 
as the spiritual life of the Shishya unfolds and perfects 
itself. The connotations of most of the important 
philosophical terms have been evolved in this way. 
Thus there are different meanings of Prana, Ak&sha, 
Vayu and so forth. Shabda also has the four meanings 
stated which thought progressively evolves in the 
manner above stated. Some may think that from the 
standpoint of pure logic this state of things is unaccept- 
able. We have however to deal with the matter practi- 
cally. And what life wants is generally not that which 
pure logic demands. But apart from that the method 
and the statements are true. For Brahman is all things 
as Shakti, though the Brahman in itself (Brahmasvarfipa) 
is beyond them all. If those, before whom all connota- 
tions of Brahman are at once placed, complain of ambi- 
guity, this is due to the fact that they have not mastered 
their subject. And because the subject must be gradually 
mastered the Guru takes his Shishya gradually upwards 
to the point where all aspects are seen in relation to the 
whole (Puma) whose aspects they are. 

For the present Chapter I will start at the beginning 
namely Causal Shabda or Shabdabrahman. Shiva has 
two aspects namely Nishkala (without parts) Xirguna 
(without attribute) and Sakala (with parts) Saguna (with 
5 33 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

attribute). The first is the unmanifested transcendent 
Supreme and the second the manifested and immanent 
creative Lord (Ishvara) or Ruling Mother (ishvarl). 
The first is NishsfJanda, without movement, for it is the 
eternal changeless Brahman. It is Ashabda which here 
means the same thing, for being unmanifest there is 
neither Shabda as effect nor Shabda as cause. The 
latter means that there is then no Causal Stress. The 
other aspect is called Shabdabrahman which appears at 
creation from out of Brahman which is the equilibrated 
condition of Sliakti. From the Shabdabrahman all 
particular Shabdas as Mantras or otherwise appear. 
Shabdabrahman is in Itself Avyakta (unmanifest) Shabda 
which is the cause of manifested (Vyakta) Shabda, 
Artha and Pratyaya and which uprises from the form of 
Bindu on the differentiation of the Supreme Bindu due 
to the prevalence of Kriyft Shakti in Prakriti. 
Kriydihakti pradh&nayuh shabda shabd&rtha k&ranam 
Prakriterb inJur up i nydh shabdabrahm&bkaval param 

ShAradA Tilaka 1-12. 
In other words the unmanifest potentiality of power 
which subsequently appears as Shabda and therefore 
as Artha and Pratyaya becomes manifest through its 
activity, manifesting in Prakriti in the form of Bindu 
which is the undifferentiated Shiva-Shakti. With such 
activity Bindu becomes threefold as Shabda, Artha, 
Pratyaya. Avyakta-Rava is the Principle of sound as 
such (NAda MAtra), that is undifferentiated sound not 
specialised in the form of letters but which is through 
creative activity the cause of manifested Shabda and 
Artha which are Its forms. 

Tena shabddrtha-r&pa-vtshislUasya shabda -brah matva m 
avadhdritam — (PrAnatoshint 13) . 

It is the Brahman considered as all-pervading Shabda, 
undivided and unmanifested whose substance is NAda and 

34 




ASHABDA AND PARASHABDA 



Bindu, the proximate creative impulse in Parashiva and 
proximate cause of manifested Shabda and Artha. 
Srish!yunmukha-para>na$hiva-prathamoll<i$ainAlrn>nakh<in- 
ao vyaldo nudubindumaya eva vydpako brahmdtmaka 
shabdah ( See PrAnatoshini io. Rdghava Bhatla Comm, oh 
v. 12 Ch. I Shurada Tilaka). 

The creative Brahman is called Shabdabrahman. It 
may be asked why is this so. since the Saguna Shiva 
(which Shabdabrahman is) is the cause not only of all 
Shabdas but of all Artha (Rupa) and Pratyaya, This 
is so but the Sh&stra uses the term Shabdabrahman 
because it is here considering the origin of* Shabda. 
But Shruti in explaining creation is impartial as between 
Shabda, Artha or Pratyaya. Now it says " Creation 
is out of Shabda " (Shabda-prabirava) regarding the 
universe as constituted of .Shabda (Vangmaya) in its 
causal sense. Now it says that creation is out of Pratyaya 
using that term in the sense of creative ideation (Srishti- 
kalpana) . Now it says ' ‘ Creation is out of Artha " that is 
the supiipme Artha the cosmic " Stuff " or cosmic 
“ Matter ” which is Prakriti-shakti. What is done in 
such a case is to take an effect (Kdryya) known to us. 
and to refer it to the one cause of all effects, giving that 
Cause however the name of the particular effect which is 
the subject of consideration. Moreover the Shabda 
aspect of Brahman is of the highest importance for it is 
in this aspect that It is Veda. 

But what is the sense in which Shabda is used in the 
terra Shabda-Brahman ? This has been already indi- 
cated in the quotations above cited. Shabda here 
does not mean cither gross or subtle sound. To begin 
with these are both effects (K&ryya) and we are dealing 
with their cause (K&rana). Manifested sound is a Guna 
of Akisha. But in what sense ? It is not merely a 
quality of Ether and thus not anything else ; that is the 

35 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

term Shabda is not limited to the Guna of Akasha. If 
it were it would not be possible to explain the well-known 
scientific experiment (which in early days was supposed 
to " demolish *' all Hindu theories) in which a ringing 
bell ceases to be heard in a closed vessel from which the 
Air has been pumped out, but in which Ether still remains. 
If Shabda were the Guna of Akasha only and unconnected 
w'ith anything else it could not be said that sound increases 
and decreases, appears and disappears with V&yu. 
Hence the term Shabda is not limited to sound gross or 
subtle. It is the Causal Stress or Spanda which inheres 
in the stressed condition of Chit Shakti and Maya -shakti 
which manifests fust as the Shabda Tanmatra to the 
absolute " Ear,” as more or less subtle sound to a Yogic 
(though not perfect ear) according as the fundamental 
Akasha Spanda is adapted to its relative capacity 
through other more or less dense media ; and which dually 
appears as average human sound when the fundamental 
Spanda is adapted to the capacity of the human car 
through a medium of such density as the common air. 
The air therefore like the ear is one of the factors of the 
manifestation of the fundamental Spanda which is Shabda 
as the original creative causal Stress or agitation in 
the body of Prakriti Shakti. Shalxla is the Cosmic 
Stress itself which takes place in the Primary Ether or 
Saspanda Shakti which produces the Shabda Tanmatra 
which evolves into Ak&sha Bhuta and then into the 
Viyu and other Tanmatras and Bhutas. These accord- 
ing to Vedanta are Panchi-krita that is each Tattva 
has four parts of its own element and one of each of the 
four others. Through the Bhautika Srishti or indirect 
causation of Hiranyagarbha there takes place the com- 
bination of the Tattvas produced by the Bhuta-srishti 
in direct causation (S&ksh4t-kartritvam) of ishvara 
producing the gross world of the human senses which is 

36 




ASHABDA AND PARASHABDA 



VirAt. Thus the one Initial Stress is communicated 
as and throughout the chain of its effects. To distin- 
guish this Shabda it is called Par4 Shabda and the mani- 
fested Shabda is Apara Shabda or commonly Shabda 
simply. The latter is subtle and gross sound, the first 
being supersensible to the normal mind and senses and 
the latter sensible or what we call in its compounds 
discrete matter. Parasliabda is thus not sound but a 
state of agitation in the Cosmic Shakti when on the ripen- 
ing of the Sangskiras the hitherto existing equilibrium 
(S4my£vasth4) of Prakriti is broken. There is then a 
disturbance (Kshobha) or general movement (SAmanya- 
spanda) in Sliakti and this Cosmic Stress which is Para- 
sliabda or ParivAk reveals itself in manifested Shabda 
(Apara). This one stress, which is the potency of all 
in which it reveals itself, manifests in man as Artha, 
Pratyaya, Shabda, in the objects (Pramcya) of which 
he as knower (Pramatri) has apprehension (Pratyaya) 
and in the names by which he thinks of them as an 
" after construction in relation to the intuitive experi- 
ences of life ” as Professor Pramathanitha Mukho- 
padhyiya has well put it. The primordial Shabda or 
Paravak (corresponding in some ways to the Logos) is 
the cosmic predisposition to and pre-condition of creative 
evolution. The agitation in the primary Substance 
projecting itself into the sensuous plane becomes audible 
as Dhvani or sound but is itself only the possibility and 
substratum of Sound. Creation is said to be Shabda- 
prabhava, that is it proceeds from, and is a manifestation 
of, the Stress or Cosmic Shakti. In this sense every 
movement or process in the universe is Parasliabda. 
Ashabda Jagat is a contradiction in terms. Whilst the 
stress or constituting lorce is one, It manifests Itself 
differently to the different sense organs. The Causal 
Stress when striking the ear and mind produces sound, 

37 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

when striking the eye and mind it produces colour and 
form, and when striking other sense organs it produces 
other kinds of sensation. It is to be noted that of the 
five Bhutas, Akasha and V&yu belong to the formless 
(Amurtta) division and the remaining three to the torm 
division (Murtta). The first is sensed by hearing. 
Shabda as lettered sound is vibration for the ear as name. 
Tejas the head of the second division is sensed as form 
(RGpa). Artha is thus vibration to the eye (mental or 
physical) as form. It is because the one Power rays 
itself forth in threefold form that Shabda, Artha and 
Pratyaya as such have a natural and inseparable relation 
to one another. It is again because the Vaidika Shabda 
is assumed (a matter which I will later discuss) to consti- 
tute the natural name of, and therefore to be in complete 
correspondence with, the Arthas denoted, that it is held 
to be eternal. Slinrti says that the world is born of 
Shabda (Shabda-prabhava) and that creation (Srishti) 
is Shabda-purvaka, thjt is Shabda is the antecedent 
condition of creative process, which cannot be if Shabda 
be taken to be only that manifestation to the ear and mind 
(natural or Yogic) which is sound (gross or subtle). 
This manifestation is a subsequent and consequent 
fact and is to be distinguished from the antecedent and 
primordial condition of creation as such. The primordial 
condition is Causal Stress ; that is in the finite ether of 
consciousness, homogeneous, quiescent, there is a moving 
—a stir. Parashabda is the name for that causal stress 
as it arises and before it manifests as the universe. 

To sum up : In the creative process three stages are 
to be noted : (x) the transcendental quiescent condition 
immanent in the others, though veiled, which is Ashab- 
dam, Asparsham. Arupain and so forth as Shruti nega- 
tively describes it (3) the condition of cosmic stress 
which is Shabdabrahman. The stress is a play of Sliakti 

38 




ASHABDA AND PARASHABDA 



m the Chidakasha in such a way that the fust condition 
is not effaced when the second appears. The Shabda- 
brahman is Veda. After manifestation and at the con- 
clusion of the cycle it is wrapped up as potential M&yfL 
Shakti, when according to some, in Mali5pr.il ay a the 
transcendental condition alone is. The human parallel 
is Sushupti. { 3 ) Shabdabrahman reproduces itself gra- 
dually and partially as countless finite centres of varied 
finite experiences of Nima and Rupa. Ilcnce forms 
together with sounds sights and so forth vary as do the 
Shabdas. The sound which represents the above men- 
tioned primordial functioning of the Brahmashakti is 
the Mah&bija " Om ” or Pranava —Omityeharang brahma 
lasya vachakah prantivah. The nature of this great 
Bija which is the source of all other Mantras will be tlic 
subject of a future Chapter after we have discussed 
what is meant by “ natural name ” which I have more 
fully dealt with in the Essay bearing that title. 



39 




CHAPTER V. 

SHAKTI AS STRESS. 

The cosmic states of Srishti, Sthiti and Laya, 
together with the transcendental Parama-shiva state as 
also Turiya and the Vyashti states of Jagrat, Svapna, 
Sushupti, must all be ultimately explained (so far as 
this can be) by the dynamical theory of Shakti as Stress 
giving rise to moving forms of Herself. For this purpose 
it is necessary to investigate conditions of equilibrium 
and movement. 

What is Stress ? Let os suppose that two things 
A and B are attracting each other. The name for the 
total mutual action is " stress ” of which the respective 
actions of A and B are the elements, partials, or com- 
ponents. Thus there may be Stress for three or four 
things and so on. Ultimately we reach Universal Stress 
which is an infinite system of correlated forces. A 
particular thing may be defined as a partial experience 
of this infinite system. Professor Prarnathanath Mu- 
kliopadhy&ya to whom 1 am indebted in the preparation 
of this and some of the following papers has given it the 
appropriate name of " Fact-section." The infinite 
system is however never really Unitized by these partials. 
When the Stress between one such partial and another 
touches the normal of consciousness in either or both, 
we may have, under circumstances and within certain 
limits, sensation of sound in either or both. The stress 
is Shabda and the sound is Dhvani. There may be 
several stages from the one to the other. It is Stress or 
Shabda which constitutes a thing. Whether this Shabda 
is followed or accompanied by a certain Dhvani or not will 

40 




SHAKTT AS STRESS 



depend firstly upon the magnitude of its action in relation 
to a percipient, and secondly upon the conditions of the 
percipient's perceptive organs. Hence in order that a 
sound may be heard the rates of vibration of the air must 
be such and such, the ears and brain must be such and 
such, and so on. Beyond these limits there are no sounds. 
Thus most objects of experience though influencing 
us do not express themselves in sounds to us such as the 
earth, sun, moon, stars and so forth. In the transcen- 
dental. Paramashiva or Turiya state which is Nirvlna, 
all Stress is dissolved and Shakti is then nothing but 
Chit, Chidrupini. ChinmitrarQpim. This may be illus- 
trated by the case where causal stress being constituted 
by a number of forces all these severally vanish and arc 
each therefore separately zero so that the resultant 
is zero. This is the Transcendent Nishkala state in 
which there is no Srishti Kalpana, no Artha, and no 
Shabda (Ashabda). In the case of Cosmic Sushupti we 
need not take into consideration any external system, 
for nothing is external to the Cosmos. In this case we 
liave the only static condition where each term is not 
separately zero, but where each of the forces constituting 
the Stress balances one another with the result that 
there, is a state of equilibrated energy. This is the state 
of the Gunas in Sardpaparinarna which, with loss of 
equilibrium in creation, is Virupaparinama. Vyashti 
Sushupti may be due to two sets of fact. Either the 
forces constituting this state, without each being sepa- 
rately zero, yet have that resultant, in which case there 
is equilibrium in the Vyashti causal body provided the 
external cosmic system docs not disturb this internal 
equilibrium of the Vyashti system ; or these forces 
result in something, but this resultant is exactly counter- 
balanced by the action of the external system. Thus 
this something which would otherwise be the Vyashti 
6 41 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



stress system practically vanishes and equilibrium is 
established in this last mentioned system. In the first 
case the external system lias no actions on the given 
internal system but it has action on other Vyashti systems. 
Thus the world is not asleep because the individual is so. 
In the second case the external system has action on the 
given internal system but this action is just negatived 
by the reaction of the internal on the external. In both 
cases the external system is an actual stressing attitude. 
In Svapna and JSgrat Avasthi the equilibrium of the 
Samashti and Vyashti Sushupti or causal body is lost, 
and in Srishti there is a system of kinetic stresses which 
again in Laya lapse into a state of potential stresses. 
The world process is thus divided into the three stages 
of Srishti, (creation), Sthiti (maintenance), and Laya 
(Dissolution) which is a passing from a state of homo- 
geneity (Laya) to one of heterogeneity (Srishti and Sthiti) 
and back to homogeneity again in an unending series 
of evolution and involution with periods of rest between. 
The growth of the universe is thus a pulsing forth of the 
Bindu holding potentially within Itself, as massive 
(Ghanlbhflta) Shakti, all into which it subsequently 
evolves. This great Universe dies down again into that 
from which it sprang. Though we thus speak of Jhree 
stages it cannot be properly said that there is Srishti, 
that when it stops there is Sthiti, and then ultimately 
there is Laya. Evolution (Srishti) and involution (Laya) 
arc going on even during Sthiti. There is always, for 
instance, molecular birth and death. Each of these 
terms is employed according as one aspect or the other 
is emphasised. During Laya the stresses are potential. 
That is actual movements cease, so that the stresses are 
due simply to the configuration of relative position of the 
units determined by their Karmas up to the time of Laya. 
There is for instance, stress in a stringed bow though the 




SIIAKTI AS STRESS 



string may not be in actual movement. The nature 
of ishvara experience as the ultimate Fact is as Such 
a logical, and therefore human categories if stretched 
to the fact will inevitably lead into paralogisms and 
antinomies. In the same way creation is an unresolved 
riddle. Why should the spell of cosmic Sushupti be bro- 
ken and in what way does the Will of God influence it ? 
Ultimately these questions are unanswerable in all faiths. 

a 

We may say that Ishvara during Laya has experience 
of the causal body. The absolute " ear,” " tongue,” 
“ eye " which God possesses are reabsorbed into a massive 
consciousness of Bliss (Ananda) as is partially the case 
with the Jiva in Sushupti for these are differentiations 
of His infinite Jnana Shakti. These are veiled during 
Laya that is the kinetic stresses (Shakti Vishv'arupa) 
become potential (Shakti Chtdrupini). What is patent 
becomes latent. The world becomes “ Memory ” which' 
at the next creation is “ remembered ” just as in the 
individual the world is lost to him in dreamless sleep, 
and when waking he sees and recalls the events of a past 
day. Yet here the world exists during our sleep for 
others. But when Ishvara goes to sleep things do not 
remain as they are. Things return to their causal 
form or seeds. During Laya, Ishvara has a massive 
experience of the totality of these *' seeds," for as Shruti 
says " I am one I will now be many.” 

To the question whether this creative act is instant- 
aneous or successive it may be replied probably neither 
the one nor the other. That is the category of time is 
inapplicable to creation as such or creation as a whole. 
Creation considered as an instantaneous flash or a 
successive flow is Vyavaharika and not Paramirthika. 
On this basis however there is a difference of opinion 
between Drishti-srishli-vada and Krama-srishti-vada. 
According to the first, and to me preferable, view, as 

43 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

Ishvara thought, so at once the whole world appeared 
in its stages as subtle and gross. At ever}' moment 
also creation is taking place. It is not something wholly 
in the past. According to the second or more commonly 
accepted doctrine the Tattvas came out gradually the 
one alter the other in a specified order (Krama) though 
such Krama is not referable to time as wc know it 
and which appeared at a lower stage. This latter time 
is the Janmak&la of the KUav&dins according to whom 
all is Kala. The Supreme Time or Mahakala is Nirguna 
Nirvishesha, Nirvik&ra or Brahman. 

As regards the cosmic cycle it is claimed to be proved 
by (a) induction from observed facts of experience which, 
all giving signs of periodicity, afford a basis for generaliza- 
tion ; and ( b ) the alleged actual remembrance by Rishis 
and other super-souls such as Jaigishavya of Chaturyuga, 
Manvantara, Kalpa and so forth. Apart therefore 
from Shniti the proof is inductive and experimental 
and not deductive. 

Creation proceeds from the generic to the specific. 
When Laya as a state of potential stresses passes into 
Srishti which is a system of kinetic stresses we have first 
the most generic condition of the latter namely S&mSnya 
Spanda, that is general undifferentiated movement. 
It is the manifestation of the tendency of Laya to pass 
into Srishti. From the standpoint of Consciousness 
it is the first stage of " Seeing ” (Ikshana) that is cosmic 
ideation on the Part of ishvara. In the individual it is 
the borderland between Sushupti and Svapna, the 
moment that Sushupti is breaking and Svapna is drawing 
to pass into Jagrat. The inertia of the first has passed 
but the specialised movements of the second and third 
arc not yet in evidence. It is a kind of massive un- 
differentiated state containing potentially all specialities. 
The Shabda or acoustic aspect of this tendency of poten- 




SHAKTI AS STRESS 

tial stress to pass into kinetic stress is the Pranava or 
Mantra “ Om.” 

This tendency realises itself in the first place in 
BhGtasrishti by ishvara. Ishvara has consciousness of 
his Anandamaya Body and Causal Body. The latter 
means the experience " 1 am all " (SarvStmakatva). 
He experiences Himself as all whether as a whole, as 
generals or particulars. As Knower of all He is Sarvajna, 
as Knower of its varieties He is Sarvavit. They arc to 
Him, Himself, for the Mayd with which He is associated 
does not govern Him and therefore His knowledge 
does not bind Hum The state ol Ishvara though not 
governed by, is yet associated with. Mi yd and is therefore 
not that of Supreme Moksha. Ishvara wills to be many 
and the Bhutas issue from him. As ishvara He does 
not think Himself to be their creator. The creation of 
the Bhfitas (Bhuta-srishti) according to the Vedantic 
order means the evoking of (a) the Apanchikrita Bhfitas 
or Tanmdtras and ( b ) their primary compounds which 
are again {aa) Sukshraa that is Antahkarana, Indriya and 
Pranas and (bb) Sthula that is the Panchikiita Bhutas. 
Broadly speaking these are the elements of creation ; the 
creation of which implies also their natural names or 
Bijas. Thus from Om are evolved the Bijas of the 
Bhutas Ham, Yam, Ram, Vam, Lam and other Bijas 
such as Hrim the Maya Bija or Pranava of the differen- 
tiating Shakti. These elements are special (Vishesha) 
in relation to the tendency and general movement 
(Sdmdnya spanda) above mentioned, but are general 
(Sdmanyaj in relation to the derivatives which follow. 

There then follows Bhautika Srishti by Hiranya- 
garbha that is the creation of the secondary compounds ; 
that is again the mixing up of the “ elements " into 
diverse forms, first the typal and then the variational. 
This is done by Ishvara in His aspect as Hiranyagarbha. 

45 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



These too have their natural names (Shabda). Hiranya- 
garbha who is the Lord of Brahmaloka thinks himself 
to be a creator. This is a state of duality in which He 
thinks that all things arc His. Hence. Hiranyagarbha 
as affected by MSyi is a Jlva. 

Lastly coming to the completed Sthiti we have the 
actions and reactions of the Bhutas and Bhautikas such 
that they continue as a system of the kinetic stresses. 
These actions and reactions have their natural names 
which may be called phenomenal Shabdas. Some of 
these namely those which fall between our limits of 
sensibility are sensible to us. So much as to Shabdas 
classified with reference to aspects of creation. 

Shabdas may lx- either directly or indirectly appre- 
hended. In the latter case they are received. The 
ordinary individual does not hear the natural name or 
sound of Agni or "Rain” directly. He is told that it 
is so having received it from those* who have heard that 
sound. It is " received ” (Apta) and not directly appre- 
hended (Saksli&tkrita.) For, from the point of view 
of apprehension, Shabdas are of two kinds, Saksh&tkrita 
and Apta. The Shabda range of Sshvara, Hiranya- 
garbha, and Virat may be thus represented. 

Thus Ishvara has no Apta or received (indirect) 
Shabdas : but all Shabdas are directly apprehended 
(Silks hi tkrita) by Him. Hiranyagarbha, as Hiranya- 
gaibha, that is a particular aspect of Ishvara has direct 
apprehension of Bhautikasrishti Shabdas and Sthiti 
Shabdas and indirect of Bhutasrishti and Laya Shabdas 
Virat as Virftt has direct apprehension only of Sthiti 
Shabdas and indirect apprehension of the rest. This 
deals with the Samashti or collective aspects of Expe- 
pericnce. 

Coming to the individual or Vyashti aspects we 
have the coresponding states of Prdjna, Taijasa and 

46 




SHAKTI AS STRESS 



Vishva. These unlike the collective states are mutually 
exclusive, the one of the other, and may thus be figured 





Pr&jna has direct but veiled or partial apprehension of 
his own Vyashti causal (Laya) Shabda but not of others. 
This Shabda is however not sound as language for him- 
self. Taijasa has both direct and indirect experience 
of Vyashti ( i.e ., some) subtle Shabda. And VirSt has 
the same of gross Shabdas. 

Here in these two cases there is gradation. The 
gross car has capacities of varying degree. A scientist 
may by means of a delicately constructed apparatus 
hear sounds which are not sensible to the natural ear. 
A Yogi may hear still more. Thus if cither were to hear 
the rise of sap in a tree that sound would be the direct 
approximate natural name of that vegetable function. 
A Yogi in Shatchakrabheda or piercing of the six cen- 
tres by Kundalini Shakti may, it is said, directly appre- 
hend the Bijas Om, Ham, Yam and the rest, as the passage 
of shakti gradually vitalises fhe six centres. A Yogi 
by mounting to a higher or the highest plane of exis- 
tence can have direct experience (Saksh&tkSra) of any 
or all kinds of Shabdas. The Absolute Ear hears the 
Shabda Tanm&tra in Akasha, not through the impact 
of undulations, but it hears movement as movement. 

In Bralimajndna the Yogi becomes the Brahman 
Itself when all Stress ceases and there is Peace. 



47 




CHAPTER VI 

ETERNALITY OF SHABDA 

The term "eternal” may mean "always is” (a) without 
change or (b) with change. The former is existence 
uncontradicted in the three times. Change again may 
be either immanent (Svagata) or its reverse (Taditara). 
Thus if there be only one circle (A) any change going 
on within it is Svagata change or distinction (Bheda). 
But if there be two circles A and B of which the latter 
added a part of itself to the former with the result that A 
is changed, this is not Svagata. Thus Svagata change 
is Advaita whilst Non-Svagata change presupposes 
Dvaita. 

Applying then these observations to the Brahman 
and Jiva, the former has three aspects (a) Brahman 
as Pure Chit (Brahma svardpa) (4) Brahman as Cliit- 
Shakti (c) Brahman as Mfiyd Sliakti or Prakriti. In 
the first or transcendent sense Brahman is Pure Chit 
and this always is as such. From the finite point of 
view we may either ignore (veil) it or accept it, but it 
is ever given. It is the changeless background of all 
change ; but Itself has no kind of change. This, is the 
Xishkala Paramashiva to whose powers or Shaktis we 
next proceed. 

Chit-shakti is Chit as Shakti, that is Chit immanent 
in the world the forms of which as Mind and Matter are 
productions of M4y&-shakti. This immanent Brahman 
(Chit-shakti) in the sense of the All (which Professor 
P. N. Mukhopadhyaya aptly calls "Fact" as opposed 
to "Fact -section”) always is as such. For the All (Puma) 
never ceases to be all. All is all. Shruti says that Purna 
remains Puma though Puma be taken from it. Brah- 

4 8 




ETERNALITY OF SHABDA 



man as Chit-sliakti is inseparably associated with MayS- 
shakti and has only Svagata change or movement. Brah- 
man as M4y4 Shakti — what the author cited calls Stress 
as distinguished from the background of Chit — is Brahman 
as Prakriti. This is eternal in the sense that it always 
is. though either as latent or as Patent, as a kinetic force 
or as a tendenc y. Here eternity doc's not exclude change 
of condition. Brahman as Prakriti has Svagata change. 
We must not then confound the terms Real and Eternal. 
According to Advaita Vedanta the transcendent Brahma- 
svarhpa is both real and eternal, for "real'' is here used 
in the «ense of that which does not change (Kutastha) 
whereas MfiyS with its changes is neither real nor unreal. 
" Eternal ” therefore includes “change of condition.” 
Non-eternal or fmitized being is, pragmatically consi- 
dered, marked by three kinds of change and distinction 
(Bhcda), viz. Intrinsic (Svagata) such as the distinction 
which exists between the leaves and branches of the 
same tree, and extrinsic which is again of two kinds, 
viz., Sajatiya such as the distinction which exists hetween 
one kind of tree and another kind of tree, and Vijatiya 
such as the distinction which exists between a tree anil 
the earth and rocks which surround it. 

The eternal Shabdabrahman manifests at creation 
(Srishti) and lapses into its quiescent ground in dissolu- 
tion (Laya). The Sliabda of its first creative movement 
is the N&da or Dhvani " Om." From this issue all par- 
ticular Sliabdas both Varnatmaka and Dhvanyatmaka. 
A given particular is obviously not the same for ever. 
But are particulars as such eternal ? The creation of 
particulars is recurrently eternal in the sense that during 
each Srisliti particulars appear. But are the parti- 
culars themselves eternal ? The question may mean 
either of two things. In the first sense the obvious 
answer is, as stated, in the negative. Then arc parti- 

49 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



culars as such eternal ? In other words are there par- 
ticulars in all times, in Srishti as well as in Lava ? This 
given particular (say the pen with which I am writing) 
may not be ir. all times, but will not some particulars 
(though different from those now given) exist always ? 
There is a genus or type (JAti) with its particulars (Vyakti). 
The jati never exists without its Vyaktis. Some Vyaktis 
(though different from those now given) will be associated 
with the jatis in all times ; though both may be either 
latent or patent. In Laya for instance the jatis associat- 
ed with their Vyaktis become latent. Associated with 
what Vyaktis ? Not the present ones ; but the Vyaktis 
immediatly antecedent to the state of Prakriti equi- 
librium, A given Vyakti is Vyakti-vishesha. Any 
Vyakti or some Vyakti is Vyakti samanya. The former 
is not. but the latter is, eternal though it may be either 
veiled or unveiled. The J&tis are etremal and mani- 
fested in every creation and their Shabdas are eternal. 
The Vyaktis arc only eternal in the sense above explained. 
Each creation is not an exact copy of the previous crea- 
tion in every particular. Particulars through revolving 
round certain fixed Jatis (latent or patent) change. 
Thus a given Jiva may be now a Brfihmana. Through 
Karma he changes and after death he may change his 
jati and become a Shudra or a Dcvata. And so he may 
go on until he reaches the antecedent state of Maha- 
pralaya. Let it be supposed that at that moment he 
is a Devati again. He is a Devata-vyakti associated 
with a jati. In Pralaya he will be veiled as such together 
with his jati, and together with all his Sangskaras active 
(Prarabdha) as well as nascent (Sanchita). It is the 
resultant of these Sangskiras that will determine his 
condition of birth after the expiry of Prakriti’s equili- 
brium. The end of this journey is reached only in 
Liberation (Mukti). 



50 




ETERNALITY OF SHABDA 



Then is the Vyakti Shabda eternal ? If by this 
teiin is meant a Shabda denoting a given Vyakti (Vyakti- 
vishesha) then this is a proper name (non-connotating) 
and is not eternal. But with the exception of a few 
proper names (those which are attached as arbitrary 
signs to this Vyakti or that) all names or words represent 
Jatis that is groups or classes of things. A Vyakti- 
vishesha is represented by either a proper name or a 
specific combination of class names, such as, ' this paper 
I am writing on ;* all these being class names the combi- 
nation of which makes or denotes a Vyakti- vishesha. 

Only such Shabdas as are approximate natural 
names (either simple or in combination) are eternal and 
the rest are not. The V'eda claims to give the names 
of class things and class functions which are approxi- 
mately natural. Hence (granting this claim) these 
Shabdas are eternal (Nitva). By Veda is here meant 
Vaidik language and by natural name Vaidika Shabda. 
Thus assuming that the word " Gauh " is an approximate 
natural name, it has existed in every universe and has 
there meant the animal cow. If the word " Cow ” 
as a variation of this has originated in some time, in some 
place and in some persons, then outside this ’imitation 
of time, place, and person the word has not existed and 
has not represented the Artha or animal cow. The 
ultimate test of a natural name is of course experimental 
verification. Vaidik language involves different strata. 
Natural names are of different kinds and degrees. Whether 
other Shabdas and their combinations are eternal depends 
on whether those words and their combinations are 
or are not approximate natural names. Apart from 
tradition the proof is experimental verification by Yoga. 
If they are variations of natural names (Vaidika Shabda) 
the extent to which they vary, and the conditions of 
time, place, and person to which they are subject, must 

5 * 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

determine the nature oi their bond with their Arthas. 
No a priori answer is possible. Sliabda brahman thinks 
creatively, his Pratyaya being’ cosmic ideation (Sriskti- 
kalpani). T he Shabda oi this is Om and the Artha 
is the totality of the universe denoted by, and poten- 
tially inhering in, the creative impulse oi which Om is 
the sound-expression. From this Om was derived all 
the letters (Varnas) and sounds (Dhvanis). These 
Vaidik Varnas are eternal and represent in themselves 
and their variations all the possibilities of articulate 
speech in all languages. In Veda the Karma oi these 
Vanias is eternal and therefore the Vaidik words are 
also, it is claimed, eternal. The vowels are continuous 
sounds formed by varying clic size of the mouth cavity. 
The vowel sounds produced by the voice arc due (Sec 
Catchpool's "Text-book of Sound," 290) to the vibrations 
of two cartilaginous plates, the " vocal chords " placed 
at the top of tire windpipe, edge to edge with a narrow 
slit between them ; air blown through this slit from 
the lungs keeps llier plate vibrating. The apparatus is 
really a free reed. The vocal chords have muscles 
attached to them which can vary the frequency of 
the vibration and the pitch of the sound produced. The 
different vowel sounds are produced by varying the 
size and shape of the mouth cavity. The consonants 
are particular interruptions of those sounds. They 
cut short the vowel sound but cannot themselves be 
sounded without vowels. And for this reason the 
vowels are known as the Shaktis of the consonants. 

This subject of the Varnas occupies an important 
place in the Tantra-Shastras in which it is sought to give 
a practical application to the very ancient doctrine 
concerning Shabda. The letters are classified accord- 
ing to their place of pronunciation (Uchcharana) such 
as guttural, labials, dentals and so forth. The lips, 

5 * 




ETERNALITY OF SHABDA 

mouth, and throat form a pipe or musical instrument 
which being formed in various ways and by the aid of 
the circumambient air produces the various sounds 
which are the letters of the Alphabet. Pinini (sec 
Part I of SiddhAnta Kaumudi) and Patanjali’s Maha- 
bhashya deal with the effort or Prayatna in speech, divid- 
ing it into inner (Antarapravatna) and outer effort 
(Bahyaprayatna). The former is of four kinds Sprishta, 
Ishat Sprishta, Vivritta. Samvritta according as the 
effort fully or slightly touches the place of origin of the 
sound and according as the mouth is open or closed. 
B&hyaprayatna is of eleven kinds namely Vi vara, Sam' vida, 
Shv&sa, NAda, Ghosha, Aghosha, AlpaprAna, Maha- 
prana, lldAtta, AnudAtta, Svarita. Vivara pronun- 
ciation is with the month open, Samvada when it is 
closed. In Shv&sa there is a predominant user of the 
breat hin g, in NAda there is a humming sound, in Ghosha 
ringing sound, Aghosha being the opposite of this. In 
AlpaprAna the sound is quickly pronounced, little de- 
mand being made on the Prana, MahAprana being the 
opposite of this. In Udatta the sound is given with a 
loud voice, in AnudAtta with a low voice, and Svarita 
is a mixture ol these two. In Panini various letters are 
assigned to each of these classes of Prayatna. Thus 
the consonants from Ka to Ma belong to Sprishta Antara- 
Prayatna ; Ya, Ka, La, Va to Ishat Sprishta Antara- 
Prayatna and so on. 

The Tantra ShAstra in its doctrine and practice of 
Shatchakrabhcda iudicate various parts of the body 
which are " touched " in the pronunciation of various 
letters. By this is meant that in the sounding of certain 
letters various parts of the body take a part. Thus the 
letter Va is pronounced from that part of the body 
wherein is the Muladhara, and the letter 11a from be- 
tween the eyebrows in the Ajna Cliakra. The sound 

53 




THE OAKLAND OF LETTERS 

produced by the body in motion (lor the external cause 
of sound is something in a state of vibration) is pro- 
pagated by sound-waves in the circumambient air. The 
rise and fall of pressure which occur as sound-waves 
arrive at the ear, produce by their effect on its structures 
the sensation of sound and the nature of this sensation 
depends on the nature of the rise and fall of pressure ; in 
other words on the character of the sound waves. 

According to Indian doctrine, God evolved man after 
having evolved most (if not all) other species of living 
beings so that language (as also intelligence, moral sense, 
and many other things which had been less perfectly 
developed in the lower animals) became more developed 
in man. The lower animals were " approaches ” to man, 
the difference between man and animal being according 
to this doctrine a difference of degree and not of kind. 
It is possible then that there may be an inchoate Vamat- 
maka Shabda in the higher animals, though it is to be 
noted that the proposition (which is dealt with elsewhere) 
that " there is no thinking without language ” is true 
only if by thinking is meant some kinds only of cognitive 
processes. Apart irom these, man gets on without 
language and therefore also the animals. It is only 
tire after-construction on perceptive processes which call 
for language and this we find mainly if not wholly in man 
alone. Patanjala Darshana also discusses the question of 
transmigration into an animal body. In this case there 
is a soul which had been in a human body or even in a 
Devati body before and has therefore the Sangsk&ras 
(linguistic and others) of those births implicitly given 
amongst its animal SangskSras. Its instinct therefore 
may be (partly if not wholly) " lapsed intelligence ” and 
its Dhvanyatmaka language a partly veiled Varnatmaka 
or human language. 

What is eternal then is Shabda in its aspect as Causal 

54 




ETERNAUTY OF SHABDA 



Stress or Shabdabrahman, the letters (Vaidika Varna) 
evolved from the primordial Dhvani the Pranava or 
“ Om ”, and the combinations of these letters which 
constitute approximately natural names. These accord- 
ing to Hinduism are the Vaidika Shabdas. Whether 
that claim is well-founded is another question which is 
not here discussed. 



55 




CHAPTER VII 

SHABDA AS LANGUAGE 



It has been said that there is no thought without language. 
This proposition requires examination both formthe Brah- 
man an<l Jiva standpoint. If it be assumed that there is 
no thinking without language this merely establishes 
the necessary connection of thought and language 
and not a law that words or names must come to the mind 
first and then thoughts. They may be inseparably con- 
nected as aspects of one and the same concrete, that is 
actual, process but between aspects there is no sequence. 
When a gun is fired the explosion of the cartridge is the 
causal stress. This manifests to the ear as a report, to 
the eye as a Hash and also it may be by the movement 
of the object hit. But the last three are co-eltccts of the 
first that is the explosion. In the same way when there 
is a centre of Causal stress in Chit we may have several 
lines of effectual manifestation. But it cannot be said 
that one line of effectual manifestation causes another. 
Now Shruti as already mentioned calls creation Shabda- 
prabhava and Shabda-purva, both terms implying 
sequence as between a cause and its consequence. 
When again Shruti says " Brahma created Dcvat&s 
with the Shabda ' Etc, ’ ” what is meant is that the 
causal stress of that special creation manifests to His 
absolute " Ear ” as a sound which is the pure form 
of what we can approximately utter and hear as the sound 
“Ete. " We may, as stated, have several lines of effec- 
tual manifestation on there arising a centre of causal 
stress in Chit, one of which is (say) the sound “ Etc, " 
and another the appearance of the DcvatAs. But we 
cannot say that one line of effectual manifestation 




SHABDA AS LANGUAGE 



causes another. Therefore when Shruti says that Shabda 
underlies, precedes and enters Jagat, Shabda is not 
used in the sense of sound but as the causal stress or 
initial Spanda which from the subjective aspect is IchoM- 
shakti. Tlic universe is creative ideation (Srishti- 
kalpan&). To use the terms of human speech this 
ideation is intuitive and not inferential and therefore 
does not involve language which is one of Its products. 
The proposition that there is no thought without language 
is correct only in a Vyavaharika sense and is then only 
true if bv " thinking ” is meant the formation of concepts 
or general notions, judgments and drawing inferences. 
For even in us, intuitive processes, such as perception 
and ideation, are .done without language. To use the 
apt language of Professor Pramathanatha Mukho- 
pftdhv4ya, words are an “after-thought or after-construc- 
tion in relation to the intuitive experiences of life.” 
(See as to the principles from which this statement follows 
“Approaches to Truth", "Patent Wonder”). To begin 
with experience is had without language (Apara-shabda) 
both in the Turiya (Ashabda condition) and the Sushupti 
(Parashabda or Causal Stress) states. Coming down to 
Svapna and Jagrat it is to be recognised that there are 
settle ways in which language may’ be associated with 
thinking processes. On the other hand some processes 
may go on without language. In Svapna and Jugrat 
Avasthi, Arthas and Pratyayas necessarily imply the 
possibility of sound manifestation, that is, vocal language, 
but do not always actually suggest their acoustic counter- 
parts. In some cases they do go on apparently without 
language, though there is always the possibility of their 
being expressed in language. A child sees, hears and 
so forth almost without language, so does the animal 
and we ourselves in part. Most of the paiticular objects 
of perception have during such perception no specific 
8 57 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



names for us ; still we perceive them and may afterwards 
recall the class names. Absence of language occurs 
primarily in two cases, namely, in intuitive perception 
and intuitive ideation. Much seeing and hearing is 
done intuitively and without language. By' intuitive 
ideation is meant the forming of a mental image of 
an object. Thus 1 see a tree : close my eyes and see it 
again in mental image. Many such sights and sounds 
pass through our mental range from time to time which 
do not always call up their names. But though these 
intuitive processes may actually go on without language, 
there is the possibility of their being vehicled in language, 
and in description, analysis, classification, judgment 
and other mental elaborations such, linguistic vehicle 
is indispensable. For the moment it is required to 
describe, analyse, classify perceptions, recourse must be 
had to language. Looking. I see a thing and very well 
see it. But this seeing is often done without actually 
remembering the name ''tree" or “ mangoe tree.” 
To describe, classify and otherwise to elaborate this seeing 
I must remember the name. In this sens'- language is 
called an " after-construction.” Language again is a 
system of signs either natural or arbitrary, either vocal 
or non-vocal, by which we describe tilings and consider 
the attributes and relations of things. In this definition 
four marks are employed, namely, natural, arbitrary, 
vocal and non-vocal. Taking two at a lime there are 
six combinations namely natural-vocal, natural non- 
vocal, arbitrary- vocal, arbitrary non -vocal, natural arbi- 
trary, vocal non-vocal. The last two may be at once 
rejected as the marks in them are contradictory. The 
first four give us four kinds of signs which exhaust 
possible language. Of the first the example is Vaidik 
Shabda including Bija Mantras uttered by the vocal 
organs and of the second we mav instance " expressive ” 

58 




SHABDA AS LANGUAGE 



signs made to a man (who does not understand tlit 
spoken language) by means of the hand or other bodily 
organ in order to indicate a particular object. The third 
and fourth classes refer to arbitrary forms of the first two. 
Arbi tran?- vocal is an arbitrary combination of natural 
vocal signs, each separately being vocal and natural 
but their combinations being arbitrary as where two or 
more natural words are taken and an arbitrary meaning 
is given to the whole group, e.g. code words. In the 
same way it may be possible to combine two or more 
non-vocal natural signs and give the whole thing an 
arbitrary meaning. A particular name attached to a 
thought or thing may be arbitrary as in the case of some 
proper names, but names as such are necessary to higher 
mental processes directly and also to intuitive processes 
implicitly. All proper names however are not arbitrary. 
Those that arc, are attached as signs to objects to denote 
them or mark them off from other objects. They do not 
connote any attributes or relations of the tilings to which 
they may be attached. Our perceptions and ideations 
often go on without language. Many rapid automatic 
inferences are drawn and habitual actions are performed 
without language. But sometimes these processes are 
with their language accompaniment and the moment 
we want to review, describe, classify, and judge thc-sr* 
processes, their language accompaniment appears in 
consciousness. 

Now Sbabda according to previously given defini- 
tions is either Para or Apara. The former is Movement 
or Stress considered in itself, that is, apart from conditions 
of its manifestation to specialised sense organs or sense 
capacities. One of these sense capacities is the ear 
which is subject to degrees, since the capacity of one 
individual is greater than that of another. This grada- 
tion points to a highest or alisolute capacity which may 

59 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

be called the Absolute Ear. The appearance or mani- 
festation of Parashabda or Causal Stress to the highest 
capacity (wherever that be) is Shabda Tanmatra. This 
last is still a manifestation and not the Stress itself. 
It is the Stress-in itself appearing to an ideal ear. It is 
this stress in itself regai ded from a special standpoint. 
Just as we conceive an absolute ear, so we may conceive 
an absolute eye, tongue and so forth. Each means the 
Ideal limit (a mathematical term) of certain capacities 
of specialised feeling which are exercised in us in varying 
degree. Shabda Tanm&tra therefore means not sound 
in general or undifferentiated pure sound only, but 
SAmanya (general) sounds including the highest, the 
Pranava or Mantra " Om." as well as Vishesha (special) 
sounds. In the Tanm&tra lorm they are both of them 
sounds as apprehended by the highest capacity and 
therefore not subject to the conditions of variability. 
" Sound in itself " or " sound as such ” therefore does 
not necessarily mean " undifferentiated sound." Thus 
a dove is cooing in a grove of mangoe trees hard by. 
I hear it. You may hear it better. By a scientific 
instrument (megaphone, microphone) it may be heard 
better still and so on. Rut what is that sound as appre- 
hended by a perfect capacity of hearing ? What is this 
cooing sound in itself or the standard of this cooing 
sound of which you, I, the Yogi hear so many variations ? 
The answer to this will give us the Tanmatra of a Vishesha 
sound. 

Now Parashabda is not language. Ap&rashabda in- 
cluding Shabda Tarun&tra is. In the individual (Vyashti) 
consciousness there is intuitive consciousness (which 
answers to Pratyaya) of veiled Ananda. The Aitha 
is the temporarily equilibrated causal body. But this 
Artlia does not manifest itself to the sleeper at that 
time in language. In Sushupti the individual is without 

60 




SHABDA AS LANGUAGE 



language though he has an intuitive experience of his 
Vyashti Anandamaya causal body. But the Artha in 
Sushupti, though wanting language, must have its 
Parashabda. 

The individual is a centre correlated to other centres 
in a cosmic system. For a while he is in equilibrium in 
Sushupti. Dynamically this means that the algebraic 
sum of the forces of the other centres exerted upon the 
individual and of the forces of his own causal body 
exerted upon the other centres is zero. It follows 
therefore that the whole cosmic system need not l>e in 
equilibrium whilst the individual (that is, his causal 
body) is in equilibrium. His slumber does not mean the 
slumher of the universe. The question is not here dis- 
cussed as to the forces constituting the individual causal 
stress during Sushupti. This I deal with elsewhere. To 
explain equilibrium in Sushupti we require only to 
assume that the resultant action of the universe on the 
individual causal body and the resultant reaction of the 
individual causal body on the universe annul each other 
during Sushupti or dreamless sleep. They (at the former) 
need not be separately nil. Hence the going by the 
individual into slumber means an actual stressing atti- 
tude of the cosmic system which is Parashabda. But 
for a certain attitude of the external system there would 
be no equilibrium in the internal system. Nay more : 
this Parashabda may manifest itself as sound (i.e., as 
lahguage) to other centres such as Shabda Tanmatra to 
the Absolute Ear, Sflkshma Shabda of varying degree to 
the Yogic ear, or as the self-produced physical sounds 
of the sleeper to the gross ear. Just as a Devata has a 
Bija mantra or Primary Natural Name, so has each other 
individual Jlva, corresponding to their respective causal 
bodies, and these may bo heard in varying degree by 
finer ears and fully by the Absolute Ear. But the indi- 

61 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



victual does the sleeping without language just as he may 
make sounds in his sleep without being conscious of it 
whilst a person sitting by him hears them. Laya or 
Cosmic Sushupti is the dreamless slumber of Bbagav&u 
or Ishvara. If our own analogy can be pushed up to 
this, then this Cosmic Sushupti is also without language, 
though it is an intuitive experience by God oi His own 
causal body. Since there are no other centres here and 
no absolute ear other than that oi fshvara (who is ex 
kypothesi in Sushupti), this intuitive experience is 
absolutely without language (Mauna). It is silence 
itself. But Parashabda is there still, namely equilibrated 
Samashti Causal Stress. Hence language or no language, 
the correlation of Shabda and Artha persists. Thus 
language is not the whole of Shabda. 

Shabda, Artha and Pratvava are the three poles of a 
jiolar triangle. In all planes of consciousness below the 
pure or transcendent plane this polar triangle necessarily 
holds. In Ishvara experience the three poles meet 
together at a point so that Shabda=Artha=Pratyaya. 
In the individual Sushupti experience also they are not 
clearly distinguishable. Language can be put for Shabda 
(causal movement or stress) only when there arises the 
possibility of its being apprehended as sound by sonic 
hearing capacity (either absolute or relative). A name 
or a word ceases to be such when the apprehension by 
the appropriate cognitive capacity is not there. A name 
is a manifestation to such cognitive capacity and when the 
conditions of manifestation aie not there the manifesta- 
tion disappears. But the causal stress (I’arashabda) of 
the name remains. Hence in Vyashti Sushupti actual 
names or words (or vocal language) lapse back into their 
causal stress. The operation Is essentially the same in 
Samashti Sushupti or Laya. So that Shabda is (that is, 
equals) language, actual or possible, in all cases. In the 

62 




SHABDA AS LANGUAGE 



lower planes (Svapna, JAgrat), however, Language may 
be put for Shabda but subject to this provision that the 
language-pole may be regarded as being sometimes 
above and sometimes below the threshold line of normal 
or pragmatic consciousness. Thus in the case of the 
intuitive processes afoie-mentioned we may save the 
polar triangle by assuming that the language pole though 
not apparent is still there below the threshold line ready 
to be called up whenever occasion should arise. Thus 
the development from infancy may be shown by the 
following diagram in which A » Artha, P= Pratyaya and 
S-»Shabd«' as language, shown as being above or below 
the line which is the threshold— 




In this diagram, showing the child’s development, 
the five diagrams do not represent definite stages but 
only the gradual separation of A and P and the rising 
of S above the line. First no language or more strictly 
speaking only simple rudimentary sounds — Artha and 
Pratyaya merge into one, there being no discrimination. 
Then Artha and Pratyaya are more and more discri- 
nated and their language correlate is more and more 
developed and brought above the threshold line. Ani- 
mals probably remain in the first two stages of the child. 

In JAgrat and Svapna, Artha and Pratyaya are all 
necessarily associated not merely with Shabda but with 
that condition of Shabda which wc call language. But 

63 



THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



the association may bo either manifest or unniaiiifest. 
In the the hitter case whilst Artha and Pratyaya are above 
the threshold line of normal consciousness, Language 
is below it, so that in the intuitive processes above des- 
cribed Artha and Pratyaya alone seem to appear, though 
their normal associates are waiting for them below the 
threshold line. The moment it is dpsired to review, 
describe, classify Artha and Pratyaya, then the Shabdas 
as words appear. 

Thus 

Judging, inferring, classi- Some intuitive Processes 
fying etc. 




The above account, whilst saving psychology, would 
imply that Shabda, Artha and Pratyaya being involved 
(though as identities) in ishvara' consciousness must be 
involved in all downward experience also. It is however 
necessary to clearly understand that Shabda is not 
necessarily language in all cases, and that language may 
be either consciously or subconsciously given. Accord- 
ing to the scheme suggested the correlation of Artha, 
Pratyaya and Shabda as language is essential in the 

64 




SHABDA AS LANGUAGE 

planes of Jflgrat and Svapna, but they may be latent 
as regards the third partner in some intuitive processes, 
but patent in others as well as in conceiving, judging, 
inferring anil so forth. The conclusion therefore is 
(i) The Turiya state is undifferentiated. Hence in it 
there is no Artha, Shabda, Pratyaya. A, Sand P severally 
vanish. (2) The Sushupti state (Samashti or Vyashti) is 
temporarily equilibrated Consciousness in which there are 
A, S and P, but their resultant is ineffectual. In the 
Vyashti consciousness there are Artha, Shabda. Pratyaya. 
But these three seem to blend into one and are not clearly 
distinguishable. Here Shabda is not language to the 
subject himself. (3) The Svapna and Jagrat states in 
which the temporarily equilibrated consciousness ceases 
are actually stirring Vyashti or Samashti consciousness. 
In them there is Sliabda, Artha, Pratyaya, but in some 
intuitive processes (perceptional and ideational) Shabda 
as language is below the threshold line of the normal 
Consciousness. 

Thus the cosmic and individual states must all be 
ultimately explained (so far as this can be) by the dyna- 
mical theory of Stress or Shakti in which an investigation 
is marie as to the conditions of equilibrium and movement. 



9 



65 




CHAPTER VIII 



NATURAL NAME 

What is a natural name ? Every thing is composed 
of moving material forces. Even what seems stable is 
in movement, for all its parts are in movement, though 
they arc some time held together as a whole until by 
design or in the course of nature they are disrupted and 
dissolved. Matter itself is only a relatively stable form 
of cosmic energy. Because all is in movement, the world 
is called Jagat or that which moves. Everything is 
moving which is not the unmoving (Xihspanda) Brahman. 
This movement, which is the world, is apprehended by 
man as sound, touch and feel, form and colour, taste and 
smell. This is its effect on the sense organs (Indriya) 
and mind (Manas), which are again themselves in move- 
ment, being ultimately composed ot the same TannifUras 
which are the components of the mind's object or matter. 
All movement is accompanied by sound. In other 
words, movements presented to a subject is apprehended 
by the ear and mind as sound, just as it is appreneded 
by the eye as form and colour, or by the tongue as taste. 
We say ‘ ear and mind.' For it is to be remembered that 
according to Indian notions the Indriya or sense is not 
the physical organ ear, eye and so forth, but the faculty 
of mind operating through that organ as its instrument. 
The physical organs are the usual means whereby on the 
physical plane the functions of hearing and so forth are 
accomplished. But as they are mere instruments and 
their power is derived from the mind, a Yogi may accom- 
plish by the mind only all that may be done by these 
physical organs, and indeed more, without the use of 
the latter. So also a hypnotised subject can perceive 

66 




NATURAL NAME 



things, oven when no use of the Special physical organs 
ordinarily necessary for the purpose is made. The 
paramountcv of mind is shown by the fact that an object 
is not perceived unless ihe mind gives its attention. 
So in the Brihadaranyaka Upanishad it is said, " My 
mind was elsewhere : 1 did not hear." Now movement 
being accompanied by sound, let us suppose wc could 
hear (which we cannot do through the individual natural 
ear) the sound produced by the generating stress or con- 
stituting forces oi (say) the household lire, then the 
sound so heard would be the natural name of that fire. 
Again the sap rises in the trees. Could we hear the 
forces constituting this rising sap, then the sound heard 
would be the natural name of that vegetable function, 
and so on. Natural name in its purest sense may there- 
fore b<- defined as the sound produced by the generating 
stress (Shakti) or constituting forces of a thing, not as 
apprehended by this ear or that (which apprehends 
within limits and subject to conditions) but by what 
may be called the Supreme and Infinite Ear which 
apprehends unconditionally a sound, which is sound as it 
is. By Supreme Ear is meant the power (Shakti) of 
apprehending sound in itself or as such, without subject- 
ion to the varying conditions of Time, Place (*.«., Plane) 
and Person. It is that which hears causal stress of a 
thing as such or unconditionally. Then the natural 
name of a thing is that sound which the Supreme Ear 
hears. Natural language in its highest sense is a language 
of natural names only. In this sense no language below 
the absolute plane can be such. In this sense even the 
Vedic language and its Mahamantra ‘‘ Om " is not 
natural language. 

The relative car docs not hear such stress uncondi- 
tionally. To it therefore a thing has no natural name. 
In this connection we must, distinguish between tlic sound 

67 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



accompanying causal stress and the sound which a thing 
gives forth under the acuon of stimuli. The latter may be 
heard, but the former not. Fire or heat acting upon 
various things may produce various sounds which the 
ordinary relative eat hears, but its causal stress is ex- 
perienced as a sound which a Yogi alone hears. 

Nevertheless there may be according to the ShSstra 
what is called an approximate natural name, that is the 
sound of the causal stress heard by a Yogi and transmitted 
imperfectly by him. Wc say ' imperfectly’, because it 
is transmitted by an imperfect agent as a sound which 
can be heard by the gross ear. Prajapati hears the 
causal sound by His Supreme Ear (not gorss or physical) 
and utters it by His Supreme Tongue to His Sadhaka 
who, not yet himself possessing the Supreme Ear, hears 
it a little imperfectly. In him the primordial sound 
is somewhat veiled. By S&dhana he either attains 
the Supreme Ear or stops short of it. In the former 
case he is like Prajapati himself. In the latter case 
he communicates by his relative " tongue ” the 
imperfectly heard primeval sound to his disciple 
(Shishya) who can by Yoga cither verify the archetypal 
sound, or falls shore of it. In this way the primordial 
sounds descend down to our relative planes, where the 
natural sounds, that is, causal sounds of many objects, are 
not represented at all, and those that are represented 
arc represented suitably to conditions of relative ears 
and relative tongues. According to the Mantra Sh&stra 
the Bija Mantras represent approximately natural names. 
Thus the causal stress of fire is a sound heard by the 
Yogi which is said to l>e represented for the ordinary 
relative ear as the sound or Bija “ Ram ” j_ ( i ). Vital 
function under different stimuli produces various sounds, 
some of which the ordinary’ ear hears, but the causal 
sound of vital function as breathing is represented by 

6S 




NATURAL NAME 



the Pr&na Bija " Hangsa ” and so on. If attention 
is paid to breathing it will be found that the outward 
breath is in the foim of the letter Ha and the indrawn 
breath of Sa. It is not possible to indraw the breath 
and say the letter Ha, but it is pushed forth by the out- 
ward breath. And so with " Om.” The creative en- 
ergising out of which this world evolves is Shabda and 
it is an immense sound (Nada) to the Supreme Ear as 
uttered by the Supreme Tongue which is also Nada. 
But no finite car can hear it oerfectlv and no finite tongue 
can utter it perfectly. The sound which has descended 
to us as “ Om ” cannot therefore be a natural name 
of the creative process in the full sense : but having des- 
cended through the Manasaputras and a line of Gurus 
each of whom more or less closely approximated to the 
pure sound in his personal experience, it is practically 
taken as an approximate natural name of tin- initial crea- 
tive action. It is an open continuous sound, unin- 
terrupted bv any consonant which clips it. vanishing as 
it were upward in the N&dabindu which is placed on the 
vowel. The same observations apply to Ham ( * ), 
Yam { v ), Ram ( i ). Hangsah ( ), and other Bijas. 

So much for " natural name " in the pure sense 
and approximate sense of the term. 

The term " natural ” in this connection can how- 
ever be interpreted in five different senses : — 

(i) Sound as pioduced by causal stress. Shabda 
is stress winch may or may not reach the normal of con- 
sciousness. If two things arc affecting one another, 
then the name for the total mutual action is stress, of 
which the respective actions of each of those things 
are the elements or partials or compoments. Thus we 
have stress for three things, for four tilings, and so on. 
Ultimately we leach universal stress which is an infinite 
system of correlated forces A particular thing inay be 

69 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

defined as a partial experience of this infinite system 
which has been well called by Professor P. N. Mukhyo- 
p&dhyiya (to whom I am indebted in the matter here 
discussed) " fact section.’ This experience is Jiva. 
The infinite system is however never really finitized 
by these partials. When the stress between one such 
partial and another touches the normal of consciousness 
in either or both, we may have under circumstances 
and within certain limits sensation of sound in either 
or both. The stress is Shabda and the sound is Dhvani. 
It is stress or Shabda which constitutes a thing. Whether 
this Shabda is followed or accompanied by a certain 
Dhvani or not will depend upon (<?) the magnitude of 
its action in relation to a percipient subject, and (f>) upon 
the condition of the percipient’s perceptive organs. 
Hence in order that the sound of a thing’s constituent 
stress may be heard, the rates of vibration of the air must 
be such and such, the cars and brain must be such and 
such and so forth. Thus most objects of experience, 
though influencing the individual, do not express them- 
selves in sound to him, such as the earth, rocks, sun, 
moon, and stars. Sound as produced by causal stress 
and apprehended by the Supreme Ear and uttered by 
the Supreme Tongue is natural name in its pure: sense 
and in this sense none of our sounds arc natural. If 
by this approximate ' natural name ’ of a tiling we mean 
its sound (that is, the sound produced in us by its causal 
stress) as apprehended by the relative ear to which it is 
revealed, then most things have no natural names to us, 
though they may have to other beings with different per- 
ceptive conditions. A being who has an experience 
of the causal stress itself and whose ears (gross or subtle) 
can respond to it in any form (*.«., whatever be the rates 
of vibration of air and ether) knows the natural names 
of all tilings. Such a Being is Prajapati Himself and 

70 




NATURAL NAME 



Souls that resemble Him. Hence the natural names 
of such things are revealed through V&kya which, though 
the JSva may not completely verify now, he may pro 
grcssivdy verify by personal experience, and ultimately 
completely verify by personal experience too. In this 
sense only do Shruti and Agama, that is, the Tantra 
Sh&stras, give the natural names of Artha, sensuous or 
supersensuous. The test of a natural name is this — 
If '* Supreme or Absolute Ear ” be defined as that which 
hears causal stress of a thing as such unconditionally, 
then the natural name of a thing is that sound the 
Supreme Ear hears. The relative car does not hear 
this and therefore to it this has no natural name. 

( 2 ) Sound as produced by causal stress as projected 
on to our planes, with necessary limitations, through 
Minasaputras and others. This is approximate natural 
language, and as the Mantras Om. Ham, Ram, and the 
like ; it constitutes one stratum of the Vcdic language. In 
this case the pure sound is represented by a sound capable 
of being heard by the relative ear. The Yogi who hears 
the Mantra " Om ” does not hear it as the sound ' Om,” 
but as a sound which the relative ear can hear as " Om.” 
" Om " is thus only a gross sound which approximates 
to the ml sound only so far as the gross relative ear 
permits. The pure sound is thus represented by its 
nearest gross equivalent. 

(.1) A thing, such as a conch shell or an animal, may 
under the action of external forces give forth variable 
sounds of certain kinds. This may be perceived by us 
and we ordinarily call it its natural sound, and some- 
times name it after it as “ cuckoo," " crow.” But it is 
not the sound produced by the " causal stress ” (whicli 
may’ be reduced to the motions of the electrons and 
therefore unperceived except to the Yogi) Hence we 
must distinguish between the sound produced by causal 

/I 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



stress, and the sound which a thing gives forth under 
the action of stimuli such as the crackle (another onomato- 
poeic name) of fire when wood is thrown on it. The latter 
may be heard but the former not. These names, 
"cuckoo ” and so forth, are practically regarded as natural 
names, though according to the definition they arc not. 
Such names enter into all languages, Vaidik and others. 
Fire or heat acting upon various things may produce 
various sounds which the relative gross ear hears. But 
its causal stress produces, it is said, the sound Ram 
( i ), which Bija Mantra a Yogi alone hears. Vital 
function under different stimuli is producing various 
sounds in the body, some of which may be heard, but the 
causal stress in the form of vital function is represented 
by the Mantra " Hangsa ” and so on. Prajfipati (as 
above stated) hears the causal sound or Pure Natural 
Name by His Supreme Ear (not gross or physical) and 
utters it by His Supreme Tongue to His S&dhaka, who, not 
yet possessing the absolute ear. hears it only imperfectly. 
This, as pointed out before, is the approximate natural 
name. The Primordial Sound is thus somewhat veiled in 
him. By S&dhan& he cither attains the Absolute Ear or 
stops short of it. In the former case he is like Praj&pati 
Himself. In the latter case lie communicates by his 
relative tongue the imperfectly heard Primaeval sound 
to his Shishya, who can either bv Yoga himself verify 
the archetpyal sound, or falls short of it. In this way 
the Primordial Sounds descend down to our relative 
planes where (a) the natural or causal sounds of many 
objects are not represented at all, and (6) those that are 
represented are so represented suitably to conditions 
of relative ears and relative tongues. But these 
approximate natural names must be distinguished 
from what are popularly called natural names (in 
the third class), which are not sounds of the causal 
stress but are due to the action of external forces on a 

72 




NATURAL NAME 



particular object which is constituted of the causal stress, 
the sound of which is the true natural name, pure or 
approximate. 

(4) There is then a class of secondary natural names, 
that is, those which are not, in the primary sense, purely or 
approximately natural, as sound of causal stress, nor 
natural in the onomatopoeic sense, but which are second- 
arily natural in that they are evolved out of elements of 
sounds which are primarily (though approximately) 
natural. 

The Causal Stress when striking the ear produces 
sound, when striking the eye produces light and colour ; 
and when striking other seme organs produces other 
kinds of sensation. The stress or constituting force is 
one and this is Sliabda : but it manifests itself differently 
to the different sense organs. II then, instead of calling 
a thing in terms oi its sound, it is desired to express it 
in terms of its other manifestations (sensations )to us, 
we want to state its relations to other perceptive faculties, 
how in such cases can this be expressed ? The " natural 
sound ” in its primary sense cannot do this ; the thing 
as a whole may be best represented by the natural sound, 
but not its touch, colour, taste and smell specifically : 
yet this latter representation is also important and 
useful. The sound or Bija Ram {*). for example, may be 
the approximate natural name of Agni, but unless we can 
grip the causal stress of Agni itself, it tells nothing about 
the attributes and relations of the thing with which we are 
prattically concerned. Ordinarily Ram ( f ), Hrim 
(Tf). Aim ($*), Om (^f) are unmeaning. For this 
reason we hear talk of Mantra being " Jabber," as if any 
body of men in the world’s history' deliberately occupied 
themselves with what was in fact meaningless jabber. 
That is not necessarily to say that the theory is correct, 
but that it is not absurd and without sense as supj>osed. 

10 73 




THE OAKLAND OF LETTERS 

Now-a-days when the Sliftstra is nearly lost, it may be so in 
those cases where the Mantras are said without under- 
standing. These Bljas may be made to denote things or 
processes, but ordinarily (unless it is possible to penetrate 
into the kernel itself) they do not connote qualities <?r 
attributes of things ; and hence are what J. S. Mill calls 
non-connotative terms. They are however according 
to Shistra really connotative. Hence in the average 
plane man requires other terms besides Ram (f) to 
represent Agni. Suppose we take the quality " burning ” 
(Dahika Shakti). Then in order to express Agni in terms 
of this quality we may do (or it might have been done for 
us by linguistic tradition) either of two things : (a) Taking 
the letters (Vanias) and remembering that each repre- 
sents the natural sound of a certain thing or process, 
it is possible to make such a permutation and combination 
of them (taken two or more at a time) that " burning " 
may be represented by the combination thus formed. 
Here a compound- term is formed (either by ourselves or 
by tradition) by the collocation in due order of elementary 
approximate natural sounds (viz., the letters). To express 
the same attribute more than one such combination 
may be possible. (6) Or there may exist already s im ple 
roots (Dhatu) formed in their turn either by the com- 
bination of elementary natural sounds, or in the onoma- 
topsic fashion (see 3 ante), which with proper affixes and 
suffixes can be made to connote " burning " and thus 
evolve the term Agni. Here again, to express the same 
quality or relation, different words may be evolved by 
ourselves or by tradition. _ Thus there are synonyms or 
Paryyaya. These secondary names may be arranged 
in grades in accordance with the degree of their closeness 
to primary names. Hindu philologists distinguish 
between Shaktyartha and Lakshy&rtha, that is, Abhidha- 
sliakti and Lakshan&shakti and classify each. 

74 




NATURAL NAME 



This in itself is a vast subject. It issuflicicnt to say 
here that words have two Vrittis, namely. AbhidM and 
Lakshana. The first is Shakti in the sense that it compels 
the understanding of the thing denoted by a word. The 
object " cow ” is described by and is the VakyArtha of the 
word or Shabda " cow ", The second only approximate- 
ly denotes the object (Artlia). It so to speak leads the 
hearer to the door but does not enter. Lakshya is that 
denoted by Lakshani, which means a sign, that is. object 
denoted by a sign. Thus the word Brahman is not VakyS- 
rtha of the Supreme Brahman (Nirguna Parabrahma), but 
it is VakyArtha of the Saguna Brahman. The word 
Brahman is only LnkshyArtha of the Supreme Brahman. 

We may say that these secondary names are not in- 
different as to their expressiveness of the qualities and 
relations of things. Some do it better and more closely 
than others. Agni, Vahni, HutAshana, and other names 
of Fire are connected with the Bija Mantra Ram (f ) in 
this sense, that while the latter approximately represents 
the natural name of the thing as a whole, the former ex- 
press the attributes and relations of the thing specifically 
regarded. Hence whilst " Ram ” ( i ) is apparently non- 
connotative, the former are connotative. 

(5) Primary and secondary names may be combined 
in such order (Krama) and metre or harmony (Chhandah) 
that by vitalizing one another, these in combination may 
appear as an approximate name of a thing or process. In 
tb.is manner a Vaidik or Tantrik Mantra (consisting of 
several words) may. it is said, naturally denote a DevatA 
or a function. 

Beside these five senses of natural sound of which the 
pure and absolute sense is that first given, there is non- 
natural or artificial sound or name, which means an arbit- 
rary name taken at random to denote a thing, such as 
some proper names. 



75 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



The test of natural names is, it is said, twofold and 
capable of experimental verification (i) Whether the 
causal stress of a thing makes a sound (say the Bija Yam) 
may be verified by Yoga. The thing being given, a sound 
evolves. (2) This sound repeatedly and harmonically 
uttered, that is in Japa of Mantra, must create or project 
into perception the corresponding thing. This too is cap- 
able of experimental verification. In this case the sound 
being given, a thing evolves. 



76 




CHAPTER IX 

VAIDIKA SHABDA 

The Veda? communicate the natural names of some 
things, subject to the necessary limitations involved in 
their representation suitably to conditions of relative ears 
and tongues. No Vedic word is an absolute natural 
name. This cannot be. Just as in the Tantra ShAstra 
we find Bija mantras, which are said to represent approxi- 
mately natural names, scattered here and there in a va- 
ried mass of ordinary Sanskrit which remotely represent 
natural sounds, so is the case in Shruti. There are. it is 
said, closely approximate natural names, combined 
according to natural laws of harmony (Chhandah), form- 
ing Mantras which are irresistibly connected with their 
esoteric Art has (Devat&s) : but these are commented upon, 
explained, applied and so forth in passages which do not 
express natural names in this sense. On analyzing these 
Mantras themselves, both Vaidik and Tint rik, there are 
found some sounds which arc* not and others which arc 
in natural use. Here each word in the Mantra does not 
necessarily stand for an approximate natural sound (that 
is produced by causal stress). These tendencies to the 
archetypal forms may be varying. But in the Mantra it 
is their order of combination and rhythm that mainly 
counts. Thus as a whole the Mantra may be the approxi- 
mate natural name of a DevatA or function. Its creative 
and projecting power lies in the two things : — (a) The 
mutual aiding and inhibiting of the sounds in the 
Chhandah; the veils of the individual sounds are removed 
by the order of their collocation. Here the " Curves ” 
of sound are constructive and not destructive, (b) The 
cumulative effect of the repetition of sounds and strings 
of sounds also may produce the aforesaid result. By 
repetition is there summation of stimuli. 

77 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



So that by analyzing the Vaidik language we get 

this 

(1) Certain approximate natural names, standing 
alone or in groups, such as Om, Ham, Hangsah, Sv&ha 
and soon. These are fundamental sounds or primaries. 

(2) Certain combinations of sounds which, though 
not natural distributively. naturalize each other in and 
by the order and harmony of the combinations. Thus 
arise Mantras which become approximate natural names 
of objects and processes. These may gather creative mo- 
mentum by repetition. 

(3) A large mass of sounds or names used to explain 
the meanings and applications and results of the above 
which need not be natural names in the above sense. 

Hence it follows that the Veda which is heard by the 
gross ear and spoken by the gross tongue is not a system 
of natural names. It is however claimed to be a system 
of approximate natural names in varying degree. The 
Veda of the Absolute Ear and Tongue is a system of abso- 
lute natural names. 

Then is the relative and approximate Veda the pri- 
mordial. universal, unitary language ? The answer must 
be in the negative, but in the case of the first class of names 
it is amongst all languages most nearly so upon the basis 
of the theory here dealt with. In the second class of 
names it is less so and in the third it is least so. 

There are four different strata in Vaidik experience. 
First there is the nameless Supremo Experience ; then the 
three above described. Shabda, Artlia and Pratyaya are 
absolutely connected in the absolute plane but progres- 
sively less so in the lower strata. The natural connection 
of Shabda and Artha means that the latter being given, 
the former is there whether audible by us or not ; the for- 
mer being given, the latter is created or projected. 
But we must distinguish between what is here called 




VAIDIKA SHABDA 



natural name and what often receives that term. 
Thus a conch shell is blown*. What is the natural name 
here ? Not the sound which we may make it give forth, 
for these arg produced by our effort and vary, but the 
sound of the causal stress which generates and keeps 
together the shell. The blowing sound is only practically 
natural. What is the basis of the Vaidik theory? In the final 
resort experimental verification is the test of Ayurveda. 

Besides the division of name into natural and arbi- 
trary, of the former into absolute and relative, and of the 
latter into primary and secondary, name may be classified 
according as it is (a) typal or (6) variational, as for exam- 
ple of the first the Sanskrit word " Gauli ”, and of the 
second the English word. " Cow Language according 
to Indian notions is not something arbitrary and invented. 
No man ever invented a language. Volapuk, Esperanto 
and the like are mere combinations of the sounds of pre- 
existing language. The Vaidik Language was revealed 
by Ishvara to the M&nasaputras and others and through 
them to men. This itself as ordinary worldly (Laukika) 
speech became corrupted and when rectified was called 
Sanskrit, that which has been purified. A distinction 
must therefore be made between the original Vaidik lang- 
uage and current Sanskrit in which however there are 
words which also occur in the Vedas. Now the ordinary 
orthodox view is that there is a typal or standard 
language and that this is the universal language of which 
all others are variations. 

Whenever a typal or standard name has a variation, 
the following questions arise : — (a) When docs that vari- 
ation appear and lor how long does it last ? (6) In what 
places or planes does that variation arise ? (c) In what per- 
sons or groups of persons does that variation appear or 
for whom docs it arise ? 

Briefly stated a variation is always subject to condi- 

79 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



tions of time, place and person. Then a variation may be 
( a ) common (S&m&nya), or (?>) special (Vishesha). The 
former is what comprises a whole class of objects. Thus 
" Cow " is a sound variation apjxiaring in a whole class of 
[xabons ; Gki or G&bhi with another class of persons name- 
ly Bengalis. The special variation is one appearing in an 
individual object. Thus one individual pronounces the 
word “ Cow " slightly differently from what another does. 
Every person in fact has his own way of pronunciation. 

Again a variation may be (c) voluntary', or {d) involun- 
tary. The former is due to the free will of a person or a 
group of persons ; the latter is not so. 

The typal sounds are eternal. They arc latent how- 
ever during cosmic sleep (Sushupti). The Sdmanya 
variations of the typal sounds are not eternal in the sense 
and to the extent that the types are ; they appear when 
the conditions of their expressions appear, and disappear 
when these go. 

If we take these four divisions, two at a time, we get 
six possible combinations— (i) Common and special vari- 
ation, (2) Common and voluntary variation, (3) Common 
and involuntary variation, (4) Special and voluntary 
variation, (5) Special and involuntary variation. (6) Volun- 
tary and involuntary variation. Of these, the first and 
and last are impossible, being self-contradictory. Of the 
remaining four, the second is not eternal. In so far as a 
common variation is due to the free will of a person or per- 
sons it has an absolute beginning ; for if it be simply the 
the repetition ol a previous cosmic order, then it is not a 
free act but pre-determined. The third class are eternal 
but not to the extent the types are. Comparing them 
with the latter we can say that they are passing, though 
recurrently. Types too are recurrently passing during 
creation (Srishti) and dissolution (Laya), but their cycles 
of recurrence are larger. They are eternal in the full sense 

80 




VAIDIKA SHABDA 



in so far as they approximate to their type. For the same 
reasons given as regards the second class, the fourth class 
is not eternal. The fifth class is not eternal in so far as 
it is brought about by the part volitions ol persons. The 
whole question is however of so great difficulty, that it is 
difficult to fully unravel the tangle in which we find it. 
How and where are wc to draw the line between voluntary 
and non- voluntary, between absolute will and finite will ? 
Is again the cosmic cycle exactly recurrent or not ? From 
a practical point of view we may perhaps not greatly err 
if we say (ij that the general plan and the types are re- 
current and eternal; (2) that the common variations are 
recurrent and eternal subject to more conditions ; and (3) 
that the special variations are practically not eternal. 

It is claimed for the Veda that it is a system of stand- 
ard and typal and therefore natural names. But natural 
name has, as already explained, various meanings. There 
are therefore different strata of natural name in Veda. 
Name may be either (a) natural or (b) conventional, that 
is, arbitrary. With the latter we are not here concerned. 
Natural name may be (c) Absolute, that is, as apprehended 
unconditionally, or (i) Relative, that is, as apprehended 
subject to varying conditions. Veda as a manifestation 
is not the first. Absolute name is only beard on the 
unconditioned plane. We are therefore concerned with 
the relative natural name. This may be either '(c) pri- 
mary, or (/) secondary. The first is the causal stress, thing 
or functioning as a whole, as represented approximately 
to the relative ear and is again twofold as (g) the elemen- 
tary sounds or letters (Varna), and (/*) as compound 
sounds, such as are found in Bijas and roots (Dliatu) . In the 
Yoga Bh&shya, that is, Vy&sa's commentary on the Patan- 
jala Darshana (3, 17), it is said : Taira vagvarneshvarlha- 
vatiii. According to this, each letter is intrinsically Sar- 
v&bhidh&na-shakti-pracfiila, that is, possessing the power 

11 81 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



(Shakti) to denote and connote all object (Artha). For, 
as the Vishvasara Tanlra says : "What is not here is no- 
where" ( Yannehdsti na tat- kvachit). A letter (Varna) is 
the whole cosmos in miniature. One Varna differs from 
another in the relative latency of the universe of Artha 
involved in it, the universe being the same in both. They 
come to denote special Arthas by virtue of the order (Kra- 
ma) of their collocation (Kram&Kiiro’dkinoTt!ui$a>igkel6ii- 
fivachchhinnah.) Their particular meanings or Sangketa 
are thus due not to intrinsic difference but to order (Kra- 
ma) in grouping. 

In the relative secondary natural name, functioning 
is specifically represented. The specific attributes and 
relations are given. These again may (i) appeal directly 
to the ear, and be cither (/) self-produced, or (A) induced or 
excited ; or (i) they may appeal to other senses and either 
(m) consist of single words which are combinations of Var- 
nas themselves, or Dhatus, or (n) of combinations of words 
which may be either (o) harmonic, or [p) non-hannonic 
but Kramic. 

The first and main division of this scheme is into na- 
tural and arbitrary. As to this it is to be observed that 
all names are made up of elements of sounds or letters 
(Varna). But to naturally connote an Artha, the Vamas 
cannot be arbitrarily selected and arranged. To natur- 
ally represent a given Artha, certain Vamas which are in 
some way connected with that Artha must be chosen and 
arranged according to a certain order (Krama) . A word 
in which such selection and order arc not in evidence is a 
conventional name, e.g. a telegraphic code (though even 
in this there is a designed Krama), many proper names, 
and algebraical symbols. The Krama of the Vaidika 
Sbabdas is said to be eternal. To explain this further, let 
it be supposed that it is desired to evolve a certain Artha, 
say an atom of hydrogen. A certain number of moving 

82 




VAIDIKA SHABDA 



electrons arranged in a certain order must be chosen. 
The number and order being different we have a different 
kind of atom. Suppose again it is desired to evolve wa- 
ter. Two atoms of hydrogen and one atom of oxygen 
must be taken and so arranged by electric or other influ- 
ence that a molecule II, O is evolved. So also is tire case 
of any compound material substance. The Varnas are in 
relation to ordinary sounds, what the atoms are in rela- 
tion to material substances. The atoms can be aggregat- 
ed into molecules and things only in certain definite pro- 
portions and not arbitrarily ; so with the Varnas and na- 
tural words. 

Further as radio -activity and other facts prove, an 
atom is a system of moving electrons. It is not therefore 
absolutely simple and elementary. Similarly what wc 
recognise as the Varnas may not be absolutely simple or 
elementary sounds ; they are however so for all practical 
purposes, as the atoms are for all chemical purposes. 
There are about 75 different atoms but the electrons which 
make them up are of the same kind ; their number and 
arrangement account for the differences of Oxygen, Hy- 
drogen. Carbon and other atoms. In the same way the 
garland or rosary of letters (VarnarnfUi) may be evolved 
out of the same kind of elementary sound by differential 
aggregation. It may be that the basic elementary sound 
is the uninterrupted AnAhata Dhvani fmitised into var- 
ious points (Shabdabindu) or atoms (ShabdaparamSnu) 
of sound. 

So again taking any curve, say a circle — its circum- 
ference may be regarded as Ihe sum of an infinity number 
of small bits of straight lines : these are the elements. 
Any ritualistic diagram, such as, say, the Sarvatobhadra- 
mandala.ora Yajnaor Homa may be similarly regarded. 
Hence a natural word may be compared to, and in the case 
of a Bija Mantra can be represented by, a diagram 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



(Yantra) which in that case, become? the graph of the 
Bija in question, or of causa! stress of which that Bija 
is the acoustic manifestation and counterpart. Lastly 
an electron is an unit charge of electricity, which after 
all may be only an clement of ether in stress. This 
element of ether in stress is Parashabda Paramanu 
according to the definition given ; and as heard by the 
relative ear it is Shabda Paramanu. So that this last 
and the electron are naturally connected. Hence Shabdas 
(aggregates of Shabda-paramanus) and Arthas (aggregates 
of electrons) are connected. But as electrons aggregated 
at random will not make a natural Artha, so Shabda 
Paramanus aggregated at random do not make a natural 
name. 

Physically the vibration? represented by a Varna can 
be resolved into component vibration? which are harmonic 
motions. As Fourier’s theorem gives it, a complex 
harmonic motion may be analysed into simple harmonic 
motions. All the ordinary letters are complex harmonic 
motions ; and physically speaking a simple harmonic 
motion is Shabda-pai ainSnu. Physiologically each single 
vibration acting on the ear, neives and brain centres, 
produces a single pulse of cerebral agitation, a single 
" nerve-shock,” just as a single tap on the door produces 
a single shock and this again a single sound. This single 
pulse of brain excitement ought to produce a single 
pulse of feeling, a feeling-atom or a " feeling element, ” 
as W. K. Clifford called it in developing his theory ” mind- 
dust,” which was controverted by W. James (See Pro- 
fessor P. N. Mukhyopadhy&ya’s “ Approaches to Truth "). 
The view of the last mentioned author is as follows — 
It is difficult to say in the absence of direct Yogik testi- 
mony whether these fccling-dusts actually exist. Ordi- 
narily we do apprehend the Varnas as being themselves 
elementary or simple sounds ; perceptually or presenta- 




VAIDIKA SHABDA 



tively they are simple. But they can certainly be 
represented as made up of feeling-dusts, or what the 
author cited calls Shabda-Paramanus (Sound atoms) 
each answering to a single nerve-shock and to a single 
external vibration ; and for aught we know the feeling- 
dusts may themselves be actually apprehended by the 
Yogic ears. 

A secondary natural name means this : — Take Fire. 
The stress or functioning as a whole which constitutes 
the thing has an acoustic equivalent which is said to be 
approximately Ram ( f ). But if we wish to consider 
and speak of the various attributes and relations of the 
thing " Fire " specifically ; if for instance we wish to 
denote the virtue of winding movement which marks the 
activity of fire ( e.g . the vortex of heated gas and the 
curling up of smoke), this specific virtue and relation is 
not connoted by the causal or Bija name (Ram) in parti- 
cular. Hence taking the root " Ag " which signifies 
tortuous movement by reason of that particular colloca- 
tion of these two particular Vamas (in fact the unheard 
causal stress of tortuous movement itself may have for 
its approximate acoustic equivalent the sound ’ Ag ’) 
and selecting the proper prefix and suffix, we get Agni. 
Tradition might have done this, but it is possible to coin a 
new word to connote a particular property of a thing by 
the process above outlined. Should we wish to connote 
the relation of fire that it purifies, there is the root Pu. 
If it is wanted to connote the relation that it consumes 
ail things, there arc the two roots '* Hu " and '* Ash " 
and the word HutAshana is formed. And so on. The 
Bija name gives the whole-thing-vicw ; other names 
give side views, specific-relations-views. Agni is called 
Vaishvanara because it is present in Vishvanara or all 
living beings as the heat of oxidization or combustion ; 
it is called Valmi because it carries (root Vah) offerings 

85 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



to the gods ; Anala because it pervades (root An— to be) 
all things and so forth. 

The words " smooth ”, ** rough ”, " horrible ", ” tre- 
mendous ” and so forth are secondary natural names 
falling under the class (/) as appealing to other senses than 
the ear. " Smooth ”, “ rough ” and so forth in utterance 
produce organic sensations (that is, sensations of the 
organism as distinguished from those of the special 
sense organs) which arc closely connected with, and 
suggest, the actual sensations of smooth and rough 
objects. 

Class (i) directly appealing to the ear refers to 
onomatopoeic word, which are evidently of two kinds. A 
cuckoo or a crow itself naturally produces a sound and 
this directly appeals to the car. On the other hand a 
flute gives out a certain kind of sound, if it is acted upon 
by a certain stimulus. Sometimes a thing may be 
called after a sound which it accidentally produces. 
Under class («) we have two forms. The Krama in a 
combination of words may be rhythmic or non-rhythmic. 
The former is Chhandovaddhavakya. 

When it is said that Veda claims to give the approxi- 
mate natural names of class things and class functions, 
there is thereby practically included the whole scheme of 
natural names. "Approximate” or dynamical name 
admits of ” more or less.” so that the primary group 
gives approximate natural names par excellence, and the 
secondary group gives in varying degree approximate 
natural names. Within the secondary group the class 
(o).that is Mantras, represent the closest approximation 
to natural names. 

The test of a natural name is ultimately experimental, 
that is the sound (Shabda) being given, the object (Artha) 
is evolved : the object being given, the sound is evolved. 
In absolute natural names these relations are at once 

86 




VAIDIKA SHABDA 



established. In relative names they are established in 
varying measure through Krama and Japa. Ultimately 
the question whether Veda is a system of approximate 
natural names is thus a question of fact. 

This leads to a consideration of the claim made by 
Veda that it is the standard language, an eternal system 
of natural names of which all others are variations. 
Hitherto we have dealt with the matter philosophically. 
We now approach the historical and philological question. 
The two must be kept apart. Much may be said in favour 
of tire philosophical theory, namely, that the relation 
between Shabda and Art ha is eternal, that there is some 
Shabda which is the natural name of the Artha, that this 
natural language is the standard language, that all others 
are a straying away from and variation of the true norm 
and so on. But the point now arises as a question of 
fact, viz., assuming all that is said in theory, is the Vaidika 
language, that is the language in which tire Vedas arc 
as they exist to-day, the eternal standard language ? The 
orthodox affirm that it is, and that the sound " Gauh ” 
is the natural name and standard representation in speech 
of the object “ Cow " from all eternity. That the relation 
of Shabda and Artha is eternal and that some Shabdas 
may be natural names of objects are philosophically 
probable. It is however an entirely different matter 
when it is affirmed that the Vaidika speech, as existing 
to-day, is that language. Philologists and historians will 
deny this, for they will point out changes in that speech 
and make claim as regards priority in age for the language 
of other peoples. Assuming that there was, as the Biblic- 
al tradition runs, once a universal language, it will be 
denied that the Vaidika language as known to us to-day is 
that. It will moreover be shown that even in Veda itself 
there is evidence to the contrary. Thus it has been 
argued that according to the Shatapatha BriUimana the 

87 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



original language was monosyllabic. With this question 
of philology and history I am not here concerned. But 
the ultimate philosophical question is, " Who, il any 
one, first said that this sound meant that thing ?” 
The Indian answer is that the relation of the 
word and the object denoted are eternal and not a con- 
ventional thing, that there is a system of Natural Names, 
whatever in fact that system may be. This stands clear 
of the claim made for the Vcdic language, as it exists to- 
day, that it is that system. 




CHAPTER X 

THE TATTVAS 

A knowledge of the Mantra Shastra involves an un- 
derstanding of the thiry-six Shaiva-shakta Tattvas. 
Thus it is said that Shakti is in Shakti-tattva. N5da in 
Sadakhya Tattva, Bindu in lshvara-Tattva. What then 
are these Tattvas to which reference is made bolh in the 
Shaiva and Shakta Tantras ? Unless these be fully under- 
stood, no progress in knowledge of the Mantra Science as 
here described may be expected. 

The Shaiva-Shakta Sinistra calls experience as Shakti 
by the term Vimarsha. Experience has two elements the 
"I” (Aharn) and the "This " (Idam), the subjective-know- 
ing aspect (GrShaka) of the Self and the objective or 
known (Gr&liya) aspect of the Sell. For it must be re- 
membered that an object is nothing but the one Self 
appearing through Maya as non-Self to Itself as subject. 
At base the experienced is nothing but the experience! : 
though this is not realised until the bonds of Mftya which 
make subject and object appear to be different are loosen- 
ed. The " 1 " side of experience is that in which the 
Self rests in the light of one’s own Self without looking 
towards another (Ananyotmukhah aham-pratyayah ) ; 
just as the experience (Vimarsha) which looks towards 
another is called — Idam ( Yastu anyonmukhah s a idam 
Hi pratyayah). But this " Other " can only be the 
Self, for there is in reality nothing but the one Self. It 
is experienced, however, differently. In the Supreme 
state it exists with the ‘ Aimin' in a mingled union ; in the 
pure experience between this state and Maya the " Other" 
is recognised to be an aspect of the Self ; in impure expe- 
rience governed by Maya the object appears to be different 
from the limited self. 

Experience again is, at its two poles, Perfect Expe- 

89 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



riencc of the Perfect Universe and the limited experience 
of the three worlds of reincarnation. Between these two 
extremes there are intermediate experiences marking the 
stages whereby the one pure Spirit or Consciousness in- 
volves itself in matter. 

The Hermetic maxim says: "As above so below." Si- 
milarly the Vishvas&ra Tantra says: " What is here is 
there, what is not here is now here.” ( Yad ih&sli tadanya • 
tra.yan mhdsti na tat kvachii). Sbaiva doctrine says: "Thai 
which appears without, only so appears because it exists 
within." (Vartamdndvabhdsdndm bhdvdttdm avabhdsa- 
nam antahsthitavaldm eva ghaiate vahirdtmand). " The 
manifestation of those things which presently appear, hap- 
j>en in the form of external things because they exist 
within." "Therefore what exists in our experience, evolv- 
ed from the Supreme, also exists in the Supreme experi- 
ence though in another way.” The Supreme experience 
called Parasamvit is not a mere abstract objectless know- 
ing (JnAna). It is the coalescence into one undivided 
unity of the " I " and the " This,” that is, of Shiva and 
the supreme unmanifested Shakti. The former is the illu- 
minating (Prakasha), knowing aspect, and the latter that 
Vimarslia aspect which is " the known.” But here the 
two arc undistinguishably one. This supreme experience 
lias the immediacy of feeling. It is Bliss (Ananda) which 
is defined as ” Resting in the Self ” (Svartipavishranti). 
In the Mdyika world the Self concerns itself with what if 
takes to be the non-Self. Here the Universe which is the 
object pf Shiva’s experience is the Perfect Universe, that 
is, Supreme Shakti which is but another aspect of Himsell 
as consciousness. She is beautifully caMed in the ParA- 
praveshikA : ” The Heart of the Supreme Lord ” (Ilri- 
dayam purameshiiuh). For the Mayika cxpcriencer (Md- 
yd pramulri ) the universe is the manifested world of ob- 
jects seen as different from himself. Supreme Shiva and 

90 




THE TATTVAS 



Shakti exist in mutual embrace and love. " Bliss is su- 
preme love.” (NiratishayaprcmAsp adatvani dnandalvam). 
The Supreme state is described by the BrihadSranyaka 
Upanishad in the words. " He indeed was just as man and 
woman in embrace " (Si i ha efavAn dsa yatha sltipui/tAng- 
sau sampatisvaktau) ; when there is neither within nor 
without, when all thought of lover, loving and loved are 
forgotten in the joy of blissful unity. The experience is 
spaceless, timeless, full, nil-knowing, almighty. This is 
the state of Shiva without Kala (Nishkala) or Parma- 
mashiva. This is Parasamvit which is beyond all Tat- 
tvas (TattvStitS). As the Perfect Universe it is called 
Paran&da (Supreme "Sound”) and Parft vitk (Supreme 
"Speech”). Paramashiva is an experience of the Perfect 
Universe, that is. of Paranada (Amarsha paranddagarbhah). 
Such universe is pure Shakti (Shakti-svarupa). 

Our worldly experience is as it were an inverted re- 
flexion of all this seen in the causal waters of Mayfu M&- 
y’A Shakti is the sense of difference (Bhedabudhi) which 
makes the Purusha, who is subject to it. See the Universe 
in the form of an observing self with a multitude of ob- 
jects conceived of as being outside of and separate from 
it. In the Mayika world each self excludes the other sel- 
ves. In the Supreme experience there is one Self experi- 
encing Itself. The Purusha is Consciousness, subject to 
MSya and the five Kanchukas which are limiting forces 
contracting the natural perfections of the Self. Thus the 
Perfect state is formless, the world state is with form ; the 
first is spaceless, timeless, all-pervading, the latter is the 
reverse and so forth. Kaia produces limitations of time. 
Niyati destroys independence (Svatantrata), regulating 
the Purusha as to what he should or should not do at any 
given moment of time. The Supreme experience is full 
and in want of nothing (Pfirna). Raga Kanchuka crea- 
tes interest in objects as something other than the self 

9 1 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



and therefore desire for them. The all-knowingncss 
(Sarvajnatd) and all-mightiness (Sarvakartritd) ol the 
Supreme Shiva arc circumscribed through the action of 
Vidydand Raid, and the Purusha becomes a "little know- 
er" and " Utile doer 

The intermediate Tattvas next described explain 
the process how from the creative aspect of the Perfect 
Experience the imperfect World-experience comes into 
being. Shiva has two aspects in one of which He is Trans- 
cendent and in the other Creative and Immanent. The 
creative (Sakala) aspect of the Supreme Shiva (Nishkala 
Paramashiva) is called Shiva-tattva. wherein is the Sha- 
kti called Unmani. Through operation in His creative 
aspect Shiva becomes His own object as the Manifested 
Universe. For in truth there is nothing else than Para- 
mashiva. Shiva-tattva is the first creative movement 
(Prathama spauda) ol the Unmo\'ing Paramashiva. 
Shakti-tattva is only the negative aspect of, or in, the Shi- 
va-tattva. The function of Shakti is to negate [Nish- 
edhavy&pararfrpa shaktih). She who is Consciousness 
negates Herself, that Is, deprives experience of the element 
of objectivity which is Itself as Pard Shaxti. There is 
thus left only the other side of experience which is Pra- 
kashamdtra, that is, what we should call the 'T' (Aham) 
side of experience when regarded as consisting of an " I " 
and "Ihis” (Idam). Because in this experience there 
is no trace of objectivity whatsoever, either of such ob- 
jectivity latent or expressed as exists in the Supreme or 
other lower and derived form of experience, the Shiva 
Tattva is called " the very void ” (ShunydtishOnya). 
It is the experience in which the Self is not looking to- 
wards any other (/l nanyonmukhah ahampratyayah). The 
objective content, so to speak, of Consciousness is a mere 
negation. It is Shunya because it is empty of objec- 
tive content. Shakti-tattva is also spoken of as the Will 

92 




THE TATTY AS 



(IchchM) of Shiva as yet Unmanifest and inseparable 
from Him { Sanialasamavdyini ). 

This account of Shakti's operation is extraordinarily 
subtle, explaining as it does how the supreme unitary 
experience is also the first source of dual experience. 
Such latter experience and the stages whereby the latter 
is fully developed can only be produced by positing an 
aspect in which there is a breaking up of the unitary 
experience. This is done by first blotting out from the 
Perfect experience its object or the Perfect Universe 
(Para Shakti, Paranada) thus leaving a mere subjectivity. 
To the subjectivity thus disengaged there is again gra- 
dually unveiled the universe at first as unmanifested 
and then (through Mitva) as manifested Shakti. In 
Pari Samvit the " I " and the " This " existed as one 
undistinguishable unity. In Shiva Tattva through the 
operation of the associated Shakti Tattva, the “This” 
(I dam) is withdrawn from experience so that the “ I- 
experience " {A ham-vimarsha) alone remains. To this 
the TdanT or Universe is again by degrees presented, 
when there is no longer an undistinguishable unity of 
“ I ” and " This,” but an " I— this " in which both, 
though distinguishable, are yet part of the Self which 
eventually through MSyi-Shakti becomes an " I ” and 
“ This,” in which the two are severed the one from the 
other. How this occurs, the description of the remaining 
Tattvas explains. The Shiva-Shakti Tattva is not an 
emanation, because it ever remains the same whether 
in Creation or Dissolution. It is the seed and womb 
of the whole universe. 

The first emanation or manifestation (Abhitsa) of 
and by Consciousness is called the Sadakhya or Sad&shiva 
Tattva. Here it is to be observed that the cause ever 
remains the same and what it was, though appearing 
differently in the effect. The Supreme Experience change- 

93 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



lessly endures even though in its creative aspect it gives 
birth to the Universe. This Abh&sa is like the Vivartta 
of Maydvada, the difference between the two lying in the 
fact that according to the former the effect is real, and 
according to Shangkara, unreal. This difference again 
depends on the definition given of " reality.” 

Real evolution (ParinfLma), in which when one thing 
is evolved into another it ceases to be what it was, exists 
only in the compounded products of the material world. 

In SadSshiva Tattva there is the commencement 
of the first subjective formation of ideas. It is called 
Niinesha (closing of the eyes) as contrasted with Unmesha 
(opening of the eyes) of the next stage of experience. 
In the former the Universe as Shakti is seen only faintly. 
The Self hazily experiences Itself as object. It is the 
first step in evolution and the last in involution. Un- 
mesha is the distinct blossoming (Sphutatvam) and 
extemalization (Vfkhyatvam) of the Universe. The 
" This ” (Idam) is faintly perceived by the " I ” (Aham) 
as part of the one Self, the emphasis being therefore 
on the " 1 ” side of experience. Sacteshiva is He whom 
the Vaishnavas call Mahfivishnu, and the Buddhists. 
Avalokiteshvara who sheds compassion on all. Accord- 
ing to tradition, tills is the source whence the Avataras 
come. It is in this Tattva that there is what the Mantra 
Sh&stra calls Nada Shakti. 

The third stage of the developing consciousness is 
Tshvara Tattva, the extemalization of the last. The 
Universe (Idam) is experienced by the " I ” (Aham) 
distinctly and yet as part of, and not separate from, 
the one Self. As in the last experience the emphasis 
was on the ‘‘Aham." here it is on the ‘‘Idam.” This Tattva 
is called Bindu in Mantra Shastra. and is so called because 
Consciousness here completely identifies itself with the 
Universe as unmanifested Idam, and thus subjectifies 

94 




THE TATTVAS 



it and becomes with it a Point (Hindu) of Consciousness. 
Tims by way of example the mind is completely sub- 
jectified and exists for each of us as a mathematical point, 
though the body, to the extent to which if is not sub- 
jectified, appears as an object or extended thing. 

The fourth Tattva is known as Vidya. Sadvidyi 
or Shuddhavidyft. In the experience of this stage, 
emphasis is equal on the " f ” and the " This ” (Srfwd- 
nadhikaranya). In Shiva Tattva there is the I -experience 
(Ah am Vimarsha) ; in Sad&shiva the I -This experience 
(Aham-idam Vimarshaj ; in ishvara Tattva the 
This-I experience (Idamaham Vimarsha). In each 
case the stress is laid on the first term. In Vidya 
Tattva there is an equality of either term in an experi- 
ence which is that of the true relation of the Aham and 
and the Idam, consisting of a synthesis (Sanggamana) 
of the two on a single “ basis ” (Adhikaiana) and not 
on two different " bases ” according to the experience 
of those under the influence of M5y& (Mdyapram&tri), 
thus eliminating the duality which exists in the latter 
experience. 

By equality of the ” I ” and the " This ”, experience 
is in the state of readiness for the next stage in which 
the two are to be severed. SadvidyS as l>eing the in- 
termediate stage between the pure (Shuddlia) and im- 
pure (Ashuddha) Creation is called ParSparadasha. It 
is also spoken of as experience of difference in the 
form of Mantra. (Bhcddbhcda-vimarshandhnaka-mantra 
nlpa). It is experience of difference because tin- Idam 
is separated from the Aham. It is the experience of 
of non-difference because they are still regarded as part 
of one Self. The experience is compared to that of the 
Ishvarh of the Dvaitavadins, who sees the Universe 
as different from Himself and yet as part of and in con- 
nection therewith. “ All this is my manifestation " 

95 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

{ Sarvo mamdyam vibhavah). The experience is said 
to be in the nature of Mantra, because here we arc in the 
reign of pure spiritual ideation. As yet there is no 
objective manifestation such as exists in our world. 
Below this Tattva it is said that there were created eight 
Pudgalas, that is, Jivas in the form of knowledge (Vijn&na- 
rupa) and then seven crores of Mantras and their 
Mandalas. 

At this point Maya Shakti intervenes and divides 
the A ham and Tdam, and the Kanchukas or limitations 
of the natural perfections of Consciousness make It 
subject to time and space, birth and death, limitation, 
and desire for object, which It now conceives of as persons 
and things other than Itself. This is the Purusha- 
Prakriti Tattva. Purusba in Shaiva-Sh&kta philo- 
sophy is the At mi> or Shiva subject to M&yft 
and to the Kanchukas whicli are limiting forces 
whrebv the Self as Pure Consciousness loses Its natural 
perfections. 

Prakriti is the Shanta Shakti of Shiva in contracted 
form existing as the equilibrium of the Gunas which are 
themselves a gross form of the Shaktis of Will (Ichchhd), 
Action (Kriyft) and Knowledge (Jnana). All things 
exist in Her who is of the nature of feeling in a homo- 
geneous mass. Purusha is enjoyer (Bhokti) and Prakriti 
the enjoyed (Bhogya). The latter is at first the barest 
objectivity seen as different from the experiencing Self 
as Purusha. Prakriti then differentiates into the Tattvas 
of mind (Antahkarana), senses (Indriya), and matter 
(Bhffta) which constitutes our universe. 

Purusha does not merely mean man nor indeed any 
animal. Every single thing in the Universe is Purusha. 
Thus an atom of sand is a Purusha or Consciousness, 
identifying itself with solidity (Prithivi), manifesting 
its limited Consciousness as atomic memory and other 

96 




THE TAT TV AS 



ways- What Consciousness thinks, that is, identifies 
itself with, that it becomes. 

To sum up, the Supreme Experience (Para samvit) 
has a creative aspect (Shiva-Shakti Tattva), which is a 
Consciousness of “ I " (Aham-vimarsha) which gradually 
experiences the Universe (Idam) as part of Itself, at 
first faintly with predominant ”1", then clearly with 
predominant "This", and then as equal “I and This”, 
ready for severance by Maya. The latter then cleaves 
consciousness in twain, thus setting up a dichotomy of 
Subject and Object, though in truth the object is nothing 
but tin* Self as its own object. Lastly Shakti, as Prakriti, 
differentiates into the multitudinous beings which make 
the Universe. But throughout it is the one and only 
Shiva whether as the Supreme Experience or as 
the Consciousness embodied in solid matter. Shakti 
Nida. Hindu mentioned in previous articles are Shakti 
Tattva, Sadikhya Tattva and tshvara Tattva (here 
desciibed), considered from the standpoint of the Mantra 
Shistra which treats of the origin of Shabda or Sound. 

With the Tattvas the Kalis are associated. These 
are the forms of activity (Kriva) of the Tattvas as Shakti. 
Thus Srishti (Creation) is a Kali of Brahma. Palana 
(Protection) is a Kala of Vishnu and Mrityu (Death) is a 
Kali of Rudra. It is, however, not always as easy to see 
the appropriateness of the Kalis as in the simple exam- 
ples given. The Shikta Trantras speak of 94 Kalis, 
namely, 19 Kalis of Sadishiva, 6 of ishvara, 11 of Rudra, 
10 of Vishnu, 10 of Brahma, 10 of Fire, 12 of Sun, and 16 
of Moon. According to Saubhigyaratnakara the 19 Ka- 
lis of Sadishiva are Nivritti, Pratishtha, Vidyi, Shftnti, 
lndhiki, Dipika, Rechikd, Mocliika, Para, Sfikshmi.Sfiksh- 
mimriti, Jninimriti, Arnriti, Apyiyanl, Vyipinl, Vyo- 
rriarupi, Mhlavidyamantrakali, Mahamantrakali, Jyo- 
tishkali. The 6 of ishvara arc i'iti, Shveti, Nityi.Aruni, 

97 




1 HE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



AsitA, AnantA. The n Rudra Kalis are TlkshnA, Rau- 
dri, Bhaya, Nidra. Tandra, KshudhA, Krodhini, Kriya, 
Udgari, Amaya, Mrityu. The ro of Vishnu are JadA, 
Palim, Shanti, Ishvari, Rati, KarnikA, BaradA, HISdini, 
Priti, Diksha. The 10 of BrahmA are Srishti. Riddhi, 
Smriti. McdhA, Kanti, Laksbmi. Dvuti, StliirA, Stliiti, 
Siddhi. The xo of Fire are Dhumrarchi, UshmA, Jvalini, 
JvAlini, Visphulinginl, Sushri, Surupa, KapilA, Havya- 
vahA, Kavya valia. The 12 of Sun are Tapini, TApini. 
DhumrA, Marichi, J vAlint, Ruclii, SushumnA, BhogadA, 
VishvA, Bodhint, DhArini, KshamA. The 16 of Moon are 
Amrita, Manada, Push A, Tushti. Pushti, Rati, Dliriti, 
Sashini, ChandrikA, Kanti, Jyotsna, Shii, Priti, Angada, 
Puma, PumAmritA. Out of these 50 are Matrika Kalas 
which manifest through thn Pashyanti, MadhvamA and 
Vaikhari stages (BhAva) as the gross letters (Varna), 
The 50 MAtrikA Kalas are given in the same account as 
follows Nivritti, Pratishtha, Vidya, Shanti, Indhika, 
DipikA, Rechika, Mochika, ParA, SukslunA, SQkshmimritA, 
JnAnAmritA, Apyiyani, VyApini, VyomarQpA, AnantA, 
Srishti. Riddhi, Smriti. MedhA, KAnti. Lakshmi. Iiyuti, 
SthirA. Sthiti, Siddhi. JadA, Palini. Shanti, Aishvarya, 
Rati. KamikA, Barada, HlAdinS, Priti, DirghA, Tikshna, 
Raudri, BhayA, Nidra, TandrA. KshudhA, Krodhini, Kri- 
yA. UtkAri, MrityurupA, PitA, ShvetA. AsitA, AnantA. 
These $4 Kalas are worshipped in the Wine Jar which 
holds TArA dravamavi or the Saviour-Mother in liquid 
form. She Herself is called Saravit Kala and so the Yo- 
ginlhridaya Tantra says — 

DeshaMlapaddithatma yad yad vastu vathd yathd, 
Tat-tadr6pev.ayd bhati tdng shraye Samvidam Kal&m. 



98 




CHAPTER XI 

SHAKTI— POTENCY TO CREATE 
In the previous Chapter I have referred to Shakti, 
NAda, Bindu. In this and the two next I will deal in great- 
er detail with each of these three concepts of Shakti. 
Oneoi the clearest accounts known to me of the evolution 
of Shakti is that given in the authoritative T&ntrik Pra- 
karana called Sharadi (also spelt SAradA) Tilaka by La- 
kshmanacharyya. This work was formerly of great 
authority in Bengal. Its value is much increased bv the 
commentary of R&gbava Bhatta. As this work with its 
commentary is of prime importance, and is cited 
throughout the following Chapters, I may here note 
the following account which LakshtnanAchAry va gives of 
himself at its close. Maha-hala a great sage was 
succeeded by his son AchAryapandita, a Dcshika 
(TAntrik Guru). His son Stikrishna Deshika had a 
son Lakshmana Deshika who wrote the ShAradA-Tilaka. 
RAghava, in his commentary called PadArthAdarsha, 
says that Lakshmana was the disciple of UtpalAchAryya, 
who was the disciple of Somananda, who was the 
disciple ol Vasumanta, who was the disciple of 
Shrikantha. This is the Gurupangkti of Lakshmana. 
His disciple was the great Kashmirian Abhinava Gupta, 
the autor of ParainArthasAra. The latter’s disciple 
was Kshemaraja, the author of the ShivasOtra-Vimar- 
shini. The date generally assigned to Abhinava Gupta 
is the eleventh century. Therefore Sj. Akshaya KumAra 
Maitra, Director of the Varendra AnusandhAna Samiti, 
who has supplied me with these details of the Gurus and 
Shisbyas of the author, concludes that the ShAradA was 
written at the end of the tenth or beginning of the ele- 
venth century. RAghava mentions 1510 as the age 
of his commentary. Taking this to be the Vikrama 
Samvat we get 1454 A. D. as its date. These details 

99 




1 HE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



serve another purpose. There aie persons who insist 
on a total disconnection between the Shaiva and Shakta 
Tantras. Lakshmanacharya was a member of the 
Kashmirian Shaiva School, and his work was, as I have 
stated, of great authority among the Bengal Sh&ktas. 

The Shiraija (Chapter I, verse 7 ) says : " From 
Sakai a Parameshvara vested with the wealth of Sat, 
Chit, Ananda issued Shakti : from Shakti came Nada ; 
and . from Nada issued Hindu." 

Sachchidananda-vibhavat sakaldl parameshvar&t 

Astch chhaklis tato n<;do midad bindu-samudbhavah. 
Parameshvara is here Shiva Tattva. He is Sakala, 
because He is with the creative KaI5 or Shakti. As 
already explained Shakti. when Vyashtirupa, that is 
individualised, is called Kalft. Shiva is always with 
Shakti. But in the supreme state, Shakti is unmanifest 
and exists in Hei own (SvarQpa) foim as Being- 
Consciousness -Bliss (Sachchid&nandam&yt, Chidrfipini), 
undistinguishablc from Shiva. Sakala Shiva is thus 
Saguna Brahman. He is said to be vested with the wealth 
of Sat, Chit, Ananda or Being, Consciousness and Bliss 
to show that His association with Avidva does not de- 
prive Him of, or affect. His own true nature (Svarupa). 
Shiva has two aspects. In one of these He is the 
Supreme Changeless One who is Sachchiddnanda and 
Sachchiddnandamaya. This is Pardsamvit. In the other 
He changes as the Universe ; change being the experience 
of the Jlva so created. The cause of such change is 
Shiva Tattva inseparably associated with Shakti Tattva. 

" There issued Shakti.” This is Shakti Tattva 
of the Thirty-six Tattvas. Shakti evolves Nada, and 
Nada, Bindu. These are aspects of Shakti preparing 
to create the Univesre and are dealt with in future 
Chapters. Here 1 am concerned with Shakti Tattva 
only : that is, with that form of Shakti which is speci- 

100 




SHAKTI— POTENCY TO CREATE 

fically so called ; since N&da, Bindu and the rest are 
all but names for different aspects of Shakti. 

It may be asked how Shakti can Ik- said to issue 
from that which was already with Shakti. R&ghava 
Bhatta explains that the author here follows the Sang- 
khya principle of the appearance of realities from 
realities (Sadutpattivfida) and speaks of the condition 
of readiness (Uchchhflnivastha} of Her who being without 
beginning or end existed in a subtle state identified 
with Chaitanya in Dissolution (Y<x antidi-rupa chaiUinyd- 
dkyasena niuMpralayc siikshnui sthitd). Adhyasa is the 
attribution of the nature of one thing to another accord- 
ing to which something is considered to be what it is 
not. In other words during Dissolution there is some 
potential principle in the Brahman which, as manifest, 
appears not to be Consciousness (Chit), but which owing 
to the absence of operation during the dissolved (Laya) 
state is identified with Chit. The distinction is very 
subtly marked by the Sanskrit word Chit for Shiva and 
Chidrupini for Shakti. Chit is there in either case, for 
ultimately there is nothing but Consciousness. But 
that principle which in creation manifests as seeming 
Achit is in itself Chidrupini. One is Consciousness and 
the other is a principle in the form of Consciousness. 
I prefer to look at Shakti from the Consciousness aspect 
which is Her own form (SvarQpa) and to say that Shakti 
in Dissolution is what She really is, namely, Chit. In 
creation Consciousness, as Shakti, has power to veil Its 
own true nature, and when we are ourselves subject to this 
power we attribute unconsciousness to It. The substance 
in either case is this : — In Dissolution Consciousness and 
Bliss alone is. Then without derogation to the changc- 
lcssncss of Consciousness there is an apparent dichotomy 
into subject and object, that is, Consciousness and 
Unconsciousness. Shakti is conceived as ready to create 

xo x 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



the Universe composed of Gunas as its effect (Kftryya). 
In other words, pure Consciousness becomes the world- 
experience. The Prayogesara says : "She. who is eternal 
and all-pervading, the Genetrix of the Universe, issues 
from Him.” Vavaviya-Samhita says : "By the will of 
Shiva, ParS Shakti is united with Shiva-tattva and at the 
beginning of Creation appears from It just as oil from 
sesamum seed when pressed.” The Pancharatra is also 
cited by Riighava Bhatta as saying, "The Parama 
Punisha at the beginning of Creation, seeing that She who 
is Sarhchidfmandarupini is the source (AdhishthAna) of 
the manifestation of all Tattvas makes manifest eternal 
Prakriti.” These statements, like all our accounts in 
such matters, arc pictorial thinking, being necessarily 
imperfect attempts to explain the manifestation of 
activity of Consciousness. 

Cause and effect are really one, but appear different. 
The first aspect of Shakti is its causal (Karana) aspect. 
But this again may be analysed into the various stages 
of its capacity and preparedness to create. These 
stages are marked by certain names which again are mere 
labels denoting states of Shakti. Thus NAda and Bindu 
are names for those aspects of Shakti which are more 
and more prone to Creation (UchchhhnSvasthA). Nada 
and Bindu are but two states of Her fit for Creation 
(Srishtyupayo&'avasthfirupau). Shakti Tattva is the 
first kinetic aspect of Brahman. Shakti then Ixtcomes 
more and more kinetic until, as Bindu, Shakti is Ishvara 
Tattva. This Bindu differentiates into the Triangle of 
Divine Desire called the KAmakalA upon which there is 
that Braliman Sound (Shabda-brahman), which, bifur- 
cating into Shabda ancl Artha, is Shakti in its aspect 
as effect (K&rvya) or the manifested Universe of Mind 
and Matter. This " TAntrik ” account gives firstly an 
apparent " development ” in the causal body of Shakti 




SHAKTI— POTENCY TO CREATE 



being in the nature of a resolution of like to like ; and 
then a real development (ParinAma)of the effects (K&ryya) 
produced from the causal body. The whole is necessarily 
described after the manner of a gradual process stated 
in terms of our own psychological experience. But such 
a process exists only in time which first appears with the 
Sun and Moon. Bhaskararctva in his commentary on the 
Lalita Sahasran&ma (Verse 117) cites Gorakshanitha a s 
saying in his Maharthamanjari, “In a moment the world is 
created and in a moment it is destroyed." 

Shakti Tattva and Shiva Tattva are inseparable 
(Santata-samavayini), the former being only the negative 
aspect of the latter. Both exist even in Dissolution, the 
first emanation proper being Sadakhya which corresponds 
with NSda in the above mentioned verse. Shiva Tattva 
is defined in the Tattva-Sandolla x, as follows "That, 
beyond which there is none other, moved of His own 
will in order to create the whole world. The first 
movement (Spanda prathama) is called the Shiva Tattva 
by those who know." 

Yad ay am anuttaramurlir 

nijechchhaydkhilam idam jagat srashtum 
Paspaiude sah sfiandah 

pralhamah Shiva-tattvam uchyate tujjnaih. 
As the Vimarshinl on the Pratyabhijna says — It is 
the " I-experiencc not looking towards another” (Ana- 
nyonmukhah ahampratyayah). It is the self-side of 
experience, Prakasha or Jninamatra, which is such, 
because of the negation of all objectivity or not-self by 
Shakti Tattva. For this Jnanamatra, She, as Vimarsha 
Shakti, provides through gradual stages the objects of 
its experience. Her function is negation { Nishedha - 
vyapdra-r&pd Shaklih) of all objectivity so as to produce 
the mere subjective knowing (Prakishamatra) which 
is the Shflnyatishunya. She then evolves from Herself 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

the objective world in order that it may be the content 
of the Shiva consciousness. She is pure Will ever asso- 
ciated with Shiva. She is the seed of the whole Universe 
ot moving and unmoving things then absorbed in Herself. 
Ichchhd saiva svachchM 

sanlatasamav&yinl sal i shaktih 
Sacharacharasya jagaio 

bijam nikhilasya nijattillnasya. 

(Tattva-Sandoha. 2 ). 

She is thus called the Womb (Yoni), or Seed-state 
(Blj&vasthft), and by the Parapraveshika, "Heart of the 
Supreme Lord" (Hridayam Parameshituh). The Yogini- 
hridayaTantra says that men speak of the heart of Yogini ; 
She is Yogini because She is connected with all things 
both a-* Causer and lifloet. This Yogini is knowerof Herselt 
(Yogini svavid). She is called the Heart : for from the 
Heart all issues. She is the Heart of the Universe : 
the pulsing movements of which are Herself as Shakti. 
What more can be said than the words of the Yoginl- 
hridaya, "What man knows the heart of a woman, only 
Shiva knows the heart of Yogini." 

In the Pratyabhijna-Hridaya it is said, " The 
auspicious supreme Shiva desiring to make manifest 
the Universe which is one with Himself first of all shines 
forth as the one Chit as the Very Void detached from 
M4y& (that is, there is no objectivity) and as undifferen- 
tiated Illumination (that is, Prakasha or Jnfina). He 
then next appears in the form of diverse cxperiencers 
consisting of an infinite endless number of Tattvas. 
words and beings which are in the nature of a blooming 
forth of Consciousness and Bliss." (Shri-parama-shivah 
svatmaikycna sthitam vishvam avabibhdsayishuh pitrvam 
chidaikyakhyali mdydndshrita-shiva-parydya-shUnydli- 
sh&ny&lmataya prakashabhedata prakiisham/lnaltiya spku- 
rali ; tatah chid-rasdshydnatdnlpdshesha-lattva-bhuvana- 
bhdva-laital-pmmdirddydtniataya'pi pralhatc ) . 




SHAKTI— POTENCY TO CREATE 



The substance of the matter may be stated thus : — 
Whilst from the static transcendental asj>ect (Parasliiva, 
ParSshakti) Consciousness changelessly endures, there is 
from the kinetic creative aspect (Shiva-Shakti) a pola- 
risation in consciousness, the polos of which are Shiva 
and Shakti representing the Aham and Idam aspects 
of experience. Owing to this polarisation there is in 
lieu of the unitary experience a division into the knower. 
knowing and known, M4tri, Mina. Meva, as it is called. 
Consciousness then identifies itself with the products 
of its own kinetic Shakti, that is. with mind as the subject 
of experience and with matter as its object. This pola- 
risation is explained in the Sliakta Tantras by the illus- 
tration of the grain of gram (Chanaka). Under the 
sheath of the grain of gram two seeds are found in such 
close union that they appear when held together as 
one. With, however, the tearing of the outer sheath 
the two halves of the seeds fall apart. These two seeds 
are said to be Shiva and Shakti and the encircling sheath 
is Mftyi. Like all attempts to explain the unexplain- 
able, the illustration is to some extent defective, for in 
the gram there are two separate seeds— but Shiva-Shakti 
are an undistinguishable unity. The commentator on 
the Shat-chakranirupana (Vol. II of my Tantrika Texts) 
cites the following (v. 49) : " In the Satyaloka is 
the formless and lustrous Or.e. She is like a grain of 
gram devoid of hands, feet or the like. She has surround- 
ed Herself by Maya. She is Sun, Moon and Fire. When 
casting off (Utsrijya) the covering She devides in two 
(Dvidha bhittvfi) and becomes intent on (UnmukhI) 
creation, then by differentiation of Shiva and Shakti arises 
creative ideation (Srishti-kalpana).’’ By "differentia- 
tion ” is meant the polarisation of Consciousness into 
subjective (Prak&sha) and objective (Vimarsha) aspects 
The Self sees another. The same commentator cites 

14 I0 5 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

t>io Prapanchasira Tantra as saying that tin- Parabindu 
divides into two parts, of which the right is Hindu,. the 
male, Purusha or Hang, and the left is Visargab, the 
female I’rakriti or Sail. Hangsah is the Union of Prakiiti 
and Purusha and the Universe is Hangsa. In, however, 
the Mss. on which my edition of this Tantra is based 
(Vol. ITT Tfintrika Texts), it is said that Parabindu divided 
by Kala becomes threefold — Hindu, Nada. Bija The 
difference is of no moment for this Hindu (Karyya) is 
Shiva and Bija is Shakti, and Nada is merely the illa- 
tion (Mithah samav&yah) of the two. The combind 
Hangsah indicates the same relation as is expressed by 
Nida. In the Kulachudamani Nigama (Chap. I, 
w. 16-24, Vol. IV, Tlntrilca Texts) the Devi says of the 
first stage : "I, though in the form of Prakiiti. lie hidden 
in Being-consciousness-bliss (A ham prakritirtipA did 

sachchidanandapar&yaii&). Then in the initial creative 
stage when Karma ripens the Devi in the words 01 the Ni- 
gama " becomes desirous of creation and covers Herself 
with Her own Maya.” This is the appearance of the kine- 
tic Shakti. The same doctrine is stated with greater or less 
detail in various ways. Unitary experience, without 
ceasing to be such, is yet, as Jiva polarised into the dual 
experience of the Mayika world. Consciousness as Chit- 
Shakti and MayS Shakti projects from itself in a manner 
conformable with our own psychological experience, 
the object of its experience. The Mftyika experiencer 
(M&y&pramitri) takes what is one to be dual or many. 
This is the division of Shiva and Shakti which are yet 
eternally one. All action implies duality. Duality is mani- 
festation. Manifestation is nothing but an appearance to 
consciousness. As there is ultimately but one Self, the Self 
appears to itself ; that is, consciousness is polarised. 
These two poles are the continuity of the " I ” (Aham) 
and its ever changing content which is " This ” (Idam). 

106 




SHAKTI— POTENCY TO CREATE 



Just as there is absolute rest and a world movement, 
so Shakti or Creative Consciousness is itself of twofold 
aspect, static and dynamic. Cosmic energy in its physi- 
cal aspect is potential or kinetic, the first being that state 
in which the equilibrated elements of Power hold each 
other in check. It is not possible to have one without 
the other. In any sphere of activity, according to these 
views, there must be a static background. If one 
Spiritual Reality be assumed it cannot be actually 
divided into two. It is possible, however, that there 
should be a polarisation in your experience whereby 
what is indi visibly one ansi the self, appears as many 
and the not-self. How 5 The answer is MayA, that 
Power of Her whereby what is impossible to us be- 
comes possible. Maya is Slmkti. but Shakti is not to be 
identified only with this form of It. In the thirty- 
six Tattvas, May A is a particular and comparatively gross 
form of Shakti which appears after the evolution of the 
SadvidyA Tattva. It is defined as that Shakti which is 
the sense of difference (Bhedabuddhi) ; that is, the power 
whereby the individual consciousness, distinguishing 
itself from others, considers itself separate from them. 
Shakti is understood differently in the Shakta Tantra 
and in Shangkara’s MayavAda ; a matter of primary im- 
portance from the point of view of SAdhani and with 
which I will deal on some future occasion. Whatever 
be the description given, all accounts must end in the 
inconceivable Shakti (AchintyA Shakti). She the One, 
the Primordial Shakti (AdyA Shakti) appears as many ; 
and so the ShAkta Sadhaka saying, "Ahatn Devi na chiin- 
yosmi " (I am the Devi and none other), thinks to him- 
self “ Sa'ham ” (She am I). 




CHAPTER XII 



NADA— THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 

SHAKTI-TATTVA dealt with in the preceding Chapter is 
really the negative aspect of the Shiva-tattva. Though 
spoken of separately the two are indissolubly one. Shakti- 
tattva, as the Tattva-sandoha says, is the Will of Shiva as 
yet nnmanifest : — 

Ichchh'i saiva svachchhA santatasanutvdyini sati shaklih. 
Saiharacharasya jagato bijam nikhilasya mjanilinasya. 

These two principles (Shiva-Shakti Tattva) are the 
ultimate Potency of creation, and as and when they (con- 
sidered as one Tattva) commence to act, the first move- 
ment towards manifestation takes place. After the 
previous restful state of Shiva-Shakti there follows the 
union tor the purpose of creation of the two principles 
which are Shivatattva and Shaktitattva. So it is said 
in the Shakta Tantra, *' Shiva-Shakli-sam&yog&t jayale 
srishlikalpan/i " (From the union of Shiva and Shakti 
arises creative ideation). This union and mutual rela- 
tion is called Nada. As the relation is not some subs- 
tantial thing apart from Shiva or Shakti, N4da is really 
Shiva-Shakti ; passing from the state of mere potency 
into that of the first ideating movement, from which at 
length, when finally perfected, the whole universe is 
evolved. The Sh&kta Tantras frequently employ erotic 
symbolism to explain the creative process. This has 
led a missionary author to the conclusion that " through- 
out its symbolism and pscudo-philosophisings there 

lies at the basis of the whole system the conception 

of the sexual relationship as the ultimate explanation 
of the universe." An American auther reviewing one 
or my works has called it 11 a doctrine for suffragette 

108 




NaL)A— the first produced movement 



monists " religious feminism nin mad." Both state- 
ments are examples of those deprcdative misnnder 
standings which are so common in Western descriptions 
of Eastern belief and which seem so absurd to anyone 
who has understood the subject. How ran " sexual 
relationship " which exists on the gross plane of matter 
be the ultimate explanation of That which has manifested 
not only this but all other relations and subjects. As 
for " feminism ” and the supposed priority of the femi- 
nine principle, the doctrine has no more to do with either 
than with old age pensions or any other social question. 
We are not dealing with the biological question whether 
the female antedates the male principle, or the social 
question of the rights of Woman, but with those ultimate 
dual principles, aspects of the one active Consciousness, 
which projects from Itself both man and woman and all 
other dualities on the universe. Shiva and Shakti are 
one and neither is higher than the other. But how are 
European writers to be blamed when we find a distin- 
guished Indian Sanskritist affirming that according to 
Shakto doctrine " God is a woman " (the italics are mine). 

Shakti is spoken of as female, that is, as Mother, 
because that is the aspect of the Supreme in which It 
is thought of as the Genetrix and Nourishcr of the 
universe. But God is neither male nor female. As 
the Yamala says for the benefit of all such ignorance., 
" Neyamyoshihiac/ia pum<bina shandah ita jadah smritah 
These are all symbolisms borrowed from the only world 
which we ordinarily know — that around us. As lor the 
charge of pseudo-philosophy, if it be that, then the same 
criticism must apply to the AdvaitavAda VedAnta. 
For the Shakta Tantra is the Sadhan&sh&stra ol Ad- 
vaitavada presenting the teachings of Vedanta in ita 
own manner and in terms of its own ritual symbolism. 
Thus it is said that Nada is the Maithuna of Shiva and 

log 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

Shakti and that when Mahakala was in Virparlta Maitlmn; 
with Mah&k&li (a form of Maithuna again which is sym- 
bolical of the fact that Shiva is Nishkriyaa and Shakti 
SakriyS) there issued Bindu. For Maithuna others 
substitute the logical term Mithah-samavSynh as a 
desesription of NSda, which is Kriy&shakti. Before 
the appearance of Shabda there must be two. Unity 
is necessarily actionless. Two involves a tljird— which 
is the relation of both ; a T rinity of Power which is re- 
flected in the Tiimfirti of the Mayika world as Brahma. 
Vishnu. Rudra. 

From Nada came MahSbindu and this latter differ- 
entiated into the Tribindu which is K&makala, the Mula 
of all Mantras. In Pralaya, Shiva and Shakti exist as 
the " two in one Shiva as Chit. Shakti as Chidrupini ; 
the Para Shakti— not Iwing different or separated from 
Shiva {Aviu&bh&vasambandha) and being undivided su- 
preme Chit-Shakti (Akhandaparachichchhakti). 

The SharadS-Titaka (1-7) then says From the 
Sakala Parameshvara vested with the wealth of Sachchi- 
dinanda (Sachckid&nandavibhavat) appeared Shakti 
(Shakti Tattvaj ; from Shakti. Nada and from Nada. 
Bindu (Mahabindu). Sakala means with Kala ; that 
is, the Brahman with what the Sangkhya calls Mflla- 
prakriti, that which the Ved&nta calls Avidya and the 
Sh&kta Tantras or Agamas call Shakti. On the other 
hand Nishkala Shiva is Nirguna Shiva or that aspect of 
the Brahman which is unconnected with the creative 
Shakti ; just as Sakala Shiva is the Brahman so associated. 
Shiva in either aspect is always with Shakti ; for Shakti 
is but Himself ; but whereas the Shakti associated with 
Paramashiva is ChidrUpini and Vishvottirna or beyond 
the Universe, the Shakti which is associated with the 
creative Shiva is that which appears as the Universe 
(Vishv&tmika). The Parikshakti is one with Chaitanya 

no 




N AD A— THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 



at rest. The other aspect which ripens into Nlda and 
Bimlu denotes the " swollen " condition of readiness 
{U chchMn&vAsthi) of Her who existed in a subtle state 
in the great dissolution (Mahftpralaya). These two 
Shaktis (Nada, Hindu) are stages in the movement 
towards the manifestation of the Sell as object, that is, 
as the Universe. In these Ihe mere readiness or potency 
of Shaktitattva to act develops into action. Jn N’ada- 
Shakti therefore Kriyft predominates When we speak 
of stages, development and so forth, we are using language 
borrowed from the manifested world which, in the sense 
there understood, are not appropriate to a state prior 
to manifestation ; for such manifestation does not take 
place until after the appearance of the Puruslia-Prakiiti 
Tattva and the development from the latter of the impure 
Tattvas from Buddhi to Prithivi. But a SSdhanS 
Shastra, even if it had the power to do otherwise, could 
not usefully use terms and symbols other than those 
borrowed from the world of the Sfldhaka. The Prayoga- 
sSra says that the Shakti who is " turned towards ” the 
state of Liberation {Nirumiyapado» miikhi) awakes as 
NSda and is turned to Shiva ( Shivonmukhi ) at which 
time She is said to be male (Puugrlipa). For then She 
becomes Hang in Hangsah. She who was one with 
Parashiva in Pralaya as the coalesced " I ” (Aham) and 
" Tliis " (Idam), now in Her creative aspect as .Shakti- 
tattva transforms Herself into Nada. NSda is action 
(KriySshaktirtlpa). In simple language, potency and 
readiness to create, (Shaktitattva), becomes for the first 
time active as NSda, and then more so as Hindu, which is 
a further development of KriyS Shakti dealt with in the 
next Chapter. 

According to RSghava Bhatta in his Commentary on 
the ShSrada some writers do not speak of Nada, though 
the author of the ShSrada does so in order to indicate the 

hi 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



sevenfold character of TSra. The Nada state is however 
indicated by those Achdryyas who speak of Kdla. So it 
is said, " in the Kdlatattva which is Sound" [Ravdtmani 
kalatativt). In the Hymn to Bhuvaneshi also it is said, 
“ Obeisance to Thee who art called Tattva in the charac- 
ter of Sound " {NantasU ravatvena tattvAbhidhdne). 

Nada occupies Llie same place in the Mantra scheme as 
the Saddkhya Tattva of the 36 Tattvas, for Bindu is 
Ishvara Tattva. They are each transcendent aspects 
of Shabda in the respective Tattvas. As Consciousness 
reaches forth to enjoyment and the " I " is separated 
from the " This, 1 ’ what was mere diffusive consciousness 
as Saddkhya Tattva is objectified into the all-embracing 
Akasha, the Guna of which is gross Shabda ; that is some 
thing experienced as an object apparently different 
from and other chan ourselves. 

Nada which etymologically means " Sound ” is a 
technical term of the Mantrashastra. The latter Shdstra 
is concerned with Mantravidyd, and Mantra is manifested 
Shabda which also literally means " Sound.” By 
"Sound" of course is not meant gross sound which is heard 
by the ear and which is the property of the Karyyakasha 
developed as a Vikriti from the Prakriti Tattva which, 
with the Purusha Tattva, occupies the place, (though with- 
out its dualities) of the-. Purusha and Prakriti of the S&ng- 
khva. Gross sound belongs to the impure creation as 
Guna of Ak&sha or the ether which fills space. To avoid 
misconception, it is better to use the word Shabda which 
with Artha is manifested in the " Garland (or Rosary) 
of Letters ’’ (Varnamdld) with which I will later deal. 

N&da is the most subtle aspect of Shabda, as the 
first putting forth of Kriyashakti. Parandda aud Parfi 
Vak are Parashakti. N&da into which it evolves is the 
unmanifested (Avyakt&tmd) seed or essence (Nadamdtrd) 
of that which is later manifested as Shabda, devoid of 

112 




NADA— THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 



particularities such as letters and the like [Varn&divi- 
shesharahitak). It develops into Bindu which is of the 
same character. From the Mantra aspect, as the source 
of Shabda, this Mah&bindu as it differentiates to " create ” 
is called the Shabdabrahman. Bindu when differentiated 
is also the source of the Vikritis or Tattvas and of their 
Lords (Tattvcsha). In its character as Shabdabrahman 
it is the .^>urce of the manifested Shabda and Artha 
[ShabdashabddrlhaMranam). Shabdabrahman is thus a 
name of Brahman as the immediate creative source of 
the manifold Shabda and Artha. 

What Shabdabrahman is, has been the subject of 
contention, as RSghava Bhatia's Commentary shows. 
It is sufficient to sav here (where we are only concerned 
with Shabdabrahinitinaka Bindu so far as it is necessary 
to explain N;\da) that Raghava Bhatta says that Shabda- 
brahman is the Chaitanya in all beings (Chaitanyam 
sarvabhdldiubn). This cosmic Shakti exists in the indivi- 
dual bodies of all breathing creatures (Prani) in the form 
of Kundalini (KundalirhpA). Nada therefore which 
assumes the aspect of Bindu is also Chaitanya and Shakti. 
Nada is thus the first emanative stage in the production 
of Mantra. The second is Bindu, or Shabdabrahman ; 
the third is Tribindu (Bindu, Nada and Bija) or Kdma- 
kali ; the fourth is the production of Shabda as the 
Matrikis which are the subtle state oi the subsequently 
manifested gross letters (Varna) ; and the last is these 
gross letters (Sthulashabda), which compose the mani- 
fested Shabda or Mantra composed of letters (Varna), 
Syllables (Pada) and sentences (Vakya). Thus Mantra 
ultimately derives irorn Nada which is itself the Kriya- 
shaktirftpa aspect of Shiva-Shakti who are the Supreme 
Nada (Paran&da) and Supreme Speech (Paravak). The 
Prayogas&ra says : " Oh Devi that AntarStma in the form 
of Nikda (Niditma) itself makes sound (Nadate svayam )/' 

113 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



that is, displays activity. "Urged on by VAyu (that is, the 

Pr&navSyu in Jivas) it assumes the form of letters.” 

N&da again is itself divided into several stages, namely, 

Mahanada or N&ddnta, the first movement forth of the 

Shabdabrahman ; Nada, when Shakti fills up the whole 

Universe with Nadanta, in other words, the completed 

movement of which Nidfinta is the commencement ; and 

Nirodhini, which is that aspect of N&da in which its 

universal operation having been completed, it operates 

in a particular manner and is transformed into Bindu, 

which is the completion of the first movement of Shakti, 

in which She assumes the character of the Creative Lord 
* 

of the Universe (Ishvara Tattva). NManta considered 
as the end and not the commencement of the series is 
that in which there is dissolution of Nada (Niidasya 
anlah layah). Above Bindu. the Shaktis which have 
been already given in previous articles become more and 
more subtle until Nishkala Unmani is reached which, as 
the Yoginihridaya says, is uncreate motionless speech 
(A Mitpznnanishpanduvtik) , the twin aspects of which are 
Samvit or the Void (Shfinya Samvit) and Samvit as 
tendency to manifestation in a subtle state (Vlpatsuh 
samvid tupattyavasthd sdkshma). Unmani is beyond 
Karanarupa Shakti ; where there is no experience 
(Bhanam) or Kala or Kala nor of Devata or Tattva, in 
the sense of category, as that which distinguishes one 
thing from another. It is Svanirvanamparam padam, 
the Nirvikalpaniranjanashivashakti which is Guruvaktra. 

Nada and Bindu exist in all Bija Mantras which are 
generally written with the Bindu above and the Nada 
below, for this is the form of the written Chandrabindu. 
In however some of the old pictorial representations of 
Ongkara the real position of Nada is shown as being over 
Bindu as an inverted crescent. Thus the great Bija, 
Hrim ( ) is composed of Ha, Ra, I and Ma. Of these 

11 4 




NAD A— THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 

Ha — Ak&sha, Ra — Agni, 1 — Ardhandrishvara and M — 
NSdabindu. The five Bhutas ate divided into two 
groups Amurtta (formless) and Murtta (with form). 
Both Ak&sha and Vayu belong to the first group, because 
until the appearance of Agni as Rupa, there is no colour 
and form. Agni therefore heads the second division. 
When Akasha is with Agni there is form ; for Ra is the 
first manifestation of RQpa. This form is in Ardha- 
n&rishvara, the combined Shiva-Shakti, who hold all in 
themselves. The fust three letters represent the Akara or 
form aspect. The Mantra receives its complete iorm by 
tire addition of the Mah&tmya, which is N 4 da-bindu 
which are Nirakara (formless) and the K&rana (cause) of 
the other three in which they are implicitly and poten- 
tially contained ; being in technical phrase Antargata 
oi, or held within, Hindu, which again is Antargata of all 
the previously evolving Shaktis mentioned. The meaning 
of tire Bija Mantra then is that the ChidSkSsha is asso- 
ciated (Yukta) with Rupa. It is thus the Shabda 
statement of the birth of General Form ; that is. Form 
as such of which all particular forms are a derivation. 
Hrim is. as pronounced, the gross-body as sound of the 
ideation of Form as such in the Cosmic Mind. 

The degree of subtlety of the Shaktis preceding and 
following Nada is in the Mantra Shastra indicated by 
what is called " the utterance time ’’ (UchcharanakMa). 
Thus taking Bindu as the unit : Unman! is Nir&k&ra and 
Niruchchara, formless and without utterance, undefined 
by any adjective : being beyond mind and speech and the 
universe (Vishvottima). The Uchcharanak&la of Samani 
(so named Manahsahitatv&t : on account of its association 
with mind ; the preceding Shakti Unman! being Tadrahitd 
or devoid of that), is i — 256, of Vy&piki 1 — 128 and so on 
to N&danta 1—32, N 4 da x — 16, to Ardhachandra which is 
1—2 of Bindu and to Bindu itself. 

115 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



NSda is thus in Mantra Shfistra that aspect of Shakti 
which evolves into Bindu, which later as differentiating 
into the Tribindu is called the Shabdabrahman, who is the 
creative source of Shabda and Artha and thus of the 
revealed Shabda which Mantra is. 

I would in conclusion meet an objection, which I have 
heard urged, namely that the Mantra Shftstra treats its 
subject with unnecessary complexity of detail. It is 
undoubtedly difficult and requires careful study. Simple 
minds may be satisfied with the statement that God 
created the world. Veda too gives an explanation of the 
cosmic problem in two words " He saw” (5a aikshata). 
But who saw, and what, and how did He see ? How 
also if there be only One came there to be anything to 
see ? And what is "to see" (Ikshana) ? For the process 
is not like looking out of a window and seeing a man 
passing. " He " is Consciousness which is in Itself 
(Svarupa) actionless. How then did "I" see and thus 
become active ? Because It has two aspects one (Nish- 
kalashiva) in which It is actionless and the other (Sakala- 
shiva) in which it is Activity as the embodiment of all 
the Sangskiras. In this last aspect it is called Shakti. 
The latter term denotes Active Consciousness. How 
can one and the same thing have two contradictory 
aspects ? . We cannot say, otherwise than by aftiiming 
SvabhSva. By way of analogy we can refer to what 
psychology calls dual and multiple personalities. The 
ultimate Reality is alogical and unexplainable (Anirva- 
chaniya). That it is one and not two is. it is said, proved 
by Veda and the actual experience (Svanubhava) had in 
Yoga. What is " seeing " ? It is not the observing of 
something outside which was there before it was observed. 
“ Seeing " is the rising into consciousness (void of objects) 
of the memory of past universes existing in the form of 
the Sangskdras, Before this can occur. Consciousness 

116 




NADA — THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 

must obscure to Itself Its nature and (though in truth 
an unity) must experience itself as an " I " observing a 
" This ” which it has through Maya Shakti projected 
outside Itself. There is no answer again to the question 
how this is possible except inscrutable Shakti (Achmtya 
Shakti). But just as a man rising from deep sleep has 
first a more or less bare awareness which is gradually 
filled out with the thought of self and particular objects ; 
consciousness coming to itself, so that in the waking state 
it again recognises the world which had vanished utterly in 
dreamless slumber : so it is with the Cosmic Consciousness. 
Just as man does not pass at once from dreamless slumber 
to the fullest w'aking perception ; so neither does the 
Cosmic Consciousness. It passes gradually from its 
dreamless slumber (Sushupti) state which is the general 
dissolution (Mahapralaya) to the waking state (Jagrat) 
which is consciousness of the gross universe. The degrees 
in this cmanative process are the Tattvas described in 
the last article. Manifestation, which is nothing but 
presentation of apparently external objects to the inner 
consciousness, is, as experienced by the limited conscious- 
ness, gradual. The seeds of the " I " and “ This " are 
first formed and then grown. The first principal stage 
is that before and in Ishvara Tattva or Bindu and which 
therefore includes N&da. The second is that of the 
World-consciousness arising through the agency of M4yi- 
shakti. These two stages are marked by two principal 
differences. In the first the " This ” (Idam) is seen as 
part of the self, the two not being differentiated in the 
sense of inner and outer. In the second the object is 
externalised and seen as different from the self. In the 
first, when the Self experiences itself as object, the latter 
is held as a vague undefined generality. There is, as it 
were, an awareness of seli-scission in which the self as 
subject knows itself as object and nothing more. The 

117 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

degrees in this process have been already explained. In 
the second not only is the object defined as something 
which appears to be not the self, but there arc a multi- 
plicity of objects each marked by its own differences ; for 
M&yft has intervened. The whole world-process is thus 
a re-awakening oi the Cosmic Consciousness from sleep 
to the world, into which at Dissolution it had fallen ; 
and the Tattvas mark the gradual stages of re-awakening, 
that is re-awakening to the world, but a falling into sleep 
so far as true Consciousness is concerned. So in Kundali- 
yoga when Kundalini sleeps in the Mul4dh&ra, man is 
awake to the world ; and when She awakes, the world 
vanishes from Consciousness which then regains its own 
state (Svarflpa), There is no reason to suppose that, 
judged in the terms of our present experience, the change 
is other than gradual. But how, it may be asked, is this 
known or what the stages arc : for were we there ? As 
individuals we were not ; for we speak of that which 
preceded the formation of the Sakala Jiva Consciousness. 
But Jiva was there as the plant is in the seed. It is the 
one Shiva who displays himself in all the Tattvas. Those 
who fall back into the seed have experience of it. There 
are, however, two bases on which these affirmations rest. 
In the first place there is correspondence between all 
planes. . " What is without, is so manifested because it 
is within " ; not of course in the exact form in which it 
exists without, but in the corresponding form of its own 
plane. We may therefore look for instruction to our 
daily life and its psychological states to discover both 
the elements and the working of the cosmic process. 
These also disclose a gradual unfolding of consciousness 
from something in the nature oi mere awareness to the 
definite perception of a variety of multiple objects. But 
the normal experience is by its nature limited. That 
normal experience is, however, transcended in Yoga- 

118 




NADA— THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 

states, when consciousness becomes NirSlambapurl, that 
is, detached from worldly objects : the experience wherein 
is (in part at least) available for the instruction of others. 
Secondly the Shastras are records of truth beyond the 
senses (Atindriya Tattva). The Tattvas are not put 
forth as mere speculative guesses or imaginings of what 
might have been. When, however, supersensual truth 
is described in language it is necessarily expressed in 
terms, and with the use of symbols, of present experience. 
That experience is had under conditions of time and space 
and others. We know and speak of mere potency ripening 
into actuality, of potential energy becoming more and 
more kinetic, of shifting states of consciousness, and so 
forth. These are matters the knowledge of which is 
drawn from the world around us. But this does not 
necessarily make them wholly untrue or unreal as applied 
to higher planes. One of the commonest errors is to 
raise false partitions between things. The experience 
is real for it is Shiva's and His experience is never unreal. 
It is according to its degree (that is on its plane) real ; 
an expression (limited though it be) of the ultimate Reality 
Itself. Wc can think in no other terms. But it is also 
true that these terms and symbols, having only complete 
validity on our plane, are no longer wholly true for 
Consciousness as it rises from it. But other forms of 
Consciousness must take their place until the Formless is 
reached. The Tattvas explain (limited though such 
explanation be by the bounds of our thought and language) 
the modes through which the returning Consciousness 
passes until it rests in Itself (SvarQpavishranti) and has 
Peace. And so the Buddhist Mantray&na aptly defines 
Yoga (which in Tibetan is called rNal-rByor) in the 
sense of result, as the " Finding rest or peace." This 
final state, as also those intermediate ones which lie 
between it and the normal individual world-consciousness, 

“9 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



are only actually realised in JnSna Yoga (by whatsoever 
method Jnana is attained) when the mind has been 
wholly withdrawn from without and faces the operative 
power of Consciousness behind it (Niramayapadonmukhl). 

But here we are dealing with Mantrayoga when the 
mind is thinking the states which JnSna, in whatever 
degree, realises as Consciousness. The Mantra Sh&stra 
looks at the 'matter, ol which we write, from the stand- 
jwint of Mantra that is of manifested Shabda its object. 
Ktmdalini is both Jyotirmayi, Her SukshmarQpa : and 
Mantramayi, Her Stlnilarupa. We begin with the latter. 
All things are then defined in terms of Shabd&rtha and 
of the various causal forms which precede it. The first 
of such produced forms is N&da which becomes Bindu 
and then on the differentiation of the Tattvas the " liidden 
sound ” (Avyaktarava). the Logos or Cosmic Word utters 
“ the Garland of Letters ” (Vamamala) of which all 
.Mantras are formed. It traces the degrees in which the 
ideating Cosmic Consciousness becomes, as Supreme 
Speech (Paravak), the Genetrix of the suhtle and gross 
Shabda which are the Matrikas and Varnas respectively. 
That Supreme Speech (Parav&k) is without idea or lan- 
guage, but is represented as gradually assuming the state 
in which it utters both and projects from Itself into the 
sensual world the objects (Artha) which they denote. 
The actual manifestation of these from Parashabda 
through Pashyanti, Madhyami and Vaikhari, will be 
described in another Chapter. 

The practice of Mantra Yoga not only gives, from a 
merely intellectual standpoint, an understanding of 
VedSnta which cannot ordinarily be had by the mere 
reading of philosophical texts ; but also produces a pure 
Bh&va ripening into Mahibhava through the purification 
of mind (Chittashuddhi) which such practice (according to 
the rules of S&dhana laid down in the Tantras or Mantra- 

120 




NADA— THE FIRST PRODUCED MOVEMENT 



shftstra) gives, as one of its Siddhis. What the Western, 
and sometimes the English educated Indian, does not 
understand or recognise, is the fact that the mere reading 
of Vedantic texts without Chittashuddhi will neither 
bring true understanding or other fruitful result. The 
experienced will lind that this apparent complexity and 
wealth of detail is not useless and is, from an extra-ritual 
standpoint, to a considerable extent, and from that of 
Sddhand wholly, necessary. A friend of mine was once 
asked by a man in a somewhat testy manner " to give 
him a plain exposition of the Vedanta in five minutes." 
It takes years to understand perfectly any science or 
profession. How can that, which claims to explain all, 
be mastered in a short talk ? But more than this ; 
however prolonged the intellectual study may be, it must, 
to be fruitful, be accompanied by some form of SidhanfL. 
The Tantra Shflstras contain this for the Hindu, though 
it is open to him or any other to devise a better if he can. 
Forms ever change with the ages, while the Truth which 
they express, remains. 



121 




CHAPTER XIII 

BIN DU OR SHAKTI— READY TO CREATE 

From Nada, previously described, evolved Bindu 
( Ndddd bindusamitdbhavah) . What then is Biudu ? 
Literally the term means a “ Drop ” or a " Point " such 
as the AnusvSra breathing. But in the Mantra ShSstra 
it has a technical meaning. It is not, as a distinguished 
Indian Sanskritist called it, merely a "Drop.” It is not 
that " red drops " mix with " white drops ” and so 
forth, a description of Iris, which reminds one more of the 
pharmacy or sweet shop than the Sh&stra. Tliis and 
other statements betray an ignorance of Indian tradition 
and a mental attitude alien to Indian thinking which 
distinguishes so many of those whose souls have been 
captured in the net of an English education. Those who 
speak another's language and think another’s thought 
must see to it that their own Indian self is not, through 
the dangers to which it is thus exposed, lost. But even 
an educated Western, ignorant of the Shastra, but with 
a knowledge of the history of religious thought would 
have perceived the significance of the term Bindu when 
he had learnt that one of its literal meanings was a 
"Point." 

In an anonymous Mystical Work published in the 
eighteenth century by one of the " French Protestants 
of the Desert " called Le Mystfire de la Croix, it is said 
(p. 9). " Ante omnia Punctum exstitit ; non to atomon, 
aut mathematicum sed diffusivum. Monas erat cxpli- 
cite : implicite Myrias. Lux erat, erant et Tenebrae ; 
Principium et Finis principii. Omnia et nihil : Est 
et non." 

" Before all things were, there was a Point (Punctum : 

122 




BINDU OR SHAKTI READY TO CREATE 

Bindu) not the Atom or mathematical point (which 
though it is without magnitude has position} but the 
diffusive (neither with magnitude nor position). In the 
One (Monas) there was implicitly contained the Many 
(Mynas). There was Light and Darkness : Beginning 
and End : Everything and Nothing : Being and Non-being 
(that is. the state was neither Sat nor Asat)." The 
author says that the All is engendered from the central 
indivisible Point of the double triangle (that is, what 
is called in the Tantras. Shatkona Yantra) regarded as 
the symbol of creation. " Le Tout est engendr^ du 
point central indivisible du double triangle.” This 
" Point ” is one of the world’s religious symbols and is 
set iu the centre of a Shatkona as above or in a circular 
Mandala or sphere. On this symbol St. Clement of 
Alexandria in the second century A.D. says that if abs- 
traction be made from a body of its properties, its 
depth, breadth, and then length,” the point which remains 
is a unit, so to speak; having position ; from which if we 
abstract position there is the notion of unity ” (Stromata 
V. 2. Ante Nicene Library Yol. IV). Again Shelley 
in his " Prometheus ” says: " plunge into eternity where 
recorded time seems but a point." 

Where does the Extended universe go at the Great 
Dissolution (Mahapralaya) ? It collapses so to speak 
into a Point. This point may be regarded as a mathe- 
matical point in so far as it is without any magnitude 
whatever, but as distinguished from it. in that it has 
in fact no position. For there is then no notion of 
space. It need hardly be said that this is a symbol, 
and a symbol borrowed from our present experience 
cannot adequately represent any state beyond it. Wc 
only conceive of it as a point, as something infinitesimally 
subtle, which is in contrast with the extended manifested 
universe which is withdrawn into it. This point is Bindu. 

123 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

But this again is to make use of material images borrowed 
from the world of objective form, Bindu is an aspect 
of Shakti or Consciousness ; therefore it is interpreted 
also in terms of our present consciousness. As so inter- 
preted and as Ishvara Tattva, in which it is, Shakti is 
called Bindu ; because here consciounsess completely 
indentifies itself with the universe as unmanifested Idam 
and thus subjectifies it and becomes with it a point of 
consciousness. Thus by way of example the individual 
mind is completely subjectified and exists for each of 
us as a mathematical point (and so it is spoken of by 
some as being of atomic dimension) though the body to 
the extent to which it is not subjectified appears as an 
object or extended thing. We do not conceive of our 
own minds as extended because of tliis complete sub- 
j edification. In the same way the consciousness of 
Ishvara completely subjectifies the universe. He does 
not of course see the universe as a multiplicity of objects 
outside and different from Himself ; for if He did. He 
would be Jiva and not Ishvara. He sees it as an object 
which is a whole and which whole is Himself. In Sad&- 
khya Tattva " Otherness " (Idam) is presented to Con- 
sciousness by Shakti. This Idam is then faintly perceived 
(to use the language of the VimarshinI on Ishvara- 
Pratyabhijna III. r. 2 ) “ in a hazy fashion (Dhydmala- 
prdyam) like a picture just forming itself (Uttmilita- 
milra-chilra-kilpam) ; seen by the mind only and not 
as something seen outside by the senses (Antahkaranaika- 
veiyatH)." The object thus vaguely surges up into the 
field of consciousness in which the emphasis is on the 
cognitive aspect or " I " (Ahain). This however is not 
the " I " or “This” of our experience, for it is had in 
the realms beyond M4y4. The “ This " is then experienced 
as part of the Self. In Ishvara Tattva all haziness 
gives place to clarity of the " This " which is thus seen 

124 




BINDU OR SHAKTI READY TO CREATE 

completely as part of the Self ; the emphasis being on the 
" This.” After equal emphasis on the " I ” anil " This ", 
the two are in ShuddhavidyA Tattva wholly separated 
by Maya. When therefore the Yogi passes beyond the 
MAyik world his first higher experience is in this Tattva. 

Nflda and Bindu are stales of Shakti in which the 
germ of action (KriyA-shakti) so to speak increasingly 
sprouts with a view to manifestation producing a state 
of compactness of energy and readiness to create. 
Righava Bhatta (Comm. SharadA I. 7) speaks of them 
as two states of Shakti which are the proper conditions 
( U payogydvaslhd ) for creation They are, like all else, 
aspects of Shakti, but are names of those aspects which 
are prone to and ready for creation ( U chclth&ndvaslhti . 
Bindu is said to be the massive or Ghandvasthd state 
of Shakti. The Prapanchasara Tantra says that Shakti 
is seized with the desire to create and becomes Ghani- 
bhfitd ( Vichikirshur ghanibhdta). Thus milk becomes 
Ghanibhdta when it turns into cream or curd. In 
other words, Shakti is conceived as passing gradually 
from its subtle state through Shakti-tattva and NAda 
(in its three stages) and becomes what is relatively gross 
or massive as Power which is fully equipped to pass from 
the stage of potency into that of active manifestation. 
That stage is Bindu which is called MahAbindu or Para- 
bindu to distinguish it from the other Bindus into which 
it subsequently differentiates. 

The commentary of KAlicharana on the Shatchakra- 
nirfipana (see ray Tantrik Texts, Vol. 2, V. 4) citing 
Todala Tantra (Ch. VI) says that the Supreme Light is 
formless ; but Bindu implies both the Void(Shfinya) and 
Guna also. Bindu is the Void in so far as it is the Supreme 
Brahman. It implies Guna as being the creative or 
Shakti aspect of the Brahman which subsequently evolves 
into the Purusha and Prakriti Tattvas of which the latter 

125 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

is with Guna. The commentary to V. 49 states that this 
Bindu is the Lord (Ishvara) whom some Paurdnikas 
call Mah&vishnu and others the Brahmapurusha : and 
(V. 37) that Parabindu is the state of " Ma " before 
manifestation ; being Shiva-Shakti enveloped by M&yi. 
As to this it may be observed that the letter M is inale. 
and Bindu which is I he nasal breathing, sounded as M, is 
the unmanifested Shiva-Sliakti or Ma which is revealed 
upon its subsequent differentiation into the three 
Shaktis from which the universe proceeds. Bindu as the 
Cause is Chidghana or massive Consciousness and Power 
in which lie potentially in a mass (Ghana), though 
undistinguishable the one from other, all the worlds 
and beings about to be created. This is Parama Shiva 
and in Him are all the Devatds. It is thus this Bindu 
which is worshipped in secret by ail Devas (V. 41) and 
which is indicated in its different phases in the Chandra- 
bindu (Xada-Bindu) Shakti and Shinta of the Om and 
other Bija mantras. 

This Bindu is in Satyaloba which, within the human 
body, exists in the pericarp of the thousand-pctalled 
Lotus (Sahasrara) in the highest cerebral centre. It is, 
as I have already said, compared to a grain of gram 
(Chanaka) which under its outer sheath (which is M&yd) 
contains the two seeds (Shiva and Shakti) in close and 
undivided union. 

Kdlicharana (V. 49) thus cites the following : “ In the 
Satyaloka is the formless and lustrous one. She is like a 
grain of gram devoid of hands, feet and the like. She has 
surrounded Herself by MAyd (that is She is about to 
create by the agency of this Power of Hers). She is Sun, 
Fire and Moon. She being intent on creation (Unmukhi) 
becomes twoiold {Dvidhd bhitvd) and then, by differen- 
tiation of Shiva and Shakti, arises creative ideation 
( Srishlikalpani ). Shiva and Shakti are of course not 

126 




BINDU OR SHAKTI READY TO CREATE 



actually divided for they are not like a chufalli or some 
other material thing. It might seem unnecessary to 
make such obvious remarks, did not experience tell 
me of the absurd misunderstandings which exist of the 
Scripture. When we read that Cod “ is a woman," 
that the Shkkta Tantra is “ Feminism " with a doctrine 
similar to that of Prof. Tester Ward’s primacy of the 
female sex, that " the conception of the sexual relation- 
ship is the ultimate explanation of the universe ” and so 
forth, no caveats, however obvious, are unnecessary. 
What of course is meant is that, whereas in Pralaya 
Shiva and Shakti existed as one unity of consciousness, 
They in creation, whilst still remaining in them-selves 
what They always were, project the universe which is 
Shakti ; and then we have the ParamStm& and Jiv&tmfi 
consciousness -which seem to the latter to be different. 

Although Parabindu and all which evolves from It 
are nothing but aspects of Shakti and in no wise different 
from It, v<“t as representing that state of Shakti which 
immediately precedes creation, it is this state of Shakti 
which is said to be the cause of the universe of name 
and form (NamarupaJ ; concepts and concepts objectified; 
or Shabda the word and Art ha its meaning. The states 
of Shakti preceding Bindu arc those in which the Bindu 
state is in process of being "evolved" according to what 
we may call an Avikrita Parinama and when evolved 
it is the cause of the universe. Really they are merely 
aspects of one and the same pure Shakti. This is not 
an evolution in time. As Plotinus says, the universe 
" was formed according to intellect (here the Cosmic 
Power or Prapancha-Shakti which manifests as Mahat) 
and intellect not preceding in time but prior " (in the 
sense that cause precedes effect). This again, as all 
descriptions, (in so far as they are applicable to the 
transcendent Shakti) is imperfect, for sequence of cause 

127 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



and effect involves to our minds the notion of time. 
This Supreme Bindu as containing in Himself all DevatSs 
is the ultimate object of adoration by all classses of 
worshippers (V. 44) under the name of Shiva, or Mahfl- 
vishnu or the Devi as those call it “ who are tilled with a 
passion for Her Lotus Feet." The sectarianism of the 
lower mind, still existent in both East and West, is here 
shown to be a matter of words (the fight for which is of 
such interest to many) and is reduced to its real common 
denominator. As the Lord says in the Gita, Whomever 
men may worship all such worship comes eventually 
to Him. 

Parabindu is thus the Head of every line of creation ; 
of the Tattvas or Vikritis from Buddhi to Pritluvi and 
their Lords (Tattvesha) and of the Shabda or Mantra 
creations ; all belonging to the VikSra Srishti or Parin&ma 
Srishti. The development after the manifestation of 
Prakriti i= a real evolution (Parinama), for Consciousness 
has then been divided into subject and object in time 
and space. What is spoken of in terms of a development 
in the Ishvara body is not that. There Shakti assumes 
various aspects with a view to create but without mani- 
festation. Shaktitattva. whilst remaining such, assumes 
the aspects of Nada and Bindu. 

The next stage is thus described in the Sh&radi Tilaka 
(Ch. 1) as follows 

Paraskaktiniayah sdkshfil tridh&'sau bhidyate punah 
Bindur n&do bijamiti tasya bhedSh samirittih 
Binduk shivdlmako bijang shaklir nudas tayor mithah 
Samavayah samakhyiitah samdgawavishdradaih 

(That whch is supreme Shakti again divides Itself 
into three, such divisions being known as Bindu, N&da, 
Bija. Bindu is said to be of the nature of Shiva and Bija 
of Shakti, and Nada is the mutual relation between these 
two, by those who are learned in the Agamas). 

128 




BINDU OR SHAKTI READY TO CREATE 



One Ms. I have seen has ‘Bindur nftdStmako', but the 
commentary of the Shatchakra (V. 40) explains this as 
Shivatmaka. These form the three Bindus (Tribindu). 
Nflda here again is Trait d'Union, the Yoga of the other 
two Bindus as the PrayogasSra calls it. (See Rftghava's 
Comm, to V. 8 of Ch. I Sharada). These are Shiva, 
Shiva-Shakti, Shakti. By this it is not to be understood 
that Shiva or Shakti are ever altogether dissociated but 
the aspects may be regarded as Shiva or Shakti-pradh&na 
respectively. Bh4skarar&ya in his valuable commentary 
on the Lalita Sahasranfima says " From the causal 
(Karana) Bindu proceeds the effect (Karyya) Bindu, 
Nada and Bija. Thus these three which are known 
as supreme, subtle and gross arose." (Asrndch cha 
kdranjbindoh sdkshdtkramena k&ryyahindus tato nddas 
talo bijam Hi trayam utpannam tadidang parasUkshmas- 
IhHiapadair apy uchyaie, V. 132). 

One text of the Prapanchas&ra Tantra says that the 
Parabindu divides into two parts, of which the right is 
Bindu, the Male. Purushaor Hang, and the left Visarga 
the Female, Prakriti or Sah making Hie combined 
Hangsah. Hangsah is the union of Prakriti and Purusha 
and the universe is Hangsah. In however the Ms. on 
which my edition of that Tantra is based (Tantrik Texts, 
VoL III) it is said that the Bindu (Para) divided by Kala 
becomes threefold as Bindu, N4da, Bija. Substantially the 
matter seems one of nomenclature, for the two Bindus 
which make Visarga become three by the addition of the 
Shiva Bindu. Moreover as Hang is Shiva and Sah is 
Shakti, the combined Hangsah implies the relation which 
in the Sh&rada account is called N4da. So it is aLo said 
from the first vowel issued " Hrim." from the second 
Hangsah, and from the third the Mantra "Hrim, Shrlm 
Klim," the first indicative of general form ; the second 
being a more Stlidla form of Akasha and Agni (Sba^» 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



AkAsha ; Ra=Agni) held as ii were within the " skin ” 
(Charraa) of the enveloping ArdhanArlshvara : the third 
commencing with the first and last letters including all 
the 24 Tattvas and all the fifty letters into which the 
general Form particularises itself. 

Parabindu is Shiva-Shakti considered as undivided, 
undifferentiated principles. On the " bursting " of the 
seed which is the Parabindu the latter assumes a threefold 
aspect as Shiva or Bindu. Shakti or Bija and N&da the 
Shiva-Shakti aspect which, considered as the result, 
is the combination, and from the point of view of cause, 
the inter-relation of the two (SharadA 1 . 9) the one acting 
as excitant (Kshobhaka) and the other being the excited 
(Kshobhya). The commentary on V. 40 of the Shatcha- 
kranirupana speaks of Nada as the union of Shiva and 
Shakti ; as the connection between the two and as being 
in the nature of the Shakti of action (KriyAshaktisvarfipa) 
It is also said to be that, the substance of which is Kundali 
( KundalinLmaya) . All three are but different phases 
of Shakti in creation (Comrn. 1 . 39) being different aspects 
of Parabindu which is itself the Ghanavastha aspect 
of Shakti, 

Thus in the first division of Shakti, NAda, Bindu, 
NAda is the Maithuna or Yoga of Shiva and Shakti to 
produce the Parabindu which again differentiates into 
threefold aspects as the Shaktis, though in grosser form, 
wliich produced it. Though the Gunas are factors of the 
gross Shakti Prakriti, they are in subtle form contained 
within the higher Shaktis. This Shakti as the first poten- 
tially kinetic aspect about to display itself is the Chit 
aspect of Shakti and Chit Shakti is, when seen from the 
lower level of the Gunas, Sattvik ; NAda is in the same 
sense Rajasik, for Shakti becomes more and more kinetic 
gathering together Its powers, as it were from the previous 
state of barely stirring potency, for the state of complete 

130 




BINDU OR SHAKTI READY TO CREATE 



readiness to create which is Bindu, and which in the 
aforesaid sense as Ghanibhffta foreshadows that Tamas 
Guna which at a lower stage is the chief factor which 
creates the world, ior the latter is largely the product 
of Tamas. Each aspect of the Tribindu again is asso- 
ciated with one or other of the Gunas. These divisions 
of aspect from the Guna stand-point are not to be under- 
stood as thogh they were separate and exclusively 
concerned with only one of the Gunas. The Gunas 
themselves never exist separately. Where there is Sattva 
there is also Rajas and Tamas. In the same way in the 
case of the three Shaktis IchchhA, Jnana, Kriya, from 
which the Gunas develop, one never stands by itself, 
though it may be predominant. Where there is Ichchh& 
there is Jn&na and so forth. And so again Shakti, Nftda 
and Bindu are not to be severed like different objects in 
the MAyik world. In each there is implicitly or expli- 
citly contained the other. Parameshvara assumes (for 
the Jiva) successively the triple aspects of Shakti. Nfida 
Bindu, Karyya Bindu, Bija, Nada, thus completing by 
this differentiation of Shakti the sevenfold causal sound- 
forms of the Pranava or OngkSra ; namely. Sakala Para- 
meshvara (which is Sachchidananda, for even when the 
Brahman is associated with Avidya its own true nature 
(Svarflpa) is not affected.) Shakri (Shakti Tattva) Nada 
(SadSkhya Tattva) Parabindu (Ishvara Tattva) Bindu 
(Karyya) Nada and Bija. It is not clear to me where 
(if at all) the Shuddhavidya Tattva comes in acording 
to this scheme, unless it be involved in Nada the Mithah- 
samav&ya ; but the Purnsha-Prakriti Tattvas appear to 
take birth on the division of the Parabindu into Shiva 
and Shakti or Hang and Sah ; Hangsah being the 
Purusha-Prakriti Mantra. 

The first impulse to creation comes from the ripening 
of the Adrishta of Jivas, on which Sakala Parameshvara 

131 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



puts forth His Shakti (which means Himself as Shakti) 
to produce the Universe wherein the fruits of Karma may 
be suffered and enjoyed. All the above seven stages are 
included in, and constitute, the first stage of Ikshana or 
"Seeing’' and is that stage in which Shabda exists in its 
supreme or Para form (Parashabdasrishti). She who is 
eternal (An&dirflp&) existing subtly as Chidrfipini in 
MahSpralaya becomes on the ripening of Adrishta in- 
clined (Utsuka) towards the life of form and enjoyment, 
and reveals Herself on the disturbance of the equilibrium 
of the Gunas. As the V&yavtya Samhita says " Parft 
Shakti through the will of Shiva is revealed with Shiva 
Tattva (for the purpose of creation). Then She mani- 
fests as the oil which is latent in, and exudes from, the 
sesamum seed." Paiameshvara is Saguna Shiva or the 
Ishvara of Vedanta Philosophy with Maya as His Upadlu. 
He is Sat, Chit, Ananda in Miyfl body and endowed with 
all Shaktis (Sarvavedintasidd&ntas&rasangraha 312. 313, 
315). There is, as the Pandiadash! says. (3-38 ), a Shakti 
of Shiva which is in and controls all things which have 
their origin in Ananda or Ishvara. When Ishvara is 
moved to create, this Ishvara-shakti or M&y& which is 
the aggregate of, and which yet transcends, all individual 
Shaktis issues from Him and from this May& issue all the 
particular Shaktis by which the universe is evolved 
and is maintained. The same substance is, to a large 
extent, to be found in all accounts under a variety of 
presentment or Symbols ; even where there are real 
differences due to the diversity of doctrine of different 
VedSntic schools. This is not the case here : for the 
account given is a S 4 dhan& presentment of Advaitav&da. 
The Shakta Tantra teaches the unity of Param&tma and 
Jiva, though its presentation of some subjects as Shakti, 
Maya, Chiddbh&sa is different (owing to its practical view 
point) from Shangkara’s May 4 vida. On this matter I 

*33 




BINDU OR SHAKTI READY TO CREATE 

may refer my readers to the article which I recently wrote 
on Shakti and M&yfl in the second number of the Indian 
Philosophical Review (Baroda) since incorporated in the 
second Edition of my "Shakti and Shdkta" 

The three Hindus constitute the great Triangle of 
World-Desire which is the K&makala ; an intricate subject 
which I must leave for a future chapter. The three 
Bind us are Sun, Moon and Fire and the three Shaktis 
Ichchhft, Jnfina, Kriya associated with the three Gunas 
Sattva, Rajas, Tamas. I do not here deal with the 
order or correspondence which requires discussion. 
From them issued the Dens Raudri, Jyeshtha, VamA 
and the Trimurti Rudra, Brahma, Vishnu. 

The three Bindus are also known as the wh ite Bindu 
(Sitabindu), the red Bindu (Shonabindu) and die mixed 
Bindu (Mishrabindu). These represent the Prakasba, 
Vitnarsha and PrakSsha-Vimarsha aspects of the Bra liman 
which are called in the ritual Charanatritaya (The Three 
Feet). The Gurup&duka Mantra in which initiation is 
given in the last or ShadamnSya DikshS represents a state 
beyond the Shukla, Rakta and Mishra Charanas. So 
it is said in Shruti that there are four Brahma pada, 
three here and one the Supreme which is beyond. 

As is the case in many other systems the One for the 
purpose of creation is presented in twofold aspect, for 
Unity is actionless, and their relation involves a third 
aspects which makes the Trinity. But this apparent 
differentiation does not derogate from the substantial 
unity of the Brahman. As the ancient Rudrayfimala 
(II. 22) says : “ The three Devas Brahma, Vishnu. 
Mahcshvara are but one and formed out of My body.” 
EkA mtirtis trayo devd brahmavisknumakeskvar&h 
Mama vigrahasangklipfAh srijaty avali hanli cha 
From the differentiating Bindu arc evo lved the 
Tattvas from Buddhi to Prithivl and the six Lords of 

x 33 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

ihe Tattvas (preceding from Parashiva the seventh) 
who are the presiding DevatSs of mind and of the five 
forms of matter. Here on the diremption or dichotomy 
of Consciousness, Mind and Matter are produc ed. That 
is, Consciousness functions in and through the self-created 
limitations of mind and matter. It was on this division 
also that there arose the Cosmic Sound (Shabda- brahman) 
which manifests as Shabda and Artha. This is the 
Shabda-brahtnan ; so called by those who know the 
Agamas. 

Bhidycmanat pardd bindar avyaktdtnui ravo'bluaat, 
Shabdabrahmeti tang prdhuh sarvtiga muvish&raddh 

(Sharadd-T ilaka I- U) 

It will be observed that in this verse the first Bindu is 
called Para and to make this dear the author of the 
PrSnatoshinf adds the following note : " By Parabindu- is 
meant the first Bindu which is a state of Shakti ( Parddbin - 
dority anena shaklyavasthurupo yah prathamabindus tas- 
m&t). Shabda-brahnian is the Brahman in Its aspect 
as the immediate undifferentiated Cause of the manifested 
and differentiated Shabda, or language in prose or verse ; 
and of Artha or the subtle or gross objects which thought 
and language denote. It is thus the causal state of the 
manifested Shabda or Mantra. 



*34 




CHAPTER XIV 



MAY A TATTVA 

What Matter is in itself the senses do not tell us. 
All that can be predicated of it is its effect upon these 
senses. The expcriencer is affected in five different ways 
giving rise in him to the sensations of hearing (Shabda) ; 
feel by which is experienced the thermal quality of things 
(Sparsha) ; colour anil form (Kupa) ; taste (Kasa) ; and 
smell (Gandha). The cause of these are the five Bhutas 
which, in the general cosmic evolution, arc derived from 
the Tanmatra or general elements of the particulars of 
sense perception. These again together with the senses 
(Indriya) or faculties of mind operating through a parti- 
cular physical organ as their instrument and Manas the 
mental faculty of attention, selection and synthesis of 
the discrete manifold, derive from the still more ge neral 
aspects of the Cosmic Mind or Antahkarana which are the 
personal forms of limited experience respectively called 
Ahangkara and Buddhi. These again are evolutes from 
that form of Shakti which is Prakriti Tattva and which 
in the 36 Tattva scheme comes into being through the 
instrumentality of M&ya Shakti from the preceding 
Tattvas of the pure creation extending from Shuddha- 
vidyd to Shivashakti-Tattva ; the Svarupa of the last 
being Sachchidananda or Pure spirit. Matter is thus a 
manifestation or aspect of Spirit. The two are ultimately 
one. They seem to be two because the fundamental 
Feeling (Chit) is able, as Shakti, to experience itself as 
object. As Professor Haeckel says, in conformity with 
Sh&kta Monism, Spirit and Matter are not two distinct 
entities but two forms or aspects of one single funda- 
mental Substance (which is here the Brahman). The one 

*35 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



entity with dual aspect is the sole Reality which presents 
itself to view as the infinitely varied picture of the 
universe. The two are inseparably combined in every 
atom which, itself and its forces, possess the elements not 
only of vitality but of further development in all degrees 
of consciousness and will. The ultimate substance is 
Shakti, which is of dual aspect as Chit-Shakti which re- 
presents the spiritual, and Maya-Shakti which represents 
the material aspect. These are not separable. In the 
universe the former is the Spirit-matter and the latter 
Matter-spirit. The two exist in inseparable connection 
(Avin&bh&va-sambandha) as inseparable (to use a simile 
of the Shaiva ShSstra) as the winds of the heaven from 
the ether in which they blow. Manifested Shakti or MavA 
is the universe. Unmanifest Shakti is feeling-conscious- 
ncss (ChidrflpA). MiyS-Shakti appears as subtle mind 
and as gross matter and as the life-force and is in Herself 
(SvarQpa) consciousness. There is and can be nothing 
absolutely lifeless or unconscious because Shakti is in 
itself Being — Feeling — Consciousness — Bliss (ChidiGpini. 
Anandamayi) beyond all worlds (VishvottirnG) ; and 
appears as apparently unconscious, or partly conscious 
and partly unconscious, material forms in the universe 
(Vishvatmaka). The universe is Shakti. Therefore it 
is commingled Spirit-Matter. Shakti beyond all worlds 
is Consciousness. The one Consciousness exists through- 
out ; when changeless it receives the name of Shiva ; 
when the source of, and as all moving objects it is called 
Shakti. 

The universe arises through a Negation or Veiling of 
true Consciousness. As the SpaodakfirikA says " By 
veiling the own true form its Shaktis ever arise " (Svani- 
puvatane ch&sya shaklayah saialolthiUxh ) . This is a com- 
mon doctrine of the three schools here discussed. The 
difference lies in this, that in S&ngkhya it is a second 

136 




mAya tattva 



independent principle (Prakriti) which veils ; in M&yav&da 
Vedanta it is the non-Brahman unexplainable mystery 
(Maya) which veils, and in Sh&kta Advaitavada it is 
Consciousness which, without ceasing to be such, yet 
veils itself. This statement shortly describes the differ- 
ence in the three concepts which may however be more 
fully elaborated. 

The Mah&nirv&na Tantra says that the Vakya " All 
this verily is Brahman " khalvidam Brahma) 

is the basis of Kulachara. But Brahman is Conscious- 
ness ; and it cannot be denied that there is an element 
of apparent unconsciousness in things. Sangkhya says 
that this is due to another Principle independent of the 
Purusha-consdousness, namely, the unconscious Prakriti, 
which is real, notv. ithstanding its changes. But accord- 
ing to Advaitav&da Vedftnta there is only one Reality. 
It therefore denies the existence of any second independ- 
ent principle. Shangkara attributes unconsciousness 
to the unexplainable (AnirvachaniyS) wonder (May5), 
which is neither real (Sat) nor unreal (Asat) nor partly 
real and partly unreal (Sadasat), and which though not 
fonning part of Brahman, and therefore not Brahman, is 
yet, though not a second reality, inscparatdy associated 
and sheltering with Brahman (Maya Brahmasritfi) in one 
of its aspects (Ishvara) ; owing what false appearance 
of reality it has to the Brahman with which it is so 
associated. It is an eternal falsity {MithydbhiUd santi- 
lani) unthinkable, alogical, unexplainable (A nirvachantyi). 
The reflection of Purusha on Prakriti gives the appear- 
ance of consciousness to the latter. So also the reflec- 
tion (Chid3bli&sa) of Brahman on unconscious M&y& is 
ishvara and on unconscious AvidyA is Jiva. Though 
M&y& is thus not a second reality, the fact of positing it 
at all gives to Shangkara’s doctrine a tinge of dualism 
from which the Sh&kta doctrine (which has yet a wcak- 

137 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



ness of its own) is free. The Shakta doctrine has no need 
of Chidabhaso. It says that Maya is a Shakti of Brahman 
and being Shakti. which is not different from the possessor 
of Shakti (Shaktiman), it is. in its Sraiup >/. consciousness. 
It is then consciousness which veils itself ; not unconscious 
Maya which veils consciousness. According to Shang- 
kam, man is the Spirit (Atma) vestured in the Mftyik 
falsities of mind and matter. He accordingly can only 
establish the unity of Jiva and Ishvara by eliminating 
from the first Av'dyii and from the second Mava, both 
being essentially — and from the transcendent stand- 
point —nothing. Brahman ri thus left as common deno- 
minator. The Shakta lias need to eliminate nothing. 
Man's spirit or Atma is Shiva. His mind anil body are 
Shakti. Shiva and Shakti are one. Tin- Jivatmfi is 
Shiva-Shakti, the latter being understood as in it* world- 
aspect So is the Paramfttrt» 4 ; though here Shakti, 
being uncreating, is in the form of Consciousness 
(GhidrupiniL Tfvjsupreme Shiva-Shakti exists as one. 
Shiva-Shakti as the world is the Manifold. Man is thus 
not the Spirit covered by a non-Brahman falsity but 
Spirit covering itself with its own Power or Shakti. As 
the Kaulacharyya Sadftnanda says in his Commentary 
(which I have published) on the 4th Mantra of the Isha 
Upauishad — " The changeless Brahman which is consci- 
ousness appears in creation as Mav& which is Brahman 
(Brahmamayi) Consciousness (Chidrupini) holding in 
Herse!' unbeginning •; AnAdi) K.'irniik tendencies (Karma- 
sangskara) in the form of the three Gunas. Hence She 
is Gunamayi (Her substance is Guna) despite being 
Chinmayi (Consciousness). As there is no second prin- 
ciple these Gunas are Chit-Shakti." Hence, in the 
words of the Yoginihridaya Tantra, the Devi is Praktisha- 
vimarshasfanarasytir&pittf There i« Min> *ni|\r no uncon- 
scious and no rmda be- \ii . 11. -xistsis Con- 




MAYA TATTY A 



sciousness as Shakti. "Aharn sin " as the Advaitabhava 
Upanishad exclaims. And so flic grand doctrine " AH 
is Consciousness ” is boldly and vigorously affirmed. 
Those who worship the Mother, worship nothing uncon- 
scious but a Supreme Consciousness which is Love, the 
body of which Love is all forms ol consciousnuss-uncon- 
sciousness produced by, and which is. Hera* Shiva’s Power. 
In shoit Sangkara says that there is unconsciousness 
which appears to be conscious through Chid4bhasa. 
ShSkta doctrine says Consciousness appears to be un- 
consciousness or more truly to have an element of un- 
consciousness in it (for nothing even empirically is 
absolutely unconscious) owing to the veiling play of 
Consciousness itself as Mayd-Shakti. The result is in 
the end the same—" All is Cored ousness ’’—but the 
method by which this conclj.-ion is attained and the 
presentment of the matter is reversed. 

This presentment again is in conformity with scienti- 
fic research which has shown that even so-called " brute 
matter ” exhibits the elements of that sentiency which, 
when evolved in man, is the full self-consciousness. It 
has been well said that sentiency is an integrant cons- 
tituent of all existence, physical as well as metaphysical, 
and its manifestation can be traced throughout the 
mineral and chemical as well as the vegetable and animal 

to environment, response to stimuli and atomic memory 
in the lower or inorganic plane, whilst in the higher or 
organic plane it includes all the psychic functions such 
as consciousness, perception, thought, reason, volition 
and individual memory. Ihiuiighout it is the one 
Mother who works, now veiling Her Bliss in inorganic 
matter, now more fully revealing Ikrself by gradual 
stagesas the vilivity (which She is) displays iLsdl in the 
evolving forms ot worldly life. As Hieckel says, sen- 

139 



THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



tiency is. like movement, found in all matter. To reach 
this conclusion we must assume (as the Shiva-Shakta 
schools do) that IvriyA and Ichchhfi, its preliminary, 
are functions of Consciouness. Abbinava Gupta in his 
Commentary on the PratyabhijnA K&rika says, " The 
characteristic of action is the manifestation of all objects. 
These objects again characterised by consciousness- 
unconsciousness are in the nature of a shining forth 
(AbhAsa).” The universe is thus described as a " going 
forth ” (Prasara) of Shiva. 

The ultimate reality is Sachchidananda which, as 
the source of appearances, is called Shakti. The latter 
in its Sat (Being) aspect is omnipresent-indestructible 
(eternal) Source and Basis both of the Cosmic Breath 
or Prana as also of all vital phenomena displayed as the 
individual Prina in separate and concrete bodies. 
Shakti is Life which, in its phenomenal sense as mani- 
fested in individual bodies, issues from, and rests upon, 
and at basis is. Sat. In this aspect manifested Shakti 
is vitality which is the one fixed unalterable potential 
in the universe of which all other forms of energy are 
particular effects. Life is the phenomenal aspect of 
Spirit in which, as its Cause, it is at the great dissolution 
merged. There is no absolute end uf life but only to 
certain structures of life. As it had no end it has no 
absolute beginning. It appears only in creation from 
the depths of Being which is its unmanifested ground. 
The search for the "origin of life" is futile ; for it issues 
from Brahman who, in a supreme sense, is Infinite Life. 
Life is throughout the universe. Every atom of dust 
is quivering with it, as are the most sensitive organic 
structures. In the latter case it is obvious ; in the former 
it is not so, but is yet traced. The existence and func- 
tions of life cannot be explained on exclusively mechanic- 
al principles. What is called mechanical energy is the 

140 




MAYA tatty a 



effect and not the cause of vitality or vitivitv or Shakti 
as the Mother of all. The purpose of evolution is to 
take up the living potential from some lower grade, 
develop it and hand it over to a higher grade of forms. 

Shakti as Chidananda is, as IchchhA Shakti, the 
source of all forms of will-power and, in matter, of mecha- 
nical energy ; and as Jn&na Shakti, of all forms of men- 
tality and feeling, and as KriyS, of all forms of activity 
(Kartritva), being in itself all-mighty. 

The ultimate changeless Reality, in its aspect as 
Shakti, veils and contracts in various degree its power 
of will, knowledge and action. This veiling, negation, 
limitation or contraction is seen at its fullest in so-called 
“ dead inert brute " matter. This allegation of lifeless 
inertia is however the result of superficial observation. 
It is true that in gross matter (Bhfita) the light of cons- 
ciousness is turned down to its utmost. It is nowhere 
however even empirically extinguished. Chit is faintly 
manifested by scientific experiment in gross matter ; 
more clearly in the micro-organisms between such matter 
and the vegetable world, in which, as in the animal 
world evolved from it, vitality is so obvious that we have 
been wont to call these alone " alive.” Sh&kta doctrine 
starts with the Full (POrna) and deals with the creation 
of tilings as a cutting down thereof. From a scientific 
point ol view we may commence with the world as it 
is, taking inorganic matter as the starting point. From 
such a standpoint we may speak (See ” Vedas vital mole- 
cule “ and ” Notes on the radical vitality of all concrete 
matter ” by G. Dubern) of a Radical Vital Potential in all 
mutter, universal, omnipresent, indestructible, all-power- 
ful ; the source as will-power ol mechanical energy, and 
as rudimentary sentiency of all mentality. From the 
Shastric standpoint the process is one of veiling and 
unveiling. Shakti veils itself down to and in Pritihvl 

141 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



Tattva of gross matter (BhQta) ; and thereafter gradually 
unveils Herself up to and in mail who in Samadhi realises 
his Svarupa as pure, unveiled, Consciousness. 

This veiling by Shakti takes place first in Shiva- 
Shakti Tattva by the complete negation of the " I dam ” 
of experience ; and then through the action of the “Ham ' 
on the subjective aspect of the consciousness of the pure 
creation, in which subject aud object exist as part of the 
One Self ; and then through that form of Shakti which is 
May 4 which effects a severance of subject and object 
which are then experienced no longer as part of the one 
Self but as separate. The point of junction between 
Pure and Impure experience is the Tattva variously 
called Vidya Sadvidya, or Shuddhavidyil, the first truly 
realistic stage of the Yogi. Because it is in the inter- 
mediate state, it is called Parapara-dashS (Isli. Prat. 
HI. 1-5) and, as the Svachchhanda Tantra (IV, 95) 
says, the “ Experience in the form of Mantra of both 
difference and non-difference.’’ After this Tattva, Mfiya 
intervenes. 

In the Tattva Sandoha (v. 5) it is said, “Maya is the 
sense of difference (Bhedabuddhi) in all Jivas which are 
parts ol Her. Just ns the shore holds in the sea, so She 
ever obstructs the manifestation (Vibhava) of Atm 4 
which but lor Her is otherwise unobstructed.” 

May a vibheda-buddhir nijdngsha-jdteshu nihhilajiveshu, 
Niiyani Casya nirankushavibhavam ve leva vdridhe rundhe. 

So also in the ish vara-Pratyabhij n 4 it is said, "That 
which is nothing but the notion of difference (Bhcda-dhi) 
in tilings entertained by the Doer (KaitS), though in 
Himself of the nature of consciousness, is Maya-Shakti, 
whom others, as in the case of Vidyeshvaras, call Vidya". 
Bhcdadhir ev a bhdveshu kartur bodhdlmano ’ pi yd, 

Mdyd shaklycvu sd vidyetyanye vidyeshvard yalhd. 

(HI, ii, 6) 
142 




mAyA tattva 



" She is Vidyii Shakti when She reveals in the Pashu 
state of the Alma whose true nature is Lordship (Aish- 
varya), but when She veils (Tirodhanakari) then She 
is called Maya ” 

T asyaiskvaryasvabhdvasya pashu-bhdve prohUhihd, 

V idy&shaklis tirodb&nakafi mdydbhidhd fmnah. (ib. 7) 
Shiva has two functions namely Tirodh&na, that by 
which He veils Himself to His worshipper, and Anugraha 
whereby He, through His grace . reveals Himself by the 
" descent of Shakti " or grace (Shaktipata). She is both 
Madhumati '’Honey” and Maya {T alitA-sahasrambna, 
v. 139). She is that saving (Taraka) knowledge by which 
the ocean of the Sangsftra is crossed. The Chitkali or 
Angsha of the great Consciousness enveloped by mind 
and matter is the Shakti which, as the Padma Purina 
says, resides as the core of the “ inner working ’’ of all 
Jlvas and the Anandakalikd or Germ of Bliss therein ; 
She again as the Lalit&sahasranSma says (v. 142J is basis 
of the false fin the sense of impermanent) universe ( Milky d 
jagadadhislhdnd ) created by, and which is, Her M4yd, the 
power of the Lord (Shandilya Sutra, 80) which obscures 
and which, as the Shakta Devi Purina says, is called 
Miya, because it is the marvellous instrument whereby 
unheared of results are produced like those of dreams or 
Magic. She is in all systems, whether as Prakriti, M4y4 
or M4yA-shakti, the /utilising principle whereby forms 
are created in the formless Consciousness. This She 
effects by causing that duality of feeling of the self and 
not-self in the grand experience which is MaMsatti. 
Under Her influence the Self experiences Itself as object 
in all the forms of the universe, which when completed is 
objectively seen as an evolution from Prakriti Tattva. that 
state of Shakti which is evolved by the action of M4y& 
and the five Kanchukas developed from Her. These 
are specific aspects of the great general limiting Power 

*43 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

(Shakti) which Maya is. With this Prakriti is associated 
Purusha Tattva, the two combined being Hangsa. 
Purusha Tattva is Atma enveloped by the Kanchukas 
derived from Maya and specific aspects of its operation. 
Shakti as Prakriti, subject to the influence of the Kanchu- 
kas. develops on the dis-cquilihrium of Her Gunas from 
Herself, as Virkritis, the impure Tattvas (Ashuddha 
Tattva) extending to Prithivt. At this point conscious vit- 
al energy materialises, forming what has been called by 
the author cited "the crust of the vital molecule” of all 
forms of solid matter. Subjectively therefore the MSya 
process is the establishment ol a dichotomy of subject 
and object in what would otherwise be an unitary exper i- 
ence ; and objectively it is the creation of the various 
psychical and physical forms into which the Universal 
Substance projects ; becoming in the course of such 
emanation more and more gross. Bindu as the Mantra 
designation of Ishvara Tattva is Ghanibhfita : that is, 
the first Ghanava-stha aspect of Shakti becoming (through 
MayS) Prakriti Tattva and its evolutes which are more 
and more gross (Sthiila) ; until passing the first four 
states of decreasing subtlety of matter. Substance emer 
ges as the solid atoms of matter of which the physical 
universe is composed. These compounds being the 
subject of the senses arc the materials of physical science 
which seeks to work the process backwards. At a point, 
search on the path of objectivity is closed. If it would 
know more, the mind must turn in on itself and release 
itself from all objectivity which Maya is and fall back 
into that ground of Consciousness (Mayatita) whence it 
has emerged. From the Mantra aspect dealing with 
the origin of language the undifferentiated Shabda 
which arises on the differentiation of the Bindu into 
Purusha-Prakriti or Hangsa develops, with the creation 
of mind and matter, into the manifested Shabda and 

144 




MAYA tattva 



Artha which ate the Varnas or letters (springing Irom 
the subtle M4trikds) expressed in Vaikhar! speech made 
up of letters (VarnaJ syllables (l’ada) and sentences 
(V&kya or the uttered Mantra). Mantra again is the 
thought (Man) which saves (Tra, Truyale ) : Saves from 
what ? From firstly the evil which man. subject to 
MayA, commits ; and then, by the thorough purification 
of the mind (Chittashuddhi), from M4y2 Herself who is 
transformed in the Sadhaka into Vidya Shakti. Mantra 
is thus here a pure thought-form ; a pure Vritti or modi- 
fication of the Antahkarana which is Devati. The 
senses and mind are also Devatis being operations of 
the one Divine Shakti. Through Mantra the mind is 
divinely transformed. Contemplating, filled by, and 
identified with, Divinity in Mantra form, which is a StliQla 
(gross) aspect of Devi, it passes into Her subtle (Sukshma) 
Light form (Jyotirmayi Devi) which is the Consciousness 
beyond the world of Mayik forms ; the Ishvara and 
Ishvari who as Shabda-brahman are the source of. and 
appear as, that M&ya which is the Crcatrix both of the 
objective world of Mind and Matter and of the manifested 
Shabda and Artha ; the Word and its Meaning derived 
from the Mother in Her aspect as Supreme Nftda 
(Paranada) and Supreme Speech (Para vak). 



*43 




CHAPTER XV 
THE KANCHUKAS 

The six Kanchukas including Maya which may be 
regarded as the root of the other five are Kala, Niyati, 
Raga, Vidyi, Kala. The term Kanchuka means sheath 
or envelope. The same Tattvas are also called contrac- 
tions (Sangkocha), for creation is the contracted (Sang- 
kuchadrOpi) form of infinite Shakti. It is to be observed 
that MlyA, Niyati and K41a, occupy in the philosophy 
of the Pancharatra Agarna the very place which is 
held in the Shaiva-Shakta system by the Kanchukas 
(See as to this Dr. Otto Schrader's Ahirbudhnya Samhitd 
63, 64, 90). The author cited opines that tire six Kanchu- 
kas are only an elaboration of the older doctrine of the 
three powers of limitation (Sangkocha) of the Pancha- 
r&tra which arc MAyA, KAla, Niyati. The same idea is 
expressed by these two terms, namely limitations by 
whidh the Atma, in its form as the finite experiencer, 
is deprived of the specific attributes which It, as the 
Perfect Experience, possessed. Consciousness reaching 
forth to the World of enjoyment becomes subject to 
the Kanchukas and thus becomes the impure, finite 
worldly experience where subject and object are com- 
pletely different ; which experience is, as it were, the 
inversion by the contraction and negation of Shakti of 
the perfect Experience from whose Shiva-Shakti-Tattva 
aspect it proceeds. Infinite Consciousness whilst still 
transcendentally retaining its Svanipa is, as Shakti, 
narrowed to the degree which constitutes our experience 
on the material plane. The process may be represented 
in Diagram by an inverted triangle representing the 
Yoni or Shakti, in the form of the Pure Tattvas, resting 

146 




THF. KANCHUKAS 



on the point of ait upright triangle. The point of inter- 
section is M&yfi from which proceeds the second triangle 
representing the impure Tattvas, which constitute world- 
ly experience. Seen in the waters of Maya all is reversed. 
Through the operation of Maya and the Kar.chukas, 
Shakti assumes the gross contracted form of Prakriti 
Tattva which in association with Purusha Tattva is 
Hangsa. Shiva and Shakti are the Rird Hangsa. Hangsa 
is both male (Pung or Purusha) and female (Prakriti). 
Hang is Shiva and Sail is Shakti. This Hangsa-dvandva 
are in their gross form the universe {Pung-prakrityattmko 
hangsas taddtmakam tdum jagal), Purusha is the Atma 
enveloped by the Kanchukas which arc the contractions 
of Consciousness and Its Powers. Maya is the root 
and cause of all limitations of the powers (Vibhava) of 
consciousness (Atma) : for Maya is the sense of difference 
(Bhedabuddhi) between all persons and things. Each 
Purusha, (and they are innumerable) being, as the Svach- 
chhanda Tantra says, an universe of his own. Each 
Purusha creates under Maya his or its own universe. 
The Kanchukas are thus the delimitations of the Supreme 
in Its form as Shakti. It was Eternity (Nityatft) but is 
now orderly delimitation (Parichchheda) productive of 
appearance and disappearance (that is life and death). 
This is the operation of the Time-power or Kala which 
is defined as follows in the Tattva-Sandoha (V. n) "That 
Shakti of His which is Eternity (Nityata) descending 
and producing appearance and disappearance (birth 
and death) ; and which ever in regulated manner performs 
the function of division or delimitation (Parichch- 
heda) should be regarded as in the form of Kala 
Tattva," 

Si i nityat&'sya shakti > nikrishya k id ha nodayapradd new, 
Niyataparichckhcdakari hlipta syat K&la-tattva-r&pena 
K&la is the power which urges on and matures things. 

147 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



It is not in itself subjective or empirical time, though it 
gives rise to it. It is transcendental Time without 
sections (Akhanda Kala) -giving birth to time as effect 
(K&ryyakfila). This gross time with parts (Sakala K&la) 
only coincs in with the creation of the gross Tattvas. 
So it is said “Time leads me in time" (See Ahirbudlmya 
64-67. See also the same Author's Ueber den stand der 
Indischen Philosophic zur zeit MahSvIras und Buddhas 
17-30). Consciousness as Shakti is contracted into the 
mode of temporal thinking. It was freedom and in- 
dependence (Svatantrata). This is now contracted and 
the Purusha is forcibly subjected to guidance and regula- 
tion in what he must or must not do in any moment of 
time. This is Niyati. which is defined in the Tattva 
Sandoha (v. 12) as follows : — "That which constitutes 
that Shakti of His which is called Independence or Free- 
dom (Svatantrata) ; this same Shakti, and none other, 
becoming contracted and subjecting Him perforce to 
guidance and regulation (Niyamayantl) in a definitely 
ordered and restricted manner (Niyatam) as regards what 
is to be done or not done (that- is, what he must not do 
at any given moment of time) is Niyati." 

Yasya svatantratakhya shaktih sangkochash&lini saiva, 

K r ityakrityeshvavasha tig niyatam a mum niyamayan- 

lyabhitn Niyatih. 

Niyati is spoken of in the Pancharfitra Agama as the 
subtle regulator of everything (Sfikshma-sarva-niyS- 
makah. Ahirbudhnya VI. 46) and is said by Dr. Schrader 
(1 op-cit 64, 65) to include in that system the functions 
of the three Shaiva-Sh&kta Kanchukas Vidyi, K&ga and 
Kala (Ahirbudhnya S. 64-65). It was completely 
satisfied with Itself for there was then no other. It was 
the Full (Pflrna), and there was nothing else for it to 
interest Itself in and thus want. This Shakti, becoming 
limited, makes the Purusha interested in objects and thus 

14S 




THE KANCHUKAS 



attaches them to enjoyment. This is Raga which is 
defined in the Tattva Sandolia (v. to) as follows 

"There is another Shakti of His which is eternal 
complete satisfaction ; the same becoming limited and 
attaching him ever to enjoyment, this Shakti is reduced 
to the condition of R&gatattva.” 

NHya-paripdriuitripiih shaft! is tasyaiva par: mild ini salt, 
Bhogeshu ranjayanli salalam amum R&ga-lattvatdm y&td. 

The Brahman is, as the Isha Upanishad says. Puma 
the Full, the All which wants nothing ; for there is nothing 
to the All which It can want. But when the one Ex- 
perience becomes dual, and, subject and object are 
separate, then the self as subject becomes interested in 
objects that Is in things other than itself. IchchltfL in 
the sense of desire implies a want of the fullness which is 
that of the Supreme perfect experience. In the supreme 
creative sense IchchhA is the direction of Consciousness 
towards activity. The term Raga is commonly trans- 
lated desire. It is however properly that interest in 
objects which precedes desire. Raga is thus that 
interest in objects, seen as other than the self, which 
ripens into desire (IchchhS) for them. Such Ichchhft is 
thus a limitation of the all-satisfied fullness of the 
Supreme. 

The power of the Supreme was to know or experience 
all things and so it is Sarvajnata. This is limited and 
the Purusha thereby becomes a "little knower.” This 
Kanchuka is called Vidya which is defined in the Tattva 
Sandoha (V. q) as follows : — "His power of all-knowing- 
ness becoming- limited and capable of knowing only a 
few things and producing knowledge (of a limited 
character) is called Vidyfi by the wise of old” 

Sarvajnatdsya shakiih parimitatanur alpa-vedyamdtra- 
pard, 

Jn&nam utpddayanli Vidyeii vigadyate budhair Adyaih 

149 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



The supreme is all powerful .mighty to do all things 
(SarvakartritS). This power is contracted so that the 
Parasha can accomplish few things and becomes a "little 
doer," This is Kala which is defined in the Tatlva Sandoha 
(v. 8} as follows — 

"That which was His power of all-doing-ness, the 
same being contracted and capable of accomplishing 
but a few things and reducing him to the state of a little 
doer is called Kal&." 

TiU-sarvakarlrild si S s angkuchita katipayurtha-matra-para 
Kinchit-kartaram amum kalayanti kirtyate Kald ndttta. 

Kala is thus nothing but Kartrittva or infinite activity, 
agency, and mightiness cut down to the limits of the 
Jtva's power : that is lowered to the possibilities of finite 
action. 

Thus the Shaktis of the Supreme which are many 
become contracted. Consciousness thus limited in six- 
fold manner by its own Shakti is the Puruslia associated 
with Prakriti. Kali (in its more generic sense) is said 
in the Shaiva Tantrasara (Ahnika 8) to be "the cause of 
the manifestation of Vidyi and the root when She is 
operating on that Kartritva which is qualified by the 
qualifying conditions of littleness ; this limited power 
of agency having been itself the work of M&yi. Now 
the moment that Kali separates from herself what cons- 
titutes this qualifying aspect spoken of above as Kinchit 
(little) at that very moment there is the creation of the 
Prakriti-Tattva which is in the nature of a generality 
(Simanya-matra) unmarked by any specific form of object 
of enjoyment, such as happiness, sorrow and delusion ; 
and of which another name is the equalisation of -the 
Gunas. Thus the creation under the influence of the 
Kali-tattva of the limited cxperiencer (Bhoktri) that is 
of the Purusha and of the experienced (Bhogya) or 
Prakriti is quite simultaneous that is without any succes- 

*50 




THE KANCHUKAS 



sion whatever in the process. Thus being simultaneous 
they are ever associated." 

The eighth Ahnika of the Tantrasiira (the Shaiva and 
not the Shikta ritual work of KrishnSnanda Agamava- 
gisha) says : — Thus it has been already shown that Kala 
is the cause of manifestation of Y'idy&and the rest (». e., 
the other four Kanchukas leaving out Mfty&) when She 
(Kali) is operating on that agency or doer-ness(Kartritva) 
which is qualilied (Visheshya) by the qualifying ( Vishesh- 
ana) condition of littleness : this limited power of 
agency (Kmchitkartritva as opposed to Sarva-kartritva) 
having been itself the work of Maya. Now the moment 
that Kala separates from Herself that which constitutes 
this qualifying aspect ( Visheshana-bhaga) spoken of above 
as Kinclnt and is an object of knowledge and action, that 
verj’ moment there is the creation (Sarga) of the Prakriti- 
Tattva which is of the nature of a generality only (S&mS- 
nya-matra) unmarked by any specific forms of the enjoy- 
able (Bhogya) such as happiness, sorrow, and delusion 
(which are therefore as yet undifferentiated) and of 
which another name is the equalisation of their Gunas 
(». e., of Sukha, Duhkha and Moha or of the Gunas 
of Her). Thus- the creation under the influence of the 
Kala Tattva of the Enjoycr (Bhoktri or limited 
experiencer) and Enjoyable (Bhogya or experienced) 
is quite simultaneous, that is without any succession 
whatever in the process and being simultaneous they are 
conjoined. 

(Eiutm kinchil-karlritvant you mayakaryam, tatra 
hinchitlva-viskisklam yat kartritvam visheshyatn , tatra 
vydpriyamdtut kaid vidyddiprasavahetur iti nirupitam. 
Iddnfm visheshanabhdgo yah kinchid ityuklo jneyah 
kuryash cha tarn ydvat sd Kala sv&tmanak prithak kurule 
tdzad esha eva suk/ta-duhkha-inchdtmaka-bhagyavishes- 
hdnusytitasya sdmdnya-mdtrasya tad-guna-samyd-para- 

151 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



fulmnah prakriti-tallvasya sargah — Hi bhoklribltogya-yvga- 
lasya s \amam eva kald-fallvdyatld srishtih.) 

Again in the Tantrfdoka (Ahnika 9) it is said "So far 
it has been shown how Agency (Kartritva) which is 
always accompanied by the power to enjoy 
(Bhoktritva) is (to be found) in that qualified aspect 
(that is Kartritva) of the Tattva called Kal 4 which 
(aspect) is characterised by a limited agency (little- 
docrncss).’’ 

Here may be interposed a note of explanation. 
Kartritva is creative activity, ideation and formation as 
contrasted with a merely induced and passively accepted 
experience which is Jnatritva. Kartritva is the power ol 
modifying the Idam. The SSngkhyas say that the 
Purusha is BhoktS but not Karla. But the Shaiva- 
Shiktas hold that there is no Kartritva witout 
Bhoktritva. In Parasamvit there is the potential germ of 
(t) Jnatritva. (2) Bhoktritva, (3) Kartritva, held in un- 
distinguishable unity In Shiva-Shakti Tattva the first 
exists and the second and third are, through Shakti, sup- 
pressed. In Sadakhya there are the first and the incipiency 
of the second and third ; and in ishvara Tattva all three 
are developed but as yet undifferentiated. The ishvara 
consciousness directed to the "Idam" produces equality 
of attention on "Aham" and "Idam" which is Sadvidyi 
Tattva whence arise M 4 yS and the Kanchukas evolving 
Purusha-Prakriti. Parasamvit is the pure changeless 
aspect of Chit. Ishvara is the fully risen creative cons- 
ciousness wherein is the undiflerentiated Shakti which 
functions as Icbchh&, Jnana, KriyfL JnStrittva or Jn&na. 
Shakti in ishvara does not involve limited modification, 
for the whole universe as the Self is present to the Self. 
But in Purusha there is such modification : the Jn&t- 
ritva functioning through Buddhi, the Vrittis of which 
are expressions of the changing, limited, and partial 

152 




THE KANCHUKAS 



characteristics of the knowledge had through this ins- 
trument and its derivatives. 

The citation continues, “But in what constitutes 
therein the part “Kinchit" as a qualifying aspect, Kal4 
gives birth to the PradhSna which arises from that 
(Kinchit aspect) as a clear but general objectivity which 
is separate or distinct from (the Purusha)." 

Evdm kal&khya-tattvasya kinchif-karlritva-lakshane, 

V tshcshyabhdge kartritvam charchHam bhoklri-ptirvakam 
Visheshattalayd yo'tra kinchtd bh&gas-UuMhitam , 
Vedyam&tram sphulam bhinnam pradhunam siiyaU kala. 

That is Kartritva is that aspect of Kali which is 
characterised by Kinchit -Kartritva. From the qualifying 
(Visheshana, that, is Kinchit) aspect Kala produces 
Prakriti which is distinct from Kala as Purusha. which 
Prakriti exists as a mere general objectivity which becomes 
particular when owing to disequilibrium in the Gunas the 
Vikritis are produced. 

Again it is said (ibid) “Kala produces the Bhogya 
(Prakriti) and the Bhokta (Purusha) simultaneously by 
the notion of. or by seeking for, a distinction (that is by 
seeking to establish a difference between the two aspects 
in Herself, namely. Kartritva and Kinchit ; by working 
on Kartritva alone.) (yet), the Bhokta and Bhogya are 
inseparate from one another. And because what is thus 
the barest objectivity (Samvedya-matra) is known (or 
experienced ) later as [or in the form of, happiness (Sukha) 
Sorrow (Duhkha) and delusion (Viraoha) it is therefore 
called the equalisation of these (three) in the beginning." 
(Satnameva hi bhogyang cha bhokldrang cha pras&yale kali 
bhsd&bhhandhandd aviyuktam parasparam. Evam 
samvedyamdlram yai sukiiaduhkha-i'imohatah, bhotsyate 
yat tatah proklam /alsdmydlmakam Mil ah). 

When M4y& Sliakti first severs the “Aham" and 
"Idam" this latter is still experienced as an unlimited 

*33 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



whole. The next step is that in which the whole is limited 
and broken up into parts, for our experience is not of an 
all- pervading homogeneous whole but of a heterogeneous 
universe. Kali, as a development of Mdy& Shakti, 
belittles the Purusha's liitherto unlimited Agency which 
thus becomes Kinchit-Kartritva. Agency which exists 
both as to the Knowable (Jncya) and object of action 
(K&ryva) has two aspects, namely the qualified power of 
action (Visheshya-Kartritva) on the part of the Purusha 
and the object or "little” in respect of which Kartritva 
operates, namely the “little” or universe (Kinchit or 
Visheshana) which is the "Idam" as viewed by Purusha 
after the operation of Kald Shakti. Kal& operates on 
agency (Kartritva) and not on the "this” which is by 
such operation necessarily Kinchit. For i f the power 
and experience of the Self is limited, the object is expe- 
rienced as limited : for the object is nothing but the Self 
as object. In oilier words the production of Purusha 
is a positive operation of Kala whereas the production 
of Prakriti is a negative operation due to the limitation 
of the Purusha which, as so limited, experiences the 
universe as Kinchit. Prakriti is thus nothing but the 
object of Kartritva as it exists when the latter has been 
whittled down by Kali. Purusha and Prakriti thus 
both emerge as the result of the action by Kali on the 
Purusha. For this reason Purusha and Prakriti are 
simultaneously produced and arc also inseparable. 

The following chapters deal with Purusha and Prakriti 
or Hangsa ; the K&makala or three Bindus arising on the 
differentiation of the Parabindu which differentiation 
witnesses the birtli of the Hangsa ; and then with the 
creation of the impure Tattvas (Ashuddha-Tattva) from 
Prakriti and the Vamamili or the Garland or Rosary 
of Letters, the evolution of which denotes the origin of 
speech and of Mantra. 



*54 




CHAPTER XVI 
HANGSA 

Hangsa is I’urusha-Prakriti Tattva. Hang is "Male” 
or Shiva ; Sah is "Female” and Shakti. Shiva-Shakti 
are therefore Hangsa which combined mean the "Bird” 
Hangsa, the material shape of which is variously said to 
be that of the goose, flamingo, brShmini duck and rightly 
by others to be legendary. The universe is made of, 
and informed by this Hangsa Pair (Hangsadvandva) 
who are Purusha and l’rakriii and in all the latter’s 
varied forms (Pirngfitakrityti/iiuiko hangsas iadalmakdm 
idtwi jagat). Of these the Anandalahart says (39) "In 
Thy An&hata Lotus F salute the Wondrous Pair who are 
Hang and Sah, swimming in the mind of the Great who 
ever delight in the honey of the blooming lotus of know- 
ledge.” That is, they manifest in the mind of the Great 
delighting in the honey of Consciousness. This Hangsah 
reversed is the Vedintic "So'ham" of which the Satnmoh- 
ana Tantra (Ch. VIII) says “Hakara is one wing. 
Sak&ra is the other. When stripped of both wings then 
Tara is KJimakalft.” Jiva is Hangsa. The same Tantra 
says that the Sfidhaka of Tar& is the Lord of both Khdi 
and Hadi Mata. The Hangsat&rS Mahavidya is the 
sovereign mistress of Yoga whom the K 4 dis call Kali, 
the Hadis Shrisundari and the Ka-H&dis llangsah. 

The Jn&namava Tantra (xxi-22) speaking of the 
Chitkunda as the Mandala in the Mtil&dhara w-here 
Homa is done, defines as follows the four Atmas, viz, 
ParamatmS, Antaratma, Jnanatma and AtmS which 
form the Chitkunda and by the knowledge whereof there 
is no rebirth. Atm&is Pranarupi that is theAtma which 
is in all beings as their Prfuia. It is Hangsa-SvarQpi 

155 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



or Jlv&tm& manifested by outer and inner breathing 
(Shvflsa, Uchchhv&sa). It is compared to the ether 
in a pot, which the potter's wheel separates from the 
surrounding Akasha but from which there is no distinc- 
tion when the pot is broken. The individual brealh is 
the Cosmic Breath from which it seems to be different b.v 
the forms which the latter vitalises. Jn&n&tmi is 
S&kshats4kshi-rupaka. It is that which witnesses all 
and by which the unity of all is known. It is reflected in 
Buddhi and the rest, and is yet in its own form distin- 
guishable therefrom, just as the rays of the moon are 
reflected on water and seem to be. and are yet not, one 
with it. It is thus the substratum of Buddhi and of all 
the subjective or mental Tattvas derivable therefrom. 



By "Antar" in the term AntaratmS is meant the subtle 
(Rahasya-sdkshmarQpaka) Atma which pervades 
all things ; the spark of ParamatmS which indwells all 
bodies (Antargata). It is the Hangsa known only by 
Yogis. Its beak is Tara (Pranava or “Om” Mantra). 
Nigama and Agama are its two wings. Shiva and Shakti 
its two feet. The three Bindus are its three eyes. This 
is the Paramahangsa ; that is Hangsa in its supreme 



aspect as the Consciousness-ground of the manifested 
Hangsa or Jiva. When this Paramahangsa is spread 
(Vy&pta), that is, displayed, then all forms of matter 
(BhQta), viz, Ak&sha, Pavana and the rest spring up in 
their order. Of these five the root is Chitta. This Hangsa 
disports itself in the World-lotus sprung from the Mud 



of Delusion (Mohapangka) in the Lake of Ignorance 
(Avidya). When this Hangsa becomes unworldly 
(Nishprapanclia) and in dissolving from (Sangliararfipi) 
then it makes visible the Atmfi or Self (Atmdnam pra- 
darshayd). Then its "Birdncss” (Pakshitva) disappears 
and the So ’ham Atm& is established. "Know this" says 



the Jn&narnava "to be the Paramatm&." 



156 




HANGSA 



Purusha is Atmfl subject to M&yfi Shakti and the 
other limiting Shaktis called the Ivanchukas. Prakriti 
is that state of Shakti which arises as the result of the 
collective operation of Mftya and the Kanchukas ; a trans- 
formation of Shakti existing as a homogeneity and general 
objectivity which develops of its own power, which is the 
summation of the Shaktis producing it, into the heteroge- 
neous universe. The- Purusha- Prakriti Tattvas arise as a 
bifurcation in Consciousness on the differentiation of the 
Parabindu into the three Hindus which form the Kama- 
kalft, which again may be pictured as the triangular base of 
the pyramidal (Shringitaka) figure in the Shri-Yantra at 
whose apex is the Baindava Chakra and Parabindu. The 
three Bindus represent die Shiva aspect and the Shakti 
aspect of the one Consciousness, and the third the mutual 
relation or Shiva-Shakti aspect of the two. From this 
differentiation arises in the Mantra line of creation 
Parashadba and manifested Shabda and Artha ; in the 
Tattva line Buddhi and the rest : and in the line of the 
Lords of the Tattvas (TattVesha) Shambhu and the rest. 
In its most general and philosophical sense Purusha- 
Prakriti represent that stage in the evolving Consciousness 
(Shakti) in which, after passing from the mere 1-expe- 
rience [Ahamprafyayavitnarsha), and the "I-tlils" or 
"Aham-Idam.” experience, in which the object or Idam 
is still experienced as part of the self (the completed 
type of such experiencer being tshvara). Consciousness 
emerges as the experience of duality in which the object 
is seen as outside of, and separate from, the self This 
however is a state of mere general objectivity. The 
final state has yet to be described when undifferentiated 
objectivity and supreme Sound (Parashabda) evolve, 
the first into the differentiated objects of the universe 
(Ashuddha Tattva) and the second into the differentiated 
word (Shadba) and its meaning (Artha) which is the 

157 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



birth of Mantra consisting of letters (Varna), syllables 
(Pada) and sentences (Vakya). With the differentia- 
tion of Prakriti appear multitudinous Purushas of vary- 
ing experience, each living in an universe of its own. 

Purusba is not merely confined to man but is appli- 
cable to every J!va who is the Enjoyer (Bhokt&) or 
Purusha of the enjoyable (Bhogya) or Prakriti. Puruslia 
again is not limited to the organic life of animals and 
plants or the micro-organisms which hover between 
organic and inorganic matter. The term includes the 
latter also. For whatever may be the popular significa- 
tion of the term Jlva as living organic bodies, in its 
philosophical sense all is Jivatmfi which is not Para- 
matma. And in this, modern science bears out the 
notions here described. The former arbitrary partitions 
made between the living and non-living are being broken 
down. We may for practical purposes call that "living" 
which obviously displays certain characteristic^ which 
we call “life" such as the so-called vital phenomena 
manifested by plants, animals and men. But the life 
and consciousness displayed in organic bodies is not 
something wholly new which had no place in the inorganic 
material of which they are composed. All such vital 
phenomena exist in subdued or potential form in every 
kind of matter which contains the potentiality of all 
life. Life as >ve know it is the phenomenal aspect of 
Being-Itselt (Sat). Feeling -Consciousness as we know 
it is the limited manifestation (manifestation being 
limitation) of the undifferentiated Feeling-Consciousness 
which is Chit, Sat and Ananda. All which is manifested 
exists potentially in its ground. Each of such manifes- 
tations is such ground (Bhfiini) veiled in varying degrees ; 
now more, now less fully displaying the nature of Spirit, 
the source of all life, feeling, will, and consciousness. 
Superficial notions based on appearances have given 

«5S 




HANGSA 



rise to the notion of "dead” matter But science has 
given new instruments for, and extended the range of, 
our observation and has shown that life and conscious- 
ness, though in a subdued or veiled form, exists through- 
out the universe. Vedanta in its Shakta version says 
that all forms are the operation of Consciousness as 
M&yS-Shakti. As the ancient Upanisliad says and modern 
so-called "New thought" repeats "What one thinks that 
one becomes." All recognise this principle to a certain 
point. If man thinks inhuman thoughts he dehumanises 
himself. Vedinta carries the application of this prin- 
ciple to its logical condition and affirms tiiat not only 
docs thought o pet ate modifications in and within the 
limits of particulai types or species, but actually evolves 
such and all other types through the cosmic or collective 
Thought of which the universe is a material expression. 
Thus every unit or atom of matter is a Puruslia identify- 
ing itself with the solid (Parthiva) "crust" of matter, 
which is the gross expression on the sensual plane of more 
subtle forces emanating from that Ground Substance, 
which is the source both of the experiencing subject and 
the object experienced, ff the operation of gross matter 
gives the appearance of rigid mechanism, this does not 
imply that such operation is wholly unconscious and 
lifeless, but that life and consciousness are veiled by the 
Tamas Guna of Prakriti in which Kala, Niyati and other 
Kanchukas are operating to theii fullest extent. But 
however intense may be their operation, life and cons- 
ciousness can never' be destroyed, for being Shakti Her- 
self they are indestructible, Thus every molecule of 
mineral substance is a Purusha or Consciousness iden- 
tifying itself with matter in its solid and apparently 
unconscious inert state. For Consciousness becomes 
that with which it identifies itself. When it completely 
identifies itself with mineral matter it becomes that 

*59 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

matter. What we think that we become. Nothing 
however is absolutely unconscious or inert. Every 
single atom in the universe is in constant movement and 
hence the world is called Jagat oi that which moves. 
This scientific doctrine is in India an ancient inheritance. 
And so the Mantra runs “Hring. The Supreme Hangsa 
dwells in the brilliant Heaven." The word Hangsah is 
here said to be derived from the word Hanti which means 
Gati or motion. S&yana says that it is called Aditya 
because it is in perpetual motion. 

The Tattva Sandoha (vv. 13, 14) says : — 

‘She is considered to be Prakriti who is the collecti- 
vity of all the Shaktis, (Will. Knowledge and Action) 
who is the peaceiul, that is, quiescent (Shanta) Shakti 
of Him in contracted form (Samkuchadrupa) ; who is 
in the form of the equilibrium of Saliva, Rajas and Tamas 
Gunas which again are Will, Knowledge and Action 
gathered together (Sangkalita ) ; who is in the nature 
of general un particularised feeling (Chitta) which is in 
the form of the undifferentiated Buddhi (and otner 
Tattvas).’’ 

Ichchh&d i-tri-samasht ih shakti h shanta sy a sawkiichadriipd , 
SamkalitechchhMy&tmaka-saUvadika-$amya-r&p\ni tu sa/i 
Buddhyddi-samarasya-svariipachilfdlmika maid prakriiih 
"Hang” or the male (Puman) or Purusha is again in 
the same work (V.6) described as : — 

“He who having by Her become of limited form with 
all His powers contracted is this Male (Puman or Purusha) 
like the sun which becoming red at eventide and His 
Power (of shining) contracted can scarce reveal Himself 
(by shining abroad)" 

Sa laya parimilaintirlih samkuchita-samas Ui- 
shakMr eshah pumin, 

Raviriva sandhyA-raktah samhrita-shahtih 
svabh&sane py apatuh. 

160 




HANGSA 



Again in the same work (v. 7 ) it is said : — 

"His Shaktis are many consisting of complete Kar- 
tritva (power of action) and others, but on His becoming 
contracted (that is, limited) they also become contracted 
in the forms of Kala and the rest and make him thus 
manifest (as Purusha)”. 

Sampurna-karlrilvddyd bahvyah sattlyasya 
shaklayas lasya, 

Samkochal samkuchitdh kalddirupena 
rildhayauly evam. 

Again in the fshvara-Pratyabhijn4 it is said 

"He who is Expcricncer commencing with Shunya 
(Shivatattva) and the rest. He being clothed by the live 
Kanchukas, Kala and the rest, and becoming object to 
Himself, is then the Experiencer of objects as separate 
from Him". 

Yash cha pramald shunyadih p tain eye vyalirekini 

Afdtd sa meya/i san k&Miika-panchaka-vcshlitah . 

(Ill-ii g). 

That is, object is the Self appearing as such. He retains 
His own Self-hood and becomes at the same time the 
object of His own experience. May* is not something 
apart from Brahman, for it is Brahman who through 
Maya, an aspect of Brahman. Himself becomes His own 
object. In the first act of creation He commences to 
become His own object, but it is only when the subject 
as Purusha is clothed, that is limited, by the Kanchukas, 
that the latter sees objects as other than and outside 
Himself. At this stage duality is established and ex- 
foliates m the Vikritis of Prakritis as the multiple 
experience of the World of Mind and Matter. 

The Gunas of Prakriti are inadequately translated as 
“qualities", because the latter word involves some Subs- 
tance of which they are the qualities. But Prakriti 
Shakti is, as Prakriti, the Gunas and nothing else, though 

1C1 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

Her Svarfipa, as that ol all Shaktis, is Sat-Chit Ananda. 
The Gunas Sattva. Rajas, Tamas are properly factors 
or constituents of Prakriti. Of these it is commonly 
said that Tamas Guna is the veiling principle of Prakriti. 
This is so. But nevertheless it is to be remembered 
that all the factors of Prakriti in one way or another 
veil ; the difference being that whereas Sattva to some 
degree veils {for Sattva-guna is not as such the same as 
absolute Sat) it is in its highest degree of potency, that is, 
predominance, the least degree of veiling, and therefore 
it represents the tendency to unveil, that is, to reveal 
and manifest Being (Sat) and Consciousness {Chit) ; 
whereas Tamas is in its highest potency the greatest 
degree of veiling and therefore specifically represents 
the tendency to veil. Rajas is the operative power in 
both cases. In all bodies there are the three Gunas (for 
these cannot separately exist though one or other may 
predominate), and it is because of this and therefore of 
the presence of Sattva Guna in inorganic matter that it 
exhibits the rudiments of sentiency and consciousness. 
But in inorganic matter Tamas Guna prevails. As 
bodies evolve, the strength of the operaton of Tamas 
gradually diminishes and that of Sattva increases until 
in man it becomes predominant. The whole object 
of Sadhani is to increase Sattva Guna until, on man be- 
coming wholly Sattvika, li is body passes from the state of 
predominant Sattva Guna into Sal Itself. These Gunas 
represent in the Jiva or Pashu the Ichchha, Kriya. Jndna 
and May 4 Shaktis of the. Lord. As regards M4y4, the 
Lord (Mayin), as the Kulamava Tantra says, wields 
and controls and is free of it ; Jiva is controlled by it. 
So the ishvara-Pratyabijnd (IV. i, 4) says, "Wliat are 
Jnana and Kriyh (on the part) of the Lord (Pati) in all 
beings and tilings (Bhavesliuj which (to Him) are really 
of the nature of His own body (or limbs) — it is these 

162 ' 




HANGS A 



two (that is Jnana and KriyA) and nothing else (eva) 
which together with Maya as the third are the Sattva, 
Rajas, and Tamas (Gunas in respect) of the Pashu". 

Svdnga-rtipeshu bhdveshu palyurjn&uam 
kriyd cha yd, 

Mdyd tritiyd Id eva pashoh satlvam rajas tamah, 

Shiva-Shakti have threefold aspect as Ichchha, Jnana, 
KriyA, which are inseparably associated, just as the Gunas 
are, though, as in the latter case, one or other may be pre- 
dominant. Of these again IchchhA and KriyA inay be 
considered together ; lor as resolve is directed te action 
it is the preliminary of it. IchchhA in the Shaiva ShAstra 
is described as state of wonder (Sir chamatkdrd Ichchha- 
shaktih) in the Purusha. But KriyA considered (for the 
purpose of analysis only) as apart from Jnana is blind. 
For this reason KriyA has beeen associated with Tamas. 
It is very clearly explained by KshemarAja in his Tattva 
Sandoha (w. 53-15), that Ichchha or resolve to action 
becomes at a lower stage Rajas Guna, the principle of 
activity in Prakriti ; JnAna becomes Sattva or the prin- 
ciple of manifestation in the same ; and KriyA becomes 
Tamas Guna or the specific veiling principle of the same 
form of Shakti. He says, "His Will (Ichchha) assumed 
the form of Rajas and became Ahangkara which produces 
the notion of T (Aham). His knowledge (JnSna) 
likewise became Sattvarupa and Buddlu which is the 
determining form of experience. His KriyA being in 
the nature of Tamas and productive of Vikalpa (and 
Sangkalpa), i. e., rejection (and selection) is called Manas” 
{Iehchdsya rajo-r&pdhamkritir dsid aham-pratitikari 
jn&n&pi sattvardfd nirnayabodhasya k&ranam buddhih, 
Tasya kriyd lamomaya-mArlir mana uchyate vikalpakari ). 

The evolution of these Tattvas (Ashuddha) is the 
subject of a future chapter. But before dealing with 
these it is necessary, in the creative order, to further 

163 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



describe the K&makala in which the Hangsa arises and 
the Rosary or Garland of letters (Vamam&ia) which 
is the Mantra aspect of the Tattvika evolution. 



164 




CHAPTER XVII 
KAMAKALA 



In the previous chapters it has been shown that the 
Para bindu or Ishvara Tattva assumes in creation a three- 
fold aspect as the three Bindus,— Bindu (KftryyaJ.Nada, 
Bija. These three Points constitute symbolically a 
Triangle which is known as the KflmakalS. Kfima is of 
course not here used in the gross sense of desire, sexual or 
otherwise, but of Ichchhi, the Divine creative Will to- 
wards the life of form, which is here explicated from Bindu, 
the aspect previously assumed by Shakti through N5da 
{Bindutdm abhyeti). The undivided supreme Chit shakti 
( Akhandapatachichchhaldi ) becoming desirous of appear- 
ing as all the Tattvas {Samastatattvabh&vena vivarptch- 
chhasamanvitd) assumes the Bindu aspect [Rindublidumg 
paryeti) characterised by a predominance of activity 
[KriytiprAdhiiiya/aksfMntt). Here it may be observed 
that Ichchhd or Will is a form of Kiiya (action) : in the 
sense that it is the preliminary to action and sets the Self 
in motion. Shakti passes from potency through Will to 
action, which through Para Bindu manifests. Bindubhava 
is that state (Ishvaratattva) in which it is fully equipped 
to work and does so. Its threefold aspect as it works 
are Bindu Shivdtmaka, Bfja Shaktyotmaka and N'&da. 
Ndda is Samavaya that is relationship or connection 
(Sambandha) as exciter (Kshobhaka) and that which is 
excited (Kshobhya), which relation is the cause of creation 
(Srishtihetu). The Sharadd (I. 10) then proceeds to deal 
with the appearance of the three Pevis and three Devas 
which are in the nature of the three Shaktis (Ichchhd, 
etc.) and Fire, Moon and Sun. Having then dealt with 
Shabdasrishti it proceeds to describe Arthasrishti (I. 15), 

165 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



giving first the line of Devas from Shambhu who arc the 
Lords of the Tattvas (Tattvesha) and then that part of 
Arthasrishti which is Tattvasrishti or the evolution of the 
Tattvas of mind and matter from Buddhi to Prithivi. 

It is not easy in all cases to discover and set forth an 
accurate summary of the Devis, Devas, Shaktis and so 
forth in Shabdasrishti : because the Texts being in verse 
are not always to l>e read as they stand, the order of words 
being in some cases regulated by the metre. As the author 
of the PrAnatoshini says in dealing with a citation from the 
Goraksha Samhita. the texts must not be read “ Prati- 
shabdam ", that is, according to the order of the worths, 
but "Yathdsambhavam", according to the facts. But 
this does not relieve us from the difficulty of ascertaining 
what is the fact , that is, the real order. Other elements 
may also enter into the calculation : for instance, as 
RAghava Bhatta |>oints out. the order of Shaktis varies in 
Ishvara and Jtva. In the former it is IchchhA, Jnana, 
KriyA and in Jiva. Jnana. IchchhA, Kriya. In Ishvara ’s 
ideation (Pratyabhijna) when He desires to do anything, 
an act of volition proceeds from Him {SvechckhayA 
kriyi i) to know or to do it {Taj jnAtung kart ting vii) ; next 
there is the capacity for cognising such acts [Tat kuryyu- 
jndnadarshanashaktita ) which is Jnana-shakti ; thirdly the 
gross effort {Sthulah samudyamah) is the Kriya-shakti 
{Kriya ska k! i rad i l A ) from which the whole world proceeds 
{Tatah sarvang jagat param). RAghava also points out 
that there is a difference of order in Shabdasrishti and 
Arthasrishti. Thus in dealing with the Pranava it is 
said, "A (the letter) which is Sun is BrahmA but here 
in the ShAradA verse, "Vishnu is Sun." I will first 
give the order as it is given in the ShAradA Text (v. 10) : 
"From Bindu came Raudri ; from Xada Jycslitha, from 
B!ja, VAina. From these came Rudra, Brahma, RamS- 
dhipa (Vishnu)”. 



166 




kAmakala 



Raudri bindos talo tutdtij jycshtM bij&d ajilyata 
Vama, tubhyah samutpannA Tudrabrahmaram&dhipah. 
Il then continues, " Who are in the nature of Jn&na, 
Ichchha. Kriy& and Fire, Moon and Sun (v. xi) 
(Saiigjn&mchchhd kriydlm&no vahnindvarkasvartipinah) , 
who are in the form (RQpa) of Nirodhikd, Arddhendu 
and Bindu." These arc all different states of Shakti 
{Shakier ev&vasth&visheshAh) , for it is owing to their 
arising from Shakti [Shaktitah ulpannatvat), that they are 
identified with the Shaktis Ichchhd and so forth. 

According to the Yoginihridnya Tantra (I) the order is 
(ti) Ichchha, Vdina, Pashyanti ; ( 6 ) Jnana, Jyeshtha. Madh- 
yamS ; (c) Kriya, Raudri, Vaikhari. It says that when 
Iclichh 4 Shakti in the form of a goad (Angkushdkara, 
that is, the bent line Vakrarekhd) is about to display the 
universe which is in seed (Bija) form. She is Mainland in 
the form of Pashyanti Shabda. PashyantW She who 
sees,” ikshana. Vama is so called because tliis Shakti 
vomits forth the universe (Vamatuil Vama). Jyeshtha 
which is in the form of a straight liue (Rijurekbd) attain- 
ing the state of Matrika (MAtrik/iham upupannd ) is 
Madhyamd vlk. Raudri is Kriya in triangular or 
pyramidal (Shringataka). that is, three-dimensional form, 
and is -the manifested Vaikhari Shabda. According to 
the Kamakalavilisa (Comm. v. 22), Yoginthridaya Tantra 
(Sangketa 1), and the Saubhagyasudhodaya (cited in 
Sangketa 2 of the last Shastra), the order would appear 
to be (a) Ichchha Rajas Vama Brahma Pashyanti- 
Shabda ; ( b ) Jnina Sattva Jyeshtha Vishnu Madhyamd- 
Shabda ; (c) Kriya Taraas Raudri Rudra Vaikhari-Shabda. 

I will not however here attempt a discussion, which 
would be both lengthy and technical, of the texts on this 
point. For present practical purposes it is sufficient to 
know that the three Bindus are Shiva, Shakti, Shiva- 
shakti ; Prakdsha, Vimarsha, Prakdsha-Vimarsha ; White, 

167 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



Red and Mixed ; Bindu, Nftda, Bija ; Supreme, Subtle, 
Gross ; the three Devts, the three Devas, and the three 
Shaktis of Will, Knowledge and Action. The Supreme 
at this point thus becomes a Trinity of Energy. 

The division of the Mah&bindu may be memorised by 
writing in Sanskrit the '* Fire " Bija or “ Ram”, that is 
Ra with Chandrabmdu ( i ). Then invert the Nada sign 
which will thus represent the Moon (Indu), the Bindu, the 
Sun (Ravi), and the Ra, Fire (Agni). The Triangle may 
be formed by drawing two sides or a l>cnt line and then 
completing it with a straight line. At the apex place the 
Ravibindu (Sim) and at the left and right hand comers 
Vahnibindu (Fire) and Moon (Chandrabindu). Between 
Sun and Moon place Vfimi Vakrarekhi and Brahma ; 
between Fire and Moon, JyeshthA and Vishnu ; and 
between Moon and Sun, Raudri Rijurekha and Rudra. 
Between each of the points are lines formed by all the 
letters (M&trika-vama) of the alphabet called the A-Ka- 
Tha triangle. The PAdukapanchaka, a Hymn attributed 
to Shiva. (T&ntrik Texts, Vol. 2) speaks of A-Ka-Tha in 
the second verse on which Kdlicharana comments as 
follows : — Here Shakti is Kamakala in form and the three 
Shaktis (Varna, Jyeshtlia, Raudri) emanating from the 
three Bindus are the three lines. The sixteen vowels 
beginning with A form the line V 4 ra&, the sixteen letters 
beginning with Ka form the line Jyeshtlia and the sixteen 
letters beginning With Tha form the line Raudri. The 
abode of Shakti (Abalilaya) is formed by these three lines. 
The other three letters ITa, I-a, Ksha are in the comers of 
the Triangle. Kalyuradhvamnaya says, "The Tribindu 
is the Supreme Tattva and embodies in Itself Brahma, 
Vishnu, Shiva ( Brahmavisknushivdimakam ). The Tri- 
angle composed of the Letters has emanated from the 
Bindu ; ” also " The letters A to Visarga make the line 
Brahma, the letters Ka to Ta the line Vishnu, and the 

168 




KAMAKALA 



letters Tha to Sa the Rudra. The three lines emanate 
from Ihe three Bindus. The Gunas, as aspects of Shakti, 
are also represented by this threefold division. The 
Tantrajivana says : " The lines Rajas, Sattva, Tamas 
surrounded the Vonimandala.” -Also " above is the line 
of Sattva, the liny of Rajas is on its left and the line of 
Tamas on its right.” 

The Shabdabrahman in its threefold aspect and 
Energies is represented in the Tantras by this triangular 
Kamakala which is the abode of Shakti (Abalalaya). The 
Triangle is in every way an apposite symbol, for on the 
material plane if there are three forms there is no other 
way in which they can be brought to interact except in the 
form of a triangle in which whilst they are each, as aspects, 
separate and distinct from one another, they are yet 
related to each other and form part of one whole. In the 
Agama-kalpadruma it is said that the Hindu is Hang (one 
point) and Visargah (two points) is Sah or Shakti. The 
Yamala thus speaks of this abode, "I now speak of 
Kamakala,” arid proceeding says, " She is the Eternal 
One who is the three Bindus, the three Shaktis and the 
three Forms (Trimurtti)”. The Maheshvarf Samhita says : 
"Sun, Moon and Fire are the three Bindus and Brahma, 
Vishnu, Rudra the three lines ” The Lalitisahasranima 
calls the Devi, Kiinakalirupa. Bhaskararfiya in his 
commentary thereon (v. 73) says that Kama or creative 
will (Ichchha) is both Shiva and Devi and Kala is their 
manifestation. Hence it is called Kim ak ala. This is 
explained in the Tripurasiddhinta : "Oh P5rvati, Kala is 
the manifestation of Kameshvara and Kamcshvari. 
Hence She is known as Kimakala. Or. She is the manifes- 
tation (Kala) of Desire (Kama), that is, of Ichchha Shakti. 
The Devi is the great Tripurasundari. Bhaskararaya's 
Gum Nrisinghinandanatha wrote the following verse on 
which the disciple comments : 

169 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

"I hymn Tripura, the treasure of Kula, who is red of 
beauty : Her limbs like unto those of Kamar&ja who is 
adored by the three Devatas of the three Gunas : who is 
the desire or Will of Shiva (according to the Anokartha- 
dhvanimaujari lexicon l=.\lanmatha==K&ma=Ichchh&) 
who dwells in the Bindu and who manifests the Universe." 
She is red because She is the Vimarshashakti. She is 
called (says the Commentator cited) Tripura as She has 
three (Tri) Puras (literally cities or abodes), here meaning 
three Bindus, lines, angles, syllables and so forth. She 
has three angles (in the triangular Yoni the source oi the 
universe) as well as three circles (the three Bindus) and the 
Bhupura of Her Yantra has three lines. Yoni does not 
here mean generative organ, but KSrana— the Cause of the 
universe. She has three aspects and creates the three 
DevatAs through the three Shaktis, Vania and others, and 
manifests as Will, Knowledge and Action. Thus since 
She the Supreme Energy is everywhere triple. She is 
called Tripurasundarl. The three, syllables of Her Mantra 
are the three divisions of the Panchadashi, namely Vag- 
bhava, Kamardja and Shakti Kfitas, which according to 
the Vamakeshvara Tantra are the Jnana and other 
Shaktis. The Kamabija is Ivling and Kling-kdra is 
Shivakdma. Here " 1 " is said to denote the Kamakala 
in the Turlya state through which Moksha is gained, and 
hence the meaning of the saying that " he who hears the 
Bija without Ka and La does not reach the place of good 
actions "—that is he does not go to the region attainable 
by good actions but to that (Moksha) attainable by 
Jn&na alone. The BhdvachudAmani says : “ Meditate on 
the face in the form of Bindu, and below on the twin 
breasts (the two other Bindus) and below them the beaute- 
ous form of the flak&rarddha. The commentator on the 
Anandalahart says : "In the fifth sacrifice (Yajna) let the 
SSdhaka think of his Atmd as in no wise different from, 

170 




kAmakalA 



but as the one and only Shiva ; and of the subtle thread- 
like Kundalini who is all Shaktis extending from the 
AdhAra Lotus to Paramashiva. Let him think of the 
three Bindus as being in Her body indicating IchchhA, 
Jnana, Kriya ; Moon, Sun, Fire ; Rajas, Sattva, Tamas ; 
Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra ; and then let him meditate upon 
the ChitkalA who is Shakti below it.' The Bindu which is 
the " Face ” indicates Vinnchi (Brahma) associated with 
the Rajas Guna. The two Bindus which arc the 
" Breasts " and upon which meditation should be done in 
the heart indicate Hari (Vishnu) and Hara (Rudra) asso- 
ciated with the Sattva and Tamas Gnnas. Below these 
meditate upon the subtle ChitkalA which indicates all 
three Gunas and which is all these three Devatfts. Similar 
meditation is given in Yogini (and other) Tantras winding 
up with the direction, "and then let the Sadhaka think of 
his own body as such KAmakalA.'' 

As regards this it is to be observed that in the Mtila- 
dhara there is a Traipura Trikona, so-called because of the 
presence of the Devi Tripura within the Ka inside the 
triangle. Tliis Ka is the chief letter of the Kama Bija 
and Kang is the Bija of Kamini, the aspect of Tripura- 
sundari in the MulAdhAra. Here also arc the three lines. 
VAmA. Ichchha and so forth. Thus the Traipura Trikona 
is the Sthiila aspect of the Sukshma Shakti in the region of 
the upper SahasrAra called KAmakalA. It is to this 
KAmin! that in worship the essence of Japa (Tejorupajapa) 
is offered, the external Japa being given to the DevatA 
worshipped in order that the SAdhaka may retain the 
fruits of his Japa. [Nilyapdjdpaddhati 8). Man physically 
and psychically is a limited manifestation of this threefold 
Shakti which resides within himself and is the object of 
worship. Such worship leads to identification and so the 
ShritattvArnava says: "Those glorious men who worship 
that Body in SAmarasya arc freed from the waves of 

171 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



poison in the untraversable sea of the universe (Sangsara)." 
S&marasya, I may here observe, is a term which is ordi- 
narily applied to the bliss of sexual union { Slripungyogdt 
yat saukhyang tat s&marasyam). For the benefit however 
of those who are always reading gross meanings into 
parts of the Shits tra alien to them it is necessary to explain 
that S&marasya is both gross (Sthula) and subtle 
(SGkshma). Here the latter is meant. An erotic symbol 
is employed to denote the merger of the Jiva and Supreme 
Consciousness in Ecstasy (Samadhi). The Tantras largely 
employ such imagery which is to be found in the Upa- 
nishads and in non-Indian scriptures. Thus the highly 
sensual imagery of the Biblical " Song of Songs ” is said 
(whether rightly or not, I will not here inquire) to sym- 
bolise Christ’s love for His Bride, the Church. Spiritual 
union is symbolised by terms borrowed from the world 
of man. By Mantrayoga is sought that perfection and 
unity of Bhflva which leads to JnSnayoga Sam&dbi. 

“ On the division of the Supreme Hindu (into the 
threefold K^ma-kali) there was L’nmanifested Sound ” 
(Bhidyam&n&t pardd bindor avyakt&tmA ravo'bhavat, 
Sh&rada-I-n). This is the Shabdabrahman or the 
Brahman as the cause of manifested Shabda and Artha 
and therefore of Mantra. This causal “ Sound " is the 
unmanifested (Avyakt&tm4), undifferentiated (Akhanda) 
principle of Shabda (N&dam&tra), composed ofNftdaand 
Bindu (N&dabindumaya), devoid of all particularity such 
as letters and the like (Vam&divishesha-rahita). Some, 
as the Shdrada says (V. 12), have thought that the Shabda- 
brahman was Shabda and others Shabd&rtha, but this 
cannot be, for both are unconscious (Jadatv&t). “In my 
opinion,” its author say's (v. 13), " Shabdabrahman is the 
Consciousness in all beings ” (Chaitanyang sarvabhllld- 
riSng shabdabrahmeli me matxh). For if Shabd artha or 



Shabda be called Shabdabrahman then the meaning of the 



172 




kAmakalA 



term Brahman is lost (Brahmafat’av/elyai-atig itopa - 
padyate) ; for the meaning of the term Bral: man (Brahma- 
paddrtha) is Sat-Chit-Ananda (SachebidSnandarupa), 
whilst these are unconscious (Jada). Raghava Bhatta 
says that Shabdabrahman is Xadabindnmava Brahman 
(Brahmdtmaka) Sound (Shabda) unmanifested (Avyakta), 
undifferentiated (Akhanda).all pervading (Vyipaka),' which 
is the first manifestation of Paramashiva in creative mood 
{SrishtymmukhaparamashivapralhamcUdsarndtrant). He 
also cites a passage from some work unnamed which says 
that out of Prakriti in Hindu form in whom Kriyft Shakti 
prevails (Kriy&shakli pra&h&naylth praUritcr bindu-iupi- 
ny&h) arose the Supreme Shabdabrahman the cause of 
Shabda and Shabddrtha (Sh abdashabd art h a k5r an am ) . 
Tlie Sound (Rava) here spoken of is in the form of Bindu 
(Bindurupa). which later appears in all bodies as the 
Matrik&s and Varnas in their respective places. The 
Sharada (I. 14) having thus dealt with Parashabdasrishti 
concludes in a general way, "Consciousness which is the 
Svarupa oL and appears as, Kundali Shakti in the bodies 
of all living beings manifests as Letters in prose and verse, 
having obtained the instruments for utterance which are 
the throat and so forth," 

Tat prapya kundalirupang pr&nir.dng dehamadhyagam 

Varndlvian&virbhavati gadyapadyfid i bh edata h . 

The subsequent Shabdasrishti is derived from Kunda- 
lint. The Kamakala is thus called the root (Mula) ol all 
Mantra, for it is the threefold aspect of the Shabda- 
brahman, the cause of all manifested Shabda and Artha 
and therefore of Mantra. In a future article I will conti- 
nue the account of the creative process, namely, the 
Arthasrishti in which are included the Tattvas from 
Buddhi to Prithivl and the Lords (Tattvesha) 01 farms 
of Consciousness which preside over them. These are 
necessarily dealt with in connection with the Tattvas over 

*73 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



which they preside. In the same way Pashyanti, 
Madhyami, and Vaikharl states of sound arc here also 
dealt with, because Pashyanti and the others only exist 
in the created body. Parashabda is unmanifested Chai- 
tanva, but the other Three Feet of the One Brahman are 
set in the manifested world of Mind and Matter. 



W4 




CHAPTER XVIII 

THE GROSS TATTVAS AND THEIR LORDS 

The ShArada Tilaka (Chapter I) having first dealt 
with Shabdasrishti on account of its priority ( I’radhdnya - 
dyotandya prathanwddhhlam ) commences with the 
fifteenth verse to speak of the creation of objects (Artha- 
srishti), for Pashyanti and the other Bhavas assume the 
existence of the manifested body. It says that from 
Shambhu who is in the nature of Kail ( Kaldtmanah ) and 
Bindu ( Bindvdtmanah ) and friend of KAIa (Kalabandhu), 
issued (Ajavata) the " Witness of the World " (Jagat- 
sakshi), the all pervading (SarvavyApi) SadAshiva. RA- 
ghava says Kala is here either used generally, or as refer- 
ring to the Nivritti and other KalAs which Shambhu 
produces. By " friend of K&la ” is meant that Shambhu 
is in the nature of Nada (NAdAtmA), because in unbegin- 
ning and unending Time He is the helper of KAIa which 
is Srishti (A n&dyanante kale srishlirupiikdlasakdydl) . The 
connection again is one between cause and its possessor. 
Again “ friend ” indicates the causality (Nimittatvam) 
of KAIa. For it has been said : " It has its beginning in 
Lava and ends in Pralaya and is full of Tamas Shakti.” 
Lava is the time taken to pierce with a needle a lotus- 
petal. Thirty Lavas=one Truti. This Kftla is Apara, 
for there is also Para K&la. Kala or MAyA is the cause of 
the occurrence of birth and destruction. R&ghava con- 
cludes that Prakriti and KAIa exist in even MahApralaya. 
But their pennanence (NityatS) is* a dependent one 
( Apekshakanityat A) . For the permanence of the Purusha 
in which all things have their goal is alone independent 
(Svatahnityatvam). 

From Shambhu emanated the SadAshiva who is the 

*75 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

Doer of the five forms of work, namely Creation, Preserva- 
tion and Destruction, Favour (Anugraha) and Disfavour 
(Xigraha). From Sad&shiva. comes isha, from Him 
Rudra, from Rudra Vishnu, from Vishnu Brahma (v. 16). 
On tliis verse RAghava says : "It has been said before how 
they arise In Shabdasrishti. Here they arise in Artha- 
srishti." 

Tlie five Shivas arc known in the Tantras as the 
" Five great coq>ses " (Panchamahapreta). Shiva is 
constantly represented in corpse-like (Shavarupa) form. 
This symbolises that Consciousness in Itself (Svarfipa) is 
actionless and inert. All action is by Shakti. Hence 
the Devi is in pictures imaged as standing on the inert 
corpse-likc body of Shiva. The same notion is represented 
by V iparilamaithuna, a prominent example of the use 
of erotic symbolism in the Shdkta Shastra. These 
Panchamahdpreta form the couch on which the Devi, 
Wave of Consciousness and Bliss, rests in the house of 
Chint 4 mani adorned with a garden of Nfpa trees, which 
is in the Island of Gems, surrounded with a grove of 
celestial trees, in the midst of the ocean of nectar 
(Anandalahari). This is the well-known Tdntrika medita- 
tion on the Heart-lotus of worship below the Anihata- 
chakra. The BahurupAshtaka and Bhairavayimala say : 
" There is the supreme abode (Mandira) of Devi full of 
Cbintimani stones (which grant all desires). The great 
couch is ShWa, the cushion or mattress (Kaslupu) is 
Sadashiva, the pillow the great Ishana. The four supports 
(Pada) are ishana, Rudra, Hari, and BrahmA. On that 
Bed reclines the supreme TripurasundatL” Hence the 
Devi in the Lalitasahasranama (v. 73) is called l’anclia- 
brahmasanasthit<L The " Jewelled Island ” is a high 
state of Consciousness in that Ocean of Nectar which is 
tlie infinite all pervading Consciousness Itself. The 
Devi is united with Paramashiva in the Pranava ; the 

176 




THE GROSS TATTVAS AND THEIR LORDS 



Nada over the Ongkira being the couch on which is 
resting Parashiva in His Bindu form. A.U.M, NMa. 
Bindu the five component parts of Om and the Shri- 
chakra Yantra arc here referred to. 

The supreme Paramashiva abides in Satyaloka 
beyond mind and matter. Shambhu presides over mind 
and His abode is Maharloka. Ether, air, fire, water, 
earth are presided over by SadAshiva, Isha, Rudra, 
Vishnu, Brahma whose abodes are Tapoloka, Janaloka, 
Svarloka, Bhuvarloka, Bhtirloka ; and their centres in 
the human body are in the AjnA, Vishuddha, Anahata, 
Manipura, SvadhishthSna, and MulAdhAra Chakras, res- 
pectively. Kundali Siiakti manifests as the six. But 
notwithstanding all Her subtle and gross manifestations 
She remains ever the same Chit and Ananda ; for the 
Atm 4 in its own nature (Svarfipa) as distinguished from 
its Powers and their products is the same in all times and 
places. 

Turning then to the Tattvas the Sh&rada says (v. 17) 
that from the unmanifest MOlabhuta (Prakriti or root of 
all creation) of the Supreme (Paravastu — Bindu) when 
subject to change (Vikriti) issued, through inequality of 
the Gunas, the Sattvikn Tattva Mahat in the form of tlte 
Antahkarana and Gunas. 

MaHat is the cosmic Buddhi which is said to be in the 
form of the Antahkarana (Buddhi, AhangkAra, Manas) for 
all three are implicitly contained in the first (UpachArAdu- 
bhayAtmakah), as also the Gunas which here mean the 
TanmAlaas of sound, touch, sight, taste and smell. 
According to NySya the Gunas appertain each to each 
(TattadvisheshagnnAh) : or according to SAngkhya 
Ether has one Guna, Air has two. Fire three and so forth. 
From Mahat was derived Ahangkara which is threefold 
as Vaikarika. Taijasa, and Bhutadi 01 the SAttvika. 
Rajasa, and Tamasa Ahangkaras (v. 18), Raghava says 

1 77 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



that it is called Vaik&rika because it issues from Para- 
meshvara when His Samarasva with Shakti becomes 
Vikrita or disturbed. The Devas also are VaikArika 
because produced from it. According to S4ngkh\a the 
Vaikttrika nature is due to its generation from Pradh&na 
when Vikrita. The VaikArika Devas are Dik, Vita, 
Arka, PrachetA (Varuna) Ashvins (two AshvintkumAras) 
Vahni, Indra, Upendra (VishnorekA mfxrtih) Mitra (the 
third sun} and Ka (Chandra). These are the Presiding 
Derates of the senses (Indriya). From the Taijasa 
Ahangkara were evolved the Indriyas. The five Tan- 
matras and the derived Bhutas came from BhQtAdi 
Ahangkara. 

The Text and Commentary speak of the derivation of 
AkAsha from Shabdatanm&tra, VAyu from Sparshatan- 
mAtra and so forth. But as the word Purva occurs, 
others read tliis as meaning that each becomes cause of 
what follows in association with what had gone before. 
Thus Shabdatanmatra produces Akasha. From Shabda- 
tanm&tra together with SparshatanmAtra come VAyu. 
From these two and Rupatanmatra come Agni and so 
forth. 

The SharadA then gives the colours of the Bhutas 
namely transparent (Svachchha) ether, black air, red fire, 
white water, and yellow earth, the Adharas of which are 
the Tanm&tra and the Gunas of which are sound, touch, 
sight, taste and smell. RAghava Bhatta says that it is for 
the purpose of worship (Upasan&sthAnam) in pursuance of 
Sh&stra (SvashAstrAnurodhena) that certain invisible 
things are here said to have colours (Atm kcsh&nchit 
arup i-dravya ni >:g varnakathanam). This might perhaps 
seem to suggest to some that the colours are not real. 
But if tliis be so is it correct ? Ether is transparent 
which is no colour, black is the absence of colour. With 
Rupa there must be colour. For what is colourless is 




THE GROSS TATTVAS AND THEIR LORDS 

formless. Form is only perceived by means of colour : 
and the last three BhOtas are with form. Their colours 
are widely adopted. Thus in China also yellow is the 
colour of earth, and red and white are generally assigned 
to fire and water, respectively. Possibly what is meant is 
that the colours are here mentioned for the purpose of 
worship : that is, the mentioning is for such purpose. 
Else how could the Yogi perceive them ? For it is said 
Tani vastuni t&mnfitradmi pratyaksha-vishayAni (that 
is to Yogis). Elsewhere it is said that ether is hollow or 
pitted (Sushirachihnam) air is moving (Chalanaparah) fire 
is digesting (ParipAkav&n) water is tasteful fRasavat) 
earth is solid (Ghana). All the universe is composed of 
the four BliQtas entering into one another [ParasbarAnu- 
pravhhlaih mahAbhutaisb chaturvidkaih) pervaded by 
ether (Vyaptakashaih). 

Thus Consciousness as Shakti evolves inind and 
matter. The principles (Tattvas) of these are not always 
clearly understood. They may, and indeed must be, 
considered from the point of view of evolution— that is 
according to the sequence in which the limited experience 
of the Jiva is evolved — or from that in which they are 
regarded after creation when the experience of concrete 
sense objects has l>een had. According to the former 
aspect. Buddhi is the state of mere presentation ; con- 
sciousness of being only, without thought of " I ” (Ahang- 
kira) and unaffected by sensations (Manas, Indriya) of 
particular objects which ex hypothesi do not vet exist. 
It is thus a state of impersonal Jiva consciousness. 
AhangkAra of which Buddhi is the basis is the personal 
Consciousness which realises itself as a particular " I " 
the experiences The Jiva wakes to world experience 
under the influence of Maya Shakti. In the order of 
awakening he first experiences in a vague general way 
without consciousness of the limited self, like the experi- 

179 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

ence which is hud immediately on waking after Sleep. 
It then refers this experience to the limited self and has 
the consciousness " I am so and so.” Manas is the desire 
which follows on such experience, and the senses and their 
objects are the means whereby that enjoyment is had 
which is the end of all will to life. The Cosmic mind 
projects its content as ideas and desires on to the gross 
sensual plane and there the individual mind enjoys them 
as such. 

I may here observe that the same scheme exists in 
Buddhism where the root is given as AvidvA, from which 
arises Sangskara. This gives birth to VijnSna (which is 
Buddlii) and then to N Amaru pu that is an external world 
at first vaguely perceived. The desire 10 take cognisance 
of this gives rise to the six sense organs (Shadayatana) 
namely Manas and the Indriyas. From this follows 
contact (Sparsha) of the sense organs with the external 
world giving rise to feeling (Vedana) called forth by such 
contact in the form of pleasure and pain. This experi- 
ence produces Desire (Trishna) which a recent work on the 
Unconscious calls Libido, for pleasant sensations resulting 
in attachment and enjoyment (Up&d&na), and then the 
individual Jiva consciousness (Bhava) is born (JAta). ages 
and dies and is again reborn until Nirvana is attained. 
Throughout it is the will to life, the root of which is in 
Avidya which produces the instruments namely the mind 
and senses whereby enjoyment is to be had and which 
creatively imagines the content of its experience from out 
the store of past lives in past universes. True experience 
therefore can only be had by destroying the root which is 
Avidya. One of the tasks which yet remains to be done 
is to show the essential similarities of Buddhism and 
Hinduism instead of dwelling, as is usually done, on their 
differences, alleged or real. When it is fully realised that 
Buddhism took its birth in India and the implications 

ifio 




THE GROSS TATTVAS AND THEIR LORDS 



necessary therein truer notions will be entertained ol it 
than generally prevails. 

An example from science has lx-cn given which illus- 
trates the process stated. In some animals there are no 
specialised sense organs but when stimulus is often given 
to a particular part of a body that part gets specially 
sensitive to it and a particular organ is developed. The 
illustration of course assumes that objects have been 
already created. Hut in the evolution of the word similar 
principles come into play as those which exist after it has 
been evolved. The effect exists in its cause. Conscious- 
ness awakening to world-experiences reaches forth and 
forth and as it seeks to come by recollection to its limited 
self, its desire evolves the instruments of enjoyment and 
projects tire objects of enjoyment into the sensual world. 
This is the action of the Sangsk&ra operating in and upon 
consciousness. 

Whilst however in the order of evolution Buddhi is 
the first principle ; in the actual working of the Antah- 
karana after creation has taken place it comes last. It is 
more convenient therefore, for ordinary exposition to com- 
mence with the sense objects and the sensations they 
evoke. Matter as the objective cause of perception is not, 
in its character, as such, under the cognisance of the 
senses. All that can be predicated of it is its effect upon 
these senses which is realised by the instrumentality of 
mind in its character as Manas. In science the notion of 
indestructible matter in atomic form is no longer held, 
for all matter it is now shown can be dissociated and the 
atom is dematerialised. The old duality of Force and 
Matter disappears, these two being held to he differing 
forms of the same thing. The ultimate basis is now 
recognised as Maya nr Prakriti Shakti. Matter is a stable 
form of force into which on disturbance of its equilibrium 
it disappears. Sensible matter (Bhuta) affects the ex- 

181 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



periencer in five different ways giving rise to the sensations 
of hearing (Ak&sha), touch and feel (Vayu : not in the sense 
of all forms of contact, for form and solidity are not yet 
developed) colour and form and sight (Rupa) taste (Rasa) 
and smell (Gandha). Sensible perception however exists 
only in respect of particular objects. But there exist 
also general elements of the particulars of sense-percep- 
tion. There is an abstract quality by which sensible 
matter (Mahabhfita) is perceived. This abstract quality 
is Tanmatra the " mere thatness " or abstract quality of 
an object. These are the general elements of sense per- 
ception which necessarily come into existence when the 
senses (Indriya) are produced. This is supersensible 
(Atindriya) matter, the existence of which is ordinarily 
only mediately perceived through the gross particular 
objects of which they are the generals and which proceed 
from them. Sensations aroused by sense objects are 
experienced by the outer instruments (VfUiyakarana) or 
senses (Indriya) whether of cognition (Jnanendriya) or 
action (Karmendriya) which arc the afferent and efferent 
impulses respectively. The Indriyas are not however 
sufficient in themselves. In the first place unless atten- 
tion co-operates there is no sensation (Aloehana) at all. 
Nextly as the experiencer is at very moment beseiged by 
countless sensations from all sides : if any of these is to be 
brought into the field of consciousness it must be selected 
to the exclusion of others. Lastly the manifold of sense 
or " points of sensation ” must be gathered together and 
made into a whole. Those three function? are those of 
Manas the function of which is said to be Sangkalpavikalpa 
that is selection and rejection of material provided by the 
Jnanendriya. These sensations, to affect the experiencer, 
must be made his own and this is clone by Ahangk&ra or 
" Self-arrcgation.” It is then passed on to Buddhi which 
determines either by way of forming percepts and concepts 

182 




THE GROSS TATTVAS AND THEIR LORDS 



or resolutions {Karlavyam efa! may A). Thus all the 
Tattvas work for the enjoyment of the Self or Purusha. 
They are not to be regarded as things existing indepen- 
dently by themselves but as endowments of the Spirit 
(Atmii). They do not work arbitrarily as they will but 
represent an organised co-operative effort in the service 
of the Enjoyer, tire Expericnccr or Purusha. 

The Tantras speak of three Tattvas namely of Atmfi, 
VidvS, Shiva. The first includes those Tattvas of the 
Thirty-six which are called impure (Asliuddha) namely 
Prithivi to Prakriti ; the second tiie pure-impure (Shuddha- 
Asliuddha) or M&y&, the Kanchukas and Purusha ; and 
the tbinl the pure Tattvas (Shuddha) from SliuddhavidyH 
to Shiva Tattva. I have dealt with the last two in pre- 
vious Shiva Tattva. 1 have dealt with the last two in 
previous Chapters and deal with the first in the present 
one. It is also said (see Jn&n&rnava Tantra XXI- 1 - 22 ) 
that there are four Atmas constituting the Chitkunda or 
Mandala in the MuUdhara where the inner Homa is. made. 
By knowledge thereof there is no rebirth. These axe 
Atma, Jilin atma, Antaratma and Paramatma. 

Thu AtmJL (PianarQpi) which is in all creatures 
(Jantu) as the basis of their Prana or vital principle is 
their Atma. It is HangsasvarQpl and is manifested in 
individual bodies by inspiration and expiration (Shvasa, 
UchchhvSsa). This is JivStma. It is like the Ak&sha 
separated in a pot which when broken becomes mingled 
with the total Akaslia. Jnaniltma is said to be S4ksh4t- 
s&kshirflpaka. Thai is, it is that aspect of Atma which 
witnesses all and by which the unity of all is known. It 
is thus the basis of Buddhi and all mental Tattvas derived 
therefrom. By " Antar ” in Antar&tma is meant the 
subtle Atma of atomic dimension [R,thasya-suks!i»ia- 
nipakaparatnanu) which pervades every object. It is the 
“ inner bodiness '* (Antarangati) die spark of ParamatmS.. 

183 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

It is Hangsa known only by Yogis. Its beak is Tara 
(Mantra Om) ; Its two wings are Agama and Nigama. 
Its two feet are Shiva and Shakti. The three Bindus are 
Its three eyes. When this Paramahangsa is spread 
(Vyftpta) throughout Creation then all Bhfitas spring up 
in their order (Ak&sha, Pavana, etc.). Of these five the 
root is Chitta. This Hangsa Bird disports Itself in tho 
Lake of Ignorance (Avidya) in the mud of illusion and 
infatuation (Mohapangka) which is the world. When 
this Hangsa becomes other-worldly (Nishprapancha) and 
dissolving (Sanghfirarupi) then It reveals the Self 
natn pradarshayet). Then Its " Birdness ” (Pakshitva) 
ceases. Then the So’hamStma is established which is the 
Supreme Experience or Paramatma. 

To complete the creative process it is now necessary 
to resume the creation of Shabda (Shabdasrishti) from its 
supreme state (Parashabda or Parabrahman) through its 
three Bh&vas, Pashyanti. Madhyamd and Vaikharl mani- 
festing in bodies composed of the Tattvas above described: 
for in this way the birth of the letters composing Mantras 
is shown. I will deal with this in Chapter XXI under the 
title “ Garland of Letters” (Varnamald), a subject of 
primary importance in the Tantras, after a description 
of the Causal Sliaktis of the Pranava or Mantra Om and 
an explanation of the Kalas. 



184 




CHAPTER XIX 

CAUSAL SHAKTIS OF THE PRANAVA 

The present Chapter is but a short summary of the 
result of some enquiries recently pursued in Kashmir with 
a view to ascertain the notions of the Northern Shaiva 
school on several matters which 1 have been studying in 
connection with my work on the wakening of the spiraline 
energy or Serpent Power. 1 was already aware, as the 
Kul&mava Tantra (one of the foremost Tantras of the 
" Bengal ” school) indicates, that the Shaiva-Sh&kta 
Darshana and not Shangkara’s exposition of Vedanta is 
the original philosophical basis of the Shakta iaith, 
though some who call themselves Shaktas seem nowa- 
days to have forgotten, if they were ever aware of, that 
fact. In Kashmir, Kula ShSstra is, I believe, another 
name for the Trika. But amongst several other objects 
in view I wished to link up the connection of certain 
Shaktis mentioned in the Kriyi portion of the Shastras 
with the thirty -six Tattvas of the Shaiva-Shakta school, 
their position in the scheme not being in all cases clear to 
me according to the information previously at my disposal. 
I have worked the matter out in more detail and the 
present Chapter will summarise conclusions on certain 
points. 

Being (Satta) is of two kinds, formless (ArCipa) and 
with form (Riipa). In the first the " I ” (Aham)‘aiid the 
" This ” {I dam) or universe representing the PrakSsha and 
Vimarsha aspects of experience are one. Shiva and 
Shakti exist in all the planes. But they are hero undis- 
tinguishably one in the embrace of the Lord (Shiva) and 
" the Heart of the Lord ” (Shakti). Shiva is Chit. 
Shakti is ChidrUpifti. He is Para and She, Para. This is 
the Perfect Experience which is Ananda or " Resting in 

*85 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



the Self ” (Svarupavishranti). Shiva then experiences 
the universe as Parashakti, that is, Paranikda and Par&vik. 
This is the Love of the Self for the Self. The Supreme 
experience is the bliss of unalloyed Love. The Idam 
then exists as Parashakti.' The two aspects are as it 
were one (Ekatn taltvam iva), to use a phrase in the 
Ahirbudhnya Samhitft of the Panchar&tra Agama. The 
" Supreme Sound ” and " Supreme Speech " are thus the 
perfect Universe which is the supreme Kail&sa. This is 
the supreme unitary experience in which, though the 
“ I ” and the “ This " do not cease to exist, they are both 
in their SvarUpa and thus mysteriously coalesce in one 
unity of Being which is the " Two in one." The whole 
process then of creation, that is, the rise of imperfect or 
dual experience, is the establishment through the negation 
of Shakti (Nts/u'dha-xydpjra-rupa Shakti) of a (liremption 
in the one unitary consciousness whereby the Aliam and 
the Idam, which had then existed, coalesced in one. 
diverge in consciousness, until in our own experience the 
" I " is separated from the " This ” seen as objects outside 
ourselves. 

The process of manifestation of Mantra is that of 
cosmic ideation {Srishtihalpana) in which Jnina Shakti 
first merely formulates as thought the outlines of the 
limited universe which is about to emerge from, and for, 
consciousness, and which is called the " thinkable ” 
(Manlavya), which through Nada which is Kriyashakli- 
rupa moves towards the " speakable " ( Vdchya ), with 
which again consciousness identifies itself as Bindu which 
is characterised by a predominance of activity ( Kriyd - 
prddhdnyalahshana). Diversity (P/itliagblidva) is then 
produced by Bindu as Ma-kara in the Maya Tattva. 
Shakti as U-k&ra creates objects [Prameya] as separate 
existences and by the completion of the Tattvas objecti- 
vity is completely revealed as A-kara. To describe 

186 




CAUSAL SHAKTIS OF THE PRANAVA 



however adequately this grand system of Abhftsa, as it is 
called, would require a foil exposition of the Northern or 
monistic Shalva and the allied Shftkta Darshana on which 
the Shiikta doctrine and practice of the Agamas is based. 
I can l]cre only indicate shortly the Shaktis of the Mula 
Mantra or Pranava, which are the correspondences from 
the Shakti aspect of the Shaiva-Sh&kta Tattvas. The 
accounts of the Shaktis van,’, but such variance is rather 
due to the fact that some accounts are fuller than others 
than to any substantial difference in principle. 

The gist of the matter may be shortly stated as fol- 
lows In creation, the three Shaktis, Jnftna, Ichchha, 
Kriyfi, manifest. These are manifested powers of the 
supreme Bindu. " What is here is there,” and these 
Shaktis of the Lord (Pati) appear as the Gunas of Prakriti 
in the Pashu ; or as it has also been said, Jnana and Kriyfi 
with Maya as the third appear as Sattva, Rajas, and 
Tamas of the Purusha-Prakriti stage which is the imme- 
diate source of the consciousness of the Pashu. 

SviUiga-rfipcshu blith est: t< palyur jndvam kriyfi cha \& 

M dyd triiiyd l < f eva pashoh satlvam rajas tamah 

(Ishx'ara-Praiyabhijttd, IV i, 4). 

The creative consciousness. (Shakti) projects the uni- 
verse as all-diffusive Consciousness {Sad&khya Taltva), 
which considered from the Mantra aspect is all-diffusive 
" Sound,” that is movement or Nada. Here the emphasis 
is on the Aham, which is yet coloured by the Idam as the 
universe faintly rises into the field of the changeless 
consciousness.' Consciousness then identifies itself with 
the clearly perceived Idam and becomes Bindu. Here 
the emphasis is on the Idam with which consciousness 
becomes a point (Bindu). Then the evoking conscious- 
ness holds the ” I " and the " This ” in equal balance 
(Samdnddhikarana), at which point Mayh Shakti, which 
is the sense of difference ( Bkedabuddhi ), intervenes to 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

separate the Aham (as Purusha) and Idam (as Prakriti) 
hitherto held as parts of the one Consciousness, and the 
divisive power of Kali Shakti breaks up the universe so 
separated from the Self into that plurality of objects 
which is our ordinary worldly experience. The universe 
which in the Purusha-Prakriti stage was seen as a whole, 
though different from the Self, is now also seen as separate 
but as a multitude of mutually exclusive beings. 

There Is first a fivefold division of the *' five rays " of 
Om, namely, A. U, M. Nada Bindu, ShAnta. The Pra- 
panchasira Tantra says that Jagrat is Bija, Svapna is 
Bindu, Sushupti is NAda, Turiya is Shakti and the Lava 
beyond is ShAnta. This is the simplest form of statement 
setting forth one Shakti for each of the Vamas. and the 
Chandra-Bindu. In other words from Shiva-Shakti 
(which includes all the Tattvas down to the appearance 
of the three Devatas) these latter are produced. There 
is next a sevenfold division . ParAsam vit or Paramashiva 
is not technically accounted a Tattva, for the Supreme 
Experience is Tattvatita. But if we include it as the 
transcendental aspect of the Shaivatattva from which 
the AbhAsa proceeds, we get the number seven counting 
Purusha and Prakriti as two. The number seven is of 
frequent occurrence ; as in the case of the seven Shivas, 
namely, Parashiva, Shambhu and the five Mahapretas ; 
the seven Shaktis of the OngkAra as given in the ShArada 
Tilaka ; the seven Shaktis Unmani and the rest as given 
in the Commentary of KAlicharana on the Shatchakra- 
nirfipana Chapter of Pumananda SvAml’s work entitled 
ShritattvachintAmani published as the second volume of 
my TAntrik Texts ; and the three and a half coils of 
Kundalini of which the Kubjika Tantra speaks, namely 
Purusha, Prakriti, Vikriti, which it may be observed when 
uncoiled and divided by its diameter gives seven divisions. 

The SharadA speaks of six Shaktis which with 

188 




CAUSAL SHAKTIS OF THE PRANAVA 



Parameshvara who is Sachchidananda make seven name- 
ly : — Shiva, Shakii, NAda, Hindu (KArana), Bindu 
(KAryya), NAda (KAryya) and Bija. The other seven 
Shaktis above mentioned are Unmani (or Unman 6.), 
Samani (or SamanA), Anji. MahanAda (or NAdAnta), NAda. 
Ardhachandra and Bindu. If in the first scries we take 
K&ryya-Nida which is desciibed as the Mithah-samavAya 
(mutual relation) of Shi var u pak A rv y a Bindu and Bija. 
which is ShaktirQpa, as the correspondence in this scheme 
of the Shaiva Shuddhavidya Tattva with its SamanAdhi- 
karana, then this series represents all the Shaiva Tattvas 
up to and including Purusha-Prakriti. The same remarks 
apply to the second seiies of Shaktis or causal forms 
(KAranarupa). The first is described by Kalicharana as 
the state in which all mindness (Manastva), that is. ideation 
ceases. Here there is neither KalA nor K&la, for it is 
" the sweet pure mouth of Rudra " (Shivapada). The 
second is the cause of all causes (SarvakAranakaranam). 
The third which is also called by him VyapikA Shakti 
appears in the beginning of creation. MahanAda is the 
Karana-N'ada which is KriyA Shakti and the first appear- 
ance of NAda. Shakti as NAda is a development of the 
latter which is transformed into Ardhachandra and then 
Bindu. 

These Shaktis (as well as two others with AUM, mak- 
ing together twelve) are explained according to Shaiva 
views in an account extracted from the Netra Tantra with 
KshcmarAja’s Commentary and from the Tantraloka. 
There the Shaktis are given as Unmana. Samani, VyApikA 
(or Vyapini), Anjani. MahanAda, NAda, Nirodhini, Ardha- 
chandra, Bindu, Ma-kara, U-kAra, A-kAra. The Sanskrit 
passages here given are the summary- in his own language 
made for me by the Kashmirian Pandit Ilarabhatta 
ShAstri of Srinagar. 

" When the Supreme Shiva beyond whom there is 

1S9 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



nought, who is in the natureof unchanged and unchange- 
able illumination moves forth by His will, such (willing 
movement as) Shakti though in fact, inseparable from 
Him, is called Unmand ; Her place is the Shiva Tattva" 
(Anut/ara-paramashiva avichalaprakdskdtmd y add svechchh- 
ayd prasarati stf shaktih shiv&d abhinnaivu Unmand 
ityuchyate : tat-sthdnam shiva-tattvam ifi). 

" When the UnmanS Shakti displays Herself in the 
form of the universe beginning with the Shflnva and end- 
ing with Dhard, formulates as mere thought the thinkable, 
then She is called SamanA as well as Shakti-tattva ” 
(Yadd uninatui-shaktir dtmdnam kshobhayati shAnyddinS 
dhardnlena jagad-dtmand sphurati mantavyam inanana- 
mdtrena dsdirayali, (add Samatid ityuchyate. Shakti- 
tattvam iti cha). " This Samand Shakti Herself is called 
Vydpini when She operates as the Power which withdraws 
into Herself all thinkables which are Her creation. She 
resides in the Shakti-tattva” (Samatid shaktir eva svaman- 
taxye samhdrapradhdr.at)>ena Vydpini ityuchyate. eshd 
Shaktiiattve tishthati). " It is again the same SamanA 
Herself who is called Shakti when Her operation is chiefly 
creative in regard to Her own thinkables. She resides in 
the Shakti-tattva and is also called Anjant because of Her 
being associated with the thinkables ” (Samauaiva 
svamanlavye srishtipradhinatvena shaktirityvehyate 
eshd Shakti-tattve tishthati maniavyoparaktatvdt cha 
Anjani ityapi uchyate). " When Shabdabrahman moves 
forth with great strength form Its Shiva form then the 
very first sound (produced thereby) like the vibration 
produced by a sounding bell is called Nddanta (i.e., 
Mahandda). It resides in the Saddshiva-tattva." ( Yadd 
shabdabrahma shiva-rdpdd ativegena prasarali ladd pratha- 
mataram ghanldnurananatma shabdo Ndddnla ityuchyate, 
sa Sadd-shiva-ta/ive tishthati). " When Shakti fills up the 
whole universe with Ndddnta then She is called Ndda, 

190 




CAUSAL SHAKTIS OF THE PRANAVA 



And this also is the Sad&shiva Tattva because of the 
equality therein of the " I ” and the " This ” (Niddntem 
yadii vishvan dpdrayati tadd Ndda ityuchyate, sa cha 
ahantedanlayoh sdm&n&dhikaranyena Saddskiva-tatlva- 
tnili)". SamfinSdhikarana in its technical sense is the 
function of the later developed Shuddhavidya Tattva. 
Apparently its original is here represented to be the func- 
tion of the earlier Sadashiva Tattva in which the duality 
of the Aharn and Idam first manifests 

"When Nada, after having ceased to ojicrate in its uni- 
versal scope, does so limitedly (or particularly), then it is 
called Nirodhini. This Shakti rests in the Sadashiva 
Tattva" (Nado yadd asheshavydplim nimajjya adharam 
vydptim unmajjayati tadd Nirodhini ityuchyate s<i Sadd- 
shivatatlvam dlamhate). " When Nado is slightly ope- 
rative towards the creation of the *' speakable,” it is called 
Ardhachandra which is fshvara Tattva.” (Nado yada 
ishadvdehyonmesham skrayali tadd Ardhachandra ityuckate 
Ishvara-tattve). Then " Para-Shakti Herself is called 
Bindu when She is in the nature of inseparate illumination 
in regard to the whole range of the speakable ” ( Paraiva 
shaklih yadd samastavdehye abheda-prakdsha-rupatdm 
grihnati tadd Bindur ityuchyate, sa Jshvaratatlve iishthati). 

Ma-kara or Kudra Devata is defined : — "When Bindu 
causes diversity to manifest it is called Ma-kara and It 
moves in Maya Tattva” (Yadd binduh prilkag-bhdvam 
abhasayati tadd Ma-kdra ityuchyate, sa cha Mdydtattve) 
" When Shakti creates objects as separate existences then 
She is called U-kara. It resides in the Prakriti Tattva ” 
(Yadd prameyam prithag-bhdvcna unmeshayati tadd U-kara 
ityuchyate, sa cha PrakrUi-taUve tishthali). " When the 
creation of the Tattvas has come to an end, then because 
objectivity is completely revealed, (Shakti as) Mantri Kal& 
(that is the creative art or process considered as " Sound ” 
or Mantra) is called A-kara” (Tattva-sargasya nivrittir yadd 

191 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



jfiyatc tada pramyasya pumataya prakashaniU A-kdra t!i 
Mdnlri-kald uchyale). 

The extra five Shaktis enumerated in this account are 
due firstly to the inclusion ol AUM; seocndly to counting 
Vyapini and Anjani separately instead of as being the 
Nimesha and Unmesha aspect of one Shakti ; and thirdly 
the sevenfold series would appear to include Nirodhinl, 
also called Nirodhika, in N5da of which it is a more parti- 
cularised development. NAda would appear in the fuller 
series to represent Sdmanyaspanda of the sound ema- 
nation. For just as in the region of ideation the evolu- 
tion is from infinite consciousness to the general and 
thence to particular ideas ; so from the corresponding ob- 
jective or Mantra aspect, which is that of Shftktop&yayoga, 
motion commences from the unextended point first as 
general, then as particular movement, at length develop- 
ing into the clearly defined particularity of speech and of 
the objects which speech denotes. The rhythmic vibra- 
tion of objects is the same as that o' the mind which 
perceives them, since both are aspects of the one Shakti 
which thus divides itself. 

Namasle ravatvcua fatlvdbhidhdnc 




CHAPTER XX 

THE KALAS 

Kala is a common term in Tantrik literature for 
which it is difficult to find an appropriate English render- 
ing. Shiva has two aspects Nishkala (Nirguna) and 
Sakala (Saguna). The former is therefore without Kala. 
The latter is with Kala. Shiva is never without Shaktj, 
for the two are one and the same, and Shakti in Herself, 
according to Her proper nature (Shakti-Svarflpa), Is 
Consciousness or Chaitanva (Chaitanyarupini). Thus 
there are said to be no Kalis in Unmani which is in the 
Shiva Tattva. Thereafter with Samani in Shakti Tattva 
the Kalis appear. Thus in Netra Tantra (Ch. 22) 
seven Kalis are assigned to Samani. The Shakti of a 
Devati is divided into sixteen Kalasor ‘‘parts’' of Power. 
That aspect of the DevatA which has full power is called 
Puma Kalamurti. One sixteenth of that or any part of 
the whole (Puma) is Kalamdi ti. A fraction again of that 
is Angshamurti and a fraction of Angshamurti is 
Angshingshamiirti. Shiva is partless. Shakti has 
parts (Kala). But parts as we know them do not exist 
until after the universe has evolved from Prakrit i : that 
is, parts in the literal sense of the Mayik world. When 
therefore mention is made of Kala in connection with 
so high a Shakti as Samani or any other Shakti which 
precedes Prakriti, what is meant is something which may 
be best expressed by modes or aspects of Shakti. Kala, 
in short, is a particular display of Power or Vibhfiti. 
Kali is also one of the Kanchukas which go to the making 
of the Purusha consciousness and is the product of higher 
SJiaktis and Kalis. The Kanchukas or enveloping 
Shaktis cut down the natural perfections as they exist 

*93 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



in the Supreme Self and thus constitute the evolved Self 
or Purusha. The four Kalas called Nivritti, Pratishtha, 
Vidya, Shanti arc specific modes of Shakti well defined. 
These arc explained later. As regards the other Kalas 
there is greater difficulty. In the first place the texts 
are not consonant. This may be either due to inaccuracy 
in the Mss. or real variances or to both. Then explana- 
tions of the terms are in general wanting, though some- 
times they are given by the commentators. The Sans- 
kritist will however perceive that these latter Kalas are 
variant aspects (like Avarana DevatAs of worship), des- 
criptive of the nature and functions of the Shakti whose 
Kal&s they are and as such may have been set forth for 
Up&sana ; the lengthy lists being in conformity with the 
taste of the age in which these Shastras were promulgated 
Thus Kalis have been called Jyotsna (moonlight) and 
the like on account of their Sarva j natidharma , that is, 
Prakasharupatidharma ; that which being in the nature 
of manifesation is white and brilliant as moonlight. 
So again Indhika (kindling) Kala is so called because 
it is Jninarfipi or in the nature of knowledge ; and 
Rundhani is so called because of its opposing or staying 
quality as explained later. This great elaboration of 
Shaktis is also in conformity with a psychological prin- 
ciple on which Tantrik Up4san& is based into which I 
cannot enter here. 

The above remarks are illustrated by the lengthy 
list of Kalas of the Vamas and Pranava given in Ch. Ill 
of the Prapanchas&ra Tantra. (See Vol. Ill cl my T&ntrik 
Texts). The Kaliis of Nada, Bindu, A U M are there 
given and I will not repeat them here : but I will relate 
instead an account obtained from the Kashmirian .Pandit 
Hara Bhatta Sh&stri and taken by him from Netra Tantra 
which has not been published. The reader of the Pra- 
panchasara will observe that the accounts vary both as 

194 




THE KALAS 



to the names and numbers of the Kalis. In Netra 
Tantra seven Kalis are given of Samani Shakti, viz., 
Sarvajni, Sarvaga, Durga, Savarna. Spriliana. Dhriti. 
Samaria ; five of Anjani, viz., Sukshmi, SusQkshma, 
Amrita, Amritasambhavi, Vy&pini ; one of Mahin&da 
viz., Urddhvagamini four of Nada, viz., Indhiki, Dipika. 
Rochika, Mochika. Some texts speak of Kcc hi k i . 
Xirodhini Shakti has five Kalis called Rundhani, Kodhanl, 
Raudri, Jnanabodhi, Tamo’pahi. The Shatchakra- 
nirupana (V. 38) speaks of Bandhati. Bodhini, Bodha. 
Rodhini and Rundhaii!, which mean "opposing/' indicate 
the opposition encountered by lower Experiences such 
as Brahma and other Devas attempting to enter into the 
higher state of X:\da. These Shaktis (like the " Dwelleis 
on the threshold’’ of Western occult literature) oppose 
all those to whom they do not extend their grace 
(Anugraba) by the Kalas Jnanabodha (Wisdom) and 
Tamo’pahi (Disi>eller of darkness). These Kalas are 
therefore called Sarvadevanirodhiki, that is, they oppose 
entrance into the higher state of consciousness and they 
oppose the fall therefrom of such Devas as have attained 
thereto. Of Ardhachandra there arc five Kalis, viz., 
Jyotsni, Jyotsn&vati. Knnti. Suprabha, and Vimala, 
which are said to be Sarvajnapadasamsthita. For She 
is Knower of all. If one can remain in Ardhachandra- 
pada then all things are known —past, present and future. 
I am informed that according to Netra Tantra (Ch. 22) 
and Svachchhanda Tantra (Ch. 20), the four Kalas of 
Bindu are the very important ones Nivritti, Pratishthi, 
VidyS, Skint! ; which however are said in Prapanchasara 
to be Kalas of Nada, the four Kalas of Bindu being there 
given as Pili, Shveta, Aruni and Asita. These live 
modes of Shakti arc described later. The number and 
names of the Kalis of A 15 M differ in these several texts. 
According to the former the Kalis of the Destructive 

195 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



Rudra are Tamomohi, Ksliudha. Nidri, Mrityu, Mfiya, 
Bhaya, Jadi ; of the Protective Vishnu the Kalas are 
Raja (?), Raksha, Rati. Palya, Kamya, Buddhi. M&y&, 
Nadi, Bhramani, Mohini, Trishna, Mati, Kriya ; and of 
tile Creative Brahma there are Siddlu, Riddhi, Dyuti, 
Lakshmi, Medha, Kanti, Dhriti, Sudlii. The three 
Bindus of the differentiating Parabiudu form the Kama- 
kala. The Kalis Nivritti aud the rest are the genera- 
lities (Samanya) of the Tattvas issuing from Prakriti ; 
that is the Tattvas are sub-divisions or differentiations 
of these four Kalas. Nivritti Kali is the working force 
and essential element in the Prithivi Tattva or Solidity ; 
and is so called because here the stream of tendency is 
stopped and the manifesting energy turned upwards. 
When Prithivi has been reached by process of evolu- 
tion, Shakti becomes Kunduli (coiled ; at rest). Her 
next movement which is that of Yoga is upwards by in- 
volution retracing the steps of descent. The Prithivi 
Anu or point of solidity is inexhaustible potentiality 
in, and as a physical, that is, sensible manifestation of, 
the Spiraline Power welliug up from and coiling round 
the Shiva-bindu. This aspect of the Power supplies 
(as a friend learned in Shaiva literature informs me) 
the curving aud circular motion which manifests as the 
rounding and spherical skin and flesh with which all 
Pranis are supplied. According to the same view Pra- 
tishtha which is the same force in all the Tattvas from 
Ap to Prakriti (Tantriloka Alui. io) is so called, because 
whilst Nivritti supplies the outer covering, Pratishthi, 
as its name indicates, supplies the basis and inner 
framework on which the outer physical universe is laid. 
Vidya Kali, which is so called because it is limited 
knowledge, is the dominant Kali in the Tattvas from 
Purusha upwards together with five Kanchukas to 
Mayi. These are related to the Shaktis Vimi, Jyeshtha 

196 




THE KAL.4S 



and Raudri, which manifest as the three motions which 
go to make the universe, which in terms of conscious- 
ness are the movements of the Antahkarana towards 
the objects (Vishaya) of its experience ; sucli objects 
being the combination of lines on various planes, in 
curves and circles. The three dimensional framework 
affords the basis (Pratishthd) for the outer solid covering 
(Nivritti) supplied by the spiraline Shakti as the mani- 
fested sensible and physical. Beyond MfiylL there is the 
consciousness which is peace (Sh&nti), for it is free of the 
duality which is the source of sorrow. The last Kali 
is therefore called Shantfi and is dominant in the glorious 
experience of the Tattvas from Sadvidyi to Shakti 
Tattva. Thus the Tattvas arc only the manifestations 
of Shakti as three typical forms of movement starting 
from the kinetic state. It is these moving forces as the 
Kalis which are the inner life and secret of them. The 
Kalis are not dead forces ; for the universe does not 
proceed from such . They are realised in direct experience 
as Deval&s in and beyond all natural manifestations 
and may be made to serve the purpose of Sidhana. As 
Divine Beings they are modes of the one Divine Mother 
worshipped diagramatically in Yantras. As the inner 
forces in the Tattvas the Kalis group together the latter 
into four great "Eggs’’ (Anda), that is, Spheroids com- 
prising those Tattvas only of which a Kali is the common 
dominant feature and inner force. These are the Brah- 
manda comprising Prithivi Tattva in which all others 
are involved, the bounding principle or envelope of which 
is ether (Akisha) ; Prakrityanda or MulAnda ; Mayinda ; 
and Shaktyanda of which the envelopes are Prakriti, 
Miya and Shakti respectively. Beyond>ll these in the 
centre thereof and pervading all is the Shiva Tattva in 
regard to which the Divine Shakti as a Kali is an utter 
negation (ShQnyitishffnyal . an empty space-giving or 

*97 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



vacuity-producing power (Avakashada), which is the 
negative pole of the conjoint Shiva-Shakti Tattvas. The 
Shiva Tattva is thus the Paramashiva or Parasamvit. 
the great Bhairava experience with its supreme experience 
of the universe negatived. 

Regarding then this ultimate Shakti also, in so far 
as it is a manifestation, as a Kali or moving Power, the 
thirty-six Tattvas of which the universe consists are but 
manifestations of five forces (Shakti) or Kalas into which 
the one partless Divine Shakti differentiates Herself in 
an infinite variety of permutations so as to produce the 
universe with parts : namely, Shintitita or Avakishadi, 
Shinti, V'idya, Pratishtha, Nivritti. 

According to the account given in the Shatchakrani- 
rupana (Vol. II of my Tantrik Texts) and the Commen- 
taries of Kilicharana and Vishvanitha, there is a Shakti 
called Nirv Ana- Shakti with two Kalis, which arc Nir- 
vana Kali and Ama-Kala, known as the seventeenth 
and sixteenth Kalas respectively. Unmani is Shiva- 
pada which is beyond Kila and Kali. In Shakti Tattva 
these have their source. The highest' Shakti in this 
Tattva is Samani ; Nirvina Shakti is, according to 
Vishvanitha, Samanapada or Samani, the life and origin 
of all being (Sarvcshim yonirupini). According 'to 
Kilicharana, NirvSna Shakti is Unman!. Shakti as 
seventeenth Kali is Chinmitra and is called Nirvina- 
Kali. Vishvanatha identifies it with Vy&pini-Tattva 
which is Shakti-svarupi and above (Paratpara) the six- 
teenth Kali. It is Antargata ol, that is. included with- 
in, Amikali, just as NirvSna Shakti is Antargata of 
Nirvina Kala. Kilicharana identifies it with Sama- 
nipada. Ami is the sixteenth Kali. She is the recep- 
tacle of the nectar which flows from the union of Para 
(Bindurffpa Shiva) and Pari (Shakti). Vishvan&tha 
cites the Yoginihridaya Tantra to show that Ami is 

198 




THE KALAS 



Vy&pikA Shakti. Kalicharana agrees as to this. But 
it lias been said by Vishvanatha that Nirvana Kala is 
Vy&pint Tattva. We must take it then that according 
to this view Nirvdna Kala and Ama Kala are the two 
aspects, supreme and creative, of Vy&pint Tattva as 
VyApika and Anjani. Beyond or more excellent than 
Ama-Kal& is NirvAna Kala, and then this last, Nirvana 
Shakti or Samani in Shakti Tattva wherein is bondage 
(l’&shajala). Thus Nirv&na Kal& is the Chinm&tra- 
svabhAvA or pure consciousness aspect of what in the 
creative aspect is called Ama, the receptacle of nectar, 
that is. the blissful current which flows from the union 
of Shiva and Shakti. This is the rapture of creation 
which is known to us also. The same Shakti is in differ- 
ing aspect Am ri t& kdrar Qpint as the seventeenth and the 
receptacle of Amrita as the sixteenth Kala Ama is 
both Srishtyunmukhi (looking towards creation) and 
Urddhvashaktir&pA (looking upwards, that is, towards 
Liberation.) The former is the meaning of tin* expres- 
sion ' 'down waid turned -mouth” (Adhomuklii). This is 
the position of ihe Petals before Kttndalinf ascends. 

This is my reading of Texts which are not devoid of 
discussion. Thus apart from difficulties in the Texts 
cited I was informed in Kashmir that Shakti is called the 
seventeenth Kali or AmA when Chinm&trasvabhAvA ; 
and Amrit& Kala when Purusha is with the sixteen KalAs, 
which in this case are said to be the JnAnendriva, Kar- 
mendriya. Tanm&tra and Manas (which includes Ahang- 
kara and Buddhi). This may be a difference of termi- 
nology only. What seems clear is that in Shakti Tattva 
(of the thirty-six Tattvas) there are two KalAs which 
represent the supreme and creative modes of Shakti, 
whether we call them Nirvana and Ami or Amrita- 
kara and AmritA Kali. The sixteenth is the creative 
Shakti and the Kala which is in the nature of ever exis- 

*99 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

tent changeless Chit (Chinm&trasvabh&v&) is the seven- 
teenth. 

To sum up. Paramashiva (Pardsamvit) in His 
aspects as Shiva Tattvas is the ShflnydtishQnya, so called 
because in His experience there is not the slightest trace 
of objectivity whatever. Both these aspects are Slidn- 
tdttta. Shakti then gradually unveils again the universe 
for the consciousness of Shiva who is PrakAsha or the 
Illuminating Consciousness which is the subjective as- 
pect of things ; and the experience which is summed up 
as Shdnta Raid arises, extending from Shakti Tattva to 
Sadvidyfi, with the Shaktis, Samani, Vyfipinf, Anjani 
and their Kalis ; and the Shaktis of the NSda and Bindu 
groups with their Kalis. This is the Spheroid of Shakti 
(Shaktyanda) which is the abode of those glorious Beings 
who are called Mantram&heshvara, Mantreshvara, 
Mantra and Vidyeshvara. The Vi j nan Alcalas who are 
below Shuddhavidya are also above Mftyfi. From the 
unfolding of Bindu the other Spheroids emanate, which 
manifest the three principal forms of movement which 
go to the making of the universe. Next, in concentric 
circles arise the Spheroid of (Mayanda). the field of opera- 
tion of Vidyd-kala, which is the Shakti producing the 
limited dual consciousness of all experiences (Pralayd- 
kala, Sakala) below Sadvidya and in or below Maya. 
Lastly, the Spheroids of Prakriti and Brahma provide 
the vehicles in which the Expcriencer called Sakala 
functions. These Experiences comprise all things from 
Brahma downwards who are not liberated. Brahma, 
Vishnu and Rudra are the Lords of the spheres from 
Prithivi to Mdy& ; Isha and Andshrita Shiva of higher 
Tattvas; and lastly, Shiva of Shiva Tattva, which is the 
ultimate source of, but is Itself beyond, all Raids. 



200 




CHAPTER XXI 



THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMACA 

We now speak oi "V&k"— ' The Word"— a great 
concept of the Sh&stras. Shruti says : "Four are the steps 
measured by V&k. The wise Brahmana knows them. 
Three being hidden in the cave do not issue. The fourth 
is spoken by men in their speech." 

The Parabindu is the Shadba-brahman : for on its 
differentiation arises the " unmanifest sound" (Avyakta- 
rava), the Hidden Word from which all manifested speech 
and the objects which it denotes are derived. This is the 
state of Supreme Shabda (Parashabda), the evolution of 
which (Parashabdasrishti) lias been shown in the previous 
Chapters. In its further development the existence of 
mind and body is assumed. This has been discussed in 
the account of the evolution of the objects (Arthasrishti) 
which man thinks and in uttered speech names. This 
Shabdabrahman as appearing in bodies is Kundalini 
Shakti (Kundalini shabdabrahmamayl). The Shirada 
Tilakasays (i-Tio-112) : 

Sa prasutc Kundalini shabdabrakmamayi vibhuh 
Shaftting talo dhvanis tasmdn itddas tasmdn nirodhikd 
Talo' rdhtndus talo bindtts lasrn&d dsU parti talah. 
“She who is Kundalini, all pervading Shabdabrahman, 
produces Shakti. From this came Dhvani ; from Dhvani, 
Nada ; from Ndda, Nirodhikd ; from Nirodhika, Ardhen- 
du ; from Ardhendu, Bindu ; and then comes Para.” 

It will be observed that just as there is a sevenfold 
cosmic development, it is repeated here in the case of indi- 
vidual bodies. Kundalini is Shabdabrahman, an aspect 
of Chaitanya or Consciousness (Chit). By Shakti is here 
meant Chit entered into by Sattva (Sattvapravishta). 
which is the ParamAk&shavastha. By Dhvani is meant 
that same Chit when entered into by Sattva (Sattvapra- 



201 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



vishtA), penetrated by Rajas (Rajo'nubiddhA), which is 
AksharAvasthA. By XAda Is meant the same Chit pene- 
trated by Tamas (Tamo'nubiddhA) or AvyaktavasthA. 
By NirodhikA is denoted that same Chit with abundance 
of Tamas (Taniah-prAchuryyA) ; by Ardhendu the same 
with abundance of Sattva (Sattva-prachuryyA). By 
the term Bindu is denoted that same Chit when in it 
there is a combination of the two (Tadubhayusangyogat). 
This development appears to indicate the gradual process 
whereby Shakti passes through subtle to more gross 
forms of potency until it reaches that ftfll potency for 
manifestation which is the GhanavasthA State or Bindu 
in which KriyA exists in full creative perfection. So it 
is said, "Moved by the strength of IchchhA-shakti (Ich- 
chhashaktibalakrishtah), illumined by Jnana-shakti 
(Jnanashaktipradipitah)," that Shakti (Sa shaktih) in 
male form (PungrupintJ who is the Lord (Prabhu) puts 
forth Her who is called Action (Kriy&khyi), that is, 
KriyAsbakti. 

The ShAradA then continues : — 

Pashyanti madhyamti vdchi vaikhari shabda- janmabhkh 
Ichchhdjndnakriydtmd’ san tijoriipj gundtmikd 
Kramendtutia srijati Knndalt varnamdlik&m . 

“(Then Para) and then came Pashyanti, Madhyama and 
Vaikhari Shabda. In this order Kundali who is Will 
(IchchhA), Knowledge (Jnina) and Action (Kriya), who is 
both Light (Tejorupa, and ChidrfipA ; in Herself consci- 
ousness) and in the form of the Gunas (GunAtmikA, that 
is, Prakriti) creates the Garland of Letters." 

Para is Shabda as Parabindu and is motionless (Nish- 
panda). This as already explained becomes threefold and 
the threefold aspects from the Shabda stand-point are 
Pashyanti, Madhyama, Vaikhari. Each of these are 
manifested forms of the Unmanifested Parabindu or 
Shabdubrahman. It is, as Raghava says, by shifting to 

202 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMAlA 



another place in Her (A sydnt eva bittdtth sthun&ttliira- 
gatah ) that Bindu which is Para when unmanifested and 
motionless is called Pashyanti, Madhya and Vaikhari 
speech (V&k). ParS is in the Mul&dh&ra chakra, Pashyanti 
in Svadhishthana (and upwards), Madhyama in Anahata 
(and upwards), and Vaikhari in the throat. In Kundali, 
Shakti is subtle (Sukshma) and in the form of mere Light 
Jyotirm air alma tup i ni) and not an object of hearing 
( Ashrot ra vishnya) . Thence She goes upward (L'rddhva- 
gamini) and becomes Pashyanti. self-manifesting (Svayang- 
prakasha) in the Sushumna Nadi (Sushumnam ashrita). 
She again becomes Madhyamft as a form of Nada (NSdarQ- 
pint) when reaching the Heart Lotus (Anahata). Then 
She goes upward as a mere undifferentiated ‘‘hum'’ 
(, Sanjalpamatra avibhakld). It is She who appearing 
at the chest, throat, teeth, nose, palate and head assumes 
the form of all letters (Varna) issuing from the root of 
the tongue and lips, and thus becomes Vaikhari, the 
Mother of all sounds, audible to the sense of hearing 
(Rftghava Bhatta). The same Commentator then says, 
citing the Kftdimata section of TantrarSja, “Under the 
influence of one’s own will ( SvAtmcchchhuskakti - 
ghatena ) a high (Uttama) form of the Nada called Para 
generates in the MfM&dhara as Priinav&yu {PrUnnvayusva- 
rupatah). This when carried up by will (Ichchhfi) and 
made to appear in Ihe Svadhishthana is called Pashyanti 
associated with Manas. Gradually led up by Her it is 
called MadhyamA associated with Buddhi in the Anahata. 
Carried still further upward it is called Vaikhari in the 
Vishuddha in the region of the throat. Thence it is 
generated as the letters from A to Ksha through its 
presence at the head and throat. Thence it is generated 
as the Letters from A to Ksha through its presence at 
the head, throat, palate, lips, teeth, tongue (root, tip 
and back), nose, palate, and throat (together), lips and 

203 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



teeth (together), and throat and lips (together). Their 
letter-hood (Aksharatva) is said to be due to their being 
divided inro different parts beginning with the letter A 
and ending with Ksha.” 

It is Chit-Shukti which is called Parft, that is to say, it 
is Par3 V&k not moved to vibration by the M4y& which 
reveals (ParApruktishikA M dya nishpandd) on account of 
its bearing the reflection of Chaitanya [Chaitany&bhasa- 
vishishiatayd). The vibratory states are Pasliyanti and 
the other two (Saspandttvasthah pashyantyddyAh). 
Pashyanti which is in the nature of Bindu ( Bindutattv&t - 
rnikd) is the form of a general (that is, not particularised) 
motion {Samanyapraspandaprakasharupini), which is 
manifested in the region between the Muladliara and the 
Navel ( Mdhidhdrddindbhyaiitaravyakiisthdnd ). It is 
called Pashyanti because of its being Jnana (J ndtidlma- 
katvat). It is associated with Manas. Madhyamd is 
in the form of the internal and external instruments 
(lidhycinSafikarar.dtmikd) and manifests as Nadabindu 
(Nddabindumayt). Hiranyagarbha sound (Hiranya- 
garbharupini ) is in the reigon extending from the navel to 
the heart (Ndbhyddikridayantdbhivyaklislhdnd). It is 
associated with the Tattvas of specific ideation and so 
forth (Vxshi’shasangkaipddisataUvd). She is Madhyamd 
when Buddhi is Madhyamd. Madhyamd is middle, that 
is, “in the midst" between Pashyanti which is "Seeing” 
(Ikshana) and Vaikhari which is utterance. She is neither 
like Pashyanti nor does She proceed outward like Vaikhari 
with articulation fully developed. But She is in the 
middle between these two. Vaikhari is a form of Bija 
(BljMmikd) as Madhyamd is of Ndda {Nddardpini), and 
as Pashyanti is of Bindu (BindvdtmiM). Vaikhari is 
manifested in the region from the heart to the mouth 
{HridayddyAsydnlabkivyaktislhand). It is called Vaikhari 
according to Rdghava on account of its particular 

204 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMALA 



(Vishesha) hardness (Kharatva). Bhaskarariya (Lalita 
v. 81) derives it from Vi=vcry ; Khara=hard. Accord- 
ing to the Saubhitgya-Sudhodaya, Vat=certainly ; Kha— 
cavity (of the ear) : Ra=to go or enter. But according to 
the VogashSstras the Devi who is in the form of Vaikharl 
(V aikhartrdpA) is so called because She was produced by 
the Pr&na called Vikhara. This is Viritshabda, that is, the 
manifested letters which singly, or in combination, make 
certain sounds which are called Mantras. Strictly speak- 
ing nil uttered sounds are Mantras, all uttered speech 
having a common origin or development : but in the more 
usual sense, Mantra means those letters or combination of 
letters which arc used in Upasana and Mantrayoga and 
are the Mantras of the DevatSs of Shastrik worship. The 
Arthasrishti of Kundalini arc tiro Kalis which arise from 
the letters such as the Rudra and Vishnu MQrtis, their 
Shaktis and so forth. 

The root “Man" means "to think” and the suffix 
"tra” indicates the saving character of Mantra. 
I have elsewhere spoken of Mantra as “thought- 
movement vehicled by and expressed in speech” and as 
being a "power in the form of idea clothed with sound.” 
I find that this has lei to misunderstanding. I will 
therefore make my meaning clearer. The one supreme 
Shakti appears in dual aspect as the Word, the Sense 
by which as uttered sound it Is heard, and as the Object 
or Artlia which the w'ord denotes. The child is taught 
the meaning of words. Such and such an object is pointed 
out as being indicated by a word. But a Mantra is the 
Devati. The Sadhaka is taught who that Dcvatt is. 
He does not however at once sec that Dcvata. At this 
stage the Devata exists for him clothed with or as an 
audible sound, which evokes a particular thought- 
movement or transformation of mental substance. The 
next stage is by Mantra- Sadhana to realise that Devata ; 

205 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

to know it not only as a word and its mental counterpart, 
but as a form of that Power of which they are hut a faint 
reflection in the world of mind and matter. That Power 
is infinitely greater than either, and the Mantra is a par- 
ticular form of DevatA vehicled as all else in the world 
by mind and matter. The power by which the Devata 
is realised is also Shakti, that is, S&dhana-Shakti, that is 
again the power of the individual Sadhaka to realise by 
SAdhanA. The Devata whom he is taught to realise is 
infinitely greater than that. All is Shakti, but what is 
sought to be realised is Shakti Hqrsclf presented to the 
SAdhaka in the Mantra form. Brahman is of course in 
all things as their substance and all forms of becoming 
are without exception Shakti. But these forms arc 
only Shakti as such. As such limited forms we realise 
them at once. For this we requiie mind, senses, and 
attention only in their functioning. But the Devata, 
which the Mantra is, cannot be realised in this way only, 
since in Itself (that is other than as the sound heard, 
and the idea it evokes) it is not an object in the ordinary 
material universe. The Sadhaka has to pierce through 
the vehicle of the audible Shabda and realise the DcvatA 
whose form the Mantra is. He is enabled to do this by 
the co-operation of the Mantra-Shakti with his own 
SAdliana Shakti. The latter gives to those who exert 
their own power (SAdhanA Shakti) the ability to achieve. 
At length and by striving, the Consciousness which 
manifests as SAdliana Shakti unites both, and the Cons- 
ciousness, which is the DevatA, is thus realised and in 
this sense appears to the Sadhaka. This is the Saguiia or 
V&chaka form of Devata. and this when realised at length 
procures for the SAdhaka a realisation of the V Achy A 
Shakti which the Saguna Devata indicates. In short 
the Devi or Supreme Shakti has two "forms,” Her gross 
(Sthtlla) Saguna form as Mantra (Mantramayi) and Her 

206 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMAlA 



subtle (Sfikshma) form as "light" (Jyotirmayl). Reali- 
sation is the passage from that indirect knowing, through 
word and its mental counterpart, to that direct knowledge 
which is union with the Devata whose form a particular 
Mantra is. 

Shabdabrahman is all-pervading, undifferentiated 
Shakti, and Mantra is Its particular manifestation. It 
is Varn&tmakashabda (Lettered sound) manifested by 
Akaslia caused by the contact of the surrounding air 
with the vocal organs, the formation of which in speech 
is in response to the mental movement or idea, which by 
the will thus seeks outward expression as audible sound. 
All Shabda has its corresponding Artha, for neither can 
be dissociated from the other. The word "Artha’’ 
comes from the root "R»” which means to get, to know, 
to enjoy. Artha is that which is denoted by Shabda 
and is that which is known and enjoyed. This Artha 
is either subtle (Sfikshma) or gross (SthOla). The latter 
is the outer physical object which speech denotes and 
the former is the Vritti (modification) of the mind which 
corresponds to the gross Artha : for as an object is per- 
ceived the mind forms itself into a Vritti which is the 
exact mental counterpart of the object perceived. The 
mind has thus two aspects, in one of which it is the per- 
ceiver (Grahaka) and in the other the perceived (Gr&hya) 
in the shape of the mental impression. That aspect 
of the mind which cognises is called Shabda or NAma 
(name) and that aspect in which it is its own object or 
cognised is called Artha or ROpa (Form), Shabda being 
associated with all mental operation. In the evolution 
of the universe the undifferentiated Shabda divides 
itself into subtle Shabda and subtle Artha which then 
evolve into gross Shabda and gross Artha. For the 
Cosmic Mind projects its subtle Artha on to the sensuous 
plane which is then a physical grossArtha named in spoken 

207 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



speech. Thus the subtle Shabda associated with cog- 
nition is called Mdtrikd and the subtle Artha is the mental 
impression ; whilst the gross Shabdas are the uttered 
letters {Varna) denoting the gross outer physical object 
(Sthula Artha). 

Just as the body is causal, subtle, gross, and as there 
are three cosmic and individual states, dreamless sleep, 
dreaming, waking ; Prdjna, Taijasa, Vishva ; Ishvara, 
Hiranyagarbha, Vaishvdnara or Virdt ; and a fourth 
transcendent state or Turfya ; so there are three states 
(Bhava) of sound Pashyanti, Madhyamd, Vaikharl deve- 
loped from a fourth supreme and undifferentiated state 
(Para). This last and Pashyanti represent the causal 
asj>ect of Shabda, for Pashyanti is the actual moving 
aspect of the unmoving Para. Madhyma is Hiranya- 
garbhashabda. This SOkshmashabda and its correspond- 
ing Artha belong to the subtle body (Linga Sharira). 
In creation the Cosmic Mind first develops Pashyanti- 
shabda and Artha, and then projects this subtle Artha 
into the world of sensuous experience and names it in 
spoken speech developed in the throat and issuing from 
the mouth. Vaikhari is Viratshabda belonging, as well 
as the physical objects it denotes, to the gross body 
(Sthiila Sharira). This last Gross Shabda is language, 
that is, sentences (V&kya), words (Pada) and letters 
(Varna) which are the expressions of ideas and Mantra. 
Pashyanti is characterised by non-particular general 
movement (Saradnyaspanda), the first undefined push of 
the V&yu towards manifestation ; Madhyamd is specific, 
movement (Visheshaspanda), the Vayu commencing to 
differentiate ; and Vaikhari is Spashtataraspanda, that is, 
the clear separate movements of articulate speech. 
Mental Artha is a Sangsk&ra, an impression left on the 
subtle body by previous experience and which is recalled 
when the jiva re-awakes to world-experience and re- 

208 




THE CAF I^D OF LETTERS OR VAFNAMAT.A 



collects tlie experience temporarily lost in the cosmic 
dreamless state (Sushupti) which is dissolution (Pralaya). 
The Cause (Karana) which arouses this Sangskara is the 
Shabda or Nima, subtle or gross, corresponding to that 
particular Artha. There is thus a double line of creation 
from the Shabdabrahman, namely, language expressive 
of ideas and the objects which these denote. Uttered 
speech is a manifestation of the inner "naming” or 
thought which is similar in men of all races. Possibly 
for this reason a thought-reader whose cerebral centre 
is tn rapport with that of another may read the hidden 
"speech," that is, the thought of one whose spoken speech 
he cannot understand. Vaikharishabda however differs 
; n various races owing to racial and climatic conditions, 
the physical formation of the vocal organs and so forth. 
But for each particular -man speaking any particular 
language:, the uttered name of any object is the gross 
expression of his inner thought movement. It evokes 
that movement and again expresses it. It evokes the 
idea and that idea is consciousness as mental operation. 
That operation can be so intensified as to make itself 
creative. This is Mantra-chaitanya when thought is not 
only in the outer husk but is vitalised through its 
conscious centre. 

The above is but the Mantra way of saying that the 
homogeneous Consciousness differentiates as Shakti and 
appears as subject (Shabda) and object (Artha), at first 
in the subtle form of mind and its contents generated by 
the Sangsk&ra and then in the gross form of language 
as the expression of Ideas and of physical objccts(Artha), 
which the creative or Cosmic Mind projects into the 
world of sensuous experience to be the source of impres- 
sions to the individual expericncer therein. The natural 
name of any thing is the sound which is produced by the 
action of the moving forces which constitute it. He 

209 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

therefore, it is said, who mentally or vocally utters with 
creative force the natural name of anything brings into 
being the tiling which bears that name. Thus "Ram" is 
the Bija of fire ; and is said to be the expression in gross 
sound (Vaikhari-shabda) of the subtle sound produced 
by the activity of, and which is, the subtle fire-force. 
The mere utterance however of "Ram” or any other 
Mantra is nothing but a movement of jhe two lips. When 
however the Mantra is awakened (Prabuddha). that is, 
when there is Mantra -chaitanya, then the Siidhaka can 
make the Mantra work. However this may be, in all 
cases it is the creative thought which ensouls the uttered 
sound which works now in man's small magic, just as 
it first worked in the grand magical display of the World- 
Creator. His thought was the aggregate, with creative 
power, of all thought. Each man is Shiva and can attain 
His power to the degree of hi? ability to consciously 
realise himself as such. Mantra and Dcvat& are one 
and the same. By Japa the presence of the latter is 
invoked. Japa or repetition of Mantra is compared to 
the action of a man shaking a sleeper to wake him up. 
The two lips are Shiva and Shakti. Their movement is 
the coition (Maithuna) of the two. Shabda which 
issues herefrom is in the nature of Bindu. The Devatfk 
thus produced is as it were the son of the Sadhaka. It 
is not the Supreme Devata (who is actionless) who 
appears, but in all cases an emanation produced by the 
Sftdhaka for his benefit only. The Boy-Shiva 
(Bala-Shiva) who thus appears is then made strong by 
the nurture which the S&dhaka gives to his creation. 
The occultist will understand all such symbolism to 
mean that the Devata is a form of the consciousness of 
the pure Sadhaka, which the latter arouses and strengthens 
and gains good thereby. It is his consciousness which be- 
comes BiUa-Shiva and which when strengthened is the 

210 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARNAMALA 



full-grown Divine Power Itself. All Mantras are in the 
body as forms of consciousness (Vijn&narflpa). Wien the 
Mantra is frilly practised, it enlivens the Sangsk&ra and 
the Artha appears to the mind. Mantras are thus a form 
of the Sangski'iras of Jivas — the Artha of’which appears 
to the consciousness which is pure. The essence of all 
this is— concentrate and vitalise thought and will-power. 
But for such a purpose a method is necessary, namely, 
language and determined varieties of practice according 
to the end sought. These Mantravidya (which explains 
what Mantra is) also enjoins. For thought in the sense 
previously stated, words {gross or subtle) are necessary. 
MantravidyS is the science of thought and of its expres- 
sion in language as evolved from the Logos or Shabda- 
brahman Itself. 

It is in this sense that the universe is said to be com- 
posed of the Letters. It is the fifty (or as some count 
them fifty-one) Letters of the Sanskrit alphabet which 
are denoted by the Garland of severed heads which the 
naked Mother Kali, dark like a threatening rain cloud, 
wears as She stands amidst bones and carrion, beasts 
and birds, in the burning ground, on the white corpse- 
like (Shavarupa) body of Shiva. For it is She who 
"slaughters.” that is. withdraws all speech and its objects 
into Herself at the time of the dissolution of all things 
(Maliipralaya). From Her in Her aspect of Mah&kun- 
dali coiled round the Shivabindu they are derived. 
Mabakundall when with one coil is Hindu ; with two 
Prakriti-Purusha ; with three the three Shaktis (IchchhS, 
Jn&na, Kriya and the three Gunas, Rajas, Sattva.Tamas); 
with three and a half She is then actually creative {Srish- 
tyunmukhi) with Vikriti. Then with lour coils and so 
on to 5X. She is according to the Shaktisanggama Tantra 
(Utpatti Khanda, UllSsa i) Ekajata, Ugratara. Siddlia- 
kali, Kalasundari, Bhuvaneshvari, Chandikeshvari, 

211 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

Dashamah&vidya (ten coils), Shmash&nakalika, Chanda- 
bhairavi, Kamat4ra, VashlkaranakHlikS, Panchadashi, 
Shodashi, Chhinnamastft, Mahimadhumall, Mahapadmil- 
vati, Rama, Kamasundari, Dakshinakalik&, Vidveshi, 
Gdyatri (24 coils), Panchami, Shashthi, Mahfiratneshvari, 
Millasanjlvanl, Param&kali, MahSnilasarasvatl, Vasudhfi- 
ra, Trail okya-mohint, TrailokyavijayH, Mahikimatarini, 
Aghor4, Samitamohini, BagalA, Arundhati, AnnapdrnS, 
Nakuli, Trikantaki, RAjeshvatS, Trailoky4karshini, 
Rajarajeshvari, Kukkuti, Siddhavidy4, Mrityuharini,, 
Mahibhagavati, Visavi, Phetk&ri, Mahfishrim&trisundari, 
and Shrimatrikotpattisundari (coils 51) respectively. 
Each coil is said to represent the Matrika or subtle form 
of each of the letters (Varna) and to donote the number 
of Kutas or divisions in the Mantras of each of these 
Devatas. Mahikundali coiled round the Shivabindu, 
as it were a mathematical line without magnitude, makes 
with it one point. When the time tor creation comes 
She uncoils Herself and creates the whole universe in the 
form of the Letters and the objects which they denote. 
Having so created it, She again rests as Knndali in the 
root centre of the body (MdlAdhara) of all living creatures 
from which She issues as Pashyanti, Madhyami, and 
Vaikhari Shabda. Man’s body is called in the Tantras a 
microcosm (Kshudrabrahnianda), containing within itself 
all which is in the universe (Maliabrahmanda) of which 
it is a part. The Yoginihridaya Tantra(Chap. I. 36) 
says that, when Shakti first "sees” (chat is, ideates), She 
is Parama Kala in the Mother form (Arabikarupa) which 
is both supreme Peace (Parama Shinto) au^ Supreme 
Speech (Para vak). She sees the manifested Shabda from 
Pashyanti to Vaikhari. The Pashyanti state is that in 
which Will (Ichchha-shakti) is about to display the uni- 
verse then in seed (Bija) form. This is the Shakti Vania. 
Madhyami V4k which is knowledge (Jndna) is Jyeshtha. 



212 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS OR VARXAMALA 



Here there is the first assumption of form as the M&trika 
(MAtrik&tvam dpannA), for here is particular motion 
(Visheshaspanda). The Vaikhari state is that of Kriya 
Shakti (action) whose form is that of the gross universe. 
As the former Shakti produces the subtle letters or 
Matrika which are the Vasana, so the latter is the Shakti 
of the gross letters (Varna) of words aud their objects. 
These letters form the Garland of the Mother (VarnamalS), 
issuing from Her as Kundali and absorbed by Her in the 
Yoga which bears Her name. 

As the Yogakundalf Upanisliad says ' "That Vak 

(Power of speech or Logos) which sprouts in Para, gives 
forth leaves in Pashyanti. buds in Madhyam 4 , and 
blossoms in Vaikhari. By reversing the above order 
sound is absorbed. Whoever realises the great Lord of 
Vak, the undifferentiated illumining Self is unaffected 
by any word (Shabda), be it what it may." As the 
Halhayogapradipiki (IV.101-102) concisely says: "What- 
ever is heard in the form of sound is Shakti. The absorb- 
ed state (Laya) of the Tattvas (Prakritis evolutes) is that 
in which no sound exists. So long as there is the notion 
of Ether, so long is the sound (that is, vibration) heard. 
The soundless is called Parabraliman or Param 4 tma.” 
Shabdabrahman is thus the Brahman in its aspect as 
the cause of the manifested 5 habd 4 rtha. It is the 
ideating kinetic aspect 01 the undifferentiated Ether of 
Consciousness, the Chid&kisha of Phlosophy and the 
Saguna Brahman of worship. It is Chit Shakti vehicled 
by undifi'ereutiated Maya Shakti or the manifesting 
Godhead-uncreated, unborn, eternal, evolving the chang- 
ing worlds of name and form (Namarupa) by its wondrous 
and uiiscrutable Maya. Therefore, as Chandi says, "Re- 
verence to Her Who is eternal, Raudri, Gauri, Dhitrt, 
reverence and again reverence ; to Her who is the Cons- 
ciousness in all beings, reference and again reverene." 

213 




CHAPTER XXII 

OM 



The ancient Hindus had an aptitude, much to be 
appreciated in these often verbose days, of saying a 
great deal in a few words. The Mantra " Om " is an 
instance. For this short syllable contains a whole philo- 
sophy which many volumes would not suffice to state— 
an Eastern philosophy 1 may add which is gaining in- 
creased support from Western science. These two will 
be before long reconciled when the latter has cast aside 
what a friend calls its "habit blinkers." Tne beneficial 
result will, it is hoped, be a science which is religious, 
and a religion which is scientific. 

The Mantra “ Om " is composed of three letters— 
A, U, M,— of which the first two vowels coalesce into 0. 
Over the Om is written the sign Chandrabindu or N&da 
and Hindu, shown as a crescent with a dot or point over 
it. N&da and Bindu are two of many aspects of 
That which in India is called the Mother, or Great Power 
(Mah&shakti), as it was by the near East called Magna 
Mater and by the Gnostics Megale Dunamis. This is 
both the efficient and material Cause of the universe 
which is Its form or body. N&da is the Mantra name for 
the first going forth of Power which gathers itself together 
in massive strength (Ghanibhfita) as Bindu to create the 
universe, and which Bindu, as so creating, differentiates 
into a Trinity of Energies which are symbolised by A,U, M. 
N&da and Bindu thus represent the unmanifested 
"fourth” (Turtya) state, immediately before the mani- 
festation of the world, in which animate life exists in the 
three conditions of dreamless sleep, dream, and waking. 
Man always anthropomorphises. In the West he calls 

214 




OM 

the Creator the Father. More aptly Supreme Creative 
Being in the East and by the Sh&ktas is called the Mother, 
for this Power conceives in Its Womb.which is Conscious- 
ness, gives birth to and nourishes, the Universe. The 
first Mantra into which a child is initiated is Ma or Mother, 
for that is its first word, and Mother is often the last 
word on the lips of the dying. Reverence to the natural 
Mother is reverence to the Mother of all and they who in 
life and at death drink the milk of that Mother attain 
to Her. Moreover in the world the Mother-aspect of Her 
who is Brahman is alone fully manifested. What She 
is in Herself (Svarftpa) is not known to mind or senses. 
The YoginiUridyaya Tantrasays: "What man knows the 
heart of a woman ? Only Shiva knows the Heart of 
Yogini." This is the Cosmic Heart of the universe whose 
systole and diastole is tin 1 going forth and return 'of 
millions of worlds. This process Br&hmanism calls 
Pravritti and Nivritti, and Taoism (which is perhaps 
a Chinese adaptation of the doctrine of the Upanishads) 
names it Yang and Yinn. Relatively to man's knowledge 
the Supreme Power is said to be in Itself Being (Sat). 
Consciousness (Chit) and Bliss (Ananda). The Primordial 
Power or Adya Shakti is inconceivably beyond manifested 
personality, for this is limited experience hedged in by 
mind and matter. Though not in Itself a Poison as we 
understand that term, It is ever personalizing in the form 
of all individual (Vyashti) things in the world. It is also 
a Person as the aggregate (Samashti) of all such perso- 
nalities. Whilst infinite, it contains in Itself the sum 
of all human and other experience. Whilst the Power 
(Mahashakti) is in Itself beyond mind and senses in that 
darkness (as man thinks it to be) which is the body of 
Mahakali, its manifestations are seen. It is with reference 
to such manifestation inferred to be the Radical Vital 
Potential which is, as it were, the thread (Sfltratmi) 

215 




THE GARI.AND OF LETTERS 

of the whole series of beings, which form one Vital Con- 
tinuity, a principle on which Indian Monistic philosophy 
is based. Nothing lias an absolute commencement 
or end. AU is transformed. Birth and death are modes 
thereof. Each existence is as it were a knot tied in an 
infinite rope which knot is made at birth and untied 
at death. Something docs not come from nothing, and 
something never becomes nothing. An absolute begin- 
ning or end is inconceivable. Particular universes come 
into being and go. Birth, life and death are modes of the 
universal transformation governing all organic life "from 
a blade of grass to Brahma Himself." The divine infi- 
nitude is ever such, but appears as limited function and 
its effects, and as apparently discontinuous.because of the 
limitation of the senses which perceive its workings. The 
whole Fact is never present to consciousness, but only 
that section to which pragmatic attention is for the 
moment given, and which therefore appears localised and 
in succession of time. Nevertheless there is an infinite 
Vital Continuity stretching from the Radical Potential 
to its actualisation as the crust of matter, which is but 
an infinitesimal portion'd the effect produced by the 
function of Substance relative to the whole universal 
efficiency. For ether (Akasha) is more continuous than 
matter which is but the outer crust of the Central Power. 
Ether is continuous and all pervading and is said to be 
more than a thousand times denser than gross ponderable 
matter. The visible earth is therefore but a microscopic 
point evolved by the Vital Power (Shakti) of substance 
(Shiva) in the midst of the invisible, perpetually active, 
but it* its own nature (Start) pa) unaffected Divine 
Substance pervading all space. Therein nothing- truly 
exists independently of another, bnt all are transforma- 
tions of the one Power. And as that Power is Itself 
vital and creative, its products or rather transformations 

216 




OM 



of Itself are that. As It is Being with the potentialities 
of all life in form, none of its manifestations are "dead," 
though in common parlance we concede “life” only to 
that which displays evolutionary growth. The search 
therefore for the origin of life is futile, since life is 
eternal and had no beginning. 

All things are part of the one Mother who is Life 
itself. It displays itself in innumerable forms, but the 
vastest generalisation of Its working discloses three 
movements of creative upbuilding, of destructive dis- 
integration. and the holding of these two opposing 
forces in equilibrium. Nada-bindu differentiate into the 
Trinity of Will (Ichchha), Knowledge (Jnana) and Action 
(KrlyA), "Sun," “Moon,” and “Fire," and this self- 
explicating Power manifests in matter in the threefold 
manner described. These three Powers are A. U. M. 
or the Devatas BrahmA, Vishnu, Rudra. These are not 
"Gods." There is only one God. They are Devas or 
"Shining ones," being aspects and specific manifestations 
of the One Divine Power whose Feet (in the words of 
Sh&stra) even Brahma, Vishnu and Rudra worship. 
They arc scientific concepts deified, and rightly so, for 
their content refers to aspects of the Supreme Power 
which is God. Scientifically jhey stand for the three 
functions of Vital Substance. It is incorrect to suppose 
that God in His aspect as BrahmA created the world 
some millions of years ago and has since done nothing, 
or that He in His form as Rudra has as yet had no-oppor- 
tunity of displaying His power of dissolution. BrahmA 
is always creating and recreating the elements of manifest- 
ed substance which Rudra is ever breaking down. 
Throughout Nature there are these twin forces upbuilding 
and destroying forms, integrating and disintegrating, 
anabolism and catabolism tending to change and con- 
servation of tissues and so on. The three aspects 

217 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



A, U, M, of the Primordial Power (N&da-bindu) are always 
operating. Whilst Rudra is, by chemical destruction, 
breaking down the combinations of matter and thus 
working towards the linal dissolution of things, that is 
the disintegration of forms into cither its more general 
elements (MahibhGta) or into the formless substance 
(Prakriti) the material Cause of all, Brahma creates it 
anew by His ever rejuvenescent molecular activity, thus 
rescuing organised vitality from the processes which are 
ever at work to consume its forms. Vishnu again is the 
power which stabilises matter in the midst of these con- 
flicting forces and thus maintains all Existences. Things 
only possess relative stability. So it is that the Power 
of Rudra works its purpose at the end. Matter itself is 
only a relatively stable form of Energy from which as 
Supreme Will it appears and into which.on the attainment 
of its terminal state, it again merges. It is Vishnu who 
holds it together in equilibrium. Again leaving individual 
existences and looking at the sum total of manifested 
Energy, Vishnu, the Maintained throughout Space and 
Time, is a theological statement of the general Conserva- 
tion of Energy. To these intuited laws and truths 
objective science is giving increasing support. In this 
sense " Om ” is the Pratika or representative of the 
Radical Vital Potential of the Universe and of the Trinity 
of Energies by which It actualises and materialises Itself 
as the five forms of “ matter '* (though Ether is not pon- 
derable matter), namely ethereal (Akasha), aerial (Vayu), 
fiery (Agni), liquid (Ap) and solid (Prithivi). Through 
worship of and meditation on this Pratika, with all its 
implications, man, according to Advaita Ved&nta, realises 
himself as the one vital Shakti who is the Mother of all. 




CHAPTER XXIII. 



THE NECKLACE OF KALI. 

The world has never been altogether without the 
Wisdom— the Mula Veda nor its Teachers. The degree 
and manner in wliich it has been imparted have, however, 
necessarily varied according to the capacities of men to 
receive it. So also have the symbols by which it has 
been conveyed. These symbols further have varying 
significance according to the spiritual advancement of 
the worshipper. This question of d<^>rec and variety of 
presentation have led to the superficial view that 
difference in beliefs negatives the existence of any com- 
monly established Truth. But if the matter be regarded 
more deeply, it will be seen that whilst there is one essen- 
tial Wisdom its revelation has been more or less complete 
according to symbols evolved by, and, therefore, fitting 
to, particular racial temperaments and characters. 
Symbols are naturally misunderstood by those to whom 
the beliefs they typify are unfamiliar, and who differ in 
temperament from those who have evolved them. To 
the ordinary Western mind the symbols of Hinduism are 
often repulsive and absurd. It must not, however, be 
forgotten that some of the symbols of Western Faiths 
have the same effect on the Hindu. From the picture 
of the "Slain Lamb," and other symbols in terms of blood 
and death, he naturally shrinks in disgust. The same 
effect on the other liand is not seldom produced in the 
Western at the sight of the terrible forms in which India 
has embodied Her vision of the undoubted Terrors which 
exist in and around us. All is not smiling in this world. 
Even amongst persons of the same race and indeed of 

219 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

the same faith we may observe such differences. Before 
the Catholic Cultus of the “Sacred Heart" had overcome 
the opposition which it at first encountered, and for 
a considerable time after, its imagery was regarded with 
aversion by some who spoke of it in terms which would 
be to-day counted as shocking irreverence. These dif- 
ferences are likely to exist so long as men vary in mental 
attitude and temperament, and until they reach the 
stage in which, having discovered the essential truths, 
they become indifferent to the mode in which they are 
presented. We must also in such matters distinguish 
between what a symbol may have meant and what it 
now means. Until quite recent times the English peasant 
folk and others danced around the flower- wreathed .May- 
pole. That the pole originally (like other similar forms) 
represented the great Linga admits of as little doubt as 
that these folk, who in recent ages danced around it. 
were ignorant of that fact. The Bishop’s mitre is said 
to be the head of a fish worn by ancient near-eastern 
hierophants. But what of that ? It has no such asso- 
ciations now. 

Let us illustrate these general remarks by a short 
study of one portion of the KAlt symbolism which affects 
so many, who are not Hindus, with disgust or horror. 
Kali is the Deity in that aspect in which It withdraws all 
things which it had created into Itself. Kali is so called 
because She devours KAla (Time) and then resumes Her 
own dark formlessness. 

The MahAnirvAna Tantra says (IV. 30-34) of the 
Supreme Mother “Thou the supreme Yogini moved 
by His mere will doth create, maintain and withdraw the 
w’orld with all that moves and ft motionless therein. 
Mahakala (Great Time) the Dissolver of the universe is 
Thy form. At the dissolution of things it is KAla (Time) 
who will devour all and by reason of this He is called 

220 




THE KECKI A(E OF KALE 

MaMkila and since Thou devourest MahSkfila Himself 
it is Thou who art called the Supreme Primordial Kalika. 

“Because Thou devourest Kala, Thou art called Kali 
and because Thou art the origin of and devourest all 
things Thou art called the Ady& Kali. Resuming after 
Dissolution Thine own nature dark and formless, Thou 
alone remainest as One, Ineffable, and Inconceivable. 
Though appearing in form Thou art yet formless ; though 
•Thyself without beginning, multiform by the Power of 
MSyi, Thou art the beginning of all, Creatrix, Protectress 
and Destructress that Thou art". From Her then, in Her 
nature one with Shiva — the state which is Ashabda, 
issues all letters and words (Shabda) and the world of 
things (Artha) which they denote. Into Her as Kfili 
thev are dissolved. 

The scene is laid in the cremation ground (Shntashftna) 
amidst white sun-dried bones and fragments of flesh, 
gnawed and pecked at by carrion beasts and birds. 
Here the "heroic” (Vfra) worshipper (S&dhaka) performs 
at dead of night his awe-inspiring rituals. Kali is set in 
such a scene for She is that aspect of the Great Power 
which withdraws all things into Herself at, and by, 
the dissolution of the universe. He alone worships 
without fear, who has abandoned all worldly desires, 
and seeks union with Her as the One Blissful and Perfect 
Experience. On the burning ground all worldly desires 
are burnt away. She is naked and dark like a threaten- 
ing rain-cloud. She is dark, for She who is Herself beyond 
mind and speech, reduces all things into that worldly 
“nothingness,” which as the Void (Shflnya) of all which 
we now know, is at ihe same time the All (Pflrna) which 
is Light and Peace. She is naked, being clothed in space 
alone (Digambarl). because the Great Power is unlimited; 
further She is in Herself beyond Maya ; that 

Power of Herself with which She covers Her own nature 



221 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



and so creates all universes. She stands upon the white 
corpse-like (ShavarOpa) body of Shiva. He is white, 
because He is the illuminating (Prakflsha) transcendental 
aspect of Consciousness. He is inert, because He is the 
changeless aspect of the Supreme.and She the apparently 
changing aspect of the same. In truth She and He are 
one and the same, being twin aspects of the One who is 
changclossncss in, and exists as, change. Much might 
be said in explanation of those and other symbols such as 
Her loosened hair, the lolling tongue, the thin stream 
of blood which trickles from the corners of the mouth, 
the position of Her feet, the apron of dead men's hands 
around Her waist, Her implements and so forth. Here 
I take only the garland of freshly-severed heads which 
hangs like a VanamSla low from Her neck. 

Some have conjectured that Kali was originally the 
Goddess of the dark-skinned inhabitants of the Vindhya 
Hills taken over by the Br&hmanas into their worship. 

One of them has thought that She was a deified Prin- 
cess of these folk, who fought against the white incoming 
Aryans. He pointed to the significant fact that the 
severed heads are those of white men. The Western may 
say that K51I was an objectification of the Indian mind, 
making a Divinity of the Power of Death. An Eastern 
may reply that She is the Sangketa (symbol) which is the 
effect of the impress of a Spiritual Power on the Indian 
mind. I do not pause to consider these matters here. 

The question before us is. what does this imagery 
mean now, and what has it meant for centuries past to 
the initiate in Her symbolism ? An exoteric explanation 
describes this Garland as made up of the heads of Demons, 
which She as a power of righteousness, has conquered. 
According to an inner explanation given in the Indian 
Tantra Sh&stta this string of heads is the Garland of 
Letters (Varnamil&), that is the fifty, and as some count 




THE NECKLACE OF KALI. 

it, fifty-one letters, of the Sanskrit Alphabet, The same 
interpretation is given in the Buddhist Demchog Tantra 
in respect of the Garland worn by the great Heruka. 
(See Vol. VII of A. Avalon's Tantrik Texts). These letters 
represent the universe i^f names and forms (N&marflpa) 
that is Speech (Shabda) and its meaning or object (Artha). 
She, the Dcvourerof all, "slaughters," that is, withdraws, 
both into Her undivided Consciousness at the Great 
dissolution of the Universe. She wears the letters which 
She as Creatrix, bore. She wears the Letters which, 
She. as the Dissolving Power, takes to Herself again. 
A very profound doctrine is connected with these letters, 
which space prevents me from fully entering into here. 
I have set it out elsewhere in greater detail. The move- 
ments of Her creative projection are indicated by the 
Letters subtile and gross which exist on the Petals of the 
inner bodily centres or Lotuses. 

Very shortly stated, Shabda which literally means 
Sound— here lettered sound— is in its causal state (Para 
shabda) known as "Supreme Speech" (Part Yak). This 
is the Shabdabrahman or Logos ; that aspect of Reality 
or Consciousness (Chit) in which It is the immediate 
cause of creation : that is of the dichotomy in Conscious- 
ness which is "I" and "This,” subject and object, mind 
and matter. This condition of causal Shabda is the 
Cosmic Dreamless State (Sushupti). This Logos awaken- 
ing from Its Causal Sleep “sees," that is, creatively ideates 
the universe, and is then known as Pashyanti Shabda. 
As Consciousness "sees" or ideates, forms arise in the 
Creative Mind, which are themselves impressions (Sangs- 
kira) carried over from previous worlds, which ceased 
to exist as such when the Universe entered the state of 
causal dreamless sleep on the previous dissolution. 
These re-arise as the formless Consciousness awakes to 
enjoy once again sensuous life in the world of form s. 

223 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

The Cosmic Mind is at first itself both cognising sub- 
ject (Gr&haka) and cognised object (Gr&hya) ; for it has 
not yet projected its thought into the plane of Matter : 
the mind as subject-cogniser is Shabda and the mind as 
the object cognised, that is the mind in the form of object 
is subtle Artha. This Shabda called Madhyamft Shabda 
is an "Inner Naming” or "Hidden Speech.” At this 
stage, that which answers to the spoken letters (Varna) 
are the “Little Mothers" or Matrika, the subtle forms 
of gross speech. There is at this stage a differentiation 
of Consciousness into subject and object but the latter 
is now within and forms part of the self. This is the 
state of Cosmic Dreaming (Svapna). The Cosmic Mind 
then projects these mental images on to the material 
plane and they there become materialised as gross 
physical objects (Sthilla Artha) which make impressions 
from without on the mind of the created consciousness. 
This is the cosmic waking stage (J&grat). At this last 
stage the thought-movement expresses itself through the 
vocal organs in contact with the air as uttered speech 
(Vaikhari Shabda) made up of letters, syllables and 
sentences. This lettered sound is manifested Shabda or 
Name (Nama) anil the physical objects denoted by- 
speech are the gross Artha or Form (Rupa.) 

This manifested speech varies in men, for their 
individual and racial characteristics and the conditions, 
such as country and climate in which they live, differ. 
There is a tradition that there was once a universal speech 
before the building of the Tower of Babel, signifying 
the confusion of tongues. Of these letters and names 
and their meaning or objects, that is concepts and con- 
cepts objectified the whole Universe is composed. When 
Kali withdraws the world, that is the names and forms 
which the Letters signify, the dualism in consciousness, 
which is creation, vanishes. There is neither "I” (Aham) 

32 4 




THE NECKLACE OF KALI 



nor "This” (Idam) but the one non-dual Perfect Expe- 
periencc which Kali in Her own true nature (Svatfipa) 
is. In this way Her Garland is understood. 

"Surely’' I hear it said "not by all. Does every Hindu 
worshipper think such profundities when he sees the 
figure of Mother Kali ?" Of course not. no more than, 
(sav) an ordinary Italian peasant knows of, or can under- 
stand. the subtleties of either the Catholic mystics or 
Doctors of theology. When, however, the Western under- 
takes to depict and explain Indian symbolism, he should, 
in the interest both of knowledge and fairness, under- 
stand what it means both to the high as well as to the 
humble worsliipper. Salutation is thus made to Her 
from whom the mind and its thoughts proceeds and the 
language (V&k) in which they arc expressed. Vak is 
Prakasha, the illuminating consciousness, and Artha is 
Vimarsha its object. Vak is in the form of Varna (letters), 
Pada (syllables) Mantra. Artha is KaU\, Tattva, and 
Bhuvana the other so called AdhvSs. (See Cb. 27). Out 
of Vak and Artha tli whole world, consisting of six Adhvas 
(Shadadhv&tmaka) originated. Round the neck of Kali 
the Letters (Varna) which make the syllables (Pada) 
and Mantra are hung. In Her they are dissolved in the 
fiery ending of the worlds. 




CHAPTER XXIV 



DHVAJ01 

Motion may be cither produced or unproduced. 
The latter is the causal stress itself, and the former the 
effect of it. In the world, sound is produced by the 
contact of one thing with another— of (say) the hand 
and the drum in case of unlettered sound and the vocal 
organs and air in the case of uttered speech. Causal 
stress itself is uncreate, is self-produced and not caused 
by the striking of one thing against another. For this 
reason it is called Anahata. This Anahata Shabda 
which is Brahman-movement is heard in the heart which 
It has produced and which It causes to pulse, a movement 
which we can feel and hear. 

This uncreated self-existing Shabda as causal stress 
manifests in double form as unlettered sound or Dhvani 
and is thus called Dhvany&ttBaka Shabda and as lettered 
sound or Varna which is Vamfitmaka Shabda. And 
so the Bh&sh&pariclichheda says 
Shabdo dhvanischa vatmshcha mridangadibkavo dhvanih, 
Kantha-sa ngyoga -ja n via i: o varuddydh kttdayo matah. 

That is Shabda is of two kinds — Dhvani and Varna. 
The first is illustrated in the sound given forth by a drum 
and the like. In the production of the second the throat 
organ is exercised and it is manifested as Ka, Kha and 
the other letters of the Alphabet. That is in certain 
sounds such as the beating of a drum, the roar of thunder, 
the sounds of laughing, crying and so forth no letters 
appear to be manifested (Varna-visheshdnabhivyanjaka) 
but that in certain others, letters or Vamas are manifested 
as in the case of sounds of articulate speech. The former 
class are called Dhvanis and the latter Vamas. 

226 




DHVANI 



In both case it is to be observed that sound is pro- 
duced by the clashing (AbhighSta) of two created things, 
viz., the drum and the hand or drumstick and the vocal 
organs in contact with the circumambient air. 

The distinction therefore between the two classes 
dote not depend upon this — (i) that whilst Varaas arc 
produced by the mutual impact of the throat, air, and the 
ear, the PUvanis are produced by an assemblage of con- 
ditions of which the throat is not one. In other words 
the Vyipftra or functioning of the vocal organ does not 
constitute the distinction between Dhvanvatmaka and 
Varnatraaka Shabda. For the vocal organ is exercised 
in laughing, crying and so forth and also in the cries of 
animals, but in them we hear no Vamatmaka Shabda or 
articulate speech. Thus Dhvanis may he produced by 
the vocal organs. (2) N'or can it be said that the exorcise 
of the vocal organs is the sine qua non of the Varnat - 
maka Shabda. Thus when we hear articulate sounds over 
the telephone or from the gramophone, the immediate 
cause of the sound is not the Vyapara of the vocal organ ; 
though the uon-iramediate cause may be so. (3} Nor 
again can wo say that the Vavnatmaka Shabdas are in 
all cases significant or expressive of meanings and that 
the Dhvany&tmakas are in all cases insignificant. In a 
general sense tliis is so, and thus, in common parlance, 
we speak of Vamitmaka Shabda as having a meaning 
and Dhvani as being without it. But this is not neces- 
sarily and always so. Doubtless to Ishvara every Dhvani 
has a meaning, and even to us unlettered sound may 
express a meaning. Again some Vamatinaka Shabdas 
may not. For even to a man who knows a particular 
language any combination of letters or any combinations 
of words will not be expressive language— but only 
letters in certain order and combination. Thus the sound 
of laughter or crying is Dhvanvatmaka yet the sound 

227 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



may express a meaning in the sense that it is recognised 
at once from the sound that a particular person is happy 
or in trouble. Many of the Dhvanis of animals may be 
significant in this sense. The sound of a bell, bugle, or 
drum may be suggestive oi meaning as in the case of the 
midday gun. On the other hand many Vam&tmakas 
may not express a meaning. Thus the combination 
M, A, N has a meaning and spells "man" in English but 
M, N, A and other combinations (except N, A, M which 
may have some sort of meaning) do not express meaning. 
Each letter separately may have a meaning. According 
to the Vyasa Bh&shya on Yoga, each Varna is capable 
of expressing all Arthas or meanings. But any arbitrary 
combination of separate letters will not give a meaning. 
A special combination of Varnas is necessary to express 
a special meaning. Electricity may be latent in all 
material objects but we require to make special com- 
binations of such objects (tf.g., zinc, copper and sulphuric 
acid in a cell) to make such electricity patent. Any 
arbitrary combinations (<;,g., of wood, water, and oil) 
will not effect this. In an unsuitable combination of 
Vanias, their Shaktis check the one the other. 

The distinction between the two classes Is therefore 
a distinction between sounds which manifest themselves 
as letters and others which do not. The former arc 
usually produced by the throat (KarUfui-s'ingyoga- 
janmiiwh) but not invariably. On the other hand, 
as wc have seen. Dhvanis too may be so produced. Both 
Varnas and Dhvanis again are momentary' (Kshanika). 
Both therefore are produced by the contact (Abhighita) 
of two or more created things. Let the letter Ka' be 
uttered a hundred times. Each time it is a different 
sound which is uttered. Again one person says ’Ka’ 
and then another say Ka. The sounds again are different. 
The sounds produced and heard in these cases are indeed 

228 




DHVANI 



different. Nevertheless we may still recognise that one 
Varna sound, e. g.. 'Ka' is being uttered by oneself all 
those hundred times and by oneself and the other person. 
We recognise here oneness in the midst of all differences 
of the individual sounds produced and heard. The 
recognition (Pratyabhijn&na) takes this form : — 

"It is the same ‘Ka’ that I utter now and that I 
uttered a moment before. It is the same Ka that you 
have uttered and I have uttered." Western psychology 
may attempt an explanation of this recognition of Vama- 
identity by comparison, abstraction and assimilation. 
Thus if Ka is uttered by one person ten times, actually 
different sounds arc produced varying, in pitch, softness, 
harshness and so on. If another person utters the same 
letter ton times, then each of them is a different sound 
and the sounds are also, different irom the sounds 
produced by the first person. But though all these 
Dhvanis are different in pitch, timbre and the like, it will 
be admitted that both persons have uttered the same 
letter. Western psychology would explain this as 
follows : — 

The Dhvanis are different but we make a rapid com- 
parison of them and find that though they have differences 
in pitch, timbre, etc., still they have a great deal of simi- 
larity. The differences are then thought away or abs- 
tracted and then the twenty sounds are assimilated so 
as to give us a generic sound which we recognise as the 
Varna sound "Ka.” It is in ihis way also we form the 
generic notion of "Man" or "Book.” The generic sound 
Ka is not something that actually exists apart from the 
twenty variations which either of the two persons men- 
tioned have heard. On the contrary the variations are 
the actual phenomena. The type (the generic sound) 
is simply our mental construction through comparison, 
abstraction and assimilation. To a mind which cannot 

229 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

compare, abstract and assimilate. the sounds are different 
sounds and it cannot recognise any typal sound in their 
midst. The Indian theory on the subjects is. on the 
other hand, as follows : — 

The Varnas or letters have imperishable and invari- 
able (Xitya) forms. As the Paramanus or prime “atoms’’ 
of matter arc imperishable so are the Varna-shabdas. 
"Nitya” however here means “imperishable" so long 
as the cosmic order itself lasts. [Natu madhye varndnam, 
utpalli-vin&shau." — Vedanta- Praribh&sha). That is in 
the period of cosmic life beginning with Creation (Srishti) 
and ending with Dissolution (Laya) the Varna sounds 
persist. They arc compared to a jar in a dark room 
which cannot l>y reason of darkness be seen. (Andha- 
k draslkaghaidnupalambkavat- -Vedanta - Paribhasha) . J ust 
as the jar existing in the dark may not be seen with 
the eyes, so the prime Shabdas or Varnas, though 
always given, may not be always manisfested as acoustic 
phenomena. To be thus manisfested they require a 
manifester (Abhivyanjaka) or vehicle of expression. 
This vehicle (Abhivyanjaka) through which an eternal 
existing letter becomes an acoustic phenomenon now 
and then is called Dhvani. The period of cosmic life 
(Madhye) is a roo years of Brahma when the world 
dissolves (Laya). The Varnas persist during all these 
years of Brahma — a time which is called Kaipa. In 
Laya they enter the germinal state as seeds of potency. 
This view is thus essentially different from that of 
ordinary western psychology. Plato's doctrine of ideal 
archetypes and their sensible variations comes nearer 
the Vedanta doctrine. 

According to this the Varna-shabdas are always {i.e. 
during a Kaipa) actually going on (Nitya and An&hata 
i.e., continuous and uninterruped.) produced by arti- 
ficial means. But they are often unmanifest (Avyakta) 

230 




DHVANI 



to the gross perceptive organs. They become manifest 
(Vyakta) to gross sensibility through certain manifestos 
(Abhivyanjaka) which are the Dhvanis. Tlius the 
Shabda "Om” is uninterruptedly going on, but this 
it is said, one can only hear in certain stages of SfldhanS, 
or in a quiet place particularly during night time when 
there is little’ promfscuous interference of the sound- 
waves. The Kali Marti is an eternal symbol of the world- 
process (involving Chit and the play of Shakti) and the 
Garland of Letters (M4trik4s) on the breast of the Mother 
Ls also an eternal possession. Whether the Vamas are 
uttered and heard or not, they are AnShata sound-forms 
and according to Indian ideas they axe more real and 
more actual than the variations (differing in pitch, timbre 
and so forth) which arc uttered and heard. Thus the 
variations alone are not the actual phenomena as the 
ordinary western empiricist would hold. 

Therefore a Dhvani as an acoustic manifestation of 
a Nitya Shabda is subject to all conditions of place, 
time and circumstance and is non-permanent (Anitya) 
and variable (Vikarl). This variableness and transitori- 
ness which really pertain to the Abhivyanjaka Dhvani 
are transferred by us (thorugh association) to the mani- 
fested letter (Varna). Thus we say "Ka is now produced 
and is no more." But really that which comes to be or 
ceases to be is the vehicle (Dhvani) and not the Vama- 
Shabda. As the Vedanta- l’aribhasha (Ch. IV.) says 
UtpanMT gakara i/yudipralyaksh<inlu so' yang 
gakiira ityddipralyabhijnd-virodhdd apramAnam . Varna- 
bhivyanjakadhoaJiigatotpaUi-nirdpit<i~~pay<u>ipard-samban- 
dha- vishayatveno pramanang vd. "The apprehension 
(Pratyaksha) that "Ga” is now produced is not right 
apprehension because it conflicts with the recognition 
(Pratyabhijna) of the present 'Ga' [i.c., at present uttered 
and heard by me) being identical with all other ’Ga', 

231 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



(i.fi., those uttered and heard in the past). Or we may 
take it as a correct apprehension if we ascribe the idea 
of production to the Varnas (which are manifested but 
not produced) seeing that the Dhvanis which manifest 
them are produced and using a characteristic which really 
belongs to the manifester for the manifested." 

Shangkaracharya discusses the theory oi Vania and 
Sphota in his Sh&riraka Bhfishya (1-3-28). He describes 
Dhvani in these words : — 

"Kah pmarayang dhvanir Kama, yo durdd Aharnayato 
vatnavivekam apratipadyamiinasya karnapatham avata- 
rali, pratydsidatashcha mandatvapaUilv&dibhedam 
varMshv&sanjayati, tannivandhandshchodatlddayo visil- 
es h < ? na varnasv^rupatiibandhandh. Varndndng pralyu - 
chchdtamug p ratya 6/1 ij luiyamtin a tool, etc." By Dhvani 
is to be understood that which is heard by a per- 
son listening from a distance without distinguishing the 
separate letters and which in the case of a person standing 
near by affects the letters with its own distinctions of 
high and low pitch and so forth. It is in this Dhvani that 
all the distinctions of Udatta, Anudatta and the like 
depend and not on the intrinsic nature of the letters which 
are recognised to be the same whenever pronounced. 

When a man is heard shouting from a great distance 
wc do not catch his actual words and yet we can hear 
the pitch, modulation and so forth of his voice. When 
he speaks dose to us we catch his words as well as the 
modulation, pitch, sweetness or otherwise and so forth 
of his voice. In both cases the pitch, etc., of the sound 
constitute its Dhvani. These qualities of pitch, sweet- 
ness and the like do not inhere in the Varnas themselves 
but belong to their acoustic expression, the Dhvanis. 
Thus Dhvanis arc (1) gross embodiments (Anitya, Vik&ri) 
of Nitya Avik&ri Vama-Shabdas ; {2) other gross sounds 
(either produced in nature such as the sound of the 

232 




DHVANI 



storm or produced by ourselves such as laughter or the 
sound of musical instruments) which do not appear to 
us as embodying Varna Shabdas. Those who believe 
(such as the Grammarians) in Sphota regard Dhvani as 
its Abhivyanjaka. Shangkara however contests the 
necessity of assuming Sphota or that which causes the 
apprehension of the sense of a word. 

Dhvani however is used also in a sense different from 
that in which it is defined in Nyftya or Vedanta as ex- 
pounded by Shangkara and different from Dhvani as 
conceived by those Grammarians who regard Dhvani as 
the manifestor (Vyanjaka) of the ideal sound called 
'Sphota.' 

In the Tan Iras Dhvani is a form of Causal Shabda. 
Thus we hear of the "sweet murmuring Dhvani of Kun- 
dalini,” the Creatrix of all Shabdas and Arthas. 

The Sb&radd Tilaka to which I have repeatedly 
referred (I, iio-mjsays : — 

Sd prattle Kundallni shabia-brahmamayt vibhuh 
Shakting lalo Dhvanis tasmdn \'<idas tasmdn Nirodhika 
Tato’rdhendus lalo bindus tusmdddsit pard taluk 
Pashyantl MadhyamA vdchi Vaikhart yhabda- 

janmabhdh. 

The words in roman type are various forms of Shakti, 
producing one another in the order in which they are 
mentioned in the verse. From Kundalini issued Shakti, 
from Shakti, Dhvani and so on. From the order of 
evolution it will appear that Dhvani in .such Shastra is 
a subtle causal principle and not a gross manifestation 
of Shabda which is its ordinary sense. It is Vaikhar! 
which is the gross manifestation of Shabda. Here the 
Shabda manifests from its subtle state as Madhyamft, 
which issued from the causal state as Pari, Pashyantl, 
through the Dhvani caused by the contact of the vocal 
organs and air. Para and the rest are located in various 

233 




T HE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



Chakras and tracts of the bodily organism. Raghava 
Blialta quoted by V&chaspatya says — 

So ivorah-ka itlhit-l,i/usifta shiro-ghr&na-radasthila 
J ihvtt-viii/QsIillM-iiisyufu-sarva-Varita-parigraiui 
Shabda-prapa ncha-jana n i shrotra-grdhyd hi vaikhari. 

“She (Kundalini) being in the heart, throat and palate 
and going through the passages of the head and nose 
and teeth and coming out from the base of the tongue 
and the lips becomes audible Vaikhari — the Kundalini 
who has invested Herself with the Vamas and is the 
Mother of all varieties of Shabda." 

Shakti, Dlivani, Xada and the rest arc described as 
various aspects of Chit due to its varied association with 
the Gunas — Sattva, Rajas and Tanias. Thus Shakti is 
defined as the Sattva -predominant (Sfittvika) condition 
of Chit Dhvani as the Kujasik-SAttvik condition 
(Rajo'nuviddha Sattvika) of Chit, that is, a Sattvik condi- 
tion in which there is also a trace of Rajas ; and NAda 
a state of Causal Shabda in which there is a trace of 
Tam as (Tamo’riuviddha). These are called Parama- 
kiUhiivasthA, Aksharlvastha, Av?aktAvastM. Whether 
then we have to deal with Dhvani in the sense of a 
form of causal Shabda or as a gross manifestation of 
Shabda depends upon the context. 







CHAPTER XXV 



SUN. MOON AND FIRE 

These words do not refer to the heavenless lum- 
inaries or Fire in the three worlds of Birth and Death, 
but are technical term' of the Mantrashftstra denoting 
the creative Trinity. 

In the BralimasvarOpa Is merged Vi mars ha (Antar- 
linavimarsha). Shruti says that there was first merely 
One witont a second or Brahman. It became inclined 
towards creation (Srishti-mukha). The material cause out 
of which the world is made is. according to the Vaidik 
Text, "May I be many.” Vimarslja is that which is the 
object of experience as "This” (1 dam) and this Idam is 
the Universe. The 'Idam' is thus the world as object 
of experience (Prapanchchaparftmarsha). Vimarsha- 
Shakti is thus the Power which produces and exists in 
the form of the universe. Before the world existed it 
was in the Brahman in the form of lirahma-Shakti. 
Then alone was the Light which is beyond Sun, Moon and 
Stars which in the Agama is known as the imperishable 
Supreme Word (Anap&yini Pard V&k), 

She the supreme Vimarsha Shakti is our Supreme 
Lady (Parabhattarika) Maha-tripura-Sundari. in whom 
are all the 36 Tattvas beginning with Shiva and ending 
with Ksliiti, who is in the form of all worlds (Sarva- 
prapancMtmika) and also transcends them (Taduttirna). 
She is beyond the three Shaktis who are Sun. Moon and 
Fire. She is the causal seed of all. with whom Shiva 
unseparately is. For Shiva cannot create without 
Shakti nor Shakti without Shiva. As between moon and 
moonbeam there is no difference so there is none between 
Shiva and Shakti. The Svarupa of Shiva is "1” (Aham). 

235 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



for it is said in the K&makal&vil&sa from which this (See 
Tantrik Texts. Ed. A. Avalon) account is, in general, 
taken (Shivasya svarupam aham-ityevam&k&ram). The 
Vimarsha of that is the Experience of "I-ness.” She the 
primordial Vimarsha-Shakti is the pure mirror which 
manifests that Experience (Tasya prakiishane nirmald- 
darshah). The work cited illustrates this as follows 

A handsome King looking at his reflection in a 
mirror which is before him knows "lam he who is thus 
reflected." So the Supremo Lord looking at His own 
Power within Himself knows His own Self as “1 am all 
(Paripurno'kam)" , that is, the whole or Perfect "I.” 
This is the union of A -Shiva and Ha - Shakti. A + Ha 
= Aham or "I." Shiva indicates Jn&na-Shakti, and 
5hakti. Kriya-Shakti— Knowledge and Action. Shiva is 
Illumination (Prak&sha). The Vimarsha mirror is com- 
posed of a mass of His rays and Vimarsha-Shakti is 
impulse (Visphurana Shakti) maturing in action. The 
Rays being reflected back on the foundation of Conscious- 
ness there is the MahSbindu. So when the Supreme 
Lord who is Illumination (Prakasha) is connected with 
the mirror-like Vimarsha there shines forth the Paia- 
meshvara as Pumo’ham (The Lord Experience as "I am 
all.”) The Supreme "I" is thus the massing together 
of Shiva and Shakti. This "I-ness” (Ahambh&va) arises 
upon .the gaze of Shiva upon His own luminous Shakti 
or Power. So it has been said that in the notion of T 
Illumination rests in itself (Atma-vishranti). So Shruti 
(Svet. 4 - 1 ) says, "that which is letterless (A varna) gene- 
rates many letters (Varna)." This supreme "I” is 
Chittamaya. 

We have spoken of the A ham or "I” and Idam or 
"This.” The first is known as the white (Sita) Hindu 
or “Moon" and represents the Shiva aspect of this 
supreme "I,” and the second is the red (Shona) Bindu 




SUN, MOON AND FIRE 



or "Fire", the Shakti aspect. They are in conjunction 
known as the Divine Husband and Wife (Kameshvara 
and K 3 meshvari). The union of both is the Mixed 
(Mishra) Bindu or "Sun." The "Sun" is Kama and Kali 
is "Moon" and "Fire,” the three Bindus being known 
as the Kamakala. This mixed Bindu becomes creative 
and is the cause of the manifested Word (Vak) and its 
meaning (Artha). From this Bindu issues Nada-Shakti 
in seed form. The Bindu is the union of the letters 
A and Ha, which denote the union of Prakasha and 
Vimarsha, that is, white and red Bindus. 

Kama is that which • is desired (K&myate) by the 
great Yogis who know the Paramartha as their self. 
Mahatripurasumlari, inseparable from Kameshvara, is 
the collectivity of the Bindus and Kamakala. The 
Bindu above is Her Face (Sun) and the two Bindus below 
are Her two breasts (Moon and Fire) and the Kala below 
it, which is half of Ha, is Her womb (Yoni). Nada which 
comes forth is the caoise of the origin of all sounds. This 
Nada is eventually divided into all the particular letters 
and words, their compounds and the subtle elements 
and all objects, their compounds. For both the world of 
speech and of objects have ultimately the same_ origin. 
A letter or word is the Brahman as such, just as an object 
denoted by the word is the Brahman as such object. 
The two Bindus are inseparate, that is, Prak&sha and Vi- 
marsha. For this reason it is said that Shiva and Shakti 
are one Tattva. In the same way there is no difference 
between Vidya or Mantra as indicator (Vedaka.Vachaka) 
and the Devata thereby denoted (Vedya.Vachya). Vak 
and Artha are always united. This is realised in Sadhani 
when the Devati, the Artha oi the Mantra, appears and 
leads the Sadhaka to a realization of the V'achyi Shakti, 
the Brahma Svarftpa. So Natan&nandanStha in his 
Commentary on Puny&nanda's K&makalavilasa (VV. 6,7) 

237 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



says that great Yogis worship the Mother Mah&tripura- 
sundari, who is Kdmakala, the collectivity of the three 
Hindus. (For " Pura” here means Hindu ; the three (Tri) 
which are Sun, Moon and Fire, which are Illumination 
and Bliss : within whom is the Power (Vlryya), which 
is the endless mass of letters (Anant&kshararfishi) and 
great Mantras. In the worship of the great Shrichakra 
Yantra (figured in my Edition of the KiunakaLivilSsa) 
the gross letters, in Vaikhari form, are in the outer Man- 
dalas, and passing through the subtler forms of Shabda, 
the Shabdabrahman and then Shunya are attained. 
He therefore cites the Vijn&na-bhattaraka as saying : 
"By passsing through the different Mandalas (of the 
Shrichakra) where the gross (Sthula) letters (Varna) are, 
and rising up to Ardhendu, Hindu, Nadanta and to the 
Shunya in the Bindurfipachakra, one becomes Shiva.” 
This is the worship which a Missionary author describes 
as worship of the pudgrndum muliebre. The Yantra is 
composed of intersecting triangles, some upright and 
some inverted. The latter only are symbolic of the Yoni, 
which is here not the Yoni of any woman. Here it is 
the Womb of the Divine Mother of the world. Here 
is the seat of the secret play of Shiva and Shakti as 
"Moon, "Fire” and as the “Sun" which is the union of 
both — the Divine Energy, whence proceeds the world 
of Name (Kama — Shabda) and Forms (R6pa*= Artlia). 




CHAPTER XXVI 



BijA MANTRA 

Action necessarily implies movement. Whenever 
therefore, there is action, there is Spanda or movement 
and therefore what to the perceiving subject (when heard) 
is called Sound. This may or may not be heard. One 
person may have a sharpened natural faculty of hearing ; 
so that he may hear what escapes the ear ol another. 
There is Sound, though the latter may not hear it. 
Similarly, there is Sound which is not heard by any 
natural ear until assisted by the extension of faculty 
procured by a material Scientific instrument. Similarly 
again, there is Sound which cannot be heard by any 
material instrument, but which is apprehended by the 
Yogic Mind as part of its experience. In the beginning 
of things the natural Principal (Prakriti) was in a state 
of equilibrium (SainyavastM). Then there was no 
Sound, for there was no movement of the objective 
world. The first Vibration which took place at the 
commencement of creation, that is, on the disturbance 
of equilibrium ( Vais hamy& vast ha) was a general move- 
ment (Samanya Spanda) in the whole mass of Prakrit!. 
This was the Pranava Dhvani ol Om Sound. It is not 
that the Sound is represented as it is by the Sound of 
the letters Om. Om is only the approximate representa- 
tion or gross utterance to gross ear of the Subtle Sound 
which is heard in Yoga experience of the first movement 
which is continually taking place, tor at each moment the 
creative movement is present. From out this general 
movement and Sound special movements (Vishesha 
Spanda) and Sounds arise. The following apt illustra- 
tion has been given (see "Worlds’ Eternal Religion"). 

239 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

If a vessel of water is shaken, there is first a general 
movement of the whole water in the vessel. Next, there 
are particular movements in every part of the water, 
now tins way, now that. So the evenly balanced gunas 
or factors of Prakriti equally vibrate throughout their 
whole mass, and as the movement continues, the equili- 
brium is disturbed and the Gunas act and re-act on one 
another as in the second state of the water in the illustra- 
tion. Diverse vibratory conditions being set up, diverse 
Sounds are given forth. The first equally distributed 
motion throughout the mass is Om, which is the great 
seed-mantra (Mah&bija), for it is the source of all others 
and of all compounded Sounds. Jnst as Om is the 
general Sound, the other Bija Mantras are the particular 
Sounds which are the letters of the alphabet. These are 
evolved out of the general Sound which underlies all 
particular Sounds. Both the Ongkdra or Pranava and 
the Bija Mantras as pronounced by the mouth are thus 
the articulate equivalents of the inarticulate primal 
Dhvani. They become articulate at the last stage called 
Vaikhari or Spashtatara Spanda of the four stages, 
known as Para (Rest passing into movement), Pashyanti 
(general movement), Madhyami or special movement of 
subtle character heard by the subtle ear, and Vaikhari 
or special movement whicli as speech is the fully arti- 
culated *Sound heard by the gross car. The Pranava 
Mantra is thus the Sound Equivalent of Brahman and the 
Bija Mantras are the various forms with attribute 
(Sagunarupa) of the Devas and Devfe. It is true that 
the approximate Sound Om is said to be constituted of 
the letters a, u, m. This is not to say that the primordial 
Dhvani was these letters or their combination. For tjiese 
letters are the product of the primordial DbvajTi which 
precedes them. What is meant is that Om as a gross 
Sound heard by the gross ear is the Sandhi or combina- 

240 




BiJA MANTRA 



tion of these letters. A European Sanskritist told a 
friend of mine that Om said before a Mantra is simply 
the "clearing of the throat” before utterance; and I 
suppose he would have said— the clearing of the throat 
after utterance, for Om both precedes and follows a 
Mantra. tVhy however should one clear the throat 
then ? Om has nothing to do with haw king sounds, 
or the throat. Om is, according to Indian belief, a sound 
actually heard by Yogis as above described. If, more- 
over, the learned man had ever heard the Mantra Om 
recited he would have fell that it could not be explained 
in so shallow’ and materialistic a way. For Om is sounded 
as from the navel with a deep rolling and continuous 
Sound ending nt the upper part of the nostrils where 
the Chandrabindu is sounded. Moreover, how are we 
to account for the other Bija Sounds on this hypothesis, 
such as Am, Am, F.in and so forth, except by supposing 
that the unpleasant and unmannerly act of clearing 
the throat had undergone an unaccountably varied 
development ? Be tlu; doctrine true or false, it is more 
profound than that. 

Mantras are given various names according to the 
number of their syllables. A Bija or Seed-mantra is, 
strictly speaking, a Mantra of a single letter such as 
Kang, which is composed of the letter K (Ka) together 
with Chandrabindu (' ) which terminates all Mantras. 
Even here there is in a sense another letter. The reason 
b that the vowel cannot be interminably pronounced 
and is therefore terminated by a consonant. In fact, 
as Panini says, the function of a consonant is to interrupt 
a vowel sound. The consonant cannot be pronounced 
without .a vowel, which is hence known as the Shakti 
of a consonant. Mere the termination is M in the form 
of the nasal breathing called Chandrabindu (*) which 
is N&da and Bindu. The M which ends the Bija is 

241 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

sounded nasally, high up in the bridge of the nose, and 
never reaches the lips. In all the other letters one or 
other of the five Bhutas or forms of sensible matter 
(Ak&sha, Vftyu, Agni, Ap, PrithivS) predominates. For 
this reason, in the selection by the Guru of the Mantra 
for his disciple the letters are chosen according as an 
examination shows that there is an excess or deficiency 
of any particular Bhfita. Where there is excess of a 
Bhuta, the letter in which it is predominant is said 
with the outbreatliing. Where there is deficiency it is 
said with the inbreathing. M is chosen to end the Biia 
because here the Bhutas are said to be in equipoise. 
Though strictly the Bija is of one letter as the seed 
from which the Mantra springs, popularly other short 
unetymological vocables such as HrSng, Shrlng, Kring, 
HQng, Aing, Phat are called Bijas. In these there arc 
two or more letters, such as in the first il, R, I and 
Chaildrabindu. Thus a .Mantra may, or may not, convey 
on its face its meaning. Bijas have no meaning accord- 
ing to the ordinary use of language and for this reason 
they have formed the subject of ridicule to those 
ignorant of the Mantra-shfistra. The initiated however 
knows that their meaning is the own form (Svarfipa) 
of the particular DevatSs whose Mantra they are. and 
that they are a form of the Subtle Pou'er as creative 
Dhvani which makes all letters sound and which exists 
in all that we say or hear. Each Devata has His or Her 
Bija. Thus the Devatis of Kring, Hring and Rang 
are Kill, MAyi and Agni respectively. The primary 
Mantra in the worship of any Deva or Devi is known 
as the Root Mantra (Mulamantra). Every letter, syllable 
and Mantra is then a form (Rupa) of the Brahinan, and 
so is the image and are the lines of the Yantra and all 
objects in the universe. And so the Sh^stra says that 
they go to Hell who tliink that the image is merely 

242 




BIJA MANTRA 



stone and that the Mantra is merely a letter of the alpha- 
bet. All letters are forms of Shakti-as Sound-powers. 
The Shakti, of which they are a manifestation, is the living 
Energy which projects itself into the form of the universe. 
The Mantra of a Devata is the Devata. The rhythmical 
vibration^of its sounds not merely regulate the unsteady 
vibrations of the sheaths of the worshipper, thus trans- 
forming him, bat through the power of striving (Sddhand- 
slukti) of the worshipper there arises the form of the 
Devati which it is. And thus the Brihad-gandharva 
Tantra {Ch. V) says 

Shnnu deni pravakskyimi bijinim deva-rupattim 
M anlrochzh ira nim itrena diuurritpxm prajiyate. 

The Bijas thus hive a meaning. They indicate the 
Artha or DevaU which they are. What that Devata is, 
is taught to the Sli.liki. just as the child learns that 
rose in uns a pirlicular flower, ani tint rice and milk are 
the names for particular forms of food and drink which 
he takes. 

The Bijas of the live BhCitas, that is, of the Davatis 
of the four forms of sensible matter, are Ha, Ya, Ra, 
La, Va with Chandrabindu. Where there arc more than 
one letter, each has its meaning. As examples I here 
select twelve Bija-mantras (in their popular sense), the 
meanings of which are given in the 6th Chapter of the 
Barada Tantra as quoted in the well known Bengali 
compendium known as the Pranatoshini. I may here 
observe that the meaning of individual letters is given in 
the Bijakoshas, such as the Tantrabhidhana which has 
been published as the first volume of Arthur Avalon’s 
Tdntrik Texts. The Baradd Tantra, Ch. 6, says 

Haung (tI) 

Shivavachi /jakarastu atikarah syat Sadashivah, 
Shiinyang duhkhahar&rtliantu tasmattena Shivang yajet. 

243 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



That is, 

Ha means Shiva. Au is Sadashiva. The SMnya 
(* ) is that which dispels sorrow. Hence with that Shiva 
should be worshipped. 



Dung ( 5 ) 

Da durgAv&chakang devi nkArashchApi rakshane, 
Vishvam&ta mdanipk kurwarthoiiWwflpakah. 
That is, 

Da, 0 Devi, means Durga. U also means to save. 
Ndda is the mother of the Universe. Hindu means 
(pray) do. 

Kring (»f) 

Ka Kali brahma ra proktang MahamayArthakashcha i, 
Vishva m Atari hako nddo dtmtarduhkhaharirthakah, 
Tenaiva Kalikadeving pujayedduhkbashantaye. 

That is, 

Ka is Kill. Ra is said to be Brahma. I means 
Mahimaya. Ndda means Mother of the universe. 
Bindu means Dispeller of sorrow. With that Devi 
KAlika should be worshipped for cessation of sorrow. 



Hiing (*f) 



tfakarah shivavachi syad ref hah prakritiruchyate, 
MahAmayirtha i-shabdo nddo vishvaprasuh smritah, 

tena phjayet. 



That is, 

Ha means Shiva. Ra is said to be Prakriti. / 
means MaliAmAyA. Ndda is said to be the mother ol 
the universe. Hindu means dispeller of sorrow. With 
that Bhuvaneshvari should be worshipped. 



Shring («ff) 

MahAlakshmyarthakah Shah syAd dhauArtha repha 

uchyatc, 



244 




BIJA MANTRA 

/ tushtyartho' paro n&Ao iiniurdulikhahararthakah, 
LakshmidevyA vijam otat tcna deving prapujayet. 
That is. 

Sha means Mahalakshmi. Ru is said to mean 
wealth. / moans satisfaction. N&da is Apara (which 
may mean Aparabrahma or ishvara). Hindu means 
Dispeller of sorrow. This is the bija of Dew! Lakshmi. 
With it the Devi shoud be worshipped. 

Aing (tf) 

Sarasvatyartha ni-shabdo &tH(/wrduhkhahar3rthakah, 
Sarasvatya vijam etat tcna Vining prapujayet. 

That is, 

At means Sarasvati. Hindu means Dispeller of 
sorrow. This is the bija of Sarasvati. With it Van! 
or Saraivati should be worshipped. 

Kling <*) 

Kah Kimadeva uddishto’ pyathava Krishna uchyatc. 
La Indra i tushtivachi sukhaduhkhaprada cha ang, 
K&mabijartha uktastc tava sneh-m niaheshvari. 
That is. 

Ka refers to Kamadeva, or according to some to 
Krishna. La means Indra. / means contentment. Ang 
is that which grants happiness and sorrow. Thus. O 
Maheshvari, the meaning of Kdmabija is spoken unto 
Thee out of my love for Thee. 

Hfing (**) 

Ha Shivah kathito devi i3 Bhairava ihochyate 
Parirtho nida shabdastu Bi>K/Krduhkhahar4rthakah, 
Varraabijatrayo hyatra kathitas tava yatnatah. 

That is. 

Ha, 0 Devi, is said to be be Shiva. U is said to be 
Bhairava. Ndda means Para, Supreme. Biitdu means 
Dispeller of sorrow. Here the three composing the 

245 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



vatmabija (armour-b!ja) are spoken unto Thee owing to 
Thy solicitation. 

Gang (jt) 

Ganesharthe ga uktas te fitnt/nrduhkliahar&rthakah, 

GangbijSrthantu kathitang tava snehSn malieshvari. 
That is, 

Ga, 1 speak unto Thee, means Ganesha. Hindu 
means Dispeller of sorrow. Thus. 0 Maheshvari, the 
meaning of Gang-blja is spoken unto Thee out of love 
for Thee. 

Glaung ( tif ) 

Ga Ganesho vyapakartho /iik&rasteja an matah, 

Duhkhahararthako fortiurganeshang tena pujayet. 
That is, 

Ga is Ganesha, La means what pervades. Au means 
tejas. Hindu means Dispeller of sorrow. With it 
Ganesha should be worshipped. 

Kshraung ( ff ) 

Ksha Nrisingho Brahma rashcha urddhvadant&r- 

thakashcha au, 

DuhkhaharArthako &iHtiwrNrisinghang tena pujayet. 
That is. 

Ksha is Nrisingha and Ra is Brahma. Au means 
teeth pointing upwards. Bindu means Dispeller of 
sorrow. With it Nrisingha should be worshipped . 

String ( ) 

DurgotUranav&chyah s a tirak&rthastakarakah, 

Muktyartho repha ukto’tra maliamavarthakashcha t, 

Vishvamatarthako nddo Biuimduhkhahararthakah, 

Badhubijartha ukto’tra tava snehan maheshvari. 

246 




BljA MANTRA 



That is. 

Sa means deliverance from difficulties. Ta means 
Saviour. Ra here means salvation or liberation, /means 
Maham4y4. Ndda means Mother of the universe. 
Bindu means Dispeller of sorrow. Thus the meaning of 
Badhubija is spoken unto -Thee, O Malieshvari, out of 
love for Thee. 

A close examination of the above may raise some 
difficulties, but must, in connection with what is else- 
where written, remove the charge that the Bija is a 
meaningless saying to the worshipper. It is full of 
meaning to him. 




PAKASAMVIT 




feMMAlft OULTl) 



IMI/DOMA TAT7VI 



fAfclKWA TATTVA 
Oil OA «MAHT<| 



V*NTnAM*"t1«»a* 



l*MtASU TATI » A 

• »nOU fHAKTl) 



VuaUacila 
UUJ^BACTOOtI 
A Abovi vXvA 



U0H0V4 TaTTV* 



r*ltATl«Al.A 

•H UXvA 



• AKAU Alt 
Iiir^sa #now 
tn ahm* cewwarARDr 

*’XOARl NOTMUKTA 



.THt TATTVA? f PC M 

•UDC*4» TO tltiTMivI 





CHAPTER XXVII 



SHADADHVAS 

ADHVA means a path, and Mantradhva is all know- 
ledge relating to Mantra. The Six (Shat) AdhvAs are, on 
the Shabda side, the three Varna (letter), Pada (syllable) 
and Mantra (combination of syllables), each being depen- 
dent on one another, Pada on Varna, and Mantra on 
Pada, which are said, in the work from which 1 take the 
following table, to be 51, Si, ti respectively. On the 
Artlia side the three other Adhv&s are Kala (5), Tattva 
(36) and Bhuvana (224). each similarly dependent. The 
science of theShadadhvas is referred toinboth Shaiva and 
Shakta works, but seems peculiarly characteristic of the 
Shambhava Darshana in which Shaiva and Sh&kta 
Darshanas are synthetised. The Shakta doubtless wor- 
ships Shiva as well as Shakti with emphasis on the 
latter aspect. The ordinary Shaiva worships Shakti 
as well as Shiva with emphasis on the latter aspect. In 
ShSmbhava Darshana both are raised into a higher 
synthesis. In the same way Kula = Shakti and Akula = 
Shiva, and therefore Kulina means one who worships 
the two in one. 

Kala means Shakti either generally in its higher 
aspect, and more commonly some specific aspect and 
function of Shakti. The five chief KalAs which sum up 
in themselves groups of Tattvas are Sh&nty&titAkali, 
Shdntikali, VidyAkali, Pratisluhikata, Nivrittikala. 
These have been already referred to. These are the 
Powers of certain Tattvas or Principles, and two 
stages in the emanative process. They (the Tattvas) 
are 36 in number and arc divided into 3 classes, 
viz., Pure (Shuddhatattva), Pure-Impure (Shuddha- 

24S 




shadadhvAs 



shuddhatattva) and Impure (Ashuddhatattva). Three 
groups of Tattvas are also called Shiva, Vidya, 
Atml Tattvas. Tlic first as stated in the Siudhanta 
Sardvali and other works comprise the Shiva Tattva and 
Siiakti Tattva ; the second the Tattvas from Sadashiva 
Tattva to Shuddha vidyA Tattva ; and the third the 
Tattvas from Maya to ITithivi. I may here observe that 
in the drawing ot the table of Tattvas given in my “Shakti 
and Shakta" an error has been committed which escaped 
my notice. There the Shuddha, Shuddhashuddha and 
Ashuddiia Tattvas are treated as bracketed with the 
Shiva, Vidya and Atma Tattvas. The Shuddha Tattvas 
comprise all the Tattvas there given under that Bracket. 
But Shiva Tattva comprises only the first two of the 
Shuddha Tattvas, namely, Shiva Tattva and Shakti 
Tattva. The other members of the Pure group are 
Vidya Tattva and all from Maya to Prithivi are Atma 
Tattva. 

The Word Bhuvana means world or region. 
Bhuvana — Hswdf bhavaii ili bhuvamm, or "what comes 
from this,‘ ' that is, "what is produced' ’ is Bhuvana. These 
Bhuvana or Regional Bodies are also Pure, Pure-Impure, 
and Impure. These are shown with the corresponding 
Kala and Tattva in the accompanying table which 1 
have extracted with the permission of the owner of the 
copyright from pp. 392-397 oI Part II. Vol. II, oi the 
late T. A. Gopinatha lvao's '“Elements of Hindu Icono- 
graphy" where they are conveniently tabulated. I 'nave 
made one or two verbal corrections. 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



KalU 


Tturas. 


IWTTil 


XaAMS uf tbo bhlUVAHM. 




1 . Skuddh* uuvia. 




Ai.kiluiio, Atitho, Aunilo, Yyomnru. 


4 


10 


pin!. V j-.' pill. Crdhv.jjlinlnt, H'ohiki, 


% 


n 8bivAUttv» ... 


ftashiM. iMplka oivi Indhlkk— (Fir. of 




1 




a.d ok MUkU-bkuruu ud U» »■ 


& 


I 




mining 5 vo NidunWKva-bhurouoi). 


i 


\z autMtuw'* ... 


5 


Shuuljiltil. 8hiii.ll, Yldyi. 1’reti.h- 




Total ... 


IS 


tU And NitrilU-fTkue M« <*»«> ah. 








RkltKUrMmra»|. 
&uUsJii * abhu vana. 


i 

3 


'3. $#\bk\ VftUUVA. 


1 


4. LhrttmlaUvA ... 


« 


Shikhurfll, Sbrl ItAlha, TrimdrU. 

TUrr'-M. SbivolUma, Sftkibra* and 


1 






Annot*. 


<c 


5. Sfcvddhividyl 




Mininm.il, tevafahltU-dMUfit. IW»- 


** 


, iiUvs 


9 


pramUfcmi, BaUvikuooi, K.l.nkaral, 




ToUl ... 


IS 


Kill, Rkudrt. .IjuhlhA tod Vimi 




U Sauddliiihoddh*. 








HMm. 
'6. Nijfl 


8 


Afv«.hlb.m*l«, i-htns KUkal.im, 
Ek*pni£«l», UJbV»v», Ilham, VAnuldva 
.nd MaliMyuti. 


4 


7 . kiu 


2 


8hiUn.Ua tod ilkaviro. 




8. Kalft 


2 


F.nnb&iilakk aod Bbflnv. 


1 


a Vi,i r i 


2 


Ping* and Jyoti. 




ia tfiMii 
n. 

li Panuh* 


2 


Btoii.rU vid Kn-ihu. 


2 


& 

6 


EkiuhivA, A nan I., Aj*. UmSpuil tod 

PrtohtniU. 

Kkivlm. Uhdaa, BUv*. lain, Ugra. 
Bbiiua and Vlau. 




Total «»« 


n 






lit Aiand 4 basalt va# 








f 13. Prakrit! 


8 


Sbilknnlha, A nma. KaumAiu, V»|»h- 
na»», Ur.hrni, Hhsirarj, Krita tod 
AktiU. 






14. Buddhi 


8 


Brlli run. Pi.J.afck, fi.aitjB, Aiwlrn., 
Gtodharra, V.Uh^ Rkk.hu. «.vl llihj- 








cba. 


1 


15. AbBoklra ... 

16. Mvim 

17. 8hr«r» 

18. Tvok 


| 1 


Blbilnhrjrv 


1 


19. €h»h«htt* 

2I>. Jihti 


1 ' 


Slhdlwhvkr*. 


4 


•21. NW 






£ 


22. \U 
A P8nl 






5 


24. PA/ii 


1 


Bhaaknkarna. 




* P*va 

26. Upulb. 

71. 8Wbdt 
» Spiral* 

29. Ki» > 


3 


Kill ATI jar», M.ndiloihviri, MtkoU, 




30. Ru. 

81. Gu*!ho J 

i 




Drtvloila .ml Cbkakaliodo. 



250 








SHADADHVAS 




Thus to take the first and highest or Shivatattva 
and the associated Shaktitattva, the Bhuvanas are 
An&shrita, the Region or Bhuvana without support and 
self-sustaining. An&tha or Lordless because there is no 
higher Lord here. Ananta or endless, Vyomarupini in 
the form of the all-spreading Ether, Vyapini all-spread- 
ing, Urddbvagamini upward going, Mochiki freed of all 
bonds, Rochika Beautiful or source of Beauty, Dipika 
illuminating, IndhikS destroyer of all impurity. Such 
are the Bhuvanas of the Kali ShSntyatltS (Beyond even 
the high abode of Peace) and the conjoined Shiva and 
Shakti Tattvas. Five of these are called Shakta and the 
remaining five Nadorddhva (above Nada) Bhuvanas. 
The rest are various other disine bodies named after 
their divine residents. All these regions have been 
created by Paramashiva for the enjoyment of the Beings 
therein ; there being an immense variety of beings in an 
ascending hierarchy from man up to the supreme Lord 
and Lady of all. The Beings in the Pure Regions arc 



251 









THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



wholly Pure and the others Pure-Impure or Impure. Im- 
purity or Mala isignorance andis of three kinds, namely, 
Mala, MSyS and Karma. There arc thus three classes of 
Pashus or created beings, namely, Vjjnanakalas envelop- 
ed by that ignorance which is called Mala, PralaySkalas 
envelojied in both Mala and Maya, and Sakala or those 
surrounded by the three forms of ignorance Mala, Maya 
and Karma. Above the Vijn&n&kala are the beings 
called Mantras. The Mala envelope when in the stage 
at which it is about to leayp the being Ls said to liavc 
undergone Pariplka. The Vijnanakalas, whose Mala 
is in a high state of Parip:Ika, are the eight Vidye- 
slivaras. They are eight in number and are variously 
coloured as in the following table, for wliich I am 
indebted to the same work. 



No. 


Name. 


Colour. 


1 . 


Anantesha. 


Blood-red. 


2 . 


SOkshma. 


White. 


3- 


oiii voiiania. 

Ekanetra. 


DlUr. 

Yellow. 


5- 


Ekarudra. 


Black. 


6. 


Trimurti. 


Crimson. 


7- 


Shrikantha. 


Rod. 


8. 


Shikhandi, 


Dark-brown. 

I 



The author cited refers to several soutnem Agamas, 
such as Purva-KSrana, Angshumabhedagama, Kamika 
and other works for their Dhyana. From these it would 
appear that the colours and so forth are not always given 
in the same way. 

These Vidycshvaras are higher spiritual Entities, 
by whose aid the lower orders ol beings attain the higher 

252 






SHADADHVAS 



stages of spiritual evolution. Next to the Vidyeshvaras 
come the Mantreshvaras. Having been given pure 
bodies (Tanu), instrument (Karana), regions (Bhuvana) 
and enjoyment (Blioga), these gradually get ridof all 
Mala. Above the Mantreshvaras arc the Mantrrun'i- 
heshvaras and beyond these arc the Eternal and un- 
produced Shiva Tattva and Shakti Tattva. 

In the Vimarshin! on Ishvara-pratyabhijna (III) 
Sadlshiva Tattva is described as that particular speciali- 
sation (Chid-visheshatvain) .which consists in the ex- 
perience of that Bhavarashi or mass of ideation belonging 
to the collectivity (Varga) of Chaitanya called Mantra- 
maheshvara. Of the Vidyeshvaras it is said (cf. Ill, 1-6) 
that whilst the Ego-side is pure, yet unlike the experience 
of higher states they perceive the object as different 
from themselves in the same way as the Ishvaras, as 
recognised by the Dvaitavadins, perceive theirs. The 
various locations of the Jivas in the various Tattvas 
is given as follow's MantramAheshvara in SadAkhya 
Tattva, Mahcshvara in [shvara Tattva, Mantras in 
Shuddhavidya Tattva (the eight Vidyeshvaras Ananta 
and the rest are different from the Mantras), Vijninikalas 
below ShuddliavidyS but above Miyi, Pralay&kalas in 
Miyi, and Sakalas include all other beings from Brahmi 
downwards who are not Mukta. 

The whole of the Sh&mbhava Darshana rests on a 
principle of the specialisation of Consciousness, stages 
of descent from Pure Chit to the consciousness of the 
gross material world. F.ach stage is more bound in 
ignorance than the former until gross matter is reached. 
The Shistra speaks of the eight called Chit, Chiti, Chitta, 
Chaitanya, Chetani, Indriya-karma, Deha and Kali. 
The first is consciousness in the pointed or Bindu state, 
the second outspreading (Vyapini,) the third with inward 
and outward activity, the fourth the Bodha or experience 

253 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



which is from outwards inwards, the fifth is the retention 
(Dh&ranfi) of that Boilha, the sixth is experience through 
action of the senses, and the seventh and eighth are the 
Body and its inherent subtle moving forces such as the 
38 KalSs of Moon, Sun and Fire. In Moon Sattva is 
dominant and in Fire Tamas. The Rftjasik activity of 
the Sun mediates between these opposites. The Lords 
of the Tattvas proceeding from “Earth” (Prithivi) 
upwards are Brahma from Prithivi to Pradhana (Pra- 
kriti), Vishnu from Ptirusha to KalS, Rudra in Mitya. 
Isha in tlie regions extending to Sadakliva Tattva. 
Then follows Anashrita Shiva and Parashiva. 




CHAPTER XXVIII 

mantra-sAdhanA 

Ik the G&yatri Tantra it is said — "that is called 
Mantra, by the meditation (Mananaj on which the Jiva 
acquires freedom from sin, enjoyment oi heaven and 
Liberation and by the aid of which he attains in full the 
tour-fold fruit (Chaturvarga).” Elsewhere it is said 
"Mantra is so called bccause.it is achieved by mental 
process". "‘Man" ol "Mantra" comes from the first syllable 
of Manana or thinking and “tra" from Trana or libera- 
tion from the bondage ol the Sangsara or phenomenal 
world. By the combination ol “man" and "tra" that 
is called Mantra which “calls forth' ’ (Aman trana) the 
four aims of being (Chaturvarga). 

A Mantra is composed of letters. Letters and 
their combinations as syllables and words are all forms 
ol manifested Shabila, that is. Brahman-forms. They 
are each and all forms of the Creative Stress, as uttered 
by the mouth, heard by the car, and apprehended by the 
mind ; but what are ordinarily called Mantras are those 
particular sounds which are used in worship and practice 
(Sadhana) wliich consist ol certain letters, or letters 
arranged in a definite sequence of sounds of which the 
letters are the representative signs. The relations of 
Varna, Xada, Bindu, vowel and consonant in a Mantra 
constitute the Devata in varying forms. Certain Vibhiiti 
or aspects of the Devata are inherent in certain Yarn as. 
The Mantra of a Devata is that letter or combination of 
letters which reveals the Devatd to the consciousness 
of the Sadhaka. who has evoked it by S&dliana-shakti 
The form of a particular Devata therefore appears out 
of the particular Mantra of which that Devata is the 
Adhishtli&tri Devata. This Mantra is intoned in 

255 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



proper way according to letter (Varna) and rhythm 
(Svara). For these reasons a Mantra, when translated 
ceases to be a Mantra, that is, the sounds heard and 
uttered in the translation are not the body of, and do 
not evoke, the Devata. We arc then not dealing with 
the same sound, but with a translation in another 
language, with other sounds giving the meaning to the 
intellect o i the Sanskrit Mantra. This shows that 
Mantra is not mere individual thinking but a particular 
sound-body ol consciousness. 

A particular Mantra therefore (such as the Gayatri) 
is not a mere collocation of words. Though to a non- 
believer it may seem but a string of mere letters bearing 
on their face a particular meaning or in the case of Bija 
Mantras apparently no meaning at all, to the SAdhaka it 
is a very mass of radiant Ttjas or energy. An ordinary 
collection of words is something gross. These, as all 
else, are forms of Shakti. But the Mantra of which we 
speak is the Devata Himself or Herself in Mantra-body. 
Mantra is thus a mass of radiant Energy. Sayings give 
information and advice to men of the world, whilst 
Mantras awaken superhuman power or Shakti. A mere 
saying is therefore, like a Jiva, subject to birth and death, 
whilst a Mantra is directly Brahman in sound-body, un- 
wasting and undecaying. A Man tra again is not the same 
tiling as prayer or self-dedication (Atma-nivedana). 
Prayer is conveyed in what words the worshipper chooses 
and bears its meaning on its face. It is only ignorance 
of Shastrik principle (See Arthur Avalon’s "Tantra- 
Tattva or Principles of Tautia" as to what precedes and 
follows) which supposes that Mantra is merely the name 
for the words in which one expresses what one has to say 
to the Divinity. If it were, the SAdhaka might choose 
his own language without recourse to the eternal and 
determined sounds of Shastra. 




mantra-sAdhanA 



Shabda is Shakti. The VishvasAra Tantra (Ch. II) 
says that Shabda-brahman which is Mantra (Mantra- 
may a) exists in the body of Jiva and is the subtle aspect 
of the Jiva’s vital Shakti. As the Prapanchasara Tantra 
states, the Brahmanda or Spheroid (universe) is pervaded 
by Shakti as Dhvani, called Nada, Prana and the like. 
The manifestation of the gross (Sthula) form of Shabda 
would not be possible, unless Shabda existed also in a 
subtle (SQkshma) form. 

Shabda is theGuna of Akasha, but is not produced 
by it. It manifests in it ; and Shabda-svariipa is the 
Brahman. In the same way however as in outer space 
waves of sound are produced by movements of air (Vayu), 
so in the space within the Jiva's body, waves of sound 
are produced according to the movements of the vital 
air (Pr&nav&yu) and the process of inhalation and ex- 
halation. The Shabda which first appears in the MQ 1 &- 
dhira (See A. Avalon’s "Serpent Power”) is in fact the 
Shakti which gives life to the Jiva. The Jiva who in- 
breathes and ou threat hos utters a great Mantra. This is 
the Ajapa Mantra or Hangsah, calk'd "Ajapa", because 
it repeats itself naturally without any effort on the part 
of the Jiva. It is the heaving of the Dhvani which causes 
alternate inspiration and expiration. Shakti it is who is 
the Cause of the sweet, indistinct and murmuring Dhvani 
(See Ch. 24) which sounds like the humming of black bees. 
This sound is Para, and then Pashyanti, which becomes 
subtle as Madhyama and gross as Vaikhari. Kundalini, 
who is Varoamayl and Dhvanimayi, is the manifestation in 
bodies of the ParamatmfL So the substance of all Mantra 
is Chit, manifested as letters, syllables, words and their 
sentences. In fact the letters ol the alphabet which are 
known as Akshara arc nothing but the Yantra of the 
Akshara or imperishable Brahman. It is the gross or 
Sthula form of Kundalini. appearing in different aspects 

257 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

as different Dcvatds, which is the presiding Devata 
(Adhishthdtrl) of all Mantra, though it is the subtle (Siik- 
shma) form at which all Sddhakas aim. For in every 
Mantra there arc two Shaktis. The Vachya-Shakti and the 
Vdchaka-Shakti. The Devata who is indicated (Prati- 
padya-Devatd) as the ultimate Svarupa is the Vachya- 
Shakti, and the Devata who is that Mantra (Mantramayl 
Devatd) is the Vdchaka-Shakti. Thus if Durga is the 
Devatd of a Mantra, then Mahdtndya is the Vdchya 
Shakti. The latter is without attribute and the Vdchika 
Shakti with attribute. The latter is the object of worship 
and is a support and means whereby the Vdchya-Shakti 
is realised. For worship assumes as its object some 
form. When the Shakti with attribute, resident in and 
as the Mantra, is by dint of Sadhand awakened, then 
She opens the gate of monistic truth, revealing the true 
nature and essence of the universe. 

There are thus two Shaktis, viz., the Mantra-Shakti 
and the Sadhand Shakti, that is the Sbakti of the Sadhaka 
generated by Sadhand. It is the uniting of these two 
Shaktis which accomplishes the fruit of Mantra-sddhand. 
How ? The Saguna-Shakti is awakened by Sadhand 
and worshipped. This Sagnna-Devatd is the Presiding 
Deity (Adhishthdtri Devata) of the Mantra as the Nirguna 
(formless) Ishvara or lshvari is the Vdchya-Shakti. 
Both are one ; but the Jiva by the laws of his nature and 
its three gunas must first meditate on the gross (SthOla) 
form before he can realise the subtle (SQkshma) form 
which is liberation. 

The utterance of a Mantra without knowledge of 
its meaning' or of the Mantra method is a mere movement 
of the lips and nothing more. The Mantra sleeps. There 
are various processes preliminary to; and involved in, 
its right utterance, which processes again consist of 
Mantra, such as, purification of the mouth ( Mukha - 

258 




MANT RA-SADHAXA 



skodhana) , (See Chapter X., Sharada-Tilaka. Japa oi 
pranava or the mantra Om varies with the Devati — e.g., 
Ong Hsau for Bhairava), purification of the tongue 
(Jikvd-skodhaw, seven Japa of one-lettered Bija tripli- 
cated, Pranava triplicated, then one-lettcred Bija tripli- 
cated) and of the Mantra ( Ashaucha-bhanga , Japa of 
M&la-mantra preceded and followed by Pranava . As 
to the "birth” and "death” defilements of a mantra, see 
Tantra-sira 75, cl se q.), Kulluka (See SharadS, loc. cit. 
Thus Kulluka, which is done over the head, of K&lik 4 is 
Mayd, see Purascharana-BodhinI, p. 48, andTantra-sara), 
Nirvana (Japa oi Mula - and Mdtriku-bija in the Mani- 
pura), Sclu (Generally the MahSmantra Om or Mdyd- 
bija Hring, but it also varies. Thus Setu of Kali is her 
own Bija Kring. of Tara, Kurchcha, etc), NiJrd-bhanga, 
awakening of mantra (Japa of the Mantra preceded and 
followed by lug seven times), Manlra-chaitanya, or 
giving of life or vitality to the mantra (Japa of MUla- 
mantra in Mani-pdra preceded and followed by Matrika- 
bija. Meditating on the M<*la-mantra in the SaJiasnlra. 
A ndka/a, Mdlddluira, with Hung, and again in Sahasrara. 
The MAla is the principal mantra, such as the Pancha- 
da$hi), Mantrdrtkabhdva nd , forming of a mental image of 
the Divinity (Lit., thinking of meaning of mantra 
or thinking of the mdtrikd in the mantra which constitutes 
the Devata from foot to head). There are also ten 
Sangskdras of the Mantra (See Tantra-sara, p, 90). 
Dipani is seven Japa of the bija. preceded and followed 
by Om. Where Bring is employed instead of Om it is 
Prana-yoga. Yoni-mudrfi is meditation on the Guru 
in the head and on the Ishta-devatA in the heart, and then 
on tire Yoni-rdpd Bhuga-ati from the head to the A/«M- 
dhdra, and from the Mtilddhdra to the head, making 
japa of the Yoni Bija (Eng) ten times(See Purohita- 
darpanara.) 



259 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



The Mantra itself is DevatA, that is, the Supreme 
Consciousness (Chitshakti) manifesting in that form. 
The Mantra is awakened from its sleep (Majitracliaitanya) 
through the SAdhanA Shakti of the Mantrin. It is at 
base one and the same Shakti which appears as Sadhana 
Shakti and Mantrashakti, the latter however being the 
more powerful manifestation. The consciousness of 
the Sadhaka becomes en rapport and in union with the 
Consciousness in the form of the Mantra ; and the Devata 
who is the Artha of the Mantra appears to the Sadhaka, 
whose mind has been cleansed and illumined by devotion. 
Though the substance of the Mantra is Consciousness, 
that fact is not realised without the union of the SAdliaka’s 
Shakti derived from Sadhana with Mantrashakti. The 
Devata is then revealed. In the case of PujA, Dhy&na 
and other SAdhanAs, it is only the Sadhaka’s SAdlianA 
Shakti which operates, whilst in the case of Mantra- 
sAdhanA, Sadhanashakti works in conjunction with 
Mantrashakti which is all powerful and re-inforces 
SAdlianAshakii wliieh is imperfect and meets with obs- 
tacles. The individual Shakti is like fire. Just as waves 
of air, when struck and rcstruck by flames of lire, set up 
a blaze with redoubled force, so the Sadhaka's individual 
Shakti when struck by Mantrashakti is rapidly developed, 
and then a strong active individual Shakti unites with 
Mantra-shakti to make the latter doubly powerful. Il is 
because Mantra possesses this wonderful power that a 
Jiva can, it is said, accomplish that which apjicars im- 
possible. Otherwise a Jiva could not achieve by his 
own effort the treasure which is worshipped even by 
Shiva. The Jaivi Shakti or Shakti of a Jiva (as such) 
is transformed by the aid of Mantra into the Daivi Shakti 
or the Shakti of a Deva (as such). With this Shakti he can 
accomplish that which a Deva can. Mantra is thus 
an aspect of the Divine Mother appearmg through 

2G0 




mantra-sAdhana 



Mantrasadhana with devotion to Her, It lias been 
thus said (Tantra Tattva II. 45): “The string 
of fifty letters from A to Ksha which a re the Matrikds is 
Eternal, unbeginning and unending and Brahman itself/' 
This great saying is the first of all Tantras. The reali- 
zation of this Mantra-consciousness is Mantrasiddhi. 
II a Sfidhaka attains perfect Siddlii in even a single 
Mantra he becomes jiosscssed of the spiritual knowledge 
which is acquired by learning all Vedas. For Veda is 
the Pari nama or evolution of the Dhvani of Kula-Kun- 
dalini in the body of Ishvara, and the Parinima of the 
same in the body of the Jiva is Shabda. For Veda is 
Dhvani uttered by Brahma and Shabda is Dhvani uttered 
by the Jiva. In that Shabda is every form of Mantra 
which is that which gives vitality to the Jiva. It is this 
Dhvani too which evolves into gross Shabda as uttered 
sound, the body of the Devatd. Siddlii in such Mantra 
is not gained so long as such Mantra is not awakened. 
It may be that the appearance of the DcvatA is a fact 
or it is not a fact. But it cannot be said that the mere 
utterance of a Mantra is superstitiously supposed to 
effect any result, or that Japa of the Mantra is done with 
no other object than a mere vain and senseless repetition. 
The particular Mantra suitable for a SAdhaka is a matter 
determined by Chakra and other calculations. 




CHAPTER XXIX 



THE GAYATRI MANTRA 

The Gayatrl is the most sacred of all Vaidika 
mantras. In it the Veda lies embodied as in its seed. 
It runs : O/n. Bhdr bhuvah svah : tat saviltir varenyam 
bhargo devasya dktmahi : dhiyoyo nah prachodayat. Om. 
"Om. The earthly, atmospheric and celestial spheres. 
Let us contemplate the wondrous Solar Spirit of the 
Divine Creator (Savitri). May He direct our minds 
(that is, towards the attainment of Dharma, A rtha, 
Kama and Moksha). Om." 

The G&yatri-Vy&karaaaof Yogi Yajnavalkya thus 
explains the following words : Tut, means that. ( Tut is 
apparently here treated as in the objective case, agreeing 
with varenyam, etc., but others holding that the vyShriti— 
Bhur bhuvah svah- forms part of, and should be linked 
with, the rest of the GAyatri, treat thal&s par t of a genitive 
compound connected with the previous vy/ihriti, in which 
case it is Ush&m). The word ydt, "which,” is to be under- 
stood (It may, however, be said that yat is there in Y<> 
nah). Savituh is the possessive case of Savitri, derived 
from the root sh, “to bring forth." Savitri is, therefore, 
the Bringer-foith of all that exists. The Sun (SHryya) is 
the cause ol all that exists, and of the state in which 
it exists. Bringing lorth and creating all things, it is 
called Savitri. The Bhavishya l'urana says : "Suryya 
is the visible Devata. He is the eye of the world and the 
Maker of the day. There is no other Devata eternal 
like unto Him. This universe has emanated from, 
and will be again absorbed into Him. Time is of and in 
Him. The planets, stars, the Vasus, Rudras, Vayu, 
Agni, and the rest are but parts of Him." By Bhargah is 

262 




GAVATRI MANTRA 



meant the Aditya-devata. dwelling *n tlie region of ih e 
Sun [SAryya-mandala) in all His might and glory. He is 
to the Sun what our spirit (Alma) is to our body. Though 
He is in the region of the Sun, in the outer or material 
sphere, He also dwells in our inner selves. He is the ligln 
of the light in the solar circle, and is the light of the 
lives of all beings. As He is in the outer ether, so also 
is He in the ethereal region of the heart. In the outer 
ether He is the Sun (Sflryya), and in the inner ether He 
is the wonderful Light which is the Smokeless Fire. 
In short, that Being whom the S&dhaka realizes m the 
region of his heart is the Aditya in the heavenly firma- 
ment. The two are one. The word is derived in two 
ways: (n) from the root Bhrij, " to ripen, mature, 
destroy, reveal, shine.” In this derivation Stiryya is 
He who matures and transforms all things. He Himself 
shines and reveals all things by His Light. And it is He 
who at the final Dissolution { Praiaya ) will in His form 
of destructive Fire [KAMgni] destroy all tilings. (2) From 
Ww=dividing all things into different classes ; ra~ colour, 
for He produces the colour of all created objects ; g a ?= 
constantly going and returning. The Sun divides all 
things, produces the different colours of all tilings and 
is constantly going and returning. As the Brahmana- 
sarvasva say's : "The Bharga is the Atm A of all that 
exists, whether moving or motionless, in the three Lokas 
[BMr Bhuvah Svah). There is nothing which exists 
apart from it." 

Devasya is the genitive of Deva, agreeing with 
Saviluh. Deva is the radiant and playful (L/iimaya) 
one. SGryya is in constant play with creation ( Srishij ), 
existence (Sth/ti), and destruction [Pralaya), and by 
His radiance pleases all. [LUA, as applied to the Brahman, 
is the equivalent of MAya). Varcnyum=varaniyam or 
adorable. He should be rfteditated upon and adored 

263 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



that we may be relieved of the misery of birth and death. 
Those who fear rebirth, who desire freedom from death and 
seek Liberation, and who strive to escape the three kinds 
of pain (tdpa-lraya), which are Adhydtmika, Adhidaivika, 
and Aihibhautika, meditate upon and adore the Bharga, 
who, dwelling in the region of the Sun, has in Himself 
the three regions called likiir-loka , Bkuvar-toka and 
Svar-loka. Dl: hnah i —dhyaynnu {from the tool dhyai), 
we meditate upon, or let us meditate upon. 

Prachodaydl=may He direct. The Gflyatri docs 
not so expressly state, but it is understood that such 
direction is along the Chalitr-varga , or four-fold path, 
which is Dharma, Artha, Kama, and Moksha (piety, 
wealth, desire and its fulfilment, and Liberation). The 
Bharg.ih L- ever directing our inner faculties (Buddhi- 
vritti) along these paths. 

The above is the Vaidikl Gdydtfi, which, according 
to the Vaidika system, none but the twice-born may utter. 
To the Shudra, whether man or woman, and to women 
of all other castes it is forbidden. The Tantra Shastra, 
which has a Gayatri-Mantra of its own, shows no such 
exclusiveness: Chapter 111, verses 109-iri. ot' the 
Mahanirvana Tantra gives the Brahma-g&yatri for wor- 
shippers of the Brahman : " Parameshvardya vtdmahe 
■para-tallviiya dhimahi : tan no Brahma prachodayat" 
(May we know the Supreme Lord. Let us contemplate 
the Supreme Reality. And may that Brahman direct 
us.) 



264 




CHAPTER XXX 



THE GAYATRI MANTRA 
As an Exercise of reasoning 

The Society 1 is called "Rationalistic." Hits forma- 
tion was meant to be merely a homage to one form of 
modern western thought, the title may be fairly correct. 
L think however that you had no intention of adding 
to the volume of imitativeness in this country, but by 
your action you wished to affirm the necessity of such 
reasonable thinking and practice as is characteristic 
of the Ary a Dharma, rightly understood and cleansed of 
all bad and useless accretion. There is always a difficulty, 
when English verbal labels are used to describe Indian 
philosophical and religious theories and practices. 
In fact such labels are a fertile source of confusion 
I hear of a good suggestion to call it Satyajndna Sabha 
or a similar name. 

Rationalism, in the sense of its technical opposition 
to Sensationalism, has no meaning in this country for 
those who believe that a child is born with his Sangsk&ras. 

"Rationalism” in its more general sense involves, 
it has been said, the following beliefs : — (i) Reason is 
the chief source and final criterion of knowledge. (2) 
Each individual must investigate and gain knowledge for 
himself, and must not merely submit himself to external 
authority. In other words he must do his own thinking. 
(3) As a result of this it is said that a rationalist must 
reject any alleged knowledge, the truth of which cannot 
be rationally demonstrated. 

Upon such a statement a Ved&ntist (I speak through- 
out of the Advaita-Vedinta) would ask, what is the 



1 Thl* Chapter rcprcdoces a Lecture given V, th-i Rationalistic Sociuty, 
Calcutta. 

265 





THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



"knowledge" here mentioned ? If worldly (Lauldka) 
knowledge is meant, then the Rationalist and Vedantist 
are at one. Worldly knowledge is apprehended through 
the senses (Indriya). Tn its own sphere, reason is the 
chief source of knowledge and final critetiom. So much, 
is this so, that Shangkar 4 ch 4 ryya says that if even Veda 
were to contradict what is the subject of worldly proof 
(Laukika-Pramana) it would not he Veda. In this 
sphere it is not a Pramina, which overrides the testimony 
of the senses and inferences therefrom. The Yoga 
Vasishtha (Bk. 2— Ch. x8, w. 2-3) says : 

Apt paurusham ddeyam shastram chetd yuktibodhakam 
Anyat tvirsham api lyujyun: bhivyam nydyyaikasctiuu 
Yukiiyuktam upddcyum vachamuu b&iakiid api 
Anyat trinam iva ly&jyam apyuidaiv. PadmajunmanA. 

That is, "Even a Shistra of purely human author- 
ship should be accepted if conformable to reason. Any- 
thing else (which is umeasonable), even though it be the 
word of a Rishi, should be rejected by one who follows 
reason. The w-ord of a boy if leasonable should be 
accepted. Anything unreasonable should be rejected as 
of no more count than a blade of grass, even if it be uttered 
by the Lotus-born (Brahma) Himself." On this subject 
read the whole of the 14th Chapter of Book II of the 
Mumukshu Khanda of this work which is a glorification 
of Vich 4 ra or reasoning. 

But there is more than what is seen with the eyes. 
The mind admittedly exists, but it is not seen by the 
senses (Atindriya). Again as to objects, scientific in- 
struments enable the senses to perceive more than is 
presented to them in their natural state. These instru- 
ments thus effect a material extension of natural faculty. 
Then there are Psychic Powers (Suldhi), the subject of 
much study to-day in the West, but matters of long 
familiar practice in this country. Here the mind may 

26b 




gAyatr! mantra 



operate independently of the gross bodily organs of sense, 
as also occurs in some cases of Hypnosis. These psychic 
powers arc again extensions of natural faculty. They 
are not supernatural, except in the sense that they are 
supernormal. They may, in any one individual, be 
natural or produced, but we do not reason ourselves 
into them. We can reason only upon whether they 
exist, and what they are and indicate. That is, we reason 
about them. In themselves they arc peculiar mental 
faculties, by which the mind sees tilings or imposes 
itself upon and controls, or affects, others, such as 
Clairvoyance, Clairaudiencc, Hypnosis, Thought-reading, 
Telepathy and so forth. There is nothing unreasonable 
in all this. On the contrary an affirmation of their 
existence is reasonable and in accordance with the 
VedSntic theory of Being upon which this paper proceeds. 
The only question about them is one of fact or proof. 
Do they exist or not ? Nothing is more unscientific 
than to pronounce a priori against them and without 
investigation into the facts. Notwithstanding scientific 
bigotry (for there is a bigotry of science as of religion) 
psychical research is coming to be recognised as a useful 
form of enquiry. 

Lastly there is what is called spiritual or religious 
experience, which is of varying degrees and kinds, and 
is a knowledge of the nature (through an actual parti- 
cipation in Its Being) of the excelling and infinite Prin- 
ciple which lies behind and manifests all Phenomena. 
Professor James’s celebrated- work "Varieties of Exper- 
ience’*’ is one of the first essays in a field, which is 
only now commencing to be cultivated extensively. 
The possibility or fact of such experience cannot 
be said to be unreasonable. Such experience has 
been affirmed by all the great Religions, and by some 
of the great Philosophies. If it is unreasonable, then 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

the bulk of Humanity have been lacking in reason in all 
the past and in the present times. The question again 
here is one of fact and proof. Have such experiences 
taken place in fact ? Are they real experiences or mere 
hallucinations ? In the latter case why should they 
occur ? The only direct and certain proof is the having 
of such an experience oneself. Probable proof may be 
had in various ways, such as the persistence and univer- 
sality of such experiences, the nature of the truths said' 
to be revealed by them, and. in particular, the extra- 
ordinary effect which they have produced on the indivi- 
duals who have had such experience, and (in the case 
of the greater experiences) the effect that they have 
produced on the world at large. To my mind it is a 
very shallow view which regards the effect produced on 
millions of past and present Humanity, by the Rishis and 
Shakva Muni of India, by Laotze, Jesus and Mahommed, 
as the outcome of the hallucination of the Mah&/mds 
named and otheis. Which of these experiences, it may 
be asked, is true, or which one is truer than the others ? 
This is too vast a question to be answered here. Let 
me however say this, that those who read these experiences 
with knowledge will find elements common to all, together 
with some elements which seem to vary. As to these 
last let it be noted that just as in our ordinary life one 
man sees and knows more than another, so it is with 
spiritual experience, of which there arc many grades. 
If two men are approaching a mountain, is the experience 
which one man has of it yojniles distant untrue, because 
it differs from the experience of the other man who sees 
it at its fool ? Do we not say that both arc true, con- 
sidering the position of each experiencer ? 

In India spiritual experience is called Veda, from 
the root "Vid" to know. It is experience in the limit, 
of which all others arc gradual and partial reproductions. 

26S 




gAyatrt mantra 



This may be primary, that is, an individual may himself 
have the experience, or he may accept the authority of 
those who have had such experience, for reasons I have 
slightly indicated but cannot develop here 

The Vedanta says that Reason is supreme in worldly 
( Laukika ) matters open to nur senses. By reasoning 
we may establish Laukika truth, but as regards wlsat is 
not seen, such as the being of one Supreme Cause of which 
the Universe is an effect, unaided reason can only establish 
probabilities and not certainty. Thus one may, with 
reasonableness, argue for or against Monism, Dualism, 
Pluralism and so forth. In this way mere reasoning may 
lead to contrary conclusions. And in fact what is more 
contradictory than the conclusions of Western philosophy 
with Realism 'old style and new as propounded by Mr. 
Bertrand Russell), Idealism (objective and subjective), 
Monism, Pluralism, l’an psychism, Humanism, Pragma- 
tism, and the many other systems which jostle for men’s 
custom in this Philosophical Fair ? It is a matter of 
doubt whether modem metaphysic is any real advance 
on that of the greater among the ancients. In my 
opinion none are better constructed than the Six Dar- 
shanas. The advance has been made in Science. But 
even here there is dispute, both as to the facts observed, 
and the theories based on them. For me, their greatest 
importance just lies in the fart, that the latest scientific 
inferences corroborate the intuitively derived teaching of 
tire ancient sages. Thus present scientific conceptions 
of the constitution of matter, and notably the break- 
down of the Atomic Theory, support the notions of 
MayA, a single material basis of the Universe, and the 
existence of Ether which, as AkAsha, was accepted in 
India when Europe had not passed Ireyond the so-called 
“four elements.’’ Both science and Indian beliefs posit 
an evolution of beings from the organic to the inorganic, 

269 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



and, in the latter division, from plant to animal and 
animal to man. In India it lias always been held that 
there arc no partitions or gulfs between the various 
forms of existence, and that, for instance, the difference 
between man and animal is not a difference of kind but 
of degree. Again from the new Psychology and Psychical 
Research, Vedanta gains support, as from theories 
touching the nature of mind as a material force (as Her- 
bert Spencer teaches) and as a power (the picdominant 
idea in "New Thought” literature), the extension of the 
field of Consciousness, dual personalities and various 
forms of psychical phenomena. 

Nevertheless, so far as ultimate? are concerned, 
neither Metaphysic nor Science can establish more than a 
high degree of probability ; they may lead to the door 
of the shrine, but they do not directly and unaided place 
the enquirer within. The Brahman or All-Pervader 
cannot be established by reason, because it is never an 
object of knowledge. The Shastra says, one can only 
know Brahman by being Brahman and that is by spiri- 
tual experience. Its being and nature are taught by 
revelation. Revelation is not the speaking of any voice, 
divine or otherwise, from without. It is self-knowledge 
in its deepest sense and nothing ‘more. The VedSntist 
affirms that we can know ourselves, not only in our gross 
or physical aspect as being fair or dark, short and tall 
and so on, or in our subtle or mental aspect as perceiving 
and reasoning beings, but in our innermost essence as 
that of which both body and mind are manifestations. 
It may be the fact, or it may not be the fact, but there 
is nothing unreasonable in the proposition as such. 
It is this Self-knowledge, attained by oneself in varying 
degrees, or accepted as the experience of others (Shruti), 
whose testimony we may, for reasons satistying to 
ourselves, accept, which renders certain that which to 

270 




gAyatr! mantra 



reason is only probable. Once Sliruti is accepted, 
Reason can follow its teaching without violence to 
its own principles. What was before reasonable and 
probable is now both reasonable and certain. Tliis 
must be so, unless we assume what is impossible, 
namely a divorce between rational and spiritual 
truth. Truth however is one and what is umeasonabe 
must be rejected, whoever says it, "even if He be 
the Lotus-bom.” 

It is not India who has denied the rights of Reason. 
It is Europe who in the past has done so. But Europe 
has now, after fierce contest against Church tyranny 
and oppression (aided by the State) with its imprison- 
ment, torture and burning at the stake, largely achieved 
in the present the right of free thinking. Had India 
been so opposed She might have been to-day more in- 
tellectually active. In the same way the political 
activity of Europe has been stimulated by the oppressive 
governance of its peoples. We westerners have bad to 
fight for all the things o i worth we have won. 

Nowhere however has intellectual liberty been so 
authoritatively, and for such a length of time, recognised 
as in India. The word “Man” is derived from the root 
Man, wlrich in Sanskrit means "to think”. Man is 
Mann. Therefore man is "The Thinker ." He is thus 
distinguished from the rest of the world by Iris thinking. 
What greater definition than this of our Aryan fore- 
fathers can be found ? In no country in the whole world 
has there been more thinking than in India, which has 
been indeed a very hot-bed of speculation and divergent 
beliefs and practice : such as the Materialism of Chdrv&ka 
and the Lokayatas, true atheists, men of the type of 
Ajitakeshakambali, the opponent of Sh&kya -Muni, who 
denied that any Brahmana, or any one else, had dis- 
covered any truth concerning any other life than this, 

271 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



who said that man was made of the four elements and 
dissolved into the elements at death and had gone for 
ever ; such again as the Sanldiyas, dualists and realists, 
affirming the existence of Spirit, but holding a God as 
Governor of the universe unproved (Nirlshvara Darshana): 
the N y iya vaisheshi kas, pluralists, realists affirming the 
existence of the Supreme Lord ; Buddhist idealism 
(Vijnanavada) and so called "Nihilists” (Shflnyav'tdins) ; 
VedSntic Monism, qualified Monism, and Dualism in 
various theistic forms, Altmangsakas. Jainas and every 
shade of thought imaginable. 

In Vcdantic S 4 dhan 4 , Reasoning or Manana occu- 
pies, with Shravana and Kididhyasatia, a principal place. 
All the Darsha nas, particularly ptjrhaps the Nyaya, 
are written to serve Manana or reasoning, and the 
BrahraasOtras, which the Vcdantic systems expound, 
are known as Vaiyisikanyayamala. 

As regards science, India has had its own great 
achievements which you will find recorded in part in 
Professors Brojendranath Seal’s and Binav-kumar Sirkar’s 
workson the subject. Up to the modern period India 
was more than the equal in this field of any other country. 
But undoubtedly, since that period, the palm for scientific 
thinking and experiment must be given to the West. 
Those who however imagine, that reasoning and freedom 
of thought are a distinctive appanage of the West, arc 
very ignorant of the history of their country. If one 
had to make the comparison, and one did make it over 
a period, extending from say (to go no further) 2000 B.C., 
the statement must be reversed in favour of India. No 
country has honoured Reason more, or given it greater 
freedom than India. The cultural restrictions in this 
country have been of a different kind, consisting in the 
social ordering of life, and in later times exclusion from 
knowledge by reason of artificial distinctions of caste. 

272 




gAyatri mantra 



Bat those, to whom the book of knowledge was open, 
have always been able to think freely enough. When 
Europe was under ecclesiastical domination, the attempt 
was made to make every one think the same way in the 
maimer laid down by Church authority. It is against 
this that European Rationalism protested. 

I at first found a difficulty in choosing a subject 
to address to you out of the many which presented 
themselves, and I had practically written a paper, with 
which 1 was not satisfied, because 1 could not put before 
you (as indeed I cannot even now) what I wished to say 
within the limits available to me, when, by something 
more than chance, l found amongst my old papers a note 
sent me some years ago on tlic Oayatri Mantra, the 
holiest expression of the thought of India. I therefore 
restate its argument more summarily in words, and with 
some further additions, of my own. 

The Mantra opens and ends with the Pratuiva or 
Om. This refers in the first place to the threefold aspect 
of the World-Cause in manifestation. That there is a 
cause (MaiiAshakti) which, as the Universal Self, contains 
the universe within Itself, is dealt with in the meditation 
which follows. Here both the Cause and Its manifesta- 
tion are the object of thought. The Nadu bind u indicates 
that causal state of the World-Power, prior to its three- 
fold differentiation as represented by the letters A, U, M, 
which coalesce into Om. These letters stand for its 
working which is observable by all. For the first and 
second refer to present activities, as well as those in the 
past and future, of the MuMshakli, as the Radical Vital 
Potential. M or Rudra as so observed is chemical action 
breaking down the combinations of matter. This is the 
disintegration of form. A (Brahma) is the force which 
creates it anew by its ever rejuvenescent molecular 
activity, thus rescuing organised vitality from the pro- 

273 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



cesses which are ever at work to consume (as “M" ) its 
forms. U (Vishnu) is the maintaining power which 
stabilizes matter, which is only a relatively stable condi- 
tion of energy, from which it appears, and into which it, 
at length, merges. Looking at the sum total of mani- 
fested energy, Vishnu as Maintainor, through space and 
time, is a theological statement of the doctrine of the 
general conservation of energy. The Mah&shakti, in 
Herself Perfect Consciousness (Chidrupini) . is the three- 
fold Powers of Will, Knowledge and Action, and mani- 
fests in the building up, maintenance and disintegration 
of forms. What follows, as all else, is contained in Om, 
but some of its implications are developed in the rest of 
the Gayatri Mantra. Om considered as a sound (Dfnani) 
is the approximate natural name of the first undifferen- 
tiated movement (Sdmdnya-Spanio) of the stressing 
mitcrial cause (Prakrit!) of the universe. The primor- 
dial "Sound" or Stress is the primordial functioning 
of the Brahma-Shakti. 

Then follow the three Vy&hriiis—Bhtik, Bhuvah. 
Suah, which are Lakshaiia of, that is, stand for, all the 
fourteen Lokas, though now in this (Vyavah&rik a) 
world we are only concerned with the iirst three ; Bhdh 
for Baih and the seven nether Talas, Bhuvah for itself, 
and Svah for Svah and the remaining upper regions up 
to Satya. The Lokas represent states of consciousness. 
Bhurloka or earth is the state oi normal experience . 
The Lokas above it are states of supernormal conscious- 
ness, and the Talas below are conditions of sub-normal 
experience. Objectively considered matter becomes 
more and more dense as one descends from the highest 
to the lowest Loka and thence to the Talas ; and as 
the veil of matter is more or less dense, so the state of 
consciousness varies. The first five Lokas, from and 
including Earth, are those of the five forms of sensible 

274 




gAyatr! mantra 



matter, the sixth is that of Mind ; and the seventh is the 
causal state of both Mind and Matter. Earth and the 
nether states are the gross body, the Lot' as from Bhuvah 
to Tapali are the subtle body, and Satya is the causal 
body of the great Purusha referred to in the GSyatrf 
and worshipped in the Sun-circle {AdUya-mandala). 
The Vytihriiis indicate that the Great Self which is 
indicated in Om pervades all the regions of the universe. 
How then do we get the notion of that Self and then 
experience it ? 

In our ordinary condition of consciousness, the outer 
world is completely objective and stable and independent 
of it. It lies “over there” in the outer space entirely 
external to us, having apparently its existence in itself 
and of itself. This state of consciousness is indicated 
by the first Vyahriti "Wnih." This is our normal state. 
Our mind is here. It is one thing — A ham or I. The 
object, the I dam or “This,” the Vimarsha-Shakti, is 
there. It is another. But a little reflection reveals 
that these seemingly independent objects are for us 
bundles of certain qualities, which are so. only because 
they are sensed by the Senses which are constituted 
in a particular way. It is obvious that if our senses 
were not there, or if they were not seizing the object, 
there would be no sensation and no object. Again if 
the senses themselves were modified, the sense percep- 
tions would also change. In that case the objects, which 
at first sight exist independently of our perceptions, 
would become something different from what they for- 
merly were, as they would exhibit a different set of 
qualities. Thus the objective world is not really inde- 
pendent as we first thought, and the form it presents 
to us is due to the action of some objective force acting 
upon the subjectively sensuous character of the beings 
who perceive it. With such reflections the notion of 

275 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

objective stability wears oil, and the world first assumes 
a mobile condition, in so far as it is seen that the objects, 
which at first seem to possess the qualities which charac- 
terise them, do so not only of themselves but also of 
ourselves. The condition of mind in which this notion 
is firmly held is the second of the seven divisions or 
stages of the Parthiva consciousness. All materially- 
minded thinkers, who look upon the objoctise world 
as independent of a subjective perceiver, are in the 
Bhurloka. 

The second condit:on of consciousness in which the 
subjectivity of the self first asserts itself, and the objective 
world loses its absolute and independent character and 
appears as dependent upon, influenced and modified 
by the subjective factor, is expressed in some forms 
of idealism. In such cases though the subjective element 
is recognised, it is not ideal in the sense that it has its 
root wholly in itself, but it is objectively actual in the 
sense that it has its existence at least main*y in the 
external. The seer, seeing, and seen, are localised in 
the outer space. As we proceed upwards, whilst the seen 
Jneya) remains external to us, the seeing {Juana) is 
localised internally, until at length the seer (Jnatd), seeing 
Juana), and seen Jneya) are all internalised, subjecti- 
fied and unified. This J ndnasiarupa or the Supreme 
Consciousness is opposed to Jndnavrilli or the limited 
and differentiated conscionsness. 

After the attainment of this second stage we pass 
to the third. We then ask, what lies behind the senses, 
wherein to a great extent the appearance of the external 
world depends ? Wc then perceive that the senses do 
not apprehend objects unless attention, in the form of 
Manas, is bestowed upon them. The whole world, 
open at any moment to the senses, is impinging on them 
at every moment, but only that is perceived to which 

276 




GAYATKi MANTRA 



we pa> f attention. The Brihad&ranyaka Upanishad 
gives good psychology when it says, "1 did not hear. 
My mind was elsewhere." But attention must be 
directed and willed. We learn then that behind the 
Senses there is some Self which directs its attention to 
a particular object, and so perceives it by the medium 
of the senses. There is thus no sense-perception without 
the co-operation of the attention of the Self. Therefore, 
the world (considered apart from what it may possibly 
be in itself) is dependent both upon the senses and atten- 
tive mind of the self which is behind them. The attain- 
ment and habit of this thought is the third ascending 
stage of the Pftrtliiva consciousness. 

We have thus attained a knowledge of the self. 
We next reflect upon its nature. To the ordinary cons- 
ciousness of the first two states, the self either did not 
appear important, or seemed to be limited to the body 
and restricted within its scope. But reflection has now 
shown tiiat not only is it unconditioned by the senses, 
but actually conditions them, giving them effective 
operation through it* power of attention. The self 
then appears uncontrolled by the physical body, self- 
luminous and overlapping the bounds of the physical 
senses. When this notion is reached the fourth stage 
of consciousness is attained. 

The next question is — what is the relation of the self, 
the senses and the objects ? Are they each independent 
in their origin the one of the other, or is one the cause 
of the other two ? They cannot be independent of each 
other, for this would mean that either they had no 
relation to each other, or if there is any relation, it is 
due to some fourth thing external to the others, which 
is the basis of their relation and apart from which they 
cannot be in relation. It is obvious that they arc in 
relation to each other, and, as such, the ground of their 

277 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



relation must be either in. or outside, themselves. It is 
sufficient to say here that no fourth principle capable ol 
holding them together and bringing them into relation 
is perceived. Hut logically the same result can be 
established, for if a fourth principle bringing them into 
relation were assumed, which was dependent on some 
one or other of them, the causal element would be still 
to seek, whereas if it were independent and still in relation 
to the three, then the ground of this relation would have 
to be sought for in some fifth element, and so on with a 
regressio ad infinitum. We must then confine ourselves 
to the three and examine the nature of this relation. 

The relation can be grounded only in that element 
out ot the three which is independent of the others, 
for a dependent entity cannot have the ground of its 
relation to others within itself. The perceived objects 
are not independent. For they require tin* senses to be 
perceived as objects of that character according to which 
we perceive them. The senses are not independent, 
for sense perception requires attention of the Self. 
Objects in order to be objects must be perceived by the 
senses. Without the senses they are not objects for us. 
The senses are not operative senses without the attention 
oi the Self behind them. On the other hand the Self 
does not cease to be the Self, when it is not attentively 
perceiving objects through the senses, as we see in the 
case of dream. The Self in dream is cm off from the senses. 
Indeed it evolves both objects and senses. The Self 
in dream is cut off from the objective world, having 
nothing in it but ideas thereto. Yet it transforms for 
itself those ideas into outer objects and the senses which 
perceive them. What we see in dream is real while it 
lasts. Thus the Self is independent of the other two 
and has within itself the ground of the causal relation 
by which it evolves them. The firm and lasting cons- 

278 




GAYAlRi MANTRA 



ciousness which realises this is the fifth step in the ascend- 
ing consciousness. 

What then is the nature of the relation between 
the cause producing the objective world and the effect 
so produced ? Is it a cause material in its nature, 
producing an effect external to i tself , or an ideal cause 
working ideally upon itself to produce an effect ? The 
cause cannot produce an effect which is really external 
to itself. Were this so, the dream-world of which we 
are creators would be external to the self which produces 
it. In that case it would not vanish with that state of 
consciousness which lies at tbe root of it. The objective 
world can only be ideally connected with its cause. 
Gradnally the notion that the objective world is produced 
by a cause external to it is rejected, and the notion is 
accepted that the cause has the effect lying ideally 
within it, which is projected and externalised in the 
course of cosmic evolution. For when mind and matter 
are evolved, each lias equal reality and (in the sense of 
impermanence) unreality. In its highest sense Reality= 
Persistence^ Deathlessness (Amritatva)— Ananda which 
is living unimpeded in the fullest measure, which is Atma. 
And so Herbert Spencer on biological principles defines 
“pleasure" as the index of the uuimpeded flow of vitality. 
What fully persists and is therefore fully “real” is the 
self. The firm establishment of this experience is the 
sixth consciousness. Just as the dream-world lies within 
tiie consciousness of the dreamer, who projects it into 
fancied objectivity, so the objective world of common 
{Vyavahdrika) experience lies within, and is projected 
by, the Consciousness of the so-called World-dreamer, 
who suras up in Himself all experiences. Is the world 
or its cause necessarily thus by virtue of the nature of 
the cause itself, or on account of some external fact ? 
There is no material other than itself outside the cause 

279 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



which it takes within, works upon, and puts forth. It 
might be thought that there was ideal connection with 
the objective world on the causal side, but that the root 
of the objective world upon which it operates was some- 
thing lying elsewhere than in its inner being. But this 
is not so. as the effect, the objective world, must neces- 
sarily be within the cause, otherwise it is not possible 
that it should he ideally connected with it. II the 
connection with the cause were something other than 
the constitution of the cause itself, there must be an 
indication of what that something is and the nature of 
its connection with the cause. Moreover if that some- 
thing lies outside the cause, we must suppose some 
medium connecting that something with the cause 
itself. And again the question would arise whether 
this connection was natural and necessary, or adventi- 
tious. If the latter, then what is it Which brings about 
the connection ? In this way we have a regressio ad 
infinitum unless we suppose the connection to be natural 
and necessary. It is reasonable then to hold that the 
objective world lies necessarily in its root the cause. 
Moreover having arrived at the consciousness that the 
eftect is ideally connected with the cause, it is more 
reasonable to hold that this connection is clue to the 
constitution of the cause itself. When the entire objec- 
tive world is viewed as necessarily lying within the cause, 
the seventh, or what wc may call the Satya stage of 
the Parthiva consciousness, is attained. 

Up to this we have only dealt with the subdivisions 
of the Parthiva or eartli consciousness, that is, experience 
as beings in the Parthiva state elaborated by reflection 
to its highest point. By such reflection we reach the 
standpoint from which the whole universe is viewed as 
lying in a seed (Bija) form, ideally and potentially 
within its cause which is nothing but the Self. 

280 




GAYATRI MANTRA 



Thus one aspect ol the grandeur ol the Self as the 
potential cause of the entire universe is revealed. The 
Sddhaka has thus passed through higher and higher 
stages of the Pdrthiva consciousness to the indwelling 
Spirit within it. His thus expanded consciousness 
brings forth the exclamation which is the Gayatri Mantra, 
in which homage is made to the Supreme Power, which 
manifests in this and all other forms of experience and 
its objects in the Universe. Hence the word by which the 
Sddhaka denotes this indwelling Spirit is Savitd, or the 
Projector of the Universe from out Its own thought, 
without external material or aid. It is however to be 
remembered that the strength of the force of the exter- 
nality-notion which commenced at the stage of Ether 
[AMsha) reached its greatest power in the earth-principle 
(Prithivi Tattva) of solid, ponderable, three dimensioned 
matter and in the Pdrthiva consciousness. Therefore 
it is Iliac Savitd the Producer, though really the Inner 
Self, is itself externalised as something placed out in space 
and hence we iind it designated by Tat or That. This 
"Thatness" will, as we proceed; meet in one unity the 
Supremeness of the last stage. Hut it is the charac- 
teristic of the Pdrthiva consciousness that it always 
tends to locate both the Seer and the Seen in outer space. 
The devotee to whose mental gaze the indwelling Spirit 
reveals itself, bursts forth into the Mantra : “Let us 
meditate on the adorable darkness-dispelling Spirit 
of the self-luminous all-producing Savitd" with the 
prayer that It may inspire and illumine our inward 
Reason. It is through this illumination of the Reason 
by the source of Reason, that the inner Reason which 
is our inner being sees and understands the entire universe 
and its principles. This Savitd produces the universe 
in accordance with the principles of Reason which are 
at base His own inner being (Vichdrachamatkritih parain- 

2S1 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 



tUmamayt), and this production of Ilis is revealed to us 
and realised by us in participation with the Divine Reason 
of His being. As we arc, in our deepest ground, the 
Spirit, which, in its outer aspect, is our limited selves 
and what is not ourselves ; as our reason is an efflorescence 
of Its own eternal all-knowingness, so our outer reason- 
ing is in conformity with the truth in its own sphere, 
and is illumined to pass beyond reasoning upon the 
objective world to an understanding of the rational 
vesture of the Spirit, and then to the intuitive realisa- 
tion of the Spirit Itself. This union of ours with the 
universal is shown by the fact that we, as so many in- 
dividuals, if we were to remain confined within our indi- 
viduality, could never perceive the universe as common 
to us all. This common perception of the universe could 
not be achieved by us as individuals, but*only as being 
one with the universal. And therefore in so far as we 
are the common pe red vers of the universe, we arc not 
individual but universal. Our individuality consists 
in our perception of the universe in so far as it differs 
from that of others. Thus difference of perception, which 
individualises us, is not based upon any inherent differ- 
entiating condition in our essential being, but upon the 
externalising limitations, the result of particular Karma, 
which make it impossible for all to perceive everything 
at the same time to the same extent. This perception 
of the difference of the many, due to limitation, differ- 
entiates each individual from the other, but it docs not, 
and cannot, differentiate him from the Indwelling Uni- 
versal (here P&rthiva) which is the common ground of 
all. Thus the Sadhaka says that it is this Savitu, or 
Indwelling Universal, which inspires the Reason of us 
all, both as individual and as universal, and it is through 
the Self-luminous Consciousness of this Most Glorious 
Self (known not only in Sam&dhi, but in and through 

2S2 




GAYATRI MANTRA 



every act of reasoning, its mental embodiment) that we 
are enabled to learn and understand the Truth {Salyam). 
For it is Salya or the Persistent Self Itself. The relation 
between the individual and the universal being thus 
grasped, and it being realised that the individuality of 
the individual is only through the universal, we should 
then proceed to sec what is the nature of this Universal 
which makes it project the universe as we see it around 
us. 

Here we pass beyond the Gayatri Sad liana into the 
subtle AtmasadhanS. The Ved&ntist says that to such 
as truly see, whether with the eye of reason or intuition, 
the whole universe is perceived as originating from its 
source, as the Gangi from the Himalayas, and at length 
returning thereto. It* source is in the Power of the 
Perfect Consciousness which is Shiva, which means the 
Auspicious and Good, the Brahman or all Pervading. 
All which exists are Its varying forms, existing in happi- 
ness so loug as they are in Harmony with Him who is 
Bliss (Ananda) itself. Power and Harmony— let us 
repeat these words day by day. Think continuously 
the Thought of Power and be powerful. Individual 
Power is a small thing, but when it links itself to, or 
indentifies itself with, the Supreme Power, it shows its 
mightiness according to the degree oi such harmony 
and union. Power however does not merely mean 
material force. The latter is only Power translated to 
the material plane. Power is also mental, moral, spiri- 
tual. l-ove is Power — the greatest of Powers. Every- 
thing in fact which exists is Power, which is the .Mother 
(Ambika). 

We may intellectually conceive this. But how to 
realise it ? Here the Yedfintic practice (.Srii/m >i£) is 
as profound as its theory. It says that man as body, 
mind and spirit is one whole. If one would understand 

283 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

and realise the Pure, one must be that, both in body 
and mind [Shuddh&lmH). In the West it is commonly 
supposed that a man may arrive at, or at any rate is 
competent to seek lor, the truth by reason alone. Mere 
reason however is insufficient. A man may be deemed 
a philosopher in the West, and yet lack in character 
and morals. This is not so in Vedanta which says that 
its doctrine cannot be perfectly understood, much less 
realised, unless the body and mind are made puie enough 
to approach the Punty which that doctrine teaches. 
The whole being must be brought in harmony, so far 
as may be, with it. Tlius is it understood and at length 
realised. The pure mind and body naturally thinks 
the thoughts which links man's mind with the Universal 
Mind and the Universal Sell of which it is the subtle 
form. Sadhand varies according to the stages of develop- 
ment and therefore competency {Adhikdra) of man. 
But the highest of Sddhands is Karutu i or compassion. 
1 took up recently an English novel, curiously enough 
called "The Rationalist.” There I found the phrase 
"this new tiling appearing on the horizon— the pheno- 
menon of Compassion which is now beginning to express 
itself in action.” Th's “new thing” is as old here as the 
Vedas and the Buddha Golama who ceaselessly taught it. 
Avoid giving pain. Allay it where it is. Yet the appli- 
cation of this principle is not so simple as is sometimes 
thought. The truly great of our race need no other 
power nor effort than to be themselves. By the mere 
fact of their own self-redemption, they redeem others. 
Others must at least strive to hold in view the ideal in 
the midst of the struggles into which their nature and 
circumstances may lead them. Merc apathy however 
is not Yoga. Yoga is unity with the Lord in the forms 
of His Power as one’s family, friends, people and the 
world at large. He is J ngadbandhn, that is. Friend 

284 




gAyatr! mantra 



of the World. We can each make effort to follow this 
Supreme Law and to extricate ourselves from the morass 
of merely selfish struggle. And as we successfully, 
according to our varying opportunity and capacity, 
do so, we will find that we make individual advance, 
and that the power to impose our will on others increases. 
If each will, according to his capacity, so order his life 
that lie does not cause pain to. and relieves the suffering 
of this great Body of the Lord which is the Universe, 
of which each is an infinitesimal part, then they will com- 
mence to really understand. The greatest cloud upon 
understanding is selfishness. The mass of men are still 
mere candidates for Humanity and must raise themselves 
to it. The meaning of Evolution is the liberation of 
the Spirit or Inner Self from all which obscures its essen- 
tia! freedom. This liberation is taking place in the 
gradual ascent from inorganic to organic being and the 
advance of organism culminating, for the present, in man 
as we know him. The highest humanity is that in which it 
and Divinity meet. In man the 1-principle is still being 
developed in present humanity. The end is the perfec- 
tion of the present "1," and then by stages its identi- 
fication with the Universal "I." the Purndham which 
is the Infinite Self. The Sadhaka thinks of this ascending 
or return movement repeatedly, for Japa on the Gayatri 
is necessary to correct the natural objective tendencies of 
thought. This is the true performance of Sandhyd, 
which literally means perfect Dhyana or meditation, 
of which the Gayatri Mantra is the sou!. 

Those who have not learnt the goal of evolution 
do not realise the necessity of Sandhya. They have 
before their eyes only the present powers and capacities 
of man and think that his present possibilities on the 
lower plane should alone be realised. They think only 
of the fulfilment of desires, shutting their eyes to tire 

285 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

purpose lor which man exists in the world, namely, 
first harmony with the active (Vishvalma-Shakti) and 
then union with the Unchanging Brahman (Chidrupini- 
Shakti). They fail to realise that the Reality, which 
underlies all phenomena, must also be in the deepest 
nature of man, and unless that Reality is known the 
deepest aspirations of H unram ty cannot bo fulfilled. 
From the earliest beginnings all earnest minds have 
sought the solution of the riddle of the universe. All 
types of thinkers whether materialists, idealists, or spiri- 
tualists, have supposed that there is some Reality, call 
it Matter, Mind, Spirit, Brahman, God, Allah, what 
they will, which, whilst eluding their mental grasp, is 
all the same there, though it cannot be comprehended 
by the mind in Us tullness. it cannot only be there, 
but it must be h ere within the inmost nature of all, as 
one with the deepest inmost self. II so, man must not 
only study the objective universe, which lie should do to 
gain knowledge df the external Shakti-asjicct of this 
reality, but he must plunge deep into his own nature, 
for he can only realise It within and not without the self. 
Man’s present existence is a mode of consciousness, 
ordinarily in the spiritual Bhuk Consciousness, or in the 
forms of a Tala Consciousness. The search is to find 
out the universal principle. Beings in the lower order 
of evolution have not the "l’' principle evolved to the 
level of Vijndna or Buddhi, and therefore the reason and 
understanding must be developed. The greater portion 
of the work of evolution must be done by the individual 
himself, under the guidance of the divine principle of 
Reason, and if we do not wish to be left behind in the 
general progressive movement, we must give up all 
lethargy and the contentment which the animal (whether 
as beast or man) has with his present powers and capacities 
and their external environment. Man must seek to 

2S6 




gAyatr? mantra 



understand the meaning of life and its end, and looking 
beyond by the Eye of Divine Wisdom J nuna-chakshu) 
endeavour to first intellectually grasp, and then to 
realise, that wliich is the Beginning, the Maintainor and 
the End of all- the V Acbya-shakli of the Gayatii Mantra. 



287 




CHAPTER XXXI 



Atma-sAdhanA 

(Yoga by Reasoning) 

I have in the previous article shortly indicated a 
form of Gayatri-SadhanA given to me some years ago. 
Ifere follows the Atma-SAdhana which is taken up at the 
point at which the Gayatri-Sadhana ends. 

Duality is inherent in the constitution of all mani- 
fested being. Therefore until man realises the whole 
(PAma-brahman), that is, the Universe as one with its 
both immanent and transcending Root, there is an object, 
whether the same is apparently wholly outside, and 
different from, and independent of the Self, or whether 
it is experienced internally as a mode oi the latter’s 
subjective existence. But the ex]>erience is of varying 
grades. For jusr as matter, objectively considered, 
becomes more and more gross from its first ethereal 
(AkSsha) form to scientific, that is, ponderable matter, 
so when in the upward ascent of consciousness Matter 
has been withdrawn into itself and exists there as a inode 
of being, that mode becomes a more and more suhtlc 
expression of the principle whence all objectivity, 
whether externally sensed or internally experienced, 
is derived. At the stage of complete manifestation, 
that is, ordinary Bh&h experience, the object or "This" 
(Idara) is wholly outside, and independent of, the Self, 
the two being mutually exclusive the one of the other. 
Matter is then in the form in which we ordinarily sense it. 
We may remain at this stage which is that of objective 
science or go within and to the Root of all experience. 
If that Root is within, then introspection can alone dis- 
cover it. How ? That which carries us upwards or 

288 




Atma-sAdhanA 



inwards is the will-to-know of a nature ever more and 
more purifying itself and thus gaining strength by its 
approach to the Almighty SavitA of all. This is Prayer 
in its highest form. At each moment of attainment 
and advance we naturally render homage to the glory 
of the AU-pervading Being, who gradually reveals His 
infinite Self, just as Linnaeus the great botanist fell on 
his knees when he first saw Its objective expression in 
the form of the golden beauty of the flower of the wild 
Gorse. But the object, though it persists in experience 
until the attainment of the perfect Consciousness (Brahma- 
Svarupa), is yet diversely realised as wc proceed inner- 
wards. In the first place it is brought from without 
to within the Self, and there experienced not as something 
different from the Self but as a mode of its own existence. 
Next as such it becomes less and less pointed and more 
diffused and is brought into closer and closer touch with 
the subjective being. This is effected by an intense 
and penetrating meditation at each stage of advance 
with a view to realise the subjective root of that stage. 
When the objective tendencies of thought are held in 
check, Consciousness of Itself more and more purely 
manifests. 

In the Parthiva consciousness, matter is in a fully 
pointed condition outside the Self until the Satya stage 
is reached. Even the Self appeared as a concentrated 
objective point in space. At the Satya stage the notion 
is gained through reasoning that the entire universe 
must lie within the Self as its cause. Acting on this sug- 
gestion ot the Reason, the PArthiva consciousness turns 
back into itself, and for the first time as Antarmukhi is 
conscious of something within itself lying there in a 
pointed form. The pointedness remains, but the world 
is carried witliin the Self, where it is grasped as a mode 
of its own existence. This peculiar consciousness is 

289 




TIH- GARLAND OF LETTERS 



Rasa, which is the subjective root of what objectively 
appears to the Parthiva consciousness as Ap. The 
externa! particularised location disappears. If the point 
is located outside, there is Gandha — experience of matter 
in its Prithivt condition. Gandha, Rasa, RGpa, Sparsha, 
Sliabda are the various kinds ol consciousness, which 
in the evolutionary process arc the subjective root of 
sensible matter and which on the full externalisation 
of such matter are the five different ways in which it 
affects the senses as smell, taste, sight, touch, and hearing. 

In Rasa experience the object is brought in closer 
relation with the Self, both by reason of its being placed 
therein, and of a lessened intensity ol its pointedness to 
the Self as compared with Gandha or Bhuh experience. 
With a lessening intensity of the Rasa cxpeiience, the 
latter is shifted from the inner to the outer and seems 
to be coming from outside less in the form of feeling 
than of intellection in the shape of general unqualitativc 
and undifferentiated form. There is then the idea of 
something there all round the Self, affecting the subjective 
being by way of a superficially, instead of interiorly, 
felt experience. This is Riipa experience, the subjective 
root of Agni who is the builder of forms. This is the last 
of the form (Murtta) division of Tattvas. The lessened 
intensity of the pointedness of the Rasa-feeling has 
necessarily the effect of setting consciousness on the 
surface of subjective being, and as the idea of space or 
co-existing externality- points is already there, this 
weakened Rasa experience, being externally localised, 
spreads itself over the space and becomes the subjective 
root of the Rupa consciousness. This Rftpa experience, 
when closely looked into and allowed to come very 
dose to the subjective being, is experienced as Touch 
or Sparsha, the subjective root as Vayu. This is not the 
touch produced by specialised form, for this is a sensation 

290 




ATMA-SADHANA 



had only after the production of Agni. The experience 
may be compared to.the perception in ordinary life of 
the thermal quality of objects. The subjective inten- 
sification of Rupa, with its surface expansion, when 
concentrated into a point of the inner subjective being, 
produced the Rasa feeling, which when located outwards 
was, as Gaudha, the subjective root of the externalised 
objectivity of daily life. Rupa affects the surface 
subjective being, whilst Sparsha again shifts experience 
into the inner, as the whole subjective being then responds 
to Sparsha as a whole. This Sparsha Consciousness, 
which is objectively Vayu, is when closely examined 
found to consist of externality idea-points spread over 
the surface of the subjective being, receding away as 
mere hints of outsideiiess, as compared with lhe some- 
thing which is outside of Rupa experience. This is 
Sliabda experience, the subjective root of Akhsha, the seed 
of all externalised or externally located world-phenomena. 
It persists as the deathless basis (Amrita) of all mani- 
festation downwards or outwards, into \vhich all pheno- 
mena are resolved in their upward or inward course. 
The realisation of this is the Shadba consciousness. 

This root of externality-consciousness refers back 
to its origin the inner mind (which projects the idea of 
mere outerness and which is its counterpart), the root 
from which the notion of externality arises as the tree 
from its seed. This internal-root which grows into 
Akasha is the Brahma-consciousness as the internal 
root-will (corresponding on the Parthiva plane to the 
Manas) which lies at the root of all manifestation. Be- 
hind this is the "I am myself,” which subjectifying itself 
as the "1 am myself I” becomes the Cosmic WilL The 
former is Chit as the objectified self -consciousness. And 
from the fact that it is the starting point and internal 
correspondence of the objective world it may be called 

291 




THE GARLAND OF LETTERS 

the Bhfth Consciousness ol the internal, ideal, the sub- 
jective region as distinguished from the Bliuh conscious- 
ness of the external, actual, objective region, the first 
Vyahriti in the ascending scale. But this Supreme 
Bhuh, being the terminating point of objectivity in the 
form of the Self as Universe cannot stand by itself. It 
must be the result of some assertion of consciousness 
which is not that of any other than Self-Being, as all 
other assertions or Vy&hritis of the external world are 
here transcended. Thus this assertion as "1 am” may 
be called the Bhuvah of the supreme objective region as 
distinguished from the Bhuvah of the objective region 
lower down. And behind this assertion of self-cxistcnce 
as its root is the eternal subjective "I" (Aham) of the 
supreme Svah as distinguished from the external objec- 
tive "I” or individuality in the Svah lower down. This 
completes the field of assertion of self-consciousncss 
behind which lies the entire Consciousness (Chit) Itself, 
that is, Consciousness (Chit) per se, which, whilst itself 
ever unchanged - and unconditioned, is the source of All 
the changing forms of experience mentioned which again 
merge into it, This is Bliss itself (Ananda) or Joy, of 
which the world is an expression in time and space, 
the Joy by which it is maintained and the Joy into which 
the world re-enters, the Universal Mother (like the earthly 
mother) clasping the child which She has produced to Her 
breast. 

The "I" or Aham here spoken of is not the limited 
"1” of Ahangkara which is only a gross and particularised 
reflection of the former. In the Kanukalavilasa the 
Supreme 1 (Aham) is very beautifully explained as the 
union (Samarasya) of its own infinite Self as l’rakisha 
with itself as Vimarsha Shakti, which is a pure mirror 
(Darpana) made of a mass of the PrakSsha Shiva’s own 
rays. These are reflected back and the Pflrnahambhava 

292 




Atma-sadhanA 



or the experience of the “I” as being all arises. Thatisthe 
notion of Self had by reference to the Sell which is then 
the Enjoyer of Bliss. There is no other but the Self 
in the fullest purity and unlimitedness of both and is 
thus the supreme Aham. From this root “I", wliich is 
Kama, the will to create and the collectivity (Samashti) 
of all the powers which constitute all manifested things, 
there burgeons forth the trunk, the brauches, the leaves, 
and fruit of the great Ashvattha tree which is the uni- 
verse. 

It is only when this Supreme Universal "I" is reached 
that it is possible to realise its eternaJ inwardness as t.ie 
Mahashunya, which is the Great Void in the sense that 
it is nothing which thought can conceive or words utter. 
None of the higher stages can be realised until the next 
lower one is grasped. Before the universal' 1 1" isreached, 
it is not possible to realise the “I-less” Chit or conscious- 
ness, as the veil of matter covers (though with decreasing 
thickness as we ascend) us Glorious Face. It requires 
a strong effort of subjective penetration to pass through 
this covering, dense as ponderable matter at its lowest 
end, and to reach the Consciousness which lies beliind, 
ol which all forms are Its assertions. At the tune of 
meditation, the entire thick veil of material (Parthiva) 
existence must be gradually thinned by moving inwards 
according to the stages described ; by reducing the 
crude and thicker form of consciousness into the subtle 
and more refined, till by gradual inner progress the 
subtlest point of the universal "I" which is the Lord 
(Ishvara) of Vedanta is reached. Alter this That which 
is the eternal and changeless ground of even this is realised 
and then there is Kaivalya Moksha, the ultimate Basis 
of all the Forms which have arisen out of Its self-asser- 
tion,— the Will to be many of which the Veda speaks. 
This is the great Self of the Vedanta. This is the Perfect 

293 




1HE OAKLAND OF LETTERS 



Experience which is called the Supreme Love 
( Niralishaya-frenuispadtUvam unandalvam). 

These forms of the Self can be broadly classified 
into the actual, objective or external which is the waking 
slate (Jagrat avasthi) ; the ideal, the subjective or in- 
ternal, the asscrtional or the state of dream (Svapna) ; 
and the third the stale of dreamless slumber (Sushupti) 
which is the bare subjective standing by, itself not 
yet in active assertion, but having passed the equilibrium 
]>oint about to assert itself, but for the time being having 
the assertions latent in it, lying there unperccivcd. but 
ready to shoot forth into assertion, at first qualitative, 
and then into perception, by reason of both qualitative 
and external manifestation. Herein all ideas become 
merged and latent and thence project themselves into 
the Ideal and thence again into the Actual in the course 
of the involution of the Self into the Mayik covering 
which is the universe. The Perfect Consciousness, as 
realising all these three stages with all their differences 
and similarities, lies beyond them all, though it is one 
with all, supporting them by Its own essential Being 
and Power (Shakti). They are Its forms— tire forms 
of that Consciousness which It is. It runs through all 
(Sutratma) and unifies them all, but remains in Itself 
unlimited and unconditioned, giving them both their 
separate existence, yet summing them up into Its own 
Life and Being, which comprehending all yet transcends 
them from the standpoint of its own Being in itself or 
Svarupa. It is beyond all because it is infinite. It 
comprehends all in its supremely rich experience because 
It is tire whole (Puma). It is Love because It is the Love 
of the Self for the Self. It is Joy because all Love is 
that ; but it is perfect also. It is the Perfect Experience 
(Jnanasvarupa) which thought achieves by a pure mind 
in a pure body. It is thus the Supreme Siddiii of all 
Sidhani and Yoga. 

Om Tat Sal 



294 




TANTRIK texts 

UNDER THE GENERAL EDITORSHIP OF 
ARTHUR AVALON 

Vol. I. Tantrabhidhana with Bija-Nighantu and 
Mudra-Nighantu. — A Tdntrik Dictionary. Edited by 
Taranatha Vidvaratna, with an Introduction in English 
by Arthur Avalon Rs. 2. Out of print. 

Vol. II. Shatchakra Niriipana. — A work on the six 
centres of the body by PurnSnanda Sw5mi, with 
Commentary of Shangkara. Padukiipanchaka ("Five- 
fold footstool of the Guru"), with Commentary of 
Kalicharana and Notes from the TTk3 of Vishvanatha 
on the Second Patala of Kaivalva Kalika Tantra, with 
an Introduction in English by Arthur Avalon. Rs. 2. 
Out o f print. 

Vol. III. Prapanchasara Tantra. — Edited by Tara- 
natha Vidyaratna, with an Introduction in English by 
Arthur Avalon. Rs. 3. Out of print. 

Vol. IV. Kulachudimani Nigama. — Edited by Girish 
Chandra Vcd&ntatirtha. With an Introduction by 
Aksliaya Kumara Maitia. Rs. 2. 

Vol. V. Kularnava Tantra. — Edited by Taranatha 
Vidyaratna, with an Introduction in English by Arthur 
Avalon. Rs. 3. 

Vol. VI. Kalivilasa Tantra. — Edited by Parvati 
Charana Tarkatirtha, with an English Introduction by 
Arthur Avalon. Rs. 2. 

Vol. VII. Shrichakra Sambhara (a Buddhist Tantra). 
Edited by K. Dausamdup. Rs. 5. 

Vol. VIII Tantraraja (Kfidimata). Edited by 
MahSinahopadhyaya Lakshmana Shastri Drlvida. Part I, 
Rs. 3. With summary in English by Arthur Avalon. 

Vol. IX. Karpuradi Stotra with Svarupa VySkhya 
by Vimalunanda Svaini, fully translated by Arthur 
Avalon. Rs. 5. 

Vol. X. Kamakalavilasa By Punyinanda with 
Commentary by Natanfinandanatiia. Edited by Mahii- 
mahopadhyAya Sad3shiva Misra. with a full translation 
in English by A. Avalon Coloured plate and explanation 
of the Shri Yantra. 

Vo!. XI. Advaita Bhavopanishad, Kalyupanishad, 
Taropanishad, Kaulopanishad, Bhavanopanishad. Edited 
by Si tar fun a Sliiistri, with Introduction by Arthur Avalon. 

Vol. XII. Tantraraja. Part II. (In preparation.) 




OTHER WORKS BY ARTHUR AVALON 



Tantra of the Great Liberation (Mahanirvjna Tantra). 
A Translation from the Sanskrit, with an Introduction 
and Commentary by Arthur Avalon. Rs. 10. ( Out of 
print. Second Edition in preparation). 

Hymns to the Goddess. From the Tantra and other 
ShSstras and the Stotra of Shangkarftch 5 ryya. With 
Introduction and Commentary. Translated from the 
Sanskrit, by Arthur & Ellen Avalon. Rs. 3 {Out of 
Print). 

Principles of Tantra. Part I. The Tantratattva of 
Shriynkta Shiva .Chandra VidySrnava Bhattacharyya 
Mahodava. Edited with an Introduction and Commen- 
tary by Arthur Avalon. Rs. 8. 

Principles of Tantra. Part II. With an Introduction 
by Shrlyukta Barada Kanta Majumdar. Edited by 
Arthur Avalon. Rs. 12. 

Wave of Bliss (Anandalahari). A Translation and 
Commentary by Arthur Avalon. As. 2. {Out of Print). 

Greatness of Shiva (Mahimnastava of Pushpadanta). 
A Translation and Commentary by Arthur Avalon, 
together with Sanskrit Commentary of Jagannatha 
Chakravarti. Rs. 2. (Out of Print). 

The Serpent Power (Kundalini Yoga). By Arthur 
Avalon. Rs. i5-r2-o. 

Shakti and Shikta (Studies in the Shakta Shastra). 
Second Edition Rs. 7-8-0. 

Isha Upanishad, with a new Commentary by Kaula- 
chSryya Sadaiunda. Translation and Introduction by 
J. Majumdar. Foreword by A. Avalon. Out of print. 



TO BE HAD OF 

KAR. MAJOMDER & CO., Calcutta OANESH & CO„ Madras. 
THACKER SPINK & CO. Calcutta. LUZAC & CO., London. 
TARAPOBEWALA & CO.. Bombay. 




SOME PRESS NOTICES 

" These Books dealing with the secret Mysticism and Magic 
nl India are the mosl interesting which have been published in 
recent years.”— Netu Mi/apkysiseke Rundschau. 

"Ifis book (Mahdmrvina) brilliantly inaugurates thestudyof 
the Tantras. the literature of which occupies a froul rank in the 
religious life of Modem India. The introduction to it is the most 
solid and exact account that has yet been written on the doctrines 
of the Tantras, thoir ontology, mystical phraseology, worship, yoga 
and ethic*.”— -Revue Critique (Dr. Professor Syivuin Levi). 

" The translation (Makar, indna) is distinguished by its elegance 
and by the profound and comprehensive knowledge by which it 
is backed " ; (and by another critic ill the same journal) " Skahli 
and Skdhla n< visits a woiidcrlul grasp of the fundamentals of 
consciousness." — The Theosojrhist (Dr. Professor Schrader). 

" He commenced his work with a Hindu's heart, with a Hindu's 
regard and a Hindu's taitli, and so his translation is what it ought 
to be. The Introduction not only re vials the learning of its author, 
but is a l-o proof that lie has understood in what light Hindus 
regard the T antra SkJstia. 1 '— Hitabddi. 

"In perusing the author's Introduction to the Makanindna 
Tanlra we have been bewildered with astonishment. Wo could 
never have dreamt that it was possible lor a Modem Christian 
Englishman tu -o fully understand such matters as the Mode of 
T&nt(ik t>4dhanL The author has certainly leamt a great deal 
of the inner and secret doctrine of the Tan era. We have never 
heard even front any Bengali Pandit such a clear exposition of 
Mantra Shakti as the author has given. It seems as if the World- 
Mother has again willed it and has again desired to manifest Her 
power." — Sdhitya. 

"The first really important work that I know of on die S|iiril 
ol any Ritual- philosophy.''— Dai Reise Tagebuck Eintr Philosophers 
(Hermann Keyserling) . 

"A magnificent historical and philological record due to the 
author who has taken upon himself with complete success a task 
which might seem to be thankless, but which is in reality fecund. 

38 




ii 



SOME PRESS NOTICES 



opening foi die first tjme an enormous and almost unknown branch 
of Indian literature ."— Isis (M. Masse* D'Oursd). 

"Mr. Avalon is doing a very great service fui students ol 
religion* by making a small part ol it (Tantru-Fhistra) accessible. 
The Treatise (Principles of T antra) is the most remarkable present- 
ment on the subject which has yet appeared. It is full of points 
of very great interest ."— The Quest (If. Mead). 

“Is clearly a European disciple of some Pandit belonging to 
the left-hand Shaktas and he shows great sympathy for the sect. 
He is always ready to defend any of its doctrines and practices, 
even the most shameful. On the other hand his faithful diseipleship 
has brought him a wonderful understanding ol the teaching and 
cult of the sect .... of great uxcgeticnl value . International 
Review of Missions (Dr. J. N. Farqimhar). 

"For the student of religious there is then a mine opened for 
his enquiries. The whole work bears the stamp ol conscientiousness 
and accuracy ”. — LUetarishehts ZentraUdail fucr Deutschland. 

"The liist impression was of amazement and delight. The 
Mahdninxhta is one of the most important ol Hindu philosophical 
works combined with elaborate ritualism, and its translation there- 
fore by a European involved certainly a prodigious amount of 
study, sympathy and real understanding. Of the 'Introduction' 
alone it may be said that for its lucidity, conciseness, directness 
and for its depth of penetration and insight it may itself claim to 
be a standard work on the much abused Trunins. We have rarely 
oame across such an illuminating exposition of the Principles of 
Devi Worship."— Prabuidha Dhdrata. 

"Most meritorious productions. From what has been said it is 
clear that Avalon is right when he declares that up to now this 
literature has been too often judged aud more often condemned 
without knowing it and that ths Tantras deserve to become belter 
known than has been the case hitherto ." — Ostasialische Zeitschrijt 
(Dr. Professor .If. Wintemilz). 

"Arthur Avalon has rendered an eminent service to the Cause 
of Sanskrit Lite raiure."— Calcutta Review (M ahdmahopddkydya 
Satish Chandra VidyMkushtma). 

“We suspect that Arthur Avalon is one of tho learned Pandits of 
Bengal whose native speech has not been without influence upon his 
almost impeccable English. We value highly the woric done, if for 
no other reason than that it gives us a real insight into the jargon of 




SOME PRESS NOTICES 



iii 

the ritual and the worthlessness ol Tflntrik Philosophy ."--: The 
X alien (Nae York). 

''Illuminating discussion (“Serpent Power"). The Author makes 
sonic rarely fine brilliant defini tion«... throughout maintains a strictly 
scientific attitude, though he is obviously impressed with the 
extraordinary nature ol the T&ntrik Doctrine."— Britain and India. 

“There is no doubt that he has an extensive and peculiar 
knowledge ol the subject ol which he irrats.”— Ltuac's Oriental List 
(Dr. Barnett.] 

"The fust laet which strikes the student ol Eastern Philosophy 
is the Author's extraordinary knowledge and the second is his 
impartiality" (Shakti ani SMkta).—Xe-> India. 




BOOKS BY SIR JOHN WOODROFFE. 

BHARATA SHAKT! (Addresses on Indian 



culture) 



3rd Edition 


Ks. 


I 


8 


0 


IS INDIA CIVILIZED? 


3id Edition 


R*. 


2 


8 


0 


THE SEED OF RACE 2nd Edition 


Re. 


r 


o 


0 


SHAKT I AND SHAKTA (Essay? and Addresses 
in the Tantm Sh^stra) 


2nd Edition 


Rs. 


7 


8 


o 


THE WORLD AS POWER-REALITY 


Rs. 


2 


o 


o 


THE WORLD AS POWER — LITE 


Rs. 


2 


0 


o 


THE WORLD AS POWi-R— MIND 


Rs. 


2 


0 


u 



Other Volumes on aspect* of Sliakti 
(Power) in preparation. 




IS INDIA CIVILIZED ? 

PRESS OPINIONS 

Foreign domination ha* been much more than mainly political. 
It is the cultural and <odal conquest of India which rs the really 
important one, insidious in its cause hut permanent tn its result*. 
Alien culture threatens tn obscure the soul of India, to swamp the 
Indian culture. Therefore Sir John WoodroHe'a latest book is 
most opportune. Hrs style is simple and convincing. Th*r funda- 
mental principle* of Indian cult urc are examined with great power 
of insight. &r John's purpose is to defend the minds of young 
India against defilement— to create a strong working faith in their 
own ideals, and tor this India will be very grateful The Common • 
mdiVJiM.)' 

'Powerful exposition of Indian culture ... .Many wise political, 
social and religions observations abound in its inspiring pages. 
We can commend its perusal to ail who are seekers after the tnith. 
If it serves to induce the Europeans to abate some of their racial 
pride, prejudice and intolerance, and the Indians to have a more 
m rivet appreciation of their culture, then it must be regarded as a 
most opportune publication at the present moment when the great 
♦ it * tn»phc in tire Wr-it ha** shaken Hk* faith in the baric principles 
u! Western culture and has given a powerful stimulus to the spirit 
of introspection and enquiry " — The Leader. 

'•Deep insight into what Is of true value in Indian culture — 
clear with an enthusiasm all the more effective because restrained. 
It is his conception of India that is the great inspiration in the 
book. His conception of life is Indian through and through I 
have read this book all one afternoon, marking page after page its 
trenchant criticisms of our detractors, its pen pictures of Indian 
life and culture, and especially its illuminating description of what 
some of our philosophies really meau. It is as if once again as of 
old, one heard an ancient Gum talking to hh disciples. Il is a 
noble book for every Indian home ."— Nm India (C. Jinarajadasa). 

"Sir John has already earned an abiding place in the affections 
of our countrymen by his intimate and profound studies of 
Hinduism and hits enthusiastic exposition of the basis of Hindu 




vi 



PRESS OPINION’S 



culture. The volume in spite o| tin* cphaBctal nature u( tin* 
incidents of com|KV»itinn h.i' a permanent value ami mu-t find a 
place in the library of every self-respecting Indian." ‘—Central Hindu 
College Magazine. The mmUhly organ of Iicna >< m Hindu University. 

"Thi« matter and much mon an* ixplained with wonderful 
lucidity. Sir John point*, ont that (lie true view o( human evolution 
is the' Eastern one. and supports nnd ilht'trnte* Id' position by 
refennice to and also using the clearrrit and meaningful nomencla- 
ture of that system ol Hindu Philosophy and Religion of which 
he is such a master.” — The Hindu (/)/. Subtamanya Aiyar). 

“So ably indicates the basic principle*, ol Indian civilixation 
and repudiates the baseless charges with such loinuKiidubk 
enthusiasm and righteous indignation as rnuld have belli ted one 
who by birth ha* inherited the culture -deserves study by every* 
sincere believer in Indian thought. An udinirahlr book — crushing 
reply— from slarl to finish shows that ihe author hus a masterly and 
sympathetic grasp of tile whole situation and he why goe* through it 
will find himself in touch with the es-. nliaK of ‘Indian civili/a- 
tion.'’— PrabiutJha Hharata. 

•'Sir John Woodrolfc lia« done well to expose the fallacies 
underlying certain old time attacks recently rciteralul— r> deeply 
imbued with the -pint of Shikta Veilfintism. and it is from this 
paint of view that he defend* Indian civihiation. In a very fine 
chapter Sir John Woodrode exhibits the various opinion' held 
alxint India and her civilization." — Ser.-anf of India (Pnf,\\inr 1C. I) 
R anode). 

“Contains high Intellectual qualities witli fn-doin from prejudice 
or nonsense of any kind— the b.-st informed work on the subject 
written by one not a Hindu.”— I- niW India and Motive Slates. 

"The book demands the close attention of every Indian who 
is interested in the future of Ids country, ft is an urgent invitation 
to us to appreciate better both this sacred trust and the near |H*ril 
which besets it. and to Stand firm and faithful in the hour o! ordeal. 
The author develop* his theory with great skill and much quiet 
depth and the essays are strewn throughout with acute and 
penetrating observations expressed with a lucid solidity which 
tempts one constantly to quotation.” — Arya. 

“Is throughout thought-provoking and replete with interesting 
passages. But those on whom Sir John's eulogisrns will drop like 
manna from Heaven should also ponder on what (else) lie has to 




PRESS OPINIONS 



•Hi 

-.a v. 1 1 woulil bi- well lor India il instead u( cultivating a blind 
racial vanity. for which Sir John's kick will furnish ample material 
tu 'In* unthinking Irigut, we concentrate om attention on those 
other lc— >uus pnsachod by him, for only by so doing we would make 
.1 right Iix* III tin- truths it con tains . "—M Oder* Revie w. 

"Tin* noble work is a trumpet call to the Indians to realise their 
Kir ilin-.* and distinctiveness and to build the great future of India 
— a loving and intimate student ot a great culture ." — Hindu 
Message. 

“India owes a deep debt of gratitude to &r John Woodrofle for 
this timely volume in defence of Indian culture— certain social 
aspect* haw been su satisfactorily discussed and defended by this 
erudite defender of our civilization that if the Indian social reformer 
would can* to read and think over them, much of his rancour 
towards ortltodoxy will prow baseless. India’s giuatcst civilization is 
ini-understood by many intellectual imps botli foreign and in- 
digenous. It i* a consolation to find that great minds, Indian or 
foreign, can realise it so well as in the ease of Sir John's. Know- 
ledge ol the inucr capability of the Ego teaches but one kind ot 
patriotism which is ol course uni versa! and not national. It is as 
silly to hug the degenerates ol our own nationality as to hate the 
great souls of the other continents. But to stand for their rights 
when oppressed is the privilege ol every right thinking man and 
words fail us In thanking Sir John for his humane duty , may they 
be ever more." — MakraUa. 

“Sir John writes profoundly of the Hindu religion am! culture 
ct which lie is an anient admirer and his delence oi Indian civiliza- 
tion is inlormcd with a glowing enthusiasm. He finds it easy to 
coalound the rationalist Mr. Archer. The book will not please every 
Christian that reads it. But no occidental student oi Indian politics 
should miss the reading, loi it explains much in the Hindu character 
and point of view that before was obscure and incomprehensible. 
The Author believes that the ancient Hindu culture which bas 
persisted throughout the ages, is the best (or India and lie is fearful 
lost it bo lost in the political maelstrom which will follow the wav." 
— Capital. 

"Great erudition — sturdy champion of Sanitaria Dhattna 
Indian Duly Next. 

' Most effective and crashing rejoinder— the work ol a distinguish- 
ed scholar and deep thinker— truly merits a very wide circulation 




PRESS OPINIONS 



'nil 

in this couiiiry. li i' u profoundly plulosojiliic study of the subject." 
—Hinduslkan Review. 

"The constitution ol a politically dependent people can never 
appear to advantage, because a is the interest of the politically 
dominant people to discredit everything belonging to the subject 
race a* uitenoi. The Author bas been actuated by a strict regard 
for truth and a desire for the establishment ol true Dhnrnia. He 
has uot spared (rom criticism what is mean, calculating, vulgar, in- 
human in his own countrymen, nor has hi minced words in condemn- 
ing what is low or servile or selfish ur imitative in Indians of tn-day. 
Actuated by tin; I ugliest aims, he has really given a most remark- 
able and convincing book on a difhcult and much -abused theme. " 

II entity Chronicle. 

"Ably written defence of Hindu civilization by a prolinmd 

scbolat It would have been better if he had cut end as much tin 

emphatic protest against the prevailing abuses of Hindu society 
.is lie has taken care to deline its virtues and ideals ' '—liveryman's 
Review. 

"It U rather unusual to find among the British members of the 
Indian Judiciary an apologist for the claims of the Neo-Hindu 
revivalists and their allies, the Extreme Nationalists. It is in this 
role that we find Sir John Woodrolle figuring as a sort of modem 
Soul among the prophets — much of tho book is occupied with an 
unworthy attack on Western ;uid particularly Christian civilization.'' 
— Madrai Mail. 

"From keen irritation and annoyance. . . .we passed to a feeling 
of contempt touched by a sorry scum- of amusement that the 
Absolute (or the Spint or whatever else Uie Author wishes to cull 
it) should indulge in the bad join of this conflict ..Wo consider botl^ 
Mr. Archer and Sir John Woodrolle in this episode a nuisance... 
There is an absence of clearness own of logic... A person who presents 
such a petition as this is not really aud truly the friend ol India.''— 
The Indian Philosophical Review {Professor A. Widgary). 

"Rcchaufitf of more or less familiar arguments— without tho 
illumination ol any new thought— vague, obscure— illogical antithesis 
ami loose and disingenuous asertions— extravagant abstraction 
— cannot be exempted fn.ni the charge of bias. His interpretation 
of the West suggests that with all his metaphydeui abstractions 
he is unable to distinguish form from reality— vapourising, nebulous. 
Tlie aspect of these essays is when not obscure, familiar ; their 




PRESS OPINIONS 



IX 



style is provocative without being very stimulating. The confusion 
of issues, tin- multiplication cf sketchy extracts without context, 
the breach of simple rules of logic and a running speech that gives 
no reason for the division into Chapters, make altogether a look 
which Is very hard to read and still harder to remember when 
rend." — linglMman.. 

"Sir John Woodroffc is a guide whom the reader may follow 
with confidence He has lived many years in India and has shown 
himself to he in real sympathy with the spirit of the East ; on the 
other hand ho had not lost touch with the ideals of his own people 
nor been blinded by the essential beauty of Indian tradition so as 
to be unaware of actual present defects; nor does he forget that 
those who write against or in praise of India must do so with 
exactness, discrimination, and the latter with the avcidanccof mere 
puffing general statements. He is definite and balanced and gives 
one thi. impression of being thoroughly reliable ."—Theosophist 
(.1 iic /..) 

"I admire the spirit of ubsolutc fairness with which Sir John 
WoodroHe has approached the task— should be studied carefully 
by every Indian who aspire* lo lead the people and to mould the 
aspiration* of his countrymen . ' '—Indian Retriev {Hon. Mr. Justin 
Seshagiri Aiyar). 

"The whole book is replete with useful suggestions to every one 
who is interested in a proper understanding of Indian culture— Sir 
John who has devond many years to the study of Indian religion 
and who brings to his task a judicial frame of mind and abundant 
-.ympathy lus no difficulty in proving the utter bollcwnws of Mr. 
Archer's conclusions ."— VedinU Kesari. 

"Sir John Woodroffc rightly earned the gratitude of the people 
by hi* recent vigorous repudiation of the many unjust aspersions 
nude on India and the Indians by a foreign critic." (Hon. Justice 
Sir ALdur Kaium in his Convocation Address of 1919 to the Mysore 
University.) 

"We have not seen any one who loves Bbirata as Sir John 
Woodrolli docs. His pre-eminence consists in this that he has 
said that Hu- service |Seva) ol Bharata is the service of God 
(Shri Bliagaviu) .“—Uliava 




X 



PRESS OPINIONS 



By the iame /I u!ho> 

BHARATA SHAKTI 

COLLDCnON OP ADOHESslii Oh' INDIAN CULTURE 

“The thoughtful saying* of an honest foreigner, a true Ilf uni or 

"Freethinker” as he himself interpret* iliu Hindu terms ought 

to be in the hands of every Indian. It would give him thought and 
self-respect. The Christian Missionary and the Christian Orientalist 
are the two great factor of Indian denationalisation. Wo fight 
the thud factor the politician more or less successfully. We have 
fought the Missionary and defeated him generally, but the scars of 
his early attacks we an- unconsciously fearing a> acceptable 

badges Thus when we run down — in are unwittingly shewing 

ourselves as Chelas of the mediocrity of Europe. Like a living 
organism we must cast ot( the foreign matter trying to bore a 
home into our intellectual system. Sir John does not spare the 
Indian mind in its analysis. He lias very ably shown that our so 
often professed Vairogya is more often our incapacity and some- 
times philosophic confusion. Tin- little hook is one of those 
productions which would go to make a new ago in this country. 
It is a protest against cultural suicide ol a civilization designed 
by its past to live for ever .”— Modem Htsiew. 

“Sir John Woodrofle rarely say* anything which has not an 
element of originality in it. He makes a powerful plea against the 
cultural conquest of this country by the nations of the West_..a 
vigorous plea which we commend to the notice of every true bom 
Indian. Sir John's sympathy is bold and fearless as his scholarship 
is deep and erudite — be bas a clear and perspective view of our 
culture." — .4 mute BAxir PairikA. 

“The whole oi the booklet U studded with shining gems of 
thought and thrilling insight into truth ..this sterling faith in the 
profound individuality oi India, in die glorious future which She 
is bound to work out for Herself, in the great mission She is to 
fulfil in the world, animates every word spoken in the addresses 
compiled in this book. We cannot, in fact overestimate the 
necessity of every student ol India, of every worker in Her cause, 
furnishing himself with a copy of this compilation and it is our 
ardent wish that the great exponent of the wonderful T&ntrik lore 
ol India would more often make time to come forward, as in dic.se 





PRESS OPINIONS 



xi 

addresses (o contribute his weighty ideas to the keen intellectual 
struggle going on in out country round practical problems ol re- 
organising our life arid thought .”— Prabuddha Bhdrala. 

"Each o( these papers is overflowing with thoughtfulness and 
desire to do good to Bhlrata. We a>k ever}- English educated man 
to read it. It will give us reverence for our natural culture and 
will save us from the thoughtless spirit ci imitation." 

"Politically India is dead ; this is bad enough, but if cultural 
conquest follows the political, then She will be truly dead. Is India 
to b-' a mere name and Her culture assigned to the cold room of 
the Oriental scholar, or is She to be a living form? Sir John 
Woodroiic takes up the question with as much enthusiasm as the 
youngest Nationalist amongst us, HU answer is one of courage 
and Uupe -but Sir John is not blind to the difficulties.” — Search- 
fig*. 

"Inspiring title— ho has, what is not given to many, understood 
the soul of [ndia. He is a thorough sympathiser with Indian 
aspirations and has dwelt upon the real aim and purpose of our 
efforts. Ought to be read by every patriotic Indian. He will 
then have a clear vision and feel a new strength in his onward 
struggle- New India. 




THE SEED OF RACE 

Au Essay on Indian Education. Price Re. i. 

“There is much in this little essay with whirh the s.udn'J: of 
India cannot hut heartily agree ." — Asiatic Rctia 

"Of immense value.... what U Sangskara, the Racial soul, the 
author as one who haa dived deep into Indian Philo-ophy, fully 
discusses in detail... .this is the right view of Indian Education."- — 
Searchlight, Patna. 

"All who seek knowledge as to the essentials ot Indian - diicatiou 
should possess and study carefully a copy of this book' . — New India. 

"Readers oi -Is Iivdia Civilized ?‘ will realise how well qualified 
the author is to offer an opinion on the maintenance ol racial 
culture. His answer is sufficient to refute the contention of his 
critics that his love for the old and beautiful in Indian Culture has 
made his outlook macliona iy. -T Acosofih isl (.1 it 



PcBUSliEi- DY GANE5H & Co., MADRAS. 





I 02-2 

MADIIAS : (JANKSII & CO. 

I-OMinX : LL ZAl & CO. 




