# SOURCE TEXT EXTRACTION: 1928-vasu-gheranda-samhita-sanskrit-english.pdf
# Extraction Date: 2026-09-17 06:27:25
# Total Pages: 326
# File Size: 12.2 MB
# Text Layer Status: SCANNED_IMAGE (avg 130.9 chars/page in sample)
# NOTE (Rule 10): Likely scanned facsimile/manuscript. Pages contain image plates or low-quality OCR.
# Use Vision/Image models on specific pages when detailed textual analysis is needed.
================================================================================

--- PAGE 1 ---
00044186
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 2 ---
tH E 
I
ASIATIC SOCIETY OF BOMBAY $ 
TOWN HALL, BOMBAY-400 023. I
on 16 November, 2018
Digitized with financial assistance from
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 3 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 4 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 5 ---
THE.
SACRED BOOKS OF THE HINDUS
Translated 1by various Sanskrit Scholars.
44186
bdheo b y
Major B. I>4 BASU, 
{Retired.)^
yoL. xy.
THE YOGA SASTRA
PCBUSHB0 BY
s u d h i n d r a n A t h a v a s u
THE! PAl^INI OFFICE, BHtTVANES'WARI As'RAMA, BAHADUROANJ,
BUababaO
Printed by A purva K rishna Bose, at the Indian Press
1914
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 6 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 7 ---
THE TOGA SASTRA
OON^TINO OF
AN INTRODUCrriON TO YOGA PHILOSOPHY;
SANSKRIT TEXT WITH ENGLISH TRANSLATION OF
1. THE SIVA SAMHITA
AND OF
2. THE GHEBANPA SAMHITA
BY
E A I BAH ADUB SRIS CHANDRA VASD
2
1
I 10
PUBLISHEfi BY
SUDHINDBA NATH VASV,
THE pAnivi office, bhuvanEs'wari Asrama, BAHADURGANJ)
HKababad
P rinted by A pbrya K rishna Bose, at the I ndian P ress
1915
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 8 ---
00044186
00044186
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 9 ---
AN INTRODUCTION
TO THE
YOQ-A PHILOSOPHY
BV
RAI BAH ADUR ^RISA CHANDRA VASU
PDBUSBBD BY
THE P ip N I OFBlCIi BHUVANBSWARI iSBAMA, BAHADtRGANJ*
HlIababa^
P rintbo by Apurva Krishna Bosb, at tmb Indian Press
1915
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 10 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 11 ---
TRBLE OF CONTENTS
fAGE.
Chapter 
I
...
...
...
•. 1
„ 
n
• • •
...
...
...
7
III
t« «
...
* *>
10
„ 
vr
• «*
...
16
...
•
20
„ 
ViJ
• « «
...
...
23
» 
v n
• • •
...
29
» 
VIII
• • •
...
34
„ 
IX
• • •
37
X
• • •
...
49
„ 
X I
• • •
•
...
• • •
51
» 
X II
• • •
...
...
• • •
54
A ppekdix 
I
...
• »«
• *-0
58
„ 
II
• • •
0 
0 
0
...
64
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 12 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 13 ---
FOREWORD.
Gheranda SanliitS is a TSntrika work, treating of Hatha- 
Yoga. 
It consists of a dialogue between the sage Gheranda and an 
enquirer called Cha:»da Klpfili. 
The book is divided into seven 
Lessons or Chapters and comprises, in all, some three hundred and 
fifty verses. 
It closely follows in the foot-steps of the famous 
treatise on Hatha-Yoga, known as Hatha-Yoga PradipikS. 
In fact, 
a large number of verses of Gheranda Sanhitfi correspond verbatim 
with those of the PradipikS. 
It may, therefore, be presumed that 
one has borrowed from the other, or both have drawn from a 
common source.
The book teaches Yoga under seven heads or S^dhanas. 
The first gives directions for the purification of the Body (inside 
and out). 
The second relates to Postures, the third to Mudrfisi, the 
fourth to ]|-atyfihSra, the fifth to Pra^&yfima, the sixth to Dhyfina, 
and the "^venth to Samfidhi, 
These are taught successively— 
a chapter being devoted to each (see Ch. I v. 9-10-11),
The theory 
of Hatha-Yoga, 
to put it 
broadly, is that 
concenti’ation or Samadhi can be attained by purification of the 
physical body and certain physical exercises. 
The relation between- 
physical shell (ghata) and mind is so complete and subtle, and 
their inter-action is so curious and so much enveloped in mystery, 
that it is not strange that Hatha-Yogis should have imagined that 
certain physical training will induce certain mental transformations.
; 
Another explanation— and a later one— is that Hatha-Yoga 
means the Yoga or union between ha (5) and tha (z) ; the (5) 
meaning the sun; and (Z) the moon ; or the union of the Prfipa and 
the Apfina Vfiyus. 
This is also a physical process carried to a 
higher plane.
The first question, which an unprejudiced enquirer will 
naturally put, after perusing this'book, wilPbe, are all these things 
possible? and do.these practices produce the result attributed to 
them ?
As to the possibility of these practices, there can be no 
doubt. 
They do not violate any anatomical or physiological facts. 
The practices, some of them trt'l^ st, may appear revolting and
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 14 ---
u
FOBEWOBD.
disgusting, but they are not per se impossible. 
Moreover, many of 
my readers may have come across persons who can practically 
illustrate these. 
Such persons ax-e by no means rare in India. 
Every place of pilgrimage, such as Benares and Allahabad, contains 
several of them, in various stages of pi-^gress. 
My own Guru 
showed me and all his visitors at Allahabad and Meerut several of 
these processes, and taught some people iiow to do them themselves. 
The difficult processes, such as Vfiri-Sara (Ch. I. 17), Agni-Sara 
(I. 20), Danda-Bhauti (I. 37), Vasa-Dhauti (I. 40), &c., were all shown 
by h im ; so also the various Vastis, Neti, .Asanas, <&c. 
Many of 
these may be classified as gymnastic exercises ; their performers need 
not always be holy or saint-like personages. 
Several jugglers have 
been known to perform various Asanas and Mudras, and earn their 
livelihood by showing them to the public. 
For persons whose 
muscles have become stiffened and the bones hardened by age, the 
accjuirement of several of these postures, &c., is next to impos­
sib le; 
and it is better that they should not court fai’ nro or 
disappointment by attempting" these at an advanced age, 
PrSrifiySma 
(regulation of breath), Dhfirana 
-^e
possible for ^11. 
'.-mm"
As to the utility of these processes, 
hmbts suay
be entertained. 
Many of them may appear p«^ 
and, if not 
positively injurious, at least, useless. 
Although it is not possible 
within the short space at my command, to give the rationale of all 
these practices, and to justify them to a doubting public, 1 shall 
briefly illustrate the advantages of some of them. 
Thus, to begin 
with VMa-sdra (I. 15). 
It is the process of filling the stomach with 
air, and expelling the wind through the posterior passage. 
The 
fgreatest duct or canal in the human body is the alimentary canal, 
beginning with the oesophagus (throat) and ending with the rectum. 
It is some twenty-six feet in length. 
This great di-ain contains 
all the rubbish of the body. 
Nature periodically cleanses it. 
yoga 
practice m ^ e s that cleansing thoi’ough and voluntary. 
If the 
cleansing is incomplete, then the foetid matters putrify in the 
stomach and intestines, and generate noxious and deleterious gases 
which cause diseases. 
Now Vdta-sdra by passing a current of air 
through the canal, causes the oxidation of the foetid products of 
the body ; and thus conduces to health, and increases digestion. 
In fact, it gives a tone to the whole system. 
Similaidy, Vdt'i-edraiB 
flushing the canal with water, instead of air. 
It thoroughly purges
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 15 ---
FORmonD.
m
the whole canal; and does the same work as an aperient or a 
purgative, but with ten times more e^&cacy and without 
the 
injurious effects of these drugs. 
A person, knowing Vltas&ra and 
VSrisSra, stands in no need of purgatives: the same may be said 
of Bahiskrita Dhauti (I. 22). 
ByAgnisSra (I. 20), the nerves and 
muscles of the stomach are brought under the control of volition ; 
and by the gentle shaking of the stomach and tire intestines, 
these organs lose their lethargy, 
and act with greater vigour. 
The washing taught in I. 23, 24, is a little dangerouSj and may 
lead to prolapsus, and, a person who can do Vfiri SSra need not do this. 
The advantages of cleaning the teeth and the tongue are obvious, 
and, need not be dilated upon. 
The lengthening of the tongue 
(I. 32) is necessary for performing hybernation. 
In doing this,^ 
man but imitates the lower 
creation, like 
frogs, &c., who in 
hybernating turn their tongues upward, closing the respiratory 
passage. 
Perhaps, the most interesting of all Dhautis is the Vgsa- 
Dhauti (I. 41), which has led unobservant persons to the belief 
that the Yogis can bring out the intestines by the mouth, wash 
them, and|then swallowing them again place them in their proper 
po'-tioc 
= nis Ohanti is, however, a very simple process, and by 
so doing t 
6, phlegm, &c., adhering to the sides of the
alimentary 
. 
are removed. 
Water and air could not remove
these viscid substances that stick to the sides of the canal.
The Neti, an easy process, clears the nostrils; and cures the 
tendency or predisposition to cold and catarrh. 
The KapSlabhSti 
(I. 55) is a means of cleansing the frontal sinus, said to be the seat 
of Intelligence. 
This hollow cannot be directly reached from the 
outside, but by this process of Kapalbhati, the nerves surroimding 
it and spreading over the fore*head are brought into play and 
invigorated.
The various Asanas taught in Chapter II are gymnastic 
exercises, good for general health and peace of mind, and calming 
of passions. 
The thirty-two Asanas taught in this book are not all 
of equal efficacy or importance. 
PadmSsana is generally approved 
by aU. 
The others may be practised occasionally for variation 
and recreation. 
Some of these postures help in checking animal 
passions by causing atrophy of the nerves of particular places. 
Others by straining and 
stretching of certain muscles create 
a pleasant sensation of strength and refrediment. 
The Asanas 
are antidotes to the sedentary contemplation of Yoga— a habit
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 16 ---
IV
POEEWOnt).
which may otherwise lead do mental .hallucinations and nervous 
disorders.
The Mudras aie similar to 
Asanas in their action and 
efficacy. 
The gazing taught in some of these induces hypnotic 
sleep; and the Bandhas, by closing all thp exits for air, produce 
a tension within the system, generating thereby a sort of electric 
current or force, called Kundalini Sakti. 
It is this ^akti which 
is the help-mate of the Yogis in performing their wonders. 
The 
Khechari Mudra CHI. 25-27) causes levitation of the body.^ That 
levitation is possible has now been established 
beyond doubt. 
What t^e particular conditions are, under which this takes place, 
has not yet been fully investigated by Western Science; but that 
the restraining of breath is one of these conditions may be said to 
be an undoubted truth. 
(The Saktichalana is a mysterious process, 
and until a person practically realises it, he can hardly believe it. 
The Mudras are mixed physical and mental processes, a bridge 
between Asanas and Pratyahara.f
The subject of Pratyfihara is treated in Chapter TV in five 
rflokas. 
It is the process of restraining the mind from vandering, 
and restricting it to a fixed idea. 
All the five senses mus.r be 
controlled, and they should not be allowed to divert the .ittention.
PranifiySma is the Hatha-Yoga par exaelltu.ee. 
It is as 
dangerous when practised without the supervision of a competent 
'teacher, as it is useful when practised under his supervision. 
To 
quote the words of a great authority on this subject: 
By practis­
ing it according to rule, all diseases are destroyed ; but by doing 
so in-egularly, all diseases are genei’ated, such as hiccough, asthma, 
cough, head-ache, ear-ache, diseases of the eye, &c.” 
A practical 
Guru is absolutely necessary to teach Pranayama :|[ the directions 
given in this book are useful as subsidiary rules. 
Many mistakes 
and dangers will, however, be warded off by a strict adherence 
to these rules. 
The place— a small and solitary c e ll; the t im e - 
spring and autumn; the food— light and sfitwika; these are some 
of the important preliminaries. 
Over-exertion, fasting, &c., should 
be avoided (V. 30.) 
This shows clearly that Hatha-Yoga is not to 
be confounded with asceticism. 
It is far from that. 
As the training 
of an athlete is not asceticism; so that of a Hatha-Yogi is far 
from being so. 
True, 
celibacy is a necessary condition for both, 
but then that alone does not constitute asceticism. 
The directions 
regarding foOd are peculiar for the people of Bengal, the author
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 17 ---
POEBWOBV.
of this treatise being apparently a Vaisbnava of Bengal. 
For 
other countries and persons, 
these 
directions 
may 
not 
be 
applicable in their entirety. 
But animal food, intoxicating liquors, 
tobacco, and drugs are strictly prohibited for all climes.
(There are thrq,e parts of PranaySma:— Phraka or drawing 
in of the 
breath; 
Kumbhaka or 
retaining 
the breath; and 
Rechaka or expelling th® breath. 
The proportion of these should 
be 1 : 4 : 2, i.e., if Ptlraka takes 12 seconds, Kumbhaka should be 
48 seconds, and Rechaka 24 seconds. 
The ratio being kept the 
same, the period of retention, &c., may be increased ad irifinitum. 
The beginner should proceed cautiously, and should not Jncrease 
the periods of 16 : 64 : 32 seconds. 
He should carefully note the 
various mental and physical changes going on in his system while 
practising it. 
Perspiration should be wiped off with a dry towel: 
uor should he be afraid when he begins to feel a sort of quiver all 
over the body. Sometimes he may be jerked off his seat, sometimes 
he may involuntarily jump about the room like a frog. 
These 
should not frighten him. 
Sometimes there may be no physical 
manifestations, but mental reactions. 
He may hear noises, see 
vi' 'ons, smell strange odours, or taste delightful delicacies. 
These 
are for the most p’art hallucinations, indicating an excited state of 
the nervous 
stem. 
These will soon go off of themselves when 
not attended to. 
But flashes of truth will also illumine his heart 
now and then. 
Sometimes in the Chidakarfa, he may see reflected 
distant scenes and events, thoughts of persons will become visible 
to him ; and he himself may leave his body and be carried in space 
with incalculable velocity. 
All these symptoms accompany Prapa* 
yama. The Q-uru must always be near at hand to help and control; 
for otherwise insanity and not clairvoyance may be the outcome of 
all this. 
These are the results of higher stages of Prauayama. 
But every person may practise this for two or three minutes, and 
experience its beneficial results on his own body. 
Petty disorders, 
like head-ache, stomach-ache, chill before fever, weariness of body 
and mind will vanish instantaneously by performing two or three 
Kurabhakas. 
Some persons are born with the faculty of perform­
ing Pranayama— Swedenbourg was a living example of this in the 
West. 
All 
persons, 
unconsciously perform 
PranaySma when 
absorbed in deep thinking.
The ten Vdyus (V. 60) are the various nervous forces or 
currents of the human body.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 18 ---
n
FOBtJWOitb.
The various sorts of Kumbhakas taught in Chapter V do 
not require much elucidation. 
The BhrSmari Kumbhaka (V. 77), 
however, is a little peculiar. 
It leads one to hear the various 
sounds called AnShata. 
These sounds are said to be caused within 
the body by the rushing of the blood through the arteries and 
veins. 
The fixing of mind on these sounds soon produces trance.
Dhyana and SamSdhi are purely mental processes. 
Fixity 
and one-pointedness of attention produce tranceft 
The experiments 
of hypnotism prove this. 
To fix the mind on one idea produces 
exaltation of mental faculties.
S. C. V.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 19 ---
FOREWORD.
Siva SarphitSjis a T&ntrika treatise on Yoga. 
It was trans­
lated by nae as far back §s 1884 and first published in the Arya of 
Lahore— a monthly journal Oonducted by the late Mr. E. C. Bary.
The mystic phraseology of the Tantras is very difficult to 
understand. 
My brother, Major B. D. Basu, I. M. S., the Editor of 
the Series of these Sacred Books of the Hindus, said in his Prize 
Essay on the Hindu System of Medicine published in tfle Ouy^s 
Hospital Gazette of London (1889), regarding the anatomy of the 
Tantras;—
“ When these Tantras will be studied by oriental pcholars, as 
closely as they have explored other branches of Sanskrit learning, 
the anatomical knowledge of the ancient Hindus shall be better 
known to the world ; ” for, according to him, ‘‘ better anatomy is 
given in |he Tantras than in the medical works of the Hindus,”
“From Siva SamhitA we learn that the Hindus were acqu­
ainted with the sginal-cord and the brain. 
They knew that the 
central nervous system is composed of grey and white matters. 
They discovered the central canal of the spinal-cord, and traced its 
connexion, 
through the fourth and third ventricles, 
with the 
lateral ventricles of the brain. 
They call it Brahmarandhra, or the 
dwelling-house of the human soul. 
The same Tantric work gives 
a description of the several ganglia and plexuses of the nervous 
system. 
The brain is said to be composed of Ghandrakald or con­
volutions resembling half-moons ”
In a paper on the Anatomy of the Tantras, originally pub* 
lished in the “ Theosophist” for March 1888, Major Basu has tried 
to unravel the mystery of the Yogis and TSntrists regarding the 
nerves and nerve-centres, and identify the NMis, Chakras, and 
Padmas. 
The following is a reproduction from that paper; —
“The language of the Tantras being too allegorical and too 
mystical to be understood by the uninitiated, it is very difficult to 
identify the NSdls, the Chakras, and the Padmas described in them,
“However, some of the spots are easily identifiable from their 
simple and 
lucid description. 
Thus 
it is 
apparent that the
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 20 ---
u
FOBBWOBD.
I “ nectar-rayed moon ” {vide Shiva Saiphit^, Oh. II, verse (6) is the 
underpart of the brain; that “ Susumni ” is the spinal cord ; “Ida ’’ 
a n d “ PingalS” are the left and right sympathetic cords respec­
tively.”
W e shall try now to identify some of the nervous structures 
described in the Tantras: —
“ Ohitra.”— From the description of this N^di in the Tantras 
(Shiva SatphitS) Gh. II, verses.18-19), it may be«identified with the 
grey matter of the spinal cord. 
For “ in it is the subtlest ” of all 
hollows called ‘ Brahmarandhra,’ which is nothing else save the 
central panal of the spinal cord— a structure whose functions remain 
as yet to be discovered by the physiologists. 
The Tantrists appear 
to have traced its connection with the lateral ventricles of the brain. 
It has been considered by them to be the seat of the human soul. 
Even in these daj’^s, when it is no exaggeration to say that the 
Hindus have quite forgotten the scientific truths discovered by 
their ancestors, they point to the hollow space in the crown of the 
head (known as the anterior fontanalle) of the new-born child as 
the Brahmarandhra.
Every tyro in anatomy knows that this space contains the 
lateral ventricles of the brain.
The “ Sacred Triverii ” (Shiva Sarphita, Ch. V , p. 52) is the 
spot in the medulla oblongata where the sympathetic cords join 
together Cr whence they take their origin. 
{Vide Ashby’s Notes on 
Physiology,-^Article Medulla 
Oblongata). 
The mystic 
Mount 
KailSsa Shiva' Samhitfi, Ch. V , p. 154) is certainly the brain.
Padmas and Ghakras.— Great difficulty arises in identifying 
these Padraas and 
Chakras. 
W hat are these structures one is 
\ tempted to ask? 
Are they real, or do they only exist in the imagi­
nation of the TSntrists ? 
Though we are unable to satisfactorily 
identify theta, we nevertheless believe that the Tantrists obtained 
their knowledge about them by dissection. These terms have been 
indefinitely used to 
designate two different nervous structures, 
viz, n e r v o u s plexuses and ganglia. But it may be questioned, how 
are We authorized to identify the T&ntric Padmas a n d , Chakras 
with either the ganglia or plexases of the modern anatomists. 
Our 
reasons for doing so are the following ;
1st.— The position of some of these . Padmas and Chakras 
corresponds with that of the plexus or ganglion of the maderq 
anatomists,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 21 ---
FOBBWOBD.
m
2nd.— These Ofaakras are said to be composed of petals 
designated by certain letters, which clearly point to either the 
nerves that go to form a ganglion or plexus, or the nerves distri­
buted from such ganglion or plexus.
3rd.— Certain fprces are said to be concentrated in these 
Chakras, thus identifying ^hem with the plexuses or ganglia which 
the modern physiologists have proved to be “ separate and inde­
pendent nervous ceiftres.”
This NSdi Su§umnS has six Padmas (Shiva SaiphitS, Cb. II, 
V, 27, p. 12), evidently signifying the six nervous plexuses formed 
by the spinal cord. 
,
The 
description 
of the thousand-petalled 
lotus 
(Shiva 
Saiphita, p. 51) shows it to be the medulla oblongata.
We proceed next to tlie identification of the famous six 
Chakras of the Tantras
i. 
Muladh&ra Chakra (Shiva SaiphitSr, p. 44) is the sacral
plexus.
ii. 
Stoadhwthdna Chakra (Shiva Satpbitfi, p. 46).. There can 
hardly be ,two opinions as to its being the prostatb plexus of the 
modern anatomists.
iii. Manipur Chakra (Shiva Saiphitfi, p. 47) appears to be 
the epigastr ic plexus. 
‘
iv. 
Anahat Chakra (Shiva SainhitS, p. 47) is the cardiac 
plexus.
V. 
Vi^idha Chakra (Shiva Satphitfi, p. 48) is either the 
laryngeal or pharyngeal plexus.
vi. AjnA Chakra (Shiva Satphitfi, p. 47) is the cavernous 
plexus.
We have very briefly .hastened over the six TSntric Chakras. 
We see that these Chakras are the vital and important sympathetic 
plexuses, and preside over all the functions of organic life.
There can be little doubt that by the “ contemplation ” on 
these Chakras, one obtains psychic powers.
“ Contemplation ” leads to control over the functions of 
these Chakras or plexuses. 
“ The intimate connection between the 
sympathetic nerves and the great viscera renders it highly probable 
that the sympathetic system has mainly to do with the organic 
functions. 
* 
^ 
» 
The sympathetic is the system of organic 
life.” When one gets control over the sympathetic nervous system, 
pne is the master of one’s body, one cah die at will, 
Th© heart
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 22 ---
ir
FOREWORD.
beats at his will. 
The lungs, the intestines, nay, all the different 
viscera of the body, carry on their allotted duties at the command 
of such a Yogi, 
Verily, verily that is the stage of Samadhi.
PratyShSra must be clearly distinguished from Samfidhi. 
No more serious mistake, we think, can be ^committed than con­
sidering the hybernation 
of the reptiles and other animals as 
illustrating the SamSdhi stage of the Yogis. 
The hybernation 
corresponds with the PratyShara, and not tllfe Samadhi stage of 
Yoga. 
PratyShSra has 
been 
compared 
with 
the 
stage 
of 
insensibility produced by the administration of ansesthetics, e.g.,
chloroform. 
But it is a well-known fact 
that the inhalation 
of
(
chloroform has 
little 
perceptible effect upon 
the sympathetic 
nerves. The spiritual consciousness of man is intensified only when 
the functions of the organic life are brought under his control, and 
when he can modify and regulate the functions of the different 
viscera. 
W e repeat that that is the stage of Samfidhi.
It behoves all students of Yoga and occultism then to gain a 
clear knowledge of these six Chakras, from the contemplation of 
which they can aspire to attain to the stage of Samfidhi.”
In this connection. Dr. 
Brajendra 
Nath Seal’s Physical 
Sciences of the Hindus, and the late Revd. Dr. Arthur Ewing’s 
The Hindu Goneeption of the Functions of Breath may also be 
profitably consulted.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 23 ---
INTRODUCTION
TO
YOGA PHILOSOPHY'.
CHAPTER I.
Pkeliminary.
yoya hehittavritti-nirodhal^.
Yoga has been dehued by Patanjali as the restraint of 
mental modifications {Vritlis). 
Any discussion of this subject, 
therefore, necessarily branches itself into three parts, viz., (1) the 
Mind, (2) its modifications (3) and the mode of restraining them. 
No treatise on Yoga, can be complete, which does not enter into 
these questions. 
The nature of mind is the first thing which ought 
to be explained. 
It wovdd embrace an enquiry into all those hypo­
theses which philosophers have formed about this entity. 
Is it 
in^iaterial and self-existent, or is it material and perishing, sub­
ject to dissolution with the body ? 
Is it the same as spirit or is it 
apart from it ? 
Is it merely a dream, a shadow, a reflection of the 
Supreme ; or is it a s.eparate and entire entity by itself ? 
Such and 
many other questions of this nature must be answered before one has 
done away with the subject of Chitta (Mind). 
The second part 
consits of the enumeration, classification, and definitions of the 
various faculties of the mind. 
This part is generally free from 
controversy, as the faculties are facts more widely known and com­
prehended. 
This branch is what is known by the name of psycho­
logy., So far all the enquiry may be said to be preliminary ;—but 
a preliminary absolutely necessary for the right understanding of 
the third part—vis., Nirodha or restraint. That division contains all
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 24 ---
YOGA PHtLOSOPtiV.
those various methods adopted by the ancients as well as the mo­
derns for the concentration of the mind, which is the essence of 
Yoga. 
All the questions of diet, sleep, exercise, posture, &c., faci­
litating concentration naturally fall in that sub-division. 
A compa­
rative view may also be taken in that as to the various means adopt­
ed by Yogis, saints, &c., for this purpose, as well as the contrivances 
used by the modern mystics to bring aboSit this state of mind. 
In 
conclusion, we shall try to show what are the good results of Yoga, 
what are the spiritual faculties which it developes, what new chan­
nels for the acquisition of knowledge it opens, what new powers of 
work it creates and what a source of innocent, but sublime, happi­
ness it forms for its votaries.
In this chapter we shall treat of two things:— first, the 
importance of the study of this Science, and second, the various 
objections which ai’e generally raised against this subject.
The Impoi'tance of the study of this Scieiiee, and Objections.
The usefulness of this science as a means of mental culture 
has been often questioned. 
There are to be found many who even 
deny it the title of science. 
To their minds, the art and philosophy 
of Yoga have no better claims to be recognised as a branch of 
science, than alchemy or astrology. 
To them it is a dream of the 
poets, a hallucination of the enthusiasts. 
By what process of 
reasoning they have come to this conclusion, a conclusion contra­
dicting almost all the religious as well as the philosophical convic­
tions of the ancient and the modern times— is not very easy to 
decide. 
But so far as we can find, much of disbelief and scepti­
cism is to be attributed to^he ignorance of the real truths of Yoga. 
In India many uuderstandV^y the word Yogi, those hideous speci­
mens of humanity who paiade through our streets bedaubed with 
dirt and ash,— frightening the 
children, and extorting money 
from timid and good-natured folk by threats, abuse or pertinacity 
of demand. 
Of course, all true Yogis renounce any fraternity with 
these. 
If these painted caricatures by any stretch of language 
can be called Yogis, surely their yoga (communion) is with ash and 
dirt, with mud and m oneyj
There is another class of persons who have assumed this 
honored and sacred title, and who by their bigotry and ignorance 
have proved a great stumbling-block to the progress of this science. 
I mean the\llatha Yogis, those strange ascetics who by inflicting
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 25 ---
OH AFTER T.
tortures and exquisite pains to their flesh, hope to liberate their 
spirits. 
Through a mistaken 
idea that mind and matter must 
necessarily be opposed to eacli other, they have evolved a philoso­
phy of torture, whose fundamental doctrine seems to be :— the 
greater the power of ^spirit, the less you are pained by torturejJ 
Some of these persons are seen sitting in the same posture for 
years together, their legs ^lalf paralysed by unuse ; some are seen 
with their hands upraised, which they never bring down, and which 
wither away and become dead stalks; while others, in their 
supreme contempt of nature and everything natural, prefer to pass 
severe winter among snows, and the burning days o f . summer 
surrounded by fire. 
These persons by their misdirectecf energy 
and enthusiasm, have already done a good deal of mischief. 
They 
have engendered a belief in ordinary 
minds that Yoga is 
perfectly unattainable without austerities, that persons not pre­
pared to fight with their physical nature such severe struggles as 
these Hatha Yogis, should never expect to make any spiritual 
progress.
Another, but far more gentle and rational, class of Yogis are 
those who might be called recluses. (These persons are often very 
intelligent, and sometimes well-educated. 
But to us, these persons 
also seem to labor under a great eiTor. 
By some false physical ana­
logy they think that it is impossible to practise Y'^oga in household 
life, that to attain perfection in Yoga one must leave father and 
mother, wife and children, and run to deserts or high mountains. 
According to such, the magnetic and mental atmosphere (?) of cities 
and inhabited places is not favorable to spiritual culture, and only 
the deep solitudes of a cave or a desert are the best helps for Yoga. 
This belief that no householder can be a Yogi, is one tacitly believed 
in by our spiritual-minded Hindu brothers, who would no more think 
of practising Yoga without turning an ascetic than travelling to the 
m oo:^ Nay, this belief is carried to an absurd extent by some 
sentimental Yogis of recluse type, who seriously maintain that 
the sacred and divine tie of marriage is an insuperable barrier in 
the path of a neophyte.
^Looking on the disgusting spectacle of the ash-besmeared 
and lazy beggar, the horrible self-infictions of the Ha{ha Yogi, and 
inhuman apathy of the recluse, no wonder that many should think 
that Yoga is after all a great humbug, not worth the consideration 
of any sane man.)
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 26 ---
YOOA PHILOSOPHY.
There is another ^lass of objectors, who cannot bring their 
minds to believe tlie strange and weird powers which the practice 
of Yoga gives to its votary. 
Such are the scientists of our day--^inen 
of eminent learning and clear understanding, persons fitted by 
tlieir education and pursuits for tlie proper investigation of such a 
complicated subject as Yoga, 
it is a pity that they should look 
with sublime disdain on the claims of Imga to be recognised as a 
science. 
Powers such as those possessed by <Sankaracharya and 
Guru Nanak— foresight, transference of their cJiitta into other 
bodies, projecting their Kama-Rupa to distant places, healing the 
sick, &c., are so many stumbling-blocks to the modern scientist. 
Brouglit up in a school of severe reasoning, and strict and accurate 
observation and experiment, the scientist is unwilling to give his 
credence to the high pretensions of the Yogi without convincing 
proofs. 
Nor do we think that the demand is unnatural. 
But 
we had hoped, that his own good sense would have shown the 
scientist the futility of his objection. 
He ought to have known, 
that, while his science deals with things rvliich can be perceived by 
the senses, and therefore can be demonstrated to all average huma­
nity the very alphabets of Yoga are Jivatma and Parainatnia— 
things essentially supersensnous. 
In fact, there can be no analogv 
between the physical sciences and Yoga in this respect. 
The study 
of both the physical and mental sciences must, no doubt, be con­
ducted through experiment and observation, but the objects of one 
are all tangible and outside of us, while the other has its materials 
in inward ideas and thoughts. 
Mathematics is perhaps the only 
science which can afford any slight analogy to Yoga. 
As it would 
be impossible for a common man to understand the calculations 
by w'hich an asti’onomer predicts an eclipse, unless he goes 
through years of mental training in Mathematics, so it is much 
more impossible to make ordinary scientific minds grasp the 
conclusions of Yoga, unless they are regularly initiated. 
As to 
the question why Yogis do not show phenomena, it might he 
answered in two ways. 
All Yogis have not the poiver of producing 
the visible manifestation of invisible forces. 
By far the great 
majority of Hindu Yogis practise it for the sake of spiritual 
development, and serenity and calmness of mind. 
Siddhis {psychic 
powers) ai’e no ambition of their souls; they do not court them ; 
nor are they elated if they produce some phenomena now and: 
then. 
Their eyes bent upon mohhsha, these students of Yoga
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 27 ---
CHAPTER I.
do not tarry in their course to pick up these baubles of Siddhis. 
Such persons, though never showing a single phenomenon in 
the course of their wliole lives, intuitively produce conviction 
to our hearts b}'^ the purity, nay, almost the divinity of their lives. 
You can distinguish a real Yogi out of thousands, by that inex­
pressible serenity of his countenance, 
that nameless something 
about his look, voice and every movement of his limb, which are 
the invariable results of ^ama and Dama— the control of mind and 
the control of senses. CvVherever a Yogi goes, he carries happiness 
and purity with him. 
ft is impossible to see a Yogi without being . 
pleasantly influenced bj’^ him. 
He is the natural leader of huma-- 
iiity ; his intense self-communion and concentration make him 
honored and respected, without any courting on his part. 
In 
.short, a Yogi carries his credentials on his fa c^ Such are the 
Yogis, with whom some of our readers might have had the 
pleasure of passing the happiest periods of their lives ; and if we 
are convinced of anything it is this that, be Yoga a delusion or 
hallucination, it certainly makes one happy.
That class of Yogis, who are called Siddhos, and who can 
produce phenomena, are extremely rare ; or at least they do not 
mingle much with mankind. 
But thej’’ are not so rare, as deligent 
search may not reveal them to the enquirer, tit is these Siddhas 
only who can satisfy the experimental spirit of the scientist. 
It 
is they who at will can produce those psychical phenomena which 
cannot but convince the most confirmed sceptic.^ But for reasons, 
best known to them, Siddhas are always very reserved in displaying 
their powers to strangers. 
Long acquaintance and great intimacy 
with them can only break their reserve. 
Our scientific reader 
may very justly wonder at this, and think it rather inexplicable 
that persons knowing such a strange science should hesitate to 
establish its truth to the satisfaction of the outside world.
But this conduct of the Siddhas is not all so inexplicable 
and mysterious. 
Now, if we mistake not, a majority of the 
Siddhas are Hindus or belong to races nearly allied to Aryas. 
And 
Hindus, as is well-known, are the most jealous people on earth as 
regards their sciences. 
It is very hard to gain their confidence. 
The people of India have learned by sad experience that the only 
means of preserving their science and sacred scripture is in keeping 
them in strict secrecy. 
And it was no doubt a very safe means of 
preservation in olden times. 
We cannot but approve the policy of
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 28 ---
6
YOOA PHILOSOPHY.
our ancestors in this respect. 
The world would not have appreci­
ated the merits of our Sastras and Vedas had they been made 
public earlier. 
We are certain that many of our scientific works 
would not have been understood by the world two centuries before, 
even if made knowm to it. 
Even now, with ^11 the advance which 
the sciences of language and grammar ^have made, we find how 
great injustice is done to our literatui-e by occasional misinterpreta­
tion. 
It is only of late that our Panini’s gramnfar has been acluiow- 
ledged as the best treatise on the subject, nay, we may go even so 
far as to assert, that it is to the discovery of thi.s book that we see 
all the attempts of modern Europe for the construction of a Univer­
sal Grammar. 
Well, when even Indian Pandits, who are anything 
but Yogis, were so very jealous with regard to those secular sciences, 
shall we blame the Siddhas that they are not more explicit and 
open. 
Surely they must have ve)’y good grounds for keeping their 
powers concealed from the gaze of the uninitiated profane. 
Surely 
we have no right to call them impostors and their science a moon­
shine, if they do not comply with our idle importunities. ^To 
sincere seekers after knowledge, to those who pant for spiritual 
regeneration, they are always accessible. 
They aie ready to teach 
their science ; they but seek persons who deserve that high gift. 
Where is the adhikdri, the truly ciualified student. 
Where is he 
who has fitted himself by mental training, to pursue and understand 
the process or the processes, by which a Yogi acquires these mental 
powers? 
Where is the person who has the firmness of will, earnest­
ness of purpose, 
doggedness of perseverance, 
by which alone 
success in any undertaking can be ensured ? 
We know how few 
are the men who make any marked success in the ordinaiy human 
sciences.^ We do not 6ee Newtons, Franklins, Tyndalls and Darwins 
everywhere, and must we expect to see Yogis and Siddhas made 
out of ordinary men— men whose spirituality is altogether dormant 
or dead.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 29 ---
CHAPTER II.
D k f i n i t i o n .s .
'i
For ready reference, we here give the definitions of some of 
the important wordl. 
These definitions, as far as possible, are in 
the words of Patahjali.
1. 
Yaga is the restraining of the tnodifications of the 
thinking principle.
2. 
Samddhi (Meditation) is the iiitentness on a single point; 
O f that state of knowledge in which the mind, having avoided the 
obstacles, is well fixed on, or confined to, one object only. 
It is a 
continual concentration of thought, by means of which all external 
objects, and even one’s own individuality, are forgotten, and the 
mind fixed completely and immovably on the One Being.
3. 
SamprajMta-sainddhi (Meditation ivith distinct cognition) 
is that form of meditation which arises from the attendan'^e, of 
argumentation (yjfaj’Aia), deliberation {oiehdra), beatitude idnanda), 
and egotism iasmita).
4. 
Asamprajnata-samddhi ^Meditation icitliout distinct re­
cognition) is independent of any fresh antecedent, being in the 
shape of the self-reproduction of thought, after the departure of all 
objects.
5. 
Ahhyasa (Practice) is the repeated effort that the internal 
organ— Chitta—shall remain in its unmodified state, and in a firm 
position, without regard for the end in view, and perseveringly 
adhered to for a long time unintermittingly.
6. 
Vairdgya (Indifference) is the consciousness of having 
overcome one’s desires ; this consciousness is of one who neither 
thirsts after the objects that are seen on earth, nor those that are 
heard of in the Scriptures.
7. 
Vritli (Modification 
of the 
internal organ) 
is 
the 
modification produced from either of the following five causes: —
(а) . 
PramcLna (Evidence of right notion) is that which
arises from perception, inference and testimony.
(б) . 
Viparydya (Misconception) is incorrect 
notion, pot
staying in the proper fonn of that, in respect whereof 
the misconception is entertained.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 30 ---
8
yoO A PHILOSOPHY.
(e). 
Vikalpa (Doubt) 
notion devoid of a thing in reality 
corresponding thereto, following upon knowledge 
produced by words.
(d) . 
Nidra (Sleep) depends on the conception of nothing.
(e) . 
Smriti (Memory) is the not letting go of an object, of
which the mind has been aware.
- 
8. 
Ihwam (Lord) is a particular Spirit {Furusha) untouched
by troubles, works, fruits, or deserts, in wHozn the germ of the 
omniscient becomes infinite, who is the preceptor even of the liist, 
for he is not limited by time, and whose name is Glory.
9. 
Drashtd (Seer, soul) is a vision simply, though pure, 
looking directly ; it is the spectator merely through proximity. 
It 
is the mere thought. 
It alone is the experience!'.
10. 
Aoidyd (Ignorance) is the notion that the transitory, 
the impure, the evil and what is not-soul, are eternal, pure, joy and 
soul.
11. 
Aamitd (Egotism) is the identifying of the power that 
sees with the power of seeing.
12. 
Uaga (Desire) is ■ that which dwells on pleasure : it is 
longing for the means of enjoyment.
13. 
Dwesa (Aversion) is that which dwells on pain.
14. 
Ahhinivesa (Tenacity of life) is the attachment whidi 
every one feels naturally to the body% through dread of death.
. 15. 
Yama (Forbearance) consists of not killing, veracity, 
not stealing, continence, and not coveting.
16. 
Niyama (Religious observances) includes purification, 
contentment, 
austerity, inaudible 
mutterings, and 
persevering 
devotion to the Lord (li^wara).
17. 
Asana (Posture) is the position which one sets himself 
to. 
It must be steady and pleasant.
18. 
Prdrj&ydma (Regulation of the breath) is the cutting 
short of the motion of inspiration and expiration.
19. Pr'att/i/i.(Jra (Restraint) is the accommodation of the senses 
to the nature of the mind, in the absence of the concernment with 
each one’s own object. It is the complete subjugation of the senses.
20. 
Dhdrand (Attention) is the fixing of the internal organ 
(Chitta) to a place.
21. 
Dliydna (Contemplation) is the course of uniform (fixed 
only on one object) modification of knowledge at that place where 
the internal organ is fixed in DharanS..
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 31 ---
GBAPTEn 11.
9
__ 
22. 
Samddhi (Modification) [see Def. 2] is the same con­
templation or DhyAna when it arises only about a material substance 
or object of sense, and therefore it is then like non-existence of 
itself an4 like ignorance.
___ 23. 
Sanyama p the three, Dharan*^, Dhyana and Sam&dhi,
operating only on one object; or the technical name, for the above 
three taken together, is Sanyama.
( 
24. 
A ntaraitga (Interior) is the name applied in Samprajn&ta
Samadhi to the three Yogangas : Dharana, Dhy&na, and Samddhi.
25. 
Bahiranga (Exterior) is the name applied in Sampraj- 
uata Samadhi 
to the five Yogahgas: Yama, 
Niyama, ^Asana, ^ 
Pranayima, and Praty&hara.
26. 
Dharma is that which follows upon, or has the pro­
perties in, the shape of Santa (tranquil), Udita (risen), and Avya- 
pradeslya (incapable of denomination). 
In other words, Dharma 
means the substance to which properties adhere.
— 27. 
Siddhis are the psychic faculties developed from the 
practice of Yoga.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 32 ---
c h a p t e r III.
|_The student of Yoga should, as far cas possible, make up 
his mind what kind of Yoga method h^ is going to adopt. 
For, 
though the aim of the various systems of Y^oga is the concentration 
of the mind, yet some are more difficult than t^e others, some lead 
to the attainment of Yoga earlier than the rest. } Even there is 
difference in the capacity of student which ought to be taken into 
consideration. 
There cannot be given any hard and fast rule for 
all. All that can be done is to give the first principles, the primary 
truths, and leave the rest to the intelligent student to evolve out 
for himself. 
Differehce of age, difference of education, religion, 
race and nationality, require different treatment from the hand 
of the master. \Thus the methods of Hatha Yoga are such whicli 
an adult, after a certain age, can master with extreme difficulty, 
while to the plastic and supple limbs of a child or a boy of ten 
and twelve they are very easy of attainment. 
Similarly, a man 
whose mind is well cultivated with philosophy and poetry, whoso 
fancy is vivid, whose imagination quick and creative, need not 
undergo any of those preliminary methods laid down in the trea­
tises of Yoga for the development of imagination.
The period within which success in Yoga is acquired by 
the student also has proportional variation. 
To an energetic and 
enthusiastic nature success may crown his efforts very soon, while 
a dull person may pass years ere he understands the first principles 
of this mind-regulating philc^ophy. 
The treatises of Hindu Yoga 
are full of dissertations about the various kinds of persons fitted to 
acquire Yoga. 
In fact, the chapter on adhikdris, persons fitted for 
Yoga, forms generally the first in various systems of Yoga. 
The 
father of Yoga philosophy, Patanjali, disposes of this question with 
his characteristic brevity and universality by two Sdtras or apho­
risms. 
That which puzzled the brains of the latter-day Yogis, and 
on which so much ingenuity has been mis-spent, has been com­
pressed likewise by Patanjali within the narrow but all-embracing 
compass of two lines. 
Aphorism twenty-two, book first, enun­
ciates:— “ According to the nature of the methods— the mild, the 
medium, and the transcendent— adopted, the ascetics who adopt me­
thod, are of nine kinds.”
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 33 ---
GUAl^TEB III.
11
In accordance with tiiis division, there are nine classes of 
followers of Yoga. 
In the mild variety there are three sub-divisions, 
and similarly with the medium and the transcendental methods. 
The following table shows the different kinds of followers of Y oga: —
. Methods.
j 
Classes of followers.
Mjldly impe­
tuous (M rid u 
sam vega) sim p le 
o r en erg etic.
Moderately 
impetuous 
{M ad hya sam ­
vega) or impe­
tuous.
Hotly impetuous 
{T ivra sam vega) 
or hot.
Mild (M ridii) ... 
Medium
1. Mildly ener­
getic.
4, Mildly impe­
tuous.
7. Mildly hot
{M adhya)
Transcendent
2. Middling I y 
energetic.
5. Middling 1y 
impetuous.
8. Middlin g 1 y 
hot.
(Adhim atra) 
...
8. Extrem ely 
energetic.
6. Extrem ely 
impetuous.
9. Extrem ely 
hot.
Patanjali promises speedy success to him who is hotly 
impetuous and follows the transcendental method i.e., he who comes 
under the ninth class of transcendent, hotly impetuous. 
Thus 
there is ample room for the student of Yoga Vidya to select from. 
He may follow the mild method, which is the lowest, or he may, if 
he can, take up the Adhimdtra method. 
An explanation of tlvese 
methods will be given further on. 
Now we shall speak of some of 
the preliminary things conducive to the concentration of mind, and 
thereby unfolding the spiritual powers latent in every human soul. 
In this chapter we intend to dwell on the following points— food, 
dress, habits, and place. 
-
Patanjali in his aphorisms does not touch on any one of these 
points. 
He takes it for granted that the followers of Yoga have this 
requisite knowledge. 
In fact, the directions which the later authors 
ou Yoga have given are such as are applicable not only exclusively 
to the student of occultism, but to every description of students. 
Nevertheless, we shall give here some short hints on this subject.
LAs regards dress, it must be borne in mind that the concen­
tration is best facilitated when one is warmly dressed, and hjs 
attention is not distracted by the changes of weather.J We think it 
highly unphilosophical to renounce all dress in the first stage of 
Yaga abhydsa, as many of the Sadhus are seen to, do. 
Instead of
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 34 ---
12
YOQA PHILOSOPHY.
helping in any way the fixing of attention, their naked bodies 
continually divert their thought. 
No doubt, the master Yogi needs 
no external help to protect his body from the inclemencies of the 
weather. 
He can throw around him an impenetrable veil of dkdsa, 
and defy the forces of nature; but what ta master may do with 
impunity, can never be done by a neopljyte without injury. ^Tlie 
dress should not be too tight nor too loose, and, as far as possibly 
it should not be sewn by a tailor. If sewn-cloth cannot be dispensed 
with, let it be well purified of all foreign magnetism as far as pos­
sible. ^ h e clothes 
should 
be washed well every day by the 
student ^himself if possible, and it should be made a rule to change 
the lower garment at least once a day, and in no case to keep it on 
for two daj'^s without washing. 
The materials of which the dress 
of a Yogi should be made ought to be of non-conductors like silk, 
wool, cotton, &C;)
^As to the food most conducive to the spiritual and pschyic 
development, the authorities ai-e unanimous in favor of a vegeta­
rian diet,^ not that there were no Yogis who were meat-eaters, but 
(it has been found by the concurrent experience of ages that meat, 
while it increases animal activity, decreases the power of concentra­
tion^ All races of meat-eaters are physically active and strong, 
but the same cannot be said of their spiritual state. 
Animal pas­
sions and appetites are increased by the carnivorous diet, and the 
natural and constant restlessness of carnivorous .animals is dia­
metrically opposed to those conditions wdiich favour quietness and 
abstraction. 
In recommending a vegetable diet for the student of 
the Yoga, w'e need not enforce our doctrine from consideration of 
occult philosophy, which he would not be in a position to undei’- 
stand were we to do so. In the very first stage of Yoga, viz., Yama, 
the student is exhorted to practise maitri, universal kindness, and 
how can this be consistent with the cruel system of butchering 
innocent creatures for satisfaction of one’s taste. 
We need not dis­
prove the position of those who try to equivocate with tlipir own 
conscience by saying that it is not thej"^ who kill but the butchers ; 
for they ought to remember the aphorism of Patanjali, which says 
that—‘“ The things 
questionable,’ e.g^., killing, 
stealing, 
&c., 
whether done, 
caused to be done, or approved of, 
whether 
resulting from covetousness, anger or delusion, whether slight, 
of intermediate character, or beyond measure, have no end . of 
fruits in the shape of pain and ignorance.” 
In fact, the vegetable
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 35 ---
GHAPTER III.
13
world can supply all the constituents which a healthy human 
organism requres. 
As to the quality of food, the Yogis of India 
have all shown a great love for milk and rice. 
The chemical ana­
lysis of milk shows that it contains all ingredients which a human 
body requires, while »iee is to be recommended chiefly on account 
of its containing proportionately smaller amount of stimulating 
nitrogenous matter which abounds so much in meats of every des­
cription. 
It must fee all the while remembered, that the food above 
recommended is for Rishis and Yogis, and Such persons whose 
habits are sedentary, and require intense mental abstraction ; and 
therefore, this kind of diet has been called satiM-guni-bhojan. 
Fm- 
warriors and mechanics emploj’ed in physical active duties of life 
Rnjoguni food is the one to be recommended. 
The following verses 
of the Gita should also be remembered in this connection. 
Next 
as to the quality of food to be taken, let the student beware of glut­
tony ; he should eat just enough for livelihood-^for the support of 
life. 
But let him not at the same time starve himself to emacia­
tion. 
It is desirable that he should eat less than usual, and rise 
from the table with appetite remaining than fully satisfied. 
Let 
him also decrease the quantity of food slowly, steadily, but imper­
ceptibly. 
In fact, his progress through the several stages of Yoga 
will of itself tend towards decreasing the amount of food, but let 
him, nevertheless, help nature. 
In no case should the student of 
Yoga indulge in alcoholic or any other intoxicating drug or liquor, 
&c. 
The practices of some classes of inferior Yogis of stimulating 
psychic development by opium, bhang, charas and ganja, are to 
be strongly denounced by every sane and reasonable man : for 
these, though inducing momentary or temporary trance by their 
skilful administration, yet invariably are followed by terrible reac­
tion, and make the divine temple of the soul a ruin for the vam­
pires, spooks and elementals to take possession of and prey upon.
(jThe student of Yoga, like his fellow-student of physical j 
sciences, should cultivate regular habits. 
He should attend to all | 
the rules of health and sanitation. 
Early rising and the Y oga' 
abhyasa for an hour or so before sunrise have been often recoin- 
mended^ The would-be Yogi must attend to the purity of the 
body as well as the soul. 
Let him bathe twice daily, in the morn­
ing and evening, and, if his constitution would, allow, with cold 
watei-, at all seasons of the year. 
Several Yogis of the Sikh school, 
maintain that the keeping of long hair, by preserving the animal
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 36 ---
14
YOGA PHILOSOPHY.
electricity, facilitates Yoga. 
And in truth the majority of Saints, 
Rishis, and Prophets are generally represented with flowing hair.
(The Yogi should choose a retired and unfrequented spot 
for practising Yoga^ A league or two away from the hustle of 
active life, let the contemplative student select his retreat. 
The 
place should be such as to call up pure aig,d divine thought. 
But it 
is also possible for a student to live in the city and aquii-e Yoga. 
And, as the majority of our readers, I fear, are Qrihastas, house­
holders, and family-men, let them, therefore, set apart a room in their 
house sacred for meditation. 
Let it never be entered by anybody 
and every-body; and it should be so situated or constructed as 
effectually to exclude all outside noise and commotion. 
If he likes 
he may burn incense, like dhoop, &c., to make the atmosphere of 
the room sweet and agreeable. 
The Buddhist scriptures enjoin the 
following particulars about the choice of place by the ascetic 
“ It 
is a place where no business is transacted, and where there are no 
contentions or disputes. 
There are three descriptions of such 
places : (1) in some deep mountain ravine, remote from human 
intercourse; (2) in some forest resort • Aranya), at least a mile or 
two from a village, so as to be removed from any sound of worldly 
business or contention ; (3) in a spot at a distance from a place 
where laymen live, in the midst of a quiet Sangharama.” 
This 
precept of the Buddhistic school is, however, practicable only to the 
ascetic who has I’enounced all the concerns of the world. 
But as 
we tried to show in our preliminary remarks. Yoga is not meant 
only for the ascetic, but is a common heritage of the Qrihasta and 
Sanydsi, rich and poor.
(^Next as to the time of practising Yoga. 
Every pemon who 
has a sound mind and a healthj’- body is capable of attaining Y'oga. 
The training should be begun as early in life as possible.j In 
old age, when the habits are crystallized into second nature, it 
becomes almost impossible for the student to shake off the old 
Adam and to turn over a new page in life. 
Our countrymen have 
imbibed certain mistaken notions as to the proper age when Yoga 
should be begun. 
They assert that gi’eat kings, &c., practised Yoga 
towards the close of their lives when they had completed their wordly 
career, had children and grand-children, and had been satiated by 
satisfying all their carnal appetites. 
The great poet, Kalidasa, in 
his Eaghuvanm says of the kings of the solar dynasty :— Yogendvte 
tanu tyajam, i.e., they (.the kiugs)deft their bodies (i. e., died) by
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 37 ---
CHAPTER 111.
15
practising Yoga. 
But it must be remembered that Janaka also was 
a great king and a great Yogi, too ; similarly, Dhruva and Prablada 
were children when they had acquired great Yogic powei-s. 
It 
should also be borne in mind that the very training of all our kings 
and great men, though not strictly Yogic, was yet conducive to 
spiritual development. CYoga should be begun as soon as the child' 
reaches years of discretion. The proper time of abhydsa is morning, 
and, according to ’Mahomedan Sufis, 
midnight, 
It should be 
practised with empty stomach, but seldom after-a nieaj^
^The student should do well not to sleep more than six hours. 
Sleep is overpowering of the mind by Tamo-Ouna.J? The Budhistic 
saying is, “ too much sleep destroys all religious merits.* By not 
yielding to the influences of sloth, either one night or two, reject­
ing and not listening to its bewitchments, the life is cleansed and 
there is nothing further to attain.” 
We d'o not recommend such 
an extreme course, but we can assure him there is much truth in 
the above saying, and that he will do well if he fasts twice or thrice' 
a month, and observes vigils occasionally.
There is another advice of the Buddhists which we quote 
here for our readers:— “ Care must be taken that no violent exer­
tion be used previous to entering on the exercise of meditation, 
lest the breath should be agitated and the mind in consequence 
unsettled.”
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 38 ---
CHAPTER TV.
In onr last chapter we dealt with some^f the phj'sical quali- 
Hcations of a student of this science. 
Tn the present chapter we 
shall briefly glance over some features of the mental training in­
dispensably necessary to hipi, as it paves tlie iva^ to the final goal, 
the concentration of the mind.
There are certain spiritual obstacles which the Yogi will 
find in the very beginning of his career, and which, if not timely 
guarded by the warning voice of his rjuru, are sure to cause miser­
able shipwreck in his hopes of future progress. 
A would-be Yogi 
tries to separate, by the force of concentration, his soul from the 
body; and in that emancipated state he enjoys the blissful pleasure 
of the company of spirits more or less elevated in the scale-of ad­
vancement. 
By the very act of being thus enabled to roam free 
through the eternity of time and space, cutting off the shackle of 
the material body, he incurs new dangers to which he was not 
liable before 
-dangers arising from the jealousy of Devatds pre­
siding over the various elements. 
Those acquainted with the true 
significance of the sacred Purapas will readily conceive our mean­
ing. 
The Devatds, Indra, &c., who so often tempt the sage and 
anchorite, are, none, if rightly understood, but the spirits of fire, air 
and water. 
They are intelligent entities, with tremendous powers, 
and the only mode of overcoming them lies through the path of 
Yoga. 
The student of Yoga will, therefore, find himself surrounded 
by these influences, which, though invisible, nevertheless act very 
powerfully. 
These elenientals constantly whisper strange sugges­
tions and distract 
thoughts, in 
order to withdraw him from 
contemplation, but he should not listen to those promptings of his 
“ imagination.” 
No blame, however, should be attached to the 
Devas for so doing. 
They have their .scope and jurisdiction, and 
test the student from time to time. 
They are the true soul-exami­
ners. 
Happy the man who has such “ temptations” thrown in his 
path, for that is the sure sign that he is making progress and has 
attracted the attention of these Higher beings. 
Some of these 
obstacles are now being mentioned in detail.
(^The first and foremost temptation which the student meets 
•with is from his passion, particularly from that of lust. Sexual desires
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 39 ---
GtlAPTm IV.
17
will overcome him with irresistible force, vague yearnings will 
torture his every-day existence, and they will be the more powex’ful, 
the more idle he is^ The common proverb, that Satan finds some 
mischief for idle hands to do, is nowhere so well illustrated as 
in the case of the yqpng Yogi. 
His sedantary habits, if not well 
regulated, peculiarly pre-dispose him to these temptations, and 
it is to guard against them that such minute details are often 
given about food, regimen, posture, &c. 
To prevent distraction 
proceeding from this cause, the Sikh Guru Arjuu advised his 
chelas to be married. 
He knew that, though Yoga, like poetry, 
is a very jealous mistress, and that for the highest development 
of psychic powers, celibacy, or, at least moderation, was an important 
condition, still he had well probed the depth of the human heart, 
and by his own example of married life showed that it is compatible 
with Yogic education.
Pataujali enumerates the following nine obstaclesI'^Sicfcness, 
langour, doubt, carelessness, laziness, addiction to objects of senses, 
erroneous perception, failure to attain any stage of abstraction, and 
•instability in it when attained. These are the primary distractions; 
there is yet another class which may be called secondary, vis., grief, 
distress, trembling and sighing. 
The method of overcoming these 
obstacles is through ahhydsa and Vairdgya.J In fact., Vairdgya 
(indifference) will be of the greatest help to the student. 
If he is 
grieved at the death of a dear friend, let him betake to Vairagya, take 
shelter under its shade and hear its sweet and solemn admonitions, 
saying— “ nothing is 
permanent in this transitory world.” 
If 
suffering from the excruciating pains of sickness and disease, let 
him resort to this never-failing doctor Vairdgya, and his pains 
will vanish. 
Martyrs have died on the stake without showing the 
slightest sign of pain, though their flesh was torn from the body 
by inches. 
What was it that supported them through this hoiTible 
trial of the physical nature ? 
Their mind no doubt. 
Is it then 
too much to expect from the aspirant that he should conquer his 
nerve-life by the indomitable strength of Vairdgya ? Truly, there 
lie hid innumerable wonderful potencies under the covering of 
Vairdgya ! 
Disease, distress, grief, nay, all obstacles, vanish like 
mist before the burning rays of Vairdgya. 
Learn, therefore, 
betimes to practise this virtue.
Besides Vairdgya, there are enumerated by Patanjali some 
five or six other methods of- eliminating the evil consequences of
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 40 ---
18
YOOA VHILOSOPHY.
the above-mentioned obstacles. 
I ’irstly, by profound devoteduess 
towards the Ix)rd Is^wara. 
We have already defined 
the term 
Ikwara. 
This devotedness to God is an easy method of attaining 
Yoga. 
Those who adopt this system are called followers of Bhakti- 
mdrga^ The majority of the Aryans of India now know no otlier 
method than this. 
It is very popular yrith the masses; and that 
it is a very successful method is proved bej’ond doubt by the lives 
of the religious saints and faktrs .viho perform wonders by their faith 
in the Lord God. 
By devotedness is not to be understood the 
hypocritical system of prayers which passes by that name. It must 
be entire resignation to God, accompanied with intense love. 
It 
must be the forgetfulness of self,—^living in the Lord. 
We must 
worship the Lord, not only with flowers and incense, but with 
“ repeating His name and reflecting on its signification.” 
He has 
got many names amongst different nations, but the Hindus have 
assigned most mystical powers to the word “ Om.” 
This word 
is called pranava (glory), and its repetition is 
enjoined as a 
help to concentration. 
The Mahomedans use Alla-hu, the Sikhs 
Vdh Guru the Buddhists Out mani padme hum, the Jews Jah-ve.’ 
The proper pronunciation of the prdnaca and reflecting on its 
signification, brings with it the knowledge of the Lord.
The second method of 
over-powering these obstacles is 
“ Dwelling upon one truth.” 
We must fix our attention again and 
again upon some one accepted truth ; we myst concentrate our 
mind upon one point, and allbvv it under no circumstance to wander 
from it. 
Another method is “ through the practising of benevo­
lence, tenderness, complacency, and 
disregard towards objects 
of happiness, 
grief, virtue and vice.” 
Benevolence but half 
represents the meaning of the original Sanskrit word Maitri. 
It 
is a term of larger signification than even charity. 
It is good-
heartedness and love confined not within the limited circle of 
% -
humanity, but extending to 
all animate 
creation, friendliness 
towards the creatures of God,—something more than philanthropy. 
‘ Tendernesa’ is showing compassion to 
the unfortunate, the 
wretched and the poor: while “ complacency” is that state of 
sympathy which feels joy in the happiness of a fellow-creature. The 
whole essence of this method may be summed up in -the comprehen- 
aive vVord— “ Sympathy,” —universal sympathy, sympathy for the 
animate and inanimate creation. 
The fourth expedient of combat­
ing mental distraction is “ by forcibly restraining the breath,” t.e,,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 41 ---
OEAFTER IV.
19
Fr&n^yama. 
We will treat of it in detail in the next chapter. The 
fifth method mentioned by Patanjali is “ by fixing the attention on 
any object cognizable through the senses.” 
The student may fix 
hjs attention on the tip of the nose, tl*e centre of the tongue, &c. 
Another method is “ by fixing the attention on a luminous object.” * 
This is more active, an^ produces, in certain constitutions, the 
trance state sooner than other methods. 
Placing a luminous object 
a yard or so at a distance, and looking at it steadily for some minutes, 
keeping the head all the while at an angle of 45° will almost induce 
hypnotic trance. 
The mystic needs no external luminous object to 
fix his eyes upon : he sees a pure steady light in the “ lotjis of his 
heart.” 
The seventh means of combating distraction is “ by fixing 
the jiiind on some person whose life is holy and devoid of passion.” 
This method is in great favor with the Jainas and Buddhists. Many 
followers of those persuasions keep the images of their gurus in 
their houses, and in Ordinary parlance are said to worship them, 
and are consequently branded by ignorant bigots as idolaters and 
hero-worshippers; but to those who know rightly, they do no such 
thing ; they only contemplate the imago of their guru^ as a means 
of facilitating mental concentration.
The eighth method of Patanjali is
“ By dwelling on knowledge that presents itself in transition 
from waking to dream or to sleep.” This transition state is a natural 
state of Yoga. 
When passing from the state of waking to that of 
dream, the mind passes through a zero point. 
Similarly when 
passing from the state of dream to that of dreamless sleep. 
These 
zero points of consciousness are the natural states of samadhi or con- • 
centration. 
Hypnopompic and hypnogogic are the modern names 
given to some of these states. 
Just before falling into sleep or 
coming out of sleep, wonderful pictures pass before mind’s eyes. 
Fixing attention on these is helpful.
“ Oomentration of the mind may he effected hy 'pondering on 
anything that one approves.” 
Different persons have 
different 
temperaments, and no hard and fast rule can be laid down for this 
purpose to fit them all. Thus the Tantriks have their own ways, the 
Sufis their own, and the Buddhists their particular system, and 
80 also the mystic Christians.
♦ This method is called Braidism. 
'
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 42 ---
CHAPTER V.
In the last chapter we dwelt on thg theoretical side of 
the question of steadying the mental fui^ction ; in the present, we 
shall consider the practical means of bringing it about. 
Practically 
the subject consists of three divisions - (1) to pa ^reflection ; as well 
as mortification of the flesh); (2) svadhyaya, {repeating of some 
sacred formula or mantras); and (3) pranidhdna (resignation or 
consigning unto the Lord all the fruits of one’s works, without 
expecting any reward, here or hereafter.)
By this practice, different kinds of afflictions, such as ig­
norance, egotism, desire, aversion and tenacity to mundane existence, 
are removed. 
Ignorance is in fact the parent of all the rest, and 
when that is removed, the extinction of others is but a matter of 
time, and comparatively easy. 
We have defined them before, and 
we may say that they can be got rid of by meditation. 
Our karma 
owes its origin to these afflictions, which result inconstant re-births. 
The fruits of the karma are received sometimes in this life, but 
generally in the next. 
The karma is the root, while the fruits 
which it produces are— (a) rank (raised or lowered such as that of 
angel, planetary spirit, man, elemantal, bird or beast); (h) years 
(duration in which the spirit is confined in body) ; (c) enjoyment 
(sensation or experience of pleasure and pain). 
The fruits of good 
karma are joyful, and of the vicious painful. 
Even this suffering 
and enjoyment must be taken in their relative signification, for to a 
truly discriminating philosopher all is grief. 
For what ordinary 
men consider pleasure is but a modification of grief,— for it is 
never lasting. 
Being but transitory, its absence causes pain. 
The 
more we enjoy, the more we become miserable, for, with the in­
crement of the sources and objects of pleasure, our desires and 
wants also increase, and disappointment at the non-attainment 
of those wants. 
Real wisdom does not consist in 
increasing 
our wants, which the civilization of the present age has been at 
pains to multiply, but in the opposite direction. 
The fewer our 
wants, the happier we shall ultimately be.
Vexation and anxiety will ever be the lot of those who hunt 
after pleasure and temporal happiness, instead of philosophy and 
quietism. 
Let it be clearly realised by the student of Yoga that
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 43 ---
CHAPTER V.
21
the great secret of true happiness consists in considering all obj^ ts 
as sources of grief. 
It is through ignorance thatman thinks one 
thing pleasant and another painful ; but let the curtain of Avidya 
be removed from his mind, and he will see that all objects are 
equally painful or pjeasant, in fact, he will be indifferent to them 
all. 
Let a wise man, therefore, shun the pain which has not yet 
come, and the fear of future pain will hold him back from present 
pleasure 
for he w^ll undeistand that every pleasure has in it the 
nidus of pain. 
If you ask, whence is this evil which we see in this 
world, we reply that there is no such thing as evil; what appears 
so is due to Avidyd. 
To the philosopher who has attained right 
knowledge, all is equal. 
The origin of evil lies in the relationship 
of the seer with the seen, soul with non~soul, spirit viith nature 
(material), experiencer with the experienced. 
The idea that soul is 
different from nature is the cause of all evil :—It arises from con­
founding the attributes with their substratum or receptacle in 
which they adhere. ^ All grief vanishes when the Yogi clearly 
understands the grand truth that matter exists but through the 
spirit; that nature has njo rehl existence of its own, but has its 
being through the entit}', spirit—in fact, matter is dependent on 
spirit for its existence, and not the latter on the former. 
Or as 
Patanjali has i t :— “ For the sake of it (soul) alone is the entity of 
the visible (matter).” 
The soul reaches the state of kaivalyam 
(isolation) when it separates itself from matter and dwells in 
its own pure light. 
To such a soul, even on earth, mundane exis­
tence ceases to have any tangible reality, though to others who i 
have not elevated themselves by this consideration, the world might | 
possess an existence, too gross to be safely ignored.
But let us not be understood fi’om the foregoing remarks 
that we recommend anything like misanthropic asceticism and 
inhuman self-mortification. 
These practices we have all along 
strongly denounced, and we think it our duty to enter our protest 
against them again in this place. 
Let a Yogi be unselfish, but not 
inhuman ; let him search real happiness in his soul, and not in the 
world ; let him move through the scenes and vicissitudes of life 
as a calm witness (intelligence), seeing all, feeling all, enjoying 
all, neither absorbed in any one, nor engrossed by them. 
To quote 
an old maxim— let him be a pearly liquid drop on a lotus-leaf, 
moving on it, but not adhering to it, ever keeping his soul free from 
all selfish anxieties and cares of the world, but taking nevertheless
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 44 ---
22
YOGA PHILOSOPHY.
active and earnest interest in tlie welfare of humanity. 
Let him 
conquer sorrow, grief and pain by contemplating upon the follow­
ing sublime Words of one of the brightest— if not the briglitest— 
gem of humanity, Lord Buddha : —
“ The first truth is of soj*rou5. 
Be not pocked !
Life which ye prize is long-drawn agony :
Onlj' its pains abide ; its pleasures are 
Like birds which light and fly.
“ The second truth is soi'row’s cause. 
What grief 
Springs of itself and springs not of desire? 
Senses and things perceived mingle and light 
Passion’s quick spark of fire.
The third is sorrows's ceasing. 
This is peace 
To conquerdove of self and lust of life,
To tear deep-rooted passion from the breast.
To still the inward strife ;
For love to clasp eternal beauty close ;
For glory to be Lord of self, for pleasure 
To live beyond the gods ; for countless wealth.
To lay up lasting treasure.
Of perfect service rendered, duties done.
In charity, soft speech, and stainless days. 
The riches shall not fade away in life,
Nor any death dispraise.
“ Then sorrow ends, for life and death liave ceased. 
How should lamps flicker when their oil is spent ? 
The old sad count is clear, the new is clean,
Thus hath a man content.”
Arnold’s Light of Asia.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 45 ---
CHAPTER VI.
“ The fourth, truth is the way. 
It openeth wide,
Plain for all^feet to tread, easy and near,
The noble eight-fold path, it goelh straight 
To peh,ce and refuge. Hear !” *
Now we enter upon the best known and most practical part 
of Yoga, viz., Yama, Niyama, Asana, Pranay/Hma, pratyahdra, 
Dhdrand, Dhydna and Samddhi. 
The first five belong to the 
Bahiranga, i.e., external Yoga, while the latter tliree to internal 
Yoga. 
These eight steps lead to the final goal of Kaivalyam or 
isolation, otlicrw'ise called emancipation, Mokhsha or I^irvdna.
1.— Yama.
(^Yama consists of five parts, and is the universal duty of alD 
It enjoins ahinsd (not-killing), satya (truth\ asteya (not stealing), 
BraJmacharya ■ (continence, and perfect chastity), aparigraha (not 
coveting). (_^It is a duty incumbent on all persons, whatever be 
their rank, nationality or country. 
It forms the first chapter of the 
universal code of morality. 
Almost all the evils of the world may 
be traced, directly or indirectly, to a breach of some one of these 
lavvsj Strict observance of these rules brings with it its own 
reward. However, we shall mention some of the perfections which a 
Yogi acquires, who adheres firmly to them. 
When a Yogi becomes 
completely harmless and has no hinsd whatever, then in his presence 
all ferocious animals forget their ferocity, none of them dare injure 
him, nor cause harm to each other while under his influence.' 
When a Yogi becomes a perfect lover of truth, and practises always 
veracity, he amasses a store of good karma without performing the 
usual sacrifices, alms, &c. 
When" his abstinence from theft is 
complete, all jewels of the earth, in whatever quarter they may be 
hid, come to him unasked, that is, he can command wealth if he 
leaves off totally the desire of wealth. 
If he practises perfect . 
Brahmaeharya, he gains strength. 
And it is but reasonable that it 
should be so : for every act of unchastity is destructive to self and 
power. 
If his uncovetousness is complete, he regains the knowledge 
of all his former states of existence. 
That this should be so is a
♦ Arnold’s Light o f Asia.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 46 ---
24
y o o A p s iL o s o P H r .
mystery apparently. 
But the word covetousness should he taken 
in its largest sense, i.e., the soul should not covet the body, which 
is its tabernacle and temporary home ; and thus when it becomes 
free from the body bj^ discarding it, it gains the knowledge of its 
past lives and deaths, and of the bodies whichdt had once filled. 
Of 
course virtue must be practised for its oipn sake without looking to 
any ulterior end, but in the economy of nature good acts are ever 
followed by good fruits. 
Nor must the above perfections, resulting 
from the practice of Yama, be regarded as fictitious and imagi­
nary. 
Lives of holy Rishis and saints, of every country and age, 
bear ample testimony to the truth of this doctrine. 
A person who 
loves all creatures, whose soul is in sympathy with all animate 
creation, emits a magnetic aura of great potentiality, and -every 
creature, however ferocious, must feel its influence. 
The most 
ferocious brute dares not lift its eyes in his presence, for the law of 
sympathy requires it so. 
Thus ahinsd 
made Pythagoras and 
Buddha tamers of the brute creation. 
We read in Manu :— “ He 
who injures no animated creature shall attain without hardship 
whatever he thinks of, whatever he strives for, whatever he fixes 
his mind on.”
Similarly, we can understand that a person who practises 
veracity acquires a store of good karmas, though he may not perform 
a single yajna. 
Of all virtues, truth is the most divine, and one 
who adheres to it has no need of sacrifices and ablutions. 
He will 
never do wrong or injustice, and thus, though not performing 
karma, will get its fruits.
“ When abstinence from theft is complete, all jewels come 
near him.” 
Let it not be thought to be an inducement for not steal­
ing ; noqcommission of theft is after all not a great virtue.' But 
what the author means is probably this, that a Yogi should not 
even entertain the thought of possessing, by unlawful means, the 
property of another. 
The word steya, translated into theft, includes 
fraud, misrepresentation, cheating, and even adultery ; for wife is 
said to be the property of her husband.
Similarly, that the practice of Brahmacliarya (chastity) should 
give strength, is very clear. 
Thei-e is a class of medical men who 
think total abstinence from sexual intercourse is productive of as 
injurious restdts as excessive venereal or sexual indulgence. 
They 
argue that every organ must have its normal and healthy use, while 
unuse must result in the atrophy of that part. 
From considerations
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 47 ---
GHAPTER VI.
25
like these they assert that celibacy is prejudicial to longevity, BraJi- 
rmeharya is a violation of the creative and reproductive law of nature. 
There is much truth in these remarks ; but do we not think that 
celibacy_is.meant bx.the word Brahmaeharya? 
Though for our own 
part, we believe celibacy unnatural, yet we are not prepared to 
admit that it is injurious tq,longevity. We have seen perfect celibates 
enjoying the best health possible, and attaining to old age. However, 
we think with Manu that it is not total abstinence only which 
constitutes Brahmaeharya, but moderation. 
“ He who abstains 
from conjugal embraces on the six reprehended nights and on eight 
others, is equal in chastity to a Brahmachari, in whichever of 
the two next orders he may live.” 
Nor is total abstinence a sine 
qua non of Yoga. There have been Hindus, Sikhs, Mahomedans, &c., 
who were married men, with wives and children, and still good 
Yogis. 
The best of them, in fact the teacher and discoverer of 
Yoga, the very ideal of a Yogi—stands the sublime picture of fJiva. 
Students of the Indian Yoga worship Him as the param guru-^ 
the great teacher—and a large class of people contemplate nothing 
but his attributes in their Dhydna. He, the founder and discoverer 
of this spiritual science, showed by f)is life^hat marriage, instead 
of being an obstacle in the path of spiritual enlightenment, posi­
tively facilitates the development. 
He is represented not only as a 
Yogi-raja, but the most loving of husbands and the kindest of 
fathers. 
Therefore, it is but reasonable to conclude that, by Brah­
maeharya the author Patanjali, does not mean celibacy, but conti­
nence.
The fifth part of Yama is “ non-eoveting.” 
Its fruit is the 
knowledge of past lives. 
It has been already explained what is 
meant by aparigralia, whose English equivalent, in the’ qjjsence of. 
anything better, we have given as above. 
It is that state in which 
the soul does not desire to have anything which is not its own ; and, 
as body is no part of -the soul, but is only a temporary house in 
which the soul resides, or rather a wonderful instrument on which 
the soul plays, a love therefore of body is a love of a thing which 
is not-soul, and, 
therefore, amounts to parigraha, or Covetous­
ness. 
That aparigralia produces knowledge of past existences, 
establishes, through implication, a much contested point in meta­
physics, viz., that the human soul has to pass through successirm 
stages before it becomes human. 
Many of us have been nurtured , 
in the belief that the soul is created with the body, and thus, though 
4
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 48 ---
26
rOOA PHILOSOPHY.
it has a beginning, it is nevertheless eternal. 
The position taken up 
■ by Patanjali and almost every school of Indian philosophy is that, 
-lot only the soul has no end, but it has no beginning as well. 
It 
had experienced many existences before it became human. 
The 
Yogi knows his past lives, which an ordinary man does not. 
But 
the question arises—did our souls exist before as human, or had it 
any other body, e.g., of the beast or the brute ? 
The principle of 
progress, as evidenced throughout the works of nature, proves 
to demonstration that the human soul has become so by passing 
through lower stages of existence,—stages of mineral, vegetable, 
and aiunial—and that this progress is in a spiral line, and not 
in a cii'cle. 
The theory of transmigration is reasonable only in so 
far as it propounds the doctrine of previous and subsequent exist­
ences, but it is gros.sly in error if it inculcates that man, however 
depraved, will ever revert to a brute or beast again. 
Those who 
quote Patanjali in support of the latter doctrine, seem not to have 
grasped the full spirit of his philosophy. 
He, no doubt, believes 
in the previous existences of soul, but there is no mention in his 
writings of this retrogression. 
The soul of a beast after a course 
of ages may become human; but once human, it can, under no 
ordinary circumstances, ever revert to beasthood. 
Taking it then 
as reasotiable that man had previous existences in the shape of 
lower animals, the next difficulty that arises is, how does one gain 
back the reminiscences of those long forgotten ages by simply non­
coveting of his body. 
To understand this properly, the enquirer 
should realise that there is no past, pre.sent or future in eternity ; 
nothing perhaps explains it so clearly as the phenomena of light. 
Suppose two persons, A and B, quarrel in a dark room, and A 
, strikes down B dead. 
Just at the moment when B falls, a light is 
brought into the room, when a third person, C, whom we suppose 
to be standing near the door of the room, will eee B fall just 
actually at the very moment when B fell. 
How did he see it ? 
Because the light, which was introduced into the room, carried 
with it the picture of B from the room into the eye of C standing 
outside. 
Suppose the distance from B to the eye of C to be 18 
feet, the time which light will take to travel from B to C will be so 
very inappreciable that we may call it instantaneous. 
But suppose 
C is situated at the distance of 180,000,000 miles instead of 18 feet, 
now the light which will reach his eyes will do so, ten seconds after 
-it was brought into the room, and 0 will see B falling ten seconds
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 49 ---
OHAPTEB Vt.
27
after the actual event. 
Again, suppbse C is standing on the star 
named Serius, and looking towards the room in which A and B 
fight. 
Now, astronomers have calculated that light takes about 
three years to travel from Serius to the earth, and vice versa. So C 
will see B falling some three years after the event, i.e., if B was 
killed in 1880, C will see i^; in 1883. 
Thus, what passed with us 
three years ago, will be present to 0. To take another example :— 
Suppose we wish to see the Durbar of Delhi which took place in 
1911, in the month of January. 
On our earth it is past three 
years. 
If we go to the distance of Serius, and then look to­
wards the spot on the earth where Delhi is, we shall ,see the 
whole Durbar passing before our sight. 
In fact, light carries for 
ever through space the pictures of things, and it is a calculation 
involving simple multiplication to find out at what distance a 
particular picture will be found at a particular time. 
The original 
may have perished long ago, but its picture is retained for eteimity 
in light. 
Under certain circumstances, the picture of the past is 
possible to be seen on this earth. 
Taking the above example of 
the Durbar, light travelled from the Earth to the Serius in three 
years, and reached that star in 1914 ; if this light be reflected from 
it by some polished surface back towards the earth three years 
after 1911, that is, in -191,4, so that even in this earth, if we will 
know the proper ray and catch it, we shall see the Durbar of Delhi 
three years after it actually took place. Thus by reading the pictures 
in the dkas (ether), one can know the past. 
Physical science may 
perhaps discover some day the means of developing these pictures 
impressed in the dkas ; but spiritual science has already attained 
it. 
Psychometry is a standing proof of this. 
And the means for 
attaining this end, as proposed by Yoga, is “ covet not the body.” 
Let the human soul free itself from this mortal coil, this prison- 
house of body, and in. its LzAgfa sanm (the etherial duplicate), it 
will be enabled as easily to read pictures impressed in ether, as in 
its material body it perceives phenomena.
Thus we have enumerated all the five parts of yama. 
They 
have been very aptly called the mahd vratas or the great duties. 
These vratas must have precedence over all other vratas. 
Those 
ceremonies which we now-a-days call vratas, such as fasting on the 
eleventh day of the moon, giving alms to Brahmans, &c., are all 
inferior to them. 
One who does not kill the most insignificant 
of the living creatures of God, commits no theft, violates not the
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 50 ---
28
YOGA PHltOSOPBY.
law of chastity, tells no falsehood, and covets not anything of 
the world, needs not perform any other vrata or ceremony. 
He 
needs not the guidance of priests, for he is a guide to himself. 
He 
may defy all the opposition of the ignorant of the age, and bravely 
go on in his path of duty.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 51 ---
CHAPTER VII.
j 
2.—Wiyama,
(^The second part ofjYoga is niyawa or sacred observances. 
It consists of five parts, vis., (1) sauclia (purification), (2) santo?a 
(contentment), (3) tapa (austerity), (4) swadhyava (inaudible and 
incessant repetition of 
the woi-d), 
and 
(5) Iswara-pranidhdna 
(persevering devotion to the Lord). 
These form tHesecond step 
of the ladder of Yoga.^ When one has got complete m^astery in 
the practice of the five mahdvratas, then one should turn one’s atten­
tion towards gaining perfection in these five sacfed observances. 
They all relate to practices calculated to bring about a calm state 
of mind, and thereby prepare it for concentration.
■ We shall now enumerate the fruits of this five-fold ob­
servance. 
The result of purification, which means mental as well 
as bodily purification (a) is two-fold :— “ It produces a loathing for 
one’s own members and non-intercourse with others, and (fi) "pro­
duces the purity in the quality of goodness, complacency, intentness, 
subjugation of the senses, and fitness for beholding the soul.” 
A clean body can only contain a pure soul, and if the bodily 
tabernacle be kept unclean and impure, the indwelling soul receives 
the taint. 
We cannot believe that a person who swelters in im­
purities of the flesh can possess a pure soul. 
A filthy body must 
have a filthy tenant. 
It is from this consideration that we condemn 
those Hatha Yogis, who live a filthy physical life, whose bodies smell 
of odours inexpressible, and many of whom glory in the command 
over their nerves, as expressed in swallowing filth and ordure of every 
kind. 
Such practices are simply disgusting and not countenanced 
by true Yoga. Purification of the body produces mental purification, 
which in itself is not a small gain. But besides that, it produces, as 
said above, a loathing for one’s own members "Und that of others too. 
When we clearly see before our mental sight what a sack of foulness 
and filth our body is, what a veritable dung-hill of nuisance is 
contained within it, we cannot but feel disgusted with it, and begin 
to love our bodies less and our souls more. 
This purification also 
detaches our souls from the love of women and beautiful faces. 
IX 
at once reminds us that physical beauty is but a painted sepulchre, 
containing within it abominations, and that our souls should not be
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 52 ---
30
r O Q A V E i t O S O V m .
ensnared in the meshes of outward charms, but piercing through 
the fleshy curtain, look into the soul within and fall in love with 
that, if it be beautiful. 
Beautiful souls let us love by all means, 
but not allow ourselves to be misled by beautiful bodies. 
This is 
one result of saueha. 
It shows our own fouli^iess as well as that of 
others; and inasmuch as it produces disgust of physical bodies, it 
indirectly helps the mind in the attainment of concentration. 
But 
it has also a direct bearing on the subject.
Our bodies 
are made up of 
three qualities—goodness, 
passion, and darkness. 
Health is the result when the quality of 
goodness (satwa guna) is predominant, and disease when darkness 
predominates. 
By saueha the quality of goodness is made pureTit 
is freed from the two other qualities—Raja and Tama (passion and 
darkness) ; in other words,— and to use modern phraseology,— 
saueha produces health. 
When there is health, there is cheerfulness 
and complacency. 
The unhealthy are 
generally 
moping and 
melancholy ; but sound physical health engenders buoyancy and 
elasticity of spirit. 
When there is cheerfulness, it brings intentness, 
{ekdgrata}. 
It is the fixing of the mind to one train of ideas ; but 
when the mind is not cheerful, it is impossible so to fix it. 
When 
there is ekagrata, and the mind is intent upon one subject, tlien 
there is indy'iya jaya (subjugation of senses). 
For all of us have 
seen that, when deeply engaged in one thought, we are not conscious 
of any external event, our senses are abstracted from the perform­
ance of their function, and we are said to be in abstraction. 
Where 
there is subjugation of the senses and perfect abstraction, the mind 
sees the soul. 
For what must one be cognizant of but his own soul, 
when one has made himself totally unconscious to the impressions 
conveyed by the senses ? 
And seeing one’s soul is Yoga. 
Thus 
we see how saueha, through an unbroken chain of effects, leads to 
Yoga.
Next to purification, comes santoga (contentment). 
“ The 
fruit of santosa is superlative felicity.” 
Contentment is the foun­
tain of true happiness. 
Our desires are infinite and insatiable, and 
lead but to so”row. 
Happiness for which every one strives is not 
the result of enjoyment. 
There is a Persian saying, “ Contentment 
makes one rich ’’ nay, we say it makes one more than kings. 
A 
person is rich who has more than he desires, and, as one who is 
contented, has few desires— he is rich. 
We measure riches by 
wealth, but it is a false standard. 
The true measure of riches is
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 53 ---
CHAPTEB VII.
31
our wants. 
If our wants be greater than our means to supply them, 
we are poor; but if our wants be few we are rich. 
Contentment 
is the true philosopher’s stone. 
It diminishes our wants and mul­
tiplies our happiness. 
But we hear some to object that contentment 
is the bane of progress ; the contented people are always stationary ; 
that multiplicaHon of our»wants is a sign of civilization, and it is 
only among less ad^janced nations that we see the so-called virtue 
of contetitment: civilized nations 
ai’e ever pi’ogressive, never 
content. 
To all this we reply :—What is after all 
the result 
of all 
your 
vaunted 
civilization ? 
Has it 
not 
made 
men 
heartless, greedy 
and 
selfish ? 
Has it not sown discontent 
broad and wide ? 
Does it not 
give rise to pains, envy and 
heart-burnings ? 
Has it not turned all our energies to material 
improvements, external progress, and made us forget that we have 
a soul to save, immortality to achieve ? 
Has materialistic philoso­
phy made a single soul happy, or has it not cast a gloomy Shroud 
of sadness apd doubt over all our spiritual aspirations of futurity ? 
No, this philosophy stands self-condemned, as it has failed to 
achieve its object, viz., the increase of the sum total of human 
happiness. 
Nor do we admit that because a nation practises 
contentment it becomes incapable of progress and enterprise. 
Contentment only purges away the dross of self from our actions, 
and makes all our deeds shine with a lustre divine. 
It inspires 
the nation with love of justice and fair-play ; and, since it takes 
away the petty, cold,-calculating greediness, which is the charac­
teristic of most of the civilized nations, it makes us truly noble. 
Contentment is not a foe to progress, but it offers the necessary 
counterbalance to that spirit of insatiate hunger, which progress 
tends to generate.
Now we return to the fruit of tnpa or taking trouble or 
exercise. 
“ The prelection of the bodily senses by the removal 
of impurity is the fruit of austerity.” 
It is a well-known law of 
nature that exercise strengthens our bodily organs ; and that, if an 
organ is not properly exercised, it becomes imperfect. 
The system 
of tapa lays down minute rules for the perfection of the bodily 
senses. 
By a course of severe and rigorous discipline all our 
senses are sharpened and perfected. 
Tapa during these latter days 
of Indian history, has degenerated into physical penance and morti­
fications, totally unfruitful of the beneficial results contemplated. 
For a description of the various kinds of ta'pas, the reader is
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 54 ---
32
YOGA PHILOSOPHY.
referred to treatises like Manu Sanhita, Yiijnyavalkya, &c. 
Any 
book on gymnastics will give moi-e about the rules of tapas than 
we can do within the short space at our command. 
But, in passing, 
we may be allowed to remark that our tapns should not be confined 
to any one bodily organ, but to all. Thus, we^hould try to improve 
the keenness of our sight by looking stcadil}' towards the stars, to 
make ourselves proof against heat and cold by bathing in cold 
water, during winter and so on. 
In fact, any practice tending 
towards the perfection of bodily senses is a tapas.
Fourthl}', a s. to the fruits jjf incessant repetition of the 
word 
Through swadhyaya, there is meeting with one’s favorite 
deity.” 
This requires no explanation. 
If we constantly and 
earnestly call upon a person, and if such a person does exist, it is 
but rational to suppose that he will answer our call. 
Deities or 
Devas are higher than pitras or spirits. 
Modern theology has 
named thenr angels, seraphs, cherubs, &c., while modern theosophy 
is pleased to call them elementals, spirits and elementaries. 
Some 
of these Devas are beneficient and others malignant; however, both 
classess possess powerful attributes. 
In India, we have a class of 
religionists who are known as devatd-siddhas, i.e., those who have 
met with their special deity. 
Some worship Durga, others Ganesla, 
some Siva, and so on. 
These persons, from intently repeating the 
name of a particular deity for a certain number of times, at last 
see that deity and receive certain powers as a reward of their 
labour. 
Some pan cure peculiar diseases, others can find lost 
treasure, &c. 
That there is a good deal of imposition by them, 
and that all their vaunts and pretensions may not be true, is proved , 
beyond doubt. 
But that there are genuine and real devatd-siddhas 
is equally certain. 
But it is not a very high order of perfection 
after all, that we should aim at it. 
Rather we should leave the 
Devatas to themselves, for they are potent to do evil as well as 
good, and it is not always easy to invoke them. 
Instead of 
worshipping any of these second?iry deities, we should try to 
invoke none but the only one without a second, and dovote to 
Uwara pninidhdna, the fruit of which is as follows ; —
“ Perfection in meditation (samddhi-siddhi) comes froni 
persevering 
devotion 
to 
the 
Lord.” 
In fact, 
as we have 
said in the 
previous 
chapter, this 
path, is the easiest, most 
simple, and pleasantest of all. 
“ Love thy God with all thy heart, 
soul, and with all thy might,”, is the formula which explains the
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 55 ---
CBAFTER V II.
33
adeptship of Lord Jesus and other saints. 
Jndna Yogis aie ~veiy 
few, but the BJiakti Yog<i, being simple in theory and easy of 
practice, has been always popular with the masses. 
The essence of 
this system of Yoga is faith— faith in one’s own-self, and faith in 
one’s own God. 
But the path, though less difficult, is not all 
smooth sailing. 
While Jndna Yoga is definite and certain of its 
results, the Bhakti Yoga is*vague, indefinite and uncertain. . Trance 
and ecstacy are tl*e states which sometimes so fascinate the 
imagination of the Bhahta, that he thinks it the ultima thule of 
samadhiy and does not wish to progress further. 
Moreover, there is 
more discordance of views among religionists than among philoso­
phers. 
For, religion appeals more to the feelings than ihtuition, 
and 
consequently there is seldom found harmony among the 
saints of the world. 
No doubt both lead to the same goal, and it is 
a matter of choice, which of these one prefers.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 56 ---
CHAPTER VIII.
2.— Asana.
^The third afiga of Yoga is dsana (posture). 
The best posture 
is that which is steady and pleasant. 
If wo be uncomfortably 
seated, it is clear that our thoughts will be never collected.^ A 
good conscience, which follows from the practice of yama; and 
sound health which is the result of niyama, are no doubt very 
necessai*^y! 
But given a clear conscience and sound health, the 
third requisite is good posture while practising Yoga. 
The later 
authors on Yoga mention some eighty-four different postures, e.g., 
Padm&sana, Yogdsana, Siddhdsana, Sukhdsana, and so on. 
But 
Patanjali is very wisely silent on this point, and leaves the question 
of dsana to be settled by everybody for himself. 
He only points 
out the conditions of a good dsana, and does not enter into details. 
As a guide for the beginner, we 
here quote some few of the 
postures.
The Vi?nu Purdrxa gives the following directions :— “ Sitting 
with the feet stretched out and so crossed as to touch the thighs, 
with the right hand stretched out and resting on the left, with 
the tongue fixed in the palate, and without bringing one row of 
teeth in contact with the other, with the eyes directed to the tip of 
the nose, and without glancing at any of the four quarters of the 
sky, let him meditate,” &c.
The Buddhist method i s
“ If the mode called pwankea be 
adopted, then the left leg is placed above the right and drawn 
close into the body, so that the toes of the left foot be placed evenly 
on the right thigh, and those of the right foot on the left thigh. But 
if the tsHnen-kea mode of sitting be preferred, then the right leg is 
to be put uppermost. The palm of the left hand shoitld be placed in 
the hollow of the right, corresponding to the position of the legs. 
The next requirement is to straighten the body'. 
Having first of all 
stretched the joints seven or eight times, let the spine be perfectly 
straight, neither curved nor humped, the head and neck upright, 
the nose exactly plumb with the navel, neither awry, nor slanting, 
nor up, nor down, but ti^e whole face straight and perfectly 
fixed.”
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 57 ---
CHAPTER VIII.
35
According to the Persian method, the devotee sits on his 
hands, cross-legged, passing the outside of the right foot over 
the left thigh, and that of the foot over the right thigh ; he then 
places his hands behind his back, and holds in his left hand the 
great toe of the right foot, and in the right hand the great toe of 
the left foot, fixing his ey^s intently on the tip of the nose.”
The aim ofj Yoga being to train the will-power, a steady j 
posture should never be neglected. 
Determination and firmness of 
will appear as much from actions, as from the outward demeanour 
of the person. 
A strong-willed person will always sit upright, and 
walk with upraised head, straight and steadily; while*a weak 
person will be always changing his posture, whether sitting or 
standing; his gait in motion is shambling, wavering and zigzag, 
and his every step betrays infirmity and want of resolution of the 
mind. 
Such a one can never sit at his ease for any length of time 
in one posture, but will be constantly shifting it. 
Therefore, 
it is of great importance to learn ‘ fisana.’ 
No doubt it wjll be 
found irksome to a degree in the beginning, to be sitting like 
a statue without motion, in one posture; but habit will make 
it pleasant.
/'The result or fruit of practising asana i s :—“ There is no 
assault from the pairs,^i e., heat and cold, hunger and thirst, &c. 
By assuming a steady manly posture, our nerves are braced and 
tightened with the tightening of the body, and enable the body to 
resist heat and cold better, than a loose and weak one. 
Now for an 
example : if on a cold day. you sit shivering and trembling and con­
torting yourself into diverse postures to feel warm, ten to one you 
will feehmore cold ; but if, on the contrary, you tight yourself up, 
erect your spine, and sit steadily in any one of the dsauus mentioned 
before, or in fact in any posture, you will at once feel a considerable 
diminution of cold and a pleasant increase of Ireat. 
The reason of 
this may be, that in sitting with our chest straight we inhale 
more oxygen, and our blood is more completely aerated than other- 
and so enables us to keep up the normal temperature. 
In
wise:
summer, when one is perspiring profusely and finds little relief 
from the fan, let him assume a good asana, and witness with what a 
magic effect all the sweat vanishes and he feels comfortably cool.
CA steady asana produces mental equilibrium, )and thus explains 
some of the results which follow from its mastery. 
We can resist 
the claims of hunger and thirst for a long time, if we turn away our
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 58 ---
36.
YOQA PHILOSOPHY.
thoughts from them ; and dsana, (by diverting our minds from 
them and strengthening our will) produces the desired result.
The postures should be continued not only while practising 
Yoga, but always. 
While walking, let our steps fall firm and 
steady, and so in sleep, &c. 
W e should regularly drill ourselves 
to perfection, and must never lose sighttof these apparently trifling 
things.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 59 ---
-CHAPTER IX.
a 
4— Prdr)&ydma.
tPr^i^^'inn. is mean>t to restrain the inspiration and expiration. 
Prana is synonymous with bieath and life. 
It has both thes6 mean­
ings./ The ancient philosophers of India had, at a very early 
period of their investigations, discovered the grand truth that life, 
as found in higher animals, is dependent upon oxygen. 
Modern 
science but confirms their view. 
Of the “ tripod of life,” pomposed 
of the lungs, heart, and brain, the latter two are Ordinarily beyond 
tlie control of our direct volition. 
The heart will beat, and the 
hemispheres of the cerebrum will go on with their work giving birth 
to thought, &c., (as a rule) independent of will. 
These two hemis­
pheres, as well as the heart, are not under our control. The muscular 
fibres of the heart contract and dilate from the action or direct in­
fluence of the brain as well as the nervous ganglia centred in its very 
substance. 
The action of the hearh On the whole, is involuntary ; 
though sometimes, as under the influence of great fear or excite­
ment, its motion may be acceleiated or retarded considerably be­
yond normal limits. 
Unconscious cerebration goes on simultane­
ously with the impulse of the heart, and then manifested as 
conscious ideas, independent of the will. 
The heart is the principal 
organ which, by propelling the blood through the lungs aerates 
and purifies it, and, by distributing it through the arteries, keeps up 
the animal life. To suspend animal life, therefore, we must suspend 
the action of the heart, so that the various organs, such as the 
eye, the ear, &c., may become for the time paralysed, and the 
spirit liberated. All the senses work harmoniously so long as they 
receive a pure blood suppl3’^ from the heart ; and when that is 
stopped or vitiated their action also stops or becomes dull or 
deadened. 
But as the action of the heart has been shown to be in­
voluntary, to influence it we must act through the lungs,— in 
other words, through the breath. PrSnayfima (or regulation of the 
breath) treats, consequently, of all those methods which temporarily 
suspend the functions of animal life, and thereby facilitate the liber­
ation of the spirit- 
There are different modes of bringing about 
this result, but the one proposed by the Yogi through the regulation 
of the breath, is the easiest, and safest, and, what is its greatest
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 60 ---
38
YOGA PBILOSOPHY.
recomtneridatioa, it requires no external accessories. 
Fumigation, 
dancing, music, &c., have been employed by various mystics to 
bring about trance, but all these mean the help of external adjuncts. 
The Aryan mind, panting after absolute liberty, would never be in­
debted to anything beyond its own soul. 
It'always strove to find 
all its resources within itself, and thus itcbecame really, and, in the 
true sense of the word, free. 
Music and fumigating pastilles or 
essences and spirits, balsams and ointments, may not always be with 
you, and if by Pranfiyama you can bring about the same result as 
the Magi by his incense, or the wizard by his ointment, ov the Fnqir 
by his music, where then is the necessity of all these appliances ? 
They seem to a true Yogi as so many fetters and hindrances, 
rather than helps. 
Thus the extreme simplicity of the methods 
employed by our forefathers strikes us at every turn, and gives 
ample proof of their wisdom and knowledge of psychology.
To understand fully the action of respiration on life, some 
knowledge of physiology is absolutely necessary.- 
With this pur­
pose we give below a short account of the three organs—the heart, 
lungs and brain— and shall try to show their relation with each 
other and action and inter-action.
To begin with the heart:— It is a small muscular sac of 
the size of the human fist inclined to the left side of the 
chest, underneath the ribs. 
Its apex corresponds with the left 
nipple and is broad at the base, resembling in form a betel leaf. 
Its colour is dark purple. 
The inside of the sack is divided into 
two chambers, by a muscular wall running mid-way, and called 
the right and left divisions. 
The impure blood, which is of a dark 
color, comes, through the various veins of the body, into one princi­
pal vein, which discharges its contents into the right half of the 
heart. 
From the right chamber, the impure blood goes to the 
lungs, where, being purified by absorbing oxygen, it comes to the 
left side of the heart, and is thence driven to the whole body by the 
arterial system. 
The two chambers of the heart contain different 
kinds of blood— the right half containing the dark, purple, venous 
blood ; and the left, bright, crimson, arterial blood. 
The effect of 
the dark venous blood on the nerves is to deaden their suscep­
tibility, while that of the bright arterial blood is to quicken the 
vitality; the vetious blood produces asphyxia, because it contains 
a good deal of carbonic acid, the product of muscular waste; 
while the arterial blood sustains life, because it contains a great
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 61 ---
CHAPTER IX .
39
proportion of oxygen. 
In the economy of the human system, the 
heart serves as a general caterer, which supplies nourishment to 
the whole body.
The lungs are intimately related to the heart. 
They are 
two large organs situ§ted in the thoracic cavity containing air-cells. 
Under a microscope a sniall section of the substance of the lungs, 
if examined, will be found to consist of infinite minute cavities, 
lined with a very tfiin membrane. 
The blood remains outside of 
these cavities, which are full of air. 
Tlie exchange 
the caidtonic 
acid of the blood with the oxygen of the air does not take place 
direct, but through the intervention of this thin membrane.
The brain is the organ of the mind, the seat of intellect and 
ideas. 
The centre whence the nerve-force for the production of 
combined respiratory movement appears to issue, is situated in the 
interior of that part of medplla oblongata, from which the pneumo- 
gastric nerves arise. This part of the medulla oblongata is the 
nerve centre, which gives rise to the respiratory movements and 
through which impulses conveyed from distant parts are reflected. 
With every beating of the heart and the heaving of the breath, the 
brain cerebrates. 
The effect of breathing on thought is very well 
explained by Swedenborg, which we quote b e l o w “ Thought 
commences and corresponds with respiration. 
The reader has 
•before attended to the presence of the heaving over the body j now 
let him feel his thoughts, and he will see that they too heave with 
the mass. 
Whei. he entertains a long thought, he draws a long 
breath; when he thinks quickly, his breath vibrates with rapid 
alternation ; when the tempest of anger shakes his mind, his breath 
is tumultuous ; when his soul is deep and tranquil, so is his respira­
tion; when success inflates him, his lungs are as timid as his 
concepts. 
Let him make trial of the contrary ; let him endeavour 
to think in long stretches, at the same time that he breathes in fits, 
and he will find that it is i.mpossible ; that in this case, the chop­
ping will needs mince his thoughts. 
Now, this mind dwells in the 
brain, and it is the brain, therefore, w'hich shares the varying 
fortunes of the breathing. 
Inward thoughts have inward breaths, 
and purer spiritual breaths hardly mixed with material.”
We have said before that prdmyama aims at suspending the 
functions of the physical and mental bodies, and that it tries to do 
so, among other things, by reducing the beating of the heart through, 
restraining the breath. 
This is the highest aim of prdmy&ma.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 62 ---
40
YOOA PHILOSOPHY.
But now-a-days those who practise Yoga and ■prariayama generally 
do not think of reducing the normal action of tbe heart. 
They 
wish to harmonise the faculties by slow, steady' and synchro­
nous breathing. 
The mind may be compared to a gas flame, 
which 
is being constantly agitated by the 
uneven flow of 
the gas' from the pipe, and not being wejl protected by properly 
constructed chimneys and shades from external a ir; the blood 
which the heart sends to the brain is the gas which sustains the 
flame of the mind ; and owing to the various passions and feelings, 
the supply of blood to the brain is not always constant; and the 
mind flickers and flutters, and sheds but a tremulous light. 
Therefore, by the practice of the praydyamie method, the Yogi, 
consciously or unconsciously, sends a constant, uninterrupted and 
equable stream of blood to the. brain, and tries to keep the flame 
ever steady.
The methods of prdv&ydma are infinite, and a vast majority 
of them very difficult to practise. 
Among the Persians, it is known 
by the name of habs-i-dam, confining of breath. 
The technical 
name of inspiiution is puraka; expiration is called reehaka, and 
restraining of breath is known as kumhhaka. 
One of the methods 
in general pl-actice is the follow in g:—Close with the thumb of 
the right hand the right nostril, and breathe slowly through tbe 
left one, repeating seven times the word Om ; then close both the' 
nostrils and restrain the breath for a space of time sufficient for 
repeating the sacred formula Om tat sat (or any other favourite 
mantra) fourteen tiines; and then breathe out through the right 
nostril, repeating the mystic syllable seven times. 
This should be 
practised continually till the Yogi can sit in kumbhaka for minutes 
together. 
It can be done by slowly increasing the period of kum- 
bhaka by increasing the duration from fourteen to twenty-one 
times, and so on by every increment of seven. 
There are ordinary 
grihastas even, who have carried the practice of kumbhaka to such 
lengths that they can easily restrain their breath for five or six 
minutes. 
A beginner needs not despair if he can, after the 
practice of a month, withhold his breath for a minute,— as a minute 
will seem like an hour.
Another method peculiar to the Persian is the follow ing:— 
Sitting in a good dsana, inspire slowly, repeating the word nist 
till the lungs are so much filled that the pressure of the diaphragm 
is felt at the navel; then incline the head towards the right breast,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 63 ---
GHAFTER IX.
41
reciting the woid hasti, and expel the breath ; and raise the head 
up, take a deep inspiration, repeating the word magar ; afterwards 
uttering ydzd&fi, and, inclining the head on the left side, expel the 
breath. 
“ The devotee makes no pause between the words thus 
recited.” 
The formula is nest hasti, magar yazd&h. 
“ There is no 
existence save God.” 
In^this system, there is Ho himhhaka, but 
reehaka and puraka pnly, and the period between them is gradually 
lessened, so that in one minute the devotee repeats the formula 
more than a hundred times. 
We saw a Muhammadan friend of 
ours practising this method ; but he had substituted, instead of the 
above words, the formula Allah Hu,—raising his head witii Allah 
and throwing it down with Hu. 
He repeated thenj so very quickly, 
and threw his head from one side to the other so incessantly, that 
within a short time he felt exhausted, and afterwards informed us 
that he could go into a trance wdthin five minutes by continuing it. 
Another modification of the same method is that in which the 
devotee raises and drops his head and utters several formulae in 
one breath, gradually increasing their number. 
This latter method 
is more calm and less exciting, and the duration of kumhhaha, 
being continually increased, approaches more to the Hindu system, 
and is the real habs-i-dam,—restraining of the breath.
Another Persian method is :— “ The 
worshipper, 
having 
closed the right nostril, enumerates the names of God from one 
to sixteen times, and, whilst counting, draws his breath upwards, 
after which he repeats it twenty-two times lets the breath escape 
out of the right nostril, and, whilst counting, propels the breath 
aloft, thus passing from the six khans or stages to the seventh' 
until, from the intensity of imagination, he arrives at a state 
in .which he thinks that his soul and breath are bound like the 
jet of a fountain to the crown of the head.” 
After this, there fol­
lows a very peculiar and mystical passage :— “ As causing the 
breath to mount to the crown of the head is a power peculiar to the 
most eminent persons, so whoever can convey his breath and soul 
together to that part becomes the viceregent of God.” 
We do not 
say that we have fully uuderatood the above passage, but having 
some knowledge of the symbolical writing of our forefathers, we 
think that the above sentence should be construed not in its literal 
sense, but occult signification. 
Breath is the vehicle of thought, 
soul or jivatmS,; this jivdtmd must be purified and united with 
the paramdtmd, whose seat is represented to be the crown of the
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 64 ---
42
YOGA PHILOSOPHY.
head. 
When this unification is complete, man becomes one with 
Brahma.
The seven stages alluded to above are the following;—(1) 
between the organ of generation and anus; (2) the root of the 
organ; (3) the navel; (4) the heart; (5) the throat; (6) between 
the eyebrows; and (7) the crown of the head. 
The first is the seat 
of the earth ; the second, of the water ; the tjiird, of the fire; the 
fourth, of air ; the fifth, of the ether ; the sixth, of the mind ; and 
the seventh, of the Param^itma. 
The human soul must pass through 
all these stages before it can join with its original source. 
The 
fimt is yie cause of the physical body, the second, of vital force, the 
third, of the astral body or Lifiga Sarira, the fourth, of the.aerial 
body or Kamrdpa, the fifth, of the etherial body or elemental spirit, 
the sixth is the human soul, and the seventh needs no explanation. 
A Yogi, as long as he does not conquer the first step, stands in peed 
of solid food ; when he reaches the second stage, he can dispense 
with it, and would require only liquid food ; and the more he 
progresses, the more subtle becomes his nourishment. 
We have 
rather digressed from our subject intentionally, in order to warn 
the unguided reader of Yoga not to take literally whatever he finds 
in those ancient occult books. 
Nay, he may meet with some misled 
and misleading Yogis who will 
seriously tell him to practise 
prdriaydma hy drawing his breath forcibly up to the Brahmaran- 
dhra,—a feat which, under the present constitution of our body, is 
simply impossible. 
Ignorant, self-taught Yogis are always exposed 
to the danger of degenerating into Hatha Yoga. We know of a lady 
who, putting a wrong interpretation on a passage in the Bhagavat 
Gitii, practised prdmydma all night and became mad ; and it was 
after many days that she regained her intellect, after being daily 
mesmerised by her brother.
Buddhists enumerate four kinds of respiration :— “ 1st, the 
windy ; 2nd, gasping ; 3rd, emotional; and 4th, pure respiration. 
The fimt three modes are unharrnonised ; the last is harmonised. 
When the breath passing in and out of the nostrils is perceived by 
the noise it makes, it is called windy ; second, although thei'e is no 
noise in breathing, yet, when the respiration is broken and uneven, 
as though it comes not through a clear passage, it is gasping ; the 
third is emotional, when, although there is no noise or gasping, 
still the respiration is not equable or smooth. 
Proper and pure 
respiration is that in which there is neither noise nor gasping nor
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 65 ---
GHA.PTEE IX.
43
uneven breathing, but it is calm and regular, the sign of an equable 
and well balanced mind.”
Another method of regulating the breath is as follows :— 
Close with tlie thumb of your right hand the right ear, and with 
that of the left hand, ^le left .ear. 
Close with the two index fingers 
the two eyes, place the tw® middle fingers upon the two nostrils, 
and let the remaining fingers press upon the upper and the lower 
lips. 
Draw a deep breath, close both the upper nostrils at once, 
and swallow the breath. 
This act of swallowing, if Well done, will 
make a partial vacuum in tlie passages of the nostrils and the 
mouth, and there will be felt a strain upon the auditory nervps which 
will be partially paralysed, followed by confused humming in the 
ears Keep the breath inside as long as you conveueintly can ; then 
expire it slowly, and so on. 
Swallowing of the breath not only 
facilitates the deadening of the nerves of the ear, but after some 
tiipe the eye in its turn will be affected. 
Strange coruscations 
similarly, blue and white flashes like theriightning, will pass before 
the eyes. 
These lights must not be mistaken for the pure astral 
light of which we will speak soon, but they owe their existence 
to the physical pressm-e which falls upon the optic nerve.”
” Another mode, which is rather dangerous, is by directing 
the current of the breath towards the heart. 
Breath is drawn in 
such a way that the left lung is distended more than the right, 
and presses upon the heart. 
But the process being somewhat 
perilous, and the present writer having pledged his word to his 
instructor not to reveal it without his express permission, though 
there is after all nothing much in it worth keeping back, he for­
bears for the present from entering into details. 
Broad hints, 
however, have been given in the foregoing lines, which, if under­
stood and practised, might lead to speedy attainment of perfec­
tion in prSndy&ma than any other method.”
Sanskrit authors of comparatively modern ^ rio d unneces­
sarily complicate this simple system of prdtfdydma, as taught bj' the 
original teacher, PataSjali, by enumerating five different kinds of 
vdyus or winds. 
These vdyus preside over the various functions 
in the*human economy, and are called— 1st, the PrfinA vAyu, or 
the ascending air with its seat at the fore end or tip of the no.se ; 
2nd, the ApAna vayu or the descending air with its seat in the anus ; 
3rd, the Vyana vayu moves in all directions, and is present in all 
parts of the body ; 4th, the Udana vayu is the ascending air, situated
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 66 ---
'44
YOOA PHILOSOPHY.
in the throat; 5th, Sanx^na v4yu, the air inside the body, which 
helps the digestion of food. 
“ These five vital airs originate in 
the active attribute of ether and other elements. 
With the five 
organs action they constitute what is designated “ the life-sac.” 
From the above classification of vagus andotheir intimate connec­
tion with the life-sac or anna-maya 605a oit has been argued that 
to suspend, though temporarily, the active phenomena of life one 
must have control over these five winds. 
Rut to us all this seems 
to be altogether unnecessary. 
Proper regulation of the Pranavayu 
is sufficient for the purpose, and we need not trj’^ to learn the 
method(Of regulating the other winds.
Pranftyama is both natural as well as artificial. 
Whenever 
a person thinks intensely on a subject, his breath of itself assumes 
proper prana3famic motion. 
Observe the respiration of one in deep* 
sleej^and you will get some idea of what should be the proper dura­
tion, etc., of the breath for a Yogi. 
A Yogi but consciously produces 
that state of respiration which is favourable for contemplation, as 
others produce occasionally and unconsciously. 
Often one can 
in the stillness of night, when sleep does not visit his eyelids, and 
ideas flow uncalled and unasked for put himself to sleep by merely 
drawing in and expelling breath simultaneously and synchronously 
with that of any other person sleeping near him. 
Thus often by 
bringing one’s breath in harmony with that of another he can 
enjoy the same state for felicity as the other; and though we 
cannot vouch for the truth of the theory from our own personal 
experience, yet we say there might be something in that saying, 
which asserts ; “ bring thy breath in harmony with that of another, 
and thou wilt know what passes in his mind.”
The hygienic effect of pranAyama is beyond doubt. 
We 
have seen a friend curing small ailments like headache or approach 
of fever and cold, by simply practising pranayama.
There are many points in connection with regulation 
of breath 
which 
we 
now-a-days 
class 
among supei’stitions, 
since we have lost the rationale. 
Thus it is said that one’s 
undertakings will all prove successful if he commences it when 
he respires through his right nostril. 
Similarly, if you start from 
your home to visit a friend, and wish to know whether you will 
find him or not at home, examine your breath ; if it flows through 
the right nostril, you will see him, otherwise not. 
There are others 
who could tell the hour, of the day from the motion of their breath.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 67 ---
CHAPTER IX.
45
It is said, that in every healthy person the breath (technically 
known as sura) changes from one nostril to the other at well-estab­
lished regular intervals, and thus from its being right or left-sided, 
those practised in it can appi’oximately say the hour of the day.
Now, for tha fruit or result of pran4y&ma:—“ .Thereby is 
removed the obscuratiopjof the light.” 
The light here alluded to 
is the pure sAttvik light which the Yogi sees in his heart when in 
deep contemplation. 
It may be the same light which the mespier- 
ised subjects of Baron Reichenbach saw issuing from the poles of 
the magnet, &c. 
When mesmerising, we have invariably found 
that the first thing which the mesmerised person sees, as soon as 
his eyes are closed in utter darkness, as black as night. 
Slowly, in 
this darkness there are seen flashes of blue liglit which growing 
stronger, the subject begins to see a blue atmosphere surrounding 
him. This is the chid^kdsi of the Vedllntins, the region of imagina­
tion. 
Pictures and persons seen in this light are generally the pro­
ducts of the brain of the sensitive, and have no objective reality. 
This light gives way to pure white electric light, very brilliant, and 
described as more pleasant, clear and luminous than that of the sun. 
This is the chiddkdsa proper, the light of intelligence or soul, 
through which the clairvoyant sees.
A further result of prvln4y&raa is “ that the mind becomes 
fit for acts of attention.” 
This requires no explanation. 
When 
there is harmony in breathing, there also ensues harmony in ideas, 
and the mind becomes better adapted to acts of attention.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 68 ---
NOTE.
The importance of Prat^dydma is recpgnized by some of 
the celebrated medical authorities of the^ present day as may be 
gathered from the following extract from “ A Lecture on means for 
the Prolongation of Life ” delivered by Sir Hernfann Weber, M D., 
F.R. O.P., before the Royal College of Physicians of London and 
published is the British Medical Journal for Deceml^er 5th. 1903. 
i t in needless to add that “ Respiratory Exercises” mean Prmjtd- 
ydvia. 
^
R espiratory E xercises.
“ The remarkable improvement in the heart’s nutrition and 
action is, I think, to a great degree caused by the deep inspirations 
which are necessitated by the act of climbing, especially steady and 
prolonged climbing. This consideration has led me to pay particular 
attention to respiratory exercises, which since then have been 
very useful to myself and many others, especially persons with 
weak heart muscles. 
I make no claim of originality for these 
exercises ; they are only a modification of several'older systems of 
gymnastics. 
As in walking and other bodily exercises, the amount 
and modus of respiratory movements which are useful, greatly vary 
with the inidividual condition, and must be adapted to the latter. 
It is often injurious in eases of weakness of .the heart or lungs, or 
the sequelm of pneumonia or’ pleurisy or other acute disease, 
especially influenza, to begin at once 
with forced respiratory 
movements. 
I have mostly commenced 
with moderately deep 
inspirations and expirations, 
continued during 
three to five 
minutes, once or twice a day, and have gradually increased the 
exercise to ten minutes or a quarter of an hour. 
The depth of 
each inspiration and expiration, is likewise to be only gradu­
ally increased. 
At the beginning, a sixth or a quarter or half a 
minute, for every inspiration and every expiration ought to be 
sufficient; if this is 
well borne, each 
act may be gradually 
prolonged in duration, so that in 
the majority of cases, each 
inspiration and each expiration may be brought up to a minute. 
All the movements are to be made slowly, not rapidly. 
1 usually 
advise to inspire in the erect position, with raised arms and 
closed mouth, 
and to bend down the body during expiration,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 69 ---
GHAPTHm IX.
47
so that the fingers touch the ground or the -toes. 
By degrees 
one can learn to make several up-and-down movements during 
every inspiration, and bend and raise the body several titnes during 
the expiration. 
By this alternate bending and raising of the body 
we gain the additienal advantage of strengthening the lumbar 
muscles and, through this, successfully combating the tendency 
to lumbago. 
.Another useful combination with the respiratory 
exercises is the turning of the body round the axis of the spinal 
column, alternately with deep inspiration from left to right, and 
with expiration from right to left, with half raised arms. ^By this 
movement we bring into action some of the muscles of jh e spine 
which are apt to be only imperfectly used by most persons in 
advanced years ; and the stiffness of the neck and spine, and the 
tendency to stoop, so common in old people, can be to some degree 
corrected by this kind of movement, if commenced early enough 
and practised regularly and thoroughly. 
The swinging of the 
arms round the shoulder-joint is, likewise, a useful combination. 
® 
In addition to the influence on the circulation, the
respiratory movements keep up the nutrition and eflSciency of the 
lungs themselves, which undergo in old age a kind of atrophy ; 
the walls of the smallest divisions and air-cells become thinner, 
and a kind of senile emphysema in these exercises is to some 
degree prevented. 
Another important influence consists in main­
taining the elasticity of the chest walls, which are apt to become 
stiff in old age, and thus to interfere with free movements of the 
lungs and the pleura.
“ If for some reason the erect position should be inconvenient, 
the mere respiratory movements can be made also in the horizontal 
and sitting positions. 
I have 'already alluded to the additional 
advantage of the compression of the abdomen and the blood vessels 
and organs contained in the abdominal cavity, and we may further 
point out that the action of the serous membranes, of the pleura, 
the pericardium, and the peritoneum are also beneficially influenced 
by the deep respiratory movements; they constitute a kind of 
massage to the lungs, the thoracic walls, pericardium, and heart 
(Sir Lauder Brunton). 
® 
*
“ We must, however, not be satisfied with the few minutes 
of respiratory exercises, but we must make a habit of taking at 
several other times of each day deep inspirations and expirations, 
especially while walking. 
Breathing exercises are especially useful
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 70 ---
4$
rooA PHiLosopsr.
to literaiy workers, statesmen, professional men, and others who are 
unable to take one of the usual modes of exercise. 
The most 
convenient time for practising them is in the morning before or 
after the bath, when the body is loosely covered with flannel. 
I ought to add that they are not suitable for very delicate persons ; 
they are, for instance, injurious in great-dilatation of the heart 
with or without valvular disease. 
® 
On tlie other hand,
their judicious use may be regarded as one of the preventives of 
diseases of the lungs, and can also be rendered beneficial in the 
later stages of convalescence from acute disease, and under medical 
guidance in some apyreiic forms of chronic tuberculosis.”
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 71 ---
c h a p t e r X.
5.-~Pratyahara.
“ Praty^h^ra is as it jvere the accommodation of the senses to 
the nature of the mind in the absence of concernment with each 
one’s own object. 
T&S fruit of this is the complete subjection of 
the senses.” 
Mind in ordinary men is the slave of the senses. 
If 
our sensations are pleasant, we feel pleasure; if painful, we are 
pained. 
Senses not only domineer, but tyrannize oyer the mind. 
Therefore, when the Yogi has passed through all the four stages 
enumerated above, i.e., yama, viyama, dsana and prnndydma, he 
should try to accommodate his senses to the nature of his mind. 
When ho does not wish to see, let not external things make any 
impression on his retina, though he may have his eyes wide open. 
When he has no mind to hear, let no external sound make any im­
pression on the nerves of the cochlea, and so on ; not only he should 
be the negative master over his senses, i.e., restraining them from 
their functions whenever he wishes, but he should be so complete and 
perfect master over them, that they should respond like obedient 
servants to every call of his mind- 
When his mind thinks of a 
pleasant picture, let the nerves of the eye catch up the thought and 
show it to him in objective reality. 
When he thinks of a sound, 
let the ears responding to 
the thought make him hear it 
as 
well. 
When he imagines of a smell, let his olfactory nerves feel 
the sensation. 
In fact, pratydhdra is that state in which the sub­
jective world overcomes the objective, and imagination is exalted 
to such a pitch that all its pictures stand forth vividly on the canvas 
of objectivity. 
The practice of prfipSyS.ma as invariably induces 
the pratyahara as the passes of a strong mesmeriser produce sleep. 
Yoga has been very happily termed self-mesmerisation, in which 
the subject is the mystic’s own body. 
As in mesmerism, the 
operator can make his subject see any sight, hear any sound, smell 
any odour, taste any taste, or feel any sensation which the operatoi- 
imagines, so the Yogi, who has reached the fifth stage, has a similar 
control over the organs of his body. 
He asserts the supremacy of 
the mind over the body by the same will-force as the ordinary raes- 
meriser, and as the latter makes his patient unconscious to all exter­
nal sensations, so that a gun may be fired without his hearing it ; 
7
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 72 ---
50
YOGA PHILOSOPHY.
pungent odours like that of ammonia may be held near the nose 
without his smelling it ; brilliant light may pass unnoticed when 
focussed on his eyes, for them's remains inert; pungent chillies may 
be placed on the tongue, and he will swallow them without show­
ing any sign of pain ; so does many a Yogi get supremacy over his 
own body so as to defy sensation. 
Pratyahara is not a distinct 
method in itself, but is a result of pr^nayama. 
There are no rules 
laid down for the subjugation of the senses^ as there are for the 
regulation of the breath; but it comes in the wake of the other 
four processes. 
When in practising pr^nayama the dbharana or 
obscuration of light is removed and the Yogi sees the pellucid 
Chidakasha (the pure spiritual light), he enjoys such pleasant sen­
sations that of itself his mind is transferred from taking cognition 
of the external things to internal ideas, and the senses become 
inactive.
Thus we have treated of the five externalities of Yoga—the 
Bahiranga, as they are called. 
The mind has not yet been reached, 
as up to this time we have been dealing only with the body. 
The 
last of these five stages culminates in the suppression of the 
senses and total subjugation of the body to the mind. 
The remain­
ing three stages treat of the methods of subjecting the mind to 
the soul, and these processes are called antaranga (internal) in 
relation to the body; while considered in relation to the sold they 
are Bahiranga.
TABLE OP METHODS.
II
in
Methods culminating 
in the subjugation 
of the body.
Methods culminating in the 
subjugating of the m ind.
Method of union 
...of the human 
A tm a with the 
Paramfitma.
1. Yama
2. Niayama ... 
8. Asana
4. PpSnftyfima
5. Pratyfihftra
6. DhySna
7. Dhfirftna
8. Savikalpa- 
SamSdhi
M 1
c.jLh: 
iS ^
.S.S'S
I J §
||g
Nirvikalpa
Sam ddM .
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 73 ---
CHAPTER XI.
(Fratyalidra and Ancestheties.)
We have said • before, that there are other methods of sush 
pending the nerves*of 
consciousness, 
or physical life, besides 
Pr^n^y^tna and Pratyahara. 
Some of them are occult; in short, 
the agency through which these results are produced is not properly 
understood by modern scientists ; there are others which may be 
termed scientific in the limited acceptation of the term. 
All these 
methods tend to produce unconsciousness, to suspend vitality, and 
to bring on temporary death. 
A man in .this state of Pratyah&ra, 
whether induced by medicinal drugs, or by the occult manipulation 
of vdyA and dkds is little removed from a vegetable in the external 
manifestations of .life ; but his mental consciousness is at the same 
time much intensified.
The medicinal drugs which produce Pratyahara are known 
as anesthetics. “ When inhaled in the form of vapour, they possess 
the property of destroying consciousness (?) and at the same time 
causing insensibility to pain.” 
The most important of them are (1) 
chloroform, (2) ether, (3) nitrous oxide gas, etc. Ether was formerly 
in greater demand than at present; now chloroform reigns supreme; 
while nitrous oxide gas, also known as the laughing gas, is used 
for smaller operations, by Dentists. 
The principal condition of 
their administration is the same, as that required in Yoga, viz. f— 
“ the patient should fast for 0 or 6 hours before chloroform is 
exhibited,” so also “ before administering the nitrous oxide gas ; 
the only precaution to. be observed is that a meal should 
not have been recently taken.” 
Messrs. Lallemand, Perin and 
Duroy observe :—“ We have usually experimented [with chloi’o- 
form] only on fasting animals,* but once we happened to give 
chloroform to a dog, whilst it was digesting a full meal. 
The 
coui*se of the phenomena was %o irregular and so grave (the animal 
dying a short time afterwards) that we considered it our duty to 
record the experiment. 
In all experiments wherein the dogs were 
fasting, the mark of etherism was regular.” 
But in submittirig to 
“ inhalation three dogs, a short time after they had taken food, 
the results were incomplete. 
The animals betrayed a painful
4418S
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 74 ---
52
VOQA PHILOSOPHY.
anxiety, and rejected the food which loaded the stomach, the 
vomiting relieved them.”
The nitrous oxide gas is the safest as an anfestbetic, leaving 
no injurious results. 
It doest not act chemically on the blood, 
and is soon eliminated out of the system when natural respiration 
is commenced. 
The action of chloroform in its various stages 
towards anmsthesia will do for an illusti’ation : —
“ When inhaled in small doses, it pi'oduces a slight species 
of inebriation, with some impairment of vision and common sensi­
bility, consciousness remaining. 
The sensation produced by these 
small (|.oses are usually of a pleasurable character.” 
In the second 
stage, ” if the inhalation be continued longer, the patient passes 
into a dx-eamy \?) state, sometimes with considerable mental excite­
ment, but with loss of common sensibility.” This stage corresponds 
with Praty^hara, when the Yogi loses common physical sensibility, 
but still retains consciousness. 
By carrying on the inhalation “ the 
patient loses the power of voluntary motion, and he passes into 
unconsciousness ; then theie is an inclination of the eyes upwards, 
and complete suspension of the mental faculties.” 
This in Yoga 
corresponds to savikalpa samddhi. 
Here modern medical science 
stops, and does not profess to go beyond. 
It has studied with 
great care and precaution, taken note of the minute changes which 
the body of the patient undergoes successively, but has not been 
equally successful in tracing the mental side of the picture. 
The 
science of Yoga steps in to supply the hiatus. 
If its results are to 
be credited (and we do not see why they should not), then we must 
perforce differ from the scientists who would have us believe that 
the last stage of aneesthesia is loss of consciousness. We are taught 
by those who have experimented with the mind, that the last stage, 
far from being loss of consciousness, is the highest and absolute 
state of consciousness which the human spirit, in its present stage 
of development, is capable of. 
Loss of memory which ordinary 
men experience when returning to their normal condition from a 
state of anaesthesia is no more pi-oof of loss of consciousness than the 
Sushuptiavasthd (the state of profound dreamless sleep). It requires 
special training to transfer the spiritual consciousness back into 
the physical consciousness. 
Some are naturally endowed with this 
faculty, and , are born seers and magicians; while others can 
develope it by a painful and laborious course of mental training, 
and are known as Adepts, Yogis, &c.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 75 ---
GBAPTER X I.
53
Some of the results of anaesthesia and the conditions of its 
administration ihrow a curious side*light on the truth of Yoga and 
the phenomena observed in Pratyahara. 
We give the following in 
confirmation of our assertion from a book on Oliloroforin by Dr. A. 
E. Samson, if. B. 
In the second stage “ the senses become affected, 
frequently, the sounds in,the room are exaggerated in their inten­
sity, the tickling of the clock becomes like the falling of a ponder­
ous hammer. 
The*surrounding objects become dim and as it were 
dissolve in light, and then a veil enwraps them all. 
A strange 
eftect is the phenomena of narcotic reminiscence. 
Events of the 
past life may be recalled, conversations may be repeated, and 
actions reproduced. 
I have heard a young girl, throughout the 
whole course of a surgical operation, sing, ‘ Beautiful star ’ correct­
ly, word for word and note for note.” 
Similarly the precautions, 
necessary in the administration of anaesthetics, are almost the same 
as required by the Yogi 
Thus, to quote the satne authority :—“ Of 
all conditions of system, probably the worst to bear chloroform is 
alcoholism. 
It is a most note-worthy fact that when we look over 
the records of death from chloroform, we find that veiw many have 
occurred in hard drinkers. 
Intemperance induces a state of system 
most inimical to chloroform,” 
For chloroform substitute Yoga, 
and it will be equally true. 
“ The average age at which death 
from chloroform has occurred is 30, the married are almost twice 
the number." 
Here again We see the necessity of celibacy and the 
early practice of Yoga.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 76 ---
CHAPTER XII.
A ntaranga Y oga.
The Psychic or super-normal powers, as enumerated by 
Patanjali, are many. 
Men can acquire them by certain training, 
a training which requires the development of spiritual faculties 
dormant in every man. 
That training has ☆een divided into 
two parts:—Bahiranga (External or Subsidiary) and Antaranga 
(Internal or Primary). 
The Bahiranga consist of five parts, viz., 
Yama, Niyama Asana, Pri^aySma, Pratydhara. 
Yama enjoins the 
observance of the following five rules :— 1, Islot to injure any living 
being [Ahinsd) ; 2, Never to tell a lie and always to speak the truth, 
(Satya); 3, Never to steal another’s property (Asteya); 4, Always to 
be pure and chaste, or celibacy (Brahmacharya); 5, 
Never to covet 
any thing (Aparigraha).
The Niyama enjoins tlie observance of the following :—
1. 
Be always pure, and observe the rules of purification. (For 
a detailed account of these, see “ Daily Practice of the Hindus,” 
recently published);
' 
2] 
Be^w ays content;
3. 
Observe austerity and asceticism ;
4. 
Study sacred books ;
6. 
Be perseveringly devoted to God.
The rules of Asana or the postures are various. 
There are 
some 84 postures in which a Yogi can sit, some six of which are 
more important.
The rules of PrA,nayS.ma or regulation of breath have already, 
been given before.
Lastly, Pratyahara is the accommodation of the senses to 
the nature of the mind, or, in other words, the complete subjection 
of the senses.
The above are then the externalities of Yoga on which we 
need not dwell longer. 
They may be summed up in the following 
thirteen rules
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Do not injure any living creature, but love all.
Always speak the truth.
Never commit theft (or wrongly take another’s property). 
Observe chastity and celibacy.
Forsake covetousness.
Be always pure in body and mind.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 77 ---
GEAPTEU X II.
55
7. 
Be always contented.
8. 
Observe anstei-ities and learn endiirahce.
9. 
Study sacred books and repeat sacred formulas.
10. 
Love the Lord with all thy heart and soul.
11. 
While practising Yoga, sit in a posture which is comfort­
able and easy. 
,
12. 
Being so seated, regulate your breath by observing the 
rules of inspiring,“ expiring and retaining of breath.
13. 
Completely subdue all your senses and bring them in 
harmony with mind.
The observance of the above thirteen rules will pi^pai-e the 
aspirant for’the attainment of higher powers. 
How to attain them, 
is the immediate object of our discussion. 
All psychic powers are 
obtained and wonders worked through sanyama. 
This sanyama 
is the harmonious and simultaneous working of the three faculties 
or conditions of mind, called DhSranA, Bhyana, and Samadhi. 
These three constitute the internal or the primary or the essential 
part of Yoga. 
We shall now enter upon a detailed description of 
these.
DhArana is the fixing of the thinking principle (chitta) to a 
particular locality. 
This is the definition of Patanjali, and requires 
explanation to make its meaning clear. 
When the mind is bound 
up in a particular object or thinks only of a particular thing, it is 
said to hold (dh&ranA) that thing. 
The effort to catch hold of the 
object, and to keep it before the mind’s eye, or, in other words, the 
effort to keep the mind fixed on a particular object, is dhfirana. 
In Yoga, mind is fixed consecutively on various parts of the body, 
for example, on the navel, on the heart, on the throat. &c. A little 
experience will show that it is a difficult task to bind up the chitta 
or mind within a specified locality. 
Try to concentrate your mind, 
for example, on your heart, and try to keep it within the limit 
prescribed, and you will find it will soon slide out of it, roving 
about everywhere else, rather .be confined to the place where you 
would like to have it. 
Or, to take another example, try to imagine 
and realise the picture of a flower, say rose. 
The effort in catch­
ing hold of the idea of the rose and keeping it before the mental 
eye is what is meant by the word DhSrana, as used by Patanjali 
Or, to take another example from the Hindu system of worship. 
A man is a worshipper of Siva, when he enters on the path of 
mentally worshipping Siva, sits in an easy posture, puts down
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 78 ---
56
YOGA PHILOSOPHY.
the physical agitation by regulating his breath, composes bis mind, 
and then practises dhdranas; i.e., he closes his eyes, and makes 
mental effort to picture the figure of Siva. 
When this effort 
succeeds, the picture is developed and comes out prominently 
and distinctly in the field of mental vision. 
Here is then the 
consummation of the dhftrana of the devotee.
After dhaih.na eoraeB dhyd7ia, which is defined to be the course 
of uniform modification of knowledge in that place where the internal 
organ (chitta) is fixed in DhSranA. 
The word DhySna has been ti ans- 
lated in English by the word contemplation. 
In contemplation, as 
above defined, there is a uniform course of knowledge of the object 
of Dharana. 
That is to say, in contemplation the mind performs two 
operations, it uniformly is conscious of the object of Dharana ; 
and it rejects every other thought incongruous with the above. 
The 
difference between the DharanI and the Dhyana consists in this : 
the first is the fixing of attention on a particular object or thought, 
out of many ; but it supposes that there are other thoughts also in 
the mental field, along with the idea on which attention is directed. 
But in contemplation, all such extraneous thoughts are rejected 
and driven out, and the mind is fixed on the particular thought 
which reigns supreme and excludes all other thoughts ; and the mind 
is conscious and cognisant of that idea and of no other, and does 
not allow auy other idea to distract its attention.
After dharana and dhyana, comes Samidhi. 
In contempla­
tion or dhyana the consciousness, uniform and without break, flows 
in one cliannel, i.e., of the object of contemplation. 
In Samadhi, 
this state of mental concenti’ation reaches its culmination. 
It is 
defined to be the same contemplation or Dhyana, when it arises 
only about a substance or object of sense, and is then like non­
existence of itself. 
When by constant practice of contemplation, the 
consciousness of all other objects than the object contemplated is 
completely lost, and when the mind is intent upon that contem­
plated object only, that oneness of mind is Sam4dhi.
The three states—dh&ran&, dhyfina and samadhi— rise by 
gradual gradations. 
In dhfiranS. there is an effo7't to fix the mind 
on the object to be contemplated ; in Dhyana that object having 
risen vividly before the mental vision, there is an effort to concen­
trate the consciousness in that object, to the exclusion of every 
other idea ; in samMhi, this effort having succeeded, the mind 
loses, as if its own form, and becomes one with the object contem-
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 79 ---
CtlAPfER X iL
57
plated. 
These three—dhilraad, dbyaua and sainadhi—will thus be 
apparent to be but the various stages of one mental effort or work, 
vis., the effort of concentration. 
There is no difference in kind 
between theta, but only one of degree. 
These three conjointly are 
called Sanyama. 
Every effort of concentration consists of these 
three parts. 
^
What is then tlie result of Sanyama. 
The result is the 
attainment of 
®
The first psychic poioer.
The light of Prajna or soul bursts forth when one lias 
mastered or has obtained full control over Sanyama. 
\Vhen by 
constant practice and training one can perform sanyama about any 
object with ease and for long, the light of spiritual intelligence 
then manifests itself 
Through and by the medium of that light, 
knowledge of higher or suksjina universe is obtained. 
Through 
that astral light wonders are wrought, and the so-called miracles 
performed.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 80 ---
a p p e n d i x I.
A BRIEF SKETCH OF VEDANTA AND YOGA.
Q. —Who is the adhikari, oi' the person qualified to learn 
Vedanta and Yoga ? 
^
A.— He who is pure iu his thoughts, mild ill his words, and 
being free from all evil deeds, is benevolent towards a ll; who 
performs all the duties prescribed by the Sastras and Vedas ; who 
moving in this world is not ensnared by it, and who has a burning, 
longing, panting and yearning after emancipation.
Q.—How should such a mumuhui acquire self-knowledge ?
A.— By means of the four sddhanas :—
(1) 
. 
Distinguishing between the real and the non-real, the 
phenomena and 
the noumena, the eternal and 
the 
transient, 
realising that Brahma is the only truth.
(2) 
. 
Performing works from the most disinterested motives, 
doing good for the sake of good, without expecting any reward 
here or hereafter.
(3) 
. 
Having 
faith, 
endurance, 
self-control, 
passivity, 
abstinence, and intensity of thought.
(4'. 
A strong desire for Nirvana.
Q. —What is the subject of Vedanta ?
A.— To prove that the Paramatma and Jivatma, are one 
and the same in essence—the human spirit being the reflection of 
the Divine Spirit.
Q.— What is the necessity of such a knowledge ?
A.— The aim of all systems of philosophy is to acquii-e 
freedom 
from pain. 
Worldy philosophies, like medicine, etc., 
give momentary relief from pain, which might 
recur. 
True 
philosophy gives eternal peace and bliss. 
Vedanta does so.
Q.— What are the arguments to prove your position ?
A.— Arguments are 
three— 1, authority; 2, reason ; 3, 
experience.
Q.— What is authority ?
A.—Authority is the Veda, as interpreted by the light of 
Nature, Upanisads, and the sayings of the great men of different 
climes and ages.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 81 ---
APPENDIX 1.
50
Q.— Quote some passages 
from the Veda, to prove the 
identity of human and divine spirits.
A.— Such passages of the Vedas are hnown as mdhdvakyns.
1. 
Tat twam asi:—Thou art ihat(Brahma).
2. 
Ayam dtma Brahma r—Tliis self (Atma) is Brahma.
3. 
Ekameradtciti^am :— One without a second,
4. 
Tasya bhasa sarvam idam hibhati:—His light illumines 
all these.
5. 
Yo 
savasau 
Purushah 
soham asmi:— What is this 
purusha (Brahma), the same am I,
6. 
Dvittad vai bhayam bhavati:—'From duality^ there is
fear.
7. 
Nelrn 
ndndsti kineJianaAll 
the 
appearances are 
nothing.
8. 
Sa7’va khalvidam Brahma :— All this is verily Brahma.
Q.— Give some other authorities from the teachings of other
nations.
A.— 1. 
Socrates said ;— “ The soul was allied to the Divine 
Being by similarity of nature.”
2. 
Plato believed this world a mirage, non-reality, and 
an obstacle to divine knowledge.
3. 
Cicero said 
“ I would swear that the soul is divine.”
4. 
M. A. Antoninus says:— “ Soul is all-intelligence, and 
a portion of the divinity.”
5. 
Plotinus taught;— “ By reducing the soul to abstraction 
we are one with the Infinite.”
6. 
Philo says 
“ The soul of man is divine.”
7. 
Proclus: —“ Know the divinity that is within you, that 
you may know the divine one, of which your soul is a ray.”
8. 
Spinoza:— “ God is the only substance.”
9. 
Mansflr, a Muhammadam mystic, was crucified, because 
he said ‘ Anal Haq ’ (I am God.)
10. 
Hafiz Shams-i*Tabriz, Mawlana Rumi, Abu Ali Kalen- 
dar, were all Vedantists. 
Christ said : “ Ye are gods.”
Q.— What are the reasons that the soul is divine and the 
world a dream ?
*A.—If we believe that the human soul is different from 
God, then the question arises in what relation does that God stand
*If we do not believe the soul to be a portion of divinity and the world a 
dream, we are forced to the other hypothesis that the soul is s^arate from Qbd, and
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 82 ---
60
YOGA PHILOSOPHY.
to us ? 
As a ruler, he would seciu to be the most tyrannical being, 
seeing that the world is full of misery. 
But this need not be a 
stumbling block, if we believe that the whole world is a dream. 
We have many consciousnesses— our waking consciousness, our 
sleeping consciousness of susupti, our dreaming, and our divine 
consciousness. Now in every one of these States, the ideas presented 
to us seem to be real, and for the time being we believe them to 
be real. 
But no sooner is that state changed, than we think the 
ideas of that state to be unreal, and the ideas of our new state 
to be real. 
Therefore, the world is an idea, and spirit the onlj' 
substance,,
Q.—The dreams of no two persons ever coincide, nor do the 
same dreams recur again. 
If then the world were a dream,, how 
do all men see it in the same way, and why does it always appear 
the same ?
A.— The world is not a dream of an ordinary man ; the uni­
verse is a dream in the consciousness of the Brahma. 
As a great 
magnetiser can make his audience see, hear, perceive, &c., anything 
which he strongly wills, so the eternal will of the Brahma has made 
this world through his MayH or willforce or delusion. 
He wills 
that we should see so and so, and we do s o : but when we become 
He, the delusion vanishes.
Q.— If the world be a dream, there is no such thing as vice 
or virtue, good or bad, and we are not responsible for what vire do.
A .—The world is false from paramdrthika point of view, 
but is real from relative point of view, and for all practical pur­
poses we must consider it to be so. 
As a cup of water will 
intoxicate a mesmerised subject, if he is told that it is wine, though 
water has no such property, so a person, as long as he is not 
emancipated, will suffer the consequences of his karmas, simply 
because he still is involved in M&yd.
the world is a reality. 
If these two substances—.soul and Matter—be real, then 
they must be eternal, for to say that they were created by the will of God from 
nothing is an absurdity, for out of nothing something cannot be produced. To .say 
that the substance of matter came out of God would also be derogatoi’y to His 
dignity, for then non-intelligence would come out of perfect intelligence. For 
similar reasons, the materialistic theory, that soul is an evolution of matter is unten­
able, as, according to this doctrine intelligence would be produced out of non­
intelligence. Thus we are led to three alternatives —(1) to believe the soul and 
matter to be eternal, which would be atheistic : it would do away with God ; (2) the 
substance of the world is a portion of God—a doctrine derogatory to Godhead ; 
(8) that the soul is a portion of divinity, and the world a dream,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 83 ---
APPENDIX I.
61
Q.—How do you prove from experience that Paranuituia and 
Jivatra^ are one ?
A.— Because the lives of those persons who had reached the 
threshold of Nirvdna prove it conclusively. 
They possessed all 
those attributes which we ascribe to God. 
They performed deeds 
which we in our ignoranc^ call miracles and supernatural, Pereons 
like Krishna, Buddha, Shankaracharya show by their lives that they 
are gods.
Q.— HoW should one, then, practically unite himself with God?
A.— The method lies through the practice of Yoga.
Q.— Define Yoga. 
^
A.—Yoga is the suspension of the various modifications of 
the mind.
Q.— ITow many kinds of Yoga are there?
A.—Many kinds of Yoga have been enumerated by ancient 
authors, i.e.. Karma Yoga or Hatha Yoga, Mantra Yoga, Raja Yoga, 
&c 
But of all these, only the ITatha Yoga and the Raja Yoga need 
be mentioned here.
Q.— Define and distinguish between the Hatha Yoga and 
the Raja Yoga.
A.—The Hatha Yoga is a process of physical training, in 
order to strengthen the will. 
The Raja Yoga is a process of pure 
mental training, for the same purpose. 
The Hatha Yoga is the 
lowest, the Raja Yoga the middle, and the Siva 
Yoga {i.e., 
spiritual method) the highest.
Q.— How should one practise Rftja Yoga?
A.— The adhikdri, as defined above, should select first a 
suitable place, free from all disturbances, <&:c., and a suitable time 
when his mind is pure and elevated, and his body in its normal 
healthy state. 
He should practise yavia, niyaina, dsaria, prdvdydma, 
pratydhara and sanyama.
Q.— Define Yama.
A.—Yama is the first step of Yoga. 
It requires the adhikdri 
to practise the following five virtues :—
(1) 
. 
Ahinsd:—Not killing or doing injury to any animal, 
and not eating animal food.
(2) . 
Sdtya :—Speaking truth under every circumstance.
(3) . 
Asteya :—’Non-stealing.
(4) . 
BramaeJiarya :—^Continence and chastity of mind and
deed.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 84 ---
62
YOGA PHILOSOPHY.
(5), 
Aparigraha:— Non-covetousrtess of things of tliis as 
well as of the world to come.
Q.— What is Niyama ?
A.— The Niyama is also fivefold—
(1). 
Saiicha :—Purification of body and mind.
Santo.^a:— Contentment 
wifli one’s 
state, 
without
(2).
grumbling.
(3) 
.
(4) 
.
Tapas:— Purification of bodily senses.
Swadhyaya 
Silently muttering any religious formula, 
and study of sacred books.
{&). 
Iswara p^'anidhdna : —Persevering devotion to God.
Q.— What dsana (posture) should one adopt ?
A.— Any posture -which is steady and convenient. 
Do not 
change it at all.
Q.— What should one do after this ?
A.—Having assumed a steady and pleasant posture, let him 
practise prdndydma, if he likes. 
Pra^ayama is not absolutely 
necessary for Raja Yoga. 
The 
general method of Pranayama 
“ consists in three modifications of breathing. 
The first act is 
expiration, which is performed through the right nostril, while the 
left is closed with the fingers of the right hand ; this is called 
lieeJmka ; the thumb is then placed upon the right nostril and the 
fingers raised from the left, through which breath is inhaled ; this 
is called Puraka; in the third act both nostrils are closed and 
bi’eathing suspended; this is Kutnhhaka.” 
B^irst 
Puraka, then 
Kumhhaka and then Reehaka. 
The Kumhhaka or non-breathing 
should at least be practised for 30 seconds. 
To estimate this 
period, repeat last 30 times the mantra. 
When the practice of 
Pranayama becomes complete, Pratydhdra will follow, i.e., the 
practitioner will become insensible to all external things. 
He will 
not feel if one pinches his body; he will not hear if you fire a gun 
near him, and so on. 
In Raja yoga jmu need not practise 
Pranayfima, in order to bring about Pratyah.ara.
Q.—How should one practise Raja Yoga ?
A.—^The Raja Yoga may be divided into three' parts—
(1) . 
Tndriya-snnyama :—Subjugation of the senses.
(2) . 
Mano^sanyama :— Subjugation of the mind.
(3) . 
Layd; — A bsorption.
To attain Indriya-sanyama {i.e., Pratyahnra,] you should 
strongly imagine that you are out of the body and moving in dkdsa.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 85 ---
A p p ^ m ix t.
63
Practise for months till you attain the power of throwing your 
body into catalepsy whenever you like. 
It will be easier if you 
begin step by step, e-g., will strongly that you will not hear any 
external sound, so much so that you should be able to make yourself 
deaf, whenever you like. 
This is hard of course, but not impossi­
ble, and requires 
patience. 
Having subdued the ear, try to 
subdue in a similar way the senses of sight, taste, smell, and touch. 
Having conquered‘^he external senses, go to the internal senses, 
hunger, thirst, and conquer them too. 
Firm faith and persevering 
practice will bring about speedy success.
Q.— What is Mano-mnyama f
A.— One who has got mastery over his senses, to him the 
subjugation of mind is not very difficult. 
The first blow should 
be struck at memory and reasoning faculties. 
Then the associa­
tion of ideas should be stopped, and so on. 
Thus the human 
soul which is pure consciousness, will be free from the trammels 
of senses and mind, and become mukta. 
When it has reached the 
mukta state, let it try to reach the Laya state, and plunging 
into the Divinity, become one with it. 
This will come last of 
all, and is known as Kaivalyam. 
But long before this state is 
attained, the Yogi will be amply rewarded for his toil by the 
attainment of psychic powers or siddhis. 
Even in the fii-st stage, 
i.e.,'ot Indriya-sanyama, he will begin to see things at a distance 
clairvoyantly, and will perceive and read the thoughts of others. 
The whole secret of Yoga consists in making yom’self a VOID, a 
VACUUM for the influx of Divinity. 
KNOW THYSELF is the 
secret of Philosophy, but VOID THYSELF is the secret of Nirvana 
or Divine Wisdom.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 86 ---
A PPE N D IX II.
AN ACCOUNT OF SADHU HARIDAS.
It \vas in the year 1839 that I had returned to Lahore, after 
having visited the European continent and my native country. 
I 
enjoyed the pleasure, on my return, of being the companion of 
General Ventura, who was also hastening to India to resume his 
duties. 
On our voyage, we had many conversations, among which, 
the events which had happened during ray absence from Lahore 
underwent discussion. 
On that occasion, the General related to me 
an occurrence which, at first, I could scarcely believe, thinking it a 
pure invention or a mere joke ; but I soon became persuaded that 
he was in earnest. 
1 give it here with the remark only, that, after 
having arrived at Ijahore, 1 heard it confirmed by other persons, in 
whose statements I could also place confidence.
Ruujeet Sing—thus runs the narrative— was told that a saat, 
or faqueer, living in the mountains, was able to keep himself in a 
state resembling death, and would allow himself to be even buried, 
without injuring or endangering his life, provided they would 
remove or release him fiom the grave after expiration of a fixed 
time, he being in the possession of the means of resuscitating 
himself again. 
The Maharajah thought it impossible. To convince 
himself of the truth of the assertion, he ordered the faqueer to be 
brought to his court, and caused him to undergo the experiment, 
assuring him that no precaution would be omitted to discover 
whether it was a deception. 
In consequence, thq faqueer, in the 
presence of the court, placed himself in a complete state of 
asphyxia, having all the appearance of death.
In that state, he vvas wxupped in the linen on which he, was 
sitting, the seal of Runjeet Sing was stamped thex’eon, and it was 
placed in a chest, on which the Maharajah put a strong lock. 
The chest was buried in a garden, outside the ©ity, belonging to 
-tarthe minister, barley was sown on the ground, and the space 
enclosed with a wall and surrounded by sentinels. 
On the fortieth 
day, which was the time fixed for his exhumation, a great num­
ber of the authorities of the durbar, with General Ventura, and 
several Englishmen from the vicinity, one of them a medical man,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 87 ---
APPENDIX 11
6S
went to the enclosure. 
The chest was brought up and opened, 
and the faqueer was found in the same position as they had left 
him, cold and stiff. 
A friend of mine told me that had I been 
present when they endeavoured to bring him to life, by applying 
warmth to the head, injecting air into his ears and mouth, and 
rubbing the whole of diis body to promote circulation, &c., I 
should certainly eot have had the slightest doubt ®f the reality of 
the performance. 
The minister, Rajah Dhyan Sing, assured me, 
that he himself kept this faqueer (whose name was Haridas) four 
months under the ground, when he was at Jummoo in the moun­
tains. 
On the day of his burial, he ordered his beard to be shaved, 
and at his exhumation his chin was as smooth as on the day of his 
interment, thus furnishing a complete proof of the powers of 
vitality having been suspended during that period. 
He likewise 
caused himself to be interred at Jesrota, in the mountains, and at 
Umritsir, and also by the English in Hindostan. 
In the GaleuUa 
Medical Journal, about 1835, there is a full descriptioO of the 
faqueer, and we are tliere informed, that he preferred having the 
chest, in which he was enclosed, suspended in the air, instead of 
its being buried beneath the earth, as he feared the possibility of 
his body being attacked by ants, whilst in that middle state 
between life and death. 
Having, however, refused 
to undergo 
another trial, several of the English people there doubted the truth of 
the story, and refused credence is so astonishing a power.* 
But 
it is quite certain that had there been any deception as regards 
the interment of the faqueer^ rendering his •experiment easy of 
accomplishment, those engaged or associated with him, and to 
whom the task of restoring the vital energies was necessarily 
entrusted, would, of necessity, be acquainted with the mystery, and 
be able, since his real decease, to emulate his example; that, 
however, is not the case. 
It appears, consequently, 
that the 
faqueer was the only one then in possession of that power; and, 
as a further corroboration of this view of the case, I may mention 
that I myself inquired in the Pan jab, in the mountains and valleyS 
of Cashmere, and in other parts of India, and made every exertion 
to find a person possessed of this power, in order to take him to 
Europe, or at least to Calcutta, but without success. 
Several
• To corroborate the above, my readers can refer to General Tentnra 
(Paris) and also the Colonel Sir 0. M. Wade (London), who were present, and 
assisted at the restoration of the faqueer, some accounts of whom have bean 
published from the Colonel's statement,
. 
9
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 88 ---
168
YOGA miTjOSOPEY,
Hindcos told me that such faqueers set no value upon money; I 
replied to them, however, that, at all events, they fully appreciated 
other worldly pleasures. 
They did not like to hear this statement, 
implying that the faqueer was a debatiehee. 
Several complaints 
had, however, been made of hinti on which account Runjeet Sing 
intended to banish him from Lahore. 
He'anticipated the intention, 
by eloping with a Khatrani (womaa of a E^ndoo caste) to the 
mountains, where he died, and was bufned according to the custom 
of the country. 
His elopement with this woman may serve as a 
proof (in contradiction to other statetoonts) that he was neither 
ah eunuch nor a hermaphrodite.
Doubtless, it is a difficult task, tmd not within the power o f- 
every.one, to acquire the skill necessary |q]r the performance of this 
experiment, and those who do succeed must undergo a long and 
continual practice of preparatory measures. 
1 was informed that 
such people have their frcBnulum linguob cut and entirely loosened, 
and that they get their tongue prominent, drawing and lengthen­
ing it by means of rubbing it with butter mixed with some 
pellitory of Spain, in order that they may be able to lay back the 
tongue at the time they are about to stop respiration, so as to 
cover the oi-ifice of the hinder part of the fosses nasales, and thus 
(with other means for the same purpose, which I shall mention) 
keep the air shut up in the body and head.® 
Novices, in trying 
the experiment, shut their eyes, and press them with their fingers, 
as also the cavities of the ears and nostrils, because the natural 
warmth of the body might cause such an expansion of the enclosed 
gas as otherwise to produce, by the violence of its pressure, a 
rtiptur© of some of those delicate organs not yet accustomed by 
practice to endure it. 
This, T am told, is especially the case with 
the eyes and the tympanum of the ear. 
For the better acquisition of 
this power, they are accustomed to practise the holding of the breath 
for a long period. 
They swallow a small strip o f linen, in order to 
eleanse the stomach, and by a tube draw a quantity of water through 
the anus into the intestines to rinse them. This is performed while 
sitting in a vessel filled with water to the height’ of the arm-pits. 
Jt is said that the faqueer in question, a few days previous to his 
experiments, took 
some 
kind 
of 
purgative, 
a n d , subsisted 
for several days on a coarse milk regimen. 
On the day o f his
* A similar process is explained in some of the Encyclopasdias, in the 
itrtiele on*" Bngastrimythe,” or the mechanism of the yentrilo^uists,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 89 ---
APPENDIX I t
Si
burial, instead of food, be slowly swallowed, iu the presence of 
assembly, a rag of three fingers in breadth and thirty yards in 
length, and afterwards extracted it, for the purpose of removing 
all foreign matters from the stomach, having previously rinsed 
the bowels in the manner I have before mentioned. 
Eidiculous as 
this operation may appeav to the reader, and as it appears, indeed, 
to me also, yet these artists must, of necessity, be complete; masters 
of their body and its oi'ganism, and possess a more than ordinary 
power over the muscles. 
We are scarcely capable of swallowing a 
somewhat long piece of maccaroni if it is not well boiled and 
moistened with butter, &c., to render it palatable. 
It is ^probable, 
however, that they may have lost the sense of taste, and their 
neck-muscles may be relaxed to such a degree that the long linen 
strip does not meet with any resistance in the throat. 
These 
preparations being made, the faqueer stopped all the natural open­
ings of the body 
with plugs 
of aromatic wax, 
placed back 
his tongue in the manner I have before indicated, crossed his 
arms over his breast, and thus suffocated himself, in the presence 
of a multitude of spectators. 
On his exhumation, one of the first 
operations is to draw his tongue into its natural position ; after 
this, a warm aromatic paste, made from pulse meal, is placed on 
his head, and air is injected into his lungs and also through the 
ears, from which the plugs are withdrawn. 
By this operationj 
the pellets in the nostrils are driven out with considerable force 
and noise, and this is considered the first symptom of hisresuroit^ 
tion. 
Friction is then strenuously applied all over the body, and 
at length he begins to breathe naturally, opens bis eyes, and is 
gradually 
restored 
to 
consciousness. 
It is related 
that, two 
hundred and fifty years ago, in the ’time of the Gooroo Aijun 
Sing, a Jogee faqueer was found in his tomb in a sitting posture, 
at Umritsir, and was restored to life. 
This faqueer is reported to 
have been helow* the ground for one hundred years; and when 
he revived, he related many circumstances connected with the 
times in which he had lived. 
Whether this tradition be true 
or false, it is impossible to say; but I am of opinion, that he, who 
can pass four months below the ground without becoming a prey to 
corruption, may also remain there for one year. 
Granting this, it 
is impossible to fix a limit to the time during which a suspension 
of the vital functions may continue, 
without injury to their 
sul^quent power.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 90 ---
68
YOQA PHILOSOPHY.
However paradoxical or absurd this statement may appear, 
and however persuaded I may be that many a reader, believing 
himself to be a wise man, will smile at the relation, I cannot, 
nevertheless, avoid confessing freely, that I do not entirely reject 
all the details given respecting the circumstances, for as Haller 
observes : 
In the interior of nature,, k.o mortal can penetrate ;
happy is he who knows a small part, even of its surface.” W e find 
much credence given to such phenomena in the most ancient 
traditions. 
Who will not remember the history of Epimenides of 
Greta, who, after a sleep of forty years in a grotto there, is reported 
to have again re-entered the world, from which he had so long been 
separated ! 
W ho will not remember also the seven holy sleepers, 
who, according to a Vatican manuscript, 
were concealed in a 
grotto near Ephesus, in order to escape the persecutions of the 
Christians, during the reign of the Emperor 
Dacius, and who, 
155 years subsequently, in the time of Theodosius II, returned to 
consciousness ? 
But even rejecting these traditions, have we not 
also similar examples in the animal kipgdom ? 
Have not animals, 
especially toads, been detected in rocks, wherein, according to the 
calculations made, they had been enclosed for several centuries, 
in a state of sleep or torpor, and which animals, after having 
been brought into the air, have recovered their vitality ; and it is 
not necessary to remind the naturalist of the fact, that many 
species of animals invariably pass the winter season in a kind 
of sleep, awaking in the spring with renewed and unimpaired 
energies. 
Among 
recent 
cases, 
which 
demonstrate the great 
endurance of human life, is the following relation :— At Vienna, 
■some years ago, a Hungarian was, during a period of twelve 
months, in a comatose state, and his jaw-bones were so firmly 
closed- that it was impossible to open his mouth f the physicians 
were consequently obliged to extract some of his teeth, in order 
to administer some remedies and broth, 
to preserve life; he, 
nevertheless, at last recovered.
In the Philosophical Transactions for 1705 (Nov. and Dec., 
Vol. X V II, p. 2177), the history of a case is related, which supports 
what has been previously mentioned:— “ A man of about twenty- 
five years of age, living in 
the neighbourhood of 
Bath, fell 
suddenly asleep, and continued for nearly a month in that state. 
Two years afterwards, he was again in a similar condition: his 
.jaw-bones closed themselves; he was unable to eat, but fell asleep,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 91 ---
Appsmix I t
6d
and continued to be devoid of sensation for seventeen weeks. 
This occurred at the time when barley was being sown, and when 
he again awoke it was quite ripe. 
In the naonth of August, he 
again fell 
asleep. 
He 
was bleds stimulating 
remedies 
were 
employed; and every means of restoration was used which the 
medical skill of the period could suggest, but in vain; he did not 
awake until the month of November.” 
In Plott’s Natural History 
of Oxfordshire (c. 8, sec- 11, p. 196, published in 1677), a case is 
alluded to, which, not being generally known, I will quote here, 
it being another evidence of the length of time during which a 
person may exist without nourishment. 
^
“ Rebekah Smith, the servant-maid of one Thomas White, 
of Minster Lovel, being above fifty years of age, and of a robust 
constitution, though she seldom ate flesh (it scarcely agreeing with 
her), after she came from the communion on Palm-Sunday, April 
16, 1671, was taken with such a dryness in her throat, that she 
could not swallow her spittle, nor any thing else to supply the 
demands of nature ; and in this state she continued, without eating 
or drinking, to the amazement of all, for about ten weeks, viz., to 
the 29th of June, being both St. Peter’s and W itn ^ fair day ; by 
^hieh time, being , brought very low, her master made inquiry, 
and fodfiStJbut a person who gave him an amulet (for, it was 
8i$pose^, she was bewitched) against this evil; after the applica­
tion of this amulet, within two or three days (though I dare not 
suppose there was any connection between the medicine and the 
disease), she first drank a little water, then warm broths in small 
quantities at a time, and nothing else till Palm-Sunday again, 
twelve months after, when she began to eat bread and other food 
as she had formerly done ; and the record states that she was then 
about the age of sixty, and still living in the same place, ready to 
testify to the truth of the matter ; as were also Thomas W hite and 
his wife, who were the only other persons living in the house with 
her, and who would confidently assert (for they carefully observ­
ed), that they did not believe she ever took anything whatever in 
those ten weeks time, nor anything more than what is before 
mentioned until the expiration of the year.” 
^
The London Medical and Physical Journal, Vol. X X X V , p. 
609, states t h a t “
” An account of the sleeping woman of Dunnibald, near 
Montrose, 
was 
read 
by 
the 
Rev. 
James 
Brewster, 
at the
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 92 ---
70
YOGA PBILQSOPBir.
Royal Society of Edinburgh. 
Her first sleeping fit lasted from 
the 27th to the 30th of June, 1815. 
Next morning she again fell 
into a sleep which lasted seven days, without motion, food, or 
evacuation. 
At the end of this time, by moving her hand and 
pointing to her mouth, it was understood she wanted food, which 
was given to her ; but she remained in her lethargic state till the 
8th of August, six weeks in all, without appeming to be awake, 
except on the 30th of June,” &C., &c. This case is well authenticated.
And in J. N. Willan’s Miscellaneous Work, published by 
A. Smith, M. D., p. 339, he states that he had seen many, mostly' 
Jews and other aliens, of a dark, swarthy complexion, sometimes 
lie six or eight weeks in the torpid, insensible condition above 
described.— Honntjfecr^er’s “ Thirty-five years in the East"
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 93 ---
THE
S I V A S A M H I T A
TRANSLATED BY
R A I BAHADUR SRISA CHANDRA VASU
PUBLKBBD BY
THE pA^INI office, BHUYANE^WARI iSBAlHA, BAHADBBGAEJ,
2lUabHba^
Printed by Apurva Krishna B ose at the Indian P ress
1914
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 94 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 95 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Chaptee 
I 
„ 
II 
„ 
in 
„ 
IV 
.. 
V
Page,
1
16
24
41
62
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 96 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 97 ---
SIV A SAM H ITA-
Chapter I.
Existence one only-
5lTS^ 
^
 ^ ?q n I
I 
ii t n
The Jadna [Gnosis] alone is eternal; it is without beginning or end ; 
there exists no other real substance. 
Diversities which we see in the 
world are results of sense-conditions; when the latter cease, then this 
JnSna alone, and nothing else, remains.
wwa
c?if>r 
m 
i
iiiOTirT;!!?! »j5n5niRHi»T%%5r?nfn n \ n
2-3. 
I, Ishvara, the lover of my devotees, and Giver of spiritual 
emancipation to all creatures, thus declare the science of Yoganusdmna 
(the exposition of Yoga). 
In it are discarded all those doctrines of 
dfsputants, 
which lead to false knowledge. 
If is for the spiritual 
disenthralment of persons whose minds are undistracted and fully turned 
towards Me.
Differences of opinion.
ctt: 
5r*arq^ i
II H H
4. 
Some praise truth, others purification and asceticism ; some praise 
forgiveness, others equality and sincerity.
I
Ji5f5r% 
ii 
ii
5. 
Some praise alms-giving, others laud sacrifices made in honor 
of one’s ancestors ; some praise action (Karma), others think dispassiou 
(Vairdgya) to be the best.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 98 ---
2
SIVA SAMEITA.
arm 
? ii %. n
6. 
Some wise persons praise the performance of the duties of the 
householder ; other authorities hold up fire-sacrifice &c., as the highest.
sntr?ifi»Er 
•
^
 
li « ii
7. 
Some praise Mantra Yoga, others the frequenting of places of 
pilgrimage. 
Thus diverse are the ways which people declare for emanci­
pation.
•w 
srt* i
II
8. 
Being thus diversely engaged in this world, even those who 
still know what actions are good and what evil, tliough free from sin, be­
come subject to bewilderment.
^TS5T
.11 ^ II
9. 
Persons who follow these doctrines, having committed good 
and bad actions, constantly wander in the worlds, in the cycle of births 
and deaths, bound by dire necessity.
sitgjT 
n \o n
10. 
Others, wiser among the many, and eagerly devoted to the 
investigation of the occult, declare that the souls are many and eternal, 
and omnipresent.
fc fj 
ii
11. 
Others say, —“ Only those things can be said to exist which are 
perceived through the senses and nothing besides them ; where is heaven 
or hell ?” 
Such is their firm belief.
fT H s rm f 
I
12. 
Others believe the world to be a current of consciousness and 
no material entity ; some call the void as the greatest. 
Others believe 
in two essences-—Matter {PrahHti} and Spirit {Purusa),
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 99 ---
OBAPTBB 1, 
13-19.
«5PTO*^ § #tNr !i 
H
Sr6»^i:#Rf srrf .* 
cr«irfe i
ferRwRTOJ’ H 
ii
13-14. 
Thus believing, in widely different doctrines, with faces 
turned away from the supreme goal, they think, according to their under­
standing and education, that this universe is without God 
others believe 
there is a God, basing their assertions on various irrefutable arguments, 
founded on texts,, declaring difference between soul and God, and anxious 
to establish the existence of God.
3 ^»f^T if ^ 
II 
II
ncf 
I
^
 
nK%ii
15-16. 
These and 
many other. sageS with various different 
denominations, have been declared in the Sastras as leaders of the human 
mind into delusion. 
It is not possible to describe fully the doctrinos 
of these persons so fond of quarrel and contention ; people thus wander 
in this univeme, being driven away from the path of emancipation.
Yoga the only true method.
^ 2**: 2^* I
17. 
Having studied all the Sastras and having pondered over
them well, again and again, this Yoga Sdstra has been found to be the only 
true and firm doctrine. 
*
mcf 
^rfsRwi. I
II 
II
18. 
Since by Yoga all this, verily is known as a certaipty, all exer­
tion should be made to acquire it. 
What is the necessity then of any 
other doctrines ?
i
g^ aar 
^ g fia i^ ii 
il
19. 
This Yoga Sdstra, now being declared by us, is a very seci’et
doctrine, only to be revealed to a high-souled pious devotee throughouttl 
. 
the three worlds. • 
1/ v
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 100 ---
SIVA 8AMBITA.
Karma Kdvia.
%«IT WcT: II R9 It 
II ?.o II
20. 
There are two systems (as found in the Vedas'?. 
Karma Kdvda 
(ritualism) and Jndna Kdv^a (wisdom). ^ Jndna Kdr^da and Karma 
Kdij^a are again each subdivided into tWo parts.
u 
II
21. 
The Karma Kdvda is twofold—consisting of injunctions and 
p>rohibitions.‘
*i5rflr 
i
3^?!* ¥i5r% 
ii 
ii
22. 
Prohibited acts when done, will certainly bi’ing forth sin; 
from performance of enjoined acts there certainly results merit.
II 
II
23. 
The injunctions are threefold—nitya ' (regular), 
naimittika 
(occasional), and hdmya (optional). 
By the non-performance of nitya 
or daily rites there accrues sin ; but by their performance no merit is 
gained. 
On the other hand, the occasional and optional duties, if done 
or left undone, produce merit or demerit.
^ I
?r«ir 
u 
ii
24. 
Fruits of actions are twofold—heaven or hell. 
The heavens 
are of various kinds and sp also hells are diverse,
II 
II
25. 
The good actions are verilj^ heaven, and sinful deeds are verily 
hell; the creation is the natural outcome of Karma, and nothing else.
5iRTl^«iT^t 
5w:% 
t il R^ w
26. 
Creatures enjoy many pleasures in heaven ; many intolerable 
pains are suffered in hell.
II Rvs II
27. 
From sinful acts pain, from good acts happiness, results. 
For 
the sake of happiness, men constantly perform good actions.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 101 ---
OEAPfER 1. 
28-U.
g 
ii 
ii
28. 
When the sufferings for evil actions are gone through, then 
there take place re-births certainly; when the fruits of good actions have 
been exhausted, then also, verily, the result is the same.
29. 
Even in heaven there is experiencing of pain by seeing the 
higher enjoyment of others ; verily, there is no doubt of it that this whole 
universe is full of sorrow.
sit« 5«?r‘ 
%«rr i
u ^0 II
30. 
The classifiers of Kartna have divided it into two parts; good 
and bad actions ; they are the veritable bondage of the embodied soulS 
each in its turn.
/ I 
^
 991%^ I
9ifjr 
II %% H
31. 
Those who are not desirous of^joyTng the fruits of their actions 
in this or next world, should renounce ail actions which are done with an 
eye to their fruits, and having similarly discarded the aiftachment for the 
daily and the naimittiha acts, should employ themselves in the practice of 
Yoga.
Jndna Kanda.
32. 
The wise Yogi, having realised the truth of Karma Kdt.ida 
(works), should renounce them ; and having left both virtue and vice, he 
must engage in Jfidna Kai}4a (knowledge).
V 
IS ? !! 
H
.^iT ^air 5irsr?it5T 
ii 
ii
33. 
The Vedic texts,— “ The spirit ought to be seen,”— “ About it 
one must hear,” &c., are the real saviours and givers of true knowledge. 
They must be studied with great care.
I ^ g «r 
sr% r?r^ i
irat 
Jiflr 
1
H g 
II \\i II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 102 ---
SIVA SAMBITA.
34. 
That Intelligence, which incites the functions into the paths of 
virtue or vice, am I. All this universe, moveable and immoveable, is from 
m e; all things are preserved by me ; all are absorbed into me (at the time 
of pralaya) ; because there exists nothing hut spirit and I am that spirit.— 
There exists nothing else.
^ 
ST 
II
qr 
TO I
^IT 
qqr 
TO«IT II 
II
35. 
As in innumerable cups full of water, many reflections of the 
sun are seen, but the substance is the saine ; similarly individuals, like, 
cups,' are innumerable, but the vivifying spirit, like the sun, is one.
s n q ^ 
qf«iT srng^ ii 
ii
in a dream the one soul creates many objects by mere 
on awaking everything vanishes but the one soul; so is
36. 
As 
w illing; but 
this universe.
qr 
qr 
i
1 ^ * ^ fc T 
ii 
n
37. .A s through illusion a rope appears like a snake, or pearl-shell 
like silver; similarly, all this universe is superimposed in the ParamAtma 
(the Universal Spirit.)
q i5 q ^ r a « IT q r% 
II \ i. |l
38. 
As, when the knowledge of the rope is obtained, the erroneous 
notion of its being a snake does not remain ; so, by the arising of the 
knowledge of seif, vanishes this universu based on illusion.
q i^ 
ii « » it
siq^^ai^ftq* qrfe 
qq? ii 
ii
39. 
As, when the knowledge of the mother-of-pearl is obtained, the 
erroneous notion of its being silver does not remain; so, through the 
knowledge of spirit, the world always appears a delusion.
40. 
As, when a man besmears his eyelids with the collyrium pre­
pared from the fat of frogs, a bamboo appears like a serpent, so the world 
appears in the Param^md, owing to the delusive pigment of habit and 
imagination.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 103 ---
CHAPTER 1. 
41-47.
?rm 
^
 5*^% *n?*i«iT I
■ Jb 
W *T tt^ T ^ W ^ 5 m ^ W % I^ 3 IS ,U 9 U l
41. ' As through kilowledge of rope the serpent appears a delusion ; 
similarly, through spiritual kppwledge, the world. 
As through jaundiced 
eyes white appears yellow ; similarly, through the disease of ignorance, 
this world appears in the spirit;—an error very difficult to he removed.
. 
5?«ir g ift 
i
42. 
As when the jaundice is removed the patient sees t&e colour as 
it is, so when delusive ignorance is destroyed, the true nature of the 
spirit is made manifest.
*f *T«I!r 
I
?r«nmr 
% s5 R t u 
w
43. 
As a rope can never become a snake,, in the past, present or 
future. ; so the spirit which is beyond all aunds and which is pure, never 
becomes the universe.
44. 
Somewise men, well-versed in Scriptures, receiving the know­
ledge of spirit, have declared that even. Devas like Indra, etc., are 
non-eternal, subject to birth and death, and liable to destruction.
45. 
Like a bubble in the’ sea rising-through the agitation of the 
wind, this transitory world arises from the Spirit.
*f 
i
ii 
ii
46. 
The Unity exists always ; the Diversity does not exist always ; 
there comes a time when it ceases; two-fold, three-fold, and manifold 
distinctions arise only through illusion.
W5U* I 
^ I
47. 
Whatever was, is or will be, either formed or formless, 
in short, all this universe is superimposed on the Supreme Spirit.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 104 ---
8
8IVA.SAMH1TA.
l%m lir^rr larcnr 
i
3R ^?f ^
 ^Rqr* wflr«?iflr ii a<i»
48. 
Suggested by the Lords of suggestion comes out Avidyd. 
It 
is born of untruth, and its very essence is unreal. 
How can this world 
with such antecedents (foundations) be true^?
The Spirit.
5f 
ii 
u
49. 
All this universe, moveable or immoveable, has come out of 
Intelligencftk 
Renouncing eveiything else, take shelter in it (Intelli­
gence.)
sngf 
i
cT«iiWT«f*?r^ 
n ^0 H
50. 
As space pervades a jar both in and out, similarly within 
and beyond this ever-changing univerae, there exists one Universal Spirit.
51. 
As the space pervading the five false states of matter does 
not mix with them, so the Spirit does not mix with this ever-changing 
universe.
5 
n 
u
52. 
From Devas down to this material universe all are pervaded 
by one Spirit, 
There is one Saehehidananda (Existence, Intelligence 
and Bliss) all-pervading and secondless.
srrfef ^sw »rat wilder: i 
?i5reeRm?nw sqtfir: 
u 
ii
53. 
Since it is not illumined by another, therefore it is self- 
luminous ; and for that self-luminosity, the very nature of Spirit is 
Light.
^
 HTfla ^«FTS!5E3^qcrs I
Wen!!: 
^
 
n 
II
54. 
Since the Spirit in its nature is not limited by time, or space, 
it is therefore infinite, all-pervading and entirety itself.
5iT5n 
i
W ^R irerardt ^ 
ii
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 105 ---
GUATTBU 1. 
55-62.
55. 
Since the Spirit is unlike this world, which is composed of 
five states of matter, that are false and subject to destruction, therefore, it 
is eternal. 
It is never destroj^ed.
II 
II
56. 
Save and beyond it, there is no other substance, therefore, 
it is one; without it everything else is false; therefore, it is True 
Existence.
iTRT^Rf^SEr’ 
^'S"ll
57. 
Since in tliis world created by ignorance, the destruction 
of sorrow means the gaining of happiness ; and, through Gnosis, immunity 
from all sorrow ensues ; therefore, the Spirit is Bliss.
w r e r ^ c m y r ^ 
i
: 58. 
Since by Gnosis is destroyed the Ignorance, which is the cause 
of the universe ; therefore, the Spirit is .G n osisa n d this Gnosis is 
Consequently eternal.
?RT55clT 
II
II 
II
59. 
Since in time this manifold universe takes its origin, therefore, 
there is One who is verily the Self, unchanging through all times. 
Who 
is one, and unthinkable.
sirerr^ 
Hthtw iirfR 
i
ii 
ii
60. 
All these external substances will perish - in the course of 
time ; (but) that Spirit which is indescribable by Word (will exist) without 
a second.
^5T?W;T?I‘ 
'jfc R T 
If 
II
61. ' Neither ether, air, fire, water, earth, nor their combinations, 
nor the Devas, are perfect; the Spirit alone is so.
Yoga and Mayd.
62. 
Having renounced all false desires and abandoned all false 
worldly chains, the Yogi sees certainly in his own spirit the Universal 
Spirit by the self.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 106 ---
10
SIVA SAMHITA.
ffPIScT* 
I
i^s^’ ?:»!% y n r^ e iN rg Fiy T n %\ ti
63. 
Having seen the Spirit, that brings forth happiness, in his own 
spirit by the help of the self, he forgets this universe, and enjoys the 
ineffable bliss of SamMhi (profound meditation.)
sn5t ^JTrai% 
5iTf^?r ^
 
ii 
u
64. 
Maya (illusion) is the mother of the universe. 
Not from any 
other 
principle has the universe been created ; when this Maya is 
destroyed, the world certainly does not exist.
5T 
II 
i>
65. 
He, to whom this world is but the pleasure-ground of Maya, 
therefore, contemptible and worthless, cannot find any happiness in riches, 
body, etc., nor in pleasures.
wqsf 
5TIWT«IT 5H: II 
^ f s R n f ^ ^ g ^5^35 ^ ? r : 
ii %% ii
66. 
This world appears in three dilferent aspects to men—either 
friendly, inimical, or indifferent; 
such is always found in worldly 
dealings; there is distinction also in substances, as they are good, bad or 
indifferent.
wfcT^FTBcTt il 
f#^cT 
II 
II
67. 
That one Spirit, through differentiation, verily becomes a son, 
a father, etc. 
The Sacred Seri'ptures have demonstrated the universe to 
be the freak of Mdyd (illusion). 
The Yogi destroys this phenomenal 
universe by realising that it is but the result of Adhyaropa (superimposi­
tion) and by means of Apavdda (refutation of a wrong belief).
Definition of a Parama Hansa.
% ?iefr 
i
II 
II
68. 
When a person is free from the infinite distinctions and 
states of existence as caste, individuality etc., then he can say that he is 
indivisible intelligence, and pure Unit.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 107 ---
GBAFTER I. 
69-14.
11
Emanation or Evolution.
^ 
"sr srau
^vira^rt u 
ii
69. 
The Lord willed to create his creatures ; from His will came out 
Avidyd (fguoraace), the mothe?r of this false universe.
f^RPIT 
I
Hwr: n vso ii
70. 
There takes place the conjunction between the Pure Brahma 
and AvidyS, from which arises Brahm4, from which comes out the 
Aktiia.
!WT?a% ?Rn ? «fr 
feRft 
»
71. 
From the Akasa emanated the a ir; from air came the fire; 
from fire—water ; and from water came the earth. 
This is the order of 
subtle emanation.
sqtfi^ta^ttctt stft u 
It
72. 
From ether, air; from the air and ether combined came 
fire ; from the triple compound of ether, air and fire came water; and from 
the combination of ether, air, fire and water was produced the (gross) 
earth.
^ 
I
u 
ii
73. 
The quality of ether is ^ o u n d ; of air motion and touch. 
Form is the quality of,fire, and taste of water. 
And smell is the quality 
of the earth. 
There is no gainsaying this.
vr^f^^Nssrgff^oT: ii
UrTcQ^S’MI 
«R3q|:: 
H vW H
74. 
Ak&sa has one quality; air two, fire three, water four, and 
earth five qualities, 
—sound, touch, taste, form and smell. 
This has 
been declared by the wise.
<51^ 
^
 irMt s r r ^ ajsrcT i
w ^
«
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 108 ---
IS
SIVA SAMEITA:
75-76. 
Form is perceived through the eyes, smell through the 
nose, taste through the tongue, touch through the skin and sound through 
the ear. 
These are verily the organs o f perception.
77. 
From Intelligence has come out all ^his universe, movable 
and immovable ; whether or not its existence can be inferred, the “ All 
Intelligence ” One does exist.
Absorption or Involution,
^5!^ ?^fnsS 31% niff 31% ffiffsff 
I
ff«ff 
^ 1% 
II
n t II ^ II
78. 
The earth becomes subtle and is dissolved in water ; water is 
resolved into fire; fire similarly merges in air; air gets absorption in ether, 
and ether is resolved in Avidyd (Ignorance), which merges into the Great 
Brahma.
s iffw fftT«T«ir 
II vSMI
79. 
There are two forces-^ utVc^epa, (the out-going energy) and 
dvarana (the transforming energy) which are of great potentiality and 
power, and whose form is happiness. 
The great Mdyd, when non-intelli- 
gent and material, has three attributes sattva (rhythm) mjas (energy) 
and tamas (inertia).
. 
II
?f 
11 <0 11
80. 
The non-intelligent form of Mdyd covered by the dvarana force 
(concealment), manifests itself as the universe, owing to the nature of 
vik^epa force.
II
^ ffT firarr 
1
ffffffffT II 
II
81. 
When the avidyd has an excess oitamas^ then it manifests itself 
asDurga;the intelligence vrhich presides over her is called Islvara.
81 (a). 
When the Avidyd has an excess of Sattva, it manifests itself 
as the beautiful Lakshmi ; the Intelligence which presides over her is 
called Vishnu, -
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 109 ---
CE APTm i. 
82.88.
IB
^:^g<nTi^f>r ftrar 
^ I 
i
flsife a®T5Tf 
It 
II
82. 
When the avidya has an excess of rajas, it manifests itself as
the wise SarasWati; the intelligence which presides over her is known as 
ferahmS. 
a 
‘ 
,
t5ftmt,?Rv55T 
q m a iS i \
cT^^iT ?r«iT lU^ II
83. 
Gods like iSiva, Brahma, Vishnu, etc., are all seen in the great 
Spirit; bodies and all material objects are the various products of avidya..
ii <h ii
84. 
The wise have thus explained the creation of the world— 
tatiwas (elements) and not-tattwas (non-elements) are thus produced— 
not otherwise.
f^dqsfNhrrsn^ 
ii 
n
85. 
All things are seen as finite, etc. (endowed with qualities, 
etc.), and there arise various distinctions merely through words and 
names; but there is no real difference.
¥ira%t ^ ^ 5 q?:: i
^«qf% 5T 
II 
H
86. 
Therefore, the things do not exist; the great and glorious 
One that manifests them, alone exists; though things are false and 
unreal, yet, as the reflection of the real, they, for the time being, appear 
real.
*cq>{ 
^
 
arfer 
i
q{ q»^ i^ #Rq* gqjt 
H^ll
87. 
The One Entity, blissful, entire and 
all-pervading, 
afone 
exists, and nothing else; he who constantly realises this knowledge is 
freed from death and the sorrpw of the world-wheel.
q^qnctqrqqT^iwTf qq « q sq* qart i 
q#^ qRq^H%qiqqrq’^% II dd II
88. 
When, through the knowledge that all is illusory perception 
(firopa) and by intellectual refutation (apavada) of other doctrines, this 
universe is I’esolved into the one, then, there exists that One and nothing 
else ; then this is clearly perceived by the mind.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 110 ---
14
M V A SAMBITA.
Karma elotjies the Jiva with body.
89. 
From the Annamaya Ko§a (the physical vehicle) of the father, 
and in accordance with its past karma, the ho.man soul is re-incarnated; 
therefore, the wise consider this beautiful body as,a punishment, for the 
suffering of the effects of past Karma.
90. 
This temjple of suffering and enjoyment (human body), mad 
up of flesh, bones, nerves, marrow, blood, and intersected with blood
ves^ls etc., is only for the sake of suffering of sorrow.
nrsr 
i
91. 
This body, the abode of Brahma, and composed of five elements 
and known as Brahman(ja (the egg of Brahma or microcosm) has been 
made for the enjoyment of pleasure or suffering of pain.-
92. 
From the self-combination of the Spirit which is ^iva and the 
Matter which is ^akti, 
and, through their inherent inter-action on each 
Other, all creatures are born.
^
 
it
ii 
it
93. 
From the fivefold combination of all subtle elements, in this 
Universe, gross innumerable objects are produced. 
The intelligence that 
is confined in them, through Karma, is called^ the J^ro. 
All this world 
is derived from the five elements. 
The J im is the enjoyer of the fruits 
of action.
arefeRjrr 5 ??% 5iR( 1 1 1 1
94. 
in conformity with the effects of the past karma of the Jivas, 
I regulate- all their destinies. 
Jioa is immaterial, and is in all things; 
but it enters the material body to enjoy the fruits of karma.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 111 ---
CHAPTER 1. 
95-96.
15
^Tni^r^TSTct ^
 sisrfST^ 5?n 55?? ii 
11
95. 
Bound in the chain of matter by their karma, the Jivas receive 
various names. 
In this world, they come again and again to undex’go the 
consequences of their Tzarma.
^ 
ii 
u
-9
96, 
When the fruits of harma have been enjoyed, the Jiva is 
absorbed in the Paramhrahma.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 112 ---
Chapter II.
(1). 
The microcosm.
^ h?:t5 Irssn 
^
u
 t ii
In this body, the mount Meru— i.e., the veflebral column—^^is sur­
rounded by seven islands ; there are rivers, seas, mountains, fields; and 
lords of the fields too.
^ c T 
H ^ u
2. 
There are in it seers and sages ; all the stars and planets as well. 
There are sacred pilgrimages, shrines ; and presiding dieties of the shrines.
n \ ii
3. 
The sun and moon, agents of creation and destruction, also move 
in it. 
Ether, air, fire, water and earth are also there.
(2). 
The Nerve Centres.
a i^ n ;t 
11 a ii
4. 
All the beings that exist in the three worlds are also to be 
found in the b od y; surrounding the Meru they are engaged in their 
respective functions.
5ITHT% 
^ 
W^W
5. 
(But ordinary men do not know it). 
He who knows all this is 
a Y og i; there is no doubt about it.
6. 
In this body, which is called Brahmanda (microcosm, literally 
the mundane egg), there is the nectar-rayed moon, in its proper place, on 
the top of the spinal cord, with eight Kal4s (in the shape of a semi-circle).
^ % H> n
7. 
This has its face downwards, and rains nectar day; and night. 
The ambrosia further sub-divides itself into two subtle parts:
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 113 ---
CEAPTER IL 
8E5.
17
555nfcT W f^ 
^n
8. 
One of these, thi-ough the channel named IdS, goes over the 
body to nourish it, like the waters of the heavenly Ganges— certainly this 
ambrosia nourishes the whole body through the channel of 14^.
sjRrfeer: n
Jr3wnf?H 
H 
H
9. 
This milfc^ray (moon) is on the left side. The other ray, brilliant 
as the purest milk and fountain of great joy, enters through the middle 
path (called Su^humnd) into the spinal cord, in order to Create tliis moon.
5 
I
^
 
si3iN%? u III II
10. 
At the bottom of the Meru there is the sun having twelve 
KaUs. 
In the right side path (Pingala) the lord of creatures carries 
(the fluid) through its rays upwards.
«n?i;5s si^Tflr 
i 
^
 
ii U u
11. 
It certainly 
swalloAVs the 
vital secretions, 
and ray-exuded 
nectar. 
Together with the atmosphere, the sun moves through the whole 
body.
<WT 
TOJ|f?r5 
I
II 
II
12. 
The right-side vessel, which is pUigald is another form of the 
sun, and is the giver of Nirvana. 
The lord of creation and destruction 
(the sun) moves in this vessel through auspicious ecliptical signs.
(3).—The Nerves.
5ii^: 
gqim f
sr«nq»|^T 
ii U ii
13. 
In the body of ' man tliere are 3,50,000 nd^is ; of them, the 
principal are fourteen;
fq»RT 
i
ii Vi ii
q iW 5ii|9 r 
I
gqqn 
EgRqmr ii 
ii
14-15. 
Sushumpa, 
ld&, PingalS, Gfindhiri, HastijihvikA, Kuhu, 
Safaswati, Pustt, Sankhini, Payaswani, VSruni, AlumbusS, Vishwodari, 
and Ya4aswani. 
Among these I4&, Pingaltl and Sushumna are the chief.
3
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 114 ---
m
SIVA SAMUITA.
5IT5^{ 
^ 
II
16. 
Among tKese three, 
Sushumn4 alone 
is the highest and 
beloved of the Yogis. 
Other vessels are subordinate to it in the body.
m ^trsrfsrt: 
i
?rwT^5i 
t'S n
17. 
All these principal nddis (vessels) have their mouths down­
wards, and are like thin threads of lotus. 
They are all supported by the 
vertebral coluijin, and represent the sun, moon and fire.
*i«^ *rar 
^ir m 
i
g w i II 
II
18. 
The innermost of these three is Ghitrd ; it is my beloved. 
In 
that there, is the subtlest of all hollows called Brahmarandhra.
m 
ii 
ii
19. 
Brilliant with five colours, pure, moving 
in the middle of 
SushuranS., 
this 
Chitr4 is the vital part of body and centre of Su- 
shumnS.
ii ro ii
20. 
This has been called in 4he ^Astras the Heavenly W ay; this 
is the giver of the joy of immortality; by contemplating it, the great 
Yogi destroys all sins.
(4).— The Pelvic "Region.
5^*3551^ : 1
eig ^ n ip ^ ren ^ rsin cir^ ^ sann^ii 
ii
21. 
Two digits above the rectum and two digits below the organ 
is the adhdra lotus, having a dimension of four digits.
^ra5T^3 
ii 
n
22. 
In the pericarp of the ddhara lotus there is the triangular, 
beautiful yoni, hidden and kept secret in all the Tantras.
35«irr qi^^;fe5rT il 
ii
23. 
In it is the supreme 
goddess Kundalini of the form of 
electricity, in a coil- 
It has three coils and a half (like a serpent), and 
is in the mouth of Sushunm4.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 115 ---
CHAPTER II. 
24-30.
10
?iT 
i
24. 
It represents the creative force of the world, and is always 
engaged in creation. 
It is the goddess of speech, whom, speech cannot 
manifest* and who is praised by all gods.
f[5T5!n^ 9 
wmwn 
i
^3WDT?it 
•*
25. 
The -nddf called Id^ is on the left side coiling round the 
Sushumn^, it goes to the right nostril.
5iw m salt ^ m n ajwfeRrr l
»r<rr u 
u
26. 
The na4i called Pingala is on- the right side ; coiling round 
the central vessel, it enters the left nostril.
?n 
I
’SI 
iirp n 
u
27. 
The n&4i which is between 
IdS and PingalS is certainly
Sushumnft. 
It has six stages, six forces,* six lotuses, known to the 
Yogis. 
^ ^
^nrarr^^ 
ii 
n
28. 
The first five stages t of Sushumnfi are known under various 
names; being necessary, they have been made known in this book.
qjfqr 
5iTfr 
i
qr^ijSS ^ a t 5 i ^ \\
?rf % 
?T«iTt![rerg^t ii 
u
i 29. 
The other nadjs, rising from Mulddhdi', go to the various parts 
of the body, e.g. the tongu^, organ, eyes, feet, toes, ears, the abdomen, the 
armpit, fingers of the hapds,' the scrotum and the anus. 
Having risen 
from their proper place, theV stop at their respective destinations, as above 
described.
H5rF«r <^sr m im i 
m m , \
3ii?f qqwin* 
II
30. 
From all these (fourteen) nd^is, there arise gradually other 
branches and sub-branches, so that at last they become three hundred 
thousand and a half in number, and supply their respective places.
* That is, the f anctious of the Cord, v i s :—Reflection, co-ordination, etc.
■f The parts of which the Spinal Cord is composed are the Tahtrik stages vis. 
Cervical, Dorsal, Lumbar, Sacral and Coccygeal.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 116 ---
20
SIVA SAUEITA. ■
%9Sit?rT: l^sssncjt 
II %\\\
SI. 
These? nd4is are spread through the body cross-wise and length­
wise ; they are vehicles of sensation and keep watch over the movements 
of the air i.e,, they regulate the motor functions also.
(5).— Th$ Abdominal Begio^.
n q |»rT n 5 c ti^ q q ^ 5 if5 r^ iw T ^ j I
snftr^t 
ii 
ii
32- 
In the abdomen there burns the fire— digestor of food—situat­
ed in the middle of the sphere of the sun having twelve Kalas. 
Know 
this as the fire of Vaiswanara; it is born from a portion of my own energy, 
and digests the various foods of creatures, being inside their bodies.
SRfTq^T 
I
ii 
ii
33. 
This fire increases life, and gives strength and nourishment, 
makes the body full of energy, destroys all diseases, and gives health.
'{ 
?rft3Tfrer* 
sr^if 
ii 
ii
34. 
The wise Yogi, having kindled this Viswanaric fire according 
to proper rites, should sacrifice food into it eveiy day, in conformity with 
the teachings of his spiritual teacher.
n^ran^ snsrr?rr% ^rrcrsqi^f 
ii 
»
35. • This body called the Brahm-anda (microcosm] has many parts, 
but I have enumerated the 
most important of 
them in 
this book. 
(Surely) they ought to be known.
5iR TW t5im r^ 
«5i j
^
 
II 
II
36. 
Various are their nanies, and innumerable are the places in 
this human body; all of them cannot be enumerated here.
(16).—The Jivdtma.
^
 
^isliTt I
II ^^9 II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 117 ---
G BAPTm II. 
87-43.
21
37. 
In the body thus described, there dwelleth the Jiva, al];«-pervad- 
ing, adorned with the garland of endless desires and chainM (to the 
body) by karma.
^ II 
II
38. 
The Jiva possessed of many qualities and the agent of all events, 
enjoys the fruit of his various Jtarmas amassed in the past life.
I ii^^ ii
39. 
Whatever is seen among men (whether pleasure or pain) 
is born of kayma. 
All creatures enjoy or suffer, according to the results 
of their actions.
^ ^ ^
 
II «o II
40. 
The desires, etc., which cause pleasure or pain, act according 
to the past karma of the Jtva.
SJT<DI!?ft^ntfcr 
I
araj $tT3asR5 
ii « U i
41. 
The Jiva that has accumulated an excess of good and virtuous, 
actions receives a happy life ; and in the world he gets pleasant and good 
things to enjoy, without any trouble.
5RT5 
f 
<31 I
^
 flrsflr ^if^cti^^ii
51 
¥r^?di5l^r 
^ g 
i
snrra^ ii 
ii
42. 
In proportion to the force of his karma, man suffers misery or 
enjoys pleasure. 
The Jiva that has accumulated an excess of evil never 
stays in peace—it is not separate from its karmas ; except karma, there is 
nothing in this world. 
From the Intelligence veiled by M^yd, all things 
have been evolved..
$mn5i 3pxi5it 
i
srnt^ii 
ii
, 
' 43. As in their proper season, various creatures are boim to enjoy
the consequences of their karma; as through mistake a pearl-shell is 
taken for silver, so through the taint of one’s own karmas, a man mistakes 
Brahman for the material duniverse.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 118 ---
22
SIVA SAMBITA.
tf 
^a^rt«T 5fn ii« « ii
44. 
From desire all these delusions arise ; they can be eradicated 
with gi-eat difficulty ; when the salvation-givitig knowledge of the un­
reality of the world arises, then are desu-es destroyed^
ii 
n
45. 
Being engrossed in tlie manifested (objective). world, the de­
lusion arises about that which is the manifestor— the subject. 
There is 
no other, (ca^use of this delusion). 
Verily, verily, I tell you the truth.
^ 
II 
H
46. 
The illusion of the manifested (objective world) is destroyed 
when the Maker of the Manifest becomes manifest. 
This illusion does 
not cease so long as one thinks, “ Brahm is not.”
iF?raT sf 
II avs ii
47. 
By looking closely and deeply into the matter, this false know­
ledge vanishes. 
It cannot be removed otherwise ; the delusion of silver 
remains.
“sr II a<£ ii
48. 
As long as knowledge does not arise about the stainless 
Manifestor of the universe, so long all 
things 
appear separate and 
many.
i
»
49. 
When this body, obtained through karma, is made the means of 
obtaining Nii’y^na (divine beatitude); then only the carrying of the 
burden e f the body becomes fruitful,— not otherwise.
m g # m?T*ir war 
i
m gm ^
 
a n n H 
ii
50. 
Of whatever nature is the original desire • (vAsana), that clings 
to and accompanies the Jiva (through various incarnations); similar is the 
delusion which it suffers, according to its deeds and misdeeds.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 119 ---
OtlAPTEB It. 
51-54.
23
^ r ^ s m * 
ii 
»
51. 
If the practiser of Yoga wishes to cross the ocean of the world, 
he should perform all the duties of his dshrama^ (the condition, of life), 
renouncing all the fruits of hi^s works.
q r r ^ ^ n 
ii
52. 
' Persons attached to sensual objects and desirous of sensual 
pleasures, descend from the road of Nirvana, through the' delusion of 
much talk, and fall into-sinful deeds.
qnvwswicWT 
q^qfcT \
5T^ 
5T 
»I5f W 
«
53. 
When a person does not see anything else hei-e, haying seen 
the Self by the self; then there is no sin (for him if he) renounces all 
ritual works. 
This is my opinion.
i
ii 
u
- 
54. 
All desires and the rest are dissolved through Gnosis only, 
and not otherwise. 
When all (minor) tattvas (principles), cease to exist, 
then My Tattva becomes manifest.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 120 ---
C hapter HI.
On Yoga Practice. 
The Vdyus.
II III
In the heart, there is a brilliant lotus with ^twelve petals adorned 
with brilliant signs. 
It has the letters from k to th (i.e., k, kh, g. gh, 
n, ch, chh. j, jh, iijifik, th.), the twelve beautiful letters.
s n ^ 
crtgr 
i
n ^ n
2. 
The Prdna lives there, adorned with various desires, accom­
panied by its past works, that have no beginning, and joined with egoism 
{ahankdra.)
N o t e :—The heart is in the centre where there is the seed »j
^ 
II ^ II
3. 
From the different modifications of the Prdna, it receives various 
names; all of them cannot be stated here.
anntsqmj 
a iR ^ 
i
f 
II « II
4. 
Prana', "apdna, samdna, udana, vydna, ndga, kurma, Krikara, 
devadatta, and dhananjaya.
^551 
ii ^ ii
5. 
These are the ten pj-incipal names, described by me in this 
Sastra; they perform all the functions, incited thereto by their own 
actions.
> 
3*r: i
craTf^ 
sin ffR i^ 
ii ^ u
6. 
Again, out of these ten, the first five are the leading ones; even 
among these, the Prdna and Af&na are the highest agents, in my 
opinion.
sn^ir 3^5qRt ^srar^r 
i
shrift 
II « II
7. 
The seat of the Prdna is the heart; of the apdna, anus; of the 
samana, the region about the navel; of the uddno, the throat; while the 
vydna moves all over the body.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 121 ---
Oh AFTER III. 
8-15.
25
qssr ^ 
^ ^rsrl i
^<T3^W H ^ II
8. 
The five remaining vdym, the ndga,: etc*, perform the following 
functions in the body 
Eructation, opening the eyes, hunger and thirst, 
gaping or yawning, and lastly hiccup.
% asTT^ ^
 
J
^ 
»r{?rq. u ^ ii
9. 
He who in this way knows the microcosm of the body, being 
absolved from all sins, reaches the highest state.
(2).— T/te Guru.
10. 
Now I shall tell you, how easily to attain success in Yoga, by 
knowing which the Yogis never fail in the practice of Yoga.
»i^g(t’§5r5t t o 
i
5Ri«ir 
«
11. 
Only the knowledge imparted by a Guru, through his lips, is 
powerful and useful; otherwise it becomes fruitless, weak and very 
painful.
S 5 
^ % to g m ^ r ^ i
i k r ii
12. 
He who is devoted to any knowledge, while pleasing his Guru 
with every attention, readily obtains the fruit of that knowledge.
!S^: t o 
g ^ T 
trm i \
g^twRrlPj s it o ^ II u II
13. 
There is not the least doubt that Guru is father, Guru is 
mother, and Guru is God even; and as such, he shotdd be served by all 
with their thought, word and deed.
g ^ s R TT^ j ^
 
g vrtm iw t i
g e f^ ^ R P w *T 
II 
II
14. 
By Guru’s favour everything good relating to one’s self is 
obtained. 
So the Guru ought to be daily served; else there can be noth­
ing auspicious.
a ^ to rsra * ^
 
<irftRr i
W h ii i m ^ ^ g w ^ y t r c ^ i l tM l
15. 
Let him salute his Guru after walking three times round him, 
and touching with his right hand his lotus-feet.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 122 ---
SIVA SAMBlTA.
(3).—The Adhikdri.
16. 
The person who has control over himself attains verily success 
through faith ; none other can succeed. 
Therefore, with faith, the Yoga 
should be practised with care and perseverance. 
,c
51 
cT«lKl% >aT% 5lW ft I
3 ^ 3 T T fe f|5 ir*lf 5r«IT 
II 
II
5j55a!?it^ft5ir5if H 
ii 
ii
17. 
Those who are addicted to sensual pleasures or beep bad com­
pany, who are disbelievers, who are devoid of respect towards their Guru, 
who resort to promiscuous assemblies, who are addicted to false and 
vain controversies, who are cruel in their speech, and who do not give 
satisfaction to their Guru never attain success.
^
 
wliRrTfrt ^ a»r' 
ii 
ii 
•
18. 
The first condition of success is the firm belief that it (vidya) 
must sixcceed and be fruitful; the second condition is having faith in it; 
the third is respect towards the Guru ; the fourth is the spirit .of universal 
equality ; the fifth is the restraint of the organs of sense ; the sixth is 
moderate eating, these are all. 
There is no seventh condition.
^rsri'Jr 
3 ^ *1. i
3 «q |^ s ^ i^ 5 iT i^^ir 
ii 
ii
19. 
Having received instructions in Yoga, and obtained a Guru 
who knows Yoga, let him practise with earnestness and faith, accord­
ing to the method taught by the teacher.
(4).— The Place, Etc.
ii Ro ii
20. 
Let the Yogi go to a beautiful and pleasant place of retirement 
or a cell, assume the posture padmdsana, and sitting on a seat (made of 
Jttisa grass) begin to practise the regulation of breath.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 123 ---
O B A P rm III. 
21-26.
snHPT 
I
^ 
5«IJ II 
H
21. 
The wise beginner should keep his body firm and inflexible, 
his Lands joined as if in supplicatipn, and salute the Grurus ou the left 
side. He should also pay salutations to Gane^a on the right side, and 
again to the guardians of the worlds and goddess AmbikS, who are on the 
left side.
(5).—The Prdtfdpdma.
Sfgrar 
Pf»T55f 
i
?T«n?5Tf9ir g 
K -
^ IT O I'fT 
5T %*T?T5 II RR II
22. 
Then let the wise practitioner close with his right thumb the 
pingald (the right nostril), inspire air through the I(i^ (the left nostril); 
and keep the air confined—suspend his breathing—as long as he can ; 
and afterwards let him breathe out slowly, and not forcibly, through the 
right nostril.
gflfs f^f*T5T?n5s<j5f ?i«w5rf55rr g f 
i
'll R% ||
23. 
Again, let him draw breath through the right nostril, and stop 
breathing as long as his ’ strength permits ; then let him expel the air 
through the left nostril, not forcibly, but slowly and gently.
^5nrfli«n^?r 
i
(^ncTRS^rt II 
H
24. 
According to the above method of Yoga, let him practise twenty 
kumhhakas (stopping of the breath). 
He should practise this daily 
without neglect or idleness, and free from all 
duals (of love and hatred, 
and doubt and contention), etc.
f w m g II 
II
25. These kumhhakas shonld. be practised four times :-^once (1) 
early in the morning at sun-rise, (2) then at mid-day, (3) the third at 
sunset, and (4) the fourth at mid-night.
f?«f 
I
5T?lT 
|| R%, II
26. 
When this has been practised daily, for three months, with 
regularity, the ndd,is (the vessels) of the body will readily and sui’ely be 
purified.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 124 ---
28
SIVA SAMBITA.
5n?T 
« ^ g iw r e iw i^ : ii 
h
27. 
When thus the ndiis of tha truth-perceiving Yogi are purified, 
then his defects being all destroyed, he enters the first stage in the practice 
of Yoga called drambha.
g 
t^r 
Ti^x II R'i H
28. 
Certain signs are perceived in the body of the Yogi whose nd4is 
have been purified. 
I shall describe, in brief, all these various signs.
i
?i«ir 
ii
err: ii 
ii
29. 
The body of the person practising'the regulation of breath 
becomes harmoniously developed, emits sweet scent, and looks beautiful 
and lovely. 
In all kinds of Yoga, there are four stages of Tprdmydma ;— 
1, Arambha-avasthfi, (the state of beginning) ; 2, Ghata-avastha (the state 
of co-operation of Self and Higher S elf); 3, Parichaya-avasth4 (knowledge); 
4, Nishpattiavastha (the final consummation).
ii |o ii
30. 
W e have already described the beginning or Arambha-avasthfi 
of prdridydma; the rest will be described hereafter. 
They , destroy all sin 
and sorrow.
5Tra% 
II \K II
31. 
The following qualities are surely always found in the bodies 
of every Yogi :— Strong appetite, good digestion, cheerfulness, handsome 
figure, great courage, mighty enthusiasm and full strength.
im qsq* s m ’qrjii 
q c n I
ii 
ii
32. 
Now 1 tell you the .great obstacles, to Yoga which must be 
avoided, as by their removal the Yogis cross easily this sea of worldly 
sorrow.
f6).—-The things to he renounced,
?Rir
^ WPS sHcTt 
a
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 125 ---
CHAPTER TIL 
33-36.
29
3tei[S3^m flClERT3hH, I
M ir 
irferan n \\ ii
33. 
The Yogi should renounce the following:— 1 Acids, 2 astrin^ 
gents, 3 pungent subs|ances, 4 salt, 5 mustard, and 6 bitter things; 
7 much walking, 8 early bathing (before sunrise) and 9 things roasted 
in oil; 10 theft, 11 killing (of animals) 12 enmity towards any person, 13 
pride, 14 duplicity, and 15 crookedness; 16 fasting, 17 untruth, 18 
thoughts other than those of moksha, 19 cruelty towards animals; 20 
companionship of women, 21 worship of (or handling or sitting near) fire, 
and 22 much talking, without regard to pleasantness or unpleasantness of 
speech, and lastly, 23 much eating.
(7).—The means.
g rM 'ST sr^tirftr % sr 
i
J tiq M 
II 
II
34. 
Now I will tell you the means by which success in Yoga is 
quickly obtained; it must be kept secret by the practitioner so that 
success may come with certainty.
f gf 
^ 
i
v i t 
fire* ^
 
II
w n ciqt 
M f c n g f i
5 itcn ft 
M t 
il
35. 
The great Yogi should observe always the following obser­
vances :—He should use 1 clarified butter, 2 milk, 3 sweet food, and 4 
betel without lime, 5 camphor; 6 kind words, 7 pleasant monastery or 
retired cell, having a small door ; 8 hear discourses on truth, and 9 always 
discharge his household duties with vairagya (without attachment) 10 
sing the name of Vishnu; 11 and hear sweet music, 12 have patience, 
13 constancy, 14 forgiveness, 15 austerities, 16 purifications, 17 modesty, 
18 devotion, and 19 service of the Guru.
M r scNs' 51%^ 
n 
n
36. 
When the air enters the sun, it is the proper time for the Yogi 
to takekis food (i.e., when the breath flows.thx-ough the PingaU) ; when
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 126 ---
BIVA SAMRITA.
th« air enters the moon, he should go to sleep {i-e., when the breath 
flows through the left nostril or the I^a).
snsrir 
ii 
n
37. 
The Yoga {pra^ciyama) should not be practised just after the 
meals, nor when one is very hungry ; before beginning the practice, some 
milk and butter should be taken.
?rclTS«iT^ 
^ 5Tr?^Rr?TW5r?: i
ii
ii 
ii
38. 
When one is well established in his practice, then he need not 
observe these restrictions. 
The practitioner should eat in small quantities 
at a time, though frequently ; and should practise kumbhaka daily at the 
stated times.
fWT^J 
^
 II 
-
f nr% 
ftp 5f 
li 
ii
39. 
When the Yogi can, of his will, regulate the air and stop the 
breath (whenever and how long) he likes, then certainly he gets success 
in kumbhaka, and from the success in kumbhaka only, what things cannot 
the Yogi command here ?
The first stage.
ipRi«n ftpri « i r g ^ 
ii «© ii
- 40. 
In the first stage of pr&rjtdydma, the body of the Yogi begins to 
perspire. 
When it perspires, he should rub it well, otherwise the body 
of the Yogi loses its dhdtu (humors).
The second and third stages.
JT55r^ »T?rr 1
41. 
In the second stage, there takes place the trembling of the 
body j in the third, the jumping about like a frog; and when the practice 
becomes greater, >the adept walks in the air.
Vdyusiddhi.
^
 «wrrenw«itsft ^
g c^ ssr 
i
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 127 ---
G BAPTm III. 
42-48,
B1
42. 
When the Yogi, though remaining in Padmdsana, can rise in 
the air and leave the ground, then know that he has gained Vdyu-siddhi 
.(succ6ss over air), which destroys the darkness of the world.
43. 
But so long (a| he does not gain it), let him practise observing 
all the rules and restrictions laid down above. 
From the perfection of 
pravaydma, follows decrease of sleep, excrements and urine.
^ 
II 
II
44. 
The truth-perceiving Yogi becomes free from disease, and 
sorrow or affliction ; he never 
gets (putrid) perspiration, saliva and 
intestinal worms.
ii 
ii
45. 
When in the body of the practitioner, there is neither any 
increase of phlegm, wind, nor bile ; then he may with impunity be irre­
gular in his diet and the rest.
5l|STr 
5T 
f| 5f: I
46. 
No injurious results then would follow, were the Yogi to take 
a large quantity of food, or very little, or no food at all. 
Through the 
strength of constant practice, the Yogi obtains Bhuehari-siddhi, he moves 
as the frog jumps over the ground, when frightened away* by the 
dapping of hands.
^re^OT 
I
crmi^r 
sn^j 
ii avs ii
47. 
Verily, there are many hard and almost insurmountable - obs­
tacles in Yoga, yet the Yogi should go on with his practice at all hazards; 
even were his life to come to the throat.
jR it 
^HTsif sftsErIcrt II a^ ii
48. 
Then let the practitioner, sitting in a retired place and 
restraining his senses, utter by inaudible repetition, the long*pmnam OM, 
in order to destroy all obstacles.
Note.—The A.U.M. all three should be distinctly uttered.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 128 ---
^ t V A S A U B l f A .
49. 
The wise practitioner surely destroys all his karma, whether 
acquired in this life or in the past, through the regulation of breath.
»iniT#r 
i
5rra^?^smn!iT?iT^*T 
s»rw: c*l 
ii
50. 
The great Yogi destroys by sixteen prdn^ydmas the various 
virtues and vices accumulated in his past life.
qrtRj55*5raT5!T|Ts»^|?jr^?Tr%*Tr i 
t 
qsrTcyRn#r 
n 
ii
51. 
This prdndydma destroys sin, as fire burns away a heappf 
cotton; it makes the Yogi free from sin ; next it destroys the bonds 
of all his good actions.
srmi?iT&5i 
% I
ii 
ii
52. 
The mighty Yogi having attained, through prdvaydma, the 
eight sorts of psychic powers, and having crossed the ocean of virtue and 
vice, moves about freely through the three worlds.
hievease of duration.
^
 
a ^
 II 
II
53. 
Then gradually he should make himself able to practise for 
three gharis (one hour and a half at a time, he should be able to restrain 
breath for that period). 
Through this, the Yogi undoubtedly obtains all 
the longed-for powers.
Siddhis- or Perfections.
5r«rr i
64. 
The Yogi acquires the following powers .•— adkya siddhi (pro­
phecy), transporting himself everywhere at will {Kamaehdri), claii'voyance 
{duradristhi), clairaudience (durashruti), s\ibtle-sight'~(shukshma-drishti], 
and the power of entering another’s body (pamM^pj-onesano),burning base 
metals to gold by rvibbing them with his excrements and urine, and the 
power of becoming invisible, and lastly, moving in the air.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 129 ---
GHAPTSR in . 
55-60.
33
I I —The Ghata Avastha.
t o i
rRHT 
ii 
w
55. 
When, by the practice of Prdrtdyama, the Yogi reaches the 
state of giTiato (water-jar), then for him there is nothing in this circle of 
universe which he canngt accomplish.
srScT 
^ 
II 
H
50. 
The ghata is said to be that state in which the prdna and the 
'apana vdyus, the ndda and the vindit, the jivdtmd (the Human Spirit) and 
the Paramdtmd (the Universal Spirit) combine and co-operate.
qraTtnr 
i
StgiT^TCg ll^ 
II H'S II
57. - When he gets the power of holding breath {i.e., to be in 
trance) for three hours, then c6rtainly the wonderful state of pratyah&r is 
reached without fail.
?T ?T 5TRT% 
?WT?&% W ^g^l
II 
II
58. 
Whatever object the Yogi perceives, let him consider it to be 
the spirit. 
When the modes of action of various senses are known, then 
they can be conquered.
ci^ ^
 ^ 
ii
59. 
When, through great practice, the Yogi can perform one 
kumhhahator full three hours, when for eight tZundas (= 3 hours) the 
breathing of the Yogi is suspended, then that wise one can balance 
himself on his thumb ; but he appears to others as insane.
III.—The Pariehaya.
3r5Tt 
I
g ift 
II
^ 3 5 ^35TT 
II 
II
60. 
After this, through exercise, the Yogi reaches the Pariehaya 
avasthd. 
When the air leaving the sun and the moon (the right and 
the left nosfails), remains unmoved and steady in the ether of the tube 
sushumnd, then it is in the pariehaya state.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 130 ---
$4
SW A B AMBIT A.
«i?r «?ft«r?Trarw ^T%isrwn?r^nTa.‘ ii 
f 5 i ^ 
M t a tr 
^ fe r a n » %% ii
61. 
When he, by the practice oE Yoga, acquires potver of action 
{kHyA ^akti) and pierces through the six chakras, and reaches the sure 
Condition of parichaya, then the Yogi, verily, sees the three-fold effects 
of karma.
aaar 
snita 
i
^ ^
 
»
62. 
T^en, let the ' Yogi destroy the multitude of karmas by the 
pranava (om) ; let him accomplish kayavyuha (a mystical process of arrang­
ing the various skandas of the body), in order to enjoy or suffer the 
consequences of all his actions in one life, without the necessity of 
re-birth.
ii
^ 
«ia«nin5r ii 
ii
63. 
At that time let the great Yogi practise the five-fold dharand 
forms of concentration on'Vishnu, by which command over the five 
elements is obtained, and fear of injuries from 
any one of them is 
removed. 
(Earth, water, fire, air, 4has cannot harm him.)
Note.—He should perform 5 Eumbhakas at each centre or Chakra.
srfNff? 
^
 u
rr«if ^
 
i
H 
n 
u
64. 
Let 
the wise Yogi practise dharani 
th u s:— five ghatis 
(2J hours) in the adhdra lotus (Mul&dhara'l; five gliafis in the seat of 
the Unga (Svfi,dhisthan4), five ghatis in the region above it, (in the navel, 
Jlanipur), and the same in the heart (Anflhata); five ghatis in the throat 
(Visuddha) and, lastly let him hold dharani for five ghatis in the space 
between the two eye-brows (Ajn&pur). 
By this practice the elements 
cease to cause any harm to the great Yogi.
^ ilnicr u 
»
65. 
The wise Yogi, who thus continually practises concentration 
{dhdrand), never dies through hundreds of cycles of the great BrahmS.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 131 ---
OHABTER t i t 
66-70.
3S
IV.-~r-The Nishpatti.
^
 
u %.% II
66. 
After this, through gradual exercise, th6 Yogi reaches the 
Nishpatti-avasthd (the conditiou of consummation). 
The Yogi, having 
destroyed all the seeds of karma which existed from the beginning, 
drinks the wateiu of immortality.
<51 
II
*9 
a ^vs h
67. 
When the jivan-mukta (delivered in the present life,) tranquil 
Yogi has obtained, through 
practice, the consummatmn of samddhi 
(meditation), and when this state of consummated samddhi can be volun­
tarily evoked, then let the Yogi take hold of the chetana (conscious 
intelligence), together with the air, and with the force of {kriya-sakti)' 
conquer the six wheels, and absorb it in the force called jnana-sakti.
i f 
I<
^
 
II 
II
68. 
Now we have described the management of the air in order 
to remove the troubles (which await the Y ogi); through this knowledge 
of vdyu-sddhand vanish all sufferings and enjoyments in the circle of 
this universe.
f^ r a tn in ^ 
ii 
ii
69. 
When the skilful Yogi, by placing the tongue at the root of 
the palate, can drink the prdva vdyu, then tlrere occurs complete disso­
lution of all Yogas (i.e., he is no longer in need of Yoga).*
jTTOiqrsi^vnsffr: ^ 
n « » ii
,70. 
When the skilful Yogi, knowing the laws of the action of Prdto> 
and Ap&na, can drink the cold air through the contraction of the mouth, 
in the form*of a crow-bjill, then be becomes entitled to liberation.
* Some texts read 
instead of *1PIH1 in which case, it will mean “ freedom 
from all diseases.”
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 132 ---
SAMEITA.
f ^ l^ r 
I
5n5?i% 
?srJi?r§3f^wmMl vst n
71. 
That wise Yo^i, who daily drinks the ambrosial air, according 
to proper rules, destroys fatigue, burning (fever), decay and old age, 
and injuries.
1
^ 3 ‘s R f^ ^ fe R n i. ii 's r m
72. 
Pointing the tongue upwards, when the Yogi can drink the 
nectar flowing from the moon (situated between the two eye-brows), within 
a month he certainly would conquer death.
f 
’spi«t#5T 
II 
H
73. 
When having firmly closed the glottis by the proper yogic 
method, and contemplating on the goddess Kurujalini, he drinks (the 
moon fluid of immortality), he becomes a sage of poet within six months.
f # «EtRqT 
5iiwi% n vsa II
74. 
When he drinks the air through the crow-bill, both in the 
morning and the evening twilight, contemplating that it goes to the 
mouth of the Kundalini, consumption of the lungs (phthisis) is cured.
li
^
 II 
II
75. 
When the wise Yogi drinks the fluid day and night through 
the crow-beak, his diseases are destroyed : he acquires certainly the powers 
of clairaudience and clairvoyance.
»3?3* 5iqf^ 
n
76. 
When firmly dosing the teeth (by pressing the upper on the 
lower jaw), and placing the tongue upwards, the wise Yogi drinks the 
fluid very slowly, within a short period he conquers death.
qflqraqnw iw irer q t 
i
^
 
f| ’etj ii ^
 ii
77. 
One, who daily continues this exercise for six months only, 
is freed from all sins, and destroys all diseases.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 133 ---
OUAPfEil III. 
78-84.
81
^f@rori^gm%»isrr ^>|?r*TO: 
ii vs<s n
78. 
If he continues this exercise for a year, he becomes a Bhairava ; 
he obtains the powers of a^irnd &c., and conquers all elements and the 
elementals.
^
 ^rgUr i
an i^i^3ra% {5i! H ^ H
79. 
If the Yogi can remain for half a second with his tongue 
drawn upwards, he becomes free from disease, death, and old age.
t
51 ^
 51151% 
II 
II
80. 
Verily, verily, I tell you the truth that the person never dies 
who contemplates by pressing the tongue, combined with the vital 
fluid or Prana.
^ ^
 ^ 
^
 N 
sT3rni% II 
II
81. 
Through this exercise and Yoga, he becomes like a Kfimadeva, 
without a rival. 
He feels neither hunger, 
nor thirst, nor sleep,- nor 
swoon.
^ 
ii 
ii
82. 
Acting upon these methods the great Yogi becomes in the 
world perfectly independent; and freed from all obstacles, he can go 
everywhere.
5T 5^51 
I
5??r?iOTt5r 
n 
ii
83. 
By practising thus, he is never reborn, nor is tainted by virtue 
and vice, but enjoys (for ages) with the gods.
The postures.
5^rs!Tf%‘sif#r 
i 
%wrsr3««Bm^5i 
it
cr<r: 
^ 
ii 
ii
84. 
There are eighty*four postures, of various modes. 
Out of 
them, four ought to be adopted, which I mention below: —I, Siddhfisana; 
2, Padmasana; 3, Ugrasana; 4, Svastikasana.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 134 ---
M
81VA SAMHlfA.
1.— Siddhdsana.
«iT^»i5y 
II
3;^ * 
^n «? i #jsrer: 
I
^ 5 ^ * T ^ cT: II
^f^ rstr?!^ liT 4 ^iscnif 
11 
11
85. 
Tbe Siddhasatia ihat gives success to the practitioner is as 
follows:— Pressing with cai-e by the heel the yont, the other heel the 
Yogi should place on the litigam; he should fix his gaze upwards on the 
space between the t,Wo e3'ebrows, should be steady, and restrain his senses. 
His body particularly must be Straight and without any bend. 
The place 
should be a retired one, without any noise.
86. 
He who wishes to attain quick consummation of Yoga, by 
exercise, should adopt the Siddhasana posture,- and practise regulation of 
the breath.
5U?Tt 
3 !^ 11
11 <^^911
87. 
Through this posture the Yogi, leaving the world, attains the 
highest end and throughout the world there is no posture more secret 
than this. 
By assuming and contemplating in this posture, the Yogi is 
freed from sin.
2.—The Padmdsana.
i
g m fllr 11
^ > 5 ? ! 
^
 
II
qqreraqr 
1
q m 
II
qura^r sittu* 
i>
88. 
I describe now the Padmdsana which wards off (or cures) all 
diseases:— Having crossed the legs, carefully place the feet on fhe opposite 
thighs {i.e., the left foot on the right thigh, and vice versa) ; cross both 
the hands and place them similarly on the thighs ; fix the sight on the
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 135 ---
OEAPTER III. 
89-93.
89
tip o! the nose; pressing the tongae against the root of the teeth, (the 
chin should be elevated, the chest expanded) then draw the air slowly, 
fill the chest with all your might, and expel it slowly, in an unobstructed 
Stream.
. 5 ^ ^
 
<10^ lU M l
89. 
It cannot be practised by everybody; only the wise attains
success in it. 
*
^clr stw 
i
90. 
By performing and practising this posture, undoubtedly the 
vital airs of the practitioner at once become completely equable, and flow ' 
harmoniously through the body.
smoTORf%«iF!?r: i 
^ g g j: 
^
91. 
Sitting in the Padmasana posture, and knowing the action 
of the PrdtiLa and Apdna, when tlie Yogi performs the regulation of the 
breath, he is emancipated. 
I tell you the truth. 
Verily, I tell yon the 
truth.
3.— The Ugrdsana. 
iICtW Rfgclil I
^pnftiwrt ^
^ 
SR!|f 
I
92. 
Stretch out both the legs and keep them apart; firmly take 
hold of head by the hands, and place them on the knees. 
This is called 
Ugrasana (the stern-posture), it excites the motion of the air, destroys 
the dullness and uneasiness of the body, and is also called Pasehima- 
uttdna (the posterior crossed posture.) 
That wise 
man 
who 
daily 
practises this noble posture can certainly induce the flow of the air 
per viam posteriori.
sra^5T 
II 
II
y
93. 
Those who practise this obtain all the siddhis; therefore, those, 
desirous of attaining powers, should practise this diligently.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 136 ---
40
SIVA Sa m b i t A.
sSrsr* 
|‘{^ sR rR r^ ii v i w
94. 
This should be kept secrpt with the greatest care, and not he 
given to anybody and everybody. 
Through it, vdyu-siddhi is 
easily 
obtained, and it destroys a multitude of miseries.
4,— The svastikdsana. 
.
II 
II
95. 
Place the soles of the. feet completely under the thighs, keep 
the body stfiiight, and sit nt ease. 
This is called the Svastik.nsana.
^
 
aiTl^5E?r 
u
i i
96. 
In this way, the wise Yogi should practise the regulation of the 
air. No disease can attack his bodj% and he obtains vdyu siddhi.
srt^* 
i
ii «.vs ii
97. 
This is also called the Sukh&sana, the easy posture. 
This 
health-giving, good Svastikisana should be kept secret by the Yogi.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 137 ---
c h a p t e r IV.
YonirMudrd. 
The Sacred Drink of the Paulas.
3 1 ^ 
I
3 ? ^ * ^ 
^ sra^cT n \ ii
First with a strong inspiration fix the minfi in the ddhdr lotus. 
Then eagage in contracting the Yoni, which is situated in the perineal 
space.
5Pir 
u r u
2 
There let him contemplate that the God of Love resides in that 
Bralima Yoni and that he is beautiful like fiandhijk flower {Pentapetes 
Phojntcta)—brilliant as tens of millions of suns, and cool as tens of millions 
of moons. 
Above this (Yoni) is a very small and subtle flame, whose 
form is intelligence. 
Then let him imagine that a union takes jplace 
there between himself and that flame (the l^iva and Sakti).
n«sflr 
% i
f
U
 \ U
3. 
(Then imagine that)—There go up through the 
SushumnS 
vessel, the three bodies in their due order {i.e., the etheric, the astral and 
the mental bodies). 
There is emitted in every chakra the nectar, the 
characteristic of which is great bliss. 
Its colour is whitish rosy (pink), full 
of splendour, showering down in jets the immortal fluid. 
Let him drink 
this wine of immortality which is divine, and then again enter the KuM 
(i.e., perineal space.)
Note.—While these subtle bodies go up, they drink at every stage this nectar, called 
KulSmrita. -
^ ^ aniRniTezrm s r ^ 
u a ii
4. 
Then let him go again to the Kulfi through the practice of
rndtra Yoga (•i.e., prS.?Syama.) 
This Yoni has been called by me in the 
Tantras as equal to life.
6
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 138 ---
42
SIVA SAMEITA.
^ ^ S [ T 
i f ^ s P 3 g !^ ! 
I
?R?ireg 
cren%r ?iw 
ii 
ii
5. 
Again let him be absorbed in that Yoni, where dwells the lire 
of death—’ the nature of Shiva, &c. 
Thus has been described by me 
the method of practising the great Yoni-Mudr^. 
From success in its 
practice, there is nothing which cannot be accomplished.
^ 
^ l^ c rr: 
% l
wfenreg ^tr^f.crr*- ii 
*n ^ r 5iT®T?5i«ir f^ rrt after 
i
teicrr % 
5 T ? ^ w f^ r: i
^ «ir 
^5 irsr ^ t e r r t 
w
te«n^«T g- ?T2 ^ J s r W 9 i^ i!i 5 1 
% ra r^ sr^ t 
te^^r%crrt ii
^ ^ a s rr 1
rfclr 
gs[T 
u ^ u
6. 
Even those mantras which are deformed (chhinna) or paralyzed 
(Kilita), scorched (stambhita) by fire, or whose flame’has become attenuat­
ed, or which are dark, and ought to be abandoned, or which are evil, or too 
old, or which are proud of their budding youth, or have gone over to 
the side of the enemy, or weak and essenceless without vitality ; or which 
have been divided into hundreds of parts, even they become fertile 
through time and method. 
All these can give powers and emancipation 
when properly given to the disciple by the Guru, after having initiated 
him according to proper rites, and bathed him a thousand times. 
This 
Yoni-mudrst has been described, in order that the. student may deserve (to 
be initiated into the mysteries of) and receive the mantos.
^ 1% fe<zrte qte?! 
iivs II
7. 
He who practises Yoni-Mudra is not polluted by sin, were he
to murder a thousand Brfi.hmanas or kill all the^ inhabitants of -the three 
worlds:— 
•
R ^ I 'S t R 
R 35?T5q»K I
^T^g?i^5jf«nng^ii d 11
8. 
Were he^ to kill his teacher or drink wine or conimit theft, or 
tiolate the bed of his preceptor, he is not stained by these sins also, by 
virtue of this mudra.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 139 ---
CBAPTER IV. 
9-14.
43
i w m s m r ^ 
n
»
9. 
Therefore, those who wish for emancipation should practise this
daily. 
Through fractiee {ahhydsa), success is obtained; thi'ough practice 
one gains liberation. 
^
g?CT’>rt feriT^wn ^T^wireTgT5>i3i>5rRn ii 
i>R5W3sgr^w:jimra«jr 
ii
10. 
Perfect consciousness 
is gained through practice. 
Yoga is 
attained through practice', success in Mudnls comes by practise ; through 
practice is gained success in prAndydma. 
Death can be cheated of its 
prey through' practice, and man becomes the conqueror of death by 
practice.
5rrN:5ri^j 
¥r^5?T?i^r»Tfr: u
*lMr SI 
i
^
 ^5ism sn%j 
ri \\ ii
11. 
Through practice one gets the power of vdch (prophecy), 
and the 
power of going everywhere, through mere exertion of will. 
This Yoni-mudrS, should be kept in great secrecy, and not be given to 
everybody. 
Even when threatened with death, it should not be revealed 
or given to others.
The Awakening of Kuritdalini.
^rf[ 
u \\ ii
12. 
Now I shall tell you the best means of attaining success in 
Yoga. The practitioners should keep it secret. 
It is the most inaccessible 
Yoga.
sn n ft f 
i
cT?r 
5n=«i^Tft ^ ii \\ ii
13. 
When the sleeping goddess Kundalini is awakened, through the 
grace of (3-uru, then all tlie lotuses and the bonds are readily pierced ^ 
through and through.
5i?*w?5flnq?^5i 
i
asriifag# 
w 
ii
14. 
Therefore, in order that the goddess, who is asleep in the 
mouth of the Brahmarandhra (the innermost hollow of Sushumnft) be 
awakened, the Madras should be practised with the greatest care.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 140 ---
44
SIVA SAMEITA.
I
ii
^
 
5r^ ^ 35in ^ I
? ? % gso^5i% gs[H!rrg^^^nn^ii 
ii
15. 
Out of the many Mudras, the following ten are the best:—(1)
Mah&mudra, (2) Mahabandha, (3) MahS,vedha, (4) Khechari, (5) Jalan­
dhar, (6) Mulabandha, (7) Viparitkarana, (8) Uddana, (9) Vajrortdi, and? 
(.10) Shaktichalana. 
'
*i5rgs[n»«Hn I
w5Tgs[f sra^^iTftr 
i
^ SIM 
^ 
5^mcin It K% ii
16. 
My dearest, I shall now describe to you the MahamudrS, from 
whose knowledge the ancient sages Kapila and others obtained success in 
Yoga.
{l.)—Mahd-Muclrd.
5aar* si?irft5f qr^ 3?qr qiftigJtq % i 
MSRTftr # n a r 
s^^rqft ii 
i%ra* ^ ’a q^ sm ^srg^im qg. t
»i5Tgscnpi^^ 
itrSiciT ti
qrai^q ^mvqFi
snqqqm 
^ w i r q y i ii 
n
17. 
In accordance with 
the instructions of the Guru, press gently
the perineum with the heel of the left foot. Stretching the right foot out, 
hold it fast by the two hands. 
Having closed the nine gates (of the body), I 
place the chin on the chest. 
Then concentrate the vibrations of the mind 
and inspire air and retain it by kumbhaka (so long as one can comfortably 
keep it). 
This is the Mahamudr§, held secret in all the Tantras. The 
steady-minded Yogi, having practised it on the left side, should then
. practise it on the right side ; and in all cases must be firm in pran&y^nia 
— the regulation of his breath.
q i ^ f 
ii
S tq q ^ qwrqM q fc m q f ra q ra qn i
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 141 ---
GEAPTER IV . 
18-21.
45
^5«tT 
5icr^[^^^RnCT5«i; i
gft%5ri^7:5y 
ii
55Rftftr ^mre:5^«r 
i 
w % ?«n ^ ^ rs^ * sinr 
(^■gR UFt ii 
n
18. 
In this way, even the most unfortunate Yogi might obtain 
success. 
By this means all the vessels of the body are roused and stirred 
into activity; the life is increased and its decay is checked, and all sins 
are destroyed. All diseases are healed, and the gastric fire is increased. 
It 
gives faultless beauty to the body, and destroys decay and death. 
All 
fruits of desires and pleasures are obtained, and the senses are conquered. 
The Yogi fixed * in meditation acquires all the above-mentJbned things, 
through practice. 
There should be no hesitation in doing so.
?lf g SII«T 
M 
,
19. 
0 ye worshipped of the gods ! know that this MudrA is to be 
kept secret with the greatest care. 
Obtaining this, the Yogi crosses the 
ocean of the world.
gs[T ip w fm i f qr 
i
q>#arf q ^
 
II 
||
20. 
This MudrH, described by me, is the giver of all desires to the 
practitioner; it should be practised in secrecy, and ought never to be 
given to everybody,
(2).—Maha-Ban()ha.
5RTJ s r a ift t T J q r ^ f ^ f q t f q 
I
?niTf « q ^?qT qrrqRg^qqti I 
^irl^icqT ^TflT?rq ^rqr srniw^rgqni^ ii 
snqqqi^q q : 
i
qsfqrei: ^f^cqi*Tsrqiq«R: 1 
qrit3iT®!5[iErsq^ g q H qrfci 
u
u ’l l ii
21. 
Then (after M^hamudr^), having extended the (right) foot, place 
it on the (left) thigh ; contract the perineum, and draw the ap&na vdy4 
upwards atid join it with the sanrtirea vdyu ; bend the prdna vdyit down­
wards, and then let the wise Yogi bind them in trinity in the navel (t.e. 
the prdna and the apiina should be joined/with the Samdna in the navel.)
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 142 ---
40
BIVA SAME IT A.
I have told you now the Mahabandha, which shows the way to emancipa­
tion. 
By this, all the fluids in the vessels of the body of the Yogi are 
propelled towards the head.- 
This should be practised with great care, 
alternately with both feet.
II
II 
II
22. 
Through this practice, the wind enters the middle channel of 
the Sushuncina, the body is invigorated by it, the bones are firmly 
knitted, thee heart of the Yogi becomes full (of cheerfulness). 
By this 
Bandha, the great Yogi accomplishes all his desires.
(3.) -~Muhd~Veclha.
I
^rgsiT I
li 
ii
23. 
0 goddess of the three worlds ! when the Yogi, while performing 
the Mahabandha, causes the union of the prana and apdna vayus and 
filling in the viscera with air drives it slowly towards the nates, it is called 
Mahavedha.
^T^5*Tt: I
asifira 
ii 
ii
24. 
The best of the Yogis having, through the help of the vdyu, 
pierced with this perforator the knot which is in the path of Sushumna, 
should then pierce the knot of Brahma.
?i: 
?f?rs?ingr 
^tfirerq. i
ii 
ii
25. 
He who practises this MahS-vedha 
with great 
secrecy, obtains
vdyu-siddhi (success over the wind). 'I t destroys decay and death.
f ^ T 
^3P T N t 
I
m 
ii 
ii
26. 
The gods residing in the chakras tremble owing to the gentle
influx and eflux of air in pr^n^yama ; the great goddess, K u m U Mah^ 
M&yfi., is also absorbed in the mount Kail4sa. 
^
^ 1 % 
^RJ^II 
II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 143 ---
GBAPTEB IV. 
27-32,
.
27. 
The Mahfimudra and Mahabandha become froitless if they are
not followed by MahA-vedha ; therefore, the Yogi should practise all these 
three successively with great care. 
s
sRi?^?r
28. 
He who practises these three daily four times with great care, 
uUdoubtedly conquers death w ^ in six months.
3rrHT% 
i
29. 
Only, the^siddha knows the importance of these^hree and no 
one else; knowing these, the practitioner obtains all success.
itiqSTl?ir 
1
30. 
This should be kept in great secrecy by the practitioner 
desirous of obtaining power; otherwise, it is certain that the coveted 
powers can never be obtained through the practice of MudrAs.
(4.)— Khechari.
%^€irgsci^«RJT I
^
 
II
5C55T*tf ^qCfcFirg. I
srtrKT 5qgjRwg^T«Rrs ii \\ ii
31. 
The wise Yogi, sitting in vajrdsana posture, in a place free from 
all disturbance, should firmly fix his gaze on the spot in the middle of the 
two eyebrows,; and reversing the tongue backwards, fix it in the hollow un­
der the epi-glottis, placing it with gieat care on the mouth of the well of 
nectar, 
{i.e. closing up the air passage). 
This mudrA, described by me 
at the mquest of my devotees, is the Khechari-Mudra,
3T5i^ IT 
snqjTi^fiPir I
32. 
0, my beloved ! 
always
vigra.
source of all success, 
w b is he obtains 
iJephant
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 144 ---
4S
StVA SAMUlfA.
?R?T 
3 ^ ^
 STfsr ^5T?T: II 
II
33. 
Whether pure or impure, in whatever condition one may be, 
if success be obtained in Khechari, he becomes pure. 
There is no doubt 
of it. 
^
q r q jifT ^ ^ i
^ 5Tcf% 
SI5fni^ II 
II
3i. 
He who practises it even for a moment crosses the great ocean 
of sins, and having enjoyed the pleasures of Deva-world is born into 
a noble family.
g t ^ 
gicr^«r: i
II 
II
35. 
He who practises this Khechari-Mudra calmlj’ and without 
laziness counts as seconds the period of hundred Brahmas.
3 ^ ^ ^ gs[f ^ 
#^dfirJirn i
’I’CJif »r%n.u 
ii
36. 
He knows this 
K'hechari-Mudr^ 
according to the instruc­
tions of his Guru, 
obtains the highest end, though immersed in great 
sins.
w 
gsH 
i
sr«SRic» 
H 
H
37. 
0 , ye adored of gods ! this MudrS, dear as life, should not be 
given to everybody ; it should be kept concealed with great care.
(5.)—J alandhara.
STRswsncaiPsi I
5(5^3rt55Psp:! ntri^ 
ii
H 
II
38. 
Having contracted the muscles of the throat press the chin 
on the breast. 
This is said to be the Jalandhara-Mudra. 
Even gods 
reckon it as inestimable. 
The fire in the region of the navel (i.e., the 
gastric juice) drinks the nectar which exudes out of the thousand-petalled 
lotus, 
[tn order to^^||||||^|^^||j|^y^j^b^thus consumed], he should 
practise thi^
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 145 ---
G U A P t m I V . 
S9 45 .
49
39. 
Through thig 
Bandha, 
the wise Yogi himself drinks the 
nectar, and, obtaining immortality enjoys the three-worlds.
#R5T* 
ii «© u
40. 
This Jalandhara-Bandha is the giver of success to the practi­
tioner ; the Yogi desirous of success should practise it daily.
{6.)-~M‘i4a-Bandha.
«f«r 
I
n » l ii
41. 
Pressing well the anus with the heel, forcibly draw upwards 
the apana vdyu slowly by practice. 
This is described as the Mula- 
Bandha—the destroyer of decay and death.
^i^gs[r sil^rsc^
»
h
42. 
If, in the course of the practice of this Mudr^, the Yogi <?an 
unite the apana with the prd,vn vdyu, then it becomes of course the 
Yoni-MudrS,.
%^CT5rt ^^gs[rar ^ 
%«rfcr 
i 
nn% 
ii
qsiRrit ft*r?rr ^
 
^
 
n
43. 
He who has accomplished Yoni-Mudr&, what 
can he not 
accomplish in this world. 
Sitting in Ch'e padmdsana posture, free from 
idleness, the Yogi, leaving the ground, moves through the aii*, by virtue 
of this MudrS.
cTg' 
|»Tgf: H a« ii
44. 
If the wise Yogi is desirous of crossing the ocean of the world, 
let him practise this Bandha in secret, in a retired place.
(7.) 
V iparit-Tidratiia. 
i^q€f5R»??gt 35[T I
Jttto II 
li
45i Putting the head on the ground, let him stretch out his legs 
upwards, moving them round and round. 
This is Viparit-Ttarav-a, kept 
secret in all the Tantras.
7
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 146 ---
$6
StVA SA M BIfA
swRr m ^
 a r ^ 
H
i i
46. 
The Yogi who practises it daily for three hours, Conquers death, 
and is not destroyed even in the Pralaya.
^ w 9 n n g ( i
?r 
^rfcT 
H «V9 H
47. 
He who drinks nectar becomes'fequal to Siddhas ; he w'ho prac­
tises this Bandha becomes an adept among all creatures.
(8.)— U44ana-handha,
qferw* 
g ?bw: ^ i
3^ETRr^rs5r 
n «<i ii
48. 
When the intestines above and below the navel are brought to 
the left side, it is called Udd^na-Bandha—the destroyer of all sins and 
sorrows. 
The left side viscera of the abdominal cavity should be brought 
above the navel. ThisisUddana-Bandha, the lion of the elephant of death.
II 
ti
49. 
The Yogi, Avho always practises it four times a day, purifies 
thereby his navel, through which the winds are purified.
sRrraci n 
ii
50. 
By practising it for six months, the Yogi certainly conquers 
death ; the gastric ifire is kindled, and there takes place an increase of 
the fluids of the body.
?r^5f 
srsiR^ l
II
* 51. 
Through this, consequently, the vigrahasiddhi is also obtained. 
All the diseases of the Yogi are certainly destroyed by it.
I
^
 
f^W 5 f.ll 
II
52. 
Having learnt the method from the Guru, the wise I'ogi should 
practise it with great caire. 
This most inacessible Mudra should be prac­
tised in a retired and undisturbed place.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 147 ---
CHAPTER IV. 
53-58.
51
Shahti-eh&lan.
II 
II
53. 
Let the wise Yogi forcibly and firmly draw up the goddess 
Kundali sleeping in the adhar lotus, by means of the apana vdyu. 
This 
is Shakti-Chftlan Mudr&, the giver of all powers.
% srsi5 ’'It 
I
^mnnf ^ 
ii
54. 
He who practises this Shakti-Chdlan daily, gets increase of life 
and destruction of diseases.
§ISCT 5|5I^ 
1
II 
II
55. 
Leaving sleep, the serpent {i.e. the Kundali) herself goes up ; 
therefore let the Yogi desirous of power practise this.
m 
^rqiwn^ 
I
?Rqr gcgiTO f? n ii 
ii
56. 
He who practises always this best Shakti-Ch&lan according to the 
instructions of his guru, obtains the vigraha-siddhi, which gives the powers 
of animd, etc., and has no fear of death.
Vx 
I
q > ^ 
II 
II
57. 
He who practises the Shakti-Chellan properly for two seconds, 
and with care, is very near to success. 
This MudrS, should be practised 
by the Yogi in the proper posture.
«^gr^4|S[T<;gi<h 5T 
i
«l%^15qra3| 
II V II
58. 
These are the ten Mudras whose equal there never was nor 
ever shall b e : through the practice of any one of them, a person becomes a 
siddha and obtains success.
^niRTt II « II
[Yajrondi Mudrfi described in this chap^r in the original is omitted here, as it is 
anohseene practice indulged in by low class Tantrists, Translator.)
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 148 ---
CHAPTER V.
?r«T <is:?riT: 
it
Sift 
II ^
 ft q m tfftiH 
srftr i
ft 
^rft^r 
^ ft fft?r 51^
 11 ? 11
P&rmti.-^O Lord, 0 beloved Shanfcar ! tell roe, for the sake of 
those whose 4Jiinds search after the Supreme end, the obstacles and the 
hindanees to Yoga.
II 
ftfft sTW?JTTlft ?T«ir 
f|!icrrt ^
 i
gftr 
ftm t 
ii r ii
2. 
^iva. —Hear, 0 Goddess ! I shall tell thee, all the obstacles that 
stand in the path of Yoga. 
For the attainment of emancipation, enjoy­
ments (bhoga) are the greatest of all impediments.
Bhoga (enjoyment).
- WK?" 
'■n ^ 
%
s!t€^ 5pzrr^5ft ^
 
w € «i fftn s R JT i
| « h«ir" arar arar* 
i
S T to r * 
I
ftsSt ftwfr 
i
^ N ^ q r^ r ^ ? iT fftuT <tft 
i
ftrn^qr fft fftm 
,u \ u
3. 
Women, beds,, seats, dresses, and riches are obstacles to Yoga. 
Betels, dainty dishes, carriages, kingdoms, lordliness and powers ; gold, 
silver, as well as copper, gems, aloe wood, and kine ; learning the Vedas 
and the S&stras ; dancing, singing and ornaments ; harp, flute and drum; 
riding on elephants and horses ; wives and children, woxddly enjoyments; 
all these are so many impediments. 
These ate the obstacles which arise 
from bhoga (enjoyment). 
Hear now the impediments which arise from 
ritualistic religion. 
^
Dharma (ritualism of "Religion.)
5r«rr ftw »i?ft f ^ t i
nftftT«nft ^
 
^
 
qr i
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 149 ---
CUAPTEB V. 
4-7.
53
^ 
few 
^^«l5ri: II H II
4. 
The following are the obstacles which (jharma interposes :— 
ablutions, worship of dieties, observing the sacred days of the moon, fire 
sacrifice, hankering after moksha, vows and penances, fasts, religious 
observances,^ilence, the ascetic practices, contemplation and the object 
of contemplation, mantras, and alms-giving. World-wide fame, excavating 
and endowing of tanks, wells, ponds, convents and groves ; sacrifices, 
vows of starvation, Chandrayana, and pilgrimages.
Jndna {Knowledge-obstacles').
fen" 
wjnwfer 
i
few s iW 
!
JiTsfe 
II M l
5. 
Now I shall describe, 0 Parvati, the obstacles which arise from 
knowledge. 
Sitting in the 
Qomukh posture and practising 
Dhauti 
(washing the intestines by Hatha Yoga). 
Knowledge of the distribution 
of the nddis (the vessels of the human body), learning of praty&h&ra 
(subjugation of senses), trying to awakeQ the Kundalini force, by moving 
quickly the belly (a process of Hatha Yoga), entering into the path of 
the indriyas, and knowledge of the action of the nddis; these are the 
obstacles. 
Now listen to the mistaken notions of diet, 0 Parvati.
^wfe: 
II ^ II
6. 
That samddhi (trance) can be at once induced by drinking
certain new chemical essences and by eating certain kinds of food, is 
a mistake. 
Now hear about the 
mistaken notion of the influence of 
company, 
f
¥T3r flR Tg; I
fe^r5R%?^ II v9 II
7. 
“(Keep the company of the virtuous, and avoid that of the 
vicious ” (is a mistaken notion). 
Measuring of the heaviness and light­
ness of the inspired and expired air (is an erroneous idea).
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 150 ---
54
SIVA SAMEITA.
£??T3ssr :r5irRT% i
fcsT^ 
a i ^ f ^ : \\ 4 ii
8. 
Brahman is ill the body or lie is the maker of form, or He has 
a form, or He has no form, or He is everything— all these consoling 
doctrines are obstacles. 
Such notions are impediments in the shape of 
Jnaha (knowledge).
Four Kinds of Yoga.
<513^ 
fesiram h§cn n % ii
9. 
The Yoga is of four kinds:— First Mantra-Yoga, second Hatha- 
Yoga, third Laya-Yoga, fourth Raj-Yoga, which discards duality.
Sddhahs {Aspirants).
^5n«i%T 
i,
sT ^ 
ii 
ii
10. 
Know that aspirants are of four orders;—mild, moderate, 
ardent and the iriost ai-dent— the best who can cross the ocean of the 
world.
{Mild) entitled to Mantra~Yoga.
?I«I 
1
3 ^ 0 ^ ! I 
siftsSr ^?rT«ni: ii 
^RT^t 
I
^ 
I t »
11. 
Men of small enterprise, obliviorrs, sickly and finding faults with 
their teachers ; avaricious, sinful gourmands, and attached helplessly to 
their wives ; fickle, timid, diseased, nof independent, and cruel; those 
whose characters are bad and who are weak—know aU the above to be 
mild sftdhaks. 
With great efforts such men succeed in twelve years; 
them the teacher should know fit for the Mantra-Yoga.
{Moderate) entitled to Laya-Yoga.
i
m m vfi ^qwr 
u
5 ^ 1 ^ m t H 
\\
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 151 ---
G U A F fm V. 
IU 4 .
55
. 
12. 
Liberal-minded, merciful, desirous of virtue, 
swfeet in their
speech; who never go to extremes in any undertaking— these are the 
middling. 
These are to be initiated by the teacher in Laya-Yoga.
- (Ardent) entitled to Hatha Yoga
HcRii 
«ite [«n y ^ T O i
u 
n
13. 
Steady-minded, knowing the Laya-Yoga, 
independent, full 
of energy, magnanimous, full of sympathy, forgiving, truthful, coura­
geous, full of faith, worshippers of the lotus-feet of their Gurus, engaged 
always in the practice of Yoga,— know such men to be adhimdtra. 
They 
obtain success in the practice of Yoga within six years, and ought ,to be 
initiated in Hat*ha-Yoga and its branches.
(The most ardent) entitled to all Yogas ■
?r«I 
I
#w%asr PT’Clf^: ||
?RiT ?sr43R!«r?it u
iira^n€r 
^
 i
t^cTT ?j5q:ir«51 
JTf la n N 
H
5IIW ?T5l?P II
II 
II
14, 
Those who have the largest amount of energy, are enterprising, 
engaging, heroic, who know the sastras, and are persevering, free from the 
effects of Hind emotions., and, not easily confused, who are in the prime of 
their youth, moderate in their diet, rulers of their senses, fearless, clean, 
skilful, charttable, a help to a ll; competent, firm, talented, contented, 
forgiving, good-natured, religious, who keep their endeavours secret, of 
sweet speech, peaceful, who have faith in scriptures and* are worshippers
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 152 ---
56
SIVA SAU H ttA.
o f God iand Gum, who are averse to fritter away their time in society, 
and are, free fi-om any grievous malady, who are acquainted with the 
duties of the adhimatra, and are' the practitioners of every kind of Yoga— 
undoubtedly, they obtain success in three years ; they ai'e entitled to be 
initiated in all kinds of Yoga, without any hesitation.
Invocation of the shadow (pratikopasana).
HTsr 
ii 
n
15. 
'Ehe invocation of Pratika (shadow) gives to the devotee the 
objects seen as well as unseen; undoubtedly, by its very sight, a man 
becomes pure. 
• •
II 
ii
16. 
In a clear sun-lit sky, behold with a steady gaze your own 
divine reflection ; whenever this is seen even for a single second in the sky, 
you behold God at once in the sky.
S5g[5 
II tvs a
1'?. 
He who daily sees his shadow in the sky, will get his years 
increased and will never die an accidental death.
5i^r 5r?mmsrt% 
a 
a
18. 
When the shadow is seen fully reflected in the field of the
sky, then 
he 
obtains victory ; 
and 
conquering the v%u, he goes
everywhere.*
Sow to invoke.
At the time of the rising sun, or by moon, 
let him steadily fix 
his gaze on the neck of the shadow he throws ; then, after sometime, let 
him look into the sky ; if he sees a full grey shadow in the sky, it is 
auspicious,
IQ. 
19e who always practises this and knows the ParamatmS, 
becomes fully happy, through the grace of his shadow.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 153 ---
O B A ? f E R 7 . 
^0-26.
51
n ^% T it^r35^^ ii ro \\
20. 
At the time of commencing travel, marriage, or auspicious 
work, or when in trouble, it is of great use. This invocation of the shadow 
destroys sins and increases virtue.
#RScRW !«fm T^<cr^ 
i
gr^ ghRTiWTStl^ W
 
u 
u
21. 
By practising it always, he begins at last to see it in his heart, 
and the persevering Yogi gets liberation.
Raj Yoga.
^Hggr«iTgit srhT rrlr^s^if 
i
a ii^iw m R raiw rf 5 ^ 
w
^
 
^ 
U RR H
22. 
Let him close the ears ‘ with his thumbs, the eyes with index 
fingers, the nostril with the middle fingers, and with the remaining feur ’ 
fingers let him press together the upper and lower lips. 
The 1^ogi, by 
having thus firmly confined the air, sees his soul in the shape of light.
tR{ 
ii R\\\
23. 
When one sees, without obstruction, this light for .even a 
moment, becoming free from sin, he reaches the highest end.
m ff' Ti?rt a r ^ a
24. 
The Yogi, free from sin, and practising this continually, forgets 
his physical, subtle and causal bodies, and becomes one with that sbul. -
^ ^ 
a R^ a
25. 
He who practises this in seci-ecy, is absorbed in the Brahman, 
though he had been engaged in sinful works.
jT?? 
cre?T 
t . n 
a
26. 
This should be kept secret; it at oncej)roduces convfctioa ; 
it gives nitvdna to mankind. 
This is my most beloved Yoga. * From 
practising this gradually, the Yogi begins to hear the mystic sounds
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 154 ---
s$
SiVA SAM BlfA.
A n&had Sounds,
srq^ 
I
WRi?55m« »Ts?sngc;vw^wf5n:^mj i 
^
 crNi^nitr 
^
 
ii
^fST^ 5^5 ST55^II TO 
U 
II 
’
27. 
The first sound is like the hum of the honey-intoxicated hee,
next that of a flute, then of a harp ; after this, by the gradual practice of 
Yoga, the destroyer of the darkness of the world, he hears the sounds of 
ringing bells ; then sounds like roar of thunder. 
When one fixes his full 
attention on, this sound, being free from fear, he gets absorption, 0 my 
beloved! 
,
5Rf in i’ 
^
 TOcT 
i
5|TS* sn ^ 
5ITORt II 
II
28. 
When the mind of the Yogi is exceedingly engaged in this 
sound, he forgets all external things, and is absorbed in this sound.
TO?wiT5i%rJt5T i^TOT ?iTO ayjrr?^ i
II 
II
29. 
By this practice of Yoga he conquers all the three qualities 
(i.e., good, bad and 
indifferent); and being free from all states, he is 
absorbed in chiddkds (the ether of intelligence).
A Secret.
^ 
gS[T ^ 
II \9 II
30 
There is no posture like that of SiddMsana, no power like that 
of Kumhha, no Mudrd .like the Kheehari, and no absorption like that of 
ndda (the mystic sound).
qr<^!0Rtfq 
ii 
ii
31. 
Now I shall describe to thee, 0 dear, the foretaste of salvation, 
knowing which even the sinful aspirant may obtain salvation.
^
 
?r ^mgrTTOL l
g f^ ra : ii 
ii
32. 
Having adored tlie Lord God properly, and having completely 
performed the best of the Yogas, and being in a calm and steady state and 
posture, let the wise Yogi initiate himself into this Yoga by pleasing his 
Guru.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 155 ---
GRAPTEB V. 
33-39.
59
I
^ I«iT% S I? T^ 5 T 
gsi% 5^^: II 
II
33. 
Having given all his cattle and property to the Guru whp 
knows Yoga, and having satisfied him with great care, let the wise man 
receive this initiation.
?srr 
u 
ii
34. 
Having pleased the Brahmans (and priest), by giving them 
all kinds of good things, let the wise man receive this auspicious Yoga 
in my house (i.e., the temple of Shiva) with purity of heart.
35. 
Having renounced by the afiove methods all his previous 
bodies (the results of his past karma), and being in his spiritual (or 
luminous) body, let the Yogi receive this highest Yoga.
H ^^ ||
36. 
Sitting in the padmS,sana posture, renouncing the society of 
men, let the Yogi press the two vijndna nddis (the vessels of consciousness, 
perhaps coronal arteries) with his two fingers.
^
 
u 
ii
37. 
By obtaining success in this, he becomes all happiness and
unstained; therefore, let him endeavour with all his might, in order to 
ensure success. 
_
?i: 
IJCat I
38. He who practises this always, obtains success within a short 
time; he gets also vayu-siddhi in course of time.
sr%5i> hiw 
II 
ii
39. 
The Yogi, who does it even once, verily destroys all sins ; and 
undoubtedly in him the vayus enter the middle channel.
ii«® il
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 156 ---
60
SIVA. SAMHITA.
40. 
The Yogi who practises this with perseverance is worshipped 
even by gods; he receives the psychic powers of animd, laghimd etc., 
and can go everywhere, throughout the three worlds, at pleasure.
II 
II
41. 
According to the strength of one’s practice in commanding 
the vdyu, he gets command over his body ; the wise, remaining in the 
spirit, enjoys the world in the present body.
tfi srm ^t 
II M R II
42. 
This Toga is a great secret, and not to be given to every 
b o d y -it might be revealed to him only, in whom all the qualifications 
of a Yogi are perceived.
Various kinds of Dharand.
^
 q gra# 
i
^
 
ii«^ii
43. 
Let the Yogi seat himself in the PadmAsana, and fix his 
attention on the cavity of the throat, let him place his tongue at the 
base of the palate; by this he will extinguish'hunger and thirst.
W
 ^
 
II 
II
44. 
Below the cavity of the throat, 
there 
is a beautiful nd^i 
(vessel) called kurma; when the Yogi fixes his attention on it, he acquires 
great concentration of the thinking principle (chitta).
I
^
 
swrort 
i
m q w R f 
i
q w 
ii 
ii
45. 
When the Yogi constantly thinks that he has got a third 
^ ye— the eye of Shiva— in the middle of his forehead, he then perceives
a fire brilliant like lightning. 
By contemplating on this light, all sins 
are destroyed* and even the most wicked person obtains the highest 
end.
^
 
I
ftrarrqf 
II 
II
46. 
If the experienced Yogi thinks of this light day and night, 
he sees the Siddhas (adepts), and can certainly converse with them.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 157 ---
G E A P T m V. 
47-51.
61
5T?W Rjii^ M r ^ ^ i^ r d 
a 
n
47. 
He who coatemplateS on sunya (void or vacuum or space), 
while walking or standing, dreaming or waking, becomes 
altogether 
etherial, and is absorbed in the chid
^ r^ 
M
ih t 
I
3«!rr 
ii
II 
II
48. 
The Yogi, desirous of success, should 
alwaj’^s 
obtain this 
knowledge ; by habitual exercise he becomes equal to me ;jthrough the 
force of this knowledge, he becomes the beloved of all.
^ r M :» ^ r r !i.M 
PpfKTr^qftn^t i 
's r r ^ 
M w e $ M iT I I I
. 
II 
II
49. 
Having conquered all the elements, and being void of all 
hopes and worldly connections, when tho Yogi sitting in the Padmlsana, 
fixes his gaze on the tip of the noSe, his noind becomes dead and he 
obtains the spiritual power called Kheehan.
M r ^ t ^
 
I
^
 
ll 
11
50. 
The great Yogi beholds light, pure as holy mountain (Kail&sh 
and through the force of his exercise in it, he becomes the lord and 
guardian of the light.
5rar«T5iq%_»3[^ 
I
feR: q s n f w»Rtr «n% 
5^%?^ w
a 
ff^irr%?n 
11 
11
51. 
Stretching himself on the ground, let him contemplate on this 
light; by so doing all his weariness and fatigue are destroyed. 
By con­
templating on the back part of his head, he becomes the conqueror of 
death. (We have described before the effect of fixing one’s attention on 
the space between the two eyebrows, so it need not be enumerated 
here).
I
ii<\^ii
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 158 ---
62
SIVA SAMEITA.
52. 
Of the four kinds of food (i.e., that which is chewed, that which 
is sucked, that which is licked and that which is drunk), which a man 
takes, the chyle fluid is converted into three parts. 
The best part (or the 
finest extract, of food) goes to nourish the lingia sharira or subtle body 
(the seat of force). 
The second or the middle part goes to nourish this 
gross body composed of seven dhdtus (humours).
II 
II
53. 
The third or the most inferior part goes out of the body in 
the shape 6f excrement and urine. 
The first two essences of food are 
found in the ndclis, and being carried by them, they nourisli the body 
from head to foot.
^
 
a r ^ ii 
ii
54. 
When the vdyu moves through all the na^is, then, owing to this 
vdyu (oxygen ?), the fluids of the body get extraordinary force and energy.
55. 
The most important of these nddis are fourteen, distributed 
in different parts 6f the body and performing various functions. 
They are 
either weak or strong, and the prana (vitality) flows through them.
The six Chakras.
Mulddhdr Chakra.
^
 
u 
ii
56. 
TvVo fingers above the rectum and two fingers below the linga, 
four fingers in width, is a space like a bulbous root.
era ^
 
ii
m 
ii 
i
57. 
Between this space is the yoni having its face towards the 
back^ that space is called the root; there dwells the goddess ^Kundalini. 
It surrounds all the nddis, and has three coils and a half; and catching 
its tail in its own mouth, it rests in the hole of the Sushumnd.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 159 ---
GUAPTEB. V. 
$8-63.
63
f
s
w
i
r
 
i
II <^<S II
58. 
It sleeps there Uke a serpent, and is 
luminous by its own 
light. 
Like a serpent it lives between the joints; it is the goddess of 
speech, and is called the seed {vija).
^sreina fir 
ii 
ii
59. 
Full of energy, and like burning gold, know this Kunijalini 
to he the power (shahti) of Vishnu; it is the' mother 
of the three 
qualities—sattwa (rhythm;, rajas (energy) and tamas (inertia).
5i»|^3WTt¥r im isfhf st^ t^ chl i
^
 
it
60. 
There, 
beautiful like the Bandhuh flower, 
is placed the 
seed of love m
 ; it is brilliant like burnished gold, and is described 
in Yoga as eternal.
^ 
sfiir ?T5r 
f ^ r ^ i
T* ■gr^rfegrgtgr^
i
«Wc5r?j
^ 3 1 ^ * q^%3t?cr|^ 
ii %% ii .
61. 
The Susliumnd also embraces it, and the beautiful seed is 
there; there it rests shining brilliantly like the autumnal moon, with the 
luminosity of millions of suns, and the coolness of millions of mobns. The 
goddess Tripflra Bhairavi has^ these three (fire, sun, and moon) taken 
together, and collectively she is called the vija. 
It is also called the great 
energy.
^rfire«r 
^»|fe*»T2%?rr^, ll 
H
62. 
It {vija) is endowed with the powers of action (motion) and 
sensation, and circulates throughout the /body. 
It is subtle, and has a 
flame of fire ; sometimes it rises up, and at other times it falls down into 
the water. 
This is the great energy which rests in the perinaeum; and is 
called the swayamhhu-linga (the self-born).
63. 
All this is called the ddhdr-padma (the support lotus), and 
the fo;ir jpetals of it are designated by the letters ^ (v) n {4), s (§),« (s).
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 160 ---
64
&1VA SAM BlfA.
?rsr 
II
a??^m q»iT ^^i^crsr 
^ tctt i
5reqr 
^53:??^ ? ^ r i s ^ giiPWcni. 11 
q t 
^
 «ITq 
I
creq 
^ 
M
64. 
Near this Smyambhu-linga is , a golden region called Kula 
(family); its presiding adept is called ■* Dviranda, 
and its presiding 
goddess called Ddkini. 
In the centre of that lotus is the Yoni where 
resides the Kuifdalini; the circulating bright energy above that, is called 
kdmorrvtja (the seed of love). 
The wise man who always contemplates 
on this Muladhar obtains Darduri-siddhi (the frog-jump power); and by 
degrees he can altogether leave the ground {i.e., rise in the air).
q i^ »q s?q qf?q330r 
3nq^ II 
II
65. 
The brilliancy of the^body is increased, the gastric fire becomes 
powerful, and freedom from disease, cjeyerness, and omniscience ensue.
^
 wsq 
«SI8BRqrn I
66. 
He knows what has been, what is happening, and what is to 
be, together with their causes; 
he masters the unheard of sciences 
together with their mysteries.
qqsT 
^
 qR[f 
^ w :q (l
q ^ q rq : 11 
u
67. 
On his tongue always dances the goddess of learning, he 
obtains mantra-siddhi (success in mantras), through constant repetition 
only.
3 ra m ? D f:^ m R n 5 rq % 
1
? ? «qtq 
qqq q q q r w iii^ 
I 
«wqqT5Tqi 
gqq& 
w 
11
68. 
This is the dictum of the Guru:—"It destroys old age, death, 
and troubles innumerable.” 
The practitioner of pr^nayama ought always 
to meditate upon it ; by its very contemplation, the great Yogi is freed 
from all sins.
qqr 
1
qr qi% «r 
n 
11
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 161 ---
GEAPTEBV. 
69-75
65
69. 
When the Yogi contemplates this MulAdhdr lotus— the. 
hhu-linga—then, 
undoubtedly, at that 
very moment, all; his sins are; 
destroyed.
4 
^
 51 cf 
I
« T s 
s r a ^ t i
5f5r: sTs5ra’ s f5 R rR i? r^ Hcf n « a «© a
70. 
Whatever the mind^desires, he gets ; by habitual exercise he ^ 
sees him, who gives salvation, who is the best both in and out, and who 
is to be worshipped with great care. 
Bettef than Him, I know none.
ftr# siy gfr
^l%5rt?EWT II V9( a
71. 
He who, leaving the Siva (God) who is inside, worships that 
which is outside {viz., worships external forms), is like one who throws 
away the sweetmeat in his hand, and wanders away in search of food.
5T^ 
a 
n
72. 
Let one thus meditate daily, without negligence, on his own
Swayamhhu-linga ; and have no doubts that from tliis 
will come all powers,
#R?5T?:^5n«ii5n5^njiT^ 
i
5IW 
vs^ ii
73. 
By habitual exercise, he gets success in six months; and 
-undoubtedly his vdyu enters the middle channel (the SttsTmmwd).
jj^rsRssET 
gr^f^i=|^rmwg; i
a 
ii
74. 
He conquers the mind, and can restrain his breath and his 
semen ; then he gets success in this as well as the other world, wrthbikt 
doubt,
2.. Swadhisthdn Ghakra. {PrOstatie Plexus),
i
5it^«5Tf5f '3 
II
^rl^ST5iTf^«r 
I
75. 
^he second Chakra is situated at the base of the organ. 
It 
has six petals designated by the letters b, bh, m, ,y ,. r, 1. 
Its stalk is
a
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 162 ---
66
SIVA SAMBITA.
called Swadhisthan, the colour of the lotus is blood-red, its presiding 
adept is called Bdlfi, and its goddess, Rakini.
iiT «imRT ^
 ^
 
I
^
 
«RtJTftT%rTJ H vs^ H
76. 
He who daily contemplates on this SwMhisthdn lotus, becomes 
an object of love and adoration to all beautiful goddesses.
cf 5 in ^* 
I
77. 
He fearlessly recites the various 6^stras and sciences unknown
to him before ; becomes free from all diseases, and moves throughout the 
universe fearlessly. 
—
^
 5T 
51 
I
78. 
Death is eaten by him, he is eaten by none ; he obtains the 
highest psychic powers like anima, laghima, etc. 
The vdyu moves 
equably throughout his body ; the humours of his body also are increased; 
the ambrosia exuding from the etherial lotus also increases in him.
' 
3. 
Manipur Chakra.
q fs i 5fi§T 
I
II vs^ II
79. 
The third Chakra, called Manipur, is situated near the navel; 
it is of golden color, having ten petals designated by the letters d>
p, t, th, d, dh, n,-p, ph.
anTOT 
«n :*r«iT W H <:© n
80. 
Its presiding adept is called Rudra— the giver of all auspicious 
things, and the presiding goddess of this place is called the most sacred
L&kiui.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 163 ---
GRAPtER V. 
8 W .
df
81. 
When the Yogi contemplates on the Manipur lotus, he gets 
the power called the pXtdl-siddhi— the giver of constant happiness. 
He 
becomes lord of desires, destroys sorrows and diseases, cheats death, and 
can enter the body of another.
5fiir^ a 
II
82. 
He can make gold, etc., see the adepts (clairvoyantly), discover 
medicines for diseases, and see hidden treasures.
4 
Anahat Chakra.
'jfsr 
I
mgsftar 
n 
u
83. 
In the heart, is the fourth Chakra, the AnShat. 
It has twelve 
petals designated by the letters k, kh, g, gh, ii, ch, chh, j, jh, S, t, th. 
Its color is deep blood-red ; it has the seed of vayu, 
and is a very 
pleasant spot.
%lrr 
I
ii 
h
84. 
In this lotus is a flame called v^vlinga ; by contemplating on 
this, one gets objects of the seen and the unseen universe.
?i3r 
I
^:F?rr % 
H 
ii
o
85. 
Its presiding adept is Pinaki, and the K&kini is its goddess. 
He who always contemplates on this lotus of the heart is eagerly desired 
by celestial maidens.
^n?rt 
ii 
ii
86. 
He gets immeasurable knowledge, knows the past, present 
and future time ; has clairaudience, clairvoyance and can walk in the air, 
whenever he likes.
ii 
ii
87. ’ He sees the adepts, and the goddesses known as Yoginis; 
obtains the power known as Kheahari, and conquers all who move in thd 
mr.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 164 ---
68
. S i t A BAMUlTA.
^ 
i R j 5rr?B%‘^r 
i
# 8 id 
ST ^r5m : u 
ii
88. 
He who contemplates daily the hidden Bdnalinga, undoubtedly 
obtains the psychic powers called Khechari (moving in the air) and 
Bhudtari (going at will all over the world).
«? c t:5 ^S T^ »TT?tcR? ^ f^ g * 
I 
-
HOTSTTJ ^TSB^T 
II 
II
89. 
I cannot fully describe the importance of the meditation of 
this lotus ; even the gods Brahma etc, keep the method of its contempla­
tion secret.
5. 
Vishuddha Chakra.
TO 
i
^ ^ T ^ 
II
®TOTnit5^ 
«sni^tTOr ii 
ii
90. 
This Chakra situated in the throat, is the fifth, and is called 
, the Vishuddha lotus. 
Its color is like brilliant gold, and it is adorned
with sixteen petals and is the seat of the vowel sounds {i-e., its sixteen 
petals are designated bj'^ the sixteen vowels—a, d, i, i, u ,4, ri, ri, Iri, Irt, 
e, ai, 0, au, am, ah. 
Its presiding adept is called Ohhagaldnda, and its 
presiding goddess is called Sdkini.
«|T5T 
^ ^
 i^T 
I
II
^
T
^
 
II 
II
91. 
He who always contemplates it, is truly the lord of the Yogis, 
and deserves to be called wise ; by the meditation of this Vishuddha lotus, 
the Yogi at once understands the four Fcdas with their mysteries.
5TW 
II 
II
92. 
When the Yogi, fixing his mind on this secret spot, feels 
angry, then undoubtedly all three worlds begin to tremble.
55 ^
 
i
?r?T m m ' 
»
g 
93i 
Eten, if by chance, the m ind of the Yogi is absorbed in this 
place,; then: Ee becomes unconscious of the external world, and enjoys 
certainly the inner world.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 165 ---
GBAFTER V. 
94-100.
69
5i^ 
I I I «.« II
94. 
His body never grows ■B'eak, and he retains his full strength 
for a thousand years, it becomes harder than adamant.
«R[r ?T3r% c T ^ s r 
i
rr?T 
JT^^fcT 
H 
II
95. 
When the Yogi leaves off this contemplation, then to him in 
this world, thousands of years, appear as so many moments.
6. 
Ajna Chakra.
frar^nr 
i
?iwfr*T55{ 
^ai5r |T%^ ij 
II
96. 
The two-petalled Chakra, called the Ajna, m situated between 
the two eye-brows, and has the letters h, and ksh ; its presiding adept is 
called Shukla Mahakdla (the 'White Great Time', ; its presiding goddess 
is called BdJdni.
^?n^5ft5f f^*R r?rn i
II 
II
97. ,^Vithin that petal, there is the eterjial bija (the syllable 
S thaip), brilliant as the autumnal moon. 
The wise anchorite, by knowing 
this, is never pulled down.
ii 
ii
98. 
This is tlie great light held secret in all the Tantra»\. by 
contemplating' on this, one obtains the highest success, there is no doubt 
of it.
II 
H
99. 
I am the giver of salvation, I am the third linga in the turiya 
(the state of ecstacy, also the name of the thousand-petalled lotus). 
By 
contemplating on this, the Yogi becomes certainly like me.
?5T 
^*R5T «sm5TT 
I
incnn^ 
flr>aRr«iNr 
II 
«
100. 
-The two vessels called the T4d and the Pinguid are the w Z Va- 
rana and Asf) 
The space between them is called FtfrinasY (Benares, the 
holy city of l8iva).' There it is said that the Vi8hwanS,tha (the Hord of 
the universe) dwells.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 166 ---
SIVA SAMBtTA.
!OT^5 3Jl«ir sflrK* 
?o ? w
101. 
The greatness of this holy place has been declared in manifold 
scriptures by the truth-perceiving sages. 
Its great secret has been very 
eloquently dwelt upon by them.
-7. 
The Thousand-Petalled Lotus.
% i
crcr^iiT ^ r f5 T 
ti
102. 
T’he Sushumnd goes along the spinal cord up to where the 
Brahmamndhm (the hole of Brahma) is situated. 
Thence by a certain 
flexure, it goes to the right side of the Ajna lotus, whence it proceeds to 
the left nostril, and is called the Ganges.
HgTtJsf ft: 
sqqrftran i
^fT 
?IT 
*eR(t sq^ft«Rr: I
^
 
ii
515T 
i
ii
m w r a r jj ?Ttft 
ft 
ii 
ii
103. 
The lotus which is situated in the Brahmarandhra is called 
Sahasrara (the thousand-petalled). 
In the space in its centre, dwells the 
moon. 
From that triangular place, elixir is continually exuding. 
This 
moon-fluid of immortality unceasingly flows through the Ida. 
The elixir 
flows in a stream,— a continuous stream. 
Going to the left nostril, i t ' 
receives from the Yogis the name of the “ Ganges.”
w m f3 i^ 9 f9 i8 [m q ra i3 3 r*m T i
c T O qrcqjT 
n 
»
104. 
From the right-side portion of the Ajna lotus and going to the 
left nostril flows the I4d. 
It is here called Varana (the northward-flowing 
Ganges).
?i^T s i^ ft 
g 
I
% H to's ii
105. 
Let the Yogi contemplate on the space between the twp (14^ 
and Pingald) as Vdranasi (Benares).' The Pingald also comespin the same 
way from the left side'portion of the Ajna lotus, and goes to the right 
nostril, and has been called by us the Asi.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 167 ---
GBAPTEBV. 
106-112.
11
?nr 
m 
5?i^«i5r5 ii 
«
106. 
The lotus which is situated in the Muladh^r has four petals. 
In the space between them, dwells the sun.
W *!^nrt 
cT3i 
m «w t II ^0^9 M
107. 
From that sphere of the sun, poison exudes continuously. 
That excessively heating venom flows full through the Pingald.
^
 ?T5r 
m
?ir% 
II \o^ II
108. 
The venom (sun-fluid of mortality) which flows there Continu­
ously in a stream goes to the right nostril, as the moon-fluid of immorta­
lity goes to the left.
*t?tt i
^ s T 5 T 
sr^^cTT II ^0^ n
109. 
Rising from the left-side of the Ajna lotus and going to the 
right nostril, this northward flowing PingaM has been called of yore the 
Asi.
?Tcr^«^ ^ R tb* 
II
n it® ii
- 
110. 
The two-petailed Ajna-lotus has been thus described where
dwells the God Maheshwara. The Yogis describe three more sacred stages 
above this. 
They are called Vindu, Ndda and ^dhti, and are situated in 
the lotus of the forehead.
- 
^
 (Ir ^ ^ ^ t«ictmi KKK h
111. 
He who always contemplates on the hidden Ajna lotus, at 
once destroys all the karmas of his past life, without any oppoStion.
55 
^
 «n?i
cT^ 
>33Bnfqa5!’3[ag(ii 
«
112. 
Remaining in this place, when the Yogi meditates constantly, 
then to him all forms, worships and prayers appear as worthless.
w ^ngnt: h \\\ h
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 168 ---
7Z.
SIVA SAMEITA.
113. 
The Yalcshas, Rabshasbas, Gandharvas, Apsaras, and Kin- 
naras, all serve at his. feet. 
They become obedient to his command.
^
 
II
Ji^r ?T€?i 
I
?re!i 
qniT^ 
?irf?ar c i c w ^ « ? ? » ii
114. 
By reversing the tongue and placing it in the long hollow of 
the palate, let the Yogi enter into contemplation, that destroys all fears.: 
All his sins, whose mind remains steady here even for a second,— are at 
once destroyed.
% i
cfT^ 
% « KK^ »
115. 
All the fruits which have been described above as resulting 
from the contemplation of the other five lotuses, are obtained thi'ough the 
knowledge of this one Ajna lotus alone.
TO 
i
ii 
n
The wise one, who continually practises contemplation of this 
becomes free from the mighty chain of desires, and enjoys
116.
Ajnalotus,
happiness.
^?TO 
I
117. 
When at the time of death, the Yogi contemplates ,6n this 
lotus, leaving this life, that holy one is absorbed in the ParamatmA
«iTiT 
I
118. 
He who contemplates on this, standing or walking, sleeping 
or waking, is not touched by sins, even if it were possible for him to do 
sinful works.
^5^ 5ireiT%[%g^'!R5 
SW?IT 
I
^ 
%^fi=cr ^ (I 
H
119. 
The Yogi becomes free from the chain by his own exertion. 
The importance of the contemplation of the two-petalled loj^ps cannot be 
fully described. 
Even the gods like BrahmS, etc., have learnt only a 
portion of its grandeur from me,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 169 ---
dHAPfER V. 
180^125.
n
'J . 
The Thovsand-Petalled Lotus,
ii 
ii
120. 
Above tbis, at the base of the palate, is the thousand-petalled 
lotus, in that part where the hole of that Sushumna is.
T^i 
’EWT^m: n
crT5ft3T»|me^^ aironfsT^TfWj ii KR\ ii
121. 
From the base or root of the palate, the Sushumna extends 
downwards, till it reaches the Mulddhdr and the perinaeum : all vessels 
surround it, or are supported by it. 
These nddis are the seeds of mystery, 
or the sources of all principles which constitute a man, and show tho 
road to Brahma (i.e. give salvation).
;Rrr ii 
ii
122.. 
The lotus which is at the root of the palate is called the 
Sdhasrdr (the thousand-petalled); in its centre, there is a Yoni (seat or 
force-centre) which has its face downwards.
3T^ ii 
ii
123. 
In that is the root of the Sushumna, together with its hole; 
this is called the Brahmarandhra (the hole of Brahma), extending up to 
the MulSdhar padma.
^
 I
^
 5lfTR5T ^
 
II
5i^t w *1^ 
a ir??m ^ 9 T in ii vca n
124. 
In that hole of the Sushumna there dwells as its inner force 
the Kun^alini. 
In the Sushumna there is also a constant current of force 
called ehitrd, its actions or modifications should be called, in my opinion 
as Brahmarandhra, etc.
srstra^ i
qtq^ssr 
a vjat 
ii 
h
125. 
By simply remembering this, one obtains the knowledge of 
Brahman, all sins are destroyed, and one is never born again as man.
' 
g ir 
1
^ 
u V <%.»
10
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 170 ---
74
SIVA SAM illfA.
126. 
Let him thrust the moving thumb into its mouth : by this the 
air, which flows through the body, is stopped.
^ 
n sn^snsin:^ i
^
 «?sn%®r !Ti^ 
I
??T 
3[RRi‘ ^fSC* 9 I 3 r % U lRv9 u
127, 
Owing to this (odyu) man wauders in the circle of the universe ; 
the Yogis, therefore, do not desire to keep up this circulation; all the 
ndilis are bound by eight knots ; only this hun4olini can pierce these knots 
and pass out of the Brahmarandjira, and show the way to salvation.
5i«R!intiT f 
w 
ii
128. 
When the air is confined fully in all the vessels, then the 
Kupdalini leaves these knots and forces its way out of the Brahmaran- 
dhra.
^ gw rr 
ii 
ii
129, 
Then the vital air continually flows in the Sushumna. 
On 
the right and the left side of the Mulfidh&r, are situated the I4a and the 
Pingald. 
The Sushumna passes through the middle of it.
sr®R:a g 
i
130. 
The hollow of the Sushumna in the sphere of the adh&r 
is called the Brahmarandhra. 
The wise one who knows this is eman­
cipated from the chain of karma.
?rfw^5n% 5E5fr5r«iiT*it gftRt 
ii 
u
131. 
All these three vessels meet certainly at the mouth of the 
Brahmarandhra ; by bathing at this place one certainly obtains salvation.
The Sacred Triveni (Praydg),
araf g 
ii 
ii
132. 
Between the Ganges and the Jamuna, flows this Saraswati: by 
bathing at their'junction^ the fortunate one obtains salvation.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 171 ---
OHAPTEB r. 
133-m .
sftrRT 
i
sihCT ir a t 
H 
ii
133. 
We have said before that the 
is the Changes and the 
Pingald is the daughter of the sun (the Jamuna), in the middle the 
Sushumni, is the Saraswati;— the place where all three join is a most 
inaccessible one.
?rr% h§ t 
w 
u
134. 
He who performs mental bathing at the junction of the White 
(Ida) and the Black (Pingala) becomes free from all sins, and reaches the 
eternal Bi’ahma.
^trI ^
 
<RHt 
ii 
h
135. 
He who performs the funeral rites of his ancestors at the 
junction of these three rivers {Triveni) procures salvation for his ancestors 
and himself reaches the highest end.
f trt siRif jjt 
I
RTOT 
g 
<?T3ww 
u 
u
136. 
He who daily performs the threefold duties (i.e., the regular, 
occasional and the optional ones) by mentally meditating on this place, 
receives the unfading reward.
^
137. 
He who once bathes at this sacred place enjoys heavenly 
felicity, his manifold sins are burned, he becomes a pure-minded Yogi.
^ « i r w 
w
138. 
Whether pure or impure, in whatever state one might be, by 
performing ablution at this mystic place, he becomes undoubtedly holy.
<i^lK$rTW ^ ^
 
h 
h
139. 
At the time of death let him bathe himself in the water of 
this Triveni (the Trinity of rivers): he who dies thinking on this, reaches 
salvation t^en and there.
gsr* 
I
litRsq ?i?sra^ ^ 
h 
i|
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 172 ---
16
SIVA SAMEITA.
140. 
There is no greater secret than this throughout the three 
worlds. 
This should be kept secret with great care. It ought never to be 
revealed.
^ 
u 
ii
141. 
If the mind becomes steadily fixed even for half a second at 
the Brahmarandhra, one becomes free from sins and reaches the highest 
end.
ii 
ii
142. 
3^he holy Yogi whose mind is absorbed in this, is absorbed in 
me after having enjoyed the powers called anima, laghima etc.
l^ii t«^ii
143. 
The man knowing this Brahmarandhra, becomes my beloved 
in this world; conquering sins, he becomes entitled to salvation; by 
spreading knowledge, he saves thousands of people.
!RR^5i 
5f?^gR5a* 
ii 
u
144. 
The Four-faced and gods can hardly obtain this knowledge, 
it is the most invaluable treasure of the Y ogis; this mysteiy of the 
Brahmarandhra should be kept a great secret.
The Moon of Mystery.
W^TrCT ?IT 
I
5R!TTS^r 
II 
ii
145. 
I have said before that there is a force-centre iyoni) in the 
middle of the Sahasrdra ; below that is the m oon; let the wise contem­
plate this.
ii 
ii
146. 
By contemplating on this the Yogi becomes adorable in this 
world, and is respected by gods and adepts.
ftR: 
I
^ 
^
 
II 
II
147. 
In the sinus of the forehead let him contemplate on the 
oceUn of m ilk; from that place let him meditate on the moon, which is 
in the Sahasrara,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 173 ---
CHAPTER V. 
148H51.
77-
3?r: \
ffsnpt^D q i^si 
qr 
ii 
«
148. 
In the sinus of the forehead there is the nectar-containing 
moon, having sixteen digits Qtalas, i.e., full). 
Let him contemplate on 
this stainless one. 
By constant practice, he sees it in three days. 
By 
merely seeing it, the practitioner burns all his sins,
n i r q r a w ^ w it 
h
149. 
The future reveals itself to him, his mind becomes puj-e; 
and though he might have committed the five great sins, by a moment’s 
contemplation of this he desti'oys them.
^ 1 3 ^ *i?r q r % ^
 q^ ^ ^ q^ qn i
qq^m^j t^nr qrfqT 5 ^ srqqqis^qigi; 1
«qrqitq*r% 
q iq 
i
^ c TIW W ^ Tilq 
¥iq% qtfqqr I
5l?q ^ q jq t ^Rq JW
^mqiT^ssqfireeT 
fef^tqtRiill 
11
150. 
All the heavenly bodies (planets, etc.,) become auspicious, 
all dangers are destroyed, all accidents are warded off, success is obtained 
in war; the Kheehari and the Bhuehari powers are acquired by the Seeing 
of the moon which is in the head* 
By mere contemplation on it all these 
results ensue, there is no doubt of it. 
By constant practice of Yoga one 
verily becomes an adept. 
Verily, verily, again most verily, he becomes 
certainly my equal. 
The continual study of the science of Yoga, gives 
success to the Yogis.
Here ends the description of the Ajnapura Chakra.
The Mystic Mount Kailas.
I
m ^
 ^ s q ^ 
I
W H T ^ m q q ^5Eq q i^ (crg% §Ber^
 II 
H
151. 
Above this (i.e., the lunar sphere) is the brilliant thousand- 
petalled lotus. 
It is outside this microcosm of the body, it is the giver of 
salvation,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 174 ---
78
SIVA SAMHITA,
lt55T^T W T 
?J3r 
I
152. 
Its name is v«rily the Kailds mount, where dwells the great 
Lord (Shiva,) W'ho is called Nakula and is without destruction, and without 
increase or decrease.
irrsTOTiNr 
^ *35:1
5rf%? 
11 
11
153. 
Men, as soon as they discover this most secret place, become 
free from re-births in this universe. 
By the practice of this Yoga he gets 
the power of creating or destroying the creation, this aggregate of elements.
it V<i ii
154. When the min(! is steadily fixed at this place, which is 
the residence of the Great Swan and is called Kailds, then that Yogi, 
devoid of diseases and subduing all accidents, lives for a great age, free 
from death.
5 1 ^ II 
II
155. When the mind of the Yogi is absorbed in the Great God called 
the ICula, then the fullness of the SamMlii is attained, then the Yogi gets 
steadfastness.
156. 
By constant meditation one foi'gets the world, then in sooth 
the Yogi obtains wonderful power.
fer?grr 
1
^
 f < i l i ^ 
555Tfir^ I
,?r^r 
ii V O ii
157. 
Let the Yogi continually drink the nectar which flows out oL 
it ; by this he gives law to d^th, and conquers the Jculd. 
Here the kuld 
kmdalini force is absorbed, after this the quadruple creation is absorbed 
in the Param Atman.
The Rdja Yoga.
sn ^ 
I
h tv 11
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 175 ---
GSAPfER V. 
158-165.
158. 
By this knowledge, the modifications of the mind arie sus­
pended, however active they may be : therefore, let the Yogi untiringly 
and unselfishly try to obtain, this knowledge.
5T^ 
II 
II
159. 
When the modifications of the thinking principle are.sus- 
pended, then one certainly becomes a Y og i; then is known the Indivisible,, 
holy, pure Gnosis.
H 
II
160. 
Let him contemplate on his own reflection in^the sky as, 
beyond the Cosmic E g g : in the manner previously described. 
Through 
that let him think on the Great Void unceasingly.
ii \%\ w
161. 
The Great Void, whose beginning is void, whose middle is 
void, whose end is void, has the brilliancy of tens of millions of suns, 
and the coolness of tens of millions of moons. 
By contemplating con­
tinually on this, one obtains success.
% F ^r?n:R rm 
ii 
ii
162. 
Let him practise with energy daily this dhyana, within a year 
he will obtain all success undoubtedly.
cf3T 
I
a;a W
 
’jfecTt II 
II
163. 
He whose mind is absorbed in that place even for a second, 
is certainly a Yogi, and a good devotee, and is reverenced in all worlds.
164. 
All his stores of sins are at once verily destroyed.
^ 5 in i 
II
165. 
By seeing it one n^ver returns to the path of this mortal 
universe; let the Y’ogi, therefore, practise this with great care by the 
path of the Sjv&dhisthan.
a : 
StRTfll 
U 
H
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 176 ---
80
SIVA SAM BtfA.
166. 
I cannot describe the grandetu- of this contemplation. 
He 
who practises, knows. 
He becomes' respected by me.
%sTr?ir^ 
i
^ 5Tsnf«T: h 
H
167. 
By meditation one at once knows the wonderful effects of 
this Yoga (i.e., of the contemplation of the void) ; undoubtedly he attains" 
the psychic powers, called animd and laghimd, etc.
i
' 
ii 
ii
168. 
Thus have I described the R4ja Yoga, it is kept secret in all ' 
the Tantras ; now I shall describe to you briefly the B&j&dhiraj Yoga.
The Bdjddhirdj Yoga.
169. 
Sitting in the Swastikdsana, in a beautiful monastery, free 
from all men and animals, having paid respects to his Guru, let the Yogi 
practise this contemplation,
W : 
a 
[[ 
II
170. 
Knowing through the arguments of the Vedanta that the 
Jiva is independent and self-supported, let him make his mind also 
self-supported ; and let him not contemplate anything else.
5T 
I
^
 *i#g(^ II \ s \ ii
171. 
Undoubtedly, 
by this 
contemplation the highest success 
(wiaM-sidd/if) is obtained, by making the mind functionless; he himself 
becomes perfectly Full.
^ira^r^TcTcf 
^ 
11
5f 
u 
ii
172. 
He who practises this always, is the real passionless Yogi, he 
never uses the word “ I,” but always finds himself full of l.tman.
^ «ip«rt ^
 m ^
 
i
tW B I^ 
^
 ^ 
51TST 
U 
II
173. 
What is bondage, what is emancipation ? To him ever all is 
one ; undoubtedly, he who practises this always, is the really emancipated.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 177 ---
aHAPTBB V. 
174-179.
81
m ^3( ^
 
I
i
II 
H
174. 
He is the Yogi, he is the true devotee, he is worshipped in 
all the worlds, who contemplates the JivitraS and the Pdratnatmfi as 
related to each other as “ I ” and “ Am,” who renounces “ I ” and “ thou ” 
and contemplates the indivisible; the Yogi free from all attachment takes 
shelter of that contemplation in which, through the knowledge of super­
imposition and negation, all is dissolved.
I
^ 
% II 
II
175. 
Leaving that Brahma, who is manifest, who is knowledge, 
who is bliss, and who is absolute consciousness, the deluded wander 
about, vainly discussing the manifested and the unmanifested.
'ar i
asr 9r j* 
ii 
ii
176. 
He who meditates on this movable and immovable universe, 
that is really unmanifest, but abandons the supreme Brahman—directly 
manifest—is verily absorbed in this universe.
ITTa[a>i?:awaH ?i«it 
i
f^cT W ^
 
II 
II
177. 
The Yogi, free from all attachment, constantly exerts himself 
in keeping up this practice that leads to Gnosis, so that there may not be 
again the up-heaval of Ignorance.
#Eff5T 
I
.178. 
The wise one, by restraining all his senses from their objects, 
and being free from all company, remains in the midst of these objects, 
as if in deep-sleep, i.e., does not perceive them.
sr«T5t^ i
«rtg* 
5^rf»ks i
^ 
»TSf* 
U 
N
179. 
Thus constantly practising the Self-luminous becomes manifest: 
here end all the teachings of the Guru, (they can help the student no further/ 
11
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 178 ---
82
SIVA SAMBIT A.
Henceforth he must help himself, they can no more increase his reason or 
power, henceforth by ' the mere force of his own practice he must gain 
the Gnosis.
imrsr 
i
180. 
That Gnosis from which the speech and mind turn back 
baffled, is only to be obtained through practice; for then this pure Gnosis 
bursts forth of itself.
<ren3ra#i 
ii 
11
18 1. 
Tfie Hatha Yoga cannot be obtained without the Raja Yoga, 
nor can the Raja Yoga be attained without the Hatha Yoga. 
Therefore, 
let the Yogi first learn the Hatha Yoga from the instructions of the wise 
Guru.
5t 
II 
II
182. 
He who, while living in this physical body, does not practise 
Yoga, is living merely for the sake of sensual .enjoyments.
iH W t 
11 
11
183. 
From the time he begins till the time he gains perfect mastery, 
let the Yogi eat moderately and abstemiously, otherwise, however clever, 
he cannot gain success.
q fTg Tqfqqfid t I
5I5qcl' 3 R q ^ 
9I3q^ » f5 iq I
iifq«nr H 
Jaw ^
 
11 U\i 11
184. 
The wise Yogi in an assembly should utter words of highest 
good, but should not talk much : he eats a little to keep up his physical 
frame; let him renounce the company of men, let him renounce the 
company of men, verily, let him renounce all com pany; otherwise he 
cannot attain mukti (salvation) ; verily, I tell you the truth.
II U h h
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 179 ---
QUAPTBU V. 
m -190.
SB
185. 
Let him practise this in secrecy, free from the company of 
men, in a, retired place. 
For the sake of appearances, he should remain 
in society, but should not have his heart in it. 
He should not renounce 
the duties of his profession, caste Or rank; but let him perform thesd 
merely, as an instrument of the Lord, without any thought of the event.! 
By thus doing there is no sin.
^
 
?inr 
ii 
u
186. 
Even the house-holder (grihastha), by wisely following this 
method, may obtain success, there is no doubt of it.
^ 
t e w
 ^
 I
^ 
g|T<igTh> w
 ^
 I
W
 
w 
u
187. 
Remaining in the midst of the family, always doing the I 
duties ol the-house-holder, he who is free.from merits and demerits, and' 
has restrained his senses, attains salvation. 
The house-holder practising 
Yoga is not touched by sins, if to protect mankind he does any sin, he is 
not polluted by it.
The Mantra 
^
 ^
II 
II
188. 
Now I shall tell you the best of practices, the japa of mantra : 
from this, one gains happiness in this as well in the world beyond this.
H 
II
189. 
By knowing this highest of the mantras, the Yogi certainly 
attains success (siddhi) : this gives all power and pleasure to the one- 
pointed Yogi.
It 
II
190. 
In the four-petalled Mul4dh4r lotus is the bija of apeeeh, 
brilliant as lightning (i.e., the syllable k airp,.)
^hnra6Rr ^
 g N g t e i e W l i
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 180 ---
84
SiVA SAMBITA.
191. 
In the heart is the bija of love, beautiful as the handhuk 
flower 
tlim.) 
In the space between the two eyebrows {i.e., in the 
Ajna lotus,) is the bija of ^akti 
strim), brilliant as tens of millions of 
moons. 
These three seeds should be kept secret— they give enjoyment 
and emancipation. 
Let the Yogi repeat these, three mantras and try 
to attain success.
(N. B.— The mystical names of these bija mantras are not given 
in the text. 
The whole mantra is Otp, aim, klim> strim.
ST 
i
^J5Tf«^»«m5Tr 3 1 ^ II 
II
<
192. 
Let him learn this mantra from his Guru, let him repeat 
it neither too fast nor too slowly, keeping the mind free from all 
doubts, and understanding the mystic relation between the letters of the 
mantra,
5 1 ^ H 
II
193. 
The wise Yogi, intently fixing his attention on this mantra, 
performing all the duties peculiar to his caste, should perform one 
hundred thousand horns (fire sacrifices,) and then repeat this mantra 
three hundred thousand times in the presence of the Goddess fPripur^
f u t 
ii 
ii
194. 
At the end of this sacred repetition (japa), let the wise Yogi 
again perform hom, in a triangular hollow, with sugar', milk, butter and 
the flower of karani (oleander).
5rrlr 
il 
n
195. 
By this performance of Homa-Japa-Homa, the Goddess Tripura 
Bhairavi, who has been 
propitiated by the above mantra, becomes 
pleased, and grants all the desires of the Yogi.
^ 5 
II 
II
196. 
Having satisfied the Guru and having received this highest 
of mantras, in the proper way, and performing its repetition hn the way 
laid down, with mind concentrated, even the most heavy-burdened with 
past Karmas attains success.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 181 ---
o n A p r m r . 
197-m .
5 5 ^ ^ 
i
?^5»ra€!I 
^^[HTgSCT: II
’T5T^ 
II l^vS u
197. 
The Yogi, who having controlled his senses, repeats this man­
tra one hundred thousand times, gains the power of attracting others.
^ 5 T 
^ 
ftfRTT* I
II
Wrsg^er
?R?r 
?r 
f^?ri: w 
ii
198. 
By repeating it two lacs of times he can control all persons— 
they come to him as freely, as women go to a pilgrimage. 
They give him 
all that they possess, and remain always under his control. 
^
199. 
By repeating this mantra three laes of times, all the deities 
presiding over the spheres as well as the "spheres, are brought under his 
dominion.
H Roo II
200. 
By repeating this six' lacs of times, he becomes the vehicle 
' of power—yea, the protector of the world— surrounded by servants.
^ y w n fN r ^ 
ii 
ii
201. 
By repeating this twelve laes of times, the lords of Yakshas, 
E&kshas and the Ndgas come under his control; all obey his command 
constantly.
55rs|Ri!ifNni 
araiT^^ ii 
ii
202. 
By repeating this fifteen laes of times, 
the Siddhas, the 
Viddytidharas, the Gandharvas, the Apsaras come under the control of the 
Yogi. 
There is no doubt of it. 
He attains immediately the knowledge of 
all audition and thus all-knowinghood.
II
5 ^ 
^
 ^
 
M 5^«|||
203. 
By repeating this eighteen laes of times, he, in this body, can 
rise from the ground: he attains verily the luminous body; he goes all over
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 182 ---
5iVA BAUtUfA.
the universe, wherever he likes; he sees the pores of the earth, i.e., he sees 
the interspaces and the molecules of this solid earth.
e iy n iH if s i^ t ^ A T 
I
Jm iM r 
<1^ I
«3T«nwg 
li ro« n
204. 
By repeating this 28 lacs of times, he becomes the lord of 
the Viddyidhar&s, the wise Yogi becomes kama-i‘dpi {i.e., can assume what­
ever form he desires.) 
By repeating these thirty lacs of times he becomes 
equal to Brahma and Vishnu. 
He becomes a Rudra, by sixty lac repeti­
tions, by eighty lac repetitions he becomes all-enjoyer, by repeating one 
tens of millions of times, the great Yogi is absorbed in the Param Brahman. 
Such a practitioner is hardly to be found throughout the three worlds.
205. 
0 Goddess! 
Shiva, the destroyer of Tripura, is the One
first and the Highest cause. 
The wise attains Him, who is unchanging, 
undecaying, all peace, immeasureable and free from all ills-—the Highest 
Goal, 
^
fer^ iiR ir 
^
 *itw i€ r i
5 %: w 
u
206. 
0 great Goddess ! this, science of Shiva is a great science 
(mahavidyd), it had always been kept secret. 
Therefore, this science 
revealed by me, the wise should keep secret.
^iPr i % f^ 5 s ? r T 1
^ awfe?!? II 
II
207. 
The Yogi, desirous of success, should keep the Hatha Yoga as 
a great secret. 
It becomes fruitful while kept secret, revealed it loses its 
power.
^ 
11 
11
208. 
The wise one, who reads it daily from begini^ing to end, 
undoubtedly, gradually obtains success in Yoga. 
He attains emancipation 
who honors it daily.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 183 ---
CHAPTER V. 
2 0 9 - m .
81
%r^s ^«iT?^5q^ 
II 
II
209. 
Let this science be recited to all holy men, who desire 
emancipation. 
By practice success is obtained, without it how can suc­
cess follow.
^ciraTT ^fi^ijnt: i ‘
^rTn=rmRi;ii 
n
210. 
Therefore, the Yogis should perform Yoga according to the 
rules of practice. 
He who is contented with what he gets, who restrains 
his senses, being a house-holder, who is not ab$orbed in the iiouse-hold 
duties, certainly attains emancipation by the practice of Yoga,
ii R U u
211. 
Even the lordly house-holders obtain 
success by jafa, 
if they perform the duties of Yoga properly. 
Let, therefore, a house-holder 
also exert in Yoga (his wealth and condition of life are no obstacles in 
this.)
Jit
^
 
cqfT 
^ * i m 1
q s n f
% T v m 
II
212. 
Living in the house amidst wife and children, but being 
free from attachments to them, practising Yoga in secrecy, a house-holder 
even finds marks of success (slowly crowning his efforts), and thus follow­
ing this teaching of mine, he ever lives in blissful happiness.
ii 
n 3 «m ii
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 184 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 185 ---
T H E
G H E R A N D A S A M H I T A
TRANSLATED BY
RAI BAHADUR SRISA CHANDRA VASU
pd bu sh bd b y
THE pAlSma OPPIOB, BHUVANEi^WARI Asram a, BahaduKoanj,
H^ababa^
P rintbd by Apurva Krishna Bose, at the Indian P ress,
1 9 1 4
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 186 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 187 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Lesson First.
ON THE TRAINING OF THE 
PHYSICAL BODY.
Salutation 
...
Page.
1
The Seven Exercises
2
The Six Purificatory Processes
3
The Foiu Internal Dhautis
...
8
Antar-Dhanti...
...
3
Yfitasfira-Dhauti
4
Yfiiisfira-Dhauti
...
4
Agnisfira, or Fire Purification
...
4
Bahiskrita-Dhanti
...
5
Dautadhauti, or Teeth purification
5
Danta-Muia-Dhauti
6
Jivh& Sodhana, or Tongue-Dhauti
8
Earna-Dhauti, or Ear-Cleaning
.*•
7
Hrid-Dhanti ...
...
T
Danda-Dhauti
...
7
Yamaua-Dbauti
...
7
Vastra-Dhauti
...
8
Mnla Sodhana, or Purification of the 
Rectum 
... 
... 
...
8
End of Dhautis
...
8
Bastis 
...................
...
9
Jala-Basti
...
9
Sthala-Basti ...
...
9
End of Basti'Earma
...
9
Neti
...
9
Laukiki-Yoga...
10
Trfitaka, or Gazing
...
10
Eapfilabhfiti ...
...
10
Yfima-Erama...
...
11
Yyftt-Erama ...
...
11
Sit-Erama
...
11
End of the First Lesson
...
11
Second Lesson.
The Asanas, or Postures...
...
12
Different Einds of Postures
12
The Siddhfisana
13
ThePadmfisana)
13
The Bhadrfisana
13
The Muktisann
•f
U
Page.
Posture
...
...
14
The Swastikfisana
...
...
14
The Simhfisaua
14
The Gomukh&sana
...
...
14
The YirSsana
...
...
IS
The Dhanurasaua
«A.
...
16
The Mritfisana
•
15
The Guptfisana
...
15
The Matsyiisana
...
...
15
The Matsyendr4sana
..r
18
The Paschimottaua-Asana
16
The GorakshAsana
16
The Utka^asana
...
16
The Saukatasaua
...
17
The MayOrfisana
...
17
The Eukutisana
...
17
The Eflrmfisana
...
17
The Ctt4ua EOrm&sana ...
17
The Mapduk4sana
...
18
The Cttftna Mandukfisaua
18
The Vrikshasana
...
18
The Garud&sana
...
...
18
The Vrishfisana
...
18
The Salabhfisana
...
...
19
The Makarasana
A .
19
The Dshtrfisaua
...
19
The Bhnjang&sana
...
...
19
The Yog&saua
...
19
Third Lesson,
On Mudrks ...
•••
20
The 
Advantages
of 
Practising
Mudrfis
20
Mahdmudrd ...
•••
21
Its Benefits ...
**• 
•••
21
Nabho Mudrfi...
21
Uddiyfina-Bandha
•••
21
Its Benefits ...
•••
21
Jfiiandhara ...
••• 
•••
22
Its Benefits ...
22
MOlabandha ...
••• 
•••
22
Its Benefits ...
»?• 
•••
3?
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 188 ---
11
Page.
Page.
Fourth Lesson.
Mahdbandha ...
... 
23
Its Benefits ...
... 
23
Pratyfihfira, or Restraining the Min<3
86
Mah&vedha ...
' 
... 
28
Fifth Lesson.
Its Benefits ...
... 
28
Prfinfiyfima, or Restraint of Breath...
37
Ebechari Mndrfi
... 
24
Place
87
Its Benefits ...
... 
24
Time 
...
88
Viparitakarani
... 
25
Six Seasons ...
38
Its Benefits ...
• ••
... 
25
The Experiencing of Seasons
89
Yonimudrfi 
...
... 
26
Moderation of Diet
39
Its Benefits ...
*‘5*
... 
26.
Prohibited Foods
40
Vajroni Mudrfi
... 
27
Purification of Nfidis
42
Its Benefits ...
• ••
... 
27 -
Kinds of Eumbhaka
44
Bakti Ch&lani
... 
27
Sahita 
... 
...
44
Its Benefits ...
... 
28
SfiryabhedS-Kumbhaka ...
46
Tadfigi-Mudr^[
... 
29
Its Benefits 
...
46
Mfiudoki-Mndr&
... 
29
The Vfiyus
46
Its Benefits ...
... 
29
Their Seats ...
46
Bfimbhavi-Hndrfi
29
Rjiftyf
47
Its Benefits ...
... 
29
Sitali
48
The Five DhSranft-Mndras
... 
30
Bhastrika
48
Pfirthivi
... 
80
* Bhr&mari (or Beetle-Droning Eam-
Its Benefits ...
... 
30
bhaka)
49
Ambhasi
... 
81
Mfirchhfi
49
Its Benefits ...
• ••
... 
81
Kevali
50
Agneyi
... 
31-
Sixth Lesson.
Its Benefits ...
... 
82
Dhyana-Yoga ...
52
VSyavI
... 
82
Sthfila Dhyfina
52
Its Benefits ...
... 
32
Another Process
58
Akfisi Dbfiranft
..... . 32
Jyotir Dhyfina
54
Its Benefits ...
. ... 
33
Another Process
54
Asvim'Mudrfi
...
... 
33
Sfikshma Dhyfina
54
Its Benefits ...
... 
83
Seventh Lesson.
Pfisini-Madrfi...
..V 
^
Samfidhi Yoga 
...
56
Its Benefits ...
... 
33
DhySna-YognSamfidhi ...
57
Efiki'Mudrfi ...
... 
33
Nfida-YogaSatnfidhi
57
Its Benefits ...
...
... 
84
I^asfinanda Yoga Samfidhi
57
M fitangini-Mndr
... 
34
Laya-Sidddhi Yoga Samfidhi
58
Its Benefits ...
... 
34
Bhakti Yoga Samfidhi
58
Bhujangini-Mndrfi
... 
34
Rfija-Yoga SamAdhi . 
...
58
Its Benefits ...
... 
85
Praise of SamAdhi
58
The Benefits of Mndrfis...
... 
,35
The end
59
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 189 ---
THE G-HEEANDA, 8AMHITA
'L esson F ir st
ON THE TRAINING OF THE PHYSICAL BODY.
SALUTATION.
I bow to that Lord Primeval who taught in the beginning the 
science of the Training in Hardiness (Hatha Yoga)—a science that stands 
out as the first rung on the ladder that leads to the supreme heights of 
Royal Training (Raja Yoga).
Note.—The Training of the body is the first step to the training of the mind. A 
healthy mind can exist only in a healthy body. Hence the Hatha Yoga or training of 
the body is the first step to the training of the mind or Raja Yoga. Hatha may be taranslated 
as “ hard” or the training of or in Hardiness. Raja in this connection may be translated 
as royal or softness, or training in royal graces or mental discipline.
1
1. 
Once Chapda KSpali going to the cottage of Gheranda saluted 
him with reverence and devotion.
gf? a^fr ii r u
Chanda Kapdli said :—
2. 
0 Master of Yoga ! 0 best of the Yogins ! 0 
I wish now
to learn the Physical Discipline (Yoga), which leads to t^^^nowledge of 
truth (or Tattva-jnelna). 
?
5r^«r—
t
^ 5TRr ? n ^ a r a « r R a 1| ^ H
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 190 ---
THE OHERANDA SAMHITA.
GHBRAiypA HEPLIED.
3. 
Well asked, indeed, 0 mighty armed, I shall tell thee, 0 child, 
what thou askest me. 
Attend to it with diligence.
4. 
There are no fetters like those of Illusion (Mayd), no strength 
like that which Oome? from discipline (Yoga), there is no friend higher 
than knowledge (Jh4na), and no greater enemy than Egoism (Ahankara).
?i«ir 
i
, 
^
 
il 
ii
5. 
As by learning the alphabets one can, through practice, master 
all the sciences, so by thoroughly practising first the (physical) training, 
one acquires the Knowledge of the True.
6. 
On account of good and bad deeds, the bodies of all animated 
beings are produced, and the bodies give rise to works (Karma which leads 
to rebirth) and thus the circle is continued like that of a Persian Wheel.
II V9 II
*
7. 
As the Persian 
Wheel in drawing w'ater from a well goes 
up and down, moved by the bullocks (filling aiul exhausting the buckets 
again and again), so the soul paSses through life and death moved by its 
Deeds,
limfWT 
I
^r»TR#!T 
53^11 
tl <i II
8. 
lake unto an unbaked earthen pot thrown in water, the body is 
soon decayed (in this world). Bake it hard in the fire of Training in order 
to strengthen and purify the body.
THE SEVEN EXERCISES.
9. 
The seven exercises which appertain to this Training^of the body 
are the following 
-Purificatory, strengthening, steadying, calming, and 
those leading to lightness, perception, and isolation,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 191 ---
LESSON FIRST.
sjtrsiJfsq-
gs[?Tr ferccrr 
si^sn fr^ ’^ g rr u \o ii 
sn^rraTurgra^^ 
sTRicsigq^RtrH^ i
^rf^HSJsr g f r i ^ ^ ^5g«rj w U w
10—11. 1st.—The purification is acq^uired by the regular perform­
ance of 
six practices Uo be 
mentioned 
shortly); 2nd—'Asana 
or 
posture gives Driddhata or strength; 3rd—MudrS gives SthiratS or steadi­
ness ; 4th—Pratyah^ra gives DhairyatS, or calmness ; 5th—Pr^payama 
gives lightness or Laghima; 6th— Dhyana gives perception (Pratyak- 
shatwa) of S elf; and 7th—Sam^dhi gives isolation (NirliptaW.), whick is 
verily the Freedom.
?r«ff i
«B«?T5wr%i5%cn^r 
^Enrr^r^ u v< ii
THE SIX PURIPIOATORY PROCESSES.
12. 
(1) Dhauti; (2) Basti; (3) N eti; (4) Laukiki; (5) Trataka ;-(6) 
Kapalabhati are the Shatkarmas or six practices, known as Sadhana.
P a r t I.
%fxTJ I
srj 
\ \ II
THE POOR INTERNAL PHAUT18.
13. 
The Dhautis are of four kinds, and they clear away the impu­
rities of the body. 
They are:—
-Antardhauti (internal washing); {&) 
Dantadhauti (cleaning the teeth); (c) Hriddhauti (cleaning the heart); {d) 
Mulashodhana (cleaning the rectum).
?r«i 
I
^?ranf 
t
<wrrtrflrsig^«iT ii 
ii
(a) ANTAR-DHAtTI.
14. 
.^ntardhauti is again sub-divided into four parts : —Vfitasfi ra 
(wind purification), Varisara (water purification), Vahnisara (fire purifica­
tion), and Bahiskrita.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 192 ---
THR OERRARDA SAUElTA.
qS5T§[?6^T 
II 
II
(ai) VITASa RA-DHAUTI.
15. 
Contract the month like the beak of a crow and drink air 
slowly, and filling the stomach slowly with it, move it therein, and then 
slowly force it out through the lower passage.
It K% II
16. 
The. Vatas^ra is a very secret process, it causes the purification 
of the body, it destroys all diseases and increases the gastric-fire.
1T«I 
I
ii ^vs n
(a’) Va RIsAr A-DHATJTI.
17. 
Pill the mouth with water down to the throat, and then drink 
it slowly ; and then move it through the stomach, forcing it downwards 
expelling it through the rectum.
srqu^ II 
n
18. 
This process should be kept very secret. 
It purifies the body. 
And by practising it with care, one gets a luminous or shining body.
t|?:i 
S rq ^ : I
*13^5 
srq?it II 
II
, 
19. 
The Varisara is the highest Dliauti. 
He w’ho practises it with
ease, purifies his filthy body and turns it into a shining one.
I
5lcT^T?:s^ 
I
T II R© II
(a») AGNISaRA o r FIRE PURIFICATION.
20. 
Press in the naval knot or intestines towards the spine for one 
hundred times. 
This is Agnisara or fire process. 
This gives success in 
the practice of Yoga, it cures all the cffseases of the stomach (gastric juice) 
and increases the internal fire.
ii Rt n
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 193 ---
LESSON FIEST.
21. 
This form of Dhauti should be kept very secret, and it is 
hardly to be attained even by the gods* 
By this Dhauti alone one 
certainly gets a luminous body.
I
H rs rto T 
i
«WT 
TOitparr ^ sr^R^ir 
ii 
n
(a') BAHISKRITA-DHAUTI.
22. 
By Kifcachafichu or crow-bill Mudrft fill the stomach with air, 
hold it there for one hour and a half, and then force it down towards the 
intestines. 
This Dhauti must be kept a great secret, and>mnst not be 
revealed to anybody.
IP I 
I
gn^ o j^Tg i 5nit5g 
ii 
«
23. 
Then standing in navel-deep water, draw out the Baktinadt 
(long intestines), wash the Nadi with hand, and so long as its filth is not 
all washed away, wash it with care, and then draw it in again into the 
abdomen.
itpaf tg R w fif
%%in5r?!r
24. 
This process should be kept secret. 
It is not easily to be 
attained even by the gods. 
Simply by this Dhauti one gets Deva-deha 
(Grodlike body.)
tm 
I
«iR3!rt 
i
q d 'sg g 
si 
ii 
«
25. 
As long as a person has not the power of retaining the breath 
for an hour and a half (or retaining wind in the stomach for that period), 
so long he cannot achieve this grand Dhauti or purification, known as 
Bahiskritadhauti.
I
I
ii 
ii
^ 
(b).-DANTA-DHAUTI, OR TEETH PURIFICATION.
26. 
Danta-Dhauti is of five kinds : purification of the teeth, of the 
root of the tongue, of the two holes of the ear, and of the frontal-sinuses.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 194 ---
THE GEEBAEDA SAMEITA.
^ ^T«7r i
m^^i[»?n33s^ 
u ^vs ii
(6‘) DANTA-MULA-DHAUTI.
27. 
Rub tbe teeth with cateqhu-powder or with pure earth, so long 
as dental impurities are not renioved.
3 
II R<£ I)
28. 
This teeth-washing is a great Rhauti and an important process 
in the practice of Yoga for the Yogis. 
It should be done daily in the 
morning by the Ypgis, in order to preserve the teeth. 
In purification 
this is approved of by the Yogis.
(b’) j iv h a sodhana, o r tongub-d h a u t i.
29. 
I shall now tell you the method of cleansing the tongue. 
The 
elongation of the tongue destroys old age, death and disease.
5 r § r^ n ^ R n iT 
i
?E^ 
u 
II
30.. 
Join together the three fingers known as the index, the middle 
and the ring finger, put them into the throat, and rub well and clean 
the root of the tongue, and by washing it again throw out the phlegm.
5i^t 5i^t 11 
11
. 31. 
Having thus washed it, rub it with butter, and milk it again 
and again; then by holding the tip of the tongue with an iron instrument 
pull it out slowly and slowly.
#191* f
1
^
 *9 #i9r’^ r s f t i w 
II ^5^ II
32. 
Do this daily with diligence before the rising and setting sun. 
By so doing the tongue becomes elongated.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 195 ---
LESSON FIRST.
(b*) KAENA-DHAUTI, OE BAR-CLEAWING.
33. 
Clean the two holes of the ears by the index and the ring 
fingers. 
By practising it daily, the mystical sounds are heard.
II V i II
KAPlL A-RAN DHRA-I) HAUTI.
34. 
Rub with the thumb of the right hand the depression in the 
forehead near the bridge of the nose. 
By the practice of this Yoga, 
diseases arising from derangements of phlegmatic humours are cured.
- 
H i f t s r 3 t T « i c » I 
^
^I*rT ¥tT5Rl?^ =5T 
^ ^ 
II 
II
35. 
The vessels become purified and^clairvoyance is induced. 
This 
should be practised daily after awakening from sleep, after meals, a,nd; 
in the evening.
?l«I 
I
f^f^T 
II 
N
(c) HRID GHAUTI.
36. 
Hrid-Dhauti, or purification of heart (or rather throat) is of three 
kinds, vis., by Danda (a stick), Vamana (vomiting), and by VasG'a (cloth).
cT^qr ^ I
g 2HS 
ii 
H
(c>) DANDA-DHAUTI.
37. 
Take either a plantain stalk or a stalk of turmeric (Haridra) 
or a stalk of cane, and thrust it slowly into the sesophagus and then draw 
it out slowly.
cseR 
II 
n
38. -By this process all the phlegm, bile and other impurities are 
expelled out of the mouth. 
By this Danda-Dhaiiti every kind of heart- 
disease is surely cured.
I
II 
II
(c’) vamaNa-dhadti.
1
39. 
After meal, let the wise practitioner drink water full up to 
the throat, then looking for a short while upwards, ‘let him vomit it oat
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 196 ---
THE QEEUAEDA 8AM BIT A,
again.
cured.
By daily practising this Yoga, disorders of phlegm and bile are
5HJ 
^
 u «0 II
" 
^ 
(c») VASTRA-DHAUTI.
40. 
Let him swallow slowly a thin cloth, four fingers wide, then 
let him draw it out again. 
This is called Vastra-Dhauti.
u a t ii
41. 
This cures Gulma or abdominal diseases, fever, enlarged 
spleen, leprosy, and other skin diseases and disorders of phlegm and 
bile, and day by day the practitioner gets health, strength, and cheerful­
ness.
I
iWif^^cTt ?rra?nw?i^ sr 
i
5 rw e#!R i#5 r 
n a^i ii
(d ) MUbA SODHANA, OR PORIFICATION OP THE RBOTtJM.
42. 
The Apanayfiyu does not flow freely so long as the rectum is 
not purified. 
Therefore with the greatest care let him practise this 
purification of the large intestines.
mTtmT^fasTiftr m i
m ftm <51 jHt 
n a^ ii
4 3.. 
By the stalk of the root of Haridra (turmeric) or the middle 
finger, the rectum should be carefully cleansed with water over and over 
again.
ii aa ii
44. 
This destroys constipation, indigestion, and dyspepsia,' and 
increases the beauty and vigour of the body and enkindles the sphere of 
the fire (i. e., the gastric juice).
End of Dhautis.
P a r t II.
sr# f 
II 
w
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 197 ---
LESSON FIRST.
9
:bastis.
45. 
The Bastis are described of two kinds, ri^rJala Basti (or 
water Basti) and Sukshma Basti (or dry Basti). 
Water Basti is done in 
water and dry Basti always on land.
?m!sr553rfe|{ i
HiRrmrsTt 
i
II 
II
JALA-BASTI.
46. 
Entering water up to the navel and assuming the posture 
called Utkatfisana, let him contract and dilate the sphincter-muscle of 
the anus. 
This is called Jala-Basti.
I
wtg; ii 
ii
47. 
This cures Prameha (urinary disorders), udivarta (disorders 
of digestion) and Kruravayu (disorders of the wind). 
The body becomes 
free from all diseases and becomes as beautiful as that of the god Cupid.
Slfef 
I
ii 
h
STHALA-BASTI,
48. 
Assuming the posture called Paschimottftna, let him move the 
intestines slowly downwards, then contract and dilate the sphincter- 
muscle of the anus with A^wini-Mudra. .
5T 
I
49. 
By this practice of Yoga, constipation never occurs, and it 
increases gastric fire and cures flatulence.
End of Basti*Karma.
P art III.
f^rTf^saraT^ 
i
NBTI.
50. 
T^ke a thin thread, measuring half a cubit, and insert it into 
the nostrils, and passing it through, pull it out by the mouth. 
This is 
callld Neti-KriyS.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 198 ---
'10
TEE QEEEAEDA SAMEITA.
!PK ^’6tT 
^ 3 r f % sT5ira% ii 
ii
51. 
By practising the Neti-Kriya, one obtains Khechari Siddhi. 
It destroys the disorders of phlegm and produces clairvoyance or clear 
sight-
P a r t IV.
W 
I
wwr'SiTt i
latjkiki-yoga.
52. 
With great force move the stomach and intestines from one 
side to the other. 
This is called 
Laukiki-Yoga. 
This destroys all 
diseases and increases the bodily fire.
P a r t V .
?r«i 5115^1
ii 
u
TKaTAKA or GAZIN<5.
53. 
Gaze steadily without winking at any small object, until tears 
begin to flow. 
This is called Trataka by the wise.
3«?icr 
i
^ ? i^ r 
sniRcJ it 
il
54. 
By practising this Yoga, Sapibhavi Si ddhis are obtained; and 
certaiuly all diseases of the eye afe destroyed and clairvoyance is induced.
P a r t VI.
I
?nRRi^ 
i
Bi«nr ^
n
 
ii
kapAlabhAti.
55. 
The KapSlabhfiti is of three kinds .* Yfima-krama, Vyflt-krama, 
and ^it^kraraa. 
They destroy disorders of phlegm.
^f?iRT 
II 
If
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 199 ---
LESSON PIBST.
11
vAm a-k r a m a.
56. 
Draw the wiad through the left nostril and expel it through the 
right, and draw it again through the right and expel it through the left.
^
 
g 
i
h 
u
57. 
This inspiration and expiration must be done without any 
force. 
This practice destroys disorders of phlegm..
ir«i 
I
RT^fTWIT 
I
qi?i qr?r 
II 
H
vyOt-krama
58. 
Draw the water' through the two nostrils and expel it through 
the mouth slowly and slowly. 
This is called Vyut-krama which destroy? 
disorders of phlegm.
iT«r 
I
SIT-KRAMA.
59. 
Suck water through the * mouth and expel it through the 
nostrils. 
By this practice of Yoga one becomes like the god Oupid.’
H 5ira^ 
g 
sr5fTO^ I
I
60. 
Old age never comes to him and decrepitude never disfigures 
him. 
The body becomes healthy, elastic, and disorders of phlegm are
: destroyed.
End of the first lesson.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 200 ---
S econd L ssso fl.
?f«r 
I
^an^cTTPr 5Erra% ^sra^cRt i 
"gg^sStl^^Tftr 
*9 ii ui
The Asanas or postures.
Gbee^nDa said :—'1. 
There are eighty-four hundreds of thousands 
of Asanas described by Shiva. 
The postures are as many in number as 
there are numbers of species of living creatures in this universe.
Cl'S!? 
drftfTST^ 
5tef 
I
sTfsf5i?ra?r* 
il R ii
2. 
Amojig them eighty-four are the best ; and among these eighty- 
four, thirty-two have been found useful for mankind in this world.
qw erar «!?:* 
i
5rtair 
“sr i
^m z' 
j ' 
ii « n
»re5‘ f q j l « ^ ii 
«[R55iT* nqjt 
i
STfWy^remTfqg 
II ^ II
DIPRERBNT KINDS OP POSTURES.
3— 6. 
The thirty-two Asanas that give perfection in this mortal 
world are the following:—
1. Siddham (p e r fe c t p ostu re),
2. Padmam (L otu s p ostu re).
8. Bbadram (O en tle posture).
4. Mnktam (Pree p ostu re).
6. Vajram (Adam ant p ostu re).
6. Swastika (P rosp erou s p ostu re),
7. Siubam (L ion p ostu re). 
Gomukba (Cou>~mouth p ostu re). 
Vira (H eroic posture).
Obaiiur (B ow posture).
Writam (Corpse p ostu re). 
Guptam tU idden posture).
18. Matsyam (Pisb p ostu re).
14. Atatseudra.
15. Goraksba.
16. PasebimottAna.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12,
17. Utkatam (h a za rd ou s p o s tu r e ),
18. Sankatam (D a n g erou s posture)* 
Wayuram (P ea co ck p o s tu r e ). 
Eukkutam (C o ck p o s tu re ). 
Kbrma (T o r to is e p o s tu re ). 
Uttana Manduka.
Uttana Eurmakam.
Vriksba (T ree p o s tu re ). 
Manduka {F rog p o s tu re ).
26. Gaiuda (E agle p o s tu r e ),
27. 'Vrisham (B u ll p o s tu re ). 
fealabha (L o c u s t p o s ti^ e ). 
Makara (D olp h in p o stu re), 
Ushtram (C am el p o stu re). 
Bbujangatn (Snofec p ostu re), 
Yoga.
19,20. 
21. 
22.
23.
24.
25.
28.
29-
80.
31.
32.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 201 ---
LESSON SECOND.
\
13
I
!S^Rnf
%?[RR* jffe?Icr II vs II
1. 
—THE SIDOHAsANA.
7, 
The practitioner who has subdued his passions, having placed 
one heel at the anal aperture should keep the other heel on the root of the 
generative organ ; afterwards he should affix his chin upon the chest, and 
being quiet and straight, gaze at the spot between the two eyebrows. This 
is called the Siddh-asana and leads to emancipation.
U
#5«iTO WRT ?r«n
^cfs:^Ti^l^5!r5i5iTtirH^ 
ii 
n
2. 
—THE PADMA8ANA. ,
8. 
Place the right foot on the left thigh and similarly the left one 
on the right thigh, also cross the hands behind the back and firmly catch 
hold of the great toes of feet so crossed. 
Place the chin on the chest and 
fix the gaze on the tip of the nose. • This posture is called the Padmfisana 
(or Lotus postui’e). 
This posture destroys all diseases.
^ «S[rasi*l. I
3 5 ^ *sr 
I
^ 
II ^ H
3IT55WrJC 
1
5ffs[T^ 
II \o II
8.-THE BHADKAsANA.
9— 10. 
Place the heels crosswise under the testes attentively; cross 
the hands behind the back and take hold of the toes of the feet. Fix the 
gaze on the tip of the nose, having previously adopted the Hudr4 called 
Jalandhara. This is the Bhadr4sana (or happy posture) which destroys all 
sorts of diseases.
^«i g^RRf 
I
q t^ % qr*i35q^ 
i
*
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 202 ---
u
THE GHEBAEDA SAMEITA.
4.—THE MTJKTASANA.
11. 
Place the left heel at the root o f the organ of generation and the 
right heel above .that, keep the head and the neck straight with the 
body. This posture is Called the Muktasana. It gives Siddhi (perfection).
i
6.—THE VAJRaSANA OR THE ADAMANT POSTURE.
12. 
Make the thighs tight like adamant and place the legs by the 
two sides of the anus. 
This is called the VajrAsana. 
It gives psychic 
powers to the Yogi.
ii 1% ii
8.-THB SWASTIKaSANA.
13- 
Drawing the legs and thighs together and placing the feet 
underneath them, keeping the body in its easy condition and sitting 
straight, constitute the posture called the SwastikSsana.
fm 
I
<si sngSliqft ii 
n 
sq g ^ fsfl 
i
7.—THE SIMHASANA.
14— 
15. 
The two heels to be placed rrnder the scrotum contrariwise 
(i.C; left heel on the right side and the right heel on the left side of it) 
and turned upwards, the knees to be placed on the ground, (and the hands 
placed on the knees), mouth to be kept open ; practising the Jalandhara 
mudra one should fix his gaze on the tip of the nose. 
This is the 
Simh&sana (Lion-posture), the destroyer of all diseases.
i
8.—THE GOMDKHaSANA.
16. 
The two feet to be placed on the ground, and the heels to be 
placed contrariwise under the buttocks ; the body to be kep^ steady and 
and the njouth raised, and sitting equably : this is called the Gomukh4- 
sana: resembling the mouth of a cow.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 203 ---
LSSSON SBGOm.
15
ttcrc%rsi«n »Tsn§it?:TS3*!Mtft?rq^ii K'S n
9.—THE VIRa SANA.
17. 
One leg (the fight foot) to be placed on the other (left) thigh,: 
and the other foot to be turned backwards: This is called the'lVirasana 
(Hero-posture).
10.—THE DHANURASANA. 
' 
»
18. 
Spreading the legs on the ground, straight like a stick, and 
catching hold of (the toes of) the feet with the hands, and making the 
body bent like a bow, is called by the Yogis the Dhanurasana or Bow^ 
posture.
11. 
—THE MRITa SANA.
19. 
Lying flat on the ground like a corpse is called the Mrit&sana 
(tlie Corpse-posture). 
This posture destroys fatigue, and quiets the agita­
tion of the mind.
S H ra sill. I
3n^*k5?^ qi|r 
qi|T <5r 
i
^ 
s ? 
: u 
tt
12. 
—THE GUPTaSANA.
20. 
Hide the two feet under the two knees, and place the anus bn 
the feet. 
This is known as the Guptasana (Hidden-pdsture).
18.—THE MATSYaSANA.
21. 
Make the PadmAsana-posture (as stated in verse 8) without the 
crossing of the arms ; lie on the back, holding the head by the two elbows. 
This is the Matsyasana (Fish-posture), the destroyer of diseases.
^
 qfew m r^ 
i
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 204 ---
16
THE QUERAEDA SAMEITA.
»T?rT 
^af 
II 5i^ II
14.—THE MATSYENERASANA.
22— 23. 
Keeping the abdominal region at ease like the back, bend­
ing the left leg, place it on the right thigh ; then place on this the elbow 
o f the right hand, and place the face on the palm of the right hand, and 
fix the gaze between the eye-brows. 
This is called the Matsyendra- 
posture.
3ISI 
i
tjTtr 
i
11^ ^ ^
 
q f^ ^ rw rf: II 
II
15.- THE PASCHIMOTTa NA-ASANA.
24. 
Spread the two legs on the ground, stiff like a stick (the heels 
not touching), and place the forehead on the two knees, and catch with 
the hands the toes. 
This is called the Paschimottdna-iisana.
iT«I 
I
!s n ^ k s ^ irtr 
i
^35'lr 'srrssmr f^fwrrg^rsnwit srg ^ t ii 
ii
il 
ii
16. 
—TH^; GORAKSH aSANA.
25— 26. 
Between the knees and the thighs, the two feet turned 
upward and placed in a hidden way, the heels being carefully covered by 
the two hands outstretched ; the throat being contracted, let one fix the 
gaze on the tip of the nose. 
This is called the Groraksh^sana. It gives 
success to the Yogis.
fi«j 
I
ufST«rrngrepHJ 
3 5 ^ 'sr 
1’
5T3ftqft 3 ? 
11 
it
17. 
—THE UTKATa SANA.
27. 
Let the toes touch the ground, and the heels be raised in the 
air ; place the anus on the heels : this is known as the Utka^Ssana.
?n¥?r5? I. %^s[TtiqT^3 , 1 
51133*^ 
u R< II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 205 ---
LUS80N SECOND.
i t
X8.-THH SANKATlSAVA.
28. 
Placing the left foot and the leg on the ground, surround the 
left foot by the right leg; and place the two hands on the two knees. 
This is the Sankattsana.
5 ^ 
^*i5rtr«rflra^ 
n
19. —THE MAYORaSANA.
29— 30. 
Place the palms of the two hands on the ground, place 
the umbilical region on the two elbows, stand upon the hands, the legs 
being raised in the air, and crossed like Padmasana. 
This is called the 
Mayurasana (Peacock-posture''. 
The Peacock-posture destroys the effects 
of unwholesome food ; it produces heat in the stomach ; it destroys the 
effects of deadly poisons ; it easily cures diseases, like Gulma and fever; 
such is this useful posture.
20. -TH E KUKUTaSANA.
31. 
Sitting on the ground, cross the legs in the Padmasana posture, 
thrust down the hands between the thighs and the knees, stand on the 
hands, supporting the body on the elbows. 
This is called the Cock- 
posture.
5 5 ^ 'sr 
\
II 
H
21. 
-TH E KCtRMa SANA.
32. 
Place the heels contrariwise under the scrotum, stiffen (or keep 
at ease) the head, neck and body. 
This is called the Tortoise-posture.
u«i 
I
^
 
ii 
ii
22.-THB XJTTAnA KORMa SANA.
33. 
Assume the Cock-posture (as stated in verse 31), catch hold of 
the neck with the hands, and stand stretched like a tortoise. 
This is 
the Uttana Khrmasana.
8.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 206 ---
18
TUE GREkAEDA S A M E lfA .
5 *sr 
i
3TTW” 5 ^ ^ ^ ^r«i^of«ra5Tq; ii ^ «n
23.—THE MAISJlUKiSANA.
34. 
Carry the feet towards the hack, the toes touching each other, 
and place the knees forwards, ^ ’his is called the Frog-posture.
^ c r w if ^cf ftr?:: i
« 
24.—th e UTTANA MAl!fpTJKA8ANA.
35. 
Assume the Frog-posture (as in verse 34), hold the head by the 
elbows, and stand up like a frog. This is called the UttAna Mandukasana.
l^fraRqC. I
?irR »rrcf 
i
5 n 
I
2 5 .-THE VBIKSHASANA.
36. 
Stand straight on one leg (the left), bending the right leg, and 
placing the right fopt on the root of the left thigh j standing thus like a 
tree on the ground, is called the Tree-posture.
wa 
i
t o 
i
II \ s II
26.—I'HE GARUDa SANA.
37. 
Hace the legs and the thighs on the ground pressing it, steady 
the body with the two knees, place the two hands on the knees : this is 
called the Garuda-posture.
I
?nR23% 
i
ii 
ii
2?.—THE VRISHiSANA.
38. 
Place the anus on the right heel, on the left of it place the left 
leg crossing it opposite way, and touch the ground. 
This is called the 
Bull-posture.
I
qi|i 5sr ^
 ^ (Terfel 
<Sts 
H
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 207 ---
LESSO'N SECOND.
19
28.-THB s'a LABHAsANA.
39. 
Lie on the ground face downwards, the two hands being placed 
on the chest, touching the ground with the palms, raise the legs in the air 
one cubit high. 
This is called the Locust-posture.
ftpsr 
tisR^ra^ 
it «• ii
29. 
—THE MAKARASANA.
40. 
Lie on the ground face downwards, the chest touching the 
earth, the two legs being stretched : catch the head with the two arms. 
This is Makar^sana, the increaser of the bodily heat.
I 
a
it « l ii
30. 
—THE USHTRASANA.
41. 
Lie on the ground face downwards, turn up the legs and place 
them towards the back, catch the legs with the hands, contract forcibly the 
mouth and the abdomen. This is called the Canael-posture.
I
^g^Tw rt 
ti 
M
^
 53Rra5i?n«rgRi; ii 
ii
81.—THE BHHJANGAsANA.
42—43. 
Let the body, from the navel downwards to the foes, touch 
the ground, place the palms on the ground, raise the head.(the upper por­
tion of the body) like a serpent. 
This is called the Serpent-posture. 
This 
always increases the bodily heat, destroys all diseases, and by the practice 
of this posture the serpent-Goddess (the kupdalini force) awakes.
^ 
^ 
I
srrailrqft 
u 8» li
ii 8^ ii
*?% 
AiudMn^iili 
tiro
fl(^^Tq^5n 
i
32.—THE YOGa SANA.
44—45, 
Turn the feet upwards, place them on the knees ; then 
place the ha^nds on the ground with the palms turned upwards ; inspire, 
and fix the gaze on the tip of the nose. 
This is called the i oga-posture, 
assnnied by the Yogis when practising Yoga,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 208 ---
v*^
T h ie d L esso n.
I
—
*^Tg^ ’T^rrgscr 
3T55?«i^H i
Tsirer 
^g^€ir ii ^ «
Rr'i€td'*-D 
i 
^
5nst% 
gs[T !OT»i^ qs^«iRw ii si ii
jncTff'<5 331% ^ I
»ISS3[^% gS[Tftj 
II ^ 1 1
ON MUDRa S.
Ghera^ida said :— 1—3. 
There are twenty-five mudr^s, the practice 
of which gives success to the Yogis. 
They are :—
(1) Mahfi.-mudra, (2) Nabho-mudrli, (3) Uddiyana, (4) Jalandhara, (5) 
Mfilabandha, (6) TMahahandha, (7) MahAvedha, (8) Khechari, (9) Viparita- 
kari, (10) Yoni, (11) Vajropi, (12) iSaktichalani, (13; TadAgi, (14) Mandavi, 
(15) Sambhavi, (16) Panchadhfirana (five dh^ranas), (21) A4virii, (22) 
Paslini, (23) Kaki, (24) M^tangi and (25) Bhujangini.
gjfrcot q»?5^r«r?in i 
gs[i®t 7*5^ 
grsr?rf«r% i
ararr?!^ ii « ii
^#WT5%^ 
ii ^ ii
|b advan tages OE PRAOTISINO MUDRla
4-*-5. 'Sal^^rai^w hen addressing his consort, has recited the 
advantages of 
these words : “ O Pevi ! I have told you all the
Mudras ; their knov^fege leads to adeptship. 
It should be kept secret 
v?ith great care, and should not be taught indiscriminately to every one. 
This gives happiness to the Yogis, and is not to be easily attained by the 
maruts (gods of air) ev^n.”
sm rg^ 
gs?i?*i5rj i 
sRrraf«i 
11^ II
«5TgS[Tftl«lt 
||V9||
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 209 ---
LESSON THIRD.
21
1. -^ mahamudbA.
6—I. 
Pressing carefully the anus by the left lieel, stretch the right 
leg, and take hold of the great toe by the hand ; contract the throat (not 
expelling the breath), and fix the gaze between tlie eye-brows. 
This is 
called Maha-niudra by the wise.
cr«rr i
*r5Fgs[r ^ 
ii <2 u
Its benefits.
-8. 
The practice of MahS,-mudra cures consumption, the obstruction 
of the bowels, the enlargement of the spleen, indigestion and fover-—in fact 
it cures all diseases.
5fefT 1
^^ligsTT 
II 
II
2. 
—NABHO MUDRA.
9. 
In whatever business a Yogi may be engaged, wherever he may 
be, let him always keep his tongue turned upwards (towards the soft pal­
ate), and restrain the breath. This is called Nabho-MudrS, ; it destroys all 
the diseases of the Yogi.
g^?H5f5lKn \
II \o II
3.—uppIyAna-bandha.
10; 
Contract the bowels equably above and below the navel to­
wards the back, so that the abdominal viscera may touch the back. He who 
practises this Uddiy&na (Flying up), without ceasing, conquers death. The 
Great Bird (Breath), by this process, is instantly forced up into the 
Sushumna, and flies (moves) constantly therein only.
g ^ j 
H U i*
Its benefits.
11. 
t)f all Bandhanas, this is the best. 
The complete praptice of 
this makes emancipation easy.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 210 ---
22
THE QREEANDA SAMEITA.
srT^rer?:srreRj«i5iH i
irr^ s^ ^ ^
 ^?5i?«irc5F«r5TH i 
wra«rc»ifrgsrr 
ii Vi 
n
4.-JALANDHARA.
12. 
Contracting the throat, place the chin on the chest. 
This is 
called J&landhara. 
By this Bandha the sixteen Adharas are closed. 
This 
and the Mah^l*mudrfi destroy death.
3TTSf«nc spsf 
I
'sn u T ^ w r^ % ^ 
5fT5r ^ ? T J ti u ii
Its benefits.
13. 
The J^landhara is a success-giving and well-tried Bandha ; he 
who practises it for $ix months, becomes an adept without doubt.
5nf$T5Tff«f 
II ?a ii
g 
I
g$[T ^515% 
ii 
ii
5.—MOLABANDHA.
14. 
—15. 
Press with the heel of the left foot the region between the 
anus and the scrotum, and contract the rectum ; carefully press the intes­
tines near the navel on the spine ; and put the right heel on the organ of 
generation or pubes. 
This is called Mfilabandha, destroyer of decay.
IS B t »j5^r gser&cif 
li 
ii
warrar??iPSR^?n^?i 
l
crif 
g 
li t's ii
Its benefits.
16— 17. 
The person who desires to cross the ocean of Existence, 
let him go to a retired place, and practise in secrecy this MudrA. 
By the 
practice of it, the Vdyu (Pr&na) is controlled’undoubtedly; let one silently 
practise this, without laziness and with care.
gf ggK 
II 
ii
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 211 ---
IBBSOii TBIBD.
23
srwf »ht^
t 
w 
il
6 —MAHAbANDHA.
18 —19. 
Close the anal orifice by the heel of the left foot, press 
that heel with the right foot carefully, move slowly and slowly the 
muscles of the rectum, and slowly contract ihe muscles of the yoni or 
perineum (space between 
anus and organ) : restrain the breath by 
J&landhara. 
This is called Mah4bandha.
qtr 
srmiwiTsasr; i
' 
Its benefits.
20. 
The Mahabandha is the Greatest Bandha; it destroys decay 
and death : by virtue of this Bandha a man accomplishes all his desires,
5Tl€t^!rf 5 ^ 
I
f^5|T cTOT II R t II
F5F«r 
grfTSTf«T^ 
I
ggT%«n.T5WTW%T 
H Vi. n
7.—MAHAVEDHA.
21— 22.’ As the beauty, youth and charms of women are in vain 
without men, so are Mfilabandha and Mahabandha without MahAvedha, 
Sit first in Mah&bandha posture, then restrain breath by UddSna Kum- 
bhaka. 
This is called Mahavedha— the giver of success to the Yogis.
^ ^
 
n 
n
*r 
g sRr 
i
n v i u
Its benefits.
23—24. 
The Yogi who daily practises Mahabandha and Mulaban* 
dha, accompanied with Mahavedha, is the best of the Yogis. 
For him 
there is no fear of death, and decay does not approach him : this Vedha 
should be kept carefully secret by the Yogis.
“STts^g 5r?rt i
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 212 ---
u
G H E B A ^ ^ b A S A M B lt A .
8.—KHECHARI MUDRa .
25. 
Cut down the lower tendon of the tongue, frenulum linguae) 
and move the tongue constantly ; rub it with fresh butter, and draw it out 
1 to lengthen it) with an iron instrument.
This is the preliminary to Khechari Mudrft. Its object is so to lengthen the 
tongue, that when drawn out it may touch with its tip the space between the eye-brows. 
This can be done by cutting away the lower tendon. It takes about three years to cut 
away the whole tendon. I saw my Guru doing it in this wise. On every Monday he used 
to cut the tendon one-twelfth of an inch deep and sprinkle salt over it, so that the cut 
portions might not join together. Then rubbing the tongue with butter he used to pull it 
out. Peculiar iron instruments are employed for this purpose ; the painful process is 
repeated every week till the tongue can be stretched out to the requisite length.
26. 
By practising this always, the tongue becomes long, and when 
it reaches the space between the two eyebrows, then the Khechari is 
accomplished.
u?n 
ii Rvs ii
27. 
Then (the tongue being lengthened) practise, turning it upwards 
and backwards so as to touch the palate, till at length it reaches the holes 
of the nostrils opening into the mouth. 
Close those holes with the tongue 
(thus stopping inspiration), and fix the gaze on the space between the two 
eyebrows. 
This is called Khechari.
^ ^ 
^
 ^aiT 
1
^ tfJlT 5RF 
^ 
II 
II
Its benefits.
28. 
By this practice there is neither fainting, nor hunger, nor 
thirst, nor laziness. 
There comes neither disease, laor decay, nor death. 
The body becomes divine.
553rf«{ ii 
ii
29. 
The body cannot be burned by fire, nor dried up by the air, 
nor wetted by water, nOr bitten by snakes.
ii 
ii ,
30. 
The body becomes beautiful; Samadhi is verily attained, and 
the tongue touching the holes obtains various juices (it drinks nectar.)
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 213 ---
im S O N THIRD:
25
?n|r 
^?rfl5RR««rr?i^*l II \ \ ii
5i^^5T fc f MW ^
 
*sr 1
JO^^^ETs^ ^ « r 5rr?r% 
m 
il
31—32. 
Various juices being produced, day by day the 
man 
experiences new sensations; first, he experiences a saltish taste, then 
alkaline, then bitter, then astringent, then he feels the taste of butter, tlien 
of ghee, then of milk, then of curd, then of whey, then of honey, then of 
palm juice, and, lastly, arises the taste of nectar.
>5r 
i
5i?r^ 
«w:: ii 
n
« i i ii 
i
{^q€lgTfi€t Hgrr ii 
ii
9.—VIPARiTAKARAiyi.
33—35. 
The sun (the solar Nadi or plexus) dwells at the root of the 
navel, and the moon at the root of the palate; the process by which the sun is 
brought upward and the moon carried downward is called Viparitakarani. 
It is a secret MudrS in all the Tantras. 
Place the head on the ground, 
with hands spread, raise the legs up, and thus remain steady. 
Phis is 
called Viparitakarani.
gs[f ^ 
i
5T 
ii 
ii
Its benefits.
36. 
By the constant practice of this MudrS, decay and death are 
destroyed. 
He becomes an adept, and does not perish even at Pralaya.
i^<rir^«TRTwi^Rm 
ii^vs ii
<RT%Tfir? sttM 
i
t 
II V
^ 5 rr ?iTgsr%^ i
?fi?«n<aT WWfit II 
II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 214 ---
26
TEB OHEEANDA SAUBITa .
W «® 0
u ra *^ « m # T »i5 ^ 
M 
^ i\ n
^Ptgs[T »TO J^r:?iT ^?IR t*lftr 5 S W i
?TJni^5 ^ <?5r % u 
ii
10*~YONIMUDRl.
37— 42. 
Sitting in Siddhgsana, close the two ears with the two 
thumbs, the eyes with the index fingers, the nostrils with the middle 
fingers, the upper lip with the fore fingers, and the lower lip with the 
little fingers. 
Draw in the Prfina-Vayu by Kfiki-mudrfi, (as in verse 86) 
and join it with the Apfina-V^yu ; contemplating the six chakras in their 
order, let the wise one awaken the sleeping serpent-Goddess Kundalini, 
by repeating the mantra Hun ( l ), and Hansa ( ^ 0 , and raising the Sakti 
(Force-kupdali) with the jiva, place them at the thousand-petalled lotus. 
Being himself full of Sakti, being joined with the great Siva, let him 
think of the various pleasures and enjoyments. 
Let him contemplate on 
the union of Siva (spirit) and Sakti (Force or energy) in this world. 
Being 
himself all bliss, let him realise that he is the Brahma. 
This Yoni-mudr§ 
is a great secret, difficult to be obtained even by the Devas. 
By once 
obtaining perfection in its practice, one enters verily into Samadhi.
5t!#rg$[TSl5|?SRTg( II 
II .
«3r i
f 
U « » H
Its benefits.
43— 44. 
By the practice of this MudrS, one is never polluted by 
the sins of killing a Brahmana, killing a foetus, drinking liquor, or 
polluting the bed of the Preceptor, 
AH the mortal sins and the venal 
sins are completely destroyed by the practice of this Mudri. 
Let him 
therefore practise it, if he wishes for emancipation,
95rNhgs[f g ^ r 
ii 
»
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 215 ---
LESSON THIRD.
27
n.-VAJR0]5ri mudRA.
45. 
Place the two palms oa the groatid, raise the legs -in the air 
upward, the head not touching the earth. 
This awakens the Sakti, causes^ 
long life, and is called Vajroni by the sages.
iiq %?rsr^ 
ii h\ ii
^ ^ 
14 «« II
irr^tsf 
gs?t 
i
cT«jff^r 
ii H i ii
Its benefits.
46—48.' This practice is the highest of Yogas; it causes emancipa­
tion, and this beneficial Yoga gives perfection to the Yogis. 
By virtue 
of this Yoga, the Bindu-Siddhi (retention of seed) is obtained, and when 
that Siddhi is obtained what else can he not attain in this world. 
Though 
immersed in manifold pleasures, if he practises this MudrA, he attains 
verily all perfections.
5i^?rr 
n
12.—SAKTI OHALANI.
49. 
The great goddess Kundalini, the energy of Self, &tma-4akti 
(spiritual force), sleeps in the MflladhSra ^rectum); she has the form of a 
serpent having three coils and a half.
?rr5i ^ 
ii 
\\
50. 
So long as she is asleep in the body, the Jiva is a mere animal, 
and true knowledge does not arise, though he may practise ten millions of 
Yoga.
^
 f 
I
HB5K 
II 
ii
51. 
As by a key a door is opened, so by awakening the Kun4alinl 
by Hatha Yoga, the door of Brahma is unlocked.
snfti 
^
 w 5T ^ ainli 
t
) 
II 
II
52. 
Encircling the loins with a piece of cloth, seated in a secret 
room, not naked in an outer room, let him practise the SaktichAlana,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 216 ---
28
TEE QBERAEDA SAMRITA,
54— 56.
%T5T^ II 
II
53. 
One cubit long, and four fingers (3 inches) wide, should be the 
encircling cloth, soft, white and of fine texture. 
Join this cloth with the 
Kati-Sutra (a string worn round the loins.)
*n3i 
i
II 
II
?jras(^^ 
ii 
n
Rub the body with ashes, sit 
in 
Siddhasana-posture, 
drawing the Prfina-V4yu with the nostrils, forcibly join it with the Apana. 
Contract the rectum slowly by the Ai^vini Mudra, so long as the Vayu 
does not enter the Sushumnfi, and manifests its presence.
cT^r 
ffwFi«Rr 
531% ^ i 
t
^ u in srq?i^ ii 
H
56. 
By restraining the breath by Kumbhaka in this way, the 
Serpent Kundalini, feeling suffocated awakes and rises upwards to the 
Brahmarandhra.
i%s!r 
I
H '^'9 n
57. 
Without the^Saktichalana, the Yoni-Mfidr4 is not complete or 
perfected ; first the Oh&lana should be practised, and then the Yoni-Mudr& 
should be learnt.
itrq^q qq#5T ^
 
li 
ii
58. 
0 Ohanda-Kap4li ! thus have I taught thee the Saktichfilana. 
Preserve it with care : and practise it daily.
5i%gT3^gscniT5 
i
g ^ q qtur 
itiosrr 
i
q;T^ 
ii 
a
Its benefits.
59. 
This mudrS should be kept carefully concealed. 
It destroys
decay and death. 
Therefore the Yogf, desirous of perfection, should 
practise it. 
‘
^
 
M r 
^
 ferat i
?req 
^qfsctnnnt 
a 
«
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 217 ---
LESSOR THIRD.
29
60. 
The Yogi who practises this daily, acquires adeptship, attains 
Vigraha-siddhi and all his diseases are cured,
■gr c R r im ^ i
<i’CTgs[r 
ii 
ii
13. 
—TADa (jH-M0DRA.
61. 
Sitting in Paschimottana-posture, make the stomach like a tank 
(hollow). -This is Tad^gi (Tank) MudrS, destroyer of decay and death.
5n=BPiffff g^«Bt 
11 
h 
"
14. 
—m an d u k i-m u d ra.
62. 
Closing the mouth, move the tip of the tongue towards the 
palate, and taste slowly the nectar (flowing from the Thousand-petalled 
Lotus.) 
This is Frog-mudra.
H 
II 
II
Its benefits.
63. 
Tho body never sickens or becomes old, and it retains perpetual 
youth ; the hair of him wlio practises this never grows white.
sgrui^m 
^ i d ^ s 1
^ 
gi[T ?S#5J5#3 i^lftcTT U 
H
16.—sAmbhavI-mudrA.
64. 
Fixing the gaze between the two eye-brows, behold the Self- 
existent. 
This is iSambhavi, secret in all the Tantras.
u «i ^nwr^tf^rar: 
i
ym T R m fim 
1
W g tOTwi^ gi[T 5 ^ 
n 
ii
Its benefits.
65. 
The Vedas, the scriptures, the PurAnas are like public women, 
but this SSmbhavi should be guarded as if it were a lady of a respectable 
family.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 218 ---
30
THE QHBRAEDA S AMBIT A.
66. 
He, who hnows this iSambhavi, is like the Adinatha, he is a 
N^r^yana, he is BrahmS the Creator.
^
 
I
^ 
53 =sr Rsr if 
k 
h
•s
67. 
Maheniwara has said, “ Truly, truly, and again truly, he who 
knows the Sambhavi, is Brahma. 
There is no doubt of this.”
«r«r qsiemiTfnrgscnFyrifu i
3sg«iT?^iT i
«iKfD T^ ^ fU R iR i 
t 
n
THE EIVB DHa RMA-MUDRaS.
68. 
The ^imbhavi has been explained ; hear now the five Dhfi.ran8,s. 
Learning these five Dh^ran&s, what cannot be accomplished in this world ?
ii^Tif 
^
3 iW ifFm n I
3 5rFfT«jr ii 
ii
69. 
By this, with the human body one can visit and revisit 
Svarga-loka, he can go wherever he likes, as swiftly as mind, he acquires 
the faculty of walking in the sky. 
These five Dharan^s are :—Pdrthivi 
(earthy), Ambhasi (Watery), Vgyavi (aerial), Agneyi (Fiery), and Akdsl 
(Ethereal).
w n qrW NrRurrgs^rv^RH i 
5$iFRTfN^
^l%5f 
^
 
I
jinsr asr
isr^ 
f 
ii <9« n
(a).-PARTHIVi.
70. 
The Pfithivl-Tattvahas the colour of orpiment (yellow), the letter 
(la)Sr is ^ s s ^ e t symbol or seed (^^), its form is four-sided, and BrahmS, 
its presidingCeity. 
Place this Tatva in the heart, and fix by Kumbhaki 
the Prfi.na-V^ii8 and the Chitta there for the period of five ghatik4s(25- 
hours). 
This is called Adhodh4rana. 
By this, one conquers the Earth, 
and no earthy-elements can injure him : and it causes steadiness.
w 3f^€tw!i5rg!rraTJ 
i
qt^^rarfsirrg^f m 
g- 
i 
fic3 ^
 
53 
f^R^f 5 % ii 
n
Its benefits.
71. 
He who practises this dhdranfi, becomes like the conqueror of 
'Peath; as an Adept he walfcs over this earth,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 219 ---
tn sso n T B im .
31
f 
^55R5* g *f
cR«ft^5r«Knc5&3ra^ f?R ^
 
i
siTO cTsr 
<is!;^fac«Ef^a^rf^
(b).—AmbhasI.
72. 
The Water-Tattva is white like the Kunda-flower or a conch or 
the moon, its form is circular like the moon, the letter q (va) is the seed of 
this ambrosial element, and Vishnu is its presiding deity. 
By Yo^a, 
produce the water-tattva in the heart, and fix there the PrSna with the 
Chitta (consciousness), for five ghatikSs, practising Kumbhaba. 
This is 
Watery Dh&ranfi; it is the destroyer of all sorrows. 
Water cannot injure 
him who practises this.
firwreif ’Riir 
i
qr 
H 
n
5 'TOirgsa ^ n i^ T 
i
qr cTt^ : ii o» ii
Its benefits.
73. 
— 74. 
The Ambhasi is a great mudrS.; the Yogi who knows it, 
never meets death even in the deepest water. 
This should be kept care­
fully concealed. 
By revealing it success is lost, verily I tell you the truth.
nra 951 
qsssrafewfeRrrfsq?? «ir ^*
l>srR€7 
ii ^
«
(c).—AQSTBYi.
75. 
The Fire-Tattva is situated at the nav^, its cofifor is red like 
the Indra-g8p insect, its foi-m is triangular, its seed is (ra» ’T>) its presidiog 
deity is Rudra. 
It is refulgent like the sun, and the giver of success. 
Fix the Prana along with the Chitta in this Tattva for five ghatikfi.s. This 
is called Fire-Dhiranfi, destroyer of the fear of dreadful death,, ^ d fire 
cannot injure him, ,
s r ^ 
tJ5i% 
(
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 220 ---
32
TEE G E E B A m A SAMElTA.
Its benefits.
76. 
If the practitioner is thrown into burning fire, by virtue of 
this Mudri he remains alive, without fear of death.
^
 
qsKT?:^i5cr* 
t^cfT I
Jintf 5ni flr^'hr 
«rn^-
qlJnit 
«n??nT li vsvs ii
(d).-VAYAVi.
77. 
The Air-tattva is black as unguent for the eyes (collirium), the 
letter q (ya) is its seed, and Isvara its presiding deity. 
This Tattva is full 
of Satva quality. 
Fix the Prana and the Chitta for five ghatikfts in this 
Tattva. This is Vd.yavi-Dhfi.rana. By this, the practitioner walks in the air.
qf^str 
II ^ II
la sw ?Fr%^!iTq q 
i
^
 
^Icq* 
qr qjq? % II «MI
Its benefits.
78— 79. 
This great Mudrfi destroys decay and death. 
Its practi­
tioner is never killed by any aerial disturbances ; by its virtue one walks 
in the air. 
This should not be taught to the wicked or to those devoid of 
faith. 
By so doing success is lost; 
Oh Chanda ! this is verily the truth.
HI® 5i5r
|| <o ||
(e).-AKASi DHABANA.
80. 
The Ether-Tattva has the colour of pure sea-water, ? ^ha) is its 
seed, its presidiDg deity is Sadfii^iva. 
Fix the Prajua along with Chitta for 
five ghatikfis in this Tattva. 
This is Ether-Dhfi.rap§. 
It opens the gates 
of emancipation.
w
 ®r®nSr«m®ig8[THn 
i
®T®T?SmR®f gsff ^ 
! i m ^ I
H 
^
 H ^ 
M 
II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 221 ---
LESSON THIRD.
3S
Its benefits.
81. 
He who knows this DhSfanS is the real Yogi. 
Death does not 
approach him, nor does he perish at the Pralaya.
jK sn c sr«ET5t^?^5?«? 3 *1:1
^iT 
gs[T 5 ito % i«i«T fN it u <2^ u
21.—a s v in i-m u d rA.
82. 
Contract and dilate the anal aperture again and again, this is 
called Ailvini-mudrS. 
It awakens the 8lakti (Kundalini).
gs[T 
1
u <% II
Its benefits.
83. 
This Aiivini is a great Mudr4 ; it destroys all diseases of the 
rectum ; it gives strength aiid vigour, and prevents premature death.
gs[T 
H <s« n
22.-pisINi-M UDRl.
84. 
Throw the two legs on the neck towards the back, holding 
them strongly together like a P4i^a (a noose). 
This is called P&!^ini-mudrfi ; 
it awakens the Sakti (Kundalini.)
*15^ gs[T 
1
Siqr^JT 
|| <£<^ II
Its benefits.
85. 
This grand Mudr4 gives strength and nourishment. 
It should 
be practised with care by those who desire success.
23.—KAKi-MUDRl.
86. 
Contract the lips, like the beak of a crow, and drink (draw in) 
the air slowly and slowly. 
This is K^ki (crow) mudrS, destroyer of all 
diseases.
.5
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 222 ---
u
THE GHERANDA SAMHITA.
«wStgs[T «Rf g?i 53^^ ^tiftrerr 1
5R^n 
H 
^<Ksri: 
^'3 II
Its benefits.
87. 
The KSki MudrS is a great MudrA, kept secret ia all Tantras. 
By virtue of this, oue becomes free from disease like a crow.
!frra%^tgs[Tfi«j5TH 1 
31^ ftifgrr 5fr5iT*?if 
1
gwftnTO^q$ng[.5 R^m <5115^^11 
11
sirenwrt 
55?; jj?: i
w ?r% ^ TO gs[T 
11 <c% 11
24.—m Atangini-m u d r a.
88—89. 
Stand in neck-deep water, draw in the water through the 
nostrils, and throw it out by the mouth. 
Then draw in the water through 
[the mouth and expel it through] the nostrils. 
Let one repeat this again 
and again. 
This is called Elephant-mudrA, 
destroyer of decay and 
death.
nraf|[€tg![rzTr$ 
1
lift# 
^
 
#«m OTTO: I
g?[f w<T|f 
3rf?r^ 11 11
?|5I 
I
t o u 11 
«
Its benefits-
"90— 91. 
In a solitary place, free from human intrusion, one should 
practise with fixed attention this 
Elephant mudrfi: by so doing, he 
becomes strong like Elephant. 
Wherever he may be, by this process 
the Yogi enjoys great pleasure ; therefore this inudrA should be practised 
with great care.
gsr%%s[r««r*ig, 1
»T^?rr 
1
m 
gsTJfr 
ii 
ii
25.-BHGJANGINi-MUDRi.
92. 
Extending the neck a little forward, let him drink (draw in) 
air through the aesophagus; this ia called Serpent-mndrA, destroyer of 
decay and death*
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 223 ---
LESSON LHIRE.
SS
^HT 
I
5r?^5aC 
?ra gs[T 
ii 
u
Its benefits.
93. 
This Serpeat-mudrS. quickly 
destroys all stomach diseases, 
especially indigestion, dyspepsia, &c.
^
 gs[n!it 
I
3 gs[i<iz^ 
^ 
1
II <,« II
THE BENEFITS OF MUDBAs.
94. 
0 Chanda-Kapali! thus have I recited to thee the chapter on 
Mudrte. 
This is beloved of all adepts, and destroys decay an<J death.
5r5T«I 
^ ^
 
I
*tnr^?r' srqr^?i 
ii 
li
95. 
This should not be taught indiscriminately, nor to a wicked 
person, nor to one devoid of faith ; this should be preserved secret with 
great care ; it is difficult to be attained even by the Devas.
aesr# 5 rrfrr^?i 
^ i
f 
Si^raai* ^ngFTRsr^TW i » 
H
96. 
These Mudrsls which give happiness and emancipation should 
be taught to a guileless, calm and peace-minded person, who is devoted 
to his Teacher and comes of good family.
gserart 
if cf^ 
i
II 
It
97. 
These Mudras destroy all diseases. 
They increase the gastric 
fire of him who practises them daily.
’ 
5T 
3rni% 
5t«it i
5iT%3R5w ^
 
ii
98. 
To him death never comes, nor decay, & c.; there is no fear to 
him from fire and water, nor from air. 
, 
t
«T?r: 
i
gscwit 
^ 
ii 
h
99. 
Cough, asthma, enlargement of spleen, leprosy, being diseases 
of twenty sorti, are verily destroyed by the practice of these Mudrds.
5I55IT 
?r 
^ i
gs[T^rii 
II ^0® II
^rmsrsi^ g^a^fitr sira 
i
100. 
t) Chanda! What more shall I tell three ? In short, there is , 
nothing in this world like the Mudras for giving quick success.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 224 ---
F o u r t h L e s s o n .
I
um ?n #nra«?iT8i 
i
l^ra rw H t^ ^«T^ftSJfT5r*w ^ ii i u
pratyI hAea, or restraining the mind.
G hebanda said :-^ i. 
Now I shall tell thee, Praty&hfira-Yoga the best. 
By its knowledge, all the passions like lUst, &c., are destroyed.
ii 
n
2. 
Let one bring the Ghitta ''thinking principle; under his control 
by withdrawing it, whenever it wanders away drawn by the various 
objects of sight.
3. 
Praise or censure ; good speech or bad speech ; let one withdraw 
his mind from all these and bring the Chitta under the control of the 
Self.
an^i^ 3rr?i% w t i
cRARI 
II « U
4. 
From sweet smells or bad smells, by whatever odour the mind 
may be distracted or attracted, let one withdravr the mind from that, 
and bring the thinking principle under the control of his Self.
m ' 
hh: i
En?r 
n « m 
sizw -
^
 ggn^it g^T^r 5TTH 
»
5. 
From sweet or acid tastes, from bitter or astringent tastes, by 
whatever taste the mind may be attracted, let one witbdravr it from that, 
and bring it within the control of his Self.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 225 ---
F ifth jLiESSoisf.
w m i 
srnirrarn^^i 
i
?W?I 
II U l
PBAeriYAMA, OR RESTRAINT OF BREATH.
Gheranda said :— 1. 
Now I shall tell thee the rales of Pr&n^yama 
or regulation of breath. 
By its practice a man becomes like a god.
?HT^«i5r?r«n «in^ 
5 rm «i^ i 
*
cRTt qssTcr^ siHurawf ^ 
ii ^ ii
2. 
Four things are necessary in practising Prandydma. 
First, a 
good place ; second, a suitable tim e; third, moderate food; and, lastly, the 
purifications of the nadis, (vessels of the body, i.e., alimentary canal, &c.)
I
5 5 ^ 
Wir^lIRlt 5RTf«?t% I
5i f ^ r f 
ii ^ ii
Place.
3. 
The practice of Yoga should not be attempted in a far off country 
(from home), nor in a forest, nor in a capital city, nor in the midst of a 
crowd. 
If one does so, he loses success.
II « li
4. 
In a distant country, one loses faith (because of the Yoga not 
being known there); in a forest, one is without protection; and in the 
midst of a thick population, there is danger of exposure (for then the 
curious will trouble him). 
Therefore, let one avoid these three.
o l d 
I
a t * f f r c 
ii 
ii
5. 
In a good country whose king is just, where food is easily and 
abundantly procurable, where there are no disturbances, let one erect 
there a small hut, around it let him raise walls.
511^ 
^ 
II ^ ||
6. 
And in the centre of the enclosure, let him sink a well and dig 
a tank. Let^the hut be neither very high nor very low : let it be free from 
inaects.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 226 ---
TEM QEEnAT<jT)A SAUElfA.
H8fwr?>33^3sinDrai»f 
ii « ii
7. 
It should he conapletelyj plastered over with cow-dung. 
In a 
hut thus built and situated in such a hidden place, let him practise
s fl^ 
«ar s i ^ 5T«ir i
5T 
^ ^ l*T ^ II
Tvme.
8. 
The practice of Yoga should not be commenced in thesef our 
seasons out Qf six ;—hemanta (winter), dirfira Ccoldj, grishma (liot), varsha 
(rainy). 
If one begins in these seasons, one will contract diseases.
» 
erat^ffir 
^i»n?gg5t 
ii ^ ii
9. 
The practice of Yoga should be commenced by a beginner in 
spring (vasanta); and autumn (iiarat). 
By so doing, he attains success; 
and verily he does not become liable to diseases.
e imrii|<CT5g5n^% f 
in i ( 
5«E5Wf% 
ii ?® n
10. 
The six seasons occur in their order in the twelve months 
begiUning with Chaitra and ending with PhSlguna: two months being 
occupied by each season, 
^ut each season is experienced for four months, 
beginning with Magha and ending with Ph&lguna.
'6r2t»if?rt 
ii u «
S ix S e a so n s.
11. • The six seasons are as follows
S eason . 
M on th s (S an sh rit).
Vasanta or Spring 
GriahiUa or Summer 
Varsha or Rainy 
Sarat or Autumn 
Hemantaor Winter 
i^sira or Cold
Chaitra and Vaisfikha 
Jeshtha and As&dha 
Sriivana and BhSdra 
Asvina and E$rtika 
Agrahdyapa and Pausha 
Magha and Phfilguna
English.
March, April. 
May, June.
July, August. 
Sept., Oct.
Nov., Dec.
January, Pebr nary.
tigw m swqrftr siegjrt ^
Hrfs ii
II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 227 ---
LESSON FIFTH.
'3 9
in m ri^ ^ ^ ^ 5it?cr* s r r f^ fl# 1^
 h 
it 
wseri^m n#^5cf 
i
m m ^ 
11 
ti
The experiencing of seasons.
12— 14. 
Now I shail tell thee the experiencing of seasons. 
They 
are as follows :—
Beginning from.
Endilt 1 i fh.
Season.
English,
MSgha
Vaisdkha
Van^dnubhava
January to April.
Cliaitra
AsSdha
GrishmSnubbava .i.
March to June.
As&dba
Asvina
YarshdUubhava
June to September.
Bhfidra
Agrahfiyaua ...
Saraddnubbava
August to Nov.
Edrtiaa
M Sgha
Hemanfitanubbava...
Oct. to Jan.
Agrahfiyana ...
Phdlguna
Sisirdnubbava
Nov. to Peb.
ir 
II
15. 
The practice of Yoga should be commenced either in Vasanta 
(springl or Sarat (autumn). 
For in these seasons success is attained with­
out much trouble.
^ f n c t I
- 
l ^ r ?reg ^tvm va' 5 
1
5 f H i ^ 
^ 
ii K% 11
3.—Moderation of diet.
16. 
He who practises Yoga without moderation of diet, incurs 
various diseases, and obtains no success.
iOTCTM' 
^ 
?rar l
17. 
A Yogi should eat rice, barley thread), or wheaten bread. 
He 
may eat Mudga beans jpi (Phaseolus 
Mungo), Masha beans (Phaseolus
v9
Radiatus), gram, &c. 
These should be clean, white and free from chaff.
*W5T 
^ 
1
«r€ s ¥ 
fTSi6r‘ «r9s «p »s ^
 ii 
«
^iw cw rt W 5RJFW 
'gr 
1
W h » f 
II 
II
18—19.^ A Yogi may eat patola (a kind of cucumber, g ^ ) , jack- 
{ruit, mSnakachn (Arum Colocasia), kakkol^ (a kind of berry), the jujube,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 228 ---
4a
TEE QHEBAEDA SAMRITA.
the bonduc mit (Bonducella guilandina), cucumber, plantain, fig ; the 
unripe plantain, the small plantain, the plantain stem, and roots, brinjal, 
and medicinal roots and fruits ie.g.y riddhi, &c.)
ii 
h
20. 
He may eat green, fresh vegetables enwisp, black vegetables 
the leaves of patola, the Vistfiku-s^&ka, and hima-lochikfi S^ka.
These are the five i^4kas (vegetable leaves) praised as fit food for Yogis.
sftsrr 
li W i(
21. 
Pure, sweet and cooling food should be eaten to fill half the 
stomach ; eating thus sweet juices with pleasure, and leaving the other 
half of the stomach empty is called moderation in diet.
freT 5T 
g 
i
u rr il
22. 
Half the stomach should be filled with food, one quarter with 
water: and one quarter should be kept empty for practising prfin&ySma.
5rr^iFKf 5naff jrt 
^ 
?rqT u 
ii
Prohibited foods.
23. 
In the beginning of Yoga-practice one should discard bitter, 
acid, salt, pungent and roasted things, curd, whey, heavy vegetables, wine, 
palmnuts, and over-ripe jack-fruit.
f ^
 
I
“sr 
u rm ii
24. 
So also hulattha and masur beans, pandu fruit, pumpkins and 
vegetable stems, gourds, berries, katha-bel, (feronia elephantum), kanta- 
bilva and palasla (Butea frondosa).
I
25. 
So also Kadamba (Nauclea cadamba), jambira (citron), bimba, 
lukucha (,a kind of bread fruit tree). Onions, lotus, KAmaranga, piySla 
(Buchan&nia latifolia), hinga (assafoetida), (iSlmali, kemuka.
f a ^
 
#^ ran ii R% II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 229 ---
im S O N FIFTH.
41
26—27. 
A beginner should avoid 
much 
travelling, company 
of women, and warming himself by fire. 
So also he should avoid fresh 
butter, ghee, thickened milk, sugar, and date-sugar, &c., as well as ripe 
plantain, cocoa-nut, pomegranate, dates, lavani fruit, Smlaki (myrobalans), 
and everything containing acid juices.
'sr
^ 
ii 
u
28. 
But cardamom, jaiphal, cloves, aphrodisiacs or stimulants, the 
ros^apple, haritaki, and palm dates, a Yogi may eat while practising 
Yoga.
«n§spfNiDH i
^TSRHT'5^ II 5^^ n
29. 
Easily digestible, agreeable and cooling foods which nourish 
the humours of the body, a Yogi may eat according to his desire.
?r«iT l
II si® II
30. 
But a Yogi should avoid hard (not easily digestible), sinful 
food, or putrid food, or very hot, or very stale food, as well as very cooling 
or very much exciting food.
. 
?r«ii i
It Prti^it ?irap^ <5151 ^ it ^ II 
II
31. 
He should avoid early (morning before sunrise) baths, fasting, 
&c., or anything giving pain to the body ; so also is prohibited to him 
eating only once a day, or not eating at all. 
But he may remain without 
food for 3 hours.
f^M ^i5i5T $mnnn# 
i
iiitJJr siq^ 
ftcimtsjJig. I
II 
II
32. 
Regulating his life in this way, let him practise PrS.nay8ma. 
In the beginning before commencing it, he should take a little milk and 
ghee daily, and take his food twice daily, once at noon, and once in the 
evening.
I
a n m ^ ^ 
i
^
i ^
 
sns^g^ 
i
u 
n
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 230 ---
42
TRB GBEUARhA SAUEITA.
4.—PURIFICATION OF NADIS,
S3. 
He should sit on a seat of Kus^a-grass, or an antelope skin, 
or tiger skin or a blaidket, or on earth, calmly and quietly, facing east or 
north. 
Having purified the n4dis, let him begin Prdnaydma.
. 
it 
ii
Chandak&pali said:—^34. 0 ocean of mercy ! How are ntldis purified, 
what is the purification of nfidis; I want to learn all this ; rm te this to 
me.
amnraw: ^
 
«K%f
stnDT^rrsf 
it 
u
Gherapda said :— 35. 
The V4yu does not (cannot) enter the nSdis so 
long as they are full of impurities (e.g., feces, &c.). 
How then can Prana- 
yfima be accomplished ? 
How can there be knowledge of Tattvas ? 
Therefore, first the N4dis should be purified, and then PrdnaySma should 
be practised.
ii 
il
36. 
The purification of nadis is of two sorts 
Samanu and Nir* 
manu. 
The Samanu is done by a mental process with B!ja-mantra. 
The 
Nirmanu is performed by physical cleanings.
5CT 
?r«if I
*305 
n ^vs ii
37. 
The physical cleanings or Dhautis 'have already been taught. 
They consist of the six Sidhanas. 
Now, 0 Chanda, listen to the Samanu 
process of purifying the vessels.
38. 
Sitting in the Padmfisaua posture, and performing the ado­
ration of the Guru, &c., as taught by the Teacher, let him perform purifi­
cation of N&dis for success in Pra^ayfima.
«nc8rr 
i
^ 8 [T 2 * #51* 
u ^ M i
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 231 ---
LESSON FIFTH.
43
HTsrsrr ^ f 
«rr^?^ i
5ffe*5Pin3r?jT 
^ 
M a© «
39—40. 
Contemplating on Vayu-Bija(i.e., ^), full of energy and of 
a smoke-colour, let him draw in breath by the left nostril, repeating the 
Btja sixteen times. 
This is Phraka. 
Let him restrain the breath for a 
period of sixty-four repetitions of the Mantra. 
This is Kumbhaka. 
Then 
let him expel the air by the right nostril slowly during a period occupied 
by repeating the Mantra thirty-two times.
w t Hnrr *er <35^
 w 
11 
w5r?iT ^ 
i
srfsr'^FinniT 
^ 
11 
11
41—42. 
The root of the navel is the seat of Agni-Tattva. 
Raising 
the fire from that place, join the Prithivi-Tattva with it f then contemplate 
on this mixed light. 
Then repeating sixteen times the Agni-Bija (i), let 
hiin draw in breath by the right nostril, and retain it for the period of 
sixty-four repetitions of the Mantras, and then expel it by the left nostril- 
for a period of thirty-two repetitions of the Mantra.
5 
II 
ii
jnsr^iT 
^ 
l
5n€t%T3r* 
1
wTsa 
II aa 11
43— 44. 
Then fixing the gaze on the tip of the nose and contem­
plating the luminous reflection of the moon there, let him inhale through 
the left nostril, repeating the Bija tham (3) sixteen times ; let him retain 
it by repeating the Bija (5) sixty-four times; in the meanwhile imagine 
(or contemplate) that the nectar flowing from the moon at the tip of 
the nose runs through all the vessels of the body, and purifies them. 
Thus contemplating, let him expel the air by repeating thirty-two times 
the Prithivi Bija lam (^f).
5rrStg;^’ 
i
? lr 
!iniiT?n»T 
ii a'^ n
45.—By these three Pranay^mas the nl,dis are purified. 
Then 
sitting firmly in a posture, let him begin regular Prin4yfi.ma.
’ 
?Sr?r# ct«it i
^
 
n a^ n
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 232 ---
u
THE GHEEANDA BAMEITA.
KINDS OP KUMBHAKA.
«
46. 
The Kumbhahas or retentions of breath are of eight sorts; 
Sahita, Sflrya-bheda, Ujj4yi, Sltali, Bhastrikd, >Bhr4mari, MhrchhS and 
Kevall.
^t»raf ^\FSRf^% n avs ii
1,-SAHlTA.
47. 
The Sahita Kumbhaka is of two sorts :— Sagarbha and Nirgar- 
bha. 
The Kumbhaka performed by the repetition of Blja Mantra is 
Sagarbha ; that done withont such repetition is Nirgarbha.
smamra 
^ si«w 
^ i
sir^5#i 
i
«
n
i
r
a
<
i
 n
48. 
First I shall tell thee the Sagarbha Prandyfima. 
Sitting in 
Sukhdsana posture, facing east or north, let him contemplate on BrahM 
full of Rajas quality of a blood-red colour, in the form of the letter
l?^r9(Tg* 
i
49. 
Let the wise practitioner inhale by the left nostril, repeating # 
sixteen times. 
Then before he begins retention (but at the end of in­
halation), let him perform UddiyAnabandha.
iWf* 
I
'arg:«re?5n 
m m 
ii 
ii
50. 
Then let him retain breath by repeating 5 sixty-four times, 
contemplating on Hari, of a black colour and of Satva quality.
ismmT 
I 
.
8[Tfif?frmT5raT ^
 
gilt H H i II
51. 
Then let him exhale the breath through the right nostril by re­
peating man (w) thirty-two times, contemplating Siva of a white colour 
and of Tamas quality.
S5t: 
i
l^m 
g II HR II
52. 
Then again inhale thibugh Pingalfi. (right nostril), retain by 
Kumbhaka, and exhale by IdS (left), in the method taught above, chang­
ing the nostrils alternately.
mcmc ^ 
I
fwifiRT* 
i
fiRT IIH^ II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 233 ---
i s s s o N F iF fa .
45
53. 
Let him practise, thus alternating the nostrils again and again. 
When inhalation is conapleted, close both no$trils, the right one by the 
thumb and the left one by the ring-finger and little-finger, never using 
the index and middle-fingers. 
The nostrils to be closed so long as 
Kumbhaka is.
sTFirnn^ 
i
f?r’ 
ii 
ii
54. 
The Nirgarbha (or simple or mantraless) Prfinftyfima is performed 
without the repetition of Bija mantra; and the period of Pfiraka (in­
halation or inspiration), Kumbhaka (retention), and Rechaka ^expiration), 
may be extended from one to hundred matr^s.
JTim m<nw i
irnnr 
»iraT sn®TJTfin%«rr 56^: «
H
55. 
The best is twenty MatrS.s: i.e., Puraka 20 seconds, Kutnbhaka 
80, and Rechaka 40 seconds. 
Tfie sixteen matras is middling, i.e., 16,64 
and 32. 
The twelve matrfis is the lowest, i.e., 12,48,24. 
Thus the PrfipS- 
y§.ma is of three sorts.
srift 
I
»jiiirEnn% r^ 
H
56. 
By practising the lowest Pr&nS.yS,ma for sometime, the body 
begins to perspire copiously; by practising the middling, the body begins 
to quiver (especially, there is a feeling of quivering along the spinal cord.) 
By the highest Prdnayama, one leaves the ground, i.e,, there is levitation, 
These signs attend the success of these three sorts of Prapayama,
fiTHaf 1
^
 
^
 
»
57. 
By Prftpaydma is attained the power of levitation (Khechaii 
iSakti), by Pr-anfiyama diseases are cured, by PrfinaySma the iSakti (spiri­
tual energy) is awakened, by Pranayama is obtained the calmness of mind 
and exaltation of mental powers (clairvoyance, &c.); by this, mind becomes 
full of bliss; verily the practitioner of Prfipayama is happy.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 234 ---
46
TEE OREEAEDA SAMEITA.
fw % «r 
I
?eI^ 
cfm?^ f ^
 
II 
II
2 , - s6 e y a b h e d a k u m b h a^:a .
Gheraijda said :— 58^— 59. 1 Lave told thee the Sahita Kumbhaka, 
now hear the Staryabheda. 
Inspire with all yonr strength the externa] 
air through the sttn-tube (right nostril): retain this air with the greatest 
care, performing the JAlandhara Mudrfi. 
Let the Kumbhaka be kept up 
so long as the perspiration does not burst out from the tips of the nails 
and the roots of the hair.
sinstsqriTt 
^ i
It 
n
THE Va YUS.
60. 
The VAyus are ten, namely PrSna, .Apdna, Samfina, Udana and 
Vyfina ; NSga, Kuima, Krikara, Devadatta and Lbananjaya.
snn# 
i
II 
II
a n ^ a n ^ ?n€lt 3 m nar: qs?^ 
i 
sntgm rt qa<ar ^ q q icrr at»n?in qs*^ 
11 V(.«
Their Seats.
61— 62. 
The Prapa moves always in the heart; the Apina in the 
sphere of anus ; the Sam§na in the navel region ; the Udana in the throat; 
and the Vy$,na pei-vades the whole body. 
These are the five principal 
Vfi.yu8j known as PrSpSdi. 
They belong to the Inner body. 
The NfigAdi 
five Vayus belong to the Outer body.
%qniftr qr 
w rarir *sr 
I
a m 
u 
11
I
q 
II V i »
63— 64. 
I now tell thee 
the seats of, these five external VSyus. 
The bfSga-VS,yu performs the function of eructation; the Kfirma opens 
the eye-lids; the Krikara causes sneezing; the Devadatta does yawning; 
the Dhananjaya pervades the whole gross body, and does not leave it 
even after death.
f ^qmrsr q 
«
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 235 ---
LESSON.FIFTH.
47
65. 
Tlie Naga-Vs.yu gives rise to Qonsciousness, the Khrma causes 
vision, the Krikara hunger and. thirst, the Devadatta produces yawning 
and by Dhananjaya sound is "^produced; this does not leave the body 
ever,
^
 % ^^rfinsiT 
1
n %%, u
N i t o r 
H 
n
66—67. 
All these V4yus, separated by the Surya-n4di, let him raise 
up from the root of the navel; then let him expire by the Idd-nddi, slowly 
and with unbroken, continuous force. Let him again draw th^ air through 
the right nostril, retaining it, as taught above, and exhale it again. 
Let 
him do tljis again and again. 
In this process, the air is always inspired 
through the Shrya-n4di.
f *5^T 5tF^* 
I
Its benefits,
68. 
The Sdrya-bheda Kumbhaka destroys decay and death, awakens 
the Kupdali rfakti, increases the bodily fire. .0 Chanda! thus have I 
taught thee the Sfiraybhedana Kumbhaka.
* N.B.—The description of this process, as given in Haths^Yoga Pradipikd, is somewhat 
different. Soon after Phraka ^aspiration), one shonld perform Jftlandbar and at the end 
of Kumbhaka, hat before Rechaka perform the Uddiyffnabandha. Then quickly contract 
the anal orifice by Hfilabandha, contract the throat, pull in the stomach towards the back; 
by this process the air is forced into the Brahma-n&di (SushumnS). Raise the 4pfina up, 
lower the Prtna, below the Kantha ; a Yogi becomes free from decay: the air should be 
drawn through the right nostril and expelled through the left,
^ 
II 
II
3 ,-U J jlY i.
69. 
Close the mouth, draw in the external air by both the nostrils, 
and pull up the internal air from the lungs an4 throat; retain them in the 
mouth.
g#r si^iTSJr 
5r?r.‘ l
ii vs© ii
70. 
'yhen having washed the mouth (i.e,, expelled air through 
mouth) perform J&landhara. 
Let him perform Kumbhaka with all his 
might and retain the air unhindered.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 236 ---
48
TBE GBEBAEDA SAMHITA.
«ir*rara: 
5t^ % i
snT9^[i^5W r9 %Rsfwf 
n 
ii
71—‘72. 
All works are accomplished by UjjSyl Kumbhaka. 
He is 
never attacked by phlegm diseases, or nervous diseases, or indigestion, or 
dysentery, or consumption, or cough ; or fever or [enlarged] spleen. 
Let 
a man perform Ujjfi.yt to destroy decay and death.
W.B.—See the Ha^a-Yoga Prad!pik&, Chap. II.—51, 53 for a different description 
ofthis. 
■ 
' 
*
^
 ^ 
5irat«it 
II 
u
4.-SITAL!.
73. 
Draw in the air through the mouth (with the lips contracted 
and tongue thrown Out), and fill the stomach slowly. 
Retain it there for 
a short time. 
Then exhale it through both the nostrils.
^ 
SI3n?% II V9« II
- 74. 
Xet the Yogi always practise this iSitali Kumbhaka, giver of 
bliss ; by so doing, he will be free from indigestion, phlegm and bilious 
disorders.
?r«ir m 3 * ^ 
n 
u
5.-BHASTRIKA (BELLOW).
75. 
As the bellows of the ironsmith constantly dilate and contract, 
similarly let him slowly draw in the air by both the nostrils and expand 
the stomach; then throw it out quickly (the wind rriaking sound like 
bellows).
<sf fm r 
fiw K ir i
^ 
ii ^ ii
*f ^ ^!>IT *1^ ifJEI 
9T 
^
 
M
76— 77. 
Having thus inspired and expired quickly twenty times, 
let him perform Kumbhaka; then let him expel it by the previous method. 
Let the wise one perform this Bhastrika (bellows-like) Kumbhaka thrice: 
he will never suffer any disease and will be always healthy.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 237 ---
LB8S0N FIFTH.
49
%r*tr 
i
w
 fiNrra 55aw?it f ? i% 
II 
II
6.-BHRAMAR1 (OR BBBTLB-DBONING KUMBHAKA).
78. 
At past midaigUt, in a place where there are no sounds of any 
animals^ &o., to be heard, let the y og i practise P&raka and Kumbhaka, 
closing the ears by the hands.
5fr?Jt*5nTcf 
I
WW 
^ ^i^r«!Tef 5RTJ 
II 
||
areri to t i
Xi II 
II
79— 80. 
He will hear then various internal sounds in his right 
ear. 
The first sound will be like that of Crickets, then that of a lute, then 
that of a thunder, then that of a drum, then that of a beetle, then that of 
bells, then those of gongs of belhmetal, trumpets, kettle-drums, mridanga, 
military drums, and dundubhi, &o.
s iw ii^ r 
#R!W»TOra i
?T5IT55retI 
!08?5Etr ^ 
ii
!5^%^:sa»Tcr TW: I 
tKw q?iT i
81—8al. 
Thus various sounds are cognised by daily practice of this 
Kumbhaka. 
Last of all is heard the Ani,hata sound rising from the 
heart ; of this sound there is a resonance, in that resonance there is a 
Light. 
In that Light the mind should be immersed. 
When the mind is 
absorbed, then it reaches the Highest seat of Visfirm (parama-pada). 
By 
success in this BhrS.mari Kumbhaka one gets success in Sam^dhi.
W t 
I
i^5rti?5P:iT i
7.—MOROHHA.
83. 
Having performed Kumbhaka with comfort, let him withdraw 
the mind from all objects and fix it in the space between the two eye­
brows. 
This causes fainting of the mind, and gives happiness. 
For, by 
thus joining the Manas with the Atma, the bliss of Yoga is certainly 
obtained.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 238 ---
50
TUB OHBBANDA SAMHITA.
1 
JSTJ I
^?CRn^ 
%5rr?:i^ 5n^p^f»S5ilifer: i 
? (iq f nm nre?ff 
5iq% 
ii 
u
8.~KBVAIii.
84. 
The breath of every person in entering makes the sound of 
“ sah” and in coming out, that of “ ham.” 
These two sounds make
(so’ham “ I am That”) or 
(hamsa “ The Great Swan” ). Through­
out a day and a night there are twenty-one thousand and six hundred such 
respiratiooSj. (that is, 15 respirations per minute). 
Every living being 
(Jiva) perfoms this japa unconsciously, but constantly. 
This is called 
AjapS gS.yatri.
<r«jr 5fraT3?gr55 
n 
ii
85. 
This AjapS japa is performed in three places, i.e., in the Mflla- 
dhSra (the space between anus and membranum virile), in theA-uahat lotus 
(heart) and in the Ajnya lotus (the space where the two nostrils join).
s r ^ s a i ^ h 
h
q*^ ^s?rqf 
I
sqnrt^ 
^ r ^ q a r ii 
n
86— 87. 
This body of Vayu is ninety-six digits length (i.6., six feet) 
as a standard. 
The ordinary length of the air-current when expired is 
twelve digits (nine inches); in singing, its length becomes sixteen digits 
(one foot); in eating, it is twenty digits (15 inches); in walking, it is twenty- 
four digits (18 inches); in sleep, it is thirty digits (21|| inches).; in copu­
lation, it is thirty-six digits (27 inches), and in taking physical exercise, it 
is more than that.
q^w^t 
srqtl% i
firecT 
h 
n
88. 
By decreasing the natural length of the expired current from 
nine inches to less and less, there takes place increase of life ; and by in­
creasing the current, there is decrease of life.
sipJ 
^ 
I
% q3fT«q»ff ii
89. 
So long as breath remains in the body there is no death. 
When
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 239 ---
LESSON FIFTH.
51
the full length of the wind is all confined in the body, nothing being ah 
lowed to go out, it is Kevala Kumbhaka.
^
 
II ^0 II
ITcT 
51^1 I
^ 
II 
II
90—91. 
All Jivas are constantly and unconsciously reciting this 
Ajapfi Mantra, only for a fixed number of times every day, 
But a Yogi 
should recite this consciously and counting the numbers. 
By doubling 
the number of Ajapi, (i.e., by 30 respirations per minute), the state of 
Manonmanl (fixedness of mind) is attained. There are no regular Reehaka 
and Pfiraka in this process. 
It is only (Kevala) Kumbhaka.
5irarwit 
i
il 
ii
92. 
By inspiring air by both nostrils, let him perform Kevala Kum­
bhaka. 
On the first day, let him retain breath from one to sixty-four 
times.
I
i i w 
?i«ir arg; ?R«raTiir ^ il 
N
II V i II
93—94. 
This Kevall should be performed eight times a day, once 
in every three hours; or one may do it five times a day, as I shall tell thee. 
First in the early morning, then at noon, then in the twilight, then at mid­
night, and then in the fourth quarter of the night. 
Or one may do it 
thrice a day, i.e.^ in the morning, noon and evening.
^ il[% erm i
nsw nftnFB 
snrnit ii 
ii
smD^?rrJ^ 
^mRrg; i
% :ir ^
 
H 
II
rniuRrm W lr
i
95—96. 
So long as success is not obtained in Kevall, he should 
increase the length of Ajapa japa every day, one to five times. 
He who 
knows PrSnayfi,ma and Kevall is the real Yogi. 
What can he not accom­
plish in this world who has acquired success in Kevali Kumbhaka ?
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 240 ---
S ix t h L e sso n.
\
v m ^ s r hrfinsf 
i 
i ^ j w * s r!^ 
3r«rr i
^
 
fsm 
ll K il
DHYaNA-YOGA.
Gheranda raid :— 1. The DhySna or conten.plation is of three sorts; 
gross, subtle and luminous. 
When a particular figure, such as one’s Guru 
or Deity is contemplated, it is Sthflla or gross contemplation. 
When 
Drahma or Prakriti is contemplated as a mass of light, it is called Jyotis 
contemplation. 
When Brahma as a Bindu (point) and Kundali force are 
contemplated, it is Sfikshma or Subtle contemplation.
g 
ii 
r ii
« a r g ^ # q H 5 * 
i
II ^ H
qrftsn^: 
ii « ii
?S*w} 
^ i
W 5 w ffim *i9 5 q n II ^ II 
g 
q ^ 
i
IIV9II
«lTqc» ^
 
U ^ H
1.—sthOla Dhyana.
2— 8. 
(Having closed the eyes), let him contemplate that there is 
a sea of nectar in his heart: that in the midst of that sea there is an island 
of precious stones, the very sand of which is pulverised diamonds and 
rubies. 
That on all sides of it, there are Kadamba trees, laden with sweet 
flowers; that, next to these trees, like a rampart, there is a row of flowering
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 241 ---
LESSON STX m .
5a
trees, such as mSlati, mallifcS, j^tl, kesara, champaka, pftrijSta and padmas, 
and that the fragrance of these flowers is spread all round, in every quarter. 
In the middle of this garden, let the Yogi imagine that there stands a 
beautiful Kalpa tree, 
having 
four 
branches, representing the four 
Vedas, and that it is full of flowers and fruits. 
Insects are humming there 
and cuckoos singing. 
Beneath that tree, let hini imagine a rich platform 
of precious gems, and on that a costly throne inlaid with jewels, and that 
on that throne sits his particular Deity, as taught to him by his Guru. 
Let him contemplate bn the appropriate form, ornaments and vehicle of 
that Deity. 
The constant contemplation of such a form is Sthflla Dhy4na.: 
STOCRRH I
TO* 
u ^ n
f ? l « n 0 R * m II I® II 
g 3w;«iTi^ ^rsraq^ i 
SWRT ^ 
II U II
another process.
9— 11. 
Let the Yogi imagine that in the pericarp of the great 
tl^ousand-petalled Lotus (Brain) tliere is a smaller lotus having twelve 
petals. 
Its colour is white, highly luminous, having twelve bija letters, 
named f , 
n, 
w, ?, g* f , 5T, % 
(ha sa ksha ma la va ra yum ha 
sa kha phrem). 
In the pericarp of this smaller lotus there are three lines 
fonning a triangle «r, % «l (a ka tha): having three angles called 5, 5T, V 
(ha la ksha): and in the middle of this triangle, there is the Pranava draf 1 
Oin.
^ ^
12. 
Then let him contemplate that in that there is a beautiful seat 
having Nada and Bindu. 
On that seat there are two swans, and a pair of 
wooden sandals or shoes. •
^
 
II U II
TOf^«rg5«TRta 
II 
II
13—14. > There let him contemplate his Guru Deva, having two arms 
and two eyes, and dressed in pare white, anointed with white sandal-paste,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 242 ---
5#
TUB QBBBABDA SAUEITA.
wearing garlands of white flowers; to the left of whom stands ^akti of 
blood-red colour. 
By thus contemplating the Guru, the Stbflla Dhyana is 
attained.
2.—JYOTIR DHYANA,
Gheranda said:— 15. 
I have told thee the Sthflla Dhy&na; listen 
now to the contemplation of Light, by which the Yogi attains success and 
sees his Self.
ilw n T flisfe 5T9r 
l
srsr ^l^rsnsr «TOrtwii. ii \% ii
16. 
In the Mfllfidh&ra is kundalint, having the form of a serpent. 
The JivStmS is there like the flame of a lamp. 
Contemplate on this Jame 
as the Luminous Brahma. 
This is the Tejo Dhyana or Jyotir Dhy&na,
jr«ra«ei?:n i
f
^
 irtTsit snngircTOn. i
it
an oth er process.
17. 
In the middle of the two eye-brows, above the Manas, there is 
A Light consisting of Om. 
Let him contemplate on this flame. 
This is 
another method of contemplation of Light.
afaF?Jw5iT? 
ii U n
nicwar 
M ia ^9r??arf5[^ar 1
^ 
II 
II
8.—SOKSHMA DHYa NA.
Gheranda said :—18— 19. 
OChapda! thou hast heard the Tejo 
Dhy&na, listen now to the Sflkshma DhyAna. 
When by a great good 
fortune, the kupdall is awakened, it joins with the Atm& and leaves the 
body through the portals of the two eyes; and enjoys itself by walking 
in the royal road (Astral Light). 
It cannot be seen pn account of its 
subtleness and great changeability.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 243 ---
tnsSON SIXTH.
m
^gflwiwftref 
ii 
m
20. 
The Yogi, however, attains this success by performing S&mbhavi 
Mudr4, i.e., by gazing fixedly at space without winking. (Then he will see 
his Sfikshma l§arira). 
This is called Sukshma DhySna, difficult to be 
attained even by the Devas, as it is a great mystery.
%^T3iHiS9jr3^ qgjpmnr 
u 
ii
21. 
The contemplation' of Light is a hundred times superior to
contemplation of Form ; and a hundred thousand times superior to Tejo 
DhyS.ua is the contemplation of the Sfikshma. 
o
W cW 
II 
II
$ft%ce54r%grraf
22. 
0 Chanda! thus have I told thee the DhySna Yoga—a most 
precious knowledge ; for, by it, there is direct perception of the Self. Hence 
DhySna is belauded.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 244 ---
S e ven th L e sso n.
im 
i
IR iB 5f^TB—
wnfear 
i3WT^ I
ii K «
SAMaDHI yoga.
Gheran4a said :— 1. 
The Sam^dhi is a great Yoga ; it is acquired 
by great g6od fortune-X It is obtained through the grace and kindness of 
tiie Guru, and.by intense devotion to him.
^35a§r^rcTcH5i§rfcf^H^i: sitrat i
2. 
That Yogi quickly attains this most beautiful practice of SamMhi, 
who has confidence (or faith) in knowledge, faith in his own Guru, faith in 
his pwn Self ; and whose mind (manas) awakens to intelligence froni day 
to day.
H5i: 
i
lU N
3. 
Separate the Manas from the body, and unite it with the Para- 
matma. 
This is known as Sam^dhi or Mukti from'all states of conscious­
ness.
ii h a
4. 
I am Brahma,a,I am^nothing else, the Brahma is certainly I, I 
am not participator of sorrow, I am Existence, Intelligence and Bliss; 
always free, of one essence.
5i!W?aiT ^
 
i
«rNi smf 
ii 
ii
q w r 
^ 
i
5— 6. 
The SamSdhi is four-fold, i.e.,DhySna-SamMhi,Nada-Samadhi, 
RasSnanda Samadhi, and Laya-SamSdhi: respectively accomplished by 
^ambhavi MudrS>, Khechari Mudr^, Bhramarl Mudrfi. and Yoni-Mudrfl. 
The Bhakti-Yoga Sam&dhi is fifth," and R4ja-Yoga Samhdhi, attained 
through Mano-Murchh^ Kumbhaha, is the sixth form of Samadhi.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 245 ---
tESSOtJ SEVENTH.
57
5JTwrsff 
i
i% 5^ ra4 
w*!5a5r 
ii « ti
1 -DHYANA-Y06A SAteiDHI.
7. 
Performing the Sambhavi Mudrfi perceive the AtmS. 
Having
seen once the Brahnia in a B^du (point of light), fix the mind in that 
point. 
. 
‘
jiiTciwr'^ ^ ^ 
t
>grw ^
 ?r 
t
u ^ II
8. 
Bring the Atm4 in Kha (Ether), bring the Kha (Ether or Space) 
in the AtmS.. 
Thus seeing the AtmS full of Kha (Space or Brahma), 
nothing will obstruct him. 
Being full of perpetual bliss, the man enters 
Samadhi (Trance or Ecstasy).
^ 
^
 
I
5!^ 
ii 
^ ii
2.—NADA-YOGA SAMa DHI.
9. 
Turn the tongue upwards, closing the wind-passages, by per­
forming the Khechart MudrS ; by so doing, Samadhi (trance asphyxiation) 
will be induced ; there is no necessity of performing anything else.
?l5r 3R%T 
I
351 
#f^ftRSRn II \\ II
3.—RAS^NANDA YOGA SAMADHI.
>
10-^11. .Let him perform the Bhr^mari Kumbhaha, drawing in the 
air slowly : expel the air slowly and slowly, with a buzzing sound like 
that of beetle. 
Let him carry the Manas and place it in the centre of this 
sound of humming beetle. 
By so doing, there will be SamS.dhi and by 
this, knowledge of ‘ so ’ ‘ ham ’ (I am That) arises, and a great happiness 
takes place.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 246 ---
58
TEE GEEBAEDA SA M E lfA .
^ f4 Hgn^i 
i
f i f 
3TTa& llUll
4.—LAYA-SIDDHI YOGASAMADHI,
12— 13. 
Perform, the Yoni-Mudr§, and let him imagine that he is 
S&kti, and ParamStma is Pnrusha; and that both have been united in one. 
By this he Becomes full of bliss, and realises Aham Brahma, ‘I am Brahma.’ 
This conduces to Advaita Samadhi.
I.
II Kn II 
sjsrr^i^ i
?fWT%%5T ?fWI^Wr 
II 
II
5. --BHAKTI YOQa ' sAMa DHI.
14— 15. 
Let him contemplate within his heart his special Diety; let 
him be full of ecstasy by such contemplation, let him shed tears of happi­
ness, and by so doing he will become entranced. 
This leads to Sam8.dhi 
and Manon-mani.
n«i 
I
t o r s i: ^grm^TFna: 
^w^isr rct ii 
ii
6. 
—r a j a -y o g a sa m a d h i.
16. 
Performing Manomfirchha Kumbhaka, unite the Manas with the 
AtmS. 
By this Union is obtained Raja-Yoga Samadhi.
cra^msETJiTl^: 
ei«rs»L I
^ 
U ?V9 II
7. 
—PRAISE OP sa m a d h i.
17. 
0 Chancia ! thus have I told thee abput Samfi,dhi which leads to 
emancipation. 
Rfija-Yoga Samfidhi, Unmani, SahajavasthA are all syno­
nyms, and mean the Union of Manas with A-tm&.
iSR^sm rsif^ 
grsR h 
u
18. 
Vishnu is in water, Vishnu is in earth, Vishnu is on the peak 
of the mountain ; Vishpu is in the midst of Volcanic fires and flames: the 
whole Universe is full of Vishnu.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 247 ---
LBSSOK SEVENTH.
59
f^g5*T5f5rTgr#<iimrT ^
 q^ciTt i 
^
 
i%3n^Rig[;5Er^ q?fq{<r 
ti 
II
19. 
All those that walk ou land or move ia the air, all living and 
animate creation, trees, shrubs, roots, creepers and grass, &C., oceans and 
mountains—all, know ye, to be Brahma. 
See them all in AtmS,.
fmw 5R?!i%?rHrnt5r* 
i
II 510 II
20. 
The 3-tmS confined in the body is Chaitanya or Consciousness, 
it is without a second, the Eterjjal, the Highest; knowing it separate from 
body, let him be free from desires and passions.
5swTr^ ?wRRr,?jT?t n 
«
21. 
Thus is Samadhi obtained^ free from all desires. 
Free from 
attachment to his own body, to son, wife, friends, kinsmen. Or riches; 
being free from all, let him obtain fully the Samidhi.
J|T«T* fer^TR* 
^ I
^
 
«K f^ ' 
ii rr ii
22. 
Siva has revealed many Tattvas, such as Laya Amrita, &o.; 
of them, I have told thee an abstract, leading to emaucipation.
^ «Bf^j5R35S' 
qtt i
q* 
5T 
ii ?\ ii
23. 
0 Chanda! thus have I told thee of SamS-dhi, difficult of attain­
ment. 
By knowing this, there is no rebirth in this Sphere.
tr?:<is^isr^^r| srs^^r*T5rr«i%
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 248 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 249 ---
THE
HATHA TOGA PEADIPIKA
TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH
BY
PANCHAM SINK.
PUKJSHBD BY
SUDHINDRA NATH VASU,
THE PANINI OFFIOB, BHUVANBi^'WARi As'RAMA, BAHADUJ^ANJ,
HUabdbaO
PfiftiTED BY A pdbva K bisbha B ose, at TBi Ihi)4an P ress
1915
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 250 ---
o m
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 251 ---
TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Introduction 
Chapter I—on Asanas 
„ 
n 
„ Prd,nayama 
„ III 
„ Madras 
„ IV 
„ Sam^hi
Pages.
i—V 
1-12 
13-27 
28-46 
47-63
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 252 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 253 ---
INTRODUCTION.
There exists at present a good deal of misconception with regard to 
the practices of the Hatha Toga. 
People easily believe in the stories told 
by those who themselves heard them second hand, and no attempt is 
made to find out the truth by a direct reference to any good treatise. 
It 
is generally believed that the six practices, 
in Hatha Toga are com­
pulsory on the student and that besides being dirty, they are fraught with 
danger to the practiser. 
This is not true, for these practices dre necessaiy 
only in the existence of impurities in the Nddisi and not otherwise.
There is the same amount of misunderstanding \Vith I’egard to the 
Prandyaraa. 
People put their faith implicitly in the stories told them 
about the dangere attending the practice, without ever taking the trouble 
of ascertaining the fact themselves. 
We have been inspiring and expiring 
air from our birth, and will continue to do so till death; and this 
is done without the help of any teacher. 
PrfinSydma is nothing but a 
properly regulated form of the otherwise irregular and hurried flow of air, 
without using much force or undue restraint; and if this is accomplished 
by patiently keeping the flow slow and steady, there can be no dariger. 
It is the impatience for the Siddliis which cause undue pressure on the 
organs and thereby causes pains in the ears, the eyes, 
the chest, etc. 
If the three bandhas 
be carefully performed while practising the 
Pran&ydma, there is no possibility of any danger.
There are two classes of students of Toga : (1 )'those who study it 
theoretically ; (2) those who combine the theory with practice.
Toga is of very little use, if studied theoretically. 
It was never 
meant for such a study. 
In its practical form, however, the path of the 
student is beset with difficulties. 
The books on Toga give instructions 
so fay as it is possible to express the methods in words, but all persons, 
not being careful enough to follow these instructions to the very letter, 
fail in 
their 
object. 
Such 
persons require a teacher versed in the 
practice of Toga. It is easy to find a teacher who will explain the language 
of the books, but this is far from being satisfactory. 
For instance, a 
Pandit without any knowledge of the science of Materia Medica will 
explain 
as 
or an enemy of thorns, 
'shoes,
while it is in reality the name of a medicinal plant.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 254 ---
11
INTRODUCTION.
The importance of a practical Yogi as a guide to a- student of 
Yoga cannot be overestimated ; and without such a teacher it is next to 
impossible for him to achieve anything.- The methods followed by the 
founders of the system and followed ever afterwards by their followers, 
have been wisely and advisedly kept secret; and this is not without a 
deep meaning. 
Looking to the gravity of the subject and the practices 
which have a very close relation with tlie vital organs of the human IxvJy, 
it is of paramount importance that tlie instructions should be received by 
students of ordinary capacity, through a practical teacher only, in order 
to avoid any possibility of mistake in practice. 
Speaking broadly, all men 
are not equally fitted to receive the instructions on equal terras. Man inherits 
on birth his'mental and physical capitals, according to his actions in past 
births, and has to increase them by manipulation, but there are, even 
among such, different grades; 
Hence, one cannot become a Yogi in one 
incarnation, as says Sri Kyisna 
I and again
%!IT H
There are men who, impelled by the force of their actions of previous 
births, gp headlong and accomplish their liberation in a single attempt; 
but others have to earn it in their successive births. 
If the student 
belongs to one of such souls and being earnest, desires from his heart to 
get rid of the pains of birth and death, he will find the means too. 
It is 
well-known that a true Yogi is above temptations and so to think that he 
keeps his knowledge secret for selling it to the highest bidder is simply 
absurd. 
Yoga is meant for the good o f all creatures, and a true Yogi is 
always desirous of benefitting as many men as possible. 
But he is 
not to throw away this precious treasure indiscriminately. 
He carefully 
chooses its recipients, and when be finds a true and earnest student, who 
will not trifle with this knowledge, he never hesitates iri placing his 
valuable treasure at the disposal of the man. 
What is essential in him is 
that he should have a real thirst for such knowledge—a thirst which will 
make him restless till satisfied ; the thirst that will make him blind to 
the world and its enjoyrnents. 
He should be, in short, fired with 5 9 ^ ^ ' 
or desire for emancipation. 
To such a one, there is nothing dearer than 
the accomplishment of this object. 
A true lover will risk his very life to 
gain union with his beloved like Tulastdfts. 
A true lover will see every­
where, in every direction, in every tree and leaf, in every blade of grass 
his own beloved. The whole of the world, with all its beauties, ("s a dreary 
waste in his eyes, without his beloved. 
And he will court death, fall into
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 255 ---
INTUODUGTION.
Ill
tb6 mouth of a gaping grave, for the sake of his. beloved. 
The student 
whose heart burns with such intense desire for union with PararafttmS, 
is sure to find a teacher, and through him he will .surely-find Him It is a 
tried experience that Paraip^traS. will try to meet you half way, with the 
degree of intensity with which you will go to meet Him. 
Even He 
Himself will become your guide, direct you on to the road to success, or 
put you on the track to find a teacher, or lead him to you.
Well has it been said 
f 
I 8
I fe n 
It is tiie half-liearted who fail. 
They hold their 
worldly pleasures dearer to their hearts than their God, and therefore He 
in His turn does not consider them worthy of His favours. 
Says the 
Upanisad 
^ 
*
H 5»f5»T 
I
The atmS, will choose you its abode only if it considers you worthy 
of such a favour, and not otherwise. 
It is therefore'necessary that one 
should first make oneself worthy of His acceptance. 
Having prepared 
the temple (your heai-t) well fitted for His installation there, having 
cleared it of all the impurities which stink and make the place unsuitable 
for the highest personage to live in, and having decorated it beautifully 
with objects as befit that Lord of the creation, you need not wait long 
for Him to adorn tliis temple of yours which you have taken pains to 
make it worthy of Him. 
If you have done all this. He will shine in you 
in all His glory. 
In your difficult moments, when you are embarrassed, 
sit in a contemplative mood, and approach ydnr Parama Guru submissively 
and refer your difficulties to Him, you are sure to 
get the proper 
advice from Him. 
He is the Guru of the ancients, for He is not limited 
by Tithe. 
He instructed the ancients in bygone times, like a Guru, and 
if you have been unable to find a teacher in the human form, enter your 
inner temple and eoasiilt this Great Guru who accompanies you every where, 
and ask Him to show you the way. 
He knows best what is best for you. 
Unlike mortal beings, He is beyond the past and the future, will either 
send one of His agents to guide you or lead you to one and put you on the 
right track. 
He is always anxious to teach the earnest seekers, and waits 
for you to offer Him an opportunity to do so. 
But if you have not done 
your duty and prepared yourself worthy of entering His door, and try 
to gain access to His presence, laden with your unclean burden, stinking 
with Kama, Krodha, Lobha, and Moha, be sure He will keep you off from 
Him.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 256 ---
IV
INTRODWTWI^.
The Asanas are a means of gaining steadiness of position and help 
to gain success in contemplation, without any distraction of the mind. It 
the position be not comfortable, the slightest inconvenience will draw the 
mind away from the lakftya (aim), and so no peace of mind will be possible 
till the posture has ceased to cause pain by regular exercise.
Of all the various methods for concentrating the mind, repetition of 
Pranava or AjnpS. J^pa end contemplation on its meaning is the best. 
It is impossible for the mind to sit idle even for a single monient, and, 
therefore, in ofder to keep it well occupied and to keep other antagonistic 
thoughts from entering it, repetition of Pranava should be practised. 
It should be repeated till Yoga NidrS is induced which, when experienced, 
should be ehcouraged by slackening all the muscles of the body. 
This 
will fill the mind with sacred and divine thoughts and will bring about 
its one-pointedness, without'much effort.
AnSbata N&da is awakened by the exercise of PranSyama. A couple 
of weeks’ practice. with 80 pr^nSySmas in the morning and the same 
number in the evening will cause distinct sounds to be heard ; and, as the 
practice will go on increasing, varied sounds become audible to the 
practiser. ^ By bearing these sounds attentively one gets concentration 
of the mind, and thence Sabaja Samfidhi. When Yoga sleep is experienced, 
the student should give himself up to it and make no efforts to check it. 
By and by, these sounds become subtle and they become less and less 
intense, so the mind loses its waywardness and becomes calm and docile; 
and, on this practice 
becoming well-established, Sam^dhi becomes a 
voluntary act. 
Tliis is, however, the highest stage and is the lot of the 
favoured and fortunate few only.
During contemplation one sees, not with his eyes, as he does the 
objects of the world, various colours, which the writers on Yoga call the 
colours of the five elements. Sometimes, stars are seen glittering, and 
lightning flashes in the sky. 
But these are all fleeting in their nature.
At first these colours are seeh in greatly agitated waves which show 
the unsteady condition of the mind ; and as the practice increases and the 
mind becomes calm, these colour-waves become steady and motionless 
and appear as one deep ocean of light. 
This is the ocean in which one 
should dive and forget the world and become one with his Lord—which is 
the condition of highest bliss.
Faith in the practices of Yoga, and in one’s own powers to accomplish 
what others have done befoi-e, is of great importance to insure speedy 
success. 
I mean “ faith that will move mountains,” will accomplish
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 257 ---
INTBODUGTION.
anything, be it howsoever difficult. 
There is nothing which cannot be 
accomplished by practice. ^ Says Siva in Siva Saiphitd.
<PFiTg iR.<^' «%3fwn^rn?ft ii 
-U
Through practice success is obtained ; through practice one gains 
liberation.
Perfect consciousness .is gained through practice ; Yoga is attained 
through practice ; success in mudr&s comes by practice. 
Thropgh practice 
is gained success in prinayalna. 
Death can be evaded of its prey through 
practice, and man becomes the conqueror of death by practice. And then 
let us gird up otir loins, and with a firnj resolutian engage in the practice, 
having faith in 
FIT 
^^T^*T, and the success must be
ours. 
May the Almighty Father, be pleased to shower His blessings on 
those who thus engage in the performance of their dnties. 
Om ^ m .
Ajmeb :
Slat January, 1915,, }
PANOHAM SINE.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 258 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 259 ---
THE HATHi YOGA PRADIPIKA.
OHAPl'EE I.
On Asanas.
^ a W iR iT II
^nara^ 
it Ui
Salutation to Adindtha (Siva) who expounded the knowle»)ge ol Hatha 
Yoga, which like a staircase leads the aspirant to the high pinnacled Rftjaj 
Yoga. 
1. 
^
sninpg^sft^* ar«T 
ii
Yogin Swatmarama, after saluting first his Gurfl SrinStha explains j 
Hatha Yoga for the attainment of Raja Yoga. 
2.
II
II \ II
Owing to tlie darkness arising from the multiplicity of opinions 
people are unable to know the Rfija Yoga. 
Compassionate Swatmarfima 
composes the Hatha Yoga Pradipika like a torch to dispel it. 
3.
sE^TciTra^sw ^
 
in^ ii
Matsvendra, Goraksa. etc., knew Hatha Vidya, anc) by theiv favour 
Yogi Swatraarama also learnt it from them. 
4.
IIH ii
The following Siddhas (masters) are said to have existed in fonner 
times:—
Sri Adinatha (i^iva), Matsyendra, Nfitha, ^abar, Anand, Bhairava, 
Chanrangi, Mina natba, GoraksanStha, VirupAksa, Bilesfaya. 
5.
w n % 
^
 
II
IIA Ii
Manthana, Bhairava, Siddhi Buddha, Kanthadi, K^rantaka, SurA- , 
nanda, Siddhipada, Charapati. 
6.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 260 ---
T m UATBA YOGA PRADIPIKA.
P>gT^
 ipcsm: u 
qnq?glt>q?J5t^J U ^9 H
Kftnert, 
P6jyapfi,d», Nif.yanS.tba, Nirailjana, Kapali, Vindunatha, 
KSka ObandWwara. 
7.
i n ^ 
q>rtni^q>^cPOT ii <i ii
AllSma, Prabh-udeva, 
Ghoda, Cboli, 
Tintini, Bhanuki, Nardeva, 
Khanda KSpalika, etc. 
8.
^ 
m rit 
% II M l
These MaliSsiddhas (great masters), breaking the sceptre of death, 
are roarping in the universe. 
9.
II
^ ^ ^ * T^HW|V4H.q»tfd1 
II ?« H
Like a house protecting one from the heat of the sun, Haf;ha Yoga 
protects its practiser from the burning heat of the three Tapas ; and, 
similarly, it is the supporting tortoise, as it were, for tliose who are 
constantly devoted to the practice of Yoga. 
10.
qpc 
% % fe^ ciT II
g a r 
§ 5Tq>ti^igiT ii K% ii
A Yogi desirous of success should keep the knowledge of Ha(ha 
Yoga secret; for it becomes potent by concealingj and impotent by expos­
ing. 
IL
^
 
II
«T3J 
ii
»ifeqniT^ 
ii 
ii
The Yogi should practise IJatha Yoga in a small room, situated in a 
solitary place, being 4 cubits square, and free from stones, fire, water, 
disturbances of all kinds, niul in a country where justice is properly 
administered, where good people live, and food . can be obtained easily 
and plentifully. 
12.
§r:gNgr^ f ^ gn^ii
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 261 ---
TBE BATH A fOQA PUADIPIKA.
The room should have a sinail door, be free from holes, hollows, 
neither too high nor too low, well plastered with cow-dung and free from 
dirt, filth and insects. 
On its outside there should be bowers, raised 
platform (chabeotra), a well, and a compound. 
These characteristics of 
a room for Hat^ha Yogis have been described by adepts in the practice 
of Hatha. 
13.
Having seated in such a room and free from all anxieties^ he should 
practise Yoga, as instructed by his guru. 
14.
Yoga is destroyed by the following six causes :—Over-eating, exer­
tion, talkativeness, adhering to rules, i.e., cold bath in the 
morning, 
eating at night, or eating fruits only, company of men, and unsteadi­
ness, 
15.
The following six 
bring 
speedy 
success:—Courage, 
daring, 
perseverance, discriminative knovvledge, faith, aloofness from company. 
16. 
'
II
^
 
II 
%5T ?WT ^ lllvs II
The ten rules of conduct are: ahinjaa (non-injuring), truth, non-steal­
ing, continence, forgiveness, endurance, compassion, meekness. Sparing 
diet and cleanliness. 
17. 
-
^
 ^srt^r 
u 
ii
The ten niyamas mentioned by those proficient in the knowledge 
of yoga are : 
Tapa, patience, belief in God, chai-ity, adoration of God, 
hearing discourses on the principles pf religion, shame, intellect, Tapa 
and Yajfia. 
18.
* 
ii
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 262 ---
THE a A m A rOQA p b a d i p i k a .
Asanas.
Being tlie first accessory of Hatfia Yoga, S,saua is described first. 
It should be practised for gaining steady posture, health and lightness 
of body. 
19.
^ 
^ 
_«V tv f 
V 
fS 
..
wIWJ U
^ ^ m s a rR R r^ 
ii 
u
I am going to describe certain asanas which have been adopted by 
Munis like Vasi§tha, etc:, and Yogis like Matsyendra, etc.' 
20.
o 
qn?5i% ^
 u
c ir s r ^ ^ u 
u
. 
Sicastika-dsana,
Having kept both the hands under both the thighs, with the body 
straight, when one sitscalmly in this posture, it is called Swastika. 
21.
o 
5 
ii
?rar 
^15^ 1^% II 
II
Oomukha-asana.
Placing the right ankle on the left side and the left ankle on the 
right side, makes Gomukha-asana, having the appearance of a cow. 22.
ii 
n
Virdsana.
One foot is to be placed on the thigh of the opposite side; and so 
alse the other foot on the opposite thigh. 
This is called Virdsana. 
23.
o !S? 
53'KTWit 
u
%^ A 
W
W
 
H
Kurmasana.
Placing the right ankle on the left side of anus, and the left ankle 
on the right side of it, makes what the Yogis call Kflrma-asana. 
24. 
'
quRR 5 
^
 II
^
 
fEzroTRI, I I n
Kukkuta dsana.
Taking the posture of Padmfi-dsana and carrying the hands under 
the thighs, when the Yogi raises himself above the ground, with his 
palms resting on the ground, it becomes Kukku{a-dsana. 
25.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 263 ---
TUB RATE A VO&A VRADlPlBiA.
II
h 
ii
Uttana KArma-dsana.
Having assumed Kukku{a-asana, wlien one grasps his neck by
crossing his hands behind his head, and lies in this posture with his back
touching the ground, it becomes Uttana Kfirma-asana, from its appearance
like tliat of a tortoise. 
26. 
./I
5 w S W IT 
II ^
II j^vs II
Dhanura dsana.
Having caught the toes of tlie feet with both the hands and carried 
them to the ears by drawing the body like a bow, it becomes Dhanura 
27.
asana.
s r ^ 
(^gcqil^fddUtt 
^qRi; ii 
ii
$rsi5i$niw^^55w*t ii
maiTORTtf 
*sr 
II 
II
Matsya-dsana.
Having placed the right foot at the root of the left thigh, let the 
toe be grasped rvith the rigiit hand passing over the back, and having 
placed the left foot on the right thigh at its root, let it be grasped with 
the left hand passing behind the back. 
This is the asana, as explained 
by Sri Matsyanatha. 
It increases appetite and i» an instrument for 
destroying the group of the most deadly diseases. 
Its practice awakens 
the Kundalinl, stops the nectar shedding from the moon in people. 
28*29.
sT?fr§ 
ii
Paschima T&na.
Having stretched the feet on the ground, like a stick, and having 
grasped the toes of both the feet with both the hands, when one sits witk 
his forehead resting on the thighs, it is called Pailchima.TSna. 
30.
dir 
II
^
 
^ 
II 
II
This Paschima T&na carries the air from the front to the back part 
of the body (i.e., to the su§umna). 
It kindles gastric fire, reduces obesity 
and cures all diseases of men. 
31.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 264 ---
6
TBB HATHA YOGA PBADIPIKA.
<Stsi^n \!( n
MayOira-dsana.
Place the palms of both the hands on the ground, and place the 
navel on both the elbows and balancing thus, the bodj' should be 
stretched backward like a stick." This is called Maj'ura-asana. 
32.
^
 
giRj^ctiMgt>ZH^ II \ \ II
This ftsana soon destroys all diseases, and removes abdominal dis­
orders, and also those arising from irregularities .of phlegm, bile and wind, 
digests unw^iolesome food taken in excess, increases appetite and destroys 
the most deadly poison. 
33.
II
^ f W ^ i w s a q ^ i i 
ii
/
Sam-dsana.
Lying down on the ground, like a corpse, is called Sava-asana. 
It 
removes fatigue and gives rest to the inihd. 
34.
^ 1 1 
II 
II
S5iva taught 84 asanas. 
Of these the first four being essential ones, 
I am going to explain them here. 
35.
TO* ^
 
« 3c %f<r eigron ii
m 
^ ^
 
^
 II 
II
These four are:—The Siddha, Padma, Sinha and Bhadra. 
Even of 
these, the Siddha-ftsana, being very comfortable, 
one 
should 
always 
practise it. 
36.
sfirolr ii ii 
u
The Siddhdmna
Press firmly the heel of the left foot against the perineum, and the 
right heel above the male organ. 
With the chin pressing on the chest, one 
should sit calmly, having restrained the senses, and gaze steadily the space 
between the eyebrows, 
door of salvation. 
37.
This is called the Siddha Asana, the opener-of the
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 265 ---
TUB BATE A YOGA PEADIPIKA.
^
 35T* 
II
gg^igf-C ^ 
>1V u
This Siddhisana is performed also by placing the left heel on 
Medhra (above the male drgari), and then placing the right one on it. 
38.
ggjrast 
II
Some call this SiddhAsaiih, some Vajrasana. 
Others call it Mukta 
Asana or Gupta Asana. 
39.
fu q 
ii« « ii
Just as sparing food is among Yamas, and Ahimstl among the 
Niyamas, so 
is Siddh^sana called 
by adepts the chief of all the 
asanas. 
40.
- 
j,
.11 
H
Out of the 84 Asanas Siddh&sana should always be practised, because 
it cleanses the impurities of 72,000 nddls. 
41.
w r s in it 
ii
^
 
S P T ^ in sq !^ i i i i
By contemplating on oneself, by eating sparingly, and by practising 
SiddhSsana for 12 years, the Yogi obtains success. 
42,
^tl} 
51% II
STPHtM 5 ira ^ SF? 
II 
II
Other postures are of no use, when success has been achieved in 
Siddh&sana, and Prana Vfiyti becomes calm and restrained by Kevala Kutn- 
bhaka. 
43.
!5ra[ rasSlI'Qn 5TkT I 
II « » H
Success in one SiddhAsana alone becoming firmly established, one 
gets Unmani at once, and the three bonds (Bandhas) are accomplished 
of themselves. 
44.
H ^ < t5 W U 55T ^ 
55^5 II 
II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 266 ---
8
T m HATHA YOQa PBADJPIKA.
Thei'e is no ^sana liko the Siddhfisana and no Kumbhaka like the 
Kevala. 
There is no mudrfi. like the Khechari and no laya-Yi}ie the N^ida 
(An^hata NAda.) 
45.
^
 5rar
'flg S I 5 ^ W W f 
^K4li444l<jjm>q^
q<ara^ sfl<s?i^ ii 
k
Padmdsana.
Placedhe right foot on theleft thigh and theleft foot on the right thigh, 
and grasp the toes with the hands crossed over the back. 
Press the chin 
against the chest and gaze on the tip of the nose. 
This is called the 
Padmfisana, the destroyer of the diseases of the Yaniis. 
46.
'SR?§It 
a W c TJ u
qp§^ ^
 eRiT 
U «vs II
Place the feet on the thighs, with the soles upwards, and place the 
hands on the thighs, with the palms upwards. 
47.
5iram 
ii
q q ^ ?rr#: II 
II
Gaze on the tip of the nose, keeping the tongue pressed against the 
root of the teeth of the upper jaw, and the chin against the chest, and raise 
the air up slowly,,f.e., pull the apana-vayu gently upwards. 
48.
qw nq^ sflrR ^a^oqi 
ii
^
 
5 ^ II 
II
This is called the Padmdsana, the destroyer of all diseases. 
It is 
difficult of attainment by everybody, but can be learnt by intelligent 
people in this world. 40.
^
 
gScTC q w 5 q^ira^
qr® 
w q q q r 
1
q r t dKtTqH^v^44ft<»t'
Having kept both the hands together in the lap, performing the 
Padm&sana firmly, keeping the chin fixed to the chest and contemplating 
on Him in the mind, by drawing the apnna-vflyfl up (performing Mula 
Bandha) and pushing down the air after inhaling it, joining tlius the prAna
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 267 ---
TEE RATE A YOGA PBADIPIKA.
and apana in the navel, one gets the highest intelligence by awakening 
the ilakti (kundalinl) th\is. 
50.
When Apana Vdyh is drawn gently up and after filling in the longs with the air 
from outside, the pr&na is forced down by and by so as to join both of them in the navel, 
they both enter then the Euhdalini and, reaching the Brahma randhra (the great hole), 
they make the mind calm. Then the mind can contemplate on the nature of the iitmana 
and can enj oy the highest bliss.
W
 
ii
The Yogi 
who, sitting with Padiaasana, can control breathing, 
there is no doubt, is free from bondage. 
51.
WJ 
II
351^ *51 
t o *
i
5 
5 
II 
II
The Sirrihdsana.
Press the heels on both sides of the seam of Perineum, in such a way 
that the left heel touches the right side and the right heel touches the left 
side of it. 52.
3 
%sRn$ ^ ii
siRmr 
ii 
ii
Place the hands on the thighs, with stretched fingers, and keeping 
the mouth open and the mind collected, gaze on the tip of the nose. 
53.
ii 
ii
This is SirnhAsana, held sacred by the best of Yogis. 
This excellent 
Asana effects the completion of the three Bandhas (The Mfilabandha, 
Kan^ha or Jalandhar Bandha and Uddij'Aiia Baudha). 
54.
II
■H^3 g»b rrai ^
 ^^i35qK 3 
11 'a'a 11
»msrqT|T 
5 * 5 1 ^ 3 ^ ^ 1 ^ 1 1
«^tdRi*ani¥^RntR*^^ii 
II
The Bhadrdsana.
Place th^ heels on either side of the seam of the Perineum, keeping 
the left heel on the left side and the right one on the right side, hold the
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 268 ---
10
THE EATBA YOGA PR ADI PIKA.
feet firmly joined to one another with both the hands. 
This Bhadrasana 
is the destroyer of all the diseases. 
55 and 56.
The expert Yogis call this Gorak«la dsana. 
By sitting with this 
dsana, the Yogi gets rid of fatigue 57.
^
 
5narr ii v
 u
The Ntdis should be cleansed of their impurities by performing 
the mudrfis, etc.,_ (which are the practices relating to the air) .Ssanas, 
Kumbhakas and various curious rnfidi'fis. 
58.
asremft ilTgTTgi«!i 
i
By regular and close attention to Nada (auahata nada) in Hatha 
Yoga, a Brahmachari, sparing in diet, unattached to objects of enjoyment, 
and devoted to Yoga, gains success, no doubt, within a year. 
59.
U %o II
Abstemious feeding is that in which f of hunger is satisfied with food, 
well cooked with ghee and sweets, and eaten witii the offering of it to 
Siva. 60.
m
 
I 
jtNi 
Wf!
^
 
w m atf? II %% II
Fo0ds injurious to a Yogi.
Bitter, sour, saltish, hot, green vegetables, fermented, oily, mixed 
with til seed, rape seed, intoxicating liquors, fish, meat, curds, chhaasa 
pulses, plums, oil-cake, asafoetida (hinga), garlic, onion, etc., 
should 
not be eaten. 
61.
II
Food heated again, dry, having too much salt, sour, minor grains, 
and vegetables that cause burning sensation, should not be erten.
Fire, women, travelling, etc., should be avoided, 
62.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 269 ---
THE HATHA YOGA PEADIPIKA.
11
5rairf|; 
u
NJ» 
^
«R ra # ^ rf^ wm w %\ ii
II
i^ 5 n % ii
^ gffrfi^M^sqq; || 
II
SS 
^
 ^l^g^lH<!!*^ II
^Fjf M t ^ R R » T F^ II 
II
As said by Goraksa, one should keep aloof from the sopiety of th© 
evil-minded, fire, women, travelling, early morning bath, fasting, and all 
kinds of bodily exertion. 
63.
Wheat, rice, barley, shlistik (a kind of rice), good corns, milk, ghe©, 
sugar, butter, sugarcandy, honey, dried ginger, Parwal (a vegetable) 
the five vegetables, moong, pure water, these are very beneficial to those 
who practise Yoga. 
64.
A Yogi should eat tonics (things giving strength), well sweetened, 
greasy (made with ghee), milk, butter, etc., which may inci’ease humors 
of the body, according to his desire. 
65.
Whether young, old or too old, sick or lean, one who discards 
laziness, gets success if he practises Yoga. 
66.
^
 
II
51 
JTsn^ II 
II
■ Success comes to him who is engaged in the practice. 
How can one 
get success without practice ; for by merely reading books on Toga, one can 
never get success. 
67.
^ 
^ ^ 
II
II V ii
Success cannot be attained by adopting a particular dress fVesa). 
It cannot be gained by telling tales. 
Practice alone is the means to 
success. 
This is true, there is no doubt. 68.
II 
II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 270 ---
12
TRW RATHA YOQA PnADlPtKA.
(pc^tares^ various Kumbbakas, and other divine means, all 
should be practised in the ’practice of Hatha Yoga, till the fruit—' 
Yoga—is obtained. 69.
End of chapter 1st, on the method of forming the Asanas.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 271 ---
CHAPTER II. 
On Pr&v^aydma.
sTWiT<irREm«i#n; ii t ii
Posture becoming established, a Yogi, master of himsell, eating 
salutary and moderate food, should practise piA^ayama, as instructed by 
his guru, 
1.
^
 
^
 
¥1^ II
W
 
l u ii
Respiration being disturbed, the mind becomes disturbed. 
By 
restraining respiration, the Yogi gets steadiness of mind 
2.
^
 
^I^PSI^II ^ II
So long as the (breathing) air stays in the body, it is called life.
Death consists in the passing out of the (breathing) air. 
It is, therefore, 
necessary to restrain the breath. 
3.
«R«r 
^
 ¥il?^ii a ii
The breath does not pass through the middle channel (su§umn&), 
owing to the impurities of the nftdis. 
How can then success be attained, 
and how can there be the unmani avasthft. 4.
^
 s m n ^ ^ 
ii ^ ii
When the whole system of n&dis which is full of impurities, is 
cleaned, then the Yogi becomes able to control the Pra^a. 5.
iwr 
rm i 
ii % ii
Therefore, Pran&y4ma 
should be performed daily with seltwika 
bu(Jdhi (intellect free from raja and tama or activity and sloth), in order 
to drive out the impurities of the su§umn9.. 6.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 272 ---
14
TEE HATE A YOOA PBADIPIKA.
^
 sn # 
»
l? 5 i^ » v5 II
smff ^ ^ 5 
II
II ^ II
Method of performing Prdndyama.
Sitting in the Padmasana posture the Yogi should fill in the air 
through the left nostril tclosing the right one); and, keeping it confined 
according to one’s ability, it should he expelled slor/ly through the sflrya 
(right nostril). 
Then, drawing in the air through the sfirya (right nostril) 
slowly, the belly should be filled, and after performing Kunibhaka as before, 
it should be< expelled slowly through the chandra (left nostril). 7 and 8.
^ 
II
l?stNf 
^ 
II ^ II
Inhaling thus through the one, through which it was expelled, and 
having restrained it there, till possible, it should be exhaled through 
the other, slowly and not forcibly. 9.
siuu 
N w rsnrt^ ^|vbwi^ i
»?i<idi fti^i^iui 
^ i 9i^g:nTOi I
Wlfe*T<ai 
II 
II
If the air be inhaled through the left nostril, it should be expelled 
again through the other, and filling it through the right nostril, confining 
it thex’e, it should be expelled through the left nostril. 
By practising 
in this way, through the right and the left nostrils alternately, the whole 
of the collection of the nadis of the yamis (practisers) becomes clean, i.e., 
free fx'om impurities, after 3 months and over. 10.
5n^^«H^%<ditiiTM<id "ST f
I
I
Kurabhakas shoxild be performed gradually 4 times during day and 
night, i.e., (morning, noon, evening and midnight), till the number of 
Kumbhakas for one time is 80 and for day and night together it is 320. 11.
<gaTHiTra>(^ 3r#T 
ii 
ii
In the beginning there is perspii^ation, in the middle stage thex'e is 
quivering, and in the last or the 3rd stage one obtains steadiness; and 
then the breath should be niade steady or motionless. 12.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 273 ---
T B E HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA.
15
5 1 ^ gwrgnjlH
^5?TT/%sr ^
 
3fT ^ II 
II
-The perepiratipn 
exuding from exertion of practice should be 
rubbed into the body (and not wiped), as by so doing the body becomes 
strong. 13.
5r?rTSWI% 
^ 5Ttgf^#POT5Tg: II 
II
During the first stage of practice the food consisting of milk and 
ghee is wholesome. 
When the practice becomes established, no such 
restriction is necessary. 14.
W
I
I
Just as lions, elephants and tigers are controlled by and by, so the 
breath is controlled by slow degrees, otherwise {i.e., by being hasty or| 
using too much force) it kills the practiser himself. 15.
Hi^Thrwira^ii>*i 
ii 
ii
When PrfinaynTna, etc., are performed properly,, they eradicate all 
diseases ; but an improper practice generates diseases. 16.
t F t r : 
S T % m : II 
II
Hiccough, asthma, cough, pain in the head, the ears, and the eyes ; 
these and other various kinds of diseases are generated by the disturbance 
of the breath. 
17.
3 ^ 7 3 ^ 
^
 ^
 ^ ’3 ? ^ II
^
 ^
 ^ 
II U II
The air should be expelled with proper tact and should be filled 
in skilfully; and when it has been kept confined properly it brings 
success. 18. 
I
N .B.—The above caution is necessary to warn the aspirants against omitting any 
instruction ; and, in their zeal to gain success or siddhis early, to begin the practice, either 
by using too much force in filling in, confining and expeliing the air. Or by omitting any 
instructions, it may cause unnecessary pressure on their ears, eyes, &e„ and cause pain. 
Bvery word in the instructions is full of meaning and is necessarily used in the slokas, 
and should be followed very carefully and with due attention. Thus there will be 
nothing to fear whatsoever. We are inhaling and exhaling the air throughout our lives 
without any sort Of danger, andPrfin&yfiina being enly a regular form of it, t b ^ fdtould 
be no cause to'tear.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 274 ---
16
TEE HATHA YOOA PRADIPIKA.
^
 
^ ? T } M
v n m 
g n ^ 
ii 
a
Wh.ea the nldis become free from impurities, and there appear 
the outward signs of success, such as lean body and glowing colour, 
theit one should feel certain of success. 19.
$rfhTiiii,u
By removing the impurities, the air can be restraiuetl, according 
to one’s wish and the appetite is increased, the divine sound is awakened, 
and the hody becomes healthy, 20.
t i MPOl ^RraPRTt a 
a
If there be excess of fat or phlegm in the body, the six kinds of kriy^s 
(duties) should be performed first. 
But others, not suffering fx'om the 
excess of these, should not perform them. 21.
t e l ; ?rar a 
^
 gsirtPtt 
a 
a
The six kinds of duties are: Dhaufci, Basti, Neti, Tr^taka, Nauti 
and Kap4la BhSti. 
These are called the six actions 
22.
These six kinds of actions which cleanse the body should be kept 
secret. 
They produce extraordinary attributes and are performed with 
earnestness by the best of Yogis. 23.
^Tsr^if^t a
^
 ^
 
a 
t e g * 5Ri( a 
a
The Vhauti (%fcf)
A strip of cloth, about 3 inches wide and 15 cubits long, is pushed 
in (swallowed\ when moist with warm water, through the passage shown 
by the gum, and is taken out again. 
This is called Dhauti Karma. 24.
N.B.—The strip should be moistened with a little warm water, and the end should 
be held with the teeth. It is swallowed slowly, little by little; thus, first day 1 eubit, 2nd 
day 2 cubits, 3rd day 3 cubits, and so on. After swallowing it the stomach should be given 
a good, round motion from left to right, and then it should be taken fut slowly and 
gently.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 275 ---
THE HATHA YOGA PBADIPIKA.
17
srWter ^ ^ ^ 5 II 
H
There is no doubt, that cough, astlima, enlargement of the spleen, 
leprosy, and 
20 kinds of diseases born of phlegm, disappear by the 
practice of Dhauti Karma. 25.
srf^PR# ^
 
II
The Ba$ti 
.
Squatting in navel-deep water, and intrcdneing a six inches long, 
smooth piece of i an inch diameter pipe, open at both ends, half inside 
the anus ; it (anus) should be drawn up (contracted) and then expelled.. 
This washing is called the Basti Karma. 26.
II 
II
By practising this Basti Karma, colic, enlarged spleen, and dropsy, 
arising from the disorders of VSta (air), pitta (bile) and kapha (phlegm', 
are all cured. 27.
II 
II
By practising Basti with water, the Dh^tfls, the Indriyas and the 
mind become calm. 
Tt gives glow and tone to the body and increases the 
appetite. 
All the disorders disappear. 28.
f w 
II
I
p r r W w ^4str 
ii 
ii
The Neti m
A cord made of threads and about six inches long, should be passed 
through tile passage of the nose and the end taken out in the mouth. 
This is,called by adepts the Neti Karma. 
29.
II
^ II ^ 0 II
The Neti is the cleaner of the brain and giver of divine sight. 
It 
soon destro;^s all the diseases of the cervical and scapular regions. 3Q,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 276 ---
18
THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA.
\K II
The Tvdtaka (5TT5«B).
Being calm, one should gaze steadily at a small mark, till eyes are 
filled with tears. 
This is called Trataka by ftchftryas. 31.
%^lR T^!!i crgr^ gfi *»qidq>q: II
ii \\ ii
Trataka destroys the eye diseases and removes sloth, etc. 
It should 
be kept secret very carefully, like a box of jewellery. 32.
II
g*?f <Ho^m<HgTgrt i
^ 5 i ^ j s r s r ^ ii \\ ii
The Hauli
Sitting on the toes with heels raised above the ground, and the palms 
resting on the ground, and in thiff bent posture the belly is moved 
forcibly from left to right just, as in vomiting. 
This is called by adepts 
^tbe Nauli Karma. 33.
fn ^ 
^ 
*ar t e : ii 
ii
It removes dyspepsia, increases appetite and digestion, and is like 
the goddess of creation, and causes happiness. 
It dries np all the dis­
orders. 
This Nauli is an excellent exercise in Ha{ha Yoga. 34.
II 
II
The Kapdla BhM 
Wlfif.
When inhalation and exhalation are performed very quickly, like 
a pair of bellows of a blacksmith, it dries up- all the disorders from the 
excess of phlegm, and is known as Kapdla Bh4ti. 35.
sTnnranr gRr? 
ii \ \ ji
When Pr4nayi5raa is performed after getting rid of obesity bom 
of the defects phlegm, by the performance of the six duties, it easily brings 
success. 36. 
^
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 277 ---
THE UATRA YOGA PRADIPIKA.
19
^
 
*R5T fU r H
, 
in^ipfraf g 
^ #Rni^ii ^vs ii
Some achAryas (teachers) do not advocate any other practice, being 
of opinion that all 
the impurities are dried up by the practice of 
Pranayfi,ma. 
37.
4|^’ib<il5l(^ 
II 
II
Oajo KaraKci (»T3r«?:fe).
By carrying the Apana Vayu up to the throat, the food, etc,, in 
the stomach are vomited. 
By degrees, the system of Nadis (f^ankhint) 
becomes known. This is called in Haf.ha as Gaja Karapi. 38.
Hsrr^si^ 
ii
ii 
ii
Brahma and other Devas were always engaged in the exercise of 
Pranay&ma, and, by means of it, got rid of the fear of death. 
Therefore, 
one should practise pranayama regularly. 
39.
crRTc^T^vnT fer? ii «®Ji
So long as the breath is restrained in The body, so long as the mind is 
undisturbed, and so long as the gaze is fixed between the eyebrows, 
there is no fear from Death. 
40.
ii 
ii
When the system of Nadis becomes clear of the impurities by 
properly controlling the prana, then the air, piercing the entrance of the 
Su4umna, enters it easily. 
41.^
srsiTOt ii
^ 
II 
II
Manomani.
Steadiness of mind comes when the air moves freely in the middle. 
That is the raanonmani 
condition, which is attained when the
mind becomes calm. 
42.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 278 ---
20
m B HATH A YOQA PRADTPIBA.
f^hisTf‘w R z iR r r^ [iW 
ii 
h
To accompUsli it, various KambUakas are performed by those who 
are expert in the methods; for, by the practice of different Kumbhakas, 
wonderful success is attained. 
43.
W d f 
II
gr«jr ii
rs f *¥i«CT} II 
II
Different kinds of kumbhakas.
Kumbhakas are of eight kinds, piz., Sflrya Bhedan, UjjAyi, Sitkiri, 
Sitali, Bhastfika, Bhramart, Mdrchha, and Pl4vint. 
44.
g 
^
 
II
f 
t=sm ^ 
II 
ii
At the end of Phraka, Jalandhara Batidha should be performed, 
and at the end of Kumbhaka, and at the beginning of Rechaka, Uddiyana 
Bandba should be performed. 
45.
N .B.—PAraka is flUing in of the air from outside.
Kumbhaka is the keeping the air confined inside. Rechaka is expel­
ling the confined air. The instructions for Puraka, Kumbhaka and Rechaka 
will be found at their proper place and should be car-efully followed.
igqTrSi# ! 
ll 
il
By drawing up from below (Mdla Bandha) and contracting the 
throat (Jalandhara Bandha) 
and by pulling back the middle of the 
front portion of the body {i.e., belly), the Prana goes to the Brahma Nadi 
(Su§umna). 
46.
4'he middle hole, through the vertebral columu, througli which the spinal cord passes, 
is called the SusumuA Nddi of the Vogis. The two other sympathetic cords, one on each 
side of the spinal cord, are called the Idft and the PingaU Nadis. These will be described 
later on.
srnff 
ii
M r wKlI^l^th? 
51^11 
II
By pulling up the Ap4na V4yu and by forcing the Prana VAyu down 
the throat, the Yogi, liberated from old age, becomes young, as it were 
16 years old. 
47.
Note.-5^ nrlir gtwrsri 
i
55TW 
I 
%fo\ 
vs i
The seat of the Pr&na is the heart; of the Ap&na anus ; of the Ham^na the region 
about the navel; of the Ud4na the throat; while the Vyftna moves throughout the body.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 279 ---
THE BATIiA YOGA PRADIPIlCA.
21
^
 3 p ^ 
!!Rr; u
ii «<i u
Siirya Bhedana (^=1 ^ q ) .
Taking any comfortable postnre and performing the asaua, tlie 
Yogi should draw in the air slowly, through the right nostril. 
48,
# T C N n ^ f 
II
rRTJ ?alj ysqqreTi 
II 
II
Then it should be confined within, so that it fills from the nails to 
the tips of the hair, and then let out through the left nostril $lo}Vly. 
49.
Note.—This is to be done alternately with both the nostrils, drawing in through the 
one, expelling through the other, and v ic e v ersa ,
q>qr555ii^ 
ii
55T1 
q jR 
ii 
ii
This excellent Surya Bliedana cleanses the forehead (frontal sinus<»s), 
destroys the disorders of Vata, and removes the worms, and, therefore, it 
should be performed again and again. 
50.
Note.—
^
 
l 
*HS?«nq 5fta:^s«RT f q : II s II
p 
I 
«rerjrr??!R n 
ii
^ 
af^rajra^ ^ l 
n ^ h
% w $ i i r e i $ r ^ i ^ $ r m n q r a i ^ ^ 5 ^ 1 
11 « u
f lf t i$ ii5W
y 5^ f N g f W
» i v q 59riq i4a T q 
q p r R r a r a w 
i
yqreqq: 1 
g n «re ^
 anrart g 
ii t( 11
f^TftgPFlf 
I 3lRfq? JT?n^ 
II ^ II
s p S fiT 
I i l T i i i f i | P f l g q ^ 
R r ^ q w i a t n » 11
^nff^rq; 
i 
^
 jsft?! 
u *; n
q^wiT^ 
I sj«i^ 
II « II
wqf 
W
 fWW?T: 
| 
WIT 
IM o n
^
 
I 
q’v P l 4 ^ ^ : II n II
333ul^ ^
 fnf5?ft?5PTff stfW fai: I irfespN ?wwi?!i fu N im w n m q ; il n II 
g?r: 
w
i ^ i w : wrnsrt 
fqq i^igf^’TUR ii 
i;
i ? rw iT n tf^ t 
q i W i m » ii
^ 
5 ^ : I H«ni 
iSiwn ii 
n
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 280 ---
22
TUB EAT a A YOGA P RADI PIKA.
fttfa 
ll «53rNrf^ 
Whi5iT>^ =5 
II 11 «
?if^ 
1 
q^*TJw?ra^f?RtJ3t 11 ?« 11
I 
mn 
11 n; li
?Sr«?rflfBr §cgri^n 
i «i^r 
%?^swn?wr^ 11 n ii
«r«?raM ?R ^^rni^r ?i?r f ’t: i 
isrwrn^ 
H
3 
I *rT«T^ 3 i^ tf 4 ???rs ?n sr 
n 
11
Traoslabion : I ara goittg to describe the procedure of the practice of Yoga, in order 
that Yogis may succeed. A wise man should ieivo his bed in the Dsa Kala (La., at the 
peep of dawn or 4 o’clock) in the morning, 
t.
Remembering his guru over his head, and his desired deity in his heart, after an­
swering the calls of natgre, and cleaning his mouth, he should apply Bhasma (ashes). 2.
In a clean spot, clean room and charming ground, he should spread a soft dsana 
(cloth for sitting on). Having seated on it a nd remembering in his mind his guru and his 
God. 3.
Having extolled the place and the time and taking up the vow thus : ‘ To day by the 
grace of God, I Will perform BraoaySraas with asanas for gaining samadhi (trance) audits 
fruits.’ He should salute the infinite Dava, Lord of the Ndgas, to ensure success in the 
dsanas (postures). 4.
Salutation to the Lord of the N&gas, who is adorned with thousands of heads, set with 
brilliant jewels (manis), and who has sustained the whole universe, nourishes it, and is 
infinite. After this he should begin his exercise of Asanas and when fatiguod, he should 
practise |.’ava dsana. Should there be no fatigue, he should not practise it. 5.
Before Kuenbhaka, he should perform Ylparita Earn! mudrd, in order that be may be 
able to perform J&landhar ban^ha comfortably. 6.
Sipping a little water, he should begin the exercise of PrandyAma, after saluting 
Yogindras, as described in the Efirma PurAua, in the words of Siva. 7.
Such as “ Saluting Yogindras and their disciples and gnrfi YinAyaka, the Yogi should 
unite with me with composed mind." 8. 
, 
■ 
*
While practising, he should sit with $iddhAsana, and having performed bandha and 
Kumbhaka, should begin with 19 PranayAraas the first day, and goon increasing 5 daily. 9.
With composed mind 80 Kumbhakas should be performed at a time; beginning first 
with the Chandra (the left nostril) and thonsdrya (the right nostril). 
10.
This has been spoken of by wise men as Annioma and Viloma. Having practised 
Sftrya Bhedan, with Bandhas, the wise man should practise Ujjayi and then SitbAri 
Sitali, and BhastrikA, he may practice others or not. U-12.
He should practise mudrAs properly, as instructed by his gurfi. Then sitting with 
PadmAsana, he should hear auAhata nAda attentively. 
13.
He should resign th e fr u its o f a l l his p ra ctice r e v e r e n tly to God, and, on rising on 
the completion of the practice, a warm bath should be taken. 14.
The bath should bring all the daily duties briefly to an end. • At noon also a little rest 
should be taken at the end of th© exercise, and then food should be taken. 15.
Yogis should always take wholesome food and never anything unwholesome. After 
dinner he should eat IIAchl or lavanga. 18.
Some like camphor, and betel leaf. To the Yogis, practising PrApAyAma, betel leaf 
without powders, i. e., lime, nuts and kAtha, is fomieficial. 17.
After taking food he should, rea^, books treating of salvation, or hear PnrAnas and 
repeat the name of God. 18. 
~
^
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 281 ---
THE HATHA YOOA PBADIPIKA.
23
In the eyening the exercise should be begun after finishing sandyhS, as before, 
beginning the practice 8 ghatikfi or one hour before the sun sets. 19.
Evening sandhya should aWrays be performed after practice, and Hatha Yoga should 
be practised at midnight. 20.
Yiparita Kaptii is to be practised in the evening and at midnight, and not just after 
eating, as it does no good at this time. 21.
sn^hRim T^ 
h
Ujj^yi
Having closed the opening of the Nadi (Larynx), the air should be 
drawn in such . a way that it goes touching from the throat to the chest, 
and making noise while passing. 
51.
cFfni
It sboidd be restrained, as before, and then let out through Ida (the 
left nostrilK -This removes iflesma (phlegm) in the throat and increases 
the appetite. 
52.
It destroys the defects of the n&dis, dropsy and disorders of Dh&tu 
(liutnours). 
t/jjayi should be performed in all conditions of life, even while 
walking or sitting. 
53.
H '!« U
^ 
SitMH (#5«f€l).
SitkSri is performed by drawing in the air through the mouth, keep­
ing the tongue between the lips. 
The air thus drawn in should not be 
expelled through the mouth. By practising in this way, one becomes next 
to the God of Love in beauty. 
54.
a ^
 a ^
 
sra ia t«
n
He is regarded adorable by the Yoginis and becomes the destroyer of 
the cycle of creation. 
He is not afflicted with hunger, thirst, sleep or 
lassitude. 
05.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 282 ---
24
TEE HATHA YOGA PRADIFIKA.
^ 
II
^
 
^
 
II 
II
The Satwa of his body becomes free from all the disturbances. In 
truth, he becomes the lord of the Yogis in this world. 
56.
II
% ?ir 
II
^[R^ghrosmiqf 
ii Hvs h
iSitali
As in the above (Sitk^ri), the tongue to be protruded a little out of 
the lips, when the air is drawn in. 
It is kept confined, as before, and then 
expelled slowly through the nostrils. 
57. .
f^^rrftr ^grrg ^ g riff 
% ii v
 ii
This $itali Kuinbhika cures colic, (enlarged) spleen, fever, disorders 
of bile, hunger, thirst, and counteracts poisons. 
58.
¥r%R5T II
The BhaStriM (« T ^ ^ )
The Padma ^sana consists in crossing the feet and placing them 
on botli tlie thighs ; it is the destroyer of all sins. 
59.
tniRf^r w m 
h
5n# srwR 
ii v ii
Binding the Padma-Asana and keeping the body straight, closing 
the mouth carefully, let the air be expelled through the nose. 
60.
^g5^«5Ti^C?qr!n^Tn^?n^ii %x ii
It should be filled up to the lotus of the heart, by drawing it in with 
force, making noiseand touching the throat, the chest and the head. 
61.
m n 
ii %■:{ ii
It should be expelled again and filled again and again as before, just 
as a pair of bellows of the blacksmith is worked. 
62.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 283 ---
TEE HATHA YOOA PRADIPIKA.
25
^
 II
gi^ 
II 
II
In the same way, the air of the body should be moved intelligently, 
filling it through Sfirya when fatigue is expei-ienced. 
63.
irsqgl^^t»rt 
II %H II
The air should be drawn in through the right nostril by pressing the 
thumb against the left side of the nose, so as to close the left nostril; and 
when filled to the full, it should be closed with the fourth finger (the one 
next to the little finger) and kept confined. 
64.
Having confined it properly, it should be expelled through the Idfi, 
(left nostril). 
This destroys Vata, pitta (bile) and phlegrn and increases the 
digestive power (the gastric fiie), 
65.
It quickly awakens the Ku^dalinl, purifies the system, gives pleasure, 
and is beneficial. 
It destroys phlegm and the impurities accumulated at 
the entrance of the Brahma Nadi. 
66.
I’his Bhastrikfi should be performed plentifully, for it breaks the 
three knots : Brahma granthi (in the chest), Visnu granthi (in the throat), 
and Rudra granthi (between the eyebrows) of the body. 
67.
The Bhrdmari (?rrad).
By filling the air with force, making noise like Bhringi (wasp), and 
expelling it slowly, making noise in the same way; this practice causes a 
sort of ecstacy in the minds of Yogiudras. 
68.
II 
II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 284 ---
26
TEE HATHA YOOA PBADIPIKA.
The Mtirelihd_
Closing the passages with Jalandhar Bandha firmly at the end of 
Pfiraka, and expelling the air slowly, is called Mfirehhfi, from its causing 
the mind to swoon and giving comfort. 
69.
H vs® n
The Pldvini
When the belly is filled with air and the inside of the body is filled 
to its utmost with air, the body floats on the deepest water, like the leaf of 
a lotus. 
76.
sn^Hwini^vsii s n ^ 
wRt \
^ifert 
f 
H 
»
Considering Puraka (Filling), Rechaka (expelling) and Itumbbaka 
(confining), Pr4nay&ma is of three^ kinds, but considering it accompanied 
by Pfiraka and Rechaka, and without these, it is -of two kinds only, ie.,' 
Sahita (with) and Kevala (alone). 
71.
_ 
- ^ ♦ 
__ V 
.
rt 
i
H V9t( u
Exercise in Sahita should be continued till success in Kevala is 
gained. 
This latter is simply confining 
the air with ease, without 
Rechaka and Pfiraka. 
72.
ll V9^ II
In the practice of Kevala Pranayt\ma when it can-be performed suc­
cessfully without Rechaka and Puraka, then it is called Kevala Kumhhaka.
73. 
• 
'
•T 51^ 
IW W I
II vsa II
There is nothing in the three worlds which may be diflicult to obtain 
for him who is able to keep the air confined according to pleasure, by 
means of Kevala Kumbhaka. 
74.
f 
f
I
I
 vsv\ ii
He obtains the position of R^ja Yoga undoubtedljr. 
Kun4alint
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 285 ---
TEE EATEA YOGA PBADIPIKA.
27
awakens by Knmbhaka, and by its awakening, Susumna becomes free from 
impurities. 
75.
W? 
f%5IT ^
 H
51 
51^ 
ii vs^ »i
No success in RAja Yoga witbont Hatba Yoga, and no success in 
Hatha Yoga without Rftja Yoga. 
One «hould, therefore, practise both of j 
these well, till complete success is gained. 
76,
f w m o t m f t 
^ = o w i; I
u vys h
On the completion of Kumbhaka, the mind should be given rest. By 
practising in this way one is raised to the position of (succeeds in getting) 
R4ja Yoga. 
77. 
.
515: 
5ra% 
1
H vs<i H
Indications of success in the 'practice of Eatha Yoga.
When the body becomes lean, the face glows with delight, AnShata- 
nada manifests, and eyes are clear, body is healthy, hind'u under control, 
and appetite increases, then one should know that the Nadis are purified andi 
success in Hatha Yoga is approaching. 
78.
End of Chapter II.
. . ^ .* A * -—
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 286 ---
CHAPrER III.
On Mudras.
I
^fmefsmnt ?r«n«n^ ft f 
ii \ ii
As the chief of the snakes is the support of the earth with all the 
mountains and foresta on it, so all the Tantras (Yoga practices) rest 
on the Kupd*ihnl. 
{The Vertebral column.) 
1.
^?ir 
snFw ^ 
i
q w ft ftr a t 
n 
n
When the sleeping Kundalini awakens by favour of a grarw, th en all 
the lotuses (in the six chakras or centres) and all the knots are pierced 
through. 
2.
srrtn^ 
^r«jr 
\
# r c r ^ * 
u ^ H
Susumna (Sunya Padavt) becomes a main . road for the passage of 
Pr&na, and the mind then becomes free from all connections (with its 
objects of enjoyments) and Death is then evaded. 
3.
SusumnS, Sunya Padavl, Brahma Randhra, MahS^ Patha, SmasStoa, 
Sambhav!, Madhya MS,rga, are names of one and the same thing. 
4.
^
 
ii ^ ii
In order, therefore, to awaken this goddess, who is sleeping at the 
entrance of Brahma DwSra (the great door), mudrAs should be practised 
well. 
5.
»mrggr 
i
. 
ii % u
The mudrds.
Maha MudrS, Maha Bandha, Maha Vedha, 
Khecha^, Uddiy^^na 
Bandha, Mhla Bandha, Jalandhara Bandha. 
6.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 287 ---
TUB EATBA YOGA PBABIPIKA.
29
g s n ^ ^ ^<w<<iwKW*j[ II v9 II
Viparita Karant, Vajroli, and Sakti Chiilana. 
These are the ten 
Mudras which annihilate old age and death, 
7.
- -fv 
- _^ 
- 
,
m w m f^ ii <i ii
They have been explained by S.di Natha (Siva) and give eight kinds 
of divine wealth, 
They are loved by all the Siddhas and are hard to 
attain even by the Marntas. 
8.
N ote.— T h e eight Aiitaaryas are: Anim& (becoming small, like aa atnm), MahimA 
(becoming great, like Akfts, by drawing in atoms of Prakriti), GarimA (U ^t things, like 
cotton becoming very heavy like mountains.)
Prftpti (coming within easy reach of everything; a? touching the moon with the little 
finger, while standing on the earth.)
PrAkfimya (non-resistance to the desires, as entering the earth like water.)
isatA (mastery over matter and objects made of it.)
Vas'itwa (controlling the animate and inanimate objects.)
f
n ^ w
These Mudi*As should be kept secret by every means, as on© keeps 
one’^ [box of jewellery, and should, on no account be told to any one, just 
as husband and wife keep their dealings secret- 
9.
The mahd mudrd.
Pressing the Yoni (perineum) with* the heel of the left foot, and 
stretching forth the right foot, its 'toe should he grasped by tbe thumb 
and first finger. 
10.
^
 
^
 
SRIWt II U H
crar 
flilr^ll
5R[r ^ 
%3STsrarii tR II
By stopping the throat (by Jalandhara Bandha) the air k drawn in 
from the outside and carried down. 
Just as a snake struck with a stick 
becomes straight like a stick, in the same way, sdkti (susumnA,) becomes 
straight at once. 
Then the Kup(lalini, beccwning as it were dead, and,
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 288 ---
30
THE h a t h a yoga PEADIPIKA.
leaving both the Ida and the Pingala, enters the sn§umn& (the middle 
passage). 
11-12,
m t 
II
ufigjtf <Er^^%ftf^r5WT{ II 
^ ^
 
II II
ffgrs^^ii^^i 
II
^ ^
 
II ^«ii
It should he expelled then, slowly only and not violently. 
For this
very reason, the best of the wise men call it the MahS MudrS. 
This MahS
Mudr4 has been propounded by great mastei-s. 
13.
♦
Oreat evila and pains, like death, are destroyed by it, and for 
this reason wise men call it the Maha MudrA. 
14.
3 w rvfm 
ii
c i ^ g
i
t
t
ii
Having practised with the left nostril, it should be practised with 
the right one ; and, when the number on both sides becomes equal, then 
the mudrS should be discontinued. 15.
iif^r 
^
 
ii 
ii
There is nothing wholesome or inj urious; for the practice of this 
mudr^ destroys the injurious effects of all the rasas (chemicals). 
Even 
the deadliest of poisons, if taken, acts like nectar. 16.
II
^
 
^
 
3 ^5W I^II ?VS II
Consumption, leprosy, prolapsus anii, colic, and the diseases due 
to indigestion,— all these irregularities are removed by the practice of this 
Maha Mudrfl,. 17.
^ N ^ l SRRN 
^
 
H \< II
This MahS Mudri has been described as the giver of great success 
(Siddhi) to men. 
It should be kept secret by every effort, and not revealed 
to any and everyone. 18.
m i jursi^r: ii
II
a w ii 
ii
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 289 ---
THE HATHA YOQA PRADIPIKA.
31
The Mahd Bandha.
Press the left heel to the perineum and place the right foot on the 
left thigh. 19.
a tr m g
Pill in the air, keeping tlje chin firm against the chest, and, having 
pressed the air, the mind should he fixed on die middle of the eyebrows 
or in the susumnfi, (the spine). 20.
51^: n
Having kept it confined so long as - possible, it shoul(^ be expelled 
slowly. Having practised on the left side, it should be practised on the 
right side. 21.
U5W3T 5 
II
ii 
ii
Some are of opinion that the closing of throat is not necessary here, 
for beeping the tongue pressed against the roots of the upper teeth makes 
a good bandha (stop). 22.
in i ^
 
II 
II
This stops the upward motion of all the NSdls. 
Verily tliis MahS 
Bandha is the giver of great Siddhis. 23.
^
 
ii 
ii
This MahS Bandha is the most skilful means for cutting away* the 
snares, of death. 
It brings about the conjunction of the Trivenl (I<Jfi, 
PingalS and ^usumna) and carries the mind to Kedar (the space between 
the eyebrows, which is the seat of ^iva). 24.
?rar ^
 
ii
ii 
ii
As beauty and loveliness, do not avail a woman without husband, 
so the Mahd. Mudrd and the Maha-Bandha are useless without the Mahfi 
Vedha. 25.
II
nO w if gi 
#®gs[?Jr II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 290 ---
32
TUB EATUA YOGA PRADlPlKA.
The Mahd Vedha.
Sitting with MahS Bandha, the Yogi should fill in the air and keep 
his mind collected. The movements of the Ydyus (Prdaa and Apana) should 
be stopped by closing the throat.) 26.
II
irsPTJ II ^V9II
Resting both the hands equally on the ground, he should raise him­
self a little and strike his buttocks against the ground gently. 
The air, 
leaving both the passages (IdS and Pingala), starts 
ibto the middle 
one. 
27.
a g m w w 
ii 
II
The union of the Idfl. and the PingaU is effected, in order to bring 
abont immortalhy. 
When the air becomes ae it were dead (by leaving its 
couiue through the Id& and the Pingal4) (i.e., when it has been kept 
confined), then it should be expelled. 
28.
u 
II
The practice of this Maha Vediia, the giver of great" Siddhis, destroys 
old age, grey hair, and shaking of the body, and therefore it is practised 
by the best piasters. 
29.
^
 8lPiW li^g^lW>^4i II 
II
These three are the great secrets. They are the destroyers of old age 
and death, increase the appetite, confer the accomplishments of Anim4, etc. *
30.
^n«rr 
^
 
^
 ii
It 
II
They should be practised in 8 ways, daily and hourly. They increase 
collection of good actions and lessen the evil ones. People, instructed well, 
should begin their practice, little by little, first. 31.
II
^
 s r f ^ 
II
II 
II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 291 ---
THE HATHA YOOA PRADIPIKA.
33
The Khechari.
The Khechari Mudr^. is accomplished by thrusting the tongue into 
the gullet, by turning it over itself, and keeping the eyesight in the 
middle of the eyebrows. 32.
^
 
ii
?rr 
^
 
u 
ii
To accomplish this, the tongue is lengthened by cutting the freenum 
lingua?, moving, and pulling it. 
l¥hen it can touch the space between 
the eyebrows, then Khechari can be accomplished. 33.
II 
M
Taking a sharp, smooth, and dean instinment, of the shape of a 
cactus leaf, the freenum of the tongue should be cut a little (as much 
as a hair’s thickness), at a time. 34.
jst: 
Jii^ 
V\ ii
Then rock salt and yellow myrobalan (both -powdered)* should be 
rubbed in. 
On the 7th day, it should again be cut a hair’s breadth. 35.
ii 
ii
One should go on doing thus, regularly for six months. At the end 
of six months, the fraenum of the tongue will be completely cut. 36.
^
 
II
m 
gs[r 
ii 
u
Turning the tongue upwards, it is fixed on the three ways (oesophagus, 
windpipe and palate.) 
Thus it makes the Khechari Mudrfl, and is celled 
the Vyoma Chakra. 37,
9FIT eiiTNi^^spOl^t II ^<£ II
The Yogi who sits for a minute turning his tongue upwards, is saved 
from poisons, diseases, death, old age, etc. 38.
^ 
JTC5rf #j[r *1 fJSH’ ^ ^srr ^
 |i
V^.ii
He who knows the Khechari Mudra is not afflicted with disease, 
death, sloth* sleep, hunger, thirst, and swooning. 39.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 292 ---
34
TaE EATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA.
M iw r ^ ^ t i w R5CJW »i 
srennf ii 
yrsi^ $1 y 
^ gi[t li% #5R itq; ii 90 II
He who knows the Khechari. Mudrf, is not troubled by diseases, is 
not stained with karmas, and is not snared by time. 40.
^
 «PC% ^ 
% n?n M
?l#sTr 
fs[T 
II 9t II
The Siddhas have devised this Khechari Mudrli from the fact that 
the mind and the tongue reach akfisla by its practice. 41.
^ 
^f^f^rstcTJ II
• 
?R!? ^1^ f% j s iriiF n # i^ R i^ II9;^ II
If the hole behind the palate be stopped with Khechari by turning 
the tongne upwards, then bindu cannot leave its place even if a woman 
were embraced. 42.
^ m f ^ i i m\ w
If the Yogi drinks Somarasa (juice) by sitting with the tongue turned 
backwards and mind concentrated, there is no doubt he conquers death 
within 15 days. 43.
5T^!i sf 
II99 II
If the Yogi, whose body is full of Somarasa (juice), were bitten by 
Takshaka (snake), its poison cannot permeate his body. 44.
wsa ^ t44<b<!tl^41l ^
 ^ !f 5*^{rT II 9^ II
As fire is inseparably connected with the wood and light is connected 
with the wick and oil, so does the soul not leave the body full of nectar 
exuding from the Soma. 45.
A'ote.—Soma (Chandra) is described later on located in the thonsand-petalled lotos 
in the human brain, and is the same as is seen on bivas’ head in pictures, and from which 
a sort of juice exudes. It is the retaining of this exudation which makes one immortal.
Rjl^TFE^T^lSlI^ll 
cHT^ 
?[cl^ 
II 9^ II
Those who'eat the flfesh of the cow and drink the immortal liquor 
daily, are regarded by me men of noble family. 
Others are b)jt a disgrace 
to their families. 
46.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 293 ---
TEE RATH A YOGA PR ADI PIKA.
35
??S5 '5 sr^ 
I
5Rrtqr?r' 5 ?!!% 
11
Translation ; Fortunate are the parents and blessed Is the country and the family 
where a Yogi is born. Anything given to such a Yogi, becomes immortal. One, who dis­
criminates between Burusa and prakriti, purges the sins of a million incarnations, by 
seeing, speaking, and touching such men (i.e,, Yogi.)
I 
H airt|
A Yogi far exceeds a thousand householders, a hundred vdnaprasthas, and a thousand' 
Brahmacharis.
e [iiS iii^ fii^ 
® 
I 
% ’ 5 R^cT?qmwi n
•Wi 
m fiPRTsi' 
1 % 
il
Who can know the reality of the lUja Yoga ? That country is very sacred WhSf® 
resides a man who knows it. By seeing and honouring him, generations of ignorant raen 
get mok$a, what to speak of those who are actually engaged in it. He who knows internal 
and external yoga, deserves adoration from you and me, what if he is adored by the rest 
of mankind! 
.
Those who engage in the great yoga, once, twice or thrice daily, are to be known as 
masters of great wealth (maheshWaras) or Lords.
, 
ferfT 
^ 
»
W T R m R R q ;n «is u
The word 
means tongue ; eatiug it is thrusting it in the gullet 
which destroys great sins. 
47,
iiTC; ^ 
II 
II
Immortal liquor is the nectar exuding from the moon (Chandra 
situated on the left side of the space between the eyebrows). 
It is pro­
duced bj' the fire which is generated by thrusting the tongue. 
48.
^
 
II
s q i^ ^
If the tongue can touch with its end the hole from which falls the 
rasa (juicet which is saltish, bitter, sour, milky and similar to ghee ancl
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 294 ---
36
TEE HATHA YOQA PRADIPIKA.
honey, one can drive away disease, destroy old age, can evade an attack 
of arms, become immortal in eight ways and can attract fairies. 
49.
tr¥5riT3r<nr»T%cr
q-^rf f^cT«rq;.n 
?r: 
^
^
 
ii \o ii
He who drinks the clear stream of liquor of the moon (soma) falling 
from the brain to the sixteen-petalled lotus (in the heart), obtained by 
means of PrSna, by applying the tongue to the hole of the pendant in the 
palate, and by meditating on the great power (Kundalini), becomes free 
from disease and tender in body, like the stalk of a lotus, and the Yogi 
lives a very Jpng life. 
50.
cT%reR# sr^flr ^ 1*3 ^ 
11
II 
II
On the top of the Merd (vertebral column), concealed in a hole, is the 
Somarasa (nectar of Ohandra); the wise, whose intellect is not over­
powered by Raja and Tama gunas, but in whom, Satwa guna is pre­
dominant, say there is the (universal spirit) dtma in it. 
It is the 
source of the down-going Ida, Pingald and Susumnd N4dis, which are 
the Ganges, the Yamuna and the Sarasvati. 
From that Ohandra is shed 
the essence of the body which causes death of men. 
It should, therefore, 
be stopped from shedding. 
This (Khechari Mudrd) is a very good instru­
ment for this purpose. 
There is no other means of achieving this end.
51.
11 
»
This hole is the generator of knowledge and is the source of the 
five streams (Idd, Pingala, &c.). In that colorless vacuum, Khechari Mudra 
should be established. 
52.
q;%r ^
 
ii 
ii
There is only one seed germinating the whole universe from i t ; and 
there is only one Mudrd, called Khechari. 
There is only one deva (god) 
without any one’s support, and there is one condition called Manonmani. 
53.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 295 ---
THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA.
37
^
 ^
 
m t i
5T€Tr^hRn5^S<f 
II 
»
The U44iy^na Bandha.
U4diyaiia is so called by, the Yogis, because by its practice tlie 
PrAna (Vdyu,) flies (flows) iu the Su^utna^, 
54.
u iran; II
ii 
ii
TJddiydaa is so called, because the great bird, PrSua, tied to it, flies 
without being fatigued. 
It is explained below. 
55.
^
 ^
a iria % ^ d ii 
ii
The belly above the navel is pressed backwards towards the spine. 
This UdfliySna Bandha is like a lion for the elephant of death, 
56.
3^% ^ 5 
II
rreurra^ ii ^ ii
Udfliy^na is always very easy, when learnt froni a guru. 
The 
practiser of this, if old, becomes young again. 
57.
^ 
IIV II
The portions above and below the navel, should be drawn backwards 
towards the spine. 
By practising this for six months one can undoubtedly 
conquer death. 
58.
^
 5 ^ 5 
«^g(ii 
II
Of all the Bandhas, UddiySna is the best; for by binding it firmly 
liberation comes spontaneously. 
59.
m t ij^sNrt II
II %o II
The MAla Bandha.
Pressing Yoni (perineum) with the heel, contract up the anus, 
drawing thJ ApS,na thus, Mfila Bandha is made. 
60.
By
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 296 ---
38
THE HATHA YOGA P E A m P IK A .
# STIfjf55^«T ^ ^tPr j II %\ II
The Apana, naturally inclining downward, is made to go up by force. 
This Miila Bandha is spoken of by Yogis as done by contracting the anus.
61.
g if urtwif g 
II
wpN k 
^rrfkw: ii \\ ii
Pressing the heel well against the anus, draw up the air by force, 
again and again till it (air) goes up. 
62.
m w n % 
ii
• »t?SIT 
II 
II
Prdpa, Apfina, Nada and Bindu uniting into one in this way, give 
success in Yoga, Undoubtedly. 
63.
i T<7r?w iiH ^i^^* ^
 
ii
5stT 
?i?Rf i^ 's r s iT ^ ii 
ii
By the purifioafion of Prfina, and Apana, urine and excrements 
decrease. 
Even an ol-d man becomes young by constantly practising 
Mula Bandha. 
64.
II
^
 
II 
II
Going up, the Apana enters the zone of fire, i.e., the stomach. The 
flame of fire struck by the air is thereby lengthened. 
65.
3 «mnufr 
# i 
qra# ii
* n g ^ —
In the centre of the body is the .seat of fire, like heated gold.
In men it is triangular, in quadrupeds square, in birds circular. There is a long 
thin flame in this fire.
It is gastric fire.
citfr ^
 
i
ii 
ii
These, fire and Apina, go to the naturally hot Prana, which, becoming 
inflamed thereby, causes burning sensation in the body. 66.
^
 f 
5§5rr 
i
aegcTT 
ii 
ii
The Kundalini, which has been sleeping all this time, becomes well 
heated by this means'and awakens well. 
It becomes straight like a ser­
pent, struck dead with a stick. 67. 
*
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 297 ---
TELE HATBA YOGA PBADIPIKA.
39
$ d ^ 
aspiRsraT 9 ^ I
^
 ii 
ii
It enters the Brahma N^dJ, just as a serpent enters its hole. 
There­
fore, the Yogi should always practise this Mula Bandha. G8.
51% 
ii 
ii
The Jalandhara Bandha.
Contract the throat and press the chin firmly against the chest. 
This is called J&Iandhara Bandha, which destroys old age and death. 69.
WTRT It j^RWI^SflMnilfH 
I
a ^ 3TR5«i^ 5T*«r5 
:%^TanrR: ii \so u
It stops the opening (hole) of the group of the NAdis, through which 
the juice from the sky (from the Soma or Chandra in the brain) falls down. 
It is, therefore, called the Jalandbaru Bandha —the destroyer of a host of 
diseases of the throat. 70.
5T*^ ^5?^a%^5r^ I
5f 
q a ^ # a ^ 
srfc?i% h vst ii
In Jalandhara Bandha, the indications of a perfect contraction of 
thtoat are, that the nectar does not fall into the five (the Sfirya situated in 
the navel), and the air is not disturbed. 71.
$ a rtir ^ a W ^ q ; I 
^TS?atqRq«Rq( ii 
w
The two Nfidis should be stopped firmly by contracting the throat. 
This is called the middle circuit or centre (Madhya Ohakrah and it stops 
the 16 fedharas («.e., vital parts). 72.
Aote.- ^
 
I 
^ 1 ^ !f#!5T 5WT il
«q«!* =51 ^ 2 ^9 
sifqsRR I <5^ qtemws 
Ii
The sixteen vital parts mentioned by renowned Yogis are the (1) thumbs, '(2> ankles, 
(3) knees, (4) thighs, (5) the prepuce, (6) organs of .generation, (17) the navel, (8) the 
heart, (9) the neck, (10) the throat, (It) the palate, (12) Ijje nose, (IS) the middle of the 
eyebrows, (14) the fOrehead,^ (15) the head and (16) the Brahma randhra.
^OTif 
5 s n r ^ ii
^
 ^ fiN st 
u
By drawing np the mulasth&na (anus,) Ud^iy^na Bandha should be 
performed. 
The flow of the air should be directed to the Sufuinmi., by 
closing the ?dS, and the PingalS. 73. 
-
I
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 298 ---
40
TEE HATHA YOGA PSADTPIKa .
:p ir^ 
nsm i i
rr^ !f srwi^ 
^
 n w ii
The Pr&aa becomes calm aad latent by this means, and thus 
there is no death, old age, disease, etc. 
74.
i|4d«tn5j 
ii vs^ ii
These three Bandhas ai*e the best of all and have been practised by 
the masters. 
Of all the means of success in the Hatha Yoga, they are 
known to the Yogis aa the chief ones. 
75.
• 
f^flT 
u 
«
The whole of the nectar, possessing divine qualities, which exudes 
from the Soma (Chandra) is devoured bj' the Sdrya ; and, owing to this, 
the body becomes old. 
76.
c r a r % 
i
?r'?i «T 5 
u vm ii
To remedy this, the opening of the Shrya is avoided by excellent 
means. 
It is to be learnt best by instructions from a guru; but not by 
"feven a million discussions. 
77.
IW 
II
3ri|5irJwrerT^re;w 
51^ 1
II ^
 II
The Viparita Karani-
Above the navel and below the palate respectively, are the Sfirya 
and the Chandra. 
The exercise, called the Viparita Karani, is learnt from 
the guru’s instructions. 
78.
w m x 
^ II
4igMi^ilT ^
 
(R^nm^ii 
ii
This exercise increases the appetite ; 
and, therefore, one who 
practises it, should obtain a good supply of food. If the food be scantyi 
it will burn him at once. 
79.
5fPnre tV F i^ rs ro iT v q y ^ 
II < o ii
Place the head on the ground and the feet up into the sky, for a 
second only the first day, and increase this time daily. 80.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 299 ---
THE HATHA YOGA PU ABlPltA.
41
w r n d r ^ »t 
ii
v m w w 5 ^ 
5 
u 
ii
After six mouths, the wrinkles and grey hair are not seen. 
He who 
practises it daily, even for two hours, conquers death. Si.
^ f^5!FiT% 
irrfr 
ii
The VajroU.
Even if one who lives a wayward life, without observing any rules of 
Yoga, but performs Vajroli, deserves success and is a Yogi. 8^.
I
^
 ^
 
5 
^ 
II <\ ii
Two things are necessary for this, and these are difiScult to get for 
the ordinary people—fl) milk and (2) a woman behaving, as desired. 83.
By practising to draw in the hindu, discharged daring cohabitation, 
whether one be a man or a woman, one obtains success in the practice of 
Vajroli. 84.
51^; 
s rfg % 
II 
ll
By means of a pipe, one should blow air slowly into the passage.in 
the male organ. 85.
w
^ i i 
II
By practice, the discharged bindu is drawn out. 
One can draw back 
and preserve one’s own discharged hindu. 
86,
^ 
I
fe*5«m:5i!iigi;ii <ivs II
The Yogi 
who can protect his* bindu 
thus, 
overcomes death; 
because death comes by discharging bindu, and life is prolonged by its 
preservation. 
87.
w w T ^ srraw 
i
?iRr? 
t t 
ii 
ii
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 300 ---
42
TEW BATEA YOOA PEADIPIKA.
By preserving bindu, the body of the Yogi emits a pleasing smell. 
There is no fear of death, so long as the bindu. is wrell-established .in the 
body. 
88.
srac5|^: H 
a
The bindu of men is under the. control of the mind, and life is 
dependent on the bindu. 
Hence, mind and bindu should be protected by 
all means. 
89.
•31% 
ii 
II
The SahajoU.
Sahajoli and Amaroli are only the different kinds of Vajroli. Ashes 
from bnrnt up cowdung should be mixed with water. 
90.
Being free from the exercise of Vajroli, man and woman should both 
rub it on their bodies.V 91.
^TTPlfirt ^
 II
^
 
ii 
ii
This is called Sahajoli, and 
should be relied on by Yogis. 
It 
does good and gives moksa. 
9^.
trmt 5< iw rt 
ii
^ 
ii 
ii
This Yoga is achieved by courageous wise men, who are free from 
sloth, and cannot be accomplished by the slothful. 
93. 
’
^ffcT^TTSi^rncr <»iMii^% 
ii V i ii
The Amaroli.
In the doctrine of the sect o f the KdpSlikas, the Amaroli is the drink­
ing of the mid stream; leaving the 1st, as it is a mixture of too much .bile 
and the last, which is useless. 
94.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 301 ---
TEE EATHA YOGA PBADIPIKA.
43
W p ff ?T5 
^
 
II
He who drinks Amari, snuffs it daily, and practices Vajroli, is called 
practising Amaroli. 
95.
^
 
II
s m
^ II 
II
The Mndu discharged in the practice of Vajroli should be mixed 
with ashes, and the rubbing it on the best parts of the body gives divine 
sight. 
96.
II
f 
II ^vs II
The ^ahti ohdlana.
Kutilangi (crooked-bodied), 
Kundalini, Bhujangi (a she-serpent) 
Sakti, Miwai’i, Kundali, Arundhati,—all these words are synonymous. 
97.
5 w
 f
t
s
m
;
 II
win Srrfr 
^ v i ^ i i v ii
As a door is opened with a key, so the Yogi opens the door of mukti 
by opening Kppdalini by means of Hatha yoga. 
98.
^
 i T ^ 
ii
qT6r»g?!tii 
II
The Paramesfwari (Kupdalini) sleeps, covering the hole of the passage 
by which one can go to the seat of Brahma which is free froiu pains. 
99.
f 
^
 
II
W s p m ^ 
^ 
II \ o o II
Kundali Sakti sleeps on the bulb, for the purpose of giving moksa to 
Yogis and bondage to the ignorant. He who knows it, knows Yoga. 
100.
f S # fi^ ^ l»*iK I 
II
m ^ it^ ^ ii^ d i ^
 ^ g r^ 
ii K^K n
Kundali is of a bent shape, and has been described to bo like a 
serpent. He who has moved that ^akti is no doubt Mukta (released from 
bondage). 
101.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 302 ---
44
THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA.
Yoaagster Tapasmni (a she-ascetic), lyiog between the Ganges and 
tbe Yaman^, (fdd and Pingala) should be caught hold of by force, to get 
the highest position. 
102.
f^f»R5r ?ifSTr 
h
a n ^ r ^ f 
II \ 9 \ II
Id& is called goddess 
Ganges, Pingal4 goddess YamunA. 
In the 
middle of the IdS and the Pingald is the infant widow, Kunijali. 
103.
fts[t 
^
 
fs ig ; II 
II
This sieeping'she-Serpent should be awakened by catching hold of 
her tail. 
By* the force of Hatha, the iSabti leaves her sleep, and starts 
upwards. 
104.
wg'feraT 
^ sTT?Ri^ ^rnr 
h
s r ^ 
si^sr 
tR'y[i<jiJ5^i' ii 
ii
This she-serpent is situated in MfilSdhftr. 
She should be caught 
and moved daily, morning and evening, for | a prahar (IJ hours), by 
filling with air through PingalS, by the Paridhana method. 
105.
3Ti# flR Tfem n r 3 f^reait 
II
sfN? 
II 
II
The bulb is above the anus, a vitasti (12 augulas) long, and measures 
4 angulas (3 inches) in extent and is soft and white, and appears as if a 
folded cloth. 
106.
q r tr 
II
^
 5T5T 
ii 
n
Keeping the feet in Vajra-S,sana (Padma-asana), hold them firmly 
with the hands. The position of the bulb then will be near the ankle joint, 
where it should be pressed. 
107.
f
I
I
 ^0^ II
The Yogi, sitting with Vajra-fisana and having moved Kuydali, 
should perfora Bhastrikli to awaken the Kundall soon. 
108.
f? r : ii 
ii
Bhfinu (Sfirya, near the navel) should be contracted (by contracting 
the navel) which will move the Kupdali. 
There is no fear/or him who 
does so, even if he has entered the mouth of death- 
109.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 303 ---
TEE RATE A YOGA PR ADI PIKA.
45
g g g ^ T ii u » »
By moving this, for two muhhrtas, it is drawn up a little by entering 
the Susumna (spinal column). 
110.
^
 
rRSTTt 
f t
SlfrfcT rRWcSn%s4 ^55Tf 
H K l\ II
By this Kuandlini leaves the entrance of the SusumnA at once, and 
the PrSna enters it of itself. 
H I.
cT ^ : 
^
 
s r g ^ t « U r II
Therefore, this comfottably sleeping Arundhatt should always be 
moved ; for by so doing tlie Yogi gets rid of diseases. 
112;
^|5lT^ s?# 3m% 
II U ^ ii
The Yogi, who has been able to move tho'iSakti deserves success. 
It 
is useless to say more, suffice it to say that he conquers death playfully. 
113.
%%•: f 
II U « II
The Yogi observing Brahmacharya (continence' and always eating 
sparingly, gets success within 40 days by practice with the Kundalini. 114.
5 w
t fq W N g r t ii
M 
II U'^ II
After moving 
the Kurnlali, plenty of BhastrS should be per­
formed. 
By such practice, he has no fear from the god of death. 
115.
fgrt 
f
\\ \\% ii
There is no other way, but the practice of the Kundali, for washing 
away the impurities of 72,000 Nadls. 
116.
5 iram r su it 
I
fjRRsrnn^wmfSCrf^* 
ii 
ii
This middle Nadi becomes straight by steady practice of postures ; 
Pr&n^ama and MudrSs of Yogis. 
117.
^
1# 
^ 1^ 
II 
II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 304 ---
46
T m EATBA YOOA PRADIPIKA.
Those whose sleep has decreased fey practice and mind has become 
Calm by samadhi, get beneficial accomplishments by Sambhavl and other 
Madras. 
148.
f%ar 
TTSitjrt f%*fr 
i 
c rW
 t o gstr 
SI 
H 
»
Without Raja Toga, tliis earth, the night, and the Mudras, be they 
howsoever wonderful, do not appear beautiful. 
119. -
N o te.— Raj$. Yoga=Asan». Earth=±csteadiness, calmness. Night=Knmbhaka j cessa­
tions of the activity of the Prftna, Jost as King’s officials cease moving at night. Hence 
night means absence of motion, le„ Eumbhaka.
• ?5tT5r 51 
t o f 
u U ® II
All the practices relating to the air should be performed with con­
centrated mind. ‘ A wise man should notallow hjs mind to wander away.— 
120.
f 
^
 t o r 3 J i t o ^ 5r35rr i
H i t o c lt^ 5 l t o 
II 
II
’ 
These are the Mudrfis, as explained by Adinatha (Siva). 
Every one 
of them is the giver of great accomplishments to the practiser. 
121.
% E g n n f ^ ^
 y h r ^ i t o q ; I
?i 
W T f t > 9 5 : I I 
II
He is really the guru and to be considered as Tilvara in human form 
who teaches the Mudrds as handed down from gui-u to guru. 
122.
g m q t r 
g sci^ i^ sErorto i
Engaging in practice, by putting faith in his words, one gets the 
Siddhis of Aiiimfl, eto., as also evades death. 
123.
II ^ II
Rnd of chapter III, on the Exposition of the Mvdrds.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 305 ---
CHAPTER IV.
Ori SamMhi.
I
HiTJ 
i
?it% 
?T5r w w r: ii ^ it
Salutation to the Guru, the dispenser of happiness to all, appearing 
as Ndda, Vindii and Kald. 
One who is devoted to Him,^ obtains the 
highest bliss. 
1.
sra^^iriiT yurj^PKny’airn u
a sT ^ ^ q T J^ ii 
II
Now I will describe a regular method of attaining to SamSdhi, which 
destroys death, is the means- for obtaining happiness, and gives the 
Brahmananda. 
?.
n ^ II
i wqM; 
^ 1 ^ 4 
I
^
 
in^ ii
Raja Yog i, SainAdhi, ITnraani, Manonmani, Amaratwa, Laya, Tatwa, 
Silnya, Aslunya, Parama Pa<la, Ainanaska, Adwaitama, Niralamba, Njran- 
jatia, Jiwaoa Mukti, Sahaja, TuryS, are all synonymons. 
3-4.
vrsrfrT %q?r: I
<m rcim 5i#hq‘ 
ii ^ ii
As salt being dissolved in water becomes one with it, so when AtmA 
and mind become one, it is called Samadhi. 
5.
q<?r 
sn% 
^ 
I
^
 
^ ^mri^rdW hi^ ii A »
When the PrAna becomes leatt (vigourless) and the mind becomes 
absorbed, then their becoming equal is called SaiuAdhi. 
6.
ii vs ii
This equality and oneness of the self and the ultra self, when all 
Samkalpas ct\|se to exist, is called Samadhi. 
7.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 306 ---
48
T m EATEA YOOA PRAD lPlKA.
%r ^ 5n?n% 
i
II 
II
Or, who can know the true greatness of the Raja Yoga. Knowledge, 
mukti, condition, and Siddhis can b©-learnt by instructions from a grant 
alone. 
8.
II ^ II
Indifference to worldly enjoyments is very difficult to obtain, and 
equally difficult is the knowledge of the Realities to obtain. 
It is very 
difficult to get the condition of Sam^dhi, without the favour of a true 
guru. 
9.
sifsrrat 
irnir: ^
 
ii 
ii
By means of various postures and different Kumbhakas, when the 
great power <^Kundali) awakens, then the Pr^na becomes absorbed in Sunya 
(Samadhij. 
10.
JRTR^ II \\ n
The Yogi whose, j^akti has awakened, and who has renounced all 
actions, attains to the condition of Samadlii, without any effort. 
11.
$1# 
I
gF?r 
ii 
H
When the Prdna flows in the Su§unin&, and the mind has entered 
ilunya, then the Yogi is free from the effects of Karmas. 
12.
II \ \ II
0 Immortal one (that is, the yogi who has attained to the condition 
of Samadhi), I salute thee ! 
Even death itself, into wlmse mouth the 
whole of this movable and immovable world has fallen, has been conquered 
by thee. 
13.
sem f^ II \H II
ximaroli, Vajroli and Sahjoli are 
accomplished when the mind 
becom es^lm and Pr4na has entered the middle channel. 
1 ^
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 307 ---
TEB BATE A YOGA PB ADI PIKA.
49
Jjrr^r
STPulAlM-ilMId »RT w W ^ ?JT^ I
srr# ^
?r »R5% 5itr 5i 
« V\ H
How can it be possible to get knowledge, 'so long as the Prana is 
living and the mind has not died? 
No one else can get moksa, except 
one who can make one’s PrSpa and mind latent. 
15.
^
 gT5* ^ iraRii^ H
^
 
H5ITW 
II K \ II
Always living in a good locality and having known the secret of 
the SusumnS, which has a middle course, and making the VAyti move in it, 
(the Yogi) should restrain the VAyu in the Brahma randhra. 
16.
«rt: q n ^ ’Uf^*i^qrm q [ ii
JlRsft 
ii
Time, in the form of night and day, is made by the sun and the moon. 
That the Susumn& devours this time (death) even, is a great secret. 
17.
^ 5 I T 
II \< i II
In this body there are 72,000 openings of Nadis; of these, the 
SusumnA, which has the ^^mbhavi Sakti in it, is the only important one, 
the rest are useless. 
18.
^
 f 
It
g p n # 
ii 
ii
The Vdyu should be made to enter the Susumn.4 without restraint by 
him who has practised the control of breathing and has awakened the 
Kupdali by the (gastric) fire. 
19
gp iT 
sn^ 
ii
The Prfi.na, flowing through the Susuinnlt, brings about the condi­
tion of manonmani; other practices are simply futile for the Yogi. 
20.
5TEq% ^ 
spsq^ II
q’S R ^ 
II ;^Ui
By whom the breathing has been controlled, by him the activities of 
the mind also have been controlled ; and, conversely, by whom the activities 
of the mind have been controlled, by hirn the breathing also has beep 
controlled.1. ^ 1 .
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 308 ---
50
TBB EATEA YOGA PRADIPIKA.
II 
II
There are two causes of the activities of the mind : (1) Vasaaa 
(desires) and (2) the respiration (the Prana). 
Of these,' the dest)uctioa of 
the one is the destruction of both. 
22.
q q% 
q srw iW rM itR r ii 
ii
, Breathing is lessened when the mind becomes absorbed, and the mind 
becomes absorbed when the Prfioa is restrained. 
23.
^
 
jn ^ i% II
Both the mind and the breath are united together, like 'milk and 
water; aOd both of them are equal in their activities. 
Mind begins its 
activities where there is the breath, and the Parana begins its activities 
where there is the mind. 
24.
‘ “ cm 
II
By the suspension of the one, therefore, comes the suspension of the 
other, and by the operations of the one are brought about the operations of 
the other. 
When they are present, the Indriyas (the senses) remain 
engaged in their proper functions, and when they become latent then there 
is moksa. 
25.
31^ 
% ^ c^ 
II 
II
By nature. Mercury and mind are unsteady : there is nothing in the 
world which cannot be accomplished when these are made steady. 
26.
3pgct 
ii 
ii
0 Pdrvati! Mercury and breatliing, when made steady, destroy 
diseases and the dead himself comes to Jife (by their means). 
By theii’ 
(proper) control, moving in the air is attained.. 27.
*Rt ^
 
3 1^ II
The breathing is calmed when the mind becomes steady and calm; 
and hence the preservation of bindu. 
The preservation of this latter 
makes the satwa established in the bo^y. 
28.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 309 ---
THE HATHA YOGA PRADIPTKA.
51
WRcTJ II
*TR5re*R!%Rr«It 
II 
II
Miad is the master of the senses, and the breath is the master of the 
mind. 
The breath in its turn is subordinate to the laj’a (absorption), and 
that laya depends on the n&da. 
29.
y rsiR R i^ iW iW TiR^ w q *raRt II 
iR : srniR?r 
II si® II
This very laya is what is called moksa, or, being a sectarian, you may 
not call it moksa ; but when the mind becomes absorbed, a sort of ecstacy 
is experienced. 
30.
sRW ^I#P9Rrt STsaiRf^’siqa^t II 
, 
^
 
^iRli^rq^ II \ \ II
By the suspension of respiration and the annihilation of the enjoy­
ments of the senses, when the mind becomes devoid of all the activities and 
remains changeless, then the Yogi attains to tlie Laya Stage. 
31.
II 
II
When all the thoughts and activities are destroyed, then the Laya 
Stage is produced, to describe which is beyond the power of speech, being 
known by self-experience alone. 
32.
JTTft 
5RIW Sq;il
II 
II
They often speak of Laya, Laya ; but what is meant by it ?
Laya is simply the forgetting of the objects of senses when the 
Vasattiis (desires) do not rise into existence again. 
33.
^W I^t|piW>l 
II
5S[r 
II 
II
The SdTnbhavi Mudrd.
The Vedas and the f^Astras are like ordinary public women. 
I^Sna- 
bhavi Mudra is the one, which is secluded like a respectable lady. 
34.
<RT ^ 
p r 
ih r i^ ii 
ii
Aiming at Brahman inwardly, while keeping the sight directed to 
the external objects, without blinking the eyes, is called the SSmbhavl 
Mudra, hidaen in the Vedas and the Sastras. 
35. 
~
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 310 ---
52
m u 3ATH A YOOA PRADIPIKA.
^
 
¥ 1 ^ w ^ssir s r e n ^
\% II
When the Yogi remains inwardly attentive to the Brahman, keeping 
the mind and the Prana absorbed, and the sight steady, as if seeing 
everything while in reality seeing nothing outside, below, or above, verily 
then it is called the Sambhavi Mudra, which is learnt by the favour of a 
guru. 
Whatever* wpnderful, Stinya or Asunya is perceived, is to be 
regarded as the manifestation ot that great ^ambhd (l^iva.) 
36. 
*sifitiNs*in?sr 
ii
^
 
II ^vs II
The two states, the iSimbhavi and the Khechari, are different because 
of their seats (being the heart and the space between the eyebrows respec­
tively); but both cause happiness, for the mind becomes absorbed in the 
Chita-sukha-Rupa-fitmana which ia void. 
37.
II
^37* 
I I I I
TheUnmani.
Fix the gaze on the light (seen on the tip of the nose) and raise the 
eyebrows a little, with the mind contemplating as before (in the Sambhavi 
Mudra, that is, inwardly thinking of Brahma, but apparently looking 
outside.) 
This will create the Unmani avastha at once. 
38.
P l% ^ 
rT R ^ ll 
II
The Taraha.
Some are devoted to the Vedas, some to Nigama, while others are 
enwrapt in Logic, but none knows the value of this mudra, which 
enables one to cross the ocean of existence 
39.
^
 
i^srsTTi^mLii« « ii
With steady calm mind and half closed eyes, fixed .on the tip 
of the nose, stopping the Idd and the Pingald without blinlm g, he who
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 311 ---
THE HATHA fOOA PRADITIKA.
53
cau see the light which is the all, the seed, the entire brilliant, great 
Tatwama, approaches Him, who is the great object. 
What is the use 
of more talk ? 
40.
*r 
^
 5T 
u
h 
u
One should not meditate on the Linga (i e., Atman) in the day {i e., 
while Sfirya or PingaU is working) or at night (when IclS is working), 
but should always contemplate after restraining both. 
41.
gsCT 
H
2'he KhechaH,
When the air has ceased to move in the right and the left nostrils, 
and has begun to flow in the middle path, then the Khechari Mudra can be 
accomplished there. 
There is no doubt of this. 
42.
lr«R!t fs[r 
5*15 2 * « «
u
If the Pr^na can be drawn into the Sflnya (Susumoli), which is 
between the Ida and the Pingala, and made motionless there, then the 
Khechari Mudra.can truly become steady there. 
43.
*JT ^ fsrr *mr 
u « « u
That Mudr& is called Khechari which is performed in the supportless 
space between the Sfiiya and the Chandra (the Ida and the Pingall.) and 
called the Vyoma Chakra. 
44.
^
 
i m
«
The Khechari which causes the, stream to flow from the Chandra 
(Soma) is beloved of Siva. 
The incomparable divine Su?umna should be 
closed by the tongue drawn back. 
45.
ii 
ii
It can be closed from the front also (by stopping the movements of 
the Pr3,na), and then surely it becomes the Khechari., By practice, this 
Khechari lesns to Uhmani. 
46.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 312 ---
54
THM HATHA YOGA PRAD iPt^A.
i
'?rra^ ?r?»# 
5Tar 
!i 
II «\9 H
The seat of iSiva is between the eyebrows, and the jnind becomes 
• absorbed there. 
This condition (in which the mind is thus absorbed) is 
known as Tfirya, a«d death has no access there. 
47.
^ l<l^tlW^lilV1pirf^ d ? I
The Kheohar! should be practised till there is Yoga-nidra (Sanutdhi). 
One who has induced Yoga-nidrS, cannot fall a victim to death. 
48. 
m t 
ST 
I
^^rerr«Rit 
ii ^ ii
Freeing the mind from all thoughts and thinking of nothing,-one 
should sit firmly like a pot in the space ^surrounded and filled with 
the ether). 
49.
tt 
i 
»TST^ ^
 U ^0 U
As the air, in and out of the body, remains unmoved, so the breath 
with mind becomes steady in its place (i.e., in Brahma randhra). 
50.
II 
II
By thus practising, night and day, the breathing is brought under 
control, and, as the practice increases, the mind becomes calm and steady. 51.
II 
II 
II
By rubbing the body over with Amrita (exitding from the moon), 
from head to fopt, one gets MahakAyS,, i.e., great strength and energy. 
52.
End of the KheehaH.
m t w s n 
i
it*t^tf m 
<1 ^ 1 1 >X ii
placing the mind into the Kupdalini, and getting the latter into the 
mind, by looking upon the Buddhi (intellect) with mind (reflexively), the 
Param Pada (Brahma) should be obtained. 
53.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 313 ---
TEB BATE A YOGA PRADIPIKA.
55
Keep the itmfi inside the Kha (Brahma) and place Brahma inside 
your atma. 
Having made everything 
pervaded with Kba (Brahma), 
think of nothing else. 
54.
^
 
f*¥i 
I
1J3&: f > 
II 
II
One should becwhe void in and void out, and void like a pot in the 
space. 
Full in and full outside, like a jar in the ocean. 
55.
ajisrferai h 
i
y g re m TO9IWI sr 
ra5ra?i^ii 
ii
He should be neither of his inside nor of outside world ; and, leaving 
all thoughts, he should think of nothing. 
56.
>aTR<HflU II
git%q: IIHV9II
The whole of this world and all the schemes of the mind are but the 
creations of thought. 
Discarding these thoughts and taking leave of all 
conjectures, 0 B&ma 1 obtain peace. 
57.
5WM
As camphor disappears in fire, and rock salt in water, so the mind 
united with the atmS loses its identity. 
58.
^
 s r ^ ^ ^
 ^ 
1
l|n^ 
SEBT 5^ 
TOT 
II 
II
When the knowable, and the knowledge, are both destroyed equally* 
then there is no second way {i.e., Duality is destroyed). 
59.
^
 qK4>Bidg5BCtga:B[ I
II ^0 II
All this movable and immovable world is mind, 
When the mind 
has attained to the unmani avasthS,, there is no dwaita (from the absence of 
the working of the mind.) 
60.'
^ w
g 
*iFrai5( I
IR%T ^ 1 ^ 
II %\ II
Mind disappear by removing the knowable, and, on its disappearance, 
Stm& only rJ^pains behind. 
61.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 314 ---
56
TEE HATHA YOGA PBADIPIKA.
qrf^rfT: 
n 
u
The high-souled AchSryas, (Teachers) of yore gained experience in 
the various methods of SamSdhi thernselves, and then they preached them 
to others. 
62.
Jf5 T 5 F^ 
II 
II
Salutations to Thee, 0 Susumn^ to Tliee O Kundalini, to Thee 
0 SudhS., born of Chandra, to Thee 0 Manonmani ! to Thee O great power, 
energy and the intelligent spirit. 
63.
sfN? 
II V i II
I will describe now the practice of anaJiata nada, as propounded by 
Goraksa Natha, for the benefit of those who are unahle to understand the 
principles of knowledge---a method, which is liked by the ignorant also. 
64
g^gRnf g?giFwq(ii 
ii
AdinS,tha propounded 
crore methods of trance, and they are all 
extant. 
Of these, the hearing of the an§,hata n4da is the only one, the 
chief, in my Opiniop. 
65.
M r 
I
^
 
II 
II
Sitting with Mukta Asana and with the Simbhavi MudrS, the Yogi 
should hear the sound inside his right ear, with collected mind. 
66.
ii Vs ii
• 
The ears, the eyes, the nose, and. the mouth should be closed and 
then the clear sound is heard in the passage of the SusumnA which has 
been cleansed of all its impurities. 
67.
In all the Yogas, there are four states: Cl) iirambha or the prelimi­
nary, (2) Ghata, or the state of a jar, (3) Parichaya (known), (4) nispatti 
(consum ate.) 
68.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 315 ---
tE E BATE A YOGA PEAEIPIKA.
57
«RPs%r 
^
 ii 
u
Arambha Avasthd.
When the Brahma granthi(iu the heart) is pierced through by PrA^S* 
y&ma, theu a sort of happiness is experienced in the vacuum of the heart, 
and the anShat sounds, like various tinkling sounds of ornaments, are 
heard in the body. 
69.
\$o w
In the dfambha, a Yogi’s body becomes divine, glowing, healthy, and 
emits a divine smell. 
The whole of his heart becomes void. 
70.
II
The Ohata Avasthd,
In the second stage, the airs are united into one and begin moving 
in the middle channel. 
The Yogi’s posture becomes firm, and he becomes 
wise like a god. 
71.
*1^ II ^ II
By this means the Visnu knot (in the throat) is pierced which is indi» 
cated by highest pleasure experienced, and then the Bheri sound (like the 
beatifig of a kettle drum) is evolved in the vacuum in the throat. • 72.
119 <Tft=5m w ii
<1^1 ^
 
II 
u
The Pariehaya Avasthd.
In the third stage, the sound of a drum is known to arise in 
the Sfinya between the eyebrows, and then 
the 
Vayu goes to the 
Mahkf^flnya, which is the home of all the siddhis. 
73.
ii vw n
Conquering, then, the pleasures of the mind, ecstacy is spontaneously 
produced which is devoid of evils, pains, old age, disease, hunger and
74. 
^
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 316 ---
58
THE HATHA YOOA PRADIPIKA.
« 5 W r ?i?r R??9r 5iVMi3»Tdr5W^j i
515?.* w ^g^
r^HHij) 
II ^ II
When {he Rii'lra grauthi is pierced and the air enters the seat of 
the Lord (the space Jjetween the eyebrows), then the perfect sound like 
that of a flute is produced. 
75.
¥1^11 
II
The union of the mind and the sound is called the Raja-Yoga. 
The 
(real) Yogi becomes the creator and destroyer of the universe, like God. 
76.
-u^JiHii'5^r«i^ ii v»s ii
Perpetual Happiness is achieved by this ; I do not care if the mukti 
be not attained. 
This happiness, resulting from absorption [in Brahma], 
is obtained by means of Raja-Yoga. 
77.
%gr5y 
i
Those who are ignorant of the Raja-Yoga and practise only the 
Hat-ha-Yoga, will, in my opinion, waste tlieir energy fruitlessly. 
78.
sng*
W * $R8RF6m ^5n^^5H ^^;ihsM i
Contemplation on the space between the eyebrows is, in my opinion, 
best for accomplishing soon the CJnmani state. 
For people of small intel­
lect, it is a very easy method for obtaining perfection in the Raja-Yoga. 
The Laya produced by nada, at once gives experience (of spiritual 
powers). 
79.
fn^^M»?ra^nmw5iRT%rrsft355fw«OTii<2o ii
The happiness which increases in the hearts of Yogirfwaras, who 
have gained success in Sam&dhi by means of attention to the nada, is 
beyond description, and is known to Bri Ourit Ndtha alone. 
80.
^
 ft«TR 
s^irilr 
I
^^11 dU i
n 
II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 317 ---
TEE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA.
59
The sound which a muni hears by closing his ears with his fingers, 
should be heard attentively, till the mind becomes steady in it. 
81.
t e r 
u
By practising with this nada, all other external sounds are stopped. 
The Yogi becomes happy by overcoming all distractions within 15 days. 
82.
5T%r5wjr# 
u <\
In the beginning, the sounds heard are of great variety and very 
loud ; butj as the practice increases, they become more and rnofe subtle. 83.
irr|r 
i
In the first stage, the sounds are surging, thundering like the beating 
of kettle drums and jingling ones. 
In the intermediate stage, they are 
like those produced by conch, Mridanga, bells, &c. 
84.
In the last stage, tlie sounds resemble those from tinklets, flute, 
VinS, bee, &e. 
These various kinds of sounds are heard as being produced 
in the body. 
85.
IK^U
Thougli hearing loud sounds like those of thunder, kettledrums, etc., 
one should practise with the subtle sounds also. 
86.
^
 errspr = 315^ ii dv9 u
Leaving the loudest, taking up the subtle one, and leaving the Subtle 
one, taking up the loudest, thus practising, the distracted mind does not 
wander elsewhere. 
87.
gnrf griF^ ^ ^
 
w m »Rt u
^
 ^
 
u dd II
Wherever the mind attaches itself first, it becomes steady there; 
and then it becomes absorbed in it. 
88.
sfR 
?rar ii 
rrar ^
 
U 
H.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 318 ---
60
THE HATHA YOGA PBAT)1P1KA.
Just as a bee, drinking sweet juice, does not care for the smell of 
the flower; so the mind, absorbed in the nfida, does not desire the objects 
of enjoyment. 
89.
u «.« ii
The mind, like an elephant habituated to wander in the garden of 
enjoyments, is capable of being controlled by the sharp goad of anShata 
ndda. 
90.
iraf 5 
nm <jgirb‘grr»T^*i: ii 
irarf^ 
^
 
^
 ?rar ir 
ii
The ritind, captiyated in the snare of nada, gives up all its activity; 
and, like a bird* with clipped wings, becomes calm at once. 
91.
^cnsr u
Those desirous of the kingdom of Yoga, should take up the practice 
of hearing the anfi.hata n§,da, with mind collected and free from all cares. 
92.
^
 
'ar u 
u
NSda is the snare for catching the mind ; and, when it is caught like 
a deer, it can be killed also like it. 
93.
ii 
ii
Nada is the bolt of the stable door for- the horse (the minds of the 
Yogis). A Yogi should determine to practise constantly in the hearing of 
the nfida sounds. 
94*
m t 
ii 
ii
Mind gets the properties of calcined mercury. 
When deprived of its 
unsteadiness it is calcined, 
combined with the sulphur of ndda, and 
then it roams like it in the supportless Sk&da or Brahma. 
95.
f ^ g r 
f s ri^gid ^rrafcT ii 
ii
The mind is like a serpent, forgetting all its unsteadiness by hearing 
the ntda, it does not run away anywhere. 
96.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 319 ---
TEE HATHA YOGA PBADIPIKA.
61
«RTt 
U
s!T^ s w ^ ^
 
u ^vs ii
The fire, catching firewood, is extinguished along with it (after 
burning it up) ; and so the mind also, working with the nada, becomes 
latent along with it. 
97.
The aniahkarana (mind), like a deer, becomes absorbed and motion­
less on hearing the sound of bells, etc.; and then it is vejy easy for an 
expert archer to kill it. 
98,
The knowable interpenetrates the anahata sound which is heard, 
and the mind interpenetrates the knowable. 
The mind becomes absorbed 
there, which is the seat of the all-pervading, almighty Lord. 
99.
5 ^ 
% R |- II \ 9 0 II
So long as the sounds continue, there is the idea of ikaila. 
When 
they disappear, then it is called Para Brahma, ParamStmana. 
100.
q;^ 
iu © t II
Whatever is heard in the form of nada, is the rfakti (power). 
That 
which is formless, the final state of the Tatwas, is the Parameflwara. 
101. 
^
 igs ^^rMiqt 
% :a(^ ii
3^ } 
it 
ii
All the methods of Ha^ha are meant for gaining success in the Raja- 
Yoga ; for, the man, who is well-established in the RSja-Yoga, overcomes 
death. 
102.
? l ^ «ftsf fS : 
H
^
 
ii 
ii
Tatwa is the seed, Hatha the field ; and Indifference (Vairiigya) the 
water. 
By the action of these three, the creeper Unman! thrives very 
rapidly. 
103.
q rq ^ g q rt ii
II \ 9 i i II
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 320 ---
62
THE BATE A. YOOA PR ADI PIKA.
All the accumulations of sins are destroyed by practising always a ith 
the nftda ; and the mind and the airs do certainly become latent in i’ac 
colorless (Paramfi-tmana). 
104.
^ ^ 
II -
Such a one does not hear the noise of the concii and Dunduhhi. 
Being in the Unmani avastliA, his bodyjbecomes like a piece of wood. i<i>.
M r ^ 
ii I p% ii
There is no doubt, such a Yogi becomes free from all states, fnru all 
cares, and reijiains like one dead.* 106.
5T^ 
^rai% 
^ M rarni 
5T ?r Mrftf Mr 5^5 ^r ^ ^r 11 ^®vs 11
He is not devoured by death, is not bound by his actions. The 
who is engaged in Samidhi is overpowered by none; 107.
«T T|^ 
^
 
“sr 
5f ^5^5T5r»^ ii
^ r f t ^
 ^
 
II 
II
"The Yogi, engaged in Samftdhi, feels neither smell, taste, color, touch, 
sound, nor is conscious of his own self. 
108.
5T 'gre ^ f^ 
*n^ w, ii 
ii
He whose mind is neither sleeping, waking, remembering, destitute 
of memory, disappearing nor appearing, is liberated. 
109.
5T f^RTTJrrf^ ?^^raff5T 
ST ^
 5T«jni
5T rrr^ 5T T W * *5f Mr 59?; qrrri^gir 11 
11
He feels neither heat, cold, pain, pleasure, respect nor disi-espect; 
Such a Yogi is absorbed in Satnadhi. 
110.
n m ^ W IT T lf 
II
# r t> 9 I# T ^ W ( h T T ^ 
gru q:^ ^TJ II 
H
He who, thougli awake, appears like one sleeping, and is without 
inspiration and expiration, is certainly free. 
111.
irmiit iTTr4giTTBt Mr 
^grRr?iT ii 
h
The Yogi, engaged in SamSdhi, cannot be killed by any instrument, 
and is beyond the controlling power of beings. 
He is beyond the*r.a h 
of incantations and charms, 
112.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 321 ---
TEE HATHA YOGA PRADIPIKA.
63
sriiR[T% ■gr<>nre^T IT3 I1TR I 
¥1^% fi5STnn^Rnra«iT^u 
3irE^ N 
u 
epptfipsqtsr^ qt ii 
u
As long as the Prana does not enter and flow in the middle channel 
^and the vindu does not become firm by the control of the movements of the 
Irapa ; as long as the mind does not assume the form of Bi’ahtna without
J
 effort in contemplation, so long all the talk of knowledge and wisdom 
erely the nonsensical babbling of a mad man. 
113.-
T he end.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 322 ---
00044186
00044186
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 323 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 324 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 325 ---
on 16 November, 2018
Digitized with financial assistance from
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

--- PAGE 326 ---
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA

