
THE 


PALI LITEBATUBE 
OF CEYLON 


BY 

G. P. MALALASEKERA 
O.B.E., M.A., Ph.D., (Lond.) D.Litt. 
L'ccole Erancais d’Extreme Orient. 

DEAN OF THE FACULTY OF ORIENTAL STUDIES 
AND PROFESSOR IN PALI, UNIVERSITY OF CEYLON. 
AMBASSAlXm FOR CEYLON IN THE U. S. S. R. 


COLOMBO 

M. D. GUNASENA & CO., LTD. 



M. D. GUNASENA & CO., LTD. 

217, Norris Road, Colombo. 

33, Yatinuwara Vidiya, Kandy. 


First published — 1928 

Reprinted — 1958 


This book is copyright. No portion of it may 
be reproduced by any process whatsoever 
without the written permission of the 
Publishers. 



To 

MALLIKA 

(M.H.R.) 

‘ Whatever she touches she transforms into Music , into Beauty , into Joy?' 



PRF.FACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 


1 am deeply beholden to the Council of the Koval Asiatic 
Society of Great Britain and Ireland for having accepted this 
little volume to be issued under the a^gis of their Prize 
Publication Fund. My obligations are due to the numerous 
scholars who have gone before me and explored the fields of 
Pali Literature in Ceylon. Their pioneer work has made my 
efforts pleasanter and more fruitful than they would other- 
wise have been. I wish also to express my thanks for 
guidance and inspiration to my teachers at the School of 
Oriental Studies, Professor K. L. Turner, Dr. L. I). Barnett, 
Dr. W. Stede, and Mr. M. de Z. Wickremasinghe, and to 
Mrs. A. de Z. Elliot for various assistance received. I have 
no words sufficient to convey my heartfelt gratitude to my 
A carry a, Mrs. Rhys Davids, but for whom this work would 
never have seen the light of day. The two years I spent in 
London as her antevdsika have been one of the happiest 
periods of my life, and I am indebted to her, more than I 
can express, for the very great honour she has conferred on 
me by revising this, the result of my first researches. 
Ciram jlvalu ! 

G. P. M. 

Colombo, 


January , 1928. 



CONTENTS 


CHAP. PAGE 

Introduction 1 

I. The Conversion of Ceylon . .13 

II. The Writing Down of the Books . 26 

III. The Development of Buddhist Culture 48 

IV. The Beginnings of Literary Activity . 65 

Y. Buddhaghosa ...... 79 

VI. Buddhaghosa’s Successors . . .102 

VII. The Pali Chronicles . .130 

VIII. The Dawn of the Golden Era 147 

IX. The Augustan Age ..... 175 

X. Sariputta’s Circle . . . . .196 

XI. The Age of Pandita Parakrama . 220 

XII. The Twilight Glow 238 

XIII. The Dark Age 259 

XIV. The Modern Period 287 



The Pali Literature of Ceylon 

Introduction 

rnilTC Pali Literature of Ceylon is of great extent and 
• importance and also of multifarious interest ; it is 
of value alike to the historian and the student of folklore, 
to the philologist* and the student of comparative religion. 
Broadly speaking, it may be classified under three main heads : 
first, the Buddhist Scriptures, or Tipitaka , which form the 
Pali Canon ; second, the Commentaries (of Buddhaghosa, 
his contemporaries and successors), exegetioal expositions of 
flic text of the Tipi taka, compiled, as we have them now, 
only after the fifth century of the Christian era, but alleged 
to be based upon records of distinctly greater antiquity ; 
and third, historical, grammatical and other works on secular 
subjects, which have been produced by scholars at various 
times from about the fifth century to the present day. 

Pali had probably ('eased to be a spoken language by the 
time it was introduced into Ceylon ; but that does not 
seem in any way to have lessened the interest which it evoked 
in the minds of the scholars of the island. To them it was of 
no pagan stock ; they had no difficult y in assimilating the 
philosophic culture of a religion, which had come into birth 
and attained to power in a country which they themselves 
claimed as the motherland ; they were oram-jata ( bosom - 
born) spiritual children of India, their lives and minds 
nourished on her age-long, yet living and growing, traditions. 
When Buddhism was introduced into the island, under the 
aegis of the Emperor Asoka. they found in its teachings the 
development of essentially their own genius. Pali was the 
language consecrated as the instrument of, as it is called, “ the 
Buddha’s word,” and in order, therefore, to realize to the 
fullest extent the value of the heritage which the Master had 
bequeathed to them, they devoted their attention to the study 



2 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


of that language. To a nation little accustomed to traffic, 
and therefore free from the endless difficulties and anxieties 
which trade produces on society in general, the cultivation 
of letters was not only ail indispensable pursuit, but a 
delight. In the Scriptures of the religion which thence- 
forward became the national faith Ceylon found material for 
endless contemplation ; each succeeding sovereign, interested 
in the 'people’s welfare and in the development of his own 
spiritual nature, rendered them essent ial service in this respect, 
extending his munificent patronage to all whose lives w r ere 
engaged in the pursuit of literary study. 

Within a moderate period men of the Sinhalese race had 
acquired proficiency in the use of the Pali tongue ; its 
phraseology, at once soft and sonorous, smooth-flowing and 
capable of employment as a language of culture and science, 
appealed to their imagination and kindled their power of 
expression. Pali became their literary dialect, raised to a 
position of dignity which, in spite of many vicissitudes, it 
still retains. Quite soon afterwards scholars began to compose 
works in Pali, so that the knowledge which they had garnered 
in the course of their studies might be recorded for the benefit 
of generations yet unborn. 

The earliest attempt at such writings that has come down 
to us is the Dtpa-vamsa , a work generally assigned to the 
fourth or fifth century. 1 From that time onwards there was 
a succession of authors of literary compilations, who wrote 
unremittingly, though there w T ere periods of special activity. 
The- Pali language continued to be assiduously cultivated ; 
kings and princes, nobles and statesmen vied with one another 
in Pali composition, and laymen and monks contributed 
Pali works, some of which can rank among the notable 
productions of the literature of the world. Books were- written 
on all conceivable subjects : exegesis and law, medicine and 
poetry, religion and folklore, history and philosophy, prosody 
and rhetoric — an array of extensive volumes on all that in 
1 Fee discussion on the Dipa-rarfim in Chap. VII. 



INTRODUCTION 


3 


their day chiefly engaged the attention of mankind. The 
high degree of the intellectual attainments and the culture and 
refinement to which the Sinhalese had reached in the hey-day 
of their prosperity is fairly indicated by what now remains of 
the art displayed in the design and decoration of their religious 
edifices, the science exhibited in the conception and execution 
of their stupendous irrigation works, and in the beautiful 
ideals of love and service and devotion which appear to have 
been the staple of their best poetry. 

Unfortunately for us, however, a large part of this ancient 
literature has been irretrievably lost. 

The Sinhalese have ever been a domestic, not a political 
people. Lulled by a sense of security in their island-home, 
set in the silver sea, the people did not provide sufficient 
safeguards for the protection of their possessions and 
industries. Having but few needs of their own, they lavished 
their wealth upon their religious edifices, which they decorated 
with a profusion of precious metals and valuable gems, such 
as were highly prized and could easily be carried away. They 
thus attracted the attention of their rapacious neighbours, who 
from time to time swooped down upon their defenceless coasts, 
ravaging and plundering the wealth of the land. On several 
occasions these marauders succeeded in establishing them- 
selves on the throne of the island, and in exercising supreme 
power. Their rule was marked by much cruelty and oppression, 
and not the least' of the damage they perpetrated was the 
systematic, destruction of whatever literary records fell into 
their hands. 

But the country's foes were not all from without. More 
than once in the course of its history the Sangha in Ceylon 
was rent asunder by violent schisms, resulting from the 
propagation of heresy within its ranks. Like a hydra-headed 
monster, the Vaitulya-vada every now and then showed 
signs of vitality, until its final destruction by Parakrama- 
Bahu the Great, in a.d. 1165. And sometimes it came to pass 
that the heretics gained the confidence of the ruling monarchs, 



4 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


who, to show their hatred of the recusant Thtriya Nikdya , 
because of their obstinate adherence to the orthodox religion, 
commanded that their temples should be confiscated and 
demolished, and their books be collected and a bonfire made 
of them. Of the literature of the Vaitulya-vddins themselves 
not a trace is left ; for the kings of Ceylon, in the excess of 
their zeal for the preservation of the purity of the faith, 
born of their passionate attachment to the Thera -vada 
fraternity, saw to it that not a vestige of their heretical 
teachings should survive. And finally, towards the dose of the 
sixteenth century, Raja Sinha I of Sltiivaka, embittered 
against Buddhism, because of the treachery of certain members 
of the Sangha, openly embraced a foreign faith, became 
virulently hostile to the Buddhist priesthood, drove them from 
their temples and destroyed their libraries. 

Amidst all these ravages, however, a good deal of the Pali 
literature of Ceylon lias survived, due mainly to the pious 
care of its loyal custodians. Regardless of personal danger 
and steadfast in their devotion to all learning, humble 
and ascetic in garb, the monks have preserved for us through 
the ages something of that heritage of wisdom which drew 
to Ceylon's shores in ancient times men from Burma and Siam 
and distant China in search of her intellectual treasures far 
more valuable than her pearls and rubies, her elephants and 
peacocks. And it happened that these seekers of knowledge 
carried back with them into their native lands copies of 
the books which they had come across in their travels ; and, 
when Ceylon had lost many of her books of priceless value, 
the Sinhalese were able to restore them from copies collected 
elsewdiere . 1 

Ever since the advent of the Portuguese into the island in 
the sixteenth century European scholars had evinced a certain 
amount of interest in the literature of the Sinhalese, 

1 Thus Olden berg says that all the copies of the Dipa-vamsa which he 
saw bore marks of being copies from, one Burmese original. (Dip., Introd., 
I>. 11.) And Tumour ( Journ . As. Soc. Bengal, vi, p. 790) says that his 
copy was obtained from MSS. brought to Ceylon from Siam. 



INTRODUCTION 


5 


particularly in the books dealing with the history of Ceylon. 
But for quite a long time it was believed that the Sinhalese 
annals were devoid of materials of historical value ; that their 
religious literature contained nothing but the ravings of 
fanaticism ; that their other works were all myth and romance, 
wearisome in their monotonous inanity. 1 It was not till about 
1826 that the discovery was made that Ceylon was in posses- 
sion of continuous written chronicles in Pali, not only rich in 
authentic facts about the history of the island, but also 
yielding valuable materials for unravelling the meshes of 
Indian chronology. A young civil servant, George Tumour, 
in charge of the administration of the district at the foot of 
Ceylon's holy mountain, Samanta-kuta (Adam’s Peak), had 
been studying Pali under the guidance of a Buddhist monk ; 
and the investigations which he made into certain rare and 
valuable manuscripts, led him to publish a series of articles 
in the Journal of the Bengal A sialic Society, under the heading 
of “ The Pali-Buddhistical Annals ”. Therein he demon- 
strated that Ceylon possessed a connected history of over 
2.300 years, authenticated by the concurrence of every 
evidence which could contribute to verify the annals of any 
country. 2 At the moment Prinsep was endeavouring to 
decipher the mysterious Buddhist inscriptions of “ Piyadassi ”, 
scattered over Hindustan, and the identification of 
“ Piyadassi ” with Asoka, made possible by the discovery 
of the Ceylon chronicles, proved to be to him of the utmost 
importance. 

The value of the Buddhist records in the scholarship of 
the East was thus brought home to research students more 
than ever before ; and a new zest was added to their greater 
and closer scrutiny. In 1833 Edward Upham made at the 
request of Sir Alexander Johnston, Chief Justice of Ceylon, 
translations of the Mahd-vamsa, together with two chrpnicles 
in Sinhalese (the Raja-ratnakara and the Rdjavali) and published 

1 Sec e.g. Valentyn, Oud en Nicuw Oost Jndien, 1725, iv, p. 60. 

8 V, p. 521 ; vi, pp. 299, 799, 1049. 



6 


THE TALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


them in three volumes under the title The Sacred and Historical 
Books of Ceylon. 1 Upham's translations included eighty-eight 
of the hundred chapters of the Maha-vanisa. It was found, 
however, that his pioneer work was full of inaccuracies ; and 
in 1837 Tumour made a fresh translation of the Maha-vamsa. 
Only thirty-eight chapters of this work were published, 
accompanied by the Pali text, Tumour dying before his 
task was completed. 2 In the Introduction to this translation 
Tumour gave a resume of the contents of his articles written 
for the Bengal Asiatic Society's Journal , and added a short 
dissertation on the Pali language and a few of its more 
important grammatical works. In addition to this he gave, in 
an Appendix, a detailed account of the Tipitaka , as to its 
arrangement and divisions. He also drew 7 the attention of 
scholars to the fact that in no part of the w r orld w-ere there 
greater facilities for the study of Pali than in Ceylon, and that 
in addition to the historical material in that language, the 
importance of which had been hitherto but little understood 
and imperfectly illustrated, there existed many doctrinal and 
metaphysical works on Buddhism still extensively and 
critically studied by the monks of Ceylon. 3 

The missionaries who had come to the island had already 
addressed themselves to the task of learning both Pali and 
Sinhalese, so that they might ascertain the nature of the 
religion which they were attempting to displace ; and, in 
order to facilitate the work of their fellow-labourers 
in the ‘field, they published translations in English of several 
of the books which had come under their notice. But for many 
years to come no attempt was made by scholars at a systematic 
study of the literature of Ceylon, whereby their books and their 
authors might be placed in some sort of chronological sequence. 
The meagreness of the published materials made the task 
doubly difficult. 

1 London, Parbury, Allen & Co. (1833). 

2 Ceylon, Cotta Church Mission Press (1837). 

8 Introd., p. xxv. 



INTRODUCTION 


7 


The first attempt to prepare a Catalogue of the literary 
works of Ceylon was made by the Rev. Spence Hardy, who, 
in the course of a residence of twenty years (1825-45) in the 
island, had made a collection of whatever manuscripts he 
happened to come across. At a meeting of the Ceylon Branch 
of the Royal Asiatic Society, held in Colombo on the 
26th February, 1848, he read out a list, compiled by him, of 
“ Books in the Pali and Sinhalese Languages ” ; this list was 
published in the Society’s Journal in the same year. 1 It was 
a bare enumeration of names of books, often wrongly spelt ; 
no mention was made of their authors, or of the dates of their 
compilation,' and the list was necessarily incomplete. In 1852 
James D’Alwis, one of the most erudite scholars of Ceylon 
during the last century, published his monumental work, an 
English translation of Vedeha’s Sinhalese grammar, the 
Sidat-sahgard. In a masterly Introduction, extending to over 
two hundred pages, he traced the development of Sinhalese 
and gave a continuous history of the books written in that 
language from the earliest times to his own day. Unfortunately 
for us, however, IVAlwis confined himself therein exclusively 
to compilations made in Sinhalese, and, beside a bare mention 
of a few Pali works, no particulars were given of scholars who 
wrote in Pali. 

In 1869, during the regime of Sir Hercules Robinson, 
Governor “of Ceylon, was established the Government Oriental 
Library of Ceylon, containing a collection of books in Pali, 
Sinhalese, and Sanskrit. D’Alwis was invited by the Governor 
to undertake to compile a catalogue of the books contained in 
the Library, and such other valuable and unknown manu- 
scripts as were not available therein, but were to be found in 
the Temple Libraries of the island. He very public-spiritedly 
accepted the invitation. But before the work could be even 
fairly completed D’Alwis departed this life. He had written 
descriptive accounts of twenty-three books, eleven of which 
were compilations in Pali, and these were published in 1870, 

1 JRAS. ( Ceylon Branch ), vol. i, No. 3, pp. 189 foil. 



8 


THE CALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


as vol. i of A Descriptive (' dialogue of Sanskrit, Pali , and 
Sinhalese. Literary HW/w of Ceylon. 1 D’Alwis did not satisfy 
himself with merely giving a list of books with their titles 
and author's names, and specifying the subject of which they 
treated ; lie gave detailed descriptions of the books themselves, 
illustrating his statements with copious quotations. 

The work so well begun remained in abeyance until the 
appointment of Louis de Zovsa, Chief Interpreter M udaliar, 
to pay ollicial visits to the. temple libraries of the island and to 
find particulars of the literary treasures they contained. In 
a report- submitted to the Government in 1870 he mentions 
that , in spite of the fact that lie was a Christian, on the whole 
he had met with a very favourable reception from the heads of 
the various Buddhist monasteries. Only in three or four 
instances does he seem to have been received with a good deal 
of distrust, the. monks evidently suspecting Government of 
some design upon their collections ! The results of his mission 
were not inconsiderable, ; he carried out his task with great 
tact and energy, and his report is interesting reading. Perhaps 
the greatest find was a copy of the Sinhalese gloss on the 
Dharnma -pada , which, excepting the Mihintale Inscription, 
is the oldest known specimen of Sinhalese prose. A strange 
fate seems to have been ordained for all those who undertook 
to make catalogues of the temple libraries, and De Zoysa 
too fell a victim to this unrelenting decree, for lie died before 
his work could be finished. However, the Government issued 
as much of t he catalogue as had been completed, 2 The works 
were included under several heads : the Pfdi MSS. being 
divided into Canonical works, Commentaries, Tlkd or Scholia, 
General Peligious Works, Historical Works and Grammatical 
and Philological Works. In regard to most of the MSS. 
mentioned no further details were given, except the title of 
the book, size, place of deposit, author, date (hypothetical in 
many cases) and subject. 

1 Government Printing Press, 1885. 

* Colombo, Government Printing Press, 1876. 



INTRODUCTION 


9 


Mr. M. (It* Z. Wickremasinghe, tlien Assistant Librarian 
of the (Viloinbo Museum Library. was appointed to complete 
the work that had been assigned to Do Zoysa. He paid visits 
to many of the temples which had hitherto been neglected, 
and the results of his researches were embodied in the 
Administration Reports of the Colombo Museum 1890 5. 
These were, later put together under the. titles of the Catalogue 
of the Colombo Museum Government Oriental Library. 1 

Meanwhile the British Museum had been acquiring by 
purchase and presentation a collection of Sinhalese MSS., 
and in 1899 the Trustees invited Air. Wickremasinghe to 
compile a Catalogue of Sinhalese MSS. in the British Museum, 
as part, of the series of the catalogues of the MSS. in the 
languages of India, which were then in course of publication. 
This catalogue was finally published by the British Museum 
in 1900. The historical Introduction to this Catalogue, though 
it contains only twenty -five pages, forms by far the most 
authentic account of the literature of Ceylon hitherto 
published. By the very nature of his work Mr. Wickremasinghe: 
was precluded from giving more than the names of the Ceylon 
scholars who wrote in Pali, and the tit les of their compositions ; 
but he has done valuable service in fixing the periods of several 
scholars whose works had till then been floating dateless on 
the sea of chronology. 

Sometime later the library of Hugh Nevill was acquired 
after his death by the British Museum and joined to their 
Oriental Collection. Nevill was for many years in the Ceylon 
Civil Service, and during his stay in the island had travelled 
extensively in search of rare and unknown MSS. He was 
immensely interested in the literature of Ceylon, and at the 
time of his death was engaged in the preparation of a catalogue 
of his collection, prefaced by a historical survey. His catalogue 
now forms part of the Nevill Collection of the Oriental Section 
of the British Museum Library ; and it is hoped that steps 


1 Government Record Office, 1896. 



10 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


may be taken soon to publish some of the works included in 
it which are at present not known to exist elsewhere. 

No account of the attempts to give a continuous history of 
the Pali Literature of Ceylon would be complete without a 
reference to that monumental work, Childers’s Pali Dictionary, 
first published in 1875. There, in his Introduction, besides 
giving an account of the books of the Tipitaka and of 
Buddhaghosa's Commentaries, Childers made brief mention 
of one or two other works in Pali, such as the Sdra-sangaha 
and the A bhidhammattha -sangaha . Reference has also to be 
made to the article published in the Indian Antiquary by 
the Rev. Thomas Foulkes on the Vicissitudes of Ceylon 
Literature} 

Among the Pali compilations themselves but two works 
devote any attention to chronicling the history of literature. 
The first is the Saddhamma-sangaha, by an author named 
Dhammakitti, who lived probably at the end of the fourteenth 
century. It is a history of Buddhism in Ceylon, and one of 
its chapters (ix) is devoted to making a record of the books 
that had been written from the earliest times down to the 
end of the reign of Parakrama-Bahu the Great (a.d. 1164 - 
97). This account contains several inaccuracies, and the 
author follows no chronological sequence ; but it is of value 
in showing what works were recognized as authoritative at 
the period in which it was written. The other is a much later 
composition, by Acariya Vimalasara Thera , who completed 
and published his poem in a.d. 1880. It is called 'the Sdmna- 
varma-dipa, and is a history of the. Buddhist church 'in the 
island. The eleventh chapter gives a list of the authors who 
flourished in Ceylon from the time of Buddhaghosa to the 
reign of Pandit a Parakrama-Bahu (a.d. 1240-75), together 
with the names of their compilations. This list also contains 
several works of Burmese authors which were introduced to 
Ceylon from time to time. 

Apart from these Subhuti Thera , in the Introduction to his 

1 Ind. Antiq xvii, pp. 100, 122. 



INTRODUCTION 


11 


Nama-mdla , published in 1870, gave a very valuable historical 
survey of the Pali grammatical literature of CeyJon. A similar 
account is contained in Dhaminarama's Introduction to his 
edition of Tt fibula's Pa n ciku-pradlpa , published in J89G. J 
With these two works and the Sasana-va rnsa-dljta , and the 
N ikdt/a -sa ityra h a 2 as his basis, Med liana tula Thera wrote a 
historical introduction to his Pali poem, the Jina-vamsa- 
dl. parti , published in 191 7, 3 giving an account of the Buddhist 
Sarigha in Ceylon and of the works of Buddhist monks. 

Short biographical memoirs of individual authors, together 
with descriptions of their compositions, are also to be found 
in the various editions of them published by scholars both 
in the Bast and the West, and in essays dealing with 
particular books that have appeared in various journals and 
periodicals/ In this connexion mention must be made of the 
Life and Work of Buddhafjhosa, bv Kimala (Tiara n Law. 4 
There, with commendable energy, the author has gathered 
together a large mass of valuable material concerning the great 
Commentator, which will be of the utmost help in any study 
of Pali literature. 

After these preliminary observations a word may also be 
said about the method of treatment adopted in this present 
dissertation. The earliest Pali work that has come down to our 
times dates only from the fourth century a.d. Perhaps at 
first sight, it might appear as if too much space has been 
allotted in the earlier chapters to a consideration of the history 
of Ceylon — apart from any literary productions — during the 
period prior to that date. It should be borne in mind, however, 
that the literature of a country cannot be separated from 
the life of its people ; books are but an index to the intellectual 
development to which men have attained in their reaction 
to the environment in which they live and move and have their 
being. To the literature of no country in the world does this 
observation apply more forcibly than to that of Ceylon, 


1 Colombo, 1876; Colombo, 1896. 
3 Colombo, 1917. 


* q.v. 

4 Calcutta, 1923. 



12 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


where literary productivity has been mainly a result of the 
sedulous attention and the munificent patronage of kings and 
rulers and the support extended to the monks by an ever 
generous and grateful lay community. Pali literature grew 
only with the advancement of Buddhist culture, and some idea 
of the development of that culture and civilization is essential 
to enable us to see its literature in a true perspective. 
The same holds true of the period of the decay of literary 
activity, which the last three centuries have witnessed and 
which is a result of the neglect of Ceylon's spiritual heritage, 
and an undue attention to a civilization extraneous to the 
genius pf the people. 

This attempt to give a continuous and connected history 
of an intellectual movement which, in spite of the many 
vicissitudes it has undergone during the course of twenty- 
four centuries, will yet come to be included in the annals of 
the scholarship of the world, is inevitably full of deficiencies 
and imperfections. The searchlight of modern critical research 
has only of late been directed to the study of Pali literature. 
Instances are numerous where scholars are not 'agreed as to 
the date and origin of particular books, and in the absence of 
direct evidence conclusions must necessarily be uncertain. 
But, as time goes on and our knowledge of the subject grows, 
there is reason to believe that there will come a gradual 
narrowing of issues and an approximation to concurrence of 
opinion. Such is the cherished hope in which this effort has 
been made — the hope that it may serve as an unpretentious 
stepping-stone to a fuller and a closer study of the history of 
the Pali literature of Ceylon. 



CHAPTER I 

The Conversion of Ceylon 

T7*OR all practical purposes the history of Buddhism in 
Ceylon, and. therefore, the history of the Pali literature 
which records the results of that great spiritual movement, 
begins from the earlier part of the third century n.c. It starts 
with the arrival of the missionaries sent from India by the 
Buddhist Emperor Asoka. It would, nevertheless, be incorrect 
to suppose that prior to that event the Buddha and his 
teachings were altogether unknown to the island. Indeed, 
there is evidence to the contrary. 

The primitive history of Ceylon, like the ancient histories 
of all nations, is enveloped in fable ; and, although latter-day 
chroniclers have recorded for our benefit events extending 
far down the vista of time, their accounts afford us very 
little of historical importance concerning the earliest times. 
It would almost seem from their manner of describing these 
remote happenings that they were not prepared to vouch 
for their strict accuracy, and that they did not regard it as their 
purpose to record anything anterior to the advent of the last 
Buddha, Gotama. 

For to these chroniclers the history of Ceylon was the history 
of the Sinhalese people, and the Sinhalese people were, above 
all else, the custodians, appointed, it was believed, by the 
Master himself, of that sublime body of teaching which he 
gave to mankind. To give to the Sinhalese their authority 
for carrying out the mission that had been entrusted to them 
the Buddha is said to have visited the island thrice, so that 
he might honour and purify with his holy presence the land 
which was to be the future home of the Sinhalese race. The 
old chronicles, such as the Mahd-vanmi and Dlpa-vamsa, 
give vivid descriptions of these visits — made in the fifth month, 
the fifth year, and the eighth year after the Enlightenment. 
How much of truth there is in these descriptions we have no 



14 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


way of ascertaining at this distant date ; but that the tradition 
was a very old one, there is no doubt at all. The oldest of the 
Ceylon chronicles, the Dipa-vamsa, 1 written in the fourth 
century a.d., mentions it. The Sarmnta-pdsddika , 
Buddhaghosa's commentary on the V inaya- Pitaka , records 
it in the’ historical section, 2 and the Maha-vamsa , Ceylon's 
best known 'chronicle, gives a graphic account of the visits, 
with a wealth of detail. 3 (The Samanta -pasddikd belongs to 
the latter half 'of the fifth century, and the Maha-vamsa to 
the earlier part- ()f the sixth century a.d.) There exist to the 
present day the remains of a monument, erected in 164 b o. 
by King Dutthagamani, on the spot where the Buddha was 
supposed to have touched the earth on his first visit. 4 It 
is cjuite probable that the Dipa-vamsa account, the earliest 
record which we have at * present, was borrowed from an 
even earlier source. For the author tells us that his work 
was based on earlier redactions, ' the Sihala - A Uhakatha (the 
Sinhalese commentaries), which contained besides exegetical 
matter on the Pitaka , also material of a historical character 
“twisted into a garland of history /from generation to 
generation like flowers of many kinds 5 \ 5 'It is significant 
that the Pali canon itself, which gives a fairly .complete 
account of the Teacher’s doings during the first few years of 
his ministry, does not make any mention of a visit to’ Ceylon. 6 
We may, therefore, be justified in concluding that the story 
first gained currency soon after the official introduction of 
Buddhism into Ceylon owing to the religious enthusiasm of the 
early converts and their national sentiment, which co-operated 
in producing a belief associating' the founder of their new 


1 ("haps. 1 and II. 

2 RT.fi. Ed., pp. 1 foil. 

2 M. V., chap, i, vv. 19 ff. 

4 Ibid., i, vv. 40-3. 

8 Dip., i, v. 4. 

• It is interesting to note that the Burmese claim a visit of the Buddha 
to Burma. He is supposed to have stayed at a place now known as the 
Lohitacandana Vihara {Sasana-vanisa, Introd., p. 13). 



THE CONVERSION OF CEYLON 


15 


faitli with the dawn of history in their island h«>nie, which 
was thus made for ever sacred to them by the touch of the 
Master’s feet. 

Whatever be the truth underlying the accounts of these 
visits, there exists other evidence which makes it possible 
to believe that prior to the arrival of Asoka's missionaries 
Buddhism was not unknown to Ceylon. 

The known history of the Sinhalese begins with the landing 
in Ceylon of Vijaya with his 700 followers in 543 b.c., 1 
according to the strict orthodox tradition on the very day 
of the Buddha’s death. 2 

There is room for suspecting, as Tumour remarks in his 
Introduction to the Maha-mmsa , 3 that, sectarian zeal had 
led to the assignment of the same date for the landing of 
Vijaya as to the cardinal Buddhistical event- the death of 
the Buddha. But we may confidently hold that Vijaya landed 
in Ceylon about the middle of the sixth century h.c. He was 
a headstrong and impetuous youth, scion of a royal race, which 
held sway over the country of Labi (or Lata), whose capital 
was Siiihapura 4 , Being banished from home because of their 
misdeeds, he and his followers, after many adventures on the 
way. landed in Ceylon, and energetically set about colonizing 
the country. 

Ceylon was inhabited by a race of men whom Vijaya and 

1 According to ( 'ey Ion chronology (ftp. £< y i, pp. 155 foil.) WVsutii 
scholars have long held this date wrong by some sixty years, but recent 
research, especially a new and more critical study of the Kharavela 
Inscription in the Hathiguinpha Caver, Orissa, has furnished very strong 
evidence; that the Buddha was contemporary with both Himhisara and 
Ajatasattu. The inscription fixes the latter at about 554 iu?., amt Bim- 
hisiira, his fatlu-r, at c. 582 ».c., thus supporting the Ceylon dates. Vide 
Bihar and Orissa Research Society Journ vol. iii, pp. 425-507 ; J HAS, 
1018, pp. 545-7 ; Ceylon Ant iq. and Lit. Reg., July, 1022, pp. (if>-7. 

2 Thus the M. 1\, vi, v. 47. The Z). V., ix, v. 21, refers the event to the 
time of the I’arinibhana . The Samanta-p . assigns it to the same year 
as the death of the Buddha (loo. cit.). 

3 M. V., Trans]., Introd., p. li. 

* Neither the country nor the city has yet been successfully identified. 
Philological evidence tends to the view that the original home of Vijaya 
was in E. Bengal ; it is not my purpose to discuss the question here. 



]G THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 

his companions called Yakkhas, and who evidently belonged 
to an earlier colony of settlers that had migrated from South 
India . 1 For there is no reason to doubt that Vijaya’s band was 
only one, perhaps the best known and the most powerful, 
of colonists who had gone over from India in their southward 
course . 2 Only a few miles of w ater separate Ceylon from the 
mainland. Even to-day people cross over in kattamarans , 
the most primitive of all modes of boat save that of the 
hollowed log. 

The country, already possessed a certain degree of 
civilization. The Yakkhas had their own cities, social 
institutions, a fairly well -developed language, and indubitable 
signs of accumulated wealth. Spence Hardy tells us that 
Lankapura, the Yakkha capital, which Vijaya visited soon 
after he had landed, is no mere city of imagination, as its 
site can still be pointed out in the district of Matale, in the 
Central Province . 3 One of Vijaya ’s first acts was to marry, 
under romantic circumstances, a Yakkha princess, by name 
Kuveni. Divested of obvious exaggerations, she appears 
before us as a very real and fascinating lady, whose ideas, 
tastes, and language harmonized wfith the princely character 
of Vijaya. And she had charms sufficiently real and refine- 
ments sufficiently captivating to win him and to obtain the 
honour of being his'wife. It is true that she was later discarded 
in favour of another ; but that was under the stress of political 
expediencies. After the marriage Vijaya founded the city of 
Tambananni and settled down there, while his f ministers 
set about to form separate establishments, each for himself, 
“ that the country might be rendered habitable for men,” 4 

1 Tennent, Ceylon, i, pp. 327 foil. 

2 Sir W. .Jones said that Rama “ conquered Silan in 1810 u.c.,” basing 
his authority on the Ramayana. However that may be, there is no doubt 
that, invited by its elephants and pearls, the fertility of the soil, and the 
salubrity and the richness of its products, the Indians settled there quite 
early, even if their occupation was not coeval with that of India. D'Alwis, 
Sidat-mhgara , Introd., p. xi. 

8 JRAS, (C.R.), i, No. 2, p. 101. 

4 Raja-rat ., chap, i, M.V. , vii, v. 39. 



THE CONVERSION OP CEYLON 


17 


in parts widely distant from each other . 1 It may be inferred 
that the places were well-populated and that the people were 
of a peaceable character, else the small party would not have 
dared to separate. Besides, the marvellous nature of the works 
executed by the Sinhalese and the rapidity with which they 
were finished in the first century and a half after the conquest 
(such as, for example, the irrigation tank of A mi radii a. con- 
structed less than forty years after Yijaya's landing ), 2 seem 
to show that the Yakkhas had a high degree of civilization. 

It is most improbable that into a community so cultured and 
well-established some traces, at least, should not have found 
their way, of that great Buddhist spiritual movement, which 
was making rapid strides in the mainland, and whose 
missionaries, with that enthusiasm which invariably marks 
allegiance to a new cause, were carrying the glad tidings even 
into regions hitherto unexplored. It is true that Vi java's 
own attention was fully engrossed with the consolidation of his 
newly acquired power. But. the others who came soon after 
him, in ever-increasing numbers, were from countries where 
Buddhism was the dominant faith . 3 This becomes all the more 
probable when we are told that Vi jay a obtained his consort 
for his coronation from among the daughters of the Fandiyan 
king, who reigned at Madhura in South India, and that she was 
accompanied by hosts of others, among them being a thousand 
families of the eighteen guilds . 4 Now these Panel iyans were 
originally a Ksatriya race of Aryans from the Madhya-desa, 
the scene of the Buddha's lifelong ministry . 5 

After they had left their original home in their wanderings 
southwards they kept in touch with those whom they 
had left behind. It is, therefore, reasonable to suppose 
tha ! lie Vand iyan families carried over with them to Ceylon 
some knowledge of the Buddha and his teachings. 

1 M. I 7 ., vii, vv. 43-5. 

2 Ibid., ix, v. 11. 

8 Tenncnt, i, p. 339, and Hiuan-Tsang, Travels , chap. iv. 

4 M. I 7 ., vii, vv. 57 foil. 

6 I). R. Bhandarkar, Carmichael Lectures , 1918, pp. 9 foil. 

2 



18 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


Hugh Nevill, in the Introduction to the Catalogue, which he 
prepared for publication, of his collection of Pali books now 
in the British Museum, says that when he was in Ceylon he 
was informed of a tradition among the Tamils there, 
that Vi jay a had actually, after settling down in Ceylon, 
introduced a colony of persecuted Buddhists from Magadha. 1 

In his Introduction to the Jiniila iikdra James Gray ascribes 
that work to a monk named Buddharakkhita, born of a 
distinguished family in Ceylon in 42fi n.o. “ With the induce- 
ments to missionary work in Vijayas domain our author must 
have joined the Church and, as an outcome of his devotion 
to Pali studies, composed the J inula /'/ him “ And he was at 
the head of a congregation of monks in ( ■ojika-t.ambri-rat ilia, 
the maritime western division of Ceylon, where the Colas of the 
Coromandel coast originally settled." 2 Though there is no 
historical evidence to support the very great antiquity 
attributed to this work/ 1 yet the Burmese tradition, which 
Gray has followed in making these statements, serves to show 
that long before Mahinda’s arrival, Buddhism was known in 
Ceylon. 

In this connexion, there is one more fact worthy of notice. 
Vijaya died, leaving no heir to the throne. Before his death 
he sent: an embassy to his younger brother Sumitta, inviting 
him to take charge of his domain in Ceylon. Sumitta, having 
been already crowned king as his father's successor, accepted 
the invitation on behalf of his youngest son Panduvasudeva, 
w r ho came over and succeeded Vijaya. His queen was a Sfikya 
princess, Bhaddakaccana, of great beauty. Suitors from many 
lands sought her hand, and her father, to escape unpleasant 
complications, put her in a boat with a few friends, ♦ and 
launched it upon the Ganges. The boat, with its precious 
cargo, reached Ceylon, and Bhaddakaccana became 
Pan<Juvasudeva\s queen. 4 She and her companions, all scions 

1 British Museum, Oriental Catalogue. 

2 Jimilankara , In trod., pp. 7 8. 

3 Nee my remarks on the Jimilankara further on. 

4 A/.r. # viii, vv. 18 foil. 



THE CONVERSION OF CEYLON 


19 


of the Sakya elan, were undoubtedly Buddhists, because the 
Pitakas bear ample testimony to the whole-hearted adherence 
and the loyal devotion of the Sakyans to the new faith taught 
by their great kinsman. It would be strange if, with such inter- 
course with the motherland, the Sinhalese people of that, day 
were not brought into touch with the religious movement 
which was then growing and spreading in power in the valley 
of the Ganges. 

Both Vijava and his successors treated all religions with a 
perfect equality of royal favour, a policy evidently dictated 
by their eagerness to encourage immigration. Vakkha temples 
were respected, and even annual offerings were provided for 
them; halls were built for the Brahmins; residences were 
erected for them at public expense, one of them being the 
Tittharaina (the monastery for foreign religious), built by 
Pandukfibhaya, on the. spot, where Abhavagiri now stands at 
Ammid hap ura . 1 No mention, however, is made of a single 

edifice having been built for t he use of the Buddhists a silence 

probably due to a natural tendency on the part of Buddhist 
chroniclers to concentrate all attention on Mahinda and thus 
connect, the introduction of Buddhism into Ceylon with the 
most distinguished person conceivable, the great Asoka . 2 

Pandukabhaya was followed by his son Mutasiva, and he 
in turn by Devanampiya-Tissa (Tissa Beloved of the Gods). 
He was Mutasiva's second son, but was chosen because he was 

foremost among all his brothers in virtue and intelligence.” 3 
At the time of his coronation many miracles came, to pass. 
“ In the whole Isle of Lanka treasures and jewels that had 
been buried deep rose to the surface, of the earth . . . pearls 
of the eight kinds . . . came forth out of the ocean and lay 
upon the shore in heaps.” 4 

Soon after his accession Tissa sent envoys to his friend 
Dhammasoka with costly presents— an act of friendly homage, 

1 Jl/.l'., x, w. 98-102. 

2 OUlcnbcrg, Vinaya , Introd., p. lii. 

3 M . V. f xi, v. (i. 

4 Ibid., xi, vv. 8-15. 



20 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


further evidence of the free intercourse which existed between 
the two kingdoms. The great emperor returned the courtesy. 
He sent an embassy of Ids chosen ministers, bearing gifts 
marvellous in splendour, that Tissa might go through a second 
coronation ceremony, and the messengers were directed to 
give this special message to the king : tk I have taken refuge 
in the Buddha, his Doctrine and his Order. 1 have declared 
myself a lay disciple of the religion of the ttakya son; seek 
then, even thou, O best of men, converting thy mind with 
believing heart, refuge in these best of gems.” 1 Thus was 
the ground prepared for Mahinda’s mission.- 

In the meanwhile., between the landing of Vijaya in 
5*13 n.c. and the arrival of Maliinda about 213 b.cl, many 
changes had come over India, north of the Yindhya 
Mountains. In the middle of the seventh century n.c. 
the paramount power was the great kingdom of Kosala, 
then at the height of its prosperity, under the great Kosaian 
(M a hfi kosala). His dominions extended from the mountains 
to the (binges, 'and from the Kosala. and Kamagariga rivers on 
the west to the (iandak on the east. But. already in the time 
of the Buddha's boyhood a new star was rising on the political 
horizon. This was Magadha. a. petty kingdom on the South of 
Kosala. The exact: course of events which made Magadha 
triumph over all her rivals it is impossible to follow. But one 
fact- stands out dearly : before more than a century and a half 
had elapsed from the date of the Buddha’s death, 
( -andragupta, a scion of the N&nda race, and a yout hful 
adventurer, (‘fleeted a revolution at Pataliputra (Patna), the 
capital of the Magadhan monarchy, exterminated the Nanda 
family, which was then holding swav, destroyed the 
Macedonian garrison in the Indus basin, and, having thus 
secured his position against all enemies, worked his way 

1 M.V . xi, vv. 3H 

* l ’< t this, and the rest of the historical portion about Asoka in this 
chapter, nee Rhys Davids, Buddhist India, pp. 272 foil. ; Vincent Smith's 
Asoka (Oxford Univ. Press), Rulers of Judia Series, jtassvm ; and The Oxford 
History of India (1923), pp. 72 foil. 



THE CONVERSION OF CEYLON 


2 \ 

to m dominion equalling the mightiest- then existing. 
He made of Magadha a gigantic* empire and became the 
first genuinely historical emperor of India. lie was succeeded 
by his son, Bindusara, whose title Armtraghata (slaver of 
foes) suggests a martial career. Though nothing definite is 
recorded of his military achievements, it seems almost certain 
that the conquest, of the Oekkhan was effected during his reign . 1 
When the reign of Bindusiira terminated after a duration of 
twenty-eight years, he was succeeded bv one of his sons, 
commonly called Asoka, then the Magadha ViccToy at Ujjeni. 
His succession was contested ; but, in the end, he asserted his 
rights and was crowned emperor, lie inherited a kingdom 
which was strong and rich and extensive, protected by a large 
army, administered by a government with elaborately 
organized departments, and carefully graded officials with 
well-defined duties. Asoka was a man of peaceable disposition, 
and did everything in his power to make his subjects happy 
and contented, flis imperishable records, in the shape of those 
wonderful inscriptions-- the most remarkable of their kind in 
the world, and apparently written for the most part to bis 
own dictation — enable us to form a fairly connected and vivid 
picture of his life. He waged but one war, and that a war of 
annexation, upon the kingdom of Kalihga, eight years after 
his consecration. This war is made to appear the turning- 
point in his career; for to this war was due not only the 
gradual development of the emperor's character and policy 
which converted him to the Buddhist faith, but also that move- 
ment which he later initiated, whereby Buddhism, from being 
a local sect, grew to be one of the world religions. The Kalihga 
war thus became one of the decisive events in the history of 
the world. 

Asoka himself tells in the Thirteenth Rock Edict 2 how 
repentance came upon him when he contemplated the 
miseries and the sufferings which the indulgence of his 

1 Smith, Oxford History, p. 76. 

2 Senarl, Inscrip . de Piyadassi . 



22 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


ambition had involved, and how he was driven to seek in the 
Good Law, which he elsewhere identifies with the teaching of 
the Buddha, refuge from the hauntings of a remorse -stricken 
conscience. 

There were three stages in this conversion. The Rupnath 
Edict , 1 written about the thirteenth year after his formal 
coronation, mentions that he had been, for two and a half 
years, a lay disciple ( 'updsaha ), but had not developed much 
zeal, but that one year before the date of the Edict he had 
entered the Order . 2 In the Eighth Edict he tells us that in 
the thirteenth year after his anointing he had set forth 
on the path to Sambodhi (towards the attainment of 
Arahantship). ‘Thenceforward he devoted his whole energy 
and all the extensive resources of his vast empire to the 
realization of the noble ideals which the new faith had given 
him. With unbounded zeal and a high and lofty devotion, 
such as was Worthy of so great a cause, Asoka devised ways and 
means of bringing about a change of heart in all men — 
whom he considered as his children — so that they, 44 hearing 
his Ordinance, based on the Law of Piety, and his instruction 
in that Law, may practise the Law.” 3 He taught not merely 
by precept, but also by personal example. In the thirteenth 
edict he describes how he had already won success in his 
ambition in this direction among the people of Egypt, Syria, 
Macedonia, Epirus, Kyrene, among the Co]as and Pandiyas 
in South India, and in Ceylon. 

This last, the only one that may be called historically 
successful, is the achievement with which we are at present 
concerned. That Asoka had a special warmth of regard for 
Ceylon is clear from the message, referred to earlier, which he 
sent to Devanampiya-Tissa. According to the statements 

1 Senart, op. fit. 

2 What exactly this “ Entering the Order " means is not clear. Perhaps 
it refers to the incident where Asoka consents to his children Mahinda and 
Sanghamitta entering the Sangha, which act made him a Sasana-dayada 
“ the inheritor, heir, or kinsman of the Buddha's religion ", to the spreading 
of which teachings he thenceforward dedicated his life. 

3 Edict xiii. 



THE CONVERSION OF CDYLON 


23 


made by the Ceylon Chronicles, which there is no valid reason 
for disbelieving — especially, in view of the evidence, brought 
to light by Cunningham in and near the Sanchi Topes, which 
corroborate, in a very remarkable manner, many of the facts 
therein mentioned — Asoka dispatched his son 1 Mahinda, 
with six others, to carry the glad tidings of the Good Law 
over to Ceylon. 

The Maha-vantsa describes with ecstatic rapture the advent 
of Mahinda to the island, his aerial flight, his descent to 
Arnbatthala, the loftiest peak of Mihintale, where, rising 
suddenly from the plain, the mountain overlooks the city of 
Anuradhapura. The story proceeds to relate how the king, 
who was hunting the elk, was miraculously allmed to the spot 
where Mahinda was standing, and how (he latter propounded 
the Doctrine to the ruler of the land, who, together with his 
forty thousand followers, embraced the new faith. 2 Thus, on 
the full moon day of Poson (June July), 230 years after the 
passing away of the Buddha, the new religion gained official 
recognition in the island. Mahinda's arrival, and the con- 
sequent conversion of the king and his royal retinue, was the 
culminating event in a process which had been going on 
gradually and without doubt tolerably rapidly for well nigh 
two centuries. 

No time could have been more opportune for the 
promulgation of the new and living religion. The two hundred 
years which had elapsed after Vijaya’s arrival had been spent 
in initiatory measures for the organization of the country. 
Encouraged by the facilities held out to settlers, fresh colonists 
had been pouring into the land in ever-increasing numbers. 
Towns had been built and arrangements made to keep them 
clean and healthy ; suburbs had been laid out and measures 

1 “ Asoka's younger brother ” says Smith (Oxford Hist., p. 99) following 
the Indian tradition and also the evidence furnished by the Chinese. 
Hiuan-Tsang mentions the name of Mahinda, but calls him ASoka's 
younger brother (Beal, Buddhist Records of the Western World, vol. ii, 
pp. 246-7). But I do not see any reason for accepting the Chinese version 
in preference to the Sinhalese. 

* M.V. , xiv, vv. 1 foil. 



24 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


adopted to provide the inhabitants with the necessary com- 
forts of life ; gardens planned, parks constructed, and fruit- 
bearing trees introduced. The production of food had been 
secured by the construction of canals and public works for 
irrigation. Every one, from the king downwards, took a 
personal interest in adding to the fruitfulness of the land. 
Carriage roads facilitated communication between the various 
settlements ; village boundaries had been fixed, and the 
cultivation of art and science encouraged . 1 The people were 
contented and happy, and they were at the dawn of a new 
era of peace and prosperity. By the earlier infiltration of 
Indian culture the ground had already been prepared to receive 
a doctrine of life which gave a new purpose to existence and 
furnished an opportunity for noble endeavour. The seed had 
only to be sown for it to take root and blossom with amazing 
vigour. 

As a fitting climax to the conversion of Ceylon, which was 
the most successful and most productive of the missionary 
efforts of Asoka, he sent his daughter Sanghamitta, carrying 
with her, as a token of the king's cordiality and goodw r ill, a 
branch of the Plpul tree at Buddha-gaya, where the Teacher 
had attained enlightenment. And the honour thus paid to 
Ceylon was well deserved. “ It is doubtful if any other single 
incident in the long story of their race has seized upon the 
imagination of the Sinhalese with such tenacity as this of the 
planting of the aged tree. Like its pliant roots, which find 
sustenance on the face of the bare rock and cleave their w r ay 
through the stoutest fabric, the influence of what it represents 
has penetrated into the innermost being of the people till the 
tree itself h^s become almost human. The loving care of some 
pious observer has left on record in sonorous Pali and with 
minute detail the incidents of the day when the soil of Ceylon 
first received it , 2 and to-day the descendants of the princely 
escort who accompanied it from India continue to be its 

1 M.V., x, vv. 88 foil. 

* Maha-Bodhi-varjiaa, q.v. 



THE CONVERSION OF CEYLON 


25 


guardians. The axe of the ruthless invaders who for so many 
centuries to come were destined to spread ruin throughout the 
country was reverently withheld from its base. And even now, 
on the stillest night, its heart-shaped leaves on their slender 
stalks ceaselessly quiver and sigh, as they have quivered and 
sighed for twenty-three centuries.” 1 

The spiritual movement introduced under such well- 
auguring auspices found a permanent abode in the little 
island home. If the criterion of the greatness of such a move- 
ment be the beneficial influence it has exerted on the character 
of those towards whom it was directed, then, certainly, the 
mission of King Asoka to Ceylon was amongst the greatest 
civilizing influences of the world, for it bequeathed to the 
Sinhalese people a gentleness of disposition and a nobility and 
refinement of character of which neither the ravages of time, 
nor centuries of ruthless warfare, nor the insidious attacks of 
modern commercialism have succeeded in depriving them. 

But by no means the least of its results was the impetus it 
gave to a fresh study of the problems of mankind in the light 
of its new philosophy— -a study which resulted in the 
production of a voluminous literature, which for centuries 
commanded the veneration of the whole Eastern world, and 
the remnants of which even to-day excite our wonder and 
admiration. “ For there, in that beautiful land,” as Rhys 
Davids reminds us, “ the province most fruitful of any in 
India or its confines, in continuous and successful literary 
work and effort, there have never been wanting, from that 
day to this, the requisite number of earnest scholars and 
students to keep alive, and hand down to their successors 
and to us that invaluable literature which has taught us so 
much of the history of religion, not only in Ceylon, but also in 
India itself.” 2 

It is the story of that literature, unique in many respects, 
that we propose to unfold in the following chapters. 

1 P. E. Pieris, Ceylon and the Portuguese , pp. 3-4. 

* Buddhist India , pp. 303-4. 



CHAPTER II 

The Writing Down of the Books 


\ VriTFI tlics arrival of Sanghamitta, and the, planting of the 
sacred Bo-tree in Sinhalese soil, the establishment of 
Buddhism in the island was complete. Great rejoicings 
marked the event. A festival of fourteen days, the like of 
which Ceylon had never before witnessed, was held in honour 
of the occasion. From the sea to the city gates the road along 
which the holy sprig was conducted to Anuradhapura was 
decorated, “ sprinkled with white sand, bestrewn with various 
dowers, and adorned with planted pennons and festoons of 
blossoms." 1 Sanghamitta was accorded all the honour due to 
so distinguished a visitor. When the ceremony of the planting 
of the tree was over, a stale function was held, where the royal 
princes and other leading men who had escorted the Hodhi- 
tree were duly presented to t he king by Arittha, t he Sinhalese 
envoy, who had been specially dispat cited to Asoka's court, 
to bring over Sanghamitta and the sacred Pipul branch. 
Titles and honours were conferred on the distinguished 
ambassadors, and arrangements were made for the custody 
of the holy tree and for the due performance of religious 
ceremonies in its honour. 

Meanwhile day after day the great Thera Mahinda, on the 
invitation of the king, visited the palace in the forenoon and 
after being entertained with his companions to the midday 
meal preached the Good Dhamma to the multitudes who 
continually flocked to the palace gates to see the Thera and 
listen to Ids message. Day after day the concourse grew larger 
and larger, and thousands, hearing the teaching of the Great 
Elder, became converted and were admitted into the new 
faith. 

A large number of the converts, both high and low, finding 
the householder’s life uncongenial to the practice of the 
1 M . V ., xix, vv. 37 foil. 



THE WRITING DOWN OF THE BOOKS 


-7 


Buddha's message, renounced the world and entered the 
Order of the ttangha. The Prime Minister, Arittha, who was 
the king's nephew, and the king’s younger brother, 
Muttsibhn-ya. were among the very first of the Sinhalese 
Bhikkhus: to he ordained. 1 2 For the residence of the Bhikkhus 
the king made an offering of the royal park. Maha megha-vana 
!lhe pieasar.ee of the Great Shower), extending southwards 
irom the en v to t lie hanks of the Kadamba river.- According 
to the Chronicles, many were the mi nicies that accompanied 
its consecration. The very elements manifested their joy at 
the glorious event ; for on the extensive grounds thus 
dedicated to the use of the new* religion was destined to rise a 
little while later the Maha-Vihara, the Great- Minster, which 
for many centuries held, as a Temple of Learning, a prolnineiit 
place in the Pastern world. Monasteries were built with all 
possible, speed for the accommodation of the monks, and 
Slmti (boundaries) were marked out for the holding of the 
Ujxwttha and other Vinaya acts of the Sangha. The women 
were by no means second to the men in their zeal for the new 
religion. Indeed, the very first of the converts to attain to 
the Fruits of the Path were Anula, the wife of the sub- king 
Mahanaga, and the ladies of the court who formed her retinue. 3 
A few days later, on attaining to the second stage of salvation 
(ftakad-agatHi), they expressed a desire to receive the pabhajja- 
ordination and enter the Sisterhood of Nuns. They w r er3 
informed that the Vinaya rules did not allow Mahinda to 
admit women to the Order, arid it was to make their ordination 
possible that Arittha was sent to Pataliputra, to Asoka’s 
court, that he might bring Sarighamitta. Soon after her arrival 
the Then admitted Anula and five hundred other women into 
the Order, thus founding the BhikkhunT-Sasana (the Sister- 
hood of Nuns) in Ceylon. They had already retired from the 
world and gone into residence in a nunnery which came to 

1 M.V., xix, v. CO. 

2 The. present. Mai vatu Ova to the south of Anuradhapura. 

3 M. V., xiv, v. 58. 



28 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


he known as the Upasika- Vihara (the Vihara of the lay sisters). 1 
Sarighamittii herself, wishing for greater seclusion and 
pleasanter remoteness, took up her abode in the Hatthajhaka 
(the Vihara near the Elephant- Post), 2 which the king built 
for her special use. There she remained till the end of her 
days, “ working for the progress of the Doctrine and mindful 
of the good of the Rhikkhunls." 3 

The monks and nuns who had thus retired from household 
life were not actuated, in taking this step, by a desire to live 
in indolent devotion, supported by the generosity of the rest 
of the community. Buddhism demands from its votaries 
ceaseless activity in the service of their fellow men and women, 
and yam ada (indolence) is the greatest of all sins. The members 
of the Sangha could, if they felt so inclined, go for a while into 
some woodland retreat, or mountain cave, and there meditate 
on the transitoriru*ss of life, and the sorrows of this never- 
ending cycle of birth and death. But their rightful place was 
in the midst of men and women, preaching and discoursing, 
exhorting them to lead the good life, which alone could bring 
them to salvation. From its very inception Buddhism was 
a missionary religion. Quite early in his career as Teacher and 
Sage the Buddha took a momentous step in bidding his 
disciples go forth and preach the Dhamma to the whole world. 
“ Go ye, monks,” he said, “ and wander for the good of the 
many, the happiness of the many, out of compassion for the 
world, for the good, for the happiness, and for the welfare 
of devas and men. Go not alone, but by twos. Preach, 
monks, the Doctrine which is lovely in the beginning, 
lovely in the middle, lovely in the end, in the spirit, and 
in the? letter ; proclaim the consummate life of holiness, perfect 
and pure/’ 4 Thus was the trumpet-call sounded, for the 
first time in the world's history, for the establishment of a 
religion, which knew no distinctions of colour or race, but 

1 JM\, xviii, vv. 11-12. 

3 Ibid., xix, vv. 77-Sii. 

3 Ibid., xix, v. 78. 

4 Mahdvagga, i, 10 ( Vinaya Texts, S.B.E., i, 112). 



THE WRITING DOWN OP THE BOOKS 


29 


which was meant for the salvation of all mankind. It was this 
command of the Master that had sent Mahinda and 
Sanghamitta over to Ceylon, and they and those whom 
they admitted into the fraternity of the Buddha's disciples 
in the island considered it their self-appointed task to make 
the message of the Dhamrna known in every hearth and home 
throughout the land. Until missionaries trained from amongst 
the sons of the soil could themselves carry aloft the light 
of the Dhaimna amidst all the people, Mahinda did not con- 
sider the Sasana firmly and securely established. 1 The 
Buddhist missionaries sought no advantage for themselves 
or for their own nationalities. It was their endeavour to 
establish in every land whither they carried the Teacher's 
message a Sangha having its own national character, free 
to develop along its own lines, untrammelled by external 
control, temporal or spiritual. Indeed, when on one occasion 
King Devanampiya-Tissa, after having done all that he thought 
was necessary for the permanent establishment of the Sasana 
in Ceylon, asked the great Thera Mahinda whether the religion 
of the Buddha was well established in the island, the reply 
he received was : “ The Sasana has been established, but it 
has not yet taken deep root." “ When will it be deeply rooted, 
Sir ? ” asked the king. “ On the (lay when a son born in 
Tambapanni (Ceylon) of parents resident in that island 
has entered the Order in this island, and, having studied the 
Vinaya in this island itself, expounds it in this island, then, 
O King, will the Sasana have taken deep root," 2 was the 
memorable reply. 

For this purpose and for the purpose of disseminating a 
knowledge of the Dliamma amongst the people a careful study 
of the religion was necessary. And Mahinda had provided 
for this by bringing with him over to Ceylon the traditions of 
the orthodox Thera-vadin school, contained in the canon 
which had been handed down by the Thera-vada-parampara 
(the succession of Elders), and which had been completed 
1 Samanta-pasadikd (P.T.S. Ed.), p. 102. 1 Ibid. 



30 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


and sanctioned by the Three Councils or Recitals held after 
the Buddha's death. 

Devana m piya-Tissa \s reign lasted for forty years, it was 
a period of unbroken peace, devoted entirely to the social and 
moral welfare of t lie country. The king had lived sufficiently 
long to see the accomplishment of the task upon which he had 
his whole heart —the permanent establishment of Buddhism 
as flic national faith. This work well done, he passed away 
in the fullness of time, leaving behind him a name whose 
lustre the lapse of centuries has failed to dim in the memory 
of a grateful people. The whole island had become the scene 
of ever-increasing religious activity from Eohana in the south 
to Bihiti in the north. By the time of Tissa’s deatli tin* new 
religion had spread into every town, village, and hamlet, 
and Viharas and other religious edifices dotted the land from 
end to end. Some of them soon acquired fame as centres of 
learning, and chief among them was the Dighasanda-senfipati- 
parivena, built by the king's commander-in-chief, Dighasanda, 
who gave it. to Mahinda. 1 * In later times it became 
famous as the residence of the author of the Maha oatnsar 
The desire for the acquisition of knowledge was also 
greatly ’encouraged by the presence of material prosperity. 
The ’disposition of the Gangctic population which had taken 
possession of Cevlon with Vi java's arrival was essentially 
adapted to agricultural pursuits, and, helped by the zeal and 
vigour of the rulers, the people easily secured all the material 
comforts necessary for a happy life. 

Tissa was succeeded by bis brother Uttiva, and during his 
reign the great Apostle Mahinda passed away on the 8th day 
of the bright half of Assayuja (October). “ the light of 
Lanka, the teacher of many disciples, he who, like unto the 
Master, had wrought great blessing for the people '\ 3 In the 
following year the saintly Sanghamitta herself passed to her 

1 M.V. t xv, vv. 212-14. 

3 q.v. 

3 M,V. t xx, vv. 30-3. 



THE WRITING DOWN OF THE HOOKS 


31 


rest-. She had worked strenuously for the religion during 
t\vent} f -nine long years, and her remains were cremated in 
sight of the Bodhi-tree which she had brought over from 
Jambu-dlpa . 1 Fttiya was followed bv Maine -Siva and t he latter 
by Sura-Tissa, who was an ardent devotee of the religion, and 
is said before and after bis accession to have built five* hundred 
monasteries in all parts of the country. His pious career, 
however, came to a tragic end. From among the large 
concourse of foreigners who had come to Ceylon from 
Jambu-dlpa, two Tamils, sons of a horse-dealer, seized the 
kingdom and slew the king . 2 Tims began those periodical 
invasions of the Tamil hordes from the continent which later 
rendered desolate the greater part of the island and all but 
completely destroyed its culture and civilization. Tt is true 
that the Tamils (or the Mala bars, as they are frequently 
called) brought with them a certain amount of civilizing 
influence in the form of Hindu culture ; but the destruction 
they wrought was immense. They pidled down all public 
buildings, put to death the. monks, and burnt; whatever 
literary records fell into their hands. The ultimate dis- 
appearance of the greater part of the literature and learning 
of Ceylon was, as we shall see later, directly or indirectly 
due to the results of these invasions. 

The usurpers were driven out after nearly twenty five years ; 
but very soon others appeared on the scene, with greater 
strength of arms, under the leadership of Ejara from the Coja 
country. They killed the reigning king, and Ejara ruled the 
kingdom for forty-four years, administering “ even justice 
towards friend and foe ”. 3 Ejara himself was a good friend of 
Buddhism and the Buddhists, and he was one of the most 
popular rulers of the country ; but his followers were not so 
scrupulous in their behaviour. In the meantime many of the 
Sinhalese, unwilling to bow the knee to the invader, had gone 

1 M.V . y xx, vv. 51-4. 

2 Ibid., xxi, vv. 10-12. 

3 Ibid., xxi, v. 14. 



32 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


south to Rohana, on the other side of the Mahaviili-guriga, 
and the Sinhalese capital was established at Mahfigarnn , 1 where 
the ruling prince was Kakavarma-Tissa. He was a devout 
Buddhist and proved to be a great patron of that faith. In 
this he was assisted by his consort Vihara-Mahadevl. whose 
enthusiasm excelled even that of her Imsband. l T nder their 
auspices the religion was firmly established in Rohana, 
which later was destined to become the birthplace of many of 
Ceylon's most distinguished sons and daughters in all spheres 
of life. More than a half of the best known names in Ceylon 
literature come from this province, and even to-dav the 
inhabitants of Rohana are reputed for their learning and t heir 
ability. The patriotism of the Sinhalese could not tolerate 
a foreign invader in their midst. No government, however 
just, if based upon alien domination, could placate national 
feeling or satisfy national aspirations. Tales of oppression, 
rumours of the supercilious contempt with which the 
comparers treated the country's holiest possessions, reached 
the Sinhalese band in their exile. Youths of strength 
and valour and ardent patriotism flocked to Mugama, 
their hearts burning to avenge their country’s insults. But 
the time was not yet ripe. The old king realized that 
the expulsion of the Tamils was a task of no small difficulty, 
and his army and his resources were yet. too weak and limited 
to undertake the reponsibility. But lie could help towards 
that end, so that, when the propitious day dawned, the hated 
oppressor would no longer be supreme in the land. With this 
in view he gathered round him at his court all the bravest 
and the strongest of his subjects. Martial ardour, however, 
was not his predominant characteristic. It was otherwise 
with his queen, the noble lady, Vihara-Mahadevl. She vras 
cast in a much more heroic mould than her husband. The 
presence of a Tamil usurper on the throne at the sacred city 
of Anuradhapura was a humiliation which she resented 
deeply. Her ardent faith, too, strengthened her resolve to 

1 M.V . , chap, xxii, vv. 11 ff. 



THE WRITING DOWN OF THE BOOKS 


33 


see the emancipation of her motherland, and, when the time 
came, this noble and sagacious woman played no small part 
in the national movement- to sweep the infidel foe into the sea. 

And tint hour produced the man . 1 To the king and queen 
was born Gamani-Abhaya, who was to rid Lanka of the 
Tamil oppression and help her to regain her lost honour. The 
omens that attended his conception and his birth indicated 
that he was no ordinary man . 2 

When he was twelve, his father, lest his son should ruin 
his chance by any attempts of rash impetuosity, had asked 
him to take an oath that lie would never fight with the Tamils. 
The brave lad promptly and indignantly refused . 3 We may be 
sure that the old king secretly rejoiced at having so courageous 
a son, and the. queen-mother openly encouraged the lad's 
ambitions. He was trained in all the arts and sciences that he 
might be fit to be a ruler of men. At the age of sixteen he was 
given a separate establishment, and he gathered round him a 
famous band of giant warriors whose names have become 
household words to this day. The prince excelled all others in 
manly accomplishments — versed in archery, dexterous in 
swordsmanship, and skilled in guiding elephant as well as 
horse, he soon showed himself a born leader of men. Soon he 
sent forth his gallant bodyguard to sound the call to arms, and 
the nation manfully responded. In a few months the Sinhalese 
army, compact, thoroughly equipped and eager for the fray, 
assembled in Magama, and Gamani demanded permission to 
cross the river and attack the foe. He met with a blunt refusal. 
“ Be not rash,” wrote the aged king, “ and desist from any 
precipitate action. The Tamils are over a million men. The 
region on this side of the river sufliceth at least for the 
present.” 4 But Gamani chafed at the restraint. He sent to 
his father a pair of bangles and other female ornaments, 

1 I have dealt with the career of Gamaiii at some length because it forms 
the central theme of the greatest of Pali epics, the Maha-vaifisa (q.v.). 

8 M.V., xxii, vv. 42 foil. 

8 Ibid., xxii, vv. 82-5. 

4 Ibid., xxiv, v. 4. 


3 



34 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


declaring “ My Royal Sire is a woman, not a man ”, and hid 
himself to escape the royal anger. Soon afterwards 
Kakavawa-Tissa died, and within a few months of his 
coronation Gamani got ready in earnest for the campaign 
which had been his dream and ambition. With the blessings 
of the Sangha and the good wishes of the people he set out 
northwards with his army. Vihara-Mahadevi accompanied 
her brave son and by her sagacity, enthusiasm, and encourage- 
ment kindled him to greater and greater achievements. Fort 
after fort fell under the charge of the brave Sinhalese band, 
and after a long siege at Vijitapura the Tamils were completely 
routed. A little while later Gamani engaged Ejara in a hand-to- 
hand fight near the south gate of Anuradhapura. Ejara was 
no match for his adversary, and soon fell. Gamani’s victory 
was complete, and in the hour of his triumph he made a 
gesture which brought honour not only to himself but also 
to the nation which produced him. For he decreed that his 
royal adversary should be accorded all the honours due to 
a king, and further declared that no man, prince or peasant, 
should pass the spot where the remains of the Tamil hero 
lay buried riding in palanquin or litter or with beating of 
drums . 1 It is to the credit of the people of Ceylon that during 
two thousand years and more they obeyed this decree and 
continued to pay their homage to one who was a brave man 
and a just and humane ruler. 

In a few days the king was crowned as supreme ruler of a 
united Lanka (the three Sinhala provinces), and great were 
the rejoicings thereat. But the king’s outlook on life had 
changed, the great and glorious success for which he had lived 
and dreamed gave him no real joy. He thought of the 
thousands of human lives on whom suffering had been wrought 
to encompass this end, and he was filled with poignant grief. 
For he had always been deeply religious in mind and com- 
passionate at heart, and the memory of these miseries 
caused him great pain. He determined to start a new chapter 
1 Jf.F., xxv, w. 71-6. 



THE WRITING DOWN OF THE BOOKS 


35 


in his life. Hitherto material conquest had been his one and 
dominant ambition ; henceforth lie would be a man of peace, 
governing his people like unto a father, and devoting himself 
to the sacred cause of the Buddha’s compassionate teaching. 
Thus was initiated an era of peace and joy and contentment, 
an age pre-eminently of faith, beautiful in its simplicity, 
yet illumined by knowledge and imbued with an extraordinary 
moral earnestness. It was an age when devas walked on earth 
and in their heavenly abodes declared their wish to be born 
in Lanka as men and women. There was happiness in the 
land and prosperity. Many are the tales, enshrined in tradition, 
of the saintly personages that flourished during this period, 
and some at least of them undoubtedly deal with historical 
characters. But the accounts of their doings are enveloped in 
myth and fable, and it is impossible to separate truth from 
fiction. 

Gamani’s munificence was especially directed to the erection 
of religious edifices, chief among them being the Lova-Maha- 
Paya (the Brazen Palace, so called because of its being roofed 
with metal plates), a nine-storied monastery elevated on 
sixteen hundred columns of monolithic granite, resplendent 
with gold and silver and precious stones, furnished with costly 
beds and chairs, a gem-palace designed and constructed after 
the reputed model of a devatas abode in heaven . 1 This was 
dedicated to the use of monks of all ranks and positions, and 
there they studied and preached the Sacred Scriptures. This 
was a great service rendered by the king to the growth of 
literature, the providing of a place where scholars could meet 
and discuss various problems. The Pujavaliya 2 tells us 
that books were supplied and all manner of comforts provided 
for the preachers. 

But the greatest of his works was the Maha-Thupa, the 
Ruvanvali Dagoba (the Relic Chamber of the Golden Sands,' 
so called from its magnificence), the most stupendous and the 

1 M.V . , xxvii, vv. 10-20. 

* Colombo Ed., p. 176. 



36 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


most venerated of those at Anuradhapura. It was a labour of 
love, and the king took special precautions that no hardships 
fell upon the people in consequence of his great enterprise. 
“ No work is to be done here without reward,” he caused to 
be proclaimed, and no labourer was allowed to go away 
unrequited. 1 We are not here concerned with the building of 
the glorious edifice, except for one circumstance connected 
with it. We are told that on the day when the foundation- 
stone was laid for the Maha-Thupa, on the full-moon day of 
Vesakha (April-May), 144 b.c., the assemblage of monks for 
the auspicious occasion included not only the bhikkhus of 
Lanka, but also large numbers from the principal Viharas 
and monasteries of India. The Mahd-vamsa 2 gives, with a 
wealth of detail, the names of many of the eminent visitors 
from India ; Candagutta from the Vanavasa country, 
Cittagutta from Buddha-gaya, Dhammasena from 
Isipattana, Indagutta from Rajagaha, Manadeva from 
Pallavabhogga, Mittin^a from Pataliputta, Piyadassin 
from SavatthI, Suriyagutta from Kelasa, Urubuddharakkhita 
from Vesall, Urudhamraarakkhita from KosambI, Uru- 
sangha-rakkhita from Ujjeni, Uttara Maha-Thera from the 
Vindhyas, Uttinija from Kasmlr, and Maha-Dhammarakkhita 
from Alasanda of the Yoiia country (probably near Kabul). 
The Mate-vamsa was here only following an older tradition, 
and, whatever we may feel about the chronicleBs’ statements 
as to the mode of travel adopted by these distinguished visitors 
and the numbers of the disciples that formed their respective 
retinues (sixty thousand, etc.), there is no gainsaying that this 
points to a historical event, that these eminent thetas did 
come to Ceylon at the time and that they were men of influence 
in their various dioceses. 

During the period of commotion which existed at the time 
of the Tamil supremacy it is not probable that learning 
made much progress, nor is there much evidence that Gama^i 

1 M.V., xxvii, v. 23, and xxx, v. 17. 

* Ibid., xxix, 30 foil. 



THE WRITING DOWN OP THE BOOKS 


37 - 


during the earlier years of his reign had time left for the 
promotion of intellectual attainment amongst his subjects ; 
for he was completely engrossed in erecting a series of monu- 
mental structures. But with the firm establishment of domestic 
peace and prosperity learning must have proceeded apace, 
and the arrival of these eminent theras from India, from 
regions as far apart as the Dekkhan and Savatthi, together 
with their followers, must undoubtedly have given a fresh 
impetus to the study of the religion of which they were the 
exponents. A hundred years had elapsed between Makinda’s 
mission and the visit of these holy and learned men, and many 
things had happened in Ceylon during that period. In India, 
too, after the expulsion of the dissentient monks from 
Moggaliputta-Tissa’s Council, many developments had 
probably taken place in the doctrine, and these visitors were 
able to acquaint the Ceylon Bhikkhus with such occurrences. 
No records exist of any literary productivity at this period, 
because the chroniclers were concerned only with accounts 
of royal munificence in the erection and endowment of religious 
structures ; but chance references to events such as this visit 
and the circumstances connected with them justify such 
conclusions as we have arrived at above. 

The thirty-second chapter 1 of the Maha-vmnsa contains 
also certain references to several of the chief monks of Gamani’s 
time. Among them we find Maha-Malaya-Deva of Kalavela, 
who was in close connexion with the Bhikkhus dwelling on the 
Samanta-kuta (Adam’s Peak), Dhammagutta, the Earth- 
shaker, of the Kalyani Vihara, Bhaggari-vasin Maha-Tissa, 
and Tissa the Short, who dwelt at Mangana in the highest 
mountains of Ceylon. It is interesting to note that some of 
these names occur in the list of the thera-parampara (succession 
of Elders) taken from the old Sinhalese Maha-vamsa, and 
preserved in the Parivdra 2 and also in the list quoted in full 
by Buddhaghosa in the Samanta-pdsadika* Professor Rhys 

1 M.V., xxxii, vv. 49 foil. 

* Oldenberg, Vinaya, iii, pp. 313-14. 

» P.T.S. Ed., pp. 32 foil. 



38 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


Davids has identified some of them with certain theras 
mentioned in the Jataka commentary , 1 * and the conclusions 
he has drawn are optimistic. “ It is evident,” says he, “ that 
these Theras are real personages. In the few scraps of the early 
Ceylon texts that have already been published we have 
sufficient information as to their opinions and as to their 
character to warrant the hope that, when the texts are com- 
pletely before us, we may be able to reconstruct, to a very 
considerable extent, the literary and intellectual history of 
Ceylon in the second century b.c.” 2 May his hopes be 
fulfilled ! 

There is one more fact in Gamani’s career worthy of 
attention for our purpose, before we pass on. So great was the 
king’s zeal for the propagation of the religion that he even 
assumed the role of preacher himself, his audience being none 
less than the monks of the Brazen Palace . 3 He seated himself 
in the preacher’s chair in the centre of the spacious hall and 
made ready to give the august assembly a discourse on some 
religious topic from the Mangala-Sutta. But, although he was 
quite familiar with the Sacred Scriptures, he could not 
proceed ; he descended from the pulpit “ perspiring 
profusely ” ; he had realized how difficult was the task of 
the teachers, and his munificence towards them was made 
greater. From that period he instituted “ the preaching of 
religious discourses to be kept up in the viharas in various 
parts of Lanka, supporting the ministers of religion who were 
gifted with the power of preaching From that day the 
custom of regular fcana-preaching at the village temple became 
an established institution, continued uninterruptedly to 
the present day. In ancient times the temple was the village 
school as well ; but with the disappearance of state endow- 
ments and the decay of old institutions the function of the 
schoolmaster has been gradually taken away from the village 

1 JBA8 ., Oct. 1901, pp. 889 foil. 

* Ibid., pp. 898-4. 

• Pujdvcdiya , Col. Ed., p. 177. 



THE WRITING DOWN OP THE BOOKS 


39 


monk. However, at no time in the history of Ceylon was the 
Sinhalese peasant deprived totally of education in the wider 
sense of the term. The monk in the village temple continued 
to relate to him passages from the Scriptures which he stored 
up in his memory . 1 In every instance stories were adduced to 
illustrate the subject under discussion, and morals were draw r n 
from such tales. Even to-day, when a large percentage of the 
population labours under the ban of “ illiteracy ”, the peasant 
cannot be considered totally un-educated ; for the traditional 
lore which he has inherited from the temple teachers continues 
to furnish him wdth ideals of sagacity, of loving service and 
good fellowship, and this is ultimately a real education. 
To the historian of literature the institution of these temple 
discourses has another significance. To them may directly 
be traced the origin of the Katha-vaUhu books of religion and 
folklore, which in later days formed the most cherished 
possession of the villagers’ scanty library. Of this more later. 

Gamani was succeeded by his brother Tissa (Saddha- 
Tissa, as he was called, because of his devotion to the religion). 
His reign of eighteen years was a period of unexampled 
prosperity. There is one story related of him w r hich illustrates 
how deep was the interest evinced in Ceylon even by royal 
personages in the pursuit of wisdom and what great humility 
marked their acquisition of learning. Whatever literary 
achievements were accomplished by the Sinhalese were due 
very largely to the patronage extended to them by men of 
position and power, kings and queens not excluded. Several 
of Ceylon’s monarchs were themselves distinguished authors, 
but they all had a love of literature and, what was more, 
showed it. One day it was announced that the great Thera 

1 Parker tells us in one of his interesting volumes on Ceylon that ho 
knew of instances where the villagers used to travel 12 miles up and 12 miles 
down every full moon day to the nearest temple, carrying with them their 
meagre provisions for the journey. At the temple under the palm-trees, 
with the light of the tropical full- moon shining on the sand, they would 
listen throughout the night to proachers who discoursed to them one after 
another. The whole-night preaching still continues in certain parts where 
the bustle of modern life has not penetrated. 



40 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


BudcLharakkhita would preach that night at Mihintale. The 
king, unannounced and without any ceremony, came to hear 
the sermon. Having arrived late and being reluctant to disturb 
the audience, he stood outside the hall, listening with rapt 
attention. The discourse lasted the whole night, and at dawn 
the Thera concluded the sermon with the usual benedictions. 
The king’s cry of acclamation revealed his identity. The 
Thera asked him when he had come. “ When you were just 
commencing, Sir,” said he. “ You are king, sire, and not 
accustomed to such discomfort. How was it possible for you 
to remain standing outside throughout the night ? ” “ Not 
one night, Venerable Sir, but many nights in succession would 
I willingly stand listening to a sermon such as yours. Let me 
assure you on my honour, I never missed one syllable of your 
discourse.” Then he entered into a discussion with the Elder 
on the Dhamma , at the conclusion of which he offered the 
throne to the Teaching. But the Thera returned it, saying : 
“ Do thou, 0 King, rule the country on behalf of the Dhamma . ’ ’ 1 
For some time after Tissa’s death there was internal trouble 
in the land. The monks made an unfortunate intervention in 
politics in an attempt to place their favourite on the throne 
in violation of the law of succession. This attempt ended in 
failure and brought disaster upon them. 2 The rightful heir, 
dissatisfied with their conduct, discontinued the various 
offerings, the cost of which had regularly been borne by the 
Royal Treasury down to that time, and which had provided 
the monks with all the necessaries of life, thus enabling them 
to carry on their work of study and teaching in comfort. 
This withdrawal of the royal favour greatly inconvenienced 
the monks, and brought upon them slight and neglect which 
interfered with the progress of the religion: But a reconciliation 
was soon effected, and the king, anxious to atone for his 
erstwhile neglect and remissness, went to the other extreme 
of lavish expenditure and unbounded munificence. A few 

1 Saddharmalaiikdraya, Colombo Ed. f p. 123. 

* i/.F., xxxiii, vv. 17-21. 



THE WRITING DOWN OP THE BOOKS 


41 


years later, when his successor was on the throne, a com- 
mander of troops in the army raised the standard of revolt 
and slew the king. But another figure, more powerful than he, 
appeared on the scene. This was Vattagamani, whose reign 
is of immense interest in the history of Pali literature. Within 
twenty-four hours of the revolt, the usurper was no more, 
and Vattagamani had consecrated himself as king. But quite 
soon the peace of the land was disturbed by rebellion within 
and invasion without. Taking advantage of the internal 
troubles, a large army of the Malabars made another of their 
periodic incursions, their object being plunder and the capture 
of the throne. In a great battle fought to the north of the 
capital the Sinhalese were completely defeated, and the king 
was compelled to mount his chariot and seek safety in flight. 
During fourteen years the king remained in concealment, 
befriended by a Thera , Maha-Tissa, and a chieftain, Tanasxva. 1 
In the meanwhile the people bowed to the inevitable, and 
accepted the Tamil domination, confident that soon their own 
royal line would be restored to them. In the hill-country the 
remnants of the Sinhalese army stoutly maintained their 
independence, and after an interval of over fourteen years 
Vattagamani slew the Tamil ruler and liberated the country 
from its oppressors. 

Quite soon after his restoration Vattagamani built the 
Abhayagiri Dagoba on the site of the Tittharama, the 
monastery of the Niganthas, whose leader, unmindful of the 
munificent hospitality which his fraternity had enjoyed at 
the hand of the Buddhist kings of Ceylon, had gloated over 
Vattagamani’s misfortunes and openly expressed his delight 
at the king’s defeat. 2 After the victory the king avenged the 
ingratitude, and, where the Tittharama stood, he con- 
structed the Abhayagiri Dagoba, the mightiest of its kind, 
which, rising from a square platform of nearly eight acres in 
extent, exceeded 400 feet in height. The Vihara attached to 

1 M. V. y xxxiii, vv. 50 foil. 

2 Ibid., xxxiii, vv. 44-6 and 81-3. 



42 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


it he gave over to his benefactor, the Thera Maha-Tissa. This 
Vihara was destined later to be the scene of events which were 
of great consequence both to the religion and to the literature 
connected with it. 

For it happened that the Thera Maha-Tissa, who had 
accepted the gift of the Abhayagiri Vihara, but actually lived 
elsewhere, was credited by general repute with living in 
domestic intercourse. Thereupon the pious monks of the 
Maha- Vihara, custodians of the purity and the reputation 
of the faith in Ceylon, assembled together and interdicted 
him. One of the Thera s pupils, who was present, obstructed 
them, and the tribunal of monks, adjudging the obstructor 
guilty of misconduct, expelled him from the Order. He, 
burning with resentment, left with a large body of his 
followers, and, breaking away from the Maha- Vihara fraternity, 
lived at Abhayagiri Vihara. Soon their band was strengthened 
by the arrival in Ceylon of a body of monks from Pallararama 
in India, who, though professedly Buddhist monks, were 
regarded as heretics by the orthodox monks both of India 
and Ceylon. They belonged to the Vajjiputta Nik ay a, one of 
the sects descended from those that had refused to recognize 
Moggaliputta-Tissa’s Council. Their teacher was the Acariya 
Dhammaruci, and on their arrival in Ceylon, finding no favour 
w r ith the Maha-Vihara, they joined the Abhayagiri fraternity, 
which quite readily welcomed them and soon accepted also 
their doctrines and tenets. The dissentient Bhikkhu who had 
attempted to defend Maha-Tissa, and who was now* living at 
the head of the Abhayagiri monks, took to himself the name 
of Dhammaruci Acariya, and thencefonvard the Abhayagiri 
fraternity became known as the Dhammaruci Nikaya, 
established in the fifteenth year of Vattagamani and 454 
years after the Buddha's death. 1 This was the beginning of 
the first schismatic division among the Sangha in Ceylon. 
It w r as originally a seceding movement, due purely to personal 
and disciplinary reasons ; but in the course of time doctrinal 

1 S ikaya-mngraha, pp. 11 and 12. 



THE WRITING DOWN OP THE BOOKS 


43 


differences came to be associated with it. For nearly twelve 
centuries it continued to disturb the peace of the Ceylon 
monks, and there is no doubt that during its period of existence 
its adherents produced literary works setting forth their point 
of view. But, unfortunately for us, kings, in the excess of their 
zeal for the preservation of the purity of the Dhamma, 
took it into their heads to persecute the heretics and burn their 
books, so that none of their doctrinal works have come down 
to us. 1 It is significant, however, that for quite a long time 
the Abhayagiri and the Maha-Vihara fraternities existed side 
by side, sometimes on quite friendly terms. 

During Vattagamaui’s reign there took place another event 
which marked an epoch in the history of the Pali literature 
not only of Ceylon, but, we may say, of the whole area. The 
Maha-vam&a, has but a brief reference to it : “ The text of the 
three Pitakas and the Atthakathd thereon did the most wise 
Bhikkhus hand down in former times orally ; but, since they 
saw the people were falling away (from religion) the Bhikkhus 
came together, and, in order that the true doctrine might 
endure, they wrote them down in books.” 2 

We gather from other sources, which give more details of 
this important event, that this solemn act of recording the 
teaching in books was the result of a council in which 500 
Elders participated under the patronage of a certain chieftain. 
The venue of the Council was Alu-vihara (Aloka-Vihara), 
a rock temple a few miles from the town of Matale in the 
Central Province. 3 

During nearly four and a half centuries the Buddha’s 
message had been preserved and propagated mainly by oral 
tradition. The ancient chronicles of Ceylon give us the 
names of the elders who formed the most important 
links in this tradition. At the head of the list appears 


1 Several other works, however, attributed to members of this sect, 
exist even now. They will be noticed in their places. 

* M.V., xxxiii, vv. 100-1, also Dipavarjisa, xx, 20, 21. 

* See Nikaya-sabgraha, pp. 10 and 11. 



44 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


Upali, probably the eminent Nigantha, but later one of the 
most ])rominent of the Buddha's disciples and the chief 
exponent, of the Yinaya. Then in succession follow Dasaka, 
Soiuika, Siggava, Moggallputta-Tissa (President of the 
3rd Council), and Mahinda and his fellow-missionaries to 
Ceylon (Ittiva, Uttiya, Sambala, and Bhaddasala, all of them 
Tissa's pupils). First in the line of Sinhalese t her as is Maha- 
Arittha, Mahinda's pupil. Then follow a number of names 
whose places in the history of this succession it is difficult to 
fix with any degree of certainty, the last being Siva, who, 
perhaps, presided over the Council of Five Hundred responsible 
for the systematic writing of the Dhatnma in books. How far 
the Alu-vihara redaction agreed with or differed from the canon 
and commentaries settled by the 3rd Council and introduced 
into Ceylon by Mahinda's mission, whether after their introduc- 
tion into t he island any passages previously considered unor- 
thodox had crept into the orthodox scriptures and whether 
the Alu-vihara council separated such interpolations, and how 
far the Tipilaka and its commentary reduced to writing at 
Alu-vihara resembled them as they have come down to us 
now, no one can say. This much, however, is certain, that in 
the fifth century of the Christian era the present Pifakas, 
etc., were considered orthodox both on the continent and in 
Ceylon, as is evidenced by the visits of Buddhaghosa 
and Fa Hsian ; and in view of the great care with which the 
orthodox monks attempted to preserve the purity of the 
Word there is not much probability that the canon underwent 
any material changes iii the interval. 

There is no reason, however, to believe that the 
writing of the Dhamma was unknown before this time. 
Mr, Wickremasinghe 1 even goes so far as to say that a written 
literature existed in Ceylon at least a century earlier than the 
Alu-vihara Council. He cites many incidents from the Mahd- 
vamsa to prove that writing was common long before 
Vattagamaxu’s period. Books are mentioned as early as 
1 Catalogue, p. x. 



THE WRITING DOWN OF THE BOOKS 


45 


150 b.c. in the reign of Gamani. The SihalaUhakatha Mahd- 
vanisa , so often referred to in the Maha-vamsa-tika , must have 
been, he says, a written document. Elsewhere he asserts, 
in reference to the Vessagiri Inscription 1 (which he fixes at 
161-137 B.c.), that the Sinhalese at the time were acquainted 
with the Brahml alphabet in a form complete enough for 
writing even Sanskrit. Thus the statement that until 
Vattagamani Abhaya the whole Buddhist canon was trans- 
mitted orally, is an exaggeration. Probably, as to some extent 
even now, the monks as a body knew the whole canon by 
heart. With regard to the Sinhalese commentaries, said 
to have been compiled by Mahinda, their very nature precludes 
the possibility of having been handed down orally. It may be 
that in Vattagamani's time they were still unarranged, 
rare, imperfect and full of inaccuracies, as even now in manu- 
scripts. At Alu-vihara the text was rehearsed and com- 
mentaries revised and distributed. 2 Writing was known even in 
the lifetime of the Buddha. 3 There is also the well-known 
commentarial story of King Pukkusati, to whom the King of 
Kosala sent a letter containing an exposition of the Dhamma . 4 
However, it is safe to assume that writing, save for contracts 
and probably letters, had not very long been in vogue and 
was not extensively known or cultivated. And it is very 
probable that lack of suitable writing material largely 
restricted its use. And there was also a high degree of sanctity 
attached to the saying of religious truths, so that it was con- 
sidered most important to receive them direct from a teacher’s 
lips. Even to-day great respect is shown to the man who carries 
all his learning in his head ; for “ who knows whether books 
may not get lost or destroyed and become not easy to lay 
hands on ? ” And the person who trusts to books for reference 
is contemptuously referred to as “ he who has a big book at 

1 Ep . Zey. 9 i, p. 14. 

1 Wickremasinghe, Catal., p. xi. 

• Maha-vagga, i, 43, and again ibid., i, 49 (“ sace kho Up&li lekharp 
sikkhissati ”). Oldenberg, vol. i, p. 75 and p. 77. 

4 Papanca-audani , Col. Ed., p. 234 ; also JPT8 . 1883, pp. 47-9, 



46 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


home, but does not know a thing.” Anyone visiting a village 
monastery in Ceylon at the present time will find the ola 
leaf books carefully wrapped up in costly silk cloths and 
reverently packed in beautifully carved bookcases, that the 
faithful devotees may offer to them flowers and incense and 
thus pay honour to the Buddha’s word. The monk is expected 
to carry all his learning in his head. 

Such circumstances as these made oral teaching at first; 1 lie 
sole, and later the chief, means of preserving and spreading the 
knowledge of the religion. From the information at our 
disposal we can form a fair idea of how this was made possible. 
JBuddhaghosa tells us that at the Rajagaha Council, when the 
Yinaya-Pitaka had been recited, Upali was entrusted with the 
work of teaching and preserving it. 1 Similarly other sections 
of the Teaching were given in charge of other Great Elders 
and their disciples. These several schools, in their combination, 
preserved the Teaching in its entirety, so that at any given 
time there were Bhikklius who, while conversant with the 
rest of the Doctrine as well, specialized in the knowledge of 
a particular section of it. Such were the Digha-bhanakas 
(reciters of the Dlgha-Nikaya ), M ajjh ima-bh an a Jca s , etc. 
We also hear of Vinaya-dharas and Tijwtakis in the com- 
mentaries. This practice of learning up portions of the 
Scriptures continued quite ordinarily for a very long time. 
Thus we find at Mihintale in the tenth century an inscription 
of King Kassapa V, recording that special honour was paid to 
monks for reciting certain sections of the Scriptures by heart. 2 
What the 500 monks of the Alu-vihara Council did was to 
arrange systematically the canon and the commentaries, 
so that what was till then known only to the few might become 
the possession of the many. Theirs was a definite step forward. 
Till then each scholar learnt a part of the canon by heart, 
taught it to his pupils and explained it in Sinhalese. Each 
was a walking, living edition of a certain text. To assist in 

1 Sumangala-vildsini, P.T.S. Ed , p. 15. 

1 Ep. Zey. t i, pt. ii, p. 56. 



THE WRITING DOWN OP THE BOOKS 


47 


remembering the explanation mnemonic verses, often doggerel 
in nature, were made use of. Books, such as we know now, 
were not then in existence. But the action of the Alu-vihara 
monks changed all this. They systematized the canon and 
arranged it, so that the study of it became easier and simpler. 
And this writing down of the literature helped its advance in 
great measure ; for a written literature can develop in a 
shorter time than one that is handed down by word of mouth, 
when each single text requires generations of teachers and 
disciples to be preserved at all. The service done by the 
Alu-vihara Council in this respect was invaluable. “ For you, 
as for me/’ said Sir Robert (now Lord) Chalmers, Governor 
of Ceylon, speaking in Colombo some years back, 1 “ the rocky 
gorge of Alu-vihara, impressive though nature has left it, 
must be always more impressive still as the scene of the 
fruitful labours of those 500 Bhikkhus — labours that mark 
an epoch in the history of the scholarship of the world, and 
that several centuries later drew that very encyclopaedic 
scholar Buddhaghosa to the same venerable scene, there to 
study the authentic tradition of the Thera-vadins, which 
writing had safeguarded and preserved amidst wars and the 
ravages of time in Ceylon/’ 

Manuscripts of the Alu-vihara edition were soon made 
and were deposited in the Maha-vihara and other principal 
temples of the island. 2 

1 Public Hall, Colombo, 27th February, 1915. 

2 PujavaHya, Col. Ed., p. 198. 



CHAPTER III 

The Development of Buddhist Culture 


^7" ATT AG AM AN I was followed by a series of undistinguished 
rulers in rapid succession. First came Maha-Culi Maha- 
Tissa, famed for his extreme piety and his ardent devotion 
to the saintly Thera Maha-Summa. The latter part of his reign 
was troubled by the lawlessness of his cousin Naga, known 
to history as Cora-Naga (Naga the rebel or robber). This prince 
was in all respects the worst of the earlier kings of the Sinhalese 
dynasty, a man of loose character and of cruel disposition. 
In spite of the munificence showered on the Buddhist religion 
by various monarcks and the devotion which most of them 
showed towards it, its tale is not one of uniform prosperity. 
And the first of its domestic enemies was Cora-Naga, who 
harrassed the monks because they had refused to help 
him during his marauding career. He spared nothing sacred 
or profane, and when, after twelve years of oppression, he was 
poisoned by his Queen Anula the people heaved a sigh of 
relief. But Anula was equally libidinous and licentious, a 
profligate woman whose passions knew no bounds, of iron 
will, shrinking from nothing to gain her ends, a firm believer 
in the efficacy of poison to remove the unfortunates who 
incurred her disfavour. This “ infamous woman ”, as the 
Maha-vamsa calls her, the Messalina of Ceylon, was before 
long put to death by Prince Kutakanna-Tissa, who, seeing 
the horrified people without a leader, left the monk’s -life to 
place himself at the head of the movement against the 
licentious queen. 1 His son, Bhatika Abhaya, succeeded him 
and reigned during twenty-eight years, a period of un- 
interrupted happiness to the people. He was a just ruler, 
truly humane and pious. One of his earliest acts was to remit 
all the taxes due to himself. 2 His devotion to religion was 


1 M. V., xxxiv, w. 16 foil. 
a Ibid., xxxiv, v. 38. 



THE DEVELOPMENT OF BUDDHIST CULTURE 


49 


extraordinary, and the chronicles dwell at length on the 
religious festivals* which he held from time to time. His 
offerings to the Maha-Thupa were enormous, and some of 
them read to us now like fairy tales. Once he ordered, at his 
own expense of course, the Cetiya to be strewn from the steps 
to the parasol on the top with jasmine flowers, and thus 
covered it with a mass of blossoms which he kept from 
withering by means of water carried by machines from the 
Abhaya tank. 1 On another occasion he had a net of coral 
prepared and cast over the Cetiya, and, when he had given 
orders to fasten in the meshes thereof lotus-flowers of gold as 
large as wagon-wheels and to hang clusters of pearls to the 
lotus-flowers beneath, he worshipped the Great Thupa with 
this offering. But what is more important, from our point of 
view, is that in five places in the capital he constantly enter- 
tained monks devoted to the acquirement of sacred learning 
and maintained them with the requisites of life. 

The next hundred years was a period of great internal 
commotion, kings succeeding one another with great rapidity 
as a result of the varying fortunes of rival claimants to the 
throne. Sometimes, as in the case of Kanira j anu-Tissa , 2 
the monks attempted to interfere in these political upheavals 
with disastrous consequences to themselves. The Lamba- 
kannas (long-eared ones), descended from the princes, who 
came over frpm India along with the branch of the sacred 
Bodhi-tree, had multiplied in numbers and acquired much 
influence in the country. They became a perpetual source of 
trouble, ultimately supplanting the ancient line of kings. 
During the whole of this period the only monarch of any 
importance was Vasabha, who reigned from about a.d. 65-109. 
The chronicles describe him as “ delighting perpetually in well- 
doing ” ; he. made lavish gifts to the monks and supported 
especially those who undertook to go about as preachers and 
teachers. 3 It is also recorded of him that he restored ruined 

1 M.V . , xxxiv , w. 44 foil. 

1 Ibid., xxxv, w, 10, 11. 

• Ibid., xxxv, w. 92-3. 



60 


THE PALT LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


and dilapidated buildings in various parts of the island where 
monks carried on their studies, and an inscription informs us 
of a gift made by him to a Thera named Majibvka who lived 
near Anuradha-pura . 1 

In the reign of the next king a small army of Colians invaded 
Ceylon and carried oil much booty and a considerable 
number of prisoners. This insult was avenged by his son and 
successor, Gaja-Bahu (the Elephant-armed), who invaded 
Tanjore with a large army. The king of Tanjore, intimidated 
by the sudden attack, acceded to all demands without a single 
act of hostility. 2 It was the first expedition of the Sinhalese 
outside their island home, and their success brought about 
several important and interesting results. Twelve thousand 
Colian prisoners accompanied Gaja-Bahu on his return home, 
and they were settled in various parts of the country, where 
they quite soon became part of the permanent population. 
Their descendants are scattered in many districts even at the 
present time, and their language has influenced Sinhalese 
speech in no small measure. A large number of Cojian words 
found their way even into the literary dialect of the Sinhalese. 
The king of Cola also presented Gaja-Bahu with the jewelled 
anklets of the Hindu goddess Pattini and the insignia of four 
Hindu deities, Visnu, Kartikeya, Natha, and Pattini. The 
cult of these gods and goddesses was thus introduced into the 
island ; an extensive literature and folklore grew up around 
these names ; special families dedicated themselves to their 
service, and observances and ceremonies connected with these 
deities continue to this day. A large number of books -dealing 
with the cult of Pattini are still available. 3 

No event of importance happened till nearly a hundred years 
later, when Voharaka-Tissa ascended the throne in a.d. 204. 
He was so called because of his skill in the law and of his 
enactments forbidding and abolishing bodily injury as a 
punitive measure. He was a great patron of learning and 

1 Ep. Zey. 9 vol. i, pt. ii, p. 69. 

1 Pieris, op. cit., p. 9. 

* JR AS. (C.B.), vol. viii (29), 462 ; ix (32), 321 ; x (34), 43. 



THE DEVELOPMENT OF BUDDHIST CULTURE 


51 


helped the monks in all their difficulties . 1 Two Thera* are 
mentioned as his special favourites, the Thera Deva, a gifted 
preacher living at Kappukagama, and Mahatissa of Anurarama 
in Rohana. His gifts to the priesthood were immense, but 
among them is one worthy of special notice. We are told that 
after his accession he ordered the book called the Ariya - 
vamsa to be read frequently, and commanded that on each 
occasion of such public recital there should be held 
over the whole island a regular almsgiving of reverence for 
the true doctrine . 2 * Now, this Ariya-vamsa was, as its name 
implies, a “ book of the holy ones ”, probably life-histories 
of men and women eminent in the Buddhist religion, which 
were read aloud for the edification of the people. It is obvious 
from the king’s order that the habit existed before his 
time, and it is interesting to note that this custom has con- 
tinued down to this day even in the remotest parts of the 
island. Every full-moon day, when the villagers assemble in 
the temple precincts to perform their religious observances, 
the monks relate to them stories of eminent men and women 
from the books of a bygone age, the chief among them being 
the Jdtakatthakathd and the Dhamma-pada commentary. 
We cannot say now whether the Ariya-vamsa was written in 
Sinhalese or in Pali, or perhaps in both, whether the audience 
were able to follow the stories as they were being read, or 
whether they had to be explained and expatiated upon by the 
monks who read them. 

In this reign the Buddhist Sangha was once more faced 
with the problem of a violent schism . 8 We have already seen 
how the formation of the Dhammaruci sect with its head- 
quarters at Abhayagiri in the reign of Vat^agamaui was the 
first serious blow to the authority of the Thera-vadins in 
Ceylon, since the establishment of the religion by Mahinda. 
The division thus originated continued all along, but 

1 M,V., xxxvi, vv. 28 foU. 

1 Ibid., xxxvi, v. 38. 

* N ik&ya- eaiigraha, pp. 12-13. 



52 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


apparently the bitterness of the controversy had disappeared. 
The two fraternities at Maha-Vihara and at Abhayagiri lived 
independently of each other, and there docs not seem to have 
been any kind of communion between them. Both had become 
centres of learning, and already in the time of Bhatika Abhaya 
differences of opinion in regard to the text of the canon had 
begun to manifest themselves. The Samanta-pasadikd 1 
gives us an account of a dispute which arose regarding 
a reading of a certain passage in the Vinaya. When the dispute 
had dragged on, the kingappointed his minister Dighakarayana, 
a man well versed in scriptural lore, to settle the matter. After 
an exhaustive inquiry, he upheld the view of the Maha- 
Vihara community. 

The kings were evidently not quite discriminating in the 
zeal they exhibited in lavishing gifts on the monks, and the 
people, too, partly ignorant and partly unconcerned with the 
individual or general disagreement over particular points of 
the Doctrine, maintained an attitude of laisser faire. The 
result was that the Dhammarucians, though they had not 
made much headway in securing adherents to their way of 
thinking, yet had grown rich in material possessions ; and vre 
find that the monarchs one after another, anxious to maintain 
the goodwill of both parties, were equally generous to both 
fraternities. Thus Subha built beautiful rows of cells both at 
Abhayagiri and at the Maha-Vihara . 2 Gajabahu raised the 
height of the Abhayuttara Thupa and caused vestibules to 
be built at the gates thereof, and constructed the Gamani- 
Tissa Tank for the maintenance of the Abhayagiri monks . 3 
Kanittha-Tissa caused to be built a splendid structure, 
named Ratana-pasada, at Abhayagiri, for the Thera 
Mahanaga ; he constructed twelve great and remarkably 
beautiful pasddas at the Maha-Vihara, and made a road leading 
from the grounds to the Dakkhina-Vihara . 4 The two parties 

1 Colombo Ed., p. 189. 

* M.V., xxxv, v. 57. 

» Ibid., xxxv, vv. 119-22. 

4 Ibid., xxxvi, vv. 7-14. 



THE DEVELOPMENT OP BUDDHIST CULTURE 


53 


had thus been existing side by side, the Maha-Vihara 
fraternity more or less tolerating their unorthodox rivals. 
But in the reign of Voharaka-Tissa the quarrel broke out 
anew. “ In the days of this king,” the Nikdya-sangraha 
tells us, “the monks of Abhayagiri of the Dhammaruci 
sect adopted the Vaitulya-Pitaka , which certain infidel 
Brahmanas called Vaitulyas, who had assumed the garb of 
monks for the purpose of destroying the religion, had composed 
in the time of Dhammasoka Maharaja, and proclaimed it as 
the preaching of the Buddha. Thereupon the priests of the 
Theriya-Nikaya , having compared it with the authentic 
text, rejected the Vaitulya doctrines as being opposed to 
religion.” 1 

It is surmised that the reference here to the events of Asoka’s 
reign relates to the beginning of the form of Buddhism 
known to us as the Mahay ana. The close resemblance of the 
name Vaitulya to the Vaipulya-Sutras belonging to that school 
is very suggestive . 2 The origin of the Mahayana sect is 
generally assigned to the first centuries of the Christian era. 
It is quite possible, however, that it had a much earlier 
beginning, but came into prominence only about the time 
referred to, because of the works of scholars like Aivaghosa, 
who flourished in that age. 

The action of the Maha-Vihara resulted in a great con- 
troversy, which produced such bitterness that the king 
himself intervened. He entrusted the investigation of the 
matter to one of his ministers, named Kapila, “ a man who 
had exhaustively studied all branches of knowledge.” Kapila 
reported in due course that the Vaitulya-Vdda was opposed 
to the strict teaching of the Buddha, whereupon Voharaka- 
Tissa burnt all the available Vaitulyan books and disgraced 
the monks of the Abhayagiri, who had tacitly or overtly 
adopted the heresy . 8 

* p. 12. 

* See also Geiger, M.V. , p. 259, footnote 2. 

1 Nihtyasafigraha , p. 13. 



54 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


This was a most unfortunate act of intolerance. Not 
a single book of the Vaitulyans has come down to us, and we 
are not able to ascertain the ways wherein their opinions 
differed from those of the orthodox Thera- vadins. 

It is noteworthy that the Buddhist monks, while they were 
perfectly tolerant with regard to other systems of belief 
professed by other religionists, were ever vehement in their 
persecution of schism. In the Vinaya an attempt to bring 
about disunion among the Sangha is put in the same category 
as shedding the blood of the Buddha. Boldly confident in 
the superiority of their own religion, they bear without 
impatience the errors, to them glaring, of open antagonists, 
and even seem to exult in the contiguity of competing systems, 
as though theirs would derive strength by comparison. To 
the assaults of open opponents the Buddhist displays the 
calmest indifference, convinced that in its undiminished 
strength his faith is firm and inexpugnable ; his vigilance is 
only excited by the alarm of internal dissent, and all his 
passions are aroused to stifle the symptoms of schism. The 
intolerance shown in this instance by the Maha-Vihara 
Bhikkhus brought its own retribution in due time. Like 
mushrooms that grow by night, the heretics secretly 
* strengthened their numbers and waited for an opportunity 
to assert themselves. Their chance was not long in its arrival. 

Next in our rapid survey of this early period we come to 
the Saint-King Siri Sanghabodhi, one of the most revered 
names in Ceylon history. He embodied the spirit of self- 
renunciation and self-sacrifice which marked those whose 
feet were set in the path to Sambodhi (Enlightenment). He 
was a visionary and an idealist, “ a man on earth devoted to 
the skies,” and from a worldly point of view his career as 
king was a disastrous failure. Yet he was loyal to his principles, 
which he maintained at the cost of his kingdom and his life. 
The Hattha-Vanagalla-vamsa (q.v.) gives us a vivid de- 
scription of the man and his ideals. Born at Mahiyangana, 
under the shade of the Thupa, which stands on a spot hallowed 



THE DEVELOPMENT OF BUDDHIST CULTURE 


55 


by the tradition of the Master’s visit, he was trained by his 
maternal uncle, the Thera Maha-Nanda, who made him an 
accomplished scholar and a perfect man. Later on he was 
raised to the throne, and we are told that his piety and com- 
passion were such that they moved the very heavens. But 
his novel methods of government and administration of justice, 
amidst a people unaccustomed to such measures, brought 
about a state of anarchy in the land ; and, when one of the 
ministers, Gothabhaya, raised the standard of revolt, he gladly 
renounced the throne and retired to the forest to lead an 
ascetic’s life. But the usurper felt his position insecure as 
long as Sarighabodhi was alive, and he therefore set a price on 
the head of the fugitive king. Many murders were committed 
by unscrupulous men who coveted the reward. Meanwhile 
the king himself, in the course of his wanderings, had come to 
Attanagalla, where, in a beautiful woodland grove, the eye 
could linger with delight on the “ pillared shades ”, thick with 
their dense green foliage and laden with their pendant fruits 
and flowers. Finding this an ideal spot, he remained there, 
leading a life of seclusion and meditation. Sometime later 
he met a peasant travelling through the forest, who on being 
questioned, not recognizing the king in his disguise, related all 
that was happening in the land. Being excessively glad at 
the opportunity of making the supreme sacrifice, the king 
revealed his identity and pressed upon the peasant to accept 
his head. This offer met with a positive refusal; but 
Sangliabodhi proceeded to immolate himself, and the man, 
apparently paralysed by this sudden development, could not 
prevent it. The head was ultimately produced at the court ; 
and when Gothabhaya saw it he was struck with sudden 
remorse. His very first act was to hurry off to Attanagalla, 
where he found also the dead body of the queen, who had lost 
her life while searching for her husband. The royal pair were 
cremated with all the honours due to their rank, and 
Gothabhaya immediately set about making all possible 
amends for his misdeeds. He built a number of monuments 



56 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


in memory of the departed king, on sites associated in some 
manner or other with the latter’s brief hermit life. The most 
remarkable of them was the Vata-dage (“ Circular Relic- 
house ”), a rotunda-shaped building constructed over the 
king’s ashes. His munificence to the monks was great, and by 
these acts he gradually regained his lost popularity . 1 

This effort on the part of the king to win the people’s 
goodwill was greatly helped by another opportunity of 
upholding undiminished the purity of the faith, which was to 
them then, as now, the greatest possession on earth. In the 
fourth year of his reign the old Vaitulyan heresy raised its 
head again, the scene of trouble being once more the 
Abhayagiri Vihara . 2 The monks launched a campaign of 
vigorous propaganda. We are told that one of their number, 
the Thera Ussiliya-Tissa, recalling to their minds the disgrace 
which had befallen the heretical monks in Voharaka-Tissa’s 
reign, refused to be associated with the new enterprise. 
Finding dissuasion of no avail, he left Abhayagiri and with 
some three or four of his followers went over to Dakkhinagiri 
Vihara. There they accepted as their leader a Mahd-Thera 
named Sagala, and were thenceforth known as the Sagaliyas, 
an offshoot of the Dhammaruci sect, but not wholly believing 
in the traditions of that community. When reports of these 
dissentient movements reached the king, he made up his 
mind to win by one stroke the everlasting gratitude of the 
true followers of the religion. As patron of the Buddhist 
church in the island, he assembled the monks of the five 
chief monasteries which constituted the orthodox Sangha of 
Ceylon — the Maha-Vihara, Thuparama, Issarasamanarama, 
Vessagiri Vihara, and the Cetiya Vihara. After having satisfied 
himself by a searching inquiry that the Vaitulyans were 
heretical in their views, he lost no time in having the books of 
the Vaitulya-vada collected and burnt. And in order to teach 
a lesson to the others, he picked out sixty of the principal 

1 Hatthavanagalla-vairisa (concluding chapters). 

a Nikdya-safigraha , p. 13. 



THE DEVELOPMENT OF BUDDHIST CULTURE 


57 


offenders, branded them, and expelled them from the 
country . 1 

For a time all went well. The exiled monks settled down at 
Kavlra, in South India, and there they soon made themselves 
powerful. To them came a young and shrewd adventurer, 
who, noticing the favours lavished upon them by their 
followers at Kavlra, joined the band as a monk. After his 
ordination he went by the name of Sanghamitta. It is said 
that one day, while the monks were changing their clothes 
preparatory to bathing, Sanghamitta saw the brand-marks 
on their bodies and questioned them about it. Having learnt 
of all that had happened, he offered them his services, if he 
could be of any use. He was told that, if he could go to 
Lanka and openly and boldly interest himself on their behalf, 
they might still be able to return thither and wrest power from 
their, enemies, now in triumph. Sanghamitta had unbounded 
confidence in his abilities and he gladly entered into the 
adventure. “ I will go and will see that either the monks of 
the Maha-Vihara adopt the Vaitulya doctrines, or that the 
Vihara itself is uprooted and destroyed.” So said he, and sailed 
in a few days. On his arrival he took residence at Abhayagiri 
and began his insidious campaign. 

Meanwhile the Sagaliya sect, which had seceded from the 
Dhammarucians a few years previously, had not been idle. 
They had attempted by every means in their power to 
propagate their views and had met with a certain measure of 
success. The people were perplexed by these varied views con- 
tending for acceptance and were unable to decide for themselves 
which were the true teachings of the Buddha. The king, 
wishing to come to some sort of settlement of these disputes, 
summoned another meeting of the different factions, and a 
solemn assembly was held, this time at the Thuparama. The 
king himself was present. Here Sanghamitta denounced the 
views of the Theriya Nikaya and the practices of the Maha- 

1 The accounts of these schisms are taken mainly from the Nikaya- 
saiigraha. 



58 


THE PALI IJTERATURE OF CEYLON 


Vihara fraternity, and he put forward his case with such great 
force of argument that the king was convinced. The king’s 
uncle, Thera Gothabhaya, after whom the king had been 
named, belonged to the orthodox party ; but his attempts to 
win over the king were of no avail. Sanghamitta triumphed, 
and thus began a period of great calamity to the Maha- 
Vihara monks. 

It was the first time in the history of Buddhism in Ceylon 
that a reigning Sinhalese sovereign had accepted and publicly 
taken the side of a heretical sect in opposition to the orthodox 
church. For over five and a half centuries the Maha-Vihara 
had been looked upon as the lawful custodian of the purity of 
the faith, and this secession of the king therefore caused great 
consternation amongst them. We are told that they held 
many and frequent meetings of their followers to decide 
upon a course of action. 

Sanghamitta soon became a great favourite of the king, 
enjoying his friendship and confidence. He was appointed 
tutor to the king’s two sons, and it is said that when he found 
the elder son too clever to be deceived by his false doctrines, 
he paid greater attention to the younger, Maha-Sena. 

Although Gothabhaya had thus taken the heretics under his 
wing, his old attachment to the Maha-Vihara was too great 
to allow him to harm them, as Sanghamitta desired. On the 
contrary, he continued to support them, though perhaps not 
with the same zeal and devotion as before. On his death his 
elder son, Jettha-Tissa, came to the throne. He was a proud 
and arrogant man, and his barbarity towards his nobles, 
whom he suspected of disloyalty, won for him the surname of 
“ the Cruel On his accession, Sanghamitta, realizing that the 
king was by no means his friend, after consultation with the 
younger prince, who was his favourite, hurriedly left the 
country, to wait patiently at Kavlra for the day of his triumph, 
when Maha-Sena should sit on the throne of Ceylon. Jeftha- 
Tissa proved himself later to be a staunch friend and patron 
of the orthodox party and showered his favours upon them 



THE DEVELOPMENT OP BUDDHIST CULTURE 


59 


during the fourteen years of his reign. He was succeeded by 
his brother Maha-Sena, one of whose first acts was to send 
for his erstwhile tutor and friend, Sanghamitta, who was also 
asked to preside at his coronation. This act of preference 
showed quite clearly what the king’s disposition was towards 
the Maha-Vihara sect. 

From the day of his return Sanghamitta tried his best to 
persuade the monks of the Theriya Nikaya to accept the 
Vaitulya-Vada. But they were loyal to their faith and 
remained adamant. At last he pointed out to them what their 
refusal would mean for them, by way of the king’s wrath. 
Such threats were of jio influence, and Sanghamitta was 
determined to have his revenge. “ The dwellers in the Maha- 
Vihara do not teach the true Vinaya,” he told the king ; 
“ we of the Abhayagiri are those who teach the true Vinaya 
But Maha-Sena, weak-minded though he was and devotedly 
attached to his tutor, shrank from the suggestion. The 
traditions which he had inherited from his ancestors of many 
centuries proved too strong for him to resist them, and perhaps 
the fear of the people’s indignation at so dastardly a crime 
as that prompted by Sanghamitta weighed with him as well. 
But Sanghamitta would not be easily baulked. Again and 
again he pleaded and entreated, he argued, “ the Devil quoted 
scripture for his purpose ” and Maha-Sena yielded at last to 
his importunities. His reluctance and weak resistance 
broke down before the ceaseless intriguing of the crafty 
Sanghamitta. 

Then followed a series of events which formed the darkest 
chapter in the early history of Buddhism in Ceylon. A Royal 
Edict went round, “ whoever gives alms to a Bhikkhu dwelling 
in the Maha-Vihara is liable to a fine of a hundred pieces of 
money/’ and no one dared disobey. Three days the monks 
went their usual round in the city, begging-bowl in hand, 
and each day they returned with empty bowls. For the first 
time in six centuries the Maha-Vihara starved. On the fourth 
day the monks of the Theriya Nikaya assembled in solemn 



60 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


conclave at the Brazen Palace. Their decision was manly : 
“ Even though we starve to death,” said they, “ we cannot 
concede that heresy is true doctrine. Should we do so, many 
others would follow us and suffer evil, and the guilt would be 
upon us. Let our lives and our asceticism be imperilled, we 
persist in refusing to adopt the Vaitulya doctrines.” Thus 
by their courageous resolve, by their steadfast loyalty to the 
faith, whose purity they valued more than their very lives, 
by their self-sacrificing zeal, did they win for Ceylon what has 
ever remained its proudest boast, that “ Lanka is the home of 
a Buddhism whose teachings are pure and unsullied and 
untainted by heresy ”. Leaving their viharas, their abodes 
of sanctity and their seats of learning, they journeyed out 
of Anuradhapura, some to the Maya Province and others to 
Rohana, there to await the day of their deliverance from 
persecution. 

Sanghamitta’s joy was unbounded ; this was the hour of 
triumph for which he had yearned and planned throughout 
his life. Things had happened exactly as he desired, and his 
success was complete. “ Ownerless land belongs to the king,” 
he whispered in Maha-Sena’s ear, when the orthodox monks 
had deserted their viharas. Thus it happened that all the 
abandoned monasteries and their possessions were seized in 
the king’s name and appropriated b y % the Dhammarucians 
now in power. A campaign was started in dead earnest, led 
by Sanghamitta and his friend, a minister named Sona, to 
extirpate the Theriya monks. They carried on apace the work 
of spoliation and destruction of all that erstwhile belonged to 
their rivals. Stately structures were demolished and plundered, 
one after the other ; the Maha-Vihara, the Brazen Palace, 
and all such religious edifices, built by the generosity of devout 
kings and pious noblemen for the use of the orthodox Sangha, 
were razed to the ground. Some three hundred and sixty-four 
colleges and great temples were uprooted and destroyed, 
says an ancient chronicle 1 ; and the spoils gathered from them 

1 N ik&yasaftgrdha, p. 14. 



THE DEVELOPMENT OF BUDDHIST CULTURE 


61 


went to enrich and adorn the home of heresy, the Abhayagiri, 
which, now splendid in ornaments and rich in possessions, 
stood, pre-eminent over all, as the greatest and the wealthiest 
monastery in Lanka. During nine years Sahghamitta lived 
in glory. In the tenth year, however, the popular indignation 
against the religious activities of the king and his two evil 
counsellors, came to a head in an open rebellion led by a noble 
named Meghavannabhaya, one of the king’s own ministers. 
Maha-Sena marched with his forces to quell the uprising, and 
the two armies met near Mahagama. There an interesting 
thing happened. The rebellious minister, anxious to indicate 
that he bore no personal ill-will against the king, although he 
was determined to fight and even slay him in defence of the 
religion, proceeded into the royal camp, taking with him choice 
food and drink that he might partake of it w r ith the king. He 
was duly recognized and led before Maha-Sena. The king, 
who always bore a great regard, even affection, for 
Meghavarmabhaya, questioned him as to the motives of his 
coming. He, setting the food and drink on a table, invited the 
king to partake of it and talk to him in confidence. In perfect 
trust Maha-Sena sat down and, when the meal was over, asked 
“ What has made thee to become a rebel, Meghavannabhaya ? ” 
“ Because the Maha-Vihara has been destroyed, sire,” said 
he, with tear-filled eyes. “ I will make the Vihara to be dwelt 
in yet again, Abhaya ; forgive me my fault,” replied the 
conscience-stricken king, who evidently was sick himself of 
the destruction wrought by his evil geniuses. The two were 
reconciled on the spot, and the two armies marched back 
to the capital in the friendliest possible intercourse. Tout 
comprendre cest tout pardonner. At Anuradhapura, meanwhile, 
the people had taken the law into their own hands, and they 
broke out into wild demonstrations. The lead for violence was 
given by one of Maha-Sena ’s own queens. She had long and 
bitterly wept over the destruction of the Maha-Vihara, and 
she had never forgiven the evil-minded Sanghamitta, who was 
responsible for this savage act of vandalism and for the 



62 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


expulsion of the Theriya monks. Sanghamitta was slain by 
a carpenter, as he attempted to obstruct the building of the 
Thuparama, which this queen had undertaken to restore. 
The people surrounded Sola’s house, killed him and flung his 
body on to a dung-heap. When order was somewhat restored, 
the angry queen, who had procured Sanghamitta ’s death, 
did what Gothabhaya had done thirty-seven years earlier — 
collected the heretical Vaitutya, books and made a bonfire 
of them. 

Maha-Sena, true to his word, began to restore the Maha- 
Vihara, and in a short time the monks of the Theriya 
fraternity, their nine years’ exile ended, returned to the 
capital. The royal Edict which had necessitated their 
departure was recalled, and for a time peace and quiet reigned 
in the land. 

But it was hot for long. The king was particularly 
susceptible to heresy. Two years later another dissentient 
monk, Kohon-Tissa by name, of the Sagaliya sect, living at 
Dakkhinarama, succeeded in gaining the king’s confidence, 
and soon began fresh trouble for the Maha-Vihara. The king 
was anxious to construct a stately Vihara for his new friend, 
and for this he wished to encroach upon the precincts of the 
Maha-Vihara. Against this the latter strongly protested, and 
left the Vihara. But the king was obstinate and he sent men 
to uproot their boundary marks. Legend has it that a Raksasa 
(demon) with an iron-club uplifted in his hand, appeared on 
the scene and frightened away the workmen. \ He then ran 
amok in the city, and the king, alarmed, undertook to repair 
the damage done and restore the Vihara to its rightful owners. 
Later, however, in spite of strenuous opposition, he built for 
his friend Kohon-Tissa the majestic Jetavana Vihara on the 
Maha-Vihara premises. The latter, refusing to be thus 
inveigled, brought against Kohon-Tissa a charge involving one 
or more of the extreme offences, punishment for which was 
expulsion from the Order ; and at a full meeting of the Safigha 
Kohon-Tissa was adjudged guilty after a long trial and ordered 



THE DEVELOPMENT OF BUDDHIST CULTURE 63 

to be disrobed. The king, apparently dissatisfied with this 
decision, appointed the Chief Justice of his court, Dhammika, 
to investigate the charge afresh. In this the king was dis- 
appointed ; for Dhammika was too upright and fearless 
to let his decision be influenced by the king’s wishes. After 
a thorough investigation he ordered Kohon-Tissa to be dis- 
robed forthwith and expelled from the Order. Maha-Sena 
owned-defeat, and sincerely repented of his folly. During twelve 
years thenceforward he became an ardent friend and supporter 
of the Theriya Nikaya, and the Mahd-vantsa mentions that 
“ There is no record of his gifts of food and drink ” : they 
were too numerous. 1 He helped all those who wished to devote 
their lives to learning and literary pursuits and became their 
great benefactor. 

With the death of Maha-Sena in a.d. 302 ended the “ Mahd- 
vamsa ”, or the “ Great Dynasty ” of Sinhalese kings. The 
sovereigns of the “ Cula-vamsa ” (or the Lesser Dynasty), says 
the Rdjavali, were no longer of the unmixed blood, but the 
offspring of parents only one of whom was descended from the 
Sun, and the other from those who had brought the Sacred 
Bodhi-tree or the Sacred Tooth ; on that account the fertility 
of the land was diminished, and the kings who succeeded 
Maha-Sena were no longer reverenced as of old. 2 

At the time when the Great Dynasty became extinct the 
material prosperity of the country was quite sound and 
auspicious. The people, though occasionally disturbed by 
minor civil commotions, were able to carry on their pursuits 
in peace ; there was contentment all round. The attention 
which the kings bestowed on the irrigation of the country 
had made the food of the people abundant ; and the sums 
expended on the adornment of the city, the multitude of its 
sacred structures, the splendour of its buildings, and the beauty 
of its lakes and gardens, bear ample testimony to the wealth 
of the kingdom. The accounts left to us by the traveller. 


1 M.V. t xxxvii , v. 46. 

1 Rdjavali (Uphain), p. 239. 



64 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


Fa Hsien, who visited the island a little while later, fully 
corroborate the descriptions given in the Mahd- Vamsa. 
It was crowded, he says, with nobles, magistrates, and foreign 
merchants ; the houses were beautiful, the public buildings 
richly adorned ; the streets and the highways were broad and 
level, and halls for preaching, teaching and reading bana were 
erected in all the thoroughfares. He was assured that the 
island contained no less than fifty to sixty thousand 
ecclesiastics, all of whom ate in common, and of whom from 
five to six thousand were supported by the bounty of the king . 1 
In such a community literary genius was bound to sprout 
in full vigour. Men and women, free from the cares of the 
material needs of the body, were able to devote their attention 
to the cultivation of the mind. They studied assiduously not 
only the text and the commentaries of the Pali canon, which 
formed their sacred scriptures, but also all branches of know- 
ledge. There was constant and free intercourse with the main- 
land of India, and many other parts of Asia as well. Moorish 
traders from Arabia travelled hither, selling their wares; 
Pliny records that early in the fourth century a.d. four 
ambassadors from Ceylon made their way to Rome on a 
complimentary mission to a state, the intercourse with which 
is still evidenced by large finds of Roman coins in the island . 2 
Along with the intercourse in goods must have existed inter- 
course in views as well ; and the people of Ceylon, then as 
now, were always prepared to learn and assimilate the culture 
of other nations. The era of contentment and prosperity gave 
a fresh impetus to this desire for the .development of the 
intellect. Whatever literary works were produced at this 
time — and there must have been many such — are 
unfortunately irretrievably lost, leaving behind them no 
records at all, and we have to satisfy ourselves with but 
vague surmises. What such surmises lead us to assume will 
be more evident in the next chapter. 

1 Giles' translation, pp. 69-70. 

* Pieris, Ceylon and the Portuguese, p. 9. 



CHAPTER IV 

The Beginnings of Literary Activity 

jyTAHl-SENA ’S son and successor, Siri Meghavanna, did 
all that lay in his power to make amends for the mis- 
chief which his father had committed. He assembled all the 
monks of the Maha-vihara, who had been scattered abroad 
by the measures of Maha-sena and reverentially asked them 
how best he could make up for the sacrileges of which his 
father had been guilty. Acting under their advice, he rebuilt 
the Brazen Palace, which was the proudest building in the 
capital ; he reconstructed all the parivenas (the temple- 
schools) which had been demolished and restored all the lands 
that had been endowed for their maintenance. Meghavaniia 
was evidently a student of history, and when he learnt of 
Mahinda, who had converted the island to Buddhism, he 
caused an image of the Thera to be made and held a great 
festival in his honour. For the ceremony of dedication he 
sent messengers and summoned to the city all the monks from 
the various parts of the country ; the Mahd-vamsa gives 
a glowing description of the rejoicings that marked the event . 1 
He also decreed that a similar festival should be held annually 
at the conclusion of the rainy season. This order was for a 
very long time carried out ; but, like many another institution, 
it has now perished . 2 But the most outstanding event of the 
reign was the bringing over to Ceylon of the Right Eye-Tooth, 
the Dathadhatu, from Kalinga. In the introductory verses of 
the Ddthd-vamsa the author tells us that his work was based 
on an' ancient poem in Sinhalese (Elu) verse, called the 
Dalada-vamsa. And this poem appears to have been com- 
posed in the ninth year of Megha vani^a’s reign — the very year 
of the arrival of the tooth relic in Ceylon — by the king’s 
express command. It is said to have contained a history of the 

1 Jlf.F., xxxvii, vv. 66 foil. 

* An attempt, however, has recently been made to revive it. 

5 



66 THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 

relic from the death of the Buddha to its arrival in Ceylon. 
There seems to have been another work, called the DdtJia- 
dhdtu-vamsa, composed either at this time or shortly after 
and mentioned in Mahd-vamsa XXXVII. In a foot- 
note to his translation of this chapter Tumour mentions 
that the work was still extant at the time (1837). 1 In spite of 
diligent search I have not been able to see a copy. 
Major Forbes identifies the Dalada-vanisa with this work, but 
gives no reason for his conclusions. 2 

Whatever information we have at present is based on the 
Ddfhd-vamsa, written by Dhammakitti in the twelfth century 
a.d. There we learn that the relic was introduced into Ceylon 
from Dantapura in the ninth year of Siri Meghavanna's reign 
by Hemamala, daughter of Guhaslva, king of Kalinga, and 
her husband, Danta Kumara, a prince of the Ujjenl royal 
family. During more than eight centuries the relic had 
remained undisturbed at Dantapura ; but Guhaslva, when 
he became a convert from Brahmanism to Buddhism, paid 
homage to the Tooth and thereby incurred the implacable 
wrath of the Brahman priests. They complained to his 
suzerain lord of Pandu at Pataliputra, who ordered it to be 
brought to his capital, and there by the wonders it exhibited 
he himself was converted. Shortly afterwards the king of 
SavatthI assembled an army and demanded the relic. War 
ensued, and Pan<Ju’s army was defeated. The relic was restored 
to Guhaslva. Sometime later the son of the king of Ujjenl, 
who was a zealous Buddhist, came to Dantapura, bringing 
tokens of homage to the relic, and there he married Hemamala, 
daughter of the Kalinga king. A large army from SavatthI 
appeared at Dantapura, demanding the relic once more, and 
Guhaslva, apprehensive of the power by which he was assailed, 
directed his daughter and son-in-law to escape from the city, 
taking the relic with them. They disguised themselves as 
members of the Buddhist Order, and after many adventures 


1 Tumour, Maha-varfisa, p. 241, footnote. 
* See Dafhd-varfisa discussion. 



THE BEGINNINGS OF LITERARY ACTIVITY 


67 


came to Ceylon (which is said to have been foretold as its 
final resting place), and delivered it to the king. There they 
were received with all the honour due to their exalted rank 
and the precious object which they escorted. On the arrival 
of the relic at Anuradhapura the king took charge of it himself 
and, rendering thereto the greatest homage, deposited it 
in a casket made of phalika (steatite) stone and lodged it in 
an edifice called the Dhamma-cakka, built by Devanampiya- 
Tissa. In the height of his felicity the king, so the Maha- 
vamsa tells us, 1 spent 9 lakhs in celebrating the Dathadhatu 
festival and made proclamation that the relic should be 
annually honoured by taking it in a procession to the 
Abhayagiri Vihara. A century later Fa-Hsien saw the 
ceremony performed, and he has described it in his memoirs. 2 
Dhammakitti 3 mentions in his work a rubric written by 
Meghavanna for the observances to be performed before the 
Tooth ( Caritta-lekham abhikkhayi). There is a copy of this 
ancient ceremonial manual still extant in the Maligava at 
Kandy, where the relic is now deposited. 

The Tooth Relic from the time of its first arrival in 
Ceylon obtained among the Sinhalese the position which the 
Palladium held in ancient Rome, for the sovereignty of the 
country belonged to the possessor of the venerated object. 
Even to-day, after the vicissitudes of many centuries, no 
relic commands more veneration than this. The wealth of the 
country was freely poured out in its honour. Wherever 
the palace of the king had to be erected, by reason of 
the incursions of invading foes, by its side, within the royal 
precincts, rose the Dalada-Maligava (the Palace of the Tooth 
Relic), smaller but incomparably more beautiful than the 
royal residence. Entire villages were dedicated to the 
maintenance of those whose business it was to supply offerings 
of rice and flowers and incense and oil, and one king at least 


1 Af.F., xxxvii, V. 96. 

* Giles' Translation, pp. 69-70. 

* Dafha-varjisa , p. 16. 



68 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


offered up all his personal ornaments as a mark of humble 
devotion . 1 

Siri Meghavanna’s contemporary in India was 
Samudragupta, whose brilliant reign saw the establishment of 
a mighty Indian empire, second only to that of Asoka. Though 
a Vaisnavaite himself, he was tolerant towards other faiths, 
and we are told that in his youth he was a friend of 
Vasubandhu, the Mahayanist teacher of great repute. 
Reference should be made to him here, because of one single 
event connected with him, which for several reasons 
is of much interest to us. It is recorded by a Chinese writer 
that Siri Meghavanna, king of Ceylon, sent an embassy to 
Samudragupta and obtained his permission to build a 
Sangharama near the Mahabodki Vihara. ITiuan-Tsang , 2 
who saw this monastery two and a half centuries later, gives 
a full description of it and adds many details about its 
foundation. According to him, a certain disciple of the 
Buddha, a monk from Ceylon, went forth to wander through 
India, but at all the convents he visited he was treated with 
disdain as a foreigner. He came back, and in great sorrow 
reported his experiences to the king. The latter, who seems 
to have held the monk in high esteem, asked what there was 
that should be done to remedy matters. He was advised 
to build convents throughout India for the benefit of 
travelling monks. A minister was accordingly dispatched to 
the Emperor with costly presents and jewels to ask permission 
for the purpose. Samudragupta was pleased at this cordiality 
shown towards him, and granted leave to “ take one of the 
places in which the Tathagata has left traces of his holy 
teaching The Bodhima^dala was chosen as the most suitable 

spot, and there an imposing edifice was erected to entertain 
all monks coming over from Ceylon. The king, Meghavawa, 
had the following inscription engraved in copper : “ To help 
all without distinction is the highest teaching of all the 

1 Klrti Sr! Raja-Sihha, Pieris, op. cit., p. 11. 

* Memoir s, ii, pp. 133 foil. (Beal). 



THE BEGINNINGS OF LITERARY ACTIVITY 


Buddhas ; to exercise mercy as occasion offers is the 
illustrious doctrine of former saints. And now I, unworthy 
descendant in the royal line, have undertaken to found this 
Sangharama to enclose the sacred traces, and to hand down 
their renown to future ages and to spread their benefits 
among the people. The monks of my country will thus obtain 
independence and be treated as members of the fraternity 
of this country. Let this privilege be handed down from 
generation to generation without interruption.” 1 In an 
inscription of a stone pillar at Allahabad, Samudragupta gives 
an account of his reign, and among the alliances he formed 
with foreign powers occurs mention of “the Saimhalakas, 
who propitiated him with presents ”. 2 

At the time of Hiuan-Tsang’s visit there were over 1,000 
monks in this convent, studying the “ Great Vehicle ” and 
belonging to the Sthavira (Shang-tso-pu) school. “ They 
carefully observe the Dharma and Vinaya,” he wrote, “ and 
their conduct is pure and correct.” 3 

The circumstances connected with the founding of this 
Sangharama allow us to infer that at this time Ceylon monks 
were not held in high esteem on the continent, the reason 
being perhaps the ascendancy of Brahmanical power, or more 
probably because the views of the Ceylon school were not 
acceptable even to the Buddhist monks of India. The cleavage 
between Hina- and Maha-y ana had grown wider and wider. The 
disfavour with which Ceylon kings and monks viewed any en- 
croachment by Vaitulya doctrines on the Thera-vada Buddhism 
of the island had made it impossible for much exchange of 
scholarship to take place between the two countries. But 
this establishment of a Thera-vada community near the 
Bodhimaijdala, which was undoubtedly then as now the chief 
centre of Buddhist pilgrimage, must have facilitated such 
interchange of views. As far as we know, there do not seem 

1 The Buddhist , vol. viii, No. 26, published in Colombo, 1922. 

* History of the Sangha , by D. B. Jayatilaka, in course of publication. 

' * Memoirs , vol. ii, p. 133 (Beal). 



70 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


to have been any restrictions as to who should make use of 
the convent. Nominally, of course, the chief power was vested 
in the hands of the Maha-Vihara, and we may well assume 
that monks of the Abhayagiri fraternity, for instance, who 
wished to study in greater detail and at much closer distance 
the doctrines which distinguished them from other schools, 
took advantage of the opportunity thus created for the 
pursuance of their purpose. I believe also that the familiarity 
thus brought about with the Mahay anists, as we may safely 
call the dissenters from the Thera-vada , was in large measure 
responsible for the convergence that later seems to have come 
about between the Maha-Vihara and the Abhayagiri 
fraternities. The Maha-Vihara community seems to have 
treated the Abhayagiri sect with much toleration through- 
out, and their doings were interfered with only when 
glaring attempts were made by them to tarnish the purity 
of the Dhamma. It was also most probably in this Sangharama 
that the young Brahman Buddhaghosa met Revata Thera , 
who converted him and admitted him into the Order . 1 

Passing over Meghavanna's brother and successor, 
Jettha-Tissa, who was a skilful carver and a clever painter , 2 
we next come to Buddhadasa, according to the Maha- 
vainsa “ a mine of virtue and an ocean of riches ”. “ This 
monarch exemplified to the people in his own person the 
conduct of the Bodhisattas ; and he entertained for mankind 
as large a compassion as a parent feels for his children. The 
indigent he made happy by distribution of riches amongst 
them, and he protected the rich in their property and life .” 3 
In addition to all his other qualifications of wisdom, piety 
and virtue, he possessed in supreme measure a knowledge of 
surgery, and many are the miraculous cures attributed to this 
royal surgeon. One case, for example, was that of a man who 
had drunk water containing the spawn of frogs in it, and an 


1 See next chapter. 

* M,V, 9 xxxvii, v. 101. 

* Ibid., xxxvii, v. 105-110; Geiger's trana., p. xxxix; 267, n. 1. 



THE BEGINNINGS OP LITERARY ACTIVITY 


71 


e SS entering the nostril, ascended into the head and being 
hatched there became a frog. There it attained its full growth, 
and in rainy weather it croaked and gnawed the head of the 
man. The king, splitting open the head and extracting the 
frog and re-uniting the several parts, quickly cured the 
wound . 1 He provided hospitals all oyer the island, not only 
for men but also for birds and beasts. To every ten villages 
a royal physician was appointed, and for their guidance he 
compiled a work called the Sardrtha-sangraha, a compendium 
of medical science . 2 By way of the encouragement of learning, 
he sought out ministers who could expound the doctrines of 
the faith, patronized them, devotedly attended to their needs, 
and provided all facilities for carrying on their work. At the 
Maha-Vihara he built a Parivei^a called Mora or Mayura 
(the remains of which still exist) and made large endowments 
for its maintenance. 

It was during this reign that a certain monk named Maha- 
Dhammakathl translated the Suttas of the PitakaUaya 
into Sinhalese . 3 Who this Dhammakathl was and what was 
the nature of his translation it is impossible to say, because 
no records of him or his work exist at the present time. The 
Maha-vamsa gives but the name of the man and the barest 
account of his work, dismissing the subject with only one verse. 
Mr. Wickremasinghe 4 identifies him with Dharmagupta 
mentioned by Fa Hsien in the account of his visit to Ceylon. 
According to him Dharmagupta lived at Mihintale at the 
head of about two thousand monks. He was “ a Sramana of 
great virtue, honoured and looked up to by all the kingdom. 
He has lived for more than forty years in an apartment of 
stone, constantly showing such gentleness of heart that he 
brought snakes and rats to stop together in the same room, 
without doing one another any harm”. The identification, 
ingenious as it is, has, as far as I am aware, nothing but 

1 M % V,, xxxvii, y. 144. 

1 Now published with a translation by a later author, Colombo, 1899. 

• M.V., xxxvii, v. 175. 

4 Ep. Zeyl ., vol. i, pt. iii, p. 83. 



72 THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 

conjecture to support it. Legge 1 in his translation of Fa Hsicn 
adds a footnote : “ Eitel says (p. 31) a famous ascetic, the 
founder of a school which flourished in Ceylon, a.d. 400,” 
and adds further : “ But Fa-Hsien gives no intimation of 
Dharmagupta’s founding a school.” Little as we know of 
DhammakathI (and there is hardly any probability of our ever 
being able to learn much more), his work is of great significance 
as showing the outcome of a steady tendency on the part of 
the Sinhalese language to assert itself over the Pali. 

Whatever be the origin of Sinhalese as the language of the 
people of Ceylon — whether it was brought over by Vijaya 
and his followers from some part of the Indian peninsula, 
or whether it was derived from the same source as classical 
Sanskrit and Pali, 2 or was, as the Maha-varnsa 3 puts it, 
indigenous (dipa-bhasd), “ the language of the land,” and later 
modified and developed by the Aryan settlers — within two 
and a half centuries after Vijaya ’s arrival the language was 
found sufficiently rich and copious in its terms and regular 
in its structure to have been capable of the enunciation in it 
of matter so varied and so abstract as that contained in the 
commentaries brought over by Mahinda from the Council 
at Pataliputta. With the advent of Pali, as the language of 
the sacred Scriptures, Sinhalese borrowed and derived from 
it various terms and expressions with all their specific con- 
notations. The steady and constant intercourse kept up 
with the mainland enabled all the advances made in various 
branches of knowledge in India to find their way into Ceylon ; 
and the numerous colonies of Brahmanas and others that 
from time to time settled down in the island contributed to 
enlarge the vocabulary of Sinhalese by the addition of words 
from their literatures. The frequent invasions of Tamil 
marauders — each one of whose attacks is sure to have left 
behind some of their number as permanent settlers, even 


1 p. 107, footnote 2. 

* For a discussion of this question see D’Alwis, Sidat-sangara , Introduction. 

* Chap, i, vv. 2-3. 



THE BEGINNINGS OF LITERARY ACTIVITY 


73 


after they hart been repelled — provided another source of 
enrichment for tHfe language. Thus Sinhalese steadily and 
quickly grew up to be a language capable of expressing the 
most varied ideas and emotions, rich in its vocabulary and 
supple in its structure. From the time when Pali was intro- 
duced into Ceylon its study was assiduously cultivated, but, 
as Sinhalese grew in power, monks and laymen alike tended 
more and more to use this medium for the exposition of the 
Buddhist faith. Mahinda gave the lead to this tendency not 
only by preaching in “ the language of the land ", but 
more so by translating into it the commentaries on the Pitakas. 1 
The very nature of the Atthakathas demanded that they should 
be compiled in a manner to be easily understood, and the choice 
of Sinhalese, which was mainly the people's tongue, is there- 
fore no matter for surprise. We shall see later, how eagerly 
scholars availed themselves of this concession to conduct their 
expositions in their own language, by the number and variety 
of the works — histories, poems, etc., commentarial and other- 
wise — which they produced in that medium, with a line or 
two of Pali verse being introduced here and there, at salient 
points, to emphasize certain things, or to sum up the 
narrative. 

But from the very commencement it seemed to have been 
agreed upon that the text of the canon itself, the Pitaka- 
ttaya , was to remain intact in Pali ; that no attempt should 
be made to have it in any other language. The reason for 
this was obviously the preservation of the purity of the 
doctrine, so that whenever doubt arose on some doctrinal 
matter, as variously expounded by the commentators, there 
was always the resource of appealing to the Scriptures them- 
selves for the correct interpretation. This understanding 
seems to have been respected for quite a long time, and the 
first attempt, as far as we know, to violate it was that made by 
Maha-Dhammakath! in Buddhadasa's reign. 

1 See next chapter on Buddhaghosa s work, which was based on these 
translations. 



74 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


The reason for Dhammakathf s enterprise is not difficult 
to guess. Most probably, as the Sinhalese language, by the 
accretion it received from many sources, grew in force and in 
extent, and as writers exercising themselves in its composition 
acquired greater and greater facility in expressing their ideas 
in that medium, they began to cultivate it even more 
assiduously than before, and Pali soon became of secondary 
importance, its use being restricted to mnemonic purposes. 
Fewer and fewer became those who specialized in Pali, and 
Dhammakathi probably felt himself justified in the belief that, 
if the canon were to be made more widely known amongst the 
people, it should be put into the form most easily intelligible 
to them. And a beginning was made with the translation of 
the Suttas. 

We are not told that the work, thus commenced by 
Dhammakathi, was continued bv others. Probably the con* 
servatism of the monks in this matter stopped any further 
attempts. Clear evidence of the neglect of Pali studies at this 
time is afforded by the fact that when scholars did come to 
write in that language, such as, for instance, in the case of the 
Dipa-vamsa, which, according to Oldenberg , 3 was begun about 
this period, the language was unnatural, weak and stilted, 
lacking in subtlety and virility of expression. The reaction 
against this lamentable state of decline came when 
Buddhaghosa’s works gave fresh impetus to the study of 
Pali, and a definite attempt was made to supersede- the 
“ language of the land ” by means of Pali. 

It is interesting to observe that, side by side with the 
ascendency of Sinhalese over Pali, another language was 
gradually coming into vogue in Ceylon. This was classical 
Sanskrit, which had rapidly become the medium of expression 
for learned works on the mainland of India. Scientific and 
secular works in that language had found their way into Ceylon, 
aftd were studied with care. And when the surgeon- 


1 Oldenberg, Dipa-varftsa , p. 9. 



THE BEGINNINGS OF LITERARY ACTIVITY 


75 


king, Buddhadasa, compiled his memorable work, “ the 
Sdrdrtha-sangraha ” — the first of its kind in Ceylon — it was 
neither Pali nor Sinhalese that he used, but Sanskrit. We shall 
have occasion to refer to the influence of Sanskrit on Ceylon 
literature later ; but the compilation of Buddhadasa's book 
in a language so far not used in Ceylon to any large extent 
is worthy of notice here. 

Buddhadasa's elder son, Upatissa, succeeded him. During 
his reign the island was afflicted with drought, disease, and 
distress, and, acting on the advice of the monks, he requested 
a body of them to walk about in the streets of the city 
throughout the night, chanting the llalana-uxdla and sprinkling 
water. We are told that, as a result, at sunrise great clouds 
poured tlown rain upon the earth ; all the sick and crippled 
disported themselves with joy, and the king issued the 
following decree : “ Should there at any time be another 
affliction of drought and sickness in the island, do ye observe 
the like ceremonies .’' 1 

This account of the ceremony given in the Mahd-vamsa is 
interesting, in that it is the first recorded instance of the 
Parittam having been recited for the public weal, the only 
other occasion being the one on which the Buddha himself 
is traditionally said to have preached the Ratana-Sutta to 
banish a deadly plague from Yesall. Ever since this time the 
ceremony of chanting the Parittam has taken fast hold of the 
imagination of the Sinhalese, and is extensively observed, 
even at the present day. The Suttas most often chanted are 
the Mangala, the Ratana , and the Karamga-Metta Suttas 
of the Khuddaka-pdlha ; and the Pirit-pota, or the book con- 
taining the suttas for such recital, forms part of the meagre 
library of every Sinhalese household. Such recital is believed 
to ward off all evils and danger, and to bring about health 
and prosperity. Most Sinhalese know some part of these 
suttas by heart, and every child is taught to recite at 


1 Af.K., xxxvii, rv. 189-198. 



76 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


least a portion of them every morning and before retiring 
to bed . 1 

Several translations of these Partita- suttas have been 
written in Sinhalese, some of them most elaborate, but, most 
of them being more difficult of comprehension than the original 
Pali, not much use is made of them, and the efficacy of the 
recital is believed to remain unaffected whether the reciter 
understands or not the meaning of what he chants ! 

Upatissa was killed by his queen consort, who was 
infatuated with his younger brother Mahanama, at that time 
a member of the Order. On his brother's death, however, he 
threw off his robes, became king and married Upatissa 's 
consort . His approval of the queen's treachery was evidently 
viewed with disfavour by the Maha-Vihara fraternity, 
for we find both him and his queen actively supporting the 
Abhayagiri establishment of schismatic priests . 2 * It was during 
this reign that there arrived in Ceylon the greatest of the 
Buddhist commentators, Buddhaghosa, whose works are of 
monumental importance. 

To this period are traditionally ascribed two short works 
in Pali, the K h udda-S ikkhd and the M fda-Sikkhd, supposed 
to have been written prior to the advent of Buddhaghosa. 
Both works are alluded to by name in the great inscription 
of Parakrama Bahu at Galvihara, Polonnaruva (a.t>. 10C5), 2 
and the grammarian Moggallana, who lived at that time, is 
said to have written a commentary on the Khudda-Sikkhd . 4 
This commentary no longer exists, but it was apparently 
based on an older Sinhalese commentary. The two works 
are short summaries of Vinaya rules, a kind of nicmoria 


1 It is interesting to recall that, when I left Ceylon for England, among 
the tokens of remembrance given to me were several editions de luxe of 
such Pirit-Pvtas. 

2 M.Y., xxx vii, v. 212. 

* Muller’s Ancient Inscrip, of Ceylon , No. 137, 11 (1922). 

4 Fryer’s Subodhulaidara, p. 4, note on Kaccayana ; see also under 
Moggallana in the present treatise. 



THE BEGINNINGS OF LITERARY ACTIVITY 


77 


technica of the \inaya. The- works are for the greatest part in 
verse, with only a few passages in prose. The verses are put 
together in a rough and ready manner, appropriate for the 
mnemonic purpose they are intended to serve. A colophon 
at the end of the Khudda-Sikkhd ascribes that work to a monk 
named Dhammasiri, who was “ like unto a banner in 
Tambapaiini ” (Ceylon). Though no mention of an author's 
name is made in the Mula-Sikkhd . tradition agrees to ascribe it 
to Mahusami. The two. being both monks of Anuradha pura. who 
lived in the same period, were probably confreres. 1 Nothing more 
is known about these authors and, from the evidence at our 
disposal, it is very difficult to form any opinion as to the age 
of tlie books. Dr. Edward Muller, basing his arguments on 
the language and certain forms of words used to meet the 
exigencies of metre, is inclined to think, that they are later 
than the Mahd-vamsa, and are not earlier than the sixth 
or seventh century a.i >. 2 IVAIwis, in his Introduction to the 
Sidat-sahgard. assigns a rather early date, viz. a.d. 350. 3 
The language of both compilations is simple and free from 
artificiality and all Sanskrit isms. Itliys Davids agrees to 
confirm the traditional date, viz. about A.r>. 350, and is 
convinced that both belong to the memoriter period of Pfili. 4 
Most of the extracts given in the works are from the text of 
the Vinaya-Pitnka , but a few passages remain unidentified. 
Dr. Muller thinks such passages are quotations from the 
Vinaya commentaries. 5 A Sinhalese sanne or translation of 
the Khudda-Sikkhd exists, a work of great scholastic merit, 
written in very elegant and archaic language, the author 
of which is not known. It is generally assigned to the eleventh 
century, and two Weds w r ere written in Pali based on this, the 
Porana-tVca , by Revata or Maha-Yasa, the author of a tikd 

1 JPTS., 1883, pp. 86-7 ; also De Zoysa, Catalogue . 

8 Ibid. 

• Introduction to Sidat-sahgard , p. cl. 

4 JPTS., 1883, p. xiii. 

6 JPTS., loc . rit. 



78 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


on Buddhadatta's Vinaya-vin icchaya , l and the other by 
Sangharakkhita, author of the Sitbodhalankara and several 
other valuable works, whose date was the latter half of the 
twelfth century. The works are used in Ceylon and Burma 
at the present day by novices of the Order as a handbook of 
Vinaya rules. 



CHAPTER V 


Buddiiaghosa 

/ lONSIDERiNG that Buddhaghosa ranks in the Buddhist 
church as its greatest commentator and exegetist, and 
that the service which he rendered to the cause of the 
Buddha's religion was of the most useful and enduring kind, 
the information we have about his life is very meagre. Very 
little is known about him, except through his own writings ; 
we have nothing to go upon except his commentaries, and 
a few traditions and legends. And these very traditions and 
legends are so much coloured by the imagination of their 
creators that much reliance cannot be placed upon them. 
Circumstantial details are so interwoven with fictitious 
elements, that it is difficult to separate strict truth from mere 
romance. Facts of historical value occupy comparatively 
little space in these narratives. 

The Budditacjhos - uppatt i 1 is the longest account of his life 
and is, in its entirety, a work highly diverting as well as 
instructive. But its author had evidently little authentic 
knowledge of the subject of liis study, and his collection of 
legends is mostly valueless from the historical point of view. 
It reads too much like a romance and does not help us much 
in elucidating Buddhaghosa's history. Gray, in his translation 
of the work, gives 1 2 a list of other sources which contain 
accounts of the commentator's life — a list of wliat he considers 
the most trustworthy Burmese records. Besides these, the 
earliest connected account of liis life is that contained in 
the Maha-vanisa (chapter xxxvii). which, though it is con- 
sidered by some to be by a later writer of the thirteenth century, 
is by far the most authentic source of our information, and is 
itself probably derived from very much older material. 

1 Edited and translated by J. Gray, Luzac & Co., 1892. 

* Ibid., p. 9 foil. ; see also that very valuable book, The Life and Work 
of Buddhaghosa , by Bimala Charan Law, Calcutta, 1923. 



80 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


The whole narrative bears upon it the impress of truth, and 
our only regret is that it contains so very little. It fixes for 
us quite definitely the period of Buddhaghosa’s activities, 
and this fact is in itself most useful. 

The following is a translation of the Maha-vamsa account : 
“ A Brahman youth, born in the neighbourhood of the Great 
Bodhi-trce, 1 accomplished in arts and sciences, one who had 
mastered the three Vedas, was well- versed in knowledge, 
skilled in all disputes, himself a schismatic wanderer over 
Jambu-dipa, assuming the character of a disputant, lived 
in a certain monastery and was in the habit of rehearsing by 
day and by night with clasped hands a discourse which he had 
learnt, perfect in all its parts, and sustained throughout in 
lofty strain. A certain Elder, He vatu by name, 2 * * becoming 
acquainted with him, thought ‘ This being is one of great 
wisdom ; he should be converted 5 . (So thinking) he inquired : 

‘ Who is this that brays like an ass ? ’ The youth replied : 

4 Dost thou know, then, the meaning of the ass’s braying ? ’ 

* I do,' rejoined the Elder, and the youth exhibited the extent 
of his knowledge. The Elder explained each of his statements 
and pointed out their fallacies. Being thus refuted, the youth 
exclaimed, ‘ Come now and propound thy creed/ and the 
Elder recited to him a passage from the Abhidhamma. The 
Brahman could not understand the meaning of that text, and 
inquired ; ‘ Whose manta (teaching) is this ? * ‘ It is the 
Buddha's manta/' On his exclaiming ‘ Impart it to me ’, the 
Elder replied : ‘ Enter the Recluses’ Order.’ And he, being 
desirous of acquiring knowledge of the Three Pitakas , and 
being convinced that ‘ This is indeed the Way took the 
vows of a Recluse. 

1 According to Burmese tradition he was born in North India in the 
fifth century a.d. in the Magadha country (see Gray, op. eit.). The 
Sasana-varfim (p. 20) says that he was the son of a Purohita named Kesa 
and that lus mother was Kesl. 

2 I have suggested in the ^preceding chapter that this Revata may have 

been an Elder of the Sahgharama built for Ceylon monks by Kitti Siri 

Meghavagna. 



BUDDHAGHOSA 


81 


“ Because he was as profound in his eloquence as the 
Buddha himself, they called him Buddhaghosa (the voice of 
the Buddha) ; and throughout the world he became as 
renowned as the Buddha. Having there (in Jambu-dipa) 
composed an original work called the Nanodayam , he at the 
same time wrote the chapter called * Attha-salini ’ on the 
Dhamma-sa iigan 7 . Revata Thera then, observing that he 

was desirous of undertaking the compilation of a Paritt- 
atthakathd (a concise commentary on the Pitaka-Uaya ), 
thus addressed him : ‘ The text alone (of the Pitaka-Uaya) 
has been preserved in this land : the Atthakathas are not 
extant here ; nor is there any complete version of the different 
vddd (schools). The Sinhalese Atthakathas are genuine ; they 
were composed in the Sinhalese language by the inspired and 
profoundly wise Mahinda, wIk) had previously consulted the 
discourses of the Buddha, confirmed at the three Convocations, 
and the dissertations and arguments of Sariputta and others ; 
and they exist among the Sinhalese. Repairing thither, and 
studying the same, translate them according to the rules of 
the MagadhI grammar. It will be an act conducive to the 
welfare of the whole Avorld’. 1 Having been thus advised, this 
eminently wise man, rejoicing therein, departed thence, and 
visited this island in the reign of this monarch, Mahanama. 2 
On reaching the Mahavihara he entered the Maha-Padhana 
Hall, the most splendid of the apartments in the Vihara, 
and listened to the Sinhalese Atthakatha and the Thera-vada , 
from beginning to end, propounded by the Elder Sanghapali. 
He became thoroughly convinced that they contained the 
true meaning of the doctrines of the Dhammaraja. Thereupon, 
paying reverential respect to the priesthood, he thus 

1 The Sasanavamsa (p. 29) says he was sent to make amends for having 
thought himself cleverer than his teacher. 

* The Ceylon Antiquary and Lit . Register (vol. i, pt. ii, pp. 94 foil.) gives 
over a score of different dates fixed upon by different scholars ; some as 
early as 543 b.o. ! Most of them centre round the name of Mahanama, 
lring of Ceylon. Sinhalese tradition assigns his arrival to 965 years after 
the Parinibbana. 


6 



82 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


petitioned : 4 I am desirous of translating the Atthakathd ; 
give me access to all your books.’ The monks, to test his 
qualifications, gave only two stanzas, saying : i Hence prove 
thy ability ; having satisfied ourselves on this point, we will 
then let thee have all our books.’ From these stanzas, and 
consulting the Pitaka-ttaya together with the Atthakathd , 
and condensing them, he composed the commentary, the 
Visuddhi-magcja. Thereupon, having assembled at the 
Bo-tree the monks who had acquired a complete knowledge 
of the Buddha's doctrines, he commenced to read out his 
work. The devas, in order to make his wisdom celebrated 
amongst men, rendered that book invisible. He, however, 
for a second and a third time, recomposed it. When he was 
producing his book for the third time the devas restored 
the other two copies also. The monks then read out the three 
books simultaneously. In the three versions, neither in a 
signification nor in a single misplacement by transposition, 
nay, not even in the Thera controversies, or in the text was 
there, in the measure of a verse or in the letter of a word, 
the slightest variation. Thereupon the monks, rejoicing again 
and again, fervently shouted, saying: 4 Most assuredly this 
is Metteyya himself,’ and gave him the books where the three 
Pitakas were recorded, together with the commentaries. 

4C Taking up his residence in the secluded Ganthakara- 
Vihara , 1 at Anuradhapura, he translated according to the 
grammatical rules of the Magadhas, the root of all 
languages, the whole of the Sinhalese Atthakathd. This proved 

1 Lord Chalmers says : “ I venture on the confident opinion that, 
although it was probably at the Mahu-Vihara in Anuradhapura (where 
he would meet Ceylon’s most accomplished scholars) that Buddhaghosa 
began his work by writing three editions of his own expository Visuddhi- 
magga, it is surely an impeccable tradition that makes him journey for hia 
authentic copy of the Pitakas and Atthakathas to Alu-vihara, renowned 
as the venerable birthplace and still the faithful custodian of the written 
records he had come bo far to seek. For in these things sentiment Counts 
for much and to none more than to a zealous and reverent scholar such as 
Buddhaghosa undoubtedly was.” ( Ceylon Antiq, and Lit . Beg. t vol. i, 
pt. i, p. 2 foil.) 



BUDDHAGHOSA 


83 


an accomplishment of the utmost benefit to all languages 
spoken by the human race. All the Theriya teachers held this 
compilation in the same estimation as the Tipitaka. There- 
after, the objects of his mission having been fulfilled, 
he returned to Jambu-dipa to worship at the Bo-tree.” 1 

So much, then, for Buddhaghosa’s life, as far as may be 
gleaned from the information at our disposal. The monks 
of the Maha-Vihara in Ceylon were by no means slow to 
recognize his genius, and they provided him with every 
facility for carrying out his work. One monk after another 
requested him to enter upon new fields of scholarship, and 
he responded gladly. Buddhism was at this time on the wane 
in India. Various new sects had arisen on the continent, 
each claiming to possess the authentic tradition of the Buddha. 
We saw in the last chapter that the Ceylon monks were not 
held in high esteem by members of these dissentient schools. 
The only place, perhaps, where the Thera-vada yet had a 
foothold was in the Sinhalese Sangharama at the Bodhi- 
mandapa. But even there the Pitakas and their commentaries 
were not being studied in their entirety. It may be that no 
exegetical works were available to them in a language easily 
understood by their disciples on the spot. Buddhaghosa 
evidently felt this keenly himself ; for, according to the 
Maha-vamsa account, the desire to compose a concise com- 
mentary on the Pitakas ( Pitakaithakatha ) was expressed 
by him spontaneously to his teacher, Rcvata, and the latter 
was only too glad to encourage this ambitious project and 
devise ways and means of helping its accomplishment. When 

1 Kern says that after completing his work in Ceylon, Buddhaghosa 
went over to Burma to propagate the Buddhist faith (Manual of Buddhism, 
p. 126), while Spence Hardy mentions that the Burmese ascribe the new 
era in their religion to the time when the great exegetist reached their 
country from Ceylon ( Buddhism , p. 632). The Buddhaghosuppatti states 
(pp. 65-6) that he was bom in the Tusita heaven after his death. The 
Cambodian Buddhists have a tradition that Buddhaghosa died in their 
country, in a monastery called after him Buddhaghosa- Vihara. He was 
cre ma ted there, his relics collected and stupas built over them (Law, 
Life and Work of Buddhaghosa , p. 42). 



84 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


Buddhaghosa mentioned his wish to the Maha-Viliara monks, 
they realized well the importance of his works, and the fruitful 
results that would follow therefrom. Once the commentaries, 
which contained a full exposition of the Dhamma, were 
available in a language understood by the monks of India, 
a new impetus would be given to the study of the orthodox 
teaching, and the glory of the religion would thereby be 
increased in manifold measure. We find them, therefore, most 
eager in their encouragement of his work.' The king himself, 
though not very favourably disposed towards the Maha- 
Vihara fraternity, for reasons given in the preceding chapter — 
extended to Buddhaghosa his royal patronage, and we find 
this acknowledged by Buddhaghosa himself. Thus in the 
epilogue to the Samunta-pdsddikd he says that he completed 
his work in the twenty-first year of King Sirinivasa of Ceylon, 
who was his benevolent patron . 1 

But the w'ork he undertook w r as by no means an easy one, 
and it is no wonder, therefore, that the learned Sinhalese 
monks, before they gave their consent to his being assigned 
this Herculean task, thought it prudent to test his talents 
beforehand by giving him a text from the sacred canon as 
a subject for a thesis ; and it was a natural tradition that 
armed him with Sakka’s iron stylus that he might be possessed 
thereby of speedier penmanship. 

While already in India, according to the Maha-vamsa, 
he had composed a w'ork called “ Naiwdaya ”, about which 
nothing further is known. We may, I think, assume that it 
was not preserved among his permanent compilations, probably 
because it was incorporated in his later and more substantial 
and better-informed works. The name of the book, however, 
lends colour to the assumption that it was a treatise on some 
philosophical subject. His first work in Ceylon was the 
Vi&uddhi-magga , set him, as we saw above, as a test-subject 
for a disquisition by the Maha-Vihara monks. In the Nidana - 
hatha, or Introduction to the book, he gives in detail the 
1 Also Dhamma pada Commentary, vol. iv, p. 235. 



BUDDHAGHOSA 


85 


circumstances in which he made this compendium, and again 
repeats them towards the close of the w T ork. x It is an 
encyclopaedia of the Doctrine, containing the whole of the 
Buddha’s teachings in a connected volume, and, as Gray says 
in his Introduction 1 2 to the Buddhaghos^uppaiti , “ If he had 
written nothing else, it alone would have secured for him un- 
dying fame.” The Sasana-vamsa-dipani 3 summarizes it 
thus : “ In short, the work deals with kusald , akusala , 
avyakata-dhammd, dyatana , dhdtu, sati-patthdna , kamma , 
pakati , and many other topics of Buddhist philosophy, and 
is the only book in which the whole of the Buddha’s system is 
well depicted in an abridged compilation of the three Piiakas , 
together with quotations from the commentaries on the 
passages from the Piiakas mentioned therein.” 

No mention is made in it of any of Buddhaghosa’s other 
works, whence it is concluded that it was the first, permanent 
work oi his pen. The work is a masterly production, and 
Buddhaghosa undoubtedly took great pains over it ; for wo 
are told that he made three editions of the work, before it 
was put into final shape. The work, as we have it, is divided 
into three parts : Conduct, Concentration (or Mental 

Training), and Wisdom. The quotations mentioned in it 
are plentiful and varied, and bestrew the work from beginning 
to end. They have been taken from nearly every work in the 
earlier Buddhist literature ; the three Piiakas , the Sinhalese 
commentaries, notably the Maha-Atthakathd of the Maha 
Vihara community, the Milinda-panha, and the Petakopadesa 4 
The result is an extraordinary book, written with admirable 
judgment as to the general arrangement of the matter and in 
lucid style (though at times long words are used and the 
language is difficult to understand), free from argument and 
discussion — a book of which, according to Mrs. Rhys 

1 Vol. i, p. 2 ; vol. ii, pp. 711 (Pali Text Soc. ed.). 

* p. 31. 

* pp. 30-1. 

4 See V.M. (P.T.S.), pp. 753 foil. 



86 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


Davids, 1 “ we might say, within limits, what is said of the 
Divina Commedia and of the Shakespearean plays : in its 
pages may be found something on everything — i.e. in the earlier 
Buddhist literature ... a closely packed microcosm ... of 
macrocosmic range.” 

Mr. Nagai, 2 in a very learned article, draws attention to the 
extraordinary similarity that exists between the Visuddhi- 
magga and a Chinese Pali work called the V imutti-magga , 
and seems inclined to conclude that they are one and the same 
work appearing in different attire. The V imutti-magga was 
translated into Chinese in a.d. 505 by a Cambodian (Funan) 
priest whose name (according to M. Nagai) was Sanghapala, 
and it is an “ encyclopedia of Buddhist theology ”. Legend 
says it was composed by Araha Upatissa, usually identified 
with Sariputta ; but Mr. Nagai, basing his conclusions on the 
internal evidence of the Dipa-vmma, assigns him to the 
first century a.d. The translator, Sanghapala, came from Mid- 
India, and stayed in China during fifteen years. His master, 
Guna-bhadra, had visited Slhala-dlpa, and other southern 
countries, and brought with him copies of various works. 
We do not know whether the V imutti-magga was among the 
books so brought, or whether it was of Mid-Indian or even 
Cambodian origin. The V imutti-magga is an Abhidhamma 
exegesis, serving as a compendium for that portion of Buddhist 
literature. A comparison of the two works shows that, though 
they resemble each other very much in form, inasmuch as 
both divide the contents according to Slla, J liana, Parma , 
and Vimutti, yet they differ greatly in the way of explanation, 
the arrangement of the materials, etc., those portions which 
are curtailed in one being given fully in the other or vice versa, 
and in some points the Chinese work seems to have been 
influenced by the Mahayana doctrine. 

There is, I feel, no need to conclude, therefore, that “the 
Visuddhi-magga, which has been considered to be entirely 

1 V.M. , p. 763. 

2 JPTS., 1917-19, pp. 69 foil. 



buddhaghosa 


87 


Buddhaghosa s own work is in reality a revised version of 
Upatissa’s V imutti-magga If we suppose that the VimvJtti- 

magga was the result of books brought by Guna-bhadra of Mid- 
India, from his travels in Ceylon and other Hlnayana countries, 
the solution of the problem seems clear. Both authors drew 
their inspiration from the same sources. A close examination 
of the two works shows that their greatest resemblance lies 
in the treatment, of philosophical (Abhidhamma) matter. 
We saw that, in the school where Buddhaghosa first- received 
his knowledge of Buddhism, the special subject of study was 
the Abhidhamma. It was by the recital of an Abhidhamma 
text that Buddhaghosa’s attention was first drawn to the 
Buddha’s teaching, and Buddhaghosa’s first work was the 
Ndnodaya , apparently a treatise on that particular aspect of 
Buddhist lore. Buddhaghosa is sent to Ceylon to get: a com- 
plete edition of the Commentaries because, as his teacher 
tells him, “ There is no complete version of the different schools 
(vddd) with us. The Sinhalese Attkakathd are genuine ; the 
text alone (of the Pitaka-ttaya) is preserved in this land ; 
the Atthakathd are not extant.” This does not mean that 
some, at least, of the commentaries were not studied in India, 
especially in view of the existence of the Sinhalese Sangharama 
at the Bodhi-mandapa. As long as the text was extant the 
traditional interpretation thereof, in various degrees of 
authenticity, at different times, existed as well, handed down 
through the centuries by a line of teachers who aimed as far 
as was possible at consistency in doctrinal interpretation. 
Buddhaghosa makes reference in the Visuddh i-magga 1 to 
the commentaries on the Ahguttara , Majjhima , and Samyutla 
Nikdyas. This reference may well be, as Maung Tin suggests , 1 2 
not to Buddhaghosa’s own commentaries, but to the original 
Ceylonese Commentary from which he later made his redaction, 
and in which he was so deeply steeped, even at the time when 
he wrote the V isuddhi-magga . If, then, it is assumed that 

1 See index to the V isuddhi-magga* 

* Path of Purity , Preface, pp. v and vi. 



THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


the Vimutti-magcja found its way to China by way of some of 
the schools which flourished in India at the time, and which 
studied the canon in the more or less traditional method, 
it w T ould not be difficult to conclude that the Yisnddhi-magga 
and V vmutti-magga are more or less independent works, 
written by men belonging to much the same school of thought 
— the Thera-vdda. 

But by far the greatest service rendered by Buddhagliosa 
to the progress of Buddhist knowledge was his series of 
masterly commentaries. The Atthahatha s (or “talks about 
the contents, meaning, or purpose of various parts of the 
doctrine ? \ as the word itself implies) represented the most 
ancient, orthodox, and traditional interpretations of the 
Buddha's teachings. They were not. so much creative as 
explicative and interpretative. Such talks go back to the time 
?>f the Buddha himself. Law, in his book on Buddhaghosa , 1 
has a very interesting chapter on the origin of these com- 
mentaries. He says t hat the need for an accurate interpretation 
of the Buddha's words, which formed the guiding principle 
of life and action of the members of the Sanglia, was felt; from 
the very earliest days of the Order. When the Mast er was alive 
there was always the possibility of referring disputed questions 
direct to him. But even during the Master's lifetime — at the 
Buddhist centres formed at various places under the leader- 
ship of one or other of the famous disciples — discussions, 
friendly interviews, and analytical expositions used to take 
place, and the raison d'etre of the commentaries is to be traced 
to these discussions. Sometimes it happened that accounts 
of these discussions were duly reported to the Teacher, and 
some of them were approved by him. and he would then ask 
the monks to bear the particular expositions in mind as the 
best that could have been given. The utterances of the 
disciples that won such approbation w r ere treasured by the 
members of the community, and especially of their respective 
groups, and held in high esteem, honoured as much as the 
1 Law, op. cit., pp. 48 foil. 



BUDDHAGHOSA 


89 


words of the Buddha himself. These formed the nucleus of 
the commentaries. Often, when the Buddha preached a sermon 
in concise form on some aspect of the doctrine, the monks used 
to repair to one of the chief disciples and get the points 
explained in greater detail. Such was Maha-Kacca[ya]na, for 
example, who was foremost in reputation for his power 
in giving detailed expositions of what the Buddha said in 
brief. When later the text of the canon came to be compiled, 
arranged, and edited, some of the expositions found their way 
into the Pitakas and were given a permanent place therein. 
Thus we have the Sa nglli-suttanta 1 of the Dlgha-Nikaya, 
ascribed to Siiriputta and forming a complete catechism of 
terms and passages of exegetical nature. Such was also the 
Sacca-vibhanga 2 (an exposition of the Four Noble Truths) 
of the Majjhima, which later found its proper place in the 
second book of the A bhidhamma-Pitaka . and also the 
Madhu-pindika-sutta of Maha-Kaccayana, included in the 
Majjh ima - Nikdya , 1 * 3 It somet imes happened that for a proper 
understanding of the text explanations of a comment-aria! 
nature were quite essential ; and in such cases the commentary 
was naturally incorporated into the text and formed part of 
the text itself. Thus we have an old commentary embedded 
in the Vwaya and the Parivdra added as a supplementary 
examination paper to the whole. Then there is the Niddesa . 
a whole book of commentary on texts now included in the 
Sutta-nipdln ; and there are passages clearly of a com- 
mentarial nature scattered throughout the Nikdyas. Lastly, 
there are the interesting fragments of commentaries, tacked, 
the one on to the Dhamma-sangam arid the other to the 
Vibhanga. We saw in an earlier chapter how the canon, in 
order to facilitate the learning and the retention of it, was 
divided into sections and entrusted to various groups of 
disciples to form their special study. There is a very old 

1 Vol. iii, p. 207 foil. 

* Majjh iii, pp. 248 foil. 

* Ibid., i, pp. 110 foil. 



90 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


tradition which tells us that the commentaries on all the 
principal canonical books were handed down by these schools 
along with the texts themselves. This probably explains how 
it was that parts of the commentaries came later to be attached 
to the texts which they interpreted, e.g. in the case of the 
Dhamma-sarigani. This, however, does not mean, as Mrs. Rhys 
Davids points out , 1 that all the commentaries were so handed 
down in all the schools, or that each of them was exactly 
the same in each of the schools where it was taught. But, 
where the commentaries were so handed down, tradition tells 
us that they were compiled and subsequently written in the 
dialect of the district where the school was situated. They 
were, therefore, not the work of one single author, but of a 
community of brethren. 

It must be borne in mind that these commentaries were not 
compiled in the modern sense of the word, nor did any com- 
mentaries, such as Buddhaghosa himself wrote later, exist in 
the Buddha's lifetime or immediately after his death. So that, 
when Buddhaghosa mentions, in the opening stanzas of the 
Sumangala-vilasini , that the commentary to the Digha- 
Nikdya was at the first council rehearsed by 500 holy Elders, 
we may assume that he means, that at this meeting the 
meanings to be attached to the various terms — particularly 
to those that appear to have been borrowed from Hindu 
philosophy — were discussed and properly defined. This 
removes the difficulty of conceiving the contemporaneous 
existence of the commentaries and the Pitakas from the yery 
earliest times. Such definitions and fixations of meaning 
formed the nucleus of the later commentaries. The Elders 
had discussed the important terms at the First Council, 
and had decided on the method of interpreting and teaching 
the more recondite doctrines. 

Later, w r hen schisms arose wdthin the Buddhist Church, 
they were caused mainly by differences of opinion as to the 
correct interpretation of certain rules of the Order, and of 
1 Bud. Psy. Ethics, 2nd ed., Introd., p. xxvi. 



BUDDHAGHOSA 


91 


the meaning to be attached to various points in the Doctrine. 
With the lapse of time the philosophical notions implicit in 
the Dhamma had grown, new ideas had developed and earlier 
conceptions been elaborated ; the simpler, archaically 
expressed Sutta teachings had been expanded and widened 
in their scope, and various schools of thought had arisen 
within the Order itself. Some of them were obviously heretical 
in their views. When, at the Second and the Third Councils, 
the custodians of the orthodox tradition met together to 
condemn such heresies, we may be sure that they determined 
with even greater preciseness and clearness than before the 
connotations and the applications of the Buddha's teachings. 
By the time of the Third Council such commentarial literature 
(using the word in the wider sense) had been more or less 
fully developed ; and when, after the conclusion of that 
Synod, Mahinda came to Ceylon, he brought over with him 
the expositions of the teaching which had been sanctioned 
by the Elders at that meeting. Very soon after Mahinda’s 
arrival he translated them into “ the language of the land ”, 
and there they continued to be studied and pondered upon 
and further developed by the monks of Ceylon. 

At the time when Buddhaghosa arrived in the island — 
in the early part of the fifth century a.d. — the commentaries 
so handed down in the schools at various times and places 
had already been put together into treatises, and books had 
been made of them, written in the native dialects. And we 
know, at least, the names of several of those which existed at 
this period. They are 1 : — 

1. The Mula- or Maha-Atthakathd , or simply the Atthakathd , 
of the dwellers of the Maha-Vihara at Anuradhapura. 

2. The commentary of the dwellers of the Uttara-Y ihara, 
also at Anuradhapura. 

3. The Mahd-paccari , or “ Great Raft ”, so called because 
it was composed on a raft somewhere in Ceylon. 

1 Manual bf Bud. Psy. Ethics , pp. xxvii and xxviii, also Vijayaainha, 
JBAS., 1870, vol. v, pp. 298 foil., N.S. 



92 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


4. The Andha-Atthakathd , handed down at Kancipura 
(Conjevaram), in South India. 

5. The Kurundi-Atthakaihd , so named because of its having 
been written at the Kurundavelu Vihara in Ceylon. 

6. The Saiikhepa-A tthakathd, or “ Short Commentary ”, 
which was also, possibly, of South Indian origin. 1 

Buddhaghosa thus found a large mass of material at his 
disposal. These commentaries doubtless embraced various 
shades of opinion, and represented different schools of thought. 
It is difficult to decide whether each one of them dealt with 
the canon as a whole, or only with separate portions of it, 
but the former is not probable. The tlkas themselves give but 
very imperfect accounts of them, because, judging from the 
meagre information they contain with regard to them, at the 
time when the tlkas came to be compiled, almost all traces of 
the older commentaries had disappeared. In the Sammoha- 
vinodam on the Vibhaiiga 2 Buddhaghosa tells us that he 
composed it “ by taking the substance of the old com- 
mentaries 55 (pora natthakath an am sdram addya). Thus, it is 
pretty clear that at least the first three of those mentioned 
above were separate works on the entire Ti-pitaka , and that 


1 In addition to these Buddhaghosa often quotes the authority of what 
he calls the Parana. Mrs. Rhys Davids suggests (Law, op. cit. Foreword) 
that these Parana# represented an evolving school of philosophical thought. 
Tt is distinctly stated in the Gandha-vamsa (pp. 55-9) that the Poraria- 
rariyd arc also the Atthakathdcariya. Law (p. t>4) considers that the name 
refers to eminent and revered teachers of the Order, who wen* often asked 
to interpret questions arising among the Saiigha. and whose interpretations 
were embodied in the great Atlhakathds ; and he suggests that these were 
preserved in the Great Sinhalese Commentaries, and distinguished by being 
quoted in the original Pali. I am of opinion that the Porands merely refer 
to teachers whose expositions were? not necessarily embodied in the Com- 
mentaries, but handed down in various schools by oral tradition, sometimes 
with mnemonic verses to help the memory and that Buddhaghosa refers 
to such traditional explanations as the anonymous Parana. Often in 
Sinhalese books, when the author quoting from an ancient work either 
does not know — or does not think it necessary to give — the source, he 
introduces it merely by eheyin puratanayo kihu (“ therefore the ancients 
said ”). 

* Vijayasinha, loc. cit., p. 299. 



BUDDHAGHOSA 


93 


all of them were more or less directed to the elucidation of one 
or more of the Pitakas , and that they purported to be 
separate and independent commentaries. 

The task before Buddhaghosa was, therefore, by no means 
an easy one. The very copiousness of the material was an 
embarrassment. When he set out from India to make his 
“ Concise Commentary ”, his idea was merely to study the 
Sinhalese Atthakathas and translate them into Pali. But. now, 
faced often with conflicting views, contradictory assertions, 
and sometimes incompatible doctrines, he had to expunge, 
abridge, enlarge, and make new a commentary of his own. 
The author of so systematic and coherent a synopsis as the 
Visuddhi-magga could not rest content with a mere translation ; 
for that no great ability was required, and certainly far less 
extraordinary talent than he possessed. He wished to collect 
and systematize the knowledge which the various works con- 
tained, to garner the criticism of ancient scholarship for the 
use of future generations of scholars ; and therefore he did 
not shrink from rewriting them so as to expand what he found 
into a fuller and richer form, embodying in the old material 
whatever he found elsewhere, to illuminate and elucidate the 
text of his comment. He approached his task with no 
iconoclastic desire to supersede the earlier scholiasts ; on 
the contrary, he studied with great assiduity what his 
predecessors had written and incorporated with pious care 
in their works ; he had always one great object pre- 
dominantly' in view, namely, to inspire reverence for what 
he considered supreme authority. 

He himself describes what he did in the metrical introduction 
to the Samanta-pasddika 1 : “ In commencing this com- 
mentary — having embodied therein the Malia-Altliakaiha> 
without excluding any proper meaning from the decisions 
contained in the Maha-paccari, as also in the famous Kurundi 
and other commentaries, and including the opinions of the 
Elders— I shall perform my task well. Let the young and 
1 PTS. ed., p. 2, w. 10-16. 



94 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


the middle-aged and the elderly monks who entertain a proper 
regard for the doctrines of the Tathagata, the Luminary of 
Truth, listen to my words with pleasure. The Dhamma, 
as well as the Vinaya , was declared by the Buddha and his 
sons understood it in the same sense as it was delivered; 
and inasmuch as in former times they (the Sinhalese com- 
mentators) composed the commentaries without disregarding 
their (sons’) opinions, therefore, excepting any error of 
transcription, everything contained therein is an authority to 
the learned in this Order, who respect ecclesiastical discipline. 
From these commentaries, after casting off the language, 
condensing detailed accounts, including authoritative 
decisions, without overstepping any Pali idiom (I shall 
proceed to compose ray work). And, as this commentary will 
be explanatory of the meanings of words belonging to the 
Suttas in conformity with the sense attached to them therein, 
therefore ought it the more diligently to be studied.” 

Thus Buddhaghosa’s work formed a synthetic unity, 
deliberately planned as a consistent scheme for dealing w r ith 
the traditions which had come down through the centuries, 
handed down by distinguished members of the Order and ever 
growing in the scope of their expositions of the canon. He was 
a critical scholar in some ways ; there is evidence of this in 
almost every passage of his commentaries ; he consulted 
manuscripts of various schools, and faithfully recorded the 
variant readings which he found in the same. Often, especially 
in the case of narratives, he found different versions of the 
same incident, and preserved them for the information of 
later generations. Working in this manner, he wrote the 
following commentaries which have come down to our day : 
The Samanta-pdsadika , regarded by some as his most 
important work. It is a voluminous compilation, dealing with 
the Vinaya texts, and he says he wrote it before all others 
because the Vinaya forms the foundation of the Buddhist 
faith . 1 Apart from its value as a commentary to explain the 
i P.T.S. Ed., p. 1, v. 5. 



BUDDHAGHOSA 95 

rules of morality, etc., embodied in the Vinaya , it contains 
a great mass of social, political, moral, religious, and 
philosophical history of Ancient India. 1 The work was trans- 
lated into Chinese quite soon after it was written, and the 
Chinese translation, made by a monk named Safighabhadra 
in a.d. 489 (according to Nariman), 2 exists to this day. In 
Ceylon itself several tlkds have been written on this work at 
various times, and they will be referred to in their proper 
places ; several of them still survive. 

His other commentary on the Vinaya is the Kahklid- 
iritaram on the Pdlimokkha , which forms one of the books of 
the Vinaya-Pitaka , and contains certain rules of discipline 
for members of the Order, in such form as could easily be 
committed to memory by them. There exists a Sinhalese 
glossary on this work, written several centuries ago. 3 

These books were followed by commentaries on the four 
Nikdyas in succession : the Suma hgala-vildnrii on the 
Dtgha-Nikdya , written in three parts, showing us 
Buddhaghosa’s encyclopaedic learning at its best, and com- 
posed in language less confused than that of his other com- 
mentaries, the Papanca-sudam on the Majjhima , the 
Sarattha-ppalcasirn on the Samyutta and the Manoratha-puram 
on the Anguttara-Nikaya. In the introductory verses to each 
of these books he gives the circumstances in which, and names 
the scholars at whose instigation, he undertook and carried 
out the work. In addition to these he is also said to have com- 
piled commentaries on three books of the Khuddaka-Nikaya — 
the Khuddaka-pdtha, the Sutta-nipata, and the Dhamma-pada . 
The commentary on the first two divisions is called the 
Paramattha-jotikd. 

Some doubts have been expressed by various scholars as 
to the authenticity of. the tradition which ascribes the 
Dhamma-pada-aUhakathd to Buddhaghosa. 4 Not a few scholars 

1 Law, p. 77. 

* Nariman, Buddhist Literature, see Index. 

* Le Zoysa, p. 7. 

4 e.g. Burlingame in his translation (Yale University Series). 



96 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


are of opinion that the work is modern and that the author was 
a later Buddhaghosa (Culla-Btiddhagkosa), who obtained his 
materials from the same source as the Sinhalese Saddhamma- 
ratanavaU , written by Mahd-Thera Dhammasena in the 
thirteenth century . 1 At the end of the commentary we find 
the following colophon : “ Vipula - visuddha - buddhind 

Buddhaghoso ’ ti garuhi gahita-ndmadheyyena katdyam 
Dhamma-padassa aitha-vannand .” (“ This commentary on 
the Dhamma-pada was written by Buddhaghosa of emin- 
ent and lustrous knowledge.”) This may well refer to the 
great commentator. In a Sinhalese work, the Pujdvaliya , 
it is mentioned that he wrote the work at the request of King 
Sirinivasa and his minister Mahanigama . 2 This Sirinivasa 
was undoubtedly Mahanama, and the Samanta -pasadika tells 
us that Buddhaghosa wrote in the Ganthakara Parivena built 
by the great Minister Mahanigama and that on other 
occasions he lived in the palace built by the king himself, this 
palace forming part of the monastery at the Maha-Vihara 
where Buddhaghosa came to study the Sinhalese commen- 
taries. At the end of theDhammapadatthakatha is a stanza : — 
“ Vihdre adhirdjena karitamhi katannund 
Pdsdde Sirikuddassa ranno viharata mayd” 

(“ By me residing in the palace of King Sirikudcla in the 
monastery built by the grateful king.”) Sirikudda is apparently 
only another name for Sirinivasa (Mahanama ). 3 

The chief stumbling block is the difference in language and 
style between this work and the other commentaries which 
undoubtedly belong to Buddhaghosa. Compared, for 
instance, with the commentary on the Majjhima Nikaya, the 
Dhammapadatthakathd resembles more the Jataka com- 
mentary than anything else. At best it seems to be the work 
of a compiler who collected and edited sermons and stories, 

1 Wickremasinghe, p. II. 

* Colombo Ed., 1897, p. 16. 

3 Vide D. B. Jayatilaka, Introd. to the Sikhavalarida (Colombo Ed., 
1923), p. vii. 



BUDDHAGHOSA 


97 


not inventing new ones, but merely presenting in literary 
Pali what existed already as folklore ; and the arrangement 
is different even from the Sutta-nipata, commentary. But 
this difference may possibly be due to the difference in 
the subject-matter of the various texts taken up for comment. 
“ The Dhammapada, unlike the great Nikayas, which consist 
of prose and gathas, is entirely made up of gathas without 
the prose setting, which, in the Nikayas, is supplied in the 
text itself. Here, therefore, was the necessity of bringing it 
into line with those canonical works.” 1 Hugh Nevill in the 
Introduction to his Catalogue ventures upon the view that 
this work did not belong to the three great atthakathds (Maha, 
Paccarl , and Kururidi) which Buddhaghosa studied, but merely 
represented the popular legends accepted before the Alu- 
vihara redaction, and were either not then treated as of 
canonical value, or accepted by rival sects without dispute, 
and therefore not found necessary to be specially set down in 
writing. In Buddhaghosa’s time they had acquired con- 
siderable authority, and they were translated by him and 
arranged at his discretion. It may be quite possible, Nevill says, 
that the legends had their origin in India or elsewhere and that 
they did not belong to Mahinda’s school ; this may account 
for the different method of treatment. Where different versions 
are given of the same story , 2 the responsibility belongs not 
to Buddhaghosa, but to the different accounts from which he 
obtained his information. 

A translation of the Dhammapadatthakatha, called the 
Saddhamma-ratandvaU was made during the thirteenth 
century a.d. by an Elder named Dhammasena . 3 All the stories, 

1 Law, op. cit., p. 81. 

1 See Hardy, JRAS., 1898, pp. 741-94, for examples of such different 
versions. That different recensions of even the Dhamma-pada existed is 
shown by a comparison of the Pali work with the Chinese. See Norman, 
Dhamma-pada Commty ., i, pt. ii, pp. 15-16. 

* Dhammasena is mentioned in the Nikaya-saAgraha with authors such 
as Vilgammula Anuruddha, who lived in the reign of, or just before, 
Pantfita Parakrama B&hu (a.d. 1236-71). See Wickremasinghe, Catalogue , 
for fuller description, Nos. 13 and 14. 


7 



98 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


save quite a few, are taken from the Dhamma-pada com- 
mentary and follow more or less the same order. The greater 
part is merely a translation of the Pali original, though, as is 
stated in the Introduction to the book, it does not follow the 
text throughout. Unlike the author of the Pali commentary, 
the translator does not quote the actual words of the 
Dhamma-pada , but in most instances gives the substance of 
the aphorisms by way of introductions to each illustrative 
tale. 

Besides these works Buddhaghosa also wrote a series of 
commentaries on the books of the Abhidhamma-Pitaka . The 
best known of them is the Attha-sdlim on the Dhamma - 
sahgam , said to have been composed in India . 1 The work 
contains more than one distinct reference to the Samanta - 
pasadikd , 2 showing that it was written or at least completed 
after the Vinaya commentary. Mrs. Rhys Davids suggests 3 4 
that, though it was written at Gaya, it was later subjected to 
a complete revision by the author after his studies in Ceylon. 
This supposition is strengthened by the fact that in the body 
of the work he quotes from or refers to many works including, 
as Mrs. Rhys Davids has shown, the Ceylonese Atthakatha s 
and the Visuddhi-magga . The commentary on the Vibhaiiga 
is named Sammolia-vitiodam , and the exegeses on the other 
five books are collectively called the Panca-ppakaran - 
atthakatha (sometimes also Paramattha-dlpan 7 i)A 

Such in brief was the nature of Buddhaghosa s vast labours, 
accomplished single-handed with a talent as wonderful as 
his industry was extraordinary. The Buddhaghosuppatti 
tells us 6 that when Buddhaghosa had completed his recension 
of this whole library of books expository of the Tipitaka, 
a bonfire “ as high as seven average-sized elephants ” was 


1 M.V., xxx vi, v. 225, and Sasana-varfisa (P.T.S.), p. 31. 

2 pp. 97 and 98. 

3 Manual Bud . Psy. Eth p. xxvii. 

4 Do Zoysa, Catalogue, p. 3, and NevilTs Catalogue . 



BUDDHAGHOSA 


99 


made of the Sinhalese translations which Mali in da gave to 
Ceylon three centuries earlier, and which had later been added 
to in that land. We need not take this statement as 
being literally true. All that it probably means is that in 
his own time, and certainly to-day, they were completely 
superseded by Buddhaghosa's compilations ; he had eclipsed 
all others. As a stanza in the Buddhaghosuppatti has it : 1 

“ Buddhaghose patiff haute jmnvuvantd pi ye jana 
Tesam pahndpabhd natthi Rdhu-mukhe va candimd ” 

(*‘ When Buddhagliosa is by, even wise men lose the lustre of 
their wisdom, like the moon in the Dragon's mouth.”) 

It is a hopeless task to inquire into what has become of 
the old Sinhalese commentaries : no trace of them now' exists. 
“ The early diffusion of Pali among the priesthood and the 
learned laity, and the subsequent introduction of Sanskrit 
literature and Sanskrit verbiage into the once pure Elu, must 
have so choked that language that it died out early and its 
memory was cherished only by the lovers of Parnassus. For 
all religious and philosophic purposes Pali and Sanskritized 
Sinhalese began to be used from a very early period and 
continue to be used to this day." 2 

So much has been written on the value of Buddhaghosa's 
labours that very little need be said here. Perhaps 
Buddhagliosa ’s greatest value to the modern historian lies in 
the very limitations of his mental powers, such as originality 
and independence of thought, wdiioli were imposed upon him 
by his extreme reverence for all that was traditional. For him 
there was no development in the doctrine and all the texts 
w*ere the words of the Master himself. For the correct under- 
standing of that doctrine, how r ever, Buddhaghosa’s work is 
indispensable. Many points of Buddhist teaching and many 
cruces of philosophy w'ould be unintelligible to us but for his 

1 p. 66. 

* JJRAS. (N.S.), vol. v, p. 301. 



100 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


expositions. Though his philology is sometimes crude 1 * and 
often fanciful, yet his notes on rare words are invaluable and 
often conclusive. “ For nearly fifteen centuries,” said 
Sir Robert (now Lord) Chalmers on one occasion, 
" Buddhaghosa has remained the unchallenged expounder 
of Buddhism for the Thera-vadin , or Southern School. In 
the evolution of Buddhist thought he marked an epoch ; 
he restated thought for his own day and stereotyped it ever 
since for the orthodox . . . Viewed as a scholar rather than as 
a philosopher, there is ample evidence in his writings to show 
that he was a critical scholar . . . From the point of view of 
textual criticism his help is invaluable to modern editions 
of Pitaka texts ; for through Buddhaghosa ’s records they 
can base their text on the best manuscripts which existed 
1,500 years ago ; and, where Buddhaghosa’s reading is 
certain, it is an almost unerring guide in these later days. We 
have to get back through Buddhaghosa’s commentary to his 
text of the canon and beyond this we can never hope to 
penetrate in restoring the Pitaka texts as first written down 
at Alu-vihara.” * 

It is true, no doubt, as Professor Rhys Davids has told us, 
“ that the method adopted in his commentaries follows very 
closely the method of those much older ones preserved in the 
canon, but the literary skill with which he uses it is a great 
advance, more especially in lucidity, over older documents.” 3 * * * * * 9 
The stories he gathered together in his writings from various 
sources and the expositions he gave with the help of his 

1 It is sometimes asked whether Buddhaghosa knew Sanskrit. A 

Mahd-kdvya in Sanskrit on the life of the Buddha, called the Padya - 

cuddmani is sometimes attributed to the great exegete (Law, p. 85 foil.). 

Perhaps his reluctance to use Sanskrit in his etymology was due to the 

suspicion with which that language is viewed in defining terms of Buddhist 

philosophy and its traditional taboo for scriptural purposes. But the 
evidence yielded by his etymological exegeses is heavily against his having 

known, or at least been proficient in it. Cf. Dr. Stede, Pali Dictionary , 

Afterword. 

9 Cey. Antiq. and Lit Reg., vol. i, pt. i, p. 2. 

9 Enc. Bel. Eth ., vol. ii, p. 887. 



BUDDHAGHOSA 


101 


very wide, if not profound, erudition constitute a thesaurus, 
preserving for later generations invaluable information of the 
social customs, commercial values, folklore, ceremonies, and 
beliefs of the ancient world. “ It may readily be granted,” 
observed Mrs. Rhys Davids, in a critical study of one of his 
works , 1 “ that Buddhaghosa must not be accepted en bloc . . . 
to me his work is not only highly suggestive, but also a mine 
of historic interest. To put it aside is to lose the historical 
perspective of the course of the Buddhist philosophy.” 

But even greater than this, for Ceylon, was the immense 
influence which his writings exerted on the development of 
the literary faculty among the Sinhalese Buddhists. The 
impetus he gave to Pali learning was very great, and we shall 
see in our next chapter how it resulted in enriching the 
literature of the island. 

1 Op.eit., p. xxxi. (Jf. her ed. Visuddhi-magga, Afterword; and Foreword 
to Dr. B. C. Law's Buddhaghosa. 



CHAPTER VI 
Buddhaghosa’s Successors 


FT1HE description, quoted from the Maha-vamsa in the last 
chapter, of the life and work of Buddhaghosa might 
cause us to think that he wrote commentaries on the whole 
Tijritaka ; but we know now that this statement is a poetic 
exaggeration. There is no doubt that Buddhaghosa’s ambition 
was to write a complete recension of Buddhist commentarial 
literature, but he was unable to achieve his aspirations com- 
pletely. He was compelled to leave Ceylon before his task 
could be finished ; the reason for his departure we do not 
know ; it may have been failing health ; he had laboured 
ceaselessly for years, engaged in hard, strenuous work, and 
his spirit, indomitable as it was, had to give way to his weaker 
body ; or it may be that his teacher was dying — Revata, 
who had shown the young enthusiast the way to a most fruit- 
ful life — and Buddhaghosa was summoned to his bedside ; 
or after many years of exile undertaken for a noble cause the 
motherland may have called to him with a voice that would 
accept no denial ; he was growing old, and he felt it was but 
right that India should see the fruits of his work before he 
died ; for it was in India’s cause that he first went out to 
Ceylon, that he might make a summary of the Sinhalese 
Atthakathd for the use of Indian monks, who were 
handicapped for want of such help in understanding the 
Dhamma. 

Whatever the reason may have been, Buddhaghosa left 
Ceylon while some of the commentaries remained yet unedited 
and untranslated into Pali. But others were forthcoming to 
complete the task thus left unfinished. Even in his own time 
Buddhaghosa was but one, the greatest, it is true, but only one, 
of several who were labouring, fired by the same purpose, 
enthusiastic in the same cause — that of writing the com- 
mentarial literature in Pali. 



buddhaghosa’s successors 


103 


Buddhaghosa’s fame spread far and wide, quite soon after 
the compilation of his monumental V isuddhi-magga ; in his 
own lifetime his works were being assiduously studied in more 
than one country — in mid-India, in Ceylon, in unlettered 
Thaton, and lastly in Burma, where, as some believe, he 
spent the latter part of his life. He established the pre- 
eminence of Ceylon over all other countries in the genuineness 
of its traditional heritage of the Buddha’s religion, and justified 
her claim to be the home of the orthodox Thera-vdda of his 
day. Scholars were thus attracted to the island for purposes 
of study in even larger numbers than heretofore, and their 
visits, as we shall see later, resulted in the production of works 
of much value. 

But above all ^stands the service which Buddhaghosa 
rendered to the development of the Pali language. In place of 
the archaic, stilted, sometimes halting Sutta speech, almost 
Puritanical in its simplicity, groping about often for want of 
words to express ideas and conceptions then fresh to the minds 
of the users of this or that dialect, Buddhaghosa left behind 
him in his many works a language rich in its vocabulary, 
flexible in its use, elegant in structure, often intricate in the 
verbiage of its constructions, and capable of expressing all 
the ideas that the human mind had then conceived. Sonorous, 
long-winded sentences took the place of the direct simple 
composition of the Sultas. The Oriental mind, fascinated by 
the ornamentation of its structure, soon began to use much 
more extensively than before the Pali language now grown 
into adolescence. And we find one author after another 
beginning his works with the proud boast that he was compiling 
his works for the benefit of learners in Pali ; in Magadhi, 
that language “ which is the root of all speech, sweet to the 
taste, pleasant to the ear, and delightful to the heart ”. 1 
In Ceylon itself, where so far the native writers of the island 
had contented themselves with composing their books in the 
language of the land, they now deliberately sought to super- 
1 B&pa-stddhi, Introduction. 



104 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


sede that language by the cultivation of their new love — 
Magadhi or Pali. They were also undoubtedly attracted by the 
prospect of appealing to a wider public through Pali than was 
possible through Sinhalese. It seems to have caught their 
fancy : they were like children fascinated by a new and clever 
toy, in the manipulation of which they had acquired more 
than average proficiency. Pali made rapid strides as the 
cultivated literary language of the wise, and mastery over 
its form grew with use till it resulted in such limpid, lucid 
verse as we find in the Maha-vcuma. 

Material prosperity is the handmaid of literary development, 
as of all artistic work ; and the century that followed 
Buddhaghosa*s arrival was an era of peace and happiness to 
the people. The Malabar invasions had ceased, at least for the 
time being, and the islanders were left free to devote them- 
selves to the pursuits of industry and skill. The annals of this 
period are replete with accounts of Anuradhapura’s growth — 
its rich endowments of temples, lands and gardens, main- 
tained at the nation s cost, of hospitals and playgrounds, of 
granaries and storehouses, of aqueducts for carrying water 
into the city, and numerous other works for the public benefit. 

The city had grown in strength and power and splendour. 
Fa Hsien, who visited the island during this period, has left 
us a graphic account of what he saw and heard during his visit. 
He tells us of royal residences, monastic edifices and dagobas, 
all enclosed within walls of great strength and shut in by. 
massive gates, and of the outer city, set apart for the common 
people, who carried on the business life of the capital, divided 
into various quarters, and inhabited by provision dealers 
and drapers, artisans and goldsmiths, with shops for the sale 
of every description of goods. The parks were maintained for 
the growth of innumerable flowers, solely for the decoration 
of temples and dagobas, and for the ornamentation of the 
streets of the great city on festal days, when the entire 
population gave themselves up to rejoicing and merry-making. 
They presented a brilliant spectacle, one unbroken vista of 



buddhaghosa’s successors 105 

holiday-makers in their hundreds and thousands, garbed in 
festive attire, walking along the long, winding highways 
bestrewn with black and white sand, and flanked by festoons 
of bright-hued flowers, while the huge forms of gaily 
caparisoned elephants passed in slow' procession to the chief 
dagoba with its myriad garlands of the gayest blossoms, 
resplendent in the tropical sunshine. 1 

In the presence of such contentment and prosperity, con- 
.fined to their island-home, and therefore free from endless 
frontier wars and from the difficulties and anxieties that trade 
produces upon society in general, the people found in the 
cultivation of letters not only a necessity, but also their chief 
delight. Each succeeding sovereign interested in the 
people’s welfare rendered them most valuable service in this 
respect, and, whilst their own intellectual development was 
nearest to their hearts, that of their subjects was not neglected. 
The monasteries served as schools for the growth of Buddhist 
culture, and the monks and the nuns acted as the religious 
instructors. 

By this time the art of w r riting had been fully developed ; 
the difficulty of finding a cheap, easily accessible material, 
durable enough for w r riting had been solved by the discovery 
of the ola-leaf, made of the dry shoots of the talipot palm, 
and we need therefore not be surprised that a notable array 
of authors followed in the footsteps of Buddhaghosa, and 
carried on the work which he had begun and continued in so 
masterly a manner. 

First among them in chronological order was Buddhadatta. 
The Gcmdha-vamsa 2 puts him next in order to Buddhaghosa. 
There is an interesting account given in the Buddhaghos- 
ujypatti 8 of a meeting between the two scholars. Buddhadatta 
was already in Ceylon before Buddhaghosa had made up his 
mind to make a summary of the Sinhalese commentaries ; 


* The Travels of Fa Hsien , Giles, pp. 66 foil. 

* G.F., p. 60. 

* Ed. Gray, pp. 49-61. 



106 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


but he had to leave the island without accomplishing the object 
which had brought him there. And on the very day when 
Buddhadatta left Ceylon Buddhaghosa is said to have taken 
ship for Anuradhapura. After three days the two ships 
passed near each other, according to the legend, through 
the influence of Sakka ; the meeting of the monks was, 
therefore, a dramatic one. They introduced themselves to 
each other. Buddhaghosa announced the purpose of his 
journey. “ I am returning from there,” said Buddhadatta, 
“after having written the Jindlankdra , and the Danta- 
dhdt u -bodh i-va msa , but not the attliakatha s and the fika s ; 
if you render the teachings of the Master into Magadhi from 
Sinhalese, write out the commentaries of the three Pitakas” 
He also gave Buddhaghosa his iron stylus, myrobalan and a 
stone, and added : “ If you have trouble in the eyes or pain 
in the back, rub this myrobalan on the stone and apply it 
and your pain will assuredly disappear." Buddhaghosa had 
evidently already heard of Buddhadatta ; for he is said to 
have praised the J inalaukdra — “ Your book is very deep and 
difficult for the unwise to understand.” “ 1 came to the 
island,” replied Buddhadatta, “ to write out the teaching of 
the Master from Sinhalese into Magadhi ; but I shall not live 
much longer. Do you therefore accomplish the task ; and, 
when your commentaries are finished, send them on to me, 
that I may summarize your labours.” Whatever we may 
think of this description of the meeting of the two teachers' 
in mid-ocean, there is no reason to disbelieve the statement 
that a meeting did take place. 

The facts known about Buddhadatta are very few. At the 
end of his book, the Vinaya -vinicchaya , we are told that it 
was written by Buddhadatta of Uragapura (Uragapurena 
Buddhadattena racito' yam), and the same appears at the close 
of the Abhidhammavatara. The Vinaya-vinicchaya colophon 
gives us the further information “ by the great exegetist of 
Tambapapfli ’ 9 ( Tambapanniyena parama-veyyakaranena ) . 

In explaining this the author of the fika tells us that Uragapura 



buddhaghosa’s successors 


107 


was a city in the south of India and that Buddhadatta was 
born in the Cola kingdom situated in the Kaveri 1 : but he 
entered the Order at the Maha-Vihara at Anuradhapura, 
and therefore belonged to the Maha-Vihara fraternity . 2 
Both the Abhidhammavatara and the Vinaya-vinicchaya , 
however, were written in India, probably after his return 
there ; for the colophons tell us that he wrote in the country 
of Cola, at Bhuta-mangala-gama in the monastery built by 
Venhudasa, and that the author's royal patron was king 
Accutavikkama . 3 It thus appears that he resided for some 
time in Ceylon, and longer, perhaps, in South India. 

His chief works are the Abhidhammavatara and the Vinaya- 
vinicchaya. The Vinaya-vinicchaya tlkd confirms the account 
given in the Buddhaghosuppatti of the meeting of the two 
scholars and adds that Buddhaghosa kept his promise to 
send Buddhadatta copies of his commentaries. It also says, 
further, that Buddhadatta read them and summarized the 
Abhidhamma commentary in the Abhidhammavatara and the 
Vinaya exposition in the Vinaya-vinicchaya. 

As its name implies, the Abhidhammavatara is an intro- 
duction to the study of Buddhist philosophy. There is much 
similarity between it and the Visuddhi-magga , and this lends 
colour to the tradition which makes it a concise summary of 
Buddhaghosa’s works. At any rate, we are quite safe in 
assuming that they drew their materials from the same 
sources. “ It is probably right to conclude,” says Mrs. Rhys 
Davids, “ that they both were but handing on an analytical 
formula which had evolved between their own time and that 
of the final closing of the Abhidhamma-Pitaka” 4 They 
often use the same similes (e.g. the simile of the blind man and 
the lame helping each other to walk, to define nama and rupa). 

In one respect, at least, his exposition of the Abhidhamma 

1 Aung ( JPTS ., 1910, p. 123) puts the Coja province in Ceylon, east of 
Anuradhapura, but gives no reason for doing so. 

* Abhidhammavatara , P.T.S. Ed., Introd., pp. xii, foil. 

* Ibid., colophon and V inaya-vicchaya, colophon. 

4 Buddhist Psychology , p. 179. 



108 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


is better than that of Buddhaghosa. Thus, whereas 
Buddhaghosa expounds his psychology in terms of the five- 
aggregate division, Buddhadatta opens his scheme with the 
fourfold division of the Compendium : mind, mental properties, 
material quality, and Nibbana. . . . His work is, mostly, in 
metrical Pali, but he stops at times to supply his own prose 
commentary. Already in his works, in place of the usual 
numerical and often, to us, arid analyses, we detect traces of 
an advance in synthesis, e.g. the doctrine of function 
(kieca) and of process (pavatti). 1 

There is no doubt that Buddhadatta’s work marked a 
further advance in many ways in the study of the Abhidhamma . 
His diction is very often less involved and ambiguous than 
Buddhaghosa ’s, his style less discursive and more graphic, 
his vocabulary is extraordinarily rich, and he obviously 
profited by the labours of the earlier and yet in many ways the 
greater commentator. The work has been held in high 
esteem from ancient times and is extensively used both in 
Ceylon and in Burma. 2 Two tikas on it exist in Ceylon, 
the older by Vacissara Mahasami, of the Maha-Vihara, and the 
later by Sumangala, pupil of the scholar named Sariputta. 

Buddhadatta’s other book on the Abhidhamma , the Rupd - 
rupa-vibhaga , does not, at present, exist in Ceylon. His 
well-known work on the Vinaya , the V inaya-vinicchaya, is 
sometimes (e.g. in the Saddhamma-sangaha , ix, 30) attributed 
to an author named Buddha-Slha. But the colophon to the 
book definitely states that Buddhadatta was the author and 
that he dedicated it to his pupil Buddha-Slha. 8 It is a 
moderately large work and a glossary has been 
published in Sinhalese in quite recent years by a monk of 
the South of Ceylon, Dhirananda by name. 4 The Vinaya - 
vinicehaya is now usually found, bound together with its 

1 Cf. Buddhist Psychology , p. 179. 

* This and the Rupa rupavi bhaga form two of the nine classical summaries 
of the Abhidhamma in Burma (Little Finger Manuals or Lt-han). 

9 So does the Gandha-varjisa, p. 40. 

4 Galle, 1864. 



109 


buddhaghosa’s successors 

supplementary volume, the Uttara-vinicchaya (also a com- 
mentary on the Vinaya) dedicated (according to the Gandha - 
vamsa , p. 40) to another pupil, Sahkhapala. 1 Vacissara wrote 
a commentary to both works in the thirteenth century ; but 
both Vinicchayas and their tikds have been largely superseded 
by Sariputta’s monumental work, the V inaya-saiigaha, 
written in the twelfth century a.d. (q.v.). An older tiled on 
the Vinaya-vinicchaya also exists, by one Revata Thera, 
who wrote a commentary on the Sinhalese Khuddha-Sikkha, 
and who lived probably towards the end of the eleventh 
century a.d. 

A Ceylon tradition attributes to Buddhadatta the author- 
ship of two other works — the MadhuraUha-vilasini , 2 and the 
Jindlankdra. The former is a commentary on the Buddha - 
vamsa , one of the books of the Khuddaka-Nikaya, and is a 
compilation of legends dealing with the lives of Gotama, 
when he practised the Paramitd during the regimes of twenty- 
four previous Buddhas. The commentary follows very closely 
the method of Buddhaghosa’s works, showing that the 
author was quite familiar with the great exegetist’s writings. 
Mr. Wickremasinghe, perhaps struck with this similarity 
in the method of treatment, seems inclined to believe that the 
author of the Buddha-varnsa commentary was distinct from 
the Buddhadatta under discussion. 3 But we saw above that 
Buddhadatta’s expositions resemble Buddhaghosa’s in many 
ways, and I . therefore can see no reason for separating the two 
authors. The Pujdvaliya of the thirteenth century 4 mentions 
the Bitddhavamsatthakathd as among Buddhadatta’s works, 5 
and the Ceylon tradition is, I find, supported by the Burmese 
authors as well. 6 

1 Ed. by Rev. A. P. Buddhadatta, for the P.T.S. 

* Sometimes also called Madhurattha-pakdsini (De Zoysa, p. 2). 

* Catalogue , p. xii. 

4 Colombo Ed., p. 169. 

* The A bhidhammartha-aatigraha Artha-kathd given in the list, evidently 
refers to the Ruparupa-vibhaga, See also A bhidhammavaiara (P.T.S.). 

4 Law, Buddhaghosa , p. 96, and Sdsanorvawsa, p. 33. 



110 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


Even more obscure is the authorship of the Jindlankara, 
It is a Pali poem of 250 verses, containing a narrative of the 
Buddha's life, written in brilliant rhythmical cadences and 
elegant language, with a large variety of versification. Some 
of the stanzas show traces of artificiality in construction, 1 
with internal rhymes, alliterations and other such rhetorical 
devices. Gray attributes its authorship to Buddharakkhita, 
“ who is stated to have been born in Ceylon in the 117th year 
of the Nirvana of the Buddha, i.e. 426 b.c. His birthplace was 
Rohana, and it appears that he was at the head of a con- 
gregation of priests in Colikatambarattha (afterwards 
Tambamani), the maritime western division of Ceylon . . . 
With the inducements to missionary work in Vijaya’s domain 
our author must have joined the Church, and, as an outcome 
of his devotion to Pali studies, composed the Jindlankara ” 2 
He further states that a tikd on the work exists written by 
Buddhadatta, “ contemporary of Buddhaghosa, the great 
commentator,” with which the text has been embodied, and’ 
“ which, as a storehouse of much information in connexion 
with the life and teachings of the Buddha, is held in high 
appreciation by native scholars”. The Gandha-vamsa , how- 
ever, attributes the Jindlankara itself to Buddhadatta and 
its tikd to Buddharakkhita. 3 De Zoysa follows the Gandha- 
vamm with regard to the authorship of the work. 4 It is very 
rare in Ceylon and is not to be found in any of the old Temple 
Libraries ; whatever copies do exist in the island are, in my 
opinion, importations from Burma. I have not heard whether 
it is studied to any extent in Ceylon. Nor is it referred to in 
the passage from the Pujdvaliya mentioned above. The Ceylon 
tradition regarding Buddhadatta does not seem to make any 
mention of such a work by him. The language of the book 
makes the date assigned to it by Gray preposterous. Gray 

1 Gray, Jiruilaiikara, Introd., p. 10. 

* p. 7 foil. 

3 pp. 69 and 72. 

4 p. 7. 



buddhaghosa’s successors 


111 


evidently feels so himself ; but he tries to explain it away. 
“ ft contains/' he says, “ stanzas in the style of Kalidasa, 
Bharavi, and Magha.” But nothing could destroy his faith 
in the author’s existence four centuries before Christ. “ If he 
(the author) is to be looked upon as an imitator of Sanskrit 
writers, the authors of Raghu-vamsa and Kirdtdrjuriiya must 
have flourished, not after the commencement of the Christian 
era, but at least four centuries before. Several parallels 
may be noticed between the artificial stanzas in their works 
and those occurring in the Jindlankdra 1 

Some of the varieties of versification found here are not met 
with in Pali books till a quite late period, when the study of 
Sanskrit had come to influence Pali to a large extent. Nor is 
there any justification, except the postscript which Gray found 
attached to the copy of his fikd 2 for believing that 
Buddhadatta wrote the fikd. Be that as it may, it is quite 
certain, if the evidence of language and construction be of 
any value in determining the date of an author, that the 
Jindlankdra , as we have it now, was a work not earlier than 
the sixth or seventh century a.i>. We do not know who wrote 
it, nor who was the author of its (Ikd. It is quite possible 
that there was a much earlier work by the same name ; the 
life of the Buddha was a favourite subject for verse (e.g. the 
Buddha-vamsa itself) ; but such a •work, if it existed, is now 
irretrievably lost, and only a traditional reference to it remains. 
I am inclined to believe that the confusion between 
Buddhadatta (if that was his name), who wrote the com- 
mentary on the Jindlankdra , and Buddhadatta, the con- 
temporary of Buddhaghosa, was due to the fact that the 
latter, too, had written a commentary on the life of the 
Buddha, namely the Madhurattha-vildsini on the Buddha- 
vamsa* The author of the J indlahkara-tikd w’as comparatively 

1 pp. 10 and 11. 

2 Mandalay MS. 

8 I am strengthened in this opinion by another fact mentioned by Gray, 
viz., that the Jinalanhara is regarded in Burma as an atthakatha, a com- 
mentary. Introd., p. 10. 



112 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


unknown, and kis work was grafted on to the more famous 
scholar. Such instances are not unknown in the history of 
literature. 1 

To this period also undoubtedly belongs Dhammapala, 
author of a large number of commentaries. It has sometimes 
been suggested that, as the name is a very common one among 
Buddhists, ancient and modern, there has possibly been con- 
fusion of several authors of the same name by writers on 
Buddhist ecclesiastical history. In the Gandha-varnsa four 
scholars of the name of Dhammapala are enumerated in a 
chapter entitled “ On the native places of the scholars ” 
(pp. 66 seq.). Two of them are mentioned in a series of ten 
scholars, all natives of India. The first is distinguished by the 
name of Acariya (the teacher), and is said to have 
written fourteen books (p. 69). His name follows that of 
Buddhadatta and that of Ananda, the author of a ilka on 
Buddhaghosa’s Abhidhamma commentaries. The second is 
called Culla-Dhammapala (Dhammapala the Lesser) to 
distinguish him from his greater namesake ; he was the senior 
pupil of Ananda, and is the author of Sacca-sankhepa . A 
third is mentioned between Sangkarakkhita, author of the 
Vuttodaya ( G.V. , pp. 61, and 70, and Sas ., p. 34), and 
Anuruddha (author of the AbhidJiammattka-saiigaha), and 
therefore belongs to about the twelfth century. A fourth 
Dhammapala belongs to a group of scholars who are said to 
have written at Arimaddana in Burma (G.V., p. 67, and 
Mrs. Bode’s Introd., p. 3). It is the first with whom we are 
concerned here, distinguished as the Acariya Dhammapala. 
The others will be dealt with, each in his proper place. The 
Sdsana-vamsa 2 records that he dwelt at Badaratittha 8 in the 

1 e.g. the Jatalcatthakatha. It is interesting that in the list of works 
of Buddhadatta given in 0. V., p. 59, no mention is made of the J indlaiikara ; 
on p. 72 occurs the name Buddhadatta, author of a tiled to the J indlaiikara, 
also, apparently, called the J indlaiikara. I suggest that the confusion in 
authorship is duo to the identity of the two names, and that, what we 
have now is a text extracted from the fika. 

* p. 33. 

3 Sometimes spelled Padaratittha , e.g., in the Sasana-varjisa. 



buddhaghosa’s successors 


113 


Damila kingdom near Ceylon. He was, therefore, very 
probably Tamil by birth, and wrote in S. India. Badaratittha 
is on the south-east coast of India, just a little to the south of 
Madras. His works show that he was a native of Kanci-pura 
(Conjevaram). We cannot be sure as to the time in which he 
flourished, but it is generally agreed that he was slightly 
posterior to Buddhaghosa. Neither scholar makes any 
reference to the other by name 1 or by their works ; 
but considering that Buddhaghosa's works cover the chief 
portions of the Buddhist scriptures, the Four Nikdyas, 
the Abhidhamma-lHtaka , and the Vinaya - Pitaka , it is most 
probable that Dhammapala came later. Else he. by no means of 
lesser intellect, would surely have attempted the exposition 
of the more important works of the canon, e.g. the Four 
Nikdyas. The Khuddaka Nikdya , which formed the special 
subject of Dhammapfila’s study, was admittedly of minor 
importance compared with the rest of the Satta Pit-aka . 
This supposition is further strengthened by the fact that he 
is credited with having written a Ilka (called the Paramattha- 
manjusa) on Buddhaghosa's Visuddh i-magga . 2 He also wrote 
a sub-commentary on Buddhaghosa's exposition of the 
four Nikdyas. 

That he studied at the Maha-vihara in Ceylon, whether he 
wrote his books there or not, is undoubted, because he states 
in his works (e.g. the Introduction to the commentaries on 
the Peta-vatthu) that he follows the traditional interpretation 
of texts as handed down in the Maha-vihara, and we know 
from Buddhaghosa’s mission to Ceylon that the Thera- vada 
commentaries, then studied by the Maha-vihara fraternity 
in Ceylon, were not available in India. It is quite likely that 
he had the advantage of studying the Tamil commentaries 
(of which we know that at least two existed) as well. In a 

1 But there are traces in Dhammapala ’s works, of several borrowings, 
evidently from Buddhaghosa — especially the Atlha-mlinl and the Dhp.A . ; 
see Hardy's Introd. to the Netti, xv-xvii. 

* Aung, JPTS. t 1910., p. 121. This tlka is not much used in Ceylon, 
but seems to be extensively used in Burma. 


8 



114 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


translation of a book of travels by the Chinese traveller 
Hiuan-Tsang, 1 some interesting details are given of 
Dhammapala’s life. Hiuan-Tsang visited Kahci-pura, the 
capital of the Tamil country, in a.d. 640. The monks then 
told him that the famous Dhammapala was born there. 
“ He was a boy of good natural parts, which received great 
development as he grew up, and when he came of age a 
daughter of the king was assigned to him as wife. But on the 
night before the ceremony of marriage was to be performed, 
being greatly distressed in mind, he prayed before an image 
of the Buddha. In answer to his prayer a god bore him away 
to a mountain monastery, some hundreds of li from the 
capital. When the brethren there heard his story, they complied 
with his request and gave him ordination.” There is good 
reason to believe that this, very probably, refers to our author. 2 
The Gandha-vamsa gives a list of the works ascribed to 
Dhammapala. 3 4 Seven out of his fourteen commentaries are 
on the principal books of poetry preserved in the canon 
(Thera- and Tkeri-gdthd , Vdana , Vimdna-vatthu, and Peta- 
vatthu , Itivuttaka and Cariya-pitaka). His other works are a 
commentary on the Netti (with a tika on the same), the 
Paramattha-rmnjusa, referred to above (a commentary on the 
V isuddhi- magga ) and the LinaUha-vannand (also called the 
LinaUha-pakasini tika) on Buddhaghosa’s commentaries to 
the Four Nikayas, and another by the same name on 
J dlakatthakatkd. 4 The Gandha-vamsa also mentions a tika 
on the BuddhavainsaUhakathd and an Anu-fika on the 
Abhidhammatthakathd* These last two works are very rare ; 
in fact, I do not know of any copy existing in Sinhalese 

1 Ed. by Rhys Davids and Watters, London, 1905, vol. ii, p. 226 sq. 

s See also Hastings’ Encyclopaedia, vol. v, p. 701. 

* p. 60. 

4 O.V. , 60 and 69. The commentaries on Vdana , Itivuttaka, Vimtina - 
and Peta-vatthu, and Cariya-pitaka are collectively called Paramattha- 
dipani, or sometimes, as in Burma, Vimala-vil&sini (De Zoysa, p. 2, and 
Law, Buddhaghosa , p. 96). 



buddhaghosa’s successors 


115 


characters ; and I am inclined to believe that they are the 
result of the labours of a later author, probably an Indian or a 
Burmese Dhammapala. 

Dhammapala’s works show great learning, much exegetical 
skill, and a good deal of sound judgment. There are many 
resemblances between him and Buddhaghosa. “ It would 
seem,” says Rhys Davids , 1 “ that Dhammapala was educated 
in the same university as Buddhaghosa ... the two writers 
hold very similar views. They refer to the same authorities ; 
they have the same method of exegesis ; they have reached the 
same style in philological and etymological science and they 
both have the same lack of any knowledge of the simple 
rules of higher criticism.” Yet Dhammapala shows much 
individuality in the treatment of his subject. He confines 
himself rigidly either to questions of meanings of words or 
discussions of ethical import in his texts ; he is, however, 
not so ethically insistent as Buddhaghosa ; his style is simpler, 
less garrulous, less diffuse, and shows more of the grammarian 
and the academician than of the exegetical compilerand fanciful 
etymologist. His explanation of terms is quite clear, and shows 
an advance over Buddhaghosa ; though he was evidently 
well-read and quite well-informed, Buddhaghosa’s knowledge 
was more widely diffused and more encyclopaedic ; and the 
information we derive from his works with regard to the social, 
religious, philosophical, and moral ideas of his time, though 
considerable, is far less than that afforded by Buddhaghosa’s 
writings. “ Dhammapala’s chronicles are, for the most part, 
unduplicated in any other extant work, but, not seldom, 
they run on all fours, not only with parallel chronicles in 
Buddhaghosa’s commentaries, but also with the prose and 
framework of poems in the Sutia-nipdta or the Samyutta- 
Nikdya , ^iot to mention the Jdtaka .” 2 Often his explanations 
of episodes and their characters are, it is true, but legends 
woven out of legends, yet they represent the most ancient 

1 Hastings’ Encyd. Rel . and Ethics, vol. iv, pp. 701 foil. 

* Mrs. Rhys Davids, Psalms of the Brethren, Introd., p. xxv. 



116 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


orthodox tradition, and help us immensely in understanding 
the more archaic idiom of the original Pali. Dhammapala’s 
work was, as he states in the colophon to several of his books, 
compilations from already existing commentaries, and shows 
the importance attached at this period, in the history of 
orthodox Buddhism, to the work of re-writing in Pali the 
traditional interpretations so far handed down in local dialects, 
namely Sinhalese or Tamil. 

In his commentaries, especially to the poetic work of the 
canon, Dhammapala follows a regular scheme. First 1 comes 
an introduction to the whole collection of poems, giving the 
traditional account of how they came to be thus put together 
as one whole, then each poem is taken separately and the 
words explained philologically and exegetically. And this 
presentation of verses in a groundwork of prose-narrative is 
essentially the historical Buddhist way of imparting canonical 
poetry. Much of Dhammapala's work is but a recast, a 
re-compilation in scholastic Pali, of the older Sinhalese or 
Tamil commentarial literature. Thus we need not be surprised 
if the narratives contain much hagiographical myth; the 
exegesis is coloured by later developments of doctrine, and 
twisted by professional exigencies of edification. Yet, as 
Mrs. Rhys Davids tells us, these commentaries “ have a 
venerableness of their own, bridging over the seas of time 
between Asoka and the days of the greater scholastics to a 
greater extent than at first appears ”. 2 They contain the old 
“ talks on meaning ”, as they came down to him unbroken, 
if varied in diction, from the earlier age of his faith, and are, 
to that extent at least, of immense value. Such defects as 
he had were but the shortcomings of his age, vrhen higher 
criticism, as we now know it, was yet unborn, and when faith 
took the place of historical and scientific investigation. 

Mr. Wickremasinghe 3 includes in this period also Upasena, 

1 e.g. Pcta-vatthu commentary. 

2 Psalms of the Brethren , Introd., p. xxv. 

3 Catalogue 9 p. xii. 



buddhaghosa’s successors 


117 


author of a commentary on the Maha-Niddesa (which is 
itself a commentary) called Saddhama-ppajjotika. Nothing 
further is known about him. The Gandha-vamsa includes him 
in the list of Ceylon authors , 1 and the Sdsana-vamsa 2 
merely states that he was the author of this volume. 

His name does not occur in the list of writers who succeeded 
Buddhaghosa, given in the Nikdya-sangraha . 3 A colophon 
to the Saddhamma-ppajjotika states that it was written by 
“ Maha Thera Upasena, like unto a banner in Tambapanni ”, 
and that he followed the tradition of the Maha-vihara. It is 
a fairly long work, but distinctly inferior to the achievements 
of Dhammapala or Buddhaghosa. The author was merely 
retranslating into Pali what he found in the Ceylon com- 
mentaries and makes no attempt at originality. 

Another work of much importance, which was composed 
during the period under consideration, is the JdlakaUhakatha 
(the commentary on the Jatakas). The Jatakas belong to the 
Akhydna type of Indian literature , 4 out of which the later 
epic poems evolved. Their chief characteristic was that the 
entire story was not yet rigidly established in form, but only 
certain parts were metrically fixed and thereby secured from 
further departure from the tradition. Such parts were, 
especially, passages of direct narrative. They were bound 
together by a framework of prose, where the details of the 
situation were described, and the names of the characters 
of the story were told, the secular prose, which held the sacred 
verses intact, forming with them “ a picture, as it were, of 
wooded slopes of verdant growth, clothing the hills that tower 
relatively unchanging, above them.” 6 

The telling of legends of virtuous monarchs, valorous men 
and holy hermits was a very early custom in India. It was 
supposed to remove evil, and in the Aitareya-BrdhrmvjM 

1 pp. 66-7. 

2 p. 33. 

3 p. 23, Colombo Ed. 

* Oldenberg, JPT8. t 1910, pp. 19 foil. 

5 Mrs. Rhys Davids, Brethren , p. xxv. 



118 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


we are told that “ if those who are longing to have a son born 
to them will have the legend of ^unahsepa related to them, 
their wishes would be gratified.” 1 And the tendency to relate 
a story in order to inculcate a moral has always been a 
characteristic trait of the Indian temperament. Tradition tells 
us, therefore, that, as occasion arose, the Buddha was 
accustomed throughout his long career of teacher, to explain 
and comment on events around him by relating similar things 
that had occurred to him in his own previous births ; the 
experience of many lives was always present to him, and he 
used this 44 to point a moral and adorn a tale ”. The stories 
so told were treasured by his disciples and later gathered 
together to form the Jataka book, on which a commentary 
had been handed down, first in India and then in Ceylon. 

Whether we believe these details or not, it is recorded 
that the Jdtakas or birth-stories were recognized by 
the Master himself for purposes of teaching. Several of them 
occur in the canonical books (e.g. the Tittira Jataka in 
Cullavagga, vi, 6, 3-5, Mahdsudassana Jataka in Dlghi , 
vol. ii, 1). The Cariyd Pitaka is in reality a Jataka book giving 
in verse accounts of previous births which the Bodhisat 
had to pass through in order to acquire the ten perfections 
necessary for the attainment of the Enlightenment. So was 
the Apaddna , another of the K huddaka - Nikaya volumes, 
containing metrical episodes in the lives of recluses, resembling 
very closely the introductory tales of the Jataka commentary. 
So too was the Buddha-vamsa (the history of the Buddhas), 
giving an account of the life of Gotama, when, as Bodhisat, he 
had to receive vivarana (the declaration) at the hands of the 
twenty-four previous Buddhas. 

By the third century b.c. most of the Jdtakas were well 
known, as we can be sure from the numerous representations 
of the stories on the bas-reliefs at Sanchl and Amaravatl, 
and especially at Bharhut, which show that at that time the 
Jdtakas were widely known and were considered part of the 
1 Wintemitz, Calcutta Review , Nov., 1923, p. 130. 



buddhaghosa’s successors 


119 


sacred history of the religion. From India they came over to 
Ceylon, and there took firm hold of the imagination of the 
people. When Fa Hsien visited Ceylon in the fifth century, 1 
he witnessed the annual procession of the Tooth Relic being 
carried from Anuradhapura to Mihintale, and he describes 
how on both sides of the road were hung pictures of the 
500 different births of the Buddha, painted in different colours, 
and “ executed with such care as to make them appear 
living 

Lven to-day, among the Sinhalese, the relating of the 
Jalaka stories is a very common practice. In the Sinhalese 
homes, it is true, the fireside with which those of harsher 
climes associate story-telling, is absent, but it finds its repre- 
sentative in the little verandah or on the roadside ; and often, 
when the family have retired to rest for the night in the 
single room or verandah which generally forms the house of 
the Sinhalese peasant, one member, frequently the grand- 
father, relates stories from the JaJtaka book till the dull god 
of sleep has drawn away his audience. In the night, as the 
villagers sit guarding the ripening grain of the paddy-fields 
from the inroads of the elephant or the wild boar, these stories 
serve to pass pleasantly what, otherwise, would be a weary 
vigil, and on numerous occasions story-telling plays an 
important part. 2 

We cannot say how the Jdtakas were originally handed 
down. No one who reads them can fail to recognize that the 
verses constitute the essential element in the form adopted 
by the compilers of these stories ; but they are not verses 
which are given as quotations, extracted from some treasures 
of old lore — they are seen to have their home in the 

1 Fa Hsien, Giles' Travel , p. 71. The 73rd chap., v. 72, of the Ma ha- 
varftsa states that Parakrama-Bahu the Great erected at Polonnaruva 
a circular house, in which he might listen to the recitation of the 
Jatakas. 

* Most of the existing books of poems in Sinhalese are verse transla- 
tions of Jataka stories;. e.g. Sasada-vata , Quttila-k&vya , Kvsa-j&taJea , 
Kavya-sekhara , and, perhaps the most popular, the V essantara -j&taka. 



120 


THE PALI LITERATURE 07 CEYLON 


narrative itself, they have their value because the characters 
in the story and the Bodhisat are made to say them. 
But was the prose narrative, too, handed down or was it left 
to the judgment and the discretion of those who related the 
story ? We cannot say, but certainly the essential points of 
the story, as well as the verses, were handed down, for most 
often the latter contain no indication of the persons who 
figure in the narrative. 

The Jdtakas , as we have them now, consist of 551 stories, 
in twenty-two nipdtas or groups, roughly divided according 
to the number of verses in each story. Each story opens with 
a quotation of part of a verse, followed by a preface (called 
paccuppanna-vatthuy or story of the present), giving the 
particular circumstances in which the story was related by 
the Buddha, and this leads the Buddha to recall some past 
event ( atita-vatthu ) in the long series of his previous lives as 
Bodhisat. It ends always in a short summary where the 
Buddha identifies the different characters in the story showing 
the parallelism which runs between the two stories, and which 
constitutes their connexion (anusandhi). Every story is 
illustrated by one or more gathas, 1 uttered usually by the 
Bodhisat or sometimes by the Buddha himself, in which 
case they are called Abhisambvddha-gdlha (stanzas after 
enlightenment). This is followed by a series of short comments 
on the words of the stanzas. 

The whole collection is prefaced by a long introductory essay 
called the Niddna-Jcatha (History of the Lineage), giving the 
Buddha’s history before his birth as Siddhattha, and also 
during his last birth before he became the Awakened One. 2 

Even the most orthodox Buddhist will admit that the 

1 “ In the midst of the unmeasured indefiniteness of the prose diction 
appear formations of another kind, welded, rounded off, and gathering 
into themselves the essence of the whole/' Oldenberg, loc. cit. 

* For a fuller and more detailed account of the nature of the Jdtakattha 
Icathd see Rhys Davids' exoeUent introduction to his Buddhist Birth Stories , 
now re-edited by Mrs. Rhys Davids in Broadway Translation Series, 
London, 1924. 



buddhaghosa’s successors 


121 


present collection contains some fables, fairy-tales, “ Joe 
Millers,” and records of everyday experience, such as are in 
no way peculiar to Buddhism, but are the common property 
of the world, floating down the ages . 1 But not even the most 
critical scholar will deny that some of the stanzas and all the 
central stories are genuinely Buddhistic, and that some of the 
narratives of the Paccuppanna-vatthu contain genuine 
fragments of the life of the Buddha, and that another con- 
siderable portion, if not distinctly Buddhistic, is Indian and 
local, and has its origin and application within a limited 
range. The stories inculcate pointed, allegorical lessons of 
morality, most of them specific points of Buddhist teaching, 
and are fables only in the most general sense of the term ; 
they are full of feeling and genuine admiration for high 
standards of self-sacrifice, perseverance, justice, and correct 
valuation of pleasure and sagacity. Some have called them 
“ artistic sermons ” ready to hand, and to be preached to 
mixed audiences. Professor Kunte, in a very interesting paper 
read before the Ceylon Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society , 2 
described how such an artistic sermon is made to work. “ A 
part of a gdthd is first recited. Faith in the Buddha is thus 
awakened, and a good basis for the chant of the gdthd in 
full is thus prepared. Then, in explaining the gdthd the 
preacher shows his pow T er of erudition. The ordinary audience 
listens on, half-puzzled and half-struck by what the mind 
considers to be profound and mysterious and, moved by the 
incomprehensible, it w T orks up into the marvellous and obtains 
from this a passive intellectual enjoyment. The preacher 
proceeds with an energy of his own. The strain on the mental 
power of the audience is now at its height, when abstruse 
comments upon the gdthd are abstrusely but eloquently 
explained. This is succeeded by the narration of the simple, 
but popular, atita-vatthu . There is thus a sudden transition 

1 e.g. The Talkative Tortoise (Faust oil, 215), and The Ass in the Lion's 
Skin (Fausfcoll, 189). 

* C.B.R.A.S. Journal , vol. viii, pp. 193 foil. 



122 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


from the mysterious to the simple, from the more religious to 
the popular element. Such a transition produces a contrast, 
and the parallelism which runs between the two stories and 
which constitutes the anusandhi is thus combined with a 
contrast. And parallelism and contrast are the foundation 
upon which all aesthetic pleasure, whether intellectual or 
emotional, is built. The transition from the comments on 
a gdthd affords relief to the minds of the audience.” And 
further on he gives the reasons for such procedure. “ An 
audience cannot be trifled with — pleasure it must have. The 
number of lay ladies and gentlemen attending a convent gave 
it importance.” 

Quite interesting and ingenious, but, I am afraid, rather 
fanciful. 

It is quite uncertain as to when the Jalakas were put 
together into a systematic form. They were probably 
first handed down orally and disjointedly, but their growing 
popularity necessitated a more permanent form, at least of 
the kernel. Rhys Davids has shown quite conclusively that 
the Jdtaka book existed at a very early date as a separate 
compilation , 1 and we have the evidence of the Ceylon tradition 
of the history of Buddhism that a collection called the Jalakas 
existed at the time of the Council of Vesali, for that formed 
one of the portions of the Tipitaka rejected or altered by the 
dissentient Vesalian monks . 2 The Ceylon tradition is that the 
original Jdtaka book consisted of galhds alone, and a com- 
mentary on these, containing the stories with which they, were 
connected, was written in very early times in Sinhalese. This 
was translated in the fifth century by Buddhaghosa, and the 
Sinhalese original was afterwards lost. The verses are 
undoubtedly very much older than the prose narrative, as 
it has come down to us. Their language is distinctly archaic, 
and they contain archaic forms and forced constructions, 
and the corrupt state in which some of the verses are found, 

1 Op. cit., Introd., pp. lv foil. 

1 Dipa-varywa, vv. 35 and foil. 



buddhaghosa’s successors 


123 


as compared with the regularity and simplicity of the prose 
parts, shows that the verse was much older. Rhys Davids 
thinks 1 that the vast majority of the stories were earlier still, 
that in most cases the verses were added after the stories 
became current, that the stories — about one-tenth of the 
collection — without the verses at all (the verses being found 
only at the conclusion) are probably the oldest, and that 
they were handed down in Ceylon in Sinhalese while the 
verses remained intact in Pali, as they were received. It is 
probable, however, that the verses form the older kernel of 
the work, and that in its original form the Jdtaka book, like 
the Cariyd-Pitaka , consisted only of verses. But the verses 
are, most of them, quite unintelligible without the story. 

Who was the author of the present Jdtakatthakathd ? Most 
Western scholars deny that it was the work of the great 
commentator, Buddhaghosa , 2 as do also the most advanced 
of scholars in Ceylon . 3 More direct evidence is necessary before 
we can come to any definite conclusion. It is very probable 
that the book is the work of one author ; in the paccuppanna - 
vatthu references are made backwards and forwards, the 
comments on later gdthds are abbreviated, and directions 
about such abbreviations are given, and the same system is 
followed of fitting in all the elements of the story and its 
commentary — part of gdthd , paccuppanna-vaUhu , gdthd in 
full, comment, atita-vatthu , and conclusion. And the Pali 
work is not necessarily to be considered as a translation of a 
Sinhalese commentary ; for the author refers several times 
to a previous Jdtaka commentary, which, probably, was a 
Sinhalese work, and in one case (i.e. in discussing the age of 
Rahula at the time of Siddhattha’s renunciation) mentions 
what it says only to overrule it . 4 There is no reason to suppose 

1 Op. cit., p. lxxviii. 

9 Childers assigned it to Buddhaghosa ( Dictionary , Preface, p. ix. note). 

9 e.g. H. Sumangala, the greatest scholar in Ceylon in the last 
century. 

4 Rhys Davids, op. cit., p. lx. 



121 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


that it belonged to the three Sinhalese commentaries which 
Buddhaghosa translated ; it may equally have belonged to the 
Dhammaruci fraternity of Abhayagiri. A very old glossary 
to the Pali commentary, of unknown date, exists in Sinhalese, 
certainly older than the Sinhalese translation, made in the 
thirteenth century, and there the work is assigned to the 
great exegetist. 

In the Sutta-nipdia-atfhakathdy which is, admittedly, 
Buddhaghosa’s, the reader is referred to the Nidana-katha 
of the Jataka commentary 1 ; but Buddhaghosa does not 
say he wrote it. On the other hand, in the commentaries 
attributed to Buddhaghosa, there appears at the end an 
eulogy of himself (pa ra ma-vis uddha-saddh d-h uddhi-viriya-guna- 
patimanditena . . . Buddhaghoso'ti garu-gahita-ndmadliiajyena 
kata). No such mention is made in the Jataka commentary ; 
Buddhaghosa gives a separate name to each of his com- 
mentaries — Sa rnanta-pdsddikd, Ka nkhd-vitaranl , Su mahgala , 
etc. — but no such name is given to the Jataka , though it is 
larger than the above-mentioned. The usual aspirations of 
Buddhaghosa, expressed at the end of his works (“ may all 
beings enjoy the taste of the Dhamma of the Omniscient 
One, may the good Dhamma last long ”), have in the 
Jdtakatthakathd given place to a personal ambition : ifc May 
I be born in Tusita heaven, and, when Metteyya comes, may 
I receive nomination to become a Buddha, and after having 
perfected the Par am it as may I become Buddha.” The 
adoration of Buddhaghosa of the Buddha, Dhamma, and 
Sangha, and of his scholarly predecessors, etc., given at the 
beginning of the commentaries which are undoubtedly his, 
are charming in their style and captivating in their sentiment. 
The same cannot be said of the verses at the outset of the 
Jataka commentary, which begin : — 

“ J dii-koti-sahassehi pamana-rahitam hitam 
Isokassa loka-ndthena katam yena mdhesina .” 


1 Colombo Ed. (Mahabodhi Press), p. 2. 



buddhaghosa’s successors 


125 


In the introduction to Buddhaghosa’s commentaries 
he gives the names of those at whose special request each 
work was compiled, and in all the other books they are T her as 
of the Maha-vihara, distinctly stated as such. Three Theras t 
however — Atthadassi, Buddhamitta, and Buddhadeva — are 
mentioned in the Jaiaka commentary, and in introducing one 
of them it is said that he belonged to the Mahimsasaka sect 
( nwhimsdsaka-varnsamhi sambhutena nayannund ), which is one 
of the unorthodox sects, then separated from the Theravada . 1 
Nothing is said about the others, but we may presume that 
they belonged to the same school. It is true, nevertheless, 
that he* states his intention of compiling the commentary in 
conformity with the exposition current among the Maha-vihara 
fraternity. As Rhys Davids points out , 2 it is noteworthy that 
there is not the slightest allusion, either to Buddhaghosa’s 
conversion, or to his journey from India, or to the high hopes 
he entertained ; there is no mention of Revata, his teacher 
in India, or Sanghapali, his teacher in Ceylon ; this silence 
seems “ almost as convincing as such negative evidence can 
possibly be ”. After reading a great deal of Buddhaghosa’s 
works one feels that the language of the Jdtaka commentary 
and its method of treatment are not characteristically 
Buddhaghosa’s — it is a mere matter of subconscious inference, 
but it is there all the same. 

So much, then, for what might be said both in favour of 
and against assigning the work to Buddhaghosa. If not by 
Buddhaghosa, the work must have been composed after his 
time, and soon after : otherwise his name would not be con- 
nected with it. It is significant that the whole of th eAvidure- 
Nidana up to the conversion of the Sakyas agrees, 
almost word for word, with the account given in the 
MadhuraUha-vildsirii, Buddhadatta's commentary on the 
Buddha-vamsa. Could they have been the work of the same 
hand ? Or were they drawn from one common source ? 

1 Gf. AM'., v, vv. 6 foil. 

8 Op. cit., p. xv. 



126 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


We cannot conclusively say. In the list of Buddhaghosa’s 
works given on page 59 of the Gandha-vamsa the Jdtaka 
commentary is included. On the other hand, a treatise 
called the Jatattagi-nidanam is attributed to a Culla 
Buddhaghosacariya (p. 63), a native of Lanka (p. 67). Could 
he have been the author of our work ? Nothing more is 
known about him except the very meagre details given in the 
Gandha-vamsa. If Culla Buddhaghosa was reponsible for the 
present JdtaJca commentary, he must have lived very soon 
after the older and greater Buddhaghosa. For it is clear from 
the Maha-vatnsa , as Rhys Davids points out, 1 that before 
Buddhaghosa's arrival no Sinhalese commentaries had been 
turned into Pali, and it is certain that his good example was 
quickly and most enthusiastically followed by others, and it 
was impossible that so important a work as the Jatakas 
could have been for long left untranslated. Once this proximity 
of time between the two authors is assumed, it is easy to 
understand how the lesser author's individuality got merged 
in that of his greater and more glorified namesake. 

We may, however, I think, be quite certain that the 
Jataka tthakathd, as we have it now, is the wrork of a Ceylonese 
author. There is no doubt that after the Jatakas had been 
brought to Ceylon certain tales w^ere added to them there. 
In two of the Jatakas ( Hatthipala , Fausboll 509, and 
Mugapakkha 538) occur the names of six Ceylon Theras 
( Mdhdvamsaka Tissa , Phussadeva of the Mountain-Side 
Gloom , Vparimandalaka Malaya-vdsi Maha Saiigharak- 
khita , Bhaggari-vdsi Mahdtissa , Mahdsiva of Vamanta Hill , 
arid Mahd-Maliyadeva of Kalavela ), famous for their learning 
and held in high esteem by the monks of the Theravada- 
parampara. 2 As already mentioned, a very old glossary to 
the Jdtakatthakathd exists in Sinhalese, written perhaps about 


1 Op. cit., Introd, pp. Ixv-lxvi. 

2 For their description see Rhys Davids, JRAS., 1901, pp. 890 foil. 



buddhaghosa’s successors 


127 


the thirteenth century, and attributed to an author named 
Rajamurari. of whom nothing further is known. 1 

The existing Sinhalese version, called the Pansiya panas 
Jataka , is a translation of the Pali work made in the reign 
of King Pandita Parakrama-Bahu IV (circa a.d. 1305), 
according to the Mahd-vamsa . 2 by the king himself, who had 
learnt them from a Cojian monk, but more probably by several 
compilers at the instigation of the king, and, as the Sinhalese 
Introduction tells us. at the personal request of the minister 
Parakrama. Though a faithful translation, it is not servile, 
and in several instances has avoided the defects of the Pali 
commentary. Some of the stories are told in indifferent 
Sinhalese, and many provincialisms are to be detected ; a 
few Tamil expressions and words are also to be found, as was 
to be expected. After the translation was completed the king 
had it read before a learned assembly of monks and distributed 
copies all over the island. The charge of its preservation was 
entrusted to a learned Thera, named Medlmnkum and the 
pupils who became his suc cessors. 3 

What were the monks of the Abhavagiri fraternity and their 
confederates doing during this period under review ? It is 
impossible to believe they were idle, for ( east less activit y in 
the propagation of their views had been their characteristic 
ever since they gained a foothold in Ceylon. The wave of 
great literary activity which swept over the island could not 
have left them unaffected. The Chronicles do not record any 
attempts on the part of the orthodox Thera- vadins to persecute 
them or suppress their activities ; the glory of the Maliavihara 
had blossomed in all its brilliance ; its fame had spread far 

1 It was published (badly edited, unfortunately) in the JRAS. (Ceylon 
Branch), vol. vii, pp. 184 foil. 

8 Chap, xc, vv. 80-6. 

3 For a fuller and more detailed description of the work, see Mr. Wiekrema - 
singhe, Catalogue , pp. 118 foil. Other independent versions of single 
J A takas, in prose as well as in poetry, made both before and after this 
work, and based probably on the Pali text , an* to be found seatt* ml through- 
out the island. 



128 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


and wide ; scholars came to it from many climes in pursuit 
of wisdom, in their search for the true unadulterated doctrine 
of the Buddha. In the hour of their triumph we may presume 
they were content to leave the Dhammarucikas free to 
go on their way. We saw that both Mahanama and his queen 
were lavish in their gifts to the Abhayagiri community, and 
we may be sure that, thus endowed with material prosperity, 
they and their followers produced works of merit. In 
discussing the authorship of the J at aka commentary it was 
suggested that the work was a compilation of the Abhayagiri 
school. 

Unfortunately for us, such a state of tolerance of heterodoxy 
did not last long, and in the holocaust of book-burning, which 
followed a few centuries later, and through the gradual 
absorption of the dissentient Nikayas into the State Church, 
their works were either completely destroyed or gradually 
fell out of use. There is, however, one incident on record which 
shows that they were not unmindful of the importance of 
literary development in the progress of religion. In the account 
of Fa-Hsien's travels we are told that he lived in Ceylon for 
two years, and continuing his search for the sacred Scriptures 
“ he obtained a copy of the Vina y a Pitaka according to the 
school of the Mahisasakas. He also obtained a copy of the 
Great Aganui ( Dlrghdgama ). the Miscellaneous Agama 
( Samyukldgama ), and also a collection of the Miscellaneous 
Pitaka ( Sannipdta (SiUta-nipdfa ?)) — all being books unknown 
in the land of Han. Having obtained these Sanskrit works, 
he took passage in a large merchantman ”. 1 From the names 
of the books we are led to conjecture that they did not belong 
to the Theravada school. The late Hugh Nevill, in his 
Catalogue of his manuscript collections now in the British 
Museum (No. 1 15), suggests that the Sahajsa-vatthu-ppakarana , 
still extant in Burma, which, in his opinion, formed the basis 

1 Legge, Travel % p. 111. See also Beal, Records of the Western World , 
vol. ii, pp. 247 foil., for a description of the Abhayagiri sect in the seventh 
century. 



buddiiaguosa’s successors 


129 


for tlic Pali liasa-vahiui (q.v.), by Vedcha, in the fourteenth 
century, was also a work of the Dhammaruci sect. As far as 
I can see, there is nothing in that work itself to justify our 
assigning it to the Abhayagiri Nikaya, but a more careful 
perusal than T have been able to give it might bring forward 
more definite evidence. The Maha-vanisa-fika refers to it as 
an atthakathd . 1 


1 Geiger, Maluivamm and Dtpammsa , p. 48. 



CHAPTER VII 


The Pali Chronicles 

TX7HILE Buddhaghosa and his fellow-labourers were 
exploring the field of commentarial literature, and 
compiling the result of their researches so that the word of 
the Buddha might be known in what they held to be its pristine 
purity, not only by the people of Ceylon — who were specially 
favoured by the presence in their midst of a genuinely orthodox 
and traditional interpretation of the Dhamma, handed down 
in their own vernacular — but also by the many millions in 
other countries, another type of literary effort was slowly 
evolving in the shape of Pali chronicles, recording the history 
of Lanka, and, what was much more important to the 
chroniclers themselves, the vicissitudes and the triumphs of 
the Buddhist faith. Many centuries later, after the labours of 
these historians had been almost forgotten and had sunk very 
largely into oblivion, a great stir was caused among students 
of historical research, when about the year 1 82b the discovery 
was made and communicated to Europe that, whilst the history 
of India was only to be conjectured from myths and elaborated 
from dates on copper grants, or from fading inscriptions on 
rocks or columns, Ceylon was in possession of continuous and 
written chronicles, rich in authentic facts, not only presenting 
a connected history of the island itself, but also yielding 
valuable materials for elucidating that of India. At the 
moment when Prinsep was deciphering the then mysterious 
inscriptions of Hindustan and Western India, and when 
Csoma de Koros was unrolling the Buddhist records of Thibet, 
and Hodgson those of Nepal, a fellow-labourer of kindred 
genius, indefatigable in his energy and distinguished equally 
by his abilities and by his modest display of the same, was 
successfully exploring these Pali chronicles of Ceylon. He was 
George Turnour of the Ceylon Civil Service, and the annals 



THE PALI CHRONICLES 


131 


of historical research in later years bear ample testimony 
to the remarkable evidence his work furnished in elucidating 
the earlier history of Southern Asia. Since Tumour’s day 
many scholars of repute, both in the East and in the West, 
have devoted their time and energies to the task of learning 
more about these chronicles, testing the accuracy of their 
statements and trying to unravel with their aid something of 
the earlier history of the Indian Peninsula. What is attempted 
here is merely to give a brief outline of the researches of such 
scholars . 1 

The tw r o chief chronicles of Ceylon are the Dipa-vamsa and 
the Maha-vamsa , the former by an unknown author in the 
fourth century, and the latter by an Elder of the Buddhist 
Church, Mahanama by name, and written in the fifth century 
a.d. We saw, in the second chapter of this treatise, that 
members of the Sangha had been, from the earliest times, in 
the habit of recording noteworthy events in the Order, and 
attempting to keep a continuous history of their activities. 
Such, for example, are the records of the last two chapters of 
the Cullavagga. When Buddhism was introduced into Ceylon 
and a branch of the Sangha established in the island, the 
Ceylonese Bhikkhus followed the example of their predecessors 
in Jambudvlpa and handed down, in succession in the Church, 
historical accounts of the Order. The zeal for keeping such 
records of their doings does not seem to have been confined 
to the Order alone ; from time to time archaeologists have 
discovered, amongst the cherished possessions of distinguished 
families of the Sinhalese gentry, authentic accounts of their 
doings handed down from father to son, faithfully preserved 
and brought up to date by each succeeding generation. Thus, 
in a copy of the Raj avail -sangraha (which is an abridged 
Rdjdvaliya) written down to the reign of Kirti Sri Rajasirpha, 
and now forming part of the library of the late Hugh Nevill, 

1 For fuller details and critical discussion see, especially, Geiger, 
Dipavarpsa and Mahavarjfisa : Maha-varpsa (P.T.S.) ; Oldenberg, Dipa- 

varjrisa ; JR AS, passim and Indian Antiquary passim . 



132 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


there is attached to the end of the book a separate account 
of the family of one Yatihelagala Polvatte Vidane, in whose 
possession the copy was found. The Vidane \s family holds 
descent from the Bodhidhara princes who accompanied the 
branch of the Sacred Bo-tree to Ceylon, and settled down 
there. The present account is composed in much later 
language, but it is clearly based on older records and contains 
accounts of the doings of the family from quite early times . 1 
It is useful as showing the nature of personal records kept by 
the Sinhalese, from which the various histories were after- 
wards compiled, suppressing matter of private interest alone. 

The Dlpa-vcmmi, as was mentioned above, is not associated 
w ith the name of any special author, and represents the earliest 
of the chronicles now extant. It is, as we shall see presently, 
the outcome of a fairly large number of previous works, no 
one of which had any special author, and is the last, of the 
literary works of Ceylon which can be assigned to a period 
during which no books had special authors. livery ancient 
country, at the beginning of its literary activity, has such a 
period, and the Dlpa-va?n$a marks the close of a very important, 
epoch— important for us in settling the literary chronology — 
an epoch of universal anonymity, when every work was 
the outcome of the literary industry of a whole school. After 
the date of the TJTpa-vamsa, books, as a rule, were written 
by one man, and his authorship was openly acknowledged. 

There is an interesting passage in the introduction of the 
M a ha-vamsa - tikd 2 which sheds considerable light on how the 
chronicles, as we have them now, came to be composed in 
Pali verse. The author tells us that up to the time when the 

1 It concludes with an interesting section on a dispute in 1862, when 
a relation of the Vidane (headman of the village), one Angoda Sanghananda 
iSamanera, ordained* in 1842, preached bana. The other worthies of tho 
place objected for an unknown cause, and the matter came up before the 
Police Magistrate of Madawalatenne, who said that under the English law 
there was perfect freedom in all such matters, and dismissed the case. 
The volume is included in the Nevill collection of the British Museum. 

* Colombo Ed., pp. 22, 31-2 ; sec also Geiger, Dip , and AI.V . , pp. 43 ff. 



THE PALI CHRONICLES 


133 


Mahd-vaima was compiled there existed in the Mahavihara, 
written in Sinhalese, a Si ha fa -Ma It d va mmtthakathd, beginning 
from the visits of the Buddha to Ceylon, accounts of the 
arrival of the relics of the Bodhi-tree ; the histories of the 
convocations and of the schisms of the TJwas ; the intro- 
duction of Buddhism into the island, the colonization by 
\ ijaya and all that was known and recorded by the pious men 
of old (Porana) connected with the supreme and well-defined 
history of those unrivalled dynasties'*. And the Mahd-vamm 
itself was an attempt at “ an imitation of the history composed 
by the Mahavihara fraternity . . . In this work the object 
aimed at is — setting aside the Sinhalese language (in which 
the former history was written)— to write in Magadhi. What- 
ever the matters may be which are contained in the 
Atthakalha. without suppressing any part thereof, rejecting 
the dialect only, this work is composed in the supreme 
Magadhi language, which is thoroughly purified from all 
imperfections ... I will celebrate! the dynasties (vamsa) 
perpetuated from generation to generation ; illustrious from 
the commencement and lauded by many bards ; like unto a 
garland strung with every variety of flowers ’*. 1 The main 
record on which the Dlpa-inimsa (and later the Mahd-ramm) 
were based was this SI h ala Mahammsaflltakatha, sometimes 
referred to as the Si ha la ft ha hat lid and the Pordnatthahilhd , 
sometimes referred to simply as the Atthakallid . 2 

Besides this the Mahd-vamm-fihl mentions also the 
following works which contained historical materials : (l) 
IJ ttaravihdra-atthahdhd and the Uttar avihdra- mahdmvma , 
(2) Vinayaltkakathd, (3) Dipavamsatlhakathd , (4) Sima-katha , 
(5) Cetiya and Maha-cetiya-vamsa-aUhakathd , (6) Mahdbodhi- 
vamsakathd , (7) Sumcdha-kathd, and (8) Sahassavatthu - 

atthakallid. As far as we know, none of these works are now 
extant, but their names give some indication of the nature 
of their contents. The first were the chronicles of 


1 Chap, i, opening stanzas. 

* Geiger, Dlpavaijisa and Mahdvamsa, pp. 45 foil. 



134 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


the Uttaravihara fraternity, the third a commentary on the 
Dlpa-vamsa , the fourth evidently a description of the 
boundaries of the Mahavihara, the fifth accounts of the 
dagobas erected in Ceylon, especially the Mahathupa of 
Dutthagamanl, and the last a collection of legends and folk 
tales. The Sumedha-kathd was, perhaps, a life-history of the 
Buddha, from the time when he received vivarana as the ascetic 
Sumedha at the hands of the Dipahkara Buddha many, 
many aeons before. 

If that surmise be correct, the later BuMhavamsatthakathd 
was evidently based on the Sumedha-katha . The presence of 
an Uttaravihara-mahavamsa in the list is very interesting, 
because it shows that each of the Sangha communities was 
in the habit of preserving special records of their own 
community. Judging from the quotations given of it in the 
Mahd-vamsa-tikd , the Uttaravihara-mahavamsa seems to have 
differed from the Mahavihara chronicle not so much in its 
general scheme as in matters of detail, and it also, apparently, 
contained much historical material not found in the other . 1 
The numerous references made in the Mahd-vamsa-fika to 
these works lead us to conclude that, even at the time of the 
composition of the tikd, there was still in existence a rich 
literature of collected works, carefully preserved in the 
different monasteries, most of them forming part of the 
Atthakathd , the commentaries to the canonical scriptures. 
And quite early in the literary history of Ceylon a secondary 
literature had sprung up, where single subjects, such, for 
example, as the history of the Bodlii-tree or the erection of the 
thupas , were taken out of the original works, and made the 
theme of connected, continuous chronicles. 

The Dlpa-vamsa represents the earliest attempt, so far as 
we know, to treat of these subjects in a compact, concise 
manner, forming one continuous story. It is a conglomeration 
of myths, legends, tales, and history, and the further we go 

x The story of the Nine Nanda princes. M. tika, p. 117, and the romantic 
history of Pandukabhaya and the Yakkhiiil Cetiya, ibid., p. 202. 



THE PALI CHRONICLES 


135 


back in time the more mythical it becomes, put together from 
various traditional sources, in an unaided st ruggle to create 
a composite whole from materials existing scattered in various 
places. This accounts for the outward form of the Dtpa-vama, 
its clumsiness and incorrectness of language and metre, 
its repetitions, omissions and general fragmentary character. 
And this very incompleteness of its composition, and its want 
of style help us in fixing the date of its compilation. It contains 
whole series of verses giving the main parts of the story, 
arranged as mnemonics and inartistically put together, 
called by Geiger Memory Verses (Memorial verse ). 1 

Often different versions are given of the same story , 2 * 
showing that they were derived from different sources and also, 
possibly, because of a desire to keep the various traditions as 
they had been, more or less authorized, with due reverence 
for their antiquity, and to hand them on unaltered to later 
generations. The Dvpa-vanisa was not the work of a single 
author, but of several generations, a succession of rhapsodies, 
added to by succeeding authors, as the Introduction tells us, 
“ twisted into a garland of history from generation to 
generation, like flowers of various kinds.” It was, perhaps, 
originally meant for oral recitation, and so arranged that 
several of the more important subjects came up before the 
listener again and again, gradually impressing the full facts 
on his memory. If that were so, what appears inartistic and 
clumsy in the written work would appear highly natural when 
it was handed down orally. There was also, evidently, a com- 
mentary to the Dipa-vamsa, giving details of the points raised 
in the mn emonic verses, for the Maha-vamsa-iikd refers to a 
Dtpavamsatthakathd, and mention is made of it by the 
Mahd-vamsa author himself, as having been recited for him 
by order of king Dhatusena at the festival of Mahinda . 8 

Nevill, in his Manuscript Catalogue referred to above, 

1 Geiger, Dipavarjwa and Mahavaijisa, p. 8. 

* e.g. the First Council in 4, vv. 1-26 ; and again, 5, vv. 1-16. 

* Maha vaijisa, xxxviii, p. 173. 



13G 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


draws attention to the “ unique consequence given to nuns ” 
all throughout the Dlpa-vamsa, and is of opinion that it seems 
to afford a clue to its authorship. “ It can scarcely be a record 
of the Theravada fraternity of the Mahavihara, because in 
the very reign in which it. was put forward by royal 
patronage (Dhatusena's) Mahanama set about to supersede 
it by his Mahn-vamm. It certainly is not a record of the 
Dhammaruci sect of the Abhayagiri community, because it 
passes over the history of that wealthy, royal foundation with 
a well-calculated but short notice that could offend no one. But 
it dilates on a third society, the community of Theravadin 
nuns. It would seem that Mahanama was jealous of their 
fame, for he tells us nothing even of t he still famous Mahila, 
daughter of Kavantissa and sister of Uemimu. ... In 
chapter xv there is a detailed account of original missionary 
nuns coining from India, learned in the Dhamma and the 
Yinaya ; in chapter xvii unusual stress is laid on previous 
Bo-trees brought by Rucananda, Kannka-datta, and 
Sudhamma, although Mahanama pays them no attention. 
In chapter xviii there was evidently a list of Rliikkhus 
preceding that of the Bhikkhunls. If this was recited by the 
monks, it could scarcely have dropped out, while it would 
naturally be omitted by the nuns who wished to impress on 
the audience the importance of their Order. 

“ The poem goes on to describe how the missionaries from 
India taught Vinaya, Sutta, and Abhidhamma. In the reign 
of Abhaya, however, Sumana taught Saddhamma-vamsa 
(religious history), and Mahila was also learned in it. In 
Saddhatissa’s reign no historian is mentioned among the 
Bhikkhunls ; but in Vajagamba’s reign the nuns boasted 
of Sivala and Maharuha from India, who w r ere both 
historians. In the reigns of Kutikanna and his son Abhaya 
they were proud of Nagamitta, ordained in Lanka, and also 
described as well-versed in religious history. After her and 
before the conclusion of the poem in Mahasena’s reign there 
flourished among the nuns Sanha and Samudda, distinguished 



THE PALI CHRONICLES 


137 


for their knowledge in the Saddhamma-vamsa. The book 
Saddhamnui-vamsa gives the names of eight historians and 
rhapsodists among a list of seventy-two nuns who taught the 
Dhamma and the Yinaya. I take it as almost certain that, in 
the reign of Gemunu, Humana taught the vaima for the first 
time among the nuns. Princess Mahila embodied the 
Sinhalese tradition of her family with other traditions handed 
down from Sanghamittii and her companions. Sivala and 
Maharuha from India revised this, and very probably formed it 
into the unpolished almost aboriginal Pali we now possess, 
to which additions were made by Nagamitta, and later by 
Sanha and Samudda.” 

This suggestion about the authorship of the Dlpa-vamsa is 
very ingenious and deserves careful consideration. I am not 
aware of its having been published anywhere yet, and hence 
I have quoted it in full. It is not possible with the information 
at our disposal to come to any definite conclusion. There are 
certain minor points — which do not affect the main argument 
at all — in NevilTs statements which are not strictly correct, 
e.g. that Mahan ama composed the MaJta-vamsa out of jealousy 
of the reputation of the nuns. Mahanama lived in an age when 
the clumsy, inartistic diction of the Dijxi-va?nsa , with its faulty 
arrangement, would not suffice for the edification of the 
learned, and lie set about to compile a work which was more 
in keeping with the literary development of his time. 

The Dipa-vama , like the Maka-vamm, finished its record 
with the death of king Mahasena. Whether this was due to 
the Maha-vamm having superseded it after that date, or 
whether, as Oldenberg suggests , 1 the authors stopped at the 
epoch of Mahasena ‘s reign, where the past destinies of their 
spiritual abode, the Maha-vihara, were divided from the 
present by the success of a host ile party in obtaining the king s 
sanction for destroying the Maha-vihara, we cannot say. 
I am inclined to the former view. The Mahd-varnsa fulfilled 
all the purposes of the Dlpct-vainsci, and better, and there was 

1 Dipa-varfisa, p. 8. 



138 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


no reason for its further continuance in the old form. I agree 
with Oldenberg 1 in assigning some time between the beginning 
of the fourth and the first third of the fifth century as the date 
of the completion of the Dlpa-vamsa in its present form. It 
could not have been closed before the beginning of the fourth 
century, because its narrative extends till about a.d. 302. 
Buddhaghosa quotes several times from the Dipa-vanisa, 
but his quotations differ in some details from our version. 2 
In the Mahd-vamsa vve are told that Dhatusena (459-77) 
ordered the Dipa-vamsa to be recited in public at the annual 
Mahinda festival, so that by that time the Dlpa~vamsa had 
been completed. 3 After that date it fell into disuse, its glory 
outdone by the more brilliant work of Mahanama ; but it 
seems to have been studied till much later, because 
Dhammakitti III of the Aranyakavasi sect, quotes it in liis 
Saddhamma-sa ngaha with great respect as a work of much 
merit and immense importance. 4 

The beginning of the fifth century saw an important 
development in tlie literary life of Ceylon through 
Buddhaghosa’s activity. Pali was once more definitely 
established as the ecclesiastical and literary language of the 
Buddhists. Buddhaghosa himself mastered the language 
fully and wrote in it fluently and voluminously. His works 
soon found their way into every monastery, where they were 
assiduously perused, portions of them being learned by heart. 
Buddhaghosa's works marked the turning point between the 
ancient and the modern epochs of Pali literature in Ceylon, 
and with his compositions as their model his successors were 
soon able to master Pali grammar and style with perfect 
ease, and, with his compilations as their background, even 
to improve upon them. Many fruitless attempts at Pali 

1 Ibid., p. 9. 

2 e.g. see Oldenberg, Dip., xii, note 2 ; and also note on Dip., 5, 30. 

3 This would make the interval between the two works about 100-150 
years, sufficient for the difference in points of their style, remembering 
that Buddhaghosa came in between them. 

4 e.g. Saddfiamina-saiigaha , pp. 47, v. 7 ; 49, vv. 8 foil. 



TIIE PALI CHRONICLES 


139 


composition must have marked the transition from the 
inartistic stilted metre of the DTjni-vamsu to the elegant, 
literary fluency of the Maha-vamsa verses. And once the 
mastery over literary form had been attained, its possessors 
were anxious to use it. Materials for the exercise of their 
powers were at hand in plenty. Pali had once more gained its 
ascendency over Sinhalese, and it was their ambition, as so 
many authors of this period tell us, in the process of their 
works, to set aside the Sinhalese language, reject the dlpa-blulsd, 
and compose their works in the “ supreme Magadhi language, 
which is the mother of all tongues, sweet to the ear and 
delightful to the heart, and cooling to the senses They found 
the works of the old authors full of imperfections ; defects 
as well of prolixity as of brevity and inaccuracies of detail. 
They had all respect for the old wine, but it was contained in 
primitive jars, antiquated, out of fashion, and covered with 
cobwebs, and they desired to put it into new bottles, polished 
and shining and full of artistic decoration. But it was old wine 
all the same, and a certain flavour of conservatism remained 
for quite a long time. Thus, when Mahanama came to write 
his work the Maha-vainsa , “ replete with information on every 
subject, comprehending the amplest details of all important 
events, like unto a splendid and dazzling garland strung with 
every variety of flowers, rich in colour, taste and scent . . . 
avoiding the defects of the ancients/' we find that he could 
not quite rise above his material. He strove to confine him- 
self to his sources to the best of his power. Often he adopted 
the Pali verses of the originals unchanged in his work, 
especially when they appeared to him to be of an authoritative 
character. He went to the same sources as the DTpa-vamsa , 
and in many passages the two works agree word for word . 1 

Very little is known of the author of the Maha-varnsa. Iu 
the concluding passage of the Maha-vamm-tika , 2 he is named 
Mahanama, and it is said of him that he lived in a cell built 

1 See Geiger, op. cit., pp. 14 foil. 

a p. 502. 



140 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


by the General Dlghasantja who was the commander of the 
army in Devanampiya-Tissa’s reign, 1 and the vihara founded 
by him bore the name of Dighasa a -senapati-par ivena , and 
belonged to the Mahavihara. Ceylon tradition assumes that 
this Mahanama was the uncle of king Dhatusena, who is 
said to have lived in the habitation of I)ighasan<Ja. 2 Tumour 
(Introduction, liv) accepts this tradition, but Geiger 3 is 
convinced that Tumour was mistaken. “I am fully 
convinced,” says he, “ that we must entirely separate the 
Mahanama, author of Mahd-vamsa , from the uncle of 
Dhatusena.” 

I am not so “ fully convinced Geiger's chief argument is 
chronological. Dhatusena entered the monastic life under the 
protection of his uncle (Mahanama) in the reign of Damija 
Parnju. The uncle w as “ at that time a Thera ” (italics are 
mine), and “ thus in all probability considerably older than 
his nephew”. Dhatusena came to the throne in 436. The 
transference of Slhagiri Vihara to Mahanama, presbyter of 
the Dighasanda Vihara ( M . F., xxxix, 42) was early in the reign 
of Moggallana I (497-515). Geiger’s objection is that the 
reign Mahanama to whom the Slhagiri Vihara was transferred, 
and who w 7 as our author, camiot be the same as Dhatusena’s 
uncle, because the latter could not have lived so long. Why ? 
Because he w 7 as already a Thera when Dhatusena entered the 
Order somew’here between a.d. 436 and 441, and must there- 
fore have been comparatively old. I believe that this inference 
is unjustified, for, though Dhatusena s uncle is referred to as 
Thera , that does not prove he was then a Thera. When the 
verses came to be written he had come to the Thera age and 
was naturally referred to as such. (If we say that when 
King George was five years old he was a boy of sweet temper, 
it does not necessarily mean that he w r as king at the age of 
five.) If Mahanfima had been, say, thirty years old at the 

1 M,V. f xv, vv. 212-13. 

* Af.F., xxxviii, v. 16, and xxxix, v. 42. 

* Dipavatfiaa and Mahavaiflsa , pp. 41 foil. 



THE PAU CHRONICLES M] 

time of Dhatusena’s Ordination, he would have been about 
ninety, at the most, when Slhagiri Yihara. was transferred to 
him, an age by no means impossible. So, while I agree, there- 
fore, that the evidence at our disposal is not sufficient- to 
establish the identity, I hold that* the (Vylon tradition has 
not yet been proved false. 

Not hing further is known about the Mtiha-vamsa author. An 
inscription, at Buddhagaya 1 2 3 mentions a Mahanama among 
Ceylon teachers in the following succession : Bhara. R fibula, 
Upasena, Malianama, Upasena (II), Malianama (II). The 
first Upasena may well refer to the author of the Muhu- 
Niddesa-AUhalatka , and the first- Malianama to our author. 
The date of this inscription is not, however, definitely known. - 
Of Mahanama's work (huger says:- “The Mahd-mmsa is 
already worthy the name of a true epic. I(; is the recognized 
work of a poet, and we are able to watch this poet at work 
in his workshop. Although he is quite dependent on his 
materials^ which he is bound to follow as closely as possible, 
he deals with them critically, perceives their shortcomings and 
irregularities, and seeks to improve and to eliminate. ” But 
though the level of (‘pic poetry was reached with the 
Maha-vamsa , the process of literary development had not vet- 
come to its highest attainment. It was still too early for that 
to be possible, so soon after Buddhaghosa’s work had given 
fresh impetus to Pali studies. Even the materials of the old 
chronicles yet remained unexhausted, and later authors 
seized upon them and continued what Mahanama had begun 
so well. Mahanama was no genius, lie was too much hide- 
bound by tradition, and his work cannot rank as a literary 
performance of the first order ; vet his services to the cause 
of Pali literature, and to historical studies of later generations, 
were immense, and to us invaluable. 

After Mahanama s death the chronicle was continued by 


1 Fieri, Gv'pfu 7 nscri plums, pp. 274 foil. 

2 KiijondrjilaJ Mitra, Buddha </aya. pp. 100 *q. 

3 Dlpavainsa and M ahum visa, p. 2. 



H2 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


later authors. The history of the island from the reign of 
Mahasena. a.d. 302, to the time of Pancjita Parakramabahu 
of Dambadeniya (1240-75) was compiled by Dhammakitti II 
under royal patronage. 1 Rhys Davids questions the accuracy 
of this statement. 2 “ Each new chronicler hurried over the 
kings preceding the one under whom he wrote, and then 
enlarged at length on the events of that monarch’s reign. There 
seems to be a break at the eventful chapter of Parakrama the 
Great’s reign, while the following kings are hurried over until 
Parakrama of Dambadeniya, who occupies seven chapters. 
Perhaps there is some confusion between the two 
Dhammakittis, the one the author of Ddtha-vamsa in 
Parakrama the Great’s reign, and the other the author of 
a part of the Mahd-vanisa in the reign of Parakrama of 
Dambadeniya. The. latter seems evidently later in style.” 
There is no evidence to support this contention, and until 
such evidence is forthcoming, we shall have to rest content 
with tradition. The name of the author by whom the history 
of Ceylon was written from the reign of the Dambadeniya 
king to that of Pantjita Parakrama-Bahu of Hastisailapura 
(modern Kurunegala) has not yet been ascertained. 3 The 
chronicle from that date until a.d. 1758 to the death of 
Kirti Sri Rajasimha was compiled by Tibbotuvave Sumangala 
Thera, and it has since been continued to 1815 (the date of 
the cession of Ceylon to the British) by the late Hikkaduve Sri 
Sumangala and Batuvantudave Pandita. 4 

There is extant a tikd 5 on the Maha-varnsa, written by ah 
author of whom we know nothing. In the closing words of 
his work he calls it the V amscUtha-ppakasirii. The Ceylon 
tradition assigns it to Mahanama, author of the Maha-vamsa 


1 Wijesinha, Maha-varnsa, p. 284, and Wickremasinghe, JR AS., 1896, 
pp. 202 foil. 

9 JRAS., vii, p. 354 and footnote. 

3 De Eoysa, p. 18. 

4 Colombo, 1877. 

3 Printed in Colombo and edited by Sumangala and Batuvantud&ve. 



THE PALI CHRONICLES 


143 


itself. 1 But it is improbable that the two authors were 
identical. On the other hand, Geiger assigns it to the tenth 
century. 8 The author of the tika distinguishes himself quite 
clearly from the older writer by calling the latter dcariya . 3 
It is clear that many years had elapsed between the original 
work and its tika, sufficiently long to allow the name of a village 
to have undergone change. 4 The tika also mentions the 
king Dathopatissa II (“ the nephew ” to distinguish him from 
the older king of the same name), 5 and it cannot, therefore, 
have been composed earlier than, roughly speaking, a.d. 670. 
But I cannot agree with Geiger in saying that the Mahd-vamsa- 
tikd belongs to the period between the years 1000 and 1250. 6 
In my opinion the date is far too late. Geiger's one argument 
for so late a date is a quotation from the Mahabodhi - 
vamsatthakathd (the only one so far traced) found in the 
Maha-vamm-tikd P He identifies this atthakathd - with the 

Mahabodhi-vantsa of Upatissa, which he assigns to the tenth 
century. Now the Mahabodhi-vamsa , as we have it, is 
admittedly a translation of an original work. Upatissa says 
so definitely in his proem, 8 and there is no means of ascertaining 
whether the Sihala Mahabodhi-vamsa referred to there was 
identical with the atthakathd mentioned in the M.V. tika , 
or whether it was not itself a later compilation in Sinhalese of 
an earlier Mahabodhi-vamsa-atthakathd. There is no need to 
deny that the Pali Mahabodhi-vamsa is a later work, written, 
perhaps, as late as the tenth century, and the language 
certainly points to some such date, as we shall see later. It 
is quite possible that both the quotation in the M.V. tika 
and the passage in the Mahabodhi-vamsa were drawn from the 

1 De Zoysa, p. 18. 

* Geiger, Dipavarjiaa and Mahavarpaa , pp. 32 foil. 

* e.g. p. 25, line 1 and 11. 34-5 ; p. 28, line 18. 

* Samagalla in the M. V . became Moragalla at the time of the tika, M .T. 
p. 427, line 26. 

• 456, 27. 

• Dip . and M. F., p. 34. 

’ M.T . , 294, 8. 

• P.T.S. Ed., p. 2. 



141 


THE PA LI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


same source directly or indirectly (if indirectly, through the 
Sinhalese Mahdbodhi-vanisa ). I think, therefore, that the date 
assigned to the M.V. fikd by Geiger rests on very slender 
evidence. 

And not this alone. A perusal of the M.V. tiled shows that 
it adds to the Mahd-vamsa a not inconsiderable amount of 
material of legends, as well as of folklore, and these were drawn, 
as we saw in our discussion of the Mahd-vamsa originals, not 
only from the sources whence the author of the Mahd-vamsa 
derived his materials, but from others equally old 1 — like the 
MahdvamsaUhahithdy Dlpa ? m mm tthakath a , and the Vttara- 
vihdratthakathd. We saw how very soon after Buddhaghosa 
compiled his commentaries in Pali from the materials he 
gathered out of the exegetical works written in Sinhalese the 
original Sinhalese commentaries fell into disuse, and, before 
long, completely disappeared, because it was found that they 
no longer served any useful purpose, their function having 
been taken up by Buddhaghosa's works. Now the Mahd-vamsa 
bore to the Sinhalese vamsaithakalhd exactly the same relation 
as Buddhaghosa \s commentaries did to Ihe scriptural 
atthakathd. It was a concise and relatively accurate com- 
pilation from various sources, avoiding their imperfections 
and containing practically all their details. 

We may, I think, legitimately presume, therefore, that the 
Sinhalese vamsatthakathds did not long survive Mahanama’s 
work. And in view of the fact that at the time the author of 
the tlkd compiled his work the original sources were still 
being studied, or, at least, were extant, his* period could not 
have been as much as five centuries later than Mahanama’s. 
Since Mahanama lived in the sixth century a.d., I would 
assign the author of the tikd to the seventh or eighth century. 
I am also supported in this by the name of a second Mahanama 
appearing in the Buddhagaya inscription referred to above, 
in the succession Upasena I, Mahanama I, Upasena II, 
Mahanama II ; I believe, also, that the later Mahanama was 
1 See also Geiger, op. cit., pp. 47 and 48. 



THE PALI CHRONICLES 


145 


identical with the author of the Patisarnbkidd^naggatthakathd. 1 
The identity of the name, and the proximity in time, of the 
two authors would account for the Ceylon tradition which 
regards the V arnsaHha-jypakdsim (M.V. Ilka) as a work of the 
Mahd-vamsa author himself. 

Much has been written on the value of the Bipa-varnsa 
and the Mahd-varnsa as works of historical accuracy and 
on their usefulness in unravelling the history of Southern 
Asia. The greater the care and the attention that have been 
given to the statements in these works the more evident 
has it become to students of J historical^research, that they 
are of immense importance in arriving at a correct under- 
standing of the mysterious mazes of Indian chronology. 
Vincent Smith early in his career called both works “ silly 
fictions of mendacious monks ”, and wrote of them : “ I 
reject absolutely the Ceylonese chronology prior to the reign 
of Dutthagamini in about 160 b.c. The undeserved credit 
given to the statements of the monks of Ceylon has been a 
great hindrance to the right understanding of ancient Indian 
history.” 2 But he was sufficiently convinced before his death 
to write about the date of the Buddha’s death, which forms 
one of the most important cruces of Indian chronology : 
“ The new reading of the Kharavela inscription ... if correct, 
obliges us to move back all the Saisunaga dates more than 
fifty years, and therefore supports the Ceylon date for the 
death of the Buddha, viz. 544 or 543 b.c. It may be argued 
that traditions preserved in Magadha should be more trust- 
worthy than those recorded at a later date by monks in 
distant Ceylon ; but there is ample evidence of the fact that 
Gautama Buddha was contemporary with both Bimbisara 
or $re$ika and his son Ajatasatru or Kuoika, and, this being 
so, I feel compelled, until further light is thrown on the subject, 
to accept, tentatively, the earlier date,. 543 b.c.” 3 

* Atoka, preface, p. 6. 

* Early History of India , p. 60, 1924 ed. 

10 



146 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


Geiger, in liis invaluable Introduction to his translation of 
the Maha-vamsa, has brought together ample evidence from 
external sources to justify the faith which later-day scholars 
have been induced to place in the Ceylonese chronicles . 1 In their 
details, it is true, they manifest the same love of the 
marvellous, the same credulity and superstition, the same 
exaggeration in description, the same adulation of kings and 
princes, as is met with in the annals and religious history of 
nations called civilized. Christian and non -Christian, of ancient 
and modern Europe. Their chief defect, in my opinion, is 
that, while they inform us of the history of monarchs and their 
deeds, and their endowments for the glorification of the 
religion, they make no mention of the everyday lives of the 
people, the many millions who made history in those ancient 
times. But that would not permit; us “to throw away the 
child with the bath A\ it h all their drawbacks, common, 
however, to annals and religious histories of all nations, their 
chronology is admirably accurate , 2 and neither lira lima nism 
nor even the Sanskrit language can show any work of an 
unquestionable date with the shadow of a claim to their 
honesty of intention and their accuracy of chronological 
record. 

1 Mahuc., Intruri., pp. xv foil. Also Norman, JR AS., 1908, pp. 1 foil. 

2 St*e Geiger, introd., pp. xx foil. 



THE DAWN OF THE GOLDEN ERA 


147 


CHAPTER VIII 

The Dawn of the Golden Era 

rjlHE history of Ceylon from the end of the fifth century to 
about the beginning of the eleventh, is but a narrative 
.of the decline of the power and prosperity which had been 
matured under the old dynasty of kings and of the rise of the 
Malabar marauders, whose ceaseless forays and incursions 
eventually reduced authority to feebleness and the island to 
desolation. The accounts given of the royal imbeciles who filled 
the throne during this period contain hardly any events of 
sufficient importance to relieve the monotonous repetitions of 
temples founded, and dagobas repaired, of tanks constructed, 
and monks endowed with lands for their maintenance. 
Civil dissensions, religious schisms, royal intrigues and 
assassinations contributed equally with foreign invasions to 
diminish the influence of the monarchy and exhaust the 
strength of the kingdom. 

Intimate relations existed between the Tamils of the 
Dekkhan and the Sinhalese settlers from quite an early period. 
Vijaya’s second wife was the daughter of a Pandyan king and 
her companions were married to Vijaya’s ministers and other 
officials. Similar alliances are frequent, and the Sinhalese 
annalists allude on more than one occasion to the Damihi 
(Tamil) consorts of their sovereigns. Intimate intercourse and 
consanguinity were thus established from the remotest times : 
high employments were given to the Tamils, their services 
made use of, and privileges given to them. Thus encouraged, 
the Malabars first came over to Ceylon as settlers and later as 
invaders. As early as 237 b.c. Sena and Guttika seized the 
throne, and, as they ruled righteously, the people seem to have 
acquiesced in their sovereignty. 1 The first regular invasion, 
however, was under Ela ja, who ruled for forty-three years, with 
characteristic justice and impartiality. These earlier bands of 
immigrants brought with them a certain amount of civilizing 

* M.V., xxi, vv. 10-12. 



148 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


influence in the form of Hindu culture, which, as we have 
already seen, the Sinhalese were quick to assimilate. The 
Tamils of South India, then as now, were earnest students of 
Sanskrit literature, and we may well presume that their 
presence in the island helped much in encouraging the study 
of Sanskrit in Ceylon. The Tamil colonists became one with 
the people ; they settled down peacefully, pursuing their 
different vocations unmolested in the observance of their 
religious rites, because of the broad-mindedness of the 
Sinhalese rulers. 

Settlement and intermarriages had all along been 
encouraged, 1 and many Sinhalese families of rank had formed 
connexions with the Tamils. The schisms among the Buddhists 
themselves, tending as they did to engraft Brahmanical rites 
upon the doctrines of the purer faith, seemed to have matured 
the intimacy that existed between the two peoples ; some of 
the Sinhalese kings erected temples for the Hindu gods, 2 
and the promoters of the Vaitulyan heresies found refuge from 
persecution among their sympathizers in the Dekkhan. 3 

But the majority of the subsequent invasions by the 
Malabars were not regular conquests nor were they, by any 
means, attempts at peaceful penetration. They were of a 
predatory character, periodic forays made by a restless and 
energetic race, into a fertile and defenceless country. From 
time to time successive bands of marauders would swoop 
dow r n upon some place of debarcation, gather together as 
much spoils as they could from the unwarlike Sinhalese of 
the coast, and retire into their fortified strongholds on the 
continent. Once, in a.d. 113, 4 Gaja-Bahu avenged their out- 
rages by means of a punitive expedition into the Cola country 
and inflicted upon them so severe a defeat, that the lesson was 
long remembered, and from that time till about the middle of 
the fifth century there w r as an interval of respite from their 

1 Tumour's Epitome, p. 19. 

* Raja-rcUndkara , p. 78. 

* M. V,, xxxvii, and Epitome, p. 25. 

4 Tennent, i, p. 397. 



THE DAWN OF THE GOLDEN ERA 


149 


depredations. In a.d. 433, however, a large army landed in 
Ceylon and seized the capital, 1 and for twenty-seven years, 
till Dhatusena recovered possession of the north of the island, 
five Tamil rulers in succession administered the government 
of the country north of the Mahavaliganga. But Dhatusena 
was followed by his son Kasyapa, 2 and the country was 
thrown into a state of chaos once more. In the succession of 
assassinations, conspiracies and civil wars, which distracted 
the kingdom during the next several centuries, and during the 
struggles of the rival branches of the royal house, each 
claimant, in his adversity, betook himself to the Indian 
continent, and Malabar mercenaries from Pandiya and Cola 
enrolled themselves indifferently under any leader, and 
deposed or restored kings at their pleasure. The Rajavali 
in a single passage, enumerates fourteen sovereigns who were 
murdered, each by his successor, between a.d. 523 and 648. 3 
For nearly four hundred years, till the beginning of the 
eleventh century, the Sinhalese annals are filled with these 
exploits and escapades of the Malabars ; they filled every 
office, 4 and it was they who decided the claims of competing 
candidates for the crown. At last the island became so infested 
with them that the feeble kings, finding it impracticable to 
oust them from the capital city of Anuradha-pura, began to 
move southwards to escape their attentions and transferred 
their residence to Polonnaruva, which eventually became the 
capital. It is remarkable that these later-day Malabars never 
identified themselves with any plan for promoting the 
prosperity, and for the embellishment of Ceylon ; they aspired 
not to beautify or enrich, but to impoverish and to deface ; 
their influence tended not to exalt and civilize, but to ruin 
and debase all that was worthy in the culture of Ceylon. 

The Sinhalese were either paralysed by dread, and made 

1 M.V. % xxxviii, vv. 11 ff. 

* Ibid., w. 85 ff. 

* Rajavali, p. 244. 

4 Epitome, p. 33. 



150 


THE PAH LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


but feeble efforts to rid themselves of their invaders, or were 
fascinated by their military pomp, and endeavoured to con- 
ciliate them by alliances, or sometimes purchased the 
evacuation of the island by paying huge ransoms. Every now 
and then the more patriotic among the Sinhalese (especially 
the sturdy mountaineers of Rohana), impatient of foreign 
domination, made determined efforts to resist the encroach- 
ments of the hated Malabar oppressors, but the brave high- 
landers were helpless against the numerical superiority of 
their foe. In the reign of Mahinda III (circa a.d. 997), the 
king married a Kalihga princess, and in a civil war that 
followed during the regime of his son and successor the island 
was reduced to extremes of anarchy and oppression, and 
finally in 1023, when the Colians again invaded Ceylon, they 
succeeded in establishing a Malabar viceroy at Polonnaruva 
(the capital city), who held sw r ay over the kingdom for neaily 
thirty years, protected by a foreign army of mercenary soldiers. 
The rightful sovereign had been taken captive and cast on 
the coast of India, where he died in exile. 1 

Meanwhile in Rohana, stern and rugged mother of many of 
Ceylon’s noblest sons, a brave and heroic band had striven to 
maintain their sturdy independence in the only remnant of 
free territory left unmolested by the oppressors. From out of 
the gloom and despondency of anarchy and intrigue, and 
amidst the terrible confusion of these conflicts, there suddenly 
arose in Rohana’s mountain fastnesses the hero destined to 
rescue the kingdom from alien domination, deliver it from 
the hated sway of the Malabars and bring it back to its ancient 
wealth and tranquillity. It was a stupendous task, this 
restoration of national independence, but the new leader was 
equal to it. Kitti was his name. With indomitable courage 
and aided by the steadfast loyalty of his mountaineers, he 
achieved victory after victory over all his enemies, and 
re-united the severed kingdom of Ceylon under one national 
banner. When his position was thus consolidated, he 

1 Baja rat., pp. 84-5, and A/.F., lv, vv. 18-33. 



THE DAWN OP THE GOLDEN ERA 


151 


proclaimed himself king under the name of Sirisanghabodhi 
Vijaya-Bahu. Thus was peace given once more to the 
stricken land. 

During the troublous times that intervened between 
Dhatusena and Vijaya-Bahu, the study of the Dhamma, as 
well as of the secular branches of learning that had been 
cultivated to a high degree in earlier times, had perforce to 
be' abandoned, owing to the alien occupation. But during 
these four hundred years, of bitter gloom and despondency, 
it was their common religion that held the people together 
and sustained them in their adversity. Their rulers recognized 
this fact, and, whenever a chance arose, the rival claimants 
to the throne attempted to earn the goodwill of the populace 
by munificent gifts to the Sangha. 

A few of them — indifferent to, or happily unembarrassed 
by, any questions of external policy or foreign expeditions, 
and limited to the narrow range of internal administration — 
devoted themselves to intellectual pursuits. The accounts of 
their reigns refresh the records of this period like oases in a 
desert tract. Some of them were ardent lovers of literature. 
Such was Culla Moggallana : “ There was no one like to him 
as a poet,” says the Maha-varnsa, 1 and, “ being a man of great 
talent, he composed many sacred songs, which he caused to 
be recited by men seated on elephants at the end of discourses 
at the temple services ”, He made “ unusual ” offerings to 
those that preached the Doctrine and caused them to read the 
Tipitaka with its commentaries. So was also Kumara- 
Dhatusena, also called Kumaradasa, author of a melodious 
Sanskrit poem, the J anakl-harana, 2 and so passionately 
attached to his bosom friend Kalidasa, that, in despair at 
his death, he flung himself into the flames of the poet’s 
funeral pyre . 3 Another was Aggabodhi I, patron of the arts, 

1 Ch. xli, vv. 55-61. (Wijesinha's transl.) 

* Wickremasinghe, p. xiii. 

* Alwis, Sidatsarigard, p. cliv. This Kalidasa was not the Sanskrit 
dramatist, but apparently a Sinhalese poet, one or two of whose verses have 
been preserved. 



152 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


surrounded by twelve talented poets, 1 of whose works, 
unfortunately, we know nothing, and Silamegha Sena or 
Matvala Sen, author of the Siyabas-lakara , the standard work 
on Sinhalese prosody. Others patronized the Sangha, the 
repository of all religious and secular learning, by providing 
them with alms, and dwelling places and extensive lands for 
the maintenance of their monasteries. Some of them were 
actuated in their generosity by a desire to make amends for 
their misdeeds, 2 and we find the orthodox monks of the 
Theriva Xikaya more than once disgraced because of their 
reluctance to accept gifts from those of whose actions they 
could not approve. 3 

The annals of this period are full of records of gifts to the 
heretic sects, possibly because of their connivance at the crimes 
of their patrons. 4 The Abliavagiri fraternity seems to have 
benefited most by such royal favours ; but even they suffered 
from the eapriciopsncss of their benefactors, who would not 
hesitate to undo all the good they had done, pull down their 
monasteries, and remove from them all objects of value. 5 
The activities of the schismatics in carrying oil their 
propaganda were- much in abeyance during this period, and we 
hear of only one attempt to spread heresy, which, however, 
proved abortive, 6 being put down with a firm hand by the 
ruling prince of the district where it reared its head. Some of 
the more broad-minded among the rulers attempted to bring 
about a reconciliation between the various sects by making 
them endowments to be held in common. Thus Aggabodhi I 
gave the Sanghikagiri Viliara with 200 fields to all members of 
the Order and dedicated the Kuruiuja Vihara to all the 


1 Kikaya-miigraha , p. 17. 

2 c.g. the parricide Kasyapa. M. V., xxxix, vv. S foil. ; chap, xliii, 
vv. 28 foil. 

3 Ibid., xxxix. vv. II foil. 

4 Ibid., passim. • 

5 Ibid., xliv, vv. 13IM2. 

• Ibid., xlii, vv. 35-40. 



THE DAWN OP THE GOLDEN ERA 


153 


fraternities. 1 Perhaps the repeated invasions of the island by 
the fierce Tamils did much to foster the feeling of brotherhood 
among the monks, who, in spite of all their dissensions, were 
yet patriotic Sinhalese and faithful sons of the Buddha. But 
the old feud between the Mahavihara and the Abhayagiri 
Vihara continued, and, when Silameghavanna requested the 
two communities to observe the uposatha ceremony together, 
the former promptly refused, and thereby earned the wrath 
of the king. 2 And later, when Dathopatissa II built the 
Kappura Parivena for the Abhayagiri monks on land which 
encroached upon the sacred boundary of the Theriya brethren, 
the latter showed their great disapproval by performing 
towards him the patta-n ikkujjan a -kamtna 3 4 (inversion of the 
alms bowl on their begging rounds, thus indicating their refusal 
to accept his alms, a kind of excommunication). 

The gifts thus indiscriminately given to members of the 
Sangha and the want of proper supervision brought dis- 
organization within the Order itself, and attracted into its 
fold many undesirables who were actuated merely by desire 
for gain. So low was the degeneracy into which the monks 
had fallen when Vijaya-Bahu came to the throne that, as we 
shall see later, he had to obtain help from Ramanfiadesa 
in re-establishing ordination in Ceylon. 

But even before Vijaya-Bahu two attempts were made to 
prevent moral worthlessness among the Sangha. The first 
was by Dalla Moggallana (a.d. 608-14), who proclaimed a 
Dhamma-kamma . 4 The second was by Sila Meghavanna 
(614-23), who was a staunch adherent of the Abhayagiri 

1 M.V., chap, xlii, vv. 9-22. 

* Ibid., xliv, vv. 80-2. 

* Ibid., xlv, vv. 32 ff. 

4 The expression often occurs in the AI.V. to denote the manner in which 
the earlier kings interfered to carry out reforms in the Buddhist Church. 
It means literally a legal act. The act seems to have consisted in the 
promulgation by the king of a decree enforcing the observance of discipline 
among the priesthood, and, in some cases, empowering one or more of its 
Order to carry the decree into effect by means of an ecclesiastical court. 
Wijesinha, M. V., ii, p. 25, footnote. 



154 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


fraternity. This Nikaya had become quite degenerate ; 
prosperity had corrupted the members of the community, 
whose lives were now unworthy of their high calling. A young 
and zealous bhikkhu, Bod hi by name, realizing the immediate 
necessity for reform, approached the king personally and 
requested him to issue a decree for enforcing discipline in the 
Order. The king readily acceded and entrusted the execution 
of it to the young reformer himself. The latter, armed with 
the royal authority, proceeded to hold a thorough investigation, 
as a result of which a large number of bhikkhus were expelled. 
This zeal for reform, however, cost him his life. The men who 
were thus driven out of the Order conspired together and 
murdered him. The king, in righteous indignation, had all the 
leading conspirators arrested, cut off their hands and made 
them tank-keepers. 1 Many others were banished. And, 
appreciating the zealous efforts of the murdered bhikkhu, 
he carried out the reforms which had been initiated, and 
purified the Order. His attempts, however, to unite the Malm- 
Vihara and Abhayagiri fraternities ended, as we saw earlier, 
in complete failure. 

And every now and then some of the monarchs, more 
enlightened than others and more anxious for the welfare of 
the religion, strove to keep alive the study of the Dhawma. 
Thus Dat-hopa-Tissa I (circa 640-52) gave a special parivena 
to the Elder Xagasfda at Maricavatti and prevailed upon him 
to teach the Abhidhavima wjth the Atthakathd , 2 and liis 
successor Kassapa II made great offerings to the holy monk 
Mahadhammakatln, and made him teach the Dhamma. 
For the monk, who dwelt at Katandhakara in the monastery 
built by the king’s brother, he caused the whole Pali scripture 
to be written, together with the lesser books or “ epitomes ” 
{Sa-saiigaham). 

The extant inscriptions of this period reveal to us 

1 M. V. 9 xliv, vv. 75-83. 

* Ibid., vv. 149 ff. 



THE DAWN OF THE GOLDEN ERA 


155 


the great care with which the monastic rules were drawn 
up with a view to securing the independence, the exalted 
prestige, and, above all, the purity of the Buddhist Church. 
No kind of corruption was tolerated in the management of 
temple property, no slackness in the observance of religious 
ceremonies. No monk of questionable character was allowed 
to remain in the Vihara, and for anyone who desired to enter 
the Order a minimum knowledge of the Dhamma was insisted 
upon. Thus from an inscription of Kassapa Y (929-39), who, 
it is interesting to note, expounded the Abhidharmna himself 
and caused it to be written on plates of gold (J/.F., lii, vv. 
49-50), we learn that no one was allowed to join the Order 
unless lie knew (probably by heart) at least four sections. 
(bhdnavdm) of the Partita. 1 2 3 

Mahinda IV (circa 975-91) encouraged the study of the 
Dhamma by decreeing, in an inscription which is still 
preserved, that the monks who read aloud and explained to an 
audience the Vinaya-pitaka should be assigned five vasay 2 of 
food and raiment, for the Sutta-pituka seven vasay, and for the 
Abhidhamma-pitaka twelve vasay* He, moreover, caused 
Dhammamitta to expound the Abliidhamma , and Dathanaga. 
* 6 who dwelt as a recluse in the forest and was like an ornament 
unto Lanka, to discourse thereon.” 4 Sena IV' (r. 972), on one 
occasion sat in the Lohapasada and expounded the Suttanta 
to the brethren of all the three fraternities assembled therein. 5 
The great attention paid to the Abhidhantma is significant. 
As a result of these activities of enlightened rulers, the torch 
of learning was prevented from being totally extinguished, 
and even this dark chapter of Ceylon's history is not completely 
barren of literary productions concerned with Pali literature. 

To this period may be assigned the K he ma -ppa kar a n a 

1 Ep. Zey. f vol. i, pt. ii, pp. 42 ~3. 

2 Vasay, a vasal? is live (tells with food and raiment. Ep. At-y., \ol. i, 
p. 100, n. 4. 

3 Ibid., vol. i, pt. iii, p. 100. 

4 M.W, liv, vv. 35-7. 

5 Ibid., liv, v. 4. 



156 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


(also called the Paramattha-dipa 1 by the Elder Khema). The 
book is now not widely known in Ceylon, and whatever copies 
there are at present have been introduced from Burma. 
The Gandha-vamsa ascribes it to a Khema Thera of Ceylon.* 
According to the Saddhamma-sangaha , 3 it is a work expository 
of the Abhidhamma, and it is extensively studied in Burma 
as one of the nine mediaeval compendia of Abhidhamma, 
known as Let-Than or “ little finger manuals ”. 4 It is more 
often called in Ceylon N ama-rupa-samasa , and this title 1 is 
more appropriate to the contents of the w r ork. It contains 
short, descriptions of the citta , a discourse on citta-cetasikd r 
defining kusald and akusala dhammd , and concludes with a 
list of t'wenty-eight mnemonic verses, giving in brief the 
meanings of such terms as mahabhuta, indriya , etc., which 
occur in Abhidhamma literature. That the book was held in 
high esteem in Ceylon from ancient times is evident from the 
references to its author in the Nikaya-sangraha and the 
Saddhamma-ratnakdra , 5 and in the latter he is spoken of as 
T ipilaka-pa riyatti-dhara (versed in the text of the Tipitaka). 
There is a commentary on it by Vacissara Mahasami of Ceylon 
(q.v.), written in the twelfth century. 6 Both text and 
commentary were published in Sinhalese characters by a 
monk named Batapola Dhammapala in Ceylon in 1908, and 
an English transliteration of the text alone has appeared in 
the Journal of the Pali Text Society. 1 The short disquisitions 
on the various subjects are concisely written in simple, easy 
style and the whole work forms a little handbook for the study 
of mediaeval Abhidhamma. 

Mr. Wickremasinghe agrees with Professor Geiger in 
accepting the tenth century as the date of the coinpilation of 

1 Sasana-varhsa- -dipa, v. 1222. 

* Q.V.,?. 61 and 71. 

* p. 63, JPTS. Ed. 

4 Aung, Compendium, pref., p. viii. 

4 p. 367, Colombo Ed. 

4 De Zoyaa ascribed the Khema-ppakaratia itself to Vacissara. Catalogue, 

p. 8. 

f 1916, pp. 1 foil. 



THE DAWN OF THE GOLDEN ERA 


157 


the Pali Mahabodhi-vamsa. 1 S. Arthur Strong, who edited it 
for the Pali Text Society (1891), assigned the author to the 
same period as Buddhaghosa, his reason being that the 
Gandha-vamsa mentions it as having been written at the 
instigation of one Dathanaga, whom he identified with another 
named Dattha, who is said (in the Gandha-vaima) to have 
requested Buddhaghosa to write the S umaiigala-vilasini. 
Strong was wrong in assuming that Dattha and Datthanaga 
were one and the same. Besides the Gandha-vanisa, the 
Sinhalese version of the Pali work, written by Saranankara 
Sangharaja in the eighteenth century, and named the 
M adhurdrtha-prakasini, 2 mentions that the Bodhi-vamsa W'as 
WTitten at the instigation of a Dathanaga. 3 Both 
Wickremasinghe and Geiger identify Dathanaga with the 
them of the same name, whom Mahinda IV (975-91) appointed 
to discourse on the Abhidhamma . 4 If that supposition be 
correct, the Mahahodhi-varma must have been written in the 
last quarter of the tenth century. 

It begins with a history of the Buddha Dlpankara, gives in 
a short summary an account of the existence of the Bodhisatta 
under previous Buddhas, the life of Gotama, his enlightenment 
at the foot of the Bodhi-tree, the planting of the Bodhi-tree 
at Jetavana by Ananda, providing the occasion for the Buddha 
to preach the Kalihga-bodhi-jataka, 6 the Parinibbana, the 
Three Councils, Mahinda ’s mission, the establishment of 
Buddhism in Ceylon, the introduction there of the relics and 
a branch of the Bodhi-tree, the planting of the sacred tree 
and the establishment of the Bodhi-puja, or ceremonies in 
connexion with it. 

The book itself says nothing about its authorship, except 
that it was a translation from a Sinhalese original. The 


Catal, 9 p. xiv, and Geiger, D.V. and M. F., p. 79. 
Wickremasinghe, p. xxi. 

De Zoysa, p. 16. 

M.V liv, v. 36, 

FausbtiU, iv, p. 288 foil. 



158 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


Gandha-vamsa (p. 61) mentions the work by name, but in a 
group of five works assigned vaguely to unnamed authors. 
The Sdsana-mmsa-dtjxi (v. 1262) calls Upa-Tissa the author of 
the Bodhi-vamsa , but says nothing more about him. The Elu- 
Bodhi-vamsa} which is an enlarged Sinhalese translation of 
the Pali work, done by Vilgammula Mahathera, in the 
beginning of the fourteenth century, ascribes the Pali 
Bodhi-vamsa to Upatissa and so does Saranankara’s later 
translation referred to above, written at the beginning of the 
eighteenth century. Gurulugomi, who lived about the latter 
half of the twelfth century, 1 2 author of the Amdvatura , wrote 
a masterly commentary in the Sinhalese of his period on the 
Pali Bodhi-vamsa, called the Bodhi-vamsa-parikathd, but better 
known as the Dharma-pradipikd , and there, too, the work is 
assigned to Upatissa. An Upatissa of Ceylon is mentioned 
in the Gandha-vamsa (p. 67), but we know nothing more 
about him. 

In the whole of the first chapter the close dependence on 
the Niddna-kathd is unmistakable. Even verbal identity is 
not rare. 3 Usually the Mahdbodhi-vamsa account is shorter 
and more like an epitome. It is interesting, however, to note 
that the story of the Kalinga-bodhi-jataka as given in the 
Bodhi-vamsa differs from FausbdlFs version of it ; among other 
peculiarities in the former version, being a long description of 
dibba-cakkhu (clairvoyance) and the seven gems of a cakkavatti 
king. The later chapters show direct dependence on the 
Samanta-pdsddikd and the Mahd-vamsa , chiefly the former. 
Thus the description of Mahinda’s activities after his arrival 
in Ceylon agrees almost word for word with that in the 
Sa manta -pdsadikd , so much so that we are led to the con- 
clusion that the whole passage was directly borrowed from 
Buddhaghosa’s commentary. The concluding verses of some 
of the chapters are the same as the closing chapters of the 

1 Wickremaainghc, p. 22. 

* Wickreraasingho, p. 31. 

* Cf. 31-4, with 17, 82. 



THE DAWN OF THE GOLDEN ERA 


159 


Malta -ra hi sa. 1 In our discussion in a previous chapter of the 
date of the Mahd-va tnsa -ilka. wo presumed that the 
Bodh i-vamsatt hakathd referred to there was different from 
l patissa s work, and was more probably the earlier Sinhalese 
source ot our M a habod It t-ra ntsa . But the quotations from later 
works such as the Mdhd-vrnum and the Sn tna nta -pcisdd ikfi 
would lead us to believe that V patissa did not merely tram date 
the Sinhalese text, directly, but also improved upon it in 
the translation, supplementing it with quotations from works., 
which, in the meantime, had attained great authority. AVe 
shall see later that this was the case with other historical 
W'orks of a similar type, e.g. the Thupa-vamsa. 

Even where the M a hdbodh i-va msa borrows from other works 
its style is different from theirs, more artificial and affected ; 
the stanzas are written in sonorous Pali, the ornamental 
epithets are plentiful and the author is fond of long periods. 
There are distinct traces in the language of the influences of 
Sanskrit on the Pali, and we may regard this book as marking 
the beginning of the period of Sanskritized Pali. Sometimes 
Pali w ords are used in their Sanskrit sense, sometimes Sanskrit 
words not found perhaps elsewhere at all in the old Pali 
literature, 2 and long compounds, possibly derived from an 
acquaintance with Sanskrit Kfivyas, are employed : the wdiole 
tone and manner of his work betray a tendency to use a kind 
of Sanskritized Pali. 

Somewhere about a.d. 1300 an amplified Sinhalese version 
of the Pali Mahabodki-vamsa was made by Vilgammula 
Mahathera, chief monk of the Kitsirimevan Kiilani Temple, 
at the request of Pandita Parakrama-Bahu of Kurunegala 
( c . 1295-1317). The author is probably the one mentioned in 
the N ikaya-sangraha (p. 24) as having made a Sinhalese 
paraphrase of May lira's Sanskrit poem Suri/a-sata ka in the 

1 e.g. M.V., xiv, 65 ; M.B.V., p. 122 ; M. V xvi, 18 ; p. 139; 

M.\\ t xviii, 68 ; M.B.V . , p. 153*. See Geiger, M. V. and 2U\, p. 77. 

* e.g. vdite hhuvana-xekhara, p. 5; para pat acarana-pafala-ragc, p. 61, 
to give but two. •See also Ithys Davids, J RAS., 1905, p. 393. 



160 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


reign of Dambadeniya Parakrama-Bahu (c. 1 236-7 1). 1 
This is written in almost pure Elu, which evidently made it 
difficult to be understood in later years, when Elu had come 
to be regarded as too archaic for ordinary usage ; for we find 
that early in the eighteenth century Saranankara Sangharaja 
compiled an interverbal paraphrase of the Pali work into the 
Sinhalese of his own period. 2 It is curious that Saranankara 
makes no mention of Vilgammula's translation. There also 
exists a Sinhalese glossary of the Pali terms, of extreme 
philological value, judging from the language, written about 
the fourteenth century by a scholar of unusual attainments 
of whom nothing is known. Both this and the other less famous 
work on the Bodhi-tree — the Sulu-bodhi-vamsa (the lesser 
Bodhi-vamsa) are still in manuscript form. 3 

The Gandha-vamsa 4 also mentions an Upatissa, a native of 
Ceylon, as author of the Anagcxta-vamsa-aUhakatha. According 
to the Gandha-vamsa , the original Anagaia-varnsa was the work 
of an Elder named Kassapa, 5 w T ho also wrote Moha-vicchedani , 
Vimati-cchedarii, and theBuddha-vamsa . The Sasana-vamsa-dipa 
(v. 1204) says that he was a poet who lived in the Cola country, 
but we know nothing either of his date or of his other works. 
It is certain that the Buddha-vamsa, which he is supposed to 
have written, was different from the canonical work of the 
same name. Ceylon tradition supports the Gandha-vamsa in 
ascribing the tika on the Andgata-vamsa to an Upatissa, but 
nothing more is known about him. A copy of this which is in 
the library of the Dalada Maligava at Kandy in Ceylon, quotes 
the Anagata-vavnsa in full, and then proceeds to explain it. 
The style of the tika inclines me to the view that we may be 
justified in identifying its author with Upatissa of the 
Bodhi-vamsa , but I would not venture any opinion until more 
definite evidence is forthcoming. 

1 Wickremasinghe, p. 23. 

* Ibid., p. 109. 

* See De Zoysa, p. 20. 

4 p. 72 and p. 67. 

* p. 61. 



THE DAWN OF THE GOLDEN ERA 


161 


The Anagata-vamsa 1 itself is a poem of about 150 stanzas 
(the number varies in different copies) on the future Buddha 
Metteyva. It is remarkable that, so far as we know, there does 
not seem to be any mention of Metteyva s name in the 
N ikdffas except in the Cakkavatti-SVianada-sulta of the 
IFujha (vol. iii, p. 70), quoted also in the Milinda 
(p. J59), where the Jiuddha speaks of the glorious 
spread of the Dhamrna under Metteyva's regime. The name 
occurs also in the last stanza of the Buddha-vamsa. By the 
time of the Maha-vastu the legend is in full vogue, 1 2 but it is 
in the A ndgaia-va rma that we find the fullest and most complete 
account of the tradition. That it is a late work there is not 
the slightest doubt ; many in Ceylon regard it as a spurious 
work altogether. 3 It is regrettable, however, that we cannot 
get any definite information as to the date of the origin and 
the subsequent growth of the belief held by the Buddhists 
in their future Buddha, Metteyva. In earlier times it was 
enough to say that many future Buddhas would come to be 
born in the world, and then a few details, one after the other, 
were added about the Buddha who was to come immediately 
after the last Gotarna, until the legend grew as we have it 
now. There are several points of analogy between the belief 
in Metteyya and the Western idea of a Messiah, though they 
are not the same. Mrs. Rhys Davids has found one reference 
to the Anagata-vamsa in Buddhaghosa's V isuddh i-magga , 4 
but whether the work referred to there is the same as 
ours, there is no possibility of saying. 

Personally, 1 am inclined to the view that Upatissa’s com- 
mentary is based on a much older work, just as the Bodhi-vamsa 
goes back to an earlier Bodhi-vamsatthakatha referred to in the 
M a hd-vamsa -tiled . Both works are now lost, and we shall 


1 For the text with extracts from the commentary see JPTS., 1886, 
pp. 33 foil. 

* Rhys Davids,- Hastings Encyclopaedia , i, p. 414. 

* e.g. l)e Zoysa,' p. 6. 

4 V isuddhi- mayga, ii, p. 761. 



162 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


probably never have a chance of knowing more about them. 
The introductory verses of the present Anagata-vamsa mention 
that it was preached by the Buddha at the request of 
Sariputta, 1 who wished to know about the future of the 
Buddha’s religion. There is no doubt that this statement goes 
back to an old tradition. To the tenth century or the earlier 
part of the eleventh also belongs the small but delightful 
Pali poem of ninety-eight stanzas, known as the Tda-kataha 
gdthd — the stanzas of the Oil Cauldron. They purport to 
be the religious exhortations of a great Elder named 
Kalyaniya Thera, who was condemned to be cast into a cauldron 
of boiling oil on suspicion of his having been accessory to an 
intrigue with the Queen Consort of king Kalani-Tissa, who 
reigned at Kelaniya (306-207 b.c.). The story is related in 
brief in the 22nd chapter of the Maha-varnsa 2 but it omits the 
fact that the thera was killed by being placed in a cauldron 
of boiling oil. We are told, instead, that both the thera and 
his attendant were slain and thrown into the sea. The 
Rasa~vdhim , written by Vedeha in the first half of the fourteenth 
century, gives us greater details of the story. 3 There we are 
informed that the kings’ attendants placed a cauldron of 
oil on the hearth and, when the oil was boiling, hurled the 
thera into it. The thera at that instant attained vipassand , 
and, becoming an Arahat, rose up in the boiling oil and 
remained unhurt, “ like a royal hamsa in an emerald vase, 5 ’ 
and, in that position reciting a hundred stanzas, looked into 
the past to ascertain of what sin this was the result. He found 
that once upon a time, when he was a shepherd, he cast a fly 
into boiling milk, and this was the punishment for his 
former misdeed. He then expired, and the king had his body 
cast into the sea. A vikdra seems to have been built later on 
the spot where the thera was put to death, for the Salalihini- 
sandesa, written in a.d. 1462, refers to it as still existing. 

1 JPTS., 1886, p. 41, w. 1-6. 

* M.V. t xxii, tv. 13-20. 

3 See Alwis, Sidat-sangard , pp. clxxx and cclxxi. 



THE DAWN OP THE GOLDEN ERA 


163 


“ The decorated hall, which in their zeal 
The merit-seeking people* built upon 
The spot where stood the cauldron of hot oil 
Into which King Kelani-Tissa threw 
The guileless sage, a mere suspect of crime.” 1 
The present text purports to contain the stanzas uttered 
by the Elder in the boiling cauldron, but their language and 
style most definitely point to a very much later date. The 
verses as we have them now are only ninety-eight in number ; 2 
possibly the u hundred ” mentioned in the Rasa-vdkirii is only 
a round figure. Neither the author of our version nor his 
date is known. There is no doubt, however, that he was a 
member of the Order, well versed in the Pitakas and com- 
mentarial literature. 

The stanzas show great depth of religious and metaphysical 
learning. The verses embody in them the fundamental tenets 
of Buddhism and are an earnest exhortation to men to lead 
the good life. They open with a blessing upon the king, apt 
beginning for the utterances of a holy man before his murderer. 
Their setting is exquisite, and the style of the poem clearly 
shows that it was written by a man who also knew Sanskrit 
quite well. Only such a man could have constructed in the 
elaborate and beautiful metre of the poem, so delicate a 
specimen of mosaic work in Sanskritized Pali. Yet the Pali 
is not overladen with Sanskritisms, which shows that the work 
is earlier than the twelfth century. It is a fine specimen of 
the literature of what might be called the Pali Renascence 
period, before the language became contaminated by 
Sanskrit influences and lost its pristine purity of diction and 
simplicity. I give below the first verse, which is a good example 
of the style of the poem : — 

Lankissaro jayatu varanarajagaml 
Bhogindabhogariicirdyatapinabdhu 
Sadhupacdranirato gunasannivdso 
Dhamme thito vigcUakodhamaddvalepo . 

1 Macready’s version, verse 70. 

* See the text in JPTS., 1884, p. 55 foil. 



164 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


Such, then, are the Pali works of which we have any know- 
ledge that were written during the four centuries previous 
to the accession of Yijaya-Bu.hu. Vijaya-Bahu succeeded to a 
kingdom torn by strife and completely overrun by foreign 
enemies. Just previous to him Sena V had reigned (c. 991), 
a lad of 12 years at the time of his coronation. Because of his 
evil companions his ministers rebelled, and the young king 
in despair handed over his capital to the Tamils and fled south. 
In his adversity he took to drink and became so addicted to. 
the vice that he was nicknamed Matvala Sen (the mad tiger). 
When he died after ten years, he was succeeded by his brother 
Mahinda V, who was fitted neither by character nor by 
capability to rule a kingdom. Sena’s misrule had plunged the 
country into confusion. Strangers from across the seas, 
belonging to diverse races, had become so numerous and 
powerful in Anuradhapura, that the king found it difficult 
to maintain his position there. The weakness of his 
administration led to insubordination ; the people refused to 
pay taxes, and the king had not the wherewithal to pay his 
army. The Coja king, seizing the opportunity, sent over a large 
army and conquered the country north of the Mahaviiliganga. 
In a few years the Tamil domination extended even beyond 
the river. The Colas became masters of both Anuradhapura 
and Polonnaruva. This was the last of the glory of 
Anuradha-pura, which for twelve centuries had been the centre 
of all the activities of the Sinhalese, religious, social, and . 
intellectual. Robbed of its ancient splendour, this noble city 
ceased henceforward to be the pride of Lanka and gradually 
fell into decay and ruin. 

In the thirty-sixth year of his reign Mahinda himself and 
his queen were captured and taken away. The Tamils were 
masters of all Ceylon. They sacked all the Yiharas and the 
Dagobas, and destroyed whatever they could not carry away. 
They had been taught by the earlier Sinhalese roval imbeciles 
who hired them 1 that wealth was to be found in plenty in 
1 <‘.g. by Kassapa II and Dathopa-Tissa I. 



THE DAWN OP THE GOLDEN ERA 


165 


the monasteries. “The Tamils, like unto Rakkhasas 
(demons),” says the Mahd-vamsa} “ began to oppress the 
country and take by force whatever belonged to the people.” 
Mahinda’s capture was in a.d. 1001. Till Vijaya-Bahu was 
crowned as king of all Ceylon in a.d. 1065 there was no peace 
in the land. The interval was one long period of war and 
persecution. “ Thus did these kings war with one another,” 
bemoans the Mahd-vamsa ; and “ drive each other away from 
the throne ; and by reason of this continual warfare the people 
we e sore oppressed and suffered greatly, and the country 
was brought to great poverty.” 1 2 

When he had driven out the enemy who had been completely 
tyrannizing over the island for over a century, Vijaya-Bahu 
turned his mind to the task, equally colossal, of repairing 
the fearful damage that had been inflicted upon the national 
life during that period of alien domination. He resided at 
Polonnaruva, which now became the capital of the kingdom. 
The century of Cola supremacy was much more than a political 
evil. Its devastating effects were felt in every fibre of the 
national being, but nowhere so disastrously as in that of 
religion. The destruction of the great religious edifices, the 
Viharas, parivenas, and monasteries, resulted in the dissolution 
of the great fraternities that formed the Sangha, and the con- 
sequent decay of that high-souled institution and of the 
national learning, of which it had been the faithful custodian. 
The most significant evidence of the complete disorganization 
of the Sangha under the Tamil rule lies in the total dis- 
appearance of the Bhikkhuni Order during this period. Hence- 
forward we find no reference to nunneries in the Mahd-vamsa. 
Up to this time they had continued to flourish unaffected by 
persecutions consequent on schisms, though there is evidence 
that among the Bhikkhunis, too, there were heretical schools 3 ; 

1 M.V. , liv, vv. 66-8. 

* Ibid., vv. 34 foil. 

» Thus, e.g. Mogg allana I (497-615) is said to have built a speoial convent 
called Rajini and given it to the Sagalika sisterhood, M.V; xxxix, v. 43* 



166 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


but we do not bear of their haying been persecuted at any 
time. Tlie Bhikkhuni Order had been fostered and cherished 
by successive rulers for over twelve centuries, and why it was 
now allowed to die out completely without any attempt at 
resuscitation, it is difficult. to understand. 

Vijaya-Bfihu found that no ordination of bhikkhus had been 
held for long years, because the wliole island could not muster 
five ordained monks, lie therefore sent an embassy to his 
friend and ally. King Anuruddha of Iblmahha-desa. soliciting 
his help in restoring the Sasana in Ceylon. A number of 
eminent T haras , masters of the Tipitaka . were sent n\er. who 
re-established the ordination in the island and helped in 
the resuscitation of learning by instructing a large number 
of bhikklms in the three Pita has and the commentaries. 1 
King Anuruddha was then fresh from vigorous measures 
against heresy in his own countiy. and it is said that lie con-, 
suited Vijaya-Bfihu and came to an agreement with him as 
to the Pali texts which were to lx* accepted as representing the 
true teaching of t lie* Buddha. (.Mrs. Bode, Pali Lit. in Banna, 
■p. 11.) The three fraternities were restored to their ancient 
homes, and, although they reappear as distinct bodies, t hey seem 
to have lost much of the sectarian spirit which had kept them 
disunited. A Tamil inscription of Vijaya-Bfihu records that 
he brought about a reconciliation of the three Xikayas. 2 
and we find that they consented to accept in common a 
Vihara he built for them at Polonnaruva . 3 

This religious revival was. as might be expected, accompanied 
by a great intellectual re-awakening. The king himself was a 
scholar and a poet of no mean order ; the pursuits of literature 
had a great attraction for him. Amidst his multifarious 
duties, he found time every morning to seclude himself for a 
few hours in his religious library (dhamma-mandirn) and there 
he composed a Sinhalese translation of the Dha anna -sa iajanl * 
i ii/.r., ix, v. r>- 7. 

8 Epy. Zeyl . , vol. ii, pt. vi. p. 

8 M.Y., lx, v* 13. 

4 Ibid., v. 17. 



THE DAWN OP THE GOLDEN ERA 


167 


Unfortunately, this work, as well as the Sinhalese poems which 
the Mahd-vamsa says he composed, are now lost. He was a 
generous patron of learning ; the young noblemen attached to 
his court were encouraged by suitable presents to engage 
themselves in literary pursuits, and the king himself acted as 
judge of them. He caused the three Pitakas to be written and 
given to the monks who desired copies. Scholars from abroad, 
especially from India, brought Ceylon once more into touch 
with the culture and the intellectual movements of other lands. 
Sanskrit and Tamil were assiduously studied, and several 
w^orks of merit in Pali too were produced. 

Chief among these was the Abhidhmnmatlh a -mil yah a of 
Anuruddha. Earlier in this chapter attention was drawn to 
the fact that during this period (seventh-eleventh century) 
much care was bestowed on the. study of the Abhidhamma . 
Special teachers were appointed to give instruction in the 
subject. Generous endowments were made to those who 
devoted themselves to Abhidhamma learning and recitals. 
More than one king studied it himself, and we now find 
Vijaya-Hfihii translating the Dham mu -m iaja nl. A\e need not 
be surprised, therefore, that the works of this time deal mostly 
with the Abhidhamma Pit aka . 1 

It was mentioned earlier that one of the influences of the 
migration into Cevlon of large numbers of Tamils from South 
India was the greater attention devoted to the study of 
Sanskrit. Already in the fourth century Huddhadusa had 
composed a medical treatise (the Sarart ha-sa iijjraha) in that 
language. At the beginning of the sixth (cnturv Kumaradasa 
had written an exquisite Sanskrit poem, the Jdnakt-haraya , 
and in the Siyabas-lakara, a work on Sinhalese prosody, 


i When King Jettha-Tissa (a.o. 023) was losing ground in his fight with 
the Tamils, the message he sent to his queen was that she should betake 
herself into a convent, learn the Doctrine and, having preached the 
Abhidhamma, give him the merits thereof : and we are told that the queen 
did as she was asked, and perfected herself m the Abhidhamma and the 
AUhakatha — a striking illustration of the* great veneration in which e 
Abhidhamma was held (M. \ .» xliv, vv. 107-17). 



168 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


already noticed, written by Silamegha Sena (846-66), the 
influence of the Sanskrit rhetoric is clearly to be seen. Some- 
where about the tenth or eleventh century lived an Elder 
named Ratna&rijhana, also called Ratnamatipada, author of 
two works on Sanskrit grammar, the Candragomi-vyakarana- 
panjika , and the &abdartha-cintd. 1 The Pali language, which 
had reached the height of its development with Buddhaghosa 
and his successors, Dhammapala, Mahanama, and others, 
remained as the cultivated literary language of Ceylon, used 
by those who had a clear mastery over it, for about three 
centuries. With the incursions of the Tamils and the con- 
sequent general disorder in the kingdom circumstances were 
incompatible w T ith much literary effort and the cultivation of 
Pali generally dwindled. More attention began to be given 
to secular subjects than heretofore, and Sanskrit came to be 
regarded as being of the first importance for that purpose. 
Already in the Mahabodhi-vamsa the influence of Sanskrit 
studies was plainly perceptible in the loss of the simplicity 
of its Pali, in the restriction of its freedom, in its long com- 
pounds, and its intricate versification. Mention was made of 
the fact that Vijaya-Bahu I encouraged learned men from other 
lands to come and settle down in Ceylon. They were par 
excellence Sanskritists, and set up a faction for Sanskrit 
modes of literature. Sanskrit forms of expression became the 
vogue. This process, however, did not reach its culmination 
till about a century or two after Vijaya-Bahu ; but we see its 
clear workings even in the literature of the period now under 
review. 

The author of the Abhidhammattha-sangaha was an Elder 
named Anuruddha. His name is mentioned in the colophon of 
that work, and there he is stated to have been an incumbent 
of the Mulas5ma Vihara. The style of his language shows that 
he did not live before the tenth or eleventh century, most 
probably the latter, and the fact that Sariputta, who lived in 
the reign of Parakrama-Bahu the Great (1164-97), compiled a 
1 Wickrem&ainghe, p. xiii. 



THE DAWN OF THE GOLDEN ERA 


169 


paraphrase to the Abhidham.mattha-savgaha — coupled with 
the fact that no mention is made in Anuruddha’s work of the 
exploits of Parakrama, whose greatness was extolled by all 
the writers of his period— would lead us to place the author 
before that monarch. Scholars agree in ascribing him to the 
beginning of the twelfth century. 1 Not much more is known 
about him. According to the Burmese tradition Anuruddha 
was an Elder of Ceylon and wrote the compendium at the 
(Mulasoma) Vihara founded by SomadevI, Queen of 
Vattagainani (88-76 b.o.) and the minister Mula, at 
Polonnaruva. 2 The statement that he lived at Mulasoma 
Vihara is supported by the Colophon to the Compendium 
mentioned above. 

The Sasana-vamsa merely calls him “ Anuruddha Acariva 
of Ceylon ”. 3 The Saddham ma-sa iigaha of the fourteenth 
century gives him as the author of the AbhidhammUthcr 
samjaha , and states also that Anuruddha (most probably 
identical with our author) also wrote another work on 
Abhidhamma, the Par am attha -vin irchaya ; but he is there 
mentioned as having lived at Kahcl-pura (Conjevarain), 
reputed as the abode of the commentator Dhammapfila. 4 

In liis edition of the Buddhaghosappatti J. Gray gives a 
chronological list of saintly and learned men of Southern 
India, taken from the Taking records, and there w T e find 
Anuruddha mentioned 5 after authors who are supposed to 
have lived later than the seventh or eighth century. The 
Gandha -va msa (p. 61) gives him as author of three treatises 
on the Abhidhamma , the Compendium, Paramattka-vinic- 
chaya, and N drm-rupa-pariccheda, and mentions him among the 
Ceylon authors (p. 67). The evidence before us would lead to 
the conclusion, therefore, that Anuruddha lived about the 
beginning of the twelfth century, that he was a native of 

Comp . of Phil , p. vii and footnote. 

Compendium, p. vii. 

p. 34. 

P.T.S. Ed., p. 02. 

p. 26. 



170 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


Ceylon, but spent part of his time at Kanci-pura, in South India, 
and that he was the author of three works on the Abhidhamma. 
Such is also the universal belief in Ceylon. 1 In the printed 
edition of the Anuruddha-sataka , a Buddhist devotional poem 
of 101 stanzas, in elegant Sanskrit — one of the few Sanskrit 
works now extant in Ceylon — Pandita Batuvantudave, one 
of the most erudite of Oriental scholars in Ceylon in the last 
century, states that the Sa ddh amnia -sa iiga ha mentions the 
Anuruddha-saiaka and the A bhidham maitha-sangaha as works 
of the same author, Anuruddha. 2 D'Alwis, in his catalogue, 
reiterates the same statement. 3 The Pali Text Society edition 
of the Saddha mma-sangaha , however, makes no such mention. 
The statements of these two responsible scholars show that 
they had a variant reading of the passage before them. At 
any rate, that both the Sal aka and the Compendium are the 
works of the same author is universally believed in Ceylon. 4 * 
Now the Sataka tells us in its concluding stanzas : — 

“ idam vyadhattottaramulandtha- 
ralndiikuropasthai'irdnuruddhah 
that “ it was done by Anuruddha, Upasthavira (or Anunayaka), 
who was like unto a gem in the necklace of the Uttaramfila 
(Nikaya) ,J . This is the first time, as far as we know, that this 
new Nikaya comes into sufficient prominence for notice to be 
taken of it. There is no doubt, to my mind, that the Uttarola 
monastery referred to in the Mahd-vamsa 5 was the 
headquarters of the new T fraternity. It was built by 
King Manavamma, son of Kasyapa II, who ascended the 
throne in (591, and ruled at Anuradha-pura, according to the 
Pujdvaliya , for thirty-five years. 6 It was an offering of 
gratitude by him to the monks of the Abhayagiri Yihara 

1 De Zoysa, p. iv. 

8 Colombo Ed„ 1866, p. ii. 

3 p. 170. 

4 See also Wickrcmasinghe, p. xiv. 

1 Chap, lvii, v. 20. 

• Wijesinha, Maha-varfisa , pt. n, p. xx (table). 



THE DAWN OF THE GOIDEN ERA 


171 


for having consented to take into the Order his elder brother 
in spite of the loss of one eye, which he had suffered in some 
yoga practices. 1 The first chief of the Uttarola was the king s 
brother himself, and he was in charge of 600 monks ; he was 
granted great honours and privileges together with five 
classes of servants to minister unto him. He was appointed to 
supervise the guardians of the tooth relic, and from that time 
the monks of the Abhayagiri became the king’s counsellors, 
and we are told that “ hearkening unto their counsel he 
governed righteously ”. 2 Manavamma was Yijaya-Bahu's 
paternal ancestor, according to the Maha-vamsa , and from a 
Tamil inscription of this king we find that he kept up his 
patronage of the Uttaramiila Nikaya, for it is recorded that 
he himself gave over the custodianship of the tooth relic, 
which was the most precious heritage of a Ceylon king, to a 
monk named Moggallana, of this fraternity. 3 Probably this 
same Moggallana was the Maha-Nayaka of the Nikaya 
during Anuruddha’s time, for we find Anuruddha describing 
himself -as Upasthavira (the second chief). In later times the 
Uttaramula Nikaya gave birth to many an illustrious star 
in Ceylon’s literary firmament, Moggallana, Vilgammula, 
and Sri Rahula, to mention but three. Successive kings 
extended to them their patronage and made munificent endow- 
ments for the maintenance of the Nikaya. Of these, each in 
its proper place. 

For nearly nine centuries the A bkidliamnuilha-sahgaha 
has stood at the head of works on Abhidhamma, held in the 
highest esteem by all Buddhists of the Southern school. It 
gives in outline what the teaching of this part of the Doctrine 
meant to the ancient Buddhists, but it is no systematic digest 
of the Abhidhamma Canon. Its style is unattractive, with its 
dry, terse categories, elliptical mnemonic summaries, its 
endless catalogues and analyses. “ Compared with the older 

1 Af.V., lvii, w. 7-11. 

• Ibid., vv. 16-20. 

* Epigraphia Zeylanica , vol. ii, p. vi, pp. 256 



172 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


and the more famous classic, Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhi-magga, 
the Compendium covers very largely the same range of subject- 
matter as that work, though without the same amplitude of 
treatment. But the object of each work, and hence, to some 
extent, the order and emphasis of treatment in each, is 
different. The Compendium is a concise statement of a view 
of things, with purely theoretical analysis. The Way of 
Purity is ethical in its end, and is psychological only in order 
the better to teach ethics, and the way to saintship. The 
two works are thus to some extent, mutually complementary .'’ 1 
The curt and dry method of its treatment, and the numerical 
characters of its psychological analyses, required a great deal 
of patient study before they could be mastered. But here we 
have a famous and venerable digest of that mere abstract, 
analytical teaching which the Buddhists called Abhidhanima, 
or ‘ultra-doctrine*, wherever the narrative and the homily 
of the Suttanta discourses found no place and the very 
nature of the work made perhaps, a simpler, more attractive 
treatment of the subject very dillicult. Words were yet 
wanting to express certain ideas ; the crystallized experience 
of the ages had not vet become sufficiently familiarized 
with the fundamental question of philosophy, for such 
subjects as mental phenomena to be talked of , except in crude 
and bizarre numerical analyses. Anuruddha\s work, however, 
was in great measure an advance on what had gone before 
him 3 ; yet the subjects he treated of were abstruse and difficult 
to understand. Everyone had not the high gifts to unravel 
the cobwebbed structure of this little manual, these subtle 
psychological analyses. Hence grew up around it a mass of 
exegetical literature, explanatory of its difficulties . 4 In 

1 Mrs. Uhys Davids, Compendium, p. x. 

* Ibid., p. xvii. 

3 e.g. in the treatment of the bhavafiga and the cittaa ; the methods of 
introspection employed with regard to the theory of cetasikaa. For a fuller 
description see Compendium, preface, pp. xix foil., and Mrs. Rhys Davids, 
Bud. Pay., 2nd ed., 1924. 

4 The Pitakottha-main (a Burmese bibliography of Burmese Buddhist 
works) mentions twenty-three different Burmese niaaayas on this work* 



THE DAWN OF THE GOLDEN ERA 


173 


Ceylon itself Sariputta Mahasami (also, apparently, called 
in Burma Navavimalabuddki) and his pupil, Sumahgala, 
wrote flkds on the work, the first of which is now hardly ever 
used. Sumahgala’s Ilka, AbhidhmtimaUha-vibhamni , still 
remains in favour both in Burma and in Ceylon. Sariputta 
also wrote an interverbal paraphrase in Sinhalese. 1 Several 
commentaries on the book have been written in Burma, some 
in Pali 'and others in Burmese, and the Compendium continues 
to be studied with great zeal and earnestness in Burma even 
to-day. 2 

Two other works of Anuruddha, the Ndma-rupa-pariccheda 
and the Paramattha-vinicchaya , are included among the nine 
Little Finger Manuals (Let-than) of the Burmese. 3 Both works 
were written while the author was residing at Kahcl-pura, in 
the Tambarattha, as he says in the colophon or nigamana of 
the Paramattha-vinicchaya. They are composed in gdthd 
verse, and show 7 him as a poet of much ability, with more 
scope for his metrical gifts than w r as possible when he was 
composing the analyses of the Compendium. It is interesting 
to note what he says, in the N dma-rupa -pariccheda , that he 
composed the w r ork according to the commentaries of the 
Mahavihara 4 ; in the colophon he makes affectionate reference 
to Ceylon, showing his connexion w r ith the island (w. 184 r - 
55) . The treatment of the subject in the Nama-rupti-pariccheda 
is much simpler than in the Compendium ; it is meant to be 
an introduction to the study of the Abhidhamma, divided into 
thirteen chapters, giving a general idea of the subjects that 
would come before the student as he reads the Abhidhamma 
books, and thus familiarizing his mind with the chief lines of 

All the Burmese authors of the seventeenth century took it in hand, and it 
has been carefully edited by modern Hsayas (Mrs. Bode, Pali Lit . in Burma, 

pp. 61-2). 

1 I)e Zoysa, p. iv. 

* Compendium, pp. ix-x. 

8 The others being Buddhadatta’s Abhidhammavatdra and Rupd - 
rupa-vibhaga, Dhammapala's Sacca - sail Ichepa, Kassapa's Moha-vicchedani , 
Khcma's Khemappakarana, and Chapala’ a Namacara-dipaka. 

4 JPTS., 1923, p. 6, v. 2. 



174 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


thought he would have to follow out later in greater detail. 
Two tXkds exist on the work, one by Vacissara (thirteenth 
century) and the other by Sumangala, author of the 
Vihhavam-tlka on the Compendium. 

The Paramattfui-vinicchaya is a much shorter work in 
twenty-nine sections, dealing with ritta , cetasika, rupa, and 
nibbdna , by no means so comprehensive as the Nama-riipa - 
'pariccheda ; nor is it as extensively used. A commentary 
exists, written bv a Maha-Bodhi Thera , of whom nothing raoie 
is known except that- he was an incumbent of the Maha- 
vihara at Anuradha-pura. 1 Both works are notable specimens 
of mediaeval Pali verse. 

1 Aung, JPTS., 1910, p. 120. The a ddha m ma - sari gaha also mentions 
him as the author of a Sacra - sa h khepa-vamia n a on Dhammapala's 
Saccasaiikhepa (q.v.). 



THE AUGUSTAN AGE 


175 


CHAPTER IX 

The Augustan Age 

"Y^LJAYA-BAHirS (loath in a.d. 1 1 20 was again the signal 
for internal discord, which threatened to dissever the 
unity of the kingdom. But in this emergency a mighty figure 
appeared on the stage and all other claimants to the throne 
were overruled in favour of Parakrama, a prince of great 
accomplishments and of energy so unrivalled as to secure for 
him the goodwill of his kindred and the admiration and loyalty 
of the people. High thoughts welled within his breast. “ If 
1, who am born of a princely race, should not do a deed worthy 
of the heroism of kings, my life would be of no avail,” 1 he 
had said while yet a child, and it had been his ambition to 
rescue his motherland from foreign dominion and consolidate 
the monarchy in his own person. He completed by foreign 
travel an education which, according to the Maha-vamsa* 
comprised every science and accomplishment of the age in 
which he lived, including theology, medicine and logic, 
grammar, poetry and music, the training of the elephant and 
the management of the horse. With consummate skill and 
unsurpassed power of organization, with an originality which 
always stood him in good stead and with unremitting care for 
details, he soon became master of the kingdomand in a.d. 1164 
crowned himself “ sole king of Lanka 

There is no name in all the annals of Sinhalese history which 
commands the veneration of the people in such measure as that 
of this prince of the “ mighty arm 5 \ Parakrama Bahu, since 
he united in his person the piety of Devanampiya-Tissa and the 
chivalry of Dutthagumani. Once peace was assured within 
his dominions, he would not rest content with the inglorious 
ease of his predecessors. His was the ambition to combine the 
renown of foreign conquests with the triumphs of domestic 
policy. In pursuance of the former he carried his arms even 

i J/.F., lxiv, v. 48. 
a Ibid., lxiv, tv. 30 ff. 



176 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


into such distant countries as Cambodia and Arammana, 
which had offered him insult or inflicted injury on his subjects . 1 
To secure the prosperity of the land he devoted himself most 
earnestly to agriculture as his first task and constructed as 
many as fourteen hundred and seventy tanks, three of them 
of such vast dimensions that they were known as the “ seas 
of Parakrama ”. 2 By a careful organization of a splendid 
civic service he suppressed all lawlessness wdth a firm hand > 
and in one of his inscriptions it is recorded, that “ the security 
which he established as well in the wilderness as in the 
inhabited places was such that even a woman might traverse 
the island with a precious jewrcl in her hand and not be asked 
wiiat it was.” 3 

But all his energies he made subservient to the restoration 
and the embellishment of his religion, and the encouragement 
of the fine arts. In spite of Vijaya-Bahu's efforts to purge the 
Buddhist Sangha of undesirables there still remained within 
its fold members wiio w r ere unfit to lead the monastic life, 
fattening on the endowments given to various monasteries by 
monarchs w T hose zeal for generosity was not tempered by any 
discrimination. “ In the villages that w T ere given to the 
Order,” says the Mahd-vamsa with scathing sarcasm, “ purity 
of conduct among monks consisted only in that they supported 
their wives and children. Verily of purity there w r as none 
other than this. Neither was there any unity in the 
performance of the office of the Church ; and those monks 
that walked the blameless life cared not even to see each 
other.” 4 

The king determined to end this lamentable state of affairs, 
and, being a just man, impartial and, resolute w T ithal, he 
proceeded with great tact and skill. He decided to hold a 
council of the Elders of the three fraternities and appointed 
Maha Kassapa of Udumbaragiri Vihara, a man learned in the 

1 M. V., lxxvi, vv. 12 foil. 

1 Raja-ratnacari , p. 88. 

* Tenncnt, i, p. 409. 

4 if.F., lxxviii, vv. 3-4. 



THE AUGUSTAN AGE 


177 


three Pitakas , who knew the Vinaya wholly, as the head of 
the assembly. He first invited the leaders of the dissentient 
schools, who lived in various parts of the country, to 
Polonnaruva and then requested the Mahavihara monks to 
be reconciled to them. But they were unwilling, “ inasmuch 
as the lewd brethren prevailed in the church and the breach 
was from old time.” 1 Some departed to countries over 
the seas, others took off their robes and many wished not 
even to sit in the same judgment hall. Then began the great 
trial to see whose teachings were correct, and very hard were 
the questions that had to be determined. “ Verily, it seemed 
as if the endeavour to accomplish this unity was like unto the 
effort to raise Mount Meru.” But the king was not to be 
baffled in his purpose. He secured the assistance of great 
doctors learned in the three Pitakas , and with their help solved 
the questions that arose for judgment. He was convinced of 
the righteousness of the claims of the Mahavihara, and ended 
by becoming their patron. He upheld their decisions and 
decreed that their teachings should be accepted. With great 
care and patience he made investigation into the members of 
the schismatic schools ; many of them he caused to return to 
the life of novices, others he persuaded to leave the Order, 
giving them lands and offices for their maintenance . 2 Where 
persuasion was of no avail, he used force and compelled them 
to disrobe themselves. The triumph of the Mahavihara was 
complete, the three fraternities 3 were united and from this 
time we hear no more of the power of dissentient bodies. This 
unification of religion was succeeded by the erection of 
numerous buildings for the benefit of its votaries. Dagobas 
and statues of the Buddha were multiplied without end, 
temples of every form erected in Polonnaruva and elsewhere 
throughoi^t the country. Halls for the reading of bana , 

* Jf.F.,lxxviii, v. 12. 

* Ibid., chap, lxxviii, vv. 17-20. 

* The Abhayagiri, the Jetavana, and the>£ah&vihara. 

12 



178 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


image-rooms, residences for the priesthood, ambulance halls 
and rest-houses for their accommodation when on journeys 
were built in every district, and rocks were hollowed out as 
dwellings for those more inclined to solitude . 1 

The Maha-vamsa devotes several chapters to describing the 
various activities of the king. Even now the ruins of 
Polonnaruva, the most picturesque city in Ceylon, attest to 
the care which he lavished on his capital. Ramparts were built 
and fortresses erected ; palaces for his own use, schools and 
libraries, magnificent halls for music and dancing and drama, 
tanks for public baths, parks and flower-gardens. 

The bare enumeration of such works conveys an idea of the 
immense prosperity which must have made their performance 
possible. With this perfect internal tranquillity, undisturbed 
by oppression, encouraged in their activities by the great and 
devout interest taken by the head of the State himself, and 
working amidst congenial and beautiful surroundings, there 
arose during this period a band of scholars, who made this 
epoch the Augustan age of Ceylon literature. 

Oldest among them was Maha Kassapa of Dimbulagala 
(Udumbaragiri) Vihara, who, as we saw above, was appointed 
by the king to preside over the great council of Elders in order 
to decide the Vinaya rules. He was especially proficient in the 
Vinaya Law, and his services were of great use at the 
Assembly . 2 * 4 He was the author of a Sinhalese sanne , a para- 
phrase, to the Samanta-pdsddikd , which is no longer extant. 
He was a Sanskrit scholar as well, and wrote a grammar 
in that language, called Baldvabodhana , on the lines of the 
Cdndra-vyakarana . 3 He is also reputed to have written a 
porand tiled on the AbhidhammaUha-sangaha. Whether he is 
identical with the Elder Kassapa, whom the Sdsana-vanisa-dipa* 
calls a poet of the Co]a country, but who is regarded in Burma 

1 M . F., chap, lxxviii, vv. 31 flf. 

* Af.F., lxxviii, v. 7. 

* Wickremasinghc, p. xv. 

4 1204. 



THE AUGUSTAN AGE 


179 


as a native of Ceylon 1 and author of a treatise on the 
A bhidhamma called the Moha-vicchedarii (which forms one of 
the little-finger manuals), a tikd on the same, a Vinaya com- 
mentary called the ViincUi-vinodarii, and also according to 
the Gandha-vamsa , 2 of two other treatises called Buddha-vamsa 
and AnagcUa-vamsa, we cannot say. Of these the Vimati- 
vinodani commentary on the Vinaya , though now hardly 
known in Ceylon itself, has been held in great esteem in Burma. 
It was one of the authorities appealed to when Dhammaceti 
carried out his reforms in the fifteenth century, and is 
mentioned in the Kalyani inscriptions. It was largely used by 
the Parupa^as in their debate with the Ekamsikas, which 
ended in the defeat of the latter by the clever Nanabhivamsa 
at the end of the eighteenth century . 3 

Contemporaneous with Kassapa was the Elder named 
Moggallana, author of the Moggallana-Vyakarana. He is, 
perhaps, to be separated from the lexicographer of the same 
name, who also lived at this time and wrote the Abhidhdnappa - 
dipika. But of this more presently. Moggallana ’s work was an 
attempt to start a new school of Pali grammar in Ceylon. The 
influence of extensive Sanskrit studies during this period 
undoubtedly had something to do with it, as we shall see later 
on. Up to this time the vade mecum of Pali writers in 
determining their grammatical form had been Kaccdyana- 
vyakarana , which was held in very high esteem. This work 
consisted of eight divisions, each division comprising suttas 
or rules expressed with sententious brevity ; vutli or supple- 
mentary comments to explain the deficiencies in the suttas and 
render them intelligible ; payoga or grammatical analyses with 
examples, and the nydsa or scholia, giving explanatory notes 
on some of the principal grammatical forms in the shape of 
questions and answers. The Nydsa often exists as a separate 
book called Mukha-matta-diparii . 4 Tradition has it that all the 

1 Aung, JPTS ., 1910, p. 126, and Bode, op. cit. f p. 33, note. 

1 Qandha-varri8a y p. 61. 

• Bode, op. cit., p. 76. 

4 Bode, op. cit., p. 37 



180 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


$utta8 or aphorisms were written by one and the same person — 
Maha-Kaccayana . In the Kaccdyana-bheda , written by 
Mahayasa Thera of Thaton about the thirteenth century, 1 
there occurs a memorial verse : “ The aphorisms were made 
by Kaccayana, the Vutti by Sanghanandi. The illustrations 
by Brahmadatta. And the Nyasa by Vimalabuddhi. ,, From 
the distinct mention of different names for the authors of the 
different parts, it would seem that Sanghanandi was different 
from Kaccayana. In the tikd to his work, written by Mahayasa 
himself, he tries to justify the tradition that both rules and 
supplements were written by Kaccayana, on the hypothesis 
that Kaccayana may also have been called Sanghanandi. That 
the tradition continued to be accepted as being authoritative, 
however, is shown by the fact that, in the Ka^dyana-mnnand 
or commentary on the Sandhi-kappa (section treating of 
euphonic combination of letters) of Kaccayana, Mahavijitavi 
of the Abhayagiri Parvata at Panya (Vijaya-pura), who lived 
about the sixteenth century, 2 still assigns the whole of the 
grammar and the Mahd-NiruUi and the Netti-ppakkararia to 
Maha-Kaccayana. In the commentary to Buddhappiya’s 
Rupa-siddhi , 3 a grammar based on the Kaccayana, the author 
of the older grammar is identified with the Great Elder 
Maha-Kaccana, one of the eighty chief disciples of the Buddha. 
“ Who is this Kaccayana ? Whence his name ? It is he who 
was selected for the important office (of compiling the first 
Pali Grammar) by the Buddha himself, saying * Bhikkhus, 
amongst my disciples capable of elucidating in detail what 
is expressed in the abstract, the most eminent is Maha- 
Kaccana According to the Rupa-siddhi , Kaccayana’s 
purpose was that “ men of various nations and tongues, 
rejecting the dialects which have become confused by its 
disorderly mixture with Sanskrit and other languages, may 
with facility acquire, by conformity to the rules of grammar 

1 Bode, p. 37. 

1 p. 46, Bode. 

. • q.v. 



THE AUGUSTAN AGE 


181 


propounded by the T athagata , the knowledge of the word of 
the Buddha ”. 1 In the Anguttara Atthakatha , Kaccayana is 
represented as a thera who was able to amplify the concise 
words of the Buddha both by means of letters and by showing 
their sense. Others could do it only one way or the other. 
Therefore was he called the chief 

It is quite possible that the great Elder Maha-Kaccana, 
a chief disciple of the Buddha, did compile a set of rules in the 
languages in which the Canon was handed down. There is 
evidence to show that Maha-Kaccana was the head of a school 
at Avantl. The Maha-vastu 2 says that he was the nephew of 
Asita or Kaladevala, seer of Vindhyacala. Acting under the 
seer’s advice, he, together with his companions, visited the 
Buddha and there, impressed by the Buddha’s erudition, they 
became monks and later attained Arahatship. Kaccana 
(or Nalaka, as he was called, Kaccana being the gotta or 
gotra or gens name), is said to have been the son of the 
minister of Cantjappajjota of Avantl. He returned with his 
followers from SavatthI and founded asramas in the Avantl 
country at Kururaghara-papata and Makkara-kata. The 
Thera - and Theri-gdtha, contain several names of monks and 
nuns of this Avanti fraternity, e.g. Nanda Kumaraputta, 
Isidatta son of a caravan-guide, Dhammapala, and 

So naku tikanoa . 3 

Though the Avantl school never grew to be large in numbers, 
yet they had an important voice in matters of dispute with 
regard to changes of doctrine and in the rules of discipline, 
for we find that in the Council of Vesall they had to be called 
in to take part in discussing the questions raised by the 
Vajjian monks. 4 The Vinaya , in the 5th book (13) of the Mahd- 
vagga , mentions Avanti as a place difficult of access, and in the 
Sutta-nipdta the names of the halting stations are given from 

1 Tumour, Maha-vaijtsa, introd., p. xxvii. 

1 Maha-vastu , vol. ii, p. 382. 

* See Psalms of the Brethren t under these names. 

4 Kern, Manual of Buddhism , p. 107. 



182 


THE PALI LITERATURE 07 CEYLON 


Patitfchana to Savatthi through Avanti, in describing the 
journey of Bavari’s ten disciples when they came to see the 
Buddha. In the Culla-vagga, (ii, p. 299) it is said that 
the Avanti Bhikkhus laid special stress on ascetic practices 
allowed in the Buddhist code which are known as the 
dhzUa-vada practices. It is significant that the Netti-ppakarana, 
which is a special work of doctrinal interpretation by way of 
exegetical analysis, should also be ascribed to Maha-Kacc&na, 
who was reputed to be the greatest analytical exponent in the 
Buddha’s time. Living in comparative isolation, the school 
at Avanti may quite possibly have developed a system of 
analysis and of grammar — two more or less related subjects — 
and the traditional assertion that Maha-Kaccana himself was 
the author of the terse aphorisms would therefore be justified 
to this extent that he was the founder of the school in whose 
parampard the subject was handed down and further 
developed. And, just as in sanctioning the Vinaya rules 
as authoritative declarations, the words “ anujanami 
bhikkhave ” were put into the mouth of the Buddha, so quite 
possibly the grammatical rules were upheld by directly 
attributing them to the founder of the school himself.’ 

That the Grammar was the work of a south Indian school 
is further supported by the fact that when, after Moggallana’s 
grammar had superseded Kaccayana’s authority, the reaction 
set in a century later in favour of the elder author, it was led 
by a south Indian, Buddhappiya or Dlpaiikara, with his 
grammar, the Rupa-siddhi. It seems, therefore, reasonable 
to conclude that there existed a set of grammatical rules 
going back possibly to Maha-Kaccana himself, and quoted on 
his authority, and that they were developed apparently in 
India, probably by members of the Avanti school, 
Sanghanandi, Brahmadatta, and lastly by Vimalabuddhi. The 
text now known to us may be considered a revised edition of 
what were traditionally known as the Mahd-Kaccdyana Suites , 
arranged and enlarged by Sanghanandi. This would also 
account for Mahayasa’s surmise, mentioned earlier, that 



THE AUGUSTAN AGE 


183 


Kaccana and Sanghanandi were one and the same. It is the 
generally accepted theory in Ceylon that the Kaccdyana - 
vydkarana has extensively borrowed its terminology from 
Sanskrit grammar and that there is much resemblance between 
the works of Kaccayana and those of the Katantrics rather 
than those of Panini and his school. The Katantric grammars 
do not labour under the studied brevity and obscurity of the 
Paninians, and this perspicuity and method of treatment bear 
close affinity to those adopted in Kaccayana ? s work. It is 
clear however that, except in the examples drawn from 
Buddhist canon and texts, most of the others are adapted 
from the well-known and common examples of all Sanskrit 
grammarians . 1 

D’Alwis, in the scholarly Introduction to his edition of the 
Kaccdyana , 2 has shown that either Buddhaghosa was not 
familiar with the work of Kaccayana, or the grammar had not 
in his time acquired the authority which it certainly exercised 
a few centuries later. Since, however, Buddhaghosa does make 
reference to Kaccayana in his Anguttara Atthakatha as the 
chief of the Neruttikas and mentions the Kaccdyana-pakarana 
in the Sutta-Niddesa , the first supposition falls to the ground. 
If in Buddhaghosa’s time Kaccayana's work had been widely- 
known and accepted as the chief authority, he certainly 
would have used Kaccayana’s terminology. That 
Buddhaghosa’s terms were different from Kaccayana’s wall 
be clear from the following tabulated list of cases 5 : — 
Buddhaghosa Kaccdyana 

Paccattain Pathama 

Upayogam Dutiya 

Karanam Tatiya 

1 For details see D'Alwis’ Introduction to his edition of the grammar. 
Colombo, 1864. 

* pp. XXV foil. 

1 There is, however, a Burmese tradition that Kacciyana's grammar was 
brought to Burma by Buddhaghosa, and the Burmese translation and 
commentary are ascribed to him (Pali Grammar, by Francis Mason, introd., 
p. ▼>. 



184 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


Buddhaghosa 

Kaccayana 

Sampadana 

Catutthi 

Nissakka 

Pancami 

Sami 

Chatthi 

Bkumma 

Sattaml 

Alapana 

Alapana 


When, however, we come to the author of the tlkds written 
during and soon after the reign of Parakrama Bahu I (a.d. 
1164), we find that their terminology tallies with that of 
Kaccayana. 1 We may, therefore, reasonably conclude that 
the Kaccayana came to be put into its present form and 
recognized in Ceylon as an authority on Pali grammar some- 
where between the century after Buddhaghosa and the 
eleventh century. Edmund Hardy has shown us in his 
introduction to the Netti-ppakarana 2 that that work, too, does 
not seem to have been well known to Buddhaghosa. Possibly 
both works were introduced to Ceylon during the time when 
scholars from South India migrated to Ceylon in large 
numbers to study at the Maha-vihara and other centres of 
learning in Anuradha-pura, soon after Buddhaghosa's works 
proved to them the richness and the genuineness of the Ceylon 
Thera-vada tradition. It is now generally accepted that the 
Kaccayana came into vogue in Ceylon about the seventh 
century of the Christian era. 3 

In the eleventh century, when Vijaya-Bahu of Ceylon 
appealed to Anuruddha, king of Burma, for help in re- 
establishing the Sangha ordination in the island, the inter- 
course between the two countries became closer and more 
intimate. We saw in the last chapter how the two monarchs 
co-operated in arranging a common authoritative canon for 
both countries, and how Anuruddha obtained from Ceylon 

1 D’Alwis, loc. cit. 

* P.T.S. Ed., pp. xiv-xv. 

* Thus Mrs. Rhys Davids, Compendium , Preface, p. viii. See, however, 
Pali Grammar , by Vidyabhiis&pa, published by the Maha Bodhi Society, 
Calcutta, where Kacc ay ana’s period is given as third century a.d. at 
Mathura (Introd., p. xxviii). 



THE AUGUSTAN AGE 


185 


copies of the Pali Tipitaka , which he examined and compared 
with the Thatdn collection, aided by the Talaing monk 
Arahanta. Anuruddha died in 1057 without being able to 
see the firstfruits of his husbandry, but during the reigns 
of his immediate successors Pali learning took firm root at 
Pagan, and the works of this period show that the Burmese 
monks specialized in the study of Abhidhamma and Nirutti 
(grammar). In 1154 the monk Aggavamsa completed the 
Sadda-riUi, a grammar based on the Tipitaka , and described it 
as the most comprehensive in existence.* It established the 
reputation of Burmese schokrship in that age, and of the 
author to the present day, for the Sadda-riUi iB still regarded in 
Burma as a classic. The Sadda-riUi formed the first return gift 
of Burma to Ceylon. A few years after its completion, th* 
Thera Uttarajlva left Pagan for the Mahavihara, taking with 
him a copy of the work, which immediately evoked enthusiastic 
admiration and was deckred superior to any work of the kind 
written by Sinhalese scholars. 1 2 Uttarajlva was accompanied 
by his pupil, the novice Chapala, who lived amidst the Ceylon 
Sangha for several years, received ordination at their hands, 
and later became one of the most famous of the Burmese 
literati under the name of Saddhammajotipala, author of many 
books, including several grammatical treatises based on the 
Kaccayana, to which we shall refer later. 3 

The intimate assocktion with grammarkns of such 
eminence as these was bound to inspire their colleagues in 
Ceylon with a zeal for the study of the ninUti-sattha 
(grammatical science). A new zest was given to the perusal 
of such works as they had already with them. Chief amongst 
such was undoubtedly the Kaccayana, which they regarded 
as their manual. But since Kaccayana ’s day other influences 
had been at work, shaping and moulding Pali grammatical 

1 Bode, 14 Early Pali Grammarians in Burma ” JPTS., 1908. An edition 
by Mr. Helmer Smith is now being published. 

* Sasana-vayua, p. 74. 

* Bode, op. cit., p. 89. 



186 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


forms. In Ceylon the great attention given to Sanskrit by 
the learned monks had brought about the birth of a 
Sanskritized Pali, which was recognized as good literature. The 
need was therefore felt for a more up-to-date treatise on Pali 
grammar, and an Elder named Moggallana came forward to 
supply that need. 

Of the man himself, apart from his work, we know little. 
He was a pupil of Maha-Kassapa of Udumbaragiri, and it is 
stated in the colophon of the grammar that he wrote it in 
the reign of Parakramabahu the Great, after the king had 
purged the Sangha of all heretical and sinful Bhikkhus, i.e. 
after a.d. 1165. Sri Rahula, author of the Panjikd-pradipa on 
Moggallana’ vyakaran-a states that Moggallana was an incum- 
bent of the Thuparama Vihara at Anuradha-pura. 1 He was 
perhaps identical with the Moggallana Thera mentioned in the 
Tamil inscription of Vijaya-Baliu, 2 as having been entrusted 
with the custodianship of the Tooth-relic, in which case he 
was the head of the Uttaramula Nikaya, of which fraternity 
the author of the Abhidhawmattha-sangaha was anundyaka. 
He was doubtless a distinguished scholar, for he is very highly 
spoken of by his contemporary, the learned Medhaiikara 3 
of Udumbaragiri Vihara, a pupil of Sariputta and author of 
several works of note. He is also mentioned as one of his 
teachers in most eulogistic terms by Sarigharakkhita, 4 another 
of Sariputta ’s pupils, who wrote no less than five com- 
prehensive works on Pali grammar and prosody. 

As has been already mentioned, there are several points of 
difference between Moggallana ’s grammar and those of the 
Kaccayana school. Aggavamsa's Sadda-riiti , introduced into 
Ceylon from Burma, had followed the terminology of 
Kaccayana. Moggallana differs from them both. His 
aphorisms are differently worded. He disputes the correct- 

1 Sec also De Zoysa, p. 24. 

* Ep. Zeyl vol. ii, pt. vi, pp. 246 foil. 

* In the Vinayarthasamuccaya (q.v.). 

4 In his Sambandha-cinta (q.v.). 



THE AUGUSTAN AGE 


187 


ness of the very first sutta in the Kaccayana— that there are 
forty-one letters in the Pali alphabet — and contends that the 
number is forty-three, including short e and o. Kaccayana, 
in his second chapter, mentions that the three inflexions, 
aya, a, and e, are used optionally with nouns for sa (dat. 
sing.), smd (abl.'sing.), and smim (loc. sing.) respectively, and 
that they are never used with pronouns. Moggallana denies 
this, and quotes examples from. the Tipitaka to support his 
contention. He takes exception to the Kaccayana definition 
of the dative case as “ that which expresses a wish to give, 
that which pleases or holds ”, and states that, though words 
of giving govern a dative case, and though the forms of the 
two cases are identical, yet words expressing pleasure and 
bidding govern a genitive . 1 The work is divided into six 
chapters : terminology and sandhi , declensions, compounds, 
nominal derivations, verbal derivatives, and verbs. 
Moggallana himself calls his work Sadda-sattha (work on verbal 
science), and mentions in the colophon that not only did he 
write the aphorisms, but also composed to them a Vutti 
explanatory of the rules in detail. He also wrote a panelled 
or commentary on his Vutti, and called it the Vutti-mnmind- 
paneikd dealing with the karaka (syntax) only. This work is 
well known because of the Pancikd-pradipa written on it, by 
Sri Rahula Sangharaja, mentioned above. Moggallana’s 
work started a new school of Pali grammar in Ceylon, which 
included such luminaries of learning as Sangharakkhita, 
Piyadassi, author of the Pada-sadhana, Ananda, Vanaratana 
Medhankara, and Sri Rahula. Their works will be dealt with 
in their respective places. 

A Moggallana was also the author of the Ahhidhanap - 
padipika, written at the same time as the above, in the reign of 
Parakraxna the Great. Whether he was identical with the 
grammarian or with the Moggallana referred to in Vijaya-Bahu s 
inscription, it is at present impossible to say. A Sinhalese 
sanne or interverbal paraphrase of the work says that it 
1 Also D’Alwis, Catalogue, p. 184. 



188 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


was composed by the author of the Vydkarana, but, though 
the sanne is undoubtedly an ancient and a valuable work, we 
know neither its author, nor the date of its compilation. The 
same statement is made in a tikd or commentary which is 
certainly later than the sanne , for reference is made there to 
the latter work. The tradition in Ceylon is that the author of 
the Abhidtena-ppadipikd is different from the grammarian. 1 
The work belongs to the latter part of Parakrama’s reign, 
for the author speaks in high praise of the king and of the 
works done by him for the adornment of his capital and as 
“ having long extended his protection to the united Sangha 
of the Three Nikayas ”. Moggallana calls himself “ the special 
object of the King’s wish-conferring patronage and a dweller 
amongst the Saro-gama fraternity He composed his work at 
the Maha Jetavana Vihara in Pulasti-pura (Polonnaruva). 2 
The seventy-eighth chapter of the Maha-varnsa speaks of 
Moggallana as having attended the Convocation of Maha- 
Kassapa from the country of the Upa-raja or sub-king. 3 
The headquarters of the Saro-gama fraternity were at 
Seruvavila near Trincomali, and this community came into 
prominence in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, when 
one of its members became head of the Kitsirimevan Kalani 
Temple and compiled several works of merit. 4 Even in the 
twelfth century they must have constituted an important 
body of monks; otherwise they would not have been* repre- 
sented in the Convocation. The Jetavana Vihara was built 
by Parakrama to rival in splendour AnathapingLika’s gift to 
the Buddha. We are told that it consisted of 520 dwelling- 
houses, apart from other buildings, and was replete with every 
means of comfort. 5 

The Abhidhana-ppadlpikd is the only ancient Pali Dictionary 
in Ceylon, and it follows the style and method of the Sanskrit 

1 See Subhuti’s edition, Colombo, 1865, and also see De Zoysa, p. 21. 

* Subhuti’s edition : colophon. 

* M.V., Ixzviii, v. 9. 

4 Wickremasinghe, p. 23. 

5 M.V., loc. cit., vv. 31-48. 



THE AUGUSTAN AGE 


189 


Amara-kosa. As the name implies, it is meant to throw light 
(padipa) on the meanings of nouns ( Abhidhdna ). In the opening 
stanzas Moggallana tells us that his work was written because 
“ an intimate acquaintance with nouns and their genders 
is essential for those desiring to learn the correct significance 
of words and is a help to those wishing to master the word of 
the Buddha”. In the colophon lie says that the lexicon 
“ interprets the names of all objects in the Deva, Manusa, 
and Naga worlds The work is divided into three parts, 
dealing with celestial, terrestrial, and miscellaneous objects 
respectively, and each partus subdivided into several sections, 
which are by no means mutually exclusive. The whole book 
is a Dictionary of Synonyms, all the names given to one 
particular thing being grouped together and put into verse 
to facilitate memorizing them. The last two sections of the 
last part are devoted to homonyms and indeclinable particles. 
The work is held in the highest esteem both in Burma and 
Ceylon. In Burma an important officer of state under 
King Kittisihasura (a.d. 1351) wrote a Samvaynana on it and 
the Elder Nana vara of Pagan translated the Lexicon into 
Burmese in the eighteenth century, thus completing a task 
which had been begun by his predecessors in the seventeenth 
century. 1 In Ceylon itself a sanne and a tiled were written, 
to which reference has already been made. 

Mrs. Bode mentions 2 that in the Ekaipsika-Parupana 
controversy in the last quarter of the eighteenth century, 
the Ekamsikas quoted in support of their arguments a treatise 
called Cula-ganthi-jxida, which they attributed to the Arahat 
Moggallana, one of the two chief disciples of the Buddha. 
They explained that it was embodied in a text known 
as the Pitaka-Uaya-lakkharm-yandha, brought to Burma 
by Buddhaghosa. But the Parupapas maintained that the 
text on which the Ekaipsikas depended was a treatise called 
the Vinaya^atythi-pada , of the twelfth century, and was written 

1 Bode, Pali Lit. in Burma , p. 67, 

* Ibid., p. 70. 



190 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEV.LON 


in Ceylon by the thera Moggallana in Parakraxna Balm's reign. 
The title of the book would suggest that it was a dissertation 
on the Vinaya , but no such book is known in Ceylon at the 
present day, and, so far as I am aware , Moggallana did not write 
any compilation on the Vinaya and the only work bearing the 
name of V inaya-ganthi-pada extant at present in ‘Burma; is 
ascribed to a Sinhalese monk named Joti, of whom nothing 
more is known . 1 

Perhaps brightest among the constellations that adorned 
Ceylon’s literary firmament during Parakrama-Bahu’s reign 
was Sariputta, called also Sagaramati , 2 * “ like to the ocean 
in wisdom.” He was one of the prominent members of 
Parakrama-Bahu’s convocation, and we are told that the king 
built for him “ a mansion of great splendour containing many 
halls and chambers ”, attached to the Great Jetavana Vihara 
at Polonnaruva . 8 Like all the other learned men of his period, 
he was a clever Sanskrit scholar as well, and wrote a tika on 
Ratna^rijnana’s panjikd to the Cdndragomi-vydkrana. This 
was called the Ratnamati-panjika-tika or Panjikdlankdra. He is 
also credited with having written a concise grammar in 
Sanskrit, called the Paddvatara, dealing mainly with words, 
their forms and meanings, but this work is now apparently 
lost . 4 

Another of his works is the Vinaya-sangaha , a summary of 
the Vinaya Pitaka , divided into various sections, giving 
concise explanations of Vinaya rules. Thus : divdseyyd ti 
divdnibbajjanam, tatrdyam vinicchayo : anujdndmi, bhikkhave , 
divdpatisalliyantena dvdram samvaritvd patisallayitun ti 
vacanato diva nippajjante dvdram samvaritvd nibbajjitahbam. 
( Divdseyya means “ sleeping by day This is the decision 
with regard to it, “ Bhikkhus, I rule that he who rests in 
sleep by day should have his door closed,” from this, “ if one 

1 Dr. Forchhammer’s List published by the Government of India, 1879. 

s S.-saiigaha , p. 63. 

■ M . F., lxxviii, v. 34. 

4 See preface, p. xvi, printed ed. of Moggatl&na-paiijih&-pradipa. 



THE AUGUSTAN AGE 


191 


sleeps by day the door should be closed.”) . In the colophon 
Sariputta mentions that it was written by him at the request 
of King Parakrama. The work seems to have been known 
under various titles. The Mandalay MS. in the India Office 
Library has the title Mahdvinaya-sangaha-pakarana, by 
Sariputta, and in the colophon the work is called PalimuUaka - 
V inaya-vinicchaya . The MS. in the Colombo Museum Library 
bears the title Palimuttaka-Vinaya ; D’Alwis in his Catalogue 
(p. 170) gives a Pali MuUaka-Vinaya-vinicchaya as one of 
Sariputta’s works, and Westergaard has the same in his 
Catalogue (p. 48). Forchhammer s list contains Vinaya-mahd- 
sangaha , by Sariputta. The Gandha-vamsa calls it Vinaya - 
sangaha (p. 61), and so does the Sdsana-vamsa (p. 33). In Burma 
the work is known as the Vinaya-sangaha and Vinaya-sangaha - 
pakarana, 1 and is mentioned in the Kalyani inscription, 2 
among several works of Sinhalese authorship. It formed one 
of the chief works consulted by King Dhammaceti of Pegu 
in the fifteenth century, when he instituted his reforms for the 
Sangha, 3 and the Pitaka ttha-main (p. 43) mentions a com- 
mentary on it by the Acariya of King Sin-gu of Ava. It has 
been suggested in view of the variety of the titles under which 
the book is known that Vinaya-sangaha, or, to give it its full 
name, PalimuUaka- V inaya-vinicchaya-sa ngaha, was only part 
of a much larger Mahd-Vimya-sangaha-pakarana , 4 but I 
see no reason to accept this suggestion. It is only too well 
known that the work of ancient authors often bore more than 
one title — sometimes confusedly so — and it is quite likely that 
Sariputta’s work was no exception to this custom and that 
whatever its full and original name was, it was generally called 
the Vinaya-sangaha . Two tikds 6 are extant on it in Ceylon, 
one old {pordna ) and the other new (nava), but the author and 
the date of neither is known. The Gandha-vamsa (p. 61) says 

1 Bode, p. 38, and n. 39, footnotes. 

* Jnd. Antiquary , vol. xxii. 

* Bode, p. 38. 

4 e.g. Fausbdll, JPTS., 1896, p. 18. 

* De Zoysa, p. 15. 



192 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


that Sariputta wrote a Vika on it himself. He al3o wrote a 
Sinhalese sanne to the Abhidhamrmttha-sangaha. 

Sariputta ’s most comprehensive work, however, is the Sar- 
attha-dipani , his masterly sub-commentary on Buddhaghosa ’s 
Samanta-pasadika on the Vinaya-Pitaka. The immense amount 
of valuable information he has collected therein shows that his 
knowledge was extensive and profound, and that he was not 
second to the great commentator himself in exegetical ability. 
The language betrays the influence of Sanskrit learning on the 
author s Pali. Many of the illustrative stories given are of 
Ceylonese Theras and laymen, and the work contains a very 
valuable historical account of the eighteen schools into which 
the Buddhist Sangha were divided at the time of the Third 
Council, and gives much information not available at present 
anywhere else. The work is divided into two sections — 
Cula and Mahd , and follows closely the lines laid down by 
Buddhaghosa, thus suffering from the same weakness of being 
tied down too much to orthodox interpretations. Sariputta is 
also sometimes credited with having written two other tikds, the 
Sarattha-manj usd on the Anguttara, based on Buddhaghosa ’s 
Manor atha-puranl , and the Linattha -p pakasim on the Papanca- 
sudani of the Majjhima. 1 To this time, most probably, also 
belong the tikds on the other three Nikayas of the SuUa-Pitaka 
collectively known as the Sdrattfia-mauj usd ilka. 2 

The tikds were sub-commentaries, that is to say, works 
containing expositions of points in the Atthakathd or com- 
mentaries which needed further elucidation for their correct 
interpretation ; or sometimes they merely gave additional 
information regarding the discussions in the commentaries, 
e.g. more illustrative stories. The tikds , unlike the com- 
mentaries, were purely of Ceylonese origin, compiled and 
written by Ceylonese scholars, and the Vikas on the Canonical 
texts and commentaries were composed soon after the 
^Convocation held under the patronage of Parakrama-Bahu 

1 Wickrem&singhe, p. zv. 

1 De Zoysa, p. 3. 



THE AUGUSTAN AGE 


193 


with Maha-Kassapa as President. The Saddhamma-sangaha 1 
has an interesting chapter on how they came to be written. 
Thus : — 

“ After the three fraternities of Ceylon monks had been 
reconciled and monasteries and places of learning had been 
b^ilt for their use, Maha-Kassapa, head of many thousand 
monks at Jetavana Vihara, assembled there and made the 
following declaration : “ Whatever commentaries have been 
compiled by teachers of old on the Atthakathd of the three 
Pitakas are now of no use to monks living in the various 
countries. Many of them are written in the Sinhalese language, 
and the others in Magadhi mixed with various languages 
( akulam ) and unintelligible. Let us therefore remove such 
faults and compose exegetical commentaries, complete and 
clear in exposition.” The Bhikkhus agreed and requested him 
to obtain the royal sanction. That having been secured, they 
reassembled in the hall (at Jetavana) built by the king, and 
composed tikds [UnaUha-mnrmnd) on the Vinaya-Pitaka 
( SaraUha-dipani) , the four chief Nikdyas of the Sutta-Pitaka 
(the SdraUha^manjusd divided into four parts) and on the 
Abhidhamma-Pitaka (Paramattha-dipam in three parts).” 

To the Abhidhamma tikds more detailed reference will be 
made later. It is significant that Sariputta’s name is not 
mentioned in this connexion, and that no special works are 
assigned to him by the author of the Saddhamma-sangaha. 
Unreliable as the information of the Saddhamma-sangaha is 
in many respects, as we shall see when we discuss it later, 
there is no doubt that the account of the tiled compilation, as 
given here, contains more than a germ of truth. It has to be 
remembered that for several centuries preceding Parakrama’s 
reconciliation of the communities the Sa&gha had been tom 
by various schisms. The different sects, while they accepted 
the authority of the common canon and of Buddhaghosa’s 
commentaries, interpreted various points of teaching in Jfheir 
own way, to support each in their claims to orthodoxy, these 
1 JPTS. Ed., pp. 68 foU. 

IS 



194 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


interpretations were written and handed down in tlkds or 
additional commentaries, and, as the author of the Saddhamma- 
sahgaha puts into the mouth of Kassapa, they were variously 
written, some in Sinhalese, others in Pali, others in a mixture 
of dialects, due to the conglomeration of the many elements 
that constituted the Sangha. The tlkds contained much 
valuable information and often the correct traditional inter- 
pretations that would be of great assistance in a correct 
understanding of various points of the Dhamma teaching. 
Much matter must have accumulated since Buddhaghosa 
compiled his works, especially after scholars began to come 
over to Ceylon from Burma and China, South India and 
Cambodia. And, just as Buddhaghosa felt the necessity of 
making a concise compilation of the different atihakathds that 
had come down to his day, the need was realized of bringing 
these various tlkas together and making a synthetic summary 
of them all. It was impossible, however, to accept all or even 
most of what they contained, nor was it politic that the works 
of any particular school should supersede those of the others. 
There were yet in the Sangha those who were not quite whole- 
heartedly reconciled to the victory of the Mahavihara over 
the other schools ; thus unity of the fraternities had been 
secured only with great tact and patience and labour, and a 
wise man, such as Kassapa undoubtedly was, would have 
shrunk from doing anything fresh to rekindle dissatisfaction. 
We may well believe, therefore, that he consulted his colleagues 
at Jetavana and obtained their help in settling the tlkas. 
These tlkds may be regarded, therefore, as the work of a 
school, rather than of single individuals ; they were rehearsed 
in solemn conclave and completed after discussion. 

What, then, about Sariputta’s part in this task ? He was 
an important member of the Jetavana monastery and 
undoubtedly took a prominent part in the proceedings. 
He may possibly have been appointed to supervise certain 
sections of the work — the Vinaya , AnguUara, and the 
Majjhima portions. It may even be that after consultation 



. THE AUGUSTAN AGE 


195 


with his saddhi- vihdrika* he was authorized by them to 
writ e those sections which now bear his name. The custom of 
single authors making compilations was then quite well- 
established, and, as long as the matter which they contained 
won their approval, the tikd compilers would have had no 
objection to any one of their number— and Sariputta was 
certainly one of the most eminent amongst them — writing 
the work. This supposition would account also for Sariputta 
having written a Vinaya-sangaha , apart from the tiled on the 
Vinaya associated with his name. The first was purely his, 
the second the work of an assembly (or a committee, we may 
call it), of which he was the head. The tikds on the Vinaya 
Pitaka and on the Anguttara and the Majjhima Nikdyas 
of the Sutta Pitaka are definitely attributed to Sariputta. As 
to the authorship of the tikds on the other two portions of the 
Sutta Nikaya , nothing is known. The common name borne 
by all the tikds of each Pitaka would seem to strengthen the 
hypothesis that they were the work either of one person or 
of a whole community, and we know r that Sariputta is not 
credited with having written them all himself. In this 
connexion it is significant that Dhammakitti, author of the 
Ddthd-vamsa , who was one of Sariputta ’s immediate disciples, 
also mentions only the Samanta-pasddikd tikd and the 
Anguttara-tika as his teacher’s works . 1 

1 Colophon JPTS. Edition, p. 151, i.e. in addition to the tiled, on 
Candragomi-panjikd and the Vinaya- sail gaha. 



CHAPTER X 
Sariputta’s Circle 

Y^HILE Maha-Kassapa, assisted by Sariputta and others 
of equal eminence, was labouring for the glory of the 
religion in Ceylon, an event took place which drew Burma and 
Ceylon together, even more intimately than before, and which 
had far-reaching consequences in. the later history of the 
Buddhist Sangha in both countries. Ever since the time of 
Buddhaghosa, Burmese monks were in the habit of coming 
over to the Mahavihara that they might there imbibe the 
orthodox Theravada tradition and bring it back with them 
to their own land. The intercourse between the two countries 
was undoubtedly interrupted to some extent during the foreign 
invasions of Ceylon, and its internal discords ; but after 
Vijaya-Bahu obtained the help of King Anuruddha in re- 
establishing the ordination in his own country it revived, 
and, in the prosperous reign of Parakrama the Great, increased 
to a very large extent. It was about this time, somewhere 
about the beginning of Parakrama ’s regime in a.d. 1165, 
that the Elder Uttarajlva left Pagan to visit the celebrated 
Mahavihara, taking with him, as we saw, a copy of Aggavamsa’s 
great work, the Pali Grammar, Sadda-riUi. Uttarajlva was 
accompanied by his pupil, the novice Chapala, known in 
religion as Saddhammajotipala, 1 whose fame surpassed, for 
a time, at least, even that of Aggavamsa. He received the 
upasampadd from the Sangha in Ceylon, and lived with them 
for several years, studiously learning the Dhamma as handed 
down in the Mahavihara, and perhaps mastering many texts 
which were as yet unknown in Burma. He was a man of great 
skill and ability, and his stay in the sacred island was of 
great importance to the literary history of Burma. He returned 
to his country deeply imbued with the conviction, that the 
Mahavihara alone had preserved the legitimate line of 


1 S & sana - varjisa , p. 74. 



sariputta’s circle 


19T 


them- succession from the time of the Buddha, and that the 
upasampadd would be valid only if it were conferred by the 
Mahavihara fraternity. He, therefore, brought with him into 
Burma four Sinhalese monks , 1 and this little group formed the 
nucleus of a Sihala Sangha in Burma, the rightful heirs of the 
legitimate tradition. We are not concerned here with following 
the vicissitudes of that community. It was well that the 
Sihala Sangha did gain a foothold in Burma and rise into 
eminence there, for, in later years, when the upasampadd 
was again lost in Ceylon, during a period of great adversity, 
it was the Burmese Sangha who helped in large measure to 
make good the loss and re-establish the ordination . 2 

Chapata was the author of several works, eight in all, 
according to the Gandha-vamsa , 3 only one of which was written 
in Ceylon, the Sankhepa-vannana, a commentary on the 
AbhidhammaUha-sangaha, divided into nine chapters, closely 
following Anuruddha’s work . 4 Meanwhile Sariputta was head 
of a large school at Jetavana, in a splendid monastery built 
by the king for his special use. He was, perhaps, more 
responsible than anyone else of this period for the spread of 
learning in Ceylon. Famed far and wide as Sagara-mati, 
“ like to the ocean in wisdom,” he left behind him several 
disciples of profound learning and great abilities, at least six 
of whom have come down to posterity as authors possessed 
of high literary erudition. 

Among them was Sangharakkhita, who specialized in nirutti 
(grammar), rhetoric, and prosody. In the Vuttodaya he speaks 
with great respect of the grammarian Moggallana, and calls 
him one of his teachers. He also mentions among his 
preceptors a certain Selaixtarayatana (Galaturu^mula) Thera , 
and in the colophon to the Sambandha-cintd calls himself a 
pupil of Medhankara “ who purified the religion”, evidently 

1 S&s. 9 p. 66. 

1 Bode, op. cit., pp. 16-20. 

# (7.F., p. 74. 

4 FausbtiU, India Office Catalogue , JPT8 1896, p. 39. 



198 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CETLON 


Udumbaragiri Medhankara, pupil of Kassapa and Sariputta. 
Perhaps the Selantarayatana Thera and Medha&kara were 
one and the same. In the Canda-sdrattha filed 1 to his 
Sambandha-cintd he is called a grandson of King Dath5paiissa, 
which is undoubtedly a mistake, because Dath5patissa lived 
about three centuries earlier. Perhaps the author was mis* 
taken for another earlier writer of the same name of whom 
nothing is known. In the colophon to the Sambandha-cintd 
Sarigharakkhita tells us that he also wrote the Vuttodaya , 
Susaddasiddhi, Y oga-vinicchaya , Subodhala hkara , and a 
K hudda-sikkhd-tika . Chief among his works ranks the 

Vuttodaya , the only original work, so far as we know, extant 
on Pali prosody ; it is of moderate length, divided into six 
chapters and written partly in prose and partly in verse. 
The author tells us in his introductory stanza, that “ the works 
on prosody composed in earlier times by Pingala and others 
are not in a manner satisfactory to those studying pure 
Magadhi. Therefore for their easy comprehension do I now 
commence in the Magadhi language this Vuttodaya adapted 
to popular prosody and divided into Matta and Va$na, 
composed in language pleasing and abounding in sense and 
embodying both rule and example ”. 2 It is wholly based on 
works dealing with Sanskrit prosody, the terms of which it 
has borrowed and adopted and, in some instances, whole 
sentences are incorporated from Pingala and other authorities 
with no more alterations than are necessary when Sanskrit 
is turned into Pali. 8 It is divided into six chapters dealing 
with prosodial feet (8 ganas) and technical terms, metre 
(different types of metre and their rules, chiefly the Ariya), 
Samavutta or verses where every line is alike, Addha- 
samavutta (where every half-gatha is alike), Visama-vutta 
(the four lines of a gatha are unequal), and the last, on the 

1 By S&ddhamafiina of Pagan, in the fourteenth century (PifakaUha-main, 
p. 74). 

* Colombo Ed., p. 7. 

9 e*g. the last ten verses of the first chapter on Pada-ccheda (caesura), 
which are taken directly from Haliyudha. 



sariputta’s circle 


199 


six kinds of knowledge essential to good poetry (e.g. spreading 
of rhythm, ascertaining the tune, symbols of rhythm, etc.). 
There is a Sinhalese Sanne, written, probably, by the author 
himself, and a Pali tiled by an unknown hand. 1 It has been 
made the subject of several commentaries and glosses in 
Burma, notably the V uttodaya-paneikd of SaddhammanaQa 
and the Vika of Vepullabuddhi of Pagan. 2 

Another of Sarigharakkhita’s works is the Sambandha- 
cintd , dealing with the Pali verb and its use in syntax. 
It also gives a description of the six Karakas or Cases 
used with the verb in the sentence. This treatise is 
based on the grammar of Moggallana, whom he mentions as 
his teacher, along with Medhankara, both of whom he 
eulogizes in the opening stanzas as having assisted in the 
suppression of heresy. There exist a Pali tikd by an unknown 
author (see below), and a Sinhalese Sanne by Gotama Thera, 8 
both of whom, judging from their comments, were undoubtedly 
well-versed in the principles of Pali grammar. Mahayasa’s 
Kaccayana-sdra of the thirteenth century quotes extensively 
from the Sambandha-cintd , showing that Sarigharakkhita’s 
work became famous after it was written. Abhaya, a Burmese 
author of Pagan of the fourteenth century, also wrote a tikd,* 
which is probably the one extant in Ceylon at present. 

The Subodhalaiikdra is a work on the art of poetry, as the 
following table of contents shows, apart from the technique 
of prosody, which is dealt with in the Vuttodaya. It is a learned 
and important work, and treats chiefly of the Gatha verse. 
It is divided into five chapters : (1) Incongruity of sense 
and tautology ; (2) the art of avoiding such faults ; (3) 
elegance of words and phrases ; (4) the elegance of sense and 
how it can be acquired ; (5) the elegance of sound and the 
art of making verse pleasant to the listener. The work is 
much used in Ceylon and in Burma, where a Nissaya or 

1 Wickremasinghe, p. xviii. 

1 Fausbdll, Cat, Mandalay MSS., p. 50. 

• De Zoysa, p. 29. ^ ' 

« Bode, p. 22, and G.V., 64-74. pp. 



200 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


scholiast has been written on it as late as 1880 called the 
Alankara-nissaya. 1 

Of SaAgharakkhita’s two other known words : (1) Su&adda - 
siddhi or SdraUha-vilasini, a tiled on the Moggallana-panjikd, 
and (2) the Khvdda-sikkhd-tika , mention has already been 
made in connexion with the works on which they are based. 

Contemporary with Sangharakkhita was Sumarigala, 
another of Sariputta’s pupils. He specialized in the study of 
Abhidhamma, and wrote tikds on several Abhidhamma 
works. His tikd on Buddhadatta’s Abhidhammdvatdra is 
entitled Abhidhamrmttha-vikdsirii (the Blossoms of 
Philosophy). He also wrote a Nava-tikd on Dhammapala’s 
Sacca-sahkhepa , called Sdraltha-sdlini (the Essence of 
Meanings). But by far the best known work is the Abhidham- 
maUha-vibhavam (Philosophy made clear), on the Compendium. 
It was once known in Burma as the J%ka Ida (the Beautiful 
Tikd), because the comments in it are so very apt to the 
subject of discussion. But when, in the fifteenth century, 
Ariyavamsa of Ava became proficient in the Buddhist 
Scriptures, the Tikd Ida changed its name to J%kd gyau 
(the Famous Tkd). 

The Sasana-vamsa 2 gives us some interesting details of this 
change of name. Ariyavamsa was a member of Chapata’s 
Slhala-sarigha, and went to Sagaing to study grammar under 
a learned Thera called Ye-din (the water-carrier). Either to 
restrain his own inclination for talk, or because he found his 
companions too talkative, this monk was in the habit of 
keeping his mouth filled with water. When Ariyavamsa 
first came to him, there seemed little hope that the silent 
water-carrier would discourse to him on any subject. But he 
was not discouraged. He came daily to the Vihara, performing 
all the services of a pupil to Ye-din, till the latter asked him 
his reasons for these visits. Ariyavamsa begged permission 
to study with the famous Acariya because, though he had 

1 Bode, p. 05. 

* pp. 95 foil. 



sariputta’s circle 


201 


studied texts, he had not grasped their meaning, and till then, 
the expositions of his teachers had not been of help to him. 
Ye-din consented to give him some instruction and explained 
this AbhidhamrnaUha-vibtemrii. In a short time Ariyavamsa 
had grasped all the knowledge he had missed till then. The 
Acariya charged him to help other students of the subject 
by writing a commentary on the text he felt fitted best to 
expound, and the result was the Manisdra-manjusa, his tiled 
on the We are told that, while 

writing it, Ariyavamsa submitted his work chapter by chapter 
to the criticism of his fellow-monks, reading it aloud to them 
as they assembled on uposatha days at the Vihara . 1 Because 
of Ariyavamsa ’s masterly exposition of the book Sumafigala’s 
work henceforth came to be known as the Famous Tiled, 
and now forms part of the regular course of Abhidhamma 
studies in Burma, Chapata, who also wrote a tiled on the 
Compendium (the Sankhepa-vannand ) , in referring to the 
earlier tikds, compares Sumangala’s work to “ the moon which 
cannot shine within bamboos ”, and his own work to the 
“ firefly which can *\ A pretty and modest simile, but by no 
means flattering to those who read his book. 

To the group of Sariputta’s disciples also belongs 
Buddhanaga, who wrote the VinayaUka-rmnjusdy a tikd 
on Buddhaghosa’s Kankhd-vitaray, i. He mentions in the 
colophon that he wrote the work at the request of an Elder 
named Sumedha, “ wise and clever and anxious for the 
furtherance of the Religion.” 

Another was Medhankara of Udumbaragiri, first of four 
Medhankaras 2 famous in Ceylon literature. Perhaps there was 
a fifth, oldest of them all, whom Safigharakkhita refers to by 
name as one of his teachers. * Our Medhafikara mentions both 
Sariputta and Moggallana as his preceptors ; but, though he 
belongs to the Udumbaragiri fraternity, no mention is made 

1 Bode, pp. 41-2 and 61. 

* The other three were ; (1) Arafifieka Medha&kara ; (2) the translator 
of the Jitakas into Sinhalese ; (3) author of the Jino-cmrita. 



202 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


of Kassapa. He does not appear to have written any works 
in Pali, or, if he did, they were later superseded by other works, 
for the only one of his compilations which has come down to 
us is a work in Sinhalese prose. It is called the Vinaydrtha- 
samnccaya , a compendium of Vinaya rules translated into 
Sinhalese from the original Pali with explanatory notes taken 
from the Commentaries. 

Sariputta had another pupil named Vacissara. I agree with 
Mr. Wickremasinghe in his suggestion 1 that there were two 
V&cissaras, both of whom lived before the end of the thirteenth 
century, the one slightly senior to the other. Considering the 
number of works assigned to Vacissara in the Gandha-vamsa , 2 
one would almost be inclined to the belief that there were 
even more than two, not all of them from Ceylon, but living 
about the same period. 

The Gandha-vamsa attributes even the Bdlavatdra to 
Vacissara, but we know now that the author lived after the 
thirteenth century. It was the younger Vacissara that 
describes himself as the pupil of Sariputta. The elder I would 
consider to have been either a contemporary of Sariputta, or, 
more probably, slightly anterior to him. To the senior monk, 
I would attribute the Khema-ppakarana-tika, two tikas on 
Buddhadatta’s works (one called simply the Uttara-vinicchaya- 
tikd on the Vttara-vinicchaya, and the other on the Vinaya - 
vinicchaya called Y oga-vinicchaya) , and an original work on 
the Abhidharama called Rupdrupa-vibhaga. He also wrote a 
treatise called the Simdlahkdra on boundaries and sites for 
religious ceremonies, to which Chapala compiled a (ikd . 3 
A pordna-tika on Anuruddha’s N ama -rupa-pariccheda is 
likewise to be assigned to him, together with a tika on the 
Sacca-sankhepa. There seems to be some uncertainty as to 
the authorship and the date of the Sacca-sankhepa. The 
Saddhamma-sangaha 4 assigns it to Ananda, but we know that 

1 Cat., p. xvi. 

* p. 62. 

* Bode, p. 18. 

4 Chap. 9. 



sariputta’s circle 


203 


the Saddhamma-sa ngaha is not always reliable in its 
information. The Gandha-vamsa 1 ascribes it to Culla- 
Dhammapala, and the colophon of the work agrees with this. 

The author of the Sacca-sankhepa is to be distinguished from 
the commentator of the same name, who is usually called 
Acariya to differentiate him from his less illustrious namesake, 
Culladhammapala. The Gandha-vamsa calls him the eldest 
pupil of Ananda. Nevill, in his Manuscript Catalogue, takes 
this Ananda to be the same as the teacher of Vedeha and 
Buddhappiya, and fixes his date as early as the seventh 
century. But Buddhappiya and Vedeha certainly lived very 
much later, as we shall see when we come to consider those 
authors. 

The Ananda who was Culla-dhammapala’s teacher was 
undoubtedly older than Buddhappiya ’s teacher, for Culla- 
dhammapala lived before the twelfth century at the latest. 
Chapata 1 2 mentions the Sacca-sankhepa in his Sahkhepa - 
vamiand commentary on the AbhidhammMha-sangaha, and, 
if Mr. Aung 3 is right in his information, Dhammapala lived 
even earlier than Anuruddha, for we are told that, when 
Anuruddha wrote his work, the Sacca-sankhepa was as a vade 
mecum superseded by it in the twelfth century. The work — 
Summary or Outline of Truth , as its name implies — is a short 
treatise in five chapters, dealing with such Abhidhamma 
matters as Rupa, Vedana, Citta, Khandha, and Nibbana. It 
forms one of the Let-Than or Little Finger Manuals, and, as 
such, is extensively studied in Burma. In his commentary 
on the Compendium, Chapata points out certain differences 
between that work and the Sacca-sankhepa , and acts as an 
apologist for the former, going into very minute details. 
“Thus, while the Sacca-sankhepa begins with an exposition 
on the body, Anuruddha sets out with an inquiry into the 
mind. Why ? Because he had the Dhamma-sangaiii instead of 

1 pp. 60, 70. 

* JPTS., 1910, p. 125. 

* Ibid., 1917, p. 2. 



204 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


the Vibhanga in his mind when he wrote the Compendium .” 1 * * 
There is no doubt, I feel, that it was the elder Vacissara who 
wrote the first or Porana-fikd to the Saccasaftkhepa , and not 
the younger, who describes himself in the Sambandha-cintd- 
tilca as a pupil of Sariputta. For we find that another of 
Sariputta’s pupils, Sumafigala, also wrote a tiled on the same 
work, called the Abhinava-tikd, and it is not probable that 
two pupilB of the same teacher would have written on the 
same work. 

If the elder Vacissara specialized in the Abhidhamma and 
the Vinaya , the younger gave most of his attention to the study 
of grammar. He was, evidently, one of Sariputta’s youngest- 
pupils, for among his works several are tlkds on books written 
by Satigharakkhita, one of Sariputta’s chief disciples. They 
are the Sambardha-cirUd-tlkd, Subodhalankdra-fikd , and 
VtJttodaya-vivarana. He al$o wrote, at the request of 
Sumarigala , 8 a Nava-fikd on the Khtulda-sikkhd , to which 
Sangharakkhita had already written a sub-commentary. 
Vacissara called his work the Sumangala-pasadanl, as a 
compliment to his colleague who incited him to write it. 
Another of his compilations was a MoggaUdna-vydkarana - 
tiled. Perhaps it was this same Vacissara who, according to 
the MaM-vamsa, left Polonnaruva during the invasion of 
Magha and went over to the Pa$<Ju and Cola countries, to 
seek for protection for Lanka . 8 The authorship of the 
Thupa-vamsa is also ascribed to him (see below). 

Apparently contemporary with the elder Vacissara was a 
Thera named Vimalabuddhi, author of the oldest tiled on the 
Compendium . 4 His work was quite recent during the time oi 
the senior Vacissara, and that was why the latter wrote his 
Wed only on Anuruddha’s Ndma-rupa-pariccheda , and why,, 
a few years later, Sariputta contented himself with writing: 

1 JPTS., 1910, p. 125. 

> 1 Colophon to that work. 

• Ch. lxxxi, w. 17-21. 

4 Do Zoyaa, p. 4 



sariputta’s circle 


205 


only a Sinhalese sanne on the Compendium. But, some time 
afterwards Sumangala felt himself at liberty to write a 
Nava-fikd. Vimalabuddhi’s work is now unknown in Ceylon, 
and considered quite superannuated even in Burma, 1 where it 
has been completely replaced by Sumangala ’s “ famous tlkti 99 
( TtJcd-gyau ). To Sariputta’s period also belongs Piyadassi, 
pupil of the grammarian Moggallana. 

He wrote the Pada-sadhana , an abridged Pali grammar 
based on Moggallana ’s work. He tells us in his colophon that 
he was a pupil of the great Nirutti-acariya, and that he wrote, 
at the request of a village chieftain named Kappinna. The 
author of the Sinhalese sanne tells us that Piyadassi was 
incumbent of the Devaraja Vihara in Dolosdas-rata (Giriva- 
pattu) on the Valave River in Ruhuna, South Ceylon. 
Kappinna was his maternal uncle, and was in charge of the 
Rambha Vihara lands of which Devaraja Vihara formed a part. 

The work is divided into six sections dealing with 
Sanna, Sandhi, Samasa, Prefixes, Suffixes, and Verbs. The 
author called it Pada-sadhana or Moggallana-SaddaUka- 
ratnakara, but posterity has refused to accept the longer 
name ! Vanaratana Ananda wrote a Sinhalese sanne on it, 
which we shall notice presently, and there also exists a Pali 
fika called the Buddhi-ppasadani by Sri Rahula of the fifteenth 
century. 

Possibly to the same period belongs Mahabodhi, author of 
a Porana-fikd (Mukha-mattakd) on Anuruddha’s Paramattha - 
viniechaya. 1 He seems to have written a ilka on the 
Khema-ppakarana as well and also according to the Saddhamma- 
sangaha ,* a Sacca-saiikhepa-witwina, entitled Nissayattha- 
kathd. 

Parakrama-Bahu the Great died in a.d. 1197. He was a 
noble king, just and tolerant and a scholar of deep learning 

1 Compendium , p.ix. 

• JPTS 1910, p. 126. 

9 Chap, ix, v. 26. 



206 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


withal, the greatest figure in the annals of the island. Ceylon 
was never to produce his like. His death was the signal for 
fresh internal strife ; his family were unable to sustain the 
honours which he had won for the land of his birth. After 
several conspiracies and assassinations among his heirs and 
relations, his widowed queen ascended the throne under the 
name of LilavatT, only to be deposed in less than three years. 
Within a short time, however, she was restored, and for a 
while all went well. But the ignominious and selfish schemings 
of rival aspirants to the throne brought disruption, discontent 
and disunion in the land, and within thirty years after 
Parakrama’s death the kingdom had been reduced to such 
an extremity of weakness by their contentions, that the 
Malabars, ever vigilant for an opportunity to carry out their 
projects, landed in Ceylon in a large band of 24,000, led by 
Magha, and in a short time reconquered the whole island. 
Magha was crowmed king and his reign was marked by extreme 
cruelty. His merciless brigands swept through the country, 
plundering, ravishing, mutilating and slaughtering. Not even 
the modest-looking yellow robe of the pious bhikkhu would 
afford any protection from the cruelties of the Malabar 
Mercenaries. The holiest shrines were violated and over- 
thrown. The Mahd-vamsa 1 and the Raja-ratnakari describe 
with painful elaboration the gradual extinction of Buddhism, 
the plundering of the temples, the expulsion of the monks, 
and the desecration of all that was holy. No outrage appeared, 
too heinous to the plunderers, no torture too cruel ; with 
sheer wantoness they broke the cords that held together the 
valuable and rare palm-leal books and scattered the leaves 
to the winds. AJ1 books and literary records such as fell into 
their hands were piled up and burnt, and the whole island 
resembled a dwelling in flames or a house darkened by funeral 
rites. 2 

After an interval of twenty years Vijaya-Bahu III collected 

1 M.V., Ch. lxxx, vv. 54 ff. f and R&jarat ., pp. 03 foil. 

1 R ajavali, p. 256 (Upham). 



sariputta’s circle 


20T 


as many Sinhalese soldiers as he could and with their aid 
succeeded in winning for himself a portion of the kingdom. 
While the Malabars were holding sway over the rest of the 
island from the capital city at Polonnaruva, Vijaya-Bahu 
established himself at Dambadeniya, 50 miles to the north 
of the present Colombo. From there he governed the Province 
of Maya ; but it was not till the time of his son and successor, 
Pandita Parakrama Bahu, that the people succeeded in com- 
‘ pelling the invaders to abandon Polonnaruva and retreat 
towards the mainland of India. 

During the earlier part of these internal conflicts and foreign 
invasions, the generality of the people were left free to follow 
their own pursuits, and the monks, supported by a generous 
laity, devoted their energies to the service of literature. Thus 
except when Magha's ruthless campaign completely destroyed 
the peace of the land, the period that intervened between the 
death of Parakrama the Great and the accession of Pan^ita 
Parakrama, was not wholly devoid of literary productions. 

Vijaya-Bahu, who succeeded Parakrama the Great, was 
himself a man of some education, and we are told that he wrote 
with his own hand, in the Pali tongue, a letter of great merit 
and sent it to the Burmese king at Arimaddana. 1 The contents 
of the letter we do not know, nor did the king live long enough 
to achieve any work of literary importance. When Lilavati 
was restored to the throne with the help of her faithful 
minister, Parakrama, she became a generous patron of art ; 
she had, also, a minister Kittisenapati, mentioned in a 
Sinhalese poem of this period, 2 who evinced a deep interest 
in literary work. 

During her reign was compiled the Pali poem Datha-wmsa, 
The author was Dhammakitti, the first of four scholars bearing 
the same name and famous in Ceylon literature. 8 He was a 
pupil of the celebrated Sariputta, and he speaks most respect- 

* M.V., Ixxx, V. 6. 

* Samdava Colophon. 

* For the other three see Index. 



208 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


fully of his teacher in the colophon to the present work. We 
are told that the Datha-vamsa was composed at the request 
of the minister Parakrama of the Kalanagara race, for whom 
the author seems to have entertained the highest regard, 
because of his exertions on behalf of the religion. 1 * Dhammakitti 
speaks highly also of Lilavatl, “ spotless as the moon . . . 
sweet-worded, just, like a mother unto her subjects, possessed 
of great intelligence, giving whatever was asked of her.” 
He tells us that the Pali Datha-vamsa is based on an older 
Dalada-vamsa , “ written in the language of the land by the 
poets of Sihala,” and that it was composed in Magadhi for 
the benefit of those living in other lands. We can infer from 
the Mahd-vamsa 2 that this Dalada-vamsa was written in Elu 
verse in the ninth year of Kitti Siri Meghavanna by his orders 
soon after the tooth relic was brought over to Ceylon. It is said 
to have given the history of the relic from the death of the 
Buddha, to the time of its arrival in Ceylon, as predicted by 
the Buddha. By the time of Dhammakitti the Sinhalese poem 
had become almost unintelligible. Turnour, in his translation 
of the Maha-vamsa , 3 remarks that the original Sinhalese poem 
was still extant in 1837, but I have not been able to see it. 

The Datha-vamsa is a very elaborate work, and rightly ranks 
among the Pali classical poems. It is written in sonorous 
language, and gives vivid descriptions, in the manner of 
Sanskrit poets. The earlier chapters give a minute account of 
the great struggle between the Buddhists and the Brahmans 
of India for religious supremacy (in the third century), and 
may, perhaps, have been taken from a very old and almost 
contemporary record of the events described therein. Except 
where the author attempts vivid descriptions, the poem 
presents one of the finest specimens of the stem simplicity, 
chasteness, and beauty of rhythm of Pali poetry, clothed in 
elegant diction, free from high-flown metaphors and ornately 

1 w. 5-6. 

1 Chap, xxzrii. 

1 p. 241, footnote. 



. sariputta’s circle 


209 


elaborated ideas. Coomaraswamy, who has translated it into 
English prose , 1 compares it to the Nalopakhydna in its sweet- 
ness of rhythm and unaffected flow of words. The Dathd-varnsa 
does not contain the history of the relic beyond the period of 
its arrival and reception in Ceylon. Tumour mentions that 
the toathdrdhatu-vamsa, referred to above, had two more 
chapters than are found in our work, relating the vicissitudes 
of the relic up to the eighteenth century. A Sinhalese 
paraphrase was written by Dhammakitti himself for the benefit, 
as he tells us, “ of less educated and local readers.” In the 
Introduction to the Sinhalese sanne he calls himself a rdjaguru 
(royal preceptor) in addition to his other titles. There are 
several works in Sinhalese on the history of the tooth relic, 
to which reference will be made in so far as they come within 
the purview of this dissertation . 2 

After Vijaya-Bahu III established his capital at 
Dambadeniya, he helped, as much as lay in his power, those 
who were labouring in the cause of religion and literature. 
Thus, the Nikaya-sangraha tells us 3 that under his auspices 
two of Sariputta’s pupils, Saiigharakkhita, the head of the 
Church of his day, and Udumbaragiri Medhankara, held 
a synod at the Vijayasundararama built by Vijaya-Bahu, 
and there, after much effort, settled various disputes which 
had arisen amongst the priesthood, formulated a new code of 
Vinaya rules, and “ did great service to religion ”. The king 
also gave shelter to all the monks who were fleeing from 
Polonnaruva, “ leaving their books and other necessaries 
wherever they chanced to be,” and provided them with such 
comforts as were possible to obtain . 4 But the country was too 
distracted for peaceful pursuits to be possible. Magha was 
carrying on his campaign of destruction “ like unto a wild 
fire that consumeth the tender plants of the forest of charity, 

1 Fubl. Trubner, 1874, Infcrod., p. ix. 

* See Wiokremasinghe, Catalogue, passim, tot further particulars. 

* p. 22. 

4 M.V., lxxxi, V7. 41-63. 


14 



210 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


like unto the sun when he closeth up the petals of the sacred 
lily of justice, and the moon when she obscureth the 
splendour of the lotus-pond of patient endurance ”. 1 

At this time, however, there existed in Ceylon a school of 

monks who were left undisturbed by any political upheavals. 

They belonged to the Vanavasi or Arannavas! fraternity 

and owed allegiance to the Mahavihara. They differed 

from each other, perhaps, only in the degree of rigour of their 

religious life, while they agreed on all doctrinal matters. 

Thus we find them acting together quite harmoniously at the 

Council of Pandita Parakrama. We hear of this sect first, 

at the beginning of the sixth century, when during the reign 

of Aggabodhi II (a.d. 598-608) the King of Kalihga, having 

resolved to lead the life of a recluse, came over to Ceylon and 

joined the Order under the famous Elder Jotipala. Vedeha, 

author of the Rasa-vdhim, has given us, in the colophon to 

that work, an account of the beginnings of the Vanavasi school 

to which he belonged. 2 It had once at its head an elder named 

Ananda, who, according to the Gandha-vamsa, (p. 66), was a 

native of India. We do not know the date of his reign, but 

he probably lived about the eighth or the ninth century. 

He it was that composed, at the request of Buddhamitta, 3 

the Mula-tlkjd to the seven books of the Abhidhamma , which, 

according to the Saddhamma-saiigaha, account mentioned 

in the preceding chapter, was revised by Maha Kassapa 

and his colleagues. This work now exists in three sections^ 

one each for the Attha-sdlim and the Samimha^inodanl 

* 

and the other for the Panca-ppakarana . Probably the original 
edition was in one volume — the SaUa-ppakarana. , as it is still 
in Burma. He was also known as Vanaratana-Tissa, because 
of his connexion with the Vanavasi school. The Mula-tikd 
were based on Buddhaghosa’s commentaries, but their author 
occasionally dissents from the great exegetist. Thus, in 

1 M.V., lxxx, y. 59. 

1 Printed Ed., Colombo, end. 

* <?. V. t p. 69. 



sarifutta’s CIRCLE 


211 


discussing the life-term of matter he disputes the existence of 
a static phase of thought, and regarded it as merely 
hypothetical. 1 * * The VanavasI sect seems to have been closely 
associated with the Buddhists of Kalifiga, for we find even 
at the end of the thirteenth century Vedeha mentioning the 
name of a Kaliftga Mahd-Thera, an Elder of great eminence, 
who acted as sponsor at Vedeha’s Ordination by Ananda ; 
and later, Buddhappiya of 0o)a belonged to the same fraternity . 
This connexion with Cola and Kalinga may possibly also 
account for the special attention members of. the school 
devoted to the study of the Abhidhamma. 

I am inclined to believe that it Was the same Ananda that 
had as his pupil Culla Dhammapala, author of the Sacca- 
tankhepa, noticed earlier in this chapter, and also of an 
Anu-fika on Ananda’s Mula-tika, called Linattha-var^vand. 
Whether he was the author of several other Vikas mentioned 
in the Gandha-mmsa (p. 60) as well, we cannot say with any 
degree of definiteness. 

The AranfiavasI sect continued to flourish even during the 
troublous times of the twelfth and the thirteenth centuries, 
and when Vijaya-Bahu was reigning at Dambadeniya it was 
presided over by another Elder named Ananda, who was a 
disciple of Udumbaragiri Medhankara, pupil of Sariputta.* 
One of his pupils, Buddhappiya, speaks of him as 
“ Tambapawi-ddhajanam ” (a banner unto the island of 
Ceylon). 8 He and his school lived in seclusion and were able 
to carry on their pursuits undisturbed. Ananda himself wrote 
a Sinhalese interverbal translation to Piyadassi’s Pali grammar 
the Pada-sadhana, and another to the Khudda-sikkha. 

The authorship of the Abhidhamma Mula-tika is also 
generally ascribed to him, 4 but, as I.have endeavoured to show 
above, that work was evidently composed prior to the Council 

1 Compendium, p. 26. 

* Poda-s&dhana-sanne colophon. 

* R&pa-siddhi colophon. 

4 Wickremaamghe’* CataL, p. xvtt. 



212 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


of Kassapa in a.d. 1165 ; for we find that Culla Dhammapala, 
who certainly lived before the twelfth century, wrote an 
Anu-tikd on it. 

Probably to the same period, but not, perhaps, to the same 
author, belongs the religious poem Sadihammopdyana. In 
the colophon to the Sinhalese paraphrase and in the intro- 
duction to a commentary on it called the SaMhammopdyana- 
viggaka, the work is assigned to a great Elder of the Order, 
named Abhaya-giri Kavi-cakravarti Ananda Maha-Thera. 1 
Whether he is in any way connected with Vanaratana Ananda, 
we have no means of finding out. The Saddhammopdyana 
itself gives no clue to its authorship, except in the introductory 
stanzas, where we are told that it was composed to be sent 
as a religious gift to the author’s friend and companion 
Buddhasoma. 2 Nevill, in his manuscript Catalogue, has 
recorded a tradition that Vanaratana Ananda and 
Buddhasoma were contemporaries and great friends, and that 
the SaMhammopdyana was written to dissuade the latter 
from renouncing his life as a monk. It is a treatise in nineteen 
chapters, dealing with such subjects as the difficulties of 
obtaining birth as a human being, a tendency to sin and the 
severe penalty attending it, the misery of existence as Pretas 
and lower animals, the advantages of being righteous, and 
the rewards it brings (such as birth in the Deva worlds), 
the merits of charity, chastity, piety, meditation, listening 
to the Doctrine, preaching it, etc. In one of the concluding 
stanzas the author expresses the wish that he might himself, 
one day, become a Buddha. It is written in simple and 
beautiful language, and parts of it are very frequently quoted 
by monks in the course of their sermons. It is held in very high 
estimation in Ceylon up to the present time. 

There is a Sinhalese paraphrase by a later writer, also called 
Ananda, and a commentary, the Saddhammopdyanchviggaha , 
by an anonymous writer. 

1 Colombo Ed., 1874. 

1 JPT8., 1887, p. 36, v. 3. 



sariputta’s circle 


213 


Parakrama-Bahu III came to the throne in a.d. 1235 ; 
he was a mighty prince, endowed with all the qualities of 
leadership, and he soon succeeded in ridding the country of 
its foreign invaders. Once more the Sinhalese flag floated 
over the whole of Ceylon, and the king set himself vigorously 
to create order out of the chaos which the Malabars had left 
behind them. With its wonderful elasticity and richness of 
natural resources, the island soon recovered from the effects 
of the Tamil occupation, and the people were once more free 
to follow their pursuits of peace. It was a miracle exhibited 
by the tooth relic that had given Parakrama confidence in 
his ability to overthrow his enemies, and had shown him 
that he was destined to advance the welfare of the Religion and 
the land of its adoption, 1 and as soon, therefore, as the country 
had settled down, he devoted all his energies to the glorification 
of the Faith. The Dambadeni-asana and the Rdja-ratnakara 
are full of glowing accounts of his numerous accomplishments, 
and because of his extensive and profound knowledge of 
religious and secular subjects he was styled Kalikala Sahitya 
Sarvajna Pandita — “ the all -knowing sage of the dark 
(kali) age of literature.” He was of an intensely religious 
disposition, and, hearing that there prevailed much misconduct 
in the Safigha calculated to damage the religion among those 
who entered the Order to lead lives of idleness and impurity, 
he called together a synod under the leadership of Araiinaka 
Medhankara 2 of the Udumbaragiri succession, chief pupil 
of Buddha vamsa Vanaratana Ananda. With their help, 
he held an inquisition and expelled those who were found 
guilty of misconduct and unsuited to the office of monkhood. 
He also drew up a Katikavata (code of monastic law) 
formulating rules for the monks who devoted themselves to 
study or to meditation, so that their religious observances 
might be maintained in strict conformity with Vinaya 

1 Jf.F., lxxxii, vr. 16-40. 

* The second Medhaftkara in oar list. The Elder Buddhavaqua was 
evidently alco a member of the Vanariei fraternity. 



214 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


regulations. 1 We are also told that he obtained -s >m the Cola 
country monks of great eminence, learned in t'i.io Tipitaka , 
endued with piety and great purity of life. 2 The ArafmavasI 
sect came in for his special favour, and lie built for their use, 
on a mountain in the forest, the Putabhatta-sela (Palabatgala) 
monastery, 3 which later became famous as the abode of many 
monks of great learning and severe austerities. He obtained 
teachers from India to teach the Ceylon bhikkhus such secular 
subjects as logic and grammar and the various sciences, and he 
persuaded his younger brother, the sub-king Bhuvaneka- 
Bahu, to acquire much wealth of knowledge and become a 
teacher to many thousands of Elders. 4 Several authors of this 
period, including Vedeha, speak most highly of the patronage 
extended to them by the king’s minister Devapatiraja, who, 
according to the Maha-mmsa (chapter 86), was a man of great 
wisdom and devotion. 

Such encouragement given to learning could not fail to 
be productive of great literary achievement, and Parakrama’s 
reign is renowned as a period of numerous scholars of high 
repute. The king himself, towards the latter part of his life, 
handed over the reins of government to his son Vijaya- 
Bahu who, to judge from the Maha-mmsa account, was a 
prince extremely well-beloved of his subjects. The leisure 
thus obtained Parakrama used in prosecuting such studies 
as were not possible to him amidst the responsibilities of 
government, and he also wrote several works of merit : 
Sinhalese translations to the Visuddhi-magga and the Vinaya- 
vinicchaya (the latter of which he called Nissandeha), and a 
Sinhalese poem, Kav-silumina, which is a masterpiece of 
beautiful Elu, melodious in its strains and sublime in its ideas. 
The Sinhalese Dalada-sirita ( History of the Tooth Relic) is 
also attributed to him. 5 

1 Nikaya-sangraha , p. 23. 

* Af.F., lxxxiv, v. 10. 

3 Ibid., v. 24. 

3 Ibid., vy. 26-31. 

5 Wickremasinghe, p. xvii. 



sariputta’s circle 


215 


At his request Dhammakitti compiled the Maha-vaima 
from the date at which Mahanama left off down to his own 
times. This Dhammakitti is usually identified with the author 
of the Ddthd-vamsa. 1 If this identification be correct, then 
Dhammakitti must have lived in retirement at Tambarattha 
in South India, when he was invited by Parakrama. The king 
had heard that a lotus had once sprung up in the path of the 
Elder as he went on his alms-rounds, and, being greatly 
astonished, sent gifts and offerings to the Tamba country, 
and persuaded him to come back to Ceylon, where he was held 
in the highest eBteem . 2 

An author whose name we do not know, but who is referred 
to as the Panca-parivena-adhipati (Pas mula Mahasami) 
composed in Pali a medical work — the only one, so far as we 
know, of its kind extant — called the Bhesajja-manj usd (the 
Casket of Medicine). The Maharvamsa 3 says it was written 
in the time of Parakrama-Bahu of Dambadeniya, by “ the 
learned and benevolent Elder, chief of the monks at the 
Panca-parive$a, to the intent that all who strive to fulfil 
their religious duties, may thereby become free from 
disease. Of the author nothing more is known. In a Sinhalese 
medical work, Yoga-ratnakara* compiled about the end of 
the fourteenth century, a verse in the colophon states that 
that work was arranged on the plan, “ of the Manjusd, 
a medical work in Pali stanzas, composed by Atthadassi Thera 
about the year a.d. 1267.” 5 If this information be correct, 
the author is undoubtedly our Panca-mula-parive^a-Adhipati. 
The Bhesajja-manjusa, is mentioned in a Burmese inscription 
in Pagan, dated a.d. 1442. 6 Sarajjarikara Sarigharaja wrote a 
Sinhalese paraphrase to it in the eighteenth century, and it is 
stated there that, having found his original defective, he added 

1 Wickremaainghe, p. xvii and footnote 4. 

• Af.F., lxxxiv, vv. 12-16. 

• xcvii, w. 59-62. 

4 Wickremasinghe, p. 58. 

s Dr. Kynsey's report on P&rangi, Ceylon Sessional Paper, 1881. 

4 Bode, p. 108. 



216 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


eighteen sections, making them sixty. The author of the 
Manjusd also wrote a tiled on his work, but copies of it are 
rare. The Manjusd once enjoyed great repute, but it has later 
been superseded by Sanskrit works on the subject and is 
now hardly ever consulted. 

To the same Thera is also generally ascribed the author- 
ship of the Sikkha-pada-valanjani, the Pali translation of the 
Sinhalese Sikha-valanda. 1 It is a code of monastic rules, 
drawn up for the guidance of monks by an unknown author, 
who also wrote a commentary on it, called the Sikha-valanda- 
vinisa (the exegesis of the Sikha-valanda). Both works 
contain quotations from the Samanta-pdsadikd and other 
works on the Vinaya. 51 In an inscription of Mahinda IV 
(circa a.d. 947) mention is made of a chapter — the Sikha - 
karani — of the Sikha-valanda , a fact which proves that the 
work was in existence prior to that date. On linguistic 
evidence the Sinhalese Sikha-valanda is assigned to the earlier 
part of the tenth century. The author of the Pali Sikkha-pada- 
valanjam tells us in his introductory verses that it was a 
translation of the Sinhalese original, but an examination of 
his work shows that it is an abridged compilation made from 
the two Sinhalese texts rather than a literal translation. The 
author gives no clue to his identity, but in copies of his work, 
made by latter-day scribes, is usually found the subscription : 
“ The Sikkhd-pada-valanjani of Panca-mula-parive^adhipati 
Maha Thera.” 

About this time was composed the Pali Thupa-vamsa. It 
resembles the Mahabodhi-vamsa rather closely and follows the 
conventional form of the Pali epic tradition in beginning with 
the history of the earlier Buddhas, passing on to that of 
Gotama, the story of the missions, the collecting of the relics, 
the arrival of the Bodhi-tree, and then on to its special subject, 
the erection of Thupas in the island. The last eight chapters 
(there are sixteen in all) are devoted to a description of the 

1 Sikha-valanda , Ed. Jayatilaka, Colombo, Preface, 1923. 

* Ibid., p. 116. 



sariputta’s circle 


217 


activities of king Dutthagamani, and of these two whole 
chapters deal with the erection of the Maha-Thupa at 
Anuradha-pura. In the colophon to the work 1 the author 
calls himself Vacissara, and says that he was a relation of 
king Parakrama, employed by him to supervise the 
Dhammagara. He professes to have been well-versed in the 
Tijritaka (Pitaka-Uaya-pdragu), and mentions that he was the 
author of several other works which he had written in 
Sinhalese : A Linattha-dlpani tiled on the Patisambhida-magga, 
two glossaries, one called Attha-dipana on the Sacca-sankhepa, 
and the other Attha-ppakdsana, on the V isuddhi-magga . It is 
now generally agreed that this Vacissara is identical with the 
younger Vacissara, referred to earlier in this chapter, pupil 
of Sariputta. 2 He was one of the heads of the Church under 
Vijaya-Bahu III, and there is nothing improbable in that he 
should still have been working under his successor. The 
Raja-ratndkara 3 enumerates a list of learned monks and laymen 
who flourished between Buddhaghosa and the year 1809, 
after the Buddha (a.d. 1266). It mentions a Vahisvara 
third from the end, who, evidently, is our author. 

In the introductory verses to his work Vacissara acknow- 
ledges obligation to two older compilations of the history’ of 
the Thupas. One was written in Sinhalese, and, therefore, 
was of use only to the inhabitants of Ceylon ; and the other, 
though in Pali, showed many defects which made a revision 
very necessary. The old Pali work referred to is perhaps 
the Ceiiya-vamsa-A tthakatha mentioned in the Maha-vaiwa 
tikd* The author has also borrowed extensively from the usual 
sources : the Jdtaka-Nidana-kathd, the Samanta-pdsadikd, 
the Mahd-vamsa , and the M.V. tikd. The language of the poem 
is the Sanskritized Pali of this period. 

A Sinhalese version of the Thupa-vamsa also exists, written 

1 Ed. Dhammaratana, Colombo, 1896. 

1 Wickremasinghe, p. xvi, Geiger, Dtp, and M, V,, p. 84, and Pref. 
Colombo Ed. 

* p. 46, Colombo Ed. 

4 Geiger, op. cit., p. 49. 



218 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


by a “ Sakala Yidya Cakravarti ”, Parakrama Papdita. Some 
maintain that this was the Sinhalese original to which 
Vacissara refers in his introductory verses, 1 and that its author 
was a nephew of Parakrama-Bahu the Great, who later 
came to the throne as Vijaya-Bahu, and whom the Mahd-vamsa 
(chap. 80, v. 1) describes as a great scholar and a poet of much 
renown. Mr. Wickremasinghe has shown this statement to be 
inaccurate. 2 Besides the language of the Sinhalese version, 
which is certainly later than the twelfth century, and there- 
fore would not agree with the date of Parakrama-Bahu’s 
nephew, there are other objections. Parakrama Pandita 
evidently wrote his Sinhalese version very soon after Vacissara 
wrote in Pali. In the Rdja-ratnakara list mentioned above his 
name appears last among the learned laymen, showing that he 
lived before a.d. 1266. 3 

The Sinhalese version is not a translation of the Pali ; it 
is, on the whole, broader and contains more details than the 
Pali, 4 showing that it was a later expansion of the Pali text. 6 

Another historical treatise belonging to the same period 
is the ff Aara- va?n5a . It is a history of the 
Vihara erected at Attanagaila on the spot where the ex-king, 
the pious Siri Saiighabodhi, decapitated himself, lest others 
should be compelled to suffer on his account. The story of 
Siri Sanghabodhi has already been related in brief in an earlier 
chapter. Attanagaila is a village situated a few miles away 
from Colombo. The remains of the temple and some of .the 
other religious edifices erected by Gothabhaya, in repentance 
for the death of the good Sanghabodhi, are still to be seen on 
a hill at the confluence of two rivulets amidst some of the most 
beautiful scenery that could be imagined. The work itself 
is divided into eleven chapters, mostly in verse, but inter- 
spersed with prose narrative. Eight of them are devoted to 

1 e.g. Dhammaratana, Colombo Ed., 1889. 

* Catalogue , p. 141. 

s Also Nikaya-eakgraha , p. 24. 

4 e.g. the history of the Paramita, which is not found at all in the P&li. 

4 Far a fuller description see Wickremasinghe, pp. 139 foil. 



sariputta’s circle 


219 


a history of Sanghabodhi, the remaining three dealing with 
accounts of the erection of the various monumental and 
religious edifices on the spot where the king had died, and the 
endowments made for their maintenance by successive rulers 
of Ceylon. It resembles more or less a historical novel 
into which the author has interwoven much material of 
varying interest — graphic descriptions of forest scenes, 
nearly a whole chapter (chapter 2) on the art of good govern- 
ment, a comprehensive moral code and a great deal of matter 
of historical importance. It is written in elegant, but simple 
Pali, and is one of the first works in Pali to which a student 
is introduced in Ceylon monasteries with a view to familiarizing 
him with Pali grammatical forms and constructions. It is 
generally assigned to a pupil of Anomadassi Sarigharaja, who 
lived in the reign of Pandita Parakrama Bahu. The author 
states in his introductory verses (stanza 3) that it was written 
at the request of his teacher Anomadassi, who was the author of 
a Sinhalese work on astrology, the DaimjM-kdma-dhenu} 
The events which the history records are brought down to this 
period, and the writer concludes his work abruptly by 
expressing the hope that “ the annals of Attanagalla may 
thenceforward be continued by later historians The 
Anomadassi mentioned here is identified with the Elder for 
whom, according to the Maha-vamsa , a the minister 
Patirajadeva, following the king’s orders, built a temple of 
three stories and a lofty pinnacle, during the latjber part of 
Parakrama’s reign. A .Sinhalese paraphrase was written by an 
anonymous author during the reign of Bhuvaneka-Bahu V 
(c. 1378-98) by a pupil of Maitri Mahasami. 8 In the eleventh 
century Nanaratana, abbot of the Attanagalla Vihara, wrote 
a Sinhalese poem 4 based on this work. In 1866 that 
indefatigable scholar, James D’Alwis, published in Colombo 
an English translation of the original Pali, prefaced with a very 
valuable Introductory Essay. 

1 D’Alwis, Attanagalu'variua, p. 7, note tt. * M.V., lxxxvi, w. 37-9. 

9 De Zoysa, p. 17. 4 Wickremaainghe, p. xxii. 



CHAPTER XI 

The Age of Pan pita Parakrama 

~VT ANARATANA ANANDA, of the Arannavasi sect 

* mentioned in the last chapter and pupil of Dimbulagala 

Medharikara, left behind him several disciples who were 
scholars of note and authors of important compilations. One 
of them, Gotama Thera, wrote a Sinhalese translation of 
Sangharakkhita’s Pali grammar, the Sambandha-cintd , on 
syntax. Two others are much better known as distinguished 
writers — Coliya Dlpankara and Vedeha Thera. The first, 
Cojiya Dlpankara, more commonly called Buddhappiya, 
was, as his name implies, a native of the Coja country in south 
India. He probably formed a member of the community 
of monks whom Pancjita Parakrama-Bahu persuaded to come 
over from the Cola country to re-establish the Sasana firmly 
in Ceylon . 1 Buddhappiya was the author of two books — 
Rupa-siddhi and the Pajja-madhu. In the Rupa-siddhi colophon 2 
he describes himself as follows : “ This perfect Rupa-siddhi 
was composed by that monk who received the title of 
Buddhappiya and was named Dlpankara — a disciple of 
Ananda, the eminent preceptor who was like unto a standard 
in Tambapanni — he (Dlpankara) was renowned like a lamp 
in the Dami]a country, and, being the resident Superior there 
of two monasteries including Baladicca , 3 4 caused the Religion 
to shine forth.” At the conclusion of the Pajja-madhu 4 he gives 
his name and pupilage : “ May they drink deeply of these 
nectar-like verses (Pajja-madhu) — made by the bee 

Buddhappiya, delighted with the Buddha’s virtues — who 
constantly attends upon that lotus, the Venerable Elder 

1 Jf.F., lxxxiv, r. 10. 

* Colombo £d., end. 

* The commentary says that the other monastery was called 
C&d&mapikya. 

4 JPTS .. 1887, p. 16, v. 103. 



THE AGE OP PANDITA PARAKRAMA 


221 


Ananda Vanaratana (Jewel of the Forest), heavy-laden with 
the perfume of his virtues and always in bloom.” 

Both works were evidently written while the author was 
residing in the Cola country, where, at this period, Buddhism 
was flourishing and where Buddhappiya, as we learn from the 
Rupa-siddhi verse, held the incumbency of two monasteries 
and had achieved eminent renown for his abilities. 

The Rupa-siddhi is a Pali grammar on the model of the 
Kaccayana. Its proper designation, as the author tells us in 
the opening stanzas, is Pada-rupa-siddhi — Etymology of the 
Parts of Speech . Although it follows the Kaccayana 

Sandhi-kappa in his general outlines, the Rupa-siddhi is a much 
fuller and more exhaustive work, supplying many deficiencies 
in the Kaccayana ; and even the division of sections differs 
in some degree from that adopted in the older grammar, as 
will be seen from the following list of contents. It is divided 
into seven chapters : Sandhi (five classes sauna, sara, pakati , 
vyanjana , niggahita), declension (masculine, feminine, neuter, 
pronominals, and numerals, personal pronouns having no 
gender, indeclinables, and inseparable particles), karaka 
(syntax), samasa, taddhita (nominal derivatives), dkhydta 
(verbs), and kitaka-unadi (verbal derivatives and particles). 
The book and its divisions were subjected to very strong 
criticism by Medhankara in his Payoga-siddhi , written a little 
while after, and because of its great length and the abstruse 
nature of its treatment was later superseded by 
Dhammakitti’s Baldvatdra , written in the fourteenth century. 
It is, however, much studied in Ceylon even at the present 
day, and retains its former prestige to some extent. The 
Burmese grammarian, Maha Yasa, in his Kaccdyana-sdra , 
written about the fourteenth century, 1 quotes with approval 
many extracts, from the Rupa-siddhi . A tikd on it is usually 
assigned to Buddhappiya himself, 2 and an old Sinhalese 
paraphrase exists, written by an anonymous author, but 

1 Bode, p. 37. 

* O.V., pp. SO and 70. 



222 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


evidently compiled soon after the Rupa-siddhi itself, because 
it is quoted in Rahula’s Panj ika-pradipa (a.o. 1457). 

Buddhappiya’s other work, the Pajja-madhu , is a beautiful 
Pali poem of Sanskritized Pali, couched in ornate language ; 
it contains 104 stanzas. The first sixty-nine verses describe 
the beauties of the Buddha’s person, dwelling on each detail, 
from the nails of his toes to the kdu-mald , or garland of rays 
over his head. Every feature is extolled with a wealth of 
poetical imagery : thus, the single curled hair between the 
Buddha’s eyebrows is like the moon in its circuit from which 
fall drops of ambrosia upon the lotus-blossoms of his toes, the 
nails of which are their petals. The rest of the poem is taken 
up with praising the “ unfathomable wisdom ” of the Buddha, 
a panegyric upon his disciples the Sangha, and several verses 
describing the glories of Nibbana. There is a Sinhalese 
paraphrase by an anonymous writer, which is of very little 
use, being more intricate in its explanations than the 
original Pali. 

The Gandha-vamsa 1 ascribes to Buddhappiya another book 
called the Sarattha-sangaha . Mr. Wickremasinghe 2 calls it 
“ a religious work ”, but I do not know of any copies existing 
in Ceylon. 

A Sarattha-sangaha is included in the list of books in the 
Pagan Inscription 8 (a.d. 1442). Mrs. Bode thinks it refers to 
Buddhadasa’s medical work of the same name written in the 
fourth century. 

There is a Sinhalese work on Buddhism, the Sdrartha- 
sangraha , 4 but the author makes no mention of its being a 
translation from the Pali original. There are extensive 
quotations from various Pali works, and the nature of its 
contents suggests that it was an original work by Saranankara. 

Ananda’s other pupil was Vedeha, of the Arannavasi 
fraternity, author of two Pali works, the Rasa-vahim and the 

1 pp. 60 and 70. 

* Catalogue, p. xviii. 

• Govt. Printing Press, Rangoon, 1899, and Bode, p. 109. 



THE AGE OP PANDITA PARAKRAMA 


223 


Samanta-kuto-vannana, the first in prose and the second in 
verse. He is also generally credited with having written the 
most authoritative Sinhalese grammar extant — the Sidat- 
sangara. 1 Vedeha gives us some account of himself in the 
Colophon to the Rasa-vahini, where he says : “ The Rasa-vahini 
was composed by Vedeha Thera, author of the beautiful 
Samanta-kuta-vannand , and the Sinhalese Grammar, who, bom 
of the Brahmana caste, was a banner to the three divisions 
of Ceylon. His tutor was the Venerable Ananda of the Forest 
Hermitage, leader of a large Chapter of monks, and one who 
has crossed over the Ocean of Knowledge. His preceptor was 
the Great Elder Mangala, skilled in all learning, chief 
supervisor of boundaries (Sima) and the Great Kalinga 
Thera.” In the Samanta-kuta-vannand Colophon he mentions 
only the Sihala-sadda-lakkha im as his work, so that the order 
in which his books were written was : first, the Sihala- 
sadda-lakkhana (said to be the same as the Sidat-sangara ), 
second the Samanta-kiUa^annand, and lastly the Rasa-vahim. 
In the Sidat-sangara — which was composed at the request 
of the minister Pratirajadeva Pandita, identified with the 
minister of that name dispatched by Parakarama-Bahu to 
South Ceylon to repair dilapidated religious edifices 2 * * — the 
author describes himself as head of the Pratiraja-parivena in 
south Ceylon. 8 

Of Vedeha’s works the Samanta-kuto-vanruina is a Pali 
poem of about 800 verses, written at the request of a monk 
named Kahula, belonging to the same Vanavasi fraternity 
as the author himself. As the name implies, the poem purports 
to be a description of the beautiful peak on which the Buddha 
is said to have imprinted the mark of his left foot on his third 
visit to Ceylon. The story is related in the first chapter of the 
Maha-varpm. But the account of this particular event occupies 

1 D'Alwis, Sidat-sangara preface, and Catalogue , p. 22. De Zoysa, 

p. 28, Wickremasinghe, p. 92. 

* D'Alwis, Catalogue, p. 225. 

• Sidat-saiigara , p. 43. 



1124 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


only a few verses of the book. The rest of it contains the life 
of the Buddha from the time of his birth in the Tusita deva- 
world, prior to his being born in the world of men, and 
continues down to his third visit to Ceylon after having 
attained Enlightenment. Vedeha has described in great detail 
many incidents of the Buddha’s life, and in the course of the 
narrative of the Master’s journeyings to Lanka the poet makes 
use of the opportunity to describe in language at once graceful 
and elegant, and replete with chaste and beautiful imagery, 
many parts of the island, little known or explored at that 
time — its hills and dales, mountains and rivers, especially the 
Kelaiji and the Mahavaligariga, the exquisite splendour of 
their scenery, the beauty of the landscape and the matchless 
variety of its forests, with their delicately tinted foliage of 
luxuriant verdure, apt abode for woodland nymphs paying 
homage to the Holy Shrine. His vivid pen pictures of cities 
and their inhabitants, show that Vedeha was deeply imbued 
with the lore of Sanskrit writers, but there is no trace of 
slavish imitation. On the contrary, the Saiimnta-kuta - van mnd 
is undoubtedly the work of a poet, rich in his gifts and inspired 
with love and reverence for the subject of his poem. The 
opening verses of adoration, enchantingly sweet in their 
beautiful cadences, are sung even to-day, by many thousands 
who have never heard his name and know nothing of his 
work. A Sinhalese paraphrase of the Pali poem has been 
published, 1 in 1890, by two Buddhist monks, Dhammananda 
and Nagissara, two of the greatest Oriental scholars of 
their day. 

The Rasa-vahini is a collection of stories in easy Pali prose, 
embodying legends historical and otherwise. In the opening 
stanza the author tells us that his work is a revision of an old 
Pali translation, made from an original compilation, by 
Ratthapala Thera of the Tangutta-Vanka Parivena of the 
Mahavihara. We do not know anything more about 
Eatthapala, except that he is supposed to have made his 

1 Printed at the Government Press, Colombo, 1890. 



THE AGE OP PANDITA PARAKRAMA 


225 


translation from a number of legends then extant in the 
“ language of the land ” and said to have been related by 
Arahats. Vedeha found Ratthapala’s translation confused in 
its constructions and corrupted by repetitions, and he there- 
fore revised it and put it into a new form, naming it the 
Rasa-vahinT. Perhaps Ratthapala’s translation was drawn from 
the ancient Sahassa-vaUhu-atthakathd {Commentary of the 
Thousand Stories), quoted four times in M aha-vamsa - tikd t 
which Geiger considers to be a collection of legends and 
folk-tales . 1 It contained among others tales of the former 
lives of the heroes who fought under king Putthagamani, 
and also the romantic tale of the love of prince Sali, 
Dutthagamani's son, for the Canclala maiden. 

Ratthapala evidently selected a number of sacred legends 
which had acquired sanctity from the belief that they had been 
handed down by Arahats. Ho naturally would not tamper with 
them and prune them into an elegant work, because each 
story had its own self-centred and venerated existence either 
at his time or before. The legends were never made to form a 
series, but each grew up of itself. Sometimes certain wide- 
spread myths, such as the inexhaustible rice-pot and the 
wishing gem, had clusters of stories which had grown round 
them as local legends, and they were written down con- 
secutively, containing clumsy repetitions. Vedeha, who was 
of a poetic temperament, and, therefore, loved beauty of 
diction, was not satisfied with such an inartistic presentation 
of these homely stories, and he proceeded to clothe them in a 
new garb. The result is the Rasa-vahirii, exquisite in its 
simplicity, charming in its naivete, and delightful in its 
innocence. It is worth noticing that a large number of the 
stories are grouped round the days of Va]agam-aba, in whose 
reign the Tipitaka and their commentaries were committed 
to writin g in Ceylon. Were they accretions to an old nucleus, 
or do they show that the original collection was made soon after 
that date ? 


1 Dip . and Jf.F. „ p. 48. 


15 



226 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


The stories are 103 in number, the first forty relating to 
incidents which happened in Jambu-dvlpa and the rest in 
Ceylon. They illustrate the benefits that accrue to those who 
do good deeds, chiefly by making offerings to the Sarigha. 
They are useful to us now, in that they throw new and 
interesting light on the manners, customs and social con- 
ditions of ancient India and Ceylon. Perhaps some of them 
contain materials of historical importance hidden in their 
half -mythical tales. 

The book is very widely used as an elementary Pali 
reader in temple-schools even to this day. The free and easy 
flow of language makes it pleasant reading, while the wealth 
of its descriptions furnishes the student with a copious 
vocabulary. 

In the fourteenth century a monk named Dhammakitti, 
belonging to the Gadaladeni Vihara, made a compilation in 
Sinhalese of Indian and Ceylon Buddhist legends. His work 
is called the Saddharmdlan kara , and the last twenty-one of its 
twenty-four chapters contain all the stories of the Rasa-vahirii. 
To them are subjoined two other stories, one of which, the 
Metteyya-vastu , is evidently derived from the Cariya-pitaka ; 
the source of the other, Padmdvati-vastu, is not known. The 
greater part of the book is undoubtedly a translation of the 
Rasa-vahirii, though Dhammakitti does not say so. In the 
colophon, however, he takes his pupillage back to the Chief 
Elder of the ArannavasI sect, showing that he belonged to the 
same fraternity as Vedeha. 1 In Burma the work is known as 
Madhura-Rasa-vdliirii , perhaps by a misconception of the words 
in one of the opening stanzas : vakkhdrri aham sumadhuram 
rasavdhinintam. Sometimes the section dealing with Ceylon 
stories is copied separately and called the Sihala-dipa-vaUku. 
The Rasa-vdhini, however, forms only one part of a much larger 
collection, called the Sahassa-mtthu-ppakarana* which seems 
to have been lost in Ceylon. 

1 For a fuller description see Wickremaainghe, Call., pp. 126 foil. 

a British Museum Or., 4674. See also Bode, p. 105. 



THE AGE OF PANDITA PARAKRAMA 


227 


There is a tradition in Ceylon that a pupil of Ananda 
Vanaratana also wrote a commentary on four Bhanavaras 
of the Tipitaka in Sinhalese at the request of another monk 
named Anomadassi. 1 

To about this time, or perhaps to a slightly earlier period, 
I would also assign the Kesa-dhdtu-vaTnsa, by an anonymous 
author. Dhammakitti, who, in the reign of Pancjita 
Parakrama, wrote a continuation of the Maha-vamsa , mentions 
it by name. It relates the story of the Buddha’s hair relic 
( kesa-dkalu ), which was brought to Ceylon in the reign of 
Moggallana I (a.d. 497-515) by a novice named Amba 
Samanera. He was a man of the Lambaka$na race, Silakala 
by name, and had fled to India with Moggallana through fear 
of the patricide Kassapa. There he became a recluse at the 
Bodhimai^da Vihara, and because of his having served a 
mango to the Elders he was given the nickname of Amba 
Samanera (Mango-novice). When Moggallana ascended the 
throne a few years later, Silakala, now no longer a monk, 
returned to Ceylon with the Kesa-dhdtu . Moggallana received 
it with great honour, and kept it in the Dlpankara Image- 
house, in a special casket, beside the statues of the two chief 
disciples of the Buddha. Silakala was appointed guardian of 
the relic, and made sword-bearer — hence his name Asiggaha 
Silakala (Silakala the Sword-Bearer). Later he married the 
king’s sister. Such is the account given in the 39th chapter 
of the Maha-vamsa . Of the later history of the Relic, we know 
nothing at all. The Kesa-dhdtu-vamsa itself is extremely rare, 
and I have heard of only one copy in Ceylon. De Zoysa does 
not mention it in his Catalogue , and Mr. Wickremasinghe 
makes but a passing reference to it. 2 

Paodita Parakrama ’s eldest son and successor, Vijaya-Bahu, 
who was entrusted with the supervision of the state during the 
very lifetime of the king, was an enlightened prince, extremely 

1 Medhananda, Jina-vaytsa-dipani, 1917, p. 17. A bhdnavdra is equal to 

260 verses of thirty-two syllables each. 



228 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


devoted to the cultivation of the arts. He was a man of great 
religious fervour, and was called Bodhisatta (Buddha- 
Aspirant) by the people. The Maha-vamsa 1 gives glowing 
descriptions of the measures he adopted to beautify the capital 
city of Polonnaruva, and we see there evidence of an 
ascetic mind belonging to a wise statesman, a just ruler and 
a man of broad views. We are told that he made the city of 
Pulatthi “ like unto the city of Indra, so that by the 
magnificence thereof it surpassed Mithila, discomfited Kanci, 
laughed at SavatthI, vanquished Madhura, despoiled BaranasI, 
robbed even Vesali, and made the city of Campa tremble It 
was this that perhaps gave Vedeha his material for the 
picturesque description of cities in the Samanta-kuta - 
vanrtana. He encouraged learning among the monks by con- 
ferring dignities and offices on such of them as brought glory 
to the Order. They were given titles of Maha-sami-pada, 
Mula-pada, Maha-Thera-pada, Pariveua-Thera-pada, etc. 
He held a great ceremony of Ordination at Sahassatittha, the 
Mahavali-ganga, lasting for a fortnight, to which monks 
came from every monastery, leaving none behind them, “ not 
even a monk in charge of the stores.’ * 2 He sent gifts to the 
monks of Cola and Pan<Ju as well. The influence of an 
enlightened ruler is bound to be reflected in the life of his 
subjects, and the large number of literary works, mostly in 
Sinhalese, written during this period, are an index to the 
prosperity and the contentment which he, acting under his 
great father, achieved. 

His brother, Bhuvaneka-Bahu, who succeeded him 
(a.d. 1277-88), was no less a patron of learning. He “ caused 
all the Three Pitakas to be written by learned scribes of the 
Scriptures, rewarded them liberally and placed copies 
in the diverse Viharas of Lanka, and thus spread the Pali 
scriptures throughout the land ”. 3 During his reign Siddhattha 

1 Jf.F., lxxjrix. 

# Ibid, ynr. 47-459. 

• if.F., 90, vy. 37-8. 



THE AGE OF PANDITA PARAKRAMA 


229 


Thera compiled the Sdrattha-san gaha . The author describes 
himself as a member of the VanavasI fraternity, and pupil of 
Buddhappiya, author of Rupa-siddhi, “famed throughout 
Coll and Lanka for his vast learning and great piety.” He also 
has a panegyric on Bhuvaneka-Bahu, whose patronage he 
seems to have enjoyed . 1 

The work is divided into forty sections, written partly in 
prose and partly in verse. The first chapter deals with the 
Buddhabhinihara, the preliminaries necessary for aspiring 
to Buddhahood, and several verses are quoted from the Sutta- 
nipata commentary ; it then passes on to the wonderful 
features of the Buddha’s life, quoting extensively from the 
commentaries accounts of such Suttas as the Maha-Sihanada, 
and the Culla-Hatthi-padopama . This is followed by a 
description of the gradual disappearance of the Buddha’s 
teaching, the appearance of cakkavatti kings, the enshrine- 
ment of the relics of Holy Men, the protection of such shrines, 
illustrated with stories of men who reached salvation thereby, 
a discourse on the threefold Sdsana ( Pariyatti , Patipatti , 
and Pativedha), and a condemnation of heresies and of 
heretics who entered the order in Asoka’s reign attracted by 
gain. Many stories are given of the virtues of piety and 
devotedness of heart and self-denial, especially in the matter of 
giving alms. 

One instance is given of a man who sold firewood and 
prepared alms for some novices (Samaueras), which they 
refused to accept because it was not well prepared. He then 
pawned his daughter, bought a cow, and prepared alms with 
milk. Later he worked at a sugar mill to get money for his 
daughter’s release, but, as he was coming home with it, he met 
Pirujapatika Tissa Thera , whom he found starving for want 
of food. Paying an exorbitant price to the only man who had 
food in the place, he gave it to the Thera who thereby became 
an Arahat. To this is added a chapter on dreams — 

1 Preface to printed edition of the first eight chapters : Colombo, 1891, 
ed. Dhaxn maratana. 



230 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


Siddhattha’s dream on the day of Enlightenment, the dream of 
king Kosala, etc., the efficacy of the Refuges, the various 
kinds of Slla, methods of meditation, foods suitable for various 
classes of beings, the reproduction of living things, including 
a story of how two eggs laid by Ambapala Ganika gave birth 
to two Theras. The author says that this is contained in the 
Apaddna, but no such story is found there. The book also has 
a very ungallant chapter on the nature of woman, and the 
concluding chapter deals with cosmology. 

As will be seen from the above brief list of its contents, 
it is a curious medley of matter of diverse, interest, jumbled 
together anyhow, with no attempt at arrangement. I am 
inclined to believe that the book, as we have it now, has been 
greatly tampered with by later editors, and many spurious 
additions have been made to it. Else it would be difficult 
to account for its admixture of religion and demonology and 
medicine. Copies of it are rare, and though an attempt was 
made in 1891 to have the book printed, only a few chapters 
have so far been published. . 

The Rev. Medhananda in his recent work the Jina-vam- 
sa-dipani says that it was this same Siddhatt&a who wrote a 
Mahd^ipatar-vannand f the Dampiyasanne , and the Rasa - 
vdhirit-fikd. 1 

Another author of the same period was Vanaratana 
Medhankara (the third of that name famous in the Buddhist 
Church of Ceylon), who wrote the Jina-carita and the 
Payoga-siddhi. In the colophon to the latter work he tells us 
that he was the pupil of Sumangala Maha Thera of the 
Jambuddoui Vihara and was Niyamaka or director there. The 
Jina-carita , however, is said to have been written at the 
Vijaya-Bahu Parivega, built by Vijaya-Bahu, of which the 
author was incumbent at the time. 2 This probably refers to the 
Vihara built at Vattalagama by Vijaya-Bahu III, who ruled 
at Daxhbadeuiya.* The Jina-carita is a short Pali poem of 

1 Medh&nanda, Jina-vatysa-dipani (Colombo, 1917), Preface, p. 19. 

1 JPT8 , 1904, p. 31. 

1 Jf.F., lxxxi, y. 58. 



THE AGE OF PANDITA PARAKRAMA 


231 


472 stanzas dealing with the life of the Buddha. The first 
hundred verses describe briefly his birth as Sumedha in the 
time of the Buddha Dipankara, and tells us how in one birth 
after another he strove to fulfil the Ten Paramita necessary 
for Buddhahood. The greater part of the work deals with the 
Renunciation and with the visit paid by Gotama to his 
relations after he had attained Enlightenment. The author 
gives vivid descriptions of Suddhodana’s city, and the Twin 
Miracle which the Buddha performed at the foot of the 
Gandabba Tree to convince his relations and win their con- 
fidence. He then proceeds to paint little cameos about the 
various spots where the Buddha lived during his long ministry 
of service to his fellow-men. 

The poem concludes with the author’s aspirations to 
become a Buddha himself, “ Giving my flesh, blood, and eyes 
with calm mind, fulfilling all the Paramita (Perfections) and 
Virtues, all self-abnegation and wisdom, attaining to the 
highest pinnacle of Perfection, may I become Buddha 
incomparable ; having preached the sweet doctrine which 
brings happiness to men, and having freed all the world of 
men and devas from the fetters of Samsara, may I reach 
the noble city of Peace and Joy.” 

There is an old Sinhalese paraphrase to the Jina-carUa , which 
is usually ascribed to Medhankara himself. Towards the end 
of last century the Rev. Dhammananda, Principal of the 
Paramadhammacetiya Parivena at Ratmalana, published a 
new paraphrase written by himself. An English translation 
of it has been published in the Pali Text Society Journal 
(1904-7) by Dr. W. H. D. Rouse, of Perse School, Cambridge. 

Medhafikara’s other work, the Payoga-siddhi , is a grammar 
written on the lines of the Moggallana school. It bears the 
same relation to Moggallana-vydkaraiui as the Rupa-siddhi 
does to the Kaccdyana . The author follows Moggallana 

closely, while supplying the deficiencies of that work which are 
criticized by Buddhappiya in his Rupa-siddhi . The scope of 
the Moggallana is thereby greatly increased, and Medhankara 



232 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


makes some caustic remarks on Buddhappiya’s criticisms. 
“ Many of his rules are mere figments of imagination,” he says 
in one place. 

The Payoga-siddhi is not now much used in Ceylon. It does 
not seem to have found its way to Burma at all, for no mention 
is made of it in any history of Burmese literature. The 
Gandha-vamsa and the Sasana-vamsa, are both silent about it. 
A Sinhalese paraphrase exists by a later anonymous writer, 
but neither paraphrase nor original has found much favour. 

A few years later, in 1295, Parakrama-Bahu IV ascended the 
throne at Kurunegala. He was a wise and mighty prince, 
and after he had obtained a semblance of peace in the kingdom 
(for the Malabar peril was ever present like Damocles’ sword) 
he assembled the monks together and caused the ceremony of 
ordination to be performed many times. 1 He was imbued with 
a great love for learning, and the books written during his 
reign are profuse in their admiration for his accomplishments, 
which were varied and numerous. He was specially devoted 
in his attentions to the tooth relic, and made to it many 
offerings and held many feasts in its honour. In order that 
similar ceremonies may be performed daily, we are told that 
he, of his own free will, wrote a book in Sinhalese called 
Dalada-sirita (the Ceremonial of the tooth relic), according to 
the tenets of which the rites were to be held daily. 2 

The Mahd-vamsa (90, vv. 80-4) also tells us that he appointed 
as his teacher a certain Great Elder from the Cola country, a 
self-denying man, conversant with many languages and skilled 
in the science of logic and in religion. The king read all the 
JdtaJcas with him, and constantly heard them expounded, 
learnt them all, and kept in mind their meaning also. There- 
after he translated in due order the entire collection, 
551 in number, from Pali into Sinhalese. He caused them to 
be read in an assembly of Elders who were well versed in the 

1 Jf.F., xc, w. 64-6. 

* Ibid, w. 76-8. But see Wickremasinghe, p. xvii, re authorship of 
Dafad&sirita. I believe that here we have to do with two different works, 
one of which evidently has been lost in later years. 



THE AGE OP PANDITA PARAKRAMA 233* 

Tipitaka , and having purified his translations of their faults,, 
he caused them to be transcribed and spread them throughout 
the whole of Lanka. Later he visited an Elder of great 
eminence called Medhankara, and gave these Jatakas into hie 
charge, so that they might be preserved in the line of 
succession of his pupils. 

This Medhankara probably refers to the author of the 
Jina-carita noticed above. 

According to the Maha-varnsa account the translation of the 
JataJcatthakctiha was done by King Parakrama himself. The 
introduction to the existing Sinhalese version is silent as to 
its authorship. It merely states that the work was 
accomplished by the exertions of the minister Vlrasimha 
Pratiraja. The translation does not always follow the Pali 
text : sometimes whole sentences being left out, which may 
perhaps be due to the carelessness of later-day scribes. Some- 
times attempts have been made to add embellishments to the 
Pali version. 1 

The late Ven. H. Siri Sumangala, Nayaka Thera, stated in 
the course of an article to the Journal of the Ceylon 
Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society (vol. viii, No. 28), that 
“ provincialisms are to be detected in the Jatakas. Some of 
them are written in indifferent Sinhalese, some contain a few 
Tamil expressions and words.” From these facts he concluded 
that the Sinhalese version must have been made by several 
persons. The language of the translations is certainly not 
worthy of the king, if the Maha-varnsa account of his having 
been the author of the Dalada-sirita is correct. It is inter- 
spersed with many Sanskrit and Pali words, and is decidedly 
colloquial in style. On the other hand, could the colloquialisms 
have been due to a deliberate desire to make the translation 
comprehensible to the ordinary layman ? The Jatakas 
formed his chief spiritual sustenance, as they do to this day, 


1 See also Wickxemaaiiighe, p. 119. D'Alwis, Sidat-satyara, Introd., 



234 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


and it was necessary that he should understand as clearly as 
possible the lessons they inculcated. 

From this period a distinct tendency is to be observed among 
the authors of books towards using Sinhalese as their medium 
of expression in preference to any other language then used 
for literary purposes in Ceylon. This was due to several 
reasons ; greater attention than ever before was being paid 
to subjects of secular interest. Pali was pre-eminently 
the language of sacred literature or, at least, of literature 
having some definite connexion with the religion — the history 
of religious movements, the chronicles of the doings of the 
Order, the measures adopted by various sovereigns and 
distinguished members of the community, for the maintenance 
of the national faith. 

It is true that Sanskrit was there, available for use where 
Pali would not suffice ; but Sanskrit ne ver became the favourite 
language in Ceylon at any time to the extent that Pali did. 
Perhaps there was a prejudice against it from very early ages 
because of its having been the language of the Tirthakas 
(unbelievers) and of the Vaitulya-vadins, who sought through 
their writings to interpret the doctrines of Buddhism 
in a manner contrary to the traditions of the Theravada 
monks. Besides, Sanskrit was par excellence a literary dialect, 
not to be easily understood, nor to be used with any degree of 
proficiency except by the very learned. Any work written in 
it would find circulation only within a narrow circle, for not 
even all the monks knew Sanskrit, while they were all 
acquainted with Pali, and there was not much chance of its 
gaining currency in the neighbouring continent, unless it 
should prove to be of remarkable merit, such as was 
Kumaradasa’s JdnakT-harana. 

There is no doubt that Vedeha’s comprehensive Sinhalese 
grammar, the Sidat-sangarci , gave great impetus to the 
attention paid to Sinhalese studies. There he had made an 
attempt to keep Sinhalese as a special language apart from 
Pali and Sanskrit, though it contained many words derived 



THE AGE OP PANDITA PARAKRAMA 


235 


from them. In such grammatical factors as gender, for 
instance, he showed how Sinhalese differed from its ancestors. 
But it was too late to stem the tide. The influence of other 
languages, especially of Sanskrit, had already proceeded apace. 

We saw how the sweet, soft rhythm of old Pali gradually 
gave place to a more sonorous, vigorous Sanskritized Pali ; 
it was the same with Sinhalese. The language was enriched 
first on the side of its religious vocabulary by words derived 
from Pali, while words and phrases and turns of expression 
now began to be borrowed bodily from Sanskrit. The 
contiguity of Tamil, too, for several centuries has had its 
effect. Sinhalese thus once more came back to its own, 
though it was a language in many ways different from that 
used prior to the eleventh century. Hitherto Ceylon authors 
had written their most important works in Pali ; henceforward 
Sinhalese comes to assume that position ; most of the 
important compositions are in the “ language of the land” 1 ; 
no attempts are made now (such as the authors of the 
Mahd-mmsa and the Ddtha-vcimsa made) to supersede it by 
any other medium of expression ; occasionally an author is 
found using Pali, ambitious perhaps to reach a wider audience 
than that confined to Ceylon, or because the very nature of 
his treatise was such that Pali seemed its pre-eminently 
fitting garb. 

From the fourteenth century onwards until the nineteenth 
the island never enjoyed perfect peace for any length of time ; 
the Malabar hordes were ever waiting to swoop down upon it, 
and later came enemies from countries further away. Rival 
claimants to the throne were constantly at war with each other, 
and it was only on rare occasions that a sovereign was found 
sufficiently strong and powerful to hold them in check. 

1 For information about them reference should be made to such works 
as D’Alwis* Sidat-safigara , Introduction; Wickrcmasinghe's Catalogue of 
Sinhalese MSS. in the British Museum, and De Zoysa’s Catalogue among 
others. In the present treatise mention will be made of Sinhalese works 
only in so far as they are translations or commentaries of Pali books or are 
in some way connected with them. 



236 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


Alarmed by this want of security, the influx of scholars 
from other lands gradually diminished and finally ceased, 
or perhaps they felt they had now obtained all the learning 
that Ceylon could give them. This diminution in the traffic 
of learning also may have been in some measure responsible 
for the adoption of Sinhalese in preference to Pali, and it is 
worth noticing that very few of the books written in Ceylon 
after the fourteenth century have gained currency in other 
lands. The golden age of Pali literature in Ceylon had ended 
perhaps never more to come back. 

Several authors of eminence flourished during the time of 
Parakrama-Bahu IV, chief among whom was Sri Parakrama- 
Bahu, Maha Thera of the Vilgammula fraternity, chief 
incumbent of the Kitsirimevan Kiilani Temple. He made a 
Sinhalese translation of the Maha-Bodhi-vamsa, in twelve 
chapters. It is an amplified version of the Pali original, 
interspersed with numerous quotations from Pali works, 
both canonical and otherwise, and from Sanskrit works 
such as Kalidasa’s Raghu-vamsa. 1 In the colophon the author 
tells us that the translation was made at the request of the 
king himself. He was a Sanskrit scholar as well, and made 
a Sinhalese paraphrase of Mayura’s Surya-iataka . 2 In the 
preface to the Bodhi-vmnsa translation mention is made also of 
the following works in Sinhalese, composed during the same 
period : a translation of the Dhamma-padatthafaUha and the 
Peta-vat (Peta-vatthu), the Viman-vat ( Vimana-vatthu) and 
the Buddha-vamsa , which, judging from their titles, were 
either translations or compilations from the Pali works of the 
same names. 

Tumour 3 makes out that a portion of the Mahd-vamsa 
was written during the reign of this king, bringing the history 
down to his own times. 

Mr. Wickremasinghe assigns also to this period a Pali 

1 For a fuller description Wickremasinghe, pp. 22 and 23. . 

* Ibid. 

* Epitome of the History of Ceylon, p. 47. 



THE AGE OF PANDITA PARAKRAMA 


237 


work called the Dhdt u-inanj usa (casket of radicals), or the 
Kaccdyana Dhdtu-manjusa , as it is more often called, a 
compilation of verbal roots in Pali and founded on the 
Kaccdyana . It is a kind of metrical vocabulary on the same 
lines as the Abhidhana-ppadipika, but, unlike the latter, it 
contains only lists of verbal roots. The Abhidhana-ppadipika 
did not contain any lists of verbs at all. The author of the 
Manjusd was a monk named Silavamsa. In the colophon he 
says : “ The Dhalu-manjusd , rendered clear and easy by its 
alphabetical arrangement (vanm-kkamd, arranged according 
to letters), has been compiled for the edification of the 
uninitiated by the learned Silavamsa, a monk, who like a 
swan to the lotus of the Scriptures, resided in the Temple of 
Yakkhaddi Lena, 1 with aspirations that Buddhism may con- 
tinue long.” In the introductory stanzas he acknowledges 
his obligation to various Pali grammars and lists of roots 
(Dhdtu-pdtha) which had been compiled earlier. No date of 
composition is given and as yet we have no clue which will 
enable us to determine the period with any definiteness. 
Silavamsa divided radicals into seven classes, each class 
typified by a single word (bhu 9 rudha , diva , su, hi , tanu, and 
cura). The 148 stanzas contain over 400 radicals arranged in 
alphabetical order. Usually only one meaning is assigned to 
each root. Thus “ kuta = chedana (cutting) ” (under the 
bhvddi ). 

The late Don A. de S. Batuvantudave Pandita, of 
Colombo, one of the foremost of Orientalists in Ceylon in the 
last century, prepared and published a scholarly edition of 
the work with a Sinhalese and an English translation, giving 
an alphabetical list of the radicals, the class to which each 
belongs and the number of the stanza in which the particular 
radical occurs in the Pali original. 2 

1 Probably Yakdess&gala in Kurunegala District (Wiokremaaingbe, 
p. xviii). 

B Colombo, 1872, pp. 1, 68. 



CHAPTER XII 
The Twilight Glow 


JpROM the end of the thirteenth century up to the extinction 
of the Sinhalese dynasty in the eighteenth Ceylon passed 
through one long period of unrest punctuated only by very 
short intervals of peace. During the whole of this time the 
island cannot be said to have been ever entirely freed from the 
presence of the Malabars. Even when temporarily subdued 
by some strong Sinhalese monarch, they continued to exercise 
their influence in divers ways, and by frequent intermarriages 
the royal line was almost as closely allied to the ruling princes 
of South India as it was to the blood of the Sinhalese kings of 
old. The effects of their ever-present influence are to be seen 
to-day in every department of life among the Sinhalese, in 
their language, their domestic and social observances, and 
in their very national religion, so much so that to this day 
the Devalas for Hindu worship are found either within the 
precincts of the Buddhist religious edifices ( viharas ) themselves 
or in close contiguity with them. The Malabars now exercised 
undisputed dominion over the northern coasts on both sides 
of the island. The two ancient capitals, Anuradhapura and 
Polannaruva, with the rich fertile and well-watered plains 
surrounding them, fell into their hands ; the country from 
Chilaw in the West to Batticaloa on the East owed allegiance 
to the foreigners, even adopting their language as the 
vernacular. In the thirteenth century, with the establishment 
of a Tamil colony in the sandy plains of Jaffna-pattanam at 
the northernmost extremity of the island, their power became 
firmly rooted, and it irresistibly extended itself. One after 
another, each capital city in the kingdom had to be 
abandoned to them, and the seat of government carried 
further and further south ; from Anuradhapura it moved to 
Polonnarnva, thence to Dambadepiya in the thirteenth 
century ; from there to Yapahuva, Kurunegala, and Gampola, 



THE TWILIGHT GLOW 


239 


thence to the lofty plateau of the Hill country, with its little 
town of Senkacjagala and to lovely Perade^iya on the banks 
of the Mahavaliganga, and finally in the fifteenth century to 
Jayavardhana-pura, now known as Kotte, 6 miles away 
from modern Colombo. 

Occasionally the Sinhalese would make desperate attempts 
to regain their lost independence, with casual successes ; 
but the odds were greatly against them ; the Tamils could 
always rely for help on the bands of marauding allies from the 
neighbouring continent and the Sinhalese were unable to 
offer effectual resistance to their overwhelming numbers. 
Whilst the north of the island was thus almost entirely 
abandoned to the Tamils, the Sinhalese provinces were sub- 
divided into several petty kingdoms, the chiefs of which often 
acknowledged nominal supremacy to someone who held sway 
over the capital city ; but they were almost always involved 
in internecine struggles, because of their rivalry and jealousy 
and hostilities provoked by the withholding of tribute. 1 

Amidst such conditions of alarm and despondency, when the 
power of the people was being steadily destroyed and foreign 
influence was gaining the ascendancy at the Court, there was 
little to fire the enthusiasm of men of letters. They depended 
for their encouragement not so much on the meritorious praise 
of their reading public as on the patronage extended to them 
by their rulers, who themselves were scholars and lovers of 
literature. The monks, who because of their dissociation from 
worldly interests had so far been able to devote their attention 
to literary pursuits, had to depend for their maintenance 
on the generosity of the lay community ; that support was 
not always forthcoming ; the people were too much engrossed 
in the protection of t eir property and persons to have time 
for anything else. Literature thus fell into decay: the 
fraternities of monks were disorganized, yet it was they who 
amidst all adversity kept alive the torch of learning in Ceylon- 
all honour to them, therefore — and, whenever a patron of 
1 Tennant, History of Ceylon , vol. i, p. 416. 



240 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


letters arose in the ranks of the princes or of their ministers, 
willing to extend to them a helping hand, they once more 
roused themselves to activity and produced works of merit, 
worthy of holding rank alongside with the productions of 
their predecessors. 

One such prince was Bhuvaneka-Bahu IV (circa a.d. 1347), 
“ a man of great wisdom and faitli and a mine of excellent 
virtues,” who ruled at Gangasiripura (now Gampola). He 
had an enlightened minister, Senalankadhikara Senerat, born 
of the Mehenavara-vamsa (the descendants of those who had 
accompanied Sanghamitta and the branch of the sacred 
Bodhi-tree). With the consent of the king, he armed himself 
with royal authority and, in order to purge the Order of the 
misconduct among its members, held a council of monks under 
the leadership of the Great Elder Vanaratana of Amaragiri, 
and caused an inquisition to be held into the characters of 
those suspected of wrong living. 1 

At this time a monk named Dhammakitti w T as Sangharaja 
(Primate). He lived in a monastery called Saddhamma-tilaka, 
in the village of Gadaladeniya. 2 According to the 
Saddharmdlankara colophon, 3 he was the pupil of another 
Dhammakitti, who seems to have flourished during the 
latter part of the thirteenth century. He was a member of 
the Putabhatta-sela (Palabatgala) fraternity and lived at 
Gangasiri-pura. Dhammakitti Sangharaja was evidently 
a man of great learning, considered quite worthy, as later 
events show, of the high office he held at the head of the 
Buddhist Church. 

Bhuvaneka-Bahu was succeeded by Parakrama-Bahu V, 
and the latter ( circa 1356) by Vikrama-Bahu III. His 
minister was Nissahka Alake^vara, or Alagakkonar, as he is 
often called, who perhaps forms the most noteworthy figure 
in the days of the decline of the Sinhalese monarchy. He 

1 Nilcaya eangrdha , p. 24. 

1 Ibid., p. 31, and Wickremasinghe, p. six. 

* Wickremasingbe, JR AS., 1896, p. 202. 



THE TWILIGHT GLOW 


241 


belonged to a noble family in the hill tribes of South India, and 
was allied by marriage to Senalankadhikara Senarat mentioned 
above. He rose from power to power ; a governor of the 
province of which Peradeniya formed the capital, he had 
already distinguished himself as a capable administrator *> 
later in the reign of the next king we find him as the Viceroy 
of the Low Country, with his seat of government at Rayi-gama. 
Making that his headquarters, he built a fortification at 
Jayavardliana-pura, so that he might attack the Tamils 
when the time was ripe for such an enterprise. His noble 
patriotism would not brook allegiance to a foreigner, and as 
soon as his plans were ready he challenged the authority of 
the Tamil king at Jaffna by hanging his officers. War was 
immediately declared, and under the competent generalship 
of Alakesvara the Tamil strongholds one after another fell 
before the onslaught of the mighty Sinhalese warriors. At 
the close of the campaign the Tamils, in spite of the aid they 
had received from India, were thoroughly beaten, and 
Alakesvara, his triumph complete, was the hero of the day. 
He had dared to cross swords with the dreaded foe, and, what 
was more, had won in the fight. His achievement fired the 
imagination of his subjects as no other event had done for 
many a long year. Panegyrics were sung in his honour : 
“ There flourishes that valiant lion, Alakesvara, very strong 
in breaking open the frontal knobs of elephants, represented 
in the person of his enemies, and ever in his place on the 
grand, beauteous, golden rock of Lanka, the home of untold 
and fascinating wealth.” 1 The Nikaya-saiigraha , written soon 
after this date, devotes several pages to a description of his 
exploits, and other works of the period bear witness to the 
importance of the place he occupied in the nation’s esteem. 

Alakesvara was not only a great warrior, but also a wise 
statesman, and an enlightened ruler, devoted to the arts of 
peace. He was a devout Buddhist as well, and his attention 
was soon occupied by measures to be adopted for thorough 
1 Nik&ya-safigraha, pp. 26 foil. 


16 



212 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


reform of the Sahglia. “ In the manner of the cultivators of 
paddy, who protect the corn by rooting out the tares and the 
weeds from amongst the corn blades,” 1 he held a synod of 
the church and empowered the pious monks to inquire into 
the state of religion in the land and disrobe all sinful members 
of the Order. The work of holding the inquiry was entrusted 
to the Sangharaja Dhammakitti, mentioned above, lineal 
representative of the Vanavasi fraternity at Putabhatta-sela, 
‘‘whose fame and glory were spread over the ten directions, 
and who was possessed of great virtue and influence, the 
home and abiding-place of a mountain of moral precepts/’ 2 
Thus was tranquillity obtained, at least for a short while. 

Dhammakitti composed a Pali poem called the Para- 
mi niahd-sataka , and in the colophon he pays well-deserved 
tribute to the higli-mindedness of Nissanka AlakeSvara of 
Amara-giri. The poem itself consists of a hundred verses, 
divided into ten sections, dealing with the ten Pdramitd 
(Perfections), which the Bodhisatta had fulfilled before 
he attained Enlightenment. The material for the poem is 
derived from the Jalakas and from the Cany d-pit aka, and the 
verses are well-written in chaste and elegant language. Copies 
of the poem are rare in Ceylon. 

Dhammakitti had a pupil and successor of the same name, 
who held the office of Sangharaja in the reigns of Bhuvaneka- 
Bahu V and Vira-Bahu II (circa 1372-1410). In the reign of 
the latter king, in collaboration with his colleague 
Galaturumula Maitri M aha- Thera, he held a synod of Buddhist 
monks, and, by suppressing unorthodox doctrines, is said to 
have rendered great service to the purification of the religion. 3 
He was a man of great literary achievements, and is the 
celebrated author of several works in Pali and Sinhalese. In 
the colophon of his own Nikdya-sangraha he tells us that 
“ This brief history of the religion was composed by the 

1 Nikdya sangraha, p. 27. 

* Ibid., p. 27. 

• Ibid., p. 29. 



THE TWILIGHT GLOW 


243 


learned monk, Devorakkhita, known and renowned over the 
\vo:M as Jaya-Bahu and celebrated as the Mill i a Thera 
Dhammakitti, who attained the rank of Sarigharaja and 
glorified the religion A set of Pali verses in the tiaddhar ma- 
la iikara 1 gives some more particulars : “ Dhammakitti 

compiled this Saddharmdla it hard. He was the atijaia (more 
renowned) pupil of Dhammakitti ; of the fraternity of 
monks at Putabhatta-sela, who lived in the reign of 
Bhuvaneka-Bahu. He was also the anujdta (taking exactly 
after his master) pupil of the Sangharaja Dhammakitti 
the author of V dr arm- maha-sataha , who resided at Gadaladeni 
Vihara. He composed the works Sa itkhepa, Nikdya-sangaha , 
Bdldvatdra , and Jina-bodh avail 

No information is available as to the nature and contents 
of two of these compilations, the Saukhcpa and the 
J ina-bodhdvali . The Nikdya-saitgraha is a very important 
work, written in Sinhalese, containing the history of Buddhism 
from the time of its founder to the twentieth century of its 
existence. It gives much valuable information about schisms 
in the Buddhist church, and is an authentic record, specially 
of events which took place in the thirteenth and fourteenth 
centuries, where the Mahd-vamsa accounts are often unreliable 
and seem to want supplementation . 2 

Dhammakitti’s Bdldvatdra is a work on Pali grammar, 
and is the most extensively used handbook in Ceylon on the 
subject. It is the smallest grammatical work extant, based 
on the Raced y ana, and forms an extremely good summary 
of the older grammar. Though it closely follows the Kaccdyana 
in its method of trea tment, yet the arrangement is somewhat 
different. The book is divided into seven chapters, dealing 
with Sandhi , Nama , Samasa, Taddhita , Akhyata , Kitaka , 
and Karaka (in two sections Uttanvita and Vibhatli-bheda) 
respectively. The section on Karaka or syntax, especially, 

1 Tho Saddharmalankdra has already been noticed in the discussion of 
Vedeha Thera's Rasa-vuhini , of which it is a translation. 

1 For a fuller description see Wickremasinghe, pp. 72-3. 



244 


THE PALT LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


is here more clearly and comprehensively dealt with than in 
any other grammar, and the work thus forms an important 
addition to the Sandhi-kappa of the Kaccdyana vydkarana. 
D’Alwis says 1 that the author seems to have been familiar 
with the Sanskrit grammar Laghu-Kaumudi , as the arrange- 
ment of both works is largely similar. Neither the 
name of the author nor the date of its compilation is 
given in the book itself, but the Saddharmdlankdra colophon, 
quoted above, helps us to fix both with certainty. The 
Mandalay MSS. in the India Office Library and the 
Gandha-vamsa assign its authorship to Vacissara, 2 but 
Forchhammer’s List 3 agrees with the Saddharmdlahkdra 
colophon in calling its author Dhammakitti. In 1824 the Rev. 
B. Clough, of the Wesleyan Mission in Ceylon, published an 
English translation, copies of which are unobtainable at 
present. Later, in 1892, L. Lee published an English trans- 
lation with copious notes in the Orientalist , vol. ii. 

The Balavatara forms the nucleus for a cluster of Sinhalese 
grammatical works on Pali. 4 Best known amongst them is 
the Gadaladeni Sanne (paraphrase), so called because it was 
compiled by an incumbent of the Gadaladeni Vihara, who is 
usually identified with the author of the Balavatara himself. 6 

It is a very large work, and is held in the same high esteem 
as the original of which it forms a paraphrase, adding many 
detailed explanations and examples, so that the short aphorisms 
of the Balavatara may be more thoroughly understood 
Another well-known paraphrase is the Liyana-sanne or 
Okandapala-sanne , or Pada-siddhi-sanne, composed at 
Okandapala Vihara by Sitinamaluve Dhammajoti, pupil of 
Sangharaja Saranankara, in the eighteenth century. It 
contains explanations in Sinhalese of the examples given in 
the Balavatara , chiefly in the chapter on compounds {samdsa). 

Catalogue , p. 78. 

F&usboll, JPTS}., 1896, pp. 45-6, and 0. F., p. 62. 

Bode, p. 22„ footnote. 

Be Zoyaa, p. 22. 

JS&l&vatara, printed ed., Colombo, 1885, preface. 



THE TWILIGHT GLOW 


245 


In 1894 Hikkaduve Siri Sumahgala published a scholarly 
edition of the Baldvaidra, complete with a tikd in Pali, which 
forms one of the most important works of that distinguished 
Orientalist. 1 

To Dhammakitti is usually assigned the authorship of 
another important work in Pali, the SaMhamma-sangaha 2 
I cannot agree to this ascription ; the colophon of the 
S.-sarigaha is against it. There 3 the author tells us : 
“ There is a Thera named Dhammakitti, who shines like the 
moon in Sihala in the sky of religion, causing to blossom 
by his rays of wisdom the lotuses, the people of Ceylon. 
He is a mine of good conduct arid virtue and is famed in the 
land of the Sihalas like the moon in the sky ; thoroughly 
versed in the Pitakas and in all sciences, a man of wisdom, 
delighting the Island of Lanka. His pupil, known as the 
Dhammakitti Mahasami, desirous of coming to Lanka, 
having come to that beautiful country, amassed much merit. 
After receiving the higher Ordination of an Elder he went 
back to his own land and there, having reached the city of 
Yodaya (Ayodhya ?), while living in the great abode of 
Lankarama, built by the King named Paramaraja, by him, 
Dhammakitti Mahasami, w 7 ell controlled and wise, was com- 
posed this Saddhamnui-sangaha , complete in every w 7 ay.” 
We are, I think, right in conjecturing that the w T ork belongs 
to some time within or about the period under consideration. 
The Dhammakitti referred to as the author’s teacher 4 is 
very probably one of the tw r o Sangharaja’s mentioned above, 
but the author is obviously a native of India and wrote his 
work in that country. 

It contains an account of Buddhism, its history and 
development in eleven chapters, commencing with the 
history of the three convocations. A fourth convocation is 
mentioned, it is interesting to note, where Mahinda held a synod 

1 Colombo, 1894. 

1 Wickremasinghe, p. xix, and De Zoysa, 20. 

» JPT8., 1890-3, p. 90. 

4 De Zoysa says that Dhammadinna was the teachers name (p. 20). 



246 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


under tlie presidency of the first Sinhalese Thera, Maharittha, 
on which occasion the latter recited the Vinaya 1 with great 
solemnity. We then pass on to the reign of Dutugamunu 
and the writing of the scriptures under the patronage of 
Vajagam-aha. The author gives a long description of 

Buddhaghosa’s labours and continues to the time of 
Parakrama-Bahu the Great, when the llkas were written by 
Kassapa and his colleagues. The ninth chapter is devoted to 
a notice of some of the principal works then known, giving the 
names of authors and their compilations. The next two 
chapters deal with the merits that accrue from setting down 
the Pitahas in writing and from listening to the Doctrine. 
The author quotes from the Kosala-Bimba-ra n nan a the merits 
of making images, and in his last chapter gives several 
illustrative stories, some of which are from Ceylon. The 
work is partly in prose and partly in verse, and is profusely 
interspersed with quotations from older compilations. The 
last chapter especially is a sort of anthology of odds and ends 
of old verses, of rare excellence and beauty. The historical 
sections, particularly the chapter (ix) on books and their 
authors, contain many imperfections , 2 and the accounts given 
are not always reliable. Some of these have already been 
dealt with ; but on the whole they aid us to some extent in 
our attempts to put together whatever little information we 
have at present on the history of the religion and of the 
literature of Ceylon. The fact that the author was away from 
Ceylon when he wrote the work might possibly account for 
the deficiencies to be found therein. The chapter on 
Dhammanisarnsa has been the source of inspiration for several 
later-day works in Sinhalese on the same subject. The 
stanzas which it contains are frequently quoted, and the 
illustrative stories are quite well known. 

1 JPTS. Ed., p. 44. 

* e.g. the Abhidhammattha-eaiigaha is attributed to Sariputta and the 
Sacca-sahkhepa to Ananda ; the list given of Dhammapaia's work it 
incomplete. The names of authors follow no chronological order. 



THE TWILIGHT GLOW 


247 


Two other works which probably belong to this period are 
the Sadhu-caritodaya and the Andpatti-dipaiii. The first is 
a short work, written in Pali verse, containing selections of 
stories of pious Buddhists who obtained merit by worshipping 
and making offerings to the Buddha, the Cetiyas, relics, etc. 
The author gives his name as Sumedha Thera, of Cutaggama 
(Ambagamuva ? ) The stories are taken from various sources, 
and some of them from the Rasa-vahinl. Several of them are 
included in a Sinhalese didactic poem, Lovada-saiigard , 
composed by Vidagama Thera , in the fifteenth century. 

The Andpatti-dl/parii is a little tract, very rare, which, as 
its name implies, discusses cases where the infringement 
of Pdtimokkha rules does not result in sin, because the actions 
are unintentional. The author does not give his name, but 
calls himself a pupil of Bhuvaneka-Bahu Thera of the 
Pamsu-pabbata Vihara in Ceylon. There is a Bhuvaneka-Bahu 
Thera mentioned in the Vutta-mdld (q.v.) writtenin the fifteenth 
century. He comes in a list of Buddhist monks of eminence 
whom the author praises for their learning and their services 
to the cause of religion, and his name appears between 
Dhammakitti and Sangharaja (possibly the Sangharaja 
Dhammakitti III). 

About the year a.d. 1412 Parakrama-Bahu VI came to 
the throne. He was the son of Sunetra Devi of the Giri-vamsa, 
and in his earlier years was befriended by an Elder named 
Vidagama Maha Sami, who dwelt in a monastery at Ray i-gama. 
Legend has cast a halo round the youth of this hero-king, and 
many stories are told of his miraculous escapes from death 
at the hands of the Dictator Alake^vara, who was reigning 
at Jayavardhana-pura (Kotte), 2 and who sought to strengthen 

1 Be Zoysa, p. 20. 

2 The his tory of the few years preceding the accession of Parakrama- 
Bahu VI is a tangled web, difficult to unravel. Speculation is rife as to his 
ancestry and the identities of the Alakesvara here referred to and the Elder 
Vidagama Mahasami. There seems to have been a Chinese invasion of 
Ceylon at this time, after which, for several years at least, the king of Ceylon 
paid tribute to China. For further detailed discussion see JRAS. (Coylon 
Branch), vol. xxii, Nob. 63 and 65. 



248 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


his position by extirpating all possible claimants to the throne. 
When he was sixteen years old, the prince slew Alakesvara 
and was crowned king at Kottc. llis long and glorious reign, 
covering over half a century (1412-67 ?) was the brightest 
period in the national annals nearest to the advent of the 
Portuguese ; lie was the last great monarch of a single Lanka ; 
and his reign marks an epoch in Ceylon's island story ; it 
was the last gleam before the darkness, which saw the Sinhalese 
engaged in a death struggle for their independent national 
existence, only to succumb to the sword of their invaders 
and bend their knee in subjection to foreign domination. 

Alakesvara had made of Kotfce a magnificent city, with 
stone baths, spacious streets, and beautiful buildings. 
Parakrama embellished it with fine edifices of solid blue- 
stone, five-storied palaces and temples, shrine rooms and 
monasteries, lie appointed as his Sangharaja Maha Sami 
Vanaratana, and built for him a spacious monastery and a 
large ordination hall (po'/ayc). 1 In memory of his mother he 
built a magnificent shrine and a college for monks as 
Papijiyana. called after her the Sunetra Devi Parivena. Here, 
by royal command, the Tipitaka with the Atthakaihd and 
tiled were inscribed, and lands allotted to the scribes who were 
daily engaged in the work. He made endowments for other 
educational establishments as well, and w*e hear of several 
ecclesiastical colleges during this period, the Fadmavat! 
Parivena at Kiiragala, under the presidency of Rajaguru 
Vanaratana Sangharaja, the Woodland Cloister (Aranyaka) 
at Pajabatgaja, the Vijaya-Bahu Parivena at Totagamuva 
under Sri Rahula, the Irugalkula Parivena at Mulgirigala, 
the &rl Gai;ananda Parivena at Rayi-gama under the Great 
Elder Maittreya Maha Thera of the Maha Netra Vihara, and 
the Sunetra Devi Parivena, already mentioned, presided 
over by Mangala Sangharaja, learned in the Tipitaka . 2 With 
the help of his foster son, Sa pumal-kumara , he was able to 

1 Rajavaliya ( Qunasekara ), p. 68. 

* E. W. Perera, JR A3. (C.B.), No. 63, p. 18. 



TI1E TWILIGHT (2 LOW 


249 


drive the Tamils under Arya Cakravarti away from the island 
and to consolidate the kingdom. Soon afterwards we find 
him successfully organizing a punitive expedition against an 
insolent Malabar prince of South India in retaliation of an 
act of wanton aggression upon some Sinhalese merchants. 1 
By means of his skilful generalship, combined with rare 
administrative ability, by his far-reaching statemanship and 
great genius and capacity for organization, he made of Ceylon 
once more a united island, respected by her neighbours and 
inhabited by a people enjoying peace and tranquillity and well- 
earned prosperity. 

Inspired by this feeling of security and contentment, men 
again turned their attention to the cultivation of the finer 
arts, and nowhere else do we see the benefits of his mild and 
beneficent sway more than in the great literary activity which 
he called forth among the people. They began to sing of the 
dawn of a new golden age, when the world would be ruled by 
righteousness and justice ; they loved to dwell on the 
achievements of the king and extolled the beauties of the 
country over which he ruled ; they told of the splendour of 
his court and the blessings the Gods had showered down upon 
them because of the piety of the rulers. The poems of Sri 
Rahula, for example, glow with an intense patriotism and a 
deep affection for the royal family whose patronage he 
enjoyed. It was an age of much literary productivity, and, 
fortunately for us, in spite of the Portuguese invasion and the 
fanatical vandalism which came along with it, much of that 
literature has come down to us undestroyed. The king himself 
was imbued with a deep scholarship and a great love for 
culture in all its variety. He possessed a wide knowledge of 
Sanskrit, and was probably much struck by the sacred works 
of the Hindus which he had read. These are unmistakable 
traces of the great influence which Hinduism exercised during 
this period, chiefly due no doubt to the close connexion which 
existed between the courts of Ceylon and South India. 

1 Mjdvaliya, p. 69. 



250 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


Brahmans came thither in large numbers, and we find them 
studying under the monks and sometimes being converted to 
the Buddhist faith. 1 Temples were erected in the capital to 
Hindu Gods such as Natha, Sumana, Visnu, and Siva, rivalling 
in excellence the Buddhist shrines. Sri Rahula Sangharaja 
was deeply skilled in all the lore of the Hindus and seems to 
have entertained very liberal notions on the question of 
religion. This epoch shows in a marked degree the compromise 
between Hinduism and Buddhism which existed from very 
early times. 

Parakrama-Bahu was patron of a brilliant band of men who 
shed the lustre of their learning upon this period. So were his 
daughter Ulakudaya Devi and her husband Nallurutun. 
Unfortunately, little is known about their lives, except what 
we can gather from the records in their own works, and in the 
compilations of other contemporary writers. The king was the 
author of a Sinhalese metrical vocabulary, the Ruvan-mala , 
composed on the model of the Amarasinha. His son-in-law 
Nallurutun Minisanhas also made a similar compilation, the 
Ndmdvaliya , but not so complete as the king’s work. But 
brightest in this constellation was &rl Rahula Vacissara, 
Sangharaja and President of the Vijaya-Bahu Parivena at 
Totagamuva, and probably a member of the royal family. 
He belonged to the Uttaramula Nikaya, and tells us that at 
the age of 15 he received a boon at the hands of the God 
Karttikeya, which enabled him to become Sad-bhasa- 
paramesvara (Master of six languages), 2 in addition to his own, 
Sinhalese. All his works are in Sinhalese, and he ranks among 
the highest of the poets of Ceylon. His Kdvya-iekhara , 
appropriately so-called (“ Crown of Song ”), brought him 
immortality, and to this day he is regarded as the chief 
exponent of rhymed verse, and his works are adopted by all 
Sinhalese poets as their model. It was during this time thatthe 

1 c.g. Sri Ramacandra Bharati, author of the Bhakti-tataba, 

* SaJa-lihini Sandesa colophon ; the six languages being Sanskrit, 
Magadhi (Pali), Apabhrarpsa, Fai&ci, Sauraseni, and Tamil. 



THE TWILIGHT GLOW 


251 


Sinhalese Sandesa (message) poem came to the forefront as 
a work of art. Such a poem, as its name implies, is based on 
Kalidasa’s Megha-duta (Cloud Messenger), and embodies 
a message to be conveyed by some bird to the shrine of a 
deva , invoking his blessings on the king or on some member of 
the royal family, or imploring the help of the divinity for the 
victory of the royal arms. The route taken by such a 
messenger-bird is described in the poem and the description 
affords ample opportunity for the poet to display his genius. 
&ri Rahula wrote two such Sandesa poems : the Sulalihini- 
and the Paravi-sandesa, and probably also the Parakumbd- 
sirita , a panegyric on the king. Other works ascribed to him 
are the Simd-saiikara-chedani, on the choice of boundaries for 
the performance of Uposatha ceremonies, the Tofagamu- 
nimitta , a work similar to Napoleon’s Book of Fate . and the 
Catur-drya-satya-kavya , a religious poem. He is also credited 
with having written several works on Demonology . 1 

To students of Pali literature, however, interest in Sri 
Rahula ’s works lies chiefly in two very elaborate and important 
treatises which he wrote on Pali grammar, viz. the Moggallana- 
panjikd-pradipa and the Pada-sadhana-likd. 

The first of these, the Panjikd -pradvpa , is one of the most 
comprehensive works on Pali grammar extant in Ceylon, 
or anywhere else. It is written partly in Pali and partly in 
Sinhalese, and is a commentary to the Panjikd written by 
Moggallana himself on the Pali grammar, which bears his 
name. The author of the PradTpa has made use of his extensive 
reading and profound scholarship to enrich the volume with 
detailed expositions of all Moggallana ’s rules. It bristles 
with references to and quotations from numerous Sanskrit, 
Pali, Sinhalese, and Tamil w T orks, many of which are no longer 
to be found in Ceylon. When the Moggallana school differs 
from the older Kaccayana and his commentators, Sr! Rahula 
e xamin es their claims to accuracy, and the conclusions he 


i Hugh Nevill's MS. Catalogue and JRA8. (C.B.), passim. 



252 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


arrives at show a great deal of critical acumen, unhampered 
by tradition and free from prejudices. 

Subhuti, in his Ndma-mdla ,* has drawn up a list of the works 
quoted by Rahula, which I give below, because of its interest 
in enabling us to know at least the names of some of the 
works studied during this period. Subhuti’s list includes : 
Kaccdyana y Nyasa,N yasa-pradipa , Nirutti-?)ia njusd,Rupa-siddhi 
and its sanne (paraphrase) and gatapada (glossary), Baldvaidra 
and $anrie,Sadda-niti,Cula-ninUli, Nirutti-pitaka , Sutta-niddesa , 
Sambandha-cintd , Pada-sddhana and sanne , Pan jika- tikd, 
Payoga-siddhi, Dik-sahgi-tika (tikd on the Digha -Nikdya) , 
Bhesajja- mahj us a and sanne, A bhidhana-ppadipikd, Cdndra- 
vyd-kararia, Mahd-bhdsya , Bhdsya-pradipa , Lagku-vrtti , 
Durgasimha - vrtti - panjikd , Panjikalankdra , Katantra , 

Sabddrtha -cintd, Sdrasvata, Kdsikd, Kdsika-vrtli , Varlika , 
Bhdgavilti, Sara-sangraha , Padavatdra , Srtdhara, Vai jay anil, 
Abhidharma kosa, Prakrta-prakdsa, Veda , Ramdyana , Bahata, 
Bharata-sdstra , Amara-kosa, Medirii-kosa, Jdtaka-sanne , 
Umanda-gatapada , Ralana-sutta-gatapada, Demala-jdtaka - 

gatapada , and Virita-sanne. This list gives some idea of the 
vast amount of trouble which the author must have spent in 
the production of his voluminous work, and the result has 
been a compilation in every way worthy of the active intellect 
of Sri Rahula. 

For many years the work had been sadly neglected for want 
of authentic copies, and, when the late Siri Dhammarama, 
Principal of the Vidyalankara Pariveiia, Colombo, brought 
out his scholarly edition in 1896, he thereby did a distinct 
service to Pali learning in Ceylon 

Sri Rahula’s other grammatical work, the Pada-sadhana 
tikd, is, as its name implies, a commentary on Piyadassi’s 
Pada-sadhana . The tika is also called Buddhi-ppasddam, and 
copies of it are very rare in Ceylon, the work having been, in 
fact, unknown to Pali scholars for many years until De Zoysa, 
in 1873, discovered a MS. in the Ridi Vihara. 2 The 

1 Subhuti, Nama-mald, Colombo, 1876. 

1 De Zoysa, Catalogue , p. 26. 



THE TWILIGHT GLOW 


253 


BuMhi-ppasadarii was evidently a production of the latter 
part of Rahula’s life, because here he calls himself Sangharaja , 
while in the other works his name is mentioned only as the 
Head of the Vijayabahu Parivena. The work suffers very 
much by comparison with his masterpiece, the Parnika- 
pradipa, and that may have been the reason for its having 
gradually fallen into disuse at the hands of Pali students— 
the greater light had dimmed the less, and made it hide its 
head in shame. 

Other authors who lived during this period or slightly 
posterior to it and composed work in Sinhalese, besides those 
mentioned above, are the President of the Irugalkula Parivena 
at Mulgirigala, author of the Kovul-sandesa ; V&ttava Thera , 
author of the Guttila-jdtakaya ; the anonymous writers of the 
Gird-sandesa and Tisara-sandesa — both evidently poets of 
J ayavardhana-pura (Kotte) — an anonymous pupil of $ri 
Maitri Mahasami of Rayi-gama, who made a Sinhalese para- 
phrase of the Attanagalu-vamsa at the king’s request ; 
Dhammadinna Vimalakitti Thera (also called Siddhattha), 
author of the Saddharma-ratnakara ; Maha-Netra -prasada- 
mula-Vidagama Thera , a monk renowned for his piety, and a 
poet in the excellence of his composition almost equal to $ri 
Rahula, and author of the Budu-gunala iikara (a poem in 
praise of the Buddha, composed in 2015 of the Buddhist Era), 
the didactic poem Ldvada-saiigard , and of the Kivilakunumini - 
-mala, a treatise on Sinhalese prosody ; and Ranasgall6 
Thera of Totagamuvihara, author of an ethical poem, the 
Lokopakaraya. 1 

To the Pali compilations of this time belongs the 
ViUta-mdld — or, to give it its full name — the Vutta-mdla- 
sandesa-sataka , a Pali poem of 102 stanzas in various elegant 
metres, composed by a monk named Gatara Parivena 
Upatapassi. In the colophon the author calls himself the 
nephew of Sarasi-gama-Mula-Maha-Sami, incumbent of 

1 For further description of these writers and their works see 
Wickremasinghe 's Catalogue , passim. 



254 


THE PALt LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


the Jati-gama Monastery (Sarasi-gdma-rnula-rmhd-sdmtno 
bhdgineyya-bhutena racitayam). 

The Saras i-gdma-mula is the Sinhalese Vilgam-mula , the 
Vilgam being Seruvavila, the modern Thopur. The author, 
therefore, undoubtedly belonged to the Saro-gama fraternity, 
which counted many scholars of repute amongst its members. 
The work was evidently composed in the reign of Parakrama- 
Bahu VI (1415-67 ?), for the writer first describes the beauty 
of a city styled Jati-gama, 1 and then extols King Parakrama 
and his mother Sunetra Devi. This is followed by a description 
of the chief Buddhist monastery, and encomiums on several 
monks, all of whom are scholars and probably belong to the 
same Acariya-parampara as the author. The monks so lauded 
are : (1) Upalantara-mula-Thera (Selantara- or Galaturu- 
mula) ; (2) Senapati-mula- ; (3) Main! Netta-pasiida-mula- ; 
(4) Saro-gama-mula ; (5) Vanaratna- ; (6) Dhammakitti- ; 
(7) Bhuvaneka-Bahu Thera (probably the teacher of the 
author of the Andpatti-diparii) ; (8) the Sangha-raja or 

Primate of the time ; and (9) Gatara-upatapassi- Thera, 
pupil of the Sangha-raja who, both Nevill and Wickremasinghe 
think, is probably identical with the author himself. Nevill 
takes Upatapassi to mean the same as Anu-Nayaka. 

These laudatory vdrses are followed by a description of 
Kalaniya and its presiding deity Vibhfsana, whose blessings 
the author asks for Parakrama and his kingdom. The 
Vutta-mala is supposed to have been composed for the purpose 
of teaching students the right pronunciation of sounds and 
the proper modulation of the voice in reciting verse, 2 and, as 
such, is largely used in temple schools. There exists an inter- 
verbal paraphrase in Sinhalese by an anonymous writer, who 
perhaps is identical with the author of the poem itself. Both 
the poem and the paraphrase have been published. 3 

1 Probably Dedigama in Beligal-Korale, though the king is not known to 
have reigned there. See Bell’s Archaeological Report on the KegaUe District, 
pp. 81-5. 

1 D'Alwis, Sidat-sahgar& , p. 225. 

1 Colombo, 1871-96. 



THE TWILIGHT GLOW 


Wickremasinghe assigns to this period the Sinhalese 
Dhatu-vurnsa . 1 The author, in the last strophe to his work, gives 
his name as the Thera Rakusandha, but no further particulars 
are available about him, nor does he say whether the 
Sinhalese version is an original composition or a translation 
from the Pali. I am inclined, however, to agree with 
Professor Geiger 2 in considering that the Dhatii-vamsa is 
only a Sinhalese translation like the Maha-Bodhi-vamsa and 
the Thupa-vamm, and that its Pali counterpart, to which, 
curiously enough, is given the fuller title of the Lalclfa - (or 
Naldta-) dhdtu-vama or simply the Lalata-vamsa , is an older 
compilation. The author of the Pali work and its date are 
unknown, 3 and copies of it are difficult to obtain. There seems 
to have been a commentary on it, called the Laldta-dhdtu- 
vamsa-vminand, but I do not know of any copies of it extant 
in Ceylon. Rhys Davids tells us that the Bibliotheque 
Nationale at Paris possesses a copy written on twenty -seven 
ola -leaves. 4 The I<ald1a - dhdt u-vanisa is a history, in five 
chapters, of the frontal bone relic of the Buddha. It is a work ) 
undoubtedly, of great antiquity, and evidently belongs to the 
cycle of sagas and legends of Rohana and Malaya. It there- 
fore contains many popular traditions not found elsewhere, 
especially grouped round the family and the contemporaries 
of the Kak a van n a - T issa , father of Dutugiimunu. The work was 
unknown to the authors of the Mahd-vamsa and its tiled, 
for we find no reference to it in their compilations. It follows 
the general outline of all vatnsa books in its mode of treatment, 
beginning with Dipankara, and passing on to the three visits 
of the Buddha, the Parinibbana, and the distribution of the 
relics. The third chapter gives the history of the frontal bone 
relic, from the time of its falling to the share of the Mallas 
at the distribution to its arrival in Ceylon when Mahanaga 
reigned in Maha-gama. It was first honoured by a wealthy 

1 p. XX. 

1 Dipa varjtsa and Maha-varjisa, p. 91. 

* The Q. V p. 62, mentions the Nal&ta-dhatu vawana, but gives no author. 

4 JRAS., N.S., vol. vii, p. 171. 



256 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


man named Mahiikala, and then, later, by the king, when he 
heard of it. It seemed to have remained for a long time in the 
hands of the Rohana princes who did honour to it in succession. 
The last two chapters contain accounts of Kakavaiirui-Tissa’s 
family, the history of the erection of a special Diigoba at 
Seruvila for the reception of the relic and its dedication and 
the enshrinement of the relics. The accounts in these two 
chapters were undoubtedly derived from popular sources 
and local traditions, and were, therefore, unknown to the 
Maha-vamsa author, else he surely would have made mention 
of them. The descriptions of the erection of the diigoba, etc., 
are entirely based on the Maha-vamsa , and follow them almost 
word for word. The similarity of treatment between the 
Laldta-varnsa and the Mahd-Bodhi-vamsa leads me to assign 
both works to the same period of Pali literature, namely to 
the tenth or the eleventh century a.d. 

The Sinhalese version of Kakusandha is more or less a 
translation of the Pali, but contains several details not found 
in the Pali compilation, e.g. in the description of the third 
visit of the Buddha to Ceylon. 1 The Sinhalese work has 
already been published in Ceylon, edited by Gintota 
Dhammakkhanda (Dodanduva, 1890), and 1 understand that 
the Pali version is in course of publication. 

It was about this time, in the reign of King Bhuvaneka- 
Bahu VI (a.d. 1464—71 1) that Dhammaceti, or Ramadhipati, 
King of Pegu, brought about a great religious revival in his 
own land. Dhammaceti reigned from 1460-91, 2 and his 
regime was a memorable one for Burma. His fame for wise 
statesmanship and munificence has spread far beyond the 
confines of his own country, and he is renowned throughout 
the Buddhist world for his extreme piety. He was an ex-monk, 
and for some time was the minister oi the famous 
Queen Shin-sau-bu. Later he became* her son-in-law and 
successor. He was not only a high-minded monarch and a 

1 For fuller description see Geiger, op. cit., pp. 91-3. 

1 Phayre, History of Burma, p. 290. 



THE TWILIGHT GLOW 


257 


protector of the Order he had quitted, but was an enthusiastic 
reformer as well. Emulating the example of such kings as 
Asoka and Parakrama-Bahu, he made the purity of Buddhism 
one of the objects of his earnest solicitude. During the four 
centuries that preceded his accession, Burma had scarcely 
enjoyed peace for any length of time, and matters pertai nin g 
to religion had been greatly neglected. He found that, because 
of the violent political convulsions which the country had 
suffered, the succession of teachers ( T hera vada-parampard) 
had been interrupted in Ramafma. In order, therefore, to 
secure for the Burmese monks direct continuity of apostolic 
succession from the spiritual descendants of Mahinda, and also 
to establish for the monks of Ramafma a duly consecrated 
place for the performance of their ecclesiastical ceremonies, 
he sent a mission to Ceylon, consisting of two ministers and 
twenty -two monks and their pupils, with costly presents to the 
king of Ceylon and the chief monks and with a letter inscribed 
on a tablet of gold. They were welcomed with every mark of 
friendship and civility, and their request was granted. They 
received their upasampadd ordination at the hands of the 
Mahavihara fraternity within the consecrated boundaries 
(slma) of the Kajyani river, near Colombo. On their return 
they consecrated the enclosure in Pegu, henceforth known 
as Kalyam-slma. Dhammaceti, in the celebrated Kalyaiii 
inscriptions at Zaingganaing, near Pegu, set forth in detail 
the account of this mission and laid down for the use of future 
generations the proper ceremonial of consecrating a Sima 
The stone slabs containing the inscriptions were broken up 
by the Vandalism of Portuguese adventurers, but have later 
been restored to some extent. The records in the inscriptions 
had been compiled in book form, copies of which are to be 
met with in many of the monasteries in Ceylon — especially 
those belonging to the Amara-pura Sect, under the title of 
M Kalyaoi -ppakarapa ”, One point of literary interest in the 
Kalya$i-ppakara$a lies in the mention made in it of the 
standard authorities on Vinaya subjects at the time, such 



258 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


as the Vinayatthakatha , SdrcUtha-daparii, Vimati-vimdam , 
Vinaya-vinicchaya, Vinaya-sa iigaha , Simdfahkdra-sangaha , 
and Vajirabuddhi-tika , practically all of them of Sinhalese 
authorship . 1 The Kajyani-ppakarana is noteworthy because 
of its significance in showing us to what degree a religious 
superiority over the rest of the community was claimed by 
those who had received their ordination direct from the monks 
of Ceylon. In spite of the many vicissitudes which the Sangha 
in Ceylon had passed through in their chequered career their 
claim to be the guardians of the genuine Thera-vada was still 
recognized in the fifteenth century. 

1 For more information about the KalyanI Inscriptions see Preliminary 
Study by Taw Sein Ko in the Indian Antiquary , vol. xxii. 



CHAPTER XIII 
The Dark Age 

rjIHE two centuries following the death of Parakrama- 
Bahu VI constitute the darkest chapter in the history 
of Ceylon. The political condition of the country was at 
it3 lowest ebb, the whole of the sea coast was virtually in the 
hands of foreigners, chiefly Moors ; the interior regions, 
including the remains of the ancient capitals, were divided 
into a number of petty fiefs uncontrolled by any paramount 
central authority and governed by chieftains holding mimic 
courts at various centres. These petty tyrants, Wen more 
degenerate in their character than they were humiliated in 
station, no longer manifested the patriotism and the zeal for 
the public welfare which had so significantly characterized 
the former sovereigns of Ceylon. They had ceased to occupy 
their attention with the advancement of religion or with the 
development of institutions calculated to benefit the people. 
The history of the period contains very little besides accounts 
of their feuds and jealousies, their ceaseless intrigues and 
insurrections. Even the food supply of the country, to the 
maintenance of which the earlier and more enlightened 
princes had devoted the greater part of their energies, had 
now failed, and Ceylon had become dependent on India for 
the very necessaries of life. Such was the sad plight of the 
country when, at the beginning of the sixteenth century, 
in the course of their discoveries and conquests in the East, 
and in the pursuit of their Eastern trade, the Portuguese 
came upon Ceylon. 1 Dharma Parakrama IX was then reigning 
at Kotte, a weak and irresolute prince, at the head of an 
insignificantly small extent of territory. By promising him 
military aid against any assaults by his ambitious relatives, 
and by holding out to him hopes of great riches to be derived 

1 For further particulars of the Portuguese period in Ceylon see Emerson 
Ttennent, Ceylon , vol. ii, chap. 1, and that excellent book, Pieris, Ceylon 
and the Portuguese (1920), passim . 



260 


THB PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


from the trade which they proposed to establish, the 
Portuguese first gained a foothold in Colombo and erected a 
fortress on the rocky beach. Once their guns were thus set 
up, and their formidable galleons had found shelter in the 
adjoining natural harbour, they were able to overawe the 
Sinhalese king, whose capital now lay almost within range of 
the Portuguese cannon. On the other hand, his own subjects, 
dissatisfied with the favour he had extended to the foreigners, 
threatened him with revolt and invasion. The Portuguese, 
with characteristic duplicity, persevered in maintaining an 
internecine warfare in the country, which enabled them at last 
to make the king their vassal, and, finding him incapable of 
refusing any of their arrogant demands, they wrung from him 
every sort of concession. Within a short time after their 
arrival they had established permanent trading settlements 
in various parts of the island, and for one hundred and fifty 
years, till they were driven away by the Dutch, they carried on 
a ceaseless warfare against the Sinhalese people, who were 
now perforce compelled to abandon the maritime provinces 
to the hated foreigner. The capital of the Sinhalese king was 
kept in a state of almost incessant siege ; to the minor chiefs 
who owed him allegiance were held out every inducement to 
break themselves off from their rightful sovereign ; it was 
part of the Portuguese policy to inflame their apprehensions 
one against the other, and excite their jealousy. Thus for 
many years the maritime provinces were devastated by civil 
war in its most revolting form. By a.d. 1540 their treachery 
had so far succeeded in estranging the Sinhalese monarch 
from the sympathies of his own countrymen, that he found 
himself now entirely at the mercy of his foreign allieB and 
appealed to them to ensure the succession of his family to the 
throne. To give solemnity to their acquiescence, an image of 
his grandson, Dharmapala — who was the only male repre- 
sentative of the royal household — was made of ivory and gold 
and silver, and this statue was dispatched, with a jewelled 
crown studded with Ceylon’s finest gems, to Lisbon, where a 



THE DARK AGE 


261 


coronation of the effigy was held by the Portuguese Emperor. 
In return for this recognition of Dharmapala as heir to the 
Sinhalese kingdom, the prince himself eventually abjured the 
national faith and professed himself a baptized convert to 
Christianity under the name ot horn Joas Periya Bandara. 
The King of Portugal, who was a pronounced fanatic, 
controlled by peculiarly aggressive ecclesiastical advisers, 
exacted a further concession. A party of Franciscans accom- 
panied the Sinhalese ambassadors back to Colombo from 
Lisbon, licence was claimed to preach the Gospel of Christ 
in all parts of the island, and the first Christian communities 
were organized in various places in the maritime districts . 1 
Thus began the gradual destruction of Buddhism, the “ only 
organization which existed for the spiritual and intellectual 
education of the people ”. 2 Meanwhile the Portuguese had 
been busy extending their power as far inland as possible ; 
and by the beginning of the seventeenth century the territory 
under their direct government embraced the whole of the 
maritime circuit of the island, including the Peninsula of 
Jaffna, and extended inland right up to the base of the lofty 
zone which encircled the little kingdom of Kandy . 3 

Every stage of their progress was marked by a rapacity, 
bigotry, cruelty, and an inhumanity unparalleled in the annals 
of any other European colonial power. Their ferocity and their 
utter indifference to all suffering increased with the success 
of their army ; their inhuman barbarities were accompanied 
by a callousness which knew no distinction between man, 
woman, and child ; no feeling of compassion was strong 
enough to stay their savage hands in their fell work. To 
terrify their subjects and to bring home to them the might of 
the Portuguese power, they committed atrocities which, had 
they not been found recorded in the decades of their own 
friendly historians, Seem too revolting to be true. Babes were 

1 Tennent, Christianity in Ceylon, chap. i. 

* Picric, op. cit , p. 78. 

• Tennent, Ceylon , voL ii, p. 26. 



262 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


spitted on the soldiers’ pikes and held up that their parents 
might “ hear the young cocks crow Sometimes they were 
mashed to pulp between millstones, while their mothers were 
compelled to witness the pitiful sight before they themselves 
were tortured to death. Men were thrown over bridges for the 
amusement of the troops to feed the crocodiles in the river, 
which eventually grew so tame that at a whistle they would 
raise their heads above the water in anticipation of the welcome 
feast . 1 The officials who acted as administrators had almost 
absolute power, and the people were ground down by 
oppressive taxation, and laws of terrible severity. The 
Sinhalese who remained loyal to their rightful sovereign were 
deprived of all their possessions, if they escaped with their 
lives, and refugees who by necessity or by choice joined the 
Portuguese ranks were received with open arms ; wealth 
and rank and lands were conferred on them, and they were 
placed in positions of command over the rest. They thus 
obtained an undesirable influence over their countrymen, who 
became only too ready to rise in revolt at the bidding of every 
renegade. The success of any one chieftain only served to 
arouse intense jealousy among his fellows ; war to them was 
only an excuse for peculation ; they were guilty of all manner 
of excesses, abuse of authority and exactions. The tenants of 
village lands were so oppressed that they were frequently 
obliged to sell their children to procure the necessaries of life. 
The Portuguese officials themselves were never better than 
brigands, bent on their own aggrandisement during their 
tenure of office, and their administration was a colossal failure. 
The whole of the country under their control suffered from 
their cruel oppression ; whatever produce their soil was made 
to yield was misappropriated ; the kingdom was thus 
depopulated, and the lands mostly left uncultivated ; the 
Sinhalese were left entirely disorganized and decadent, 
without a proper king and without leaders of ability. But 

1 Fan* Y Souza, Asia Portuguesa (Lisbon, 1666-75), Stevens' translation, 
▼ol. iii.pt.iii, chap, xv, p. 279. 



THE DARK AGE 


263 


worse than these were the results of the measures the 
Portuguese adopted to destroy the national religion of Ceylon. 

Dom Joao III, who was Emperor of Portugal at this time, 
was a staunch supporter of the church, fanatical in his zeal 
for the conversion of his heathen subjects. The Church 
itself was in a particularly aggressive mood. In 1534 Ignatius 
of Loyola had founded the Society of Jesus at Paris, and two 
years later the Inquisition was established. The first Auto da 
Fe was held in Portugal, presided over by the king, in the 
very year when Bhuvaneka-Bahu had sent the effigy of his 
grandson to be crowned at Lisbon. When Bhuvaneka-Bahu’s 
application for recognition of Dharmapala as heir to the 
Sinhalese throne was granted, one of the conditions laid down 
was, as we saw above, that permission should be given to 
preach the Christian gospel anywhere in the Sinhalese king’s 
dominions. A band of Franciscan monks accompanied the 
Ceylon ambassadors on their return from Lisbon to Colombo. 
They immediately set about their work of converting the 
Sinhalese, who had so far found consolation in Buddhism. 
The Portuguese had as their ostensible motto “Amity, 
Commerce, and Religion ”, and nowhere were they more*zealous 
than in the propagation of the gospel. Their instructions were 
“ to begin by preaching, but, that failing, to proceed to the 
decision of the sword ”. 1 In 1546 the King of Portugal sent 
a remarkable letter to his Viceroy in India : “ We charge 
you to discover all idols by means of diligent officers, to reduce 
them to fragments and utterly to consume them, in whatever 
place they may be found, proclaiming rigorous penalties 
against such persons as shall dare to engrave, cast, sculpture, 
limn, paint, or bring to light any figure in metal, bronze, 
wood, clay, or any other substance, or shall introduce them 
from foreign parts ; and against those who shall celebrate 
in public or in private any festivities which have any Gentile 
taint, or shall abet them ...” 3 His instructions were carried 

1 Faria V Souza, op. eit., voL i, pt. 1, oh. ▼, p. 63. 

1 Pieria, op. cit., p. 58. 



264 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


out to the very letter. Whosoever dared to interfere with the 
work of proselytization, action was to be taken against him with- 
out delay, so that the displeasure of the Emperor of Portugal 
upon those who had the impudence to hinder the conversion 
of the heathen might be made plain to all. The success of 
the Franciscans reached its climax when Dharmapala was 
baptized as a Christian along with h''- queen, who took the 
name of Donna Caterina, after the Queen of Portugal. Even 
the Pope found time to send the royal convert his Apostolic 
benediction, and to recommend him to the special protection 
of the King of Portugal . 1 Dharmapala’s thank-offering to 
the missionaries who had led him from out of the darkness into 
the light was a sannas (deed of gift) transferring to them the 
Dalada Maligava (the holiest possession of the Ceylon kings), 
the two great shrines at Kalaniya, and all the temple .revenues 
in the island for the maintenance of the missionary establish- 
ments. The strongest inducements were held out to the 
people to embrace the new religion ; no office could be held 
by anyone who did not profess Christianity, and all civil 
rights were denied to the heathen. In the letter of the King 
of Portugal to the Viceroy mentioned above, he had added : 
“ And, because the Gentiles submit themselves to the yoke of 
the Gospel, not alone through their conviction of the purity 
of the Faith and for that they are sustained by the hope of 
Eternal Life, they should also be encouraged to with some 
temporal favours, such as greatly mollify the hearts of those 
who receive them ; and therefore you should earnestly set 
yourself to see that the new Christians from this time forward 
do obtain and enjoy all exemptions and freedom from tribute, 
and moreover that they hold the privileges and offices of 
honour which up till now the Gentiles have been wont to 
possess.” 2 This appeal to the baser side of human nature 
was eminently successful ; it became the fashion to profess 
Christianity ; the example set by the King Dharmapala 

1 Pieris, op. cit., p. 77. 

* Ibid., pp. 58-9. 



THE DARK AGE 


265 


was soon taken up ; biblical names began to abound in the 
Sinhalese Court, and outside it, while the language and manners 
of the Portuguese were rapidly adopted by those who wished 
to earn the goodwill of those in power. When the Portuguese 
gradually gained complete ascendancy over the country below 
the Kandyan Hills, they replaced the gentler means of 
persuasion, inducement, temptation, and blandishments by 
more rigorous methods. The missionaries now applied them- 
selves with reckless ardour to the task of pulling down the 
structure which it had taken twenty centuries to build. “ The 
missionary could see in Buddhism nothing but the abhorrent 
creation of the devil ; he did not stop to inquire what were the 
principles which were taught by its sages, nor what the ideals 
after which its lofty philosophy struggled. Buddhism was not 
Christianity, and, since by Christianity alone could souls 
escape damnation and hell fire, it was his duty to God to 
destroy Buddhism by every means in this power. He did not 
ask whether the people were prepared to receive his new wine 
or whether the destruction of the ancient beliefs might not 
mean the destruction of all spiritual life ; his every idea was 
centred on the one thought that Buddhism must be wiped 
out of existence /’ 1 No trouble was spared to achieve that 
object ; monasteries were razed to the ground, and their price- 
less treasures looted ; libraries were set fire to, or the leaves 
of the books they contained scattered to the winds ; whosoever 
dared to worship in public or wear the yellow robe of the 
ascetic was visited with death ; the great institutions at 
Totagamuva and Karagala, which had long carried on the 
traditions of Taxila and Nalanda, were destroyed and their 
incumbents put to the sword. The land groaned in agony 
as one after another there fell, before the fierce onslaughts of 
the fanatic missionaries and their dastardly colleagues, the 
Buddhist religious edifices, those lovely structures which the 
piety of generations had strewn broadcast over the country. 
Never was a glorious civilization and a noble culture more 

1 Pieris, op. cit., p, 80. 



266 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


brutally destroyed. The work of centuries was undone in a 
few years — all that was noblest and best in the heritage of 
Ceylon was lost, and the damage thus wrought was irreparable. 

But it was not to be expected that the Sinhalese would 
accept tamely this subserviency to a hateful foreign 
domination. More than once they made a stern struggle to 
win back their lost freedom and stem the tide of destruction 
that was sweeping over the land. The apostacy of Dharmapala, 
who was a traitor alike to his country and to his faith, aroused 
the indignation of the people as no other single event of this 
period, and the first to organize armed obstruction to the 
intrusion of the European adventurers were the inhabitants 
of the forest-clad heights of Senkadagala (Kandy) and the 
neighbouring villages, who from the earliest times have been 
distinguished by their sturdy patriotism and ardent resistance 
to every foreign invader. Their determination to be rid of the 
enemy in their midst was such as no blandishments could 
divert and no reverses quench, and their efforts were never 
relaxed or suspended till the Portuguese were driven away from 
Ceylon, one hundred and fifty years after their first landing. 
Exasperated by the pusillanimity of their kings and their 
faithlessness to their country and the national religion, 
gallant leaders were forthcoming to guide the people in their 
insurrections of protest. Such was Mayadunne of Sltavaka, 
himself of royal blood, and his youngest son, Tikiri Bandara, 
who first joined the forces at the age of thirteen. The exploits 
of the young prince soon won him fame, and his ability as a 
leader enabled him to gain the confidence of his followers, 
who saluted him on the field of battle with the title of Kaja- 
Simha (the Lion King), a name which for many years to come 
caused the blood of the Portuguese in Ceylon to run cold. 1 
His fiery audacity and his iron will, coupled with the devoted 
courage of his men, won for him one victory after another, 
and by 1586 he was not only master of the lowlands, but was 
able to invade successfully the territory of Kandy, whose 
1 Rajavaii (upham), p. 297. 



THE DARK AGE 


267 


king, Javavlra, Lad invited Franciscan monks in his dominions, 
permitted a church it his capital and even expressed a 
desire openly to embrace Christianity 1 But Raja-Simha’s 
triumph was brief. The Mahd-vamsa 2 tells us that “ being 
pulled up with victory, this great fool, in the wickedness 
of his heart, slew his father with his own hand, and took 
possession of the kingdom.” Later, being seized with the fear 
of his crime, he inquired of the great Buddhist Elders how he 
could absolve himself of his sin. When they explained to him 
that patricide was too great a sin for absolution, “ he was 
provoked to anger, like unto a serpent full of poison, when it 
is beaten with a stick.” Other accounts make no mention of 
the patricide : 3 according to them some of the Buddhist monks 
were involved in a conspiracy against the king, whereby they 
sought to set up another in his place. The fact remains, how- 
ever, that Raja-Simha visited his anger in terrible measure 
against the priesthood. He abjured the Buddhist faith and 
became a follower of the Saivites. The Chief Buddhist Elder 
was stoned to death, many of the monks were buried up to 
their necks in the earth and their heads ploughed off ; many 
others were put to the sword ; a large number of Bacred edifices 
were pulled down ; and he burnt whatever sacred books fell 
into his hands. Many valuable works were thus irretrievably 
lost. Just before this time Vira Vikkama (in 1542) had caused 
copies to be made of religious books at great expense : 4 
they were now reduced to ashes. Most of the monks who 
escaped death disrobed themselves and fled from the king’s 
wrath. The lands which had been endowed in ancient times 
for the maintenance of the temples were taken away from 
them, and the king, to crown all his acts of impiety, deprived 
the Buddhists of all control of their most venerated spot, 
the graceful Pinnacle of the Sacred Foot Print of the Buddha, 
and placed it in the hands of ash-daubed Indian fakirs. 

1 Tennent, Ceylon, ii, pp. 20-1. 

* Chapter xciii. 

* See JR AS. C.B. vol. xviii, No. 56, pp. 382 foil, and Pieris, op. cit. v p. 94; 

4 M. V. xcii, w. 14-15. 



268 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


Raja-Simha died in 1692, deserted by aB authority and 
success ; the last part of his life was a series of reverses, where 
he lost all that he had gained for himself before. 

In the hour of Raja-Siraha’s triumph patriotism and the 
pride of their race once more revived in the hearts of the 
Sinhalese, and there was a brief interval of literary activity. 
From the king's capital at Sltavaka arose the national poet 
Alagiyavanna Mohottala (or Mukavati), son of the learned 
Dharmadhvaja Papdita, a man of great scholarly attainments. 
He wrote (in Sinhalese) of the glory of Raja-Simha’s Court, 
and fired the imagination of his country in their fervour 
to raUy round the monarch in his conquest of the Parangis 
(foreigners). Alagiyavanna stiB remains one of Ceylon’s most 
popular poets ; his Kusa-jataka and the Subhasitaya (a didactic 
poem) are recited wherever the Sinhalese language is known, 
while his Sdvulrsandesa , in spite of its lack of originality, ranks 
in its elegance of diction along with the work of Sri Rahula. 
Others composed poems dealing with the exploits of the 
Sinhalese in their struggles with, the Portuguese — katana 
poems, or poems of war, the language of which is a curious 
admixture of Sanskrit and Sinhalese. Most of them were 
panegyrics on Raja-Simha. This period also saw the develop- 
ment of the erotic poem, its chief exponent being the half- 
Portuguese courtier and gallant Gascon Adigar. 1 Shortly 
before this period, at the beginning of the sixteenth century, 
a monk named Dhammaratana wrote a Sinhalese interverbal 
paraphrase to the MahdsudassanarSzUta of the Dlgha-Nikdya. 
In the colophon he tells that he completed it in the year 
2048 after the death of the Buddha (a.d. 1505-6). 2 

Raja-simha’s successor at Kandy was Vimala-dharma- 
suriya, who reigned for twelve years till 1604. He was 
originaBy known as Dom Joao, and had been a Christian, who 
lived amongst the Portuguese. When the hour for action came, 

1 See D'Alwis, 8idat-sangar & , Introduction, and Wiokremasinghe’s 
Catalogue for details about these works. 

* Wickremasinghe, p. 4. 



THE DARK AGE 


269 


he discarded the faith, which never seems to have appealed 
to him, and ascended the throne at Kandy under the name of 
Vimala-dharma-suriya. Both he and his queen had strong 
European sympathies, 1 the influence of which soon began 
to be felt even in the court. Portuguese names were common 
among the nobility, and their manners soon prevailed over the 
simpler customs of the Sinhalese. The Portuguese language 
was freely used in all matters of state, the Portuguese jacket 
and the barrette (or cap) were adopted as the ceremonial dress, 
and still obtain as such in the Kandy and provinces ; 
Portuguese ideas moulded the fashions at the Kandyan Court 
and their influence — not always for the best — has come down 
as a legacy even to the present day. But Vimala-dharma 
did not allow these external manifestations of sympathy to 
cloud his vision ; he was ever responsive to the call of country 
and carried on an incessant warfare against her enemies. 
Whatever leisure was left to him he employed in repairing 
the damage done by Raja-Simha. The attitude of hostility 
which the latter had adopted towards the Buddhist priest- 
hood had resulted in there being hardly a single monk left 
in the country who had been properly ordained. Much grieved 
thereat, Vimala Dharma sent an embassy to the country of 
Rahkhanga (Arakkan) to bring a Chapter of monks ordained 
in the sacerdotal succession. The mission was successful and 
several monks led by the Elder Nandicakka came over to the 
island. 2 

In 1597 in the Udakukkhepa Sima at GEtambe on the 
Mahavaliganga, near Kandy, an ordination was held and 
many men of good family entered the Order, to the delight 
of the people. The Tooth-relic, which had suffered many 
vicissitudes, was once more installed at the capital in a three- 
storied edifice, and the control of $ripada (Mount of the Sacred 
Foot Print) handed over to the Buddhists, its legitimate 
custodians. 


1 Pieris, op. cit., p. 162. 
1 Af.F., xciv, w. 15-21. 



270 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


On the death of Vimala-dharma his wife, Donna Caterina, 
as queen in her own right, assumed the sovereignty, but she 
was soon set aside by a shrewd man zealous in religious works 
and beloved by his followers, Senerat by name, who killed 
rival aspirants to the throne and married Donna Caterina. 
He was a ruler of strong personality, and under his regime 
the country enjoyed a brief interval of comparative tranquillity. 
But he did not cease to wage continual warfare against the 
Portuguese, and in August, 1630, dealt a crushing blow to their 
forces, which resulted in the death of the Portuguese general, 
Don Constantine de Say Norona, and in the slaughter of his 
army. Senerat’s son and successor was Raja-Simha II, who 
was destined for the last time to kindle the smouldering fires 
of Sinhalese patriotism into a blaze. Portentous omens had 
attended his birth, which took place at Mahiyangana, close to 
the spot where the Buddha had first touched ground in his visit 
to Ceylon. On the very night when he was born the commander 
of the Portuguese fort at Colombo had dreamed that he saw 
a tiny spark no bigger than a glow-worm, travelling towards 
him from the West and increasing in size as it reached him, 
until it flamed into a great fire over -the fort of Colombo, 
destroying everything that lay there. Nor were these portents 
unjustified ; for it was during his reign that the Portuguese 
were eventually driven from Ceylon, and the people were 
enabled to breathe a sigh of relief that the bloodstained land 
was entirely rid of their presence. On the 28th March, 1638, 
amongst the mountain fortresses of Gannoruva, by the edge of 
the Mahaveliganga, was fought the last great battle of the 
Sinhalese race. An anonymous poet has left us a Sinhalese 
description of the fight, as given by an eyewitness. This work, 
the Parangi-hatane (the fight with the Parangs or Portuguese), 
is the greatest martial poem in the Sinhalese language extant, 
the most spirited piece of literary composition. “ It is no mere 
medley of tinkling bells and scented flowers, of lovely women 
and precious gems. It rings with the passion of Pindar ; 
it is Miltonic in its resounding roll of names ; it laughs with the 



THE DARK AQE 


271 


glee of Chevy-Chase.” 1 The destruction of the Portuguese 
army was complete, and their power to menace the dominions 
of the Sinhalese King was finally taken away from them. From 
this time onwards till their expulsion from the island in 
June, 1658, they made but feeble attempts to win back their 
lost glory. The ensuing period of peace was a great comfort 
to the people, who were utterly weary of devastation and 
slaughter. Tney settled down once more to cultivate their 
fields and reconstruct the villages which had been destroyed 
during the war. Raja-Siipha himself was more a man of martial 
prowess than a hero of peace. Of overbearing demeanour and 
haughty disposition, fastidious in his habits and studied in 
disdain, he spent his leisure hours in the wilds of 
Bintenna, delighting in the chase, hawking being one of his 
favourite forms of amusement. 2 His popularity among his 
subjects was due solely to his achievements on the field of 
battle ; beyond confirming the grants of land made to the 
temples by his predecessors he did nothing else for the 
promotion of the national faith 3 ; his thank-offering after the 
victory at Gannoruva was a gift to the god of war, who presided 
over Dodanvala Devala, of his headdress of gold and his 
sword of steel. 4 His rule often savoured of harshness. 
When (in 1664) 6 the Kandyans, their endurance giving way, 
attempted a revolt and proclaimed as his successor his son, 
a lad of 12 years of age, he had no scruples in having the boy 
poisoned to prevent a recurrence of such treason. 6 It is not 
surprising therefore that his reign was not productive of any 
literary works. 

In order to effect the final expulsion of the Portuguese 
from the island, Raja-Simha had invited to his aid the Dutch, 

Pieris, op. cit., p. 223. 

Tennet, Ceylon, vol. ii, pp. 47 foil. 

MahA-vaffua, xcvi, ▼. 41. 

Pieris, op. cit., p. 226. 

Tennent, op. oit., p. 49. 

Knox, History of Ceylon, p. ii, eh. 6, p. 68. 



272 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


who were then cruising near the shores of Ceylon. 1 It was in 
1595 that they had formed their “ Het Maatschappy Van 
Verre Landes ” (company for distant lands), and in the Bame 
year Cornelius Houtraan conducted the first fleet of 
merchantmen round the Cape of Good Hope, in order to 
capture the Portuguese monopoly of trade in the East. Other 
expeditions followed in rapid succession, and in the course of 
their travels, on the 30th May, 1602, the first Dutch ship 
commanded by Admiral Spilberg touched the Port of 
Batticaloa on the east coast of Ceylon. Vimala Dharma 
Suriya was reigning at Kandy at this time. At first the 
strangers were given but a jealous and reluctant reception ; 
but when Spilberg produced his credentials from the Prince 
of Orange, which contained the offer of an alliance, offensive 
and defensive, Vimala Dharma received him with a guard of 
honour of a thousand men. The proposal of an alliance was 
accepted with great ardour and alacrity, and permission was 
given to the Dutch to erect a fortress in any part of the king’s 
dominions. But it was not till 1612. when Senerat and Donna 
Caterina were on the throne of Kandy, that the terms of 
the treaty were fully agreed upon. Marcellus de Boschouwer 
brought a letter from Prince Maurice of Nassau, then King of 
the Low Countries, sending his friendship to the “ Emperor 
of Ceylon ”. The result was a treaty, whereby the Dutch 
undertook to assist the Sinhalese king with ships, forces, and 
munitions of war, in case of a renewal of Portuguese aggression 
by land or by sea. In return for the promised military aid 
they were given permission to erect a fort at Cottiar, on the 
Bay of Trincomali, and the monopoly of the trade in cinnamon, 
gems and pearls was secured for them. It was in pursuance 
of this agreement that Raja-Simha, in his attempt to expel 
the Portuguese from Ceylon, addressed himself to the Dutch 
at Batavia aud solicited their active co-operation. The 
invitation was promptly accepted, and in 1638 began the 

1 The following account of the Dutch is taken from various sources, chief 
among them being Tennent's Ceylon, vol. ii, chap. ii. 



THE DARK AGE 


273 


conflict between the two European nations, which terminated, 
as we have already seen, twenty years later, in the complete 
retirement of the Portuguese from the island, and in the 
installation of the Dutch in the parts formerly occupied by 
the Portuguese. 

The policy of the Dutch in Ceylon was in marked contrast 
to that of their predecessors. Throughout their regime their 
possession of the island was a military tenure, and not a civil 
colonization. They regarded it as an entrepot in East Indian 
trade ; no attempts were made to leave a permanent impress 
of their influence on the people ; they had no lust for conquest ; 
the fanatical zeal of the Portuguese for the propagation of their 
faith gave way to the earnest efforts of the Dutch traders 
to secure their trading monopolies ; extension of commerce was 
their only aim, and for this purpose peace was essential at 
any cost. Even when provocation was caused to them, as 
happened more than once by outrages on the part of the 
Sinhalese rulers, or by their bad faith, they attempted no 
retaliation ; by blandishments and presents they allayed the 
irritation of their ally and endured with subdued humbleness 
and meek patience whatever insults and contumely were 
hurled at them, so long as they were able to extract the utmost 
possible amount of profit from their trade. The Sinhalese 
in the dominions of the King of Kandy were therefore left 
unmolested, and were free to follow their own pursuits in 
peace. 

Raja-Simha II was followed by his son Vimala Dharma 
Suriya, who ascended the throne in 1679 (?), and reigned for 
over twenty years. The Maha-vamsa 1 tells us that “ he was 
adorned with faith and the like virtues and regarded the Three 
Sacred Gems as his own In addition to the manifold honours 
paid to the Tooth-Relic he made a pilgrimmage on foot 
to Samanta-kuta (the Sripada mountain), an act considered 
to be of great merit, even at the present day. Finding that 
the condition of the priesthood was very unsatisfactory, 

1 Jf.F., xovii, v, 1. 


18 



274 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


ho determined to hold a festival of ordination ( upasampadd ). 
And indeed the need was very pressing, for it was discovered 
that not more than five upasampadd monks were to be found 
in the whole of the island. lie accordingly sent an embassy 
of his ministers to Rakkhanga (Arakkan), and obtained thence 
thirty-three monks, led by the Elder Santana. The ordination 
ceremony was duly held, at which thirty-three persons of 
“ good families ” were ordained, and we are told also that he 
persuaded one hundred and twenty persons to be invested with 
the robe of the novitiate 1 — a significant contrast to the 
thousands who (under previous sovereigns) entered the order 
on such occasions. 

This pious king was succeeded on his death by his son, 
Sri Vlra Parakrama Narendra-Simha, surnamed Kundasala, 
after the suburb of the city of Kandy which he built in a large 
coconut grove by the beautiful bank of the Mahavaligaiiga. 
He ruled twenty-three years. Among his numerous acts of 
piety was the construction of a two-storeyed building for the 
Tooth-relic, on the walls of which were painted scenes from 
well-known Jdtakas. But he was lukewarm in his supervision 
of the priesthood, and in his reign their old scandalous practices 
revived. “ So far from begging from door to door, as they were 
expected to do,” says a chronicler who wrote a short while 
after this period , 2 “ they regarded even the eating out of their 
alms-bowl a disgrace. Their food was cooked in the same 
fashion as that of the great nobles amongst the laity, and it 
was eaten out of plates ! In fact, they were monks in nothing 
but the use of the name.” Narendra-Simha ’s successor was 
Sri Vijaya Raja-Simha, a man “ diligent and wise, who always 
loved to associate with good and virtuous men.” Following 
the custom of his predecessors, he obtained his consorts from 
the city of Madhura. But, unlike the queens of the monarchs 
who immediately preceded him, they manifested great interest 
in the religion of the land of their adoption, and hearkening 

1 M.v. , xcvii, w. 8-15. 

1 Translation of the Vimana-vatthu (a.d. 1770), see below. 



THE DARK AGE 


275 


unto the Good Law, became Buddhists. With the zeal of new 
converts they gave themselves up to continuous devotion 
and to ceaseless acts of merit, and vied with one another in 
their piety and generosity, “ like mines of virtue, showing 
much kindness and affection towards the inhabitants of 
Lanka, bestowing upon them as much love as mothers do upon 
their children /’ 1 They joined the king in persuading young 
persons to be robed as novitiates and causing them to be 
properly instructed in the doctrine, and they spent money on 
getting religious books written . 2 The king himself held many 
religious festivals, in one of which lamps were lit in all the 
shrines throughout the country. “ Thus did the king make 
the face of the Island of Lanka look bright with shining 
lights, like the sky that is spangled with stars.” 3 He caused 
preaching halls to be built in divers places, and, we are told, 
procured “ with great trouble ” many preachers of the law. 
In such manner did he attempt to bring about a revival of the 
faith and to provide even a scanty measure of religious know- 
ledge for his people, whose minds had been starved. When he 
discovered that the Order of the Sangha was almost extinct 
in the land, he was immensely grieved, and, learning from the 
Dutch that Buddhism flourished in Pegu, Arakkan, and Siam, 
he sent an embassy to Ayodhya in Siam to fetch a chapter of 
priests. The Dutch helped this mission by lending a ship 
for the voyage . 4 But the expedition proved disastrous, all 
except one person perishing in the sea. The survivor made his 
way to Pegu, whence he returned home to relate the sad news . 6 
But the king was not disheartened ; he sent a second embassy, 
and this time too with the help of the Dutch. The 
ambassadors were provided with suitable presents to the 
Siamese monks. At Batavia they left behind the presents and 
proceeded to Siam to inquire if monks were available to be 

Af.F., chap, xcviii, v. 18. 

Ibid., w. 13-17. 

Ibid., xcviii, y. 64. 

Texment, vol. ii, p. 61. 

Tumour's Epitome , pp. 63-6. 



276 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


taken to Ceylon ; the answer was in the affirmative, but on 
their return to Batavia they were told by their Dutch hosts 
that their good king was dead. They were advised not to 
convey the monks without first ascertaining the wishes of the 
ruling sovereign. They were compelled, therefore, to set sail 
for Ceylon reluctantly, their purpose unaccomplished. 
Unfortunately, however, on the voyage they were overtaken 
by a storm in which the majority of them perished, and only 
a handful of survivors were left to tell the doleful tale. Kirti 
Sri Raja-Simha, who was now on the throne, was a man of 
great wisdom and ability, imbued with great enthusiasm for 
the reform of all abuses. He studied the Dhamma with great 
care and assiduity, and caused it to be preached throughout 
his dominion. So anxious was he that the knowledge of the 
religion should be broadcast, that, we are told, he gathered 
many scribes together and had the whole of the Dtgha-Nikdya 
copied in one day. 1 Whenever copies of books were brought 
to him accurately and neatly made, he bought them and 
distributed them amongst the various monasteries. But the 
crowning glory of his work in the revival of Buddhism was 
the re-establishment of the upasampadd (ordination) in Ceylon. 

At the time of his accession to the throne there was not 
even a single upasampadd monk in the whole of the island. 8 
There were plenty of novices or samaneras, some of whom 
were good men and skilful, but owing to want of proper 
supervision the bulk of the priesthood were in a state of 
degeneracy. Ratanapala Thera, who wrote a Sinhalese 
translation of the Vimana-vatthu during the period (in the 
Saka year 1692, i.e. a.d. 1770), has left us a short sketch of 
the condition of the monks before Raja-Simha carried out his 
reforms. 8 “ Eversincethetimeof Devanampiya-Tissa,thefaith- 

1 M. F., xcix, v. 31. 

* Ibid., v. 175. 

3 This translation, with a few modifications, is taken from a paper on 
Kirti Sri's Embassy to Siam, read before the Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon 
Branch, by Dr. Paul E. Pieris, and published in their Journal, vol. xviii. 
No. 54, pp. 17 foil. 



THE BARE AOB 


277 


ful and vise kings who have reigned from time to time — aided 
by their great ministers and the efforts of pious priests, learned 
in the Law — had carefully swept away all schisms that had 
sprung up and preserved the doctrine inviolate. But in recent 
timeB the disappearance of such kings and ministers, followed 
by the oppression of the unbelieving Para'ngis and Damilas, 
had robbed the piouB priests of the Four Necessaries ; and, as 
the religious young men of good families, who assumed the 
robe, had not the learning to study with care the three 
Pitalcas — which contain the Vinaya, Sutta, and Abhidhamma, 
— and to order their lives in consonance with the precepts 
contained therein, by degrees power fell into the hands of low- 
born priests of profane life, to the great injury of the Church. 
And, as for the priestly succession, beginning from 
Upali Thera (whom the Buddha himself had named as the 
first in the knowledge of the Vinaya), and continued in the 
persons of Dasaka, Sonaka, Siggava, Moggaliputta, Mahinda, 
etc., and recruited from all pious folk who assumed the robe 
without any distinction of family, in proper and perpetual 
succession of master and pupil, this they ignored. Confus- 
ing physical with spiritual kinship, they refused to allow pious 
young men of good family to assume the robe, and treated all 
the estates and wealth which generations of godly kings and 
ministers had dedicated to the service of the priesthood as 
if they had been dedicated to the use of their private families. 
Accordingly, for the sake of this wealth they had members 
of their own families ordained, so that, being robed, they might 
receive the due rdja-kariya, pretending that this was the 
succession appointed by the church. But indeed that 
succession — which was maintained immaculate by disrobing 
all priests who had violated their oaths and by the ordination 
of religious and well-born youths — was reduced to a mockery ; 
and, save for a few holy priests, the majority were as men 
fouling themselves with hot ashes, while the gems lay before 
them. And, while the Dhamma and the Vinaya, subjects for 
unending study, lay in their path, they preferred the study 



278 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


of such profane matters as astrology, medicine, and devil- 
worship, all of which they practised in unbecoming fashion 
within and without the capital ; and, thus winning the good- 
will of kings and powerful ministers, they obtained much 
wealth and high office. They led scandalous lives, and, ignoring 
the precepts of the Law, they betook themselves to cultivation 
and trade, accumulating jewellery and clothes, and making 
the support of their brothers and nephews an article of their 
faith. When, through the increase in the number of these shame- 
less priests and the oppression of the unbelieving Parahgls 
and Damilas, the Faith was on the brink of destruction, it 
came to pass that a valiant and powerful king of the name of 
Raja-Simha succeeded to the throne of Lanka.” Raja-Simha 
was determined to put an end to this state of affairs. In the 
third year of his reign he sent an embassy to Siam to bring a 
body of monks from there, that he might reinstitute 
ordination in the island. The Dutch helped the mission by 
a loan of one of their sailing ships. The embassy was eminently 
successful. The King of Siam at the time was Dhammika, 
“ a wise man who had devoted his whole life to the support 
of religion.” He Welcomed the Sinhalese ambassadors with all 
cordiality. Having heard their purpose, he held an assembly 
of monks, presided over by the Sangharaja (Hierarch) of Siam, 
and after due deliberation a chapter of more than ten monks 
was chosen for dispatch to Ceylon, at the head of them 
being Upali Mahd-Thera. Along with them King Dhammika 
also sent copies of books on the Dhamma and the Vinaya , 
such as were not extant in Ceylon. Great were the rejoicings 
that attended the arrival of the Siamese monks in the Sinhalese 
capital. The king himself proceeded to greet them at the head 
of the whole army, with elephants and horses and other 
equipages. Thus in due time, 2,299 years 1 after the 
Parinibbana (a.d.1756), in the month of Asalha (July- August), 
the ceremony of upasampadd was held in Kandy amidst 
scenes of unparalleled pomp and ceremony. All the principal 
1 M'V., chap, c, tv. 60 foil. 



THE DARK AGE 


279 


Sdmaneras received the higher ordination, and provision was 
made for their proper instruction by the monks who had come 
from Ayodhyfu Very soon afterwards the king had drawn up a 
Katika- mla or Code of Conduct for the guidance of the monks, 
so that they might live in conformity with the rules of the 
Vdnaya . 

In all these measures of reform Klrti &r! Raja-Simha was 
assisted and inspired by the unflagging enthusiasm and most 
whole-hearted co-operation of a monk named Valivifa 
Saranankara, who was destined to revive the glories of the 
faith for the benefit of future generations. Like a lonely star, 
he illumined this dark period of the history of the Ceylon 
Sarigha. and the after-glow of his presence is felt even to-day. 
Born in the hamlet of Valivita, near Kandy, in the Saka year 
1620 (a.d. 1698-9), he entered the Order as a Sdmanera at the 
age of 16, as a pupil of Suriyagoda Thera. With commendable 
energy he addressed himself to the study of the Pali language, 
so that he might learn and understand the sacred scriptures. 
But Pali learning was then at such low ebb that no person 
could be found competent enough to teach him ; no complete 
copy of any Pali grammar was available in spite of diligent 
search. Making the best of his opportunities and unbaffled 
by the difficulties that beset his path, the young Sdmanera 
travelled about from place to place, to allay his thirst for 
knowledge, collecting one drop of learning here and another 
there. Thus he studied the Bdldvatdra up to the chapter on 
nouns under a layman called Lcuke Ralahami, and completed 
it under Palkumbure Atthadassi, himself a Sdmanera and 
known as Samaijera-guru (novice teacher) . Cherishing a strong 
desire to re-establish the priesthood in its full vigour, he 
wandered from place to place, preaching the Dhamma and 
exhorting his audience to rise up to their responsibilities. 
The fame of the young reformer spread like wildfire, and 
students flocked to him from all parts of the island. Always 
simple in his habits, he gave himself iip to austerities, 
depending for sustenance only on what he received in his 



280 


THE PALT LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


begging rounds. He thus came to be known as Pin<Japatika 
Saranankara. Already in the reign of Vimaladharma 
successor to Raja-Simha II, he had received recognition at 
the hands of the king, who, we are told, caused to be made 
a gilt casket of one and a half cubits in height, and set 
it with seven hundred gems, and presented it to 
Saranankara, together with many sacred books . 1 Later it 
was at his request that King Vijaya Raja-Simha had sent two 
embassies to Siam to bring ordained monks from that 
country. And, when Kirti £ri Raja-Simha came to the throne 
it was the inspiration and the encouragement of Saranankara 
that guided him in his reform of the Sangha and enabled him 
to earn glory as a supreme benefactor of Buddhism in Ceylon. 
It was he that had written in Pali the message that was to be 
taken to the King of Siam and the letter addressed to the 
Sangharaja of that country. The ministers who were to 
constitute the embassy were chosen on his advice, and the 
success of the mission was mainly due to his exertions. And 
after the re-establishment of the upasampadd in Ceylon, when 
the king was conferring honour on those who had helped 
to achieve it, Saranankara’s services received their due 
recognition. He stood pre-eminent among those who, 
according to the Maha-vamsa , 2 had striven to “ maintain the 
religion of the Conqueror, and had endeavoured long to restore 
to its former splendour the religion of the Sage, which had 
for a long time been often brought nigh unto the gate of 
destruction ”. He was regarded as the “ one who was diligent 
by day and night, and according to the measure of his wisdom 
and ability threw light on the doctrines and the precepts of 
the religion of the Sage ; one who shed light on religion by 
duly instructing many of his own pupils, and those of others 
also, in the doctrines and precepts of the religion ; one who 
was engaged in doing good to himself and to others, and who 
earnestly wished to maintain the religion of the Buddha for a 

1 M.V., xcvii, w. 54-7. 

1 Chap, c, vv. I02-S. 



THE DARK AGE 


281 


long time ; one who was constant in devotion to a life of 
purity ; one who in virtue and piety and austerity was like 
unto a mirror to all the sons of Buddha in Ceylon who sought 
to improve themselves He was appointed Sangharaja of 
Larfka, the highest office that obtained amongst the priesthood. 
In that office, as the last representative of a long and glorious 
line of Hierarchs who had devoted their energies to the 
welfare of the national faith, he remained for many years 
leading a very active and useful life, till his death in 1778 at 
the ripe age of 8 1. 1 He was cremated on the grounds of the 
Ampitiya Vihara, near Kandy, where a monument to his 
memory still exists. 

The new lease of life thus given to the Sangha by the united 
efforts of Saranankara and Kirti Sri Raja- Sim ha resulted — 
as we might expect — in a renewal of literary activity as well. 
Saranankara himself was the author of several important 
works. In order to facilitate the study of Pali, which, as we 
saw above, had been greatly neglected, he wrote the Rupa- 
rndld , a short treatise on the declension of Pali nouns with 
numerous paradigms and examples ; another of his original 
Pali works is the A bhisambodhi-a la iikdra , a poem in 
100 stanzas, treating of the life of the Buddha (Jotama from 
the time of his birth as the hermit Sumedha during the regime 
of Dlpankara to his last birth as Siddhattha, when he attained 
to Enlightenment. The language and form of the poem 
show that it was not the work of a master hand ; the style is 
weak, the similes and metaphors are borrowed from older 
works, and there is little originality. The following is the 
opening stanza : — 

Buddham suMhagunakaram dasabalam devdtidevam Jinam 
Dhamman tena sudesitam bhavanudam dukkhapahan nimmalam 
Saiighan capi niraiiganam munisutam vanddiriaham muddhand 
Buddho Dhammagatd Tathagatavara pdleniu te mam sadd, 

1 The materials for the above sketch of Saranankara are drawn chiefly 
from the Sarlgharaja-vata (a poem) and Sangha - rajottama - sadhucaritaya (in 
prose), both written in Sinhalese by two of his pupils. For details of their 
works see Wickremasinghe’s Catalogue under these titles. 



282 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


There is an interverbal Sinhalese paraphrase, written by 
Saranankara himself. His other works are in Sinhalese : the 
Madhurartha-prakasani, a paraphrase, a commentary to the 
Pali Maha-Bodhi-vamsa in the Sanskritized Sinhalese of this 
period ; the Sdrartha-saiigraha, a treatise on various doctrinal 
teachings in Buddhism ; a paraphrase of several Suttas used 
in the Paritta ; the M uiii-gundla ii Jcara , a Sinhalese poem 
in praise of the Buddha ; and an exhaustive Sinhalese sanne 
to the Bhesajja -ma nj usa . The last was perhaps inspired by 
the measures adopted by King Kirti Sri to ensure the physical 
well-being of the monks. “ For in this world,” says the 
Mahd-vamsa, 1 “there are two kinds of diseases to which 
novitiates and monks are liable, viz. those of the body and 
those of the mind. Of these, for the cure of diseases of 
the mind, the Buddha, the greater of men, has provided the 
Vinaya rules and the Suttanta discourses. But the monks, 
after they are instructed in the Vinaya and the Suttanta — 
remedies that are effectual in destroying lust and diseases 
of the mind — are liable to be afflicted with bodily diseases, 
by reason of which it is hard for them to practise the 
doctrines and precepts of religion.” And we are told that, thus 
reflecting, King Kirti Sri devised ways and means to combat 
disease amongst the priesthood. The new interest displayed 
in medicine may have prompted Saranankara to revive a 
study of the Bhesajja-manj usd , the only book on the subject, 
so far as we know, written by a Ceylon monk. Saranankara 
gathered round him a galaxy of brilliant scholars, both laymen 
and monks, who studied under him and continued the 
revival of learning which he had so well begun. They 
established Parivenas (or places of instruction) in various 
parts of the country and imparted knowledge to whoever was 
imbued with love for it. Thus did they rescue from destruction 
whatever little of Sinhalese Buddhist culture had escaped the 
ravages of foreign invaders. 


1 Chap, xcix, vv. 179 foil. 



THE DARK AGE 


283 


Of Saragankara’s pupils, Attaragama Bantjara Rajaguru, 
a layman, wrote three works on Pali grammar. Of these the 
Stdhlra-mukha-marulana is a short treatise dealing with 
Samasa or compounds. It is meant to be used as a handbook 
in studying this section of Pali grammar, and the rules are 
illustrated with copious examples. The Kdraka-puppha - 
manjarl deals, as its name implies, with the Karaka (or case 
relations), i.e. Pali syntax. In the introductory stanza the 
author tells us : — 

Kriyakdrakasambandham ye na jdnanti rndnavd 
pasubhis saha te ttdyd khurasingavivajjitd. 

(“ Those persons who do not know syntax are like beasts, 
without horns and hoofs ”) — hence the purpose of this book, 
to give such knowledge. 

The author quotes extensively from both Pali and Sanskrit 
grammars. The text is accompanied by a Sinhalese inter- 
pretation which was written by Barbara himself. 1 His other 
work, the Sadda-mala , is a comprehensive Pali grammar, 
based on the Kaccdyana . The author follows closely the 
method adopted in the Rupa-siddhi , and the work is divided 
into seven sections or kdndas : Sauna and Samhild, Nairn, 
Samasa, Taddhita, Akhydta, Kib-bidhana (affixes), and Karaka . 
A section of TJtyddi (prefixes) is amalgamated, as in the 
Rupa-siddhi, with the Kib-bidhdna, and, whereas both in the 
Ruparsiddhi and the Kaccdyana the Karaka section follows 
immediately after the chapter on Ndma, in the Sadda-mdld 
it is placed last of all, probably because the author felt it 
was the most difficult of them all ! The work contains, 
according to its colophon, 725 rules, and each of them is 
accompanied by a Sinhalese interpretation, written most 
probably by the author himself. The principal aphorisms are 
taken over from the Kaccdyana, while a number of secondary 
rules are also given to explain the aphorisms and some- 
times to supply their deficiencies. These latter are mainly 
from the Ruparsiddhi . Several references are made to the 

1 See Subhuti, N&mamdld, p. xciv. 



284 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


grammatical works of Sangharakkhita — the Sambandha-cinta 
and the Susadda-siddhi. The Sinhalese colophon at the end of 
the work tells us that it was completed in the month of 
Aslesa in the year of Saka, 1701 (July-August, a.d. 1779-80). 
To Attaragama Bandura is sometimes assigned also the 
authorship of a medical work in Sanskrit stanzas, the 
Sdra-sahksepa. 1 Of Saranankara’s other pupils Tibbotuvave 
Siddhattha compiled, at the king's request, the Maha-vmnsa 
from the reign of Parakrama-Bahu IV of Kurunegala down 
to his own day. 2 Sitinamaluve Dhammajoti wrote the Bald- 
valdra-sa i) graha and the Bdldvatara- liyana- sanne (or the 
Okondapola-sanne), which have been referred to already in 
discussing the Bdldvatara . Siddhattha Buddharakkhita com- 
piled Siydmopasampadd-vata, giving a description of the 
mission to Siam in search of the upammpadd (ordination), 
and the Sri Saddharmovada-sa h graha, a popular work on 
Buddhism, exhorting men and women to lead the good life, 
that they may escape the round of rebirth. Nanaratana 
Thera , incumbent of the Attanagalla Vihara, composed a 
poem based on the Altanagalla-vamsa. At the king’s special 
request Hinatikumbure Sumaiigala made a Sinhalese version 
of the Milinda-panha , called Sri Dharmaddsaya ( The Mirror 
of the Sacred Doctrine). The author tells us in the colophon that 
he was the chief pupil of Attaragama Bandara, himself a pupil 
of Saranankara, and that lie wrote at the Uposatha Arama 
of the Maha- vihara at Sirivaddhana-pura (Kandy) in the year 
2320 of the Buddhist era (a.d. 1777--8). 3 The Sinhalese 
translation follows the Pali throughout, except that here and 
there it adds, by way of gloss, extracts from various Pali 
works. It also puts into the mouth of the Buddha a prophecy 
not found in the Pali original — that, as the Buddha lay on his 
deathbed, he saw by his power of clairvoyance that the 
discussion between Milinda and Nagasena would take place 
about five hundred years after the Parinibbana. 

1 Subhuti, Nama-mdld , p. xciv. 

* M. V., xeix w. S0-S3, and Wiohemasinghe, Catalogue, p. xxi. 

* Colombo Edition, 1878. 



THE DARK AGE 


285 


Daramitipola Dhammarakkliita wrote a Sinhalese Sanne 
to the Maha-Saii-paUhana-sutta of the Dlqha-Nikdya , and 
several other writers produced numerous works in Sinhalese, 
some of which are still held in high esteem. 1 

Probably to this period belongs the Akkhara-mdld , a short 
treatise on Pali and Sinhalese alphabets. The author states 
that the alphabet which formed the basis of the Pali was 
composed by a certain teacher of men at the beginning of the 
Kalpa, and this consisted of the present Pali vowels and 
twenty-five consonants in five classes. The work is written 
in Pali stanzas, which are accompanied by a Sinhalese Sanne. 
Nagasena is given in the colophon as the name of the author, 
but nothing else is known about him. 

To the same period 1 would also assign the Kdya-virati - 
gdthd and the Srhgdra-rasa-ratna-mdld. The former is a 
Pali poem of 274 verses by an anonymous writer, divided into 
two sections, the first describing the formation of the body, 
its foulness, and the folly of bestowing any care on so worthless 
an object, the second dealing with the mind and the advantages 
of developing it regardless of the body, so that man may attain 
the emancipation of Nibbana. 2 A Sinhalese translation made 
by the author himself usually accompanies the Palj poem. 
Spence Hardy mentions the Kaya-virati-gathd-sanne as one of 
the books which he consulted and translated in the preparation 
of his Manual of Buddhism , and tells us that it was read to 
condemned criminals “ that they may not grieve at being 
obliged to leave a state that is connected with so many evils ”. 3 
The &rhgdra rasa-ralna-mald is a treatise on the eight forms 
of dancing. It is written in Pali stanzas and is accompanied 
by a Sinhalese translation. It is the only work of its kind 
extant in Ceylon, written in Pali. The eight forms of dancing 
are srngara or lascivious, hdsya or comic, karuiid or 
mournful, ruira or passionate, vira or athletic, hhaydnaka 

1 See Wickreraasinghe , Catalogue , p. xxii, introduction and text, passim. 

* Published in Colombo, 1881. 

* Manual of Buddhism , 2nd ed., p. 540. 



286 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


or intimidating, bibhatsa or horrible, and >.i ’• ' via or extra- 
ordinary feats of skill. The author says that me have a 
ninth division called SyaiUa or diverting, but he thinks that 
this last is included in the eight already mentioned. It is 
written in several metres, and is a most interesting work, 
if for nothing else, at least for its uniqueness. 



CHAPTER XIV 
The Modern Period 


J^ING K1RTI $Rl was followed by his brother, Rajadhi- 
raja-Simha. He evinced the same interest as his pre- 
decessor had shown in the cause of religion and of learning, 
and, finding that the Katika-vata drawn up by his brother 
needed revision, lie summoned an assembly of monks and 
formulated a new Katika-vata} He was a scholar, well- versed 
in Puli and Sanskrit and Sinhalese, and collected round him 
a band of brilliant literary men, whose obiter dicta , — apart- from 
their original compositions — uttered most often in extempore 
verses, form yery interesting reading, 2 The king himself was 
a poet of great merit, ami his beautiful Sinhalese poem, the 
Asadisa-J dtaka , 3 is an elegant composition, full of melody 
and teeming with a wealth of poetic imagery. 

It was during this reign that the British in 1 782 first declared 
war against the Dutch in Ceylon, and in that very same year 
they captured Trincomali. British trade in India had grown 
during the preceding two centuries, and now the seizure of the 
Dutch possessions became essential to them, both for the 
protection of their own territory and also for the humiliation 
of the only formidable rival who then competed with Great 
Britain for the commerce of the Indian seas. Already in 
1763 the English had sent an embassy to Klrti Sri in Kandy, 
to negotiate for an amicable treaty ; the Sinhalese king 
received the overtures favourably, but nothing came of 
it. 4 In 1795 Holland found herself helplessly involved in the 
great war which was then agitating Europe, and the English 
in India eagerly seized the opportunity to capture the Dutch 
dominions in Ceylon. Rajadhiraja-Simha entered into an 
alliance with the English Governor at Madras, and, when, 

1 WickremaBinghe, p. xxii. 

* These have been published in various anthologies of Sinhalese poetry 
(Kavisaitgard). 

* A f.V., Supplement to chapter c, vv. 13-14. 

4 Tennent, vol. ii, p. 46. 



288 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


early in 1796, Colonel Stuart appeared before the Dutch 
garrison at Colombo and demanded their submission, they 
marched out without striking a blow. The capitulation of the 
Dutch was completed by a convention between the Dutch 
Governor and Colonel Stuart, and on the 16th of February, 
1796, the British flag waved over the walls of Colombo. 1 

Two years later Rajadhiraja-Sim:ia died, and the Adigar, 
or Prime Minister, nominated as his successor a nephew of the 
queen, an eighteen-year-old boy, who ascended the throne as 
Sri Vikrama Raja-Simha. The Adigar, whose name was 
Pilima Talauve, was a traitor of the deepest dye, whose 
“ vaulting ambition oft overleapt itself He was fired by 
a treacherous desire to procure the death or the dethronement 
of the king and ascend the throne himself. With this end in 
view he spared no pains to spread disaffection among the 
king’s subjects and ceaselessly plotted against his life. He 
entered into secret negotiations with Frederick North, who 
had come as the first British Governor of Ceylon, and the 
latter, instead of disclaiming any participation in the 
treacherous designs of. Pilima Talauve, disgracefully lent 
himself to “ intrigues inconsistent with the dignity and the 
honour of his high office ”. 2 When the Adigar disclosed his 
plans for the ruin of the young king, North did not consider 
it unbecoming to discuss with him a matter so revolting and 
to enter into a bargain with the traitor. From this time 
onwards the life of Sri Vikrama was in continual danger ; 
he was dimly aware of the plots that were being hatched 
against him, but found himself helpless to arrest their 
progress. He was deprived of all peace of mind ; on the advice 
of his evil associates he had recourse to intoxicating drink, 
that he might thus drown his sorrows. 

There is extant a Pali poem, written about this period, by 
a monk named Sumangala of Kunkunava, in the Kandyan 
district. The author calls himself a pupil of Rambukvelle 

1 Tennent, ii, p. 68. 

1 Ibid., pp. 78-8. 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


289 


Thera, and mentions that he had studied under Saranankara. 
The names of several of the eminent Elders of the time are 
given: Moratota Dliazninunanda, Mai vat ie Sirinivasa, 

Kaduvela Thera , Dhammapala, 1 )h:numananda. Siddhattha, 
and Sunanda. The poem is called Rama-mndcsa , and is 
written in elegant Pali stanzas. It purports to be a letter 
(i SanAcsa ) addressed to the God llama ( Yi.su u) at Kama 
Devalft in Hangurankcta, praying to the god to shower his 
blessings on Sri Yikrama Eaja-Simha. The poet praises the 
beauty of the capital, its palace and temples, and the river 
at Kandy. He then goes on to eulogize the king. From this 
account of the king’s character, written before he began his 
downward career, which ended in sorrow both to himself and 
to his country ; we gather that he was a man of artistic 
temperament — witness his efforts to bea utify the capital with 
a lake, which yet remains its chief attraction — and that he was 
a great lover of learning. 

But the feeling of insecurity and helplessness, which 
ceaselessly dogged his footsteps, hardened his heart against 
all finer emotions, and he gave himself up to savage excesses, 
unsurpassed by any recorded example of human depravity. 
North now openly began to assist Pilimatalauve in exciting 
insurrections all over the country, and in forcing the king to 
commit an act of “ sufficient aggression ” which ’would 
serve as a pretext for the British to declare war upon the 
Kandyans. 

North left Ceylon in 1805 and was succeeded by Robert 
Brownrigg. The traitorous Pilamatalauve was beheaded in 
1812, detected in an attempt to assassinate the king. His 
nephew, Ehalepola, became Adigar, and, taking advantage of 
the universal horror with which the king’s atrocities were 
regarded by his subjects, organized a general rebellion. 
The attempt proved abortive, and the Icing’s vengeance knew 
no bounds. Ehalepola ’s wife and children were tortured and 
put to death with appalling cruelty. This awful occurrence 

was followed by promiscuous executions of all who were 

19 



290 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


suspected of implication in the conspiracy ; at length the 
limits of human endurance being passed, revolt became rife 
throughout the kingdom and Ehalepola again appealed to the 
British for help. In January, 1815, an army was on its march 
to the capital, and within a few weeks the king was taken 
captive. On the 2nd of March, 1815, at a solemn assembly 
of the Kandyan chiefs, the king was deposed, and his 
dominions were vested in the British Crown — contrary to 
what Ehalepola was given to expect, when the English lent 
him their support. 

In their helplessness the chiefs acquiesced in the British 
Raj, and a convention was drawn up whereby the Kandyan 
dominions were ceded to Great Britain. The Sinhalese nation, 
which had remained free for 2,358 years, now finally lost their 
independence and became subject to a foreign power. It is 
significant that in the treaty bv which the island was handed 
over to the British one article laid down that the rites and 
ceremonies of the Buddhist religion should be declared sacred 
and .inviolate, and that the Government should undertake to 
maintain and protect them. The safeguarding of the national 
religion was emphatically put forward as a condition of their 
voluntary submission. The unmitigated despotism of Sri 
Vikrama had so dazed his subjects that they regarded the 
transfer of the kingdom to an alien power with almost perfect 
indifference. The chiefs had submitted to the inevitable 
force of circumstances with admirable grace, leaving to time 
the development of the result. It is not surprising, therefore, 
that before long attempts were made to regain their 
independence, as soon as they realized the true state of affairs. 
But all such attempts ended in failure, the country was too 
disorganized for a general insurrection and the sudden and 
premature rebellions which broke out proved abortive. 
Within a few years tranquillity was restored, and the people, 
too tired to fight, were contented under a mild and indulgent 
government. They returned to their ordinary avocations, 
and there was peace in the land. 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


291 


Once tv* consummation of acq.i.r. g possession of the 
cou'ii ry nad been achieved, tl r. British Government applied 
with energy all it: resources to develop the land. Hoads were 
constructed, comiue:ce encouraged in its utmost freedom, 
mountain forests felled to make way for the plantation 
of coffee, etc., civil organizations matured, revenue reformed, 
and measures adopted for the advancement of agriculture 
and industry. 

Steps were also taken for the promotion of religion and 
education. The Portuguese had been freebooters and fanatics. 
Commerce was not their only object ; they wished to convert 
the people to Christianity by every means in tlieir power. 
For this power they had devised some sort of education, 
which - though proselyiism was its chief aim — had served 
a useful purpose. The Dutch, though they occupied them- 
selves less with conversion, manifested no disinterested concern 
at all for the elevation and happiness of their subjects, and, 
where can* was bestowed upon the spread of education, their 
motives were such as to detract from the grace and the 
generosity of the act. The avowed object of their schools 
was to wean the young Sinhalese from their allegiance to the 
king and to impress upon them the might of Holland. 1 The 
great feature of tlieir rule was the utter neglect of the country 
and its interests owing to the selfishness, egotism, folly, and 
want of energy of the general government. 2 Their religious 
policy was much more insidious than that of the Portuguese 
and much more useless. It was inspired more by a fury against 
the Church of Rome, which was in the island already, than 
by a desire for conversion. In 1658 a proclamation was issued, 
forbidding, on pain of death, the harbouring or concealing of 
a Roman Catholic priest. 3 The Presbyterian converts whom 


1 Tcnnent, ii, p. 57. 

2 M. Burnand, “ The Dutch in Ceylon," Asiatic Journal , 1821, p. 444. 

3 Tcnnent, Christianity in Ceylon, pp. 41 foil. 



292 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


they themselves made were not looked after at all in regard 
to either elementary teaching or spiritual instruction. In 
Jaffna alone there were 180,000 “ Christians ” under three 
clergymen ! Yet all the time baptism was being carried on 
apace at every village sehoolhouse, where attendance was 
compulsory. The amount of education given in these schools 
was infinitesimally small. It seldom went beyond teaching 
their pupils to read and write in the language of their district, 
and even this was discouraged by the authorities at Batavia. 
In a communication addressed to the missionaries of Ceylon 
they strongly expressed their opinion that “ reading and 
writing are things not so absolutely necessary for the 
edification of these poor wretches as teaching them the 
fundamentals of the religion which are contained in a very 
few points : and to pretend to propagate Christianity by 
reading and writing would be both tedious and chargeable 
to the Netherlands East India Company \ 1 And, in order to 
facilitate the work of conversion, proclamation was publicly 
made that no one could aspire to the rank of Modaliar (chief), 
or be even permitted to farm land or hold it under the Govern- 
ment, who had not first undergone baptism, become a member 
of the Protestant Church, and subscribed to the doctrines 
of the Helvetic confession of faith. 2 The number of nominal 
Christians was thus greatly increased. This system of political 
bribery, to encourage conversion, produced organized 
hypocrisy, whose results were pernicious and whose recoil 
and reaction, when it did come, was destructive of the object 
for the furtherance of which it had been resorted to unwisely. 
When the Dutch retired from Ceylon, they left behind them 
a superstructure of Christianity, prodigious in its outward 
dimensions, it is true, but so internally unsound and so unsub- 
stantial, that within a few years it had disappeared almost 
from the memory of the people of Ceylon. A religion which 

1 Letter of the Governor-General of Batavia to Baldaeus, 18th Sept., 
1662. See Baldaeus, Descrip, of Ceylon, etc., p. 811. 

1 Tennant, loc. cifc., p. 45. 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


293 


required coercion and persecution to enforce its adoption 
was doomed to failure. 

During the early years of the British regime but little was 
done to remedy this lamentable state of affairs, brought about 
by the artifice and corrupt inducement of the Portuguese 
priesthood and the alternate bribery and persecution of the 
clergy of the Church of Holland. 1 In 180G Governor Maitland 
published a regulation abolishing the Homan Catholic dis- 
abilities imposed by the Dutch, and later an Act for the relief 
of the Homan Catholics was passed in 1829. 2 But even as late 
as 1850 nothing had been done to remove the difficulties 
under which the Buddhists were labouring. Even at that time 
no child could be legally registered without previous baptism 
by a Christian minister, and the. clergy refused to solemnize 
the marriage of unbaptized individuals. 3 The people were 
made to understand that baptism conferred upon them some 
sort, of civil distinction, and this resulted in the production 
of prodigious numbers of Government Christians ”, who 
ostensibly professed Christianity, and we are told that “in 
point of character and conduct, they were notoriously the most 
abandoned and reckless class of the community ”. 4 They were 
made to see in Christianity not only happiness in the world 
which is to come, but, what was more important to them, the 
promise of this life as well ! 

With the proclamation of liberty of worship to all sects of 
the Christian faith the island soon became a busy scene of 
the activity of various missionary bodies. The Baptists had 
already formed a colony in 1 / 92 : they were followed by the 
Wesleyan Methodists in 1814, the Americans in 1816, and the 
Church of England in 1818. They received every encourage- 
ment from the Government, both in the island and at White- 
hall. When in 1808 Sir Thomas Maitland attempted to remove 


1 Tennent, ibid., p. 77. 

3 Ibid., pp. 75 and 91. 

• Ibid., pp. 88-9. 

4 Ibid., p. 89. 



294 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


the regulation which had rendered Christianity an essential 
qualification for office, he was promptly censured by the 
Secretary of State, and the necessity was urged upon him of 
“ devoting every energy to the promotion of education, as 
essential to the extension, if not ultimately identified with the 
existence, of Christianity itself ”. 1 

The missionaries soon realized that the mere sprinkling of 
water on the face and the repetition of the formula of the 
baptismal rite were not sufficient to make the Sinhalese a 
Christian and sever him from his deep and tenacious attach- 
ment to his own national traditions. They therefore busied 
themselves with establishing schools in various parts of the 
island, maimed and managed by missionary bodies. There 
the children were instructed in the principles of Christianity 
and the rudiments of elementary knowledge. Hitherto the 
temple had been the village school as well, and the monks had 
acted as the national instructors both in secular learning and 
spiritual wisdom. But in the chaotic conditions that prevailed 
during the preceding two centuries this system of education 
had become disorganized ; and, although here and there the 
temple-schools yet maintained a precarious existence, the 
missionaries now launched forth a campaign for superseding 
the Buddhist priesthood in the department of education. 
These schools were supported by mission funds and 
subsidized by Government grants. In most of them no formal 
declaration of Christian belief was insisted upon as a 
preliminary to admission, but each student was required to 
be present at the morning and evening devotions of the school, 
and go through a course of instruction in the Christian faith. 
They had no opportunity of participating in their own 
religious observances. 

The instruction imparted to them in these schools was 
arranged with a view to undermining the superstitions of their 
beliefs (as the missionaries were pleased to call all religions 
except their own), “to destroy the polypus vitality of their 

1 Tennent, op. cit p. 85. 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


295 


faith,” “ to demonstrate the subtle errors of their idolatry, 
to expose the absurdities of their religion, and bring home to 
them the civilizing influences of Christian life.” 1 It waB to be 
a gradual process ; the mind of the student was to be stirred, 
his inert faculties set in motion, his previous habits of thought 
disturbed ; doubts made to assail his spirit, the deception of 
his original faith pointed out. followed by a displacement of 
unsoundness, the rejection of error and the dawnings of a 
desire for the substitution of truth. For this purpose men 
were imported with years of laborious experience amongst 
“ heathens of every hue and in every quarter of the world ”. 2 
The establishment of vernacular schools was soon followed 
by the organization of schools and seminaries for the study of 
English, and these followed the same lines of policy. The 
education of girls was not neglected, and the earliest efforts 
of the missionaries were directed to the establishment of 
girls’ schools, especially of boarding schools, “ where the girls 
could be domesticated in childhood, and kept pure and 
uncontaminated till married with the approbation of their 
Christian guardians.” 3 Buddhism was held up to them as 
an object worthy of nothing else except ridicule and con- 
•t umely , and every effort was made to defeat the influence 
of parents and relations in the matter of religion by 
condemning their idolatry and laughing to scorn their habits 
and pursuits of life. 

As a result of all this, a cleavage and an estrangement, 
more deadly than had ever risen out of the institution of 
caste, began to creep in among the Sinhalese. The schools 
provided no access to their own literature : possibly it was 
recognized that national “ superstitions ” have ever found 
their surest allies in a national literature, with which their 
traditions and their tenets were almost imperceptibly blended. 
Instead their intellectual advancement was sought to be based 

1 Tennent, op. c£t. y pp. 142 and 270. 

* Ibid., p. 143. 

a Ibid., p. 159. 



296 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


on books which were almost unavoidably adaptations from 
European literatures, abounding in ideas totally foreign to 
their customs and their habits of thought, and teeming with 
forms of expression neither familiar nor intelligible to them. 

Other means were also adopted to ensure the grand con- 
summation of the ultimate triumph of Christianity ; the 
instrumentality of preaching and the printing press — 
education, exhortation, and the book. Padres went about 
preaching throughout the scattered villages, and the press 
looked after the universal distribution of the scriptures and 
scriptural tracts and publications designed to expose the 
delusions of the people’s “ idolatrous faith and to exhibit 
the “ supremacy and the divine origin of Christianity The 
violence done to the Sinhalese language! in these tracts and 
publications is extraordinary. The pliant dialect of the 
Sinhalese — so artistically inflected that by the variations of a 
single pronoun the speaker is enabled to supply it with delicate 
propriety, so as to convey no less lhan ten or twelve degrees 
of respect — is replaced in them by an artificial jargon lacking 
in nicety or tone or grace of style. 

For the successful demonstration of their errors to the 
Buddhists, to assail their code of ethics and to point out to 
them the fallacies of the metaphysical subtleties of their 
faith, the missionaries now began to study Sinhalese and 
Pali and to read the Buddhist scriptures. Their researches 
soon convinced them that the subjects of their study were full 
of literary treasures, whose value had not so far been 
sufficiently realized ; this added a new zest to their work, and 
scholars like Charter, Lambrick, Clough, Spence Hardy, and 
Gogerly began to devote their attention more and more to the 
task of mastering the books which they found in Ceylon. They 
wrote grammars for the systematic study of these languages, 
and compiled dictionaries for the benefit of future students . 1 

1 e.g. Charter's Sinhalese Grammar (1815) ; Clough's Pali Grammar 
(1824) and Sinhalese Dictionary (1821); Lambrick's Sinhalese Grammar 
(1834). 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


297 


They made translations of such books as would be useful to 
them in preaching against the Buddhists, and published them 
that they might be better known. Some of these books reached 
Europe and America, and there aroused in the hearts of various 
scholars a desire to learn more about the religion which the 
missionaries sought to condemn and the literature of which 
these books formed a part. The fervour which inspired the 
publication of such books was great. Spence Hardy in his 
Manual of Buddhism , which is a compilation from the sacred 
books of the Sinhalese, said : “ This Manual will be received, 
I doubt not, as a boon ; and it will enable them (the messengers 
of the cross) more readily to understand the system they are 
endeavouring to supersede by the establishment of Truth. I 
see before me, looming in the distance, a glorious vision, in 
which the lands of the East are presented in majesty ; happy, 
holy, and free. I may not, I dare not, describe it ; but it is 
the joy of my existence to have been an instrument, in 
degree, however feeble, to bring about this grand con- 
summation.” (Manual of Buddhism , Preface, p. x.) 

But the worm had already began to turn. The bewildering 
variety of religious beliefs which had been presented to the 
Sinhalese for acceptance by the various missionary bodies, 
under the regimes of the Portuguese, the Dutch, and now the 
English, had left them dazed, and later produced in them a 
listlessness and an indifference to all religion. The ostensible 
connexion which the churches had with the Governments of 
the day was associated in their minds with patronage and 
power, and, being allured, as all ordinary men are, by the 
prospect of obtaining wealth and rank under the Government, 
they had changed from one faith to another as the expedience 
of circumstances had dictated to them. This had encouraged 
falsehood and brought about a certain debasement of 
character. They designated themselves the followers of the 
“ Sopremad-agama ” (Government religion), and they formed 
a class “ whose reputation and whose practice were alike an 



298 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


outrage on the religion in which they were horn and an insult 
to that which they professed to have adopted ’. 1 

Education had, as we saw earlier, been neglected for several 
generations, and this had produced an obtuseness and a torpor 
of intellectual faculties ; it hail smothered all emotions of 
enterprise, emulation, and ambition, such as supply a stimulus 
to the intellect and organize tin? march of improvement. The 
Christianity which was imposed upo i them was not made to 
appear as an institution of the. land, to he cherished and 
supported as such; its exotic nature was patent; the 
missionary did not effectually accommodate his ministration 
to the habits of his flock, so as to gain upon their confidence, 
or to exert a sufficiently strong influence over their opinions 
and habits of thought. The 'civilization" which it had 
brought in its trail and which meant chiefly the adoption of 
European ways and modes of life created artificial needs; 
it is not surprising, therefore, that under its influence no art 
of any kind was developed, and no achievements of the mind, 
in the shape of literature, were produced. 

But half a century of British rule worked remarkable 
changes ; it brought peace and tranquillity into the island, 
where strife and domestic discontent and despotism had reigned 
for nearly two centuries. British capital and enterprise helped 
in the development of the land and secured the enjoyment of 
certain personal comforts which had not been possible under 
the Portuguese or the Dutch ; new careers of occupation were 
opened up, and new energies called into exertion ; which 
resulted in the industrial and the material improvement of the 
people. The British followed a policy of general religious 
tolerance ; and though, for quite a long time yet, the Buddhists 
suffered from many disabilities, the more courageous of 
them were now able to profess their faith without fear of 
being openly persecuted. Governor North, in spite of his 
ignominious participation in the conspiracy to depose the last 
King of Ceylon, was a man of broad views, and in a statesman- 
1 Tennent, Christianity in Ceylon , p. 90. 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


299 


like manner he adopted various measures to conciliate the 
people. Tennent tells us that his administration was 
characterized by signal success in the organization of civil 
government ; the promotion of religion and education and 
commerce ; the establishment- of Courts of Justice ; the 
reform of the revenue, and the advancement of native 
agriculture and industry. 1 In pursuance of this policy of the 
promotion of education he increased the number of parochial 
schools to 170 in various parts of the Island, and founded a 
“ Seminary ” at Colombo for the Sinhalese youths who wished 
to acquire a knowledge of English. 2 This “ Seminary ” w as the 
first English school in Ceylon. Other schools soon followed, 
giving instructions, some in the vernacular and others in 
English, opened by various missionary bodies. Their avowed 
object was proselyzation ; but, if the measure of their success 
be judged by the number of converts they have made, their 
efforts cannot be called productive of great results. 

The grand consummation, which Hardy and his colleagues 
so devoutly prayed for, of Christianizing Ceylon seems yet 
as far off as ever. Apart from this, howrever, these schools 
served to diffuse over a wide area that general information 
which is the first essential of all knowledge. The English 
schools provided their students with facilities for the 
acquisition of English, and opened for them the door to a 
familiarization with the advances of modern science and 
modern education ; these schools gave them the ability to 
investigate the problems that were put before them ; the 
students learned, like the Jew’s of Beroea, to examine things 
for themselves and “ search the Scriptures w’hether these 
things are so”. In many instances the alumni of these 
institutions, instead of returning the care expended on them 
by the missionaries by seeking conversion to Christianity, 
became devout Buddhists, whose desire was the propa- 
gation of their own faith. Their education had given them 

1 Tennent, Ceylon, ii, p. 86. 

1 Cey. Antiq. and Lit. Reg., ix, pt. ii, p. 145. 



300 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


exercise of thought and exertion of intellectual power sufficient 
to realize the value of their own national faith, and now, by 
a strange Nemesis, they came forward as its strong adherents 
against the onslaught of the missionaries. 

Meanwhile the missionaries themselves, more especially 
the Methodists , 1 had been studying the doctrines of Buddhism 
and the literature connected with it. The information they 
thus acquired was sedulously used by them in the preparation 
of tracts in Sinhalese, demonstrative of the errors of the 
Buddhist religion and illustrative of the evidences and 
institutes of Christianity. They acquired a command over the 
Sinhalese language, and their preachers went from village to 
village, distributing these tracts by the thousands, and 
questioning the truth of Buddha's teaching. The monks in 
their village temples, in the course of their sermons to the con- 
gregations that assembled at the Vihara on the Uposatha 
days, attempted to refute the arguments adduced against 
Buddhism by the itinerant Christian preachers. Many of them , 
with characteristic broad-mindedness, invited the missionaries 
to their temples and gave them opportunities of addressing 
assemblies of monks, at the conclusion of which they would 
ask questions, relative to the proofs and principles of 
Christianity . 2 But the denunciation of Buddhism went on 
apace, till a young monk named Mohottivatte Gunananda, 
appeared on the scene and flung the gauntlet down in a 
challenge to the Christians to meet him in open debate. The 
Christian clergy at first treated him w T ith indifference, even 
with contempt ; but the young sdmanera (novice) assiduously 
studied the Christian scriptures and read with avidity such 
Rationalist Literature as he could obtain (printed in Europe) 
dealing with the fallacies of Christianity. He possessed 

1 The Methodists have at all times been, the closest students of Buddhism 
and its sacred literature, and they produced men of great scholarship 
both in the classical and the modem languages of Ceylon, e.g. Clough, 
Gogerly, and Spence Hardy. 

* Tennent, Christianity in Ceylon , pp. 307 and 312. 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


301 


tremendous energy, and a masterful personality ; his voice 
was compared to the roar of the ocean, deep and far-reaching ; 
his flood of eloquence was unceasing. Well versed in the 
Buddha’s teaching and armed with information against the 
Christians, 1 he went with meteoric rapidity from village to 
village, carrying the war into the enemy’s camp, often at great 
personal risk. The fame of the young orator spread like wild- 
fire, and his meetings, which were generally held in the open, 
were attended by thousands who flocked to hear him ; he 
stormed several Christian strongholds, always throwing down 
his challenge to them to meet him in open debate, where the 
relative merits of the two religions could be discussed face 
to face. The challenge was at last accepted and debates took 
place at Udanvita (in the Four Korales) in 1866 and at 
Gampola in 1871. But the culmination of his efforts was the 
great Panadura Controversy in August, 1873, which lasted for 
a week. Against him were ranged the foremost missionaries 
of the day , at the end the victory naturally lay for the people 
with Mohottivatte. The orderliness of the assembly was a 
great credit to all concerned, and, when the Christians retired 
from the conflict discomfited, the enthusiasm of the Buddhist 
camp was unprecedented. It was an epoch-making event ; 
the enthusiasm it awakened amongst the Buddhists was 
immense ; festivities were held in every temple in the Island 
to mark Gunananda’s triumph, his effigy was carried in 
procession in every village, and he was the hero of the hour. 
From 1873 began the Buddhist Renaissance movement. Now 
that the truth of their religion had been vindicated, the 
Buddhists were determined to fight their Christian adversaries 
with their own weapons — “ education, exhortation, and the 
Press.” 

The attention of Colonel Henry Steele Olcott, President- 
Founder of the Theosophical Society, was first drawn to 

1 He was also an accomplished scholar in Sinhalese. Vide his edition of 
the K&vya-Sekhara (Colombo, 1872). 



302 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


Buddhism by a report of the Piinadura Controversy, which he 
happened to come across in a public library in the United 
States. He was a seeker after the truth in all religions, and, 
realizing the importance of the teachings of the Buddha 
in the development of man’s spiritual nature, he came over 
to Ceylon to study Buddhism at first hand. His researches 
soon convinced him of the sublimity of the Buddhist faith, 
and, avowing himself a follower of' the Teacher, he thence- 
forward became a staunch friend of the Sinhalese Buddhists, 
and to the best of his ability helped them in the tasks that 
awaited their attention. 

Under his guidance iu 1880 was started the Buddhist 
Thcosophical Society at Colombo. The presence of 
Col. Olcott w r as an invaluable acquisition to the Buddhist 
forward movement ; the Buddhist leaders rallied round him, 
and, acting under his counsel, they began establishing schools 
all over the Buddhist provinces. The enthusiasm thus 
awakened in the cause of Buddhist education still remains 
unabated ; to-day the number of Buddhist schools in the 
Island, both English and vernacular, reaches nearly 500, 
and the instruction they impart compares favourably with 
that of schools maintained by missionary educational 
organizations in Ceylon. 

Funds were wanted to carry on the campaign of educational 
propaganda. Volunteers were immediately forthcoming to 
act as itinerant preachers. They went from village to village, 
appealing for subscriptions to maintain the schools. The 
Buddhists, always generous in the support of religion, readily 
responded. Their devotion to the national faith, though 
submerged for a time under the flood of persecution, was 
inveterate, hereditary and insurmountable, and, as soon as 
their helplessness was removed, it found immediate expression. 
There are men and women still alive who have vivid memories 
of the tremendous enthusiasm that prevailed at these 
collection meetings. 

The Christian Missions had been flooding the country with 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


many tracts 1 dealing with the. fallacies they had discovered 
in Buddhism. To counteract their influence, and also 
to educate the Buddhists themselves in the knowledge 
of their own religion, the Buddhist leaders turned their 
attention to the publication of books. Printing was to them 
as yet quite a new art. It was unknown in Ceylon till about 
the year 1 737, when the Dutch introduced printing in 
Sinhalese character for the purpose of translating and 
publishing Christian works in the language of the people. 
The Colombo Auxiliary Bible Society followed in the same 
lines about 1813 ; the Wesleyans established a press in 1815 ; 
the Church Missionary Society in 1822 ; the Baptist Mission in 
1811 ; and the Roman Catholics in 1849. The Buddhists were 
too poor to aflord a press of their own, and they appealed to 
the King of Siam, as the only Buddhist King of the time, for 
help in their enterprise. The king gladly responded, and the 
first printing press controlled by the Sinhalese Buddhists 
was established at Galle in J862, under the name of the 
Lankopakara Press. 2 

Mohottivatte Gunananda, in his determination to fight the 
enemy in their own camp, had established his headquarters 
at Kotahena, then, as now, a stronghold of the Roman 
Catholics ; there, with the help of his lay-supporters, he 
established in 1862 the Sarvajna-sasanabhivrddhi-dayaka 
Press. The example thus set was soon followed by others : 
the Lakrivikirana Press in 1863 and the Laukabhinava- 
visruta Press in 1864. The most important work, and the 
most considerable in the point of size, among the first 
publications of these printing establishments was the Milinda- 
prasnaya (the Sinhalese translation of the Milanda-panha ) . 
It was felt that the book would be most useful in refuting the 

1 It is a regrettable fact that the language used both in thcee tracts and 
in the rejoinders issued by the Buddhists was far from being refined or 
urbane. The vilest terms of abuse were sometimes employed in the discussion 
of the most sacred subjects of religious belief. 

* I am indebted for this information to the Hon. Mr. W. A. de Silva, of 
Colombo. 



301 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


arguments hurled at the Buddhists by their adversaries. 
The expenses of the publication were borne by five Buddhist 
gentlemen, whose names deserve to be mentioned here 
because their munificence paved the way for the right exercise 
of philanthropy later. They were Karolis Pfris, Abraham 
Livcra, Luis Mcndis, Nandis Mendis Amara-Sekara, and 
Charlis Arnolis Mendis Vijavaratna Amara-Sekara. The work 
was issued from the Buddhist Press at Kotahcna in 1877-8, 
under the editorship of Gunananda. 1 

The Buddhist Renaissance movement, thus inaugurated, 
found its pioneers in the foremost scholars of the day. The 
system of temple education which existed in ancient Ceylon 
had gradually fallen into decay and disorganization, and was 
now being slowly superseded by the schools, manned and 
managed wholly by laymen. The monasteries confined their 
attention mainly to the education of the monks. Secluded in 
their cloisters, and now happily free from persecution, and 
supported by an ever generous laity, they had been sedulously 
devoting their energies to the study of the old books, both 
sacred and secular, still preserved in places where the ravages 
of the persecutors had not penetrated. When men of 
learning were required to guide the destinies of the new’ 
Forward Movement, they came forth and offered their services. 

Foremost among them was Hikkaduve Siri Sumangala. 
Born in 1827 in a small village near Gallo, he entered the Order 
while yet quite young. With remarkable assiduity he mastered 
the books of the Tipi! aka along with their commentaries 
under various teachers, and made himself very proficient 
in Sanskrit as well. In his boyhood he had witnessed the 
disabilities under which his co-religionists w r ere labouring at 
the time, and while yet a samanera he did all that he could to 
encourage their adherence to the national faith and to foster 
heir devotion to it in adversity. His fame as a preacher 
and an erudite scholar with a vast wealth of knowledge soon 

1 Milirida-prasnaya , Kotahcna, Ji.E. 2420 (1877-8 a.d.) pp. 628, 12, 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


305 


spread, and he was one of those that helped Gunananda at 
the Panadura controversy, where, it is said, his speedy 
penmanship was especially of the greatest use in taking down 
the arguments addressed oy the Christian spokesmen. Quite 
soon after that event some of the more prominent of the 
Buddhists in Colombo, impressed by his abilities and by his 
versatility, requested him to come over to the Metropolis 
and found a place of learning where both monks and laymen 
could acquire a thorough knowledge of Sinhalese, Pali, and 
Sanskrit. The invitation was accepted, and in June, 1874, 
was started the Vidyodaya Parivena, over whose destinies 
the Venerable Mahd-Thera presided till his death in May, 
1911. The Vidyodaya Parivena became a miniature of the 
old Maha-Vihara at Anuradhapura, one of the foremost places 
of learning in the East. Students flocked to it from all parts 
of the Island, and after having gone through a course of 
residence there they carried back with them the torch of 
knowledge which they had kindled at the feet of the Great 
Elder. It was a matter of common belief that no one who had 
had the good fortune of being taught by the Venerable Malui- 
Thera would fail to achieve renown in the world, and amongst 
the last two generations of Ceylon Buddhists hardly a single 
person of eminence is to be found, either amongst the monks 
or amongst the laity, who, at some time or other in his life, 
had not received instruction at the hands of the President of 
the Vidyodaya Parivena. Many of Siri Suinan gala’s students 
established Parivenas in various parts of the country, and thus 
began once more the revival of learning which had remained 
in abeyance from Saraiiaiikara’s day. The fame of the 
Institution soon spread abroad, and thither came men in 
search of knowledge, not only from India, Burma, and Siam, 
but also from distant China and Japan and Europe and 
America. Siri Sumangala himself was a hardworking student 
to the end of his days, and it is said that besides many 
languages of Asia he was able to read and understand several 


20 



306 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


languages of Europe as well, and that at the time of his death, 
aged 80, he was studying Russian. On his death, in 1911, his 
chief pupil Mahagoda Siri Nanissara 1 succeeded him as 
Principal of the Parivena, and most ably continued the work 
which had been begun by his teacher. During his regime 
several improvements were effected in the courses of 
instruction, and English was made a regular subject of study. 
On Siri Nanissara’s death, in 1922, the reins of office were 
taken over by its present Principal, the Venerable Kahave 
Siri Sumangala Ratansara, Mahd-Nayaka-Thera , an Elder 
of wide scholarship, profound erudition and great ability. 

This brief account of the literary revival in Ceylon during 
the last century would be incomplete without some reference, 
at least, to the exertions of the Europeans in the Island, 
missionaries, civil servants and others, whose researches it 
was that first brought home to the Ceylonese the glories of 
their own literature, when many of them had begun to treat 
it with neglect. Besides clergymen like Clough, (Jogerly, 
Hardy and Copleston, who always evinced a deep interest in 
the languages and the literatures of Ceylon, there has been a 
succession of civil servants, who, having sympathy with the 
institutions and the learning of the people among whom their 
lot was cast, found in the garnering in of the harvest of know- 
ledge which lay at their doors the greatest respite from the 
tedium of their official duties ; men like Armour, Tolfrey, 
Turnour, Brodie, Tennent, Upham, Childers, D’Alwis and — 
greatest of them all — Rhys Davids, who realized the splendid 
opportunities they had of advancing their own inner and 
spiritual nature and at the same time being of immense service 
to the scholarship of the world. The results of their labours 
are too fresh in men's minds to need elaboration here. On the 
7th February, 1845, was started the Ceylon Branch of the 
Royal Asiatic Society, “ to institute and promote inquiries 

1 Besides preparing scholarly editions of several Pali texts, fi&pissara 
made a Sinhalese translation of Vedeha's poem — Samaria- kvia-vannand. 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


307 


into the History, Religion, Literature, Arts, and Natural 
Philosophy of Ceylon, together with the social condition 
of its present and former inhabitants,” and the first number of 
the Society’s Journal was published the same year. 

Along with the restoration of learning and the introduction 
of the printing press an impetus was given to fresh literary 
activity. The book-burnings and the persecutions of the 
preceding two centuries had brought about a scarcity in the 
number of books available for study. The first labours of 
scholars, therefore, were directed to the task of editing and 
publishing such books as were of immediate necessity to 
students in the prosecution of their studies. The Sinhalese 
had long been accustomed to have the benefit of the patronage 
of their kings in matters of this kind, but it was found that no 
such help could be expected from their present rulers. Printing 
was to them quite a novel thing ; they had no experience in 
the art of collating manuscripts and editing them in a 
scientific manner ; often the copies of the manuscripts that 
were accessible to them were defective and full of errors 
made by unlettered scribes. There was no proper organization, 
and the editors were not all men of learning. The result was 
that many of the books issued are replete with errors both of 
printing and of editing. The texts were often printed in parts 
of about eighty pages and published at irregular intervals, 
and several of them begun, perhaps, thirty years ago, yet 
remain to be completed ! 

In the Journal of the Pali Text Society 1 Mr. W. A. de Silva 
has given a list of the books issued by the Sinhalese Press up 
to the year 1910. There we find, as he himself points out, that 
two classes of work have been published with a certain degree 
of abundance, namely Grammars for the Study of Pali and 
a large number of translations into Sinhalese of isolated 
Suttas from the Five Nikayas of the Pali Canon. 1 The reason 
for this preference is not far to seek. The study of Pali had 


1 1910-12, pp. 135 ff. 



308 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


been long neglected, and when it was now revived, simple 
works on grammar were found necessary. The laity were more 
or less completely ignorant of Pali, and hence the contents of 
their Sacred Literature were mostly unknown to them, 
except for what little they heard from the expositions of the 
monks in the village temples. It was to remedy this latter 
disadvantage that the translations were made and issued of 
some of the more well-known Suttas. 1 Both in Mr. de Silva’s 
list and in the Catalogue of the Temple Libraries of Ceylon , 
prepared in 1885 at the request of the Ceylon Government by 
the late Louis De Zoysa, 2 there is another feature worthy of 
notice — the large number of books from Burma and Siam 
w T hich seem to have been introduced into Ceylon during 
the nineteenth century ; we do not hear of the existence 
of many of them in the Island earlier. We have seen that 
from the time of Vijaya-Bahu in the twelfth century, there 
had been frequent intercourse between the countries above- 
mentioned and Ceylon, and scholars were in the habit of paying 
visits to each other across the seas. There is no reason to doubt 
that one of the results of these visits was the exchange 
of books. But during the political upheavals of the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries such intercourse had 
very largely ceased to exist, and the use of imported books 
does not seem to have at any time been prevalent to a large 
extent. 

With the re-establishment of the Upasampadd by 
Saranankara andKitti Siri Raja-Simha, however, the connexion 
with Siam was revived. When the Sinhalese embassy returned 
to Ceylon with the Upasampadd monks, we are told that they 
brought with them as a present from the King of Siam 
“ books of diverse kinds, which were not extant in the Island ”. 3 

1 It would be interesting to note, in view of what I have stated in an earlier 
chapter, that among the earliest of these translations was a compilation of 
the Suttas used in the chanting of Paritta. 

1 Govt. Printing Office, Colombo, 1885. 

» M.V . , c, 152-3. 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


309 


The friendship thus renewed with Siam has ever since been 
maintained, and we saw how, when the Ceylon Buddhists 
desired to establish a press of their own, they appealed to the 
King of Siam for funds, and received a generous response. 

Early in the nineteenth century certain events took place 
which drew Burma and Ceylon close together once more and 
freshened their bonds of affection. The Kandyan Kings were 
all strongly imbued with the prejudices of the Brahmans and 
upheld the doctrines of polytheism and caste, and, when 
King Kitti Siri re-established the Upasampadd from Siam, 
he decreed that none but members of a particular caste, the 
Gahapati (Goigama) should be admitted to the higher order 
of monks. The monks of the maritime provinces, who belonged 
to the other castes, were justifiably indignant at this 
unrighteous exclusion and this maladministration of the 
religion. In 1798 therefore, as a protest, they organized an 
expedition to Burma to introduce the Upasampxdd from that 
country. The embassy was led by Ambagahapitiye 
Nanavimala-Tissa ; he was accompanied by five sdmaneras. 
Their mission was eminently successful ; the Sangharaja 
at Amara-pura received them with singular favour. The 
Emperor caused their ordination to be celebrated with all 
the pageantry of royalty, and five Burmese monks accom- 
panied them on their return in 1802 to Ceylon, where they 
became the founders of the Amara-pura sect, which now forms 
a very influential body, with a large number of adherents. 
Seven years later, in 1809, a second expedition was led by 
Da<Jalle Dhammarakkhita, who with four colleagues received 
the Upasampadd in Burma. 

As a result of this close association between the two 
countries, several of the Ceylon monks went over to Burma 
and there specialized in the study of the Abhidhamma. On 
their return they brought with them a large number of works 
written in Pali by Burmese authors. Many of these they edited 
and published in Sinhalese characters, and some of the more 
important were translated into Sinhalese. 



310 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF U'EV LON 


Besides these translations, etc., to wlnc v t* fcr'-n /e Las 
already been made, several original works iiav- -i written 
in Pali during the last century. 

In 1835 the Wesleyan Mission Press issuer! a Pali translation 
of the New Testament. At the time of its publication there 
was a certain amount of misgiving in the minds of the 
Buddhists, because it was believed that one or two of the well- 
known Buddhist monks had a share in the work of translation, 
and that their action was ill-advised. These fears were soon 
laid to rest. It was found that the language of the 
translation was sufficient evidence against any such 
assumption. The book was not favourably received by the 
Christians, because they could not understand a word of 
what it contained, nor by the Buddhists, who would have 
nothing to do with it ! 

In 1876 Vaskaduve Siri Subhuti published the Nama-mala , 
a work on Pali grammar, compiled at the suggestion of his 
erstwhile pupil, R. C. Childers (Professor at University 
College, London, after leaving Ceylon, in the last few years 
of his short life), author of the well-known Pdli-English 
Dictionary. The work was dedicated, by permission, to 
Edward VII, then Prince of Wales, who visited Ceylon. It 
is accompanied by prefaces in English and Sinhalese, the latter 
containing a most valuable historical account of works on 
Pali grammar either written in Ceylon itself or used there. 
Subhuti had already published in 1865 an edition made by 
him of Moggallana’s Abhidtena-pjxufopika, with English and 
Sinhalese interpretations. Later, in 1893, he followed it up 
with a complete index of all the Pali words, giving their 
meanings in Sinhalese. 

In 1877, at the request of the Governor, Sir William Henry 
Gregory, Siri Sumangala, assisted by Pai?<Jita Devarakkhita 
Batuvantudave, brought out the edition of the Mate-vamsa , 
completed from the time of Kitti Siri to the cession of 
the Island to the British in 1815. A few years later, 
in 1883, they made a Sinhalese translation of the whole 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


311 


work, and published it in two volumes. 1 Siri Sumangala 
also brought out an edition of the Bdldvatdra , accompanied 
by a comprehensive original tiled in Pali. 

In 1880 Acariya Vimalasara Thera published the 
Sdsana-vamm-dipa . a “ history,” as the author tells us, of the 
Buddhist Church, written in Pali verse and compiled from 
Buddhist Holy Scriptures, Commentaries, Histories, etc.’ 7 
He had published earlier another Pali work, the Slmd-lakkhana- 
( iipani , dealing with the oft-disputed question of the consecra- 
tion of Sima or boundari es of ord i nation. Th e Sdsa na-vamsa-dipa 
is written in twelve chapters. It begins with the birth of the 
last Buddha as Sumcdha, describes the twenty-four Vivaranas, 
and gives a history of his last life up to the time of the 
Parinibbana. Chapters v-viii deal with the three convocations 
and the establishment of Buddhism in foreign lands ; 
chapters ix and x deal with the establishment of Buddhism in 
Ceylon and the writing down of the Pitakas and the 
Commentaries. Chapter xi is by far the most important, 
because it gives the names of authors who lived from the time 
of Buddhaghosa to the reign of Pandita Parakrama-Bahu, 
together with the works they produced. In spite of its faulty 
arrangement — because it follows no chronological order — 
this chapter is of great value. The last chapter deals with 
the measures adopted by various monarchs to re-establish 
the Sasana. when it died dow n at various periods of its history 
for want of proper care and attention. It ends with the intro- 
duction of the Amara-pura Nikaya into Ceylon. In 1893 Siri 
Siddhattha Dhammananda, Principal of the Parama Dhamma 
Cetiya Parivena at Itatmalana, published the Lokdpakdra , a 
didactic Pali poem of 107 stanzas, wTitten in gcUhd verse, 
accompanied by a Sinhalese translation by the author himself. 
It is based on the Saddhammopdyana , and deals with 
practically the same subjects. 

In 1902 S. M. Burrows, Director of Public Instruction, 


1 Sihftla S&maya Press, Colombo, 1883. 



312 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


established the Committee on Oriental Studies to systematize 
the instruction given at the various Parivenas, make them 
conform to one common standard, if possible, and hold com- 
petitive examinations to encourage the students. The Govern- 
ment was to give an annual subsidy to such Parivenas as 
appeared to them to deserve it. The policy of the Committee 
was set forth as follows : “ To make the Parivenas more 
attractive, progressive and useful, while zealously guarding 
their indigenous and independent character, without turning 
them into government-subsidized high schools/’ 

The examinations have not been an unmixed blessing. The 
encouragement of competition has produced cram-work in 
place of erudition, and it is a lamentable fact that, even among 
the monks the winning of a medal or diploma has proved a 
greater incentive to work than disinterested love of knowledge. 
Knowledge for its own sake has given way to knowledge for 
recognition. There is also noticeable a tendency to pay far 
more attention to Sanskrit that to Pali, which is bound to 
have an adverse influence on the growth of Pali Literature. 
In 1909 there arose a bitter controversy among the Buddhists 
as to whether it was right for audiences to be seated on chairs 
or benches, while listening to the preaching of the Dhamma. 
The more educated among the Buddhists had found it more 
advantageous to adopt European costume, because it seemed 
to them to bring greater regard from their rulers. It was, 
however, discovered that European clothes did not conduce 
to comfort when the wearer sat on the floor — as had been the 
custom at the village temples for centuries — hence the con- 
troversy. Much rancour was shown on both sides and an appeal 
was made to the usage in Burma. One of the strongest 
opponents of the use of seats was Moratuve Medhananda 
Thera. He had been to Burma to study the Abhidhamma, and 
in 1910 he publisheda book called the Dhamma^dram-^pam, 1 
written in Pali gdthd verse, giving a history of the controversy 
and his own observations on the subject, together with the 

1 Moratuva, 1910. 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


31a 

opinions expressed to him by various eminent Tlieras of Burma 
whom he had consulted. The controversy gradually died 
down ; a compromise seems to have been brought about 
whereby, if the preaching of the Dhamma was at the Vihara 
itself, the audience should sit on the floor — while if the sermon 
be. given at some place other than on the Vihara precincts, 
the listeners may use seats at their option. 

In 1911 Kodagoda Upasena Them wrote the Sammoha- 
nasarii , on certain rules on the Vinaya connected with such 
subjects as the use of the begging-bowl, the modern umbrella, 
leather covering for the feet, etc. It is composed in Pali verse, 
and divided into seven chapters. Two other works remain to 
be mentioned, to bring this history up to date. In 1917 
Moratuve Medhananda Thera, author of the Dhamma-garava - 
dlpani referred to above, published the J ina-vamsa-dipanl 
(also called Pabandha-siromani) . It is an extensive Pali 
poem of two thousand verses in thirty chapters. The author 
declares in his preface 1 that it is his ambition to write a 
Maha-kavya on the model of the Sanskrit Raghu-vamsa and 
Kumar a-sambhava, giving not only the life of the Buddha 
but also dealing with the cardinal points in his teaching. In 
this he has achieved remarkable success ; the verses are 
written in several metres, some of them intricate and all of 
them composed with sedulous care. Medhananda Thera 
has drunk deeply of the works of Sanskrit poets, and his com- 
position abounds in metaphors and similes which bear close 
resemblance to their best productions. The language of the 
poem shows the strong impress of Sanskritic influence, and it 
is significant of the times that the dedicatory verses are 
written in classical Sanskrit. There is a Sinhalese paraphrase 
to the whole work by the author himself, and the book is 
prefaced by a very valuable historical introduction, dealing 
with some of the salient points of the history of the Safigha 
in Ceylon. He also gives a brief survey of Ceylon authors and 
their works. The Jina-mmsa^parii has brought the learned 
1 p. ii (Colombo, 1917). 



314 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


author recognition for his scholarship in his own lifetime, and 
it was no insincere compliment that his lay supporters paid 
to him when, on the day of its publication, they carried the 
book in procession round the town in which the great Elder 
had taken his residence. They were, in their own humble way, 
attempting to pay their respects and express their gratitude 
to the distinguished author who had laboured in the cause 
of religion and literature, two things which have always been 
closest to their hearts. 

The other work is the Mahd-Kassapa-carita , published in 
1924 by Vidurupola Piya-Tissa Nayaka Thera, 1 a Pali poem 
of 1,500 verses arranged in twenty cantos. The learned poet 
was born in 1880, and already at the age of thirty had 
distinguished himself as a brilliant scholar at the Final 
Examination of the Committee on Oriental Studies. This 
work from his pen has fulfilled the hopes of earlier years and 
holds out the promise of greater achievements in the future. 
The language of the Kassapa-canta is forceful and elegant, 
and the subject matter is well arranged. The materials for the 
biography of the great Elder, who was held in esteem only 
second to the Buddha himself, has been taken from the 
Sarnyutta-atthakathd and the A nguttara-atihalathd. 

In 1913 Sir Robert (now Lord) Chalmers came as Governor 
of Ceylon. He had for some, time past evinced great interest 
in Pali literature, and had edited a portion of the Majjhima - 
Nikdya for the Pali Text Society. His contributions to the 
Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society on subjects connected 
with Buddhism had been read with interest, and his translation 
of a part of the Jdtakas for the Cambridge University Press 
had been studied with avidity. The people awaited his coming 
with eagerness, and, when he arrived, he was greeted with the 
utmost cordiality. Soon after he assumed office he declared 
in the course of a public speech his desire to bring out an edition 
of the Ceylonese Commentaries, which he proposed to call 
the Alu-vihara Edition. “ I have had the practical experience,” 

1 Colombo, 1924, Grantha-prakiUa Press, iii, 124, 8°. 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


315 


he said, ■' or collating for my edition oi the Majjhima-Nikaya 
n o’ only Sinhalese MSS,,, hut also the Mandalay MSS. from the 
Royal Library in Burma, and the King of Siam’s printed 
edition, and, as a result of this experience, I have no hesitation 
in affirming — as I know the most distinguished of Pali scholars 
in Europe will also affirm— that it is in the best Sinhalese MSS. 
that the soundest traditions of Pali scholarship will be found. 
... It has always seemed to me that, with this unique tradition 
of scholarship on her part, Ceylon has failed in modern times 
to assert her historic claim to leadership in her own proper 
held. For instance, Siam, under the auspices of the late King, 
has taken the lead in issuing the Tipitaha , in the printed 
yellow-bound volumes which many of us know, and Siam 
has made at least a beginning with the printing of the 
Atthakatha's in Siamese character. . . . Ceylon must follow, 
but in following ought to improve upon Siam’s example. 
Here, in Ceylon, we must have in Sinhalese characters, an 
edition both of the Canon and of the Commentaries, which 
will be worthy of the pre-eminent tradition of Pali scholar- 
ship in Ceylon.” 1 

It was with this noble ambition that the Alu-vihara Edition 
was launched. But, alas ! “ the best laid schemes of mice 
and men gang aft agley ”, and Sir Robert’s scheme was no 
exception. The Great War in Europe engaged all his attention, 
and later, in May, 1915, an unfortunate religious riot, which 
broke out between the Muslims and the Buddhists in Kandy, 
led to many a false move on the part of the officials, which 
plunged the country in gloom. Martial law was proclaimed, 
and under its regime many excesses were committed. All 
Sir Robert’s constructive plans for the re-establishment of 
Ceylon’s pre-eminence for Pali scholarship had to be 
abandoned, and,, when he left the Island, only one book, the 
Papanca-8iidanl , on the Majjhima , had been published. The 
work had "been entrusted to the two foremost scholars of the 


1 Colombo, Public Hall, 27th February, 1915. 



316 


THE PALI LITERATURE OF CEYLON 


day, Nanissara and Dhammarama, and the result fulfilled all 
expectations. 

But, fortunately, the work began under the inspiration of 
Sir Robert Chalmers was not destined to be left uncontinued, 
though by other hands and in other ways. On the 
17th January, 1913, died Simon Alexander Hewa-vitarne, 
member of the well-known Hewa-vitame family. He 
had been a pupil of the Yen. Siri Sumahgala, and was an 
earnest student of Abhidhamma. He had conceived the idea 
originally of printing the complete text of the Tipitaka , 
but, on the advice of Professor Lanman, of Harvard, later 
decided to bring out an edition of the Commentaries. 
Following this idea, he began, in 1911, to publish the Com- 
mentary on the Samyutta-Nikaya . The work was in progress 
when he died. In his will he left ample provisions for his plans 
to be carried out in their entirety. “ I give, devise, and 
bequeath,” it ran, “ all such monies as may be found 
necessary for printing the Pali text of the Commentaries 
which is being printed now, and all monies needful for bringing 
out a neat edition of the text of the Tipitaka” His executors 
have lost no time in carrying out his wishes. In 1917 appeared 
the first volume, Dhammapala’s Commentary on the Peta-vatthu J 
Several others have appeared since then. The work of editing 
is in the hands of the most distinguished scholars of Ceylon, 
and the results of their labours have won unstinted approval 
from all quarters. It is a matter of great regret that no 
arrangements have so far been made to bring out carefully 
revised editions of the other Pali works of Ceylon and the 
numerous valuable works written in Sinhalese, which form 
the national heritage of the people. The rulers of Ceylon in 
ages past have always extended their munificent patronage 
in the cause of literature, and it is to be hoped that the British 
Government will not fail to emulate the example of their 
predecessors in the sovereignty of the island. The incomes 
derived from the endowments made in former times for the 
1 Maha-Bodhi Press, Colombo, 1917. 



THE MODERN PERIOD 


317 


maintenance of the monasteries are being either wasted or 
misappropriated, for want of suitable legislation. If means 
are devised for the proper utilization of such funds as may be 
derived from them, the question of setting aside a sufficient 
yearly sum for the editing and publication of a literature of 
such great historical value as that of Ceylon, will be easily 
solved. A few hundreds a year for ten years would probably 
suffice — on the system followed by the Pali Text Society — 
for the editing and publication of the whole. The conclusion 
of the war has ushered in a new era of prosperity, and it is 
fervently hoped that attention will be paid to this matter 
of urgency for the reputation of Ceylon in the scholarship of 
the world. 



318 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Arunachalam (Sir Ponnambalam) : Sketches of Ceylon History , Colombo, 
1906. 

Barua (B. M.) : A History of Pre-Buddhistic Philosophy, Caloutta 

University, 1921. 

Beal (Samuel) : Buddhist Records of the Western World, 2 vols., Triibner, 
London, 1884. 

Bode (Mrs. Mabel H.) : The Pali Literature of Burma, R.A.S., London, 1909. 

Burlingame (E. W.) : Buddhist Legends , parts 1-3, Harvard Oriental 
Series, 1921 ; Buddhist Parables , Yale University, 1922. 

Catalogues - 

Catalogue of Pali MSS. in the Oriental Department , British Museum . 

»» „ „ „ „ „ India Office Library. 

„ „ „ „ „ „ Bibliothkque Rationale, Paris. 

See also under D’Alwis, De Zoysa, and Wickremasinghe. 

Childers (Robert CsBsar) : A Dictionary of the Pali Language, Trubner, 
London, 1875. 

Coomara Swamy (Mutu) : Da\hd Vagisa, Trubner, London, 1874. 

D’Alwis (James) : Sidat-Sangara, Colombo, 1852 ; A Descriptive Catalogue 
of Sanskrit, Pali, and Sinhalese Literary Works of Ceylon, Colombo, 
1870 ; Attanagaluvarpsa, Colombo, 1870. 

De Zoysa (Louis) : A Catalogue of the Temple Libraries of Ceylon, Colombo, 
1885. 

Durr (Sukumar) : Early Buddhist Monachism, Triibner, 1924. 

Fleet (J. F.) : Inscriptions of the Early Gupta Kings, Calcutta, 1888. 

Fobchhammer (Dr. Emil) : Report on the Pali Literature of Burma, Govern, 
ment of India Publication, 1879. 

Franks (Dr. R. Otto) : Pali und Sanskrit, Strassburg, 1902. 

Geiger (Wilhelm) : The Dipavatpsa and Mahuvar/isa (English translation), 
Colombo, 1908 ; Mahfr-vatfisa (P.T.S.) and Cula-varpsa (P.T.S.). 

Giles (H. A.) : The Travels of Fa-Hsien, Cambridge, 1923. 

Gray (James) : Buddhaghosuppatti, Luzac, London, 1892 ; J indlank&ra, 
Luzac, London, 1894. 

Hardy (R. Spence) : Eastern Monachism, Williams and Norgate, 1860 ; 
Legends and Theories of the Buddhists, Williams and Norgate, 1866 ; 
Manual of Buddhism, Williams and Norgate, 1880. 

Hastings (James) : ed. Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics , T. and C. 
Clark (12 vols.), 1910-18. 

Jdtaka : ed. by V. FausRoll, 7 vols., TrQbner, 1877-97. 

J&taka Tales : H. T. Francis and E. J. Thomas, Cambridge, 1916. 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 


319 


Jataka Tales (translation) : published by Cambridge Univ. Press, 7 vols., 
1895-1913. 

Journals : — 

Pali Text Society. 

Royal Asiatic Society , London. 

» „ ,» Ceylon Branch, Colombo. 

Bengal Asiatic Society , Calcutta. 

Indian Antiquary , Bombay. 

The Ceylon Aniujiuiry and Literary Register , Colombo. 

Calcutta Review , Calcutta. 

Journal Asiatique , Paris. 

Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenldndischen Qesellschaft, Leipzig. 

Kern (H.) : Manual of Indian Buddhism , Strassburg, 1896. 

Law (Bimala Caran) : The Life and Work of Buddhaghosa, Calcutta, 1923. 

Leqge (James) : A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms , Oxford, 1886. 

Macdonell (A. A.) : Sanskrit Literature , Heinemann, London, 1899. 

Maha-varpsa : Pali Text, ed. Sumangala and Batuvantudave, Colombo, 
1905 ; Tikd, ed. Sumangala and Batuvantudave, Colombo, 1895. 

Mitra (Rajendra Lala) : Buddha Gaya, Calcutta, 1888. 

Nariman (G. K.) : Literary History of Sanskrit Buddhism , Bombay, 1920. 

Nikdya-sangraha : Text, Government Printing Press, Colombo, 1907 ; 
translated by C. M. Fernando, and edited by W. F. Gunawardhana, 
Colombo, 1908. 

Oldenbero (Hermann) : The Vinaya Pitakam, 5 vols., Williams and 
Norgate, London, 1879-83. ; Dipa-vamsa, Williams and Norgatc, 1879. 

Pali Text Society : All publications, including the Journal and the New 
Pali Dictionary . 

Pieris (Paul E.) : Ceylon and the Portuguese , Ceylon, 1920. 

Pridham (Charles) : Ceylon and its Dependencies , 2 vols., T. and W. Boone, 
London, 1849. 

Raja-ratndkara : ed. by Simon dk Silva, Colombo, 1907 ; see also Upham. 

Rdjdvaliya : Translated by B. Gunasekara, Colombo, 1900 ; see also 

Upham. * 

Rhys Davids (Mrs. C. A. F.) : Buddhism (Home University Library), 
2nd edition; Buddhist Psychological Ethics , 2nd edition, R.A.S., 
London, 1923 ; Buddhist Psychology , 2nd edition, Luzac, London, 1924. 

Rhys Davids (T. W.) : Buddhist Birth Stories , vol. i, Triibner, 1880, and 
Routledge, 1924 (revised by Mrs. Rhys Davids) ; Buddhist Suttas 
{ Sacred Books of the East , xi), Frowde, 1881 ; Vinaya Texts ( Sacred 
Books of the East, xiii, xvii, xx), Frowde, 1881-5 ; Dialogues of the 
Buddha , 3 vols., Frowde, 1900-21; Buddhism : Its History and 
Literature (American Lectures), Putnam, 1896 ; Buddhist India 
( Story of the Nations ), Fisher Unwin, 1903. 

Senaveratna (John M.) : The Story of the Sinhalese , 2 vols., Colombo, 
1923. 

Smith (Vincent A.) : Early History of India , Clarendon Press, 1st and 
4th editions, 1904 and 1924 ; Asoka (Rulers of India Series), 1909; 
Oxford History of India (Oxford Univ. Press), 1st and 2nd ed., 1919 
and 1923, 



320 


THE PALI LITERATURE OP CEYLON 


Tenhent (Sir James Emerson) : Christianity in Ceylon , John Murray, 
London, 1850 ; Ceylon , 2 vols., Longmans, London, 1857. 

Tuknour (George) : Epitome of the History of Ceylon (Ceylon Almanac), 
Colombo, 1823 ; translation of the Maha Wanso , vol. i. Cotta, Ceylon, 
1837. 

Upham (Edward) : Sacred and Historical Books of Ceylon , 3 vols. ( Mahavansi ’, 
Jiaja ratnacari, and Raja-vali), Parbury, Allen and Co. 

Wickremasinghe (D. M. de Z.) : Sinhalese MSS. in the British Museum , 
London, 1900 ; Catalogue of the Colombo Museum , Government Oriental 
Library, Colombo, 1896 ; Sinhalese Printed Books in the British 
Museum , , London. 

Wuesinha (L. C.) : Mahd Varisa (English translation), Colombo, 1909. 

Winternitz (Dr. M.) : Geschichte der Indischen Litteratur , Zweiter Band , 
Leipzig, 1920. 



INDEX 


A 

Abhaya (ihera), 199 
Abbayagiri, 19, 41, 52, 56, 61, 69, 
70, 76, 127, 152, 154, 178, 212 
Abbayuttara {thuya), 52 
Abhidhamma, 80, 98, J08 
A bhidhamma-atthakatha, 114 
Abhidhammattha-eaiigaha , 108, 167 ff., 
178, 192, 197, 203, 
205 

„ - vibhdvani , 173, 200 

„ -vikdsini, 200 

Abhidhammdvatara, 106-7, 200 
A bhidhana-ppadipika, 179, 187 ff., 
237, 310 

„ -samvan^and, 

189 

Abhisambodhi-alaiikdra, 281 
Abhimmbuddha-gathd, 120 
Aecutavikkama (king), 107 
Aggabodhi (king), 152, 210 
Aggavaqua (monk), 185, 196 
A itareya- Brahmana, 117 
Akkhara-mdla , 285 
Alagakkonir ( Alake6vara), 240, 247 
Alagiyavanna-mohottala, 268 flf. 

Alaiikdra-nissaya (on Subodhd- 
lahkara), 199, 200 
Alu-vih&ra Edition, 314 ff . 

Aloka Vib&ra (Alu-vihara), 43 
Amaragiri, 240 

Amara-koSa (Amaraaiipha), 189, 250 
Amftvatnra, 158 
Axnba-S&manera, 227 
Ampitiya Vihfira, 281 
Anagata-varfisa, 160 ff., 179 
Ananda (thera), author, 112, 187, 
202 ff., 205, 210, 213, 220, 227 
An&tha-pipdika, 247 
A ndhra-atthakathd, 92 
Anomadftfwi, 219, 227 
Anul£, 27, 48 
Anu-ndyalca, 254 
Anurfidba^pura, downfall of, 164 
Anun-r&ma, 51 
Anornddha (them), 168 ff., 203 
„ (king), 166, 184 
A nuruddha-kUaka, 170 
Anu-tikd, 114, 212 
Apaddna, 118 
Arahanta (monk), 185 


AraMa-vdsi fraternity, 138, 210, 214, 
226, 229 

Arapyaka Vihara, 248 
Arittha (Maha-), 27, 44, 246 
Ariya-varriaa (book), 61 
Ariyavamsa of Ava {them), 200 
Aaadiaa-jataka , 287 
Asoka, 19, 21 
AAvaghoja, 53 
Attanagalla, 55, 218 
Attanagalu-varjiaa, 253, 284 
Attaragaxna-band&ra, r&j&-gura, 283 
ff. 

Atthadassi, 125, 215 

„ PalkumburS, 279 

Attha-dipaiid, 217 

Atthakathc , 43, 45, 73, 81, 88 ff., 
91 ff., 129, 154, 193, 248, 314, 316 
Attha-ppakdsand, 217 
„ -sdliwi, 98, 210 

Avanti, school of, 181 
Avidure-nidana, 125 
Ayodhya (Siam), embassy to, 275, 
279 

B 

Badaran (Padara-) tittha, 112-3 
Baladicca-Vih&ra, 220 

Bdldvabodhana , 178 
Bdldvatdra , 202, 221, 243 ff., 279 
„ -hyana-aanne , 284 

„ - sangraha , 284 

„ -tika, 311 

JBana- preaching, institution of, 38 
Batuvantud&ve, 142, 170, 237 
Bhadda-Kaccanft, 181 
Bhaggari-v&sa, 126 
Bhakti-ScUaka , 250 n. 

Bhara {them), 141 
Bharatl R&znacandra, 250 n. 
Bhatika-abhaya, 48 
Bhesajja-maAjusd , 215, 282 
Bbikkhnnl-sfisana, in Ceylon, 27, 
136, 165 

Bhfl kmiiAwiliurilnii^ .rihirt. 107 

Bhuvaneka-Bfihn (thera), 214, 247, 
254 

„ „ (king), 228, 240 

Bodhi (monk), 154 
„ dhara, princes, 132 
Bodbintap^vibta, 83, 87, 227 
21 



INDEX 


32 “ 


Bodhimagflala, 68, 69 
Bodh*~tiee, introduction ;c. Oeyxcm, 
24, 2G, 136 

Bodki-vaywa (see Mafia-) 

„ -vayisatthakathd (s*e Maha 

159 

, } -va 'nsa-pankatha, 158 

British in Ceylon, the, 287 0. 
Brahmadatta (monk), 180 
Buddha’s Visits to Ceylon, 13-4 
Buddha-dasa (king), 70 
Buddhadatta, 105 ff.. 200 
Buddhadeva, 125 

Buddhaghosa, 40, 76, 7d iff., 113, 
136, 183, 189, 194, 
246 

,, Culla, 126 
Buddhaghosuppatti, 79, 85, 98, 169 

Buddhamitta, 125, 210 
Buddhanags, 201 

Buddhappiya, 180, 182, 203, 211, 
220 ff., 229 

Buddharakkhita, 18 , 40 , no 

„ Siddhattha, 284 

Buddhasiha, 78, 108 
Buddhasoma, 212 

Buddha -varfusa, 109 ff., 160, 161, 179, 
236 

„ - atthakatka , 114, 134 

Buddhavaxpsa Vanaratana Ananda 

213 

Buddhi-ppasddim, 205, 252 
Buddhism, Manual of, 297 

Budugundlankdra, 253 

C 

Cakkavattisihandda-sutta., 161 
Candasarattha-tika , 198 
Cdi^rcigomi-vyakararia-panjikd, 168, 
190 

Candra-vydkarana , 178 

Candragupta, 20 
Cariyd-pitaka, 118, 242 
Caturdrya-satya-kavya, 251 
Cetiya-varfisaithakathd, 133, 217 
Chalmers, Lord, 47, 100, 314 
Cbapata, 185, 196 ff., 201-3 
Childers, R. G., 10 
Cohans, the, 50 
Cohka-tambaratfha, HO 
Co]iya Dfpahkara, see Buddhappiya 
Cflflfimftpikya Vihara, 220 n. 
Cula-ganthi-pada, 189 
C&ia-vamsa, (dynasty), 63 
Culla-hatthi-padopama-sutta, 229 

D 

D’Alwii 7, 77, 183 
Daivajfta-lc&madhenu, 219 


Dakkhipa t, 52, 56, 62 

Daladd-maligaya, 67, 267 

Itafatla-sirU't, 2\ 4, 232 

„ Of , 208 

Dambaddtu-asxiu 213 

Dampiyd-mnr, .% > 

Dancing, treatise on, 285 
Danta-dhatu-bodhi-vanwa, 106 
D&nta-kumara, 66 
Ddthd-dhalu. 65-7 

„ -varjisa, 66, 209 
Da{han&ga, 153, 157 
Ddiha-varpm, 65, 142, 195, 207 
Dathopa-Tissa, (king), 143, 154, 198 
Daftha, 157 
Deva \thera), 51 

Ddvanampiya-Tissa, 19, 20, 29, 67 
Deva-pratiraja, 214, 219 
Dev&raja vihdra, 205 
Devarakkhita, 243 

Dhammaceti (king), 179, 199, 256 
Dhammadinna Vimalakitti (Sid- 
dhattha), 253 
Dhammag&ra, 217 
Dkamma-garava-dipam , 312 
Dhammagutta, 37 

Dhammaioti, Sijin&maluve, 244, 284 
Dhamma-kamma , 153 
Dhammakathi, 71 ff. f 154 
Dhammakitti, 66, 138, 142, 195, 207, 
215, 226-7, 240, 242, 254 
Dhammakkhanda, Gintota, 256 
I lham mami tta, 155 
Dhammananda, 224, 231, 289, 311 
Dhammapadatthakathd , 8, 95, 236 
Dhammap&la, (Acariya), 112 ff., 317 
„ Batapole, 156, 289 

„ Culla, 112, 203 ff., 211 

Dhammarakkhita, DadallS, 309 

„ Daramiiipola, 285 

t Hw.mm&rilfim, 252, 316 
PhRTnwimtftnft, 268 

Dhaimnamci Nikaya, 42, 52, 56, 60, 
124, 129, 136 

Dhammasaitgani, 81, 89, 98, 167 
Dhammasena, 96-7 
Dhammasiri, 77 
Dhammika (king), 278 
„ (minister), 63 
Dharmadasaya, $rf, 284 
Dharmadhvaja-paitfita, 268 
Dharmagupta, 77 
DharmapSla (prince), 260 
Dh&tu-manjfad, 237 
„ -p&tha, 237 

Dh&tusena, 135, 138, 140, 149 
Dhatu-vaffisa, 255 



INDEX 


323 


Dhlrananda, 108 
Dighakaryapa (minister), 52 

Dlghasapfc-sen&pati-parivepa, 30, 

140 

Dimbulagala, see Udumbaragiri 
dipa-bhdsa, 72, 130, 235 
Dipankara, see Buddhappiya 
Dlpankara vihara, 227 
Dipa-vamsa, 74, 131 ff. 

„ -vaifisa-attha katha , 133, 135, 144 
Dirghagama , 128 
Do^anvala, Devale, 271 
Dutch in Ceylon, 272 ff. 
Duttha-gamapi, 14, 33 ff., 217, 246 
E 

Ekaqisikas, the, 179, 189 
EJaJa, 31, 34, 147 

Elu- Bodhi-va rjt sa, 158 

F 

Fa-Hsien, 63, 67, 71, 104, 119, 128 
Forbes, Major, 66 
Foulkes, the Rev. T., 10 
Franciscans, the, 261 ff. 

G 

Gadalfideni-sanne , 244 
Gadaladeni-vihara, 226, 240, 243 
Gaja-Bahu (king), 50,148 

Galaturumula, sc* Selantarayatana 
Gal vihara, 76 

Gamapi-abhaya, see Duttha-gamapi 
Ganananda-parivepa, 248 
Ganthakara vih&ra, 82, 196 
Gatara-parivepa, 253 

Qira-sande&a , 253 
Giri-vamsa, 247 
Gotama {them), 1 99, 220 
Gothabhaya (king), 55 ff., 218 
„ {them), 58 
Gray, James, 18, 79, 169 
Gupa-bhadra, 86 
Gunananda. Mohottivattl, 300 ff. 
Gurulugomi, 158 
Guttila-jdtaka, 253 

H 

Hardy, Edmund, 184 
Hardy, Spence, 7, 16, 285, 297 
hatana (war) poems, 268 
Hatthalhaka vih&ra, 28 

Heitthn-vanagnlla-vamsa 54, 218 ff. 
Hema-mdld, 66 

Hewd-vitarne, Simon Alexander, 316 
Hiuan Tsang, 68, 114 
I 

Irugalkula-parivepa, 248, 253 
J 

Jambuddopi vihara, 230 


Janaki-hararia , 151, 234 
Jdtakattha katha, 38, 114, 117 ff., 242 
314 

J dtakatthakathu, Sinhalese transla- 
tion, 232 ff. 

J atattag i-niddnam, 1 26 
J ati-gama- vihara, 254 
Jayabahu {them), 243 
J ayavardhana-pura, see Kotte 
Jetavana vihara, 62, 188 
Jettha-Tissa (king), 58 
J ina-bodhamli, 243 
„ -carita, 230 

J inalafikdra , 18, 106, 109 ff. 

Jina-i hi visa - dipani, 11, 230, 313 
Joti (monk), 190 

Jotipala, 210 

K 

K accdyana -bheda, J 80 

,, - dhdtu-mahjusa , 237 

„ -sara, 199, 221 

„ -vannana, 180 

K uceayd na-vyukarana , 179 ff., 221. 

243, 283 
Kaiduvela (Thera), 289 
Kakavappa-Tissa, 32, 255-6 
Kakusandha ( Them), 255 ff . 

Kalavela (monastery), 126 
Kalidasa, 151, 236 
Kali-kala-sahitya-papdita, 213 
Kalihga (king), 210 
„ (kingdom), 66 
„ Thera, 211, 223 
K dli hga-bodhi-jdtaka , 158 
Kajyapi Inscription, 179, 191, 257 
K alyd n i-ppakaranam, 257 
Kaiyapiya {them), 162 
Kanakadatta,(nun), 136 
Kancl-pura, 113, 169 
Kankhd-vitarani, 95, 201 
Kapila (minister), 53 
Kappinna, 205 
Kapp ura-Parivepa, 153 
K a ra ka -p upp ha - man jar %, 283 
Karagala-Parivepa, 248, 265 
Kassapa (Maha-), 160, 176, 178 ff., 
186, 193, 202, 314 
„ (king), 46, 149, 154-5 
Katandhakara Vihara, 154 
Kdtantra, 183 
Kathd-vatthu, 39 

Katikd-vata (code of conduct), 213, 
279, 287 

Kavsilumiyia, 214 
Kavya-sekhara , 250, 301 ff. 
Kdya-virati-gdthd, 285 
Kdiapi-Tissa (king), 162 



324 


INDEX 


Kesa-dhatu-vaipsa , 227 
Sterna (monk), 156 
Khema-ppakarana , 156, 202, 205 
Khudda-sikkha , 76, 109, 198, 211 
Kitti-sen&pati, 207 
Kitsirimevan-K&lapi Vihara, 150, 
189, 236 

Kittisiha-sura, 189 
K!rti-6ri-ra j asiipha, 276 ft. 

Kivilakunu-mini-mala, 253 
Kohon-Tissa (monk), 62 
Kokila-sandesa , 253 
Ko8ala-bimba-vaxbnana , 246 
Kotte, 247 ft. 

Kumara-dasa (dhatusena), 151 
Kupdasala, 274 
Kunte, Professor, 121 
Kurupfc vihara, 152 
Kururidi-aUhakatha , 92 
Kurura-ghara-pap&ta, 181 
Kusa-jdtaka , 268 
Kuvenl, 16 

L 

Laghu-kaumudi , 244 
Lalata-dhdtu-vamsa (-r aririand), 255 

Lambakappas, 49, 227 
Lahka-pnra, 16 

Tiftnki^rftmftj 245 

Let-than , 156, 173 
Leake-r&|ahami, 279 
Lll&vatl (queen), 206-7 
Lxnattha-dlpani-txkd , 217 
„ - ppakasinl , 114, 192 

„ -vannand, 114, 211 
Liyana-sanne, 244 
Lokopakdra , 253, 311 
Lovdda-aangara, 247, 253 
Lov&-maha-p&ya, 35, 155 

M 

Madhu-piiidika-autia, 89 
Madhwni-raaa-vahinx, 226 
Madhurdrtha-prakaSinu 157, 282 
Madhurattha-vildsinx, 109 ft., 125 
Magadha, 20-1 
M&gama, 32 
M&gha, 206 

Maha-bodha (tfcera), 174, 205 
Mahabodhi-varpsa, 143, 157, 236, 

255-6, 282 

„ „ - atthakatha , 133, 159 

Jfahfi-kaoc&yana, 89, 180 
Mah&k&la, 256 
Maha-Kaasapa-carita, 314 
Mah&megha-vapa, 27 
Mahfia&ga {them), 52 
f , (king), 27, 255 


Mah&n&ma (author), 131, 136 139 ft., 
144 

„ (king), 76, 81, 96 
Mahananda {them), 35 
Maha-netta-pasada-mfila, 253-4 
Maha-netra vihara, 248 

Mahd-nuldesa , 117, 141 
96 

M a ha-nipala - rannana, 230 
„ - nirutti , 180 
„ - pa ccari -atthakatha, 91 

Mahariftha, see Ariftha 
Mahaniha (nun), 136 
Mahasena (king), 58 ft., 137 
Mahasami, 77 

A1 aha - salt pa tthd na-sutta , 285 
„ -sihandda-sutta , 229 
Mahasiva (them), 126 
Maha-sudassana-sutta, 268 
Mfthftamwtrm (//tcro), 48 

Mahathftpa, 35, 49, 217 
Mahatissa (them), 37, 41, 42, 51, 126 
Maha-vaifim , 6, 131 ft., 158, 236, 
255, 284, 310 
Mahavaipsa (dynasty), 63 
Maha-varrimtlhakatha , 133, 144 
Mah&vaipsaka-Tissa (thera), 126 
Maha-vamsa-tika , 45, 132, 134, 139, 
142, ft. 217, 225, 255 
„ *msfu, 161, 181 
Maha-vihara, 52, 57 ft., 65, 69, 70, 
76, 91, 113, IV, 153, 177, 
185, 194, 196, 210, 224, 
257, 284, 305 
„ -vijitavl (thera), 180 
Malia-idnaya-sangaha-pakarana, 191 
Mahayana, 53 

Maha-yasa (or Revata), 180, 199, 221 
Mahila (nun), 136 

Mahinda, 20-1, 23, 26, 65, 135, 138 

Mahiipsfaaba, 125, 128 
Maitrl-mah&-s&mi, 219, 24 2, 248, 
253 

Majibika (thera), 50 
181 

Malabars, the, 206, 238, 249 
Maliyadeva, 37, 126 
Manavamma, 170 
MAAg Rlfl. (thera), 223, 248 
Manisara-mahjusa, 204 
Manoratha-puram, 95, 192 
Maricavatti-parivepa, 154 
Matt&bhaya, 27 
Matvakniexi, 152, 164 
MSyMnniio, 266 

Mayfira (poet), 159, 236 
„ (Mora)-Parivepa, 71 
Medh&naada, 11, 230, 312 



INDEX 


325 


Megha-duta , 251 
Meghavappa, 65, 68, 208 
Meghavapp&bhaya, 61 

Mehenavara-varjisa, 240 
Metteyya (Buddha), 161 
Metteyya-vastu , 226 
Mihintale Inscription, 46 
Milinda-panha , 85, 161, 284, 303-4 
Moggallfina, Culla (king), 151, 227 
„ Dalla (king), 140, 153 
„ {them), 76, 171, 179 if., 
186 if., 197, 199, 205 
Moggallana-saddattha-ratnakara , 205 
MoggaUdyana-vyakarana , 179 if., 186 
if., 204, 231 

„ - panjikd-pradipa , 251 

Moha-vicchedanl , 160, 179 
ukha-matta-dipani , 179 

Mukh&mattaka, 205 
Mfila (minister), 169 
Mula-sikkhu , 76 
MfUasoma-vihara, 168 
Mula-fika (on Abhidhamma), 210 
Mulgirigala vihara, 253 
Muller, Edward, 77 
Munigunalaiikara, 282 
Mufasiva (king), 19 

N 

N&ga, Cora (king), 48 
Nagamitta (nun), 136 
fiagasfila (them), 154 
A&gasena, 285 
Nalaka (Kaccana), 181 
Nalafa-dhatu-varfisa ( also see Lalata-) 
255 

NaUGrutun (minister), 250 
Nama-mala, 252, 310 
Nama-rupa-pariccheda , 169 ff., 173, 
202, 204 

„ - samdsa , 156 

Namavaliya, 250 

A&pabhi-vaipsa, 179 
ft&paratana, 219, 284 
fi&pav&ra, 189 

Bduavimala-Tissa, Ambagahapitiye, 

309 

ft&pissara, Mahagoda, 224, 306, 316 
Nandicakka, 269 
NaxLodayarfi , 81, 84 
Narendra-siipha, 274 
Nava-vimala-buddhi, 173 
Netti-ppakaraq,a, 114, 180, 182, 184 
Nidana-kathd, 120, 158 
New Testament, Pali translation, 310 
Niddesa ( see also Mahfi-Niddesa), 89 
Nigapthas, the, 41 
Nikftya, Amarapura, 309 


Nikayas, reconciliation of, 166 
N ikdya-sangraha, 241-2 ff. 
Nissandeha, 214 

Nissanka AlakeSvara, see Alakes- 
vara 

Nissaya-tthakatha, 205 
Niyamaka (director), 230 
Nuns, the, 136, 165 
Nyasa , 179 

O 

Okandapola vihara, 244 
Okandapola-sanne, 244, 284 
Olcott, Col. Henry Steele, 301 ff. 
Oriental Studies, Committee on, 312 

P 

Pabandha-siromatii, 313 
Pada-rupa-siddhi, see Rupa-siddhi 
„ - sddhana , 187, 205, 211, 251 
Padasiddhi-sanne, 244 
Padavatara , 190 
Padmavatl-parivepa, 248 
Padmdvatl-vastu , 226 
Padya-cudamarii , 100 n. 
Pajja-madhu, 220, 222 
Pal&batgala vihara (see Putabhatta- 
sela) 

Pd li multa ka - vinaya ■ vinicchaya, 191 

Pallarama, 42 
Paipsupabbata vihara, 247 
Panadura Controversy, 30 1 
Pahca-parivepa-adhipati, 215 
Pahca-ppakara^a , 210 
Panjika-pradipa , 186, 222, 251 ff. 
Pandiyans, the, 17 
Papdukabhaya, 19 
Papduvasudeva, 17-8 
Pansiya-panas-jataka, 127 
Papahca-sudani , 95, 192, 315 
Parakrama (minister), 127, 208 
„ Papdita, 218 

Par&krama-Bahu, Maha-thera , 236 
„ „ the Great, 175 ff. 

„ „ of Dadtbadeniya, 

207, 213 

„ „ Of Kotte, 247 

„ „ of Kurupegala, 

127, 232 

Pdrdkumbasirita, 251 

Paramadhamma - cetiya - parivepa, 

231, 311 

Paramar&ja, (king), 245 
Paramattha-dipa , 156 

„ - dxpanl , 98, 114 n. 

„ - jotika , 95 

„ -mahjusd, 113 

„ - vinicchaya , 169, 173 ff., 

205 



326 


INDEX 


Parami-maha-salaka , 242 
Parahgi-hatane, 270 
Paravi-sandesa, 251 
Parittarp , 75, 282, 308 n. 
Paritlatthakathd , 81 
Parker, 39 

Parupapas, the, 179, 189 
Pas-mula-mahasami, 215 
Patimokkha, 247 

Patisambhidd-magga, 145, 217 
Patia-n ikkujja r? - kamma , 1 53 

Pattini, worship of, 50 
Payoga-siddhi, 221, 230 ff. 
Petakopadesa, 85 
Peta-vat { Peta-vatthu ), 236, 316 
Pindapatika, 280 
Phussadeva, 126 
Pilimatalauve, 288 
Pipdapdtika-Tissa {them), 229 
Pirit-pota, 75 

Pitaka-ttaya , Sinhalese translation 
71, 73, 81 

„ - ttaya-lakkhapa-gandha , 189 

Pitaka ttha-main , 191 
Piyadassi (Mem), 187, 205 

Piyatissa, Vidurupola, 314 
Pliny, 64 
Polonnaruva, 178 

Pordna, 92 n. 

Portuguese in Ceylon, 259 ff. 
Pratir&jadeva-papflita, 233 
Prati rajaparivepa, 223 
Prinsep, 5, 130 
Printing in Ceylon, 303 ff . 
Pujdvaliya, 35, 96, 109, 170 
Putabhattasela vihara, 214, 240, 
242-3, 248 

R 

Raghu-varp&a , 236, 313 
Rfihula, 141, 233 

„ firl, 171, 186, 205, 248-9, 
250 ff. 

R&jadhir&ja-siipha, 287 
Rajagaha Council, 46 
Raja-guru, 209, 283 
R&jaguru-Vanaratana Sangharaja, 
248 

Rftjamur&ri, 127 
R&ja-ratnakara , 213 
R&jasixpha I, 4, 266 
„ H 270 ff. 

Rdj&valx, 63, 131, 149 
„ salvqraha, 131 
Rahkhadga (Arakkan), 269, 274 
Rimardevald, 289 
R&ma-sandesa, 289 
R&mddhipati (king), 256 


Ramanna-desa, 166, 257 
Rambha Vihara, 205 
Rambukvelle Thera , 288-9 
Ranasgalle Thera, 253 
Rasa-vdhini , 129, 162, 210, 223 ff., 
230, 247 

Ratanapala {them), 276 
Ratana-pasada, 52 
Ratanasdra, Kahave, 306 
Ratana-mtta , chanting of, 75 
Rain amati -pa hji kd -t Ikd , 1 90 
Ratna^rijnapa, 168, 190 
Ratna-matipada, 168 
Rafthapala, 224 

Rennaissance, the Buddhist, 301 ff. 
Revata or Mahayasa, 77 
Revate, 80, 83, 109 
Rayi-gama (Rajagama) Vihara, 247 
Ridi-vihara, 252 
Rohapa, 22 

„ legends of, 255 
Rome, 64, 67 

Royal Asiatic Society, Ceylon Branch, 

306-7 

Rucananda (nun), 136 
Rupti-mfild, 281 
Rupdrupa-vibhdga , 108, 202 
Rupa-siddhi, 180, 182, 220, 231, 283 
Ruvan-mala , 250 
Ruvan-vali-dagoba, 35 

S 

Sabdartha-cinta, 168 
Sacca-sa hkhepa, 112, 205, 217 

„ „ -nava-tlkd, 200, 202 ff. 

„ - vibhanga , 89 

Sacred and Historical Books of 
Ceylon , 6 

Sacred Tooth, 63, 65 ff. 
Sad-bha$a-parame6vara, 250 

Sadda-mald , 283 
„ -niti, 185, 197 
„ - sattha , 187 

Saddhamma-jotipala (Chapata), 185 
„ -ff&pa, 199 

Saddhamma-ppajjolikd, 117 

„ sangaha, 10, 138, 156, 

170, 193, 245 ff. 
Saddhamma-tilaka vihara, 240 
Saddhammopdyana , 212, 311 

„ - viggaha , 212 

Saddhamma-ratandvali , 97 
„ - vatpsa , 136-7 

Saddharmdlafikaraya, 226, 240, 
243-4 

Saddharma-ratnakara, 96, 253 
Saddharmovddnsaivjraha, 284 



INDEX 


327 


Saddhd-Tissa, 39 

Sadhucaritodaya , 247 
Sagala Thera, 50 
Sagalikd Sisterhood, 165 n. 
Sagaliyas, the, 56 6., 62 
Sagaramatl (Sdriputta), 190 ff., 197 
Sahassa-tittha Ordination, 228 
Sahassa-vatihu-atthakatha , 133, 225 
„ „ - ppakararta , 128, 226 

Saiiphalakas, the, 69 
Sakala-vidya-cakravarti, 218 
Salalihini-sande&a, 162, 251 
S&li, Prince, 225 
Samanta-kata-vunnand 228, 233 
„ - pdsddikd , 14, 52, 84, 93-4, 

96, 98, 158, 178, 192, 215 
Sambandha-cintd, 197, 199, 204, 284 
Samudragupta, 68 

Sammohu-ndsini, 31JJ 

„ - vinodanl , 92, 98, 210 

Samudda (nun), 136 
Samyuktdgama, 128 
Samyulta-nikdya-atthakathd, 316 
Sandesa poems, 251 
Sandhi-kappa, 180, 244 
SaiigJtardja-vata, 281 n. 
Sangarajottama - sadhu - caritaya, 

281 n. 

Sa&gha, Banks in Ceylon, 228 
Sadghabadra, 95 
Sanghabodhi, King, 52 ff., 218 
Sanghamitta (monk), 57 
Sanghamittd (then), 24, 137, 240 
SaPgh&nandi, 180 

Sahghap^ 81 

Sangharakkhita, 78, 126, 186, 197, 
209 

SaAghikagiri Vih&ra, 152 

Safigiti-suttanta, 89 
Sl^hi (nun), 136 

RaAkh>ptlft 1 109 

Saiikhepa , 243 

„ - atthakathd , 92 

„ - vannana , 197, 201 

Sannipftta, 128 
Santana (them), 274 
Sanskrit in Ceylon, 74-5, 148, 168, 
234 

Sapnmal-knm&ra, 248 
Sarapaftkara, fHiita, 157, 160, 215, 
222, 224, 244, 279 ff. 
S&rattha-dipani, 192-3, 258 
Sarasi-g&ma-miUa ( see also Vilgam- 
mtUa), 253 

Sdrattha-maftjusd, 192 
Sdr&rtha-saiigraha, 71, 222, 282 
Sdra-sailkfepa, 284 


Sdrattha-sdlini, 200 

„ -sahgaha, 222, 229 

„ - vilasini ( Susadda-siddhi ), 

200 

Sdriputta (author), 109, 168, 173, 
186, 189 ff., 193-5, 203,. 207 
Sasana, divisions in Ceylon, 229 
Sdsana-varjisa , 85 

„ - vaqisa-dlpa , 10, 311 

Savul-sandesa , 208 
Selantarayatana (Galaturu-mula) 
Thera , 197, 242, 254 
Sena, King, 155, 164 
Senalanka dhikara, Senerat, 240 
Senapati-mula, 254 
Seruvila (Seruv&vila), 188, 254, 256 
Shin-sau-bu, Queen, 256 
Siam, King of, 303, 309 
Siamese monks in Ceylon, 278 
Sidut-satigard, 223, 234 
Siddhattha (them), see also Dhamma- 
dinna, 229, 253, 289 
„ Tibbofuvave, 284 
Slhagiri vihara, 140 
Sihala-atthakatha , 14, 133 
„ „ -maha-vaipsa, 45 

„ - dipa-vatthu , see Rasa-vahini 

„ -sidda-lakkhana, 223 
Sihala-sangha, in Burma, 197, 200 
Sikha-karavbi, 216 
Sikkhdpada-valahjani, 216 
Sikha-valanda and - Vinisa , 216 
Silakala, 227 
Silameghasena, 152, 168 
„ -vappa, 153 

Sflavaxpsa (monk), 237 
Sima (boundaries), 257, 269 
„ -hatha, 133 
„ - lakkharui-dipani , 311 
Slmalaiikdra, 202 

„ sangaha , 258 
„ -tikCf, 202 
Sima-safikara-chedani, 251 
Sin gu, King of Ava, 191 
Sinhalese language, 72, 234 
Sirinivasa, king, 84, 96 
„ Malwatte, 289 

SirikuMa, King, 96 
Siyabas-lakara, 152, 167 
Sivala (nun), 136 
Siyamopasampada-vata , 284 
Somadevi, 169 
Sona, 61 

Srbgdm-rasa-ratna-m&ld, 285 

Siva (Maha-), 44 
Sivalft (nun), 136 
Sthavira School, 69 
Subhtyitaya, 268 



328 


INDEX 


Subhilti {Thera), 10-11, 252, 310 
Subodhalaiikara , 78, 199, 204 
Sudhamma (nun), 136 
Svdhira-mukha-rmndana , 283 
sulu-bodhi-vamsa, 160 
Sum&na (nun), 136 
Sumahgala, 108, 173, 200 ff., 204, 
230 

„ Hikkaduve, 142, 233, 

245, 304 ff. 

„ Tibbotuvave, 142 

„ Hlnatikumbure, 284 

„ Kunkunave, 288 

Su man ga lu - pasada nl , 204 
„ -vilasiniy 90, 95 

Sumedha (Thera) of Cuttagama, 247 
„ 201 

Surnedha -kaiha, 133 
Sunanda Thera , 289 

Sunetradevi Parivepa, 247-8, 254 
Suratissa, 31 
Sflriyagoda Thera , 279 
Surya-sataka , 159, 236 
Susaddasiddhi , 200, 284 
Suttas, translations of, 308 ff. 
Sutta-nipata-atthakatha , 124 

T 

Tamba-(mani)panni, 16, 110 
Tamils in Ceylon, 31, 147, 164 
Tanaslva (minister), 41 
Tangutta-vahka-parivepa, 224 
Tela-kataha-gatha, 162 
Theosophical Society, 302 ff . 
Thera-vada-parampara, 29, 37, 257 
Thera vada Nuns, 136 
Theriya Nikaya, 4, 53, 60, 152 
Thftp&rama, 56, 62, 186 
Thupa-varpaa , 204, 216 ff., 255 
Tika , 192 ff., 210, 248 
Tika-gyau, 200 
Tika-hla , 200 
Tikiri Bahd&ra, 266 
Tipitaka-pariyatti-dhara, 156 
Titth&rama, 19, 41 
Tipefakis, 46 
Tisarasandesa , 253 
Totagamu-nimitta. 251 
Totagamuvd Vih&ra, 253, 265 
Tumour, George, 5-6, 66, 130, 131 

U 

IJdaku-kkhepa-sImd, 269 
Udumbara-giri, 176, 186, 201 ff., 213 
TJlakudaya-devi, 250 
Upalantara-mfila them , 254 
Up&li Maha-thera , 44, 46, 278 
Upasampadd, revival of, 257, 269, 
274, 276 ff., 308 ff. 


Upasena, 117, 141, 144 
„ Kodagoda, 313 
Upasika vihara, 28 
Upatapassi (Gatara Parivepa), 253 
Upatissa (Araha), 86 

„ (author), 143, 159, 160 

„ (king), 75 
Upham, Edward, 5 
Uposatha-arama, 284 
Uragapura, 106 
Ussiliya-Tissa, 56 
Uttaiajxva, 185, 197 
Uttara vihara, 91, 134 
X] Itara-vihara-atthakatha , 133, 144 
„ „ - maha-vamaa , 133, 134 

„ - vinicchaya , 109 

„ „ -pika, 202 

Uttaramfila Nikaya, 170, 186, 250 
Uttaro)a Monastery, 170 ff. 

Uttiya, 30 

V 

Vahisvara (Vacissara ?), 217 
Vacissara, 108-9, 155, 174, 202, 217, 
244, 250 

Vajirabuddhi-tfka , 258 
Yaitulya-pitaka, 53, 62 

Viatulya-vada, 3, 56, 147, 234 
Vajjiputta Nikaya, 42 
Vamanta-pabbata, 126 
Vamsattha-ppakasim , 142, 145 
Vanaratana of Amaragiri, 240 
„ Mahasami, 248, 254 

„ Tissa, see Ananda 

Vana(Arafifla-)vasi fraternity 210 ff., 
223 

Vasabha, 49 
Vasag , 155 n. 

Vasubandhu, 68 
Vata-dagS, 56 

Vaftagamapi (VaJagam-abS), 41, 169, 

225, 246 

Vattala-g&ma, 230 
Vedeha Thera , 129, 203, 210, 214, 
222 ff. 

Vepulla-buddhi of Pagan, 199 
Vessagiri Inscription, 45 
Vephud&sa, 107 
Vesall Council, 122 
V&tt&vS Thera , 253 
Vibhaiiga , 89 
Vld&gama Them , 247 
Vidy&laAkara-parivepa, 252 
Vidyodaya-parivepa, 305 
Vihara-mah&devl, 32 
Vijaya (king), 15-16, 18 

„ -Bfihu, 151, 164, 184, 186, 207, 
229-30, 300 



INDEX 


329 


Vijaya-Bahu-pariveoa, 230, 248 
„ -R&jasiipha (king), 274 ff. 
Vijayasundararama, 209 
Vikrama-Rajasiipha, 288 
Tilgam-m&la-maha-thera, 158-9, 
171, 236, 253 
Vimalabuddhi, 180, 204 
Vixnala-dhamma-suriya. 268 
Vimalasara (thera), 10,311 
Vimala-vilasint , 114 n. 

V (man-vat ( Vimana-vatthu), 236 
Yimdm-vatthu translation, 276 
V imati-cchexlani, 160 
„ -mnodani, 179, 258 
Vimutti- magga, 87 
Vinaya-dhara, 46 
Vinaya-garithi-pada , 189 
„ - maha-saiigaha , 191 

„ - sangaha , 190, 195, 258 

„ „ - pakarana , 191 

Vinayatthakathd , 133, 258 


V i nayalt lui-mahjusa , 20 1 
Vinayartha-samuccaya , 202 
Vinaya-vinicchaya, 78 

„ „ - tiled , , 202, 214 

„ „ • sanne . , 106, 258 

Viraumha-pratiraja- (minister), 233 
Viravikkama (king), 267 
Visuddhi-magga , 82, 84-5, 113, 161, 
172, 214, 217 
Voharaka-Tissa, 50 
Vutta-mala, 247 

Vuttamald’sande8asataka t 253 ff. 
Vutlodaya, 197 ff. 


W 

Writing in Ceylon, 44-5 


Y 

Yakkhaddi Lena, 237 
Ye-din (monk), 200 
Y oga-ratnukara, 215 
„ -r inicchaya, 202 



Printed by Thuppahigae Earnest Almeida at Saman Press ( The New Asia 
Trading Company Ltd.,) No 1 , Dehiwala Road, Maharagama , for 
Messrs M. D. Gunasena & Co., Ltd . Norris Road, Colombo. 



