PALI.TJEXT SOCIETY 

Translation Series 

{Extra Suhscri^hon this is noia fixed at 10s. per annum.) 

VOLUMES ALREADY PUBLISHED: 

1. Psalms of the Early Buddhists, Part I., Psalms of thk 
Sisters, translated from the Therl-gdthd. By Mrs. Rhys Davids, 
DXitt., M.A., Fellow of University College, •London. 1909. 
Price 10<?. net. 

2. Cojipendium of Philosophy, being a translation of the 
Ahhklhammattha-mngalia. By Shwe Zan Aung, B.A. Revised 
and edited by Mrs. Rhys Davids. 1910. Price 10^. net. 

3. The Mahavamsa ; or, Tke Great Chronicle of Ceylon. 
Translated into English by Wilhelm Geiger, Ph.D., Professor of 
Indo-Germanic Philology at Munich University ; assisted by 
Mabel Haynes Bode, Ph.D. 1912. Price 10«?. net. 

4. '* Psalms of the Early Buddhists; Part II., Psalms of jhk 
Brethren, translated from the Theragatha^ with excerpts from 
the unpublished Commentary by Dhammapala. By Mrs. Rhys 
Davids. 1916. Price 10^. net. 

5. Points of Controversy, or Subjects of Discourse, translated 
from the Kath^-Vatthu^ with notes from the Commentary, By 
Shwe Zan Aung and Mrs. Rhys Davids. 1915. Price 10^. net. 

6. Manual of a Mystic, translated from the anonymous Pali- 
Singhalese MS., published (PTS, 1896) as* A YogdvacharcCs 
Manual^ by F. L. Woodward, M.A., Principal of Mahinda College, 
Galle. 1916, Price 10^. net, 

7, 10, 16, 16. The Book of the Kindred Saying’s, I.*IV., being 
a translation of Samyutta Nikdya^ I.-IV. By Mrs. Rhys Davids 
and F. L. Woodward. 1917-28. Price 10^, net each, 

8, 9, The Expositor, Vols. I. and U., being a translation of the 
Atthasalmu By Pe Maung Tin, B.Litt, M,A, ’^920-21, Price 
10,5, net each, 

11, The Path of Purity, L, being a translation of the Visuddhi 
Magga of Buddhaghosa. By Pe Maung Tin. 1923. Price 
10^. net 

12. A Desig’nation of Human Types. Translated from the 
Puggala-Pannatti. By B. C. Law, Ph.D., M.A., B.L. 1924. 
Price 10s. net. 

14, 15. (Sacred Books of the Buddhists, Vols. V., VI.) 
Further Dialog’ues of the Buddha, I., IL Transited from 
the Majjliima-Nikdya. By Lord Chalmers, G.C.B. .£1 Os, Od. 



iiali 

Translation Series, No. 17 
(Extra Subscription) 


THE 

PATH OF PURITY 

BEING 

A TRANSLATION OF 

BUDDHAGHOSA’S VISUDDHIMAGGA 

BY 

PE MAUNG TIN, M.A. B.Litt. 

PROFESSOR OF ORIENTAL STUDIES, 

UNIVERSITY OF RANGOON 


PART 11. 

OF CONCENTRATION 


OLoitbou 

PUBLISHED FOR THE PALI TEXT SOCIETY 

BY 

THE OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS, AMEN CORNER, E.C 

AND AT 

NEW YORK, TORONTO, MELBOURNE, AND BOMBAY 



PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BT 
BILLING AND SONS, LTD., GUILDFORD AND ESIJER 



CONTENTS 


PART II.— CONCENTRATION 

■CHAPIER P^lGE 

III. Exposition of the Acceptance op the Subjects 

OF Meditation - * - 97-137 

1. concentration - - - - 97^ 

2. THE TEN IMPEDIMENTS - - - 105 

3. CONDUCT . - . . 118 

4. THE FORTY SUBJECTS OF MEDITATION - 129 

IV. Exposition of the Earth Device -• - 138 

1. the eighteen faults of a monastery 138 

2. THE TENFOLD SKILL IN ECSTASY - 149 

V. Exposition of the Eemaining Devices - 196 

II. the water-device - - 196 

III. THE heat-device - - - 197 

IV. THE AIR- DEVICE - - - 198 

V. THE BLUE (-GREEN) DEVICE - - 198 

Vf. THE YELLOW DEVICE - - - 199 

VII. THE RED DEVICE - - * - 199 

VIII. THE WHITE DEVICE - - - 200 

IX. THE LIGHT- DEVICE - - - 200 

X. THE SEPARATED SPACE-DEVICE - - 201 

VI. Exposition of the Subject of Meditation on 

THE Foul 205 

VIL ^Exposition of the Six x\,jiuujLbjuciiujNb - 226 


V 



CONTENTS 


'chapter page 

VIIL* Exposition of the Subjects for Eecollection - *264 

RESPIRATION-MINDFULNESS - - - 305 

THE SIXTEEN BASES OF MINDFULNESS AS TO 

RESPIRATION . - - - 305 

PEACE-RECOLLECTION - - . - 337 

Exposition of the Divine States - 340-375 

1. THE DEVELOPING OF LOVE - - 340 

2. THE DEVELOPING OF PITY - - 361 

3. THE DEVELOPING OF SYMPATHY - - 363 

4. THE DEVELOPING OP EVEN-MINDEDNESS - 364 

5. THE SPECIFIC DISCOURSE - - 365 


X. Exposition of the Formless - - 376-394 

I. THE SUBJECT OF MEDITATION ON THE 

SPHERE OF INFINITE SPACE- - *376 

-II. THE SUBJECT OF MEDITATION ON THE 

SPHERE OP INFINITE CONSCIOUSNESS 382 

III. THE SUBJECT OF MEDITATION ON THE 

SPHERE OP NOTHINGNESS - - *384 

IV. THE SUBJECT OF MEDITATION ON THE 

SPHERE OF NEITHER PERCEPTION NOR 
NON-PERCEPTION - - - 386 

V. THE PARTICULAR DISCOURSE - - 391 

XL Exposition of Concentration 395-431 

1. DEVELOPMENT OF THE PERCEPTION OF RE- 

VULSION FROM FOOD - 395 

2. DEVELOPMENT OF THE DETERMINATION OF 

THE FOUR ELEMENTS - • - ' - 402 

XII. Exposition of Psychic Powers - 432-471 

1. THE TEN HINDS OF PSYCHIC POWER - ‘ 438 

2. THE VARIOUS MODES OF PSYCHIC POWER- 445 


VI 



CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAG? 

Xltl. Exposition op Higher Knowledge - • 472-504 

1. DISCOURSE ON DEVA- HEARING - - 472 

2. DISCOURSE ON KNOWLEDGE ENCOMPASSING^ 

others’ thoughts - - - 474 

3. ^DISCOURSE ON KNOWLEDGE OP RECOLLEC- 

TION OP PREVIOUS EXISTENCES - 476 

4. DISCOURSE ON KNOWLEDGE OF THE PALL'-^ 

AND RISE OF BEINGS • 490 




THE. PATH OF PURITY 


Part II 

COJNCENTRATION 

[84] CHAPTER III 

EXPOSITION OF THE ACCEPTANCE OF THE SUBJECTS 
OF MEDITATION! 

Now because be, wbo is estabbsbed in tbis morality, cleansed 
by qualities sucb as fewness of wishes, wbicb have thus been 
fulfilled in observing the ascetic practices, should develop 
concentration {samadhi) shown under the head o£ mind {citta) 
in the expression. 

The man discreet, on virtue planted firm, 

In intellect and intuition trained r 

• ^ 

and because it is not easy to understand, much less to 
develop that concentration, since it has been set forth so briefly, 
therefore,*to show it in detail and the manner of developing it, 
the following questions are asked:— 

1. What is concentration 1 

2. In what s«®nse is it concentration ? 

3. "What are its characteristics, its essence, its manifestation, 
its proximate cause ? 

4. How many kinds of concentration are there ? 

5. What is its corruption ? 

6. And what its purification ? 

7. How should it be developed ? 

8. WTiat are the advantages of developing concentration ? 

! Karn^taUhana (ht. place or occasion of work), translated in the 
Expositor and the Cofnpendium of Philosophy “ stations of exercise.” 
2 See Part I, p. 1. 


97 


7 



98 


The Path of Purity 

And tljese are the answers : — 

1 What is concentration ? 

Concentration is manifold and of Various kindsd In trying 
to explain all that, the answer might not fulfil the intended 
meaning, and moreover it might lead to wavering, therefore 
we say with reference to what is intended here: — concentra- 
tion is collectedness ^ of moral thought. 

2. In what sense is it concentration ? 

It is concentration in the sense of placmg well (sam-ddhdna). 
What IS this concentration? It is said to be the placmg, 
setting {adhdna, thapana) of mind and mental properties fit- 
tingly and well in a single object. [85] Therefore that state, 
-by the strength of which mind and mental properties are 
placed in one object fittingly and well, without wavering, 
without scattering, should be known as concentration. 

3. What are its characteristics ^ its essence, its mamfestcition, 
its proximate cause 

The characteristic of concentration is not-wavering."^ Its 
essence is to destroy wavermg. Its mamfestation is not- 
shaking. From what has been said that^'^ The mind of the 
happy one is concentrated^^ h.si.'ppmess (or ease) is its proximate 
cause. 

4. How many hinds of concentration are there ? 

(i) It IS of one kind through its characteristic of not- 
wavermg {monad 1). 

(ii) It IS of two kinds as access and ecstasy {dyad 1); like 
wise as worldly and transcendental {dyad 2), as being with 
rapture and without rapture {dyad 3); and as accompamed 
by ease and accompamed by mdifierence {dyad 4). 

^ Some prefer to road nana^j^akdrato, i.e. “ manifold because of its 
various kmds.” 

2 Or ‘ onepomtedness ’ (ekaggatd) as the term is rendered m Expositor 
156, 190, 331. Of. B,Ps,E,, § 11. 

3 Cf. Expositor 157. 

^ Or confused, distracted, disturbed: avikichepa, lit. “pot casting 
about.” Note that the Pali is a transitive term, ours intransitive. 

® In formula of Third Jhana, e.g. Digha Nihdya i, 75 etc. 



.III. — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation « 99 

/ill) It is of three kinds as inferior, middling^ superior 
{triad 1); hkewise as being with applied thinking and sustained 
thinking and so on {triad 2) ; as accompanied by rapture and 
others {triad 3), as limited, subhme, infinite {triad 4). 

(iv) It IS of four kinds as of painful progress and sluggish 
intuition and so on {tetrad 1); likewise as limited (in power) 
and with a limited object and so forth {tetrad 2); by way of 
the four Jhana-factors {tetrad 3); as partaking of wor^^ening 
and so on {tetrad 4) ; by way of the realm of sense and the rest 
{tetrad 5); and as the donnnating influence {tetrad 6). 

(v) It is of five kinds by way of the five Jhana-f actors in 
the Fivefold System {pentad 1). 

Of these, (i) the onefold division {monad 1) is evident in 
meamng. 

(ii) In the twofold division {dyad 1), collectedness of mind 
which is obtained by means of these ten (subjects of medita- 
tion), to wit: the six recollections, mindfulness of death, recol- 
lection of calm, perception of the abominableness of food, 
determining of the four elements, as well as thaf collectedness 
which comes before ecstasy and concentration — this is access- 
concentration. 

From what has»been said in such wise as: ‘‘ The preparation 
of the First Jhdna renders service to the Jhdna itself hy the re- 
lation of succession, that collectedness which comes immedi- 
ately after the preparation is ecstatic concentration. Thus 
it is twofold as access and ecstasy. 

In the second dyad, the collectedness of moral thought in 
the three plan^s^ is worldly concentration; the collectedness 
associated with the Noble Path is transcendental c(5ncentra- 
tion — thus it is twofold as worldly and transcendental. 

In the third dyad, the collectedness in the two Jhanas of the 
Fourfold.Systern^ and m the three Jhanas of the Fivefold 
System^ is concentration with rapture, [86] and that in the 
two remainmg Jhanas is concentration without rapture. 

^ OSihapatthdna, Qy. Should we read upamssaya for anmtara ? 
Cf. Mp.^Partii, 165. 

2 The worlds of sehse, of form, of the formless. 

3 On these two systems of classifying the Jhanas see Expositor 216 f. 



100 


The Path of Purity 

And access-concentration may be with or without rapture:— 
‘thus it^'is twofold as being with and without rapture. 

In the fourth dyad, the collectedi^ess in the three Jhanas 
of the fourfold System and in the four Jhanas of the Fivefold 
System is concentration accompanied by ease, and in the 
remaining Jhana the concentration is accompan^d by even- 
mmdedness.^ And access-concentration may be accom- 
paniecj. by ease or by even-mindedness — thus it is twofold as 
accompanied by eftse and by even-mindedness. 

(iii) In the first of the triads, concentration which is just ob- 
tained is inferior, that which is not developed too far is middling, 
that which is well developed and brought under control is 
superior: — thus it is threefold as inferior, middling, superior. 

In the second triad, concentration of the First Jhana 
together with the access-concentration is with applied and 
sustamed thinking; concentration of the Second Jhana in the 
Fivefold System is without applied thinking and with ]ust 
sustained thinking. For he who sees fault only in the applied 
thinking and^ot in the sustained thinking, and just desires 
the putting away of only the applied thinking passes the 
First Jhana; he gets concentration without applied thinking 
and with only sustained thinking. It is abput this that the 
above has been said. The collectedness m the Second Jhana 
and so on of the Fourfold System and in the three Jhanas 
beginning with the Third is concentration without applied or 
sustained thinkmg. Thus it is threefold as being with applied 
and sustained thinking and so on. 

In the third triad, the collectedness in the fi^st two Jhanas 
of the Fourfold System and in the first three of the Fivefold 
System is concentration accompamed by rapture; and that 
in the third and fourth respectively of the two Systems^ is 
concentration accompanied by ease. In the remainir^ Jhana^ 
it is accompanied by even-mindedness. And the access- 
concentration Js accompanied either by rapture and ease, or 
by even-mindedness. Thus it is threefold as accompanied 
by rapture and the rest. 

1 Or indifference {upehkha). 2 j^ead Tersveva as Tesu eva. 

® I.e. the last Jhana in either system. See B.Ps.E,, §§ 176 f. 



III . — Acceptance of the Subjects Meditation '*101 

•In the fourth triad, the collectedness in the accessrplane^ 
is limited concentration; that in the moral (consciousness) of 
the realms of form and bf the formless is subhme concentra- 
tion; that associated with the Noble Path is infinite concentra- 
tion. Thus it is threefold as limited, sublime, infinite. 

(iv) In the first of the tetrads there is concentration which 
is of painful progress and sluggish intuition, there is concentra- 
tion which is of painful progress and quick intuition, tllere is 
concentration which is of easy progress and sluggish intuition, 
there is concentration which is of easy progress and quick 
intuition.^ Herein, the Jhana-development which proceeds 
from the first resolve till the access of the particular Jhana 
arises is called progress. And the insight which proceeds 
from the access till the ecstasy is called intuition.^ And the 
progress is pamful to some. The meaning is that, from the 
abundant production of such opposing states as the Hin- 
drances,^ it is difificult, not pleasant to carry on. [87] To 
others, from there being no such opposition, i^ is easy. To 
some, again, intmtion is sluggish, weak, and of slow process ; to 
others it is quick, strong, and of swift process. 

Herein we shall next set forth what is fitting and is not 
fitting, prelinunafy works such as cuttmg off the impediments^ 
skilfulness in ecstasy. Of them, he who pursues what is not 
fitting is of painful progress and sluggish intuition. 'He who 
pursues what is fitting is of easy progress and quick intuition^ 
And he who in the preliminary stage to access pursues what 
is not fitting and in the subsequent stage to access pursues 
what is fitting; or who m the preliminary stage pursues what^ 
is fitting and in the subsequent stage pursues what is not fitting 
should be understood as of mixed progress and intuition. 
Further, the progress of one who, without accomplishing the 
preliminary works such as cuttmg off the impediments, applies 

^ T.e. in the uprising of consciousness at access-Jhana. For the 
uprising of consciousness is called “plane ” {bhumi, lit. ground, terrain)^ 
as being the place of origin of co-existent states. 

2 IS.Ps.E.y §§ 176-80. Vtbhanga 331 f. 

2 AbMnnd, more literally super-knowledge. 

^ The Five, presumably. Given in detail, below, Ch. IV on First 
Jhana. 



102f The Path of Purity 

^ • r r r r 

timself tQ, culture is painful. The reverse is easy progress. 
'Again, the intuition of one who does not perfect skilfulness 
in ecstasy is sluggish, and it is quick 'in one who perfects skil- 
fulness in ecstasy. Moreover, the classification according to 
craving and ignorance, and the chief reason of calm, and insight 
should be understood. Kamely, to one overcome by craving 
progress is painful;^ to one not overcome by cravtng it is easy . 
And to one overcome by ignorance intuition is sluggish; to one 
not so overcome it is quick. And he who has no past con- 
ditions for calm makes painful progress; one who has such 
makes easy progress. And one who has no past conditions 
for msight is of sluggish intuition; one who has such is of quick 
intuition. 

r Classification in respect of our lower nature*" and controlling 
faculties should also be understood. Namely, to one whose 
nature is acutely corrupt and whose controlling faculties are 
soft, progress is pamful and intuition sluggish. But to X)ne 
of keen controlling faculties, intuition is quick. To one with 
a mild lower nature and soft controlling faculties progress is 
easy and intuition sluggish. But to one of keen controlling 
faculties intuition is quick. Thus in progress and intuition 
the concentration of that person who attam^ to concentration 
by means of painful progress and sluggish intuition is said^ to 
be of painful progress and sluggish mtuition. In the remaining 
J^hxee clauses the same method is to be understood.^ Thus it is 
fourfold as of painful progress and sluggish intuition and so on. 

In the second tetrad there is concentration limited and 
^with a limited object, there is concentration lirnited and with 
an infimte object, there is concentration infinite and with a 
limited object, there is concentration infimte and with an 
infinite object. Of these, that concentration which, not being 
fit, is not able to become a cause for the next* higher "Jhana is 
[88] hmited.” But that which proceeds concerning a not- 
grown object is with a limited object. That which, being fit and 

^ Read duhhha'padd as duJckhd patipadd. 

^ Kilesd. On the ten kilesas see B,Ps.E,y § 1229 f. Together they 
may be so rendered (as used constantly in mediseval Pali). 

® On these details cf. Expositor 244 f. 



IJI, — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation 103 

well developed, is able to become a cause *of tbe next bigber 
Jbana is ‘‘ infinite.” And that wbicb proceeds cbnctoing 
an extensive object is '"^itb an infinite object.” And from 
tbe combination of tbe characteristics abeady mentioned tbe 
combined method should be understood. Thus it is fourfold 
as limited aiid.witb a limited object and so forth. 

In tbe third tetrad tbe First Jbana has five factors by way 
of applied and sustamed thinking, rapture, ease, concentra- 
tion, wbicb have all discarded tbe Hindrances. Next, tbe 
Second Jbana has three factors with tbe suppression of applied 
and sustained thinking. And then tbe Third Jbana has two 
factors with tbe elimination of rapture. And tbe Fourth 
Jbana, in which ease^ is put away, has two factors by way of 
concentration wbicb exists together with indifferent feeling.^ 
Thus tbe four kinds of concentration are factors of these four 
Jbanas. Thus it is fourfold by way of tbe four Jbana-factors. 

In tbe fourth tetrad there is concentration wbicb partakes 
of worsening, that wbicb partakes of stability, that wbicb 
partakes of distinction, that wbicb partakes otf penetration. 
Of these, tbe partaking of worsening is due to tbe frequent 
arising of opposmg states; tbe partaking of stabibty is due to 
the persistence ^^f that mindfulness wbicb is in conformity 
with concentration; tbe partaking of distmction is due to 
tbs attamment of a higher distinctive state; tbe partaking 
of pene*tration is due to tbe promptings of perception and 
attention associated with disgust. So it should be understood? 
As it has been said Perceptions and attention mixed^ with 
sensuality keep on prompting him who gets the First Jhdna — 
this is wisdom partaking of worsening. The mindfulness which* 
is in conformity with the First Jhdna stands stationary — this is 
wisdom partaking of stability. Where perceptions and attention 
associated with the absence of applied thinking"^ keep on prompt- 
ing, wisdom partakes of distinction. Where perceptions and 
attention associated with disgust and connected with dispassion' 
keep on prompting, wisdom partakes of penetration.^ And four 

'pahinasuhham upekkJia etc. 

^ Of ‘‘ even-miudedneas ” See above, p. 100. 

2 So the Tlkd. ^ I.e. in the second Jhana. 

5 'RQ3bd virdgupasamJiitd, ^ PatisambMddi,S5. 



■ 104, The 'Path of Purity 

also are the kinds ot concentration that are associated with 
that wisdom. Thus it is fourfold as partaking of worsening 
and so on. 

In the fifth tetrad there are four kinds of concentration: 
of the realm of sense, of the realm of form, of the realm of 
the formless, the unincluded,^ Of these, all the-^ollectedness 
at the access is concentration of the realm of sei^e. And the 
other ^three kinds of concentration are the collectedness of 
moral thought of d^he realm of form and so on. Thus it is 
fourfold by way of the realm of sense and the rest. 

In the sixth tetrad '' If monh, making desire-to-do the 
dominant influence, gets concentration, he gets collectedness of 
mind [89] — this is called desire-concentration. If a monk 
making energy , . . mind . . . investigation the dominant in- 
fluence gets concentration, he gets collectedness of mind — this is 
called investigation-concentration,^^^ Thus it is fourfold as the 
dominant influence. 

(v) In the pentad dividing the Second Jhana, as mentioned 
in the division of the tetrads,^ into two as a second (Jhana) 
which transcends just applied th in king, and a third which 
transcends both applied thinking and sustained thinking, we 
should understand five Jhanas, where the factors would make 
five kinds of concentration. Thus by way of the five Jhana- 
factors a fivefold nature should be rmderstood, 

r 5. What is rts corruption ? 6. And what its purification ? 

The answer here has been said in the Vibhanga. For there 
it is said Corrupting is a state that partakes of worsening. 
JPurifying^ is a state that partakes of distinction,''^^ Wherein 
perceptions and attention mixed with sense-desires keep on 
prompting him who gets the First Jhana — ^this is wisdom 
partaking of worsening. In this way a state partaking of 
worsening should be understood. Where perceptions and 
attention associated with applied thinking keep on prompting, 
wisdom partakes of distinction. In this way a state partaking 
of distinction should be understood. 

______ 

^ See Expositor 67. ^ y'iJfhahga 216-19. 

® The third tetrad, p. 103. ^ Vibhanga 343. 



III . — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation ^^105 

7. How should it he developed ? 

Here the method of developing that concentration which ’ 
is spoken of as being assMDciated with the Noble Path in ‘‘It 
is of two kinds as worldly and transcendental and so on ” 
(p. 98) is comprised in that of the developing of wisdom. For 
concentration is developed when wisdom is developed. There- 
fore we say nqthing separately as to how it should be developed. 
He who, having purified the precepts in the way akeady 
mentioned/ is established in well-purified* morahty, who if 
there have been (against) him any of the ten impediments, has 
cut it off and, having approacb:ed the good friend who gives 
him subjects of meditation, has accepted, among the forty 
subjects of meditation, that subject befitting his own conduct, 
he having forsaken that monastery which is unsuitable to. 
his concentration-culture and living in a suitable monastery 
should sever the minor impediments, and by not slackening 
the arrangement of the entire process of culture should develop 
that concentration which is worldly. This is in outline. 

Here is the detailed account: In what has beerf said in “ has 
cut off any of the ten impediments ” [90] these are the ten 
impediments: — 

Abode and family, the gains, the crowd and work the 
fifth, 

Wayiaring, kin, illhealth, the book and psychic power — 
these ten. 

Of these, (i) the “ abode ” itself is the abode as impediment. 
And the same<,with family and the rest. Of them, an inner 
room, a single cell, the whole monastery for the Orderis called 
an abode. 

This is not an impediment to all. But he who m regard to 
an abode Jails into anxiety over making repaks and so forth, 
or who has accumulated a bundle of personal belongings, or 
is interested in, enamoured of it for some reason or other — to 
him it is an impediment, not to another. Here is a story: — 

It ‘is said that two sons of good family left Anuradhapura 


1 In the fourth tetrad of the different kinds of virtue as explained on 
p. 19 of Part I. 



106 , The Path of Purity 

and in due course receivea oraination at Tliuparama. One^of 
them mastered the two Matikas^ and, having been in residence 
for five rainy seasons and performed the Pavarana ceremony 
(at the end of the rains), went to Pacinakhandaraji;^ the other 
remained where he was. He who had gone to Pacinakhanda- 
raji lived there a long time and became an Elder. He thought 
Pleasant and suitable is this place. Now I will tell my 
friend” He set forth and in due course entered Thuparama. 
Seeing him enter, ^n Elder who was of the same standing met 
him and taking his bowl and robe, carried out what was due. 
The Elder who was the guest entered the dwelling thinking 
'' Now my friend will send butter, molasses or drmks, for he 
has Hved long in this town.” Not getting anything during 
J}he night he thought early in the mornmg, Now he will send 
rice-gruel and food obtained from his supporters.” Not seeing 
that either he thought, There are none to send him any- 
thing. They will give him when he enters the village, I fancy.” 
And early in the morning he entered the village together with 
him. And iSie two of them going along the one street got 
just a ladleful of rice-gruel, sat in the sitting-hall and drank it. 
Then the guest thought I think there is no continual (offer- 
ing of) rice-gruel. Now at meal-time naen will be giving 
excellent food.” Then after they had gone round for alms at 
meal-time and eaten just what was obtained he said What, 
sir, do you live thus at all times '' Yes, my friend.” 

Sir, Pacinakhandaraji is a prosperous place. Let us go 
there.” The Elder [91] left the town by the south gate and 
took the road to Kumbhakara village. The oj}her said, Sir, 
do you take this road '2” Did you not, my friend, speak in 
praise of Pacinakhandaraji ?” But, sir, you who have lived 
so long in this place, do you not own any extra equipment 
No, friend. The bed couch belongs to the Orderj and that 
is laid by. There is none other.” But, sir, I have there a 
walldng-stick, an oil-bowl, a shoe-box ?” '' Have you, my 

^ Of Abhidbamma and Suttanta themes. See B.Ps E., 2ud ed. 
only, pp. cv f. 

^ See Mahdvamsa xxiii, 1, 5* Geiger's Trans, 155, n. 3 
® Or as we should say, “ have you then no luggage ?” 



HI . — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation '107 

friend, deposited so mucL. after staying there only o-ne ^ay 
“Yes, sir.” And lie becoming convinced in mind sainted 
the Elder and said “ Tcf such as you, sir, everywhere is as 
a forest dwelling. Thuparama is a fit place for the relics of 
the four Buddhas. In Lohapasada it is convenient to get a 
hearing of thS Law, and to visit the Mahacetiya and the Elders. 
It is, as if it were, in the tune of the Buddha. Do you abide 
just here.” On the followmg day he took his bowl and rofce and 
went by himself. To such an one the abode is no impediment. 

(ii) “Family” is either relatives or supporters. To some 
brother who lives very intimately with the family of his sup- 
porters it is an impediment in that he is happy when they are 
happy and so forth. Without the members of that family he 
does not even go to a monastery hard by to hear the Law% 
To some like the young brother, nephew of the Elder resident 
at Korandaka Monastery, even parents are no impediment. 
He, .it is said, went to Rohana^ to study. The mother, a lay- 
disciple, sister to the Elder, always asked the Elder for news of 
him. One day the Elder set out for Rohana thmking “ I will 
bring the lad.” And the lad too had left Rohana saying 
“ Long have I dwelt here. After seeing my Preceptor and 
learmng news of the lay-sister I will return.” And they met 
on the Ganga^ bank. The lad performed his duties to the 
Elder at j3he foot of a tree; and on being asked “ Whither goest 
thou ?” told him his mtention. And the Elder let him go^ 
saying “ Thou hast done well. The lay-sister asks con- 
tinually. And I have come for this very purpose. Go thou, 
but I will abide here for the rams.” [92] The youth reached 
the monastery on the day of the rains. A dwelling had been 
made by his father who came the next day and enquired “ Sir, 
to whom has our dwelhng been allotted ?” And on hearing 
that it was allotted to a young guest, he approached him and 
after greeting him said, “ Sir, there is a course for him who has 
come to reside in our dwelling for the rains.” “ What may it 
be, lay-brother?” “For three months he should take food 
in our house and after the Pavarana ceremony at the time of 

^ Geiger's Mahdvainsa Trans. 146, n. 2. 

2 See n. 6, p. 91 text. 



108 - 


The Path of Purity 

» • r • 

his gojing.away lie should take leave of us.” He consented 
' by remaining silent.^ And the lay-brother went home and 
said A worthy guest has arrived at our abode. We must 
wait on him attentively,” The lay-sister agreed saying '' Very 
well,” and made ready excellent food, hard and soft. And at 
meal-time the lad went to his paternal home. • ll?o one recog- 
nized him. There for three months he partook of their alms, 
and living finished his residence for the rains, took his leave. 
His kinsfolk said To-morrow you will go, sir,” and the next 
day fed hhn in the house, filled his oil-tube, gave him a lump 
of sugar and a new piece of *cloth, and said “ You may go, 
sir.” He thanked them and set out for Eohana. His pre- 
ceptor also having performed the Pavarana and coming from 
the opposite direction met him at the place just where they 
formerly met. At the foot of a tree, he performed his duties 
to the Elder who asked Well, Good Pace, didst thou see the 
lay-sister ?” Yes, sir,” he said and told him the whole 
matter. The Elder’s feet he washed with the oil, and he made 
a drink of the sugar for him. He also gave him the cloth and 
saluted him and departed, saying '' Eohana suits me, sir.” 
And the Elder came to the monastery and the next day 
entered Korandaka village. And the lay-sister thought Now 
my brother will come bringing my son,” and she stood con- 
stantly looking down the path. When she saw the Elder 
^coming alone she said, “ Methinks my son is dead ! The Elder 
comes alone,” and she fell down at his feet and cried in distress. 
The Elder comforted her saying “ Surely, out of fewness of 
wishes the lad has gone without making himself known J” [93] 
and aftef relating the whole story, took out the cloth from 
the bowl-bag and showed it. The lay-sister became calm and 
lay down on her breast facing the direction in which her son 
had gone and said, doing obeisance, “ Methinks it -was to a 
hvmg testimony of a monk like my son that the Blessed One 
preached the practice (prescribed m the) Eathavinita,^ 
Nalaka,^ Tuvataka"^ and Maha-ariyavamsa'”’ Suttas, in which 


^ Read tunMbhdvena. 

® Of Sidta-nipata hi, 11. 
^ Angutiara ii, 26-28. 


2 Cf^ MajgTiima 9, 145. 
- Ibid, iv, 14. 



III . — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation 109 

contentment witt tlie reqmsites ana ]oy in culture are sel 
forth. Though he ate for three months in the house Sf the 
mother who gave him bir^h, he could not say ‘ I am thy son, 
thou art mother V Oh ! the wonderful man !” To such 
an one even parents are no impediment, much less the family 
of supporters* 

(in) '' Gains ” mean the four requisites. How are they 
impediments ? Wherever a brother possessed of merit^goes, 
men give him the requisites with many* accessories.^ In 
thanking them and preaching the Law, he has no opportunity 
of doing the duties of a recluse.* From sunrise until the first 
watch there is no break in his social mtercourse. Again, even 
well after dawn, greedy almsmen come and say to him '' Sir, 
such and such a lay-brother, such and such a lay-sister, a^ 
minister or a minister's daughter wishes to see you.” Then 
get the bowl and robe, friend,” and he gets ready to go. 
Thus he is perpetually engaged. To him the requisites are an 
impediment. Hence he should forsake company and where 
they know him not, there he should walk atene. So the 
impediment is cut off. 

(iv) '' The crowd ” is either of Suttanta students or Abhi- 
dhamma students^ In giving lessons or putting questions to 
a crowd, he has no opportunities of doing the duties of a 
recluse. To him the crowd is an impediment. He should 
cut it ofi^thus: — if the monks have learnt much and but little 
remains, he should carry on to the end and then enter the'’ 
forest. If little has been learnt and much remains, [94] he 
should approach another teacher of a crowd withm the dis- 
tance of a league, not further, and say “ May the Venerable ’ 
One favour these with lessons and so forth ?” Failmg this he 
should avoid them saymg '' Friends, I have something to do. 
You may go where you please,” and he should do his own work. 

(v) Work ” means making repairs. In doing such work 
one has to know if carpenters and so on have been engaged or 
not, and to worry over what has been done and not done.^ 

^ E.g. presenting a bowl with an offering of alms. 

2 Bead hatdkate; cn* “ big and small matters ” as in phaldphale “ big 
and small fruits.” — Tlkd, 



110 


The Path of Purity 

Thus at all times it is an impediment. It should be cut-off 
in thi^ way: — If little remains to be done, he should finish it. 
If there be much to do and it pertains to the Order, he should 
make it over to the Order, or to those brothers who are the 
burden-bearers of the Order. If it pertains to himself, he 
should make it over to his own burden-bearers.. # Failing such 
persons, he should leave it to the Order and go away. 

(vi^ ‘‘ Wayfaring ” means going on a journey. If at any 
place somebody ts waiting to be ordained, or any of the 
requisites are to be received, and he cannot endure not to get 
them, then if, on going to tha forest, and performing the duty 
of a recluse he finds it difficult to suppress his will to go, he 
should go and finish what he had to do, and then use zeal in 
the duty of a recluse. 

(vii) Kin ’’ means, in the monastery, the teacher, the 
preceptor, a resident pupil, a personal pupil, fellow-brethren 
under the same teacher or preceptor as oneself; in the house 
it means mother, father, brother and so forth. When ’they 
get ill they are an impediment, which therefore one should 
cut off by ministering to them and making them well. Herein 
if the preceptor being ill does not recover quickly, he should 
be taken care of as long as life lasts. And .the same with the 
imtiation-teacher, the ordmation-teacher, a resident pupil, 
personal pupils one has ordained and initiated, and feliow- 
brethren under the same preceptor as oneself. But the teacher 
’ of paraphrasmg, the teacher of textual study, a pupil in para- 
phrasing, a pupil in textual study and fellow-brethren under 
the same teacher should be taken care of so lojig as the para- 
phrasing* and the textual study last. They should be taken 
care of beyond that stage by one who can do so. Parents 
should be tended^ hke the preceptor. Indeed, even if they are 
placed m royal authority, yet expect service from their son, 
[95] he should serve them. If they have ho medicine, he 
should give them his own. If he has none, he should seek 
for it m going round for alms and give it to them. But as for 
his brothers and sisters, he should compound medicine be- 
longing to themselves and give it to them^ If they* possess 


^ f)atijaggitahbam. 



m. — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation 111 

no. medicine, lie should give his own for the time being, and 
should take it when given afterwards, but should not press for 
it, if it is not given. He should not make medicme for, nor 
give it to, his sister’s husband, who is no kinsman. But he 
should give it to his sister, saying “ Give it to your husband.” 
And the samfe with one’s brother’s wife. But their sons being 
kinsmen, it is^proper to make medicine for them. 

(viii) ‘‘ Illhealth ” means any disease which may befajl and 
is an impediment. Therefore it should be ^ut off by medical 
means. If it is not relieved, even though he have taken 
medicine for some days, he should blame himself saying, '' I 
am not thy slave nor thy servant. Verily in nourishing thee 
I have suffered pain in this endless round of existence,” and 
so do the recluse’s duty. 

(ix) The book” means learning the scriptures. It is an 
impediment to one who is always engaged in learning 
and so on, not to another. Hereon are these stories: — 
They say that Reva the Elder, reciter of the Ma]]hima, went 
to the presence of Reva the Elder resident in Mal^a and asked 
for a subject of meditation. The Elder asked Eriend, of 
what kmd art thou in scripture ?” ‘‘I study the Majjhima, 

sir. ” “ Friend, the Maj jhima is hard to acqmre. While learn- 
ing the First Fifty, one comes to the next Fifty; while learning 
this, one comes to know the upwards of second Fifty. WTience 
IS thy subject of meditation to be ?” Sir, havmg got the 
subject of meditation m your very presence, I will not look at^ 
(the scriptures) again.” And he received it and without 
learning the scriptures for nmeteen years reached Saintship 
in the twentieth year. To the Brethren who came* to learn 
he said, '' Friends, for twenty years [96] I have not looked 
at the scriptures. However, I have made a study of this 
(the Majjhima).^ Begm^ !” And from the beginmng to the 
end he was never in doubt, not even about a smgle consonant. 

Naga, too, the Elder, resident at Karaliyagui, after having 
given up the scriptures for eighteen years, taught the monks 
the Dhatukatha.^ And to them, who were in concert with the 

^ Sbme read dgacchatha, “ come.” 

2 The third book of the Abhidhamma. 



112 The Path of Purity 

• e C e 

Elders residing in the villages (of Anuradha Town), not a single 
question came out of order. 

Again, in the Mahavihara, Tipitaha-Culahhaya the Elder, 
without learning the commentary, announced by beat of 
a golden drum: ‘'In the midst of an assembly of (scholars 
versed in) the five Nikayas I will discourse frcfm the three 
Pitabas/’ The Assembly of Brethren said, “^The version^ 
of wh-ich teachers is it ? Let him say the version of his 
own teacher. Wfe do not allow him to say otherwise.’’^ 
And his preceptor asked him, when he went to his 
presence, “ Friend, didst thou have this drum beat 
“ Yes, sn.” “ Why V “ I will interpret the scriptures, sir.’" 
“Friend Abhaya, how do the teachers say this passage?” 
“ They say it thus, sir.” The Elder said “ Humph !” and 
rejected it. Again in two other ways, three in all, he said 
“ They say thus, sir.” The Elder said “ Humph !” and rejected 
all, saying “ Friend, what thou didst say first is the way of the 
teachers. Not having learnt it from the mouth of the teachers, 
thou couldst hot establish it by saymg ‘ Thus say the teachers.’ 
Go thou to thine own teachers and hsten.” “ Where do I go, 
sh ?” “ Across the Ganga in Eohana District in mount 
Tuladhara Monastery dwells the Elder Mahadhammarakkhita® 
who knows the whole scriptures. Go to him.” “ Very well, 
sir,” — and he saluted the Elder, went with five hundred mo*nks 
to the presence of the Elder, saluted him and sat down. The 
Elder asked “ Why art thou come ?” “To hear the Law, 
sir.” “ Friend Abhaya, from time to time they put questions 
to me on the Digha and Majjhima, but for thirty years I have 
not looked at the rest. However, recite thou in my presence 
at night and in the day I will explain to thee.” He said “ Very 
well, sir,” and did so. Caiismg a large pavilion to be made 
at the door of his cell, the villagers came daily to hear the Law. 
Explaimng by day what was recited at night, [97] the Elder in 
course of time finished his discourse. And sittmg down on a 

^ Uggaho, ht. taking np~‘* learning,” and so “tiling learnt.” It 
K^ould be interesting to know whether the various uggaha's meant 
various textual readings, or modes of propounding ^nly. * 

2 I.e. his own new version. ^ 3^0 Dipavamsa xix, 6. 



in, — Acceptance of the Sulyects of Meditation 113 

mat in the presence of the Elder Abhaya, he said, ‘‘ Frjend, 
teach me a subject of meditation.” Sir, what do you say ? 
Is it not to you that I have been listener ? What shaU I 
teach that is not known to you?” The Elder said to him, 

Friend, different is the path if thou hast been along it before.” 
It is said that* the Elder Abhaya then became a stream- 
wmner. And Jie gave him a subject of meditation, and after 
his return heard that the Elder had passed utterly away tv-hile 
reciting the Law at Lohapasada. Having heard it he called 
for his robe, attired himself and said, Friends, befitting is 
the path of Saintship to our te§,cher. Our teacher, friends, 
was upright, noble. In the presence of his own pupil in the 
Law he sat on a mat and said, ^ Teach me a subject of medita- 
tion.’ Friends, befitting is the path of Saintship for The 
Elder.” To such as these study is no impediment. 

(x) Psychic powers ” are those of an average man. Like 
a child lymg on its back and like tender corn it is dfficult 
to manage. It is broken by the slightest thing. It is an 
impediment to insight, but not to concentration, because it 
ought to be obtained when concentration is obtaiaed. There- 
fore one who desires insight should cut off the impediment of 
psychic powers, but another man only the remaining impedi- 
ments. 

Thus far is the detailed discourse on impediments. (In the 
words) Approached the good friend who gives him subjects 
of meditation ” — a subject of meditation is of two kinds; 
that which is beneficial to all and that which is special. Of 
them, love for the Order of monks and so on and mindfulness 
of death and — according to some — ^perception of the Foul also 
are subjects beneficial to all. The monk who practises the 
meditation should first of all define (his object) and develop 
love thus:— May the Order of monks m the ordination-hall 
be happy, may they be free from trouble !” He should then 
extend his meditation to the devas in the Ordination-hall, 
then to the village of his begging-round, to the ruler of people, 
then starting with the people in the village, to aU beings. His 
love for tlie Order of monks engenders softness of heart among 
his fellow-inmates, who therefore live happily with him. 

8 



114 


The Path of Purity 

For tis love towards tliemselves tlie devas of tlie Ordiiiatk)n- 
liall with sympathetic hearts maintain by righteous means 
a well-ordered watch over him [98]. • For his love towards the 
ruler of people in the village of his begging-round, rulers 
responding with their whole being maintain by righteous 
means a good watch over his necessities. Thrt>ugh his love 
for the men who there are well-disposed towards»him, he walks 
aboift not despised by them. Through his love for all bemgs 
he goes unharmeS. everywhere. And being mindful of death 
and thinking '' I must surely die/’ he gives up the wrong 
search (for food) and, his concern gradually increasing, he does 
not get sluggish m his duties. Not even celestial objects can 
through greed overwhelm the mind of him who is practised^ 

‘ in the perception of the Foul. Thus because of its great use- 
fukiess it is to be desired and wished for under all circumstances, 
and it is the condition for the work of appljdng oneself in 
culture. Hence it is called a subject of meditation beneficial 
to all. 

And because one ought constantly to practise that subject 
of meditation which, among the forty, befits one’s practice, 
and because (such a subject) is the proximate cause of higher 
and higher work in culture, it is called “ special.” Whoever 
gives this twofold subject of meditation is known as giver of 
a subject of meditation. That giver of a subject of medita- 
tion, the good friend means the good friend who is 

Adorable, revered and lovable, 

A counsellor, a patient listener, 

A speaker of discourses deep, one who 
Would not apply himself to useless ends,^ 

who is endowed with such and other qualities, who verily is 
a seeker after good, and already is on the. side of progress. 
From such expressions as Indeed Ananda, on account of me 
the good friend, beings liable to birth are freed from birth, the 
Buddha Supreme himself was a good friend endowed with all 
qualities. Therefore the subject of meditation which was 

— — - - r 

^ Read ^^aricitassa, * Read attJidm for thane, 

® Samyutta i, 88. 



in. — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation 115 

received from the Blessed One during his lifetime was.well- 
received. After his final decease, one received it from him 
who, among the eighty gfeat disciples, was still alive. Such 
bemg no longer the case, one should receive it from a Saint, 
who by these same means has produced the Fourth and Fifth 
Jhanas, and who by increasing insight, with Jhana as the 
proximate cause, has reached the extinction of the cankers. 

But shall it be said that a saint declares gf himself that he 
IS a saint, one who has destroyed the cankers ? Yes, he 
declares it, knowing that he (the applicant) has devoted him- 
self to culture.^ Did not Assagutta the Elder, knowing that 
a certain monk who had begun his subject of meditation [99] 
was devoted to it, spread a piece of leather in the air, and 
sitting cross-legged on it preach to him the subject of medita- • 
tion ? Therefore if a saint be available, well and good. If he 
be not available, one should get it from the presence of the 
following persons in the order of precedence: one who returns 
no more to the world of men, one who returns to the world 
only once more, one who has entered the stream,’’ one who 
has attained to the Jhanas, one who among average men 
knows the three Pitakas, two Pitakas, one Pitaka. In the 
absence of a knower of one Pitaka, one should get it from 
him who is a reciter of one (Nikaya) with the commentary, 
and who js himself a respectable person. For such a person 
is a knower of the text, a preserver of the traditional lore, a 
teacher and a follower of the teacher’s doctrines, not a follower 
of his own doctrines. Therefore the Ancient Elders have said 
three times: respectable person will ward, a respectable 

person will ward {the religion).’’ And herein the saints and 
other persons mentioned above announce just the path they 
have themselves attamed. But a man of much learning, after 
approaching this and that teacher and, because of his accuracy 
in the texts and the queries thereon, noting here and there 
a Sutta with reasons for so domg, and comparing what is 
suitable and unsuitable, will teach a subject of meditation, 
showmg ^a wide path like a great elephant going through a 
jungle. Therefore approaching such a giver of a subject for 
^ So that the apphcant may be encouraged to go on with his culture. 



116 


The Fath of Furity 

r ^ ^ 

meditation, the good friend, one should perform the main and 
minor duties, and receive it. 

And if such a person is available in the same monastery as 
oneself, well and good. If not, where he lives, there one 
should go. And in going there, the student should not go 
wearing slippers on feet washed and oil-besmeared, himself 
holding an umbrella and causing others to carry an oil-flask, 
pots of honey and molasses and so on, and surrounded by a 
retinue of disciples. Fulfilling the duties^ of a monk about 
to travel, himself holding the bowl and robe and doing the 
duties, main and minor, everywhere on entering a monastery 
on the way, he should go simply equipped and with the highest 
simphcity of hfe. On entering the monastery he should enter 
-holding a tooth-stick obtamed on the way as a presentable 
gift. And when he has rested awhile and washed his feet and 
besmeared them with oil and so forth, he should not enter 
another cell with the intention of calling on the teacher. 
Why ? If there were monks there holdmg different views from 
the teacher, they might ask for the reason of his coming, and 
speak in dispraise of the teacher, and cause regret to arise in 
him, sajnng '' Thou art lost, if thou art come to his presence,’’^ 
[100] on which accoimt he might turn back.^ * Therefore asking 
for the teacher’s abode he should go there straightway. If the 
teacher be younger than himself, he should not acquiesce in 
his receiving the bowl, robe and other things. If the teacher 
be the older, he should go and stand saluting him. When the 
teacher says '' Friend, put down the bowl and robe,” he 
should do so. When he says '' Drink^ some w^er,” he should 
drink if he wishes. ^Vhen he says Wash thy feet,” he should 
not, for that, wash them. For if the water had been drawn 
by the teacher it would not be proper. But when he says 
“ Friend, wash. The water was not brought by me, it was 
brought by others,” then he should wash the feet, sitting down 
where the teacher sees him not, such as a covered place, the 
open sky or one side of the monastery. If the teacher brings 


^ Such as sweeping the monastery. 

2 The punctuation in the text is faulty. 
® BiCSid pafinivaiie^^a. 


^ Eead pivd for pi vd. 



III. — Acceptance of the Suhomt<i of Meditation 117 

the oil-flask, he should rise and receive it respectfull;^ with 
both hands. For if he did not receive it so, there might arise 
estrangement in the teacher : From now onwards this 
monk has broken the board-fellowship.” And after receiving 
it, he should not besmear his feet first. For should the oil be 
for rubbing fee. teacher’s limbs, it would not be proper. There- 
fore he should smear first the head and then the shoulder and 
so on. And when he says Friend, this oil is for common use.^ 
Smear your feet also,” he should put a littFe on the head and 
smear the feet. And saying Sir, I will put by the oil-flask,” 
he should give it, the teacher taking it. He should not begin 
asking on the day of his arrival Sic, teach me a subject of 
meditation.” But from the second day he should ask per- 
mission from an old attendant of the teacher — if there be one — 
and do the duties. If the permission asked for be not given, 
he should not do them without it. And in doing them he 
should ofier three tooth-sticks, small, medium and large, and 
prepare water in two ways, hot and cold, for washing the 
mouth and for the bath. And in whichever way the teacher 
uses the water for three days, the same should be served ever 
after. To him who makes no choice, but makes use of this or 
that kind, such water as is available should be served. 

What need is there to say much [101] Whatever right 
duties in the Khandhaka^ have been ordained by the Blessed 
One thus^* — Brethren, the pupil should behave properly towards 
the teacher. This herein is the right behaviour. Rising betimes 
and taking off his sandals and wearing the upper garment on one 
shoulder he should give the tooth-stick, and the mouth-water and 
prepare a seat. If there he rice-gruel, he should wash ihe vessel 
and offer the gruel ” — all that should be done. 

Thus, having fulfilled his duties and saluted the teacher 
with a conciliatory heart, in the evemng on being discharged 
with “ Go !” he should go. When he is asked “ Why hast 
thou come ?” he should tell the reason of his coming. If the 
teacher just asks not, but acquiesces in his duties, he should 
not, even on being discharged, go m ten days or a fortnight, 

^ Or for the use'of all the limbs.” 

2 The punctuation in the text is faulty. ^ 231, 



118 The "^Path of Purity 

but finding an opportunity, lie should announce the reason 
of his coming. Or going to him at the wrong time and bemg 
asked For what purpose art thou cgme he should announce 
it. If he say Come early in the mornmg,” he should go 
early. If at that time his stomach aches with a bilious attack, 
or his food is undigested from heat-weakness, .or some disease 
troubles him, he should explain the true nature of his com- 
plaint and, announcing the time smtable to himself, should 
approach him at* that tune. For at an unsuitable hour it 
is impossible for him to give attention to the subject of medita- 
tion, even though it may have been taught him. 

This herein is the detailed account of “Approached the good 
friend who gives him subjects of meditation.” 

“ Befitting his own conduct.” 

Now as “ befitting his own conduct,” conduct is of six kinds: 
conduct of lust, of hate, of delusion, of faith, of intelhgence, 
of applied thought. Some make four others out of lust etc. 
by way of Inixmg and groupmg,^ likewise with faith etc. 
Thus together with these eight they would have fourteen. 
Though the division is stated thus, various kinds of conduct 
are obtained by mixmg lust etc. with faith etc. Therefore, 
in general six only should be understood. 

Conduct, natural habit, surplus energy are as subject ^one. 
By way of these there are six (kinds of) persons [102] walkmg 
in lust (or passion), hate, delusion, faith, intelligence,^ applied 
thought. Of these (take passion and faith: — ) when there is 
noral procedure in a passionate person, faith ia,strong, because 
is a virtue it approaches passion. As in things immoral 
passion is chngmg, not repulsive, so in things moral is faith, 
is passion seeks objects of sense-desire, so faith seeks what is 
righteous and the like. As passion does not abandon what 
,s bad, so faith does not abandon what is good. Hence the 
nan of faith has something in common with the passionate 
nan. 

Agam (take hate and intelligence: — ) when there is moral 

1 I.e. lust-delusion, hate-delusion, lust-hate, rust-hate-delusion. 

2 Read buddhtcarito. 



III . — Acceptance of the Subjehts of Meditation 119 

procedure m a ruan of enmity, intelligence is strong, because 
as a virtue it approaches hate. As in things unmoraf hate 
does not cling, ^ does not cleave to its object, so in things moral 
intelligence does not. As hate seeks the flaw that does not 
exist, so intelligence seeks the flaw^ that does exist. As hate 
proceeds by ^i^he method of avoiding creatures, so does intelh- 
gence proceed^ by the method of avoiding the complex. Hence 
the man of inteUigence has somethmg in co m mon wi^ the 
hater. 

Agam, in delusion and thought: — when a deluded man is 
striving to make moral states a];ise, harmful thoughts usually 
arise, because these m character approach delusion. As 
delusion is unstable because of surroundmg complexity, so 
IS the application of thought because of multiform attending. 
As delusion because it cannot penetrate deeply is shaky, so is* 
apphcation of thought in our fluttering disposal of it. Hence 
a man thinking of this and that has something in common 
with’ a deluded person. 

Others speak of three other kmds of conduot by way of 
craving, conceit, opinions. Of these craving is just lust, and 
conceit is associated with it. Neither of them goes beyond 
lustful conduct. And because opinions have their source m 
delusion, conduct by way of opinions falls under deluded 
conduct. And what is the source of these ? And how may it 
be knowil that this person is lustful in conduct, that person 
walks either in hate or any of the others ? What is suitable 
for a person of which conduct P 

Some say that the first three kinds of conduct have their 
source m former habit and in the disorders of the elements. 
It IS said that one who m former existences had an abundance 
of desirable motives and beautiful actions is lustful m conduct; 
likewise he who passing away from the next world is reborn 
here. He who formerly was given to maiming, killing, captur- 
ing, quarrellmg is of mimical conduct; likewise he who passing 

1 Follow the v.l. in the text. 

2 Some read “ quahty ” {guna) for “ fault dosa may mean either 
“ hate,”t>r “ fault,” flaw.” 

3 Punctuation m the text is faulty. 



120 


The 'Path of Purity 

t * ^ (T 

away from the states of woe and of nagas is reborn here 
[103]t He who formerly was given to drinking, was void of 
learning and conversation is of deluded conduct ; likewise he 
who passmg away from the animal kmgdom is reborn here. 
So they say that former habit is the source (of craving, 
conceit and opinion here). 

Again, some say that, because of surplus energy in the 
two ^ements of extension and cohesion, a person is of deluded 
conduct. And because of surplus energy in the other two 
he is of inimical conduct. Owing to the equality of all the 
elements he is of passionate conduct. As to the disorders 
one with an excess of serum is of lustful conduct, one with 
an excess of wind is of deluded conduct. Or one with an 
excess of serum is of deluded conduct, one with an excess of 
wind is of lustful conduct. Thus they say that the dis- 
orders of the elements are the source.^ 

Therem (in these statements) because those who formerly 
were given to desirable motives and beautiful actions as well 
as those wh<^ passing away from the next world are reborn 
here — not all of them are of lustful conduct only, neither are 
all the others of inimical and deluded conduct, and similarly 
there is no definiteness of surplus energy of the elements in 
the way mentioned above, and in the determination of the 
disorders^ the other two: lust and delusion also have been 
mentioned, and that determination also is contradictory m 
sequence, and the source of not one among the faith-conduct 
and the rest has been stated — ^therefore all those aforesaid 
statements are indefimte. But this herem is the decision 
in accoi:dance with the opinions of commentarial teachers, 
namely as has been said m the declaration of obsession^ : — 
These beings determined by previous conditions abound 
in greedy liate and delusion^ as well as in the severally opposite 
tendencies. (Let us caU the former G, H, D ; the latter g, h, d.) 
Ify at the moment when action is exerted^ G is strong, g is weak, 

^ Scliolasticism reads into the old category of the four elements; 
earth, water, fire, air, the four abstractions, respectively, of extension, 
cohesion, heat, mobility. 

^ Dosa, the same word for “ hate.’’ 

^ Ussada Elitta, Cf. Expositor 355. 



III . — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation 121 

• • • • 

h and d are strong, H D are weak, then the weak g is unable to 
cancel^ the strong G, hut h d being strong are able to cancel H D. 
Hence the being, born ihrgugh conception given by such deeds, 
is of strong appetites, of sanguine‘s habit, good-tempered, intelligent 
and keen as adamant in wiL If on the other hand when action 
is put forth, G JI are strong, and g L. are weak, d %s strong, D 
%s weak, then by the foregoing method the resultant being has 
strong appetites and dislikes, hut is intelligent and kes-n as 
adamant in wit as was Elder Dattdhhaya. When at the moment 
Gj li, D are strong, and the others weak, he, by the foregoing 
method will be greedy and dull, bui^easy -going and good-tempered, 
as was Elder Bdkula, Furthermore, when at that moment all 
the three G, H, D are strong, the rest g, h, d are weak, then by 
the foregoing method the resultant is strong in appetites and 
dislikes, and dull in intelligence, [104] Again, when at that 
moment g, H, D are strong, the rest weak, then he, by the foregoing 
method, will be free from strong appetites and passions, and 
not mrried away even by the sight of divine objects, but he will 
be full of enmity and dull of intelligence. Again,* whe7i at that 
moment g, h, d are strong, the others weak, then by the 
foregoing method he will be free from appetites, amiable and 
easy-going but dull. Agam, when at that moment g H d are 
strong, the others weak, then he by the foregoing method will be 
free from appetites and intelligent but full of dislikes and anger. 
Finally, ibhen g, it, d at that moment are strong and G, H, D are 
weak, then he by the foregoing method will be free from appetites, 
amiable and wise, as was the Elder Mahd-Sangharakkhitai^ 
And here lie ^ho is said to be greedy is of passionate con- 
duct; he who has dislikes and is dull is hateful and* deluded 
in conduct; who is wise is intelhgent in conduct; who has no 
appetites nor dislikes is, from being calm by nature, of believ- 
ing conduct. Or, as he who is born of action attended by 
absence of delusion is intelligent in conduct, so he who is 
born of deeds attended by strong faith is of believing conduct; 
he who is born of deeds attended by sensual thoughts and so 
on is of thoughtful conduct; who is born of deeds attended 

^ lAt. to “ possess ” {pariyaddtum). 

2 Lit. “ happy-going ” (sukka-sllo). 



122 The ""Path of Purity 

by a mixture of greed and the rest is of mixed conduct. Tjaus 
it should be understood that deeds which are attended by 
either greed or any of the others ajad which produce rebirth 
are the source of the different kinds of conduct. 

And in the expression “ And how may it be known that 
this person is lustful in conduct and so forthT. — this is the 
method: — ^ 

From postures, seeing and the rest, 

From^eating, work, procedure of 
The states of mind one may explain 
The different kmds of conduct all. 

Of these, the postures: mdeed whoso is of lustful conduct 
is graceful in his natural gait, puts down his foot softly and 
'“evenly, hfts it up evenly, and the footprint is divided in the 
middle.^ He who walks in hate walks as if digging with 
the toes, puts down his foot suddenly, lifts it up suddenly, 
and the footprint leaves a trail behind it.^ He who is 
deluded in conduct goes with a wobblmg gait, puts down his 
foot as though frightened, lifts it up as though frightened, 
[105] and the footprint is a hasty impression. And this has 
been said in the account of Magandiya Sutta*^ : — 

The footprint of the lustful man 
Divided in the middle is. 

The footprint of the hateful man 
May leave a trail behind itself. 

The print of the deluded man 
Is an impression quickly made. 

Whoso has lifted up the veiV 
An even footprint makes like this. 

In standing up^ he who is of lustful conduct is comfort- 
able® and polite in manner, he who is of i n i m ical conduct is 
stiff m manner, he who is of deluded conduct is troubled in 

^ I.e. there is a break between the print made by the heel and that 
made by the forepart of the sole. 

2 As though he dragged the foot on putting it down. 

3 Papanca- Sudani on Maj^hirm i, 50X. ^ I.e.dke veil of dfepravity. 

^ Thdnam ior mdmm, ® B,e8id pasadikam £or pasadikam. 



HI . — Acceptance of the Svhjects of Meditation 123 

majmer. And the same in sitting down. He who is of lustful 
conduct prepares his bed evenly and without haste, lies down 
gently and sleeps in a composed manner gathering his limbs 
big and small. On being awakened he does not rise abruptly^ 
but gives a reply gently as though unwillingly. He who is 
of inimical dbnduct prepares his bed hastily in any fashion 
and sleeps frc^^ning with a stiffly thrown body; and on bemg 
awakened he rises abruptly and gives a reply as though m 
anger. He who is of deluded conduct prepares an ill-formed 
bed and sleeps with outstretched limbs, mostly face down- 
wards ; and on bemg awakenedr he rises sluggishly uttermg 
the sound ''humph.'' And since those who walk in faith 
and the rest resemble those who walk in lust and the others, 
therefore the posture of those is like that of these. Thus far* 
one may explam the kinds of conduct from postures. 

Work: — in such work as sweepmg the room he who is of 
lustful conduct takes hold of the broom well and without 
scattermg the sand in haste, but spreading it out like smdhu- 
vara flowers makes a clean and even sweep. He who is of 
mimical conduct takes hold of his broom roughly and being 
m haste spreads the sand on both sides and sweeps uncleanly 
and unevenly, making a harsh noise. He who is of deluded 
conduct takes hold of his broom loosely and sweeps uncleanly 
and ’unevenly, turnmg back here and there and makmg a 
mess of t£e rubbish. And as in sweeping, so also m all kinds 
of work, such as washing and dyeing the robe. He who is of 
lustful conduct is a subtle, pohshed, even, circumspect worker. 
He who is of inimical conduct is a firm, stiff, uneven worker. 
He who is of deluded conduct is an unpractised, 'clumsy, 
uneven, inaccurate worker. ^ [ 106 ] And the robe- wearing 

of one who is of lustful conduct is neither too stiff nor too loose, 
is pleasing^and complete; that of one who is of inimical conduct 
IS too stiff and is incomplete; that of one who is of deluded 
conduct IS loose and untidy. In accordance with such persons, 
to whom they bear a resemblance should be understood those 
who walk in faith etc. Thus one may explain the kmds of 
conduct*from work. 


1 Follow the footnote. 


2 Read °kdru 



124 The 'Path of Purity 

Eating : — he wJio is ot mstiul conduct loves soft, sweet 
food* and eats without haste enjoying the various tastes and 
making lumps^ round and not too big. He becomes joyful on 
gettmg anything tasty. He who is of inimical conduct loves 
coarse and sour food; and he eats in haste without enjoying 
the taste, making mouth-fillmg lumps. He becomes sad on 
getting something untasty. He who walks in delusion is fond 
of ca,^ual food and eats making lumps, small and not round, 
chucking the remains mto the plate and smearing his mouth, 
distracted in mind, thinkmg of this and that. In accordance 
with such persons, to whom, they bear a resemblance should 
be understood those who walk m faith etc. Thus one may 
explam the kmds of conduct from eating. 

Seemg and the rest: — on seeing just a small object of delight 
he who walks in lust looks long at it as though in surprise, 
clings to a merit though a small one and does not grasp even 
a real fault. And in going away from it he does so with a 
longing look, not wishing to leave oS. He who walks in hate 
on seemg a small undesirable object does not look long at it, 
as though he were tired. He is struck by a fault though a 
small one and does not seize even a real merit. And in 
going away he does so without a longing look, being desirous 
of leaving ofE. He who walks in delusion, on seeing whatever 
object IS dependent on others, gives blame when he hears the 
blame of others, bestows praise when he hears the* praise of 
others, himself lookmg on with a disinterestedness due to lack 
of mteUigence. And the same with hearing sounds and so on. 
In accordance with such persons, to whom j^hey bear a re- 
semblance should be understood those that walk m faith etc. 
Thus may one explain the kmds of conduct from seeing and 
the rest. 

Procedures of the states of mind: wiliness, deceitfuhaess, 
pride, evil desire, covetousness, discontentedness, lascivious- 
ness, frivolity, — these and other states arise abundantly in 
one who walks in lust [107]. Anger, malice, hypocrisy, 
rivalry, envy, meanness, — ^these and other states arise abun- 
dantly in one who walks in hate. Sloth, torpor, distraction, 


^ Bead dlopam. 



III . — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation 1 25 

worry, misgiving, obstinate grasping, tenacity, — ^these^ and 
other states arise abundantly in one who walks in delusion. 
Clean liberality, desire to* see the Noble Ones, desire to hear 
the good Law, abundance of joy, absence of craftiness,^ 
absence of wiUness, faithfulness in objects of faith, — ^these 
and other states arise abundantly in one who walks in faith. 
Docility, good friendship, moderation in food, mindfulness 
and comprehension, application to wakefulness, enKition 
over objects of emotion, wise effort due to emotion, — these 
and other states abundantly arise in one who walks in intelli- 
gence. Talkativeness, fondness of society, want of delight 
in moral application, unsteadiness in work,^ smokiness by 
night, ^ luminosity by day,^ running after this and that object, 
— ^these and other states abundantly arise in one who walks « 
in thoughts. Thus one may explain the kinds of conduct 
from the procedure of states. 

Bufi because this system of explaining the kinds of conduct 
in all their ways does not come in the Pah, neither in the 
commentary, but is only stated after the opinion of the 
teachers, therefore it should not be trusted in all its essence. 
For those who walk in hate etc. can perform, by leading a 
zealous life, the postures and so on which have been stated 
as belonging to those who walk in lust etc. And for a single 
person of mixed conduct, the postures etc. having various 
characteristics are not suitable.^ But that system of explain- 
ing the kinds of conduct which is stated in the commentaries, 
should be trusted in essence. For this has been said: The 
teacher who has mttained to a knowledge of the thoughts of others 
knowing the conduct will teach the subject of meditation. * Another 
kind of teacher should ask the puptl. Therefore either by know- 
ledge of the thoughts of others, or by asking the person, one should 
know : this, person walks in lust, this one in either hate or any 
of the others'^ 

What is suitable for a person of which conduct ? Speaking 
first of him who walks m lust: — ^Among dwellmgs which are 

1 SoUow the footnote. 

2 Meditating at night on things to be done by day. 

^ Striving to do in the day what was thought of at night. 



126 


The Path of Purity 

built on an unclean spot, ornamented with balusters, which 
possess no higher storey than the ground floor, ^ natural 
mountain-bends, grass-sheds, leaf-huts and other dwellings, 
that dwelling which is strewn with dust, full of bats, fallen 
to pieces, too high or too low, partaking of a rough and salty 
soil,^ fearsome, unclean, approached by an -fineven path, 
[108] where the bedstead also is covered with bvgs, ill-shaped, 
ill-favoured so that one feels loathing to look at it, — such a 
dwelling is suitable. A dress, consisting of an undergarment 
and an outer cloak that is torn at the edges, strewn over 
with hanging threads, like ^ net-shaped piece of cake, hard 
to the touch like a plank with spikes, dirty, heavy, hard to 
carry about is suitable. A bowl, — ^whether an ugly bowl of 
clay, or an iron bowl disfigured by pegs and knots — ^that is 
heavy, ill-shaped, loathsome like a skull is fitting.® And the 
path he takes m his begging-round should be unpleasant, far 
from a village, uneven. And the village to which he goes for 
alms should be one where men go about as though not seeing 
him, and wh^re they introduce him, as he comes out without 
getting any food from a household, into the sitting-hall saying 
Come Su,’’ give him nce-gruel food and go away without 
taking leave"^ as though they had mtroduced cattle into a 
pen. And the men who attend on him should be such as 
are slaves or workmen, ugly, ill-favoured, wearing dirty 
clothes, evil-smelling, despicable, men who serve liim in a 
disrespectful manner as though chucking him the rice-gruel 
food. And his rice-gruel and food should be coarse, bad in 
appearance, made of crushed millet, grain, broken rice and 
so on, sour buttermilk, vinegar, a soup of decayed potherbs, 
anything which merely fills the stomach. And he should adopt 
the posture of standing or walking to and fro. And that 
object which among the colour devices^ of blue-green etc. has 
a dirty colour is suitable for one walking in lust. For one who 
walks in hate a dwelling neither too high nor too low, well 

^ Read °bhumaUhaka°. 

2 Ujjangala, explained by the Tlha as lukha-v-usaram, i.e. “rough 
and salty.” » ’ * 

® Read vattati, ^ Or “ with indifference ” {ampcblokentd), 

5 See Ch. V. 



III. — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation 127 

• • • • 

supplied witli shade and water, having well-arranged walls, 
posts and stairs; situated on a level, soft site resplendent Vith 
well-finished flower- work, .creeper-work and various kinds of 
painting; ornamented like a Brahma mansion with flowers, 
garlands, canopies of cloth of variegated colours; having a 
bedstead with .well-arranged, clean, delightful bed-covers; 
well-scented with the perfumes and scents of flowers kept here 
and there for the sake of their perfumes; the mere sight of 
which gives joy and gladness: — such a dwelling is suitable. 
The road to the dwellmg should be free from all dangers, clean, 
level, done up and fitted out. [*109] In order to cut oS the 
possibihty of scorpions, bugs, snakes, rats making an abode 
in it, the furniture of the dwelling should not be too large, 
just a bedstead should suffice. And his dress comprising the 
inner garment and the outer cloak should be the best single or 
double cloth made of China silk, Somara cloth, silk, cotton 
stuff, fine linen etc., light, well-dyed and pure in colour to suit 
a monk. The bowl should be well-burnished, made of iron 
and flawless like a bubble of water and a well-cfat gem, and 
very pure in colour to suit a monk. And the path he takes 
in his begging-round should be free from all dangers, level, 
pleasant, neither too far nor too near a village. And the 
village to which he goes for alms should be one where men, 
saying Now the master will come,” prepare a seat in a spot 
cleared and besprinkled with water, meet him and take his 
bowl, introduce him into their house and make him sit dovoi 
on the prepared seat and serve him respectfully with their 
own hands. Arid his servitors should be men who are hand- 
some, well-disposed in mind, well-bathed, well-smeared, sweet 
with smellmg fumes, fragrance, flower-scents; decorated with 
apparels and ornaments of various colours, pure and lovely;^ 
and circumspect in their work. And his rice-gruel food should 
possess colour, scent, taste; nourishing, delightful, excellent 
in all ways and sufficient for the need. And he should adopt 
the posture of standing or sitting down. That object which 
among the colour devices of blue-green etc. is very pure in 
colour i^ suitable for h i m who walks in hate. The dwelling 


1 The text of this clause should be read as one compound. 



128 


The *Paih of Purity 

• • 

of who walks in delusion should face the cardinal points, 
and be unconfined, where seated he could see openly all the 
directions. Among the postures that of walking to and fro 
is suitable for him. But an object that is limited, the size 
of a tray, the size of a pot-lid, small, is not suitable. For in 
a confined space the mind all the more falls -info confusion; 
hence the object should be a big, large device# The rest is 
the s«?me as has been said for one who walks in hate. This 
is what is suitable* for one who walks in delusion. 

The whole system given for him who walks in hate^ is 
suitable also for him who T^alks in faith. And among the 
objects the sphere of recollectedness is proper for him. For 
him who walks in intelligence there is none among the dwellings 
-and the rest that may be said to be unsuitable. For him who 
walks apprehending things a dwelling should not be one that is 
open in all directions wherein [110] to him seated appear lovely 
parks, groves and ponds, villages, market towns and the 
country one after another as well as blue-shinmg mountams. 
For such a duelling is the cause of the thought-discursiveness. 
Therefore he should live in a dwelling like the Mahinda Cave 
on Mount Hatthikucchi hidden by the forest at the entrance 
of a deep valley. A wide object of thought moreover is 
not fit for him, for such an one would be the cause of his 
thoughts chasmg about. It should be a limited object. *The 
rest is the same as has been said for him who walks in lust. 
This IS what is suitable for him who walks observantly. 

Such is the detailed account of the kinds, origin, explana- 
tion, suitability of the conduct which is comprehended under 
the phrase befitting his own conduct.’’ But this does not 
make fully clear the subject of meditation which befits the 
conduct. This will make itself clear in the detailed account 
of the following table of contents. Hence in whafi has been 
said, viz. accepted among the forty subjects of meditation 
that subject ” (p. 105), first the decision of subject of medita- 
tion should be understood in these ten ways: exposition of 
the number, inducement of access and ecstasy, difierent 
kinds of Jhana, object-transcendmg, question of increasing 


^ Read dosacantamhi. 



IH . — Acceptance of the Subjects^ Meditation 129 

or not increasing, object, plane, grasp, cause, suitable 
conduct. 

The Forty Subjects of Meditation. 

There (in the Table of Contents) under exposition of the 
number'' — n^ention has been made of the forty subjects of 
meditation, to wit, the Ten Devices,” the Ten Foul Things, 
the Ten Kecbllections, the Four Divine States, the Four 
Formless States, the One Perception, the Oi^e Specification. 

Of these the Ten Devices are earth-device, water-device, 
heat-device, air-device, blue-green device, yellow device, red 
device, white device, light device, separated space device. 

A swollen thing, discoloured thmg, festering thing, fissured 
thing, mangled thing, dismembered thmg, cut and dismem- 
bered thing, bloody thmg, worm-foul thing, skeleton: — these 
are the Ten Foul Thmgs. 

Buddha-recollection, Law-recoUection, Order-recollection, 
morahty-recollection, liberality-recollection, (?em-recollection, 
death-recollection, body-mindfulness, respiration-mindfulness, 
calm-recollection — these are the Ten Recollections. 

[Ill] Love, pity, sympathy, equanimity — ^these are the Four 
Divine States. 

The sphere of unlimited space, the sphere of unlimited 
consciousness, the sphere of nothmgness, the sphere of the 
neither perceptible nor imperceptible, — ^these are the Four 
Formless States. 

The perception of the abominableness of food is the One 
Perception. 

The One Spec&cation is that of the four elements. 

Determination by way of exposition of the number should 
thus be known. 

‘‘ By way of Inducement of access and ecstasy ” is as follows 
these ten ‘subjects of meditation, namely, the eight recollec- 
tions, exceptmg mindfulness as to the body, and mindfulness 
as to respication, perception of the abominableness of food, 
specification of the four elements — induce access. The rest 
induce ecstasy. 

By way of the different hinds of Jhdna" is as follows: 
here among the thmgs inducing ecstasy the Ten Devices, 

9 



130 


The Path of Purity 

together with lespiration-mmatulness, are (objects) of four- 
fold Jhana. The ten Foul Things together with mindfulness 
as to the body are (objects) of fir^ Jhana. The fixst three 
Divine States are (objects) of threefold Jhana. The fourth 
Divme State and the four Formless Subjects are of fourfold 
Jhana. 

By transcending^’ is as follows: there are* two ways of 
tran^endmg: — transcending the factor and the object. Of 
these there is transcending the factor in all the subjects of 
meditation of threefold and fourfold Jhanas, because after 
transcendmg the Jhana-factors such as applied and sustained 
thinking, there would be obtamed, in those very^ objects, the 
second and other Jhanas. And the same with the fourth 
Divine State, which ought to be attained by transcendmg the 
gladness that there is in the thought of love and so on. In the 
four Formless (States) there is transcendmg of the object. 
For it IS by transcending one or other of the first mne devices 
that the sphere of unlimited space ought to be attained. 
And it IS by transcendmg in thought, space and the rest that 
the sphere of unlimited consciousness and the others ought 
to be attained. In the rest there is no transcending. 

The question of increasing or not increasing ” is as follows. 
Among these forty subjects only the ten Devices^ should be 
increased. For whatever place is diffused with tj;Le device, 
it IS possible withm that place to hear sounds through clair- 
audience, to see forms through clairvoyance, to know with 
one’s mind the thoughts of other beings. But mindfulness 
as to the body and the Foul Thmgs should ifbt be increased. 
Why ? Because of the limitations in place and the absence 
of advantage. And their limitation by place will be evident 
in the system of culture. Supposmg they are mcreased [112], 
it is only the heap of corpses that is increased. There is no 
advantage whatever. And this has been said in the answer 
to Sopaka’s query, ‘‘ 0 Blessed One^ clear is the perception of 
the visible object,^ not clear is the perception of the skeleton.” 
It is stated here that perception of the visible object is clear 

— — — s * — 

^ Read tesvev^ for te svev\ ^ Read hasinan^ eva, 

® I.e. the device. Not traced; of, text PTS, 112, n. 1. 



IJL — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation 131 

owing to tile increasing of tte sign (after-image): an(i that 
perception of the skeleton is not clear because there is no 
increase. And what is •said as This entire earth have I 
diffused with perception of the skeleton ” is said by way of 
helping him who has attamed it/ For just as in the time of 
DhammasolSt, an Indian ” cuckoo, seeing its reflection on 
the glass walls all around, was aware of '' cuckoo ’’ in every 
direction and uttered a sweet song, so the Elder, having 
got perception of the skeleton and seeing the after-image 
established in all directions, thought that the whole earth 
was burdened with bones. * 

If that be the case (that the image should not be increased), 
then is it opposed to the statement,^ that the Jhanas of the 
Foul Things have unlimited objects ? There is no such'- 
opposition; for some grasp the image in a swollen corpse or 
a big skeleton, others in either object of a small size. In 
this way, for some, the Jhana has a l i m ited object, for others 
an unlimited object. Or it is concerning one who increases 
the sign of the Foul, not seeing any fault in so doing, that the 
object has been said to be unlimited. But they should not be 
increased owing to the absence of any advantage. Similarly, 
neither should the others be mcreased. Why ? Because he 
who increases, say, the respiration-sign, only increases the 
accumulation of wind,^ and it is limited in locality. Thus 
owing to its faultiness and limitation in locahty, it should not 
be increased. 

The Divine States have as objects, beings. He who increases 
their sign may increase the number of beings'^ (contemplated), 
but that is of no use. Therefore they also should not be 
increased. But the words '' He suffuses one quarter with mind 
associated with love have been said as to the grasping (the 
object nojb yet grasped). (Mentally) to grasp and augment 
the number of bemgs in one quarter, beginning with the 
residents of one monastery, of two monasteries and so on in 
due order — ^but not to increase the sign — is to “ suffuse one 

1 Not J;)y way of developing the sign. 

2 I)hammasangan% § 263. ® Read vdtardsi yeia vaddhati* 

^ Jlead sattardsi yeva vaddheyya, ® Or amity. DlgTia i, 250, etc. 



132 


The Path of Purity 

quarter’’ [113]. TJaere is Jiere no after-image which the 
' student might increase. Here also the object as being limited 
or unlimited should be understood .by way of inclusion (of 
beings). 

And in the Formless Objects, space should not be increased 
just because it is attained by separatmg the de\dce. Indeed it 
ought to be attended to by removing the device. , Beyond that 
there es nothing in increasing it. Consciousness should not 
be increased because of its intrinsic nature, for that it is not 
possible to mcrease. Absence of consciousness may not be 
increased just because of absence. The object of the sphere 
of the neither perceptible nor imperceptible may not be 
increased because of its intrinsic nature, the rest because of 
jbheir not being the sign, for in increasing them, after-image 
itself would be increased. The object of Buddha-recollection 
and others is not the after-image and therefore should not be 
increased. 

By way of object^' is as follows: — Among these forty 
subjects of fneditation these twenty-two, namely, the ten 
Devices, ten Foul Things, mindfulness as to Respiration, 
mindfulness as to the Body — ^have their after-image as their 
mental object. Not so the rest. And twelve of these, namely, 
eight out of the ten recollections exceptmg mindfulness as to 
respiration and mindfulness as to the body, perception of the 
abominableness of food, specification of the four elements, the 
sphere of unlimited consciousness, the sphere of the neither 
perceptible nor imperceptible, have their intrinsic natures 
as object. These twenty-two, namely, the t^n Devices, ten 
Foul Things, mindfulness as to respiration, mindfulness as to 
the body, have the sign as the object. The rema inin g six 
have undefined^ objects. Further, these eight, namely, the 
festermg, the bloody and the worm-foul corpse, mmdfulness 
as to respiration, water-device, heat-device, air-device, and 
in the light-devices, whatever circle of light comes from 
the sun and so on (through apertures, wmdows etc.) have 

unsteady objects, and they vibrate previous to the after- 

— ^ — — — __ — — ^ - 

^ Navattahbdrammmidni, objects not defined as either the sign or 
intrinsic nature. 



JU,— Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation 133 * 

• . . . . 
image, whicli however remains steady. The rest have steady 
objects. 

By way of plane ” is follows: — ^here these twelve, namely, 
the ten Fonl Things, mindfulness as to the body, perception 
of the abominableness of food, do not arise among devas. 
These thirteen, namely, the twelve just mentioned and mind- 
fulness as to, respiration, do not arise in the Brahma-world. 
And in the formless existence none arises other than the four 
formless states. All may arise among meif. 

[114] As to grasp'' is as follows: — definition here is to 
be understood as grasping by -sight, touch, hearing. Here, 
excepting the air-device, these nineteen, namely, the remain- 
ing nine devices, the ten Foul Things — are to be grasped by 
sight. The meaning is that having previously (to the sign to^ 
be grasped) looked often with the eye, their sign can be grasped. 
As regards mindfulness as to the body the fivefold group of the 
skin IS to be grasped by sight, the rest by hearing. Thus the 
object of body-mindfulness is to be grasped by sight and hear- 
ing. Mindfulness as to respiration is to be grasped by touch, 
the air-device by sight and touch, the remaining eighteen by 
hearing. And here, the divine state of equanimity and the 
four formless states are not to be grasped by a beginner; 
he may grasp the remaining thirty-five. 

By way of cause" is as follows: — among these forty 
subjects,* excepting the space-device, the remaining nine 
devices are the cause of the formless subjects, the ten devices^ 
are the cause of the super-knowledges, the three divine states 
are the cause j»f the fourth divine state, the lower formless 
is the cause of the higher one, the sphere of the neither 
perceptible nor imperceptible is the cause of the attainment 
of cessation, and all of them are the cause of a happy life 
(xmder present conditions), insight and attainment of a happy 
birth. 

'' By way of suitable conduct ” is as follows: — decision here 
as to suitability to the modes of conduct should be under- 
stood in this wise: these eleven subjects, namely, ten Foul 
Things* mi ndfulness as to the body, are suitable for one who 
walks in lust; eight subjects, namely, the four divine states, 



134 The Tath of Purity 

(P ^ ^ ^ 

foiir colour-devices are suitable for bim who walks in hate; 
one subject of meditation, to wit mindfulness as to respiration, 
is suitable for him who walks in dely.sion, and him who walks 
observant; the first six recollections for him who walks in 
faith; the four, namely, mindfulness of death, mindfulness of 
calm, specifying the four elements, perception, of the abomin- 
ableness of food, for him of intelligent conduct. . The remain- 
ing devices and the four formless states are suitable for all 
modes of conduce. And among the devices, that which is 
limited^ is suitable for one who walks observant, that which 
is infinite for him who walks«in delusion. 

And all this has been said by way of their direct opposites 
and their extreme suitableness. There is no culture of merit 
^ which does not discard lust and so forth, and which is not of 
service to faith and so on. This has been said in Meghiyasutta : 
“ Four states should be cultivated further. The Foul Things 
should he cultivated for the 'putting away of lust, amity for the 
putting away of ill-will, mindfulness as to respiration for the 
cutting off of thoughts [115], perception of impermanence for 
the uprooting of the pride that says ‘ I am' In the Rahula 
sutta also for a single person seven subjects of meditation 
are stated: Rahula, let the culture of amity he developed."'^ 
Therefore without laying too much stress on mere words one 
should search everywhere for the meaning. 

This is the decision of the discourse on the subject of medita- 
tion in “ accepted that subject.’’ 

This IS the setting forth of the meaning of the word accepted." 
In accordance with what has been said as ‘‘approached the 
good fri^d who gives him subjects of meditation ” the student 
having approached the good friend who has been described 
already, entrusted himself to the Buddha, the Blessed One, or 
to a teacher, and with his wishes fulfilled and full of high resolve 
should beg for a subject. Herein he should entrust himself to 
the Buddha, the Blessed One, thus: “ Myself, 0 Blessed One, to 
you I offer.” For he who without entrusting himself thus, 
fives in the wild, being unable to stand firm when a fearful 


^ I.e. of the size of a pot-lid. 
® Majjhima i, 424. 


2 TJddna iv, 1. 



III . — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation 135 

object presents itself, miglit go* to a^'^lage-monastery and 
by intercourse with the householders would arrive at what 
he sought not and might come to dire distress. But to him 
who has entrusted himself, there arises no fear, even when a 
fearsome object presents itself. Gladness arises in him when 
he reflects, •Hast thou not, 0 wise man, first entrusted thy- 
self to the Buddhas For as a man who possessed an 
excellent piece of cloth of Benares, should it be eaten by 
rats or insects, would be grieved, if he w^e to give it to a 
monk who had no robe, even if he were afterwards to see 
that monk tearing it to pieces,^ only gladness would arise in 
him. So is the application of this simile to be understood. 
Agam, m entrusting himself to a teacher, he should say My- 
self I offer to you.’’ For he who has not so entrusted himself 
is unruly, stubborn, takes advice from no one, or goes about' 
at his own will, without asking leave of the teacher. And the 
teacher favours him not with things of the flesh or of the 
Doctrine, neither does he teach him any secret booklore. 
Not getting this double favour [116] he gets no foothold in the 
religion and before long reaches a wicked or worldly state. 
He who, on the other hand, has entrusted himself is not unruly, 
does not go about at his own will, is tractable and lives in 
dependence on his teacher. Getting the double favour from 
his teacher he attains to growth, development, increase in 
the religion like the pupils of the Elder Culapindapatika Tissa. 
They say that three Brethren came to that Elder’s presence. 
And one of them said '' Sir, if it be said that it is of benefit 
to you, I dare to jump from a cliff as high as a hundred men.” 
The second saTd Sir, if it be desired of me for your benefit, 
I dare to spend all this body of mine grinding it from the 
heels upwards on a slab of stone.” The third said, '' Sir, if it 
be desired of me for your benefit, I dare to suppress my breath 
and die.^’ The Elder, thinkmg “ These Brethren are possible 
fellows,” preached a subject of meditation to them. Standing in 
his instruction the three of them attained saintship. This is the 
advantage of entrusting oneself. Hence it is said Entrusted 
himsetE to the Buddha, the Blessed One, or to a teacher.” 


1 Read pandita purimam. 



136 The Tath of Purity 

' In with his wishes fulfilled and full of high resolve ” the 
student should have his wishes fulfilled in six ways by virtue 
of disinterestedness and so on. Tor he who has fulfilled 
his wishes has attained to one or other of the three kinds of 
enlightenment. As has been said: “Six wishes lead to the 
ripening of the enlightenment of the Future Buddhas. And 
Future Buddhas with a wish for no greed see faults in greed. 
With a wish for no hate they see faults in hate. With a wish for 
no delusion they see faults in delusion. With a wish for emanci- 
pation they see faults in the house life. With a wish for solitude 
they see faults in society. Witji a wish for escape they see faults 
in all rebirths and destinies . For whatever stream-winners, 
once-returnerSj never-returners, saints who have destroyed 
the cankers, silent Buddhas, supreme Buddhas have been, are 
"and will be in the past, present, or the future, all of them have 
attained in these six ways to any special thing to which each 
has had to attain. Therefore one should have his wishes 
fulfilled in these six ways. 

One shoulibe “full of high resolve ” by resolving on That. 
The meaning is that one should resolve to be concentrated, 
bend towards concentration, lean towards concentration 
[117], resolve to win Nibbana, bend towards Nibbana, lean 
towards Nibbana. The teacher who has attained knowledge 
of thought-reading should examine the mental behaviour of 
him who has thus fulfilled wish and resolve and has asked for 
^a subject of meditation, and find out his conduct. Another 
teacher should find it out after putting such questions as 
these: Of what conduct art thou ? Which are the states to 
which ti^ou art prone ? Attending to what makes thee 
comfortable ? On what subject of meditation is thy mind 
bent After finding this out he should teach the subject 
of meditation suitable for his conduct. And in teaching it 
he should teach in three ways. To one who has originally 
acquired the subject he should, in giving it, make him recite 
it at one or two sittings. To one who dwells in his presence 
he should teach it every time he comes to him. To one who 
wishes to acquire it and go elsewhere he^ should teach it 


^ Not traced. 



III. — Acceptance of the Subjects of Meditation 137 

neither too concisely nor too nnicli at fengtli. In teaching 
the earth-device first among the subjects he should te^ch 
these nine divisions : the four faults of the device, the work of 
the device, the mode of culture of one who has performed it, 
the twofold sign, twofold concentration, sevenfold suitability 
and unsuitability, tenfold proficiency in ecstasy, equality 
of energy (with concentration), arrangement of ecstasy. In 
the remaining subjects also wHat is suitable for this and J-hat 
person should be taught. All that will be* evident in the 
analysis of culture. 

While the subject is being taught the student should grasp 
the sign and listen. Grasp the sign ” means noting well this 
and that mode thus : — this is a lower word, this a higher word, 
this is its sense, this the intention, this is a simile. For he 
who grasps the sign and listens respectfully makes a good 
grasp of the subject. Then depending on that subject he 
attains distinction, not so any other man. This is the ex- 
position of the meaning of the word “ Accepted.’’ 

Thus far is the full treatment of the words '' Approached 
the good friend . . . accepted, among the forty subjects of 
meditation, that subject befittmg his own conduct.” 

Thus is ended the third Chapter called the Exposition of 
the acceptance of the subjects of meditation in the section 
of concentration-culture in the Path of Purity, composed for 
the purpose of gladdemng good folk. 



[118] 


CHAPTER IV 

EXPOSITION OF THE EARTH DEVIoE 


Now in what has been said m tbe words forsaken that monas- 
tery which is unwritable to his concentration-culture, and living 
in a suitable monastery ” (p. 105): — whoever finds it comfort- 
able living with his teacher in a monastery should live there, 
and clear up the subject of meditation. If it be not comfortable 
there, he should live in whatever other monastery is suitable, 
whether at a distance of a gdvuta, a ]isili-yojana or even a 
yojana. For while he lives thus, should there arise doubt 
or confusion m any detail of the subject, he should m time 
do his duties in the monastery, go seekmg alms on the way 
and, after his meal, go to the dwelhng-place of the teacher, 
and on thaj} very day and in his presence clear up the matter. 
The next day he should salute the teacher and take his depar- 
ture, and seekmg alms on the way would be able to return to 
his own abode without fatigue.^ But whoso gets no comfort 
even in a monastery a yojana distant should solve all knotty 
points in the subject and, having made it perfectly clear and 
fastened it to his apprehension, go a great distance and hve 
in a suitable monastery, forsaking the one that is unsuitable 
for his concentration-culture. 

Herein a monastery possessing one or other of eighteen 
faults ^is imsuitable. And the eighteen faults are these: — 
largeness, newness, dilapidation, dependence on a road, having 
a pool, proximity to a plantation of herbs or of flowers or of 
fruits, desirableness, dependence on a town or on a wood or 
on fields, presence of persons of dissimilar views,* dependence 
on a port, or on a border-town or on the boundaries of a 
kingdom, unsuitableness, want of access to good friends. [119] 
Possessed of one or other of these eighteen faults a monastery 
is unsuitable; where he shoidd not live. And why 

^ Fatigue would be harmful to his meditation. 

138 



IV. — Exposition of the J^arth Device 139 

1. In a large monastery many people ot varying tastes 
meet. Through mutual opposition they do not do their duty. 
The wisdom-tree yard and Qther places are not swept.^ Water 
to drink and for use is not provided. On going out thence with 
bowl and robe for alms in the village one frequents, if one 
sees the routiife work neglected or the water-pot empty, then 
one should do the work and provide the water. A monk who 
omits to do his duties commits the dukhata offence becau&e of 
the omission. Time flies while a monk is dbing his routine 
work. Too late in the day he enters the village, where he 
gets nothing as the alms-givmg is finished. Even when he 
goes into seclusion he is disturbed by the loud voices of the 
novices and young brethren and the functioning of the Order. 
But where all the duties have been performed and the other 
noises do not strike the ear, in such a monastery, though it be 
large, he may live. 

2. In a new monastery there is much new work. They 

blame him who does not do it. But where the monks say 
thus: May the Venerable One do his recIuse-ditties at his 

pleasure. We will perform the new work,” in such a place 
one may live. 

3. In a dilapidated monastery there is much to repair. 
They even go to the extent of blaming him who does not 
arrange his own bed. The subject of meditation of him who 
does the repaus suffers. 

4. In a highway monastery dependent on (i.e. hard by) the 
road guests assemble day and night. To those that arrive at 
late hours he has^ to give (up) his own bed and dwell at the 
foot of a tree or on a rock-mat. The same holds good 4or the 
next day also. Thus there is no opportunity for the subject of 
meditation. But where there is no such obligation to guests, 
there one i^ay live. 

5. Having a pool means that there is a rock-lake. Crowds 
resort there to drink. Pupils of Elders who reside m the town 
and who are supported by the king come to do the work of 
dyeing (the robes). When they ask for vessels and wooden 
troughs ^d so on, they have to be shown saying There they 


1 Read asammatthdrC eva. 



140 The Path of Purity 

are in such and such a place/ ^ [120] Thus there is a constant 
bother at all times. 

6. As he sits down for the (noon)day rest after receiving 
the subject of meditation in a monastery where there are herbs 
of various kinds, women-gatherers of potherbs, singing and 
plucking the herbs in his presence, do harmcto the subject of 
meditation through the disaccord^ of their voices. 

similar danger attends that monastery where flowering 
shrubs of various sorts are in full blossom. 

8. To a monastery where there are fruits of various kinds 
such as the mango, rose-aPpple and jack-fruit, people come 
asking for fruit and get angry on being refused, or they take it 
by force. "Walking to and fro at eventide in the middle of 
the monastery the monk sees them and asks Lay-brethren, 
why do you do this At this they abuse him to their 
hearts’ content, and even strive for his ejection (from the 
monastery). 

9. He who lives in a monastery which is considered by the 
world^ as a* desirable place, like the Dakkhinagiri Monastery, 
the Hatthikucchi Monastery, the Cetiyagiri Monastery, or the 
Cittalapabbata Monastery, gets famous as a saint and men 
gather from all quarters wishing to greet him, thus making it 
uncomfortable for him. He should go by day to a monastery 
which he finds suitable and spend the night there. ^ 

10. In a monastery dependent on a town inappropriate 
objects make their appearance. And servant-girls carrying 
water go bumping with their jars and make no room to pass. 
Government ojB&cials also sit down, putting*up a tent in the 
middle* of the monastery. 

11. In a woodland monastery are fire- wood and trees fit 
for building materials. Wood-gatherers make the place 
uncomfortable like the flower and fruit gatherer^ mentioned 
above. Men come and fell the trees saying ‘‘ There are trees 
in the monastery. We will fell them and make houses.” If 
at eventide coming out from the house of exertion^ and walking 
to and fro in the middle of the monastery, he sees them and 

1 Lit, “ dissimilaxity.” 2 p,ead the v.l. lohasammate, 

® I.e. where he has been practising meditation. 



141 


IV . — Exposition of the Earth Device 

asks '' Lay-kretliren, why do you do this ?” they abuse 
to their hearts’ content and strive for his ejection (from the 
place). 

12. At a field monastery which is surrounded on all sides 
by fields, men make a threshing-floor in the middle of the 
monastery and thresh the corn and lie down^ in front of the 
monastery. And much other discomfort they cause. And 
in a monastery which has much landed property belonging 
to the Order, the monastery-lads keep out ^from the fields) 
the cattle of the families of their supporters^ and shut ofi the 
floodgate.^ The [121] men take •the ears of corn and show 
them to the Order saying '' Look at the work of the monastery- 
lads.”^ For this or that reason he may be summoned to the 
door of the kmg’s house or the house of the king’s ministers. 
And this landed property is comprised in the field-monastery. 

13. In a monastery where there are persons of dissimilar 
views reside monks mutually opposed and inimical, engaging 
in brawls. On being restrained with the remark Sirs, do not 
behave so,” they exclaim “ Since the coming of this refuse- 
rag-man we are undone 

14. Where a monastery is dependent (or hard by) an 
emporium of sea-trade or land-trade men arrive by boat or 
caravan, and make the place unpleasant with their jostlings 
and shoutings Make room ^ give water ! give salt !” 

15. In a monastery dependent on a border-town men have 
no faith in the Buddha etc. 

16. In a monastery dependent on the boundaries of a 
kingdom there is lear of the king. One king rules out the site 
saying It is not within my jurisdiction.” Another king does 
likewise saying It is not within my jurisdiction.” There 
the monk roams about sometimes in the country of this king, 
sometimes ip. that of the other king. Then they suspect him 
to be a spy and bring him to dire distress. 

17. Unsuitableness of a monastery is due to the coming 
together of inappropriate objects and so on, or to the haunt- 

^ Rea^ Say anti. ^ Read drdmikd huldnani. 

3 So that the fields get no water. 

^ Read drdmikdnam, as in the footnote. 



142 


The Path of Purity 

ir>g s of beings not numan. liere is a story in tbis connection : — 
They tell that an Elder lived in the forest. Then an ogress 
stood at the door of his leaf-hut and sang. He came out and 
stood at the door. She went and sang at the head of the 
terrace- walk. The Elder went to the head of the terrace-walk. 
She stood on a chff of the height of a hundred men and sang. 
The Elder drew back. Then suddenly she seized him and 
sai(t“ Sir, I have eaten men like you, more than one, more 
than two.’’ ^ 

18. Want of access to good friends — that is, a monastery 
where it is not possible to ^et a good friend, either a teacher 
or an equal of a teacher, a preceptor or an equal of a preceptor. 
In a monastery this is counted a great drawback. 

Thus it should be known that a monastery possessing one 
or other of the eighteen faults is unsuitable. This also is 
said in the Commentaries: — 

Big dwelling, new abode and old abode, 

highway house, rock-pond, abode with fruits. 

And vegetables, flowers, and coveted, 

[122] Town, wood, field, home of different sects, a port, 

A frontier, borderland, unsuitable 
Abode, where friends cannot be got — eighteen 
These places are, unfit. Art wise herein, 

Shun them afar as path with perils fraught r 

. . . “and living in a suitable monastery” . . . (p. 105). 

And that (monastery) which is endowed with five qualities, 
to wit, as bemg neither too far nor too n'^ar the village of 
resort 'and so on, is suitable. For this has been said by the 
Blessed One: And how, monks, is a dwelling endowed with 
the five qualities ? Here, monks, a dwelling is neither too far 
nor too near,^ is easy of access,^ not crowded by day, with little 
sound or noise at night, scarcely exposed to gnats, mosquitoes, 
wind, heat and crawling creatures. Living in that dwelling a 
monk gets without difficulty the necessities of life, namely 
clothing, fo od, shelter and medicine. And in that dwelling 

^ Fixnctuate the text accordingly. 

2 Lit. “ full of paths of going and coming.” 



IV . — Exposition of the Ec^rth Device 1 43 

are senior monks of wide knowledge, scholars of the Texts, mgm- 
orizers of the Dhamma, of the Vinaya, of the Mdtikds. From 
time to time he approaches them and puts questions and queries 
^ How IS this, sirs ? What is the meaning of this V And the 
venerable ones explain what was not explained, make clear what 
was not clear, and remove doubt from the various doubtful points. 
Thus, monks, is a dwelling endowed with the five qualities.^’^ 
This is the detailed exposition of '' Having forsaken ^hat 
monastery which is unsuitable to his concentration-culture, 
and living in a suitable monastery.” 

. . . '‘Should sever the minor Impediments ” . . . means 
while hving in such a fittmg monastery he should sever even 
his minor impediments. He should, that is to say, cut his 
long hair (of the head), nails, hairs (of the body); do repairs 
or tailor- work to his old robes, dye those that are stained. 
If there be a flaw in the bowl, he should bake it. He should 
clean hyis bedstead, stool and other things. This is a detailed 
accoimt of " should sever the minor impediments.” 

Now, as regards the clause " by not slackenmg t£e arrange- 
ment of the entire process of culture he should develop,” the 
following is the detailed discourse by way of all the subjects 
of meditation, begimnng with the earth-device. 

[12^ A monk, who has severed the minor impediments 
and on return from the alms-gathering, after his meal, has 
dispelled the drowsmess that comes of eatmg and has seated 
himself comfortably in a secluded place, should grasp the 
sign in the ground whether prepared or unprepared. For 
this has been saiJ:^ " He, taking up the earth-device, grasps the 
sign in the earth, prepared or unprepared, finite not infinite, 
limited not unlimited, with paths and not without paths, hounded 
not unbounded, of the size of a tray or of a pot-lid. He makes 
a good grasp of the sign, notes it well, determines it well. Having 
made a good grasp of the sign, noted it well, determined it well, 
he sees advantages in it and regards it as a jewel, adopts 
a reverential attitude of mind and in a loving ^nood hinds 
his heart to that object. ' By means of this practice I shall 
surely be freed from old age and death.^ Thus aloof from 

1 Anguttara v, 15. ^ In the old commentary. 



144 The Fath of Purity 

semual desires, etc, he abides in the attainment of the first 
Jhdna.^^ 

Herein whosoever in a former esdstence has become monk 
in the Eeligion or a hermit monk, and has already mduced the 
fourth and fifth Jhanas in the earth-device — to such a meri- 
torious one, endowed with the suflS.cmg conditions, the sign 
appears as it did to the Elder Mallaka, on earth not (previously) 
set ^art in a ploughed field, or on a threshing-floor. It is said 
that to the venerable one who was lookmg at a ploughed field 
a sign arose of the size of the field. He enlarged it, mduced 
the five Jhanas, estabhshed*insight which has Jhana as proxi- 
mate cause, and attained saintship. 

But he who has had no previous experience should, without 
spoihng the arrangement of the subject received from his 
teacher, make the device avoiding its four faults. For there 
are four faults of the earth-device due to the nnxmg^ of blue, 
yellow, red, white. Therefore not taking clay of any of those 
colours, he should make the device with clay of the colour of 
dawn hke the clay m Ganges stream. [124] He should not 
make it in the middle of the monastery where novices and 
others walk about. He should make it, movable or stationary, 
at the confines of the monastery, m a covered place, cavern, 
or leaf-hut. The 'movable device should be made by tying 
on four sticks a cloth, leather or a mat of pine stalks, and 
smearing on it a circle of the size given above, with well- 
ground earth from which grass and roots, gravel and pot- 
sherds^ have been sifted. At the time of the preliminary 
exercise he should spread it on the gromni and gaze at it. 
The stationary device should be made by driving into the 
groimd stakes in the form of the pericarp of the lotus and en- 
circlmg them with creepers. If there be not enough clay (of the 
dawn-colour) he should put in some other kind of clay beneath, 
and on the upper surface make with the dawn-coloured clay 
a circle, one span four fingers in diameter. With reference to 
the size it has been said Of the size of a tray or of a pot-lid.” 

“ Finite not infinite ” and so forth are said for the purpose 
of defining the device. Therefore makmg the aforesaid size 
^ One with, another or all together. ^ Bead "^sakkliarakaiJialilcdya, 



IV . — Exposition of the J^arth Device 145 

* * • 

the he should rub it with a stone slab — a warden 

slab would set off the dissimilar dawn-colour and so should 
be avoided — and make li? smooth like the surface of a drum, 
sweep the place, bathe himself, come back and sit on a couch 
which is set within two and a half cubits from the device 
circle, and is well spread-out with legs one span four fingers 
high. For the device is not visible if ^e sits farther than 
that. If he sits too close, the faults of ^e device IBfecome 
plain Sitting higher he must look bending down his neck; 
lower, his knees ache. Therefore sitting in the prescribed 
manner he should consider the*evils of sense-desires in such 
wise as Insatiate are sense-desires , and produce joy and 
gladness through desire for emancipation which is the escape 
from sense-desires and is the means of transcending all pain, 
and through recalhng to mind the virtues of the Buddha, the 
Law and the Order. Out of the respect he has for the progres- 
sive practice, to wit — Now this practice of emancipation has 
been practised by aU Buddhas, silent Buddhas and their noble 
disciples,’’ he should put forth effort saying By means of 
this practice I shall certainly partake of the taste of the bliss 
of sohtude.” And openmg his eyes with an even gaze‘s [ 126 ] 
he should grasp the sign and develop it. By openmg too 
wide, the eye gets tired and the circle becomes too clear, on 
which account the sign does not manifest itself to him. When 
the eye opens too narrowly, the circle does not become clear, 
and the mind slackens; thus agam the sign is not mardfested. 
Therefore like a man who sees the reflection of his face on the 
surface of a mhf or, he should open the eyes with an even gaze 
and grasp the sign and develop it. The colour (of the device) 
should not be considered, nor the characteristic (of the earth) 
attended to. Without in fact lettmg go the colour he should 
let the device and the physical basis (the earth) assume one 
and the same colour, and should give attention placing his 
mind on the earth as a concept because of its abundance* 
Out of the names for the earth such as pathavi, maM, medinl, 

^ Read rnttaj^pamanam partccfiedam . 

2 Majjhima i, 96, 130 1; Further Dialogues i, 91. 

® I.e. neither too wide nor too narrow. 


10 



146 


The Path of Purity 

blium, vasudJia, vasundham, lie should utter that which he 
fancies, whichever is fit for him to note. As a matter of fact 
only the name pathavl (earth) becomes evident. Hence on 
that account he should develop it as earth ! earth !” Some- 
times opening the eyes, sometimes closing them he should 
reflect (on the image). As long as the sign to be grasped 
does not arise, so long, a himdred times, a tht)usand times, 
even ^ore often ^should he develop in this way. When to 
him thus developing, it comes into the path of sight, as well 
when he shuts the eyes as when he opens them, then the sign 
to be grasped has come into^existence. 

Once it has been produced he should not sit there. Enter- 
ing his own abode, there he should sit and develop. To 
remove delay in washing his feet he should require single-soled 
slippers and a walking stick.'^ Then if the tender concentra- 
tion perishes for any reason of inappropriatenesss, he should 
put on the slippers, take the walking stick, go to the place, ^ 
take the sign, come back and, sitting down in comfort, develop 
it; he should^repeatedly lay it to heart, consider it with applied 
and sustained thinking. 

As he acts thus, in due course the hindrances are discarded, 
the depravities subside, the mind is fixed by access-concentra- 
tion, the after-image arises. This then is the distinction 
between the previous sign that has been grasped and the 
after-image: in the former a fault" of the device appears; the 
latter is like the disc of a mirror taken out of a bag [ 126 ], 
a well-burnished conch-vessel, the round moon issuing from 
the clouds, white cranes against a ram-cloudf and makes its 
appearance as though bursting the grasped sign, than which 
it is a hundred times, a thousand times more purified. But it 
possesses neither colour nor form. For otherwise it would be 
cognizable by the eye, gross, a fit object for contemplation, 
and marked with the three characteristics. But it is not so. 
To the winner of concentration, it is just a mode of appear- 
ance, and is born of perception. And from the time of its 

^ To ward danger. 2 Where the device is. 

® E.g. a finger-print etc. • 

^ Bead bakd. Cf. the picture in Psalms of the Brethren^ verses 307, 
308. 



IV, — Exposition of the Earth Device 147 

arising, the hindrances are discarded/ the depravities suteide, 
the mind is fixed by access-concentration. 

Concentration is of two kinds, namely: access-concentra- 
tion and ecstasy-concentration. In two ways the mind is 
concentrated; at the stage of access or the stage of attainment. 
Of these, at the access stage, through the putting away of 
the hindrance the mind is concentrated, at the attainment 
stage it is concentrated through the manifestation the 
factors. And this is the difierence between the two kinds of 
concentration. At access the factors owmg to their weakness, 
are not strong. As a baby-child on being lifted to its feet, 
falls down repeatedly to the ground, even so when the access 
arises the mind at times makes the sign the object, at times 
lapses into subconsciousness. At ecstasy the factors from 
their very strength are strong. As a strong man rising from 
his seat might stand even the whole day, so when ecstatic 
concentration arises consciousness, once it has cut ofi the 
occasion of subconsciousness, lasts the whole night, even the 
whole day, and proceeds by way of moral apperceptional 
succession. 

Of these, very different is the production of that after- 
image which arises together with the access-concentration. 
Therefore if, in the cross-legged position, a man is able to 
develop it. and attain ecstasy, well and good. If not, then 
he should guard it with zeal as though it were the embryo of 
a miiversal monarch. Hence: — 

To him who guards the sign there is no loss 
Of wha^’has been obtained. Whoso neglects 
To guard it,“ loses all that he obtained. 

[127] This herein is the order in which it is guarded: — 
Abode, resort, talk, person, season, food 
And posture — shun these seven unsuitable. 

But serve the seven if suitable. For who 
So serves the seven ere long gets ecstasy. 

Of these, that abode where to the dweller the sign which 
has not arisen does not arise, or that which has arisen perishes 


^ Read viklhambhtdn' em 


2 Read ArakJchamhi asantamhi. 



148 


The Path of Purity 

and^mindfulness which, has not been established is not estab- 
lished and the unconcentrated mind is not concentrated — 
this is not suitable. Where the sign arises and remains firm, 
and mindfulness is established and the mind concentrated as 
in the case of the Elder Padhaniya Tissa while residing at 
Nagapabbata, the abode is suitable. Therefore in whatever 
monastery are many abodes, there having stayed* at each abode 
for tteee days, one should abide at length m that abode where 
the mind is collected. For it was because of the suitableness 
of the abode that five hundred brethren living in Culanaga 
cave in the island of Tambapanni (Ceylon) and there receiving 
a subject of meditation, attained saintship. And the number 
may not be counted of the stream-winners and others who, 
after reaching elsewhere the stage of the elect attained samt- 
ship, there in that cave. And so also in other monasteries 
such as the Cittalapabbata Monastery. 

That village-resort where alms are sought is suitable yv’hich 
not too far, being within the distance of a kosa and a half 
either to the north or to the south,^ and which is full of food 
easy to get. The contrary is not suitable. 

And that talk which is classed among the thirty-two kinds 
of worldly talk^ is unsuitable, as leading to the disappearance 
of the sign. That talk which is dependent on the ten themes 
of talk*^ is suitable. Even this should be mdulged in in 
moderation. 

That person who does not indulge in worldly talk, who has 
moral habits and other virtues, m whose company the un- 
concentrated mind IS concentrated, or the coticentrated mind 
becomes more steadfast, is suitable. But he who is devoted 
to the nourishment of his body,^ and indulges in worldly 
talk is unsuitable; for he corrupts others, as muddy water 
pollutes clean water. And on account of -such a. man (the 
student) is as a boy livmg (alone) on a mountain top, and 
loses what he has attamed, let alone findmg the sign ! 

So that one may not face the sun in going to the village. 

2 Literally, beast-talk. See Dlgha i, 7. Dialogues lii, p. 3#^, n, 2. 

3 Milinda 344. 

* Read as in the footnote 3 in text. 



IV. — Exposition of the Earth Device 149 

[128] As regards food , — for some, sweet food, for otiers 
sour food is suitable.^ 

As for the seasons — for some the cold season, for others 
the hot season is suitable. Therefore whatever food or season 
is felt as pleasant, where the unconcentrated mind is concen- 
trated or the concentrated mmd becomes firmer, that food 
and that season is suitable; unsuitable are the other kmds. 

And among the postures, for some, walking to and *410 is 
smtable, for others, either lying down, or standing, or sitting. 
Therefore as in the case of the abode, after a test of three 
days, one should know that posture to be suitable where the 
unconcentrated mind becomes concentrated, or the concen- 
trated mind becomes fiirmer, and the others to be unsuitable. 
Thus avoiding the seven things unsuitable, one should follow 
the seven suitable things. For ecstasy arises in a short time 
in him who so practises, and who is devoted to the sign.^ 
But if it does not arise, in spite of his practising, then he 
should bring to pass the tenfold skill in ecstasy. This is the 
method: — 

In ten ways skill in ecstasy should be desired: — (1) by 
cleansmg the physical basis, (2) by regulating the controlling 
faculties, (3) by bemg skilful m the sign, (4) he upholds 
the mmd at the time when it should be upheld, (5) he checks 
the mind^ at the time when it should be checked, (6) he 
gladdens the m ind at the time when it should be gladdened, 
(7) he views the mind with equanimity at the time when it 
should be so viewed, (8) by avoiding persons of no concen- 
tration, (9) through companionship with persons of concen- 
tration, (10) by being intent on That. 

Of these, (1) ^'the cleansing of the physical basis ” means 
the makmg the internal and external physical bases clean. For 
when the hair of the head, nails, hairs of the body are long, 
or his body is foul with sweat, then the mternal physical 
basis IS not clean, not pure. And when his robe is old, duty, 
foul-smelling, or his dwelling full of rubbish, then the external 

1 According to the Tlhd all food is either sweet or sour, all other 
tastes being mere constituents of these two. 

2 Read nimittdsevambahulassa. 



150 


The Path of Purity 

phyfical basis is not clean, [129] not pure. And the insight 
in mind and mental properties that has arisen in an unclean 
physical basis, internal and external is impure, like the light 
of an oil flame produced from a dirty lamp, wick and oil. 
The complexes^ do not manifest themselves in him when 
he considers them with unpurified sight. And the subject of 
meditation, for all his application, does not attacin to growth, 
increa*be or development. On the other hand, insight m mind 
and mental properties that have arisen in a clean physical 
basis, mternal and external, is pure, purified, like the light 
of an oil flame produced from a clean lamp, wick and oil. 
The complexes manifest themselves in him when he considers 
them with purified msight. And the subject of meditation, 
as a result of his application, grows, increases, develops. 

(2) '‘Eegulation of the controlhng faculties ’’ means the work 
of equalizing faith and the other faculties. For if his faith- 
faculty be strong and the others weak, then it is not possible 
for the energy-faculty to do the function of upholdmg, the 
mmdfulness-faculty the function of establishing, the concentra- 
tion faculty that of not scattering, the understandmg faculty 
that of seemg. Therefore that (overstrong faculty) should be 
decreased by reflecting on the intrmsic nature of states, or by 
not giving it the attention which would make it strong. And 
here the story of Vakkah the Elder is an illustration.^ 

But if the energy-faculty be strong, then the faith-faculty 
will not be able to do the function of believing resolutely, nor 
will the other faculties fulfil their respective functions. There- 
fore energy should be decreased by developing tranquillity 
and the'rest.*'^ Here also the story of Sona the Elder^ should 
serve as an illustration. 

Thus it should be known that in the remaining faculties 
also when one faculty becomes strong, the others are unable 
to perform their functions. Here they especially praise the 
equahty of faith with understanding, and that of concentration 
^ Sanhhdra. 

^ Of. Psalms of the Brethren, p. 197 f.; Commentary on Dhammapada 
381 (Toi. IV, 118 1). <3 

3 I,e. concentration, equanimity. 

^ Gf. Psahns of the Brethren, p. 276. ' 



lY ,—^xfosition of the^Earth Device 151 

with energy. For he who is strong in faith, weak in under- 
standing, will (generally) place his faith in good-for-nothing 
people and believe m the wrong object. He who is strong 
in understanding, weak in faith, leans towards dishonesty, 
and is difficult to cure like a disease caused by medicine. 
One in whonT both are equal believes in the right object. He 
who is strong, in concentration, weak m energy, is overcome 
by idleness, since concentration partakes of the nature of 
idleness [130], He who is strong in energy;’ weak in concen- 
tration, IS overcome by distraction, since energy partakes of 
the nature of distraction. But* concentration when yoked 
to energy cannot fall into idleness, nor can energy when yoked 
to concentration fall mto distraction. Therefore they should 
be made equal to each other, for from equality m both comes 
ecstasy. In fact a worker m concentration should properly 
be strong in faith. So believing, trustmg he will attain 
ecstasy. And as to concentration and understanding, a 
worker m concentration should properly be strong in collected- 
ness, for so he attains ecstasy. A worker in insight should 
properly be strong in understanding, for so he gets penetration 
into the characteristics. And from equality in both comes 
ecstasy. And mindfulness (sati) should be strong everywhere. 
For mindfulness keeps the mind away from distraction, into 
which it might fail since faith, energy, and understanding 
partake of the nature of distraction; and away from idleness 
into which it might fall smce concentration partakes of the 
nature of idleness. Therefore mmdfulness is everywhere 
desirable, like salt-spicing in all curries, like the prime minister 
in all state functions. Hence it is said (in the commentary) : — 

The Blessed One has declared mmdfulness to be useful every- 
where. And what is the reason ? The mind indeed takes 
refuge in mindfulness, which has 'protecting as its manifestation. 
Without mindfulness the mind may not he upheld or checked. 

(3) “By skill in sign ” is here meant skilfulness in the work 
of the sign, as the cause of collectedness of mind,^ which has 
not yet been performed by the earth or other device, sldlful- 
ness in developing that sign which has already been performed 


^ Read clttekagyataiUuutCiJ(^o^A. 



152 The Path of Purity 

and skilfulness in guarding tliat sign wLich has been obtained 
thrmigh development. 

(4) And how '' does he uphold the mind at the time when it 
should be upheld V When the mind slackens through over- 
slackness of energy and so forth/ then instead of developing 
the three factors of wisdom beginmng with tranquillity he 
develops the three beginning with investigation into the 
doctrine. For this has been said by the Blessed One^: ''It 
is as though, monhs, a man would wish to cause a small fire to 
blaze up ; amd he were to throw into it wet grass, were to throw 
into it wet cow-dung, were to throw into it wet fire-wood, were to 
give it wind charged with water, were to sprinkle it with dust. 
Would it he possible, monks, for that man to cause the small 
fire [131] to blaze up ? Indeed not, Sir, Even so, monks, 
" when the mind slackens, it is not the time then to develop the 
wisdom factor of tranquillity ; not the time for the wisdom factor 
of concentration ; not the time to develop the wisdom factor of 
equanimity. What is the reason ^ It is difficult, monks, to 
uplift the sla(ik mind with these states. When, monks, the mind 
slackens, it is then time to develop the wisdom factor of investi- 
gation into the doctrine ; the time to develop the wisdom factor 
of energy ; the time to develop the wisdom factor of rapture. 
What is the reason ? It is easy, monks, to uplift the slack mind 
with these states. It is, monks, as though a man should wish to 
cause a small light to blaze up, and were to throw into it dry 
^ grass, were to throw into it dry cow-dung, were to throw into it 
dry fire-wood, were to give it dry wind, and were not to sprinkle 
it with dust. Would it he possible, monks, for that man to cause 
the small fire to blaze up ? It would, Sir,"^^ 

And here should be understood the developing of the 
wisdom factors such as mvestigation mto the doctrine by 
virtue of their respective causes.^ For this has been said'^ : 

There are moral and immoral states, monks, faulty *and fault- 
less states, low and exalted states, black, white and mixed states. 
In them there is much exercnsing of wise attention, which is the 

1 Such as joyousness, emotion and changeableness. 

2 Samyutta v, 112 f. ^ 

3 Yathasakam—yam yam sakam, attano attano ti attJio, — Tlkd, 

^ Samyutta v, 104. 



IV . — Exposition of the Earth Device 153 

cause of the arising of the wisdom factor of investigation intci the 
doctrine, not yet arisen, and which leads to the multiplying, 
increasing, developing, fidfilling of the wisdom factor of investi- 
gation into the doctrine which has already arisen. Likewise, 
monks, there are the element of initiative, the element of starting 
out, the element gf progress. In them there is much eocercising 
of wise attention, which is the cause of the arising of the wisdom 
factor of energy not yet arisen, and which leads to the multiplying, 
increasing, developing, fulfilling of the wisdom factor of energy, 
which has already arisen. Again, monks, there are states that 
are occasions of the wisdom factor of rapture. In them there 
is much exercising of wise attention, which is the cause of the 
arising of the wisdom factor of rapture not yet arisen, and which 
leads to the multiplying, increasing, developing, fulfilling of the 
wisdom factor of rapture already arisen.^’ 

[132] In this text attention which proceeds by way of 
penetrating into intrinsic and general characteristics^ is 
known! as wise attention ” in the moral and so on. Attention 
which proceeds by way of producing the elements mitiative 
and so forth is known as ‘‘wise attention” in those elements. 
Of these the first stage of energy is called “initiative,” 
“The element of starting out” as escapmg from idle- 
ness is stronger than that. The “ element of progress ” as 
advancing onwards is stronger than the last. “ States that 
are occasi6ns of the wisdom factor of rapture ” are a name 
for rapture itself. Attention which gives rise to that is also 
known as “ wise attention.” 

Further, seve^ states lead to the arising of the wisdom 
factor of mvestigation into the doctrine : (i) frequent question- 
ings, (ii) the cleansing of the physical basis, (lii) the regulation 
of the controlling faculties, (iv) the avoiding of persons of 
weak understanding, (v) the compamonship of persons of 
understanding, (vi) the reflection on the spheres of the pro- 
foundly wise ones, (vii) mtentness on That (wisdom). 

Eleven states lead to the arising of energy, the wisdom 
factor: (i) reflection on the terrors of the states of woe and 
so on, (ti) the seeing of advantage in the attainment of 


^ E.g. touch is mtrmsic and impermanence is general characteristic. 



154 


The'' Path of Purity 

distinction in worldly and transcendental states concerning 
energy, (in) reflection on the way one should go: I should go 
the way of Buddhas, silent Buddhas, great disciples, the way 
that IS impossible for the idle, (iv) food-offering^ as bringing 
much benefit to the donors, (v) reflection on the greatness of 
the Teacher thus : my teacher speaks m praise of the strenu- 
ously energetic, he has a religion not to be transgressed, and 
he does much good to us, is honoured when he is honoured 
for conduct, not otherwise, (vi) reflection on the greatness 
of the heritage thus. I ought to get the great heritage called 
the Good Law, which no idier can get, (vii) the dispellmg of 
sloth and torpor by attention to the perception of light, by 
changmg the postures, by resortmg to open space and so on, 
(viii) the avoiding of idle persons, (ix) the companionship of 
strenuously energetic persons, (x) reflection on right exertion, 
(xi) intentness on That (energy). 

Eleven states lead to the arising of rapture, the 
factor: (i) recollection of the Buddha, (ii) of the Law, (lii) of 
the Order, (!v) of morality, (v) of liberality, (vi) of the spirits, 
(vii) of peace, (vm) the avoidmg of coarse persons, [133], 
(ix) the companionship of gentle persons, (x) reflection on the 
Pasadaniya Suttanta,^ (xi) intentness on That (rapture). 

Thus he who produces these states in these ways is said to 
develop the factors of wisdom such as investigation ol the 
doctrine. In this way ‘‘ he upholds the mmd at the "time when 
it should be upheld.’’ 

(5) How '‘does he check the mind at the time when it should 
be checked ?” When the mmd is distracted by excess of 
strenuous energy and so forth, then instead of developing the 
three factors of wisdom begimnng with investigation into the 
doctrme, he develops the three begmnmg with tranquillity. 
For this has been said by the Blessed One^: “ It is as though, 
monks, a man would wish to jput out a big mass of fire, and were 
to throw into %t dry grass . . . not sprinkle it with dust. Would 
It he possible, monks, for that mcm to put out that big mass of 

fire? Indeed not. Sir! Even so, monks, when the mind is 

. - ^ „ 

^ Bead pindapacdyanxitd. 2 J)lgha iii, 99 f. 

® JSaQnyutta v, 114, 



IV. — Exposition of the Earth Device 155 

mstracted^ it is not the time then to develop the factor of wis^m 
of investigation into the doctrine : not the time to develop energy 
* . . rapture^ the ivisdom fctctor. What is the reason ? Monies, 
it is difficult to calm the distracted mind with these states. When, 
brethren, the mind is distracted, it is time then to develop tran- 
quillity, the wisdom factor, the time to develop concentration, the 
wisdom factor, the time to develop equanimity, the wisdom factor. 
What is the reason ? Monks, it is easy to calm the dis'^acted 
mind with these states. 

It is as though, monks, a man would wish to put out a big 
mass of fire and were to throw Mo it wet grass . . . sprinkle 
it with dust. Would it be possible, monks, for that man to put 
out that big mass of fire ? So it would, Sir.^^ 

Here also should be understood the developing of the wisdom 
factors such as tranquillity by virtue of their respective causes. 
For this has been said by the Blessed One^ : — Monks, there 
is bodily tranquillity, mental tranquillity. [134] In them there 
is much exercising of wise attention, which is the cause of the 
arising of the wisdom factor of tranquillity not yef arisen, and 
leads to the multiplying, increasing, developing, fulfilling of the 
wisdom factor of tranquillity already aiisen. Likewise, monks, 
there is the sign of calm, the sign of non-confusion. In them 
there is much exercising of wise attention, which is the cause 
of the arising of the wisdom factor of concentration not yet arisen 
and leads to the multiplying, increasing, developing, fulfilling 
of the wisdom factor of concentration already arisen. Again, 
monks, there are states which are the occasions of the wisdom 
factor of equanirmty. In them there is much exercising of wise 
attention, which is the cause of the arising of the wisdom factor 
of equanimity not yet arisen and leads to tlw multiplying, in- 
creasing, developing, fulfilling of the wisdom factor of equanimity 
already arisen. 

In this text attention which, having noted well the manner 
in which tranquillity and so on have already arisen, proceeds 
by way of their ansmg is known as '' wise attention in the 
three sentences above. 

The s%n of calm is a name for calm itself. And in the sense 


^ SamyiUtfi v, 104 f. 



156 The Path of Purity 

of ^on-distractioiij the sign of non-confusion is a name for 
non-confusion.^ 

Further, seven states lead to the arising of the wisdom factor 
of tranquillity: — (i) the partaking of excellent food, (ii) the 
resorting to fine weather, (lii) the adoptmg of^easy ways of 
deportment, (iv) the apphcation of equanimity, (v) the avoiding 
of persons of violent temper, (vi) the companionIShip of persons 
of co#l temper, (vii) intentness on That (tranquillity). 

Eleven states lead to the arising of the wisdom factor of 
concentration: — (i) the cleansing of the physical basis, (ii) 
skill in the sign, (iii) the regfilating of the controlling faculties, 
(iv) the occasional checking of the mind, (v) the occasional 
upholding of the mind, (vi) the gladdening of the dissatisfied 
mind by means of faith and emotion, (vii) the equanimity 
of the well-conducted mind, (viii) the avoiding of persons of 
no concentration, (ix) the compamonship of persons of con- 
centration, (x) reflection on Jhana emancipation, (xi) intent- 
ness of That (concentration). 

Five states lead to the arising of the wisdom factor of 
equanimity: — (i) evenmindedness concerning beings, (ii) even- 
mindedness concerning the complexes, (iii) the avoiding of 
persons who are fond of beings and complexes, (iv) the com- 
panionship of persons evenminded towards beings and com- 
plexes, (v) intentness on That (equanimity). 

Thus he who produces these states in these ways is said 
to [135] develop the wisdom factors such as tranquillity. Thus 
“ he checks the mind at the time when it should be checked.’’ 

(6) How '' does he gladden the mind at the time when it 
should be gladdened ?” When his mind is dissatisfied through 
weakness of the motives of understandmg or through not get- 
ting the bliss of calm, then he agitates it reflecting on the eight 
objects of emotion. The eight objects of emotion .are: birth, 
old age, sickness, death the fourth, misery of the states of woe 
the fifth, misery which has its roots in the round of births 
in the past, misery which has its roots in the round of births m 
the future, misery which has its roots m the search for food in 
the present. He produces satisfaction by recalling th^ virtues 


^ I.e, concentration. 



IV . — Exposition of the* Earth Device 157 

• * • • 

of the Buddha, Law and the Order. Thus he gladdens jphe 
mind at the time when it should be gladdened.” 

(7) How does he view, the mind with equanimity at the 
time when it should be so viewed When the mind of 
him who practises thus does not slack, is not excited, not 
dissatisfied, conducts itself well towards the object, has pro- 
ceeded along the path of calm, then he has no concern about 
the upholding, checkmg and gladdening, as a charioteer has 
none about an even yoke of horse. Thus he views the mind 
with equanimity at the time when it should be so viewed. 

(8) The '' avoidmg of persons t)f no concentration” means 
the shunning from afar of persons who have never stepped on 
the path of emancipation, who are engaged m many affairs, 
and have frivolous hearts. 

(9) The '' companionship of persons of concentration ” 
means the going from time to time to persons who have 
traversed the path of emancipation and who have attained 
concentration. 

(10) ''Intentness on That” is intentness on ccfhcentration. 
The meaning is, reverence towards concentration, inclmation 
towards concentration, the leaning towards concentration, 
the slopmg towards concentration. Thus this tenfold skill 
in ecstasy should be fulfilled. 

In him who thus fulfils ecstatic skill, 

In sign obtained the ecstasy proceeds. 

If it should not arise for all he has 
In practice done, yet he the wise should not 
[136] Forsake the yoke but strive; for so a lad 
Cannot in any wise distinction gain 
Even in a httle thing, if ever he 
Has ceased to put forth energy aright. 

Therefore the wise man^ noting well the mode 
In which the nund proceeds should oft try hard 
Equality of energy to get. 

One should uphold the mind that slacks 
Ever so little, check the mind 
*Too strenuous, make it smooth in course. 


1 Buddho, 



158 


The Path of Purity 

Like bees and otner tilings on pollen/ lotus-leaf, 

In thread, and boat, and flask commended is the way. 
From cleaving and inflation wtiolly setting free 
The mind let him impel it towards the Jhana-sign. 

Here is the setting forth of the meaning: As tlfe stupid^ bee 
knowing that flowers are blossoming in a certain tree and 
settmg out with a terrific speed passes it, and in turnmg 
back reaches it when the juice is finished; another stupid bee 
setting out with a low speed reaches it when the juice is 
finished; a clever bee, on the other hand, setting out with 
even speed easily reaches the bunch of trees, takes the juice 
to its heart’s content, and turning it mto honey enjoys its 
taste: likewise as among the students of surgery who are 
practising surgical work on a lotus-leaf placed in a vessel 
of water, one stupid student lettmg fall the kmfe with speed 
either cuts the lotus -leaf in two or sinks it in the water; another 
stupid one out of fear of the cuttmg and the sinking dare not 
touch it with the knife, the clever one, on the other hand, 
makes the stroke with the kmfe with even force,*^ finishes his 
course, and earns money by domg similar work as occasion 
arises. Likewise as on an announcement of the kmg he who 
brings cobweb four fathoms long gets four thousand coins,” a 
stupid man draws the cobweb in haste and cuts it here and 
there; another stupid man through fear of cutting it dare not 
even touch it with his fingers; the clever man, on the other 
hand, rolls it from one end on a stick with even force and 
brmgs it and gets the reward. Likewise a^ a stupid [137] 
sailor who goes full sail when the wmd is strong causes the 
boat to rush ofl her course; another stupid man who lowers 
the sails when the wmd is low makes the boat remain in the 
same place; the clever one, on the other hand, goes full sail 
when the wmd is low, half sail when the wind is strong, and 
reaches his destination in safety. Likewise as when the 
teacher announces to his pupils, Who fills the tube without 
spilling the oil gets reward,” a stupid student, greedy of gain, 

— — ^ — 

^ ^ Biead renumTiL 2 p,ead acJieho for aticheho. 

2 Or “ shows the mark of the knife-blado,’’ following the footnote. 



IV. — Exposition of the ‘Earth Device 169 

• * • , 

filling witli liaste spills tlie oil; another stupid one tkro'ggli 
fear of spilling the oil dare not even pour it out, a clever one, 
on the other hand, fills the tube with even force and gets the 
reward. Even so when the sign appears a monk makes strong 
effort saying, I will quickly attam ecstasy but his mind 
through excessive strenuousness becomes distracted, and he is 
not able to aittam ecstasy. Another person seemg fault in 
excessive strenuousness gives up the effort, saying, '‘JWhat 
is the use of ecstasy to me now V’ His mind through over- 
slackness of energy becomes idle, and he also is not able to 
attain ecstasy. But he who relea'fees with even force the mind 
that is slack ever so little from slackness and the distracted 
mind from distraction drives it towards the sign, and attains 
esctasy. One should become like such an one. 

With reference to this matter it is said: — 

Like bees and other things on pollen, lotus-leaf, 

In thread, and boat, and flask commended is the way. 
From cleaving and inflation wholly settmg free 
The mind let him impel it towards the Jhana-sign. 

As he thus drives the mind towards the sign, there arises 
mind-door-adverting having for its object that very earth 
device which has appeared by cutting off subconsciousness at 
the very time when one should think Now ecstasy will be 
realized and by concentrating on Earth ! earth !’’ Then 
come into play four or five flashes of apperception in that 
object; the last one of them is of the realm of form; the rest 
are of the realms^of sense, with stronger applied and sustained 
thinking, rapture, bliss, and collectedness of mind than the 
original classes of consciousness, and are called preambles 
because of their making arrangements for ecstasy. And — 
just as a place near villages and the like is called a village- 
neighbourhood, [138] town-neighbourhood — they are called 
“ accesses ’’ (neighbourhoods) from their nearness to or fre- 
quenting the neighbourhood of ecstasy. And they are called 
also ''adaptations” as being adapted to preambles of former 
processes of thought and to higher ecstasy. And the last one 


^ Parikammanl it 



160 


The. Path of Purity 

of^all^ here is called adoption as concerning the lineage of 
the limited (of sense) and developing the lineage of the sublime. 
Andj to mention what has been omitted, preamble is the first, 
access is the second, adaptation is the third, adoption is the 
fourth. Or, access is the first, adaptation is the second, 
adoption is the third, ecstatic consciousness is the fourth 
or fifth. For only the fourth or fifth ecstasizes; and that 
by m^9.ns of quick insight and sluggish insight. After that 
apperception lapses. It is the turn for subconsciousness.^ 

But Abhidhammikagotta the Elder, quoting the sutta^: 

The ^previous moral states %re a cause hy way of repetition of 
the later moral states'' says that a later state is strong by 
virtue of the causal relation of repetition; hence there is 
ecstasy also at the sixth, seventh apperception. That is 
rejected m the commentaries with the remark that it is merely 
the Elder’s personal view. 

But it has been said that there is ecstasy only at the fourth 
and fifth, after which apperception lapses on account of the 
nearness of subconsciousness. This statement bemg made 
after due deliberation may not be set aside. !For as a man 
running to the edge of a steep cliS, though he wish to stop, 
cannot stop by putting his foot on the edge but falls down the 
cliff, so through nearness of subconsciousness it is not possible 
to ecstasize at the sixth or seventh. Hence there is ecstasy 
only at the fourth or fifth. Thus it should be understood. 

And that ecstasy lasts one conscious moment. For there 
is no time limit in seven places, namely the fijst ecstasy, the 
different kinds of worldly higher knowledge, the four Paths, 
Fruition immediately after the Path, the subconscious Jhana 
in the worlds of form and the formless, the sphere of the neither 
perceptible nor imperceptible which is in causal relation to 
trance, the attainment of fruition by one who emerges from 
trance. Of these, fruition immediately after the Path does 
not last beyond three moments [139]. The sphere of the 
neither perceptible nor imperceptible which is m causal relation 

to trance does not last beyond two moments. There is no 

— -#■ 

1 sahhantimam, ^ Gotra-bJiu: ‘‘olan-becomer.” 

® Bhavahga. ^ TikapaUhdna. 



161 


IV . — Exposition of the Earth Device 

measure of subconsciousness in the worlds of form and t^he 
formless. In the rest is only one (moment of) consciousness. 
Thus there is only one consciousness moment in ecstasy, 
after which is the lapse mto subconsciousness. Then, cutting 
off subconsciousness, arises advertmg for the purpose of 
reflection on the^ Jhana, and then comes the Jhana reflection 
itself. 

To this extent Aloof indeed from sensuous desires ^aloof 
from immoral states^ he abides in the attainment of the First 
Jhana, wherein is thinking applied and sustained, which is 
born of solitude, and full of rapture and bliss And so he 
attains the First Jhana, which has put away five factors, is 
endowed with five factors, is of threefold goodness, is possessed 
of ten characteristics, and has the earth device 

Therein, the phrase ‘‘ aloof indeed from sensuous desires ” 
means being separated from, being without, having parted 
from, the desires of sense. And the word '' mdeed ” here is to 
be understood as having the meamng of assurance. Because 
it has this meaning it shows the opposition of the^'irst Jhana 
to desires of sense, even though they may not exist during the 
time when one lives in its attainment, and that it is attained 
only by the rejecting of them. 

How '2 When thus, by being aloof from sensuous desires, 
assurance is given, this meamng is made clear: — as where 
darkness e'kists, there is no lamplight, so this Jhana does not 
arise in the presence of sensuous desires, which indeed, are 
opposed to it. As by abandoning the hither bank, the thither 
bank is reached^ so by abandonmg sensuous desires this 
(Jhana) is attained. Therefore he made this a matter of 
assurance. 

Here one might object: '' But why is this ' indeed’ spoken 
with the precedmg term (i.e. sensuous desires) and not with 
the followmg term (i.e. immoral states) ? Can one abide in the 
attainment of the Jhana without being aloof from immoral 
states Not thus should the matter be understood. ''In- 
deed ” verily is spoken with the precedmg term, because 
Jhana is^an escape from sensuous desires; and Jhana is so 


^ Formula of First Jhana, Dlglia i, 73 etc. 



162 


The* Path of Purity 

be^jause it bas passed beyond all sensuous conditions, and is 
opposed to the lust of sense-desires. Accordingly be said, 

From sensuous desires this is the escape^ this is the egress 
[140] Tbe word '' indeed ’’ may also be used with tbe following 
term, as it is in In my dispensation indeed^ monhs . , . 
the first {class of) recluse is to be found, the secZnd {class of) 
recluse is to be foundP^ It is not possible to live in tbe 
attaij^ment of tbis Jbana without being aloof from those other 
immoral states, known as hindrances, which are so difierent 
£rom it. Thus assurance should be understood in both the 
terms. And although, in both the terms, by the common 
word aloof ’’ all kinds of aloofness are included, such as that 
of the corresponding part and so on, yet here only the three, 
viz. aloofness of body, aloofness of mind and aloofness by 
way of discardmg (the hiadrances) are to be understood. 

By the term sense-desires ” the desires based on objects 
of sense are referred to, as m the Niddesa^: What are the 
desires based on objects, delightful and lovely And in that 
text and mthe Vibhanga"^ these are said to be sense-desires of 
our lower nature,® e.g. The desire that is purpose, lust, lust of 
the senses, intention, lust, lustful intentions . . . these are called 
sense-desires P All these also should be understood as included. 
This being so, the meaning of aloof mdeed from sense-desires 
ought also to be aloof indeed from sense-desires based on 
objects,’' by which bodily aloofness is meant, Aloof from 
immoral states ” — the proper meaning of this is separated 
from the sense-desires based on the vices or all the immoral 
states,” by which mental aloofness is expressed. By the 
formeiv phrase (i.e. ''aloof indeed from sense-desires ”), because 
it has been said to be aloof from the sense-desires based on 
objects, therefore it is clear that the pleasure of enjoymg such 
sense-desires has been given up. By the second phrase (i.e. 
" aloof from immoral states ”), because it has been said to 
be aloof from the sense-desires based on the vices, it is clear 
that the bliss of renunciation has been comprehended. Thus 
from their being said to be aloof from sense-desires based 


1 Dlgha 111 , 275. 
3 Nid. i, 1, 


2 MajjMmai, 63; Ahguttara ii, 238. 

^ Page 256; Nid, 2. ^ Kilesd, 



163 


IV . — Exposition of the Earth Device 

on objects and on the vices, by the first of the two phraser is 
clearly shown the relinquishment of the basis of the vices, by 
the second that of the vices; by the first is shown the giving 
up of the condition of frivohty, by the second that of foolish- 
ness; by the first is shown the purity of motive, by the second 
the fostering of the wish.^ 

Thus far, iokthe phrase “ from sense-desires ” we have the 
method for the portion includmg sense-desires based on o^'ects. 
In the portion including sense-desires of the vices, sense- 
desires,’’ variously considered as desire, lust and so on are the 
purpose of those desires. [141] This, though it is included 
among immoral states, is taken separately, as being opposed to 
Jhana in the same way as it is said in the Vibhanga^ : '' Herein 
what is the sensuous desire which is the purpose thereof?^’ 
Or it is taken in the first phrase as being sensuous desires of 
the vices, and m the second phrase as being mcluded in things 
immoral. And the plural ‘'from sense - desires,” not the 
singular, is used to show its manifold nature. And although 
other states are unmoral, only the “ hindrances ”*are spoken 
of as showing the opposition to, hostility of the higher Jhana- 
f actors in the same way as is said m the Vibhanga^: “ Herein 
which are the inmoral states? Sensuous desire, and so on. 
For it is said that the hindrances are opposed to the Jhana- 
factors, which are hostile to them and dispeP and destroy 
them. Likewise it is said in the Petakopadesa,^ that concen- 
tration is opposed to sensuous desires, rapture to ill-will, 
applied thinking to sloth and torpor, bliss to flurry and worry, 
sustained thinking to perplexity. Thus the former phrase 
“ aloof indeed from sensuous desires ” expresses separation 
from, by way of discarding of, sensuous desire; the latter — 
“ aloof from immoral states ” — expresses separation from the 
five hindrances. And if we include what has not been (ex- 
plicitly) included, separation by discarding is stated, m the 
first and second phrases, respectively of sensuous desire and of 
the remaining hmdrances; of greed which is one of the three 

1 See Expositor 220, n. 3. “ Page 256. 

® Bead mddhamsahani, 

^ A first edition of this work is being prepared for the Pali Text Society 
by Mr. Helmer Smith. 



164 


ThAPath of Purity 

inmnoral roots with the pleasures of the five senses for object, 
and of hate and delusion (the other immoral roots) with the 
bases of vexation etc. for object, of sensuality as flood,’’ 
'' bond,” bane,” '' cHnging,” '' the physical knot ” of 
covetousness, the lust of desire as a “ fetter ” among the 
''floods” etc., and of the remaining floods, ^onds, banes, 
clingings, knots, and fetters; of craving and states associated 
with it, and of ignorance and states associated with it; and 
also of the eight states of consciousness associated with greed, 
and of the remaining four immoral states of consciousness.^ 
So much then for the setting forth of the meaning of " aloof 
indeed from sensuous desires and aloof from immoral states.” 

Now having so far shown the factor eliminated in the First 
Jhana, the clause " wherem is thinkmg applied and sustamed ” 
is now stated to show the factors associated with it. 

[142] Therein "applied thought” is "thinkmg about.”^ 
It IS said to be the prescinding (of the mind). Its charac- 
teristic IS the liftmg of consciousness on to the object.^ It 
has the fuflction of impmgemg, of circumimpmgemg. And 
so by applied thinking the student is said to strike mentally, 
at and around the object. Its mamfestation is bringing the 
mind near to its object. 

"Sustained thinkmg” is (lit.) ''going about,” said to be 
the driving on of the object. It has threshing out (of* con- 
templation) of object as characteristic, the linking of co- 
existent states to the object as function, and contmuous 
bmdmg as its manifestation. Although there is in some 
(consciousness) the non-separation of applied and sustamed 
thinking, the former is the first incidence of the mind on to the 
object, as it were the striking of a bell, because it is more gross 
than and runs before (the latter). The latter is the subsequent 
bmdmg of consciousness on to the object, as it were the re- 
verberation of the bell, because it is more subtle "and of the 
nature of repeated threshing of the object. Of the two, 
applied thinking possesses vibration.^ ^en it first arises, 

^ Dhammasanganly §§ 365 

2 Vitakkanam. See parallel discussion m Bxjpositor 16 ft 

3 DUmmasangam, § 7. 4 Vipphamva. 



IV . — Exposition of the Emth Device 165 

it is as a state of mental tlirill, like the flapping of the wing^ of 
a bird about to fly up in the air, and like the alighting in front 
of the lotus of a bee with mind intent on the perfume. Sus- 
tained thinkmg is of a calm tenor, without much mental 
thrill, like the planing movement of the wings of a bird in the 
sky, and the gyrating of the bee about the lotus on which 
it has alighted. But in the Commentary on the Dukanipata^ 
applied thinking, as a lifting of the mind on to the (^ject, 
is likened to the movement of a big bird in the sky, taking 
the wind with both wings and keeping them steadily in a 
line (for it advances bent on a* single object). Sustained 
thinking, on the other hand, should be understood as like the 
movement of the flying bird flapping its wings to take the 
wind; for it has been said to be of the nature of threshing 
or contemplating of the object. It is a very fitting term to 
use for a contmuous process. The difference between the two 
is plain in the first and second Jhanas. Further as when a man 
holds firmly by one hand a dirty copper bowl, and with the 
other scrubs it with a brush soaked in soap-powder and oil, 
apphed thinking is like the firmly holding hand, and sustained 
thinkmg the scrubbmg hand. So too, as the potter twirls the 
wheel by the stroke of the handle and makes the pot [143], 
applied thinkmg is like the hand pressing the clay down, sus- 
tained thinking the hand turmng it to and fro.^ Agam, the 
lifting of applied thought is like fixing the thorn (or peg}, in 
making a circle, in the middle and the contemplating sustained 
thought the circumambulating thorn outside. It has been 
said that, as a tree is found with its flowers and fruits, so this 
Jhana occurs with apphed and sustained thinkmg. And m 
the Vibhanga the teaching, as determined in a personal way 
is given thus. — One zs endowed with^ possessed of, this ap- 
phed thinkmg, thzs sustained thinking ” etc.^ But the meaning 
there is to be understood as in this passage. 

In the term “ born of solitude/’ the meaning is separation, 
sohtude, freedom from the hindrances. Or it means solitary,” 

separated.” The group of states associated with Jhana and 

^ Manoratliapurau-i on Anguttarai, 53, § 3. 

2 TheTikattakdB samsarmyxhatiho, ® Page 257. 



166 Xhe Path of Purity 

separated from tlie hindrances is the meaning. And born 
of solitude ” is born from that solitude or in that solitude. 

In rapture and bliss ’’ rapture is that which expands 
(fattens). It has expanding as characteristic, the thrilling 
of body and mind or sufiusion as function, and elation as 
manifestation. Rapture is of five kinds: the lesser thrill, 
momentary rapture, floodmg rapture, transporting rapture, 
all-pexvadmg rapture. Of these the lesser thrill is only able 
to raise the hairs of the body. The momentary rapture is 
like the production of lightning moment by moment. Like 
waves breaking on the seashore, the flooding rapture descends 
repeatedly on the body and breaks. Transporting rapture is 
strong, and lifts the body up to the extent of launching it 
into the air. Thus the Elder Mahatissa^ residing at Punria-' 
vallika went on the full moon day at eventide mto the court- 
yard of the shrme, saw the moonhght, and turning to the 
Great Shrine, called up transporting rapture, with the Buddha 
as object of thought, and by virtue of having habitually 
dwelt upon' the vision, at the thought In such an hour, 
lo, the four assemblies salute the Great Shrine ” — on the 
cemented floor rose mto the sky like a spinnmg painted top 
and stood even in the courtyard of the Shrine. Likewise a 
certain daughter of noble fannly in Vattakalaka village, the 
support of Girikandaka Monastery, soared into the sky also 
by strong transporting rapture when thinking of the Buddha. 
It is said that the parents gomg in the evemng to the monastery 
to hear the Doctrine [144] said ''Dear, thou art heavily 
burdened; it is not the time for thee to be walkmg; thou art 
not able; we shall hear the Doctrine and make merit for thee,’’ 
and went. Though she wanted to go, she could not disregard 
their words, and remained behmd in the house. She stood 
on the floor of the house and, looking by moonhght at the 
courtyard of the Shrme against the sky at Girikan.daka, saw 
the ofiering of lamps to the Shrme and the four assemblies 
doing honour to the Shrine by garlands and scented perfumes 
etc. and walking round and round, and she heard the sound 

^ Expositor, p. 1S3. C£. Mrs. Rhys Davids, Buddh. Psychology (1914, 
1924), p. 189. 



IV. — Exposition of ih^. Enrih Device 167 

* • 

of the mass-chanting of the Brotherhood. Then to her 
occurred the thought; Blessed indeed must be those who 
can get to the monastery and walk in such a courtyard, and 
hear such sweet religious discourse and to her, looking at 
the Shrine rising like a mass of pearls, arose transporting 
3;apture. She soared mto the air, and descending therefrom 
to the courtyard earlier than her parents, saluted the Shrine, 
and stood listening to the Doctrine. Then her parents coming 
asked her: '' Dear, by which way didst thou come V Dear 
parents, by the sky I came and not by the road.” “ Dear, by 
the sky only samts, purged of the"" cankers, go. How couldst 
thou have come ?” Thus questioned, she said, ''As I stood 
looking at the Shrine in the moonlight, there arose in me a 
strong rapture while I was thinking on the Buddha. Then I 
knew not whether I stood or sat, but I laid hold of a sign, and 
sprang into the sky, and stood in the courtyard of the Shrine.” 
So far can transporting rapture work. 

When all-pervading rapture arises, the whole body is com- 
pletely surcharged, blown like a full bladder, or like a mountain 
cavern pouring forth a mighty flood of water. This fivefold 
rapture, becoming pregnant and maturmg, consummates the 
twofold serenity of mental factors and of consciousness; 
serepity, becoming pregnant and maturing, consummates the 
twofold bliss, bodily and mentally; bliss, becoming pregnant 
and maturing, consummates the threefold concentration: — 
momentary concentration, access-concentration and ecstatic 
concentration. Of the fivefold rapture this is the all-pervading 
rapture, which, "^being the root of ecstatic concentration, goes 
on growing and reaches association with concentration. This 
is the rapture meant here. 

[146] Now the other term " bliss ” (or ease) is being blissful.^ 
Or, bliss IS that which thoroughly eats up or uproots the ills 
of body and mmd. It has the characteristic of being pleasant, 
the development of associated states as its function, and 
showing favour to the same as its manifestation. Although 
in some kinds (of consciousness) rapture and bliss are not dis- 
sociated, rapture is delight m the attaining of the desired 


^ 8uTchanam, 



168 


TTm Path of Purity 

oblect, bliss is the erLjo}rmeiit of the taste of what is attained. 
Where rapture is, there is bliss: but where bliss is, there is 
not of necessity rapture. Eapture is classed under the aggre- 
gate of mental coefficients, bliss under the aggregate of feeling. 
Eapture is like a weary traveller who hears or s^es water or 
a shady wood. Bliss is as the enjoying the water or entering 
the forest shade. In fact the description (of tlie two terms) 
on thio or that occasion is well illustrated. And this rapture 
and this bliss belong to or exist in this Jhana ; hence it is said 
to be full of the bliss of rapture.’’ Or, pitisukham means 
rapture and bliss, like “ Dhamma-Vinaya ” etc. There is the 
rapture and bliss born of solitude of, or in, this Jhana; hence 
born of solitude, full of rapture-bliss.” For verily as the 
Jhana is born of solitude, so in it the rapture and bliss are also 
born of solitude and are obtainable in it. Therefore it is 
proper to say Born of solitude and full of rapture-bliss ” as 
one term. But in the Vibhanga^ it has been said in this* way : 

Ths bliss is accompamed by this rapture ” etc. The mean- 
ing, however, is to be understood as m this passage. 

First Jhana.” This term will become plain later on (p. 173). 
‘‘ In the attainment ” is said to mean having approached,” 
"^having reached,” or '^having fulfilled,” '‘havmg accom- 
plished.” In the Vibhanga,^ ‘‘having attained” is said to 
mean the getting, gaining, obtaining, reaching, touching, 
realizing, attaining of the First Jhana. There also the mean- 
ing is to be understood in the same way. 

“ He abides ” means that he is endowed with the Jhana, 
the various kinds of which have been ahead^ distinguished 
by the mode of behaviour correspondmg to that Jhana, and 
that he has accomplished the function, progress, preservation, 
regulation, maintenance, moving, abiding of a personahty. 
For this has been said m the Vibhanga^ that “ ho abides ” 
means, he functions, [146] progresses, preserves, regulates, 
maintains, moves, abides. Hence “ he abides.” 

And in the statement “ has put away five factors, is endowed 
with five factors ” the removal of the five factors is to be 
understood by way of eliminating the five hindrances: sense- 


1 


2 Page 252. 



TV .—Exposition of the Ectih Device 169 

• * • 

desire, ill- will, sloth-torpor, flurry-worry, perplexity. For wh^^u 
these are not removed, the Jhana does not arise; hence they 
are called its eliminated factors. There are indeed other 
i mm oral states that are elimmated at the Jhana-moment, 
but these especially are harmful to the Jhana. For the mind 
that lusts after many things through sense-desire is not con- 
centrated on oiie object; or, being overcome by sense-desire, 
it does not enter upon the progress (of Jhana) in order tg put 
away the sensuous element. And the mind that is harassed 
by ill-will concerning an object does not proceed at once. 
The mind that is overcome by sloth and torpor is unwieldy. 
Obsessed by worry and flurry it does not repose, but flits 
about. Struck by perplexity it does not go on the path that 
leads to the attainment of Jhana. Thus as especially danger- 
ous to the Jhana are they spoken of as the ehminated factors. 

And because applied thinking applies the mind to the object 
and sustained thinking keeps it continually engaged, rapture 
brings about the expandmg and bliss the developing of the 
mind whose motives for non-distraction have been accomplished 
by those two kinds of thinking. The brmging to pass of this is 
due to that very success in motive. And afterwards collected- 
ness, favoured by the applymg, continual bmding, expanding 
and developing of these four states,^ places evenly and well, on 
a smgle ob;[ect, the mind with the remaining associated states.^ 
Therefore endowment with the five factors is to be understood 
by way of the arising of these five : applied and sustamed think- 
ing, rapture, bliss, collectedness of mmd. For when they arise, 
Jhana arises; heilce they are called its five endowmg factors. 
Therefore it should not be held that there is any other "Jhana 
which is endowed with these. As by virtue of just the factors 
an army is called fourfold, and music fivefold, and the Path 
eightfold — »o this Jhana is said to be [147] of five factors, or 
endowed with five factors, just by virtue of its factors. And 
though these five factors exist at the access- moment, yet they 
are stronger then than the original consciousness. But here 
they are stronger than the access, having acquired the charac- 
teristics of the realm of form. For here applied thinking arises 


^ I.e. applied and sustamed tiiinkmg, rapture, bliss. ^ E.g. contact. 



170 


Path of Purity 

lifting the mind on to the object in a decidedly clear manner; 
sustamed thinking arises threshing the object very much; 
rapture-bliss arises suffusing all parts of the body. Hence it 
was said ‘‘ There %s no fart of the body that is not diffused with 
rapture-bliss born of solitude.”^ Collectedness <of mind also 
arises touching the object well,^ as the lid above touches 
the surface of the box below. This is the difference of these 
fromd}he others. 

Among the factors, although collectedness of mind is not 
shown in this readmg, as '' wherein is thinking applied and 
sustained/’ yet it is a factor, as is stated in the Vibhanga^: 
^^Jhdna is applied thmHng, sustained ihin’king, rapture, bliss, 
collectedness of mind. ’ ’ Whatever may have been the intention 
of the Blessed One in making the outline, it is revealed in the 
Vibhahga. 

In '‘Of the threefold goodness, possessed of ten charac- 
teristics,’’ the threefold goodness is by way of the beginn in g, 
middle and the end. And the possession of the ten character- 
istics IS to be understood by way of the characteristics of the 
beginning, middle and end. 

Here this is the text: “ The purity of progress of the First 
Jhana is the beginning; the developing of equanimity is in the 
middle; the thrill (over the result) is the end.” 

" The purity of progress of the First Jhana is the beginning ” 
— how many characteristics are there of the beginning ? 
There are three characteristics of the beginning. There is that 
hindrance to the Jhana from which the mind is purified. 
Owing to its purified state the mind practise the middle sign 
of calm; owing to such practice the mind rushes on to the 
sign.^ Whatever the purifying of the mmd from the hindrance, 
whatever the practising by the mind, through its purified state, 
of the middle sign of calm, and whatever the rushing thereon 
of the mmd through such practices — the purity of progress of 
the First Jhana is the beginning, of which these are the three 
characteristics. Hence it is said that the First Jhana is good 
in the beginning and possesses three characteristics. 


1 Dlgha i, 73. 
3 Page 257. 


2 Read drammane suphimtd. 
^ Or the ecstasy. 



IV. — Exposition of the Eclrth Device 171 

[]48] The developing of equanimity of the First Jhana-ns 
in the middle/’ — how many characteristics are there of the 
middle ? There are three characteristics of the middle. One 
regards with equanimity the purified mind; the mind that is 
practised in43alm; the mind that is established on a smgle 
object. Whatever the equanimity with which one regards the 
purified mind* regards the mind practised in calm, regards 
the mind established on a single object, — ^the developing of 
equammity of the First Jhana is in the middle. These are 
the three characteristics of the middle; hence is it said that 
the First Jhana is good in the huddle and possesses three 
characteristics. 

^^The thrill of the First Jhana is the end.” How many 
characteristics are there of the end ? There are four charac- 
teristics of the end. There is thrill in the sense of the states 
which have arisen in the Jhana not exceedmg one another; 
the thrill in the sense of the controlling faculties having one 
and the same function; the thrill in the sense of possessing 
energy favourable to those two senses; the thrill in the sense 
of resorting (to the aforesaid states); the thrill of the First 
Jhana is the end, of which these are the four characteristics. 
Hence it is said that the First Jhana is good in the end and 
possesses four characteristics. 

Some^ explain that there (in the text) purity of progress 
means access with its constituents, developmg of equanimity 
means ecstasy, and thrill means reflection. But because it 
IS said in the text that collectedness of mind enters into purity 
of progress, is developed by equanimity, and is thrilled by 
insight, therefore purity of progress is to be imderstood by 
way of coming withm ecstasy, developing of equammity by 
way of the function of evenmindedness, thrill by way of the 
accomplishing of the function of knowledge which is cleansed 
when the states are seen not to exceed one another and so 
forth. How ? For the mind is purified of whatever group of 
vices called the hindrances ” obstruct the Jhana on the 
occasion when ecstasy arises. Owing to such purification, 
it is freSd from obstruction and enters upon the middle sign 


1 E.g. the Abhayagiri scholars, Expositor 3, n. 2. 



172 


TJ^' Path of Purity 

€ f 

of^alm. And ecstatic concentration which proceeds evenly^ 
is the middle sign of calm. 

Then the previous (adoptive) consciousness, rendering 
immediate service to ecstasy, and [149] approaching truth in 
the manner of bending towards a single continuity, enters 
upon (practises) the middle sign of calm. .Owing to such 
practice and approach towards truth, it rushes 8n to the sign. 
Thus purity of progress is to be understood as accomplishing 
the real attributes^ in the previous consciousness, and by way 
of the arrival at the moment of genesis of the First Jhana. 
And since there is no purifyihg again of the mind that has been 
purified, one does not worry about purification, and regards 
the purified mind with equanimity. Not worrying about the 
readjusting of the mind which, by reaching calmness, is pro- 
gressing in calm, one regards such a mind with equanimity. 
Not worrying about establishing on a single object the mind 
that owing to its progress in calm has put away the society 
of the vices, one regards such mind with equanimity. Thus 
the developing of equammity is to be understood by way of 
the functioning of evenminded indifierence. 

And those pairs of states called concentration and under- 
standing which are produced there, in the developing of 
equanimity, and which proceed without exceeding one another, 
and those faculties such as faith which, being freed frorn the 
various vices, have one and the same function in emancipation, 
and that energy which one puts forth, fitting and suitable, 
to the end that the states may not exceed one another, and 
may have one and the same function, and thart recourse which 
is had at the moment of the genesis of the Jhana-consciousness 
— because all these conditions are accomplished by being 
thrilled, purified, cleansed, according as one sees by know- 
ledge the various evils and advantages in the viaes and in 
their purification, therefore has it been said that thrill ” is to 
be understood by way of the accomplishing of the functions of 
knowledge (msight) which is cleansed when the states are seen 

not to exceed one another, and so forth. 



1 I.e. free from sluggishness and excitement (llna, uddhacca). 

2 E.g. thorough purification, attainment of the middle sign of calm, 
rushing forth. 



IV. — Exposition of the E^rth Device 173 

• • • 

There, in that consciousness, because knowledge beconaes 
manifest by virtue of equanimity, — as has been said: ''So by 
virtue of equanimity he regards satisfactorily with equanimity 
the mind that is upheld; by virtue of understanding the 
faculty of understanding is abundant; by virtue of equanimity 
the mind is freed from the various vices; by virtue of emanci- 
pation and tfnderstandmg the faculty of imderstanding is 
abundant; from being emancipated the states have oij^ and 
the same function; in the sense of havmg one and the same 
function is culture,” — therefore the thrill, as havmg become 
the function of knowledge, is stated to be the end (of Jhana). 

Now in " he attains the First Jhana . . . which is the earth- 
device,” " Fust ” is the numerical order. " First ” also [150] is 
the first to have arisen. " Jhana ” is so called from its examin- 
ing the object and extingmshing the opposing (hindrances).^ 
The circular portion of earth is called " earth-device ” as 
representing the entire earth. The after-image obtained in 
dependence upon that disc of earth is also called the earth- 
device; so also is the Jhana obtamed m that imagfe. Of these 
three meanings Jhana is to be understood as having the earth- 
device according to this last meaning. With reference to 
this it IS said that " he attams the First Jhana . . . which 
has the earth-device.” 

When this is thus attained, the student should note the 
conditions like a hair-piercing archer, or a cook. For just as 
a very skilful archer, in shooting at the hair, is aware of the 
way in which he takes his steps, holds the bow, the bow-string 
and the arrow at the time when he pierces the hair, thus, 

" Standmg m this position, holding thus the bow. thus the 
bow-strmg, and thus the arrow, I pierce the hair,” and ever 
afterwards would not fail to fulfil those conditions that he 
might pierpe the hair,^ — even so should the student note the con- 
ditions such as smtable food, thus, " Eatmg this kind of food, 
following such a person, m such a dwelling, in this mode, at 
this time, I attamed to this Jhana.” And so, even though he 
may lose the concentration by fulfilling those conditions, he 
will be ^ble to induce it agam, and dwelling on that concen- 


^ For a fuller discussion see Expositor 222 f. 



174 T^e Path of Purity 

ti^tion which he has not yet felt, enter into ecstasy again 
and again. 

And as a clever cook, in serving his master, notes the kind 
of food that he relishes, and henceforward serves it and gets 
gain, so this one too notes the conditions, suc^ as nourish- 
ment, at the moment of attaining the Jhana, and in fulfilling 
them gets ecstasy agam and again. Therefore* like the hair- 
piercijQg archer and the cook, he should note the conditions. 
And this has been said by the Blessed One: It is as though, 
monks, a cook, wise, experienced^, clever, should serve the king 
or the king’s minister with ^curries of various sorts, distinctly 
sour, [151] distinctly hitter, distinctly pungent, distinctly sweet, 
astringent, not astringent, salty, saltless. And, monks, ihaP- 
cook who is wise, experienced, clever, takes the hint of his master, 
‘ To-day this food pleases my master, he stretches out his hand 
for this, he takes much of this, he speaks in praise of this. To-day 
this distinctly sour curry pleases my master, he stretches gut his 
hand for the sour curry, he takes much of the sour curry, he 
speaks in pfaise of the sour curry ,,, he speaks in praise of 
the saltless curry,’ And, monks, that friend, the wise, experienced 
and clever cook, gets clothing, gets wages, gets presents. And 
why? Because, monks, that wise, experienced, clever cook 
takes hint by his master. Even so, monks, here a wise, ex- 
perienced, clever monk who, zealous, thoughtful, mindful, has 
overcome covetousness and grief in the world, lives* seeing the 
body in the body , . . feelings in feelings . , . mind in mind 
, . . seeing ideas in ideas. As he lives seeing ideas in ideas, his 
mind becomes concentrated, the vices are put away, the which^ 
he lay» to heart. And, monks, that wise, experienced, clever 
monk gets comfort in this very life, gets mindfulness and com- 
prehension, And why ? Because, monks, the wise, experienced, 
clever monk attends to the signs of his own mind,^’\ But by 
attendmg to the sign and agam fulfilling the conditions, the 
student just attains ecstasy, but not for long. Persistence 
is brought about by the thorough purification of states which 
obstruct concentration. 


^ Or that friend, reading sahho, 
3 Samyuita v, 151 f. 


2 Read so tam. 



IV . — Exposition of the Eogth Device 175 

For that monk who enters into Jhana without quite dis- 
carding sense-desire, by reflection and so forth on the evils of 
sensuality, without quite tranquilhzing physical troubles by 
physical repose, without quite dispelling sloth and torpor by 
attending and so forth to the element of exertion, without 
quite uprootmg [152] flurry and worry by attending and so 
forth to the sfgn of calm, without qmte purifymg the other 
obstructions to concentration, quickly comes out of it^ like 
a bee that has entered its imcleaned abode, and like a king 
who has entered an untidy garden. But whoso enters into 
Jhana, after thoroughly purifyirig the states obstructive 
of concentration, abides in his attainment the whole day like 
a bee that has entered its well-cleaned abode, or like a king 
who has entered a well-tidied garden. Hence said the 
Ancients: — 

One should dispel desire for sense^ ill-will, 

And worry, torpor, doubt as fifth, with mind 
Delighting in seclusion, as a king 
Delights on entering a clean retreat. 

Therefore he who desires persistence should enter mto Jhana 
having purified the obstructmg states. 

For abundant growth of nimd-culture he should increase 
the after-image as it is acquired. There are two stages of 
increasing it: access or ecstasy. For he should mcrease it 
after attaining access, and also after attaining ecstasy. He 
should increase it without fail on one or the other occasion. 
Hence it is said that he should increase the after-image as it is 
acquired. 

This is the way in which it should be increased: The yogi 
should not increase the sign as he would mcrease a bowl, a 
piece of cake, food, a creeper, or cloth. But as a cultivator 
marks ofi with the plough the portion to be ploughed, and 
ploughs within the limits, or as monks marking the boundaries 
first note the limits and then mark the boundaries, so he 
should mark ofi mentally as much as one finger, and in due 
order tw© fingers, three fingers, four fingers, of the sign as it is 
acquired, and increase it accordmg to the limit. He should not 



176 


I^e Path of Purity 

t ^ r 

increase it without making the limits. Then he should increase 
it to the limits of a span, a cubit, a monastery-front, a cell, 
a monastery, and to the limits of a village, a market-town, 
a province, a kingdom, the ocean [153], a world-system, or 
even more than that. For as young swans, once their wings 
have grown, exercise themselves by flying ,up little by little 
into the sky, and after due course go near the sun and moon, 
even^so the brother, increasing the hmits of the sign in the 
way described, increases it even beyond the limits of a world- 
system. The sign, m places where it is increased, is like ox- 
hide beaten with a hundred*sticks on high ground, low ground, 
river-bed, difScult path, mountainous and uneven places. A 
beginner who has attained the First Jhana should enter 
repeatedly into the after-image, but should not reflect on it 
much. For to him who reflects on it much, the Jhana-factors 
appear coarse and weak. And, so arising, they do not become 
the cause of effort for higher Jhana. And he, not bemg 
familiar with the Jhana, falls from the First Jhana in spite 
of his efforte, and he is not able to attam the Second Jhana. 
Hence said the Blessed One: '^Suppose, monks, a coiv of the 
mountmns werefoohsh, inexperienced, not knowing her pasture- 
field, stupid in roaming the uneven mountain-places. It might 
occur to her thus, ‘ How if 1 were to go to a place I have never 
been to, eat grass 1 have never yet eaten, dnnk water I hav^ never 
yet drunk V And she were to lift the hind leg without planting 
her fore leg firmly. She would not get to the place she had never 
been to, would not eat the grass she had never yet eaten, would 
not dnnk the water she had never yet drunk. And she would 
not easily get back to the place where the thought had occurred to 
her, ^ How if I were to go .. . drink water I have never yet 
drunk?' Why should it be so ? Because, monks, the mountain 
cow is foolish, inexperienced, does not know her pasture-field, 
is stupid m roaming the uneven mountain-places. Even so, 
monks, here a monk, foolish, inexperienced, not knowing the 
right pasture, not skilled in the idea, ' aloof indeed from sen- 
suous desires ... in the attainment of the First Jhana ' does 
not follow the sign, does not develop, increase, or plaae it on a 
Arm foundation. He thinks thus, ^ How if from the suppression 



IV. — Exposition of the Edrih Device 177 

• • 

of applied and sustained thought . . » 7 were to live in the 
attainment of the Second Jhdna ? ’ [154] He is not able from the 
suppression of applied and sustained thought ,,, to live in the 
attainment of the Second Jhdna, He thinks thus, ‘ How if 
aloof indeed from sensuous desires, ... 7 were to live in the 
attainment of the. First Jhdna V He is not able, aloof indeed 
from sensuous'" desires to live in the attainment of the First 

Jhdna, Monks, he is called a monk fallen on both side^, lost 
on both sides. He is like, monks, that cow of the mountains, 
foolish, inexperienced, not knowing her pasture-field, stupid in 
roaming the uneven mountain-plac^J’^ 

Therefore he should first of all habitually practise the First 
Jhana in five ways. These are the five habits: adverting, 
entering, establishing, rising, reflecting. He adverts to the 
first Jhana wherever he pleases, whenever he pleases, so long 
as he pleases ; there is no sluggishness in the adverting. This is 
the adyerting-habit. He enters into the First Jhana wherever 
he pleases . . . ; there is no sluggishness in the entering. This 
is the entering-habit. So should the rest also b*e treated in 
detail. 

And this is the setting forth of the meaning here : In him who, 
rising from the First Jhana, adverts first to applied thought, 
and has cut off the subconsciousness, four or five (moments of) 
apperception come into play with applied thought as object 
immediately after the uprisen adverting. Then arise two 
(moments of) subconsciousness[es], then again adverting with 
sustained thought as object, and then the apperceptions as 
just described. Thus when he is able to send out the mind 
immediately among the five Jhana-factors, then his adverting 
habit is accomplished. 

And this accomplished habit was obtained in the Blessed 
One’s Twin Miracle. By others it is obtained at such time 
(as it is produced). There is no adverting-habit quicker than 
this. Entering-habit is ability to enter quickly as in the 
taming of Nandopananda the Naga king by the Venerable 

MahamoggaUana.^ Ability to put forth Jhana in one snap- 
» 

^ Ahgvitara iv, 418 f. 

2 Cf. Jot. Y, 126; Divy, 395; JJP.T.S. 1891, p. 67; J.B.A.S. 1912, 288. 

12 



178 


T\e Path of Purity 

• • 

ping of the fingers, or a time equal to ten snappings of the 
fingers, is the establishing-habit. Likewise ability to rise 
lightly is the rising-habit. To show both of these, the story 
of Buddharakkhita the Elder should be told. 

[155] For this Elder, eight years after his or^nation, was 
once seated in the midst of thirty thousand monks who were 
possessed of psychic powers, and had come to minister to the 
sick l^lder Maharohanagutta at Therambatthala.^ He saw 
the Inng of the Supanna birds dashing across the sky with 
intent to seize the king of the Nagas who was offering rice- 
gruel to the Elder, and immediately^ created a mountam into 
which, catching him by the arm, he made the Elder enter. 
The king of the Supannas struck the mountain and flew away. 
The Elder said, Friends, if Eakkhita had not been here, 
all of us would have deserved blame.” 

The reflecting-habit has been spoken of in the adverting- 
habit. For the apperceptions that arise immediately after 
adverting are the apperceptions of reflection. 

He who i§ well practised m these five habits, rising from the 
familiarized First Jhana, sees fault therein: — This attain- 
ment has the hindrances for near enemy; its factors are weak 
owing to the grossness of applied and sustained thought.” He 
should attend to the Second Jhana because of its calmness, 
and strive to attain it, giving up hankering after the" First. 
When applied and sustained thought appears gross, and rapture- 
bliss and collectedness appear calm to him as, mindful and 
comprehending after rising from the First Jhana, he reflects 
on the Jhana-factors, then, as he attends repeatedly to 
the after-image, thinking, ‘‘earth! earth!” in order to put 
away the gross factors and attain the calm factors, mind-door- 
adverting arises, cutting ofl subconsciousness, announcing 
“ Now the Second Jhana will arise,” and having that very 
earth-device for object. Then in that object four or five 
(moments of) apperception operate, the last of which is of the 
realm of form, belonging to the Second Jhana. The rest are 
of the realm of sense such as have already been described. 

^ Burmese texts read Therappattalene, “ the cave where the Elder 
Mahiuda first stopped.” 2 p,ead tavad eva. 



179 


IV . — Exposition of the Ecrih Device 

• * (* 

To this extent he abides in the attainment of the Second 
Jhdna which ^ from the suppression of applied and sustained 
thought, is subjective, tranquillizing, develops the supreme 
exaltation of mind, is without applied thought and without 
sustained thought, born of concentration, full of rapture^blissJ^^ 
And so he attain^ the Second Jhana, which has put away two 
factors, is endowed with three factors, of the threefold goodness, 
possessed of ten characteristics, and having the earth-device.^ 
[156] Therein from the suppression of applied and sustained 
thought” means owing to the suppression, the transcendmg 
of these two: applied and sustained thought, they not being 
manifested from the moment when the Second Jhana begins.” 
Not only are all the mental factors of the First Jhana not 
present in the Second Jhana, but even those that are present — 
contact and so on — are different. It is through the tran- 
scending of the gross element, that there is the attainment of 
the other Jhanas, the Second and so on beyond the First. And 
it should be understood that it was to show this meaning that 
the words from the suppression of applied arfd sustained 
thought ” were said. 

Subjective ” (ajjhatta) here means ‘‘ personal.” But in the 
Vibhahga just this is said: “ subjective means self-referringJ"'^ 
And because ^‘personal” is mtended, therefore that which 
is one"*s own, produced in one’s contmuity,^ is to be here 
understood*. 

Next, tranquillizing — faith is said to be tranquillizing. 
Through connection with it, the Jhana also is said to be tran- 
quillizing, as a cloth steeped in indigo is called indigo. Or, 
because this Jhana tranquillizes the mind, owing to its" union 
with faith and the suppression of the disturbing applied and 
sustained thought, therefore is it called '' tranquillizmg.” In 
this second sense the construction is to be understood as 
the tranquillizmg of mind.” In the former sense, “ of mind ” 
is to be construed as ^‘with supreme exaltation,” this being 
the connected meaning: — alone it rises above (udeti ) — - 
^ Formula of Second Jhana 

2 Or “ the Second Jhana which has the earth-device for object.” 

3 Page 258. “ Self -referring ” is Paccattam; “ personal ” is niyakam, 

^ 8antane^ ^ Lit. “ one,” eko. 



180 


The Path of Purity 

r r 

this is ekodi (exalted). “ No longer overgrown by applied 
and sustained thought, it rises up at the top as the best” is 
the meaning; for in the world what is best is also called one 
(unique, elco). Or, it may also be said that, as deprived of 
applied and sustamed thought, it rises up (udgti) single, or 
companionless. Or again, it raises {udi, uddyati) associated 
states, that is to say, causes them to rise. One ” in the 
sense,of best,” and '' exalted ” in the sense of '' raising ” give 
us ehodi : — ‘^supremely exalted,” which is a synonym for con- 
centration. But this Second Jhana develops, increases the 
exaltation, therefore is it cMed ekodibhdva, supreme exalta- 
tion.” And as it is of mind and not of an entity, or a living 
principle, it has been said to be unique exaltation of mind.” 

[It may be objected : — ] Is not this faith and this concen- 
tration, called uniquely exalting,” present in the First Jhana 
also ? Why this tranquillizing only, and unique exaltation 
of mind ? The answer is: — That First Jhana, [157] being 
disturbed by applied and sustained thought, is not quite 
clear, but is bke water full of big and little waves; therefore 
it is not said to be tranquillizing, though there be faith in it. 
And because it is not quite clear, concentration in it is not 
well manifested,^ therefore unique exaltation is not ascribed 
to it. But in the Second Jhana, owing to the absence of the 
impediments of applied and sustained thought, faith having 
got its opportunity is strong, and concentration, by attaining 
intimate alliance with strong faith, is manifested. Therefore 
in this way should the formula be understood. But in the 
Vibhanga^ only this much is said, that tranquillity is faith, 
beUevlng, confiding, assuring; and that unique exaltation of 
mind is [defined as right concentration : — ] that mental 
persistence . . . right concentration^ The explanation given 
above, however, should be understood as not going against, 
but indeed coinciding, concurring with the meaning given in 
the Vibhanga. 

Without applied and without sustamed thought ”: — ^from 
being removed by culture, there is no applied thought in 
this Jhana; hence without applied thought.” Similarly, it is 


^ “ Like fish in muddy water,” says the Tiled. 


2 Page 258. 



181 


IV . — Exposition of the Earth Device 

without sustained ttouglit,” And in the Vibhanga^ it is said : 
— ‘‘ this applied thought and this sustained thought are calmed ^ 
quieted^ suppressed^ terminated, exterminated, destroyed, com- 
pletely destroyed, dried up, quite dried up, finished; hence 
* ivithout applied and without sustained thought,^ ’’ 

Here it may be* said: — Is not this meaning determined by the 
phrase from the suppression of applied and sustained 
thought Then why is it repeated as without applied and 
without sustained thought ” ? True, the latter meaning has 
already been determined. Yet the repetition does not show 
merely the meaning of the former phrase. Have we not said 
that, from the transcending of the gross factor, there is an 
attainment of the other Jhanas, the second and so on beyond 
the First To show this, it is said that the Second Jhana 
tranquillizes the mind because of the suppression of applied 
and sustained thought, and not because of the murk of our 
lower nature (as at the moment of access). Because of the 
suppression of applied and sustained thought ^it develops 
unique exaltation, and not, like the access in Jhana, because 
of the removal of the hindrances, and also not, like the 
First Jhana, because of the manifestation of the factors. 
Thus this phrase shows the condition of tranquillity and unique 
exaltation. Moreover, this Second Jhana is without apphed 
and without sustained thought, because they are suppressed. 
Herein it is unlike the Third and Fourth Jhanas, and 
unlike visual cognition, which are without applied and without 
sustained thought, these being absent. Thus it also shows 
the condition^ of being without applied and without sustained 
thought, and not merely the fact of their absence.* [158] 
But the phrase ‘‘without applied and without sustained 
thought ” merely shows absence of these, therefore, having 
said the former phrase, we may also say the latter phrase. 

‘‘ Born of concentration ” means born of the concentration 
of the First Jhana, or of the associated concentration. Of 
the two, although the First Jhana is also born of the associated 
concentration, nevertheless only the Second Jhana is worthy 

1 Page 258. ^ See above, p. 179. 

^ In the identical passage Expositor 228, 1. 1, “Effect” should read 
“ condition ” as here. 



182 


The Pafh of Purity 

of being called concentration, because of its freedom from the 
disturbing applied and sustained thought, because it is quite 
unshakable, and because it is well clarified. Therefore, to 
speak its praises, it is said to be born of concentration. 

“ Full of rapture-bliss ” — ^this is as said above. ^ 

‘ ‘ Second ’ ’ is by numerical sequence. It is the second to have 
arisen; and also it is the second to be entered into. In what is 
said ^ ‘‘ has put away two factors, is endowed with three 
factors,” the first phrase is to be understood as the removal of 
applied and sustained thought. They are not removed at 
access in this Jhana, as the hindrances are removed at the 
access-moment of the First Jhana. Only at the moment of 
ecstasy does this Second Jhana arise without them. Therefore 
are they called its eliminated factors. 

The endowment with three factors is to be understood by 
way of the arising of these three: rapture, bliss, collectedness 
of mind. Therefore what is said in the Vibhanga,^ viz. 

Jhana is J^ranquillity, rapture-bliss, collectedness of mind,^^ 
has been said by metaphor to show the Jhana together with 
its constituents. But directly speaking, apart from the 
tranquillizing faith, the Jhana has three factors by way of the 
factors which have acquired the characteristic of scrutinizing. 
As has been said, What at that time is the threefold Jhana ? 
Jtapture, bliss, collectedness of m%ndJ^^ The rest is as has been 
said in the First Jhana. 

And when thus the Second Jhana is attained, the student 
ought to be well practised in the five habits as said above and, 
rising from the famiharised Second Jhana, he should see faults 
therein: — “ This attainment has the near enemy in applied 
and sustained thought. Its factors are weak owing to the 
grossness of rapture, which is described as Hhat rapture 
which therein is frivolity of mind and owing to which the 
Jhana is declared to be gross.’ ” He should attend to the 
Third Jhana because of its calmness, and strive to attain it, 
giving up hankering after the Second. And when rapture 
appears as gross, and bliss and collectedness appear as calm 
to him, as, [159] mindful and aware after rising from the 


1 Page 258. 


2 Cf. VibTianga, page 264 



IV . — Exposition of the 'Earth Device 183 

Second Jhana, lie reflects on the Jhana-f actors; then, as lie 
attends repeatedly to the after-image as earth ! earth!” in 
order to put away the gross factors and attain the calm factors, 
mind-door-adverting arises, cutting ofi subconsciousness and, 
announcing*^ ‘Now the Third Jhana will arise,” having that 
very earth-device as object. Then in that object, four or five 
(moments of) apperception operate, the last of which is of the 
realm of form, the Third Jhana. The rest are of the rei§i,lm of 
sense such as have already been described. 

To this extent, “ Through distaste for rapture he abides in- 
different ; and mindful and aware he experiences in his sense- 
consciousness that ease of which the Noble Ones declare : ‘ He 
that is indifferent and mindful dwells at ease^^ so he abides in 
the attainment of the Third Jhana.”^ Thus he attains the 
Third Jhana which has put away one factor, which is 
endowed with two factors, is of the threefold goodness, is 
possessed of ten factors, and is with the earth-device. 

In “ Through distaste for rapture ” distaste is the revulsion 
from, or transcending of, the kind of rapture menJioned. The 
word “ and ” between the two words “ rapture ” and “ dis- 
taste” has simply a conjunctive meaning. It combines the 
suppression of rapture with that of applied and sustained 
thought. When the work of suppression only is added, then the 
constructipn should be understood as “ through distaste for 
rapture, nay more, through its suppression.” And in this 
construction, distaste has the meaning of “ revulsion from.” 
Therefore the meaning should be taken as through revulsion 
from, and suppression of, rapture.” But when the suppression 
of applied and sustained thought is added, then the con- 
struction should be understood as “ through distaste for 
rapture, nay more, through the suppression of applied and 
sustained thought.” And in this construction, distaste has the 
meaning of transcending. Therefore the meaning should be 
taken as “ through the transcending of rapture and the suppres- 
sion of applied and sustained thought.” 

Although the applied and sustained thought has been 
suppressed, even in the Second Jhana, the suppression of both 


Formula of Third Jhana. 


Viblianga, page 245. 



184 


T^e Path of Purity 

has been said to show the way to, and to extol the praises of, 
the Third Jhana. For when through the suppression of 
applied and sustained thought ’’ is said, is not the meaning 
plain, that the suppression is the way to the Jhana ? And 
although they are not removed in the Third NoWe Path, yet 
the five lower fetters, beginning with the theory of individu- 
ality, are said to be removed by way of extolling the Path, 
[160] ^0 that those striving for its attainment may put forth 
effort. Even although they have not been suppressed, their 
removal has been mentioned for purposes of commendation. 
Hence the meaning has beeh said to be through the tran- 
scending of rapture and the suppression of applied and 
sustained thought.” 

In he abides indifferent,” “ indifferent ” means he looks on 
dismterestedly. The meaning is: he looks evenly, not taking 
any side/ One who is possessed of the Third Jhana is called 
indifferent from being endowed with that indifference,, pure, 
abundant and strong. Indifference is of two kinds: — the 
sixfold indiff'erence, that of the Divine States, that of the 
factors of wisdom, of energy, of complexes, of activity, of 
feeling, of insight, of equanimity, of Jhana, and of purity. 

Of these “ The monlc who in this life %s purged of the cankers 
sees with the eye a visible object^ and is neither joyful nor sad, 
but lives indifferent, mindful and aware — thus the in- 
difference which comes to such a saint in such a way that he 
does not abandon the pure original state, when the six kinds 
of objects, desirable or undesirable, are presented at the six 
doors, is known as the sixfold indifference. 

The indifference which takes up the neutral position regard- 
ing beings'^ thus: ‘‘ He continues to diffuse one quarter \pf any 
region] with a mind accompanied by equanimity is known as 
that of the Divine States. 

The indifference arising with the mode of neutrality among 
co-existent states thus: He develops indifference as a factor 
of wisdom and dependent on detachment is known as that of 
the Factor of Wisdom. 

^ I. e. from any feeling of pleasure or pain. ^ Anguttara%.,21%. 

® Viz, that they are owned by their kamma,'* 

^ Digha i, 251, etc. ^ Bamyutta iv, 367. 



IV. — Exposition of the 'Ehrih Device 185 

The indifference which arises thus in the text: “ The 
indifference which from time to time attends to the \so~called[\ 
mark of indifference and is neither too intense nor too slack, 
is known as that of energy* 

The indifference which is a state of equanimity derived from 
the estimate that the hindrances etc, [are to be put away] 
in such texts as How many hinds of equanimity arise by means 
of concentration^ how many by means of insight ? Eiglj} arise 
by means of concentration ; ten by means of insight, [1^1] is 
known as that of the complexes. 

The indifference which is neither painful nor pleasurable, as 
in When sensuous moral consciousness arises accompanied by 
indifference,'^^ is known as that of feeling. 

The indifference which arises as equanimity in respect of 
[intellectual] investigation thus, ‘‘ He puts aside the ' is,’ the 
^ has come to be,’ and acquires indifference,”'^ is known as that 
of insight. 

The indifference which balances co-existent states equally, 
and which comes among the Or-whatever-states^’^ beginning 
with will, is known as that of equanimity. 

The indifference which comes as He abides indifferent,"^ and 
which does not beget partisanship with the bliss, excellent 
though it may be, of the Third Jhana, is known as that of Jhana. 

The indifference which comes as The Fourth Jhana which 

% 

is purity of mindfulness born of indifference,"'^ and which is 
purified of all opposing states, and has no business in their 
suppression, is known as that of purity. 

^ Anguttara i, 257. Neutral energy, being free from contraction and 
expansion, is called indifference, 

2 Patisamhhidd 64, i,e. by means of the eight worldly attainments 
(samdpcUti), and by means of the ten composed of the Four Paths, Four 
Fruitions, the Void and the Signless. — Tlkd. 

® Dhammasanganl, §§ 150, 156. 

^ As to the five aggregates. He becomes indifferent on contemplating 
the three characteristics of the five aggregates, just as a man is no 
longer curious when he is satisfied that a snake is poisonous by seeing 
the three rings on the neck. — Tlkd, See next page. 

Viz. will, resolve, attention, equanimity, pity, sympathy, abstinence 
from misconduct of body and of speech, and from wrong livelihood. 
— Expositor 174. ® Dhammasahgam, § 163. 

’ Formula of Fourth Jhana. See below, page 190. 



186 


Tte Path of Purity 

T)f these, the sixfold indiSerence and that of the Divine 
States, of the factors of wisdom, of equanimity, of Jhana, and 
of purity, are one in sense, as being equanimity. But they are 
distinguished under six heads owing to different states or 
conditions corresponding to the classification, theugh there is 
only one kind of being, just as in boys, lads, ^elders, generals, 
kings, and so on. Therefore among them, when there is the 
sixfold indifference, there is nothing of the factor of wisdom 
and so on. But where there is the indifference which is a 
factor of wisdom, there is no sixfold indifference and so on. As 
these six are one in sense, so is the indifference of the mental 
complexes and of insight one in sense — namely, under- 
standing, which is twofold in function. As a man, holding a 
stick cleft like a goat’s hoof, searches for a snake which has 
entered the house late in the day, and seeing it lying on the 
heap of husks, looks down, thinking, ‘‘ Is it a snake or not ?” 
[162] but on seeing the three rings on the neck is no more in 
doubt, but becomes indifferent as to search, so the student who 
has worked at insight, on seeing the three characteristic signs 
by means of insight, becomes indifferent as to search for the 
impermanence of the complexes. This is the indifference of 
insight. As when the man firmly catches hold of the snake by 
his goat’S’hoof-cleft stick and, seeking to release it, thij^ing 

How shall I free it so that I may not hurt it and I^myself be 
not bitten ?” becomes indifferent as to catching it, so from the 
looking upon the three worlds-of-rebirth as though on fire, 
as a result of his seeing the three characteristic signs, a 
man becomes indifferent as to seizing the complexes. This 
is the’ indifference of the complexes. Thus when the 
indifference of msight is accomplished, that of the complexes 
is also accomphshed. In this way the twofold function of 
neutrality consists in searching and seizing. But the indif- 
ference of energy and that of feeling are different from each 
other and from the others. Thus, of the ten kinds it is the 
indifference of Jhana that is here intended. It has the 
characteristic of middleness, the function of not enjoying 
(even the excellent bliss of the Third Jhana), the manifesta- 
ti6n of absence of activity, the proximate cause of distaste 



IV. — Exposition of the *Earth Device 187 

for rapture. Here one might object: Is not this Jharfa- 
indifference the same in sense as that equanimity-indifference 
which is obtainable in the First and the Second Jhanas ? If 
so, then, in those two Jhanas also it should be said that ' he 
abides mdiffftrent.’ Why has not this been said Because 
there is no distinct function. Indeed, the function of 
equanimity is not distinct in the First and Second Jhanas 
because it is overwhelmed by applied thought, and so on^ But 
in the Third Jhana, because it is not overwhelmed by applied 
and sustained thought and rapture, it has lifted up its head, 
so to speak, and has a positive distinct function. 

Here ends the full explanation of the sentence He abides 
indifferent.’’ 

Now as to '‘mindful and aware,” "mindful” is here he 
remembers, and " aware ” is here he is aware. Thus it is with 
the person that mindfulness and awareness are stated. Of 
these, . mindfulness has the characteristic of remembering, 
the function of opposition to forgetfulness, the manifestation 
of watchfulness. Awareness has the characteristic of opposi- 
tion to bewilderment, the function of enquiry, and the 
manifestation of examination. Although this phrase is 
obtainable in the preceding Jhanas — indeed, to one of forgetful 
memory and without awareness, there does not arise even the 
access sta^e of Jhana, much less ecstasy— yet from their 
grossness the process of consciousness is easy, like the move- 
ment of a man on the earth, and in them the function of being 
mindful and aware is not revealed. [163] But from the 
putting away of the gross factor and the fineness of this Third 
Jhana, it is desirable that the process of consciousness be 
maintained by the function of being mindful and aware, like 
the movement of a man on the edge of a razor. Hence it has 
been mentioned here only. 

Is there anything more to say ? As the sucklmg calf, being 
removed from the cow and left unguarded, again approaches the 
cow, so the blissful ease of the Third Jhana, bemg removed from 
rapture, if unguarded by mindfulness and awareness, would 
again approach rapture and be associated with it. For bemgs 
long for happiness; and the bhssful ease of the Third Jhana is 



188 Tjie Path of Purity 

e:&eedingl 7 sweet, than which there is no greater bliss. But 
owing to the power of mindfulness and awareness, there is no 
longing present for this bliss, nor is there change. It is to show 
this distinctive meamng that the phrase has here been said. 

Now in the clause, “ he experiences in his sense-consciousness 
that ease ” : — although to one endowed with the Third Jhana 
there is no thought of such experience, yet he may experience 
that |ase which is associated with his mental factors, or, 
though he has emerged from Jhana, he may still experience 
that bodily ease, because his material body has been suffused 
by the exceedingly refined*^ mind-born matter produced by 
that associated ease. Hence the phrase has been said to show 
this meaning. 

Now in the clause of which the Noble Ones declare. ^ He 
that is indifferent and mindful dwells at ease.’ ” the meaning 
is that by reason of, on account of, the Third Jhana, the 
Noble Ones, i.e. the Buddhas and so on, declare, point out, 
designate, establish, reveal, disclose, explain, set forth, praise 
a person who is endowed with that Jhana. And how ? [By 
saying:] he that is indifferent and mindful dwells at ease,'’ 
and he abides in the attainment of the Third Jhana.” Thus 
should the sequence in the meaning be understood. 

But why do they praise him so ? Because he is worthy of 
praise. To expand : Because he is indifferent, eyen m the 
Third Jhana which has reached the perfection of blissful ease, 
of exceeding sweetness, because he is not dragged along by the 
contagion of the ease of it, and is mindful with an established 
mindfulness, so that rapture may not arise, and because he 
experiences by his mental factors that blissful ease which is not 
vicious and which gives delight to, and is followed by, the 
Noble Ones, therefore is he worthy of praise. Hun, praise- 
worthy, the Noble Ones '[164] praise, setting forth his merits 
as the condition of their praise: He that is indifferent and 
mindful dwells at ease,^' 

“ Third ” is by numerical sequence. This is the Third Jhana 
he enters into. And in the statement has put away one 
factor, is endowed with two factors,” the removal of one factor 
is to be understood by way of removing rapture. And this 



IV. — Exposition of the 'Enrth Device 189 

• • 

rapture; like applied and sustained thouglit of the Second 
Jhana, is eliminated at the moment of ecstasy, hence it is 
called the eliminated factor. 

The endowment with two factors is to be understood by 
virtue of th^ uprising of these two: ease and collectedness of 
mind. Therefore what is said in the Vibhanga^ as Jhana is 
indifference, mindfulness, awareness, ease, collectedness of mind ’’ 
has been said by metaphor to show the Jhana together with 
its constituents. But directly speaking, apart froSa the 
indifference, mindfulness and awareness, the Jhana has two 
factors which have acquired the eharacteristic of scrutinizing. 
As has been said, What at that tiine is the twofold Jhana '? 
Blissful ease, collectedness of mind,’^^ The rest is as has been 
said in the First Jhana. 

And when thus the Third Jhana is attained, the student 
ought to be well-practised in the five habits named above and, 
rising^ from the familiarized Third Jhana, he should see faults 
therein: This attainment has the near enemy in rapture. 

Its factors are weak owing to the grossness of esase, which is 
described as " That ease therein to which the mind bends itself, 
and owing to which the Jhana is declared to be gross.’ ” He 
ould attend to the Fourth Jhana because of its calmness, 
d strive to attain it, giving up hankering after the Third. 
id*when ease which is termed mental gladness appears gross, 
d indifferent feeKng and collectedness of mind appear 
Im to him, as, mindful and aware, after rising from the 
lird Jhana, he reflects on the Jhana-factors, then, as he is 
tending repeatedly to the after-image as earth ^ earth !” in 
der to put away the gross factors and attain the calm factors, 
ind-door-adverting arises, cutting off subconsciousness, 
inouncing '‘Now the Fourth Jhana will arise,” having that 
5ry earth-device for object. Then in that object, four or five 
oments of apperception arise, [165] the last of which is of the 
ahn of form, the Fourth Jhana. The rest are of the realm 
sense, such as have already been described. 

But this is distinctive: — ^because blissful feeling does noi 
and ia the causal relation of repetition to neutral feeling 


^ Page 260. 


2 Of. Vtbhanga 264. 



190 


The' Path of Purity 

• • 

wkich. ought to arise in the Fourth Jhana, therefore those 
apperceptions are associated with indifferent feeling. And on 
account of such association, rapture in them declines. 

And to this extent”-/rom the putting away of pleasure and 
from the putting away of pain and previously fron^ the passing 
away of joy and grief, he abides in the attainment of the fourth 
Jhdna which is neither painful nor pleasurable, which is purity 
of mindfulness born of indifference?- Thus he attains the 
FouxtB Jhana which has put away one factor, is endowed 
with two factors, of the threefold goodness, possessed of ten 
characteristics, and having the earth-device. 

Therein the phrase '' from the putting away of pleasure and 
from the putting away of pain ’’ means the putting away of 
bodily pleasure and bodily pain. “ Previously ’’ means that 
the putting away of pleasure and pain took place before, and 
not at the moment of the Fourth Jhana. The phrase '^from 
the passing away of joy and grief,” namely, of mental pleasure 
and mental pain, has been said because of the previous passing 
away, the putting away of these two. 

When, then, are they put away ? At the access-moments 
of the Four Jhanas. For joy is put away at the access- 
moment of the Fourth Jhana; pain, grief and bliss are put 
away [respectively] at the access-moments of the First, 
Second, and Third Jhanas. Thus, although they have not 
been stated according to the sequence of their reihoval, yet 
their removal should be understood even by the sequence of 
the summary of controlling faculties both in the Indriya- 
Vibhanga^ and here. 

But if they are put away at the access-moments preceding 
this or that Jhana, then why is it said that their cessation is 
in the Jhanas themselves thus: ''Where does the uprisen 
controlling faculty of pain cease completely ? Monks, in this 
case the monk, aloof indeed from sense-desires . . . abides in the 
attainment of the First Jhdna, Here the controlling faculty of 
pain which has arisen ceases completely, , , . Where do the 
controlling faculties of grief ,,, of pleasure , . . and of joy 
which have arisen cease completely ? Monks, in this ^se the 


^ Formula of Fourth Jhana. 


page 122. 



191 


IV . — Exposition of the Earth Device 

• f 

monh, from the ^putting away of pleasure . . . abides in the 
attainment of the Fourth Jhdna. Here the controlling faculty of 
joy which has arisen [166] ceases completelyJ'^ This is said 
because of their complete cessation. For in the Jhanas their 
cessation is ^completed, not merely begun; at the access- 
moments their cessation is not completed. For though there 
is cessation in* the access to the First Jhana, with a different 
adverting of the mind, yet there the controlling faculty of 
pain may be produced through contact with gadflies^ mos- 
quitoes and so on, or by falling on to an uneven seat; but there 
is no such production within the ecstasy. Or this controlling 
faculty of pain which ceases at the access does not thoroughly 
cease, because it is not killed by its opposite (faculty). But 
within the ecstasy, owing to the diffusion of rapture, the whole 
body is surcharged with pleasure. And the controlling faculty 
of pain of the pleasure-suffused body has thoroughly ceased, 
being killed by its opposite. Moreover, although it has been 
put away, the controlling faculty of grief may arise at the 
access to the Second Jhana with a different adverting of the 
mind. Why does this arise when there is bodily suffering and 
mental distress, with applied, sustained thought as its cause, 
and does not arise m the absence of applied and sustained 
thought ? Where it arises, it does so when there is applied 
and sustained thought ; and at the access to the Second Jhana, 
applied arfd sustained thought has not been put away; hence 
the possibility of its arising.^ But there is no such possibility 
owing to the removal of the cause in the Second Jhana. Simi- 
larly, though it has been put away, the controlling faculty 
of pleasure may arise at the access to the Third Jhana in one 
whose body has been suffused by refined matter produced by 
rapture; but it may not arise in the Third Jhana itself, because 
rapture, the cause of pleasure, has completely ceased therein. 
Similarly, although it has been put away, the controlling 
faculty of joy may arise at the access to the Fourth Jhana, 
because it is near and has not been well transcended, owing to 
the absence of indifference which has attained to ecstasy; 
but it laaay not arise in the Fourth Jhana itself. Hence in 
1 Samyutta v, 213. ^ Repunctuate the text here accordingly. 



192 


The Path of Purity 

• « 

the various places the word complete ’’ has been taken as 
Here the uprisen controlling faculty of pain ceases com* 
pletelyJ’ 

Why [it may be objected] are these feelings, which thus 
have been put away at the access to the various Jhanas, 
gathered together in the Fourth Jhana ? For the purpose of 
apprehending them easily. In other words: — in neither 
painful nor pleasurable ” this mental feeling is [revealed as] 
subtil and hard to understand. It is not possible to apprehend 
it easily. Therefore, as, in order to catch a vicious bull that 
may not be caught by approaching it anyhow, the cowherd 
brings together all the cows in a pen, [167] lets them out one 
by one, and, when the bull comes out in its turn, orders its 
capture saying, “ Catch it !” so the Blessed One, to make easy 
the comprehending of the neutral feeling, has brought forth 
all the feelings. By showmg all the feelings it is possible to- 
comprehend neutral feeling as that which is neither pleasure 
nor pain, neither joy nor grief. 

Further, ihese feelings should be understood to have been 
stated to show the cause of that mental emancipation in the 
Fourth Jhana which is neutral feeling. The preceding Jhanas. 
which have put away pleasure and pam are indeed the causes 
of this mental emancipation. As has been said: “ Four, sir, 
are the causes of the attainment of mental emancipation which is 
neutral feeling. In this case, sir, a monk from the putting 
away of pleasure . . . abides in the attainment of the Fourth 
Jhana, These, sir, are the four causes of the attainment of 
mental emancipation, which is neutral feeling, 

As, although they are put away elsewhere, the theory of 
individuality and so on are said^ to be put away in the Third 
Path with a view to sounding its praises, so in order to praise 
the Fourth Jhana, these feelings should be understood to be 
mentioned in connection with it. Or they should be understood 
as mentioned to show the great remoteness of lust and hate 
here, owing to the destruction of their causes. For as to- 
these, bliss is the cause of joy, joy of lust, pain of grief,* 
grief of hate. And by the destruction of bliss and so on„ 


^ MajjMma 1, 296. 


2 Read vuttd. 



IV . — Exposition of the Earth Device 193 

lust and hate are destroyed along with their causes. Thus do 
they become very remote.^ The phrase neither painful nor 
pleasurable’’ means not painful by the absence of pain; not 
pleasurable by the absence of pleasure. By this one shows the 
third [kind ^t] feeling as opposed to pain and pleasure, and 
not merely the .absence of pain and pleasure. The third 
feeling is neither pain nor pleasure, and is also called hedonic 
indifference. It has the characteristic of enjoying an ^bject 
midway between the desirable and the undesirable, the func- 
tion of middleness, the manifestation of not being apparent, 
the proximate cause of the cessation of pleasure. 

Then the phrase: purity of mindfulness, born of indiffer- 
ence ” means the purity of nnndfulness which has been pro- 
duced by indifference. For in this Jhana mindfulness is pure, 
and such purity of mindfulness as there is, is produced by 
indifference, not by any other; hence the Jhana is called purity 
of mindfulness, born of indifference. In the Vibhanga^ it has 
been said this mindfulness is cleansed, purified and burnished 
hy this indifference; hence purity of mindfulness ^born of in- 
difference.^^ [1^^] That indifference by which there is here 
purity of mindfulness should be understood to mean equani- 
mity. And not merely mindfulness has been purified by it, 
but also all the associated states have been purified. The 
teaching, however, has put mindfulness at the head. 

AJthougli the difference exists also in the first three Jhanas, 
yet as the crescent moon, being overpowered by the sun by 
day, and not getting the favourable mght which makes it cool 
and renders service to it, is not clear, not radiant, though it 
exists by day, so the crescent moon of equanimity, being 
overpowered by the might of opposing states, such as applied 
thought, and not getting the favourable night of indifferent 
feeling, is not clear in the first three Jhanas, even though in 
them it is present. And when mdifference is not clear, the 
co-existent states such as mindfulness, like the light of the 
indistinct crescent moon by day, are not clear. Therefore in 
the first three Jhanas none is said to be “purity of mindful- 
ness borU of indifference.” But in* the Fourth Jhana the 

i From the Fourth Jhana. — Tlkd. ® Page 261, 

13 



194 


I%e Path of Purity 

crescent moon of equanimity, not being overpowered by tbe 
might of opposing states, such as applied thought, and getting 
the favourable night of indiSerent feeling, is exceedingly clear. 
Owmg to its clearness the co-existent states, such as mindful- 
ness, like the light of the clear crescent moon, becomes clear, 
radiant. 5ence the Fourth Jhana is said to be ‘‘purity of 
mindfulness born of indifference.’’ 

“Fourth” is by numerical sequence; he enters into the 
Jhana as fourth. And in the statement “ has put away one 
factor, is endowed with two factors ” the removal of one 
factor is to be understood by way of removing joy. And this 
joy IS eliminated in a smgle process even in the preceding 
apperceptions; hence it is called the elim in ated factor. The 
endowment with two factors is to be understood by virtue of 
the uprising of these two : indifferent feeling and collectedness 
of mind. The rest is as has been said already in the First 
Jhana. So far is the system m the Fourth Jhana. 

When inducmg a Fivefold Jhana, one should rise from the 
familiarized First Jhana and, seemg faults therein^: “This 
attainment has the near enemy in the hindrances, and its 
factors are weak owing to the grossness of applied thought,” 
[169] and attending to the Second Jhana because of its calm- 
ness, one should strive to attain it, givmg up hankermg after 
the First. And when just the applied thought apj)ears gross, 
and sustained thought and so on appear calm to him as, min dful 
and aware, after rising from the First Jhana, he reflects on 
the Jhana-factors, — then as he attends repeatedly to the after- 
image as “ earth ! earth !” m order to put away the gross 
factors and attain the calm factors, the Second Jhana arises 
m the manner described. Just the apphed thinking is its 
eliminated factor; the four beginning with sustained thinking 
are its endowed factors. The rest is as has been described. 

And when thus the Second Jhana is attained, the student 
ought to be well-practised m the habits m the five ways already 
mentioned and, arising from the famiharized Second Jhana, 
he should see faults therem: “This attainment has the near 
enemy in applied thought, and its factors are weak o^fmg to the 


^ Read ca tattM for catuitha. 



IV . — Exposition of the Earth Device 195 

grossness of sustained thinking/’ and attending to the Third 
Jhana because of its calmness, he should strive to attain it, 
giving up hankering after the Second. And when just the 
sustamed thinking appears gross, and rapture and so on 
appear calm 4:0 him as, mindful and aware, after rising from 
the Second Jhana, he reflects on the Jhana-factors, then as he 
attends repeatedly to the after-image as earth 1 earth !” in 
order to put away the gross factors and attain the calm factors, 
the Third Jhana arises in the manner described. Just the 
sustained thinking is its eliminated factor: the three beginning 
with rapture, as in the Second Jha«.a of the fourfold system, 
are present factors. The rest is as has been described. 

Thus by dividmg the Second m the Fourfold System into 
two, we get the Second and Third of the Fivefold System. 
And the Third and Fourth of the former are the Fourth and 
Fifth of the latter, the first remaining the same. 

Thus is ended the Fourth Chapter called the Exposition of 
the Earth-device in the section of concentration-cidture in the 
Path of Purity composed for the purpose of gladdening good 
folk. 



[170] CHAPTER V 

EXPOSITION OF THE BEMAINING DEVICES 
The Water-Device, 

Now is the detailed discourse on the Water-device, which 
comes immediately aftei; the Earth-device. For he who 
wishes to develop the Water-device as one develops the Earth- 
device should, being seated in comfort, grasp the sign in 
water. Prepared or unprepared ” — ^thus everything should 
be treated in detail,^ as well in the other devices as here; for 
henceforth, without mentioning even so much as this, we 
shall speak only of what is distmctive. Here also, to one who 
formerly has made resolve and is possessed of virtue, tTie sign 
appears in natural water, a pond, lake, salt-pool, or the ocean, 
as in the case of Cula-Siva the Elder. 

It is said that as the Elder was going to Jambudipa, embark- 
ing on a boat at Mahatittha and saying, I will dwell in 
seclusion, renouncing gain and honour,’’ there arose to him, 
as on his way he looked at the great ocean, the sign of the 
device corresponding to the spot at which he looked. 

He also who has not made resolve should avoid the four 
device-faults, as well as water of any of the colours blue, 
yellow, red and white, and fill a bowl or kettle brimful with 
rain-water from the sky, collected before it reaches the ground 
in a piece of clean cloth, or with other such water as is clear 
and transparent, place it in a covered place already described 
at the end of the monastery and, having seated himself in 
comfort, should, without^ reflecting on the colour, or attending 
to the characteristic of the water, let the device and the 
physical basis assume one and the same colour, and placing 
his thoughts on the water as a conceptual term, because of its 
abundance, he should develop it as apo ! apo !” j^e name 


1 


^ Na IS omitted after van no in the text. 
196 



V. — Exposition of the Remaining Devices 197 

wMcli lias suggested itself from among the other names for 
water such as amhu, udakam, van, salilam. As he develops 
it thus, the twofold sign appears m due course as has been said 
above/ 

But here the sign to be grasped appears as shaky.- [171] If 
the water be mixed with foam and bubble, it appears as such, 
and the device-fault mamfests itseK. The after-image, how- 
ever, is steady like a jewelled fan or mirror-disc placed in the 
sky. With the appearance of that, he attains, as said above, 
the Fourth and the Fifth Jhanas. 

The Heat-Device, 

He who wishes to develop the heat-device should also grasp 
the sign in fire. To him who has made resolve therefor, and 
is possessed of virtue and grasps the sign in natural fire, the 
sign appears as he gazes at the flare of a fine anywhere, either 
in the flame of a lamp or cooking-place or bowl-baking-place 
or jungle fire, in the same way as it did to Cittagutta the Elder. 

As the Elder entered the chapel on the day of hearing the 
Law, and looked at the flame of a lamp, the sign appeared to 
him. 

Another man (who has not made resolve) should make the 
device, wherein this is the mode of procedure: cutting moist 
and pithy faggots, and having dried and made them into 
bundles, ie should go to the foot of a suitable tree, or a pavilion, 
and making a heap of them in the manner of cooking with a 
bowl, he should set fine to it. He should make a hole, a span 
four fingers wide, in a rush-mat, or a piece of leather, or of 
cloth, and placing this in front of him and sitting down in the 
manner already described, and without minding the grass or 
faggots below, or the crest of smoke above, he should grasp 
the sign in the dense flame in between. He should not con- 
sider the colour as blue or yellow, and so on, nor mind the 
characteristic by way of heat. Letting the device and the 
physical basis assume one and the same colour, and placing 
his thoughts on the fire as a concept, because of its abundance, 
he shouldf develop it as ‘‘ teja ! teja !” the name which has 
^ Page 146. ^ Or vibrating [calanam). 



198 


jfhe Path of Purity 

suggested itself from among the names of fire such as pdvaka, 
hanliamttani, jdtaveda, hutdsana. As ke develops it thus, the 
twofold sign appears in due course as has been said above. 
Of the two the sign to be grasped, i.e. the fire, appears as 
splitting repeatedly and falling down. 

[172] To him who grasps the sign m natural fire the device- 
fault manifests itself in the form of volumes of fire, a mass of 
embeds, ash or smoke. The after-image appears steady like 
a piece of red blanket, gold fan or gold pillar placed in the sky. 
With its appearance he attains the access Jhana and, as said 
above, even the Fourth and Fifth Jhanas. 

The Air-Device. 

He who wishes to develop the air-device should also grasp 
the sign in air, and that is by way of sight or touch. For this 
has been said in the Commentaries: ''He who acquires the 
air-device grasps the sign in air, notes the tops of sugar-cane 
shaking and swaying, notes the shaking and swaying bamboo- 
tops, tree-tops, or hair-tufts, or notes the air touching his body.’' 
Therefore, seeing a sugar-cane with dense foliage stand- 
ing level with a man’s head or bamboo or tree, or a man’s 
head with dense hairs four fingers long being struck by the 
wind, he establishes mindfulness thus: The wind is striking 
at this place or else the wind enters through window-space 
or a hole in the wall and strikes any part of his body. Estab- 
lishing mindfulness on the wind, he should develop it as 

vaya ! vaya !” the name which has suggested itself from 
among the names for wind, such as vdta, mdluta, anila. Here 
the sign to be grasped appears wavering like a ring of steam 
from rice-gruel just taken out of the oven. The after-image 
IS settled and steady. The rest is to be understood as said 
above. 

The Blue {-Green) Device. 

After this : — because of the statement that ''he who grasps the 
blue device grasps the sign in a blue flower or cloth or colour- 
element,”^ the sign arises to one who has made resolve and is 
possessed of virtues, when he sees such a flower-bush,^ or 


1 As in stone. 


2 Read as in footnote. 



V. — Exposition of the Rentaining Devices 19& 

• 

flower-bed in places of worship, or a blue [173] cloth or gem. 
Another man should gather such flowers as the blue lotus or the 
clitoria and spread them out, filling to the brim the basket 
or basket-cover with the leaves so that the pollen or the stalk 
may not be ^een. Or he should tie them with cloth of blue 
colour.^ Or he should arrange them on the surface of the 
basket or basket-cover, so that it may look like the surface of 
a drum. With the element of one or other among a blue 
metal, a blue leaf, or blue collyrium, he should mate, as 
described in the Earth-device, a movable device, or a fixed 
device-circle on the wall, the border being marked out with a 
dissimilar colour. Then, as described in the Earth-device, 
he should set to work attending to it as '' blue ! blue !” Here 
also the device-fault in the sign to be grasped appears in the 
form of interstices in the pollen, stalk, leaf, and so on. The 
after-image, freeing itself from the device-circle, appears like a 
jewel-fan in the sky. The rest is to be understood as above. 

The Yellow Device. * 

It is the same with the yellow device also. For this has 
been said: He who grasps the yellow device grasps the sign 
%n a yellow flower or cloth or colour-element Therefore here 
also to one who has made resolve and is possessed of virtues, 
when •he sees such a flower-bush, flower-bed or either a yellow 
cloth or silbstance, the sign arises as it did to Cittagutta the 
Elder. 

It is said that as the Venerable One looked at an offering of 
a seat presented with pattanga flowers on Mount Cittala, there 
arose in what he saw the sign of the size of the seat. 

Another man should make, as said in the blue device, a 
device with bauhinia flowers, and so on, or a yellow cloth or 
substance, and set to work attending to it as yellow ^ yellow T’ 
The rest is as above. 

The Red Device. 

It is the same with the Red Device also. For this has been 
said: He ivho grasps the red device grasps the sign in a red 

1 . . . and arrange them on the basket or basket-cover so that it 
may assume the form of a round blue object. — TlM. 



200 


The Path of Purity 

flower [174] or cloth or coloured substance^ Therefore here 
also to one who has made resolve and is possessed of virtues, 
when he sees such a flower-bush or flower-bed as the bandhu- 
jwaha and so on, or either a red cloth, gem, or substance, the 
sign arises. Another man should make, as said, in the Blue 
Device, a device with shoe flowers,^ the banfhujlvaha, nettle, 
red cloth or substance, and set to work attending to it as 
red ! red !” The rest is as above. 
r 

The White Device, 

In the White Device al^o, from the statement^ that he 
who grasps the White Device grasps the sign in a white flower 
or colour substance,” the sign arises to him who has made 
resolve and is possessed of virtues, when he sees such a flower- 
bush or flower-bed as the vassiJcd, jasmine, and so on, a bunch 
of the white lotus, or either a white cloth or substance. It 
also arises in discs of lead ore, silver ore, or the moon. Another 
man should make, as said in the Blue Device, a device with 
white floweBS of the kind described, white cloth or substance, 
and set to work attendmg to it as ‘‘ white ! white !” The 
rest is as above. 

The Light-Device. 

But in the Light-device, from the statement that he who 
grasps the Light-device grasps the sign in light entermg 
through a wall-crevice, key-hole, or window-space,'” the sign 
arises to him who has made resolve and is possessed of virtues, 
when he sees a circle of light made on the wall or the ground 
by sunlight or moonlight entering through either a wall-crevice 
or other holes, or a circle of light made on the ground by light 
issuing from the branches of a tree of dense foliage, or a pavilion 
of dense branches. Another man also should develop such a 
circle of light as has been described as obhasa! obhasa!”^ 
or aloka! aloka!”^ He who is unable to do this, should 
light a lamp in a jar and, covering the mouth of the jar, make 
a hole in the jar and place it facing the wall. The lamp-light 
issuing from the hole makes a circle on the wall. [175] He 


^ Lit. “victory -joy flowers.” 
^ I.e. aura, glow. 


2 Read ti vacanato. 
^ Le. light. 



V . — Exposition of the EemUi/ning Devices 201 

'should develop that as aloka ! aloka It lasts longer than 
the others. 

Here the sign to be grasped is like the circle made on the 
"wall or the ground. The after-image is like a mass of light 
consistently ^lear. The rest is as above. 

The Separated Space-Device. 

In the Separated Space Device also, from the statement that 
he who grasps the Separated Space Device grasps th% sign 
either in a wall-crevice or key-hole or window-space,’’ the sign 
arises to him who has made resolve-and is possessed of virtues, 
when he sees either the wall-crevice or the others. Another 
man should make a hole one span four fingers wide in either 
a well-covered pavilion or leathern mat, and so on, and 
'develop that hole made in the wall-crevice, and so on, as 
space f space !” Here the sign to be grasped, together with 
the wall limits, and so on, is like the hole, and does not lend 
itself to development. The after-image appears as a circle 
of space^ and lends itself to development. The rest is to be 
understood as said in the Earth-device. 

Thus, 

The Seer of all things, with the tenfold powers endowed. 
Hath said, the Ten Devices causes are 
Of Jh§.nas in a four- and fivefold way, 

Wherein the mind is active as in worlds of Form, 

Thus them together with their mode of culture knowing 
well, 

A man may know the better this Particular Discourse. 

For among these by virtue of the Earth-device one can perform 
such feats as being one yet many,^ walking on earth created 
in space or on water, making (in space or on water) a place for 
.standmg or sitting, and so on, acquiring the Positions of 
Mastery^ in the way of the limited and the immeasurable. 
By virtue of the Water-device one can perform such feats as 
diving m and out of earth; the producmg of water, of rain; 

The edges of the wall not appearing. 

2 Cf. Dialogues i, 88. ^ See Expositor 252. 



202 


Tfi^ Path of Purity 

the creating of rivers, of oceans, and so on; the shaking of 
earth, mountains, towers, and so on. 

By virtue of the Heat-device one can perform such feats 
as the producing of smoke, of rays, of showers of embers; 
fl76] the ability to burn whatever one wishes, the destruction 
of another man’s power by one’s own pow§r, the making of 
light by the deva-sight to reveal objects, the cremating of 
one’s own body by the heat-element at the time of death. 

By^virtue of the Air-device one can perform such feats as 
going about with the speed of the air, causing wind and rain. 

By virtue of the Blue-green Device one can perform such 
feats as creating blue forms, producing darkness, acquiring tho 
Positions of Mastery by way of clean and unclean appearance, 
attaining aesthetic emancipation.^ 

By virtue of the Yellow Device one can perform such feats as 
creating yellow forms, resolving that something shall be 
turned into gold, getting the Position of Mastery by th^ above 
method, attaining aesthetic emancipation. 

By virtue of the Bed Device one can perform such feats as 
creating red forms, getting the Position of Mastery by the said 
method, attaining aesthetic emancipation. 

By virtue of the White Device one can perform such feats as. 
creating white forms, putting sloth and torpor at a distance, 
dispelling darkness, producing light by the deva-eye to reveal 
forms. 

By virtue of the Light-device one can perform such feats 
as creating illuminated forms, putting sloth and torpor at a 
distance, dispelling darkness, producing light by the deva-eye 
to reveal forms. 

By virtue of the Space-device one can perform such feats as 
uncovering covered objects, posing oneself in space created 
in the interior of the earth, mountains, and so on, passing 
without resistance through walls, and so on. 

All of them are classified as above, below, across, non-dual,^ 
immeasurable. Por this has been said* One notes the Earth- 

device as above, below, across, non-dual, immeasurable^^ Of 

„ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

^ See Expositor 256. 2 Read advayam, 

® AnguUara v, 60. 



V . — Exposition of the RemUihing Devices 203 

• 

these, '' above ” means facing the firmament above. Below V 
means facing the earth-surface underneath. Across ’’ means 
limited on all sides, like a field-plot. For one man develops 
the Device upwards, another man downwards, another man 
on all sides. • Thus a man spreads out the device for various 
reasons, as one desirous of seeing forms by deva-sight spreads 
forth the light. [177] Hence it is said: above, below, across. 

Non-dual ” is said to show that one device does not attain 
the state of another. For as one who has entered the ^ater 
feels the water on all sides, not any other element, so the 
Earth-device is just earth-device; ihere is no mixing it with 
another. And the same everywhere. '' Immeasurable ” is 
said by way of there being no measure in the diffusing of the 
device. For he who diffuses it with the mind, diffuses it 
through the whole place and knows no measure such as '' this 
is the beginning, this the middle.” 

And .those beings who are endowed with obstructive karma, 
with obstructive vices, or with obstructive results, and who, 
being unfaithful, without good wishes and dull, are incapable 
of entering into assurance, the culmination in things that are 
good,^ — not one of such persons succeeds in developing a single 
Device. 

Herein endowed with obstructive karma ” means endowed 
with Earma of immediate effect. Endowed with obstructive 
vices ” are those of fixed wrong views, hermaphrodites and 
eunuchs.^ Endowed with obstructive results ” are those 
whose birth is controlled by no moral cause,^ (or) by two moral 
causes. ''Unfaithful” means void of faith in the Buddha, 
the Law and the Order. " Without good wishes ” means 
having no wish for the practice which is not opposed. " Dull ' ’ 
means without right views, worldly or transcendental. " In- 
capable of entering into assurance, the culmination in things 
that are good ” means it is impossible for them to enter the 
Noble Path, known as assurance, the culmination in things 

^ See Points of Controversy 1 85, 

2 These latter two kinds of persons should properly come under the 
next catagory, being of unconditioned birth {ahetnkapatisandhiJca), but 
are put here because of their sharp sensuality. — Tiled 

® These are lobJia, dosa, moTia and opposites 



204 The Path of Purity 

0 

that are good. It is not only in the Device, it is also in other 
subjects of meditation that none of such persons succeeds in 
culture. Therefore though free from obstructive results a 
clansman should shun from afar obstructive karma and 
obstructive vices, and increasing his faith, wish and under- 
standing by such means as hearing the Good. Law, associating 
himself with good people, apply himself with energy to the 
subject of meditation. 

Thus is ended the Fifth Chapter called the Exposition of the 
remaining Devices in the section of concentration-culture in 
the Path of Purity composed for the purpose of gladdening 
good folk. 



[178] CHAPTER VI 

EXPOSITION OF THE SUBJECT OP MEDITATION 
ON THE FOUL 

Of the ten inanimate Foul Things stated, after the Devices, 
as a swollen thing, discoloured thing, festering thing, fissured 
thing, mangled thing, dismembered thing, cut and dismem- 
bered thing, bloody thing, worm-foul, skeleton, — swollen ’’ 
is said of a corpse bloated by degrees from the tune of the loss 
of life onwards like an inflated leather bag. Or, “ swollen 
thing ’’ refers to its loathsomeness from its abominable state, 
and is a synonym for such a corpse. 

Discoloured thing ’’ is a corpse of a predominating blue- 
green colour^ ; or just a corpse discoloured and loathsome from 
its abominable state. It is an equivalent term for a corpse 
of a red colour in the fleshy parts, white where matter gathers, 
and generally of a blue-green colour in blue-green parts, as 
though covered with a blue-green sheet. 

“ Festering thing ” is a corpse with matter flowing in 
lacerated places; or it is a corpse loathsome from its abomin- 
able state and festering. It is an equivalent term for such a 
corpse. 

Fissured thing ” is a corpse spht in two, or a corpse 
fissured and loathsome from its abominable state. It is an 
equivalent term for a corpse cut in the middle. 

[179] Mangled thing ” is a corpse torn here and there in 
various ways by dogs and jackals, and so on; or it is a corpse 
mangled and loathsome from its abominable state. It is an 
equivalent term for such a corpse. 

Dismembered thing ” is a corpse of which the parts have 
been scattered, or it is just a corpse dismembered and loath- 
some fr^m its abominable state. It is an equivalent term 


^ “ Mixed with white and red.” — TiM, 
205 



206 


fhe Path of Purity 

for a corpse dismembered here and there, in one place a hand, 
in another a leg, in a third place the head. 

“ Cut and dismembered thing ” is a corpse cut in pieces and 
dismembered m the way just described, a name for a corpse cut 
with a knife in the limbs, large and small, after the pattern of 
a crow’s foot, and dismembered in the above .sense. 

Bloody thing ” is that which scatters, pours out blood, 
causing it to trickle here and there, — an equivalent term for a 
corpse besmeared with dripping blood. 

“ Worm-foul ” is worm-infested. It pours forth worms j 
hence a name for a corpse*full of worms. 

“ Skeleton ” means bones, and refers to its being loathsome 
from its abominable state. It is an equivalent term both for a 
group of bones linked like a cham, and for a single bone. 

And these foul things are the names both of the signs^ arisen 
in dependence on them, and also of the Jhanas obtained with 
reference to the signs. Herein, he who wishes to .develop 
Jhana called the swollen thing, by producing the sign of the 
swollen thing in the swollen corpse, should approach the 
teacher in the way described in the Earth-device, and acquire 
the subject of meditation. The teacher, in teaching him the 
subject, should tell him, that he may the better grasp the 
sign of the Foul, everything such as the regulations about 
going, the noting of the sign on all sides, the grasping' of the 
sign in eleven ways, the considering of the path o*f going and 
coming, and conclude with the arrangement for ecstasy. 
And he should accept all this carefully and going to the monas- 
tery, such as has been described above, abide seeking the sign 
of the swollen thmg. 

While abiding thus, even though he may hear people say 
that there is a swollen corpse laid down at such and such a 
village-gate, or forest-entrance, or on the highway, or at the 
foot of a mountam, or the root of a tree, [180] or in the charnel- 
field, he should not go at once, like a man jumping into a 
fordless river. Why ? Because a Foul Thmg is beset by wild 
beasts; and also by non-human bemgs. This being so, there 
may be mortal danger to him. Or, he may have to«get there 

^ Sign to be grasped and the after-image. Of. Compendium 54. 



VI. — Subject of Meditation bn tJie Foul 207 

• 

"by the village-gate or bathing-place or the ridge of a field, 
whereby a member of the opposite sex might cross his path. 
Or, the foul thing may be inappropriate. For, to a man the 
corpse of a woman is inappropriate, so is the corpse of a man 
to a woman. • And a body quite recently dead has a pleasant 
appearance, hence there may be danger to his holy practice. 

But he who argues to himself thus: '' This is no burden to 
such as I ’’ may go. And when he goes he should inform the 
Elder of the Order, or any other well-known brother. Why ? 
Because, should his limbs, big and small, tremble through 
being harassed by undesirable objeets, such as the forms and 
sounds, and so on, of non-human beings, lions, tigers, and so 
on, at the charnel-field, or should his food be not digested, 
or any other sickness come upon him, then the Elder or Brother 
would take care of his bowl and robe in the monastery, or 
look after him by sending lads or novices to attend to him. 

Moreover, thieves who have committed, or are about to 
commit theft, resort thither thinking: ''The charnel-field is a 
place free from suspicion.” Bemg chased by men*they might 
run away, dropping their stolen bundle near the Brother. 
People seize him and do hurt to him, saying, "We have found 
the thief with the bundle.” Then his friend of the monastery 
convinces the men, saymg, " Do not hurt him. He told me 
and went out to do this work of meditation,” and procures 
his liberatfon. This is the advantage of gomg after due 
notice. Therefore after informing such a Brother as is 
mentioned above, he should go according to the Rule given 
in the Commentaries, deriving joy and gladness from a desire 
to see the sign of the Foul, as goes joyfully and with gladness 
the prmce to the coronation place, the sacrificing priest to the 
sacrificial hall, or the beggar to the treasure-trove. For this 
has been said : " He who grasps the Foul Sign in a swollen thing 
goes alone without a companion, established in unforgetful 
mindfulness, with his faculties drawn in, and his mind not 
dwelling on outside things, reflecting on the path of gomg and 
coming. In whatever place is [181] laid the Foul Sign of the 
swollen 4hing, there m that place he makes a rock or ant-hil. 
or tree or bush or creeper one with the sign, one with the object 



208 


TM Path of Purity 

f 

and after doing this he considers the Foul Sign of the swollen 
thing from its intrinsic nature. He considers it from the 
point of view of colour, sex,^ shape, region, locality, limitation^ 
joints, apertures, low parts, high parts, all sides. He makes 
a good grasp of the Sign, notes it well, determines it welL 
Having grasped the Sign well, noted it wpll, determined it 
well, he goes^ alone without a companion, established in unfor- 
getful mindfulness, with his faculties drawn in and his mind 
not dwellmg on outside things, reflecting on the path of going 
and coming. To and fro he walks absorbed in the Sign.^ 
Sitting down also he is absorbed in the Sign. What is the 
purpose, what the advantage of considering the Sign [i.e. rocks 
and so on, which are] on all sides [of the swollen thing] ? 
Considering the Sign on all sides is for the sake of non-con- 
fusion, has the advantage of non-confusion. What is the 
purpose, the advantage of grasping the Sign in these eleven 
ways ? Grasping the Sign in these eleven ways is ior the 
purpose of binding the mind to the object, has the advantage 
of binding the mind to the object. What is the purpose, the 
advantage of reflectmg on the path of going and coming ? 
Eeflecting on the path of going and coming is for the sake 
of progress, has the advantage of progress in the course. 
Seeing the advantages, and aware (as) of a jewel he adopts 
a reverential attitude of min d, and in a loving mood* binds 
his heart to the idea, sajdng: ‘By means of this* progress I 
shall surely be freed from old age and death.’ Aloof indeed 
from sense-desires ... he abides in the attainment of the 
First Jhana. And he attains the First Jhana of the realm 
of sense, and the divine hfe, and the basis of meritorious act 
which consists in growth.”^ 

Therefore let him who goes for a sight of the charnel-field 
in order to restrain his mind, strike the gong to summon the 
monks to an assembly, and then go (with company). But he 
who goes there solely for the sake of a particular subject of 

^ Or “feature.” — Expositors^. 

2 “ Home ” adds the Tika. 

3 Lit. “ Walking to and fro he establishes a walking whicl^ partakes 
of it (the Sign). ” And the same with the next sentence. Read adhiphatz, 

^ Accordmg to this is from the Great Commentary. 



VI. — Subject of Meditatiofi hn the Foul 209 

meditation^ sLould go alone, without company, without letting 
go, but attending to the original subject,^ taking a walking 
stick or staff with which to ward off danger from jackals 
and so on at the cemetery, [ 182 ] his mindfulness deriving 
strength from its being effectively established, his mind not 
dwelling on outside things since he has effectively drawn in 
the faculties, of which mind is the sixth. 

Coming out of the monastery also, he should note the door, 
thus: — I have come out by such and such a door facm^such 
and such a quarter.” Then he should note the way by which 
he goes. — ‘‘'This path goes to the East . . . West . . . 
North . . . South, or the intermediate quarters.” Noting 
the path of going:— “At this point it goes to the left,'^ at this 
pomt to the right ; at this place is a rock, at this place an ant- 
hill, at this place a tree, at this place a bush, at this place a 
creeper,” he should go to the place where the Sign is. But he 
should not go against the wind, for then the smell of the corpse 
striking his nose may disturb his brain, or cause him to vomit, 
or make him regret that he has gone to such a plaCe. There- 
fore takmg care not to go against the wind, he should go with 
the wind. If there be no path along which he may go with 
the wind — if there intervenes a mountain, or cliff or rock or 
fence or thorny place or water or swamp — ^he should go stopping 
his noS^ with the hem of his robe. This is the rule of his going. 

And so hS,ving gone, he should not look at the Foul Sign at 
once, but should fix the quarters. For the object may not be 
quite visible if he stands in a certain direction, or the mind 
may not be wieldy. Therefore to avoid that he should stand 
in a place whence he can see the object well and find the 
mind wieldy. He should avoid a place which is against or 
with the wind. For if he stands against the wind, his mind, 
oppressed by the smell of the corpse, runs about. If he stands 
with the wmd, the non-human beings who may be present, 
may be displeased and do him harm. Therefore he should 
step aside just a little (so as to) stand not too much behind the 

1 Lit. “ by the head of meditation-subject,” i e. making this the 
chief causS. 

2 Such as he has been practising. ^ Bead varmto. 

14 



210 


TKe Path of Purity 

mnd. In standing at sncli a place, lie should stand neither 
too far nor too near, neither too close to the feet nor too close 
to the head (of the corpse) . For if he stands too far, he will not 
see anything; if too near he becomes afraid. If he stands too 
near to the feet or the head, the Foul (object)#is not seen in 
proportion. Therefore he should stand neitlier too far nor too 
near at a comfortable distance from the middle part of the 
body. 

[1^3] Standing thus he should note the surrounding signs, 
as it is said: ‘‘ there in that place he makes a rock . , . 
creeper one with the Sign’’ (p. 207). And this is the way he 
should note them. If there be a rock within the range of his 
vision round^ the object, he should determine whether the 
rock is high or low, or small or large, or copper-coloured or 
black or white, or long or round. Then he should note well : — 

In this place this is the rock, this the Foul Sign; this is the 
Foul Sign, this the rock.” If it be an ant-hill, he should deter- 
mine whether it also is high or low, small or large, or copper- 
coloured dr black or white, or long or round. Then he should 
note well: — '' In this place this is the ant-hill, this is the Foul 
Sign.” If it is a tree, he should determine whether it is the 
sacred fig, or banyan, or black fig,^ or wood-apple, high or 
low, or small or large, or black or white. Then he should note 
well: — “ In this place, this is the tree, this the Foul Sign.” If 
it is a bush he should determine whether it is a 'marsh date- 
palm^ or Icaramanda or Tcanavlra or nettle, high or low, small or 
large. Then he should note that in this spot this is the bush, 
this the Foul Sign. If it is a creeper, he should determine 
whether it is a gourd or pumpkm or gold creeper, or black 
creeper or Then he should note that in this spot this 

is the creeper, this the Foul Sign; this is the Foul Sign, this the 
creeper. And the expression, he makes . . . one with the 
Sign, one with the object,” is comprised hereunder. For in 
determining again and again, he makes the object “ one with 
the Sign.”^ This is the rock, this the Foul Sign; this is the 

1 Tllca says “ near.” ^ Tika says it is also called pilakkhu, 

® Sindlti khuddaka khajjurl, — Tikd. Tlie last term is -not in the 
P.T.S. Dictionary. 

^ I.e. he regards the surrounding object as one with the Foul Sign. 



VI . — Subject of Meditaliotl on the Foul 211 

* 

Foul Sign, this the rock — determining thus by taking the two 
together, he makes the (neighbourmg) object similar to the 
Foul Sign one with the object 

Having thus finished the making one with the Sign, one 
with the object, he should lay to heart that it is the nature of a 
swollen thing to b^ by itself, having nothing in common with 
others, in accordance with the statement, ‘‘ he determines it 
from its intrinsic nature.’' The meamng is, he should deter- 
mine, by way of its intrinsic nature, its essence that it is r?smg 
[like a tumour], a swollen thing. 

Having made the determination, h^ should grasp the Sign in 
six ways: from the point of colour, sex, shape, [184] region, 
locality, limitation.” How ? 

This body is that of a black, or white, or tawny-skinned 
man, — thus the yogi should determme as to the colour. As 
to the sex, without determimng it as male or female, he should 
determine whether it is the body of one in the first period of 
life, middle period, or last period of life. As to the shape, he 
should determine the shape of the Foul Thmg thus this is the 
shape of the head, this is the shape of the neck, this the shape 
of the hands, this the shape of the belly, this the shape of the 
navel, this the shape of the hips, this the shape of the breasts, 
this the shape of the legs, this of the feet. As to the region, 
he should determine thus : — ^in this body are two regions : the 
lower region from the navel downwards, the upper region 
from the navel upwards; or, I stand in this direction, the Foul 
thing is in this direction. As to the locality, he should deter- 
mine: — in this spot are the hands, here are the feet, here the 
head, here the middle part. Or else he should determme: — 
here in this spot I stand, in this spot is the Foul thing. As to 
the limits, he should determine: — this body is limited below 
by the sole of the foot, above by the head of hair, across by the 
skin, and within these limits it is burdened with the thirty- 
two putridities. Or he should determine: — this is the limit of 
the hands, this the limit of the feet, this the limit of the head, 
this the limit of the middle part. 

Or whatever part of the dead body he grasps [with his mind], 
that is just 'Hhe swollen thmg”: thus should it be defined. 



212 Tke Path of Punty 

r' 

3ut it is not proper that a man should meditate on a female 
corpse, nor a woman on a male corpse. When the dead body 
is of the opposite sex, the idea does not appear [foul, but 
pleasant], it causes a stirring [of the passions].^ It is said 
in the Majjhima Commentary that a woma^i, though she 
has been discarded, still captures the mind of a man. There- 
fore one should grasp the Sign m these six ways in a dead body 
of the same sex. But to him who has practised the subject of 
meditation in the presence of the previous Buddhas, observed 
the ascetic practices, crushed the four great elements,^ com- 
prehended the conditioned, determined name and form, 
removed the idea of bemg, performed his rehgious duties, 
[185] IS impressed with former impressions, has developed 
his culture, possesses the seed [of virtue], has higher 
knowledge, is free from the vices, a son of good family, the 
after-image appears m every spot he looks at. If to anyone 
it does not appear in this way, it appears when he grasps the 
Sign m the six ways. If to anyone it does not appear in these 
SIX ways, he should grasp the Sign agam m five ways: from the 
pomt of view of the joints, apertures, low parts, high parts, 
all sides. 

Of these, as to the joints, there are one hundred and eighty 
jomts. But how shall a man determine the hundred and 
eighty jomts m a swollen thmg ? Therefore he should deter- 
nnne them by way of the fourteen large jomtS"thus; three 
joints m the right hand,*^ three jomts m the left hand, three 
jomts m the right leg,'^ three m the left leg, one jomt at the 
neck, one jomt at the waist. 

As to the apertures, there are apertures between the hands, 
between the legs, the mside of the belly, the ear-holes; thus 
he should determine. He should determine the closmg or 
openmg of the eyes, the closmg or openmg of the mouth also. 

As to the low parts, he should determine whatever place 
in the body is low, whether it is the eye-cavity, or mouth - 
cavity, or the guUet. Or he should determine: I stand on 
low ground, the dead body lies on high ground. 

^ Gi. PsalTTis of the Brethren, cxcviii with ooxiii. 

^ Earth, Water, Eire, Air. ^ I.e. shoulder, elbow, wrist. 

^ I.e. hip, knee, ankle. 



VI. — Subject of Meditation on the Foul 213 

As to the high parts, he should determine whatever place in* 
the body is high, whether it is the knee or the breasts or the 
forehead. Or he should determine : I stand on high ground, 
the dead body lies on low ground. 

From all sidfes, — the whole body should be determined from 
all sides. Driving* his insight on to the whole body, which- 
ever part of it is manifested as the swollen thing, there he 
should fix his mind as swollen thing ! swollen thing !” If it 
persists in not manifesting itself thus, he should fix his mind 
as a swollen thing, a swollen thing !” on the upper part 
ending in the belly which is swollen ihore than the other parts. 

Now in the expression : — he takes a good grasp of the Sign 
and so on, this is the deciding discourse: — The yogi should 
grasp well the Sign in the body by way of grasping it in the 
way described, and advert to it, establishing his mindfulness 
well. Doing so repeatedly, he should consider and determine 
it well.^* Standing or seated, not too far nor too near the 
dead body, opening the eyes and looking at it he should grasp 
the Sign. [ 186 ] Swollen putridity, swollen putridity — 
thus a hundred times, a thousand times, opening his eyes he 
should regard it, shutting them advert to it. As he does 
this, over and over again, the Sign to be grasped is well 
grasped. 

When is it grasped well ? When the object appears the 
same to him whether he opens his eyes and looks at it, or 
shuts them and adverts to it, then it is said to be well grasped. 
Having thus grasped the Sign well, considered it well, deter- 
mined it well, if he be unable to reach the consummation of 
development therein, he should return to his own dwelling 
just in the same way as he came, alone, without a companion, 
established in unforgetful mindfulness, with his faculties drawn 
in and his mind not dwelling on outside things, attending to 
that very subject of meditation. 

Coming out from the charnel-field also, he should determine 
the path of return : — “ The path by which I have come out, goes 
towards the East . . . West , . . North . . . South, or an 

^ By means, respectively, of understanding preceded by mindfulness, 
and of mindfulness preceded by understanding. — Tlha, 



214 


Path of Purity 

intermediate quarter; here it goes to the left/ here it goes to 
the right. In this place is a rock, here is an ant-hill, here a 
tree, here a bush, here a creeper.’’ After determining the 
path by which he returns, he should walk to and fro absorbed 
in the Sign. The meaning is, he should walk and fro on a 
piece of ground which is in the direction of the Foul Sign. He 
should sit down absorbed in the Sign. 

But if in that direction there is a pit or cliff or tree or fence 
or ifiud, and it is not possible for him to walk to and fro on a 
piece of ground which is in that direction, nor is it possible 
for him to prepare a seat for want of room, he should then, 
without any regard for that direction, walk to and fro in a 
favourable place and sit there, but his mind should be fixed 
on that direction. 

Coming now to the questions, What is the purpose of 
considering the sign on all sides ?” and so on, this is the inten- 
tion of the answer: — for the sake of avoiding confusion ” and 
so on. To that man who goes at an unseasonable hour to the 
place of the swollen sign and considers the objects around, 
and opening the eyes looks at it with intent to grasp the sign, 
the dead body appears as though standing up, [187] as though 
towering above, as though chasing him; and he, on seeing that 
corrupted, awe-mspirmg object, becomes as it were distracted 
in mind, mad; he is terrified, paralyzed, and his hair stands on 
end. In the Pali, indeed, there is no object among the thirty- 
eight different objects which is so terrifying as this. For in 
this subject of meditation there can be such a thing as a man 
who runs away from the Jhana. Why ? Owing to the 
exceeding fearfulness of the subject. Therefore the yogi, 
summomng up his courage and establishmg his mindfulness 
well, should allay these fears thus : — “A dead body is not known 
to get up and chase anyone. For, were the rock or creeper 
near it to come towards me, then the dead body might do 
likewise. But as the rock or creeper does not move, even so 
the dead body does not move. This illusion of thine is born 
of the imagination, produced by the imagination. Now to 
thee is the subject of meditation made manifest. Tear not. 


^ Bead 



VI. — Subject of Meditatioil bn the Foul 215 

monk/’ And causing laughter to arise, he should drive th^ 
mind on to the Sign. Thus he attains distinction. With 
reference to this it is said: — Considering the Sign on all sides 
is for the sake of avoiding confusion.” And having effected the 
grasping of tke Sign in eleven ways, he binds the subject to 
the Sign. For, because of his opening the eyes and looking, 
the sign to be grasped arises. When he drives the mind on 
to it, the after-image appears. Driving the mind to it, he 
attains ecstasy. Being established in ecstasy and increasing 
insight, he realizes saintship. Hence is it said: — ''Grasping 
the Sign m the eleven ways is foi the sake of bmding the 
mind to the object.” 

In the expression, " Eeflecting on the path of going and 
coming is for the sake of progress in the course,” the meaning 
is: — ^reflecting on the path of going and the path of coming, 
which has been described, is for the sake of progress in 
the course. For if people were to meet the monk who 
is returning after having grasped the subject of meditation 
and ask him about the day, " What day of the month is 
to day, sir?” or some other question, or give greetings, he 
should not keep silence, thinking " I am engaged in exer- 
cises.” He should tell them the day it is; he should answer 
their question. If he has to say " I don’t know,” seemly 
greetings should be made. [188] Even if, in doing so, the 
tender sign 'that has been grasped is lost, he should, neverthe- 
less, give answer on being asked about the day. If he knows 
not the answer to the question they ask, he should say so. 
If he knows it, he should certainly reply. He should also 
return the greetings. On seeing a guest-monk, he should give 
him the greetings due to a guest. All the remainmg Khaniaka 
duties should be performed, such as the duties of the shrine- 
yard, the yard of the Bo-tree, the sacred-service hall, the 
dining-hall, the fire-room, the duties towards the teacher, the 
preceptor, guests. And, although while he attends to these 
duties the tender Sign perishes, and he desires to go back in 
order to grasp the Sign agam, he cannot do so, because the 
cemetery is haunted by non-human beings, or infested by 
wild beasts, or the Sign has disappeared. For a swollen thing 



216 


TJie Path of Purity 

after one or two days becomes discoloured or (otherwise foul). 
Of all the subjects there is none which is so difficult to acquire 
as this one. Therefore when the Sign is lost, the monk should 
sit down by day or by night, and so long as he sits cross-legged, 
he should reflect on the path of gomg and coming thus: — '' I 
went from the monastery by this gate, took the road in such 
a direction, towards the left at such a place, towards the right 
at such a place; there was a rock at such a place, an ant- 
hill, ^ree, bush or creeper at such a place. Going by that path 
I saw at such a place a Foul thing. Standing there facing 
such a direction and noting in such a manner the objects 
around it, I acquired the Foul Sign thus and, coming out of 
the cemetery by such a direction, I returned by such a path 
doing this and that, and I am seated here.’’ As he reflects 
thus the Sign is manifested, appearing as though placed in 
front of him. The [developing of] the subject of meditation 
progresses in the aforesaid manner. Hence it is ^aid: — 

Eeflecting on the path of going and coming is for the sake 
of progress^of the course of meditation.” 

Now as to the expression, ‘‘Seeing the advantages and aware 
(as) of a jewel, he adopts a reverential attitude of mind, and 
in a loving mood binds his heart to the idea,” driving the 
mind to^ the abominable swollen thing and producmg Jhana 
and mcreasing insight, which has Jhana as proximate cause, 
[189] he should see the advantage thus: — “Surely by this 
progress I shall be freed from old age and death.” As a 
poor man, on coming by a precious gem of great worth, looks 
upon it as a jewel, saying, “ I have indeed got something very 
rare,” begets respect for it, feels much affection for it, and 
watches over it, even so, saying : — “I have acquired this subject 
of meditation which is difficult to acquire,” he who meditates 
on the four elements grasps these in his own self , and as the 
poor man seizes the gem of great worth, he who in practising 
the respiration-exercise grasps the breath of his nostril, he 
who practises with Devices makes the Device and develops 
it as he pleases. Thus the other subjects of meditation are 
easy to acquire. But this one lasting only one or t’^o days, 


^ Read rmimsam ca/retvd. 



VI. — Subject of Meditation *on the Foul 217 

after whicli it becomes a discoloured thing, etc., there being 
nothing more difficult to acquire than this, he, regarding it 
as a jewel, begetting respect for it, and being fond of it, should 
watch over that sign. 

By day and by mght he should bind his thought to it as 
''swollen abomination^ swollen abomination’” repeatedly 
advert to it, think on it, apply his mind to it. As he does this, 
the after-image arises. And here is the difference between 
the two signs. The sign to be grasped appears coH:upt, 
horrible, awful. The after-image is like a man stout in limbs, 
large and small, lying down after -a hearty meal. Together 
with the acquirement of the after-image, sense-desire is put 
away, being discarded through non-attention to external sen- 
sualities. By the putting away of compliance, ill-will is also 
put away, just as pus is put away together with blood. Like- 
wise sloth-torpor is put away by means of strenuous endeavour, 
worry a,nd flurry by application to the calm state which knows 
not regret, doubt in the Teacher who has preached the attain- 
ment, in the attainment and in its fruits is put away fey realizing 
the special acquirements: thus are the five hindrances put 
away. Applied thinking, with the characteristic of lifting 
the mind on to the sign, sustamed thinking which effects the 
function of thrashing the sign, rapture which is the cause of 
special* attainment, repose which arises to the rapturous, bliss 
which has Tcepose as its sign,^ [1^0] collectedness which has 
bliss as its sign owing to the production of mental concentra- 
tion in the blissful one: — ^these Jhana-factors manifest them- 
selves. Thus in him is produced at that very moment the 
access-Jhana which is the very image in First Jhana. After 
that everything should be understood as said in the Earth- 
device, as far as the ecstasy of the First Jhana and the acquire- 
ment of the habits. 

Nex!t, in the Discoloured thing, and so on, whatever charac- 
teristic has been mentioned, beginning with the going in such 
wise as "he who grasps the Foul Sign in a swollen thing goes 
alone without a companion, established in unforgetful mind- 
fulness,’^ all should be understood, including the final inter- 


^ Read as in the footnote. 



218 


The Path of Purity 

pretation, as said above. There should only be ]ust a changing 
of the words ‘ ' swollen thing ’ ’ here and there in this way : — ' ' he 
who grasps the Foul Sign in a discoloured thing/’ or he who 
grasps the Foul Sign in a festering thing.” 

There is this difierence: — ^He should start attending to the 
discoloured thing as ‘‘ discoloured abomination ’ discoloured 
abomination !” Here the sign to be grasped appears striped 
in colour. And the after-image appears abundantly. He 
shouH start attending to the festering thing as festering 
abomination ! festering abomination !” Here the sign to be 
grasped appears hke a fluidrtricklmg. The after-image appears 
fixed and steady. The fissured thing is to be met with on the 
battle-field or in a forest mfested by thieves, or in the cemetery 
where kings execute robbers, or in the woods where men are 
mangled by hons and tigers. Therefore if, when he goes to 
such a place, any limbs of the body which are lying in various 
directions come into the field of vision by one act of adverting, 
well and good. If not, he should not touch them with his 
hands. Fcfi:, touching them, he becomes familiar with them. 
He should therefore cause the gardener or a novice or someone 
else to gather them in one place.^ If he gets no such help, 
he should make a space of one finger^ between two limbs with 
the help of his walking stick or some other stick, and then 
draw mgh. Having drawn nigh he should start attending to it 
as fissured abommation ! fissured abomination " There the 
sign to be grasped appears as if cut in the middle, but the 
after-image appears whole. [191] He should start attending 
to the mangled thmg as “ mangled abomination ! mangled 
abomination Here the sign to be grasped appears like an 
object mangled here and there, but the after-image appears 
whole. As regards the Dismembered thing, he should make, 
or cause to be made, as in the case of the fissured thing, spaces 
of one finger, and start attendmg to it as “ dismembered 
abomination ! dismembered abommation !” Here the sign 
to be grasped appears as visible interstices; but the after- 
image appears whole. The cut and dismembered thing !” 


1 Cf. Psalms of the Brethren, cxxxvi. 

2 So as to present the fissured appearance. 



VI . — Subject of Meditation^ on the Foul 219 

is to be met with in the difierent places mentioned in the 
fissured thing. Therefore, going there, and making or causing 
to be made, spaces of one finger as above, he should start 
attending to it as cut and dismembered abomination ! cut 
and dismembered abomination Here the sign to be grasped 
when it appears like the orifice of a wound, the after-image 
appears whole. The ‘^Bloody thing” is got in the cutting 
of the hands and feet and so on, of those wounded on the 
battle-field and so forth, or when boils and abscesses and^so on, 
burst and matter trickles from the orifices.^ Hence, on seeing 
it he should start attending to it*as '"bloody abomination! 
bloody abomination Here the sign to be grasped appears 
like the shaking of a red flag in the wind; the after-image 
appears settled. The ""Worm-foul ” is met with in a corpse 
two or three days old, when it pours forth lumps of worms 
from the nine mouths of its sores. It has the appearance of a 
heap of rice as large as the body of a dog, jackal, man, ox, 
bufialo, elephant, horse, python, and so on. He should start 
attending to it in the body of any one of these *as "" worm- 
foul abomination! worm-foul abomination !” To Culapinda- 
patika-Tissa the Elder, the sign arose m an elephant-corpse 
in the Kaladighavapi Lake. The sign to be grasped appears as 
if vibrating. The after-image appears settled like a heap of 
rice. ’ The skeleton is spoken of m various ways thus: — "" One 
may see a body discarded at the cemetery, a chain of hones, 
with flesh and blood, bound by tendonsF^ [1^2] Therefore, 
going in the aforesaid manner to where the skeleton is lying, 
and making the neighbouring rocks and so forth one with the 
Sign, one with the object, and noting it by way of its intrinsic 
nature: "" This is a skeleton,” he should grasp the Sign in the 
eleven ways from the point of view of colour and so on. 

But it does not appear to one who looks at it from the point 
of colour as white; there is a mixing with the white Device. 
Hence he should look at it as an abommation. Sex (or feature) 
here is a name for hands and so on. Therefore he should 
determine it as to the sex by way of hands, feet, head, belly, 
arm, hi^, breasts, shins. And he should determine it regarding 
i Or “ from the mouths of wounds.” — Tlha. ^ Digha li, 296. 



220 Tke^ Path of Purity 

the shape as long, short, round, square, small, large. Region 
and locality in the way described. Having determined it as 
to the limitations by way of the limits of a bone, he should 
grasp whichever bone is mamfested and attain to ecstasy. 
By way of the low parts and high parts of that boja.e, he should 
deterimne it from the point of view of lovj: parts and high 
parts. By way of position also: — I stand low, the bone is 
above; or, I stand high, the bone is below. He should 
determine it as to the joints by way of contact between 
two bones. He should determine it as to apertures by 
way of space between bones. Driving insight everywhere, 
he should determine it from all sides thus : — In this 
place is the skeleton.” When the sign does not appear 
after this, he should fix his mind on the forehead-bone. 
And as here, so m the preceding signs of the worm-foul 
and so on, he should note the grasping of the sign in eleven 
ways where it is possible to be grasped. And the subject of 
meditation is fulfilled both m the entire series of bones and 
in single boiffes. Therefore grasping the sign in either of them, 
he should start attending to it as '' skeleton abomination ^ 
skeleton abomination Here the sign to be grasped and the 
after-image are said to be as though one and the same. This, 
as regards the single bone, is as it should be. But as regards 
the series of bones, it is fitting that, in the sign to be grasped, 
there should be visible apertures; and in the after-image, 
fulness. [193] And in the single bone the sign should appear 
terrible on account of its ugliness. The after-image should be 
productive of rapturous joy because it bestows access. For 
in the matter of these two signs what is said in the Commen- 
taries has been said m paving the way^ to their distinction. 
Thus there [in the Commentaries] there is no after-image in 
the four Divine States nor in the ten Foul Things. For in the 
Divine States just the breaking down of the limits^ is the Sign; 
and m the ten Foul Things when, after drawing the distinction, 
just the abominable condition is seen, the Sign is said to 

manifest itself. In spite of this there is here the twofold sign: 
— , — ^ 

1 Lit. “ by opening the door.” 

2 On the part of the four persons in the Tour Divine States. 



VI . — Subject of Meditation *on the Foul 221 

the sign to be grasped and the after-image. It has been said 
that the sign to be grasped appears deformed, corrupted, awe- 
inspiring and so forth. Therefore what we have stated as 
driving on to ” is fitting here. Further, the appearance 
and so forth to Maha-Tissa the Elder^ of the whole body of the 
woman as a lump of bones when he had seen only the bones of 
her teeth, is evidence here. 

And so the Ten-Powered One, of virtues fine, 

And fame spread wide, the thousand-eyed, has named 
As cause for Jhana this and that foul base. 

Thus them and all the method how to expand 
Them understanding one may also learn 
The better this Particular Discourse : — 

He who has attamed Jhana anywhere among the Ten Foul 
Things is, owing to his passion being well discarded, free from 
frivolity like the samt devoid of the passions. Though this 
is so, the different kinds of the Foul which have been described, 
are to be understood by way of the corpse reaching to its 
intrmsic nature," and by way of the different kinds of lustful 
behaviour. For a dead body, in becoming an abomination, 
may reach to the intrmsic nature of the Foul or that of any of 
the others. Thus he should grasp the Sign in whichever kind 
of cofpse he can get it as swollen abomination 1 discoloured 
abommatibn !” And the classification of the Foul is said to be 
tenfold by way of the corpse reaching its intrmsic nature. 

And of them in particular, the swollen corpse, as making 
clear the decay of the form of the body, is suitable for one 
lusting after the form of the body. The discoloured corpse, as 
makmg clear the decay of the beauty of skin, is suitable for 
one lusting after the complexion of the body. The festering 
corpse, as making clear the stench connected with the sores" 
of the body, [194] is suitable for one lusting after the smell of 
the body produced by means of flowers, perfumes, and so on. 
The fissured corpse, as making clear the existence of a hollow 
within, is suitable for one lusting after the solid state [of 
limbs] ♦in the body. The mangled corpse, as making clear 


^ See p. 24. 


^ See Expositor 266 n. 


Read Kayavana°, 



222 T%e Path of Purity 

r 

the decay in the perfection of the fulness of flesh, is suitable 
for one lusting after the fulness of flesh m such parts of the 
body as the breasts, and so on. The dismembered corpse, as 
making clear the scattering of limbs, large and small, is suitable 
for one lusting after their gracefulness. The mt and dis- 
membered corpse, as making clear the change that has come 
over the different joints, is suitable for one lusting after the 
perfection of the joints of the body. The bloody corpse, as 
makijftg clear the abommable state of being besmeared with 
blood, is suitable for one lusting after beauty produced by 
adornment. The worm-foul corpse, as making clear the state 
of the body in common with various kinds of worms, is suitable 
for one lusting after the idea of what is mine.’’ The 
skeleton, as making clear the abominable state of the bones of 
the body, is suitable for one lusting after perfection of the teeth. 
Thus it should be understood that the classification of the Foul 
has been declared to be tenfold also by way of the different 
kinds of lustful behaviour. 

And because m the tenfold classification of the Foul, just 
as m a river of swift current with flowing waters a boat is steady 
by means of the steering-oar, and cannot stop without its 
help, so from the weakness of the idea^ the mind is collected 
by the strength of applied thinking, without which it cannot be 
steady; therefore here is obtainable the First Jhana'(with 
applied thinking), and not the Second or other Jhanas. Though 
there is abomination, yet because he has seen benefit in this 
foul object thus: — Surely by such progress I shall be freed 
from old age and death,” and because of the removal of the 
torments of the hmdrances, rapturous joy arises in him. He 
is like the flower-remover who feels joy over the rubbish 
heap m seeing benefit and thinks: ‘^Now I shall get much 
wages,” and like the sick man at the alleviation of the misery 
of sickness through vomiting and purgmg. 

The Foul thing, though tenfold, is one in characteristic, 
which is the impure, evil-smellmg, disgusting and abominable 
state. Not only in the dead body does it appear with this 

1 The inability of the object to draw the concentration of the mind on 
itself owing to its abominable state, is its weakness. 



VI . — Subject of Meditatioih on the Foul 223 

cliaracteristic, but, as in the case of the Elder Mahatissa, 
resident at Mount Cetiya, seeing the teeth of a laughing woman, 
and as in the case of an attendant novice of the Elder Sah- 
gharakkhita looking up at the king on an elephant’s back, it 
may also appear m a living body. Indeed, the livmg body 
is foul as is the dead body. [195] But in the former, the 
characteristic of the Foul, being covered by temporary adorn- 
ments, does not appear.^ But by nature this body is an 
accumulation of more than three hundred bones, joined by 
an hundred and eighty joints, bound by nine hundred tendons, 
smeared with nine hundred pieces oi flesh, knitted with a wet 
skin, covered by the tegument, havmg pores large and small, 
constantly exuding [impurities] above and below like a pot 
overflowing with fat, a resort of multitudes of worms, abode of 
disease, basis of painful states,^ with a constant flow of pus 
from the nine mouths of sores like an old boil which has burst, 
where filth of the eye oozes from the two eyes, filth of the ear 
from the ear-holes, mucus of the nose from the nose-cups, 
food, bile, phlegm and blood from the mouth, excrement and 
water from the openings below, impure sweaty fluid from the 
ninety-mne thousand hairy sockets, a body where blue flies 
and so forth gather round, which, without the tending by 
tooth-sticks, face-wash, head-ointment, bath, dress and 
garmefits and so forth, would not diflerentiate a king walking 
with his hair coarse and dishevelled, in a primitive state, from 
village to village, from either a flower-rubbish remover, or 
an outcast and so on, the body being equally abominable in 
either case. Thus as regards the impure, evil-smelling, loath- 
some abomination, there is no difference between the body of a 
king and the body of an outcast. 

Yet here, in the livmg body, by removing the dirt of the 
teeth and so on with tooth-sticks and washing the face and so 
on, covering the private parts with cloth of all sorts, smearmg 
the body with sweet-smelling unguent of various colours, 
adorning it with flowers and ornaments and so on, people make 
it fit to be grasped^ as I,” as “ mine.” Hence men, not 

1 So far the last two pages occur also in Expositor 265-267. 

^ Read vatthu pan°, ® Read gaJietabbdkdrappcUtam. 



224 


Tke Path of Purity 

knowing the true intrinsic nature of its characteristic foul/’ 
because it is hidden by this temporary adornment, lust after 
women, and women after men. But in reahty there is not 
the minutest spot that is fit to lust after. For truly people 
have no desire to touch with the hand the haifs of the head 
and of the body, nails, teeth, saliva, mucus,, excrement, urine, 
not even an atom of them, once they have dropped from the 
body; they are repelled by them, ashamed of them, detest 
them. And though the remaining parts of the body also are 
abonunable, people who are clouded by the darkness of 
ignorance grasp it as the person, desirable, lovely, permanent, 
blissful, because they are in love with the lust, the fondness of 
the person. [196] In grasping it thus they resemble the old 
jackal who, seeing a Icimsuka tree^ in the wood, imagines every 
flower on the tree to be a piece of flesh. Therefore : — 

Just as a fox who sees the hmsuka 
A-flowering in the forest, runs with speed : 

'' live got a tree of flesh to eat ” he thmks. 

With very greed he bites the flowers all 
As from the tree they fall. '' But this I find 
Is not the flesh. So that must be the flesh 
Which hangs there on the tree,” — thus he avers, 

E’en so the wise^ who grasps not, as the Foul, - 
Shed particles of body, should esteem 
Both these and all his body-frame as foul. 

For fools who think the body beautiful. 

Being distraught therewith, do evil deeds ; 

They are not freed from pain. Therefore the wise^ 
Should see the nature of this body vile. 

Or dead, or living, as of beauty void. 

For this has been said : — 

The body %s a corpse, like cesspool foul, 

And evil^smelling, where the fool delights, 

But which is censured by the seeing ones, 

i'! 

^ Boieafrondosa, which has red blossoms. 

2 Budho. 3 Medhdvl, 



VI , — Subject of Meditation (Jn. the Foul 225 

A wet shin covers it, nine doors it has, 

A big wound, it exudes impurities. 

If of this body inside were outside, 

We'd grasp a stick to keep off crows and dogs ! 

% 

Hence the able monk, grasping the sign wherever the foulness 
appears, be it in living body or dead, should proceed from the 
meditation to ecstasy. 

Thus is ended the Sixth Chapter called the Expositioa of 
the Subject of Meditation on the Foul, in the Section of 
Concentration-culture in the Path of» Purity, composed for the 
purpose of gladdening good folk. 



[197] 


CHAPTEE VII 


EXPOSITION OF THE SIX RECOLLECTIONS 

In ifclie Eecollections stated immediately after tlie Foul, 
'' mindfulness ” {sati) from arising repeatedly, is Eecollection 
{anu-ssati). Or, nundfuhiess wEicli, from arising in places 
wliere it ought to arise, is suitable for a well-born man who 
has entered the religious life through faith, is recollection. 

1. Eecollection arisen with reference to the Buddha is 
Buddha-recollection, a name for mindfulness with the Buddha’s 
virtues as object, 2. Eecollection arisen with reference to 
the Law is Law-recollection, a name for mindfulness having 
for object quahties of the Law such as being well-announced ” 
and so on.* 3. Eecollection arisen with reference to the Order 
is Order-recollection, a name for mindfulness having for 
object qualities of the Order such as well-progressing ” and 
so on. 4. Eecollection arisen with reference to morality is 
Morality-recollection, a name for mindfulness having for 
object qualities of morality such as bemg unbroken and so 
on. 5. Eecollection arisen with reference to ^liberality is 
Liberahty-recollection, a name for mindfulness having for 
object quahties of liberality such as free liberality and so on. 

6. Eecollection arisen with reference to spirits (devatd) is 
Spirit-recollection, a name for mindfulness having for object 
virtues such as one’s own faith with spirits as witness. 

7. Eecollection arisen with reference to death is Death- 
recollection, a name for mindfulness with the breach in the 
hfe-controUmg faculty as mental object. 8. Concerning the 
material body differentiated as the hair and so on, or just 
concerning the body, is the meaning of ‘'as to the body.” 
It is regarding both body and mindfulness, hence “ mindful- 
ness as to the body.” Though the term for this should be 

hdyagatsisati,^' the unshortened vowel in '' hdyagatdsatl^^ 

226 



• * 

VIL — Exposition of the Six Recollections 227 

is -used, a name for mindfulness having for mental object tbh 
sign of the parts of the body such as hair. 9. Mindfulness 
arisen with reference to respiration is Eespiration-mindful- 
ness, a name for mindfalness with the characteristic of inhaling 
and exhaling*"as mental object. 10. Eecollection arisen with 
reference to calm is Calm-recollection, a name for mindfulness 
with the calming of ill as object. 

[198] I. 

Thus the student who wishes to develop first the Buddha- 
recollection from among these ten, hnd who is endowed with 
strong faith, m a suitable dwelling, in seclusion, m solitude, 
should recall the Buddha’s virtues thus: He %t is, the Blessed 
One, Saint, Perfectly Enlightened, 2 )roficient in knowledge 
and conduct, well-farer, world-knower, peerless, driver of men 
to be tamed. Teacher of devas and men, Buddha, Blessed OneP^ 
Here is the way in which he should recollect them: “ He it is, 
the Blessed One, also the Saint, also the Perfectly Enlightened 
One . . . also the Blessed,” thus he recollects. The ex- 
pression IS used for this and that reason (as follows). 

He recollects that the Blessed One is Saint {araham) for 
these reasons: because of the distance {drakd, i.e. from the 
vices), destruction ( ^/han) of the foes (an) and the spokes (am-), 
worthiness (araha-tta) to receive the necessaries of hfe and so 
on, absence of secret (a-raha) evil-doing. For he is far from 
all the vices, stands at a really great distance, because of the 
destruction of the vices together with their innate tendencies 
(vdsand) by the Path, — thus is he Saint because of distance. 

He’s far from that which he possesses not. 

Possessing not the faults, on that account 

The Leader is considered as the Saint. 

And he kills those foes, the vices, by means of the Path. Thus 
is he Samt, from the killing of the foes also. 

And since the Lord has slam all foes of lust 

With sword of knowledge, he is called the Saint. 

^ Digha i, 49. Of. Kindred Sayings li, 48. 

2 “ !Foes ” are the vices, “ spokes ” are of the wheel of repeated births. 



228 


The Path of Purity 

And there is that wheel of repeated births, whose nave is made 
of ignorance and craving for existence, whose spokes are the 
storing up of merit (demerit, imperturbability), whose rim is 
old age and death, which is pierced by the axle made of the 
cankers, the cause (of ignorance and so on), and? yoked to the 
chariot of the three existences'- and whiclj has been rolling 
from time immemorial. Standing on the legs of energy, on 
the ground of morality, at the circle of the tree of knowledge, 
and'^’holding with the hand of faith the axe of knowledge 
which brings about the loss of Karma, he has destroyed all the 
spokes of this wheel. Fr5m this destroying the spokes also is 
he ‘‘ Saint.” Or, the wheel of repeated births is called the 
round of births of unknown beginning. And of this wheel 
ignorance, being the centre (lit. root), is the nave; old age and 
death being the end, are the rim; and the remaining ten 
states are the spokes just because ignorance is the centre 
and old age and death the end. Herein nescience regarding 
ill and so on, is ignorance. And in sensuous life, [199] in form- 
life, in formless life, ignorance is the cause of complexes 
therein. Complexes, in sensuous life are the cause of birth- 
consciousness therein. And the same with other forms of life. 
Birth-consciousness in sensuous life is the cause of mind and 
matter therein, likewise in form-life. In formless life it is 
the cause of mind only. Mind-and-matter, in sensuous life, 
is the cause of the six organs of sense thereinr Mind-and- 
matter, in form-life, is the cause of three organs^ therein. In 
formless life mind is the cause of one organ^ therein. The six 
organs in sensuous life are the cause of the sixfold contact 
therein. In form-life three organs^ are the cause of three 
contacts^ therem. In formless life one mind-organ is the 
cause of one contact (viz. mind) therein. The six contacts 
in sensuous life are the cause of the six feelings therein. In 
form-life three contacts are the cause of three feelings^ therein. 
In formless life one contact (viz. mind) is the cause of one 
feelmg therein. The six feelings in sensuous life are the 
cause of six groups of craving therein. In form-life three of 


1 Read tibhavarathe, 
^ I.e. itself. 


2 Viz. eye, ear aruFiniiid. 
^ Viz. form, sound, mind. 



VII . — Exposition of the.S'ix Recollections 229 

the former are the cause of three of the latter therein. Ei 
formless life^ one feeling is the cause of one group of craving 
therein. 

In this and that life this and that craving is the cause 
of this and ^that attachment, and the attachment and so 
on is the cause of becoming and so on. How ? Here some- 
one, thinking I will enjoy sense-pleasures,” misconducts 
himself in deed on account of his attachments to sense-desires, 
and misconducts himself in word and in thought. Froiil the 
fulness of misconduct he is re-born in a state of woe. The 
karma which is the condition of his re-birth there is called 
karma-life. The aggregates born of karma are called re- 
birth-life. The coming to be of the aggregates is birth. 
The maturing is old age. The break-up is death. Another 
man, thinking I will enjoy celestial bliss,” lives a good 
life, and from the fulness of good conduct, is re-born in 
heaven.* The karma which is the condition of his re-birth 
there is karma-life and so on. Again, another man, 
thinking '' I will enjoy happiness in the Brahma world,” 
develops from his attachments to sense-desire, love, pity, 
sympathy, equanimity. From the fulness of practice [200] 
he is re-born in the Brahma world. The karma which is the 
condition of his re-birth there is karma-life and so on. 
Another man, thinking '' I will enjoy happmess in formless 
existence,” likewise develops the sphere of the infinity of space, 
and the other attainments. From the fulness of practice he 
is re-born here and there. The karma which is the condition 
of his re-birth there is karma-life. The aggregates born of 
karma are called re-birth-life. The coming to be of the 
aggregates is birth. The maturing is old age. The break-up 
is death. And the same with the interpretations based on 
the remaining attachments.^ 

Thus this Ignorance is the condition ; the complexes are the 
result of the conditions. Understanding which arises in the 
comprehending of the cause that both these states are results 
of the conditions is knowledge of the duration of the law of 


^ Blmva, translated “ life,” is lit. “ becoinmg.” 
2 Wrong views, rite and ritual, self-theory. 



230 


iJhe Path of Purity 

cause and effects In both the past and the future, ignorance 
is the condition, complexes the result of the condition. Under- 
standing which arises in the comprehending of the cause that 
both these states are results of the conditions is knowledge of 
the causal genesis. In this way should all the te/ms be treated 
in detail. 

Herem ignorance and complexes form one group ; conscious- 
ness, mind-and-matter, six organs, contact, feeling, another; 
craving, attachment, becoming, another ; birth, old age, death, 
another. And of these the first group is in past time^; the 
middle two are in the present ; birth, old age, death, are in the 
future. And craving, attachment, becoming, are taken 
together with ignorance and complexes. Thus these five 
states form the round of karma in the past.^ The five be- 
ginning with consciousness are the round of result in the 
present. Ignorance and complexes are taken together with 
craving, attachment, becoming, — thus these five states are the 
roimd of karma in the present. Because consciousness and 
so on are shown in the exposition of birth, old age, death, they 
(the former) are the round of result in the future. And the 
states in detail are twentyfold. 

Of these there is one union between complexes and con- 
sciousness, another between feeling and craving, another 
between becoming and birth. Thus the Blessed One ‘knows, 
sees, comprehends, penetrates m all respects * this causal 
genesis of four groups, three times, twenty items, three unions. 
That IS, knowledge in the sense of knowing; understanding 
in the sense of understanding. Hence it was said, Under- 
standing which arises m the comprehending of the cause . . . 
is knowledge of the duration of the law of cause and effect.”’^ 
By this knowledge the Blessed One, knowing the states as they 
reaUy are, and being disgusted with, and detached and freed 
from them, has broken, destroyed, demolished the spokes of 

^ Dliammatthili — a “ technical term ” for causal genesis or paticca- 
samuppada, 

2 ‘A past condition is its portion ” — atlto hetu bJidgo — ^says the Tikd, 

® In reahty complexes and becoming are the karma, th^rost being 
its agents, working in its service. 

^ Punctuate as above. 



VIL — Exposition of the Six Recollections 231 

this wheel of repeated birth which has been described. Thu^ 
also from the destruction of the spokes is he the Saint: 

[201] Since by the sword of knowledge he has cut 

The spokes (ard) within the wheel of births renewed, 

The Lor^ of Worlds is therefore named the Saint (arahan). 

From worthiness to receive the best offerings he is worthy 
to receive the robe and the other requisites and special worship. 
Therefore when the Tathagata arose, those of the devas^and 
men who were mighty made worship nowhere else. For so 
Brahma Sahampati worshipped the.Tathagata with a garland 
of precious stones of the height of Sineru. And other devas 
and men, as well as Bimbisara, king of Kosala, and others 
spent according to their means ninety-six crores of wealth for 
the sake of the Blessed One, although he had then passed 
away. Asoka the great king put up eighty-four thousand 
monasteries in the whole of Jambudipa.^ What need is there 
to mention other special acts of worship ? Thus from ‘^worthi- 
ness ” to receive the requisites and so on he is “ saint.” 

And since this Lord of Worlds is worthy of 
Distinctive worship with the reqmsites, 

The Conqueror, he deserves this name of saint, 
According to its meaning in the world. 

And he never behaves like those fools who in the world 
imagine themselves to be wise and do evil in secret for fear of 
evil repute — ^thus from the absence of secret evildoing also 
is he “ saint.” 

Since he no evil does in secrecy (raha), 

The Saint — thus is he known on that account. 

Thus in every way also: — 

From distance, cutting off the foe of vice, 

The Sage is called the Saint, destroyer of 
The wheel of birth renewed, the Worthy One 
For gifts and requisites and other things. 

He works no evil things in secrecy. 

^ And therefore is he called the Worthy One. 


^ MaMvarirtsa v, verses 79, 176. 



232 


f¥e Pflth of Purity 

“ Perfectly Enlightened ’’ — because he knows rightly and by 
himself all things. For he has of himself known all things, 
known knowable things as knowable, comprehensible things as 
comprehensible, removable things as removable, realizable 
things as reahzable, things that may be developed as such. 
Hence it is said: — 

All that which should he known is known by me, 

What may he brought about, that have I wrought, 
Whatever should be removed I have removed. 

Hence, brahmin, 1 Buddha — one Awake 

[202] Further, sight is the Truth about 111; the preceding 
craving^ which sets it up by being its root-cause is the Truth 
about the Origin; the non-proceeding of both is the Truth 
about the Cessation; the middle path which knows cessation is 
the Truth about the Path. Thus by bringing out one word 
after another, he knows of himself all things rightly. And 
the same with the ear, nose, tongue, body, mind. 

In this way should be construed the six objects of sense 
beginning with things seen, the six groups of consciousness 
beginnmg with eye-consciousness, the six contacts beginning 
with that of the eye, the six feelings beginning with that which 
is born of eye-contact, the six perceptions beginning with that 
of things visible, the six vohtions beginning with volition in the 
seen, the six groups of craving beginnmg with that of things 
visible, the six ways of applied thinking beginnmg with that of 
things visible, the sis ways of sustained thinking beginning 
with that of things visible, the five aggregates beginning with 
that of body, the ten devices, ten recollections, ten perceptions 
by way of perception of the swollen corpse and so on, thirty- 
two parts beginning with hair, twelve organs, eighteen elements, 
nine existences beginning with that of sense, four Jhanas 
beginning with the first, four immeasurables beginning with 
the developing of love, four formless attainments, and the 
factors of causal genesis, in reverse order beginning with 
old age and death,” in direct order beginning with “ ignor- 

^ Sutta-Nipata, verse 558; Psalms of the Brethren, verse 828. 

2 Separate the compound m the text. 



VIL — Exposition of the^ Six ^Recollections 233 

ance.” Here is the summary in single compounds: Old aga- 
death is Ill-truth, birth the Origin-truth, escape from both 
is the Cessation-truth, the middle path which knows cessation 
is Path-truth. Thus by bringing out one word after another, 
he knows, Comprehends, penetrates of himself all things 
rightly. Hence is it said: ‘^Perfectly Enlightened — because 
he knows rightly and by himself all things.” 

And from the possession of knowledge and conduct is he 
proficient in knowledge and conduct.” Of them, knowledge 
is threefold, also eightfold. The former is understood to be 
as stated in the Bhayabherava Stitta,^ the latter as in the 
Ambattha Sutta,- wherem the eight kinds of knowledge are 
stated by taking the six higher knowledges together with 
insight-knowledge and psychic power of mind. These fifteen 
states are to be understood as ‘^conduct”: restraint of 
morality, guardedness of the door in faculties, moderation in 
food, application in wakefulness, the seven good states,*^ 
four Jhanas of the realm of sense. For since by means of 
these fifteen things the noble disciple conducts himself, be- 
takes himself towards deathlessness, therefore are they said 
to be ‘‘ conduct.” As has been said, ^'Here, Mahanmm, the 
noble disciple is virtuous , and all should be understood [203] 
as said m the Middle Fifty (Suttas) of the Majjhima.^ Being 
•endowed with such knowledge and conduct, the Blessed One 
is said to be’^' proficient in knowledge and conduct,” 

Here the fulfilment of knowledge serves to fulfil the omni- 
science of the Blessed One, the fulfilment of conduct his great 
mercifulness. Knowmg through omniscience what is advan- 
tageous or not advantageous for all beings, he by means of 
his great mercifulness wards off the disadvantages and engages 
the advantages, as did the Buddha in the past who was en- 
dowed with knowledge and conduct. Hence his disciples 
are well-behaved, and not ill-behaved, as were the Attantapa^ 
disciples of those devoid of knowledge and conduct. 


1 MajjMma i, 22. 2 Digha 1 , 100. 

3 Faith* sense of shame, dread of blame, wide knowledge, energy, 
mindfulness, understanding. 

^ i, 355. 


5 Majjhirmi, 341, lit. seff-tormentors. 



234 


Tfie^Path of Purity 

^From tlie beauty of going, from having gone to the beautiful 
place, from having gone rightly and spoken rightly, is he 

well-farer ’’ (lit. well-gone). For the going is the same as 

gone.” That of the Blessed One is beautiful, pure, fault- 
less. What is that ? The Noble Path. For by i<; he has gone 
without faltering to the place of security.^ Thus from the 
beauty of his going is he well-gone.” And he has gone to 
the beautiful place, the deathless Nibbana. Thus from having 
gone^to the beautiful place also is he ‘‘well-gone.” And 
rightly has he gone by this and that path, not allowing the 
removed vices to return. For this has been said : “ JTe does not 
allow to come again, return, come back again those corruptions- 
which have been put away by the Path of Stream-winning : hence 
‘ well-gone ’ . . . which have been put away by the Path of 
Saintship * hence ‘ well-gone,' 

Or, rightly he goes, working benefit and happiness for the 
whole world by his right attainments of fulfilling the full thirty 
perfections, since he was at Dipankara’s feet till he sat in 
the circle of the Tree of Knowledge without having recourse 
to the extremes of eternalism, annihilation, devotion to 
pleasure and self -mortification. Thus from his going rightly 
is he “ well-farer.” And rightly he talks, speaks fitting words- 
in fitting places — thus from speaking rightly^ also is he “ well- 
farer.” Of this, here is the testifying Sutta: Those' words 
which the Taihagata knows to be unreal, untrue, rTot connected 
with benefit, and which to others are not lovable, delightful , — 
those words the Taihagata does not speak. Those words which 
the Taihagata knows to be real, true, not connected with benefit, 
and which to others are not lovable, delightful, — those words alsO' 
the Taihagata does not [204] speak. And those words which the 
Tathdgata knows to be real, true, connected with benefit, and 
which to others are not lovable, not delightful, — for the utterance 
of such words the Taihagata bides his time. Those words which 
the Taihagata knows to be unreal, untrue, not connected with 
benefit, and which to others are lovable, delightful, — those words 
the Taihagata does not speak. Those words which the Taihagata 


^ A. P. Buddhadatta’s ed. refers this to the “ Great Commentary.” 
2 Read sammagadatta for ^padatta. 



VII . — Exposition of the Six ‘Recollections 235 

• 

hioivs to be real:, true, not connected with benefit, a)id which to 
others are lovable, delightful, — these ivords also the Tathdgata 
does not speah. And those loords which the Tathdgata knows to 
be real, true, connected with benefit, and which to others are lovable, 
delightful,— fi^r the uttering of such words the Tathdgata knoivs 
the time''^ 

Because he knows the world in all respects, he is “ world- 
knower ” For he, the Blessed One, has known, understood, 
penetrated the world in all respects, i.e., as to its intrinsic 
nature, origin, cessation, means of cessation. As has been 
said, ^AVhere, friend, one does not get born, nor groiv old, no) 
die, nor decease, nor get re-born, — thaV end of the ivorld, I 
say, 1 am not able by walkmg to come to know, nor to see, 
nor to arrive at. But neither do I say, friend, that by not having 
got to the end of the ivorld is the end of ill to be accomplished. 
It is in this fathom-long carcase, friend, with its impressions and 
its ideas that, I declare, lies the world, and the cause of the world, 
and the cessation of the world, and the course of action that leads 
to the cessation of the world. 

Ne'er may world’s end be won by walking there. 

Nor if ye ivin not are ye freed from ill. 

Therefore in sooth, he that is rich in wisdom, 

. Who knows the world, he it is goes to world's end, 

He who ’bove all liveth the life that's holy ; 

With heart serene he understands the world's end. 

Nor for this world nor for another hopeth,"^ 

Further, there are the three worlds: the world of complexes^ 
the sentient world, the visible world.^ Of these, the world is 
one: All creatures subsist on account of a cause — ^in such 
places [205] the world of complexes is to be understood. The 

^ Majjhima i, 395. Cf. Dlglia iii, 134. ^ Kindred Sayings i, 86. 

2 Tiled says, the group or continuity of aggregates bound by the 
controlling faculties is the sentient world. The group of material 
qualities born of the caloric order and not bound by the faculties, 
is the visible world. The aggregates liable to be grasped at, or 
clung to, whether bound or not by the faculties, form the world of 
complexes. 

^ Klmddakapdtha iv. 



236 


The Path of Purity 

world is eternal or the world is not eternal/ — in such places the 
world of living beings is meant. 

As far as sun and moon go round 
And shed their light on quarters all, ^ 

So far the world is thousandfold 
Wherein thy sway is exercisedr ^ — 

in such places the spatial world is meant. That world also 
the piessed One has known in all respects. Indeed he knows 
the world of complexes also in all respects thus: The world is 
one : all creatures subsist on account of a cause. There are two 
worlds : name and form. There are three worlds : the three 
feelings. There are four worlds : the four nutriments. There 
are five worlds : the five clinging aggregates. There are six 
worlds: the six subjective organs of sense. There are seven 
worlds : the seven durations of consciousness. There are 
eight worlds : the eight worldly conditions. There are nine 
worlds : the nine abodes of beings. There are ten worlds : the 
ten sense-organs. There are twelve worlds : the twelve sense- 
organs, There are eighteen worlds: the eighteen elements,’’^ 

And because he knows the wish of all beings, their inclina- 
tions, their conduct, their intentions, knows who have little 
or no dust in their eye,^ and who have much dust in their eye, 
who have sharp faculties and who have soft faculties, who are 
of good behaviour and who are of bad behaviour, who are easy 
to convince and who are difficult to convince, who are possible 
persons and who are impossible persons, — therefore does he 
know the world of living beings in all respects. 

And as with the world of living beings, so also with the 
spatial world. For he knows that a single world-system is 
twelve hundred thousand, thirty-four hundred and fifty 
yojanas^in length and breadth. 

In circumference, 

Thirty-six hundred thousand yojanas, 

Ten thousand, fifty, and three hundred make 

^ MajjUma i, 427. Ibid,, i, 328. ^ PatisamhUdd i, 122 ; cf . 4 ^ v, 50 . 

^ I.e. dust=passions; eye==:uiiderstanding. Cf. D. ii, 38 f. 

® Between seven and eight miles is a yojana. 



VII. — Exposition of the^SilJc ^Recollections 237 

The world’s whole round, wherein lies this our earth, 

In thickness four and twenty nahutas.^ 

In thickness eight and forty nahutas 

The wind-girt water flows, and the wind climbs^ 

[206] Tor sii and ninety mjrriad yojanas 
Unto the lo.wer ether. Even thus 
Is told the measure of the universe. 

Smeru, highest of the mountain peaks, 

Sinks four and eighty thousand yojanas 
In the great deep, and to that height ascends. 

To half the measure sink and^ise the seven 
In due succession named. — Yugandhara, 

And Isadhara, Karavika’s Eange, 

Sudassana, and Mount Nemindhara, 

Vinataka, and Assakanna’s mass. 

These seven celestial ranges,^ beautified 
With many gems, compass Smeru round. 

There dwell Great Regents, Yakkhas, deities. 

Himava stands five hundred yojanas 

In height (three thousand are its length and breadth), 

Crowned with its four and eighty thousand peaks. 

Tliis island Jambudipa has been named 
After the Jambu tree, which others name 
*Kaga, whose trunk is fiJteen yojanas 
In girth. The trunk and the outspreading arms 
Are fifty yojanas m length. It shades 
A hundred, and a hundred is its height. 

And the dimensions of the Jambu are the dimensions of the 
variegated trumpet-flower of the Asuras, the silk-cotton tree 
of the Garulas, the Kadamba tree of Aparagoyana, the wish- 
yielding tree of the Uttarakurus, the acacia of Pubbavideha, 
and the coral tree in Tavatimsa. Hence the ancients said: — 

Kadamba, and devas’ PdriccJiattaka, 

Pdtah, Kappa, Jambu, Simbali, 

S^risa seventh. 

^ Nahwta, ten thousand. 

2 For matthato and so on, Burmese recensions read maliito mbbliam 
uggato. ® For seta read seld. 



238 


The Path of Purity 

The great worWs rocky rim sinks in the deep 
Eighty-two thousand yojanas, its height 
Identical, encircling the whole world. 

[207] Therein, the disc of the moon measures forty-nine 
yojanas, the disc of the sun fifty yo]anas, the Tavatimsa 
mansion ten thousand yojanas; likewise the Asura mansion, 
Avici the great hell and Jambudipa. Aparagoyana is seven 
thousand yojanas, likewise Pubbavideha. Uttarakuru is 
eight thousand yojanas. Each of these great Islands is 
surrounded by five hundred smaller islands. All these 
together form one world-system, one world-element. In the 
spaces between three of them are the hells within the world- 
systems. Thus the Blessed One, by his infinite Buddha- 
knowledge has known, understood, penetrated the infinite 
world-systems. Thus he has known the spatial world in all 
respects. Thus also from his knowing the world in all respects 
is he THE WORLD-KNOWER. 

From the absence of anyone more distinguished in merit 
than himself, there is none better than this one, — hence the 
name Peerless. Indeed he surpasses the whole world in 
the qualities of virtue, also in the qualities of concentration, 
understanding, emancipation, insight into knowledge of 
emancipation. In the qualities of virtue he is without peer, 
comparable to the incomparable, matchless, withou;t a counter- 
part, Without a second, likewise in qualities ... of insight 
and knowledge of emancipation. As has been said in detail, 

I do not see, in the world including that of devas and that of 
mdras, anyone more fully endowed with virtue than myself, of 
the race of men and of devasP^ Similarly should such Suttas 
as Aggappasada, and such verses as For me is no teacher 
be expanded. 

Driver oe men to be tamed: — that is, he tames men to 
be tamed. It is said that he tames, he disciplines. Therein 
the taming of men refers to those who have not been tamed 
and are fit to be tamed, namely, males among ammals, human 
beings and non-human beings. Verily the Blessed Qne has 

1 Samyutta i, 139. See text, p. 207, n. 2. 

2 Ma^jhirm i, 171. 



VII. — Exposition of the Six^ Recollections 239 

tamed, rendered passionless, and established in the Refuges 
and Precepts male animals such as Apalala the Naga king, 
Culodara, Mahodara, Aggisikha, Dhumasikha, Aravala the 
Naga kmg, Dhanapalaka the elephant, men such as Saccaka 
the NiganthI,, Ambattha the young brahmin, [208] Pokkha- 
rasati, Sonadanda, Kutadanta; non-human males such as 
Alavaka, Suciloma, Kharaloma the Yakkha, Sakka the king 
of the devas.^ Kesi, 1 tame men gently, I tame them harshly, 
I tame them gently and harshly,^' — thus should this Sutta“ be 
expanded here. 

Further, the Blessed One tames the tamed also, announcing 
the First Jhana and the others to people of purified virtue 
and so on, and the higher Path-progress to Stream-winners 
and so on. Or, the phrase. Peerless driver oe men to be 
TAMED has this one meaning: that the Blessed One drives men 
to be tamed in such a way that they, seated cross-legged, run 
without faltering to the eight directions; hence is he called 

peerless driver of men to be tamed.” ''Brethren, the elephant 
being tanned and driven by the elephant-tamer, runs straight in 
one direction,'"'^ — thus should this Sutta be here expanded. 

Teacher ” : — that ]s, he instructs beings according to their 
worthiness, regarding ultimate truths of the present and the 
future. Further, as “ Teacher ” he is like the man ‘‘ with 
the goods’’*^; i.e., the Blessed One is the caravan leader. 
As the carhvan leader takes the goods across the desert, 
through the dangers of robbers, across places infested by 
wild beasts, through famine-stricken and waterless regions, 
takes them over, out of, through such perils, and places them 
in a safe place, so the Blessed One, the Teacher, the caravan- 
leader, takes beings^ across the desert, that is, of birth: — 
thus by this method of exposition the meaning is here to be 
understood. 

'' Of devas and men”: — this is said by way of distin- 
guishing between the higher ones and capable persons among 
devas and men. But the Blessed One, by giving instruction 

1 For references to the names see text, p. 207-8, footnotes. 

2 Angwttara n, 112. ® Ma^ghiirw, in, 222. 

^ Satihd (m-attha), the same word teacher.” 

® Bead satte as in footnote. 



240 


2 % 6 ^ Path of Purity 

even to animals, is their teacher also. For they also, acquiring 
the sufficing condition through hearing the Law of the Blessed 
One, become by means of that siifficmg condition, in the 
second or third lifetime partakers of Paths and Fruitions. 
Of this Manduka^ the deva and others are inslmnces. It is 
said that, as the Blessed One was showing the Law to the 
residents of Campanagara on the shore of Lake Gaggara, a 
frog (manduka) grasped the Sign in the Blessed One’s voice. 
[209], A cowherd who stood leaning on a stick, drove it into 
the frog’s head. The frog died there and then, and was 
re-born in a golden mansion twelve yojanas in size in the 
(next or) Tavatimsa world. There, as if roused from sleep, he 
saw himself surrounded by a company of nymphs. '' Hullo ! 
I also am re-born here ! What deed have I done ?” Thus 
reflecting, he saw no other reason than his grasping of the 
Sign m the Blessed One’s voice. He immediately came with 
his mansion and worshipped at the Blessed One’s feet. The 
Blessed One knew him and said: — 

“ Who is it worships at my feet, who shines 

With pomp and power illuminating all 

The quarters with surpassing loveliness ?” 

A frog once was I, eating watery food; 

A cowherd killed me listening to thy Law.” 

The Blessed One taught him the Law. Eighty-four thousand 
beings understood the Law. The deva, being also established 
in the fruition of Stream-winning, smiled and departed. 

“ Buddha,” the Enlightened: — because whatever knowable 
thing there is, he has understood all by means of a knowledge 
which is the consummation of emancipation. Or, since he 
himself has understood the Four Truths, he causes others also 
to understand them; for these reasons and others is he the 
Enlightened (Buddha). Also he is Enlightener in the Truths 
in order to make known the meaning. Enlightened, the 
Enlightener of all mankind: thus all procedure, whether 
Niddesa method^ or Patisambhida method^ is to be expanded. 

1 Virndna-Vaithu 4:^; Atthahatha%(i^, 

2 Niddesa 457. 3 PatisamhUdd i, 174. 



VII. — Exposition of the Six ""Recollections 241 

Blessed One (Bhagava)^ is an appellation of respect antj 
reverence for the best of all beings distinguished in virtues. 
Hence said the Ancients : — 

Blessed One is the best of names. 

* Blessed One is the tvord supreme, 

Fit for respect and reverence^ 

Hence is he called the Blessed One. 

Or again, a name is fourfold; — inherent, descriptive, signi- 
ficant, spontaneous. In worldly usage the spontaneSus ” 
name is said to be due to personal wish. Of others {e g, ) 
[210] '' calf,” domestic beast,” bullock,” — such names are 

mhe^'ent.” Having a stick, having an umbrella, crested, 
having a trunk,^ — such names are descriptive.” A scholar 
of the three Vedas, of the sixfold super-knowledge,*^ — such 
names are significant.” Sirivad^aka, Dhanavaddhaka and 
such names as arise without regard^ to the meaning, are 

spontaneous.” The name Blessed One is significant, not 
given by Mahamaya, nor by King Suddhodana, nor by the 
eighty thousand relatives, nor by Sakka, nor by Santusita, nor 
by the other eminent spirits.^ Further, this has been said by 
the Captain of the Law: '^Blessed is not a name given by the 
mother. ... It arises at the consummation of emancipation. 
This appellation of Blessed arises in the Buddhas, the Blessed 
Ones, with the attaining, the realizing of omniscience at the foot 
of the Tree of Knowledge.^’^ They utter this stanza to set 
forth those qualities of which this is the significant name: — 

Endowed with,”' divider,”® sharer,”^ owner, 
Eevered is he, for he hath made the broken, 

His IS the Wealth.” 

^ Or Adorable, or Exalted One. 

2 Read hari, viz. the elephant. The other phrases are in Pali the 
substantival adjectives dandl, cJioMl, sikhl. 

^ Tevijjo, chal~abMnno, lit. three-Vedan, six-knowledger. 

^ Read apekhitvd. ^ Delete 1. 8 in the text, p. 210. 

® Niddesa 14.3, ascribed by late tradition to Sariputta, 

^ Over -lordship and such quahties. ® Of all states. 

® In path-fruition, divine life, and so on. 

Of viftue and the necessaries of life. 

Of evil states. 


16 



242 


Ths Path of Purity 

Having the self well-trained by methods manifold. 

Gone to Becommg’s end: he’s called the Blessed One. 

And here the meanmg of the various terms is to be understood 
as in Niddesa.^ 

Or there is this way: — 

Endowed with blessedness, and fit to be breaker, 

And yoked with qualities,^ the owner, 

Eesorter,^ vomiter of life’s pursuits. 

Because of this the Blessed One.” 

Herein, taking the et 3 mfological meaning from the vowel- 
augment, vowel-change and so on, or the grammatical meaning 
thrown in by the pisodam^ method and so on, because there 
is in him glory which produces worldly and transcendental 
bliss, and which has reached the summit of charity, virtue, 
and so on, therefore is he called bhagavd (Blessed One), though 
the word should be bhdgyavd. And because he has destroyed 
covetousness, hate, delusion, perverse attention, shameless- 
ness, indiscretion, anger, malice, hypocrisy, rivalry, envy, 
meanness, craftiness, rigidity, hardness, impetuosity, pride, 
haughtiness, insolence, negligence, craving, ignorance, the 
threefold immoral root, nnsconduct, vice, taint, [211] irregu- 
larity of perceptions, medley of thoughts, fourfold contrari- 
ness, the cankers, bonds, floods, yokes, evil courses, attach- 
ments to craving, delight in the fivefold mental* barrenness, 
bondage, the hindrances, the six roots of dissension and 
groups of craving, the seven tendencies, the eightfold wrong- 
ness, the nine roots of craving, the ten causes of immoral 

^ Page 142. 

2 Read hhagehi for Wiavehi. It is impossible to translate these series 
of puns by English equivalents. The play is on derivatives of the three 
Vedic roots ^^bhaJcs^^ (bhag), to partake of, '"hhajy^ to divide, 
to break. 

^ To divine life and so on. 

^ P^sodam=:pisa-|-ndara=pe5odam, instead of which pisodara is 
used. So also, instead of the Sanskrit form bhagyava, the Pali form 
bhagava is used. Or, Pisa-^udara means a big belly, which takes in 
whatever is thrown in; so pisodara words take in other forms of words. 
The short form bhagavd instead of the full form bhagyava is thus 
accounted for. 



VII. — Exposition of the^Six TtecoUections 243 

action, the sixty- two heresies, the hundred and eight kindg 
of walks in craving, and the hundred thousand vices which 
bring trouble and fever to all, — in short, the five aggregates 
of the vices, accumulation (of kamma), celestial joys and 
death itself,— ^therefore, as destroying these perils, he is called 
Bhagavd, although the right word should be hhaggavd (the 
breaker). And here it is said: — 

With broken lush, with broken hate, 

With broken-in delusion, 

Th’ uncankered one has broken all 

The evil states — the Blessed One. 

And the possession of wealth’’ shows his physical attain- 
ments in that he bears the hundred characteristics of the 
virtuous. The brokenness of corruption shows his attainments 
in the body of the Law. And these two conditions show also 
that the worldling and the intelligent hold him in great respect, 
that he is approached by householder and monk, that he is 
a tower of strength in removing the bodily and mental pains^ 
of those who come to him, that he is a helper in carnal gifts 
and in the gift of the Doctrine, that he is able to confer on 
them worldly and transcendental bliss. And because the 
word bhaga (blessing) is used in connection with the six states: 
lordship, state, fame, glory, desire, endeavour, e.g. because 
there is the .highest kind of lordship in his own mind, and 
there is the lordship which in the world’s opinion is consum- 
mated in all sorts of forms, ^ such as power to make one’s 
body minutely small, lightness in travelling through the air, 
and so on^; there is also the transcendental state] there is the 
fame exceedingly pure and got by real merit; there is the 
glor^j of his limbs, big and small, being marked with the 
characteristic signs and capable of producing clearness of 

^ Read as m footnote. 2 ;^ead sabbdkdraparipuram. 

^ Other forms besides these two: animd and langhikdSLre: — Power to 
envelop with one’s body the whole world-system is maJiimd. Power to 
go wherever one wishes is PdpunanapattL Ability to perform any act 
is pdlcamma. Ability to make anyone or anything follow one’s wishes 
is Isitd, AJpility to create at will water, fire, and so on is vasUd. Ability 
to accomplish whatever one has undertaken to accomplish is yattha- 
kmmvasayitd. 



244 


The Path of Purity 

yision in men who make an efiort to see his physical form; 
there is the desire appearing as accomplishment of desire 
from his effecting at will whatever is wished for, aspired after, 
whether it be one’s own benefit or another’s; and there is 
the endeavour called right effort as the condition of attaining 
teachership of all the world, — therefore is he called the Blessed 
(bhagavd), 

‘"Blessed,” again in the sense that blessings exist in him 
as Jie is endowed with them. Because he is spoken of as 
divider, who has analyzed, explained, shown all states as 
moral and so on; the sta§tes which are moral and so on, [212] 
as aggregate, organ, element, truth, faculty, causal genesis 
and so on; the noble truth of 111 in the sense of oppressing, 
conditioned, burning, mutable; its origin in the sense of 
accumulating, source, fetter, nuisance; its cessation in the 
sense of escape, solitude, unconditioned, deathless; the Path 
in the sense of leading out, cause, vision, dominant influence, — 
therefore as divider is he called the Blessed One. 

And because he has followed, served, increased, the celestial, 
divine, noble life^; the detachment that is physical, mental, 
spirituaP; the emancipation which is of the Void, unhankered 
after, signless; and other states which transcend human ex- 
perience, — therefore is he called the Blessed (bhagavd)^ though 
the right word should be hhattavd (resorter). 

And because he has vomited the pursuits called the cravings 
in the three worlds of re-birth, — therefore instead of saymg 
"" vomiter of pursuits of the three worlds of re-birth,” he is 
called the Blessed, by taking bJia from bhaia (re-birth), ga 
from gamana (pursuit), va from vanta (vomited) and lengthen- 
ing the last. So we say meJchald (girdle) instead of “ the 
wreath {md-ld) of a hidden (me-Jianassa) place (Jcha-ssa) in the 
world.” 

^ The Jhana of the realm of form, such as those with the devices 
(hasina) for object, is the celestial life. The Jhana of Love and so on 
IS divine life. Attainment of the Fruition is Koble Life. 

2 Solitary life in a place free from sense-desire is physical detachment. 
Having the mind freed from the Hindrances by means of the Jhanas 
13 mental detachment. Nibbana is detachment of the ^padMs, or 
spiritual detachment. 



VII. — Exposition of the* Six Recollections 245 

When in that (formula) a man recalls the Buddha's merits 
' ‘ For this reason and that is he the Blessed One, the Saint . . . 
for this reason and that is he the Blessed One," — his mind 
at that time is not invaded by lust, not invaded by hate, not 
invaded by delusion ; but is quite upright with the Tathagata 
as object. And rn him who by absence of the invasion of 
lust and so on, has discarded the hindrances, and whose mind 
is upright towards the subjects of meditation, there arises 
applied and sustained thought bending towards the Buddha’s 
merits. Rapture arises when he applies and sustains the 
thought of the Buddha's merits. In the rapturous mind, 
bodily and mental sufferings subside through repose which is 
the cause of rapture. When his sufferings subside, there 
arises bliss physical and mental. The mind of the blissful 
who has the Buddha’s merits as object is composed. Thus 
in due order the factors of Jhana arise simultaneously And 
owing t’o the depth of the Buddha’s virtues, or to intentness 
in recollecting the virtues of various kinds, the Jhana attams 
not to ecstasy but just to the access. Because this Jhana 
arises by way of recollecting the Buddha’s virtues, it comes 
to be known as the Buddha-recollection. And the monk 
who applies himself to this Buddha-recollection has respect 
and reverence for the Teacher, attains an abundance of faith, 
of mindfulness, of understanding, of merit, is abundantly 
rapturous and joyful, overcomes fear and dread, [213] is able 
to bear pain, obtains a sense of intimacy with the Teacher; 
and his body, inhabited by recollection of the Buddha’s 
virtues, is worthy of adoration like a temple, his mind bends 
towards the sphere of the Buddha; in contact with sinful 
objects he feels a sense of shame and dread of blame as though 
he stood in the very presence of the Teacher; (though) pene- 
trating no further, yet is he bound for a happy destiny. 

Hence always eager one should wisely be 

For Buddha-rmnding’s mighty majesty. 

This,^first of all, is the substance of the detailed discourse 
on the Buddha-recollection. 



246 


The Bath of Purity 
IL 

He who wishes to develop the Law-recollection also should 
recall in solitude and seclusion the virtues of the Scriptures, 
and of the nine divisions of the transcendental law thus: 
“ {The Law) is welLpi^oclaimed by the Blessed One^ thoroughly 
seen, not subject to time, welcoming all, leading ujp to, and is 
to be attained by the wise, each one for himself 
Upder the expression well-proclaimed ” the Law as 
Scripture is included. Only the Law as transcendentaP is 
compiised in the other expressions. First, the Scripture is 
well-proclaimed because of its loveliness in the beginning, the 
middle, and the end, and because of its setting forth according 
to the meaning and the letter, the fulness and purification 
of the divine life. For any stanza that the Blessed One 
preaches has, from the full loveliness of the Law, a lovely 
beginning in the first line, a lovely centre in the second and 
third lines, a lovely end in the last line. A discourse with a 
single application has a lovely beginning in the introduction, 
a lovely end in the epilogue, a lovely centre in the rest. A 
discourse with many applications has a lovely beginmng in 
the first application, a lovely end m the last application, a 
lovely centre in the rest. Further, it is lovely in the beginning 
because of its introduction and narrative; lovely in the-middle 
from its favourableness to those ready to receive’ it, the irre- 
versibility of its meamng and its connection with cause and 
example; lovely in the end by causing the hearers to attain 
to faith, and by its epilogue. And the whole of the Law of 
the religion is lovely m the beginning through the morality 
which is its essence; lovely in the middle through calm, insight. 
Path and frmtion; lovely in the end through Nibbana. Or, 
it is lovely in the beginmng because of morality and con- 
centration, [214] lovely in the middle because of insight and 
the Path, lovely m the end because of the Fruition and 
Nibbana. Or it is lovely in the beginning because of the 
Buddha having been well enlightened, lovely m the middle 
^ Dlgha li, 93. 

2 Lolc" uttara: supramundane, not about the life of tins worlds 
spiritual. 



VII . — Exposition of the*Sik Recollections 247 

because of the Law being good, lovely in the end because of 
the good conduct of the clergy. Or, it is lovely in the begin- 
ning because Perfect Enlightenment is to be attained by one 
who has practised according as^ he has listened to the Law, 
lovely in the middle because of individual enlightenment, 
lovely in the end because of the enlightenment of the disciples. 
It is lovely in the beginning as the hindrances are discarded 
in the hearing of it and because it brings happiness to the 
hearer, lovely in the middle as it carries the bliss of t^ahn 
and insight in the practising of it and because it br ngs happi- 
ness to one who practises it, lovely therefore in the end as the 
result of its practice, since, in so far as it is practised, it carries 

suchness even when the practice ceases to yield fruit. 
Thus is it ''well-proclaimed” because of its loveliness in the 
beginning, the middle, the end. 

And that divine life of the religion, that divine life of the 
Path which the Blessed One in preachmg the Law has set 
forth, has declared in many ways, is endowed with the meaning 
and the letter because there is fulfilment according to the 
meaning and the letter. It has meaning, because it is con- 
nected with the expressions of meaning, to wit, the making 
clear, setting forth, revealing, analyzing, explaining, making 
known. It has the letter, because it is complete in character, 
word, phrase, letter, etymology, exposition. From the 
profundity of sense, from the profundity of penetration,^ it 
has meaning; from the profundity of the Law, from the 
profundity of the teaching,^ it has the letter. As the object 
of the analysis of sense and of ready wit, it has meaning; 
as the object of the analysis of the Law and of etymology, 
it has the letter. It has meaning, inasmuch as it produces 
faith in the intelligent that it is knowable by the wise , it has 
the letter, inasmuch as it produces faith in the worldling 

^ TatJiattdya patipan7iena. So Plkd. Cf. P.T.S. Diet. s.i\ T. 
Tatliatta “suclmess” occurs several times in the Samyutta (see Index 
vol.) and once in the KatTidvatthu xix, 5 as tatliatd. The Burmese 
translation of this work renders it by a term which S. Z. Aung Englishes 
as “ immi^table reality ” {Points of Co7itroversyZ3S,n. 1). Its importance 
in Mahayanist metaphysic lends it additional mterest here. 

^ Tiled paraphrases by tadibhava. ® Join hi to the preceding word. 



248 


The Path of Purity 

that it IS worthy of belief. From the profundity of the sense 
it has meaning, from having plain words it has the letter. 
From the absence of what is to be inferred it is fully complete 
with all completeness; from the absence of what is to be 
rejected it is pure in its faultlessness.^ Further, from the 
skill in attaining to the practice, it is endowed with meaning ; 
from the skill in deahng with the accepted tradition, it has 
the letter. Because it is connected with the five aggregates 
of the Law, namely morality and so on, it is fully complete ; 
because it is free from the vices, proceeds with intent to 
escape (from re-birth), looks not at worldly needs of the flesh, 
it is purified. Thus, because it sets forth according to the 
meamng and the letter the fulness and purity of divine life, 
it IS well-proclaimed.” 

Or, it is well-proclaimed ” through absence of reversibihty 
of meaning. For the meaning of the doctrine of other teachers 
undergoes reversion. The said doctrines, though* called 
“obstructive,”^ are not obstructive, [215] though they are 
declared to lead to [salvation] do not lead to salvation; hence 
they are ill-proclaimed. Not so does the Law of the Blessed 
One undergo reversion in meamng. It does not transgress 
against the truth of the said doctrines, either those that 
have been declared obstructive, or those leading to salvation. 
So far is the Law as Scripture well-proclmmed. 

But the transcendental state is [also] well-proclaimed^ 
because it proclaims a course of practice which conforms to 
Nibbana, and a Nibbana which conforms to the practice. As 
has been said: ''Well-declared by the Blessed One to the disciples 
is the W ay leading to Nibbana. He unites Nibbana and the Way. 
Just as Ganges water unites with, flows with, Yamuna water, 
so is the Way leading to Nibbana well-declared by the Blessed 
One to the disciples. He unites Nibbana and the W ay. 

Here also the Noble Path is well-proclaimed, from being 

proclaimed as the middle path which avoids two extremes. 

The fruits of recluse-ship are well-proclaimed from being 

proclaimed as having tranquillized the vices. Nibbana with 


1 Road mddosa°. ^ le. causing re-birth m a state of woe. 

3 Punctuate the text accordingly. Of. M. i, 492, 



VIL — Exposition of the^SCx Recollections 249 

its intrinsic nature of eternity, deathlessness, refuge, shelter, 
and so on, is well-proclauned from being proclaimed by way 
of the intrinsic nature of eternity, and so on. Thus the 
transcendental state also is well-pwclaimed, 

''Thoroughly seen” — here the Noble Path is to be seen 
by the noble person himself who makes an end of lust and 
so on, in his own life-continmty. As has been said: 
"Brahmin, one who is lustful, omrcoine hy lust, whose mind 
is possessed by lust, meditates harm to himself, meditates Ttarm 
to others, meditates harm to both. He experiences mental paui 
and grief. When lust is put away he does not meditate harm 
to himself, does not meditate harm to others, does not meditate 
harm to both. He does not experience mental pain and grief. 
Thus, brahmin, is the Law thoroughly seen.”^ 

[216] Further, this ninefold transcendental Law, upon 
being acquired by anyone is not to be taken up by him for 
the sake of the faith of another man, but is to be under- 
stood by himself through reflective knowledge; hence is it 
‘‘ thoroughly seen.” 

Or, a praiseworthy view is view well seen {sanditfh). It 
overcomes through seeing well — sanditthika. For herein the 
Noble Path overcomes the vices by the associated advan- 
tageous view, the Noble Fruition- does so by that which is 
its cause ; Nibbana does so by that which is its object. Hence, 
as a charioteer conquers by a chariot, so the ninefold tran- 
scendental Law conquers by being a well-seen view : hence the 
term thoroughly seen” 

Or, again, seeing is called a view, the view is the seen thing, 
well seeing is the meaning. Worthy is the well seen; — hence 
the term “thoroughly seen.’’ For the transcendental Law, on 
being seen by way of the comprehension of culture and of 
realization, turns back the dread of the round of re-births. 
Hence, as one who is well-dressed is fit to be clothed, so 
“ thoroughly seen ” means fit to be seen. 

“ Not subject to time,” i.e., in no time as regards yielding 
fruit. Ahdla (without time) is the same as aldlika (not 

^ Or “ seen here-and-now.” Ahguttara i, 156. 

2 Read ariyaphalam kdrana°. 



250 


The Bath of Purity 

belonging to time). It does not yield fruit after using up 
time sucli as five days, seven days. It gives fruit inomediately 
after its own arising. 

Or, belonging to time’’ means it takes a^long time in 
giving its own fruit. Wkat does ? The worldly moral 
state. But this Law is not belonging to tune, as it fructifies 
immediately. Hence, '' not subject to timeT This is said 
with reference to the Path.^ 

If is worthy to make arrangements for welcome such as 

come see this Law” — thus, ''welcoming all.” Why is it 
entitled to make such arrangements ? From its reality and 
purity. Though one may say there is silver or gold in an 
empty hand, one cannot say " come and look at them.” Why ? 
Because they are not there. Nor can one say " come and 
see ” with the intention of gladdening the mind by setting 
forth the pleasingness of dung or urine, albeit they really 
exist. In fact, they ought to be covered with grass or leaves. 
Why ? Because they are vile. This ninefold transcendental 
Law, on the other hand, existing in its intrinsic nature, is 
pure like the fuU-moon-disc in a sky free from clouds, or like 
a real ^gem set in an orange-coloured stone. [217] Hence 
from its reality and purity it is entitled to make such welcome 
as " come and see ^' — thus " welcoming all.” 

That which is fit to be brought (to a conclusion^ is " leading 
up toT This herein is the decision: the bringing to a 
conclusion is the leading up to it. Or, that which is fit 
to be brought to a conclusion in one’s mind by means of 
culture, being indifferent in doing so, even though one’s head- 
dress or the head itself be burning. This refers to the con- 
ditioned transcendental Law. The Unconditioned is fit to be 
brought to a conclusion by one’s own consciousness: hence, 
"leading up to.” The meamng is, it is worthy of being 
cloven to by realization. 

Or, it leads to Nibbana. That which should lead is the 

^ The rendering of akdliko by “not passing away” in the corre- 
sponding passage of the Dialogues of the Buddha ii, 99 is ijnt borne 
out by the definitions here. Kindred Sayings ii, 49 has “not a matter 
of time.” 



VII . — Exposition of the.Si^x Recollections 251 

Noble Path. Tbe Fruition and tbe Nibbana are fit to lead 
as they are to lead to a fit state for realization. That which 
is fit to lead is leading up 

To he attained to by the wise, each one for himself naeans, 
to be understood by the wise such as those of quick under- 
standing, each for himself thus . — “ The Path has been 
developed by me, the fruit is attained, cessation realized.’’ 
For the pupil’s vices are not put away by the Path developed 
by his preceptor; nor does he live in comfort by the latter ’s^ 
attainment of the Fruition; neither does he realize the Nibbana 
which the latter has realized. Therefore this is not merely 
to be looked at as one looks at an ornament on another’s 
head. It should be seen, enjoyed^ by the wise in their own 
mind, it is said. It is not a thing for fools. 

Further, this Latv is well-proclaimed. Why ? Because it 
is thoroughly seen. It is thoroughly seen because it is not 
subject to time. It is not subject to time because it weU 
comes all. And that which welcomes all leads up to. Thus 
when he recalls the qualities of the Law that it is well-pro- 
claimed and so forth, his mind then is not invaded by lust, 
nor by hate, nor by delusion, but is upright with reference 
to the Law. Thus when he has by this first method discarded 
the hindrances, the Jhana-factors arise in one and the same 
moment. But from the profundity of the qualities of the 
Law, or the* intentness with which he recalls them, various 
as they are, the Jhana, not attaining to ecstasy, attains only 
to access. This Jhana goes under the name of recollection 
of the Law because it arises by way of recalling the qualities 
of the Law. 

[218] And the monk who applies himself to the recollection 
of the Law comes to have, through seeing its qualities, respect 
and reverence for the Teacher: — “ Such a preacher of the Law 
which leads up to, such a teacher endowed with this merit 
I saw not in the past, nor do I see in the present, other 
than the Blessed One.” Honourmg the Law, he attains an 
abundance of faith and so on, is abundantly rapturous and 
joyful, cf/ercomes fear and dread, is able to bear pain, gets 

1 Kead so tassa for sotassa, ^ Punctuate the text accordingly. 



252 


Path of Purity 

a-n idea of life in the Law; and his body, informed by recol- 
lection of the qualities of the Law, is worthy of adoration 
like a temple; his mind bends towards the attainment of the 
incomparable Law, in contact with sinful objects he feels a 
sense of shame and dread as he recalls the goodness of the 
Law, he is bound for a happy destiny though he penetrate 
no further. 

Hence always eager one should wisely be, 

Eecalling Doctrine’s might and majesty. 

This is the substance t)f the detailed discourse on Law- 
recollection. 

HI. 

He who wishes to develop the Order-recollection also should 
in seclusion and solitude recall the qualities of the Noble Order 
thus: The Order of the disc%ples of the Blessed One is well- 
practised^ the Order of the disciples of the Blessed One is^ upright, 
the Order of the disciples of the Blessed One is righteous, the 
Order of the disciples of the Blessed One is law-abiding. The 
Order of the disciples of the Blessed One, that is, the four 
pairs of men, the eight personages, is worthy of offerings, of 
oblations, of gifts, and of reverential salutation, the worWs 
peerless field for merit.^^^ 

Herein “ well-practised ” means of right cbehaviour.” 
And the behaviour is spoken of as right behaviour, irrevocable^ 
behaviour, direct behaviour, unopposed behaviour, behaviour 
in conformity with the Law. ‘‘ Disciples ” are those who 
listen respectfully to the admonition and instruction of the 
Blessed One. 

The Order of the disciples is the Disciple-Order,” 
meaning thereby the group of disciples who have reached 
community through equality in virtue and beliefs. Because 
[219] that behaviour, as being upright, not crooked, not 
curved, not bent, but noble, is spoken of as righteousness,^ 

^ Anguttara i, 208. 

2 Not allowing the opposing evil states to return. Lit. noji-turning 
from (a^ni-vatti). 



VII. — Exposition of the Six ^Recollections 253 

and from its conformability goes under the name also of 
law*abidingness (or circumspection), therefore the Noble 
Order being practised therein is also spoken of as upright^ 
righteous, law-abiding. And here those who are established 
in the Patb are “well-practised’’ as endowed with right 
behaviour. Those who are established in the fruition should 
be known as “well-practised” with reference to their past 
behaviour, because it is through right behaviour that they 
have attained to what ought to have been attained. Further, 
one is “ well-practised ” as behaving according to the instruc- 
tion of the well-proclaimed Law and Discipline, also because 
one behaves faultlessly. And one is upright in behaviour 
because one behaves according to the Middle Course which 
avoids the two extremes,^ and because of a behaviour which 
puts away crookedness, curve, bend, fault in deed, word and 
thought. Eighteousness is said to mean Nibbana. Because 
one behaves in order to attain that, one is righteous. Because 
they who behave so are worthy of law-abiding behaviour, 
therefore this term is because of behaviour. 

“ That is ” means namely these. 

'' The four pairs of men'': — one established in the First 
Path, and one established in the Fruition make one pair. 
There are thus four pairs of men for the four Paths. 

“ eight personages" : — by way of the individual, one 
is established in the First Path, one in the Fruition; in this 
way there are eight personages. Here the words “men,” 
“ personages ” have the same meaning, that is, they who 
can learn. 

“ The Order of the disciples of the Blessed One" : — four pairs 
of men by way of the pair, eight men by way of the individual, 
constitute the Order of disciples of the Blessed One. 

In “ worthy of offerings and so on," ofiering {dhunani) is 
something that ought to be brought and offered. The 
meaning is, it should be brought even from far, and offered 
to the virtuous. It is a name for the four necessaries of life. 
This offering one is fit to receive, thereby producing much 
fruit fdr him: — hence “ worthy of offerings." 

^ Referring to the opening words of the First Sermon. 



254 


The Path of Purity 

Or it may mean, coining even from far, all kinds of provision 
should be offered here, hence worthy of offerings ’’ {dhavaniya). 
Or, one is worthy of ofierings even from Sakka'and so on. 
It is the view of those who hold that what is to be offered 
to Brahma devas is fire, and that anything sacrificed in that 
fire yields much fruit. [220] If the sacrificial fire is worthy of 
offerings because it yields much fruit, then surely the Order 
is worthy of offerings. Verily what is offered to the Order 
is of much fruit. As has been said: — 

A man may tend the altar's fire 
A hundred years of forest life. 

A moment's honouring cultured soul 
Is better than that sacrifice."^ 

This expression dhavaniya in other bodies of doctrine^ is the 
same in sense as the term ‘‘worthy of offerings ” (dhuneyya) 
here. There is only a slight difference in form. So nauch for 
“ worthy of offerings." 

In worthy of oblations" {pdhuneyyo), offerings for guests 
respectfully made for the benefit of dear, beloved relations 
and friends who have arrived from all quarters, are called 
oblations. Such worthy guests may be passed over and the 
offerings given to the Order. And it is fitting that the Order 
should receive them. For there is no guest like the Order, 
which appears in the interval between two Buddhas, and is of 
the open air.^ It is proper that oblations be made to its mem- 
bers, as they are endowed with qualities making for lovableness, 
and they are worthy of them; hence ''worthy of oblations" 
There are those*^ who read the text as pavahaniya. Since the 
Order in their view is worthy of the first offerings {pa+ 
dvahaniya), these should be brought first of all, and offered 
to the Order; hence pdvahamya, which also means, worthy 
of offerings in all respects. Pdhuneyyo (worthy of oblations) 
here has the same sense. 

A gift is said to be given out of faith in the next world. 
A member is worthy of such a gift, or gets good by it, because 

^ Dhammapada 107. ^ E g. the sahbatthikadada. 

® Homeless. ^ Sabhatthikavadl. 



VII . — Exposition of the Siq: Recollections 256 

he purifies it by making it greatly fruitful; bence (the term) 
worthy of gifts:^ 

He is wor-thy of every one in the world placing both hands 
on the forehead in reverential salute, to wit, worthy of 
reverential saUctationJ^ 

The worlTs peerless field for merit ” : — i.e., a place match- 
less for the growth of merit for the whole world. Just as the 
place where the paddy or barley of the king or his minister 
grows, is called the king’s paddy-field or barley-field, so is 
the Order a place for the growth of merit for the whole world. 
For works of merit conducive to eyery kind of benefit and 
happiness for the world, grow on account of the Order; hence 
the Order is the ivorWs peerless field for merit.'' 

When he thus recalls the virtues of the Order, that it is 
well-practised ” and so forth, [221] his mind is then not 
invaded by lust, nor by hate, nor by delusion, but it is upright 
with reference to the Order. When he has thus, by this first 
method, discarded the hindrances, the Jhana-factors arise in 
one and the same moment. But from the profundity of the 
virtues of the Order, or from the intentness with which he 
recalls them, various as they are, the Jhana, not attaining 
to ecstasy, attains only to access. This Jhana goes under 
the name of recollection of the Order, because it arises by 
way of recalling the virtues of the Order. 

And the monk who applies himself to the recollection of 
the Order, comes to have respect and reverence for the Order, 
attains to an abundance of faith, and so on, is abundantly 
rapturous and joyful, overcomes fear and dread, is able to 
bear pain, gets an idea of life with the Order; and his body, 
informed by recollection of the Order’s virtues, is worthy 
of adoration like a temple of the assembled Order; his mind 
bends towards the attainment of the virtues of the Order ; in 
contact with sinful objects he feels a sense of shame and dread 
of blame, as though he stood in the very presence of the 
Order; he is bound for a happy destiny (even) though he 
penetrate no farther. 

JEence always eager one should wisely be, 

Recalling Order’s might and majesty. 



256 


Thfi Path of Purity 

This is the substance of the detailed discourse on the 
^Recollection of the Order. 

IV. 

He who wishes to develop the morality-recollection should, 
m seclusion and solitude, recall his own morals in so far as they 
are ‘^unbroken’’ and so forth thus: — Verily my virtues are 
unbroken, intact, unspotted, unblemished, enfranchizing, praised 
by the intelligent, uninfected, conducive to concentration The 
morals of a householder should be recalled by a householder, 
those of a recluse by a recluse. Be they for householders, or for 
recluses, if not a single one is broken, either at the beginning 
or the end, as it were a garment frayed at the edges, they are 
said to be '' unbroken'' [222] If not a single one is broken in 
the middle, as it were a garment with holes in the middle, 
they are said to be ‘‘ intact." If two or three of them in 
a series are not broken, as it were a cow whose body is either 
black, red, and so on, with a patch of a different colour long 
or round, and so forth, in shape, on the back or under the 
belly, they are said to be '' unspotted." If they are not 
broken at difiei'ent stages, as it were a cow variegated with 
dissmular spots, they are said to be unblemished." 

Or, speaking generally, all of them being unbroken on 
account of the sevenfold association with sexual feelings, or 
evil states such as anger, enmity, they are said to be wnbroken, 
intact, unspotted, unblemished. 

They are enfranchizing " by reason of their releasing, 
setting one free from the slavery of craving. Because they 
are praised by the intelligent such as the Buddha, they are 
called praised by the intelligent." As they are not infected 
by craving or wrong views, and so on, and cannot be infected 
by anyone saying '' This is a fault in your morals,’’ they are 

uninfected." They lead to access-concentration, or again 
to Path-concentration and Fruition-concentration, — hence are 
called conducive to concentration" 

When he thus recalls his own morals, that they are unbroken 
and so forth, his mind is then not invaded by lust, nor by hate, 
nor by delusion, but is upright with reference t(), morals.^ 


^ Samyutta li, 70. 


2 Punctuate the text accordingly. 



VII . — Exposition of iho> Six Recollections 257 

When he has thus by this first method discarded the hindrances, 
the Jhana-factors arise in one and the same moment. But 
from the profundity of the virtues of moral habits, or the 
intentness with which he recalls them, various as they are, 
the Jhana, not attaining to ecstasy, only attains to access. 
This Jhafia goes under the name of recollection of the morals, 
since it arises by way of recalling the virtues of morality. 

And the monk, who applies himself to the recollection of 
morals, comes to have respect for the training, leads a common 
life [with the virtuous], is not remiss in courtesy, is removed 
from such fears as self-blame,^ sees danger in the minutest 
fault, attains an abundance of faith and so on, is abundantly 
rapturous and joyful, and is bound for a happy destiny, even 
though he penetrate no farther. 

Hence always eager one should wisely be, 
Recalling Virtue’s might and majesty. 

This is the substance of the detailed discourse on the 
Recollection of Morals. 

[223] V. 

Whoso wishes to develop the liberality-recollection should 
make a constant gift to another, or share with another what 
is reserved for himself, with an habitual intentness. Or again, 
in striving for culture he should make resolve thus: — from 
now onwards, so long as there is anyone to receive it, I will 
not eat without makmg a gift, even though it may be just 
a ladleful of food. Should there be on that day anyone of 
distinguished merit to receive his gifts, he should, according 
to his power and ability, give and share with such. And 
grasping the sign therein, he should in seclusion and solitude 
recall his own liberality by way of the virtues of freedom from 
the taint of stinginess and so on, thus: — It is indeed a gain 
to me, verily a great gain to me, that /, among a race oppressed 
hy the taint of stinginess, live with mind where is no taint of 
stinginess, generous, clean of hands, delighting m giving 
away, accessible to begging, delighting in giving and sharing y- 

jr 

^ Blame of others, punishment, evil destiny and so on. 

2 AnguttaraiinZlZ, 


17 



258 PMh of Purity 

Herein, '' It is indeed a gam to me ’’ means, to me indeed 
are gains sucli as Lave been praised as gains to tLe giver by 
tbe Blessed One on this wise: — By giving life one partakes 
of life divine or human; The giver is dear; many resort 
to him; and One who gives is dear; he followS the custom 
of the good. The meamng is. They are. my portions un- 
doubtedly. Verily a great gain to me — ^this rehgion or 
manhood that I have attained . . . that is verily a great 
gaiDp to me. Why ? In that I, among a race oppressed 
by the taint of stinginess, live . . . delighting in giving and 
sharing. Herein: — * 

Oppressed by the taint of stinginess means overpowered 
by the taint of stinginess. 

Among a race ’’ — that is, beings are so called by virtue 
of begetting. Therefore the meamng here is, among beings 
overpowered by the taint of stinginess which is one of the 
dark states, destroying the radiance of the mind by its charac- 
teristic of not being able to share in common with others 
what one has acquired. 

Freed from the taint of stinginess ’’ means freed from 
other taints also, such as lust and hate, as well as from the 
taint of stinginess. 

I live with mind ” : — the meaning is, I abide with a mind 
of the kind described. [224] But in the Suttas^ it is said, 

1 live %n a house,'"' since it has been pointed out as a depend- 
able state to Mahanama Sakka, when being a Stream-winner, 
he was enquiring after a dependable state. Here the meaning 
is, I live as having overcome. 

‘‘ Free in liberality ” means of unrestrained liberality. 

'' Clean of hands ” means of purified hands. It is said, he 
washes his hands always to give gifts respectfully with his 
own hands. 

“Delighting in giving away”: — the handing over, giving 
away; full liberality is the meaning. Delight by way of a 
constant eSort in that giving away is “ delighting in giving 
away.” 

“Accessible to begging”: — because he gives whatever 


1 Anguttara Nihaya iii, 284. 



VII. — Exposition of the* Six ^Recollections 259 

others ask, lie is accessible to requests, is tbe meaning. The 
reading also is ydjayogo, meaning that he is devoted to ofierings 
called the giving of alms. 

''Delighting in giving and sharing’’: — I delight in giving 
and sharing. For I give aims and make a share of what is 
for my own persortal enjoyment. I delight in both. That he 
thus recalls is here the meaning. 

Thus when he recalls his own liberality that it has such 
qualities as being freed from the taint of stinginess, his iHind 
then is not invaded by lust, nor by hate, nor by delusion, but 
is upright with reference to his liberality. When he has by 
this first method discarded the hindrances, the Jhana-factors 
arise in one and the same moment. But from the depth of 
the qualities of his liberality, or from the intentness with 
which he recalls them, various as they are, the Jhana, without 
attaining to ecstasy, attains only to access. This Jhana goes 
under the name of recollection of liberality, since it arises by 
way of recalling the qualities of liberality. 

And the monk who applies himself to the recollection of 
liberality is all the more intent on liberality, has desires free 
from covetousness, behaves in conformity with love, has 
confidence, is abundantly rapturous and ]oyful, and is liound, 
even if he penetrate no farther, for a happy journey. 

Lp ! let the wise hence ponder earnestly 
The mighty thought of generosity. 

This is the substance of the detailed discourse on the 
Liberality-recollection. 

VI. 

[225] Whoso wishes to develop the deva-recollection should 
be endowed with such qualities as faith brought on by the 
Noble Path, and then in seclusion and solitude recall his 
qualities of faith and others, placing the devas as witness: 

There are devas, the Four Regents. There are devas of the 
Tdvatimsa, Ydma, Tusita, Nimmdnarati, Paranimmitavasavatti 
realms. There are the Brahna-grouj) devas, there are devas 
higher thm those. These devas, endoiced with such a faith, on 
passing away hence, were re-born there. In me also is such 



260 TM Bath of Purity 

a faith. These devas endowed with such virtues . . . such 
learning . . . such liberality . . . such understanding, on pass- 
ing away heyice, were re-born there. In me also are such 
virtues, . . 

But in the Sutta it is said, “ Mahdndma, when the noble 
disciple recalls his oum and those spirits^ faith and virtues and 
learyiing ayid liberality and understanding, then his mind is 
not invaded by lust.^' Though it has been stated thus, it 
shoilld be placed in the position of a testimony.^ The state- 
ment should be understood as said in order to show the 
equality between himself and the devas as regards the qualities 
of faith and so forth. For in the Commentary it is explicitly 
stated that he recalls his own qualities, placing the devas as 
witness. Therefore, when he recalls first the qualities of 
the devas, and afterwards those that exist in himself, faith 
and so on, his mind is then not invaded by lust, nor by hate, 
nor by delusion, but is upright with reference to the devas. 
Then when he has by this first method discarded the hindrances, 
the Jhana-factors arise at one and the same moment. But 
from the depth of the qualities of faith and so on, or from 
the intentness with which he recalls them, various as they 
are, the Jhana, without attainmg to ecstasy, attains only to 
access. This Jhana goes under the name of recollection of 
the devas, since it arises by way of recalling his own faith and 
other qualities which are like those of the devas.* 

[226] And the monk who applies himself to deva-recollection 
is dear to the devas, beloved of them, and all the more attains 
abundance of faith and so on, and abides abundantly rapturous 
and joyful, he is bound for a happy destiny even though he 
penetrate no farther. 

Lo ! let the wise hence ever ponder earnestly 

The might there lies in thought of them of other worlds. 

This is the substance of the detailed discourse on Deva- 
recollection. 

1 Anguttara i, 210; iii, 287; v, 329. 

2 The meaning is, he should call his own faith, and so c^, to mind 
and adduce those of the spirits as testimony, Deva = devata. “ Spirit 
may serve if it be recollected that all these are embodied spirits. 



VIL — Exposition of the. Six ^Recollections 261 

In the detailed discourse of these (six recollections) after 
saying his mind is upright with reference to the Tathagata 
and so on* it is said, “ Mahanama, with his mind upright, 
gets knowledge of the meaning, gets knowledge of the Law, 
gets joy derived from the Law, rapture is born in the joyous.” 

Therein, ‘‘he gets knowledge of the meaning”^ is said 
concerning the delight produced on account of the meaning 
of “ He it is, the Blessed One ” and so on. “ He gets know- 
ledge of the Law is said concerning the delight produced 
on account of the text. “He gets joy derived from the 
Law should be understood as s5.id by way of both. And 
that which in the deva-recollection is stated as with reference 
to the devas ” has been stated primarily by way of conscious- 
ness proceeding with reference to the devas, or by way of 
consciousness proceeding with reference to qualities which are 
like those of the devas, or which bring about the state of 
devas. - 

And these six recollections work effectively for the noble 
disciples. For to them the qualities of the Buddha, Law, 
and Order, are apparent. And they are endowed with the 
virtues possessing such qualities as being unbroken and so 
on, with liberality freed from the taint of stinginess, with the 
qualities of faith and so on, which are like those of devas of 
might and majesty. 

In the Mahanama Sutta^ the six recollections have been 
related in detail, in order to show a dependable state to a 
stream-winner, by the Blessed One who is questioned as 
to such. 

Again, in the Gedha Sutta^ [227] they are related for the 
further attainment of absolute purity after purifying the 
noble disciple’s mind by means of recollection, thus, “Here, 
monks, the yiohle disciple recalls the Tathagata : He it is, the 

^ Tlha adds that “knowledge of the meaning” is delight produced 
on account of condition (hetu). 

2 Tlkd adds that “ knowledge of the Law is delight produced on 
account of result (phala), 

® Tlkd^sbdds that this joy is derived from qualities said to be the 
condition and result. 

^ Cf. Anjuttara iii, 284. 


5 Ibid, lii, 312. 



262 


file Path of Purity 

Blessed One . . . Ms mind then is up'ight, coming out freed 
and rising from the slime, Shme, monies, is a name here for 
the five pleasures of sense. Monies^ some beings here are purified 
by making it the object of thought.^ ^ 

In the Sambadhokasa Sutta^ preached by tfie Venerable 
Maha Kaccana, they are related by way of the attainment 
of opportunity, through the noble disciple’s worthiness in 
absolute purity: Wonderful it is, friend, marvellous it is, 
friend, inasmuch as this attainment of opportunity in the crowded 
life of laymen has been understood by the Blessed One, the knowing 
one, the seeing one, the SaM, the Perfect Buddha, for the purifi- 
cation of beings , , , for the realization of Nibbdna, to wit, the 
six recollections. Which are the six ? Here, friend, the noble 
disciple recalls the Taihdgata , , . by making it the object of 
thought,^ ^ 

In the Uposatha Sutta^ again, they are related to show 
the great fruits of the Sabbath as a station for meditation 
on the purification of the mind of the noble disciple who is 
keeping the Sabbath: And how, Visdkhd, about the noble 
Sabbath ? Visdkhd, it is the cleansing of the vicious mind by 
effort. And how, Visdkhd, is the cleansing of the vicious 
mind by effort ? Here, Visdkhd, the noble disciple recalls the 
Tathdgata, . . 

In the Ekadasanipata^ again, they are related to show the 
(manner of) life of the noble disciple who asks Lord, while 
we live all manner of lives, whit life ought we {properly) to 
liveV^ the answer being Mahdndma, faith is energetic, not 
the absence of faith. One who is strenuously energetic, of estab- 
lished mindfulness, of concentration, of understanding, is 
energetic, Mahdndma, not one who is without understanding. 
To be established in these five states, Mahdndma, thou shouldest 
further develop the six. Here, Mahdndma, thou shouldest recall 
the Tathdgata : He it is, the Blessed One . . . Buddha, the 
Blessed One.'' 

Nevertheless it is also the average man who is endowed 
with purified morality and other qualities who should attend 
to them, Eor by virtue of the Recollections [228] his mind 


^ Anguttara iii, 314. 


2 Ibid, i, 206 f . 


3 Ibid, T, 329, 333. 



VIL — Exposition of the^ Six ^Recollections 263 

becomes clear as he recalls the qualities of the Buddha and 
so on. And through the power of his mind the hindrances 
are discarded so that he in great joy strives for insight and 
the realization of saintship like Phussadeva the Elder, resident 
at Katakan’dhakara It is said that the venerable one, 
seeing the form of the Buddha assumed by Mara, derived 
joy from the contemplation of the Buddha, saying “ This 
one who is full of lust, hate, delusion, shines so. How will 
not the Blessed One shine, he who is entirely free from lust, 
hate, delusion And increasing his insight he attained 
Saintship. * 

Thus is ended the Seventh Chapter called the Exposition of 
the Six Eecollections in the section of Concentration-culture 
in the Path of Purity composed for the purpose of gladdening 
good folk. 



[229] CHAPTEE VIII 

EXPOSITION OP THE SUBJECTS FOB EECOLLECTION 


VII . — Mindfulness as to Death. 

Now immediately after tMs we come to the exposition on 
the developing of mindfulness as to death. 

Herein death is the cutting-oh of life-faculty limited by 
one existence. But the cutting-off of death of the saints called 
the cutting-off of the misery of the round of births, is not 
intended here; nor is the momentary dying called the momen- 
tary breaking-up of the bodily compounds; nor is death 
commonly so called, as in the case of a dead tree, dead .copper, 
and so on. But that which is implied is twofold: timely 
death and untimely death. 

Of these, timely death is through loss of merit or loss of 
life or both. Untimely death is through karma^ which cuts 
off the result-giving karma of these. That death which is due 
just to the ripening of the result of birth-producing karma 
in spite of the existence of causes that generate the continuity 
of life, is death through loss of merit. That death which, 
as in the case of present-day men whose term of life is merely 
a hundred years owing to the absence of attainments in 
destiny,^ time,^ food,^ and so on, is death through the loss 
of that term of life. That death, like that of Dusimara,^ 
King Kalabu^ and so on, of lives’^ cut off by karma where 
there is ability to move one from any place instantly, or that 
death of lives'^ which are being cut off by exertions in the 
bearing of weapons® in consequence of former karma, [230] is 

1 lilt, action, deeds. ^ E.g. the devas. 

3 E.g. the first inhabitants of the world. 

^ E.g. the North Islanders. ® Majjhtma i, 333. 

^ Jatalcam,Z9. ^ “ Lives,” lit. “ continuities ” 

® Bead saMM°, which may also mean ‘‘ exertions of life-taking swords, 
and so on.” 


264 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 265 

untimely deatt. All this comes under the cutting-off of life-^ 
controlling faculty in the way described. 

Thus deaT}h-mindfulness is the remembering of death, 
called the cutting-off of the life-faculty. Whoso wishes to 
develop it shduld in seclusion and solitude set up attention 
wisely thus: — “Death will take place. The life-faculty will 
be cut off.’’ Or simply “ death, death.” For him, on the 
other hand, who proceeds unwisely, sorrow arises in recalling 
the death of beloved ones, as it arises to the mother in recalling 
the death of the beloved son she bore, joy arises in recalling 
the death of undesirable persons, as it arises in those at enmity 
who recall the death of their enemies; agitation does not 
arise in recalling the death of indifferent people, no more 
than it arises in a burner of dead bodies on seeing the corpses; 
fear arises in recalling one’s own death as it arises in a timid 
man on seeing a murderer with uplifted sword. All this 
happens to one devoid of mindfulness, anxiety, understanding. 
Therefore, looking at beings killed or dead in various places, 
and reflecting on the death of those who had seen glory, and 
applying mindfulness, anxiety, understanding, he should 
proceed with attention, “ Death will take place, and so on.” 
For, proceeding thus, he acts wisely. He proceeds in the 
right way, is the meaning. When anyone proceeds thus, 
the hindrances are discarded, mindfulness is set up with 
death as object, and the subject of meditation attains access. 

If this does not suffice, he should recall death in these eight 
ways: (1) by being face to face with the death-dealer; (2) by 
the loss of prosperity; (3) by inference; (4) by the body being 
common to the many; (5) by the weakness of life, (6) by the 
absence of the sign; (7) by being limited by time, (8) by the 
shortness of the moment. 

Of these (1) by being face to face with the death-dealer 
means, being in the presence of death as though in that of 
a murderer. For, as a murderer with sword in hand comes 
up to one, and brandishes it round the neck, saying, “I will 
cut this man’s head off,” so death comes up against one: — 
thus it should be recalled. Why ? Because death comes 
together with birth, and takes away life. For as a mushroom 



266 'TJie ^aih of Purity 

,bud grows up carrying the soil on its head, so beings are 
born carrying old age and death.^ For surely their rebirth- 
consciousness attains old age immediately after %heir genesis 
and, like a stone thrown from a mountain top, [231] breaks, 
together with the associated aggregates. Thhs momentary 
dying comes with birth. And as it is certain that a person 
who has been born must die, so the dying that is here intended 
comes together with birth. Therefore this creature from the 
tirpe of his birth goes in the direction of death, turnmg not 
back in the slightest degree, just as the risen sun goes towards 
its own setting and turns not back in the slightest degree 
from the places it traverses, or as a river flows with a swift 
current from the moimtains, carrying everything that falls 
into it, and goes on and turns not back in the slightest degree. 
Hence is it said : — 

Man, once conceived within the womb, no sooner has begun, 
Than on he goes conUnually ; he, going, turns not buck.^ 

So like the drying up of small streams^ overcome by the 
summer heat, the falling from the trees of fruits whose stalks 
are rotted by the taste of the morning vapours, the breaking 
of earthen pots struck by a hammer, the dispersing of dew- 
drops touched by the sun’s rays, a man goes along and 
approaches death. Hence was it said : — 

The days, the nights pass on until they cease ; 

So doth our life break up and come to naught. 

Withers our mortal term of years and dries, 

As waVer of the rams in little rills, ^ 

As sure as for the ripened fruit there comes the fear of fall, 

So surely comes the fear of death to mortals one and all,^ 

Like as the earthen pot the potter makes, 

Little and great, or cooked or raw — they all 
In breakage end, so does a mortaVs life,^ 

^ Tiled adds that the mushroom may sometimes he without the soil, 
but bemgs are never without death. 

^ Jdtaka iv, 306: translation. ® Read hunmdlmm, 

^ Kindred Sayings i, 136. ® JdtaJca iv, p. 81 of Translation. 

® Of. Dhammapada, verse 40. 



VIII* — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 267 

Like as the dew upon the grass, ^ %ehen the sun rises hot, 

So is the hfe of mortal man * 0 mother, stay me not /’ 

Titus like a murderer witk uplifted sword is tkis death which 
comes together with birth. Like the murderer brandishing 
the sword around one's neck [232] it takes life; it does not 
turn back without'^ taking life. Therefore from coming 
together with, and taking, life, death appears opposite us 
like a murderer with uplifted sword. Thus he should recollect 
death by being face to face with the death-dealer. 

(2) By the loss of prosperity : — ^here, in this world, prosperity 
shines so long as it is not overpowered by adversity. And 
there is no such thing as prosperity which goes beyond 
adversity. Therefore, 

The conqueror of the world entire, 

The giver of a hundred crores, 

The happy (king) had in the end 
A half myrobalan as his realm. 

Bound by the body, he, the sorrowless king, 

Sank into sorrow facing death, whenas 
The sum of his good works came to an end. 

Further, all health ends in sickness, all youthfulness in old 
age, all life in death; even all the world of beings is followed 
by birth, approached by old age, oppressed by sickness, 
struck by d^th. Hence was it said : — 

As when huge mountain crags, piercing the sky. 

Advance %n avalanches on all sides, 

Crushing the plains east, west, and north, and south ; 

So age and death come rolling over all, 

Noble and brahmin, commoner and serf ; 

None can evade, or play the truant here. 

TN impending doom o'erwhelmeth one and all. 

Here is no place for strife with elephants, 

Or chariots of war, or infantry, 

Nay, nor for war of woven spell or curse, 

Nor may finance avail to win the day.^ 

^ Read tinaggamhi. ^ Jataha iv, p. 77 of translation. 

3 Read aJiaritvd. * Kindred Sayings i, 127. 



268 ■ i'he JSath of Purity 

Tims determining that life’s attainments end in loss, in death, 
one should recall death because success becomes failure. 

(3) By inference: — by inferring one’s own death from that 
of others. Here death should be recalled by inference in 
seven ways : from the greatness of pomp, greaCness of merit, 
greatness of might, greatness of power, greatness of under- 
standing, from the Silent Buddhas, from the Supreme Buddhas. 
How ? This death assuredly came upon [233] Mahasammata, 
Mapdhatu, Mahasudassana, Dalhanemi, Nimippabhuti, who 
possessed great pomp, great retinue, much wealth and many 
forces. Is there any reason why it will not come upon me 
also '2 

Mahasammata and the other kings 

Noble and of high fame succumbed to death. 

What need is there (to speak) of men like us ? 

So far should death be recalled because of the greatness of 
pomp. And how because of the greatness of merit 

Jotika, Jatila and Mendaka, 

And Ugga, Punnaka and others famed 
For worth exceeding in the world, all died. 

What need is there (to speak) of men like us 1 

Thus should it be recalled because of the greatness of merit. 
And how because of the greatness of might 1 

Yudhitthila and Vasudeva, 

And Baladeva, Bhumasena, 

The mighty wrestler Canuroya^ 

Came under power of death. Though world-renowned 
For might and strength, they all succumbed to death. 
What need is there (to speak) of men like us ? 

Thus should it be recalled because of the greatness of might* 
And how because of the greatness of power 1 

He who, his foot uplifting, with his toe 
Caused Vejayanta’s^ terraced fane to shake, 

1 Jdtaha iv, 81. *' 

2 Read Yejayantam, Cf, Psahns of the Brethren, verse 1194. 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjecjs for Recollection 269 

Was best of those possessed of magic power, 

The second chief disciple. He despite 
His magic powers entered the dreadful mouth 
Of death, as doth the deer the lion’s mouth. 

What need is there (to speak) of men like us ? 

Thus it should be recalled because of the greatness of (psychic) 
power. And how because of the greatness of understanding ? 

[234] Except the leader of the world there’s not 
Another being worth the sixteenth part 
Of Sariputta’s understanding". He, 

The great in understanding, first and chief 
Disciple, came under the power of death. 

What need is there (to speak) of men like us ? 

Thus should it be recalled because of the greatness of under- 
standing. 

How because of the Silent Buddhas ^ Those who by the 
strength of their knowledge and energy have trodden down 
all their foes, the vices, reached silent Buddhahood, and are 
self-existing like the horn of a rhinoceros, even they are not 
free from death. How shall I be free ? 

The sages great in searching for the sign, 

Now this, now that are self-developing 
By virtue of their insight’s ardent glow. 

They’ve reached the end of bane, and like the horn 
Of a rhinoceros they lead a life 
Of solitude, yet have no power o’er death. 

What need is there (to speak) of men like us ? 

Thus should it be recalled because of the Silent Buddhas. 

How because of the Supreme Buddhas ? He it is, the 
Blessed One, who has his body adorned with the eighty minor 
signs, and variegated with the thirty-two major signs of a 
great man, who has the body of the Law fulfilled with the 
jewels of the virtues, such as the groups of precepts pure in 
all respects, who has reached the highest place among the 
great in fame, great in merit, great in might, great in power, 



270 TAe Path of Purity 

great in understanding, wlio is unequalled, peerless, matcMess, 
saint, supreme Buddha, — even he was extinguished in one 
moment by the rainfall of death, like a' mass *bf fire by a 
downpour of water. 

r 

Not out of fear, not out of shame doth death 
Obey the will of him, this mighty sage, 

For all his mighty powers. Devoid of shame. 

Void of timidity it crushes all. 

^ A man like me, how will it not overcome 

Thus should it be recalled because of the Supreme Buddhas. 

Thus as he recalls death by the inference that the great 
in fame and so on, have it in common with himself, that he 
himself must die like those great ones, the subject of medita- 
tion attains to access. Thus should death be recalled by 
inference. 

[235] (4) By the body being common to the many: — this 
body is common to many, common to the eighty families of 
worms. Of the latter, those worms which depend on the 
integument eat the integument, those which depend on the 
hide eat the hide, those which depend on the flesh eat the 
flesh, those which depend on the sinews eat the sinews, those 
which depend on the bones^ eat the bones, those which depend 
on the marrow eat the marrow. There in the body are they 
born, become old, die, obey the law of naturew The body 
is their maternity hospital, their nursing home, their cemetery, 
their lavatory, their unne-trough; it perishes through the 
disturbance of these families of worms. And so it is co mm on 
to the eighty families of worms; so is the body common to 
the causes of death such as the many hundreds of internal 
diseases, as well as to snakes, scorpions and other external 
agencies. For, as on a target placed at a cross-road, arrows, 
lances, forks, stones, and so on, thrown from all directions, 
fall, so on the body all dangers fall. And by the fall of these 
dangers it perishes. Hence the Blessed One said: '' Here, 
monks, a monk, ivhen the day is gone and the mght comes round, 
reflects thus : many for me are the causes of death : a snake may 


^ Beada#A-^^ 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 271 

bite me, a scorpion may bite me, a centipede may bite me, and 
in consequence I may die, or meet with danger. Or 1 may 
trip and fait The food 1 have taken may be corrupted, or the 
bile may give me trouble, or the phlegm may give me trouble^ 
or the winds that cut like knives may give me trouble,^ and in 
consequence 1 may^ die or meet with danger Thus death 
should be recalled by way of the body being common to the 
many. 

(5) By way of the weakness of life. — This life is weak, has 
no strength. For the life of beings is bound up with inhala- 
tion and exhalation, with the postures, with heat and cold, 
with the four great primaries, and with food. It goes on 
only when it gets a regular functioning of the breath inhaled 
and the breath exhaled. When the breath going out from 
the nose does not re-enter within, or w^hen, having entered 
it does not go forth again, one dies. Again, life proceeds 
when it gets a regular functioning of the four postures, [236] 
but through the excess of any one of these the vital principle 
is cut off. It proceeds also w^hen it gets an equal measure 
of heat and cold. It is ruined when one is oppressed by 
excessive cold or excessive heat. Again, it proceeds when 
it gets an equal measure of the great primaries, but through 
the disturbance of the earthy element or the watery element 
or any other element, even a person endow^ed with strength 
may have a §tiff body, or a feeble, stinking body on account 
of the bloody flux, and so on, or may be overcome by high 
temperature, or have his joints broken and so lose his life. 
Again, life proceeds when material food is got at the proper 
time; not getting food, life is lost. Thus death should be 
recalled by way of the weakness of life. 

(6) By the absence of the sign: — from not determining (by 
w^ay of time, and so on), from the absence of the limit, is here 
the meaning. For to beings 

Life, sickness, time and body-laying-dowm, 

And destiny: — these five may ne’er be known, 

Smce they are signless in the world of life. 


^ Read 


^ Anguttara iii, 306. 



272 The Path of Purity 

Here life is signless because it cannot be determined as ‘‘ One 
should live to such an extent, no further.” Beings die during 
the first embryonic stage, the second, third, fourlih embryonic 
stage, the first month, second month, third month, fourth 
month, fifth month, tenth month, at the time of birth, and 
thence within and beyond a hundred years. 

Sickness also is signless since it cannot be determined as: 

Of this sickness beings die, not of another.” For beings 
di^ of eye-disease, ear-disease or of any other disease. 

Time also is signless since it cannot be determined as: 

One should die at this lime, not at any other.” For beings 
die in the morning, at midday, and so on. 

The laying down of the body also is signless since it cannot 
be determined as: ''Here should the body of the dying be 
laid, not elsewhere.” For the body of one born within the 
village IS laid outside the village; the body of one born outside 
the village is laid within the village. Likewise those born 
on land lay down the body on water, those born on water 
may lay down the body on land: — thus should it be expanded 
in various ways. 

[237] Destiny also is signless, since it cannot be determined 
as: "One who passes away hence should be born in this 
place.” For, passing away from the deva- world, beings are 
born among men; passing away from the world of Men also, 
they are born in the deva or other worlds, and ^o on, it may 
be here, it may be there : thus like an ox yoked to the mill, 
the world^ goes round on the fivefold course. Thus should 
death be recalled by way of the signless. 

(7) By being limited in time: — the life of men is now of 
short duration.^ He lives long who lives a hundred years 
or a little more. Hence said the Blessed One: ''Brief, 
monks, is the life of men, a matter of flitting hence, having its 
sequel elsewhere. To he wrought is the good ; to be lived is the 
holy life. To him that is born there is no not-dying. He, 
monks, lives long who lives a hundred years, or hut little longer : — 

Brief time have sons of men on earth to live. 

Let the good man herein much trouble take, • 


1 Read loko. 


2 Follow the footnote. 



VIIL — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 273 

Acting as ivere his turban all ablaze. 

There is no man to whom death cometh not,^^^ 

Further, he said: ^'Formerly, “inonhs, there was a teacher 
called AraJca,^'i thus the whole Sutta adorned with the seven 
illustrations is to be expanded. Further, he said: Monhs, 
the monk who develops mindfulness as to death thus : ' Surely 
were I to live for a day and night, were 1 to attend to the 
Blessed Okie’s religion, much surely were dojie by 7ne.^ Mobiles, 
the monk who develops mindfidness as to death thus : ' Surely 
were I to live for a day, were 1 to aUe^id to the Blessed One’s 
religio7i, 7nuch surely icere doyie by 7ne.’ The 7nonk who 
develops 77iindfulness as to death thus : ‘ Surely were I to 
live long enough for me to eat one alyns-mea\ were I to attend 
to the Blessed One’s religioyi, much surely were done by me.’ The 
7nonk who develops ^nindfulness as to death thus : ‘ Surely 
were I to live lo7ig enough for me to eat and sivallotv four or five 
mouthfuls, were I to attend to the Blessed One’s religion, much 
surely were done by me ’ : — these monks are said to lead a life 
of negligence, develop mindfulness as to death sluggishly, to the 
end that they may attain loss of the cankers. [238] On the 
other hand, the monk who develops mindfulness as to death 
thus : ‘ Surely were I to live long enough for me to eat and 
swallow. one mouthful, were I to attend to the Blessed One’s 
religion, much surely were done by me ’ ; the monk who develops 
mindfulness as to death thus : ‘ Surely were I to live just 
long enough for me to breathe in after breathing out, or to breathe 
out after breathing in, were I to attend to the Blessed One’s 
religion, 7nuch surely were done by me ’ : — these monks are said to 
lead a life free from negligence, develop mindfulness as to death 
quickly, to the end that they 7nay attam loss of the cayikers.”'^ 

(8) By way of the shortness of the moment: — in the ulti- 
mate sense exceedingly short indeed is the life-moment of 
beings, lasting just for one conscious process. Just as a 
chariot- wheel in rolling and standing, rolls and stands within 
the circumference of one rim, even so is the life of beings of 

the measure of one conscious moment. As soon as that 

« 

1 Kindred Sayhigs i, 135. ^ AhguUara iv, 136. ® Ibid, iv, 318 f. 

18 



274 


The Path of Purity 

consciousness ceases, tte being is said to cease. As it lias 
been said: In the fast conscious moment one lively one is 
not living, nor will one live. In the future conscious moment one 
did not live, does not live, one will live. In the f resent con- 
scious moment one did not live, one is living, one* will not live.'^^ 

Life, personality and bappiness 

And pain: these all are with one (point of) tbouglit 

Together yoked; the moment lightly goes. 

The aggregates of one who is to be, 

Or one who hence doth pass away are all 

Alike when once they’re ceased; they’re gone and will 

No more be reunited (in rebirth). 

Without coming-to-be there is no birth; 

And by the present (consciousness) one lives. 

When consciousness breaks up, the world is dead. 

The concept by the ultimate (is bound). 

Thus by way of the shortness of the moment death should 
be recalled. 

When one thus recalls death in one or other of these eight 
ways, the mind owing to repeated attention gets the habit, 
mindfulness is established with death as object, the hindrances 
are discarded, the Jhana-factors are manifested. But because 
of the intrinsic nature of the object and the anxiety it pro- 
duces, the Jhana attains only to the access, not to the ecstasy. 
The transcendental Jhana [239] and the second and fourth 
Jhanas of the Formless attain to ecstasy through a marked 
development in our intrinsic nature. For because of the 
progress in the development of purity, the transcendental 
attains to ecstasy, while the Formless does so by virtue of 
development in transcending the object. For there is a 
transcending of object by just the Jhana which has attained 
to ecstasy. But here (in mindfulness as to death) both of 
these causes are absent. Therefore the Jhana attains just 
to access. This Jhana gets the name of death-mindfulness, 
since it arises by the strength of death-mindfulness. 

The monk who is devoted to death-mindfulness always 


1 Probably not in the Canon, 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjeets for Recollection 275 

zealous; lie forms an idea of the absence of delight in all 
existences; he gives up hankering after life; he censures evil- 
doing; he is not addicted to hoarding treasure; he is free 
from the taint of stinginess as regards the requisites of life, 
and his perception of impermanence becomes collected. In 
consequence of these things, the perceptions of ill and of 
soullessness manifest themselves. 

Beings who have not developed mindfulness as to death 
suffer from fear, fright and bewilderment upon the apprcJ^ch 
of death, as if they were suddenly overtaken by wild beasts? 
Yakkhas, snakes, thieves, murderers. Not so he who dies 
without fear and without bewilderment. If in this present 
life he fails to attain deathlessness, upon the dissolution of 
the body he is bound for a happy destiny. 

Hence let the wise aye practise earnestly 

The mighty thought that death must come to me. 

VIII . — Mindfuhiess as to the Body, 

Now this exercise of mindfulness as to the body •which 
was never before practised except w^hen the Buddha appeared, 
and which does not come within the scope of any of the 
founders of sects, has been praised by the Blessed One in 
various ’ways in various Suttantas thus* There is one state, 
monks, which, being developed, repeated, conduces greatly to 
anxiety, conduces greatly to benefit, conduces greatly to peace 
from bondage, conduces greatly to mindfulness and compre- 
hension, conduces to the attainment of knowledge and discern- 
ment, conduces to comfort in the present life, conduces to the 
realization of wisdom, emancipation and fruition. Which is 
that one state? Mindfulness as to the body . . . Those who 
enjoy mindfulness as to the body enjoy deathlessness. Those 
who do not enjoy mindfulness as to the body do not enjoy death- 
lessness. [240] Those who have made endeavour in mindfulness 
as to the body have enjoyed deathlessness, have not lost, not missed 
it. Those who have made no endeavour in mindfulness as to 
the body hqwe not enjoyed deathlessness, but have lost, missed iC^^ 


^ Anguttara i, 43, 45. 



276 


The Path of Purity 

And it lias been set forth under the fourteen divisions of 
respiration, the Postures, the fourfold compreheijsion, atten- 
tion to loathsomeness, attention to the elements, nine kinds 
of cemetery, in this way: How, monks, %s r^indfulness as 
to the body developed ? How, being repeated, is it highly 
fruitful, highly beneficial ? Here a monk who has gone to the 
forest . . . 

We now come to the exposition of its development. 

Of these fourteen the three divisions of the postures, of 
the fourfold comprehension, of attention to the elements, 
have been stated by way of insight, the nine divisions of the 
cemetery by way, in insight and knowledge, of the discern- 
ment of disaster. And here that development of concentra- 
tion in the swollen corpse, and so on, which one should effect, 
has already been explained in the exposition of the Foul. 
The two divisions of respiration and of attention to loath- 
someness have been stated by way of concentration. Of 
them the division of respiration is a separate subject of 
meditation by way of mindfulness as to respiration. But 
that meditation on the thirty-two parts of the body described 
by way of attention to loathsomeness by grouping the brain 
with the marrow thus: ^^Furthermore, monks, the monk 
considers this body limited by the skin from the sole of the foot 
upwaids, from the crown of the head downwards, as full of 
impurities of various kinds : there are in this body hairs of the 
head, hairs of the body, and so on . . is the mindfulness 
as to the body that is intended here. 

This exposition of the developing is preceded by the follow- 
ing elucidation of the Pali: This body ’’ means the putrid 
body of the four great primaries. From the sole of the 
foot upwards means above the sole of the foot- '' From 
the crown of the head downwards ” means beneath the tips 
of hairs. Limited by the skin ’’ means limited across by 
the skin. ‘‘ Considers as full of impurities of various kinds ” 
[241] means, he sees that the body is a burden of impurities 
such as hairs of various kinds, and so on. How 1 There 
are in this body hairs . . . urine,” — here are ” me'^ns exist. 


1 MajjUma iii, 89. 


2 Dlgha li, 293. 



VIIL — Exposition of the Subjeqts for Recollection 277 

‘'In this ’’ — this, from the sole of the foot upwards, from the 
crown of the head downwards, and limited by the skin, is 
declared to he full of impurities of all kinds, in that “ body,” 
i.e. human structure, for this is declared to be the body as 
being a collection of impurities and a source of abominations 
such as hairs, and so on, and a hundred diseases such as eye- 
disease. “ Hairs of the head, hairs of the body are the 
thirty-two parts of the body beginning with hairs. 

There the construction should be understood as “in Jhis 
body are hairs of the head, in this body are hairs of the body.” 
For no one, making a thorough search of this fathom-long 
corpse, from the sole of the foot upwards, from the crown of 
the head downwards, bounded on all sides by the skin, sees 
the slightest quantity of anything pure, whether pearl or 
ruby, lapis-lazuli or aloe Tvood, saffron or camphor or fragrant 
vapours, powders, and so on. Truly he sees impurities of 
the different kinds of hairs, and so on, in various forms, un- 
sightly, highly malodorous and abominable. Hence it is said, 
“ There are in the body hairs of the head, hairs of the body, 
and so on. ...” Such is the elucidation as regards the Pali. 

The beginner who is of respectable family, wishing to develop 
the subject of meditation, should approach the good friend who 
has already been described, and receive it. And the teacher 
should &,nnounce to him the sevenfold skill in receiving, and 
the tenfold skill in attention. 

Of these, — by word of mouth, by thought, by colour, by 
form, by region, by range, by limits, — thus should the 
sevenfold skill m receiving be announced. For in this subject 
of attention to loathsomeness, even he who is a three-Pitaka- 
man should first, at the time of attending, make a verbal 
rehearsal. It may be, to one so doing the subject of medita- 
tion will manifest itself, as it did to the two Elders who 
received the subject of meditation from Maha Deva the Elder 
residing at Malaya. It is said that the Elder on being asked 
by them for a subject gave them the Pali of the thirty-two 
parts, saying, “ Recite this for four months.” [242] Though 
they we^e versed in two, or in three ISfikayas, they became 
Stream- winners only after reciting for four months the thirty- 



278 


The Path of Purity 

two parts wMciL they had received with due reverence. 
Therefore the teacher in teaching the subject should say to 
the pupil: ''First recite it aloud.” In doing so one should 
make divisions of five ending in the skin, and so on, and 
recite them in direct, and in reverse, order. After saying, 
" hairs of the head, hairs of the body, nails, teeth, skin,” one 
should again say in reverse order, " skin, teeth, nails, hairs 
of the body, hairs of the head.” Then, after saying the five 
en(Jing in the kidneys, " flesh, sinews, bones, marrow, kidneys,” 
one should again say in reverse order, "kidneys, marrow, 
bones, sinews, flesh, skin, ^ teeth, nails, hairs of the body, hairs 
of the head.” Then should be recited the five ending in the 
lungs in direct order, " heart, liver, pleura, spleen, lungs,” 
and in reverse order, "lungs, spleen, pleura, liver, heart, 
kidneys, marrow, bones, sinews, flesh, skin, teeth, nails, hairs 
of the body, hairs of the head.” Then should be recited the 
five ending in the brain in direct order, " intestines, intestinal 
tract, stomach, excrement, brain,” and in reverse order, 
" brain, excrement, stomach, intestinal tract, intestines, 
lungs, spleen, pleura, liver, heart, kidneys, marrow, bones, 
sinews, flesh, skin, teeth, nails, hairs of body, hairs of head.’ ’ 
Then should be recited the six ending in fat in direct order, 
"bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat,” and in reverse order, 
"fat, sweat, blood, pus, phlegm, bile, brain, excrement, 
stomach, intestinal tract, intestines, lungs, spleen, pleura, 
liver, heart, kidneys, marrow, bones, sinews, flesh, skin, 
teeth, nails, hairs of body, hairs of head.” Then should be 
recited the six ending in urine in direct order, " tears, grease, 
saliva, snot, fluid of the joints, urine,” and in reverse order, 
" urine, fluid of the joints, snot, saliva, grease, tears, fat, 
sweat, blood, pus, phlegm, bile, brain, excrement, stomach, 
intestinal tract, intestines, lungs, spleen, pleura, liver, heart, 
kidneys, marrow, bones, sinews, flesh, skin, teeth, nails, hair 
of body, hair of head.” 

[243] Thus a hundred times, a thousand times, even a 
hundred thousand times, should a manmake a verbal recitation. 
For by so doing he becomes familiar with the subject. And 
the mind does not run here and there. The parts of the body 



VIII . — Exposition of the SubjeQts for Recollection 279 

become manifest and appear like tke series of the fingers, 
or a row of the palings of a fence. 

And he sliould recite mentally as he has recited verbally. 
The verbal recitation is the cause of the mental recitation, 
which is the cause of penetration into characteristics. 

By colour ’’ — that is, the colour of hairs and so on, should 
be determined. By ‘"form” — that is, their form should be 
determined. By ''region” — that is, in this body from the 
navel upwards, is the upper region, downwards is the lower 
region; therefore this part is in this region, — thus should the 
region be determined. By "range” — that is, this part is 
valid in this range, — thus is the range of each to be 
determined. By "limits” — ^there are two kinds of limits: 
limitation by parts which are alike one to the other in nature, 
and limitation by dissimilarity among the parts. Here this 
part is limited below and above and across by that part: — 
thus is to be understood delimitation by other like parts. 
Hairs of the head are not hairs of the body, nor are hairs of 
the body hairs of the head : — thus by the absence of mixing 
should be understood delimitation by dissimilar parts. 

And thus in announcing the sevenfold aptitude in learning, 
the teacher should do so, knowing that this subject of medita 
tion has been preached in such and such a Siitta as abomina- 
tion, and in such and such a Sutta as element. Thus it has 
been preach'ed as abomination in the Mahasatipatthana/ as 
element in the Mahahatthipadopama,^ Maha Eahulovada,'^ 
Dhatuvibhanga Suttas."^ But in the Kayagatasati Sutta^ the 
four Jhanas have been analyzed with reference to him to 
whom (each of the thirty-two parts) appears by way of colour. 
What is here described as element is a meditation for insight; 
what is taught as abomination is a meditation for calm. The 
meditation here is that for calm. Having thus announced 
the sevenfold aptitude in learning, he should announce the 
tenfold aptitude in attending, taking it in serial order, not 
too swift, not too slow, inhibiting distraction, transcending 


^ Digha ii, 200. 
^ Ibid, 1, 414. 

® Ibid. Ill, 88. 


2 Majjhivia ], 184. 
* Ibid m, 237. 



280 I'he Path of Purity 

the idea, releasing serially, by way of the ecstasy, and the 
three Suttantas. 

Of these, ''in serial order” means, that from'the time of 
recitation the parts [244] should be attended to, one after 
another, not sporadically/ For as an inept m'an, ascending 
a staircase of thirty-two steps by now this step, now that,^ 
gets toed in body and falls backward and fails to accomplish 
the ascent, so he (who attends to the thirty-two parts leaving 
out every alternate part)^ does not attain to the en] 03 niient 
which ought to have been attained through fulfilment of the 
practice, but gets tired in? mind and collapses and fails in his 
practice. 

And in attending serially he should not attend too swiftly.” 
As a man who undertakes a journey of three yojanas, without 
noting the path to take and the path to avoid, goes back and 
forth a hundred times and, though he comes to the end of the 
journey, it is only after frequent questiomngs. So, he who 
attends too swiftly may accomplish the meditation, but it is 
not clear and consequently carries no excellence.^ Therefore 
he should not attend too swiftly. 

And as with swiftness, so with ‘‘ slowness.” As a man who, 
wishing to perform a three yojana journey in a single day, 
tarrying on the way at trees, mountains, lakes, and so on, 
takes two or three days before he accomphshes the journey, 
so when one is too slow, the meditation is ncrfc concluded, 
there arises no cause for the attainment of excellence. 

By inhibiting distraction,” — i.e. mental distraction, which 
forsakes the subject of meditation and which goes after an 
outside subject of many interests, should be inhibited. As 
a man going along a precipitous path just wide enough to 
accommodate one foot, who does not watch his steps, but, 
looking this way and that, falters in his steps and so may 
fall down a precipice of the height of a hundred men, so when 
one is distracted by outside things the subject of meditation 
dwindles and is lost. Therefore one should attend by in- 
hibiting distraction. 

1 Ekaiitarikdya , lit. by aix interval for each. 

2 Not in P.T.S. text. ^ j ^ cannot attain Jhana. 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 281 

By “ transcending the idea ” : — transcending the idea of each 
part one should be steadfast in the thought that they are 
abominations. For, just as men, seeing a well in the forest 
in time of drought, fix there some sort of sign such as a palm- 
leaf, and by that sign come back and bathe themselves and 
drink water, [245] and when a path is made by their frequent 
comings, there is then no use for the sign, but whenever they 
want they go thither, bathe themselves and drink water, so 
when one attends first by w^ay of the idea of the ‘‘ hairs^of 
the head,” hairs of the body,” the abominable state is 
manifested. Passing beyond that "idea of the hairs, one 
should establish the thought that they are an abomination. 

By ^'releasing serially — in releasing (dismissing) any part 
which does not manifest itself, it should be attentively released 
in the order of the series. For the attention of a beginner 
who attends to “ the hairs goes on and stops only at the 
last part, the urine. And the attention of him who attends 
to urine goes on (in reverse order) and stops only at the initial 
part, the hairs. Then as he attends repeatedly,^ some parts 
are manifested, others are not. One should do work, first, 
in those that are manifested until, where two are manifested, 
one is manifested more distinctly than the other. So, attend- 
ing repeatedly to that which is thus manifested, one should 
arrive at ecstasy. 

Here is a simile: Suppose a hunter'^ wishing to catch a 
monkey living in a forest of thirty-two palm-trees were to 
pierce with an arrow the leaf of a palm-tree standing first in 
a row and raise a cry. The monkey would then jump from 
palm to palm in regular order and go on to the last one. The 
hunter going there also and acting as before, the monkey 
would behave as before and return to the first palm. Being 
thus chased repeatedly from palm to palm, it would ultimately 
rise only from the tree whence the cry was made and in due 
course alight on a tree m the midst of whose (branches) it 
would hold firmly to a budding sprout of palm, and not rise 

1 But gives no heed to the characteristic signs. 

* 2 Having regard to the characteristic signs, 

3 Bead luddo. 



282 


The Path of Purity 

even when it was pierced. Thus should the completed simile 
be regarded. 

This is the application: As are the thirty-two ^trees in the 
palm-forest, so are the thuty-two parts of the body. The 
monkey is as the mind, the hunter is as the student. As the 
monkey lives in the forest of the thirty-two palms, so the 
student’s mind traverses the body in its thirty-two parts as 
object. As the monkey jumps from palm to palm, and goes 
to Ji^he last palm when the hunter pierces with the arrow the 
first palm and raises a cry, so the student’s mind, when atten- 
tion IS directed to the h§,irs, progresses serially and appears 
at the last part. 

[246] And the same with the return to the fi.rst position. 
As the monkey being chased repeatedly from tree to tree 
rises from where the cry is raised, so does the student per- 
sistently attend to those hairs which — after the lettmg go of 
those that are not manifested — ^have been manifested to him 
who gives repeated attention. As the monkey alights m due 
course on a tree in the midst of whose (branches) it takes 
a firm hold of the budding sprout of palm and does not rise up 
when it is pierced, so ultimately of the two manifested parts 
the student attends repeatedly to that which is more clearly 
manifested, and induces ecstasy. 

A further simile: As a monk who lives in dependence on 
a village of thirty-two families, upon getting, upon his alms- 
round, from the first house a double portion of alms, would 
omit to beg from the next house. Getting upon the following 
day a treble portion of alms, he would omit to beg from the 
next two houses. And on the third day, getting a bowlful 
from the first house, he would go to the dming-hall and eat it. 
The simile should be carried out thus : The village of thirty-two 
families is as the thirty-two parts of the body. The alms-man 
is as the student. The living in dependence on the village 
is the preliminary work of the student in the thirty-two parts. 
The gettmg of the double portion of alms from the fibrst house, 
and the onaitting to beg from the next one, and on the second 
day, the getting of the three portions of alms, and thei)mitting 
to beg from the next two houses, is as the preliminary work 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 283 

confined to two of tlie parts among those that are manifested, 
after letting go the unmamfested parts as one gives repeated 
attention. As the getting a bowlful from the first house 
on the third^day, the sitting in the dinmg-hall and eating it, 
so is the repeatedly attending to that part which, of the two, 
is the more clearly manifested and induces ecstasy. 

By way of ecstasy ’’ means from the part which is the 
source of ecstasy. Ecstasy arises with reference to each of 
the parts, such as hairs and so on: — thus it should be ui^der- 
stood, for such here is the intention. 

‘'And the three Suttantas ” — these three Suttantas, Adhi- 
citta, Sitibhava, Bojjhangalvosalla should be regarded as pur- 
porting to yoke energy with concentration. Such is here the 
intention. 

Of them, Monks, the monk who is intent tipon higher 
thought should attend from time to tmie to the three signs, should 
attend from time to time to the sign of concentration, should 
attend from time to time to the sign of upholding, should attend 
from time to time to the sign of indifference. [247] Verily, 
monks, if the monk intent upon higher thought were to attend 
only to the sign of concent) ation, his mind might piossibly tend 
towards idleness. Veiily, monks, if the monk intent upon higher 
thought were to attend only to the sign of upholding, his mind 
might ^possibly tend towards flurry. Verily, monks, if the monk 
intent upon higher thought were to attend only to the sign of 
indifference, his mind might pjossibly not be well concentrated to 
the end that the cankers may he destroyed. Since, monks, the 
monk attends from time to time to the sign of concentration, 
to the sign of upholding, to the sign of indifference, that mind of 
his becomes soft, wieldy, bright, not brittle, but is tvell concen- 
trated to the end that the cankers may be destroyed. 

Just as a goldsmith, monks, or his 'pupil, fixes a forge, and 
after fixing the forge lights the opening of the forge, and after 
lighting the opening of the forge, seizes the gold with a pair of 
tongs, places it in the opening and from time to time blotvs on it, 
from time to time sprinkles water over it, from time to time 
remains indifferent. If, monks, the goldsmith or his pupil 
were to keep on blowing, the gold might possibly he burnt. If, 



284 The P0li of Purity 

monies^ the goldsmith or his pupil were to heep on sprinUing 
water, the gold might possibly get cold. If, monks, the goldsmith 
or his pupil were to keep on being indifferent, the gold might 
possibly not reach the right result. But since, monks, the gold- 
smith from time to time blows on the gold, frorn time to time 
sprinkles water over it, from time to time remains indifferent, 
it becomes soft, malleable, bright, not brittle, and is quite fit to 
be worked, and it fulfils such purpose^ as he desires in the way 
of adornment , whether it be in the form of a forehead ornament, 
earring, necklace, or wreath of gold. 

Even so, monks, the m&nk who is intent upon higher thought 
,,, is well concentrated to the end that the cankers may be 
destroyed. He bends the mind towards the realization through 
higher knowledge of whatever state is to be so realized, [248] 
wherein he attains proficiency as a witness whatever be the cir- 
cumstances,^'^ Tliis Sutta is to be understood as adhicitta 
(higlier thought). 

Monks, a monk endowed with six states is fit to realize the 
peerless coolness. Which are the six ? Here, monks, a monk 
checks his mind when it ought to be checked, upholds his mind 
when it ought to be upheld, gladdens his mind when it ought to 
be gladdened, treats his mind with indifference when it ought 
to be so treated. He is bent on noble things and delights in 
Nibbdna, A monk endowed with these six states is fit to'' realize 
the peerless coolness."^ This Sutta is to be understood as 
sitibhdva (coolness). 

The Bojjhangakosalla has been set forth in the discourse 
on ecstasy-skill as ‘‘ So, monks, when the mind is slack, it is 
not the time then to develop the wisdom-factor of calm," ^ 

Thus having well acquired this sevenfold skill in receiving, 
and having well determined this tenfold skill in attending, the 
student should receive well the exercise for meditation by way 
of both kmds of skill. 

But if he lives in comfort in the same monastery as his 
teacher, he should determine to exercise well, not resorting 
to such details. When, applying himself to the subject he 

^ Or “ he enjoys such benefit as he desires, and so on.’’ 

2 AhgiiUara 1,256, sati sati ayatane^tasmini tasmim pubbahetu-ddike 
kdramsati, — Tlkd, ^ Ahguttara in, 435, ^ Samyuttav, 112, 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 285 

gains distinction, he should be taught higher and higher 
subjects. He who wishes to live elsewhere should be taught 
the arrangements m detail as set out above, and turning 
them over and over in his mind, should solve all the knotty 
points and, avoiding an unsuitable monastery, as described 
in the exposition ^ on the Earth-device,^ live in a suitable 
monastery. There, cutting oil the minor impediments, he 
should do the preliminary work of attending to abominableness. 

In doing so he should first grasp the sign in the hairs. 
How ? Plucking out one or two hairs and placing them on the 
palm of his hand, [249] he should determine their colour. 
He may also look at“ hairs off shaven heads, in a bowl of 
water or a bowl of rice-gruel Seeing them when they are 
black, he should attend to them as black; when they are 
white, as white; when they are mixed in colour, he should 
attend to them by way of the predominating colour. And as 
with hairs, so with the entire set of live ending in the skin he 
should do likewise, and grasp the sign. 

Having thus grasped the sign and determmed all the parts 
by way of colour, shape, region, range, limits, he should 
determme the fivefold abominableness by way of colour, 
shape, smell, origin, range. Herein this is the serial dis- 
course on all the parts: — First of all, hairs, as to natural 
colour,* are black, of the colour of shining soap-stone. As to 
shape, they hre long and round, of the shape of the beam of 
a balance. As to region, they grow in the body’s upper region. 
As to range, they are bounded on both sides by the roots of 
the ears, in front by the extremity of the forehead, behind 
by the nape of the neck. The wet skin enveloping the skull 
IS their range. As to limit, they are bounded below by the 
surface of their own roots which have entered to the extent 
of the tip of a paddy blade'^ into the head-enveloping skin, 
above by space, across by each other. No two hairs are as 
one: this is limitation by like parts. Hairs of the head are 
not hairs of the body, hairs of the body are not hairs of the 
head. Thus hairs are unmixed with the remaining thirty-one 


1 See Ch. IV. 

3 Pollow tile footnote. 


2 Read oloketum for olokentim, 
^ Read vih° for vilf. 



286 


^he Path of Purity 

parts. Hairs form a separate part: this is limitation by 
dissimilar things. This is the determining of hairs by way 
of colour and so forth. 

And this is the determining of them as to the fivefold 
abominableness: in colour these hairs are an^ abomination. 
They are also an abomination in shape, in smell, in origin, 
in range. For, seeing anything of the colour of hairs in a 
pleasant bowl of rice-grueF or a bowl of food, people get 
dis^sted therewith saying, This (gruel or food) is mixed 
witn hairs. Take it away !” Thus hairs are an abomination 
in colour. People eating at night and feeling with their 
hands a fibre of the swallow-wort or the rush of the shape 
of hairs, likewise become disgusted. Thus is abomination 
in shape. The smell of the hairs devoid of preparations such 
as oil-pomade, essence of flowers, and so on, is very disgusting . 
More so than that is the smell of those hairs when thrown 
into the fire. [250] Hairs indeed may not be an abomination 
in colour or in shape, but are certainly an abomination in 
smell. Just as a baby’s excrement is of the colour of turmeric, 
is like a heap of turmeric in shape, and the swollen corpse of 
a black dog thrown away at a rubbish heap is of the colour 
of a ripe palmyra fruit, is like a perfectly roimded drum in 
form, his teeth being like jasmine buds : — both of these objects 
may not be an abomination in colour and in form, but are 
certainly an abomination in smell, so also hairs' may not be 
abominable in colour and shape, but are certainly so in smell. 
And as curry-leaves growing in an unclean spot by a village^ 
are repulsive, not eaten by townsfolk, so also hairs growing 
on account of pus, blood, urine, excrement, bile, phlegm, 
and so on, are repulsive. Such is their abominableness as 
regards origm. And these hairs grow in the group of the 
thirty-one parts like a mushroom growing on a dung-heap 
Like a vegetable plant growing in the cemetery, a Tubbish 
heap and such places, like a flower such as the red and the 
white lilies growing in moats and so on, they are highly 
repulsive because they grow in unclean places. This is their 
abominableness as regards range. . 


^ Bead 


2 Bead ^nissandena. 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 287 

And the fivefold abominableness of all the parts should be 
determined as in the case of hairs, by way of colour, shape^ 
smell, origin, range And all of them should severally be 
determined by way of colour, shape, region, range, limit. 

First, hairs*' of the body are in natural colour not absolutely 
black like hairs of the head, but brownish black. As to shape, 
they are bent at the tips like palmyra roots As to region, 
they grow in both regions (upper and lower). As to range, 
excepting the site of the hairs of the head and the surface of the 
hands and feet, they grow generally on the skin which covers 
the rest of the body. As to limit,® they are bounded below 
by the surface of the roots which have entered just a UHJm 
into the body-covering skin; above by space, across by each 
other. No two hairs are as one: this is limitation by like 
parts. Limitation by dissimilar things is as in hairs of the head. 

Nails: — this is the name for the twenty nail-cups. All of 
them are white in colour. As to shape they resemble scales. 
As to region, they grow in two regions, foot-nails in the lower 
region, finger-nails in the upper. [251] As to range, they are 
placed at the upper surface of the tips of fingers and toes. 
As to limit, they are bounded in the two regions by the flesh 
at the tips of the fingers and toes, inside by the surface-flesh 
of the fingers and toes, outside and at the tips by space, 
across by one another. No tw^o nails are as one: this is 
limitation by^like parts. Limitation by dissirmlar things is as 
in hairs of the head. 

Teeth: — these are the thirty-two dental bones of one who 
has a full set of teeth. They also are white in colour. As 
to shape, they are of various shapes: — four teeth in the middle 
of the lower set are in shape like gourd-seeds placed in a row 
in a clod of clay. The tooth on either side of these has one 
root, one point, and is in shape like a jasmine bud. The tooth 
next to either of these has two roots, two points, and in shape 
is like a waggon-prop. The two teeth next to either of these 
have three roots, three points. The two further teeth on 
either side have four roots, four points. And the same with 
the upp^r set. As to region, they grow in the upper region. 
Ab to range, they are placed in the two jaw-bones. As to 



288 


I'h^ Paih of Purity 

limit, they are bounded below by the surface of their own 
roots placed in the jaw-bone, above by space, across by each 
other. No two of the teeth are as one; this is limitation by 
like parts. Limitation by dissimilar things is as in the hairs 
of the head. 

Skin: — this is the thick hide which covers the whole body. 
Above it is the tegument (thin skin), black, white, yellow, 
and so on, in colour, which, on being folded up from the whole 
body, is of the size of the kernel of the jujube. The thick 
skin is white in colour, which becomes evident when the 
tegument is damaged by the impact of flames and blows. 
Its shape is that of the body. This is a brief account. In 
detail, the skin of the toes is like the cocoon of a silk-worm, 
that of the upper part of the foot^ is like a shoe that covers 
the upper part of the foot, that of the shins is like a palm-leaf 
wrapper for rice-food, that of the thigh is like a long bag full 
of rice, that of the buttock is like a water-straining cloth full 
of water, that of the back is like leather stretched across 
a plank, that of the belly is like vellum across the hollow of 
a lute, that of the chest is generally square in shape, that 
of the two arms is like leather stretched inside a quiver/ 
that of the back of the hand is like a razor-sheath, or a comb- 
bag, that of the finger is like a case for a key, that of the neck 
is like a covermg for the throat, [252] that of the mouth being 
full of holes^ is like a nest of insects,'^ that of the head is like 
a bag for a bowl. 

The student (mentally) grasping the skin should direct his 
cognition® upward from the upper lip, and first determine the 
hide envelopmg the face, then the forehead-lme, then — ^just 
as one might insert the hand between a bowl in a bag and the 
bag — he should direct cognition between the bone of the 
head and the hide of the head and disjoining the union between 
bone and hide determine the hide of the head, then the 

^ Pitthipdda, wrongly translated “the heel” in the P.T.S. Dic- 
tionary s.v. 

2 Another reading is tuldro^, “ leather tube into which the beam of a 
balance is inserted.” 

® Bead chiddavachiddo klta°, 

5 Sana, 


^ Or “ a caterpiifer ” (?). 



VIIL — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 289 

shoulder-liide, then in direct and reverse order^ the hide of 
the right hand, likewise of the left hand, then the hide of the 
back, then in direct and reverse order the hide of the right 
leg, likewise of the left leg, then he should determine in due 
course the hides of the bladder, belly, chest,^ neck. Then, 
after determining the hide of the lower jaw immediately after 
that of the neck, he should conclude with the end of the lower 
lip. As he thus grasps the grosser (hide), the subtler (skin) also 
becomes manifest. As to region, (the skm) grows in both ^he 
regions. As to range, it envelops the whole body. As to 
limit, it is bounded below by the ^rface on which it rests, 
above by space. This is limitation by like parts. Limitation 
by dissimilar things is as in hairs of the head. 

Flesh: — that is, the nine hundred portions of flesh. All 
flesh IS of a red colour like the IdmsuJca flower. The fulness 
of the flesh of the shm is of the shape of rice-food wrapped 
in palm-leaves, the flesh of the thigh is m form like a small 
grindstone,^ the flesh of the buttock is like the edge of an 
oven, that of the back is like a thin plate of dried palm-juice, 
that of the two sets of ribs is like a thin layer of clay on the 
hollow of a granary, that of the breast is like a rounded lump 
of clay turned face dowmwards, that of the two arms is like 
a pair of big, skinless rats. As one grasps thus the grosser 
flesh, th'e subtler flesh also becomes manifest. As to region, 
it grows in both regions. As to range, it clmgs to more than 
three hundred bones. [253] As to limit, it is bounded below 
by the surface of the skeleton of bones on which it rests, above 
by the skin, across by the portions themselves. This is its 
limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar things is 
as in hairs of the head. 

Sinews: — that is, the nine hundred sinews, ail of which are 
white in colour, various m shape. Of these, starting from 
the upper portion of the neck, five great smews, intertwining 

^ From the slioulder-bone down to the wrist along the outer side, is 
the direct order From the wrist up to the shoulder along the inner 
side, IS the i everse order. 

^ Hadajja^hexe must mean chest ” rather than “ heart.” 

® Nisadapoto ti sildputtaLo ■ — Tiled, 


19 



290 The ^ath of Purity 

the body, descend in front, five descend behind, five by the 
right-hand side, five by the left-hand side. And five inter- 
twining on the right hand descend by the front* side of the 
hand, five by the back. Likewise those that intertwine the 
left hand. The five which intertwine on the rigtt leg descend 
by the front side of the foot, five by the back. Likewise 
those that intertwine on the left leg. Thus descend the sixty 
great sinews, the body-sustainers,” intertwining over the 
bq^iy. All of them, also known as tendons, are like the knob 
of the land-lily m shape. Others spread over various places. 
Those which are finer than these are like a string of threads 
in appearance. Those which are still finer are like the 
“ stinkmg creeper.” Still finer ones than these are like the 
strings of a big lute. The others are like coarse threads. 
The sinews of the upper part of the foot and the back of the 
hand are like bird’s feet. The smews of the head are like a 
net-cap for the head. The sinews of the back are like a 
wetted fish-net spread m the sun. The remaming sinews 
which run through the various parts of the body resemble 
a net-like jacket worn on the body. As to region, they are 
in both regions. As to range, they fasten on to the bones 
in the whole body. As to limit, they are bounded below 
by the surfaces which are above the three hundred bones, 
above by the places which are in touch with the flesh and 
hide, across by each other. This is their limitation by like 
parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts is as in hairs of the 
head. 

Bones . — exceptmg the thirty-two teeth, the remaining 
bones are three hundred, to wit : sixty-four bones of the hand, 
sixty-four bones of the feet, sixty-four soft bones depending 
on the flesh, two heel-bones, and two double ankle-bones, 
two shin-bones, one knee-bone, one thigh-bone in each leg, 
two hip-bones, eighteen back-bones, [254] twenty-four rib- 
bones, fourteen chest-bones, one heart-bone, two collar-bones, 
two shoulder-blade-bones,^ two arm-bones, two double fore- 
arm-bones, seven neck-bones, two jaw-bones, one nose-bone, 

1 KottaUhlm. There is no need to read hottha^ as the-'P.T.S. Dic- 
tionary {s,v.) suggests. 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 291 

two eye-bones, two ear-bones, one forebead-bone, one bead- 
bone, nine skull-bones. All of them are white in colour, 
various in shape. And among them the bones of the front 
toe-joints resemble the nux vomica^ seed, the next bones of 
the middle joints resemble the seed of the jack-fruit, the 
bones of the root-joints resemble a small cymbal, those of 
the upper part of the foot resemble a heap of crushed tendons 
of the land-lily, the heel-bone resembles a seed of the palm- 
fruit with a smgle stone, the ankle-bones resemble two playiug- 
balls tied together with a string, where the shins rest on the 
ankles resembles the peeled sprout *of the marsh-date palm,“ 
the mmor shin-bone resembles the shank of a small bow, the 
major shin-bone resembles the withered back of a snake, 
the knee-bone resembles a partially broken foam, where the 
shin-bone rests in the knee-bone resembles the blunt tip of 
an ox-horn, the thigh-bone resembles the badly hewn handle 
of an axe, where the thigh-bone rests in the hip-bone resembles 
a ball to play with, where the thigh-bone and the hip-bone 
rest resembles a big truncated punndga fruit, the two hip- 
bones resemble a pair of potter’s ovens placed together, each 
by itself resembles the straps of a blacksmith’s hammer, the 
bone of the buttock placed on end resembles a snake’s hood 
held face downwards, and has holes in seven or eight places, 
the back-bones seen from within resemble a roll of lead plates 
placed one inside the other, seen from without they resemble 
a string of rings. In between them, from place to place, 
there are two or three thorny bones like the teeth of a saw. 
Of the twenty-four rib-bones, those w^hich are undeveloped 
resemble unfinished swords, those which are developed [255] 
are like finished swords, all of them resemblmg the outstretched 
wings of a white cock. The fourteen chest-bones resemble 
a decayed chariot-frame, the heart-bone resembles the hood 
of a wooden spoon, ^ the collar-bones resemble the shaft of 

1 Kataka, not entered with, this meaning in the P.T.S. Dictionary. 

2 Read "^kahra^. 

3 Or ‘dead plates strung in a series with a string,” reading °vedhaka° 
ill the sense of ‘‘ piercing.” 

4 “Hoo^,” i.e. where the wood flattens out into a spoon, m Bui’mese 
appropriately termed the leaf.” 



292 


The SatJh of Purity 

a small iron axe, the shoulder-blade-bones resemble a Ceylonese 
spade partially used up, the arm-bones resemble the handle 
of a mirror, the fore-arm-bones resemble a pair of palm bulbs, 
the ivrist-bones resemble a roll of lead plates stuck together, 
the bones of the back of the hand resemble a heap of crushed 
tendons of the land-lily. Among the finger-bones the bones 
of the root-joints resemble a small cjnmbal, those of the middle 
joints resemble the undeveloped seed of the jack-fruit, those 
of«the front joints resemble the nux vomica seed, the seven 
neck-bones resemble discs of the bamboo sprout held together 
in a row by a stick passing through them, the bone of the 
lower jaw resembles the straps of a blacksmith’s iron hammer, 
the upper one resembles a scrapmg knife, ^ the bones of the 
eye-socket and nose-cavity resemble tender palm-seeds from 
which the kernel has been extracted, the forehead-bone 
resembles the broken bit of a conch-cup lymg face downwards, 
the bones of the ear-roots resemble the sheath of the barber’s 
razor, the bone at the place where the turban is tied above 
the forehead and ear-roots resembles a shrunken film of butter 
hanging down from a pot overflowmg with butter, the bone 
of the cranium resembles the curve of a cocoanut the face of 
which has been cut off, the bones of the head resemble a 
decayed gourd-pot sewn together. As to region, the bones 
grow m both regions (upper and lower). As to range, they 
are placed without exception over the whole body. In 
particular, the bones of the head are placed in those of the 
neck, the bones of the neck in the back-bones, the back-bones 
m the hip-bones, the hip-bones in the thigh-bones, the thigh- 
bones m the knee-bones, the knee-bones in the shin-bones, 
the shin-bones in the ankle-bones, the ankle-bones in the 
bones of the upper part of the foot. As to limit, they are 
limited within by the marrow, without by the flesh, at the 
tip and at the root by each other. This is their limitation 
by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts is as m hairs 
of the head. 

1 To peel oft the skin of sugar-cane, ucchutacavalekMna^atthakam, 
— Tlkd. P.T.S. Dictionary gives avalekhariasaUlia as “ a^chisel for 
engraving letters.’* 



VIIL — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 293 

Marrow: — this is the pith inside the various bones. It is 
white^ in colour. As to shape [256] the marrow mside the 
various big bones is like big cane-tops steamed in bamboo- 
tubes, that inside the various small bones is like tender cane- 
tops steamed in bamboo-knots. As to region, it is in both 
regions. As to ra^ge, it is placed inside the bones. As to 
limit, it is bounded by the inner surfaces of the bones. This 
is its limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts 
is as in hairs of the head. » 

The kidneys are two pieces of flesh bound by a single tie. 
In colour they are like the reddish ^eeds of the sea-coral, m 
shape like a pair of balls for boys to play with, or like a 
pair of mangoes clinging to a common stalk. As to region 
they are in the upper region. As to range, they are 
bound by a thick smew which, issuing from the throat, 
goes a little way with a single root and then branches 
ofi into two, and they are placed round the heart-flesh. 
As to limit, the kidneys are bounded by their own limit.^ 
This is their limitation by like parts. Limitation by dis- 
similar parts is as in hairs of the head. 

The heart : — this is the heart-flesh. In colour it is red like 
the back of a lotus-leaf. In shape it is like a lotus-bud turned 
face downwards after the extraneous leaves have been removed. 
It is smooth outside, the inside is like the inside of a bitter 
gourd. The heart of the wise blossoms^ a little, that of the 
weak in understanding is a mere bud. And inside it there is 
a small pit just big enough to admit a punndga seed. There 
in the pit rests half a handful of blood, depending on which 
the element of presentation and the element of representative 
intellection come into play, ^^d this blood is red m one 
who walks in lust, black in one who walks in hate, like water 
in which meat has been ^vashed in one who walks in delusion, 
of the colour of vetch soup in one who is concerned with 
many thmgs, of the colour of the bauhmia flower in one who 
lives by faith, and in one who walks in wisdom it appears 

^ Read setam for tesam. 

^ VakkaWbdgena paricchinnan ti vakkapariymitena bhdgma pane 
cMmmm. — Tlkd. Likewise in similar passages below. ^ Vikasitam, 



294 


The Eath of Purity 

mdiant like a btirnislied, high-class gem, clear, pure, unstained, 
cleansed, purified. As to region, it is in the upper region. 
As to range, it is placed between the two breasts inside the 
body. As to limit, it is bounded by its own limit. This is its 
[257] limitation by like parts Limitation by dissimilar parts 
is as in hairs of the head. 

The liver. — this is a pair of fleshy membranes. It is of 
a pale red colour, not deep red, but the colour of the back of 
a -yhite lotus-leaf. In shape it is like the sea-coral leaf, single 
at the root, double at the tip. The liver of those of sluggish 
intellect is single and Ihrge. Those who are possessed of 
Wisdom have two or three small livers. As to region, the 
liver grows in the upper region. As to range, it is placed 
between the two breasts, and leaning towards the right-hand 
side. As to limit, it is bounded by its own limit. This is its 
limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts is as 
in hairs of the head. 

The pleura : — these are the enveloping flesh, which may be 
concealed or unconcealed.^ Both are white in colour, like 
that of a piece of fine white cloth, and take the shape of the 
place they occupy. As to region, the concealed pleura is in the 
upper region, the other in both regions. As to range, the 
concealed pleura covers the heart and the kidneys, the un- 
concealed pleura lies enveloping the flesh underneath *the hide 
in the whole body. As to limit, the pleura is bounded below 
by the flesh, above by the hide, across by its own limit. This 
IS its limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts 
is as in hairs of the head. 

The spleen: — this is the flesh of the tongue of the stomach. 
It is of a dark-blue colour like that of the mggiindi flower. In 
shape it is seven fingers long, like the loose tongue of a black 
ox. As to region, it is m the upper region. x\s to range, it 
is towards the head of the membrane of the stomach to the 
left of the heart. Beings lose their lives when it is displaced 
by blows. As to limit, it is bounded by its own limit. Thu 
is its limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts 
IS as in hairs of the head. • 


^ Read faUcohainm^ati^ , 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 295 

The lungs. — these are the flesh of the lungs which are 
composed of thirty-two different pieces of flesh. They are of 
a red colour like that of a fig not too ripe. In shape it is like 
unevenly cut pieces of thick cake. They are tasteless, lustre- 
less,^ like a mass of chewed straw owing to the oppression 
by the rising heat due to karma, m the absence of things 
to eat and drink within the body. As to region, they grow 
m the upper region. As to range, they lap and hang over 
the heart and the liver between the two breasts in the body. 
[258] As to limit, they are bounded by their own limit. This 
is their limitation by like parts. • Limitation by dissimilar 
parts is as m hairs of the head 

The intestines : — these are the bowels, thirty-two cubits long 
in a man and twenty-eight cubits long in a woman, and folded 
up in twenty-one places. They are of a white colour like that 
of the gravel-coating of a cement fioor.^ In shape they resemble 
a beheaded snake folded up in a trough of blood. As to region, 
they grow m both regions. As to range, they lie within the 
body from the bottom of the gullet to the anus, being bound 
above by the bottom of the gullet, below by the anus As to 
limit, they are bomided by their own limit.'^ This is their 
limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts is as 
in hairs of the head. 

The mesentery (intestinal tract) : — this is the binding 
together of the intestines in the places where they are coiled 
up. It is of a white colour like that of roots of plants in 
stagnant water. Its shape is even as theirs. As to region, 
it IS in both regions. As to range, it lies within the twenty-one 
intestinal coils bound together as tightly as are the intestinal 
coils of those who w^ork with the spade, axe, and so on, that 
is to say, like the ropes of a machine which bind the boards 
together when it is pulled, like the cords which are sewn 
together within the circumference of a mat for wipmg the 
feet on. As to limit, it is bounded by its own limit. This 


^ Nirqja, or “ without nutritive essence.” 

^ SakJcharasudhd. The P.T.S. Dictionary under sudJid quotes this 
passage* in the sense of “ ambrosia.” 

3 Read aritablidgena. 



296 


f 

The Path of Purity 

is its limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts 
is as in bairs of the head. 

The stomach : — this in the belly is the stuff ea'ten, drunk, 
chewed, masticated. It is of the colour of the food that is 
swallowed. In shape it is like paddy loosely bound in a 
water-straining cloth. As to region, it is in the upper region. 
As to range it lies in the belly. What is called the belly is 
the intestinal membrane like the swelling produced in the 
middle of an (inflated) wet cloth squeezed at both ends. 
Outside it is smooth. Inside it is like (a bed of) decayed 
mango leaves with which rotten meat and shell-fish^ have 
been wrapped. It is also proper to say that it is like the 
inside of the skin of a rotten jack-frmt. There in the belly, 
worms belonging to the thirty-two different kinds of families 
such as the takhotaka, gandu^pddaka, tdlahlmka, sucimiikhaka, 
patatantasuttaka dwell, swarming m confused numbers. And 
[269] when food and drink run short, they jump up and 
crying make assault on the heart-flesh. And when the time 
comes for drmking and swallowing food, and so on, they with 
upturned mouths hastily snatch two or three bits for a 
first gulp. To those worms the belly is their maternity 
hospital, lavatory, nursing home and cemetery. Just as in 
summer time when big drops of rain fall, various kmds of 
putridity, such as urine, dung, hide, bones, strips of sinews, 
saliva, snot, blood, being borne along by the water, fall mto 
a pool by the gate of a village of outcasts, and get whirled 
about in the muddy water, and the families of worms which 
are begotten, after the lapse of two or three days are boiled 
by the fervour of the sun’s heat and glow, sending forth foam 
and bubble to the surface, and become very dark-blue in 
colour and are absolutely offensive in smell and loathsome, 
having reached a state which it is impossible to approach or 
to look at, much less to smell or taste — so there in the belly 
the various kmds of things to drink and to eat, being pounded 
by the pestle of the teeth, rolled by the hand of the tongue, 
obstructed by the fluid of the saliva, instantly become devoid 
of colour , smeU, taste and so on, like a weaver’s p^ste, a 


^ Kasambu. 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjeqts for Recollection 297 

dog’s vomit, and, encircled by the bile, the phlegm, wind, are 
boiled by the fervour of the glow of the digestive fire,^ get 
mixed with the families of worms and, sending up foam and 
bubble, reach^an absolutely rotten, evil-smelling, loathsome 
state, the mere mention of which leaves an unpleasantness m 
the things to drink and to eat, let alone scrutiny by the eye 
of understandmg. The drink and food, and so on, which go 
to the belly fall into five portions, one porrion is consumed 
by the worms, one is cooked by the fire of digestion, one 
becomes urme, one becomes excrement, one becommg essence” 
develops the blood, fiesh, and so on. * As to limit, the stomach 
is bounded by the membrane of the belly and by its own 
limit. This IS the limitation by like parts. Limitation by 
dissimilar parts is as in hairs of the head. 

Excrement; — this is fasces. It generally takes the colour 
of the food eaten, and the shape of the place it occupies. 
As to region, it is in the lower region. As to range, it lies 
m the colon. ^ What is called the colon is like [ 260 ] a 
bamboo tube, eight fingers deep, among the roots of the 
back-bones under the navel and at the extremity of 
the intestmes. Just as ram-water falling on high ground 
slips down to low groimd, so whatever thmgs to drink and 
to eat, and so on, fall into the stomach'^ are cooked by the 
digestive fire till foam is thrown up and become soft as though 
ground on a grindstone and, slipping down by the mtestmal 
passage, are crushed and gathered together like yellow loam 
inserted into a bamboo knot. As to limit, it is bounded by the 
membrane of the colon and by its own limit This is its 
limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts is 
as in hairs of the head. 

The bram : — this is the mass of pith inside the skull. It 
is white in colour like a mass of mushrooms. It may also ' 
be described as of the colour of sour milk prior to curdlmg. 

It takes the shape of the place occupied. As to region, it 
grows in the upper region. As to range, it lies depending 

^ Lit, fii'e of the belly.” 2 taste [rasahhavam), 

® P_akkdm>ya, lit. “ receptacle for digested food.” 

^ Amaaaya, lit. receptacle for imdigested food.” 



298 


The I^ath of Purity 

on the four sutures within the skull and so on, collected like 
four lumps of flour placed together. As to limit, it is bounded 
by the inner surfaces of the skull and by its own limit. This 
IS the limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts 
IS as in hairs of the head. 

Bile; — ^there are two kmds, bile as organ, bile as fluid.^ 
Of these the former is of the colour of thick oil of the bassia 
latifolia, the latter the colour of a faded dkuli flower. Both 
take the shape of their range. As to region, the former is in 
the upper region, the latter in both regions. As to range, 
like a drop of oil in watet, the latter pervades the whole body 
excepting the hard, dry hide and those places of the hairs 
of the head, hairs of body, teeth and nails which stand clear 
of the flesh. When the bile is disturbed, the eyes become 
yellow and roll, the limbs shake and itch. The former kind 
of bile lies in the gall-bladder which, like the skin of a big, 
bitter gourd, is placed beside the fl.esh of the liver between 
the heart and the lungs. When it is disturbed, beings turn 
mad; with corrupt thought they abandon their sense of shame 
and dread of blame, do what ought not to be done, speak 
what ought not to be spoken, think what ought not to be 
thought. As to limit, the bile is bounded by its own limit. 
This is its limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar 
parts is as in hairs of the head. 

[261] Phlegm : — this is within the body and is*of the measure 
of a pattha. It is of a white colour like the juice of a leaf of 
the urena hemp. It takes the shape of the range occupied. 
As to region, it is in the upper region. As to range, it lies 
in the membrane of the belly. Just as moss and weeds in 
the water are divided into two parts when a piece of wood 
or potsherd falls on them, and then again form one surface, 
so, at the time of eating food and so on, it is cut mto two 
pieces by the food and drink falling in, and again spreads 
out as one piece. When it is weak, the stomach is highly 
offensive and gives out foul smells, like a ripe boil, a rotten 
hen's egg. And as it comes up, the eructated wind and the 
mouth become highly offensive and give out fqjil smells. 


1 lit. “ bound and unbound.” 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 299 

And tlie man is in such a state that one might say to him, 

Go away ^ You breathe forth evil smells.’' And this evil 
smell, as it grows in strength, is confined within the membrane 
of the belly Hke the covering plank in the lavatory. As to 
limit, phlegm is bounded by its own limit. This is its limita- 
tion by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts is as in 
hairs of the head. 

Pus : — this is the matter produced by bad blood. In colour, 
it has the colour of a sere leaf, but in a dead body, the colour 
of thick, putrid scum. As to shape, it takes the shape of the 
range occupied As to region, it !s m both regions. As to 
range, there is no constant range in pus, where it gathers, 
there it is. It is to be found wherever blood stands still and 
coagulates in a part of the body w-hich is injured by stumps, 
thorns, blows, flame of fire, and so on, or which gives rise to 
boils, abscesses, and so on. As to limit, it is bounded by its 
own limit. This is its limitation by like parts. Limitation 
by dissimilar parts is as m hairs of the head. 

Blood: — this is of two kinds: accumulated blood and 
circulating blood. Of these the former is of the colour of 
the thick juice of cooked lac, the latter the colour of the clear 
juice of lac. As to shape, both take the shape of the range 
occupied. As to region, the former is in the upper region, 
the latter is in both regions. As to range, blood m circulation 
diffuses thr(3ugh the entire materiak body along the network 
of veins, excepting the hard, dry hide and those places of 
the hairs of the head, hairs of the body, teeth and nails which 
stand clear of the flesh. Accumulated blood fills the lower 
part of the place occupied by the liver, [262] and being of the 
measure of a fatlha^ trickles little by little down upon the 
heart, kidneys, lungs, and keeps the kidneys, heart, liver, “ 
lungs, wet. For when it does not wet the kidneys, heart, 
and the other things, beings become thirsty. As to limit, 
it is bounded by its own limit. This is its limitation by 

^ Upddinna^ lit. “ the issue of grasping,” For definition see Bud, 
Psych. Ethics, §§ 60S, 1213 f. 

2 It keeps the liver wet because it fills the lower part of its place — 
Tlhd. 



300 The Tjobth of Purity 

like parts. Limitation by unlike parts is as in kairs of tbe 
bead. 

Sweat: — this is the watery element exuding from the hairy 
pores of the skm. In colour it is like clear sesame oil. In 
shape it takes the shape of the range occupied. As to region, 
it IS in both regions. As to range, there is no constant range, 
wherein sweat may persist, as blood does. But when through 
the heat of fire, the heat of the sun, change of climate 
and so on, the body is heated, then like a bunch of fibres, 
roots and stalks of the lotus taken anyhow from the water, 
sweat trickles from all th^ hairy pores and openings. There- 
fore its shape also is to be imderstood by way of the hairy 
pores and openings. And in mentally grasping the sw^eat, 
the student should attend to it as it fills the hairy pores and 
openings. As to limit, it is bounded by its own limit. This 
is the linaitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar 
parts IS as m hairs of the head. 

Tat: — this is congealed viscous fluid. In colour it is the 
colour of split turmeric. As to shape, it is like pieces of fine 
cloth of the colour of turmeric placed between the skin and 
flesh of a stout man. In the case of a thin man, it is like 
such pieces placed in two or three folds by the flesh of the 
shins, of the thighs, of the back-bones, of the belly-sack. 
As to region, it is m both regions. As to range, it diffuses 
through the whole body of a stout man; in the c§;se of a thin 
man, it lies by his calves, and so on. Though it goes under 
the name of viscous liquid, it is not used as oil for the head, 
or as oil and so on, for the nose. As to limit, it is bounded 
below by the flesh, above by the skin, across by its own limit. 
This is its limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar 
parts is as in hairs of the head. 

Tears: — ^this is the watery element exudmg from the eyes. 
In colour it is like clear sesame oil. In shape it takes the 
shape of the range occupied. [263] As to region, it is in the 
upper region. As to range, it lies m the sockets of the eyes. 
It is not permanently collected m the eye-sockets, as is bile 
in the gall-bladder. But when bemgs, growing joyous, laugh 
much, growing sad, cry and lament, or take food of extreme 



VIII , — Exposition of the Suhjegts fcr Recollection 301 

tastes/ and wlien their eyes are hurt by smoke, dust, dirt, 
and so on, then tears set up^ by the joy, sadness, extreme 
food, climate, fill the eye-sockets, or trickle down. And in 
mentally gracing tears, the student should grasp them as they 
fill the eye-sockets. As to limit, they are bounded by their 
own limit. This is the limitation by like parts. Limitation 
by dissimilar part/S is as in hairs of the head. 

Grease: — this is molten viscous liquid. In colour it is like 
cocoanut oil. It may also be described as oil poured^ on 
scum. As to shape it is like a drop of oil spread over, and 
rolling on, clear water when one fs having a bath. As to 
region, it grows in both regions. As to range, it lies generally 
in the palm of the hand, the back of the hand, the sole of the 
foot, the upper part of the foot, the nostrils, the ends of the 
shoulders. But it does not always remain molten in these 
places. But when through the heat of fire, the heat of the 
sun, disagreeable weather, disagreeable conditions, these 
places become heated, then it moves about in them like a 
drop of oil spread over clear water at bath-time. As to 
limit, it is bounded by its own limit. This is its limitation 
by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts is as m hairs 
of the head. 

Saliva^: — this is the watery element mixed with foam 
inside the mouth. In colour it is white like that of foam. 
In shape it takes the shape of the range occupied. It may 
also be described as havmg the shape of foam. As to region, 
it is in the upper region. As to range, it comes down by 
both the cheek-walls and lies on the tongue. Not always 
IS it collected there. But when beings see or think of food 
(such as is hot, bitter, and so on) or when they place in the 
mouth an}dihing hot, bitter, astringent, salty, sour m taste, 
or again when their heart is wearied or anything despicable 
arises, then saliva, arising and descendmg by both the cheek- 
walls, stops on the tongue. It is thin at the tip of the tongue, 
thick at the root. And as the water in a well dug on the sandy 
bank of a river never fails, so it never fads to moisten flat 

^ E.g. "^0 hot, too bitter, too sour and so on. 

2 Road samutthahitvd. 


^ Read kJielo, 



302 


Th^ Path of Purity 

com or grain or any eatable thing that is put in the mouth. 
[264] As to limit, it is bounded by its own limit. This is 
its limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar parts 
is as m hairs of the head. 

Snot* — this is impurity exuding from the brain. In colour 
it is like the kernel of the seed of a tender palm. In shape 
it takes the shape of the range occupied. As to region, it is 
produced in the upper region. As to range, it fills the nostrils. 
Not always is it collected there, but just as when a man 
wraps milk curds in a lotus-leaf and pierces the leaf from 
below with a thorn, ^ the juice of the curds'- flows by that 
hole and falls outside, so when beings cry or a derangement 
of conditions takes place owing to disagreeable food or the 
climate, then, the brain becoming putrid, phlegm flows from 
inside the head and, descending through the aperture of the 
head above the palate,^ fills the nostrils and either stops there 
or trickles down. In mentally grasping the snot, the student 
should grasp it as it fills the nostrils. As to limit, it is bounded 
by its own limit. This is its limitation by like parts. Limita- 
tion by dissimilar parts is as in hairs of the head. 

The synovium: — this is the slippery putridity mside the 
joints of the body. In colour it is like bauhmia resin. In 
shape it takes the shape of the range occupied. As to region, 
it is in both regions. As to range, it lies inside the hundred 
and eighty joints, fulfilling the work of lubricating them. 
The bones of a man who has a small supply of this fluid, 
creak as he rises, sits down, steps forward, steps back, bends 
his limbs, stretches out his limbs; he moves about making 
a sound like the snapping of the fingers, and when he has 
gone just a yojana or two, his wind is upset, his limbs ache. 
But the bones of a man who has a plentiful supply of the 
fluid do not creak as he rises, sits down, and so on; even when 
he has gone a long distance, his wind is not upset, his limbs 
do not ache. As to limit, it is bounded by its own limit. 

1 So as to prevent the leaf from opening out. 

2 Read dadhimuttam, explained by the Tlkd as dadhino vissandam 
accharavasd, “ clear liquid flowing from the curds.” 

2 Tdlutmithakavivarem = matthakavivarato dgantvd tdlun:xitthakena 
otantvd, — Tlkd. 



VIIL — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 303 

This is its limitation by like parts. Limitation by dissimilar 
parts is as in hairs of the head. 

Urine: — ttis is in colour like an alkaline solution of bean- 
water.^ In shape it is like water inside a water-] ar placed 
face downwards. As to region, it is in the lower region. As 
to range, it lies inside the bladder, namely what is called 
the bladder-cup. Just as into a mouthless pitcher thrown 
into a pool [265] the essence of the pool enters, and yet the 
way by which it has entered is not apparent, so into the 
bladder urine from the body enters The path by which it 
enters is not apparent. The path by which it goes out, how- 
ever, is plain. And when the bladder is burdened with urine, 
beings set about relieving themselves. The limit of urine is 
bounded by the inside of the bladder, and by its own limit. 
This is its limitation by like parts Limitation by dissimilar 
parts is as in hairs of the head. 

Thus as he, having determined the parts beginning with 
hairs of the head by w’ay of colour, shape, region, range, 
limitation, attends to them as abomination 1 abomination 
by way of colour, shape, smell, origin, range, according to 
the method of the serial order, of not being too swift, and so 
on, and as he, at the conclusion of his work to transcend 
the concept, surveys the body saying, There are in the 
body, hairs . . all those states appear to him simultane- 
ously, just a*s to a man with eyes, who looks at a garland 
of flowers of thirty-two colours, strung by a single thread, 
all the flowers appear as though simultaneously. Hence it 
was said in the discourse on skill in attendmg. For the 
attention of a beginner who attends to the hairs, goes on, and 
stops, only at the last part, the urine.’” And when he 
applies his attention to external objects (i.e., the bodies of 
other people), so that in them also all the parts appear to 
him (as abomination), then men, animals and other moving 
creatures abandon the attributes of beings and appear as so 
many heaps of the parts. And what is drunken and eaten 
by them seems as if it was throwni into the heap of the parts 

1 Water obtained by straining the ashes of roasted bean. — Tlld. 

2 Page 281. 



304 


The Path of Purity 

Then, as he attends repeatedly, thinking, Abomination ^ 
abomination by serially letting go^ (some of the parts) 
and so on, ecstasy arises in due course. There, among the 
parts, the manifestation of the hairs and so on, by way of 
colour, shape, region, range, limit, is the sign to be grasped. 
The manifestation by way of abomination in all its aspects 
IS the after-image. As one practises, develops this after- 
image, ecstasy arises by way of the First Jhana, as was said 
above in the Foul subjects of meditation. That ecstasy 
arises single in him to whom only a single part is manifested, 
or who, attaining to ecstasy in a single part, makes no further 
effort as to another part. But, as in the case of Mallaka the 
Elder, First Jhanas to the number of the parts are produced 
in him to whom the various parts are manifested, or who, 
attaining to Jhana in one part, makes further effort as to 
another part 

[266] It is said that this venerable one, grasping the Elder 
Abhaya, reciter of the Digha, by the hand and saying, “ Friend 
Abhaya, first take up this question,” spoke thus (of himself) : — 

Mallaka the Elder is one who has attained to the First 
Jhana thirty-two times over the thirty-two parts. If he 
enters into it, once each night, once each day, he finishes the 
round in just over half a month. If, however, he takes one 
a day, he does the round in just over a month.” And whereas 
this subject of meditation is effected by means^of the First 
Jhana, because it is by the strength of mindfulness as to 
colour, shape, and so on, that the effecting is done, it is called 
'' Mindfulness as to the body.” 

And whereas the monk who is devoted to this mindfulness 
as to the body, subdues discontent and a life of pleasure, 
discontent does not subdue him; he lives, putting down 
discontent as it comes up. He subdues fear and dread, fear 
and dread do not subdue him, he lives, putting down fear 
and dread as they come up. He endures cold and Jieat . . . 
he becomes one who suffers takers oj hfe.”^ Depending on the 
different kinds of colour of the hairs and so on, he attains to the 
Four Jhanas, penetrates the six kinds of Higher Knowledge. 

^ Bead anupuhhainuncanadivasena. ^ Majjhima i, 10. 



VIII. — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 305 

Therefore the wise man should devote himself 
With zeal to body-mmdfulness, which brings 
Wilh it such manifold advantages. 

This is th« substance of the detailed discourse on mind- 
fulness as to the body. 

IX. — Respiration-mindfulness. 

That mindfulness as to respiration as a subject of medita- 
tion which has been extolled thus by the Blessed One^ — 

Monks, this concentration on mvidf nines s as to respiration 
being developed, repeated, peacefid and sublime, unadulterated 
a7id of happy life, at once does away with, suppresses every evil, 
immoral state as it arises,^ has been set forth as having 
sixteen bases thus: And how, monks, is concentration of 
mindfulness as to respiration developed ? How, being repeated, 
peaceful and sublime, unadulterated and of happy life, does it 
at once do away with, suppress every evil, immoral state as 
it arises Here, monks, a monk, having gone to the forest, or 
to the foot of a tree or to an empty house, sits down bending the 
legs cross-wise, setting the body upright, and establishing his 
mindfuhiess in front. [ 267 ] And consciously he breathes out, 
consciously he breathes in. (i) In breathing out a long breath 
he knows, ^ I breathe out a long breath.^ In breathing in a 
long breath ... . (li) In breathing out a short breath . . . 
In breathing in a short breath he knows, ‘ I breathe in a short 
breath.'^ (lii) ^ Experiencing the ivhole body I shall breathe 
out,’ thus he trains himself. ^Experiencing the whole body I 
shall breathe in,’ thus he trains himself, (iv) ^ Calming the 
body-complex I shall breathe out,’ thus he trains himself. 

^ Calming the body-complex I shall breathe in,’ thus he 
trains himself, (v) Experiencing rapture . . . (vi) Experi- 
encing happiness . . . (vii) Experiencing the mind-com- 
plex . . . (viii) Calming the mind-complex . . . (ix) Ex- 
periencing the mind ... (x) Gladdetiing the mind . . . 
(xi) Concentrating the mind . . . (xii) Releasing the mind . . . 

1 Majjhima iii, 82 f.; Samyutta v, 321. 

^ Ibid. 322. For the following see Ibid., p. 311. 


20 



306 


The Path of Purity 

(xiii) Discerning the impermanent . . . (xiv) Discerning dis- 
passion . . . (xv) Discerning cessation . . . (xvi) 'Dis- 
cerning renunciation I shall breathe out/ thus he trams himself 
'Discerning renunciation I shall breathe in/ thus he trains 
himself T ^ 

We now come to the method of its development. And 
because that method, when it is stated to follow the elucida- 
tion of the text, is fulfilled in all its parts,^ therefore we give 
the Exposition preceded by the elucidation of the text. 

tfirst, in And how, monies, is concentration on mindfulness 
as to respiration developed V' " how ” is a question asked 
with a desire to explain in detail the respiration, mindfulness, 
concentration, development, in all their aspects. The sen- 
tence, “ And developed, monies, is concentration on mindfulness 
as to respiration/' is an indication of the subject in question. 
And the same in How, being repeated . . . immoral state as 
it arises V 

And there '' developed " means caused to arise, increase. 

Concentration on mindfulness as to respiration " is concen- 
tration associated with mindfulness which is occupied with 
respiration. Or, concentration on mindfulness as to respira- 
tion is respiration-mindfulness-concentration. 

Repeated " means worked over and over again. 

Peaceful and sublime " means both peaceful and sublime. 
The word both ” (eva) is to be understood asr determining 
both the terms. What has (here) been said ? 

This (concentration) namely — unlike the Foul ” subject 
of meditation which is peaceful and sublime solely as pene- 
tration,^ but is neither peaceful nor sublime as regards the 
object which is gross and abominable — is not unpeaceful nor 
not sublime under any aspect. It certainly is peaceful, 
quieted, calmed owing to the calmness of the object, and also 
to the calmness of the factor, termed penetration; sublime 
and never to be contented with, owing to the sublime state 
of the object [268] and of the factor. 

^ Such as the meaning of terms, condensed meaning, example, 
objection and so on. — Tlka, r 

2 I.e. apart from the object. 



VIII > — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 307 

“ Unadulterated and of happy life,"’ — ^here in this concen- 
tration there is no sprinkling (i.e., adulteration) of any kind, 
hence unadulterated. Because there is no adulteration^ it 
is unmixed, ^separate, special. Here in this concentration 
there is neither preliminary work,^ nor is there peace through 
access. Since first it was entered into, it has been peaceful 
and sublime by its own intrinsic nature : — such is the meanmg. 
But others say that "^^unadulterated” means unstufied, 
possessed of essential property, sweet in intrinsic natme. 
And so this unadulterated^ concentration is to be understood 
as a happy life because it conduces to the attainment of bodily 
and mental happiness every time it is induced. 

Every {state) as it arises ” means every one that is not 
discarded. 

Evil ” means sinful. 

Immoral state ” means state that is immoral. 

“ At once does away with ” means causes to disappear, 
discards in a moment. 

Suppresses'" allays well. Or it is said that, because it 
partakes of the nature of penetration, it, he having reached 
growth in the Noble Path, extirpates, sets at rest. 

And this is the meanmg in brief. Monks, in what manner, 
in what way, by what arrangement is the concentration on mind- 
fulness as to respiration developed ? In what manner, being 
repeated, IS it peaceful . . . and suppresses every evil, immoral 
state as it arises ? Now in treating the meaning of this in detail 
(the Blessed One) said: Here, monks," and so forth. 

Wherein Here, monks, a monk," means a monk in this 
religion. For this word here " shows the religion which is 
the vantage-point of a person who produces the concentration 
on mindfulness as to respiration in all its aspects, and re- 
pudiates such a state in another religion. For this has been 
said: Monks, only here is a monk in the first stage to be 

found . . . devoid of such monks are the teachings of other 
sectarians"^ Hence it was said, a monk in this religion" 

1 Bead anasittakattd. ^ Read, after the Tlka, parikammam va 

3 Read asecanako, 

4 Majjhima i, 63; Ahguttara ii, 238. Read sunndpara^. 



308 The Path of Purity 

''Having gone to the forest ... or to an empy house '' — 
this shows the inclusion of a dwelling favourable to the develop- 
ing of his concentration on mindfulness as to respiration. For 
the mind of a monk, which keeps running aftei^the various 
objects of sense for a long time, has no wish to mount an 
object in concentration on mindfulness as tp respiration, but 
runs off the track, like a chariot yoked to vicious oxen.^ 
Therefore, as a cowherd, [269] wishing to tame a vicious calf 
that has been fed on the milk of a vicious cow, might take 
it away from the cow and tie it apart by a rope to a strong 
post driven in the ground; and that calf of his, trembling all 
over, unable to run away, would crouch down, or would lie 
down by that post, even so the monk, wishing to tame his 
malignant mmd which has been fed for a long time on the 
essence arising out of the various objects of sense, should 
take it away from those objects and, introducing it to the 
forest ... the empty house, tie it there by the rope of mind- 
fulness to the post of breathing in and out. And so that 
mind of his, though it may hover about, will no more get the 
object on which it dwelt formerly, and being unable to cut 
the rope of mindfulness and run away, sits down, lies down, 
by the object of concentration by virtue of access and ecstasy.^ 
Hence said the Ancients : — 

As here in this religion the man 
Who tames a calf secures it to the post. 

So firmly to the object should a man 
Secure his mind by means of mindfulness. 

Such is a dwelling favourable to his developing. Hence it was 
said, ‘ ' this shows the inclusion of a dwelling favourable to the de- 
veloping of his concentration on mindfulness as to respiration.” 

Or, because this respiration-mindfulness as a subject of 
meditation is the chiefs among the different kinds of subjects, 

1 Read kutagona°. The P T.8, Dictionary gives the meaning of 

kutasbs “without horns, i.e. harmless,” in preference to “rascal.” But 
m the following simile where the taming of the malignant mind {duttha- 
citta) is illustrated by the taming of a Mia-calf, the meaning of “ vicious ’ ’ 
suits the context much better than “ harmless.” * 

2 Read for ® as in the footnote. 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subj§cts»for Recollection 309 

iSj to all Buddiias, (some^ of the) Silent Buddhas, (some^ of the) 
disciples of the Buddhas, the proximate cause for the attam- 
ment of happiness m life under present conditions, and is not 
easy to develop without abandoning a monastery near a 
village which is disturbed by sounds of women, of men, of 
elephants, of horses, and so forth, sound being a thorn to 
the Jhana,^ — whereas it is easy for the student,*^ in the forest 
away from the village, to take up this subject, produce the 
fourfold Jhana with respiration as object, and making that 
the basis, contemplate the complexes, and attain to the sub- 
lime Fruition, to Sanctity, — therefore in showing a dwelling 
favourable to him, the Blessed One said, ''having gone to the 
forest ” and so forth. 

For the Blessed One is like a master of the science of buildmg 
sites.^ As the master of the science of building sites [270] 
looks at the site for a town, examines it well and gives direc- 
tions: — ^^Here build the town!'’ and, when the town is 
safely finished, receives great honour from the royal family, 
so he examines a dwelling if it be suitable for the student 
and directs, '' Here you should devote yourself to the subject 
of meditation !” and later on gets great honour when the 
student, who has devoted himself to the subject, attains to 
saintship in course of time and says, '' The Blessed One is 
indeed the Perfectly Enlightened Buddha !” 

And this ifstudent) monk is said to be like a panther. For, 
as the king of the panthers in the forest conceals himself in 
a grass-thicket, or a wood-thicket, or a mountain-thicket, and 
catches wild beasts — the wild bufialo, wild ox,^ pig and so 
on, — so the monk, devoting himself to the subject of his 
meditation in the forest and other places,® lays hold in due 
course on the paths of a stream-winner, of a once-returner, 
of a non-returner, of a samt and the noble fruition of saint- 
ship. Thus is it to be understood. Hence said the Ancients : — 

Just as the crouching panther gets the deer. 

E'en so this Buddha's son, to effort yohed, 

^ “ Some,” after the Tlkd, ^ Cf. Points of Controversy, p. 331. 

3 Re^d yogdvacarena, ^ Cf. Dialogues of the Buddha i, 1 8. 

^ Gohama, the Bos Sondaicus. ® Read arahnddlsu. 



310 


The Path of Purity 

With msigJit goes into the forest ivild, 

And there obtains frmUon utterynostd 

Therefore in pointing ont to him the forest-dwelling as a fit 
place for effort and quick endeavour, the Blessed One said, 
having gone to the forest and so on. Wherein gone to 
the forest ” means, gone to any forest, happy in solitude, 
anyone from among the forests whose characteristics have 
been stated thus: ''The forest, — that is, it is forest when 
one*goes out by the gate-pillars. " A forest-dwelling is at 
least five hundred bow-lengths distant.”- 

" Gone to the foot of a tree ” means, gone near a tree. 

" Gone to an empty house ” means, gone to what is empty, 
a secluded space. 

And here it is fit to say that he has gone to an empty 
house, if he goes to the seven kinds" of dwellings, from which 
the forest and the foot of a tree are excluded. 

[271] Having thus pointed out a dwelling favourable to 
the three seasons, favourable to conditions and conduct, and 
favourable to the developing of mindfulness as to respiration, 
{the Blessed One), in setting forth a way of deportment which 
is calm and does not partake of slackness or of distraction,^ 
said " he sits downP 

And then to show" that he has sat down in a firm position, 
that he is feeling the bliss derived from the breathing in and 
out, and that there is a wray to seize the object, the Blessed 
One said " bending the legs cross-wise,^ and so forth, wherein 
" cross-ivise ” means, to sit bending in the thighs ail roimd. 

" Bending ” means fixing. 

" Setting the body upright ” means placing the upper part 
of the body upright, one end of the eighteen back-bones 
touching the other end. For, the skm, flesh, ^ and the sinews 

1 See text, p 270, n 2. ^ See above, p. 82 of Part I. 

3 The seven are at a mountain, grotto, mountain-cleft, cemetery, 
forest jungle, open sky, straw-heap (pabbata, handma, giriguhd, susdna, 
vanapattha, abbhokdsa, paldlapunja), 

^ To lie down partakes of idleness, to stand up or walk to and fro 
partakes of distraction. To sit indicates calmness. 

® Read camma-mamsa-. 



VIII. — Exposition of the Subjects* for Recollection 311 

of a man who sits thus, are not bent. And he does not feel 
those sensations which arise every moment from their being 
bent. Those sensations not arising/ the mind becomes 
collected,^ the subject of meditation does not fall through, 
but attains to growth and increase. 

EstabhsMng his mindfulness in front ” means, setting his 
mindfulness in the direction of the subject of meditation. 
Or, pari (in parimukham “ in front ”) has the meaning of 
''grasping all round’’; mukham of ''going out ; jati 

(mindfulness) of " being present,” and it is therefore said 
to be parimukham sati. The metomg is to be taken here 
according to the version of the Patisambhida,^ of which the 
following IS an abstract: setting up mindfulness concerning 
a going forth which is thoroughly grasped. 

" Consciously he breathes out, consciously he breathes in /^ — 
the monk having sat down thus, and set up his mindfulness 
thus, does not let it go, but consciously breathes out, con- 
sciously breathes in. He does his work consciously, so it 
is said. 

Now to show the difierent ways in which he does his work 
consciously, the Blessed One said, (i.) In breathing out a long 
breath,'' and so on. For it has been said in the Patisambhida,® 
in the analysis of some one^ that " consciously he breathes out, 
consciously he breathes in," that " In thirty-two ways''" is he 
a conscious worker : Established is the mindfulness of him 
who knows the collectedness and non-wavering of mind by 
virtue of breathing out a long breath. By that mindfulness, by 
that knowledge is he a conscious worker. . . . Established is 
the mindfulness of him who, while discerning renunciation, 
knows the collectedness and non-wavering of mind by virtue 
of breathing in. By that mindfulness, by that knowledge is he 
a conscious worker." 

In that text, "m breathing out a long breath" means, 
producing a long breathing-out. [272] ''Breathing out " is the 


^ Read anuppajjamdndsu. ^ Or ‘‘ has a single object.” 

3 1 , 176. ^ Bead ehass'eva for etass’eva. 

The^sixteen ways mentioned on p. 305 as inhalation and exhalation 
make thirty -two. 



312 


The J^ath of Purity 

outgoing breath. Breathing m ’’ is the incoming breath, — 
thus is it said in the Commentary on the Vinaya. ^ But in the 
Commentaries on the Suttantas it comes out of order. ^ 

Of the two kinds of breathing, at the time w]ien all babes 
lying in the mother’s womb^ come out therefrom, first the 
breath from within goes out; later the breath from without, 
gathering fine dust and entering within, strikes the palate 
and goes out.^ Thus are breathings in and out to be under- 
stood. And their length and shortness are to be understood 
by way of time. For as water and sand, spread on the space 
of earth, ^ is spoken of as a*long (stretch of) water, long (stretch 
of) sand, a short (stretch of) water, short (stretch of) sand, 
so the breathings in and out, though taken in minute quantities, 
in the body of an elephant and in the body of a snake, slowly 
fill the long space called their physical structures, and slowly 
go out, therefore they are spoken of as long.^ They quickly 
fill the short space called the body of a dog, of a hare and 
such creatines, and go out quickly, therefore they are spoken 
of as short. And among mankind some, like elephants, snakes 
and so on, breathe in and breathe out long breaths, long in 
time; others like dogs, hares and so on, breathe short breaths. 
Therefore the breath of these creatures which takes a long 
time in going out and entering in, is long, the breath which 
takes a short time in going out and entering in, is short: — 
Thus it should be understood. 

The monk, breathing m and breathing out long breaths in 
nine ways, knows that he is domg so. And to him who has 
this knowledge there is fulfilled in one aspect^ the develop- 
ment of the setting up of mindfulness which discerns the 
body: — Thus it is to be understood. 

1 The P.T S. Dictionary s,v, here renders uppati^atiya as ‘‘ with 
reference to the preceding/’ and on p. 96 of text as impossible.” 

2 This rendering for gahhhaseyijaka is not quite the same as one 
who enters another womb,” the rendering given m the P.T.S. Dic- 
tionary s,v. 

® Here nibbdyati, below mklchamati, 

4 Hote th ' 'n this and the followmg examples the twofold meanings 
of addlid as space and time are interdependent. 

® I e. in regard to a long breath. Or in one of the nine ways men- 
tioned in the followmg text quoted. 



VIII, — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 313 

As it lias been said in tbe Patisambbida^ : How in breathing 
out a long breath does he know, ' I am breathing out a long 
breath ’ ; in breathing in a long breath does he know, ‘ I am 
breathing m ^ long breath ’ ? He breathes out a long breath 
which takes a long time;^ he breathes %n a long breath which 
takes a long time ;.he breathes in and breathes out long breaths 
each of which takes a long time. As he breathes in and breathes 
out long breaths each of which takes a long time, desire arises.^ 
By means of desire he breathes out a long breath more subtle 
than the last, and which takes a long time. By means of desire 
he breathes m a long breath . . . he breathes in and breathes 
out long breaths ... As by means of desire he breathes in 
and breathes out loyig breaths more subtle than the last and each 
of which takes a long time, he becomes joyful. [273] By means 
of joy he breathes out a long breath more subtle than the last, 
and which takes a long time. By means of joy he breathes in 
a long breath ... he breathes in and breathes out long breaths 
... As by means of joy he breathes in and breathes out long 
breaths more subtle than the last, each of which takes a long time, 
the mind is diverted from the long breathings in and out, even- 
mmdedness is set up.^ The long breathings in and out which 
arise in these nine ways are termed the body, mindfulness is 
appearance, discernment is knowledge. The body is appearance 
but not mindfulness. Mindfulness is both appearance and 
mindfulness. " By means of that mindfulness, that knowledge, 
he discerns that body. Hence it is said as regards the body : 

' The development of the setting up of mindfulness which discerns 
the body.' " 

(ii) And tbe same witli the short breath, with this difference: 
As the expression was used above, '' a long breath which takes 
a long time," so we now have here the expression, a short 
breath which takes a short time." Therefore the construction 

1 , 177 . 

^ Addhmiasanlchate ti addMnakotthdse, 'na desahlidge ti attho. — Tlhd. 

3 Chando uppajjati. We should probably say “ will.” But chanda 
IS not exactly “ will.” 

^ Now that the breathings have become very subtle, the mind attends 
to their* after-image, and therefore is diverted from the original 
breathings. 



314 The Path of Purity 

with the word short ” is to be made as far as the sentence, 
Hence it is said, as regards the body : ' The development of 
the setting up of mindfulness which discerns the body.^ ” Thus 
(the student,) knowing the breathings short and long in time 
in these ways, knows in breathing out a long breath, '' I am 
breathing out a long breath , in breathing in a short 
breath, “lam breathing in a short breath/' 

The breathings in and out, and short and long — 

These four degrees take place at monk’s nose-tip, 

i.e , of him who has such* knowledge. 

(iii) “ ‘ Experiencing the whole body I shall breathe out . . . 
shall breathe inf thus he trains himself,^' means, “ making clear, 
making plain, the beginning, middle and end of the entire 
exhaling body, I shall breathe out,” thus he trains himself. 
“ Making clear, making plain, the beginning, middle and end 
of the entire inhaling body, I shall breathe in,” thus he trains 
himself. Thus making them clear and plain, he breathes out 
and breathes in with a consciousness associated with know- 
ledge, hence the expression, “ ‘ I shall breathe oat, I shall 
breathe in,' thus he trains himself.” For to one monk the 
beginning of the exhaling and inhaling body which is diffused 
in minute particles is clear, not the middle nor the end. He 
is able to apprehend only the beginning, and is distressed by 
the middle and the end. To another the middle is clear, not 
the beginning nor the end. To a third the end is clear, not 
the beginning nor the middle. He is able to apprehend only 
the end, [274] and is distressed by the beginning and the 
middle. To a fourth all the stages are clear; he is able to 
apprehend all, and is nowhere in distress. One should be 
like this last. In pointing out this meaning (the Blessed One) 
said: “ ‘ Experiencing the whole body 1 shall breathe out . . . 
shall breathe in,' thus he trains himself." 

Where “ trains himself" means, he struggles, makes effort. 
The restraint of such an one as described above is here 
the higher training in virtue. The concentration of such 
an one is the higher training in mind. The under-standing 
of such an one is the higher traimng in understanding. 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 315 

These are the three courses of training. He trains, practises, 
develops, repeats m regard to that object, by means of that 
mindfulness, by means of that attention: — Thus the meaning 
should be knc»vn. 

And because he in the first (of the sixteen ways^) should 
only breathe out and only breathe in, not doing anything 
else, and henceforward strive for the arising of understanding, 
therefore, the present tense having been used in the text, 

He hnows, " I am breathing out,'' he knows, ‘ I am breathing 
in,' '' the future tense is used in the text beginning with, 
“ Experiencing the whole body I shall breathe out^' m order 
to show the way in which understanding may henceforward 
arise. Thus it is to be understood. 

(iv) ^ Calming the body-complex I shall breathe out . . . 
shall breathe in,'' thus he trains himself," means calmmg, tran- 
quillizmg, allaying, setting at rest, the gross body-complex,^ 
I shall breathe out, breathe in, thus he trains himself. 

And here the grossness and subtlety and calmness are to 
be understood thus: For, previous to the time of making 
effort,^ the body and the mind of the monk are distressed, 
gross. And when the grossness of body and mind does not 
subside, the breathings too are gross, becoming very thick, 
so that the nostrils cannot hold them, and he has to breathe 
through the mouth also. But when his body and mind are 
taken in hand, then they are calm and quiet. When they 
are calm, his breathings become fine, insomuch that he might 
ask, '' Do they exist or do they not V 

Just as the breathings of a man running down from a 
mountain and putting down a heavy load from his head, are 
gross, and the nostrils cannot contam them, and he has to 
breathe also through the mouth; but when, getting rid of his 
fatigue, and taking a bath and a drink of water [275] and 
puttmg a piece of wet cloth on his heart, he lies down in a 
cool shade, then his breathings become fine, so that he might 

1 See p. 305, 

2 Though the breathing is set up by mind {cittasamutthana), it is 
known as body-complex because it is bound by the sentient body 
{karaja-k^a). — Tlkd. 

® I.e. for the apprehending of body and mind. 



316 


T-he JPath of Purity 

ask, '' Do they exist or do they not V even so, previous to 
the time of makmg effort ... he might ask, ‘'Do they 
exist or do they not Why should it be so ? Because 
previous to the time of making effort he did^not think nor 
lay it to heart, attend nor reflect, “ I will calm the grosser 
body-complex,’’ which however he did when he put forth 
effort. Therefore his body-complex is finer when he puts 
forth effort than when he does not. Hence said the 
Ancients : — 

When mind and body are distressed, 

{The complex) verily is gross. 

But when the body's not distressed, 

Finely and smooth it heeps its course. 

In the apprehension (of the subject of meditation) too (the 
complex) IS gross. It is subtle^ in the access to the First 
Jhana, subtle in the First Jhana, gross in the First Jhana 
and in the access to the Second Jhana, subtle in the Second 
Jhana, gross in the Second Jhana and in the access to the 
Third Jhana, subtle in the Third Jhana, gross in the Third 
Jhana and m the access to the Fourth Jhana. In the Fourth 
Jhana it is exceedmgly subtle and attains to extinction. 
Such is the opinion held by the Reciters of the Digha and the 
Samjmtta. But the Majjhima Reciters desire that it should 
be more subtle at the access than at the Jhana which is 
immediately below, that is, it is gross at the First Jhana, 
subtle at the access to the Second Jhana, and so on. In the 
opinion of all (schools), however, the process of the body- 
complex before the time of apprehension subsides at the 
time of apprehension. The body-complex that arose at the 
time of apprehension subsides at the access to the First Jhana. 
, . . The body-complex that arose at the access to the 
Fourth Jhana subsides at the Fourth Jhana. 

This is the method in cultivating calm. According to the 
method of insight the body-complex that arises before appre- 
hension is gross, it is gross as well as subtle in the apprehension 


1 In this paragraph it is as though Buddhaghosa needed, but had 
not, a word meaning relatively. 



VIII. — Exposition of the Subject^ for Recollection 317 

of the Great Essentials, it is gross as well as subtle in the 
apprehension of the derived and the immaterial, it is gross 
as well as subtle in the apprehension of all matter, it is gross 
as well as suljtle in the apprehension of the immaterial, it 
is gross as well as subtle in the apprehension of matter and 
non-matter, it is gross as well as subtle in the apprehension 
of causes, it is gross as well as subtle in the discernment of 
mind and matter with their causes, it is subtle in the insight 
into characteristics as object, gross in feeble insight, subtle 
in keen insight. 

Here, as said above, we are to urcderstand the subsidence 
of the preceding by means of the subsequent (complex). 
Thus should grossness, subtlety and calmness here be under- 
stood. 

[276] But in the Patisambhida,^ the meaning with objec- 
tions and solutions has been stated thus: ''How, calming 
the body-complex, does he train himself : ' I shall breathe out 
. . . / shall breathe in ’ ? Which are the body-complexes ? 
Long breathings in and out,^ which are of the body, bound up 
with the body, — these states are the body-complexes. Calming, 
tranquillizing, setting at rest, allaying those body-complexes, he 
trains himself. Calming the body-complexes, I shall breathe out, 
calming the body-complexes I shall breathe in, thus he trams 
himself, — such complexes as cause the bending forward, bending 
sideways, hendting all over, bending backward, the moving for- 
ward, moving sideways, moving all over, moving backward of 
the body. Calming the tranquil, subtle body-complexes, I shall 
breathe out, shall breathe in, thus he trains himself, — such 
complex as produces no bending forward, bending sideways, 
bending all over, bending backward, nor moving forward, moving 
sideways, moving all over, moving backward. Thus, they say 
(by way of objection), calming the body-complex he trains him- 
self: I shall breathe out, calming the body-complex, he trains 
himself : I shall breathe in ; if this he the case, then there arises 
no consciousness of the proximity of the breath, the breathings 
in and out do not take place, there is set up no mindfulness 
as to respiration, nor concentration on mindfulness as to 
^ 1 , 184-6. ^ Read assdsapassdsa kdyikd. 



318 


Tie Path of Purity 

re&firalion^ and consequently the wise do not enter into nor 
rise from such an attainment, But^ they say {by %vay of 
solution)^ calming the body-complex he trains himself saying^ 

I shall breathe out, I shall breathe in ; this pemg so there 
arises consciousness of the qjroxiynity of the breath, breathings 
in and out take place, there are set up mindfulness as to 
respiration and concentration on mindfulness as to respiration, 
and consequently the ivise enter into, and rise from, such an 
attainment. 

In whit way ? J ust as when a metal gong is struck, first 
of all coarse sounds arise. And afterwards, because their 
general chamcteristics are well grasped, well attended to, well 
noted, even when they have ceased, faint reverberations^ arise ; 
and afterwards even when these have ceased, because their general 
characteristics are well grasped, well attended to, well noted, 
[277] consciousness proceeds out of the same general charac- 
teristics as object, — even so at first the breathings are coarse ; 
and afterwards because their general characteristics are well 
grasped, well attended to, well noted, even when they have ceased, 
very fine breathings arise ; and afterwards even when these have 
ceased, because their general characteristics are well grasped, 
well attended to, well noted, consciousness having the same general 
characteristics as object, does not waver. This being so, there 
arises consciousness of the proximity of the breath, the breathings 
in and out take place, there are set up mindfulness as to respira- 
tion and concentration thereon, and consequently the wise enter 
into, and rise from, such an attainment. In the calming of the 
body-complex, the breathings are the body, mindfulness is appear- 
ance, discernment is knowledge. The body is appearance but 
not mindfulness; mindfulness is both appearance and mind- 
fulness, By means of that mindfulness, that knowledge, he 
discerns that body. Hence it is said as regards the body, ' the 
development of the setting up of mindfulness which discerns 
the body,' " 

Tliiis far IS the explanation in the order of words of the 
first tetrad stated by way of discernment of the body. 

^ Suhhumakasadda ti anurave aha, ye appahd ap^attho hi aycm hasaddo, 
— Tlkd. 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 319 

But because here tbis tetrad is stated as a subject for 
meditation for a beginner, and the other three tetrads by- 
way of discernment of feeling, consciousness, and things^ on 
the part of hipi who has attamed to Jhana in the first tetrad, 
therefore the beginner, a man of good birth, who, developing 
this subject, wishes to win saintship together with the Analyses 
through that insight which has the Fourth Jhana of respira- 
tion for its proximate cause, should, after performing all the 
duties, such as the cleansing of his virtues already mentioned,^ 
take up the fivefold series in meditation from the kind b)f 
teacher who has been described above.^ And here are the 
five parts: — ^learning, asking, presence, application, charac- 
teristic. Of these, learning is the learning of the (text of the) 
subject of meditation. Askmg is asking questions on the 
subject. Presence is the presence of the subject. Application 
is [278] the focussing of the subject. Characteristic is the 
characterizing of the subject; it is stated thus: — This subject 
has such a characteristic.’’ 

He who thus takes up this fivefold series does not tire 
himself, nor does he worry the teacher. Therefore he should 
be taught a little at a time, and take long over reciting it. 
And thus, accepting the fivefold series in meditation, and 
living either with the teacher or elsewhere, in a dwelling of 
the sort described above, ^ and having cut off the minor 
impediments, -and done all his duties, he should dispel drowsi- 
ness due to over-eating and, being seated at ease, gladden 
the heart with recollection of the qualities of the Three 
Gems, and, not bewildered by any passage of the teacher’s 
lesson, give attention to this subject of mindfulness as to 
respiration. 

And herein is the procedure of his attention: counting, 
connection, touching, fixing, noting, turning away, purification, 
and the viewing of them. Of these, counting is just counting 
(the breathings) ; connection is sequence (of mindfulness after 
breathings); touching is touching the places of contact (i.e., 
nostrils); fixing is applying (mind to Jhana); noting is dis- 


^ JQJiammd, 

3 See above, Cli. III. 


See p. 19 of Part I. 



320 


The Path of Purity 

cerning; turning away is tlie Path; purification is the fruition; 
and the viewing of them is reflection. 

Now the beginner who is of good birth should attend to 
the subject first by means of counting. In ^counting, he 
should not stop short of five, nor go beyond ten, neither 
should he make any break in the series.^ For, when he stops 
short of five, the state of consciousness that has arisen in 
a confined space is restless, like a herd of cattle shut in a 
cow-pen. When he goes beyond ten, the state of conscious- 
ness is dependent on the number.” When the series is broken, 
his nodnd trembles, wondering if the subject will reach com- 
pletion or not. Therefore he should do the counting avoiding 
these faults. He should first count slowly after the manner 
of a grain-measurer. For he who measures out grain fills the 
basket and empties it, saying, '' one.’’ And in refilling it 
he says, one, one,’’ even though he is removing any rubbish 
he may have found in the basket. And the same with ‘‘ two, 
two ’’ and so on. So, seizing the breath that reveals itself 
from the breathings in and out, he should begin counting 

one, one [279] till he has counted ten, ten,” noting it 
as it arises each time.'^ As he counts thus, the outgoing breath 
and the incoming breath are manifested. Then, putting aside 
the slow process of counting like a grain-measurer, he should 
count quickly like a cowherd. For a capable cowherd, whip 
in hand, takes gravel and other stones in his* pouch, goes 
early to the cow-pen, and striking the cows on the back 
while sitting on top of the cross-bar, he counts the cows as 
they reach the door, dropping a stone on each, saying, “ One^ 
two.” And the herd of cows, which have been experiencing 
the misery of confined space during the three watches of the 
mght, rush out rubbmg up against one another and quickly 
forming groups. And he quickly counts three, four, five . . . 

^ He should not count “ one, three, five ” or “ two, four, six ” and 
so on. Or else, he should not stop counting and then resume it after 
some time. 

2 Instead of the subject. 

® The expression “ he should not stop short of five implies that 
after counting five or a higher number up to ten, he may return to 
“ one ” and repeat the counting. 



VIII , — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 321 

ten. Tte breathings which becanae evident by the preceding 
(slow) way^ of counting, now naove about quickly and re- 
peatedly. Therefore knowing that they move about, he 
should not seize them either mside or outside the body, but 
seize them as they reach the nostril,^ and count quickly, one, 
two, three, four, five; one, two, three, four, five, six; one, two, 
three, four, five, six, seven . . . eight . . . nine . . . ten. 
For in a subject connected with numbers, it is only through 
them that the mind becomes collected. As a boat in a swjft 
current is steadied by means of the steering-oar, so to one 
who counts quickly, the subject appears like a continuous 
series, and then it proceeds without a break. With this 
knowledge he, without apprehending the breath that is within 
or without, should count with speed m the way described. 
For when he brings his mind in together with the incommg 
breath, it there becomes as if struck by the wind or filled 
with fat. When he takes his mind out together with the 
outgoing breath it becomes distracted by many objects 
outside. Only by developing with his mindfulness fixed on 
each point of contact, does he attain to success. Hence it 
was said '' without apprehending the breath that is within 
or without, he should count with speed in the way described.’’ 

But how long IS he to go on counting ? Until, [ 280 ] without 
the help of counting, his mindfulness is established on the 
breathings as* object. For counting serves the purpose of 
cutting off thoughts which run after external things, and 
establishing mindfulness on the breathings as object. 

Having thus directed his attention by means of counting, 
he should direct it by means of connection. Connection is the 
ceaseless pursuit of the breathings by mindfulness after 
counting has been given up. It does not depend on pursuing 
after the beginning, middle or the end. Of the outgomg 
breath the navel is the beginning, the heart is the middle, 
the nose-tip' is the end. Of the incoming breath the nose-tip^ 
is the beginning, the heart the middle, and the navel the end. 

1 Lit. ‘ door.’ 

2 Bead ^idsikd. So also in footnote 1, where ndhhihd is clearly a 
mistake for ndsikd. In Burmese script s is easily mistaken for hh. 

21 



322 


The Faih of Purity 

And tlie mind of one wlio pursues the breathings (through 
the three stages) being distracted, is apt to be disturbed and 
waver. As it has been said,^ “ The mind of him who pursues 
with mindfulness the beginning, middle and end of exhaled 
breath being distracted in his own person, both body and mind 
become disturbed, tvaver, tremble. The miridofhim who pursues 
with mindfulness the beginning, middle and end of inhaled 
breath, being distracted outside of his own person, both body 
and mind become disturbed, waver, tremble P Therefore, in 
directing his attention by means of connection he should not 
direct it through the three stages of beginning, middle and 
end. 

Further, he should direct his attention by touching and 
fixing. Indeed there is no special attention because of touch- 
ing and fixing as there is because of counting and connection. 
In counting the breathings at the point of contact^ he attends 
by means of counting and touching. And in connecting 
them by mindfulness, after giving up counting them at the 
points of contact, and in fixing the mind by means of ecstasy, 
he is said to attend by means of connection, touching and 
fixing. And the meaning (of these statements) is to be 
understood after the similes of the lame man and the door- 
keeper as given in the Commentaries, and after the simile of 
the saw as given in the Patisambhida. 

Of these, this is the simile of the lame mah. Just as a 
lame man, in rocking a cradle for the amusement of his family, 
sits at the foot of the cradle-post [281] and watches the two 
ends^ and the middle part of the cradle-plank as it approaches 
and recedes in turn, in which undertakmg he is not worried, 
so the monk stands at the foot of the post and pillar,^ and 
rocking the cradle of the breathings, and sitting there at the 
sign Jof the breath) in mindfulness looks on pursuing with 
mindfulness the breathings in the beginning, middle and end 
at the points of contact as they come and go in turn, and 

^ Patisambhida i, 165. 

2 Thus noting the unbroken series of the breathings. 

® I.e. the front end of the approaching, and the back end of the 
receding, cradle. 

^ I.e. the nose-tips and the upper lip. — Tiha, 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 323 

fixing liis mind thereat (points of contact), in which’ imder- 
taking he is not worried. This is the simile of the lame man. 

And this is the simile of the door-keeper: Just as a door- 
keeper does i?ot go about examining people within and without 
the town asking, Who art thou ? Whence comest thou ? 
WTiither goest thop. ? What hast thou in thy hand — Such 
questions do not concern him. — But he examines every man 
that comes to the door. So the monk is not concerned with 
the incoming breath nor with the outgoing breath, but oply 
with the breath that reaches the door (i.e., nostril). This is 
the simile of the door-keeper. 

And the simile of the saw is to be understood from the 
beginning thus: For it has been said: — 

The outward sign, the breathings in and out, 

Are not the object of one consciousness. 

Development is not attained by those 
Who know not these three states. 

The outward sign, the breathings in and out. 

Are not the object of one consciousness. 

Development is attained by those 
Who know these three states. 

How is it that these three states are not the object of one con- 
sciousness, and they are not unknow-n, and the mind does not 
waver, and effort is possible, and he accomplishes the under- 
taking and attains distinction ? As, when a timber is placed 
on level ground, and a man were to cut it with a saw, the man's 
mindfulness is set up because of those teeth of the saw which come 
into contact with the tvnber ; he does not direct his attention to 
those teeth which approach or recede from him as he saws the 
timber, nor is he unaware of those approaching or receding 
teeth. He puts forth effort, accomplishes what he has to under- 
take and attains distinct results, so the outward sign {nostril and 
lip) which binds {the mind to the object) is like the timber which 
is placed on level ground ; the breathings in and out are like the 
teeth of the saw. And as the man's mindfulness is set up because 
of those teeth of the saw which come into contact with the timber, 
and he does not direct attention to those teeth which approach 



324 


The PMh of Piirity 

or recede from him, yet is not miaivare of those apjn'oaching or 
receding teeth, and he puts forth effort, accoynplishes ivhat he 
has to undertake and attains distinct results, [282] so the monk 
Sits doum with his mindfulness established on th% nose-tip, or 
the upp>er part of the mouth as the outward sign, and does not 
direct his attention to the heathings which come and go, but is 
not unaware of them and jmts forth effort, accomplishes udiat he 
has to undertake and attains distinction. 

What son of effoit is it ^ The body and the mind of one 
who IS strenuously energetic cue wieldy ; they are the effoit. 
And which is the undertaking? The vices of the stienuoiisly 
energetic one are put away, his {wrong) thoughts are quieted ; 
this IS the undertaking. And which is the distinction ? The 
fetters of the strenuously energetic one are put away, his latent 
tendencies are wholly abolished; this is the distinction. Thus 
these three states are not the object of one consciousness, they are 
not outside it, the mind does not waver, he puts forth effort, 
accomplishes what he has to undertale and attains distmction. 

'' Whoso develops well, e'er practises, 

Fulfils the respiration-mindfulness, 

In order due as by the Buddha taught, 

Lights up the world, as does the cloudless moonP^ 

This IS the Simile of the Saw. 

Here just the non-attention at every time the breathing 
comes is to be understood as the purpose. To anyone who 
attends to this subject of meditatioUj before long the after- 
image appears, and the focussing called the ecstasy, adorned 
with the remaining Jhaiia-factors, is attained. And when 
anyone’s physical distress is quieted, owing to the cessation 
in due course of gross breathings which come and go smce 
the time he has directed his attention by way of counting, 
both his body and mind become light as though the body 
would jump up into the sky. As when a body in distress 
sits down on a cot or bench, the cot or bench bends down 
and squeaks, the cover becomes folded, but when a body 
not m distress sits down, the cot or bench neither bends nor 


1 Patisambh'da i, 170. On this simile, cf Dhammapada 173. 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 325 

squeaks, nor does tie cover become folded, but tbe cot or 
bench is ag though filled with cotton-wool. 

Why ? Because a body not in distress is light. Even so, 
when physical distress is quieted, owing to the cessation in 
due course of gross breathmgs which come and go since the 
time of directing .one’s attention by way of counting, [ 283 ] 
both body and mind become light as though the body would 
jump up into the sky. Upon the cessation of the gross 
breathings which come and go, consciousness arises with 'the 
subtle sign of the breathings as object. And when this has 
ceased, the sign as object becomes gradually more and more 
subtle. How ? As if a man were to strike a metal gong 
with a big iron rod and a loud sound were to be produced 
at the first stroke, and his consciousness were to have the 
gross sound for object, and when afterwards the gross sound 
has ceased, the object of thought is the subtle sign of sounds, 
and when this has ceased, the sign as object becomes gradually 
more and more subtle. Thus it is to be understood. 

And such is the detailed account of what has been stated 
as Just as when a metal gong is struck.”^ And this subject 
of meditation does not become clearer at every higher stage 
as other subjects do, but it becomes more subtle at every 
higher stage as it is developed, it does not become manifested. 
But when it is not manifested the monk should rise from his 
seat and go Way shaking the dust off the piece of hide (on 
which he has been sitting). What is he to do ? He should 
not rise with the idea, '' Shall I ask the teacher ?” or '' Is the 
subject of meditation lost for me ?” For when he goes away 
with a perturbed demeanour, the subject becomes new again. 
Therefore, as when he was seated, he should induce it from 
where he was. 

This is the way m which he induces it. The monl^, knowmg 
that the subject has not manifested itself, should reflect 
thus: “ Where are these breathings ? Where are they not ? 
Who has them ? Who has them not ?” Then as he reflects 
thus he knows that they are not in one within the mother’s 
womb, TOr in those who are drowned in water, nor similarly 


1 See p. 318. 



326 


The Bath of Purity 

in imcohscious beings, in the dead, in those who have entered 
into the Fourth Jhana, in those who are capable of existing 
with or without form, nor in those who have entered into 
trance; and he should talk to himself^ thus: ''♦0 wise one ! 
Art thou not one who is neither within the mother’s womb, 
nor drowned in water, nor an unconscious being, nor dead, 
nor has entered into the Fourth Jhana, nor belongs to the 
existence of the formed or of the formless, nor is in trance ? 
Thpse breathings are indeed in thee ! Thou art not capable 
of apprehending them through weakness in understanding.” 
Then fixing his mind l>y means of the original point of 
contact he should set up attention. And inasmuch as the 
breathings of a long-nosed man [284] proceed, striking the 
tip of the nose, while those of a short-nosed man strike the 
upper lip, he should fix the sign, saying, Here they go 
striking this place.” Because of this condition^ the Blessed 
One has said, Monies^ I do not declare the development of the 
respiration-mindfuh%ess for one who is forgetful and unknowing 
For although any subject of meditation is attained by one 
who is thoughtful and knowing, to one who is attentive some 
other subject than’* this is manifested. This subject of respira- 
tion-mindfulness is heavy, hard to develop, a fit subject of 
attention for the Buddhas, Silent Buddhas, sons of the 
Buddhas. It is not a small thing, nor to be practised by 
inferior persons. Accordmg as it is attended to, it becomes 
calm and subtle; therefore in it strong mindfulness and under- 
standing are to be desired. For as in doing needle-work on 
a fine piece of cloth it is desirable that the needle also should 
be fine, and the instrument for boring the eye of the needle 
should be still finer, so at the time of developing this subject 
which is like the fine cloth, it is desirable that both mind- 
fulness which is like the needle, and understanding which 
is associated with it and is like the needle-eye-boring instru- 
ment should be strong. And the monk who is endowed 
with the^ mindfulness and understanding should not look for 


^ Head attana m atta, 

2 The Tlka explains atthavasam by lietu. 
® SamyiUta v, 337. 


^ Read TdM, 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 327 

the breathings anywhere else than in the original points of 
contact. 

As a farmer, having ploughed the field, unyoked the oxen 
and let them%go in the direction of the grazing ground, might 
sit in the shade to rest himself, and those oxen of his were 
to hasten to enter the forest, the capable farmer, wishing 
to catch them and yoke them, did not roam the forest, follow- 
ing their tracks, but taking rope and goad went straight to 
their meetmg-place at the ford, and might either sit or lie 
down. Then when the oxen, having roamed the whole day, 
had come down to the meeting-placb at the ford, and having 
bathed themselves and drunk water, had come out of the 
water, and he would bind them with the rope, and urging 
them with the goad, bring them along and yoke them and 
resume his work, even so the monk should not look for the 
breathings anywhere else than at the original points of contact, 
and seizing the rope of mindfulness and the goad of under- 
standing, he should place the mind on the original points 
of contact and set up attention. [285] And as he attends 
thus they manifest themselves before long like the oxen at 
the meeting-place at the ford. And then binding them with 
the rope of mindfulness and yoking them there (with atten- 
tion) and urging them on with the goad of understanding 
he should repeatedly apply himself to the subject of medi- 
tation. As he thus applies himself the image appears before 
long. But this is not the same for all. It appears to some 
producing a soft touch like cotton-wool, silk-cotton or a 
breeze. So some say. This, however, is the decision of the 
Co mm entaries. Indeed the image appears to some like a 
star, a ball of ruby or a ball of pearl; to some it has a harsh 
touch like a cotton seed, or a pin made of the essence of wood; 
to some it is like a long string, or a wreath of flowers or a 
crest of smoke , to others it is like a spread-out cobweb, a film 
of cloud, the lotus flower, a chariot-wheel, the disc of the 
moon or the disc of the sun. When a number of monks are 
seated together reciting a Suttanta text, one of them asks, 
‘"'Like^what does the Suttanta appear to you?” and one 
answers, ‘‘To me it appears like a great mountain torrent,’' 



328 The Path of Purity 

and another, “To me it is like a row of forest trees,” and 
still another, “ To me it is like a fruit-bearing tree, complete 
with foliage, giving cool shade,” So, as one Sutta appears 
differently to them, owing to the difference in perception, 
this one subject of meditation appears differently owing to 
the difference in perception, for it is born of perception, 
originated by perception, sprung from perception. Therefore 
it appears differently owing to the difference in perception. 
Thus it is to be understood. 

And here consciousness with the exhalation as object is 
one; consciousness with the inhalation as object is another; 
consciousness with the image as object is still another. For 
whoso possesses not these three states, his subject of medita- 
tion attains neither to ecstasy nor to access. Whoso possesses 
these three states, his subject of meditation attains both to 
access and to ecstasy. For it has been said : — 

The outward sign, the breathings in and out 
Are not the object of one consciousness. 

Development is not attained by those 
Who know not these three states. 

The outward sign, the breathings in and out, 

Are not the object of one consciousness. 

Development is attained by those 
Who know these three states.'^ 

[ 286 ] And when the after-image has made its appearance, 
the monk should approach the teacher and inform him thus: 
“ To me, sir, such and such an image has appeared.” The 
teacher should not say, “ It is the image,” or “ It is not 
the image,” but he should say, “ Friend, it is so. Give 
repeated attention to it.” Should he say, “ It is the image,” 
the monk might become slack. Should he say, “It is not 
the image,” the monk might become discouraged and dejected. 
Therefore without saying either, he should exhort him to give 
attention. So say the Digha Reciters. But the Majjhima 
Reciters hold that the teacher should say, “ Friend, it is the 
image. Attend to the subject repeatedly, good man.” After 


1 See p. 323. 



VIII. — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 329 

this the monk should fix the mind on the image. Such is the 
development by way of fixing the mind since the appearance 
of the image. For this has been said by the Ancients : — 

Tie clever man, knowing the different ways 
And on the after-sign establishing 
His mind, to respiration binds it down. 

Thus, since the appearance of the after-image, the hindrances 
come to be discarded, the vices are got under, mindfulness 
is set up, and the mind is well fixed with access and con- 
centration. 

After this he should not attend to the image for its colour, 
nor reflect upon it for its characteristic. But as the king’s 
chief queen guards the embryo of a world-monarch, and the 
cultivator guards the ripening corn and barley, so should he 
guard well the image, avoiding the abode, and so on, which 
are the seven unsuitable things, and serving those which are 
suitable. Then, after thus guarding it well and causing it 
to attain to growth and increase by repeated attention, he 
should fulfil the tenfold skill in ecstasy and strive for equality 
of energy. As he strives thus, the Fourth and the Fifth 
Jhanas are produced in the image, according to what has 
been said in the Earth-device.^ And here the monk who has 
produced the Fourth and Fifth Jhanas, and who wishes to 
increase the" subject of meditation by means of notmg and 
turning away and attain to purification,^ should practise that 
Jhana in five ways,^ until he has mastered it and, determining 
mind and matter, set up insight. How ? Rising from his 
attainment he [287] discerns both the sentient body which is 
the source of the breathings, and the mind. For, as when 
the blacksmith’s bellows are blown, the wind is set in motion 
on account of the bellows and the corresponding efiort of the 
man, so on account of the body'^ and mind the breath is set 
in motion. After this he determines the breathings and the 

1 See p. 147 f. 2 gee p. 319. 

3 By means of adverting, entering upon, making np the mind, 
emerging, reflection. 

^ Read hayanca. 



330 The Path of Purity 

body ag matter, and the mind and states associated with it 
as non-matter. 

This is an abstract. The determination of mind and matter 
in full will be set forth later on. Having determined mind 
and matter thus, he searches for their cause, and not finding 
it, he gets over any doubt concerning the procedure of mind 
and matter in the three divisions of time. Free from doubt 
he puts forward the three characteristics by contemplating 
the aggregates in groups, puts away the ten defilements of 
insight such as illumination,^ which arise previous to the 
discernment of the rise «,nd fall of states, determmes the 
Progress-knowledge which is without the defilements to be the 
Path, arrives at the discernment of the break-up of states 
after forsaking the idea of their origination, and being dis- 
gusted with, detached from, released from all conditioned 
things which appear to be perishable through his discernment 
of their ceaseless break-up, reaches the Four Noble Paths 
in due course, and being established in the fruition of Saint- 
ship, he reaches the end of reflective knowledge of the nineteen 
various kinds, and becomes a fit person to receive the highest 
gifts from the world of men and of the spirits. 

Thus far is ended the development of concentration in 
respiration-mindfulness, beginmng with counting and ending 
m viewing. This is the elucidation of the first tetrad in all 
respects. 

Now since there is no separate system of developing the 
subject of meditation in the other three tetrads,^ this meaning 
is to be imderstood through word-by-word explanation, 
(v) Experiencing rapture ” means, making an experience of 
rapture, making it plam {to the mind) he trains himself, '' I 
shall breathe out, I shall breathe in.” 

Therem, rapture is experienced in two ways, through the 
object and through non-confusion. How is rapture ex- 
perienced through the object ? He enters into the two Jhanas 

^ The ten are : obhma, ndnam, pUi, passaddhz, sukham, adMmokhha, 
paggaha, upekkhd, upaUTidnanfii nikanti — ^illumination, knowledge, 
rapture, tranquillity, bliss, resolve, grasp, indifference, appearance, 
desire. 

2 Seep. 305. 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 331 

in wiiicli rapture is present. Owing to ids attainment of 
Jhana, the^ moment lie has entered into it, he experiences 
rapture when he experiences the object. How is it experienced 
through non»confusion ? He enters into those two Jhanas in 
which rapture is present, and emerging therefrom [ 288 ] con- 
templates the raptme associated with the Jhana as destructible 
and perishable. By his penetration into its characteristics at 
the moment of insight, he experiences rapture through non- 
confusion, For this has been said in the Patisambhida^ : 

By breathing out a long breathy mindfulness is set up in one who 
knows the unwavering collectedness of^nind; by that mindfulness, 
by that knowledge is rapture experienced. By breathing in a long 
breath ... By breathing out a short breath ... By breathing 
in a short breath . . . By breathing in and out while experiencing 
the whole body . . . By breathing in while calming the body- 
complex, mindfulness is set up in one who knows the un- 
wavering collectedness of mind; by that mindfulness, by that 
knowledge is rapture experienced. Rapture is experienced by 
one who adverts, who knows, who sees, ivho considers, who makes 
up his mind, who is possessed by faith, who puts forth effort, 
who sets up mindfulness, who concentrates his mind, who knows 
through understanding, who has a higher knowledge of what is 
to be known through higher knowledge, who comprehends what 
is to be comprehended, who puts away what is to be put away, 
who develops"' what is to be developed, who realizes what is to be 
realized. Thus is rapture experienced.''^ 

The remaining terms'^ are to be understood as to their 
meaning in the same way. But this is distinctive here: 
(vi) '^Experiencing happiness is to be understood by means 
of the Three Jhanas, (vii) experiencing the mind-complex " 
by means of the Four Jhanas. Mind-complex ’’ refers to the 
two aggregates: feeling and (understandmg). In order to 

1 1, 187. 

2 Tins quotation as far as the words “ who makes up his mmd ” shows 
that rapture is experienced through the object. The last five clauses 
show that it is experienced through non-confusion. The five clauses 
beginning with “ who is possessed by faith ” show that it is experienced 
through'*both the object and non-confusion. 

3 Nos. (vi), (vii), (viii) of p. 305. 



332 The l^ath of Purity 

show tJie object^ of insight by the expression experiencing 
happiness/’ it is said in the Patisambhida: Hapjnness is 
of turn Ihids: bodily and mental happinessT'^ (viii) Calming 
the mind^complex^^ means calming the gross ntind-complex, 
causing it to cease; and is to be understood in detail as in 
the body-complex. And in the term rapture here feeling 
is stated under the head of rapture; under the term happi- 
ness it is stated m its visible form; in the two phrases where 
mind-complex ” occurs, feeling is stated as being asso- 
ciated with perception from the expression, Perception and 
feeling are mental coefBcients. These states are bound up 
with mind, complexes of mind.” [289] Thus by way of the 
discernment of feeling is this tetrad spoken. So it is to be 
understood. In the third tetrad also^ (ix) “ expermicing the 
nund^' IS to be understood by means of the Four Jhanas. 
(x) '' Gladdening the mind ” means, heartening, rejoicing, 
pleasing, delighting the mind. He trains himself, I shall 
breathe out, I shall breathe in.” Herein one is gladdened in 
two ways, through concentration and through insight. How 
is one gladdened through concentration ? He enters into the 
two Jhanas which are possessed of rapture. The moment he 
has attained to it, he pleases, rejoices, the mind with the 
associated rapture. How is one gladdened through insight 1 
He enters into the two Jhanas which are possessed of rapture, 
and emerging therefrom contemplates the rapture associated 
with the Jhana as destructible and perishable. Thus at the 
moment of insight he makes rapture associated with the 
Jhana the object of thought and pleases, rejoices the mind. 
So practising he is spoken of thus: ''Gladdening the mind 
he trains himself: I shall breathe out, I shall breathe in.” 

(xi) " Concentrating the mind ” means putting down the mind 
well, placing it well on the object by means of the First Jhana, 
and so on. Or, as he, entering into those Jhanas and rising 
therefrom, sees the mind associated with the Jhana as de- 
structible and perishable, there is a momentary collectedness 
of mind at the time of insight due to penetration of charac- 


^ Bhum% lit. “ plane.” 

3 Nos. (ix)-(xii) of p. 305. 


2 i, 188. • 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 333 

teristics. Putting down tlie mind well, placing it well in 
the object ^by means of momentary collectedness of mind 
which has arisen thus, he is spoken of thus: Composing 
the mind he^ trains himself: I shall breathe out, I shall 
breathe in.” 

(xii) Releasing Jhe mind'' means setting free the mind, 
releasing it from the hmdrances by means of the First Jhana, 
from applied and sustained thinkmg by means of the Second 
Jhana, from rapture by means of the Third, from happmess 
and pam by means of the Fourth. Or entering into those 
Jhanas and rising therefrom he contemplates the mind asso- 
ciated with the Jhana as destructible and perishable. He 
breathes out and breathes in, setting the mmd free, releasing 
it at the moment of insight from the perception of permanence 
by means of the discernment of impermanence, from the 
perception of happiness by means of the discernment of pain, 
from the perception of self by means of the discernment of 
selflessness, from delight by means of the discernment of 
disgust, from passion by means of the discernment of dis- 
passion, from origination by means of the discernment of 
cessation, from clinging by means of the discernment of 
renunciation; hence he is spoken of thus: Keleasing [290] 
the mind he trains himself : I shall breathe out, I shall breathe 
in.” Thus this tetrad is stated by means of discernment of 
the mind. Sb it is to be understood. 

And in the fourth tetrad,^ in the phrase (xiii) discerning the 
impermanent^" first the impermanent should be understood, 
impermanence should be understood, the discernment of the 
impermanent should be understood, the discerner of the 
impermanent should be imderstood. Here, impermanent ” 
are the Five Aggregates. Wherefore ? Because of their 
rising, fallmg and changing.^ Impermanence ” is just their 
rise, fall and change. Or it is the commg-to-be, and the being 
no more. The meaning is that things that are in process 
of becoming do not retain that quality but break up in momen- 
tary dissolution.^ Discernment of the impermanent ” is dis- 

^ N<7s. (xni)-(xvi) of p 306. ^ Read °annathattabhdvd. 

^ The punctuation of the text is faulty. 



334 


The Path of Purity 

ceming that material forms, and so on, are impermanent 
owing to that impermanence. Discerner of the imperma- 
nent is one endowed with that discernment. Therefore such 
an one in breathing out and breathing in, is to be understood 
here thus: Discerning the impermanent he trains himself: 
I shall breathe in, I shall breathe out.” 

(xiv) Discerning dispassion ” — here there are two kinds of 
dispassion: dispassion as destruction, and dispassion as the 
absolute. Of these, dispassion as destruction is the momentary^ 
break-up of the complexes. Absolute dispassion is Nibbana. 
The discernment of dispassion is the insight and the Path 
which proceed by way of seemg both. Being endowed with 
that twofold discernment, in breathing out and breathing m, 
he is t6 be understood thus: ‘‘Discerning dispassion he trains 
himself: I shall breathe out, I shall breathe in.” 

And the same with the expression (xv) “ discerning cessa- 
tion” 

In the expression, (xvi) ''discerning renunciation” renuncia- 
tion is of two kinds: renunciation as giving up, and renuncia- 
tion as leaping forth. Kenunciation itself is the discernment: 
discernment of renunciation, a name for the insight-paths. 
For insight by means of partial discarding^ gives up the vices 
together with the accumulating forces of the aggregates. 
By seeing the faults of conditioned things it is inclined towards, 
and leaps into, the opposite, Nibbana. Thu^ it is called 
renunciation, both as giving up and as leaping forth. The 
path by means of extirpation gives up the vices together with 
the accumulating forces of the aggregates, and by reason of 
being the object, leaps into Nibbana. Thus it is called renun- 
ciation both as giving up and as leaping forth. And both 
of them are called discernment from reviewing the previous 
knowledges. [291] Being endowed with that twofold discern- 
ment of renunciation, in breathing out and breathing in, he 
is to be understood thus: “Discerning renunciation he 
trains himself: I shall breathe out, I shall breathe in.” 

^ Bead Jchanabhango, 

2 I.e. a part at a time, the idea of permanence being discarded by 
discernment of impermanence, and so on. 



VIII . — Exposition of the SubjeQts for Recollection 335 

This fourth tetrad is stated by way of the bare insight; 
the three preceding ones by way of calm and insight. Thus 
by way of Ihe four tetrads is the development of respiration- 
mindfulness with its sixteen bases to be understood.^ 

And this respiration-mindfulness with its sixteen bases is 
of much fruit, and greatly beneficial, From the statement, 
Monks, this concentration on respiration-mindfulness being 
developed and repeated, is tranquil and exalted,^’ ^ that it is 
greatly beneficial is to be understood by way of its tran- 
quillity and so on, and also of its ability to cut off evil thouglits. 
For, owing to its tranquillity, exaltedness, unadulteratedness, 
happiness of life, this concentration destroys the wanderings 
here and there of the mind, due to harmful, evil thoughts, 
and brings it towards respiration as the object. Hence is it 
said: ^^Respiration-mindfulness is to he developed to the end 
that it may cut off evil thoughts 
By being the root in the fulfilment of knowledge and 
emancipation^ also, it is to be understood that it is greatly 
beneficial. For this has been said by the Blessed One: 

Respiration-mindfulness, monks, being developed and repeated, 
fulfils the Four Bases of Mindfulness. The Four Bases of 
Mindfulness being developed and repeated, fulfil the Seven 
Factors of Wisdom. The Seven Factors of Wisdom being 
developed and repeated, fulfil Knowledge and Emancipation.''^'' 
That it is ^eatly beneficial is also to be understood from 
its making known the final breathings. For this has been 
said by the Blessed One: Rdhula, when the respiration- 
mindfulness is thus developed, thus repeated, those breathings 
which are final are known when they cease, they do not cease 
unknown.'"'^ Therein, three are the last to cease: last m 
existence, last in Jhana, last in passing away. For, among 
existences the breathings occur in the existence of sense, not 

1 In the text, footnotes 4 of p. 287, 4 and 5 of p. 288, 1 and 3 of 
p. 289, 1, 3 and 4 of p. 290, 1 of p. 291, should refer to the extract 
on pp. 266-267 (translation p. 305), as the terms commented on are 
taken out of the extract and not out of the Fatisambhida, although 
they occur in it. ® Samyutta v, 32^1. 

^ A iig^ttara iv, 353. I.e. the Path and the fruition. 

5 Majjhima iii, 82. ® Ibid., i, 425. 



336 TJie Bath of Purity 

in the existences of form and the formless, therefore are they 
last in existence. Among the Jhanas they occur in the first 
three Jhanas, not in the Fourth, therefore they are last in 
Jhana. Those that arise [292] with the sixteemth conscious- 
ness preceding decease-consciousness, cease together with the 
decease-consciousness, and are called the last in passing 
away. These last are intended here. They are evident to 
the monk who is devoted to this subject of meditation^ because 
he has well apprehended respiration as the object. Their 
appearance also is evident to him who adverts to it at the 
moment of the appearance of the sixteenth consciousness 
preceding decease-consciousness. Their duration also is 
evident to him who adverts to it. And their break-up is 
evident to him who adverts to it. 

A monk who has attained to saintship after developing 
any other subject of meditation than this, may be able or 
not to limit his life-term. But the monk who has attained 
to saintship after developing respiration-mindfulness with its 
sixteen bases, is able to limit his life-term. He knows: 

For so long and no further, will my life-term now go on,*’ 
performs in his own way all functions such as looking after 
the body, wearing the imier garment and the outer dress, 
and closes his eyes like Tissa the Elder of Kotapabbata 
Monastery, Mahatissa the Elder of Makakaranjiya Monastery, 
Pindapatika-tissa the Elder in the kingdom of Devaputta, 
and the two brothers who were Elders of Cittalapabbata 
Monastery. 

Here is the setting forth of one story. They say that one 
of the two brothers, the Elders havmg expounded the Pati- 
mokkha on the full-moon holy day, went with a gathering 
of monks to his own dwelling-place and stood on the terrace- 
walk. Looking at the moonlight he considered the term of 
his life and said to the assembly of monks: '' In what position 
have you seen monks entering Parinibbana Some of them 
said: '‘We have seen them entering Parinibbana seated in 
their seats.” Others said: " We have seen them seated 

^ Tlka and SaraUhacUpani read: I me Jcira %mam Icammattha^mi anu- 
yuttassa bMkkJmno pakata. 



VIII . — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 337 

cross-legged in the sky.” The Elder replied: ''I wiH. show 
you an entering Parinibbana while walking to and fro on the 
terrace now.” He then drew a line across on the terrace- 
walk and said: '' From this end of the terrace to the other 
end will I go, and on turning back I will enter Parinibbana 
as soon as I reach the line,” came down the terrace, went to 
the other side and on turning back he died the moment he 
stepped on the line with one foot. 

[293] Therefore the wise one always should apply 
With zeal to respiration-mindfulness, 

Which brings such manifold advantages. 

This is the substance of the detailed discourse on respiration- 
mindfulness. 


X. — Peace-recollection. 

He who wishes to develop peace-recollection shown im- 
mediately after respiration-mindfulness, in seclusion and 
solitude should call to mind the attributes of Mbbana termed 
the calming of all ills thus: '"Monks, in so far as there are 
states conditioned or unconditioned, dispassion among them is 
held to be the best, namely * that which crushes out pride, 
quenches thirst, roots up attachment, cuts off the round of births, 
which is the extinction of, fading of, cessation of, craving , — 
Nibbdna:^^ • 

In that text '' in so far means, to such an extent. 

States ” are nature’s own.^ Conditioned or uncon- 
ditioned ” means, brought about by accumulating, collective 
causes. “ Dispassion among them is held to be the best ” 
means, among those conditioned and unconditioned states 
dispassion is held to be the best; highest, excellent is the 
meaning. 

And here '' dispassion ” is not the mere absence of lust, 
but is to be taken to be that unconditioned state which gets 
the epithets '' crushing out pride, and so on,” in the state- 
ment, “ namely, that which crushes out pride . . . Nibbana.” 
Because all pride such as self-conceit, pride of manhood on 

^ Angvitara li, 34. ^ Sabhava {svablhdvd). 

22 



338 


The -Path of Purity 

arriving at this state, becomes free from pride, void of pride, 
and perishes, therefore is it said to crush out j>ride. And 
because all sensual thirst on arriving at this state disappears, 
vanishes, therefore is it said to quench thirst. ^ And because 
attachment to the five sensual pleasures, on arriving at this 
state, is uprooted, therefore is it said to root up attachment. 
And because, on arriving at this state, the round of the three 
planes of existence is cut off, therefore is it said to cut off 
the round of births. And because on arriving at this state, 
craving goes to extinction,^ fades out, ceases, therefore 
is it spoken of as the ^extinction of, fading out, cessation 
of, craving. And because it has gone out from, escaped 
from, is dissociated from, craving which goes under the 
name of vdna owing to its tying, binding, stitching up in a 
series of existences the four sources of life, the five destinies, 
the seven conscious durations and the nine sentient abodes, 
therefore is it called Nibbana. [294] Thus is peace which is 
termed Nibbana to be called to mind by virtue of its attributes 
such as the crushing out of pride. It is also to be called to 
mind by virtue of whatever other attributes of peace have 
been declared by the Blessed One in such Suttas as: Monks, 
I will teach you the unconditioned , . . and ike Truth, and 
the other shore, and what is very difficult to see, and the ageless, 
and the permanent, and that which is without hindrance, and 
the deathless, and the auspicious, and the secure, and what has 
not been before, and what is without calamity, and what is 
without suffering, and the pure, and the Island, and the shelter, 
and the refuge will I teach you, monks 
As he thus calls to mind peace by virtue of the attributes 
of crushing out pride and so on, and as the hindrances are 
discarded in the manner mentioned in the Buddha-recoUection, 
and so on, At that time his mind is not assailed by lust . . . 
nor by hate . . . nor by delusion. His mind at that time is 
upright with reference to peace, the factors of Jhana arise 
in one moment. But owing to the profundity of the attributes 
of peace, and the intentness with which he recalls the attri- 

^ Bead tmAia hhayam. 2 Samyutta iv, ^62,^69. 

^ AngvMara v, 32k 



VIII. — Exposition of the Subjects for Recollection 339 

butes of tbe various sorts, tbe Jbana without reaching ecstasy 
attains to access. By virtue of the recalling the attributes 
of peace, the Jhana goes under the name of Peace-recollection. 

Like the sfe recollections it is fulfilled by the noble disciple. 
It should be attended to, however, by the average man who 
inclines towards peace. For through information the mind is 
well-disposed towards peace. And the monk who is devoted 
to this peace-recollection, sleeps happily, wakes up happy, is 
calm in faculties, calm in mind, endowed with a sense of 
shame and a dread of blame, is faithful, noble in intention, 
and is revered and respected by his** brother-monks. Though 
he may penetrate no farther, he is bound for a happy course. 

Therefore indeed the wise man should with zeal 
Develop mindfulness on peace sublime. 

Which brings such manifold advantages. 

Thus is ended the eighth chapter called the Exposition of 
the Eecollections as subjects of meditation in the section 
of the development of concentration in the Path of Purity, 
composed for the purpose of gladdening good folk. 



[295] 


CHAPTER IX 

EXPOSITION OF THE DIVINE STATES 


The student who wishes to begin with the development of the 
F^ur Divine States: love, pity, sjonpathy, even-mindedness, 
which are set forth immediately after the subjects of medita- 
tion on the recollections, should first, having cut ofi the 
impediments, taken up the subject of meditation, finished Ms 
meal and driven away drowsiness due to eating, sit com- 
fortably on a seat well arranged in a secluded spot and think 
on the evils of hate and the advantages of forbearance. Why 1 
Verily by means of this practice hate is to be put away, 
forbearance is to be acquired. But he is not able to put away 
any unseen evil or to acquire any unknown advantage; there- 
fore the evils of hate should be considered through such 
Suttas as: Friend, a man who is overcome hy hate and whose 
mind is assailed by hate kills heingsF The advantages of 
forbearance are to be considered through such expressions as: — 

“ The Buddhas declare forbearance is tim highest, patience to be 
the highest Nibbdna ’ ’ b* * 

Him I call a brahmin who is strong in forbearance, who 
makes an army of 
Nothing forbearance doth excel 

The development of love should then begin, so that the mind 
may be separated from hate, the evils of wMch have been seen, 
and be joined to forbearance, the advantages of wHch are 
known. And from the outset the beginner should know the 
different kinds of beings thus: ‘‘ Love for these beings should 
not first be developed; [296] love for those beings 'should not 
be developed at all.’’'^ Verily this (sort of) love should not be 


^ Dhmmmpada, verse 184. 
® Kindred Sayings i, 290. 


2 Ibid, 399. 

^ Follow the footnote. 



341 


IX . — Exposition of the^ Divine States 

developed at first towards tliese foiir : — ^beings one does not liold 
dear, very dear friends, neutral beings, enemies. It should 
not be developed specifically towards those of the opposite 
sex, and not ^t all towards the dead. Why should it not be 
developed first towards beings one does not hold dear, and 
so on ? By holding an imloved person dear one gets tired; 
by being indifferent towards a very dear friend, one gets tired, 
for should the dear friend experience the slightest pain, one 
feels disposed to weep. By showing respect and love towards 
a neutral person, one gets tired. Anger arises in him who 
thinks of his enemy. Therefore love should not be developed 
first towards the unloved ones, and so on. Lust arises in him 
who develops it specifically towards a person of the opposite 
sex. Once a certain minister’s son asked the Elder Kulnpaka, 

Sir, towards whom is love to be developed The Elder 
said: Towards a person one holds dear.” The minister’s 

son had a dear wife. And he, developing love towards her, 
kept banging the wall the whole night. Therefore love should 
not be developed 'specifically towards the opposite sex. 
Developmg love towards the dead, one reaches neither 
ecstasy nor access. Once a yoxmg monk began to stir up love 
towards his teacher. Love would not come. So he went to 
the Elder and said, Sir, I have been practising the Jhana- 
attainment of love but I cannot enter mto it. What may be 
the reason ?”• The Elder said, Look, friend, for the outward 
sign.”^ And the monk, looking for it, knew that the teacher 
was dead, and directing his love towards another Elder, entered 
upon the attainment. Therefore love should not be developed 
for the dead. 

Love should first of all be developed for oneself time and 
agam thus: “May I be well, free from misery,” or “May 
I keep myself without enmity, without ill-will, rmtroubled, 
well !” This being so, does it not contradict what is said in 
the Vibhanga^: '‘And how, Tnonks, does a monk live suffusing 
one quarter of the globe with a heart full of love ? J ust as on 
seeing a dear charming person one would fall %n love, so he suffuses 
all beings^ with love what is said m the Patisambhxda^ : “ In 

2 Page 272. ^ ii, 130. 


^ I.e. “ See if he is alive.” 



342 


The Path of Purity 

which five ways is the emanci'pated heart of love a suffusing 
unspecifically ? May all beings he without enmity without ill- 
will, untroubled ; may they keep the self well. May all living 
things, all [297] creatures, all persons, all those wit) are included 
in a personality, he without enmity, without ill-tvill, untroubled ; 
may they keep the self well /” and so on; and what is said in 
the Metta Sutta^ : — 

May all beings he well and safe, 

May they be well in heart 

and so on, seeing that in, these passages love is not developed 
towards oneself ? 

There is no contradiction. How is that ? Because those 
passages are spoken by way of ecstasy; the statement here 
is made by way of making oneself the witness. For even 
though one develop love for oneself for a hundred years, a 
thousand years, in this way: ‘‘ May I be well and so on, he 
will not attain to ecstasy. When he who cultivates the wish^ 
May I be well appeals to himself as testimony that “ as 
I wish to be happy, have a distaste for misery, wish to live, do 
not wish to die, so other beings also wish for the same,’’ then a 
wish arises in him that they also may enjoy blessings and 
happiness. The way also has been shown by the Blessed One 
in the words: — 

The whole wide world we traverse with our thought, . 
And nothing find to man more dear than soul. 

Since aye so dear the soul to others %$, 

Let the soul-lover harm no other manJ^ - 

Therefore he should diffuse first himself with love, and imme- 
diately afterwards, to the end that it may arise easily, call to 
mind affectionn,te expressions and other causes of love and 
tender feeling, used by one vrho is dear, affectionate, and 
respected by him, and the virtue, learning and other causes 
of reverence possessed by such an one, be he his teacher or 
one like his teacher, his preceptor or one like his preceptor, 
and develop love in this way: May this good man be weU, 


^ Khuddahapathaix. 


2 Kindred Sayings i, 102 ; and Note 2, p. 101- 



IX . — Exposition of tliQ Divine States 343 

free from misery !” Verily in the case of snch a person, ecstasy 
is fulfilled.^ 

The monk, however, who, not contented with such fulfil- 
ment, and ]it)t deriving joy therefrom, wishes to abolish the 
dividing line,^ shoidd immediately develop love for a 
very dear person, after him for an indifferent person, 
after him for an enemy. And in doing so, in each com- 
partment he should make the heart tender and wieldy, and 
immediately afterwards induce Jhana.^ He who has no 
enemy, or who, out of his gentlemanly nature does not e'^en 
entertain inimical thoughts of another who may have 
done him harm, should not have this evil intention: “ On 
this neutral person my heart of love has grown tender. Now 
I will regard him as an enemy. [298] But whoso has enemies, 
it is concerning him that it was said that love should be 
developed towards an enemy immediately after a neutral 
person. If, while he is directing his mind towards his enemy, 
he recalls the offences that have been committed against 
himself and hatred arises in him, he should dispel it by re- 
peatedly dwelling with love on that one, among the previous 
persons, in regard to whom he has over and over again entered 
into, and emerged from, love. If in spite of his efforts it 
does not vanish, then he should strive repeatedly to put it away 
by recalling the admonitions of the parable of the Saw, and 
others, reproving himself on this wise: Ho ! thou man of 
anger, has not the Blessed One uttered these sayings: ^ Monks, 
were spies and thieves with a double-handled saw to cut the 
various limbs of a man, and he were to be angry in mind thereat, 
he on that account would not he a follower of my religion 

^ Worse of the two is he who, when reviled, 

Reviles again. Who doth not, when reviled, 

^ That marks off the four compartments ; hzmself , a dear love, an 
indifferent person, an enemy. 

^ Upasamharitahbam, explained by the Tiled as jhdnaciUam upane- 
tahbam, 

3 That is : he must not turn a neutral person on whom he has been 
exercising love into an enemy because of the statement that he should 
develop love towards an enemy immediately after a neutral person. 

^ Majjhima i, 129. 



344 


The P.aih of Purity 

Revile aga%n, a twofold victory wins. 

Both of the other and himself he seeks 
The good ; for he the othefs angry ‘ynood 
Doth understand and groweth calm and st§V^ 

''Monks, these seven states, pleasing to the enemy, caused by the 
enemy, come to the angry man or woman. Which are the seven ? 

" Monks, here an enemy wishes this of an enemy : ' Would 
that he ivere ugly P What is the reason ? An enemy, 9nonks, 
tak§s no delight in the physical beauty of an enemy. Though 
a man who is angry, oveicome by anger, a slave to anger, ^nay 
have washed himself well, anointed himself well, dressed his hair 
and beard, put on white garments, yet he is ugly, being overcome 
by anger. This is the first state pleasing to the enemy, caused 
by the enemy, lohich comes to the angry man or woman. 

"And again, monks, an enemy wishes this of an enemy : 
' Would that he were suffering pain ^ . that ho had not 

abundant wealth : . . that he were not wealthy . . . that he 
were mt famous . . . that he had no friends . . . [299] thcd on 
the dissolution of the body after death he might not reach the 
happy bourne, the bright ivorld!" What is the reason? An 
enemy, monks, takes no delight in the happy faring of an enemy. 
This man who is angry, cvercome by anger, a slave to anger, 
misconducts himself in deed, misconducts himself in word, in 
thought. Having misconducted himself in deed,^ word, and 
thought, he, being overcome by anger, on the dissolution of the 
body after death comes to a state of woe, an evil destiny, a phce 
of suffering, helU ' Just as a cremation-firebrand, monks, 
lit at both ends and smeared with dung in the middle does not 
serve the purpose of fire-wood either in the village or in the forest 
. . . so in the same way I declare this person to be.' Thou, 
now, in thus getting angry wilt not be following the Blessed 
One’s religion. In requiting anger thou art worse than- the 
angry man and wilt not win the battle hard to win. Thou 
wilt only bring upon thyself those hostile states. And thou 
wilt be like the cremation-firebrand.” If, as he strives and 
makes effort thus, the hatred subsides, well and good. If not, 


^ Kindred Sayings i, 285. ^ AhgvUara iv, 94-6. ® Ibid, ii, 95. 



IX . — Exposition of tho Divine States 345 

then he should recall any calm and pure state which, when 
brought to mind, brings composure and suppresses the hatred. 

Verily a certain man m behaviour is calm. His calmness is 
noticed by eVeryone, as he discharges many of his duties, 
large and small. But he is not calm in his behaviour in 
speech and thought. These being disregarded, the calmness 
of his bodily behaviour only should be recollected. Another 
man is calm in his behaviour in speech, which is ^noticed 
by everyone. For by nature he is apt in welcoming, friendly, 
sweet in speech, congenial, of a frank countenance, ready at 
greetings, recites the Law in a sweet'voice, preaches a sermon 
with full terms and expressions. But he is not calm in bodily 
and mental behaviour. These being disregarded, only the 
calmness of his speech-behaviour should be recoflected. 
Another man is calm in mental behaviour, which is manifest 
to all in the way he salutes the shrine, and in other acts. 
For he whose mind is not calm salutes the shrine or the Tree 
of Knowledge or the Elders without showing respect, [300] or 
he sits down wavering in mind, or dozes off in the pavilion 
where the Doctrine is preached. On the other hand, he who 
is calm m mind salutes them in faith and with respect, he 
listens to the Law with attentive ears, making it his own, 
and working peace of mind by deed and word. Thus to 
some only the mental behaviour is calm, the behaviour in 
body and in Speech is not calm; (here) the former should be 
recollected, the latter being disregarded. When any one of 
these three states in a person is disturbed, that person is to 
be pitied: '' This one now walks about in the world of men; 
but when a few days have passed, he will fill the eight great 
hells, the sixteen Ussada hells.’’ For through pity hatred 
subsides. Another man is calm in all three states; one should 
recollect whichever of them one wishes. For toward such an 
one the development of love is not diflGicult. And the Aghata- 
pativinaya Sutta^ in the fifth Nipata should be expanded so 
as to make this meaning clear: Friend,, five are the ways of 
removing hatred by which one ought entirely to remove the hatred 
that has arisen in a monh^ 


^ AngvMma in, 185. 



346 


The Path of Purity 

If in 'spite of his efforts hatred still arises, then he should 
reprove himself thus: — 

If in his sphere thy foe lays pain on thee, 

Why dost thou wish to suffer in thy mind 
Outside his sphere^ ? Thou canst give up thy kith 
And kin who have done thee great services, 

With tearful face. Why canst thou not forsake 
Thine anger-foe that has done thee rduch harm ? 

Thou play’st with anger that uprooteth precepts 
That thou hast kepj:. Is there a fool like thee ? 

Thou waxest wroth because someone has done 
Thee harm. Then couldst thou do unto thyself 
The selfsame thing ? Someone wishing to rouse 
Thy anger does thee some unpleasant thing. 

Fulfillest thou his joy by waxing wroth ? 

Angry, thou mayest cause him harm or not ; 

But on thyself thou now inflictest pain 
That comes of anger. If thy enemies 
Pursue the unprofitable path of wrath, 

Why dost thou imitate their angry deeds ? 

Cut off that hate by which thy foe has done 
Thee harm. Why frettest thou where no occasion is ? 
[301] Because at every moment states break up, 

Those aggregates which caused thee harm Jiave ceased. 
With which of these art thou in anger now ? 

When on someone a man inflicteth pain. 

No one gets pain beside the sufferer. 

Thou art thyself the cause of pain. Then why 
Wouldst thou get angry with another man 

If in spite of his self-admonition his hatred does not subside, 
he should ponder the fact of another man’s deeds as well 
as his own. And he should ponder thus^ concerning himself: 

Man, what wilt thou do getting angry with another man ? 
Will not this angry deed which is the origin of hate lead to 
thy harm ? Thou hast, verily, thine own deeds, thou art the 
heir of (thy) deeds, originated by deeds, akin to (thy) deeds; 


1 Bead tassavisaye for tassa visaye. 


Bead evam for ekam^ 



IX . — Exposition of the Divine States 347 

thy deeds are thy fountain-head.^ Thou wilt be the heir 
of whatever deeds thou dost. And these deeds of thine are 
not capable of bringing about Buddha-knowledge, Pacceka- 
knowledge, dSscipleship, or any of the attainments such as those 
of the Brahma, the Sakka, the universal monarch, or a local 
king; but it will lead thee away from the religion to the state of 
one who eats scraps and other such (fate), or to suSer special 
kinds of miserv in the hells. Thou who dost such deeds art 
like a man who seizes with both hands glowmg live coals. or 
dung in order to strike another man therewith, but who &st 
burns and befouls himself.” Having thus pondered the fact 
that he has his own deeds,^ he should ponder that another 
man also has his own deeds. And what will he also do 
by getting angry with thee ? Will not his anger lead to his 
harm ? He has verily his own deeds, he is heir, matrix, 
kinsman, and so on, to them. He will be the heir of whatever 
deeds he does. And these deeds of his are not capable of 
brmging him any success as aforesaid. He who does such 
deeds is like a man who facmg the wind wishes to throw dust 
at another man but only throws it on himself.” 

For this has been uttered by the Blessed One: — 

Whoso doth wrong the man that hath no gmle : — 

The pure in hearty and from all error free — 

[ 302 ] Onjiim, poor fool, his wicked act recoils, 

Like fine dust that is thrown against the windJ'^ 

If, in spite of his pondering the fact that each man has his 
very own deeds, his hatred does not subside, he should then 
recall the virtues of the Teacher’s former conduct. This is 
how he should do it: ‘‘Monk, is it not a fact that before 
the Enlightenment the Teacher, while he was still fulfilling, 
as the unenlightened Buddha-to-be, the Perfections for four 
incalculable periods and a hundred thousand cycles, was not 
offended with his murderous enemies in various places ? As, 
for instance, in the Silavajataka"^ he did not allow his mimsters 

^ Majjhima iii, 203. ^ Read JcammassaJcatam, 

3 Kiiidred SayiTigs i, 20; Dhamma'pada 125. 

^ Jdtaka i, 261; tr, i, 128. 



348 


The Path of Purity 

to touch even a weapon, xninisters who rose to suppress the 
rival king who had seized the kingdom three hund:^ed yojanas 
in extent, and who had been brought by a bad minister who 
had misconducted himself with the queen. Ag^in, when he 
was buried up to the neck in the charnel-field with his thousand 
companions, he did not even get offended at heart, but having 
wrought a man’s work, when jackals came scraping out the 
earth to devour corpses, and having won back life, as- 
cended to his magnificent chamber by the power of a yakkha, 
and seeing his enemy lying on the state couch, did not get 
angry but made a mutual (5ath, and placing him in the position 
of a friend, said. — 

A should hope, the wise should not disgusted be : 

Myself I see, looh you . — e'en as 1 wished it came about," 

In the Khantivadi Jataka^ the monk, on being questioned 
by the foolish king of Kasi as to the doctrine he was preaching, 
said, The doctrine of forbearance,” and showed no anger even 
when he was beaten with whips of thorns, and his hands and 
feet were cut off. That an aged man who had embraced 
monkhood should show such patience is not wonderful. But 
in the Cfiladhammapala-Jataka,* it is a child lying on its 
back: — 

‘‘ Thou, Dhammapdla, tvert by right of birth 
The Im'd of earth : • 

Thy ai ms, once bathed in oil of sandal-wood. 

Lie steeped in blood. 

My fitful breath, alas I is choked with sighs 
And broken cries," 

With the mother thus wailing, the father Mahapatapa was 
causing his two hands and two feet, tender as bamboo-shoots, 
to be lopped off; [303] and not content therewith he gave an 
order for his head to be cut off. Dhammapala established 
equality of mind firmly thus: “ Now is the time to check thy 
mind, friend Dhammapala,^ keep thou an even mind 
towards these four: the father who orders the cutting off of 


^ Jataka iii, 39. 2 I73. 12(f. 

® Read awhlw Dhamvmpala ! 



IX . — Exposition of tM Divine States '349 

thy head, the men who are cutting off thy head, the, mother 
who is wailing, and thyself,” and he did not even get offended. 

This, however, is not yet wonderful, that a human should 
have acted ^?o. For even a lower animal, an elephant called 
Chaddanta,^ though pierced in the navel with a poisoned 
arrow, was not, in the face of such pain, offended with the 
hunter. As it has been said: — 

“ The beast with mighty shaft laid low. 

Unruffled still, addressed his foe : 

' What object, friend, in slaying me, 

And pray, ivho instigated thee 

And when it was replied, “ Sir, the chief queen of the king 
of Kasi has sent me to get thy tusks,” the elephant by-way of 
fulfflling her wishes, cut off his beautiful and lovely tusks which 
were resplendent with the six kinds of rays. 

When, as the king of the monkeys,^ he had saved a man 
from a mountain chasm, the man thinking: — 

Monkeys and such like deer are good to eat ; 

What if I kill him and my hunger cheat ? 

The beast, if slain, would furnish savoury meat. 

When sated, here no longer will I stay, 

But well provisioned for full many a day, 

Out from the forest I will find a wayj^ 

lifted up a stone and broke the monkey’s head. With eyes 
full of tears the monkey looked at the man and said: — 

God bless thee, act not thus, 1 pray, good sir. 

For otherwise thy fate, I dare aver, 

Will long all others from such deeds deter ” ; 

and without being offended with the man or thinking of his 
own pain, took him to a place of safety. 

^ I.e. “with tusks emitting six kinds of rays,” w)t “having six 
tusks.” 

2 JdtaJca V, 36; ir, v, 28. 

® Ibid. V, 67 ; tr. v, 40. The reference in the Pali text to Jdt, iii, 
369, is aja oversight due to the two Jatakas having the same title, 

“ Mahakapi.” 



350 


The P^aih of Purity 

As Bhuridatta,^ king of the serpents he, having observed the 
sacred duties [304] was lying down on an ant-hill. He did 
not get angry with the Brahmin when his whole body was 
sprinkled with a drug like the world-destroying^fire, or even 
when, thrown into a basket, he was carried about the whole of 
Jambudipa and made to dance. As it has been said: — 

“ Though Alampdna thow me in Ins crate 
And pound me with kis hand most grievously, 

1 show no wrath lest I my virtue wreck P 

Again as Champeyya,“‘the cobra-king, on being ill-treated 
by the snake-charmer, he was not offended. As it has been 
said: — 

'' Then me, the while I kept the holy votes 
According to the Law, a juggler caught 
And at the royal gate made sport with me. 

Whatever the colour preseM in his mind, 

Whether Hums indigo, yellow, or red, 

According to the shifting of his thougUs, 

Even of hue resembling I became. 

I who could make the dry laml waier, nuike 
The waier dry lard, should I let my wraldi 
Arise, could in an instant blast to ashes — 

If I, my heart controlled, give up, I fall 
Amy from virtue, and by such a fall 
The highest good is ne^er accomplished.'^^ 

Again, as Sahkhapala, the cobra-king,^ when sixteen ruffians 
had pierced him in eight places with sharp spears, inserted 
thorny creepers through the open spear- wounds, lifted him up 
with a rope passed firmly through the nose, and were carrying 
him with a pole, he experienced great pain from his body being 
dragged along the surface of the ground. Though he had the 
power to turn the ruffians, the whole lot of them into ashes, 
were he but to look at them in anger, he opening his eyes 
did not show the slightest sign of offence. As it has been 
said: — 


^ Jataha yi, 157 f. 


^ Ibid, iv, 454. 


3 Ibid. V, 161; tr. v, 90. 



351 


IX . — Exposition of the Bivine States 

Two times each moon I kept a holy day; 

’Twas theUy Aldra^ that there crossed my wa^ 

Twice eight lewd fellows^ hearing in their hand 
A rope and knotted noose of finest strand. 

The ruffians pierced my nose, and through the slit 
Passing the cord, dragged me along by it. 

Such pam I had to hear — ah ! cruel fate — 

For holding holy days inviolate.'^ 

[306] Not merely these, but other various wondrous acts also 
the Teacher did in the Matuposaka^ and other Jatakas. Now it 
is not at all fitting, not at all proper that thou shouldst harbour 
a heart of hatred, seeing that thou hast acknowledged as thy 
Teacher the Blessed One who has attained to omniscience and 
who possesses such qualities of patience as are not jfossessed 
by anyone in the world of men and in the world of devas. 

If, in spite of such reflections on the qualities of the Teacher’s 
former conduct, his hatred does not subside, since he has 
been so long a slave to the vices, he should then consider the 
Suttas on the repeated roimd of births, wherein it is said: 

Monks, it is not easy to find a being who has not been a 
mother, a father, a brother, a sister, a son, or a daughter P 
Therefore the person should be considered thus: — This, they 
say, was formerly my mother, who for ten months carried me 
in her womb, removed my urine, excrement, saliva, snot and 
so on without loathing, as if they were yellow sandal-wood, 
hid me in her bosom,^ carried me on her hip and brought me up. 
He who was my father went to trade by goat-tracks, by paths 
rough with stakes, and for my sake risked his life; who went to 
war where the battle was in array on both sides; who went out 
in his boat on the high sea, and did other difficult deeds; who 
amassed wealth in various ways with the object of bringing up 
children, and so brought me up. And those also who were 
my brother, sister, son, daughter, did such and such service 
to me. Therefore it does not behove me to bear ill feeling 
against them.” 

If he is still unable to pacify his heart, then he should reflect 
on th^ blessings of love: ''My good recluse ! Has not the 


^ Jdtaka iv, 90. 


Read %rem cMdertl. 



352 


The Itatli of Purity 

Blessecl One spoken these words ? ‘ Monhs^ the enrnticipci- 
(ion of heart through hve being practised, developed, repeated, 
made a vehicle and a basis, persisted in, i^nade familiar with, 
veil set on foot, may he expected to produce elevSn blessings,^ 
What are these eleven ? Happy he sheps ; happy he awakes ; 
he sees no bad dreams , he is dear to men ; he is dear to non- 
hit man bei ngs ; devas guard him ; fire, poison, and sword come not 
near him ; quickly he concentrates his mind ; his complexion is 
serene ; he dies tindeluded : and (if) he penetrate no further, he 
go^ to Brahma's heavenP [306] Unless thou wilt extinguish^ 
(the fires in) thy heart, thou wilt become an outsider to these 
blessings.” 

If he is still unable to quench*^ his heart, he should make 
an analysis of elements. How ? My good recluse ! In 
getting angry with this man, with what art thou angry ? 
Art thou angry with the hairs on the head ? or with the hairs 
of the body, nails . . . urine ? Or art thou angry with the 
earthy element, the watery element, the heat element, the 
wind clement in the hairs, and so on ? Or, with the aggregate 
of matter or the aggregate of feeling, of perception, of activities, 
of consciousness. Or art thou angry with the sense-organ of 
sight, of visible objects ... of mind, of things ? Or art thou 
angry with the element of seeing, of visible objects, of visual 
cognition . . . with the element of mind, of things, of mind- 
cognition ? When he analyses the elements thus”, there is no 
place for anger as there is none for a mustard seed on the point 
of an awl, or for a painted picture in the sky. 

If he is unable to analyze the elements, he should perform 
the sharing of gifts: he should give to another what belongs to 
himself, receive what belongs to another. And if another is 
impure in livelihood and has property he has no right to have, 
he should give from his own. If he does so, his hatred of that 
person must certainly subside. And the anger of the other 


^ Discussed in Questions of MiUnda i, 279. 

2 AnguMara v, 342. Of. Jdtaka ii, 60 {Araka-jdiaka), which leaves 
out “ he is dear to non-human beings.” 

® nibhdpeti. ^ 



IX . — Exposition of the Divine States 353 

man wMcii has been pursuing him since past existences subsides 
that very moment. Pindapatika the Elder had been ousted^ 
from his bed three times at Cittalapabbata Monastery. Six, 
this bowl wofth eight pieces of money was given by my mother, 
the lay-sister. It is a righteous gift. Please make merit 
for a great lay-sister,”^ — so saying, he gave the bowl to the 
senior monk. So powerful is this alms-giving. And this 
has been said: — 

Alms-giving tames untamed men, 

Effects its purpose ever^w^iere. 

By gifts and speaking kindly ivords, 

Men ra%se their heads, wh%le others how^^ 

[307] Thus, with hatred dispelled, he should direct thoughts 
of love towards his enemy just as he does towards a dear person, 
a very dear friend, or a neutral person. Then after exercising 
love repeatedly and producing an even mind towards the four, 
namely, himself, the loved one, the neutral person, the enemy, 
he should break down the barriers, of which this is the char- 
acteristic: Suppose that while this person, together with the 
other three, the loved one, the neutral person, and the enemy, 
was seated in a certain place, thieves came and demanded, 

Sir, give us a monk,” and being asked the reason why, 
they were to say that they meant to kill him, and taking the 
blood of his throat, make an offering of it. Suppose that of 
the four persons, the monk were to think, Let them sekie 
this one or that one,” the breaking down of the barrier would 
not be accomplished. Neither would it be accomplished were 
he also to think, Let them seize me, not the other three.” 
Why? Because he wishes harm to him whose capture he 
desires, and seeks the welfare of the others. But when he 
sees none out of the four that he would like to deliver to the 
thieves, he produces an even mind towards himself and the 
other three, and breaks down the barriers. Wherefore said 
the Ancients: — 

^ By a senior monk who apparently was not a friend. 

2 By accepting it as a gift. 

^ Tiled says that it is the donors who raise their heads {i.e. get praise 
for the gift) and the receivers who bow to them respectfully. 

23 



354 


The Path of Purity 

Himself y beloved y foe ^ indifferent one , — 

When he distinction sees among these four ^ ^ 

Welfare of living things is in his hearty 
But not the shill, not his to attain at will : 

So is it said of him. But when the 7nonh 
These four d%vvding lines has blotted out, 

And fills the world, of men and devas too 
With equal love which knows no boundaries ^ 

He is by far the greater of the twoP 

The moment when the barriers are thus broken down, the 
monk attains to the sign and the access. And when, the 
barriers having been broken down, he practises, develops, 
repeats the sign (of calm), he gets ecstasy without trouble 
as has been said in the Earth-device. By so much does he 
attain to the First Jhana which is associated with love, which 
has five factors to be put away, which is endowed with five 
factors, possesses the threefold goodness, and is fulfilled with 
the ten characteristics.^ And when, that having been attained, 
he practises, develops, repeats it as the sign, he in due 
course attains to the Second and Third Jhanas of the fourfold 
system, the Second, Third and Fourth Jhanas of the fivefold 
system. [308] For he by means of one or other of these Jhanas, 
‘‘ abides suffusing one quarter of the globe 'with a heart full 
of love. And so the second quarter, and so the* third, and so 
the fourth. And thus he abides suffusing whole-heartedly'^ 
the whole wide world, above, below, around, and everywhere 
with heart full of love, far-reaching, grown great, and beyond 
'measure, without enmity, without ill-will Such a change 
of heart is accomplished by just him who has reached ecstasy 
by the Jhanas. 

And here “ full of love ” means, possessed of love. 

“ With heart means, with mind. 

One quarter of the globe ’’ — this is said by way of referring 
to one sentient being first grasped in one quarter and suffusing 
the sentient beings included in that quarter. 

^ P. 161 , above. ^ SabbcUtatdya. ^ 

3 Biqha ii, 186. 



IX. — Exposition of the Divine States 355 

“Suffusing’’ means (mentally), touching and making an 
object of. • 

“ Abides means, maintains tbe posture set up by tbe divine 
state. 

“ And so tbe second quarter ” — ^just as be abides suffusing 
any one quarter from among tbe four; East, and so on; so, 
immediately after that, be suffuses tbe second, tbe third, and 
tbe fourth, is tbe meaning. 

“ Above ” is said in tbe same way to mean tbe direction 
above. 

“ Below, around ” means, so also tbe direction below, tbe 
direction across. Of these, “ below ” means beneath; 
“around” in tbe intermediate points of tbe compass.^ Thus 
be sends tbe mind full of love in all directions, as it were 
a horse on a race-course. Thus far has tbe suffusion of 
love been shown specifically by limiting it to each of tbe 
quarters. 

“ Everywhere ” and tbe other terms have been said to show 
tbe unspecified suffusion. Of these, “ everywhere ” means in 
every place. 

“ Whole-heartedly ” means, on all beings, inferior, middling, 
noble, friend, foe or neutral, considering them as oneself. 
It IS treating another as equal to oneself, without makmg tbe 
distinction that “be is another.” Or, “whole-heartedly” 
has been said to mean, with all one’s heart, not leaving out tbe 
smallest bit. 

[309] “ Tbe whole wide” means, with all creatures; con- 
nected with all creatures is tbe meaning. 

“ World ” means, the sentient world. 

Because of tbe mention of “ far-reaching ” and the other 
synonyms, tbe expression “ full of love ” is repeated here. 
Or, because here neither tbe words “ and so,” nor tbe words 
“ and thus ” are mentioned as in tbe suffusion of love specifi- 
cally through the different quarters, therefore tbe expression 
“ full of love ” IS repeated. Or, this expression is said by way 
of conclusion. Here “ far-reaching” is to be understood as 
far-reacbing by way of suffusing. 

By way of plane is this heart “ grown great.” 



356 


The Path of Purity 

And by way of acquaintance with, and of making numberless 
beings the object, is it beyond measure.” 

By removing malevolent hostility is it without enmity.” 
From the removal of dejection is it without ill-will.” It 
is said to be void of ill. 

This is the meaning of the change of heart expressed in 
with heart full of love ” and so forth. And as this change is 
accomplished by one whose mind has attained to ecstasy, 
so^ what has been said in the Patisambhida^ as, '^Mental 
emancipation through love suffused unspecifically in five forrm^ 
mental emancipation through love suffused specifically in seven 
forms^ mental emancipation through love suffused through the 
quarters in ten forms f is also to be understood as accomplished 
by one whose mind has attained to ecstasy. 

And in this quotation, mental emancipation through love 
suffused unspecifically in five forms is to be understood thus: 

May all beings keep without enynity^ without ill-wiU, without 
harm^ well t May all living things, all creatures, all persons, 
all who are included under the term, individuality , keep . . . 
welir 

Mental emancipation through love suffused specifically in 
seven forms is to be understood thus: ‘‘ May all women keep 
without enmity , . , well ! May all men, all the elect, all the 
non-elect, all devas, all human beings, all who are liable to punish- 
ment after death keep . . . well 

Mental emancipation through love sufiused through the 
quarters in ten forms is to be understood thus: May all beings 
in the East keep . . . well! May all in the West, all in the 
North, all in the South, all in the Eastern corner, all in the 
Western corner, all m the Northern corner, all [310] in the Southern 
corner, all in the direction below, all beings in the direction above, 
keep . • . well! May all living things, creatures, persons, 
those who are included in the term individuality in the East keep 
. . . well ! May all women, all men, the Elect, the non-Eled, 
devas, human beings, those liable to punishment after death in 
the East keep . . . well! May all women , . . those liahle 
to punishment after death in the West, North, South, Eastern, 


1 ii, 130. 


^ Patisamhhida 



357 


IX. — Exposition of the Divine States 

Western^ Northern, Southern, corners, below, above, Jceepnoithout 
enmity, without ill-will, without harm, wellP^^ 

In (these texts) all ” is a word which includes all without 
remainder. 

Beings’’: i,e. because they are entangled^ fast entangled 
through lust of desire concerned with the five aggregates. This 
indeed has been said by the Blessed One: That desire, Rddha. 
that lust, that lure, that craving which is concerned with body , — 
entangled thereby, fast entangled thereby : therefore is one called 
a being. That desire, that lust, that craving, that lure whicK is 
concerned with feeling, with jyerception, the activities, conscious- 
ness, entangled thereby, fast entangled thereby : therefore is one 
called a heing.^^- In popular language the term is also applied 
to those who are without lust, just as a special kind’ of fan, 
(though) made of split bamboo, is yet called a palmyra fan. 
But grammarians without investigating the meaning wish to 
regard it as a mere name. Those w^'ho investigate the meaning 
wish to derive a being {satta) from force {satva). 

“Living beings”: i.e. from the functioning of the breath. 
Because they maintain life through respiration and inspiration 
is the meaning. From their coming to be (through their 
deeds) “creatures” are so called.^ The meaning is, from 
their manifestly comhig to be, coming to bhth. 

“ P erson ” {puggala)^ is made up of pun, which means “ hell,” 
and galanti, which means “ fail into.” 

“Individuality” means body, just the five aggregates. 
Because with reference to the five aggregates, just the concept 
of being arises, beings included in that individuality are spoken 
of as “ included under the term individuality.” 

“ Included ” means limited by, comprised in. And like the 
term “ being,” the remaining terms also (living thing, creature, 
and so on) are used in popular language (with a wider meaning). 
And therefore all these terms are to be understood as synonyms 
of all beings. Although [311] there may be other synonyms 
^f all beings such as “ all living creatures, aU animated things,” 

1 PatisawhMdd li, 131. 

2 Kindred Sayings iii, p. 156. There is a pun here on satta, beings 
(from sai), and satta, bound, entangled, (from saj). 

® Bhutd. ^ Trom pums, male. 



358 


The Bath of Purity 

it is to- these five terms that the original reference is made in 
'‘mental emancipation through love suffused unspecifically 
in five forms/’ 

But those who seek the difference between " beings, 
creatures ” and so on, not merely as terms, but also as to their 
meaning, go counter to the unspecific suffusion of love. There- 
fore without having regard to such meaning love should 
be suffused unspecifically for one or other of the five forms. 
And here " May all beings be without enmity !” — this is one 
ecs*tasy. "Be without ill-will!” — ^this is another ecstasy. 
" Without ill-will ” means bereft of ill-will. " Be without 
harm ” — this is another ecstasy. " Without harm ” means rid 
of ill. " Keep well,’ ’ — ^this is another ecstasy. Therefore which- 
ever cl^se among the five is made plain, by that should love 
be suffused. Thus four ecstasies each in the five forms give 
twenty ecstasies in the unspecific suffusion of love. And four 
ecstasies each m the seven forms give twenty-eight in the 
specific suffusion of love. 

And here " women, men ” are said by way of sex; " elect, 
non-elect ” by way of the elect and the average man; " devas, 
humans, those liable to punishment after death,” by way 
of birth. 

And as regards suffusion through the quarters : — " All beings 
in the East,” and so forth, — m this way there are two hundred 
ecstasies, twenty being in each quarter.^ " All Women in the 
East,” and so forth, — in this way there are two hundred and 
eighty ecstasies, twenty-eight being in each quarter. There 
are thus four hundred and eighty ecstasies. In all there are 
five hundred and twenty-eight ecstasies mentioned in the 
Patisambhida. 

Thus the student, developing mental emancipation through 
love by means of any one of these ecstasies, enjoys the 
eleven blessings spoken of above^ as "happy he sleeps” and 
so on. 

(1) Of these, " happy he sleeps — that is, without sleeping 
a bad sleep like the rest of the people, turning from side to 

^ There are ten points of the compass: the four mam points, four 
intermediate points, above, below. - P. 352. 



IX . — Exposition of the^ Divine States 359 

side and snoring liarslily. Though asleep he, as it were, enters 
into his attainment. 

(2) Happy he awakes — ^he does not awake in want of 
ease like othv^rs, moaning, yawning, turning from side to side, 
but awakes happy, without physical change, like an opening 
lotus. 

[312] (3) '‘He sees no bad dreams”: — ^though he may 
dream, he sees good dreams, as though he were paying respects 
to a shrine, or doing acts of worship, or listening to the Doctrine. 
He does not see, as others do, such dreams as being surrounded 
by thieves, or oppressed by wild beasts,^ or falling down a 
precipice. 

(4) "He is dear to men — ^he is dear, attractive to men 
like a pearl necklace danglmg on the breast, a wreath oMowers 
worn on the head. 

(5) "He is dear to non-human beings — ^he is dear to non- 
human beings as he is dear to men, like the Elder Visakha. 
They say that he was a rich householder at Pataliputta. 
Living there he heard this report: " It is said that Tambapawi 
Island (Ceylon) is adorned with garlands of shrines, is re- 
splendent with yellow robes.^ There one may sit or lie down 
in any place one likes. Agreeable weather, suitable dwellings, 
agreeable men — all these are easy to get there.” He made 
over his property to his family and, with only a coin wrapped 
in the hem of his garment,^ left his home and lived for a month 
on the sea-shore waiting for a boat. Through his skill in trade 
he bought goods at that place and, selling them elsewhere, 
made by lawful trade during that one month a thousand 
[coins]. In due course he reached the Mahavihara and asked 
for ordination. Being led to the ordination-hall to be ordained, 
he let fall the bundle of the thousand coins from inside his 
waist-band to the ground. " What is this 1” "A thousand 
coins, sir.” " Lay-brother, you cannot use them once you 
are ordained. You had better turn them to use now.” When 
this was said he replied, " Let those who come to the ordination 
of Visakha not go empty-handed,” untied the bundle, scattered 

^-'Read valehi. ^ Bead ‘^lankoio Msdvapajjoto. 

® Bead dasante. 



360 


TJie Rath of Purity 

the money on a stand in the ordination-hall, was initiated 
and then fully ordained. After five years’ standmg he was 
acquainted with the two Matikas; and after residence during 
the rains took up the subject of meditation suitalfle to himself 
and, spendmg four months at each monastery where he led 
an agreeable life,^ he went on tour. Thus touring, 

The Thera, biding in the wood, 

Visakha, roars his triumph-song, 

Bent on his own perfection’s growth, 

This was the burden of his thought, 

Thus far my qtest has been achieved ! 

Thus far my feet have hither come ! 

Here where no further stumbling lies — 

Ah friend ! ’tis thou hast won the day.^ 

[313] Going to Cittalapahbata Monastery, he came to the 
parting of the ways and stood thinking: Is this the way, or 
is that ? The fairy residing on the mountain stretched his 
hand and pointed out the way to him. He went to Cittala- 
pabbata Monastery and, having spent four months there, lay 
down thin kin g to depart early m the morning. The fairy 
residing in a rose-apple tree at the head of the terrace- walk 
sat on a plank at the stairway and wept. The Elder asked, 
‘‘ Who is it ?” Sir, I am of the rose-apple tree.” Why 
weep you Because of your gomg away.” What 
advantage is there to you by my living here ?” ‘‘ Sir, while 
you live here the non-human beings learn to love one another. 
When you are gone, they will quarrel and make lewd talk.” 

If my living here makes your life pleasant, it is good,” — so 
saying the Elder lived there another four months. Again he 
conceived the desire to go. The fairy wept again as before. 
In this way the Elder lived there; and even there he passed 
utterly away. A monk living thus in love is dear to mon- 
human beings. 

(6) “ Devas guard him — ^that is to say, as parents guard 
their son. 

(7) ^"Fire, poison and sword come not near him”; — ^the 

^ By perforining such duties as ke could in the monastei5^. 

^ Translated by Mrs. Rhys Davids: Buddhist Beview, 1921* 



IX . — Exposition of thOi Divine States 361 

body of Kim who lives in love fire does not burn, as for e^iample 
Uttara the lay-sister' ; poison does not enter, as for instance 
the Elder tJulasiva, a repeater of the Samyutta; the sword 
does not touCh, witness Sankicca the novice They cannot 
injure his body”. — In this connection they relate the story 
of the doe. A doe stood suckling her fawn. A hunter let fly 
a long-handled spear after taking a good aim, with the intention 
of piercing the doe. The spear struck the body and was curled 
into rolls like a palm-leaf, not by strength of access, nor by 
strength of ecstasy, but just by the strength of her thoughts 
of love for the fawn. So greatly powerful is love. 

(8) Quickly he concentrates his mind — ^he who lives in 
love concentrates his mind quickly. There is no sluggishness 
in him. [314] 

(9) ^'His complexion is serene”: — ^he has a calm counten- 
ance, like a ripe palm about to fall from the stalk.^ 

(10) “He dies undeluded”: — ^the death of him who lives 
in love knows no delusion. Without delusion he dies as 
though falling into sleep, 

(11) “ If he penetrate no further”: — if, after death, he is 
unable to attam saintship which is higher than the attainment 
of love, he is reborn in Brahma’s heaven as though he awoke 
from sleep. 

This is the detailed Discourse on the Developing of Love. 


The Developing of Pity, 

He who wishes to develop pity should begin by reflectmg 
on the evils of not pitying, and on the blessings of pity. In 
domg so he should not begin first with beloved persons and 
others. Eor a beloved person remains dear, and so too a very 
dear Mend, a neutral person, an unloved person, an enemy, 
remain what they are. Those of the opposite sex, and the 
dead, are not fit objects. 

This has been said in the Vibhanga^: '‘And how does the 
monk live suffusing one quarter of the globe with heart full of 


^ Dliammapada Corny, in, 302. 
^ Bead handhand pavuttam. 


2 Ibid, ii, 240, 
^ Page 273. 



362 


The P.ath of Purity 

'pity ? ^A$ on seeing a person in poor circumstances, of evil ways, 
he should show pity, so he suffuses all beings with pityT There- 
fore first of all, on seeing anyone pitiable, deformed, in 
extreme misery, in poor condition, of evil a pauper, 

who often goes a-hungry, with a begging-plate in front, seated 
in an unpatronized shed, a host of vermin issuing from his 
hands and feet, who is uttering moans of pam, one should 
cause pity to arise saying, illas * this being has fallen into 
misery ! Would that he were freed from such pain !” 

‘When such an object is not met with, one should exercise 
pity on a person who, though at ease, is an evil-doer, com- 
paring him to a man condemned to death. How % For 
instance, the king’s men, by the king’s orders bind a thief 
caught in the act, that he may be killed, and take him to the 
place of execution, giving him a hundred lashes at all the 
cross-roads. And men give him food hard and soft, flowers, 
scent, unguents, and betel to chew. Although [315] he, 
eating and enjoying these, goes along with the semblance of 
happiness and the possession of wealth, no one would consider 
him as really happy and wealthy. On the contrary, people 
take pity on him, sajdng, ‘‘ In sooth the poor fellow will die. 
Every step he takes is bringing him nearer death.” Even so 
the monk who is practising pity as a subject of meditation, 
should pity the man of ease, pitying him thus: However 
much this pitiable man feels happy now, is well ofi^ and enjoys 
wealth, he will experience not a little pain and grief in the 
states of woe, owing to the absence of any good deeds done 
through any one of the three doors of action.” Then in the 
same way he should practise pity in due order on a beloved 
person, a neutral person, an enemy. 

If, in the way mentioned above, his hatred of the enemy 
arises, it should be calmed as stated under love. And here 
when one sees or hears of a man also who, having done merit, 
has met with one or other form of ruin, that is, the ruin of 
relatives, disease, ruin of wealth, one should pity him and also 
even when he has not met with such ruin, saying, Indeed he 
is in misery,” since the misery of the round of births^ cannot 

^ Siisajjtto is explained by the Tlhd as suhha/tmhhavam sannaddko. 



363 


IX . — Exposition of the Divine States 

be escaped. Thus showing pity in all respects, and breaking 
dowm the harriers between the four persons, to wit, himself, 
a beloved jierson, a neutral person, an enemy, as already 
mentioned, he should practise, develop, repeat the sign 
(of calm) and increase the ecstasies by means of the threefold 
and fourfold Jhanas in the manner stated under love. 

But in the Commentary on Anguttara this order is given: 
the object of pity should first be the enemy; then, the mind 
being made soft, the pauper; then the loved one; then the self. 
It does not tally with the text: '' The man in poor circum- 
stances, of evil ways.” Therefore one should strive for 
development here in the way stated, and breaking down the 
barriers, increase the ecstasies. 

Furthermore, the change of heart, namely, the utfepecific 
suffusion in five forms, the specific suffusion in seven forms, the 
suffusion through the quarters in ten forms; and the blessings 
beginning with '' happy he sleeps ” are to be understood as 
said under love. 

This is the detailed Discourse on the Developing of Pity. 

[316] The Developing of Sympathy} 

He who strives for the developing of sympathy also should 
not begin with the loved one and the others. For a loved one, 
just because^ of his being loved, is not a proximate cause of 
sympathy, much less the neutral person and the enemy. 
Persons of the opposite sex, and the dead, are not fit objects. 

A very dear friend, however, may be the proximate cause. 
He who is spoken of in the Commentary as a drinking com- 
panion, IS indeed very sympathetic. He laughs first, speaks 
afterwards. Therefore he should first be suffused with sym- 
pathy. On seeing or hearing of a loved person happy, well-off, 
joyful, one should express sympathetic joy, saying: ‘‘Joyful 
indeed is this being. How good ! How splendid !” Concern- 
ing this specific meamng it is stated in the Vibhanga^: ^‘And 
how does a monk live, suffusing one quarter of the globe with heart 
full of sympathy ? As, on seeing a person, loved, lovable, he 
would bz joyful, so he suffuses all beings with sympathy}'^ 

^ Miiditd, lit. “ gladness ” 2 page 274. 



364 


Tlfie Bath of Purity 

If his drinking companion or loved person was happy in the 
past, he is now poor and evil m conduct. Calling Jo mind his 
former happiness, This one in the past had plenty of wealth 
and retinue, and was always joyful,” and dwelling on the mode 
of his ]oy, one should express joy. 

“ Again in the future he will get hack his glory and ride on 
elephant-crupper, horseback, golden palanquin, and so on”:— 
thus dwelling on the mode of his future joy also, one should 
express joy. 

Saving expressed sympathy (i.e. joy) for a dear person, the 
monk in due course shoilld express it for a neutral person, 
and for an enemy. 

If, as has been said above, his hatred for the enemy arises, 
it shouM be calmed as in the case of love. Breaking down the 
barriers through equality of mind towards the three persons, 
and himself as the fourth and practismg, developing, repeat- 
ing the sign, as already mentioned under love, he should 
increase the ecstasies by means of the threefold and fourfold 
Jhanas. Furthermore, the change of heart, namely, the 
unspecified suffusion in five forms, the specific suffusion in 
seven forms, the suffusion through the quarters in ten forms, 
and the blessings such as Happy he sleeps,” are to be 
understood in the manner stated under love. 

This is the detailed Discourse on the Developing of 
Sympathy. 

[317] The Developing of Even-mindedness. 

He who, having attained to the threefold, fourfold Jhanas 
in love and the other two, wishes to develop the culture of 
even-mindedness, should emerge from the familiarized third 
Jhana and seeing the evils in the preceding three states, where 
attention is associated with fondness for beings through a wish 
for their welfare and so on, hatred and fawning are near 
neighbours, and grossness comes of union with joy, and seeing 
the blessings of even-mindedness in its tranquil nature, should 
regard with even mind a person who is by nature neutral and 
set up even-mmdedness. Afterwards he should dea]^ with a 
loved person and the rest. For this has been said: ''And 



IX . — Exposition of the Divine States 365 

how does a monk live suffusing one quarter of the globe with heart 
full of even-mindedness ? As, on seeing a person neither lovable 
nor unlovable, he would be even-minded, so he suffuses all beings 
with even-mindedness.^^^ Therefore having exercised even- 
mindedness for a neutral person as just said, and then a 
loved one, then a drinking companion, then an enemy, he 
should break down the barriers by being neutral towards all, 
that is, those three persons and himself, and practise, develop, 
repeat the sign. 

When he does this, the Fourth Jhana arises as told in l^he 
Earth-device. Does the Fourth Jhana arise in him who has 
risen to the Third Jhana‘^ in the Earth and the other devices ? 
It does not. Why not ^ Because of dissimilarity in the 
object. But it arises in him who has risen to the Third Jhana 
in love and so on, because of similarity in the object. 

Furthermore, the change of heart and the acquisition of 
blessings are to be understood as stated under love. 

This is the detailed Discourse on the Developing of Even- 
mindedness. 

The Specific Discourse? 

Having Imown these four divme states as taught by the best 
of Brahmas {brahmuttamena), one should further know the 
following particular comments on them. Thus, of love, pity, 
sympathy, even-mmdedness, love means '' one loves.” It 
signifies one wishes well.” Or, love is called so because of the 
state of being a loved one, [318] or because it goes on concern- 
ing a loved one. That which makes the heart of the good 
quiver at the pain of others is pity. Or it crushes, destroys, 
kills, the pain of others, thus is it pity. Or it is pity because 
it is scattered over the afflicted, stretched out over them by 
suffusion. Sympathetic joy means, those endowed therewith*^ 
rejoice, or oneself rejoices, or just rejoicing, '' May they be 
without enmity.” Thus, by the removal of such ill-will, one 
contemplates with disinterestedness by attainmg to a con- 
dition of centrality; this is even-mindedness. 

1 Vibhanga 275. 

^ Read uppanriatcUiyajjhanassa, as also two lines below. 

3 Expositor 258 f. ^ Or “ the co-existent states.” 



366 


TTie Bath of Purity 

As t© characteristic marks and so on, first among them love 
has the characteristic of being a procedure of modes of benefi- 
cence; the fimction or property of bringing good; the mani- 
festation or effect of taking hatred away; the proximate cause 
of seemg the lovableness of beings. Its consu mm ation^ is 
the suppressing of ill-will, its failure^ is the production of lust. 

Pity has the characteristic of evolving the mode of removing 
paiu; the property of not being able to bear (seeing) others 
suffer, the manifestation of not harming; the proximate cause 
of seeing the need of those overcome by pain. Its consumma- 
tion is the suppression of harming; its failure is the produc- 
tion of sorrow. 

Symfathy has the characteristic of gladness; its property is 
the ab^nce of envying; its mamfestation is the destruction 
of disaffection; its proximate cause is seeing the prosperous 
state of other beings. Its consummation is the suppression 
of dislike; its failure is the production of derision. 

Even-mindedness has the characteristic of evolving the mode 
of centrality as regards bemgs ; its function is seeing the equality 
of beings, its manifestation is suppressmg aversion and syco- 
phancy; its proximate cause is seeing the heritage of the pre- 
vailing kamma as beings are the property of kamma. By 
its influence they wil] attain to pleasure, or be free from pain, 
or not fall from the prosperity already acquired.” Its con- 
summation is the suppressing of aversion and of sycophancy; 
its failure is the production of a profane and unintelligent 
indifference. 

These four Divine States have the bliss of insight and the 
attainment of a happy existence as their common result. Their 
several results are the destruction of ill-will, and so on. Love, 
for instance, has the destruction of ill-will as result. The 
others have the destruction of cruelty, or dislike, and of Just, 
as respective results. As it has been said: '‘’Friends, that 
mental emancipation through love is the escape from ill-will, . . . 
Friends, that mental emancipation through pity is the escape 
from cruelty, . . . Friends, that mental emancipation through 
sympathy is the escape from dislike. , , . Friends, thatrmental 
^ Sumpatti. 2 yipaiti. So for the other three. 



IX . — Exposition of the Divine States 367 

emancipation through even-mindedness is the escape from 

lustr^ 

Each, of them has two enemies, near and distant. Of the 
divine state of love the near enemy is lust, because, like love, 
it sees good qualities. It is like a foe lurking near a man. 
[319] Quickly it :pnds access. Hence love should be well 
protected from lust. Ill-will is the distant enemy. From its 
dissimilarity in nature it is like a man’s foe dwelling in a 
mountain fastness, and so on. Hence love should be devel- 
oped secure from ill-will. It is impossible that one should 
develop love and at the same time get angry. 

As to pity, one who views visible objects, desirable, lovable, 
endearing,^ attractive, delightful, associated with craving, ob- 
jects which have not been obtained as not obtained, or Vho re- 
members what has been obtained formerly as now past, ceased, 
changed, is filled with the sorrow called worldly (or profane).'^ 
This, because it also contemplates adversity, is the near enemy 
of the divine state of pity. From its dissimilarity in nature, 
cruelty is the distant enemy. Hence pity should be developed 
secure from cruelty. It is impossible that one should develop 
pity, and at the same time strike with the hand, and so on. 

As to S}mipathy, one who views visible objects, desirable, 
and so on, is filled with the joy called worldly. This, because 
it also contemplates prosperity, is the near enemy of the divine 
state of sympathy. From its dissimilarity in nature dislike 
is its distant enemy. Hence sympathy should be developed 
secure from it. It is impossible that one should be sympa- 
thetic and at the same time discontented with secluded 
monasteries or the higher moral states. 

The fool who has seen a visible object and who is deluded, 
an average man who has not overcome the limits of his lower 
nature and the result of former births, who does not see the 
evils of all conditioned things, is unacquainted with the teach- 
ing — this average man is filled with such indifference as is not 
able to transcend the visible object. Hence it is called worldly 

^ Anguttara iii, 291. 

^ Piyanam, which Atthasdlinl (P.T.S. ed.) omits. 

3 Cf. MajjMma i, 364. 



368 


The Path of Purity 

(or profane) and is mere absence of intelligence. Owing to its 
similarity in not considering faults and merits, it, is tbe near 
enemy of tbe divine state of even-mindedness. From their 
dissimilarity in nature, both lust and aversion are its distant 
enemies. Hence even-mindedness should be developed secure 
from them. [320] It is impossible that one should be even- 
mmded, and at the same time be enamoured with, or hurt, 
another. 

^ Of all these divine states, desire, that is, the wish-to-do, is 
the beginning ; the discarding of the hindrances and so on, is the 
middle; ecstasy is the eM. One being, or many beings as 
concepts, are the objects of these states. There is growth 
of the object on attaining to the access or the ecstasy. This is 
the order of the growth: — ^As a good cultivator marks off 
the portion to be ploughed, and then ploughs it, so, marking 
off one dwelling, one should develop love for the beings 
therein on this wise: May the beings in this dwelling be free 
from enmity The mind having been made soft and work- 
able as to one dwelling, two dwellings should be marked off, 
then in order, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten 
dwellings, a highway, half a village, the whole village, a district, 
a kingdom, one quarter of the globe — thus a world-system and 
more should be marked off, and love should be developed as 
to the beings in them. Likewise pity and the rest. This 
herein is the order in the growth of the object. 

And just as the Formless States are the result of the devices, 
the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception is the 
result of concentration (on the Formless States), the attain- 
ment of fruition is the result of insight, the attainment of 
cessation is the result of calm and insight, so here even-minded- 
ness is the result of the preceding three divine states. As, 
without raising the pillars and hoisting the cross-beams and 
wall-plates, it is not possible to place aloft the peak and the 
rafters, so without the Third Jhana obtainable in the first [three 
divine states] it is not possible to develop the fourth state.^ 

1 “Even though that state does not arise in dependence on the 
Third Jhana produced in the devices, owing to dissimilarity of the 
obiects.’^ adds Attkasalmu 



369 


IX . — Exposition of the* Divine States 

Here it may be (said): — ‘"Why are love, pity, sympathy 
and even-i^indedness called the divine states? Why are 
there four ? ^What is their order ? And why in Abhidhamma 
are they called the Immeasurables ?”^ 

First, they are to be understood as divine in the sense of 
‘‘ best ” (or highestj, and by their faultless nature. For these 
states are best as constituting the right mode of conduct 
towards other beings. And as the Brahma live with faultless 
thoughts, so aspirants associated with these four states li’g'e 
like the Brahmas. Thus because of the meaning of '' divine ” 
and of their faultless nature, they are called divine states. 

[321] And this is the answer to the questions which begin 
with Why are there four ?” 

There are four powers in ways to purity; 

These are the modes that start with amity. 

Limit unto their onward sweep is none. 

By range as the Immeasurables they’re known. 

Namely, inasmuch as love is the way to purity for him who 
abounds m ill-will, as pity is the way if he abound in harming, 
sympathy if he abound in repulsion, even-mindedness if he 
abound in lust; again, because the fourfold work of the mind m 
relation to others is the conveyance of good, the removal of 
bad, gladness over their success, and absence of preoccupa- 
tion; and inasmuch as he who practises the Immeasurables 
should develop the four states towards all beings like a mother 
who amid her duties to four sons, one a babe, one ailing, one 
adolescent, one managing his own afiairs, desires for the babe 
much growth, desires for the sick riddance of illness, desires 
for the youth persistence in the good things of youth, and is 
in no way anxious for the son who manages his own duties, 
therefore are '' the powers in ways to purity ” thus. And 
because a person desirous of developing them should first 
practise them on beings by way of working good, and love has 
the characteristic of proceeding by way of working advantage; 
and because he then, pondering on what he has seen or heard, 
of being% praying for welfare when overcome by sufferings, 


^ Vibhaiiga, ch. xiii. 



370 


The Path of Purity 

should'practise them by way of taking away suffering, and pity 
has the characteristic of proceeding by way of t§.king away 
suffering; next because he, seeing the prosperity of those beings 
who had prayed for welfare and for the removal of suffering 
should practise them by way of rejoicing at prosperity, and 
sympathy has the characteristic of profce gladness; and 
lastly, because he should practise them by the mode of cen- 
trality called even-mmdedness, owing to the absence of a 
thing that has got to be done,” and even-mindedness has the 
characteristic of proceedmg by the mode of centrality, — 
therefore love has been ‘mentioned first by way of working 
good, and so on, then pity, sympathy, even-mindedness. Thus 
is the order to be understood. 

And"^ because all of them arise in an immeasurable field, 
therefore are they called the Immeasurables. For beings 
without limit constitute their field. Though it be but a 
smgle being, in such a portion should love, and so on, be 
developed,” thus without making any limit they evolve by 
way of thorough-going diffusion. Hence has it been said: — 

[322] There are four powers in ways of purity; 

These are the modes that start with amity. 

Limit unto their onward sweep is none. 

By range as the Immeasurables they're known. 

And of these having the characteristic of Immeasurables 
in their field of objects, the first three are of the Third and 
Fourth Jhanas. Why ? Because they are not dissociated 
from joy. But why should they not be dissociated from joy ? 
Because of their being the escape of such qualities as ill-will, 
which spring from melancholy. The last divme state is of 
the remaining (Fifth) Jhana. Why ? Because of association 
with neutral feeling. For the divine state of even-minded- 
ness which arises in the mode of centrality does not arise 
without neutral feeling. 

If any were to say, Because in the Eighth Nipata a general 
statement by the Blessed One is made regarding the four 
Immeasurables: ‘ Thou, 0 monh, shouldst develop the concen- 
tration wherein is thinking applied and sustained, that also 



IX . — Exposition of the Divine States 371 

wherein is only sustained thinking ivithoid initial thinking^ 
that also wherein there is no applied nor sustained thinking^ 
that wherein^ is rapture, that also wherein is no rapture, that 
also which is accompanied hy happiness, that also ivhich is 
accompanied by even-mmdedness,^ ^ therefore the four 
Immeasurables also are of the Fourth and Fifth Jhanas/' he 
should be told not to say so. For if such be the case, discern- 
ment of the body and the rest, would also be of the Fourth and 
Fifth Jhanas. And in feeling, and so on, there is not e^en 
the First Jhana, let alone the Second and the others. There- 
fore, do not, under cover of the letter, accuse the Blessed One. 
For profound is the Buddha’s word. You ought to sit at 
the feet of your teachers and learn the meaning (of that Sutta) 
which is on this wise. It is said that the Blessed On^ denied 
favour to a monk who, having made a request for a religious 
discourse, saying: “It is well, sir! May the Blessed One 
teach me the doctrine concisely. After hearing the doctrine of 
the Blessed One, I ivould live alone, secluded, earnest, ardent 
and strenuous, energetic,^^^ remained where he was although 
he had heard the doctrine on a previous occasion and did not 
set about practising the law of a recluse, the reason of the denial 
bemg this: “Here some good-for-nothing men seek for me, 
and when I have preached the doctrine imagine that they must 
pursue after mel'~ Again because that monk was fulfilled 
with the sufiicmg condition for saintship, therefore the Blessed 
One said by way of admonition: [323] “Therefore, monk, 
thou oughtest to train thyself in this : ‘ My miyid being centred 
on the personal will be well established. And no immoral 
states that have arisen will capture it.^ Thus indeed thou 
oughtest to train thyself By this admonition to him the 
basic concentration which is just collectedness of mind, has 
been stated by way of the internal, the personal. 

Then not finding contentment with so much, he should 
increase that basic concentration. In order to show this, 
the Blessed One stated to him development by way of love: 

Monk, since thy mind being centred on the personal is well 
established, and immoral states which have uprisen do not 
^ A nguttara iy, 300. ^ Ibid» 299. 



372 


The Puth of Purity 

capture 'it, thou oughtest on that account to train thyself thus: 
‘ The emancipation of my heart through hve will ha'i^e been de- 
veloped, repeated, made a vehicle of progress, made the one object, 
established, ^nade familiar with, ivell begund 'fhus indeed, 
monk, thou oughtest to train thyself’^ Again lie said this: 
'' Since, by thee, monk, this concentration has been developed, 
Tep)eated, thou, on that account, monk, shouldst develop this 
basic concentration ^vheiein is thought initial and sustained . . . 
loJyich is accompanied by even~rmndednessd^^ The meaning is: 
When thou, monk, hast developed this basic concentration by 
way of love, thou not being contented therewith, shouldst 
then develop it as being together with thought initial and sus- 
tained after causing it to attain to the Fourth and Fifth Jhanas 
in other*objects also. Having said this, again the Blessed One, 
in seeing that the monk should practise the developing preceded 
{‘•y the remaining divine states of pity, and so on, by way of 
the Fourth and Fifth Jhanas in other objects, uttered this: 

Since thou, mobile, hast developed, repeated, this concentration, 
thou on that account oughtest to train thyself thus : ^ The emanci- 
pation of my heart through pity, and so on.' 

Having shown thus the developing preceded by love and so 
on, by way of the Fourth and Fifth Jhanas, he again, to show 
that it is preceded by discernment of the body, and so on, first 
said: Since thou, 7nonk, hast developed, repeated, this concen- 
tration, thou oughtest on that account to train thyself thus , 

‘ I shall live discerning the body ' ; and he ended the discourse 

by crowning it with samtship thus: ''Since thou, monk, wilt 
have developed, well developed this concentration, then, monk, 
thou shalt find comfort wherever thou goest, thou shall find com- 
fort wherever thou stayidest, [324] thou shalt find comfort wherever 
thou sittest, thou shalt find comfort wherever thou liest downd'^ 
Therefore love and the others are of the threefold and foucfold 
Jhanas, but even-mindedness is of the remaining Jhana. 
Thus should it be understood. 

In the same W’ay has the classification been made in the 
Abhidhammad 

1 AngvUara xv, 299. 2 3qq^ 3 3q j, 

^ E.g., in Cittuppadakanda, Appamaiina Vihhanga. 



373 


IX . — Exposition of the Divine States 

And the difference between one another in special power 
through distinction in supreme beauty/ and so on, among 
the Immeasurables which thus stand divided into two 
classes by way of the threefold and fourfold Jhanas, and 
the remaming one Jhana is to be understood thus. For 
in the Haliddayasana Sutta^ they have been stated as 
different as regards supreme beauty, and so on. As it 
has been said: '^Supremely beautiful, 1 say, monks, is the 
emancipation of heart through love. Siqneme, I say, is , the 
sphere of infinite space for the ejnancipation of heart through 
pity. Supreme, I say, is the sphere of infinite consciousness 
for the emancipation of heart through sympathy. Supreme, I 
say, is the sphere of nothingness for the einomcipation of heart 
through even-mindedness * 

But why are they thus described ? Owing to their being 
the sufficing condition of that supremeness. For beings are 
not repulsive to one abiding in love. And when the monk, 
being accustomed to regardmg objects as not repulsive, 
brings his mind on to the devices of pure colour, e.g. blue- 
green, which are not repulsive, the mind rushes in wiLhout 
difficulty. Thus love is the sufficing condition of supremeness 
in beauty of emancipation, not of anything higher; hence the 
statement: “ supremely beautiful.’’ 

When he, in a state of pity, looks on a suffering creature, 
where the sign is something material, receiving blows from 
sticks, and so on, he, from the production, arising, of pity, 
fully understands the evils m things material. And when, 
these evils having been well understood, he removes'^ one or 
other of the Earth-devices, and so on, and brings his mind 
on to space whence matter has departed, the mind rushes 
in without difficulty. Thus pity is the sufficing condition of 
the sphere of Infinite Space, not of anything further; hence 
the statement, supreme is the sphere of Infinite Space.” 

When he, in a state of sympathy, contemplates the con- 
sciousness of beings, in whom joy has arisen for joyful reasons, 
his mind, owing to the arising of a flux‘d of sympathy, becomes 


1 Suh%a = subhavtmokJcha. — TIM. 
3 Read uggMpetvd. 


2 Sanjbyvita v, 119, 

^ Pavatti ; “ a rolling on.” 



374 The Puth of Purity 

experienced in apprehending the consciousness. And when, 
passing beyond the sphere of infinite space which 4 .has been 
reached in due course, he brings his mind on to consciousness, 
the field of which is the sign of space, [325] his consciousness 
rushes in without difficulty. Thus sympathy is the sufficing 
condition of the sphere of infinite consciousness, not of any- 
thing higher; hence the statement, supreme is the sphere 
of infinite consciousness.” 

But the mind of him who is m a state of even mmdedness, 
owing to the absence of laying to heart that beings may be 
happy, may be released from pain, may not be without the 
bliss of prosperity, is in pain as regards the apprehending of 
a non-existent concept, because it is turned away from the 
apprehending of bliss and pain, and so on, in a higher sense. 
And when he, whose mind is experienced in turning away from 
the apprehending of the ultimate truth, and is in pain as 
regards the apprehending of the non-existent in the ultimate 
sense, passes beyond the sphere of infinite consciousness which 
has been reached in due course, and brings his mind on to 
the absence of consciousness which is, as an ultimate truth, 
non-existent, his mind rushes in without difficulty. Thus 
even-mindedness is the sufficing condition of the sphere of 
nothingness, not of anything higher; hence the statement: 

supreme is the sphere of nothingness.” 

Having thus understood the power of these Immeasurables 
by way of supreme beauty, and so on, one should consider 
all of them as fulfilling all good states, such as alms-giving. 
For, from a desire for the welfare of beings, from the inability 
to bear (seeing) the pain of beings, out of a wish for the per- 
sistence of those prosperous conditions specially attained by 
beings, and owing to the absence of partiality for any being, 
great beings, in whom equality of mmd has arisen, give ^ifts 
which bring about happiness without making a difference as, 
“ To this one it should be given, to that one it should not be 
given.’ ’ They shun what is hurtful, they practise the precepts, 
they follow renunciation with a view to fulfilling the precepts, 
they cleanse their intellect in order that they may ^ot be 
deluded as regards what is good or not good for beings, they 



375 


IX . — Exposition of the Divine States 

put forth, effort always for the weal and happiness of .beings, 
and though they attain to heroism through highest energy; 
they bear with the manifold failings of others, they do not 
break their promise given as, '‘We shall give this to you, do 
that for you”; their resolve is unswerving as regards the 
welfare and happiness of those beings; they' are foremost in 
unswerving love to them; and by even-mmdedness they expect 
nothing in return. Thus having fulfilled the Perfections they 
fulfil, besides, all good states as far as the ten powers, the 
four confidences, the six distinctive knowledges, the eighteen 
attributes of a Buddha. Thus these Immeasurables fulfil all 
lovely states such as alms-giving. 

Thus is ended the Ninth Chapter called the Exposition of 
the Divine States in the section of the development of 
Concentration in the Path of Purity composed for the purpose 
of gladdening good folk. 



[326] CHAPTER X 
EXPOSITION OF THE FORMLESS 

I . — The Subject of Meditation on the Sphere of Infinite Space. 

He who wishes to develop first the sphere of infinite space 
among the four Formless subjects shown immediately after 
the divine states, reflects that the taking up of sticks, the 
taking up of spears, quarrels, contentions, disputes^ are seen 
because^ of form (or matter), that they are wholly absent in 
the Formless, and, as expressed in ‘‘he practises for the 
disgust, fading, cessation of material things,’’ sees the evils in 
the sentient body on account both of the handling of sticks, 
and so on, and of diseases of the eye, ear, and so on, and 
thousand (other) ailments. Passing beyond that he induces 
the Fourth Jhana in one or other of nine devices, excepting 
the limited space-device. 

The sentient bodily form may be transcended by means of 
the Fourth Jhana of the realm of form, but because the device- 
form is similar to it, therefore it is desirable to transcend 
that (the device-form) also. How ^ For instance, a man 
who has a terror of snakes, being chased by one in the forest, 
runs swiftly, and seeing in the place to which he has run a 
palm-leaf variegated with writing, or a creeper, a rope, or a 
crack in the earth, does not wish to look^ at any of them, 
so frightened and terrified is he: — and a man dwellmg in 
a village together with an enemy who does him harm, and 
being oppressed by his acts of torture, bondage and arson, 
goes to live in another village, and on seeing there also a man 
like his enemy in outward appearance, voice and conduct, 
has no wish to look at him, so frightened and terrified is he. 
This is now the application of the siimles: — The time w’’hen 
the men are oppressed by the snake and the enemy [327] is 
^ Anguflara xv, 400. - Read dakkhUukd^no. 


376 



X . — Exposition of the Tormless 377 

like tke time when the monk is possessed by the sentient body 
by way of the object. The running away with speed, and the 
gomg to another village, are like the monk’s transcending 
of the sentient body by means of the Fourth Jhana. The 
absence of a desire through fright and terror to look at the 
palm-leaf variegated with writing, and so on, and at the man 
resembling the enemy in the place of refuge and the other 
village, is like the takmg note by the monk: ‘‘ The device-form 
resembles it,” and a desire to transcend the device-form also. 
And here such similes as the dog charged by a pig, a man 
frightened by an ogre, should be considered as well. 

Thus disgusted with the device-form which is the object 
of the Fourth Jhana, and wishing to get a, way from it, he, 
having reached mastery in the five w^ays,^ and rising from 
the familiarized Fourth Jhana of the realm of form, sees these 
disadvantages: ‘'In that Jhana (the Fourth Jhana of the 
realm of form) form which repels me is made the object,” 
“ It has joy as near enemy,” “ It is more gross than the calm 
emancipation (of the Formless Jhana).” 

Yet in this Jhana (fourth of the realm of form) there is no 
grossness of factors. For as it has two factors, so also has 
the Formless. After seeing its disadvantages and putting an 
end to hankering after it, he attends to the sphere of infinite 
space as calm and infimte, extends the device to the limits 
of the world-system, or as much as he desires, and attending 
to the space touched by the device as, “ Space, space; infinite 
space 1” removes* the device. In domg so he must not roll 
it up like a mat, or draw it out like a cake from the pan. 
He must not even advert to it, attend to it or reflect on it. 
Without adverting to it, attending to it, or reflecting on it, 
but only attending to the space touched as, “ Space, space,” 
he removes the device. And the device is neither swollen nor 
shrunken. The separation just depends on the not attending 
to the device and the attending as, " Space, space.” And 
just the space from w'hich the device has been removed, 
appears. “ Space from which the device is removed,” “ space 


^ See above, p. 177. 

2 Bead uggMteti, ugghdiento. 



378 


THe Path of Purity 

touched by the device/’ space from wMcli the device is 
separated,” are all one and the same thing. He^repeatedly 
[328] adverts to the sign of the space from which the device 
has been removed as Space, space,” and impinges on it 
With application and exercise of thought. As he thus 
repeatedly adverts to it and impinges ^ on it with such 
thinking, the hindrances are discarded, mindfulness is estab- 
lished, the mind is concentrated through access. Again and 
again he practises the sign, develops it, repeats it. As he 
thus again and again adverts and attends to it, consciousness 
of the sphere of infinite •space is fixed in the space as con- 
sciousness of the realm of form is fixed in the Earth-device, 
and so on. Eor here also, primarily, the three or the four 
apperc^tions are of the realm of sense, and associated with 
even-mindedness and feeling. The fourth or the fifth is of the 
realm of the Formless. 

The rest is as described in the Earth-device. This, however, 
IS distuictive. As if the door of a carriage, the opening of 
a small door,^ or the mouth of a jar, and so on, were covered 
with a blue cloth, a yellow cloth, a red or a white cloth, and 
the cloth were removed by the fury of the wmd or by anyone, 
a man looking on would be looking at the space — so the 
monk who, conscious of the realm of the Formless having 
arisen, remamed at first looking with Jhana-eyes at the circle 
of the device, would remain looking at the spa*ce when the 
sign was removed suddenly by the preliminary attention as, 

Space, space.” 

In so far is it said of him that “ By passing wholly beyond 
all perceptions of matter, by the dying out of the perception of 
impact, by not attending to perceptions of difference, he, thinking, 

^ It is all infinite space,’ enters into and abides in the sphere 
of infinite space 

Therein, '‘wholly” means, "in all respects”; "of all, 
without remainder” is the meaning. 

" Perceptions of matter,” that is, jhanas of the realms of form 
and the registered objects (m the devices) mentioned under 

1 PatpoU or Putoli, which the P.T.S. Dictionary {s.v. PattoU\ takes to 
be a variant of mutoU in the sense of “ provision bag for a carriage.” 

2 Ptgha ii, 1 12. See Expositor 269 f . 



379 


X . — Exposition of the Formless 

the head of perception. For Jhana of the realm of form is 
called ''matter'’ in such phrases as, ''Aware of his bodily 
frame he sees^ material objects so also its object in such 
phrases as, Externally he sees objects comely^ uncomely. 
Hence in this passage, '' perception of matter,” that is, per- 
ception with respect to matter, is an equivalent term for such 
Jhana of the realm of form symbolized by the perception. 
That such Jhana is called “ matter-perceptioned ” means that 
‘‘ matter ” (material quality) is a name for it, and should be 
understood as an equivalent term for the different kinds of 
devices and the registered mental objects. 

[329] By passing beyond,” that is, through fading and 
cessation. What is this sa 5 dng^ It means that he, havmg 
attained, abides in [the Jhana of] the infinitude oi space 
conditioned by fading and cessation, to wit, the fading 
and cessation in all respects of, all perceptions of material 
qualities, of those which are known as the fifteen perceptions 
of Jhana by virtue of moral, of resultant, and of inoperative 
consciousness, and of those which are known as the nine 
perceptions of object by virtue of the Earth-device, and so 
on. It is not possible to live in the attainment of that without 
wholly passing beyond the perception of matter. And on this 
point, because one who lusts after the object cannot possibly 
transcend such perception, and because when the perceptions are 
transcended, the object is transcended, therefore without speak- 
ing of the latter process, the Vibhanga^ mentions only the tran- 
scending of the perceptions: — '' Herein, what is the perception 
of matter ? To one who has reached the attainment of the realm 
of matter, or who is born in a material abode, or to one who lives 
in happiness under present conditions, there are perception, the 
percemng, the state of having perceived. These are called per- 
ceptions of matter. There is the passing beyond, the surpassing, 
the transcending of those perceptions. Hence it has been said, 
' Wholly by passing beyond the perceptions of matter J ” And 
because these attainments are to be acquired by transcending 
the object, not like the First Jhanas, and so on, which are to 
be acquired only in an object, therefore this exposition of the 


^ Dlgha ii, 111. 


2 lUd. 110. 


3 Page 261. 



380 The •Path of Purity 

meaning lias been made also by way of transcending tbe 
object. 

‘‘By tbe dying out of tbe perception of impact/^ — tbe 
perception, that is, which is produced by tbe impact between 
eye, and so on, as physical bases and visible things, and so 
on, as objects,* is called the perception of impact. It is an 
equivalent term for the perception of visible things, and so 
on. As he said: “ The 'perceptim of visible object, of sound, 
smell, taste, tangible object — these are called the perception of 
impact.'^^ The stated clause implies, by the dying out, 
putting away, not arising, not proceeding, of the whole ten 
impact-perceptions, that is, of the five good results, and five 
bad results. Surely [it may be said] these are not obtained by 
one who has attained to the first and other Jhanas, since at 
the time of attaming these, consciousness is not arising by 
way of the five doors ? Nevertheless, just as pleasure and 
pain are mentioned in the Fourth Jhana, and just as the 
theory of individuality, and so on, is mentioned in the Third 
Path,^ [330] although they are removed at another stage, 
so these impact-perceptions are to be understood as mentioned 
here by way of praismg this Jhana, so that people may. strive 
for it. Or, although they are not obtained by one who has 
attained to the [consciousness of the] realm of matter, it is not 
because they have been removed; for the developing of the 
Jhana of that realm is not conducive to distaste for matter; 
rather the procedure of these impact-perceptions is in con- 
jmiction with matter. But this developing of the Formless (or 
immaterial) is conducive to dispassion for matter. Hence it 
is proper to speak of their removal here. It is proper not 
only to speak of them, but also to bear in mind that they 
have actively been removed. Verily it has been said by the 
Blessed One that, because of the non-removal of these impact- 
perceptions prior to the Jhana of the immaterial, sound is 
a thorn to one attaining to the First Jhana.^ But owing to 
^ Patighasannd Vibhanga 261. 

2 The path of “ the Never-retumer, for whom the five lower fetters 
are done away with .” — Points of Controversy 74. The “ theory of in- 
dividnaiity ” or soul was the first Fetter. * 

® Points of Controversy 331, quoting AngvUara v, 133-5. 



381 


X . — Exfosition of the Formless 

their removal, here the imperturbability of the immaterial 
attainments and peacefulness of emancipation have been 
declared. And when.Alara Kalama entered on the attain- 
ment of the immaterial, he did not see, nor did he hear, the 
sound of five hundred carts passing close by him.^ 

By not attendmg to perceptions of difference ’’ means 
either ‘‘ to perceptions going on in a different field,” or to 
perceptions of differences” (or multiformity). This term, 
“ perception of difference,” is mentioned for two reasons — 
Vibhanga- analyzes it as follows: — What, herein, is percef- 
tion of difference ? The 2 >erception, perceiving, state of having 
perceived, in one who has not attained to Jhdna and ivho is 
endowed with the datum of mind, or ivith that of mental awareness 
— these are called perceptions of difference'' In other words, 
the perception of such an one, comprising the data of his mind 
and mental awareness, goes on in a field of diverse nature with 
reference to difference in sights, sounds, and so on. In the 
next place, there are forty-four classes of perceptions which 
are mutually unKke, being diverse in their intrinsic nature. 
These are the eight classes of moral perceptions, the twelve 
immoral, the eleven of moral results, the two of immoral 
results, and the eleven inoperatives — all of the realm of 
sensuous experience.^ And the entire inattention to these 
perceptions of difference ” implies not adverting to, not con- 
sidering, not £*eflecting upon. And because he does not advert 
in mind to them, does not attend to, does not reflect upon, 
them, therefore the expression [commented on] was used. 

And because the preceding perceptions of matter and of 
impact do not exist in the immaterial plane produced by this 
Jhana, much less in that plane at the time of abiding in the 
attainment of this Jhana, therefore is their non-existence said 
thus to be due to the two causes of transcending and dying 
out. [331] But among the different perceptions, because 
twenty-seven perceptions, to wit, eight moral perceptions of 
the sensuous realm, nine inoperative perceptions, ten im m oral 
perceptions, exist in the plane produced by this Jhana, there- 
fore the cause of not attending to them was mentioned. 


^ Dialogues ii, 141. 


" Page 261. 


^ Expositor 141 ff. 



382 The Path of Purity 

And because one abiding in tbe attainment of this Jhana in 
that plane of existence does so by not attending to those per- 
ceptions, one who attends to them h§,s not attained to the 
Jhana. 

Briefly: ‘'By passing beyond the perceptions of matter” 
imphes the removal of all states of the realm of form. “ By 
the dying out of the perceptions of impact, by inattention to 
perceptions of difierence,” implies the removal of, and in- 
attention to, all consciousness and mental properties of the 
Sensuous realm. 

In “ Infinite is space,” “ infinite ” means, where it rises or 
where it ends, does not appear. “ Space ” is space separated 
off by the [Space]-device. And here infinitude is also to be 
knowu^ by virtue of attention. Therefore it is said in the 
Vibhanga^: “In that space he places, fixes his consciousness, 
touches the infinite ; hence, infinite is space. 

In the expression, “ Enters into and abides in the sphere of 
infinite space,” “infinite” means “it has no end.” Space 
having no end is infinite space, which agam is infinitude of 
space. The sphere of i nfinit ude of space means infinite space 
is the realm (sphere) in the sense of abode of the associated 
Jhana, like a deva-realm of devas. 

“ Enters into and abides in ” means “ reaches the [Jhana of 
the] sphere of infinite space, accomplishes it and lives with 
fitting modes of behaviour.” 

This is the detailed Discourse on the Subject of Meditation 
on the Sphere of Infinite Space. 


11 . — The Subject of Meditation 07i the Sphere of Infinite 
Consciousness. 

He who, having reached mastery over the attainment of 
the sphere of infinite space in the five ways, wishes to develop 
the sphere of infinite consciousness, should, after seemg the 
evils of the former sphere as: “This attainment has Jhana 
of the realm of Form for near enemy. It is not calm^ like the 
sphere of infinite consciousness,” put an end to hankering 


^ Page 262. 


2 Read santa ti. 



383 


X . — Exposition of the ‘Formless 

after it, attend to tlie sphere of infinite consciousness ^s calm, 
and repea^fedly advert to the consciousness which proceeds 
diffusing through space as '' Consciousness, consciousness,” 
attend to it, reflect upon it, impinge on it with application 
and exercise of thought. 

[332] But it should not be attended to as '' Infinite, infinite.” 
As he thus drives his mind repeatedly on to the sign, the 
hmdrances are discarded, mindfulness is established, the mind 
is concentrated through access. He repeatedly practises the 
sign, develops it, repeats it. As he does so, consciousiiess 
of the sphere of infinite consciousness is fixed in consciousness 
which has touched the space, as [consciousness of] the sphere 
of infinite space is fixed in space. The way of the ecstasy is 
to be understood as described above. „ 

In so far is this said of him that By ivholly passing beyond 
the sphere of infinitude of space^ he, thinking ‘ it is all infinite 
consciousness,^ enters into, and abides in, the sphere of infini- 
tude of consciousness ^ ] wherein ‘^wholly ” is as already 
stated. 

In the expression '' By passing beyond the sphere of infini- 
tude of space ” both Jhana and the object are called the sphere 
of infinite space in the way already stated. For the object by 
the previous method is infinitude of space, which, as being the 
object of the First Formless Jhana, is the sphere in the sense 
of abode, lite a deva-sphere of devas: thus, sphere of infim- 
tude of space. And infinitude of space as being the condition 
of the birth of the Jhana, is sphere in the sense of birth-place 
as Kambojd is of horses: thus sphere of infinite space. By 
not proceeding with, by not attending to, Jhana and object, 
he transcends both of them, and since he ought to attain to 
and abide in the sphere of infinitude of consciousness, he 
unites both of them in one term, and so the expression 
passing beyond the space-infinitude-sphere ” is stated. 
“Infinite consciousness” is said as he, thinking, “infinite 
is consciousness, infinite is consciousness,” attends to the 
consciousness that proceeds diffused with the thought 
“ infinjte is space.” Or, infinite is by way of attention. For 


^ Digha li, 112. 



384 


TKe Bath of Purity 

in attending completely to consciousness, with space as object, 
he attends to it as infinite. 

This has been said in the Vibhanga^ : “ Infinite consciousness ! 
He attends to the consciousness as infinite with which space is 
diffused ; hence infinite spacefi where the expression con- 
sciousness . . . with which shows reason in the sense of 
application. The teachers of the Commentaries explain the 
meaning thus: He attends to consciousness which touches (or 
diffuses through) space as infinite. 

in the expression, He enters into and abides in conscious- 
ness-infinitude-sphere,’’ [333] infinite” means, it has no 
end. Infinite is the same as infinitude. Instead of using 
vimmydnahcam for consciousness-infinitude,” the [shorter] 
term {viMndnancam) is used, an instance of the elision of a 
syllable. This consciousness-infinitude is sphere (or realm) 
in the sense of abode, of the associated Jhana like a deva- 
realm of devas. The rest is the same as in the previous Jhana. 

This is the detailed Discourse on the Subject of Meditation 
on the Sphere of Infinite Consciousness. 

III. — The Subject of Meditation on the Sphere of 
Nothingness. 

Whoso, having reached mastery over the attainment of the 
sphere of infinite consciousness in the five ways, wishes to 
develop the sphere of nothingness, should [first] see the evils 
of the former sphere as, This attainment has the sphere of 
infinite space for near enemy. It is not calm like the sphere 
of nothingness.” He should then put an end to hankering 
after it, attend to the sphere of nothingness as calm and attend 
to the absence, emptiness, mode of seclusion of the sphere of 
infinite space as the object of the sphere of infinite conscious- 
ness. How ? Without attending to consciousness he should 
repeatedly advert to this “It is nothing, it is nothing,” 
“It is empty, it is empty,” or “It is secluded, it is 
secluded,” attend to it, reflect on it, impinge on it with 
application and exercise of thought. As he drives 
his mind on to the sign,^ the hindrances are discarded, 


1 Page 262. 


Read nimiite ciUam for nimittacittam. 



X. — Exposition of the Formless 385 

mindfulness is established, the mind is concentrated through 
access. Eepeatedly he practises, develops, repeats, the 
sign. As he does so,, consciousness of the sphere of nothing- 
ness is fixed in the emptiness, seclusion, nothingness of the 
lofty consciousness which proceeds diffusing through space 
just as the sphere of infinite consciousness is fixed in the lofty 
consciousness diffused through space. 

And here the way of the ecstasy is to be understood as already 
described. This, however, is distinctive* — For, just as a man 
goes somewhere after seeing the assembly of monks gathered 
on a certain business in a pavilion,* hall, and so on, and on 
returning when the monks have risen and left at the end of the 
business which called them together, and standing at the door 
and looking through the place sees that it is empty, that it is 
secluded, this thought does not occur to him, Have so many 
monks died ? or have they departed for any particular place 
but he sees indeed that the place is empty, [334] secluded, that 
there is nothing, — so first the monk lives, views the conscious-’ 
ness which has proceeded in space with the Jhana-eye of the 
sphere of infinite consciousness. And when the consciousness 
disappears through the preliminary work of attention that 
there is nothing, there is nothing,” he remains viewing its 
absence reckoned as a going away.” 

In so far is it said of him that Wholly 'passing beyond 
the sphere of infinitude of consciousness Ae, thinking ^ there is 
nothing,' enters into and abides in the sphere of nothingness''^ 
Here also wholly ” means the same as above. 

In the expression sphere of infinitude of consciousness,” 
also, both Jhana and object are called the sphere of infinite 
consciousness in the way already stated. For the object by 
the previous method is infinitude of consciousness, which as 
being the object of the Second Formless Jhana is the sphere, 
in the sense of abode, like a deva-sphere of devas: hence the 
term sphere of infinitude of consciousness.” iioid infinitude 
of consciousness, as being the condition of the birth of the 
Jhana, is sphere in the sense of buth-place, as Kambojd is of 
horses: hence sphere of infinitude of consciousness.” By 
1 Digha ii, 112. 


26 



386 TUe Bath of Purity 

not proceeding with, by not attending to, Jbana and object, 
be transcends both of them and, since be ought to attain to, 
and abide m, tbe sphere of nothingness, he unites both of them 
in one term; hence the expression, passing beyond the con- 
sciousness-infimtude-sphere,” is to be considered. 

The expression, There is nothing'’ is used as he attends 
thus: Is not, is not ^ Empty ! empty ^ Separate 1 separate 1” 
Although what has been said in the Vibhanga^ as, ‘ There 
is nothing' that is, he does not develop that consciousness [of 
tht First Formless Jhdna], he makes it wane, he makes it dis- 
appear : he sees, ' There vs nothing,' hence it is said, ‘ There is 
nothing,' " has been said as contemplating consciousness by 
way of loss, the meaning is to be understood as in the passage 
here. For without adverting to, attending to, reflecting on, 
consciousness, but attending only to its absence, its emptmess, 
its separateness, he reframs from developing it, he makes it 
wane, he makes it disappear. There is no other meaning. 

He enters into and abides in the sphere of nothingness," — 
here “ nothing " signifies, there is nothing of it." The state- 
ment is, that not even disruption remains of it. Nothingness 
is the state of having nothing left, an equivalent term for the 
disappearance of the consciousness of the sphere of infinite 
space. [335] Nothmgness is the sphere, in the sense of abode, 
of that [third] Jhana, like a deva-sphere of devas: thus, 
'' sphere of nothmgness." The rest is the same Us in the pre- 
ceding Jhana. 

This is the detailed Discourse on the Subject of Meditation 
on the Sphere of Nothingness, 

IV. — The Subject of Meditation on th£ Sphere of Neither 
Perception nor Non-perception. 

Wh^so has reached mastery over the attainment of the 
sphere of nothingness in these five ways, and wishes to develop 
the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception, should 
first see the evils of the former sphere as, ‘‘ This attainment 
has the sphere of infinite consciousness for a near enemy. It is 
not calm like the sphere of neither perception nor no^i-percep- 


1 Page 262. 



387 


X . — Exposition of tjie Formless 

tion,” or '' Perception is a disease, perception is a boil, percep- 
tion is a dart. This sphere, namely, of neither perception nor 
non-perception is calm, it is lofty,’’ and see the blessings of 
the higher stages. He should then put an end to hankering 
after it and, attending to the sphere of neither perception nor 
non-perception as calm, should repeatedly advert to that attain- 
ment of the sphere of nothingness which has proceeded with 
nothingness as object, should attend to it, reflect upon it, 
impinge on it with application and exercise of thought, regard- 
ing it as calm! calm! As he repeatedly drives his mind^on 
to the sign, the liindrances are discarded, mindfulness is estab- 
lished, the mind is concentrated through access. He repeatedly 
practises, develops, repeats the sign. As he does so, conscious- 
ness of the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception is 
fixed in the four aggregates called^ the attainment of the sphere 
of nothingness, as the sphere of nothingness is fixed in the dis- 
appearance of consciousness. The way of the ecstasy is to be 
understood as given above. 

In so far is this said of him that wholly passing beyond 
the sphere of nothingness he enters into and abides in the sphere 
of neither perception nor non-perception. 

Here also wholly ” has the meaning already given. 

Passing beyond the sphere of nothingness,” — here also 
both Jhana and object are called the sphere of nothingness 
in the way already stated. For the object of the previous 
method is nothmgness, which, as being the object of the Third 
Formless Jhana, is the sphere, in the sense of abode, like a 
deva-sphere of devas: thus, sphere of nothingness. And 
nothingness as being the condition of the birth of the Jhana 
[336] IS sphere in the sense of birth-place, as Kambojd is of 
horses; thus, sphere of nothingness. By not proceeding with, 
not attending to, Jhana and object, he transcends both o.f them; 
and since he ought to attain to, and abide m, the sphere of 
neither perception nor non-perception, he imites both of them 
in one term, and so the expression “ passing beyond the sphere 
of nothingness ” is stated. 

• 1 “Called,” i.e., “which are the objects of.” — Tiled. 

2 Dialogues Uf 112 , 



388 


TTie Bath of Purity 

'' The sphere of neither perception nor non-perception,” — 
here the Jhana is so called because of the real existence of 
such perception. In order to show this perception and 
its progress^ arising in one who practises accordingly, the 
Vibhanga' elaborates the phrase, neither perceptml nor non- 
percepiml,'^ and •says that one attends to the sphere of nothing- 
ness as peace, and develops the attainment of the residuum of 
mental coefficients ; therefore is it said to he neither perceptual 
nor non-perceptual ” In that text the sentence attends . , . 
as«peace ” means that he attends to the sphere of nothingness 
as peace, from the peaceMness of the object, thmking: '' Verily 
this attainment is peace, since it will hold with non-existence 
as its object.” If he attends to it as peace, he is no longer in a 
state of desire for [further] attainment when he would be 
thinking, '‘How can I transcend this '2” His mind is con- 
sidering its peace, but as to regarding, contemplating, attend- 
ing how “ I shall advert,^ I shall attain, I shall sustain, I shall 
emerge from, I shall reflect upon [what I have gone through],” 
he does nothmg of all this, "Why? Because the sphere of 
neither perception nor non-perception is more peaceful, more 
exalted, than the sphere of nothingness. As a king, riding his 
elephant in great state and gomg about the city streets, might 
see craftsmen such as carvers m ivory, tightly swathed in one 
garment, their heads covered in another, their limbs besprinkled 
with ivory dust, making various forms out of ivorj^, and so on. 
And he, being pleased with their skill, might say: ” 0 sirs, 
how clever are these masters who can do such things !” But 
the thought does not arise in him: “ Good indeed would it be 
were I to give up my kingdom and become such a craftsman !” 
And why is that ? Because of the great advantage of the 
glory of kmgship. Now just as the king goes past the crafts- 
men, ao although the monk attends to that attainment as 
peace, he does not consider, ponder, attend thus: “I will 
advert to it, attain it, sustain it, emerge from it, reflect upon 
it.” Attending to it as peace by the previous method, [337] 

^ Tam tava dassetun ti^tan ti tam sauna pafipadam, yathdiidtor- 
sannam tassdca adMgamupdyan U attho. — Tiled, » 

2 Page 263. ® Bead dvajjissdmi for dpagjissdmL 



389 


X . — Exposition of the Formless 

Lo arrives at the exceedingly subtle perception with the'attam- 
ment of ecstasy. By means of that perception he becomes 
neither perceptive nor nomperceptive. And he is said to 
have developed the attainment of the residuum of mental 
coefficients, that is, the Fomi^h Formless attainment of mental 
coefficients of exceeding subtlety. 

Now in order to show the meaning of that sphere of neither 
perception nor non-perception which by virtue of the thus 
acquired perception is so called, the states of mind and mental 
properties are here stated of one who has entered into that 
sphere of consciousness, or of one who is born in that plane of 
existence, or of one who lives in happiness under present con- 
ditions.^ Of these three the states of mind and mental proper- 
ties of one who has entered on that conscious experifsnce are 
here intended. The literal definition is that, owing to the 
absence of gross perception and the presence of subtle percep- 
tion in this Jliana, with its associated states, there is neither 
perception nor is there the absence of perception. This Jhana 
of neither perception nor non-perception is [classed as] a 
sphere included in the [conscious] spheres of mind and of ideas; 
hence the name '' sphere of neither perception nor non-percep- 
tion.’’ Or, again, the perception here is non-perceptual in 
so far as it is incapable of effective functioning; and owing 
to the presence of the subtle residuum of mental coefficients, 
it is not non-perceptual : hence '' neither perceptual nor 
non-perceptual.” And sphere of neither perception nor 
non-perception ” means that it is a sphere m the sense of 
abode of the remainmg states. And not only perception is 
of such a kind. Feeling also is neither feeling nor non- 
feeling, consciousness also is neither consciousness nor non- 
consciousness, contact also is neither contact nor non-contact. 
It should be understood that this discourse has been made 
with perception as representative of the other associated 
states. 

This meaning can be made plaui by the simile of oil for 
besmearing bowls, and so on. It is said that a novice be- 
smeared a bowl with oil and put it by. At the time of drinking 


^ Vibhanga 263 . 



390 


The Path of Purity 

rice-gniel, the Elder said to him: Bring the bowl/’ He 
answered: ‘"There is oil on the bowl, sir.” Then,*' when the 
Elder said: “Novice, fetch it; we will' fill an ml-tube,” he 
answered: “There is no oil, sir.” In this simile, as from 
the said [quantnjn of] oil inside, there is oil in the sense of the 
bowl’s being unfit for rice-gruel, and yet there is not sufficient 
oil for the filling of the oil-tube, even so that perception, from 
its incapacity for efiective functioning, is not perception, and 
fro^m the presence of the subtle residuum of mental coefficients 
is not non-perception. 

But what IS the function of perception here The noting of 
the object and the engendering of repulsion after becoming the 
object of insight/ [338] As the element of heat cannot per- 
form its function of burning in cold water, so this perception 
cannot manifest the function of noting. And in the remaining 
attainments it is not possible to engender repulsion after 
becoming the object of insight as perception can. Indeed, a 
monk, who has not accomplished his contemplation in other 
groups [of exercises] cannot attain to repulsion after he has 
grasped the groups of the sphere of neither perception nor 
non-perception, albeit perhaps the venerable Sariputta,^ or 
a greatly wise man of matured insight like Sariputta might 
be able to do so. "" These states (of neither perception nor 
non-perception) not having been, have come to be; having 
become, they perish,” — thus he might be able to do so by way 
of contemplating the group as a whole, but not by means of 
insight into individual states. Such is the subtlety of this 
attainment. 

As by the simile of oil for besmearing the bowl, so by the 
following simile of water in one’s path this meaning is to be 
made plain. They say that a novice, going on a journey ahead 
of his Elder, saw a little water and said: “ Water, sir; take off 
your sandals.” Then, when the Effier said: “If so, bring 
the bathing cloth; we will bathe,” he replied: “ There is no 
water.” In this simile, as there is water in the sense of there 

^ Some read visesa- for maaya-, meaning thereby, “and the en- 
gendering of repulsion through extraordinary insight.” See Expositor 
279 ?i. 

^ IfajjMma, Anupada SuUa. 



391 


X . — Exposition of the 'Formless 

being just enougb to wet the sandals, and no water in the 
sense of ^here not being enough for bathing, so this per- 
ception from its incapacity for efiective functioning is not 
perception, and from the presence of the subtle residuum of 
mental coefficients is not non-perception. Not only by these, 
but also by other fitting similes, should this*meaning be made 
clear. 

He enters into and abides,” — ^this is as said above. 

This is the detailed discourse on the subject of meditation 
on the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception. 

V . — The Particular Discourse. 

The fourfold consciousness of immaterial spheres 
Th’ incomparable Lord hath [here] declared. AnS now 
That these we’ve learnt, we must go on to know thereof 
Some teaching in detail. These four do come to pass 
If one transcend th’ object experienced. But the wise 
Believe the Jhana quahties are not surpassed. 

Of the four attainments, the first is from transcending the 
image of the mark or the device-object, the second is from 
transcending space, the third is from transcending the con- 
sciousness proceeding with reference to space, the fourth is 
from transcending the disappearance of consciousness proceed- 
ing with reference to space. Thus these four Formless attain- 
ments should be understood in all respects to have transcended 
the object. [339] But in them the wise do not hold with 
the transcendmg of the factors. In them there is no transcend- 
ing of the factors as in the attainments of the realm of form, 
because in all of them there are just two Jhana-factors, even- 
mindedness and collectedness of mind. Though it be so, 

Here each latter one is nobler; understand 
The sinules of dress and storeys thus: — 

As in the lowest storey of a four-storeyed palace there might 
be available the highest of the five pleasures of sense in the 
form celestial dancing, singing, music, fragrant scent, gar- 
lands, sweet drinks and eatables, couches, clothes, and so on; 



392 


TJie Path of Purity 

in tlie second storey the pleasures available might be higher 
than those in the first; those in the third storey ^might be 
higher still; those in the fourth storey might be tl^e highest of 
all; although herein the four are all palace storeys, and there 
is no distinction in them as such, yet owing to the difference 
in the achievement of the pleasures, the higher storey is more 
excellent than the lower: — 

And as a woman might possess garments of a texture 
[numbered] four, three, two, or one in weight, spun thick, soft, 
very soft, most soft, and of the same dimensions in length and 
breadth; although herein the four garments are the same in 
length and breadth, and there is no difference in respect of 
size, yet the last named are more excellent than the former as 
regards J^he coarseness or smoothness of touch, fineness of 
texture and value, so also in these four Formless attainments, 
although there are only two factors, even-mindedness and 
collectedness of mind, yet owing to the distinction m develop- 
ment and the degree of excellence of the factors, the subsequent 
attainments here are more exalted. Thus they are of graduated 
excellence. 

Where a pavilion stands with filth aroimd, 

One clinging hangs, another on him leans, 

Another stands without, and leaning not, 

On him a fourth man leans: — ^the wise should see 
In these four men, those four respectively. 

This is how the meaning is connected: — They say that there 
was a pavilion in an unclean place. A certam man on arriving 
there, loathing the dirt, hung on to the pavilion with both 
hands and remained there as though fixed. Another man 
having come, remained leant on the first man who was 
hangmg.to the pavihon. Then another having come, thought . 

He who hangs on to the pavilion, he who leans on him — 
both of them are badly placed. Their fall, with the fall of the 
pavilion, is certam. Now I stand outside,” [340] and he stood 
outside without dependiug on that support. Then another 
came and considered the unsafe positions of the man whq hung 
"Oil to the pavilion and of the man who leant on him, and con- 



393 


X . — Exposition of the Formless 

sidering the safe position of the man who stood apart> stood 
leaning on, him. Herein space from which the device has 
been separated should be regarded as the pavilion in an unclean 
place; the sphere of infinite space, with space for object and 
contempt for the device-object, as the man who, loathing the 
impurity, hung on to the pavilion; the sphere of infimte con- 
sciousness arising in dependence on the sphere of infinite space, 
with space for object, as the man who leant on him who hung 
on to the pavilion; the sphere of nothingness, which does not 
make the sphere of infinite space its object, but has the absence 
(of the first Formless consciousness) ‘'for its object, as the man 
who thought of the unsafe position of both those men, and 
who without leaning on him who hung on to the pavilion, 
stood outside; the sphere of neither perception nor noiit^percep- 
tion proceeding in dependence on the sphere of nothingness, 
established in the exterior position called the absence of the 
(first Formless) consciousness, as the man who thought of the 
unsafe positions of the man who hung on to the pavilion and 
of the man who leant on him, and who, considermg the man 
who stood without as '' he is well placed,’' stood leaning on 
him. 

Though this be so, 

“ This ” takes just that ” as object, for there is 
No other; even so, that they may live, 

Men take a king though his defects be seen. 

This " sphere of neither perception nor non-perception 
takes that " sphere of nothingness for its object for want of 
another, in spite of the latter’s fault of having the sphere of 
infinite consciousness as its ‘‘ near enemy.” Like what 
As when that they may live, men take a king though his 
defects be seen.” For although the people see his faults, to 
wit, “ his conduct is harsh,” they would not get their livelihood 
save under this king who, though unrestrained, harsh in act, 
speech, and thought, is lord of all the quarters of the country. 
Even so this sphere of neither perception nor non-perception 
takes that sphere of nothingness for its object, in spite of its 
defect, from mability to get any other. Still, 



394 


The Path of Purity 

Wto climbs a stairway grasps the stairway rail; 

Who climbs a hill sees steadfastly the pealj; 

Who climbs a rock will seek a kneehold fijm; 

So doth a man just on this Jhana lean. 

And so he, leaning on it, carries on. 

Thus IS ended the Tenth Chapter called: the Exposition of 
the Formless in the section of the development of Concentration 
in the Path of Purity composed for the purpose of gladdemng 
good folk. 



[341] CHAPTEE XI 
EXPOSITION OE CONCENTEATION 

Development of the Perception of Revulsion from Food. 

Now we come to the exposition of the development of tlie 
perception of revulsion from (or abommableness of) sustenance^ 
shown in outline as one perception ” immediately after the 
Formless. 

Therein, sustenance {dhdro) is that which fetches (fiharati, 
its own fruit). It is of four kmds. material food, contact, 
purpose, and consciousness. Of them, who sustains (fetches) 
what ? (1) Material food sustains the eight material qualities 

ending in nutritive essence." (2) Contact sustains the three 
feelings. (3) Purpose sustains re-conception in the three 
forms of becoming. (4) Consciousness sustams name-form 
at the moment of conception. 

Of them, in material food there is the danger of desire (for 
taste) ; in contact there is the danger of approach (or attraction 
to the object); in purpose the danger of coming to be; in 
consciousness the danger of re-conception. And among them 
with their dangers, material food is to be illustrated by the 
simile of the child’s flesh, contact by the simile of a cow with 
a sore hide,^ purpose by the simile of a charcoal-pit,*^ con- 
sciousness by the simile of sword and stake.’* 

And among them, only material food, such as the different 
kmds of things to eat, to drink, to bite, to lick, is intended in 
this sense to be sustenance. Perception which arises by way 
of seizing the abominable mode in such food is perception of 

^ See Dialogues in, p. 263, Kindred Sayings ii, p. 8 and footnotes. 
Translated “ nutriment ” in Expositor^ e g. p. 430 f. 

^ The eight are: The four primaries — extension, cohesion, heat, 
mobihty, and four depending on these — colour, odour, taste, nutritive 
Expositor 110- 

^ Kind, red Sayings ii, p. 68. ^Ibid. 69. ® Ibid. 70. 


395 



396 The Path of Purity 

revulsion from food. He who wishes to develop that per- 
ception should, after acquiring the subject of meditation and 
not missing a single word of it, reflect, alone ^^id secluded, 
[342] on the abominableness of material food such as the 
different kinds of things to eat, to drink, to bite, to lick, 
the abominableness of food manifesting itself in ten ways: 
(1) From the necessity of having to go for it; (2) of seeking 
for it; (3) of eating it; (4) because of ingredients; (5) of 
the receptacle; (6) of its undigested state; (7) of its digested 
st&te; (8) of its fruit; (9) of its oozing; (10) of its bemg 
smeared. 

(1) Of these, '' From the necessity of having to go for it,” 
means: — In this mighty religion, a monk, after reciting the 
word of the Buddha or doing his ascetic duties the whole 
night, rises in time, does what he has to do in the courtyard 
of his shrine, and of the Bo-tree, sees to the water for washing, 
sweeps the cell, nourishes his body, takes his seat and attends 
to the subject of meditation twenty or thirty times. Kismg 
therefrom he must needs take his bowl and robe, forsake the 
groves which are the scene of his religious austerities, free from 
crowding, pleasant in their solitude, full of shade and water, 
clean, cool, delightful spots, and go, regardless of the noble 
delight of solitude, in the direction of the village for the sake 
of food, like a jackal going towards the charnel-field. As he 
goes along he must, as soon as he gets down from the bedstead 
or stool, step on the mat which is covered with dust from the 
feet, with droppings of house lizards, and so on. Then his 
eyes must meet the front of the monastery which is more 
filthy than the inner room owing to the occasional defilements 
of rat-dung, bat-dung, and so on; then the lower floor which, 
being occasionally besmeared with droppings of owls, pigeons, 
and so .on, is more filthy than the upper floor, then the. cell, 
which is more filthy than the lower floor owmg to the occasional 
defilements of faded grasses and leaves borne on the wind, of 
the sick novices obeying the calls of nature, spitting and 
blowing their noses there, and of water and mud and so on, in 
the rainy season. He must see the monastery road vihich is 
uaore filthy than the cell. After saluting in due course the 



XL — Exposition of Goncentmmn ijyv 

Bo-tree, and tlie strine, and standing in a considering-pen/ 
he, regard^^ess of the shrine which is like a heap of pearls, the 
Bo-tree whijh is as naptivatmg as a tuft of peacock's tail- 
feathers, the dwelling which is glorious with the splendour of 
a deva-mansion, goes forth with the thought: '^Turning 
one’s back on such a delightful place, one must go for the sake 
of food,” and going along the road to the village, he finds the 
road to be full of stumps and thorns, broken and uneven, 
owing to the active running of water. Then, wearing his 
inner garments as though covering a boil, fastening his girSle 
as though bindmg a bandage on a wound, putting on the outer 
garment as though covering a heap of bones, [343] and taking 
out his bowl as though taking out a medicine-pot, he arrives 
near the village gate where he must behold corpses of elephants, 
of horses, of cattle, of bufialoes, of men, of snakes and dogs. 
Not merely must he behold them, he must also suffer their 
smell to strike his nose. Then standing at the village gate, he 
must observe the village roads to shun danger from fierce 
elephants, horses, and so on. Thus for the sake of food must 
he step on, behold, smell, such abominations begmmng with 
the mat and ending in the various kinds of corpses. Food is 
indeed abominable: thus he should consider its abominable- 
ness from the necessity of having to go for it. 

(2) How, from the necessity of having to seek for it ? 
Bearing the ^bominableness of having to go for food, the monk, 
having entered the village, must walk the village streets from 
house to house, bowl in hand, like a pauper dressed in rags.^ 
There in the village during the ramy season, his legs sink in 
the muddy water as far as his calves at every step, one hand 
holding the bowl, the other lifting the robe. In the hot 
season he must walk about, his body covered with dust and 
grass hurled by the fury of the wind. Reaching every door 
he must behold and step into dirty pools and pools of mud 
mixed with the washings of fish, of meat, of rice, with saliva, 
mucus, dog’s dung, pig’s dung, and so on, and full of worms 

^ Vitahka-malake, i e., where he thinks as to the place where he ought 
to go to for alms. 

2 Thu^ the Tikd explains sahghdtipdrutena : kappampdmpamna 
pdrviasanrena. 



398 


The Bath of Furity 

and black flies. And tbe flies from the pools come and alight 
on his garments, his bowl, and his head. When he has 
entered the houses, some give, others do not give alms. Some 
of those who give, give food which was cooked the day previous, 
or stale food, or putrid junkets and cakes, and so on. Some 
who do not give*say, ‘‘ Please pass on to the next house, sir.’’ 
Some remain silent as though not seeing him. Others turn 
their faces elsewhere; still others use harsh speech, such as, 
‘‘Away, you bald pate!” After thus roaming the village 
foj' alms, he must leave it like a pauper. Thus for the sake 
of food he must step on, behold and put up with, such abomina- 
tions as muddy water from the time he enters the village until 
he leaves it. Food is indeed abominable, — thus he should 
consider its abommableness from the necessity of having to 
seek for it. 

[344] (3) How about eating it ? Having thus sought the 
food and seated himself comfortably in a pleasant spot outside 
the village he, on seeing a monk worthy of reverence or a 
respectable man, ought to invite him so long as he has not 
dipped his hand in the food. But the moment he has dipped 
his hand with intent to eat the food, he should be ashamed to 
say, ‘‘ Have some.” And as he kneads the food after dipping 
his hand in it, the perspiration that flows along his five fingers 
wets the dry, hard food and makes it soft. When making 
lumps of the food which has lost its beauty throu'gh kneading, 
he puts it in his mouth, the lower teeth fulfil the functions of 
a mortar, the upper teeth those of a pestle, the tongue those 
of the hand. There in the mouth it is ground like dog’s food 
in a dog’s food-dish, with the pestles of the teeth, turned over 
by the tongue, and is besmeared with the thin, clear saliva on 
the blade of the tongue; with the thick saliva from the middle 
of the .tongue; with the impurities from between the teeth in 
places where the teeth-bones cannot get at it. And so the food 
being at that moment a special preparation devoid of beauty 
and odour, reaches a highly loathsome state like dog’s vomit 
in a dog’s food-dish. And in such a state it appears to the eye as 
something that might have been swallowed long ago. Thus he 
should consider its abominableness that arises from eating it. 



XL — Exposition of Qoyicentration 399 

(4) How about the lugredieuts ? xlnd since Buddhaa, silent 
Buddhas, or universal monarchs provide one or other of the 
four ingrediejits : bile, .phlegm, pus, blood, and persons of weak 
merit provide all the four, the food when eaten and taken 
inside becomes highly loathsome, as though it was smeared 
with thick oil of the honey-tree in him who has an excess of 
bile; as though it was smeared with the juice of the nagabala 
leaf in him who has an excess of phlegm; as though it was 
smeared with sour butter-nnlk in him who has an excess of 
pus; as though it was smeared with colouring dye in him vjhio 
has an excess of blood. Thus he should consider its abomin- 
ableness from the ingredients. 

(5) How about the receptacle ? When the food, being 
smeared with any one of the four ingredients, enters the 
stomach, it is not stored up in golden vessels, jewel vessels or 
silver vessels, and so on. If it is swallowed by a young person 
of ten years of age, it is put m a place (i.e., stomach) which 
resembles an excrement-pit unwashed for ten years. [345] 
If it is swallowed by a person of twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, 
sixty, seventy, eighty, ninety or a hundred years of age, it is 
put in a place which resembles an excrement-pit unwashed for 
twenty ... a himdred years. Thus he should consider its 
abominations from the receptacle. 

(6) How about its undigested state ? This food bemg stored 
in such a place remains, so long as it is undigested, m a highly 
loathsome state, m that loathsome place which, as has been 
stated above, is excessively foul-smelling, of pitch darkness, 
a passage for the wmds carrying the smell of various corpses, 
all the food swallowed to-day, yesterday, and the day before, 
being gathered up in a lump m a membrane of phlegm, boiled 
by the heat of the body’s fire, givmg rise to foam and bubble, 
just as when in s um mer an unseasonable rain pours down 
violently, the grasses, leaves, bits of mats, and dead bodies of 
snakes, of dogs, of men, and so on, which have fallen into a 
pit at the gate of a village of outcastes, being heated by the 
sun’s rays, rise up and down in foam and bubble. Thus 
he should consider its abominableness from its undigested 
state. 



400 


The Bath of Purity 

(7) How about its digested state ? The food, cooked by 
tke body’s lieat^ does aot become gold or silver, ^nd so on, 
as do the elements of those metals. But, giving /ise to foam 
and bubble, it becomes excrement like yellow loam ground 
on a smooth grindstone and put in a tube, and fills the abdomen. 
Becoming urine It fills the bladder. Thus he should consider 
its abominableness from its digested state. 

(8) How about its frmt ^ The food, when well digested, 
brmgs about various putridities such as the hairs of the head, 
hairs of the body, nails, teeth. When it is not well digested, 
it brings about hundreds ^of diseases such as rmgworm, itch, 
scab, leprosy, cutaneous disease, consumption, cough, hemor- 
rhage. Such IS its fruit, — ^thus he should consider its 
abomin§.bleness from its fruit. 

(9) How about the oozing? The food being swallowed, 
goes in by one door, and oozes out by the various doors as 
filth of the eye, from the eye, as filth of the ear, from the ear, 
and so on. When he swallows it he does so in great company; 
but when he throws it out as excrement, urine, and so on, he 
does so alone by himself.- [346] He who eats it feels happy 
and delighted, elated and full of joy and gladness for the first 
day. When he relieves himself on the second day he has to 
shut his nose, distort his face, and is disgusted and sick at 
heart. Lustful, greedy, giddy, infatuated, he eats it on the 
first day, and ejects it on the second day, when after it has 
abided one night he has lost all passion for it, is vexed with it, 
ashamed of it, disgusted with it. Hence said the Ancients: — 

Nice things to eat and drink, food hard and soft, 

By one door enter in, by nine go out, 

Nice things to eat and drink, food hard and soft, 

One eats in company, throws out alone, 

Nice things to eat and drink, food hard and soft. 

One eats in joy and throws out in disgust. 

Nice things to eat and dhnk, food hard and soft— 

They all become foul things in one nighfs time, 

^ Tattha hdyaggina. P.T.S. taUakdy°, by the fire ol the heated body. 

2 Or, “ when it is swallowed, it is done in great company; bat when 
it oozes out, it does so severally as,” and so on. 



XL — Exposition of Goncentmtion 401 

Thus should one consider its abominableness f 2 ?om its 
oozins; out. 

(10) How^ about the smearing ? While food is eaten, it 
smears the hands, lips, tongue, and palate, which on that 
account become abominable, must needs be washed again and 
again to remove the smell. Just as when rice is boiled, the 
chaff, broken rice, husk-powder, and so on, boil over and smear 
the brim and lid of the pot with scum, so when food, which 
has been eaten, is cooked (digested), giving rise to foam by 
means of the body’s heat which goes through the whole body, 
it rises up and smears the teeth with dental filth; the tongue, 
palate, and so on, with saliva, phlegm, and so on; the eyes, 
ears, nose, the lower passage, and so on, with filth of the eye, 
filth of the ear, mucus, urine, excrement and so on, on ^iccount 
of which these outlets are neither clean nor pleasant though 
they be washed every day. After washing any one of these 
outlets, the hand must needs be washed with water in its turn. 
After washing some outlet the hand does not cease to be 
abominable though it be washed two or three times with cow- 
dung, clay-earth or scented powder. Thus should one consider 
the abominableness of food from the smearing. 

As he thus reflects upon the tenfold abommableness, im- 
pinges on it with application and exercise of thought, the 
material food becomes manifest by virtue of the mode of 
abominableness. [347] Agam and again he practises, develops, 
repeats, the sign. As he does so, the hindrances are discarded. 
He concentrates the mind by means of access-concentration 
which has not reached^ ecstasy on account of the intrinsic 
nature and profundity of material food. And the perception 
here appears by virtue of grasping the mode of abominable- 
ness. Therefore this subject of meditation goes under the 
name of perception of the abominableness of food. And the 
mind of the monk who is devoted to the perception of the 
abommableness of food, shrinks, withdraws, turns away from 
the lust of taste. Like a traveller who eats his child’s flesh 
from a desire to get out of the desert, he takes food without 
going to excess, to the end that he may escape from ill. By 
1 Read appaitena for appamttena* 


26 



402 


The Path of Purity 

ineaiiS'of the mastery of material food, lie attains mastery 
over the lust of the five sensual pleasures. By m^ns of the 
mastery of the five sense-desires, he masters tfie aggregate 
of matter. And by virtue of the abominable state such as the 
undigested state, the development of his mindfulness as regards 
the body is fulfilled. He is trained in the practice favourable 
to the perception of the Foul. And dependmg on this attam- 
ment, he is bound for a happy destiny, though he fall short 
of the goal of deathlessness under present conditions. 

^^his is the detailed discourse on the development of percep- 
tion of the abominableness of food. 

Pemlo'pment of the Detemimtion of the Four Elements. 

We now come to the exposition of the development of the 
determination of the four elements, shown in outline as 
^‘one determination ’’ immediately after the perception of 
the abominableness of food. 

Therein, “determination” means deciding by way of 
noting the intrinsic nature. Four-element-determination 
is the determining of the four elements. Attending to the four 
elements, meditating on the four elements as subject, deter- 
mining the four elements, are the same in sense. This deter- 
mination of the four elements is treated in two ways: briefij 
and at length: briefly in the Mahasatipatthana^ ; at lengti 
in the Mahahatthipadupama,^ Rahulovada,^ Dhatuvibhanga. 
“ Just as a clever cattle-butcher, monies, or his apprentice, who 
he has slain an ox, displays the carcase piecemeal at the crossway 
as he sits, [ 348 ] even so does a monk reflect upon this very bodi^ 
hoivever it he placed or disposed, with respect to its fundamentals 
— ‘ There are in this body the four primary elements of eartJ 
icater, heat, and airJ ’ So it is stated briefly in the Mahasat 
patthana for the sake of one who, being sharp of intellec 
meditates on the elements. The meaning is: — ^As the clev( 
cattle-butcher or his apprentice who works for food, kills tl 
ox, cuts it up and, sitting at the crossways called the meetini 
place of main roads from the four directions, displays it piec 

2 Moojhimoi i, 184. • 

4 Ibid, iii, 237. 


^ Digha ii, 290. 
3 Ibid. 421. 



'XI— Exposition of Ooncenlration 403 

meal, so tlie monk reflects upon the body, however it bo placed 
according "^^o any of the postures or disposed according as it 
has been placed, with respect to its fundamentals: — ‘‘There 
are in this body the four primary elements of earth . . , air.” 
What does this amount to ? As when the butcher is rearing 
the ox, is taking it to the slaughter-house, and there at the 
slaughter-house is fastening it, placing it, slaying it, seeing 
it slain, ^ dead, the concept “ ox ” does not disappear so 
long as he has not cut it up and displayed it piecemeal; bnt 
when he has cut it up and sat down, the percept “ ox ” dis- 
appears, the percept “ flesh ” arises, ^o that he does not think 
that it is the ox which he sells and others buy, but it is the 
flesh that he sells and that others buy, — so, while the monk 
is a foolish, average man, a householder, or has jiisit been 
ordained, the concept “being,” “man,” or “person” does 
not disappear so long as he, making a concrete estimate of 
this very body, however it be placed or disposed, does not 
reflect upon it as elements.^ But when he reflects upon it 
as elements, the concept “ being ” disappears, and the mind 
is established by virtue of the elements. Hence said the 
Blessed One: “Just as a clever cattle-butcher, monks, and 
so on. 

And in the Mahahatthipadupama it is said at length for the 
sake of him who, being not too sharp of intellect, meditates on 
the elements": “ Friends^ which is the earth-element that %s 
personal ? Everything personal and referable to an individual 
which is hard^ solid, or derived therefrom, — such as the hairs 
of the head or body . . . stomach, excrement, together ^ with 
anything else that, being personal and referable to an individual, 
is hard, solid, or derived therefrom, is called, friends, the earth- 
element that is personal, [349] Friends, which is the watei- 
elemenU that is personal ? Everything personal and referable 
to an ^individual which is water, watery or derived therefrom,— 
such as bile . . . urine, together with anything else that, being 
personal and referable to an individual, is water, watery, or 
derived therefrom, is called, friends, the water-element that is 
personal. Friends, which i s the fire-element that is personal ^ 

1 Bead vadhitam, ^ Elements = fundamentals, dJiat%. 



404 


The Path of Purity 

Everything fersonal and referable to an individual which is fire^ 
fiery ^ or derived therefrom, such as whatever heat% consumes, 
or burns up, or whatever wholly transmutes food ^nd dnnk in 
digestion ; together with anything else that, being personal and 
referable to an individual, is fire, fiery, or derived therefrom, is 
called, friends, the fire-element that is personal. Friends, which 
is the air-element that is personal ? Everything personal and 
referable to an individual which is air, airy, or derived therefrom, 
such as wind discharged upwards or downwards, wind in the 
stomach or abdomen, vapours that traverse the several members, 
inhalings and exhalings^of breath, together with anything else 
that, being personal and referable to an individual, is air, airy, 
or derived therefrom, is called, friends, the air-element that is 
personal F And so also in the Rahulovada and Dhatuvi- 
bhanga Suttas. 

And here is the explanation of the terms which are not clear: 
"^Personal, referable to an individual,” are both synonyms of 
one’s own,” which means, born of self, included in one’s 
continuum {santdna). Just as in the world talk among women 
folk is called '^womanly,” personal” is because it arises 
in one’s person, ^‘referable to an individual” is because it 
arises on account of the self. 

Hard ” means rigid. Solid ” means harsh to the touch. 
The first denotes the characteristic, the second the mode. For 
the earth-element has the characteristic of hardness, the mode 
of harshness to the touch, hence '' solid.” 

"^Derived therefrom ” means, held firmly, i.e., to the notions 
of “ I,” mine.” Held firmly, seized, touched, is the meaning. 

Such as ” is a particle. Which is that earth-element ? — 
is the meaning. To show what it is, he says, hairs,” and so 
on. Here the earth-element is to be understood as shown in 
twenty forms including the brain. 

Anything else ” includes the earth-element in the remain- 
ing three elements. 

[350] It gets to this and that place by flowing: — ^thus it is 
water.” Watery — ^it comes under the various kinds of 
water set up by karma, and so on. What is that ? The 
cohering characteristic of the earth-element. 



XI. — Exposition of Goncentration 405 

'^Fire” is by virtue of beat. As said above, fiery’’ is 
that wbiclu comes under tbe various kinds of heat. What is 
that ? The icharacteristic of caloncity. 

''Whatever”: — is that by which this body, through the 
perturbed watery element, is heated, through siclmess lasting 
for a day and so on, becomes hot. 

" WTiatever consumes — ^is that by which the body is con- 
sumed and becomes short of faculties, loses its strength, gets 
wrinkles and grey hairs. 

"Whatever burns up”: — is that by the perturbation *of 
which this body burns, and so the Inan, crying, “ I burn I I 
burn !” longs to be anointed with butter, washed a hundred 
times with goslta, sandal-wood and such unguents, to be 
fanned with a palm-leaf. ^ 

" Or whatever wholly transmutes food and drink in 
digestion,” is that by which anjdhmg to eat such as rice, 
anything to drink such as sweet beverages, anything to 
bite such as pastry, or anything to suck such as a ripe 
mango, honey, molasses, is well digested; each has its own 
function to perform. And here the first three kinds of fire 
are set up by the four causes,^ the last (digestive fire) by 
karma only. 

" Air ” is by virtue of moving. As said above, " airy ” is 
that which comes under the various kinds of air. What is 
that ? The characteristic of supportmg. 

" Wind discharged upwards ” is wind rising upward leading 
to vomiting, hiccough, and so on, 

" Wind discharged downwards ” is wind going downward 
ejecting excrement, urine, and so on. 

" Wind in the stomach ” is wind outside the viscera. 

" Wmd in the abdomen ” is wind inside the intestines. 

" Vapours that traverse the several members ” are vapours 
which, passing along the network of veins, traverse the 
several members of the whole body, giving rise to such actions 
as bendmg in and stretching out. 

Inhalings of breath ” are the breath going in. 

Exhalmgs of breath ” are the breath going out. 

^ Viz. karma, consciousness, season, food. 



406 


The Path of Purity 

And here the first five kinds are set up by the four causes, 
inhalings and exhalings by consciousness. 

[351] Everywhere the term, anything else/ ’•includes the 
water-element, and so on, in the three sections other than 
the one treated of. 

Thus the four elements have been treated at length in forty- 
two forms, namely: the earth-element in twenty forms, the 
water-element in twelve, the fire-element in four, the air- 
element in six. This, so far, is the explanation of the text. 

And in this system of developing^ the monk of sharp intellect 
gradually comes to apprehend the elements in details that the 
haii‘s of head are the earth-element, the hairs of body are the 
earth-element. And the subject of meditation becomes plain 
as he afttends that whatever has the characteristic of rigidity 
is the earth-element, whatever has the characteristic of cohering 
is the water-element, whatever has the characteristic of bring- 
ing to maturity is the fire-element, whatever has the charac- 
teristic of supporting is the air-element. But when a monk 
not too sharp of intellect attends so, it keeps in the dark and 
does not reveal itself to him. It becomes plain when he 
attends in detail by the former method. How ? Just as, of 
two monks, reciting the texts with many repetitions, the one 
who is of sharp intellect recites once or twice the repeated 
passage in full, and then goes on with his recitation saying 
only the initial and final words of the repeated passages, the 
other not too sharp of intellect says: ‘'What a recitation! 
This one does not even let the lips touch each other. If he 
recites thus, when will he get to know the text and he him- 
self does the recitation going through the repeated passages in 
full. And the other man says to him: “ What a recitation ! 
This one does not let himself come to the end. If he recites 
thus, when will he finish the text Even so, the monk of 
sharp intellect gradually comes to apprehend in detail the 
elements as hairs, and so on. And the subject of meditation 
becomes plain as he attends by the brief method that what- 
ever has the characterisitc of rigidity is the earth-element, and 
so on. There is darkness and non-revelation when tjie other 


^ Read Bhdvandnmje, 


Read tanti for tan ti. 



XI. — Exposition of Concentration 407 

monk attends likewise.^ The subject is manifested when he 
attends in^ detail by way of hairs, and so on. Therefore the 
monlc, sharp of intellect, wishing to develop this subject of 
meditation, should in solitude and seclusion advert to his 
whole physical body, apprehend the elements briefly that in 
this body whatever is rigid or hard is the earth-element, 
whatever is cohesive [352] or is flowing* is the water-element, 
whatever brmgs to maturity or is hot is the fire-element, 
whatever is supporting or moving is the air-element, and again 
and again advert to, attend to, reflect on, the earth-elemetit, 
the water-element, as mere element, without sentience, 
without soul. 

As he thus strives there arises before long the concentration 
which, from having intrmsic nature as object, is ju^t access 
and has not reached ecstasy, and which is attended by under- 
standing that illuminates the different kinds of elements.^ 

Or, in order to show that these Four Great Primaries are 
devoid of sentience, the Captain of the Law has declared four 
groups: It is hy and because of hones and sinews, flesh and 
skin, that a space is enclosed which is called a visible shape 
Classifying them by the hand of knowledge which goes through 
the spaces in between any two of them, the monk should 
apprehend the elements as stated previously: '' Whatever 
among them is rigid or hard is the earth-element, and again 
and again advert to, attend to, reflect on, the earth-element, the 
water-element, as mere elements, without sentience, without 
soul.” As he thus strives, there arises before long the con- 
centration which, from having intrinsic nature as object, is 
just access, and has not reached ecstasy, and which is attended 
by understanding that illuminates the different kinds of 
elements. 

This in brief is the system of development in the determina- 
tion of the Four Elements. 

It is to be understood in detail thus: — The student not too 
sharp of intellect who wdshes to develop this subject of medita- 

1 Read tathd, ^ Drava, not registered in P.T.S Dictionary. 

® Read pariggahito as one compound. 

^ F%iTtlier DialogiLes i, 137. 



408 


The Path of Purity 

tion should study in detail the elements in forty-two aspects 
from his teacher, and living m a dwelling as described above,, 
should, in solitude and seclusion, his duties alb performed, 
develop the subject in four aspects thus: (1) Treating them 
in brief along with their constituents; (2) classifying them 
together with their constituents, (3) treating them in brief 
along with their characteristics; (4) classifying them together 
with their characteristics. 

^(1) Of these, how does he develop it, treating them in brief 
along with their constituents ? Here the monk determines 
the attribute of rigidness ih twenty parts of the body to be the 
earth-element; determines the attribute of cohesion in watery 
fluid in twelve parts of the body to be the water-element; 
[353] doifcermines the heat which brings to maturity in four 
parts to be the fire-element; determines the attribute of 
support in SIX parts to be the air-element. As he determines 
thus, the elements manifest themselves. As he repeatedly 
adverts to, attends to them, access-concentration arises in 
the way described. 

(2) But if, though he develops it so, the subject of medi- 
tation is not realized, he should then develop it by classify- 
ing the elements together with their constituents. How? 
First, without forgetting all that has been said under the 
thirty-two parts of the body about the sevenfold proficiency 
in acquirement and the tenfold proficiency in attention, as 
set forth in the subject of mindfulness regarding the body, 
he should begin reciting in direct and reverse order the sets 
of five endmg in skin and so on, and do all that has been laid 
down there. 

This is distinctive: There, attending to the hairs and so on, 
by way of colour, shape, direction, range, limit, one is to 
establish one’s mind through revulsion, here through the 
elements. Therefore, after attending to the hairs, and so on, 
by fives, by way of colour, and so on, one should attend in 
the end thus: — 

These hairs grow on the skin which envelops the skull. 
Just as when huntha grass is growing on an ant-hill, the ant- 
hill does not know that the grass grows on it, nor does the 



409 


XL — Exposition of Concentration 

grass know that it grows on the ant-hillj so the skin enveloping 
the skull does not know that the hairs grow on it^, nor do the 
hairs know^that they grow on the skin which envelops the 
skull. There is no mutual laying to heart, no reflection,^ 
Thus hairs form a separate class in the body, are non-mental, 
indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentuJnce, hard, earth- 
element. 

Hairs of body grow on the skin which envelops the body. 
Just as when dahha grass is growing in a deserted village, 
the village does not know that the grass grows in it, nor does 
the dahha grass know that it grows* in the deserted village, so 
the skin enveloping the body does not know that hairs grow 
on it, nor do the hairs know that they grow on the skin which 
envelops the body. There is no mutual laymg to heart, no 
reflection. Thus, hairs of body form a separate class in the 
body, are non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), without 
sentience, hard, earth-element. 

Nails grow at the tips of fingers and toes. Just as when 
boys play at piercing the seeds of the honey fruit with sticks, 
the sticks [354] do not know that the seeds are fixed on them, 
nor do the seeds know that they are fixed on the sticks, so 
the fingers and toes do not know that the nails grow at their 
tips, nor do the nails know that they grow at finger-tips, toe- 
tips. There is no mutual laymg to heart, no reflection. 
Thus nails form a separate class in the body, are non-mental, 
indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, hard, earth- 
element. 

Teeth grow in the jaw-bones. Just as when carpenters 
put up posts by sticking them with some sort of plaster to 
stone mortars, the mortars do not know that on them stand 
the posts, nor do the posts know that they stand on the mortars, 
so the jaw-bones do not know that the teeth grow on them, 
nor do the teeth know that they grow on the jaw-bones. 
There is no mutual laying to heart, no reflection. Thus 
teeth form a separate class in the body, are non-mental, 
indetermmate, void (of soul), without sentience, hard, earth- 

element. 

^ Cf. the similar argument in Kkuddakapdtha Comm, 42 



410 


THe Bath of Purity 

Skin, envelops the whole body. Just as a harp which is 
covered with wet ox-hide does not know that it is covered 
wdth the wet ox-hide, nor does the wet px-hide l^aow that it 
covers the harp, so the body does not know that it is enveloped 
by the skin, neither does the skin know that it envelops the 
body. There is nb mutual laying to heart, no reflection. Thus 
skin forms a separate class in the body, is non-mental, indeter- 
minate, void (of soul), without sentience, hard, earth-element. 

Flesh is smeared on the skeleton. Just as a wall, besmeared 
with clay, does not know that it is smeared with the clay, nor 
does the clay know that it smears the wall, so the skeleton 
does not know that it is smeared with the nine hundred difier- 
ent pieces of flesh, nor does the flesh know that it smears the 
skeleton^ There is no mutual laying to heart, no reflection. 
Thus flesh forms a separate class in the body, is non-mental, 
indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, hard, earth- 
element. 

Sinews bind the bones inside the body. Just as sticks in 
a wattle-and-daub wall being kept in position by creepers, 
do not know [355] that they are kept in position by the creepers, 
nor do the creepers know that they keep the sticks in position, 
so the bones do not know that they are bound by the sinews, 
nor do the sinews know that they bind the bones. There is 
no mutual laying to heart, no reflection. Thus sinews form 
a separate class in the body, are non-mental, indeterminate, 
void (of soul), without sentience, hard, earth-element. 

Among the bones the heel-bone supports the ankle-bone, 
which in turn supports the leg-bone, which supports the 
thigh-bone, which supports the hip-bone, which supports the 
back-bone, which supports the neck-bone, which supports 
the bone of the head. The bone of the head rests on the neck- 
bone, which in turn rests on the back-bone, which rests on the 
hip-bone, which rests on the thigh-bone, which rests on the 
leg-bone, which rests on the ankle-bone, which rests on the 
heel-bone. Just as, in heaps consistuag of bricks, timber, 
cow-dung, and so on, the lower bricks, and so on, do not know 
that they support the upper ones, neither do the upper ones 
know that they rest on the lower ones, so the heel-bone does 



411 


XI . — Exposition of^Ooncentration 

not know that it supports tke ankle-bone, which in turn does 
not kno'Ri that it supports the leg-bone, which does not know 
that it supports tha thigh-bone, which does not know that it 
supports the hip-bone, which does not know that it supports 
the back-bone, which does not know that it supports the neck- 
bone, which does not know that it supporlis the head-bone; 
neither does the head-bone know that it rests on the neck- 
bone, which does not know that it rests on the back-bone, 
which does not know that it rests on the hip-bone, which 
does not know that it rests on the thigh-bone, which does*not 
know that it rests on the leg-bone* which does not know that 
it rests on the ankle-bone, which does not know that it rests 
on the heel-bone. There is no mutual laying to heart, no 
reflection. Thus bone forms [356] a separate class in j3he body, 
is non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, 
hard, earth-element. 

Marrow is inside the various bones. Just as bamboo-tubes, 
and so on, in which are placed sodden cane-sprouts, and so on, 
do not know that in them are placed the sodden cane-sprouts, 
and so on, nor do the cane -sprouts, and so on, know that they 
are placed in the bamboo -tubes, and so on, so the bones 
do not know that inside them is the marrow, nor does the 
marrow know that it is inside the bones. There is no mutual 
laying to heart, no reflection. Thus marrow forms a separate 
class in the body, is non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), 
without sentience, hard, earth-element. 

Kidneys are bound together by a thick sinew which issues 
as a single root from the oesophagus, and branches out into 
two at a little distance and surrounds the heart-flesh. Just 
as a couple of mangoes being bound together by their stalk, 
the stalk does not know that it binds the two mangoes together, 
nor do the two mangoes know that they are bound together by 
the stalk, so the thick sinew does not know that it binds to- ^ 
gether the kidneys, nor do the kidneys know that they are 
bound together by the thick sinew. There is no mutual laying 
to heart, no reflection. Thus the kidneys form a separate 
class jn the body, are non-mental, indeterminate, void (of 
soul), without sentience, hard, earth-element. 



412 


The Path of Purity 

The heart rests on the middle of the cave made by the breast- 
bone inside the body. Just as the interior of an olc^ camage- 
frame, in which a piece of meat is placed^ does no^ know that 
in it is placed the piece of meat, nor does the piece of meat 
know that it is inside the old carriage-frame, so the interior 
of the breast-bonS-cave does not know that in it is the heart, 
nor does the heart Imow that it is inside the cave of the breast- 
bone. There is no mutual laying to heart, no reflection. 
Thus heart forms a separate class in the body, is non-mental, 
indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, hard, earth- 
element. 

Liver leans against the right side between the two breasts 
within the body. Just as the side of a frying-pan to which 
two pieces of meat are stuck does not know that to it are stuck 
the two pieces of meat, nor do the two pieces of meat know 
[357] that they are stuck to the side of the frying-pan, so the 
right side in between the two breasts does not know that 
against it leans the liver, nor does the liver know that it leans 
against the right side between the two breasts. There is no 
mutual laying to heart, no reflection. Thus liver forms a 
separate class in the body, is non-mental, indeterminate, 
void (of soul), without sentience, hard, earth-element. 

Of the pleurae, the .covering pleura surrounds the heart and 
kidneys. The non-covering pleura envelops the flesh beneath 
the skin in the whole body. Just as meat wrapped in white 
cloth does not know that it is wrapped in the white cloth, 
nor does the white cloth know that it wraps the meat, so the 
kidneys and heart and flesh in the whole body do not know 
that they are covered by the pleura, nor does the pleura know 
that it covers the kidneys and heart and flesh m the whole 
body. There is no mutual laying to heart, no reflection. 
Thus pleura forms a separate class m the body, is non-mental, 
indetermmate, void (of soul), without sentience, hard, earth- 
element. 

Spleen rests on top of the stomach-membrane to the left 
of the heart. Just as the top of a granary on which is a piece 
of cow-dung does not know that on it is the piece of cow-dung, 
nor does the piece of cow-dung know that it is on top of the 



413 


XI . — Exposition of * Concentration 

granary, so the top of the stomach-membrane does not know 
that the spleen rests on it, nor does the spleen know that it rests 
on top of tjie stomach-membrane. There is no mutual laying 
to heart, no reflection. Thus spleen forms a separate class 
in the body, is non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), 
without sentience, hard, earth-element. * 

Lungs hang down covering from above the heart and liver 
between the two breasts within the body. Just as the interior 
of an old granary from which hangs a bird’s nest does not know 
that the bird’s nest hangs from it, nor does the bird’s nest know 
that it hangs from the interior of the old granary, so [358] the 
interior of the body does not know that in it hang the lungs, nor 
do the lungs know that they hang in such interior of the body. 
There is no mutual laying to heart, no reflection. Thus lungs 
form a separate class in the body, are non-mental, indetermin- 
ate, void (of soul), without sentience, hard, earth-element. 

Intestines are situated within the body limited by the 
oesophagus and the anus. Just as a trough of blood, in which 
is coiled a (snake’s) dead body from which the head has been 
severed and which is covered with veins, does not know that 
in it is placed the dead body of veins, nor does the dead body 
of veins know that it is placed in the trough of blood, so the 
interior of the body does not know that in it lie the mtestines, 
nor do the intestines know that they are withm the body. 
There is ho mutual laying to heart, no reflection. Thus 
intestmes form a separate class in the body, are non-mental, 
indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, hard, earbh- 
element. 

Bowels are bound in twenty-one coils within the intestinal 
sac. Just as a mattress of cords for the wiping of feet sewn 
together with cords does not know that it is sewn together 
with- the cords, nor do the cords loiow that they h^ve sewn 
the mattress, so the intestines do not know that the bowels 
bind them together, nor do the bowels know that they bind 
the intestmes. There is no mutual lajdng to heart, no reflec- 
tion. Thus bowels form a separate class in the body, are 
non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, 
hard, earth-element. 



414 


The Path of Purity 

Stomgicli, by which are meant things to eat, to drink, to 
bite, to lick, is situated in the belly. Just as a dog’s dish, 
in which a dog has deposited his vomit, ^does not^know that 
in it is the dog’s vomit, nor does the dog’s vomit know that 
it IS in the dog’s dish, so the belly does not know that in it 
lies the stomach, ‘nor does the stomach know that it lies in 
the belly. There is no mutual laying to heart, no reflection. 
Thus stomach forms a separate class in the body, is non- 
mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, hard, 
earth-element. 

Excrement is in what is. called the abdomen like an eight- 
finger bamboo-tube at the end of the intestines. [369] Just 
as a bamboo-tube, in which is placed fine, well-ground yellow 
loam, does not know that in it is the yellow loam, nor does the 
yellow loam know that it is placed in the bamboo -tube, so 
the abdomen does not know that in it lies excrement, nor does 
excrement know that it is in the abdomen. There is no mutual 
laying to heart, no reflection. Thus excrement forms a 
separate class in the body, is non-mental, indeterminate, 
void (of soul), without sentience, hard, earth-element. 

Brain is situated inside the skull. Just as a gourd-skin 
into which a lump of flour is put does not know that in it is 
put the lump of flour, nor does the lump of flour know that 
it is in the gourd-skin, so the mterior of the skull does not know 
that in it lies the brain, nor does the brain know that it is 
inside the skull. Thus brain forms a separate class in the 
body, is non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), without 
sentience, hard, earth-element. 

Of the (two kinds of) bile, fluid-bile is bound up with the 
life-controlling faculty, and is diffused through the whole 
body. Bile as organ is situated in the gall-bladder. Just 
as a piece of cake through which oil is diffused does not feow 
^ that the oil is diffused through it, nor does the oil know that It is 
diffused through the cake, so the body does not know that the 
bile-fluid is diffused through it, nor does the bile-fluid know 
that it is diffused through the body. Just as a luffa-skin full 
of rain-water does not know that in it is the rain-water, nor 
does the rain-water know that it is in the luffa-skin, so the 



XI. — Exposition of Concentration 415 

gall-bladder does not know that in it lies the organ gf bile, 
nor does the organ of bile know that it lies in the gall-bladder. 
There is no^ mutual laying to heart, no reflection. Thus bile 
forms a separate class in the body, is non-mental, indeter- 
minate, void (of soul), without sentience, fluid, cohesive in 
mode, water-element. ^ 

Phlegm, being as much as to fill a bowl, is situated in the 
membrane of the stomach. Just as a village-pool, on the surface 
of which a film of foam has formed itself, does not know that 
on it lies the film of foam, nor does the film of foam [3fi‘0] 
know that it is on the village-pool, «o the stomach-membrane 
does not know that in it lies the phlegm, nor does the phlegm 
know that it lies in the stomach-membrane. There is no mutual 
laying to heart, no reflection. Thus phlegm forms a ^separate 
class in the body, is non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), 
without sentience, fluid, cohesive in mode, water-element. 

Pus has no fixed abode. Wherever any part of the body 
is hurt by stumps, thorns, sticks, flames of fire, and so on, 
so that the blood coagulates, matures, and boils, pustules, and 
so on, are formed, there it arises. Just as the parts of a tree 
from which, owmg to the strokes of an axe, and so on, resin 
oozes, do not know that the resin is in them, nor does the 
resin know that it is in those parts of the tree which are 
struck by strokes, and so on, so those parts of the body 
which are hurt by stumps, thorns, and so on, do not know 
that in them is the pus, nor does the pus know that it 
lies in those places. There is no mutual laying to heart, no 
reflection. Thus pus forms a separate class in the body, is 
non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, 
fluid, cohesive in mode, water-element. 

Of the (two kmds of) blood, the circulating blood like bile 
difiuses through the whole body; the stationary blood, being 
just a bowlful, fills the lower portion of the place where lies 
the liver, and wets the kidneys, heart, liver and lungs. Blood 
in circulation is decided in the same way as fluid-bile. As 
regards the other, just as when rain falls on a broken potsherd 
and the water in it wets pieces of stones, and so on, under- 
neath, these do not know that they are moistened by the 



416 


Tte Bath of Biirity 

water, .nor does the water know that it moistens the pieces 
of stones, and so on, so neither the lower part of the liver nor 
the kidneys, and so on, know that the .blood is them, or 
that it moistens them, nor does the blood know that it fills 
the lower part of the liver and moistens the kidneys, and so 
on. There is no*mutnal laying to heart, no reflection. Thus 
blood forms a separate class in the body, is non-mental, 
indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, fluid, cohesive^ 
in mode, water-element 

’Sweat in times of heat from fire, and so on, fills the pores 
of the skin and flows oS.» Just as when fibres and stalks of 
the lotus and bunches of white lotus-stems are taken out of 
the water, [361] the bunches and openings of the lotus-fibres do 
not kno-y that the water flows from them, nor does the water 
which flows from them know that it flows from them, so the 
pores of the skin do not know that sweat flows from them, nor 
does sweat know that it flows from the pores of the skin. There 
is no mutual laying to heart, no reflection. Thus sweat forms a 
separate class in the body, is non-mental, indeterminate, void (of 
soul), without sentience, fluid, cohesive in mode, water-element. 

Fat is coagulated liquid spread through the whole body of 
a stout person and located in the flesh of the leg, and so on, 
of a thin person. Just as a piece of flesh, covered with a cloth 
of the colour of turmeric, does not know that the cloth of the 
colour of turmeric is dependent on it, nor does the cloth of 
the colour of turmeric know that it depends on the piece of 
flesh, so the flesh in the whole body or located in the legs 
does not know that the fat is dependent on it, nor does the 
fat know that it is dependent on the flesh in the whole body 
or located in the legs, and so on. There is no mutual laying 
to heart, no reflection. Thus fat forms a separate class in 
the body, is non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), without 
sentience, coagulated liquid, cohesive in mode, water-element. 

Tears, on coming to be, fill the eye-sockets or flow down. 
Just as tender palmyra seed-cups, filled with water, do not 
know that the water is in them, nor does the water know that 
it is in the tender palmyra seed-cups, so the eye-sockets do 


^ Read abaiidhanakdro. 



XI. — Expositiofi of Goncentration 417 

not know that the tear is in them, nor does the tear know 
that it is in the eye-sockets. There is no mutual laying to 
heart, no reflection. ^ Thus tear forms a separate class in the 
body, is non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), without 
sentience, fluid, cohesive in mode, water-element. 

Serum is the viscous liquid in the palm of the hand, back of 
the hand, inner surface of the foot, outer surface of the foot, 
nose-tip, forehead and shoulder m time of heat from fire, and so 
on. Just as the scum of boiled rice, when oil is poured on it, 
does not know that the oil is spread over it, nor does theliil 
know that it is spread over the scum, so the palm of the 
hand and the other parts [362] do not know that they are 
spread over with the serum, nor does the serum know that 
it is spread over the palm of the hand and the other parts. 
There is no mutual laying to heart, no reflection. Thus 
serum forms a separate class in the body, is non-mental, 
indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, cohesive in 
mode, water-element. 

Saliva, in the existence of a cause for the production of 
such saliva, comes down from the sides of both cheeks and 
remains on the surface of the tongue. Just as the ground- 
surface of a well dug on the banks of a perennial stream does 
not know that the water is on it, nor does the water know 
that it IS on the surface of the well, so the surface of the tongue 
does not know that the saliva coming down from the sides of 
both cheeks remains on it, nor does the saliva know that it 
comes down from the sides of the cheeks and remains on the 
surface of the tongue. There is no mutual laying to heart, 
no reflection. Thus saliva forms a separate class in the body, 
is non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, 
fluid, cohesive in mode, water-element. 

Mucus, on coming to be, fills the nostrils or flows, down. 
Just as an oyster-shell containing sour curds does not know 
that the sour curds are in it, nor do the sour curds know that 
they are in the oyster-shell, so the nose-cups do not know 
that in them is the mucus, nor does the mucus know that it 
is in the nose-cups. There is no mutual laying to heart, no 
reflection. Thus mucus forms a separate class in the body, 

27 



418 


TTie P<itTi of Piirity 

is non-^tieiital, indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, 
fluid, cohesive in mode, water-element. 

Synovial fluid is situated in the hundred-and-eiglity joints, 
performing the work of lubricating the joints ol the bones. 
Just as the axle of a wheel, being lubricated with oil, does 
not know that it*has been lubricated with oil, nor does the oil 
know that it has lubricated the axle, so the Itondred-and-eighty 
joints do not know that they have been lubricated with the 
synovial fluid, nor does the sjmovial fluid know that it has lubri- 
cated the hundred-and-eighty joints. There is no mutual laying 
to heart, no reflection. 'Ihus synovial fluid forms a separate 
class in the body, is non-mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), 
without sentience, fluid, cohesive in mode, water- element. 

Urine is situated within the bladder. Just as a sound jar,^ 
thrown mouth downwards into a village-pool, does not know 
that the essence of the village-pool has entered it, nor does 
the essence of the village-pool know that it has entered the 
sound jar, so the bladder does not know that [363] in it is 
the urine, nor does the urine know that it is in the bladder. 
There is no mutual laying to heart, no reflection. Thus urine 
forms a separate class m the body, is non-mental, indeter- 
minate, void (of soul), without sentience, fluid, cohesive in 
mode, water-element. 

Having thus set up attention as to hairs, and so on, one 
ought to set up attention as to the divisions of fire thus: 
Whatever"' heats forms a separate class in the body, is non- 
mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, with 
the mode of brmging to maturity, fire-element; whatever 
consumes or burns up, or whatever wholly transmutes food and 
drink in digestion, forms a separate class in the body, is non- 
mental, indeterminate, void (of soul), without sentience, with 
i/he mode of bringing to maturity, fire-element. 


^ Bavana gliata^ a jar which does not admit water (save through the 
mouth) even so much as is contained on the point of an awl: “ Yassa 
pana draggamattampi udakassa pavisanamukliam natthi” — SammoJia 
Vinodanl Tlkd, which (wrongly) for adhomukhe reads amukhe ; clearly 
a bad reading. 

^ Bead uyam for aJiam* 



XI. — Exposition of Goncentratioyi 419 

Then attention as to the divisions of wind should be <set up 
thus; Apprehending the wind discharged upwards as such, the 
winds discharged downwards as such, wind in the stomach as 
such, wmd in the abdomen as such, vapours that traverse the 
several members as such, inhalmgs and exhalmgs of breath 
as such, one should set up attention that the wind discharged 
upwards . , . the wind discharged downwards . . . wind in 
the stomach . , . wind m the abdomen . . . vapours that 
traverse the several members . . . inhalings and exhalings of 
breath, forms (or form) a separate class in the body, is non- 
mental, indeterminate, void (of soul)-, without sentience, with 
the mode of supporting, air-element. As he sets up attention 
thus, the elements manifest themselves. As he repeated!}- 
adverts to, attends to, them, access-concentration arisen in the 
way described. 

(3) But if, though he cultivate it so, the subject of meditation 
is not realized, he should then develop it by treating the elements 
in brief along with their characteristics. How ? He should 
determine that m the twenty parts of the body^ the charac- 
teristic of hardness is earth-element, that in them the charac- 
teristic of cohesion is water-element, that the characteristic of 
bringing to maturity is fire-element, that the characteristic of 
support is air-element. He should determme that in the twelve 
parts of the body^ the characteristic of cohesion is water- 
element, that in them the characteristic of bringing to 
maturity is fire-element, that the characteristic of support is 
air-element, that the characteristic of hardness is earth-element. 
He should determine that in the four divisions (of fire) the 
characteristic of bringing to maturity is fire-element, that the 
characteristic of support undistinguished therefrom [364] is 
air-element, that the characteristic of hardness is earth-element, 
that the characteristic of cohesion is water-element. He 
should determine that in the six divisions (of air) the charac- 
teristic of support"^ is air-element, that in them the character- 
istic of hardness is earth-element, the characteristic of cohesion 

^ Beginning with hairs and ending in brain. 

2 Beginning with bile and ending in urine. 

3 Bead vittham° for vittJmnf. 



420 


The Path of Purity 

is water-element, the characteristic of bringing to maturity 
IS fire-element. As he determines thus, the elements manifest 
themselves. As he repeatedly adverts to, attends to, them, 
access-concentration arises in the way described. 

(4) But if, though he thus cultivate it, the subject of medi- 
tation is not a silccess, he should then develop it by classifying 
the elements together with their characteristics. How ? 
Apprehending the hairs, and so on, in the way already men- 
tioned,^ he should determine the characteristic of hardness in 
th:^ hairs to be earth-element, the characteristic in them of 
cohesion to be water-element, the characteristic of bringing 
to maturity to be fire-element, the characteristic of support 
to be air-element. Thus in all the parts or divisions, four 
elements in each part or division should be determined. As 
he determines them, thus do the elements manifest them- 
selves. As he repeatedly adverts to, attends to, them, access- 
concentration arises in the way described. 

And further the elements should be attended to under these 
aspects’: — (1) imder the meaning of terms, (2) as groups, 
(3) as powder,” (4) under their characteristics, and so on, 
(5) under the source, (6) as different or the same, (7) as divided 
or as undivided, (8) as similar or dissimilar, (9) imder the 
distinction between internal and external, (10) as classified, 
(11) under the cause, (12) as not laying to heart, (13) under 
distinctive causes. 

Of these (1) as to the meaning of terms “ earth ” ]s owing 
to extensiveness. It is mobile, it dries up, or it develops: — 
this is water. It heats, — ^this is fire. It moves, — this is air. 
Inclusively, because it bears its own characteristics, because 
it bestows and administers ill, — ^this is element. Thus dis- 
tinctively and inclusively attention to elements is to be con- 
sidered under the aspect of the meaning of terms. 

(2) As groups: — The earth-element has been shown in 
twenty forms beginning with hairs of head, hairs of body, 
the water-element in twelve forms beginmng with bile, phlegm. 
Therefore herein, 


^ As in (2) on p. 408. 


^ Akara. 



XL — Exposition of Concentration 421 

Colour, smell, taste, essence, the Elements fonr--^ 

Wlv 0 n these eight states collect together, then 
The common label, hairs, comes into use. 

AVhen they are analyzed, no ' hair ’ is there. 

Hence hairs are just a collocation of the eight states, 
likewise hairs of the body, [366] and the others. Of the parts 
of the body, that which is set up by karma is, together with 
the life-controlling faculty and nature, a collocation of ten 
states. But by virtue of abundance they are known as Ihe 
earth-element, water-element. Thus he should consider them 
as groups. 

(3) As '^powder’’: — There may be in this body a dona- 
measure, by the medium standard, of the earthnelement, 
reduced to the minutest particles, the finest dust. This bemg 
held together by half the measure of the water-element, 
guarded by the fire-element, supported by the air-element, 
is not scattered, not destroyed. Not bemg scattered, not 
destroyed, it gives rise to such varieties of form as woman, 
man, manifestmg smallness or largeness, tallness or shortness, 
hardness, stifiness, and so on. And there in the body the 
water-element, which has become fluid with the mode of 
cohering, bemg established on the earth, guarded by fire, 
supported by air, does not trickle, does not flow. In not 
trickling or flowmg, it shows gradual development. And 
there also the fire-element which has the characteristic of heat, 
and which, taking on the mode of heat, brings to matuiity 
whatever is eaten or drunk, being established on the earth, 
held together by water, supported by air, brings this body 
to maturity, and brings about its attainment of beauty. 
Being brought to maturity by it, the body shows no putre- 
faction. And there also the air-element, along the -various 
limbs, with its characteristic of moving and supporting, being 
established on the earth, held together by water, guarded by 
fire, supports the body. Being supported by it the body does 
not fall, remains upright. Moved by the other air-element, it 
shows intimation for the postures, going, standmg, sittmg, 
lying down; bends, stretches, dallies with the hands and feet. 



422 


The Path of Purity 

Thus -by means of femininity, masculinity, and so on, arises 
the machine of the elements like a creation of magip, deceiving 
the foolish folk. Thus elements should be con^dered under 
the aspect of powder.’”- 

(4) Under their characteristics, and so on, — What is the 
characteristic of the earth-element, its property, its mani- 
festation ? Reflecting on the four elements in this way, one 
should attend to their characteristics, and so on, thus: The 
earth-element has the characteristic of solidity, it has the 
property of being the resting-place (of associated states), the 
manifestation of receiving (them). The water-element has 
the characteristic of trickling, the property of satisfying, the 
manifestation of cohering; the fire-element has the charac- 
teristic ^of heating, the property of bringing to maturity, the 
manifestation of bringing about softness: the air-element has 
the characteristic of supporting, the property of movmg, the 
manifestation of bringing out. 

[366] (5) Under the source: — By showing these elements of 
earth, and so on, in detail, the forty-two parts, such as hairs, 
are also shown. Of them the four, namely, the stomach, 
excrement, pus, urme, originate from the season {utu-)\ the 
four, namely, tears, sweat, saliva, mucus, originate from the 
season and consciousness; fire, which brings whatever is eaten, 
and so on, to maturity, originates from karma; inhalmgs and 
exhalings of breath originate from consciousness; all the rest 
from the four sources. Thus, under the aspect of source 
should elements be considered. 

(6) As difierent or the same: — ^All the elements are different 
as regards characteristics, and so on. For different are the 
characteristics, properties, manifestations, of the earth- 
element from those of the element of water, and so on. 
Different as they are in characteristics, and so on, and in 
source (karma, and so on), they are the same in being matter, 
primary, element, state, impermanent, and so on. For all 
elements are matter in not discarding their characteristic of 
vexation; primaries for such reasons as manifestation of 


^ Cuvnato, i.e. as subdivided. 



XI. — Exposition of ' Concentration 423 

greatness, and so on. For (to give the other reasons), they 
are called primaries because of the manifestation of their 
greatness, the illusory resemblances they show in phenomena, 
the immensity of their maintenance, the immensity of their 
metamorphoses, their vast elementality. Of these terms, the 
first means that they are manifested as vast in a continuity 
that is not derived, and in a continuity that is derived.^ In 
continuity that is not derived: — 

Two hundred thousand and four nahutas ^ : — 

So much in bulb is reckoned this our earth. 

In this way the manifestation of their greatness has been 
described in the Exposition of the Buddha-recoUection.^ 

In derived contmuity. such material forms as tke bodies 
of fish, turtle, deva, demon, and so on, are big m appearance. 
As it was said (by the Blessed One): '' Monhs, in the great 
ocean are creatures one hundred yojanas in size.^^^ 

Of illusory resemblances they show in phenomena means, 
just as the juggler shows water which is not a gem as a gem, 
a stone which is not gold as gold, and himself, not being a 
yakkha or a bird, as yakkha or as bird,^ so these forms, not 
being (say) indigo, may appear as indigo-coloured derived 
matter, not being yellow, nor red, nor white, [367] as derived 
matter of these colours. Thus because of their illusory 
resemblances to the juggler’s counterfeiting are they called 
primaries (lit. great phenomena). As such great phenomena of 
yakkhas and the like who seize any being are not found inside 
that being, nor outside, but just exist in dependence upon him, 
so these great phenomena are not found standing mutually 
inside or outside; they just exist depending one on the other. 
Thus, because they have an unimaginable footing and resemble 
the Counterfeiting of phenomena by ya k khas and the* like, are 
they called great phenomena.” 


^ Upddinna, translated also as ‘‘grasped at” in the Expositor, 
p. 392. See also Ibid. 437, n. 1. 

^ Nahuta=- 10,000. ® Page 236. ^ V i-my a Texts liiyZO^. 

^ It certainly is better to read pakkM (as in Atthasdlinl 299) than 
yahkhi. 



424 


The Path of Purity 

Again, the primaries are like female yakkhas. As these, 
by seductive transformations of their external appearance, 
and hiding their own fearfulness, deceive people, 50 they, by 
means of lovely skin and complexion in the bodies of women, 
men, and so on, and of lovely contour of limbs, big and small, 
and of lovely gestures of hands, feet, fingers, eyebrows, hiding 
their own various intrinsic characteristics of harshness, and 
so on, deceive fools, and do not allow them to see their real 
nature. Thus owing also to their similarity to the illusory 
phenomena of female yakkhas in counterfeiting, they are 
great phenomena.” 

Of maintenance ” means, because they are maintained by 
great or many causes. They, from being daily maintained 
proceed jas primaries (or essentials) through abundance of 
food, covering, and so on; hence the name. 

“ Of the immensity of their metamorphoses ” means, 
because of the great changes [undergone by] the elements in 
material forms, derived as well as underived. Of these, the 
vastness of the change in the underived is manifested at the 
destruction of a world-cycle; that of the derived is manifested 
when the elements are disturbed. Therefore: — 

When heat consumes the world, the flame of fire 
Leaps upward even to the Brahma-world. 

When angry waters whelm the universe. 

The whole world of ten mjrriad kotis falls. 

When perturbation of the element 
Of motion overwhelms the universe, 

The whole world of ten m 5 rriad kotis falls. 

As bodies that the katthamukha bites, 

Stiffen, so bodies from the tottering 
Of the extension-element grow stiff 
As though they entered katthamukha’s mouth. 

As bodies that the putimukha bites 
Grow putrid, bodies from the tottering 
Of the cohesion-element will rot 
As though they entered putimukha’s mouth. 

[368] As bodies that the aggimukha bites 

Grow hot, so bodies from the tottering 



XI. — Exposition of Concentration 425 

Of the heat^element wax also hot 

As, though they entered aggimukha’s mouth. 

As hpdies that the satthamukha bites 
Axe cut up, bodies from the tottering 
Of the element of motion are cut up 
As though they entered satthamukha’s mouth. 

Such mighty changes are implied in the name '' great pheno- 
mena,” or primaries. 

Because of their vast elementality ” : — that is, tlt.@so 
[elemental forms], as existing, require mighty eSort to cope 
with them, and on this account are called great pheno- 
mena.” Thus all elements are great phenomena ” (or 
“ essentials ”) for such (reasons) as the manifestation of their 
greatness. And all are elements because they bear ttieir own 
characteristics, because they bestow and administer ill, and 
because they do not discard the characteristic of elements. 

And by bearing their own characteristics and lasting^ their 
own length of time are they states.” In the sense of decaying 
are they ‘"impermanent,” in the sense of danger are they 
“ill,” in the sense of essencelessness are they “selfless”: — 
thus all are at one in being matter, primary, element, state, 
impermanent, and so on. Thus as being different and the same 
should elements be considered. 

(7) As divided or undivided: — ^Arising together, they are 
locally undivided in each lowest group among the bare sets 
of eight, and so on.- They are divided in characteristic. 
Thus as divided or undivided should elements be considered. 

(8) As similar or dissimilar: — The first two of them, un- 
divided as they are, are alike in heaviness, likewise the last 
two in lightness. And the first two are unlike the last two, 
as these are unlike those. Thus as similar or dissimilar should 
elements be considered. 

(9) Under the distinction between internal and external: — 
the internal elements are the foundations of the [six] physical 
bases of consciousness,^ the [twofold] intimation,^ the [three] 

^ Read khandnurilpadharaneria. 

^ Read sahhapariyaMime suddhaithahddikaldpe, 

® Viz. eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind. ^ Viz. vocal and bodily. 



426 


The Path of Purity 

controlling faculties/ arise together with the postures, and 
spring from the four causes.^ The external elements are just 
the reverse of these. Thus from the. distinctipn between 
internal and external should elements be considered. 

(10) As classified: — The earth-element which springs from 
karma is classified together with the others which also spring 
from karma, as there is no difference as to’ source. Likewise 
with those which spring from consciousness, and so on. Thus 
as classified should elements be considered. 

’^11) Under the cause.— The earth-element, held together by 
water, guarded by fire, supported by air, is the cause, being 
the resting-place of three primaries. The water-element, 
resting on earth, guarded by fire, supported by air, is the 
cause, Ijinding three primaries. The fire-element resting on 
earth, held together by water, [369] supported by air, is the 
cause, maturing three primaries. The air-element resting on 
earth, held together by water, matured by fire, is the cause 
supporting three primaries. Thus under the aspect of cause 
should elements be considered. 

(12) As not laying to heart: — Of the elements the earth- 
element does not know, I am earth-element,’’ or I am the 
cause, being the resting-place of the three primaries.” ISTor 
do the three others know, The earth-element is the cause, 
being the resting-place of us.” And the same with every 
other element.^ Thus, under not laying to heart should 
elements be considered. 

(13) Under distmctive causes: — There are four causes of the 
elements: karma, consciousness, nutriment, season. Here, just 
karma, not consciousness and the others, is the engendering 
relation of those that spring from karma. Consciousness and 
the others, not karma, are the engendermg relation of those 
that spring from consciousness and the others. And karma 
is the engendering relation of those that spring from karma. 
Of the others it is the sufficing cause, speaking figuratively.^ 
Consciousness is the generating cause of those that spring from 

^ Viz, of femminity, masculinity, life. 

^ Viz. karma, consciousness, season, nutriment. 

2 Read sabbattM tu ^ I.e. as taught by the Suttanta method. 



XI. — Exposition of * Concentration 427 

consciousness, and the post-existence-cause, cause-by-presence, 
not causq,-in-absence of the others. Nutriment is the generating 
cause of those that spring from nutriment, and the nutriment- 
cause, presence-cause, non-absence-cause of the others. Season 
is the generating cause of those that spring from season, and 
the presence-cause, non-absence-cause of ^the others. The 
primary that springs from karma is the cause of those that 
spring from karma as well as of those that spring from con* 
sciousness and the others. Likewise that which springs from 
consciousness, and that which springs from nutriment. And 
that which springs from season is the cause of those that 
spring from season as well as of those that spring from karma 
and the others. 

Of them the earth-element which springs from ka^ma is the 
cause by way of the relations of co-existence, of reciprocity, 
of dependence, of presence, of non-absence, and by way of the 
resting-place of the others which sprmg from karma. Of the 
other primaries which are of the three continuities [of season, 
consciousness, nutriment] it is the cause by way of the rela- 
tions of dependence, of presence, of non-absence, not by way 
of resting-place nor of generation. And here (among the 
primaries which spring from karma) the water-element is the 
cause of the other three by way of co-existence, and so on, 
and of binding but not by way of generation. Among the 
others of the three continuities it is the cause by way of the 
relations of dependence, of presence, of non-absence, but not 
by way of binding nor of generation. And here again the 
fire element is the cause of the other three by way of existence 
and so on and maturing, not by way of generation. Among 
the others of the three continuities it is the cause by way of 
the relations of dependence, of presence, of non-absence, but 
not by way of maturing nor of generation. And here again the 
air-element [370] is the cause of the other three by way of 
co-existence, and so on, and of supporting but not by way of 
generation. Among the others of the three continuities it 
is the cause by way of the relations of dependence, of presence, 
of non-absence, but not by way of supporting nor of genera- 
tion, The same with the earth-element and the others which 



428 


Tlie Path of Purity 

spring . from consciousness, from nutriment, from season. 
Thus among those elements which proceed by virtue of the 
causal relations of co-existence, and so on: — 

Because of one, three come four times, 

And sp comes one because of three. 

Because of two, two come six times. 

For among them, because of each the other three arise, that 
is, because of one, three arise four times. Likewise each of 
the^ arises because of the other three, that is, one arises 
four times because of the three. And the latter two arise 
because of the first two, and the first two because of the latter 
two, the second and fourth because of the first and third, 
and the, first and third because of the second and fourth, 
the second and third because of the first and fourth, and the 
first and fourth because of the second and third, that is: 
two arise six tunes because of two. -Among them the earth- 
element is the cause of pressing the foot in taking steps forward 
or backward, and so on. Followed by the water-element, it 
is the cause of planting the foot. The water-element followed 
by the earth-element is the cause of putting the foot down. 
The fire-element followed by the air-element is the cause of 
lifting the foot. The air-element followed by the fire-element 
is the cause of moving the foot forward or sideways. Thus 
under distinctive causes should elements be considered. 

Thus as one considers by way of word-meaning and so on, 
the elements beginning with each manifest themselves. As he 
adverts, attends, to them repeatedly, there arises in the way 
described, access-concentration, which, because it arises through 
the power of knowledge which determmes the four elements, 
goes imder the name of determination of the four elements. 

And the monk who is devoted to the determination of, the 
four elements plunges into the Void, severs the idea of a 
being’’; and because he has severed the idea of a being, he 
overcomes fear and danger, not entertaining any doubt regard- 
ing the true nature of wild beasts, ogres, demons and so on, 
overcomes discontent and worldly pleasure, is not elated or 
depressed by desirable or undesirable objects, is great in 



XI. — Exposition of {Joncentration 429 

wisdom, destined for deathlessness, bound for a . happy 
course. 

Thus the wise ascetic {yogi) should always practise this 
determination of the four elements which has such powers, and 
is the sport of the noble Lion. 

This IS the exposition of development in* determming the 
four elements. 

[371] Thus far, to show the detailed accoimt of concentra- 
tion and the system of development, the question has b*een 
put in this way: '‘What is concentration? In what sense 
is it concentration V And so on.^ 

The setting forth m all aspects of the meaning of this 
[seventh] question among those questions: “ How should it be 
developed V is completed. Here the twofold concentration 
is intended: access-concentration and ecstatic concentration. 
Of them, collectedness in the ten subjects of meditation and 
in the risings of consciousness previous to ecstasy is access- 
concentration. Collectedness of mind in the remaming 
subjects of meditation is ecstatic concentration. Those 
subjects of meditation being developed, this twofold concen- 
tration also is developed. Hence it is said: The settmg forth 
in all aspects of the meaning of the [seventh] question, “ How 
should it be developed V is completed. 

8. In the [eighth]^ question which has been put as, What 
are the advantages of developing concentration V there are five 
advantages of developing concentration, such as a happy 
life under present conditions, and so on. For those saints 
who have extinguished the banes havmg entered into Jhana, 
develop concentration in the thought; “With collected mind 
we shall live in bliss the whole day.’’ The development of 
ecstatic concentration by them brings the advantage of a 
happy life under present conditions. Hence said the Blessed 
One: “ But in the rule of him that is noble^ 0 Cunda, the 
ecstasies are called not expungings, but a happy life under 
present conditions 


1 See p. 97. 


- No. 7 13 on p. 105. 


3 Majjhima i, 41. 



430 


TTie Path of Purity 

To those probationers and average persons who, rising from 
their attainment of Jhana, develop their hearts in the thought, 
''With concentrated minds we shall haye insigh^/’ the de- 
velopment of ecstatic concentration, which is the proximate 
cause of insight and the development of access-concentration 
which proceeds hf getting an opportimitv in this constrained 
life of repeated births, bring insight as their advantage. Hence 
said the Blessed One: " Monies, practise concentration. A 
monk who is concentrated knows a thing as it really 
i&Ld those who, having induced the eight attainments, 
abide in the Jhana which 4s the foundation of higher know- 
ledge, and havmg arisen from their attainment, have a desire 
for, and produce, the higher knowledges in the way described 
as, Being one, he becomes many^’' — to them, provided 
there is occasion for the attainment of higher knowledge 
perfected in the past,^ the development of ecstatic concen- 
tration, which is the proximate cause of higher knowledge, 
brings higher knowledge as their advantage. Hence said the 
Blessed One: " He bends his mind %n order to realize by higher 
knowledge this and that state which he ought so to realize, and 
becomes fit to realize such states, ^provided there is occasion for 
the attainment of higher knowledge perfected in the pasV^^ 

[372] To those average persons who, not falling off from 
Jhana, do not fall off from concentration, whether they desire 
or do not desire re-birth in the Brahma- world, the development 
of ecstatic concentration as bestowing a special kind of birth 
brmgs this special birth as their advantage. Hence said the 
Blessed One : ' ' Developing the First Jhana to a small extent, where 
do they attain re-birth ? They attain to companionship in the 
Brahma Assemblies'"'^ The development of access-concentra- 
tion, how.ever, bestows special birth in a happy realm of sense. 

The Elect who, having produced the eight attainments, 
abide in the attainment of cessation and develop concentration 
in the thought, "Being without mind for seven days we 

^ Kindred Sayings iii, 15. Quoted in Expositor 216. 

2 Sati sati dyatane is explained by the filed thus: Purima-bhava- 
siddhe obhinnddMgamassa Jedrane vijjamdneP 

VihJianga 424. 


4 



431 


XI . — Exposition of Qoneentartion 

shall attain cessation, Nibbana, in this present life and live 
happily to them the development of ecstatic concentration 
brings cessation as their advantage Hence said the Blessed 
One: Knowledge is the attainment of cessation from percej)- 
tions^ through practice in the sixteen 'inodes of knowledge, the 
nine modes of concentratioyiJ^- • 

Such are the five advantages of the development of concen- 
tration beginning with a happy life under present conditions. 

Therefore the wise should not be negligent 
In constant application to this mode 
Of concentration-culture, Which has such 
Advantages, and purges passion-taints. 

In so far has concentration been set forth in the Path of 
Purity shown under the heads of virtue, concentratioif, under- 
standmg, in the stanza: 

The man discreet, on virtue planted firm,^^ 

Thus is ended the Eleventh Chapter called the Exposition 
of Concentration in the Path of Purity, composed for the 
purpose of gladdening good folk. 

2 Patisambhida i, 97. 


^ Bead sannd for 



[373] CHAPTEE XII 

EXPOSITION OE PSYCHIC POWERS (IDDHI) 

Now we shall begin the discourse on higher knowledges, 
inasmuch as the ascetic who has attained to the Fourth 
Jhana by earth-device, and so on, should make effort to fulfil 
that worldly higher knowledge by means of which the de- 
velopment of concentration brings higher knowledge as a 
reward, so that this development of concentration by him 
will realize its advantages and become stronger, and he himself 
having fulfilled the development of that concentration which 
has realized its rewards and become stronger, will early reach 
the development of understanding. For the Blessed One, 
in order to show the advantages of developing concentration 
and to preach the more and more subtle law to those noble 
sons who have attamed to concentration of the Fourth Jhana, 
has stated the five branches of worldly knowledge, to wit: 
various kinds of psychic powers, deva-hearing, knowledge of 
others’ thoughts, recollection of past existences, knowledge 
of the decease and re-birth of beings in this wise: With his 
heart thus serene, made pure, translucent, free from blemishes, 
devoid of ev%l, supple, ready to act, firm and imperturbable, 
he applies and bends down h%s mind to the modes of psychic 
power. He enjoys psychic power in the various modes — being 
one he becomes many/^^ 

Herein the beginner who is a recluse, who wishes to perform 
the practice of psychic powers, such as being one to become 
many,” should, after producing the eight attainments in* the 
eight devices ending in the white device, [374] subdue the 
mind in these fourteen ways: In the direct order of the device, 
in the reverse order of the device, in the direct and the reverse 
order of the device, in the direct order of the Jhana, in the 

~ 1 Dlgha i, 77 f 
432 



XII. — Exposition of Psychic Poivers 43 

reverse order of the Jhana, in the direct and the reverse order 
of the Jhana, by skipping over the Jhana, by skipping over 
the device,** by skipping over the Jhana and device, by 
shifting the factor, by shifting the object, by shifting 
the factor and object, by fixing the factor, by fixing the 
object. 

Which is ''the direct order of the device,’’ and so on? 
Here a monk attains to Jhana in the earth-device, and then 
in the water-device, thus in due order of the eight devices he 
attains to Jhana a hundred times, a thousand times. Tliis 
is the direct order of the device. 

The attainment in reverse order, starting from the white 
device, is " the reverse order of the device.” 

The repeated attainment in direct and reverse order, from 
the earth-device up to the white device, and from the white 
device back to the earth-device, is " the direct and reverse 
order of the device.” 

The repeated attainment start-ing from the First Jhana up 
to the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception, is 
" the direct order of the Jhana.” The repeated attainment 
starting from the sphere of neither perception nor non-per- 
ception, back to the First Jhana, is " the reverse order of the 
Jhana.” The repeated attainment in direct and reverse order 
from the First Jhana up to the sphere of neither perception 
nor non-perception, and from the sphere of neither perception 
nor non-perception back to the First Jhana, is "the direct 
and reverse order of the Jhana.” 

He enters into the First Jhana in the earth-device, the 
Third Jhana in the same device, then removing it he enters 
into the sphere of the infinitude of space, then the sphere of 
nothingness: — Thus the skipping over every second Jhana, 
but not the device, is called " the skipping over the Jhana.” 

The same construction with reference to the water-device, 
and so on, should be made. Having entered into the First 
Jhana in the earth-device, he again enters into it in the heat- 
device, then in the blue device, then in the red device: — ^the 
skipping over every second device, but not the Jhana, in this 
way is called " the skipping over the device.” 


28 



434 


The Path of Purity 

Having entered into tlie First Jhana in the earth-device, 
he enters into the Third in the heat-device, removirjig the blue 
device he enters into the sphere of the infinitude oi space, into 
the sphere of nothingness from the red device: — the alternate 
skipping of Jhana and device in this way is “ the skipping 
of Jhana and device.’’ 

Having entered into the First Jhana in the earth-device, 
[375] he enters into the other Jhanas in the same device: — 
this is shifting the factor.” 

After entering into the First Jhana in the earth-device, he 
enters into the same in th^ water-device, the same in the white 
device: — ^the entering thus into one Jhana in all devices is 

shifting the object.” 

After entering into the First Jhana in the earth-device, he 
enters into the Second in the water-device, the Third in the 
heat-device, the Fourth in the air-device, he enters into the 
sphere of the infinitude of space, removing the blue device, 
into the sphere of the infinitude of consciousness from the 
white device, into the sphere of nothingness from the red device, 
into the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception from 
the white device: — ^this shifting of factors and objects alter- 
nately is the shifting of factor and object.” 

The First Jhana has two factors, the Second has three, the 
Third has two, likewise the Fourth, the sphere of the infinitude 
of space . . . the sphere of neither perception nor non- 
perception: — thus the fixing only of the Jhana-f actors is 

the fixing of the factor.” 

Similarly this has the earth-device for object . . . this the 
water-device , . . this the white device for object: — ^thus 
the fixing only of the object is the fixing of the object.” 

Some -prefer the fixing also of factor and object. But since 
it is not mentioned in the Commentaries, it certainly is no.t an 
introduction to developing {bhdvand). 

It is impossible that a recluse, a beginner, who has not 
subdued his mind in these fourteen ways, nor developed the 
developing, should attain the practice of psychic powers. 
For to the beginner the preliminary work of the device is a 
burden; only one in a hundred or a thousand can do it. To 



XIL — Exposition of Psychic Poicers 435 

him who has done the prelimmary work of the device, the 
production of the after-image is a burden; only one in a 
hundred 05 , a thousand can do it. When one has produced 
the after-image and increased it, the attainment of ecstasy is 
a burden; only one in a hundred or a thousand can do it. To 
him who has attained to ecstasy the subjugation of the mmd 
in the fourteen ways is a burden; only one in a hundred or a 
thousand can do it. To him who has subdued the mind in 
the fourteen ways, the practice of psychic powers is a burden; 
only one in a hundred or a thousand can do it. To him "v^ho 
has attained to the practice of psychic powers, the quick 
inducement of Jhana^ is a burden] only one in a hundred or 
a thousand can do it. 

[Such an one is] like Rakkhita the Elder (whose grower has 
been mentioned in the exposition of the earth-device-), of 
eight years’ standing among the thirty thousand possessors 
of psychic powers who had come to minister to the sick Elder 
Maha-Eohanagutta at Therambatthala. [376] Seeing the 
display of his power, the Elder said: ''Eriends, if Rakkhita 
had not been present, all of us would have deserved the blame 
that we could not protect the king of the Nagas. Therefore 
it is fit that one should walk about holding the weapon with 
which one should purify the taints.” Bemg established m 
the admonition of the Elder, the thirty thousand monks 
became quick inducers of Jhana. When such inducement 
of Jhana is obtained, protection^ of others is a burden; only 
one in a hundred or a thousand can give it. 

[Such an one is] like the Elder who prevented the fall of 
coals by creating earth in the sky when Mara rained down a 
shower of coals at the great lights festival of Ceylon.^ 

But those who have made strong application in the past, 
such .as the Buddhas, silent Buddhas, and the chief Disciples, 
are successful in the practice of psychic powers, and obtain 
various qualities, such as the different kinds of analytical 

^ “ Kliippanisanti ” = slgliataram jliamm Tlha. 

2 Page 178. 

2 “ Patitthabhavo ” :=■ ‘pa/rassa upaddctvupOrSO/Mayui* 

^ ‘‘ Giribiiarida vdhaTiapugd ndma cetiyaginm adm katvd salala- 
dlpe samudde ca ydva yojand 'indhatidipapujdy — Tlhd. 



436 


Tlie Puth of Purity 

knowledge by virtue of the attainment of saintship only without 
the aid of the course of developing (in subduing the mind) 
just described. Therefore just as a goldsmith who wishes 
to make a special kind of ornament makes the gold soft and 
malleable by heating it in the fire, and so on, and makes the 
ornament: and aS a potter who wishes to make a special kind 
of pot makes the clay well-ground and soft and makes the pot, 
so should the beginner subdue the mind in the fourteen ways, 
make it wieldy by entering into Jhana under the dominance 
of desire-to-act, of consciousness, of energy, of investigation, 
and by the practice of adverting, and so on, and devote himself 
to the various kinds of psychic powers. 

But he who is fulfilled by his past conditions, and is accus- 
tomed to the practice of only the Fourth Jhana in the devices, 
should also make application. As the Blessed One has said 
in showing here the order in which application should be made: 
— With his heart thus serene and so onP'^ 

Here follows the determining according to the textual 
method. 

Herein, he ’’ is the recluse who has attained to the Fourth 
Jhana. 

Thus ” shows the order in which the Fourth Jhana is 
attained. Having attained to the First Jhana he gets the 
Fourth Jhana in due course; thus is it said, serene,” that 
is, through the concentration of the Fourth Jhana. 

Heart ” is consciousness of the sensuous realm. 

As regards ‘‘ made pure ” and so on, the statement is that 
it is made pure by the purity of mindfulness and equanimity; 
‘translucent,” cleansed in splendour because of purity. 

[377] It is “ free from blemishes ” from the absence of 
blemishes such as lust, through the destruction of causes such 
as bliss ; “ devoid of evil ” from being free from the blemishes ; 
for^ the mind is defiled by blemishes. 

“ Supple ” — owing to its well-developed state, said to be in 
a well-controlled state. For the mind which follows one’s 
power is said to be soft. 

And it is “ ready to act ” from being supple. It is said to be 
1 P. 432, alove. ^ Bead M tmr^ cUtarn^ 



XII . — Exposition of Psychic Powers 437 

amenable to work, prepared to act. For the mind is' plastic 
and wieldy like well-burnished gold. Both the terms are due 
to the wetl-developed state. As has been said: “A/oiife, 
I do not see any other state which, being thus developed, 
repeated, becomes pliant and wieldy like th^ miyid^^ It is 
'' firm” from being established in purity and other qualities. 

Imperturbable ” is due to firmness: immovable, unpeiturbed 
— this has been stated. Or it is firm as being placed under 
control through its pliancy and wieldiness, impertuib^ble 
as being upheld by faith, and so on. For the mmd, upheld 
by faith, and so on, is miperturbed by absence of faith; the 
mind upheld by energy is unperturbed by idleness; the mmd 
upheld by mindfulness is unperturbed by negligence; upheld 
by concentration it is unperturbed by distraction; upheld by 
understandmg it is unperturbed by ignorance; upheld by 
light it is unperturbed by the darkness of the passions. Upheld 
by these six states it is imperturbable. Thus endowed with 
the eight factors, the mind is easily applied for the realization 
through understanding of states which are to be so realized* 

Another way of explanation is: — It is ''serene” tlirough 
the concentration of the Fourth Jhana; " made pure ” through 
the hmdrances being far away; " translucent ” through the 
surpassing of applied thinking, and so on; "free from 
blemishes ” through the absence of the realms of evil desire 
which are caused by the attainment of Jhana; "devoid of 
evil ” through the departure of the defilements of the mind 
such as covetousness. The latter two qualities should be known 
after the Anaiigana and Vattha Suttas.^ It is " supple ” 
through being under control, " ready to act ” through the 
acquirement of the bases of psychic powers; " firm, imperturb- 
able ” through the fulfilment of development and the acquire- 
menfof exaltedness. As it is imperturbable, so is it firm — is 
the meaning. The mind being thus endowed with the eight 
factors is easily appHed [378] and becomes the foundation and 
proximate cause of the realization through understanding 
of states which are to be so realized. 

^ Angiittara i, 9. 

2 MajjMtm i, Suttas 5 and 7. Further Dialogues, pp. 18 f. and 26 f. 



438 


The Path of Purity 

He applies and bends down his mind to the modes of psychic 
power/' — here ''psychic power” is in the sense of^effecting, 
said to be in the sense of accomplishing, of obtaining. For 
that which finishes and obtains is said to give effect. As it 
has been said: — * 

If one desiring aught ^ accomplish his desire , , 

Thus "psychic power” means, renunciation is effected; 
miracle means a striking down [opposition]; psychic power 
me§ns the path of sanctity is effected^; miracle means a 
striking down [opposition]. 

Another way of explanation: — It is psychic power in the 
sense of effecting; it is a synonym of the means of attainment, 
which gives effect because it gives the desired fruit. As has 
been said: " Oto, the householder^ is virtuous and of good 
conduct. Should he wish it, he might become in the future a 
universal monarch, for effective is the mental resolution of the 
virtuous owing to its purity.’ 

Another way: — psychic power is that by which beings 
thrive, that is, they grow and attain excellence. 

Psychic power is of ten kinds; as has been said: " There are 
ten psychic powers,” Again it was said further: " Which are 
the ten psychic powers? (1) The psychic power of resolve,"^ 
(2) of transformation, (3) accomplished by mind, (4) of dif- 
fusion by knowledge, (5) of diffusion by concentration, (6) of 
the Elect, (7) inborn as the result of karma, (8) of the meritori- 
ous, (9) accomplished through art, (10) accomplished through 
industrial processes in this or that work,”^ 

Of these, as regards (1) being one by nature he contemplates 
many forms. Contemplating a hundred, a thousand, or a 
hundred thousand forms, he resolves by [higher] knowledge 
to have many forms. The psychic power displayed after 
making' such a classification is the psychic power of will, 
since it is accomplished through will. 

^ Sutta Ni2)(UalQQ. 

^ Read ijjhati ti. 

® Samyutta iv, 303, reading cetopanidhi vis°. 

^ Or “will.” AdhiUhdna, lit. “ standing-np-to.” 

^ Patisambhida ii, 205. Of. Expositor 121, where ISTo. (5) is omitted, 
and “accomplished by culture ” is substituted as the ninth. 



439 


XII . — Exposition of Psychic Poicers 

(2) He discards his original form and takes on the form of 
a boy, of a snake ... of the different forms of an army/ Such 
psychic f>ower which proceeds through transformation by 
discarding one’s original form is the psychic power of trans- 
formation. 

[379] (3) The psychic power which is displayed in this way: 
Here a monk calls up from this body another body, having 
form, made of mmd,'^^ is the psychic power accomplished by 
mind, since it proceeds by calling up from one’s own body 
another body made of mind. ** 

(4) That special psychic power which is produced through 
the power of insight, before or after, or the very moment of, 
the uprising of the msight, is the psychic power diffused by 
knowledge. For this has been said: The function of putting 
away the idea of permanence is accompanied by the discernment 
of impermanence, — thus is psychic power diffused by insight. . . . 
The function of putting away all passions is accomplished by the 
path of sanctity, — thus is psychic power diffused by knowledge. 
The venerable Bakkula has it. The venerable Safikicca has it. 
The venerable BhutapdJa has itJ^^ 

Of them the venerable Bakkula, when he was a child, fell 
into a stream through the negligence of his nurse while she 
was giving him a bath on the feast-day (of givmg him his name). 
A fish swallowed him and went to the landing-place of Baranasi, 
where a fisherman having caught it, sold it to a rich man’s 
wife. A fancy for it arose in her, and she, saying, '' I myself 
will cook it,” was cutting it open, when she saw the child like 
a golden doll in its belly. She became jojrful, thinking she 
had got a son. Thus the venerable Bakkula’s keeping his 
health in the belly of the fish, as being due to the power of 
insight into the path of sanctity obtained through his person- 
ality in his last existence, is the psychic power diffused by 
knowledge. The story should be told at length. 

The mother of Sankicca the elder’ died while he was still 
unborn. As the dead body, pierced with spikes and dragged 
on to a pyre, was being burned, the sharp end of a spike hurt 


^ PahsctmbMdd li, 210. 
^ PatisambJiidd 11, 2l\. 


2 Dialogues i, 87. 

^ Dhammapada Commentary ii, 240. 



440 TJre Path of Purity 

the corner of the eye of the child and it gave a cry. They 
then took the dead body down, saying, The child lives/’ 
and cut open the womb, and gave the child to the graMmother. 
The child under her care grew up. In course of time he was 
ordained and attained to sanctity together with analytical 
knowledge. Thu^ the escape from harm on the funera’’ pyre 
of wood, as described above, is the venerable Sankicca’s 
psychic power diffused by knowledge. 

The father of the child Bhutapala was a poor man in 
Eajagaha. [380] He went in a cart to the forest to collect 
fire-wood. Having made a bundle of fire-wood, he reached in 
the evening the neighbourhood of the town-gate. Then the 
oxen, having got loose from the yoke, entered the town-gate. 
Making the child sit near the cart, he followed the track of the 
oxen and*entered the town. Before he could get out, the gate 
was closed. The child’s escape from harm throughout the 
three watches of the night outside the town traversed by wild 
beasts and demons, was his psychic power diffused by know- 
ledge. The story should be told at length. 

(5) That special psychic power which is produced through 
the power of calm before or after, or at the very moment of, 
concentration, is psychic power diffused by concentration. 
Bor this has been said: The function of putting away the 
hMrances is accomplished by the First Jhdna, — thus is psychic 
power diffused by concentration, . . . The function of putting 
aivay the perception of the sphere of nothingness is accomplished 
by the attainment of the sphere of neither perception nor non- 
perception^ — thus is psychic poiver diffused by concentration. 
The venerable Sdriputta has it. The venerable Sanjiva, the 
venerable Khanuhondahna^ the lay-sister Vttard, the lay-sister 
Sdmdvati have 

Of these, when at Kapotakandara Monastery the venerable 
Sariputta, together with Maha Moggallana the elder, was lying 
down with his newly shaven head in the open air on a moonlight 
night, a malignant demon, despite the remonstrances of his 
<!emon-friend, struck him on the head, the sound of the blow 
bemg like the sound of thunder; the elder at that very moment 


^ Fatisambhida 11^^12, 



XIL — Exposition of Psychic Powers 441 

entered into his attainment (of trance). He was none the 
worse for the blow. This is the venerable one’s psychic power 
diffused by^concentration. The story occurs in the Udana.^ 
Cowherds and others, thinking that Sanjiva the elder, who 
had entered into trance, was dead, collected grass, fire-wood 
and cow-dung, and set them on fire. The fire did not bum 
even the threads of the elder’s robe. This marvel, because it 
was produced through the power of calm, proceeding in the 
due order of the attainments, is known as psychic power 
diffused by concentration. The story occurs in the Sutta.^' 
By nature Khanukondanna the elder was fond of entering 
into trance* At night in a certain forest he entered into 
trance and [381] sat down. Five hundred thieves, having 
stolen a bundle of treasure, went away, and thinking that no 
one was following them and desiring to rest, put down all their 
bundles on top of the elder, under the impression that he 
was a tree-stump. The elder emerged from trance after an 
interval of time during which they, after resting themselves, 
were taking up the bundles they had placed on him. Seeing 
the elder moving, they shouted in fear. He said: “Lay- 
brethren, fear not. I am a recluse.” They came near, saluted 
him, were converted through faith in him, and attained sanctity 
together with analytical knowledge. The absence of hurt to 
the elder who was pressed down by the five hundred bundles is 
psychic power diffused by concentration. 

The lay-sister Uttara was the daughter of Punnaka the rich 
man, Sirima the courtezan, being oppressed by jealousy, 
poured on her head boiling oil from a pot. That very moment 
Uttara exercised love. The oil rolled off like a drop of water 
from off a lotus-leaf. This is her psychic power diffused by 
concentration. The story should be told at length, 

Samavati was the chief queen of King Udena.^ Magai^diya 
the Brahmin, desiring the chief queenship for his own daughter, 
caused a poisonous snake to be placed in the queen’s lute, 
and said to the king: “Sire, Samavati, wishing to kill your 
majesty, carries a snake in her lute.” Seemg the snake the 
king was angry, and saying, “ I will kill Samavati,” drew 
1 iv, 4. 2 Further Dialogues i, 240. ® Comm. AngutL i, 442. 



442 


The Path of Purity 

Ms boF, fixing an arrow dipped in poison. Samavati, sur- 
rounded by ber women, diffused love towards the king. The 
king, unable to shoot the arrow or to^ put it ddwn, stood 
trembling. Then said the queen: ^^Art thou weary, Sire 
King V '' Yes, I am weary.” '' Then put the bow down.” 
The arrow fell alTthe king’s feet. Then the queen admonished 
him saying, Sire, one should not do harm* to the harmless.” 
Thus the king’s inability to shoot the arrow was Samavati’s, the 
lay-sister’s, psychic power diffused by concentration. 

*f6) Psychic power of the elect is dwelling on repulsive 
objects, and so on, with the idea that they are not repulsive. 
As has been said: Which is the ^psychic power of the elect? 
Here if a monh wishes that he could dwell on repulsive things 
uith the idea that they are not^ he could so abide therein . . . 
indifferent^ [382] thoughtful and knowing^ he dwells on objects 
both repulsive and attractive,’^^ Since this happens only to the 
elect who are masters of their will, it is called psychic power 
of the elect. Indeed a monk who is free from the banes, and 
is endowed with it, dwells on a repulsive, undesirable object 
with the idea that it is not repulsive, either by diffusing 
thoughts of love, or regarding it as a group of elements. He 
dwells on an object, attractive, desirable, with the idea that 
it is repulsive, by laying to heart that it is foul or impermanent. 
And similarly he dwells on objects repulsive and attractive 
with the idea that they are not repulsive by diffusing thoughts 
of love or regarding them as a group of elements. And he 
dwells on objects attractive and repulsive with the idea that 
they are repulsive by laying to heart that they are foul or 
impermanent. Producing the sixfold indifference which is 
described in tMs way: ^'Seeing a visible object he is not 
delighiedff^ he overcomes both the ideas of repulsion and 
attraction, and lives indifferent, thoughtful and knowmg. For 
m PatisambMda^ the meaning is thus analyzed: How ^ does 
one dwell on a repulsive object with the idea tlmt it is attractive ? 
He diffuses love towards the undesirable object or regards it as an 
element This is the psychic power of the elect smce it 
happens only to the elect who are masters of their will. 

^ PatisambMMii,2>\2. ^ AhgiUtara h, 198. ^ li, 212. 



XII . — Exposition of Psychic Potvers 443 

(7) Such performances as birds and others flying in the 
sky, are b\own as psychic power inborn as the result of karma. 
As has been said: Which ^s the psychic power inborn as the 
result of karma ? [The traversing of the shy'\ by all birds, all 
devas, some men and some denizens of purgatory, is the psychic 
power inborn as the result of karma^^ Of tliese, indeed, all 
birds go in the sky without Jhana or insight. Likewise all 
devas, and some men at the beginning of the world-cycle. 
Likewise the ogress who was Piyankara’s mother,^ Uttara's 
mother, Phussamitta, Dhammagutta and such other denizens 
of purgatory. Their going in the sky is psychic power inborn 
as the result of karma. 

(8) The traversing of the sky by universal monarchs, and 

so on is the psychic power of the meritorious. As ^as been 
said: What is the psychic power of the meritorious? A 

universal monarch goes in the sky together with his fourfold 
army, even though depending on horse-grooms and cowherds, 
Jotika the householder has it, Jatilaka the householder [383] 
has it, Ghosita the householder has it, Mendaka the householder 
has it. The five persons of great merit have Briefly, any- 
thing specially accomplished when the supporting cause of 
merit has ripened, is psychic power of the meritorious. 

And of these persons, to Jotika the householder there arose 
a jewel-palace, and sixty-four wish-yieldmg trees breaking 
through the earth. This was his psychic power of the meri- 
torious. To Jatilaka arose a mountain of gold eighty cubits 
high. It was Ghosita’s psychic power of the meritorious that 
he was unharmed for all the efforts made to kill him in seven 
places. The appearance of [figures of] goats made of the seven 
gems in a place a furrow^ long was Mecidaka’s psychic power 
of the meritorious. The five persons of great merit were 
Meii^ka the rich, his wife Candapadumasiri, their son Dhan- 
ancaya the rich, [their] daughter-in-law Sumanadevi, [their] 
slave Punna. Of these, when the rich man, after bathing his 
head looked up at the sky, twelve thousand, five hundred 
granaries were filled with red paddy from the sky. When his 

1 PatisambMdd ii, 213. ^ See Kindred Saiji'iigs i, 263. 

3 Read 



444 


The Path of Purity 

wife, taking a ndli quantity of rice, fed tke whole of J ambudipa 
with it, the rice showed no diminution. When the ^on, taking 
a bag of a thousand coins, gave them to everyone in Jambu- 
dipa, the coins showed no diminution. When the daughter- 
in-law, taking a basketful of hill-paddy distributed it among 
the dwellers of Jambudfpa, the grain showed no diminution. 
When the slave ploughed the field with a single plough, he 
made fourteen furrows, seven on each side. This was their 
psychic power of the meritorious.^ 

*f9) Performances of magicians going through the sky are 
psychic powers accompkshed through art.^ As has been 
said: What is the psychic power accomplished through art? 

Magicians recite spells (vijjd) and go through the shy^ where 
in the jirmament they display forms of elephants ... the 
various groups of an armyT^ 

(10) Psychic power accomplished through industrial pro- 
cesses in this or that work is the accomplishment of this or 
that work through this or that right mdustry. As has been 
said: The function of putting away sense-desire is accom- 

plished through renunciation: — thus is psychic power accom- 
plished through industrial processes in this or that work ... the 
function of putting away all passions is accomplished by means 
of the path of sanctity: — thus is psychic power accomplished 
through industrial processes in this or that work.^'^ Here, by 
showing '' right industry ” as attainment, the text is the same 
as in the preceding on psychic powers. [384] But in the 
Commentary anything specially accomplished^ m the way of 
arrays of carts, etc., concerning any work accomplished by 
arts, or by science, the acquiring of the three Vedas, of the three 
Pitakas, and even of ploughing, sowing, and so on is psychic 
power accomplished through industrial processes in this or 
that work. Thus m the expression, To the modes of paychic 
power,” the psychic power is that called resolve. But in this 
matter the psychic powers called “ transformation ” and 
accomplished by mind ” also are desirable. To the modes 
of psychic power ” means, to the divisions of, or the different 

^ These stories are not in the Pitaka reference. ^ Vijja, or “ lore.’’ 
® Patuarnhliida ^ nippliaUiviseso. 



XII. — Exposition of Psychic Potvers 445 

kinds of, (psyckic power). He applies and bends do.wn his 
mind ’’ means, when, in the way already stated, the mind has 
become the^ basis of the higher knowledge, the monk applies 
that preparatory mind for the attainment of the modes of 
psychic power and, taking it away from the device-object, sends 
it in their direction. Bends down” meanS, makes it lean, 
incline, towards the psychic power that is to be attained. 
'' He ” is the monk who applies the mind so prepared. Its 
various modes ” are its different kinds, different sorts. Modes 
of psychic power” are the divisions. '^Enjoys” means ti- 
periences, touches, realizes, acquires# 

Now in order to show its various modes, the Blessed One 
said, '' Being one ” and so forth, wherein Being one ” means, 
being one by nature previous to the working of psychic power. 
‘^Becomes many” means, in the presence of many, being 
desirous of walking to and fro, of making recitations, or putting 
questions, he becomes a hundred or a thousand. How does this 
happen 1 By fulfilling the four stages, the four bases, the 
eight steps, and the sixteen roots of psychic power, ^ and being 
resolute through knowledge. Of these, the Four Jhanas should 
be regarded as the four stages. For this has been said by the 
Captain of the Law-: Which are the four stages of psychic 
power ? The stage of solitude is the First Jhdna, The stage of 
rapturous bliss is the Second Jhdna. The stage of the bliss of 
indifference is the Third Jhdna, The stage of neither bliss nor 
misery is the Fourth Jhdna, These four stages of psychic power 
conduce to the getting of psychic power ^ its acquirement^ its 
practice, its increase, its mastery, its confidenceJ^^ And of these, 
since in the first three Jhanas a man, being suffused with rap- 
ture and bliss, enters into the perception of bliss and the per- 
ception of buoyancy, and becoming buoyant, pliant, wieldy, 
attains to psychic power, [385] they are to be regarded, as con- 
stituent stages inasmuch as they conduce to the attainment of 
psychic power in that way. But the Fourth Jhana is the 
original stage for the attainment of psychic power. 

^ Patisambliidd ii, 205. 

2 Sariputta. The Patisanibhidd is patently a late work. Possibly 
of a school which called itself Sariputta’s. 



446 


The Path of Purity 

The. four bases (pada) are to be regarded as the four bases of 
psychic power. For this has been said: Which are the four 
bases of psychic power ? Here a monh . develops the basis of 
psychic poiver which is endowed with activities of effort and wifh 
concentration of purpose^ . . . with concentration of energy^ 
. . . with conceMration of thought^ . . . with concentration of 
investigation} These four bases of psychic poiver conduce to 
. . . its confidence}'^ 

Here concentration of purpose ” means concentration 
conditioned by purpose, or with an excess of purpose. This 
is another name for concentration, which is obtained by making 
desire-to-act the dominant principle. “ Activities of effort ” 
mean activities which are effort, another name for energy with 
right effort which accomplishes the four functions such as 
work not yet accomplished. Endowed with ’’ means pos- 
sessed of concentration of purpose and activities of effort. 
‘‘ Basis of psychic power ” is so called in the sense of accom- 
plishing, which is another way of effecting, and because by it 
beings are accomplished, thrive, and attain excellence. The 
meaning is: — The group of the remainmg mind and mental 
properties which are the basis in the sense of foundation of 
concentration of purpose and activities of effort associated 
with the consciousness of higher knowledge which go under 
the name of psychic power. For this has been said: ''Basis 
of psychic power is likewise^ the aggregate of feeling the 
aggregate of consciousness of a creature}''' Or, by it one ar- 
rives, — thus, basis; the meaning is, attains. Psychic-power- 
basis is the basis of psychic power, a name for purpose, and so 
on. As has been said: "Monks, if a monk through purpose 
gets concentration, he gets collectedness of mind ; this is called 
concentration of purpose. He makes effort to the end that evil 
states which have not yet arisen should not arise , , , those are 

^ Rendered by Lord Chalmers in Further Dialogues i, 73, by “He 
develops the four bases of psychic power, in which purpose, will, thought, 
and study respectively inspire what moulds and fashions vigorous 
concentration.'^ The Rhys Bavidses, Dialogues li, 246, render it 
by “Which compounded of concentration and effort with desire,” 
and so on. 

^ PatisamhMdd ii, 205, Samyutta i, 268. 

® Read tatha hhutassa. 


^ Vibhahga 217, 



447 


XIL — Exfosition of Psychic Poivers 

called activities of effort. Thus this purpose^ ^nonhs^ this con- 
centration ff purpose and these activities of effort are said to he 
basis of psydiic power, endowed with activities of effort and loiih 
concentration of purposeT^ The meaning should be thus 
understood in the remaining bases of psychic power also. 

The eight steps ” are to be understood as \'he eight, to wit, 
purpose, and so on. For this has been said: '' Which are the 
eight steps of psychic power ? Monks, %f a monk through 
purpose gets concentration, he gets collectedness of mind. Purpose 
is not concentration, nor is concentration purpose. They dre 
different. [386] Monks, if a monk through energy . . . through 
thought . . . through investigation gets concentration, he gets 
collectedness of mind. Investigation is not concentration, nor is 
concentration investigation. They are different. These eight 
steps of psychic power conduce to the getting of psychic poiver 
to its confidence.’'^ For here purpose which purports to 
produce psychic power, being yoked with concentration, con- 
duces to the getting of psychic power. Likewise energy and 
the rest. Therefore the eight steps have been stated. Thus is 
it to be understood. 

“ The sixteen roots ’’ are to be understood as the imperturb- 
ability of the mind in sixteen ways. For this has been said : 

How many roots are there of psychic power ? Sixteen. The 
inflexible mind does not waver in idleness, thus is it imperturb- 
able. The unelated mind does not waver in distraction, thus 
is it imperturbable. The unbending mind does not waver in lust, 
•thus is it imperturbable. The unoffended mind does not waver 
in malice, thus is it imperturbable. The indegyendent mind does 
not waver in opinion, thus is it imperturbable. The unfettered 
mind does not waver in lustfid desire, thus is it imperturbable. 
The emancipated mind does not waver in sensual lust, thus is it 
imperturbable. The dissociated mind does not waver in passion, 
thus is it imperturbable. The unconfined mind does not waver 
in the confinement of passion, thus is it imperturbable. The 
one-centred mind does not waver in manifold passions, thus is 
it imperturbable. The mind upheld by faith does not waver in 
absence of faith, thus is it imperturbable. The mind upheld by 


^ 8amyutta v, 268. 


2 Patisambhidd ii, 205. 



448 


The Path of Purity 

energy, does not waver in idleness, thus is it imperturbable. The 
mind upheld by mindfulness does not waver in negligence, thus 
is it imperturbable. The mind upheld by. concentration does not 
waver in distraction, thus is it imperturbable. The mind upheld 
by understanding does not waver in ignorance, thus is it imper- 
turbable. The illuminated mind does not waver in the darkness of 
ignorance, thus is it imperturbable. These sixteen roots of psychic 
power conduce to the getting of psychic poiver . . . its confidence. 

Although the meaning has been effected by the statement, 
■‘‘With his heart thus serene/’ and so on, yet it is repeated in 
order to show that the Eirst Jhana, and so on are the stage, 
basis, step, and root of psychic power. The method previously 
given is from the Suttas; the present one is from Patisambhida.^ 
Thus in both places the repetition is made in order to prevent 
comparison. 

Being resolute through Imowledge means, fulfilling those 
states which are the stage, basis, step and root of psychic power, 
he [387] enters into the [Fourth] Jhana, the basis of higher 
knowledge, rises therefrom, and setting to work, saying. 

May I be a hundred, may I be a hundred,” if he chooses to be 
so, and again entering into the Jhana, the basis of higher 
knowledge, and rising therefrom becomes resolute. And 
together with the thought of resolve he becomes a hundred. 
The same with a thousand, and so on. If by so much he does 
not succeed, he ought to repeat the preliminary work, the 
entering into Jhana and rismg therefrom, and the resolve. 
For in the Commentary on the Samyutta Nikaya it is said that, 
one should enter into Jhana once, twice. The consciousness 
which is the basis of Jhana has the after-image for object. 
The risings of consciousness for preliminary work have the 
hundred or thousand forms for object; and this is so by virtue 
of the appearance of the forms devised, and not by regarding 
them as concepts. The consciousness of resolve similarly has. 

^ Patisambfiidd li, 206. 

® The previous method is the sixfold imperturbability of mind 
upheld by faith, and so on, as given on p. 437. The present method 
is the sixteenfold imperturbability just stated. 

® The reference is to the sentence on p. 445 and not to Pahsam- 
bhida as directed by footnote 6 in the text. 



XII. — Exposition of Psychic Powers 449 

the hundred or thousand forms for object. Like the ecstatic 
consciousness mentioned above, it arises once immediately 
after the it^option, and is of the Fourth Jhana of the realm of 
form. In what also has been said in Patisambhida^ as: 

One by nature^ he contemplates multiformity. Contemplating 
a hundred or a thousand forms or a hundred^ thousand forms, 
he resolves by knoivledge . ‘ May I be many, many,^ like the 
Venerable Cula-Panthaha,'^“ ‘‘contemplates’’ is stated by way 
of preliminary work. “ Contemplating, he resolves by know- 
ledge,” — this is said by way of higher knowledge; therefbre 
he contemplates many forms. Then at the end of the risings 
of preliminary consciousness, he enters into the Jhana, and 
again rising therefrom, contemplates the possession of many 
forms, and then resolves by one rising of higher knowledge 
which has received the name “ resolve ” by virtue of making 
up one’s mind, and which has arisen immediately after the 
three or four previous risings of consciousness. Thus should 
the meanmg here be taken. 

The expression, “Like the Venerable Cula-Panthaka ” has 
been made as a personal testimony to a display of many forms, 
which should be illustrated by the story: — 

It IS said that two brothers were named Panthakas(Waymen) 
because they were born by the wayside. The elder of them 
was Maha Panthaka (Great Wayman). He became a monk 
and attained sanctity together with analytical knowledge. 
Being Saint he caused Cida Panthaka (Little Wa3anan) to be 
ordained, [ 388 ] and spoke this stanza: — 

“ Lo ! like a fragrant lotus at the dawn 
Of day, full-blown, with virgin wealth of scent, 
Behold the Buddha’s glory shinmg forth, 

As in the vaulted heaven beams the sun !” 

The latter was unable to learn this by heart in four months. 
The elder then expelled him from the monastery saying, 
“ Thou art unfit for the rehgion.” At that time the elder 
was the superintendent of meals. Jivaka approached him 

^ 11, 207. 

^ Psalms of the Brethren, p. 258 £. Cf. Jdtaka translation i, 15. 

29 



450 


TTie Puih of Pwity 

and said: “Sir, to-morrow take your meal at our kouse 
bringing 500 monks witk the Blessed One/’ The elder 
accepted the mvitation on behalf of the monks/excepting 
Cula-Panthaka who, standing at the threshold, wept. The 
Blessed One with his deva-sight saw him and, going up to him, 
asked: “Why do you weep?” He told him everything. 
The Blessed One said: “ None is unfit for ray religion merely 
because he cannot learn something by heart. Do not grieve, 
monk.” And he took him by the arm, entered the monastery, 
creS,ted by his psychic power a piece of white cloth and gave it 
to him, saymg: “ Now monk, as you handle this cloth repeat 
these words agam and again: ' Removal of impurity, removal 
of impurity !’ ” 

And as Cuia-Panthaka kept handling the cloth, it grew 
soiled. Then he thought: “ This piece of cloth was quite 
clean, there was no fault in it. Surely this dirt comes of my 
personality,” acquired the perception of the foul, caused his 
knowledge to descend into the five aggregates, increased his 
insight, and made it approach [the state of] “ Adoption ” 
in direct order. Then the Blessed One said to him these 
illuminating stanzas: — 

“ Impurity in lust consists, not dirt; 

Lust is the term for real impurity. 

The wise who utterly expel this dust, 

They in the Dust-gone Man’s religion live. 

“ Impurity m wrath consists, not dirt, 

Wrath IS the term for real impurity. 

The wise who utterly expel this dust, 

They in the Dust-gone Man’s religion live. 

“ Delusion is impuiity, not dirt, 

We term delusion real impurity. 

The wise who utterly expel this dust. 

They m the Dust-gone Man’s religion live.” 

[389] At the conclusion of these stanzas he mastered the nine 
transcmdental states set round with the four branches of 
analytical knowledge’ and the six branches of higher know- 
ledge. On the next day the Teacher went to Jivaka’s house, 



— Exposition of "Psychic Potvers 451 

together with the assembly of monks. Then at the conclusion 
of the water of donation, when rice-gruel was offered, the 
Teacher covered the bowl with his hand. Why, Lord T’ 
asked Jivaka. ‘‘ There is a monk in the monastery,’’ was the 
reply. Jivaka sent a man saying, “ Cto Bring the gentleman, 
and come quickly.” Now w’hen the Blessed One had gone 
from the monastery, 

Wayman, a thousandfold self-multiplied, 

Sat on, till bidden, in that pleasant grove. 

Then the man went and, seeing the monastery a mass of 
light on account of the yellow robes, returned and said: 

Lord, the monastery is full of monks. I do not know which 
the gentleman is.” Then said the Blessed One to ^im : “ Go 
thou * Catch the one you see first by the hem of his robe, 
and bring him, saying, ^ The Master calls thee !’ ” The other 
went and caught hold of the hem of the elder’s robe. At 
once all the created monks disappeared. The elder sent 
away the man saying, Go thou ahead,” finished his ablutions 
such as washing his face, got there before him, and sat down 
in the seat given him. Concerning this was it said: Like the 
Venerable Cula-Panthaka.” 

Here those many forms which are created resemble the 
creator because they have been created 'without reference to 
particular parts or postures. Whatever he does, be he 
standmg, sitting down, and so on, or speaking or keeping 
silent, and so on, they also do. But if he wishes to create 
various'forms, some in the first part of life, some in the middle 
part, and others in the last part of life, some with long hair, 
some with half-shaven heads, some with bald heads, and others 
with mixed hair, some with robes half red and half yellow, 
some .with pale-red robes, and others reciting passages, 
pre*achmg the Law, intoning their voices, asking questions, 
making rephes, cookmg the dye, stitchmg and washing their 
robes, and other varieties of forms, he should rise from the 
basic Jhana and set to work saying, Let so many monks be 
of the first part of life,” again enter into JTiana and, rismg 
therefrom, make resolve. Together with the resolute thought 



452 


The Puth of Purity 

every form desired appears. The same with, Having 
become many, he becomes one again.” 

This is distinctive: — The monk who, having created many 
forms, again thinks. ‘‘ Being one, I will walk to and fro, recite 
passages, [390] ask questions,” or who out of fewness of wishes 
says, There are only a few monks in the monastery. If 
some guests were to arrive, they would ask : ^ Whence come 
so many monks who resemble each other ? Surely it must be 
the work of the Elder,’ and thus find me out,” and wishes to 
return to his single self within a certain fixed time, should 
enter into the basic Jhana and, rising therefrom, set to work 
to be a single self, and again entering into Jhana and rising 
therefrom, make resolve that he would be a single self. And 
together j^ith the resolute thought he would be single. If he 
did not do this, he would be single of himself after the lapse 
of the time fixed. 

He becomes visible or invisible — here the meaning is 
that he produces visibility, produces invisibility. For con- 
cerning this it has been said m Patisambhida- : Y%sihle 
means uncovered hij anythng, unhidden, open, apparent. 
Invisible means covered by something, hidden, enclosed, turned 
face downward.^ ’ Here the possessor of psychic power, wishing 
to produce visibility, lights up the darkness, reveals what is 
hidden, or brings into focus what is out of sight. How does he 
do this ? Indeed, wishing so to render himself or others 
visible, whether hidden or standing at a distance, he, rising 
from the basic Jhana should set to work, contemplating: 
‘‘ May this dark place be lighted up,” or May this hidden 
place be revealed,” or May this place out of sight be brought 
into focus,” and make resolve in the way described. Together 
with the resolve, what is resolved upon takes place. Others 
who are at a distance can see, as he himself can, if he so wishes. 

By whom has this miracle ever been performed ? By the 
Blessed One. For the Blessed One, having been invited by Cula- 
Subhadda, was going along in five hundred gabled mansions 
created by Vissakamma to Saketa situated within a distance 

^ Continuation of the formula quoted on p. 432 from Dlgha i, 77 f. 

^ ii, 207. 



453 


XIL — Exposition of Psychic Powers 

of seven yojanas from Savattki. He resolved so that the 
citizens gf Saketa saw the citizens of Savatthi, and the citizens 
of Savatthi saw the citizens of Saketa. Resting in the middle 
of the town he split the earth in two as far below as Avici, and 
separated the open space into two as far above as the Brahma 
world, and showed them. The meaning is also to be illus- 
trated by his descent from the devas. 

It is said that the Blessed One, having shown the Twin 
Miracle,^ released from bondage 84,000 creatures, and on 
reflecting where Buddhas of the past had gone at the'con- 
clusion of the performance of the Twin Miracle, saw that 
they had gone to the Tavatimsa abode. [391] Then, placing 
one foot on the earth’s surface, and the other on Mount 
Yugandhara, and again lifting the first foot and ^placing it 
on top of Smeru, he reached Tavatimsa, where on Pandu- 
kambala rock he resided for the rainy season and imdertook 
to teach the Abhidhamma discourse from the beginning to 
the devas from the ten thousand world-systems. When the 
time came for alms-gathering, he created an image of himself, 
and the image preached the Law." The Blessed One, having 
used (lit. chewed) the tooth-pick of naga-creeper, washed his 
mouth at Lake Anotatta, received alms from the dwellers of 
Uttakurii, and partook of it on the shore of the lake. San- 
putta the elder went there and saluted the Blessed One, who 
gave him his method, saying, To-day I taught so much of 
the Law.” Thus for three months he preached the Abhi- 
dhamma discourse without a break. Hearing it, eighty 
mjnnads of devas understood the Law. The people, twelve 
yojanas deep, who gathered at the performance of the Twin 
Miracle, encamped, saying, We will not depart till we 
have seen the Blessed One.” Cula-Anathapindika,^ the rich 
citizen, ministered to their wants. The people enquired of 
Anuruddha the elder where the Blessed One was. The elder 
increased the light and with deva-sight saw the Blessed One 
residing there for the rainy season, and told them. They 

^ Yamaka-patihariya. Pts, i, 125. 

On this Bocetio theory cf. Points of Controversy xviii, 1 and 2. 

® Brother of Anathapindika. — Ttka. 



454 


The Path of Purity 

requested Maha Moggallana that they might salute the 
Blessed One. The elder, in the middle of the Assembly, 
dived into the earth, and piercing through Mount Sineru, 
emerged at the Tathagata’s feet, saluting them. He addressed 
the Blessed One saying, Lord, the dwellers of Jambudipa 
say that they will not depart until they have seen the Blessed 
One, and bowed down at his feet.’^ The Blessed One replied: 

Moggallana, where is now thy elder brother, the Captain of 
the Law?’’ ''In Sankassa Town, Lord.” "Moggallana, let 
those who wish to see me come to Sankassa Town to-morrow. 
To-morrow the sacred day^'of the full moon of the conclusion 
of the rainy term, I will come over into Sankassa Town.” 
" Very well, Lord.” So saying, the elder saluted Him of the 
Ten Powers, and going down by the way he had come, arrived 
in the presence of the people. When he went and came, he 
resolved so that the people saw him. This miracle of 
visibility was first performed by Maha Moggallana the elder. 
On his return he told them everything, and said: "Without 
giving heed to the distance, set out after breakfast.” The 
Blessed One informed Sakka, king of the devas, saying, " Sire, 
to-morrow I go to the world of men.” The king of the devas 
[392] gave orders to Vissakamma saying, " Friend, to-morrow 
the Blessed One wishes to go to the world of men. Create 
three flights of steps, one made of gold, one of silver, one of 
ruby.” He did so. On the next day the Blessed One standing 
on the top of Smeru looked at the Eastern world. The many 
thousands of the concentric [universe] appeared open like a 
courtyard. Likewise he saw everythmg open in the West, 
North, and South. He saw below as far as Avici; above as 
far as the Akanittha abode. On that day, they say, was the 
opening of the world. Men saw devas, devas saw men. There 
men did -not look up, nor did devas look down. All of them 
saw one another face to face. The Blessed One descended by 
the ruby staircase in the middle. Six devas of the world of 
sense[-experience] descended by the gold staircase on the left. 
The dwellers of the Suddhavasa abode and Mahabrahma 
descended by the silver staircase on the right. The king of 
the devas took hold of the bowl and robe, Mahabrahma, of 



XIL — Exposition of Tsychic Powers 455 

the white umbrellaj thirty-seven yojanas in height, Suyama, 
of the fart of yak’s tail, and Pancasikha the Gandhabba, taking 
hold of the belitvapandu lute, three gavutas in size, descended 
making an offering of music to the Tathagata. On that day 
there were none who, seeing the Blessed One, did not conceive 
an affection for Buddhahood. This miracle of visibility was 
performed by the Blessed One. Further, Dhammadinna^ the 
elder, dwelling at Talangara in the island of Tambapanni, 
sat in the shrine-yard of the Tissa Maha Vihara^ Monastery, 
and preaching the Apannaka Sutta^ sa 3 dng, Monks, it is the 
monk endowed with three states who has practised the reliable 
practice,” pointed the fan downwards. All the way, as far 
as Avici, was one open courtyard. Then he pointed it 
upwards. All the way up to the Brahma worl4 was one 
open courtyard. The elder preached the Law, frightening his 
audience with the fear of hell, and enticing them with the 
bliss of heaven. Some became stream-winners, others once- 
returners, never-returners, saints. 

Now, desiring to be invisible, he turns light into darkness, 
what is not hidden into what is hidden, what is within sight 
into what is out of sight. How 1 Desirmg to cause himself 
or another, though not hidden and close by, to be invisible, 
he rises from the basic Jhana [393] and sets to work contemplat- 
ing: Let this place of light be dark,” or Let this unhidden 
place be hidden,” or "'Let this place within sight be out of 
sight,” and resolves in the way described. Together with 
the resolute thought, that which is resolved upon takes place. 
Others, though near, do not see him, nor does he see them if 
he so desires. 

Who has ever done this miracle ? The Blessed One. For 
the Blessed One so worked that the father did not see Yasa 
the • clansman,” though he was seated near-by.^* Again, 
having gone to meet Maha-Kappina, one hundred and twenty ^ 
yojanas, and established him in the fruition of a non-returner, 
and his thousand ministers in that of stream-winners, he so 
worked that Queen Anoja who, with a company of a thousand 


^ Read as suck in the text. 
^ AngvMara i, 113. 


2 Mahdvamsa 20, 25. 
^ Yimya i, 16 . 



456 


The Path of Purity 

women'liad followed the king and sat down near him, did not 
see him with his company. When the queen asked : “ Perhaps, 
Lord, you have seen the king?” he said: ''Which is better, 
to seek the king or to seek the self ?” " The self, Lord,” was 

the reply. And he taught her the Law as she sat there, so 
that she, with the thousand women, was established in the 
fruition of a stream-winner, the ministers m that of a non- 
retumer, the king in sanctity.^ Further, the same was 
performed by Mahmda the elder, who on the day of his arrival 
at the isle of Tambapanni so worked that he and the others 
who came with him were hot seen by the king. 

Further, all miracles of manifestation are visible; all miracles 
of concealment are invisible. Of these, in the miracle of 
manifestation both the psychic power and its possessor are 
revealed. The Twin Miracle is an illustration, where both 
were manifested: ''Here the Taihagata performed the Tivin 
Miracle^ which did not include the disciples . the upper half of 
the body was a mass of fire, the lower half a stream of water 
In the miracle of concealment only the psychic power is mani- 
fested, not the possessor. The Mahaka Sutta^ and the 
Brahmanimantanika Sutta^ are illustrations, where the 
psychic powers of the Venerable Mahaka and the Blessed 
One are manifested, not the possessors. As has been said: 
" Citta the householder who was seated aside said to the Venerable 
MahaJca : ' Well, sir, may the reverend Mahaka show me a 
miracle beyond the reach of men' ' Then, 0 householder, spread 
a garment on the veranda [394] and scatter a bundle of grass.' 

' Very well, sir,' replied Citta the householder to the Venerable 
Mahaka, and he spread a garment on the veranda and scattered 
a bundle of grass. The Venerable Mahaka then entered the 
monastery, bolted the door and worked such psychic power as 
made aflame issue forth from the key-hole and the cross-bars <iYbd 
burn the grass but not the garment." Also, " Then, monks, by 

^ 3Ianoratha;puram i, 323 only states that Anoja drove after her 
husband, and also benefited by the “ miracle ” of crossing the river 
dry: nothing further. The conversation on the ‘‘self” is borrowed 
from Vimya, Mhv. I, 14, where it is mistranslated “yourselves,” 
meaningless to an Indian. 

2 Pis. i, 125. ® Kindred Sayings 197. ^ IlajjTiima i. 326. 



XIT. — Exposition of Psychic Powers 457 

the exercise of such psychic powers as would Jet Brahma and< his 
host and (ionclave hear me without seeing me, I disappeared, 
repeating these lines : — 

‘ Peril I saw in coming-to-be, and coming-to-be 
I saw for them who seek of becoming the and. 

Therefore I paid no court to coming-to-be, 

Nor grasped at aught that is held of delight {thereinl," 

He goes, feeling no obstruction, to the further side of a w^ll 
or rampart or hill, as if through air/’^ — here the further side 
of a wall ’’ means outside of a wall, the outside portion of a 
wall. The same with the other expressions. Wall’ ’ is a name 
for the wall of a house. Eampart ” is one that encloses a 
house, monastery, village, and so on. is-jeither of 

earth or of rock. ‘'Feeling no obstruction ” means without 
sticking. “ As if through air,” — as through space. Wishing 
to go thus, he should enter into space-device, rise therefrom, 
think of a wall, or rampart or any hill in the world-systems, 
with Smeru, and having done the preparatory act of thinking, 
resolve: “Let there be space.” And there is space. If he 
desires to go up or down, there is a hollow. If he desires to 
go through, there is a hole. He goes feeling no obstruction. 
But here Tipitaka-Culabhaya the elder said: “ Friends, what 
is the use of entering into the space-device Does one who 
desires to create elephants, horses, and so on, enter into the 
devices of elephants, horses, and so on 1 Is not mastery of 
the eight attainments after doing the preparatory work in any 
device whatsoever, the criterion, so that whatever he wishes 
takes place?” The monks answered* “Sir, space-device is 
mentioned in the text; hence it must certainly be so.” Here 
is the text"’: ‘‘^Naturally, he gets the aftaimnent of space-device, 
contemplates the further side of a ivall or rampart or hill, [395J 
having contemplated, makes resolve through knowledge : ‘ Let there 
be space, ^ and there %s space, goes feeling no obstruction to the 
further side of a wall or rampart or hill. As ordinary men, feehng 
no obstruction, naturally go through an unobstructed, unenclosed 
place, even so the man of psychic power who has attained^ to 
Continuation of the formula from p. 432. ^ PatibamhJdda ii, 20S. 



458 The Path of Purity 

mastery over will-power goes, feeling no obstruction^ to the further 
side of the wall or rampart or hill, as if through space T * 

But if while the monk, having made resolve, is going along, 
there springs up a hill or a tree on the way, should he again 
enter into Jhana and make resolve ? There is no harm in 
so doing; but it would be like learning a crib from one’s 
preceptor. There must be the space because he has resolved: 

Let there be space.” Because of the strength of his first 
resolve, it is impossible that another hill or tree made of the 
caloric order should spring up on the way. But suppose it 
was created by another ;Person of psychic power. Still, the 
first creation is the stronger, and the other should go above 
or below it. 

‘'He penetrates up and down through solid ground,” — 
here “penetrating up” is arising, “penetrating down” is 
diving down. “ Penetrates up and down ” means penetrates 
up and penetrates down. Wishing to do this he should enter 
into water-device, rise therefrom, mark off as much of the 
ground as he wishes to turn into water, and having done the 
preliminary act, make resolve in the way described. Together 
with the resolve, the ground, as marked off, becomes water 
where he penetrates up and down. This is the text^ : “ Natur- 
ally he gets the attainment of the water-device, contemplates the 
ground, having contemplated makes resolve through knowledge : 

‘ Let there be water, ^ and there is water. He penetrates up and 
down through solid ground. As ordinary men naturally float 
and sink in water, even so the possessor of psychic power, having 
obta%ned mastery over will-power, penetrates up and down through 
solid ground as if through water'' 

It is not merely the penetrating up and down that he does: 
he also does at will such actions as bathmg, drinking, washing 
his face and clothes, and so on. It is not only water, but also 
butter, oil, honey, molasses, anything he likes that he con- 
templates, saying, “ Let so much of this, and so much of that, 
be,” As he, after performing the preliminary act, resolves, 
it all turns out [396] as he has resolved. As he takes these 
different fluids out and puts them into jars, the butter remains 


^ Papisambhida ii, 208 . 



XII . — Exposition of Psychic Poioers 459 

butter, oil and so on remain oil and so on, water remains 
water. If die wishes to be wet in it, he is wet; if not, he is not 
wet. Only*for him is the ground turned into water, for others 
it remains ground, where men walk on foot, go in conveyances 
and so on, and do the work of ploughing, an^ so forth. But 
if he so wishes that, for them also it should be water, it becomes 
water. x4.fter the expiry of the time-limit, excepting the water 
which naturally is in pots and ponds and so on, the rest of 
the place marked off turns back into solid ground. ^ . 

He walks on water without breaking through,’’^ — here if 
he steps on water and sinks he is saiH to break through. The 
contrary is without breaking. Wishing to go thus, he should 
enter into earth-device, rise therefrom, mark off so much of 
the water that should turn into earth, do the preliminary act 
and resolve in the way described. Together with the resolve, 
the water in the place marked off becomes earth whereon he 
walks. This is the text": Naturally he gets the attainment of 
earth-device, contemplates water, having contemplated, resolves 
through Icnoivledge : ^ Let there he earth, ^ and there is earth. 
He walks on water without breaking through. As ordinary 
men naturally walk on earth toWhout breaking through even so 
the possessor of psychic power who has attained mastery of will- 
power, walks on water without breaking through, as if on solid 
ground'' 

Not only does he walk; he adopts whatever posture he likes. 
And it is not only earth that he creates. Rubies, gold, Ml, 
tree, whatever he chooses he resolves upon after contemplating 
in the aforesaid manner, and it comes to pass as he has resolve 
upon. For him only does the water become earth: for others 
it is water, wherein fishes, tortoises and cormorants, and so 
on, move about at will But if for other men also he wishes 
to make the earth, he does it. After the expiry of the time- 
limit it becomes water again. 

He travels cross-legged means, goes cross-legged. 

'' A bird on the wing ” means, a bird endowed with win^. 
Wishing to do this, he should enter into earth-device, rise 
therefrom, and if [397] he wishes to travel seated, mark oft 
“r^^i^oontinued ^ PaHsamhUM ii, 208. 



460 The Path of Purity 

a placB of the size of a seat, do the preliminary act and resolve 
in the aforesaid manner. If he wishes to travel lying down, 
the place marked off should be of the size of a cot* if he wishes 
to go on foot, it should be of the size of a path, — thus he 
should mark off^the place according to his needs, and resolve 
in the aforesaid manner saying, “ Let there be earth.” To- 
gether with the resolve it becomes earth. This is the text^ : 
‘‘He travels cross-legged in space like a bird on the wing. 
Naturally he gets the attainment of earth-device, contemplates 
space, having contemplated, resolves through knowledge : ‘ Let 
there he earth,^ and there is earth. In space, in the sky he walks 
to and fro, stands, sits, lies down. As ordinary men naturally 
walk on earth to and fro . . . lie down, even so the possessor 
of psychic power, who has obtained mastery of will-power, ivalks 
to and fro , . . lies down in space in the sky.^^ 

And the monk who desires to travel in space should be 
possessed of the deva-sight. Wherefore In order to see 
hills, trees, and so on, on the way, which spring from the caloric 
order, or are created by ndgas, fairy birds, and so on, out of 
jealousy. What should he do when he sees them ? He should 
enter into the basic Jhana, rise therefrom, do the prebminary 
act: ‘‘Let there be space,” and resolve. But the elder 
[Tipitaka-Cfilabhaya] says: “Friends, what is the use of 
entering into Jhana-attainment Should not his mind be 
concentrated, so that whatever place he resolves upon that it 
should be space, becomes space ?” Although he may have 
said so, one should do as in the miracle of going to the further 
side of a wall. Further, he should be possessed of the divine 
eye in order that he may descend in a suitable place. For if 
he descends in an unsuitable place, a bathing-place, a landing- 
place, or a village-gate, he reveals himself to the populace. 
Therefore he must look with the divine eye, avoid an unsuitable 
place and descend. 

“ Even the moon and the sun, so potent, so mighty though 
they be, does he touch and feel with his hand,” — here the sim 
and the moon should be understood to be “ potent ” because 
they move at a height of forty-two thousand yojanas, and to 


PatisamhMdd n, 208 . 



461 


XII . — Exposition of Esychic Powers 

be “ miglity ’’ because they light up the three islands simul- 
taneously. [398] Or, they are potent because they move above 
and produc^e light; and mighty because of their potency. 

Touches ” means holds, or comes into contact on one side. 
'' Feels ’ means, rubs on all sides as though the surface of a 
mirror This is effected by the Jhana-bases*of higher know- 
ledge. 

There is here no order of device-attainment. For this has 
been said m the Patisambhida^- ‘'As regards [the statement]^ 
‘ Even the moon and the sun . . . with his hand,^ here 4he 
possessor of psychic power who ha^ obtained control of his 
mind . . . contemplates the moon and the sun, having conteyn- 
plated, resolves through knowledge : ‘ Let theyn come to the side 
of my hand,' and they come. Seated or lying dowyi he hayidles, 
touches, feels, the moon and the sun with his hands, Ai ordinary 
men naturally handle, touch, feel, any material object that is by 
the side of the hand, even so the jyossessor of psychic potver , . . 
with his hands." If he wishes to go to them and feel them, 
he can do so. But if seated or lying down here on earth he 
wishes to feel them, he resolves; '' Let them come to the side 
of my hand,” and by virtue of his resolve they come like the 
palm-fruit severed from the stalk, and he touches them when 
they come to the side of his hand, or by makmg his hand grow. 
In making it grow, does the derived matter grow, or the un- 
derived ? Depending on the derived the underived matter 
grows. Here Tipitaka-Culanaga the eider says: “Why, 
friends, does not derived matter become smaller, and bigger 
as well ? When a monk goes through a key-hole, and so on, 
does not the derived matter become small ? And does it not 
become large when he increases the size of his body like that 
of Maha Moggallana the elder V 

Itps said that on a certain time Anathapindika the house- 
holder, after hearing the Law expounded by the Blessed One, 
invited him and the five hundred monks to take their meal 
at his house the followmg day, and went away. The Blessed 
One consented, and having passed that day and the night, 
surveyed the ten thousand world-elements early the next day. 


1 Patisamhhida ii, 208. 



462 


The l^ath of Purity 

Then Nandopananda, king of the Nagas, came into the path 
of his ’knowledge. The Blessed One thought: This king of 
the Nagas has come mto the path of my knowledge* Is there 
any sufficmg condition in him?” and saw that he, being of 
false views, was not a believer in the Three Gems [399]. Con- 
sidermg who wqnld draw him away from his false views, he 
saw Maha Moggallana the elder. Then when the night had 
passed mto dawn he ministered to his bodily needs and said 
to the Venerable Ananda: ‘‘ Ananda, tell the five hundred 
m<inks that the Tathagata has gone to make a circuit of the 
deva- world.” On that day they got ready a banquet for 
Nandopananda, who, seated under a celestial white umbrella 
on a celestial jewelled throne, and surrounded by the three 
grades of dancers and the host of the Nagas, was looking 
at the various kinds of food and drink served in celestial vessels. 
Then the Blessed One, having so worked that the king of the 
Nagas should see him, set forth towards the Tavatimsa deva- 
world together with the five hundred monks over the canopy 
above the Naga-king. At that time this evil opinion arose in 
Nandopananda the Naga-king : '' Verily those bald-headed 
monks enter into and issue from, the Tavatimsa abode, from an 
abode above us. Henceforth I do not allow them to go scatter- 
ing the dust ofi their feet on our heads.” So saying, he rose 
up, went to the foot of Sineru, and abandoning his true form, 
coiled himself seven times round Sineru and, spreading his 
hood above it, covered the Tavatimsa abode with his hood 
from above, and made it invisible. Then the venerable 
Eatthapala said to the Blessed One: '' Formerly, Lord, stand- 
ing in this spot I could see Sineru, I could see Smeru^s girdle, 
I could see Tavatimsa, I could see Vejayanta, and I could see 
the flag on Vejayanta’s palace. Lord, what is the cause, 
what are the conditions, whereby now I do not see Smeru . . . 
palace ?” ‘‘ Eatthapala, this Naga-king, Nandopananda, 
being angry with you, has coiled himself seven times round 
Smeru and, covering it with his hood from above, has produced 
darkness,” Lord, I will tame him.” The Blessed One did 
not give him permission. Then all the monks rose up in due 
order, the venerable Bhaddiya, the venerable Eahula, and 



Exposition of Esychic Poivers 463 

so forth. The Blessed One did not give them permission. 
At la^t Maha Moggallana the elder said: ''Lord, I will tame 
him.’^ The Blessed One permitted him, saying, " Tame him, 
Moggallana.’’ The elder abandoned his form and, assuming 
the guise of a Naga-kmg, coiled himself fourteen times round 
Nandopananda and, laying his own hood on that of the other, 
pressed him against Sineru. The king of the Nagas [400] 
let ofi vapour. The elder did likewise, saying, " There is 
vapour not in thee only, but in me also.” The vapour of the 
Naga-king did not hurt the elder, but the elder’s vapour hurt 
him. Then the Naga-king sent forth flames. The elder did 
likewise, saying, " There is fire not in thee only, but m me also.” 
The fire of the Naga-king did not hurt the eider, but the elder’s 
fire huro him. The Naga-king thought* “ This one pressing 
me against Smeru sends forth vapour and flames,” and asked: 
" Ho ! Who art thou V " Nanda, I am Moggallana.” " Sir, 
stand forth in thy own shape of a monk.” The elder aban- 
doned his form and, entering by his right ear-hole came out 
from his left ear-hole, entermg by his left ear-hole came out 
from his right ear-hole, entering into his right nostril came 
out from his left nostril, entermg into his left nostril came out 
from his right nostril. Then the Naga-kmg opened his mouth. 
The elder entered his mouth and walked to and fro in his 
belly on the east side and on the west side. The Blessed 
One said: " Moggallana, Moggallana, have a care ! This Naga 
is possessed of great psychic power.” The elder replied; 
" Lord, I have developed, repeated, made a vehicle of, a 
basis of, established, practised, made endeavour in, the four 
bases of psychic power. Lord, let Nandopananda be ! I 
would tame hundreds and thousands and hundred-thousands 
of Naga-kings like Nandopananda.” The Naga-kmg thought : 
“ I did not see him entering withm me. When he comes out 
now* I will place him between my fangs and devour him,” and 
said, '' Come out, sir ! Do not oppress me by walking to and 
fro in my belly.” The elder came out and stood outside. 
The Naga-kmg, seeing him, said: “ That’s him,” and snorted 
[wind]. The elder entered into the Fourth Jhana. The wind 
was unable to make even the pores of his skin tremble. It 



464 


The PjOLth of Purity 

is said that the rest of the monks would be able to perform all 
the wonders starting from the first one. But meeting, such 
an emergency they would not have been able to seize the device- 
object so quickly and enter into Jhana.* That was why the 
Blessed One did not consent to their taming the Naga-king, 
The Naga-king thought* I was not able to make even the 
pores of this monk’s skin tremble with the* wind of my nose. 
Great is the monk in psychic power.” . The elder abandoned 
his form and, assuming the guise, and showing forth the wind 
catKed by the movements, of a fairy bird, chased the Naga- 
king, who [401] abandoning his own form and assuming the 
guise of a novice, saluted the elder’s feet, saying, “ Lord, 
I take refuge in you.” The elder, saymg, Nanda, the Teacher 
IS come. Come, we will go,” tamed the Naga-king, made him 
poisonlesS, took him and went to the presence of the Blessed 
One. The Naga-king saluted the Blessed One and said: 

Lord, I take refuge in you.” The Blessed One said: '' King 
of the Nagas, be happy,” and surrounded by the company 
of monks, went to the abode of Anathapindika, who asked: 
^^Lord, why have you come so late in the day?” ''There 
was battle between Moggallana and Nandopananda.” " Lord, 
whose is the victory, and whose the defeat ?” "Of Moggallana 
is the victory, and of Nanda the defeat.” Anathapindika, 
saying, " Lord, may the Blessed One consent to take his meal 
with me for seven days without a break. For seven days will 
I do honour to the elder,” gave much honour for seven days 
to the five hundred monks, led by the Buddha. 

Concerning the enlargement of the body in the taming of 
Nandopananda was it said: "Does it [derived matter] not 
become large, when he increases the size of his body, like that 
of Maha Moggallana the elder ?” Although this statement 
was made, the monks said: "Depending on derived matter, 
underived matter grows.” 

This view here is a fitting one. He feels in this manner not 
only sun and moon. If he wishes, he places his feet on them 
as on a footstool, sits on them as on a bench, lies down on 
them as on a bed, leans on them as on a bolster. 

As one monk does this, so does another. And when many 



4C5 


XII . — Exposihon of Psychic Powers 

limidreds and thousands of monks do this, each one ©f them 
succeeds.^ The same with the movement of the moon and the 
sun and the production of light. For as when a thousand 
cups are filled with water, in each cup the disc of the moon 
is seen, the movement of the moon and the production of 
light are natural, so this miracle is like this illustration. 

He reaches in the body even up to the heaven of Brahma,”^ 
that is, having made a limit up to the Brahma- world, ‘^he 
reaches in the body,” that is, with his body, he brings the 
Brahma-worlds under his control. The meaning is to be under- 
stood according to the text^ which runs thus: '' He reaches in the 
body even up to the heaven of Brahma. If the p)OSsessor of psychic 
power ^ having control of his will, wishes to go thither, he resolves 
that a distant place he near, and it becomes near ; [402] resolves^ 
that a near place should be distant, and it becomes distant ; he 
resolves that the many be few, and it is so ; he resolves that the 
few be many, and it is so. With the deva sight he sees Brahmans 
form ; with the deva ear-elemerd he hears Brahmans voice ; with 
his hnowledge encompassing others' thoughts he knows Brahma's 
thoughts. If he, possessed of psychic power and having control 
over his will, wishes to go to the Brahynd-world in a visible body, 
he bends his mind by means of the body, he makes up his mind 
by means of the body. Having bent his mind by means of the 
body, and made up his mind by means of the body, he descends 
into the perception of bliss and the perception of buoyancy, 
and with a visible body goes to the Brahmd-toorld. If he, pos- 
sessed of psychic power, and having control over his will, wishes 
to go to the Brahma-ivorU in an invisible body, he bends his hoiij 
by means of his mind, he resolves upon the body by means of 
the mind. Having bent his body by means of the mind, and 
resolved upon the body by means of the mind, he descends into 
the perception of bliss and the perception of buoyancy, and with 
an invisible body goes to the Brahmd-world. In the presence of 
Brahma he creates a body having form, made of mind, having all 
limbs and parts, not deprived of any organ. If he, the possessor 
of psychic power, walks to and fro, the created body there also 

^ Tlie last clause in the formula continued from p. 432. 

® PatisaTnbMdd ii, 209. ® AdliiUhati. 


30 



466 


The Path of Purity 

walks to and fro. If he the creator stands . . . sits down, . . lies 
down, the created body also . . • lies down. If he the crefdor sends 
forth vapour , . , flames * . . speaks on the Law . . asks a 
question , , . answers a query, the created body also . . . answers 
a query. If he the creator stops with, talks with, holds a 
conversation iviih, Brahma, the created body also does like- 
wise, Por whatever he does, the very same does the created 
hodyJ^ 

Ip. the text, He resolves that a distant place shall be near,’^ 
means, rising from the basic Jhana he contemplates the distant 
deva-world or the world of Brahma: May it be near !” And 
having contemplated so, he does the preliminary act, and 
again entering into Jhana, resolves through knowledge: Let 
it be neaff!’^ and it is near. The same with the remaining 
phrases. 

Who has seized the distant and made it near ? The Blessed 
One. For when the Blessed One at the conclusion of the 
Twin Miracle went to the deva-world, he drew Yugandhara 
and Sineru near, and from the surface of the earth [403] 
placed one foot on Yugandhara and the second on top of 
Sineru. 

Who else did this wonder ? Maha Moggallana the elder. 
For this elder contracted the distance of thirty yojanas to 
the town of Sankassa, so that the multitude of men extending 
twelve yojanas, who, after their meal came out of Savatthi, 
reached it instantly. So also did Cula-Samudda the elder in 
Tambapanni. It is said that in a time of famine seven 
Imndred monks came early in the day to him. The elder 
thinking: ^^The gathering of monks is large; where shall the 
alms-begging be saw that it should be nowhere in the 
whole of Tambapanni but in Pataliputta across the waters. 
He made the monks carry his bowl and robe, and saying, 

Come, friends ! we will go for alms-begging,” contracted the 
earth and went to Pataliputta. The monks asked: ^'Lord, 
what town is this ?” Pataliputta, friends.” Lord, Patali- 
putta is a long way off,” Friends, aged elders seize the 
distance and make it near.” Where is the ocean, Lord ?” 
'‘Friends, did you not cross a dark ditch on the way and 



467 


XIL — Exposition of Psychic Potvers 

come ?” Yea, Lord ! But the ocean is large.” '' Friends, 
aged elders make the great small.” 

And sirtiilarly did Tissadatta the elder, .having bathed in 
the evening and donned his garment and conceived a wish to 
salute the Bo-tree, draw it near. 

And who has n\ade a near place distant ? The Blessed One. 
For the Blessed One made the nearness between iiiigalimala 
and himself distant. And who has made the many few 1 
Mahakassapa the elder. It is said that on a festival day, in 
Eajagaha five hundred maidens took cakes round like the 
moon and, going forth to enjoy tFe festival, saw the Blessed 
One and did not ofier him anything. But seeing the elder 
coming from behind him, they took all their cakes and ap- 
proached him saying, Our elder comes. We will give him 
the cakes.” The elder took out his bowl and made all the 
cakes fill just his single bowl. The Blessed One, being ahead, 
sat waiting for the elder. The elder took the cakes and gave 
them to him. 

In the story of Ulisa,^ the rich man, the elder Maha Mog- 
gallana made the few many, as also the Blessed One in the 
Kakavalliya story. It is said that the elder Mahakassapa, 
having spent seven days in [spiritual] attainment, stood at 
the door of the poor man, Kakavalliya, meanmg to do him a 
favour. [404] His wife saw the elder and poured into his 
bowl the saltless, sour gruel she had cooked for her husband. 
The elder took it and put it in the hands of the Blessed One, 
who resolved that it should suffice for the large assembly of 
monks. What was brought in a bowl was sufficient for all. 
And Kakavalliya on the seventh day obtained the position of 
a rich man. 

He makes not only the few many, but also accomplishes 
through psychic power whatever he likes such as making a 
sweet thing not sweet, and a not sweet thing sweet. For 
instance, the elder Maha Anula saw a number of monks who, 
having collected alms and obtained nothing but dry food, had 
sat down on the river-bank and were eating it. He resolved 
that the river-water should be turned into butter-cream, and 


^ Dhammapada Atthahathd i, 367. 



468 


The Path of Purity 

gave assign to tlie novices, who took it in cups and gave it 
to the assembly of monks. All enjoyed the sweet butter-cream. 

^^With deva-sight” means, standing here he increases his 
sight and sees Brahma’s form. And standing here he hears 
thfe sound of all Ije says and knows his thoughts. 

He bends his mind by means of the body/’ means, he bends 
it by means of his physical body. He seizes the basic Jhana- 
thought and puts it on the body and makes it follow the body 
and. go slowly, for the body goes slowly. 

And he descends into the perception of bliss and the per- 
ception of buoyancy,” — ^he descends into, [that is,] enters 
into, touches, attains to, the perception of bliss and the per- 
ception of buoyancy, co-existent with the psychic conscious- 
ness which has the basic Jhana for object. Perception of bliss 
means perception associated with equanimity, for equanimity 
being calm is called bliss. And this perception, being free from 
the hindrances and the opposing states such as applied think- 
ing, is to be understood as the perception of buoyancy. As 
he descends into it, his physical body becomes buoyant like 
cotton-wool. And so he goes to the Brahma- world in a visible 
body, light as cotton-wool blown by the wind.^ In going thus, 
if he wishes, he creates a path in the space through the earth- 
device, and goes on foot. If he wishes, he resolves upon the air 
through the air-device, and goes through the air like cotton- 
wool. But here the desire to go is the main thmg. Por if he 
desires to go, he makes- up his mind so, and borne by the fury 
of the resolve, goes forth visibly like an arrow shot by the 
archer. 

[405] He bends the body by means of the mind,” — seizing 
the body he fixes it on to the mind, makes it follow the mind 
and go 'speedily, for the mind goes speedily.^ And he 
descends into the perception of bliss and the perception of 

^ Gf. Psalim of the Brethren, ver. 104: — 

“ Buoyant in sooth my body, every pulse 
Throbbing in wondrous bliss and ecstasy. 

Even as cotton-down blown on the breeze, 

So floats and hovers this my body light.” 

^ Bead va so for vaso, 

® Gf. Milinda, Questions of King, i, 126; text) 82. 



XII. — Exposition of Psychic Poioers 469 

buoyancy,” — he descends into the perception of bliss and the 
perception of buoyancy co-existent with the psychic con- 
sciousness* which has the material body for object. The rest 
is to be understood as stated above. But this wonder is 
subject to the mind. 

In going thus with an invisible body, does he go at the 
moment of genesis, or the moment of stability, or the moment 
of break-up of the resolute thought ? This being asked, the 
elder (one of the Commentators) replied: “He goes at the 
three moments.” “ But does he go himself or does he send 
the created form ?” “ He does just as he pleases.” But here 
it is mentioned that he goes himself. 

“ Made of mind,” — ^that is because it is created by the mind 
of resolve. “ Not deprived of any organ,” — ^this is said by 
way of appearances in respect to eye, ear, and so on. But 
in the created body there is no sentient organ. 

“ If the possessor of psychic power walks to and fro, the 
created body there also walks to and fro,” — this and all the 
rest are spoken concerning the creations of disciples. That 
which is created by the Buddha does whatever the Blessed 
One does. It also does other thmgs by virtue of the Blessed 
One’s wishes. And herein, whatever form the possessor of 
psychic power standing here may see through the deva-sight, 
whatever sound he may hear through the deva-hearing, 
whatever thoughts he may know through his knowledge en- 
compassing others’ thoughts, — ^he has not yet got control by 
means of the body. And standing here he may stop with, 
talk with, hold a conversation with Brahma, — he has not yet 
got control by means of the body. Whatever resolve he may 
make, such as making the distant near, — he has not yet got 
control by means of the body. He may go to the Brahma- 
world visibly or invisibly, — he has not yet got control by means 
of the body. But when he contrives to do such a thing as 
creating a body in the presence of Brahma, then only does he 
get control. And the remaining statements here have been 
made in order to show what precedes the getting control by 
means of the body. So far is this the psychic power of ' 
resolve. 



470 The Pcpth of Purity 

And this is the difference between the method of psychic 
power of transformation and that made of mind. In doing the 
transformation [406] he should resolve upon whatever form 
he likes from among those of a boy, and so on, as stated thus: 
'‘lie discards his original form and takes on ihefom of a hoy, 
of a snake, of a birU, of a demon, of a deva, of a spirit, of Brahma, 
of the ocean, of a hill, of a lion of d tiger of a 
leopard of an elephant^ ... of a horse ,,, of a 
chariot ... 0 / a foot-soldier ... 0 / the different forms of 
an army,^^^ And m doing so, he should rise from the basic 
Jhana of higher knowledge with one or other among the 
devices for object, and contemplate himself as having the form 
of a boy. Having done so he should re-enter Jhana at the 
conclusion of the preliminary act and, rising therefrom, re- 
solve: May I be such and such a boy.’’ With the resolute 
thought, he becomes a boy like Devadatta.^ And the same 
everywhere. The expressions: ‘‘He takes on the form of an 
elephant,” and so on, are made by way of showing the elephant, 
and so on, externally. Here, without resolving: “May I be 
an elephant,” he should resolve: “ Let there be an elephant.” 
And the same with horse, and so on. This is the psychic power 
of transformation. 

Desiring to exercise the psychic power made of mind, he 
rises from the basic Jhana and first, contemplating the body, 
resolves as said above: “ Let it be a hollow,” and it is a hollow. 
He then contemplates another body within himself, and having 
done the preliminary act, resolves as said above, and there is^ 
another body within himself. He takes it out as he would 
a reed® from its sheath, a sword from its scabbard, a snake 
from its slough. Hence was it said: “ Here a monk calls up 
from this body another body, having form, made of mind, having 
all limbs and parts, not deprived of any organ. Just as if a man 
were to pull out a reed from its sheath, he would know : ‘ This is 
the sheath, this the reed. The sheath is one thing, the reed 

2 Patisambliidd ii, 210. Quoted above, p. 439. 

3 Dhammapada AtthaJcatM i, 139. 

^ Read hoh for Tiotu ti. 

® The P.T.S. Dictionary reads isilca {islkd). 



XII . — Exposition of JPsi/chiG Powers 471 

mother. It is from the sheath that the reed Tms been drawn 
forthJ And here, as the reed and the others are like the 
sheath, ^nd so on, so is the body made of mind like the pos- 
sessor of psychic power. In order to show this have these 
illustrations been given. This is the psychic power made of 
oind. 

Thus is ended the Twelfth Chapter called the Exposition of 
Psychic Power in the Path of Purity composed for the purpose 
of gladdening good folk. 

Dialogues i, 87. 



[407] CHAPTEE XIII 
THE EXPOSITION OE HIGHEH KNOWLEDGE 

Now we come to tlie exposition of the deva [conditions of] 
hearing.^ In it and in the following three kinds of higher 
knowledge, the meaning of, With his heart thus serene/’^ 
and" so on, should be understood as above. Everjrwhere we 
shall comment only on what is distmctive. 

In the deva-hearing ” it is of devas because it is like that 
of deva-beings. For devas possess their own sensitive ear- 
element. This is able to receive a distant sound because it is 
produced through well-performed karma, unobstructed by bile, 
phlegm, blood, and so on, and freed from low passions. And 
this monk’s ear-element of knowledge, being produced by the 
strength of energy-culture, is similar to it. Thus from 
similarity to that deva-ear it is deva.” Further, because it 
is obtained through, and is dependent on living like a deva,^ 
it is deva.” In the sense of hearing, and of the absence in 
it of soul, it is element ” of hearing, also because, like the 
deva-hearmg, it performs the function of the ear-element. 

With that deva-hearing clear ” means purified, free from 
low passions. 

‘'Surpassmg the ear of men” means, going beyond^ the 
fleshy ear-element of men in hearing sounds beyond the 
capacity of men. 

' ' He hears both sounds ” — ^he hears two sounds. Which are 
the two ? Of devas and of men. It is said that he hears 
sounds of . the devas and of men. By this statement are 
meant particularized sounds. 

^ 1 Dibba-sota-dhdtu. Dibba, mistranslated as “heavenly,” “celes- 

tial,” “divine,” means “of devas,” i.e. denizens of the next world, 
in happy conditions. Conditions, or “ element ” = dhatu, always a 
difficult word to equate. The sense is approximately “ clairaudience.’* 

2 Dialogues i, 89. 3 Dibba-vihareua, 

’ ^ Head vUivattitvd for ti vatlitvd. 

47‘2 



XIII . — Exposition of Higher Knowledge 473 

Whetlier far or near/’ that is, whether the sounds come 
from, a distant other world-system, or whether they are as 
near as thfe sounds of worms living in one’s own body, he hears 
them, so it is said. By this expression are included all sounds 
without remainder. 

And how is deva-hearing to arise ? The monk, [408] having 
-entered into, and risen from, the basic Jhana of higher know- 
ledge, should first by means of the prelinnnary concentration- 
consciousness contemplate the gross sounds of lions, and so 
■on, in the distant forest which are in the path of ordinary hear- 
ing. He should contemplate sounds which range gradually 
from complete grossness to fineness such as in a monastery the 
sounds of bells, of drums, of conches, of novices and young 
monks reciting at the top of their voices, of those who say 
in natural tones, What, sir?” ^‘What, friend?” and so on, 
of birds, of the wind, of the feet, of boiling water, of sizzling 
water, of a palm-leaf being dried in the sun, of ants, and so 
on. Then he should attend to the mark of sounds from the 
East, from the West, from the North, from the South, from 
below, from above, from the Eastern quarter, from the Western, 
Northern, Southern quarters. He should attend to gross 
and fine sounds as such. These sounds are evident to a natural 
mind, the more so to the preliminary concentration-con- 
sciousness. As he attends to sounds as such, representative 
cognition^arises, after making any one of the sounds its object, 
saying, '' Now will the deva-hearing arise.” When it ceases, 
four or five apperceptions take place, of which the first three or 
four are known as '' preliminary,” access,” ‘‘ adaptation,” and 
adoption,”'^ of the realm of sense. The fourth or the fifth is 
ecstatic consciousness of the realm of matter belonging to the 
Eourth Jhana. And that knowledge which arises together 
with that ecstatic consciousness is the deva-hearing. . 

After that it falls into the stream [of that knowledge], l.i 
making it grow in strength he should mark ofi a space of one 
finger, saying, I wish to hear the sounds within this space,” 
and increase it. Then he should increase it, marking ofi spaces 

^ C5f. on these Com^ndium of Philosophy (a latier work), pp. 55, ' 
129, 215. 



474 


The Bath of Purity 

of two fingers, four fingers, eight fingers, a span, a cubit, a 
chamber, a monastery-front, a palace, a cell, a monastery^ 
a village of his alms-round, a hamlet, and so on,^ far as a 
world-system, or even farther. Thus attaining to higher 
knowledge, he hears by means of it sounds which come from 
within the space touched by the object of the basic Jhana^ 
even though he does not re-enter into Jhana. While hearing 
thus, if there is a tumult of sounds from conches, drums and 
cymbals, and so on, reaching as far as the Brahma-world, [409] 
aiid if he wishes to distinguish them individually, he is able 
to distinguish them as, This is the sound of conches, this of 
the drums.’^ 

The Discourse on Deva-hearing is ended. 

As regards the phrase, Knowledge encompassing others^ 
thoughts, in the discourse on the same, encompassing 
means, he encompasses; marking ofi is the meaning. “En- 
compassing [others’] thoughts ” means, “ encompassing qua 
thoughts.” Encompassing thought plus this knowledge: this 
is why the compoimd phrase was said. ‘‘ Of other beings,” 
— of all remaining beings exclusive of himself. “ Of other 
men,” — this has the same meaning; the difference in the 
letter is made by way of instruction and adornment, “ With 
his own thoughts, the thoughts,” that is, [he knows] the 
thoughts of others with his own. '' Encompassing ” is 
marking off; “knows” means, knows in various aspects as 
passionate, and so on. 

How is this knowledge to arise 1 Verily it is brought about 
through the deva-sight, which is the preparation. Therefore 
the monk, increasing his sight and looking with the deva-eye 
at the colour of someone’s blood, which is dependent on the 
heart-flesh,^ searches his thoughts. Eor when the mind is 
joyous, then the blood of the heart is red like a ripe banyan 
fruit. When the mind is sad, it is black like a ripe rose-apple. 

^ jana^adddivasena. 

2 Dlgha i, 79, cf. Dialogues i, 89. In text read “ pariyatiti pariyam,'^ 
not ‘ ‘ pan yatih pariyam. ’ ’ 

^ (fSdya says; hada/yarupa is not the physical basis of the heart, but 
hadayamarmapesi. 



XIII . — Exposition of Higher Knowledge 4:1 5 

Wiien tlie mind is neutral, then it is like clear sesamum oil. 
Therefore he looks repeatedly at the colour of the heart-blood 
of another^ person, saying, ‘‘This material quality is set up 
by the controlling faculty of joy, this by the faculty of sadness^ 
this by the faculty of neutrality.” And searching his thoughts, 
he makes the knowledge encompassing others’ thoughts grow 
in strength. And*when thus it has gained in strength, he knows 
in due course all thoughts of the realms of sense and of form 
and the formless, bringing thought to thought without even 
the necessity of looking at the heart-flesh. And this has been 
said in the Commentary: “ He who, wishes to know another’s 
thoughts in the formless, — ^whose heart-flesh does he look 
at ? Whose change of the controlling faculties does he survey ? 
Of no one. The province of the possessor of psychic power 
is that he considers any mind whatsoever, and knoVs sixteen 
different kinds. But this discourse has been made for one who 
has not laid it to heart.” 

As regards the expression: “The passionate mind,” and so 
on, the eight classes of consciousness which are accompamed 
by greed [410] are to be understood as the passionate mind. 
The remaining moral and indeterminate consciousness of the 
four planes is passionless. The four classes of consciousness, 
namely, two of grief and two of doubt and distraction, are not 
included in this pair. But some of the elders include them. 

The twofold consciousness of grief is “the hateful mind.” 
All those which are moral and indeterminate of the four planes 
are free from hate. The remaining ten classes of immoral 
consciousness are not included in this pair. But some of the 
elders include them. 

As regards “ deluded, undeluded,” taking them quite apart 
from others, the two which are accompanied by doubt and 
distraction are deluded. But because delusion appears among 
all immoral states, the twelvefold immoral consciousness also 
is to be regarded as deluded, the rest being undeluded. Con- 
sciousness which follows sloth and torpor is “ contracted,” 
that which follows distraction is “ distracted.” Consciousness 
of the realm of form and formless is “ sublime,” the rest bemg. 
“not sublime.” All consciousness of the three planes is 



476 


The Path of Purity 

mean,” tlie transcendental mind is lofty/’ That which 
has reached access and also ecstasy is steadfast that which 
reaches neither is wavering.” That which has attuned to the 
emancipation by means of partial removal of discarding, of ex- 
tirpation, tranquillity, escape, is ''emancipated” ; that which has 
not attained to the fivefold emancipation is " unemancipated.” 

Thus the monk who has acquired knowledge encompassing 
others’ thoughts discerns all kinds of mind, such as the 
passionate naind . . . the emancipated mind,^ the unemanci- 
pai^d mind. 

The Discourse on knowledge encompassing others’ thoughts 
is ended. 

In the discourse on the knowledge of the recalling of previous 
existence^, ^ "to the knowledge of the recalling of previous 
existences ” means, to that knowledge which is the recallmg 
of previous existences. " Previous existences ” means aggre- 
gates experienced (lit. " indwelt ”) in previous past existences. 
"Experienced” means, invested m, enjoyed in one’s own 
continuum, which has happened and ceased; or experienced 
things. " Experienced ” means experienced with range and 
dwelling, cognized by one’s own mind, marked out, or cog- 
nized, by others’ minds as well in the recalling of those who 
have finished their career, and so on. They are obtained by 
such as are Buddhas. " Eecalling of previous existences ” 
means that mindfulness by which one recalls previous exist- 
ences. " Knowledge ” is that knowledge which is associated 
with that mindfulness. The statement is, [411] for the sake 
of the attainment, the getting of this knowledge of the recalling 
of previous existences. " Various ” means, of many kinds; 
proceeding in, described as many aspects, is the meaning. 
"Previous existences” are the continuity of aggregates ex- 
perienced in this or that existence, starting with that which is 
immediately past. " Recalls ” means, calls to mind, following 
by way of the series of aggregates and of decease and rebirth. 

Six classes of men recall previous existences: heretics, 
original disciples, great disciples, chief disciples, silent Buddhas, 


1 Read vimuUam, 


2 Dlgha i, 81. Lit: residings. 



XIII. — Exposition of Higher Knowledge 477 

Buddhas. Of these, heretics recall forty world-cycles, not 
more, ^^y not ? Because of their weak understanding. 
Bor beingodevoid of the classification of mind and matter, 
their mderstanding is weak. The original 'disciples recall a 
hundred, a thousand cycles, because their understanding ^is 
strong. The eighty great disciples recall a hhndred thousand 
cycles. The two chief disciples recall an incalculable period 
and a hundred thousand. Silent Buddhas recall two in- 
calculable periods, a hundred thousand, for to such extent 
carries their aspiration. As to the Buddhas, there is^ho 
limit to their recalling power. ® 

And the heretics remember the order of the aggregates. 
They cannot remember by way of decease and rebirth, letting 
go the order of the aggregates. Like the blind, they do not 
get to the places they want to get to. Just as the blind go 
without releasing the stick, so they remember without re- 
leasing the order of the aggregates. The origmal disciples 
recall to mind both by means of the order of the aggregates, 
and also alternately by means of decease and rebirth; likewise 
the great disciples. There is no functioning of the order of 
the aggregates to the two chief disciples. Seeing the decease 
of one individuality, they see its rebirth, agam seeing the 
decease of another one they see rebirth, — thus they go 
alternately by decease and rebirth. Likewise the silent 
Buddhas. But to the Buddhas there is no functioning of the 
order of the aggregates, neither that of decease and rebirth. 
For to them whatever place they desire, above or below in 
many myriads of cycles, becomes evident. Therefore, skip- 
pmg many myriads of cycles like abbreviated texts, they 
descend wherever they like, and go bounding like the lion. 
Just as an arrow shot by an archer skilled in hitting a hair 
as„Sarabhanga,^ goes without sticking in trees, creepers, and 
so on, or swerving, and hits the mark, so the knowledge of the 
Buddhas does not stick, does not falter in the various inter- 
vening births, [ 412 ] but without sticking or faltering, seizes 
whatever place is desired. 

And among these beings who recall their previous existences,* 
^ See Sarabhmga Jdtaka, No. 522. 



478 


The Path of Purity 

the heretics’ discernment of their previous existences appears 
like the light of a glow-worm, that of the original disjciples like 
lamp-light, that of the great disciples like the light of torches, 
that of the chief 'disciples like that of the morning star, that 
of the silent Buddhas like the moonlight, while that of the 
Buddhas is like ^he disc^ of the autumnal sun adorned with 
a thousand rays. And the discernment of the heretics is like 
the going of the blind by means of the points of their sticks, 
that of the original disciples is like going on a bridge of sticks, 
that of the great disciples is like going on a foot-bridge, that 
of the chief disciples is like going on a cart-bridge, that of the 
silent Buddhas is like going on a walkers’ highway, that of the 
Buddhas is like going on a highway for carts. 

But the recalling of previous existences by disciples is 
intended m this section. Hence it is said ‘ recalls,” which 
means, calls to mind, following by way of the series of aggre- 
gates and of decease and rebirth.’ Therefore the monk who 
IS a beginner, wishing to recall thus, should enter into the 
Four Jhanas in their due order after he, having finished his 
meal and returned from the alms-round, has gone into solitude 
and seclusion. And emerging from the Fourth Jhana, the 
basis of higher knowledge, he should contemplate his having 
sat himself down, the last of his acts. He should then con- 
template in reverse order all that he had done during the 
night and day thus : The preparation of the seat, the entermg 
into the dwelling, the putting by of the bowl and robe, the 
time of eating, the time of return from the village, the time 
of roaming the village for alms, the time of entering the village 
for alms, the time of coming out of the monastery, the time of 
saluting the shrme-yard and the court-yard of the Tree of 
Knowledge, the time of washing the bowl, the time of taking 
hold of the bowl, all that he had done from the taking hgld 
of the bowl till the washing of the mouth, all that he had done 
at the dawn, all that he had done in the last watch, all that 
he had done in the first watch. Thus much is evident to the 
natural consciousness, all the more so to the preliminary 
ooncentration-consciousness. If any one of his acts does 


^ Read °mandala'^. 



XIII. — Exposition of Higher Knowledge 479 

not become evident, lie should again enter into the basic ^ana, 
emerge and contemplate. By domg this much it becomes 
evident like lightmg. a lamp [in the dark]. Thus in reverse 
order should he contemplate all his actions oh the second day, 
the third, fourth, fifth day, the tenth day, half a month, ^ a 
month, as far back as a year. Thus conterfiplating what he 
had done during ten years, twenty years, as far back as his 
birth in the present lifetime, [413] he should contemplate 
name and form that arose at the moment of decease in the 
immediately preceding existence. 

A clever monk is indeed able at the very first time to separate 
his birth and to consider as object the name and form that arose 
at the moment of his decease. But the beginner should not 
give up the attempt, saying, ‘‘Smce name and form in the 
preceding existence has wholly ceased and another h!as arisen, 
therefore it is difficult for one weak in understanding to see 
that particular junction which is narrow like utter darkness. 
Hence I am not able to separate birth, and consider as object 
the name and form that arose at the moment of decease.’’ 
He should enter again and again into that basic Jhana, then 
emerging from it again and again,^ he should contemplate that 
junction. Just as a strong man, in cutting a great tree needed 
for the corner of the upper storey of a palace, were to ruin the 
blade of the axe merely cutting the branches and leaves, and 
were then unable to cut down the great tree, but without 
giving up the attempt he were to have the axe sharpened 
at a smithy and, returning, would cut down the tree, and the 
axe again giving way, he were to do as he did before and again 
cut the tree, until what was cut agam and again remained 
no more, and what had not been cut was cut down, and before 
long the great tree were to fall, even so the monk, in doing what 
wa§ said above and emerging from the basic Jhana, would, 
without contemplating what had abeady been contemplated, 
and contemplatmg the rebbth, be able before long to separate 
it and consider as object the name and form which arose at the 
moment of decease. This meaning is also to be illustrated 
by similes of the wood-cutter, shaving of the habs, and so on.- 
^ Read ca vutthaya vutthdya for caiuttMya vutthdya. 



480 


T'he Path of Purity 

Therein, the knowledge which arises making as object alL 
that arises, starting back from his last act of sitting down 
till his rebirth, is not the knowledge of. previous .existences. 
It is the preliminary concentration-knowledge. Some say it 
is knowledge of the past. If they say so concerning that in 
tlie realm of form, it is not correct.^ But when to the monk 
there arises (representative cognition) which, passing beyond 
his rebirth, has made the name and form, which arose at the 
moment of his (former) decease, the object, and on the ceasing 
ohrt there come into play four or five apperceptions with the 
same object, of which, ^ as was said above, the first ones are 
called preliminary, and so on, of the realm of sense, the last 
being ecstatic consciousness of the realm of form and belongings 
to the Fourth Jhana, — then that knowledge which arises 
together Vith that consciousness is called the knowledge 
which recalls previous existences. 

By means of the mindfulness associated with it, he recalls 
to mind his various previous existences, namely, one birth 
[414] 01 two births . . . in all their modes, in all their details.’^ 
Of these, one birth ’’ means one continuity of the aggregates 
beginning with rebirth and endmg in decease and comprising 
one existence. Similarly with two births ” and so on. 
As regards, ^^Many a cycle of dissolution’^ and so on, the 
descending cycle is the cycle of dissolution; the ascending 
cycle is the cycle of evolution. A cycle in a state of dissolu- 
tion is included in the cycle of dissolution which is the root of 
it. A cycle in a state of evolution is included in a cycle of 
evolution which is the root of it. This being so, those also are 
to be included which are stated as, Monks, of the cycle there 
are four ceons. Which are the four ? The ceons of dissolution, 
in a state of dissolution, of evolution, in a state of evolution, 

Of these., there are three kinds of dissolution: by water, ^i-re, 
air. The three limits of dissolution are: Abhassara^ abode, 
Subhakinha abode, Vehapphala abode. When the cycle is. 
destroyed by fire, the place below the Abhassara is burnt. 
When it is destroyed by water, the place below the Subhakinha 

^ Because knowledge of the past is of the sensuous realm. 

^ Read yesam for sesam. 3 AnguUara ii, 142, ^ Read dbJiassard. 



XIII . — Exposition of Higher Knoivledge 481 

is dissolved. When it is destroyed by air, the place below the 
Vehapphala is blown to pieces. Coming to details: At all 
times (of* the three, stages of dissolution) one Buddha-field 
perishes. The field of a Buddha is of three kinds: the field 
of his birth, the field of his authority, the field of his sphere. 
Of these, the field of his birth is bounded by the ten thousand 
world-systems wMch shook at the time of the Tathagata's 
conception, and so on. The field of his authority is bounded 
by the myriad hundred thousand world-systems where pre- 
vails the power of these protection Suttas^: Eatana SuT^fa, 
Khandhaparitta, Dhajaggaparitta,* Atanatiyaparitta, Mora- 
paritta. The field of his sphere is infinite and boundless, 
concermng which it has been said, As far as he wishes,” 
where, that is, the Tathagata knows whatever he wishes. 
Thus of these three fields, one field of authority* perishes, 
when that perishes, the field of birth also perishes. They 
perish together: they also appear together. The perishing 
and the appearance should be understood thus : — 

When the world-cycle is destroyed by fire, at first [415] a 
great world-destroying rain-cloud rises, and a great downpour 
of ram takes place in the hundred thousand myriad world- 
systems. Men, pleased and delighted, bring forth all their 
seeds of gram and sow them. Wh.en the crops are ready for 
cattle to eat them, not a single drop of rain falls with a sound 
like the braymg of an ass. Then the rain is completely cut ofi. 
Concerning this has the Blessed One said: '' Monks ^ there comes 
a time when it does not rain for many years, for ^nany hundred 
years, many thousand years, many hundred thousand years 
Beings who live by the rains die and are reborn in the Brahma- 
world, as well as devas who live on flowers and fruits. Thus 
when a long period of time is passed, water dries up in various 
places. Then in due course fishes and turtles also die and are 
reborn in the Brahma-world, as well as beings of the hells. 
Some say that of these, denizens of the hells perish by the 
appearance of the seventh sun,^ since without Jhana there 

^ Suttampdta ii, 1; Khuddakapatha vi; Anguttara li, 72; Vinaya b, 
5, 6; SamyvMa i, 218; Dlgha iii, 195; Jdtaka li, No. 159. Of Dialogues 
111 , 185 on these “ warding runes.” 

2 AnguUara iv, 100. 


® See below, p. 482, 



482 


TJie Path of Purity 

is no rebirtli in the Brahma-world. Moreover, some of the 
creatures mentioned suffer from famine, others are incapable 
of attaining to Jhana. How do they get to th^* Brahma- 
world ? By virtue of the Jhana acquired in the world of 
devas. For then devas of the realm of sense, called the 
Lokavyuhas, with confusion in their heads, dishevelled hair, 
tearful faces, wiping off the tears with theii? hands, dressed in 
red garments and assuming very ugly forms, knowing that the 
destruction of the world will take place after a hundred 
tKcTusand years, roam about the paths of men and announce 
thus: “Masters, masters I When a hundred thousand years 
from now have passed by, the world-destroying rain will fall. 
This world will perish; the great ocean also will dry up. This 
earth and Sineru, kmg of mountams, will be burnt and 
destroyed. As far as the Brahma-world will the destruction 
of the world be. Masters 1 develop love, develop pity, develop 
sympathy, develop equanirmty. Support your mother, sup- 
port your father. Give respect to the semors of the family.’’^ 
Hearing their exhortation, men and fairies generally, moved 
by anxiety, become gentle in heart towards one another, do 
meritorious deeds of love, and so on, and are reborn in the 
deva-world. There, eating heavenly ambrosia, they do the 
preliminary work in the air-device and attain to Jhana. 
Others are reborn in the deva-world owmg to karma of suc- 
cessive experience, without which, indeed, no being passes 
to and fro in the round of existence. There in the deva-world 
they also attain to Jhana. [416] Thus all are reborn in the 
Brahma- world by means of Jhana attained in the deva-world. 

After a long time has passed since the end of the rams, a 
second sun manifests itself. And this has been said by the 
Blessed^ One: “ Monks, there comes a t%me,''^ — thus should 
be expanded the Sutta of the seven suns. When the second 
sun makes its appearance, the divisions into night and *day 
are seen no more. One sun rises, the other sets, and the 
world receives the sun’s heat uninterruptedly. There is no 
sun-deva in the world-destroymg sun as there is in the natural 

^ N idd'imJcathd, Buddhist Birthstories 1926, p. 145. 

^ An guitar a iv, 100. 



XIII . — Exposition of Riffier Knowledge 483 

sun. Of the two suns, when the natural sun rises, clouds and 
crests of vapour travel in space. When the world-destroying 
sun rises, the sky is free frona vapour and cloud, and is spotless 
like the disc of a mirror. Water in small streams other than 
the five great rivers dries up. When a long time has pas§ed 
smce the second sun, a third sun appears* owmg to which 
even the great rivers dry up. A long time after that, a fourth 
sun appears, owing to which these seven great lakes Sihapatana, 
Hamsapatana, Kannamundaka, Rathakara, Anotatta, Chad- 
danta, Kunala, which are the sources of the great Himalayan 
rivers, dry up. A long time after* that, a fifth sun appears, 
owing to which there does not remam in the great ocean water 
enough to wet a finger-joint. A long tune afterwards a sixth 
sun appears, owmg to which the whole world-system becomes 
one mass of vapour, which sucks up moisture. AnS the same 
with the hundred thousand myriad world-systems. A long 
time after that a seventh sun appears, owmg to which the 
whole world-system is a mass of flame with the hundred 
thousand myriad world-systems. Peaks from Smeru of 
difierent sizes, a hundred yojanas and so forth, break loose 
and disappear m space. The fiery flame rises and catches the 
abode of the Pour Regents, where, buxmng mansions of gold, of 
precious stones and of ruby, it catches the Tavatimsa Mansion. 
In this way it catches as far as the First Jhana plane. 
There it burns the three Brahma-worlds and keeps strikmg the 
Abhassaras. So long as [417] the smallest amount of material 
substance remains, it does not go out. But when material 
substances perish, it goes out without leaving even the ashes, 
like a flame of fire buxmng up butter and oil. The lower sky 
forms a mass of darkness with the upper sky. 

Then after a long time a great rain-cloud comes up and at 
firsf) rams down fine drops. In course of time, rammg down 
torrents of the size of the white lotus-stalk, a stick, pestle, 
palm-tree trunk and so on, it fills up all the burnt places in the 
hundred thousand myriad world-systems, and disappears. 
A wind comes up from below and across the water, and holds 
it m a mass, rouudmg it like a water-drop m a lotus-leaf. * 
How does it hold m a mass such a vast collection of water 2 



4:84 TKe Path of Purity 

By letting it enter its openings, for the water lets the wind 
enter its openings in various places. So the water, being 
collected together, held in a mass by the wind and in receding, 
in due course descends. When the water gradually descends, 
the Brahma-world makes its appearance where it is situated, 
so do the worlds* of devas where the four worlds of devas of 
the realm of sense are situated. In descending to the former 
site of the earth, strong wmds arise and they catch the water 
without letting it go, like water placed in a water-bag whose 
, mofith is closed. The sweet water in receding gives rise to a 
tasty earth above, which -bemg endowed with colour, odour 
and taste, appears like a film on undiluted rice-porridge. 
Then bemgs who have first been born in the Abhassara Brahma- 
world pass away from thence owmg to loss of life or of merit, 
and appear here. Self-illummated, they traverse the firma- 
ment. As explained m the Agganna Sutta^ they lick the 
tasty earth and, overcome by craving, try to eat it in mouth- 
fuls. Then their self-illumination disappears. There is dark- 
ness. Seeing the darkness they become frightened. Then the 
round disc of the sun, fifty yojanas in size, appears putting away 
their fear and makmg them brave (s-Sm). On seeing it they 
become glad and delighted, saying, ‘'We have got light,” and 
give it the name of “sun” (sunyd) saymg, “It has arisen 
putting away fear from us who have been frightened, and 
makmg us brave. Therefore let it be sun.” Then, when the 
sun after shinmg during the day, sets, they [418] again become 
frightened saymg, “ That light which we got is lost for us.” 
This thought occurs to them: “ It would be well, indeed, if we 
got another light !” As though knowing their wish, the disc 
of the moon appears, forty-nine yojanas in size. Upon seemg 
it, they become all the more glad and delighted, and give it 
the name of moon (ca'/^^o), saymg, “ It has arisen as though 
knowing our wish {chando). Therefore let it be moon.” When 
thus the moon and the sun have made their appearance, the 
stars and the constellations also make their appearance. From 
that time day and night appear, and m due course the month, 
' ,the half-month, the seasons, the year also, appear. And on the 


1 Dlglm ill, 80. 



XIII . — Exposition of Higher Knowledge 485 

day the moon and the sim appear, Sineru, the world-system, 
and the Himalaya mountains appear. And they appear simul- 
taneously •on the full-moon day of the month of Phagguna. 
How ? As when millet is cooked, bubbles at once rise up, 
some places are elevated, some are low, others level, so tjae 
elevated places are mountains, the low places are oceans, and 
the level places islands. 

Then some of those beings who have eaten the tasty earth 
are beautiful, others are ugly. The beautiful ones despise the 
ugly ones. In consequence the tasty earth disappears, an 
earthy outgrowth appears. And iDecause of this same be- 
haviour, that also disappears, and a creeper called boddlata 
appears. That also disappears for the same reason. And 
there appears paddy uncooked with the aid of fuel^ free from 
the coating of red powder, huskless, pure,^ sweet-smelling, 
yielding rice. Then to them appear vessels. They place the 
paddy in the vessels on rocks. A flame of fire rises of its own 
accord and cooks it. And that rice is like a kind of jasmine 
flower. There is no need to cook it with soup or curry. It 
becomes whatever tasty food they desire to eat. As they eat 
that grass food they develop urine and excrement. Then holes 
like the mouths of wounds open up in order to let them go out. 
And there appears masculinity to man, femininity to woman. 
So that man and woman gaze long at each other. Because 
they gaze long at each other, the burning of lust arises. Then 
they follow their sensual instincts. [419] Because of their 
evil practices they are blamed, censured by the wise; and to 
hide their sin, they make houses wherein they dwell. In due 
course, following the practice of an unknown lazy man, they 
hoard up their grain with the result that it is covered by a 
coating of red powder and husk, and the place of reaping is not 
recultivated. They gather together and bemoan themselves 
thus: “Indeed, evil conditions have come upon beings. 
Formerly we were made of mind,’’ and so on, as given in the 
Agganna Sutta. 

Then they set up boundaries. And a certain man steals 
another man’s portion. They repriman d him twice, but at the 
1 B>e8.d evddho. 



486 


The Path of Purity 

tMrd time they strike him with the hand, stones, sticks, and so 
on. When thus, stealing, reprimanding, telling lies, holding 
sticks, come to pass, they meet together -and think: What 
if we were to choose one being who would rightly degrade 
him that deserved to be degraded, blame him that deserved 
blame, expel him that deserved to be expelled. We would 
give him a tithe of our grain.” In this cycle, 'among the beings 
who have made this resolution, the Blessed One, the future 
Buddha, was then more beautiful, comely, powerful, than 
they, and was endowed with wisdom and competent to 
suppress and uphold. They approached him, asked his 
permission and chose him. He was known by three names: 
Mahasammata, chosen (sammato) by the people”; prince 
{hhattiya)/J lord of the fields {MettaY ’ ; king {raja), he delights 
(ranjeti) others by righteousness and equity.” That wondrous 
event in the world, the future Buddha was the first man: thus 
they made him the beginning, and the class of nobles having 
arisen, the castes, viz,, brahmins, and so on, in due course 
arose. 

Of these cycles one seon, from the great world-destroying 
rain till the cessation of the flames, is called dissolution. The 
second aeon, from the cessation of the world-destroying flames 
till the great rain flooding up the hundred thousand myriad 
world-systems, is called the process of dissolution. The third 
aeon, from the great world-flooding rain till the appearance 
of sun and moon, is called evolution. [420] The fourth aeon, 
from the appearance of sun and moon till the great world- 
destroying rain once again, is called the process of evolution. 
These four seons make one great cycle. Thus the destruction 
by fixe and reappearance should be understood. 

When the world perishes by water, at first the great world- 
destroying rain comes up and the detailed account is as said 
above with this difference: — 

As a second sun rises in the case of the destruction by fixe, so 
here a great rain of alkaline water, destructive to the world, 
comes up. At first it rains very fine drops, but in due course 
'the drops become great torrents filling the hundred thousand 
myriad world-systems. Mountains of the earth, and so on, 



XIII . — Exposition of Higher Knoivledge 487 

touched by the alkaline water, are dissolved. The water is 
held* on all sides by the winds. Erom the earth to the Second 
Jhana-plane the water rises, and there it dissolves the three 
Brahma-worlds and keeps striking the Siibhakiioha abode. 
It is not quieted as long as the smallest particle of material 
substance remains. It overpowers all mal^erial substances 
which come into contact with it, and suddenly quiets down 
and disappears. The lower sky forms one mass of darkness 
with the upper sky, and everything is as said before. But 
really here the world appears beginning with the AbhasSara 
Brahma-world. And beings pass asway from the Subhakinha 
abode and are reborn in Abhassara and other places. 

From the great world-destroying ram till the cessation of 
the world-destroying water is one seon. From the cessation 
of the water to the great flooding rain is the second aeon. 
From the great flooding rain . , . these four aeons make one 
great cycle. Thus should the destruction by water and the 
reappearance be understood. 

When the cycle perishes by wind, at first the great world- 
destroying rain comes. Thus it should be expanded as before, 
with this difference: As there a second sun appears, so here 
wind arises in order to destroy the world. At first it raises 
thick dust, then fine dust, refined sand, thick sand, gravel, 
rocks, and so on until [421] it raises rocks of the size of a 
storied house, and big trees in uneven places. These ascend 
from the earth into the sky, and do not fall again. There 
they are reduced to fine powder and become nothing. Then 
in due course from underneath the great earth the wind 
comes up, turns the earth upside down and throws it into space. 
Pieces of earth, one hundred, two hundred, three hundred, 
four hundred, even five hundred yojanas in size, break loose 
and, hurled by the fury of the wind, are reduced to fine powder 
in space and become nothing. The wind lifts both the moun- 
tain-range of the world-system and Mount Sineru, and hurls 
them into space. They strike each other and perish, reduced 
to fine powder. In this way, destroying earthy mansions and 
airy mansions and the six deva-worlds of the realm of sense, 
it destroys the hundred thousand myriad world-systems where 



488 


TKe Path of Purity 

world-system with world-system, Himalaya with Himalaya, 
Sineru with Sineru, each meeting each, are reduced to* fine 
powder and perish. The wind reaches from the earth as far 
as the third Jhana-stage, where, destroying the three Brahma- 
worlds, it keeps striking the Vehapphala abode. Thus destroy- 
ing all material substances, it itself perishes. The lower sky 
with the upper sky forms one mass of darkness. Thus every- 
thing is as above. But here the world appears beginning 
with the Subhakigha Brahma-world. Beings pass away 
from Vehapphala and are reborn in Subhakinha and other 
places. Therein from the great world-destroying rain till 
the end of the world-destroying wind is one seen. Brom the 
end of the wind till the great flooding rain is the second aeon 
. . . these four aeons make one great cycle. Thus should be 
understood destruction by wind and reappearance. 

Why does the world so perish ? By reason of the immoral 
roots. Bor in the abundance of these the world perishes. 
When lust is superabundant it perishes by fixe. When hate 
is superabundant it perishes by water. Some say that it 
perishes by fire when hate superabounds, by water when lust 
superabounds. When delusion is superabundant, it perishes 
by wind. In perishing thus, it perishes by fire continuously 
seven times, by water at the eighth time, again for seven times 
by fire, the eighth by water. In perishing in this way for the 
eighth time, [422] it perishes seven times by water, and seven 
times again by fire. By so much are passed sixty-three cycles.^ 
Within this limit, although the turn to perish by water is 
arrived, it is inhibited, and the wind which takes its turn 
destroys the world, crushing the Subhakigha whose term of 
life is full sixty-four cycles^ 

Though recalling previous existences, the monk who recalls 
the cycles recalls from among them many cycles of dissolu- 
tion, many cycles of evolution, and many of dissolution and 
evolution. How ? In this way : — In s'mh a 'place I was,^' 
and so on. Here, ‘‘ In such a place I was,’’ means, I was in 
such a world of dissolution, in such a state or place of birth 
or destiny, phase of consciousness or sentient abode or sentient 

^ I.e. fifty-six times by fire, sev^en times by water. 



XTII. — Exposition of Higher Knowledge 489 

group. “ Such was my name/’ — Tissa or Phussa. „ Such 
my family/’ — Kaccana or Kassapa. These statements are 
made by*-' way of recalling his own name and family in a past 
existence. If he wishes to recall his attainment of beauty, 
or his hard or glorious life, his experiences of bliss or misery, 
or his short or long life at that time, he ^ust recalls them 
Hence was it said, Such my caste^ . . . smh the limits of my 
life.’' Of these, such my caste ” means fair or golden. 

Such my food ” means rice, flesh or gruel was my food, or I 
ate whatever fruits I got. Such my experience of discomfort 
and of ease ” means, I experien(5ed discomfort and ease of 
various sorts, bodily and mental, connected with desires and 
free from desires, and so on. '' Such the limits of my life ” 
means, my life was limited to a hundred years or jeighty-four 
thousand cycles. When I passed away from that state, I 
took form again m such a place” means, I passed away from 
that state, place of birth, destiny, phase of consciousness, 
sentient abode, or sentient group, and took form again in such 
a state, place of birth, destiny, phase of consciousness, sentient 
abode or sentient group. There also I was ” means, in that 
state, place of birth, destiny, phase of consciousness, sentient 
abode or sentient group again I was. Such was my name,” 
and so on, means the same as above. But because the 
expression, In such a place I was ” is the recallmg at 
will of one who is going through the series of his previous 
existences backward, and the expression, ''When I passed 
away from that state ” is a reflection of him who is actually 
turning back, therefore the former expression is stated con- 
cerning the place of his rebirth immediately preceding the 
present one denoted by the expression, " I took form again 
here.” The expression, "There also I was,” and so on 
[423] is made for the purpose of showing the recollection of 
name and family, and so on, in the place of birth, just before 
his present life-birth. " When I passed away from that state 
I took form again here ” means, passing away from the 
immediately preceding place of birth, I was reborn here in a 
princely family of such a name, or a brahmin family. " Thus ” 


^ Vanna^ ‘‘colour/' “beauty.” 



490 


The Path of Purity 

means in this way. In all their modes, in all their details,” 
— in all their details by way of name and family, in all their 
modes by way of caste and so on. For through n^me and 
family a being is designated as Tissa, Kassapa. By colour, 
and^ so on, people are difierentiated as brown, white in com- 
plexion. Therefoi^ name and family are details, the others 
modes “ He recalls to mind his various previous existences,” 
— ^this is plain in meaning. 

The Discourse on the Knowledge of Recollection of previous 
existences is ended. 

« 

In the discourse on the knowledge of the fall and rise of 
beings^: To the knowledge of the fall and rise ” means, to 
the knowledge with respect to the fall and the rise; for the 
sake of tha^ knowledge by which the fall and rise of beings are 
known, that is to say, for the sake of deva-sight. He directs 
and bends down his mind ” means, he directs and bends down 
the preparatory mind. '' He ” is the monk who has directed 
his mind. As regards “ deva ” and so on, it is “ of devas ” from 
its resemblance to [the sight of] the devas. For the devas 
possess the deva-sentient eye which is produced by well- 
wrought karma, unhindered by bile, phlegm, blood, and so on, 
able to receive distant objects through its freedom from the 
low passions. And the eye of knowledge, being produced by 
the strength of energetic developing, is like that. Thus it is 
deva ” from its resemblance to that. It is deva also from 
bemg acquired through living like a deva, and from its depend- 
ence on that. Further, it is deva ” from the power of its 
brilliance due to its seizure of light; from the greatness of its 
course due to the seeing of objects across walls, and so on. 
All this is to be understood in accordance with grammatical 
treatises.^' 

‘‘ Eye ” is in the sense of seeing; also because it perforins^ 
the function of the eye. Pure ” from being the condition 
of purity of views through discernment of the fall and rise. 

^ Dlgha i, 82. Lit. “ The fall-and-rise-knowledge.” It is, as else- 
Vvhere, only the form-analysis of a compound into its parts. 

^ treatises- on sounds, 1^, words. - -- 

^ Bead °karanena. 



XIII . — Exposition of Higher Knowledge 491 

He who sees only the fall, not the rise,^ holds to the view of anni- 
hilation. He who sees only the rise, not the fall, holds to the 
view of appearance of fresh beings. But the discernment 
of him who sees both, inasmuch as it goes Beyond the twofold 
view, is the condition for purity of views. The sons of the 
Buddha see both, hence the statement, [424] '‘Pure, from 
being the condition of purity of views through the discernment 
of the fall and rise.” " Surpassing that of men ” means, seeing 
forms surpassing the experience of men; or it is because it 
surpasses the fleshy eye of men. " With that pure deva^eye, 
surpassing that of men, he sees beings ” means, he looks at 
beings as though with the fleshy eye of men. 

" Deceasing, being reborn ” : — ^here it is not possible to see at 
the moment of the fall, or the moment of rise. The intention 
is, those who are nearing the fall and will now fall are those 
who are passing away; and those who have taken conception 
and are about to be born are those who are takmg shape. 
He shows that he sees such beings as they pass away from 
one form of existence and take shape in another. 

" The mean,” that is, those who are despised, much de- 
spised, looked down upon, much looked down upon because of 
their mean birth, family, wealth, and so on, because they are 
yoked to the outcome of delusion (moha). " The noble ” — 
the opposite of those, in consequence of non-delusion. " The 
well-favoured” — ^those endowed with desirable, pleasing, 
lovely form as a result of the absence of hate. " The ill- 
favoured” are those endowed with undesirable, unpleasing, 
unlovely form as a result of hate; uncomely, deformed, is the 
meaning. " The happy ” are those who are bound on a happy 
course, or who are rich, wealthy, as a result of the absence 
of greed. " The wretched” are those who are bound on a 
wretched course, or are poor, short of food and drink, as a 
result of greed. " Passing away according to their deeds ” 
means, going away by whatever karma has been accumulated. 

Of these terms, by means of the first terms, " passing away ” 
and so on, the function of deva-sight is expressed. By the last 
term the function of knowledge, the passing away of beings 
^ These refer always to decease and rebirth. 



492 


The Path of Purity 

according to their deeds, is expressed. This is the order in 
which this knowledge arises: Here a monk, mcreasing his sight 
downwards in the direction of the hells, sees the beings in them 
undergoing great pain. That discernment is the function of 
deya-sight. He gives attention thus: '^Having done what 
deeds, are these ^beings undergoing this pam ‘^Havmg 
done these deeds”: — ^thus to him arises Knowledge which 
makes the deed its object. In the same way, increasing his 
sight upward in the direction of the world of devas, he sees 
beings enjoymg great prosperity in Nandanavana, Missaka- 
vana, Pharusakavana, and* so on. That discernment also is 
the function of deva-sight. He gives attention thus: — 

Having done what deeds, are these beings enjoymg this 
prosperity?” “Having done these deeds,” — thus to him 
arises knowledge which makes the deed its object. This [425] 
is called knowledge of the passing away of beings according 
to their deeds. It has no preparation apart [from deva-sight]. 
And so also with knowledge of the future.^ For both have 
their base in the deva-eye, and are accomplished by it. As 
regards “ misbehaviour in body ” and so on, “ misbehaviour ” 
means, one behaves ill, or a behaviour which is evil owing to the 
putridity of the passions. “ Misbehaviour in body ” means, 
misbehaviour through the body or nusbehaviour arising out 
of the body. The same with the others (i.e., in speech and 
thought). “ Endowed with ” means possessed of. 

“Revilers of the Elect” are revilers, accusers, deriders, of 
the Elect: that is, of the Buddhas, silent Buddhas, Buddhas’ 
disciples, even of lajunen who are stream-winners, out of a 
desire to do them harm either by the worst sin,^ or by ruining 
their character. Whoso says: “ These men have no saintly 
character. They are not monks,” reviles by way of the worst 
sin. Whoso says: “They have not Jhana, or emancipatign, 
or the Path, or Fruition,” and so on, reviles by ruinmg their 
character. Whether he reviles knowingly or unknowingly, he 
is a reviler of the Elect in both ways. It is a grave action 
like an action that carries immediate retribution, shuts out 


^ Read anagaiam^ananossa pi. 

2 Antima-Mthu. Cf. Vin* Texts i, 276, n. 1. 



XIII . — Exposition of Higher Knowledge 493 

the heavens and the Path, but it is pardonable. To, explain 
it, this story is to be understood. 

It is said that an elder and a young monk went about for 
alms in a certain village. At the very first house they got a 
ladleful of warm gruel. The elder was suffering from wind in 
the stomach. He thought: ‘'This gruel i^ beneficial to me. 
I will drink it before it gets cold.” And he sat down on a piece 
of wood brought by men for the purpose of making a door-post, 
and drank the gruel. The other being disgusted with him 
thought: “ This old man, being oppressed by excessive huhger^ 
has done something we should «be ashamed of.” Havmg 
roamed the village, the elder went to the monastery and asked 
the yoimg monk: “ Friend, hast thou made a foothold m this 
religion?” “Yes, sir. I am a stream- winner.” “Friend, 
then do not try for the higher Path. Thou hast reviled one 
who is free from the cankers.” He apologized so that his sin 
was condoned. Therefore whoever should revile one of the 
Elect should, if he himself is the senior, go, crouch [426] and 
apologize, saying, “ I have said such and such words of the 
Venerable One. Forgive me.” If he be the junior, he should 
salute him, crouch, raise his hands to his forehead and apolo- 
gize, saying: “ Sir, I have said such and such words of you. 
Forgive me.” If the reviled monk has departed elsewhere, 
he should himself go, or send his own pupils, and so on, and 
ask forgiveness. If it is not possible for him to go or to send 
his pupils, he should go to those monks who live m the same 
monastery as the reviled monk, and crouch if they are his 
juniors, or do what should be done to a semor if they are the 
seniors, and apologize, saying, “ Sirs, I have said such and such 
words of such and such a monk. May the Venerable One for- 
give me.” He should do the same if he be not personally 
forgiven. If the noble one be a monk who lives by himself, 
and neither his dwellmg-place nor the place he frequents is 
known, then he should go to a wise monk and say: “ Sir, I 
have said such and such words of such and such a venerable 
person. I regret it whenever I think of it. What shall I do ? ” 
The other will reply: “ Do not be anxious. The elder forgives 
you. Quiet your thoughts.” Then he should raise his hands 



494 


The Path of Purity 

in salutation towards the direction in which the noble one has 
gone, and say: May he forgive me.” If the noble one' has 
died, he should go to his death-bed, or even to the cemetery, and 
ask forgiveness. If this is done, the heavens and the Path 
ar§ not shut out, and his offence is condoned. 

Holding to wrong views ” means, of perverse views. 
^ ' Acquiring that karma which results from wrong views ’ ’ means, 
haviug various kmds of karma built up by means of wrong 
views. Those who prevail upon others to do bodily acts and 
so on, which have their roots in wrong views, are also meant. 
Though the revilmg of th^ Elect is included in misbehaviour 
in speech, and wrong views are included in misbehaviour in 
thought, the two are repeated here to show the greatness of 
the offence. Owing to its resemblance to those acts that 
carry immediate retribution,^ the reviling of the Elect is a 
grave offence. And this has been said: Just as, Sariputta, 
a monk who is equipped with virtue, concentration, and wisdom, 
will here and now come to [the Arahanfsl plenitude of knowledge, 
so this other equip'inent — if the man does not recant his words, 
change his heart, and renounce his view — will end [427] in his 
being hauled off to purgatory And there is no sin greater 
than wrong views. As has been said: Monks, I do not 
perceive any one state which is so great an offence as wrong 
views. Wrong views are supreme offences 

On the dissolution of the body ” means, on the giving up 
of the derived aggregates. iLfter death ” — upon the taking 
on of the new-born aggregates immediately afterwards. Or, 
the first term means the cessation of hfe-controllmg faculty, 
the second is after the consciousness durmg decease. 

“ State of woe ” and so on, are ail synonyms of hell, which 
IS called state of woe,” because it is off the course which is 
reckoned as of merit, and the condition for the attamment.of 
heaven and emancipation, or because of the absence of pleasant 
gomg. It is the course or refuge of ill: — whence '' miserable 
existence.” Or it is a course produced by bad karma out of 

^ Anaritanya, or ^ika. Of. Points of Controversy viii, 2; xiii, 3. 

^ Further Dialogues i, 47. Read appahdya tarn in the text. 

^ Anguttara i, 33. * • 



XIII. — Exposition of HigHer Knowledge 495 

an abundance of bate. EvH-doers “fall” {vinipdto\ therein 
against tbeir will^ : — whence “ state of suffering.” Or, they 
perish fa\j|[ing there .with broken limbs. Here is no course 
(aya) which can be called pleasant: — Whence “hell” (niraya). Or, 
by “ state of woe ” is shown the animal kingdom, because the 
latter, being devoid of happmess, is a state of woe, but not 
miserable existence, smce mighty beings such as Naga-kings 
are bom in it. By “miserable existence” the “peta”- 
world IS meant, which is also a state of woe, because it is devoid 
of happmess and the resort of misery. But it is not a stEte of 
suffering since there are no broken«limbs as among the Asuxas. 
By state of suffering is meant the Asura-world, which m the 
sense just given is both state of woe and miserable existence. 
It is also called state of suffering because it is devoid of the 
sum of desirable thmgs. By hell are meant the various kinds 
of hell such as Avici. “Are reborn” is come to; come to 
birth therein is the meaning. 

In the opposite sense of what has been said is the bright side 
to be understood. This is distmctive: — there by “happy 
existence” is meant human existence, by “heaven” deva- 
existence. Of these, a beautiful career is a well-career (su- 
gati). Among material objects it is s^^re, the acme {su-agra 
s^agga), hence “ heaven.” Everything is the “ world ” in the 
sense of loosemng, dissolving (loJca),^ This is the meaning of 
terms. 

“ With deva-sight ” and so on — all this is epilogue. Thus 
herem is the meamng m brief of the expression, “ He sees 
with deva-sight.” 

“ The beginner, a clansman, who wishes to discern thus, 
should make the Jhana which has the devices for object, and 
IS the basis of higher knowledge, fit to be directed in all ways 
and bring any of the three devices: fire-device, white-device 
light-device [428] near [unto the production of the deva-eye]. 
Having made it the object of access- Jhana, he should increase 
it and place it. The meamng is, he should not produce it 
there [in the increased device-object] through ecstasy. For 
if he produces [ecstasy], it [the device-object] becomes the 
1 Read vivasd, * ^ Cf, &amyutta iv, 52. 



496 The Path of Purity 

support [or object] of the basic Jhana, not of the preparation/ 
Of the three, the hght-device is the best. Therefore, pro- 
ducing it or any of the others in the way described in the 
exposition of the devices, he should place it at access stage 
and increase it. And the way in which it is increased is to be 
understood as said in the above exposition. He should look 
at the material object within the place increased. If he looks 
at the object outside, the turn of the preparation slips by, 
consequently the light disappears when the object within is 
not’ visible. In that case he should enter again and again 
into the basic Jhana and, rising therefrom, difiuse light which 
in due course becomes firm. Light remains within that place 
which he has limited by saying Here let there be light.’’ 
The discernment of the object comes to him as he sits and looks 
the whole (fey. It is like a man who goes his way m the night 
by means of a torch of hay. 

They say that a man went on a road by means of a torch of 
hay. The torch went out, so that he could not see the places 
even and uneven. He rubbed the torch on the ground and 
lit it again. It blazed forth giving out more light than before. 
As he lit it again and again every time it went out, in due 
course the sun came out. When the sun rose up he threw 
away the torch which he needed no longer, and went about 
the whole day. In the simile the light of the torch is like the 
light of the device at the time of preparation. The inability 
to see the even and uneven places when the torch goes out is 
like the inability to see the object within, in the disappearance of 
the light, through the slipping by of the turn of the preparation 
as he looks at the object outside. The rubbing of the torch is 
like the repeated entermg into Jhana. The increased light of 
the torch is like the difiusion of the stronger light as he per- 
forms thQ preparation over again. The rising of the sun is 
like the appearance of the steady light within the space limited. 

' The going about the whole day after throwing away the torch 
is like the lookmg at the object the whole day by means of the 
steady light after renewmg the weaker light. When an object 
which is inside the belly, situated near the heart-basis, or beneath 


Read pankainnia^ . 



XIII . — Exposition of Higher Knowledge 497 

the earth’s surface, across a wall, mountain, rampart, or in some 
other world-system, and which is invisible to the monk^s fleshy 
eye, com^s [429] into the focus of his eye of knowledge, so that 
it is seen by his fleshy eye, then deva-sight.has come to pass* 
This alone is able to see the object, not so the preliminary 
risings of consciousness, ^ • 

It is, however, a danger to the average man. Why ? 
Because a mass of light appearmg through the earth, ocean, 
and mountains, at whatever place he has resolved upon, he is 
overcome by fear as he sees fearful forms such as ogresuand 
demons, with the result that he becomes distracted in mmd 
and mad through Jhana; therefore he should not be negligent 
in the matter of seeing objects. 

Here is the order in which deva-sight comes to pass. When 
representative cognition, dwelling on the aforesaid object, 
rises and ceases, four or five apperceptions dwelling on that 
object come into play — thus everythmg is to be understood 
as said above. Here also the preliminary risings of con- 
sciousness are connected with applied and sustained thinking 
and are of the realm of sense. The consciousness which has 
accomplished the purpose at the conclusion is connected with 
the Fourth Jhana, and is of the realm of form. The know- 
ledge which is co-existent with it is called both the knowledge 
of the fall and rise of beings and the knowledge of the deva- 
sight. 

The Discourse on Knowledge of Fall and Eise is ended. 


The Lord who knows the fivefold aggregate, 

He did five higher knowledges proclaim. 

When one has known them one should also know 
This that is called Particular Discourse. 

For of those, that deva-sight which is called knowledge of 
faU and rise has two others attending it, namely, knowledge 
of the future and knowledge of the passing away of beings 
according to their deeds. Those two and the five, beginning 
with the various kinds of psychical power, make seven kinds 
of higher knowledge which are here mentioned. 


32 



498 


Path of Purity 

Now in order that there may be no confusion in the classifica- 
tion of their objects. 

The mighty Sage has said the triplets four i 
Of mental objects. Let there now be shown 
Seven modes of knowing with respect to these. 

This is the setting forth: The great sage has indeed declared 
four object-triplets. Which are the four ? The limited- 
object-triplet, the sublime-object-triplet, the past-object- 
tripl^t, the internal-object-triplet. Of these, knowledge of 
the various kinds of psychic power proceeds in the seven 
objects by means of linaited, sublime, past, future, [430] 
present, internal, external, objects. How? Thus: — ^when a 
monk makes the body dependent on the mind and, desiring to 
go with aninvisible body, bends it by means of the mind, places 
it in, fixes it on to, the mind become sublime, then the body 
which has received this apphcation becomes the object. This 
is the limited ” object, the material body being the object. 
When he makes the mind dependent on the body and, desiring 
to go with a visible body, bends it by means of the body, 
places the basic Jhana-mind in, fixes it on to, the material 
body, then the mind which has received this application is the 
object. This is sublime ” object through the sublime mind 
being the object. And since he makes his object the same 
consciousness when it is past, has ceased, then it is “ past ” 
object. It had a future ” object when, for instance, Kassapa 
and other Elders resolved upon the future at the Mahadha- 
tunidhana.^ 

It is said namely that, in making a receptacle for the relics, 
Mahakassapa the Elder resolved thus: For two hundred and 
eighteen years to come, may these flavours not dry up, may 
these flowers not fade away, may these lamps not die out 
Everything came to pass. Assagutta the Elder on seeing the 
clergy at Vattaniya abode partaking of dry food, resolved thus : 
“ Every day before meals may the pool of water turn into 
the taste of curds.’^ And it had the taste of curds before the 
meal, an d became natural water again after the meal. 

^ Sumangala Vildsinl on DlgTia ii, 1C7. 



p) 

XIII , — Exposition of Higher Knowledge 499 

Again wten making the body dependent on the mind, he 
goes with an invisible body, the object is a present object. 
When h^ bends the mind by means of the body, or the body 
by means of the mind, and transforms himself into a boy, and 
so on, the object is ‘‘ personal ” (or internal), because he makes 
his own body and mind the object. When he shows -the 
external forms of an elephant, horse, and so on, the object is 
external.’’ Thus so far is the procedure of the knowledge 
of the various kinds of psychic power in the seven objects to 
be understood. ^ « 

Knowledge of deva-hearing proceed;? in four objects by 
means of limited, present, internaf, external, objects. How ? 
Because it makes sound the object, and sound is limited, 
therefore it has a limited object. Because it proceeds making 
an existing sound the object, it has a present object. When 
one hears a sound from within one’s belly, the object is internal. 
When one hears a sound made by others, the object is external. 
[431] Thus is the procedure of the knowledge of deva-hearmg 
in four objects to be understood. 

Emowledge encompassing others’ thoughts proceeds^ in 
eight objects by means of limited, sublime, unlimited, Path, 
past, future, present, external, objects. How ? When there 
is knowing the thoughts of others of the realm of sense, it has 
a limited object. When there is knowing thoughts of the 
realms of form and formless, it has a sublime object. When 
there is knowing the Path and Fruition, it has an unlimited 
object. Here an average man does not know the thoughts of 
a stream-winner, nor does a stream-winner know those of a 
once-returner, and so on to the saint. But a saint knows 
. the thoughts of all. And one who is of a higher stage knows 
the thoughts of one of a lower: — This is the special point to 
be understood. When Path-consciousness is the object, the 
Path is the object. But when within seven days id the past, 
and within seven days in the future, he knows others’ thoughts, 
then there is the past and the future as object. 

How about the present object ? The present is threefold; 
momentary present, continuous present, temporary present. 


^ ^avattati, , 



500 


The Path of Purity 

Of these that which has attained to genesis, stability and 
break-up is the momeutary present. That which is comprised 
in one or two intervals of continuity is the continuoi^ present. 
The interval during which an object does not appear to one 
who, having sat in darkness, goes out into the light, is to be 
Jc^bwn as one or.two intervals of continuity. The interval 
during which an object does not suddenly appear to one who, 
having roamed in the light, has entered an inner room is to 
be known as one or two intervals of continuity. The interval 
during which a man, having seen from a distance the move- 
ments of washermei^s hands and the striking of gongs and 
drums, does not hear the sound, is to be known as one or two 
intervals of continuity. So say the Majjhima reciters. 

But the Samyutta reciters, having spoken of two continuities : 
of matter amd of non-matter, define the continuity of matter 
as the interval during which a man having stepped into water 
and gone away, the streak of water stepped into on the bank 
does not disappear; the heat in the body of a man who has 
arrived from a journey does not subside; darkness does not 
depart when a man coming from the heat has entered a room; 
the quivering of the eyes does not stop when a man, attending 
to a subject of meditation in a room, opens the window in 
the day and looks out. Saying that two or three occasions 
of apperception are the continuity of non-matter, they say 
that both the continuities are called the piesent. 

[432] What is limited by one existence is called the tem- 
porary present. Concerning this it is said in the Bhaddekaratta 
Sutta: ^‘Friends, mind and things both are f resent. In that 
2 oresent is consciousness hound by lust of desire. Being hound 
by lust of desire, one tahes delight in that present. Taking, 
delight in that, one is drawn towards present things, Of these, 
the continuous present is mentioned in the Commentaries, 
the temporary present in the Sutta. {Majjhima iii, 197.) ** 

Here some say that consciousness of the momentary present 
is the object of knowledge encompassing others’ thoughts. 
Hor what reason ? For the reason that consciousness arises 
simultaneously in the possessor of psychic power and the other 
man. And this is the.ir simile: As .when a handful of flowers 



XIII. — Exposition of Higher Knowledge 501 

is thrown into the sky, one flower undoubtedly hits another, 
stalk to stalk, so, on adverting to the minds of the milltitude 
as a gro^!^p, thinking: I will know the mind of another,.’^ 
undoubtedly the mind of one penetrates another’s at the genetic 
moment or the static moment or the moment of. break-up. 
This view is rejected in the Commentaries tht^^: Even thougJi, 
a man were to attend for a hundred years, a thousand years, 
there is no simultaneity between the thought with which he 
attends and the thought with which he comes to know. And 
this adverting and apperception follow various objects -in 
undesirable places. Therefore it is no^ p9^er.” 

But it should be considered that the continuous present as 
well as the temporary present is the object. Of these another 
man’s consciousness which arises at a time measured by two 
or three processes of apperception before or after the present 
moment of apperception, is all known as the continuous present. 
But the temporary present is to be shown by the occasion of 
apperception. So it is said in the Samyutta Commentary, 
and it is well said. Herein is the explanation. 

The possessor of psychic power wishing to know another’s 
mind attends to it. The attending makes the momentary 
present its object, and together with it, ceases. Then four 
or five apperceptions arise, the last of which is the psychic 
mmd, the rest being of the realm of sense, of all of them the 
same mind (of another) which has ceased, is the object. The 
other risings of consciousness (their psychic consciousness) 
do not have various objects because they have the present for 
object by way of time. In having one object, the psychic 
mind knows another’s mind, but the others do not do so in the 
way that visual cognition sees an object at the eye-door. 
Thus the higher knowledge of others’ thoughts has a present 
object by way of the continuous present and temporary present. 
[453] Or, because the continuous present falls into the tem- 
porary present, therefore it has a present object by way^of 
the temporary present. And it has an external object because 
it has another’s mind for object. Thus is the procedure of 
knowledge encompassing others’ thoughts in the eight objects 
to be understood. 



502 


The Path of. Purity 

Knowledge of previous existences proceeds in eight objects 
by way of limited, sublime, unlimited, Path, past, internal, 
external, conceptual, objects. How ? ^S\^en it recalls aggre- 
gates of the realm of sense, it has a limited object. When it 
recalls aggregates of the realms of form and formless, it has a 
.^blime object. ^ When it recalls the Path developed, the 
Fruition realized, by oneself or others in tjie past, it has an 
unlimited object. When it recalls the developed Path, it has 
the Path for object. Herein, although knowledges encompass- 
ing cpthers’ tho’.^ghts, and those on the passing on of beings 
according to thek^eds have past objects, the first kind of 
knowledge has for object consciousness which is passed within 
seven days. For it does not know another aggregate or some- 
thing connected with the aggregates. It is said figuratively 
to have the Path for object since the object is consciousness 
associated with the Path. Past volition only is the object in 
knowledge of the passing on of beings according to their deeds. 
But there is no past aggregate or something connected with 
aggregate which is not the object of knowledge of previous 
existences. Indeed it has a similar course to omniscient 
knowledge regardiug past aggregates and states connected 
with aggregates. Thus this special point is to be understood. 
This is the method of the Commentaries. 

But since it is said in the Patthana: Moral aggregates 
are the cause hy way of object-relation of knowledge of the various 
kinds of psychic power, of knowledge penetrating others" thoughts, 
of knowledge recalling previous existences, of knowledge of the 
passing away of beings according to their deeds, of knowledge of 
the future,""^ therefore the four aggregates also are the object 
of knowledge penetrating others’ thoughts, and knowledge the 
passing away of beings according to their deeds. 

And here moral and immoral aggregates are the object of 
knowledge of the passing away of beings according to their 
d^eds. When it recalls one’s own aggregates, it has an internal 
object. When it recalls name, family, earth, signs, and so on, 
in such way as: In past times Vipassin was the Blessed One. 
His mother was Bandhumati, father Bandhumat,” the object 


\ TtkdpaUhdm ij, p. 154. 



503 


XIII . — Exposition of Higlj^ex Knowledge 

IS conceptual. Here name and family should be regarded as 
the meaning of the letter connected with the aggregate and 
accomplished by convention, not the letter itself. For tljp 
letter being comprised under the organ of sound [434] is limited. 
As has been said: The analysis of etymology has a limited 
object.’’^ This is the view we favour. Thus is the procedil^ 
of knowledge of previous existences in eight objects to be 
understood. 

Knowledge by the deva-sight proceeds in four objects by 
way of limited, present, internal, externaj^jj^^ects. I^w ? 
Because it makes a material thing ij^gj^i^jJect and matter is 
limited, therefore it has a limited bbject. From proceeding 
in an existing material thing, it has a pi^sent object. When 
it discerns something inside one’s belly, and so on, the object 
is internal. When it discerns the material form gf another, 
the object is external. Thus is the procedure of knowledge 
by the deva-sight in four objects to be understood. 

Knowledge of the future proceeds in eight objects by way of 
limited, sublime, unlimited. Path, future, internal, external, 
conceptual, objects. How ? When it knows: This one will 
be born in the future in the realm of sense,” the object is 
limited. When it knows: He will be born in the realm of 
form or formless,” the object is sublime. When it knows: 
^^He will develop the Path, realize the fruit,” the object is 
unlimited. When it knows: ‘‘ He will develop the Path,” the 
Path is the object. But regularly it has a future object. 
Although knowledge penetrating others’ thoughts has a future 
object, its object is consciousness within seven days in the 
future. For it does not know another aggregate or something 
connected therewith. As said under knowledge of previous 
oxistences, there is nothing in the future which is not the 
object of knowledge of the future. When it knows: I shall 
be' bom at such and such a place,” the object is ‘internal. 
WTien it knows: Such and such an one will be born m such 
and such a place,” the object is external. As said under know- 
ledge of previous existences, when it knows name, family, in 
such wise as: In the future, Metteyya the Blessed will arise. 


^ Yjib'hanga 304. 



504 


ih^Path of ^Purity 

Subraima will be Ms brahmin father, Brahmavati his brah- 
mani ifLother/’ the object is conceptual. Thus is the procedure 
knowledge of the future in eight objects to be understood. 
Knowledge of the passing away of beings according to their 
;de^'ds 5 pr^ciieds in five objects by way of limited, sublime, 
jipfet, tnternal,,, external, objects. How? When it knows 
‘deeds of the realm of sense, the object is limited. [435] When 
it knows deeds of the realms of form and formless, the object 
is sublime. He knows the past; thus the object is past. 

it kno'wiii^lg^s own deeds, the object is internal. When 
it knows^ anothers^d^ds, the object is external. Thus is 
the procedure of knowledge of the passing away of beings- 
according to their deeds in five objects to be understood. And 
here, as regards the statement ‘'internal object and external 
object,” when it knows sometimes the internal' sometimes the 
external, the object is internal-external. 

Thus is ended the Thirteenth Chapter called the Exposition 
of Higher Knowledge in the Path of Purity composed for the 
purpose of gladdening good folk. 


^ jdnanahdle for 



