================================================================================
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA: ESSAYS AND ADDRESSES ON THE SHAKTA TANTRASHASTRA (3RD ED., 1929)
By Sir John Woodroffe (Arthur Avalon)
Madras: Ganesh & Co. / London: Luzac & Co., 1929.
Extracted Text of Key Chapters for Philological and Tantric Research:
- Chapter XXIV: Shakti as Mantra (The Shabda Theory, pp. 452–483)
- Chapter XXV: Varnamala (The Garland of Letters, pp. 484–489)
- Chapter XXVI: Shakta Sadhana (The Ordinary Ritual: The Guru, Shishya, Diksha, Adhikara, pp. 490–552)
- Chapter XXVIII: Matam Rutra (The Right and Wrong Interpretation: The Guru Rebellion Myth, pp. 608–631)
- Chapter XXIX: Kundalini Shakti (Yoga, pp. 632–658)
================================================================================


=== PDF PAGE 510 (BOOK PAGE ~491) ===
SHAKTA SADHANA

(Kaulikottama) who, having surpassed all ritualism, medi-
tates upon the Universal Self. These are more particularly
described in the next Chapter.

Until a Sadhaka is Siddha all Sadhané is or should be
undertaken with the authority and under the direction of a
Guru or Spiritual Teacher and Director. There is in
reality but one Guru and that is the Lord (Ishvara) Himself.
He is the Supreme Guru as also is Devi His Power, one
with Himself. But he acts through man and human means.
The ordinary human Guru is but the manifestation on earth
of the Adi-natha Mahak@la and Mahakalt the Supreme
Guru abiding in Kailésa. As the Yogint Tantra (Ch. 1)
says Guroh sthénam hi kaildsam. He it is who is in, and
speaks with the voice of, the Earthly Guru. So, to turn
to an analogy in the West, it is Christ who speaks in the
voice of the Pontifex Maximus when declaring faith and
morals, and in the voice of the priest who confers upon the
penitent absolution for his sins. It is not the man who
speaks in either case but God through him. It is the Guru
who initiates and helps, and the relationship between him and
the disciple (Shishya) continues until the attainment of
spiritual Siddhi. It is only from him that Sadhané and
Yoga are learnt and not (as it is commonly said) from a
thousand Shastras. As the Shatkarmadipiké says, mere
book-knowledge is useless.

Pustake likhitd vidyd yena sundari japyate

Siddhir na jdyate tasya kalpakoti-shatair api.

(O Beauteous one! he who does Japa of a Vidya
==Mantra) learnt from a book can never attain Siddhi
even if he persists for countless millions of years.)

Manu therefore says, “of him who gives natural birth,
and of him who gives knowledge of the Veda, the giver of
sacred knowledge is the more, venerable father.” The
Tantra Shastras also are full of the greatness of the Guru.
He is not to be thought of as a mere man. There is no
difference between Guru, Mantra and Deva. Guru is father,

491


=== PDF PAGE 511 (BOOK PAGE ~492) ===
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

mother and Brahman. Guru, it is said, can save from the
wrath of Shiva, but inno way can one be saved from the wrath
of the Guru. Attached to this greatness there is, however,
responsibility ; for the sins of the disciple may recoil upon
him. The Tantra Shastras deal with the high qualities
which are demanded of a Guru and the good qualities which
are to be looked for in an intending disciple (see for instance
Tantraséra, Ch. I), Before initiation, the Guru examines
and tests the intending disciple for a specified period. The
latter’s moral qualifications are purity of soul (Shuddhatma),
control of the senses (Jitendriya), the following of the
Purushartha or aims of all sentient being (Purushdrtha-
parayana). Amongst others, those who are lewd (K&muka),
adulterous {Para-daratura), addicted to sin, ignorant, sloth-
ful and devoid of religion should be rejected (see Matsya-
sikta Tantra, XIII, Pranatoshini 108, Maharudrayamala,
I, XV, II. ii, Kularnava Tantra Ch. XIII). The good
Sadhaka who is entitled to the knowledge of all Shastra is
he who is pure-minded, self-controlled, ever engaged in
doing good to all beings, free from false notions of dualism
attached to the speaking of, taking shelter with and ever
living in the consciousness of, the supreme Brahman
(Gandharva Tantra, Ch. ii).

All orthodox Hindus of all divisions of worshippers
submit themselves to the direction of a Guru. The latter
initiates. The Vaidik initiation into the twice-born classes
is by the Upanayana. This is for the first three castes
only, viz., Brahmana (priesthood and teaching), Kshatriya
(warrior), Vaishya (merchant). All are (it is said) by birth,
Shidra (Janman& jdyate Shudrah) and by sacrament (that
is, the Upanayana ceremony) twice-born. By study of the
Vedas one is a Vipra. And he who has knowledge of the
Brahman is a Brahmana (Brahma janati brahmanah).
From this well-known verse it will be seen how few there
really are who are entitled to the noble name of Brahmana.
The ‘Tantrik Mantra-initiation is a different ceremony and

492


=== PDF PAGE 512 (BOOK PAGE ~493) ===
SHAKTA SADHANA

is for all castes. Initiation (Diksh4) is the giving of Mantra
by the Guru. The latter should first establish the life of
the Guru in his own body; that is the vital power (Prana-
shakti) of the Supreme Guru in the thousand-petalled lotus
(Sahasrara). He then transmits it to the disciple. As an
image is the instrument (Yantra) in which Divinity (Devatva)
inheres, so also is the body of the Guru. The candidate is
prepared for initiation, fasts and lives chastely. Initiation
(which follows) gives spiritual knowledge and destroys sin.
As one lamp is lit at the flame of another, so the divine
Shakti consisting of Mantra is communicated from the
Guru’s body to that of the Shishya. I need not be always
repeating that this is the theory and ideal, which to-day is
generally remote from the fact. The Supreme Guru speaks
with the voice of the earthly Guru at the time of giving
Mantra. As the Yogini Tantra (Ch. I) says :—

Manitra-pradéna-kéle hi manushe Naganandini
Adhishthanam bhavet tatra Mahdkdlasya Shankari
Ato na gurutd devi maénushe ndtra samshayah.

(At the time the Mantra is communicated, there is
in man (i.e. Guru) the Presence of Mahakala. There is
no doubt that man is not the Guru.) Guru is the root
(Mila) of initiation (Dikshé). Diksha is the root of
Mantra. Mantra is the root of Devaté, and Devata is
the root of Siddhi. The Mundamalé Tantra says that
Mantra is born of Guru, and Devaté of Mantra, so that
the Guru is in the position of Father’s Father to the Ishta-
devaté. Without initiation, Japa (recitation) of the Mantra,
Paéja, and other ritual acts are useless. The Mantra chosen
for the candidate must be suitable (Anukila). Whether a
Mantra is Svakula or Akula to the person about to be
initiated is ascertained by the Kulékulachakra, the zodiacal
circle called Rashichakra and other Chakras which may be
found in the Tantraséra. Initiation by a woman is efficaci-
ous ; that by the mother is eightfold so (ib.). For, according

493


=== PDF PAGE 513 (BOOK PAGE ~494) ===
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

to the Tantra Shastra, a woman with the necessary qualifi-
cations, may be a Guru and give initiation. The Kulagurus
are four in number, each of them being the Guru of the
preceding ones. There are also three lines of Gurus (see
Mahfnirvana, Ed. A. Avalon, p. 111, n. 10; p. 120, n. 3).

So long as the Shakti communicated by a Guru to his
disciple is not fully developed, the relation of Teacher and
Director and Disciple exists. A man is Shishya so long as
he is SAdhaka. When, however, Siddhi is attained, Guru and
Shishya, as also all other dualisms, and relations, disappear.
Besides the preliminary initiation, there are a number of
other initiations or consecrations (Abhisheka) which mark
greater and greater degrees of advance from Shaktabhi-
sheka when entrance is made on the path of Shikta SAadhan&
to Pfarnadikshabhisheka and Mahapirnadikshabhisheka also
called Viraja-grahanabhisheka. On the attainment of per-
fection in the last grade the Sadhaka performs his own funeral
tite (Shriddha), makes Pirnahuti with his sacred thread
and crown lock. The relation of Guru and Shishya now
ceases. From this point he ascends by himself until he
realizes the great saying So’ham “He I am”, Sa’ham “She
Iam”. Now he is Jivan-mukta and Paramahamsa.

The word Sadhana comes from the root Sddh, to exert
or strive, and Sadhané is therefore striving, practice, disci-
pline and worship in order to obtain success or Siddhi, which
may be of any of the kinds, worldly or spiritual, desired, but
which, on the religious side of the Shastras, means spiritual
advancement with its fruit of happiness in this world and
in Heaven and at length Liberation (Moksha). He who
practises Sédhana is (if a man) called Sadhaka or (if a
woman) Sadhiké. But men vary in capacity, temperament,
knowledge and general advancement, and therefore the means
(for Sadhana also means instrument) by which they are to
be led to Siddhi must vary. Methods which are: suitable
for highly advanced men will fail as regards the ignorant
and undeveloped for they cannot understand them. What

494


=== PDF PAGE 514 (BOOK PAGE ~495) ===
SHAKTA SADHANA

suits the latter has been long out-passed by the former.
At least that is the Hindu view. It is called Adhikara or
competency. Thus some few men are competent (Adhikart)
to study Vedanta and to follow high mental rituals and
Yoga processes. Others are not. Some are grown-up
children and must be dealt with as such. As all men, and
indeed all beings, are, as to their psychical and physical
bodies, made of the primordial substance Prakriti-shakti
(Prakrityatmaka), as Prakriti is Herself the three Gunas,
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, and as all things and beings are
composed of these three Gunas in varying proportions, it
follows that men are divisible into three general classes,
namely, those in which the Sattva, Rajas, and Tamas Gunas,
predominate respectively. There are, of course, degrees in
each of these three classes. Amongst Sattvika men, in
whom Sattva predominates, some are more and some ‘less
Sattvika than others and so on with the rest. These three
classes of temperament (Bhava) are known in the Shakta
Tantras as the Divine (Divyabhava), Heroic (Virabhava)
and Animal (Pashubhéva) temperaments respectively.
Bhava is defined as a property or quality (Dharma) of the
Manas or mind (Pranatoshinf, 570). The Divyabhava is
that in which Sattva-guna predominates only, because it
is to be noted that none of the Gunas are, or ever can be,
absent. Prakriti cannot be partitioned. Prakriti is the
three Gunas. Sattva is essentially the spiritual Guna, for
it is that which manifests Spirit or Pure Consciousness (Chit).
A Sattvika man is thus a spiritual man. His is a calm,
pure, equable, refined, wise, spiritual temperament, free of
materiality and of passion, or he possesses these qualities
imperfectly, and to the degree that he possesses them he is
Sattvik. Pashubhava is, on the other hand, the tempera-
ment of the man in whom Tamas guna prevails and produces
such dark characteristics as ignorance, error, apathy; sloth
and so forth. He is called a Pashu or animal because Tanias
predominates in the merely animal nature as compared with

495


=== PDF PAGE 515 (BOOK PAGE ~496) ===
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

the disposition of spiritually-minded men. He is also Pashu
because he is bound by the bonds (Pasha). The term Pasha
comes from the root Pash to bind. The Kularnava enume-
tates eight bonds, namely, pity (Daya, of the type which
Taoists call “inferior benevolence” as opposed to the divine
compassion or Karun), ignorance and delusion (Moha), fear
(Bhaya), shame (Lajjé), disgust (Ghrin4), family (Kula),
habit and observance (Shila), and caste (Varna). Other
larger enumerations are given. The Pashu is the man
caught by the world, in ignorance and bondage. Bhaskara-
raya, on the Siitra “have no converse with a Pashu”, says
that a Pashu is Bahirmukha or outward looking, seeing the
outside only of things and not inner realities. The injunc-
tion, he says, only applies to converse as regards things
spiritual.

_ -The Shaiva Shastra speaks of three classes of Pashu,
namely, Sakala bound by the three Pashas, Anu, Bheda,
Karma, that is, limited knowledge, the seeing of the one
Self, as many by the operation of May&, and action and
its product. These are the three impurities (Mala) called
Anavamala, Mayamala, and Karmamala. The Sakala’ Jiva
or Pashu is bound by all three, the Pralayakala by the first
and last, and the Vijnanakala by the first only. (See as to
these the diagram of the 36 Tattvas.) He who is wholly
freed of the remaining impurity of Anu is Shiva Himself,
Here however Pashu is used in a different sense, that is, as
denoting the creature as contrasted with the Lord (Pati).
In this sense, Pashu is a name for all men. In the Shakta
use of the term, thoughell men are certainly Pashu, as com-
pared with the Lord, yet as between themselves one may be
Pashu (in the narrower sense above stated) and the other
not. Some men are more Pashu than others. It is a mis-
take to suppose that the Pashu is necessarily a bad man.
He may be and often is a good one. He is certainly better
than a bad Vira who is really no Vira at all. He is, however,
not, according to this Shastra, an enlightened man in the

496,


=== PDF PAGE 516 (BOOK PAGE ~497) ===
SHAKTA SADHANA

sense that the Vira or Divya is, and he is generally marked
by various degrees of ignorance and material-mindedness,
It is the mark of a bad Pashu to be given over to gross acts
of sin. Between these two comes the Hero or Vira of whose
temperament (Virabhfva) so much is heard in the Shakta
Shastras. In him there is prevalent the strongly active
Rajas Guna. Rajas is always active either to incite Tamas
or Sattva. In the former case the result isa Pashu, in the
latter case either a Vira or Divya. Where Sattva approaches
perfection of development there is the Divyabhava. Sattva
is here firmly established in calm and in high degree. But,
until such time, and whilst man who has largely liberated
himself through knowledge of the influence of Tamas, is
active to promote Sattva, he is a Vira. Being heroic, he is
permitted to meet his enemy Tamas face to face, counter-
attacking where the lower developed man flees away. It
has been pointed out by Dr. Garbe (Philosophy of Ancient
India, 481), as before him by Baur, that the analogous Gnostic
classification of men as material, psychical, and spiritual
also corresponds (as does this) to the three Gunas of the
Safikhya Darshana.

Even in its limited Shakta sense, there are degrees of
Pashu, one man being more so than another. The Pashas
are the creations of May& Shakti. The Devi therefore is
pictured as bearing them. But as She is in Her form as
Maya and Avidya Shakti the cause of bondage, so as Vidya
Shakti She breaks the bonds (Pashupfsha-Vimochini) (see
vy. 78, Lalitésahasranéma), and is thus the Liberatrix of the
Pashu from his bondage.

Nitya Tantra says that the Bhava of the Divya is the
best, the Vira the next best, and Pashu the lowest. In fact,
the state of the last is the starting point in Sadhan4, that of
the first the goal, and that of the Vira is the stage of one
who having ceased to be a Pashu is on the way to the attain-
ment of the goal. From being a Pashu, @ man rises in this
or some other birth to be a Vira and Divyabhava or

497


=== PDF PAGE 472 (BOOK PAGE ~453) ===
SHAKTI AS MANTRA

lakhs of “real”? Rupees for those who have sent it. Mantra-
vidya, whether it be true or not, is a profoundly conceived
science, and, as interpreted by the Shakta Agama, is a
practical application of Vedantic doctrine.

The textual source of Mantras is to be found in the
Vedas (see in particular the Mantra portion of the Atharva-
veda so associated with the Tantra Shastra), the Puranas
and Tantras. The latter Scripture is essentially the Mantra-
Sh&stra. In fact it is so called generally by Sadhakas and
not Tantra Shastra. And so it is said of all the Shastras,
symbolized as a body, that Tantra Shastra which consists of
Mantra is the Paramatmé, the Vedas are the Jivatmé,
Darshana or systems of philosophy are the senses, Puranas
are the body and the Smritis are the limbs. Tantra Shastra
is thus the Shakti of Consciousness consisting of Mantra.
For, as the Vishvaséra Tantra (Ch. 2) says, the Parabrahman
in Its form as the Sound Brahman (Shabda-Brahman or
Saguna-Brahman), whose substance is all Mantra, exists
in the body of the Jivatma. Kundalini Shakti is a form of
the Shabda-Brahman in individual bodies (Sharada-Tilaka,
Ch. 1). Itis from this Shabda-Brahman that the whole
universe proceeds in the form of sound (Shabda) and the
objects (Artha) which sound or words denote. And this is
the meaning of the statement that the Devi and the Universe
are composed of letters, that is, the signs for the sounds
which denote all that is. ;

At any point in the flow of phenomena, we can enter.
the stream, and realize therein the changeless Real. The
latter is everywhere and in all things, and is hidden in, and
manifested by, sound as by all else. Any form (and all
which is not the Formless is that) can be pierced by the
mind, and union may be had therein with the Devat&é who
is at its core. It matters not what that form may be. And
why? What I have said concerning Shakti gives the
answer. Allis Shakti. All is Consciousness. We desire to
think and speak. This is Ichchhé Shakti. We make an

453


=== PDF PAGE 473 (BOOK PAGE ~454) ===
SHAKTL AND SHAKTA

effort “towards realization. This is Kriya Shakti. We
think and know. This is Jnana Shakti. Through Prana-
vayu,. another.form of Shakti, we speak ; and the word we
utter is Shakti Mantramayi. For what is a letter (Varna)
which is made into syllable. (Pada) and sentences (Vakya) ?
It may be heard in speech, thus affecting the sense of hear-
ing. It may be seen as a form in writing. It may be tactu-
ally sensed by the blind through the perforated dots of
Braille type. The same thing thus affecting the various
senses. But what is the thing which does so? The senses
are Shakti, and so is the objective form which evokes the
sensation. Both are in themselves Shakti as Chit, Shakti
and Mayé Shakti, and the Svaripa of these is Chit, or
Feeling-Consciousness. When, therefore, a Mantra is real-
ized ; when there is what is called in the Shastra Mantra-
Chaitanya, what happens is the union of the consciousness
of the Sadhaka with that Consciousness which manifests
in the form of the Mantra. It is this union which makes
the Mantra “work”.

_ The subject is of such importance in the Tantras that
their other name is Mantra Shastra. But what is a Mantra ?
Commonly Orientalists and others describe Mantra as
“Prayer,” “Formule of worship,” “Mystic syllables” and
so forth. These are but the superficialities of those who do
not know their subject. Wherever we find the word
“Mystic”, we may be on our guard : for it is a word which
covers much ignorance. Thus Mantra is said to be a
“mystic” word ; Yantra a “mystic” diagram, and Mudra
a “mystic” gesture, But have these definitions taught us
anything? No, nothing. Those who framed these defi-
nitions knew nothing of their subject. And yet, whilst I
am aware of no work in any European language which
shows a knowledge of what Mantra is or of its science (Mantra-
vidya), there -is nevertheless perhaps no subject which
has been so ridiculed ; a not unusual attitude of ignorance.
There is a widely diffused lower mind which says, “what I

454


=== PDF PAGE 474 (BOOK PAGE ~455) ===
SHAKTI AS MANTRA

do not understand is absurd”. But this science, whether
well-founded or not, is not that. Those who so think might
expect Mantras which are prayers and the meaning of which
they understand ; for with prayer the whole world is familiar.
But such appreciation itself displays a lack of understanding.
For there is nothing necessarily holy or prayerful alone in
-Mantras as some think. Some combinations of letters
constitute prayers and are called Mantras, as for instance
the most celebrated Gayatri Mantra.

A Mantra is not the same thing as prayer or self-
dedication (Atma-nivedana). Prayer is conveyed in the
words the Sédhaka chooses. Any set of words or letters is
not a Mantra. Only that Mantra in which the Devata
has revealed His or Her particular aspects can reveal that
aspect, and is therefore the Mantra of that one of His or
Her particular aspects. The relations of the letters (Varna),
whether vowel or consonant, Nada and Bindu, in a Mantra
indicate the appearance of Devata in different forms. Cer-
tain Vibhiti or aspects of the Devata are inherent in certain
Varna, but perfect Shakti does not appear in any but a whole
Mantra. All letters are forms of the Shabda-Brahman, but
only particular combinations of letters are a particular form,
just as the name of a particular being is made up of certain
letters and not of any indiscriminately. The whole universe
is Shakti and is pervaded by Shakti. Nada, Bindu, Varna
are all forms of Shakti and combinations of these, and these
combinations only are the Shabda corresponding to the Artha
or forms of any particular Devaté. The gross lettered sound
is, as explained later, the manifestation of sound in a more
subtle form, and this again is the production of causal “sound”
in its supreme (Para) form. Mantras are manifestations of
Kulakundalint (see Chapter on the same) which is a name
for the Shabda-Brahman or Saguna-Brahman in individual
bodies, Produced Shabda js an aspect of the Jiva’s vital
Shakti. Kundalf is. the Shakti who gives life to the Jiva.
She it is who in the M@ladhara Chakra (or basal bodily

455


=== PDF PAGE 475 (BOOK PAGE ~456) ===
SHAKTI AND ‘SHAKTA

centre) is the cause of the sweet, indistinct and murmuring
Dhvani which is compared to the humming of a black bee.
Thence Shabda originates and, being first Para, gradually
‘manifests upwards as Pashyanti, Madhyama, Vaikhart (see
<post.) Just as in outer space, waves of sound are produced
by movements of air (Vayu), so in the space within the
Jiva’s body, waves of sound are said to be produced accord-
ing to the movements of the vital air (Priéna-vayu) and
the process of in and out breathing. As the Svardpa of
Kundalf, in whom are all sounds, is Paramatm&, so the
substance of all Mantra, Her manifestation, is Consciousness
(Chit) manifesting as letters and words. In fact the letters
of the Alphabet which are called Akshara are nothing but
the Yantra of the Akshara or Imperishable Brahman. This
is however only realized by the Sadhaka, when his Shakti
generated by Sadhané is united with Mantra-Shakti.
Kundalini, who is extremely subtle, manifests in gross
(Sthila) form in differing aspects as different Devatis. It
is this gross form which is the Presiding Deity (Adishthatri
Devata) of a Mantra, though it is the subtle (Sikshma) form
at which all Sadhakas aim. Mantra and Devata are thus one
and particular forms of Brahman as Shiva-Shakti. There-
fore the Shastra says that they go to Hell who think that the
Image (or “Idol” as it is commonly called) is but a stone and
the Mantra merely letters of the alphabet. It is therefore
also ignorance of ShAstric principle which supposes that
Mantra is merely the name for the words in which one ex-
presses what one has to say to the Divinity. If it were,
the Sadhaka might choose his own language without recourse
to the eternal and determined sounds of Shastra. (See gene-
rally as to the above the Chapter on Mantra-tattva in second
volume of “Principles of Tantra,” Ed. A. Avalon.) The
particular Mantra of a Devaté is that Devata. A Mantra,
on the contrary, consists of certain letters arranged in definite
sequence of sounds of which the letters are the representative
signs. To produce the designed effect, the Mantra must be


=== PDF PAGE 480 (BOOK PAGE ~461) ===
SHAKTI AS MANTRA

the Sadhaka worshipping the Devi with Hrim, by that Bija
calls to mind the transcendent Shakti who is the causal body
of the subtle and gross bodies of all existing things. Shrim
(see Barada Tantra) is used in the worship of Lakshmi Devi.
Sh=Mahalakshmi, R=Wealth (Dhanartham) which as well
as I=(eatisfaction or Tushtyartham) She gives. Krim is
used in the worship of Kali. Ka—Ka&lf (Shakti worshipped
for relief from the world and its sorrows). R—Brahma
(Shiva with whom She is ever associated). I=Mahamaya
(Her aspect in which She overcomes for the Sadhaka the
Maya in which as Creatrix She has involved him). “Aim” is
used in the worship of Sarasvati and is Vaghhava Biya. Dim
is used in the worship of Durgé. D=Durg&. U=protection.
Nada—Her aspect as Mother of the Universe, and Bindu
is its Lord. The Sadhaka asks Durga as Mother-Lord to
protect, him, and looks on Her in Her protecting aspect as
upholder of the universe (Jagaddhatri). In “Strim,” S=
saving from difficulty. T—deliverer. R=(here) liberation
(Muktyartho repha ukto’tra). I=Mahamaya. Bindu=Dis-
peller of grief. N&ada—Mother of the Universe. She as
the Lord is the dispeller of Maya and the sorrows it produces,
the Saviour and deliverer from all difficulties by grant of
liberation. I have dealt elsewhere (“Serpent Power’’)
with Hum and Him the former of which is called Varma
(armour) Bija and the latter Karcha, H denoting Shiva in
“4”, His Bhairava or formidable aspect (see generally
Vol. I, Tantrik Texts. Tantrabhidhana). He is an armour
to the Sidhaka by His destruction of evil. Phat is the
weapon or guarding Mantra used with Hum, just as Svaha
(the Shakti of Fire), is used with Vashat, in making offerings.
The primary Mantra of a Devata is called Mila-mantra.
Mantras are solar (Saura) and masculine, and lunar (Saumya)
and feminine, as also neuter. If it be asked why things
of mind are given sex, the answer is for the sake of the
requirements of the worshipper. The masculine and neuter
forms are called specifically Mantra and the feminine Vidya,

46


=== PDF PAGE 481 (BOOK PAGE ~462) ===
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

though the first term may be used for both. Neuter Mantras
end with Namah. Hum, Phat are masculine terminations,
and “Tham” or Sv&ha, feminine (see Sh&radatilaka II.
N&radapancharatra VII, Prayogasara, Pranatoshint 70).

The Nitya Tantra gives various names to Mantra
according to the number of the syllables such as Pinda,
Kartari, Bija, Mantra, Mala. Commonly however the term
Bija is applied to monosyllabic Mantras.

The word “ Mantra” comes from the root “man” to
think. “Man” is the first syllable of manana or thinking.
It is also the root of the word “Man” who alone of all
creation is properly a Thinker. “Tra” comes from the
root “tra,” for the effect of a Mantra when used with that
end, is to save him who utters and realizes it. Tra is the
first syllable of Trdna or liberation from the Samsara.
By combination of man and tra, that is called Mantra which,
from the religious stand-point, calls forth (Amantrana)
the four aims (Chaturvarga) of sentient being as happiness
in the world and eternal: bliss in Liberation. Mantra is
thus Thought-movement vehicled by, and expressed in,
speech. Its Svariipa is, like all else, consciousness (Chit)
which is the Shabda-Brahman. A Mantra is not merely
sound or letters. This is a form in which Shakti manifests
Herself. The mere utterance of a Mantra without knowing
its meaning, without realization of the consciousness which
Mantra manifests is a mere movement of the lips and nothing
else. We are then in the outer husk of consciousness ;
just as we are when we identify ourselves with any other
form of gross matter which is, as it were, the “crust” (as
a friend of mine has aptly called it) of those subtler forces
which emerge from the Yoni or Cause of all, who is, in Herself
Consciousness (Chidrapini). When the Sadhaka knows the
meaning of the Mantra he makes an advance. But this is
not, enough. He must, through his consciousness, realize
that Consciousness which appears in the form of the Mantra,
and thus attain Mantra-Chaitanya, At this point, thought

462


=== PDF PAGE 627 (BOOK PAGE ~608) ===
Cuapter XXVIII. .

MATAM RUTRA.
(Tae Ricut anp Wrone INTERPRETATION.)
iw connection with the doctrine and Sadhana just describ-
ed it is apposite to cite the following legend from Tibet,
which shows how, according to its Sadhakas, it may be
either rightly or wrongly interpreted, and how, in the latter
case, it leads to terrible evils and their punishment.

Guru Padma-sambhava, the so-called founder of
“Lamaism,” had five women disciples who compiled several
accounts of the teachings of their Master and hid them in
various places for the benefit of future believers. One of
these disciples—Khandro Yeshe Tsogyal—was a Tibetan
lady who is said to have possessed such a wonderful power
of memory that if she was told a thing only once she re-
membered it for ever. She gathered what she had heard
from her Guru into a book called the Padma Thangyig
Serteng or Golden Rosary of the history of her Guru who was
entitled the Lotus-born (Padma-sambhava). The book
was hidden away and was subsequently, under inspiration,
revealed some five hundred years ago by a Terton.

The first Chapter of the Work deals with Sukhavati, the
realm of Buddha Amitaébha. In the second the Buddha
emanates a ray which is incarnated for the welfare of the
Universe. In Chapter III it is said that there have been a
Buddha and a Guru working together in various worlds and
at various times, the former preaching the Sfitras’ and the
latter the Tantras. The fourth Chapter speaks of the
Mantras and the five Dhyani Buddhas (as to which see Shri-
chakra-sambhara Tantra in Tantrik Texts, edited by Arthur
Avalon), and in the fifth we find the subject of the present
Chapter, an account of the origin of the Vajrayana Faith.
The present Chapter is based on a translation, which I asked

608


=== PDF PAGE 628 (BOOK PAGE ~609) ===
“MATAM RUTRA

Kazi Dawasamdup to prepare for me, of portions of the
Thangyig Serteng. I have further had, and here acknow-
ledge, the assistance of the very learned Lama Ugyen Tanzin,
in the elucidation of the inner meaning of the legend. I
cannot go fully into this but give certain indications which
will enable the competent to work out much of the rest for
themselves from the terrible symbolism in n which evil for
evil’s sake is here expressed.

The story is that of the rise and fall of the Self. The
disciple “Transcendent Faith” who became the Bodhisattva
Vajrapani illustrates the former ; the case of “ Black Salva-
tion” who incarnated as a Demoniac Rutra displays the
latter. He was no ordinary man, for at the time of his
initiation he had already attained eight out of the thirteen
stages (Bhimika) on the way to perfect Buddhahood. His
powers were correspondingly great. But the higher the rise
the greater the fall if it comes. Through misunderstanding
and misapplying, as so many others have done, the Tantrik
doctrine, he “fell back” into Hell. Extraordinary men
who were teachers of recondite doctrines such as those of
Thubka, who was himself “hard to overcome’’, seem not
to have failed to warn lesser brethren against their dangers.
It is commonly said in Tibet of the so-called “heroic” modes
of extremist Yoga, that they waft the disciple with the ut-
most speed either to the heights of Nirvana or to the depths
of Hell. For the aspirant is compared to a snake which is
made to go up a hollow Bamboo. It must ascend and escape
at the top, at the peril otherwise of falling down. Not-
withstanding these warnings many of the vulgar, the vicious,
the misunderstanding, and the fools who play with fire
have gone to Hells far more terrible than those which await
human frailties in pursuance of the common life of men
whose progress if slow is sure. “Black Salvation”, though
an advanced disciple, misinterpreted his teacher’s doctrine
and consciously identifying himself with the world-evil
fell into Hell. In time he rose therefrom and incarnating

609
30 e


=== PDF PAGE 629 (BOOK PAGE ~610) ===
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

at first in gross material forms, he at length manifested as
a great Rutra, the embodiment of all wickedness. ‘The
Tibetan Rutra here spoken of and the Indian Rudra seem
to be etymologically the same but their meaning is different.
Both are fierce and terrible Spirits; but a Rutra as here
depicted is essentially evil, and neither the Lord of any
sensual celestial paradise, nor the Cosmic Shakti which
loosens forms. ‘A Rutra is rather what in some secret circles
is called (though in ungrammatical Sanskrit) an Adhatma,
or a soul upon the lower and destructive path. ‘he general
destructive energy (Samhfra-Shakti), however, uses for
its purpose the disintegrating propensities of these forms.
The evil which appears as Rutra is the expression of various
kinds of Egoism. Thus Matam Rutra is Egoism as attached
to ‘the gross physical body. Again, all sentient worldly
being gives expression to its feelings, saying “I am happy,
unhappy, and so forth.” All this is here embodied in the
speech of the Rutra and is called Akar Rutra. Khatram
Rutra is Egoism of the mind, as when it is said of any object
“this is mine”. “Black Salvation” became a Rutra of such
terrific power that to save him and the world the Buddhas
intervened. There are four methods by which they and the
Bodhisattvas subdue and save sentient being, namely, the
Peaceful, the Grand or Attractive, the Fascinating which
renders powerless (Vashikaranam), and the stern method of
downright Force. All forms of Egoism must be destroyed
in order that the pure “That Which Is” or formless Con-
sciousness may be attained. ‘Black Salvation” incarnated as
the Pride of Egoism in its most terrible form. And, in order
to subdue him, the last two methods had to be ‘employed.
He was, through the Glorious One, redeemed by the suffering
which attends all sin and became the “Dark Defender of the
Faith”, which by his egoistic apostasy he had abjured, to
be later the Buddha known as the “Lord of Ashes” in that
world which is called “the immediately self-produced”’.
How this came about the legend describes,

610


=== PDF PAGE 630 (BOOK PAGE ~611) ===
MATAM RUTRA

The fifth Chapter of the Golden Rosary says that Guru
Padma-Vajradhara was reborn as Bhikshu ‘I hubkazhonnu,
which means the “youth who is hard to overcome”. He
was a ‘lantrik who preached an abstruse doctrine which is
condensed in the following verse : -~

“He who has attained the ‘That Which Is’
Or uncreated In-itself-ness

Is unaffected even by the ‘four things’
Just as the cloud which floats in the sky
Adheres not thereto.

This is the way of Supreme Yoga.

Than this in all the three worlds

There is not a higher wisdom.”

This Guru had two disciples, Kuntri and his servant
Pramadeva. To the latter was given, on initiation, the name
‘Transcendent Faith’’, and to the former “ Black Salvation”.
This last name was a prophetic prediction that he would be
saved, not through peaceful or agreeable means but through
the just wrath of the Jinas. The real meaning of the verse
as understood and practised by Pramadeva and as declared
to be right by the Guru was as follows: “The pure Con-
sciousness (Dagpa-ye-shes) is the foundation (Gshi-hdsin)
of the limited consciousness (Rnam-shes) and is in Scripture
“That which is,” the real uncreated “Jn-Itself-ness™.
This being unaffected or unruffled is the path of Tantra.
Passions (Klesha) are like clouds wandering in the wide
spaces of the sky. (These clouds are distinct from, and do
not touch the back-ground of space against which they
appear.) So passions do not touch but disappear from the
Void (Shinyata). Whilst ascending upwards the three-fold
accomplishments (Activity, non-activity, absolute repose)
must be persevered in; and this is the meaning of our
Teacher ‘lhubka’s doctrine.”

The latter, however, was misunderstood by “Black
Salvation” (Tharpa Nagpo) who took it to mean that he
was to make no effort to save himself by the gaining of

611


=== PDF PAGE 631 (BOOK PAGE ~612) ===
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

merit, but that he was to indulge in the four acts of sinful
enjoyment, by the eye, nose, tongue and organ of generation.
On this account he fell out with his brother in the faith
Pramadeva, and later with his Guru, both of whom he caused
to be persecuted and banished the country. Continuing
in a career of reckless and sin-hardened life, he died .un-
repentant after a score of years passed in various diabolical
practices. He fell into Hell and continued there for count-
less ages. At the close of the time of Buddha Dipankara
(Marmedzad or “Light maker’) he was reborn several
times as huge sea monsters. Atlength, just before the time
of the last Buddha Shakya Muni, he was born as the son
of a woman of loose morals in a country called LankApuri
of the Rakshasas. This woman used to consort with three
Spirits- a Deva in the morning, a Fire Genius at noon, and
a Daitya in the evening. “Black Salvation” was reborn
in the eighth month as the offspring of these three Spirits.
The child was a terrible monster, black of colour, with three
heads, each of which had three eyes, six hands, four feet
and two wings. He was horrible to look at, and immediately
at his birth all the auspicious signs of the country disappear-
ed, and the eighteen inauspicious signs were seen. Malignant
epidemics attacked the whole region of Lankapuri. Some
died, others only suffered, but all were in misery. Lament-
ation, famine and’ sorrow beset the land. There were
disease, bloodshed, mildew, hailstorms, droughts, floods and
all other kinds of calamities. Even dreams were frightful,
and ominous signs portending a great catastrophe oppressed
all, Evil spirits roamed the land. So great were the evils
that it seemed as if the good merits of everyone had been
exhausted all at once. :

The mother who had given birth to this monster died
nine days after its birth. The people of the country decreed
that this monstrous infant should be bound to the mother’s
corpse and left in the cemetery. The infant was then tied
to his mother’s breast. The mother was borne away in a

612


=== PDF PAGE 632 (BOOK PAGE ~613) ===
MATAM RUTRA

stretcher to the cemetery, and the stretcher was left at the
foot of a poisonous tree which had a boar’s den at its root,
a poisonous snake coiled round the middle of its trunk,
and a bird of prey sitting in its uppermost branches. (These
animals are the emblems of lust, anger and greed respectively
which “kindle the fire of individuality”.) At this place
there was a huge sepulchre built by the Rakshasas where
they used to leave their dead at the foot of the tree. Ele-
phants and tigers came there to die; serpents infested it,
and witch-like spirits called Dakinis and Ghouls brought
human bodies there. After the bearers of the corpse had
left, the infant sustained his life by sucking the breasts of
his mother’s corpse. These yielded only a thin, yellowish,
watery fluid for seven days. Next he sucked the blood and
lived a week; then he gnawed at the breast and lived the
third week ; then he ate the entrails and lived for a week.
Then he ate the outer flesh and lived for the fifth week.
Lastly he crunched the bones, sucked the marrow, licked
the humours and brains and lived a week. He thus in six
weeks developed full physical maturity. Having exhausted
his stock of food he moved about ; and his motion shook the
cemetery building to pieces. He observed the Ghouls and
Dakinis feasting on human corpses which he took as his
food and human blood as his drink, filling the skulls with it.
His clothing was dried human skins as also the hides of dead
elephants, the flesh of which he also ate. He ate also the
flesh of tigers and wrapped his loins in their furs. He used
serpents as bracelets, anklets, armlets and as necklaces
and garlands. His lips were thick with frozen fat, and his
body was covered with ashes from the burning ground.
He wore a garland of dead skulls on one string; freshly
severed heads on another; and decomposing heads on a
third. These were worn crosswise as a triple garland. Each
- cheek was adorned with a spot of blood. His three great
heads ever wrathful, of three different colours, were fierce
and horrible to look at. The middle head was dark blue

613


=== PDF PAGE 633 (BOOK PAGE ~614) ===
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

and those to the right and left were white and red respec-
tively. His body and limbs which were of gigantic size
and proportions were ashy grey. His skin was coarse and
his hair as stiff as hog’s bristles. His mouth wide agape
showed fangs. His terrible eyes were fixed in a stare. Half
of the dark brown hair on his head stood erect, bound with
four kinds of snakes. The nails of his fingers and toes
were like the talons of a great bird of prey, which seized hold
of everything within reach, whether animals or human
corpses which he crushed and swallowed. He bore a trident
and other weapons in his right hands, and with his left he
filled the emptied skulls with blood which he drank with
great relish. He was a monster of ugliness who delighted
in every kind of impious act. His unnatural food produced
a strange lustre on his face, which shone with a dull though
great and terrible light. His breath was so poisonous that
those touched by it were attacked with various diseases.
For his nostrils breathed forth disease. His eyes, ears and
arms produced the 404 different ills. Thus, the diseases
paralysis, epilepsy, bubonic swellings, urinary ills, skin
diseases, aches, rheumatism, gout, colic, cholera, leprosy,
cancer, small-pox, dropsy and various other sores and boils
appeared in this world at that time. (For evil thoughts and
acts make the vital spirit sick and thence springs gross
disease.)

The name of this great Demon was Matam Rutra. He
was the fruit of the Karma of the great wickedness of his
former life as Tharpa Nagpo. At that time, in each of the
24 Pilgrimages, there was a powerful destructive Bhairava
Spirit, These Devas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas, Asuras and
Nagas were proud, malignant and mighty Spirits, despotic
masters of men, with great magical powers of illusion and
transformation. ‘lhese Spirits used to wander over these
countries dressed in the eight sepulchral raiments, wearing
the six kinds of bone ornaments, and armed with various
weapons, accompanied by their female consorts, and revelled

614


=== PDF PAGE 634 (BOOK PAGE ~615) ===
MATAM RUTRA

in all kinds of obscene orgies. Their chief occupation con-
sisted in depriving all sentient beings of their lives. After
consultation, -all these Spirits elected Matam Rutra as their
Chief. Thus all these non-human beings became his slaves.
In the midst of his horrible retinue he continued to devour
human beings alive until the race became almost destroyed
and the cities emptied. He was thus the most terrible
scourge that the earth had ever seen. All who died in those
days fell into Hell. But, as for Matam Rutra himself, his
pride knew no bounds: he thought there was no one greater
than himself and would roar out:

“Who is there greater and mightier than 1? If there
be any Lord who would excel me, Him too will I subjugate.”

As there was no one to gainsay him, the world was
oppressed by heavy gloom. At that time, however, Kali
proclaimed,

“Tn the country of Lanka, the land of Rakshasas,

In a portion of the city called Koka-Thangmaling,

On the peak of Malaya, the abode of Thunder,

There dwells the Lord of Lanka, King of Rakshasas.

He is a disciple of the light-giving Buddha.

His fame far excels thine.

He is unconquerable in fight by any foe.

He sleeps secure and doth awake in peace.”

Hearing this, the pride and ambition of the Demon
became aflame. His body emitted flames great enough
to have consumed all worlds at the great Kalpa dissolution.
His voice resounded in a deep thundering roar like that of
a thousand claps of thunder heard together. With sparks
of fire flying from his mouth he summoned a huge force.
He filled the very heavens with them, and moving with the
speed of a meteor he invaded the Rakshasa’s capital of
Koka-Thangmaling. Encamping, Matam Rutra proclaimed
his name proudly, at which the entire country of Lanka
trembled and was shaken terribly as though by an earth-
quake. ‘The Rakshasas, both male and female, became

615


=== PDF PAGE 638 (BOOK PAGE ~619) ===
MATAM RUTRA

They are Thubka-Zhonnu and Dad-Phags (Pramadeva,
Arya Shriddha called Transcendent Faith)

‘They will be able to make him taste the fruits of his
evil deeds in this very life.

He will not be subdued by peaceful, nor by any gene-
Tous means. ;

He will only be conquered by the methods of Fascina-
tion and Sternness.

(The various means of redemption have been previously
explained. Thubka and his good disciple “Transcendent
Faith” who had then become Buddha Vajra-Sattva, and
Bodhisattva Vajrapani were selected for this purpose. They
assumed the forms of the Devatas with the Horse’s head
(Hayagriva) and the Sow’s head (Vajra-Varahi.)

“Who, of the Noble Sangha, will doubt this,

That Hayagriva and Vajra-Varahi will give him their
bodies.

(When it is said “These will give him their bodies”
this means, as hereafter described, entering the Rutra’s
body, assuming his shape and destroying his Rutra life
and nature. They give him their divine bodies so that
they may destroy his demoniac body.)

“And who will not trust in the Wisdom of the Jinas,
to conquer him by the upward-piercing method,
From this (demon) will come the Precious-nectar,
which will be of use in acquiring Virtue.

From this (demon) will originate the changing of
poison into elixir.

(There are various ‘l'antrik methods suited to various
natures. “I'he upward-piercing” (Khatar-yar-phig) is that
of Vajrayana, This is the method which goes upward
and upward, that is straight upward without delay and
without going to right or left. ‘lo change poison into
nectar or elixir is a well-known principle of these schools.)

“This Demon will have to be ground down and destroy-
ed, to the last atom, in one body.

619


=== PDF PAGE 639 (BOOK PAGE ~620) ===
’ SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

(It is said “in one body” because, ordinarily, several
lives are necessary ; but in this case and by this method
Liberation is achieved in a single life-time and in one body.
Not one atom. of the Rutra body is left, for Egoism is
wholly destroyed.)

“The Divine Horse-headed Deity (Vajra-Hayagriva),

is he who will dispel this threatening misfortune,
Dad-phags, (Pramadeva who was given on initiation
the name “Transcendent faith”) is at present Vajra-
pani (Bodhisattva).

And Thubka-Zhonnu is, at present, the Buddha
Vajrasattva.

The divine prophesies of the Jinas are to be inter-
preted thus :—

‘ They will exterminate their opponents

For myself I go to take birth in May4-Devi’s womb.
I will practise Samadhi at the root of the Bodhi-'Tree.
I will not hold those beliefs in doubt.

For it has been said that the Buddha’s Faith will
triumph over this, ~

And will remain long in the Jambudvipa.

By means of the mysterious practice of Kmancipating
by means of Communion.’

(The practice here referred to is the method called
Jordol (sByor sGrol) which has both exoteric and esoteric
meanings, such as in the case of the latter the communion
of the Divine Male and Female whose union destroys to its
uttermost root egoistic attachment; the communion with
Shinyata whose innermost significance is the non-dual
Consciousness (gNyismed-yeshes) which dispels ignorance
and cuts at the root of all Samsaric life by the destruction
of all the Rutra forms. “Female” here is Shinyata and not
a woman. When a learned Lama is asked why the terms of
sex are used they say it is to symbolise Thabs (Upiya) and
Shes-rabs (Prajna) which it is not possible to further explain
here. (See Vol. XIII, XIV of Tantrik Texts, Ed. A. Avalon.)

620


=== PDF PAGE 651 (BOOK PAGE ~632) ===
Cuaprer XXIX.

KUNDALINI SHAKTI.
(Yooa.)

Te word ‘Yoga’ comes from the root “Yuj” which

means “to join” and, in its spiritual sense, it is that
process by which the human spirit is brought into near
and conscious communion with, or is merged in, the Divine
Spirit, according as the nature of the human spirit is held
to be separate from (Dvaita, Vishishtadvaita) or one with
(Advaita) the Divine Spirit. As, according to Shakta doc-
trine, with which alone we are concerned, the latter pro-
position is affirmed, Yoga is that process by which the
identity of the two (Jivatma and Paramatmé),— which identity
ever in fact exists,—is realized by the Yogi or practitioner of
Yoga. It is so realized because the Spirit has then pierced
through the veil of Maya which as mind and matter obscures
this knowledge from itself. ‘lhe means by which this. is
achieved is the Yoga process which liberates from Maya.
So the Gheranda Samhita, a Hathayoga treatise of the
Tantrik school, says (Chap. 5): “There is no bond equal in
strength to Maya, and no power greater to destroy that
bond than Yoga.” From an Advaita or Monistic stand-
point, Yoga in the sense of a final union is inapplicable,
for union implies a dualism of the Divine and Human
spirit. In such case, it denotes the process rather than the
result. When the two are regarded as distinct, Yoga may
apply to both. A person who practises Yoga is called a
“Yogi”. According to Indian notions all are not competent
(Adhikari) to attempt Yoga; only a very few are. One
must, in this or in other lives, have first gone through
Karma or ritual, and Upasana or devotional, worship and
obtained the fruit thereof, namely,a pure mind (Chitta-
shuddhi). This Sanskrit term does not merely mean a

632


=== PDF PAGE 652 (BOOK PAGE ~633) ===
KUNDALINI SHAKTI

mind free from sexual impurity, as an English reader might
suppose. The attainment of this and other good qualities
is the A BC of Sadhané. A person may have @ pure
mind in this sense and yet be wholly incapable of Yoga.
Chittashuddhi consists not merely in moral purity of every
kind, but in knowledge, detachment, capacity for pure
intellectual functioning, attention, meditation and so forth.
When, by Karma and Upasana, the mind is brought to this
point and when, in the case of Vedantik Yoga, there is
dispassion and detachment from the world and its desires,
then the Yoga path is open for the realization of Tattvajnana,
that is ultimate Truth. Very few persons indeed are com-
petent for Yoga in its higher forms. The majority should
seek their advancement along the path of ritual and devotion.

There are four main forms of Yoga, according to a
common computation, namely, Mantrayoga, Hathayoga,
Layayoga, and Rajayoga, the general characteristics of which
have been described in “The Serpent Power”. It is only
necessary here to note that Kundali-yoga is Laya-yoga.
‘Ihe Eighth Chapter of the Sammohana Tantra, however,
speaks of five kinds, namely, Jnana, Raja, Laya, Hatha, and
Mantra, and mentions as five aspects of the spiritual life,
Dharma, Kriya, Bhava, Jnana, and Yoga ; Mantrayoga being
said to be of two kinds, according as it is pursued along the
path of Kriya or Bhéva. Many forms of Yoga are in fact
mentioned in the Books. There are seven SAdhanis of
Yoga, namely, Shatkarma, Asana, Mudra, Pratyéhara,
Pranéyaéma, Dhyana, and Samadhi, which are cleansing of
the body, seat, postures for gymnastic and Yoga purposes,
the abstraction of the senses from their objects, breath
control (the celebrated Pranéyéma), meditation, and ecstasy,
which is of two kinds, imperfect- (Savikalpa) in which
dualism is not wholly overcome, and perfect (Nirvikalpa)
which is complete Monistic experience-- “ Aham Brahméami”,
“¥ am the Brahman ”--a knowledge in the sense of
realization which, it is to be observed, does not produce


=== PDF PAGE 653 (BOOK PAGE ~634) ===
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

Liberation (Moksha) but is Liberation itself. The Samadhi
of Laya-yoga is said to be Savikalpasamadhi, and that of
complete Raja-yoga is said to be Nirvikalpasamadhi. The
first four processes are physical and the last three mental
and supramental (see Gheranda Samhita Upadesha, I).
By these seven processes respectively certain qualities are
gained, namely, purity (Shodhana), firmness and strength
(Dridhata), fortitude (Sthirata), steadiness (Dhairya), light-
ness (Laghava), realization (Pratyaksha), and detachment
leading to Liberation (Nirliptattva).

What is known as the eight-limbed Yoga (Ashtanga-
yoga) contains five of the above Saédhanas (Asana, Prana-
yama, Pratyahaéra, Dhyana, and Samadhi) and three others,
namely, Yama or self-control by way of chastity, temperance,
avoidance of harm (Ahims&) and other virtues; Niyama or
religious observances, charity and so forth, with Devotion to
the Lord (Ishvara-pranidhana), and Dharana, the fixing of
the internal organ on its subject as directed in the Yoga
practice. For further details, I refer the reader to my in-
troduction to the work entitled “The Serpent Power”
(2nd Ed., 1925). Here I will only deal shortly with
Laya-yoga or the arousing of Kundalini Shakti, a subject
of the highest importance in the Tantra Shastra, and
without some knowledge of which much of its ritual will
not be understood. I cannot here enter into all the details
which demand a lengthy exposition, and which I have
given in the Introduction to the two Sanskrit works
called Shatchakraniripana, and Paduképanchaka translat-
ed in the volume, “The Serpent Power” which deals with
Kundalini Shakti and the piercing by Her of the six
bodily centres or Chakras. The general principle and
meaning of this Yoga’ has never yet been published, and
the present Chapter is devoted to a short summary of
these two points only.

All the world (I speak, of course, of those interested in
such subjects) is beginning to speak of Kundalini Shakti,

634


=== PDF PAGE 654 (BOOK PAGE ~635) ===
KUNDALINI SHAKTI

“cette fameuse Kundalini” as a French friend of mine calls
Her. ‘There is considerable talk about the Chakras and the
Serpent Power but lack of understanding as to what they
mean. This, as usual, is sought to be covered by an air of
mystery, mystical mists, and sometimes the attitude; “I
should much like to tell you if only I were allowed to give
it out.” A silly Indian boast of which I lately read is, “I
have the key and I keep it.” ‘Those who really have the
key to anything are superior men, above boasting. “Mysti-
cism,” which is often confused thinking, is also a fertile
soil of humbug. I do not, of course, speak of true Mysti-
cism. Like all other matters in this Indian Shastra the
basis of this Yoga is essentially rational. Its thought, like
that of the ancients generally, whether of East or West,
has in general the form and brilliance of a cut gem. It is
this quality which makes it so dear to some of those who
have had to wade through the slush of much modern thought
and literature. No attempt has hitherto been made to
explain the general principles which underlie it. This
form of Yoga is an application of the general principles
relating to Shakti with which I have already dealt. ‘The
subject has both a theoretical and practical aspect. ‘The
latter is concerned with the teaching of the method in such
a way that the aspirant may give effect to it. ‘his cannot
be learnt from books but only from the Guru who has himself
successfully practised this Yoga. Apart from difficulties,
inherent in written explanations, it cannot be practically
learnt from books, because the carrying out of the method
is affected by the nature and capacity of the Sadhaka and
what takes place during his Sadhané. Further, though
some general features of the method have been explained
to me, I have had no practical experience myself of this
Power. I am not speaking as a Yogi in this method, which
I am not; but as one who has read and studied the
Shastra on this matter, and has had the further advantage
of some oral explanations which have enabled me to better

635


=== PDF PAGE 655 (BOOK PAGE ~636) ===
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

understand it. I have dealt with this practical side, so far as
it is possible to me, in my work on “The Serpent Power”.
Even so far as the matter can be dealt with in writing, I
cannot, within the limits of such a paper as this, deal with
it in any way fully. A detailed description of the Chakras
and their significance cannot be attempted here. I refer the
reader to the work entitled “The Serpent Power” (second
Edition). What I wish to do is to treat the subject on the
broadest lines possible and to explain the fundamental
principles which underlie this Yoga method. It is because
these are not understood that there is much confused think-
ing and misty, if not mystical, talk upon the subject. How
many persons, for instance, can correctly answer the question,
“What is Kundalini Shakti?” One may be told that it
is a Power or Shakti; that it is coiled like a serpent in the
Miladhara; and that it is wakened and goes up through
the Chakras to the Sahasrara. But what Shakti is it?
Why, again, is it coiled like a serpent ? What is the meaning
of this? What is the nature of the Power? Why is it
in the Miladhéra? What is the meaning of “awakening”
the power? Why if awakened should it go up? What
are the Chakras? It is easy to say that they are regions or
lotuses. What are they in themselves? Why have each
of the lotuses a different number of petals? What is a
petal? What and why are the “Letters” on them? What
is the effect of going to the Sahasrira: and how does that
effect come about ? These and other similar questions require
an answer before this form of Yoga can be understood.
I have said something as to the Letters in the chapters on
Shakti as Mantra and Varnamala. With these and with other
general questions, rather than with the details of the six
Chakras, set forth in “Ihe Serpent Power”’ I will here deal.

In the first place, it is necessary to remember the funda-
mental principle of the Tantra Shastra to which I have
already 1eferred, viz., that. man is a microcosm (Kshudra-
brahmanda). Whatever exists in the outer universe existe

636


=== PDF PAGE 656 (BOOK PAGE ~637) ===
KUNDALINI SHAKTI

in him, All the Tattvas and the worlds are within him
and so are the supreme Shiva-Shakti.

The body may be divided into two main parts, namely,
the head and trunk on one hand, and the legs on the other.
In man, the centre of the body is between these two, at the
base of the spine where the legs begin. Supporting the
trunk and throughout the whole body there is the spinal
cord. This is the axis of the body, just as Mount Meru is
the axis of the earth. Hence man’s spine is called Meru-
danda, the Meru or axis-stafi. The legs and feet are gross
matter which show less signs of consciousness than the
trunk with its spinal white and grey matter; which trunk
itself is greatly subordinate in this respect to the head
containing the organ of mind, or physical brain, with its
white and grey matter. The position of the white and
grey matter in the head and spinal column respectively
are reversed. The body and legs below the centre are
the seven lower or nether worlds upheld by the sustaining
Shaktis of the universe. From the centre upwards, con-
sciousness more. freely manifests through the spinal and
cerebral centres. Here there are the seven upper regions
or Lokas, a term which Satyananda in his commentary on
Isha Upanishad says, means “what are seen” (Lokyante),
that is, experienced and are hence the fruits of Karma in
the form of particular re-birth. These regions, namely,
Bhih, Bhuvah, Svah, Tapah, Jana, Mahah, and Satya Lokas
correspond with the six centres; five in the trunk, the
sixth in the lower cerebral centre; and the seventh in the
upper Brain or Satyaloka, the abode of the supreme Shiva-
Shakti.

The six centres are the Miladhara or root-support
situated at the base of the spinal column in a position
midway in the perineum between the root of the genitals
and the anus. Above it, in the region of the genitals,
abdomen, heart, chest or throat and in the forehead be-
tween the two eyes (Bhrimadhye) are the Svadhishthana,

637


=== PDF PAGE 657 (BOOK PAGE ~638) ===
SHAKTI AND SHAKTA

Manipira, Anahata, Vishuddha and Ajna Chakras or
lotuses (Padma) respectively. These are the chief centres,
though the books speak of others such as the Lalan& and
Manas and Soma Chakras. In fact, in the Advaita Mar-
tanda, a modern Sanskrit book by the late Guru.of the
Maharaja of Kashmir, some fifty Chakras and Adharas are
mentioned : though the six stated are the chief upon which
all accounts agree. And so it is said, “How can there be
any Siddhi for him who knows not the six Chakras, the
sixteen Adharas, the five Ethers and the three Lingas in
his own body?” The seventh region beyond the Chakras
is the upper brain, the highest centre of manifestation of
Consciousness in the body and therefore the abode of the
supreme Shiva-Shakti. When “abode” is said, it is not
meant, of course, that the Supreme is there placed in the
sense of our “placing”, namely, it is there and not
elsewhere. The Supreme is never localized whilst its mani-
festations are. It is everywhere both within and without
the body, but it is said to be in the Sahasrara, because it is
there that the Supreme Shiva-Shakti is realized. And this
must be so, because consciousness is realized by entering
in and passing through the highest manifestation of mind,
the Sattvamayi Buddhi, above and beyond which is Chit
and Chidripint Shakti themselves. From their Shiva-
Shakti Tattva aspect are evolved Mind in its form as Buddhi,
Ahamkara, Manas and associated senses (Indriyas) the
centre of which is in and above the Ajné Chakra and below
the Sahasréra. From Ahamkéra proceed the Tanmatras or
generals of the sense-particulars which evolve the five forms
of sensible matter (Bhiita), namely, Akasha (“Ether”),
Vayu (“Air”), Agni (“Fire”), Apas (“Water’’), and Prithivi
(“Earth”), The English translation given of these terms
do not imply that the Bhiitas are the same as the English
elements of air, fire, water, earth. The terms indicate
varying degrees of matter from the ethereal to the solid.
Thus Prithivi or earth is any matter in the Prithivi state ;

638


=== PDF PAGE 658 (BOOK PAGE ~639) ===
KUNDALINI SHAKTI

that is, which may be sensed by the Indriya of smell. Mind
and matter pervade the whole body. .-But there are centres
therein in which they are predominant. Thus Ajna is a
centre of mind, and the five lower Chakras are centres of
the five Bhiitas; Vishuddha of Akasha, Anahata of Vayu,
Manipira of Agni, Svadhishthana of Apas, and Miladhara
of Prithivi.

In short, man as a microcosm is the all-pervading Spirit
(which most purely manifests in the Sahasrara) vehicled by
Shakti in the form of Mind and Matter the centres of which
are the sixth and following five Chakras respectively.

The six Chakras have been identified with the following
plexuses commencing from the lowest, the Maladhara :— ‘The
Sacrococcygeal plexus, the Sacral plexus, the Solar plexus
(which forms the great junction of the right and left sym-
pathetic chains Ida and Pingala) with the cerebro-spinal
axis. Connected with this is the Lumbar plexus. Then
follows the Cardiac plexus (Anadata), Laryngeal plexus, and
lastly the Ajna or cerebellum with its two lobes, and above
this the Manas Chakra or sensorium with its six lobes, the
Soma-chakra or middle Cerebrum, and lastly the Sahasrara
or upper Cerebrum. ‘To some extent these localizations are
yet tentative. This statement may involve an erroneous
view of what the Chakras really are, and is likely to produce
wrong notions concerning them in others. The six Chakras
themselves are vital centres within the spinal column in the
white and grey matter there. They may, however, and
probably do, influence and govern the gross tract outside the
spine in the bodily region lateral to, and co-extensive with,
that section of the spinal column in which a particular
centre is situated. The Chakras are centres of Shakti as’
vital force. In other words, they are centres of Pranashakti
manifested by Pranavayu in the living body, the presiding
Devatas of which are names for the Universal Consciousness
as It manifests in the form of those centres. The Chakras
are not perceptible to the gross senses, whatever may be a

639

