--- PAGE 1 ---
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY 
CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL 
LIBRARY 
Gall No. ...Jjt-C1 -V 
Acc. No. '3SLZ3— 
—2D. G- Arch. N.D./57.—25-9-58— 100,000. 
ARTHUR PROBSTHAiH, 
f'rl*! f 1 Bnr.lU«|ler i 

--- PAGE 2 ---


--- PAGE 3 ---


--- PAGE 4 ---
THE PATH OF PURITY 

--- PAGE 5 ---


--- PAGE 6 ---
Walt ffext Society 
Translation Ssrik, No. 21 
(Extra SvusonimoK) 
THE 
PATH OF PURITY 
BEING 
A TRANSLATION OF 
BUDDHAGHOSA'S VISUDDHIMAGGA 
A4h^- 
•» * 
PE MAUNG TIN, M.A., B.Litt. 
ur sxictkk cnLLKnx, oxtorp ; IHDIAN kpvcatiomai. kbrticb 
PKOb'e&tPK OP CinilX-rAL HYU Linn HI THIS USaiVKUdlTY 
or RAxnooK 
. dSMt" 
K: i‘» J 
PART III 
OF UNDERSTANDING 
WITH AN EPILOGUE BY MRS. RHYS DAVIDS 
I %onoon 
PUBLISHED FOR THE PALI TEXT SOCIETY 
BT 
the oxford uyivo,g|TV tuttiu^men HOUSE, E.C. 
NEW YORK. WELBOUft M BA Y 
X 

--- PAGE 7 ---
JiWTRAL ARCHAEOLOGIGAS 
Lib. .*Y, Nt-W u&i.rii. 
Aoo. Mu .. 
•.tefco,.** ^ ••* ■ 
o*w M*..^ 
Cu-A It 
PRIUTRT) IS Oil RAT BUTTAIS 

--- PAGE 8 ---
CONTENTS 
PART III.—UNDERSTANDING OIUPTttl PAGE 
XIV. Exposition of the Aggregates (Khan dr a) 505-567 
505 
506 
507 
508 
514 
515 
527 
537 
539 
540 
555 
562 
568-580 
THE SENSE-ORGANS .... 568 
THE ELEMENTS - - - - 573 
XVI. Exposition of the Controlling Faculties 
and the Truths - - 581-614 
THE CONTROLLING FACULTIES - - 581 
THE TRUTHS ----- 585 
EXPOSITION OF ILL - - - 591 
EXPOSITION OP THE ORIGIN - - - 600 
EXPOSITION OF THE CESSATION OF ILL - 601 
EXPOSITION OF THE COURSE LEADING TO THE 
CESSATION OF ILL - 605 
v 
WHAT IS UNDERSTANDING ? - 
rN WHAT SENSE IS IT UNDERSTANDING ? 
WHAT ARE ITS CHARACTERISTICS, ITS ESSENCE, 
ITS MANIFESTATION, ITS PROXIMATE CAUSE ? 
HOW MANY KINDS OF UNDERSTANDING ARE 
THERE ? - - - - - 
HOW SHOULD IT BE DEVELOPED ? 
THE AGGREGATE OF MATTER (RVPAM) 
THE AGGREGATE OF CONSCIOUSNESS - 
THE AGGREGATE OF FEELING 
THE AGGREGATE OF PERCEPTION 
THE AGGREGATE OF MENTAL ACTIVITIES 
THE CLASSIFICATION OF THE AGGREGATE OF 
FEELING AS PAST, AND SO ON 
THE CLASSIFICATION OF INSIGHT INTO THE 
AGGREGATES - 
XV. Exposition of Sense-Organs and Elements 

--- PAGE 9 ---
VI Contents 
OHAMTrt FAOK 
XVII. Exposition of the Plane op Understand¬ 
ing . 615-707 
CONDITIONED BY IGNORANCE ARE ACTIVITIES 622 
CONDITIONED BY ACTIVITIES IS CONSCIOUS¬ 
NESS - - - - - 651 
CONDITIONED BY CONSCIOUSNESS IS NAME* 
AND-FORM ..... 669 
CONDITIONED BY NAME-AND-FORM IS SENSE - 675 
CONDITIONED BY SENSE IS CONTACT - 678 
CONDITIONED BY CONTACT IS FEELINO - 680 
CONDITIONED BY FEELING IS CRAVING - 681 
CONDITIONED BY CRAVING IS GRASPING - 683 
CONDITIONED BY GRASPING IS BECOMING - 686 
CONDITIONED BY BECOMING IS BIRTH AND THE 
REST ..... 692 
IGNORANCE IS ACCOMPLISHED BY SORROW 
AND THE LIKE .... 693 
THE WHEEL OF LIFE, UNKNOWN IN BEGINNING G95 
BEREFT OF ONE TO DO AND FEEL - - 696 
VOID THROUGH THE VOID TWELVE PARTS - 696 
THE THREE TIMES OF THE WHEEL OF BECOMING 696 
THE FORMING OF FOUR GROUPS - - 697 
THE SPOKES OF TWENTY MODES - ' - 098 
THE ROUND OF THREE . . . KEEPS ROLLING ON 
AND ON WITHOUT A BREAK - - - 700 
BY WAY OF ORIGIN IN TRUTHS - - 700 
BY WAY OF FUNCTION - - - 701 
BY WAY OF PREVENTION - - - 701 
AND BY WAY OF SIMILE - - - 702 
AND BY DIFFERENT KINDS OP DEEP METHODS 703 
IT SHOULD FITTINGLY BE KNOWN - - 705 
XVIII. Exposition of Purity of Views - 708-720 
DETERMINATION OF NAME AND FORM 
(a) BY THE FOUR ELEMENTS - - 709 
(b) BY THE EIGHTEEN ELEMENTS - - 711 
(c) BY THE TWELVE SENSE-ORGANS - 712 
(<Z) BY THE FIVE AGGREGATES - - 712 

--- PAGE 10 ---
Contents vii 
CHAFTEK l'AOE 
XIX. Exposition of Purity of the Transcending 
of Doubt .... 721-730 
FOUR KINDS OF KARMA - - 724-6 
XX. Exposition of Purity in the Knowledge 
and Discernment of the (Right) and the 
Wrong Paths - - - 731-778 
the three comprehensions - - 732 
contemplation of the five aggregates by 
WAY OF IMPERMANENCE, ETC. - - 73(5 
THE NINE MODES OF SHARPENING ONE’S 
faculties - - - - 740 
METHOD OF THE CONTEMPLATION OF MATTER - 741 
METHOD OF THE CONTEMPLATION OF NON¬ 
MATTER - - - - - 746 
THE ATTRIBUTION OF THE THREE CHARAC¬ 
TERISTICS 
(а) BY WAY OF THE SEVENFOLD ATTENTION 
TO MATTER - - - - 748 
(б) BY WAY OF THE NON-MATTER-SEPTAD - 758 
THE EIGHTEEN GREAT INSIGHTS - - 762 
REVIEWING KNOWLEDGE OF RISE AND FALL - 765 
INSIGHT CORRUPTERS - - - 771 
DETERMINATION OF THE THREE TRUTHS - 778 
XXI. Exposition of Purity in Knowledge and 
Discernment of Progress - 779-823 
1. reviewing knowledge of rise and 
FALL • - - - - - 780 
2. reviewing knowledge of breaking up 782 
3. KNOWLEDGE of THE PRESENCE OF FEAR - 788 
4. REVIEWING KNOWLEDGE OF TRIBULATION 790 
5. REVIEWING KNOWLEDGE OF REPULSION - 795 
6. KNOWLEDGE OF DESIRE FOR RELEASE - 795 
7. REVIEWING KNOWLEDGE OF ANALYSIS - 796 
GRASPING OF EMPTINE6S - - 799 
DISCOURSE OF DELIVERANCE - - 802 
8. KNOWLEDGE OF INDIFFERENCE TO COM¬ 
PLEXES - 806 
ADAPTIVE KNOWLEDGE - - 819 
SUTTA CONCORDANCE - • - 821 

--- PAGE 11 ---
viii Contents 
CILlPrEK * PAD* 
XXII. Exposition of Purity in Knowledge and 
Discernment ... 824-868 
THE FIRST PATH-KNOWLEDGE - - 824 
THE SECOND PATH-KNOWLEDGE - • 828 
THE THIRD PATH-KNOWLEDGE - - 830 
THE FOURTH PATH-KNOWLEDGE - - 831 
CLASSES OF FRUITldNAL CONSCIOUSNESS 
A. THIRTY-SEVEN ACCESSORIES OF ENLIGHTEN¬ 
MENT ..... 832 
B. EMERGENCE .... 836 
C. REMOVAL .... - 838 
D. FUNCTIONS .... 847 
E. COMPREHENSIONS - - - - 851 
XXlil. Exposition of the Advantages in Develop¬ 
ing Understanding - - 859-875 
(1) DESTRUCTION OF THE VARIOUS VICES - 859 
(2) ENJOYMENT OF THE ESSENCE OF AR1YAN 
FRUIT ..... 860 
(3) ABILITY TO ENTER UPON THE ATTAINMENT 
OF TRANCE .... 864 
(4) BRINGING ABOUT OF THE STATE OP BEING 
WORTHY OF OFFERINGS AND SO ON - 873 
Conclusion - - - - - 876 
Epilogue ..... 879 
Index I. Main Words and Subjects - 883 
Index II. Proper Names - - - 889 
Index III. Pali Words - - - 894 
Index IV. Similes .... 899 
Corrigenda ..... 908 

--- PAGE 12 ---
THE PATH OF PURITY 
Part III 
PANNAKKHANDHA 
CHAPTER XIV 
[436] EXPOSITION OF THE AGGREGATES (KUANDHA) 
Now since the monk, who has fulfilled satisfactorily the 
development of concentration and has enjoyed its benefits 
through higher knowledge, has fully developed that concen¬ 
tration which is shown under the head of mind (citta) in the 
expression: 
The man discreet, on virtue planted firm, 
In mind and understanding trained 
he should at once develop understanding. But it is not easy 
to define, much less develop, understanding, which has been 
stated too briefly. Therefore, in order to show it in detail 
and the manner of developing it, the following questions are 
asked:— * 
1. What is understanding ? 
2. In what sense is it understanding ? 
3. What are its characteristics, its essence, its manifestations, 
its proximate cause ? 
4. How many kinds of understanding are there ? 
5. How should it be developed ? 
6. What are the advantages of developing understanding ? 
And these are the answers:— 
1. What is understanding ? 
Understanding is manifold and of various kinds. In trying 
to explain2 all that, the answer might not fulfil the intended 
1 See above, p. 1 of Part I. 
* Read vibhavayitum, ae on p. 84 of text. 
505 33 

--- PAGE 13 ---
506 The Path of Purity 
meaning, and moreover it might lead to wavering; therefore 
we say, with reference to what is intended here:—Understand¬ 
ing is insight-knowledge associated with moral thought. 
2. In what sense is it understanding ? 
It is understanding in the sense of knowing in various ways. 
What is this understanding ? It is the knowing in various 
ways as distinct from perceiving and cognizing (or being 
conscious). [437] Now although perception, consciousness1 
and understanding are the same as regards knowing, perception 
is the mere noting of objects such as blue-green, yellow; it 
cannot reach the penetration into characteristics as imper¬ 
manent, ill, selfless. Consciousness knows objects to be 
blue-green, yellow, and reaches the penetration into charac¬ 
teristics. But it cannot endeavour to reach the manifestation 
of the Path. Understanding knows the object and reaches 
the penetration into characteristics as said above, and it 
reaches through endeavour the manifestation of the Path. 
Suppose that three persons: one an undiscerning child, one 
a peasant, one a banker, see a heap of coins on a counter. 
The undiscerning child just knows that the coins are pretty 
and variegated, long, square, round; but does not know that 
they are held to be valuables for the use and employment2 of 
men. The peasant knows that they arc pretty and variegated, 
and that they are held to be valuables for the use and employ¬ 
ment2 of men; but does not know such distinctions as: This 
coin is genuine, that false, and that half genuine. The banker 
knows all the varieties: he knows that by looking at the coins, 
or by striking them and listening to the sound, or by finding 
out what smell or taste they have, or by holding them in the 
hand. He knows further that they were made by such and 
such a master in such and such a village, market town, city, 
or on such and such a hill, or by the banks of such and such 
a river. The application of this simile should be understood8 
thus: Because it seizes just the appearance of an object as 
blue-green and so forth, perception is like the seeing of the 
1 YiUMnam. * Read upayogaparibhogam. 
8 See Questions of MHindu i, 132, n. 2. 

--- PAGE 14 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 607 
coins by the undiscerning child. Because it seizes the appear¬ 
ance of the object as blue-green and so forth, and also leads to 
penetration of the characteristics, consciousness is like the 
seeing of the coins by the peasant. Because it seizes the 
appearance of the object as blue-green and so forth, leads to the 
penetration of the characteristics, and also leads to the mani¬ 
festation of the Path, understanding is like the seeing of the 
coins by the banker. Therefore this understanding is to be 
understood as the knowing in various ways as distinct from 
perceiving and being conscious. With reference to this the 
statement was made: “It is understanding in the sense of 
knowing in various ways.” 
It is not certain to be found where there are perception 
and consciousness.1 [438] But where it is present it is not 
to be distinguished from those two states, because it is not 
possible to make distinctions such as, “ This is perception, 
this is consciousness, this understanding,” so subtle and 
difficult to discern are they. Hence said the reverend 
Nagasena: “ A difficult thing, sire, has been done by the Blessed 
One.” “ What difficult thing, reverend Nagasena, has been 
done by the Blessed One ?” “ A difficult thing, sire, has been 
done by the Blessed One when he declared the determination of 
these immaterial states, mind and its coefficients, which have 
arisen in one object, saying, this is contact, this is feeling, this is 
;perception, this is volition, this is mind”2 
3. What are its characteristics, its essence, its manifestation, 
its proximate cause ? 
Here understanding has the characteristic of penetrating 
into the true nature of states; it has the function of dispelling 
the darkness of bewilderment which covers the true nature of 
states; it has the manifestation of not being bewildered. 
Because of the statement: “ He who is concentrated knows, sees 
a thing as it really is,”2 concentration is its proximate cause. 
1 It is not present in states of consciousness with two root-conditions, 
or with no root-conditions (duhetuka, ahetuka).—Tika. 
* See Expositor 187; Questions of Milinda i, 133. 
■ See above, p. 430. n. 1. 

--- PAGE 15 ---
508 The Path of Purity 
4. How many kinds of understanding are there ? 
It is of one kind through its characteristic of penetrating 
the true nature, of states {monad 1). It is of two kinds as 
worldly and transcendental {dyad 1); likewise as being with 
the cankers, without the cankers1 and so forth (dyad 2); by 
way of fixing mental and material qualities (dyad 3); of being 
accompanied by joy and by even-mindedness (dyad 4); and of 
being the plane of discernment and of culture (dyad 5). It is 
of three kinds as being made by imagination, by tradition, by 
culture (triad 1); likewise by way of the limited, sublime, 
infinite object (triad 2); of skill in profit, loss and means 
(triad 3); and of laying to heart as to the internal and bo forth 
(triad 4). It is of four kinds by way of knowledge about the 
Four Truths (tetrad 1); and by way of the Four Analyses and 
so forth (tetrad 2). 
Of these, the onefold portion (monad 1) is plain in meaning. 
In the twofold portion (dyad 1), understanding which is 
associated with the Path in worldly (states of consciousness) 
is worldly; that which is associated with the transcendental 
Path is transcendental. Thus it is of two kinds as worldly and 
transcendental. In the second dyad, understanding which 
is affected by the cankers is with cankers; that which is 
not affected by them is without cankers. In meaning, this 
understanding which is with, or is without, the cankers, is 
understanding which is worldly, or is transcendental. And 
tho same with such statements as “ Understanding which is 
associated with cankers is with cankers; that which is dis¬ 
sociated from cankers is without cankers.” Thus it is of 
two kinds, as with, or without, cankers, and so on. 
In the third dyad, that understanding which exists in the 
fixing of the four immaterial aggregates of him who is striving 
for insight is understanding for the fixing of mental qualities.2 
[439] That which exists in the fixing of his material aggregates 
is understanding for the fixing of material,qualities. Thus it 
is of two kinds by way of fixing mental and material qualities. 
In the fourth dyad, understanding in the two classes of moral 
1 Read sdsamnamva°. 3 Read ndmavavatlhdpanapannd. 

--- PAGE 16 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 509 
consciousness of the realm of sense and in the sixteen classes of 
path-consciousness of the four Jhanas according to the Five¬ 
fold System, is accompanied by joy. Understanding in the 
two classes of moral consciousness of the realm of sense, and 
in the four classes of path-consciousness of the Fifth Jhana, 
is accompanied by even-mindedness. Thus it is of two kinds 
by way of being accompanied by joy or by even-mindedness. 
In the fifth dyad, understanding of the First Path is the 
plane of discernment;1 understanding of the remaining three 
Paths is the plane of culture. Thus it is of two kinds by being 
the plane of discernment and of culture. 
In the first of the triads, understanding effected through 
one’s own imagination without learning from another person, 
is made by imagination; that which is acquired by learning 
from another person and effected through tradition, is made 
by tradition; that which is effected through culture in what¬ 
soever way, and has attained to ecstasy, is made by culture. 
And this has been said: “ Of these, which is understanding 
made by imagination ? Such conformable patience, view, fancy, 
experience, consideration, delight in contemplating things as one 
acquires without learning from another to the effect that matter 
. . . feeling . . . perception . . . complexes . . . conscious¬ 
ness of which karma is their own property, or which are con¬ 
formable to the truth, are impermanent in respect of vocational 
works, or of works of art or science directed by right application,— 
this is called understanding made by imagination. . . . Through 
learning from another it is understanding made by tradition. 
And aU understanding of one who has acquired the attainments, 
is made by culture."2 Thus it is of three kinds as being made 
by imagination, by tradition, or by culture. 
In the second triad, understanding which proceeds in 
respect of states of the realm of sense, has a limited object; 
that which proceeds in respect of states of the realms of form 
and the formless, has a sublime object. This twofold under¬ 
standing is worldly insight. Understanding which proceeds in 
respect of Nibbana has an infinite object. It iB transcendental 
1 Read “patina dassanabhtimi. * Vibhanpimi. 

--- PAGE 17 ---
510 The Path of Purity 
insight. Thus understanding is of three kinds by way of the 
object as limited, as sublime, and as infinite. 
In the third triad, profit means increase. It is twofold 
as being due to destruction of disadvantages, and to production 
of advantages. Skill in it is skill in profit. As it has been 
said: “ Therein, which is skill in profit ? As one attends to these 
states, immoral states which have not arisen do not arise ; and 
immoral states which have arisen are put away. Or, as one 
attends to these states, [440] moral states which have not arisen, 
come to arise ; and moral states which have arisen, lead to growth, 
increase and fulfilment of culture. The understanding, the know¬ 
ing in various ways ... the absence of bewilderment, the 
investigation of states, the right views therein,—this is called skill 
in profit.”1 And loss means decrease. It also is twofold 
as being due to destruction of advantages and production of 
disadvantages. Skill in it is skill in loss. As it has been 
said: “ Therein, which is skill in loss ? As one attends to these 
states, moral states which have not arisen do not arise,2 and so 
on.” ’ Everywhere, that skill which arises instantly, being 
equal to the occasion in matters of bringing about and effecting 
various states, is called skill in means. As it has been said: 
“And all understanding in bringing about various actions, 
is skill in means.”2 Thus it is of three kinds, by way of skill 
in profit, loss, and means. 
In the fourth triad, insight-understanding which is exercised 
after one has grasped one’s own aggregates, is the laying to 
heart as to the internal; that which is exercised after one has 
grasped another person’s aggregates or the external form 
which is not bound by controlling faculties, is the laying to 
heart as to the external; that which is exercised after one has 
grasped both, is the laying to heart as to the internal and the 
external. Thus it is of three kinds by way of laying to heart 
as to the internal, and so on. 
In the first of the tetrads, knowledge which proceeds with 
reference to the truth about Ill is knowledge about HI; that 
which proceeds with reference to the origin of Ill is knowledge 
» V&hahga 324 f. 
8 Vibhanga 326. 
8 Insert na before uppajjanti. 

--- PAGE 18 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 511 
about the origin of HI; that which proceeds with reference to 
the cessation of Ill is knowledge about the cessation of Ill; 
that which proceeds with reference to the path leading t-o the 
cessation of Ill, is knowledge about the path leading to the 
cessation of Ill. Thus it iB of four kinds by way of knowledge 
about the four Truths. 
In the second tetrad the four Analyses are the four kinds 
of knowledge making distinctions as to the meaning, and so on. 
And this has been said: “ Knowledge in respect of the meaning 
is the analysis of meaning. Knowledge in respect of doctrine 
is the analysis of dhamma. Knowledge in respect of a true 
etymological interpretation therein (i.e. meaning, doctrine) is 
analysis of interpretation. Knowledge in respect of the fore¬ 
going threefold knowledge is analysis of ready wit.”1 Herein 
“ meaning” briefly is a synonym for the result of a root- 
condition. 
Because the result of a condition is got, obtained, attained 
in consequence of the conditions, therefore is it called the 
meaning. In detailed explanation: [441] Anything that is 
produced by causes, Nibbana, the sense of what is spoken, 
result, action,—these five states should be understood as the 
meaning. Knowledge which makes distinctions in respect of 
that meaning on the part of one who reflects thereon, is the 
analysis of meaning. Briefly “ dhamma ” is another name 
for root-cause. Because a root-cause disposes, produces, or 
manages to attain this or that result, therefore is it called 
“ dhamma.” In detailed explanation: Whatever root-con¬ 
dition brings about a result, the Noble Path, whatever is 
spoken, morality, i mmorality,3— these five should be under¬ 
stood as “ dhamma.” Knowledge which makes distinctions 
in respect of that “ dhamma ” on the part of one who reflects 
thereon, is the analysis of “ dhamma.” And this interpre¬ 
tation has been shown specifically in Abhidhamma in this 
way: “Knowledge in respect of ill is analysis of meaning. 
Knowledge in respect of the origin of ill is analysis of dhamma. 
1 Vibhanga 293, 331. 
a Punctuate the text accordingly. And cf. Points of Controversy, 
Appendix, Note 4. 

--- PAGE 19 ---
512 The Path of Purity 
Knowledge in respect of the cessation of ill is analysis of meaning. 
Knowledge in respect of the path leading to the cessation of ill is 
analysis of dhamma.1 Knowledge in respect of root-condition is 
analysis of dhamma. Knowledge in respect of the result of a 
condition is analysis of meaning. Knowledge in respect of those 
states which have been born, produced, have come to be, come to 
arise,2 * come to birth, manifested themselves, is analysis of mean¬ 
ing. Knowledge in respect of that state from which these states 
have been born, produced, have come to be, come to arise, come 
to birth, manifested themselves, is analysis of ‘ dhamma.* . . . 
Knowledge in respect of old age and death is analysis of meaning. 
Knowledge m respect of the origin of old age and death8 is analysis 
of dhamma. . . . Knowledge in respect of the cessation of com¬ 
pounded things is analysis of meaning. Knowledge in respect 
of the path leading to the cessation of compounded things is 
analysis of ‘ dhamma * . . . Here in this world a monk knows 
‘ dhamma ’ ‘ sutta,’ mixed prose and verse ... 1 vedalla.* 
This is called analysis of ‘ dhamma.’ He knows the meaning 
of everything that is spoken : ‘ This is the meaning of what is 
spoken.’ This is called analysis of meaning. Which are the 
states that are moral ? When a moral thought arises which is 
of the realm of sense . . . these are the moral states. Knowledge 
in respect of them is analysis of ‘ dhamma.’ Knowledge in respect 
of their result is analysis of meaning.As regards “ Know¬ 
ledge in respect of a true etymological interpretation therein,” 
in respect of that meaning and doctrine there is a true ety¬ 
mology, an imperishable usage of words, which being recited, 
spoken, uttered, the hearer knows: “ This is the true ety¬ 
mology. That is not the true etymology. ’ ’ Knowledge which 
makes distinctions in respect of the Magadhi language, of true 
and natural etymology, the root-speech of all beings [442] 
is analysis of interpretation. For he who has attained to 
analysis of etymological interpretation knows, upon hearing 
(the sequence): phasso, vedand, that they are of true ety¬ 
mology. But when he hears (the sequence): phassd, vedand ,b 
1 This and the preceding sentence are omitted in the text. 
2 Supply nibbatid in the text. * Read jaramaramsamudayc ndnam. 
4 ViMtanga 293 f. 5 Read pheuva, vzdana. 

--- PAGE 20 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 513 
lie knows that they are not true in etymology. “ Knowledge 
in respect of the (threefold) knowledge ” is the knowledge with 
knowledge as object possessed by one who reflects upon 
knowledge of all three kinds as the object. Or, it is knowledge 
treated in detail by way of its spheres and functions, and so 
on, in respect of the aforesaid kinds of knowledge. Analysis 
of ready wit is the meaning. 
And these four Analyses make distinctions in two places: 
the province of probationers and the province of non-proba¬ 
tioners. The Analyses possessed by the Chief Disciples and 
the Great Disciples are of the province of non-probationers. 
Those possessed by Ananda the Elder, Citta the householder, 
Dhammika the lay-brother, Upali the householder, Khuj- 
juttara the lay-sister and others, are of the province of pro¬ 
bationers. 
Slaking distinctions in these two spheres, these Analyses 
are purified in five ways: through attainment, study, hearing, 
query, former application. Of these, “attainment” means 
the obtaining of Saintship. “ Study ” is the learning of the 
Buddha’s word. “Hearing” is listening to “ dhamma ’ 
respectfully and profitably. “ Query ” is question for settle¬ 
ment as regards the literal meaning and the general sense.1 
“ Former application ” is effort for insight through constant 
devotion* to the religion of the Buddhas until one has ap¬ 
proached the knowledge of Adaptation and of Adoption. 
Others have said: 
Wide knowledge, former application, 
And study, mastery of languages, 
Attainment, query, calling on the sage, 
And friendship,—these comprise Analysis. 
Therein “former application” is as said above. “Wide 
knowledge ” is proficiency in book lore and the branches of 
1 Ycusa hi pada-aaa attho duvinnet/yo Uim ganfhipadam. Yasaa 
adhippayo duvinneyyo tarn atthapadam.—Tiled. 
* Constant, i.e. devotion to the subject of meditation even while 
walking to and from his dwelling-placo and the village to which he 
resorts for alma. 

--- PAGE 21 ---
514 The Path of Purity 
arts and science. “Mastery of languages” means pro¬ 
ficiency in the languages of the hundred and one countries, 
especially in the Magadhi language. “ Study ” is the study 
of the Buddha’s word, be it just the Chapter of Similes.1 
“ Query ” is questioning about the meaning and determination 
of even one verse. “ Attainment ” is Stream-winnership or 
. . . Saintship. “ Calling on the sage ” means to be near 
teachers who are learned and full of wit. “ Friendship ” is 
the getting of such friends. 
[443] As to them, the Buddhas and Individualist Buddhas 
attain to their analytical knowledge through former application 
and attainment. Disciples depend on all of them. There is 
no such thing as special application to the development of a 
subject of meditation in order that analytical knowledge may 
be attained. But its attainment by probationers takes place 
at the conclusion of the emancipation known as the fruition 
of probationership. And its attainment by non-probationers 
takes place at the conclusion of the emancipation known as 
the fruition of non-probationership. Like the Ten Powers of 
the Tathagatas, the analytical powers of the Elect are con¬ 
summated by the fruition of the Elect. Thus, with reference 
to them was it said, “ fourfold by way of the four Analyses.” 
5. How should it be developed ? 
Herein, because states such as the aggregates, sense-organs, 
elements, faculties, truths, dependent origination, are the 
“plane” of understanding, the two purities of morality and 
of mind are its “ root ”; and the five purities:—that in respect 
of views, the overcoming of doubt, the knowledge and discern¬ 
ment of the right Path and the wrong Path,2 the knowledge 
and discernment of the Middle Way, knowledge and discern¬ 
ment-—are its “ body,” therefore one should develop it, making 
his knowledge mature through study and query in those states3 
which are its “ plane,” fulfilling the two purities which are its 
“roots,” and the five which are its “body.” Such is the abstract. 
But this is the detailed account. 
1 I.e. The MQlapami&sa of the Majjhima NikSva. 
8 Read maggamagganaiia0. 3 Read dhamjnesu for maggesu. 

--- PAGE 22 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 515 
It has been said that such states as the aggregates, sense- 
organs, elements, faculties, truths, dependent origination, are 
its “ plane.” Of them, “ aggregates” are:—the aggregate of 
matter, the aggregate of feeling, the aggregate of perception, 
the aggregate of activities, the aggregate of consciousness. 
[The aggregate of matter (rupam).] 
Herein, whatever state has the characteristic of changing 
through cold and so forth,1—all such states taken together 
are to be known as the aggregate of matter.2 * Though it is 
one in kind through its characteristic of changing, it is of 
two kinds as primary (principle of nature) and as derived. 
Of these, “primary matter” is fourfold: the earth-element, 
water-element, fire-element, air-element. Their character¬ 
istics, function, manifestation, have been stated in determining 
the four elements.8 And as to the proximate cause, each has 
the other three for its proximate cause.4 5 * [444] “ Derived 
material qualities ” are twenty-four in number: eye, ear, nose, 
tongue, body, visible object, sound, odour, taste, femininity, 
masculinity, vitality-controlling faculty, heart-basis, body- 
intimation, speech-intimation, space-element, buoyancy of 
matter, plasticity of matter, wieldiness of matter, integration 
of matter, continuity of matter, decay of matter, imperman¬ 
ence of matter, solid food. 
5 Of these, the “ eye ” has the characteristic of sentience for 
natural phenomena® fit for being directly impinged upon by 
the seen thing, or of sentience sprung from action caused by 
a desire to see the object. It has the function of drawing 
consciousness towards objects; it has the localizing of visual 
cognition as its manifestation; it has the being produced by 
action caused by a desire to see, as proximate cause. The 
ear has the characteristic of sentience for phenomena fit for 
1 I.e. heat, hunger, thirst, and so on. 
s Or, “ form ” (riipa). “ Changing ” is ruppana. 
8 See above, p. 402 f. 
* See above, p. 421, where the four elements, considered as “ powder,” 
are shown to be dependent each on the other. 
5 Thi3 and the following paragraph are repeated in Expositor 408 f. 
* Bhuki =mahdbhuta, acoording to the Commentary. 

--- PAGE 23 ---
516 The Path of Purity 
being directly impinged upon by sounds, or of sentience 
sprung from action caused by a desire to hear Bounds; it has 
the function of drawing consciousness towards sounds; it has 
the localizing of auditory cognition as its manifestation; and 
it has a proximate cause as above. The nose and the tongue, 
and lastly, the body, may be analogously defined. 
But some say that eye is a sentient surface for phenomena 
having excess of heat (fire); that ear, nose, tongue, are sentient 
surfaces for phenomena having excess of mobility (air), ex¬ 
tension (earth), cohesion (water); that body is a sentient 
surface for all phenomena. Others again, in the case of the 
last four senses, assign sentience as follows: space-element, 
mobility, cohesion, extension. 
Such persons should be asked: Adduce your Sutta l Surely 
they will never find such a Sutta. But some of these give 
as their reason that object-seizing is aided by visible objects 
which are qualities of heat,1 and so for the other senses. 
They should be answered: “ Who has said that visible objects 
are qualities of heat, and so on 1” [445] Nay, it is not per¬ 
missible to say of indivisible phenomena, this is a quality of 
that. 
Should they say: “Just as you assigned the functions of 
sustaining and so forth, on the part of extension and the 
others, owing to the excess of this and that phenomenon 
among the various supports,2 3 * * so should you agree to this 
expression: ‘ Visible objects and so on, are qualities of 
elements ’ from seeing the excess in visible and other sense- 
objects when in these supports there is preponderance of 
heat,8 and so on,”—they should be answered thus: “If the 
smell in cotton with a preponderance of extension is greater 
than that of fermented liquor with a preponderance of co¬ 
hesion, and if the colour of cold water be inferior to that of 
1 For instance, light as a quality of lamp-fire aid9 in the seizing of 
the visible object by the eye; sound as a quality of mobility aids the 
seizing of the audible object by the ear; and so on. 
3 I.e. the material objects sprung from the four elements. 
3 Saoh as the blazing and dazzling column of fire, audible sound 
of wind, good taste in earth, sweet taste in water. 

--- PAGE 24 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 517 
hot water with an excess of heat,—if these were so, we should 
agree to your expression. But since neither of these two 
can happen, therefore you should give up the special reasoning 
in regard to those phenomena which are bases. As in one 
group, although there is no distinction of phenomena, the 
tastes of visible and other objects are unlike each other, so, 
even though there is no other special reason, the visual and 
other sentient organs are unlike each other.” What is that 
reason which is not mutually common 1 The reason of the 
distinction among the senses is just action. Therefore from 
the difference of action, and not from that of phenomena, 
the difference in these is to be understood. 
Verily if phenomena were different [in kind], there would 
be no sentient organ. Hence the ancient thinkers said; 
“ The sentient organ is [sentient] of phenomena similar [to 
itself], not of dissimilar.”1 And so among these sentient 
organs, because they arc distinct and because of the differences 
of action, eye and ear seize the object before they have come 
into physical contact with it. This is because consciousness 
arises in an object which does not adhere to its own basis.2 
Nose, tongue, and tactile sense seize their object while in 
physical contact with themselves. This is because con¬ 
sciousness arises in objects which adhere to their own basis. 
And [of the five derived material substances] what, in the 
world, is called the eye is like a dark-blue lotus-petal, sur¬ 
rounded by dark eye-lashes and variegated by black and 
white discs. In8 the circle of vision where arise images of the 
bodies of men standing, right in front, in the middle of the 
black disc surrounded by white circles of the constituent 
organism of the eye, it [the sentient organ] permeates the 
ocular membranes as sprinkled oil permeates sevencotton wicks. 
And it iB served by the four elements performing the functions 
of sustaining, binding, maturing and vibrating, just as a 
princely boy is tended by four muses performing the functions 
1 Cf. the Greek theorem: Knowledge is of like by like, e.g., in Aris¬ 
totle’s De Anima i, 2, 5. 
* Namely, one of the great essentials or primaries. 
* This paragraph is repeated in Expositor 403 f. 

--- PAGE 25 ---
518 The Path of Purity 
of holding, bathing, dressing and fanning him. And being 
upheld by the caloric order, by thought and nutriment, and 
guarded by vitality1 and attended by colour, odour, taste, 
and so on, the organ, no bigger in size than the head of a 
louse, [446] stands duly fulfilling the nature of the basis and 
door of visual cognition, and bo on. As it has been said by the 
Dhamma-Captain: 
That organ of the visual sense by which 
Objects are apprehended, is a small 
And subtle thing, and like a louse’s head.2 
In* the interior of the compound organ of the interior of the 
“ear,” at a spot Bhaped like a finger-ring and fringed by tender, 
tawny hairs, tended by the elements of which the different 
kinds have been mentioned, sustained by the caloric order, 
by mind, by nutriment, guarded by vitality, attended by 
colour and so on, it stands duly fulfilling the nature of the 
basis and door of auditory cognition and so on. 
In the interior of the compound organ of the “nose,” at a 
spot shaped like a goat’s hoof, tended, supported, guarded, 
attended [as aforesaid], it stands duly fulfilling the nature of 
the basis and door of olfactory cognition and so on. 
Above the middle of the compound organ of the “ tongue,” 
at a spot shaped like the upper part of a torn lotus leaf, it 
stands duly fulfilling the nature of the basis and door of 
gustatory cognition and so on. 
But in the “body,” wherever there is derivative matter, 
the body as field of touch4 everywhere becomes [the object of] 
service, sustenance, protection, attendance, as said above. 
Like oil diffusing itself over a cotton-rag, it stands duly fulfilling 
the nature of basis and of door of bodily cognition and so on. 
Just as snakes, crocodiles, birds, dogs, jackals6 incline 
their minds towards their pastures—i.e., the ant-hill, water, 
1 I.e. Life-controlling faculty. * Untraced. 
9 This and the next three paragraphs are repeated in Expositor 407 f. 
4 Kdya (body) does duty also for “ sense-organ of touch,” or “ skin- 
sensibility.” 
8 Delete the hyphen between sifig&U, and rdpa. 

--- PAGE 26 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 519 
the sky, a village, a graveyard—so these sentient organs, the 
eye and so on, should be regarded as inclining towards visible 
objects and so on, their spheres. 
Of visible objects and so on other than the sentient organs, 
“ visible object ” has the characteristic of impinging on the 
eye, the function of being the object of visual cognition, and 
the manifestation of being its sphere; it has the four great 
essentials [or primaries] as proximate cause. And bo also 
with all derived material qualities. "Wherever there is any 
distinction, we shall mention it. And this visible object is 
of various sorts as dark blue, yellow, and so forth. 
“Sound” has the characteristic of impinging on the ear, 
the function of being the object of auditory cognition, and the 
manifestation of being its sphere; it is of various kindB such 
as the sound of the drum, the sound of the rmdinga. 
[447] “ Odour ” has the characteristic of impinging on the 
nose, the function of being the object of olfactory cognition, 
and the manifestation of being its sphere; it is of various kinds 
such as the odour of roots, the odour of essences. 
“ Taste ” has the characteristic of impinging on the tongue, 
the function of being the object of gustatory cognition, and 
the manifestation of being its sphere; it is of various kinds, 
such as the taste of roots, the taste of trunks. 
“Femininity” has the feminine nature as characteristic, 
the function of showing, “ This is woman,” the manifestation 
of being the cause of the feminine sex, attribute, behaviour 
and feature. “Masculinity” has the masculine nature as 
characteristic, the function of showing, “ This is man,” the 
manifestation of being the cause of the masculine sex, attribute, 
behaviour and feature. Both of them are diffused through the 
whole body, as is skin-sensibility. But it cannot be said that 
they are obtained where skin-sensibility is obtained, or where 
it is not obtained. There is no mutual mixing as there is 
none in material objects and taste, and so on. 
“Vitality-controlling faculty” has the characteristic of 
watching over co-existent material objects, their precedure as 
function, their maintenance as manifestation, the primary 
element to be maintained as proximate cause. Such a plan 

--- PAGE 27 ---
520 The Path of Purity 
aa to the characteristic of watching and so forth, may exist; 
but only when there ore co-existent material objects to watch 
over, can the life-faculty watch over them, as water guards 
the lotus and so on. It guards them as the nurse a child, 
though they each have their own cause. Like the captain 
of a ship it itself proceeds through association with the states 
which have been made to proceed. It does not proceed 
beyond the moment of break-up, because of the non-existence 
of states which it is to cause to proceed. It does not maintain 
them at the moment of break-up because it itself is breaking 
up, as the wick with failing oil cannot sustain the lamp-light. 
But it is not devoid of the power to watch, prolong, maintain, 
since at the moment mentioned it has accomplished those 
functions. Thus should it be regarded. 
“ Heart-basis ” has the seat of the elements of presentative 
and representative intellection for characteristic, the function 
of bearing these two elements,1 the manifestation of carrying 
them. Inside the heart, depending on the blood which has 
already been described2 in the discourse on mindfulness 
as to the body, served by the primary elements performing the 
functions of supporting and so on, sustained by the caloric 
order, by thought and by nutriment, guarded by vitality, it 
stands fulfilling the nature of the basis of the elements of 
presentative and representative intellection and associated 
states. 
“ Body-intimation ” is the mode of change which gives aid 
to the sustaining, supporting, shaking of the co-existent 
physical body, undergone by the element of mobility sprung 
from thought giving rise to such acts as stepping forward. 
[448] It has the function of making one’s intentions known, 
the manifestation of being the condition for the agitating of 
the body, the element of mobility set up by the mind as the 
proximate cause. Because it gives intimation of its intentions 
through the agitating of the body, and because it itself is to 
be known through the body, called the body-agitation, it is 
1 Or, “ the property of being the abode of these two elements.1’ 
* See above, p. 293. 

--- PAGE 28 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 521 
known as body-intimation. Such acts as stepping forward 
are due to the shaking of material qualities and so on, born 
of the caloric order and bound up with those which are born 
of mind, and which shake on account of body-intimation. 
Thus it is to be understood. 
Speech-intimation” is the mode of change which gives 
aid to the impact with the derived matter1 in the earth-element 
sprung from thought giving rise to the different kinds of speech. 
It has the function of making one’s intentions known, the 
manifestation of being the condition for the sounds of speech, 
the element of extension set up by the mind as proximate 
cause. Because it gives intimation of its intentions through the 
sounds of speech, and because it itself is to be known through 
speech, called the physical and speech sounds, it is known as 
speech-intimation. Just as, on seeing a sign for water in a 
forest, such as the bone of a cow’s head raised high on a post, 
one knows, “ Here is water,” so people, grasping the agitating 
of the body and the sounds of speech, know the intimations 
of body and of speech. 
“Space-element”2 has the characteristic of delimitating 
material objects, the function of showing their boundaries, 
the manifestation of showing their limits, or the state of being 
untouched by the four primaries and of being their holes and 
openings as manifestation, the separated objects as proximate 
cause. It is that of which in the separated groups we say, 
“ This is above, this is below, this is across.” 
“ Buoyancy of matter ” has non-sluggishness as its charac¬ 
teristic, removing the heaviness of material objects as its 
function, quickness of change as its manifestation, buoyant 
matter as its proximate cause. “ Plasticity of matter ” has 
non-rigidity as characteristic, removing the rigidity of material 
objects as function, absence of opposition in all acts [due to 
its own plasticity] as manifestation, plastic matter as proximate 
cause. “Wieldiness of matter” has workableness suitable 
or favourable to bodily actions as characteristic, removal of 
1 I.e. the earthy element of the speech-organs such as the throat, 
palate. 
8 Cf. Expositor 425 f. 
34 

--- PAGE 29 ---
522 The Path of Purity 
non-workableness as function, non-weakness as manifestation, 
workable matter as proximate cause. These three do not 
abandon one another. Yet though this be so [they are 
mutually distinguishable]. That change of matter which is 
buoyancy of matter is buoyancy of material objects, non¬ 
sluggishness and the special kind of change which is as the 
quick movement of one free from ailment, and is produced 
from the opposite cause to that perturbation of the elements 
which makes the sluggishness of matter. [449] That change 
of matter which is plasticity of matter is plasticity of objects 
like that of well-pounded leather, is distinguished by trac¬ 
tableness, suavity in all special works, and is produced from 
the opposite cause to that perturbation of the elements which 
makes the rigidity of matter. That change of matter which is 
wieldiness of matter is wieldiness of material objects like that 
of well-polished gold, is distinguished by suitableness for all 
bodily works, and is produced from the opposite cause to the 
perturbation of the elements which makes unsuitableness. 
Thus should their difference be understood. 
“ Integration of matter ” has the characteristic of accumu¬ 
lation, the function of making material things rise at the 
beginning, leading them, or the fullness of matter as mani¬ 
festation, integrated matter as proximate cause. “Con¬ 
tinuity of matter ” has the characteristic of continuous 
procedure, the function of linking or building without a break, 
unbroken series as manifestation, matter bound without a 
break as proximate cause. Both integration and continuity 
are synonyms of the production of matter. Yet, so as to make 
clear the difference in the mode of production, [the Blessed 
One] has taught us the Outline1 as [distinguishing between] 
integration and continuity. But because there is, in a real 
sense, no difference in meaning, therefore in the exposition of 
these two terms he said, “ That which is accumulation of sense- 
organs is integration of matter," “ That which is integration of 
matter is continuity of matter."2 And in the Commentary 
accumulation should be understood as genesis, as when water 
1 Cf. Dhammasanyani, § 596. 4 Ibid., §$§ 642, 732, 866. 

--- PAGE 30 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 523 
issues from a hole dug in the river bank; integration as growth, 
as when the hole is full of water; continuity as continuous 
procedure, as when the water overflows. What does this 
comparison signify ? By sense-organ is implied accumulating; 
and by accumulation, sense-organ. Therefore the initial 
production of material objects is accumulation; the production 
of others over and above those, is integration because they 
appear with the mode of growth j1 the repeated production of 
still others over and above those, is continuity because they 
appear with the mode of binding without a break. Thus 
should it be understood. 
“Decay” has the characteristic of maturity of matter; 
leading (to disruption) as function; want of a fresh state, 
though not devoid of its intrinsic nature, as manifestation, 
like rotten paddy; the maturing matter as proximate cause. 
Change coming over teeth, and so on, is shown by2 their 
broken state, and so on. This refers to evident change, 
which is absent from immaterial objects, where decay is 
hidden. It is also absent in earth, water, mountains, the 
moon and the sun, and so on, where change is uninterrupted.3 
[450] “Impermanence of matter” has the characteristic 
of complete dissolution, the merging of matter as function, 
destruction and evanescence as manifestation, matter under¬ 
going dissolution as proximate cause. 
“ Solid food ” has the characteristic of nutritive essence, 
the function of fetching matter [to the eater], the sustaining 
[of the body] as its manifestation, substance to be swallowed 
as its proximate cause. 
These are the material qualities that are mentioned in the 
Text. But in the Commentary other material qualities are 
brought together, to wit: the material quality of strength, of 
origin, of production, of ill-health and, in Ihe opinion of some, 
of torpor. But the material quality of torpor is rejected from 
one with this statement: “ Surely thou art a sage, the perfectly 
Enlightened One 1 There are no Hindrances in thee.” Of 
1 Read vaddhi AkArena. 
a Reading vikard da&sita for vikdradassanato. 
* See Expositor 427 f. for a fuller explanation. 

--- PAGE 31 ---
524 The Path of Purity 
the others, the material quality of ill-health is implied in 
decay and impermanence; that of production, in integration 
and continuity; that of origin, in the element of water; that 
of strength, in the element of air. Therefore has it been 
decided that not one of them haB a separate existence. Thus 
these twenty-four hinds of derived matter, and the aforesaid 
four kinds of primary matter make twenty-eight kinds, neither 
more nor less. 
And all of them are one in kind as not being a condition, 
unconditioned, dissociated from condition, causally related, 
worldly, cankerous;1 of two kinds, as internal and external, 
gross and subtle, distant and near, determined and undeter¬ 
mined, sentient organ and non-sentient organ, controlling! acuity 
and non-controlling faculty, derivative and underivative. 
Of them, five beginning with the eye are “ internal ” because 
they proceed in dependence upon the personality. The 
rest, being outside,‘ are “external.” Twelve: e.g., nine 
beginning with the eye, and the three elements other than the 
water-element, are “ gross ” as they are to be seized through 
impact. The rest, being contrary thereto, are “subtle.” 
That which is subtle, being of a nature difficult to penetrate, 
is “ distant.” The other, being of a nature easy to penetrate, 
is “neaT.” Eighteen:—e.g., the four elements, thirteen 
beginning with the eye, and solid food, are “determined” 
as they transcend limits, change, and characteristics, and are 
to be seized in their intrinsic nature. The rest, being contrary 
thereto, are “undetermined.” Five, beginning with the 
eye, by being clear like the surface of a mirror as the con¬ 
dition of grasping the material objects, and so on, are “ sen¬ 
tient organs.” The rest, being contrary thereto, are “not 
[451] sentient organs.” Sentient organ, together with the 
three beginning with femininity, is “controlling faculty” in 
the sense of governance. The rest, as being contrary thereto, 
are “ not controlling faculty.” That of which we shall say 
further that it is born of action, is “ derivative ”2 from being 
seized-as-efiect by an action. The Test, as being contrary 
thereto, aTe “underivative.” 
1 Dhammasangani, § 584 f. * “ Upadinna,” Bee Expositor 55. I 

--- PAGE 32 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 525 
Again, all the material qualities are of three kinds by way 
of the triplets, such as visible, bom of action, and so on. Of 
them, material sense-organ in the gross material qualities 
is visible and re-acting; the rest is invisible and re-acting. 
All that is subtle is invisible and non-re-acting. Thus matter 
is of three kinds by way of the triplet of the visible. By way 
of the triplet beginning with “ born of action ” matter that is 
produced by action is “ born of action ”; that produced by 
some other cause is “not action-born”; that not produced 
by any cause is neither action-bom nor not-action-born. That 
which is produced from consciousness is “ born of conscious¬ 
ness that produced by some other cause is “ not born of 
consciousness”; that not produced by any cause is neither 
born of consciousness nor not born of.consciousness. That 
which is produced from nutriment is “ bom of nutriment”; 
that produced from some other cause is “ not bom of nutri¬ 
ment”; that not produced by any cause is neither born of 
nutriment nor not born of nutriment. That which is produced 
by the caloric order is “ born of caloric order ”; that produced 
by some other cause is “ not bora of caloric order ”; that not 
produced from any cause is neither born of caloric order nor 
not born of caloric order. Thus it is of three kinds by way 
of the triplet born of action, and so on. 
Again, it is of four kinds by way of the tetrads, such as 
things seen and so on, material form and so on, physical basis 
and so on. Of these, matter as sense-object is said to be 
“seen” from being the object of sight. Sound as sense- 
object is said to be “ heard ” from being the object of hearing. 
The thrco: odour, taste, touch, are said to be “ considered ” 
from being the objecte of the controlling faculties which seize 
objects in contact. The rest is said to be “cognized” from 
being the object of cognition. Thus it is of four kinds by way 
of the tetrads of what is seen, and so on. 
And herein, matter that is determined is material form. 
The space-element is defined matter. Material qualities 
beginning with bodily intimation and ending in wieldiness1 
1 Read cpariyaniam vikdrarupam. 

--- PAGE 33 ---
526 The Path of Purity 
are matter undergoing change. Birth, decay and disruption 
are material qualities showing characteristics. Thus is it of 
four kinds by way of the tetrads of material form, and so on. 
And herein, what is known as the material quality of the 
heart is a physical basis, not door. The two intimations are 
door, not basis. The sentient organ of matter is both basis 
and door. The rest is neither basis nor door. Thus it is of 
four kinds by way of the tetrad of the physical basis, and so on. 
Again it is of five kinds as bom of from one, two, three, 
four, or from nothing whatever. Of these, that which is 
produced by action and by consciousness is produced from 
one [cause]. -Of these, matter as controlling faculty together 
with the heart-basis, is produced by action. The two intima¬ 
tions are produced by consciousness. That which is produced 
by consciousness and caloric order is produced by two [causes], 
that is sound as sense-object. That which is produced by 
caloric order, consciousness, nutriment [452] are produced 
by three [causes], that is the three beginning with buoyancy. 
That which is produced by the four [causes] beginning with 
action, are produced by four [causes], that is everything other 
than the material quality of characteristic. This material 
quality of characteristic is not produced by any [cause]. 
Why ? For there is no origin of origin itself. In anything 
that has been originated there appear the two, just maturing 
and breaking up. What has been allowed as the birth from 
something of birth itself in such statements as: “ Matter 
as sense-object, sound as sense-object, odour as sense-object, 
taste as sense-object, touch as sense-object, space-element, 
water-element, buoyancy of matter, pliancy of matter, wieldi- 
ness of matter, integration of matter, continuity of matter, 
solid food: these states spring from consciousness ” is because 
birth is seen at the moment when causes which produce the 
material qualities display their power in their functions. 
Thus is it to be understood. 
This is the substance of the detailed discourse on the aggre¬ 
gate of matter. 

--- PAGE 34 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 527 
[The aggregate of Consciousness.'] 
Now as to the other aggregates, everything taken together 
that has the characteristic of enjoying is to be known as the 
aggregate of feeling. Everything taken together that has the 
characteristic of perceiving is to be known as the aggregate 
of perception. Everything taken together that has the 
characteristic of bringing about (composing) is to be known 
as the aggregate of mental activities. Everything taken 
together that has the characteristic of cognizing is to be 
known as the aggregate of consciousness. Of them, because 
it is very easy to know the others when the aggregate of 
consciousness is understood, therefore we will begin our 
exposition with the aggregate of consciousness. 
“ Everything taken together that has the characteristic of 
cognizing is to be known as the aggregate of consciousness,”— 
thus has it been said. What is this consciousness with the 
characteristic of cognizing ? As has been said: “ Friend, it ts 
because he cognizes, that we speak of consciousness ”l Consci oub- 
ness, thought, mind, are the same in meaning.2 Consciousness 
with its characteristic of being conscious is one in intrinsic 
nature. It is threefold in kind: moral, immoral, indeter¬ 
minate. Of these, the moral is fourfold by way of plane: the 
realm of sense, the realm of form, the realm of the formless, 
the transcendental. 
Of these the realm of sense is of eight kinds owing to the 
divisions into joy and equanimity, understanding, and external 
prompting (instigation), to wit: (A) accompanied by joy, (B) 
associated with understanding, (c) unprompted (or instigated), 
(C) prompted; likewise (6) dissociated from understanding; 
(D) accompanied by equanimity, (5) associated with under¬ 
standing, (c) unprompted, (C) prompted; [453] likewise (b) 
dissociated from understanding.3 (ABc) As when one derives 
Majjhima i, 292. 
Vinnonam cittam mano. Cf. Samyvtta ii. 94. 
Expanded: ABc =1. DBc =5. 
ABC -2. DBC =6. 
Abe =3. Dbc -7. 
AbC =4. DbC =8. 

--- PAGE 35 ---
528 The Path of Purity 
joy and gladness from the merits of a thing given or of the 
recipient, and so on, or from some other cause of joy; and in 
consequence of right views operating in suchwise as, “ There 
is charity to be made ” does meritorious deeds such as giving 
gifts unhesitatingly and unurged by others, the consciousness 
then is accompanied by joy, associated with understanding 
and unprompted. (ABC) But when, being joyful and glad 
in the aforesaid manner, he follows right views and does them 
hesitatingly through lack of unimpeded charity, and so on, 
or on being urged by others, the consciousness is the same but 
prompted. In this sense the prompting is equivalent to the 
former effort which arises in oneself or in others. (Abe) When 
immature children who are in the habit of behaving as they 
see the moral attainments of their relatives, see the monks, they 
become joyful, and at once give them what is in their hands 
or salute them, then the third class of consciousness arises. 
(AbC) When they behave so on being urged by their relatives, 
saying: “ Give 1 Salute the monks !” then the fourth class of 
consciousness arises. (DBc, etc.) When, owing to the absence 
of merits in things to be given or the recipient, and so on, 
or any other cause for joy, there is a lack of joy in the four 
statements, then the remaining four classes accompanied by 
equanimity arise. Thus should be understood the eightfold 
moral consciousness in the realm of sense according to the 
divisions into joy and equanimity, understanding and prompt¬ 
ing.1 
The realm of Form is of five kinds as being conjoined with 
jhana-factors, to wit: the first conjoined with inception of 
thought, sustained thinking, zest,2 ease, concentration, the 
second with excessive applied thinking, then the third with 
excessive sustained thinking, then the fourth with detached 
zest, the fifth with ease set at rest and conjoined with equa¬ 
nimity and concentration. 
The realm of the Formless-is of four kinds as being conjoined 
with the four formless jhanas: the first conjoined with jhana 
of the infinitude of space as has been already described; the 
1 iJhammaaanQcnxx, §§ 1-169. 
* Piti, rendered above by “ joy.” 

--- PAGE 36 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 529 
second, third, and fourth, with the infinitude of consciousness, 
and so on. 
The transcendental is of four kinds as being conjoined 
with the four Paths; thus, moral consciousness is of twenty- 
one kinds. 
[454] The immoral is single in plane: of the realm of sense. 
It is of three kinds as to the root: greed, hate and delusion 
are the roots. Of them, that which has its root in greed is of 
eight kinds owing to the divisions of joy and equanimity, 
wrong views and external promptings, to wit: accompanied 
by joy, associated with wrong views, unprompted, and 
prompted; the same with the dissociated from wrong views; 
accompanied by equanimity, associated with wrong views, 
unprompted, and prompted; the same with the dissociated 
from wrong views. As when in joy and gladness one follows 
wrong views in such wise as: “There is no evil in sensual 
pleasures” and enjoys sensual pleasures or believes in the 
good things of this world in their essence, with a mind keen 
in its nature and unurged by others, then the first immoral 
consciousness arises. When one does thus with a weak con¬ 
sciousness, urged by others, then it is the second. But when 
one does not follow wrong views but merely in joy and gladness 
follows sensual pleasures or covets others’ wealth or steals 
others’ property, with a consciousness keen in its nature and 
unurged, then it is the third. When one does thus with a 
weak and urged consciousness, then it is the fourth. When, 
from a lack of sensual pleasures or absence of some other 
cause for joy, there is joy wanting in the above statements, 
then the remaining four accompanied by equanimity arise. 
Thus the root in greed is to be understood as eightfold accord¬ 
ing to the divisions into joy and equanimity, wrong views, 
external promptings. That which has its root in hate is 
twofold as accompanied by grief, associated with hatred, and 
unprompted, and prompted. It should be understood as 
proceeding in a strong or weak form in times of taking life, and 
so on. That which has its root in delusion is twofold as 
accompanied by equanimity, associated with doubt and as¬ 
sociated with flurry. It should be understood as proceeding 

--- PAGE 37 ---
530 The Path of Purity 
in times of indecision1 and wavering. Thus the immoral con¬ 
sciousness is of twelve kinds. 
The indeterminate is twofold in kind: resultant and in¬ 
operative. Of these the resultant is of four kinds as to plane: 
of the realm of sense, of the realm of form, of the realm of the 
formless, and transcendental. Of these, the realm of sense 
is of two kinds: moral resultant and immoral resultant. 
And the moral result is twofold: unconditioned and con¬ 
ditioned. Of them the unconditioned is devoid of conditions 
for results such as non-greed. It is of eight kinds: eye-con¬ 
sciousness, ear-, nose-, tongue-, body-consciousness, the 
mind-clement (presentative) with the function of receiving, 
the two elements of mind-consciousness2 (representative) with 
the function of deciding [and registering]. 
[455] Of them, eye-consciousness has the characteristic of 
cognizing a material object dependent on the eye, the function 
of making just matter its object, the manifestation of facing 
towards matter, the absence of the inoperative mind-element 
with a material object as proximate cause. Ear-, nose-, 
tongue-, body-consciousnesses have the characteristic of 
cognizing sounds, and so on, dependent on the ear, and so on, 
the function of making just the sound, and so on, their object, 
the absence of the inoperative mind-element with sound, 
and so on, for object as proximate cause. The mind-clement 
has the characteristic of cognizing material objects, and so on, 
immediately after eye-consciousness, and so on, the function 
of receiving material objects, and so on, the manifestation of 
that capacity, the absence of eye-consciousness, and so on, as 
proximate cause. The twofold mind-consciousness-element 
with an unconditioned resultant and the function of receiving, 
has the characteristic of cognizing the six objects, the function 
of receiving and so forth, the manifestation of that capacity, 
the heart-basis as proximate cause. It is divided because it 
is conjoined with joy and equanimity, and haB two and five 
localities. For one of them is associated with joy because it 
clearly proceeds in a decidedly desirable object, and has two 
1 Read asan0. 2 Delete comma after dvt. 

--- PAGE 38 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 531 
localities because it proceeds at the five doors, and at the 
conclusion of apperception by way of receiving and registering. 
The other is associated with equanimity because it clearly 
proceeds in a neutral object, and has five localities because it 
proceeds by way of examining, registering, reconception, life- 
continuum and decease. And this eightfold consciousness with 
an unconditioned resultant is divided into two kinds: with a 
constant object, and with an inconstant.object. It is of three 
kinds as being indifferent, easeful, joyful in feeling. For the 
fivefold consciousness has a constant object as it proceeds 
in the material objects, and so on, in due order; the remainder 
has an inconstant object.1 The mind-element proceeds in the 
five objects, material and so on, the twofold mind-conscious¬ 
ness-element in the six. Body-consciousness is conjoined with 
ease. The mind-consciousness-element with the two localities 
is conjoined with joy; the rest with indifference. Thus should 
be known the eightfold moral, resultant unconditioned con¬ 
sciousness.2 
The conditioned consciousness is associated with Buch re¬ 
sultant conditions as non-greed. Like the moral of the realm 
of sense, it is of eight kinds through joy, and so on. But it 
does not, as does the moral, proceed in six objects by way of 
almsgiving, and so on. It proceeds in six objects included 
among the limited states by way of reconception, life-con¬ 
tinuum, decease and registration. It should be understood 
as prompted and unprompted by way of [the causal relation 
of] arrival. [456] Though there is no distinction among the 
associated states, the resultant is without potentiality3 like 
the reflection of the face on the surface of a mirror, and so on. 
The moral should be understood to be possessed of potentiality 
like the face. It is just the immoral result that is uncon¬ 
ditioned. It is of seven kinds: eye-consciousness, ear-, nose-, 
tongue-, body-consciousness, mind-element with the function 
of receiving, mind-consciousness-element. Its characteristics 
and so on, should be understood by what has been said about 
1 Read aniyatd for saniyaid. 3 Cf. Dhammasangarii, §$ 431-98. 
3 ** Ussdha ” is explained in the Tikd as “ potentiality for producing 
a result in a continuity not free from ignorance, craving and conceit.” 

--- PAGE 39 ---
532 The Path of Purity 
the moral unconditioned result. It is only the moral results 
that take desirable and neutral objects; these (the immoral) 
take undesirable and neutral objects. Those are of three 
kinds through indifference, ease, joy; these of two kinds through 
pain and indifference. And of these, body-consciousness is 
accompanied by pain, the rest by indifference. And the 
indifference in them is of low order and not so very sharp as 
the pain. In the others (the moral), the indifference is of 
high order, and is not so very sharp as the ease. Thus the 
resultant consciousness of the realm of sense is to be under¬ 
stood as of twenty-three kinds, these namely: seven immoral 
results and the foregoing sixteen moral results. 
The resultant of the realm of form is fivefold like the moral. 
That, however, proceeds in a process of apperception by way 
of right attainment, this in birth by way of reconception, life- 
continuum and decease. Similarly the resultant of the 
realm of the formless is fourfold like the moral. And the 
different ways in which it proceeds are as said above concern¬ 
ing the resultant of the realm of form. 
The transcendental resultant, being the fruition of con¬ 
sciousness joined to the four Paths, is of four kinds. It 
proceeds in two ways, by way of the process of the Path and 
by way of attainment.1 
Thus in the four planes the entire resultant consciousness 
is of thirty-six kinds. 
The inoperative consciousness as to the division into 
“ plane ” is of three kinds: of the realm of sense, of the realm 
of form, and of the realm of the formless. Of these the realm 
of sense is of two kinds: unconditioned and conditioned. Of 
these the “ unconditioned ” is bereft of conditions, an opera¬ 
tive where is absence of greed, etc. It is of two kinds, as 
divided into mind-element and ideational, or representative 
element.* Of these, mind-element has the characteristic of 
cognizing material objects, and so on, which precede eye- 
consciousness, and so on, the function of adverting, the 
manifestation of facing towards material objects, and so on. 
1 Follow the v.l. in the text. * Lit. mind-consciousneas-element. 

--- PAGE 40 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 533 
the cutting-of[ of life-continuum as proximate cause. It is 
yoked to indifference. The ideational-element is of two 
kinds: common and special. 
[457] Of these, the common unconditioned inoperative accom¬ 
panied by indifference, has the characteristic of cognising the 
six objects; as to work, it has the function of determining, at 
the five doors and the mind-door; the manifestation of that 
state; it has the absence of either the unconditioned resultant 
mind-door-consciousness, or the life-continuum as proximate 
cause. The special unconditioned inoperative, accompanied 
by joy, has the characteristic of cognizing the Bix objects. 
As to work, it has the function of producing laughter at 
objects1 not held in respect by the saints, the manifestation 
of such a state, and assuredly the heart-basis for proximate 
cause. Thus the unconditioned inoperative of the realm of 
sense is of three kinds. And the conditioned inoperative is, 
like the moral inoperative, of eight kinds through the divisions 
into joy, and so on. But only the moral arises in the case of 
probationers and the many-folk, and this (conditioned) only 
in the case of saints. This is the difference. 
Thus consciousness of the realm of sense is of eleven kinds; 
those of the realm of form and the formless, are of five kinds 
and four kinds like their respective moral [consciousness]. 
The difference between this (inoperative) and the moral is to 
be known through their arising in the case of saints. Thus 
in the three planes the entire inoperative consciousness is of 
twenty kinds. And thus there are eighty-nine classes of 
consciousness in all, namely: moral, twenty-one; immoral, 
twelve; resultant, thirty-six; inoperative, twenty. 
And how about those that proceed in fourteen ways through 
conception, life-continuum, adverting, seeing, hearing, smell¬ 
ing, tasting, touching, receiving, examining, deciding, apper- 
ceiving, registering, death ? When through the power of the 
eight moral consciousnesses of the realm of sense, beings are 
re-born among devas and men, then, making as object2 one 
or other among actions and attributes of actions, attributes 
1 Such as beauty, colour of skin, and so forth. 
1 Cf. Compendium of Philosophy, 149 f. 

--- PAGE 41 ---
534 The Path of Purity 
of destinies which appear to them at the time of death, there 
proceed by way of reconception, nine resultant conscious¬ 
nesses, to wit: eight conditioned results of the realm of sense 
and the unconditioned resultant ideational element, accom¬ 
panied by indifference, and the resultant of the weak, twice- 
conditioned moral [consciousness] which arises in eunuchs, and 
so on, among men. When through the power of the moral 
consciousness of the realms of form and the formless, beings 
are re-born among existences of form and the formless, then, 
making as object the actions and attributes of actions which 
appear to them at the time of death, there proceed, by way of 
reconception, nine resultants of the realms of form and the 
formless. And when through the power of the immoral, beings 
are re-born in a state of woe, then, making as object one or 
other among actions, attributes of actions, attributes of 
destinies which appear to them at the time of death, there 
proceeds, by way of reconception, one immoral unconditioned 
resulting ideational element. 
[458] Thus, here nineteen kinds of resultant consciousness 
are to be known as proceeding by way of re-birth. And when 
reconception-consciousness ceases, immediately following it 
there proceeds, in that very object, (one or other of the actions, 
and so on) a similar subconsciousness1 which iB the result of 
this or that action. Again a similar subconsciousness proceeds. 
When thus there is no2 other uprising of consciousness 
which submerges the continuity, the subconsciousness proceeds, 
like the stream of a river, an infinite number of times during 
such times as when one is asleep without seeing dreams. 
And those (flashes of) rcconceptdon-consciousness also should 
be understood to proceed by way of subconsciousness. 
And when, the subconscious continuity proceeding, the 
controlling faculties of beings are able to seise objects, then, 
as a visible object enters the path of the eye there is impact 
of the sentient eye-organism with the object. Then there is a 
vibrating of the subconsciousness by the power of the impact. 
Next, the subconsciousness ceasing, there arises the inoperative 
1 Being associated with the reconception-consciouanesa in root-cauBe. 
* Punctuate the text accordingly. 

--- PAGE 42 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 535 
mind-clement1 dwelling on that very object and effecting the 
function of adverting as though cutting off the subconscious¬ 
ness. And the same with the ear-door and the others. And 
when the sixfold object enters the avenue at the mind-door, 
immediately after the vibrating of the subconsciousness, there 
arises the unconditioned, inoperative ideational element 
accompanied by indifference, effecting the function of advert¬ 
ing as though cutting off the subconsciousness.2 
Thus should be understood the proceeding of the two classes 
of inoperative consciousness by way of adverting. And 
immediately after the adverting, there arise at the eye-door 
eye-consciousness with the sentient eye for physical basis and 
effecting the function of seeing; at the ear-door and the 
others, ear-, nose-, tongue-, body-consciousness, effecting the 
functions of hearing, and so on. 
They are moral resultant in respect of desirable and neutral 
objects, immoral resultant in respect of undesirable and 
neutral objects. Thus should be understood the proceeding 
of the ten kinds of resultant consciousness by way of seeing, 
hearing, smelling, tasting, touching. 
In accordance with such a statement as :8 “ Immediately 
after the eye-consciousness-element has arisen and ceased, there 
arises the appropriate mind-element which is mind, thought, 
thinking. . . .” there arises immediately after eye-conscious¬ 
ness, and so on, [459] the mind-element which receives their 
very object and which, immediately after a moral result, is 
moral resultant and, immediately after an immoral result, 
is immoral resultant. Thus should be understood the pro¬ 
ceeding of two kinds of resultant consciousness by way of 
receiving. 
In accordance with such a statement as: “Immediately 
after the mind-element has arisen and ceased, there arises the 
appropriate ideational element which is mind, thought, thinking 
. . .”4 there arises, examining the object received by the 
mind-element, the resultant conditioned mind-consciousness- 
element which is immoral resultant after an immoral resultant 
1 Or, the five-door-adverting. 
8 Vibfui-nga 88. 
* See text, p. 468, n. 1. 
« Ibid. 89 f. 

--- PAGE 43 ---
536 The Path of Purity 
mind-element, accompanied by joy in a desirable object after 
a moral result, accompanied by indifference in a neutral 
object. Thus should be understood the proceeding of three 
kinds of resultant consciousness by way of examining. 
Immediately after the examination there arises, determining 
that very object, the inoperative, unconditioned ideational 
element, accompanied by indifference. Thus is to be under¬ 
stood the procedure of one inoperative consciousness by way 
of determining. 
Then, immediately after the determination, if the object 
such as visible form, and so on, be large, there come into play 
in the object as has been determined, six or seven apperceptions 
by way of some one among the eight moral of the realm of 
sense, or the twelve immoral, or the nine remaining inoperative 
of the realm of sense. This is the manner at the five doors. 
But at the mind-door immediately after the mind-door- 
adverting, there arise those (twenty-nine classes of apper- 
ceptional consciousness just mentioned).1 
Above the Adoption, that apperception comes into play 
which obtains a cause (such as wise attention), from among 
these, to wit: five moral and five inoperative of the realm of 
form, four moral and four inoperative of the realm of the form¬ 
less, four classes of Path-consciousness and four of Fruition- 
consciousness of the transcendental. Thus is to be understood 
the procedure of the fifty-five classes of moral, immoral, 
inoperative, resultant consciousness by way of apperception. 
But if at the conclusion of apperception, a very large 
object at the five doors is manifested at the mind-door also, 
then by means of that cause, which is obtained by way of 
desirable objects, and so on, and of apperceptional conscious¬ 
ness with a previous action by beings of the realm of sense, 
at the conclusion of apperception of the realm of sense, there 
arises once or twice one resultant consciousness or another 
of the eight conditioned resultants of the realm of sense, or 
of the three resultant, unconditioned ideational elements 
which follows the apperception which has come into play, at 
x T&ni yevd ti atihannam v& it adind vuUdni tkunaiimsa kdmdvacara 
javandni yeva.—Ttkd. 

--- PAGE 44 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates • 537 
an object other than that of the life-continuum, just as 
the water follows for a little while the boat which is going 
up the stream. [460] That consciousness, being worthy of 
proceeding in an object of the life-continuum, at the con¬ 
clusion of apperception is known as “registration”1 because 
it proceeds making the object of apperception its own object. 
Thus is to be understood the procedure of eleven classes of 
resultant consciousness by way of the registered object. 
At the conclusion of registration the life-continuum again 
proceeds. When the life-continuum is cut off, the adverting 
and so on, again proceed. Thus the continuity of consciousness 
which has obtained a cause proceeds as adverting immediately 
after the life-continuum, as seeing, and so on,2 immediately 
after the adverting. Thus it proceeds again and again accord¬ 
ing to the system of consciousness, until the life-continuum in 
an existence is exhausted. And the last subconscious life- 
continuum in an existence is called decease, because it passes 
away from that existence. Therefore it also is of nineteen 
kinds. Thus is to be understood the procedure of the nineteen 
kinds of resultant consciousness by way of decease. And 
after decease re-birth again proceeds; after re-birth, life- 
continuum again proceeds. Thus unbroken, proceeds the 
continuity of consciousness of beings passing to and fro the 
[three] sources of life, [five] destinies, [seven] conscious 
durations, [nine] sentient abodes. But whoso among them 
attains to saintship, his consciousness ceases on the cessation 
of his decease-consciousness. 
This is the substance of the detailed discourse on the aggre¬ 
gate of consciousness. 
[The Aggregate of Feeling.] 
Now in what also has been stated as: “ Everything taken 
together that has the characteristic of enjoying is to be known 
as the aggregate of feeling,”3 the characteristic of feeling itself 
is feeling. As it has been said: “ Friend, a man feels and 
therefore it is called feeling .”4 From its intrinsic nature of the 
1 Lit. “ That-object.” * I.e. hearing, smelling, tasting, touching. 
8 Above, p. 527. 4 Further Dialogues i, 208. 
35 

--- PAGE 45 ---
538 The Path of Purity 
characteristic of enjoying, it is single. As good, bad,1 in¬ 
determinate, it is of three kinds. Of these, that which is 
associated with moral consciousness described as “ Of the realm 
of sense, of eight kinds owing to the divisions of joy, indif¬ 
ference, insight, complex,” is good feeling. That which is 
associated with the immoral is bad feeling. That which is 
associated with the indeterminate is indeterminate feeling. 
[461] It is of five kinds owing to the difference due to in¬ 
trinsic nature: pleasant, painful, joyful, sad, indifferent. Of 
these, that which is associated with body-consciousness, of the 
moral result, is pleasant. That which is associated with the 
immoral result is painful. And joyful is the feeling which is 
associated with sixty-two classes of consciousness, namely, 
from the realm of sense with four moral, four conditioned 
resultants, one unconditioned resultant, four conditioned 
inoperatives, one unconditioned inoperative, four immoral; 
and from the realm of form, excepting the consciousness of 
the fifth jhana, with four moral, four resultant, four inopera¬ 
tive ; and from the transcendental, excepting the eight which 
are of the fifth jhana, with the remaining thirty-two moral 
results, for the eight transcendental classes of consciousness 
make forty by virtue of the five jhanas, since there is no 
transcendental consciousness which is without a jhana. That 
which is associated with the two immoral is sad feeling. 
That which is associated with the remaining fifty-five classes 
of consciousness is indifferent feeling. 
Of these five kinds, pleasant feeling has the enjoying of 
a desirable tangible object as characteristic, the waxing of 
associated states as function, physical satisfaction as manifes¬ 
tation, the controlling faculty of the body as proximate cause. 
Painful feeling has the enjoying of an undesirable tangible 
object as characteristic, the waning of associated states aB 
function, physical affliction as manifestation, the controlling 
faculty of the body as proximate cause. Joyful feeling has 
the enjoying of a desirable object as characteristic, the making 
use of an object anyhow with the mode of desire as function, 
1 Or moral, immoral. 

--- PAGE 46 ---
XTV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 539 
mental satisfaction as manifestation, tranquillity as proximate 
cause. Sad feeling has the enjoying of an undesirable object as 
characteristic, the making use of an object anyhow with the 
mode of no desire as function, mental affliction as manifesta¬ 
tion, and verily the heart-basis as proximate cause. In¬ 
different feeling has neutral enjoyment as characteristic, the 
not waxing or waning of associated states as function, peaceful 
state as manifestation, consciousness void of zest as proximate 
cause. 
This is the substance of the detailed discourse on the 
aggregate of feeling. 
[The Aggregate of Perception.] 
Now in what also has been stated as: “ Everything taken 
together that has the characteristic of perceiving is to be 
known as the aggregate of perception,”1 the characteristic of 
perceiving itself is perception. As it has been said: “ jFriends, 
he perceives and therefore it is called perception”2 From its 
intrinsic nature of the characteristic of perceiving, it is single. 
As moral, immoral, indeterminate, it is of three kinds. Of 
these, [462] that which is associated with moral consciousness 
is moral perception. That which is associated with the 
immoral is .immoral perception. That which is associated 
with the indeterminate is indeterminate perception. Verily 
there is no consciousness which is dissociated from perception. 
Therefore the divisions of perception are as many as those of 
consciousness. Though it is equally differentiated as con¬ 
sciousness, all perception as regards characteristic and so on, 
has the characteristic of perceiving. It has the function of 
giving hint as to the cause of recognition saying, “ That is the 
very same thing !” as do hewers of logs, and so on, with logs, 
and so on. It has the manifestation of producing the laying 
to heart by virtue of the hint taken, as a blind man sees the 
elephant.8 It has the object conceived in the mind as the 
1 Above, p. 527. * Further Dialogues i, 208. 
3 I.e. in hia mind’s eye, forming an idea of the elephant from the 
particular part of the elephant which he happens to touch. 

--- PAGE 47 ---
540 The Path of Purity 
proximate cause, like the perception which arises to young 
deer on seeing scarecrows, thinking they are men. 
This is the substance of the detailed discourse on the aggre¬ 
gate of perception. 
[The Aggregate of Mental Activities.]1 
And in what has been stated as: “ Everything taken 
together that has the characteristic of bringing about is to be 
known as the aggregate of mental activities,”2 * the charac¬ 
teristic of bringing about (composing) is the characteristic of 
forming a group. Which is that ? The mental activities them¬ 
selves. As it has been said: “ Because they compose a com¬ 
pound. That is why, brethren, the word ‘ aclivities-compound ’ 
is used."* They have the characteristic of composing, the 
function of combining,4 * * the manifestation of being busy,® 
the remaining three aggregates [of mind] as proximate cause. 
Though of one kind in characteristic and so on, they are of 
three kinds as moral, immoral, indeterminate. Of these, 
those which are associated with moral consciousness are 
moral, those associated with the immoral are immoral, and 
those associated with the indeterminate are indeterminate. 
Of these, those that are associated with the first moral 
consciousness of the realm of sense are thirty-six, namely: 
twenty-seven which are constant, and which appear in their 
true nature, the four or-whatever states,® the five which are 
not constant.7 
1 Smkkdrd, also rendered “ complexes,” “mental coefficients”: 
“ synergies ” is the latest term suggested by Mrs. Rhys Davids, Buddh. 
Psych. Ethics, second edition, xi. 
9 Above, p. 527. 
8 Kindred Sayings iii, p. 73. 
* uyuhana. This meaning is not registered in P.T.S. Dictionary 
(*.t>.). Rdsikaramdaklchawan ti sampindanalakkhanam, tato sahkhdra 
dy&hana rasd ti vuccanti.—Tikd. 
‘ Vipphara, explained as vydpdra by the TikiS. 
• Cf. Expositor 174. 
7 Nigeria, constant, i.e. immutable by nature. Cf. Points of Con¬ 
troversy 355. The reference cannot be to Dfiammasangani, §§ 1028-30, 
which deal with the five acts that have immediate results, and are 
niyata, in the sense that they are “ fixed as to their consequences.” 

--- PAGE 48 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 541 
Of these,— 
Contact 
Volition 
Applied Thinking 
Sustained Thinking 
Zest 
Energy 
Life 
Concentration 
Faith 
Mindfulness 
[463] Sense of Shame (conscien¬ 
tiousness) 
Dread of Blame 
Absence of Greed (disin¬ 
terestedness) 
Absence of Hate 
Absence of Dullness 
Repose of Mental Factors1 
Repose (serenity) of Mind 
Buoyancy of Mental Factors 
Buoyancy of Mind 
Pliancy of Mental Factors 
Pliancy of Mind 
Wieldiness of Mental Factors 
Wieldiness of Mind 
Fitness of Mental Factors 
Fitness of Mind 
Rectitude of Mental Factors 
Rectitude of Mind 
—these are the twenty-seven which appear in their true nature. 
Desire-to-do Attention 
Resolve Equanimity 
—these are the four “ or-whatever ” states. 
Pity • Abstinence from Misconduct 
Sympathy of Speech 
Abstinence from Miscon- Abstinence from Wrong Live- 
duct of Body lihood 
—these are the five inconstant states. For they arise occasion¬ 
ally, and when they do, they do not arise together.2 Of these, 
contact means “ it touches.” It has touching as characteristic, 
impact as function, “coinciding” (of the physical basis, 
object and consciousness) as manifestation, and the object 
which has entered the avenue [of awareness] as proximate 
cause. Though it is an immaterial state, it proceeds with 
respect to objects after the mode of “ touching.” There is no 
impinging on one side of the object [as in physical contact], 
1 Kayo. See Expositor 199. It may mean (1) the body {Surnyutta 
i, 156); (2) the taofcile sense; (3) bodily action; (4) any group as here. 
2 From here, cf. Expositor 143 f. 

--- PAGE 49 ---
542 The Path of Purity 
nevertheless it causes consciousness and object to be in 
collision, as visible objects and the eye, sound and the car. 
It has coinciding as manifestation, because it is revealed 
through its own cause, known as the coinciding of three 
(basis, object, and consciousness). Because it arises by 
means of suitable “adverting,” and through some faculty 
(i.e., eye, and so on), and immediately in the object that has 
been prepared by consciousness, therefore it has as its proxi¬ 
mate cause an object that has entered the avenue of thought. 
And because it is the source of feeling, it is to be regarded as 
a hideless cow.1 
Volition is that which co-ordinates, that is, it binds closely 
[to itself associated states as objects].2 This is its charac¬ 
teristic ; its function is conation.3 It has directing as mani¬ 
festation, like the chief discipline, the head carpenter, and so 
on, who fulfil their own and others’ duties.4 It is also evident 
that it proceeds by causing associated states to be energetic in 
such things as recollecting an urgent work, and so on. 
[464] Whatever should be said concerning applied and 
sustained thinking and zest, has been said in the elucidation of 
the first Jhana in the exposition of the earth-device.5 
Energy is the state of an energetic man. It has strength¬ 
ening as its characteristic, supporting the co-existent states 
as function, opposition to giving way as manifestation. It 
has been said: “ He, being agitated, makes a rational effort ” :e 
hence it has agitation, or the basic condition of making energy, 
as proximate cause. Right effort should be regarded as the 
root of all attainments. 
Life is that by which [associated states] live, or it itself 
lives, or just the living. Its characteristics, and so on, should 
be understood as in the case of the life of matter.7 What is 
different is that there it is the life of material things, here it 
is that of immaterial states. 
1 Just as a hidelesB cow suffers pain whatever place it comes in 
contact with, so contact gives rise to feeling. 
* Abhisanddhati, see Expositor i, appendix. 
* Aytihana. 4 Expositor 148. 8 Above, p. 164 f. 
* Milinda i, 57. 1 See The. Aggregate of Matter above, p. 515. 

--- PAGE 50 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 543 
Concentration, is tliat which places the mind fittingly or 
well in an object; or it is just the placing well of the mind. 
It has not-scattering, or not-wavering1 as characteristic; 
the welding together of the co-existent states as function, as 
water kneads bath-powder into a paste; and peace of mind as 
manifestation. It is distinguished by having ease as proxi¬ 
mate cause. Like the steadiness of the flame of a lamp2 in 
the absence of wind, so should steadfastness of mind be under¬ 
stood. 
By it [persons or associated states] believe, or it itself 
believes, or the mere believing—this is faith. It has believing 
or confiding as characteristic; purifying as function, like the 
water-purifying gem, or aspiring faith as function, like the 
crossing of the floods ; freedom from pollution, or decision, as 
manifestation; an object worthy of faith, or factors of stream- 
winning such as hearing the Good Law and so on,8 as proximate 
cause. It should be regarded as at once hand, property, and 
seed.4 
By it associated states remember the object, or it itself 
remembers the object, or the mere remembering—this is 
mindfulness. It has “not floating away’’6 as characteristic; 
the fighting of forgetfulness8 as function; guarding, or the 
state of facing the object, as manifestation; firm perception 
or application in mindfulness os regards the body, and so on, 
as proximate cause. It should be regarded as a door-post 
from being firmly established in the object, and as a door¬ 
keeper from guarding the door of the senses. 
Conscientiousness is that which abominates misconduct 
in body, and so on. It is a synonym for shame. Dread of 
blame is that which dreads misconduct in body, and so on. 
1 The fxka says the not-scattering refers to itself, and the not- 
wavering to associated states. 
2 Read dipacclnam for cRpacchinam. 
3 Association with good folk, wise attention, conduct in conformity 
with the Law. Samyutta v, 347. 
4 I.e. as emblems of agency, fulfilment, and condition of good thoughts. 
* Not allowing any floating away, as of a pumpkin in a stream. It 
does not suffer the object to slip, but keeps it steady as a rock.—Tiled, 
• Read asammosa, whioh the Tiled defines as the opposition of 3am- 
mosa, not its absence. Read accordingly in Expositor 161. 

--- PAGE 51 ---
544 The Path of Purity 
It is a synonym for agitation at evil. Of the two, conscien¬ 
tiousness has the abominating of evil as characteristic, dread 
of blame has fear as characteristic. Conscientiousness has as 
its function the non-doing of evil deeds owing to the mode of 
shame, dread of blame owing to fear. From their modes wrhich 
have just been described they have the shrinking from evil 
as manifestation, respect for self and others [465] as proximate 
cause. Out of self-respect one abandons, like a daughter of 
noble family, evil-doing by means of conscientiousness. Out 
of respect for the world one abandons, like the courtesan, 
evil-doing by means of dread of blame. These two states 
should be regarded as guardians of the world. 
By this they do not lust, or it itself does not lust, or the 
mere act of not lusting—this is the absence of greed (or dis¬ 
interestedness). And the same for absence of hate and absence 
of dullness. Of these three, absence of greed has the charac¬ 
teristic of the mind being free from cupidity for an object of 
thought, or of its being detached, like a drop of water on a 
lotus leai It has the function of not appropriating, like an 
emancipated monk; and the manifestation of detachment, like 
a man falling into a foul place. Absence of hate has the 
characteristic of freedom from churlishness or from resent¬ 
ment, like an agreeable friend; the function of destroying 
vexation or dispelling distress, like the sandal wood; the 
manifestation of being pleasing, like the full moon. Absence 
of dullness has the penetration of intrinsic nature, unfaltering 
penetration, as its characteristic, like the penetration of an 
arrow shot by a skilled archer; illumination of the object as 
its function, as it were a lamp; non-perplexity as its proximate 
cause, as it were a good guide in the forest. And the three 
should be regarded as the roots of all moral states. 
Repose of kaya is the calming of the three groups of mental 
factors. Repose of citta is the calming of mind. Raya here 
refers to the three aggregates—feeling, perception, and mental 
activities. These two states, being taken together, have 
the characteristic of pacifying the suffering of both mental 
factors and consciousness; the function of crushing the 
suffering of both; the manifestation of an unwavering and 

--- PAGE 52 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 545 
cool state of both; and have mental factors and consciousness 
as proximate cause. They should be regarded as the opponents 
of the corruptions, such as distraction, which cause the dis¬ 
turbance of mental factors and consciousness. 
Buoyancy of kdya is the buoyant state of mental factors; 
buoyancy of citta is the buoyant state of mind. They have the 
characteristic of suppressing the heaviness of the one and the 
other; the function of crushing heaviness in both; the manifes¬ 
tation of opposition to sluggishness in both; and have mental 
factors and consciousness as proximate cause. They should 
be regarded as the opponents of the corruptions, such as sloth 
and torpor, which cause heaviness in mental factors and 
consciousness. 
Pliancy of kdya is the pliant state of mental factors; pliancy 
of citta is the pliant state of mind. They have the characteris¬ 
tic of suppressing the rigidity of mental factors and of con¬ 
sciousness; the function of crushing the same in both; the 
manifestation of setting up no resistance; and have mental 
factors and consciousness as proximate cause. They 
should be regarded as the opponents of the corruptions, such 
as opinionativeness and conceit, which cause rigidity in 
mental factors and consciousness. 
Wieldiness of kdya is wieldiness of mental factors; citta- 
wieldiness is wieldiness of mind. They have the characteristic 
[466] of suppressing unwieldiness1 in both; the function of 
crushing the same in both; the manifestation of success of 
both in making objects of thought; and they have mental 
factors and consciousness as proximate cause. They should 
be regarded as the opponents of the remaining hindrances 
which cause unwieldiness in mental factors and consciousness ; 
as bringing faith in objects of faith, and patient application 
in works of advantage, and as being like the purity of gold. 
Xaya-fitness is fitness of mental factors; ettta-fitness is 
that of mind. They have the characteristic of the freedom 
of mental factors and of consciousness from illness; the function 
of crushing illness in both ; the manifestation of freedom from 
1 Read Icayacittukam0. 

--- PAGE 53 ---
546 The Path of Purity 
evil; they have the mental factors and consciousness as 
proximate cause. They should be regarded as the opponents 
of the corruptions, such as diffidence, which cause illness in 
both. 
JTaya-rectitude is rectitude of mental factors; ciMa-rectitude 
is that of mind. They have the characteristic of straightness 
in both; the function of crushing crookedness in both; the 
manifestation of non-deflection; they have mental factors 
and mind as proximate cause. They should be regarded as 
the opponents of the corruptions, such as deception and crafti¬ 
ness, which cause crookedness in mental factors and con¬ 
sciousness. 
Desire is synonymous with wish to act. Hence its charac¬ 
teristic is wish-to-aefc, its function is searching for an object, 
its manifestation, having the object at its disposal, which 
object is its proximate cause. In the taking of an object by 
the mind, desire should be regarded as the stretching forth of 
the hand.1 
Resolve as to an object is choice of the same. Its charac¬ 
teristic is determination, its function, opposition to slinking 
along,2 its manifestation is judging,3 its proximate cause is an 
object fit to be decided. Owing to its unshakable nature 
as to the object, it should be regarded as a stone pillar. 
Attention is a mode of work, working in the mind. It 
makes mind, so to speak, different from the previous mind. 
It is of three kinds: attention which regulates the object, 
attention which regulates process-consciousness, attention 
which regulates apperception. Of these, that which regulates 
the object is called attention because it makes [the object] in 
the mind. It has the characteristic of driving associated 
states towards the object, the function of joining associated 
states to the object, the manifestation of facing the object, 
which object is its proximate cause. It is included in the 
aggregate of mental coefficients, and should be regarded as 
1 As by thieves to grasp an object in the dark. 
* Asairuappana, as of an irresolute child, thinking: Shall I do it ? 
shall I not do it T—Tlka. Cf. Angvtlam v, 288, 291. 
* Atthasalinl reads niccala, “ unshakableness.” 

--- PAGE 54 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 547 
the charioteer of associated states because it regulates the 
object. Attention which regulates process-consciouBness is a 
synonym for the adverting of mind at the live doors (presen- 
tative consciousness); and attention which regulates apper¬ 
ception is a synonym for mind-door-adverting (representative 
consciousness). The latter two kinds of attention are not 
intended here. 
Equanimity1 is neutrality regarding various states. It 
has the characteristic of carrying on consciousness and mental 
properties equally, the function of checking deficiency and 
excess [467], or of cutting off partisanship; it has the manifes¬ 
tation of neutrality. By virtue of its indifference regarding 
consciousness and mental properties, it should be regarded 
as a charioteer who treats with impartiality the well-trained 
horses he is driving. 
Pity and sympathy are to be understood as described in the 
exposition of the divine states.2 There is only this difference 
—there they have attained to ecstasy and are experienced in 
the realm of form; here they are experienced in the realm of 
sense. 
Aaya-misconduct-abstinence means abstinence from mis¬ 
conduct in bodily action. And the same with the remaining 
two sentences. As regards characteristic, and so on, it has 
been said that none of these three trespasses or treads on 
objects of the other two. They have the function of shrinking 
from the same, the manifestation of not committing any of 
these evil acts, and they have faith, sense of shame, fear of 
blame, contentment and more as proximate causes. They 
should be regarded as produced by the state of mind averted 
from evil action. 
Thus these thirty-six mental activities should be under¬ 
stood as being united with the first moral consciousness of the 
realm of sense,8 and so also with the Second Consciousness.4 
What is distinctive is that in the latter they arise by instiga¬ 
tion. Excepting absence of dullness, the remaining states 
1 Lit. “ There-middleness.” * Ch. IX. 
a Dhammasangani, § 1. 4 Ibid., § 146. 

--- PAGE 55 ---
548 The Path of Purity 
are to be understood as being united -with the Third Con¬ 
sciousness,1 and so also with the Fourth. What is distinctive 
is that in the latter they arise by instigation. Excepting 
zest from among those states mentioned in the First Con¬ 
sciousness, the remaining states are united with the Fifth, 
and so also with the Sixth. What is distinctive is that in the 
latter they arise by instigation. Excepting absence of dullness, 
the remaining states are to be understood as being united with 
the Seventh, and so also with the Eighth. What is distinctive 
is that in the latter they arise by instigation. Excepting 
the three states of abstinence mentioned in the First, the 
remaining [thirty-three] states are united with the First 
Consciousness of the moral of the realm of form. Leaving 
out applied thought from these, the remaining [thirty-two] 
states are united with the Second. Leaving out sustained 
thought from these, the remaining [thirty-one] states are 
united with the Third. Leaving out zest from these, the 
remaining [thirty] states are united with the Fourth. Leaving 
out from these pity and sympathy from among the inconstant 
states, the remaining [twenty-eight] states are united with 
the Fifth. The very same are united in the Formless moral. 
The only distinction is their being in the realm of the Formless. 
As regards the transcendental, what has been said about the 
First Consciousness of the realm of form is to be understood as 
applicable to the Path-consciousness of the first Jhana; what 
has been said about the Second Consciousness, and so on, of 
the realm of form, is to be understood as applicable to the 
different kinds of Path-consciousness of the Second Jhana, 
and so on. The absence of pity and sympathy, the constancy 
of the abstinences, ohe tranBcendality are [468] the distinctive 
features in them. Thus should be understood the mental 
activities which are moral. 
Among the immoral, there are seventeen mental activities 
in the consciousness rooted in greed, namely, the thirteen 
which appear in their true nature, and which are constant and 
associated with the First immoral, and the four “ or-what- 
1 Dhammcuangani, § 147 f. 

--- PAGE 56 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 549 
Of these, the thirteen appearing in their true nature evers. 
as:— 
Contact 
Volition 
Applied Thought 
Sustained Thought 
Zest 
Energy 
Life 
Concentration 
Unconscientiousness 
Fearlessness of Blame 
Greed 
Dullness 
Wrong Views 
The four “ or-whatevers” arc:— 
Desire-to-act Distraction 
Kesolve Attention 
Of these, unconscientiousness means that it is not modest 
(or, docs not abominate); the state of immodesty (or of not 
abominating) is unconscientiousness. Non-fear of blame is 
fearlessness of blame. Of them, unconscientiousness has the 
characteristic of not abominating misconduct of the body, and 
so on, or of the absence of shame. Fearlessness of blame has 
the characteristic of not being diffident on account of mis¬ 
conduct of the body, and so on, or of absence of confusion.1 
This iB the short account. The detailed account is to be 
understood as the opposite of what has been said about 
conscientiousness and fear of blame.2 
By it associated states lust, or itself lusts, or the mere 
act of lusting—such is greed. By it associated states are 
deluded, or itself is deluded, or just the being deluded—this 
is delusion (or dullness). Of them, greed has the charac¬ 
teristic of grasping the object like sticky lime; the function 
of clinging like a piece of flesh thrown into a hot pan; the 
manifestation of not letting go like a taint of lamp-black; the 
proximate cause of viewing the fetter-like states as enjoyment. 
Growing into a river of craving, it takes away beings to 
a Btate of woe, as a river of swift current carries away any 
object fallen into it to the great ocean. Thus should it be 
regarded. 
1 Anutt&sa ■■ asambhamo.—fllca. 2 Above, p. 644. 

--- PAGE 57 ---
550 The Path of Purity 
Delusion has the characteristic of blindness or opposition 
to knowledge; the essence of non-penetration, or the function 
of covering the intrinsic nature of the object; the manifesta¬ 
tion of being opposed to right conduct, or causing blindness; 
the proximate cause of unwise attention; and should be 
regarded as the root of all immoralities.1 
By it associated states see wrongly, or itself sees wrongly, 
[469] or as just the act of wrong seeing,—thus is it wrong view. 
It has unwise conviction as characteristic; perversion as 
function; wrong conviction as manifestation; the desire not 
to see the Elect as proximate cause, and should be regarded as 
supreme fault.2 
Distraction is the state of an excited mind. Absence of 
calmness is its characteristic, like water agitated by 
the wind. Unsteadiness is its function, like a flag or 
banner struck by the wind. Trembling is its manifestation, 
like ashes scattered by impacts with a stone. Unwise 
attention due to the unsettled state of mind is its 
proximate cause. It should be regarded as wavering of the 
mind. 
The rest of the immoral mental activities should be under¬ 
stood as said above. Their being immoral and their being 
vile owing to immorality, are what distinguishes them from 
[moral] activities. 
Thus these seventeen mental activities should be under¬ 
stood as being united with the First immoral consciousness, 
and so also with the Second. What is distinctive is that in 
the latter they arise by instigation, and sloth-torpor is in¬ 
constant. 
Of these, sloth is the imworkableness of mind. Torpor is 
8tiflne8s of mind. The meaning is: Shrinkage due to lack of 
effort, and oppression due to lack of courage.3 Sloth and 
torpor, thus sloth-torpor. Of these, sloth has the charac¬ 
teristic of opposition to effort,4 the function of destroying 
1 For this and the two preceding paragraphs, cf. Expositor 331-2. 
* Expositor 331. 
* Read anussdhanasamhanat& asatti0. 
* Anussdha=ussdhapafipaklcha.—filed. 

--- PAGE 58 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 551 
energy,1 the manifestation of sinking [the associated states]. 
Torpor has the characteristic of nnwieldincss, the function of 
binding2 the associated states, the manifestation of tardiness 
(in seizing an object) or drowsiness with blinking of 
the eyes.3 Both sloth and torpor have the proximate 
cause of unwise attention with discontent and yawning, and 
so on. 
Excepting wrong views mentioned in the First conscious¬ 
ness, the remaining [sixteen] states should be understood 
(as being united) with the Third. What is distinctive is that 
in the latter, conceit is not constant. This conceit has the 
characteristic of haughtiness, the function of praising, the 
manifestation of desire for the banner (t.e., self-advertisement); 
and it has greed dissociated from opinion as proximate cause, 
and should be regarded as madness. Excepting wrong views 
mentioned in the Second consciousness, the remaining states 
should be understood as being united with the Fourth, where 
also conceit and [sloth-torpor] are among the inconstant states. 
Excepting zest from those mentioned in the First Conscious¬ 
ness, the remaining states are united with the Fifth, and so 
also with the Sixth. The arising by instigation, and the 
inconstancy of sloth-torpor, are what is distinctive in the 
latter. Excepting views from those mentioned in the Fifth 
Consciousness, the rest are to be understood with the Seventh, 
where also conceit is not constant. Excepting views from 
among those mentioned in the Sixth Consciousness, the rest 
are to be understood with the Eighth, where also conceit and 
[sloth-torpor] are among the inconstant states. 
[470] Of the two classes of consciousness rooted in hate, 
there are eighteen mental activities, to wit: eleven which 
appear in their true nature and which are constant, and are 
associated with the First Consciousness; four “or-whatever ” 
states; three inconstant states. 
1 %'lko, reads tnriyavanodanam as vlriyassa avanodanam, defining 
avanodunam (not in P.T.S. Dictionary) as khxpanam. 
2 Another reading is oddhanartuam, the function of shutting (the door 
of consciousness). 
3 Read capaldyikd°, which is not in the P.T.S. Dictionary. 
9223 

--- PAGE 59 ---
552 The Path of Purity 
Of these, the eleven appearing in their true nature are:— 
Contact 
Volition 
Applied Thought 
Sustained Thought 
Energy 
Life 
Concentration 
Unconscientiousness 
Fearlessness of Blame 
Hate 
Delusion 
The four “ or-whatever ” states are:— 
Desire Distraction 
Resolve Attention 
The three inconstant states are:— 
Envy Worry 
Meanness 
Of these, by it [associated states] offend [the object], or 
itself is offensive, or the mere act of offending—this is hate. 
It has flying into anger (or churlishness) as characteristic, like 
a smitten snake; spreading of itself (or writhing), as when 
poison takes effect, as function; or, burning that on which it 
depends1 as function, like a jungle fire; offending (or injuring) 
as manifestation, like a foe who has got his chance; the grounds 
of vexation as proximate cause, like urine mixed with poison. 
Envy is that which envies, and has the characteristic of 
envying the prosperity of others, the function of taking no 
delight in such prosperity, the manifestation of turning one’s 
face from such prosperity, the proximate cause being such 
prosperity; and it should be regarded as a fetter. 
Meanness is the state of being mean. It has, as character¬ 
istic, the concealing of one’s property, either attained or about 
to be attained; the not enduring the sharing of one’s property 
in common with others, as function; the shrinking from such 
sharing, or niggardliness or sour feeling2 as manifestation; 
one’s own property as proximate cause; and it should be 
regarded as mental ugliness. 
A contemptible act is kuJcata; the state of [a displeased 
mind, produced by making] such an act [its object] is worry 
1 I.o. the body or heart-basis. 
* KafuJcaUcukaid, see Expositor, Index. 

--- PAGE 60 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 553 
(kukkucca). It has repentance as characteristic, sorrow at 
deeds of commission and omission as function, regret as mani¬ 
festation, deeds of commission and omission as proximate 
cause; and it should be regarded as a state of bondage.1 
The remaining states are of the kinds described. Thus 
these seventeen mental activities should be understood 
as being united with the First Consciousness rooted in hate, 
as also with the Second. What is distinctive is the arising 
by instigation, and the inclusion of sloth-torpor among the 
inconstant states. 
Of the two classes of consciousness rooted in delusion [471] 
there are thirteen mental activities which are united with 
the consciousness associated with perplexity, to wit: eleven 
appearing in their true nature as:— 
Contact Conscious Duration 
Volition Unconscientiousness 
Applied Thought Fearlessness of Blame 
Sustained Thought Delusion 
Energy Perplexity 
Life 
Of these, conscious duration is weak concentration lasting just 
a moment.2 
That which is devoid of the cure of thought is perplexity. 
It has shifting of the mind as characteristic, trembling as 
function,3 indecision or uncertain grasp as manifestation, 
unwise attention as proximate cause; and it should be regarded 
as doing harm to the attainments. 
The remaining states are of the kinds described. Excepting 
perplexity from those mentioned in the consciousness asso¬ 
ciated with perplexity, the remaining twelve states are united 
1 See also Expositor 342-343 for the definitions of hate, envy, mean¬ 
ness, and worry. 
* Pamttitfhiii is explained by the flka as khanafthiti, like the dura¬ 
tion of the flame of a lamp in the wind. The Abhidhammdvat&rafikd, 
on the other hand, explains it as the duration of a process of conscious¬ 
ness which does not attain to factors of the Path and so on, and which 
therefore is void of decision (pavattiffhiH motto ti cetaso pavatti saAkhdto 
thiti motto, no maggangddibhaxam gacchati, ndhimokkhavirahato ti attho). 
8 The TikA points out that whereas distraction proceeds, causing 
the mind to tremble over one object, perplexity causes the mind to 
tremble over many objects. 
36 

--- PAGE 61 ---
554 The Path of Purity 
with that associated with distraction, wherein decision arises 
owing to the absence of perplexity. Together with this 
[decision] there remain thirteen mental activities. And 
owing to the production of decision, concentration becomes 
stronger. And whatever distraction there is, appears in its 
true nature; decision and attention come by way of the 
“ or-whatever ” states. Thus should the immoral mental 
activities be understood. 
Of the indeterminate, the resultant indeterminate mental 
activities are of two kinds as unconditioned and conditioned. 
Of them, those that are associated with the unconditioned 
resultant consciousness are unconditioned. Of these, there are 
five which are associated with moral and immoral resultant 
oye-consciousness, to wit: four appearing in their true nature 
&s * 
Contact Life 
Volition Conscious Duration 
and the “ or-whatever ” state, attention. And the same five 
are those that are associated with ear-, nose-, tongue-, body- 
consciousness. And eight are those that are [associated] with 
the double (i.e., moral, immoral) resultant mind-element, 
namely, the same five, applied thought, sustained thought, 
and decision. And the same eight are those that are asso¬ 
ciated with the threefold unconditioned mind-consciousness- 
element. Here in these three kinds, zest is excessive together 
with that [examining consciousness] which is accompanied by 
joy and which is present there. Thus should it be understood. 
Those mental activities that are associated with the con¬ 
ditioned resultant consciousness are conditioned. Of these, 
those that are associated with the eight results in the realm 
of sense resemble those that are associated with the eight 
moral of the realm of sense. But pity and sympathy, which 
are among the inconstant states, are not among the results since 
they have beings for object; for the results of the realm of 
sense have certainly1 limited objects. Not merely pity and 
sympathy, but also the abstinences are not present among the 
results [472]; for it has been said that the five Precepts are 
1 Read ekanUf. 

--- PAGE 62 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 555 
moral. Those associated with the transcendental resultant 
consciousness of the realms of form, and of the formless, arc 
the same as those associated with the moral consciousness. 
The inoperative, indeterminate mental activities also are 
divided into the unconditioned and the conditioned. Of 
them, those associated with the unconditioned, inoperative 
consciousness are unconditioned; and they are the same as 
those associated1 with the twofold moral resultant mind- 
element and unconditioned mind-consciousness-element. But 
in the twofold mind-consciousness-element, energy is excessive. 
Owing to the presence of energy, concentration gains in 
strength. Such is the distinction here. Those associated 
with the conditioned, inoperative consciousness are con¬ 
ditioned. Of these, those associated with the eight classes 
of inoperative consciousness of the realm of sense resemble 
those associated with the eight moral of the realm of sense. 
But those associated with the inoperative of the realms of 
form and the formless, resemble in all respects the moral 
consciousness of the same. Thus should the indeterminate 
mental activities be understood. 
This is the substance of the detailed discourse on the aggre¬ 
gate of mental activities. 
[The Classification of the Aggregate of Feeling as past, and so on.] 
This is the substance of the detailed discourse on the aggre¬ 
gates by the word-classifying method in Abhidhamma. The 
Blessed One has treated the aggregates in detail thus: “ What¬ 
ever matter there is, that is past, future, or present, subjective or 
objective, gross or refined, inferior or superior, distant or near, 
being grouped together, put together, as one, is called the aggregate 
of matter. Whatever feeling . . . whatever perception . . . 
whatever mental activities . . . whatever consciousness there is 
. . . is called the aggregate of consciousness ”2 In this pas¬ 
sage “ whatever ” includes everything without remainder. 
“ Matter ” prohibits too wide a signification.3 In these two 
terms is implied everything that is intended of matter. Then 
1 Read sampayutlehi''. 2 Vibhanga, pp. 1, 3, 5, 7, 9. 
2 I.e. beyond the actual meaning borne by the word “ matter." 

--- PAGE 63 ---
556 The Path of Purity 
begins its classification as past, and so on; for some matter is 
past, some is future, and so on. The same with feeling, and so on. 
Of these, matter of the four kinds by way of time, continuity, 
occasion, moment, is known as “past” matter. Likewise 
“ the future and the present.” Of these, first, as regards 
time, matter which is prior to the reconception of a being in 
one becoming, is past; that which is subsequent to decease 
is future; that which is between these two stages is present. 
As to continuity, that which is set up by an equable season, and 
which is set up by agreeable food [473] is present matter, 
though it may arise earlier or later. That which is set up 
previous to that by unequable season or food, is past matter; 
that which is later is future matter. That which is born of 
consciousness and set up by a single process, single apper¬ 
ception,1 single attainment, is present matter. That which is 
previous to that is past matter, later is future matter. There 
is no separate division of matter set up by Karma, such as 
past, and so on, by way of continuity. But such a division 
is to be understood as giving support to matter set up by the 
caloric order, by nutriment, by consciousness. As to occasion, 
whatever occasional [matter]2 proceeds by way of continuity 
on such occasions as a single instant, the morning or the 
evening, night or day, is known as present matter. That 
which is previous to that is past matter; later is future matter. 
As to moment, that which is included in the three moments 
of genesis [stability, disruption] is present matter. That 
which is previous to that is future matter ;3 that which is later 
is past matter.4 * Further, that which has the functions of 
past root-condition and causal relation6 is past matter. That 
which has the functions of concluded root-condition and of 
causal relation not yet concluded, is present matter. That 
which has not arrived at the functions of either is future 
1 Single process and single apperception are explained by the ftfed 
as the fifth door prooess and the sixth door process. 
* Tam tam samayan ti . . . taw ton* samayavantan ti attho.—Tiled. 
* Because it has not yet arisen, or arrived at the three moments. 
4 Because it has passed through the three moments. 
* I.e. helu and paccaya. The former, acoording to the fikd Is genera¬ 
tive (janaka), the latter is supporting {upa(lhambhaka). 

--- PAGE 64 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 557 
matter. Or, at the moment of performing its own functions1 
is present matter. Previous to that is future matter, 
subsequent to that is past matter. And here (in this triad of 
the past) the discourse on moment [and on function] is a literal 
discourse. The remaining discourses (on time, continuity, 
occasion) are figurative.2 
The distinction as to the “ subjective and objective ” is 
as already stated. And, here also the subjective should be 
understood as the personal, the objective is what belongs to 
another person.3 
The distinction as to the “ gross and refined ” is as already 
stated. The distinction as to the “ inferior and superior ” 
is twofold: figuratively and literally. Inferior to the form 
(rupa) of the Akaniftha4 Brahmas is the form of the Sudassi 
Brahmas. Superior to the last is the form of the Sudassa 
Brahmas. Thus is the inferiority or superiority to be under¬ 
stood figuratively as far as the form (rupa) of the denizens of 
hell. Literally, where an immoral resultant consciousness 
arises, there matter is inferior [being undesirable]. Where 
a moral resultant consciousness arises, there matter is superior 
[being desirable]. 
The ‘ ‘ distant and near ” are as already explained. And here 
also they are to be understood with reference to the context.5 
“Being grouped together, put together, as one”—the 
meaning here is, all matter which has been severally described 
as past, and so on, is through understanding grouped into one 
class, possessing the characteristic of change and called the 
aggregate of matter. It is shown by this statement that all 
matter by being grouped into one class, having the character¬ 
istic of change is the aggregate of matter. There is nothing 
besides matter which is known as the aggregate of matter. 
1 E.g. the function of the earth is holding, that of contact is touching, 
and so on. 
* By way of these three, states may be past, present, or future. But 
such distinctions, in the case of moment and its function, are due, not 
to the states, but to the moment itself.—Tikd. 
8 See p. 179 above. 4 Read Akaniffhdnam. 
s One’s own rupa is near; that of another who has entered the mother’s 
womb is distant. If the latter is near, then one who has been born is 
distant. And so on as far as the limits of the world-system.—Tikd. 

--- PAGE 65 ---
558 The Path of Purity 
[474] As with matter, so with feeling, and so on, which are 
grouped into classes having the characteristics of feeling, and 
so on. There is nothing besides feeling, and so on, which 
is known as aggregate of feeling, and so on. 
And here under this classification into the past, and so on, 
feeling should be understood as past, future, present by way 
of continuity, moment, and so on. Now as regards continuity, 
feeling which is included in a single process, single apperception, 
single attainment, and which proceeds in conjunction with 
[faith in] a single object1 is present. That which is previous 
to that is past feeling, that which is subsequent is future 
feeling. As to moment, ancl so forth, feeling which is included 
in the three moments, which falls midway between what 
goes before and what comes after, and which is performing its 
own functions, is present feeling. Past feeling is previous, 
and future feeling is subsequent, to it. 
The distinction2 as to the subjective and objective is to be 
understood by way of the personal, the internal. 
The distinction2 as to the gross and the refined is to be 
understood by way of kind, intrinsic nature, person, the 
worldly and transcendental, as stated in the Yibhanga3 thus : 
Immoral feelings are gross ; moral and indeterminate feelings 
are refined, and so forth. 
By way of kind, as being the condition of doing blameworthy 
acts, and as burning with the heat of the vices, immoral feeling 
is habitually not cool, and is gross in comparison with moral 
feeling. As being actively engaged [in deeds of the body, and 
so on], as making effort [for the production of results], as being 
productive of results, as burning with the heat of the vices, 
and as being blameworthy, it is gross in comparison with 
the resultant and the indeterminate. As being productive 
of results, as burning with the heat of the vices, as being 
troubled [with HI], and as being blameworthy, it is gross 
1 Read ekavidtiavisai/a0 = divasam pi Buddharupam passanta-sm 
dhammam sunantassa pamUasaddhadisahitavtdan&, feeling which is 
connected with faith, and so on, proceeding in one who by day sees the 
form of the Buddha and listens to the Law.—J’iM. 
8 Read °bhtdo. 8 Pages 3, 13. 

--- PAGE 66 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 559 
in comparison with the inoperative and the indeterminate. 
Contrariwise, moral, and indeterminate feelings are refined in 
comparison with the immoral. The two feelings, moral and 
immoral, in so far as they are yoked together being actively 
engaged [in deeds of the body, and so on], making effort [for the 
production of results], and being productive of results, are gross 
in comparison with the twofold indeterminate feeling [the 
resultant and the inoperative]. The twofold indeterminate is 
refined in comparison with them [moral and immoral]. Thus, 
by way of kind, should grossness and fineness be understood. 
By way of intrinsic nature, painful feeling as being free from 
enjoyment, being attended with trembling, causing per¬ 
turbation, producing agitation and overpowering others, is 
gross in comparison with the other two [pleasant, indifferent]. 
These two, in so far as they are yoked together,1 are refined 
in comparison with painful feeling because of their enjoy¬ 
ableness, calmness, exaltedness, lovableness, and neutrality. 
Both the pleasant and the painful feelings are grosser than the 
feeling which is neither painful nor pleasant, because they are 
attended with trembling, produce perturbation, and are self- 
evident. Contrariwise, this last feeling is more refined than 
those two. Thus by way of intrinsic nature should grossness 
and refineness be understood. 
By way of the person, the feeling of one who has not attained 
[to trance] is, through wavering over various objects, grosser 
than that of one who has attained to it. Contrariwise, the 
feeling of one who has attained to trance is moTe refined than 
the other. Thus, by way of the person, should grossness and 
refineness be understood. 
[475] By way of the worldly and the transcendental, feeling 
which is the object of the cankers is worldly. Because it is 
the condition of the arising of the cankers, is overwhelmed by 
the floods, bound by the bonds, tied by the knots, obstructed 
by the hindrances, clung to by the attachments, oppressed by 
the vices, and is in common with the average man, it is grosser 
1 Neutrality is not obtainable in pleasant feeling, nor enjoyableneBs 
in indifferent feeling. Hence the phrase “in so far as they are yoked 
together.” 

--- PAGE 67 ---
560 The Path of Purity 
than feeling which is not the object of the cankers. Con¬ 
trariwise, feeling which is not the object of the cankers is 
more refined than the other. 
Here, in the matter of grossness and refineness, intermixing 
by way of kind and the rest, is to be avoided. For although 
the feeling which is associated with immoral, resultant body- 
consciousness is refined because it is indeterminate, it is gross 
in intrinsic nature. And this has been spoken:1 ''Inde¬ 
terminate feeling is refined, painful feeling is gross. The 
feeling of one who has attained to trance is refined ; the feeling 
of one who has not attained to trance is gross. Feeling which 
is not the object of the cankers is refined ; feeling which is the 
object of the cankers is gross .” And as in the case of painful 
feeling,2 so, pleasant feeling and so on, though gross in kind, 
are refined in nature. Therefore grossness or refineness of 
feelings is to be understood according as there is no inter¬ 
mixing in kind and so on. For instance: Indeterminate 
feeling is more refined in kind than the moral and the immoral.8 
In this statement, which is the indeterminate ? Is it the 
painful ? Is it the pleasant ? Is it the feeling of one who 
has attained to trance 1 Is it the feeling of one who has not 
attained to trance ? Is it the feeling which is the object of the 
cankers ? Is it the feeling which is not the object of the 
cankers ? Thus the classification by intrinsic nature is not 
to be taken up. And the same everywhere. Further, 
owing to the statement: “ With reference to this or that feeling, 
feelings should be regarded as gross or refined”* among the 
feelings, immoral and so on, that which is accompanied by 
hate is grosser than that which is accompanied by greed, 
because like fire it burns up its own [heart]-basis. That 
accompanied by greed is more refined than the other [accom¬ 
panied by hate]. And that accompanied by hate, if constant, 
is gross; if not constant, is refined. And the constant, if 
lasting a world-cycle, is gross; if not, it is refined. And among 
the feelings lasting for a world-cycle, that which does not 
1 Vibhanga, p. 3 f. 
1 Which, though refined in kind, is gross in nature. 
* Read °kusalahi. 4 Vibhanga, p. 4. 

--- PAGE 68 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 561 
arise by instigation is gross, that which arises by instigation 
is refined.1 And that accompanied by greed, if associated 
with wrong views, is gross; if not, it is refined. And if it is 
constant, or lasts for a world-cycle, or does not arise by 
instigation, it is gross; if not, it is refined. Generally, the 
immoral feeling, if productive of many results, is gross; if 
not, it is refined. But the moral is gross if it is not productive 
of many results; refined, if productive of many results. 
Further: Moral feeling of the realm of sense is gross, that 
of the realm of form is refined. More refined than the last 
is that of the realm of the formless. More refined still is 
the transcendental feeling. [Moral feeling] of the realm of 
sense, if made of almsgiving, is gross; if made of virtues, is 
refined. More refined than that is the feeling which is made 
of mind-developing. This last, if it has two root-conditions, 
is gross; if it has three root-conditions, is refined. And that 
which has three root-conditions, if it arises by instigation, 
is gross; if not, it is refined. Feeling which is of the First 
Jhana of the realm of form is gross . . . that which is of the 
Fifth Jhana is refined. Feeling of the realm of the formless, 
if associated with the sphere of infinite space, is gross; [476] 
... if associated with the sphere of neither perception nor 
non-perception, it is refined. The transcendental, if associated 
with the Path of Stream-winning, is grosB ... if associated 
with the Path of Saintship, it is refined. And the same with 
the resultant and inoperative feelings in the various planes, 
and with the said feelings by way of pain and so on, of the 
non-attainment of trance and so on, of being the object of the 
cankers and so on. 
As to the range, painful feelings is gross in hell, refined in 
birth as a lower animal . . . refined among the Paranim- 
mitavasavattl abodes. And as with painful feeling, so with 
pleasant feeling. It is to be construed everywhere in its 
right place. 
1 For these two sentences the P.T.S. edition reads : Niyatd pi leap- 
jxtifhitikasu pi asanlcharika olariba. Hard sukhumd. But the Burmese 
edition, which the translation follows, reads: Niyatd pi kappaUhitikd 
olarikd, Hard sukhumd- Kappafitntikdsu pi asankharika olarikd, Hard 
sukhumd- 

--- PAGE 69 ---
562 The Path of Purity 
As to the physical basis, whatever feeling is produced' from 
an inferior basis is gross; whatever feeling is produced from a 
superior basis is refined.1 In the division of inferior and 
superior, that which is gross should be known as inferior; 
that which is refined should be known as superior. 
The words “ distant and near ” have been defined in the 
Vibhahga thus: “ Immoral feeling is distant from the moral and 
the indeterminate feelings. Immoral feeling is near immoral 
feeding .” Therefore because of dissimilarity,2 non-association, 
unlikeness, immoral feeling is distant from the moral and the 
indeterminate. In the same way, these are distant from it. 
And the same in all sections. But the immoral feeling is near 
the immoral owing to similarity and likeness. 
This is the substance of the detailed discourse on the classi¬ 
fication of the aggregate of feeling as past and so on. 
[The Classification of Insight into the Aggregates.] 
This detailed discourse8 is to be understood in the same 
way in perception and so forth, which are associated with 
the various feelings. This being understood, 
By series, number accurate, 
Distinction, and the twofold view, 
Example—who thus sees4 the five- 
Fold aggregate in order to 
His insight classify, fulfils 
His wishes all. The wise should know 
This method of deciding well. 
Of these, “ series ” here is of many kinds, namely, the 
serial order of arising, the order of putting away, the order of 
practice, the order of plane, the order of instruction. Of them, 
“ At first the kalala takes birth, and thence 
The abbuda,”5 
—and so forth: this is the order of arising. 
1 pi4 says that the feeling which arises in a man as he eats a dish 
of rough millet is gross. If he is eating rice and a curry of meat, the 
feeling is refined. * Read visabhagato for pi sdbh&galo. 
* Supply eiam before evam eva. 4 Read passantass'. 
* Kindred Saying<) i, 263. 

--- PAGE 70 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 563 
States to be put away by discernment, states to be put away 
by developing ”l and so on: this is the order of putting away. 
“ The purity of virtues [477] ... the purity of mind ”2 and 
so forth: this is the order of practice. “ The realm of sense, 
the realm of form”* and so forth: this is the order of plane. 
“ The four bases of mindfulness, the fourfold supreme effort 
or “ Discourse on almsgiving, discourse on virtue,”6 and so 
forth: this is the order of instruction. Of these, the order 
of arising is not suitable here, because the aggregates do not 
arise, as do the kalala embryo and so forth, by way of se¬ 
quence. The order of putting away is not suitable, for the 
moral and the indeterminate are not to be put away. Neither 
is the order of practice suitable, for the immoral should not 
be practised. Nor is the order of plane suitable, for the 
feelings and so forth are included in the four planes. But the 
order of instruction is suitable. Wishing to save tractable 
men who, not having classified the five aggregates, have 
fallen into the heresy of the self, from that heresy, by showing 
forth the division of the group and the mass, the Blessed One, 
desiring to work their benefit, first shows, in order that it 
may be easily grasped, the gross aggregate of matter, which is 
the object of sight and so forth. Then [he shows] feeling 
which feels desirable and undesirable objects. Then percep¬ 
tion which seizes the mode of the object of feeling, as said 
thus: “What one feels, that one perceives.” Then the 
complexes brought together by perception. Then conscious¬ 
ness, which is the basis of feeling and the rest, and is their 
dominant influence. Thus “ by series ” should the method 
of decision be understood. 
“By distinction” means, by way of distinction between 
the aggregates and clinging aggregates. What is the distinc¬ 
tion between them ? “ Aggregates ”—this is said in a general 
way. “Clinging aggregates”—this is said distinctively, as 
they are the objects of the cankers and of clinging. As it 
has been said: “ Monks, I will explain to you the five aggregates, 
the five dingiitg aggregates. Listen. Monks, which are the 
1 Dhammamriganl, p. 1. a Digha iii, 288. 
3 Dhammasafiganl, § 1292. * Digha ii, 120. 4 Angutiaraiv, 186. 

--- PAGE 71 ---
564 The Path of Purity 
five aggregates ? Monks, whatever matter is past, future, 
present. . . or near ; this, monks, is called the aggregate of matter. 
Whatever feeling . . . whatever consciousness ... is near ; 
this, monks, is called the aggregate of consciousness. Monks, 
these are coded the five aggregates. Monks, which are the five 
clinging aggregates ? Monks, whatever matter ... is near, 
or is the object of the cankers, of clinging ; this, monks, is called 
the dinging aggregate of matter. Whatever feeling . . . what¬ 
ever consciousness is near or is the object of the cankers, of 
clinging ; this, monks, is called the clinging aggregate of conscious¬ 
ness. Monks, these are called the five [478] dinging aggregates. * 1 
In this text, there is no matter which is not the object of the 
cankers, as there are feeling and the rest which are not the 
object of the cankers. But because it is fitting that matter 
should be aggregate in the sense of a heap, therefore it is 
mentioned among the aggregates. Because it is fitting that 
matter should be a clinging aggregate in the sense of heap and 
of being the object of the cookers, therefore it is mentioned 
among the clinging aggregates. But feeling and bo forth aTe 
mentioned among aggregates when they are not the object 
of the cankers; among clinging aggregates, when they are the 
object of the cankers. And here in the expression, “ clinging 
aggregates,” aggregates which are the sphere of clinging are 
clinging aggregates. Thus should the meaning be understood. 
But here [in the Path of Purity] all aggregates are grouped 
together. This is the intention. 
“By the number accurate”: Why has the Blessed One 
spoken the five aggregates, neither more nor less ? Because all 
similar conditioned states are grouped together, because the 
five are the measure of the hankering after the self, after what 
belongs to the self, and because in them are included2 the 
other states. For when the various kinds of conditioned 
states which are alike, are grouped together, matter being 
grouped according to likeness forms an aggregate, feeling being 
grouped according to likeness forms an aggregate. The same 
with perception and so on. Therefore they arc stated as 
1 Anffuttara iv, 47 f. * Avarodha, not in P.T.S. Dictionary. 

--- PAGE 72 ---
XIV.—Exposition of the Aggregates 565 
the five, because all conditioned states are taken together into 
similar groups. And these five aggregates are the measure 
and basis of hankering after the self, after what belongs to the 
self. For this has been said:1 “Monks, in the existence of 
matter a wrong view arises, through dinging to matter, through 
laying matter to heart, namely: 1 It is mine, I am it, it is my 
own self.’ In the existence of feeling . . . perception . . . 
complexes . . . consciousness, a wrong view arises, through 
dinging to consciousness, through laying consciousness to heart, 
namdy : 1 It is mine, I am it, it is my own self.’ ” 
Therefore they are stated as the five as being the basis and 
measure of grasping after the self, after what belongs to the 
self. And those other five aggregates of states such as the 
virtues and so on, which have been mentioned, are also in¬ 
cluded, as they are comprised under the aggregate of com¬ 
plexes. Therefore are the five spoken because others are 
included therein. Thus should the method of decision be 
understood from the exact number. 
As for the “ example,” the clinging aggregate of matter 
is like an hospital, because it is the dwelling-place, by way 
of basis, door and object, of the clinging aggregate of conscious¬ 
ness, which is like the sick man. The clinging aggregate of 
feeling is like the disease from being oppressed [by pain]. 
The clinging aggregate of perception is like the immediate 
cause of the disease, because of its producing feeling associated 
with lust, and so on, through perception of sense-desire and so 
on.2 3 The clinging aggregate of the activities [or complexes] 
is like having recourse to unsuitable things, from being the 
root-cause of the disease of feeling.8 [479] It has been said, 
“ They bri)ig about feeling for the purpose of feeling.”4 Like- 
1 Anguttara iv, 1811. 
1 Just as the disorders of phlegm, bile, wind, and bo on, are the 
immediate cause of disease, so the perception which seizes the fascinat¬ 
ing features of a man or a woman, and such other things, is the im¬ 
mediate cause of pain associated with lust.—Tikd. 
3 As phlegm, bile, and so on, are the immediate cause (samufthdna = 
dsanakdrana) of disease, 90 the distempers of the season and food are 
itB root-cause (nid&na — mulakdrana).—Tikd. 
4 See text p. 479, ft. 1. 

--- PAGE 73 ---
566 The Path of Purity 
wise: “As the result of immoral karma having been wrought, 
having been stored up, consciousness of body has arisen accom¬ 
panied by pain”1 The clinging aggregate of consciousness 
is like the sick man from being not freed from the sickness 
of feeling. Further, there are the similes of the setting in 
motion, functioning (of the thirty-two parts of the body); 
offending, the agent and the guilty; and those of the vessel, 
food, curry, service and the eater. Thus should the method of 
decision be known from the Bimiles. 
“ The twofold view ” means concisely and in detail. Thus 
here should the method of decision be known. For concisely, 
the five clinging aggregates are to be regarded as a sword- 
uplifting foe, as stated in Asivisupama Sutta ;2 as a burden, as 
stated in the Bhara Sutta ;8 as a devouring monster, as stated 
in Khajjaniyapariyaya Sutta;4 as the conditioned states of 
impermanence, ill, selflessness and a murderer, as stated in the 
Yamaka Sutta.6 In detail, matter is to be regarded aB a mass 
of foam because it cannot be kneaded; feeling as a water- 
bubble,6 because it is to be enjoyed only for a moment; per¬ 
ception, as the mirage, because of illusion; the complexes as 
a plantain trunk because of esscncelessness; consciousness 
as a magic show because of deception. And specifically, the 
subjective matter, though highly refined, is to be regarded as 
the foul; ill as ill, because it is not freed from the threefold 
ill;7 perception and the complexes as the selfless, because 
they cannot be brought to order; consciousness as imper¬ 
manent, from its liability to rise and fall. 
“Who thus secs8 . . . fulfils his wishes all” means: 
Whoso sees (the aggregates) thus by the twofold view, con¬ 
cisely and in detail, has all his wishes fulfilled. Hence the 
method of decision should thus be understood. For example: 
Concisely, he who sees the five clinging aggregates as a foe 
with uplifted sword and so on, is not harassed by them. In 
detail, he who Bees matter and the others as a mass of foam 
1 Dhammasaiiganl 566. * Read asivirupame. Samyutla iv, p. 172 f. 
■ Ibid, iii, p. 26 f. ♦ Ibid. 87 f. ■ Ibid. 114 f. 
* Some Burmese texts read °pupphvfam. 
7 I.e. dukkha0, viparin&ma°, sankhara-dukkha, ill as such, ill due to 
change, ill of the complexes. * Read passantass'. 

--- PAGE 74 ---
XIY.—Exposition of the Aggregates 567 
and so forth, does not see essence in essenceleas things. And 
spe-cijically, [480] he who sees personal material quality as the 
foul, fully understands material nutriment, abandons the 
perverted view that there is something pleasant in the foul, 
crosses the flood of sense-desire, is dissociated from the bond 
of sense-desire, is freed from the canker of sense-desire, cuts 
the physical knot of covetousness, does not cling to the attach¬ 
ment of sense-desire. 
He who sees feeling as ill fully understands contact as 
nutriment,1 abandons the perverted view that pleasure is in 
ill, crosses the flood of becoming, is dissociated from the 
bond of becoming, is freed from the canker of becoming, cuts 
the physical knot of active engagements, does not cling to the 
attachment of mere rite and ritual. 
He who sees perception and the complexes as selfless, fully 
understands volition as nutriment, abandons the perverted 
view that there is self in the selfless, crosses the flood of wrong 
views, is dissociated from the bond of wrong views, is freed 
from the canker of wrong views, cuts the physical knot of the 
conviction that “ this is truth,” does not cling to the attach¬ 
ment of the theory of the self. 
He who sees consciousness as impermanent, fully under¬ 
stands consciousness as nutriment, abandons the perverted 
view that permanence is in the impermanent, crosses the 
flood of ignorance, is dissociated from the bond of ignorance, 
is freed from the canker of ignorance, cuts the physical knot 
of the perversion of mere rite and ritual, does not cling to the 
attachment of wrong views. 
Because discernment of the aggregates 
By way of murder and of other things 
Brings great advantages, therefore the wise 
Should look upon the aggregates as such. 
Thus is ended the fourteenth chapter called the exposition 
of the aggregates in the section of the development of under¬ 
standing in the Path of Purity, composed ior the purpose of 
gladdening good folk. 
1 Or cause (paccaya), the figurative meaning of <3ham. 

--- PAGE 75 ---
CHAPTER XV 
[481] EXPOSITION OF SENSE-ORGANS AND ELEMENTS 
[The Sense-organs.] 
The sense-organs are twelve in number: the eye-organ, form- 
organ. ear-organ, sound-organ, nose-organ, odour - organ, 
tongue-organ, taste-organ, body-organ, touch-organ, mind- 
organ, mental-state organ. 
Herein, 
Tlie meaning, characteristic, relative 
Extent,1 series, account abridged and full, 
Thus for our judgment must we apprehend 
And into [due] consideration take. 
Of these, as to the distinctive, that which enjoys2 3 is the 
eye. It enjoys, reveals, the visible object, is the meaning. 
That which manifests (itself) is shape.8 9 It manifests the desire 
of the heart in one whose colour is changed.4 That which 
listens is the ear. That which is uttere * *d5 is sound. It speaks, 
is the meaning. That which smells is the nose. That which 
discovers (or betrays itself) is odour. It discovers* (or betrays) 
its own physical basis, is the meaning. That which summons 
1 Tdvatrxi. P.T.S. Dictionary has tdvata. 
* Cakkhati, not in P.T.S. Dictionary. It also means “ announces 
what is even and uneven,” “ reveals,” as explained immediately after 
in the text. The meaning of “ announcing what is even and uneven ” 
seems to bo due to the connection between the verb deikkhati and 
cakkhati. 
3 Rapa, matter, material quality, as well as shape or form. Rupayali 
is not registered in P.T.S. Dictionary, though it is quoted under Rapa. 
9 In paroxysms of lust, anger, and so on, as the chameleon or the 
otter changes its colour,—adds the Tiki. [RattadutfhddikdUau kakan• 
fakam rUparn viya xiddarupam viya ca.] 
9 Sappati. This meaning is not given in P.T.S. Dictionary, nor is 
uddhariyati registered. 
9 Oandhayatt, »Qcayali— not in P.T.S. Dictionary. The simile of a 
flower betraying itself by its scent, is the simile given in the Jlkd. 
568 

--- PAGE 76 ---
XV.—Sense-Organs 569 
(the taste of food which sustains)1 life is the tongue. That 
which creatures relish2 is taste; they enjoy it, is the meaning. 
That which is the course of despicable states associated with 
the cankers, is the body. “ Course ” denotes arising.3 That 
which is in contact is the tangible. That which thinks is the 
mind. That which bears its own characteristic is mental 
state. 
And generally, sense-organ (ayatana) is so called because of 
putting forth effort, of the “ stretching ” of (mind and mental 
properties which are putting forth) effort, of bearing the ill 
of the round of rebirths. It has been said that the various 
states of mind and mental properties as doors and objects 
among the doors of eye and objects of sight and so on, stretch 
forth,4 * stand, strive, exert each in its own function of sensing 
(or experiencing); that the eye and so forth stretch, extend 
those states which are door and object; and that as long as 
the long-extended ill which proceeds in the beginning-less 
round of rebirths does not recede, so long they carry on, 
proceed. Thus all [482] these states are called scnse-OTgan 
because they put forth, stretch the states of mind and mental 
properties, bear the ill of the round of rebirths. Further, 
ayatana (sense-organ) is to be understood in the sense of 
abode, mine, meeting-place, place of birth and reason. Thus, 
among mankind in such passages6 as “ The ayatana of the 
lord* the ayatana of Vasudeva,”7 8 dyaiana means “abode.” 
In such passages as “ An ayatana of gold, or of silver” it means 
“ mine.” In such religious passages as, 
** In fair ayatana the passengers of air attend,”6 
it means “meeting-place.” And in such passages as: “ The 
Deccan is the ayatana of cattle,” it means “birth-place.”2 
And in such passages as: "If there he any ayatana, then he 
1 Ahftra-ram is thuH taken here to connect life with the tongue. 
3 Rasati, not given with this moaning in P.T.S. Dictionary. 
* Or, “ Course ” is the place of arising. 
* Ayatati, not in P.T.S. Dictionary. 
1 The remainder of the paragraph is reproduced in Expositor 180 f. 
a I^vara. 1 Of. Jat. iv, 82. 
8 Ahguttara iii, 43. 
8 This sentence has been inadvertently omitted in Expositor, p. 180. 
37 

--- PAGE 77 ---
570 The Path of Purity 
attains the ability of testifying . . .”l it means “ reason ” (or 
ground for). And those states, mind and mental properties, 
being connected with the eye and so on, dwell in them, so to 
speak.2 Thus the latter are the abode of the former. And 
they (eye and so on) constitute a mine for them, since in them 
the states occur abundantly, on them they are dependent, and 
of them they make the object. And they are the meeting- 
place for the states, which meet therein as physical basis, 
door and object. And they are the birth-place for the states, 
since the states arise in them as sufficing condition and object. 
And they constitute a reason for the states, since these do 
not exist in their absence. Thus in the sense of abode, of 
mine, of meeting-place, of birth-place, of reason, owing to these 
reasons these states, i.e., eye and so on, are called dyatana. 
Therefore in the aforesaid meanings, eye as dyatana is eye- 
dyatana (eye-organ). . . . Mental states as dyatana are 
mental-state-organ. So far is decision to be understood as to 
the meaning. 
Characteristic. Decision here should also be understood 
from the characteristics of the eye and so on. The charac¬ 
teristics should be understood as stated in the Exposition 
of the Aggregates.8 
By Relative Extent is meant such extent. The eye and 
so on, are indeed states. This being so, why are they spoken 
of as the twelve sense-organs, and not state-organs ? 
They are stated as twelve from the determining of the 
arising of the six consciousness-groups by way of door-object, 
that is, the determining [483] of the six consciousness-groups 
by way of door and by way of object. For of the consciousness- 
group which is included in the field of eye-consciousneBS, the 
eye-organ is the door of arising, and the form-organ is the 
object. The same with the others. But of the sixth [con¬ 
sciousness-group, included in the field of mind-consciousness], 
only a portion of the mind-organ is the door of arising, the 
[mental] state-organ which has nothing in common [with the 
eye-consciousness and so on] is the object. Thus are the 
1 See Majjhima i, 494. 
* f\ka explains nivasanti by nivasaiM viya. * Page 615 f. 

--- PAGE 78 ---
571 XV.—Sense- Organs 
twelve stated by determining the arising of the six con¬ 
sciousness-groups by way of door and of object. Thus far 
should decision be understood from the relative extent. 
Serially. Here also out of the series of arising and so on 
mentioned above [in the Discourse on Aggregates] the serial 
order of teaching is suitable. For among the internal sense- 
organs, the eye-organ is shown first as being evident through 
having a visible and re-acting object. Then aTe shown the 
ear-organ and so on which have invisible and re-acting objects. 
Or, among the internal sense-organs the sense-organs of eye 
and of ear are shown first because of their great serviceableness 
through pre-eminence in seeing and in hearing. Then are 
shown the other three, beginning with nose-organ. And last 
is shown mind-organ which has for object the sphere of the five 
organs. As being the spheres of eye-organ and so on, succes¬ 
sively after them1 are shown the form-organ and so on, among 
the external organs. Further, the serial order is to be under¬ 
stood by determining the reason for the rising of consciousness. 
And this has been said: “ Depending on the eye and visible forms 
there arises eye-consciousness. . . . Depending on the mind and 
ideas there arises mind-consciousness ”2 Thus decision here 
is also to be understood by the serial order. 
Account abridged and full—that is, by the abridged account, 
the twelve sense-organs are just name and form, since the 
mind-organ and a portion of idea-organ are counted as name, 
and the remaining organs as form. By the full account, 
among the internal organs, the eye-organ in kind is just 
visual sensory organism, but is of infinite variety by the 
divisions of relative cause, course, group, person. The same 
with the other four organs. By the divisions of moral, 
immoral, resultant, inoperative consciousness, the mind-organ 
is of cighty-ninc kinds and one hundred and twenty-one kinds. 
It is of infinite variety by the divisions of physical basiB,8 
the way,4 and so on.® Form-sound-odour-and-taste-organs 
are of infinite variety owing to the divisions of dissimilarity, 
1 Some read anantardni, “ immediately after them.” 
a Majjhima i, III. 8 E.g. the eye. 4 E.g. III. 
5 Such as Jhana, dominant influence, plane, object.—Pika. 

--- PAGE 79 ---
572 The Path of Purity 
cause, and so on. Touch-organ is of three kinds by way of 
earth-element, fire-element, air-element, [484] and is of various 
kinds owing to the division of cause and so on. Mental state- 
organ is of various kinds owing to the divisions through 
intrinsic nature and difference of the aggregates of feeling, per¬ 
ception, activities, and of refined matter and Nirvana.1 Thus 
by the abridged and full acount is decision to be understood. 
Into [due] consideration take :—Here also all the conditioned 
sense-organs should be regarded as not arriving and not going 
forth. For they do not arrive [here] from anywhere previous 
to their coming to birth; nor do they go [hence] anywhere sub¬ 
sequent to their disintegration. Indeed, previous to their 
coming to birth they do not possess intrinsic nature; after 
their disintegration their intrinsic nature is broken up. During 
the period between these two moments they proceed, subject 
to no one’s will, being bound with causal relations. Therefore 
are they to be regarded as not arriving and not going forth. 
They should be regarded also as inactive, unoccupied.2 For 
the eye and the visible object and so on, do not think thus: 
“ Good would it be were consciousness to arise out of our 
concord!” Nor do they act, occupy themselves by being 
door, physical basis or object, so that consciousness may 
arise. But it is natural that out of the concord between 
eye and visible object and so on, there should arise eye-con¬ 
sciousness and so on. Therefore are they to be regarded as 
inactive, unoccupied. Further, the internal organs are to be 
regarded as an empty village, because they are devoid of 
permanence, pleasantness, bliss, and personality. The ex¬ 
ternal organs are to be regarded as the village-robbers, since 
they impinge on the internal organs. And this has been said: 
“ Monks, the eye is struck by visible objects, lovely and unlovely.”3 
And the internal organs should also be regarded as the six 
1 Their being blissful, painful, neither blissful nor painful, iB intrinsic 
nature. Their being bom of visual oontact, auditory contact, and 
so on, is the difference.—filed. 
* The being active, is striving with nervous excitement. The being 
occupied, is being engaged with a definite purpose.—fikd. [8apari~ 
phandakriydvaaena ihanam ihd; cintandvasena bydparakaranani bydp&ro.] 
8 Samyutta iv, 175. 

--- PAGE 80 ---
XV.—The Elements 573 
creatures,1 and the external organs as the places they frequent. 
Thus should decision be understood from considerations. 
This is the substance of the detailed discourse on sense- 
organs. 
[The Elements.'] 
Then come immediately after these the elements which 
are eighteen in number: namely:—eye-element, form-element, 
eye-consciousness-element; ear-element, sound-element, ear- 
consciousness-element ; nose-element, odour-element, nose- 
consciousness-element ; tongue-element, taste-element, tongue- 
consciousness-element; body-element, touch-element, body- 
consciousness-element ; mind-element, idea-element, mind- 
consciousness-element. Herein, 
From meaning, characteristics and the rest,2 
Series, and also relative extent, 
Enumeration, causes and withal3 
Considerations—hence we judgment frame. 
Of these, as regards the meaning, that which enjoys is the 
eye; that which manifests itself is the shape; consciousness 
of the eye is eye-consciousness. In this way [485] should 
decision be understood from the distinctive sense. Generally, 
it is called element because it disposes, it carries, it iB the 
disposing, by it the disposing is made, or in it something is 
kept.4 For among mankind, the elements, being severally 
fixed as reasons, dispose of the ill of the round of rebirths 
which is of various kinds, just as the elements of gold and of 
silver and so on, give rise to the gold and silver and so on. 
And the meaning is: sentient beings carry it, bear it along, as 
porters carry the burden. And it6 is just the disposing of ill, 
since it obeys no man’s will. And by means of these elements 
as reasons, beings dispose of the ill of the round of re-births. 
And the meaning is: the ill thus disposed of is placed, put in 
1 The snake, crocodile, bird, dog, fox, monkey. Ibid. 198. 
2 Viz. the other three modes of definition, as on p. 515. 
* Read atha for afjha. 
* These are the root-meanings of dMlu, element. 
h Read tad for eta. 

--- PAGE 81 ---
574 The Path of Purity 
them (elements, e.g., in eye, and so on) Thus each state 
among the eye and so on, as it arises disposes, carries. By 
virtue of such meaning it is called an element. /Further, it is 
not with these worldly elements as with what'is known as 
the self of the sectarians which intrinsically does not exist. 
They do [exist and] carry their own intrinsic nature; thus 
are they called elements. And as in the world the constituents 
of stones such as the variegated yellow orpiment, red arsenic, 
are called elements, so arc these (the eye and so on) like the 
elements; they are elements for they are variegated and are 
constituents of knowledge and of the knowable. Or, the name 
“ element ” is to be understood in regard to those constituents 
of a personality called the five aggregates, just as the name 
“ element ” is used concerning the fatty substances, blood and 
so on, which are the constituents, mutually distinguished by 
dissimilar characteristics, of the group known as the body. 
And these states, the eye and so on, are also distinguished 
from one another by dissimilar characteristics. Moreover, 
“ element ” is a synonym just for absence of the soul.1 
Accordingly the Blessed One, with intent to eradicate the 
idea of the soul, has taught the lesson of the elements in such 
passages as, “ Monk, this person is made up of the six elements."2 
Hence, according to the meaning given, decision should be 
understood as to the sense thus: the eye, that is the element, 
thus the eye-element . . . mind-consciousness, that is the 
element, thus mind-consciousness-element. 
By way of “ characteristics and the rest ”—Here decision 
should also be made by way of the characteristics and so on 
of the eye and so forth. And their characteristics and so on 
should be understood in the way mentioned in the Exposition 
of the Aggregates.8 
“ By series ”—here also the serial order of instruction from 
among the order of arising and so on mentioned previously4 
is in place. It is stated by way of determining the sequence 
of cause and effect. For the element of eye and the element 
1 Jiva. 
* See above, p. 515 f. 
8 Majjhima iii, 239. 
4 Page 562, above. 

--- PAGE 82 ---
XV.—The Elements 575 
of visible object together form the cause, and the element of 
cye-oonsciousness is the effect. The same everywhere. 
“ By relative extent ” means to that extent. [486] In the 
various passages of the Sutta and Abhidhamma there are 
mentioned other elements (than these eighteen) such as: the 
radiance-element, the beauty-element, the space-infinity- 
element, the consciousness-infinity-element, the nothingness- 
sphere-element, the neither-pcrception-nor-non-perception- 
sphere-element, the perception-and-feeling-cessation-element, 
the element of sense-desire, the element of ill-will, the element 
of cruelty, the element of renunciation, the element of benevo¬ 
lence, the element of kindness,1 the element of ease, the 
element of ill, the element of joy, the element of grief, the 
element of indifference,2 the element of ignorance,3 the element 
of effort, the element of exertion, the element of endeavour,2 
the low element, the average element, the excellent element,4 
the earth-element, the water-element, the fire-element, the 
air-element, the space-clement, the consciousness-element,6 
the conditioned element, the unconditioned element,® the 
world of various elements and of diverse elements.7 
If some one should ask: “ This being so, why is the limit 
fixed at eighteen, and not by virtue of all these (thirty-five) 
elements ?” the reply would be that it is because all the 
elements which exist in their true nature are included in the 
eighteen. For the element of matter is just the radiance- 
element. And the beauty-element is bound up with matter 
(or visible object). Why ? Because it is a mark of beauty. 
The mark of beauty is indeed the element of beauty; it is 
never freed from matter and so on. Or, matter and so on 
which are the objects of moral resultant consciousness being 
the element of beauty, the clement of beauty is just matter 
and so on. In the elements of space-infinity and so on, 
thought (cittam) is the element of mind-consciousness, the 
remaining (associated states) are the element of state. The 
perception-and-feeling-cessation-element does not exist in its 
1 Sarpy utta ii, 150-152. * FibhaAga 85. * Samyutta ii, 153. 
4 Samyutta ii, 154. 1 Ibid. 248. 
" DhammasaAgani 1085-1086. 7 AAgutiara i, 22. 

--- PAGE 83 ---
576 The Path of Purity 
intrinsic nature; it is just the cessation of the twofold element 
(of mind-consciousness and of state). The element of sense- 
desire is just the element of state.1 As it has been said: 
“ What, therein, is the element of sense-desire ? . . . Thought, 
applied thinking, wrong imaginings, which are connected with 
sense-desire.”2 Or the eighteen elements (are the element of 
sense-desire). As it has been said: “ From the waveless deep of 
woe beneath up to the heaven above of the Paranimitta Vasavatti 
devas inclusive . . . whatever has there its range, and is therein 
included, whether it be aggregate, element or sphere . . . matter, 
feeling, perception, activities, cognition: this is called the element 
of sense-desire.”*■ [487] The element of renunciation is the 
element of state. So also is the element of mind-consciousness 
from the saying, “ All moral states are the element of renun¬ 
ciation."2 
The elements of ill-will, of cruelty, of benevolence, of 
kindness, of ease and ill, of joy and grief, of indifference, of 
ignorance, of effort, of exertion, of endeavour, are elements of 
state. 
The low, average, excellent elements are just the eighteen 
elements. For the. eye and so on which are inferior, medium, 
superior, are the low, average, and excellent elements re¬ 
spectively. Directly speaking, the immoral element of state 
and the element of mind-consciousncss are low element; both 
these kinds of clement and the eye-element and so on which 
are worldly, moral, indeterminate, are average element; the 
element of state and the elements of mind-consciousness which 
are transcendental, are excellent element. 
The elements of earth, of fire, of air, are the tangible element. 
The elements of water and of space are elements of state. 
The element of consciousness is an abstract of the seven 
consciousness-elements beginning with eye-consciousness. 
The seventeen elements and a portion of the state-element 
are the conditioned element. A portion of the state-element 
is the unconditioned element. The world of various elements 
and of diverse elements is just the different kinds of the 
1 Ke-punctuate the text accordingly. * Vibhafiga 86. 

--- PAGE 84 ---
XV.—The Elements 577 
eighteen elements. Thus only the eighteen are mentioned since 
all elements existing in their intrinsic natures are included 
therein. The eighteen are also stated for the purpose of 
removing the error of those people who imagine a soul in 
consciousness which has the intrinsic nature of cognizing the 
object. For there are people who imagine a soul in such 
consciousness. To them has the Blessed One pointed out its 
variety through the divisions of the mind-element and mind- 
consciousness-clement of the eye, ear, nose, tongue and body, 
and its impermanence on account of its dependence on the 
cause of the eye and visible form and so on, and desirous of 
eradicating the long-latent idea of the soul he has declared 
the eighteen elements. Furthermore, he has declared them in 
accordance with the wishes of beings who are ready to receive 
instruction. And the eighteen have been declared in accord¬ 
ance with the wishes of those beings who are ready to receive 
instruction as a result of this discourse, which is neither too 
abridged nor too detailed. 
For he has taught the Law by methods short 
And long, so that the darkness in the hearts 
Of creatures tamable is in a trice 
Destroyed, when struck by the Good Dhamma heat. 
“ Enumeration*’—first, the element of eye by virtue of the 
sensitive organism of the eye1 is considered as one state by 
origin. [488] And the same with the elements of ear, nose, 
tongue, body, form, sound, smell, taste by virtue of the 
sensitive organisms of the ear, and so on. The element of 
touch is considered as three states by way of earth, fire and 
air; the element of eve-consciousness as two states by way of 
moral and immoral resultant. And the same with the 
elements of ear-, nose-, tongue-, body-consciousness. Mind- 
element is considered as three states by way of five-door- 
adverting, moral and immoral resultant, and receiving. 
The element of state is considered as twenty states by way 
of three non-material aggregates, sixteen subtle material 
qualities and the unconditioned element. Mind-consciousness- 
1 For cakkhupaaddamsena the 'J'xkd reads cakkhupasddo. 

--- PAGE 85 ---
578 The Path of Purity 
element is considered as seventy-six states by way of the 
remaining classes of moral, immoral, indeterminate conscious¬ 
ness. Thus decision also should be understood here by way 
of enumeration. 
“Causes”—here the element of eye renders service to the 
element of eye-consciousness by six causes by way of the 
relations of dissociation, pre-existence, presence, non-absence, 
dependence, controlling faculties. The element of visible 
form renders service to it by four causes by way of the relations 
of pre-existence, presence, non-absence, object. Likewise 
the elements of ear and of sound and so on render service to 
the elements of ear-consciousness and so forth. And to 
these five classes of consciousness the element of adverting 
mind renders service by five causes by way of the five relations 
of immediacy, direct immediacy, non-presence, absence, 
immediate sufficing condition. And by way of these five 
relations the elements of this fivefold consciousness render 
service to the receiving mind-element, which in turn renders 
service to the examining mind-consciousness-element, which 
in turn renders service to the deciding mind-consciousness- 
element, which in t\irn renders service to the apperceptional 
mind-consciousnes8-element. And the apperceptional mind- 
consciousness-element renders service to the immediately 
succeeding1 apperceptional mind-consciousness-element by 
six causes, namely, those five mentioned above and repetition. 
This is the manner at the five doors. And at the mind-door 
by the five relations mentioned above, the element of subliminal 
consciousness renders service to the element of adverting- 
mind-consciousness, which in turn renders service to the 
apperceptional mind-consciousness. The element of states 
renders service to the seven elements of consciousness by 
many relations, such as co-existence, reciprocity, dependence, 
association, presence, non-absence, and so on.2 The eye- 
element and so on, and some of the elements of state render 
service to some of the mind-consciousness-elements by means 
1 Read ananiaraya. Some texts repeat it twice. 
* “ And so on ” include root-oondition, predominant principles, 
karma, result, nutrimont, controlling faculties, JhJnn, means.—filed. 

--- PAGE 86 ---
579 XV.—The Elements 
of the relations of object and so forth. To eye-consciousness- 
element and so on, not only do the eye and visible form and 
so forth render service, but also the light of the sun and so on. 
Hence said the teachers of old: “ Eye-consciousness arises 
depending on the eye, visible form, light, %vise attention. [489] 
Ear-consciousness arises depending on the ear, sound, ear-hole, 
wise attention. Nose-consciousness arises depending on the 
nose, smell, air, wise attention. Tongue-consciousness arises 
depending on the tongue, taste, water[y element], tvi.se attention. 
Body-consciousness arises depending on the body, touch, earth\y 
demerit], wise attention. Mind-consciousness arises depending 
on the life-continuum, mind, idea, wise attention” This herein 
is the abridged account. The detailed account of the different 
lands of causal relations will be made clear in the exposition of 
the Causal Genesis.1 Thus herein is decision to be understood 
by way of causes. 
“Considerations”:—here decision is to he understood by 
viewing the elements, is the meaning. For all the con¬ 
ditioned elements are to be regarded as devoid of intrinsic 
nature2 either in the past or in the future; as being empty of 
eternity, pleasantness, happiness, individuality; and as being 
connected with causes. But distinctively, of them the element 
of eye is to be regarded as the surface of a drum, the element 
of visible form as the drum-stick, the element of eye-conscious¬ 
ness as the sound. Further, the element of eye is to be regarded 
as the surface of a mirror, the element of visible form as a 
man’s face, the element of eye-consciousness as the image of 
the face. Or, the element of eye is to be regarded as sugar¬ 
cane and sesame, the element of visible form as the rod of the 
pressing machine, the element of eye-consciousness as the 
sugar-cane juice and sesame oil. Again, the element of eye 
is to be regarded as the fire-kindling plank,3 the element of 
visible form as the fire-kindling sticks,8 the element of eye- 
consciousness as the fire. And the same with the elements 
of ear and so on. The element of mind is to be regarded as 
1 Below, Ch. XVII. ! VivitUz. 
* Adhardranl, uttararanl—the base and top of the fire-kindling 
apparatus; not registered as such compounds in the P.T.S. Dictionary. 

--- PAGE 87 ---
580 The Path of Purity 
the forerunner and follower of the elements of eye-consciousness 
and so on, as they arise. The aggregate of feeling in the 
element of states should be regarded as a dart and a stake; 
the aggregates of perception and activities, from being con¬ 
nected with the dart and stake of feeling,1 should be regarded 
as disease. Or the perception of average men, as producing 
the pain of (unfulfilled) desire should be regarded as the 
empty closed fist, or from seizing the general characteristics 
of unreality, as the forest deer.2 The activities, from throwing 
one into rebirth, should be regarded as men who throw one 
into a fire-pit, or from being followed by the pain of birth, 
as thieves pursued by the king’s men, or, from being the 
root-condition of the continuity of aggregates, carrying 
disadvantages of all kinds, as the seeds of a poisonous tree.3 
Matter (or visible form) should be regarded as a razor-wheel 
because it is a sign for danger of various kinds.4 
The unconditioned element should be regarded as death¬ 
lessness, peace and security. Why? Because of its oppo¬ 
sition to that which carries disadvantage of all kinds. [490] 
The element of mind-consciousness, from its not determining 
as to the objects, should be regarded as a forest-monkey; 
from the difficulty of bringing it under control, as a wild horse; 
from its falling on any object it pleases, as a stick thrown 
into the sky; and from its connection with the assumed 
appearance of the various kinds of vice such as greed, hate, it 
should be regarded as a nautch girl. 
Thus is ended the fifteenth chapter called the Exposition 
of sense-organs and elements in the section of the development 
of understanding in the Path of Purity, composed for the 
purpose of gladdening good folk. 
1 Some read aoUaaularoga, “as being the disease of the dart and 
stake ” (of feeling). 
* Which is apt to mistake a scarecrow in the fields for a human being. 
s Re-punctuate the text accordingly. 
4 As in the case of the forms of men and women. 

--- PAGE 88 ---
CHAPTER XVI 
[491] EXPOSITION OF THE CONTROLLING FACULTIES AND 
THE TRUTHS 
[Controlling Faculties.] 
The controlling faculties, pointed out immediately after the 
elements are the twenty-two controlling faculties, namely: 
eye-faculty, ear-faculty, nose-faculty, tongue-faculty, body- 
faculty, mind-faculty, woman-faculty, man-faculty, life- 
faculty, bliss-faculty, ill-faculty, joy-faculty, grief-faculty, 
indifference-faculty, faith-faculty, energy-faculty, mindfulnesB- 
faculty, concentration-faculty, understanding-faculty, I-shall- 
come-to-know-the-unknown-faculty, perfected-knowledge - 
faculty, one-who-has-come-to-know-facuity. Therein: 
From meaning, characteristic and so forth, 
And series, whether there division be, 
And function, plane: thus knowing we decide. 
“ Meaning ”—the meaning of eye and so on has been set 
forth as: it takes delight or reveals itself, thus is it eye and 
so on. Of the last three terms, the first is called the faculty 
of I-shall-come-to-know-the-unknown because it has the sense 
of controlling faculty, and it arises in one who practises to 
the end that “ I shall come to know the path of deathlessness 
or the law of the Four Truths, not known previously." The 
second is called the Perfected-Knowledge-Faculty because it 
keeps on knowing (the Four Truths) and it has the sense of 
controlling faculty. The third is called the One-who-has- 
come-to-know-faculty because it has the sense of controlling 
faculty, and it arises in one who has destroyed the cankers 
and who has como to know the Four Truths, wherein he has 
accomplished the function of knowledge. 
What then is this sense of controlling faculty ? It means 
681 

--- PAGE 89 ---
582 The Path of Purity 
the indication of control (inda),1 what is taught bv the Lord 
(inda),* what is seen by the Lord (inda),* what is brought 
about8 by action (inda), what is used4 by the Lord (inda).2 * 
.411 these meanings are proper, each in its place. For the 
Blessed One. the fully Enlightened One is inda because he is 
the supreme overlord; and moral and immoral acts are inda 
because no one can be overlord among actions. Therefore 
here [492] the controlling faculties which are produced by 
action indicate moral and immoral action, and are brought 
about by such action. Thus they are controlling faculties in 
the sense of indicating action (inda) and of being brought about 
by action (inda). And all of them have been explained and 
fully understood according as they really are by the Blessed 
One. Thus are they controlling faculties in the sense of being 
taught and seen by the Lord (inda). And some of them have 
been used6 * by the Blessed One, the Lord of sages, for the needs 
of life.5 some as means of developing. Thus are they con¬ 
trolling faculties in the sense of being used by the Lord (inda). 
They are also controlling faculties in the sense of sovereignty, 
which is called the dominant influence. For the dominant 
influence of the eye and so on is effected at the proceeding of 
eye-consciousness and so on; these being sharp or mild 
according as those are sharp or mild. This is the decision 
here by the meaning. 
“ Characteristic and so forth ”—decision as to the eye and 
so on is to be understood also by means of their characteristics, 
properties, manifestation and proximate cause, is the meaning. 
And their characteristics and so on have been stated in the 
exposition of the Aggregates.6 The four beginning with 
understanding are non-delusion in meaning. The remaining 
faculties are mentioned there in their true form. 
1 Of moral and immoral acts, and not of Indra, as explained in P.T.S. 
Dictionary, s.v. inda. 
a I.e. the Omniscient One. 
8 Siffha, not in this sense in P.T.S. Dictionary. Explained by fxkd 
as sajjitam, uppidikirp. 
* Jutlha, not in P.T.S. Dictionary. Explained by J'Vcd as seviiam. 
6 Oocarasevandija. This iB the nearest to our “usage,” “use’’afforded 
by Pali. « Page 515 f. 

--- PAGE 90 ---
583 XVI.'—Controlling Faculties 
“ Series ”—this is the serial order of instruction. 
The attainment of the plane of the Ariyans is through 
comprehension of subjective states. Hence eye-controlling- 
faculties and so on which are included in the personality 
have been taught first. 
Next, woman-faculty and man-faculty1 are mentioned 
with a view to pointing out that state with reference to which 
an individual is counted as a woman or as a man. And then 
comes life-controlling faculty, by which we are to understand 
that the twofold faculty of femininity and masculinity is bound 
up with it. 
Then come bliss-faculty and so on, by which we are to 
understand that, as long as it (life-controlling faculty) proceeds, 
so long is the non-cessation of these feelings, and that whatever 
is felt is ill. 
Then faith-faculty and so on are mentioned in order to 
show religious attainment thus: “ These states should be 
developed to the end that those (feelings) may cease.” 
The faculty of believing, “ I shall come to know the un¬ 
known ” is next mentioned in order to show that the attain¬ 
ment is not useless since that faculty is first manifested in 
one’s self owing to the attainment. And owing to the fruit 
that the last-named faculty yields, the faculty of perfected 
knowledge should be developed immediately after it; hence 
the faculty of perfected knowledge comes next in order. Then 
the faculty of one who has come to know, the faculty which 
gives supreme comfort, is taught last so that we may understand 
that its attainment comes of the developing of the last-named 
faculty, and that when it has been attained there is nothing 
further for us to do. Such is the serial order of the faculties. 
[493] “ Whether there division be ”—here there is division 
only of the life-controlling faculty, which is of two kinds: 
life-controlling faculty of matter, life-controlling faculty of 
non-matter. The rest is undivided.2 Thus one should under¬ 
stand the decision here as to division and no-division. 
1 Or, femininity and masculinity. 
a Although the remaining faculties are divided by way of plane and 
the person, and so on, they are undivided in intrinsic nature. 

--- PAGE 91 ---
5 84 The Path of Purity 
“Function”—What is the function of the faculties ? As 
regards the eye-faculty, because of the statement, “ The 
eye-organ is the cause, by means of the relation of governance, 
of the element of eye-conscio-usness and the states associated 
therewith,”1 whatever act there is, of making such states as 
eye-consciousness to conform to its own modes of sharpness 
and weakness and so on, itself being sharp and weak and so 
on, by means of the relation of governance—that is its function. 
And the same with the ear, nose, tongue and body. But the 
function of the mind-faculty is to bring the co-existent states 
under its own power; that of the life-faculty is to guard the 
co-existent states; that of femininity and masculinity is to 
dispose of the features, characteristics, attire, behaviour2 and 
modes of women and men; that of the faculties of bliss, ill, 
joy and grief is to overpower the co-existent states and bring 
them to their proper modes of grossness; that of the faculty 
of indifference is to bring them to the modes3 of calmness, 
exaltedness, neutrality; that of faith and so on is to overpower 
the opposite states and to bring the associated states to the 
modes of repose and so on; that of the faculty of believing, “ I 
shall come to know the unknown,” is to remove the three 
fetters and to make the associated states turn towards such 
removal; that of the faculty of perfected knowledge is to 
reduce, remove sense-desire, lust, ill-will and so on, and to 
bring the co-existent states under its own power; that of the 
faculty of one who has come to know is to put away zeal in all 
works and to cause the associated states to turn towards 
deathlessness. Thus should decision be understood by way of 
function. 
“Plane”—the faculties of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, 
female, male, bliss, ill, grief, are of the realm of sense. The 
faculties of mind, life, indifference, and those of faith, energy, 
mindfulness, concentration, understanding, are included in the 
four planes. The faculty of joy is included in three planes 
1 Tikapaffhana i, 5, which reads “ cyc-faculty ” for “ eye-organ." The 
formula, however, occurs on pp. 4, 6, under the relations of dependence, 
pre-exiatencc, and of presence and not of governance. 
s Read °dkappd°. * Read °ttdJcdranupipanam. 

--- PAGE 92 ---
XVI.—The Truths 585 
by way of the realm of sense, the realm of form and the tran¬ 
scendental. The last three faculties are transcendental. Thus 
here should decision be understood by way of plane. 
Discerning this, 
The greatly agitated monk, 
Who stands on faculty-restraint, 
Will make an end of ill, since he 
The faculties has understood. 
This is the detailed discourse on the faculties. 
[494] II 
[The Truths.] 
The Truths which are next mentioned arc the four Noble 
(=Axiyan) Truths, to wit: Ill is Noble Truth, the origin of ill is 
Noble Truth, the cessation of ill is Noble Truth, the practice 
leading to the cessation of ill is Noble Truth. Herein, 
By classification, analysis,1 
Characteristic and such other kinds, 
Synopsis and likewise exactitude, 
By series, by decision as to birth, 
And other things, by functioning 
Of knowledge, by division of contents, 
Analogy, tetrad, the void and by 
The single species and by other things 
Unlike and like portions—thus should the wise 
Consider judgment in instruction’s course.2 
Of these, “ by classification **—four in each case are the 
meanings given to ill and so forth as true, not false, not other¬ 
wise which should be clearly understood by those who have 
understood ill and so forth. As it has been said: ‘ ‘ Oppression, 
being conditioned, heart-burning, change—these four meanings 
of ill are true, not false, not otherwise. Heaping up, source, 
1 Nibbacana, not in P.T.S. Dictionary. 
* Sasanakkame ti ariyasaccdni vuccanti, ariya&accadt&and vd.—Tlka. 
38 

--- PAGE 93 ---
586 The Path of Purity 
fetter, impediment—these are the meanings of the Origin. Escape, 
aloofness, no condition, deathlessness—these are the meanings 
of the Cessation. Wag out, root-cause, discernment, dominant 
influence—these are the meanings of the Path. . . . These four 
meanings of the Path are true, not false, not otherwiseP1 Further 
it is said: “ Oppression, being conditioned, heart-burning, 
change, thoroughly knowahle—these are the meanings of ill,” 
and so on. Thus by means of the meanings classified as four in 
each case, are ill and others to be understood. This is the 
decision by way of classification. 
“ By analysis, characteristic and such other kinds ”— 
first, on analyzing the word dukkham (ill), the sound du is used 
in the sense of despicable, since they speak of a despised son as 
duppuUo. The sound kham means empty, as the empty space 
is spoken of as kham. And this, the first truth, is despicable 
because it is the abode of various dangers, empty because 
it is devoid of the ideas of eternity, pleasantness, happiness, 
individuality, which exist only in the thoughts of the foolish. 
Hence, as being despicable and empty, it is called dukkham. 
[495] And the sound sum denotes connection in such words 
as sa/ndgamo, sametam (coming-together, concurrence). The 
sound «[d] denotes uprising in such words as uppannam, 
udiUnn (upriseu, sprung up). The sound ay a shows reason. 
And this second truth shows the reason for the uprising of ill 
when it is connected with other causes than itself. Hence, 
as being the reason for the uprising of ill when in connection 
with causes, it is called the origin of ill. 
And because the sound ni means absence, and the sound 
rodha signifies a prison,2 therefore as being devoid of all 
courses of life, the third truth (of the Cessation of ill, dukkha- 
nirodha) is the absence (m) of the prison (rodha) of ill, said 
to be the prison of repeated births. Or, when one has attained 
to it (the third truth), one is freed from the prison of ill, said 
to be the prison of repeated births; hence as being opposed to 
that prison, the third truth is called the cessation of ill. Or 
it is the cessation of ill because it is the cause of the non¬ 
arising, cessation of ill. 
1 Cf. Patisambhid& i, 118. ' Caraka, not in P.T.S. Dictionary. 

--- PAGE 94 ---
XVI.—The Truths 587 
And because one goes forth with the cessation of ill as 
the object, as the goal, and because the fourth truth is the 
practice leading to its attainment, therefore the fourth truth 
is called the progress leading to the cessation of ill. 
And because the Noble Ones (Ariyans) such as the Buddhas 
penetrate them, therefore axe these truths called the Noble 
(Ariyan) Truths. As it has been said: “ Monks, there are the 
four noble truths. Which are they ? . . . These, 0 monks, are 
the four noble truths-”1 The Noble Ones penetrate them, 
therefore are they called the Noble Truths. 
Again, they are the noble truths as being the truths of the 
Noble One. As it has been said: “ Monks, in the world of men 
together with that of the devas, the Tathagata is the Noble One, 
hence they are caUed the noble truths.”2 
Further, they are the noble truths since the condition of 
nobleness is fulfilled by a perfect understanding of them.3 
As it has been said, “ By perfectly understanding these four 
noble truths according as they really are, is the TcUhdgata called 
the Saint, the perfectly enlightened, the Noble One.”2 
Furthermore, they are the noble truths in the sense of 
being true. “Noble” means tTue, not false, not uncertain. 
As it has been said: “ Monks, these four noble truths are true, 
not false, not otherwise, hence are they called the noble truths.”* 
Thus should decision be understood by way of the analysis of 
terms. 
How [do we decide by] “ the characteristic and such other 
kinds ”? Of the four truths, the truth of ill has the charac¬ 
teristic of oppression, [496] the essence of heart-burning, the 
manifestation of proceeding. The truth of the origin has the 
characteristic of production, the essence of not cutting off, 
the manifestation of impediment. The truth of cessation has 
the characteristic of calm, the essence of not passing away, the 
manifestation of the signless.5 The truth of the Path has the 
characteristic of going away, the essence of putting off the vices, 
the manifestation of emerging. And further, the character- 
1 Samyutia v, 433. 
3 Read eiesam for ekesam. 
* The five aggregates being the sign. 
* Ibid. 
4 Samyutia v, 431. 

--- PAGE 95 ---
588 The Path of Purity 
<•■ - -»rssS proceeding, re vers being a conditioned Btate, 
conditioned stat , 'characteristics. Thus 
‘£JtSS “JL-* -y - “d 
££i.*rsrtr? 
S^not of an 
expanded. Further: 
Without oppression there’s no ill, 
There’s no oppression that’s not ill, 
The two by nature are conjoined, 
Therefore is ill declared the truth. 
Apart from it no ill exists, 
There is no ill but springs from it, 
It is the basic root of ill, 
And’t is attachment that is truth. 
Without Nirvana there’s no peace, 
There is no peace but springs from it, 
The two by nature are conjoined, 
Nirvana thus is judged the truth. 
Without the Path there’s no escape,- 
Without escape2 it is no Path, 
The Path is true and real escape, 
Therefore it is declared the truth. _ 
i Samyntta v, 430. 
» Niyyanarn, lit. going away or out ol. 

--- PAGE 96 ---
XVI.—The Truths 589 
Thus as to the whole1 the wise declare 
The true, unchangeable and real 
To be the nature of the truth 
Concerning ill and all the rest. 
Thus should decision be understood according to the mean¬ 
ing. 
But why synopsis ? Here the word “truth ” is seen with 
various meanings, for instance: In such passages as 
“ A man should speak the truth, no anger show,”2 
it means verbal truth. 
In such passages as, 
“ On truth the monks and brahmins stand,”3 
[497] it means truth as abstinence (from falsehood). 
In such passages as, 
“ Why do they speak the truths, they who 
Preach other views without a fault ?”x 
it means doctrinal views. 
Ip such passages as, 
“ For truth is one, no second has,”6 
it means truth in the ultimate sense, also in the sense of 
Nirvana and the Path. 
In such passages as, 
Of the four noble truths how many are moral?” etc.6 
it means a noble truth; here also this is said with reference 
to the noble truths. Thus is decision to be understood by 
way of synopsis. 
“ Exactitude ”—Why are the noble truths stated as four, 
neither more nor less ? Because there is no other truth, and 
not any one among them is to be eliminated. For there is not 
a single truth beyond the four, and not a single one among 
them can be eliminated. As it has been said; “ Monks, it is 
1 Kead dukkhQdisva pisesena as dukkhadisu am$e*ena. 
* Dhammapada 224. * Untraced ? 
4 Suttanipdta 885. 4 Ibid. 884. B VibhaAga, p. 112. 

--- PAGE 97 ---
590 The Path of Purity 
impossible here in this world for a monk or a brahmin to come 
and say, ‘ This is not the noble truth of HI, another is the noble 
truth of ill. I will put aside this noble truth of ill and will 
expound another noble truth of iU.’ ” And also: “ It is im¬ 
possible, monks, that any monk or brahmin should say, ‘ This is 
not the first noble truth of ill that has been taught by the monk 
Gotama. Casting aside this first noble truth of ill, I will expound 
another noble truth of ill.’”1 Further, in announcing the 
proceeding (of repeated births), the Blessed One has announced 
it together with its cause. And he has announced their 
subsiding, together with the way in which they subside. 
Thus by the measure of the proceeding and subsiding of 
repeated births and the causes of both, have the truths been 
stated as four. Further, they are four by way of states to be 
comprehended, to be put away, to be realized, and to be 
developed; by way of the physical basis of craving, craving, its 
cessation and the means of its cessation; by way of sensual 
lust, its delight, its extirpation and the means thereof. Thus 
here should decision be understood by way of the exact 
number. 
“ By series ’’—is the order of instruction. Of the four truths, 
the truth of ill is stated first as being easy to understand 
because it is gross and is common to all beings. In order to 
show its cause the truth of the origin is stated immediately 
after it. The truth of the cessation comes next in order to 
show that the cessation of the result is due to the cessation 
of the cause. Last, the truth of the Path is for the purpose 
of showing the way to the attainment of that cessation. 
[498] Or, ill is stated first in order to agitate the hearts of 
beings who are intoxicated by the blissful pleasures of life. 
The Origin is stated immediately after it in order to show that 
the ill does not come by itself, is not created by the Lord 
(Paramesva) and so on, hut springs from this cause. Then 
comes the cessation in order to give comfort by pointing out 
the way of escape to those who are seeking it and whose hearts 
have been agitated by the oppression of ill together with its 
1 Samyutta v, 428. 

--- PAGE 98 ---
XVI.—The Truths 591 
cause. Then comes the Path leading to cessation in order that 
people may reach cessation. Thus here should decision be 
understood by way of series. 
[The Exposition of III.] 
“ By decision as to birth and other things **—decision here is 
in respect of those states: birth and so on, which are stated in 
the Exposition of the four truths by the Blessed One in the 
course of an exposition of the noble troths, ob twelve states in 
the exposition of Ill, thus: “ Birth is ill, old age is ill, death 
is ill, sorrow, lamentation, misery, grief and despair are ill, 
association with those one does not love is ill, separation from 
the objects of one's love is ill. the not getting of what is wished 
for is ill, in short the five dinging aggregates are ill ”;1 aB the 
threefold craving in the exposition of the Origin thus: “ Even 
this craving, potent for re-birth, that is accompanied by lust 
and self-indulgence, seeking satisfaction now here now there, 
to wit: the craving for the life of sense, the craving for becoming, 
and the craving for not-becoming ";2 as a single state, that is, 
Nirvana, in the exposition of the Cessation thus: “ The utter 
fading away and cessation of that very craving, giving it up, 
renouncing it, emancipation from it, detachment from it";2 
as eight states in the exposition of the Path thus: “ Which is 
the noble truth of the course leading to the cessation of ill ? It 
is the noble Eightfold Path, to wit: . . . right concentration."2 
And the decision is as follows: This word “ birth ” has many 
meanings: It is used in the sense of existence in “one birth, 
two births"3 It means group in, “ There is, VisaJcha, a group 
of monks called the NiganthasIt means a characteristic of 
the conditioned in, “ Birth is comprised under two aggregates.”8 
It means re-birth in, “ A person's birth is on account of the 
first thought, the first consciousness which has manifested itself 
in the mother's wotnb." [499] It means giving birth in, “ The 
future Buddha, Ananda, is just born."3 It means family in, 
i Digha ii, 305. * Ibid. 308, 309; Dialogues ii, 339, 341. 
8 Dlgha i, 81. 4 Anguttara i, 206. 
6 Dhatukathu 15. 8 Majjhima iii, 123. 

--- PAGE 99 ---
592 The Path of Purity 
“ One is not cast off, reviled on account of one's birth."1 It 
means the Noble Precepts in, “ Since when, Sister, have I 
become purified by the Noble Precepts?"2 And here in this 
passage the word is used in respect of those aggregates 
which proceed from the time that beings are conceived in 
the mother’s womb till they issue therefrom. But in the other 
forms of life8 it is used only in respect of re-incarnated aggre¬ 
gates. This is the discursive teaching. 
Directly speaking, birth is the first appearance of the 
aggregates of the beings who are reborn in various existences. 
And the first appearance in the various existences is its charac¬ 
teristic, the giving back (the aggregate to the being) is its 
function, the emerging (of the aggregate) from the past exist¬ 
ence to the present is its manifestation, ot the variety of ill 
is its manifestation (or result). But why is this birth ill ? 
Because it is the physical basis of ills of various kinds. For 
ills are various, as follows: painful, changeable, compounded, 
covered, uncovered, figurative, direct. Of these, bodily and 
mental painful feeling, being ill by nature and by name, is 
called painful ill. Pleasant sensation is called changeable ill, 
because it becomes the root^condition of pain through change. 
Neutral feeling and the remaining compounded things of the 
three planes of life are called compounded ill, because they are 
oppressed by the rise and fall of living beings. Bodily and 
mental illness such as fever due to ear-ache, tooth-ache4 and 
born of lust, hate and so on, is called covered ill, because it 
may be known by asking a question, and the attack is not 
manifest. It is also called unmanifested ill. Suffering which 
is set up by the thirty-two punishments due to one’s deeds and 
so on, and which needs no question to make itself known, 
and is evident, is called uncovered ill, or evident ill. Except¬ 
ing painful ill, the rest are mentioned in the Duklchasacca 
Vibhanga.5 And all, beginning with birth, as being the 
1 AngvXtara iii, 152. 8 Majjhima ii, 103. 
3 Such as the moisture-born or the apparitional. 
4 The Piled explains that though a man, suffering from ear-ache or 
tooth-ache, may moke known his pain by means of his groans, the exact 
spot where the pain is may be known only by asking him. 
8 Page 99. 

--- PAGE 100 ---
XVI.—The Truths 593 
physical basis of this and that ill, are figurative ills. Painful 
ill is called direct ill. 
And this birth is ill because it is the physical basis of that 
ill which, as pointed out in a simile by the Blessed One in such 
Suttas as Balapaij^ita Sutta,1 leads to a state of woe, and of 
that ill which, though in a happy course of existence, has 
its root in descent into the mother’s womb and so forth. 
[500J And this is the ill such as has its root in descent into the 
mother’s womb. For when a being is born thence, he is not 
born as though on lotus leaves, blue, red, white and so forth, 
but, like a worm among rotten fish, rotten junkets, and dirty 
pools and such-like places, is born in the highly loathsome 
uterine cavity, very narrow, densely dark, a passage for most 
offensive winds,2 intensified by the smell of various putridities, 
below the stomach,3 above the abdomen,4 and between the 
mucous membrane of the belly and the backbones. And 
there for ten months the child experiences excessive pain, 
unable to do such things as the bending or stretching of its 
limbs, cooked like a bag of vegetables, and steamed like a lump 
of flour, by the heat produced in the uterus. This, so far, is 
ill which has its root in descent into the womb. 
And like a kid in the hands of a drunkard, the young of a 
snake in the hands of a snake-charmer, the child experiences 
excessive pain through such acts as dragging forward, dragging 
round, shaking downwards, shaking on all sides,® when the 
mother suddenly stumbles, walks, sits, rises, turns from side 
to side and so forth. It experiences sharp pain as though it 
had fallen into the cold hells when the mother drinks cold 
water, as though it was deluged by a torrent of embers when 
she swallows hot rice-gruel, food and so on, as though it was 
tortured by being hewn with a hatchet and sprinkled with 
salt water6 when she swallows anything salty, sour and so 
on. This is ill which has its root in the care of the embryo. 
1 Majjhimaiu, 163. * Parana, not in this sense in P.T.S. Dictionary. 
8 Lit. “ receptacle for undigested food.” 
* Lit. “ receptacle for digested food.” 
6 Adho dhunanam odhunanam, tiriyam sabbalo va dhuna-nam nidhuna- 
nam.—Tikd. 
* Khardpat\cc)uikam=taccheivd kTidrapakkhipanarn.— 

--- PAGE 101 ---
594 The Path of Purity 
And in the case of a miscarriage, pain comes upon the child 
through the operations of cutting and splitting and so forth at 
the seat of pain, which it is not proper even for the mother’s 
acquaintances and bosom friends to witness. This is ill which 
has its root in miscarriage. 
At the time of birth, the child suffers pain when it is turned 
upside down as though fallen into hell through the pains of 
the mother, falls into the very fearful passage of the womb, 
and is dragged out through its really narrow' mouth, like a 
great elephant through a key-hole, or a denizen of the hells 
crushed into powder by mountains. This is ill w'hich has its 
root in child-birth. 
The child, having been born, suffers pain as though pierced 
and cut with pointed needles and sharp razors and so on, 
when its delicate body like a tender wound is handled, bathed, 
washed, wrapped in swaddling clothes and so forth. This is 
ill which has its root in delivery from the mother’s womb. 
[501] Then afterwards ill comes upon him who in life commits 
suicide, upon him who, following the example of the naked 
ascetic and so on, undergoes himself such tortures as baking 
himself in the sun and burning himself in the fire, and upon 
him who in anger refuses to eat, and hangs himself. This is 
ill which has its root in acts done by oneself. 
Then a man experiences the pains of murder and physical 
bondage and so on, at the hands of others. This is ill which 
has its root in acts done by others. Thus this birth is the 
physical basis of all this ill. 
Hence it is said: 
Should no being be born in hell, where else 
Could he be that he might experience 
Such ills unbearable as burning fire ? 
Hence birth is ill, so has the sage declared. 
The lower animals experience 
Such ills as come from whips and goads and sticks. 
But how could that be so without rebirth 
As lower animals ? Hence birth is ill. 
The ghosts experience such wondrous ills 
As hunger, thirst, cold air and burning heat. 

--- PAGE 102 ---
XVI.—The Truths 595 
These happen not to one not born as such. 
Hence birth is ill, so has the sage declared. 
What ill there is among the fallen gods, 
In hells between the worlds, intensely dark, 
Intolerably cold, affects not one 
Who is not born therein. Hence birth is ill. 
Whoso dwells long in mother’s womb like as 
In hell of excrement and then comes out 
Feels dreadful pain. This happens not to one 
Who is not born therein. Hence birth is ill. 
What need is there for further speech I Ill may 
Be found in any place. But without birth 
Has it ever been found ? Hence birth is ill. 
So, first of all, declares the mighty sage. 
This, so far, is the decision as to birth. 
[502] In “ Old age is ill,” old age is of two kinds: that which 
is the characteristic of conditioned things, and that which 
in continuity is the ageing of the aggregates included in one 
existence, namely, the state of having broken teeth and so on. 
The latter is intended here. And the coming to maturity of 
the aggregates is the characteristic of old age, the bringing them 
near unto death is its function, the destruction of youthfulness 
is its manifestation. It is ill because it is the ill of com¬ 
pounded things and the physical basis of ill. It is the physical 
basis of whatever bodily and mental ill arises caused by 
various things such as the loosening of limbs, big and small, 
the change in controlling faculties, deformity, destruction of 
youtlifulness, loss of strength, absence of mindfulness and 
intelligence, disparagement by others. Hence it is said : 
The laxity of limbs, and loss of youth, 
The change in faculties, and loss of strength, 
And absent-mindedness and other faults, 
Disparagement by one’s own family, 
And dotage also. On account of these 
A mortal suffers mind-and-body ill. 
Old age has caused all this: hence it is ill. 
This is the decision as to old age. 

--- PAGE 103 ---
596 The Path of Purity 
In “ death is ill,” death is of two kinds: the characteristic 
mark of conditioned things, concerning which it has been 
said: “ Old age and death are comprised under two aggregates,”1 
and the cutting asunder of the faculties included in one exist¬ 
ence, concerning which it has been said, “ There is constant 
fear from death.”2 The latter is intended here. It is a name 
also for death which arises on account of birth, death with a 
purpose, natural death, death which is due to loss of life, 
death which is due to loss of merit. It has passing away for 
characteristic, separation for function, not arriving at one’s 
destiny for manifestation. It should be understood as ill 
because it is its physical basis. Hence has it been said: 
The evil man who sees the ripening 
Of evil deeds, the good man who cannot 
Bear to be separate from those he loves: 
They both, on nearing death, feel mental pain. 
All things in general, through wear and tear. 
Are physically undergoing pain, 
Insufferable, irreparable, as 
The cutting off of joints and bandages.3 
[503] Since of such ill, death constitutes the base, 
So death has been declared the same as ill. 
This is the decision as to death. 
Among “sorrow” and the rest, sorrow is the heart-burning 
of one who is afflicted by loss of relatives and so on. Although 
it is the same in sense as grief,4 still its characteristic is the 
burning of the heart,5 conflagration is its function, mourning 
is its manifestation. And it is ill because it is painful ill, and 
the physical basis of ill. 
1 DKatukathd 15. 8 Suitanipdta 576. 
3 The last two lines of the text on p. 502 should be printed as verse. 
4 There being no separate mental property as sorrow. Its character¬ 
istics and so on, however, are given separately from those of grief. 
8 Antonijjhanum ci/tasaninpo.—P%k&, which, however, gives two 
other moanings not in P.T.S. Dictionary, s.v., namely, “ inward shrink¬ 
age or drying up of thought due to absence of diffusion,” visararahitam 
onto era sankucitam cintanam sukkhanam va anio nijjhdnam. 

--- PAGE 104 ---
XVI.—The Truths 597 
Hence is it said: 
Sorrow pricks the hearts of beings, 
Like the poisoned dart. 
Grievously and oft it burns, 
Like the heated iron. 
It bears disease, old age and death and ruin 
And other forms of ill: hence ill it’s called. 
This is the decision as to sorrow. 
“ Lamentation ” is the vocal noise uttered by one afflicted 
by loss of relatives and so on. Wailing is its characteristic, 
the publishing of faults and merits is its function, confusion 
of mind is its manifestation. And it is ill because it is the 
ill of compounded things, and the physical basis of ill. Hence 
is it said: 
The man who, struck by sorrow’s dart, laments, 
Feels further pain unbearable and born 
Of dried-up throat and lip and palate-blade. 
Lament is ill: so says the Blessed One. 
This is the decision as to lamentation. 
“Misery”1 is physical ill. It has oppression of the body 
as its characteristic, causing grief to the unintelligent is its 
function, illness of the body is its manifestation. It is ill, 
because it is painful ill and bears mental ill. Hence is it said: 
This body-misery oppresses one, 
And generates the mental misery. 
Therefore particularly is it said 
That misery and ill are just the same. 
This is the decision as to misery. 
[504] “ Grief ” is mental ill. It has oppression of the mind 
as its characteristic, tormenting the mind as its function, 
disease of the mind aB its manifestation. And it is ill, because 
it is painful ill and bears physical ill. For those who are 
afflicted by mental ill cry out with their hair dishevelled, beat 
their breasts, roll forward, roll round and roimd, fall down 
1 Dukkha, the same word as for “ ill,” also translated “ pain.” 

--- PAGE 105 ---
598 The Path of Purity 
feet upward, carry a weapon, eat poison, hang themselves 
by a rope, enter the fire and undergo ills of various kinds. 
Hence is it said: 
Since grief gives torments to the mind. 
And for the body stores them up, 
Therefore do those who have no grief, 
Declare that grief is ill indeed. 
This is the decision as to grief. 
“ Despair ” is a weakness due to the excessive mental ill 
of one afflicted by loss of relatives and so on. Some hold that 
it is a state included in the aggregate of mental coefficients. 
Heart-burning is its characteristic, moaning is its function, 
depression is its manifestation. It is ill because it is com¬ 
pounded ill and causes heart-burning and physical depression. 
Hence is it said: 
Despair brings forth excessive ill 
Through physical depression and 
Through burning of the heart. Therefore 
Despair is judged the same as ill. 
This is the decision as to despair. 
Of these, sorrow is like some food-stuff in a vessel cooked by 
a weak fire; lamentation is like the boiling over of the vessel 
when the food-stuff is cooked by a strong fire; despair is like 
the drying up within the vessel of what remains after the 
boiling over. 
“Association with those one does not love” is meeting 
with undesirable persons and things. The meeting with un¬ 
desirables is its characteristic, the causing of mental torture 
is its function, misfortune1 is its manifestation. It is ill 
because it is its physical basis. Hence is it said: 
On seeing something undesirable, 
It is the mind that first the pain receives. 
Then through the mind it spreads the body o’er. 
Association with those one does not love 
Is of this mind-and-body ill the base. 
So it is ill declares the mighty sage. 
1 Head anatihabhava0, explained by the Txkd aa upaddavabhava. 

--- PAGE 106 ---
XVI.—The Truths 599 
[505] “ Separation from the objects of one’s love” means 
to be away from desirable persons and things. Separation 
from the desired object is its characteristic, the production of 
sorrow is its function, loss of relatives1 is its manifestation. It 
is ill because it is the physical basis of sorrowful ill. Hence 
is it said: 
Through loss of relatives and wealth 
Fools grieve, by sorrow’s dart sore pricked. 
Hence separation from one’s love 
Has been declared the same as ill. 
This is the decision as to separation from the objects of one’s 
love. 
As to “ the not getting of what is wished for ”—the wish 
to have some impossible thing as in such expressions as, 
“ Good would it he were we not subject to birth /”2 is said to be 
" the not getting of what is wished for is ill.” The wish to 
have some impossible thing is its characteristic, the search 
for the impossible thing is its function, the not getting what 
is wished for is its manifestation. It is ill, because it is its 
physical basis. Hence is it said: 
The things we want wc do not get 
And suffer mental agony. 
The wish for things impossible 
Is of such agony the cause. 
Hence not to get the things we want 
Is ill: so says the conqueror. 
This is the decision as to the not getting the things we want. 
“ In short the five clinging aggregates are ill”—as regards 
this, All kinds of ill, with birth as chief, 
Herein declared or not declared, 
Without these clinging aggregates 
Do not exist.3 So these are ill, 
So, briefly says the mighty sage, 
Announcer of the end of ill. 
1 So the ftkd which gives an alternative meaning of “ loes ” by 
'* misfortune ” (upaddava). 
3 Vibhaiiga, p. 101. 3 Read ete na vxjjati for (Una vijjati. 

--- PAGE 107 ---
600 The Path of Purity 
Further, as in the case of the fire and the fuel, weapons 
and the target, gadflies, mosquitoes and so on and the cow’s 
body, the reapers and the field, village-robbers and the village, 
—so here also, birth and so on in various ways oppress the 
five clinging aggregates, in which they are produced as grass, 
creepers and so forth grow on the earth, the flowers, fruits 
and sprouts on trees. And birth is the first ill of the clinging 
aggregates, old age is their middle ill, death is the final ill. 
Sorrow is the burning ill, stmek by the pain of approaching 
death. Lamentation is the wailing ill of one who cannot bear 
the last-mentioned pain. Then misery is the ill of physical 
suffering due to undesirable sensations, called the perturba¬ 
tions of the (four) elements. [506] Grief is the mental suffer¬ 
ing which arises in average people through reaction against 
the physical pain. Despair is the heart-burning1 ill of those 
who become depressed through the growth of sorrow and so 
on. The not getting of what one wants is the pain of unful¬ 
filled desire suffered by those whose heart’s desire, is upset. 
Thus the clinging aggregates, upon being examined in various 
ways are found to be ill. It would not be possible even in 
many cycles of time to point out and speak about each one of 
the various forms of ill without remainder. Therefore has the 
Blessed One declared: “ In short, the jive dinging aggregates a re 
ill,” in order to show all kinds of ill by comprising them under 
the five clinging aggregates, just as the properties of the waters 
of the whole ocean may be illustrated by a single water-drop. 
This is the decision as to the clinging aggregates. 
This, so far, is the method in the Exposition of Ill. 
[Exposition of the Origin.] 
In the exposition of the origin “ even this craving ”2 is this 
craving. “ Potent for rebirth ” means causing rebirth, making 
for rebirth. Its habit is making for rebirth, thus “ potent for 
1 Anutthumnam onto nijjhayanam.—fikil. 
* The footnote references 1, 2 and 6 on p. 606 of the Pali Text should 
be made to refer to p. 498 (p. 691 of this translation), where the Digha 
quotations are given. 

--- PAGE 108 ---
XVI.—The Truths 601 
rebirth.” “ That is accompanied by lust and self-indulgence ” 
means lust-and-self-indulgencc-accompanied. Together with, 
one in sense with lust and self-indulgence:—so it is said. 
“Seeking satisfaction, now here now there” means seeking 
satisfaction wheresoever an individuality is born. “ To wit ” 
is a grammatical particle. Should the question be: Which is 
that craving ?—is the meaning. * ‘ The craving for the life 
of sense, the craving for becoming, the craving for not-becom- 
ing ”—these will be explained in the exposition of the Causal 
Genesis.1 Here grouping the three kinds of craving into one 
in the sense of producing the truth of ill, the statement “ The 
noble truth of the Origin of ill ” has been made. Thus should 
it be understood. 
[The Exposition of the Cessation of III.] 
In the exposition of the cessation of ill, “of that very 
craving” and so on:—in this way the cessation of the origin 
has been stated. Why has it been stated ? The cessation of 
ill is through the cessation of the origin. For ill ceases through 
the cessation of the origin, not otherwise. Hence is it said: 
[507] As when the root’s free and unharmed, 
The tree, though severed, grows again, 
So when the craving’s not destroyed, 
This ill persists in its rebirth.2 
Thus because ill ceases through the cessation of the origin 
therefore has the Blessed One shown the cessation of ill through 
the cessation of the origin. For the Thus-Gone behave like 
lions:3 in causing ill to cease and showing the cessation of 
ill, they concern themselves with the cause, not the effect. 
But the heretics behave like dogs :3 in causing ill to cease and 
showing the cessation of ill, they concern themselves not with 
the cause, but with the effect by teaching such things as the 
1 In the following chapter. 9 Dhammapada v, 338. 
8 Lions, when shot at by the arrow do not bother the arrow but charge 
the hunter. Dogs, when hit with sticks, stones, etc., bite these things 
in anger but not the man who has hit them. 
39 

--- PAGE 109 ---
602 The Path of Purity 
practice of mortifying one’s self. Thus should be understood 
the motive of the instruction regarding the cessation of ill 
by way of the cessation of the origin. This is the meaning. 
That very craving having been spoken of as being “ potent 
for re-birth,” the path of such craving as has been classified 
by way of the craving for the life of sense and so on is called 
the “ fading away.”1 For it is said that through disenchant¬ 
ment one is emancipated. Cessation comes through fading 
away: hence the “fading away and cessation.” “The 
utter fading away and cessation ” is the complete fading away 
and cessation through the uprooting of latent tendencies. 
Or the construction should be understood as follows:—fading 
away is spoken of as putting away, hence utter fading away 
is utter cessation. But in meaning all the terms2 are synonyms 
of Nirvana. For in the ultimate sense Nirvana is called the 
Noble Truth of cessation of ill. Because when Nirvana is 
reached craving fades away and ceases, therefore it is spoken 
of as the fading away and cessation. And because when it is 
reached, craving is given up and so on and there remains not 
a single attachment to the pleasures of sense, therefore it is 
spoken of as the “ giving up and renouncing of, the emanci¬ 
pation and detachment from ” (craving). 
It has peace as characteristic, not passing away or, comfort¬ 
ing as function, the signless or freedom from delay as mani¬ 
festation. Should it he said that there is no Nirvana: that it 
is like the hare’s horn, not to be found ? No, there is a means 
of finding it. For it is found by means of suitable attainment, 
just as the transcendental thought of others is known through 
knowledge encompassing other’s thoughts. Therefore it 
should not be said that there is no Nirvana because it is not 
to be found. Nor should it be said that there is no Nirvana 
because fools and average persons do not find it. Again, it 
should not be said that there is no Nirvana. Why ? Because 
of the practice of the religion being not barren. [508] For 
1 Re-punctuate the text accordingly. " Fading away ” is Virago., also 
translated “ disposaion ” and in the Dialogues as "disenchantment.” 
* I.e. the fading away, cessation, giving up, renouncing, emancipa¬ 
tion, detachment. 

--- PAGE 110 ---
XVI.—The Truths 603 
should there be no Nirvana, the good practice comprised 
under the three aggregates of morality and so on, and preceded 
by right outlook -would become barren, but it is not barren 
because of the attainment of Nirvana. But (some one might 
argue that) is the practice not barren1 because of the absence 
of the aggregates 1 It is not so, because there should be no 
absence2 of the aggregates; if absent, they would not be 
happening at the present time and fault might be found that 
there would be no attainment of the element of Nirvana with 
the substratum of life remaining at the moment of the Path 
which is dependent on the present existing aggregates. But 
(the argument might continue) would there be any fault if at 
that moment the vices (and not the aggregates) were not 
to exist ? Yes, there would be fault, for then the noble Path 
would be rendered useless. Besides, supposing the argument 
to hold good, there were no vices previous to the moment of 
the noble Path, which thus becomes useless. Hence, the 
argument does not hold good. But surely extinction is 
Nirvana, from such expressions as “ Sir, that which is ex¬ 
tinction of lust1,3 and so on ? No, because Saintship also 
becomes just extinction; for it is also shown in such expressions 
as the one just cited. 
Furthermore, Nirvana would have such faults as short 
duration in time. For if it were extinction. Nirvana would 
be of short duration, with a conditioned thing for characteristic 
and would be attainable regardless of right energy. But 
since that extinction beyond which there is no procedure 
(of lust and so on) is Nirvana, would it not be free from those 
faults ? No, it would not, because there is no such extinction. 
Even if there were such an extinction, it would not be able to 
transcend those faults which have been described. And also 
a further reason is that the noble Path is considered as Nirvana. 
For the noble Path extinguishes faults, hence it is called 
extinction. Beyond it there is no further procedure of faults. 
And Nirvana has been metaphorically stated as extinction, 
1 Read Vaiijhabk&v°. 
a Read abhdvdsambhamto=abhdv<i +asambhavato. 
. 3 Samyxitta iv, 251. 

--- PAGE 111 ---
604 The Path of Purity 
since in a broad sense it is the sufficing condition of that 
extinction which is termed cessation without rebirth. But. 
why is it not so stated explicitly ? Because of its exceeding 
subtlety, which is effected by its bearing for the Blessed One 
freedom from care, and by its being discernible through noble 
insight. And this Nirvana is not held in common with others, 
since it is to be reached1 only by one who is endowed with the 
Path, and it is without a source since it has no ultimate point. 
But if it exists2 in the existence of the Path, then is it not 
without source ? It is not so, because it cannot be produced 
by the Path. It can only be reached, not produced, by the 
Path. Hence it is without source. Being without source it is 
free from old age and death. Owing to the absence of source, 
old age and death, it is permanent. [509] Does the atom 
(and such things)3 also attain to the permanent state as does 
Nirvana ? No, because of the absence of a cause. Are they per¬ 
manent because of the permanence of Nirvana ? No, because 
the characteristic of a cause does not arise. Are they permanent 
like Nirvana owing to the absence of (the characteristic of) 
arising and so on ? No, because they arc not successful (in 
their appearance as ultimate truths). But for the reasons 
already given this Nirvana is permanent; because it transcends 
the intrinsic nature of matter it is non-material. There is only 
one goal, since to the Buddhas and so on there is no dis¬ 
tinction as to the goal. Nirvana is called sa-wpadisesa, when, 
being attained by a man through developing the Path, it is 
understood to be with residue of the substratum of being, 
because it is to be understood with reference to the suppres¬ 
sion of his vices and the residue of the substratum of being. 
Nirvana is called an-upadisesa with reference to the non¬ 
arising of the procedure of aggregates beyond this last phase 
of consciousness, to the disappearing of those which have 
arisen and to the absence of the residue of the substratum 
of being, owing to the putting away of the cause and the 
destruction of the fruit of action. Being attainable through 
special insight effected by strong effort and being announced 
1 Read pattabbato for vaU°. 4 Read bhavato for bhav&io. 
8 I.e. the original nature, time, person (pakaii, kula, purisa). 

--- PAGE 112 ---
XVI.—The Truths 605 
by the omniscient one, Nirvana, as existing in the ultimate 
sense, is not non-existent. For this has been said “ Monks, 
there is that which is not born, not the result of becoming, not made 
not conditioned.”x 
This is the substance of the decision in the exposition of the 
cessation of ill. 
[The Exposition of the Course leading to the Cessation of III.] 
Although the eight states mentioned in the exposition of the 
course leading to the cessation of ill have been set forth accord¬ 
ing to the meaning in the exposition of the Aggregates, we 
shall speak of them here in order to bring out the distinction 
between the states proceeding in a single moment. 
Briefly, the eye of understanding which has Nirvana as the 
object and extirpates the latent bias of ignorance and which is 
possessed by the aspirant who practises in order that he may 
penetrate the four truths is “ right outlook.” Seeing rightly is 
its characteristic, the setting forth of the elements is its 
function, the dispelling of the darkness of ignorance is its 
manifestation. The (Path-factor) which is possessed by one 
endowed with right outlook, which is associated with it and 
kills wrong aims and is the directing of the mind on to Nirvana 
as the base is “ right aims.” It has directing of the right 
mind as characteristic, application of mind as function, the 
putting away of wrong thoughts as manifestation. That 
which, being associated with right aims, is, on the part of him 
who sees rightly and thinks rightly, the doing away with 
misconduct in speech, [510] the abstaining from wrong speech 
is called “ right speech.” Seizing (the listener or associated 
states) is its characteristic, abstaining is its function, the 
putting away of wrong speech is its manifestation. That 
which, being associated with the last, is, on the part of him 
who so abstains, the extirpating of wrong work, the abstaining 
from life-taking, and so on is called “Tight action.”2 Produc¬ 
ing is its characteristic, abstaining is its function, the putting 
1 Itivuttaka, p. 37. 2 Readpdnd0. 

--- PAGE 113 ---
606 The Path of Purity 
away of wrong work is its manifestation. That which, being 
the purification of right speech and. right work, is associated 
with these two states, and is the cutting off of trickery and 
so on, the abstaining from wrong living is “ right means of 
livelihood.” Purification is its characteristic, the mode of 
proper livelihood is its function, the putting away of wrong 
livelihood is its manifestation. That which, being in con¬ 
formity and association with the last named factor, is the 
cutting off of laziness and the putting forth of energy on the 
part of him who is established on the ground of morality, 
termed right speech and living and work is called “right 
effort.” Upholding is its characteristic, the not producing 
of immoral states not yet arisen and so on is its function, the 
putting away of wrong effort is its manifestation. That 
which being associated with the laBt, is, on the part of one who 
makes effort, the thorough shaking off1 of wrong mindfulness, 
the non-confuBion of mind is called “right mindfulness.” 
Attending is its characteristic, not confusing is its function, 
the putting away of wrong mindfulness is its manifestation. 
That which being associated with the last, is the destroying of 
wrong concentration, the collectedness of mind on the part 
of him who is guarded by such transcendental mindfulness is 
called *‘ right concentration.” Not wavering is its characteris¬ 
tic, placing well (the mind in the object) is its function, the 
putting away of wrong concentration is its manifestation. 
This is the method in the exposition of the course leading 
to the cessation of ilL 
Thus should be understood the decision as to birth and so on. 
“ By functioning of knowledge ”2—by the functioning of the 
knowledge of the truths is decision to he understood. For 
twofold is the knowledge of the truths: awakening knowledge 
and penetrating knowledge. Of these, the awakening know¬ 
ledge is worldly and proceeds in the cessation and the Path 
through hearsay and so on. The penetrating knowledge is 
transcendental and penetrates the four truths by functioning 
1 Viniddhvmno. The verb viniddhunMi should be registered in 
the P.T.S. Dictionary. 
* This resumes the explanation of the verse on p. 586, above. 

--- PAGE 114 ---
XVI.—The Truths 607 
with the cessation as object. As it has been said, “ Monks, 
he who sees ill also sees the origin of ill, also sees the cessation 
of ill, also sees the course leading to the cessation of ill.”1 And 
thus everything should be stated. Its function will be made 
clear in the purity of knowledge and discernment.2 [511] In 
the case of worldly knowledge, knowledge of ill turns back 
the soul-theory which proceeds by the overpowering might 
of obsession, knowledge of the origin does the same with the 
view of eternalism, knowledge of the Path does the same with 
the doctrine of annihilation, knowledge of cessation does the 
same with the doctrine of no-action. Or, knowledge of ill puts 
a stop to the wrong practice regarding the result which attri¬ 
butes permanence, pleasantness, happiness and individuality 
to aggregates which are devoid of these things. Knowledge 
of the origin puts a stop to the wrong practice regarding 
the root-cause which proceeds to find a reason where no 
reason exists such as that the world proceeds by means of a 
creative deity, original cause,3 time, infinite nature, and so 
forth. Knowledge of the cessation puts a stop to the wrong 
practice regarding cessation which holds to the belief that 
final delivery is to be found in the formless worlds and in 
the summits4 of the world and so on. Knowledge of the 
Path puts a stop to the wrong practice regarding the way 
which proceeds in the belief that the path of purity is to be 
found in what is not the path of purity, such as the devotion 
to the pleasures of sense and the mortifying of one’s self. 
Hence this has been said: 
The world, its cause, its happy end, 
The means thereof—in these a man 
Remains confused, as long as he 
The truths yet understandeth not. 
Thus is decision here to be understood by way of the 
functioning of knowledge. 
1 Samyutta v, 437. 2 Ch. XXII, below. 
3 Read °padh&na°, whioh — paffhana. 
4 Lokathapika—“ the summit of the world ” is the sphere of neither 
consciousness nor non-consciousness; or (wrongly) according to some 
it is the aaanflasatta world.— 

--- PAGE 115 ---
608 The Path of Purity 
“ Division of contents ”—excepting craving and states 
which are not objects of the cankers, all the remaining states 
are included in the truth of ill.1 The thirty-six occupied 
by craving2 are included in the truth of origin. The truth 
of cessation is unmixed with any state. In the truth of the 
Path are included under the head of right outlook, examina¬ 
tion, the bases of magical power, the faculty of understanding, 
the strength of understanding and investigation of the doctrine 
as a factor of wisdom; the three kinds of thought concerning 
emancipation and so on3 as indicating right aims; the four 
kinds of good conduct in speech4 as indicating right speech; 
the three kinds of good conduct8 in body as indicating right 
work; and fewness of wishes and contentment under the head 
of right living; also faith as faculty, faith as strength, desire 
as magical power since right speech, work and living are in the 
habit of being loved by the elect, and such habit is upheld 
by the hand of faith and its existence depends on them; 
also the fourfold right exertion, energy as faculty, energy as 
strength, the wisdom factor of energy as indicating right 
effort; also the four bases of mindfulness, mindfulness-faculty, 
mindfulness-strength, mindfulness-the-wisdom-factor as in¬ 
dicating right mindfulness; and also the three kinds of con¬ 
centration beginning with that which is with applied and 
sustained thought, mind-concentration, concentration-faculty, 
[512] concentration-strength, the wisdom-factors of rapture, 
of repose, of concentration, of indifference as indicating right 
concentration. Thus here should decision by way of the 
division of contents be understood. 
“ Analogy ”—the truth of ill is to be regarded like a burden, 
the truth of the origin like the bearing of the burden, the truth 
of the cessation like the putting down of the burden, the truth 
of the Path like the way in which the burden is put down.6 The 
truth of ill is like a disease, the truth of the origin is like the 
cause of the disease, the truth of the cessation is like the allaying 
of the disease, the truth of the path is like the medicine. Again, 
1 Read dukkhasaccam hi dukkasaccamhi. * Vibhanga, pp. 392,396. 
3 l.e. emancipation, goodwill and kindness, Dighaiii, 215. 
4 Anguttara ii, 141. * Cf. ibid, i, 114. • Samyvtta iii, 25. 

--- PAGE 116 ---
XVI.—The Truths 609 
the truth of ill is like the famine, the truth of the origin is 
like the scarcity of rain, the truth of the cessation is lik<? the 
time of prosperity, the truth of the Path is like the abundance 
of rain. Further, the following similes also should be applied: 
enmity, cause of enmity, destruction of enmity, means of 
destroying enmity; poison-tree, root of poison-tree, uprooting 
it. means of uprooting it: danger, root of danger, freedom from 
danger, means of attaining freedom; hither bank, flood, 
thither bank, effort to reach it. Thus here decision should be 
understood by way of analogy. 
“ Tetrad”—there is ill, which is not noble truth; there is 
noble truth, which is not ill; there is that which is both ill and 
noble truth; there is that which is neither ill nor noble truth. 
And the same with the origin and so on. 
In this tetrad states which are associated with the Path 
and which are the fruits of monkhood are ill, not noble truth, 
as being the ill of the activities as expressed in such a statement 
as “ What is impermanent is ill."1 Cessation is noble truth, not 
ill. But the other two noble truths may be ill, because they are 
impermanent, not because of the real nature of the tTuth of 
ill to comprehend which one lives the life of holiness in the 
Blessed One. Except craving, the five clinging aggregates in 
all respects are both ill and noble truth. States which are 
associated with the Path and are the fruits of monkhood are 
neither ill nor noble truth in the sense of the real nature of that 
for the comprehension of which one lives the life of holiness 
in the Blessed One. Thus making fitting applications in the 
origin and so on, one should understand decision by way of 
the “ tetrad.” 
“ The void, and by the single species and by other things.”— 
First, as to the void all the truths in the ultimate sense are 
devoid of the person who feels, the agent, the person who has 
gone into peace, the person who goes. Hence it is said: 
[513] For there is ill but none to feel it; 
For there is action but no doer; 
And there is peace but none enjoy it; 
A way there is but no one goes it (gatnako).2 
1 Ibid, ii, 53. 2 Contradicted in Expositor, p. 218, 1.12. 

--- PAGE 117 ---
610 The Path of Purity 
Or again— 
The first two truths are void of permanence, 
Self, bliss and happiness. The deathless way 
Is void of self. The Path is void of bliss, 
Self, permanence. Such is the void in them. 
Or, the three truths are devoid of cessation, and cessation is 
devoid of the other three. Again of the four truths the root- 
cause is devoid of the result, because of the absence of ill in 
the origin and of the absence of cessation in the Path. The 
cause has not a common seed with the result just as the 
original nature of those who hold to the doctrine of the original 
nature has a common seed (with such changes as growth and 
so on). And the result is devoid of the cause, since there is 
no combination between ill and origin, cessation and Path. 
The result of a cause does not combine1 with the cause, as 
two atoms and so on do (to give a common result) according 
to those who believe in such combination. Hence it has 
been said:— 
The three here are devoid of cessation, 
And cessation is also void of them. 
The cause is of the fruit devoid, 
So is the fruit void of the cause. 
Thus so far should decision as to the void be understood. 
[514] “ The single species and by other things.”— 
Of the four truths, all ill is of one kind by way of procedure; 
two kinds by way of mind and matter; three kinds by way of 
arising in the worlds of sense, form and formless; four kinds 
by way of four sustenances; five kinds by way of the five 
clinging aggregates. The origin also is of one kind by pro¬ 
ducing ill; two kinds by way of being associated and not 
associated with wrong outlook; three kinds by way of the 
cravings for the life of sense, for becoming and for not becom¬ 
ing ; four kinds as to be put away by the four paths; five kinds 
1 Iletusavuivetam, explained by the ekibhutam iva sambandham, 
i.e. the cause does not enter into combination with the result in order to 
form a single thing, much as in ohemistry two elements oombine to 
form a single compound. 

--- PAGE 118 ---
XVI.—The Truths 611 
by way of taking delight in visible forms and so on; six kinds by 
way of the six groups of craving. Cessation also is of one kind 
by being the unconditioned clement; two kinds, metaphorically, 
by being the residue of the substratum of being and not the 
residue of the substratum of being; three kinds as calming 
the three existences; four kinds as to be attained by the four 
paths; five kinds as putting a stop to the five ways of taking 
delight; six kinds by being the extinction of the six groups of 
craving. The Path also is of one kind as to be developed; 
two kinds by way of calm and insight, or by way of discern¬ 
ment and development; three kinds by way of the three 
groups.1 Since it is part of them, the Path is included in 
the whole2 three of them, just as a town is included in the 
kingdom. As it has been said: “ Friend Visakha, the three 
groups are not included in the noble eightfold Path. The noble 
eightfold path, friend Visdlcha, is included in the three groups. 
That which is Right speech, friend Visakha, and that which is 
right action, and that which is right means of livelihood, these 
states are included in the virtue-group. That which is right 
effort, that which is right mindfulness, and that which is right 
concentration, these states are included in the concentration 
group. That which is right outlook and that which are right 
aims, these states are included in the understanding group.”3 
Here in the text quoted the three beginning with right speech 
are just virtue, therefore are they included in the virtue- 
group as being the same in kind. Although the phrase “ in the 
virtue-group ” is in the locative case, it should be taken in 
the instrumentive case. And in the three beginning with right 
effort concentration is not able in its own nature to fix on 
the object as a single point, but it is able to do so with the 
help received when energy accomplishes its function of up¬ 
holding and mindfulness its function of not forgetting. 
Here is an illustration: Three friends enter a garden4 with 
the intention of enjoying the festival. One of them seeing a 
champak6 tree full of flowers cannot reach them with his hand. 
1 I.e. of virtue, concentration, understanding. 
3 Nippadesehi, translated as “ separately ” in the P.T.S. Dictionary. 
3 Majjhima i, 301. 
4 Read uyyanam for iieyydnam. 8 Read campaka0. 

--- PAGE 119 ---
612 The Path of Purity 
Then the second man bends his back which the other mounts. 
Still owing to his shaking he is unable to get the flowers. 
[515] Then the third man offers his shoulder-blade, so that 
the first man standing on the back of one and hanging on to 
the shoulder-blade of the other plucks the flowers to his 
heart’s content, adorns himself with them and enjoys the 
festival. The illustration should be applied thus: The three 
friends who together have entered the garden are like the three 
states: right effort and so on, which are produced together. 
The full-blown champak is like the object. The man who 
cannot reach the flowers with his hand is like concentration 
which is not able, in its own nature, to fix on the object as a 
single point. The friend who bends his back is like energy, 
and the friend who stands offering his shoulder-blade is like 
mindfulness. Just as the man standing on the back of one 
and hanging on to the shoulder-blade of the other plucks the 
flowers to his heart’s content, so is concentration able to fix 
on the object as a single point through the help received when 
energy accomplishes the function of upholding and mindfulness 
the function of not forgetting. Therefore of the three, con¬ 
centration is the one which is included in the concentration- 
group as being the same in kind, but energy and mindfulness 
are included through their functions. And among right out¬ 
look and right aims also, understanding is not able, in its own 
nature, to decide an object to be impermanent, ill or not-self; 
but is able to do so when applied thought renders help through 
the repeated impingings. How 1 Just as a banker,1 although 
he wishes to examine coins thoroughly in his hand, cannot 
turn them over with the surface of his eyes, but can only 
examine them from various angles by turning them over with 
his finger-joints, so is understanding unable, in its own nature, 
to decide an object as impermanent and so forth, but can make 
the decision regarding an object that has been seized and 
made over to it by applied thought, which with its charac¬ 
teristic of placing forward impinges on and turns it over, as 
it were, by striking it repeatedly. Therefore here also right 
1 Compare above, p. 506. 

--- PAGE 120 ---
XVI.—The Truths 613 
outlook is included in tlie understanding-group as being the 
same in kind, but right aims are included through their 
functions. Thus the Path is included in these three groups. 
Hence it was said to be of “ three kinds by way of the three 
groups.” It is of four kinds by way of the path of stream¬ 
winning and so on. Further all the truths are of one kind 
from being not false or from being knowable; of two kinds 
as being worldly and transcendental, or as being conditioned 
and unconditioned; of three kinds are being fit to be put away 
through discernment, to be put away through development, 
not to be put away through discernment and development; of 
four kinds as being fit to be comprehended (to be put away, 
to be realized, to be developed). 
Thus is here decision to be understood by way of the single 
species and other things. 
[516] “ Unlike and like portions ”—all the truths are like 
each other in that they are not false, void of the self and 
difficult to penetrate. As it has been said: “ What dost thou 
think, Ananda ? Which is more difficult to do or more difficult 
to accomplish ? That a man should shoot from a distance arrow 
after arrow through a narrow keyhole and miss not once, or that 
a man should shoot and penetrate with the tip of hair split a 
hundred times a piece a hair similarly split? This, Sir, is more 
difficult to do, more difficult to accomplish—that a man should 
shoot and penetrate with the tip of hair split a hundred times a 
piece of hair similarly split. A more difficult thing, Ananda, 
have they penetrated, who penetrate according to the truth that 
‘ this is ill.’ ... ‘ This is the course leading to the cessation 
of ill * ”l They are unlike as regards determining by means 
of their own characteristics. And the first two are alike as 
being profound in the sense2 of difficult to lay to heart, worldly 
and connected with the cankers. They are unlike as to the 
kinds of cause and effect and as to being fit to be compre¬ 
hended and to be put away. The last two are alike as being 
difficult to lay to heart in the sense of2 being profound, tran¬ 
scendental and free from the cankers. They are unlike as to the 
1 Samyutta v, 454. * Read °ffJiena for °ttena. 

--- PAGE 121 ---
614 The Path of Purity 
difference between object and having an object, and as to 
being fit to be realized, to be developed. And the first and 
the third are alike as pointing ont the result, unlike as regards 
being conditioned and unconditioned. The second and the 
fourth are alike as pointing out the cause, unlike as being 
undoubtedly moral and immoral. The first and the fourth 
are alike as being conditioned, unlike as to the worldly and 
transcendental. The second and the third are alike as being 
neither for probationers nor for non-probationers, unlike as 
being with and without object. 
So shall the seeing man discern 
The various modes and ways in which 
The likeness and unlikeness of 
The noble truths are to be seen. 
Thus is ended the Sixteenth Chapter called the Exposition 
of controlling faculties and the Truths in the section of the 
development of Understanding in the Path of Purity composed 
for the purpose of gladdening good folk. 

--- PAGE 122 ---
[517] CHAPTER XVII 
EXPOSITION OF THE PLANE OF UNDERSTANDING 
Because, from among the states which are the plane of this 
understanding and which have been stated as the “ states Buch 
as the aggregates, sense-organs, elements, faculties, truths, 
dependent origination, are the plane of understanding,”1 
there still remain the dependent origination and things as 
having dependency originated,2 included under the “ such as ”; 
therefore the turn of their explanation has now arrived. 
Of these, it is the states beginning with ignorance which are 
to be known as the “ causal law ” (dependent origination). 
For this has been spoken by the Blessed One: “ What, brethren, 
is the causal law? Conditioned by ignorance, brethren, (are) 
activities; conditioned by activities consciousness, conditioned 
by consciousness name-and-shape, conditioned by name-and- 
shape sense, conditioned by sense contact, conditioned by 
contact feeling, conditioned by feeling craving, conditioned by 
craving grasping, conditioned by grasping becoming, con¬ 
ditioned by becoming birth, conditioned by birth (are) old age, 
and death, sorrow (grief), lamenting, suffering, grief (sorrow), 
despair. Such is the uprising of this entire mass of ill. This, 
monks, is called (causal) happening.”3 And old age and death 
and so on are to be known as things as having causally hap¬ 
pened. For this has been said by the Blessed One: “ And 
what, monks, are things as having causally happened ? Decay 
and death, monks, is impermanent, conditioned, arisen causally, 
is by nature withering away, passing away, fading away, coming 
to an end. So too, monks, is birth, becoming, grasping, craving, 
feeling, contact, sense, name-and-shape, consciousness, activities, 
1 Above, p. 514. 
* Or, “ The Causal Law ” and “ things as having causally happened ”: 
palicca samuppada and paftcca samuppanna. 
3 Kindred Sayings ii, 1. 
615 

--- PAGE 123 ---
616 The Path of Purity 
ignorance. These also are impermanent, conditioned, arisen 
causally, are by nature withering away, passing away, fading 
away, coming to an end. These, monks, are called things as 
having causally happenedP1 
[518] And here is a brief account. “ Causal law ” is to be 
known as causal states; “ things as having causally happened ” 
as states generated by those various causes. How may this 
be known ? By the word of the Blessed One. For the 
Blessed One in the Sutta of the right teaching of the Causal 
law and things as having causally happened has declared the 
causal states to be the causal law by means of such equivalent 
terms as “ such wise ” and so forth in the course of his teach¬ 
ing the causal law thus: “ What, 7nonks, is causal happening ? 
Conditioned by rebirth is decay and death—whether, monks, 
there be an arising of Tathdgatas, or whether there be no such 
arising, this nature of things just stands, this causal status, 
this causal orderliness, the relatedness of this to that. Concerning 
that the Tathdgata is fully enlightened, that he fully understands. 
Fully enlightened, fully understanding he declares it, teaches it, 
reveals it, sets it forth, manifests, explains, makes it plain, 
saying— 
Behold! 
“ Conditioned by rebirth is decay and death . . . 
“ Conditioned by becoming is rebirth . . .2 
“ Conditioned by grasping is becoming . . . 
“ Conditioned by craving is grasping . . . 
“ Conditioned by feeling is craving . . . 
“ Conditioned by contact is feeling . . . 
“ Conditioned by sense is contact . . . 
“ Conditioned by name-and-shape is sense . . . 
“ Conditioned by consciousness is name-and-shape . . . 
“ Conditioned by activities is consciousness . . . 
“ Conditioned by ignorance arc activities. . . . 
“ Whether, monks, there be an arising of Tathdgatas, or whether 
there be no such arising, in each this nature of things just stands, 
i Ibid, 22. 
* The foregoing paragraph ia to be understood after each clause. 

--- PAGE 124 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 617 
this causal status, this causal orderliness, the relatedness of this 
to that. Concerning that the Tathdgata is fully enlightened, 
that he fully understands. Fully enlightened, fully understand¬ 
ing, he declares it, teaches it, reveals it. sets it forth, manifests, 
explains, makes it plain, saying : ‘ Behold ! conditioned by 
this, that co?nes to be.' Thus, brethren, that which is here is 
such wise, not elsewise, not otherwise, the relatedness of this to 
that: this, brethren, is called causal happening P1 Therefore 
causal happening has the characteristic of being conditional 
to states such as decay and death and so on, the function of 
closely following after ill, the manifestation of being a wrong 
path. It is said to be such wise as being the origin of this 
and that state by means of these and those causes, neither 
more nor less; not elsewise because of the impossibility of the 
resultant states not coming to be once the causes have come 
together; not otherwise because of the non-arising of other 
states through the causes of other states; the relatedness of 
this to that as being the cause or collection of causes of decay- 
and-death and so forth, such as have been described. This is 
the word-meaning of the last-named: the causes of these states 
(decay and so on) are the relations of this to that (idappaccaya) 
which are just the relatedness of this to that2 (idappaccayata); 
or the collection of the causes of these states is the relatedness 
of this to that.3 The salient feature should be looked for in 
the grammar. 
But some declare that causal happening is a mere arising 
when they say that it causally and rightly is an arising4 
which pays no heed to the reasons for the original nature, the 
person and so on, (things) which exist only in the imagination 
of the heretics. That [519] is not proper ? Why ? Because 
(1) it does not occur in the Suttas, (2) it contradicts the Suttas, 
(3) it does not possess profundity and system, and (4) it breaks 
the rules of grammar. 
1 Kindred Sayings ii, 21. 
* Just as devd--= devoid (Jlkd). 
3 Just as the collection of villages is gamata (gumdnam samutio), or 
a collection of people is janata (jandnam savitiho) (fika). 
4 Paticca-samuppdda is here taken to be palicca + sammii+uppada, 
with special emphasis on the itppdda. 
40 

--- PAGE 125 ---
618 The Path of Purity 
(1) There is no Sutta which says that the causal law is a 
mere arising. 
(2) To say that the causal law is that (a mere arising) is in 
contradiction to the Padesaviharasutta. How ? For, from 
what the Blessed One has said, “ Then the Blessed One during 
the first watch of the night gave attention to the causal happening 
in direct and reverse order”1 and so on, the giving attention 
to the causal happening is the first abiding state after the 
perfect enlightenment, by which a particular mode of life is 
meant. As it has been said: “ Monks, the state in which I 
abode after 1 first attained enlightenment, by that particular mode 
of life 1 have lived.”2 And in that mode he lived as discerning 
the causal method, not a mere arising. As he has said, “ 1 
remember living with the feeling caused by wrong outlook, also 
the feeling caused by right outlook, also the feeling caused by 
wrong aims,”3 and so everything should be expanded. Thus 
to say that the causal happening is a mere arising contradicts 
the Padesaviharasutta. It contradicts the Kaccanasutta also, 
wherein it is said: “ Now he, Kdccana, who with right 
insight sees the uprising of the world as it really is, to him 
it does not occur that the world is not.”* The causal happening 
in progressive order, since it is a world-condition, has been 
set forth as the uprising of the world in order that the heresy 
of annihilation may be destroyed. The mere arising (is not 
so set forth), because by discerning it (as such), the heresy of 
annihilation is not killed. But it is killed by discerning the 
unbroken series of causes, because the unbroken, series of 
causes gives rise to the unbroken series of results. Thus to say 
that the causal happening is a mere arising is to contradict 
the Kaccana Sutta. 
(3) Because it does not possess profoundly and system:— 
Now this has been said by the Blessed One: “ Deep indeed is 
this causal law, Ananda, and deep it appears.”3 And depth is 
fourfold, which we shall explain later. That is not to be 
found in what is a mere arising, and they explain this causal 
happening adorned with the fourfold method, but that four- 
1 Vinaya i, 2. a Samyutta v, 12. 3 Not traced. 
* Kindred Sayings ii, 12. a Ibid. 64; Dialogues ii, p. 60. 

--- PAGE 126 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 619 
fold method is also not to be found in what is a mere arising. 
Thus because of its being deep and arising methodically, the 
causal law is not a mere arising. 
(4) It breaks the rules of grammar:—here the word 
“ causal ” (paticca) [520] fulfils its meaning, being construed 
in the past tense with one and the same subject (as the verb 
“ arises ”) for instance, “Because of the eye and visible objects 
eye-consciousness arises."1 But in the objection, the con¬ 
struction is with the word “ arising,” which has a passive 
meaning, and is against the Tules of grammar, owing to the 
absence of the subject to the two verbs. Nothing is effected 
by such a construction. Hence, as going against the rules 
of grammar, causal happening is not a mere arising. The 
objectors might say, “ We will construe it with the verb 
becomes (hoti), so that it will be the causal happening.” That 
is not proper. Why 1 Because the construction is impossible 
and the arising of an arising8 would be faulty. For in these 
passages, “ Monks, I will show you the causal happening. 
What is the causal happening ? This, monks, is called the 
causal happening,”3 there is not a single construction with 
the verb becomes, and there is no arising of an arising. If it 
were so, we should have arising of an arising stated. 
Again, there are they who imagine that the relatedncss of 
this to that is the being (bhdva) of the relations of this to that, 
and the word being means that mode of ignorance and so forth, 
which is the root-condition of the appearance of the activities 
and so on, and which in the course of change is called the 
causal happening. That also is not proper. Why ? Because 
the root-condition of ignorance and so on is definitely stated. 
For the Blessed One has declared ignorance and so on, not 
their change, to be the root-condition. When he says, 
“ Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the root-condition, that is 
the basis, that is the origin, that is the cause of old age and death, 
x Samyutta ii, 72. The point here is that paticca, as a gerund, pre¬ 
cedes in action the finite verb uppajjaii; and both have eye-conscious¬ 
ness for subject. Emphasis is thus laid on the dhamma’s of the causal 
happening, not on their mere arising. 
8 Hoti, meaning “ arises,” comes to pass. It is to atthi as the German 
wird is to ist. 9 Ibid. i. 

--- PAGE 127 ---
620 The Path of Purity 
to toit, birth,”1 therefore the statement, that the causal happen¬ 
ing is to be regarded as states that are causes, should be 
understood as the right statement. 
The idea that the causal happening has been declared, under 
the shadow of grammatical construction, to be a mere arising, 
should be set aside, on considering the meaning of the term thus: 
For by the Blessed One it was said: 
Since this expression has a double sense— 
As of a group of states which start from those— 
Therefore it is by access to results2 
Declared to be just those causes themselves. 
There is the group of states which proceed from causality, 
and (the wise) desire to seek a double meaning of the term 
“ causal happening ” in that group of states. [521] Because, 
being laid hold of, it conduces to benefit, to happiness, therefore 
it is worthy of being laid hold of3 by the wise—hence it is 
causal {paticca). And when it arises it does so “ with ” and 
rightly, not alone nor without root-condition—thus it is 
“ happening.”. Thus causal and happening give “causal 
happening.” Further, it arises with, thus it is “ happening.” 
But it arises on account of, not regardless of the harmony of 
causes. Thus it is “ causal,” such a happening is “ causal 
happening.” Of those (resultant states) those groups of root- 
conditions are the cause—hence “ those causes,” as being the 
causes of those resultant states. Just as in the world, molasses, 
as the cause of phlegm, are spoken of as phlegin-molasses, and 
the appearance of the Buddhas as the cause of the bliss in 
the religion is spoken of as: blissful is the appearance of the 
Buddhas, so the group of causes is spoken of metaphorically 
as happening through cause or causal happening. Or again, 
The group of root-conditions goes towards, 
Hence causal are they called. 
They cause the states associated to rise, 
Hence happening are they called. 
1 ZHyAa ii, 67 (Dialogues ii, 62). 
* Phalopacarena. Quotation not traced. 
3 Here is punning on pafiyati, is made to fall, and pacceti=.pa(i-i, to 
have recourse to. 

--- PAGE 128 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 621 
For the group of root-conditions has been explained under 
the head of single root-condition, such as ignorance and so 
forth, in order that the activities may be made manifest; and 
the root-conditions in the sense of yielding a common fruit 
and of being not deficient have one with the other gone towards 
the factors of the harmony of causes—hence “ causal ” is the 
name given to them. They are called the “ happening ” 
because they produce associated states which are not to be 
separated from one another. Thus causal and happening give 
“ causal happening.” Again. 
The group of causes through each other’s help. 
Together equally produce the states 
(Resulting from themselves). On that account 
The sage has spoken thus of them. 
For those causes, which, among the causes set forth under 
the head of ignorance and so on, produce the states such -as 
the activities, would not be able to do so, were they mutually 
independent and deficient. Therefore through mutual de¬ 
pendence, equally and together they produce the resultant 
states, not a portion at a time. Thus has the sage who is 
skilled in the use of words in conformity with the sense, 
declared here the meaning of “ causal happening.” And thus, 
by what is said: 
The first sets forth non-eternalism, 
The latter kills annihilationism. 
The two together show the system right. 
By the “ first,” that is, the word causal which shows the 
harmony of causes, [522] is shown the .disbelief in eternalism 
and so on, such as the different doctrines of eternalism, of no 
cause, of dissimilar causes, of a disposer, because of its de¬ 
pendence on the harmony of causes of things in process of 
being. For where is the use of a harmony of causes to 
eternalism and other doctrines which proceed without a root 
cause ? By the “latter” term happening, which shows the 
uprising of states, is shown the destruction of such doctrines 
as annihilation, non-existence, non-action, because of the 

--- PAGE 129 ---
622 The Path of Purity 
arising of states through a harmony of causes. Seeing that 
states arise repeatedly by means of previous causes, how could 
one hold the doctrines of annihilation, non-existence, no-action? 
And because the various states come to being without cutting 
of the continuity (of cause and effect) in the respective har¬ 
mony of causes, by the “ two together,” that is, the whole 
term causal happening is shown the right system, that is, the 
middle course and the putting away of such a doctrine as 
“ The same (tnan) acts and experiences ; (or) one acts, another 
experiences,M1 the not laying to heart of the verbal usages of 
country folk, the not going against popular expressions. Thus 
far is the meaning of just the term “ causal happening.” 
In explaining the causal happening, the Blessed One has 
fixed the text in this way: “ Conditioned by ignorance are 
activities.” And in expounding its meaning, one shall do so 
by going to an assembly of Analysts,1 2 not accusing the teachers 
(of making a wrong interpretation), not setting aside one’s 
own opinion, not striving to find fault with the opinion of 
others, not shutting out the Suttas, conforming to the Vinaya, 
having regard to the Great Authorities,3 making clear the law, 
comprising the meaning, again paraphrasing the meaning and 
setting it forth by means of other methods. But to expound 
the causal happening is in the nature of things a difficult thing 
to do, as the Ancients have said: 
The truths, rebirth, the person, causal mode 
Are four things difficult to see and teach. 
Therefore, weighing in mind that it is not an easy thing to 
expound the causal happening except for those who are 
proficient in scriptural study and spiritual attainment: 
Fain would I now set forth the causal mode, 
But am o’erwhelmed as though drowned in the sea, 
[523] However, this religion is adorned 
With ways of exposition manifold. 
1 Samyvtta ii, 20. 
1 Vibhajjav&din : “ perhaps a unique reference outside the accounts 
of the Third Congress,” writes Mrs. Rhys Davids. 
3 Dialogues ii, 133. 

--- PAGE 130 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 623 
And in unbroken continuity 
Proceeds the path of teachers in the past. 
So with the twofold help I will set going 
The meaning. Listen ye with fixed minds. 
For this has been said by the teachers in the past:— 
Whoso attends devotedly1 to me 
Will first and last great honour get, 
And getting it will pass2 beyond 
The vision of the king of death. 
Thus in the statements: “ Conditioned by ignorance arc 
activities ” and so on, from the first— 
The different kinds of teaching, sense, 
Characteristic and so forth, 
The factor fixing, single kind— 
By these decision should be known. 
Of these, “ the different kinds of teaching ” are these:— 
For the Blessed One in the way that four men gather creepers 
has taught the causal law in four ways: Starting from the 
beginning or the middle up to the end, and starting from the 
end or the middle up to the beginning. The first of the four 
men sees first the root of the creeper, cuts it at the root and 
pulls it in, takes it and makes use of it. So the Blessed 
One teaches the causal law starting from the beginning 
up to the end in this way: “ Thus, monks, conditioned by 
ignorance are activities. . . . Conditioned by both is old age 
and death”3 The second man sees first the middle of the 
creeper, cuts it in the middle and pulls up the upper part, 
takes it and makes use of it. So the Blessed One teaches 
from the middle up to the end of this way: “ Delight came 
upon him as he rejoices in and welcomes and cleaves to that 
feeling (which he experiences), that delight which is in the feelings 
is grasping. Conditioned by that grasping is becoming. Con¬ 
ditioned by becoming is birth.”* The third man sees first the 
1 The TiJc& gives the meaning of afthimkatva thus: evam atfhigatam 
viya karonto atthimkaiva. The usual meaning ia to connect it with 
attha, “ benefit,” and 8.v. P.T.S. Dictionary. 
a Read goccheli. * Majjhima i, 261. 4 Ibid. 266. 

--- PAGE 131 ---
624 The Path of Purity 
top of the creeper, seizes it by the tip, and following it up 
takes the whole creeper and makes use of it. So the Blessed 
One teaches the causal law from the end to the beginning 
thus: “ 1 have said that birth conditions decay and death. Does 
it, or does it not, condition them ? Or how stands the matter ? 
Birth, sir, does condition decay and death ; and that is how the 
matter (stands) for us [524]. ... I have said that ignorance 
conditions activities. Does it, or does it not condition them ? 
Or how stands the matter ?>n The fourth man sees first the 
middle of the creeper, cuts it in the middle, and following it 
up takes the lower part down to the root and makes use of 
it. So the Blessed One teaches from the middle up to the 
beginning thus: “ There are these four sustenances, monks. 
What is the base ? Whence is the uprising ? How are they 
produced ? What causes them to be? Craving is their base, from, 
craving is their uprising, craving produces them, causes them io 
be. What is the base of craving, . . . feeling, contact, sense, 
name-atid-shape, consciousness, activities ? Ignorance is the 
base of activities, from ignorance is their uprising, ignorance 
produces them, causes them to be."2 
Why does he teach it in this way ? Because of its complete 
auspiciousness, and because of its attaining to embellishment 
in teaching by himself. The causal law is indeed completely 
auspicious: it conduces to the penetration of the System3 (by 
any of the four ways). And the Blessed One attained to 
embellished teaching through his connection with the four 
confidences and analyses and his attainment of the fourfold 
profundity ;4 and through the attainment of that embellish¬ 
ment of instruction taught the law in various ways. Especially 
as he sees persons capable of training, perplexed as to the 
distinctive reasons in procedure, he haB taught it, starting from 
the beginning in the forward order with a view to show that 
things go on each for its own reason, and to show the order 
1 Further Dialogues i, 187. * Kindred Sayings ii, 8. 
3 N&yo=maggo says the piled, whioli also gives the alternative 
meaning of the causal law itself, explaining that the causal law, because 
of its auspioiousness, is worthy to penetrate itself. 
4 Viz. dhamma, attha, desand, pativedha, “doctrine, meaning, ex¬ 
position, penetration,” Expositor 28. 

--- PAGE 132 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 625 
of their arising. And as he sees the suffering world thus, 
“Alas ! this world has fallen upon trouble. There is getting 
born and growing old, and dying and falling and being bom,”1 
he has taught the discourse in reverse order beginning from, 
the end, in order to show the reason he himself had arrived 
at of the various kinds of ill, such as old age and death, in 
consequence of the previous penetration. And he has taught 
it starting from the middle up to the beginning in order to 
show the series of cause and effect in going back to the past 
time,3 and then starting beckwards theTefrom, in the deter¬ 
mination of the bases of the sustenances. And he has taught 
it from the middle up to the end in order to show the future 
time since the setting up of causes of the future in the present 
time. Of these, that discourse which purports to show the 
procedure of things [525] each for its own reason and the order 
of the procedure to persons capable of training perplexed as to 
the reason in procedure is a discourse in forward ordeT starting 
from the beginning, and is the one which is laid down here. 
But why is ignorance stated as the beginning ? What! is 
ignorance also a causeless root-cause of the world like the 
original nature in the view of those who believe in the original 
nature ? It is not causeless. For the cause of ignorance is 
stated thus: “ The uprising of ignorance is due to the uprising 
of the cankers.” Is there, then, a way by which ignorance 
may be the root-cause ? What, then, may it be 1 (Yes, there 
is the way of stating it) as the head of discourse on the round 
of births. For the Blessed One, in discoursing on the round 
of births, has made two states the head. The first is ignorance, 
as he has said: “ Monks, the ultimate point of ignorance does 
not appear, so that one may say: ignorance did not exist formerly, 
but it has since come to being. Such a statement, monks, is made. 
However, it is apparent that ignorance is conditioned by that, 
(i.e. cankers).”* The second head is the craving for becoming, 
as it has been said: “ Monies, the ultimate point of craving for 
1 Kindred Sayings ii, 6. 
a .Sustenance, craving, feeling, contact, sense, name-and-forxn, 
consciousness arc of the present. Activities and ignorance are of the 
past.—Tikd. ♦ 
5 This and the following quotation are from Anguttara v, 113, 116. 

--- PAGE 133 ---
626 The Path of Purity 
becoming does not appear, so that one may say: craving for 
becoming did not exist formerly, but it has since come to being. 
Such a statement, monks, is made. However, it is apparent that 
the craving for becoming is conditioned by that (i.e. feeling) ” 
Bat why does the Blessed One preach the round of births 
under the head of these two states 1 Because they are the 
specific conditions of action which leads to the happy and un¬ 
happy fates.1 For ignorance is the specific condition of action 
which leads to an unhappy fate. Wherefore ? Because the 
average man overcome by ignorance strives to do the various 
kinds of actions leading to an unhappy fate, such as life-taking, 
actions which to him are unpleasant owing to the burning of 
his lower nature, and are of no advantage to him since they 
drag him to an unhappy fate; just as a cow to be slaughtered,2 3 * * * 
being oppressed with the torments of the burning heat and 
the strokes of the cudgel, strives to drink the hot water,8 
though she derives no enjoyment from it owing to her torments 
and suffering, and it leads to her own disadvantage. Craving 
for becoming is the specific condition of action which leads to 
a happy fate. Wherefore ? Because the average man, over¬ 
come by the craving for becoming, strives to do the various 
kinds of deeds leading to a happy fate, such as abstinence from 
life-taking, deeds which being free from the burning of the 
lower nature he finds to be pleasant, and which dispel the 
sufferings and torments of an unhappy fate, since they lead 
him to a happy fate, just as the cow mentioned strives to 
drink cold water, which owing to the craving for it she finds 
to he pleasant and dispels her own torments. 
Sometimes the Blessed One preached the discourse with 
its root in a single state out of the two states which arc the 
heads of the discourse on the round of rebirths, for example : 
[526] “ Even so, monks, there is causal association of activities 
1 Oati, lit. going, course. 
* Read vajjhagavl t&ya for vajjhagaritaya. 
3 The filed says that savages apply heat to the body of the cow and 
beat her with sticks, and give her hot water to drink, so that the flesh 
may not Btick to her bones, and then slay her as she becomes swollen 
in tho body and purging herself of the effects of the hot drinks. 

--- PAGE 134 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 627 
with ignorance, of cotisciousness with activities,”1 and so on; 
also, “ In him, monks, who contemplates the enjoyment that 
there is in all that makes for grasping, craving grows. Grasping 
is conditioned by craving !”2 Sometimes the discourse has its 
root in both the states: for instance: “ For the fool, monks, 
cloaked by ignorance and tied to craving, this body is wrought 
in this wise:—there is just this body and names-and-shapes 
without:—thus this pair. Because of the pair (there is)' contact, 
just six spheres of sense. Touched by these, or by one of them, 
the fool experiences pleasure and pain.”3 Among these, the 
statement: “Conditioned by ignorance arc activities” is 
to be known as a discourse with its root in one state, that is, 
ignorance. Thus is the decision by way of the different kinds 
of teaching to be known. 
“ Sense ”—the sense of the terms “ ignorance ” and the 
rest is as follows: In the sense of not being fit to fulfil, miscon¬ 
duct in body and so on is a thing not [worthy] to be found.4 
that is, not to be obtained. Ignorance is that which finds 
the unfindable. Contrariwise, good conduct in body and so 
on is a thing worthy to be found, that findable thing ignorance 
does not find. And it is ignorance which has “ no knowledge * ’ 
of the meanings of the aggregates as a heap, of the sense- 
organs as extension, of the elements as being void, of the 
controlling faculties as dominant influence, of the truths as 
being true. And it is ignorance which has no knowledge 
of the fourfold meaning of ill and so on as oppressing and so 
forth. It is ignorance that makes beings “ run ” in all the 
places of birth, destinies, existences, durations of consciousness, 
sentient abodes in the endless onfaring (of life). It is ignorance 
that “ runs ” its course among “ women ” and “ men ” and so 
on who do not exist in the ultimate sense, and does not run its 
course among the aggregates and so on which do exist. And 
it is ignorance because it “ covers up ” the states which are 
1 Kindred Sayings ii, 27. 1 Ibid. 69. 
8 Ibid. 19. In text here read yehi. 
4 The exegetical word play here on avijjd, a-yutta, a-vindiya cannot be 
rendered in English. So also in the following sentences, on the word 
play: avijjd-avidita, jav-oii, jav-eti, cha-danato. 

--- PAGE 135 ---
628 The Path of Purity 
cause and effect in the causal law, and which are the physical 
objects of life-consciousness and so on. 
That because of which (it) goes to a result is cause. ‘ ‘ Causal *’ 
means, not without, not disregarding. “(Joes to” means, 
arises, also proceeds. Further, the meaning of cause is to render 
service. It is ignorance and it renders service—thus ignorance 
rendering service.1 Hence “ conditioned by ignorance.” 
The word activities means: they prepare the conditioned 
results. Further, activities are of two kinds: those which are 
conditioned by ignorance and those which come under the 
name of activities. Of these, the three preparations2 * of merit, 
demerit, stationariness and the three activities of body, speech 
and mind make these six activities which are conditioned by 
ignorance.8 All of these are just moral and immoral volition, 
connected with the world. Conditioned activities [527], 
prepared activities, activities of preparation, applied prepara¬ 
tions—these four come under the name of activities. Of 
these, in such passages as: “ Transient, alas l are aU the things 
°f life,”4 all things together with their causes are called “ con¬ 
ditioned activities.” Material and immaterial states born of 
karma, of the three planes of life are spoken of in the Com¬ 
mentaries as “ prepared activities ”: which also are included 
in “ Transient, alas! are all the things of life,” but do not 
appear to be separately mentioned in the texts. Moral and 
immoral volition of the three planes of life is called “ activities 
of preparation,” which is mentioned in such passages as “ This 
man, monks, who is ignorant plans an act of merit.”* Bodily 
and mental energy is called “applied preparation,” which 
is seen in such passages as “ Having run the full course of the 
momentum, it stood, methinks, as it were, fixed by the axle.”* 
Not only are these, but also many others come under the name 
of activities, such as “ Friend Visakha, while one is passing 
into the state wherein perception and feeling cease, the activity 
1 In the text, the word upakara, “ render service,” occurs but once. 
3 AbhisaOkh&ri, the same word for activities (satikhara with the 
prefix abhi-). 
* The words kdyavacxcitUuankkara tayo are left out in the text before 
ti imt cha, etc. 
4 Kindred Sayings i, 197. B Samyutta ii, 82. 9 Anguttara i, 112. 

--- PAGE 136 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 629 
of speech ceases first, then that of the body, and lastly that of the 
mind l”1 And among them there is no activity which is not 
included in the conditioned activities. This should be under¬ 
stood by what is said in the succeeding “ links ” of the causal 
law: “ Conditioned by activities is consciousness " and so on.2 
In what remains to be said: that which is aware is conscious¬ 
ness ; that which names is name; that which is corruptible is 
form (or shape); that which extends what comes3 (within its 
causal relationship), and also, leads to the long stretch (of 
the ocean of life) is sense; that which touches is contact; that 
which experiences is feeling; that which thirsts is craving; 
that which clings is grasping; that which comes to be or causes 
to be is becoming; that which produces is birth; the wearing 
out is old age; that by which things die is death; the sorrowing 
is sorrow; lamenting is lamentation; what suffers is suffering, 
or, what digs up associated states into two by means of 
genetic and static periods is suffering ;4 the being dejected is 
grief; excessive sorrowing is despair; “(are)” means “are 
produced.” This verb should be construed, not only with 
the words beginning with “ sorrow,” but also with all the terms. 
Otherwise, the meaning of the clause “ Conditioned by 
ignorance are activities ” would not be evident. But when 
it is construed with the verb “are,” the meaning is: 
ignorance and cause give ignorance as the cause, and con¬ 
ditioned by that ignorance [526] activities come to pass. Thus 
the cause and the efEect are determined. It is the same every¬ 
where. The word “such” shows the method just explained. 
It shows that the uprising of the states is due to the causes of 
ignorance and the rest, and not to the creation of an Almighty 
Lord (issara). “ This ” means, such as has been explained. 
“ Entire ” means unmixed, or the whole. “ Mass of ill ” 
means collection of ill, not of a sentient being, nor of what is 
happy or lovely, etc. “ Uprising ” means birth. “ Is ” means 
comes to pass. Thus is decision by way of sense (meaning) 
to be known here. 
1 Further Dialogues i, 216. E Above, p. 615. 
3 Word play, again, on dyatanam (field of sense). 
* Similarly on duk-kha and fcAan-dig. 

--- PAGE 137 ---
630 The Path of Purity 
“ Characteristic and so forth ”—The characteristic and so 
on of ignorance and so on are as follows: Ignorance has the 
characteristic of not knowing, the essence of confusion, the 
manifestation of covering up, the cankers as proximate cause. 
Preparing is the characteristic of activities, endeavouring is 
their function, volition is their manifestation, ignorance their 
proximate cause. Consciousness has the characteristic of know¬ 
ing specifically, the function of going before (name and form), 
the manifestation of rebirth, activities, or a physical object as its 
proximate cause. Name has the characteristic of bending, the 
function of associating, the manifestation of being undivided, 
consciousness as its proximate cause. Shape (or form) has the 
characteristic of being corruptible, the essence of scattering, 
the manifestation of being indeterminate, consciousness as 
proximate cause. The sixfold sense has extending (the 
round of births) as characteristic, seeing and so forth1 as 
function, physical object and door (of consciousness) as 
manifestation, name and form as proximate cause. Contact 
has touching as characteristic, impinging as function, coming 
together as2 manifestation, the sixfold sense as proximate 
cause. Feeling has experiencing as characteristic, enjoying 
the taste of the object as function, the pleasant and the painful 
as manifestation, contact as proximate cause. The condition 
(of ill) is the characteristic of craving, taking delight is its 
function, discontent is its manifestation, feeling is its proximate 
cause. Seizing is the characteristic of grasping, not letting 
go is its function, opinion based on strong craving is its mani¬ 
festation, craving is its proximate cause. Action and its 
fruit arc tbe characteristic of becoming, causing to be and 
coming to be are its function, the being moral, immoral, and in¬ 
determinate is its manifestation, grasping is its proximate 
cause. The characteristic and so on of birth and the rest 
should be understood as said in the exposition of the Truths.3 
Thu 8 is decision by way of characteristics and so forth to be 
known here. 
1 Seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching, and thinking, for the 
six senses. 
* Of object, sense-organ and consciousness. * Page 592 f., above. 

--- PAGE 138 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 631 
“ The single kind ” (and so forth)—Ignorance is single in not 
knowing, not seeing, being confused and so on. It is of two 
kinds by way of non-attainment of knowledge and attainment 
of false knowledge, also as being due to instigation and not 
due to instigation; three kinds as being associated with the 
three kinds of feeling; four kinds as not penetrating the four 
Truths; [529] five kinds as covering up the evils of the five 
destinies; six kinds by way of door and object in all non¬ 
material states. 
The activities are single in being of the nature of resultant 
states connected with the cankers, and so on; of two kinds as 
moral and immoral, also as limited and sublime, low and 
middling, wrong and right, systematized and unsystematized; 
of three kinds as meritorious preparations and so on ;x of four 
kinds as conducive to the four places of birth ;a of five kinds as 
leading to the five destinies.8 
Consciousness is single as being worldly in result and so 
on; of two kinds as being with and without root-condition; 
of three kinds as being included in the three existences, 
associated with the three feelings and as being without root- 
condition, with two and with three Toot-conditions; of four 
and five kinds by way of the origins and the destinies. 
Name-and-form is single as being dependent on conscious¬ 
ness, and as conditioned by karma; of two kinds as being with 
and without an object; of three kinds as the past (present and 
future); of four and five kinds by wTay of the origins and the 
destinies. 
The sixfold sense is single as being the source and meeting- 
place; of two kinds as being the sentient surface and con¬ 
sciousness of what has become, and so on; of three kinds as 
taking objects at hand, not at hand and neither;4 of four 
1 Preparation of merit, of demerit, of stationarine&s. 
a The four places of birth or origins (yoni) are birth from eggs, from 
a womb, from moisture, and apparitional birth. 
* The five destinies or courses (gati) are a state of woe, the world of 
Peia-s, the world of lower animals, men, and devas. 
♦ Read esampaUanobhaya°. Smell, taste, and touch take objects 
at hand, the eye takes objects not at band, the mind takes an object 
which is neither.—Tiled. 

--- PAGE 139 ---
632 The Path of Purity 
kinds and five kinds as being included in the origins and 
destinies. And contact and the rest should be treated in the 
same way. Thus by the single kind and so forth is decision 
to be understood here. 
“ The factor-fixing ”—here sorrow and others are spoken in 
order to show the continuity of the wheel of life, for they 
happen to the fool afflicted by old age and death, as it has 
been said, “ Monks, the average man cf no wisdom who is 
touched by bodily painful feeling grieves and laments and 
weeps, beats his breast and falls into distraction.,n So long as 
they proceed, ignorance proceeds and so do the activities 
conditioned by ignorance. Thus the wheel of life is con¬ 
tinuous. Therefore they (sorrow and so on) are taken together 
with old age and death, and the factors of the causal law are 
to be understood as twelve. Thus by the factor-fixing also is 
decision here to be understood. Thus far is the brief discourse. 
This is the detailed account:—Ignorance, by the Suttanta 
method [530] is lack of knowledge in the four things: ill and 
so on. By the Abhidhamma method it is lack of knowledge 
in eight things, together with the past and so on. For this 
has been said: “ What herein is ignorance ? It is lack of 
knowledge about ill . . . about the course leading to the stopping 
of ill, lack of knowledge about the former things, about the latter 
things, and about both taken together ; lack of knowledge about 
the relatedness of this to that in the states that have causally 
happened.”2 Although, save for the two transcendental 
truths, ignorance arises in the others by way of object, the 
intention here is that it arises by way of covering up. For 
it, having arisen, remains covering up the truth about ill. and 
does not allow it to penetrate itB own true essential charac¬ 
teristic. It is the same with the origin, the stopping and the 
Way. It stands covering up the past five aggregates, known 
as the former things; the future five aggregates known as the 
latter things; both, taken together, that is, the former and 
the latter things; the relatedness of this to that and the 
states that have causally happened. It does not allow the 
1 See text, p. 529, footnote 1. 
1 Dhammasanganx, § 1162. Cf. Bud. Psyclt. Ethics, p. 260. 

--- PAGE 140 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 633 
truth to penetrate its own true essential characteristic as 
“ This is ignorance, these are the activities.” Therefore it 
has been said that it is lack of knowledge about ill . . . states 
that have causally happened. 
Activities are the six which have already been briefly 
described as the three beginning with merit and the three 
beginning with the body. In detail, the thirteen volitions 
constitute the preparations of merit, namely, eight moral voli¬ 
tions1 of the realm of sense-desire proceeding by way of alms¬ 
giving, virtue, and so on, and five moral volitions of the realms 
of Form proceeding by way of (spiritual) development. The 
twelve immoral volitions8 proceeding by way of life-taking 
and so on constitute the preparations of demerit. The four 
moral volitions of the realms of the Formless proceeding by 
way of (spiritual) development constitute the preparations for 
stationariness. Thus twenty-nine volitions constitute the 
three activities. In the other three, intentions in body, 
speech and thought are activities of the body, speech and 
thought. This triad is mentioned in order to show the pro¬ 
cedure by way of the door of the preparations of merit and 
so on at the moment of making endeavour for action. Full 
twenty volitions, namely, eight moral volitions and twelve 
immoral volitions of the realms of sense-desire, proceeding as 
door of the body after setting up body-intimation, constitute 
body-activities. [531] The same volitions, proceeding as 
door of speech after setting-up speech-intimation, are speech- 
activities. But here (in these twenty volitions) the volition 
of higher knowledge as a different thing is not the cause of 
consciousness; hence it is not mentioned. For the same 
reason the volition of flurry is not mentioned, and on this 
account it is to be removed from among the causes of con¬ 
sciousness. But all of them (the twenty volitions) are con¬ 
ditioned by ignorance. And all the twenty-nine volitions 
arising at the mind-door without setting up either of the two 
intimations constitute thought-activities. Thus this triad 
enters into the preceding triad, and is to be regarded in a 
1 Ca\l6dcittdni(tho\ights)inDhammaMngani(Bud.Psy.Ethics),§§l 3. 
* Also so-called, ibid., § 325 ff. 
41 

--- PAGE 141 ---
634 The Path of Purity 
sense as being conditioned by ignorance by way of the pre¬ 
parations of merit and so on. 
Herein (the objection) may arise:—how can it be known that 
these activities are conditioned by ignorance ? Because they 
come to being when ignorance comes to being. For he who 
has not put away lack of knowledge, called ignorance, about 
ill and so on, grasps the idea, that the ill of repeated births 
is a happy notion, through lack of knowledge regarding ill 
and the former things and so on, and brings about the three 
kinds of activities which are the root-condition of ill. 
Through lack of knowledge about the Origin1 he brings 
about the activities which are the root-condition of ill and 
are the equipment of craving, thinking them to be bliss. And 
through lack of knowledge about the ending1 and the Way,1 
he imagines that there is stopping of ill in some particular 
destiny which is not the ending of ill, and that the way to 
ending lies in sacrificial rites and religious austerities practised 
with a view to attain the immortal state and so on, rites and 
austerities which do not lead to ending, and so aspiring for 
the ending of ill he brings about the three kinds of activities 
on account of such rites and austerities. 
Further, because that ignorance of the four truths is not put 
away, he especially brings about the preparations for merit 
classified as the activities of the body, speech, thought in order 
that he, not knowing ill to be ill. might attain to that ill which 
is called the fruition of meritorious act, fully mixed as it is 
with evils such as birth, old age, disease, death and so forth, 
just as he who desires a celestial nymph might strive to jump 
off the peak of a mountain.2 Not perceiving that at the end 
of the fruition of meritorious action, considered as bliss, one 
experiences no satisfaction but the misery of a change in¬ 
volving great suffering, he brings about the preparations for 
merit which are the cause of such fruition and which have 
been described already, just as a moth should fall into the 
flame of a lamp, and a man, greedy for honey-drops, should 
lick the blade of a knife besmeared with honey. Not per- 
1 The Second Truth; Third and Fourth respectively. 
* MariLppap&tam—Pabbata-Bikhara-ppap&to.—JTiird. 

--- PAGE 142 ---
XVn,—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 635 
ceiving the evils of pursuits after sensual pleasures and so on 
with their consequences, he imagines them to be bliss, and 
being overcome by his lower nature brings about the prepara¬ 
tions for demerit which proceeds at the three doors, just as 
a child should play with dung and a man who wishes to die 
should swallow poison. And, not understanding the ill that is 
in the changing nature of all things in general among the 
results of the formless, he brings about, through the perverted 
views of etemalism and so on, the preparations for stationari- 
ness which constitute thought-activities, just as a man who 
has lost his way should strive to go in the direction of a town 
inhabited by goblins. Therefore, inasmuch as the activities 
come to being because ignorance comes to being [532], do not 
come to being if ignorance does not do so, therefore one should 
know that these activities are conditioned by ignorance. 
Aid this has been said: “Monks, he who knows not, is ignorant, 
■plans the preparations for merit, also plans the preparations for 
demerit, also plans the preparations for stationariness. But 
when, monks, ignorance has been put away, and wisdom has 
arisen, because of the fading aioay of ignorance and the arising 
of wisdom he does not1 plan the preparations for merit.”2 
At this stage the objector might say: “We accept that 
ignorance is the cause of activities. But one ought to ask 
of which of them and in what way is it the cause ?” As to 
this, the Blessed One has declared the twenty-four causes3 
—namely, root-condition, object, dominant influence, im¬ 
mediacy, direct immediacy, co-existence, reciprocity, de¬ 
pendence, sufficing condition, pre-existence, post-existence, 
repetition, karma, result, sustenance, controlling influence, 
jhana, Path, association, dissociation, presence, non-presence, 
absence, non-absence. 
Herein, it is root-condition and cause—thus the root- 
condition is cause. This has been said: “ Being condition it 
is cause, by being condition it is cause.” It is the same with 
the object-cause and others. Of these, “ condition ” is an 
equivalent word for part of speech, reason, root. In the 
1 Read vijjuppadd n era. 
1 See note 2, page 532 of text. a Tikapafthdna i, 1. 

--- PAGE 143 ---
636 The Path of Purity 
worldly sense, in such expressions as “ The condition of a 
promise,” it means part of speech. In the religious sense, in 
such passages as “ Those states which arise through conditions,”1 
it means reason. In such passages as “ The three conditions 
of good {karma), the three conditions of had {karma)”2 it means 
root, which is the meaning here. And this is the literal mean¬ 
ing of “ cause ” here: “ because of,” (i.e.) from this one goes: 
this is “ cause.” One proceeds to it by not rejecting it, is 
the meaning. It is said that whatever state stands or arises 
through not letting go another state, the latter is the cause 
of the former. In characteristics, a cause has the characteristic 
of rendering service. For whatever [533] state renders service 
to the standing or arising of a state is said to be its cause.3 
Such words as condition, reason, base, coming-to-be, source, 
are the same in meaning, different in form. Thus it is “ con¬ 
dition ” in the sense of root, “ cause ” in the sense of rendering 
service, in a word condition-cause is a state which renders 
service in the sense of a root. The significance for the teachers 
is, that it effects goodness in good states and so on, just as 
paddy-seeds the paddy, and blue-coloured stones the blue rays 
and so on. 
But if this be so, there would be no conditioned-causality 
in material objects, which originate through condition. The 
fact is that the condition does not effect goodness and so on, 
nor is it not cause. For this has been said: “ Of states asso¬ 
ciated with root-condition and of material things which originate 
therefrom, root-condition is the cause by way of rendering service 
to them as root-condition.”4 
The indeterminate nature of classes of unconditioned con¬ 
sciousness is eSected without this condition. And the goodness 
and so on of classes of conditioned consciousness is bound up 
with wise attention and so on, not with the associated con¬ 
dition. And if the goodness and so on were by nature in the 
associated conditions, it would be bound up with the con¬ 
dition in the condition-associated states; (thus) absence of 
greed would be either good or indeterminate, but because, 
1 Vinaya i, 40. 
* Pafth&na corny., p. 5. 
* Dhammasanganl, § 1053. 
1 Tihapatthdna i, 1. 

--- PAGE 144 ---
X VII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 637 
it being both good and indifferent, the goodness and so 
on would Have to be looked for among the conditions as 
among the associated states. There is no contradiction if, 
instead of taking condition to mean roots by virtue of their 
effecting goodness and so on, we take them to mean roots 
by virtue of their effecting a fixed position. For those states 
which are actually caused by conditions are firm and well- 
fixed like firmly rooted trees; those which are not conditioned 
are not well-fixed like watery plants and so on (which have 
roots) of the size of a sesame seed. Thus the clause “ which 
renders service in the sense of a root ” is to be understood 
as a state caused by condition which renders service by effecting 
a fixed position. 
Of the following causal relations, the object cause is a state 
which renders service by being object. Because for all states 
after beginning with “ The visible object by means of the 
element of eye-consciousness,” the conclusion is “ whatever 
states of mind and of mental properties arise through what¬ 
ever states, are caused by way of object-cause of those states,” 
therefore there is no state which is not in that causal relation. 
Just as a weak man should rise and stand up by leaning on 
a stick or a rope, so the states of mind and mental properties 
rise up and remain through visible objects and so on. There¬ 
fore all states which are the objects of mind and mental 
properties are in the object-causal relation. 
[534] That state which renders service in the sense of being 
the chief is cause as dominant influence. It is of two kinds: 
by way of co-existence and object. Of these, because of the 
saying: “ The dominant influence of desire-to-act is cause by 
means of the cause of dominant influence of states associated 
with desire-to-act and of material objects originating therefrom,,”x 
and so on the four states, called desire-to-act, energy, thought, 
investigation are to be understood as the dominant influence 
causes, but not together. For when making desire-to-act the 
principal, the chief, consciousness proceeds, then desire-to-act, 
not the others, is the dominant influence. The same with the 
others. That state with due regard to which the non-material 
1 Ibid., 2. 

--- PAGE 145 ---
638 The Path of Purity 
states proceed, is their dominant influence by way of object. 
Hence it is said: “ Whatever states of mind and of mental 
'properties arise 'paying due regard to whatever states, are cause 
by way of the dominant influence-cause of those states.”1 
The state which renders service by immediacy is the im¬ 
mediate cause. The state which renders service by direct 
immediacy is the directly immediate cause. These two causes 
may be expanded in many ways, but this is the essence: 
After eye-consciousness comes mind-element, after which 
comes mind-consciousness-element and so on—thus inas¬ 
much as the order of consciousness is fulfilled by means of 
the preceding classes of consciousness, not otherwise, therefore 
the state which is capable of producing a suitable conscious¬ 
ness immediately after itself is the immediate cause. Hence 
it was said: “ The immediate cause is eye-consciousness-element 
and states associated therewith, it is the cause by way of im¬ 
mediacy of mind-element and of states associated therewith,”1 
and so on. The immediate cause is the same as the directly 
immediate cause. The difference is only in the letter as with 
integration and continuity, equivalent term and expression2 
and so on. There is no difference in meaning. The opinion 
of the teachers, that it is immediate cause by means of im¬ 
mediacy in meaning,3 and directly immediate cause by means 
of immediacy in time, conflicts with the statement, that the 
moral good of the realm of neither perception nor non-per¬ 
ception of one who has emerged from trance is the cause of 
the attainment of fruition, by way of directly immediate 
causal relation and so on. And when they say that the 
capability of states to produce does not wane, but being 
prevented by the strength of spiritual development, the 
(resultant) states do not arise quite immediately, this just 
proves the absence of immediacy in time [535]. We also say 
that there is no immediacy in time on account of the strength 
of spiritual development. And because there is no immediacy 
in time, therefore the directly immediate causality cannot 
1 Ibid. 
1 Dhamrruuanganl 642 f., 1306 /. 
* Some read addh&nantaratdya for atihd0. 

--- PAGE 146 ---
XVII.'—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 639 
arise. For it is their view that the directly immediate cause 
is dependent on the immediate-in-time. Therefore, without 
adhering to that opinion, one should conclude that the differ¬ 
ence is in the letter, not in the meaning. How ? There is 
no break in these states—they are immediate. They are 
quite immediate owing to the absence of form—thus they are 
directly immediate. 
A state which is about to arise and which renders service 
by being together with the arising is co-existent cause, like 
the lamp and the lamp-light. It is of six kinds by way of the 
immaterial aggregates, etc. As it has been said: “ The four 
immaterial aggregates are in co-existent causal relation to one 
another. So are the four great primaries to one another, name 
and form at the moment of descent at birth,1 states of mind and 
mental properties to material states originating from mind, the 
great primaries to derived material things, material states some¬ 
times are, somelitnes are not in co-existent causal relation to non- 
material states.”2 This (clause) is said concerning the heart- 
basis. 
States which mutually render service by causing to be, and 
giving support arc in reciprocal causal relation, like three 
sticks (in a tripod) supporting one another. It is of three kinds 
by way of immaterial aggregates, etc. As it has been said: 
“ The four immaterial aggregates are in reciprocal causal relation. 
So are the four great primaries, name and form at the moment 
of appearing.”2 
A state which renders service by the circumstances of fixed 
abode and dependence is the dependent cause, as the earth, 
a canvas, and so on, to trees, the drawing of pictures and 
so on. It should be understood in the same way as is said 
of the co-existent cause: “ The four immaterial aggregates are 
in dependent causal relation to one another and so on.”2 But 
the sixth portion here has been classified thus: “ The eye-organ 
is the dependent cause of eye-consciousness-element and states 
associated with it. The ear, nose, tongue, body organ is the 
dependent cause of ear—nose—tongue—body-consciousness-ele- 
1 Cf. Maha-nid&na-Suttanta. D'tgha ii, 55. 
* Tikapatfh&na i, 3. 

--- PAGE 147 ---
640 The Path of Purity 
ment and states associated with it. That material state by 
depending on which mind-element and mind-consciovsness- 
element arise is the dependent cause of mind-element and mind- 
consciousness-element and states associated with them”1 
This is the literal meaning of “ sufficing condition-cause.” 
[536] For its fruition it depends on, cannot reject that, because 
of which it arises—thus dependence. Just as despair is 
excessive sorrowing, so sufficing condition is excessive de¬ 
pendence. It is an equivalent term for strong reason. Hence 
that state which renders service by being a strong reason is 
to be known as the sufficing condition. It is of three kinds: 
object-sufficing condition, immediate sufficing condition, 
natural sufficing condition. 
Of these, in the first place the object-sufficing condition 
has been classified together with the dominant influence of 
the object without making any difference, thus: “Having 
given charity, observed the precepts and the holy day, one reflects 
thereon with due regard. One reflects on one's past good beha¬ 
viour with due regard. Having emerged from Jhdna, one reflects 
with due regard. Probationers reflect on the Adoption with due 
regard; they reflect on purification with due regard. They 
emerge from the Path and reflect on it with due regard”1 and so 
on. That object with due regard to which mind and mental 
properties arise, is as a rule the strong object among objects. 
Thus dominant influence has the meaning of being fit for due 
regard, sufficing condition of the object, that of a strong 
reason. In this way the difference between them should he 
understood. 
The immediate sufficing condition also has "been classified 
together with the immediate cause without making any 
difference thus: “ The preceding moral aggregates are the 
causes, by way of sufficing conditions, of the succeeding moral 
aggregates,”1 and so on. But in the summary of contents the 
difference lies where the immediate cause is put down as “ Eye- 
consciousness-element and states associated with it are in 
immediate causal relation to mind-element and states associated 
with it,”1 and so on, and the sufficing condition is first put down 
1 Ibid., 4. 

--- PAGE 148 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 641 
as ‘ ‘ The former moral states are the causes, by way of sufficing 
conditions, of the latter moral states.” But in meaning it amounts 
to one and the same. Though this he so, immediacy is to he 
understood as the ability to produce suitable risings of con¬ 
sciousness immediately after itself; immediate sufficing con¬ 
dition as the strength of the former consciousness in producing 
the latter consciousness. For there is no rising of consciousness 
without succeeding consciousness, as there is rising of con¬ 
sciousness even without some phenomenon in the causal 
relations of conditions and so on. [537] Hence the strength of 
the cause. Thus the difference between the two is to he under¬ 
stood on this wise: it is the immediate cause by way of produc¬ 
ing a suitable consciousness immediately after itself, and it is 
the immediate sufficing condition by way of the strong reason. 
Natural sufficing condition is prepared sufficing condition. 
Faith, morals and so on, accomplished in their own continuity 
or long accustomed season, food and so on, are said to be 
prepared.1 Or it is a sufficing condition by nature—thus 
“ natural sufficing condition.” The meaning is, not mixed 
with the (other two modes of) object and of immediacy, its 
different kinds should be understood in various ways thus: 
“ With faith as sufficing condition one gives alms, observes the 
moral code, does the sacred duties, produces the Jhana, insight, 
Ike Path, higher knowledge, attainment. IFith morality, 
learning, liberality, understanding as sufficing condition 
one . . . produces attainment. Faith, morality, learning, liber¬ 
ality, understanding are in the causal relation of sufficing con¬ 
dition to faith, morality, learning, liberality, understanding.”2 
Thus these states, faith and so on, are prepared sufficing 
conditions in the sense of strong reasons. Thus is the natural 
sufficing condition. 
The state which, arising first, renders service by proceeding 
is the pre-existent cause. It is of eleven kinds by way of 
physical objects and the heart-basis at the five doors. As it 
is said: “ The eye-organ is in the causal relation of pre-existence 
to eye-consciousness-elettient and states associated with it. Ear 
1 Punctuate the text accordingly. Cf. the double meaning of pa kata 
in Svtia Nipala, ver. 286. * TikapaUhana ii, 165. 

--- PAGE 149 ---
642 The Path of Purity 
. . . nose . . . tongue . . . body-organ, form . . . sound . . . 
smell . . . taste . . . touch-organ are in causal relation of 
■pre-existence to body-consciousness-element and states associated 
therewith ; and form . . . sowid . . . smell . . . taste . . . 
touch-organ to mind element. That form depending on which 
mind-element and mind-consciousness-element arise is in the 
causal relation of pre-existence to mind-element and states 
associated with it, sometimes is or is not so related to mind- 
consciousness-element and states associated with it.”1 
The immaterial state which renders service by supporting the 
pre-existent material states is post-existent cause, as food¬ 
longing intent renders service to the bodies of infant vultures. 
Hence it is said: “ The post-existent [538] states of mind and 
mental properties are in the causal relation of post-existence to 
this pre-existent body.” 
That state which, in the sense of repeating,2 renders sendee 
in keeping the immediately following states in efficiency and 
strength is the repetition-cause, like the (effect of the) pre¬ 
ceding lessons in books and so on. It is of three kinds as the 
moral, immoral, and inoperative apperception. As it has been 
said: •* The preceding moral states are in causal relation of re¬ 
petition to the latter moral states. The preceding immoral . . . 
inoperative, indeterminate states arein causal relation of repetition 
to the latter inoperative indeterminate states.” 
The state which renders service by action, called the 
exercise of mind, is karma3-cause. It is of two kinds by way 
of moral and immoral volition lasting various moments and 
by way of all co-existent volition. As it has been said: 
“ Moral and immoral karma is the karma-cause of resultant 
aggregates and of the (kama-)madc* material qualities. Co¬ 
existent volition is the karma-cause of associated states and 
material states originating from itself.” 
1 The quotations on this and the following four pages are, unless 
otherwise indicated, from the Tikajtaffhana i, 4-7. 
* Sevana is lit. attending upon, serving; thence practice, repetition. 
* Lit. action as bringing effect. Kiriyu: “ action ” hero, just above, 
is the act considered as having wrought its effect.—B. Pay. Eth., § 56C; 
Expositor, 385. 
4 Katattd «• patisandhi-kammaja. See also Compendium of Philosophy, 
p. 144, n. 4. 

--- PAGE 150 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 643 
The resultant state which renders service to effortless calm 
by being effortless calm is result-cause. At the time of hap¬ 
pening it is the cause of material things originating from itself, 
and at rebirth it is the cause of karma-made material things, 
and everywhere (at both times) of associated states. As it 
has been said: “ The one aggregate, resultant and indeterminate 
is the result-cause of three aggregates and of material things 
originating from mind.. ... At the moment of rebirth the one 
stale, resultant and indeterminate, is the result-cause of three 
aggregates and the karma-made material things . . . three 
aggregates are the result-cause of one aggregate . . . two aggre¬ 
gates are the result-cause of two aggregates and the kamta-made 
material things, the aggregates are the result of the (heart) 
basis”1 
The four sustenances which render service, in the sense of 
giving support, to material and immaterial (things), are the 
sustenance-cause. As it has been said: “ Solid food is the 
sustenance-cause of this body. Immaterial sustenances are the 
sustenance-cause of associated states and of material things 
originating therefrom.” Aud in the section of queries, it is 
said: “At the moment of rebirth resultant and indeterminate 
sustena)ice is the sustenance-cause of aggregates associated 
therewith and, because of what has been done, of material things”2 
Twenty controlling faculties, excepting femininity and 
masculinity, which render service in the sense of governing 
[539] arc the controlling faculty-cause. Of them, the faculties 
of the eye and so on are causes of immaterial states, the rest 
of states of matter and non-matter. As it has been said: 
“Eye-faculty is the controlling-facuity-cause of eye-consciousness- 
element . . . ear . . . nose . . . tongue . . . body-faculty is 
controlling-faculty cause of body-consciousness-element and 
states associated therewith. Life-faculty of matter is controlling 
faculty cause of karma-made material things. The non-material 
faculties are controlling faculty causes of associated states and 
material things originating therefrom.” And in the section on 
queries it is said: “At the moment of rebirth resultant and in- 
1 Tikapaflhdna ii, 173, which reads 'aggregate’ for ‘state’ in the 
fourth line of quotation. a Ibid., 174. 

--- PAGE 151 ---
644 The Path of Purity 
determinate faculties are the faculty-cause of associated aggregates 
and karma-made material things'!1 
Excepting the pair, pleasurable and painful feeling in the 
twice-five classes of consciousness, all the seven Jhana-factors,2 
differentiated as moral and so on, which render service in the 
sense of access to musing, are Jhana-causes. As it has been 
said: “ The Jhana-factors arc the Jhana-causes of states asso¬ 
ciated mtli'Jhdna and material things originating from it.” And 
in the section on queries it is also said: 11 At the moment of 
rebirth the resultant and indeterminate Jhana-factors are the 
Jhana-causes of the associated aggregates and the karma-made 
material things.”1 
The twelve Path-factors,2 differentiated as moral and so on, 
which render sendee in the sense of leading out hence or thence, 
are the Path-causes. As it has been said: “ The Path-factors 
are the Path-causes of states associated with the Path and 
material things originating from it.” And in the section on 
queries it is also said: “ At the moment of rebirth the resultant 
and indeterminate Path^factors are the Path-causes of the as¬ 
sociated aggregates and the karma-made material things.”3 
These two Jhana-and-Path-causes do not occur among the 
twice-five classes of consciousness unconditioned by mind. 
Thus it should be understood. 
The immaterial states which render service through as¬ 
sociation, said4 to be one in physical basis, object, origin and 
cessation, arc the association causes. As it has been said: 
“ The four immaterial aggregates are causes one to another 
through the association-cause.” 
Material states which render service by not being one in 
physical basis and so on are the dissociation-causes of non¬ 
material states, and so are the non-material states the dis¬ 
sociation causes of the material states. The dissociation-cause 
is of three kinds, by way of the co-existent, post-existent and 
pre-existent. For this has been said: “The co-existent moral 
aggregates are the dissociation causes of material things originat¬ 
ing from mind. The post-existent [540] moral aggregates are the 
1 Ibid., 175. 3 See Compendium, 175. * Tikapatthana ii» 176. 
4 Read °eanlchdtena. 

--- PAGE 152 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 645 
dissociation-causes of this pre-existent bodyZ’1 And in the 
classification of the co-existent in the word “ indeterminate ” 
also it is said: “ At the moment of rebirth the resultant, indeter¬ 
minate aggregates are the dissociation-causes of the original 
material things. The aggregates are so related to the (heart) 
basis, and the (heart) basis to the aggregates.”1 And the pre¬ 
existent should be understood by way of the physical basis of 
eye-consciousness and so on. As it has been said: “ The 
pre-existent eye-organ is related to eye-consciousness2 through 
dissociation-cause. . . . So is body-organ to body-consciousness; 
the (heart) basis to the resultant indeterminate, inoperative 
indeterminate aggregates; . . . the (heart) basis to the moral 
aggregates; . . . the (heart) basis to the immoral aggregates.”1 
The state which renders service by being a support to a 
state through presence, the characteristic of the present 
time, is the presence-cause. Its table of contents has been 
laid down seven-fold: By way of the non-material aggregates, 
great primaries, name and form, mind and mental properties, 
great primaries, sense-organs, (heart) basis. As it has been 
said: “ The four non-material aggregates mutually are causes 
through presence. The four great primaries and name and 
form at the moment of appearing are mutually so related . . . 
and so are states of mind and mental properties to material 
objects originating from mind . . . the great primaries to derived 
material things ... the eye-organ to eye-consciousness demerit 
. . body-organ . . . form-organ . . . touch-organ to body- 
consciousness-element and states associated with it. Form-organ, 
touch-organ to states associated with it. . . . That form de¬ 
pending on which mind-element and mind-consciousness-element 
arise, is the presence-cause of mind-element and mind-conscious- 
ness-element and states associated with it” But in the 
section on queries after the table of contents has been laid 
down as co-existence, pre-existence, post-existence,sustenance, 
controlling faculty, the exposition is made first regarding the 
co-existence thus: “ One aggregate is the presence-cause of three 
aggregates and material things originating therefrom,”3 and so on. 
1 Ibid. * Read cakkhu- before vinndnassa. 3 Ibid,, 177. 

--- PAGE 153 ---
646 The Path of Purity 
As to pre-existence, the exposition is made by way of pre¬ 
existent eye and so on. As to the post-existence, the exposi¬ 
tion is made by way of the post-existent mind and mental 
properties being in causal relation to this pre-existent body. 
Among the controlling faculties of sustenance, material food 
is the presence-cause of this body. [541] The controlling 
faculty of material life is the presence-cause of karma-made 
material things. Thus the exposition is made. 
Non-material states which have ceased quite immediately 
and which render service by giving an opportunity for the 
proceeding of immaterial states which arise immediately after 
themselves are the non-presence-cause. As it has been said: 
“ States of mind and menial properties which have ceased quite 
immediately are in the non-presence causal relation to the present 
states of mind and mental properties.” 
Those which render service through absence are the absence- 
causes. As it has been said: “ States of mind and mental 
•properties which are absent quite immediately are the absence- 
cause of the present states of mind and mental properties.” 
The states which are the presence-cause should be understood 
as the non-absence-cause by rendering service through non- 
absence. This couplet of causes is stated by way of embellish¬ 
ing the teaching and to suit the purposes of people who may 
be saved; just in the same way as the couplet of dissociation 
from condition is stated after the un-conditioned couplet. 
Of merit is the double cause, 
Of others it is manifold, 
And of the last is counted one. 
And here “ Of merit is the double cause means it is cause 
by way of object-cause and sufficing-condition-cause. For 
through loss and vanishing at the time of contemplation, 
ignorance is the object-cause of the preparation for merit of 
the realm of sense. At the time of knowing the deluded mind 
by the mind of higher knowledge, it is the suffieing-condition- 
cause to the activities of the realm of form, that is both to 
him who is fulfilling meritorious acts of the realm of sense 
such as alms-giving with a view to transcend ignorance and 

--- PAGE 154 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 647 
to him who is inducing the Jhanas of the realm of form. It 
is the same with one who does meritorious deeds praying for 
the glories of the existence of sense and of form owing to his 
confusion through ignorance. 
“ Of others it is manifold ” means, it is the cause in manifold 
ways of the preparation for demerit. How ? For it is the 
object-cause at the time when lust and so forth arise on 
account of ignorance; the cause by way of object-dominant- 
influence and object-sufficing condition at the time when regard 
is paid to ignorance and it is treated pleasantly; the sufficing- 
condition-cause when one, deluded by ignorance, commits 
life-taking and so on, not seeing the evils of such deeds; the 
cause by way of immediacy, direct immediacy, immediate 
sufficing-condition, repetition, non-presence, absence to the 
second apperception and so on; the cause by way of condition, 
co-existence, reciprocity, dependence, association, presence, 
non-absence when one does any demerit whatsoever. Thus 
the cause is manifold. 
“ And of the last is counted one,” [542] it is counted as one 
cause by way of sufficing condition in the case of preparations 
for stationariness. The fact of its being sufficing-condition- 
cause is to be understood as said in the preparation for merit. 
Here the objector might say, “ Is ignorance the sole cause 
of the activities, or are there other causes ? If it is the sole 
cause, then the theory of a single-cause arises. If there are 
other causes, then it is not proper to make the exposition of a 
single cause as: Conditioned by ignorance activities come to 
pass.” The exposition is not improper. Why ? Because— 
From one come neither one nor more, 
The many yield no single fruit. 
There’s then some meaning in the view 
Of single cause and single fruit. 
For here (in this world) no single fruit whatsoever comes 
from a single cause, nor is there a variety of fruits. And there 
is not a single fruit that comes from various causes. Various 
fruits are due to various causes. Thus various fruits are seen 
to arise in the form of shoots possessed of shape, scent, taste, 

--- PAGE 155 ---
648 The Path of Purity 
and so on, from various causes such as the climate, earth, seed, 
water. So there is some use, some purpose in the explanation 
of a single cause and a single fruit in “ Conditioned by ignorance, 
activities come to pass; conditioned by activities, consciousness 
comes to pass.”1 For the Blessed One teaches a single cause 
or fruit for the embellishment of the teaching and the con¬ 
venience of possible converts owing to the meaning being 
sometime established, sometime evident, sometime specific. 
He has stated one cause-and-fruit by establishing the meaning 
as “ Conditioned by contact feeling comes to pass.” For 
contact is the established root-cause of feeling, because feeling 
is fixed according to contact, and feeling is the established 
fruit of contact, for contact is fixed according to feeling. 
“ Diseases due to phleg?n ” thus he has stated a cause as evident, 
since phlegm is evident, but not so are karma and so on. 
“ Monks, whatever states are immoral, are all of them rooted in 
unmethodical attention?”2 Thus he has stated a cause as 
specific (or uncommon) since unmethodical attention is not 
common to all immoralities, but common to them are physical 
base, object and so on. Therefore, here this ignorance should 
be understood as shown to be the root-condition of the activi¬ 
ties, though there may be other states such as the physical 
objects and the co-existent states which make for the activi¬ 
ties, because it has been established as the root-condition of 
other conditions of the activities such as craving, as stated in 
“ The craving of one who sees delight increases” and “The 
origination of craving is due to the origmatim of ignorance” 
and because of its naturebeing evident and not held in common, 
in “ If, monks, a man who is ignorant plans an act of merit.”3 
[543] It is by just this explanation of a single cause and a 
single fruit that the use everywhere in the exposition of the 
phrase is to be understood. 
Here the objector might say: “If this be so, howcanignorance 
which has a decidedly undesirable fruit and is blameworthy 
be the cause of preparations for merit and stationariness 1 
1 TikA says the first clause shows the single cause, the second the 
Bingle fruit. 
9 Cf. Samyutta v, 91. * See above, p. 635. 

--- PAGE 156 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 649 
Verily, as a sugar-cane cannot issue from a nimb seed.” In 
what way is that impossible ? Verily, in the world,— 
Opposed and unopposed, unlike and like— 
Such are the causes that have brought about 
The states; they are not just results. 
For states are effected by causes, opposed or unopposed in 
existence,1 intrinsic nature, function and so on. A previous 
consciousness is a cause of a subsequent consciousness,2 
opposed as regards existence, and so are the previous lessons 
in arts and science such causes of the subsequent works of art 
and science. Action is a cause of matter opposed in its intrinsic 
nature, and so are milk, etc., of curds, etc. Light is opposed 
in function to eye-consciousness. So are molasses, etc., to 
intoxicating drinks and so on. But the eye and visible forms 
and so on are not opposed as regards existence to eye-con¬ 
sciousness and so on. The preceding apperceptions and so on 
are causes of the latter ones, unopposed as to intrinsic nature 
and function. And the same holds good for like and unlike 
causes as for opposed and unopposed causes. For the cause 
of matter is like matter in the form of the seasons and material 
food. And so hill-paddy seeds and so on are causes of hill- 
paddy crops and so on. Unlike matter is cause of non-matter 
and so is non-matter the cause of matter. Cow’s hair, goat’s3 
hair, horns, curds, sesame, flour and such things (though 
unlike) are causes of4 dabba and bhutinaka grasses and so on. 
But those things of which the causes are opposed or unopposed, 
like or unlike, are not just their results. Thus this ignorance, 
though it may have a decidedly undesirable fruit as a result 
and blameworthy in intrinsic nature, should be understood 
as a cause, so far as possible, of all these preparations for 
merit and so on, opposed or unopposed, like or unlike, as to 
existence, function, intrinsic nature. 
1 Th&na is explained by the piled as atthitd. 
1 I.e. the former has ceased while the latter exists. 
3 Avi means goat. 
4 I.e. render service to the grasses which grow where the hairs and 
so on are gathered together. 
42 

--- PAGE 157 ---
650 The Path of Purity 
And its being a cause has been stated in this way: Whoso¬ 
ever has not put away lack of knowledge, called ignorance, 
about ill and so on, grasps the idea, through lack of knowledge 
primarily about ill and the former things, that the ill of the 
round of births is pleasant and strives for the threefold activi¬ 
ties which are the conditions of that ill. 
Moreover, here is another explanation:— 
Since, he who is confused about rebirth, 
Decease, the round of births, distinctive signs 
Of the activities and states which spring 
[544] Through causal happenings, plans these three kinds 
Of acts, thus ignorance becomes their cause. 
But objection might arise thus: How does a man who is 
confused about these things perform these three kinds of 
activities ? (The answer is)—He who is confused about 
decease does not consider it as “ Everywhere death is the 
break-up of the aggregates,” but thinks thus: “ A sentient 
being dies; it is the transference of the sentient being into 
another body,” and so on. He who is confused about rebirth 
does not consider it as “ Everywhere birth is the manifestation 
of the aggregates,” but thinks thus: “ A sentient being arises: 
it is the manifestation of the sentient being’s new physical 
body,” and so on. He who is confused about the revolution 
of repeated births does not consider it as described as: 
The unbroken series of the aggregates, 
Sense-organs and the elements is called 
The revolution of repeated births— 
but thinks thus: “ This sentient being goes from this world 
to the other world, comes from the other world to this world,” 
and so on. He who is confused about the characteristics of 
the activities does not hold by their intrinsic and general 
characteristics but thinks that the activities are the self, 
belonging to the self, eternal, happy, pleasant. He who is 
confused about the states which spring through causal happen¬ 
ing does not hold that the procedure of the activities and so on 

--- PAGE 158 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 651 
is on account of ignorance and so on, but thinks that the self1 
knows ot docs not know; that it acts and instigates and comes 
to birth; that the Atom and the Lord and so on put its 
corporeal form into shape through the embryonic stages and 
cause it to fulfil the controlling faculties; that it, being en¬ 
dowed with the controlling faculties touches, feels, craves, 
grasps, incites ;2 or that it becomes in a subsequent becoming; 
or he thinks that all beings undergo a change in natural state 
through fate and collision.3 Thus blinded in his interpretation 
by ignorance, he plans acts of merit, of demerit and of station- 
ariness, just as a blind man walking on the ground comes 
across the right path and the wrong path, high ground and 
lowland, even places and uneven places. Hence it is said: 
Just as a blind man walks without a guide. 
Sometimes the right pathway, sometimes the wrong, 
E’en so the fool forthfaring without guide 
Now merit does and then demerit; when 
He knows the Law and ponders on the Truths, 
His ignorance will cease and bring him peace. 
This is the substance of the detailed discourse on the clause: 
“ Conditioned by ignorance activities come to pass.” 
[545] In the clause “ Conditioned by activities consciousness 
comes to pass,” consciousness is of six kinds, beginning with 
eye-consciousness. Of these, eye-consciousness is of two 
kinds: moral result and immoral result. And the same with 
ear-nose-tongue-body-consciousness. Mind-consciousness is 
of twenty-two kinds, namely, two mind-elements of the moral 
and immoral results, three unconditioned mind-consciousness- 
elements, eight classes of conditioned resultant consciousness 
of the realm of sense, five of the realm of form, four of the 
realm of the formless. Thus under these six kinds of conscious¬ 
ness are comprised all the thirty-two classes of worldly 
resultant consciousness. But the transcendental classes of 
1 Or, the soul, alia. 8 Head ghafiyaii. 
8 The Tiled Bays that the different changes of form undergone such 
aB the state of a deva, of man, etc., are hung together by fate (nt'ya/t) 
just as the different sizes of balls are hung by a thread. 

--- PAGE 159 ---
652 The Path of Purity 
consciousness are not included as being not in place in a dis¬ 
course on the round of births. 
Objection might arise “ But how may it be known that this 
consciousness which has been described is ‘conditioned by 
activities ’? ” It may be known from the absence of result 
in the absence of accumulated karma. For this consciousness 
is a result, and a result does not arise in the absence of accumu¬ 
lated karma. If it did, then all the resultant consciousnesses 
would arise to all beings. But they do not do so. Thus it 
should be known that it is this consciousness which is con¬ 
ditioned by activities. 
But which consciousness is conditioned by which activities 1 
Sixteen are conditioned by the preparations for merit of the 
realm of sense, namely, five beginning with eye-consciousness 
which are moral results, one mind-element in mind-conscious¬ 
ness, two mind-consciousness-elements, eight results of the 
realm of sense. As it is said: “ When, as the result of good 
karma having been wrought, having been stored up in connection 
with the sensuous realm, eye-consciousness has arisen . . . ear- 
nose-tongue-body-consciousness has arisen ... an element of 
mind has arisen ... an dement of mind-consciousness (or 
representative cognition) has arisen, accompanied by joy . . . 
an dement of mind-consciousness has risen, accompanied by 
indifference . . . accompanied by joy and associated with 
knowledge . . . accompanied by joy, associated with know¬ 
ledge and instigated . . . accompanied by joy and dis¬ 
connected with knowledge . . . accompanied by joy, dis¬ 
connected with knowledge and instigated . . . accompanied 
by indifference and associated with knowledge . . . accompanied 
by indifference, associated with knowledge and instigated . . . 
accompanied by indifference and disconnected with knowledge 
. . . accompanied by indifference, disconnected with knowledge 
and instigated.”1 And five results of the realm of form arc 
conditioned by preparations for merit of the realm of form, 
as it is said: “ When, as the result of just this good karma having 
been wrought, having been stored up, in connection with the 
realm of form, [546] he, aloof from sensuous desires, enters into 
i DhammasoAganl, §§ 431, 443, 455, 469, 484, 498- 

--- PAGE 160 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 653 
and abides in the First Jhana ... the Fifth Jhana”1 Thus 
twenty-one kinds of consciousness are conditioned by the pre¬ 
parations for merit. Seven kinds of consciousness are condi¬ 
tioned by the preparations for demerit, namely, five beginning 
with eye-consciousness which are immoral results, one element 
of mind, one element of mind-consciousness as it is said. 
When, as the result of bad karma having been wrought, having 
been stored up, eye-consciousness has arisen . . . ear-nose- 
tongue-body-consciousness ... on element of mind ... on 
element of mind-consciousness has arisen.”2 And four results 
of the formless are conditioned by preparations for stationari- 
ness. Thus consciousness is of four kinds. As it has been 
said: “ When, as the result of just this good karma having been 
wrought, having been stored up in connexion with the realm of 
the formless, he, by passing wholly beyond all consciousness of 
form, . . . enters into and abides in that rapt meditation which 
-is accompanied by the perception of a sphere of unbounded 
space . . . which is accompanied by the sphere of infinite con¬ 
sciousness ... by the sphere of nothingness ... by the sphere 
where there is neither perception nor non-perception . . . even 
the Fourth Jhana, to gain which all sense of ease and of ill 
has been put away”* Thus knowing that consciousness is 
conditioned by activities, one should know its procedure thuB. 
All this proceeds in two ways as procedure and rebirth. 
Of these, these thirteen, namely, two classes of fivefold 
consciousness, two mind-elements, unconditioned mind- 
consciousness-element accompanied by joy, proceed in the 
procedure of a world4 where are five constituents. The 
remaining nineteen proceed in procedure proper to three worlds 
of becoming and in rebirth. How 1 The five moral results 
beginning with eye-consciousness proceed with a result either 
moral or the reverse, effecting the functions of seeing, hearing, 
smelling, tasting, touching, through the sensory organisms 
of eye and so on, with reference to the visible object and so on, 
desirable or moderately desirable, which has come into the 
focus of the eye and so on, of him who was born by means 
1 Ibid., § 499. 
* Ibid., § 501-4. 
* Ibid., §§ 556, 562, 564. 
4 Bhava (or phase of becoming). 

--- PAGE 161 ---
654 The Path of Purity 
of a moral or immoral result according to the maturity reached 
by the controlling faculty involved. And the same with 
the five immoral results, with just this difference, that the 
object is undesirable or moderately undesirable. And these 
ten are fixed as to door, object, physical basis, origin and as to 
function. Then, immediately after the moral results, begin¬ 
ning with eye-consciousness, the moral resultant mind-element 
[547] proceeds effecting the function of receiving1 through the 
heart-basis with reference to the object of those conscious¬ 
nesses. And the same with the immoral resultant mind- 
element immediately after the immoral results. And these two 
elements of mind are not fixed as to door and object, but are 
fixed as to physical basis, origin and function. It is said in 
the Majjhima Commentary that immediately after the moral 
resultant mind-element, the unconditioned mind-consciousness- 
element accompanied by joy proceeds once or twice by way of 
registration in the object seized by apperception, effecting the 
function of examining through the heart basis with reference to 
the object of that mind-element, after cutting off the process 
of life-continuum at the conclusion of apperception associated 
with greed generally in the case of beings of the worlds of sense 
in a strong object at the six doors. According to the Abhi- 
clhamma Commentary, however, two turns of consciousness 
in registration are postulated. And this consciousness gets 
two names: registration and supplementary life-continuum. 
It is not fixed as to door and object, but it is fixed as to 
physical basis, not fixed as to origin and function. Thus 
thirteen (classes of consciousness) proceed in the procedure 
where are five constituents of being. 
Of the remaining nineteen none of them can be said not 
to proceed in rebirth suitable to itself. But in procedure the 
two unconditioned mind-consciousness-elements, moral and 
immoral in result, fixed as to physical basis, not fixed as to 
door, object, origin and function, proceed effecting four 
functions, namely: the function of examining immediately 
after the moral and immoral resultant mind-consciousness- 
1 Read aampaticcha nabiocam. 

--- PAGE 162 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 655 
elements at the five doors; the function of registration at the 
six doors in the manner already mentioned; the function of 
life-continuum in the absence of a rising consciousness which 
cuts off the life-continuum above the birth given by them¬ 
selves ; and the function of passing away in the end. Eight 
classes of conditioned consciousness of the realm of sense, 
fixed as to physical basis, not fixed as to door, object, origin, 
function, proceed effecting three functions, namely: the 
function of registration at the six doors as mentioned above; 
the function of life-continuum in the absence of a rising 
consciousness which cuts off the life-continuum above the 
rebirth given by themselves; and the function of passing away 
in the end. Five of the realm of form and four of the realm 
of the formless proceed effecting the two functions namely: 
the function of life-continuum in the absence of a rising con¬ 
sciousness cutting off the life-continuum above the rebirth 
given by themselves and the function of passing away in 
the end. Of these, those of the realm of form are fixed as to 
physical basis and object, not fixed as to origin and function; 
the others are fixed as to physical basis and object and not 
fixed as to origin and function. Thus proceeds in procedure 
consciousness of thirty-two kinds conditioned by activities. 
And there in procedure the various activities are causes of 
it by way of karma and sufficing condition. [546] What has 
just been said above as “ Of the remaining nineteen none of 
them can be said not to proceed in rebirth suitable to itself ” 
has been said too briefly and is difficult to understand. In 
order to show it in detail these questions are asked: How 
many rebirths1 are there ? How many are the rebirth-con¬ 
sciousnesses ? Where and by which consciousness does rebirth 
take place ? What is the object in rebirth ? 
Together with rebirth as unconscious beings, there are 
twenty (modes of) rebirths. There are nineteen rebirth- 
conBciousnesses which already have been described. Of 
these, by the unconditioned mind-consciousness-element of 
immoral result, rebirth is in the states of woe. By the moral 
1 Or re-incarnations, re-uniona: palisandhi. 

--- PAGE 163 ---
656 The Path of Purity 
result, rebirth takes place of persons who arc born blind, 
bom deaf, born mad, deaf and dumb and sexless and so on, 
in the world of men. By the eight conditioned results of the 
Tealm of sense rebirth is of persons possessing merit among 
devas and men. By the five results pertaining to the realm 
of form, rebirth is in the Brahma world of form. By the four 
results pertaining to the realm of the formless, rebirth is in 
the formless world. And wherever rebirth takes place by 
whichever consciousness, the rebirth is said to be in conformity1 
with the consciousness. Briefly there are three objects of 
rebirth: past, present, and undeclared. Unconscious rebirth 
has no object. Of these, the past is the object of rebirths in 
the spheres of infinite consciousness and of neither perception 
nor non-perception; the past or present is the object of the ten 
pertaining to the realm of sense. The object of the rest is 
undeclared. Thus because rebirth proceeding as to three 
objects proceeds immediately after the decease-consciousness 
of a past or undeclared object, and there is n,o decease-con¬ 
sciousness with a present object, therefore the mode of the 
proceeding by way of a happy or evil course of the rebirth 
of one or other of the three objects immediately after the 
decease of one or other of the two objects is to be understood. 
For instance, from the statement that at the time of his death 
evil deeds hang over an evil man who has stood in the happy 
course of the realm of sense, and so on, all his accumulated 
evil deeds or their sign come into the avenue of the mind-door 
as he is lying on this death-couch. Immediately after the 
process of apperception ending in registration arisen with 
reference to such a sign of his deeds, arises the decease- 
consciousness with the object of life-continuum as its object. 
On its cessation there arises with reference to that very deed 
or its sign which has appeared the rebirth consciousness which 
is included among the evil courses, and is bent by the strength 
of the vices not yet cut off. [549] This is rebirth with a past 
object immediately after decease with a past object. 
To another person at the time of death there comes into 
1 Read anurQpd-patisandhi for arup&°. 

--- PAGE 164 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 657 
the avenue of the mind-door by means of the karma described 
above, the sign of the evil course such as the colour of fire- 
flames in places like the hells. Therefore, on the cessation 
of the life-continuum after having arisen twice, three conscious 
processes arise, namely, one adverting with reference to that 
object, five apperceptions and two registrations owing to the 
slowness of speed due to the proximity of death. Then arises 
one death-consciousness with the object of the life-continuum 
as its object. In so far are the past eleven conscious moments. 
Then to him arises the rebirth consciousness in that very 
object lasting for the remaining five conscious moments. This 
is the rebirth with a present object immediately after the 
decease with a past object. 
To another person at the time of death there comes into 
focus at one or other of the five doors an inferior1 object which 
is the condition of lust and so on. When in due course the 
process ending with the deciding consciousness has arisen to 
him, there arise five apperceptions and two registrations 
owing to the slowness of speed due to the proximity of death. 
Then arises one decease-consciousness with the object of the 
life-continuum as its object. In so far are the past fifteen 
conscious moments, namely: two life-continuum, adverting, 
discerning, receiving, examining, deciding, five apperceptions, 
two registrations, one decease-consciousness. Then arises 
rebirth consciousness in that very object lasting for the 
remaining one conscious-moment. This also is the rebirth 
with a present object immediately after the decease with a 
past object. Such is the mode of procedure of rebirth in an 
unhappy course with a past or present object immediately 
after the decease in a happy course with a past object. 
To one who stands on the unhappy course but has stored up 
faultless deeds, the faultless deeds or their sign appear at the 
mind-door as said above. And everything should be under¬ 
stood as said above, only substituting bright features for the 
dark features.2 Such is the mode of procedure of rebirth in 
x I.e. undesirable. 
8 Instead of saying that the rebirth-conaciousnesB is included in the • 
evil course, read that it is included in the happy course. And instead 

--- PAGE 165 ---
658 The Path of Purity 
a happy course with a past or present object immediately 
after the decease in an unhappy course with a past object. 
In the case of one who stands on the happy course and has 
stored up faultless deeds, the faultless deeds so stored up or 
their sign appear at the mind-door in accordance with the 
expression that they hang over him at the time of death. 
This applies [550] to the faultless deeds of the realm of sense 
which have been stored up. In the case of him who has stored 
up sublime deeds, only the sign of the deeds comes into focus. 
Immediately after the bare apperceptional process which has 
arisen with reference to that sign and which ends with regis¬ 
tration, there arises decease-consciousness making its object 
the field of the life-continuum. When that ceases, there arises, 
with reference to the deeds or the sign of the deeds which have 
come into focus, rebirth-consciousness which is included in the 
happy course and which is bent by the strength of the corrup¬ 
tions1 not yet cut off. This is the rebirth with a past or 
undeclared object immediately after decease with a past 
object. 
To another person at the time of death there appears at the 
mind-door, by means of faultless deeds of the realm of sensef 
the sign of the happy course in the form of the rank in the 
conceiving mother in the world of men. or of the status of the 
garden, mansion, wish-yielding tree and so on in the world of 
devas. Immediately after the decease-consciousness the 
rebirth-consciousness arises to him in the order as shown in the 
sign of the unhappy course. This is the rebirth with a present 
object immediately after the decease with a past object. 
To another person at the time of death relatives present at 
the five doors a visible object by means of garlands of flowers, 
streamers and so on, saying: “ This, dear one, is offered as an 
offering to the Buddha for thy benefit. Keep your mind 
well-disposedor an object of sound by means of preaching on 
of the sign of the evil course such as the fire flame3 in places like the 
hells, read the sign of the happy course, such as the status of the garden 
and the wish-yielding tree of the devas, or as the rank in the conceiving 
mother in the world of men. See immediately below. 
1 Kiltsd. 

--- PAGE 166 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Under standing 659 
the Law, sacred music and so on: or an object of smell by 
means of incense, perfumes, flavours and so on; or an object 
of taste by means of honey, molasses and so on, saying: “ Taste 
this, dear one. It is an offering made for thy benefitor an 
object of touch by means of a piece of fine cloth1 from China or 
Somara and so on, saying: “ Feel this, dear one, it is an offering 
made for thy benefit.” Five apperceptions and two regis¬ 
trations arise to him owing to the slowness of speed due to the 
proximity of death at the conclusion of the deciding conscious¬ 
ness arisen in due order as to that object, visible and so on, 
which had come into focus. Then arises one decease-con¬ 
sciousness with the field of the life-continuum as its object. 
At the conclusion of that, the rebirth-consciousness arises in 
that very object lasting for one conscious moment. This 
also is the rebirth with a present object immediately after the 
decease with a past object. 
In the case of one who stands in the happy course and who 
has acquired the sublime state by virtue of the Jhana of the 
earth-device and so on, there comes into focus at the mind-door 
at the time of his death one or other from among the moral 
deeds, the sign of the deeds, the sign of the course pertaining 
to the realm of sense, or the earth device and so on as the sign, 
or the sublime consciousness. [551] Or there appears the 
exalted object which is the condition of the production of 
merit at the door of either the eye or the ear. Five apper¬ 
ceptions arise to him owing to the slowness of speed due to 
the proximity of death at the conclusion of the deciding' 
consciousness arisen in due order. There is no registration 
to those on the sublime course. Therefore, immediately after 
the apperception one decease-consciousness arises with the 
field of the life-continuum as its object. At its conclusion 
there arises the rebirth-consciousness having as object one or 
other of the objects which have arisen and which is included 
in one or other of the sublime happy courses of the realm of 
sense. This is the rebirth with an object, either past, present, 
or undeclared immediately after the decease in the happy 
1 Read °somdrapaUudi°. 

--- PAGE 167 ---
660 The Path of Purity 
course with an undeclared object. In this order should be 
understood rebirth immediately after decease of the formless. 
Such is the mode of procedure of rebirth with a past, undeclared 
or present object immediately after decease in a happy course 
with a past or undeclared object.. 
In the case of one who stands in an unhappy course and has 
done evil deeds, the deed, the sign of the deed or the sign of 
the course appears at the mind-door as said above, or the 
object which is the condition of the production of demerit 
appears at the five doors. Then to him in due course at the 
conclusion of decease-consciousness there appears rebirth- 
consciousness which is included in the unhappy course and 
which has for object one or other of those objects. Such is 
the mode of procedure of rebirth with a past or present object 
immediately after decease in an unhappy course with a past 
object. 
In so far has been shown the procedure by way of rebirth 
of the nineteen kinds of consciousness. And all this con¬ 
sciousness thus: 
Proceeding in rebirth is of two kinds 
Because of karma; two and more in kind 
When mixed with matter and with other things. 
This resultant consciousness of nineteen kinds in proceeding 
in rebirth is, namely, twofold because of karma. And the 
respective generative karma is the cause of it by way of karma 
lasting various moments and by way of the sufficing condition. 
And this has been said: “ Moral-immoral karma is the cause 
of the result by the sufficing condition”1 By this should also 
be understood the twofold and more divisions due to its mixed 
kinds. For instance: Although it proceeds single by way of 
rebirth, it is [552] twofold as being mixed and unmixed with 
matter; threefold by the division of the worlds of sense, of 
form, of the formless; fourfold by way of birth from an egg, 
from a womb, from moisture and apparitional; fivefold by way 
of the courses (or destinies); sevenfold by way of the conscious 
1 Of. Tikapatfh&na, i, p. 5. 

--- PAGE 168 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 661 
durations; eightfold by way of the sentient worlds. Of 
these, 
The mixed is twofold as to natural state, 
And twofold is the one with natural state. 
Together with the very first mentioned, 
There are at least the two or three decads. 
“ The mixed is twofold as to natural state,” means, that 
rebirth consciousness which, leaving aside the natural state 
of non-matter, arises mixed with matter is of two kinds; 
namely, with or without natural state as it arises without the 
natural state of femininity and masculinity in the existence of 
form, and with natural state, excepting rebirth as eunuch 
in the existence of sense. 
“ And twofold is the one with natural state,” means, of 
these two that which is with natural state is of two kinds, as it 
arises with one or other of the natural states of man or woman. 
“ Together with the very first mentioned, 
There are at least the two or three decads ”:— 
namely, there is that rebirth-consciousness mixed with matter, 
the first in the pair, mixed and unmixed. Together with it 
at least two or three decads arise by way of the decad of 
physical basis and body, and of the decad of physical basis 
and natural state. Matter cannot be less than that. And 
this matter with such a minimum limitation arises under the 
name “ kalala embryo,” like the cream of butter drawn with 
the single thread of the hair of the Himalayan goat1 from 
among the two places of birth called the egg and the womb. 
Here should be understood what places of birth are possible 
by way of courses (or destinies). Among them 
The three first birth places are not in hell, 
Nor with the devas, saving those of earth. 
But all the four are with the courses three.2 
1 Jdti-unnd is explained by pika as the hair of a kid a day old, of a 
Himalayan goat of good breed, of a kid extracted by cutting open 
the mother. 
* I.e. men, ghosts, and lower animals. 

--- PAGE 169 ---
662 The Path of Purity 
By the phrase “ Nor with the devas ” it is to be understood 
that the fiist three places of birth aie not to be found among 
the Betas of consuming thirst, for these are apparitional in 
birth. All the four places of birth are found among the re¬ 
maining three destinies of lower animals. Peta-world, and men, 
and among the devas of earth left out above. Among them, 
Nine forms and thirty in the realm of four; 
In apparitional and moisture births 
There are seventy at most,1 thirty at least. 
Among the Brahmas in the realm of form, who are appari¬ 
tional in birth [553], thirty material forms {rupa) and nine arise 
together with rebirth-consciousness by way of four groups, 
namely the decads of the eye, the ear and physical basis and 
the ennead of life. But excepting the Brahmas of the realm 
of form, there are, in the other apparitional and moisture 
births, at the most seventy material forms by way of the 
decads of the eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, physical basis, and 
natural state. These are constant among the devas. 
Of these, colour, smell, taste, nutritive essence, the four 
elements, sentient eye, life:—this collection of matter, to the 
extent of ten material qualities, is known as the cye-decad. 
So should the remainder be understood. But at least thirty 
material qualities by way of the decads of the tongue, body, 
physical basis, arise in a sexless person born blind, deaf, 
without the sense of taste. And between the highest and 
the lowest numbers, suitable reckonings should be made. 
Having known this, again 
By aggregates, condition, feeling, course, 
Applied and sustained thinking, object, zest, 
One ought to know the difference between 
Divided, undivided four rebirths. 
There is the rebirth twofold, as mixed and unmixed, and 
there is the decease immediately preceding it. The meaning 
is, that the difference between their being divided and un¬ 
divided, through the aggregates and so on, should be known. 
1 Read eaUaii ukkairisalc 'tha. 

--- PAGE 170 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 663 
How ? Sometimes rebirth with four aggregates is undivided 
as to the object immediately after decease of the formless 
with four aggregates. Sometimes after an object, external 
and not sublime, it has an object sublime and internal.1 Such 
is the way in the formless planes. And sometimes rebirth is im¬ 
mediately after decease from the formless with four aggregates 
into the realm of sense with five aggregates. Sometimes im¬ 
mediately after decease from the realm of sense, or from the 
realm of form with five aggregates rebirth is of the formless with 
four aggregates. But so (immediately) after decease with a past 
object, rebirth is with a present object. After decease in some 
happy courses, rebirth is in some unhappy courses. After 
unconditioned decease, rebirth is conditioned. After decease 
with two conditions, rebirth is with three conditions. After 
decease accompanied by indifference, rebirth is accompanied 
by joy. After decease without zest, rebirth is with zest. After 
decease without applied thinking, rebirth is with applied 
thinking. After decease without sustained thinking, rebirth 
is with sustained thinking. After decease without applied 
and sustained thinking, rebirth is with applied and sustained 
thinking. And so construction should fittingly be made by 
reversion of the terms (aggregates and the rest). 
Merely a state by cause-relations served, 
To some other existence forth it goes. 
It has had no transition from the past, 
Nor there did it become without a cause. 
It is not a sentient being, nor the soul, but this which, 
having got its cause-relations and arising as a mere state of 
form or formless, is said to approach some other existence. 
[554] And there is no passage of it from a past existence to 
this, nor does it appear here without a cause there. 
We shall make this evident by the evident order of human 
decease and rebirth. For when the body of a man who has 
come nigh unto death, either in the course of nature, or through 
effort, and who cannot bear the touch of unbearable weapons2 
which cut off the joints and ligaments of all limbs, causing pain 
1 Read °nd. s Read satthanam. 

--- PAGE 171 ---
664 The Path of Purity 
ending in death, wilts up in due course like a discarded green 
palm-leaf, when the controlling faculties such as the eye 
become weakened1 and the controlling faculties of the body, of 
thought, of life, are established on just the heart-basis, the 
consciousness, which is dependent at that moment on the 
remaining heart-basis, proceeds with reference to the object 
which, among the grave, repeated, proximate and former 
karmas, is the karma called the activities, served by the re¬ 
maining cause (of ignorance and so on), or which is called 
the sign of karma, the sign of the course manifested by that 
karma. Craving bends the consciousness thus proceeding on 
to the object, which has the disadvantage of being covered 
up by ignorance, owing to craving and ignorance not having 
been put away; the co-existent activities throw it into the 
object. Being bent by craving and thrown by the activities 
by way of continuity, it abandons the former basis like a man 
who crosses a conduit by hanging to a rope tied to a tree on 
the hither bank, and proceeds by the causes such as the object 
and so on, reaching, or not reaching the latter basis set up 
by karma. And here the preceding consciousness is called 
^ decease because it passes away; the latter consciousness is 
called rebirth because it is connected with the beginning of 
1 
another existence. But the consciousness does not arrive 
here from a previous existence; nor does it appear from thence 
without a condition such as karma, activities, the bending2 on 
to the object and so on. 
The echo may be (taken) and such similes. 
Because the series is continuous, 
There’s no identity nor otherness. 
y (Thus:—matter of this consciousness not coming over 
from a pfeyfijjto wtktence, and its arising from causes inoluded 
in a past e dstemto, such things as the echo, a lamp, the im¬ 
pression of a seal, the Election of an image are illustrations. 
Just as the echo, & kThpy seal, a shadow are conditioned by 
1 Sotuli,iy,{idtCXp|a.iEisntrtt<i(iAej«. 
* Read aw one compound. 

--- PAGE 172 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 665 
Bound and so on, and do not move elsewhere, so it is with 
consciousness. As regards— 
“ Because the series is continuous. 
There’s no identity nor otherness ”— 
should there really be identity (or oneness) in the continuity j 
of the series, there would be no formation of curds from milk.' 
And should there really be. otherness there would be no curds 
which are due to milk. It is the same with all causes and 
effects. Else there would be an end to all worldly usage, 
and that would not be desirable. Therefore here the view i 
of neither oneness nor otherness should be upheld. 
[555] Herein objection might arise:—“ Because, the absence 
of passage from the past to the present being evident, those 
aggregates of this human personality have ceased, and the 
karma which is the cause of the fruit does not pass on to that i 
fruit, can any other than the doer get the fruit I1 And can * 
that fruit come from some other cause ? In the absence of one 
who enjoys, to whom does the fruit go ? The present order 
is therefore not satisfactory.” This is the reply:— 
The fruit that comes in continuity 
Is not of any other, nor is it 
From any other (cause.) This purport is 
Effected by preparing (growth) of seeds. 
A fruit arising in a certain continuity does not belong to 
“any other, nor is it from any other cause,” because of the 
inhibition of a decided oneness or otherness. And “this 
purport is effected by preparing (growth) of seeds ”:—When 
preparations for (the growth of) mango seeds and so on have 
been made, the particular fruit, which arises in time from the- 
conditions obtained in the continuity of that seed, is not the 
fruit of other seeds, nor is it due to the preparations of other 
seeds. Neither do the seeds nor the preparations reach the 
place of the fruit. Thus should the fulfilment (of this simile) 
be understood. 
1 Mra. Rhys Davids writes: raised in Majjhima iii, 19; Samyutta Lii. 
103. 
43 

--- PAGE 173 ---
666 The Path of Purity 
The meaning is to be understood also by the result that is 
ultimately given to the graduates in arts and sciences and 
medicine studied by them when young. 
As regards the question: “ In the absence of one who enjoys, 
to whom does the fruit go ?” 
The saying: “ he enjoys ” comes into use, 
Because the fructification is made. 
Even so a tree is said to fructify, 
Because of the appearance of the fruit. 
For just as owing to the appearance of the fruit of a tree 
which is only a part of the things called trees, the tree is said to 
give fruit or has given fruit, so by the appearance of the fruit 
of case and ill, called experience, which is only a part of the 
aggregates known as the devas and men, a deva or man is 
said to experience ease or ill. Hence there is no need for 
any other person who enjoys. 
But the objector might say: “ If this be so are the existing 
activities causes of the fruit or the non-existing ones ? If 
the existing activities are the cause, then the result should 
be at the moment of their proceeding. If the non-existing 
activities are the cause, then they would always be bearing 
fruit before and after that moment.” He should be answered 
thus: 
Through commission root-causes they become, 
But they do not carry the fruit always. 
Trust-money and such other similes 
Should here in this respect be understood. 
For the activities are causes through commission of deeds, 
not because they are existent, or non-existent. As it is said: 
[556] “ As a result of good karma having been wrought, having 
been stored up in connexion with the sensuous realm, eye- 
consciousness arisesP1 The activities are fittingly the causes 
of the results, but owing to the ripening of the result they do 
not again bear fruit. In order to make this clear, the illus¬ 
tration of trust-money and so on should be understood. For 
1 Dhammasangam, § 431. 

--- PAGE 174 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 667 
in the world a man receives in trust the management of a 
business. He either buys goods or invests the money. The 
actual carrying on of the business is the cause of the fulfilling 
of the trust, not whether the business exists or does not exist. 
But the trust does not constitute a permanent cause of the 
business, once it has been transacted. Why ? Because of 
the trust having been discharged. So also the activities are 
causes of their own results. But they do not bear fruit after 
they have fittingly done so. 
So far has been shown the proceeding through the activities 
as causes of rebirth-consciousness happening as twofold by 
way of mixed and unmixed. 
Now in order to remove confusion as regards all these thirty- 
two classes of resultant consciousness, 
By virtue of procedure and rebirth 
In life and so on, these activities 
Are to be known as causes such of those. 
Herein, the three existences, four places of birth, five 
courses, seven stations of consciousness, nine sentient abodes 
are called “becomings (bfiavd) and so on.” The meaning is, 
that these activities should be known as causes of those 
classes of resultant consciousness at rebirth and in (vital) 
procedure and so on. 
Of these as regards preparations for merit, the preparation 
for merit classified as the eight volitions of the realm of sense 
is generally a twofold cause, by way of karma lasting various 
moments, and by way of sufficing condition to nine classes of 
resultant consciousness at rebirth in a world of sense. And 
the preparation for merit classified as the five moral volitions 
of the world of form is a twofold cause of five classes of con¬ 
sciousness at rebirth in the world of form. The preparation 
for merit of the world of sense, mentioned above, is a twofold 
cause in the manner, mentioned above, at procedure, not 
rebirth, of seven classes of limited resultant consciousness, 
without the unconditioned mind-consciousness-element, asso¬ 
ciated with indifference in a happy course in the world of sense. 
And the same is such a cause at procedure, not rebirth of five 

--- PAGE 175 ---
668 The Path of Purity 
classes of resultant consciousness in the world of form. It 
is such a cause [557], in procedure, not at rebirth, of eight 
classes of limited resultant consciousness in an unhappy 
world of sense. 
And it is a cause (of such consciousness) on meeting with a 
desirable object on such occasions as when Mahamoggallana 
the Elder makes his round of the hells.1 And a desirable 
object is obtainable among animals and Petas of great power. 
The said preparation for merit is such a cause, in procedure 
and at rebirth, of sixteen classes of moral resultant conscious¬ 
ness in a happy world of sense. But generally speaking 
the preparation for merit is such a cause in procedure and at 
rebirth, of ten classes of resultant consciousness in the world 
of form. 
Preparation for demerit,2 which is classified as the twelve 
immoral volitions, is such a cause of one consciousness in an 
unhappy world of sense at rebirth, not in procedure; of six 
classes of consciousness in procedure, not at rebirth: and of 
seven classes of immoral resultant consciousness in procedure 
and at rebirth; and of the same seven in a happy world of 
sense in procedure, not at rebirth; of four classes of resultant 
consciousness in the world of form in procedure, not at rebirth. 
And it is a cause in the world of sense by way of seeing unde¬ 
sirable forms and hearing undesirable sounds. But in the 
Brahma world there is no such thing as undesirable forms 
and so on, nor is there in the deva-world of the world of sense. 
Preparation for stationariness is such a cause in procedure 
and at rebirth of four classes of resultant consciousness in the 
world of the formless. 
Thus by way of rebirth and procedure in the worlds these 
activities should be understood to be such and such causes to 
such and such classes of consciousness. And the same with 
the places of birth and so forth. 
. This, herein, is the substance of the explanation beginning 
from the first. Because among these activities the preparation 
for merit, after giving rebirth, produces all its result in two 
1 Cf. Dhatnmapada A^hakatha iii, 69. 1 Read apart0. 

--- PAGE 176 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 669 
worlds; and likewise in the four matrices such as the egg; the 
two courses namely, of devas and .men; the four durations of 
consciousness, namely, different in body and in perception, 
different in body same in perception, same in body different 
in perception, same in body same in perception; and in the 
four sentient abodes, since in the perception!ess sentient abode 
the preparation is only of the material form, therefore it is 
as mentioned above, a cause, at rebirth or in procedure as the 
case may be, of twenty-one classes of resultant consciousness 
in these two worlds, fouT matrices, two courses, four durations 
of consciousness and four sentient abodes. [558] Because 
the preparation for demerit yields its result by way of rebirth 
in one world of sense, four matrices, the remaining three 
courses, one duration of consciousness called different in body 
same in perception, and such a sentient abode, therefore it is 
the cause, as said above, at rebirth and in procedure of seven 
classes of resultant consciousness in one world, four matrices, 
three courses, one station of consciousness and one sentient 
abode. Since the preparation for stationariness yields its 
result by way of rebirth in one world of the formless, one 
matrix, the apparitional, one course of the devas, three 
conscious durations beginning with the sphere of the infinity 
of space, four sentient abodes beginning with the same, 
therefore, as said above, it is the cause, at rebirth and in proce¬ 
dure, of four classes of consciousness in one world, one matrix, 
one course, three conscious durations, four sentient abodes. 
^us * By virtue of procedure and rebirth 
In life and so on, these activities 
Are to be known as causes such of those. 
This is the substance of the discourse on the clause “ Con¬ 
ditioned by activities consciousness comes to pass.” 
In the clause: “ Conditioned by consciousness, name and 
form comes to pass ”: 
Decision should be known by classifying 
Of name and form, by causal mode and groups, 
Procedure in existence and so forth. 

--- PAGE 177 ---
670 The Path of Purity 
As regards “ By classifying of name and form ”—“ name ” 
refers to the three aggregates beginning with feeling because 
they bend (namanato) towards the object. By “ form ” are 
understood the four Primaries, and matter derived therefrom. 
The classification of name and form has been stated in the 
Exposition of the Aggregates.1 Thus first of all, decision 
should here be known by the classifying of name and form. 
“ Procedure in existence and so forth”—“ name ” proceeds 
in all worlds, matrices, courses, conscious durations and 
sentient abodes, excepting one sentient abode.8 Matter 
proceeds in two worlds, in four matrices, in five courses, in 
the first four conscious durations, in five sentient abodes. 
And when name-and-form proceeds thus, because, [559] at 
the moment of the conception of beings in the womb which 
are without specific nature, and of those born from eggs, two 
heads in the continuity from the material and three non¬ 
material aggregates are manifested by way of the decads 
of the physical basis and the bodily frame, therefore in detail 
twenty-three states should be understood as name and form 
conditioned by consciousness, namely twenty from matter 
and three aggregates which are non-material. 
Now if what has not been mentioned is taken into account, 
fourteen (states) are obtained by leaving out nine material 
states from one head of continuity; and thirty-three states are 
obtained by adding the nature-decad of those endowed with 
nature. And if what has not been mentioned from among 
these is taken into account, fifteen states are obtained by 
leaving out eighteen material states from the two heads of 
continuity. And because, at the moment of conception of 
the Brahmas among apparitional beings, four heads of con¬ 
tinuity from matter and three non-material aggregates are 
manifested by way of the decads of the eyes’ and ears’ physical 
basis and the ennead of life-controlling faculty, therefore in 
detail forty-two states should be understood as “ name and 
form conditioned by consciousness,” namely, thirty-nine states 
from matter and three immaterial aggregates. 
Taking into account what lias not been mentioned, fifteen 
1 Above, Chap. XIV. * I.e. the perception-less sentient abode. 

--- PAGE 178 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 671 
states are obtained by leaving out twenty-seven states from 
three heads of continuity. In the world of sense, however, be¬ 
cause at the moment of conception of the remaining beings, 
the apparitional and the moisture-bom who have sense-organs 
with complete intrinsic nature, seven heads of continuity from 
matter and three immaterial aggregates are manifested, there¬ 
fore in detail these seventy-three states should be understood 
as “ name and form conditioned by consciousness,” namely, 
seventy states from matter and three immaterial aggregates. 
Taking into account what has not been mentioned, nineteen 
states are obtained by leaving out fifty-fouT from the 
sextet1 of heads of the continuity of matter: this at the 
most; but at the least the reckoning of name and form 
in brief and in detail, as conditioned by consciousness at 
conception, is to be understood by subtracting those heads of 
the continuity of matter in which they are deficient. But of 
formless beings the three non-material aggregates, and of 
perceptionless beings the ennead of life-controlling faculty 
from form [are to be reckoned as name and form.] Such in 
the first place is the way in rebirth. 
In procedure at the static moment of rebirth-consciousness, 
everywhere at the place of the procedure of matter there are 
manifested the bare octad set up by the caloric order arising 
together with the rebirth-consciousness. But the rebirth- 
consciousness does not set up matter, for it is unable to do so 
owing to weakness from the weakness of the physical basis, 
just as a man fallen from a precipice cannot give help to 
another man. The bare octad set up by consciousness [560] 
appears since2 the beginning of the life-continuum above the 
rebirth-consciousness. 
At the time of the appearance of sound the ennead of sound 
appears by means of the caloric order and consciousness pro¬ 
ceeding beyond the moment of rebirth. But as regards those 
beings of the womb who sustain life by material food, from the 
statement: 
Whatever food and drink his mother takes, 
Sustains the child that is within the womb, 
* Read pabkuii 1 Read °8i8achalckalo. 

--- PAGE 179 ---
672 The Path of Purity 
the bare octad produced by sustenance appears in the body 
diffused with the food taken by the mother, and in the case of 
those of apparitional birth, it appears at the time when first 
of all they swallow the saliva in their own mouths. Thus 
there are twenty-six kinds by way of the bare octad produced 
by sustenance and of the two enneads, at the most, produced 
by caloric order and consciousness: and there are seventy 
kinds produced by karma stated previously as arising three 
times in each conscious moment. These ninety-six kinds of 
matter, together with the three immaterial aggregates, make 
altogether ninety-nine states. Because sound is inconstant, 
making its appearance at any time, therefore its two kinds 
being left out, the ninety-seven states should fittingly be 
understood in the case of all beings as “ name and form 
conditioned by consciousness.” For in beings both when 
asleep and when negligent, when eating and drinking, these 
ninety-seven states proceed day and night as conditioned by 
consciousness. We shall explain later their state as so 
conditioned. 
That which is karma-bom matter, though it is established 
in the existences, places of birth, courses, durations, sentient 
abodes, cannot stand without the support of.matter set up 
by three things,1 nor can the latter stand without its support. 
Like bundles of reeds fixed together in the four directions 
though smitten by wind, like a collection of broken boats2 
which have found shelter somewhere in the great ocean, though 
smitten by the fury of the waves, these states of matter, each 
giving support to the other do not fall down but stand together 
for one year, two years—even a hundred years so long as the 
term of life of the beings, or the merit acquired by them lasts. 
Thus is decision to be understood by way of “ procedure in 
existence and so forth.” 
“By groups”—what name conditioned by consciousness 
there is at procedure and rebirth in the formless and at pro¬ 
cedure in existence of the five constituents; and what matter 
conditioned by consciousness there is everywhere among the 
1 I.e. caloric order, consciouaneaa, material food. 
* Vakanika, not in the P.T.S. Dictionary. 

--- PAGE 180 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 673 
perceptionless and at procedure in existence of the five con¬ 
stituents; and what name and form [561] conditioned by 
consciousness there is everywhere in existence of the five 
constituents, all that name and form and name-and-form, 
being grouped together as namc-and-form by leaving out 
those terms which correspond to its members1 should be 
understood as “ name-and-form conditioned by consciousness.” 
Is this phrase suitable for the perceptionless beings, who 
have no consciousness ? It is not unsuitable. For 
That consciousness which is the cause, 
Of name and form twofold, is deemed 
As with result and eke without; 
Hence what is said of it is fit. 
For that consciousness which is the cause of name and form 
is considered to be twofold os giving a result and not giving 
a result. And since this kind of matter is set up by karma 
among the perceptionless beings, it is conditioned by the 
consciousness of preparation proceeding in existence of the 
five constituents. And so is that matter which is set up by 
karma at the moment of consciousness, which is moral and so 
on at procedure in the five constituents. Hence is the above 
statement suitable. Thus is decision to be understood by 
way of groups also. 
As regards “ By causal mode ” 
Resultant consciousness ninefold condition is 
Of name and form with base material; 
Eightfold of matter that’s residual. 
Single of form wherein the consciousness 
Is a preparing; any other kind 
Of this and that the fit condition is. 
For at rebirth or at procedure there is name which is called 
the result. Of this name, whether it is mixed with matter or 
not, the resultant consciousness, connected with rebirth2 or 
any other kind, is the ninefold cause by way of co-existence, 
1 I.e. the three terms: name, and form, and name-and-form, have 
their counterparts, aa far as the letter goes, in the last term. 
* Read patisandhikam. 

--- PAGE 181 ---
674 The Path of Purity 
reciprocity, dependence, association, result, sustenance, con¬ 
trolling faculty, presence, non-absence. Of matter which is 
the heart-basis the cause is ninefold by way of co-existence, 
reciprocity, dependence, result, sustenance, controlling faculty, 
dissociation, presence, non-absence. Leaving out basic matter, 
of the remaining kinds of matter the cause is eightfold except¬ 
ing reciprocity from the nine causes. Consciousness of pre¬ 
paration is a single cause by way of sufficing condition by the 
suttantika method of matter of perceptionless beings or of 
karma-born matter in existence of the five constituents. All 
the remaining consciousness beginning from the first life- 
continuum is to be understood as cause befitting this and that 
name-and-form. When causal mode is shown in detail, the 
entire discourse of the Pafthana should be treated in detail. 
Hence we do not set about it here. 
But,—objection might arise—how can it be known that 
[562] name-and-form at rebirth is conditioned by con¬ 
sciousness ? 
By Sutta-evidence and by fitness. In the Suttas, that 
feelings and so on are conditioned by consciousness has been 
averred in many ways such as “ States which are consecutive to 
consciousness.”1 
As to fitness:— 
Effected Jtis by matter seen, and born of mind, 
That consciousness is of unseen matter the cause. 
For material things which arise in conformity to mind full 
of faith or without faith are “ seen.” And the unseen is 
inferred from the seen. Thus through visible mind-born 
matter here in this world consciousness should be known as 
the cause of invisible rebirth-matter. That matter which is 
set up by karma, just as matter which is set up by conscious¬ 
ness, is conditioned by consciousness is mentioned in the 
Patthana. Thus herein is decision to be known by causal modes. 
This is the detailed discourse on the clause “ Conditioned 
by consciousness, name-and-form [comes to pass].” 
1 Cf. Dhammasangaj}l, §§ 671, 772. 

--- PAGE 182 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 675 
In the clause “ Conditioned by name-and-form the sixfold 
sense conies to pass ”: 
Three aggregates are held to be the “ name ” 
And “ form *’ the essentials, basis physical. 
The one remaining (aggregate) of such 
And such cause condition is. 
Of the name and form which is the cause of the sixfold 
sense, name means the three aggregates beginning with feeling; 
form means the constant four essentials, six physical bases, 
life-controlling faculty which are included in one’s continuity. 
Thus are the essentials, physical bases and so on held to be 
(form). And the final term name-and-form in the series: name, 
form, and name-and-form is to be understood as the cause of 
the sixfold sense, which is the final tenn in the series: Sixth 
sense and sixfold sense. Why % Because in the formless world 
name only is the cause of the sixth sense, not of any other. 
And it has been said in the Vibhanga1 that the sixth sense 
is conditioned by name. 
But how—objection might arise—may it be known that 
name and form is the cause of the sixfold sense ? Because 
the latter exists in the existence of the former. For sense 
exists when this and that name and form exist, not otherwise. 
And its existence conditional on the existence2 of name-and- 
form will become clear in the causal mode. Therefore— 
[563] Whatsoever is cause of whatever 
At moments of procedure and rebirth, 
The wise should understand accordingly. 
The explanation is as follows:— 
For at formless procedure and rebirth 
Just name is cause sevenfold, sixfold, at least. 
How '? At rebirth name is cause at least sevenfold of the 
sixth sense by way of the causes of co-existence, reciprocity, 
dependence, association, result, presence, non-absence. Some 
sort of name is cause through condition, some through sus- 
1 Page 144. 
2 Tabbhdvabhdvitd. Cf. Compendium of Philosophy, p. 187, n. 4. 

--- PAGE 183 ---
676 The Path of Purity 
tenance. Thus the cause is also in other ways. In this way is 
the highest and the lowest number of causes to be understood. 
At procedure also resultant name is the cause in the way 
described." The other (non-resultant) is cause at least sixfold 
by way of causes excepting the result among those mentioned 
above. Here also some sort is cause through condition, some 
through sustenance. Thus the cause is also in other ways. 
In this way is the highest and the lowest number to be under¬ 
stood. jn Qthgj existence also name 
Is such a cause of sixth. It is a cause 
In six ways of the other five senses. 
For in another existence of the five constituents the re¬ 
sultant name becoming friendly with the heart-basis is at least 
a sevenfold cause of the sixth sense, the mind, as it has been 
said in the formless. Of the other five senses, that is, the eye 
and so on, it is a cause in bLx ways by way of co-existence, 
dependence, result, dissociation, presence, non-absence, after 
becoming friendly with the four great primaries. Here also 
some kind is cause through condition, some through sustenance. 
Thus the cause is also in other ways. In this way is the 
highest and the lowest number to be understood. 
So also at procedure the result 
Is cause of the result, the non-result 
Is sixfold cause of non-resultant sixth. 
At procedure also as at rebirth in existence of the five 
constituents the resultant name is at least sevenfold cause of 
the resultant sixth sense. And by leaving out the resultant 
cause therefrom the non-resultant is at least sixfold cause of 
the non-resultant sixth. The highest and the lowest number 
is to be understood as said above. 
Resultant is a fourfold cause therein 
Of the remaining five. And it’s the same 
With the description of the non-result. 
[564] For there at procedure (of the five-conBtituent ex¬ 
istence) the resultant name which depends on the physical 
basis of sensory organism of the eye and so on, or the other1 
1 I.e. which depends on the heart-basis. 

--- PAGE 184 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 677 
is a cause in four ways through post-existence, dissociation, 
presence, non-absence of the remaining five senses, that is, 
the eye and so on. The non-resultant has been described 
exactly like the resultant. Therefore the different kinds of 
name such as the moral should be understood as the fourfold 
cause of the five senses. Thus name should be understood 
according to whatever cause it is of whichever sense at 
rebirth or procedure. 
Herein matter in formless existence 
Is cause of not a single sense, whereas 
In existence of the five aggregates 
The heart-basis as matter is Bixfold cause 
Of sixth at birth. The primaries are cause 
In four ways of the five in general. 
For at rebirth physical basic matter is a cause in six ways of 
the sixth sense, the mind, through co-existence, reciprocity, 
dependence, dissociation, presence, non-absence. The four pri¬ 
maries are a fourfold cause generally at rebirth and procedure 
by way of whatever sense has arisen of the five senses, that is, 
the eye and so on through co-existence, dependence, presence, 
non-absence. 
To them threefold are life and sustenance 
In procedure. Sixfold are they to sixth, 
Of which the fivefold cause is heart-basis. 
At rebirth and procedure the life of matter is a cause of the 
five senses of the eye, etc., in three ways through presence, 
non-absence, controlling faculty. And sustenance is a cause 
in three ways through presence, non-absence, sustenance. As 
to the food-suffused body of those beings who live on food, 
it is a cause of procedure, not at rebirth. The five senses of 
the eye and so on are causes in six ways at procedure, not at 
rebirth, of the sixth sense of the mind, termed consciousness 
of eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, through the causes of de¬ 
pendence, pre-oxistence, controlling faculty, dissociation, 
presence, non-absence. Basic matter is a cause in five ways at 
procedure, not at rebirth, of the sense of mind, leaving out 

--- PAGE 185 ---
678 The Path of Purity 
the fivefold consciousness, through the causes of dependence, 
pre-existence, dissociation, presence, non-absence. Thus 
matter should be understood according to what cause it is of 
whichever sense at rebirth or at procedure. 
[565] What name-and-form is cause of whatever, 
So everywhere the wise should understand. 
For instance, at rebirth name-and-form, which is called the 
three aggregates, and basic matter, in a world of the five 
constituents, is a cause of the sixth sense by way of co-existence, 
reciprocity, dependence, result, association, dissociation, 
presence, non-absence and so on. This is only a digest. The 
detailed account has not been made since one could construe 
everything from the method shown. 
This is the detailed discourse on the clause: “ Conditioned 
by name-and-form the sixfold sense comes to pass.” 
As to the clause “conditioned by sixfold sense, contact 
comes to pass,” 
In brief eye-contact and so on make six, 
In detail thirty-two, like consciousness. 
Briefly, “ Conditioned by sixfold sense, contact comes to 
pass” means there are six contacts: namely the contact of 
eye, of ear, of nose, of tongue, of body, of mind. In all these 
are thirty-two as in the case of consciousness, mentioned 
above, which is conditioned by activities, namely, ten made 
up of five moral results beginning with eye-contact and so on 
and five immoral results, and the remaining twenty-two which 
are associated with the worldly resultant consciousness. Of 
these thirty-two kinds of contact, sixfold sense is the cause, 
wherein The wise desire the sixfold sense to mean, 
Internal eye and so on with the sixth, 
And also these with the external six. 
Those who, thinking that this is a discourse on procedure of 
derived things, set forth the cause and result included in their 
own continuity, following the text, “ Conditioned by the sixth 
sense, contact comes to pass,” leave out the corresponding 
parts, seeing that the cause of contact is the sixth sense of the 

--- PAGE 186 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 679 
formless as well as the sixfold sense which comprises all senses 
from elsewhere, and desire the sixfold sense to be the internal 
eye and so on, together with the sixth sense. And that as well 
as the sixth sense, as well as the sixfold sense goes under1 the 
name of sixfold sense. But those, who set forth the result, 
as being included in one continuity, and the cause as belonging 
to a different continuity, also set forth every sense that is the 
cause of contact, thereby including the external sense, and 
desire that internal sense, together with the sixth, to be the 
sixfold sense together with the external senses of matter and 
so on. [566] That also as well as the sixth sense and the 
sixfold sense, as well as the sixfold sense goes under the name 
of sixfold sense, the corresponding parts being left out. 
Here the objector might say: “A single contact is not pro¬ 
duced from all the senses, nor are all contacts produced from 
a single sense. But a single one is stated in * Conditioned by 
the sixfold sense contact comes to pass.’ Why is that bo 
stated ?” This is the reply. It is true that a single one is 
not produced from all nor are all produced from a single one. 
But one is produced from many: As eye-contact is produced 
from eye-sense, matter-sense, mind-sense termed eye-con¬ 
sciousness and the rest of the associated states. Therefore: 
“ Such-as-He ”a shows by number singular 
That one contact from several senses3 springs. 
“ By number singular ” means by the singular number in 
“ Conditioned by sixfold sense, contact comes to pass,” 
such-as-He has shown that one contact comes to pass from 
several senses. Among the senses, 
The five in six ways, one in nine, 
External six in fitting ways— 
Such is the explanation of 
The cause-relation of the one. 
This is the explanation: Eye-sense and so on are causes of 
contact of five kinds such as eye-contact and so on in six ways 
through dependence, pre-existence, faculty, dissociation, 
1 Read tveva for sveva. * Tadin. 9 Read p' aneJcd0. 

--- PAGE 187 ---
680 The Path of Purity 
presence, non-absence. Then the one sense of resultant mind 
is cause of the manifold resultant mind-contact in nine ways 
through co-existence, reciprocity, dependence, results, sus¬ 
tenance, faculty, association, presence, non-absence. Among 
the external senses, the sense of matter is a cause of eye- 
contact in four ways through object, pre-existence.. presence, 
non-absence, likewise the senses of sound and so on are causes 
in four ways of ear-contact and so on. Of mind-contact 
however, those senses of matter and so on and the sense of 
mental idea1 are causes in these four ways and also just2 by 
way of the object. Thus the cause relation of the external 
six in fitting ways to this has been explained. 
This is the detailed discourse on the clause: “ Conditioned 
by sixfold sense, contact comes to pass.” 
As to the clause “ Conditioned by contact, feeling comes to 
pass ”: 
By way of door are mentioned feelings six, 
Such as that born of eye-contact, which are 
Considered to be eighty-nine in kind. 
Concerning this clause also, six feelings by way of door are 
stated in the Vibhanga3 thus:—“Feeling which is born of 
eye-contact, ... of ear-contact, ... of nose-contact, ... of 
tongue-contact, ... of body-contact, ... of mind-contact.” 
[567] From association with eighty-nine classes of conscious¬ 
ness, they “ are considered to be eighty-nine in kind — 
Of these feelings the thirty-two results are here— 
Both meant and called “ connected with result.” 
Of five of them contact is eight-fold cause, 
A single cause of others at five doors. 
At the mind-door also it is the same. 
For of the five feelings which have the sentient eye and so 
on4 for physical basis, contact of the eye and so on is cause 
at the five doors by way of the causes of co-existence, recipro¬ 
city, dependence, result, sustenance, association, presence, non- 
1 Should we not read dhammayatnnanca for dhamm&rammaruxnca ? 
* Read drammana-paccayamaUen> eva. 
* Page 380. 4 I.e. ear, etc. 

--- PAGE 188 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 681 
absence. Of the remaining feelings which are results of the 
world of sense proceeding by way of receiving, examining, 
registration at each door, the same contact is a single cause 
through sufficing condition. “ At the mind-door also it is the 
same ” means, of the feelings which are results of the world 
of sense, proceeding by way of registration also at the mind- 
door, that contact which is termed contact of co-existent 
mind is cause in the same eight ways: also of the feelings which 
are results of the three planes1 proceeding by way of rebirth, 
life-continuum and decease. But of those feelings of the realm 
of sense which have proceeded by way of registration at the 
mind-door, mind-contact which is associated with mind-door- 
adverting iB a single cause by way of sufficing condition. 
This is the detailed discourse on the clause “ Conditioned 
by contact, feeling arises.” 
As regards the versee< Conditioned by feeling, craving comes 
to pass ”:— 
Six cravings of matter and other kinds 
Have here been set forth. From the manner of 
Procedure, each is held to be threefold. 
For as to this verse, in Vibhahga2 six cravings have been 
shown by way of the nomenclature derived from the object 
as craving of matter, of sound, of smell, of taste, of touch, of 
idea, just as a son derives his name from his father as Setthi- 
putta, Brahmapaputta. Each of these cravings from the 
manner of proceeding is considered to be threefold as craving 
for sense-desire, craving for existence, craving for non-exist¬ 
ence.3 For when the craving for matter proceeds to enjoy 
with the taste of sense-desire a material object that has come 
into the avenue of the eye, it becomes known as sensuous 
craving. When it proceeds together with the heresy of 
Eternalism, according to which that very object is permanent, 
eternal, [568] then it is known as craving for existence: for 
passion accompanied by the heresy of Eternalism is called the 
craving for existence. When it proceeds together with the 
heresy of annihilation, according to which that very object 
1 Read lebhumika° for eta bhumikaa Page 380. 3 Ibid., 365. 
44 

--- PAGE 189 ---
682 The Path of Purity 
is cut off, destroyed, then it is known as craving for non¬ 
existence ; for passion accompanied by the heresy of annihila¬ 
tion is called the craving for non-existence. And the same 
with cravings for sound and so on. These make eighteen 
cravings from among the internal material qualities and 
eighteen from among the external, giving thirty-six. And 
these as past, future and present give one hundred and eight. 
Again they are, briefly, six by way of the material object and 
so on, and three by way of sensuous craving and so on. 
Because these beings give much honour to painters, musicians, 
perfumers, cooks, weavers and physicians, givers of life’s 
elixir,1 who grant them the material objects and so on, which 
they taste with jealous enjoyment, just as they give much 
honour to a nurse out of their feelings for, and jealous pride 
in their son, therefore all these cravings should be understood 
as being conditioned by feeling. 
Since here one blissful feeling as result 
Is meant, of craving it is just one cause. 
“ Just one ”—that is, through just the cause of sufficing 
condition. Or because:— 
A man in pain doth ease desire; 
The man of ease desires yet more. 
It’s neutralness that, being calm, 
Is said to be the same as ease. 
Therefore the threefold feeling is 
The cause of craving. And it’s said 
By that great sage, that craving is 
Conditioned by the feelings three. 
It without bias never is, 
Although it is by feeling caused. 
Therefore it does not come to him, 
Who as “ brahman ” has lived the life. 
1 Jtasdyatana is taken to mean the nutritive essence (ojd) for the 
strengthening of life’s controlling faculty. 

--- PAGE 190 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 683 
This is the detailed discourse on the clause: “ Conditioned 
by feeling, craving comes to pass.” 
As to the clause “ Conditioned by craving, grasping comes 
to pass,” 
There are four graspings which should be explained 
By sense-classification, order due. 
And by the brief and full accounts of states. 
[569] This is the explanation:—these are the four graspings, 
namely, of sense-desires, of wrong views, of mere rite and 
ritual, of a theory of the self. And this is the literal meaning: 
It clings to sense-desires which are termed the physical basis— 
thus “ grasping of sense-desires.” Sense-desires and grasping 
give the grasping of sense-desires. Grasping means a firm 
seizure. For the prefix upa (in upaddna, gTasping) denotes 
firmness as in updyasa (despair), upakattha (approaching), and 
so on. 
Similarly, views and grasping give the grasping of views. 
Or, it clings to views—thus “ grasping of views.” In such 
views as, the self is eternal, the world is eternal, the latter 
view clings to the former. Similarly it clings to mere rite 
and ritual—thus “gTasping of rite and ritual.” The rite and 
ritual and the grasping give the grasping of rite and ritual. 
Graspings themselves are so because they hold that bovine 
habits and bovine practices and so on are “ purity.” Similarly, 
by it they speak, thus “ theory.” By it they grasp—thus 
“ grasping.” What do they speak or grasp ? the self. The 
clinging to a theory1 about the self is the grasping of the self- 
theory. By it they cling to the view that just this self-theory 
is the self. Such is the literal meaning. 
“And by the brief and full accounts of states”:—the 
firmness of craving is briefly stated in the text: “ What herein 
is the grasping of sense-desires ? That sensuous desire, sensuous 
passion, sensuous delight, sensuous craving, sensuous cleaving, 
sensuous fever, sensuous languishing, sensuous reciprocity, which 
is excited by the pleasures of the senses—this is called the grasping 
1 Reading attano vidHpudanain. 

--- PAGE 191 ---
684 The Path of Purity 
of sense-desires”1 Firmness of craving means the subsequent 
craving which derives its firmness through the cause of the 
sufficing conditions of the previous craving. Now, say some, 
that craving is a longing for an object not yet attained, like 
the stretched-out hand of a thief in the dark; that grasping is 
the seizing of an object that is attained, like the seizing of 
treasure by the thief; that fewness of wishes and contentment 
are their opposing states; further, that they are the roots 
of the ills of having to search and keep watch. The remaining 
three graspings are briefly just views. In detail the grasping 
in sense-desires is the firmness of craving, already described 
as being of one hundred and eight kinds, for visible objects 
and so on; the grasping of views is wrong views having ten 
bases. As it has been said: “ What therein is the grasping of 
speculative opinion (views) ? * There is no such thing as alms, 
or sacrifice . . . there are in the world no recluses or brahmins 
who have reached the highest point, who, having understood and 
realized by themselves alone both this world and the next, make 
known the same '—all this sort of speculation ... this shifti¬ 
ness of grasp is what is called the grasping of speculative opinion 
(views).”2 Perversion as to the opinion that holiness is by 
means of rite and ritual is the grasping of rite and ritual. As 
it has been said: “ What therein is the grasping of rite and 
ritual ? The theory, held by recluses and brahmins outside our 
doctrine that holiness is got by rules of moral conduct, that 
holiness is got by rites, that holiness is got by rides of moral con¬ 
duct and by rites [570]—this kind of opinion . . . this inverted 
grasp is called the grasping of rite and ritual.”3 The theory 
of individuality with the twenty bases is the grasping of a 
theory of the self. As it is said, “ What therein is the grasping 
of a theory of the self ? When in this world the ignorant, average 
man who . . . is not trained according to the doctrine of good 
men, regards the self as bodily shape . . . then this inverted 
grasp is called the grasping of a theory of the self.”* 
1 Dhammasahgani, § 1214. 
* Ibid., § 1215. See Buddhist Psychological Ethics, p. 300. 
* Ibid., pp. 239-240. 4 Ibid., pp. 236-239. 

--- PAGE 192 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 685 
Such is here the brief and full accounts of states. 
“ Order due ” is of three kinds: the order of arising, the 
order of removing, the order of instruction. Of these, the 
order of the arising of the vices is not stated directly owing 
to the absence of the first arising of this beginningless round 
of births. But indirectly, speaking of one world generally 
the conviction of eternalism and annihilation is preceded by 
a clinging to the self; then to him who clings to the idea that 
this self is eternal there arises the grasping of rite and ritual 
for the purpose of purifying the self. The grasping of sense- 
desires arises to him who does not look to the next world, and 
who adheres to the idea that the self is annihilated. Hence 
first the grasping of a theory of the self, and the grasping of 
views, rite and ritual, and of sense-desires. Thus is the order 
of arising in one world. Of them, the grasping of views and 
the next are put away first, being killed by the path of stream¬ 
winning ; later the gTasping of sense-desires, being killed by the 
way of saintship. This is the order of their removal. And 
of them, the grasping of sense-desires is taught first, owing 
to its large province and obviousness. For through associa¬ 
tion with the eight classes of consciousness, it has a large 
province; the others have small provinces being associated 
with four consciousnesses. And generally it is obvious as 
being an abode in which mankind delights; not so are the 
others. One who has a grasping for sense-desires makes much 
fuss and festivity in order that he may attain his objects. 
This is his1 gTasping of views, which accordingly is shown 
immediately after the other kind of grasping. It branches 
off into two: by way of the grasping of rite and ritual and of 
a theory of the self. Of the two the grasping of rite and ritual, 
being gross, is shown first, being easily understood on seeing 
the cow-and-dog-rites. Finally owing to its subtleness comes 
the grasping of a theory of the self. Such is the order of 
theiT instruction. 
A single cause is craving of the first, 
And sevenfold, eightfold of the other three. 
1 Construe sa&satan a8 ta assa tan. 

--- PAGE 193 ---
686 The Path of Purity 
And here, in the grasping-tetrad, the craving of sense- 
desires is a single cause of the first grasping of sense-desires 
by way of sufficing condition, because it arises in objects in 
which craving delights. Of the remaining three it is a cause 
in seven ways:—[571] through co-existence, reciprocity, de¬ 
pendence, association, presence, non-absence, or it is eightfold, 
taken together with sufficing condition. And when the cause is 
through sufficing condition, it is not co-existent (with the 
present). 
This is the detailed discourse on the clause “ Conditioned 
by craving, grasping comes to pass.” 
As to the clause “ Conditioned by grasping, becoming comes 
to pass — 
By meaning, state, group, difference, usefulness, 
Whatc’er is cause of what should one decide. 
Of these, it becomes—this is “ becoming.” It is twofold 
as karma-becoming and rebirth-becoming. As it is said: 
“ Becoming is twofold: 'there is karma-becoming, there is rebirth 
becoming.”1 Of these, karma as becoming is karma-becoming. 
Similarly rebirth itself as becoming is rebirth-becoming. And 
here rebirth becomes, thus it is becoming. And as karma, 
because it is the reasonjfor bliss, is spoken of as 
For Buddhas to appear is bliss,2 
so, because it is a reason for becoming, it is to be understood 
as becoming, the cause being used for the effect. Thus should 
decision be known by way of the meaning. 
“ By state ”:—briefly, volition and states termed karma, 
such as covetousness associated with volition, are karma¬ 
becoming. As it is said: " What therein is karma-becoming ? 
The preparation for merit, the preparation for demerit, the 
preparation for stationariness whether of the limited stage or 
the sublime stage—this is called karma-becoming. And all 
karma leading to becoming is karma-becoming.”3 Of these, 
thirteen volitions are the preparation for merit, twelve are the 
1 VibhaAga, p. 137. * Sukho, Dhammapada, ver. 194. 
* See note 4, page 571 of4text, referring to YibhaAga, p. 137. 

--- PAGE 194 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 687 
preparation for demerit, four are the preparation for station- 
ariness. Thus, by the expression: “ Whether of the limited 
stage or the sublime, stage ” is meant the feebleness or strength 
of the results of these volitions. And by the expression “ And 
all karma leading to becoming ” are meant covetousness and 
so on which are associated with volition. 
Rebirth-becoming is briefly the aggregates produced by 
karma and is ninefold in kind. As it is said: “ What therein 
is rebirth-becoming ? The becoming of sense-desires, of matter, 
of non-matter, of perception, of non-perception, of neither per¬ 
ception nor non-perception, of one co?istituent, [572] of four 
constituents, of five constituents—this is called rebirth-becoming.”1 
Of these, becoming which is termed sense-desires is becoming 
of sense-desires. And the same with becomiug of matter and 
of non-matter. Becoming of those possessed of perception,2 
or, in this becoming is perception:—thus “perception- 
becoming.” The contrary is becoming of non-perception. 
Owing to the absence of gross perception and the presence of 
refined perception there is, in this becoming, neither percep¬ 
tion nor non-perception: hence “ becoming of neither percep- 
ception nor non-perception.” Becoming mixed with one 
aggregate of matter is one-constituent-becoming, which also 
means, that in it there is one mixture. And the same with 
becomings of four and five constituents. 
Of them (in nine kinds) becoming of sense-desires is the five 
derived aggregates, likewise matter-becoming. Non-matter¬ 
becoming is four such aggregates. Perception-becoming is 
four or five. Non-perception-becoming is one derived aggre¬ 
gate ; becoming of neither perception nor non-perception iB 
four. Becomings of one constituent and so forth are one, 
four, five aggregates by way of derived aggregates. ThuB 
by way of states should the conclusion be understood. 
“By usefulness”:—although the preparations for merit 
and so on have been mentioned in the exposition of the activi¬ 
ties, just as in the exposition of becoming, there is advantage 
1 Ibid. 
2 Read saHUdvatam, explained by the Tiki as saiindvantanam pug- 
galdnam. 

--- PAGE 195 ---
688 The Path of Purity 
in the repetition, because the activities of the previous exposi¬ 
tion are causes of rebirth here, by way of past karma, and 
because the activities of the present exposition are causes of 
rebirth in the future by way of present karma. Or, in the 
previous exposition, volition has been said to be the activities 
in this way: “ W hat therein is the preparation for m eri t ? M ora l 
volition of the realm of sense.”1 But here states associated with 
volition as well are so described, from the expression “ And 
all karma leading to becoming.”2 And previously it has been 
said that the activities are karma which is the cause of con¬ 
sciousness ; now they are described as karma which produces 
becoming of non-perception. For that matter what is the 
use of making many statements ? In “ conditioned by 
ignorance, activities come to pass ” the moral and immoral 
states such as the preparations for merit and so on have 
already been mentioned. Here, in “ Conditioned by grasping, 
becoming comes to pass,” the moral, immoral and indeter¬ 
minate states are mentioned owing to the inclusion of rebirth- 
becoming. Therefore everywhere the repetition serves its 
purpose. Thus by way of “ usefulness ” also is the conclusion 
to be understood. 
“By group, difference”:—by the difference and grouping 
of becoming, conditioned by gTasping. For the karma which, 
conditioned by grasping of sense-desires, produces becoming 
of sense-desire is the becoming of karma. The aggregates 
produced by it are rebirth-becoming. And the same with 
becoming of matter and non-matter. Thus [573] there are 
two becomings of sense-desires conditioned by the grasping 
of sense-desires. In them are included the becomings of per¬ 
ception and of the five constituents. There are two becomings 
of matter, in which are included the becomings of perception, 
of non-perception, of one and five constituents. There are two 
becomings of non-matter, in which axe included the becomings 
of perception, of neither perception nor non-perception, and 
of the four constituents. Thus there are six becomings, 
with those which are included therein. As there are six 
1 Yibhatigtty p. 135. * Above, p.686. 

--- PAGE 196 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 689 
becomings conditioned by the grasping of sense-desires, 
together with the included states, so is it the same with 
becomings which are conditioned by the remaining graspings. 
Thus there are twenty-four different kinds of becomings con¬ 
ditioned by the graspings together with the included states. 
“By groups”:—grouping the karma-becoming and the 
rebirth-becoming, we get one becoming of Bense-desires, 
conditioned by the grasping of sense-desires, together with the 
included states. Similarly with the becoming of matter and 
non-matter. Thus we get three becomings. Similarly with 
those conditioned by the remaining graspings. Thus by way 
of groups together with the included states there are twelve 
becomings conditioned by the graspings. 
But generally speaking, the karma which, conditioned by 
grasping, leads to the becoming of sense-desires is becoming 
of karma. The aggregates produced by it are the becoming 
of rebirth. And the same with the becomings of matter and 
non-matter. Thus, conditioned by grasping together with 
the included states, there are two becomings of sense-desires, 
two of matter, twro of non-matter. In this other way then 
there are altogether six becomings. Or, without having 
recourse to the divisions of karma-becoraing and rebirth- 
becoming, there are three becomings by way of the becomings 
of sense-desires and so on, together with the included states. 
Again, without having recourse to the divisions of becomings 
of sense-desires and so on, there are two becomings: karma¬ 
becoming and rebirth-becoming. And without having 
recourse to the division of karma and rebirth, there is a single 
becoming: viz., becoming as stated in “Conditioned by 
grasping, becoming comes to pass.” Thus here by way of the 
different kinds and groupings of “ becoming conditioned by 
grasping ” is the conclusion to be understood. 
“ Whate’er is cause of what ”:—the meaning is that decision 
should be known according to what grasping is cause of what. 
And here, which is the “ cause of what ” I Any (grasping) 
whatsoever is cause of any (becoming) whatsoever. For the 
average man is like a madman. Without considering what 
is proper, or what is improper, he aspires to any becoming 

--- PAGE 197 ---
690 The Path of Purity 
whatsoever, by means of any grasping whatsoever, and does 
any act whatsoever. Therefore what some say, namely, 
that becomings of matter and non-matter are not due to the 
grasping of rite and ritual should not be accepted. We should 
accept that all (becomings) are due to all (graspings). For 
instance some one here, through hearsay, or as a result of his 
opinion, thinks thus: “These things which are known as 
sense-desires arc fulfilled both among the families1 of wealthy 
princes in the world of men, and also in the world of devas of 
the world of sense,” and he, being deceived [574] into hoping 
to get them by listening to the bad doctrine and so on, does mis¬ 
deeds of the body and so on by means of the grasping of sense- 
desires, thinking to fulfil sense-desires by deeds. Through 
the fulness of his misdeeds he goes to a state of woe. Or 
longing for sense-desires of the present life and keeping watch 
over the things he has acquired, he does misdeeds of the body 
and so on, by means of the graspings of sense-desires. Through 
the fulness of his misdeeds he goes to a state of woe. The karma 
which is the condition of his rebirth there is the becoming of 
karma. The aggregates which produce the karma are the becom¬ 
ing of rebirth. And the becomings of perception and of the five 
constituents are included in that becoming of sense-desires.2 
Another man, who finds his knowledge growing by listening 
to the good doctrine and so on. does good deeds of the body 
and so on by means of the grasping of sense-desires, thinking 
to fulfil his sense-desires by such deeds. Through the fulness 
of his good deeds he is reborn among devas or men. The 
karma which is the condition of his rebirth there is the becoming 
of karma; the aggregates which produce the karma are the 
becoming of rebirth. And the becomings of perception and 
of the five constituents are included in that becoming of sense- 
desires. Thus is the grasping of sense-desires the cause of 
the becoming of sense-desires together with its different kinds 
and the included states. 
1 Read khattiya-mahasdlalculadisu. 
* The 3 adds, that they are only partially included in that becom¬ 
ing of senae-desirea. 

--- PAGE 198 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 691 
Another man, hearing or imagining, that greater than that1 
is the fulfilment in the becomings of matter and non-matter, 
produces the attainments of matter and non-matter by means 
of the grasping of sense-desires, and through the strength of 
his attainments is reborn in the Brahma world of matter and 
of non-matter. The karma which is the condition of his rebirth 
there is the becoming of karma; the aggregates which produce 
the karma are the becoming of rebirth. And the becomings 
of perception, non-perception, neither perception nor non¬ 
perception, and of one, four, or five constituents are included 
in that becoming. Thus is the grasping of sense-desires the 
cause of the becomings of matter and non-matter, together 
with their different kinds and the included states. 
Another man clings to the heresy of annihilation: viz., that 
what is known as the self is annihilated, completely annihi¬ 
lated in the becoming of attainments in a world of sense or 
in one or other of the becomings of matter and non-matter, 
and does deeds which lead thereto. His deeds constitute the 
becoming of karma; the aggregates which produce the karma 
are the becoming of rebirth, and the becomings of perception 
and so on are included therein. Thus is the grasping of views 
the cause of the three becomings of sense-desires, matter and 
non-matter, together with their different kinds and the in¬ 
cluded states. 
Another man, by means of the grasping of a theory of the 
self thinks, that what is known as the self is happy and free 
from torments in the becoming of attainments in a world of 
sense, or in one or other of the becomings of matter and non- 
matter, and does deeds which lead thereto. That karma of 
his is the becoming of karma; the aggregates which produce it 
[575] are the becoming of rebirth. And included therein are 
the becomings of perception and so on. Thus is the grasping 
of a theory of the self the cause of the three becomings, together 
with their different kinds and the included states. 
Another man by means of the grasping of rite and ritual 
thinks that this rite and ritual easily reaches perfection for 
1 Le. among devas and men. 

--- PAGE 199 ---
692 The Path of Purity 
one who fulfils it in the becoming of attainments in a world of 
sense, or in one or other of the becomings of matter and non¬ 
matter, and does deeds which lead thereto. That karma of 
his is the becoming of karma; the aggregates which produce 
it are the becoming of rebirth. And included therein are the 
becomings of perception and so on. Thus is the grasping of 
rite and ritual the cause of the three becomings, together with 
their different kinds and the included states. Thus should 
decision be known according to what is cause of what. 
And here what is the cause of what becoming in what 
way I 
That grasping is the cause of mattcr-and 
Non-matter-becomings through condition 
Sufficing and of sense-becomings through 
Such cause of co-existence should be known. 
This fourfold grasping is a single cause, through sufficing 
condition, of becomings of matter-and-non-matter, of moral 
karma included under the becoming of sense-desires in karma¬ 
becoming, and also of rebirth-becoming. It is a cause of 
immoral1 karma-becoming, associated with itself in the 
becoming of sense-desires through the different kinds of 
causes, such as co-existence, reciprocity, dependence, associ¬ 
ation, presence, non-absence, root-condition. Of the dis¬ 
sociated it is a cause through sufficing condition. 
This is the detailed discourse on the clause: “ Conditioned 
by grasping, becoming comes to pass.” 
In “Conditioned by becoming, birth comes to pass” and 
the rest, the decision regarding birth and so on should be 
understood as explained in the exposition of the Truths.2 
And here, by becoming is meant karma-becoming, which— 
and not rebirth-becoming—is the cause of birth, and that in 
two ways through karma and sufficing condition. 
Objection might arise: How may it be known that becoming 
is the cause of birth ? 
By seeing divisions such as low and high (in the born aggre¬ 
gates), although there is equality in external causes. For al- 
1 Read sampayuttakusala. * Ch. XVI, p. 591 f. 

--- PAGE 200 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 693 
though, there is equality in external causes, such as the parents, 
union, blood1 and food, even in the case of twins there are 
seen such divisions as low and high. Such divisions are not 
without condition, for they do not always happen to all. [576] 
There is no other condition than karma-becoming, since there 
is no other reason in the subjective continuity of beings who 
give rise to it. Hence karma-becoming is the condition. For 
karma is the condition of the divisions of the low and the high 
among beings, as the Blessed One has said: “ It is their deeds 
which divide people into high and low.”2 Therefore may it 
be known that becoming is the cause of birth. And because 
when there is no birth, there is no old age and death, nor states 
such as old age, death and sorrow, but when there is birth 
there are old age-and-death and states beginning with sorrow, 
which are bound with old age and death, in the case of a foolish 
person who has been touched by painful states called old age 
and death, and which are not bound therewith in the case of 
one who has been touched by this and that painful state,3 
therefore, this birth should be known as the cause of old age 
and death and sorrow and so on. It however constitutes a 
single cause by way of the point4 of sufficing condition. 
This is the detailed discourse on “ Conditioned by becoming, 
birth comes to pass ” and so on. 
Ignorance is accomplished by sorrow and the like. 
Because sorrow and so on are mentioned last (in the formula), 
therefore that which comes first in the wheel of becoming: 
“Conditioned by ignorance, activities come to pass,” namely:— 
This ignorance is by sorrow and such 
Others accomplished. This wheel of life 
Unknown in beginning,5 bereft of one 
To do and feel, void through the void twelve parts,— 
should be understood to proceed continuously for ever. 
1 Read °sonitda. 8 Majjhima iii, 203. Further Dialogues ii, 208. 
8 Snch as a loss of relatives and so on. 
4 The PlkA explains this to be such as is not found in the Patthdna 
but is found in tho Suttanta methods of exposition. 
4 Read aviditadim idarn. 

--- PAGE 201 ---
694 The Path of Purity 
How “is ignorance accomplished by sorrow and such 
others ” ? How is “ this wheel of life unknown in beginning ”1 
How “ bereft of one to do and feel ” ? How “ void through the 
void twelve parts ” ? 
Herein sorrow, grief, despair are not dissociated from 
ignorance. What is called lamentation occurs in a deluded 
person. Thus wheh these are effected, ignorance is effected. 
Further, it has been said that ignorance springs up through 
the origination of the cankers. And these states such as sorrow 
are due to the origination of the cankers. How ? When dis¬ 
jointed from objective sense-desires, sorrow has the cankers 
of sense-desires for its origin. As it is said: 
Should seme-desires decrease in that person, 
Who makes of them a vehicle, who grows 
Excited over them, he just becomes 
Corruptible as though by arrow shot.1 
And it has been said: 
“ From sense-desire is sorrow born.”2 And all of them have 
their source in the canker of views. As it has been said: 
“ In him who says ‘ I am the body, [577] body is mine ’ and is 
possessed by this idea sorrow and lamenting, suffering, grief and 
despair arise, owing to the unstable and changeful nature of 
body.”3 And as they spring from the canker of views so do 
they from the canker of becoming. As it is said: “.Then, 
whatsoever devas there be, long-living, beautiful and blissful, 
long established in lofty palaces, when they hear the Norm-teach¬ 
ing of the Tathdgata, they become fearful, fall a-trembling and 
a-quaking ”* as do the devas frightened by the fear of death 
on seeing the five signs.5 And as they spring from the canker 
of becoming, so do they from the canker of ignorance. As 
it is said “ Monks, he is a fool who, here and now, experiences 
threefold pain and grief Thus because these states (sorrow 
1 Sutta-Nip&ta, verse 767. 3 Dhammapada, verse 216. 
* Samyvtta iii, 3. 4 Kindred. Sayings iii, 71. 
* The five signs are: the flowers worn by them become faded, their 
clothea become dirty, sweat exudes from their armpits, their complexion 
changes, they do not delight in the world of devas.—fiktt. Cf. Iti. v, 
§ 83. * Majjhima iii, 163. 

--- PAGE 202 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 695 
and so on) spring from the cankers, therefore when they are 
effected, they give effect to the cankers which are the condition 
of ignorance. And when the cankers are effected, ignorance 
is also effected, since it exists in the existence of the cause. 
Thus herein should be understood, “ ignorance is by sorrow 
and such others accomplished.” 
The wheel of life, unknown in beginning. 
But because, when, the cause thus existing, ignorance is 
effected, there is no end to the series of cause and effect which 
again runs as “ Conditioned by ignorance activities come to 
pass, conditioned by activities consciousness comes to pass,” 
therefore in effect the wheel of life, proceeding in twelve 
parts through the series of cause and effect, is without a 
beginning. 
But if this be so, does it not contradict the statement that 
ignorance Is just the beginning in “ Conditioned by ignorance 
activities come to pass ”? 
The statement is not just about the beginning. It is a 
statement about the ground-work. For of the threefold 
round of births,1 ignorance is the grodnd-work. The round 
of births of the remaining vices and karma and so on impede 
the fool, who clings to ignoranco, just as a snake being seized 
by the head, entwines the body round the seizing arm. But 
when ignorance is cut off, there is release from the rounds of 
births, just as when the snake’s head is cut off, the man’s arm 
is released from the coils of the snake. As it is said: “But 
from the utter fading out and ceasing of ignorance is the ceasing 
of activities ”2 and so on. Thus bondage comes of clinging to 
ignorance, and release from letting it go. And the above 
statement is about its being the ground-work, not just the 
beginning:—thus should the expression “ The wheel of life, 
unknown in beginning ” be understood. 
1 I.e. of the vices, of karma and of result. 
* Samyntla ii, 4,12,17. 

--- PAGE 203 ---
696 The Path of Purity 
[678] Bereft of one to do and feel. 
Because this wheel of becoming is the proceeding of activities 
and so on through such causes as ignorance and so on, there¬ 
fore it has nothing to do with any other maker of the round of 
births such as Brahma, with the idea that “ Brahma is great,1 
Brahma is the best, the creator,” or with any other self who 
experiences happiness and misery, and who is imagined to 
be on this wise—“ This self of mine speaks, is sentient.”2 
Thus “ Bereft of one to do and feel ” should be understood. 
Void through the void twelve parts. 
And because ignorance is void of permanence from its 
nature of rising and falling; of pleasantness from being cor¬ 
rupted and corruptible; of bliss from being oppressed by rise 
and fall; and of an obedient individuality from being connected 
with its own causes, and the same with its parts: activities 
and so on; or, because ignorance is not the self, nor of the self, 
neither is it in the self, nor does it possess the self, and the 
same with the parts: activities and so on, therefore this wheel 
of becoming should be understood to be void through the 
void twelve parts. 
The three times of the wheel of becoming. 
Having known this, one should know further that— 
Its roots are craving, ignorance; 
Its times are three, past and so on. 
To which respectively belong 
Two, eight, and two, from its twelve parts. 
The two states: ignorance and craving should be understood 
to be the root of this wheel of becoming. As canying on the 
past, it has its root in ignorance and its end in feeling; as being 
continuous with the future, it has its root in craving and its end 
in old age and death. Thus it is twofold. The former is 
spoken by way of one who walks in views, the latter by way 
1 Read rnaha Brahma for Mahdbrahmd. 8 Majjhima i, 8. 

--- PAGE 204 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 697 
of one who walks in craving. For the ignorance of those who 
walk in views, and the craving of those who walk in craving 
lead them to repeated births. Or the former is spoken for the 
purpose of extirpating the theory of annihilation, the unbroken 
series of causes being made clear by the production of results; 
the latter is spoken for the purpose of extirpating the theory 
of eternalism, it being clear that states which have made their 
appearance undergo old age and death. Or, the former is 
stated by way of those who are still in the mother’s womb, 
as it shows the proceeding of states in due sequence; the latter 
is by way of the apparitional as showing the simultaneous 
appearance1 of states. The past, present and the future are 
its three times. The two factors: namely, ignorance and 
activities as they appear in their nature in the Pali text, are 
of the past time. The eight beginning with consciousness 
and ending in becoming are of the present time. The two, 
namely, birth and old-age-and-death are of the future. 
[579] Again it should be understood that, 
The thrice-knit cause, condition and effect, 
The forming of four groups, the round of three, 
The spokes of twenty modes:—this wheel of life. 
Keeps rolling on and on without a break. 
Here, the interval between the activities and rebirth-conscious¬ 
ness is called once-knit condition and effect; the interval 
between feeling and craving is known as once-knit effect and 
condition; the interval between becoming and birth is once- 
knit condition and effect. Thus, “The thrice-knit cause, 
condition and effect ” is to be understood. 
(The forming of four groups.) 
There are four groups of the unions determined by the 
beginning and the end, namely: ignorance and activities form 
one group; consciousness, name-and-form, sixfold sense, 
contact, feeling, the second group; craving, grasping, becoming 
1 Read sahupatli0 for &akupaiti°. The f\k& explains this as the 
simultaneous appearance of the aggregates (upapaiti-kkhandhunam 
ekajjham upapaUiya). 
45 

--- PAGE 205 ---
698 The Path of Purity 
the third; birth, old age and death the fourth. Thus, “the 
forming of four groups ” is to be understood. 
(The spokes of twenty modes.) 
Five causes in the Past and Now a fivefold fruit; 
Five causes Now, and yet to come a fivefold fruit.1 
“ The spokes of twenty modes ” should be understood by way 
of the spokes which are termed these twenty modes. 
Of these, by “ Five causes in the Past ” are meant these 
two: ignorance and activities. But because a man with no 
knowledge craves and, in craving, grasps, and becoming 
arises in him through grasping, therefore craving, grasping and 
becoming also are meant here. Therefore was it said: “ In 
the previous karma-becoming, confusion is ignorance ; effort is 
activities ; desire is craving; clinging is grasping; volition is 
becoming. Thus these five states of the previous kartna-becoming 
are the causes of the present rebirth.”2 
In this passage, “ in the previous karma-becoming ” means, 
in karma-becoming that is past, the meaning being:—when 
karma-becoming is made in a past birth. “ Confusion is 
ignorance ” is that confusion which at that time is in regard 
to ill and so on, and by means of which ji man who is confused 
does a deed. “ Effort is activities” means, the previous 
volitions which have arisen in him who is doing a deed, such 
volitions, for instance, as a thought, that he will give alms, 
and who is getting ready the materials thereof for a month or 
a year. [580] The volition of one who places gifts in the 
hands of those wrho receive them is called becoming. Or, 
volition in six apperceptions with one adverting is called the 
activities of effort; the Beventh volition is becoming. Or any 
volition is becoming; the associated volition is activities of 
effort. “ Desire is craving ”:—this means that craving which 
is a wish, and aspiration for a resultant rebirth-becoming 
entertained by one who is doing a deed. " Clinging is grasp¬ 
ing ”—the clinging, the seizure, the perversion which pro¬ 
ceeds in such a way as “ By doing this deed, which is the 
1 Compendium 160. * Pafisambhidd i, 52. 

--- PAGE 206 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 699 
cause of karma-becoming, I shall enjoy, or cut off the pleasures 
of sense in such and such a place ” is known as grasping. 
“ Volition is becoming ” means, volition spoken of at the end of 
effort is becoming. Thus should the meaning be understood. 
“ And Now a fivefold fruit/’ this is that which begins with 
consciousness and ends in feeling as mentioned in the Pali. 
As it is said: “ Here rebirth is consciousness, descent is name- 
and-form, sensory organism is sense-organ, the being touched 
is touch, the being felt is feeling. Thus these five states here in 
rebirth-becoming are the cause of previous karma.**1 In that 
text, “ rebirth is consciousness ” is that consciousness which is 
called rebirth, because it arises by way of continuity through 
different becomings. “Descent is name-and-form ” is that 
name-and-form which is a descent, as it were a coming 
and an entering into the matrix of states material and non- 
material. “ Sensory organism i6 sense-organ ”—this is said by 
way of the five sense-organs, the eye and so on. “ The being 
touched is touch”:—that which is in touch with an object, 
and arises touching it, is touch. “ The being felt is feeling ” 
is the feeling which is felt as a result, having arisen together 
with rebirth-consciousness, or with touch conditioned by six¬ 
fold sense. Thus should the meaning be understood. 
“ Five causes Now ” are craving and the rest. In the Pali 
are mentioned craving, grasping, becoming. When becoming 
is mentioned, the activities which precede it or which are 
associated with it are also mentioned; together with craving 
and grasping, (ignorance) which is associated2 therewith is 
mentioned. Or, that ignorance by which the deluded man 
does acts is mentioned. Thus are the five. Hence was it 
said: “ From the maturity of sense-organs here delusion is 
ignorance, effort is activities, desire is craving, clinging is 
grasping, volition is becoming. Thus these five states here in 
kar/na-becoming are causes of rebirth in the future.”* 
In that passage by the phrase “ from the maturity of sense- 
organs here ” is shown confusion of one with mature sense- 
* Ibid. 
* Pafisambhidd i, 52. 
3 Read sampayuUd. 

--- PAGE 207 ---
700 The Path of Purity 
organs at the time of doing karma. The rest is plain in 
meaning. 
[581] “And yet to come a fivefold fruit”—these are the 
five beginning with consciousness, which are mentioned along 
with birth. And of them is old-age-and-death. Hence was 
it said: “ In future rebirth is consciousness, descent is name- 
and-form, sensory organism is sense-organ, the being touched 
■is touch, the being felt is feeling.*’1 Thus these five states in a 
future karma-becoming are causes of karma done here. Such 
are the spokes of twenty modes. 
(The round of three, 
Keeps rolling on and on without a break.) 
The activities and becoming are the round of karma; 
ignorance, craving and grasping are the round of the vices; 
consciousness, name-and-form, sixfold sense, contact, feeling 
are the round of Tesult. Thus with these three rounds the 
wheel of becoming, “ the round of three . . . keeps rolling 
on and on ” turning repeatedly “ without a break,” because 
it does not cease so long as the wheel of corruptions is not 
cut off. 
(By way of origin in truths.) 
And this wheel of becoming, thus revolving— 
By way of origin in truths, function, 
And simile, prevention, different kinds 
Of deep methods should fittingly be known. 
Herein because moral and immoral karma have been 
stated without distinction in the Saccavibhahga2 as the truth 
of origin, therefore (be it understood that) as stated in “ Con¬ 
ditioned by ignorance activities come to pass,” through 
ignorance the activities are of the second truth having the 
second truth as their cause; through the activities consciousness 
is of the first truth due t-o the second truth.8 Through conscious¬ 
ness and so on the factors beginning with name-and-form and 
1 Ibid. * Vibhanga, p. 106 f. 
8 Remembering that the first truth is the result and the second 
truth is the cause. 

--- PAGE 208 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 701 
ending in resultant feeling arc of the first truth due to the 
first; through feeling craving is of the second truth due to the 
first. Through craving grasping is of the second truth due to 
the second; through grasping becoming is of the first and 
second truths due to the second. Through becoming birth is 
of the first truth due to the second; through birth old-age- 
and-death is of the first truth due to the first. This should 
then be known fittingly by way of origin in the truths. 
(By way of function.) 
And because ignorance brings confusion to beings as regards 
objects and is the cause of the appearance of the activities; 
likewise the activities [582] make preparations for conditioned 
things and are the cause of consciousness; and consciousness 
cognizes the object and is the cause of name-and-form; and 
name-and-form gives support to each other and is the cause 
of the sixfold sense; and the sixfold sense proceeds in its own 
range and is the cause of contact; and contact touches the 
object and is the cause of feeling; and feeling enjoys the taste 
of the object and is the cause of craving; and craving lusts after 
the things of lust and is the cause of grasping; and grasping 
clings to what it can cling to and is the cause of becoming; 
and becoming throws (a man) into the various courses of life 
and is the cause of birth; and birth produces the aggregates 
by proceeding as their first appearance and is the cause of old- 
age-and-death; and 'old-age-and-death is established in the 
maturity and breaking up of the aggregates and is the cause 
of the appearance of a new becoming, it being the abode of 
sorrow and so on:—therefore, in all the terms, this should be 
understood by way of the double function of procedure. 
(By way of prevention.) 
And because the clause “ Conditioned by ignorance activi¬ 
ties come to pass ” inhibits the view that there is a doer; and 
the clause “ Conditioned by activities consciousness comeB 
to pass ” inhibits the view of the transmigration of the self; 
and the clause “ Conditioned by consciousness name-and-form 
comes to pass ” inhibits the idea of density, by showing the 

--- PAGE 209 ---
702 The Path of Purity 
break-up of things conceived to be the self; and the clause 
“ Conditioned by narae-and-form sixfold sense conies to 
pass,” inhibits such views as the self secs, etc., knows, touches, 
feels, craves, grasps, becomes, is bom, decays, dies:—there¬ 
fore, as inhibiting also false views, this wheel of becoming is 
fittingly to be known. 
{And by way of simile.) 
And because ignorance is like a blind man who does not 
see the states in their intrinsic and general characteristics, 
the activities conditioned by ignorance are like the stumbling 
of the blind man, consciousness conditioned by the activities 
is like the fall after the stumbling, name-and-form conditioned 
by consciousness is like the appearance of an abscess on the 
fallen man, sixfold sense conditioned by name-and-form is 
like the accumulation of matter when the abscess is about to 
burst, contact conditioned by sixfold sense is like hurting 
the accumulated matter on the abscess, feeling conditioned 
by contact is like the pain due to the hurting, craving con¬ 
ditioned by feeling is like the longing for a cure, grasping 
conditioned by craving is like the having recourse to wrong 
medicine, [583] becoming conditioned by grasping is like the 
application of wrong ointment resorted to, birth conditioned 
by becoming is like the manifestation of a change1 in the 
abscess due to the application of the wrong ointment, old-age- 
and-death conditioned by birth is like the bursting of the 
abscess due to the change;—or again, because ignorance 
overpowers beings through lack of vision, or false vision, as 
cataract overpowers the eyes; and the fool, who is over¬ 
powered by it, wraps himself with the activities which produce 
fresh becomings, as the silkworm wraps itself with bits of 
cocoon; consciousness possessed by the activities findB a 
resting-place in the courses of life as a prince, taken in hand by 
the prime minister, finds a place in the kingdom; by dwelling 
on the sign of rebirth, consciousness gives rise to various kinds 
1 The flicd Bays the change ia Bhown by the swelling of the abBcesa 
and the appearance of pus. 

--- PAGE 210 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 703 
of name-and-form at rebirth, as the magician creates false 
objects; sixfold sense established in name-and-form attains 
to growth, increase and development, like a forest bush growing 
on a good soil; contact is produced from the friction of sense- 
organs, as fire is produced from the rubbing of fire-sticks; 
feeling arises in him touched by contact, as burning arises in 
him who is touched by fire; craving increases in him who 
experiences feelings, as thirst grows in one who drinks salt 
water; the man of craving has a desire for becoming, as the 
thirsty man longs for water; the grasping of such a man 
through itself clings to becoming, as the fish through greed 
for raw food grasps at the hook; birth takes place when there 
is becoming, as a sprout comes out when there is seed; there 
is certain old-age-and-death to one who is bom, as a tree 
that has risen must surely fall:—therefore by way of simile 
also is the wheel of becoming to be fittingly understood. 
(And by different kinds of deep methods:—) 
And because the Blessed has said this: “ Deep, Ananda, is 
this causal law, and it looks deep too 5,1 concerning the pro¬ 
fundity in meaning,in doctrine, in teaching, and in penetration, 
therefore is this wheel of becoming fittingly to be understood 
under different aspects of profundity. 
Herein, whereas it is difficult to understand the arising of 
old-age-and-death from birth, it is not that old-age-and-death 
is not due to birth, that it is due to nothing other than birth, 
that is, so arises from birth:—such arising constitutes its 
profundity. And the same with the activities, the arising of 
which is conditioned by ignorance:—therefore is the wheel of 
becoming profound in meaning. This so far is [584] the 
profundity in meaning. For the result of a cause is said to 
be the meaning, as it is said: “ Knowledge in respect of the 
result of a cause is the analysis of meaning”2 And because 
from the difficulty to understand that mode and that period3 
in which ignorance is cause of the various activities, the causal 
1 Digha ii, 55. See Dialogues ii, 50, n. 2. 
* Vibhahqa, p. 239. * Avaitha. in yad-avatthd. 

--- PAGE 211 ---
704 The Path of Purity 
relation of ignorance to the activities is a profound matter; 
and the same with the profundity of the cause-relation of ac¬ 
tivities . .. birth to old-age-and-death—therefore is this wheel 
of becoming profound in doctrine. Thus is herein the profund¬ 
ity in doctrine. For doctrine is a name for cause, as it is said: 
11 Knowledge in respect of the cause is the analysis of doctrine.”1 
And because it is taught for various reasons and in various ways, 
the teaching is profound, in which no knowledge other than 
omniscience finds a resting-place. For it is taught in some 
suttas by the direct method, in others by the reverse method, 
sometimes by the direct and reverse method, sometimes by 
the direct or reverse method fiom the middle, sometimes 
only three joints and four sections, sometimes two joints and 
three sections, sometimes one joint and two sections—there¬ 
fore is this wheel of becoming profound in the teaching. This 
is the profundity of teaching. 
And because that intrinsic nature of ignorance and so on, 
by the intuition of which ignorance and so on are rightly 
penetrated as to their characteristics, is difficult to fathom, 
therefore is this wheel of becoming profound in penetration. 
For since the nature of ignorance being opposed to knowledge, 
to discernment, to the penetration of the truths is a profound 
(matter); and profound is the nature of the activities being 
prepared, putting forth energy, being with and without passion; 
as also is the nature of consciousness being void, being not 
occupied, not transmigrating, manifesting itself in rebirth; 
and the nature of name-and-form arising together, being 
separate and not separate in classification, bending and 
changing; and the nature of sixfold sense being the dominant 
influence, the world, the door, the field, the province; and the 
nature of contact being the touching, impingeing, concourse, 
meeting together; the nature of feeling enjoying the taste of 
objects, being pleasant, painful and neutral, not the soul (jiva) 
and experiencing; the nature of craving being a delighting, an 
attachment, a flowing, like a creeper, like a river, an ocean of 
thirst, hard to fill; the nature of grasping being a clinging, 
1 Vibhafiga, p. 293. 

--- PAGE 212 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 705 
seizing, laying to heart, perversion, difficult to transcend; 
the nature of becoming being co-ordinating, preparing, throw¬ 
ing one on to a place of birth, on to a course, on to a conscious 
duration, on to an abode; the nature of birth being a first birth, 
complete birth, descent (into the matrix), coming to birth, 
appearance; and the nature of old-age-and-death being a fall¬ 
ing off, decaying, breaking, transforming,—is the profundity 
in penetration here to be understood. 
(It should fittingly be known:—) 
And because there are foiiT methods as to the meaning 
[585] namely, the method of sameness, of difference, of non¬ 
occupation, of the nature of being such, therefore according 
to the different methods also this wheel of becoming should 
fittingly be known. 
Of these, the method of sameness is the unbroken continuity, 
as in “ Conditioned by ignorance activities come to pass, 
conditioned by activities consciousness comes to pass,” like 
the growth of a tree from a seed through sprouts and 
so on. He who sees it rightly, knowing it to be an un¬ 
broken series of cause and effect, abandons the heresy of 
annihilation; seeing it wrongly by grasping the sameness of 
the unbroken series proceeding by way of cause and effect, 
he clings to the heresy of eternalism. The fixing of the 
characteristics belonging to ignorance and so on is known as 
the method of difference. He who sees it rightly as the repeated 
arising of fresh states, abandons the heresy of eternalism; 
seeing it wrongly by grasping the different kinds of a state 
which has fallen into a single continuity as though it had 
fallen into several continuities, he clings to the heresy of 
annihilation. Non-occupation is the absence of occupation 
on the part of ignorance, that it must produce the activities, 
and on the part of the activities that they must produce 
consciousness and so on. He who sees it rightly, knowing the 
absence of a doer, abandons the theory of the self; seeing it 
wrongly not grasping that, there being no occupation, the 
cause of ignorance and so on is effected by the order of intrinsic 

--- PAGE 213 ---
706 The Path of Purity 
nature, he clings to the heresy of non-action. The activities 
and so on arise because of ignorance and so on, just as curds 
and so on are due to milk and so ou, not to other 6auscs:— 
this is known as the nature of being such. He who sees it 
rightly, knowing that a result comes in accordance with a 
cause, abandons the theory of no-cause and the theory of 
no-action; seeing it wrongly not grasping the proceeding of 
a result in accordance with a cause but holding some impossible 
view that something arises from somewhere, he clings to the 
theory of no-cause and the doctrine of assurance. Thus the 
wheel of becoming 
By way of origin in truths, function, 
And simile, prevention, different kinds 
Of deep methods should fittingly be known. 
Therefore this wheel of life, being very deep 
Is fathomless, a jungle of pathways1 
Impassable. It may not be severed 
E’en by the sword of knowledge sharpened on 
The noble stone of fixity of thought. 
This awful danger of repeated births 
Is ever present like the falling disc2 
Of thunderbolt. Not e’en3 4 in dream can there 
Be such a one as has transcended it. 
[586] For this has been said by the Blessed One: “ Deep, 
Ananda, is this causal law, and it looks deep too. It is through 
not understanding this law, through not penetrating it, that this 
generation has become a tangled skein, a matted ball of thread, 
like to muhja-grass and rushes, unable to overpass the state of 
woe, the evil way, the downfall, the repeated round of 
births.”* Hence abandoning all other duties and practising 
to the end that he may bring benefit and happiness to 
himself and others, 
1 Read ndnunayagahatialo. 
8 Asanivicakkam =asan\TTW\<j.alam. Cf. P.T.8. Dictionary a.v. 
* Read supinantare pyatthi ( —pt+attM). 
4 Dxgha ii, 55. Cf. Dialogues ii, 50. 

--- PAGE 214 ---
XVII.—Exposition of the Plane of Understanding 707 
The wise and mindful one here should 
Be always heedful of the deep 
And varied causal mode,1 that he 
May get therein a foothold firm. 
Thus is ended the seventeenth chapter called the Exposition 
of the Plane of Understanding in the section of the develop¬ 
ment of Understanding in the Path of Purity composed for 
the gladdening of good folk. 
1 Read paccayak&ra0 as one compound. 

--- PAGE 215 ---
[587] CHAPTER XV11I 
EXPOSITION OF THE PURITY OF VIEWS 
Now it has been said that1 the two purities which are the 
root, namely the purity of morality and the purity of mind, 
should be fulfilled, after making one’s knowledge mature 
through study and questioning in those states which are the 
plane (of understanding). Of these the purity of morality is 
the well purified fourfold morality, such as restraint ac¬ 
cording to Patimolckha, treated in detail in the exposition of 
morality.2 And the purity of mind is the eight attainments 
together with the access - concentration, which have been 
treated at length in all modes in the Exposition of Concentra¬ 
tion3 discussed under the head4 of morality. Therefore all 
of them should be understood in the way described. But in 
what has-been said such as, “ The five purities in respect of 
views, the overcoming of doubt, the knowledge and discern¬ 
ment of the (right) path and the wrong path, the knowledge 
and discernment of the middle way, knowledge and discern¬ 
ment are the ‘ body,’ *,;l the discernment of name-and-form 
according to fact is “ purity of views.” 
A man who is desirous of fulfilling it (viz., that purity), 
and who is progressing in calm should first of all rise from one 
or other of the jhanas of the realms of form, or of the formless 
—excepting the realm of neither perception nor non-perception 
—and seize by way of characteristic, function and so on, the 
jhana-factors, such as applied thinking (vilakJco) and the 
states associated therewith. Having seized all of them, he 
should fix them as name in the sense of (naming or) bending, 
owing to their tendency to (name, or to) bend towards the 
* Page 19, above, Chap. I. 
4 Read cittasisena for cittasihna. 
708 
1 Page 514. 
8 Above, Chap. XI. 

--- PAGE 216 ---
XVIII.—Exposition of ike Purity of Views 709 
object. Then just as a man, seeing a snake inside his bouse, 
would chase it and find its hole, so the ascetic, considering the 
name and making search “ Depending on what does this name 
proceed 1” would see that it is the heart-basis on which it 
depends. [588] Then he secs the things which are the support 
of the heart-basis and the remaining derived material qualities 
which depend on them—thus he sees form.1 And he fixes all 
these as form, owing to their liability to change. Then he fixes 
name and form briefly thus: “Name ” has the characteristic 
of bending, “ form ” has the characteristic of changing. 
And he who is progressing in bare insight, who also is 
progressing in calm, seises the four elements briefly or at 
length, by one or the other of the ways of seizing the elements 
mentioned2 in the determination of the four elements. Then 
to him are manifested ten material qualities by way of the body- 
decad, namely, the four elements, colour, smell, taste, nutritive 
essence, life, clearness of the sense of touch in the hair which is 
produced by karma, when the elements arc manifested in their 
own true functions and characteristics. There are also mani¬ 
fested in it3 ten material qualities by way of the sex-decad4 * 
owing to the existence of sex. In it are also manifested the set 
of eight ending in nutritive essence8 produced by sustenance, 
the same produced by the caloric order, the same produced 
by mind:—twenty-four in addition to the others. Thus in 
each of the twenty-four parts6 of the body produced by the 
four causes there are forty-four material qualities. But in 
each of the four parts, namely, sweat, tears, saliva, mucus, 
which are produced by the caloric order and by mind there are 
sixteen by means of the two sets of eight, ending in nutritive 
essence. And in each of the four parts, namely, the stomach, 
excrement, pus, urine, which are produced by the caloric 
order, there are eight by means of the set of eight, ending in 
1 Rupa, translated also by “ matter,” “ material quality.” 
* Page 402 f. above. 
8 I.e. in “ hair,” among bodily features. 
4 Bhdva, i.e. being a man or woman. 
s For enumeration, see p. 395, n. 2 above. 
8 Excepting the eight which are mentioned immediately below. 

--- PAGE 217 ---
710 The Path of Purity 
nutritive essence and produced by caloric order. Thus is the 
way as regards the thirty-two parts. 
And when the thirty-two parts are manifested, ten other 
modes1 are manifested. Of these, in that portion of fire, which, 
being bom of karma, wholly transmutes food and so on in 
digestion, there arc nine material qualities, namely, the set 
of eight ending in nutritive essence and life. Likewise in the 
portion of inhalings and exhalings of breath, which are born 
of mind, there are nine, namely, the same set of eight and 
sound. In each of the remaining eight, which are produced 
by the four causes, there are manifested thirty-three material 
qualities, namely, the set of nine ending in life and three sets 
of eight ending in nutritive essence. Thus when the material 
things and derived material qualities are manifested by means 
of the full forty-two modes, sixty other material qualities are 
manifested by way of the physical object and the door, namely, 
five decade of the eye and so on, and the heart-basis-decad. 
Taking all of them as one, by the characteristics of changing, 
he views them as form. And when he has seized form thus, 
the non-material states appear to him by way of the door. 
And they are the eighty-one worldly consciousnesses, made up 
of twice five consciousnesses, three mind-elements, sixty-eight 
mind-consciousness-elements. [589] And, generally speaking, 
the seven mental properties, which are co-existent therewith, 
namely, contact, feeling, perception, volition, life, conscious 
duration, attention make their appearance. But the transcen¬ 
dental thoughts are seized neither by him who has just bare 
insight, nor by him who iB progressing in calm, because they are 
unattainable.2 Taking all the non-material states as one, by 
the characteristics of bending, he views them as “ name.” 
1 The ten modes are made up of four of the fire-element and six of 
the air-element. The four fiery modes are “Whatever givee heat, 
•whatever consumes, whatever burns up, whatever wholly transmutes 
food and drink in digestion,” and the Bix airy modes are “ Wind dis¬ 
charged upwards, wind discharged downwards, wind in the stomach, 
wind in the abdomen, vapours that traverse the several members, 
inhalings and exhalings of breath.” These are all described on p. 405, 
above. 8 ReadonodAi®. 

--- PAGE 218 ---
XVIII.—Exposition of the Purity of Views 711 
Thus does one person determine name-and-form at length by 
way of the determination of the four elements. 
Another man does so by way of the eighteen elements.. 
How ? Here a monk considers the elements thus: “ In this 
individuality there are eye-element . . . mind consciousness 
element,” and does not recognize the eye, as does the world, 
to be the lump of flesh, which, variegated with white and 
black circles, has length and width, and is bound in the eye- 
cavity with veins as with strings, but determines, as the eye- 
element, that sensory organism of the eye which has been 
described in the derived material qualities in the Exposition 
of the Aggregates.1 But he does not determine, as the eye- 
element, the other fifty-three material qualities, namely, the 
nine co-existent material qualities comprising the four elements 
which are the support of the eye-organism, the four attendant 
material qualities of colour, smell, taste, nutritive essence and 
the protecting life-faculty; the twenty karma-born material 
qualities which are established in the organism by way of the 
decads of the body and sex; and the twenty-four underived 
material qualities by way of the three sets of eight ending in 
nutritive essence which are produced by sustenance and so on. 
In the same way (he proceeds) with the ear-element and the 
rest. But as regards the body-element the remaining material 
qualities are forty-three. 
But others make nine out of those produced by the caloric 
order and mind, by including sound in each case, and thus 
they enumerate up to forty-five. Thus the ten material 
qualities, namely, five sensory organisms and their fields:— 
shapes, sounds, smells, tastes, tangible things—make ten 
elements. And the remaining material qualities also are 
elements of mental states. Thoughts which proceed by de¬ 
pending on the eye, and making an object of matter, are known 
as the element of cye-consciousness. Thus twice five con¬ 
sciousnesses make five elements of consciousness. The three 
thoughts of mind-element make one mind-element. The 
sixty-eight thoughts of mind-consciousness element make one 
1 Page 517, above. 

--- PAGE 219 ---
712 The Path of Purity 
mind-consciousness element. Thus all the eight-one worldly 
consciousnesses make seven elements of consciousness. The 
mental properties, such as contact, which are associated there¬ 
with, make one element of mental state. Thus here ten 
and a half elements are form, seven and a half1 [590] are name. 
Thus one man determines name-and-form by way of the 
eighteen elements. 
Another man does so by way of the twelve sense-organs. 
How ? Excepting the fifty-three material qualities, he deter¬ 
mines just the sensory organism of the eye as the sense-organ 
of the eye, as described under the eye-element. In the same 
way he determines the elements of ear, nose, tongue, body, to 
be the sense-organs of ear, nose, tongue, body. The five 
states which are their objects are determined to be the sense- 
organs of matter, sound, smell, taste, tangible thing and the 
seven worldly elements of consciousness to be the sense-organ 
of mind. He determines contact and so on, which are as¬ 
sociated therewith, and the remaining matter to be the sense- 
organ of mental state. Thus ten and a half sense-organs are 
form, one and a half are name. Thus one man determines 
name-and-form by way of the twelve sense-organs. 
Another man determines it by way of the aggregates even 
more briefly. How ? In this body the four elements pro¬ 
duced by the four causes, and colour, smell, taste, nutritive 
essence, the five sensory organisms which all depend on the 
elements, and basic matter, and sex and life-faculty and sound- 
products by two causes:—these seventeen material qualities 
can be mastered, can be determined as material form. 
Body-intimation, speech-intimation, space-element, buoy¬ 
ancy, pliancy, wieldineas, integration, continuity, ageing, 
impermanence of form:—these ten material qualities cannot 
be mastered; they are mere limitation of difference in mode and 
change, they cannot be determined as material form, but they 
are considered to be material qualities from the mere limitation 
of difference in the mode and change of material qualities. 
All these twenty-seven material qualities are the aggregate 
1 AdfflaftJiama. The P.T.S. Dictionary gives the moaning only as 
four, i.e. half of eight. 

--- PAGE 220 ---
XVIII.—Exposition of the Purity of Views 713 
of matter, the feeling which arises, together with the eighty- 
one worldly consciousnesses, is the aggregate of feeling, the per¬ 
ception associated with those consciousnesses is the aggregate 
of perception, the activities are the aggregate of activities, the 
consciousness is the aggregate of consciousness. Thus the 
aggregate of matter is “ form,’ ’ the four non-material aggregates 
are “ name.” Thus one monk here determines “ name and 
form ” by way of the five aggregates. 
Another man determines name-and-form briefly thus: He 
grasps “ form ” (or matter) in this individuality briefly thus:— 
“ Whatever form there is, is (a) the four great primaries and 
(b) form derived from the four great primaries.” Likewise 
he grasps the sense-organ of mind and a portion of the sense- 
organ of mental state as “ name.” And this name and this 
form give rise to (the dual idea) name-and-form. 
[591] If, after grasping “ form ” under various conditions, 
he grasps “ name,” and it does not appear to him because it is 
refined, he should not lose heart but contemplate, attend to, 
grasp and determine form repeatedly. For as form appears to 
him cleansed, disentangled, well-purified, so the states of the 
formless registering the states of form manifest themselves. 
Just as a man, not seeing the reflection of his face by looking 
at an unburnished mirror, would not throw away the mirror, 
but would have it burnished until the reflection of his face 
appears; as a man, scattering sesamum seeds into a mortar, 
sprinkling them with water, and grinding them once or twice 
and not getting the oil, would not throw away the seeds, but 
would sprinkle hot water and crush and grind them until he 
sees clear sesamum oil issuing therefrom; as a man, wishing to 
purify water, gets hold of clear water-strychnos, and putting 
his hand inside the jar, scrubs it once or twice, and when the 
water does not become clear, does not throw away the strychnos, 
but scrubs the jar again and again, until the mud subsides 
and the water becomes clear and transparent; so the monk 
should not throw down the burden, but should contemplate, 
attend to, grasp and determine form repeatedly. For as form 
appears to him cleansed, disentangled and well-purified, so 
the hostile vices subside, the mind becomes clear like the water 
46 

--- PAGE 221 ---
714 The Path of Purity 
on top of the mud, and the registering states of the formless 
manifest themselves. 
In the same way should this meaning be made clear by other 
similes, such as (pressing) the sugar-cane (for sugar), (extorting 
information out of a) thief, (taming) an ox, (churning) milk 
curds (for cream, and cooking) fish.1 
As he grasps thus the well-purified form, the states of the 
formless appear to him in three aspects, by way of contact, 
by way of feeling, or by way of consciousness. How ? 
To one who is grasping the elements in such a way as “ the 
earthy-element has the characteristic of solidity,”2 contact 
appears as the first impact; feeling associated therewith is 
the aggregate of feeling; perception is the aggregate of per¬ 
ception; volition together with feeling is the aggregate of 
activities; mind is the aggregate of consciousness. [592] 
Likewise the earthy element, in hairs, etc., in the inkalings 
and exhalings of breath, has the characteristic of solidity, 
contact appears as the first impact, feeling associated 
therewith is the aggregate of feeling . . . mind is the aggre¬ 
gate of consciousness. Thus the states of the formless appear 
by way of contact. To one (who grasps the elements in such a 
way as) “The earthy element has the characteristic of 
solidity,” the feeling which enjoys the essence (of solidity) 
of the registered object appears as the aggregate of feeling, 
the perception associated therewith is the aggregate of per¬ 
ception, contact and volition associated therewith are the 
aggregate. of activities, mind associated therewith is the 
aggregate of consciousness. Likewise the earthy element 
in hair, etc., in the inhalings and exhalings of breath, has 
the characteristic of solidity, feeling which enjoys the 
essence of the registered object is the aggregate of feeling . . . 
mind associated therewith is the aggregate of consciousness. 
Thus the states of the formless appear by way of feeling. 
To another one (who grasps the elements in 6uoh a way 
as) “ The earthy element has the characteristic of solidity,” 
consciousness, cognizing the object, appears as the aggregate 
1 The information about these similes has been taken from the Jlkd. 
* See aboye, p. 422. 

--- PAGE 222 ---
_ V 
XVIII.—Exposition of the Purity of Views 715 
of consciousness, feeling associated therewith is the aggregate 
of feeling, perception is the aggregate of perception, contact 
and volition are the aggregate of activities. Thus the states 
of the formless appear by way of consciousness. 
Construction should be made by this method by way of 
the four elements in the forty-two parts of elements beginning 
with hair on this wise: “ In the hair set up by karma the 
earth-element has the characteristic of solidity,” and by way 
of the entire special method in the remaining elements of 
eye and so on which are the reasons for the grasping of form. 
Because to him who grasps well-purified form the states of 
the formless manifest themselves in three ways, therefore 
it is he, not another, who should strive to grasp the formless. 
For if, when one or two of the states of form have appeared,1 
he gives up form, and begins to grasp the formless, the subject 
of his meditation falls off, like the mountain cow mentioned 
in the development of the earth-device.2 [593] But when 
he tries hard to grasp the formless after having grasped the 
well-purified form, the subject of his meditation attains in¬ 
crease, growth and development. He determines the four 
formless aggregates, which have appeared thus by way of 
contact and so on, as “ name,” and the four great primaries, 
which are the object of the formless, and form which iB 
derived from the four great primaries, as “form.” Thus 
he determines the twofold division into name-and-form of 
all the states of the three planes, that is, the eighteen elements, 
twelve sense-organs, five aggregates, as though by means of 
a sword he had opened a box, or split a twin palmyra bulb,8 
and comes to the conclusion, that there is no being, or person, 
or deva, or Brahma higher than the mere name-and-form. 
After thus determining name-and-form in its true essence, 
and in order that he may the more easily put away this worldly 
concept of a being, a person, transcend the confusion arising 
out of Buch concept, and place the mind on a plane free from 
1 Should it not be “ has not appeared,” reading anupotfhiU ? 
* See above, p. 176. 
* Reading yarnakat&lahintlain. 

--- PAGE 223 ---
716 The Path of Purity 
such confusion, he determines it, assimilating1 the meaning 
derived from many suttantas, that it is mere name-and-form ; 
it is no being, no person. For this has been said: 
For just as, when the parts are rightly set, 
The word chariot ariieth (in our minds) 
So doth our usage covenant to say : 
A being when the aggregates are there.2 
Thus also has it been said: “ Just as it is by and because of 
wattle and withies, grass and clay, that a space is enclosed which 
is called a house, so it is by and because of bones and sinews, 
flesh and skin, that a space is enclosed which is called a visible 
shape.”2 
Again it has been said: 
“ Nay, it is simply III that rises, III 
That doth persist, and III that wanes away. 
Nought beside III it is that comes to pass, 
Nought else but III it is doth cease to be.”4 
Thus in many hundreds of suttantas has name-and-form 
been set forth, not a being, not a person. Therefore just as 
when the parts such as the axle, wheel, frame, pole, are put 
together in a certain manner, the mere word “ chariot ” 
comes into use, but there is no Buch thing as “ chariot ” in 
the ultimate sense when any of the parts are examined:—as 
when the parts of a house, such as wattle, are set up in a 
certain manner enclosing a space, the mere word “ house ” 
comes into use, but there is no such thing as a house in the 
ultimate sense; as when the thumb and the fingers and so 
on are placed in a certain manner, [594] the mere word 
“fist ” comes into use; aB the mere words “lute,” “ army,” 
“ town," “ tree," come into use when their respective parts, 
such as the body of the lute and the strings,6 elephants and 
horses, walls and houses and gates, trunk and branches and 
leaves are arranged in certain positions, and there is no such 
thing (any of these, e.g.) as a tree in the ultimate sense, on 
1 Read samsandetvd. 8 Kindred Sayings, i, 170. 
3 Further Dialogues, i, 137. 
1 Kindred Sayings, i, 170, n. 2. * Read (Lmyi-tanti. 

--- PAGE 224 ---
XVIII.—Exposition of the Purity oj Views 717 
examining each part, so when the five clinging aggregates 
exist, the mere word “ being,” “ person,” comes into use, 
but on examining each of the states, in the ultimate sense 
there is no such thing as a being, (it is) the object of a mis¬ 
conception that makes one say “ I am ” or “ I ”; in the ulti¬ 
mate sense there just is name-and-form. The discernment 
of him who sees thus is called the discernment of reality. 
And he who puts away discernment of reality, and clings 
to the view that a being exists, must admit that it is either 
perishable, or imperishable. If he admits that it is imperish¬ 
able, he falls into the theory of eternalism; if he admitB 
that it is perishable, he falls into the theory of annihilation. 
For there is no other state which is an issue of that being, 
as curd is an issue of milk. He who holds that a being is i 
eternal sinks.1 He who holds that it is annihilated is carried 
away by extremism.2 
Hence said the Blessed One: “ Being obsessed, monks, by 
two views, some devas and men sink in the pleasures oj becoming, 
some are carried away by extremism; only those who possess 
the eye (oj truth) see the truth. And how, monks, do some sink 
■in the pleasures oj becoming ? Monks, there are devas and men 
who delight in becoming, Jind pleasure in becoming, revel in 
becoming. When they are taught the Law jor the cessation oj be¬ 
coming, their mind does not respond, does not have jaith, is not 
steady or intent. Thus, monks, some sink in becoming. And how, 
monks, are some extremists? Being oppressed by, ashamed 
oj, disgusted with becoming, some take delight in non-becoming, 
saying, ‘ Since, masters, it is said that this self on the dissolution 
oj the body, is cut off, perishes, and does not exist after death, 
that is peace, that is noble, that is the truth.* Thus, monks, 
are some extremists. And how, monks, do those possessed oj 
the eye see ? Here, monks, a monk sees the jive aggregates3 as 
such. Seeing the jive aggregates as such he practises, in order 
that he may be disgusted with them, have no passion jor them, 
1 I.e. Sinks in the pleasures of becoming, or it may mean ** recodes 
from the cessation of becoming.” 
* Or, “ runs past the cessation of becoming.” 
* Bhuta. Read bhilclchu bhtitam. 

--- PAGE 225 ---
718 * The Path of Purity 
that they may cease. Thus, monks, does one who has the eye 
Bee”1 
Therefore just as a wooden doll, void of soul, without life 
or force, walks or stops by means of the string attached to 
wood, [595] and appears to be endowed with force and vital¬ 
ity, so this narae-and-form, though without soul, life or force, 
walks or stops owing to mutual association, and appears to 
be endowed with force and vitality. Hence said the Ancients: 
There is here truly name-and-form, 
Wherein exists no being nor man. 
’Tis void and fashioned like a doll, 
A lump of ill, like grass and sticks. 
Not only by the simile of the wooden doll, but also by such 
similes as sheaves of reeds should the illustration be made. 
For as when two sheaves of reeds are placed one against the 
other, one gives support to the other, and one falls down 
together with the other, so in the five-constituent existence 
name-and-form depend on one other, so that one is the 
support of the other, and one falls together with the other 
through death.2 Hence said the Ancients:— 
The couple name-and-form depend on one another, 
When one breaks up, so through relation doth the other. 
And as when sound arises depending on a drum struck by 
the hand, the drum is one, the sound another, drum and sound 
do not mix together, the drum is void of the sound, and the 
sound is void of the drum, even so when name proceeds 
depending on form, called the physical basis, door, object, 
form is one, name another, name-and-form do not mix 
together, name3 is void of form and form is void of name. 
Nevertheless on account of the drum, sound arises, on 
account of form, name arises. Hence said the Ancients 
1 Not traced. Is this passage in the Pifakas ? 
Cf. Kindred Sayings, ii, 80, where name-and-form and consciousness 
are the two sheaves of reeda. 
* Read namam rQpena for ndma-rupena. 

--- PAGE 226 ---
XVIII.—Exposition of the Purity of Views 719 
The fivefold contact-states come not from eye 
Or form, or anything behind the two. 
The states conditioned from a cause proceed, 
A3 sound arises when the drum is struck. 
The fivefold contact-states come not from ear,1 
Or sound or anything behind the two . . . 
The fivefold contact-states come not from nose 
Or smell or anything betwixt the two . . . 
The fivefold contact-states come not from tongue 
Or taste or anything betwixt the two. . . . 
[596] The fivefold contact-states come not from body 
Or touch or anything betwixt the two . . . 
It is not material form or field of thought 
From which the states conditioned come to pass. 
The states conditioned from a cause proceed, 
As sound arises when the drum is struck. 
Of the two, “ name ” is without power, and is unable to 
proceed2 by its own power. It does not eat, or drink, or 
speak, or adopt any of the four postures. “ Form ” is also 
without power, and is unable to proceed by its own power.8 
It has no desire to eat, to drink, to speak, or adopt any of the 
postures. But depending on name, form proceeds: depending 
on form, name proceeds. When there is a desire on the part 
of name to eat, to drink, to speak, or to adopt any of the 
postures, form eats, drinks, speaks, adopts the posture. 
To make the meaning clear they cite this simile :4 Suppose 
a born-blind and a cripple wished to go to some other place. 
The born-blind said to the cripple, “ I say! I can do what 
is to be done by legs, but I have no eyes to enable me to 
see even and uneven places.” The cripple said to the born- 
blind, “ I say 1 I can do what is to be done by the eyes, but 
I have no legs to enable me to go forward or step backwards.” 
1 Read Na sotato. * Read pavaititum. 
* The J’iJbd adds that, nevertheless, name is not without power as 
regards believing, putting forth energy, etc. (saddahanuwahanddisu), 
nor is form without power as regards maintaining, binding, etc. (sand- 
Jidranabandhan&disu). 
4 For a more graphic account see Expositor, 371, where, in line 1, 
read “ inability ” for “ non-inability." 

--- PAGE 227 ---
720 The Path of Purity 
The born-bliud was highly delighted and made the cripple 
mount his shoulder. The cripple sat there and gave out 
directions saying, “ Give up the left and take the right path. 
Give up the right and take the left.” 
Herein the born-blind is without power or strength and 
cannot go by his own power or strength, and so is the cripple. 
But there is nothing to prevent their going when they depend 
on one another. So both name-and-form separately are 
without power, unable to arise in their own power, or to per¬ 
form their various functions. But when one depends on the 
other, there is nothing to prevent their arising or procedure. 
Hence this is said: 
They neither rise nor stand in their own strength: 
These states conditioned which themselves are weak. 
And must obey the will of other states. 
[597] By others are they caused, of others are 
The object, they have come to pass by means 
Of cause and object and such other things. 
As by a boat men roam about the sea, 
So by the form, the group of name proceeds. 
As by the men, the boat goes on the sea, 
So by the name, the group of form proceeds. 
As men and boat together cross the sea, 
So name and form on one another rest. 
Thus the discernment of name-and-form according to the 
truth, which is brought to the stage free from confusion 
when one has determined name-and-form in such maimer 
and mastered the idea of a being is to be known as the Purity 
of Views, for which the determination of name-and-form and 
the analysis of all compounded things are synonyms. 
Thus is ended the eighteenth chapter called the Exposition 
of the Purity of Views in the section of the development of 
understanding in the Path of Purity composed for the purpose 
of gladdening good folk. 

--- PAGE 228 ---
[598] CHAPTER XIX 
EXPOSITION OF PURITY OF THE TRANSCENDING 
OF DOUBT 
Knowledge established by the transcending of doubt in the 
three (phases of) time through grasping the causes of this 
name-and-form is called Purity of the transcending of doubt. 
The monk who desires to fulfil it sets about making a 
search for the condition and cause of name-and-form, just 
as a clever physician seeks for the origin of a disease, or a 
compassionate man, seeing a young little child lying on its 
back on the road, thinks of its parents, saying “ Whose child 
may it be V* From the beginning he reflects thus: “ This 
name-and-form is not without condition since it is the same 
name-and-form everywhere, at all times, in all cases. It is 
not caused by a creative deity or others, for there is no creator, 
or anyone beyond the name-and-form. And they who say the 
Creator and others are mere name-and-form, according to 
them the name-and-form arises without such conditions as 
those called creator and so on. Therefore, since it must have 
its root-condition and cause, which are they?” Attending 
thus to the condition and cause of name-and-form, he grasps 
the condition and cause of the body-group thus: “ This body 
is not born amidst water-lilies, lotuses, white lotuses, white 
water-lilies and so on, or amidst rubies, pearls and so on. 
It is born between the stomach and the colon, with the 
membrane of the stomach behind, the back-bones in front, 
surrounded by the intestines and the mesentery, itself evil¬ 
smelling, loathsome and repulsive, confined in a place, evil¬ 
smelling, loathsome and repulsive, like worms in rotten fish, 
decomposed corpses,1 putrid junkets, cesspools, pools of mud 
and so on. And of the body that is born thus, [599] these 
1 PiUikwnapa is omitted in the Burmese tests. 
721 

--- PAGE 229 ---
722 The Path of Purity 
four states: ignorance, craving, grasping, karma are the 
root-condition, as having produced it, and sustenance is the 
cause, as having supported it. Thus these five states are its 
root-condition and cause. Of these the three beginning with 
ignorance are the sufficing condition of this body, like the 
mother of a child; karma is the generator, like the father of 
a son; sustenance is the supporter,1 like the nurse of a child.” 
Having thus made a grasp of the cause of the gToup of 
“ form,” he again makes a grasp of the group of “ name ” in 
this wise: “It is because of the eye and of t'isible objects 
that eye-oo>isciousness arises.”2 Having seen thus the pro¬ 
ceeding of name-and-form according to the cause, he discerns 
that, as it proceeds now, so it proceeded causally in the past, 
and will proceed causally in the future. As he discerns thus, 
the fivefold doubt concerning the past expressed as “ Was 
I in ages past ? TTos I not in ages past ? What was I then ? 
How was 1 then? From what did I pass to ivhat?”; and the 
fivefold doubt concerning the future expressed as “ Shall I 
be in ages to come ? Shall I not be in ages to come ? What 
shall I then be ? How shall I then be ? From what shall I 
pass to what ?”; and the sixfold doubt concerning the present 
expressed as “ Or, again it is present time3 about which he is 
in doubt asking himself: Am I ? Am I not ? What am I ? 
How am I? Whence came my being ? Whither Krill it pass ?” 
—all this doubt is put away. 
Another man sees the cause of “ name ” twofold: as being 
held in common, and not held in common; the cause of form 
fourfold by way of karma and so on. For twofold is the 
cause of “ name ”: held in common and not held in common. 
Of these, the six doors, such as the eye, and the six objects, 
such as visible form, are causes of name held in common, 
1 SandJiaraka. 
* ifajjhima i, 111. This reference, given as footnote 1 on page 599 
of Visuddhi Magga Pali text, should be to this passage (which should be 
marked i in the Pali text) and not to the immediately following quota¬ 
tion, which is from Majjhima i, 8. 
* Majjhima i, 8, from which these quotations on doubt concerning 
the three times are made, reads ajjhattaiji, “ self." See Further 
Dialogue*, i, 5. 

--- PAGE 230 ---
XIX.—Exposition of Transcending of Doubt 723 
since from them all aspects of name arise, as moral and so on. 
Attention and so on are causes not held in common. For 
wise attention, hearing the Good Law and so on, are the 
cause of morality [600]; the opposites are the cause of im¬ 
morality ; karma and so on are the cause of the result; life- 
continuum1 and so on are the cause of the inoperative. The 
causes of form are four, namely karma, consciousness, the 
caloric order, sustenance. 
Of these, karma is the past cause of form produced by 
itself; consciousness is the present cause of form produced 
by itself; the caloric order and sustenance are causes of form 
produced by themselves at the static moment.2 
Thus a man makes a grasp of the cause of name-and-form. 
Having seen thus the proceeding of name-and-form causally, 
he discerns that, as it now proceeds, so also in the past it 
proceeded causally, and in the future it will proceed causally. 
As he discerns thus, doubt in the three times is put away in 
the way described. 
Another man, seeing that the activities called name-and- 
form reach old age, and those that have reached old age break 
up, makes a grasp of the cause of name-and-form by way of 
the causal law in the reverse way thus: Old age-and-death 
of activities happens when there is birth; birth happens when 
there is becoming; becoming when there is grasping; grasping 
when there is craving; craving when there is feeling; feeling 
when there is contact; contact when there is sixfold sense; 
sixfold sense when there is name-and-form; name-and-form 
when there is consciousness; consciousness when there are 
activities; activities when there is ignorance. Then his 
doubt is put away in the manner described. 
Another man makes a grasp of the cause of name-and-form 
by the causal law in the direct order, already shown in full 
as “ Conditioned by ignorance activities come to pass.” 
Then his doubt is put away as said above. 
Another man makes a grasp of the cause of name-and-form 
1 Bhavangam. 
1 Viz. the middle of the three instants of every happening; genesis, 
stasis, ceasing. 

--- PAGE 231 ---
724 The Path of Purity 
by way of the round of karmas and the round of results thus: 
In the previous karma-becoming delusion is ignorance, effort 
is activities, desire is craving, approach is grasping, volition 
is becoming. These five states in the previous karma-becom¬ 
ing are the causes of rebirth in the present. In the present 
existence rebirth is consciousness, descent is name-and-form, 
sensory organism is sense-organ, the being touched is contact, 
the being felt is feeling—these five states of the present 
rebirth-becoming are the causes of previously performed 
karma. From the maturity of sense-organs here delusion 
is ignorance . . . volition is becoming—these five states of 
the present karma-becoming are the causes of rebirth in the 
future. 
[601] Iu this respect there are four kinds of karma i1 karma 
(the fruit of which is) to be experienced in this life, karma (the 
fruit of which is) to be experienced in (the next) life, karma 
(the fruit of which is) to be experienced in some after life, 
karma “ which has been.”2 Of them, the first apperceptional 
volition, moral or immoral, out of the seven classes of con¬ 
sciousness in a single process of apperception, is known as 
karma (the fruit of which is) to be experienced in this life. It 
gives fruit during this very life. That which is unable to do 
so is karma “ which has been,” so called by way of the triple 
statement: there was no fruit of karma, there will be no 
fruit of karma, there is no fruit of karma. The seventh 
apperceptional volition which effects its purpose is known 
as karma (the fruit of which is) to be experienced in (the 
next) life. It yields fruit in the immediately succeeding life. 
That which is unable to do so is, as said above, karma “ which 
has been.” Volition of the five apperceptions between the 
first and the seventh is known as karma (the fruit of which is) 
to be experienced in some after life. It yields fruit in the 
future when an opportunity occurs. There is no karma 
“ which has been ” when the round of births is proceeding. 
Further there are four kinds of karma: weighty karma, 
1 For this and the two following paragraphs see Compendium, 
pp. 144-5. 
1 Ahosi^Kammam. 

--- PAGE 232 ---
XIX.—Exposition of Transcending of Doubt 725 
abundant karma,1 proximate karma, outstanding karma. 
Of them, that weighty karma, whether moral or immoral, 
which among weighty and light deeds is a deed such as 
killing a mother, or a very great deed, is the first to give 
fruit. Likewise that abundant karma which, among abundant 
or slender deeds,2 is either good conduct or bad conduct is 
the first to give fruit. The karma of recollection, at the 
time of death, is proximate karma, which a man nearing 
death is able to recall, and by which he is reborn. That 
karma which is not of the first three kinds, and which has 
had many opportunities of repetition, is out-standing karma. 
In the absence of the other three kinds, it brings on rebirth. 
Again, there are four kinds of karma: reproductive karxna, 
maintaining karma, unfavourable karma, destructive karma. 
Of them, reproductive karma is both moral and immoral, and 
reproduces the resultant aggregates of mind and matter at 
rebirth and at procedure. The maintaining karma is unable 
to reproduce a result. It maintains and prolongs the happi¬ 
ness ot ill, which arises when rebirth has been granted, and a 
result yielded by another karma. The unfavourable karma 
oppresses, afflicts and gives no opportunity of long life to the 
happiness or ill, which arises when rebirth has been granted, 
and a result yielded by another karma. The destructive 
karma, though itself moral and immoral, [602] kills some 
other karma which is weak, inhibits its result and makes 
room for its own results. That result, which is due to the 
opportunity thus given by the karma, is called uprisen 
result. 
Thus the difference among these twelve kinds of karma, 
both as karma and as result, is evident in its true essence 
to the Buddhas who possess a knowledge of karma and itB 
result, which knowledge is not held in common with their 
disciples. But their difference as karma and as result should 
be partially known by one possessed of insight. Therefore 
just this gist of the distinction between karmas has been 
made. __ 
1 Bahularp. For this Compendium, l.c., has ucinnakam, “ chrouio 
karma.” 2 Head bahuidbahuUsu. 

--- PAGE 233 ---
726 The Path of Purity 
Thus, by throwing this twelvefold karma into the round of 
karmas, a man makes a grasp of the cause of name-and-form 
by way of the round of karmas and the round of results. 
Having seen thus the proceeding of name-and-form causally, 
by way of the round of karmas and the round of results, he 
discerns that, as it now proceeds, so also in the past it pro¬ 
ceeded causally by way of the round of karmas and the round 
of results, and also in the future it will proceed causally by 
way of the rounds of karmas and the round of results. Thus 
proceed kanna and its results, the round of karmas and the 
round of results, the procedure of karma and the procedure 
of result, the continuity of karma and the continuity of re¬ 
sult, action and the fruit of action. And he discerns:— 
From karma come to pass results. 
Result has karma for its source. 
From karma comes a future life, 
And in this way the world proceeds. 
As he discerns thus, all the sixteen kinds of doubt con¬ 
cerning the past and so on expressed as “ Was I in ages past ?” 
and so on are put away. In all becomings, places of birth, 
courses, durations and abodes there appear just the name- 
and-form proceeding by way of cause and effect. Beyond the 
cause he sees not a doer, beyond the proceeding of results 
he sees not anyone to enjoy the results. And by means of 
right understanding he sees clearly that, to say there is a 
doer, when there is a cause, there is some one to enjoy when 
there is proceeding of results, is, among the wise, only a con¬ 
cept, a mere usage.1 Hence said the Ancients:— 
Of karma there’s no doer; nor is there 
Somebody to experience its result. 
It’s nothing but bare states that come to pass. 
To see this is to have discernment right. 
The starting point of karma and result, 
Proceeding thus together with their cause, 
May not be known, just like the starting point 
Of trees and other things that grow from seeds. 
1 Read voharanti'cc'ev’. 

--- PAGE 234 ---
XIX.—Exposition of Transcending of Doubt 721 
Their non-proceeding is not manifest 
Within the stream of life that is to come. 
The heretics who do not know this truth 
Are no more independent in their views. 
[603] They hold, there is a person, and they grasp1 
As Nihilists, and as Eternalists, 
At all the sixty-two perverted views,2 
Thus causing contradiction ’mongst themselves. 
They’re bound fast by the chains of their own views; 
The stream of craving carries them away. 
And as the stream of craving carries them, 
They do not get release from suffering. 
The Buddha’s own disciple-monk, 
Who knows this truth by knowledge high. 
Acquires a thorough knowledge of 
The subtle cause, profound and void. 
^ There is no karma in result, 
Nor is result in karma found; 
Each of the other is devoid; 
Apart from karma there’s no fruit. 
As fires dwell not in sun, cowdung, 
Or gem, or outside of these things, 
But only is produced by means 
Of all its parts constituent, 
So fruit is not in karma or outside; 
Nor in the fruit is karma to be found. 
The karma is devoid of fruit. 
Nor is the fruit in karma3 found. 
But it’s the karma and naught else, 
From which the fruit is reproduced. 
For there’s no deva, no Brahma, 
The maker of the round of life. 
It’s nothing but bare states that come to pass, 
The right conditions being all fulfilled. 
To him who having made a grasp of the cause of name-and- 
form by way of the round of karmas and the round of results, 
1 Read gahetvana. 5 Digha i, 39. a Read in the text kammc na. 

--- PAGE 235 ---
728 The Path of Purity 
and who has put away doubt in the three times, all states, 
past, future and present are known by way of death and 
rebirth. This is his full knowledge realized.1 
He knows this: those aggregates which were born through 
karma in the past ceased even there. But other aggregates 
are bom in this existence because of past karma ; there is not 
a single state that has come over to this existence from a 
past existence. And the aggregates born through karma in 
this existence will cease. Others will be bom in the next 
existence; there is not a single state that will go over to the 
next existence from this. 
Further, just as the rehearsing voice from the mouth of the 
teacher does not enter the pupil’s mouth,2 yet it cannot be 
denied that, because of it, the rehearsal takes place in the 
latter’s mouth; as the charmed water drunk by a (sick man’s) 
messenger does not enter the stomach of the sick man, yet 
it cannot be denied that because of it the disease is cured; 
as the decoration on the face does not go to the reflection of 
the face on the surface of a mirror and so on, yet it cannot be 
denied that, because of it, the decoration appears there; as 
the flame of a lamp does not go from one wick to the other, 
yet it cannot be denied that, because of it, the flame appears 
on the other wick;—even so nothing comes over to this 
existence from the past, nor does anything pass over to the 
future from the present [604], yet it cannot be denied that—^ 
because of the aggregates, sense-organs, elements of the past 
existence they are bom here, or that, because of them being 
here, they are born in the future. 
As consciousness of eye, that comes at once 
After the element of mind, does not 
Come thence, yet similarly is born at once, 
So at rebirth thought is continuous; 
The first breaks up, the second thought is born. 
No break nor interval between them is, 
Naught goes from hence and yet rebirth takes place. 
1 Read ft&ta-parinna. 
2 Cf. Questions of King MUinda (S.B.E.), i. 111, where it is what the 
teacher utters, not his voice. 

--- PAGE 236 ---
XIX.—Exposition of Transcending of Doubt 729 
Thus the knowledge which grasps the cause of name-and- 
form in all respects, on the part of one who has known all 
states by way of death and rebirth, gains in strength and 
. the sixteen kinds of doubt are completely put away. Not 
only these, but also the eight kinds of doubt1 expressed in 
this way:—“ One is perplexed about the Teacher” and so on, 
are also put away, and the sixty-two heretical views* are 
discarded. Thus the knowledge which is established by the 
transcending of doubt in the three (phases of) time, by 
grasping the cause of name-and-form in various ways, is to 
be known as Purity through the Transcending of doubt. 
Knowledge of the law of cause and effect,8 knowledge 
of the reality, right discernment are its synonyms. For this 
has been said: “ Conditioned by ignorance activities come to 
pass as results. And both these states are results. Thus under¬ 
standing of the grasp of the cause is knowledge of the law of 
cause and effect.”1 
“ Attending to the impermanent, which states does he know 
and see as they really are ? How does that become right dis¬ 
cernment ? How in consequence are all things seen clearly as 
impermanent ? Concerning what is his doubt put away ? 
Attending to ill, to not-self, which states does he know and see 
as they really are ? ... is his doubt put away ? Attending 
to the impermanent he knows and sees the sign as it really is, 
hence the name right discernment. Thus in consequence all 
things are seen clearly as impermanent. Doubt concern¬ 
ing them is put away. Attending to ill, he knows and sees 
the procedure as it really is. Attending to the not-self he 
knows and sees the sign and procedure as they really are; 
hence the name right discernment. Thus in consequence all 
states are seen dearly as not the self. Doubt concerning 
them is put away. That which is knowledge according to the 
reality, and that which is right discernment, and that which is 
the transcending of doubt: are these [G05] states different in 
meaning and in the letter, or are they one in meaning, and 
1 DhammasaAgam, § 1004. * Digha i, 39. 
8 Dhammatthiti. Sec Kindred Sayings, ii, 88, n. 2. 
4 PatisambhxdA i, 50. 

--- PAGE 237 ---
730 The Path of Purity 
different in the letter ? That which is knowledge according to 
the reality and that which is right discernment and that which 
is the transcending of doubt: these states are one in meaning 
and different in the letter."1 
He who is endowed with this knowledge, has gained inBight, 
obtained comfort and a foothold in the Buddha’s religion, 
and is assured of salvation, is known as a junior Stream- 
winner. 
Therefore the monk, who wishes to transcend 
His doubt, should mindful be and grasp 
The cause of name-and-fonn in all respects. 
Thus is ended the nineteenth chapter called the Exposition 
of Purity -through the Transcending of Doubt in the section 
of the development of understanding in the Path of Purity 
composed for the purpose of gladdening good folk. 
1 Ibid, ii, 62 f. 

--- PAGE 238 ---
[606] CHAPTER XX 
EXPOSITION OF PURITY IN THE KNOWLEDGE AND DIS¬ 
CERNMENT OF THE (RIGHT) AND THE WRONG PATHS 
Now the knowledge established by knowing the right Path 
and the wrong Path thus “ This is the Path, this is not the 
Path ” is known as Purity in the knowledge and discernment 
of the right and wrong Paths. 
He who wishes to achieve it should apply himself first of 
all to methodical insight, known as the contemplation of 
groups.1 Why ? Because to him who has begun to have 
insight, knowledge of the right and wrong Paths arises, when 
illumination and other (influences)2 arise. Indeed when such 
influences arise in him, he has knowledge of the right and 
wrong Paths. And the contemplation of groups is the begin¬ 
ning of insight; therefore it has been set forth immediately 
after (the preceding chapter on) the transcending of doubt. 
And further, because knowledge of the right and wrong Paths 
arises when there exists comprehension of scrutiny, and the 
comprehension of scrutiny immediately follows comprehension 
of the known, therefore he who wishes to achieve that Purity 
in the knowledge and discernment of the right and wrong 
Paths should first apply himself to the contemplation of groups.3 
1 “ The concise contemplation, in groups, of states divided into 
various divisions by way of the past etc. (i.e. present and future) is 
group-contemplation. This, they say, is a term of the dwellers of 
Jambudlpa (India). The insight into states by such method as “ what¬ 
ever matter ”—this, they say, is a term of the dwellers of Tambapan- 
nidlpa (Ceylon) ”—f ikd. [Atitfidivasena anekabbedabhinne dhamme 
kal&pato samkhipitva Bammasanam kalfipasammasanam. Ayam kira 
Jambudlpav&slnaih abhilapo. Yam kind rupan ti adina nayena hi 
dhammanam vipassana, ayam kira Tambapanmdlpavaslnam abhilapo.] 
3 On illumination and nine other insight-corrupters, which “ arise 
to the scion of good family who is well-behaved, devoted to what is 
fitting (i.e. knowledge), who has begun his insight.” See p. 771. 
3 “ Because what is known as group-contemplation is not included 
in any one single Purity; some describe the course of insight without 
731 

--- PAGE 239 ---
732 The Path of Purity 
[The Three Comprehensions.] 
Therein this is the conclusion: There are three worldly 
comprehensions: comprehension of the known, comprehension of 
scrutiny, and comprehension of rejection, concerning which it 
has been said “ The understanding which is higher knowledge 
is knowledge in the sense of what is known. The understanding 
which is comprehension is knowledge in the sense of scrutinizing. 
The understanding which is rejection is knowledge in the sense 
of abandoningNow understanding which proceeds by way 
of noting the individual characteristics of several states as: 
matter has the characteristic of altering form, feeling has the 
characteristic of experiencing, is known as comprehension of the 
known. Insight-understanding which makes characteristics its 
object and [607] which proceeds by putting forward (or attribu¬ 
ting) the general characteristics2 of those very states in such 
wise as, matter is impermanent, feeling is impermanent and 
so on, is known as comprehension of scrutiny. Insight-under¬ 
standing which makes characteristics its object, and which 
proceeds by way of rejecting the perception of permanence 
etc., in those very states, is known as comprehension of 
rejection. 
touching it. Though this be so it has been set forth separately and 
wholly in the Suttantas and placed as the beginning of insight for the 
easy attention of beginners in Analytical Knowledge ”—Pika. [Yasma 
kalSpasammaaanarii nAma ekavisuddhiyam pi na antogadhaih, ekacce 
oa tarn anamasitva va vipassonacaram vaijijouti. Evam sante pi 
tarn Suttantesu ekadesena anavasesato ca dassitam. PaLisambkidA- 
yam fidikammikSnaih manasikArasukaratfiya vipasaanaya adibhavena 
thapitam.] 
1 Patimmbhidd i, 1, 87. 
2 “ The (general) characteristics of hardnoss, of touching etc. be¬ 
longing to the element of extension, to contact etc., should be con¬ 
sidered with regard to the three moments (of genesis, stability, breaking- 
up) as having the intrinsic nature brought about (or accomplished) 
by the fixedness of outward form. Not so are the characteristics of 
impermanence eto., which are held to be like attributed material 
qualities since they are considered chiefly in the modes of breaking, 
rising, falling, being oppressed and unruly ”—pika- [Yatha pathavl- 
phass&dlnam kakkhalaphusanadilakkhanfini tisu pi khanesu eallak- 
khitabbani patiniyatarupat&ya sabhAvasiddhan5 eva hutva gayhati. 
Na evam aniccatadilakkhanani, tani pana bharigudayabbayapllavasa- 
vattan&k&ramukhena gaketabbato samAropitarupAni viya gankauti Li.] 

--- PAGE 240 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 733 
Now the plane of comprehension of the known extends from 
the classification of activities to the grasping of causes; for 
within this range lies the dominant influence of penetration 
into the individual characteristics of states. And the plane 
of comprehension of scrutiny extends from the contemplation 
of groups to the reviewing of rise and fall; for within this range 
lies the dominant influence of penetration into general charac¬ 
teristics. Onwards from the reviewing of the break-up of 
states is the plane of comprehension of rejection; for, beginning 
therefrom, he who reviews states as impermanent rejects the 
perception of permanence, he who reviews states as ill rejects 
the perception of bliss, he who reviews states as not-self rejects 
the perception of the self; being disgusted with them he rejects 
delight,1 being dispassionate he rejects passion, reviewing 
them as ended (nirodhento) he rejects origination, in relin¬ 
quishing them he rejects clinging. Thus is the dominant 
influence of the seven reviewings which effect the rejection 
of the perception of permanence etc. Thus in these three 
comprehensions the classification of complexes and the 
grasping of causes being effected, the meditator attains 
comprehension of the known; and the other two are still 
to be attained. Hence it was said “ Because knowledge of the 
right and wrong Paths arises when there exists comprehension 
of scrutiny, and the comprehension of scrutiny immediately 
follows comprehension of the known, therefore he who wishes 
to achieve that Purity in the knowledge and discernment of 
the right and wrong Paths should first apply himself to the 
contemplation of groups.”2 
Therein this is the text (Pali): “ How does understanding 
in the concise determination of past, future and present states 
(become) knowledge in contemplation ? Whatever matter there 
is, whether past, future or present, subjective or . . . distant 
or proximate, all matter he determines as impermanent. This is 
one contemplation. He determines it as ill. This is one con- 
templation. He determines it as not-self. This is one con¬ 
templation. Whatever feeling there is . . . whatever cognition 
1 Read nandim. The commas should be readjusted and pe in the 
preceding line deleted. 2 P. 731. 

--- PAGE 241 ---
734 The Path of Purity 
(consciousness) ... he determines as not-self. This is one 
contemplation. The eye .. . decay and death, whether past, 
future or present he determines as impermanent. This is one 
contemplation. He determines them as ill, as not-self. This 
is one contemplation. Understanding in the concise determina¬ 
tion that matter past, future or present is impermanent in the 
sense of being extinct, ill in the sense of fearful, not-self in the 
setise of without essence is knowledge in their contemplation. 
[608] (Similar understanding as regards) feeling . . . cognition 
(consciousness) ... eye .. . decay and death . . . is know¬ 
ledge in their contemplation. Understanding in the concise 
determination that matter past, future or present is impermanent, 
cotiditioned,1 generated through cause, liable to extinction and 
liable to fall, liable to disjxtssion and liable to cessation is know¬ 
ledge in their contemplation. Understanding in the concise 
determination that feeling . . . cognition (consciousness) . . . 
eye .. . decay and death past, future or present is (each) im¬ 
permanent, conditioned- . . . liable to cessation is knowledge in 
their contemplation. Understanding in the concise determination 
that decay and death have birth as their cause; if there is no birth, 
there is no decay nor death is knowledge in their contemplation. 
Understanding in the concise determination that in the past time 
also and in the future time also decay and death have birth as 
their cause; if there is no birth there is no decay nor death is 
knowledge m their contemplation. Understanding in the con¬ 
cise determination that birth has becoming as its cause . . . 
complexes have ignorance as their cause ; if there is no ignorance, 
there are no complexes is knowledge in their contemplation. 
Understanding in the concise determination that in the past time 
also and in the future time also complexes have ignorance as their 
cause ; if there is no ignorance, there are no complexes is know¬ 
ledge in their contemplation. 
“ It is knowledge in the sense of what is known, understanding 
in the sense of understanding. Hence it is said that under¬ 
standing in the concise determination of past, future and present 
states is knowledge in their contemplation.”* 
1 I.e. by karma, consciousness, temperature, sustenance. 
a Patisambhidd i, 53. 

--- PAGE 242 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 735 
And here in the expression to be filled up “ eye . . . decay 
and death ” are included the following aggregates (ran) of 
states: states proceeding at the door together with the door 
and object, the five aggregates (khandhd), six doors, six 
objects, six types of cognition, six kinds of contact, six of 
feeling, six of perception, six of volition, six of craving, six 
of applied thought, six of sustained thought, six elements, 
ten devices, thirty-two parts of the body, twelve sense-organs, 
eighteen elements, twenty-two controlling faculties, three 
elements, nine becomings, four jhanas, four immeasurables, 
four attainments, twelve factors of genesis through cause. 
For this has been said in the Abhinneyya Niddesa: “ Monks, 
[609] all is to be thoroughly known. And what, monks, is the 
all that is to be thoroughly known ? Monks, the eye is to be 
thoroughly known; matter . . . eye-cognition (consciousness) 
. . . eye-contact—this feeling which is caused by eye-contact, 
is pleasurable or painful, neither pleasurable nor painful, 
—that also is to be thoroughly known. The ear . . . this feeling 
which is caused by mind-contact, is pleasurable or painful, 
neither pleasurable nor painful,—that also is to be thoroughly 
known. (Similarly as regards) matter . . . cognition, eye . . . 
mind, matter . . . ideas, eye-cognition . . . mind-cognition 
(consciousness), eye-contact . . . mind-contact, feeling born of 
eye-contact . . . feeling born of mind-contact, perception of 
matter . . . perception of ideas (dhamma), volition of matter . . . 
volition of ideas, craving for matter . . . craving for ideas, 
applied thinking to matter . . . applied thinking to ideas, sus¬ 
tained thinking to matter . . . sustained thinking to ideas; the 
element of extension ... the element of cognition (conscious¬ 
ness); earth-device . . . cognition-(consciouanesa)-deviee; 
hairs . . . brain; eye-organ . . . idea-organ; eye-element . . . 
mind-cognition-element; eye-faculty . . . faculty of one who 
has perfected knowledge; element of sensuousness, element of 
matter, element of non-matter; existence of seyxsuousness, exis¬ 
tence of -matter, existence of non-matter ; existence of perception, 
existence of non-perception, existence of neither perception nor 
non-perception, becoming of one constituent, becoming of four 
constituents, becoming of five constituents; first jhana. . . 

--- PAGE 243 ---
736 The Path of Purity 
fourth jkdna, menial emancipation through good-will . . . 
mental emancipation through indifference; attainment of the 
sphere of infinite space . . . attainment of the sphere of neither 
perception nor non-perception; ignorance is to be thoroughly 
known . , . decay and death are to be thoroughly known.”1 
Because there it is so stated at length, therefore here all has 
been concisely stated by the peyydla expression to be filled up. 
And because those transcendental states which come in 
this concise expression have not been submitted (lit. gone up) 
to contemplation, therefore they are not to be taken in this 
special chapter. And of those which have been submitted 
to contemplation those (states), to whomsoever they are 
evident, are grasped easily. And it is the contemplation of 
these that one should strive for. 
[Contemplation of the five aggregates by way of imper¬ 
manence etc.] 
Therein this is concerning the application of the system 
by way of aggregates: “ Whatever matter there is . . . all 
matter he determines as impermanent. This is one contempla¬ 
tion. He determines it as ill, as not-sdf. This is one [610] 
contemplation.”2 Thus far this monk classifies all matter 
indefinitely indicated as “ whatever matter ” into eleven 
positions, namely, by the triplet of the past and the four 
couplets of subjective and so on. “ He determines all matter 
as impermanent ”—i.e., contemplates it as impermanent. How? 
By the method next stated. For this has been stated “ matter 
past, future or present is impermanent in the sense of being 
extinct.”2 Therefore this (phrase) “ past matter” (means) 
that because it has become extinct in the past it has not 
reached this (present) becoming; hence it is impermanent 
in the sense of being extinct. The matter which is “ future ” 
(means) it will come to birth in the next becoming. Even 
that will indeed be extinct then, it will not reach a becoming 
after that; hence it is impermanent in the sense of being 
extinct. The “ matter which is present ” also is extinct even 
now, it does not go further; hence it is impermanent in the 
1 Ibid. 51. » P. 733. 

--- PAGE 244 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 737 
sense of being extinct. That which is subjective becomes 
extinct as just subjective, it does not get to the objective state; 
hence it is impermanent in the sense of being extinct. That 
which is objective . . . gross, refined, inferior, superior, 
distant . . . proximate becomes extinct just there and does 
not get to the distant state; hence he contemplates that it is 
impermanent in the sense of being extinct. In this way, that 
all is impermanent in the sense of being extinct is one con¬ 
templation. Differentiated, it is of eleven kinds. 
And all this is ill in the sense of fearful. “ In the sense of 
fearful ” (means) because it is beset with fear. For what is 
impermanent brings fear as to the gods at (the preaching of) 
the Sihopama Sutta.1 In this way that even this is ill in the 
sense of fearful is one contemplation. Being differentiated, 
it is of eleven kinds. 
And as all is thus ill it is “ not-self in the sense of without 
essence.” “ In the sense of without essence ” (means) by the 
absence of the self-essence which is thus fashioned, that the self 
is unruly (i.e. obeying no man’s mil), instigates, feels and con¬ 
trols itself (or self-willed). For what is impermanent, that is 
ill,2 and is unable to inhibit its own impermanence, or its 
oppression by rise and fall. Whence is its position to instigate 
and so on ? Hence He said “ Indeed, monks, if this body 
were the self, it would not be liable to sickness etc.”9 In this 
way that even this is not self in the sense of without essence 
is one contemplation. As differentiated it is of eleven kinds. 
[611] The same with feeling etc. 
But because what is impermanent is assuredly differentiated 
as conditioned etc., therefore in order to show its synonyms 
in various ways, or to show the procedure of attention the 
text is again worded as “ Body past, future or present is im¬ 
permanent, conditioned, generated through cause, liable to ex¬ 
tinction, liable to fall, liable to dispassion, liable to ending 
The same with feeling etc. 
1 Samyutta iii, 84 f. * Ibid. 82. 5 Ibid. 66. 
* Ibid. 24. The f%ka comments on this quotation thus: The terms 
liable to extinction and the following are its synonyms, but not the three 
first; for impermanence is not a synonym of itself. The Becond and 

--- PAGE 245 ---
738 The Path of Purity 
For the strengthening of his contemplation of the five 
aggregates as impermanent, ill, not-self the Blessed One has 
spoken of that contemplation of impermanence etc., as of 
different kinds, by differentiating1 adaptive knowledge in the 
differentiation2 of these expressions: “ Which arc the forty ways 
in which he gets adaptable patience ? Which are the forty ways 
in which he enters upon absolute certaintyin such a way as 
this “ (He contemplates) the five aggregates as impermanent, 
ill, disease, boil, thorn, evil, sickness, foreign, crumbling, calamity, 
danger, fear, misfortune, shaky, disintegrating, uncertain, non¬ 
protection, non-shelter, non-refuge, null, vain, empty, not-self, 
tribulation, perverse in nature, without essence, rooted in evil, 
murderous, unprosperous, cankerous, conditioned, deadly car¬ 
nality, liable to birth, liable to decay, liable to ailment, liable to 
death, liable to sorrow, liable to lamentation, liable to despair, 
liable to corruption* Thus seeing the five aggregates in these 
forty ways as impermanent he gets adaptable patience. Seeing 
that cessation of the five aggregates is permanent nibbana, 
he enters upon absolute certainty.** By way of that also he 
contemplates these five aggregates. How 1 
He contemplates each aggregate as impermanent because 
it is not eternal,4 but has a beginning and end; as ill because 
it is oppressed by rise and fall and is the basis of ill; as disease 
because it is maintained by causes and is rooted in disease; 
as boil because it is connected with the stake of ill and exudes 
impure corruptions and is swollen, cooked and disintegrated 
by birth, decay and break-up; as thorn because it is productive 
of injury, pricks internally and is difficult to extract; as evil 
because it is blameworthy, brings deterioration and is the 
basis of evil; [612] as sickness because it does not produce 
third torms conditioned, generated through cause are not synonyms of 
impermanence because they denote nothingness and maturity. [Tam 
pana khayadhamman ti adlnarn vasena veditabbarii, na purimSnam 
tirmarn. Na hi tad eva tasHa pariySyo hoti, nfipi sahkhatapaticca- 
samuppannapadfini hutvfL abhivadlpanato pakabhavadlpanato.] 
1 Construe with line 2 from end of paragraph. 
2 “ Vibhahge,” 1. 5 of para. a Pafisambhida ii, 238. 
4 For aniccan-tikataya read anaccantihatiya, “ not going beyond the 
end.” 

--- PAGE 246 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 739 
independence and is the proximate cause of sickness; as foreign 
because it is unruly and not to be disposed of; as crumbling 
because it crumbles by ailment, decay, and death; as calamity 
because it brings manifold destruction; as danger because it 
brings many unknown disadvantages and is the basis of all 
dangers; as fear because it is the mine of all fears and is 
opposed to the highest comfort called the calming of ill; as 
misfortune because it is bound up with many disadvantages 
and is attached to faults, and because like misfortune it is 
not worthy to be acquiesced in; as shaky because it is shaken 
by ailment, decay and death and the worldly conditions such 
as gain etc.; as disintegrating because it is liable to disintegrate 
both through exertion and its own essential nature (rasa); 
as uncertain because it is liable to drop at all periods and has no 
stability; as non-protection because it is unable to give pro¬ 
tection and no security is to be obtained from it; as non-shelter 
because it is not worthy to be resorted to and does not pro¬ 
vide shelter to those who resort to it; as non-refuge because 
it does not destroy the fear of those who depend on it; as null 
because it is without such fixedness, pleasantness, bliss, and 
individuality as are imagined; as vain because it is null or 
insignificant for in the world an insignificant thing is called 
vain; as empty because it is devoid of (the self) which could be 
ruled by no master,1 which could instigate, feel and establish; 
as n-ot-self because it is itself under no master etc.; as tribulation 
because it has the ill of procedure2 and the tribulation of ill, 
or—tribulation means it goes, proceeds (vd) miserably*—it 
is the appellation of a miserable man, and as tribulation it 
resembles tribulation in that the aggregates are miserable; 
as perverse in nature because of its changeable nature through 
the two causes of decay and death; as without essence because 
of weakness and easiness of breaking like the bark; as rooted in 
evil because it is the condition of evil; as murderous because it 
1 Read 8&minivaA°. 
* PavatH, which is ratta (round of births) and is dvkkha as opposed 
to nivatti, which is nirodha (cessation) and is svkha. 
8 Adinam, an adverb like ekamantam. The meaning is ativiya ka- 
panam.—7*1 ka. 

--- PAGE 247 ---
740 The Path of Purity 
kills friendship like a foe with a friendly face; as unprosperous 
because it is without prosperity and produces the unprosperous 
state; as cankerous because it is the proximate cause of the 
cankers; as conditioned because it is brought about by con¬ 
ditions and causes; as deadly carnality because it is the carnality 
of deadly death (maccwndra) and deadly corruptions; as 
liable to birth, decay, ailment, death because it has the nature 
(pakati) of birth, decay, ailment and death; as liable to sorrow, 
lamentation, despair1 because it is the condition (hetu) of sorrow, 
lamentation and despair; as liable to corruption because it has 
the nature of the province of the corruptions of craving, of 
wrong viewrs, of misconduct. Thus he contemplates it by way 
of the contemplation of impermanence etc., stated as being 
of (forty) different, kinds. 
For here [613] there are fifty reviewings of the impermanent, 
ten being made of each aggregate as impermanent, crumbling, 
shaky, disintegrating, uncertain, perverse in nature, essencc- 
less, unprosperous, conditioned, liable to death; twenty-five 
reviewings of the not-self, five being made of each aggregate as 
foreign, null,* vain, empty, not-self; and the remaining one 
hundred and twenty-five reviewings of ill, twenty-five being 
made of each aggregate as ill, disease, etc. Thus to him who 
contemplates the five aggregates by this contemplation of 
two hundred kinds beginning with that of impermanence 
that contemplation of the impermanent, ill and not-self termed 
methodical insight becomes firm. Thus far is the system of 
striving for contemplation after the method of the Pali text. 
[The Nine Modes.] 
He who, though he has thus applied himself in methodical 
insight, cannot achieve it, should make his controlling faculties 
sharp in the nine ways in which they are sharpened and in which 
he sees the extinction of complexes as they arise, to wit: 
he achieves it by careful work, achieves it by constant work, 
achieves it by profitable work, by seizing the general marks 
of concentration, by the proper production of the enlighten- 
1 In tliiB and the preceding term dharnma is used for pakati and hetu. 
a For parittato read rittato. 

--- PAGE 248 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 741 
meat-factors, he establishes impartiality regarding body and 
life, wherein he overcomes (ill) by zeal1 and by not shrinking 
at intervals (before the end is reached). He should avoid the 
seven unprofitable things and serve the seven profitable things 
in the way in which it is mentioned in the exposition of the 
earth-device2 and should contemplate sometime matter and 
sometime non-matter. 
[Method of the Contemplation of Matter.] 
Contemplating matter he should see its coming to birth, as 
for instance: this matter comes to birth through the four 
instruments by way of karma etc. Therein matter, in coming 
to birth for all beings, comes to birth first through karma. 
Indeed to embryos at the moment of conception thirty material 
things termed the basis-body-sex-decads by way of the three 
series come to birth, and they (come to birth) even at the 
genesis-moment of rebirth-consciousness; and as at the 
genesis-moment, so also at the stability-moment and the 
break-up moment. Therein matter has a sluggish cessation,8 
heavy transformation; consciousness has a quick cessation 
and light transformation. Hence He has said “ Monks, I 
do not see any other single state so light in transformation [614] as 
this consciousness, monies.”* Indeed while matter persists 
sub-consciousness (or life-continuum) arises sixteen times and 
ceases. The genesis-moment, stability-moment and break-up 
moment of consciousness are all alike. But the genesis- and 
break-up moments of matter are light (short) like those6 
(of consciousness); but its stability-moment is large (long) and 
goes on until sixteen (units of) consciousness arise and cease. 
The second life-continuum arises depending on the (heart-) 
basis which has arisen at the genesis-moment of rebirth- 
consciousness, which has reached the occasion6 and (which takes 
the causal relation of) pre-existence. The third life-continuum 
arises depending on the (heart-) basis which has arisen together 
1 nikkamena. Or “ emancipation 5 * reading nekkhammena. 
a P. 147. 
3 For it laBts for seventeen thought-momenta. See Comp. 26. 
4 Anguttara i, 10. 5 Head Tehi for Te hi. 
0 fhana which is explained by the Tikd aa {hitikkhaiia. So also below. 

--- PAGE 249 ---
742 The Path of Purity 
with that (second life-continuum), which has reached the 
occasion1 and (which takes the causal relation of) pre-existence. 
In this way is the procedure of consciousness to be understood 
as long as life lasts. 
Now to one who is near to death sixteen (units of) conscious¬ 
ness arise depending on a single (heart-) basis, which has 
reached the occasion1 and (which takes the causal relation) 
of pre-existence. Matter which has arisen at the genesis- 
moment of rebirth-consciousness ceases together with the 
sixteenth consciousness above the rebirth-consciousness; 
that which has arisen at the occasion-moment ceases with the 
genesis-moment of the seventeenth consciousness; that which 
has arisen at the break-up moment ceases after reaching the 
occasion-moment of the seventeenth consciousness. And 
this proceeds as long as the process (of consciousness) lasts. 
To beings of spontaneous birth there even so proceed seventy 
material things by way of the seven series. 
Therein this differentiation should be understood: karma, 
set up by karma, caused by karma, caused by karma and set 
up by consciousness, caused by karma and set up by sustenance, 
caused by karma and set up by temperature. Wherein karma 
means moral and immoral volition. Set up by karma means the 
resultant aggregates and the full seventy material things 
beginning with the eye-decad. Caused by karma means the 
same. For karma is the upholding cause of (a state) set up 
by karma. Caused by karma and set up by consciousness means 
matter set up by resultant consciousness. Caused by karma 
and set up by sustenance means that the nutritive essence (oja) 
which has reached the occasion in material things set up by 
karma sets up another (matter) with nutritive essence as the 
eighth, and there (in this new matter) also it reaches the 
occasion and (sets up) another (matter), and in this way joins 
four or five procedures (of matter). Caused by karma and set 
up by temperature means that the heat element born of karma 
reaching the occasion sets up (matter) which has nutritive 
essence as the eighth and which is set up by temperature and 
1 Ibid. 

--- PAGE 250 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 743 
there also the temperature sets up another (matter) with 
nutritive essence as the eighth and in this way joins four or 
five procedures. So far the coming to birth of karma-born 
matter is to be seen. 
[615] In the consciousness-born also this differentiation 
is to be understood: consciousness, set up by consciousness, 
caused by consciousness, caused by consciousness and set 
up by sustenance, caused by consciousness and set up by 
temperature. 
Therein eighty-nine (units of) consciousness are known as 
consciousness: 
Of them the two and thirty consciousnesses, 
And six and twenty, twenty less by one, 
And sixteen are declared to be, of form 
The genitors, the postures, intimation.1 
For eight moral, twelve immoral, ten inoperative free from 
mind-element as the realm of sense; two higher classes of 
consciousness as moral inoperative—thus thirty-two (classes 
of) consciousness generate matter, postures, intimation. The 
remaining ten of the realm of matter and free from results, 
eight of the realm of non-matter, eight (classes of) transcen¬ 
dental consciousness—these twenty-six (classes of) conscious¬ 
ness generate matter and the postures but not intimation. 
Ten (classes of) sub-consciousness in the realm of sense, five 
in the realm of matter, three mind-elements, one mind- 
cognition-element, which is resultant, without root-conditions, 
and accompanied by joy—these nineteen (classes of) con¬ 
sciousness generate only matter but not the postures or 
intimation. Twice fivefold cognitions, rebirth-consciousness 
of all beings, decease-consciousness of those purged of the 
cankers, four immaterial results—these sixteen (classes of) 
consciousness generate neither matter, postures nor intimation. 
1 Janakarwta of this verse is explained by the 'fika as janalc&jana- 
Jcdmata, the first groups being progenitors (janalca) and the laBt, i.e. 
sixteen, being non-progenitors (ajanaka). [Janakfijanaka matfi ti 
purimakatikotthasasafigahita janakfi, pacchinaakotthfisikfi solasfi ti 
vuttfi ajanaka ti mat&.] 

--- PAGE 251 ---
744 The Path of Purity 
And of these, those which generate matter (do so) not at the 
stability-moment or the break-up moment, for then conscious¬ 
ness is weak, but it is strong at the genesis-moment. There¬ 
fore depending on the (heart-) basis with (the causal relation 
of) pre-existence it sets up matter. 
Set up by consciousness means the three immaterial aggre¬ 
gates and seventeen kinds of matter, to wit, the nine marked 
by sound, body-intimation, vocal intimation, space-element, 
buoyancy, plasticity, wieldiness, integration, continuity. 
Caused by consciousness means matter set up by four things 
and declared thus: “post-existent slates of consciousness, and 
properties of consciousness are cause of this pre-existent, body.”1 
Caused by consciousness and set up by sustenance means that the 
nutritive essence reaching the occasion in material things set 
up by consciousness sets up another (matter) with nutritive 
essence as the eighth and thus joins two or three procedures. 
Caused by consciousness and set up by temperature (uiu) 
means that the temperature set up by consciousness [616] 
reaching the occasion sets up another (matter) with nutritive 
essence as the eighth and so joins two or three procedures. 
Thus the coming to birth of consciousness-born matter should 
be seen. 
As regards (material things) born of sustenance also the 
differentiation into sustenance, 6et up by sustenance, caused 
by sustenance, caused by sustenance and set up by sustenance, 
caused by sustenance and set up by temperature is to be 
understood. 
Therein sustenance means material food. 
Set up by sustenance means the fourteen kinds of matter, 
to wit, matter with nutritive essence as the eighth and which 
has obtained derived karma-bom matter as causal relation 
and which, being established therein (karma-born matter) is 
set up by nutritive essence which has reached the occasion,— 
space-element, buoyancy, plasticity, wieldiness, integration, 
continuity.2 
1 Tikapaftfuina i, 5. 
s “ By the statement' which has obtained derived karma-born matter 
as causal relation ’ it shows that the nutritive essence whioh is external 

--- PAGE 252 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 745 
Caused by sustenance means matter set up by four things 
and declared thus: “Material food is the cause, by giving 
nutritive aid (paccaya), of this body.”1 
Caused by sustenance and set up by sustenance means that in 
material things set up by sustenance the nutritive essence 
reaching the occasion sets up another (matter) which has 
nutritive essence as the eighth. And the nutritive essence 
there also (in this new matter sets up) another and thus it 
joins the procedure ten or twelve times. Sustenance taken in 
a day nourishes one for seven days. But-' celestial nutritive 
essence nourishes one for a month or even two. And nourish¬ 
ment taken by a mother diffuses through the child’s body and 
sets up matter. Sustenance besmeared on the body also 
sets up matter. Sustenance born of karma means derived 
sustenance, which also reaching the occasion sets up matter. 
The nutritive essence there also sets up another and thus 
joins four or five procedures. 
Caused by sustenance and set up by temperature means that 
the heat element set up by sustenance reaching the occasion 
sets up (matter) which has nutritive essence as the eighth and 
which is set up by temperature. There also this sustenance 
is the cause by being the progenitor of (material things) set 
up by sustenance. (It is the cause) of the rest of them by way 
of dependence, of sustenance, of presence and of continuance. 
Thus should the coming to birth of matter born of sustenance 
be seen. 
In those born of temperature also the differentiation into 
(to the body) and is not derived does not perform the function of bearing 
matter. And the attainment of the causal relation is said to be by 
means of dependence on karma-born phenomena (i.e. matter); hence 
the phrase 4 being established therein.’ And the term 4 derived ’ is 
distinctively said in order to preclude that matter which is caused by 
karma, set up by consciousness etc., and which also may be considered 
as karraa-born because it has karma as root”—Tiled. [Upadinn&m 
kammajarupam paccayarii labliitvfi ti etena babiddha anupadinjja-oja 
rupaharanakiecam na karoti ti dasseti. PaccayalAbho c’ assa kamma- 
jabhutasannissayata vasenfl ti aha. Tattha patitthfiyfi ti, tattha kam- 
mapaccayacittasamuttbanadirQpassa pi kammamulakattiL siya 
kammajapariyayo ti taiii nivattanattham upSdii^oan ti visesetvfi 
vuttam.] • 1 Ibid. 
48 

--- PAGE 253 ---
746 The Path of Purity 
temperature, set up by temperature, caused by temperature, 
caused by temperature and set up by temperature, caused 
by temperature and set up by sustenance is to be understood. 
Therein temperature means the heat element set up by four 
things. It is of two kinds, hot season and cold season. 
Set up by temperature means that the temperature, set up 
by four things getting the derived (matter) as causal relation, 
reaches the occasion and sets up matter in the body. [617] 
That (matter set up by temperature) is of fifteen kinds: 
nine marked by sound, space-element, buoyancy, plasticity, 
wieldiness, integration, continuity. 
Caused by temperature means that temperature is the cause 
of the procedure and destruction of material things set up 
by the four things. 
Caused by temperature and set up by temperature means, 
that the heat element, set up by temperature reaching the 
occasion, sets up another (matter) with nutritive essence as 
the eighth. The temperature there also sets up another, and 
thus the setting up by temperature, being established for a 
long time1 in the derived portion proceeds. 
Caused by temperature and set up by sustenance means, that 
the nutritive essence, set up by temperature reaching the 
occasion, sets up another (matter), with nutritive essence as 
the eighth. The nutritive essence there also sets up another, 
and thus joins the procedure ten or twelve times. Therein 
this temperature is the cause of those set up by temperature 
as progenitor and of the rest by way of dependence, presence, 
continuance. 
Thus is the coming to birth of matter born of temperature 
to be seen. For he who sees the coming to birth of matter 
thus is known to contemplate matter in time. 
[Method of the Contemplation of Non-matter.] 
And as by contemplating matter (he sees the coming to 
birth of matter) so also by contemplating non-matter he should 
see the coming to birth of non-matter. And this is done by 
1 “ I.e. ten or twelve times ”—pika. (Dlgham pi addhfinan ti 
dasadvadaaa vare ti.] 

--- PAGE 254 ---
747 XX.—The Path and Not the Path 
way of eighty-one risings of worldly consciousness, i.o. this 
non-matter comes to birth indeed as nineteen different 
risings of consciousness at conception by virtue of karma 
exerted in a previous existence. And its mode of coming to 
birth iB to be understood as said in the Exposition of the 
Causal Law.1 That (non-matter) is by way of life-continuum 
beginning from the consciousness immediately following the 
rebirth-consciousness. At the end of life it is by way of 
decease. Whichever (consciousness) among them is of the 
realm of sense is by way of identification (or registration) in a 
strong (vivid) object at the six doors. But at procedure 
because of the eye being unimpaired and of visible objects 
having reached the avenue of the eye, eye-consciousness 
depending on light and conditioned by attention comes to 
birth together with the associated states, for a visible object 
which has reached stability at the stability-moment of the 
sensory organism of the eye impinges on the eye. In that 
impact life-continuum arises twice and ceases. Next the in¬ 
operative mind-element in that object arises effecting the 
function of adverting. Immediately afterwards arises eye- 
consciousness which is either moral resultant or immoral 
resultant and which sees that very object. [618] Next the 
resultant mind-element arises receiving that very object. 
Next the resultant element of mind-consciousness without 
root-conditions arises scrutinizing that very object. Next is 
the inoperative element of mind-consciousness, without con¬ 
ditions, accompanied by indifference determining that very 
object. After that there is from among the moral, immoral or 
inoperative classes of consciousness of the realm of sense either 
a consciousness without root-conditions and accompanied by 
indifference or five or seven apperceptions come into play. 
Next there comes to beings of the realm of sense whichever 
identification is conformable to apperception from among the 
eleven classes of identifying consciousness. And the same in the 
remaining doors also. But at the mind-door classes of lofty con¬ 
sciousness also arise. For he who thus sees the coming to birth 
of non-matter is known to contemplate non-matter in time. 
1 Ch. xvn. 

--- PAGE 255 ---
743 The Path of Purity 
[The “putting forward of the Three Characteristics (a) by way of 
the matier-septad (sevenfold attention to matter).] 
Thus contemplating matter at one time and non-matter at 
another time and putting forward the three characteristics 
and progressing gradually, he achieves the culture of under¬ 
standing. 
Another one puts forward the three characteristics by way 
of the sevenfold (attention to) matter and the sevenfold 
(attention to) non-matter and contemplates the complexes. 
Therein he who contemplates matter, putting forward the 
three characteristics in such ways as the clinging to and putting 
down (of new existence at birth and death), as the passing 
away of the old in age, as caused by (lit. made of) sustenance , 
as caused by temperature, as born of karma, as set up by 
consciousness, as natural matter (or matter by nature)—is 
known to contemplate it by putting them forward by way of 
the sevenfold (attention to) matter. Hence the Ancients say: 
The clinging to and putting down, and mind, 
The passing of the aged, sustenance, 
And season, karma, matter natural— 
These seven he views with insight in detail. 
Therein clinging to means conception; putting down means 
decease. Thus the meditator by means of these, the clinging 
to and putting down, limits one hundred years and puts for¬ 
ward the three characteristics in the complexes. How ? All 
complexes within this range are impermanent. Why?— 
because of the procedure of rise and fall, of being perverse, 
of lasting for a time, of the denial of permanence. Because 
then the complexes which have arisen reach stability, fade 
during stability through decay, and reaching decay must 
certainly break-up, therefore owing to the repeated oppression 
(of birth, decay and break-up), to their difficulty in bearing 
such oppression,1 to their being the basis of ill, and to bliss 
being denied are they ill. And because there is no obeying 
1 Or, “ owing to the difficulty of bearing them because of such 
oppression.” 

--- PAGE 256 ---
XX.—The Path and, Not the Path 749 
the will1 of anyone (wsavattibh&vo) regarding these three 
positions: let the complexes which have arisen not reach 
stability; let them which have reached the occasion (stability) 
not decay; let them which have reached decay not break-up;— 
and they are void of such mode of obedience, therefore as being 
void, under no master, unruly (avasavattito) and denying the 
self are they not-self. 
[619] Thus having put forward the three characteristics 
in matter having the limit of a hundred years by way of the 
clinging to and laying down (of life), he next puts them forward 
by way of the passing of the aged. Therein “ passing of the 
aged ” means the passing away of the full-grown matter of 
one old by age, by virtue of which he puts forward the three 
characteristics; such is the meaning. How % He classifies 
the hundred years into three periods: first, middle and last. 
The first thirty-three years form the first period, the next 
thirty-four years the middle period, and the following thirty- 
three years the last period. It being classified into these three 
periods, matter proceeding in the first period ceases therein 
without reaching the middle period. Therefore it is imper¬ 
manent, what is impermanent is ill, what is ill is not-self. 
And matter proceeding in the middle period ceases therein 
without reaching the last period. Therefore it also is im¬ 
permanent, ill and not-self. And matter proceeding thirty- 
three years in the last period is not known to be capable of 
going beyond death. Therefore it also is impermanent, ill 
and not-self. Thus he puts forward the three characteristics. 
Having thus put them forward from the passing away of the 
aged by way of the first and other periods, he again puts 
them forward by way of these ten decades: the decades of 
feebleness, of play, of beauty, of strength, of understanding, 
of decline, of stooping forward, of being humpbacked, of 
silliness (dotage), of lying in bed. 
In those ten decades then the first ten years of a person 
living a hundred years are known as the feeble-decade; for 
1 “ No one is able to alter their characteristics. Even magic power 
can not do more than change their state ”—ftka. [Na hi lakkhajia&na- 
thattam kenaci kStura Bakkfi. BMvafifiathattam cva hi iddhivisayo. | 

--- PAGE 257 ---
750 The Path of Purity 
then he is feeble, fickle, youthful. The next ton years are 
known as the play-decade; for then he is given up to love of 
play. The next ten years are known as the beauty-decade-, 
for then his beauty-organ attains development. The next 
ten years are known as the strength-decade; for then his strength 
and might attain development. The next ten years are known 
as the understanding-decade-, for then his understanding is well 
established; they say that, even to a person who is by nature 
of weak understanding, a little understanding arises at that 
time. The next ten years are known as the decline-decade; for 
then his love of play, his beauty, strength and understanding 
decline. The next ten years are known as the stooping- 
fonoard-decade; for then his [620] body (lit. self-state) stoops 
forward. The next ten years are known as the humpback- 
decade; for then his body is bent, like a ploughshare. The 
next ten years are known as the silly-decade; for then he is silly, 
forgets whatever he has done. The next ten years are known 
as the lying-in-bed-decade; for the man of hundred years is 
usually lying in bed. 
Therein this meditator reflects thus in order to put forward 
the three characteristics from the passing away of the aged 
by way of these decades: matter proceeding in the first decade 
ceases therein without reaching the second; therefore it is 
impermanent, ill and not-aelf. Matter proceeding in the second 
decade . . . ninth decade ceases therein without reaching the 
tenth. And matter proceeding in the tenth decade ceases 
therein without reaching a new existence; therefore it is 
impermanent, ill and not-self. Thus he puts forward the three 
characteristics. 
Having thus put forward the three characteristics from the 
passing away of the aged by way of the decadeB, he again puts 
them forward from the passing away of the aged dividing 
the hundred years into twenty portions of five. How? 
He reflects thus: matter proceeding in the first five years 
ceases therein without reaching the second five years; there¬ 
fore it is impermanent, ill and not-self. Matter proceeding 
in the second five years, third . . . matter proceeding in the 
nineteenth five years ceases therein without reaching the 

--- PAGE 258 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 751 
twentieth five years. Matter proceeding in the twentieth 
five years is not known to be capable of going beyond death; 
therefore it also is impermanent, ill and not-self. 
Having thus put forward the three characteristics from the 
passing away of the aged by way of the twenty portions, he 
again puts them forward by way of twenty-five portions made 
up of four years each. Then by way of thirty-three1 portions 
made up of three years each, fifty portions made up of two 
years each, hundred portions of one year each, then dividing 
one year into three portions, i.e. the three seasons of the rains, 
winter and summer, he puts forward by way of each single 
season the three characteristics in that matter which passes 
away through old age. How? Matter proceeding during 
four months in the rains ceases therein without reaching the 
winter; matter proceeding in winter ceases therein without 
reaching the summer; matter proceeding in summer ceases 
therein without reaching again the rains; therefore it [621] 
is impermanent, ill and not-self. Having thus put them forward 
he again divides one year into six portions: “ matter proceeding 
in two months in the rains ceases therein without reaching the 
autumn, matter proceeding in autumn . . . the winter, 
matter proceeding in winter . . . the cold season, matter 
proceeding in the cold season . . . the spring, matter pro¬ 
ceeding in spring . . . the summer, matter proceeding in 
summer ceases therein without again reaching the rains. 
Therefore it is impermanent, ill and not-self.” Thus he puts 
forward the three characteristics in that matter which passes 
away through old age. Having thus put them forward he puts 
forward the three characteristics next by way of the dark and 
bright fortnights as “ matter proceeding in the dark fortnight 
ceases therein without reaching the bright fortnight, matter 
proceeding in the bright fortnight ceases therein without 
reaching the dark fortnight; therefore it is impermanent, ill 
and not-self.” He puts forward the three characteristics 
next by way of night and day as “ matter proceeding in the 
night ceases therein without reaching the day, matter pro- 
1 Obviously one portion has four years to make the total 100. 

--- PAGE 259 ---
752 The Path of Purity 
ceeding in the day also ceases therein without reaching the 
night; therefore it is impermanent, ill and not-self.” Then ho 
divides that night and day into six portions by way of morning 
etc., and he puts forward the three characteristics as “ matter 
proceeding in the morning ceases therein without reaching 
midday, matter proceeding in midday . . . the evening, 
matter proceeding in the evening . . . the first watch, matter 
proceeding in the first watch . . . the middle watch, matter 
proceeding in the middle watch ceases therein without reaching 
the last watch, matter proceeding in the last watch ceases 
therein without again reaching the morning; therefore it is 
impermanent, ill and not-self.” 
Having thus put forward the three characteristics he again 
puts them forward in that very matter by way of advancing, 
retreating, looking straight, glancing aside, bending and 
stretching of limbs; “matter proceeding in stepping forth 
ceases therein without reaching the retreating, matter pro¬ 
ceeding in retreating . . . the looldng straight, matter pro¬ 
ceeding in looking straight . . . the glancing aside, matter 
proceeding in glancing aside . . . the bending of limbs, matter 
proceeding in the bending of limbs ceases therein without 
reaching the stretching of limbs; therefore it is impermanent, 
ill and not-self.” 
Then he divides the turn of one foot-step into six portions 
by way of lifting, carrying, extending, relaxing, placing and 
arresting. 
Therein lifting means raising the foot from the ground; 
carrying means taking it forward; extending means guiding the 
foot hither and thither on seeing anything such as a stump, 
thorn, snake, etc.; relaxing means causing the foot to come 
down; [622] 'placing means putting it on the surface of the 
ground; arresting means pressing the foot to the ground when 
the other foot is lifted. 
Therein in the lifting (of a foot) the two elements of ex¬ 
tension and of cohesion are deficient and feeble; the other 
two (elements) are preponderating and strong. Likewise 
in the carrying and extending. In the relaxing, the two 
elements of heat and of mobility are deficient and feeble; 

--- PAGE 260 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 753 
the other two are preponderating and strong. Likewise in the 
placing and the arresting. Thus he makes the six portions, 
and by way of them puts forward the three characteristics 
in that matter which passes away through old age. How ? 
He reflects thus, “ The elements proceeding in the lifting (of a 
foot) and the1 material things derived therefrom—all those 
states cease therein without reaching the carrying of it; there¬ 
fore they are impermanent, ill and not-self. Likewise those 
proceeding in the carrying . . . the extending, those pro¬ 
ceeding in the extending . . . the relaxing, those proceeding 
in the relaxing . . . the placing, those proceeding in the 
placing cease therein without reaching the arresting. Thus 
having arisen there (in any of those six portions) and not 
reaching any other portion the complexes break up even there 
severally knot by knot, joint by joint, limit by limit making a 
crackling noise tata tala like sessamum seeds thrown into a 
heated potsherd; therefore they are impermanent, ill and 
not-self.” Subtle is the contemplation of matter of one who 
so has insight into the complexes broken knot by knot. 
And as regards the subtleness of it this is a simile. They 
say that a certain man living on the frontier and accustomed 
to torches of firewood and (dried) grass, etc., who had never 
before seen an oil-lamp came to town. Seeing a lamp burning 
in a street-shop he asked a man “ Friend, what indeed is this 
so delightful ?” The man replied, “ What is there delightful 
in this 1 It is known as a lamp. The path on which it has 
gone at the extinction of the oil and the extinction of the wick 
will not be apparent.” To him another said, “ ThiB (statement) 
is gross; for the flame, when this wick burns in due course, 
will cease at every third part without reaching any other 
place.” To him another said “ This also is gross; for the flame 
will cease at the 6pace of every finger, at the space of every half¬ 
finger, at every thread, at every fibre without reaching any 
other fibre.” It is not possible for the flame to make itself 
apparent without the fibre. 
[623] Therein like the knowledge of the man that the path 
1 Read yttni for yoni. 

--- PAGE 261 ---
754 The Path of Purity 
on which, the lamp has gone at the extinction of the oil and the 
extinction of the wick will not be apparent is the meditator’s 
attribution of the three characteristics from the clinging to 
and putting down (of life) in matter limited by a hundred years. 
Like the knowledge of the man that the flame will cease at the 
third part of the wick without reaching any other place is the 
meditator’s putting forward of the three characteristics in 
matter passing away through old age and limited by a third 
portion of a hundred years. Like the knowledge of the man 
that the flame will cease at the space of every finger without 
reaching anywhere else is the meditator’s putting forward of 
the three characteristics in matter within the limits of ten, five, 
four, three, two years, one year. Like the knowledge of the 
man that the flame will cease at the space of every half-finger 
without reaching anywhere else is the meditator’s putting 
forward of the three characteristics in matter limited to four 
months and two months by dividing one year threefold and 
sixfold by way of each season. Like the knowledge of the 
man that the flame will cease at every thread without reaching 
anywhere else is the meditator’s putting forward of the three 
characteristics in matter limited by the dark and bright 
fortnights, by night and day, and by the six portions of a night 
and day, that is, by morning and so on. Like the knowledge 
of the man that the flame will cease at every fibre without 
reaching anywhere else is the meditator’s putting forward of 
the three characteristics in matter limited by advancing and 
so on and by each of the portions of lifting the foot and so on. 
Having thus in various ways put forward the three character¬ 
istics in matter which passes away through old age he again 
classifies1 that matter making four portions as that which is 
produced by (lit. made of) sustenance and so on and puts 
forward the three characteristics in each portion. Therein 
matter produced by sustenance is evident to him by way of 
being famished and satiated. For matter set up at the time 
of being famished is faded, fatigued, ill-favoured, ill-formed, 
like a burnt stump and a crow seated in a basket of live-coals. 
1 VisaAkharitm, explained as vibhajjitvd by the fifed, which gives 
visangharitva and visamgharitvd aa alternate readings. 

--- PAGE 262 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 755 
That set up at the time of being satiated is contented, full, 
soft, unctuous, pleasant to the touch. He grasps that matter 
and puts forward the three characteristics therein thus “ matter 
which proceeds at the time of being famished ceases then 
without reaching the time of being satiated; therefore it is 
impermanent, ill and not-self.” 
Matter produced by the season is evident by way of cold 
and heat. For matter set up in the time of heat is faded, 
fatigued, ill-favoured. [624] Matter set up by the cold season 
is contented, full, soft, unctuous, pleasant to the touch. He 
grasps that matter and puts forward the three characteristics 
therein thus, “ matter proceeding in the time of heat ceases 
then without reaching the time of cold. Matter proceeding 
in the time of cold ceases then without reaching the time of 
heat; therefore it is impermanent, ill and not-self.” 
That born of karma is evident by way of the door which 
is the sense-organ.1 For in the eye-door there are thirty 
karma-bom material things by way of the eye-decad, body- 
decad, sex-decad. And twenty-four are those which uphold 
them and are set up by temperature, consciousness and 
sustenance—thus there are fifty-four. Likewise in the doors 
of the ear, of nose and of tongue. In the body-door there are 
forty-four by way of the body-decad and sex-decad and as 
set up by temperature and so on. In the mind-door2 there are 
fifty-four by way of the heart-basis-decad, body-decad, sex- 
decad and as set up by temperature and so on. He grasps all 
that (karma-born) matter and puts forward the three character¬ 
istics therein thus, “ matter proceeding in the eye-door ceases 
therein without reaching the ear-door; matter proceeding in 
ear-door ceases therein without reaching the nose-door— 
matter proceeding in nose-door ceases therein without reach¬ 
ing the tongue-door—matter proceeding in the tongue-door 
ceases therein without reaching the body-door—matter pro- 
1 This is thus different from the door which “ receives its name from 
the act” and which is discussed by Buddhaghosa in the Atthasalml. 
See Expositor, 113. 
* The heart as the basis of apperception with adverting is called the 
inind-door. See also Compendium, 123, n. 1. 

--- PAGE 263 ---
756 The Path of Purity 
ceeding in body-door ceases therein without reaching the mind- 
door; therefore it is impermanent, ill and not-self.” 
That set up by consciousness is evident by way of one 
joyful and grieved. For matter which has arisen in the time 
of joy is unctuous, soft, full, pleasant to the touch. That 
which has arisen in the time of grief is faded, fatigued, ill- 
favoured. He grasps that and puts forward the three character¬ 
istics therein thus, “ matter proceeding in the time of joy ceases 
then without reaching the time of grief, matter proceeding in 
the time of grief ceases then without reaching the time of joy; 
therefore it is impermanent, ill and not-self.” 
To him thus grasping matter set up by consciousness and 
putting forward the three characteristics therein, this meaning 
becomes evident:— 
Associated with one consciousness 
Are life and individuality 
And bliss and ill. The moment lightly goes. 
The gods last four and eighty thousand aeons,1 
But by two consciousnesses aren’t conjoined. 
[625] Whether a man be dying or alive, 
His aggregates, once they have ceased, are all 
Alike: they're gone and do not take rebirth. 
Those aggregates that have just broken up. 
And those that will break up in time to come, 
And those that are in course of breaking up2 
Are not dissimilar in character. 
No birth takes place without coming to be. 
The present is the time by which one lives. 
The world is dead when consciousness breaks up.3 
The concept by the ultimate is bound.4 
1 On the life-term of gods see Compendium, 142. 
s Tad-mUara-niruddhdnam. It is possible to read tad-antara-ani- 
niddh&naih, which would then mean “those present ones which are 
not yet broken up.” 
* Thus there is death, philosophically speaking, even during the 
present term of life. 
4 *' There is a concept of continuity, which is within the range of 
word-expression as when we say, Tissa lives, Phussa lives. This saying 
is made with reference to the existing or present consciousness together 

--- PAGE 264 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 757 
The broken aggregates are not stored up, 
Nor does the future hold a piled up heap; 
And e’en those aggregates that have been born 
Are like a mustard seed on needle’s point.1 
And predestined is break-up of the states, 
Which have been born. Unmixed with the old states. 
They undergo the process of decay. 
No one can see the place from whence they come, 
Or where it is they go on breaking up. 
Like lightning-flash in space they rise and fall.2 
Having thus put forward the three characteristics in matter 
produced by sustenance and others, he again puts them forward 
in natural matter. Natural matter means matter in external 
(continuity) unbound3 by controlling faculty and of such kinds 
as iron, copper, white lead, black lead, gold, silver, pearl, 
ruby, cat’s eye, conch, coral, red ruby, spinelle, earth, rock, 
mountain, grass, tree, creeper arising from the revolving 
world-cycle. That is evident to him by way of a Cape-jasmine 
sprout etc., for a Cape-jasmine sprout is at first slightly 
red. Again after two or three days it is less red. Then it 
has the colour of a tender shoot, then of a mature shoot, 
then of a green leaf, then of an indigo leaf, then from the time 
of having the colour of an indigo leaf, being bound up4 with 
the continuity of similar5 matter it becomes in just a year a 
with its base. But that concept in such a saying is really in the ultimate 
sense. For truly the mere name or tribe (of Tissa and Phussa) cannot 
grow old ”—J%kd. [Yftyatii tam tarn santam sanissayam cittern upa- 
dSya Tisso jivati, Phusso jivati, vacanapavattiya visayabhuta eantfina- 
pafxnatti. S3, ettha paramatthika, paramatthabhuta, tatha hi vadanti 
nSmagottam na jlratl ti.] 
1 “ As the mustard seed as soon as it touches the point of the needle 
falls off, so the complexes having arisen break up; there is no standing 
ground for them ”—Tried. [Yatha nama suciyam thititayam aanapo 
khitfco tassft slkharn phuttkamatto vigacchati na titthati, evam sau- 
khftrfi uppajjitvfi bhijjanti, na tesarn avatthinahi atthi.] 
* Some of these verses in the Pali are the same as those translated 
on p. 274. 9 Read aniTidriyabaddham. 
* “ By way of a series of cause and effect,” [betupbalaparamparfiya 
Bambandhanavasena pavattantam]—?*tfcd, which reads pabandhd- 
payamAnam for the textual ip-anuppabandhapayamdnam, 
5 " In colour etc.” [varujftdinfl samanabliSga]—Q'xka. 

--- PAGE 265 ---
758 The Path of Purity 
sere leaf and falls off the stalk. He mentally grasps it and 
puts forward the three characteristics therein, “ matter pro¬ 
ceeding in the time when it is slightly red ceases without 
reaching the time of deep red, matter proceeding in the time 
of deep red ceases without reaching the time of less red, 
matter proceeding in the time of less red ceases without reach¬ 
ing the time of tender-shoot-colour—that proceeding in the 
time of tender-shoot-colour ceases without reaching the time of 
mature-shoot-colour—that proceeding in the time of mature 
shoot-colour ceases without reaching the time of green-leaf- 
colour—that proceeding in the time of green-leaf-colour ceases 
without reaching the time of indigo-leaf-colour—that proceed¬ 
ing in the time of indigo-leaf-colour ceases without reaching 
the time of sere leaf—that proceeding in the time of sere 
leaf [626] ceases without reaching the time of falling off1 the 
stalk; therefore it is impermanent, ill and not-self.” 
In this way he contemplates all natural matter. Thus then 
he contemplates the complexes putting forward the three 
characteristics by way of the sevenfold (attention to) matter. 
[Putting forward (or attribution) of the Three Characteristics 
(6) by way of the non-matter-septad.] 
In what then has been said as “ by way of the sevenfold 
(attention to) non-matter ”2 this is the table of contents: 
as groups, as pairs, as momentary flash, as serial order, as 
removing of views, as thorough removing of conceit, as 
finishing of desire. 
Therein os groups means states such as contact, and the four 
others. How does he contemplate them as groups 1 Here 
(in this religion) a bhikkhu reflects thus: “ The contact- 
quintet-states (i.e., contact and the four others) which have 
arisen in the contemplation that these hairs are impermanent, 
ill and selfless; the contact-quintet-states which have arisen 
in the contemplation that hairs of the body . . . brain are 
impermanent, ill and not-self—all of them without reaching 
anywhere else perish knot by knot, limit by limit, crackling 
1 Read patanakdlam for pahana-kdlam. * P. 748. 

--- PAGE 266 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 759 
like sessamum seeds thrown into a heated potsherd, therefore 
they are impermanent, ill and not-self.” This then is the 
method in the Purity-discourse. But in the Ariya-lineage- 
discourse the consciousness which proceeds (in the con¬ 
templation) that in the seven positions of the sevenfold (atten¬ 
tion to) matter above, matter is impermanent, ill and not-self— 
in contemplating that consciousness as impermanent, ill and 
not-self by another consciousness, one is said to contemplate 
them as groups. That is most fitting and so we shall differen¬ 
tiate the remaining (tables of content) by that method. 
As pairs means that here a bhikkhu contemplates matter 
between the clinging to and laying down (of life) as imper¬ 
manent, ill and not-self and contemplates that consciousness 
itself as impermanent, ill and not-self by another conscious¬ 
ness. He contemplates as impermanent, ill and not-self 
matter which passes away through old age, which is produced 
by sustenance, by temperature, which is born of karma, set 
up by consciousness, which is natural matter and contemplates 
that consciousness itself as impermanent, ill and not-self by 
another consciousness. Thus he is known to contemplate 
them as pairs. 
As momentary Jlash means that here a bhikkhu contemplates 
matter between the clinging to and laying down (of life) as 
impermanent, ill and not-self and contemplates that first 
consciousness by a second consciousness, the second by a third, 
the third by a fourth, the fourth by a fifth that the (conscious¬ 
ness) itself (in each case) is impermanent, ill and not-self. 
He contemplates matter which passes away through old age, 
which is produced by sustenance, by temperature, [627] born 
of karma, set up by consciousness, and is natural matter as 
impermanent, ill and not-self and contemplates that first 
consciousness by a second, the second by a third, the third 
by a fourth, the fourth by a fifth that the (consciousness) 
itself (in each case) is impermanent, ill and not-self. Thus 
contemplating four (classes of consciousness at a time) begin¬ 
ning from the grasping of matter he is known to contemplate 
them as momentary. 
As serial order means that he contemplates matter between 

--- PAGE 267 ---
760 The Path of Purity 
the clinging to and laying down (of life) as impermanent, ill 
and not-self and contemplates that first consciousness by a 
second, the second by a third, the third by a fourth, . . . the 
tenth by an eleventh that the (consciousness) itself (in each 
case) is impermanent, ill and not-self. He contemplates matter 
which passes away through old age, is produced by sustenance, 
by temperature, born of karma, set up by consciousness, is 
natural matter as impermanent, ill and not-self and it behoves 
him to contemplate during the whole day in the serial order 
of insight the first consciousness by a second, the second by 
a third ... the tenth by an eleventh that the (consciousness) 
itself (in each case) is impermanent, ill and not-self. However 
the subject of meditation on matter and on non-matter as 
far as the tenth consciousness-contemplation is familiar to 
him. Therefore he should stop at the tenth. So it is said (in the 
Ariya-lineage-discourse). Contemplating thus he is known to 
contemplate them in serial order. 
Regarding the three, as removing of views, as removing of 
conceit and as finishing of desire, no separate method of con¬ 
templation is known to exist. Still he who sees whatever 
matter above and non-matter here has been grasped, does not 
see any other thing known as a being beyond the matter and 
non-matter. Since he does not see a being, the perception of 
a being is removed. And views do not arise to one who grasps 
the complexes by consciousness which has removed the per¬ 
ception of a being. When views do not arise, views are known 
as removed. Conceit does not arise to one who grasps the 
complexes by consciousness which has removed views. When 
conceit does not arise, conceit is known as thoroughly removed. 
Craving does not arise to one who grasps the complexes by 
consciousness which has thoroughly removed conceit; and when 
craving does not arise desire is known as finished. This then 
is said in the Purity discourse.1 But in the Ariya-lineage 
discourse1 this method has been shown placing the table of 
contents thus: as removing of views, as thorough removing 
of conceit and as finishing of desire. For there is no such thing 
1 P. 759. 

--- PAGE 268 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 761 
as thorough removing of views to one who holds “ I have 
insight, the insight is mine.” [628] Views are known as 
removed to one who holds that only complexes have insight 
into, contemplate, determine, grasp, classify complexes. 
There is no such thing as thorough removing of conceit to one 
who holds “ I have a good insight, I have a delightful insight.” 
Conceit is known as thoroughly removed to one who holds 
“ Only complexes have insight into, contemplate, determine, 
grasp, classify complexes.” There is no such thing as finish¬ 
ing of desire to one who relishes in insight thuB “ I am able to 
have insight.” But desire is known as finished to one who 
holds “ Only complexes have insight into, contemplate, 
determine, grasp, classify complexes.” Were complexes the 
self, it would be proper to hold them t-o be the self. But being 
not the self, they have been (wrongly) held to be the self; 
therefore they are not the self in the sense of being unruly, 
impermanent in the sense of being nothing (abhava) after 
becoming, ill in the sense of oppression by rise and fall. To 
one who sees thus views are known as removed. Were 
complexes permanent, it would be proper to hold them as 
permanent; but being impermanent they have been held to be 
permanent; therefore they are impermanent in the sense of 
being nothing after becoming, ill in the sense of oppression 
by rise and fall, not-self in the sense of being unruly. Conceit 
is known as thoroughly removed to one who sees thus. Were 
complexes bliss it would be proper to hold them to be bliss, but 
being ill they have been held to be bliss; therefore they are ill 
in the sense of oppression by rise and fall, impermanent in the 
sense of being nothing after becoming, not-self in the sense of 
being unruly. Desire is known as finished to one who sees 
thus. So to him seeing the complexes as not-self views are 
known as thoroughly removed; seeing them as miperrnanent 
his conceit is known as thoroughly removed; seeing them as ill 
his desire is known as finished. Thus this insight stands 
each in its own place.1 
1 “ When the reviewing of the not-self is sharp, heroic, clear, the 
other two follow it. By it then views are removed. For all views are 
rooted in the self-view, and the reviewing of the not-self is directly 
49 

--- PAGE 269 ---
762 The Path of Purity 
[The eighteen Great Insights.] 
Thus having put forward (or attributed) the three character¬ 
istics by way of the sevenfold (attention to) non-matter he 
contemplates the complexes. And thus far the subject of 
meditation on matter and on non-matter is familiar to him. 
Thus he, familiar with the subject of meditation on matter 
and non-matter, penetrates first here (in scrutinizing compre¬ 
hension) a part of the eighteen great insights which are to be 
attained in all modes by way of the comprehension of rejection 
beginning upwards with the reviewing of break-up, and rejects 
states opposed thereto. The eighteen great insights are known 
to be understanding which reviews impermanence etc., wherein 
developing the reviewing of impermanence he rejects the 
perception of permanence, [629] developing the reviewing 
of ill he rejects the perception of bliss, developing the reviewing 
of the not-self he rejects the perception of the self, developing 
the reviewing of disgust he rejects delight, developing the 
reviewing of dispassion he rejects passion, developing the 
reviewing of cessation he rejects origination, developing the 
opposite the self-view. When the reviewing of impermanence is sharp, 
heroic, clear, the other two follow it. By it then conceit is thoroughly 
removed. For in the holding of the permanence-view there is the 
vaunting of conceit like that of BakabrahmS such as ‘ This is permanent, 
this is eternal.’ And the reviewing of impermanence iB directly opposite 
the holding of the permanence-view. When the reviewing of ill is sharp, 
heroic, clear, the other two follow it. Then desire is finished. For when 
there is the notion of bliss, craving is seized. And the reviewing of ill 
is opposed to desire. Thus by the different functions of the three 
reviewings the removing of views etc. are brought about. Hence it is 
said that this insight stands each in its own place ”—filed. [Yada 
anattanupassana tikkha surS visada pavattati, itarS dve pi tadanuga- 
tikfi; tad&nena ditthi-uggh&tanam kataih hoti. Attaditthimulaka 
hi sabba dittbiyo. Anattanupassana ca attaditthiya ujupakkhfi. 
Yada pana aniccanupassanfi tlkkhfl. Bura visadfi, pavattati, itara dve pi 
tadanugatikfi; tadanena manasamugghatanam katam hoti. Sati 
hi niccagahe manajappanfi idam niccam idam dhuvan ti JldinS baka- 
brahmuno viya. Aniccanupassana ca niccagahassa ujupakkhfi. Yada 
pana dukkhfinupassanfi. tikkhft surfi. visadfi. pavattati, itarfi. dve tadanu- 
gatika. Tadfi. nikantipariyfidfinam katam hoti; sati hi sukhas&hM 
tajjhagSho, dukkhfinupassanfi ca nikantipatipakkhfi. Evaria tissan- 
naro anupas3anfinam kiccavisesavasena ditthi-uggkfitanamfidim honti. 
Tena vuttam iti ayarn vipassana attano thane yeva titthati ti.] 

--- PAGE 270 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 763 
reviewing of relinquishment he rejects clinging, developing 
the reviewing of extinction he rejects the perception of density 
developing the reviewing of falling he rejects exertion, develop¬ 
ing the reviewing of perversion he rejects the perception of 
fixedness, developing the reviewing of the signless he rejects 
the sign,1 developing the reviewing of the unhankered he 
rejects hankering,2 developing the reviewing of the empty he 
rejects conviction, developing insight into states called the 
higher understanding3 he rejects the conviction of clinging 
to essence, developing the knowledge and discernment of the 
true nature of things he rejects the conviction of confusion, 
developing the reviewing of tribulation he rejects the conviction 
of attachment, developing the reviewing of reflection he rejects 
non-reflection, developing the reviewing of separation from the 
round of births4 he rejects the conviction of fetters. Because 
among them (eighteen great insights) complexes have been seen 
by him by virtue of the three characteristics of impermanence, 
1 “ The sign is just the appearance, as it were bodily, through the 
classification of their own functions, of the complexes, which have been 
seized as stable or permanent in the intervals of time, by the notion 
of oneness in continuity and in mass ”—/p\M. [Nimittan ti santatiyam 
aamuhe ca ekattasanMya gayhamanam kAlantara va thaylbhavena 
niocabhavena ca sankhArftnam sakiccaparicchcdataya saviggaham 
viya upatth&namattam.] 
3 Panidhi, lit. “ laying-down-toward,” is mind bent by craving to¬ 
ward complexes as the self. Cf. Anguttara i, 8. 
3 “ The insight which cognizes an object, such as a visible object, and 
sees the breaking-up of the identifying consciousness and which pro¬ 
ceeds by seizing the emptiness by way of breaking-up thus: ‘ complexes 
are breaking, death is to complexes, there is nothing else,’ is higher 
understanding; and that being insight into dhammas is insight into 
states called the higher understanding ”—J'ikd. [Rfip&di Srammaijam 
Gatva tadflxammaj^assa cittasea bharigarii disva sahkhara eva bhijjanti 
aafikharanam maraiiarii na anno koci atthl ti bhangavasena 8 uftfiato.ro 
gahetva pavatta vipassanS adbipaniia ca sa dhammesu c& vipassana 
ti adhipafiMdhammavipassana.] 
4 “ Indifference to complexes and the adaptive knowledge axe called 
the reviewing of Reparation from the rounds of rebirth. For by means 
of it the consciousness shrinks, retracts from all complexes like a water- 
drop on a lotus leaf ”—Tiki. [Sahkharupekkha anulomaMnafi ca 
vivatt&nupassanft, tassa hi vasena tassa padumapalfise udakabindu 
viya aabbasaiikharehi cittam patillyati patikutati.J 

--- PAGE 271 ---
764 The Path of Purity 
etc., therefore are the reviowings of impermanence, ill and 
the not-self penetrated. 
And because it has been said that which is the reviewing of 
impermanence and that which is the reviewing of the signless 
are states which are one in meaning, the letter only being 
different; and likewise that which is the reviewing of ill and 
that which is the reviewing of the unhankered are states 
which are one in meaning, the letter only being different; and 
that which is the reviewing of the not-self and that which is 
the reviewing of the empty are states which are one in meaning, 
the letter only being different3—therefore are those (three 
reviewings) also penetrated. But every insight into states 
called the higher understanding is (the same as) insight. 
The knowledge and discernment of the true nature of things 
is included in the Purity of transcending doubt.2 Hence these 
two also (insight into states called the higher understanding 
and knowledge and discernment of the true nature of things) 
are penetrated. In the remaining insight-knowledges some 
are penetrated, others are not.3 The differentiation among 
them we shall explain afterwards. For it is concerning what 
has already been penetrated that this was said, “ Thus he, 
familiar with the subject of meditation on matter and non- 
matter, penetrates first here a part of the eighteen great 
insights which are to be attained in all modes by way of the 
comprehension of rejection beginning upwards with the 
reviewing of break-up and rejects states opposed thereto.”1 
1 On p. 629, line 22 of the Pali text, after n&ruut insert yd ca anatldnu- 
paaeani yd ca mivnatdnupaasand, ime. dhamma e&atthd, vyafljanam eva 
nation. 
* Ch. XIX. 
s “ For when the reviewing of impermanence is effected, the review¬ 
ings of cessation, of extinction, of falling, and of perversion are also 
partially effected. When the reviewing of ill is effected, the reviewings 
of disgust and of tribulation are partially effected. When the reviewing 
of not-self is effected the others, i.e. reviewings of reflection and of 
the separation from the round of rebirth, are partially effected ”—filed. 
[Aniccfinupassanaya hi siddhaya nirodhanupassanS khay&nupaBsana 
vayanupassana viparinarnSnupassanS ca ehadesena 3iddha nama honti. 
Dukkhanupassanaya siddbaya nibbidanupassana adlnavinupaasana 
ca, anattanupassanfiya siddhfiya itarfi fcL] 4 P. 762. 

--- PAGE 272 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 765 
[Reviewing-knowledge of Rise and Fall.] 
So by the rejection of the perceptions of permanence and 
so on, opposed to the reviewing of impermanence and so on1 he 
acquires pure knowledge, reaches the fulness2 of contemplating- 
knowledge and [630] begins to apply himself to attain that 
reviewing of rise and fall which is described immediately 
after that contemplating knowledge as “ Understanding in 
reviewing the 'perversion of present states is knowledge in rise 
and fall” And in applying himself he begins concisely. 
Therein this is the Pali: “ How is understanding in reviewing 
the perversion of present states knowledge in reviewing their 
rise and fall ? Matter that is born3 is present. The character¬ 
istic of its coming to birth is the rise. The characteristic of its 
perversion is thefaU. The reviewing is the knowledge. Feeling 
that is bom . . . perception . . . mental activities . . . con¬ 
sciousness ; eye that is born . . . becoming* that is born is present. 
The characteristic of its coining to birth is the rise. The character¬ 
istic of its perversion is the fall. The reviewing is the knowledge.”6 
By the method of this Pali he thoroughly reviews the birth, the 
genesis, the new mode which are the characteristics of the 
coming to birth of the mind-matter that has been born as 
the rise, and its extinction, break-up which are the character- 
1 Read aniccanupassanddi. 1 Lit. “ other bank.” 
* I.e. “ has got individuality within the three moments of genesis, 
stability and breaking-up.” 
1 Read bhava. “Though in the group-contemplation etc. under 
the head of birth-decay-death states have been spoken of as possessing 
birth, decay and death, here in the Exposition of the knowledge of 
rise and fall, to say that birth is present, the characteristic of its coming 
to birth is tho rise and the characteristic of its perversion is the fall etc. 
would imply that these three states (birth, decay, death) possess birth, 
decay and death, have been accomplished and acquiesced in. To guard 
against that the explanation ends with becoming among the factors 
of genesis through cause ”—Tiled. [Kihcfipi kalapasammasanfidlsu 
jatijar&maran&6l&ena jfitijarimaranavanto dhnmmil vutta idha pana 
udayabbayahaimniddcse' jati paccuppanna tassa nibbattilakkhajjam 
udayo, vipaxiuamalakkha^am vayo ti adina vuccamilne j&tijarS- 
maran&nam jfttijarimaranavantatll nipphannat& ca anunnata viya 
hotl ti. Tam parihariturh paticcasamupp&dangesu bhavapariyos&n& 
va desana gattU] 
1 Pafisambhidu i, 54. 

--- PAGE 273 ---
766 The Path of Purity 
istics of perversion as the fall. So he understands: “ Previous 
to the arising of this mind-matter there was no heap or accumu¬ 
lation of what has not arisen. Of that which is arising there 
is no such thing as arrival from a heap or accumulation. Of 
that which is ceasing there is no such thing as going to any 
major or minor point of the compass. Of that which has ceased 
there is in no place such a thing as a ground-stand (avatthana) 
from a heap, accumulation or hidden deposit.1 As when a 
lute iB played there is of the sound which has arisen no accumula¬ 
tion previous to its arising, neither does it, arising, come from 
an accumulation. Of the ceasing sound, too, there is no 
going to any major or minor point of the compass, neither 
does the sound which has ceased stand accumulated anywhere; 
but in fact depending on the lute and the vellum and the man’s 
suitable effort,.not having been it becomes, having become it 
disappears. So all states of matter and of non-matter, not 
having been become, having become disappear.Having 
thus made a concise attention to the rise and fall he again sees 
in the differentiation of this knowledge of the rise and fall 
the rise of matter-aggregate from a cause having arisen2 thus : 
because ignorance has arisen3 * * * * 8 matter arises. He sees the rise 
of matter-aggregate from a cause having arisen thus: because 
1 Neither in the past nor in the future is there any heap or accumula¬ 
tion. It arises for the present due to concurrent causes. In the 
Expositor, p. 79, Buddhaghosa has shown that this concurrence from 
many causes or “ harmony of antecedents ” means “ the mutual con¬ 
tribution towards the production of a common result. Therefore this 
also shows that there is no single agent ” such as BrahmS, Prajfipati, 
Puru?a, Kala or Yispxi as creator, or nature as original cause. 
* Par.cayasamudayatfhena = paccayassa uppannabhdvato ti—fits. 
8 “ * Because ignorance has arisen * means because of the arising 
of ignorance; because of the existence, is the meaning. For arising 
opposed to cessation is also another word for existence (or presence). 
Therefore in the existence of ignorance accomplished in a previous 
existence, there is the arising of matter in this existence ”—jTikd. 
[Avijjasamudaya ti avijjfiya uppfida, atthibh&vfi ti attho. Nirodha- 
virodhi hi uppado atthibha va vficako pi hotl ti vutto ’yam attho. Tasma 
purimabhavasiddhSva avijjfiya sati imasmirh bhave rupasBa uppfido 
hotl ti attho.] Thus arising (samudaya) here does not mean the rise 
of the present with three moments of genesis, stability and breaking- 
up, but refers to the initial rise of ignorance, the source of all dukkha. 

--- PAGE 274 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 767 
craving . . . because karma . . . because sustenance1 has arisen 
matter arises. Seeing the characteristic of coming to birth also 
he sees the rise of matter-aggregate. Seeing the rise of mailer- 
aggregate he sees these five characteristics. ... He sees the 
fall of matter-aggregate because of the cessation of the cause thus: 
from the cessation of ignorance matter ceases. He sees the fall 
of matter-aggregate because of the cessation of the cause thus: 
from the cessation of craving . . . from the cessation of karma 
. . . from the cessation of sustenance matter ceases. [631] Seeing 
the characteristic of its •perversion also he sees the fall of matter- 
aggregate. Seeing the fall of matter-aggregate also he sees these 
five characteristics. 
Likewise he sees the rise offeeling-aggregate from a cause having 
arisen thus : because ignorance has arisen feeling arises. He sees 
the rise of feeling-aggregate from a cause having arisen thus: 
because craving . . . karma . . . contact has arisen feeling 
arises. Seeing the characteristic of its coming to birth also he 
sees the rise of feeling-aggregate. Seeing the rise of feeling-aggre¬ 
gate he sees these five characteristics. He sees the fall of feeling- 
aggregate because of the cessation of the cause : from the cessation 
of ignorance ... of craving ... of karma ... of contact 
feeling ceases. Seeing the characteristic of its perversion also 
he sees the fall of feeling-aggregate. Seeing the faU of feeling- 
aggregate he sees these five characteristics.2 
As in the feeling-aggregate so in the aggregates of perception, 
of activities, and of consciousness. But there is this differ¬ 
ence: in the case of consciousness-aggregate this statement 
“ because of the arising of mind-matter . . . because of the 
cessation of mind-matter ” is in the place of contact.3 Thus 
1 “ Material food is taken here as being stronger than the other 
causes of procedure. Ignorance and craving are brought in as being 
the sufficing condition of karma”—ka. [Pavattipaceayesu kabajl- 
kilrilh&rassa balavakfirato eva gahito . . . Avijjfitanhupaniesfya sati 
ten’ eva kammunft rQpakayanibbatti.] 
9 Pafisambhidd i, 55 f. 
3 “ Because with contact one feels, cognizes, wills. Because of 
contact arise feeling, feeling born of eye-contact, perception, volition. 
Thus contact is the cause of the procedure of the aggregates of feeling, 
perception and activities. With its cessation they cease. But in 
Mah&pad&namah&nidanasutta and in the section of mutual causal 

--- PAGE 275 ---
768 The Path of Purity 
by his insight of rise and fall, fifty characteristics, ten 
being made of each aggregate, have been declared. By means 
of these he attends causally and momentarily in detail: thus 
is the rise of matter, thus is the fall of matter, thus matter 
relation in Abidhamma, from the expression that cognition is through 
the cause of mind-matter, mind-matter is the cause of the procedure 
of cognition, it ceases with its cessation”—J1lid. [Phuttho vedeti, 
phuttho sanjanati, phuttho ceteti, phassapaccaya vedano, cakkhu- 
samphassajfi. vedanl, sanfiiL, cetanS. ti vacanato phasso vedanSeaflM- 
aankharakkhandhanam pavattipaccavo, tarn nirodha ca tesarh nirodho. 
MahSpadfinamahanidfinasutte Abhidhamme ca aflilamafi flapaccayava re 
namarfxpapaccaya vifma^an ti vacanato namarnpam vinftanassa pavatti- 
paccayo, tam nirodhfi tassa nirodho ti vuttam.) 
“ Herein some say: The discernment of the rise and fall of the aggre¬ 
gates of non-matter is by way of time and continuity, not by way of 
the moment. In their opinion there should be no discernment from the 
moment. Bat others say: Not considering such divisions as the past 
etc. in discerning the rise and fall causally, he views that feeling should 
arise, be obtained from ignorance etc. as cause owing to a general 
connection. He does not view the (present) arising. And when 
ignorance etc. do not exist he views that feeling should not arise, nor 
be obtained; he does not view the (present) breaking-up. It is fitting 
that he should view the arising and breaking-up of present states in 
discerning their rise and fall momentarily. For whoso attends to 
states of matter and non-matter with reference to their riBe and fall by 
way of a continuous series in due course, his knowledge, when culture 
becomes strong, becomeB sharp, clear and so the rise and fall appear to 
him as momentary. And he attending to the rise and fall first causally 
casts off ignorance and other states as cause, and seizing the aggregates 
in the rise and fall attends to their riso and fall causally and momentarily. 
And when his knowledge becomes sharp and clear, then the states of 
matter and non-matter appear to him as arising and breaking moment 
by moment”—T’tid. [Ettha ca keci tfiva Shu: arupakkhandhgnam 
udayavayadassanam addhasantativasen’ eva, na khanavasena ti. 
Tesam matena khaijato udayavayadassanam eva na siya. A pare 
panahu: paccayato udayavayadassane atitadivibhagam anamasitvll 
sabbasadharanato avijjftdipaecayfi vedanasambhavarn labbhamanatam 
passati, na uppadam; avijjadi-abh&ve ca tassa asambbavam alabbha- 
manatam passati, na bhangam. Kha^ato udayavayadassane paccup- 
panMnam uppadam bhafigan ca paRsatl ti tarn yuttam. Santativasena 
hi ruparupadhamme udayato vayato ca manasikarontassa anukkamena 
bhavanfiya balapattakSle nanassa tikkhavisadabhavappattiya khanato 
udayavaya upatthahantl ti. Ayam hi pathamam pacoayato udayab- 
bayam manasikaronto avijjfidike paccayadh&mme viaeajjetvi udayab- 
bayavanto khandhe gahetva tesam paccayato udayavayadassanamu- 
khena khanato pi udayabbayam manasikarofci. Tassa yadfi nanam 
tikkham visa dam hutva pavattati, tad a ruparupadhamma kha$e kha^c 
uppajjanta bhij janta ca hutvfi upatthahantl ti.) 

--- PAGE 276 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 769 
rises, thus matter falls. As he attends thus his knowledge be¬ 
comes more clear: “ Thus they say these states not having 
been become, having become they disappear.” As he sees the 
rise and fall thus in two ways, causally and momentarily, the 
distinctions among the Truths, the causal law, methods and 
characteristics become evident. 
For that which he sees thus: from the arising of ignorance 
etc. is the rising of aggregates, and from the cessation of 
ignorance etc. is the cessation of aggregates—is the discern¬ 
ment of the rise and fall causally. And he, seeing that which 
is the characteristic of their coming to birth and the character¬ 
istic of perversion secs the rise and fall of aggregates—this is 
the discernment of rise and fall momentarily. For the character¬ 
istic of their coming to birth is at the genesis-moment only, the 
characteristic of their perversion is at the break-up moment 
only. Thus as he sees the rise and fall in two ways, causally and 
momentarily, by his discernment of the rise causally, the Truth 
of origination becomes evident owing to his understanding 
the progenitor. [632] By his discernment of the rise and fall 
momentarily, the Truth of ill becomes evident owing to his 
understanding the ill of birth. By his discernment of the fall 
causally, the Truth of cessation becomes evident owing to his 
understanding the non-arising of causally related states when 
the causes themselves do not arise. By his discernment of 
the fall momentarily, the Truth of ill becomes evident owing 
to his understanding the ill of death. “ Whatever discern¬ 
ment he has of the rise and fall—this is the worldly Path,” 
thus the Truth of the Path is evident from his killing of 
confusion therein (rise and fall). And by his discernment 
of the rise causally, the cause happening in direct order is 
evident from his understanding that this (cause) existing, this 
(result) becomes.1 By discernment of the fall causally, the 
causal happening in reverse order is evident from his under¬ 
standing that owing to the cessation of this (cause) this (result) 
ceases.2 Moreover by discernment of the rise and fall momen¬ 
tarily, states causally generated are evident from his under- 
1 Majjhima ii, 32. * Samyvita ii, 28. 

--- PAGE 277 ---
770 The Path of Purity 
standing the characteristic of the conditioned, to wit, states 
undergoing the rise and fall are indeed conditioned states, 
and they are causally generated. By discernment of the rise 
causally, the method of their oneness is evident from his 
understanding the unbrokenness of continuity through the 
connection between cause and effect; the more easily then 
does he reject the annihilationist view. By discernment of 
the rise momentarily, the method of their variety is evident from 
his understanding the genesis of every fresh (complex); the 
more easily then does he reject the eternalist view. And by his 
discernment of the rise and fall causally, the principle of no 
effort is evident from his understanding the unruliness of states; 
the more easily then does he reject the theory of the self. 
And by discernment of the rise causally, the way of nature is 
evident from his understanding the genesis of effect in con¬ 
formity with its cause; the more easily then does he reject 
the non-action view.1 And by his discernment of the rise 
causally, the characteristic of not-self is evident from his 
understanding that states are free from effort and arise in 
connection with causes. By discernment of the rise and fall 
momentarily, the characteristic of impermanence is evident 
from his understanding that states, having become, are 
nothing2 and from his understanding of their vacuity (viveka) 
before and after (i.e. past and future.)3 The characteristic 
of ill also is evident from his understanding the oppression by 
rise and fall. The characteristic of intrinsic nature also is 
evident from his understanding that states aTe limited by 
the rise and fall. In the characteristic of intrinsic nature the 
short duration of the conditioned characteristic also is evident 
1 “In the oxistcnoe of action (or cause), whence can there be the non- 
aotion view ?’’—T’tid. (Sati kfirane kuto akiriyav&do !] 
* “I.e. having arisen they cease "—filed. [Uppajjitva nirujjhanam 
hi hutvS abhivo.] 
* “ I.o. that they are void in the past and future, for complexes do 
not exist before or after the three moments. Hence ‘ from his under¬ 
standing of their vacuity beforo and after.’ The sense is, he penetrates 
that they are finite "—Tiled. [Pubbantaparantaviveko atitanSga- 
tabhflvasunBatH. Na hi safikh&ra khanattayato pub be pacchfi, ca 
vijjanti, tasma pubbantaparanta-vivekavabodhato ti fidi. AntatS 
pativedhato ti attho.] 

--- PAGE 278 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 771 
from liis understanding the absence of the fall at the rising 
moment and of the rise at the falling moment. Thus to him 
to whom the distinction among the Truths, the causal law, 
methods, characteristics is evident the complexes appear 
constantly new thus: “ So they say that these states, not 
having arisen before arise (now), having arisen they cease.” 
[633] Not only constantly new; they appear also limited 
(partita) in stability, like a dew-drop at sunrise,1 like a water- 
bubble,2 like a line drawn with a stick on water,3 like a mustard- 
seed on the point of an awl,4 and like lightning flash. They 
also appear without essence, essenceless like a magic show,6 
mirage,® dream, whirling disc of Are, celestial town, foam,7 
banana stem.8 Thus far he penetrates full fifty9 charac¬ 
teristics in this manner: “ It arises liable to fall, and having 
arisen it falls,” and attains the tender insight-knowledge known 
as the established reviewing of the rise and fall, owing to which 
attainment he iB counted as one who has begun his insight. 
[ I nsight-corrupters.] 
Then in him who has begun his insight by means of this 
tender insight ten insight-corrupters arise. For insight- 
corrupters do not arise in the Ariyan disciple who has reached 
penetration, to one of depraved conduct, to one who has given 
up his subject of meditation, or to an idle person. But they 
arise in the scion of good family who is well behaved, devoted 
to what is fitting, who has begun his insight. And which are 
those ten corrupters ? 
Illumination, knowledge, rapture, repose, bliss, resolve, 
uplift, presentation, indifference, desire. For this has been 
said: ‘ ‘ How does the mind wrongly seized by excitement as to the 
doctrine arise ? To one who attends to impermanence illumin¬ 
ation arises. He adverts to illumination .that illumination is 
the doctrine ; the distraction therefrom is excitement. The mind 
1 Jdtaka iv, 122. 8 Satnyutia iii, 141. 
8 AAffuttara iv, 137. 4 Suita Nipdta 625, ver. 
* Samyvtta iii, 141. * Sutta Nipdta 807, ver. 
7 Dhammapada 46, ver. 
* Read Samapaiindsa. 
8 Sainyutta i, 154. 

--- PAGE 279 ---
772 The Path of Purity 
wrongly seized by that excitement does not understand acccording 
to the true nature of things a presented (object) as impermanent, 
does not understand according to the true nature of things a pre¬ 
sented (object) as ill ... as not-self. Likewise to one who 
attends to impermanence knowledge arises . . . rapture . . . 
repose . . . bliss . . . resolve . . . uplift . . . presentation 
(or appearance) . . . indifference . . . desire arises. He 
adverts to desire that desire is the doctrine ; the distraction there¬ 
from is excitement. And the mind wrongly seized by that 
excitement does not understand according to the true nature of 
things a presented (object) as impermanent, [634] does not under¬ 
stand according to the true nature of things a presented (object) 
as ill ... as not-self.”1 
Therein illumination means i nsight-illumination. When that 
arises the meditator seizes what is not the Path as the Path, 
and what is not the fruition as the fruition saying. “ Never 
indeed has such illumination arisen to me before now. Surely 
I have reached the Path, I have reached the fruition.” And 
the course of insight of him who has seized what is not the 
Path as Path, what is not the fruition as fruition iB known to 
have gone astray. He lets go his original subject of meditation 
and rests relishing the illumination. And this illumination 
indeed arises in the case of some bhikkhu illuminating just 
his seat, in the case of others the interior of the chamber, of 
others the exterior of the chamber also, of others the whole 
monastery, a gavuta, half yojana, one, two, three yojana—and in 
the case of some it makes one (continuous) light from the 
surface of the earth as far as the Akaniftha Brahma world. 
And that of the Blessed One’s arose illuminating the ten 
thousand world-elements. So here is a story of its variety: 
It is said that two elders sat down within a double-gabled 
house on Mt. Cittala. And it was the holy day of the dark 
fortnight. The quarters were overcast with rain-clouds. 
At night there was a four-fold darkness. Then one elder said, 
“ Reverend sir, on the lion’s seat in the shrineyard flowers of 
the five colours are visible to me now.” The other replied to 
1 Pafisambhidd ii, 100 f. 

--- PAGE 280 ---
773 XX.—The Path and Not the Path 
him. “ You have said nothing wonderful, friend. Now to 
me fishes and turtles in the great ocean are visible at a yojana 
distance.” But this insight-corrupter arises generally in one 
who has obtained, calm insight. Because of the inoperation of 
the corruptions which have been discarded by attainment 
such a person produces the thought “I am a saint” like 
Mahanaga the elder, resident at Uccavalika, like Mahadatta 
the eider, resident at Hankanaka, and like Culasumana the 
elder, resident at Nikapennakapadhanaghara on Mt. Cittala. 
Therein this story is an illustration: It is said that a certain 
great saint, purged of the cankers, master of analytical know¬ 
ledge, by name Dhammadinna the elder resident at Talankara 
was a giver of admonition to a large assembly of bhikkhus. 
One day he sat in his daily seat and reflected “ What now 1 
Has our master Mahanaga the elder resident at Uccavalika 
[635] finished his duties of monkhood or not ?” And seeing 
that he (the latter) was only an average person and deciding 
“ If I do not go he will die the death of an average person,” 
rose by his magical power into the sky and descending near the 
elder, who was seated in his daily seat saluted him, paid his 
respects and sat aside. “ What, friend Dhammadinna, have 
you come at an unusual time ?” On this being asked he 
replied, “ Reverend sir, I have come to ask a question.” “ Then 
ask, we shall answer as we know it, friend.” On this being said 
(Dhammadinna) asked a thousand questions. The elder an¬ 
swered every question without a hitch. When (Dhammadinna) 
said “ Reverend sir, very sharp is your knowledge. When 
did you attain this dhamma ?” he replied, “ Sixty years ago, 
friend.” “ Reverend sir, could you use your concentration ?” 
“ Friend, this is not difficult.” “ Then create an elephant, 
Reverend sir.” The elder created an elephant all white. 
(Dhammadinna) said, “ Now, Reverend sir, make this elephant 
come towards you with fixed ears,1 tail stretched out, trunk 
thrust into mouth, trumpeting terrifically.” The elder did 
so, and seeing the terrible form of the swift-coming elephant 
rose and began to run. The elder (Dhammadinna), purged 
1 Anjitakanno **niccalalhapitakannapufo—ftka. 

--- PAGE 281 ---
774 The Path of Purity 
of the cankers, stretching out his hand caught him by the 
edge of the robe and said “ Reverend sir, is there such a thing 
as timidity in one purged of the cankers ?” The other 
knowing himself to be then an average person said, “ Friend 
Dhammadinna, be1 thou my protector,” and 6at on his heels 
at his feet. “ Reverend sir, I have come with the thought of 
becoming your protector. Do not be anxious ”—so saying 
(Dhammadinna) preached to him the subject of meditation. 
The elder took it and ascending the terrace walk attained at 
the third stride the highest fruition, saintship. The elder, it 
is said, had been faulty in conduct. Such bhikkhus waver in 
illumination. 
Knowledge means insight-knowledge. It is said that in him 
who weighs, scrutinizes2 the states of matter and of non¬ 
matter there arises knowledge of unfaltering speed, sharp, 
heroic, exceeding clear like Inda’s discharged thunderbolt. 
Rapture is insight-rapture. It is said that in him the five¬ 
fold rapture,3 to wit, the lesser rapture, momentary’’ rapture, 
flooding rapture, transporting rapture, thrilling rapture arise, 
at that time diflusing the whole body. 
Repose means insight-repose. It is said that in him then 
as he sits in his nightly or daily place there is [636] no suffering, 
no heaviness, no rigidity, no unwieldiness, no sickness, no 
crookedness of body4 and mind. But indeed his body and 
mind are reposed, light, plastic, wieldy, very clear, straight. 
His body and mind being upheld by these, repose and so on, 
he at that time enjoys delight known as non-human, concerning 
which it is said: 
1 Read Kohl. 
a “ By way of the reviewing of rise and fall such as, thus matter rises, 
thus matter ceaseB ”—flkd. [Evarii pi rupam udeti, evam pi rupam 
vetl ti adina uadayabbayanupaasanam ev’ ettha tulanam tiranafi ca 
veditabbam.] 
5 Above, p. 166. 
4 “ Kdya here means the material body and not the three mental 
aggregates of feeling, perception, mental activities ”—f\h&. [Kftyaga- 
haijena rfipakfiyassa pi gohanam veditabbam, na vedanadikkhandhatta- 
yaaa’ eva.] On the different meanings of k&ya see Expositor 171, 199, 
408, 486. 

--- PAGE 282 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 775 
Non-human bliss comes to the monk who has 
Entered the empty house,1 whose mind is calm, 
Who has the right insight into the Law. 
Inasmuch as he contemplates the rise 
And fall of aggregates, he gets the joy 
And rapture ending2 in the deathlessness, 
Which is enjoyed by those who know the truths.3 
Thus in him arises repose associated with buoyancy etc., 
and effecting this non-human delight. 
Bliss means insight-bliss. It is said that in him at that 
time there arises bliss, exceeding noble and flooding his whole 
body.4 
Resolve means faith. For in him there arises faith, asso¬ 
ciated with insight, strong and exceedingly serene to conscious¬ 
ness and its properties. 
Uplift means energy. For in him there arises energy 
associated with insight, not slack, not exceedingly strenuous, 
well upheld. 
Presentation means mindfulness. For in him there arises 
mindfulness associated with insight, well-fixed, well-estab¬ 
lished, planted, like the immovable king of mountains. What¬ 
ever subject5 he adverts to, ponders, attends to, considers, that 
very subject rushes and enters into him and presents itself 
to his mindfulness as does the other world to divine vision. 
Indifference means insight-indifference and adverting- 
indifference.6 For in him at that time there arises strong in- 
1 I.e. Insight, “ which should be regarded as the empty house because 
it is void of the notions of permanence etc. and because it is the medita¬ 
tor’s basis of bliss *’—pxkd. [Sa pi niccabhavgdisunfiataya yogino 
sukhasannissayataya ca aunfiagaran ti vattabbarii.] 
8 Read amatantam. * Dhammapada ver. 373, 374. 
4 Cf. Dlgha U 73 f. * Read thanam. 
* “ Insight-indifference is established by neutrality (lit. middleness) 
in the investigation of the complexes, which are the object of investiga¬ 
tion. So proceeding it is, in meaning, the indifference, which is equani¬ 
mity. Adverting-indifference is spoken of as proceeding by way of 
indifference in adverting; it is volition associated with mind-door- 
adverting-consciousness ”—Pika. [VicinitavisayattasaAkhfirfinaih vi- 
cinane majjhattabhSvena thita vipassanupekkhn, rS pana atthato 
tathfi pavattA tatramajjhattupekkha va. Manodvfir&vajjanacitta- 

--- PAGE 283 ---
776 The Path of Purity 
sight-indifference which is neutral to all complexes; so also 
does adverting-indifference at the mind-door. Indeed to him 
who adverts to any subject, it (the indifference) becomes heroic 
and sharp like the discharged Inda’s bolt1 and a heated iron 
barb shot through a folded leaf1 and bears him along. 
Desire means insight-desire. For in him there arises subtle 
desire having the mode of calm, making an attachment for 
insight adorned thus with illumination etc. [637] It is not 
possible to grasp that desire as corruption. As in illumination 
so when any one of these (other nine) arises, the meditator seizes 
what is not Path as the Path, what is not fruition as the 
fruition, “ Never before now indeed has such knowledge arisen 
to me, . . . such rapture, . . . repose, bliss, resolve, uplift, 
presentation, indifference, desire. Surely I have reached the 
Path, surely I have reached the fruition.” The course of insight 
of him who seizes what is not Path as the Path, what is not 
fruition as the fruition is known to have gone astray. Letting 
go his original subject of meditation he sits down relishing the 
desire. 
* And herein illumination etc. are called corrupters as being 
the bases of corruptions and not because they are immoral. 
But desire is both corrupter and corruption-basis. And they 
are ten by way of the basis only. And they make full thirty by 
way of seizure. How ? For he who holds, “ My illumination 
has arisen” seizes views. He who holds, “ Delightful is the 
illumination that has arisen ” seizes conceit. He who delights 
in illumination seizes craving. Thus there are three seizures 
in illumination by way of views, conceit, craving. Likewise 
in the rest. Thus there are full thirty corrupters by way of 
seizure. On account of them the unskilled, inexperienced 
Bampayuttfl. eetana avnjjane ajjhupekklianavasena pavattiya avajja- 
nupekkha ti vuttfi.] UpekkhS, hedonic indifference, is a “ zero-point 
between pain and pleasure, joy and sorrow.” Equanimity (tairanwj- 
jhaitatd) is “ the more complex intellectual and ethical upekkM ” 
{Compendium 66, 83). 
1 The simile holds good both for adverting which precedes omniscience 
and for insight which follows adverting. The 'pika has Avajjanaya 
indavajiratattauiracasadisatfi ca suratikkliabbavo ca sabbaftilutaM- 
zjap&reoaril viya tadanucaraflapoasa tath&bhfivena dattbabba. 

--- PAGE 284 ---
XX.—The Path and Not the Path 777 
meditator wavers, is distracted by illumination, etc., each of 
which he thoroughly reviews as “ This is mine, this is I, this 
is myself.” Therefore the Ancients say 
The mind is agitated, shakes by faith, 
Illumination, knowledge, bliss, repose, 
Indifference, presentation, and uplift, 
"Resolve, indifferent adverting, desire. 
But the skilled, clever, experienced, intelligent meditator, 
when illumination etc. arise, classifies them by understanding 
and investigates thus: “This illumination has arisen in me 
indeed. But indeed it is impermanent, conditioned, generated 
through cause, liable to extinction, liable to fall, liable to 
dispassion, liable to cessation.” Or then this thought occurs 
to him: “ Were illumination the self, it would be proper to 
hold it to be the self. But being not the self, it has been held 
to be the self; therefore it is not-self in the sense of being 
unruly, impermanent in the sense of being nothing after having 
become, ill in the sense of oppression by rise and fall.” Thus 
all should be expanded by the method stated in the sevenfold 
attention to non-matter.1 And as with illumination so also 
with the rest. Having thus investigated it, he thoroughly 
reviews illumination as “ This is not mine, this is not I, this is 
not myself. . . .” [638] He thoroughly reviews knowledge . . . 
desire as “ This is not mine, this is not I, this is not myself.” 
So reviewing thoroughly he wavers not, quakes not on account 
of illumination etc. Hence the Ancients say 
Whoso by understanding has searched out 
These subjects ten is skilful in regard 
To states and is not scattered in his mind. 
Thus not going to distraction he disentangles the tangle of 
the full thirty kinds of corrupters and determines the Path and 
the wrong Path as, “ Illumination and the other states are not 
the Path, but insight and knowledge freed from the corrupters 
and going along the (right) course is the Path.” So his 
knowledge, established in knowing the right and wrong Paths 
1 Above, p. 761. 
50 

--- PAGE 285 ---
778 The Path of Purity 
as “ This is the Path, this is not the Path ” should be under¬ 
stood as Purity of the knowledge and discernment of the right 
and wrong Paths. 
[Determination of the Three Truths.) 
And by thus much is the determination of the three Truths 
made by him. How ? In purifying views, first of all, he has 
determined the Truth of ill by determining name and form. 
In purifying the transcending of doubt he has determined the 
Truth of origination by grasping the cause. In purifying the 
knowledge and discernment of the right and wrong Paths he 
has determined the Truth of the Path by limiting (avadha- 
ranena) rightly the Path. Thus first of all by this worldly 
knowledge the determination of the three Truths is made. 
Thus is ended the twentieth chapter called the Exposition 
of Purity of the knowledge and discernment of the right and 
wrong paths in the section of the development of understand¬ 
ing in the Path of Purity, composed for the purpose of gladden¬ 
ing good folk. 

--- PAGE 286 ---
CHAPTER XXI 
EXPOSITION OF PURITY IN KNOWLEDGE AND DISCERN¬ 
MENT OF PROGRESS 
[639] Now insight, where training has been achieved by virtue 
of the eight knowledges, and of knowledge adapted to the 
truths as the ninth, is known as Purity in the knowledge and 
discernment of progress.1 And here “ eight ** should be 
understood as these eight knowledges:— 
(1) The reviewing knowledge of rise and fall2 which is freed 
1 “ In the sense of knowing the rise and fall etc. and of seeing as 
though visually, it ia knowledge and discernment beginning with know¬ 
ledge of the rise and fall. Because of purification from the opposite 
it is Purity of knowledge and discernment. And that purity by itself 
progresses towards the Ariyan Path—this is progress. Hence Purity of 
knowing and discernment of Progress ”—fikd. [Udayabbayadlnam 
pana j&nanatthcna paccakkhato dassanutthena ca nanadassanfini uda- 
yabbayaiianadlni. Tani yeva patipakkhato visuddhattA nagadassa- 
navisuddhi; s£ ova ariyamaggapatipajjati etflyA ti patipadfi cfiti pati- 
padSfiauadassanavisuddhi.] 
8 “ That the knowledge of rise and fall is included in the comprehen¬ 
sion of scrutiny is said with reference to that knowledge when it has 
juBt arisen before it becomes familiar. For when it becomes familiar 
it takes its stand with the comprehension of removal because of its 
having removed the perception of permanence etc. Thereforo by 
attaining this knowledge some among the eighteen great insights are 
obtained. Indeed just by the scrutinizing of ordinary modes or forms 
without penetration, visually, of the rise and fall there should be no 
thorough removal of the opposite, without which latter removal whence 
can there be the unimpeded vehemence like the adamant or the sharp¬ 
ness or cleanness of the knowledges ? Therefore knowledge of rise and 
fall when it has become familiar should be regarded as belonging to the 
comprehension of removal ”—filed. [Tam pana uppannamattam 
appagunam sandbaya vuttam. Paguijam hi niccasanhAdipohanasid- 
dhiya pahanapariMfiya adhitthanabh&tarii. Yato tadadhig&mena 
attharasasu mahavipaBBanfisu ekaeca adhigata eva honti. Na hi 
udayabbayanam paccakkhato pativedhena vin& samahnak&rAni tlra- 
namattena satisayam patipakkhappahfinam sambhavati, asati ca 
patipakkhappahSne kuto fiSnftdinarU vajiram iva avihatavegata 
tikhlnavisadadita va 7 Tasmfi pagujjabhkvappattam udayabbaya- 
hfinam pahanaparihiiSpakkhiyam eva datthabbam.] 
779 

--- PAGE 287 ---
I 
780 The Path of Purity 
from the corruptions, progresses along the right course and is 
termed insight; 
(2) The reviewing knowledge of breaking-up; 
(3) The knowledge of the presence of fear; 
(4) The reviewing knowledge of tribulation; 
(5) The reviewing knowledge of repulsion; 
(6) The knowledge of desire for release; 
(7) The reviewing knowledge of analysis; 
(8) The knowledge of indifference to complexes (saiikkard). 
The ninth knowledge adapted to the truths is a synonym 
of adaptation. Therefore one desirous of achieving it (Purity 
in the knowledge and discernment of progress) should begin 
with the knowledge of rise and fall which is freed from the 
corruptions, and apply himself to these (nine) knowledges. 
[(1) The reviewing knowledge of rise and fall.] 
But (if anyone should ask), what is the advantage of apply¬ 
ing oneself to the knowledge of rise and fall ?—(the answer is) 
the noting well of the characteristics is the advantage.1 For 
the knowledge of rise and fall being corrupted by the ten 
corruptions above is not able to note well the three character¬ 
istics according to their true peculiar property; but being freed 
from the corruptions it is able (to do so). Therefore applica- 
1 “ Docs not this knowledge note tho rise and fall of things and not 
the three characteristics ? True it should not be regarded as having 
the throe characteristics for its sphere. But when the rise and fall are 
penetrated the characteristic of impermanence becomes evident. 
Consequently that which is impermanent is ill, that which is ill is not- 
self. Thus the other characteristics also become evident. Moreover 
when the knowledge of the rise and fall is grasped the mode of becoming 
and being nothing, of repeated oppression and of unrulinees beoomeB 
the more evident. For this reason, and not because of itself, the 
application of this knowledge has the advantage of noting well the three 
characteristics ”—fihd. [Na kho pana etahi evamdatthabbam ndayab- 
bayaM^am lakkhanattayaviaayam hotiti. L'dayavaye pana pati- 
viddhe aniccaJakkhanam pikatam hutvft upatthAti. Tato yadaniccam 
tarn dukkharh, yam dukkham tadana.Ua ti itaralakkhanaih pi. AthavA 
uadayabbayagahanena hutva abhavakaro abhinhasampatipilanfikfiro 
avaaavattanAkAro ca vibhutataro hotiti kArajjabhavena udayabbava- 
fiaijayogaasa lakkhanattayasallakkhajjattatA veditabbfi na samukhe- 
neva.] 
J - . 

--- PAGE 288 ---
XXL—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 781 
tion herein should be made for the purpose of noting well the 
characteristics. 
[6401 But because of what being not attended to, do the 
characteristics not appear, being hidden by what ? Because 
the rise and fall are not attended to, the characteristic of 
impermanence does not appear, as long as it is hidden by 
continuity. Because repeated oppression is not attended to, 
the characteristic of ill does not appear as long as it is hidden 
by the postures. Because the differentiation (vinibbhoga) of 
the elements is not attended to, the characteristic of the not- 
self does not appear so long as it is hidden by density.1 * But 
when the rise and fall are grasped and continuity is brokem 
the characteristic of impermanence appears in its true peculiar 
property. When one attends to repeated oppression and 
removes (the concealed pain in)8 the postures, the characteristic 
of ill appears in its true peculiar property. When the various 
elements are differentiated and the differentiation of destiny3 * * * * 
is made, the characteristic of not-self appears in its true 
peculiar property. 
And herein this differentiation (vibfwga) should be under- 
1 Ghanena, “what is unbroken.” 
* From the Tika, labbhamanadukkhapcUicohddakabhdva. 
3 I.e. into mass, function, object. Cf. Expositor 76. “ Samfiha 
is mass, a conception of those who have not threshed out the complexes 
and who regard as one lump material and immaterial states, which 
arise mutually supporting each other. Though there is distinction of 
the different functions of states, they are considered as one:—this is 
function. Though there is difference in object-seizing in states which 
take objects, they are considered as one as regards the object:—this 
is object. When that notion of mass in the elements is differentiated 
by knowledge and viewed thus, they perish like a mass of foam crushed 
by the hand. The states which arise according to cause become void, 
mere states. Thus the characteristic of not-self becomes the more 
evident"—JVUL [Afinamannupatthambhesu samuditesu ruparupa- 
dhammesu ekatt&bhinivesavasena aparimadditasahkkarehi gayhamana 
samhhaghanata. Tatha tea am tesam dhammfinam kiccabhedassa sati 
pi patiniyatabhSve ekato gayhamana kiccaghanatA. TathA saramma- 
nadhammanam sati pi Srammaijakaranabhede ekato gayhamana 
arammanaghan&tA. Ta dhfitusu Mnena pi vinibbhijjitva vinibbhijji- 
tvft dissamana hatthena parimajjiyamano phenapiu<Jo viya vilayam 
gacchanti. Yath&paecayam pavattamana sufiftA ete dhammamatta 
ti anattaJakkaijam pakatataram hoti.] 

--- PAGE 289 ---
782 The . Path of Purity 
stood:—impermanence, characteristic of impermanence, ill, 
characteristic of ill, not-self, characteristic of not-selfness. 
Of these, impermanence means the five aggregates. Why ? 
Because of rising and falling, and being otherwise,1 or being 
nothing after having been. Rising and falling and being 
otherwise are the characteristic of impermanence; or, it is the 
change of form (or the mode of change) termed the being 
nothing after having been. 
And from the expression “ that which is impermanent is ill”* 
those very five aggregates are ill. Why? Because of repeated 
oppressiveness. The mode of repeated oppressiveness iB the 
characteristic of ill. 
And from the expression “ that which is ill is net-self,"2 
those very five aggregates are not the self. Why ? Because 
they are unruly. The mode of unruliness is the characteristic 
of not-self. 
And all this the meditator notes well according to their 
true peculiar property by means of the reviewing knowledge of 
the rise and fall which is freed from the corruptions and is 
termed insight progressing along the right course. 
[(2) The Reviewing Knowledge of Breaking-up.] 
Having thus noted them well, as he again and again weighs, 
scrutinizes material and immaterial states as impermanent, 
ill and not-self, his knowledge becomes sharp and keeps (sharp), 
the complexes appear quickly. When the knowledge keeps 
sharp and the complexes appear quickly he does not arrive at 
their genesis, stability or procedure3 or the sign; but his mind¬ 
fulness establishes itself in their extinction, fall, breaking-up 
and cessation. [641] And as he sees “ Thus what goes under 
the name of complex arises, and thus it ceases,” there arises 
to him, attending thuB to one theme, the inBight-knowledge 
called the reviewing of breaking-up; concerning which it has 
been said: “ How is understanding which analyzes the object 
in reviewing breaking-up knowledge in insight ? Consciousness 
arises with matter as object and breaks up. He reviews the 
1 I.e. through decay by way of genesis, stability and breaking-up. 
1 Samyutta iv, 1. * The fika defines this as upadimiakapavaUa. 

--- PAGE 290 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 783 
breaking-up of that consciousness which analyzes that object. 
How does he review it ? He reviews it as impermanent and not 
permanent, reviews it as ill and not bliss, reviews it as not-self 
and not as the self,1 is disgusted and not delighted, dispassionate 
and 'not passionate, causes it to cease and not to arise, relinquishes 
it and does not cling to it. Reviewing it as impermanent he 
rejects the perception of permanence, reviewing it as ill he rejects 
the perception of bliss, . . . reviewing it as not-self he rejects 
the perception of the self, . . . being disgusted he rejects delight, 
. . . being dispassionate he rejects passion, . . . causing it to 
cease he rejects the origination, relinquishing it he rejects clinging- 
Consciousness arises with feeling as object . . . perception as 
object ... the activities as object, cognition as object, eye as 
object, . . . Consciousness arises with decay and death as 
object and breaks up . . . in relinquishing it he rejects clinging. 
The basis-shifting, strength of adverting. 
And understanding-reverting . . . this is 
Analysis-insight. The fixing both 
(Unseen and seen) as one by following 
The object, on cessation being intent . . . 
This is the seeing of the sign of falling. 
Analyzing how the object breaks 
And empty seems, he gets the higher kind 
Of understanding. Skilled in insights four, 
Reviewings three and three appearances. 
He does not tremble at the various views. 
It is knowledge in the sense of knowing, understanding in the 
sense of understanding. Hence it is said that understanding 
which analyzes the object in reviewing breaking-up is knowledge 
in insight."2 
There “ which analyzes the object” means knowing by 
analysis3 of any object. Seeing as extinguishing and falling, 
is the meaning. 
“ Understanding . . . in reviewing breaking-up ” is that 
1 Bead attato for anattato in line 9 of text, p, 641. 
* Patixambhidd i, 57 f. 
8 The Tiled defines analysis as the knowing. (Patisaiikhanam nima 
Snanarn.] 

--- PAGE 291 ---
784 The Path of Purity 
understanding in reviewing the breaking-up of that knowledge 
which has arisen by analyzing the object and extinguishing 
and falling. It is said to be knowledge in insight. 
[642] “ How ?”—this is the meaning of the query of desire 
to discourse. Then to show koto that is so, “ with matter as 
object ** etc. is said. 
Therein “consciousness arises with matter as object and 
breaks up ” means consciousness having matter as object 
arises and breaks up; or having matter as object consciousness 
arises and breaks up, is the meaning. 
“ Which analyzes that object ”—knowing by analysis that 
material object and seeing it as extinguishing and falling iB 
the meaning. 
“ Reviews the breaking-up of that consciousness ”—by what¬ 
ever consciousness that material object is seen as extinguishing 
and falling he reviews the breaking-up of that consciousness 
by another consciousness is the meaning. Hence the Ancients 
say: “ He has insight into both the known (object) and the 
knowing (knowledge).” 
And here “ reviews ” means views repeatedly; views in many 
modes and repeatedly is the meaning. Hence it is said “ Re¬ 
views—how does he review it ? He reviews it as impermanent ” 
etc. Therein because what is known as breaking-up is the 
highest point of impermanence, therefore the meditator who 
reviews brealdng-up reviews what goes under the name of 
complex as impermanent, not permanent. 
Then because what is impermanent is ill, what is ill is not- 
self, he reviews that as ill and not bliss, reviews it as not-self, 
not as the self. 
And because what is impermanent, ill, the not-self should 
not be delighted at, and what should not be rejoiced at should 
not be lusted after, therefore herein, by following up the re¬ 
viewing of breaking-up, he is disgusted with what goes under the 
name of complex seen as impermanent, ill, not-self, does not 
delight in it, has no lust (or passion) for it. 
Thus having no passion for it, he in good time causes 
passion to cease, and not to arise by worldly knowledge. “ He 
does not make its arising ” is the meaning. Or then, being 

--- PAGE 292 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 785 
thus dispassionate, he, by means of inferential knowledge, to 
wit, “ As what is seen goes as complex, so also does the 
unseen ” causes it to cease and not to arise. He attends to 
it as ceased, views its cessation only and not its origina¬ 
tion, is the meaning. 
Thus progressing he relinquishes it, docs not cling to it. 
What has been said t That this reviewing of impermanence 
etc. [643] is said to be abandonment, relinquishment, and 
rushing relinquishment because of the abandoning by way of 
parts of the corruptions, together with the aggregates1 and con¬ 
stituents,1 and because, on discerning the faults of the con¬ 
ditioned, (the heart) inclines to and rushes into nibbana, which 
is the reverse of that (the conditioned). Therefore the monk, en¬ 
dowed therewith (i.e. the reviewing), abandons the corruptions 
in the said manner and rushes into nibbana. He does not cling 
to the corruptions under the influence of coming to birth. He 
does not, through its unseen faults, cling to the conditioned as 
object. Hence it is said: “ relinquishes and does not cling 
to it” 
Now to show that the rejection of those states is by means of 
those knowledges, it has been said beginning thus: “ Revieunng 
it as impermanent he rejects the perception of permanence,” and 
so on. 
Therein “ delight ” means craving with rapture. 
The rest is as said. 
In the verse *' The basis-shifting ” means that by seeing 
the breaking-up of matter and by again seeing the breaking-up 
of that consciousness also by which the breaking-up of that 
(matter) has been seen, there is a shifting of the basis from the 
first basis (matter) to the other basis (insight). 
“ And understanding-reverting” means establishing in the 
fall by rejecting the rise. 
“ Strength of adverting ” means ability to advert immediately 
for the purpose of discerning the breaking-up of matter, and 
again of that of the consciousness which has the breaking-up 
(of that matter) for object. 
1 These two are really not to be removed but are said to be so because 
of the corruptions being removed. 

--- PAGE 293 ---
786 The Path of Purity 
“ Analysis-insight ”—this is known as the reviewing of • 
breaking-up with analysis of the object. 
“ The fixing both (unseen and seen) as one by following the 
object ”—by following, going after the object seen, visually 
determining both (the seen and unseen) as one in intrinsic 
nature: “ as this (seen) one, so what goes as complex broke 
up in the past and will break up in the future also,” is the 
meaning. And this has been said by the Ancients: 
“ Discerning purity in present life, 
A man infers it for future and past. 
And all activities are crumbling down 
Like dew-drops at the rising of the sun.” 
“ On cessation being intent” means intentness on that very 
cessation which is termed the breaking-up after making the 
determination of both as one by way of breaking-up; the giving 
weight to, inclining, sloping, bending towards that, is the 
meaning. 
“ This is the seeing of the sign of falling ”—such (determina¬ 
tion), it has been said, is known as insight into the character¬ 
istic of falling. 
“ Analyzing how the object ” means knowing the first 
object as matter etc. “ How ike object breaks ” means after 
seeing the breaking-up of that object he reviews the break¬ 
ing-up of the identifying (or registering) consciousness. 
[644] *‘ And empty seems ’' means, as he reviews the breaking- 
up thus, the complexes are just breaking; their breaking-up 
is death; there is nothing else. Thus the appearance as empty 
is fulfilled. Hence the ancients say: 
“ The aggregates are ceasing; there’s nought else. 
The break-up of the aggregates is death. 
The ardent man wisely their loss discerns, 
As though a gem were drilled with adamant.”1 
1 I.e. he attends to the hole that has been made and not to the colour 
of the gem. So the meditator attends only to the breaking-up of the 
aggregates and not to the aggregates themselves. 

--- PAGE 294 ---
XXL—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 787 
“ He gets the higher kind of understanding ” is that which 
analyzes the object, and that which reviews the breaking-up, 
and that which is appearance as empty. This, it is said, is 
known as insight of the higher understanding. 
“ Skilled in . . . reviewings three ” means, the monk is 
clever in the three reviewings of impermanence etc. 
“ In insights four ” means, in the four insights into repulsion 
etc. 
“ And three appearances ” means, through skill in this 
threefold appearance as extinguishing and falling, fearful, 
empty. 
“ Does not tremble at the various views ” means, does not 
waver in the various views such as eternal ism etc. 
He not wavering thus, his attention proceeds as “ what has 
not yet ceased is ceasing, what has not yet broken is breaking, 
and he sees the breaking-up of all c®mplexes forsaking the sign 
of genesis, of stability and of procedure as he would see a 
fragile jar breaking, fine dust being scattered, scssamum being 
fried. Just as a man with eyes to see, standing on the bank 
of a lake or river while it rains big drops, would see on the 
surface of the water big bubbles of water rising and as quickly 
breaking, so he sees that all complexes are continually break¬ 
ing-up. Indeed concerning such a meditator this has been 
said by the Blessed one: 
“ The king of death perceives not him, 
Who looks upon the world 
Like as a bubble or mirage. 
As he thus sees repeatedly that all complexes are continually 
breaking-up, the reviewing knowledge of breaking-up, set off 
with eight advantages, gainB strength. And these are the 
eight advantages: 
Rejection of views regarding existence. 
Abandonment of desire for life. 
Constant application in what is fitting. 
Purity of life. 
1 Dhummapada, ver. 170. 

--- PAGE 295 ---
788 The Path of Purity 
Rejection of anxiety. 
Expulsion of fear. 
Getting of patience and temperance. 
Overcoming of discontent and pleasure-loving. 
[645] Hence say the Ancients. 
“ Seeing these eight supreme advantages, 
The Sage reviews break-up and contemplates 
Repeatedly to gain the deathless state, 
Like one whose head is wrapped in blazing cloth.” 
The reviewing of bio-wledge of breaking-up is ended. 
[(3) Knowledge of the presence of fear.] 
To him who thus resorts to, develops, increases the reviewing 
of breaking-up which has for object the extinction, fall, 
breaking-up, cessation of all complexes, the complexes which 
are breaking in all becomings, places of birth, destinies, 
stations {thiti), sentient abodes appear greatly fearful, like 
a lion, tiger, leopard, bear, wild beast,1 ogre, demon, vicious 
ox, vicious dog, vicious elephant in rut, snake of terrible 
poison, lightning-disc, cemetery, battleground, blazing mass 
of live-coal etc., to a timid man who desires to live in bliss. 
As he sees that the past complexes have ceased, the present 
ones are ceasing, and so also those that are coming to birth 
in future will cease, there arises in this matter what is known 
as knowledge as to the presence of fear. 
Of that this is a simile: It is said that the three sons of a 
certain woman oSended the king. The king ordered their 
execution. She went with her sons to the execution-place. 
They then cut off the eldest son’s head and were beginning to 
cut off that of the middle one. Seeing the head of her eldest 
son cut off and that of the middle one being cut off, she forsook 
attachment for her youngest son: “ This one also will be just 
like them.” Therein the woman’s seeing the head of her 
eldest son cut off is like the meditator’s discerning the cessation 
of the past complexes. Her seeing the head of the middle son 
1 Read accha-taraccha-. 

--- PAGE 296 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 789 
being cut off is like his discerning the cessation of the present 
complexes. Her forsaking of attachment for the youngest 
son saying, “ This one also will be just like them ” is like his 
discerning the cessation of the future complexes: “ complexes 
that are coming to birth in future also will break up.” To 
him seeing thus there arises in this matter knowledge as to the 
presence of fear. 
A further simile: It is said that a woman who gave birth 
to still-born sons1 gave birth to ten sons. [646] Of them nine 
had died. One died in her hands. Another was in her womb. 
Seeing that the nine had been still-born and that the tenth was 
dying she forsook attachment for the one in her womb: “ This 
one also will be just like them.” Therein the woman’s 
recalling the death of her nine dead boys is like the meditator’s 
discerning the cessation of the past complexes. Her seeing 
the dying condition of the one in her hands is like the medi¬ 
tator’s discerning the cessation of the present complexes. 
Her forsaking of the attachment for the one in her womb is 
like his discerning the cessation of the future complexes. To 
him thus seeing there arises in one moment knowledge as to the 
presence of fear. 
But is this knowledge of the fearful appearance itself fearful, 
or is it not? It is not. For it is just a scrutinizing thus “ the 
past complexes have ceased, the present ones are ceasing,, 
the future ones will cease.” Therefore just as a man with eyes 
to see, looking at three live-coal pits at the city-gate, himself 
does not have fear; it is just a scrutinizing to him thus “ Who¬ 
ever falls herein, all will experience not a little pain.” Or a 
man with eyes to see, looking at three 6pikes placed in a row: 
acacia-spike, iron-spike, gold-spike, himself does not have fear; 
it is to him just a scrutinizing, “ Whoever falls on these spikes, 
all will experience not a little pain.” So knowledge of the 
appearance of fear is itself not fearful. It is just its scrutinizing 
1 Putipaja, lit. putrid offspring. “Just as putrid food etc. do not 
stand in their intrinsio nature but become rotten so every one of her sons 
as he is bom does not live but dies ”—J'ibd. [Yathi putibhutam 
odanadi na sabhavena titthati vinassati, evarii yassil itthiyi vij&tavi- 
jata putta na jlvanti maranti eva, a5 putipaja ti vutta.] 

--- PAGE 297 ---
790 The Path of Purity 
that in the three existences resembling the three coal pits 
and the three spikes, past complexes have ceased, present 
ones are ceasing, future ones will cease. But because to it 
just, the complexes in all existences, places of birth, destinies, 
durations, abodes have reached destruction and seem fearful 
and appear as fearful, therefore it is said to be the presence 
of fear. 
So this is the Pali on the appearance of fear to him: “To 
him who attends to impermanence what appears as fear ? To 
him who attends to HI, . . . not-self v)hat appears as fear ? 
To him who attends to impermanence the sign appears fearful. 
To him who attends to ill procedure appears fearful. To him 
who attends to not-self the sign and procedure appear fearful.”1 
Therein “ sign ” is the sign of complexes.2 This is a syno¬ 
nym for past, future, present complexes. [647J For he who 
attends to impermanence sees only the death of complexes. 
Hence to him the sign appears fearful. 
“ Procedure ” is the procedure of material and immaterial 
existence. For he who attends to ill sees only the repeated 
oppression of the procedure (though) considered as bliss. 
Hence to him procedure appears fearful. And he who attends 
to not-self sees both (sign and procedure) like an empty village, 
a mirage, celestial city etc., null, void, empty, ownerless, 
guideless. Hence to him sign and procedure both appear 
fearful. 
Knowledge of the appearance of fear is ended. 
[(4) The Revieuring Knowledge of tribulation.] 
To him who resorts to, develops, increases that knowledge 
of the appearance of fear in all becomings, places of birth, 
destinies, stations, sentient abodes there appears no pro¬ 
tection, no shelter, no destiny, no refuge. In the complexes 
1 Patisambhidd ii, 63. 
* The complexes are the sign. But the fikiL says that it means the 
appearance or manifestation of the complexes as though in their bodily 
form, each being classified in its own function by way of mass etc. 
[SahkhAranimittan ti sankharAnam samuhadighanavasena aakiccaiii 
pariochedataya ca saviggahana viya upatthAnan ti.] 

--- PAGE 298 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 791 
obtainable in (lit. gone to) all existences, places of birth, 
destinies, durations, abodes there i6 not one complex to desire 
or misconstrue (as the self). The three existences appear 
like coal-pits filled with flameless coals, the four primaries 
like snakes of terrible and quick poison,1 the five aggregates 
like murderers with uplifted swords, the six subjective organs 
like an empty village, the six objective organs like murdering 
robbers of villages, the seven conscious durations and the nine 
sentient abodes arc as though burning, ablaze, aflame with the 
eleven fires; and all complexes are like a boil, disease, thorn, 
evil, sickness and appear tasteless, essenceless, a mass of great 
tribulations. How ? They are to a timid man desirous of 
blissful life like a dense forest infested by wild beasts though it 
stands out in delightful form, like a cave with a leopard inside, 
like water in which are sharks and water-demons, like enemies 
with uplifted swords, like food with poison in it, like a pathway 
infested by robbers, like burning embers,2 like a battle-ground 
to which armies have been despatched. For as that man 
coming to these: the forest infested by wild beasts etc., is 
frightened, agitated, horrified and sees only tribulation on all 
sides, so this meditator, when all complexes appear fearful, 
sees by way of the reviewing of breaking-up only their cssence- 
lessness, tastelessness, tribulation on all sides. As he sees thus 
there arises what is known as knowledge of tribulaton, con¬ 
cerning which this has been said: “ How does understanding in 
the appearance of fear become knowledge in tribulation ? 
[648] Genesis is fear—thus understanding in the appearance 
of fear becomes knowledge m tribulation. Procedure is fear . . . 
the sign is fear . . . exerting is fear . . . conception is fear . . . 
destiny is fear . . . coming to birth is fear . . . bringing forth3 
is fear . . . birth is fear . . . decay is fear . . . ailment is fear 
. . . death is fear . . . sorrow is fear . . . lamentation is fear 
. . . despair is fear, thus understanding in the appearance of 
fear is knowledge in tribulation. 
1 Like the Katthamukha, Putimukha, Aggimukha, S&tthamukha, 
a ay 8 the fika. For theee snakes see Expositor 395. 
‘ » Some read agdrarp, “ like a house burning.” 
3 Read upapatti for uppatti. 

--- PAGE 299 ---
792 The Path of Purity 
Thai non-genesis is safety is knowledge in the tranquil path. 
That non-procedure . . . non-despair is safety is knowledge in 
the tranquil path. 
That genesis is fear, non-genesis is safety is knowledge in the 
tranquil path. That procedure . . . despair is fear, non¬ 
despair is safety is knowledge in the tranquil path. 
Understanding in the appearance of fear that genesis is ill 
is knowledge in tribulation. Understanding in the appearance of 
fear that procedure . . . despair is ill is knowledge in tribulation. 
That non-genesis is bliss is knowledge in the tranquil path. 
That non-procedure . . . non-despair is bliss is knowledge in 
the tranquil path. 
That genesis is ill, non-genesis is bliss is knowledge in the 
tranquil path. That procedure ... despair is ill, non-despair 
is bliss is knowledge in the tranquil path. 
Understanding in the appearance of fear that genesis is carnal 
is knowledge in tribulation. Understanding in the appear¬ 
ance of fear that procedure . . . despair is carnal is knowledge 
in tribulation. 
That non-genesis is not carnal is knowledge in the tranquil 
path. That non-procedure . . . non-despair is not carnal is 
knowledge in the tranquil path. 
That genesis is carnal, non-genesis is not carnal is knowledge 
in the tranquil path. That procedure . . . despair is carnal, 
non-despair is not carnal is knowledge in the tranquil path. 
Understanding in the appearance of fear that genesis is complex 
is knowledge in tribulation. Understanding in the appearance 
of fear that procedure . . . despair is complex is knowledge in 
tribulation. 
That non-genesis is nibbdna is knowledge in the tranquil path. 
That non-procedure . . . non-despair is nibbdna is knowledge 
in the tranquil path. 
That genesis is complex, non-genesis is nibbdna is knowledge 
in the tranquil path. That procedure . . . despair is complex, 
non-despair is nibbdna is knowledge in the tranquil path. 
[649] Procedure and exertion, genesis, 
Conception, sign—all these he views as ill. 
In tribulation such a knowledge is. 

--- PAGE 300 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 793 
The absence of these five ■phenomena 
He views as happiness. This constitutes 
His knowledge in the path of peacefulness. 
On five themes tribulation-knowledge rests. 
On five is knowledge of the peaceful path. 
These ten he knows. In twofold knowledge skilled, 
He does not tremble at the various views. 
It is knowledge in the sense of knowing, understanding in the 
sense of understanding. Hence it is said that understanding 
in the appearance of fear is knowledge in tribulation.”1 
Therein “ genesis ” means production here (in this world) 
with a former karma as cause. 
“ Procedure ” is the proceeding2 of what has arisen thus. 
“ Sign ” is the sign of all the complexes. 
“ Exerting ” is karma which is the condition of conception 
in future. 
“ Conception ” is production in future. 
“ Destiny ”s is that destiny by which there is that conception. 
“ Coming to birth ” is the coming to birth of the aggregates. 
“ Bringing forth ”4 is the procedure of results said to be 
attained or brought forth.** 
“ Birth ” is the birth which is the cause of decay etc. and 
is caused by becoming. Decay and death etc. are evident. 
And herein the five beginning with genesis are said by way 
of basis of the knowledge of tribulation. The rest is said by 
way of synonyms. For this pair of coming to birth and birth 
are synonyms of genesis and conception; this pair of destiny 
and bringing forth4 arc of procedure; decay etc. are of the 
sign. Hence he said: 
“ Procedure and exertion, genesis. 
Conception, sign—all these he views as ill. 
In tribulation such a knowledge is.” 
“ On five themes tribulation-knowledge rests.” 
1 Paiisambhidd i, 59 f. 2 Read pavatti for pavattah. 
8 Gati ia so called because it is to be traversed by way of good and 
bad conduct. Genes ia, procedure, exerting karma refer to present 
complexes, conception to future ones. Genesis also includes past 
karma-complexes. Sign refers to those in the three times. 
* Read upapatti. * Read upapannassa. 
51 

--- PAGE 301 ---
794 The Path of Purity 
That “ that non-genesis is safety is knowledge in the tranquil 
path ” etc. has been said to show the knowledge which is the 
opposite of the knowledge of tribulation. Or it has been said 
to generate comfort for thoBe whose hearts are agitated by 
seeing tribulation in the appearance of fear—(the comfort) 
that there is also absence of fear, safety and absence of trib¬ 
ulation. Or because the mind of him to whom genesis etc. 
stand out clearly as fearful is inclined to their opposites, 
therefore [650] it has been said also to show the advantages 
of knowledge in tribulation which has been accomplished by 
means of the appearance of tribulation. Thus it should be 
understood. 
And herein because that which is fearful is from the 
fixed order of things ill, and that which is ill is carnal, not 
freed from the carnalities1 of the round of births, carnalities 
of the world and carnalities of the corruptions, and that which 
is carnal is just complex, therefore it has been said that under¬ 
standing in the appearance of fear that genesis is ill is knowledge 
in tribulation etc. Though this be so, the variety (of the know¬ 
ledge) here is to be understood by way of procedure from the 
various modes such as the mode of fear, mode of ill and mode 
of carnalities. 
“ These ten he knows ” means, understanding the knowledge 
of tribulation he understands, penetrates, realizes ten know¬ 
ledges : five having genesis etc. as basis and five having non¬ 
genesis etc. as basis. 
“ In twofold knowledge skilled ” means, through skill in these 
two: knowledge of tribulation and knowledge of the tranquil 
path. 
“ He does not tremble at the various views ” means, does 
not waver in views proceeding by way of the view that nibbana 
etc. are ultimate under present conditions. The rest here is 
plain. 
The reviewing knowledge of tribulation is ended. 
1 Derived aggregates us being dependent on vafta are called carnality 
of vaffa or round of birthB. The five pleasures of sense, being enjoyed 
by the lower nature are called the carnality of the world. The lower 
nature itself is carnality of the corruptions. 

--- PAGE 302 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 795- 
[(5) The reviewing knowledge of repulsion.] 
Thus seeing all complexes as tribulation he is repelled by, frets 
against, does not delight in what is known as complexes, which 
are breakable, and which appear in all the existences, places of 
birth, destinies, conscious durations, sentient abodes. Just as 
a golden swan which delights at the foot of Mt. Cittakuta1 does 
not delight in a dirty puddle at the gate of a Capdala1 village, 
but delights only in the seven great lakes; even so this meditator, 
a swan, does not delight in what goes as the breakable com¬ 
plexes, the tribulation of which he has well seen, but delights 
in the seven reviewings which are endowed with the delight of 
development and the joy of development. And as the lion, 
king of beasts when shut in a golden cage is not delighted but 
delights in the Himalaya 3,000 yojana in expanse, so this 
meditator, a lion, does not delight in existence with the three 
kinds of pleasant destiny but delights in the three reviewings. 
And as the king of elephants, Chaddanta, all white, with 
seven limbs touching the earth, possessed of magical power, 
sky-traversing is not delighted in the midst of a city but delights 
in the Chaddanta lake-forest in the Himalaya,2 so [651] this 
meditator, a noble elephant, does not delight in all that is 
considered as complexes but delights in the tranquil path 
seen in such manner as non-genesis is safety etc.; he inclines, 
slopes, bends his mind to it. 
The reviewing knowledge of repulsion is ended. 
[(6) The knowledge of desire for release.] 
And this (knowledge of repulsion) is one in meaning with the 
preceding pair of knowledge. Hence the Ancients say: One 
(knowledge of the) appearance of fear gets three names. It has 
seen all complexes as fear—thus it comes to be known as 
appearance of fear. It has produced tribulation in those very 
complexes—thus it comes to be known as reviewing of tribula¬ 
tion. It has arisen repelled by those very complexes—thus 
it comes to be known aB reviewing of repulsion. And it is said 
in the Pali: “ that which is understanding in the appearance of 
1 Pronounced Ch*. * a. Jdtaka v, 37. 

--- PAGE 303 ---
796 The Path of Purity 
fear and that which is knowledge of tribulation and that which 
is repulsion—these states are one in meaning; only the letter is 
different'*1 And the consciousness of this scion of noble 
family who through this repulsion-knowledge is repelled by, 
frets against and docs not delight in (complexes), does not 
cling, adhere, bind itself to a single complex among the break¬ 
able complexes in all the existences, places of birth, destinies, 
conscious durations, sentient abodes. There is only a desire 
to be released, to escape from all that is considered as complexes. 
How ? As a fish inside a net, frog in a snake’s mouth, wild 
fowl caught in a cage, deer in the power of a strong snare, 
snake in the hands of a snake-charmer, elephant sunk in a big 
swamp, naga-king in sup&uga’s mouth, moon entered into 
Raliu’s mouth, man surrounded by enemies and so on desire 
to be released, to escape from each (bondage), so the conscious¬ 
ness of that meditator desires to be released, to escape from 
all that is considered as complexes. Then to him who is thus 
without attachment to, and is desirous of release from all 
that is considered as complexes there arises the knowledge of 
desire for release. 
The knowledge of desire for release is ended. 
[(7) The Reviewing Knowledge of Analysis.] 
Thus desirous of release from the breakable complexes in 
all existences, places of birth, destinies, durations, abodes 
[652] he again attributes, that he may be released from all 
that is considered as complexes, the three characteristics to 
those complexes by the reviewing knowledge of analysis and 
grasps them. He views all complexes as impermanent 
because they end in impermanence, last only for a time, are 
limited by rise and fall, are crumbling, shaky, breaking-up, 
uncertain, liable to perversion, essenceless, unprosperous, 
conditioned, liable to death and so on. He views them as ill 
because they are repeatedly oppressive, unbearable, basis of ill, 
disease, boil, thorn, evil, sickness, calamity, danger, fear, 
misfortune, non-protection, non-shelter, non-refuge, fcribula- 
1 Patisambhidd ii, 63. 

--- PAGE 304 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 797 
tion, root of evil, murderous, cankerous, deadly carnalities, 
liable to birth, liable to decay, liable to ailment, liable to sorrow, 
liable to lamentation, liable to despair, liable to corruptions 
and so on. He views them as foul, that is, attendant, of the 
characteristic of ill, because they are ungraceful.1 malodorous, 
despicable, abominable, bare in their foulness,2 3 * * * deformed, 
loathesome8 and so on. He views them as not-self because they 
are foreign, null, void, empty, ownerless, masterlcss, unruly 
and so on. For by seeing them thus he is known to have 
attributed the three characteristics and grasped the complexes. 
But why does he thus grasp them ?—in order to achieve 
the means of release. Of that this is a simile: It is said that a 
certain man thinking “ I will catch fish ” took a fish-basket 
and sank it in the water. He inserted his hand by the basket- 
mouth and catching in the water a snake by the neck was 
glad thinking “ I have caught a fish.” He thinking “ Great 
is the fish I have got ” raised it up and looking at it knew by 
seeing three stripes on its neck that it was a snake. He was 
frightened and seeing the danger (lit. tribulation) was repelled 
by the catch and was desirous of releasing it. In making a 
way of release he loosened his hand beginning from the tip 
of the tail and raised his arm and twirled the snake two or threa 
times above his head and, making it weak, got rid of it saying 
“ Go, vile snake 1” He ascended the bank of the lake with 
speed and saying “ Ho ! from the mouth of a great snake I am 
freed ” stood looking at the way he had come. 
Therein like the time when that man, catching the snake 
by the neck with the thought it was a fish, rejoiced, is the time 
when this meditator, after first obtaining his individuality, 
rejoices. Like the seeing of the three stripes after extracting 
1 Ajannalo ti amanuHHato, asobhanaio vd—fikd. 
* “ I.e. displaying their foulness or destroying their pleasantness by 
lack of adornment ”—filed. [AmaptJanena va tesam asubhata pa kata 
hotlti amapdanahatit . . . amandanena sakka etesaiii subhabhavam 
hantun ti.] 
3 “ Like excrement—gutham viya pariccajiiabbam vd vigaexharh. Or, 
they bind the on-looker to themselves through the fetter of hatred, 
palighasatnyojanavaUhnt&ya pa&savte aUanibandhatl ti vigaccham ”— 
fil'd. 

--- PAGE 305 ---
798 The Path of Purity 
its head from the basket-mouth is [653] the discernment of the 
three characteristics in the complexes after making a differen¬ 
tiation of density. Like the time of that man’s fright is this 
man’s knowledge of the appearance of fear. Like the seeing 
afterwards of danger is the reviewing knowledge of tribulation. 
Like the being repelled by his catch is the reviewing know¬ 
ledge of repulsion. Like his desire of releasing the snake is 
knowledge of desire for release. Like the making of the means 
of release is the attributing of the three characteristics to the 
complexes by the reviewing knowledge of analysis. As indeed 
that man twirled the snake and, making it weak and unable 
to strike back, released it altogether, so this meditator twirls the 
complexes by attributing the three characteristics and making 
them weak and unable to appear again in the modes of per¬ 
manence, bliss, pleasantness, the self, releases them altogether. 
Hence it is said that he bo grasps them in order to achieve the 
means of release. 
By this much has the analytic knowledge arisen to him, 
concerning which it has been said: “ To him who attends to 
impermanence analyzing on what does the knowledge arise? 
To him who attends to ill ... to not-self analyzing what does 
the knowledge arise? To him who attends to impermanence 
knowledge arises analyzing the sign. To him who attends to ill 
knowledge arises analyzing the procedure. To him who attends 
to the not-self knowledge arises analyzing the sign and pro¬ 
cedure.”1 
And herein “ analyzing the sign ” means, knowing by way 
of the characteristic of impermanence the Bign of the com¬ 
plexes to be uncertain, lasting for a time. Although the 
knowledge does not2 arise after having known first, yet it has 
been so said by virtue of common usage as in “ Because of 
Mind and states there arises mind-cognition ” etc. Or, by the 
method of oneness it has been said so making one out of the 
first (i.e. knowing) and the last (i.e. arising). Thus it should 
be understood. In this way the meaning in the other two 
terms also should be understood. 
The Reviewing Knowledge of Analysis is ended. 
» Ibid. 1 Read ca na for ca pana. 

--- PAGE 306 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 799 
[The Reviewing Knowledge of Emptiness.]1 
Having thus grasped that all complexes are empty2 by means 
of the reviewing knowledge of reflection he again grasps the 
two-pointed emptiness that it is empty of the self or anything 
connected with the self.2 Thus he does not see the self nor does 
he see any other thing established in the requisite part of the 
self. Now [654] the four-pointed emptiness has been stated as: 
Not I anywhere, or in anything of anybody’s, and not mine 
anywhere, nor is anything in anything. That again he grasps. 
How ? For “ not I anywhere ” means that he does not see 
the self in anything. “ Or in anything of anybody’s ” means 
that he does not see the self of himself ascribable to any state 
of any other (person). The meaning is that he does not see 
that it is ascribable by imagining a brother in a brother’s 
place, a friend in a friend’s place, or a requisite in a requisite’s 
place. In “ and not mine anywhere ” first reserving the word 
“ mine,” he does not see the self of another anywhere in any¬ 
thing, this is the meaning. Now bringing in the word “ mine,” 
“ nor is anything in anything of mine ” means he does not see 
that the self of another is anywhere in any state of mine, a 
brother in one’s brother’s place, friend in a friend’s place, 
requisite in a requisite’s place—thus in any place he does not 
see the self of another ascribable to any state, is the meaning. 
Thus because he does not see the self anywhere, does not see 
it ascribable to any state of another, does not see the self of 
another or that it is ascribable to any state of himself, there¬ 
fore by him the four-pointed emptiness has been grasped. 
Having thus grasped the four-pointed emptiness he again 
grasps the emptiness in six ways. How ? the eye is empty 
of the self or anything connected with the self, of permanence, 
of fixedness, of eternity, of non-liability to perversion . . . 
the mind is empty . . . material objects are empty . . . 
ideas (dhamtna) are empty . . . eye-consciousness . . . mind- 
consciousness4 . . . eye-contact is empty, and thus the method 
should be taken as far as decay and death. 
Having thus grasped emptiness in the six ways he again 
1 Transfer (8) to p- 659,1. 12 in the Pali text. * Cf. Samyulta iii, 167. 
* Ibid, iv, 54. 4 Read mano riUndnatfi. 

--- PAGE 307 ---
800 The Path of Purity 
grasps it in eight ways, namely: matter is essenceless, without 
essence, devoid of essence as regards the very essence of per¬ 
manence or the very essence of fixedness, or the very essence of 
bliss, or the very essence of the self, or as regards permanence, 
or fixedness, or eternity, or non-liability to perversion. Feeling 
. . . perception . . . activities . . . consciousness, eye . . . 
decay and death is essenceless, without essence, devoid of 
essence as regards the very essence of permanence, or the very 
essence of fixedness, or the very essence of bliss, or the very 
essence of the self, or as regards permanence, or fixedness, or 
eternity, or non-liability to perversion. Just as a reed is 
essenceless, without essence, devoid of essence, as a castor-oil 
plant, as a fig, as a setavaccha tree, as a butea tree, as a mass of 
foam, as a water-bubble, as a mirage, as a banana trunk [655], 
as a magic show is essenceless, without essence, devoid of essence. 
even so matter . . ,l decay and death is essenceless, without 
essence, devoid of essence as regards the very essence of per¬ 
manence or . . . non-liability to perversion. 
Having thus grasped emptiness in the eight ways he again 
grasps it in ten ways. How ? He views matter as null, views it 
as void, empty, not-self, masterless, not to be treated at will, un¬ 
reachable, unruly, foreign, aloof He views feeling . . . con¬ 
sciousness as null . . . aloof.2 Having thus grasped empti¬ 
ness in the ten ways he again grasps it in twelve ways, namely: 
matter is not a sentient being 2 not a living soul {jiva), not human 
1 Ctdlaniddesa 278 f. * Ibid. 279. 
* Since no one even in common usage calls just rupa by the name satla 
in the sense of what is commonly known by the concept “ Bentient 
being," satta here refers to the attd which heretics imagine and so call 
beoause it clings (saj) to rupa etc. and makes other people cling to it. 
This mistaken idea of the heretics of satta is meant here. Similarly 
with jiro eto. where also some false idea of the heretics is meant and not 
the concepts accepted in common usage. Derivations of the other 
terms are: jiva in the sense of living (jiv), nara of carrying (ni), rndnavd 
of being the place where conceit arises saying I am [mdna-vd), itthx 
where the embryo is, purisa because he lies (or ia) above exalted by 
being the chief (pvrim seti), attd where the conceit of I is placed, heretics 
call it aJiam as being the basis of self-exaltation in each individual—J'ikd. 
[Rupam na satto ti fidisu yo lokavohfirena satto, rflpam so na hotl 
ti ayam ettha idha nfidhippeto, tassa vuttasiddhattfi, na hi loko rOpa- 
mattam satto ti voharati. B&birakaparikappito pana atta satto ti 

--- PAGE 308 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 801 
being, not lad, not woman, not male -person (purisa), not the self, 
not anything connected with the self, not I, not mine, not another's, 
not anybody's;feeling . . . consciousness . . . is not anybody's.1 
Having thus grasped emptiness in the twelve way8 he again 
grasps emptiness in forty-two ways by way of scrutinizing 
comprehension: He views matter as impermanent, ill, disease, 
boil, thorn, evil, sickness, foreign, crumbling, calamity, danger, 
fear, misfortune, shaky, breaking-up, uncertain, 'non-protection, 
non-shelter, non-refuge, nor something to go to as refuge, null, 
void, empty, •not-self, tasteless, tribulation, liable to per¬ 
version, essenceless, root of evil, murderous, unprosperous, 
cankerous, conditioned, deadly carnality, liable to birth, liable 
to decay, liable to ailment, liable to death, liable to sorrow, to 
lamentation, to iU, to grief, to despair, as origination, as passing 
away, as escape.2 He views feeling . . . consciousness as 
impermanent ... as escape.8 This has also been said: 
“ Viewing matter as imperrmnent ... as escape he looks upon 
adhippeto. So hi tehi rupadlau sattavisattataya paresanca sanjfi- 
panatt.hena satto ti vuccati. RQpam so na hot! ti attho. Sufiila- 
t&parigganhanam. h’ etan ti, esa nayo na jivo ti fidfau pi . . . nara- 
n at then a netubhavena naro, uh&m asm! ti miinuppattitthanat&ya 
mSno ettha va ti pav&ttati mfinavo, thiyati ettha gabbho ti ittbl. 
patthanabhfivena purim Bet! ti puriso, ahito aharn mano ettha ti attho, 
paccattara tassa tassa ahahkara-vatthutuya ahan ti ca ditthigatikehi 
atta vaocati.] 
1 Ibid, with a few variant readings. 
2 Patixambhida ii, 238 which omits awranibhutato and anassadato 
and reads saAkiiesikadhammato for the last three. 
* Discernment here varies with the aspect thus: “ Whatever bliBs, 
joy arises on account of riipa is its taBte. Such discernment is the 
revealing of emptiness by way of cause and causal relation. Whatever 
riipa is impermanent, ill, liable to perversion—is the tribulation of 
riipa. Such discernment is by revealing the emptiness of impermanence 
etc. The discipline in and removal of passionate desire in riipa is the 
escape from riipa. Thus exposition of emptiness should be made by 
discerning as origin and cessation and also as taste, tribulation and 
escape ”—Pika. [Yarii rupam paticca uppajjati sukharii somanassam 
ayaxh rupassa assado ti dassanam paccayapaccayuppannavibhavanena 
aufifiat&vibhfivanam. Yam rupam aniccam dukkham viparJnama- 
dhammaih ayarn rOpassa adlnavo ti ca dassanam niccntftdisunftatH- 
vibhavanato. Tathft yo rQpe chandarfi-gavinayo chandarfigappahSnam 
idam rupassa nisaaranan ti ev&m samudayfididassananam itaresafica 
yatharaham suftfiatanupassanfinubruhanata datthabbft.] 

--- PAGE 309 ---
802 The Path of Purity 
the loorld as empty. Viewing feeling . . . consciousness as 
impermanent ... as escape he looks upon the world as 
empty.1 
[656] 0 Mogharajan ! look upon the world 
As void, and do thou ever heedful hide. 
Gut out the (worldly) theories of the self. 
So may'st thou get past death ; so an thou look, 
The King of death shall no more look on theer 
[Discourse of Deliverance.] 
Having thus seen the complexes as empty and attributed 
the three characteristics, and grasping them by putting away 
fear and delight, he becomes indifferent (uddsino) and impartial 
to complexes. He does not seize them as I or mine, but is like 
a man who has forsaken his wife. As if a man were to have 
a wife, desirable, loveable and dear; without her he could not 
abide even a moment, so very much he cherished her. He 
were to see that woman standing or seated, talking or laughing 
with another man. He would be angry, displeased and ex¬ 
perience violent grief. Seeing the fault of that woman at a 
subsequent time, he would be desirous of release from her 
and were to forsake her and would not hold her as his. From 
that time, even if he saw her with any man whatsoever, doing 
anything whatsoever, he would not be angry nor fall into grief. 
In fact he would be indifferent and impartial. Even so this 
(meditator) being desirous of release from all complexes, grasps 
them by means of the reviewing of analysis, and seeing nothing 
to seize as I, mine, puts away fear and delight and becomes in¬ 
different and impartial to all complexes. The consciousness of 
him who knows and sees this in the three existences, four places 
of birth, five destinies, seven conscious durations, nine sentient 
abodes shrinks, retracts, sinks and does not expand, but 
indifference or repulsion is established. As for example water- 
drops on a lotus leaf bent ever so slightly would shrink, retract, 
sink and not spread; or as a fowl’s feather or a knot of nerves 
thrown into fire would shrink, retract, sink, not spread—even 
1 CuUanid. loc. cit. * Sutta-Nip&ia, ver. 1119. 

--- PAGE 310 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 803 
so the consciousness of him who in the three existences . . . 
but indifference or repulsion is established. Thus to him 
arises what is known as knowledge of indifference to complexes. 
And if this knowledge views the tranquil path, nibbana 
as calm, it forsakes the whole procedure of the complexes and 
rushes into nibbana. If it does not view nibbana as calm, it 
proceeds again and again [657] having the complexes for 
object like the mariners’ crow1 which knows the quarters of the 
globe. It is said that mariners who are merchants embarking 
on a boat take a crow which knows the quarters. "When the 
boat is tossed by the wind and rushes out into unknown places 
and the shore does not appear, they let go the crow. It 
stands on the mast-top and rises up into the sky and going 
to all the quarters, main and intermediate, goes away in a 
certain direction if it sees the shore there. If it did not see it, 
it would return again and again and alight on the mast-top. 
Even so if this knowledge of indifference to complexes views 
the tranquil path, nibbana as calm, it forsakes the whole 
procedure of complexes and rushes into nibbana. If it does 
not view it (so), it proceeds again and again having the com¬ 
plexes for object. 
It grasps the complexes under various aspects2 as (clearly 
as) flour ground on a plate or as carded cotton with seeds taken 
out, and rejecting fear and delight and being impartial in the 
investigation of the complexes, is established by virtue of 
the threefold reviewing. Being so established it becomes the 
entrance to the threefold deliverance and the cause of the 
differentiation of the seven Ariya persons. Then because of 
its proceeding by way of the threefold reviewing, it is said to 
become the entrance to the threefold deliverance by way of the 
dominant influence of the three controlling faculties. For the 
three reviewings are said to be three entrances to deliverance. 
As has been said: “ Indeed these three deliverance-entrances lead 
to exit from the world, to the thorough reviewing of all complexes 
as regards their limitation and course, to the conscious rushing 
into the signless element, to the mental agitation in all complexes, 
1 Cf. Dialogues i, 282-3. * Read nunappakdrato. 

--- PAGE 311 ---
804 The Path of Purity 
to the conscious rushing into the unhankered element. to the 
thorough reviewing of all states as foreign, to the conscious rushing 
into the element of emptiness. These three deliverance-entrances 
lead to exit from the worldP1 
Therein “ as regards their limitation and course ” means, 
limitation and course by way of rise and fall. For the review¬ 
ing of impermanence makes a limit that before their rise com¬ 
plexes were not; and in following up their destiny reviews 
thoroughly that beyond their fall they do not go, that herein 
they disappear. 
“ To the mental agitation ” means, to the agitation of con¬ 
sciousness. For by means of the reviewing of ill consciousness 
is agitated in the complexes. 
[658] “ To the thorough reviewing ... as foreign ” means, 
to the thorough reviewing as not-self thus “ not I, nor mine.” 
These three expressions should be understood to have been 
said by way of the reviewing of impermanence etc. Therefore 
in the immediately following answer it has been said, ** To him 
who attends to impermanence complexes appear as extinct. To 
him who attends to ill complexes appear as fearful. To him who 
attends to not-self complexes appear as empty.”1 
But which are those deliverances of which these reviewingB 
are the entrances ? The signless, the unhankered, the empty. 
For it has been said, “ He who is atteyiding to impermanence, 
being abundant in resolve, gets the signless deliverance. He who 
is attending to ill, being abundant in repose, gets the unhankered 
deliverance. He who is attending to not-self, being abundant in 
wisdom, gels the empty deliverance ”z And herein “ signless 
deliverance ” is the Ariya Path as proceeding in the mode of the 
signless, making nibbana the object. Indeed it is “ signless ” 
from arising in the signless element and “ deliverance ” from 
being delivered from the corruptions. In the same way it is 
“ unhankered ” as proceeding in the mode of the unhankered, 
making nibbana the object; and “ empty ” as proceeding in the 
mode of emptiness, making nibbana the object. Thus it should 
be understood. 
1 Patiaambhidd ii, 48. » Ibid. 68. 

--- PAGE 312 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 805 
But that pair of deliverances which is stated in Abhidhamma 
to be thus: “ When after rejecting what is considered as views 
he develops, in order that he may attain the first plane, the transcen¬ 
dental jhana which is the exit and which leads to dispersion, then 
he, aloof from sensualities and achieving the first jhana, lives the 
unhankered emptiness 1,1—has been stated directly concerning 
the arrival (of the path) from insight; for although insight- 
knowledge has been stated in the Patisambhidamagga as 
follows: “ the reviewing knowledge of impermanence is empty 
deliverance, because it releases the conviction of permanence ; the 
reviewing knowledge of ill. . . (because it releases) the conviction 
of bliss; the reviewing knowledge of not-self is empty deliver¬ 
ance because it releases the conviction of the self ”2—they are thus 
empty deliverance by way of releasing conviction; and “ the 
reviewing knowledge of impermanence is signless deliverance 
because it releases the sign as permanence, the reviewing knowledge 
of ill . . . [because it releases) the sign as bliss; the reviewing know¬ 
ledge of not-self is signless3 deliverance because it releases the sign 
as the self ”*—they are thus [659] signless deliverance by way 
of releasing the sign; and “ the reviewing knowledge of im¬ 
permanence is unhankered deliverance because it releases the 
hankering as permanence, the reviewing knowledge of ill . . . 
hankering as bliss, the reviewing knowledge of not-self is un¬ 
hankered deliverance because it releases the hankering as the 
self”*—they are thus said to be unhankered deliverance by 
way of releasing hankering—still that is not signless, speaking 
directly, because it docs not reject the sign of complexes but it 
is, directly speaking, empty and unhankcrcd. And by virtue 
of its arrival (at the Path) deliverance is brought out at the 
moment of the Ariya Path; therefore only the pair of deliver¬ 
ances: unhankered and empty is stated (in Abhidhamma)— 
thus it should be understood. 
So far is this the discourse on deliverance. 
1 Dhammasanganl, § 510. 
3 Read animitto. 
a Pafisambkidd ii, 67. 
* Ibid. 08. 

--- PAGE 313 ---
806 The Path of Purity 
[(8) Knowledge of indifference to complexes.] 
Moreover in what has been said as “ It is the cause of the 
differentiation of the seven Ariya persons 5>1 there are these 
seven Ariya persons: (1) faith-follower, (2) faith-delivered, 
(3) mental-realizer, (4) twice-delivered, (5) dhamma-follower, 
(6) sight-attained, (7) understanding-delivered. Of their 
differentiation this knowledge of indifference to complexes 
is the cause. 
(1), (2) For he who attending to impermanence is abundant 
in resolve gets faith-faculty; he is faith-follower at the moment 
of the stream-winning path. In the remaining seven places he 
is faith-delivered. (3) And he, who attending to ill is abundant 
in repose, gets concentration-faculty; he everywhere (in all 
the eight places) is known as mental-realizer* (4) And he 
who having reached the immaterial jhana has reached the 
highest fruition is known as twice-delivered. (5) And he who 
attending to not-self is abundant in wisdom gets understand¬ 
ing-faculty; he is dhamma-follower* at the moment of the 
stream-winning path. (6), (7) In the (following) six places 
he is sight-attained and in the highest fruition understanding- 
delivered. 
For this has been said: “To him who attends to imper¬ 
manence faith-faculty is preponderating. By the preponderance 
of faith-faculty he attains the stream-winning path ; hence he 
is called faith-follower.”* Also [660] “to him who attends to 
impermanence faith-jacuity is preponderating; by the preponder¬ 
ance of faith-faculty he realizes the fruition of stream-winning ; 
hence he is catted faith-delivered etc.”* Further it has been 
said Believing he has been delivered—he is faith-delivered. He 
1 Above, p. 803. For the seven Arivae see Further Dialogues i, 336 
and note 3 to text, p. 659. 
3 iiere moanB tbe three mental factors. Sec Expositor 199. 
But Further Dialogues loo. cit. has “he that baa fathomed the 
corporeal.” 
3 This definition gives dhamma the meaning of ‘pahhd. 
4 Pafieambhidd ii, 63. 
8 Ibid. 23. 

--- PAGE 314 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 807 
has realized the finality of touch ”1 (i.e. arupajhdna)—he is 
mental-realizer. He has reached the finality of sight (or view) 
—he is sight-attained. He who believes is delivered—he is faith- 
delivered. First he touches the jhana-touch, afterwards realizes 
cessation, nibbana—he is mental-realizer. lU are complexes, 
bliss is cessation, thus it is known, seen, discerned, realized, 
touched by understanding—he is sight-attained.”2 And in the 
other four terms, he follows after faith, by faith he gets along, 
goes along—he is faith-follower. Likewise he follows after 
the dhamma termed understanding, or by dhamma he gets 
along—he is dhamma-follower. By the immaterial jhana 
and by the Ariya Path, thus in both parts (or on both sides) 
he is delivered—he is twice-delivered. Understanding (the 
four truths) he is delivered—he is understanding-delivered. 
Thus should the word-definition be understood. 
And this knowledge of indifference to complexes is one in 
meaning with the foregoing pair of knowledges. Therefore 
the Ancients said: “ This knowledge of indifference to complexes 
being one gets three names. Above it is known as the know¬ 
ledge of desire for release, in the middle it is known as the 
reviewing knowledge of analysis, at the end it is known as the 
knowledge of indifference to complexes which has reached the 
summit.” In the Pali also it has been said: “ How does under¬ 
standing which is desire for release, analysis and establishment 
become knowledge of indifference to complexes ? The under- 
1 “ Phutthantam sacchikato ti phufthdnam anantaram phufthanto. 
Phufthanam arupajkandnam anantaro kdlo li adhippdyo. He who 
by ardpajhdna is freed from rupakaya, and by means of discarding- 
removal from a portion of his ndmakdya, as it were glances at and nmkes 
olear but does not realize the deliverance called the cessation. But 
when he makes cessation the object and some of the cankers are ended, 
then he realizes it. Therefore he iB called kdyasakkhi. But as some of 
the cankers are still not ended ho is not said to be delivered”—I'ika. 
[Yo hi arupajhiinena rupakayato namakayckadeaato ca vikkhambha- 
nena vimokkhena vimutto, tena nirodhasaiikhato vimokkho filocito 
pak&sito viya hoti, na pana kfiyena sacchikato. Nirodh&m pana 
arammanam katvi ekaccesu asavesu khipiteau tena so sacchikato hoti. 
Tasma so sacchikatabbam yatha alocitam namakayena saccbflkfisl ti 
k&yasakkhl ti vuccati na tu vimutto ekaccfinam asavnnnm aparik- 
khlijattfi.] 
* Ibid, ii, 52. 

--- PAGE 315 ---
808 The Path of Purity 
standing which is desire for release, analysis and establishment 
as to genesis is knowledge of indifference to complexes. The 
understanding which is desire for release, analysis and establish¬ 
ment as to procedure . . . sign . . . despair is knowledge of 
indifference to complexes. The understanding which is desire 
for release, analysis and establishment as to genesis as ill . . . 
fearful, carnal ... as to genesis as the complexes ... as to 
despair as the complexes is knowledge of indifference to com¬ 
plexes.”1 
Therein it is a desire for release as well as analysis and 
establishment—thus (knowledge) of desire for release, analysis 
and establishment. Thus [661] the desire to abandon genesis 
etc. on the part of him who is being repelled through know¬ 
ledge of repulsion previous to (the Path) is desire for release. 
The analysis in the middle to make a means of release is 
analysis. The being indifferent at the conclusion of release 
is establishment; concerning which (knowledge) it has been 
said “ genesis is complexes, to those complexes he is indifferent. 
This is indifference to complexes ”2 etc. Thus this is only one 
knowledge. 
And further by the Pali it should be understood that this is 
only one.3 F or it has been said “ that which is desire for release, 
and that which is reviewing of analysis, and that which is in- 
difference to complexes: these states are one in meaning, only 
the letter is indifferent.”4 
Thus the insight of that scion of noble family who has 
attained to indifference to complexes, having reached the 
summit leads to the emergence. Whether it is insight which 
has reached the summit or it is emergence-leading—this is a 
name for the three knowledges beginning with that of in¬ 
difference to complexes.6 For it is “ summit reached ” from 
having reached the summit, the highest state. It goes to 
the emergence—thus “ emergence-going.” Because it emerges 
from the objective sign, which is the basis of conviction, and 
i Ibid, i, 60 f. 
* Read eJeam &vd. 
8 The others being adaptation and adoption. 
» Ibid, i, 61. 
4 Ibid, ii, 64. 

--- PAGE 316 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 809 
from the subjective procedure,1 the path is called emergence. 
It goes to that—thus “ emergence-going.” It unites with the 
Path, is the meaning. 
Therein this is the table of contents for the elucidation2 of 
conviction and emergence: subjectively convinced, one emerges 
from the subjective. Subjectively convinced, one emerges 
from the objective. Objectively convinced, one emerges 
from the objective. Objectively convinced, one emerges from 
the subjective. Convinced in matter, one emerges from matter. 
Convinced in matter, one emerges from non-matter. Con¬ 
vinced in non-matter, one emerges from non-matter. Con¬ 
vinced in non-matter, one emerges from matter. One emerges 
from the five aggregates together. Convinced as to the im¬ 
permanent, one emerges from the impermanent. Convinced 
as to the impermanent, one emerges from ill, from the not-self. 
Convinced as to ill, one emerges from ill, impermanent, the 
not-self. Convinced as to the not-self, one emerges from the 
not-self, impermanent, ill. How \ 
Some one here (in this world) from the outset is convinced 
as regards the subjective complexes, being convinced he sees 
them. And since by just discerning the bare (suddha) sub¬ 
jective, there is no emergence of the Path but the objective 
also has to be discerned, therefore he sees the aggregates of 
another and underived complexes also as impermanence, 
ill, not-self. At times he [662] contemplates the subjective, 
at times the objective. As he contemplates thuB, his insight 
at the time of contemplating the subjective unites with the 
Path. He is said to be convinced subjectively and emerge 
from the subjective. If, when he is contemplating the objec¬ 
tive, his insight unites with the Path, he is said to be convinced 
subjectively and emerge from the objective. And the same 
1 “ This threefold procedure is called subjective because of the pro¬ 
cedure of the corruptions in it9 own continuity and because, on that 
account, of the procedure of derived aggregates arising in the absence 
of Path-culture ”—fika. [Tam hi sasantatiyam kilesappavatta- 
bhavato tamnimittam asati maggabhivanftya uppajjanakaupSdinoa- 
khandhapavattabhSvato ca.] 
2 Read avibhav0. 
52 

--- PAGE 317 ---
810 The Path of Purity 
with emerging from the objective and subjective on being 
convinced objectively. 
Another from the first is convinced as regards matter; 
being convinced he views phenomenal matter (bhutarupa) 
and derived matter all in one lump. And since there is no 
emergence by the Path which just discerns the bare matter, 
the non-matter also has to be discerned, therefore he makes that 
matter the object and views non-matter saying “ the feeling, 
perception, activities, consciousness which have arisen—these 
are non-matter.” At times he contemplates matter, at times 
non-matter. As he contemplates thus, his insight, when he is 
contemplating matter, unites with the Path. He is said to bo 
convinced of matter and emerge from matter. If, when he is 
contemplating non-matter, his insight unites with the Path 
he is said to be convinced of matter and emerge from non¬ 
matter. And the same with emerging from non-matter and 
matter, on being convinced of non-matter. When he, being 
convinced that whatever is liable to arise is liable to cease1 
emerges so, he is said to emerge from the five aggregates 
together. 
From the outset one contemplates complexes as imperman¬ 
ent. But since by just contemplating them as impermanent 
there is no emergence, he should contemplate them as ill and 
not-self also, and he contemplates them as ill and not-self also. 
As he progresses thus, when he is contemplating them as 
impermanent there is emergence; he is said to be convinced 
as to the impermanent and emerge from the impermanent. 
If when he is contemplating them as ill and not-self there is 
emergence, he is said to be convinced as to the impermanent 
and emerge from the ill and the not-self. And the same with 
being convinced as to ill and the not-self and the remaining 
emergences. 
And here (among them) he who is convinced as to imperman¬ 
ence, as to ill also, as to the not-self also—emergence is from 
impermanence at the time of emerging. The three persons 
also are abundant in resolve, get faith-faculty, are delivered by 
1 Majjhima iii, 280. 

--- PAGE 318 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 811 
the signless deliverance, are faith-followers at the first Path- 
moment, faith-delivered in the seven places. [663] But if 
emergence be from ill, the three persons are abundant in 
repose, get concentration-faculty, are delivered through the 
unhankered-deliveranee, are everywhere mental-realizers. But 
he to whom among them the immaterial jhana is the basis, 
is twice-delivered at the highest fruition. Moreover to them 
emergence is from the not-self. The three persons also are 
abundant in wisdom, get understanding-faculty, are delivered 
through the deliverance of emptiness, are dhamma-followers 
at the first Path-moment, sight-attained in the six places, 
understanding-delivered at the highest fruition. 
Now for the elucidation of this insight leading to emergence 
together with the first and last knowledges (i.e. appearance of 
fear and adoption) twelve similes should be understood.1 
Their list is this: 
Black snake and bat, house, ox, and ogress, child, 
Thirst, hunger, cold and heat, and darkness, poison. 
And it is proper to bring out these similes as established in 
any2 of the knowledges beginning with the appearance of fear. 
And when they are brought out on this occasion everything 
becomes evident, from the appearance of fear up to fruitional 
knowledge. Therefore, it is said, they should be brought out 
just here. 
(1) Bat.—They say that a bat alighted on a five-branched 
Madhuka tree thinking “ here I shall get flower or fruit.” It 
examined (pardmasitvfi) one branch and did not see anything 
obtainable there either flower or fruit. And as the first, so the 
second, third, fourth, fifth branch it examined and saw no¬ 
thing (obtainable). Saying “this indeed is a fruitless tree. 
There is nothing obtainable here,” it forsook attachment for 
that tree and going up a straight branch, looked up stretching 
out its head from the fork (of the tree), flew up into the sky 
and alighted on another fruit-tree. Therein the meditator 
should be regarded as the bat. Like the five-branched 
1 Read veditabbd. 2 Read katlhaci. 

--- PAGE 319 ---
812 The Path of Purity 
Madhuka tree arc the five clinging aggregates. Like the alight¬ 
ing there of the bat is the meditator’s conviction in the five 
aggregates. Like its examination of one particular branch 
without seeing anything obtainable there and its examination 
of the other branches is the meditator’s contemplation of the 
aggregate of matter without seeing anything obtainable there 
and his contemplation of the remaining aggregates. Like its 
forsaking of attachment for the tree saying it indeed was 
fruitless are [664] the three knowledges of desire for release 
etc. of the meditator who is repelled by discerning the char¬ 
acteristics of impermanence etc. in the five aggregates. Liko 
its going up the straight branch is the meditator’s adaptive 
knowledge. Like the lifting of its head and looking up is 
adoptive knowledge. Like the flying up in the sky is Path- 
knowledge. Like the alighting on another fruit-tree is 
fruitional knowledge. 
(2) The black-snake simile has been mentioned in analytic 
knowledge.1 But in the application of the simile this is 
distinctive: like the getting rid of the snake is adoptive know¬ 
ledge. Like the standing after releasing it and looking at 
the path he had come is Path-knowledge. Like the going and 
standing in the place out of danger is fruitional knowledge. 
(3) House,.—It is said that when the owner of a house 
had taken his evening meal and gone to bed and slept, the 
house caught fire.2 He awaking saw the fire and being 
frightened thought “ Good indeed it is for me to get away before 
I am burnt,” and looking about saw a way out and got away 
and went in haste and stood at a safe place. Therein like the 
house-owner falling asleep after eating and going to bed is the 
foolish average man seizing the five aggregates as I, mine. 
Like the time of being frightened on waking and seeing the fire 
is knowledge of the appearance of fear after progressing in good 
progress and seeing the three characteristics. Like the looking 
for a way of getting away is knowledge of desire for release. 
Like the seeing of the way is adaptation. Like the getting 
away is adoptive knowledge. Like the going in haste is Path- 
1 Above, p. 797. * Read adittam. 

--- PAGE 320 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 813 
knowledge. Like the standing in the safe place is fnational 
knowledge. 
(4) Ox.—It is said that while a cultivator was asleep at 
night his oxen breaking through the cattle-pen ran away. 
At early dawn he went there and looking saw that they had 
run away and following up their foot-marks saw the King’s 
oxen. Thinking “ they are my oxen ” he brought them back 
and at full dawn perceived “ these are not my oxen but the 
king’s oxen.” He was frightened thinking “ I must flee before 
the King’s men seize me as a thief and lead me to utter de¬ 
struction ” and fled in haste leaving the oxen and stood in a 
place out of danger. Therein like the seizing of the king’s 
oxen thinking “ my oxen ” is the seizing by the foolish average 
man of the aggregates as I, mine. Like the perceiving them 
as the king’s oxen at full dawn is the perceiving by the meditator 
of the aggregates by way of the three characteristics as im¬ 
permanent, ill, not-self. Like the time of fear.is knowledge of 
the appearance of fear. Like the desire to go after forsaking 
them is desire for release. Like the forsaking is adoption. 
Like the flight is the Path. Like the standing in the dangerless 
place after flight is the fruition. 
[665] (5) Ogress.—It is said that a man lived with an ogress. 
At night she thinking “ he is asleep ” went to the cemetery of 
raw corpses and ate human flesh. He saying “ Where does 
she go ?” followed her and saw her eating human flesh and 
knowing that she was not a human being was frightened 
thinking “ Before she eats me I must fly.” He fled in haste 
and stood in a safe place. Therein like the living with the 
ogress is the seizing of the aggregates as I, mine. Like the 
knowing her to be an ogress by seeing her eat human flesh at 
the cemetery is knowing the aggregates as impermanent etc. 
by seeing the three characteristics. Like the time of fear is 
the appearance of fear. Like the desire for flight is the desire 
for release. Like the forsaking of the cemetery is adoption. 
Like the hasty flight is the Path. Like the standing in the 
dangerless place is the fruition. 
(6) Child.—It is said that a woman doted on her child. 
Seated on an upper terrace she heard the cry of a child in the 

--- PAGE 321 ---
814 The Path of Purity 
■ 
streets. Thinking “ Is my child being hurt by some one V* 
she went in haste and with the perception that it was her child 
seized the child of another. She then perceived “this is 
another’s child ” and with fear of reproach looked here and 
there and saying “ Let no one call me a child-kidnapper ” she 
put down the child there, again ascended the terrace in haste 
and sat down. Therein the seizing of another’s child thinking 
it was her own is the grasping of the five aggregates as I, mine. 
Like the perceiving “ this is another’s child ” is the perceiving 
by way of the three characteristics that (the aggregates) are 
not I, not mine. Like the fear of reproach is the appearance of 
fear. Like the looking here and there is knowledge of desire 
for release. Like the putting down of the child there is adapta¬ 
tion. Like the time of standing in the streets after putting it 
down is adoption. Like the ascending of the terrace is the 
Path. Like the sitting down after ascending is the fruition. 
(7-12) Thirst,1 hunger, cold and heat and darkness, poison— ■ 
these six similes are mentioned to show that one who is 
established in insight leading to emergence faces, inclines, 
slopes, bends towards the transcendental state. 
(7) For as a very hungry man, oppressed by hunger longs 
for delicious and tasty food, so this meditator touched by the 
hunger of the round of the stream of existence longs for the 
food of mindfulness as regards (lit. going to) the body, that 
ambrosial taste. 
(8) And as a thirsty man with throat and mouth quite dry 
longs for a drink of many ingredients, so this meditator [666] 
being touched by the thirst of the round of the stream of 
existence longs for a drink of the eightfold Ariya Path. 
(9) And as a man touched by the cold longs for the heat, 
so this meditator touched by the cold of craving and affection 
in the round of the stream of existence longs for the heat of 
the Path that burns up the corruptions. 
(10) And as a man touched by the heat longs for the cold, 
so this meditator burned by the heat of the eleven fires in the 
round of the stream of existence longs for nibbana, the quieting 
of the eleven fires. 
1 Read pipdsam. 

--- PAGE 322 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 815 
(11) And just as a man overcome by darkness longs for 
the light, so this meditator wrapped and enveloped by the 
darkness of ignorance longs for the development of the path 
lit up by knowledge. 
(12) And as a man touched by poison longs for a poison- 
antidote, so this meditator touched by the poison of the corrup¬ 
tions longs for nibbana, the ambrosial medicine that counteracts 
the poison of the corruptions. Hence it has been said “ the 
consciousness of him who knows and sees this in the three 
existences . ; . in the nine sentient abodes shrinks, retracts, 
sinks and does not expand but indifference or repulsion is 
established. As for example water-drops on a lotus leaf 
bent ever so slightly”—thus all should be understood in 
the way stated previously.1 By this much is he known 
as one who is in the habit of shrinking, concerning 
whom it is said: 
A monk who does not show himself in life 
Is so in harmony, so they declare, 
That he habitually withdraws himself 
And follows the aloofness of the mind.2 
Thus this knowledge of indifference to complexes having 
fixed the meditator’s habit of shrinking (or withdrawing him¬ 
self) fixes higher up the distinction of the enlightenment- 
factors, Path-factors, jhana-factors, progress and deliverance 
of the Ariya Path also. Some elders indeed say that basic 
jhana fixes the distinction of enlightenment-factors, Path- 
factors, jhana-factors. OtherB say that aggregates which are 
the object of insight fix them. Others say that personal wish 
fixes them. Among their doctrines it should be understood 
that this previous insight leading to emergence only fixes them. 
In this matter here is a discourse in order: the Path which 
has arisen to one of dried-up insight by insight-fixing, and the 
Path which to one who gets attainment has arisen without 
making jhana the basis, and the Path which is produced by 
making the first jhana the basis [667] and contemplating the 
1 Above, p. 802. * Sutta Nipata, ver. 809. 

--- PAGE 323 ---
816 The Path of Purity 
particular complexes (i.e. other than the first jhana)1 are of the 
first jhana. In all (the -Paths) there are the seven enlighten¬ 
ment-factors. eight Path-factors, five jhana-factors. For in¬ 
sight previous to those (ariya Paths), being accompanied by 
joy and also accompanied by indifference, reaches the state of 
being indifferent to complexes at the time of emergence and 
is accompanied by joy. In the Paths produced by making the 
second, third, fourth jhanas the basis in the fifth method, 
the jhana has in due order four, three, two factors. But in all 
of them there are seven Path-factors. In the fourth (i.e. 
Path with fourth jhana as basis) are six enlightenment- 
factors. This distinction is due to the fixing by the basic 
jhana and to the fixing by insight. For the insight previous 
to them (paths) is accompanied by joy and accompanied also 
by indifference; (insight) leading to emergence is accompanied 
by joy only. But there are two jhana-factors by way of 
indifference and one-pointcdness of consciousness in the Path 
produced by making the fifth jhana the basis. The en¬ 
lightenment-factors and path-factors are just six and seven. 
This distinction is due to the double fixing of both (of basic 
jhana and insight). For in this method the previous insight 
is accompanied by joy or accompanied by indifference; the 
emergence-leading is accompanied by indifference only. The 
same is the metnod in the Path produced by making im¬ 
material jhanas the basis. 
Thus the attainment which has emerged in a place close 
to the Path which is produced after emerging from the basic 
1 “ One who has not got jhana but has just the bare insight is of 
dry-insight. For he being not soaked in the juice of jhana has dried, 
hard insight. Particular complexes are other complexes than the basic 
jhana . . . Without the insight leading to emergence the basic jhana 
etc. which are only the condition of fixing are not discerned. But even 
when the basic jh&na etc. are absent the emergence-leading insight is the 
oondition of tho Path being connected with the first jhana to those of 
dry insight and others ”—Tikd. [Ajhanalabh! suddhavipassanayaniko 
sukkhavipas&ako, so hi jh&nasinehena vipassanil aainiddhabhAvato 
sukkh&lukha vipassana etassA ti sukkhavipassako ti voccata. Pakin- 
nakaaai\khara ti p&dakajhanato anne sankh&re . . . na hi vutthana- 
gaminim vinS kevalam padakajhfinAdayo niyamahetu dittha, vuttha- 
uagawinl pana pAdakajhAnadfnam abhSve pi sukkhavipaas&kadlnam 
maggassa pathamajhanikabhavahetu.] 

--- PAGE 324 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 817 
jhana and after contemplating any of the complexes produces 
resemblance to itself as the colour of the ground simulates that 
of the iguana. But in the second doctrine of elders the path 
is produced after emerging from thiB and that attainment 
and contemplating this and that state attained and resembles 
this and that attainment. There also insight-fixing is to be 
understood by the said method. In the third doctrine of 
elders the path is produced by mating this and that jhana the 
basis in conformity with one’s own wish and contemplating 
these and those jhana-states and resembles this and that jhana. 
But that (i.e. such resemblance) is not fulfilled merely by wish 
without the basic jhana or contemplated jhana. This purport 
is to be explained by the Nandakovada Sutta.1 Here also 
insight-fixing is to be understood by the said method. 
Thus, it should be understood, indifference to complexes 
fixes the enlightenment-factors, Path-factors, jhana-factors. 
And if from the first in discarding the corruptions, it is able 
to discard them only with pain, with application, with external 
aid, the progress is known as painful; [668] contrariwise the 
progress is easy. And if after discarding the corruptions it 
makes the Path, home of insight, become manifest slowly, it is 
known as sluggish in higher knowledge; contrariwise it is quick 
in higher knowledge. Thus this indifference to complexes 
standing in the place of arrival gives each its own name to the 
Path. Hence the Path gets four names. And this progress 
is to some monk manifold, to others single in the four Paths. 
And to Buddhas the four paths were easy in progress and 
quick in higher knowledge: so were they to the Captain of the 
Law. And the first Path of Mahamoggallana the Elder also 
was easy in progress and quick in higher knowledge, but his 
three upper Paths were painful in progress and sluggish in 
higher knowledge. 
And as the progress so are the dominant influences, manifold 
to some monk in the four Paths and single to others in the 
four (Paths). Thus indifference to complexes fixes the dis¬ 
tinction of the progress. And how it fixes the distinction of 
deliverance has already been said.® 
1 Majjhima iii, 270 f. a Above, p. 815. 

--- PAGE 325 ---
818 The Path of Purity 
Still what is known as the Path gets its name for five reasons: 
by its own peculiar property, by the opposite, by its own quality, 
by the object, or by the arrival. 
For if indifference to complexes emerges after contemplat¬ 
ing the complexes as impermanent, he is delivered by the 
signless deliverance; if it emerges after contemplating them as 
ill, he is delivered by the unhankered deliverance; if it emerges 
after contemplating them as not-self, he is delivered by the 
empty deliverance. This is known as the name according to the 
peculiar property (of the Path). 
And because it (Path) makes a differentiation of the density 
of the complexes by the reviewing of impermanence and comes 
rejecting the sign of permanence, sign of fixedness, sign of 
eternity, therefore it is signless. And it is unhankered because 
it rejects the perception of bliss through the reviewing of ill 
and comes drying up hankering and longing. And it is empty 
because it rejects the perception of the Bclf, a being, or person 
through the reviewing of the not-self and sees the complexes 
as empty. This is known as the name according to the opposite. 
Also it is empty by being empty of lust etc., signless from 
the absence of the sign of matter etc. or from the absence 
of the sign of lust etc., unhankered from the absence of hanker¬ 
ing after lust etc. This is the name according to its own quality. 
This (Path) makes as object nibbana which is empty, sign¬ 
less and unhankered; thus is it called empty, signless, un¬ 
hankered. This is the name according to its object. 
[669] Again, arrival is twofold; insight-arrival and Path- 
arrival. Therein in the Path the insight-arrival is obtained.1 
at fruition the Path-arrival. For the reviewing of not-self 
is known as emptiness; the Path of the insight of emptiness 
is empty. The reviewing of impermanence is known as sign¬ 
less; the path of insight of the signless is signless. ThiB name 
(of signless for the Path) is not obtained2 in the Abhidhamma 
teaching. It is obtained in the Suttanta teaching. 
1 Read labbhati. 
* 14 For insight and path are not the opposite of the sign ”—ka. 
[Vipaasana nimittapatipakkha na hoti . . . maggo na nimittassa 
patipakkho.] 

--- PAGE 326 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 819 
For there (in the Suttas) adoptive knowledge makes the 
signless nibbana the object and being known as the signless 
itself stands in the place of arrival and giveB the name to the 
Fath. So say they (the Ancients). Hence is the path called 
the signless. Also it is fitting to say that through the Path- 
arrival fruition is signless. The reviewing of ill is known 
as unhankercd because it comes drying up hankering after 
the complexes. Through the unhankered insight the Path is 
unhankered.1 The fruition of the unhankered Path is un¬ 
hankered. Thus the insight gives its own name to the Path 
and the Path to the fruition. This is the name according to 
the arrival. 
Thus this indifference to complexes fixes the deliverance- 
distinction. 
Knowledge of indifference to complexes is ended. 
[Adaptive Knowledge.] 
To him who resorts to, develops, increases that know¬ 
ledge of indifference to complexes resolute faith becomes 
stronger, energy is well upheld, mindfulness is well-established; 
thought (citta) is well-concentrated, indifference to complexes 
grows sharper. “ Now to him the Path arises ”—so indiffer¬ 
ence to complexes contemplates complexes as impermanent or 
ill or not-self and lapses into life-continuum. Immediately 
after the life-continuum, adverting which is the door of the 
mind arises, making complexes the object, as impermanent or 
ill or not-self in the way made by indifference to complexes. 
Then immediately after that inoperative consciousness which 
has arisen setting life-continuum in motion, there arises 
the first apperceptional consciousness which is called the 
preamble (or preparation) closely following the gapless con¬ 
tinuity of consciousness and making complexes the object in 
the same way. Next arises the second apperceptional con¬ 
sciousness which is called the access making complexes the 
object in the same way. Next [670] arises the third appercep¬ 
tional consciousness which is called the Adaptation similarly 
1 Read appanihita. 

--- PAGE 327 ---
820 The Path of Purity 
making complexes the object. These (preamble etc.) are their 
individual names. 
Yet because it is common (to all apperceptions) it is proper 
to call this threefold (consciousness) the resort, preamble, 
access, adaptation. To what is it adaptive ? To (the states) 
in the first and last parts. For it is adaptive to the three 
functions of the first eight insight-knowledges and to those 
of the thirty-seven constituents of enlightenment in the 
higher (Path-moment). For because it has proceeded refer¬ 
ring to complexes by way of the characteristics of imper¬ 
manence etc. it is adaptive to the true functions of these 
eight knowledges as though saying in purport “ Knowledge 
of rise and fall has indeed seen the rise and fall of states 
possessing, rise and fall, and the reviewing of breaking-up 
has indeed seen the breaking-up of states possessing breaking- 
up, and the fearful has indeed appeared fearful to the knowledge 
of the appearance of fear, and the reviewing of tribulation has 
indeed seen tribulation in the tribulation-associated, and the 
knowledge that produces repulsion is indeed repelled by what 
should be repelled, and the knowledge of desire for release 
has indeed produced desire for release from what should be 
released, and what should be analyzed has indeed been 
analyzed by the analytic knowledge, and what should be 
regarded with indifference has been indeed regarded with in¬ 
difference by indifference to complexes.” And at the higher 
(Path-moments it is adaptive) to the thirty-seven accessories 
of enlightenment because of its progress in (or attainment of) 
what should be attained.1 
For as a righteous king seated in the law-court hears the 
decision given by the magisterial high ministers. Rejecting 
the evil way he becomes impartial and adapts himself to their 
decision which he approves saying “ be it so ” and also to the 
ancient royal law; so the application (sampadd) is to be under- 
1 “ Without such attainment it is not possible for Adoption to make 
nibb&na the object and without adoption there is no Path-knowlodge ”— 
Tika. [Na hi anuIomafiAnc tathfi anuppanne gotrabhunSnam nibbfinam 
alambiturb sakkoti, gotrabhun&ne v* anuppanne maggaMn&m n’uppaj- 
jatl ti.] 

--- PAGE 328 ---
XXI*—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 821 
stood. Adaptive knowledge is like the king. The eight 
knowledges are like the eight magisterial high ministers. The 
thirty-seven accessories of enlightenment are like the ancient 
royal law. As the king saying “be it so ” adapts himself 
to the decision of the magistrates and to the royal law, so this 
(adaptive knowledge) which arises referring to the complexes 
as impermanent etc. adapts itself to the true functions of the 
eight knowledges and of the thirty-seven accessories of en¬ 
lightenment at the upper (Path-moment). Hence it is called 
truth-adaptive knowledge. 
Adaptive Knowledge is ended. 
[671] Sutta Concordance. 
And this adaptive knowledge is the conclusion of insight 
leading to emergence which has complexes for object. But 
taken all in all, the adoptive knowledge is the conclusion of 
insight leading to emergence. 
Now to prevent confusion regarding this insight leading to 
emergence, this sutta-concordance should be understood as 
follows: Indeed this insight leading to emergence has been 
called atammayata in the Sajayatana-Vibhanga sutta1 as 
“ Monks, depending on atammayata, coming to atammayata 
there is that indifference which is one in meaning, which rests on 
an object of one meaning ;2 reject that, transcend that.”3 It is 
1 Majjhima iii, 220. a Read ekatthd ekatthasitd. 
s “ Craving, because it does not arise without complexes, is callod 
tammaya or lammayata: ‘ that made of.’ Or the aggregates associated 
with craving are so called. Insight leading to emergence is called 
a-tammayaid because it is opposed to craving. The indifference which 
iB dependent on this atammayata and which is one in meaning and which 
the bhikkhu is exhorted to reject, transcend is the feeling-indifference 
included in the ardpa state of consciousness. It is spoken of thus: 
Bhikkhus. there is that indifference whioh is dependent on tho sphere 
of infinite space . . . sphere of neither perception nor non-perception 
and which is one in meaning and rests on one meaning. For that 
indifference which is included among the four ariipa Rtates of conscious¬ 
ness is the same in nature, takes the samo object, hence it is said to he 
one in meaning and one in objeot. It should be rejected with the 
corruptions which such indifferenco has for object ”—filed. [Ye lokiye 
aaiikhare Rrabbha anulomapariyosanivutth&nagfiminivipasBana pavat- 
tati, fcaih sannissita tappatibaddha tai^ha, tehi vini apavattanato 

--- PAGE 329 ---
822 The Path of Purity 
called repulsion in the Alagaddasuttanta,1 “ Being repelled he. 
becomes dispassionate. Owing to dispassion he is delivered 
It is called knowledge of the Law of cause in the Susima 
Suttanta:2 “ First, Susima, is knowledge of the law of cause, 
afterwards knowledge in nibbdna.” It is called the height of 
perception in the Pofthapada Suttanta:3 “ Potthapdda, first 
perception4 arises, then knowledge.” It is called the chief 
factor of purification in the Dasuttara Suttanta:5 “Purity 
in the knowledge and discernment of progress is a factor in wrest¬ 
ling for purification.” It is called by three names in the Pa{i- 
sarabhida-magga :8 “ that which is desire for release and that 
which is reviewing of analysis7 and that which is indifference 
to complexes : these states are one in meaning, only the letter is 
different.” It is called by two names in the Patthana :8 
“ Adaptation of adoption, adaptation of deansing.” It is called 
purity in the knowledge and discernment of progress in the 
Rathavinlta Suttanta:9 “Sir, is the holy life lived in the 
Blessed One for the sake of purity in the knowledge and discern- 
ment of progress ?” 
By many names the great Sage has extolled 
Th’ emergence-going insight, calm and pure. 
Desirous of emerging from the great 
And fearful mire of the existence-ill, 
The wise by birth should strive his best alway. 
tammaya naraa, tammaya va tammayata, tammaya va tanhfi, sampa- 
yuttft khandhft, tesam bhfivo tammayatfi, si eva tanka, tappatipakkha 
vuttkanagSminivipa&sana atammayata, tcna vuttam atthakathftyam 
atammayata nama tanha, fcaasa pariyadiyanato vutthfinag&minivi- 
pas8ana atammayatA ti. Nissftyft ti tarn atammayatam nissayam 
katva bhftvetva ti attho. Ekattha ti ottha avam Pali: Atthi bhikkhave 
upekkhfi ak&sAnakcAyatananiBsitA . . . nevasafiMnfi&afiMyatananiB- 
sitft, ayam bhikkhave upekkha ekattha ekatthasita ti, ya hi tam tam 
arupacittuppadapariy&panna upekkha sa ekasabh&vattA ekiramma- 
nafctft ca ekatthfi ekatthasita. ti vuccati, sa pans tam tam jhanasaha- 
gatavedanupekkba oa tadnrammajjavipaasanupekkha eft ti vadanti. 
Tam pajahathS, ti tadarammanakilesapahanena pajahatha, tenftha 
tam atikkamatha ti.] 
1 Ibid, i, 139. * Samyutta ii, 124. 8 Diyha i, 185. 
4 Read saMd for sannaggam. * Ibid, iii, 288. 
8 ii, 64. 7 Read pafimnlchinupaasand yd. 
* Tikapafthana ii, 169. 9 Majjhima i, 147. 

--- PAGE 330 ---
XXI.—Knowledge and Discernment of Progress 823 
Thus is ended the twenty-first chapter called the exposition 
of Purity of the knowledge and discernment of progress in the 
section of the development of understanding in the Path 
of Purity composed for the purpose of gladdening good 
folk. 

--- PAGE 331 ---
CHAPTER XXII 
EXPOSITION OF PURITY IN KNOWLEDGE AND 
DISCERNMENT 
[672] [The First Path-Knowledge.] 
Next is adoptive knowledge.1 Because it stands in the place 
of the adverting to the Path it does not appertain to Purity 
in the Knowledge and discernment2 of Progress, neither 
to Purity in Knowledge and Discernment.3 It is not com¬ 
monly used between (the sixth and seventh Purities). How¬ 
ever, because it falls into the stream of insight, it is counted 
as insight. And the knowledge in these four Paths:—Path of 
Stream-winning, Path of Once-returning, Path of Non¬ 
returning, Path of Arahatta—is known as Purity in Know¬ 
ledge and Discernment. 
Therein there is indeed nothing else to be done by one who 
wishes to achieve the first Path-knowledge. For whatever 
may have to be done by him has been done by him as he was 
producing insight with adaptation as the conclusion. Thus 
when by those three4 adaptive knowledges, each in conformity 
with its own strength, the very thick darkness hiding the 
truths has been dispelled, the consciousness of him in whom 
adaptive knowledge has arisen does not rush into, nor stand 
in, nor resolve upon, nor adhere to, nor stick to, nor bind 
itself to all that is considered as complexes but shrinks, 
retracts, sinks from it as water from a lotus leaf. The whole 
1 Gotra-bhu-n&nam ; lit. knowledge of the becoming of the clan. 
* Read PalipadoMna-dassana-visuddhim. 
* “ Hence it is said to stand in the place of adverting to the Path 
pointing out the object to the elements of cognition like the inoperative 
mind-element ”—pika. [Tato eva c’ etam viii na^adhUtunaih visayam 
uddesantam dassanakicoam karontaw kiriyamanodhatu viva maggassa 
Svajjanatthaniyam vuccati.] 
4 The T’ifcd includes two in three. [Tlsu vfi dvinnam antogatattA.] 
824 

--- PAGE 332 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 825 
sign as object and also the whole procedure as object appear 
as an impediment. 
Then, when the whole of the sign and procedure as object 
appears as an impediment, there arises in him at the end 
of resorting to the (second or third) adaptive knowledge1 the 
knowledge of adoption, which has reached the summit, which 
is the crown of insight, which never turns back, which makes 
its object nibbana, ending, that is signless, procedure-less, 
without complexes;2 which passes beyond the kinship of 
average men, the appellation of average men, the plane of 
average men; which enters into the kinship of Ariyas, the 
appellation of Ariyas, the plane of Ariyas; which effects the 
state of causal relation; which is the first turning to, first 
laying to heart of, first considering of nibbana as object, [673] 
in six (causal) modes of the Path, to wit, contiguity, immediate 
contiguity, repetition (or habitual recurrence), sufficing depend¬ 
ence, absence, abeyance. Concerning which it has been said, 
“ How does understanding in the turning of emergence from the 
objective become adoptive knowledge ? It overcomes genesis— 
thus (it is) adoptive. It overcones procedure . . . despair— 
thus it is adoptive. It overcomes the objective sign of 
complexes, thus it is adoptive. It rushes into non-genesis, thus 
it is adoptive. It rushes into non-procedure . . . non-despair, 
cessation, nibbana, thus it is adoptive. Having overcome genesis 
it rushes into non-genesis, thus it is adoptive ”3—thus should all 
be expanded. 
There is this illustration showing the mode of procedure of 
adaptation and adoption in various objects, though they 
are proceeding by one adverting in one process (vithi):—As a 
man, desiring to jump across a big ditch and stand on the 
further bank, runs with speed and, seizing a hanging rope or 
pole tied to a tree-branch on the near bank of the ditch, jumps 
up, and with body inclined, sloped, bent towards the further 
1 " Because adoption cannot arise after the first adaptive knowledge, 
since the latter haa not got the oausal relation of repetition ”—filed. 
[Na pathamassu ti dasaeti tassa anfi&evanatta, na hi aladdbasevanam 
gotrabhuMnath uppadotum sakkoti.] 
* Vi-sankhdram. 8 PafisambhUd i, 06. 
53 

--- PAGE 333 ---
826 The Path of Purity 
bank reaches the top of the further bank, and releasing that 
(rope or pole) alights swaying on the further bank, and slowly 
rights himself, so this meditator, desiring to stand in nibbana 
which is the further bank of existence, place of birth, destiny, 
duration, abode, runs with the speed of the reviewing of rise 
and fall etc., and by means of the adverting of adaptation 
seizes, as impermanent or ill or not-Be If, the hanging rope of 
matter, or the stick of one or other of the aggregates of mind 
which is tied to the branch of the tree of individuality, and 
without releasing it, jumps up by the first adaptive con¬ 
sciousness, and by means of the second (adaptation) has his 
mind inclined, sloped, bent towards nibbana, as the body 
(of the man in the simile) is inclined, sloped, bent towards 
the further bank; and with the third (adaptation) is now near 
the goal of nibbana, as the other man reaches the top of the 
further bank; and by the cessation of that (third) consciousness 
he releases the complexes as object, and by means of adoptive 
consciousness falls onto nibbana without complexes, the further 
bank. Still, as the (causal relation of) practice1 is not ob¬ 
tained in the one object (nibbana) he, like the swaying man, 
is not yet well-established. Afterwards he is established by 
means of the Path-knowledge. 
Therein adaptation is able to dispel the darkness of the 
corruptions hiding the truths, but not to make nibbana the 
object. Adoption is able to make nibbana the object, but not 
to dispel the darkness which hides the truths. Herein (is) 
this simile:2—[674] It is said that an intelligent man, thinking 
“ I will observe the conjunction of stars,” went out at night 
and looked up to see the moon. Being hidden by clouds, the 
moon did not appear to him. Then a wind arose and dispersed 
the thickest clouds, another the middling thick ones, a third 
the thinnest. Then the man saw the moon in the sky cleaT 
of clouds, and observed (lit. knew) the conjunction of stars. 
Herein, like the three clouds is the darkness of the corrup¬ 
tions, thick, middling, thin, which hide the truths. Like the 
three winds are the three classes of adaptive consciousness. 
Like the intelligent man is adoptive knowledge. Like the 
1 Or repetition, or pursuit (a&evana). 8 Expositor, 312 f. 

--- PAGE 334 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 827 
moon is nibbana. Like the dispersing of the clouds by each 
of the winds, in order, is the dispelling of the truths-hiding 
darkness by each adaptive consciousness. Like the man’s 
seeing the pure moon in the sky clear of clouds is the discerning 
of pure nibbana by adoptive knowledge, when the truths- 
hiding darkness clears away. As the three winds are able 
to disperse the moon-hiding clouds, not to see the moon, so 
the adaptations are able to dispel the truths-hiding darkness, 
not to see nibbana. As the man is only able to see the moon, 
not to disperse the clouds, so adoptive knowledge is only able 
to see nibbana, not to dispel the darkness of corruptions. 
Therefore this is said to be the adverting to the Path. Indeed, 
though it is not adverting, it stands in the place of adverting, 
and ceases as it were giving a sign (srnmd) to the Path: ‘‘Do 
thou thus arise I”1 And the Path, without there being a 
releasing of the sign that has been given, follows that know¬ 
ledge closely in an unbroken succession, and arises piercing 
and bursting the aggregates of greed, of hate, of delusion, 
never before pierced and never before burst. 
Herein is this simile:—It is said, that an archer caused 
one hundred planks to be placed in a place eight usabha’s 
distant, and wrapping his face with cloth and fixing the 
arrow, stood on a wheel-machine. Another man turned the 
wheel-machine and, when the planks were facing the archer, 
gave intimation (safina) by a stick (struck) thereon. Not 
missing the intimation from the stick, the archer shot the 
arrow, and pierced the hundred planks. Herein, like the 
intimation of the stick is adoptive knowledge. Like the archer 
is Path-knowledge. Like the archer’s not missing the intima¬ 
tion from the stick, and piercing the hundred planks is the 
Path-knowledge’s [675] not releasing the sign given by adoptive 
knowledge, making nibbana the object and piercing and 
bursting the aggregates of greed, hate, delusion never before 
pierced and never before burst.2 This Path not only does 
the piercing of the aggregates of greed etc., but also dries up 
the ocean of ill in the round of the stream of existence which 
* Read in text nibbattdMli. 
2 See also Expositor ii, 312-3 for these two similes. 

--- PAGE 335 ---
828 The Path of Purity 
is without beginning, shuts all the gates of the place of evil 
doom, brings the seven Aiiyan treasures into one’s presence, 
rejects the eightfold false path,1 quiets all enmities and fears, 
leads to the cherished (lit. breast-born) sonship of the supremely 
Perfect Buddha, conduces to the obtaining of many hundred 
other advantages. Thus the knowledge associated with the 
stream-winning Path which bestows many advantages is 
knowledge in the stream-winning Path. 
The First Path-Knowledge is ended. 
[The Second (Path)-Knowledge.] 
Immediately after the knowledge (of stream-winning Path) 
there arise, as its result (lit. ripening), two or three classes 
of fruitional consciousness. Because the transcendental and 
the moral give immediate result, this and more has been said: 
“ That concentration which they say is prompt (in result) ”2 
and “ For the extinction of the cankers he attains sluggishly the 
immediate result-giving (Path).”* 
But some say that there are one, two, three or four classes 
of fruitional consciousness. That should not be said. For 
at the end of the practice of adaptation, adoptive knowledge 
arises. Therefore by the lowest4 limit (or classification) there 
should be two classes of adaptive consciousness. For one 
(adaptation) does not get the causal relation of repetition. 
Also, one apperceptional process has the measure of seven 
consciousnesses. Therefore whoever has two adaptations, 
has adoption as the third, and the Path-consciousness as the 
fourth, and three classes of fruitional consciousness. Who¬ 
ever has three adaptations has adoption as the fourth, Path- 
consciousness as the fifth and two classes of fruitional con¬ 
sciousness. Hence the statement that two or three classes of 
fruitional consciousness arise. 
But some say, that whoever has four adaptations has 
adoption as the fifth, Path-consciousness as the sixth, one 
fruitional consciousness. But because one may induce the 
1 Namely,, the wrong states mentioned on p. 83$, below. 
* Sutta Nipata, ver. 226. * Anguttara ii, 149. 
4 Read aabbantimena. 

--- PAGE 336 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 829 
fourth or the fifth, not more (or higher), owing to the proximity 
of life-continuum, that has been denied and should not be 
believed in essence. 
[676] By this much, then, is one the second Ariya-person 
known as stream-winner. However much he may be negligent, 
he is able, after running on, going on, among devas and men 
seven times, to make an end of ill.1 And at the conclusion 
of the fruition his consciousness lapses into life-continuum. 
Then, cutting oil the life-continuum, the mind-door-adverting 
arises in order to survey the Path. When it ceases, seven 
Path-surveying apperceptions (arise) in order. Again, lapsing 
into life-continuum, the advertings etc. arise in order to 
survey the Fruit etc. in the same manner. Because of their 
arising he surveys the Path, surveys the Fruit, surveys the 
rejected corruptions, surveys the remaining corruptions, 
surveys nibbana. Indeed, he surveys the Path thus: “ Verily 
by this Path have I come.” Then he surveys the fruit thus: 
“ Such an advantage has been got by me.” Then he surveys 
the rejected corruptions: ** These very corruptions have been 
rejected by me.” Then he surveys the corruptions to be killed 
by the three upper Paths: “ These very corruptions have 
remained in me.” Then finally he surveys the deathless 
nibbana: “ This state by way of object has been penetrated 
by me.” 
Thus are the five surveys of the Stream-winning Ariya- 
disciple’s. And as are the stream-winner’s, so are the Once- 
returner’s and the Never-returneT’s. But for the Saint there 
is not the surveying of the remaining corruptions. 
Thus there are in all nineteen surveyings. And this is 
the supreme classification. For to probationers there is or 
is not the surveying of rejected and remaining corruptions. 
Indeed because of the absence of that surveying, Mahanama 
asked the Blessed One “ Which indeed is that state in me. not 
subjectively rejected, by which states of greed stand as one 
occupying my consciousness ?”2 All should be understood in 
detail. 
1 Cf. Points of Controversy xiii, 6. * Majjhima i, 91. 

--- PAGE 337 ---
830 The Path of Purity 
And after surveying thus, that Stream-winning Ariya- 
disciple, seated even there in his seat, or at some subsequent 
time, applies himself to the weakening1 of sensuous passion 
and ill-will, and to the reaching of the second plane. He 
collects the faculties, strengths and enlightenment-factors and, 
by means of his knowledge that what are considered as com¬ 
plexes, divided into matter, feeling, perception, activities, 
consciousness, are impermanent, ill, not-self, he threshes out 
and turns them in his mind, and dives into insight-process. As 
he thus [677] progresses, when, by one adverting, adaptation 
and adoption-knowledge arise at the conclusion of indifference 
to complexes in the way mentioned, the Path of the Once- 
returner arises immediately after the Adoption. The know¬ 
ledge associated with it is knowledge in the Path of the Once- 
returner. 
The Second Knowledge is ended. 
[The Third Path-Knowledge.] 
Immediately after this (second) knowledge the fruitional 
consciousness should be understood as above. So far he is 
the fourth Ariya-person, known as the Once-returner. Coming 
only once to this world, he is able to make an end of ill. His 
subsequent surveying is as above. Having surveyed thus, 
1 “ Ah in its less frequent arising and obsession. For corruptions do 
not arise to the once-retumer as frequently as they do to the people who 
follow the round of births but only at times and sparsely. Even when 
they do arise they do not crush, cover him in darkness but having 
been put away by the first two Paths they are very mild and sparse. 
But some say that to the Once-returner corruptions arise only after a 
long time, but that when they do arise they come thick, as witness the 
birth of his sons and daughters. This however is no reason, for con¬ 
ception may take place even without actual soxual intercourse’*— 
Tika. [Tattha dvlhi karapehi tanubhavo adhiccuppattiya pariyut- 
thanamandat&ya ca sakad&gSmisaa hi vat.tAnusfirl maliSjanassa viya 
kileefi abhinham na uppajjanti kadaci kadfici virajakara hutva uppaj¬ 
janti, tatha uppajjanta pi maddanW chfidenta andhakftram karonta 
na uppajjanti, dvlhi pana maggehi pahinattfi m&ndamanda tanukakara 
hutvil uppajjanti, keci pana sakadagamissa pi kilesa cirena uppajjanti, 
uppajjantA pi bahula va uppajjanti, tatha hi’ assa puttadhltaro 
disBantl ti, tam akfiranam, vatthupatisevanena vina pi gabbhagahana- 
sambhavato.] 

--- PAGE 338 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 831 
this Once-returning Ariya-disciple, seated even there in hiB 
scat, or at a subsequent time, applies himself to the entire 
rejection of sensuous lust and ill-will, and to the reaching of 
the third plane. He collects the faculties, strengths and 
enlightenment-factors and, by means of his knowledge that 
what are considered as complexes are impermanent, ill, not- 
self, he threshes out and turns them in his mind and dives into 
the insight-process. As he thus progresses, when the adaptive 
and adoptive knowledges arise by one adverting at the con¬ 
clusion of indifference to complexes as above, the Path of the 
Non-returner arises immediately after the adoption. The 
knowledge associated with it is the knowledge in the Path 
of the Non-returner. 
The Third Knowledge is ended. 
[The Fourth Path-Knowledge.] 
Immediately after this knowledge the classes of fruitional 
consciousness should be understood as above. By this much 
is he the sixth Ariya-person, known as the Non-returner, of 
spontaneous birth, passing away there, not liable to return.1 not 
coming back again by way of conception to this world. His 
subsequent surveying is as above. Having surveyed thus, that 
Non-returning Ariya-disciple, seated even there in his seat, or 
at a subsequent time applies himself to the entire rejection of 
lust for the material and the immaterial, of conceit, of excite¬ 
ment, of ignorance, and to the reaching of the fourth plane. 
He collects the faculties, strengths and enlightenment-factors 
and, by knowledge that what are considered as complexes are 
impermanent, ill, not-self, threshes out and turns them in his 
mind [678] and dives into insight-knowledge. As he thus 
progresses, when the adaptive and adoptive knowledges arise 
by one adverting at the conclusion of indifference to com¬ 
plexes as above, the Arahatta-Path arises immediately after 
the adoption. The knowledge associated with it is the know¬ 
ledge in the Arahatta-Path. 
The Fourth Knowledge is ended. 
1 Cf. Afi/juttara iv, 12. 

--- PAGE 339 ---
832 The Path of Purity 
[Classes of fruitional Consciousness. A. Thirty-seven 
accessories of enlightenment.] 
Immediately after this knowledge classes of fruitional con¬ 
sciousness aie to be understood as above. By so much 
is he the eighth Ariya-person known as an “ Araha.” a great 
one, purged of the cankers, hearing his last body, who has 
discharged his burden, attained to his goal,1 destroyed his existence- 
fetters, is delivered by right gnosis,2 worthy of receiving the first 
gifts of the devas and of this world. What was said above,8 
viz.: “The knowledge in these four paths:—Path of stream- 
winning, Path of once-returning, path of non-returning, Path 
of arahatta, is known as Purity in knowledge and discern¬ 
ment,” has been said concerning these four knowledges 
attainable in this order. 
Now to be conscious of the power of this four(fold) know¬ 
ledge, Purity of knowledge and discernment, thus— 
The being endowed with the accessories 
Of wisdom, and emergence, union 
With strength, removal of the states to be 
Removed. The comprehension-functions which 
Are stated at the penetration-time:— 
All should be known by nature intrinsic. 
Herein “The being endowed with the accessories of wisdom” 
means the being endowed with the enlightenment-accessories. 
These thirty-seven states indeed, namely: four applications of 
mindfulness, four right efforts, four bases of supernormal 
power, five faculties, five strengths, seven enlightenment- 
factors, eightfold Ariya-Path, are known as enlightenment- 
accessories from being on the side of the Ariya-Path which 
has got the name of enlightenment in the sense of being 
enlightened.4 “ Being on the side of ” is being serviceable to. 
“Application ” (patthana) is because it appears by dashing, 
jumping into those several objects. Mindfulness as applica¬ 
tion is “ application of mindfulness.” And from proceeding 
1 I.e. arahatta, “ aadattho ti ca arahattam veditabbam ”—T’tird. 
* Sarp-yutla vi, 12. * P. 824. 4 Read bojjhanaiffuna. 

--- PAGE 340 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 833 
by way of seizing the mode of foulness, ill, impermanence, not- 
self in body, feeling, consciousness, state, and by way of effect¬ 
ing the function of rejecting the notions (or perceptions) of 
pleasantness, bliss, permanence, self, [679] it is fourfold in kind. 
Therefore they are called four applications of mindfulness. 
“ Effort ” means: “ by this they make effort.” A beautiful 
effort is “ right, effort.*’ Or “ right effort * * means: “ by it they 
make effort rightly.” Or, it is beautiful, from being devoid 
of the deformity of the corruptions j1 and effort, because in the 
sense of accomplishing benefit and bliss, it brings about the 
best state, and is instrumental for the chief (padhdna) state 
—hence “ right effort.” It is a synonym of energy. It is four¬ 
fold as it effects the function of rejecting and not producing 
immoralities already arisen, and not arisen, and the function 
of producing and establishing moralities not arisen and arisen- 
Therefore they aTe called the four right efforts. 
Supernormal power is in the sense of effecting as said above.2 
“ Base ” in the sense of being fore-runner of that associated 
(power) and in the sense of being the cause previous to power 
which is result—thus (we get) ** base of power.” It is fourfold 
as desire, etc. Hence they are called the four bases of super¬ 
normal power. As has been said: “ The four bases of power are 
desire as base of power, consciousness as base of power, energy 
as base of power, investigation as base of power.”* These are 
transcendental. But because of the statement “ if the monk, 
making desire the dominant influence, gets concentration, he 
gets one-pointedness of consciousness, this is called desire-con¬ 
centration ”4 and so on, the worldly states (such as contact 
etc.) are also obtained (as bases of power) by way of the 
dominant influence of desire etc. From the overcoming of non¬ 
faith, idleness, negligence, distraction, confusion it is a con¬ 
trolling “ faculty”6 in the sense of dominant influence termed 
the overcoming. In the sense of not shaking, because it is 
not to be overcome by non-faith etc.:—such is “strength.” 
1 Read kilesavirupatlivirahato. 
* Above, p. 438, translated “psychic power.” 
* Vibhaiiga, 223, which places energy second. 
* Jbid. 216. 4 Read indriyam for iddhiyam. 

--- PAGE 341 ---
834 The Path of Purity 
Both of these are fivefold, as faith etc. Therefore they are 
called the five faculties,1 five strengths. 
Mindfulness etc., by being the factor (or means) of an 
enlightened being,2 are the seven enlightenment-factors. 
And right views etc. in the sense of exit are the eight Path- 
factors. Hence it was said “ seven enlightenment-factors, 
eightfold Ariya-Path.” 
When worldly insight arises in him who grasps the body 
in fourteen ways, the reviewing of the body is application of 
mindfulness.3 In him who grasps feeling in nine ways, the 
reviewing of feeling is application of mindfulness. In him 
who grasps mind in sixteen ways, the reviewing of the mind 
is application of mindfulness. [680] In him who grasps things 
(dhamma’s) in five ways, the reviewing of things is application 
of mindfulness. 
When he, seeing that immorality has never before arisen in 
his individuality, and has arisen in that of another, strives for 
its non-arising, “ This has arisen in one who behaves in such a 
way, I will not behave so; this shall not arise in me/’ it is 
the first right effort. When he, seeing that by his own conduct 
immorality has arrived, strives for its reflection, it is the 
second. To him who strives to produce that jhana or insight 
which has never before arisen in this individuality,4 it is the 
third. To him who repeatedly produces it (jhana or insight) 
so that, having arisen, it may not decrease, it is the fourth right 
effort. 
At the time of producing morality by making desire the 
principal, it is desire as base of power. ... At the time of 
abstaining from wrong speech, it is right speech. In this way 
(these thirty-seven accessories of enlightenment) are obtained 
(prior to the Path) in various classes of consciousness. And 
at the time of the arising of these four knowledges they are 
obtained in one consciousness. At the fruitional moment 
excepting the four right efforts, the remaining thirty-three 
1 Read pancindriytini. * Lit. a waking-one (bujjhanaka). 
* In the text construe the first line of this paragraph with nund- 
citteau labbharUi of p. 680, line 14. 
4 Bhave^attabhave. 

--- PAGE 342 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 835 
are obtained. Thus among those which are obtained in one 
consciousness, the single mindfulness having nibbana as 
object is called the four applications of mindfulness, by way 
of effecting the function of rejecting the notions of pleasantness 
etc. in the body etc. And one single energy is called the four 
right efforts by way of effecting such function as the not 
producing etc. of unarisen (immoral states). But in the 
remaining (bases of power) there is no decrease nor increase. 
And among these. 
Nine onefold, one twofold, then four-five-fold, 
Eightfold and ninefold—thus they are sixfold. 
“Nine onefold”—desire, consciousness, rapture, repose, 
indifference, thought, speech, work;, livelihood—these are 
onefold by way of this desire as base of power etc. They 
do not enter another portion. 
“ One tioofold ”—faith is twofold by way of faculty and 
strength. 
“ Then four-five-fold” means that another one is fourfold, 
another fivefold. Therein one (namely) concentration is 
fourfold by way of faculty, strength, enlightenment-factor 
and Path-factor. Understanding is fivefold by way of these 
four and the portion of base of power. 
“Eightfold and ninefold”—another one is eightfold, one 
ninefold, is the meaning. Mindfulness is eightfold by way 
of the four applications of mindfulness, faculty,1 strength, 
enlightenment-factor, Path-factor. Energy is ninefold by 
way of the four right efforts, base of power, faculty, strength, 
enlightenment-factor, Path-factor. So 
[681] Accessories of wisdom are fourteen 
Unclassified, they are seven in groups, 
And thirty-seven in kind. Accomplishing 
Their functions, rising in their natural state, 
They all arise when Ariyan Path obtains. 
Thus far is here “ The being endowed with the accessories 
of wisdom ” to be known. 
1 Read -indriya-. 

--- PAGE 343 ---
836 The Path of Purity 
[B. Emergence.] 
“ And Emergence-union-with-strength ”—is (a) emergence 
and (6) union with strength. For worldly insight emerges 
neither from the sign nor from procedure, because it has the 
sign for object, and because it has not cut off origination 
which is the cause (kdrana) of procedure. Adoptive know¬ 
ledge does not emerge from procedure, because it has not cut 
off origination, but it emerges from the sign, because it has 
nibbana for object. Thus there is a partial (efca-to) emergence. 
Hence it has been said “ Understanding in emerging and in 
turning from the objective is adoptive knowledge.”1 Likewise 
“ it is adoption became it turns from genesis and rushes into 
non-genesis” “ turning from procedure ”:2—thus should all be 
understood. These four knowledges emerge from the sign 
because they have the signless for object; and they emerge 
from procedure because they have cut off origination. Thus 
they emerge from both. Hence it has been said “ Bow does 
understanding in emerging and in turning from both become 
knowledge in the Path ? Right view in the sense of discerning 
at the stream-winning Path-moment emerges from wrong views, 
and it emerges from the attendant corruptions and aggregates; 
it emerges from all signs objectively. Hence it is said that 
understanding in emerging and in turning from both is know¬ 
ledge in the Path. In the sense of bringing fonvard, right thought 
emerges from wrong thought. ... In the sense of grasping, 
right speech emerges from wrong speech. ... In the sense of 
setting up, right work. ... In the sense of being cleansed, right 
livelihood. . . . In the sense of upholding, right effort. ... In 
the sense of appearing closely, right mindfulness. ... In the 
sense of being not distracted, right concentration emerges from 
wrong concentration, and it emerges from the attendant corrup¬ 
tions and aggregates, and it emerges objectively from aU signs. 
Hence it is said that understanding in emerging and in turn¬ 
ing from both is knowledge in the Path. 
In the sense of discerning at the moment of the Path of the 
1 Patisambhida i, 66. * Ibid, i, 67. 

--- PAGE 344 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 837 
once-returner, right views- In the sense of not being scattered, 
right concentration emerges from the gross fetter of sensuous lust 
and fetter of hatred, from the gross bias of sensuous lust and bias 
of hatred. ... In the sense of discerning at the moment of 
the never-returning Path, right views. ... In the sense of not 
being scattered, right concentration emerges from the minute1 
[682] (remaining) fetter of sensuous lust and fetter of hatred, 
from the minute (iremaining) bias of sensuous lust and bias of 
hatred. ... In the sense of discerning at the moment of the 
Arahatta Path, right views. ... In the sense of being not 
scattered, right concentration emerges from lust for matter, from 
lust for non-matter, from conceit . . . from excitement . . . 
from ignorance . . . from bias of conceit, from bias of lust for 
existence, from bias of ignorance ; and it emerges from the 
attendant corruptions and aggregates, and it emerges objectively 
from all the signs. Hence it is said that understanding in 
emerging and in turning from both is knowledge in the Path.”2 
At the time of developing the eight worldly attainments 
the strength of calm is preponderating. At the time of 
developing the reviewing of impermanence etc. the strength 
of insight (is preponderating). But at the moment of the 
Axiya-Path those (two) states proceed yoked equally in the 
sense of not exceeding each other. Therefore in these four 
knowledges also the strength of both is evenly united. As 
has been said, “ Undistracted concentration which is one-pointed- 
ness of consciousness that emerges from the corruptions and 
aggregates accompanied by excitement has cessation for its 
sphere. The insight in the sense of reviewing (of the conscious¬ 
ness) which has emerged from the corruptions and aggregates 
accompanied by ignorance has cessation for its sphere. Thus in 
the sense of emerging, calm and insight are one in peculiar 
property (rasa), are evenly yoked2 do not exceed each other. 
Hence it is said, that he develops the even yoke of calm and 
insight in the sense of emergence”1 
Thus here the emergence and union with strength should be 
understood. 
i Anusahagata =tanubhQta.—Tiki1. 
3 Read yuyatiandha. 
* Ibid, i, 69 f. 
« Ibid. 98. 

--- PAGE 345 ---
838 The Path of Purity 
[C. Removal.'] 
“ Removal of the states to be removed ”—the removal of those 
states which should be removed by whatever knowledge 
among these four knowledges should be known. For these 
befittingly do remove states termed fetter, corruption, wrong¬ 
ness, worldly state, meanness, reversal, knot, evil destiny, 
canker, flood, yoke, hindrance, infection, clinging, bias, taint, 
course of immoral action, rising of consciousness. 
Therein “ fetters ” are said to be the ten states beginning 
with lust for matter, because of the fettering of aggregates by 
aggregates, of karma by fruition, or of beings by ill. Indeed 
as long as they (arise), there is no cessation of these (i.e. aggre¬ 
gates, fruition, ill). There also, lust for matter, lust for non¬ 
matter, conceit, excitement, ignorance:—these five are known 
as fetters of the upper part, because of the fettering of the 
aggregates etc. that are arising above. [683] Heresy of 
individuality, doubt, infection by rite and ritual, sensuous lust, 
hatred:—these five are known as fetters of the lower part, 
because of the fettering1 of the aggregates etc. that are arising 
below. 
Corruptions are these ten states:—greed, hate, delusion, 
conceit, wrong views, doubt, sloth, excitement, shamelessness, 
recklessness of blame, because they are themselves corrupted 
and because they corrupt associated states. 
Wrongness are these eight states:—wrong views, wrong 
thoughts, wrong speech, wrong work, wrong livelihood, wrong 
striving, wrong mindfulness, wrong concentration, from their 
wrong procedure. Or they are ten together with wrong 
deliverance,2 wrong knowledge. 
Worldly states (or conditions) are these eight: gain, loss, fame, 
disgrace, bliss, pain, blame, praise, because they are not liable 
to cessation when there is procedure of the world. But here 
metaphorically by worldly states, fawning, which is the basis 
of gain etc., and hatred which is the basis of loss etc. are 
implied:—thus it is to be understood. 
Meannesses are five: meanness regarding a dwelling, mean- 
1 Read °adi9amyojaJcattd. a Read micchdvimutli-. 

--- PAGE 346 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 839 
ness regarding family, meanness regarding gain, meanness 
regarding the Law, meanness regarding personal beauty. 
These proceed in the mode of being unable to bear community 
with others in these things, such as dwelling, etc. 
Reversals are these three: reversal of perception, reversal 
of consciousness, reversal of views, which proceed thus, that 
in things impermanent, ill, not-self, foul, there is permanence, 
bliss, self, or pleasure. 
Knots are four, beginning with covetousness, because of 
the knotting of mental group (Tcdya) and material group; so 
indeed they are said to be the knot of covetousness-group, the 
knot of ill-will-group, the knot of the group of the infection 
by rite and ritual, the knot of the group of the obsession that 
“ this is truth !” 
Evil destiny is a synonym for doing what should not be 
done, and not doing what should be done through desire, hate, 
delusion, fear. It is called evil destiny because Aliyas should 
not go by it. 
Cankers:—this is a synonym for sensuous lust, lust for 
becoming (re-birth), wrong views, ignorance from flowing 
(sawmaio) by way of object as far as adoption (by dhamma) 
and as far as the heavens (by space); or because they flow 
in the sense of perpetually oozing from unclosed doors (of 
eye etc.) like water from pot-holes; or because they beget the 
ill of the stream of existence. 
[684] Floods, in the sense of dragging to the sea of becoming 
and in the sense of being difficult to cross. 
Yokes, from not allowing dissociation from the object and 
dissociation from ill, are synonyms for them (i.e. sensuous lust 
etc.). 
Hindrances are five: sensuous desire etc., in the sense of the 
blocking, hindering and hiding of consciousness. 
Infection:—this is a synonym for wrong views from proceed¬ 
ing with the mode of going beyond the true nature, and from 
misconstruing the unreal nature of this and that state. 
Clingings are four, beginning with clinging to sensuality, 
mentioned in all modes in the Exposition of the Causal Law.1 
1 Above, p. 683, translated “ grasping.” 

--- PAGE 347 ---
840 The Path of Purity 
“ Biases” are in the sense of growing strong seven, beginning 
with sensuous lust and stated thus:—bias of sensuous lust, of 
hatred, of conceit, of views, of doubt, of becoming-lust, of 
ignorance. For they are bias, because they have grown 
strong and lie dormant by being repeatedly the condition of 
the arising of sensuous lust, etc. 
Taints1 are three: greed, hate, delusion from being them¬ 
selves impure and making others impure, like mud besmeared 
with oil. 
Courses of immoral action are these ten:—life-taking, theft, 
wrong conduct in sensuous pleasure, lying, slanderous speech, 
harsh speech, frivolous talk, covetousness, ill-will, wrong 
views by being immoral actions and being courses of evil 
destinies. 
Risings of immoral consciousness are these twelve:—the 
eight rooted in greed, two rooted in hate, two rooted in delusion. 
Thus these (four knowledges) fittingly make the rejection 
of these states beginning with fetters. How ? First among 
the fetters, the heresy of individuality, doubt, infection of rite 
and ritual, and sensuous lust and hatred, which (latter two) 
lead to evil doom:—these five states are to be slain by the first 
(Path-) knowledge. The remaining sensuous lust and hatred 
which are gross are to be slain by the second knowledge; and 
those which are refined (sensuous lust and hatred) by the 
third knowledge. The five beginning with lust for matter are 
to be slain by the fourth knowledge. In the following (corrup¬ 
tions etc.) wherever we make no qualification by the word 
“indeed ” we shall say, that whatever is to be slain by the 
higher knowledges, is severally to be slain by the higher 
knowledges after its tendency to evil doom etc. has been 
killed by the first Path-Knowledges. Among the corruptions 
wrong views and doubt are to be slain by the first knowledge; 
hate is to be slain by the third knowledge: greed, delusion, con¬ 
ceit, sloth, excitement, shamelessness, recklessness of blame 
are to be slain by the fourth knowledge. Among the wrong 
states these:—wrong views, lying, wrong work, wrong [685] 
livelihood are to be slain by the first knowledge; wrong 
1 Maid. 

--- PAGE 348 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 841 
thoughts, slanderous speech, harsh speech:—these aTe to be 
slain by the third knowledge. And here speech is to be 
understood as volition. Frivolous talk, wrong striving 
mindfulness, concentration, deliverance and knowledge are 
to be slain by the fourth knowledge. Among the worldly 
states hatred is to be slain by the third knowledge. Fawning 
is to be slain by the fourth knowledge, so also the fawning 
for pomp and for praise is, as some say, to be slain by the 
fourth knowledge. The meannesses are to be slain indeed by 
the first knowledge. Among the reversals the reversals of 
perception, of consciousness, of views holding impermanence 
to be permanence, not-self to be the self; and the reversal of 
views holding ill to be bliss, foul to be pleasant:—these are 
to be slain by the first knowledge. The reversals of perception 
and of consciousness holding the foul to be pleasant are to be 
slain by the third knowledge; reversals of perception, and of 
consciousness holding ill to be bliss are to be slain by the fourth 
knowledge. Among the knots the bodily knots of infection by 
rite and ritual, and of conviction that “ this is truth ” are to 
be slain by the first knowledge; the knot of ill-will is to be slain 
by the third; the other (one of covetousness) is to be slain by 
the fourth. Evil destiny is to be slain indeed by the first 
knowledge. Among the cankers the canker of wToug views is 
to be slain by the first knowledge; the canker of sensuality is 
to be slain by the third knowledge; the other two are to be 
slain by the fourth knowledge. And the same with the floods 
and yokes. Among the hindrances the hindrance of doubt is 
to be slain by the first knowledge; the three: Bensuous desire, 
ill-will, worrying are to be slain by the third knowledge; sloth 
and torpor and excitement are to be slain by the fourth 
knowledge; infection is to be slain indeed by the first know¬ 
ledge. Among the clingings,1 because lust for matter and 
non-matter is considered as sense-desire2 by way of basis- 
sense-desire of all the worldly conditions, it falls within the 
clinging of sense-desire; it therefore is to be slain by the fourth 
knowledge; the remainder are to be Blain by the first know¬ 
ledge. Among the biases, the biases of wrong views and of 
1 Updddneau. * K&ma. 
54 

--- PAGE 349 ---
842 The Path of Purity 
doubt are to be slain indeed by the first knowledge; biases 
of sensual passion and of hatred are to be slain by the third 
knowledge; biases of conceit and of lust for existence and of 
ignorance are to be slain by the fourth knowledge. Among the 
taints, the taint of hate is to be slain by the third knowledge; 
the others are to be slain by the fourth knowledge. Among 
the courses of immoral action, these:—life-taking, theft., 
wrong conduct, lying, wrong views—are to be slain by the 
first knowledge; the three:—slanderous speech, harsh speech, 
ill-will—are to be 6lain by the third knowledge; frivolous 
talk and covetousness are to be slain by the fourth knowledge. 
Among the risings of immoral consciousness, the five, namely, 
four associated with views, and that associated with doubt are 
to be slain indeed by the first knowledge; two associated with 
hatred are to be slain by the third knowledge; the rest are to 
be slain by the fourth knowledge. Thus any state that is to 
be slain by any (path-knowledge) is known as rejectable by 
that (knowledge). Hence it was said that “these (four 
knowledges) fittingly make the rejection of these states 
beginning with fetters.”1 
But what! do these (knowledges) reject these states past 
and future, or [686] those which are present ? If moreover 
they (reject) past and future ones, the effort here becomes 
fruitless. Why ? Because of the absence (of states) to be 
rejected. If present (states were rejected) it would likewise 
be fruitless, because the presence of states to be rejected, 
together with the effort and the development of the Path 
would be corrupted; or again the corruptions would be dis¬ 
sociated, and there is really no such thing as a present corrup¬ 
tion dissociated from consciousness. 
This2 objection is independent (or uncommon). For it has 
been denied in Pali by saying “ He who rejects corruptions 
rejects past corruptions, rejects future corruptions, rejects present 
corruptions ”;3 again by saying “ If he rejects past corruptions 
then he extinguishes what has been extinguished, stops what has 
ceased, dispatches what has already gone away, puts an end to 
1 P.840. 1 Readayawforn’dyam. 8 Patisarhb\iddmaggaii,2n. 

--- PAGE 350 ---
XXn.—Knowledge and Discernment 843 
what has passed away, rejects the past which does not exist,” and 
also by saying “ he does not reject past corruptions ”l Likewise 
by saying “ If he rejects future corruptions, then he rejects what 
has not been born, rejects tohat has not come to birth, rejects what 
has not arisen, rejects what has not appeared, rejects the future 
which does not exist,” and also “ he does not reject future cor¬ 
ruptions.”'1 Likewise ” if he rejects present corruptions, then 
the lustful rejects lust, the hateful hate ... the deluded delusion 
,... the entangled one conceit ... the infected one wrong 
views, the distracted one excitement ... the indecisive one 
doubt ... the one grown strong rejects bias, the black and white 
stales would go yoked together, the Path-development vxndd be 
corrupted ;” and by saying “ he does not reject past corruptions 
nor future ones, or reject present corruptions”1 thus all is denied. 
But at the conclusion of (the subject in) question:8—“ Then 
there would be no path-development, no realization of fruit, no 
rejection of the corruptions, no comprehension of the Law,”— 
it is admitted that “ It is not so:—there is path-development 
. . . comprehension of the Law.” And when it was asked 
“ how may that be ?” this was said:—“ For example, a tender 
tree bears no fruit. Suppose a man should cut its root. The 
unborn fruits of that tree not being born verily are not bom, not 
being produced are verily not produced, not arising verily do no* 
arise, not appearing verily do not appear. Even so genesis is 
the condition, genesis is the cause of the coming to birth of cor¬ 
ruptions. Seeing tribulation in genesis, consciousness rushes 
into non-genesis. Because consciousness has rushed into non¬ 
genesis, those corruptions, which would have come to birth through 
the cause of genesis, not being bom, verily are not bom . . . not 
appearing, verily do not appear. Thus from the cessation of the 
condition is the cessation of HI. [687] Procedure is a condition. 
. . . The sign is a condition . . . exerting is a condition. . . . 
Because consciousness has rushed into non-exerting, those 
corruptions which would have come to birth through the cause of 
exerting, they not being bom . . . not appearing verily do not 
appear. Thus from the cessation of the condition is the cessation 
1 Ibid. 9 Bead panhapariyosane na hi. 

--- PAGE 351 ---
844 The Path of Purity 
of fruition. Thus there is Path-development, there is fruition- 
realization, there is rejection of corruptions, there is .cotnpre- 
hension of the Law*n 
What does this show ? It shows the rej ection of corruptions 
which have obtained their plane (of origin). But are cor¬ 
ruptions, which have obtained their plane, past or future 
or present ? They are known as “ arisen after obtaining their 
plane.” For “arisen” is of different kinds as existing, as 
having become and departed, as having been made by occasion 
(ohdsa), as having obtained the plane. Therein all that is 
said to be endowed with genesis, decay and break-up is known 
as “ arisen as existing.” Moral and immoral (states) which, 
having enjoyed the taste of the object, and having ceased, are 
said to have been enjoyed and departed, as well as those which, 
with the remaining conditioned states having arrived at the 
three momentsgenesis (decay and break-up) and ceased, 
are said to have become and departed,2 are known as “ arisen 
as having become and dejxirted.” Because that karma which, 
spoken of in such a way as “By him whatever karmas were 
done formerly,” being past, inhibits a different result, and gives 
occasion to its own result, therefore the result, for which 
occasion is made and which, though not yet arisen, invariably 
arises when occasion is thus made, is known as “ arisen as 
having been made by occasion ” Immorality in the various 
planes not yet removed is known as “ arisen as having obtained 
the plane.” And here the difference between plane and plane- 
obtained should be understood. Plane means the five aggre¬ 
gates existing in (any of) the three planes as having become 
objects of insight. By “ plane-obtained ” are known the 
kinds of corruptions fit to arise in those aggregates. Because 
the plane is said to be obtained by that (kind), therefore that 
is called plane-obtained. But the plane is not by way of 
object. For corruptions arise by way of object, with reference 
to all past and future aggregates and aggregates comprehended 
by (saints) purged of the cankers, like those of Soreyya the 
banker,3 Nanda the young brahman4 etc. with reference to the 
x Ibid. ii, 218. * Read hvtvdpagatasankhatath. 
* Dhammapada afthakathd i, 322 f. . 4 Ibid, ii, 49. 

--- PAGE 352 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 845 
aggregates of Mahakaccana, Uppalavanna, etc. And if such 
corruption should be known as “plane-obtained,” no one 
would reject the root of becoming because that is not to be 
rejected. But “ plane-obtained ” should be understood by 
way of basis. For wherever aggregates not comprehended by 
insight arise, there in them lie dormant from their genesis the 
kinds of corruptions which are the root of the round (of 
births)—and this, in the sense of being unrejected, should be 
understood as “plane-obtained.” 
[688] And there (among such aggregates) those aggregates 
of any one in which the corruptions lie dormant, in the sense 
of being unrejected, are called the basis of those corruptions, 
and not aggregates belonging to others. And past aggregates, 
and not the others (i.e. future and present) are the basis of 
corruptions which lie dormant unrejccted in past aggregates. 
And the same with future ones etc. Likewise aggregates of 
the realm of sense, and not the others are the basis of corrup¬ 
tions which lie dormant unrejected in aggregates of the realm 
of sense. And the same with the realms of matter and non¬ 
matter. But among stream-winners etc. the kinds of corrup¬ 
tions, which are the root of the round (of births) in the aggre¬ 
gates of any Ariya-person are rejected by this and that Path. 
Because those aggregates of his are not the basis of those 
rejected corruptions, which are the root of the round (of 
births), they do not get the appellation of plane. Because, 
to the average person, the corruptions which are the root of 
the round (of births) are not wholly rejected, any karma that 
is being done is either moral or immoral. Owing to the 
corruption of his karma the round (of births) rolls on. It 
should not be said that for him this root of the round (of 
births lies) only in the material aggregate, not in feeling and 
other aggregates; or only in consciousness-aggregate, not 
in material and other aggregates. Why ? Because it lies 
dormant without distinction in the five aggregates. How ? 
Like the peculiar property of the earth etc. in a tree. For 
as were a great tree to grow on the surface of the earth de¬ 
pending on the peculiar property of the earth and the peculiar 
property of water, owing to which causes it grows in root, 

--- PAGE 353 ---
846 The Path of Purity 
stem, branch, twig, sprout, leaf, flower, fruit and fills the sky, 
and continuing into a series of trees through a succession of 
seeds, lasts till the end of the cycle, it should not be said that 
the peculiar property of the earth etc. is only in the root, and 
not in the stem etc. ... or only in the fruit, and not in the 
root etc. Why ? Because it goes without distinction through 
the root and all (other parts). And as were any man, disgusted 
with the flowers, fruits etc. of the tree, to pierce its four sides 
with a poisonous thorn known as manduka-thorn, and the tree, 
being touched by that poison, would reach the nature of not 
growing, owing to the entire exhaustion of the peculiar property 
of earth and the peculiar property of water, and would be 
unable to give birth again to the series, even so a man of good 
family, repelled by the procedure of aggregates, begins the 
development of the Four Paths in his own life-continuum,1 
just as the man pierced the four sides of the tree with poison. 
Then the life-continuum of his aggregates, by that contact 
with the poison of the Four Paths, reaches the nature of not 
coming to birth again in future because, from the entire 
exhaustion of the corruptions, which are the root of the round 
(of births), all his different karmas, such as bodily acts, will 
have reached just the inoperative state, [689] and are unable 
to give birth to the continua of different becomings. Simply 
by the cessation of the last consciousness he, like fire without 
fuel, being devoid of clinging enters Parinibbana. Thus the 
difference (between plane and) plane-obtained should be 
understood. 
Further, “arisen” is fourfold, as habitual, object-seizing, 
undiscarded, unremoved. Therein the omen as existing is 
even the arisen as habit. And when the object goes into the 
avenue of the eye etc., the kinds of corruptions, which 
formerly did not arise but would certainly arise later, owing 
to the object being seized, are said to have “ arisen through 
the object being seized,” like the kind of corruptions that arose 
in Mahatissa the Elder, who while roaming for food in Kalya- 
uagama, saw an object unsuitable (to monkhood). The kinds 
of corruptions which have not been discarded by either calm 
1 Son/ana. 

--- PAGE 354 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 847 
or insight, and which have not yet come up to the continuum 
of consciousness are, owing to the absence of condition hinder¬ 
ing their arising, known as “ arisen as undiscarded.” And 
because those (corruptions) though discarded by calm 
and insight, have not yet been removed by the Arriya-Path 
and have not got beyond the nature of arising, they are 
known as “ arisen as unremoved,” like the kind of corruptions 
which arose to an elder who, attainer of the eight attainments, 
going through the sky, heard the song of a woman singing 
sweetly as she plucked flowers in a garden of flowering trees 
These three kinds:—arisen as object-seizing, undiscarded,1 
unremoved, should be understood as going together with the 
“plane-obtained.” In these different kinds of “arisen” 
which have been stated, the four that are known as existing, 
as having become and departed, as having been made by 
occasion, habitual, are not to be rejected by any knowledge, 
as they are not to be slain by the Path. As for the “ arisen ” 
which is termed plane-obtained, object-seizing, undiscarded, 
unremoved:—because this and that worldly and transcendental 
knowledges arise, destroying them as they arise, therefore they 
are all to be rejected. Thus here is to be known the rejection 
of whatever states are to be rejected by whatever (knowledge). 
[D. FwncJions.] 
“ The comprehension functions which 
Are stated cU the penetration-lime:— 
All should be known by nature intrinsic.” 
Functions in fours havo been spoken of:—that of com¬ 
prehending, of rejecting, of realizing, of developing at one and 
the same moment of each of these four knowledges at the time 
of comprehending the Truths. These should be known in their 
intrinsic nature. [690] For this has been said by the Ancients: 
“ As a lamp simultaneously in one moment fulfils four func¬ 
tions: it burns the wick, dispels darkness, diffuses light, ex¬ 
hausts the oil, even so the Path-knowledge simultaneously in 
one moment comprehends the four truths: it comprehends ill by 
1 Read °gahituvikkhambhita-. 

--- PAGE 355 ---
848 The Path of Purity 
apprehending comprehension, it comprehends origination 
by comprehending the rejection, it comprehends the Path 
by comprehending development, it comprehends cessation 
by comprehending the realization. What has been said ? 
Making cessation the object he attains, sees, penetrates the 
four truths.” This has also been said: “ Monks, he who 
sees HI, sees also origination of HI, sees also cessation of iU, sees 
also the Path leading to the cessation of iU.”1 Thus all should 
be understood. Further this has been said: “ The bxowledge 
of one endowed with the Path is knowledge also in ill, is knowledge 
also in origination of ill, is knowledge also tw cessation of ill, 
is knowledge also in the Path leading to cessation of ill.”* As 
the lamp burns the wick, so the Path-knowledge comprehends 
ill. As the one dispels darkness, so the other rejects origina¬ 
tion. As the one diffuses light, so the other develops the 
Path which is termed the Law of right thought etc. owing to 
the causal relation of co-existence etc. As the one exhausts 
the oil, so the other realizes cessation which is the exhaustion 
of corruptions. Thus the application of the simile should be 
understood. 
Another method: As the sun rising fulfils four functions 
simultaneously with its appearance: it lights up what is 
considered as matter, dispels darkness, shows light, allays 
the cold, even so the Path-knowledge . . . comprehends 
cessation by comprehending the realization. Here also as the 
sun lights up what is considered as matter, so the Path- 
knowledge comprehends ill. As the one dispels darkness, so 
the other rejects origination. As the one shows light, so the 
other develops the Path through the causal relation of co¬ 
existence etc.3 As the one allays the cold, so the other 
realizes cessation, the tranquillizing of the corruptions. Thus 
the application of the simile should be understood. 
A further method: as a boat fulfils four functions simul¬ 
taneously, in one moment: it leaves the near bank, cuts the 
current, [691] carries the cargo, reaches the further bank, 
so the Path-knowledge . . . comprehends cessation by com- 
1 Samyvtta v, 437. 9 Pafiaatnbhidd i, 119. * Read odhajatadi. 

--- PAGE 356 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 849 
prehcnding realization. Here also as the boat leaves the near 
bank, so the Path-knowledge comprehends ill. As the one 
cuts the current, so the other rejects origination. As the one 
carries the cargo, so the other develops the Path through 
the causal relation of co-existence etc. As the one reaches 
the further bank, so the other realizes cessation which is the 
further bank. Thus the application of the simile should be 
understood. 
Thus are penetrated as one, in the sense of true nature 
(itath'aUhena), in sixteen modes, the four functions of this 
knowledge, proceeding by way of the four functions in one 
moment at the time of comprehending the Truths. As it has 
been said: “ How in the sense of true nature are the four Truths 
penetrated as one ? In sixteen modes in the sense of true nature 
are the four Truths penetrated as one. Of ill the sense of oppress¬ 
ing, the sense of being conditioned, the sense of burning, the 
sense of perversion—such is the sense of its true nature. Of 
origination the sense of exerting, the sense of being the source, 
the sense of fettering, the sense of impeding—such is the sense 
of its true nature. Of cessation the sense of being the escape, 
the sense of seclusion, the sense of being unconditioned, the sense 
of being deathless—such is the sense of its true nature. Of the 
Path the sense of being the exit, the sense of being the condition, 
the sense of seeing, the sense of being the dominant influence— 
such is the sense of its true nature. In these sixteen modes in the 
sense of true nature are the four truths taken together as one. 
That which is taken as one is (its) oneness. What is oneness, 
he penetrates btj one knowledge. Thus the four truths are 
penetrated as one.”1 
1 Ibid, ii, 107. “ Though the Path-knowledge makes cessation the 
object, it arises penetrating and realizing that true nature which is in 
ill etc. as their truth, non-perversion, intrinsic nature by dispelling 
the delusion covering that true nature. Hence subsequently the 
sixteen aspects of the Truth appear in their true nature to the Ariya 
like a pure jewel in the hand ”—Tiku. [Maggaiianam hi nirodliam 
eva arammauam karontam pi yo yo dukkhadlsu tacchfivipaJlasabhu- 
tabh4vasankh&to saccattho tappaticchadakasainmohaviddhaihsanena 
tarn y&thfivato pativijjhantam paccakkham karontam eva pavattati, 
yato aparabhage pi pljon&dayo solasa pi saccattha ariyassa hatthfima- 
lakam viya yithavato upatthahanti.] 

--- PAGE 357 ---
850 The Path of Purity 
Thereat objection might arise:—when there are other 
meanings of ill etc. such as that of disease, boil and so on, 
then why are just four stated? We say in reply here:— 
Because they are manifest by the discernment of other truths. 
For herein “ Which is knowledge in ill? The understanding 
which arises with reference to ill understands1,1 etc.—in this 
way the truth-knowledge has been said by way of each truth 
as object. “ Monks, he who sees ill, also sees its origination ”2 
etc.—in this way it has been said by way of making one truth 
the object and accomplishing the function also in the rest. 
Herein when one makes each function the object, then 
through discerning origination there is manifested, in its 
intrinsic nature, the conditioned sense of ill which has the 
characteristic of oppression, (why ?) because it is exerted, 
conditioned, grouped by origination which has the charac¬ 
teristic of exerting. And because the Path takes away the 
burning of corruptions and is very cool [692] therefore by 
discerning this Path the sense of burning (of ill) is manifested, 
as the ugliness of Sundari was manifested to the venerable 
Nanrla by his seeing of an heavenly nymph.3 And by dis¬ 
cerning cessation which is not liable to perversion, the sense 
of perversion is manifested. Thus it needs saying no further. 
Likewise by discerning ill, the sense of origination as source, 
which (origination) by its nature has the characteristic of 
exerting, is manifested as the ailment-giving nature of food 
is manifested, when one sees ailment arisen from eating 
unsuitable food. By discerning cessation which has become 
dissociation, the sense of origination as fettering (is manifested). 
By discerning the Path which has become an exit, the sense 
of impeding (of origination is manifested). Likewise by 
discerning origination which is not separated (fromcorruptions), 
the sense of cessation as separation (or aloofness), which has 
the characteristic of escape, is manifested. By discerning 
the Path the sense of the unconditioned (is manifested). 
Indeed, by him the Path in the stream of existence which is 
without beginning has never been seen. And that (Path) is 
i Ibid, i, 119. * Sarnyutta v, 437. 3 Jataka ii, 92 f. 

--- PAGE 358 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 851 
indeed conditioned on account of having causal relations:— 
thus the unconditionedness of the uncaused state becomes 
very evident. And by discerning ill the sense of deathlessness 
is manifested. For ill is poison, deathlessness is nibbana. 
Likewise by discerning origination the sense of the Path which 
has the characteristic of exit is manifested as condition:— 
“ This (origination) is not the condition of the attainment 
of nibbana; this (Path) is the condition.” By discerning 
cessation the sense of discerning (is manifested), as clearness 
of eye is manifested to one who sees very fine objects thinking, 
“ my eye is indeed very clear.” By discerning ill the sense of 
dominant influence (is manifested), as by seeing a pauper 
afflicted with various diseases the grandeur of a lordly person 
(is manifested). Thus here, because of the manifestation of 
each (meaning) by virtue of its own characteristic, and of the 
other (meanings) by virtue of discerning another Truth, four 
meanings have been stated of each (truth). But at the Path- 
moment all these (sixteen) meanings go to penetration by a 
single knowledge with four functions in ill etc. But those 
who desire manifold apprehension (of the truths), to them 
the answer has been said in the Kathavatthu1 in Abhidhamma. 
[E. Ccomprehensions.]2 
Now among the four functions of comprehending etc. which 
have been spoken of— 
Threefold is comprehension, and likewise 
Rejection, also realization; 
And twofold development is allowed: 
Here the conclusion should be understood. 
“ Threefold is comprehension ”—comprehension of the known, 
comprehension of scrutiny, comprehension of rejection, thus 
comprehension is threefold. 
Therein after the outline thus “ The understanding which is 
higher knowledge is knowledge in the sense of what is known ”3 
[693] the concise statement is: “ whatever states are knoivn by 
1 Cf. Points of Controversy, 130. a ParinHa. See abo p. 732. 
* Read natafjhena; Pafisambhidu i, 87. 

--- PAGE 359 ---
852 The Path of Purity 
higher knowledge have been known1,1 and the full statement is: 
“ Monks. all is to be thoroughly known. And, Monks, what is 
the all that is to be thoroughly known ? Monks, the eye is to be 
thoroughly known etc.” ;2 as such has comprehension of the 
known been stated. The thorough knowing of mind-matter 
with causal relations is its special plane. After the outline 
thus: “ The understanding which is comprehension is knowledge 
in the sense of scrutinizing ”8 the concise statement is: “ whatever 
states are comprehended have been scrutinized”1 and the full 
statement is: “ Monks, all is to be comprehended. And, Monks, 
what is the all that is to be comprehended- ? Monks, the eye is to 
be comprehended etc.”2—as such has scrutinizing comprehension 
been stated. From the group-contemplation up to adaptation 
is its special plane, as it proceeds by way of scrutinizing that 
such is impermanence, ill, notrself. After the outline thus:— 
“ The comprehension which is rejection is knowledge in the sense of 
abandoning ”4 that (comprehension) spoken of fully as “ What¬ 
ever states are rejected have been abandoned,”1 and proceeding 
in such wise as: “ By the reviewing of impermanence one 
rejects the perception of permanence etc.,” is the comprehension 
of rejection. From the reviewing of breaking-up to the Path- 
knowledge is its plane. Here, this (last comprehension) is 
intended. Or, because comprehensions of the known and 
of scrutiny serve that (third), and because whatever states 
one rejects are certainly known and scrutinized, therefore the 
three comprehensions should in this way be understood as the 
function of the Path-knowledge. 
And likewise rejection—rejection also, like comprehension, 
is threefold:—discarding rejection, partial rejection, extir¬ 
pating rejection. Therein the rejection of opposite states, 
such as the hindrances etc., by this and that worldly concen¬ 
tration, like that of water-weeds by a pot thrown into water 
full of weeds, is known as discarding rejection. But in the 
Pali only the discarding of the hindrances has been stated:— 
“ The discarding rejection of the hindrances by one who de- 
1 a. Ibid. 22 f. * Ibid. 5, 22. » Ibid. 87. 
4 Ibid., where, as also on p. 732 above, the reading is Pahdnapanrid, 
"The understanding which is rejection,” etc. 

--- PAGE 360 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 853 
velops the first jhana.”1 That should be understood to have 
been spoken because (the rejection) was evident. For 
hindrances do not overwhelm consciousness suddenly in the 
preceding, or subsequent portions of the jhana. Initial 
application etc. (are discarded) only at the moment of inducing 
(jhana). Therefore discarding of the hindrances is evident. 
That rejection of this and that rejeefcable state by this and 
that opposing knowledge-factor [694] which forms part of 
insight, like (the rejection of) darkness by a blazing lamp at 
night, is known as partial rejection as follows:—the rejection 
of the heresy of individuality by the classification of mind 
and matter, of the theories of no-condition and dissimilar con¬ 
ditions and of the taint of doubt by the grasping of causes, of 
the seizing of the mass2 as “ I,” “ mine ” by group-contempla¬ 
tion, of the notion (or perception) of what is not the Path as 
the Path by determining (both) the Path and what is not the 
Path, of the theory of annihilation by discernment of the rise, 
of the theory of eternalism by discernment of the fall, of the 
perception of the fearful as without fear by the appearance 
of fear, of the perception of sweetness of life by the discern¬ 
ment of tribulation, of the perception (or notion) of enjoyment 
by the reviewing of repulsion, of the absence of desire for 
release by desire for release, of non-analysis by an alysis, of 
non-indifference by indifference, of seizing what is contrary 
to the Truths by adaptation. Or, as regards the eighteen 
great insights,3 the rejection of the perception of permanence 
by the reviewing of impermanence, of the perception of blisB 
by the reviewing of ill, of the perception (or notion) of the self 
by the reviewing of not-self, of delight by the reviewing of 
repulsion, of passion by the reviewing of dispassion, of origina¬ 
tion by the reviewing of cessation, of clinging by the reviewing 
of relinquishment, of the perception of density by the reviewing 
of extinction, of exerting by the reviewing of the fall, of the 
perception of fixedness by the reviewing of change, of the sign 
by the reviewing of the signless, of hankering by the review- 
i Ibid. 27. 8 Kal&pa, lit. a quiver (of arrows). 
» Above, p. 762, with slight changes in the rendering of Pali words. 

--- PAGE 361 ---
854 The Path of Purity 
ing of the unhankered, of false conviction by the reviewing 
of emptiness, of the clinging to conviction of essence by insight 
of higher understanding of states, of the false conviction of 
confusion by the knowledge and discernment of the true nature 
of things, of the false conviction of attachment by the reviewing 
of tribulation, of non-analysis by the reviewing of analysis, 
of the false conviction of fetters by the reviewing of separation 
from the round (of births):—even this is partial rejection. 
Therein (in these eighteen great insights), as the rejection of 
the perception of permanence etc. is by the seven insights 
beginning with the reviewing of impermanence, it has been 
stated in the reviewing of breaking-up. 
Reviewing of extinction is the knowledge of one who sees 
the extinction thus “ it is impermanent in the sense of differ¬ 
entiating the density and of extinguishing.” Rejection of the 
perception of density is by that (knowledge). 
Reviewing of the fall :— 
“ The fixing both 
(Unseen and seen) as one by following 
The object, on cessation being intent— 
This is the seeing of the sign of falling.”1 
It is that intentness which is so spoken of and which, dis¬ 
cerning the breaking-up of complexes visuallyandby inference, 
is intent on cessation that is termed that very breaking-up. It 
is through it that exertion is rejected. [695] The consciousness 
of one who has the insight that “ those (states) for whose sake 
one may exert oneself are thus liable to fall ” does not incline 
towards exertion. 
Reviewing of change is going beyond this and that classi¬ 
fication (of states) and seeing some other procedure by way of 
the sevenfold (attention) to matter etc. Or it is the seeing of 
the change of an arisen (state) in two modes by decay and death. 
It is through it that the perception of fixedness is rejected. 
Reviewing of the signless is the reviewing of impermanence. 
It is through it that the sign of permanence is rejected. 
1 Above, p. 783. 

--- PAGE 362 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 855 
Reviewing of the unhankered is the reviewing of ill. It is 
through it that the hankering after bliss and of the longing for 
bliss is rejected. 
Reviewing of emptiness is the reviewing of not-self. It is 
through it that the conviction that the self exists is rejected. 
Insight of higher understanding of dhamma :— 
“ Analyzing how the object breaks 
And empty seems, he gets the higher kind 
Of understanding.”1 
So described, insight proceeds, knowing the object such 
aB matter etc., and seeing the breaking-up of that object and 
the identifying consciousness, and seizing emptiness by way of 
breaking-up as “ complexes break up, complexes have death. 
There is nothing else whatever besides.” And that higher 
understanding, making it insight into states, is called insight 
of higher understanding of states. From the seeing well of the 
absence of the essence of permanence and the absence of the 
essence of the self, the clinging to and conviction of essence is 
rejected by it. 
Knowledge and discernment of the true nature of things—is 
the grasping of mind and matter with causal relations. By 
it is rejected the conviction of confusion proceeding in such 
wise aB “ Indeed was I not in the past ? etc.”2 and “ the world 
comes into being through a creator ” etc. 
Reviewing of tribulation is the knowledge of discerning 
tribulation in all existences etc., a knowledge which arises by 
way of the appearance of fear. By it is rejected the oon- 
viction of attachment thus: “ One sees nothing to be attached 
to.” 
Reviewing of analysis is analytic knowledge making a means 
for release. Non-reflection is rejected by it. 
Reviewing of separation from the round {of births) is in¬ 
difference to complexes and adaptation. It is said that then 
his consciousness shrinks, retracts, sinks from all that is 
considered as complexes, as a water-drop on a lotus-leaf bent 
ever so little.3 Therefore the conviction of the fetters is 
1 Above, p. 783. s Samyutta ii, 26. * Above, p. 802. 

--- PAGE 363 ---
856 The Path of Purity 
rejected by it. [696] The meaning is, that the rejection is of 
the conviction of corruptions, beginning with the fetter of 
sensuality and of the procedure of the corruptions. 
Thus fully should partial rejection be understood. And in 
the Pali it has been said concisely: “ To him who develops con¬ 
centration belonging to penetration, there is the partial rejection 
of what is considered as views.”1 
That rejection by the Ariya Path-knowledge, by which there 
is no re-procedure of states such as the fetters etc. as of a 
tree struck by lightning disc, is known as extirpating-rejection, 
concerning which it is said “ The extirpating-rejection is to one 
who develops the transcendental Path leading to extinction,”2 
Thus of these three rejections only the extirpating-rejection 
is intended here. But since to the meditator the preceding3 
rejection of discarding and the partial rejection but serve that 
(third), therefore the three rejections should be understood in 
this way as functions of Path-knowledge. All the actions 
done formerly by a man who, after killing a rival king, attains 
kingship are indeed spoken of as having been done by the king. 
Also realization4—although it is divided into two kinds as 
worldly realization and transcendental realization, it is three¬ 
fold, as the transcendental is divided by way of discerning 
and developing. 
Therein the touching with the first jhana etc. in such wise 
as “ I have got, I have lived the first jhana, I have realized 
the first jhana ” etc. is known as worldly realization. Touch¬ 
ing is by attaining; it is touching by the touch of knowledge 
through visualizing as “I have attained it.” Indeed, con¬ 
cerning this meaning, it has been shown in outline, that 
“ realizing-understanding is knowledge in the 6ense of touch¬ 
ing”; and the exposition of realization has been stated as 
“ whatever stales have been realized have been touched.”* 
Further, though not produced in one’s own continuum, 
those states, which are known by knowledge entirely inde- 
1 Patisambhida i, 27. a Ibid, i, 26. 8 Read pubbabhage.. 
4 This should not b© given a separate heading F as is done in the Pfili 
text, p. 696, since it comes under E (p. 851 of translation) and not in the 
verse on p. 832 (ir.) which gives the subjects for the headings 
A, B, C, D, E. 4 Ibid, i, 35. 

--- PAGE 364 ---
XXII.—Knowledge and Discernment 857 
pendent of another are realized. Hence it has been said: 
“ Monks, all should be realized. What, monks, is the all that 
is to be realized ? The eye, monks, should be realized ” etc.1 
It has further been said: “ Seeing matter he realizes, seeing 
feeling . . . [697] . . . consciousness, he realizes. Seeing 
eye, decay and death, nibbana connected with the deathless, he 
realizes. Thus whatever states have been realized haw been 
touched.’*1 
And the discerning of nibbana at the moment of the first 
Path is realization which is discernment. In the moments 
of the remaining Paths the realization is development. This 
twofold realization is intended here. Therefore the realization 
of nibbana by way of discerning and developing should be 
understood as the function of this (transcendental) knowledge. 
“And twofold development is allowed”—development is 
recognized as two: worldly and transcendental. 
Therein the producing of worldly morality, concentration 
and understanding and the habituating of one’s continuum 
with them2 is worldly development. The producing of 
transcendental (morality, concentration, understanding) and 
the habituating of one’s continuity with them2is transcendental 
development. Of them the transcendental is intended here. 
For this fourfold knowledge produces transcendental morality 
etc. by being the causal relations of co-existence etc. to them. 
And he habituates his continuum with them—thus only 
transcendental development is its (Path-knowledge’s) function. 
Thus 
“The comprehension functions which 
Are stated at the penetration-time . . . 
.All should be known by nature intrinsic.”8 
Thus far 
“ The man discreet, on virtue planted firm. 
In intellect and intuition trained»” 
in what has been said as “ One should develop it . . . fulfilling4 
the two purities which are its ‘roots,’ and the five purities 
8 Read tdhi. 
Read sampddentena. 
65 
1 Ibid. 
3 P. 832. 4 

--- PAGE 365 ---
858 The Path of Purity 
which are its ‘ body,* *’1 to the intent that the system, in 
the development of understanding which comes in its true 
form (sarvpena) may be discerned, has been fully treated. 
The query “ How should it be developed f”1 is thus answered. 
Thus is ended the twenty-second chapter called the ex¬ 
position of purity of knowledge and discernment in the section 
of the development of understanding in the Path of Purity, 
composed for the purpose of gladdening good folk. 
1 Above, p. 514. 

--- PAGE 366 ---
CHAPTER XXIII 
[698] EXPOSITION OF THE ADVANTAGES OF DEVELOPING 
UNDERSTANDING 
We shall speak on the subject mentioned already r1 “What 
are the advantages of developing understanding ?” The 
developing of understanding verily brings hundreds of 
advantages. It is not easy to deal with them in full detail 
even in a long time. Briefly they are (1) the destruction of 
the various vices, (2) the enjoyment of the essence of Ariyan 
fruit, (3) the ability to enter upon the attainment of trance,2 3 * 
(4) the bringing about of the state of being worthy of offerings, 
and so on. 
(1) Of these, the destruction of the various vices is that which 
is stated by way of the heresies of individuality and so on 
since the time when name-and-form is analysed. This is 
the advantage of developing worldly understanding. The 
destruction of the various vices is stated by way of the fetters 
and so on at the moment of the Ariyan Path: this is the 
advantage of developing transcendental understanding: 
Just as the thunderbolt with dreadful speed 
Falls on and crushes mountains of hard rock, 
And as the fire fanned by the furious wind 
The jungle burns, and as the disc of sun 
Kills darkness by its own effulgent heat, 
So doth developed understanding break 
The net of the corruptions lying long 
In evils all. Know then8 th’ advantages 
As to be gotten in this very life. 
1 The beginning of Ch. XIV., p. 606, above. 
3 Nirodha, “ cessation ” of perception and feeling. “ Trance ” is 
employed here to avoid confusion with “ cessation,” a common synonym 
for nirvana. 
3 Ato (= tasmd), reading sandiffhOcam ato. 
859 

--- PAGE 367 ---
860 The Path of Purity 
(2) The enjoyment of the essence of Ariyan fruit. The 
advantage of the developing of understanding is not merely the 
destruction of the corruptions, but also the enjoyment of the 
essence of Ariyan fruit. [699] For the fruit of monkhood, 
such as stream-winning, is called Ariyan fruit. The enjoyment 
of its essence is in two modes: at the Path-process and at 
procedure by way of the attainment of the fruit. Of these 
two the procedure has been shown under the path-process. 
Further this sutta should be. taught to convince those who 
say, that just the putting away of the fetters is called the fruit, 
and that there is no other Btate:—“ How is understanding due 
to the subsiding of exertion called knowledge about the fruit?1 
At the moment of the path of stream-winning, right outlook in the 
sense of seeing emerges from wrong outlook, from the corruptions 
and aggregates which follow it, aiul from all the signs external 
to these. Owing to the subsiding of that exertion right outlook 
arises. It is the fruit of the Path."2 Other evidences3 are: 
“ The four Ariyan Paths, and the four fruits of monkhood— 
these states have immeasurable objects. The sublime state is the 
cause by vjay of contiguity of the immeasurable slate " and 
so on. 
Now in order to show the procedure on attainment of the 
fruit this act of questioning (is made): Which is the attain¬ 
ment of the fruit 1 "Who enter upon it 1 Who do not enter 
upon it 1 Why do they enter upon it ? How does one enter 
upon it ? How does it persist ? And how does one emerge ? 
What follows the fruit immediately ? After what is the fruit 
immediate ? 
Of these, Which is the attainment of the fruit ?—it is that 
ecstasy which is at cessation of the Ariyan fruit. 
Who enter upon it and who do not ? None of the average 
folk can enter upon it. Why ? Because they have not got 
so far. All Ariyans enter upon it. Why ? Because they 
have got so far. But persons in a higher stage do not enter 
upon a loweT attainment, because, they having reached the 
next state of the man, the (latter attainment) has sub- 
1 Bead 'paaaddhipannd phate ft&nam. 
* Pafisambhida i, 71. * Sddhakdni. 

--- PAGE 368 ---
XXIII.—Advantages of Developing Understanding 861 
sided. (Persons) in a lower stage do not enter upon a higher 
attainment, since it has not been reached. (People) attain 
to each his own fruit. This is here the conclusion. 
But 60me say that the stream-winners and the once- 
returners also do not enter upon the attainment, but the two 
higher classes (i.e. non-returners and saints) do; giving, as 
their reason, that the latter two classes are fulfillers of con¬ 
centration.1 But that is no reason, since an average person 
also enters upon worldly concentration that he has himself 
attained. What does it avail to he thinking of a reason or 
otherwise ? Is it not said in the Pali text, “ Which ten states 
of adoption arise by way of insight ? [700] For the sake of the 
attainment of the path of stream-winning it vanquishes origin, 
proceeding . . . despair, the external sign of activities—hence 
adoption. For the sake of the attainment of the fruit of stream- 
winning, the path of once-returning . . . the fruit of saintship, 
the life of emptiness, the life of the signless, it vanquishes . . . 
the external sign of activities—hence adoption ”* Therefore all 
Ariyans enter each upon his own attainment. Thus one 
should conclude. 
Why do they enter upon it?—For the sake of happy life 
under present conditions. For just as a king enjoys the 
pleasures of kingship, a deva enjoys deva-bliss, so the Ariyans 
enter upon the attainment of the fruit at the desired moment 
after making a limit of time, saying “ We will enjoy the 
Ariyan transcendental happiness.” 
How does one enter upon it and how does it persist, and how 
does one emerge ? The attainment is entered upon in two ways: 
by not attending to any other object than Nirvana, by attend¬ 
ing to Nirvana. As has been said: “ Friends, there are two 
causes of the heart's deliverance which is void of phenomenal 
relations:—non-attention to all that is phenomenal and attention 
to the eletnent that is not phenomenal.”3 This herein is the 
order of entering:4 The Ariyan disciple who wishes to enter 
upon the attainment of the fruit should view in seclusion and 
solitude the activities by way of rise and fall and so on. As 
1 Whereas the first two classes are fulfillers of morality. 
* Patsambhidd i, 68. 9 Majjhima i, 296. 4 Road °kkamo. - 

--- PAGE 369 ---
862 The Path of Purity 
the discerning knowledges arise in him one after another, his 
mind becomes fixed on trance, by way of the attainment of 
fruit immediately after the knowledge of adoption, which 
has the activities for ita object. As his mind is inclined 
towards the attainment of fruit, in the probationer, the fruit, 
not the Path, arises. 
But some there are who say, that a stream-winner sets up 
insight, saying: " I will enter upon the attainment of fruit,” 
and becomes a once-returner; and a once-returner in the 
same way becomes a non-returner. They should be told, 
that in that case a non-returner should become a saint, a 
saint a silent Buddha, and a silent Buddha a perfect Buddha. 
Hence there is nothing else (besides the fruit that counts). 
This opinion should be rejected and not adhered to in view 
of the text.1 Just this should be adhered to: that for the 
probationer the fruit, not the Path, arises. If one has attained 
to the path of the first Jhana, then the fruit that arises is of 
the first Jhana: if the path attained be the second or any 
other Jhana, then the fruit is of that particular Jhana. Thus 
is his entering upon the attainment. 
[701] It persists in three ways from the expression: 
“ Friends, there are three causes of the •persistence of the heart's 
deliverance which is void of phenomenal relations: non-attention 
to all that is phenomenal; attention to the element that is not 
phenomenal; and precedent preparation.”2 Of these, precedent 
preparation is the limit of time previous to the attainment. 
The persistence lasts so long as the time limited by him:— 
“ I will emerge at such and such a time ” has not arrived. 
Thus is the persistence. 
The emergence takes place in two ways, as it is said in 
“ Friends, there are two causes of the emergence from the heart's 
deliverance which is void of phenomenal relations:—attention to 
all that is phenomenal and non-attention to the element that is 
not phenomenal.”2 Therein “ all that is phenomenal ” means 
the phenomenal in form, feeling, perception, activities, and 
in consciousness. Though he may not attend to all of them 
1 On the ten states of adoption just quoted, 
8 Majjhima i, 297. » Ibid, i, 296. 

--- PAGE 370 ---
' XXIII.—Advantages of Developing Understanding 863 
together, they have been stated as a whole. Therefore the 
emergence from the attainment of fruit takes place in him 
who attends to that which is the object of subconsciousness. 
Thus should emergence be understood. 
What follows the fruit immediately, and after which is the fruit 
immediate ? Immediately after the fruit comes just the fruit, 
or else subconsciousness. The fruit is immediately after the 
path, after the fruit, after the adoption, or after the sphere 
of neither perception nor non-perception. 
Of these, the fruit that is immediately after the path is the 
one at the path-process. The fruit that is immediately after 
the fruit means every fruit that is subsequent to every pre¬ 
ceding fruit. The fruit that is immediately after the adoption 
is every preceding fruit that is in attainments of the fruit. 
By the adoption here adaptive knowledge is to be understood. 
For this has been said in the Patthana: “ The adaptive know¬ 
ledge of the saint renders service to the attainment of fruit by 
way of contiguity. The adaptive knowledge of probationers 
renders service to the attainment of fruit by way of immediate 
contiguity *n The fruit that comes immediately after the 
sphere of neither perception nor non-perception is the fruit 
by which one emerges from trance. 
Of these, excepting the fruit which has appeared at tho 
path-process, all the rest come about by way of the attain¬ 
ment of fruit. Thus byway of arising at the path-process 
or the fruit-attainment, 
The fruit of monkhood is most excellent, 
In which all sufferings are quieted, 
As pleasant, calm and aims at deathlessness; 
As purged of all the world’s material things. 
[702] As honey with ambrosia is mixed, 
So it pervades with pure and nourishing blise, 
Of passing sweetness. Since the wise who have 
Developed understanding find such bliss, 
Incomparable essence of the Ariyan (folk), 
The enjoyment of the essence of the Ariyan fruit 
Is of insight-development the good result. 
1 Tikapalfhdna ii, 159. 

--- PAGE 371 ---
864 The Path of Purity 
(3) The ability to enter upon the attainment of trance. Not 
merely the enjoyment of the essence of Ariyan fruit, but also 
this ability to enter upon the attainment of trance should be 
understood as an advantage from developing understanding. 
Herein, in order to set forth this attainment of trance this 
work of questioning (is asked):—What is the attainment of 
tTance ? Who enter upon it ? Who do not enter upon it ? 
Where do they enter upon it ? Why do they enter upon it ? 
And how does one enter upon it ? How does it persist ? 
And how does one emerge ? Towards what is the mind of 
him who has emerged inclined ? And what is the difference 
between him who is dead and him who has entered upon the 
attainment ? Is the attainment of trance conditioned or 
unconditioned, worldly or transcendental, accomplished or 
unaccomplished ? 
Of these, What is the attainment of trance ? It is the not- 
proceeding, owing to cessation, of states of mind and mental 
properties. 
Who enter upon it and who do not?—All average persons, 
stream-winners, once-returners, and non-returners, and saints 
with '* * dry ’ insight ” do not enter upon it. But those non- 
returners and saints who have obtained the eight attainments 
enter upon it. For this has been said: “ From being endowed 
with the twofold strength, and from the tranquillizing of the three 
activities, from the behaviour of the sixteen kinds of knowledge 
and of the nine kinds of concentration, the understanding as 
controller1 is the knowledge of the attainment of trance.”2 And 
this attainment is not within the reach of other than non¬ 
returners and saints who have reached the eight attainments; 
it is they, not others, who enter upon it. 
Herein, what is the twofold strength 1 . . . what is the 
controller ? We need not say anything about these. Every¬ 
thing has been said in the exposition of this outline, as it has 
been said: IFith the twofold, strength ' means the two strengths: 
the strength of calm, and the strength of insight. [703] What is 
the strength of calm ? The collectedness, non-scattering of mind 
1 Vasibhdvata paiUUL 8 Patisambhidd i, 97. 

--- PAGE 372 ---
XXIII.—Advantages of Developing Understanding 865 
by virtue of freedom is the strength of calm. The collectedness, 
non-scattering of mind by virtue of good-will ... of the per¬ 
ception of light ... of non-distraction ... of the inhalings 
of breath while reviewing the renunciation of the world ... of 
the exhalings of breath while reviewing the renunciation of the 
world is the strength of calm. In what sense is it the strength 
of calm ? Because of the first jhana one does not tremble for 
the hindrances—thus it is the strength of calm. Because of the 
second jhana one does not tremble for applied and sustained 
thinking . . . because of the attainment of the sphere of neither 
perception nor non-perception one does not tremble for the per¬ 
ception of the sphere of nothingness. Thus is it the strength of 
calm. One does not tremble, shake or quake from distraction 
and the corruptions and aggregates accompanied by distrac¬ 
tion .'—thus is it the strength of calm. This is the strength of 
calm. 
“ What is the strength of insight ? The reviewing of im¬ 
permanence is the strength of insight. The reviewing of ill . . . 
the reviewing of the not-self ... the reviewing of repulsion . . . 
the reviewing of dispassion ... the reviewing of cessation . . . 
the reviewing of renunciation is the strength of insight. The 
reviewing of impermanence as to mailer. . . . The reviewing of 
renunciation as to matter is the strength of insight. The review¬ 
ing of impermanence as to feeling ... as to perception . . . 
as to activities ... as to consciousness ... as to eye . . . as 
to old age and death ... the reviewing of renunciation as to 
old age and death is the strength of insight. 
“In what sense is it the strength of insight ? By reviewing 
impermanence one does not tremble at the perception of per¬ 
manence—thus is it strength of insight. By reviewing ill one 
does not tremble at the perception of bliss. ... By reviewing 
the not-self one does not tremble at the perception of self. . . . 
By reviewing repulsion one does not tremble with delight. . . . 
By reviewing dispassion one does not tremble with passion. . . . 
By reviewing cessation one does not tremble at origin. ... By 
reviewing renunciation one does not tremble at attachment— 
thus is it strength of insight. One does not tremble, shake or 
quake at ignorance and the corruptions and aggregates accom- 

--- PAGE 373 ---
866 The Path of Purity 
panied by ignorance:—thus is it strength of insight: This is 
the strength of insight. 
“‘And from the tranquillizing of the three activities from 
the tranquillizing of which three activities ? The vocal activities 
of applied and sustained thinking become tranquillized when one 
enters upon the second jhdna. The body-activities of inhalings 
and exhalings of breath are tranquillized when one enters upon 
the fourth jhdna. And the mind-activities of perception and 
feeling are tranquillized when one enters upon the cessation of 
perception and feeling. 
“ ‘ From the behaviour of the sixteen kinds of knowledge *— 
from the behaviour of which sixteen kinds of knowledge ? The 
reviewing of impermanence is the behaviour of knowledge. The 
reviewing of HI, not-self, repulsion, dispassion, cessation, re¬ 
nunciation, salvation from the round of life, is the behaviour of 
knowledge. The Path of stream-winning [704] is the behaviour 
of knowledge. The attainment of the fruit of stream-winning 
is the behaviour of knowledge. The path of once-returning . . . 
the attainment of the fruit of saintship is the behaviour of knovt- 
ledge: It is from the behaviour of these sixteen kinds of knowledge. 
“ 1 From the behaviour of the nine kinds of concentration *— 
from the behaviour of which nine kinds of concentration ? The 
fret jhdna is the behaviour of concentration. The second 
jhdna ... the attainment of the sphere of neither perception 
nor non-perception is the behaviour of co>icentration. Applied 
thinking and sustained thinking and zest and bliss and collected¬ 
ness of mind for the acquirement of the first jhdna. . . . 
Applied thinking and sustained thinking and zest and bliss and 
collectedness of mind for the acquirement of the attainment of 
the sphere of neither perception nor non-perception : it is by the 
behaviour of these nine kinds of concentration.1 
“ Control2 is of five hinds: control of adverting, control of 
entering upon, control of persistence, control of emergence, control 
of reflection. One adverts to the first jhdna wherever, whenever, 
as long as o?ie wishes ; there is no sluggishness to the adverting— 
1 The eight attainments and their access-concentration “ upacdra- 
samadhi piled. ‘ 
1 7<m. In “ of ” here read “ which is.” 

--- PAGE 374 ---
XXIII. Advantages of Developing Understanding 867 
this is control of adverting. One enters upon the first jkana 
wherever, whenever, as long as one wishes ; there is no sluggish¬ 
ness to the entering: this is control of entering. One persists 
in .. . emerges from . . . reflects on . . there is no sluggish¬ 
ness to the reflection: this is control of reflection. One adverts 
to the second jhana ... to the attainment of the sphere of 
neither perception nor non-perception wherever, whenever, as long 
as one wishes; . . . one reflects on ...; there is no sluggish¬ 
ness to the reflection : this is control of reflection. These are the 
five controls."1 
In this passage, “ from the behaviour of the sixteen kinds 
of knowledge’5 is an extreme statement:—For the non- 
returner just fourteen will suffice. If this be so, cannot 
twelve for the once-returner and ten for the stream-winner 
suffice ? No, they have not put away lust for the pleasures 
of sense which is hostile to concentration. This lust verily 
is not put away by them. Therefore the strength of calm 
is not full. When that is not full, they are not able, owing 
to the lack of strength, to enter upon the attainment of 
trance which is to be entered upon by means of the twofold 
strength. On the other hand lust has been put away by 
the non-returner. Therefore his strength is full and he is 
able to enter upon the attainment through the fulness of his 
strength. Hence said the Blessed One: “To one who has 
emerged from trance the moral {state) of the sphere of neither 
perception nor non-perception renders service to the attainment 
of the fruit by way of the cause of contiguityThis is said in 
the Patthana, the Great Book, concerning the emerging of 
the non-returner from trance. 
[705] Where do they enter upon it ?—in a five-constituent- 
world.3 Why ? Because the attainment takes place there 
in due order. In a four-constituent-world there is no birth of 
the first and the other jhanas; therefore one is not able there 
to enter upon the attainment. But some say that it is 
because of the absence of the (heart-) basis. 
Why do they enter upon it 1 Being distressed by the arising 
1 Pafisambhida i, 97-9. 
* Bead °bhave. 
* Tikapaghdna ii, 159. 

--- PAGE 375 ---
868 The Path of Purity 
and breaking-np of the activities they enter upon this attain¬ 
ment saying: “ Being -without mind even in this present world, 
we shall reach cessation and dwell in bliss.” 
And how does one enter upon it? One enters upon it as 
one emerges from the trance of (the attainment of) the sphere 
of neither perception nor non-perception after having made 
endeavours by way of calm and insight and performed the 
preliminary duties. For he who makes endeavours by way 
of calm is established in the attainment of the sphere of 
neither perception nor non-perception. He who makes 
endeavours by way of insight is established in the attainment 
of the fruit. But he who makes endeavours by way of both 
performs the preliminary duties, brings about the trance of the 
sphere of neither perception nor non-perception and enters 
upon the attainment. This is the account in brief. 
Here are the details: Here a monk who wishes to pass into 
trance, takes his meals, washes well his hands and feet and 
sits down cross-legged on a well-prepared scat in a secluded 
place, keeping his body erect and setting up his mindfulness. 
He enters upon the first jhana, emerges therefrom and views 
with insight the activities as impermanent, ill, not-self. And 
this insight is of three kinds: the insight which grasps the 
activities, the insight of attainment of the fruit, the insight 
of attainment of trance. 
Of these the insight which grasps the activities may be 
weak or sharp, yet it is the proximate cause of the path. The 
insight of attainment of the fruit should be sharp, like the 
development of the path. The insight of attainment of trance 
should be neither weak nor sharp. Therefore by means of 
the insight which is neither weak nor sharp he views the 
activities with insight. 
Then he enters upon the second jhana and emerges there¬ 
from and in the same way viewB the activities there. Then 
having entered upon the third jhana . . . upon the sphere 
of the infinity of consciousness he emerges therefrom and 
in the same way views the activities there. Likewise having 
entered upon the sphere of nothingness he emerges therefrom 
and performs the fourfold preliminary duties, namely, the 

--- PAGE 376 ---
XXIII. Advantages of Developing Understanding 869 
causing no damage to requisites pertaining to various persons, 
the waiting of the clergy, the summoning by the Teacher, 
the limit of his life-term. 
J-106] Of these, the causing no damage to requisites per¬ 
taining to various persons means, whatever bowl or robe or 
bed or bench or dwelling place or any other requisite which 
does not pertain to the monk but to various persons. He 
should resolve that such requisites be not damaged or perish 
by fire, water, wind, thieves or rats and so on. 
This is the order of resolving: When he resolves that such 
and such an article may not be burnt by fire within this week, 
nor be carried off by water, nor be destroyed by the wind, 
nor stolen by thieves, nor eaten by rats and so on, no danger 
arises for it during the week. If he does not make the resolu¬ 
tion, the article perishes through fire and so on, as in the case 
of the Elder Mahanaga. 
They say that the Elder entered the village of his mother, 
the lay-discipje, for alms. The lay-disciple gave him rice- 
gruel and asked him to sit in the sitting hall. The Elder 
sat down passing into trance. When he had sat down, the 
sitting hall caught fire and all the other monks each took 
hold of his own seat and fled. The villagers gathered together, 
and on seeing the Elder said he was a very lazy monk. The 
fire burnt the thatch, bamboo and timber and encircled the 
Elder. Men brought water in jars, put out the fire, removed 
the ashes, plastered the place (with cow-dung), spread flowers1 
and stood bowing to him. The Elder emerged at the end of the 
time-limit, and seeing them rose up in the sky, saying: “ I 
am discovered,” and went to Piyangu Island. This is called 
the causing no damage to requisites pertaining to other 
persons. There is no need for special resolution in regard to 
the inner and outer garments, or one’s own seat. It is pro¬ 
tected by means of the attainment, like that of the Venerable 
Safljlva. This has been said: “ The magic ‘power possessed by 
the Venerable Sanjiva is suffused tcilh concentration. The 
magical power possessed by the Venerable Sariputta is suffused 
with concentration.”2 
1 Read pupphdni. 8 Pafisambhidd ii, 212. 

--- PAGE 377 ---
870 The Path of Purity 
The waiting of the clergy means the waiting, expecting on 
the part of the clergy. So long as the monk is there, the 
clergy do not perform their ceremonies, is the meaning. Here 
(of the fourfold duties) the waiting is not his preliminary 
duty, but the consideration of the waiting is. Therefore he 
should consider thus:—“If I should sit here passing into 
trance for a week, the clergy might wish to perform some 
function such as putting a resolution and so on. Before 
some monk comes and calls me [707] I will emerge.” He 
who passes into trance after making such consideration emerges 
betimes. But when one makes no such consideration, the 
clergy assemble and not seeing him ask, Where is such and 
such a monk? The reply being that he is in trance, the 
clergy send some monk, saying: “Go and summon him in 
the name of the clergy.” Then that monk standing ■within 
earshot of him calls out, “ Sir, the clergy wait for thee.” He 
emerges immediately. So great is the authority of the clergy. 
Therefore one should consider it, and pass into trance so 
that one emerges by oneself. 
As regards the summoning by the Teacher also, considera¬ 
tion of the summoning by the Teacher is a function of the 
monk. Hence he should consider thus: “ If I should sit here 
passing into trance for a week, the Teacher might wish to 
lay down a precept on a specific occasion arising or preach 
the law for a similar reason. Before someone comes and calls 
me, I will emerge.” He who sits down with this resolution 
emerges betimes. But when one makes no such consideration, 
the Teacher does not see him when the clergy have assembled 
and asks, Where is such and such a monk ? On being told 
that he is in trance, he sends some monk, saying: “ Go and 
call him in my name. ’* The other monk stands within earshot 
of him and shouts out: “The Teacher calls thee.” There¬ 
upon the monk emerges. So authoritative is the summons 
by the Teacher. Therefore one should consider it and pass 
into trance so that one emerges by oneself. 
His “ life-term-limit ” is the limit of the term of his life. 
The monk should be very skilful in this. He should reflect 
whether the constituents of his life will last a week or not 

--- PAGE 378 ---
XXIII.—Advantages of Developing Under standiyig 871 
and then should pass into trance. Should the constituents 
of his life be ceasing within a week, and should he pass into 
txance without making such reflection, the attainment of 
trance is not able to prevent death. Since death does not 
take place within the period of trance, he emerges from 
attainment before the time-limit. Therefore he should re¬ 
flect1 and enter upon his attainment. He may not reflect on 
the other three duties; but he should reflect on this. So it 
is said. 
Thus he enters upon the sphere of nothingness, and emerging 
therefrom does the preliminary duties and enters upon the 
sphere of neither perception nor non-perception. Then 
passing beyond one or two turns of consciousness, he becomes 
unconscious and in touch with trance. Why do not the con¬ 
sciousnesses higher than the two turns of consciousness 
proceed ? Because of the preparation for trance. For [708] 
the ascending to the eight attainments yoked with the even 
pair of the states of calm and insight is the preparation for 
trance in due order, not for the attainment of neither per¬ 
ception nor non-perception. Thus owing to the preparation 
for trance the consciousnesses higher than the two do not 
proceed. But the monk who having emerged from the sphere 
of nothingness does not perform the preliminary duties and 
enters upon the attainment of neither perception nor non¬ 
perception is not able to be unconscious subsequently. He 
reverts to the sphere of nothingness where he remains. 
Here the simile of a man who is strange to a certain road 
should be told. They say that a man who has never gone 
along a certain road comes on the way to a grotto full of 
water, or a rock8 heated by the burning rays of the sun, lying 
beyond a muddy swamp. Without arranging his inner and 
outer garments he goes down to the grotto, but returns to 
the bank for fear of wetting his garments. Stepping on the 
rock he burns his feet and so returns to the hither bank. 
Just as the man returns to the hither bank on going down 
1 Saying, “ May death not take place suddenly before the time-limit 
of my attainment.” 
* Read pdnanaiji va agamma for pdsonam vd kandaram va agamma. 

--- PAGE 379 ---
872 The Path of Purity . 
to the grotto with his garments not properly arranged, or 
on stepping on to the heated rock, even so the student, not 
having done his preliminary duties, returns, the moment he 
has entered upon the sphere of neither perception nor non- 
perception, to the sphere of nothingness where he remains. 
But as a man who has been on the road before, on coining 
to that spot binds one garment firmly to his body and holds 
the other in his hand and crosses the grotto and stepping 
on to the rock so as just to touch it with his feet he goes on 
to the thither bank, so a monk who has done his preliminary 
duties enters upon the sphere of neither perception nor non¬ 
perception and becoming unconscious dwells in touch with 
trance. 
How does it persist ? It persists as far as the time-limit 
fixed and the absence meantime of loss of life, waiting of the 
clergy, summoning by the Teacher. 
And how does one emerge ? The emergence is twofold: on the 
attainment of the fruit of non-returner by the non-returner, 
on the attainment of the fruit of saintship by the saint. 
Towards what is the mind of him who has emerged inclined ? 
It is inclined towards nirvana. For this has been said: 
“ Friend Visakha, the mind of the monk who has emerged from 
the attainment of the cessation of perception and feeling is in¬ 
clined towards inward aloofness, bent on inward aloofness, slopes 
towards inward aloofness.”1 
[709] And what is the difference between him who is dead 
and him who has entered upon the attainment ? The meaning 
of this has been declared in the Sutta, where it is said: “ In 
the corpse not only are the plastic forces of the body and speech 
and mind stilled and quiescent but also vitality is exhausted, 
heal is quenched, and the faculties of sense broken up;—whereas 
in the Almsman in trance vitality persists, heat abides, and the 
faculties are clear, although respiration, observation and per¬ 
ception are stilled arid quiescent.”2 
Is the attainment of trance conditioned or unconditioned ? 
and so on ? To this question one should not reply that the 
1 Majjhima i, 302. 
* /6id.i,299. Further Dialoguesi, 211. “ Plastic forces ”=sankhard. 

--- PAGE 380 ---
XXIII.—Advantages of Developing Understanding 873 
attainment is conditioned or unconditioned, worldly or trans¬ 
cendental. Why ? Because it does not exist in its own 
nature. But because it iB spoken of as being entered on by 
virtue of the monk who has entered upon it, therefore it may 
be said to be accomplished, not unaccomplished. 
Wise men when they have brought to pass 
The insight of the Ariyans attain 
This trance calm, practised by the Ariyans 
And called nirvana in this very life. 
Therefore ability to pass into 
This trance is said to be a good result 
Of understanding in the Ariyan paths. 
(4) The bringing about of the state of being worthy of offerings 
and so on. Not merely the ability to enter upon is the ad¬ 
vantage of the attainment of trance. The bringing about 
of the state of being worthy of offerings and so on is also an 
advantage in developing this transcendental understanding. 
Generally speaking a person, who has developed understand¬ 
ing because he has developed this fourfold understanding, 
is the incomparable field of merit of the world, worthy of 
offerings, worthy of hospitality, worthy of gifts, worthy to be 
honoured with respectful salutations by the world of men 
and of devas. 
Specifically, one who, having developed the first path of 
understanding, has won the stream through weak insight is, 
despite his tender faculties, known to have earned the destiny 
of but seven more rebirths (sattakhattuparamo). Wandering 
through seven existences of a happy course he makes an end 
of ill. He who has won the stream through medium insight 
is of medium faculties and is known to have earned the destiny 
to be born in good families (kolankolo). Running through 
two or three births in a good family he makes an end of ill. 
He who has won the stream through sharp insight is of sharp 
faculties and is known as the “ one-seeder “ (ekabijt). W ith 
one more rebirth [710] as a human being he makes an end of 
ill. After developing the second path of understanding one 
becomes a once-retumer. Coming back to this world but 
50 

--- PAGE 381 ---
874 The Path of Purity 
once lie makes an end of ill. After developing the third path 
of understanding one becomes a non-returner. By virtue of 
the difference in the faculties he leaves this world in five ways, 
namely: antard parinibbdyi, upahacca parinibbdyi, asah- 
kdraparinibbdyi, sasaiikhdraparinibbdyI, uddhamsoto Akanittha- 
gami1—and reaches the end. 
Of these, he who, being reborn anywhere in a “Pure 
Abode”2 enters complete nirvana without reaching the 
middle of his life is antaraparinibbayi. He who enters com¬ 
plete nirvana after passing the middle of his life is Upahacca 
parinibbdyi. He who -without external instigation, without 
incentive gains the higher path of saintship is Asaiikhara 
parinibbdyi. He who does so with external instigation, with 
incentive is Sasankhara parinibbdyi. He who, wherever 
he may be born, goes up the stream until he reaches the 
Akanittha world, where he enters complete nirvana is 
uddhamtoto Akanitfhagamx. After developing the fourth path 
of understanding one becomes emancipated through faith, 
one becomes emancipated through understanding, one becomes 
emancipated in both wayB,3 another has threefold lore, one 
has sixfold supernormal knowledge, another is a great saint, 
purged of the cankers who has attained the different kinds 
of analytical knowledge. Concerning this fourth path it is 
said that at the moment of the path one clears the entangle¬ 
ments; at the moment of the fruit one, having cleared the 
entanglements, is worthy of the best gifts of the world of men 
and of devas. 
The growth of understanding Arivan 
Thus brings forth manifold advantages. 
Therefore the wise should find delight therein. 
In so far has been explained the development of understand¬ 
ing which yields such advantages, in the Path of Purity shown 
1 See Points of Controversy 77-8. 
* Suddhavasa: the five arc: Avihd, Atappd, Sudassd, Sudastri, 
Alcaniffba. 
* Ubhatcbhaga. See Dialogues ii, 70 note. 

--- PAGE 382 ---
XXIII.—Advantages of Developing Understanding 875 
under the heads of Virtue, Concentration and Understanding 
in the stanza: 
The man discreet, on virtue planted firm. 
In intellect and intuition trained; 
The brother ardent and discriminant: 
'Tis he may from this tangle disembroil. 
Thus is ended the twenty-third chapter called the exposi¬ 
tion of the advantages of developing understanding in the 
Path of Purity, composed for the purpose of gladdening good 
folk. 

--- PAGE 383 ---
[711] CONCLUSION 
Putting aside the stanza 
The man discreet, on virtue pla nted Jinn, 
In intellect and intuition trained ; 
The brother ardent and discriminant: 
*Tie he may from this tangle disembroil, 
we have said above the following: 
In setting forth, according to the truth, 
The meaning of the stanza of the Sage, 
Which treats of virtue and such other things, 
I will expound the Path of Purity, 
Which rests on the strict rules of the devout 
Dwellers at the Great Minster, and contains 
Purest decisions, gladdening even those 
Who never may attain to purity 
For all their striving, though they seek it here, 
Not knowing aright the Path of Purity, 
'Which holds all virtue, and is straight and safe, 
Though they to ordination have attained, 
Hard to attain in the Great Conqueror’s realm. 
Devout men, whose desire is purity, 
Attend ye to the things that I relate.1 
—That Path of Purity (promised therein) has been declared. 
In it, 
The sense of virtue with its different kinds 
And other things has been decided as 
Declared in the five Nikayas after 
The method of commentaries. 
Since that decision takes in all that sense 
And generally is made clear of faults 
1 Above, p. 2. 
876 

--- PAGE 384 ---
Conclusion 877 
That come of conflict, students who are pure 
In understanding, who seek purity 
Should reverence the Path of Purity. 
It was composed by me according to 
The wishes of Bhadanta Sahghapala, 
That wise descendant of the famous elders, 
Dwellers at the Great Minster, chief of those 
Who held the doctrine of analysis— 
A monk who led a pure and simple life, 
Devoted to strict rules of discipline, 
[712] Whose mind was graced by qualities such as 
Forbearance, gentleness and amity. 
May all beings attain to happiness 
By virtue of the merit11 have gained, 
Who pray that the good Law may long abide. 
This Path of Purity is safely ended 
In eight and fifty texts of recitations. 
E’en so may all good wishes of the world 
Be without hindrance speedily fulfilled. 
The Path of Purity was made by the elder, in whom are 
grouped together the immaculate and gentle virtues of precept 
and conduct, adorned by pure and exalted faith, under¬ 
standing and energy, who is capable of diving into the depths 
of his own and other doctrines, endowed with keen intellect, 
fulfilled with the ability of unhindered knowledge in the 
Teacher’s religion,—the which is divided into three Pi takas, 
together with the commentaries,—a great grammarian, gifted 
with sweetness of speech, full of the virtues of sweetness, 
nobleness, issuing from the bliss born of the perfection of 
syntax, an unerring speaker equal to every occasion, most 
excellent of speakers, a great poet, who is the ornament of 
the lineage of elders resident at the Great Minster who are 
lamps in the lineage of the elders of unhindered intelligence 
in the Law' which surpassing human law is adorned with such 
virtues as the sixfold super-knowledge and the different kinds 
of analytical knowledge, whose wisdom is very extensive and 
1 Read punna0 for patina0. 

--- PAGE 385 ---
878 The Path of Purity 
pure, who bears the name Btiddhaghoea given him by the 
venerable ones, and who ought to be called the meek and 
painstaking.1 
While Buddha, the great name of the great Sage, 
Pure-minded world-chief, in the world abides, 
So long may this book live and show the way 
Of Virtue’s2 purity to noble sons 
Who seek for liberation from the world. 
[713] Whatever merit has been gained by this, 
And whatsoever other deeds are done: 
By these, the merit and the deeds may I 
In my next birth in Tavatimsa heaven 
Delight in virtuous behaviour, 
Not cleaving to the five delights of sense, 
But gaining the first fruit. In my last birth 
May I behold the Sage-bull Metteyya, 
The foremost person of the world, the Lord, 
Whose joy is in the good of all beings, 
Hear him, the wise one, preach the holy Law, 
Attain the highest fruit and beautify 
The dispensation of the Conqueror. 
The Path of Purity is ended.3 
Thus this discourse, the Path of Purity, 
Has been composed good folk to edify4 * 
In eight and fifty recitation-texts. 
The Book of the Path of Purity is ended.6 
1 Beading Mudantakhedal-oc. The whole of this paragraph differs 
but slightly from the corresponding paragraph of AtthasAUnl (see 
Expositor, 541-2). The translation here is more literal and gram¬ 
matical. 
3 Atthasalini reads panna. Otherwise the stanza is the samo as the 
one here. 
* So end the Singhalese recensions with these verses. 
4 Read °pamojjatthdya. 
8 So end the Burmese recensions with this verse, omitting the lines 
from “Whatever merit ...” (1. 9) to the line marked 3. 

--- PAGE 386 ---
EPILOGUE 
The first English, the first European, translation of the early 
mediaeval treatise, the Visuddhi-Magga, composed, it is 
believed, by a monk of Indian birth, resident in Ceylon, for 
Ceylon monks, is here completed, and herewith made acces¬ 
sible to the world as never heretofore. My esteemed colleague 
the translator has asked me to write, in this third and last 
volume, a few words, and, in so doing, to defend him from 
possible charges of 8 inconsistency ’ in one or two changed 
renderings, notably in this section. 
I am more concerned to make use of this opportunity by 
expressing, on behalf of the Pali Text Society and, indeed, of 
all readers, present and to come, our high appreciation of 
the way in which the translator has with patient, ‘ consistent,’ 
and indomitable persistence carried to a finish—0 si sic 
omnes 1—an arduous, often tedious, often difficult task, to do 
which we had sought and found no man. Requests for a 
translation and material means were not lacking, notably a 
donation thirteen years ago from the “Anagarika” H. 
Dharmapala of 1,000 rupees. It was a competent translator 
who had yet to be found. 
Now that we, at last successful, have found him and have 
exploited his generous gifts of time, energy, and talents—now 
that we read the very readable flow of his renderings of thiB 
highly scholastic, very monastic work—we tend to graze over 
—leviler transire ac tantummodo 'per string ere (thank you, 
Cicero 1)—the many difficulties in it. Buddhaghosa is not 
always complicated and laboured in style; now and then he is 
not wordy and windy; sometimes within his limited horizons 
he is not aggravating. And his peculiar idiom, whether it 
was that of his world and his day, or whether it is largely 
individual, is, when we come to be familiar with it in the 
879 

--- PAGE 387 ---
880 The Path of Purity 
original, methodical and to be mastered. None tbe less, and 
childlike as is at times bis mental procedure, his writing is 
often crabbed and even obscure. There are passages in his 
last bunch of chapters which, in their elliptical diction, are 
tiresome to follow and to make intelligible. Whether this be 
entirely his fault and his misfortune, or it be due in part to 
faulty recensions—herein my own edition needs revisions 
here and there, for which the translator has made me his debtor 
in many a footnote—I am not sure. 
In any case, to reproduce such a work as has here been 
reproduced is an achievement of considerable note. Not only 
have we, in the original, a writer living in an adopted country, 
and thus speaking two tongues, writing in a literary diction 
(Pali), which may or may not by that date have been the 
current idiom of his monastic world, but we have also, at the 
other end, a translator turning that idiom into another literary 
diction (English), which is not his own vernacular, however 
fluently it may have come to be used in his own country. 
And all has been accomplished as a gift to his readers. The 
only portion of it by which he sought and won recognition of 
a kind was when, as the climax of his studies at Oxford, he 
presented certain of the latter chapters as candidate for a 
higher degree. The Pali Text Society has, in its fifty years 
of issues, elicited, and profited by, a great deal of this scholar- 
generosity. And in the words of the Pitakan saintly pass- 
list we may say: “ So the man Pe Maung Tin became also of 
the Worthy Ones.” Great verily is his merit. 
Here is not the place to dwell in detail on the Visuddhi- 
Magga, or on this part of it. I have said this and that else¬ 
where, and hope yet to say more. The chief usefulness of 
this volume will be to show readers who wish to know their 
Buddhism, not asan all-foreground picture, but as an historical 
growth, how far that religion had, in Hinayana (or Theravada), 
wandered from the teaching and the Indian religious atmo¬ 
sphere of its first gospel. One thing—a very vital thing—has 
remained with it in this work, and that is the nature and life 
of “the man” viewed as essentially growing and “ growable,” 
■so much so, that here, as never so earnestly before, we see it 

--- PAGE 388 ---
881 Epilogue 
called a plant, a vital “ series,” possessing an (undefined) 
continuity1 * till final fruition be won. Here was echo of the 
first teaching: the “Thus art thou becoming,” by which, 
under the great figure of the Way, Sakya sought to expand and 
popularize the best religious Indian teaching of its day. 
On the other hand, how much has not been lost! Lost is 
the positive conception of a “Most,” in whom that “ becoming- 
More ” would in a way yet inconceivable culminate. Lost was 
the vision of a Way leading by beneficent opportunities of rebirth 
in this and that world; the “ becoming more ” was now a con¬ 
tracted bridge, a short-cut to a Negation. Lost, too, was the 
Man who as wayfarer (gamako) alone gave great value and 
reality to the Way: man “thus-gone,” man “well-gone.”* 
Pushing past the qualified dissent of the Suttas from the 
Brahmanic ‘ ‘Self,*5 past the guarded scepticism as to the human 
self of Abhidhamma and the Milinda Questions, Buddhaghosa 
and his day flaunt with dogged insistence a man who is body 
and mind, but no valuer, who judges it is he who is thus valuing 
himself; “ no doer, no experiencer.”3 And in his last chapters, 
especially XIX. to XXI., he, in iteration on “ impermanence, 
ill, not-self,” is almost a rosary-chatterer; he reminds us of 
our modern abomination of repeated advertisement. 
As to those inconsistencies in rendering, I willingly shoulder 
responsibility for any occurring in this volume. Where there 
is an interval of time, the presence of an inconsistency in 
a rendering as compared with a former rendering may show’ 
that greater consistency with our true nature, which is growth 
or becoming. The translator has expressed an honourable 
scrupulousness in the matter, suitable in the young. If, to 
name one instance only, the word an-atta which he was 
rendering “ selfless ” has at my request been altered to “ not- 
self,” this is because we have come to see, and are anxious to 
show, that the term has in Buddhism no ethical implications. 
A study of Buddhaghosa’s nihilistic point of view leaves no 
1 Chapter XVII, pp. 664-0. 
8 Tatbigato, Sugato. Cf. p. 609. It is difficult to imagine a worse 
libel on the Man of the Way than the verses on this page (text 613). 
3 Cf. p. 578, etc. 

--- PAGE 389 ---
882 The Path of Purity 
doubt about that. We in our culture have saddled the word 
“self” with egoistic implications; hence, since the word 
“ selfless ” means, for us, “ disinterested,” “ unselfish,” it is 
truer to both Indian and Buddhist traditions not to use it for 
anatta. Anatta meant that there was no “man,*’ no self, 
using body and mind. Atta, the Sakyamuni said, is not 
body, is not mind. But some propagandist Buddhism of today 
is identifying anatta with abstinence from egoism; hence the 
special need there is to observe scrupulous accuracy, an im¬ 
proved accuracy in the matter, no matter if there be incon¬ 
sistency, no matter if there be substitution of a less elegant, 
if more forceful, because more accurate term. If in such 
ways there will have been slight inconsistencies, let us, in 
place of blame, rather rejoice over the growth in right inter¬ 
pretation which has been going on, and absolve our translator 
(traduttore) from that want of grasp which has played the 
traitor (traditore) with many a word in this field of the history 
of ideas.1 
0. A. F. RHYS DAVIDS. 
1 I have not apologized for sankhdrd as in more than one rendering, 
for our nomenclature here is still fluid, and no vital principle is in¬ 
volved. Meaning literally ‘preparings,’ the term came to be stuffed 
with a heterogeneous content. 

--- PAGE 390 ---
INDEX 
I.—MAIN WORDS AND SUBJECTS 
Abode, 105,147 
Abuse, ten terms of, 34 
Abusing, 33 
Acacia, 237 
Accepted, 134 
Access {upacdru)115 
Accusing, 34 
Action, causes of immoral, 840 
Activities (sarlkhard), 3, 623, 866; 
aggregate of mental, 540 
Adaptation (anuloma), 159, 160, 
810 /., 855 
Adoption, 160, 822, 825 /. 
Adverting (avajjana), 25 
Afterfood, 68 
Afterfood-refuser, 66, 68, 81, 93 
Aggregates, clinging [updddna- 
kkhandha), 563 
Aggregates, five, 333,505-67; con¬ 
templation of the five, 736 
Alms, 37, 67 
Almsman, 66, 74, 93 
Alms-roamer, 67 
Aloofness (viveka), 162 
Analyses, four (palisambhida), 6, 
5li /., 624; five ways of purify¬ 
ing, 513 
Analysts, 622 
Ancients {Parana), 24, 175, 241, 
308,309,353/400,622,718,726, 
777, 786, 788, 795, 807, 819, 847 
Annihilation, 622, 685, 705, 717, 
770, 853 
Any-bed, 68 
Any-bcdder, 66, 68, 89, 93 
Apperception (jarana), 25, 26 
Application, 832 
Ardent, 4, 6 
Arisen, 846 
Army, 716 
Arrival (ugamana), 818 
Ascetic, 92 
Assurance, 706 
Atom (anu), 604, 610, 651 
Attention, 153, 541, 546; pro¬ 
cedure of, 319; skill in, 277 
Authorities, great, 622 
Awareness, 187 
Backbiting, 34 
Beautification, 37 
Beauty, supreme, 373 
Becoming, 667, 686 
Begging, accessible to, 257, 258 
Behaviour, good, 21, 22 
Being (a concept), 403 
Being (satJa), 710 
Bias, 840 
Bile, 298, 414 
Birth, 591, 692 
Birth of a being, 593 
Blame, dread of, 541, 543; fear¬ 
lessness of, 540 
Blaming, 34 
Blessed One, 227, 241 
Bliss, 167, 771, 775 
Blood, 299, 415 
Bo tree (bodhi), 215, 396, 307, 467 
Body, 515, 518, 569; abstinence 
from misconduct of, 541, 547; 
constituent of, 277; mindfulness 
os to the, 132; nature of the, 
223; recitation of the thirty-two 
parts of the, 277 / 
Body-group, 721 
Body-mindfulness, 275 
“ Body-sustainers,” 290 
Bones, 290, 410 
Book, 111 
Bowels, 413 
Bowl-ascetic, 80 
Bowl-food, 67 
Bowl-fooder, 66, 68, 79, 93 
Brahmins, 38 
Brain, 297, 414 
Breathings, connection of, 321; 
counting one’s, 320; two kinds 
of, 312 
Burning-grounder, 66, 68, 87, 93 
Cankers (atava), 839 
Captain of the Law, 241,407, 445, 
464, 518, 817 
883 

--- PAGE 391 ---
884 Index 
Carnalities (dwrisa), 794 
Casting out, 34 
Cause, absence, 646; association, 
644; co-existent, 639; controll¬ 
ing faculty, 643; dependent, 
639; dissociation, 644; dominant 
influence, 637; immediate, 638; 
jhana, 644; Karma, 642; non¬ 
absence, 646; non-presence, 646; 
object, 637; Path, 644; Post- 
existent, 642; Pre-existent, 641; 
Presence, 645; reciprocal, 639; 
repetition, 642; result, 643; 
root-condition, 635; sufficing 
condition, 640; sustenance, 643; 
thrice-knit, 697 
Causes, 24, 635 
Cessation (nirodha), 611 
Characteristics, 506; attribution of 
the three, 748 
Chariot, 716 
Charm, personal, 37 
Child-birth, pains of, 593 
" Clan-becomer,” 160 
Clingings (upddana), 839 
Cold, 36 
Comfort, 39 
Commentary, gg, 142, 198, 207, 
220. 260, 322, 327, 363, 384, 
434, 444, 475, 500-2, 522, 523 
Complexes 761,780,786,795/., 855 
Comprehension [pariUM), 732,851 
'Concentration (eam&dhi), 541,543; 
advantages of,429; conducive to, 
256; definition of, 98; kinds of, 
98,99; outline of developing, 105 
Condition (helu), 2 
Conditions (hkadhammd), worldly, 
838; (paccayd), 635, 647/. 
Conduct, kinds of, 118; negative 
and positive rules of, 13 
Confidences, four, 2, 624 
Conscientiousness, 541, 543 
Consciousness, 651, 743; aggre¬ 
gate of, 527; different from per¬ 
ception and understanding, 506; 
risings of immoral, 840; variety 
of, 527/.; conditioned, 531 /. 
Contact, 541, 678 
Control (tori), 866 
Corruptions (kUet&), 838 
Craving, 600, 681 
Creator, 721 
Danger, 40 
Death, 596; two kinds of, 264; 
king of, 787, 802; recalling, 
265 
Decad of eyo, etc., 662 
Decades, 10, 749 
Decease, 537 
Deliverance, 802 
Desire (chanda), 541, 546; (nt- 
kanti), 771, 770 
Despair, 598 
Destiny, evil, 839 
Device, air, 198; blue-green, 198; 
oarth, 144; faults of, 144, 190; 
heat* 197; light* 200; movable, 
144; red, 199; separated space, 
201; stationary, 144; virtues of, 
210 /.; water, 196; white, 200; 
yellow', 199; ten kinds of, 129 
Disciple, chief, 69 
Discourse, Ariyan lineage, 759, 
760; purity, 759 
Discreet, 4, 5 
Discriminant, 4, 5 
Disease, 41 
Dispassion (virtiga), 337 
Dispraise, 34- 
Dissolution, three kinds of, 480; 
three limits of, 480 
Distaste (virdga), 183 
Distraction (uddhacca■), 549, 550 
Doctrine, ascetic, 92; obstructive, 
248 
Doer, 726 /. 
Doubt, kinds of, 722 
Driver of men to be tamed, 227,238 
Dullness (moAa), 549; absence of, 
541,544 
Duration, conscious (cittatfhiti), 
553 
Duties, Khandhaka, 14 
Dwelling, 39; forest, 310; seven 
kinds of, 310 
Ear, 515, 518, 568 
Eating, 124; moderate, 39 
Ecstasy (appana), 160; skill in, 149 
Effort, 833; supreme, 3 
Elders, ancient, 115 
Elementality, 425 
Elements, 711; eighteen, 573; 
four, 403; space, 515, 521; 
thirty-five, 575; three, 2 
Emergence, 808/., 836, 872 
Emotion, eight object* of, 156 
Emptiness, four-pointed, 799 
“ Empty house,” 775 
Enemy, seven wishes of an, 344 

--- PAGE 392 ---
Index 885 
Energy, 541, 542 
Enfranchizing, 256 
Enlightened, 227, 240; perfectly, 
227, 232 
Enlightenment, thirty-seven ac¬ 
cessories of, 832 
Envy, 552 
Equanimity, 541, 547, 776 
Essentials, great, 317 
Etemalism, 681, 685, 705, 717, 
727, 770, 853 
Evenmindedness, 364 
Exaltation, unique, 180 
Excrement, 297, 414 
Existence, classes of men recalling 
previous, 476; recollection of 
previous, 476 
Experience^ 726 /. 
External, 499 
Extremism, 717 
Eye, 515, 568 
Faotor, eliminated, 194 
Faculties, controlling, 22, 24, 581; 
nine modes of sharpening, 740; 
vitality-controlling, 515, 519 
Faith, 541, 543 
Family, 107 
Fat, 300, 416 
Faultlessness, 39 
Fawning, 20, 32 
Feeling, 680; aggregate of, 537; 
classes of, 558; old and new, 38; 
sexual, 59, 60 
Femininity, 515, 519 
Fetters, 838 
Field of a Buddha, 481 
Fire, divisions of, 418 
“ Fire of the belly,” 297 
Fist, 716 
FleBh, 289, 410 
Flood, 839 
Flower, Trumpot, 237 
Fluid, Bynovial, 418 
Food, 149; material, 395; Bolid, 
516, 523 
Footstep, divisions of, 752 
Forest, 68, 310; Himalayan, 42 
Forester, 66, 68, 81, 93 
Form (rupa), 568,709 
Friend, good, 114 
Gadflies, 36 
Gains, 109 
Gems, Three, 319 
Genesis, causal, 601 
Gifts, worthy of, 252, 256 
Giving and sharing, delighting in, 
257, 259 
Giving away, delighting in, 257, 
258 
Greed, 549; absence of, 541, 544 
Grief, 597 
Habits (van), five, 177 
Hairs, 285,408,409 
Hands, clean of, 257, 238 
Happening, causal, 620 
Hate, 552; absence of, 541, 544 
Hearing, deva, 472 
Heart, 293, 412 
Heart-basis, 515, 520 
Heat, 36 
Heaven, 495 
Hell, 495 
Heresies, sixty-two, 729 
Hindrances, 101, 103, 168, 839 
Hint, 32 
House, 716 
HouBe-to-bouse-goer, 66,67,76, 93 
Hunger, 38 
Hungering, 35 
Hungering to add gain to gain, 
28, 34 
Ignorance, 625 
HI, 506, 510,/. 592, 634; cessation 
of, 601; course leading to the 
cessation of, 605; kindB of, 610; 
origin of, 600; and see Truths 
Ill-health, 111 
Illumination, 771-2 
Immeasurabics (appamaiind), 369, 
370 
Impediments, 105; minor, 143 
Impermanen-ce, -t, 506, 566 /., 
609 /., 729, 732, 736 /., 740, 
748/., 753, 755/., 758/., 761/., 
770, 782, 790, 806, 810, 818 /., 
831, 839, 841,852/. 
Indifference, 184, 193, 771, 775 
Individuality (attabhava), 579; 
theory of, 192, 684 
Infection (paramdaa), 839 
Insight, defilements of, 330; dry, 
864; gTeat, 762, 853 
Insight-corrupters, 731, 771 
Insinuation, 27, 19, 32, 35 
Intact, 256 
Intelligent, praised by the, 256 

--- PAGE 393 ---
886 Index 
Intestines, 295, 413 
Intimation, body, 515,520; speech, 
515,521 
Intoxication, 37 
Intuition (ubftiiliiu), 101 
Invisible, 452 
Islanders, North, 264 
Karma, see Index III. 
Kidneys, 293, 411 
Kin,110 
Knots, 839 
Knowledge, 771, 774; adaptive, 
819, 825; adoptive, 824; eight 
kinds of, 779; sixteen kinds, 866; 
retrospective, 16, 64; threefold 
(ttvijid), 5, 6, 7; tree of, 237, 
241, 345, 478; worldly, 432 
Knowledge encompassing others’ 
thought, 474 
Knowledge of analysis, 780, 796; 
of breaking-up, 780, 782; of 
desire for release, 780, 795; of 
indifference to complexes, 780, 
806; of repulsion, 780, 795; of 
rise and fall, 490,779,780; of the 
presence of feaT, 780, 788; of 
tribulation, 780, 790 
Lamentation, 597 
Law, causal, 615; good, 61 
Law-abiding, 252, 253 
Leading up to, 246, 250 
Liberality, free in, 258 
Life, 541, 542; weakness of, 271; 
wheel of, 695 / 
Life-moment, 273 
Life-term, briefness of, 272; por¬ 
tions of, 750 
Livelihood, abstinence from wrong, 
541, 547; purity of, 26, 35 
Liver, 294, 412 
Lord, 651 
Love, development of, 340 
Lungs, 295,413 
Lute, 716 
Man, 4,5,403; wicked, 60 
Man on earth, appearance of, 485 
Marrow, 293,411 
Masculinity, 516, 519 
Mastery, positions of, 201 
Matter, aggregate of, 515; buoy¬ 
ancy of, 515, 521; eontempla- j 
tion of, 741; continuity, 515, | 
522; decay of, 515, 523; imper¬ 
manence of, 515, 523; integra- { 
tion of, 515, 522; four kinds of, 
556; natural, 757; plasticity of, 
515, 521; wieldiness of, 515, 521 
Meanness, 552, 83S 
Medicine, 40, 41 
Meditation, image of, 327; fivefold 
series in, 319 
t Men, four pairs of, 252-3 
i Mental factors, buoyancy of, 541, 
i 545; fitness of, 541,545; pliancy 
of, 541, 545; rectitude of, 541, 
! 546; repose of, 541, 544: wieldi- 
I ness of, 541, 546 
I Merit, world’s peerless field of, 252, 
255; preparation for, 667 
i Mesentery, 295 
Metamorphoses, 424 
Mind, buoyancy of, 541, 545; fit¬ 
ness of, 541,545; pliancy of, 541, 
545; rectitude of, 541, 546; re¬ 
pose of, 541, 544; wieldiness of, 
541, 545 
Mind-cognition, inoperative ele¬ 
ment of, 25; resultant element 
of, 25 
Mind-clement, inoperative, 25; re¬ 
sultant, 25 
Mindfulness,187,541,543; applica¬ 
tion of, 3, 23; death, 265; re¬ 
spiration, 305 
Miracle, twin, 177, 453, 456 
Misbehaviour, 20-2 
! Misery, 597 
Momentary discernment, 769 
Monastery endowed with five 
qualities, 142; faults of, 138 
, Moon, 4&4 
! Morality, 5 
Mosquitoes, 36 
Muons, 417 
Nails, 287, 409 
Name, 708; fourfold, 241 
Namc-and-form, 670, 719 / 
Never-returning, 7, 67 
Nihilists, 727 
No-aotion, 607, 622, 706, 770 
No-cause, 706 
No-effort, principle of, 770 
Non-matter, contemplation of, 
747; sevenfold attention to, 758 
Non-occupation, 705 
Nose, 515, 518, 568 
Not-self, 506, 566 /, 705, 716, 
718, 729, 733 /, 737, 739, 
749/., 753/, 755 /, 758/, 761/, 

--- PAGE 394 ---
Index 887 
770, 782, 790.. 806, 810, 818 
831, 839, 841, 852 /. 
Nurture, 20, 32 
A 
Object, visible, 515,519 
Objective organa, 1 
Oblations, worthy of, 252, 254 
Odour, 515, 519, 568 
Offence, dukkata, 27, 139; picit- 
tiya, 27; par&jika, 27; p&tide- 
saniya, 27; SanghMisesa," 27; 
thullaccaya, 27 
Offerings, worthy of, 252-3 
Old-age, 595 
Once-returning, 7, 57 
One-Bcssion, 67 
One-scssioner, 66, 67,78, 93 
Open-spacer, 66, 68, 86, 93 
Pangs, 38 
Parts, private, 36 
Path, 3, 506, 818; eightfold false, 
828; kinds of, 611; ingroups, 613 
Path-knowledge, first, 824; second, 
828; third, 830; fourth, 831 
Peerless, 227, 238 
Perception, 129; aggregate of, 539; 
different from understanding 
and consciousness, 506 
Perfections, 347 
Perplexity, 553 
•Person, 148, 403, 559, 717; ariya, 
806 
Personages, right, 252-3 
Personal, 179, 404, 499 
Phenomenal, 861 /. 
Phlegm, 298, 415 
Pity, 541,547; development of, 316 
Plane, 844 
Play, 37 
Pleura, 294, 412 
Postures, 30-1,122,149 
Powder, 421 
Powers, ten, 514; psychic (iddhi), 
113; ten kindB of psychio, 438; 
four bases, eight stepB, sixteen 
roots of psychic, 446-7; base of 
supernormal (iddhi), 833 
Practice, ascetic, 93, 97; custom¬ 
ary, 19 
Praise, 32 
Preamble, 159 
Precepts, 239; fundamental, 14; 
major and minor, 14; special¬ 
ized, 13; of purity, 52-3, 55 
Present (time), threefold, 499 
: Presentation, 771, 775 
j Primaries, 407, 670 
I Proficient in knowledge and con¬ 
duct, 227,233 
Profundity, fourfold, 624, 703 
j Progress, 101 
I Pun, 357 
| Purity, 2; path of, 2,3,5,8 
! Pus, 299, 415 
: Qualities, material, 395, 709; 
twenty-four derived material, 
515; five kinds of material, 526; 
tetrads of material, 525; triplets 
of material, 525 
Rags, 70 
Rapture (ptti), 166, 771, 774 
Ready to act, 436 
Reality (yatiia bhuta), 717 
Realization, 856 
y Rebirth-consciousness, 655; con¬ 
tinuity in, 665, 705 
Recollection, 129; Buddha, 227; 
deva, 259; dhamma, 246; liber- 
! ality, 257; morality, 256; order, 
252; peace, 337 
I Refuges, 239 
Refuse-rag, 67 
i Refuse-ragman, 66-7, 70, 93; three 
i grades of, 72 
1 Regents, four, 237, 259,483 
I Registration, 537 
: Rejection (removal), 57, 852; 
partial, 0 
' Relatedness of this to that, 617 
j Removal, 838 
Renunciation of seven Buddhas, 
44 
Repose, 771, 774 
Reptiles, 36 
Requisites, 29, 31, 35, 40-1 
Resemblances, illusory, 423 
Resolve, 541,546, 771,775 
Resort, lawful and unlawful, 21-3 
Respiration, mindfulness as to, 132 
Restraint, 9, 20; Patimokkha, 20, 
22,24, 42-3 
Reversals, 839 
Reviling, 34 
Ridiculing, 34 
Righteous, 252-3 
i Rise and fall, 765 
Robe, 36 
Root-condition, 635/. 
, Round of three, 700 

--- PAGE 395 ---
888 Index 
Sabbath, 262 
Saint, 227 
Saliva, 301,417 
Salutation, worthy of reverential, 
252, 256 
Sanctity, 24-5, 57 
Scripture, 246 
Search, 34; earnest, 35; full, 35 
Seasons, 149, 755 
Seeing, 124 
Seeking, 35 
Seen, thoroughly, 246, 249 
Self, 588, 683/., 691, 696, 701 
Selfless, 506; and see Not-self 
Self-referring, 179 
SenBe, sixfold, 675 
Sense-desire, 162 
Sense-organ, 12, 568-0 
Serene, 436 
Serum, 417 
Shape, visible, 716 
Sign, 32 
Similes, chapter of, 514 
Sinews, 289, 410 
Sitting-man, 66, 68, 90, 93 
Skeleton, 206, 219 
Skin, 288,410 
Slander, oruahing, 19, 28, 33-5 
Sloth-and-torpor, 550 
Snot, 302 
Sorrow, 596 
Soul (jita), 574, 577,663 
Sound, 515, 519, 56S 
Specification, 129 
Speech, abstinenco from miscon¬ 
duct of, 541, 547; binding, 32; 
encircling, 32; pleasant, 32; 
winding, 33 
Sphere of infinite consciousness, 
382; of infinite space, 376; of 
neither perception nor non-per¬ 
ception, 3S6; of nothingness, 384 
Spleen, 294, 412 
Spokes of twenty modes, 698 
Sport, 37 
States, ascetic, 92; divine, 129, 
340; formless, 129; “or what¬ 
ever,” 185, 564 
States leading to the arising of the 
wisdom factors of concentra¬ 
tion, equanimity, tranquillity, 
156; and of investigation into 
the doctrine, 153 
Status, causal, 617 
Stinginess, taint of, 257-8 
“ Stinking creepers,” 290 
Stomach, 296, 414 
Stream-winning, 5,7,57 
Strength, 2, 864 
Sub-consciousness, 25-6 
Subject of meditation, 40, 105, 
113-4, 118, 129; skill in re¬ 
ceiving, 277 
Subjective, 1,179 
| Such, nature of being, 70C 
i SuchnesB, 247 
I Suitable things for persons of con¬ 
duct of various kinds, 126-7 
Sun, 484 
Suns, sutta of the seven, 4S2 
Superknowledge (abhiftfla), six¬ 
fold, 6, 241 
Supple, 435 
Sustenance (uhfira), 395; (thili), 37 
Sweat, 300, 416 
! Sympathy, 363, 541, 547 
i Synovium, 302 
System, fourfold and fivefold, 
| 99,100 
Taints, 840 
Talk, 148; bean-curry, 20, 32; 
boastful, 19, 27, 31, 35; flatter- 
! ing, 31; initial, 31; repeated, 31; 
■ round-about, 30-1, 33 
i Tangle, 1, 4 
! Taste, 515, 519, 569 
' Teacher, 239; of devas and men, 
I 227; of old, 579 
Teaching, kinds of, 623 
Tears, 300, 416 
Teeth, 287, 409 
Tempter, 73, 90 
“ There-middleness,” 547 
Thing, bloody, 206, 219; cut and 
dismembered, 206, 218; dis¬ 
coloured, 205, 217; dismem¬ 
bered, 205, 218; festering, 205, 
218; fissured, 205, 218; foul, 29, 
205; mangled, 205,218; swollen, 
205, 211/. 
Things, nature of, 616 
Thought, applied and sustained, 
164, 541-2 
Three-rober, 66-7, 73, 93 
Thrill, 172 
Time, not subject to, 246, 249 
Tongue, 515, 518, 569 
Town, 716 
Training, threefold, 5, 7 
i Trance, preliminary duties of 
entering upon, 868* 

--- PAGE 396 ---
Index 889 
Tranquil path, 792 
Tranquillizing, 179 
Transcending, 130 
Transmigration (atbuanka), 701 
Tree, 716; coral, 237; silk cotton, 
237; wish-yielding, 237 
Tree-root, 68 
Treo-rootman, 66, 68, 84, 93 
Trickery, 19, 27-31, 35 
Truth, 589 
Truths, four noble, 240, 585 /.; 
kinds of, 613 
Unadulterated, 307 
Unblemished, 256 
Unbroken, 256 
Unconscientiousness, 549 
Understanding, 505; advantages of 
developing, 859; “body” of, 
514; different from perception 
and consciousness, 506; kinds 
of, 508; “ plane " of, 614, 615; 
“root” of, 514 
Uninfected, 256 
Unspotted, 266 
Uplift, 771, 775 
Upright, 252-3 
Urine, 303, 418 
Usage, worldly, 665 
Views, wrong, 549, 550 
Village-resort, 148 
Virtue (ilia), 9, 10; adept, 17; 
broken, 58-9; advantages of, 11; 
depravity of, 60, 64; disin¬ 
terested, 15; doubtful, 17; ful¬ 
filment of, 64; impure, 17; in¬ 
ferior, 16; interested, 14; in¬ 
violable, 15; kinds of, 12/., 56; 
liberating, 60; middling, 16; 
misconstrued, 17; natural, 18; 
not misconstrued, 60; praised 
by the wise, 60; probationary, 
17; pure, 17; riddled, 58-9; 
spotted, 58-9; streaked, 58-9; 
superior, 10; tranquillized, 17; 
transcendental, 15; unbroken, 
60; unriddled, 60; unspotted, 
60; unstreaked, 60; violable, 
15; worldly, 15 
Virtues (ginwJ), Buddha’s, 227 
Visibility, 10 
Visible, 452 
Void, 428 
Volition, 8, 541-2 
Wayfaring, 110 
Welcoming all, 246. 250 
Welfarer, 227, 234 
Well-practised, 252 
Well-proclaimed, 246 
Wind, 36; divisions of, 419 
Wisdom, preserving, 4; Treo of, 82 
Woe (apaya), state of, 494 
Work, 109, 123 
World, 495; destroyed by fire, 481, 
486; destroyed by wind, 487; 
first inhabitants of, 264 
World-knower, 227, 235 
World-system, 236 
Worm-foul, 206, 219 
Worms, families of, 270 
Worry (kukkucca), 552 
Wrongness, 838 
Yokes, 839 
Zest (pili), 164,541-2 
II.—PROPER NAMES 
AKANITTHA, 454, 657, 772, 874 
AgaMa^ 484, 485 
Aggappasada-Sutta, 238 
Aggimukha, 424, 791 
Aggisikha, 239 
Agni, 35 
Aiiguttara Commentary, 303 
Ailguttara Nikftya, 85, 86, 88 
Angulim&la, 467 
AciravatT, 12 
Ajita, 9 
AtappI, 874 
Attantapa disciples, 233 
Adhicitta-Sutta, 283 
Anangana-Sutta. 437 
Anathapinrlika, householder, 461 
Anuradkapura, 24, 70, 82, 105 
Anuruddha, Elder, 71,453 
Anoja, Queen, 455 
Anotatta, Lake, 453, 483 
Apaitfjaka-Sutta, 455 
Aparagoyana, 237, 238 
67 

--- PAGE 397 ---
890 Index 
Apalala, Naga-King, 239 
Abhaya, Elder, 42, 304 
Abhayagiri Scholar*, 171 
Abhinfi eyya-Niddesa, 735 
Abhidhamraa, 82, 369, 453, 511, 
555, 575, 632, 805, 851 
Abhidhamma Commentary, 654 
Ambakhfidaka-Mahatissa, Elder, 
49,53 
A mbattha-Sutta, 233 
Ambattha-Sntfca, 233 
Ambatfcha, Young Brahmin, 239 
A vita * 874 
Avici Hell, 238,453, 454, 495 
Asivisupama-Sutta, 566 
Aaura, 237, 238, 495 
Asaakaijija, 237 
Assagntta, Elder, 115, 498 
Alagadda-Suttanta, 822 
AJara, 351 
Agama, 69 
Aghata pativinaya-Sutta, 345 
Atfitatiyaparitta-Sutta, 4S1 
Ananda, 11, 19, 43, 72, 114, 462, 
513,591,613, 618, 619, 703,706 
Abkasaara, 480, 483, 484, 487 
Abhidhammik&gotta, Elder, 160 
Arav&la, Naga-King, 239 
Alampana, 350 
Ajara-Kajama, 381 
Alavaka, 239 
Tndriya-Vibhaiiga, 190 
IUlaa, rich man, 467 
Isadhara, 237 
Issara, 629 
Ijvara, 569 
Ugga, 268 
Uccav&lika, 773 
Uttarakuru, 18, 237, 238, 453 
XJttarfi, lay sister, 361, 440, 443 
Udana, 441 
Udena, King, 441 * 
Ujxananda, Elder, 92 
Upaii, householder, 513 
Uposatha-Sutta, 262 
Uppalavappa, 845 
Uaaada Hells, 345 
Ussadakitta, 120 
Ekadasa-Nipilta, 262 
Kaccana, 489 
Kaccana-Sutta, 618 
Katakandhakfira, 263 
Katthamukha, 424, 791 
Kannaraundaka Lake, 483 
Kathavatthu, 851 
Kapotakandara Monastery, 440 
Kappa, 237 
Kamboja, 3S3, 385 
KaravTka, 237 
Kalabu, King, 2C4 
Kalyanagfima, 846 
Knssapa, 489, 490 
KSkavalliya, poor man, 467 
Kiyagatisati-Sutta, 279 
KAraliyagiri, 111 
KfiladlgliavSpi Lake, 219 
; Kfiai, 73, 348, 349 
Kutumbiya, 55 
I Kunaja Lake, 483 
j Kumbbakara Village, 106 
Kuraiidaka Cave, 44, 45 
Kulupaka, Elder, 341 
Kutaidanta, 239 
Keei, 239 
Kotapabbata Monastery, 336 
Korandaka Monastery, 107 
I KosaJa, 231 
| 
Kha j j aniy apariy fiy a*Sutto, 566 
Kbantivfidi-Jfltaka, 346 
I Kliandhaka, 117, 215 
Khandhaka paritta-Sutta, 481 
Kbaraloma, Yakkha, 239 
Khapukoptjabntii 440 
Kkujjuttara, lay-sister, 513 
Lake Gaggara , 240 
Gaiiga, 12,107,112 
Canges, 248 
Garuja, 237 
Girikan<Jaka 3fonastery, 106 
Gedha-Sutta, 261 
Gotama, 1,2,43 
Great Minster, 2, 876 
Great Shrine, 166 
Ghosita, householder, 443 
Cand&la Village, 795 
Candapadumasirl, rich man's wife, 
443 
Campanagara, 240 
Canuroya, mighty wrestler, 268 
Citta, householder, 438, 456 
Mt. Cittakuta, 795 
Cittagntta, Elder, 44,197,199 
Mt. Cittala, 199,772,773 
Cittalapabbata Monastery, 140, 
336,353,360 
! Ciragumba, 49, 53 

--- PAGE 398 ---
Index, 891 
Cunda, 429 
Cula-Anatbapii^lika, 453 
C'Q a-Dkammapala Jataka, 348 
Cu a-Pantkakn, 449 
Cu a - Pijjdapatika - Tisso, Elder, 
135, 219 
Cu a-Samudda, Elder, 466 
Cu a-Subhadda, 452 
Cu a-Siva, Elder, 196, 361 
Cu a Sumana, Elder, 773 
Cu odara, 239 
Mt. Cetiya, 24, 69, 223 
Cetij'agiri Monastery, 140 
Ceylon, 435 
Coraka Monastery, 44 
Cbaddanta Lake, 483 
Cbaddanta, Elephant, 349 
Cbampoyya, Cobra-King, 350 
China cloth, 659 
China silk, 127 
Jatila, 268 
Jatilaka, householder, 443 
.Jambu, 54, 237 
Jambudlpa, 196, 231, 237, 238, 
350, 444, 454 
Jlvaka, 449 
Jotika, householder, 268, 443 
Tambapaniji Isle, 42, 359, 455, 
456,466 
Talangara, 455 
Tftiankara, 773 
Talaveli Road, 70 
Tfivatimsa, 237, 238, 259, 453, 
462,483, 740, 878 
Tipitaka-Culanfiga, 461 
Tipitaka-Culftbbaya, Elder, 78, 
112,457 
Tissa, Elder, 55, 336, 489, 490 
Tisea’s mother, 70 
Tiaaadatta, Elder, 467 
Tissa-Mahfivib5xa, 455 
ML T uladh&ra Monastery, 112 
Tuvateka-Sutta, 108 
Tusita, 259 
Telakandarika Story, 32 
Thuparama, 107 
Tberappattaleija-, 178 
Tberambatthala, 178, 435 
Dakkbinagiri Monastery, 140 
Dattabhaya, Elder, 121 
Dasuttara-Suttanta, 822 
Dajhanemi, 268 
Dlgba reciters, 316, 328 
Dlgha-Nikflya, 42,112, 304 
Dlpai'ikara, 234 
, Dokkhasacca-VibbaAga, 592 
! Duaimara, 264 
i Deccan, 569 
Devadatta, 470 
Devaputta, 336 
I Dhajaggaparitta, 481 
Dhaflcaya, rich man, 443 
1 Dbanapala, elephant, 239 
Dhanavaddhaka, 241 
Dhammagutta, 443 
Dhammadayada-Sutta, 50 
Dhammadinna, Elder, 455, 773, 
774 
Dhammap&Ia, 348 
Dh&mmSsoka, 131 
Dhammika, 513 
Dhatukathl, 111 
Dhatuvibbanga-Sutta, 279, 402, 
404 
j Dhumasikkha, 239 
Naga, 237 
Nanda, 850 
Nandakovftda-Sutta, 817 
Nandanavana, 492 
Nandopananda, Ndga-King, 177, 
462 
Naga, 435, 462 
Nagas, King of the, 178, 495, 796 
Nagaeena, 507 
Nagita, 83 
Najaka-Sutta, 108 
NikapennakapadhSnagkara, 773 
. Nikaya, 112, 277 
Nigantba, 591 
i Niddosa, 162, 242 
! Niddesa Method, 240 
I Nip&ta, Fifth, 345 
I Nip&ta, Eighth, 370 
I Nimippabhuti, 268 
Nimm&narati, 259 
! Mt. Nemindhara, 237 
• Paiioaaikkha, Gandhabba, 465 
PatiBambhida, 8, 15, 52, 56, 311, 
313, 317, 322, 331,332,341,356, 
358, 442, 448, 449, 451, 461, 822 
Patisambhida method, 240 
Patthfina, 502, 674, 822, 863 
j Pan'dukambala Rock, 453 
Padeeavihara-Sutta, 618 
' P&ranimmitavasavattI, 259, 561 
I Pas&daniya-Suttanta, 154 
I Paaenadi,72 

--- PAGE 399 ---
892 Index 
Paclnakliftrjdaraji, 106 
Patdiputta, 359,466 
Patall, 237 
Patiraokklia, 9, 19, 20,22, 23, 41, 
42, 50, 336, 708 
Paricob&ttaluL, 237 
Pitaka, 69,112,115 
Pi^lapatika-Tiasa, 336 
Piyaukara’B mother, 443 
Putjija* slave, 443 
Puiwaka, 268 
Punijaka, rich man, 441 
Pumjavallika, 166 
Pubbavideha, 237, 238 
Pure Abode, 874 
Pufcimukha, 424, 791 
Petakopadesa, 163 
Peia, 493, 631, 662, 688 
Pokkharas&ti, 239 
Potthapfida suttanta, 822 
Phaggima, 485 
Phfiruaakavana, 492 
Pliussa, 489 
Phusaadeva, Elder, 263 
Pii uaaamitt.fi, 443 
Bakkula, Elder, 92, 439 
Baladeva, 268 
Bakula, Elder, 121 
BaraijasI, 439 
BalapaJKUte-Sutta, 693 
Birabisara, King of Kosala, 231 
Buddha, 6, 54, 72, 85, 227, 240 
Buddba./idure, 19 
Buddha., supreme, 46,69 
Buddhaghosa, 878 
Buddbarakkhita, Elder, 178 
Bojjhahgakosalla-Sutta, 283 
Benares cloth, 135 
BrahmajSla-Sutta, 35 
Brahman imontanika-Sutta, 456 
Brahmavatl, 504 
Brahma, 2, 54, 347, 369, 696, 715, 
727 
Brahmft assemblies, 430 
Brahma devas, 254 
Brahma mansion, 127 
Brahma tcorld, 42 
Brahma Sahampati, 231 
Brfihmanaputta, 681 
Bhagava, 241 
Bhaddiyo, Venerable, 482 
Bhadanta-SahghapSla, 877 
Bhaddekaratta-Sutta, 500 
Bhayabherava-Sutta, 233 
1 Bhara-Sutta, 566 
BhutapaJa, Venerable, 430 
Bhumasena, 268 
Bhuridatta, King of the Serpents, 
350 
I Makfikarafijiya Monastery, 336 
Majjhima Commentary, 82, 212, 
654 
Majjhima Nikaya, Ill, 233 
Majjhima reciters, 316, 328, 500 
Manuka, d&va, 240 
Mandhafcu, 268 
Malaya, 111, 277 
Mallaka, Elder, 144, 304 
Mahaka, Venerable, 456 
Mahaka-Sutta, 456 
Maha Anula, Elder, 467 
Mah5 Ariy a vamaa-Su tta, 108 
Mahi Kacc&na, 262, 845 
Maha Kappina, 455 
Maha Kaaaapa, 19,77,467,498 
Mahagama, 70 
Mahacetiya, 107 
MahStittha, 196 
Mahatissa, Elder, 24, 166, 221, 
223, 336, 840 
Mahadatta, Elder, 773 
Mahadeva, Elder, 277 
Mahftdhammarakkhita, Elder, 112 
) Mahadhatunidhana, 498 
| Mahan4ga, 773,869 
Mahanima, 233,260-2,829 
Mah&niLma-Sakka, 258 
Mahanama-Sutta, 261 
Mahaniddcaa, 28, 29 
Mahapatapa, 348 
Maha Panthaka, 449 
> Maha Brahma, 454 
Maha MayS,241 
Mahamitta, Elder, 44,45 
Maha Moggallfina, 47, 48, 177, 
440, 454, 461, 668, 817 
Mahfi R&hulovfida-Sutta, 279 
Maha Rohanagutta, Elder, 178,435 
Mah&vihara, 112, 359 
Mahisaiigharakkhita, Elder, 54, 
121 
Mahasatipatthana-Sutta, 279, 402 
Mahasamraata, 268, 486 
MahaBudaasana, 268 
Mahahatthipadupama-Sutta, 279, 
402, 403 
Mabinda, 456 
Mahinda Cave, 128 

--- PAGE 400 ---
Mahl, 12 
Mahodara, 239 
Mfigajidiya, Brahmin, 441 
MiLgadhi, 512 
MSgandiya-Sutta, 122 
MiLtika, 106,143, 360 
Matuposaka-Jataka, 351 
Mara, 84, 263, 435 
Mitta, Elder, 46 
Miasakavana, 492 
Mllhabhava, Elder, 90 
Meghiya-Sutta, 134 
Mencjaka, rich householder, 268, 
443 
MetU-Sutta, 342 
Mettevya, 54, 503, 878 
Mogharijan, 802 
Moraparitta-Sutta, 481 
Yakkha, 237, 275, 348, 423, 424 
Y amaka-Sutta, 566 
Yamuna, 12,248 
Yama, 259 
Yugandhara, 237, 453,466 
Yudhittbila, 268 
Rakkhita, 178 
Ratthapala, 462 
Rataua-Sutta, 481 
Rathakara Lake, 483 
Rathavinlta-Suttanta, 108, 822 
Ra jagaha, 440, 467 
Radha, 357 
Rahu,796 
Rahula, 335, 462 
R&hula-Sutta, 134 
Rfthulovftda-Sutta, 402, 404 
Rev a. Elder, 111 
Rohana, 107, 112 
Lajudayl, 92 
Lokavyuha dcras, 482 
Lohapfisada, 107,113 
Vakkali, Elder, 150 
Vafigisa, Elder, 43 
Vattakataka village, 160 
Vattha-Sutta, 437 
VSsudeva, 268, 569 
Vinataka, 237 
Vinaya, 47, 143 
Vinaya Oommenlary, 82, 312 
Vinava-Pitaka, 53, 82, 622 
VibhaAga,* 14, 162, 163, 165, 168, 
170, 179, 180-2, 189, 193, 341, 
361,363,379,381, 382, 384,386, 
388, 675, 680-1 
Index 893 
I VisAkba, 262, 359, 360, 591, 611, 
628, 872 
, Vissakamma, 452, 454 
| Vejayanta, 268, 462 
Veda, 241,444 
| Veliapphala, 480, 488 
Sakka, 2, 239, 241, 254, 347, 454 
Sankassa Town, 454,466 
Sankicca, Venerable, 439 
Sabkieea, novice, 361 
Sankhapala, cobra-King, 350 
Sabgbarakkhita, 51, 53, 223 
! Saccaka, Niganthd, 239 
Sacca-VibhaOga, 700 
i Sanjiva, 440, 869 
Satthamukha, 425, 791 
Santusita, 241 
Samb5dhokafia-Sutta, 262 
Samyutta, 361 
Samyutta Commentary, 501 
Samyutta Reciters, 316, 500 
Samyutta-Nikaya Commentary, 
| 448 
Sarabhadga, 477 
; Sarabbu, 12 
Sajayatana-Vibliabga, 821 
j Saketa, 452 
Samavatl, lay-sister, 440 
Sariputta, 47,48,92,269, 390,440, 
453, 494 
I Savatthi, 1, 453, 466 
i Sineru, 231, 237, 453, 454, 482, 
483, 485, 487, 888 
Simbali, 237 
Sirima, courtezan, 441 
Sirivaddbaka, 241 
Sirlsa, 237 
Sltibhava-Sutta, 283 
Sllava-jataka, 347 
Slhapatana, Lake, 483 
Sutta, 328,448,500,516, 575, 617, 
622, 674, 872 
Suttanta, 47, 82, 327, 632, 716 
Suttantas, Commentary on, 312 
Sudassana, 237 
Sudaa&a, 557, 874 
SudaesT, 557, 874 
Suddbavasa, 454, 874 
Suddhodana, King, 241 
Sundari, 850 
Supai?ija, 178, 796 
Subrahma, 504 
Subhakiijha, 480, 487, 488 
Sumanadevi, 443 
Suyama, 455 

--- PAGE 401 ---
894 Index 
Suaima Suttanta, 822 
Sficiloma, 239 
Settkiputta, 681 
Sermon, Fire. 42 
Soija, Elder, 150 
Soijdantjla, 239 
SopSka’s query, 130 
Somara doth, 127, 659 
Hankanaka, 773 
Mt. Hatthikuccki, 128 
Hatthikucchi Monastery, 140 
i Haliddavaaana-Sutta, 373 
Hamsapfitana, Lake, 483 
Him&laya, 483, 4S5, 488, 795 
Hinuudi, 237 
III.—PALI WORDS 
Akala, °ika, 249, 250 
Ag&ram, 791 
Ah gam, 67 
Ajanfiato, 797 
Ajjhatta, 179, 722 
Afijitakaiuia, 773 
Atthimkatvfi, 623 
A<Y<jLhattbama, 712 
Anim&j *243 
Atammayata, 821 
Ato, 859 
Atta, 651,800 
Attha, 623, 624 
Atthavaflam, 326 
Atthi, 619 
AddhS, 312 
Adhar&rarn, 579 
Adkifcthati, 465 
Adhitthana, 438 
Adhimoklcha, 330 
Anatthabhava, 598 
Anantara, 99 
Anila, 198 
AnuttSsa, 549 
Anutthunanam, G00 
AnupSd&parmibbana, 16 
An-upidisesa, 604J 
Anusahagata, 837 
Anuasati, 226 
Auuasaha, 550 
Antara parinibbayi, 874 
Antima-vatthu, 492 
Antonijjhanarp, 596 
Apadana, 67 
Abbuda, 562 
Abbhokfisa, 310 
Abhfiva, 761 
AbhiMS, 101 
AbhiftaAkharS, 628 
Ambu, 197 
Ava, 586 
Ara, 227, 231 
Araka, 273 
I A-raha, 227 
Arahfi, 832 
Arahatta, 227, 832 
Arahan, 231 
Araharu, 227 
ArS, 231 
Ari, 227 
Ariyan, 66, 69, 72, 70, 5S7, 825, 
860 
ArupajhSna, 807 
Avattkfina, 766 
AvatthS, 703 
Avarodha, 564 
Avi, 649 
Avikkhepa, 98 
l Avijja, 627 
Asankhara parinibbayi, 874 
Asani vioakkam, 700 
Asambhamo, 549 
Asammosa, 543 
I Asamaappana, 540 
i Aharn, 800 
I Ahctuka, 507 
1 Ahetuka patisandkika, 203 
j Ahosi-kamina, 724 
Akara,420 
Akuli flower, 298 
Acikkhati, 568 
Aoinnakam, 725 
Adlnarn, 739 
Adhana, 98 
Anantariya, 494 
Apo, 196 
Amaaaya, 297 
Avatati, 569 
Ayatana, 569, 629 
Ayuhana, 540, 542 
ArakS, 227 
Aloka, 200 
AsanakSrana, 565 
! Ahavanlya, 254 

--- PAGE 402 ---
Index 895 
Ah5.ro, 305, 567 
Abirati, 395 
Ahara-rasa, 569 
Ahuneyya, 254 
ItthI, 800 
Idappaccayata, 617 
Iddhi, 432 
Inda, 582 
Iriyapathasamasisl, 42 
laitfl, 243 
Ukkhepani, 34 
Uggalio, 112 
Ujjaiigala, 126 
Utu, 422 
Uttar5rai>I, 579 
Ud, 586 
Udakara, 197 
Udayati, 180 
Udisino, 802 
Ud&bariyati, 568 
Udi, 180 
Uditam, 586 
Udeti, 179 
Uddhacca, 172 
Uddharpsota Akaoitthagfiml, 874 
Upa, 683 
Upakattha, 683 
Upattliinam, 330 
Upatthainbhaka, 55G 
Upadiijrjaka pavatta, 782 
Upadhi, 244 
UpaniBsaya, 99 
Upasamhiaritabbaip, 343 
Upapacca parinibbfiyl, 874 
UpSdana, 683, 841 
Upadinna, 299, 423, 524 
Upayasa, 683 
Upekkha, 100, 330, 776 
Uppajjati, 619 
Uppatipatiya, 312 
Uppannani, 586 
Uppida, 617 
Uppfiditarp, 582 
Uohatobbaga, 874 
Usabha, 827 
Us&iha, 531 
EkaggatS, 98 
Ekato, 836 
Ekantarikaya, 280 
EkabijI, 873 
Ekamantani, 739 
Ekagama, 69 
j Ekodi, 180 
: Ekodibhfiva, 180 
Eva, 306 
Ehibbikkbu, 71 
: Okasa, 844 
Oja, 682 
: Odahanarasam, 551 
Obhasa, 200, 330 
Katakaficukata, 552 
Katatfca, 642 
1 Katakate, 100 
! Kanhavattani, 198 
l Kataka, 291 
Kadamba, 237 
; Kanavlra, 210 
Kandara, 310 
Kammatthana, 97 
Karaja-kfiva, 315 
Karamandn, 210 
Karl, 241 
Karma, 61, 742, 748, 844; (kinds 
j of), 724; obstructive, 203 
Kalala, 562, 061 
Kali pa, 853 
Kalira, 291 
Kasambu, 290 
i Kasipa, 244 
1 Kama, 841 j 
J Kfiya, 518, 541, 544, 774, 806, 
839 
Kayagata&ati, 226 
’ Itayasakkhi, 807 
K&rnpa, 836 
KSla, 604 
Kiriya, 642 
Kilesa, 102,162, 658 
Kimsuka, 224, 289 
Kukata, 552 
. Kukkucea, 553 
« Kuntha, 408 
Kutagona, 308 
Koti, 53 
I Kottattblni, 290 
1 Kotokolo, 873 
Kbajjurl, 210 
Kbanatthiti, 553 
Khattiya, 486 
Khandiio, 735 
Kbalu, 68 
Kbarp, 586 
Khirfipaticchakam, 593 
Kbippamsanti, 435 
! Kbetta, 486 

--- PAGE 403 ---
896 
Ganduppadaka, 296 
Gati, 626, 631, 793 
Gandhayati, 568 
Gabbhaaeyyaka, 312 
Gamaka, 609 
Gamana, 244 
Galaati, 357 
Gamata, 617 
Gavuta, 138, 455, 772 
Giriguha, 310 
Guija, 119 
Gokawa, 300 
Gocaraaevanftya, 582 
Gotrabhu, 160, 824 
Goslta, 405 
Ghana, 781 
Cakkhati, 568 
Cando, 484 
Capal&yika, 551 
Calanam, 197 
CJraka, 586 
Citta, 97, 505, 613, 575, 810 
Cittasantapa, 596 
Cittasamutthana, 315 
Cittani, 633 
Cungato, 422 
ChafctI, 241 
Chanda, 313, 484 
C’hal-abhinno, 241 
Janaka, 556 
JanakfimSta, 743 
Janata, 617 
Jataveda, 198 
Jati-upijS, 601 
JIva, 574, 800 
Jlvitaaamaalsl, 42 
Juttha, 582 
Jhana, 161, 173, 179, 183, 190 
(Jive ways of practising), 329 
ftanam, 288,330 
tfSyo, 252, 624 
Thapana, 98 
Th&na, 649, 741 
Thiti, 788 
Takkotaka, 296 
Tatrama jjhattat5, 776 
Tathattha, 849 
Tathatta (tathata), 247 
Index 
Tadangappah 5 n a, 6 
Tanubnuta, 837 
Tabbhfi vabhfi vita, 675 
TasmS, 869 
Tldin, 679 
TadibhUva, 247 
Talahlraka, 296 
Tavatva, 568 
Teja, 197 
Tevijjo, 241 
Dan<jl, 241 
Dadhimuttaip, 302 
Dabba, 409 
Dana, 67 
Dibbavihara, 472 
Dibbaaotadhatu, 472 
Du, 586 
Dukkha, 586, 597, 629, 739 
Dutthacitta, 308 
Dupputto, 586 
Duhetuka, 507 
Deva, 259, 260, 472,490, 017 
DevatS, 226, 260, 617 
\ DesanS, 624 
Doea, 119, 120, 203 
Drava, 407 
Dbannna, 13, 319, 511, 624, 740, 
799, 806, 834 
Dhammattbiti, 230, 729 
Dbltu, 403, 573 
Dhutahga, 69 
Nora, 800 
N avattabbarammana n i, 132 
Nahuta, 237, 423 
Nanappakarato, 98 
Namakaya, 807 
Nab, 444 
Nasika, 321 
Ni, 586 
Nikanti, 330 
Nikaya, 69. 876 
Nikkhamati, 312 
NigguijiJi, 294 
Niccala, 546 
Nidflna, 565 
Nibbacana, 585 
Nibb&na, 2, 3, 12, 54, 57, 65, 331, 
337,338,340,431,509,588,589, 
602,603, 851,861 
1 Nibbapeti, 352 
Nibbayati, 312 
Niyakam, 179 
Niyata, 540 
Niyyanaip, 588 

--- PAGE 404 ---
Index 897 
Niraya, 495 
Niroja, 295 
Nirodha, 566, 739, 859 
Nirodhento, 733 
Nivatti, 739 
Nivaaanti, 570 
Nisadapoto, 289 
Nekkhammena, 741 
Piti, 330, 526 
Pltisukhani, 168 
Puggala, 357 
Putoli, 378 
Pnnnfiga, 291, 293 
Paris*, 604, 800 
Puti, 42, 210 
PiitipajS, 789 
Pakati, 604, 740 
Pakkfiaava, 297 
Paggaha', 330 
Paocattarp, 179 
Paccaya, 556, 567 
Paccayas&mudaya, 766 
Pacceti, 620 
Pafifil, 505 806 
Patatantasuttaka, 296 
PatighaaarSna, 380 
Patieca, 619, 620 
PaticcaEamuppfida, 230, 615, 617 
Pativedha, 624 
Pattoli, 378 
Patthana, 832 
Panidhi, 763 
PatitthftbhXvo, 435 
Patlyati, 620 
Pattanga, 199 
Pattha, 298, 299 
Pathavl, 145 
Padhana, 833 
Pabbata, 310 
Paramasitva, 811 
Parikammani, 159 
Paritta, 771 
Parinibbana, 16, 336, 337, 846 
Parimatthita, 31 
Parimukhaip, 311 
Pariyfidatuip, 121 
Palfilapuija, 310 
Pavatti, 373, 739 
Pavattitthiti, 553 
Pavana, 593 
Pavura^S, 81, 106,107 
Pavaritena sat&, 68 
Pnsaddhi, 330 
Pakamma, 243 
Pads, 446 
Papananapatti, 243 
Pavaka, 198 
Pavahaniya, 254 
Pahuneyya, 254 
Pitthipada, 288 
Pimjapfitika, 353 
Pilakkhu, 210 
Pisodara, 242 
Phala, 261 
PhalSphale, 109 
Phalopacfirena, 620 
\ Phasso, 512 
Bandhujlvaka, 200 
Bahulaip, 725 
Bujjhanaka, 834 
Buclho, 224 
Beluvapa»<Ju, 455 
Bodfilatfi, 485 
Brahmuttamena, 365 
Bhaga, 243 
Bhagavfi, 242, 243, 244 
BhaggavS, 243 
Bliattavfi, 244 
Bhava, 229, 244, 653, 667 
Bhavanga, 160, 723 
BhAgyavfi, 242 
Bhllva, 619, 709, 834 
Bhavana, 434 
Bhikkhu, 4 
BhQta, 357, 515, 717 
' Bhfltarupa, 810 
Bhumi, 101,146, 332 
Maggo, 506, 624 
! Maccumara, 740 
MandOka, 640 
! Madkuka, 811 
! Maruppapatam, 634 
Mala, 840 
Mahabhuta, 515 
; Mahixna, 243 
1 Mahl, 145 
Mauava, 800 
Malula, 198 
Mukham, 311 
Mutoli, 378 
Madantakhedhaka, 878 
Mndiftga, 519 
Mulakarana, 565 
Mekhala, 244 
MedinI, 145 
Medhavl, 224 
! Moha, 203, 491 

--- PAGE 405 ---
898 Index 
Yatino, 12 
YatthakamavasSyitS, 243 
Yaraaka patihSriya, 453 
Yajayogo, 259 
Yeva, 72 
Yogi, 420 
Yojana, 54, 138, 236, 302, 348, 
772 
Yoni, 631 
Rakkliita, 435 
Rafljeti, 486 
Ravanaghaia, 418 
Rasati, 569' 
Raaabhavam, 207 
Rasavatana, 682 
Raha’ 231 
Raja, 486 
Ruppana, 515 
Rupa, 515, 557, 568,662, 709, 800 
Rupakfiya, 807 
Rupayati, 568 
Rogasamaslsl, 42 
Rodha, 58G 
Laiighlka, 243 
Likkha, 287 
Lina, 172 
Lukha-v-usaram, 126 
Loka, 495 
Lokathupika, 607 
Lokuttara, 246 
Lobha, 203 
YatU, 739,794 
Vim'ria, 489 
Vattaniya, 498 
Vanapattha, 310 
Vanta, 244 
Vasavatti bh&ro, 749 
Vaaitfi, 243 
Vaaibhavata, 864 
Vaaudha, 146 
VaaundbarS, 146 
Vaasik*, 200 
Ya, 730 
Vita, 198 
Vim, 338 
Vaya, 198 
Vftri, 197 
VasanS, 227 
Yahaniki, 672 
Vikasitam, 293 
Vijja,444 
506 
YififlSijiiiafl.cam, 384 
j Vitakka, 708 
Yitakkanam, 164 
Yitakka mSlaka, 397 
Viniddhunano, 606 
Vinip&to, 495 
Vinibblioga, 781 
Yipatti, 366 
Vippharava, 164 
J Vippliarl, 540 
| Vibhajjavadin, 622 
Yibhajjitva, 754 
j Vibhaga, 781 
Viraga, 602 
Viveka, 770 
Visankharitvfi, 754 
Visankhararp, 825 
Vlthi, 825 J 
Vedana, 512 
Vyapgra, 540 
Sa-upadisesa, 604 
I Sakkhara sudha, 295 
495 
ra, 150, 540, 872 
SanghAtipanitena, 397 
Sajjita.ni, 582 
Saflfli, 827 
SoMAvatam, 687 
Sati, 151, 226, 311 
Satta, 357, 800 
Satta khattuparamo, 873 
! Sattha, 239 
j Satva, 357 
! Sadda sattha, 490 
( Sanidaasanattam, 10 
Santana, 179, 264, 404, 846 
Sanditthi, 249 
Sappati, 568 
I Sabbattatfiya, 354 
i Sabhiva, 337 
Samasisi, 42 
SamAganio, 586 
Sam-adhana, 98 
Samadhi, 97 
Samukkhepana, 34 
Samutthana, 565 
i Samuta, 781 
Sametam, 586 
Sampatti, 360 
Sampadfi, 820 
Sammato, 4S6 
Sarupa, 858 
Salilam, 197 
Savanato, 839 
Saaailkhara parinibbSyl, 874 
Sah’ uppatti, 697 

--- PAGE 406 ---
Index 899 
Sadhakfini, 860 
Sapadiina, °carika, 67 
Sasanakkama, 585 
SikhI, 241 
Sittha, 582 
Sindi, 210 
Sira, 10 
Silaputtako, 289 
Slta, 10 
Slla, 8 
Sukham, 330, 739 
Sulchanam, 167 
Sukhasllo, 121 
Sugati, 495 
Suddha, 809 
Subha, 373 
Suriya, 484 
Suaajjito, 362 
Susana, 310 
SOc&yati, 568 
Sucimukhako, 290 
Sura, 484 
Sevana, 642 
Sevitaip, 582 
Hadaya, 289 
Hadayarupa, 474 
■ HirlkopinapaticchSnattham, 36 
Hutasana, 19*8 
Hotu, 261, 556, 740 
Hotusaraavetara, 610 
Hoti, 619 
IV.—SIMILES 
Actors and dancers, 37 
Akuli.flower, faded, 298 
Alkaline solution of bean-water, 
303 
Apparatus, fire-kindling, 579 
Archer piercing hundred planks, 
821 
Archer shooting at hair, Bkilfril, 
173 
Arrow shot by archer, 477, 544 
Ashes scattered by impacts with 
stone, 550 
Axe, badly hewn handle of, 291 
Axe, shaft of small iron, 291 
Axle of a wheel lubricated with 
oil, 418 
Baby-child being lifted to feet, 147 
Bag'for bowl, 288 
Bag full of rioe, long, 288 
Balance, shape of beam of, 285 
Ball to play with, 291 
Balls for boys’ play, pair of, 293 
Balls tied with string, two playing, 
291 
Bamboos and bamboo-bushes, 1 
Bamboo tube eight fingers deep, 
297 
Bamboo tubes containing sodden 
cane sprouts, 411 
Banana stem, 771 
Banker examining coins, 612 
Banner struck by wind, 550 
Banyan fruit, ripe, 474 
Bat, 811 
I Bath-powder into paste, water 
kneads, 543 
Battle-ground, 788 
Battle-ground, armies dispatched 
to, 791 
Bauhinia flower, colour of the, 293 
Bear, 788 
Beast, wild, 788 
Bee on lotus, 165 
Bees and honey, 158 
Bell and reverberation, 164 
Bellows, blowing blacksmith’s, 
329 
Bird, 573 
Bird about to fly, 165 
Birds inclining minds towards 
sky, 518 
Bird's feet, 290 
Bird’s nest hanging from interior 
of old granary, 413 
Blanket placed in sky, piece of 
red, 198 
Blind man and cripple, 719 
| Blind man going about, 477 
Blind man going by points of 
sticks, 478 
Blind man seeing elephant, 539 
Blind man stumbling., hurting 
himself, 702 
| Blind man walking, 651 
1 Boat fulfilling four functions, 848 
I Boat in river of swift current, 
222 
Boat going up stream, water 
follows, 537 

--- PAGE 407 ---
900 Index 
Boat steadied in current by steer¬ 
ing oar, 321 
Boats, collection of broken, 672 
Body not in distress sits down on 
bench, 324 
Boil, 791 
Boil which has burst, old, 223 
Boil, ripe, 298 
Boiling over of vessel, 598 
Boundaries, monks marking, 175 
Bow, shank of small, 291 
Box opened by sword, 715 
Boxers and wrestlers, 37 
Boys playing at piercing seeds of 
honey fruit with sticks, 409 
Boy tended by four nurses, 
princely, 617 
Breathings of man running down 
mountain, 315 
Bridge, going on cart, 478 
Bridge of sticks, going on, 478 
Bull, catching vicious, 192 
Burden, 566, 608 
Burning man by fire, 703 
Butcher displaying meat piece¬ 
meal at cross-ways, 402 
Butter hanging down from pot 
overflowing with butter, 
shrunken film of, 292 
Buttermilk, smeared with sour, 
399 
Cake, unevenly cut pieces of 
thick, 295 
Calf removed from cow, suckling, 
187 
Cane-tops steamed in bamboo 
tubes and knote, 293 
Canvas and pictures, 639 
Captain of ship, 520 
Carpenters putting up posts stuck 
with plaster, 409 
Carriago covered with blue cloth, 
door of, 378 
Cartman lubricating axles of cart, 
37,51 
Case for key, 288 
Cataract overpowering eye, 702 
Cattle shut in cowpen, herd of, 
320 
Cave with leopard inside, 791 
Cemetery, 788 
Chain, linked like, 206 
Chariot yoked to vicious oxen, 308 
Chariot-frame, decayed, 291 
Chariot-wheel, 327 
I Charioteer treating horses im¬ 
partially, 547 
Charmed water and sick man, 728 
Child, 813 
Child lying on road, 721 
Circle of space, 201 
Circle on wall or ground, 201 
Clay turned face downwards, 
rounded lump of, 289 
Clay on hollow of granary, thin 
layer of, 289 
Clay in Ganges stream, 144 
Cliff, man running to edge of 
steep, 160 
Cloth, piece of fine white, 294 
Cloth full of water, water-strain¬ 
ing, 288 
Cloth of colour of turmeric placed 
between skin and flesh of stout 
man, pieces of fino, 300 
Cloth of turmeric colour placed in 
two or three folds by flesh of 
shins, etc., pieces of fine, 300 
Cloud, film of, 327 
Cobweb, men drawing, 158 
Cobweb spread out, 327 
Cocoanut with face cut off, curve 
of, 292 
Coins, 506 
Cold, 814 
Comb-bag, 288 
Conch-cup lying face downwards, 
broken bit of, 292 
Conduit crossed by man hanging 
to rope, 664 
Constituents of group of body, 574 
Constituents of stones, 574 
Cook serving his master, 174 
Cords sewn together inside mat 
for wiping feet on, 295 
Corn set round with thick-set 
hedge, 43 
Cotton, carded, 803 
Cotton seed, 327 
Cotton-wool, 468 
Court people and courtezans, 37 
Courtezan abandoning evil-doing, 
544 
Covering for throat, 288 
Cow, hideless, 542 
Cow of mountains, 176, 715 
Cow to be slaughtered, 626 
Cow variegated with dissimilar 
spots, 256 
Cow with sore hide, 395 
Cow with variegated colours, 58 

--- PAGE 408 ---
Index 901 
Cow with body spotted with 
various colours, 256 
Cowdung on granary, 412 
Cowherd counting cows, 320 
Cowherd taming vicious calf, 308 
Cream of butter drawn with hair 
of Himalayan goat, 661 
Creeper, 704 
Creeper, vile, 60 
Creepers, four men gathering, 623 
Crocodile, 573 
Crocodiles inclining minds towards 
water, 518 
Crow, mariners’, 803 
Crow’s foot, after pattern of, 206 
Cuckoo and reflection, Indian, 131 
Cultivator guarding ripening corn, 
329 
Cultivator marking off portions to 
be ploughed, 368 
Cultivator ploughing field, 175 
Curds, churning milk, 714 
Curds due to milk, 706,717 
Curds wrapped in lotus-leaf, milk, 
302 
Curry leaves growing in unclean 
spot, 286 
Cymbal, small, 291, 292 
Danger, 609 
Darkness, 815 
Darkness rejected by blazing 
lamp, 853 
Dart and stake, 580 
Daughter of noble family abandon¬ 
ing evil-doing, 544 
Dead body, 60 
Decoration on face and mirror, 728 
Deer in power of strong snare, 796 
Demon, 788 
Deva enjoying deva-bliss, 861 
Dew-drop at sunrise, 771 
Dew-drops dispersed by sun’s ravB, 
266 
Disease, 565, 608, 791 
Doe suckling fawn, 361 
Dog, 573, 601 
Dog chargod by pig, 377 
Dog, vicious, 788 
Dog’s food in dog’s food-dish, 398 
Dogs inclining minds towards vil¬ 
lage, 518 
Dog’8 vomit in dog’s dish, 297, 
398, 414 
Doll, wooden, 718 
Donkey following herd of cattle, GO 
Door covered with yellow cloth, 
| opening of small, 378 
i Door-keeper, 543 
| Door - keeper examining every 
comer, 323 
Door-post, 543 
I Dream, 771 
! Drum, 579 
Drum, sound of a, 718 
Dye, smeared with colouring, 399 
Earth and trees, G39 
Echo, 664 
Egg, rotten hen’s, 298 
Elder hearing the song of woman, 
847 
Elephant dragged through key¬ 
hole, 594 
Elephant going through jungle, 
115 
Elophant delighting in Cbaddanta 
lake-forest, Chaddanta, 795 
Elephant in rut, vicious, 788 
Elephant sunk in big swamp, 796 
Embers, burning, 791 
Enemies with uplifted swords, 
791 
Enmity, 609 
Evil, 791 
Excrement like heap of turmeric 
in shape, baby’s, 286 
Excrement-pit, 60 
Excrement-pit unwashed for ten 
years, 399 
Famine, 609 
Fan placed in sky, gold, 198 
Fan or mirror disc placed in Bkv, 
jewelled, 197, 199 
Farmer catching oxen, 327 
j Father of son, 722 
l Feather thrown into fire, fowl’s, 
802 
Feathers, tuft of peacock’s tail, 
397 
Field-pot, 203 
Fig not too ripe, 295 
Finger-ring, 518 
Fire, characteristic mark of, 588 
Fire, man wishing to put out big 
mass of, 164 
Fire, mass of, 62 
Fire, whirling disc of, 771 
Fire and fuel, 600 
i Fire burning jungle, 859 
Fire to blaze, man wishing to 
cause, 152 

--- PAGE 409 ---
902 Index 
Fire produced from rubbing flre- 
aticks, 703 
Firebrand smeared with dnng, i 
cremation, 344 
Fire-pit, men throwing one into, ; 
580 
Fish, cooking, 714 
FiBb grasping at hook, 703 
Fish inside net, 796 
Fisherman oatching snake, 797 
Fish-net in sun, wetted, 290 
Fist, empty closed, 580 
Flag struct by wind, 550 
Flame of lamp, 543, 728 
Flesh covered with cloth, piece of, 
416 
Flesh, child’8, 395 
Flesh thrown into hot pan, piece 
of, 549 
Float and sink in water, men 
naturally, 458 
Floods, crossing of, 543 
Flour ground on plate, 603 
Flour in a gourd skin, lump of, 414 1 
Flour, lump of, 593 
Floor placed together, four lumps 
of, 298 
Flowers, fruits, sproutB growing 
on trees, 600 
Flowers thrown into skv, handful 
of, 501 
Flowers growing in moats, 286 
Flower-remover feeling joy over 
rubbish, 222 
Foam, 301, 771 
Foam, mass of, 566 
Foam, partially broken, 291 
Foam on the surface of village ; 
pool, film of, 415 
Foe dwelling in mountain-fast¬ 
ness, 367 
Foe getting his chance, 552 
Foe lurking near man, 3G7 
Foe with friendly faco, 740 
Foe, sword-uplifting, 666 
Food with poison in it, 791 
Foodstuff in vessel cooked by 
weak fire, 598 
Foot-bridge, going on, 478 
Forest-bush growing on good soil, 
703 
ForeBt infested by wild beasts, 791 
Forest-deer, 580 
Forest-monkey, 580 
Forester and oil-lamp, 753 
Foul plaoe, falling into, 544 
Fowl caught in cage, wild, 796 
Fox, 573 
Friend, agreeable, 544 
Friends plucking flowers, 611 
Frog in snake’s mouth, 796 
Fruit of tree, 666 
Fruits falling from trees, 260 
Gadflies and mosquitoes and cow’s 
body, 600 
Garland of flowers strung by single 
thread, 303 
Garment, hempen, 60 
Garment frayed at edges, 58, 256 
Garment with holes in middle, 58, 
256 
Gem, burnished high-class, 294 
Gem set in orange-coloured stone, 
250 
Gem, water-purifying, 543 
Glow-worm, light of, 478 
Gold, well-polished, 522 
Goldsmith making special kind of 
ornament, 436 
Goldsmith working at gold, 283 
Gong being struck, metal, 318 
Gong struck with big iron rod, 
metal, 325 
Gourd, inside of bitter, 293 
Gourd, skin of big, bitter, 29S 
Gourd-pot sewn together, 292 
Gourd-seeds placed in row in clod 
of clay, 287 
Grain-measurer, 320 
Grass, creepers growing in earth, 
600 
Grass and rushes, 706 
Grass growing in deserted village, 
409 
Grass growing on ant-hill, 408 
Grave-digger’s boy, 61 
Gravel-coating or cement floor, 
295 
Grindstone, 289 
Guide in forest, 544 
Hair-rope, 63 
Hammer, straps of blacksmith’s, 
291, 292 
Harp covered with wet ox-hide, 
410 
Heap of bricks, timber, cow-dung, 
etc., 410 
Heat, 814 
Hells, crushed into powder by 
mountains, denizens of, 594 

--- PAGE 410 ---
Index 903 
Hemp, juice oI leaf of urena, 208 
Hewers of logs, 539 
Highway, going on walkers’, 478 
Highway for carts, going on, 478 
Hill paddy seeds and crops, 049 
Honey mixed with ambrosia, 863 
Honey-drops, greedy for, 634 
Honey tree, smeared with thick 
oil of, 399 
Hood of wooden spoon, 291 
Hoof, goat’s, 518 
HorBe sent on race-course, 355 
Horse, wild, 580 
Hospital, 565 
House, 812 
House, four-storeyed, 301 
House, owner of decayed, 37 
Hunger, 814 
Hunter catching monkey, 281 
Iron ball, 63 
Iron bed, 63 
Iron chair, 63 
Iron plate, 63 
Iron pot, 63 
Jack fruit* inside of skin of rotten, 
296 
Jack fruit, seed of, 291 
Jack fruit, undeveloped seed of, 
292 
Jackal going towards charnel field, 
396 
Jackals inclining minds towards 
graveyard, 518 
Jacket worn on body, net-like, 290 
Jar covered with red cloth, mouth 
of, 378 
Jar thrown mouth downwards into 
village pool, 418 
Jasmine bud, 287 
Journey, undertaking, 280 
Juggler showing false things, 423 
Jujube, size of kernel of, 288 
Jungle fire, 552 
Kid in hands of drunkard, 593 
Kimsuka flower, 289 
King despite defects, 393 
King enjoying pleasures of king¬ 
ship, 861 
King on elephant going about city 
to see craftsmen, 388 
King seated in law court, right¬ 
eous, 820 
Knife, scraping, 292 
Lac, clear juice of, 299 
Lac, thick juice of, 299 
i Lame man rocking cradle, 322 
Lamp, 544, 664 
Lamp being lit in dark, 479 
Lamp fulfilling four functions, 847 
Lamp and lamplight, 639 
Lampblack, taint of, 549 
j Lamplight, 478 
| Landlily, heap of crashed tendons 
of, 291,292 
{ Landlily, knob of, 290 
Lavatory, covering plank in, 299 
Leaf, sere, 299 
j Leather stretched across plank, 
288 
Leather stretched inside quiver, 
i 288 
Leather bag, inflated, 205 
Leopard, 788 
Lessons in arts and sciences, 
| previous, 649 
i Lessons in books, effect of pre¬ 
ceding, 642 
Le88ons"rebearsed by pupils, 728 
Lid touching surface oi box, 170 
Lightning disc, 788 
Lightning flash, 771 
Lime, sticky, 549 
Line drawn with stick on water, 
771 
Lion, 477, 601, 788 
Lion shut in a golden cage, 795 
Live coal, blazing mass of, 788 
Lotus taken anyhow from water, 
bunch of fibres and roots and 
stalks of, 300, 416 
LotuB bud turned face downwards 
after external leaves have been 
removed, 293 
Lotus flower, 327 
Lotus leaf, back of white, 293, 
294 
LotuB leaf, upper part of torn, 618 
Louse, head of, 518 
Luffa-skin full of rain-water, 414 
Lute, sound of, 766 
Machine for pressing sugar-cane, 
579 
Magio, 422, 588 
Magic show, 566, 771 
Magician creating false objects, 
703 
! Man cutting roots of tree, 843 
Man dwelling with enemy, 376 

--- PAGE 411 ---
904 Index 
Man going along precipitous path, 
280 
Man jumping big ditch, 825 
Man observing conjunction of 
stars, 820 
Man strange to road, 871 
Man surrounded by enemies, 796 
Man who has forsaken wife, 802 
Mangoes bound together by stalk, 
couple of, 411 
Mangoes clinging to common 
stalk, pair of, 293 
Mango-leaves with which rotten 
meat and shell-fish have been 
wrapped, bed of decayed, 296 
Mansion, Brahma, 127 
Marsh-date palm, peeled sprout of, 
291 
Mattress of cords sewn with cords, 
413 
Meat inside old carriage-frame, 
piece of, 412 
Meat stuck to side of a frying pan, 
two pieces of, 412 
Meat wrapped in white cloth, 412 
Milk prior to curdling, sour, 297 
Millet being cooked, 485 
Mirage, 560, 588,771 
Mirror, 579 
Mirror, handle of, 292 
Molasses and intoxicating drinks, 
049 
Monk begging food in village, 282 
Monk, emancipated, 544 
Monkey, 673 
Monks, man goes somewhere after 
seeing assembly of, 385 
Monster, devouring, 566 
Moon in day, crescent, 193 
Moon, disc of, 327 
Moon, full, 544 
Moon in Rahu’s mouth, 796 
Moon disc in sky free from clouds, 
full, 250 
Moonlight, 478 
Moss and weed*? in water, 298 
Moth falling into Same of lamp, 634 
Mother of child, 722 
Motion, function, etc., 506 
Movement of man on edge of 
razor, 187 
Murderer, 566 
Murderer with uplifted swords, 
265,791 
Mushroom bud carrying 6oil on 
bead, 265 
I Mushroom growing on dung heap, 
286 
' Mushrooms, mass of, 297 
; Mustard seed on point of awl, 771 
Naga-king'in SupaQija’s mouth, 
796 
NiJgabala leaf, smeared with juice 
of, 399 
Nature of the world, original, 588 
Nautch girl, 580 
Needlework on fine piece of cloth, 
326 
Nerves thrown into fire, knot of, 
802 
Nest of insects, 288 
Net-cap for head, 290 
Niggundi flower, colour of, 294 
Nurae guarding child, 520 
Nurse of child, 722 
Nux vomica seed, 291, 292 
Nymph, man desiring, 634 
Ocean of thirst, 704 
Ogre, 788 
Ogre, man frightened by, 377 
Ogress, 813 
Oil, cocoanut, 301 
Oil diffusing over cotton rag, 518 
Oil diffusing through piece of cake, 
414 
Oil for besmearing bowls, 389 
Oil in water, drop of, 298 
Oil of bassia latifolia, 298 
I Oil poured on scum, 301,417 
Oilspread over clear water at bath 
time, 301 
i Oil-flame, light of, 150 
1 Oven, ed^e of, 289 
I Ovens placed together, pair of 
potter’s, 291 
Ox, 813 
Ox, loose tongue of black, 294 
Ox, taming, 714 
Ox, vicious, 788 
Ox-hom, blunt tip of, 291 
Oyster shells containing sour 
curds, 417 
Paddy loosely bound in straining 
cloth, 296 
Palm about to fall, ripe, 361 
Palm bulbs, pair of, 292 
Palm fruit with single stone, seed 
of, 291 
Palm, kernel of seed of tender, 302 

--- PAGE 412 ---
Index 
Palm leaf, discarded green, 664 
Palm juice, thin plate of dried, 
289 
Palm seeds from -which kernel 
extracted, 292 
Palmyra bulb split by s-word, 
twin, 716 
Palmyra seed cups filled with 
water, 416 
Panthers catching wild beasts, 
king of, 309 
Parents, starving, 38, 61 
Paste, weaver’s, 296 
Pathway infested by robbers, 791 
Pauper dressed in rags, 397 
Pavilion in unclean place, 392 
Pearl, ball of, 327 
Pearls, heap of, 397 
Physician seeking for origin of i disease, 721 
Pillar placed in sky, gold, 198 
Pin made of essence of wood, 327 j 
Pit, charcoal, 395 
Pit at gate of village of outcasts, 
399 
Pitcher thrown into pool, mouth¬ 
less, 303 
Pits filled with flameless coals, 
791 
Pits at city-gate, three live-coal, 
789 
Plantain trunk, 666 
Plante, watery, 637 
Plante in stagnant water, roots of, 
295 
Plates placed one inside other, 
roll of lead, 291 
Plates stuck together, roll of lead, 
292 
Poison, 815 
Poison taking effect, 552 
Poison tree, 609 
Pot overflowing with fat, 223 
Pots broken by hammer, earthen, 
266 
Potter at work,. 164 
Potter making special kind of pot, 
436 
Prince in kingdom, 702 
Punnaga fruit, big truncated, 291 
Queen guarding embryo of world- 
monarch, 329 
Rafters, placing aloft the peak 
and,368 
905 
Rain falling on broken potsherd. 
415 
Rain water flowing down to low 
ground, 297 
Rwning big drops on lake, 787 
Rats, pair of big skinless, 289 
Razor, sheath of barber’s, 288, 
292 
Razor-whoel, 580 
Reapers and field, 600 
Reeds, bundles of, 672 
Reeds, sheaves of, 718 
Reflection of image, 664 
Reflection of man’s face in mirror, 
146, 713 
Resin, bauhinia, 302 
Resin oozing from tree, 415 
Rhinoceros, horn of, 269 
l}icc boiling, smearing lid of 
pot with scum, 401 
Rice-food wrapped in palm leaves, 
289 
River, 704 
River, man jumping into fordlesB, 
206 
Rivor of swift current, 266, 549 
I River-bank, 609 
Robbers and village, 43, 791 
: Repos of machine binding boards 
togothcr when pulled, 295 
Rose-apple, ripe, 474 
Ruby, ball of, 327 
Sailors sailing boat, 158 
Salt water, drinking, 703 
Sandal-wood, 544 
Scales, 287 
Scrubbing copper bowl, 165 
Scum, thick putrid, 299 
Sea by boat, crossing, 720 
Sea-coral, reddish seeds of, 293 
Sea-coral leaf, 294 
Seal, impression of, 664 
Self of the heretics, 588 
Series of fingers, 279 
Sesame oil, 300, 475 
Sesame seeds on heated potsherd. 
753 
Sesame seeds being ground for oil, 
713 
Shaving of hairs, 479 
Shoe covering upper part of foot, 
288 
Sick man, 566 
Sick man getting better, 222 
Sickness, 791 
58 

--- PAGE 413 ---
906 Index 
Sign-board for water in forest, ‘ 
281, 521 
Silk-worm, cocoon of, 288 
Silk-worm wrapping itself with 
cocoon, 702 
Sites, master of science of building, 
309 
Smoke, crest of, 327 
Snake, 673 
Snake, black, 812 
Snake folded up in trough of 
blood, beheaded, 296, 413 
Snake, man ohaaed by, 376 
Snake, man searching for, 186 
Snake, smitten, 552 
Snake traoed to hole, 709 
Snake, withered back of, 291 
Snake-charmer, snake in hands of, 
593, 796 
Snake’s hood held face down¬ 
wards, 291 
Snakes inclining minds towards 
ant-hill, 518 
Snakes of terrible quick poison, 
788, 791 
Soapstone, colour of shining, 285 
Sons, mother’s attitude towards 
four, 369 
Sons ordered to be executed, 788 
Sons, still-born, 789 
Spade partially used up, Cey¬ 
lonese, 292 
Spear, sharp, 63 
Spies and thieves cutting man 
with double-handled saw, 343 
Sprout, cape jasmine, 767 
Sprout coming out from seed, 
703 
Sprout held together in row by , 
stick, discs of bamboo, 292 
Stair-case, inept man ascending, 
2S0 
Star, 327 
Star, light of morning, 478 
Stick thrown into sky, 580 
Sticks in wsttle-and-daub wall, 410 
Stone thrown from mountain-top, 
266 
Stone pillar, 546 
Straw, mass of chewed, 295 
Streams drying up, 266 
Stretching form of hand, 646 
String, long, 327 
String of rings, 291 
String of threads, 290 
Strings of big lute, 290 
Strung man cutting great tree, 479 
Strong man rising from Beat, 147 
Strychnos, purifying water with, 
713 
Students filling oil-tube, 168 
Sugar, pressing sugar-cane for, 714 
Sun, disc of, 327, 478 
Sun fulfilling four functions, 848 
Sun going towards own setting, 
266 
Sun killing darkness, disc of, 859 
Surgery, students of, 158 
Swan not delighting in dirty pool, 
796 
Swans learning to fly, young, 176 
Swelling produced in middle of in¬ 
flated wet cloth squeezed at both 
ends, 296 
Swollen corpse of black dog, 286 
Sword and stake, 395 
Swords, finished and unfinished, 
291 
i 
| Target placed at cross-road, 270 
i Teeth oi saw, 291 
; Temple of assembled order, 256 
; Thief, extorting information cut 
1 of, 714 
! Thief in the dark, 684 
Thief taken to place of execution, 
362 
Thieves and treasure, 26 
Thieves pursued by King’s men, 
680 
Thirst, 814 
Thirsty man longing for water, 
703 
Thorn, 791 
Thorn fixed in circle, 165 
Threads, coarse, 290 
Thunderbolt crushing mountains, 
869 
Tiger, 788 
Timber cut with saw, 323 
Torch of hay, man going at night 
by means of, 496 
Torches, light of, 478 
Torrent, groat mountain, 327 
Town, celestial, 771 
Town included in kingdom, 611 
Traveller who eats his child’s flesh, 
401- 
Tree, fruit-bearing, 328 
Tree growing on earth, 845 
Tree growing from seed through 
sprouts, 705 

--- PAGE 414 ---
Index 
Tree, seeds of poisonous, 580 
Tree that has risen must fall, 703 ' 
Trees, row of forest, 328 
Trust money, 666 
Turmeric, split, 300 
Unsuitable things, having recourse 
to, 565 
Urine mixed with poison, 552 
Vegetable plant growing in ceme¬ 
tery, 286 
Vegetables, bag of, 593 
Vellum across hollow of lute, 288 
Vessel and food, etc., 566 
Vessel of what remains after the ! 
boiling over, drying up within, 
598 
Vetch soup, colour of, 293 
Village, empty, 572, 791 
Village boys, 37 
Village robbers, 572, 600 
Waggon-prop, 287 
Walking on earth, men naturally, 
459 
Wall besmeared with clay, 410 
Water agitated by wind, 550 
Water guarding lotus, 520 
Water in which are sharks and 
water-demons, 791 
Water in one’s path, 390 
Water inside water-jar placed face ■ 
downwards, 303 
907 
Water issuing from hole dug in 
river-hank, 523 
Water sinking from lotus leaf, 
824 
Water-bubble, 566, 771 
Water-drop on lotus leaf, 483, 544, 
802,856 
Water-weeds removed by pot 
thrown into water, 852 
Weak man rising by means of 
stick, 637 
Weapons and target, 600 
Well dug on banks of perennial 
stream, ground-Burface of, 417 
Well dug on sandy bank of river, 
water in, 301 
Wheel of life, 695 
Wick with failing oil cannot sus¬ 
tain lamplight, 520 
Wings of white cock, outstretched, 
291 
Woman possessing four garments, 
392 
Wood cutter, 479 
Worms in pool, 296 
Wrapper for rice-food, palm leaf, 
288 
Wreath of flowers, 327 
Yellow-loam in bamboo tubo, 414 
Yellow-loam ground on smooth 
grindstone, 400 
Yellow-loam inserted into bamboo 
knot, 297 

--- PAGE 415 ---
CORRIGENDA 
P. 36,1.12, for sicknesB read oold. 
P. 88,1. 3, from below read Such qualities and merits manifold. 
P. 247, L 11, read lovely therefore in the end as it brings happiness in 
the result of its practice, since, etc. 
P. 247, footnote 1, read Tathattdya pafipannena, expanded by the Tika 
as “ who practises the dhamma as it was preached by the Blessed 
One.” P.T.S Dictionary s.v. translates the phrase by u to be on the 
road to (i.e., attain) Nibbana.” Tathatta occurs several times 
(continue as printed). 
P. 247, footnote 2, read Tddibhava—i.e., the higest qualification. 
P. 257,1.3, from below for where is no read freed from the. 
P. 295,1.3, for it is read they are. 
P. 453,1.23, for Uttakuru read Uttarakuru. 
P. 495,1. 29, delete inverted commas. 
P. 502,1. 9, between object and Herein insert But regularly it has a past 
object. 
P. 502,11.26,30, for penetrating read encompassing. 
P. 502,1. 3, from below, between object, and When insert When it recalls 
another’s aggregates, it has an external object. 
P. 503,1. 27, for penetrating read encompassing. 
P. 594, footnote 1, read Itivutlaka, p. 43. 
PRINTED w GREA7 BRITAIN BV 
BILUNC AND SONS LID., GUILDFORD AND Eh'HRtt 

--- PAGE 416 ---


--- PAGE 417 ---


--- PAGE 418 ---
1 
Central Archaeological Library, 

