






KHASARPANA : LOKESVARA 



AN INTRODUCTION TO 

BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 


BY 

BENOYTOSH BH ATTACH ARYYA 

M.A., Ph.D., Rajaratna, T aiimmcaspati 

Director, Oriental Institute, Baroda 




! 

Ur ^ 

f.; 




HUMPHREY MILFORD 
OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 
1932 


OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS 

LONDON EDINBURGH GLASGOW 
LEIPZIG NEW’ YORK TORONTO 
MELBOURNE CAPETOW^N BOMBAY 
CALCUTTA MADRAS SHANGHAI 

HUMPHREY MILFORD 

PUBLISHER TO THE 
UNIVERSITY 


central ARCHAEOLOGlGAIi 
LIBRARY, NLW ULlHI. 

Aeo. No.........F3« i 

No. r#«« - 


, PRINTED IN INDIA BY THOMAS GOULD 
AT THE WESLEYAN. MISSION PRESS, MYSORE ■ CITY 



TO THE SACRED MEMORY 
OF MY FATHER 


^ ^ qr ?r I 
:t pTlTr% 5lff^ II 






y/ci" 




/ ki n \ K ‘ 




PREFACE 


If at any time in the history of India the mind of the nation 
as a whole has been diseased, it was in the Tantric age, or the 
period immediately preceding the Muhammadan conquest of India. 
The story related in the pages of the numerous Tantric works is 
supposed to be so repugnant that, excepting a few, all respectable 
scholars have condemned them wholesale and left the field of 
Tantras severely alone. But in spite of what the great historians 
of Sanskrit literature have said against Tantrism and the Tantric 
literature, no one should forget that the Hindu population of India 
as a whole is even today in the grip of this very Tantra in its daily 
life, customs and usages, and is suffering from the same disease 
which originated 1,300 years ago and consumed its vitality slowly 
but surely during these long centuries. Someone should there- 
fore take up the study comprising the diagnosis, aetiology, patho- 
logy and prognosis of the disease, so that more capable men may 
take up its treatment and eradication in the future. The present 
work represents the first instalment of a series of investigations 
into this fascinating branch of study, and an attempt to place 
before scholars a dispassionate account of the Tantras in general, 
and Buddhist Tantras in particular.^ 

Acknowledgments are here made of the splendid help 
rendered by Dr. Helen M. Johnson, of Osceola, U.S.A., in revis- 
ing the manuscript very carefully and conscientiously, and for 
generously offering valuable advice. Indeed, I feel very deeply 
indebted to her for all the sympathy and encouragement she 
freely bestowed on me during her stay in India. 

^ Numerous articles on this subject have been contributed by me to 
Journals of learned societies and other publications, and many of these are here 
incorporated for a connected account. 




via 


PREFACE 


I had a great desire to dedicate this book to my father, the 
[ate Mahamahopadhyaya Haraprasad Sastri, but as he left us all 
to mourn his loss during the time this book was passing through 
the press, I can only inscribe this volume to his sacred memory. 


Baroda 

March 18, 1931 


B. Bhattacharyya 



CONTENTS 


Chapter 

I. Introductory 

II. Origin of Buddhist Magic . . 

III. Growth of Buddhist Magic . . 

IV. Rise of Vajrayana . . 

V. The Place of Origin . . 

VI. The Tantras 

VII. The Mantras . . . . . . 

VIII. Some Prominent Authors 

IX. Aims and Objects 

X. Leading Tenets 
XL Procedure for Worship 

XII. The Deities . . .. .. 

XIII. The Pantheon .. .. .. 

XIV. Influence of Buddhist Tantrism on Hinduism 

XV. Conclusion .. .. . . •• 

Index . . . . . . . . . 


Page 
. . 1 
. . 10 
.. 22 
.. 32 

.. 43 

.. 47 

.. 55 

. . 62 
.. 83 

.. 93 

.. 104 
.. 109 
.. 120 
.. 147 
.. 165 
.. 175 





ILLUSTRATIONS 


PulTS 

1. 

KHASARPAISrA ' LOKESVARA 

. . ' 

. . Frontispiece 

11. 

Vajeasana .. . 


facing page 

124 

III. 

Adi-Budbha Vajradhara 

. ... , 


127 

IV. 

(a) Ak^obhya 
id) Vairocana 

(c) Locana 

(d) VAJRADHATViSVARI . . 


.j> ' ■ 

128 

V. 

(a) Amitabha 
(d) Ratnasambhava 
(c) Amoghasiddhi 


» 

129 

VI. 

(a) Pai^dara 
id) Mamaki 
( c) Aryatara 



130 

VII. 

ict) Vajrasattva in Yab-yum 

(d) Vajrasattva 

(c) Vajrasattva IN Yab-yum .. 



131 

VIII. 

Nairatma . . ... ■ . . 



135 

IX. 

Marici . . 



137 

X. 

SiMHANADA LoKESVARA 



141 

XI. 

"Jambhala . . ' 


, jj . 

143 

XII. 

' PAR3:jr aSavari . . ■ 


, 5J. ■ 

145 




fif/ 








CHAPTER I 
INTRODUCTORY 

TanTRISM originated from primitive magic. The primitive 
people of India, like all other primitive and nomadic races 
throughout the world, must have had the primitive magical 
practices prevalent among them. They had many natural and un- 
natural enemies to overcome and many unforeseen difficulties to 
tide over, especially because they had to live like wild animals, 
in jungles and forests. They could overcome only a small fraction 
of their distress by using their physical force and their primitive 
intelligence ; but the rest they were powerless to overcome, and 
these inspired them with superstitious awe and fear. In the 
physical sphere they were greatly afraid of wild animals, snakes, 
calamities of nature, diseases, and so forth, which it was not in 
their power to overcome at all. The common people, afflicted 
by these dangers, flocked around their sorcerer, who had gifts 
superior to the ordinary folk. But the sorcerer also being an 
ordinary mortal was not found always equal to the occasion; 
and thus the primitive people were inspired with greater awe and 
fear. In the intellectual sphere, on the other hand, fear of death 
and of spirits and ghosts exercised the minds of the primitive 
people to a far greater extent than at present. 

It is in this fear that magic, mysticism, sorcery and necrom- 
ancy had their origin. As the primitive people began to be more 
and more civilized, they wanted to do something to allay this 
superstitious fear ; and in their attempt to do this they laid the 
foundation of magic, which in its turn gave rise to the more 
advanced sciences. To protect themselves from wild animals 
they had recourse to amulets and charms ; against snakes and 
snake-bites the sorcerers gave them charms and herbs; against 


2 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

diseases they discovered the various crude drugs from plants, 
leaves and minerals. It was in this way that the primitive people 
attempted to protect themselves against their natural and super- 
natural enemies. 

When the primitive inhabitants of India were developing a sort 
of magical system, with a large number of magical practices, they 
came in contact with the Aryans, who came from the west in 
large numbers in several waves of migrations. They had natural 
advantages over the primitive inhabitants of India, because they 
were strong and intelligent and because they carried with them 
a sort of civilization. It is difficult at this stage to determine 
exactly the nature of their civilization; but from the references 
in their literature, which later on came to be regarded as the 
four Vedas, it can be seen that they led a sort of nomadic life, 
moving about from place to place like the herds of animals. 
As has been said already, there were several waves of migrations, 
and the Aryan people involved in each migration penetrated 
further and further towards the east, conquering the primitive 
inhabitants and reducing them to the position of serfs. They 
settled in the most convenient places, where there was enough of 
water and food available, lived like lords by exploiting the labours 
of the primitive people, and set up independent governments 
run mostly on republican lines. One such migration settled in 
the Doab, between the Ganges and the Jumna, and developed 
a sort of social hierarchy and divided itself into four castes, 
Brahmanas, Ksattriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras. In striking a line 
of demarcation amongst the four castes the principle followed 
was that of the division of labour. Those who had an intellectual 
bent of mind were regarded as Brahmanas; those who were strong, 
heroic and of a fighting nature were called Ksattriyas; those 
who betook themselves to agriculture and commerce were called 
Vaisyas; and the primitive people, who were content to serve 
these three higher castes ungrudgingly and who followed the 



INTRODUCTORY 


3 

rules and regulations laid down by the new society, were called 
Sudras. In the course of time, when this experiment of caste 
system^ was well established, it was no longer considered as an 
experiment, but taken as a settled fact. The Aryans of previous 
and later migrations were called Vratyas. These Vratyas were 
so called because they moved about in hordes, or vratyas, 
in a primitive fashion ; and resembled more or less the other 
nomadic tribes. The orthodox Aryans, who built up for the first 
time a grand structure of social hierarchy, were nevertheless con- 
scious that the Vratyas were their brethren, and they felt a neces- 
sity for incorporating them into their own fold.® In order to 
accomplish their object, they convened large congregations of 
people and performed certain sacrifices, called the Vratyastomas, 
in which large numbers of Vratyas were taken into the orthodox 
fold on the simple condition that they should relinquish their 
nomadic habits and dress and take to a settled form of existence. 
The Aryan settlers of India came with a large number of pre- 
conceived notions, dogmas, various philosophical speculations, 
and magical practices in the form of sacrifices ; and, because of 
these, they were able to exercise a tremendous influence on the 
primitive inhabitants of the place. 

The primitive inhabitants, who were called Dasyus by the 
Aryans, and sometimes Sudras, also did not fail to exercise a 
considerable influence over their white superiors. It is in this 
way that one reacted on the other, and both were benefited to 
a certain extent and demoralized also to a certain extent, in 

^ Caste appears to be a purely Indian product. Had it been of still 
earlier origin we should have expected some sort of caste system amongst the 
Iranian people. 

® For this Vratya theory and the significance of the Vratyastoma I am 
much indebted to Mm. Haraprasad Sastri, with whom I have had several dis- 
cussions. The most illuminating paper on this subject has been published by 
the same author in the Proceedings of the Asiatic Society of Bengal, N.S. 
Vol. XVII, 1921, p. 1 A. 



4 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

accordance with the intensity of their respective influences. The 
Aryans came with their Vedic chants and sacrifices, and the 
primitive people taught them how to live in a strange country 
and how to protect themselves against the difficulties peculiar 
to the place itself. 

The Aryans brought with them, as is well-known to all, a 
super-sacrificial system. They were accustomed to perform some 
sort of sacrifice before commencing any important action. The 
sacrifices were performed both for physical and spiritual gains. 
They were of various kinds: some lasted for a few hours and 
some were carried on for a number of years; some required a 
few priests only and some required a huge number of them. 
There were elaborate rules and regulations for the performance 
of these sacrifices, and it was stipulated that if the sacrifices could 
be performed in strict accordance with the rules and regulations, 
their results were most surely obtained. But, as a matter of fact, 
the rules for the performance of such sacrifices were so elaborate 
and so minute— the very method of the pronunciation of the 
letters of the Vedic mantras was so intricate, and had such minute 
differences — that it was almost humanly impossible either to 
perform the sacrifices correctly or to pronounce the letters of the 
mantras accurately. Modern investigators of ancient history 
designate the sacrifices as instances of a purely primitive form of 
magic^ designed in order that those who performed the sacrifices 
should gain an importance over the other members of the com- 
munity in the same way as the sorcerers commanded an uncanny 
influence over the aboriginals. The result was inevitable. The 
priests, who busied themselves with the sacrifices with ceaseless 
regularity, were looked upon as the most intelligent people 

^ Dr. Das Gupta thinks otherwise ; he considers these as a repository of 
cosmic secrets and cosmic forces. It is, however, absurd to think that primitive 
people could realize and discover such secrets and forces when in a practically 
aboriginal state. See S. N. Das Gupta, Hindu Mysticism, pp. 9-10. 


INTRODUCTORY 


5 


amongst the Aryans, and they formed a class amongst themselves 
as Brahmanas, who exerted a tremendous influence over the Hindu 
community in those olden days and who continue to exert the 
same kind of influence even at the present moment. 

We cannot call the performance of these sacrifices anything 
like science, as results to be obtained therefrom were either not 
obtained at all or were obtained by mere accident. Nor was 
this religion, because the sacrifices were a sort of revolt 
against nature. When, in the ordinary course of events, for 
instance, a king had no child even after many years, he directly 
engaged a large number of priests, well-known for their abilities, 
and on payment of fees requested them to hold the Putresti 
sacrifice. Here the sacrificers were required to change the natural 
course of events, which was ordained by God, who is the very 
essence of all religions. When a man, for instance, engages 
priests and requests them to perform a sacrifice so that he may 
proceed to heaven on his demise, the process cannot but be 
designated as a sort of sacrificial mysticism; because it is not 
within human power to ascertain whether the given cause gives 
rise to the expected result or not. The Aryans, before forming 
themselves into a well-organized caste system, brought with them 
certain chants and songs, mainly addressed to the elements of 
nature or the supposed presiding deities of the different natural 
elements. These songs later on were sifted and arranged 
into the four Vedas, which today stand as one of the earliest 
monuments of ancient literature in the world. These songs 
were composed in a burst of ecstatic joy on the part of 
persons who had the gift of composing such verses and for 
singing these songs. These composers of verses were later on 
called Rsis, from the word ‘Rs’, to see. They were regarded in 
later times as Rsis or seers of the Vedas or Vedic words, which 
were considered eternal and indestructible. The theory of the 
eternity of the Vedas gave needless importance to the arrange- 



6 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

ment of words, lines, verses and Suktas or songs. The meanings 
of these words in course of time were rapidly forgotten ; and 
the sacrificers were fully satisfied with the mere skeleton 
without the substance. When the songs were composed they 
were never meant to be used for sacrificers; neither w'ere they 
taken to be eternal, nor divine. But when we find in later times 
the frequent use of these mantras in the performance of all kinds 
of sacrifices, and such words or their combinations regarded as 
eternal,^ we cannot but attribute some motive to the guardians of 
the sacrifices. Was it because the Brahmanas wanted to maintain 
their superiority over all others in this fashion, or was it because, 
by making the performance of sacrifices more and more difficult 
and technical, they wanted to keep off all other kinds of people 
from attempting to follow their own profession, in much the same 
way as the primitive sorcerer in an aboriginal tribe tries to main- 
tain his superiority by many an uncanny gesticulation and the 
handling of many an awe-inspiring object, such as the human skull, 
human bones, snakes, and so forth, and by his weird incantations ? 

When orthodox Brahmanism, with its four castes, had grown to 
be an institution on a more or less permanent basis, it was at once 
designated as a divine institution,^ and strict watertight compart- 
ments were made of the duties incumbent on each caste. It is not 
difficult to understand that it was purely with the idea of self- 
preservation and the preservation of the community that the 
institution was given out as a divine institution. The natural 

^ This is the chief pivot on which the whole fabric of the Mimaihsa 
philosophy revolves. The Mimamsakas therefore take the greatest pains in 
establishing the eternity of the Vedic words, and their divinity or 
cf., for instance, Sayana, J^gveda Bhasya, Sanskrit Sahitya Parisad Series, No. 9, 
pp. 36 flf.; also Jaimini Sutra, 1-1-27 and ff., and conamentary by Sahara. 

^ cf., for instance, Mann 1-31, where the Brahman creates the four castes 
from the four different limbs: g t wi 

11 


INTRODUCTORY 


7 


consequence of this was the establishment of the theory of Karma, 
or what is known as act-force. In the physical sphere, we see all 
acts as pure or impure, good or bad, producing good or bad 
results. If an offence is committed against the community the 
offender is punished. Similarly one who has always the good of 
the community at heart is rewarded. Bad actions were designated 
sins and good actions merits. But there were many actions which 
were bad morally, but not so bad as to deserve any punishment or 
done in a way to escape detection. The question naturally arises 
as to whether the sin attached to actions of this nature incurs any 
punishment or not, or whether it can be expiated, and how ? The 
natural consequence of this is the theory of divine punishment or 
divine rewards. To be logically consistent, a life after death has 
to be postulated in the theory of transmigration of the soul. The 
Brahmanas postulated that the body is nothing but a temporary gar- 
ment within which the soul is contained ; and, as a garment becomes 
in course of time worn out and unfit for use, even so the soul leaves 
the old decrepit body and seeks new shelters, after having 
enjoyed the rewards of its good actions in heaven and punish- 
ment for bad actions in hell, before returning to earth in a new 
form. We can thus see how the combined conceptions of the 
theories of Karma and the transmigration of the soul produced 
the conceptions of heaven and hell. It is needless to point 
out that all these theories of Karma, transmigration of the soul, 
and heaven and hell are not proved by logic or by reason. 
They were mere speculations to satisfy the curiosity of the 
primitive mind, to satisfy the vanity of the priestly class, and 
to preserve society against disruptive forces. The Brahmanas 
wanted others to take these as divine mandates, wanted the 
people to regard the authority of the Vedas as absolutely 
unquestionable, and the existence of God as a matter fully 
established. 

It is in this way that the Brahmanas satisfied themselves and 



8 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

satisfied others by giving a semi-reasonable explanation of as 
many physical and spiritual phenomena as they could. The final 
touch was given to this great construction by the theory of 
emancipation, which proved a deluding mirage to the primitive 
Aryans and to all who came after them, including scientists, 
philosophers and magicians. It is extremely difficult to investigate 
the truth lying behind the conception of emancipation, which has 
been taken by philosophers of all ages in India as a settled fact. 
But there is nothing to show that the theory of emancipation was 
everproved. The theory of emancipation requires that every indivi- 
dual should undergo a series of births and rebirths till his soul or 
consciousness is free from all impurities. Emancipation means 
cessation of births and rebirths, and therefore of worldly miseries. 
It is this emancipation that every Indian, from the most ancient 
times up to the present day, strove and strives hard to attain. To 
the average Indian, therefore, the present life is a misery and devoid 
of all interests. He cares more for an improved condition in the 
next birth than his material prosperity in this. The obvious result of 
this was that emancipation proved to be a philosophy of idleness 
and apathy towards all things material. Thus the orthodox 
community went on merrily for several centuries with their 
favourite social institutions and philosophical speculations, their 
Vedic mandates and their mystical sacrifices. But later on 
an unforeseen difficulty arose, when the Vratyas became sufficiently 
enlightened and were taken into the orthodox fold in such huge 
numbers that the Vratya converts far outnumbered the orthodox 
members of the society. They were still bolder in their specula- 
tions, and seemed to cherish but a scant regard for the ‘ house of 
cards ’ set up by the Brahmanas. India at that time was in a great 
ferment. Incorporation of the Vratyas produced a great revolu- 
tion — a revolution in ideas, speculations, language, dress, customs, 
manners, and, in fact, everything connected with ancient 
Indian life. The Vratyas challenged everything : the caste system. 



INTRODUCTORY 


9 


the sacrifices and the Vedas. They formed themselves into 
many different philosophical schools, and we hear of as many as 
sixty heretical teachers, each having a peculiar dogma of his own 
and each having a large number of followers. The materialists 
were the most bitter opponents of the orthodox Brahmanas. The 
Brahmanas used to say that the animals immolated in the Jyotistoma 
sacrifice went to heaven ; the materialists ridiculed them, and said 
that if the animal immolated in this fashion went to heaven why 
should not the sacrificer immolate his father whom he was very 
keen on sending to heaven.^ When the Brahmanas taught that the 
present life is nothing and that emancipation is everything, they 
ridiculed them and said, ‘So long as you live, live happily; take 
much ghee even by running into debt. When the body is reduced 
to ashes, where is the chance of its coming back to life.'”® They 
characterized the authors of the three Vedas as cheats, rogues and 
night-revellers.® The Brahmanas retaliated against them by driving 
them out of the orthodox community and put a ban on challenging 
the authority of the Vedas and the Smrtis, which were a direct 
outcome of the Vedas. In the Manusamhiia it is said that if any 
one of the orthodox community insults the Vedas and the Smrtis 
by taking recourse to the science of logic, he should be driven 
out by good men as an atheist and a reviler of the Vedas.'‘ 

WIM II Sarva-dar^ ana -saik.gr aha, Bombay 

Govt. Or. (Hindu) Series, No. I, p. 13. 

^ 3?rTFW?r p; 11 op. cit., p, 14. 

® ^ I op. cit., p. 14. 

cT I 

B II op. cit, II, 11. 


4 



CHAPTER II 

ORIGIN OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 

The incorporation of the Vratyas into orthodox society and 
the growing restlessness of the unincorporated Vratyas, who 
already occupied a position of importance by having set up inde- 
pendent kingdoms, produced a great intellectual ferment which 
shook the very foundation of the orthodox community. The 
unincorporated Vratyas often called themselves Ksattriyas and 
in this respect they w^ere more or less correct, as they had to 
lead the life of a warrior as a matter of necessity. Buddha and 
Mahavira, and many other lesser celebrities, were a product of 
this intellectual ferment. They were the greatest repudiators 
of orthodoxy and all that it had set up to preserve its cherished 
institutions. Buddha challenged everything set up by the 
orthodox community: their caste system, their Vedas, their sacri- 
fices and their philosophical speculations. 

It is difficult to determine whether Buddha was a member 
of the orthodox community. In the traditional books giving an 
account of the life of Buddha, he is generally mentioned as a 
K§attriya. But he belonged to a place, namely, ‘Kapilavastu’, 
which was quite outside the pale of orthodox influence and sur- 
rounded on all sides by territories setup by different Vratya races. 
This evidence leads us to think that the family in which Buddha 
was born was really a Vratya family, which was erroneously called 
a Ksattriya family in olden literature. To be a twice-born in the 
orthodox sense is to have all the ten sacraments; but in the 
accounts of the life of Buddha left to us we not only find no 
mention of all the ten, but also no trace even of the most important 
sacrament of Upanayana, or the investiture of a sacred thread. 



ORIGIN OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 11 

which primarily distinguished a Vratya from an orthodox twice- 
born. For in the Manusamhita find that if a member of the 
twice-born caste passed the maximum age-limit prescribed for 
Upanayana he became a Vratya, and he obtained a definitely lower 
status in the community.^ These considerations point to the fact 
that Buddha was, in all probability, an unincorporated Vratya, 
though later writers considered him to be a Ksattriya. The fact 
that Buddha was an unincorporated Vratya is very important for 
understanding his teachings, his dogmas and his life-story — inas- 
much as his Vratya-mind and Vratya-philosophy are traceable in 
all his undertakings and actions. 

If we are to believe in the life-story of Buddha, as recorded, 
for instance, in the Lalitavistara, have also to believe that 
Buddha was born of rich parents of the Sakya race ruling in 
Kapilavastu. But it has to be pointed out here that the Buddhists 
themselves do not consider him to be the first founder of the 
Buddhist religion. They formulate six past Buddhas : Vipasyl, 
SikhI, Visvabhu, Krakucchanda, Kanakamuni and Kasyapa, with 
Gautama Buddha as the seventh, and Maitreya Buddha as the 
future Buddha, who will come down to earth full 4,000 years 
after the Mahaparinirvana of Buddha, which is believed to have 
taken place in the year 483 B.C. 

It is not an easy thing to come down to earth and obtain 
enlightenment, as Buddha did, in one birth; as a matter of fact, 
the Buddhists formulated that Buddha was born and re-born 
several hundreds of times, and performed an act of great merit in 
each of these births. The literature which preserves the life-stories 
of Buddha is now known as the Jatakas, and there are at least 550 
stories of his previous births recorded in the Jatakas. He was 



12 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

born 83 times as a sannyasin, 58 times as a king, 43 times as a 
tree-god, 26 times as a preacher, 24 times as a minister, 24 times 
as a priest, 24 times as an heir-apparent, 23 times as a gentleman, 
22 times as a scholar, 20 times as Indra, 18 times as a monkey, 

13 times as a merchant, 12 times as a rich man, 12 times as a hen, 
10 times as a deer, 10 times as a lion, 8 times as a goose, 6 times 
as an elephant, 5 times as a Garuda, 4 times as a horse, 4 times as 
a tree, thrice as a potter, thrice as an untouchable, twice as a fish, 
twice as an elephant-rider, twice as a rat, and once each as a car- 
penter, ironsmith, frog and hare. In each of these lives Gautama 
Buddha — the founder of Buddhism — did one or more good 
deeds of benevolence, renunciation, valour, wisdom, friendship, 
and charity, and, as a result of good deeds done in innumerable 
lives in the past, he obtained enlightenment and freedom from the 
cycle of Samsara. 

Siddhartha,* as Gautama Buddha was called in his childhood, 
was born in the beautiful garden at Lumbinl in the outskirts of 
the capital city of Kapilavastu, and his mother died seven days 
after his birth. Soon after, a Rsi came from the Himalayas, and, 
after examining the 32 principal and 80 minor characteristics, 
predicted that if the boy remained a householder he would be a 
great emperor ; but if he renounced the world he would obtain 
perfect enlightenment. Some time after, Siddhartha w-as sent to 
the house of his preceptor, Visvamitra, who was surprised to find 
that his pupil was proficient in as many as 64 different scripts — 
more than the preceptor himself knew. The boy quickly mastered 
the Vedas and Upanisads and learnt many other sastras of the 
orthodox. He was subsequently brought to the capital and 
married to Gopa, daughter of Sakya Dan4apani. The day the 
first child was born to him, on that most auspicious day, the 
young and beautiful Siddhartha Gautama, prince and heir-apparent 

^ cf. N. J. Krom, The Life of Buddha. This account is a summary of 
the account as preserved in the Laliiavislara. 


ORIGIN OS' BUDDHIST MAGIC 


13 


to the throne, renounced the world, alone, unaccompanied, in the 
search for eternal truth which may bring salvation to mankind. 
The immediate cause which led to this great renunciation is 
related in the Lalitavistara as follows : 

One day the prince Gautama resolved to visit the 
gardens in the neighbourhood of his father’s city, desiring 
to examine the beautiful trees and flowers. Then there 
appeared before his eyes in one of the streets the form of a 
decrepit old man, his skin shrivelled, his head bald, his teeth 
gone, his body infirm and bent. A staff supported his totter- 
ing limbs, as he stood across the path of the prince’s chariot. 
He asked his charioteer for explanation, and he explained 
that old age was the common lot of all sentient beings ; all 
that was born must die. 

Soon afterwards another strange sight presented itself 
— a sick man, who was seen tottering on the road, pale and 
miserable from disease and suffering, scarcely able to draw 
his breath. The charioteer explained that this was a sick man 
and that such sickness was common to all. 

Soon after, there passed before him a corpse borne on 
a bier. Siddhartha asked his charioteer : ‘ Who is this, 
borne onwards on his bed, covered with strange garments 
and surrounded by people weeping and lamenting ? ’ The 
charioteer said, ‘This, my lord, is called a dead body. He 
has ended his life. He has no further beauty of form, no 
desires of any kind. He is one with the stone and the fallen 
tree. He is like a ruined wall or a fallen leaf. No more shall 
he see his father and mother, brother or sister. His body is 
dead, and your body must also come to this.’ 

This was too much for the good prince to bear. He 
exclaimed : 

s# rr 

SWT itow: 11 


AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

j f^ ' -ni -i M i it t-nr -nr-ir 

1% P 

BP irfcrf^^ il#p II* 

Out upon youth, because old age is running after it. 
Out upon health, because health is endangered by various 
diseases. Out upon life, for life is not permanent. Out upon 
the wise, for they are always seeking for enjoyment. Even 
if there were no disease, old age and death, the five skandhas 
will always cause great sufferings. What wonder is there, 
therefore, if we always have old age, disease and death as our 
constant companions.? Therefore, I must return home and 
find out the means to relieve the distress of mankind. 

Next day, when he was in this mood, he came across a 
man moving with measured steps, with shaven head and 
monk’s robe, his right shoulder bare, a staff in his right 
hand and the mendicant’s alms-bowl in his left. This man, 
the charioteer explained, devotes himself to charity and 
restrains himself, his appetite and bodily desires. He 
hurts nobody, but does good to all and is full of sympathy 
for all. The prince asked the man to give an account of 
himself. The monk said : ‘ I am called a homeless ascetic. 
I have forsaken the world, relatives and friends. I seek 
deliverance of myself and desire the salvation of all creatures 
and I do harm to none.’ The prince forthwith returned 
to the palace to ask his father’s permission to renounce 
the world. ‘ I wish to become a wandering ascetic, O 
father, and to seek Nirvana. All worldly things, O king, 
are changeable and transitory.’ His father was altogether 
amazed to hear this strange request, and not only did he not 
grant his request but also kept him under strict surveillance 
and in very attractive circumstances, so that the young 
prince’s mind might not brood over things spiritual. But the 
prince possessed so much determination that he renounced 
the world, leaving his child, his wife, his father and his 

* Lalitavisiara, ed. Rajendralal Mitra, p. 230 . 



ORIGIN OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 


15 


relatives, forsaking the riches and pleasures of life and 
embraced the career of a wandering ascetic. He went from 
place to place, visiting the well-known philosophers of his 
time, and studied under them for a considerable length of 
time; but he did not obtain what he wanted to have. No one 
could tell him in what lies the salvation of suffering mankind. 
He was in very great despair, and therefore wanted to take 
the last recourse to find out the truth — by meditation and 
introspection and by self-inflicted bodily pain and austerity. 
He went near Gaya, at Uruvilva, for this purpose, and, with 
five other ascetics, began the terrible Asphanaka asceticism, 
along with its sexennial fast and practice of austerity. Sitting 
down with his legs folded on a raised seat, exposed to the 
sun, rain, dew and cold, he reduced his daily ration to one 
grain of rice, and thus continued for six long years. He was 
totally exhausted physically and mentally, and at last actually 
fell unconscious one day. No peace of mind came to him and 
no divine enlightenment. He became convinced of his folly 
and took food and nourishment in a natural way, and then the 
truth dawned on him that freedom from the cycles of count- 
less existences cannot be obtained either by excessive self- 
mortification or by excessive enjoyments of worldly objects, but 
only by following a middle course. He meditated further and 
further, and discovered what is known in Buddhism as the 
twelve-linked chain of causation. He diagnosed the ultimate 
cause of worldly miseries as Avidya, or ignorance, which in a 
twelve-linked process gives rise to desires. The truth dawned 
on him that everything in this world is unreal, that everything 
is non-ego, and that Nirvana is the only calm. He came to 
know of the four noble truths and the eight-fold noble path 
which leads to Nirvana. Buddha was determined to teach 
the doctrines to his fellow-men, and with this purpose in 
view he went to Mrgadava near Benares and preached his 
doctrine first to his fellow-comrades of Uruvilva, who had 
deserted him long ago. 

This first sermon is called the Dharmacakrapravartana, or the 
turning of the wheel of the law, as this is the first time Buddha 



16 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

set the wheel of righteousness rolling in the world. Afterwards 
he moved about throughout upper India converting people to 
Buddhism, and founded the order of Buddhist raonachism. 
People were admitted into the Sahgha after they had recited the 
formula: 

M I 

The Sahgha was open to all, without distinction of caste and 
creed, both male and female. Separate monasteries were assigned 
to monks and nuns; and there were lots of householders as lay- 
brethren. The success of Buddhism was due to the working out 
of the idea of establishing a haven of rest to all. 

It has already been pointed out that Buddha was a product 
of a great upheaval, and that he was a great repudiator of 
Brahma^ic orthodoxy. His religion knew no caste bar. He dis- 
regarded Sanskrit and preached in the vernacular. He discarded 
the authority of the Vedas, and God had no place in his religion. 
His was a religion which knew no mandates and no divine 
institutions. Yet, nevertheless, Buddha was a product of his 
particular age, and, therefore, he was not entirely free from the 
superstitious beliefs current in his time, and the philosophical 
speculations which were not entirely proved as purely logical 
conclusions. His religion was based more or less on a fairly 
rational system. He gave his disciples an opportunity of challeng- 
ing and examining his doctrines f and never threatened, like the 
Brahmanas, to outcast those who would challenge the authority of 
the Vedas and all that was arbitrarily set up by them. Naturally, the 
Brahmanas and the orthodox community did not encourage Buddha, 
and regarded him as, more or less, an enemy of orthodoxy. Buddha 

^ He used to say, as we learn from the TaiivasafkgraM (see Foreword, 
p. dv): JHSr t{I=^ a g I 


ORIGIN OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 


17 


had naturally to be content with the vast majority of the Vratyas 
and the aboriginal inhabitants, who were not raised to the status of 
the Sudras probably because of their not getting any opportunity 
of coming in contact with orthodox Brahmanism. It was perhaps 
for this reason that he discarded the use of Sanskrit as a medium 
for his preachings, but employed the vernaculars for the purpose. 
It was also a remarkable fact that Buddha did not write any com- 
prehensive treatises, embodying his general conclusions and his 
philosophy. He taught everything orally, and these teachings 
were collected after his death in a literature which came to be 
known as the Buddhist Tripitaka. When he was living he taught 
differently to different people with different mentality and a 
different degree of understanding faculty. It is for this reason 
that contradictions are sometimes noticeable in his teachings on 
the same topic.’^ 

The theory of transmigration and the consequential chain of 
births and re-births he took for granted without stopping for a 
moment to prove it. Similarly, he took emancipation as a settled 
fact and the theory of Karma in the same way. He believed in the 
easier method of salvation by the practice of austerities, asceticism 
and meditation. He carefully incorporated them into his new 
religious system and preached them to his people. In his time 
people were steeped in absurd superstitions, and invariably sought 
to have short-cuts to salvation by easy methods — by the practice 
of mantras, the practice of self-mortification, and by various other 
practices, some of which were filthy and revolting.* We have 
conclusive evidence that recourse to mantras was widely taken, 
as they were believed to bestow magical powers to the individuals 

^ A long discussion on the character of Pudgala as recorded in the 
Tativaswnigraha, si. 348, 349, is an instance in point. 

“ For instance, the practices of the Kapalikas, a reference to whom has 
been made in the Artha§dstra of Vrhaspati, who is undoubtedly earlier than 
Kautilya. See also S.B.E., Vol. XX, p. 89 f. 


18 


AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 


practising them. Buddha, as a clever organizer, could not fail to 
notice this type of mentality amongst the masses, which were his 
favourite field of action, and he did not venture to forbid magical 
practices altogether in his religion, though it is difficult to say 
whether he ever believed in their efficacy.^ Moreover, to make his 
religion perfect, the founder has not only to take into account the 
mentality of the intelligentsia by giving them hopes for the next 
birth and far-off salvation, but also of those who have no concep- 
tion of distant emancipation, or merits to be gained in the next 
birth, but are eager to attain worldly prosperities in this very 
birth.^ It was to satisfy this second class of the laity that Buddha 
had to incorporate some sort of mantras, Dharams, Mudras and 
Mandalas, so that those that might wish to have prosperity in the 
present birth would feel satisfied® by practising them. 

In the Brahniajdla SuBa* we find mention of a large number 
of Vidyas or esoteric sciences, which were current in the time of 
Buddha and condemned by him as tiracchdm^ or crooked. It is, 
therefore, easy to conceive that there were many more Vidyas 
current in his time which were not, in the opinion of Buddha, 
iiracchmia, or crooked, but free from all blame, and these he must 

‘ In the Dighanikaya Buddha is represented as saying, ‘ It is because I 
see danger in the practice of these mystic wonders that I loathe and abhor and 
am ashamed thereof’ (T. W. Rhys Davids’s Pali EnglUh Dicii&nary, p, 121). See 
also the enumeration of the ten kinds of Iddhis, ibid, 

“ cf. TativasaThgraha, il. 3486 : 



g u 


Tattvasa’Mgraha^ 3487 : 





P.T.S.ed„pp.9ff. 


4 



ORIGIN OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 


19 

have incorporated into his religion. In the Manjusrimulakalfa^ 
which formed part of the extensive Vaipulyasutra literature of the 
Buddhists and was probably composed in the first century of the 
Christian era, we find quite an astonishing number of mantras, 
Mudras, Mandalas and Dharams, which must have taken their 
origin in the early centuries B.C., and probably from the time of 
Buddha himself. Later on, in the Gukyasatndja,^ which is con- 
sidered as the first systematic Tantric work of the Buddhists, and 
which was probably written in the third or the fourth century A.D., 
we find Buddha saying to the congregation of the faithful, that as 
the people were not sufficiently enlightened he did not preach the 
Tantric system when he was born as the Dipankara and Kasyapa 
Buddha. In the SMkanamala, & Tantric work containing about 
312 small works called Sadhanas, composed by distinguished 
writers of the third to the twelfth centuries A.D., we find mention 
of a fairly large number of mantras originating from Buddha 
himself.® Is there, therefore, any room to doubt that the Tantras 
and mantras, Mudras and Dharams, were taught by Buddha 
himself to the lay-brethren who believed in their efficacy? From 
the Pali literature it can be easily proved that Buddha believed 
in the doctrine of Iddhis, or supernatural powers, and he mentioned 
four Iddhipadas: Chhando (will), Viriyam (effort), Cittam (thought), 
and Vimamsa (investigation), which were conducive to the produc- 
tion of superhuman powers.* 

In the Vinaya Pitaka are recorded two stories which at once 
show the popularity of the cultivation of magical powers amongst 
Buddha’s own disciples. One is the story of Bharadvaja, and 
the other the story of a lay-householder, all of whose relatives 

^ Published in three volumes in the Trivandrum Sanskrit Series. 

^ The work is now published as No. LIII in the Gaekwad’s Oriental 
Series. 

^ See infra, chap. VII. 

* R. C. Childers, Dictimary oi the Pali La^iguage, p. 157. 



20 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

knew how to perform many miracles. Below is given a summary 
of these two stories from the Vinaya Pitaka, as they have a direct 
bearing on the subject-matter of this particular chapter. 

I. ‘At one time the Setthi of Rijagrha had acquired a block 
of sandalwood of precious flavour. He had a bowl carved out of 
it, put the same in a balance and had it lifted to the top of a 
bamboo, which was tied at the top of a succession of bamboos, and 
publicly declared : ‘ If any Brahmana or Sramana be an Arhat and 
possessed of Iddhi, let him take down the bowl. It is a gift to 
him.’ 

Purna Kassapa went to the Setthi and wanted to have the 
bowl, but the Setthi asked him to take down the bowl by his 
miraculous power. Then there came successively Mankhali 
Gosala, Ajita Kesakambali, Pakuda Kaccayana, Sanjaya Belatthi- 
putta, and Niggantha Nataputta, ail of whom proffered the same 
request and received the same reply from the Setthi. 

One morning it so happened that Maha Moggalana and 
Pindola Bharadvaja were out for alms in the streets of Rajagrha. 
Bharadvaja asked Moggalana to fetch down the bowl, but as the 
latter in his turn requested Bharadvaja to do the same thing, 
Bharadvaja, rising up in the air, took the bowl and went thrice 
round Rajagrha in the air. 

Directly the people came to know of this wonderful feat 
of miraculous power, they began following in the steps of Bharad- 
vaja with shouts loud and long. The Blessed One then heard the 
whole story, and rebuked Bharadvaja for wantonly displaying his 
miraculous power before the public for a miserable wooden pot. 
The Buddha then ruled that whoever should display his super- 
human powers before the laity should be guilty of Dukkata, and 
that whoever should use wooden bowls should be guilty of 
Dukkata. 


ORIGIN OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 


21 


11. The second story^ related to the miraculous powers of 
the whole family of a layman. In the Bhaddiyanagara there was 
a householder named Mendaka who, when he had bathed his head, 
could fill the empty granary by making showers of grain fall 
from the sky. 

When his wife sat down beside a pint pot and vessel for curry 
and sauce, she could serve the serving men with food: and so 
long as she did not get up it was not exhausted. 

Their son could take up a bag containing a thousand coins, 
and give to each serving man six months’ wages : and so long as 
as he held it in his hand it was not exhausted. 

When their daughter-in-law sat down beside a four-bushel 
basket, she could give six months’ rice to serving men : and so 
long as she did not get up, it was not exhausted. 

When their slave ploughed the land with one ploughshare, 
seven furrows were formed on the ground. 

The Magadha king Seniya Bimbisara came to know about 
the miraculous powers of the householder, and wanted to know 
the whole truth about it. He called his minister and asked him 
personally to go to the Bhaddiyanagara to test the truth of the 
rumours. The minister accordingly went to the house of Mendaka 
and asked him to show his special powers and those of the 
members of his family. Mendaka showed the identical feats men- 
tioned before, and satisfied the minister and King Bimbisara about 
the truth of his miraculous powers. 


Vinaya Pitaka, ‘ Mahavagga ’, VI, 34-1-2. 



CHAPTER III 

GROWTH OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 

In the previous chapter an account has been given of the 
state of Buddhist magic, when it was in a more or less embryonic 
condition. In the present chapter an attempt will be made to 
show how the rudimentary form of magic in Buddhism developed 
in later times owing to a variety of favourable conditions. These 
conditions comprise the enforcement of strict discipline among 
the monks, the gradual changes in the conception of emancipation 
in the different schools of Buddhism, the enormous growth of 
Buddhist literature, the introduction of the altruistic philosophy 
of Mahayana^ — all these factors, though sublime by nature, exercised 
a great influence on the masses and produced most baneful results 
which were quite unexpected. It would be reasonably expected 
that the sublime Mahayana philosophy would lead the people to 
happiness, prosperity and salvation ; but, instead, it led them to 
evil and culminated in Tantrism, which may justly be called a 
full-fledged esoteric system. 

It will be remembered that from the very start of early 
Buddhism till the time when Mahayanism sprang up with ’all its 
brilliance, a very strict discipline was enjoined on the followers 
of the faith. For the Bhiksus and the Bhiksunls, who were 
provided with a haven of rest in the shape of monasteries, 
the rules were strictly put into operation. Men and women were 
very strictly kept apart ; they were never allowed to have any 
contact with each other. Men were enjoined to take a vow 
of celibacy, and the women were asked either not to marry or 
to abandon their husbands, relatives and children, if there were 
any. All kinds of luxuries were forbidden, and various foods for 
which man has a natural desire were entirely tabooed. Wine, fish. 



23 


GROWTH OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 

meat, appetisers, and many similar objects of enjoyment were 
specially forbidden. The rules were indeed good, and were very 
attractive in the time of Buddha, but as they were very unnatural 
his followers could be expected to follow them only for a certain 
time, but not for centuries afterwards. It was wholly absurd to 
expect obedience to such strict disciplinary measures from all 
members of the Sangha even in Buddha’s lifetime, to say nothing 
of centuries after his Mahaparinirvana. Buddha’s was a great per- 
sonality, and so long as he was alive the majority of his followers 
dared not commit any offence by going against his wishes. 

But all were not of the same mentality ; there were monks in 
his own time who used to send, contrary to his specific injunctions, 
wreaths of flowers to wives, daughters, young women and female 
slaves, to sit on one seat, lie on one bed, one mat, one coverlet, 
with the wives and daughters and young women and female 
slaves, to eat food at any time, to drink strong drinks, to dance, to 
sing and play music, and all these together in every combination. 
These monks must have considered in their minds what the result 
would be by forgoing all the pleasures of life, by strictly following 
the injunctions imposed on the Sangha by Buddha. The promise 
of freedom from births and rebirths may be only a possibility, 
and success at best is very questionable. This particular set of 
monks, therefore, instead of running after a deluding Nirvana, 
violated the rules of discipline and took to worldly enjoyments. 
Buddha was very much perturbed when he heard of the infamous 
conduct of his followers, and sent some of his trusted disciples 
to carry out his order of expulsion from the Sangha against these 
monks.’' 

Thus the members of the Sangha must have revolted from 
time to time against the unnatural rules of discipline, and party 
quarrels on such points were already in evidence in the second 


^ S.B.E., Vol. XVII, p. 347 f. 



24 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISil 

great council, when the Mahasahghikas were expelled from the 
church by the Sthaviras because the latter were unwilling to 
make any concessions on the ten minor points of discipline raised 
by the youngsters. Rebellion against the rules on broader and 
more important matters of discipline must have been in existence 
among tlhe monks ; but they could not create a party of their own 
which would be able to cope sufficiently with the orthodox section, 
which was sure to go against them and denounce them as heretics. 
Those monks, who saw salvation only from leading a natural 
life and did not like to forgo the pleasures of the world, 
went on devising plans in secret, and probably writing what are 
called the original Tantras, which were secretly handed down 
through successive chains of preceptors and disciples who could 
practise the rites only in secret. These Tantras are in the form 
of Sangitis,* and are said to have been delivered by Buddha in an 
assembly of the faithful. It is in this Sahgiti form that all new 
ideas, dogmas and philosophical speculations were introduced 
into Buddhism, and the Sahgitis, we must remember, were very 
powerful agencies in the introduction of innovations. 

The orthodox followers of the faith were sure to challenge 
anything that was not said by Buddha. That seems to be the 
reason of the great popularity of the Sangiti literature. The 
original Tantras of Buddhism were, therefore, in the Sangiti form, 
wherein were inculcated doctrines which were diametrically 
opposed to the teachings of Buddha. Easy methods leading to 
happiness in this world were held out in this literature. Easy 
paths leading to salvation were shown. Great parade was made 
of the merits to be gained by the repetition of the mantras, 
Dharanis, and panegyrics, and by the worship of innumerable 
gods and goddesses. But everywhere any casual reader can 

' The Sahgitis begin with 154 hRT BWif . . . 1 In this 

literature Buddha is introduced in an Assembly of the Faithful, where he is 
represented as delivering sermons on diverse points of Dharma. 



GROWTH OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 25 

detect a desire on the part of the authors to thwart all unnatural 
rules and regulations forcibly chained on to the followers of 
Buddhism. These disciplinary regulations were gradually relaxed 
one after another, and ultimately, when the Vajrayanists gained in 
power and got an overwhelming majority, a general revolution 
was declared against the orthodox Mahayana, which in course of 
time dwindled to nothingness, as it was powerless to fight the 
growing disorder amongst the Tantrics. 

It is thus quite clear that there was nothing inherently wrong 
when Buddha imposed certain moral discipline on his disciples. 
On the contrary, they were very attractive in his time. People 
praised them and Buddha got a large number of converts. It is 
a most tragic event in the history of the subsequent development 
of Buddhism, that the strictness of discipline actuated a large 
section of Buddhists in later times to revolt against it and undo 
everything that the founder of the religion had attempted to accom- 
plish, and bring about a disgraceful degeneration in Buddhism 
and weaken its very foundations. But how this degeneration 
helped the growth of Buddhist magic will be shown in the sequel. 

There was another disturbing factor which helped the 
degeneration of Buddhism, though the factor itself was quite lofty 
and laudable. This was the development of the idea of Buddhist 
emancipation, or Nirvana, as it was termed by Buddha. Buddha 
was himself satisfied when the truth of Nirvana dawned on him : 
this was a loftier doctrine than any the leading Sankhya philo- 
sophers of his age taught. But did he define Nirvana.? No. 
Whenever questioned, his usual answer was: ‘You should 
first realize Nirvana and then you can know what it is. 
You need not know that even. The attainment of Nirvana will 
give you freedom from births and rebirths, which means 
emancipation.’ In the first century B.C., in the Milinda PaMo^ we 

The Questions of King Milinda, S.B.E., Part II, pp. 186 ff., ‘Dilemma the 
Eighth. The Outward Form of Nirvaija.’ 



26 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

find a glowing account of Nirvana. But there also we do not meet 
with a reference to the condition of the individual when he attains 
Nirvaria. In the first century A.D., Asvaghosa, in his Saundam- 
nanda^ compares Nirvana to the extinction of a flame — as a 
lamp goes out when the oil is exhausted, even so the individual is 
extinguished when there is no more suffering, or Klesa, to his 
credit. This is practically the last word of the Hinayanic 
interpretation of Nirvana. With the Mahayanists the interpreta- 
tion became different. They were not satisfied with the mystic 
silence of Buddha on the most important philosophical concept 
promised to the followers as a reward for all the moral restrictions 
practised by them in this life. They wanted to speculate, and 
formulated that Nirvana is nothing but Sunya, which meant, 
according to the Madhyamaka conception, a condition about which 
neither existence nor non-existence, nor a combination of the two, 
nor a negation of the two, can be predicated.® This is the theory 
of the great Nagarjuna — the founder of the Madhyamaka system of 
Buddhist philosophy, who flourished in the second century A.D.® 
But can this Sunya, as defined by Nagarjuna, satisfy anybody, 
even intellectual men, not to speak of the ignorant masses ? It is 
a condition similar to a transcendental condition, and, in fact, much 
worse truth than the mystic silence of Buddha. 

The Yogacaras, therefore, came to their rescue. They 
retained the term ‘Sunya’; but formulated that it was not an 
empty Sunya, as proposed by the Madhyamakas, but a positive 
Sunya with a positive element of Vijnana.* People heaved a sigh 
of relief. On the attainment of Nirvana, therefore, the individual 

‘ Ed. Mm. Haraprasad Sastri, in the Bibliotheca Indtca, p. 102, XVI, 28, 29. 
® cf. SarvadarSanasaiUgraha, p. 23 : 

1 Also Advayavajrasaiiigraha, p. 19, 11. 21-22, G.O.S., No. XL. 

® Nagarjuna also explained Nirvapa by six negatives, cf. Madhyamaka 
Kdrika, chap. XXV, Kariki, 3. 

* Yamakami Sogen, Systems oi Buddhist Thought, chap. VI. 


GROWTH OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 


27 


neither attains complete extinction, nor does he go out like a 
lamp, nor pass into a condition which cannot be conceived. The 
Yogacara idea of emancipation satisfied the people for a time. It 
is believed that Maitreya was the author of the Yogacara school of 
thought. 

Soon after, a time came when Vijnanavada also could not 
satisfy all. Some greater brains came forward with a new doctrine 
and introduced it into the conception of Yogacara. This new in- 
troduction w^as known as the Mahasukhavada,^ and the form 
of Buddhism which was based on this Mahasukhavada was known 
as Vajra3'^ana, or the adamant-vehicle. In Vajrayana Nirvana had 
three elements : ‘ Sunya, Vijnana and Mahasukha.’ This triple 
combination of Sunya was termed by them as Vajra; because, as 
they said, it is firm and sound, unchangeable, unpierceable, im- 
penetrable, incombustible and indestructible.^ They formulated 
that Sunya is Niratma, and a goddess in whose eternal embrace 
the individual mind, i.e. the Bodhicitta, or Vijnana, is locked, and 
there remains in eternal bliss and happiness. 

It was no fault of original Buddhism that its conception of 
Nirvana should take so many shapes and culminate in Maha- 
sukhavada, which would considerably weaken the religion and 
plunge Buddhism headlong into the deepest abyss of degeneration. 

The third factor which, though sublime in its conception, 
brought about degeneration, is the evolution of the idea of Karuna. 
It must be remembered that Buddha advised his followers to 
obtain Nirvana for themselves by their own efforts. They should 
have nothing to do with others or their sufferings or miseries. It 


^ The character of Mahasukha is described in the Jnanasiddhi, chap. VII. 
See Two Vajrayana Works, G.O.S., No. XLIV, p. 57. Also Advayavajra- 
samgraha, G.O.S., No. XL, intro., p. xxxviii, and p. 50. 



I 3rf|?nf|' ^ II Quoted from 


the Yogarainamdld in the Bauddha Gan O Doha, p. 8 ; also from VajraSekhara 
in the Advayavajrasadngraha, op. cit., p. 23, 11, 23-4. 



28 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

was different when Mahayanism came forth later on, with its 
dazzling conception of Karuna, or compassion, for all human 
beings. They designated themselves as Mahayanists, and de- 
nounced the self-seeking monks of the old style as Hlnayanists. 
The Mahayanists differed from the Hinayanists on several 
important points, though for both of them the realization of 
Nirvana, which leads to the cessation of sufferings, was imperative. 
But the methods followed by the two branches of Buddhism 
were widely different, if not altogether antagonistic. The 
Hinayanists obtain Nirvana, or the freedom from suffering 
and the consequential repetition of births and rebirths, or 
virtually an extinction of self altogether. But it must be re- 
membered that, even if they are able to gain Nirvana, they cannot 
realize the perfect truth or remove the veil which conceals 
the transcendental truth ; nor can they impart the knowledge of 
salvation to others. The Mahayanists, on the other hand, do not 
care for their own salvation ; they are more solicitous about the 
deliverance of their fellow-creatures, who are in the grip of 
constant suffering, than about their own. They are not afraid of 
Saihsara, or the cycle of births and rebirths, in the same sense as 
the Hinayanists are ; but they are always ready to undergo any 
troubles and sufferings, if these lead even in a small measure to 
the spiritual uplift of their fellow beings. Their compassion for 
suffering humanity actuates them to renounce their merits or 
even their salvation, and as a reward for this selfless sacrifice they 
are able to remove the veil covering the transcendental truth, and 
become omniscient.* This ideal of a Mahayanist finds expression 
in the Karan^vyuha^ where the example of Avalokitesvara — the 

* TaUvasaHtgraha of §antarak?ita, G.O.S., Nos. XXX, XXXI, pp. 869, 870, 
872. Also B. Bhattacharyya, foreword to the above work, pp. xlvii ff. 

* Satyavrata Samasrami’s ed., Calcutta, p. 21 : 

’Hfdl ’I#?! 



GROWTH OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 


29 


all-compassioaate Bodhisattva — is set up, who refused his salvation, 
though fully entitled to it, until all creatures of the world were 
in possession of the Bodhi knowledge and obtained freedom from 
worldly miseries. 

It is said that when Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva,"^ after obtain- 
ing Nirvana, was about to merge himself in the eternal Sunya 
from the summit of the Sumeru mountain he heard an uproar 
from a very remote quarter and became remorseful. He sat there 
forthwith in intense meditation, and immediately realized that the 
uproar was nothing but the wailings of the people at the dis- 
appearance of Avalokitesvara, the all-compassionate Bodhisattva. 
In their utter helplessness at the prospect of losing the support of 
Avalokitesvara, who was their only saviour from their worldly 
miseries and sufferings, they rent the skies with their bitter wail- 
ings. Avalokitesvara was deeply moved when he came to know 
about this, and resolved within himself not to accept his well-merited 
emancipation so long as even a single individual on earth remained 
.unemancipated. In the KarandavyUka we hear him saying that 
he will live and act for the uplift of humanity till the end of 
creation before merging himself in Sunya. He will take the form 
of Visnu and impart lessons in Dharma to those who worship 
him ; he will take the form of Siva in order to impart lessons to 
those who worship him ; he will take the form of Ganesa and 
impart lessons to those who worship him; he will take the form 
of a king in order to impart lessons to those who admire 
and love their king ; he will even take the forms of father 
and mother, in order to teach Dharma to those who worship 
them.^ This theory of Karuna was an outstanding feature in the 

^ For an account of Avalokitesvara see the notice of the MS. Guim- 
karajidavyuha, in Rajendralal Mitra’s Sanskrit Buddhist Literature oi Nepal^ 
p. 95. ' 

^ Kdraridavyuha, op. cit., pp. 21-22; also B. Bhattacharyya, Indian Bud- 
dhist Iconography, pp. 32 if. 



30 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

Mahayana religion, and such a high ideal as Avalokitesvara’s is 
unprecedented in the history of any other religion of the world. 
It was no fault of Buddhism that, though it set up such a high 
ideal, the result was most disappointing. Buddhism, w'e should 
remember, both in its earlier and later stages of development, 
was mostly concerned with the masses and people of low castes 
with lower degrees of intellectual development. The high ideal of 
Karuna was too much for them ; but every individual follower of 
the faith had to associate himself with the theory of Karuna in 
some w'ay or other. Day after day, without realizing its impor- 
tance, they had to resolve that they would devote all their energies 
and sacrifice everything dear to them for the uplift of humanity. 
Day after day, they had to repeat this pious wish, till after a time 
it became a mere convention entirely bereft of its import and 
importance ; and, what is worse, the priests found in this theory 
of Karuija an excuse for the grossest forms of immorality and 
lawlessness. 

In the course of time, the literature of the Buddhists of both 
the Hinayana and Mahayana schools had developed to such an 
enormous extent that it had become almost impossible to give any 
benefit from this literature to the lay-brethren, whose intellectual 
faculties were mostly far below the ordinary. The priests 
held that the perusal of the Buddhist literature was capable 
of conferring great merits on the followers of the faith. The 
perusal and the handling of lengthy works were found difficult 
even for those who possessed some intellectual superiority. 
It was in response to popular demands that the priests had 
to shorten the books to suit popular needs. Take, for example, 
AstasMasrikaprafnaparamiHd, which is a fairly stupendous 

* cf. CMUcdodhanaprakaraipa, in J-A..S.Bt LXVII, p. 178 : 

1 

■■■ , , ... . ' I I I II ■ 


GROWTH OF BUDDHIST MAGIC 


31 


and difficult work for a tolerably learned Buddhist to read 
through and understand. It was therefore shortened into the 
form of Satasloki Praj^paramiiS,, in one hundred stanzas ; 
and the people were asked to read and memorize it. For 
many this, too, proved very trying, and it was soon reduced to 
a Prajnaparamifahrdayasittra — a still shorter form. This was 
further shortened into a Praj^paramita Dharanl^ in a few 
unintelligible words, and this ultimately gave rise to the mantra 
of Prajnaparamita. It was given out to the people that if 
either the mantra, the Dharani, the Hrdaya Sutra or the longer 
forms of the work were once recited, the merit to be gained by a 
perusal of the complete Prajnaparamita was obtainable. In Tibet 
they made the process still shorter and easier. They prepared 
prayer-wheels, in which were contained their favourite books, 
soldered up the covers, and went on turning the wheels round 
and round. Their belief was that by each turn of the wheel the 
worshipper gained the merit of perusing the entire literature 
contained in the wheel. 

What wonder is it that Buddhism should degenerate under 
these unfavourable circumstances, and people should grow more 
superstitious by running after easier and cheaper methods for 
obtaining salvation ! 



CHAPTER IV 
RISE OF VAJRAYANA 

It has been seen how primitive Buddhism, as taught by 
Buddha, passed through many changes and underwent degenera- 
tion owing to a variety of circumstances which cropped up in 
later times. This degenerated form of Buddhism is what is called 
Vajrayana, or Tantric Buddhism. We have already mentioned 
that Buddhism was a challenge to, and a repudiation of, earlier 
Brahmanism. It was now the part of Tantric Buddhism to 
challenge the authority of Buddha and repudiate the original 
Buddhism. 

Buddha enforced a large number of unnatural and strict 
rules for the guidance of his followers. All kinds of worldly 
enjoyments were forbidden, especially wine, women, fish, meat and 
all kinds of exciting food. All these the Tantrics of the later age 
introduced into their religion in the form of five Makaras, and 
they did so with a vengeance, and even went so far as to declare 
that without these emancipation was impossible. 

With regard to Buddha, they said that he was only an ordinary 
mortal Buddha, and it was through him that the eternal truth of 
Buddhism came to the world. Truth is the all-important factor 
in Buddhism. Buddha served only as a post-office, as many 
other Buddhas had done previously and will do in future. 
Thus Buddha lost his importance in the religion founded and 
preached by him. They formulated the theory of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas,* each with a Sakti attached to him, as presiding over the 

* This theory was for the first time formulated in the Guhyasamaja, first 
chapter, now published in the Gaekwad’s Oriental Series. 



RISE OF VAJRAYANA 33 

five Skandhas, or elements/ These Dhyani Buddhas are a peculiar 
class of Buddhas, who are eternal and have not to pass through 
the lower stages of the Bodhisattva/ The Dhyani Buddha and 
the Sakti bring forth a number of Bodhisattvas, who look after 
creation. Under the regime of each Bodhisattva eight mortal 
Buddhas are required to appear in the world, to preach the 
doctrines and help the people to emancipate themselves. From 
this, the position occupied by Buddha in later days can be easily 
comprehended. 

Then there is the theory of emancipation. Buddha did not 
like to define Nirvana, and whenever questioned on this point he 
remained silent. The Tantrics defined Nirvana as Sunya, 
Vijnana and Mahasukha, and explained the condition of the 
Bodhi-mind in Nirvana as in the embrace of a woman. The 
Tantrics associated themselves with a number of women, whom 
they designated as Saktis, and their union was termed Yoga, 
which they said was a powerful agency for the attainment of 
salvation. In the earlier Buddhism instructions were given to 
individuals to attain Nirvana. The Nirvana was entirely narrow 
in its outlook, which made the priests self-seeking and regardless 
of the sufferings of their fellow creatures. The theory of Karuna 
was a direct challenge to this form of Nirvana. But the Tantrics, 
who were leading lives of great sin and immorality, found in the 
theory of Karuna, or self-sacrifice, an excuse for their heinous 
doings. The Bodhisattva, they stated, is daily making untold 
sacrifices for suffering humanity, and, therefore, there is nothing that 
he should not do,® meaning thereby that the theory of Karuna gives 
him a blank charter for committing all kinds of heinous offences and 
violating all laws, human or divine. They formulated the theory that 

cf . Jnanasiddhi, op. cit. : 

® Kem, Manual of Indian Buddhism, p. 64. 

® JA.S.B., Vol. LXVII, p. 178 ; I 


3 



34 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

these three worlds have been created by the Holder of the Thunder- 
bolt for the enjoyment and benefit of the worshippers/ They further 
said that one who strives after salvation should always enjoy 
Prajnaparamita, or the perfect truth. This Prajna, they said, 
resides in every woman on earth, and they should be enjoyed 
without reservation. Good, bad, indifferent, diseased and depraved, 
all are welcome to him. No distinction should be made between 
women of higher castes or lower castes, and no women, even those 
closely related, should be allowed to escape.* Their favourite 
slogan was: 

i 

By those identical actions by which mortals rot in hell 

for hundreds of crores of cycles, the Yogin is liberated.* 

The Tantrics had many things which, when brought to 
public notice, were likely to give a rude shock to the people at 
large. In other words, secrecy was their keynote in the begin- 
ning, till the practices enjoined in the Tantras were widely current. 
In the Gukyasamafa there are many practices which cannot be made 
public until the ground is prepared to receive them. Thus the 
Tantra w^ent into private hands, and was transmitted in the most 
secret manner possible through an unbroken chain of gurus and 
disciples, till it gained currency after about 300 years,* mainly 
through the teachings and mystic songs of the 84 Siddhapurusas 
and their disciples, and all those who came into intimate contact 
with them. These Mahasiddhas mostly belonged to the seventh, 

^ Prajmp&yaviniicayasiddM, in Tw Vajrayana Works, G.O.S., No. XLIV, 
p. 23, verse 31. 

^ Prajnopdyaviniicayasiddhi, op. cit., p. 22 f, verses 22, 23 ff. 

® JMnasiddhi, op. cit., p. 31, si. 15. 

* This appears evident from a statement in TSranatka referred to by 
Kem in his Mavm.1 of Indian Buddhism, p. 133. TardnSiha, p. 201. 


RISE OF VAJRAYANA 35 

eighth and ninth centuries of the Christian Era/ at a time when 
Vajrayana had already made great headway and was almost casting 
into the shade the original and the purer form of the Buddhist 
religion. They wrote in a language which was designated by them 
as the Sandhyabhasa, or the twilight language, meaning thereby 
that the contents may be explained either by the light of day or by 
the darkness of night. The songs composed by the Mahasiddhas 
were all written in this language, which had always a hidden or a 
mystic meaning. 

It has been made abundantly clear that Vajrayana was 
a direct development of the Yogacara philosophy of Mahayana 
Buddhism, which was started by Maitreyanatha in the third century 
A.D. According to Yogacara, the world, as we see it, has no 
existence. It is the creation of the mind or the momentary 
consciousness which is real. The worldly phenomena, accord- 
ing to Yogacara, are like a dream or as if set up by magic. 
All individuals are composed of a chain of momentary conscious- 
ness, which passes through a series of births and rebirths until it 
is emancipated, when births and rebirths cease. The realization of 
Sunya, they said, leads to the attainment of omniscience, or the 
quality of knowing all things. They formulated that there are two 
kinds of obstructions,^ which, when destroyed by the realization of 
the voidness of the universe, lead to the attainment of omniscience. 
The first is called the Klesavara^a, or the obstruction of sufferings, 
and the second is the Jneyavarana, or the obstruction hiding the 
transcendental truth. Sufferings are feelings such as attachment, 
antipathy, etc., which are indeed hindrances to knowing a thing as 
it is. The other obstruction is the want of perfect knowledge or 
the highest truth, and the inability to impart that true knowledge 
to others for their benefit. The first kind of veil or obstruction 
can be removed only by the realization of the voidness of the 

^ See infra, chap. VIII. 

^ Foreword to TaitvasaiUgraha, op. cit., p. xlvii. 



36 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

universe. The feelings of attachment, hatred, etc., indeed result 
in the first kind of obstruction ; and these impure feelings are 
caused not by external objects, but by the constant practice of 
thinking of the Ego as real. The realization of Nairatmya destroj^s 
the Ego and its connexion with the surrounding objects, which 
are unreal, as also the feelings of attachment, antipathy, etc., 
which are only the outcome of thinking the Ego real. The 
constant meditation on Nairatmya removes the veil and the 
ascetic is then, after considerable practice, able to discover that 
everything is void. This kind of intense meditation leads to 
the realization of Nairatmya of the universe in a way very similar 
to a man’s perception of a lovely damsel about whom he is 
constantly thinking and keenly meditating. If constant thinking 
about the Ego and its connexion with the objective world is 
once destroyed by the realization of Nairatmya, it will not possibly 
again come up in that chain of Vijnana or consciousness. The 
Sravakas and Pratyekas, who are mortally afraid of the cycle of 
existence and desire emancipation only for the self, stand always 
in need of this kind of meditation for extinction of the Ego alto- 
gether from their chain of Vijnana. The Mahayanists, who, on the 
other hand, were imbued with their unbounded feelings of com- 
passion for suffering humanity and who were always prepared 
to help all beings troubled with great suffering, were induced by 
their feeling of compassion to practise this kind of meditation for 
the realization of Nairatmya. But between the Hinayanist and 
the Mahayanist there is only this difference — that, while the Hina- 
yanist is selfish, the Mahayanist is selfless in the matter of 
removing the first kind of veil by meditation on the Nairatmya of 
the external world. 

The second kind of obstruction, namely, the veil covering 
the transcendental truth, can only be removed by constant 
meditation on Nairatmya with great reverence and without 
cessation. By meditating thus the veil is removed and the 


37 


RISE OF VAJRAYANA 

ascetic becomes omniscient; and in this lies the most funda- 
mental difference between the Hinayana and Mahayana. Though 
the Sravakas and Pratyekas are able to realize Nairatmya, 
they cannot obtain omniscience, because of their inability to 
identify themselves with the universe as the Mahayanists are 
able to do from their unbounded compassion for suffering 
humanity. The Hinayana, or the lower vehicle, therefore, is 
an easier path leading to salvation, but the Mahayana, or the 
greater vehicle, is much more difficult inasmuch as it involves a 
great self-sacrifice without the prospect of obtaining any reward. 
For even when, by the removal of the veil of Jfieyavarana, omnis- 
cience is attained, they are required to employ all their religious 
merit for the uplift of suffering humanity and until all creatures 
of the world obtain salvation. With the deliverance of the world 
and with the emancipation of the inmates of Samsara, all Bodhi- 
sattvas may enter Nirvana and be emancipated. 

In order to define more clearly certain principal tenets, it is 
proposed to give here a succinct summary of a highly technical 
Vajrayana work, entitled the Praj nopay aviniscayasiddhi^ com- 
posed by Anangavajra, one of the 84 Siddhacaryas, who flourished 
at about the end of the seventh century A.D. In the first chapter 
the author defines Bhava, or existence, which originates from false 
reflections, or the reflection (Kalpana) of the worldly phenomena 
as real. Existence gives rise to manifold sufferings and to a large 
number of actions and their results. From them originate 
birth and death and a variety of such sufferings. So long as the 
people of the universe consider its outward manifestations as 
really due to ignorance, they neither do good to themselves nor to 
the people at large. It is for this reason that the followers of 
Buddhism, who are bent upon emancipating the three worlds, 
should abandon the reflection of reality. Once reality is abandoned, 

^ Published in the Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, under the title Two 
Vajrayana Works. 



38 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

one should not go to the other extreme and think of everything as 
unreal. Granting that there is difference tetween the two, in the 
cognition there exists no such difference. It is better to take the 
world as real rather than to reflect on everything as unreal, 
because the lamp which is burning can go out ; but how can it be 
extinguished in Nirvana when it is not burning ? Reflection 
of reality should be abandoned, because it is like magic; so also 
that of unreality, because it is non-existent. When the conception 
of unreality is abandoned, it gives rise to a state w'hich is neither 
Samsara nor Nirvana. Realization of the voidness (Sunyata) of all 
worldly phenomena, after careful differentiation between know- 
ledge and the object of knowledge, is what is known as the highest 
knowledge, or the knowledge of Prajni. Compassion is of the 
nature of affection (Raga), as it removes sufferings (Ranjati) 
which spring up from numberless causes. Compassion is called 
Upaya, or means, because it always, like a lx)at, leads him 
towards the goal. The commingling of the two — Prajua and 
Upaya — is like the commingling of water and milk; in it the 
duality is merged into one without distinction and is called 
Prajnopaya. This Prajnopaya is the creative principle of the 
universe, and everything emerges and develops from this principle. 
It is called Mahasukha, because it gives eternal happiness, and 
is known as Samantabhadra, as it is wholly auspicious. 

The second chapter opens with the remark that perfect 
knowledge cannot be defined, as it is dependent more or less on 
self-realization, and, therefore, previous teachers have not attempt- 
ed any definition in the numerous Sutrantas, or works on mantras 
and their practices. Perfect knowledge can only be obtained from 
a qualified preceptor, and without him, however much one may 
try, one cannot get it. Thus the worshipper fails to attain 
success, as a field, though well-tilled, cannot produce if the seed 
is wanting. It is, therefore, very necessary that a preceptor w'ell- 
versed in the Tantric lore should be served and w'orshipped with 



39 


RISE OF VAJRAYANA 

great devotion, so that the knowledge may be attained eventually 
and perfection may be gained. As the Suryakanta (sun-crystal) 
jewel burns when it comes in contact with the rays of the sun, so 
also the Citta (mind) jewel of the disciple suddenly bursts into 
flames when it comes in contact with the preceptor, who, after 
having realized the truth, radiates strong rays of knowledge. 

The third chapter deals with the initiation of the disciple 
into Prajnopaya. The preceptor is to be approached by the 
disciple in the company of the Mahamudra (the great woman), 
who appears charming in outward appearance and is profusely 
decked in ornaments. Then the disciple worships the preceptor 
with a long panegyric, and at the end entreats the guru to grant 
him initiation, so that he may be regarded as belonging to the 
family {kuld) of the Buddhas as their offspring. The preceptor, 
as a mark of great favour, then grants the requisite initiation, after 
associating the disciple in the presence of the assembly with the 
Mahamudra previously described. Further on, the guru gives 
him the five Samayas and imparts instructions on Samvara, or 
restraint, imposed on a Bodhisattva. The initiated disciple there- 
upon pays his compliments to the preceptor for this act of great 
kindness, which has given him the much-longed-for freedom from 
suffering, and takes a solemn vow to place beings in the three 
worlds in the sphere of Buddha-hood after obtaining it himself. 

In the fourth chapter the author dilates on the meditation of 
Prajnopaya. This consists of the meditation on something which 
is neither Sunya nor its opposite, nor a negation of the two. By 
the acceptance of Sunya, or Asunya, numerous false constructions 
arise, and in their attempted abandonment the determination to 
abandon them arises. Therefore both these should be given up. 
In the attempt to abandon both Sunyata and the determination 
also, the cognition of self becomes predominant. Therefore, all 
such methods should be given up. The worshipper should 
think himself as unchanging, absolute, nameless, stainless. 



40 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERIS^M 

without a beginning or an end, like the sky. The compassion- 
ate Bodhisattva should not neglect beings in misery, nor 
should he think whether they exist or not The Prajna is 
so called because it does not admit of transformation, and the 
Krpa (compassion) is so called because it tries to do good to 
all beings, like the Cintamani jewel. The Prajna is absolute ; 
Krpa, or compassion, is absolute. They both commingle to- 
gether in cognition. When this commingling takes place, there 
is neither the knower, nor the knowledge, nor the object of 
knowledge; and that is exactly what is called the highest know- 
ledge. There is neither any doer nor enjoyer, because it is free 
from the knowledge of either the doer or the enjoyer. It is called 
the knowledge of the great truth. In this there is no receiver, no 
giver, no object to be given, no object to be taken. Those who 
have realized this great truth acquire innumerable attainments, 
even while doing ordinary things such as seeing, hearing, talking, 
laughing and eating, or when their attention is otherwise diverted. 
This truth is also known as non-duality, the Bodhi-mind, thunder- 
bolt or Vajrasattva, the enlightened one or the enlightenment. 
This is also known as Prajnaparamita, the embodiment of all 
Paramitas, or Samata or equality, or the best object of meditation 
for all classes of the Buddhas. In this, the world with its movable 
and immovable objects, takes its origin, and from this spring forth 
the innumerable Bodhisattvas, Sambuddhas and Sravakas. The 
ascetic should meditate on this, leaving aside the constructions 
of reality and non-reality; and whoever is able to cast off 
reality and non-reality attains perfection quickly. By thus shaking 
off sins he becomes free from sufferings, and attains countless 
qualities which are excellent and conduce to enlightenment. 

The author then gives us two charming verses describing 
Sarhsara and Nirvana, and in fact these two in a great measure 
point to the height to which Vajrayanists had reached in the 
matter of transcendental philosophy. Sarhsara is defined as : 



41 


RISE OF VAJRAYANA 



5r#ir#rracr^^ ^ i 



f| wni4r^ 4^ 11^ 

The holder of the thunderbolt defines Saiiisara as the 
condition of the mind which is overwhelmed with the dark- 
ness arising out of numerous false constructions, is as fleeting 
as the lightning in a storm, and is besmeared with the dirt of 
attachment, etc., not easily removable. 

Nirvana he defines again as a directly opposite condition of 
the mind:® 







^ li® 

He also said that the excellent Nirvana is another con- 
dition of the mind, which is bright with purity, is free from 
all false constructions and the dirt of attachment, etc., which 
does not know and cannot be known, and is eternal. 

In the fifth chapter practical hints are given to the disciple 
with regard to certain Tantric practices, called the Tattvacarya, 
for the attainment of salvation. This Tatti^acarya, the author 
says, is adored even by the greatest Hindu gods like Murari, 
Siva, Indra and Kubera; and by carrying on these practices 

^ op. dt, p. 18, si. 22. 

* This definition reminds us of the well-known differentiation made hy 
Nagarjuna in his Madhyamaka Kdrikd : 

^ 4T ^ I 

II 

— chap. XXV, Karika 20. 


op. cit., p. 18, si. 23. 



42 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

systematically the Tathagatas obtained the highest emancipation. 
The practices consist in the observance of the different rules 
pointed out in the Mantrayina, namely the Samayas, the five 
nectars, partaking the Pradipa (ordures) and the constant 
company of women, who are the different forms of Prajnaparamita 
on earth. 

The author further on points out that through enjoyment 
alone the ascetic can attain perfection in one life, provided that 
his mind is directed towards the Bodhi, and if he is able rightly to 
perceive the inner nature of the outward phenomena of the world 
as void, and if he makes ceaseless efforts to relieve the distress of 
all beings. If the world is realized as nothing but a dream, or as 
if set up by magic, and if the mind is free from all false reflections 
and is pure by nature, then it is faced with no obstruction 
for obtaining the Bodhi. The author concludes by saying that 
those who look upon profit and loss, honour and insult, misery 
and happiness, blame and praise with the same eye, who are free 
from all false constructions, are always compassionate towards 
worldly beings, and are the followers of the vehicles of the Carya, 
obtain Bodhi without any difficulty. 

From the foregoing it can be easily seen that Vajrayana took 
into account all the best philosophical tenets and theories, and, in 
fact, incorporated all that was best in Buddhism, and probably in 
Hinduism also, and it was owing to this fact that it attained great 
popularity. It satisfied everybody : the cultured and the uncultur- 
ed, the pious and the habitual sinners, and the lower and the 
higher ranks of people and devotees. Vajrayana, which outwardly 
appeared to be a very demoralizing religion, and went against all 
the teachings of Buddha and of the great patriarchs of Buddhism, 
became extremely popular, simply because it was able to cater for 
all tastes and because it was cosmopolitan in character. 


CHAPTER V 


THE PLACE OF ORIGIN 

It is difificult to suggest the exact place where Tantrism 
originated. The introduction of Sakti worship in religion is so 
un-Indian that we are constrained to admit it as an external 
or foreign influence. Some of the Tantras also support this view.^ 
But these Tantrics, who incorporated Sakti worship into their 
religion, had some strongholds of their own from which the 
Tantras were disseminated amongst the Indian people and 
became popular. In the Scidhanamald? we find mention of four 
Pithas, or sacred spots, of the Vajrayanists, namely: Kamakhya, 
Sirihatta, Purnagiri and Uddiyana. The identification of the first 
two is certain. Both are situated in the province of Assam. 
Kamakhya is now known as Kamakhya or Kamarupa, which is 
only a few miles distant from Gauhati, the capital of Assam. 
Sirihatta is the modern Sylhet. But the identification of the two 
others has given rise to much speculation and theorising. Purna- 
giri is sometimes identified with the modern Poona; but this is 
very doubtful, though at this stage it is extremely difficult to 
suggest any identification.® Uddiy^i^a is by far the most frequently 

^ See Nepal Catalogue, Vol. II, p. 148, under ‘Sodasanityatantra': 

^ ^ II 

Also op. cit, Vol. I, preface, pp. Ixxviii ff. That the Tantra came from 
outside India is suggested by the verse : 

^ pp. 453, 455. 

® Mr. H. E. Stapleton, Director of Public Instruction, Bengal, who was 
Tery intimately connected with Assam, suggested to me that Purnagiri may 
very conveniently be identified with the ancient site of Pupyatirtha, in Assam. 



44 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

mentioned among the four Pifhas, and its exact situation has been 
a matter of great controversy. Waddell* identified Uddiyana 
with Udyana in the Swat valley. The Tibetan scholar, S. C. Das, 
followed in his footsteps.” M. Sylvain Levi would place Uddiyana 
somewhere in Kashgarh. Mm. Haraprasad Sastri definitely iden- 
tifies Uddiyana with Orissa. In view of this wide divergence of 
opinion amongst scholars of high reputation, it is necessary to 
enter into the question in detail and examine it carefully. Indra- 
bhuti is described as a king of Uddiyana, and Guru Padmasam- 
bhava, who went to Tibet to help Santaraksita in founding the 
great monastery at Samye, is described as the son of Indrabhuti.* 
Padmasambhava married a sister of Santaraksita in the latter’s 
native place at Zahor,’’ when driven away by his father (Indrabhuti) 
for killing some of his favourite subjects. This Zahor is identified 
with the modern village of Sabhar, in the district of Dacca in 
Eastern Bengal.® Santaraksita belonged to the royal family of 
Zahor, and, therefore, it is hardly possible that the king of this 
place would allow his daughter to be married to an unknown 
vagabond, who came from such a distant place as Kashgarh, or 
Udyana in Swat, being driven out of the kingdom. This marriage 
can be explained only if Uddiyana and Zahor are taken to be 
nearer to each other. Moreover, Uddiyana is mentioned along 
with Kamakhya and Sirihatta, which, as we can see, are very near 
each other ; and it is hardly possible that Uddiyana would be 
associated in Buddhist books with the other two if the distance 
were very considerable.® 

” Lamaism, p. 380. 

” S. C. Das wrongly writes Udyana for Uddiyana, as he might have 
thought the two to be definitely identical. 

® Lamaism, p. 380. 

* op. cit^ p. 382. Za-hor is identified by Waddell as Lahore, with a query 
after it. 

° I am indebted to Mr. N. K- Bhattaiali for this identification. 

* cf. Waddell, op. cit, p. 382: ‘and to the cemetery of Lanka (crtsegs-pa). 



THE PLACE OF ORIGIN 


45 


Uddiyana, according to the authority of the Pag Sam Jon Zan^ 
is the place where Tantric Buddhism first developed. In the 
history of the 84 Siddhas,* Uddiyana is described as a 
country containing 500,000 towns, and divided into two king- 
doms. In one, called Sambhala, Indrabhuti ruled ; while 
the other, Lahkapuri,® was in the occupation of Jalendra, whose 
son had for his wife Indrabhuti’s sister, Laksmihkara. When she 
became a Siddha, after being initiated by Indrabhuti, the latter 
retired after handing over the kingdom to his son. 

This also does not clear up our difficulties; but the identi- 
fication of Uddiyana becomes dependent on that of Lahkapuri, 
which is generally identified with either a peak in the Amarakan- 
taka mountain, or a place in Assam or Central India or Ceylon.^ 
But Lanka has never been even remotely considered in the 
northernmost or the westernmost part of India, such as either 
Kashgarh or Swat. Now, if we accept the identification of Lanka 
in Assam, then Uddiyana will have to be located in the same 
country, probably in the western part of it; and this seems to 
be more likely, as Kamakhya and Sylhet are both situated 
in Assam, which until recently formed part of the province of 
Bengal. 

Moreover, Luipa, who is regarded as one of the earliest 
Siddhacaryas, is described in the Pag Sam Jon ZaiJ as a member 
of the fisherman caste who rose to be the writer in the employ of 
the king of Uddiyana and was then known as Samantasubha. He 
met Sabarlpa, who initiated him into the mysteries of Tantrism. 

in the Za-hor, where he was named “Padmasambhava”’. Note this Lanka was a 
part of the kingdom of Uddiyana. 

^ op. cit., index, p. cxli. 

® TdraMdtha,p. 325. 

® Note in Waddell, op. cit., p. 382, Lanka is associated with Za-hor. 

^ LH.Q., Vol. II, June, p. 354, 

® op. cit., index, p. cxv. 



46 AN 

In the Tan 
svara, and, 
Luipa 
which have 
O DoM,~ w 
introductio 
entitled thf 
translation 
the orisfina 


there is then an apparent discrepancy m the two statements 
of the native place of Luipa. The testimony of the Pag Sam Jm 
Zan would take it to Uddiyana ; while the Tangyur catalogue will 
have it in Bengal. There is, however, no real discrepancy in the 
two statements, because Luipa can Ixith belong to Uddiyana and 
still be a Bengali. On the circumstances enumerated above, and 
the identification of Uddiyana not being settled, it is quite possible 
to locate it in Bengal. If, however, Lankapuri — the counterpart of 


UddiySn^ also will have to be located in Assam, possibly in the 
western part of it, which is also a part of Bengal.® 

It is, then, in Uddiyana that Tintrism first developed, and 
was probably transmitted to the other Pithas, Kamakhya, Sirihatfa 
and Purnagiri (which must be somewhere near), and thence to 
the rest of India. 

^ P. Cordier, Caialogjte du Fonds Tibiiain de la BiMiotMqtte Naitmakf 
2 partie, p. 33, under No. xii, 8. 

® Published by the Vangiya Sahitya Pari§ad, Calcutta, under the editor- 
ship of Mm. Haraprasad Ssstri. See intro., p. 20. 

* In the SddAanamSla, pp. 80 and 83, Sarahapa is also associated with 
Uddiyana. This Sarahapa was one of the earliest Siddhacaryas. In the 
Bauddka Gan 0 Doha are recorded a number of his songs, composed in the 
Bei^ali language. He is said to have been bom in the Kingdom of Rajni (?)> 
in Eastern India. 







CHAPTER VI 


THE TANTRAS 

Both Hindus and Buddhists were alike prolific writers of 
the Tantras, and the extant literature on them is wonderfully 
extensive. One of the reasons why the word Tantra cannot 
be defined, but can only be described, is because of the fact 
that an astonishing number of subjects comes within its 
purview, not to speak of its own numerous subdivisions. The 
Buddhist Tantras in outward appearance resemble the Hindu 
Tantras to a marked degree, but in reality there is very little 
similarity between them, either in the subject matter or in the 
philosophical doctrines inculcated in them, or in religious prin- 
ciples. This is not to be wondered at, since the aims and objects 
of the Buddhists are widely different from those of the Hindus. 
It is difficult to determine when and under what circumstances the 
word Tantra came to be employed in the sense in which it is used 
in this literature; nor is it possible to trace the origin of the 
Tantras or of the people who first introduced them. To any careful 
student of Tantric literature it will be evident that when magical 
practices become extremely popular with one section of Indian 
population the other sections take them up and incorporate 
them into their religion, mostly in a modified form to suit their 
own requirements and tenets ; and this process of emergence and 
relapsing goes on continually. The Vedic sacrifices, as performed 
by the orthodox Brahmanic society in the very earliest times, 
attracted a large number of converts from among the Vratyas; 
and it can be very easily imagined, from the practice obtaining in 
the present time, that people in those days looked upon the sacri- 
fices, and the Brahmanas performing them, with superstitious awe 
and reverence. The sacrifices were at one time very popular. 



48 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

specially in the pre-Buddhistic period ; and, as a matter of fact, no 
undertaking of any consequence was hazarded without a sacrifice 
immediately preceding it. Sacrifices were performed mostly for 
obtaining happiness in this, the next, and future lives. The results 
of these sacrifices could, under the circumstances, never be ascer- 
tained with scientific regularity, and it appears, therefore, all the 
more strange that sacrifices, even in modern times, should be so 
popular in Southern India, especially in Travancore, and that we 
should hear even now of sacrifices being performed on a gigantic 
scale and at an enormous cost. Buddhism came in when sacrifices 
were the order of the day ; when numerous animals were immo- 
lated and eaten in monstrous assemblies. In Asoka’s time also we 
find sacrifices and the free use of meat in the assemblies very 
popular. That the very first of a long series of rock-edicts of Asoka 
should deal with the stoppage of such assemblies displays the great 
influence sacrifices, with their cooked meat, exercised on the 
minds of the Indian population, including the Brahmanas. It is 
no wonder, therefore, that, on the dismemberment of the Mauryan 
empire, the sacrifices prohibited by the great Buddhist emperor 
should be revived with great vigour under the SamavedI Suhgas, 
who performed two sacrifices* on a grand scale in the very capital 
of the king who had insulted the orthodox sacrifice. Though 
Buddha was antagonistic to all sorts of sacrifices, necromancy, 
sorcery or magic, he is credited, nevertheless, with having given 
instructions concerning Mudras, Mandalas and Tantras, etc., so 
that by virtue of these prosperity in this world could be attained 
by his less advanced disciples, who seemed to care more for this 
world than for the Nirvana preached by him. India in Buddha’s 
time was so steeped in superstitions that any religion which dared 
forbid all kinds of magic, sorcery and necromancy could hardly 
hope to withstand popular opposition. A clever organizer, as 

* J.B.O.R.S., K. P. Jayaswal, ‘An Inscription of the Sunga Dynasty’, 
Vol. X, p. 205. 


THE TANTRAS 49 

Buddha was, he did not fail to notice the importance of incor- 
porating magical practices in his religion to make it popular from 
all points of view and attract more adherents thereby. Up till 
now we were ignorant of Buddha’s attitude towards the Tantric 
practices, excepting a few meagre references in Pali literature, 
and were unable to determine the time of their introduction in 
Buddhism. But Santaraksita (a.D. 705-762) and his disciple 
Kamalaslla brought out this connexion very forcibly in the 
Tattvasamgrahi^ and its commentary, stating fully the reasons 
which made Buddha incorporate them in his system. The 
Tantras and the mantras have been practised by the Buddhists 
since the time of Buddha ; but, unfortunately, we do not possess 
any connected account of them. We only know that a few works 
on the Dharanis must have been in existence early in the 
beginning of the Christian era. The Dharanis are only 
unmeaning strings of words, which are said to confer great 
merit when muttered repeatedly. Then comes the worship 
of Buddha in the Prajnaparamita, with all the paraphernalia 
of worship, such as is to be found in the Tantric worship, 
for obtaining worldly happiness. Then follows the different 
recensions of the Prajnaparamita-. the Sutra, the Hrdayasutra 
with its Dharanis and mantras, recitations of all of which are able 
to confer the benefit of reading the whole of the Prajnapammita. 
Contemporaneous with the Prafndpammita is the Manjusrimula- 
kalpa., where ManjusrI in a princely form is worshipped in a 
Mandala, with all the paraphernalia of worship and an immense 
number of Mudras, mantras and Dharanis. Later on, in the 
Guhyasamafa, the five Dhyani Buddhas, with a Sakti attached to 
each, are found described in a Mandala, and a number of secret 
and immoral practices introduced. 

On the side of Hinduism, the Pauranic literature attracted a 


^ op. cit, p. 90S. “ ' 


50 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

large number of people, by its wonderful stories holding out a 
promise of an award of merits to be gained by hearing it, and 
practising the rites and observances recommended therein, and 
worshipping the gods described in it. The Puranas in a very 
popular form continued to wield vigorously their influence 
on the minds of only the superstitious people of India, right up 
to the time of the Muhammadan conquest ; and after that, in 
a more or less acute form, up to the present time. The flood 
of mighty western civilization may generally be held responsible 
for the total annihilation of public discourses on the Puranas and 
allied literature in many parts of Eastern India ; the same forces 
are now at work everywhere in other parts of India also. 

Moreover, the conception of gods and goddesses in the 
Pauranic literature was so very attractive that the Buddhists 
in later times could not help incorporating the idea of godhead 
into their religion ; and when they actually did this they deified 
all important personalities of Buddhism, together with the deifica- 
tion of a large number of abstract ideas and philosophical concepts, 
and included a few purely Hindu gods such as Ganesa, Sarasvati, 
etc., in their pantheon. The Buddhists busied themselves with 
producing a variety of literature on the Tantras, and during the 
Tantric age thousands of works were written. These works were 
readily transmitted through the Himalayan passes to Tibet and 
Mongolia, and thence to China and Japan, and their influence 
made a large section of population in these countries believers in 
gross magic and abject superstition. It is not strange, therefore, 
that many of these Tantric works, whose originals in Sanskrit are 
lost, are now preserved in translations in the pages of the Tibetan 
Tangyur. The developments in Tantra made by the Buddhists, 
and the extraordinary plastic art they developed, did not fail to 
create an impression also on the minds of the Hindus, who readily 
incorporated many ideas, doctrines, practices and gods, originally 
conceived by the Buddhists for their religion. The literature. 


THE TANTRAS 


51 


which goes by the name of the Hindu TantraSj arose almost 
immediately after the Buddhist ideas had established themselves; 
though after the Tantric age, even up to the last century, Tantric 
works continued to be written by Hindus. 

Having thus given a survey of the history of Tantric litera- 
ture and the mutual interchange of ideas, doctrines and concepts, 
we will now proceed to give a definition, or rather a description, 
of what is ordinarily meant by the word Tantra. Many scholars 
have tried to define and describe the Tantras; but each and 
every one of their descriptions is incomplete and insufficient. 
They are bound to be so, because the writers of the Tantras 
were most erratic and never followed any definite plan. More- 
over, the definition which holds good in the case of the Hindu 
Tantras is not found adequate when applied to the Buddhist 
branch of this literature. Therefore, the definitions of Tantra, as 
given by critical students of Sanskrit literature, are not unlike the 
description of an elephant given by a number of blind men. 

The Hindus will not call any work a Tantra^ which does 
not include the following subjects among many others: stories 
of the creation and the destruction of the world, mystic charms, 
description of the abode of gods and of holy places, the 
duties of men in the four stages of life and the position of the 
Brahmanas, description of the abode of ghosts and other nocturnal 
beings, the mystic figures, the origin of magicians, the celestial 
trees, position of the stars, discourses on old stories, meanings of 
technical terms, vows and observations, differentiations of purity 
and impurity, enumeration of the characteristics of males and 
females, an account of the duties of kings, the customs of the age, 
and the rules of law, besides other spiritual subjects. The Hindus 
distinguish this sastra from two others of a similar nature, which 
are known by the names of Agama and Yamala. They treat 

^ See SddkanamcUa, VoL II (G.O.S., No. XLVI), intro., p. xix f. 

9306 


52 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

of certain subjects which are not covered by the description of the 
Tantra given above. The Agama,^ to be called an Agama, must 
include, besides the stories of the creation and the destruction of 
the world, the mode of worshipping gods and goddesses and the 
way of obtaining perfection and repetition of mantra according to 
a definite number, the practise of six cruel rites, and four kinds of 
meditation and austerity. The literature, which is known as 
Yamala,^ contains an account of creation, astronomical specula- 
tions, daily ceremonies, the order of festivals, technical aphorisms, 
division of four castes and various subcastes, and the customs and 
manners of the time. 

The characteristics of Tantra, Yamala and Agama are 
given in almost every important Hindu Tantric work. The 
definitions are not all alike and rarely give a complete idea; 
and all the definitions, taken together, will not suffice to give a 
true account of the entire contents of this enormous literature. 
In the definitions given above it will be seen that speculations 
on alchemy, medicine, divination, astrology, horoscopy, and 
many similar pseudo-scientific subjects, which frequently make 
their appearance in the Tantric literature, are not included in the 
definitions of the word Tantra. 

Similar features present themselves in the Tantras of the 
Buddhists, and the range of the numerous subjects treated of 
in this literature will be evidenced by the Catalogue of the 
Tibetan Tangyur, in the Bibliotheque Nationale, in Paris, com- 
piled by P. Cordier. To understand the bulk of the Tantric 
literature of the Buddhists, we must first take into account the 
fact that it is distributed among the three great divisions into 
which the later Buddhism was divided — namely, the Vajrayana, 
Sahajayana and Kalacakrayana. Besides these there are other 
minor Yanas with no marked individuality, such as the Tantra 


^ ibid., p. XX. 


* ibid., p. xxi. 


THE TANTRAS 


53 


Yana, the Mantra Yana, the Bhadra Yana, etc., which may be said 
to have originated from the Vajrayana — the principal Yana among 
the three mentioned above. Moreover, we must also consider the 
numerous sub-divisions of each of these three powerful Yanas and 
many less powerful systems, in all of which the Buddhist Tantric 
literature was deeply interested. The Tantric literature was 
mainly written by the Vajrayanists, who called themselves 
Vajracaryas; and by the Siddhas, whose number is reputed to be 
eighty-four. 

Without associating ourselves with the views expressed by an 
eminent authority on later Buddhism, let us close this chapter 
with the definition and the origin of Tantra given by Maha- 
mahopadhyaya Harapasad Sastrl as early as 1911, in his introduc- 
tion to N. N. Vasu’s Modern Btiddhism and Its Followers in Orissa. 
There he writes : ‘ The word Tantra is very loosely used. Ordi- 
nary people understand by it any system other than the Vedas. 
But it really means the worship of Sakti, or female energy. The 
female energy is worshipped in conjunction with male energy. 
The union of male and female is the essence of Tantra.’^ 

This definition truly applies to the advanced Buddhist 
Tantras of the Yogatantra and Anuttarayogatantra classes des- 
cribed in sequel, but it cannot be said to apply to the lower 
forms of Tantra, such as the Kriyatantrayana or the Carya- 
tantrayana, nor is the definition all-embracing so as to include all 
classes of Tantric literature, such as the Sadhana, DharanI, Stava, 
Homa, Mandala, etc. 

But what the same veteran scholar has said regarding the 
origin of Tantra is well worth considering by all students of 
Tantra, Hindu or Buddhist. He has said: ‘Tantra came from 
outside India. Most probably it came with Magi priests of the 
Scythians. In the old Samhitas such as the Nihsvasa-tattva 


^ op. dt, p. 10. 



54 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

Samkifa wonder is expressed at the novel mode of initiation enjoin- 
ed by the Tantras. Vedic initiation was known, but people wondered 
how there could be a new initiation other than Vedic. It came 
from outside India and spread on the outskirts of the Aryan world. 
The five original places of Tantra in India are Jalandhara, Puna 
(Purnagiri), Sriparvata, Odiyana and Kamakhya.’^ The Magi 
origin of Tantra is a brilliant suggestion, though materials 
are not now sufficient to prove this contention. Asanga — the 
originator of Tantra in Buddhism — is reputed to be a Gandharian, 
and it is no wonder that he drew the inspiration from the Magi 
priests of Scythian origin. The Magi priests must have introduced 
the Sakti worship, or the union of male and female energies, and 
in the time of Asanga the ground was well prepared to receive 
this introduction, which was not known before the time of Asanga 
and that of the Guhyasamaja, either in the Dharani treatises or 
even the Arya-Mmjusnmulakalpa. This introduction for the 
first time found expression in the Guhyasamajatantra, where the 
theory of the five Dhyani Buddhas was for the first time systema- 
tized, and each was assigned a Sakti for the purposes of union. 


op. dt., pp. 10, 11. 


CHAPTER VII 


MANTRAS 

The mantras, or mystic syllables, constitute the backbone of 
Tantric Esoterism and of Vajrayana. They are of innumerable 
varieties, such as Bija Hrdaya, Upahrdaya, Puja, Arghya, Puspa, 
Dipa, Dhupa, Naivedya, Netra, Sikha, Astra, Raksa, and so forth. 
These mantras are mostly a string of unmeaning words, but they 
sometimes disclose distinctly the influence of a language now 
unknown.^ It is, however, impossible to say how these mantras 
were introduced into ancient India. Vedic hymns were indeed 
called mantras ; but they had their meaning. The Vajrayanists, 
of course, in several instances attempted to trace the origin of 
certain mantras which point unmistakably to Buddha himself as 
their originator.^ The mantras of Vajrayana seem to be a 
development of Dharanls contained in works such as the Vidhya- 
dharapitaka^ to which a reference has been given by Hiuen-thsang. 
The Dharanls, according to Kern,® existed in Buddhism froin very 
ancient times, and seemed to have been introduced into Buddhism 
for the benefit of the less-advanced followers, who did not care so 
much for Nirvana as they did for their material prosperity in this 
world. Such recruits to Buddhism were enjoined to read some of 
the Sutras, which, however, proved to be beyond their intelligence. 
For their benefit these had to be shortened into Dharanls, and the 
lay -disciples were enjoined to commit them to memory. This 

^ See, for instance, the mantra of Jahguli for the prevention and cure of 
snake-bites. Sadhatiamala, pp. 249-50. 

^ cf. Sadhanamald, p. 334 : I 

p. 335 : ^ I 

® Manual of Buddhism, p. 6. 



56 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

seems to be the process in which Sutras underwent a change 
in very ancient times, and, ultimately, when they were further 
reduced, they gave rise to mantra. To illustrate, let us take 
Astasahasnkaprajvaparamita, which is in itself too stupendous for 
a tolerably learned Buddhist to read through and understand, 
not to speak of the illiterate masses, who were mostly responsible 
for the great popularity of the Mahayana. They could not, indeed, 
read this vast literature for acquiring merit ; for them something 
shorter was necessary. Praj^pammita, with its 8,000 stanzas, 
was therefore reduced to a hundred, and, ultimately, to a very few 
stanzas, which became known as the Praj^pammitakrdayasiitra, 
which was further reduced to make room for the Praffiapara- 
mifadharani. The next step in this chain of evolution was in the 
formation of a Prajnaparamita mantra, which again led to the con- 
ception of a Bija in one syllable Pram, in response to which 
Sunya may transform itself into the form of the goddess by 
name Prajnaparamita, who is a veritable metamorphosis of the 
Prajnaparamita literature. The evolution of the Tantric mantra 
can be traced thus through its successive stages in the Buddhist 
literature. When, however, we turn our attention to Hindu 
literature, we are surprised to find that the Tantric mantras 
suddenly make their entry into it without showing even 
a faint trace of the earlier and cruder stages of development. 
This seems to be a sufficient reason for believing the Hindu 
mantric system to be later than Vajrayana, and for holding that 
the mantras were incorporated into Hinduism bodily from 
Buddhism. 

Once again it becomes necessary to discuss the origin of the 
Buddhist mantras and point to their originator. It may be remem- 
bered that all the original Tantric works of Buddhism are in the 
form of Sahgitis, where Buddha is introduced in an assembly of 
the faithful; and where he delivers these Tantras, including the 
mantras and secret practices, and gives his reasons for not doing 


MANTRAS 


57 


so earlier. The usual reason is, that he refrained from communi- 
cating the substance of the new Tantra earlier because people 
were not well-prepared to receive it.^ This fact points unmistakably 
to Buddha as the originator of the Tantras, mantras, doctrines 
and the esoteric tenets and practices. In the SMhanamala, which 
is a collection of 312 short works called Sadhanas, and of 
which the earliest MS. bears a date in the Newari era which is 
equivalent to A.D. 1165, we find Sugata, or Buddha, mentioned as 
the originator of several powerful mantras. The Sadhana of 
Jahgull, for instance, which is in the form of a Sahgiti, is said to 
have been delivered by Buddha himself.^ The Sadhana of Vajra- 
sarasvatl is said to have been composed in accordance with the 
instructions of the Sugata. The Prajnaparamita mantra is said to 
have been delivered by Buddha himself. As already mentioned, 
the famous logician, Santaraksita, and his erudite disciple, Kamala- 
sila, both of whom belonged to the eighth century of the Christian 
era, are of opinion® that Buddha himself instructed the people in 
Mudras, mantras, Mandalas, etc., so that they might obtain pros- 
perity in this world. From these evidences it is easy to conclude that 
Buddha introduced some sort of esoterism into his religion, which 
in later times, owing to a variety of influences, developed into a 
full-fledged esoteric system in the form of Vajrayana. 

The Vajrayanists maintain that the mantras are endowed 
with great powers and they blindly believe in them. In the 
Buddhist Tantric literature passages showing this blind faith on 
their part are very frequent and eloquent. In one place it is said : 
‘What is there impossible for the mantras to perform, if they are 
applied according to rules ? In another place it is said that. 


^ Gukyasamaja, G.O.S., chap. XVII, p. 144. 

^ Sddhanamala, pp. 248 f., 334, 335. 

® TattvasaiTtgraka, p. 905. Kamalasila says : 

* Sadhanamdla, p. 575: I 



58 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

‘ through the repeated mutterings of the mantra, so much power 
is generated that it can astonish the whole world The mantras 
by their power can even confer Buddha-hood. The merits that 
accrue from the mutterings of the mantra of Mahakala are so 
numerous that all the Buddhas taken together cannot count them, 
even if they were to count without cessation for a number of days 
and nights. The five greatest sins, according to Buddhism, are the 
five Anantaryas ; but these can be easily washed away, and 
perfection can be gained, if the mantra of Lokanatha is repeated. 
By the repetition of the mantra of Khasarpana Buddha-hood 
becomes as easy of access as the Badaraka fruit in the palm of the 
hand. By the DharanI of Avalokitesvara even an ass can 
keep at least 300 stanzas in memory. The mantra of Ekajata® 
is said to be so powerful that the moment it is muttered the 
person becomes free from danger, is always followed by good 
fortune, his enemies are all destroyed, and without doubt he 
becomes as pious as Buddha. Examples such as these can easily 
be multiplied. Lest the people prove doubting, which they are 
always apt to be with regard to such mystic matters, the Tantras 
from time to time give the assurance that the power of the mind is 
extraordinary, and one should not doubt, therefore, what has been 
said about the efficacy of the mantras.® 

It is said the mantras are only powerful when they are 
applied strictly in accordance with the rules. In fact, the rules are 
so strict and minute and so numerous that it is quite impossible 
that any mantra is capable of being applied by ordinary mortals in 
strict conformity to them ; and this is a factor which is apt to 
discourage the enthusiasm of the new recruits. ‘You should not 
be sorry,’ says Kumudakaramati, ‘because you are not able to 


" ibid., p. 334. 1 

® ibid., p. 262. ^ I, etc. 

® ibid, p. 330. ¥[l4%'lgiq- l 



MANTRAS 


59 


apply the mantra in accordance with the rules stated before. At 
least you should perform the rite of self-protection and think of the 
closure of the boundary and of worship, and repeat the mantra as 
long as you can and aim at perfection. In accordance with your 
powers and actions you will certainly obtain results. The testimony 
of the Tantras, in this connection, is that such a worshipper can 
alone give protection to the world.’ ^ The repetition of the mantras 
has to be done with the greatest care, and the Tantras give direction 
for their proper repetition. For instance, they should not be 
repeated too quickly or too slowly. The mind at the time of 
repetition should be free from all impure reflections and should 
be completely concentrated on the letters of the mantra, which 
should be repeated so long as there is no tired feeling.® 

The mantras are considered most sacred by the Vajraya- 
nists ; and their accuracy was jealously guarded by them, in much 
the same way as the purity of the Vedic mantras was maintained 
by means of several ingenious devices. These mantras are 
composed usually in ordinary prose, but occasionally in an 
enigmatic language, the meaning of which sometimes becomes 
very difficult to understand. The mantras are done into prose 
and mnemonic verses for the obvious purpose of memorizing. 
These verses are extremely curious and give practically no 
meaning to ordinary readers. Let us take, for instance, the 
verse — 

wP# 

mm ^ 'ft ^ I 

iff II 

^ ibid., p. 13. l, etc. 

^ ibid., p. 10. ^ ff Sfffifff 



60 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 
When translated, it will have the following meaning 

In the beginning there is the holder of the disc, who 
is followed by two Picus and Vardhani joined with Prajna. 
After that there are two Jvalas, which are followed by 
Vardhani after Medha ; even at the end there are two Dhiris, 
Buddhi and Vardhani ending in Svaha. This mantra, which 
has the power to confer the cleverness of a poet, was 
introduced by the Sugata. 

At first sight the verse gives no meaning, unless you know 
that it is the statement of a mantra which refers to Vajravinasaras- 
vati and runs as: 

There were other ways of preserving the accuracy of mantras, 
by dissecting the letters and expressing each of them by means of 
symbols. Two examples of this kind are given below. 

First, let us take the mantra of Sarasvati, which is expressed 
in the following mnemonic verse : 

^ citi; u ' 

It stands on the second of the seventh and is the fourth 
of the eighth ; it is accompanied by the fourth of the first and 
is decorated with the spot. 

The explanation seems to be: the second syllable of the 
seventh class (Antahstha) is Ra; fourth of the eighth (U§ma) 
is Ha; fourth of the first (Svara) is I ; the spot is — Anusvara ; 
therefore the resultant Bija is HRiM, which is the Bija of 
Sarasvati. 

Let us take the mantra of Ekajata, as expressed in a 
mnemonic verse, as the second example : 

^ ibid., p. 335. ibid., p. 335. 







MANTRAS 





fc^ >n I 

^ #f^rm3Tfi n 

3 WflPl 5PI^3: 11 
fTO fir^'4yHp=id*< 1 

4ci^'*m< ^rs 11 

f Wf^r =^ ^ ^T f'%T ^tTftc[>3: 1 
S^ #in?5 II 

m ar^kf ?FT^M'^lPi'^f^+K'®!>?; I 

sRiif^ 3 ^>r 3 WT^ |> " 



It ends in H, placed on fire, is pierced by the fourth 
vowel, and is accompanied by spots and the half-moon. This 
Bija is a great Bija. Now hear of the second, which ends in 
T with fire, is pierced by the same and is accompanied by 
Nadabindu. The third also I state carefully, which ends in 
H trampling on the sixth vowel and is accompanied by 
Nadabindu. This Bija is the most powerful and is able to set 
the three worlds on fire. I state now, as was done before by 
Buddha, the fourth syllable which ends in Pha and gives all 
kinds of perfections. In order to complete the mantra hear 
the half syllable ending in Ta, which is deprived of its A and 
by mere utterance saves all. 


First Bija consists of H R (fire) I (fourth vowel) H (spots) li/I, 
and the resultant syllable is Hrimh(s). The second Bija includes 
T R (fire) I and IVI, which together makes Trim. The third has 
H U (sixth vowel) and M, which together give Hum. The fourth 
is Pha, while the fifth letter is Ta, which is deprived of its A and 
therefore considered as a half letter. The last two will give Phat. 
So the whole mantra stands as: Hrirh Strim Hum Phat 


* ibid., p. 261 f. 



CHAPTER VIII 

SOME PROMINENT AUTHORS 

Never before has an attempt been made to construct a 
chronology of Tantric authors: probably because the Vajrayana 
is a field of literature entirely unexplored. It is hazardous, 
indeed, to make an attempt of that kind, and any research made in 
the beginning is likely to be faulty and not altogether free from 
error. Even so, it is necessary to make an attempt in order that 
the development of Tantric ideas, doctrines and practices may be 
more fully appreciated. 

Very little is known regarding the Tantras before they made 
a debut in a well-developed form in the beginning of the Tantric 
period, which began in about the middle of the seventh century A.D. 
It is bound to be so, because the Tantras, as has already been 
pointed out, were practised in secret and handed down in secret 
through an unbroken chain of preceptors and disciples,^ who 
never made themselves known, and, as such, passed out of recog- 
nition. 

All that we know of the earlier period is that the Manjuiri- 
nmlahalpa^ which was earlier than the Gukyasamaja, was probably 
written in the second century A.D., or even earlier; that the 
Guhyasamaja was written in the time of Asanga, in the third 
century A.D., and that Asanga composed a sadhana of Prajna- 
paramita,^ where he made a definite reference to the five 
Dhyani Buddhas and their consorts. In the later period, however, 
there are more materials for constructing the chronology of 
Vajrayana. These consist, mainly, of a few important succession 
lists of gurus and disciples, and some fragmentary accounts 


^ Taranatka, 201. 


* Sadhanamala, p. 321. 



SOME PROMINENT AUTHORS 63 

found in the work of Taranatha and the Pag Sam Jon Zan. One 
of the successions is as follows : 

1. Padmavajra. 5. Lilavajra. 

2. Anangavajra. 6. Darikapa. 

3. Indrabhuti. 7. Sahajayogini Cinta. 

4. Bhagavati Laksmi. 8. Dombl Heruka/ 

The second succession list, on which we can rely for the 
present, is the list given by Kazi Dawasamdup, in his Introduc- 
tion to the Cakrasamvara Tantra. The succession given here is 
stated as follows : 

1. Saraha. 5. Vajraghanta. 9. Guhya. 

2. Nagarjuna. 6. Kacchapa. 10. Vijayapa. 

3. Sabaripa. 7. Jalandharipa. 

4. Luipa. 8. Krsnacarya. 11. Tailopa. 

12. Naropa." 

It is natural to assume that the Tantric gurus were 
particular about their succession lists, and each important Tantra 
may be believed to have a succession list of this kind. When 
these Tantras were translated into Tibetan, the translators 
occasionally noted the tradition of the Tantras, as it was handed 
down through a succession of gurus and disciples. It is in this 
way that some lists have been preserved and at present constitute 
our chief authentic material in determining the chronology of this 
extensive literature. 

Further landmarks are furnished by an important statement 
made by Taranatha, in his History of Buddhism, with regard to 
the introduction of some original Tantras by one or other of the 
Siddhacaryas. While mentioning the origin of some of the most 
important Tantras, Taranatha gives us the information that Saraha 

^ Catalogue du Fonds Tibi tain de la BibliothSgue Nationale par P. Cordier, 
2® partie, p. 211 f. 

^ Arthur Avalon’s Tantric Texts: Shrlcakrasambhdratantra, edited by 
Kazi Dawasamdup, intro., p. xxxv. °sambhara stands for Sanskrit °samvara. 



64 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

introduced the Biidd/iakapalatantra, Luipa the Yoginisancaryd, 
Kambala and Padmavajra the Hevajratantra, Krsnacarya the 
Samputatilaka, Lalitavajra the Krsnayamdritantra, Gambhlra- 
vajra the Vajrdmrtatantra, Kukkuripa the Mahdmdydtantra, and 
Pito (?) the Kdlacakradintmy 

With these materials in hand, let us attempt to determine the 
chronology by assigning a definite time to some of the more 
familiar authors, and fix the time of others by assuming an interval 
of twelve years backwards or forwards. The two lists given 
above are pretty long, covering a considerable period, and seem 
to be fairly authentic, though not altogether correct. In these 
two lists there are several points of contact ; one is represented 
by Jalandharipa, who was the first in the second list to profess 
the Hevajratantra and to compose a work on the subject. The 
Hevajratantra introduced by Padmavajra of the first list, who 
must, therefore, be earlier than Jalandharipa by at least one genera- 
tion. The second point of contact is that Kamalasila, who was 
removed by one generation from Indrabhuti, wrote a book in which 
he closely followed a commentary composed by Saraha.^ The third 
point of contact is that Darikapa in one of his songs reverentially 
mentions the name of Luipa, who must, therefore, be earlier. 

Now in the first list the name of Indrabhuti, whose time has 
been almost definitely fixed, is well known. He was the father of 
Guru Padmasambhava, who, along with Santaraksita, the author of 
the Tattvasamgraka, went to Tibet on an invitation from the 
contemporary king, and erected a monastery at Samye in the year 
A.D. 749, on the model of the Odantapuri Vihara.* If we take 
Padmasambhava to be thirty years of age when he went to Tibet 
in the year A.D. 747, then Indrabhuti’s time will be approximately 

^ Tdranatha, p. 275 f. 

* Catalogue du Fonds Tibitain, 2® partie, p. 248. 

® Waddell, Lamaism, p. 379 et seq.; see also Tattvasaihgraha, Foreword, 
pp. X fiE, 



SOME PROMINENT AUTHORS 


65 


fixed to a period between A.D. 687 and A.D. 717 onwards. If we take 
A.D. 717 as the starting-point, and twelve years between each 
succession of a guru and his disciple, the approximate timing of 


the first succession list will be as follows: 
1. Padmavajra 

A.D. 693 

2. Anangavajra 

„ 705 

3. Indrabhuti 

» 717 

4. Laksmihkara 

„ 729 

5. Lllavajra 

„ 741 

6. Darikapa 

„ 753 

7. Sahajayogini 

„ 765 

8. Dombi Heruka 

„ 777 


If Jalandharipa is taken to be removed by only one generation 
from Padmavajra, who introduced the Hevajratantra for the first 
time, and an interval of twelve years is taken between each 
succession, the chronological order of the second succession will 
be as follows : 


1. 

Saraha 

A.D. 633 

2. 

Nagarjuna 

n 

645 

3. 

Sabaripa 


657 

4. 

Luipa 

>> 

669 

5. 

Vajraghanta 

j > 

681 

6. 

Kacchapa 

>!> ; 

693 

7. 

Jalandharipa 

>> 

705 

8. 

Krsnacarya 

>) 

717 

9. 

Guhya 

>) 

729 

10. 

Vijayapa 

n 

741 


With regard to Tailopa and Naropa, it may be assumed that 
the list does not furnish correct information, as we are able to 
check its veracity from other sources. Between Vijayapa and 
Tailopa, therefore, there must have been many intermediate gurus 
who are not mentioned. 



66 


AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

It is well known that Tailopa was a contemporary of Mahipala, 
probably the first Mahipala of the Pala dynasty of Bengal, who 
flourished between A.D. 978 and 1030 ; while Naropa succeeded 
Jetari, also a contemporary of Mahipala, as a Dvarapandita of 
Vikramasila.'^ Therefore circa A.D. 978 may be assigned to 
Tailopa and A.D. 990 to his disciple Naropa. 

When we fix the time of Saraha, we practically go to the root 
of the Buddhist Tantra or Tantrayana, because Saraha is reputed 
to be one of the chief promulgators of the Tantric religion. Both 
Taranathaand the author of the Pag Sam JonZan admit that Saraha 
was one of the earliest writers and diffusers of Tantric doctrines 
and practices. While mentioning the origin of the Tantras, Tara- 
natha places Saraha’s BuddhakapMatawtra as the first in his list. 
Saraha’ s name has also been placed on the top of the succession 
list of a Tantra of no less celebrity than the Cakrasamvaratantra. 
Saraha was one of the Siddhas to popularize the Tantra. The 
Tantra, which was practised in secret from the time of Asahga, or 
even from the time of Buddha, first got publicity through the 
teachings of a band of Siddhas, with Saraha at their head. 

1. SARAHA {A.D. 633) 

According to the author of the Pag Sam Jon Zan^ Saraha, or 
Rahulabhadra, was the name of a Buddhist sage born of a Brahman 
and a Dakini in the city of Rajnl (?), in the Eastern country. He 
was an adept both in the Brahmanical and the Buddhist lores, and 
flourished during the reign of Candanapala of Pracya. He worked 
some miracles in the presence of King Ratnaphala and his Brahman 
minister, and thereby converted them to the Buddhist faith. 
Afterwards he became the high priest of Nalanda. It is also related 
of him that he visited Orissa, where, from one Covesakalpa, he learnt 
the Mantrayana, and from there proceeded to Maharastra. There 
he united in Yoga with a female ascetic, who had approached him 

^ index, p. xxvi. 


^ Pag Sam Jon Zan, index, pp. xli, Iv. 



SOME PROMINENT AUTHORS 67 

in the guise of an archer's daughter. Having performed the 
Mahamudra ritual of mysticism, he attained perfection. He was 
thenceforward known as Siddha Saraha. He used to sing the 
Doha hymns of mysticism, and thereby converted five thousand 
people and their king to Buddhism. Saraha composed a large 
number of verses in Sanskrit, and their translations are preserved 
in the pages of the Tibetan Tangyur. Saraha was also known 
as Sarahabhadra and Rahulabhadra, and was one of the earliest 
Buddhists responsible for diffusing the Tantric knowledge and 
popularizing it. It is noteworthy that the time assigned to him, 
according to the new calculation, makes him a contemporary of 
Dharmakirti (A.D. 600-50) during or after whose time, accord- 
ing to Taranatha, the Tantras got publicity. 

2. NAGARJUNA (A.D 645) 

The next author in importance is Nagarjuna, who is, of 
course, different from the author of the same name who is 
regarded as the founder of the Madhyamaka school of Buddhist 
philosophy. Absurd accounts are recorded about the life of this 
Nagarjuna ; and wild stories are told of his stupendous magical 
feats. M. Walleser,^ after a thorough investigation of the accounts 
of N^arjuna from Tibetan and Chinese sources, has come 
to the conclusion that there was no such person as Nagarjuna; 
and that he was a pure myth. From his learned and scholarly 
observations it can be easily seen that the Tibetan sources have 
hopelessly mixed up together the accounts of Nagarjuna — the 
disciple of Asvaghosa, with Nagarjuna — the disciple of Saraha. 
One flourished in the first and the second quarter of the second 
century ; while the other flourished in the middle of the seventh 
century, the two names thus being separated by five hundred 
years. But as these two persons are taken erroneously to be the 
same, a serious confusion has arisen. The Chinese version, which 

^ The LUe of Nagarjuna, from Tibetan and Chinese Sources, p. 1. 



68 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

does not take into account the Tantric Nagarjuna, is less confus- 
ing, though it also abounds in absurd stories about his life. We 
are not^, however, concerned here with the accounts of Nagarjuna 
the founder of the Madhyamaka school ; but it can be easily 
proved that the second or the Tantric Nagarjuna is a historical 
person and a follower of Vajrayana. Two Sadhanas of his are 
recorded in the SM/ianamald, one for the worship of Vajratara, 
while the other relates to the worship of Ekajata.^ In the colophon 
of the latter, it is distinctly said that Nagarjuna rescued this 
Sadhana from the country of Bhota, which is identified with 
Tibet.^* Nagarjuna was a leading star in the Vajrayana horizon, 
and composed a large number of Tantric works, the translations 
of many of which have been preserved in the Tibetan Tangyur.® 

3. gABARIPA OR SABARAPA (A.D. 657) 

Sabaripa is the third author in chronological order. He is 
described in Tibetan works^ as belonging to the hill-tribe called 
the Sabaras, or the huntsmen, in Bangala, where he met Nagarjuna 
during the latter’s residence in that country, and embraced 
Tantrism, and, after being initiated by him along with his two 
wives, LokI and GunI, attained sainthood. This Sabaripa also must 
have been a historical person, as he has composed a Sadhana of 
Kurukulla, which was published in the Sddkanamdld for the first 
time.® This Sadhana is found in only one manuscript, namely, 
the one from Cambridge University, which bears a date in the 
Newari era equivalent to A.D. 1165. He is also the author of a 
number of melodious songs in the vernacular of his country, which, 
according to the Tibetan authorities, was Bangala, or Bengal. 

^ op. dt., pp. 193 f. and 265 f. 



® See infra, chap. VIII. 

^ For instance, in Pag Sam Jon Zan, index, p. cxxxi. 
® op. dt., p. 385. 



SOME PROMINENT AUTHORS 


69 


4. LUIPA (A.D. 669) 

Luipa is our next author in chronological order. He is 
termed the first Siddhacarya, or magician; and is even now 
respected as such, and in the Tangyur Catalogue he is distinctly 
called a Bengali.’' In other Tibetan books he is further said to 
have sprung from the fisherman caste of Uddiyana, and was very 
fond of the entrails of fish. He was formerly a clerk in the 
employ of the king of Uddiyana ; and was known as Samantasubha.® 
He composed many mystic songs, and several Dohas of his are 
recorded in the Battddha Gan O Doha. 

5. PADMAVAJRA (A.D.693) 

Very little is known about the two intermediate authors 
Vajraghanta (a.D. 681) and Kacchapa (A.D. 693), because we have 
practically no historical information regarding their birthplace or 
their biography. Padmavajra, who comes next, was a great name 
in Tantric Buddhism, and stands first in the first succession list 
given above. He was an author of a large number of works, out 
of which only two are extant in Sanskrit, while many others are 
preserved in translations in the Tibetan Tangyur. According to 
Taranatha, he was the first to introduce the Hevajratantra in 
Vajrayana, which he did along with his collaborator, Kambalapada. 
Taranatha also makes Padmavajra a contemporary of Indrabhuti, 
Lalitavajra and Kukkuripa.® This Lalitavajra is said to have 
introduced the three divisions of the Kr^'myamdritantra^ and, 
therefore, should be distinguished from the later Lalitagupta, who 
was a disciple of Advayavajra. Kukkuripa, another contempo- 
rary of his, is believed to have introduced into Vajrayana the 
Mahamayatantra. 

Padmavajra was a historical figure, and a very interesting 

’ op. cit., 2® partie, p. 33. ® Pag Sam Jon Zan, index, p. cxv. 

® Tardnailia, p. 188. * Taranatha, p. 275 f. 



70 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

work of his, entitled the Guhyasiddhi^ has lately been discovered. 
This was considered a work of great authority in Tibet, even so 
late as A.D. 1747, when the Pag Sam Jon Zan was written. The 
whole work is written in what is called the twilight language, or 
the ‘Sandhyabhasa’; but there is enough to show to an ordinary 
reader that he advocated many mystic and objectionable rites and 
practices, which he termed secret rites. According to Padma- 
vajra, such practices and rites were first formulated by the Buddha, 
and were recorded in the ‘Srisamaja’, which is only another name 
of the Guhyasafmjatantm. He says there is no better treasure 
in the three worlds than the Srisamaja. He further says how 
wonderful are the teachings of Vajrayana, which are the most 
secret of all secrets and are without Svabhava (real nature) and 
are pure and incomparable ! He advocates the meditation on the 
Prajfia (the wisdom) and the Upaya (the means) and the remem- 
brance of the adamantine mind, all of which are more secret than 
all secrets, and which are not possible of attainment without the 
female element, or the §akti. He asks his followers to enjoy the 
Mahamudra conjoined with the Upaya, which is in their own 
bodies, and says that the knowledge of Mahamudra is most auspi- 
cious and of a very peculiar nature, which can be realized by one’s 
own self only. Padmavajra, in accordance with the teachings of 
the Guhyasamaja, follows the doctrine of the five Dhyani Buddhas, 
and says that by these five forms alone Sambodhi can be attained 
in accordance with the pronouncement of the Tathagatas. Siddhi, 
or perfection, is indeed difficult of attainment in one life ; but 
those who so desire should, according to Padmavajra, take up the 
secret rite, which is the destroyer of all thoughts of duality. If 
he is initiated in the Tantra of Srisamaja, which is the cause of 
all happiness, he may attain divine perfection by coming in 
contact with the Mahamudra (or the great woman). But in order 

* MS. copies exist in the Oriental Institute, Baroda, and the library of Mm. 
Haraprasad Sastri. 


SOME PROMINENT AUTHORS 


71 


to do so the initiation (Abhiseka) must be taken from a guru, 
without whose kind assistance no success can follow. Throughout 
the Guhyasiddhi similar ideas occur, and it is not necessary to 
enumerate the practices inculcated therein. The long and short 
of the whole work is, that without Mahamudra no emancipation or 
success in any rite is possible.^ But if the worshipper is initiated 
into the Mahamudra cult, success is assured even if he may do 
things which are against all laws, social or religious.^ 

6. JALANDHARIPA (A.D. 705) 

Jalandharipa, also known as Hadipa, whom we have placed 
one generation after Padmavajra, or Saroruhavajra, is made by 
Taranatha® a contemporary of several important personalities, such 
as Bhartrhari, Vimalacandra, Krsnacarya, Tantipa and even 
Dharmakirti. In the Pag Sam Jon Zan^ it is recorded that he 
was buried in a hole underground, by the order of the king 
Gopicandra of Catigaon, who was afterwards converted to > 
mysticism by the Acarya. It is, indeed, very difficult to place him 
correctly from the above accounts, and all that can be said now is 
that Jalandharipa was regarded as a very ancient Siddhacarya, as 
may be evidenced by Taranatha’s making him a contemporary of 
Dharmakirti, whose time is definitely known to be the first half of 
the seventh century A.D. His other contemporaries are mostly 
mysterious persons, and none can say with any measure of 
accuracy as to the time when they flourished. The very fact that 
Jalandharipa wrote a commentary on a work of Saroruhavajra® and 
followed the Hevajratantra by him,® places him one 

^ rrfiw I ^ ^(i TTfipi TIT 

® op. cit., p. 195. 

* op. cit., index, p. xcvii. The same story is repeated in many old Bengali 
works. i 

® Catalogue du Ponds Tibitainy 2® partie, p. 18. ® Tdrdnatha, p. 275 f. 


72 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

generation after Padmavajra, who flourished at the end of the 
seventh century. 

A very interesting story is recorded of the life of Hadipa, or 
Jalandharipa, more or less in the same strain in a number of 
old Bengali books, such as the Dharmamangala, Sunyapurdna, 
Mdnikcdnder Gan, Mayanamatir Gan, Gopicdnder Git, Gopicdnder 
Sannyds, etc. In all these stories Hadipa is connected with 
several other important personages, viz. the queen Mayanamati, 
her husband, the king Manikcandra of the sixteen Vangas, Gopi- 
candra, their only son, and Krsnacarya, or Kanhupa, one of 
Haflipa’s disciples. It is recorded that when Gopicandra was 
born, the royal guru had predicted that he would not live for 
more than 19 years. This fact was known only to the queen, who 
used to pass all her time in meditation, and was nicknamed by 
her husband the king, Muni, or the ascetic. When Gopicandra 
was only a boy of twelve, his father, without giving intimation 
to his wife, married him to four princesses, namely Phandana, 
Candana, Rodana and Paduna. Soon after this marriage king 
Manikcandra died of fever. Mayanamati thereafter became very 
anxious, on account of the possibility of her son’s meeting with a 
premature death. In order that this calamity might be averted, 
she persuaded her son to take initiation from Hadipa who was a 
Siddha, but unluckily the raja could not remember the mantras, 
and, once being unable to fill miraculously with water a dried up 
tank by the incantation of the mantra taught by Hadipa, he became 
enraged and buried the sage underneath the stable. 

For a long time Hadipa’s disciple, Krsnacarya, or popularly 
known as Kanhupa, made a search for his guru and became 
anxious at his sudden and mysterious disappearance. But later on, 
however, he came to know about the whereabouts of Hadipa by 
mystic means, and went straight to Mayanamati and told her about 
the foolish actions of her son, Gopicandra. In order, however, to 
protect Gopicandra from the anger of Hadipa, they both hit upon 


SOME PROMINENT AUTHORS 73 

the device of placing a golden image of Gopicandra in front of the 
hole in which Hadipa was buried underground. They removed the 
earth, and as soon as the body of the guru was seen all those 
present prostrated themselves on the earth ; but, as the image did 
not show any respect, Hadipa became enraged and through his 
anger the image melted and was turned into ashes. Mayanamati 
at this opportunity held a bagful of Indian hemp before the guru, 
who had been by this time in Samadhi for full five years. He 
broke his fast with a maund and a quarter of hemp, the same 
quantity of Kucila (nux vomica), and Dhatura (stramonium). But 
ultimately he understood the whole trick played upon him by 
Kanhupa, and pronounced a curse that he would be beheaded at 
the fort of IDahuka. 

The queen, Mayanamati, again persuaded Hadipa to give 
initiation to Gopicandra so that his premature death might be 
averted. Gopicandra at first was very obstinate, but ultimately 
yielded. The queens of Gopicandra scented danger, and wanted 
to dispose of Hadipa by means of poison, but he passed through 
the ordeal entirely unharmed. Ultimately Gopicandra took the 
initiation and Hadipa put him to a severe test for twelve long 
years, after which he obtained perfection.^ 

7. ANANGAVAJRA (A,D. 70S) 

Anangavajra, the disciple of Padmavajra, is characterized in 
the history of the eighty-four Siddhapurusas as the son of king 
Gopala of Eastern India. The time of Gopala has been fixed by 
V, A. Smith as cir. A.D. 730-40.^ But S. C. Vidyabhusana places 
him between A.D. 695 and 705.® Dr. S. Krsnaswami Iyengar 
doubts the date of V. A. Smith; and, in the absence of any inscrip- 
tional or monumental evidence, we are in favour of accepting the 

^ See, for instance, Gopicdnder Sannyas, ed. N. K. Bhattasali, intro., p. 11 f. 

® 3rd edition, p. 397. 

® History of Indian Logic, p. 323. 



74 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

earlier date/ Anangavajra’s date will, therefore, be in consonance 
with the theory advanced in the history of the eighty-four 
Mahasiddhas. Anangavajra seems to be a fairly well known 
author, as can be seen from the number of works wwitten by him, 
the translations of which now find place in the Tibetan Tangyur. 
One of his famous compositions is the Prajnopayaviniscayasiddhi, 
and the work is characterized by its boldness of spirit, its lucidity 
of teaching and brevity of expression. This work has now been 
published as No. XLIV of the Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, as one 
of the Two Vafrayana Works. Like Jalandharipa, who was pro- 
bably his contemporary, he also composed several works on the 
Hevajratantra, which was for the first time introduced into Bud- 
dhism by his preceptor, Padmavajra. 

8. INDRABHUTI (A.D. 717) 

Indrabhuti, the next author of importance, was the king of 
Uddiyana, which is generally identified with Orissa but which 
may also quite conceivably be a part of Bengal.® He was the 
father of Padmasambhava, who, conjointly with the famous logi- 
cian, Santaraksita, erected the first regular monastery at Samye, in 
Tibet, in the year A.D. 749.® Indrabhuti’s sister was Laksmlnkara, 
who was married, according to the history of the eighty-four 
Siddhas,* to the prince of Sambhala, the counterpart of Uddiyana, 
and attained Siddhi. He was regarded as an authority on Vajra- 
yana and Tantra long after his time.® He has written a large 
number of works and at least twenty-three among them are 

^ It is quite possible that he ruled during the years named by V. A. Smith, 
but it is very lihely that he ascended the throne by popular consent at a very 
late age. 

® See supra, chap. V, pp. 44-46. ® Waddell, Lamaism, p. 576. 

* Die Geschisten der 84- Zanberer ; see Indrabhuti, 

® H. P. gastri, Nepal Catalogue, Vol. II, p. 56. 


SOME PROMINENT AUTHORS 


75 


preserved in the pages of the Tibetan Tangyur translations/ We 
have, however, been fortunate in discovering at least two of his 
works in original Sanskrit ; namely, the KurukullcL-sadhana^ which 
appears in the Sadhanamala, and the J nanasiddhi. This latter has 
been published along with the work of Anahgavajra as No. XLIV 
in the Gaekwad’s Oriental Series. The /nanasiddhi is an extremely 
interesting work in twenty-two chapters, giving in a nutshell 
many leading doctrines and rites of Vajrayana, which throw 
immense light on this obscure religion. 

9. KRSHACARYA (A.D. 717) 

The next author in chronological order is Krsnacarya. In the 
Tangyur® several Krsnacaryas are found, and it is indeed difficult 
to differentiate between them in the absence of more definite 
materials. Taranatha makes Krsnacarya a contemporary of 
Jalandhari, Bhartrhari, Gopicandra and even Dharmakirti. But 
he is probably wrong in making him a contemporary of Dharma- 
kirti, who is definitely known to have flourished in the first half of 
the seventh century. Krsnacarya seems to be a contemporary of 
Jalandhari and Gopicandra,* both of whom in all probability 
flourished in the first quarter of the eighth century. According to 
the Pag Sam Jon Zan, this Krsna was born of a Brahman family 
of Orissa, and was initiated into the mystic cult by Jalandharipa. 
Krsna had a disciple in Tantipa,® who was a weaver. Krsna is 
credited in the same work with having introduced the Tantras in 
which the male and female divinities sit clasping each other.® 
Krsnacarya wrote Dohas also in his own vernacular, which was 
probably Udiya and had a great affinity with the old Bengali 
language. No less than 12 songs of his are available in the 

* Bauddha Gan O Doha, app., p. 14. ® op. cit., p. 353. 

® Bauddha Gan 0 Doha, app., pp. 21 ff. 

* Sukur Muhammad, Gopicdnder Sannyds, intro., p. 2. 

® op. dt., index, p. v. ® op. dt., p. Ivii. 



76 


AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 


original vernacular, and were printed and published for the first 
time in the Bauddha Gan O Doha} 

10. LAKSMiliJEARl (AJD. 729) 

In the history of Vajrayana the name of Bhagavatl Laksmi, 
or Laksminkara, is interesting, not only because she was a woman, 
but also because of the novel doctrines she preached without 
reserve and with great confidence and emphasis. Born in the 
royal family of Uddiyana, a sister of IndrabhQti, she showed 
remarkable boldness in preaching her own peculiar theories in a 
short but interesting work, entitled the Advayasiddhi} This work 
was long lost in the original Sanskrit, but was preserved in the 
Tibetan Tangyur in translation.® To this work the attention of 
scholars was first drawn by Dr. Mm. Haraprasad Sastri, in an 
article contributed to one of the stray numbers of the Dacca 
Review. We have since had an opportunity of studying this book 
more carefully, and the leading ideas revealed by its study are 
summarized below. Throughout this work, the influence of Indra- 
bhuti’s JMinasiddhi is very perceptible ; and this is due probably 
to the fact that Laksminkara was not only a sister of Indrabhuti, 
but also one of his favourite disciplesv* 

In the Advayasiddhi a most remarkable and bold innovation 
is introduced by the authoress. Hitherto the Vajrayanists 
advocated the worship of the five Dhyani Buddhas and their 
innumerable emanations; but what Laksminkara advocated 
was quite unusual and strange, even though since her time this 
new teaching gradually won many adherents, who were styled 
Sahajiyas ; and are still to be found among the Nadha Nadhis of 
Bengal, and especially among the Bauls. Laksminkara declares 

See, for instance, op. cit., p. 18. 

® Copies of the MS. are available in the libraries of the Oriental Institute, 
Baroda, and Mm. Haraprasad Sastri. 

® op. cit, 2® partie, p. 211. 


* ibid., p. 211. 


SOME PROMINENT AUTHORS 77 

that no suffering, no fasting, no rites, no bathing, no purification 
nor other rules of society are necessary ; nor do you need to bow 
down before the images of gods, which are prepared of wood, 
stone or mud ; but you should with concentration offer worship 
to your own body, where all gods resided 

She explains later on, without however openly declaring the 
truth, that when the truth is known there is no restriction for the 
worshipper. He can eat anything, he can drink anything and 
violate any laws, human or divine. Towards women, she declares, 
no hatred should be displayed ; because they are the embodi- 
ments of the Prajna in restraint.^ Later on, she says that instruc- 
tions on Nirvana should always be obtained from the preceptor. 
In the whole of the movable and immovable world, there is noth- 
ing better than the guru, through whose kind offices the wise 
obtain many kinds of perfection.® 


11. LiLAVAJRA (A.D. 741) 

Laksmihkara’s direct disciple was Lilavajra.'* He had also a 
great reputation as a Vajracarya, and wrote a large number of 
authoritative works. So far as we know, none of his works is 
extant in the original Sanskrit, though many are preserved 
in translations in the pages of the Tibetan Tangyur.® No 
less than nine works of his are mentioned in the Tangyur 
Catalogue, and, from their titles, it can be surmised that both 
Vajrayana and Sahajayana were in a flourishing condition 
in his time ; and that the Guhyasamajatantra and the Krsnaya- 


fiswiioTOt: I 'ijfrFi#r wiPT iwrflcf: ii 

^05531 W0T % I % Weft m 0WT wnto II 

® I m HURTtf; ll: II 

^ Catalogue du Fonds Tibitain^l^ partie, p. 212. 

^ Bauddha Gd?i O Dohd^ app., p. 75. 



78 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

timritantra wext regarded as works of very great authority. It 
appears from the Tangyur that he acknowledged another guru, 
by name Vilasavajra/ besides Laksmihkara already mentioned. 
In the same way, besides Darikapada he had another devoted 
disciple, who called himself Karunacala. This latter was a poet 
of a very high order, and several of his compositions are published 
in the Sadhmiamala.^ His verses are distinguished by an easy 
flowing diction and devotional language. At the end of the 
Sadhana of the Vajramahakala he has respectfully mentioned the 
name of his guru, Lllavajra. 

12. DARIKAPADA (A.D. 753) 

The name of Darikapada, one of the disciples of Lllavajra,® is 
fairly well known through the publication of the Bauddka Gan O 
Doha. From this work it is evident that Darika belonged to Ben- 
gal and wrote a number of songs in his vernacular, some of which 
are recorded in the work above referred to.* In one of his songs 
he offers his obeisance to Luipa,® and this leads the editor. Dr, 
Mm. Sastrl, to think that Darika was a direct disciple of Lui.® It 
has already been shown that Luipa belonged to an earlier age, and 
so any close connexion between the two is hardly admissible, 
Darika probably mentioned Lui because Lui is regarded in some 
quarters as the first Siddhacarya, and this seems to be a more 
reasonable explanation. Darika composed a pretty large number 
of works in Sanskrit; but none of them is now extant in the 
original. At least ten works of his are preserved in translations 
in the Tibetan Tangyur,’’ where Darika is credited with having 
written books on the Cakrasamvaratantra., Kalacakratantra and 
Vajmyoginliantra. 

* Catalogue du Fonds Tib&tam, 2® partie, p. 87. 

® op. cit., p. 590, also 391 (Lilasani) etc. 

® Catalogue du Fonds Tibitain, 2® partie, p, 212. 

* op. cit, intro., p. 30. ® op. cit, p. 53, ^ etc. 

* op. cit, intro., p. 30. ^ Bauddha Gan 0 Doha, index, pp. 39, 40, 


SOME PROMINENT AUTHORS 


79 


13. SAHAJAYOGINl CINTA (A.D. 765) 

Next comes SahajayoginI Cinta, a female ascetic and a disciple 
of Darikapada, who is known to us as the authoress of the 
Vyaktabhavanugatatattvasiddhi} A translation of this in Tibetan 
also exists.^ It appears from her work that she was a follower of 
the Vijnanavadin school, and laid particular stress on the universe 
being nothing but the creation of the Citta, or mind. It is the 
mind, she says, which begets miseries, and in consequence creates 
external objects. The Prajna and Upaya are also creations of the 
mind, and when they combine they give rise to Mahasukha in the 
mind, which fancies the whole external world to be the forms of 
Mahasukha. The mind, she says, has its vagaries and its own 
ways : sometimes it is sleeping, sometimes it is awake, sometimes 
it begets desires, sometimes it is pure and at others it is 
impure, sometimes it has many forms, and sometimes it is in an 
indescribable state. The Yogin, who is able to realize the 
voidness of the external world and keep his mind free from 
reflections in all its different states and in all its vagaries and 
ways, is really the emancipated ; and Buddha-hood for him is 
easy of attainment. At the end of the work, the authoress describes 
Vajrasattva in eloquent language, and pays him a glowing tribute 
by characterizing him as one who is realized by self alone, who 
defies comparison and is omnipresent and all-pervading, who is 
the creator, destroyer and protector of the universe, and who 
brings into prominence the manifestations of the mind.® 

14. POMBI HERUKA (A,D. 777) 

Next comes Dombl Heruka, the disciple of SahajayoginI, 
who, like Darika, is well known to many through the publication 

^ A copy of the MS. is preserved in the Oriental Institute, Baroda. 

® Bmtddha Gdti O Doha, app., p. 96. 

® WTR; tii: I Wf # i 

sWtHOTW II 


80 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

of the Bauddha Gan 0 Doha, already referred to. The Tibetan 
authorities agree in recording that he was a king of Magadha, but 
became an ascetic later on.^ In the Tibetan Tangyur he is 
designated as Acarya, Mahacarya and Siddhacarya, and his name 
is included in the list of the eighty-four Mahasiddhas. He wrote 
books on Sahajayana and Vajrayana, and composed a book of songs 
in vernacular entitled the Dombi-gUika. Several of his songs are 
recorded in the Bauddha Gan O Doha, and very probably they are 
taken from this Dombi-gltikd composed by him. He composed a 
Sadhana of the goddess, Nairatma, and this is recorded in the 
Sddhanamala.^ It appears from the very opening lines of this 
Sadhana that he followed the Hevajrabintra^ He wrote a fairly 
large number of works in Sanskrit, and among them at least eight 
are extant in translations in the Tibetan Tangyur.* Besides these 
eight, he wrote another work entitled the Sahajasiddhi^ which 
has been discovered in the original Sanskrit. This is a highly 
interesting work, even though it is short and divided into three 
small chapters, not exceeding a hundred verses in all. In it there 
are certain topics of absorbing interest, and we take this oppor- 
tunity of recording some of the views expressed by the author. 

DombT formulates that the worship of Kula is the most 
important in the Tantric religion ; without it no success can be 
achieved ; but with it great success is possible of attainment.® 
While explaining the word, Kula, he says, Kulas are five in number 
and they originate from the five Dhyani Buddhas, Aksobhya, 
Vairocana, Amitabha, Ratnasambhava and Amoghasiddhi ; and 

* Taranatha, p. 323 ; Pag Sam Jon Zan, index, p. cxliii. 

® op. cit, p. 443. 

* Bauddha Gan, app., p. 34. 

® A copy is preserved in the Oriental Institute, Baroda. 

® m I 



SOME PROMINENT AUTHORS 


81 


this is the reason why they are called Kulesas, or the lords of the 
Kulas or the families. Dombi thus echoes the doctrines inculcated 
in the Guhyasamaja, the earliest Vajrayana work extant. 

From the word Kula, the words Kulacara, Kuladharma, 
Kaula, Kaulika, etc., are derived. The Kaulas declare themselves 
to be Tantric Hindus. From the literature extant on Kaulism, 
the meaning of Kula is not clear. Moreover, the large number 
of interpretations of the word shows unmistakably that the 
Hindus were not certain about the meaning of it; but the 
meaning in the Buddhist sense, as expressed in the Guhya- 
samaja and the Sahajasiddki, is quite clear and unequivocal. 
The Buddhists gave only a single interpretation of the word ; the 
Kaulas, according to them, mean the worshippers or the followers 
of the originators of the five families, namely of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas. The question will then arise as to whether the Kaulas 
are really Hindu or Buddhist in origin. We cannot here discuss 
this great question, which should remain open for the present 
until sufficient materials are at hand to prove either theory. 
There is, however, very little difference between the Kulacara 
of the Hindus and the Tantric practices of the Buddhists ; 
because in both the desire to do improper and illegal things to the 
fullest extent is present. 

Dombi Heruka has explained Mahasukha ; and the happiness 
obtainable from it has been fully dealt with. Happiness, which 
can best be obtained from one’s own experience, according to him, 
has four successive stages : Ananda, Paramananda, Viramananda 
and Sahajananda. By the combination of the two elements, Prajna 
and Upaya, these four stages of great happiness can be obtained.^ 
It can only be experienced by one’s own self, and when it is 
realized emancipation, or perfection, can easily be attained. In 





82 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

the eleventh century Advayavajra also voiced the same opinion."^ 
Dombl Heruka was also responsible for introducing certain new 
elements which are not mentioned here, as that would be going 
into minute details unnecessarily. 

The next period of the development of Tantric culture among 
the Buddhists is represented by a set of most powerful writers and 
popular gurus, such as Dipanhara (A.D. 980-1053), Advayavajra, 
or Avadhutipa, his disciple, Lalitavajra,^ Tailopa of Catigaon 
(Chittagong), Ratnakarasanti, Prajnakaramati and Naropa, all of 
whom were contemporaries of king Mahipala I of the Pala 
dynasty,® who flourished between A.D. 978 and 1030. Those who 
are interested in this latest development of the Tantric culture of 
the Buddhists, are recommended to consult the excellent edition 
of the Advayavajrasamgraka, which is published, with a summary 
and a scholarly introduction in English, by Dr. Mm. Haraprasad 
Sastrl, the celebrated authority on the subject, in the Gaekwad’s 
Oriental Series as No. XL. 


^ AdmyavajrasaiHgraha (G.O.S., No. 40), p. 32. 
® cf. Sadhanamala, p. 267. 


1 I! 


3 


Indian Teachers oi Buddhist Universitiesy p. 158. 


CHAPTER IX 


AIMS AND OBJECTS 

The aims and objects of the Tantrics, as has been indicated 
already, were either to obtain emancipation or the countless 
Siddhis, or perfections, mostly for prosperity and happiness in the 
present life. The word Siddhi is closely associated with the word 
Sadhana, which means a procedure by which one can attain the 
different perfections. The Sadkanamata of the Buddhists consists 
of three hundred and twelve such Sadhanas, indicating the 
methods to be pursued for obtaining particular Siddhis. The wor- 
shipper should always take care to conform to the directions given 
in the Sadhana and to practise the rites with patience and zeal. 
The Hindus generally recognize eight Siddhis, though occasion- 
ally 18 and 24 Siddhis are also acknowledged. The eight 
Siddhis^ are: 


sffSrtrr 

Atomization. 


Levitation. 


Magnification. 


Extension. 


Efficacy. 


Sovereignty. 


Mastery (over elements). 


Capacity to will actual facts. 


In the Brahmavaivariapurana^ mention is made of 34 kinds 
of Siddhis ; including the eight already cited. Some of them are : 

^ Paianjali YogasUtra, III, 45 ; and its coininentary. 

^ KrsnajanmakhaV'da, chap, 78, si. 20-29. See also TanirasaraiY&sviixtSLti, 
5th ed.), pUl7. 



84 


AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 



Power to hear distant sounds. 


Power to enter into other people’s bodies. 


Power to go at will. 


Omniscience. 


Power to stop the progress of Are. 


Power to stop the current of water. 


Immortality. 


Power to stop the current of air. 


»r Full control over hunger, thirst and sleep. 


Entering into all kinds of physical bodies. 


Perfection in speech. 


Power to revive the dead. 


Power to draw vital force. 


Power to award life. 


Power to stop the functions of the sense organs. 


Power to deaden the mtellect. 


One who is able to attain, by a particular process, a large 
number of the foregoing powers is called a Siddhapurusa, or 
one who has attained perfection. In mediaeval times, it is said 
there were many Siddhapurusas in India, who surprised people 
by their wonderful, miraculous and stupendous feats. The 
Buddhists recognized 84 such Siddhapurusas, and in Nepal and 
Tibet homage is still paid to their memory. They are venerated 
in these countries, and their traditional likenesses are still found 
hanging on the temple walls and other places. 

The Siddhas again are of three varieties, according to the 
Tantrasara, a Hindu Tantric work, composed by Krsnananda 
Agamavagisa, who flourished in about the seventeenth century of 
the Christian era. The three varieties are Uttama or the first 
class, Madhyama or the middle, and Adhama or the lowest class, 
and the characteristics of each class are also enumerated in the 

Tantrasara, op. dt, p. 417. 


1 



AIMS AND OBJECTS 85 

same treatise. According to it, a Siddha will be recognized as 
belonging to the first class, when he is able to fulfil all his desires 
by mere thought, or, in other words, as soon as a desire arises in 
his mind that very moment it is fulfilled. The second class of 
Siddhas is able to conquer death, commune with gods, enter 
unperceived into the bodies and homes of others, move in the 
firmament, hear the gods conversing in the heavens, understand 
all terrestrial truths, obtain ornaments, conveyances, etc., enjoy 
long life, bewitch people, perform miracles, remove diseases by a 
mere glance, extract poison, obtain erudition in all branches of 
knowledge, renounce all worldly enjoyments, practise Yoga in all 
its eight sub-divisions, show compassion to all beings, obtain 
omniscience, etc. The third or lowest class of Siddhas obtains 
fame, long-life, conveyances, ornaments, familiarity with the king, 
popularity with royal personages and the people, power to bewitch, 
wealth and prosperity, children and family. 

It can be easily seen from the above that the Siddhas belong- 
ing to the third class were never designated as Siddhapurusas, 
who were attached either to the first class or the middle class. In 
all Tantras, Hindu or Buddhist, general directions are always 
given as to the manner of obtaining Siddhi by the muttering of 
mantras. In case legitimate muttering of the mantras and 
conformity to the regulatfons do not bestow the desired Siddhi, 
the Tantras also give directions for obtaining it by seven different 
processes.^ 

Having thus described the nature of the Siddhas or magi- 
cians, let us now proceed to characterize the different Siddhis or 
perfections, the possession of one or the other of which entitles a 
man to be called a magician. The word, Siddhi, may be defined as 
the attainment of super-normal powers of the mind, body or the 
sense-organs. The Siddhi is generally known to be of five 

^ Tanirasara, op. cit., p.41S : mmm 1 



86 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

varieties^ — Janraaja (co-existent with birth), Ausadhija (due to 
drug), Mantraja (due to the agency of mystic syllables), Tapoja 
(due to austerities), and Samadhija (by reason of intense medita- 
tion). The mind is compared to a river in the rainy season, 
with all the exits closed except one, through which the water 
rushes with tremendous vigour. When the mind in the same way 
is concentrated on one particular thought, and is not allowed 
to wander away through numberless channels, it is able to 
acquire great strength, which is called Siddhi, or perfection. 

Siddhis, as conceived by the Buddhist Tantrics, are of various 
kinds, and range from success in love affairs to the attainment of 
the highest emancipation, and they owe their origin mostly to 
mantras or magic syllables. If we examine the kind of Siddhis for 
the attainment of which the Buddhists of the Tantric age busied 
themselves in muttering mantras and executing complicated 
Tantric practices, we shall be able to understand the aims and 
objects of the people and their mentality. Hence, a study of these 
practices is not superfluous, as it is capable of throwing a flood of 
light on the state of Tantric culture among the Buddhists. 

In all Tantric works of the Buddhists great anxiety is shown 
for averting and curing diseases, and for the extraction of snake 
poison and prevention of snake-bites. This is quite natural, 
because these matters are practically beyond human control, and, 
therefore, the aid of magic was eagerly sought by the afflicted 
people. Next in importance to the above is the longing for 
acquiring a knowledge of the Sastras without their study, but 
only through the agency of mantras. They also believed that 
Bodhi, or emancipation, was obtainable through the agency 
of mantras alone, or when mantras were associated with certain 
practices. Great anxiety is also shown for the attainment 
of Sarvajnattva, or omniscience, or the position of a Buddha, both 


^ Patanjali Yogasutra, I, 1. 


AIMS AND OBJECTS 87 

signifying one and the same thing, namely emancipation. The six 
cruel rites and the eight great Siddhis also had their share of 
attention. The Tantric Buddhists also possessed a great desire to 
have the mighty Hindu gods as their servants, whom they believed 
to be conquerable by mantras and willing to do menial work for 
the magician. 

They also believed that the benign act of protection could be 
granted by divine agencies and also secured by mantras. Curiously 
enough, the aid of mantras was widely availed of by the Tantric 
Buddhists for vanquishing their opponents in public discussions.^ 
From this it appears clear that religious discussions in public 
assemblies were very common, and victory in these assemblies was 
eagerly sought by all classes of people, including the Buddhists ; 
and it is no wonder that gods and mantras should be invented in 
order that the Sadhaka might easily obtain victory in learned 
assemblies without being qualified for it. This leads us to believe 
in the stories recorded in the Pag Sam Jon Zan, that in public 
assemblies disputants of various religions used to assemble and 
take part, each staking his own religion. Thus people were 
converted and re-converted to different religious systems when 
defeated in public discussions, sometimes with a large retinue of 
their disciples. Those who claim in modern days that the Hindus 
in earlier days never made converts belonging to other religions 
are, therefore, not quite correct in their information. 

A great desire is also shown to perform miracles, probably 
for the purpose of creating an impression on the public mind as 
to the benefits accruing from the practices enjoined in the Tantras. 
Whether or not they could actually obtain such spiritual powers as 
they claimed, it is not the province of this treatise to discuss. But 

^ cf. Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala, No. 151 : 

No. 155 : f^cOfcT No. 218 : 

No. 256 : | etc. 



88 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

we read in theTantras the story of monks who were habituated to go 
out for alms, as is evident from the devices invented by them which 
miraculously induced people to offer alms of their own accord/ 

Their conception of future happiness was also of an interest- 
ing character. In one place a desire is expressed for a Siddhi 
which will enable the worshipper to remain in a state of rapture 
in the company of numberless Apsarasas in the land of the 
Vidyadharas, where the Lord of Heaven will hold the parasol over 
his head, Brahma will act as the prime minister, Vemacitrl as the 
army-commander, Hari as the gate-keeper, and the naked god, 
Sankara, will discourse on the different virtues.^ The monks 
usually led a poor life; but they were, nevertheless, anxious for 
wealth, and believed that wealth could be obtained by the muttering 
of mantras alone. Jambhala, the god of wealth, was created by 
them ; several forms of his were conceived by them, a large number 
of mantras were invented and a number of Sadhanas were devoted 
to his worship. These, and similar instances, are evidence of 
the attraction wealth had for the poor monks. 

The Buddhists also acknowledged eight great Siddhis, 
though they were somewhat different from the eight Siddhis 
acknowledged by the Hindus. According to the Buddhists, the 
eight Siddhis are : (1 ) Khadga, (2) Anjana, (3) Padalepa, (4) Antar- 
dhana, (5) Rasarasayana, (6) Khecara, (7) Bhucara, (8) Patala.® 

It is difficult to get an explanation of these Siddhis cor- 
rectly from any Buddhist work ; but evidently the first, Khadga, 

^ Sadhana, No. 235 : Wcf: fiWT Rr4 I m cl^ 

„ 

^ Sadhana, No. 260: qRfcf: fRfd: 

^ nm ^ 1^: srfcniT: . . . 

® Sadhanamala, p. 350 : 
n 


89 


AIMS AND OBJECTS 

signifies the perfection which enables a person to conquer in 
battle with the help of a sword over which mantras have been 
muttered. The second, Anjana, very probably refers to the magic 
unguent which, when applied to the eyes, enables a person to 
perceive the treasures buried under the earth, or otherwise hidden 
from the eyes. The third, Padalepa, refers to the mysterious 
ointment which, when applied to the feet, enables a person to 
move about everywhere without his body being perceived by any 
one. The fourth, Antardhana, similarly refers to the mysterious 
power which enables a person to disappear miraculously before the 
very eyes of the people watching him. The fifth, Rasarasayana, 
refers probably either to the magic solution which turns baser 
metals into gold, or the medicine which gives immunity from 
death. The sixth, Khecara, enables one to move in the firmament. 
The seventh, Bhucara, gives a person power to go at will 
anywhere on this earth in a moment ; and the eighth, Patala, refers 
to the power of going to the nether-worlds. Such feats were 
considered superhuman, and the monks of the Tantric age directed 
their attention to executing such superhuman feats through the 
agency of mantras, which they thought helped to develop psychic 
power. 

The most important among the different rites of the Tantrics 
are probably what are known as the §atkarma, or the six rites, and 
it is necessary here to give some idea of the different rites with 
which the old monks always busied themselves. These six rites 
are; Santi, Vasikarana, Stambhana, Vidvesana, Uccatana and 
Marana. The first, Santi, is a rite which is calculated to remove 
diseases and save persons from the terrible consequences of evil 
stars or of bad actions done in previous births. The second, 
Vasikarana, is the rite which gives the performer the power to 
bewitch all other men or women, or even gods and animals, and 
get work done by them. The third, Stambhana, is the rite by the 
performance of which power is conferred on the worshipper for 



90 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

stopping all actions of others, and to stop the effect even when 
its cause is operating. Thus the burning power of fire can be 
stopped, so that even when fire is present it will not burn. It is 
the rite by which all actions of human beings can be stopped at 
will. The fourth, Vidvesana, is another interesting rite which gives 
the performer the power to separate two friends, relatives, lovers, 
and so forth, from each other, and the power to create animosity 
between two friends. The fifth, Uccatana, is the rite which when 
performed gives the performer special power to make his enemy 
flee from the country, with all attendant disgrace. Uccatana was 
also employed in destroying the dwelling-houses of enemies by 
incantations of mantras and other means. The sixth, Marana, is 
perhaps the most cruel among the six cruel rites of Tantrism. 
This consists in killing, or permanently injuring, enemies by means 
of apparently harmless practices. 

These are known as §atkarmas, and it is said that experienced 
Tantrics, even in modern times, get results immediately these rites 
are performed. It is, nevertheless, difficult for ordinary laymen to 
obtain any successful result, because the rites have to be performed 
according to time, planets, seasons, gods and mantras appropriate 
to the rite, which are known only to the specialists. The mantras 
are of primary importance in all cruel rites, and no less than six 
methods of application are generally formulated : (1) Grathana — 
consists in reciting the mantra over each of the letters of the 
name of the medium’^ (Sadhya) : generally required in Santi 
(protective rites). (2) Vidarbha — consists in reciting the letters on 
the name of the medium between the letters of the mantra : used 
mostly in Vasikarana, or bewitching. (3) Samputa — consists in 
reciting the mantra both in the beginning and at the end of the name 
of the medium : mostly required in Stambhana. (4) Rodhana — 

^ This word is purposely used to denote the object which is to be con- 
quered or benefited, as the case may be. The best word from modern 
Spiritualism which may stand for Sadhya is the word ‘medium’. 


AIMS AND OBJECTS 91 

consists in applying the mantra in the beginning, middle and at 
the end of the name of the medium: required in Vidvegana. (5) 
Yoga — consists in reciting the name of the medium at the end of 
the mantra: required in Uccatana. (6) Pallava— consists in apply- 
ing the mantra at the end of the name of the medium : required in 
Marana, or destructive rite/ 

Many more technical matters of absorbing interest to those 
interested in Esoterism might be brought in and discussed here ; 
but want of space prevents us from entering into the subject more 
in detail. Before closing this chapter, therefore, we will give a 
few references from the text of the Sadhanamala, which provides 
more practical information on the subject. These observations 
are of special value, inasmuch as there are at present only a few 
scholars who are acquainted with the purely Tantric doctrines and 
practices which were current among the Buddhists in the Tantric 
age. The Buddhist Tantra insists that the mental condition of 
the worshipper in different rites should be different. In Santi the 
mind should be peaceful. In Paustika it should have a thriving 
mentality. In Vasikarana it should display anxiety, and in 
Marana it should be in a greatly agitated state. Santi should 
be performed on the first day of the lunar fortnight, Paustika 
on the full-moon day, Abhicara or Marana on the fourteenth 
day of the moon, and Vasikarana on the eighth day. The 
worshipper should sit with his face northwards in Santi, 
eastwards in Paustika, southwards in Abhicara, and westwards in 
the rites of Akarsana (attraction) and Uccatana, Santi should be 
performed in autumn, Paustika in Hemanta, and Abhicaras in 
the summer season. Santi should be performed in the evening, 
Paustika in the early morning, and Abhicaras at noon or at 
midnight.^ 

^ See VUvako^a {Bengali ) : article on 

^ See Sadhanamala^ pp. 368, 369. 



92 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

It is not unnecessary to point out in this connexion that the 
deity worshipped in the different rites may be the same, but the 
same deity will have different colours, weapons and forms, in 
accordance with the rules guiding the rites, and it is precisely in 
this way that the deities of the Buddhist pantheon were 
multiplied. 




CHAPTER X 


LEADING TENETS 
1. Gurus 

In ancient India, for all kinds of religious and secular know- 
ledge, the necessity of a guru or a preceptor was always felt. The 
Upanisads were so called because the disciples had to sit near the 
guru to obtain knowledge of philosophical speculations directly 
from him. Also in secular literature, such as the Arthasastm of 
Kautilya and the Kamasutm, there are chapters on the Upanisads 
which contain such secret matters that lessons on these could be 
imparted to the disciple only through a direct channel by sitting 
near him. Similarly, the philosophical systems were handed down 
from gurus to disciples in an unbroken chain. In fact, the handing 
down of traditions through an uninterrupted chain of gurus and 
disciples is common with reference to all Sastras that were 
produced in India ; but nowhere is reverence to the guru so much 
in evidence as in Vajrayana. Nothing, they affirm, can be achieved 
without a preceptor. It is impossible to follow mystic doctrines 
and practices without a preceptor. For what a particular mantra 
or a mystic practice is suited a person already initiated must be 
told by a preceptor, whose duty it is to inform him of the way in 
which it should be repeated, and the number of times it should be 
muttered, in order to attain the different kinds of perfections 
(Siddhis). The Buddhists always had preceptors, practically 
since the time of Buddha; but the more Buddhism became 
mystified in its later stages, the greater was the necessity for 
preceptors felt, and in Vajrayana we find the position of the 
guru altogether paramount. He is idolized as the Buddha; he 
is the Sugata; he is Dharmakaya, and the bestowal of eman- 



AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 


94 

cipation lies in his power. In every Tantric work there is 
evidence of the high esteem in which the gurus were held/ and in 
many works the characteristics of the guru and the disciple are 
enumerated.* Simply because the mantra is known, and that 
correctly and accurately, there is no guarantee that by constantly 
muttering it one can attain perfection. It is well-nigh impossible, 
and it is against the principles of Vajrayana. The worshipper is 
first to be initiated by the guru and he must obtain the different 
kinds of Abhiseka, or initiation, from the guru ; and then, if all his 
instructions are followed in the most precise manner possible, then, 
and then alone, Siddhi is possible of attainment. Guru-ship is a 
position which is very difficult to attain ; and, unless one answers 
to the characteristics laid down in the Vajrayana literature, one 
is no guru but a cheat.* 

2. Disciples 

In view of the conflicting statements regarding the restrictions 
imposed on the worshippers of Vajrayana, it becomes difficult to say 
how their lives were regulated in those times, and what mandates of 
the Church they had to follow. We find, for instance, that they must 
abstain from taking non-vegetarian food and abandon all kinds of 
objectionable foodstuff, such as onions, oil, salt, etc., and must not 
violate the rules of strict celibacy, In other places it is said that 
the offerings should consist of meat, wine and other objectionable 
articles. In the third place, again, it is said that the worship should 
be done after purifying the body by baths and by observing the 
rules of celibacy. In the fourth place, contrary to the above, no 

^ Two Vajrayana Works, G.O.S., No. 44, p. 12, verses 9-16, where the 
guru is eulogized by the disciple. 

* ibid., pp. 71 ff. 

® ibid., p. 72. 


US#?! 4^^ II 


LEADING TENETS 


95 

restriction is laid down either of place or of any particular food. 
Again, we also meet with a general rule that the worshipper 
obtains perfection by the muttering of mantras alone, even with- 
out drawing the magic circle or purifying himself by fasting. 

The reason for this contradiction seems to be that the 
Vajrayanists recognized the existence of different grades among 
the worshippers and legislated for different classes, beginning with 
the strict observances of the Vinaya rules in the lowest rank to the 
stage of no restriction in the highest ranks. Indrabhuti recognized 
three classes of disciples, who had different degrees of mental 
development, and prescribed for them according to their mental 
capacities different regulations for their spiritual uplift.^ Advaya- 
vajra classified the Buddhists as Saiksas and Asaiksas, and 
prescribed the strictest rules for the Saiksas who were less 
advanced. The Asaiksas, being much more advanced in the 
matter of spiritual progress, were allowed to follow such advanced 
practices as are prescribed in the higher forms of the Yoga- 
tantras.* 

The Vajrayanists were thus divided into different classes by 
different authors; but the most popular classification is that in 
which the followers of Vajrayana are divided into four classes. 
Kazi Dawasamdup divided Vajrayana into six stages, though, 
of course, he regarded the different divisions as pertaining 
to Mantrayana.® His divisions are : 

(1) Kriyatantrayana. 

(2) Carya- (or Upaya-) tantrayana. 

(3) Yogatantrayana. 

(4) Mahayogatantrayana. 

(5) Anuttarayogatantrayana. 

(6) Atiyogatantrayana. 

^ ibid., pp. 95 ff. 

^ AdyavafrasaMgraka, op. cit., chap. I, p. 1. 

® CakrasambMratantra, {Tdniric Texts), intro., p. xxxii. 



96 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

It is not, however, known on what authority this classification 
was based ; and there is little hope of knowing it, as the reverend 
Kazi Saheb is now deceased. It is to be pointed out in this 
connexion that this elaborate system of classification was 
unknown in India, where only the Kriyatantra, Caryatantra, Yoga- 
tantra, Anuttarayogatantra^ were known. These four terms are 
frequently met with in Buddhist Tantric literature. Beginners 
and initiates into the mysteries of Vajrayana were, of course, 
admitted to the lowest rank, namely the Kriyatantra, where 
strict rules of discipline and celibacy were enjoined on them 
until they were considered fit to be raised to a higher class. 
Yogatantra appears to have been reserved for those who were 
considered fit to come in contact with the Saktis and to observe 
secret practices; while the Anuttarayogins belonged to the 
highest class and were immune from all laws, human or divine. 
The ascetics belonging to the last class were called the Siddhas, 
and were believed to be in possession of extraordinary powers of 
working diverse miracles and performing prodigious feats. The 
traditional number of Siddhas is recognized as eighty-four, and 
most of them belonged to the Pala period of Bengal history.® The 
Tibetans are supposed to have preserved a history of the eighty- 
four Siddhas, and this has been translated into German by Arthur 
Griinwedel. 

3. Bodhicitta 

The Vajrayanist conception of the Bodhi mind appears to be 
the same as that of the Yogacara school, which was founded by 
Maitreya and elaborated by Asanga, and the literature of which 
included, among others, such excellent works as the Tattvasamgraha 
of Santaraksita. According to this school, the human mind, or, as 
it is called in Buddhism, the Bodhi mind, is something like a 

^ See Waddell, Lamaism, p. 152. 

® Kern, Manual of Buddhism, p. 133. 


LEADING TENETS 


97 

continuous stream of momentary consciousness, which changes 
every moment the consciousness of the previous moment, giving 
rise to the consciousness of the succeeding moment, the former 
being the cause of the latter. This chain of momentary conscious- 
ness is without a beginning, or, at best, its starting-point cannot be 
traced ; and Buddhism, more or less, is not so much concerned 
with the beginnings of things as it is with the future, or the 
emancipation of this chain of Vijnana. This chain of momentary 
consciousness, operating in unison with the all-powerful act-force, 
leads itself either to degradation or to emancipation, depending on 
good or bad actions. The Bodhi mind is by nature surcharged 
with bad conformations — memory, desires, antipathies and false 
constructions (Kalpana) — which consequently make it impure. 
To purify this chain of VijSana there should be an attempt on 
the part of its owner to remove the many impurities, and, until 
the impurities are fully removed, the Bodhi-mind will be subject 
to a series of transmigrations, not necessarily in the world of 
men, but in one of the numerous heavens, if the actions done are 
good ; or in the world of animals, ghosts, etc., if the actions done 
are bad.^ 

As the impurities are removed, one after another, the Bodhi- 
mind commences an upward march in the different spiritual 
spheres, named by the Mahayanists the Bhumis, and stays in the 
different spheres only so long as he is not qualified to rise still 
higher or go down still lower. The number of these Bhumis is 
generally recognized as ten, and the work which describes the ten 
Bhumis and their characteristics, which qualify their occupants, is 
the famous Dasabhumikamtm, of which we have just got a 
magnificent edition from Dr. J. Rahder. The Bhumis are named 
on page 5 of Dr. Rahder’s book, and their names are: (1) Pramu- 
dita, (2) Vimala, (3) Prabhakarl, (4) Arcismatl, (5) Sudurajaya, 

^ B. Bhattacharyya, Foreword to the TattvasaiHgraha, p. xxxix. 


7 


98 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

(6) Abhimukti, (7) Durangama, (8) Acala, (9) Sadhumatl, (10) and 
Dharmamedhya.^ 

When the Bodhi-mind obtains emancipation, or, in other 
words, when it crosses all the ten Bhumis mentioned above, it is 
rewarded with omniscience. Now, then, the question arises as to 
the place where the omniscient Bodhi-mind resides in the real 
cosmological structure, as conceived originally by Buddha. 

In the Tantric works generally the deities reside in the 
Akanistha heaven ; but it appears, from the evidence obtained from 
the other sources, that they were inferior to the omniscient Bodhi- 
mind. The Bhumis, it may be remembered, were not meant for 
the Hinayanists ; but were exclusively meant for the Mahayanists, 
whose followers were called the Bodhisattvas. No Buddhist 
would be called a Bodhisattva, who has no compassion for 
suffering humanity or is not prepared to sacrifice his Nirvana, 
even though entitled to it, until all creatures of the universe are 
in possession of the Bodhi knowledge. Thus, we can see how the 
Sravakas and Pratyekas are not entitled to the name of Bodhi- 
sattva, which also accounts for their being called Hinayanists; 
because they selfishly look forward to their own benefit and are 
not at all moved by the intense sufferings of their other less- 
advanced brethren. The Hinayanists, before obtaining their 
Nirvana, have a place in the world structure ; but their individual- 
ity is lost when they actually obtain Nirvana. They have not to 
wait for the emancipation of others; and so the continuity of 
their existence is not at all necessary. But the Bodhi-mind of a 
Bodhisattva is entirely different. Even when the Bodhisattva is 
entitled to Nirvana, he has to continue for the benefit of all living 
beings and work vigorously for their uplift. But the question 
arises as to what heavens they occupy, and where they go while 
obtaining omniscience. A satisfactory answer to this question 



LEADING TENETS 99 

has been given by §antarak§ita, in his famous polemical work, the 
Tattvasamgraha^ There it is said : 

it 

In the excellent Akanistha heaven, which is beyond the 

Suddhavasa heaven, the Bodhisattva attains omniscience and 

(under his influence) a Buddha is born in this world. 

Kamalaslla, while commenting on this passage, adds the 
information that, beyond the Akanistha heaven, there is a 
Mahelvara Bhavana, or ‘ an abode of Mahesvara’, where the chain 
of consciousness of the compassionate Bodhisattva attains omni- 
science. The Vajrayanist conception and definition of Bodhicitta 
is in accordance with the tenets of the Bodhisattvayana, and it was 
first promulgated in the Guhyasamaja. According to this author- 
ity, the Bodhi-mind is that in which voidness and compassion 
work in unison.* 

At this stage it is necessary to explain the conception of 
external objects from the viewpoint of Vajrayana. In the eye of 
a Vajrayanist, the external world has much the same significance 
as it has in Yogacara; and in the Tantric works of the Buddhists 
there is ample evidence to show how the external world was 
treated in the philosophy of Vajrayana. In one place it character- 
izes the external world, with its movable and immovable objects, 
such as a pot, picture, conveyance, house of statues, mountains, 
etc., as reduced by reason to mere appearances, in much the same 
way as magic and dreams are considered appearances. Therefore, 
the Vajrayanists held that external objects are no more real than 

^p. 916. 

* cf. Two Vajrayana Works, p. 75, where the following line is quoted 
from the Guhyasamaja : I 



100 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

magic, a mirage, shadow or dream, and that their reality cannot 
be proved by reason.^ 

4. Ahai^kara 

The peculiar feature of Vajrayana worship lies in the doctrine 
of Ahaiiikara, or the identification of the Bodhicitta with the deity 
worshipped. Aharnkara is explained as T am the goddess and 
the goddess is in me’.^ According to Aharnkara, the worshipper 
should conceive himself as the deity, with the same complexion, 
form and limbs as described in the Sadhana, and should, instead of 
worshipping any external object, worship himself. It was suggest- 
ed elsewhere that this rite of identification of the worshipper with 
the worshipped was a new feature, introduced for the first time 
by the Tantric Buddhists. This has met with general criticism 
from a number of noteworthy scholars. They urged that, in view 
of the great antiquity of the Yoga philosophy, the contention that 
the doctrine of Aharnkara is an introduction is untenable. To this 
it may be said, that the theory of the absorption of individual self 
with the Primordial Matter, or union of the self with a personal God, 
by the practice of Yoga, to attain thereby the perfect knowledge 
and the consequential freedom from the bondage of transmigration, 
was started in India from very ancient times, and traces of it can be 
found in the Upanisads of very great antiquity, even greater than 
than that of the Yoga system. Nothing, therefore, can be said to be 
an innovation; but still we say, for instance, that the Vedanta 
school originated with Sankara, though previous to that there 
was a school of Aupanisada philosophers; that Sankara 
systematized the doctrine of Maya, though Buddhists from 
Nagarjuna’s time all acknowledged and wrote about the same 

^ For instance, SadhanamMa, p. 139 : 

W etc. 

^ For instance, ibid., p. 318: Jjr FTSf qtSf FI Weft 


LEADING TENETS 


101 


doctrine in their works. When, therefore, it is said that this 
element of Ahamkara was introduced for the first time by 
Vajrayana, it is said with reference to the identification of 
the worshipper with the deity, who is a transformation of the 
great reality known as Sunya, not only for the purpose of attain- 
ing emancipation as is found in Yoga, but also for bewitching 
women, destroying men and their dwelling-houses, for the extrac- 
tion of snake-poison, or for relieving a woman of the pains of 
labour. Ahamkara, in fact, is imperative in the Vajrayana form 
of worship, and this introduction is considered to be new in view 
of the multifarious purposes it is called upon to serve. 

In some of the Hindu Tantras, indeed, this very doctrine of 
identification (or Ahaihkara) is to be found; and this fact gives 
rise to the controversy as to the priority, or otherwise, of the two 
predominant Tantric schools, Hindu and Buddhist. There are 
sufficient reasons to hold that Hindu Tantras were introduced on 
the model of the Buddhist Tantras, and the Hindus, among others, 
borrowed many Buddhist customs, practices, deities and mantras. 
The very Kulacara appears to have been already conceived by the 
Buddhists, and probably the forefathers of a large number of the 
Kaulas today were direct disciples of Buddhists in the Tantric 
age. We are, therefore, not surprised to see Hindus making use of 
the Buddhist doctrine of Ahaihkara in their worship. 

5. Advaya 

To understand the significance of the Vajrayanist conception 
of Advaya, the theory of Sunyata and Karuna will have to be first 
taken into consideration. Voidness and compassion together 
constitute what is called Bodhicitta, or the Bodhi-mind. This 
idea, probably for the first time, makes its appearance in the 
Guhyasamaja. The mixing up of the two elements, Sunyata and 
Karuna, is what is known as Advaya.’' 

^ cf. Two Vajrayana Works, p. 75 : ^’dlWIiniW . . . etc. 



102 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

Sunyata, as conceived by the Vajrayanists, is very forcibly 
expressed in almost every Tantric work of the Buddhists. 
Sunyata consists in thinking, or realizing, all worldly phenomena 
as transitory, momentary, non-ego, mistaken as realities by the 
mind, similar to objects seen in a dream or magic, endowed with 
inherent purity, non-existent, unborn and void, like the place of 
the Tathata (thatness).^ 

The conception of compassion, or Karuna, of the Vajrayanists 
finds also a lucid expression in the Tantric works. Compassion 
is defined there as the determination on the part of the Bodhisattva 
to lead to Nirvana (and finally to place) all beings, including those 
born from eggs, the uterus, perspiration, those endowed with hoofs 
like horses, or whether with a form or formless, conscious or 
unconscious, or those who abide neither in consciousness nor in 
unconsciousness. In other places Karuna is defined as a strong 
determination to diffuse right knowledge among the people 
who, owing to desire (Trsna), are blinded by ignorance, and 
cannot realize the continuous transmigration caused by the act- 
force ; in order tha,t they may lead a life in accordance with the 
law of dependent origination (Pratlt5^-samutpada).* 

The commingling of Sunyata with Karuna is designated by 
the Vajrayanists as Advaya, and it is a theory which is very 
important for understanding the underlying features of Vajrayana, 
for on this alone the foundation of Sakti worship is based. Advaya 
is sometimes explained by means of a simile : ‘As copper leaves 
its dirty colour and becomes gold when it comes in contact with 
the magic solution, even so the body leaves off its attachment, 
antipathies, etc., when it comes in contact with the tincture of 
Advaya.’ ® The commingling of Sunyata and Karuna is compared 

^ See SadhanamSM, p. Ill : f^lWTR: . . . etc. 

" ibid., pp. 26, 111. 

® ibid., p. 82 : 

I 



I 

i 

1 


i 


i 

i 


LEADING TENETS 103 

with salt melting in water, where the duality ceases, giving rise to 
non-duality, or Advaya. Just as other ideas were deified in Vajra- 
yana, Advaya was also deified, and we find two deities, Heruka 
and Prajna, embodiments of Sunya and Karuija, coinmingled in 
Advaya, and fused together in embrace in the Yuga-naddha, or 
the yab-yum form. The duality merges into one, and gives rise 
to the single form of Heruka only. 




CHAPTER XI 


PROCEDURE FOR WORSHIP 

It has been already pointed out that the Buddhists had a 
special literature which laid down the procedure for the worship 
of Tantric deities of the Vajrayana pantheon. The rules laid 
down in the Sadhanas are interesting as showing the way in 
which the old priests and the laity engaged themselves in medieval 
times, and as pointing out their particular beliefs and doctrines, 
and the way in which they utilized their knowledge and philo- 
sophy in actual practice. We will here take an elaborate Sadhana 
of Tara, the Buddhist saviouress, which gives the procedure with 
a greater wealth of detail than most of the other Sadhanas. 

First of all the worshipper is enjoined, after leaving the bed in 
the morning, to wash his face and feet, and repair to a place which 
is lonely and agreeable, and is anointed with scent and strewn 
with fragrant flowers. He should sit in an easy pose and meditate 
in his heart on the orb of the moon, which originates from the first 
vowel ‘A’, and notice thereunder a beautiful blue lotus in full 
bloom. On the filament of the lotus on which is placed the 
spotless moon, he should meditate on the germ syllable, ‘Tam’, of 
yellow colour. Then from the yellow germ, ‘Tam’, he should 
meditate on the rays of light issuing from it as destroying the 
darkness of ignorance of the world and as illumining the innumer- 
able worlds that exist in the ten quarters, and as bringing from 
the firmament innumerable and inconceivable Buddhas and 
Bodhisattvas. Then, after an elaborate worship of these great 
compassionate Buddhas and Bodhisattvas by means of celestial 
flowers, incense, scents, garlands, unguents, powders, mendicant- 
dress, umbrellas, flags, bells, banners, and the like, he should 
make a confession of sins in the following manner: ‘What- 



PROCEDURE FOR WORSHIP 


105 


ever sinful deeds I have done, caused to be done, or allowed to be 
done, in this endless cycle of creation, everything I confess.’ 
Again meditating on the restraint of wrong deeds, he should give 
his assent to meritorious deeds done by others with the words : ‘ I 
assent to the virtues of the Sugatas, Pratyekas, Sravakas, Jinas 
and their sons, the Bodhisattvas, and of the world with all the 
gods, beginning with Brahma.’ After this, refuge in the three 
jewels should be taken with the words : ‘ I take refuge in Buddha 
so long as the Bodhi essence subsists. I take refuge in Dharma 
so long as the Bodhi essence subsists ; and I take refuge in Sangha 
so long as the Bodhi essence subsists.’ Thereafter adherence 
to the path of the Tathagata should be done with the words: 
‘By me should be followed only the path indicated by the 
Tathagata, and naught else.’ Then solicitation should be done 
with the words; ‘ The gods, the Tathagatas and their children, 
who have created everything in this world for the benefit of the 
worldly beings, be constant to me and emancipate me.’ Then a 
request should be made with the words: ‘Gods and Tathagatas, 
instruct me with such incontrovertible lessons on the law by which 
the beings of the world may be freed from the bond of the world 
quickly.’ Then he should meditate on the results of his meri- 
torious deeds with the following words : ‘ Whatever merit I have 
acquired by the seven kinds of extraordinary worship, such as 
the confession of sins, all that I devote to gain at the end the 
final Sambodhi.’ Or otherwise he should recite the following, 
which indicates the seven kinds of extraordinary worship : 
‘All sins I confess and I gladly assent to the merits of others ; 
for the sake of not having another birth, I take refuge in 
lord Buddha and in the Jewel of good Law, or in the three Jewels, 
and direct my thoughts to Bodhi. I follow his path and devote my 
merits to the attainment of Sambodhi.’ With this the seven kinds 
of extraordinary worship should be performed, and then the gods, 
who have been invoked, should be dismissed with the mantra, Orh 



106 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

Ah Muh, or with the following words : ‘ Thou movest now accord- 
ing to thy will, being anointed with the sandal of the Silas 
(commandments) and wearing the garments of Dhyana (meditation) 
and being strewn with the flowers of the Bodhi limbs.’ 

Then the worshipper should meditate on the four Brahmas, 
namely friendship, compassion, happiness and indiflference. What 
is meant by friendship ? Its indication is the love that exists in all 
beings, such as the love towards an only son or like its fruition in 
their welfare and happiness. Compassion, again, is of what kind ? 
It is the desire to save others from misery and from causes that 
lead to misery. The desire that I shall save even the people who 
are burnt with the great fire of sufifering from the three evils and 
have entered the prison of Samsara is what is known as Compas- 
sion ; or it is the desire to save from the sea of Samsara the beings 
suffering from the three evils. Happiness is of the following 
nature: It is that desire on the part of the worshipper to place 
all beings in this world in the sphere of Buddha-hood which 
they are unable to attain otherwise, or it is the attraction 
towards the virtues that exist in this world, and to their enjoy- 
ment and the spiritual powers arising out of them. What is 
indifference ? Indifference consists in producing great welfare 
of all beings, good or bad, by discarding adverse requests and 
obstacles; or it is the desire that comes of its own accord to do 
good to all beings without the least expectation of reward ; or it 
is the complete indifference to the eight human institutions of 
gain and loss, fame and notoriety, blame and praise, pleasure and 
pain, and all unusual activities. After meditating on the four 
Brahmas, the inherent purity of ail worldly phenomena should be 
meditated. All worldly phenomena indeed are pure by nature, 
and, therefore, the worshipper should think himself pure by 
nature. This natural purity of all phenomena should be established 
by the mantra : 


PROCEDURE FOR WORSHIP 


107 


If all phenomena are naturally pure, where, then, is the 
possibility of the cycle of existence? Because of their being 
covered up with the impurity of such thought-categories as the 
subject and the object. This impurity can only be purged off by 
the meditation on the good path. By that it is restrained. Thus 
is established the essential and inherent purity of all phenomena. 

After meditating on the purity of all phenomenal existence 
the voidness of all phenomena should be meditated upon. Here 
void means this. He should conceive the entire universe, with its 
mobile and immobile creations, as the clear manifestation of non- 
duality, when the mind is devoid of all kinds of false reflections 
and of such thought-categories as the subject and the object. 
This very voidness should be established by the mantra : 

Then, as previously stated, in the heart the worshipper 
should meditate on the goddess, Aryatara, who originates from 
the yellow germ syllable, ‘Tarn’, fixed on the orb of the spotless 
moon which is again on the filament of a full-blown blue lotus. 
The goddess, Tara, should be conceived as sitting in Lalitasana 
on the moon placed on the lotus, as one-faced and two-armed, 
showing the Varada Mudra in the right hand and a blue lotus in 
the left, as profusely decorated with all kinds of ornaments, and of 
peaceful appearance. The goddess of this description should be 
conceived as long as desired. Then the eternally accomplished 
Bhagavatl should be drawn out by means of the rays that illumine 
the three worlds, the rays which issue forth from the yellow germ 
syllable, ‘Taiii’, placed on the orb of the moon, which is again 
within the filament of a beautiful blue lotus. After thus taking 
her out, she should be placed on the firmament and should be 
worshipped with the offerings of scented water and fragrant flowers, 
contained in the vessel inlaid with gems at the feet of the 
Bhagavatl, She should also be worshipped with various cere- 



108 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

monies, external and internal, by means of flowers, incense, light- 
stick, food-offerings, scents, garlands, unguents, powders, mendi- 
cant-dress, umbrella, flags, bell, banner, and the like. Thus after 
repeatedly worshipping and praising her, the Mudra, or the mystic 
pose of the hand, should be exhibited. After propitiating the god- 
dess of the essence of knowledge with this Mudra, she should be 
commingled with the goddess of the essence of Samaya, and by 
so doing the non -duality of the two should be established and 
meditated upon. Then the rays that issue from the yellow germ 
syllable, ‘Tam’, which is on the spotless moon, illuminate the 
worlds in the ten quarters, cause the removal of poverty and other 
miseries of the beings that inhabit them by showers of various 
gems; and they (rays) impart to them the teachings on the 
realization of the momentary Sunya. After doing beneficial deeds 
for the worldly beings, the worshipper should meditate on the 
form of Tara which is identified with the universe. Again he 
should meditate repeatedly until tired the yellow germ syllable 
and the Bhagavatl contained therein. He who is unable to 
meditate in this fashion should mutter the mantra, Om Tare 
Tuttare Ture Svaha. This is the lord of all mantras. It is 
endowed with great powers, and is saluted, worshipped and 
revered by all the Tathagatas. After finishing the Dhyana, he 
should think of the world as the form of Tara, and should move 
about considering himself to be the Bhagavatl. Generally all the 
eight great Siddhis fall at the feet of those who meditate on the 
Bhagavatl in this manner, not to speak of other smaller perfections 
which come as a matter of course. Whoever meditates on the 
Bhagavatl in a lonely mountain cave espies her with his own 
eyes ; the Bhagavatl herself gives him his very breath, nay, more, 
even the Buddha-hood, which is most difficult to attain, remains as 
if it is in the palm of his hand.^ 

^ This represents a free translation of the Kincitvistara-Tara Sadhana, 
composed by Anupama Rak§ita, the Sthavira : Sadhanamaia, Sadhana No. 98. 



CHAPTER XII 


THE DEITIES 

It is due to the Tantric Buddhists that Buddhism can boast 
of an extensive and varied pantheon of gods, whose aids were 
invoked for all kinds of perfections and Siddhis described before. 
The deities were of various colours and of various forms, and 
were invoked to discharge multifarious functions. These deities 
were represented either in stone or in metal and paintings, in 
order to provide an aid to the worshipper for conceiving their 
forms and identifying himself with the deities in question. 
Vajrayana had made itself attractive and popular by its interesting 
tenets, doctrines and practices, and the exquisite art they had 
developed in representing images, especially in stone and metal, 
proved doubly attractive, and helped the priests in converting a 
large number of people and bringing them into their fold. The 
conception of the deities is inseparably connected with the 
Vajrayana philosophy, and is especially so with the conception of 
§unya. According to the Buddhist Tantras, the deities of the 
pantheon are all manifestations of Sunya.^ Advayavajra, who was 
a contemporary of the Pala king, Mahipala I, who flourished 
between A.D. 978 and 1030, in a characteristic stanza says that 
the deities are nothing but manifestations of Sunya and are by 
nature non-existent ; and whenever there is manifestation it must 
be Sunya in essence.® In another place the process of evolution 
of deities from Sunya is explained in an interesting stanza by the 

^ B. Bhattacharyya, Indian Buddhist Iconography, p. 166. 

® AdvayavairasaiHgraha,p. ?ili 

W W m II 



110 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

same author. The process of evolution has four stages : the first 
is the right perception of Sunyata, or voidness ; the second is the 
connexion with the germ syllable, the Blja; the third is the 
conception of an Icon ; and the fourth is the external represen- 
tation of the deities.^ This statement gives a direct lie to the 
theory that later Buddhism was nothing but gross idolatry. It 
shows, on the other hand, that their conception of godhead was 
philosophically most profound, a parallel to which is scarcely to 
be found in any other Indian religion. 

Occasionally information is obtained about the residence of 
the deities contained in the pantheon ; and, so far as can be 
gathered from the stray references, it can be asserted without 
hesitation that the abode of the Vajrayana deities was in the 
Akanistha heaven, which is the topmost of the Rupa heavens.® 
It has been pointed out before that the deities of the Vajrayana 
system represent Sunya, and they are Sunya in essence with the 
three elements, Bunya, Vijnana and Mahasukha. They are rather 
the voluntary manifestions of Sunya, in accordance with the Blja 
mantra uttered by the worshipper, with an appearance suitable for 
the function the deity has to discharge. Sometimes deities are 
described as equal to all Tathagatas, and by Tathagatas they mean 
the five Dhyani Buddhas. The implication of this is that the 
deities are an embodiment of the five Skandhas, over each of which 
one Dhyani Buddha presides® — such as Aksobhya for Vijnana; 
Vairocana for Rupa; Ratnasambhava for Vedana; Amitabha for 
Samjna, and Amoghasiddhi for Sariiskara. When one element 
among the five predominates, the deity is considered to be the 
emanation of that Dhyani Buddha who presides over the element 
in question. When such a deity is represented in art, he bears 

® ibid., p. 50 1 etc. 

® See SMhanamala, pp. 47, 64, eta 

® c^.Two Vajrayana Wor^s, p.4:l: 



THE DEITIES 111 

on his head the same Dhyani Buddha, and is considered his 
offspring and as belonging to his family. The other Dhyani 
Buddhas are generally represented on the aureole over the head 
of the principal deity. 

The Buddhist Tantras are particular to have a colour applied 
to all deities. This colour has a deep spiritual significance, and is 
a thing which should not be passed over unnoticed. The Dhyani 
Buddhas have each a different colour, and the deities emanating 
from each of the Dhyani Buddhas, constituting his family, should 
ordinarily have the same colour as that of their spiritual father. 
Thus the family of Aksobhya— the. embodiment of the Vijnana- 
skandha — should have a blue colour, because it is the colour of the 
Dhyani Buddha Aksobhya. This is, of course, the general rule; 
but numerous exceptions are also found. Let us take, for instance, 
a deity who is very popular and has the power to grant success in 
a variety of protective and destructive rites. The deity cannot 
have the same colour in all the rites, because the difference in rites 
demands a difference in form, colour, posture, and so forth.^ 
This is why occasionally we find difference of colour amongst the 
members belonging to the same family. 

It is frequently seen from the texts that the deities sometimes 
present a fierce appearance and are invoked in terrible rites, such 
as the destruction of men (Marana) and their houses (Uccatana), 
and so forth. Perhaps the authors considered this incompatible 
with the theory of compassion, and a few indirect explanations to 
clear up the point became necessary. Two characteristic passages 
are quoted below ; one with reference to the fierce form of Yamari 
and the other in respect of Ucchusma Jambhala. 





cf., for instance, p. 556, ; p. 395, wfew: ; p. 532, 


112 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

jrfSpuir flf 

II ’■ 

After making my obeisance by my head to Lord Yamari, 
who is of dignified appearance ; internally compassionate, but 
externally terrific for the good of all beings, I write the 
procedure of his worship for the benefit of all. 

^ =5(fn: II ® 

People who are stricken down with the misery of 
poverty, what desire can they have for the rites laid down by 
Sugata? It is for this reason, it seems, that Jambhala in his 
anger assumed the terrific form of Ucchusma. 

According to the Tantrics, therefore, though the deities 
appear terrific externally, they are nevertheless extremely 
compassionate internally; and they always engage themselves in 
doing good to the worshipper. It becomes sometimes necessary 
for the deities to assume a terrible form in order to overawe and 
coerce people to perform the rites laid down by Sugata. 

Mahakala is another very terrible deity, with terrible appear- 
ance, who is invoked to discharge terrible functions. Neither 
his appearance nor his functions are in keeping with the doctrine 
of Karuna, or compassion, taught in the Vajrayana Buddhism. 
But the shrewd priests offer for this an excellent explanation. 
They say : 

One who is persistently a hater of the preceptor and 
is adversely disposed towards the three jewels — Buddha, 

^ Sadhanamala, p. 550. * ibid., 570. ® ibid., p. 586. 



THE DEITIES 113 

Dharma and Sangha — and immolates many animals, is eaten 

up alive by Mahakala. 

Now, in a case like this, we can easily understand that the 
conception of the fierce form of Mahakala is quite in keeping 
with the doctrine of compassion, because such a person is 
incorrigible, and he, alone and unaccompanied, does harm to many 
beings, and a mischievous person like him ought to be removed 
by the fierce deity called Mahakala for the good of many. We 
cannot, however, perceive the necessity of eating the poor offender 
alive, unless, of course, it is assumed that his mental condition will 
change materially, at least in the next birth, by undergoing a 
transformation in the compassionate stomach of Mahakala ! 

Occasionally a charge is laid at the door of later Buddhism 
that it is a form of gross idolatry. Those who hold this theory are 
not quite correct in this estimation, and it is necessary to show in 
detail that Buddhist worship had nothing to do with idolatry. 
Idolatry means worship of idols. It has many drawbacks; but it 
is very useful for society as a whole. The formless abstraction and 
unseen power, which we characterize as God, is a thing very 
difficult to be conceived even by great ascetics, not to speak 
of the common people, who have no idea of what attributes 
God actually represents. If, of course, as we generally 
do through the medium of images, we can make the mass 
believe in the great unseen power and His unbounded 
compassion for suffering humanity, and make them fear sin and 
love piety, then we must necessarily admit that idol worship is 
fraught with great utility and is of great social service. But that 
is no reason for considering idol worship logical, unless we can 
definitely prove the actual possession of the image by God, when 
a few apparently meaningless words are uttered for the infusion 
of the image with life. This is indeed very difficult to believe in 
this scientific age, and it is one of the reasons why image worship 

has been characterized by some as grossly superstitious, and 

8 



114 AN INTRODUGTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

image worshippers as idolaters. Idol worship has its utility in 
its own sphere; and in India it has been considered a necessity 
from very ancient times. But on the ground of public utility, as 
such, it can have no scientific value; because we have never 
authoritatively known that a deity ever actually takes possession 
of the image prepared for the purpose. The Hindus worship 
idols in this way and believe that their mantras can infuse their 
image with life, and therefore they are, to all intents and pur- 
poses, idolaters. 

The Jainas regard their images as remembrancers ; by seeing 
the images of their Tirthankaras, whom they believe to be historical 
personages, they call to mind their noble lives, excellent deeds, 
their lofty preachings, their high ideals, and to their memory they 
offer various articles of worship in token of reverence. Their 
idol worship is not exactly what can be called idolatry in so far 
as these Tirthankaras are concerned. But the moment they leave 
this sphere and offer objects of worship to hypothetical beings, 
such as the Yaksas and the Yak§inis, with four faces and 
eight arms, or with other abnormalities and with strange vehicles, 
they are relegated to the sphere of idolatry. For here, also, we 
cannot prove that these strange creatures ever existed on the face 
of the earth. 

But the Buddhist mode of worship is entirely different from 
that of the Hindus or of the Jainas. To the Buddhist, the external 
world has no existence. Even the body with its sense organs is 
unreal. The real noumenon is only Sunya, which, together with 
Karuna, constitutes the Bodhicitta. The Bodhi-mind, then, is also 
a reality ; in fact, it has the same reality as that of Sunya, and 
beyond the mind there is nothing in the external world. The body, 
as such, being external, does not exist: and it has no reality. 
This is the conception of the mind and of the external world in 
Vajrayana. To the followers of Vajrayana, therefore, how can 
there be reality in an image, a grossly external object to which 



THE DEITIES 


115 

worship may be offered? The Vajrayana theory of godhead is so 
peculiar, and had such successive stages of development, traceable 
through the Buddhist literature for several centuries, that when- 
ever similar conceptions or theories are met with in literature or 
in religion of other sects, we can easily put our finger on them and 
characterize them as borrowed from the later Buddhism. 

The worshipper is generally designated as the Bodhisattva. 
After following the prescribed procedure, according to the instruc- 
tions of the guru or according to the instructions laid down in the 
Tantric works, he should regard himself as nothing but a chain of 
momentary consciousness, full of compassion for suffering human- 
ity, and invoke the aid of Sunya with the three elements : Sunya, 
Vijnanaand Mahasukha. This aid can be invoked only when the 
Bodhi-mindof the Bodhisattva is completely identified with Sunya, 
and only when this is done the Sunya responds. In accordance with 
the Bija mantra, or in accordance with the purpose for which the aid 
of Sunya is invoked, it transforms itself into the form of a divinity 
with which the Bodhi-mind is identified. When the commingling 
of the Bodhi-mind with the deity takes place, the former develops 
great power and is able to do the work for which the deity has 
been invoked, until the latter is dismissed from the mind by the 
proper formula. A glance at the list of deities and the aims and 
objects of Vajrayanists will show the multifarious duties Sunya 
had to perform, and into how many forms it had to transform 
itself. It can, indeed, be pointed out that because of the large 
number of images of gods and goddesses of the Vajrayana 
pantheon made and subsequently discovered from under the 
earth; therefore the Buddhists must be considered idolaters. 
Against this it can be pointed out that it is not always an easy 
task to conceive the outward appearance of gods and goddesses of 
an extensive pantheon for the purpose of meditation without the 
help of images or pictures, and it is in order to supply this most 
important aid to numerous worshippers that innumerable images 



116 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

had to be made of stone, metal or earth. We have evidence also 
that pictures were painted for the same purpose, and even now in 
Nepal the Vajracaryas keep a large stock of paintings and pictures 
of an overwhelming number of gods and goddesses for their 
numerous clients. It must be definitely understood that an attempt 
is made here to represent the case of the Buddhists with regard to 
the charge of idolatry occasionally levelled at them. From a 
study of their literature, we can definitely proclaim that Vajrayana 
was no idolatry. But if some ignorant lay disciple, in imitation of 
the Hindu and Jaina customs, offers a few flowers at the foot of 
the image, it need not impugn the pure doctrine of the Sastras. 

The attitude of the Buddhist priests towards Hindu religion 
and its gods and goddesses was entirely unfavourable, if not 
antagonistic.^ They were not only hostile to the Hindu gods ; 
but their hostility proves further that they had a great hatred 
towards the members of other religions also. In the Buddhist 
Tantras we find a number of Hindu gods insulted, calumniated 
and humiliated. A number of Buddhist gods are seen displaying 
the Brahmasiras, or the head of Brahma, with four faces and grey 
beards. As Brahma is the first member of the Hindu trinity, this 
signifies the hatred the Buddhist priests had for Hindu gods in 
particular and Hinduism in general. Harihariharivahanodbhava, 
a form of Avalokitesvara, the all-compassionate Bodhisattva, has 
for his Vahana (or favourite animal), Visnu, the second god of the 
Hindu trinity. The latter cannot be mistaken for any other god, 
because in the description his own favourite Vahana, the mythical 
bird, Garuda, is present. In the description of Candarosana, the 
god carries the noose in order to bind the enemies who cause 
suffering to humanity, such as Visnu, Siva, and Brahma, who are 
terrified by the raised index finger of the god. Further on, it is 

^ But Dr. Coomaraswami, of Boston, has no faith in this, and, in fact, in 
the mass of evidence collected here. J.A.O.S., Vol. 46, p. 187. 



THE DEITIES 


117 


directed that Candarosana should be conceived as looking towards 
the miserable people who are subjected to constant revolution in 
the cycle of existence by the wicked gods, Visnu, Brahma, Siva and 
Kandarpa, the god of love. By Candarosana’s intervention, the 
hosts of terrified and weeping Maras, who are nude, with 
dishevelled hair and hopeless in despair, are hacked to pieces by 
the sword carried by the deity. Candarosana gives their life back 
and places them near his feet, so that they may perform pious 
deeds in future. While enumerating the benefits that accrue 
from the worship of the Mrtyuvancana Tara, it is said that the 
worshipper conquers death and gets emancipated, and even the 
ends of his hair cannot be destroyed by the Hindu gods, such as 
Brahma, Indra, the Moon, the Sun, Siva, the deities of the 
waters, Yama and Manmatha. Again, while describing Marici, the 
principal Hindu gods are brought to the humiliating position of 
making obeisance to Marici. Some of them are actually trampled 
under her feet, while others obey her orders like servants. In 
another place it is said that to the ascetic who pleases the 
goddess Kurukulla, come Brahma, Rudra, Indra, Narayana, and 
others, and meet all his wants like servants. While describing 
Vajrajvalanalarka, he is characterized as trampling under his foot 
not only Visnu, but also his consort, Laksmi. Bhutadamara is 
described as an expert in destroying the pride of Indra, Brahma, 
Kubera, and others. Ucchusma Jambhala is described as pressing 
Kubera under his feet, so that he may vomit jewels. Trailokya- 
vijaya tramples upon the head of Siva and the bosom of Gauri, 
who lie on the ground in opposite directions. Prasannatara is 
described as trampling upon Indra and Upendra, and pressing 
Rudra and Brahma between his legs. Paramasva is described 
as four-legged, and as trampling with the first right leg on 
Indrani and Laksmi, with the second right Rati and Priti, with 
the first left Indra and Madhukara, and with the second left 
Jayakara and Vasanta. While describing the merits and 



118 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

advantages to be gained by worshipping Hayagrlva, an exceed- 
ingly attractive prospect of future happiness is held before the 
public, but not without calumniating a number of Hindu gods. 
The worshipper, when he attains perfection, goes to the Vidya- 
dhara land, installs himself as king, and enjoys all sorts of plea- 
sures. All Hindu gods flock together to him, and he assigns 
various duties to the different gods. Aparajita is described as a 
goddess, whose parasol is raised over her head by wicked and 
mischievous gods, such as Brahma and others.* 

Now the above are a few among many instances where 
Hindu gods are insulted and made subservient to Buddhist 
gods; but these are instances found in writing. The same 
happened in practice. A large number of images was carved by 
the followers of Vajrayana, which represented in stone the Hindu 
gods being humiliated by Buddhist gods, and the same occurs 
in painting. Ganesa is regarded by the Hindus as the bestower 
of perfection and success in Tantric rites. The Buddhists, in 
order to display their aversion towards the Brahmanical faith, 
made their gods trample upon Ganesa. Thus in the Indian 
Museum images of Parnasavari and Aparajita, the Calcutta 
Vahgiya Sahitya Parisad image of Vighnantaka, the deities have 
been represented as trampling Ganesa under their feet. In the 
two Vikramapur images of Parnasavari and the Dacca Sahitya 
Parisad image of Mahapratisara, Ganesa appears below the lotus 
seat, lying prostrate on the ground under the pressure of Bud- 
dhist deities. The Buddhists showed their animosity towards 
the Hindu god, Ganesa, and gave him the epithet of Vighna, or 
obstacle. In the Bodhgaya image of Trilokyavijaya, the 
deity is represented as trampling upon the prostrate forms 
of Siva and Gaurl. In the Nepal images of Harihariharivahana, 

* Sddhanamald, intro., p. cxxxi f., footnotes, where these references have 
been collected. See also pp. 77, 174, 175, 214, 241, 300, 350, 403, 510, 511, 512, 
571 . A 



119 


THE DEITIES 

Avalokitesvara rides on the shoulders of Visnu, exactly in the 
same way as Visnu rides Garuda. In the Vikramapur images of 
Parnasavari, Hayagriva, the Hindu god of fever, and Sitala, the 
Hindu goddess of smallpox, are seen running away in opposite 
directions from the mere presence of the more powerful Buddhist 
goddess. This is how the Buddhists of the Tan trie age attempted 
to exhibit the superiority of their gods over those of the Brahma- 
nical faith.^ 

The Tantric Buddhists did not spare the pet but unscientific 
theories of the Hindus regarding salvation. For instance, they 
attacked the doctrine of holy Tirthas in unequivocal language. 
In this connexion, a passage quoted Ixom “Cm. Cittasodhanapraka- 
rana of Aryadeva, a later Tantric writer, is interesting. He says : 

pi g ii 
^ f?n%T I 
5 SR w il 

A dog swimming in the Ganges is not considered 
pure ; therefore, bathing in holy places is futile for pious 
men. If bathing can confer merit, the fishermen must be 
most meritorious ; not to speak of fish and other aquatic 
animals, who are always in water, day and night It is 
certain that by bathing even sin is not dissipated, because 
people who are in the habit of making pilgrimages are 
full of passion, hatred and other vices. 

^ B. Bhattacharyya, Indian Bvddhisi Icmography, p. 162, 

® From CiitaIodhanaprakaran.a of Aryadeva, published by Mm. Haraprasad 
Sastri, in J.A.S.B., 1898, pp. 117 ff. 



CHAPTER XIII 


THE PANTHEON 

The varied, extensive and diversified pantheon of the 
Northern Buddhists owes its origin to Tantric Buddhism, or 
Vajrayana. There are certain indications that Buddhism had no 
pantheon before Tantrism was well established. In earlier 
Buddhism it recognized thirty-three gods of the Hindus, who 
were residents of the Trayastriihsa heaven, which is one among 
the many Rupa heavens. Buddha did not believe in gods, 
and in Saundarmtanda vnQ find Buddha discouraging Nanda from 
touching his feet in token of worship. He told him he would not 
be in the least pleased by Nanda’s taking the dust of his feet, but 
he would bless him if he would follow the precepts laid down in 
Buddhism and practise true Saddharma. Buddha was deified in 
Mahayana, which considered him to be Lokottara, or superhuman.* 
In Buddhist art also we do not find any of his images in any of 
the earlier schools, such as the Sanchi and Bharhut schools, and it 
is believed that the Graeco-Buddhists of Gandhara were the first 
to carve out his image from stone.* Without going into a discussion 
as to the correctness or otherwise of this theory, we can only 
remark, while passing, that in the Gandhara school alone we meet 
with a profuse number of images of Buddha. A number of gods 
and goddesses are described in the Manjmrimulakalpa, which is 
believed to have been written in about the second century A.D. ; 
also in the Pmjnaparamita we find a description of elaborate 
worship of Buddha with diverse paraphernalia. But even then, 

* cf. Mahdvasiu, Vol. I, p. 2 : etc. 

^ Theory first advanced by FxoL A. FoucUer in. Beginnings of Buddhist Art 
and Other Essays, p. 127, Dr. Coomaraswami thinks that the Mathura school 
can also have a cbim to the production of the earliest image of Buddha. 



THE PANTHEON 


121 

it does not seem clear that the Buddhists had any conception 
of a well-defined and well-classified pantheon. It is in the 
Guhyasamaja that we find the idea of a Buddhist pantheon properly 
crystallized ; here, for the first time, we find the description of the 
five Dhyani Buddhas, their mantras, their Mandalas and their 
Saktis. These Dhyani Buddhas represented the five Skandhas, or 
elements, of which the world is composed. They are here describ- 
ed as the progenitors of five Kulas, or families. Here we read : 



11 ^ 


The five Kulas are Dvesa, Moha, Raga, Cintamani 
and Samaya, which conduce to the attainment of all desires 
and emancipation. 

The emanations, or offspring, @f these Dhyani Buddhas con- 
stitute their families. It was in this way that the Buddhists got 
a systematized and well-classified pantheon, with its profusion 
of gods and goddesses. When these were represented in art 
they were required to show their origin by holding on their head 
the miniature figure of their parental Dhyani Buddha. Each deity 
was given various forms, with two hands, four hands, six hands, 
eight hands, or even up to twenty-four, and proportionately one to 
four heads, and up to twelve heads. They were given different 
colours, different companions and different expressions, in accord- 
ance with their worship in the different Tantric rites, and in 
accordance with the different functions they were required to 
discharge, from curing a disease to killing an enemy. The artist 
had a considerable hand in designing the images of deities, and 
they introduced their own traditions and innovations. The 
votaries also, according as they wanted to have their gods in more 
or less powerful forms, added extra hands, heads and feet, to suit 

^ Guhyasamaja, OQ. cit., pp. 6, 11, 16-17. 



122 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

their own ideas and whims ; and it was precisely in this way that 
the deities increased to an amazing number. 

Ithas already been indicated that the Guhyasamaja went into 
private hands after its inception, and was handed down through 
an unbroken chain of gurus and disciples for three hundred years ; 
and obtained publicity, through the teachings and mystic songs of 
the Buddhist Siddhacaryas and Vajracaryas, in about the middle 
of the seventh century. It is for this reason that we do not find 
references to this pantheon in the general Buddhist literature, or 
in the works of the Chinese travellers who came to India to 
investigate the condition of Buddhism prevalent in their own time. 
Despite this fact, certain names of Buddhist gods and goddesses 
are indeed found in these writings, though they do not pertain to 
the well-classified pantheon referred to above. In the Sukhavati- 
vyuha^ which was translated into Chinese between A.D. 148 and 
170, the name of Amitabha appears for the first time, who was the 
presiding deity of the Sukhavatl or the Akanistha heaven, where 
he is believed to have brought Avalokitesvara into existence. We 
should remember that in the Vajrayana works also this heaven has 
been characterized as the abode of all deities. In the smaller 
recension of the same work, which was also translated into Chinese 
between A.D. 384 and 417, mention is made of two more gods, 
namely Aksobhya as a Tathagata and Manjusri as a Bodhisattva. 
Fa-hien (A.D. 394 to 414) mentions the names of Manjusri, Avalo- 
kitesvara and the future Buddha Maitreya ; and Hiuen-thsang (A.D. 
629 to 645) the names of Avalokitesvara, Harlti, Ksitigarbha, Mai- 
treya, Manjusri, Padmapani, Vaisravana, Sakyabuddha, Sakya- 
Bodhisattva and Yama, as also the names of deified saints such as 
Asvaghosa, Nagarjuna, Asahga, Sumedhas, and others. I-Tsing 
(a.D. 671 to 695) mentions the names of Avalokitesvara, Amitayus 
or Amitabha, Harlti, the Caturmaharajikas, Maitreya, Manjusri, 


^ Ed. Max Muller, in Anecdota Oxoniensia, pp. 1, 28, 32. 



THE PANTHEON 


123 


Yama, besides several others. Santideva (a.D. 695 to 730), in his 
Siksasamuccaya, mentions the names of Aksobhyaas a Tathagata, 
Gaganagaiija as a Bodhisattva, Sirhhavikridita as a Tathagata, 
Cunda, Trisamayaraja, MaricT, Simhanada, Manjughosa, and many 
others. After Santideva the Tantras of the Buddhists got wide 
publicity; and in the Tantric works written after his time all 
referred to the pantheon, and described many gods who were 
included in it. The Sadhana literature, which describes the forms 
of gods and the procedure for worshipping them, was developed by 
the Siddhacaryas Saraha, Nagarjuna, Sabarlpa, Anangavajra, In- 
drabhuti, and many others, though the earliest Sadhana was perhaps 
written by Asanga, who flourished in the third century A.D., in 
which he referred to the Dhyani Buddhas and their emanations.’’ 

When we examine the images executed in the different 
schools of art, we also come to the same conclusion, that the 
Buddhist pantheon was not well-developed before the Tantras got 
wide publicity, in about the beginning of the eighth century. In 
the Gandhara school, for instance, besides the Buddha images we 
meet with the images of Jambhala, Maitreya, Hariti (the Indian 
Madonna) and her consort, along with other Bodhisattva images.® 
In the Mathura school of sculpture, which was either contempor- 
aneous or somewhat later than the Gandhara school, we meet with 
numerous Buddha and Bodhisattva images, and those of Kubera, 
Yaksas and Nagas. The Mathura school extended to the early 
Gupta period, and here also we do not meet with the later Buddhist 
gods, namely Avalokitesvara, Manjusri, Tara, and the like.® The 
case of the Magadha school, which flourished after the Mathura 
school, is otherwise. It included the images of Saranath, Nalanda 

’ Sadhana No. 159, in the Sadhanamala. 

® V. A. Smith, Fine Art in India a 7 id Ceylon, Figs. 62, 63, PI. XXVIII, 
Figs. 64, 65 ; also Garu^a and Naga images. Fig. 70 ; refer also to the image 
of Kubera, No. 3912 of the Indian Museum. 

® AS.L Ann. Rep., 1906-7, p. 145; Mathura Museiim Catalogtie, pp. 27-28. 



124 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

and Odantapuri. The most flourishing period of the Magadha 
school was contemporaneous with the reign of the Pala kings of 
Bengal, and lasted till the Muhammadan conquest of Eastern 
India.^ In this school we find the first reference to a well- 
classified pantheon ; because in most of the images there are five 
Dhyani Buddhas round the aureole over the head, as also the minia- 
ture of the parental Dhyani Buddha on their crowns. Again, unlike 
the Gandhara and Mathura schools, there is a great dearth of 
Buddha images, and, even when he is represented, he takes the form 
of Vajrasana, being flanked by Avalokitesvara and Maitreya on the 
two sides in a semi-mythical form. In the Magadha school, there- 
fore, Buddha partakes of the nature of the Dhyani Buddha 
Aksobhya, as is evident from the numerous Sadhanas dedicated 
to his worship. The Bodhisattva images also are not so stereotyped 
as we find them in Gandhara and Mathura. The Magadha school 
is characterized by its wide variety of images of gods and 
goddesses ; and this will be apparent to any visitor who goes to 
the museums at Saranath and Nalanda, or Patna, or takes a turn in 
the extensive ruins of the Odantapuri Vihara, now situated near the 
railway station at Bihar, on the Bihar Bakhtiyarpur Light Railway. 
At Saranath we meet with the images of $adaksari Lokesvara, 
Ucchusma Jambhala, ManjusrI, Tara, Vasudhara, MaricT, all the 
five Dhyani Buddhas, Vajrasattva, the sixth Dhyani Buddha, and 
many others belonging to the Vajrayana pantheon. Almost the 
same variety of images presents itself in Nalanda and Saranath. 

The Bengal school of art, which comes next, was distinguished 
by the high-class art it produced and for its beauty in execution. 
Its flourishing period ranged from the tenth century, or earlier, to 
the conquest of Bengal by the Muhammadans. Many of the 
specimens of the Bengal school are preserved in the museums at 
Calcutta, Dacca, Rajshahi and the Vahgiya Sahitya Parisad, and a 


^ V. A. Smith, History of Fine Art in India and Ceylon, p. 146. 



PLATE II 






THE PANTHEON 


125 


large number of them are scattered about in the Pargana 
Vikrampur, in the districts of Dinajpur and Comilla. In this 
school many interesting images of gods belonging to the Tantric 
Buddhism are to be met with ; and from these it seems clear that 
the artists were acquainted with a large number of descriptions of 
the form of gods as given in the Sidhana literature; for instance, 
among others there are images of Heruka, Vasudhara, Jambhala, 
Arapacana, Khasarpana, Parnasavarl, Siihhanada, Manjuvara, 
Aparajita, Mahapratisara, Nairatma, Sadaksarl Lokesvara, 
MahasrI Tara, KhadiravanI Tara, and many others/ 

The images of Buddhist deities found at Ajanta, Ellora and 
in South India show signs of an immature development of Tantra, 
and may be assigned to a period prior to the Bengal school, 
though the paintings of Ajanta and other sculptures are of great 
antiquity. Javanese art was profoundly influenced by the Bengal 
school of art, and the images of gods and goddesses as found in 
the Bodo-budur temple show that they knew many deities of the 
Vajrayana pantheon.'* As Vajrayana was mainly a product of 
Bengal, it is probable that the Bengal colonists carried their art 
and religion to Java by the sea route, probably from Tamralipti, 
which is even now regarded as a seaport. 

After the destruction of Buddhism in India, the priests of 
the celebrated monasteries of Bengal and Magadha, who could 
save their heads from the hostile swords of Muhammadanism, fled 
to Nepal, which is protected on all sides by the natural ramparts 
of the Himalayas, and took refuge in that country, and thus kept 
the torch of Buddhism still burning there. The Bengal school of 

Most of these images are reproduced in Indian Buddhist Iconography, 
in their appropriate places. The latest contribution on the subject of the Bengal 
school of art, with numerous illustrations of Hindu and Buddhist images, is 
represented by N. K. Bhattasali, Iconography oi Buddhist ajid Brahmanical 
■Sculptures in the Dacca Museum, 1929, 

^ Dr. J. Ph, Vogel, The Relation Between the Art oi India and Java, p. 14. 



126 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM ^ ^ ^ ^ ^ 

art was carried there; but it was soon modified when it came 
in contact with the native artists, and was thus stereotyped. The 
general impression of the visitor who visits the numerous 
monasteries in Nepal, which are a repository of a large number 
of images of the diverse Buddhist deities, is that the excellences 
of the Bengal school could not be preserved by the Nepal 
artists, and that decadence in art was already in evidence. 
The followers of Vajrayana, who went to Nepal in order to 
make sure of their existence, converted a good many Newars 
of the land to Buddhism, and carved innumerable images of gods 
and goddesses in stone, metal and wood, so much so that a student 
of iconography is overwhelmed by their wealth and variety. 

The cumulative evidence of art, history, philosophy and 
literature leads us to believe that the pantheon of the Northern 
Buddhists was not widely known before the eighth century A.D., 
nor was the underlying philosophy, which may warrant the for- 
mation of a pantheon, well-developed before that time, though the 
origin of the latter may have been considerably earlier. This 
may be explained by the fact that the Guhyasamafay which for the 
first time inculcated the doctrine of the five Dhyani Buddhas and 
their families, was composed and transmitted in secret for about 
three hundred years ; and that is why it did not attain wide publi- 
city. It is only in the Sadhana composed by Asanga^ that we find 
a definite reference to the five Dhyani Buddhas and their families, 
and it is for that reason not unreasonable to connect Asanga 
with the introduction of the very Guhyasamajatantra itself. The 
subsequent writers got only a glimpse of what filtered through 
the secret organizations. After the eighth century secrecy was 
no longer required, as the principles of Vajrayana then were fully 
established and widely spread, through the teachings and mystic 
songs of the eighty-four Siddhapurusas. 

The pantheon of the Northern Buddhists revolves round the 

^ Sadhana No. 159, in the Sadhanamala. 






THE PANTHEON 


127 


theory of the five Dhyani Buddhas. The Buddhists believed that 
the world is composed of five elements, or Skandhas: Rupa, 
Vedana, Samjfia, Samskara and Vijfiana; and these were deified 
in Vajrayana in the form of the five Dhyani Buddhas. In course 
of time these five Dhyani Buddhas were regarded as primordial 
gods, and, therefore, Vajrayana took more or less a polytheistic 
form. The priests were conscious of this defect, especially when 
they found all the six systems of Hindu philosophy setting up a 
monotheistic form. They tried to cure this defect by the theory 
of Vajradhara, that is, the Adi or the primordial monotheistic 
god, to whom even the Dhyani Buddhas owe their origin. The 
theory originated in the Nalanda monastery in about the tenth 
century. Thereafter a large number of images of Vajradhara must 
have been made in the different schools of art, as can be inferred 
from the numerous Vajradhara images which are to be found in 
the Nepal and Tibetan schools. Alexander Csoma de Koros 
places the introduction of this conception of Adi-Buddha in 
Central India in the latter half of the tenth century.^ It originated 
at Nalanda, according to him, in the beginning of the tenth 
century, and no mention of Adi-Buddha is made by any writer 
before that time. Homage is paid to Adi-Buddha in the shape of 
a flame of fire, which the priests consider as eternal, self-born 
and self-existent. It is said in the Svayambhupuyana that the Adi- 
Buddha first manifested himself in Nepal, in the form of a flame 
of fire, and ManjusrI erected a temple over it, in order to preserve 
the flame. This temple is known as the Svayambhu Caitya." 

The conception of Vajradhara in human form pre-supposes 
Adi-Buddha, and, therefore, is later than the first half of the tenth 
century. Vajrasattva, being a regular development of Vajrapani, 

^ J.A.S.B., Vol. II, 1833, pp. 57 ff. See also Bhattacharyya, ‘ Vajradhar 
vs. Vajrasattva,’ in J.B.O.R.S., IX, pp. 114 ff. 

^ Oldfield, Sketches irom Nepal, II, pp. 90, 156 ff., 188 ; Hodgsons Essays, 
pp. ll5 ff. ’ 


128 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

the Bodhisattva emanating from Aksobhya, is a little earlier, 
though the conceptions of Vajrasattva and Vajradhara are some- 
times inextricably mixed up. In Vajrayana Adi-Buddha is regard- 
ed as the highest deity, the originator even of the Dhyani 
Buddhas. When represented in human form, he begets the name 
of Vajradhara, and is conceived in two forms, single and yab-yum. 
When single he is bedecked in jewels and gaudy ornaments, sits 
in the Vajraparyahka attitude, carrying the Vajra in the right 
hand and the Ghanta in the left, the two hands being crossed 
against the breast in what is known as the Vajrahumkara Mudra. 
In yab-yum form he is the same as above described, with the 
difference that he is in this case locked in an embrace with his 
Sakti, whose name, according to Miss Getty, is Prajnaparamita. 
The Sakti is somewhat smaller in size, is richly dressed and 
bedecked in ornaments, carrying the Kartri in the right hand 
and the Kapala in the left,^ 

But Vajradhara was not universally accepted as the Adi- 
Buddha. When the theory of Adi-Buddha was fully established, the 
Buddhists ranged themselves into many sects, as it were, holding 
different views regarding specific forms which the Adi-Buddha 
should take. Some considered one among the five Dhyani Buddhas 
as Adi-Buddha; some acknowledged Vajrasattva as the Adi- 
Buddha ; and according to some the Bodhisattvas, Samantabhadra 
and Vajrapani, were regarded as Adi-Buddhas. Thus the cult of 
Adi-Buddha was distributed amongst the different theories, which 
gave rise to as many different sects amongst the Tantric 
Buddhists. 

Dhyani Buddhas 

The Dhyani Buddhas are a peculiar kind of Buddhas, who 
are not required to pass through the stage of a Bodhisattva. They 
have never been anything less nor more than a Buddha; they are 

Bhattacharyya, Indian Buddhist Iconography, p. xxviii. 




( c ) Locana 




THE PANTHEON 


129 


always engaged in peaceful meditation and they voluntarily 
restrain themselves from the act of creation. To create is a duty 
of their emanations or the divine Bodhisattvas. The Dhyani 
Buddhas are five in number, to which a sixth, Vajrasattva, is 
sometimes added. The theory of the five Dhyani Buddhas was 
promulgated in about the third century A.D., for the first time in 
the Guhyasamaja and later on developed in the Tantric Buddhism. 
It may be possible that the five Mudras, which Buddha Sakyasimha 
made sacred by using on memorable occasions, and which were 
constantly represented in the Buddhistic figures of the different 
schools of art, gave rise to the five Dhyani Buddhas. The Tantric 
authorities, however, maintain that the five Dhyani Buddhas took 
their origin from the theory of the eternity of the five Skandhas, 
or elements, which were held by Buddha to be the constituents of 
a being fused together by action. Vajrasattva, the sixth Dhyani 
Buddha, was generally regarded as the priest of the five Dhyani 
Buddhas, and is usually represented with the priestly symbols, the 
Vajra and Ghanta. He is an embodiment of the five Skandhas 
collectively, and undoubtedly a later incorporation into the 
pantheon. The five Dhyani Buddhas are Vairocana, Aksobhya, 
Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and Amoghasiddhi. When represented 
they appear all alike. But they vary in regard to the particular 
colour of their body and the different mystic poses exhibited in 
their hands, and according to their vehicles and recognition 
symbols. Every Dhyani Buddha is represented in a sitting 
posture on a full-blown double lotus, the attitude being known as 
the meditative pose, in which he is required to sit cross-legged, the 
right foot crossing over and in front of the left, the soles of both 
feet turned upwards. The hand, which rests on the lap, is some- 
times empty ; but in most cases it carries a bowl ; the head is bare 
and the hair curly, which radiates effulgence like a flame of fire, 
and the eyes are half-closed in token of meditation. The dress con- 
sists of an under-garment, reaching from the breast to the knees 


130 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

and tied by a scarf. The body is loosely covered by the habit of 
a monk, leaving the right arm bare. The Dhyani Buddhas are 
generally represented on the four sides of a stupa, which is the 
symbol of the Buddhist universe. Four out of the five face 
the four cardinal points ; Vairocana, the deity of the inner shrine, 
being generally unrepresented. But when he is represented out- 
side, he is assigned a place between Ratnasambhava and Ahso- 
bhya. On the stupa, Aksobhya faces east; Ratnasambhava south, 
Amitabha west, and Amoghasiddhi north. Vairocana is supposed 
to reside in the heart, or the sanctum, of the stupa. Occasionally 
Vairocana and Aksobhya change places ; and in this state they 
appear in the Dhyani-Buddha-Maindala, described in the Guhya- 
sarmja. 

These Dhyani Buddhas are regarded as the progenitors of 
the different families of Buddhist gods and goddesses. They 
are assigned a Sakti each, through whom the families are brought 
into existence. The families are Dvesa, Moha, Raga, Cintamani 
and Samaya. The members of each family are required to show 
their origin by holding the figure of their parental Dhyani Buddha 
on their heads.^ 

The colour, mudra, vahana and recognition symbol of the 
different Dhyani Buddhas is shown in the following table : 


Name 

Colour 

Mudea 

Vahana 

Symbol , 

Aksobhya 

Blue 

Bhisparsa 

^ Elephant 

Vajra 

Vairocana 

White 

Dharmacakra 

Dragon 

Gakra ' " 

Amitabha 

Red 

Samadhi 

Peacock 

Lotus 

Ratnasambhava 

Yellow 

Varada 

Horse 

Jewels.,,, 

Amoghasiddhi 

Green 

Abhaya 

Garuda 

1 Visvavajra- 


^ Indian Buddhist Iconografiky, chap. I, pp. 1 ff. 



PLATE VI 



(a) Pandara 



(^) Mamaki 


(c) Aryatara 







THE PANTHEON 


131 


I. The Dvesa Family 

The Dvesa family is presided over by Aksobhya, who is 
represented in the Bhumisparsa, or the earth-touching attitude. 
He is first mentioned as a Tathagata in the smaller recension of 
the Amitayus-sutra, which was translated into Chinese between 
A.D. 384 and 417. His Sakti is Locana; and his principal 
Bodhisattva is Vajrapani. A large number of gods and god- 
desses emanate from Aksobhya, and these constitute the Dvesa 
family. 

Amongst the gods emanating from Aksobhya, Heruka, Haya- 
grlva and Yamari are the chief. The blue colour of Aksobhya is 
associated with terrible deities and gruesome rites in the Tantra. 
The deities emanating from Aksobhya usually take a blue colour 
and they exhibit an awe-inspiring appearance, with distorted face, 
bare fangs, three eyes, protruding tongue, garland of severed 
heads and skulls, tiger’s skin and ornaments of snakes. 

1. HERUKA^ 

Amongst the members of the Dvesa family Heruka is perhaps 
the most popular and the most powerful. He is assigned many 
Saktis, and, as he is associated with the different Saktis, his forms 
are distinctively called Buddhakapala, Samvara, Vajradaka, Sapta- 
ksara and Mahamaya. Independent Tantras, said to be delivered 
by Buddha in an assembly of the faithful, are ascribed to all these 
different forms of Heruka. When two-armed Heruka dances in the 
Ardhaparyahka attitude on a corpse, and carries the Vajra and the 
skull cup full of human blood in the two hands. The Khatvanga, 
surmounted by human skulls with flowing banner, hangs from the 
left shoulder like the sacred thread. In the two-armed form he is 

^ The descriptions of all these emanations have been summarized from 
the elaborate sadhanas in the Sadha?mmMd. The same procedure is followed 
in the whole chapter. See also descriptions in Indian Buddhist Iconography. 



132 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

sometimes associated with a Sakti, who closely embraces him and 
carries the Kartri and the Kapala in her hands. 

When four-armed he is also conceived in yab-yum and carries 
the Vajra, the sword, the Khatvanga and the jewel. When he is 
embraced by Citrasena in yab-yum, he is called Buddhakapala 
and carries the Khatvanga, the Kapala, the Kartri and the 
Pamaru ; and the pair is surrounded by twenty-four goddesses 
arranged in three circles. 

When Heruka is associated with Vajra varahl he is usually 
designated as Vajradaka, which also takes two different forms as 
Samvara and Saptaksara. Samvara is two-armed, stands in the 
Alidha attitude and tramples upon Kalaratri. He carries the 
Vajra and the Ghanta; while his Sakti Vajravarahl shows the 
Vajra and the Kapala full of blood. Saptaksara, on the other hand, 
has three faces and six arms, though he is embraced by the same 
goddess, Vajravarahl. He carries the Vajra, the Ghanta and a 
human skin in the three left hands, and the Kapala, the Khatvanga 
and the Trisula in the three right hands. His Sakti Vajravarahl 
carries the same symbols as her master. The pair is surrounded 
by six deities, arranged in a circle. 

When Heruka is associated with Vajrayogini, who is gener- 
ally known as BuddhadakinT, he has the name of Mahamaya. In 
this form Heruka has four arras and four faces, and dances in the 
Ardhaparyanka attitude. He carries in his four hands the Kapala, 
the arrow, the Khatvanga and the bow. His Prajna Buddhadakini 
also shows the same symbols and is endowed with the same form 
as her master. The pair is surrounded by four goddesses in the 
four cardinal directions. 

2. YAMARI 

Yamari is another god belonging to the Dvesa family. 
Independent Tantras are devoted to his worship, and they relate 
to two different forms of Yamari, red and blue. It is said that, in 
accordance with the different functions discharged by the deity, 



THE PANTHEON 133 

he gets different colours. For instance, in Santi he is white and 
faces the east; in Paustika he is yellow and faces the north; in 
Vasya he is red and faces the west; and in Akarsana he is blue 
and faces the south, and so on. Of these, the red and blue forms 
are more popular ; and this means that his worship was mostly 
performed with a view to enchanting men and women and to force 
them to submission and bring them to the worshipper. Yamari 
may be worshipped singly, or in yab-yum in conjunction with the 
Sakti. He should have the head of a buffalo on his shoulders and 
should ride on a buffalo. The Tibetans relate a very interesting 
story regarding the origin of this fearful god. It is said that there 
was once a holy man, who lived in a cave in deep meditation for 
fifty years, after which he was to enter into Nirvana. Just a few 
hours before the completion of this period, two robbers entered the 
cave with a stolen bull and slaughtered it there ; but when they 
discovered the presence of the ascetic, a witness to their crime, they 
beheaded him. Immediately he was killed his body assumed the 
ferocious form of Yama, and, taking up the bull’s head, he set it 
upon his headless shoulders. He then killed the two robbers, 
and drank their blood from the cup made out of their skulls. In 
his fiery and insatiable thirst for victims he threatened to 
de-populate the whole of Tibet. The Tibetans appealed to their 
tutelary deity ManjusrI, whereupon the latter assumed the fierce 
form of Yamantaka, and defeated Yama in a sanguinary battle. 
This probably illustrates the popular belief that the buffalo is 
more powerful than the bull. 

Yamari in his red form is usually conceived as standing in 
the Pratyalidha attitude, and as carrying the Kapala full of blood 
in the left hand and a white staff surmounted by a severed head 
in the right. He is decked in ornaments of snakes, has brown hair 
rising upwards, and wears a tiger’s skin. The Sakti, who embraces 
him in yab-yum, also stands in the Pratyalidha attitude. She has 
two arms, garments of tiger’s skin, and is intoxicated with wine. 



134 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

Yamari, when blue, may have either one face and two arms, 
or three faces and four arms, or three or six faces and six arms. 
When he is two-armed, he stands in the Pratyalidha attitude, and 
shows a staff surmounted by a Vajra in the right hand, and the 
raised index finger with a noose in the left hand placed against the 
breast. When three-faced and four-armed he is conceived in yab- 
yum in the embrace of the Sakti. He carries in his right hands 
the hammer and the sword; in the two left the lotus and the 
jewel. When three-faced and six-armed he may also be repre- 
sented singly; and in this form he carries the thunderbolt, the 
sword and the Musala in the three right hands ; and the goblin 
(Vetall), the axe and the lasso in the three left. He may also 
have the sword, the Mudgara and the thunderbolt in the three 
right hands ; and the Ghanta, the Vajrapasa and the Musala in 
the three left. In the second form he may have six faces and six 
legs, with the same weapons. 

3. EKAJATA 

Amongst the female members of the Dvesa family, Ekajata 
and Nairatma may be cited as specimens. As is usual with the 
members of the Dve§a family, both these goddesses have a blue 
form and they are terrible in appearance and awe-inspiring, with 
hair rising upwards in the shape of a flame of fire, canine teeth, 
garments of tiger’s skin, three bloodshot eyes and protruding 
tongue. Regarding Ekajata it is said that her worship was 
introduced by Siddha Nagarjuna, one of the eighty-four Maha- 
siddhas, in the middle of the seventh century, from the country of 
of Bhota or Tibet. The country of Bhota was also known as 
MahacTna, and this accounts for the name Mahacina Tara, which 
is given to the four-armed variety of Ekajata. She was conceived 
in four different forms — as one-faced, having two, four or eight 
arms; and as twelve-faced with twenty-four arms. When two- 
armed, she is conceived as carrying the Kartri, or knife, in her 





THE PANTHEON 


135 

right hand and the Kapala, or the skull cup, in the left When 
four-armed, she carries the arrow and the sword in the two right 
hands and the bow and the skull in the two left As Mahaclna 
Tara, she carries the sword and the Kartri in the two right hands 
and the Utpala and the Kapala in the two left. When eight- 
armed, she shows the sword, the arrow, the Vajra and the Kartri 
in the four right hands; and the bow, the Utpala, the Parasu and 
the skull in the four left hands. When twelve-faced and twenty- 
four-armed, she gets the name of Vidyujjvalakarali and tramples 
on four principal Hindu gods — Indra, Brahma, Visp.u and 
Siva. She carries the Khadga, Vajra, Cakra, jewel, Ahkusa, 
arrow, dart, Mudgara, Musala, Kartri, Damaru and rosary in the 
twelve right hands ; and the bow, noose, TarjanI, banner, mace, 
Trisula, Casaka, Utpala, bell, Parasu, severed head of Brahma and 
Kapala in the twelve left. 

4. NAIRATMA 

Nairatma is another goddess who emanates from Aksobhya. 
The word, Nairatma, means soul-less, which is another name for 
Sunya, in which the Bodhisattva merges on the attainment of 
Nirvana. In Vajrayana the conception of 5unya took the form of 
a goddess in whose eternal embrace the Bodhisattva is said to 
remain in eternal bliss and happiness. Nairatma gets the blue 
colour because the colour of Sunya, according to Buddhist 
traditions, is the same as the colour of the sky. 

Nairatma is conceived as standing in Ardhaparyahka, in a 
dancing attitude on the chest of a corpse. She carries the 
Kartri in the right hand and the Kapala in the left; and a 
Khatvanga hangs from the left shoulder. She is decked with the 
five auspicious symbols, or the Mudras, viz. the torque, the bracelet, 
the girdle, the tiara and the armlets. Images of Nairatma are 
extremely rare. 



136 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 
11. The MOHA Family 

The originator of the Moha family is Vairocana, who is 
usually conceived as sitting in the Vajraparyahka attitude, white 
in colour, and showing the Dharmacakra Mudra. His recognition 
symbol is the Cakra, or the disc, and his Vahana is a pair of 
dragons. His place is in the middle of the stupa, and therefore 
he is not usually represented outside the stupa ; but exceptions 
to this rule are occasionally to be found, when he is given a 
place in the corner between Aksobhya in the east and Ratna- 
sambhava in the south. His Bodhisattva is Samantabhadra and 
his Sakti is Vajradhatvisvarl, through whom he brings forth the 
members of his family. Amongst the members of the family, 
MaricI and Vajravarahl may be cited as examples. 

1. MARiCl 

MarIcI is invoked by the Lamas of Tibet at the advent of the 
morning, showing her connexion with the sun. Like the Hindu 
sun god, she also has a chariot ; but the chariot of MaricI is drawn 
by seven pigs, while that of the sun is drawn by seven horses. 
The sun has a charioteer in Aruna, who has no legs : while the 
charioteer in the case of MaricI is Rahu, who has only ahead 
and nothing else. MaricI is conceived in six different forms. 
She may have one, three, five or six faces, and two, eight, ten or 
twelve arms. She is generally accompanied by her four attendants, 
Vartall, Vadali, Varall and VarahamukhI, and is recognized by her 
sow face and the seven pigs that run her chariot. The needle 
and thread are her characteristic symbols, by which she is said 
to sew up the mouths and the eyes of the wicked. Images of 
MaricI are rather common in India. In her two-armed form of 
Asokakanta she is seen in sculptures as an attendant of Khadira- 
vani Tara, who is an emanation of Amoghasiddhi. Among the 
other varieties of MaricI, the form with three faces and eight arms 
is extensively found in sculptures. 






THE PANTHEON 


137 

When two-armed, Marie! has the name of Asokakanta, and 
in this form she holds the bough of an Asoka tree in the left hand 
and exhibits the Varadamudra in the right hand. She is decorat- 
ed with bright jewels, wears white garments, and is conceived as 
standing on a pig of golden colour. 

The second, Arya-marIcI, is identical in all other respects 
with Asokakanta, and can only be distinguished by the symbols 
which she bears in her hands. Instead of the Asoka bough and 
Varada pose, Arya-maricI carries the needle and thread. 

When three-faced and eight-armed, Marie! has the name of i 
Mar!c!-picuva, is yellow in colour, wears red garments, and is 
decked in various ornaments. Her three faces display three 
different sentiments. The middle displays amour, and is yellow in 
colour ; the left face is distorted sow-like, is blue in colour, and 
displays wrath, with bared fangs and protruding lips. The right 
face is red in colour, glows in heavenly splendour, and displays ; 
the sentiment of Santa. In her six hands she holds the needle i 
and thread in the first pair, the elephant-goad and the noose in J 
the second pair, the bow and arrow in the third, and the thunder- 
bolt and the Asoka flowers in the fourth. She is accompanied by 
four goddesses, situated in the four cardinal directions. 

When three-faced and twelve-armed, she may be called the 
Ubhayavarahanana Mar!c!, because her two faces, to the right 
and the left of the principal one, are depicted sow-like, unlike 
any other three-faced form of Mar!c!. She stands in the Al!dha 
attitude, is clad in tiger’s skin, has red complexion, bejewelled 
head-dress, a red scarf, and is decked in jewellery. The principal 
face smiles with delight, is peaceful in appearance, and displays 
the sentiment of amour. The face to the left is red, while 
the right has very great effulgence, like the Saindhava salt. 
Homage is paid to her by a deity carrying the Vajra and the 
Mudgara in the left, and by Purandara, carrying the Vajra and the 
noose in the right, hand. In her six left hands she shows the 



138 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

Tarjam against the breast, the Asoka bough, the Ahkusa, the 
Kapala, the severed head of Brahma and the vessel. The six right 
hands carry the needle, the Ahkusa, the Bhindipala, the sword, the 
Kartri and the staff surmounted by a Vajra. She tramples under 
her feet the principal Hindu gods, such as Visnu, Siva and Brahma. 

When five-faced and ten-armed, she has four legs and a white 
colour like the colour of the Dhyani Buddha Vairocana. Of the 
five faces, the principal face is white, the one to the right is blue, 
the other to the left is red and distorted, sow-like. The face 
behind is green, and the one above is yellow, and bears the 
Trisikha and the crown of chignon (Jata). The five right hands 
hold the sun, the thunderbolt, the arrow, the goad and the needle. 
The five left hands carry the moon, the bow, the Asoka bough, the 
noose with the Tarjani and the thread. She also tramples under 
her feet the four Hindu gods, Indra, Siva, Visnu and Brahma. 

When six-faced and twelve armed, she gets three different 
names — Vajradhatvisvari Marici, Odiyana MarIcT and Vajravetall. 
These three different varieties are due to slight differences in 
weapons that are held in their hands. They are all endowed with 
six faces and twelve arms. The first five faces are respectively 
red, blue, green, yellow and white. The face on the top is 
distorted sow-like, and has a blue colour. She stands in the 
AlTdha attitude and presents a terrifying appearance, with three 
eyes in each face, protruding tongue, bared fangs, ornaments 
of serpents, and a garment of tiger’s skin. Vajradhatvisvari 
carries in her six right hands the sword, the Musala, the arrow, the 
goad, the Vajra and the Parasu; and in her six left shows the 
noose (occasionally with Tarjani), the Kapala, the Asoka bough, 
the severed head of Brahma, the bow and the Trisula. Odiyana 
MarIcI holds the Cakra in the right instead of the goad, and the 
Khatvanga- Kapala in one of the left hands, instead of the Kapala 
only. Vajravetall in one of her right hands holds the crossed 
double thunderbolt, or the Cakra, and in one of the left the noose 



THE PANTHEON 139 

instead of the Kapala or the Khatvahga-Kapala. The other hands 
carry the same weapons in all the three cases. 

2. VAJRAVARAHI 

Vajravarahl is another important member of the Moha family. 
She is so called because she has an excrescence near the right 
ear, which resembles the face of a sow ; and this is evident from 
the epithet Vajraghona, which is usually applied to her. The union 
of Vajravarahl with Heruka is the subject matter of the two 
popular Buddhist Tantras, namely the Cakrasamvaratantra and 
the Vajravarahitantra. She is described in the Sadhanas as the 
first queen of the god Sri Heruka. She is also called a Dakini, 
which in Buddhist Tantra signifies any goddess who may be 
associated with the male gods in yab-yum. She is described 
also as Vairocanakulodbhava, or belonging to the Vairocana 
family. 

Vajravarahl is conceived in three different forms. The first 
two are one-faced and two-armed, while the third is four-armed. 
In all forms she is terrible in appearance, with three eyes, 
dishevelled hair, the six Mudras, the Pratyalldha attitude, and a 
garland of severed heads. She is entirely nude, and dances on a 
corpse. She is surrounded by four deities of the Mandala, viz. 
Dakini, Lama, Khandaroha and Rupinl. In the first form she 
stands in the Pratyalldha attitude, and shows in the right hand the 
Vajra, with Tarjanl and the Kapala in the left, the Khatvanga 
hanging from her left shoulder. 

In the second form she dances in the Ardhaparyahka attitude 
on a corpse lying on its breast, and carries the Kartri in a menac- 
ing attitude in the right hand, and the Kapala, full of blood, in the 
left. The Khatvanga, as usual, hangs from the left shoulder. This 
variety of Vajravarahl is invoked widely in the rite of bewitching 
men and women, and her worship is very popular in modern days 
in Nepal and other Buddhist countries. 



140 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

The third, or four-armed form, of Vajravarahi is known as 
Arya-Vajravarahx, and carries in the two right hands the Vajra and 
the elephant goad, and in the two left the Kapala with the Tarjanf 
and the noose. She is one-faced, three-eyed, and appears terrible, 
with contortions of the brows, the adamantine excrescence and the 
protruding tongue, teeth and belly. She stands in the Alldha 
attitude on a corpse, unlike the other forms of Vajravarahi, and 
the Khatvahga hangs from her left shoulder, as usual. 

III. The Raga Family 

The progenitor of the Raga family is Amitabha, who is 
usually represented as sitting in the meditative pose and as 
showing the Samadhi-mudra in his two hands, which are placed 
on the lap, one over the other, with the palms of both hands facing 
upwards. His colour is red, his recognition symbol is the lotus, 
and his Vahana is a pair of elephants. When represented on the 
stupa, his chapel appears on the west. His Bodhisattva is Padma- 
pani and his Sakti is Pandara, through whom he brings forth the 
members of his family. 

1. lokeSvara 

Amongst the members of the Raga family, Lokesvara, or 
Avalokitesvara, is the chief, who is undoubtedly the most popular 
deity of the Vajrayana pantheon, because he is the very embodi- 
ment of compassion, to whom as many as one hundred and eight 
forms are attributed. Amongst these the two forms, Khasarpapa 
and Siihhanada, may be cited as examples. 

Khasarpana is two-armed and one-faced, and carries the lotus 
in the left hand and shows the Varadamudra in the right. He 
has a genuinely peaceful appearance, and is endowed with various 
auspicious marks. From his right hand flows the stream of 
nectar, which is received by Sucimukha, the goblin, who stands 
below with an uplifted face, a protruding belly, and an emaciated 
appearance. He is accompanied by four deities, Tara, Sudhana- 




PLATE X 



SISIHANADA LOKESVARA 





THE PANTHEON 


141 

kumara, BhrkutI and Hayagrlva, in the four cardinal directions. 
Tara is green. With her right hand she makes blossom the lotus 
held in her left. Sudhanakumara has his two hands joined against 
his breast and carries a book under his left armpit. BhrkutI is 
four-armed, has matted hair, and carries the staff with three horns 
and the Kaman^alu in her two left hands. Of the two right, one 
is raised in the attitude of bowing while the other carries the rosary. 
Hayagrlva has red complexion, a stunted appearance, and a 
protruding belly, and his hair rises upwards in the shape of a 
flame of fire. He has a snake as his sacred thread, and his face is 
recognized by a moustache of a deep brown colour. He is clad in 
a tiger’s skin and his appearance is awe-inspiring. His right hand 
exhibits the mudra of bowing ; and in the left he carries the staff 
as a weapon. 

Siihhanada, the other form of Avalokiteifvara, is widely 
worshipped as a curer of all forms of disease. He is conceived 
as of white complexion, with three eyes, the crown of chignon and 
a tiger’s skin as garment. He has no ornaments, is mounted on 
a lion, and sits in the attitude of princely ease. To his right there 
is a white trident entwined by a white snake; and to his left is a 
lotus-bowl full of fragrant flowers. From his left hand rises a 
white lotus, on which a fiery white sword is placed. 

2. KURUKULLA 

Amongst the goddesses emanating from the Dhyani Buddha 
Amitabha, Kurukulla may be cited as an example. Kurukulla is 
said to confer success in the Tantric rite of Vasikarana, or 
betwitching. If her mantra is muttered ten thousand times any 
man can be bewitched, thirty thousand will be sufficient for sub- 
duing a minister, and one lakh for a king. Her mantra is also a 
charm against snake bites ; and it has the power to extract poison 
from patients bitten by a snake. Kurukulla is worshipped in four 
different forms, with two, four, six or eight arms. When two-armed 



142 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

she is white in appearance, sits in the Vajraparyahka attitude, and 
carries the rosary and the bowl of lotuses. She displays the sen- 
timent of passionate love and compassion, and wears the ornaments 
of eight snakes. When four-armed she has a red complexion, red 
garments, red ornaments and a seat of red lotus. She shows the 
Abhayamudra and the arrow in the two right hands, and the bow 
and the red lotus m the two left. She sits in the Vajraparyahka 
attitude, and under her lotus seat appear Kamadeva and his wife 
riding on Rahu. Sometimes she fits an arrow to the bow and is 
ready to strike. She may have another form, which is known as 
Odiyana Kurukulla, when endowed with four arms. This form is 
terrible in appearance, with the garland of heads, five skulls on the 
head, protruding teeth and tongue, garments of tiger’s skin, and 
brown hair rising on her head in the shape of a flame of fire. Out 
of four arms the principal pair is engaged in drawing to the full the 
flowery bow, charged with an arrow of red lotus. The second pair 
holds a goad of flowers and the red lotus. In this form she sits 
in the Ardhaparyahka attitude on a corpse. 

When six-armed she exhibits in the first pair of hands the 
T railokyavijayamudra, in the second pair the goad and the red lotus, 
and in the third the full-drawn bow with an arrow. She exhibits 
the sentiment of amour, is youthful in appearance, and clad in red 
garments and red upper garments, and wears all kinds of orna- 
ments. She is red in colour, and sits on a lotus in the Vajra- 
paryanka attitude. 

When eight-armed, she is represented as mild, youthful and 
compassionate. She is red in complexion, and sits in the Vajra- 
paryahka attitude. She displays the T railokyavijayamudra in her 
first pair of hands, the full-drawn bow and the arrow in the 
second pair, the goad and the noose in the third pair, the Varada- 
mudra and the Utpala in the fourth pair. She is accompanied by 
Prasannatara in the east, Nispannatara in the south, Jayatara in 
the west, and the Karnatara in the north. 







JAMBHALA 



THE PANTHEON 


143 


IV. The CiNTAMANi Family 

At the head of the Cintamani family is the Dhyani Buddha, 
Ratnasambhava, who is usually conceived as yellow in colour and 
as exhibiting the Varadamudra, or the gift-bestowing pose. His 
Vahana is a pair of horses and his recognition symbol is the jewel. 
When represented on the stupa he occupies a chapel towards the 
south. Not many deities emanate from him, nor is he regarded 
as an Adi-Buddha by any of the numerous Buddhist sects. His 
Bodhisattva is Ratnapani and his Sakti is Mamaki, through whom 
he brings forth the members of his family. Amongst the deities 
belonging to his family Jambhala, the god of wealth, and Vasudhara, 
the goddess of plenty, are the chief, and may be cited as examples. 

1. JAMBHALA 

As an emanation of Ratnasambhava he may be conceived 
as single, as also in yab-yum. When single, Jambhala is of 
golden complexion and carries the mongoose in the left hand 
and the citron in the right. The mongoose is supposed to be the 
receptacle of all gems, and when Jambhala presses the two sides 
of the mongoose it vomits forth the riches. By noticing this 
mongoose in actual representations it is easy to recognize the 
possessor to be Jambhala. When represented in yab-yum, he sits 
on the moon, placed on a double conventional lotus of eight 
petals. He wears all sorts of ornaments, a garland of yellow 
lotuses, and is locked in embrace with Vasudhara. His complexion 
is golden yellow ; he has a protruding belly, and he carries the 
mongoose and the citron in his left and right hands respectively. 
The eight petals of the lotus are occupied by eight Yaksas, who 
are also associated with their respective Saktis in yab-yum. The 
Sakti, Vasudhara, is yellow in complexion, and carries the ears of 
corn and shows the Varadamudra in her two hands. 

Jambhala has another fierce form in Ucchusma Jambhala, who 



144 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

is conceived as standing in the Pratyalldha attitude, with his left 
leg stretched forward on the forehead of Kubera, the Hindu god 
of wealth • while the right, which is somewhat bent, tramples upon 
his two legs. He has a terrible appearance, with a protruding 
belly, bared fangs and ornaments of snakes. He holds the Kapala, 
full of blood, against his breast, and looks eagerly towards it with 
his three eyes. The left hand carries the mongoose, near the thigh. 

2. VASUDHARA 

Amongst the female members of the Cintamani family 
Vasudhara is noteworthy. Vasudhara is the goddess of plenty, 
and is worshipped for various boons. She is fully decked in 
ornaments, and is invariably accompanied by her confidants. Her 
complexion is always yellow, like the colour of Ratnasambhava, 
and she carries in her left hand ears of corn placed on a vessel 
which showers gems; while the right hand exhibits the 
Varadamudra. Vasudhara is very popular with the Hindus, who 
worship her widely, and there are many Hindu Tantric works in 
which the Vasudhara cult is inculcated. 

V. The Samaya Family 

At the head of the Samaya family is the Dhyani Buddha, 
Amoghasiddhi ; and a tolerably large number of deities emanates 
from him. His left hand lies open on his lap, and the right exhibits 
the Abhaya-mudra, or the attitude of assurance. When represented, 
his colour is green and he always faces north in the stupa. His 
Vahana is a pair of Garudas and his recognition symbol is 
Visvavajra, or the conventional double thunderbolt. Sometimes a 
serpent with seven hoods forms the background, while the expanded 
hoods appear like an umbrella. In front of his shrine, therefore, 
is found a small square pit, which represents the tank in which the 
serpent resides. His Bodhisattva is Visvapani and his consort is 
Aryatara, through whom he brings the members of his family into 





PARl^ASAVARl 





THE PANTHEON 


145 


existence. All the members of his family, it may be remarked, are 
females, no male emanation of this Dhyani Buddha being known 
except Visvapani ; nor is he known to have been regarded ever as 
the Adi-Buddha by any of the sects. Amongst the emanations of 
Amoghasiddhi, Khadiravainl Tara and Parnasavarl may be cited 
as examples. 

1. KHADIRAVAIirl TARA 

Khadiravani is conceived as green in colour, like her par- 
ental Dhyani Buddha, and is endowed with one face and two arms, 
which show the Varadamudra in the right and the Utpala in the 
left. She is generally accompanied with two attendant deities, 
Asokanta Marici and Ekajata. 

2. PAR^TAgAVARl 

Parnasavarl, the second deity emanating from Amoghasiddhi, 
is also green. The mantra assigned to her designates her as a 
Pisaci and as Sarvamariprasamani, or the destroyer of all kinds 
of epidemics. It is very probable that in times of epidemics, 
such as cholera, plague or smallpox, Parnasavarl was invoked and 
worshipped, in the same way as Raksakali is worshipped in 
Indian villages in modern days, to prevent and ward off epidemics. 
Parna&varl is endowed with three faces, with three eyes in each, 
and six arms. Her right and left faces are blue and white respec- 
tively. In her three right hands she carries the Vajra, Parasu 
and the arrow; and in the three left the bow, the cluster of leaves 
and the Tarjani with the noose. Her face is depicted with an 
angry laugh, and her hair is tied up above. She is in the fullness 
of youth, is decked in a tiger’s skin, wears an apron of leaves, and 
tramples under her feet various diseases and pestilences. In the 
images of Parnasavarl discovered in East Bengal, two divinities 
are represented, to her right and left, as flying away in opposite 
directions in terror to escape the wrath of the principal goddess. 
They are Hayagriva — the Hindu god of fever; and Sitala — the 

10 



146 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

Hindu goddess of smallpox. The prostrate figures under the 
feet in these images represent the diseases and pestilences in 
human shape. The figure under the right leg, apparently, is a 
man attacked with smallpox, as we can judge from the circular 
marks all over his body. The other figure, under her left foot, is 
probably attacked with some fatal disease. 



CHAPTER XIV 


INFLUENCE OF BUDDHIST TANTRISM 
ON HINDUISM 

The Tantras of the Hindus and Buddhists alike have 
incurred almost universal hatred and neglect at the hand of the 
Indologist. But whether the Tantras are altogether divested of 
great possibilities in future is a question which requires a careful 
and considerate handling. The Tantras are a product of a period 
between the seventh and twelfth centuries A.D., though many 
Hindu Tantras have been written even later, right up to the last 
century. It is possible to declare, without fear of contradiction, 
that the Buddhists were the first to introduce the Tantras into their 
religion, and that the Hindus borrowed them from the Buddhists 
in later times, and that it is idle to say that later Buddhism was an 
outcome of Saivaism. A study of the Tantras has revealed these 
facts, and it is likely to yield much historical information in the 
course of time, because we must remember that a great volume of 
the history of India, especially Eastern India, is buried in this 
literature. 

With regard to mutual interchange of deities it can be 
definitely said that the Hindus developed a pantheon in a very 
remote age, and, with the rise of Buddhism and Jainism, their 
followers had to borrow some of these Hindu deities for their 
pantheons. Though in the earlier period both Buddhism and 
Jainism exploited Hindu gods, the Buddhist pantheon was com- 
monly ransacked by Hinduism and Jainism in the later and more 
promiscuous Tantric age. We do not know how far the 
Jainas were influenced by the Buddhist Tantrism, because we do 
not find a regular Tantric literature in Jainism, as we find in 
Hinduism. It is, therefore, necessary to institute a comparative 



148 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

inquiry into the relative priority, or otherwise, of the Hindu and 
Buddhist Tantras, and this can be best accomplished by taking 
up the origin of certain deities common to both the systems. 

Let us take, for example, the instance of the Hindu deity, 
Tara, who is included in the group of the ten Mahavidya 
goddesses, These goddesses are personifications of certain man- 
tras or Vidyas, popularly known as Siddhamantras, as they are 
reputed to bestow perfection on those who constantly mutter them 
one hundred thousand times. The ten Mahavidya goddesses 
are : Kali, Tara, SodasI, Bhuvanesvarl, Bhairavi, Chinnamasta, 
Dhumavatl, Bagala, Matangi and Kamala.^ A mantra is attached 
to each of these ten deities, and, according to changes in the order 
of the letters in the mantra, new forms of the same deity spring 
forth into existence. The mantra of Tara, according to the 
Hindus, is Hrim Strim Hum Phat, which gives rise to seven more 
deities, according as the four syllables of the mantra are recited 
in different orders or sequence. These seven deities, who are 
regarded as seven different forms of the same deity Tara, are 
named as Ugra, Mahogra, Vajra, Kali, Sarasvatl, Kamesvarl and 
Bhadrakall.® The table at top of the next page shows the name 
and the mantra of each. 

From the above it is not difficult to imagine that all the 
seven deities mentioned above represent seven different forms of 
the original deity, Tara, who is one of the ten Maha vidyas. If the 

^ Tantrasara, Bengali ed. ( Vasumati, 5th ed.), p. 360. 

dm iTfT^rf 1 

dm ii 

miw =d md^ i 

W 11 

^ dm Npii rrfpd ■d m immfl i 

dliM lE^dT it 

Tantrasara^ op. cit., p. 328. 



INFLUENCE OF BUDDHIST TANTRISM ON HINDUISM 149 


Tara . . . • 



1 


Ugra . . 


r 

1 


Mahogra 

1 


r 


Vajra . . 





Kali . ■ . . . , 


c 


f 

Sarasvati . . . . 

1 

r 



Kamesvari 


1 



Bhadrakali . . . . . , } 



tr 

> 55 ^ 


origin of Tara is Hindu, then all the seven deities should be 
considered also Hindu; but if Tara is Buddhist, it is to be 
admitted that the different varieties of the same deity should also 
be Buddhist in origin. This question, therefore, leads us to a 
discussion of the origin of the Hindu deity, Tara. 

In many Tantric works of the Hindus Tara is described. 
The Taratantra, the Tanimsara, the Makacmacdrafantra, are 
among the many that may be cited in this connexion. The 
Tantrasdra^ calls the deity Tarim, or Tara, and quotes the ritual 
from an earlier work, namely the Bhairavatantm. Tara is 
described as standing in the Pratyalidha attitude, dark in 
complexion, wearing a garland of severed heads, short in stature, 
with a protruding belly and a tiger’s skin round the loins, 
youthful in appearance and decked in five Mudras. She is four- 
armed, her tongue protrudes, and she presents an awe-inspiring 
appearance; and is regarded as the bestower of all boons. She 
carries the sword and knife in the two right hands, and the severed 
head and the Utpala (blue lotus) in the two left hands. She has 
one chignon on her head, which is brown in colour and glistens 
with splendour, and is adorned with Aksobhya. 

* op. cit., p. 315. 



150 an INTRODUGTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

Tara is here described as decked in five Mudras, as Ekajata 
(one-chignoned), and as holding the figure of Aksobhya on her 
crown. What the five Mudras are, why the deity is designated as 
Ekajata, and why there is the figure of Aksobhya on her crown, 
are the three questions which cannot be satisfactorily explained 
in accordance with Hindu traditions. In the Tantmsara an 
attempt has been made to explain the five Mudras in a very crude 
manner. According to this work, the five Mudras represent the 
five skulls which form part of the tiara worn on the head.^ But 
this explanation does not seem to be convincing, because the tiara 
usually worn by the Tantric deities of fierce nature always consists 
of five skulls, suspended by means of strings made of human bones, 
and attached together by means of four transverse lines. There- 
fore, if we accept the meaning as given in the Tantrasara, it will 
be difficult to explain the four Mudras or six Mudras with which 
Tantric deities are usually adorned. 

Why Tara should be designated as Ekajata, or why she should 
have one chignon, is not explained in Hindu Tantric works, and 
the authors never even considered that an explanation was neces- 
sary. With regard to the figure of Aksobhya on the crown, the 
Toialatantra, quoted in the edition of the Taratantm, attempts 
to offer a solution. There it is said that when the churning of the 
ocean was being done by the Devas and Asuras, a fatal poison 
came out which terrified all gods and goddesses. Because the 
god, Siva, knew no terror (or ksobha), and drank up the whole 
poison, he was called Aksobhya, in whose company Mahamaya, or 
Tarini, always revels.^ 


But the ornament is nothing but the Cakri, or the tiara of the Buddhists, 
which is one of the five Mudras. See below. 


cf. ^ ! 

^ ^ trft#fnicn55: u 
Jiwtj; 'ftcT 




INFLUENCE OF BUDDHIST TANTRISM ON HINDUISM 151 

This explanation is ridiculous, to say the least, and indicates 
the unreliability of the Hindu Tantric literature and its authors. 
Anyone who is acquainted with the classification of the Buddhist 
deities, in accordance with the five Dhyani Buddhas, will be able 
to appreciate the absurdity and the hollowness of this explanation. 
The Hindus have no Ekajata, but they have a Tara, who is 
known as a form of Ekajata. They have a variety of Mudras, but 
none can be employed as an ornament. No other deity of the 
Hindus is known to have the figure of Aksobhya or any other 
deity on the crown. None of the three points raised, therefore, is 
satisfactorily explained in accordance with Hindu tradition. 

But when we turn to Buddhist Tantric literature for a solution 
of these difficulties, we find a satisfactory explanation of all the 
three points stated above. In the Buddhist pantheon there is a 
powerful goddess, who is known as Ekajata, and at least eight 
Sadhanas, devoted to her worship, are preserved in the SMhana- 
mala of the Buddhists. Ekajata is a fierce divinity and has several 
forms, from two-armed to sixteen-armed, and from one-faced to 
twelve-faced ; and her different forms are differently named as 
Ugratara, Mahacinatara, Vidyujjvalakarali, Arya-Ekajata and 
Sukla-Ekajafa. Out of these the form of Buddhist Ekajata, known 
as Mahacinatara, has the same appearance as that of the Hindu 
deity, Tara. 

As regards the second point of the ornament of the five 
Mudras, the Buddhist Tantras also offer a solution. They 
recognize a set of six Mudras, or ornaments, all made out of 
human bones, representing the six Paramitas,^ and, according as 

ajtm %llPl 3!#^: II 

^ tr^WRT u# u 

‘ Sadhanamala, p. 



152 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

the one or the other of the six is dropped, the deities are des- 
cribed as decked in five Mudras or four Mudras. A large number 
of Buddhist deities are described as decked in ornaments of these 
Mudras, numbering from four to six. Evidently, there were 
several enumerations of six Mudras, which were not definitely 
fixed because the different Tantras had different enumerations. 
The following, among others, were included in the series of six 
Mudras — (1) the torque, (2) bracelets, (3) ear-rings, (4) ashes, (5) 
the sacred thread, (6) the tiara, (7) the girdle, and (8) the jewels. 
When a deity is described as decked in five Mudras, any five 
among the eight enumerated above are selected, in accordance with 
the traditions current amongst each school ; and the five are pre- 
sided over by the five Dhyani Buddhas. Thus Aksobhya is the 
presiding deity of the tiara ; Amitabha of the ear-rings ; Ratna- 
sambhava of the torque ; Vairocana of the bracelets; andAmogha- 
siddhi of the girdle.^ 

Thus, though to the Hindus the five Mudras may appear to be 
strange and in a way unintelligible, which fact is amply borne out 
by the attempt at their elucidation in the Tantrasara, the Mudras* 
as ornaments were not unknown to the Buddhists. They knew 
how many Mudras could be applied in the form of ornaments ; 
they knew their precise meaning, and their precise position in the 
different parts of the body, and could enumerate the different 
Dhyani Buddhas associated with each of the five Mudras. 

Now, with regard to the third point, of having a figure 
of Aksobhya on the crown of Tara, it is also to be pointed out 
that an explanation of this phenomenon can come only from 
the Buddhist sources. It is absurd to believe in the mode of 
explanation suggested in the Hindu Tantras, especially in the 

See ibid., p. 475, lines 1-4. In other schools the ornaments differ. 

* The word Mudra has various meanings. It may mean a coin, a token, a 
stamp, an appetiser (for more drink), and the woman (as in Mahamudra), a 
Sakti, and so forth. 



INFLUENCE OF BUDDHIST TANTRISM ON HINDUISM 153 

Todalatantm referred to previously, that it is the figure of Siva 
which appears on the crown of Tara: because Siva is without 
terror (ksobha), and therefore Aksobhya. If that be so, why should 
other Saiva deities not show the same miniature of Siva on the 
crown ? Why is it, then, that we do not come across any such 
miniature figure on the crown of any other deity in the Hindu 
pantheon ? Those who are acquainted with the rudiments of 
Buddhist iconography know perfectly well that all deities of the 
Buddhist pantheon are divided generally into five classes,^ as 
emanations of the five Dhyani Buddhas: Amitabha, Aksobhya, 
Ratnasambhava, Vairocana and Amoghasiddhi. The deities 
emanating from the different Dhyani Buddhas form five families, 
as it were, and are required to show their origin by holding the 
miniature figures of their parental Dhyani Buddha on the crown. 
When these emanated deities are represented in stone or metal or 
paintings, they show the miniature of their parental Dhyani 
Buddha on their head. Thus Lokesvara, Mahabala, Kurukulla 
emanate from Amitabha; Candarosana, Heruka, Vajrad.aka 
emanate from Aksobhya; Marici, Usnlsavijaya, Sitatapatra 
Aparajita from Vairocana ; KhadiravanI Tara, Parnasavarl, Maha- 
mayurl from Amoghasiddhi; Jambhala, Vasudhara, etc., from 
Ratnasambhava; and they show on the crown a small figure of 
their parental Buddha. Thus when Tara is described as having 
the figure of Aksobhya on the crown, it is easy to recognize the 
goddess as an emanation of the Dhyani Buddha Aksobhya, or, 
technically speaking, as belonging to the family of Aksobhya and 
not of the Hindu Mahadeva, because he has no ksobha, or terror. 

From the above it is sufficiently clear that the character of 
the Hindu deity Tara is thoroughly Buddhist, and therefore the 
deity must be of Buddhist origin. It has been already pointed 
out that the form of Ekajata known as Mahacinatara amongst the 

^ Bhattacharyya, Indian Btiddhisi Iconography, foreword, p. vii, and the 
classification of the Buddhist Divinities in the body of the book. 



154 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM^^ 

Buddhists, is the true equivalent of the Hindu deity Tara. 
Several Sadhanas in the Sadhanamala describe the form of 
Mahacinatara, and the description given in verse by one Sasvata- 
vajra,^ a Buddhist Tantric author, materially conforms to .the 
description (Dhyana) generally current amongst the Hindus. 
One who will take pains to compare the two descriptions will be 
surprised to see their identity in both form and spirit ; and the 
Hindu description to be an outcome of the Buddhist description. 
As is usual with them, the Buddhists composed their verses in 
ungrammatical Sanskrit, and when they were incorporated into 
Hinduism they took a strictly grammatical form and their lan- 
guage became chaste and elegant. 

It has already been said that one of the many descriptions of 
Mahacinatara was composed by Sasvatavajra, whose time is not 
definitely known ; but as his name appears in a MS. which bears a 
date corresponding to A.D. 1165, his time cannot be later than the 
latter part of the eleventh century ; but, fortunately for us, there 
is another clue which may determine the time of the introduction 
of the deity Ekajata in India. With regard to the introduction 
of the worship of Ekajata, it is said that it was Nagarjuna who 
was instrumental in introducing her worship from the country of 
Bhota ; “ and if we are to rely on this statement we must regard 
the deity Ekajata to be of an entirely foreign origin. The time 
of Nagarjuna is roughly the middle of the seventh century. 
Nagarjuna was the guru of Sabaripa and the disciple of 
Sarahapa,® all three being included in the list of the eighty-four 
Mahasiddhas. Nagarjuna was one of the earliest writers on 

^ op. cit., pp. 210 and 211, ! 

® op, cit,, p, 267. 1 II The Ekajata 

mentioned in the Guhyasamaja seems to be diflEerent, because the mantras in 
the two cases do not agree. 

® See supra, p. 68. 



INFLUENCE OF BUDDHIST TANTRISM ON HINDUISM 155 

Tantric Buddhism and composed many works, the translations of 
which are now preserved in the pages of the Tibetan Tangyur. 

The origin of Tara, therefore, is neither Hindu nor Buddhist ; 
but it is of Tibetan extraction. Not only the deity is foreign, but 
also her worship and the practices connected therewith are foreign. 
The evidences of the Hindu Tantras also point to the same 
direction. In the Taratantra, for instance, we read of Bhairavl 
wishing to know from her consort the way in which Buddha 
and Vasistha obtained Siddhi. Bhairava in reply said that by 
muttering the mantra of Ugratara Buddha and Vasistha obtained 
Siddhi; Mahadeva became the Lord of the world ; Durvasa, Vyasa, 
Valmiki, Bharadvaja and others became great poets ; and Bhisma, 
Arjuna and other Ksattriyas became great conquerors.^ 

In the Rudrayamala* it is said that Vasistha, being unable to 
obtain Siddhi even after years of mutterings and severe austerities, 
at last pronounced a curse on the deity. She, thereupon, appeared 
before him, and told him that by these austerities it was impossible 
to attain Siddhi, but it would be easy of attainment if he went to 
Mahacina, in the country of the Buddhists and the land of the 
Atharvaveda. Vasistha thereafter repaired to Cinabhumi, where 
Buddha was residing and was indulging in all sorts of loathsome 
practices. Vasistha was horrified to witness the scene, and 
appealed to Buddha to allay his doubts, and ultimately grant him 
the cherished Siddhi. He asked many questions regarding 
Buddha’s use of wine and meat, and the presence of the women, 
entirely without dress, drinking blood and wine and behaving like 
drunkards, and wanted to know why Buddha associated himself 
with these women. Buddha was not perturbed at these direct 
questions, but gave him a lecture on the duties of Kaulas, and 
explained to him their mysteries and utility, and acquainted him 
with the secret rites and practices connected therewith. Vasistha 

^ loc. cjL, pp. 1-2. 

^ See Taratantra (V.R.S. ed.), app., p. 23. 



156 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

was fully convinced and soon followed the ways of Buddha, and 
eventually attained final liberation by an unrestrained use of the 
five Makaras. This is evident from the following verse : 

^ wr 11 

Rt 5#Tnqi 5^ =51 

p: Spr: ^ set: II ^ 

Again in the Brahmayamala the same story is repeated, with 
slight modifications. It is there recorded that Vasistha, after com- 
ing to Mahaclna, became frightened and disgusted with the 
practices current there. He was terrified to see Buddha in a 
deeply drunken state, with a filthy smell coming from his mouth, 
and surrounded by thousands of women. Just at this time there 
was a voice from heaven, which directed him to follow the customs 
and practices current in Cinabhumi, so that he might obtain final 
liberation, which was otherwise unattainable. Vasistha was 
mightily pleased to hear the mysterious voice from heaven, and 
went to the place where Buddha was ; and, after being initiated by 
him, he speedily obtained liberation.® 

It is needless to point out that the Hindus considered the 
Rudrayamala and the Brakmayamaia as Tantras of the highest 
authority, and, from their point of view, of highest antiquity. The 
evidence of these two Tantras and that of the Taratantra clearly 
shows the Buddhist character of the deity and of the mantra. 
The Buddhists, on the other hand, attribute their origin to the 
country of Bhota. But everywhere the mantra is common : Om 
Hrliii Strim Huih Phat. The mantra consists of four syllables, 
and, as their order is changed, it gives rise to seven more deities 
named already ; and, consequently, if Tara cannot be regarded 
as Hindu, all these seven deities, Ugra, Mahogra, Vajra, Kali, 


^ ibid., app., p. 26 . 


® ibid., pp. 29-30 (app.). 



INFLUENCE OF BUDDHIST TANTRISM ON HINDUISM 157 

Sarasvatl, Kamesvari and Bhadrakali, forfeit their claim to be 
called Hindu. It is, therefore, easy to imagine that Kali, Tantric 
Sarasvatl and Bhadrakali, the three chief forms of Tara, are all 
Buddhist in origin, though widely worshipped by the Hindus. 

There are fifty-two places considered especially sacred to 
Kali, and pilgrimages are oftentimes made by Hindus to these 
sacred places, and many hundreds and thousands of animals are 
sacrificed before the goddess even at the present time. It is said 
that Kali can only be propitiated by offerings of animals, and, 
therefore, the temples in certain seasons present the appearance of 
a common slaughter-house. It is believed that Kali can grant all 
desires, provided animals are sacrificed for her propitiation. 
Thus she is worshipped and offered animals for success in 
examinations, in obtaining a child, in relieving women from the 
pains of labour, for obtaining wealth, prosperity, happiness, for 
bewitching, for separating two friends, and even for killing 
enemies. The goddess Kali, who occupies the sanctum in the 
temple at Kallghat, in Calcutta, is regarded as a most powerful 
deity, and people from all parts of India flock together to pay her 
their homage and offer animal sacrifices. So this one temple of 
Kali has been enough to make the whole Hindu population of 
India thoroughly superstitious; and, what a strange irony of fate 
that none of the Hindus who worship the goddess know her to 
be Buddhist in origin, or realize that the practices connected with 
her worship are Buddhist Tantrism in essence. 

Sarasvatl is the name of a river, and, because many Vedic 
mantras were composed and numerous sacrifices were performed 
on both sides of this river, in very ancient times, the name of 
Sarasvatl was associated with learning and sacredness. Later on, 
in the Puranas we find Sarasvatl as a regular goddess, with various 
symbols connected with learning and culture, such as the book, 
the Vina, and similar things. Sarasvatl as a goddess of learning 
was very attractive to the Buddhist Tantrics, who incorporated 



158 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

her into their pantheon, and thus we meet with numerous 
Sadhanas devoted to her worship. The worship ol Sarasvatl that 
is current in Bengal cannot be said to be in any way Hindu, 
because, while making obeisance to her, she is associated with 
Bhadrakall,^ which is another form of Tara, as shown above. 
There is, however, no reason why Sarasvati and Bhadrakali should 
be connected in this manner, unless they are both regarded as 
different forms of the Buddhist goddess Tara. Thus it is clear 
that Sarasvatl. whom Bengal worships today, is not the Pauranic 
Sarasvatl, but the Sarasvatl of the Buddhist Tantrics. 

It is also well known that those who practise the Tantras 
look upon the mantras with superstitious awe, and they believe 
that if the mantra is changed or distorted at the time of 
muttering, either there will be no result or it will produce 
great harm. The accuracy of the mantra, therefore, was jealously 
guarded, and the mantras were handed down from preceptor to 
disciple, so long as the Tantras were a living religion. The 
mantra which is not given by a guru, therefore, should never be 
muttered ; because a great sin is committed thereby, so they 
say. If, on the other hand, the mantra is distorted or changed in 
any unauthorized manner and muttered, great harm is likely to 
befall the unfortunate worshipper. When, therefore, deities are 
borrowed by one religion from another, its followers are chiefly 
concerned with the purity of the mantra, which they cannot change, 
and it is precisely for this reason that, though the Buddhist 
Mahacinatara was borrowed by the Hindus with a different name, 
the mantra remained the same. It would really be a very inter- 
esting study, if one could collect mantras from the Tantras of 
different religions, and discover how many of them are common 
and what their origins are. 

^ At the time of offering Anjali the following mantra is uttered : 3^ 



INFLUENCE OF BUDDHIST TANTRISM ON HINDUISM 159 

Taking the similarity of mantras as the basis of com- 
parison, let us investigate the origin of another deity, who is 
claimed equally by the Hindus and the Buddhists. This is the 
Hindu Chinnamasta, who is known in Buddhism as Vajrayoginl. 
In the Tantrasam and the Ckinnamastakalpa of the Hindus 
she is described as of a very awe-inspiring appearance. She 
holds her head, which has been severed by herself, in her left 
hand, and carries the knife in the right, and stands in the Pratya- 
lidha attitude. She is accompanied by Dakin! and VarnanI, both 
carrying the Kartri and the Kapala. From the neck, from which 
the head has been severed, of the principal deity issue forth 
streams of blood, one falling into the mouth of the severed head 
and the two others into the mouths of the two attendants.*^ 

When we compare the description of the Hindu deity Chinna- 
masta with the description of the Buddhist deity Vajrayoginl, we 
find the two descriptions identical in all details. It is thus apparent 
that though the two deities belong to different religions and are 
designated by two different names, they nevertheless represent 
one and the same goddess. It is, therefore, necessary to explain 
the origin of the deity ; and in this particular case this can only 
be done by a comparison of the different mantras of the same 
deity. As regards the question as to when the deity entered into 
one of the two pantheons it cannot be easily ascertained. Tantra- 
sara, which belonged to the seventeenth century, is very late; and 
the Ckinnamastakalpa is Of uncertain date. But the Sadhananiala^ 
in which the description of the Buddhist Vajrayoginl appears, gives 
valuable data in ascertaining the antiquity of this deity. The 
Sadhana, in the first instance, appears in a MS. which bears a 
date corresponding to A.D. 1165. Secondly, Siddha Sabarapa is 

* Tantrasara ; Oriental Institute MS., No. 4995, fol. 309 f., where the 
Dhyana is quoted from an earlier work, namely the Bhairavatantra. Also 
Chimia?nasidkalpa, Oriental Institute MS., No. 1692, fol. 36 f. For the Buddhist 
Dhyana see Sadhatiamaid, p. 452. 



160 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

credited there with the introduction of a new cult of Vajrayoginid 
As regards the time of Sabarapa, it needs only to be mentioned 
that he was the disciple of Siddha Nagarjuna, who flourished in 
the middle of the seventh century ; and, therefore, must have been 
a generation later than the latter. If Sabarapa is credited with 
the introduction of a new cult of Vajrayogim, it stands to reason 
that the original cult must have been existing at a much earlier 
date. 

According to the canons of the Vajrayana, the mantra of 
Vajrayogini quite naturally runs as: 

1 1 1 'fil ^ l" 

The three Oiii letters are given to each of these three deities — 
Vajrayogini (named in the mantra as Sarvabuddhadakini), Vajra- 
varnani and Vajravairocani ; and so also the three Hum letters 
and the three Phat-karas. The prefix Vajra in the name of the 
two deities shows that they belong to Vajrayana. The epithet, 
Sarvabuddhadakini, applied to the principal deity, Vajrayogini, 
clearly indicates the Buddhist character of the mantra. 

In the Hindu literature, however, the principal deity is desig- 
nated as Chinnamasta, because of her severed head, while her 
companions are named as Dakin! and Varnanl, with the prefix 
Vajra dropped in the case of Varnanl. According to Tanirasara, 
her mantra is: 

etc.® 

In this also the three names, Dakinl, Varnanl and VairocanI, 
all appear; but why the prefixes are changed into ‘ Sarvasiddhi ’ 
in the first two cases we fail to understand. The change appears 

^ Sddhanaviala,p.4.SQ. l 

® ibid,, p. 453. 

® op. cit. Oriental Institute MS., No. 4995, fol. 312 a. 



INFLUENCE OF BUDDHIST TANTRISM ON HINDUISM 161 

due to the distortion of the mantra, from copy to copy, made in 
later times by ignorant copyists, or because at the time of the 
author the tradition was entirely lost, seeing that Buddhism was 
almost driven out of India in the beginning of the thirteenth 
century; or because the Hindu Tantric attributed far less impor- 
tance to the mantras recorded in the books than those handed 
down from gurus to disciples. In the Chinnamas&kalpa again we 
find a different mantra : 

I I 'SK Wfl 1 ^ 

From this it can be definitely said that the original of 
‘Sarvasiddhi’ in the Tan^msara represents ‘Sarvabuddha’, as is 
evident from the ‘ Sarvabuddhi ’ of the Chinnamas&kalpa, and if 
that position is accepted but little is required to show that the 
origin of the deity is decidedly Buddhist. The prefix Vajra in a 
Hindu mantra lends an additional support to this conclusion, 
Vajrayoginl is called Sarvabuddhadakini in Buddhist Tantras, 
because she is the consort of Heruka, who is looked upon as the 
embodiment of the five Dhyani Buddhas, the group being techni- 
cally known as Sarvabuddha. 

There is a third deity, who is equally claimed by the Hindus 
as well as the Buddhists. This is Manjughosa. The Buddhists 
recognize him as a form of ManjusrI, the god of learning. Manjusri 
is mentioned in the smaller recension of the Sukhavativyuha, which 
was translated into Chinese between A.D. 384 and 417.® We also 
find mention of Manjusri in such Sanskrit works as the Man/usn- 
mulakalpa, the Guhyasamaja, the Gandavyuka, the Svayambhu- 
purmta, and in the accounts of the Chinese travellers, Fa-hien, 
Hiuen-thsang and I-Tsing, and his images in the different Bud- 
dhist schools of art, such as Magadha, Bengal, Java and Nepal. 

^ op. cit., Oriental Institute MS., No, 1692, fol. 2 b. 

^ op. cit., ed. Max Muller, intro., p. iii, note 4. 



162 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

Amongst the Hindus his worship is still current in some 
parts of the Radha country in_Bengal, and his ritual is found in 
several Tantras, such as the Agamottara and the Kukkutesvam- 
tmitra, as we learn from the Tantrasara of Krsnananda. Not 
only is the deity claimed by the Hindus as well as the 
Buddhists, but also his Dhyana in the same wording is claim- 
ed by both. Curiously enough, the same Dhyana can be found in 
the Sadhanamala ; and, what appears to be extremely strange, is 
that, while the verse is attributed to one Ajitamitra in the Sadhana- 
mala, it is attributed to the highest god, Mahadeva, in the 
Kukkutesvaratanira oi 

In the Hindu Tantra the mantra of Manjughosa is stated 
as: A Ra Va Ga La DhIm: which is a corruption of the 
original Buddhist mantra : A Ra Pa Ca Na Dhih ; by which 
Mafijusrl gets one of his numerous names as Arapacana. This 
form is called Arapacana, because Manjusri and his four com- 
panions, Suryaprabha, Candraprabha, KesinI and Upakelim, 
originate from each of the five letters A Ra Pa Ca and Na. The 
correct mantra, therefore, seems to have been preserved in Buddhist 
manuscripts, which are decidedly earlier; while in the Hindu 
Tantras the correctness has vanished owing to the ignorance of 
the gurus, as well as that of the copyists, who engaged them- 
selves in preparing copies of Tantra manuscripts. 

The facts mentioned above lead one to suppose that in all 
these three cases the deities and the mantras originally belonged 
to Buddhism, and that the Hindus were indebted to the Buddhists 
for their incorporation into their religion. It is also certain that, 

'wifh II 

Tantrasara^ op, cit,, p. 368, and S^hanam^a^ p. 112, 



INFLUENCE OF BUDDHIST TANTRISM ON HINDUISM 163 

after the borrowing, they were unable to keep up the purity and 
the accuracy of the mantras, though they had been partially 
successful in preserving the correctness of the form of the deities. 
There is hardly a Tantra in Hindu literature which is not tinged 
with Buddhistic ideas of Vajrayana and its leading tenets, including 
the Mahasukhavada, and it is no exaggeration to say that some of 
the Tantras of the Hindus, such as the Mahacinakmmatantm, are 
entirely Buddhist in origin. It has already been pointed out how the 
Rudrayamala and Brakmayamala, works of the highest authority 
and antiquity for the Hindus, are profoundly influenced by 
Buddhist ideas, and how words of ordinary mortals, such as Ajita- 
mitra, etc., have been put into the mouth of the highest god 
Mahadeva in the Hindu Tantras. It is thus amply proved that 
the Buddhist Tantras greatly influenced the Hindu Tantric 
literature, and it is, therefore, not correct to say that Buddhism 
was an outcome of Saivaism. It is to be contended, on the other 
hand, that the Hindu Tantras were an outcome of Vajrayana, and 
that they represent baser imitations of Buddhist Tantras. One 
more instance is furnished by the Bhutadamaratantm and the 
deity Bhutadamara. The deity and the Tantra are claimed by the 
Hindus, though their origin is thoroughly Buddhist.’^ 

Having established the priority of the Buddhist Tantras 
over the Tantras of the Hindu literature, it is necessary to 
indicate certain general principles by which Buddhist gods can 
be detected and separated from among those already included in 
the Hindu pantheon. It has already been shown that the 
Vajrayanists described Mahasukha as a state when Bodhicitta 
merges in Sunya, even as salt melts in water, on the attainment 
of Nirvana; and to symbolize this they conceived the idea of 
Yuganaddha deities, or deities in yab-yum, where the male and 

^ See The Ciili of BhMadamara, a paper read before the Patna Oriental 
Conference, 1930, and published in Man in India, 1931, Vol. XI, pp. 83 £E. 



164 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

the female divinities are represented as embracing each other. So 
these yab-yiim deities are an outcome of the purely Vajrayanic 
concept, which was absolutely unknown in Hinduism before the 
Tantric age, and even now does not fit in well with the Hindu 
ideas and traditions.^ If there be any deity of a yab-yum nature 
in Hinduism, there is a strong suspicion that the deity is of 
Buddhist origin. When Kali, for instance, is described as locked 
in an embrace with the god Siva, we have at once to regard the 
deity as of a definitely Buddhist origin. Kali, according to 
Buddhist tradition, is Kadi or Kakaradi, or, in other words, all 
consonants of the alphabet, as the vowels are designated as Adi 
or Akaradi; and it is not to be wondered at if a deity is con- 
ceived by them as Kali, belonging to the Yogatantra class, and in 
whom all the consonants of the alphabet are deified. In the 
Yogatantra and Anuttarayogatantra, it may be remarked, all 
deities are represented as embracing their Saktis and experiencing 
the bliss of Nirvana. 

Another important fact to be noticed, in fixing the origin of 
deities, is their descriptions. If the names of the deities begin 
with or end in the word ‘Vajra’, the presumption is that the 
origin of such deities is Buddhist. Where gods and goddesses 
are described as lustful and of a very violent appearance, but 
internally compassionate, their origin may also be regarded for 
certain as Buddhistic. When deities are regarded as decked in 
ornaments or Mudras composed of human bones and representing 
the Paramitas, they may also be taken as Buddhist in origin ; and, 
lastly, whenever gods and goddesses are described as bearing a 
miniature figure of one of the five Dhyani Buddhas, Amitabha, 
Aksobhya, Vairocana, Amoghasiddhi and Ratnasambhava, on 
their crown, their origin must always be regarded as Buddhistic. 

^ Indian Buddhist Iconography, p. 166, where the significance of yab-yum 
is explained. 



CHAPTER XV 
CONCLUSION 

Several times it has been pointed out that the Tantras and 
the Tantric culture, which at one time regulated the life in ancient 
India, did not prove very healthy either for the country or for 
Buddhism. Too much attention to psychic culture, particularly 
on the part of the general population, was certain to have its 
repercussions in all departments of life, and history tells us that 
such repercussions did actually take place. The result was the 
destruction of Buddhism and the occupation of the country by 
the Muhammadans, for the first time showing that spiritual force 
can be conquered by physical force. The advocates of psychic 
culture were hopelessly out of touch with the realities of life, and 
practically destroyed themselves and their followers. 

Unduly severe criticisms have been levelled against the 
theory advanced in the foregoing pages, particularly with regard 
to the unhealthy influence of the Tantras and Tantric culture on 
the general public. It has, therefore, become necessary to state 
clearly the correct estimate of the Tantras and Tantric culture, 
especially from an orthodox point of view. No one will be so fool- 
ish as to declare that the Tantras contain nothing but preachings 
of immorality and all kinds of unnamable vices, and in this work, 
particularly, such views can never find a place. On the contrary, 
the Tantras should be regarded as the greatest contribution of 
India to world culture. The Tantras which are intimately connect- 
ed with the Rajayoga, as advocated in the system of Patanjali and 
Hathayoga, have shown to the world the correct way of developing 
mental faculties and obtaining great spiritual powers through 
psychic culture. If by developing the material resources alone 
great wonders could be achieved, what infinitely greater wonders 



166 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

can be performed by developing the hidden forces of mind ? But 
this is not easy, it requires concentration of mind to a degree almost 
inconceivable in modern times, in a regularly chalked out procedure. 
Moreover, complete purification of body, as prescribed in the 
Hathayoga, is also essential for concentrating the mind. Complete 
control over breath and over wind in the whole physiological 
system has to be attained before real concentration of mind takes 
place. The Hathayogins ought to be able to stop for days and 
months the blood circulation, by controlling the wind that gives 
motion to the blood, and by stopping the action of the heart 
and of all other organs except the brain. For controlling 
the mind the Yogins have to pass days and months without 
food or water, or even air. And however much as it may seem 
strange today, there were quite a large number of such Yogins 
in ancient days ; and even in modern days, if a search is made, it 
will not be difficult to find out at least a few. Such wonders as 
levitation, atomization, etc., are even today possible by having a 
control of mind. In fact, all that the physical world can perform, 
by proper psychic culture the same can be achieved in the mental 
sphere. 

The Tantras begin where Rajayoga and Hathayoga end, 
or, in Other wmrds, Tantric culture presupposes Rajayoga and 
Hathayoga. The Rajayoga and Hathayoga give control over the 
mind and body, and Tantric practices give different magic powers 
according as different mantras are practised or different deities 
worshipped. 

Philosophers of every age and country have visualized the 
presence of inexhaustible energy behind the world structure, 
and this has been named in different schools as God or Spirit, 
Brahma or Sunya. Yoga means commingling. The individual soul 
is called the Jivatman, while the highest spirit is called the 
Paramatman. When the commingling of the Jivatman with the 
Paramatman takes place it is called Yoga. In Buddhism, parti- 



CONCLUSION 


167 

cularly in the Tantras, the individual soul is called the Bodhicitta 
and the highest spirit is called the Sunya, with the three elements, 
Sunya, Vijnana and Mahasukha. 

Sunya is the highest spirit and an inexhaustible storehouse 
of energy, setting the whole universe in motion. Therefore, the 
chief aim of the Bodhicitta is to commingle with this Sunya and 
be a part and parcel of the great energy, eternal knowledge and 
eternal happiness. This is Yoga. 

Every day in our life we are having communion with the 
Paramatman, and whenever the individual Jivatman is depleted 
it draws energy from that inexhaustible store of energy. And 
thus life on this earth is maintained. Sleep is required for every 
individual ; but why should sleep be necessary unless it is for 
having communion with Paramatman, to draw energy from it and 
be fit for the next day’s work When a patient is passing through 
a crisis, either in pneumonia or typhoid, doctors are heard to say 
that perfect and undisturbed sleep even for a short time will save 
the patient. And, times without number, it has been seen that 
patients do revive from a dangerous condition after sleep. The 
reason is not far to seek. The Jivatman in this case, in his deep 
sleep condition, draws energy from the highest spirit which 
pervades everything, and becomes revived. Such comminglings 
are of everyday occurrence. But this is not called Yoga 
technically. 

Every individual passes through three states — the awakened 
state, the state of dreaming, and the state of deep sleep- In 
conscious and sub-conscious conditions the Jivatman does not 
get an opportunity to have communion with the highest spirit. 
Such communion takes place only in the state which is called 
Susupti, or deep sleep. The difference between Yoga and 
Susupti is really very little, though to remove the difference 
great efforts are necessary. In Susupti the individual or 
Jivatman loses all consciousness, and cannot realize or feel that 



168 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

it is having communion with the highest spirit, or that it is 
drawing energy to recuperate itself. In Yoga the condition 
is different. Concentration in Yoga produces a condition similar 
to Susupti, or deep sleep condition, oblivious to all surroundings, 
even the physical body and mind, but the Yogin does not lose his 
consciousness, but remains conscious throughout the process of 
the communion of the Jivatman with the Paramatman, and 
feels a kind of divine joy which words are scarcely able to 
describe. 

The object of Yoga is to obtain emancipation, and if that is 
not to be attained Yoga certainly purifies the mind and the 
individual, and harmony is produced in life, and therefore spiri- 
tualism is sometimes regarded as an antidote to war. 

The above will clearly demonstrate that the highest degree 
of intellectual power is necessary to follow the path of Yoga and 
Tantra, and that it cannot be, and, in fact, never was, meant for all. 
Yoga and Tantra were meant only for a few fortunate persons 
who were blessed with a high degree of intellectual refinement 
and power. If Yoga and Tantra are made the common property 
of all, as it was made by the Buddhists of old, the whole routine 
of life is upset, and abuses of all tenets follow as a matter of 
course. It is not necessary to state that this psychic culture 
appealed to men with striking force, particularly when the 
masters of Tantra could perform prodigious feats and miracles, 
and, as such, in the time of the Siddhacaryas the Tantras 
attracted almost every man without exception, and most of them 
must of necessity have had to be content with the shadow rather 
than the substance of Tantra. And, as a matter of fact, owing to 
the great influence of Tantras in earlier days, even at the present 
time there are very few Hindus in India who are not following 
the Tantric practices in some form or other. 

The chief complaints against the Tantra is that it permitted 
women to enter into its fold for the purpose of Tantric practices, 



CONCLUSION 


169 

and therefore encouraged corruption and immorality. Such 
absurd opinions are held by none except the most ignorant of 
men. It has already been pointed out that the Tantra was divided 
into various sections, both in Hinduism as well as in Buddhism. 
With the Hindus Daksinacara, or the right-hand path, is to be 
followed first, after which Vamacara, or the left-hand path, is 
permitted. In Daksinacara strict celibacy, restriction of food, 
drink, etc., are of primary importance, and when the neophyte 
is sufficiently advanced he is initiated into the mysteries of Vama- 
cara, when women are permitted for the purpose of practising the 
Yoga together. Similarly, in Buddhism, Tantra is divided into 
four sections. In the two earlier sections, namely the Kriyatantra 
and the Caryatantra, strict celibacy and restrictions of food, drink, 
etc., are enjoined. When this course is complete, the neophyte then 
can be initiated into the mysteries of Yogatantra, in which women 
become necessary for the purpose of practising Yoga. It has been 
frequently seen that there is a class of neophytes whose Kuiidalinl 
is not roused without association with women, and for such 
disciples the great preceptors prescribed association with women. 
But it must be remembered that both in Vamacara and Yogatantra 
complete control over the air that is contained within the body is 
essential, and this is obtained after a long-continued practice of 
Hathayoga, Pranayama, and so forth, so that the association with 
women produce nothing but help the initiated in rousing the 
KundalinI power which is contained within the body. It is for 
this reason that the Tantras are to be taken recourse to when 
perfection is reached in practising Hathayoga, or, in other words, 
Tantras begin where Hathayoga ends. 

The power to control wind, which gives motion to every 
little cell in the body and is responsible for the excretory secre- 
tions of the body, is not easily obtained. It requires years of 
patient and systematic practice according to a highly-complicated 
and dangerous routine. The practices must be conducted on right 

12 



170 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

lines, under the guidance and control of an expert, because 
mistakes in the process bring on incalculable harm to the 
practiser. The Tantrics say that the practice of Yoga is just 
like playing with high voltage electricity, and a little careless- 
ness may either bring on death or untold sufferings. It is 
for this reason that we find in the Tantra a great reverence for 
the guru, who is compared to the highest Sunya because without 
an expert the Yoga path is impossible to follow. 

Another great complaint against the Tantric system is that 
it advocated idolatry, and therefore it made its followers degenerate 
into mere idol worshippers. Everyone knows that mere worship- 
ping of the idol produces no benefit, and, even though it may have 
some influence in elevating the society, it can have no scientific 
value. It has already been pointed out that this charge against 
Buddhism has no foundation, and those who talk of idolatry with 
reference to Buddhism have no real knowledge of its philosophical 
tenets and doctrines. 

To seek an explanation why so many diverse types of gods 
and goddesses were created and worshipped, or to find out the 
true foundation of the extensive pantheon, mere literature or 
reading affords little guidance. Though there is no doubt that 
certain abstract ideas have been represented by means of symbols 
or gods or goddesses, the great bulk of deities have originated 
through quite a different channel. By what method such deities 
have come into existence can only be explained by Yogins, who 
have visualized them in the past and even today visualize them 
while in intense meditation. A Yogin in Nepal explained that 
when the Bodhicitta, by intense meditation and concentration, 
produces a condition similar to Susupti, or deep sleep condition, 
in his mind-sky (cittakasa) appears the form of a letter (germ 
syllable), which gradually transforms itself into indistinct human 
form. And after some time this form changes in the form of 
a full-fledged deity, whose appearance, limbs, weapons, etc., 



CONCLUSION 


171 

appear to be perfect in all respects. These deities are the 
different forms of Sunya, or the highest Spirit — the embodi- 
ment of Energy or Sakti, and appear before the Yogin in 
flashes only when he reaches a certain degree of spiritual perfec- 
tion. This form of the deity, and the process by which the Yogin 
visualizes the deity, are then communicated to the pupils, so that 
they may easily and quickly visualize the deity in question, and 
attain all the supernatural powers connected with his worship. 
Thousands of Yogins have thus visualized innumerable deities, 
who may be compared to the sparks coming out of the divine 
spirit, or the universal energy, and thus the pantheon of the 
Buddhists swelled. 

The above is what the orthodox Tantrics think of their 
deities, and it states the principle underlying the conception of 
gods and goddesses. Indeed, there are thousands of images of 
gods and goddesses of the Buddhist pantheon, but no one should 
think that these images were ever worshipped. These images were 
designed to supply the aid in order that the neophyte might con- 
centrate on the form of the deity. It is to help concentration, 
and make the process of visualization of the deity more easy of 
accomplishment, that the images were made. But today what 
do we find? Images of gods and goddesses installed in every 
house, sometimes permanently, sometimes temporarily ; they are 
instilled with life with some mantras or charms which have lost 
their real significance in course of time. Flowers, incense, 
garments, unguents are offered to these images with great klat 
amidst deafening sounds of drums and other instruments, and 
the householder obtains supreme satisfaction, thinking that he has 
done everything that ought to have been done. In this kind of 
worship there is no Yoga, no purity of mind or body, and no 
visualization, and hence it is productive of no value, because it 
cannot give the worshipper any Siddhi, any bliss, contentment or 
the visualization of the deity. But this kind of worship is 


172 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

widespread now, and certainly it has its value in its own sphere, 
but, though Tantric in origin, it has no connexion with the 
Tantra. It is virtually the metamorphosis of Tantra, on which 
has been put a commercial value. 

The above further shows that Yoga, or even Hathayoga, is 
not meant for all, as it is expected that only a few can fulfil the 
condition required in a student of Yoga. When this permeates 
into the masses, the Vamacara is reduced to vulgarity and 
prostitution, which, instead of rousing the sacred KundalinI 
produces illegitimate children, who form a caste by themselves. 
This was inevitable, and this is what actually happened in the 
olden days in ancient India, and this is what is even today happening 
in Nepal, as also in Tibet. Similarly, when god conception becomes 
the common property of all, it changes into idolatry and super- 
stition. The Tantra, rightly applied, elevates the Jivatman, but, 
wrongly applied, it takes vengeance and destroys the Jivatman. 
It caused the destruction of Buddhism as the greatest spiritual 
and moral force in India. 

It is, however, not the object to emphasize here that Buddhism 
was destroyed simply because its followers were improperly 
applying the Tantras, but it cannot be gainsaid that the moral 
force of Buddhism was entirely spent before the Muhammadan 
conquest of Eastern India, only to be given the last push by the 
Muhammadans. The other reason why the Muhammadans 
specially took upon themselves the unwanted duty of destroying 
Buddhism may be looked for in another quarter. 

With the Buddhists monasteries were a necessity from very 
early times, owing to the peculiar nature of the restrictions and 
disciplines enjoined by Buddha on his followers. Buddhism, 
moreover, had no respect for birth or for the orthodox society, and 
it was mostly concerned with outcastes or low castes, consisting of 
original inhabitants of the country not affiliated to the orthodox 
social hierarchy, and for that reason also separate organizations 



CONCLUSION 


173 

like the monasteries were a necessity in Buddhism, since its 
inception. Since the time of Buddha, his followers pinned their 
faith in monasteries, built new ones, equipped them with build- 
ings, paintings, images, stone carvings, and enriched them to a 
great extent with the accumulated wealth of ages. Some of the 
monasteries, with their massive stone enclosures and fortifica- 
tions, presented the appearance of forts, and, as the monks were 
all dressed in one particular fashion, they resembled an army of 
soldiers. So long as the Hindus remained at the helm of 
political power in India these monasteries, monks, and even the 
lay Buddhists, were not harmed except on rare occasions, because 
the Hindu rulers always practised toleration in religious 
matters, and sometimes even embraced religions other than their 
own. And hence the Buddhists were safe in the hands of 
the Hindu rulers, but when the Muhammadans came their chief 
objective was to loot and conquer. They took the monasteries to 
be forts, the monks to be uniformed soldiers, and forthwith 
annihilated them, and Buddhism along with them, and thus 
indirectly saved Hinduism from further disruption, and helped 
its followers in consolidating their position. 

To Hinduism they could do very little direct harm, as 
religion with the Hindus was a cottage industry, and to destroy 
Hinduism it becomes necessary to destroy all villages and cot- 
tages and the literature scattered over the whole country. 
Though conversion by sword was in their militant programme, 
the Muhammadans did not come with the avowed object of 
destroying any particular religion as such, and they were satisfied 
when they could get enough wealth and enough territory by 
subjugating the different rulers all over India. So the destruc- 
tion of Buddhism at the hands of the Muhammadans was a mere 
accident, and a great landmark in the history of the development 
of the different religious systems. 

It now remains to be said that the Tantric culture is the 



174 AN INTRODUCTION TO BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 

greatest of all cultures, because it aims at the spiritual perfection 
and psychic development of man, and as such no one can deny that 
the Tantric culture is the greatest contribution made by India 
towards the world’s civilization. Whenever in future man awakens 
to the necessity of psychic development or spiritual advancement, 
or of stimulating his latent magical faculties, all eyes must turn 
towards this branch of Sanskrit literature, and to those few 
Yogins India still possesses, for the most minute, thorough, 
accurate, easy and practical system of psychic exercises ever 
conceived by man in any country or in any time in history. 



INDEX 


Abhicaraj 91. 

Ablii^eba, 71, 94. See initiation, 
act-force, 7, 102, 

Adi-Bnddiia, 127-8. ' 

Advaya, 101-3. 

Advayavajra, 69, 82, 95, 109. 

Agania, 51 defimtion, 52. 
Agamavaglsa, 84, See Krsnananda. 
Ahaiiikara, 100, 101. 

Ajitamitra, 162, 163. 

Akanistha heaven, 98, 99, 110, 122. 
Akarsana, 91, 133. 

Aksobhya, 110, 111, 122, 128-31, 
149, 150, 151, 152, 153. 

Ainitabha, 110, 122. 

Amoghasiddhi, 110, 144. 
amulets, 1. 

Ananda, 81. 

Anahgavajra, 37, 73-4. 

Anantaryas, 58. 

Ahjana Siddhi, 88-9. 

Antardhana Siddhi, 88-9. 

Aniipama Raksita, 108 n. 
Annttarayogatantra, S3, 95-6. 
Aparajita, 118. 
appearances, 99. 
application, methods of, 90. 
Apsarasas, 88. 

Arapacana, 162. 

Aru^a, 136. 

Aryadeva, 119. 

Arya-marici, 137. 

Aryan settlers, 2-3. 

Aryans, orthodox, 3. 


Aryat^a, 107, 144. 
Arya-Vajravarahi, 140, 

Asaiksas, 95, 

Asahga, 54, 62, 66, 96, 126. 
Asokakanta Marici, 137, 145, 

Asoka, rock edicts of, 48. 

Asphanaka asceticism, 15. 

Assam, 43, 45, 46. 

Asiinya,39. 

Asnras, 150. 

Asvagho^a, 26. 

Atharvaveda, 155. 
Atiyogatantayana, 95. 

Avadhutipa, n. of Advayavajra, 82. 
Avalokitesvara, 28-30, 122, 

Avidya, 15. 

Bahgala, 68. 

Bauls, 76. 

Bengal, 44-6. 

Bengali, 46. 

Bhaddiyanagara, 21. 

Bhadrakali, 157, 158. 

Bhadra Yana, 52. 

Bhagavati Laksmi, 76. See Laksmih- 
kara. 

Bharadvaja, 19. 

Bhartrhari, 71. 

Bhattasali, N, K., 44 n., 125 n. 
Bhava, 37. 

Bhota, 68, 134, 154, 156; same as 
Mahacina. 

Bhrkuti, 141. 

Bhhcara Siddhi, 88-9. 



176 , , AN INTRODUCTION , TO 
BMmiSj,97. 

Bhitaclainara, 117, 163. . 

Bija, 110. ; 

,Bimbisara> 21 . ' : 

Blessed One, 20, 'See Buddha, 
blue colours 131, 135, 

Bodhi, 42. : 

Bodiiicitta, 27, 96, 114, 167 ; same' as 
■ Bodhi„mmdv 

BodM,:iia,md, 40, 97, 98, 99, 101, 114, 

..US.:,: 

Bodhisattva, 29, 39, 40, 98, 99, 102, 

115. 

Bodhisattvayam, 99. 

Brahma, 88, 116, 117; severed head 
of, 138. 

Brahma^as, 2, 6, 7, 8, 9, 16. 
Brahmasiras, 116. See Brahma, 
severed head of. 

Buddha, 10-^20, 23, 25, 26-7, 32, 48, 
49, 55, 56, 57, 93, 155-6 ; life . story 
of, 12-6. 

Buddhas, six past, 11. 

Buddhadakini, 132. 

Bnddha-hood, 39, 79. 

Buddha images, 123S. 

Buddhakapala, 132. 

Buddhism, destruction of, 165. 
Buddhist magic, 17-21. 

Buddhist Pantheon, 92, 109, 120-46. 
Buddhist Tripitaka, 17. ' ' 
buffalo, 133, 

Cakri, 150 n. 

Candana, 72, 

Candanapala, 66. 

Capdaro^iia, 116, 117. 

Candraprabha, 162. 

:Carya,;42.;: ^ 


BUDDHIST ESOTERISM ■ 

Cary atantra, 169. 

Caryatantrayana, 53, 95. 

Castes, four, 6 n. 

Caste system, 3 n. 

I Caturmaharajikas, 122. 

! Causation, twelve-linked chain of, 15. 
I celibacy, 94. 

Chhando, 19. 
charms, 1. 

I chignon, crown of, 138 ; one, ISO. 

I China, 50. 

Chinnamasta, 159, 160, 161. 
chronology, of Tantric authors, 62. 
churning of the ocean, 150. 
Cinabhumi, 155, 156. 

Cinta, Sahajayogini, 79. 

Cintamani, 130; family, 143-4. 
i citron, 143. 

Citrasena, 132. 

Gitta, 39. 

Cittam, 19. 

classification, of followers, 95. 
closure of the boundary, 59. 
cognition, 40. 
colour, 92, 111. 

compassion, 99, 106. See Karupa. 

conformation, 97. 

consonants, deified, 164. 

cosmic forces, 4 n. 

cosmic secrets, 4 n. 

cottage industry, religion a, 173. 

Covesakalpa, 66. 

Cunda, 123. 

i .. pakini, 139, 159; meaning; of, 139. 

Dapdapapi, 12. 

Dak^ipacira, 169. 

■ ; , Darikapada, 78. 

Dasyus, 3. 



INDEX 


177 


deities, 170,,171.' 

Devas, 150. 
devices, TantriCj 88. 

■.diseases,: 86, 146. 
divine institution, 6. 
divine ptmishment, 7. 
divine rewards, 7. 

Dharani, 18, 31, 49, 53, 55. 
Dharmacakrapravartana, 15. 
Dharmakaya, 93. . 

Dharmakirti, 67, 71. 

Dhatnra, 73. 

Dhyani Buddhas, 32, 33, 54, 62, 70, 
76, 80, 81, 110, 111, 121, 123, 126, 
127, 128-30, 151, 152, 161, 164. 
Dipahkara, 19. 

Dipahkara (srijh^a), 82. 
disciples, 94. 

Doha hymns, 67. 

Dohas, 75. 

Pombl Heruka, 79, 81. 
dreams, 99. 

Dukkata, 20. 

Dvarapandita, 66. 

Dve§a, 130 ; family, 131. 

ears of com, 144. 

Ego, 36. 

Ekajata, 68, 134, 145, ISO, 151, 154. 

emanations, 121. 

emancipation, 8, 86, 

enjoyment, 42. 

enlightened one, 40. 

enlightenment, 40, 

equality, 40. 

esoteric sciences, 18. 

esoteric system, 22, 

esoteric tenets, 57. 

esoterism, 57. 


essence of knowledge, 108. 
essence of Samaya, 108. 
existence, cycles of, 107. 
external representation, 110. 
external world, 99, 114. 
extraordinary worship, 105. ' 

female divinities, 75. 

female energy, 53-4. 

fierce appearance, 111. 

five Mudras, 129, 149, 150, 151, 152. 

flame of fire, 127. 

foreign influence, 43. 

forms of deity, 92. 

Foucher, Prof. A., 120 n. 
friendship, 106. 
future happiness, 88, 

Gaganaganja, 123. 

Gambhiravajra, 64. 

Gape^a, 29, 50, 118. 

Garuda, 116, 119, 145. 

Gaurl, 118. 

Gautama Buddha, 12. See Buddha, 
goblin, 134, 140. 
gods, Buddhist, 116. 
gods, Hindu, 116. 

Gopa, 12. 

Gopala, 73. 

Gopicnndra, 71, 72, 73, 75. 

Guni, 68. 

Guru, 77, 93-4. 

Hadipa, 71-4. See Jalandharipa. 
happiness, 81, 106 ; worldly, 49. 
HaraprasM Sastri. See Sastri, 
Haraprasad. 

Hari, 88. 

Harihariharivahanodbhava, 116, 118 ; 
same as Harihariharivahana. 



178 AN INTRODUCTION TO 

Hathayoga, 165, 166, 169, 172. 
Hayagri¥a, 118, 141; Hindti god of 
fever, 119,. 14S« , 
heaven, 7, 97. : ; ^ 
herbs,!.' 

heretical teachers, 9. 

Hernka, 103,!31, 139, 16L ' , 

hell, 7. 

Himyana, 36, 37. , 

H!nayanists,.28, 36, 37. 

HiMnism, 49, 56, 147, 173. 

Hindiis, 50, 114 ; Tantiic, 81 
Homa, 53. 

Hrdajyasfitra, 31, 49. 
hypothetical beings, 114. 

icon, 110. 

Iddhipadas, 19. 

Mdhis, 17 n., 19. 
idolatry, 113. ' 
idol worship, 114. 
images, 115. 
indifference, 106* 

Indra,41,117. 

Indrabhuti, 44, 45, 64, 69, 74, 76, 95. 
initiation, 39, 71 ; novel mode of, S3, 
institution, divine, 6. 

Iyengar, Dr. S. Kr^paswami, 73, 

:Jainas,!14.' 

;'!ainism, 147. 

Jalandhara, 54, , 

Jalandharipa, 71, 72, 74, 75, • 

!alendi:a,;4S.';, 

Jambhala, 143. 

Jahguli, 55 n, 

Japan, SO, 


BUDDHIST ESOTERISM , 

Jatakas, 11. 

Jayatara, 142, 

Jetari, 66. 

. Jivatman, 166, 167, 168,172:: ■ 
Jneyavarapa, 35, 37, 

Kacchapa,69. 

Kahnupa, 72, 73. 

Kalacakrayana, 52, 

Kali, 156, 157, 164. 

Kalpana, 37, 97. 

Kamadeva, 142. 

Kamakhya, 43, 54. 

Kamalasila, 57, 99. 

Kambala, 64, 69 ; same as Eambak' 
pack. 

Kamesvar!, 156. 

Kandarpa, 117. 

Kapalikas, 17 n. 

Kapilavastit, 10. 

Karma, 7, 17. 

Karpatara, 142. 

Karuna, 27, 29, 30, 33, 101, 102, 
103. 

Karnnacala, 78, 

Kashgarh, 44, 

Kasyapa, 18. 

Kank, 81. 

Kaulika, 81. 

Kaniism, 81. 

Eanlas, 155. 

Kazi Dawasamdtip, 62, 

Kesini, 162. 

Khadga Siddhi, 88. 

Khadiravap! Tara, 145. 

Khandarohi, 139. 

Khasarpapa, 140. 

Khecara Siddhi, 88-9. 

Klesivarpa, 35* 



INDEX 


179 


Kriyatantra, 169. . 

Eriyatantrayana, 53, 95. • 

Krpa, 40, 

,E|*§nacarya, 65, 71," 72, 75. 
K|*§n.anaiida Agamavagisa, 84,: 162. 
.Ksattriyas, 2, 10. 

K^itigarbha, 122. 

Kiibera, 41, 144. 

Kticila,73. 

Kukkiiripa, 64, 69. 

Kula,39,80. 

Kulacara, 81. 

Knladharma, 81. 

Kialas, five enumerated, 121. 

Ktilesas, 80. 

Ktimudakaramati, 58. 

169, 172. 

Kuritkulla, 117, 141. 

Lahore, 44 n, 

Lalitagupta, 69. 

Lalitasana, 107. 

Lalitavajra, 64, 69, 82. 

Lak^ml, Bhagavati, 76. See Lak^mm- 
kara. 

Lak§minkara, 45, 74, 76.; ' 

Lamas, 139. 

Lanka, 44 n., 45 n. 

Lankapuri, 45. 
learning," goddess of, 157. 

Lilavajra, 77. 
lion, 141. ' 

literature, Paurapic, 49. ■ 

Locana, 131. 

Lokesvara, 140. 

Loki, 68. 

Lokottara, 120. 

Lord of Heaven, 88. 

Luipa, 45, 46, 63, 69, 78.. 


'Madhyamaka, 26. 

Magi, 54 ; priests, 53. 
magic, 99, 100 ; Buddhist, 22 ; powers, 
166; primitive, 4; solution, 89; 
unguent, 89, 

magical, powers, 19 ; practices, 49. 
magician, 85. 

Mahacina, 134, 155, 156. 
Mahacmatara, 134, 135, 153, 154, 158. 
Mahadeva, 153, 162. 

Mahakala, 112, 113. 

Mahamaya, 132 ; Hindu, 150. 
Mahamudra, 39, 70, 71 ; ritual, 67. 
Mahaparinirvana, 11. 

Mahapratisara, 118. 

Maharastra, 66. 

Mahasiddhas, 34, 35, 154. 
Mahasanghikas, 24. 

Mahasukha, 27, 33, 38, 79, 81. 
MahasukhavMa, 27, 163. 

Mahavidya goddesses, 148. 

Mahavira, 10. 

Mahay ana, 36, 37. 

Mahayanistn, 22. 

Mahayanists, 28, 36, 37. 
Mahayogatantrayana, 95. 

Mahesvara Bhavana, 99. 

Mahipala, 66, 82, 109. 

Mahogra, 156. 

Maitreya, 96, 122. 

Maitreyanatha, 35. 

Makaras, 32 ; five, 156. 

Mandalas, 18, 49, 53, 

Manjughosa, 161. 

Manjusri, 49, 122, 127, 133. 
Manikacandra, 72. 

Manmatha, 117. 

Mantras, 17, 31, 57; purity of the, 
158. 



180/ . , ' INTRODUCTION TO' BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 


■ Mantrayim, 42s 52. 

MaranajSS. , ■■ 

'.Maras, 117.,, - • 

MMci, 117 , 1 . 23 , 136 - 9 . 
Marici-piciiva, 137 . 
materialists, 9 . 

Maya, doctrine of, 100. 

Mayanam,ati, 12, 73. 
meat, 48 , 94 . 
mediciiie, 89 , 90 . 

Mendaka, 21, 
merit, 7.. 

I^limaiiisa, 6 n. 
mind, 79. 
mind-sky, 170. 
miracles, 87, 96. ■ 
mirage, 100, 
mnemonic verses, 59. ' 

Moggalana, 20. 

Moha, 130; family, 136-40. 
momenta'ry consciousness, 115. 
monasteries, 172, 173. 

Mongolia, 50. 
mongoose, 143. 
monks, 16, 23, 24, 87, 173. ■ 
Mrtyuvancana Tara, 117. 

Mudras, 17 ; their meaning, 151 ,152 n. 
Muni, 72, 

Murarl, 41. 

mystic, poses, 129 ; wonders, 18 n. 
mysterious ointment, 89. 

Nadha Nadhis, 76. 

Nagarjuna (senior), 26, 41 n., 134. 
Nagarjuna, 67, 68, 154, 159. 
Nairatma, 80, 134, 135. 

Nairatmya, 36, 37. 
naked god, 88. 

Nalanda, 66, 127, 


Nanda,m 
Naropa,65,.66, 82. 
needle, 137. 
nether worlds, 89. 

Niratma, 27. 

NOTapa, 15, 25, 33, 40, 41, 77, 98, 163. 

Nispannatara, 142; 

non-duality, 40. 

noumenon, 114. 

nuns, 16, 

object, 107. 

Odantapuri Vihara, 64. 

Odiyana, 54. See Uddiy^ua. 

Odiyana Kurakulla, 142. 

Odiyana Marie!, 138. 
offspring, 121. 
omniscience, 35, 37, 99. 
original Tantras, 24. 
origination, law of dependent, 102. 
Orissa, 44, 75. 

Padalepa Siddhi, 88-9. 

Padmapapi, 122. 

Padmasambhava, 44,, 45 n., 64, 74. , 
Padmavajra, 64, 69, 70. 

Paduna, 72. 

Papdari, 140, 

Pantheon, 120 Buddhist, 92. 
Paramananda, 81. 

Paramatman, 166, 167, 168. 
Paramitas, 40; six, 151, 164. 
Parpasavari, 118, 145. 

Patala Siddhi, 88-9. 

Patahjali, 165. 

Patriarchs, 42. 

Paurapic literature, 49. 

Pau^tika, 91, 133. 
pestilences, 146. 



INDEX 


181 


Phandana, 72« 
pictures, 115. 
pigs, seven, 136. 

Pisaci, 145., 

Pithas,'43. , 
plastic art, 50. 
powers, extraordinary, 96. 
practices, Tantric, 41, 

Pradipa, 42. 

Prajna, 34, 40, 70, 77, 79, 81, 103, 
Prajnaparamita, 31, 34, 40, 42, 56, 
82 ; Sakti of Adi-Buddha, 128, 
Prajnopaya, 38, 39. 

Pranayama, 169. 

Prasannatara, 117, 142, 

Pratyekas, 36, 37, 96. 
prayer-wheels, 31. 
preceptor, 39. 

princely ease, attitude of, 141. 
psychic exercises, 174, 
public assemblies, 87. 
public discussions, 87. 

Pudgala, 17 n. 

Puna, 54. 

punishment, divine, 7. 

Putiyatirtha, 43 n. 

Puranas, 50. 

Purandara, 137. 

Purciagiri, 43. 

Putresti, 5. 

Riga, 38, 130 ; family, 140-2. 

Rahu, 136, 142. : 

Rihulabhadra,66, 67; same as Saraha. 
Rajayoga, 165, 166. 

Raksakali, 145, 

Rajhi (?), 66. 

Rasarasayana Siddhi, 88-9, 
Ratnakarasanti, 82, 110, 143. 


reality, 40. 
remembrances, 114. 
repetition, of the mantra, 59. 
restrictions, 94, 
rewards, divine, 7. 
rites, six cruel, 87. 

Rodana, 72. 

R§,5. 

!R.§is,5. , 

Rupini, 139. 

Sabaripa, 154, 159, 160; same as 
Sabarapa. 

Sabhar, 44. 
sacred spots, 43. 
sacrifices, 3, 4, 48 ; Vedic, 47. 
Sadhanas, 19, 53, 57, 83, 87, 104. 
Sadhya, 90, 

Sahajayana, 52. 

Sahajayogini Cinta, 79. See Cinta. 
Sahajananda, 81. 

Sahajiyas, 76. 

§aiksas,95. 
saints, deified, 122. 

Saiva deities, 153. 

Saivaism, 147, 163. 

Sakti, 32, 33, S3, 70; worship, 43, 54, 

102 . 

Sakya Dandapani, 12. 
salvation, 119 ; short cuts to, 17. 
Samadhi, 73, 

Samantabhadra, 38. 

Samantasubha, 45, 69. 

Samata, 40. 

Samaya, 39, 42, 130 ; family, 144-6. 
Sambhala, 45, 74. 

Sambodhi, 70. 

Sambuddhas, 40. 

Samsara, 40, 41. 



182 . 


AN INTRODUCTION TO. BUDDHIST ESOTERISM. 


Samvaray 39. 

Sandhyabhasa, 35^ 70* : 

Sangha, 16, 23. 

... Sang-ftis, 24, 56* , , 

::§aBka.ta, SS, 100* . 
Santaraksita|44,4,9, 57, 64, 74., 96, 99. 
gants, 89, 91, 133, 

SantideYa, 122. 

Sarahapa, 46 n., 63, 66, 67, 154 ; same 
as Saraha and Sarahabhadra. 

■ Sarasvatl, 50,136, 157, 158. 
.;.SaroitihaYajra, 71* See Padmavajra. 
Sarvabiiddlia, 161. 

Sarvajnattva, 86. 

gastri, Haraprasad, 3 n., 46 n., 70 n., 
76,78, 82, 119 a'. 
gasvatavajra, 154. 

Satkarma., 89,90. ' 
schools of art., 123. 
sciences, esoteric, 18. , 

Scythians, S3, 54. 

secret practices, 96. 

secret rites, 70.. ■ 

sects, 128* 

self-protection, 59. ■ 

self-realization, 38. , ■ 

self sacrifice, 37. 

settlers, Aryan, 3. 

short-cuts to salvation, 17. 

SMdhacirya, 46 n., 122 ; first, 78. 

Siddhamantras, 148. 

Siddhaptirnsas, 34, 84, 126. 
Siddhartha, 12. 

Siddhas, 53, 84, 96 ; three classes of, 
85 * 

Siddhi, 70, 83, 85, 93, 94, 109, 171; 
eight great, 87, 88, 108; of five 
varieties, 86. 

SiihhanMa, 123, 140, 141. 


sins, 7. 

Sirihatta, 43. 

Sitala, 119, MS. 

Siva, 29, 41, 116, 117, 118, 150, 153, 
164. 

sixteen Vangas, 72, : % ; 

Skandhas, 33, 110, 127* 

Smith, V. A., 73* 

Smitis, 9. 
snake-bites, 86. 
snakes, ornament of, 133. 
snake, white, 141, 
social hierarchy, 2. 
sorcerer, 1. 
spiritnal spheres, 97. 
gravakas, 36, 37, 40, 98. 
griparvata, 54, 
grisamaja, 70. 

Stambhana, 89. 

Stapleton, 'Mr, H. E., 43 n, 

Stava, 53. 

Sthaviras, 24. 
subject, 107. 
succession lists, 62, 

Sucimukha, 140, 

Siidhanakiimara, 140, 
guclras,2,17. 

Siigata, 57, 93. 

Suktas, 6. 
gungas, 48, 

Sun-god, Hindu, 136.* ' 
gunya, 26, 27, 33," 39, 101,, 108, 109., 
114, 115, 163, 167, 171. 
gunyata, 38, 39, 101, 102, 103, 110. 
supernatural powers, 171. ' 
superstitions, 48. 

Suryaprabha, 162, 

Susupti, 167, 168, 170. 

Sutra, 49, 56. 



Svayambhn Caitya, 127. 
sword, magic, 89. 
symbols, 60 ; five auspicious, 135, 

Tailopa, 65, 82. 

Tantipi, 71, 75. 

Tantra, 43 n., 47, 52, 53, 165, 168; 
Buddhist, 101; definition, 51; 
Hindu, 101 ; original, 24. 
Tantrayana, 52. 

Tantric Buddhism, 32; culture^ 173, 
174; practices, 41, 166; Hindus, 
81 ; system, 18. 

Tantrism, 22, 46 ; origin, 1 ; place of 
origin, 43. 

Tara, 104, 107, 108, 140, 148, 149, 
151, 152, 154, 158 ; different forms 
of, 148. 

Tarini, 149, ISO. 

Tathagatas, 41. 

Tattvacarya, 41. 

teachers, heretical, 9. > 

thought categories, 107. . 

thread, 137. 

three jewels, 42, 105. 

thunderbolt, 40. 

Tibet, 50. 
tiger's skin, 133. 
iiracchdna, 18. 

Tirthahkaras, 114. 

Trailokyavijaya, 117, 118 ; Mudri, 
142. 

trident, white, 141. 

Tripitaka, Buddhist, 17. 

Trsna, 102. 
twilight language, 35. 

Ubhayavarahanana Marici, 137. 
Uccatana, 89, 91. 


INDEX 183 

Ucchusma Jambhala, ; 111 ,' 112 , 117 ,: 

143; same as XJcchii^ma, , ' . 
Uddiyana, 43, 44, 45, 69, 76. 

Udiya, 75. 

Udyana, 44, 

Ugra, 156. 

Ugratara, mantra of, 155. 

UpakesinI, 162. 

Upam§ads, 93. 

Upaya, 38, 70, 79, 81. 
Upayatantrayana, 95. 

Vaipulyasutra, 19. 

Vairocana, 110, 130, 136, 160. 
Vaisravapa, 122. 

Vaisyas, 2. 

Vajra, 156. 

Vajracaryas, 53. 

Vajradaka, 132. 

Vajradhara, 127. 

Vajraghopa,139. 

Vajradhatvisvari, 136 ; MMci, 138, 
Vajraghanta, 69. 

Vajrajvalanalarka, 117. 

Vajrapani, 127, 131. 

Vajrasana, 124. 

Vajrasattva, 40, 79, 127, 129. 
Vajravairocani, 160. 

Vajravarahi, 132, 139. 

Vajravarpani, 160. 

Vajravetali, 138. 

Vajrayana, 27, 32, 35, 42, 52, 56, 57, 
70, 114. 

Vajrayanists, 25, 55. 

Vajrayogini, 132, 158, 159, 160, 161. 
Vtoacara, 169, 172. 

Varnani, 159, 160. 

Vasikarapa, 89, 91, 141. 

Vasistha, 155, 156, 


182 


AN .INTRODUCTION TO' - BUDDHIST ESOTERISM 


'Samvaraj 89. , 

Sandhyabha^a, 35s, 70. 

SaHgha, 16* 23. 

Sangltis* 24, 56. 

Sankara, '88, 100. 

§aiitaraksita,44, 49, 57, 64, 74, 96, 99. 
• ganti, 89,91, 133. 
gantideTa, 122. 

Sarabapa, 46 n,, 63, 66, 67, 154, ; same 
as Saraha and Sarababhadra, ' 
Sarasvati, 50, 156, 157, 158. 

' SaronihaYaJra, 71. . See Padmavajra. 
Sarvabiiddha, 161. 

Sarvajnattva, 86. 

gastrl, Ha,raprasad, 3 n., 46 n., 70 n., 

. 76, 78, 82, 119 a 
gas'vatavajra, 154. 

8atkanna, 89, 90. 
schools of art, 123. 
sciences, esoteric, 18. 

Scythians, 53, 54. 

secret practices, 96. 

secret rites, 70. 

sects, 128. 

self-protection, 59. 

self-realkation,' 38. 

self sacrifice, 37. 

settlers, Aryan, 3. 

short-cuts to salvation, 17. 

Siddhacarya, 46 n., 122 ; first, 78. 

Siddhamantras, 148. 

Siddhaptirusas, 34, 84, 126. 
Siddhartha, 12. 

Siddhas, 53, 84, 96 ; three classes of, 
85. 

SMdhi, 70, 83, 85, 93, 94, 109, 171 ; 
eight great, 87, 88, 108; of five 
varieties, 86. 

Siiiihanada, 123, 140, 141. 


sins, 7. 

Sirihatta,. 43. 
gitala, 119, 145. 

Siva, 29, 41, 116, 117, 118, 150, 153, 
164. 

sixteen Vangas, 72. ' " 

Skandhas, 33, 110, 127. 

Smith, V. A., 73. ' 

Smi*tis, 9. 
snake-bites, 86. 
snakes, ornament of, 133. 
snake, white, 141. 
social hierarchy, 2. 
j sorcerer, 1. 

1 spiritual spheres, 97. 
j gravakas, 36, 37, 40, 98. 

I griparvata, 54. 
i grisamija, 70. 

I Stambhana, 89. 
j Stapleton, Mr. H. E., 43 n. 

Stava,' S3. 

Sthaviras,'24, 
subject, 107. 
succession lists, 62. ' ' 

Sucimukha, 140. 

Siidhanakumara, 140. 
gudras, 2, 17. 

Sugata, 57, 93, 

Suktas, 6. 
gufigas, 48. 

Sun-god, Hindu, 136. 
gunya, 26, 27, 33, , 39, TOl, 108, 109, 
114,.115, 163, 167,171. • 

gunyata, 38, 39, 101,102, 103, llO.^ ',' 
supernatural powers, 171., : . . 
superstitions, 48, 

Sutyaprabha, 162, 

Su^upti, 167, 168, 170. 

Sutra, 49, 56. 



INDEX 


Svayambhn Gaitya, 127, 

sword, magic, 89. 

symbols, 60 ; five auspicious, 135. 

Tailopa, 65, 82. 

Tantipa, 71, 75. ' 

Tantra, 43 u„ 47, 52, 53, 165, 168; 
Buddhist, 101; definition, 51; 
Hindu, 101 ; original, 24, 
Tantrayana, 52. 

Tantric Buddhism, 32 ; culture, 173, 
174; practices, 41, 166; Hindus, 
81 ; system, 18. 

Tantrism, 22, 46 ; origin, 1 ; place of 
origin, 43. 

Tara, 104, 107, 108, 140, 148, 149, 
151, 152, 154, 158 ; different forms 
of, 148, 

Taripi, 149, 150. 

Tathagatas, 41. 

Tattvacarya, 41. 
teachers, heretical, 9. i 
thought categories, 107. 
thread, 137, . 

three jewels, 42, 105. 
thunderbolt, 40. 

Tibet, 50. 
tiger's skin, 133. 
tiracchdna,l%. 

Tirthankaras, 114. 

Trailokyavijaya, 117, 118 ; Mudra, 
142. 

trident, white, 141. 

Tripitaka, Buddhist, 17. 

Trsna, 102. 
twilight language, 35. 

Ubhayavarahanana Marici, 137. 
Uccataiia, 89, 91. 


183 

Ucchu^ma Jambhala, 111, 112, 117, 

' : 143 ; same as Ucchusma, 

Uddiyana, 43, 44, 45, 69, 76. 

Udiya, 75. 

' Udyana, 44.' ; 

Ugra, 156. 

Ugratara, mantra' of, 155. / 
Upakesini, 162. 

Upani^ads, 93, 

Upaya, 38, 70, 79, 81. 
Upayatantrayana, 95. 

Vaipulyasutra, 19. 

Vairocana, 110, 130, 136, 160. 
Vaisravapa, 122, 

Vaisyas, 2. 

Vajra, 156. 

Vajracaryas, 53. 

Vajradaka, 132. 

Vajradhara, 127. 

Vajraghopa, 139. 

Vajradhatvisvari, 136 ; Marici, 138, 
Vajraghapta, 69. 

Vajrajvalanalarka, 117. 

Vajrapapi, 127, 131. 

Vajrasana, 124. 

Vajrasattva, 40, 79, 127, 129. 
Vajravairocani, 160, 

¥ajravarahi, 132, 139. 

Vajravarpam, 160. 

Vajravetali, 138. 

Vajrayana, 27, 32, 35, 42, 52, 56, 57, 
70,114. 

Vajrayanists, 25, 55. 

Vajrayogini, 132, 158, 159, 160, 161. 

■; Vamacara, 169, 172. 

VarnanI, 159, 160. 

Va^ikarapa, 89,91, 141. 

Vasistha, 155, 156, 


184 : , '. AN:INTRGDUCTI0N to. BUDDHIST, ESOTERISM 


Vasu, N. R, 53. 

Vasudham, 143, 144. 

Va%^a, 133. 

Vedas, 5, 9, 53. 

Vedic hymns, 55, 

Vemacitri, 88. 
vernaculars, 16-7. 

Vidve§ai^a, 89. 

Vidyabhnsai^ia, S. C., 73. 
Vidyidharas, land of the, 88, ■ 
Vktyas, 18. 

Vidynjjvalakarali, 135. ' 
Vig:hiia,im 
Vighnantaka, 118. 

Vijayapa, 65. 

Vijnana, 26, 27, 33 ; chain of, 97. 
Vijhanavada, 27, 

Vijnanavidin, 79. 

Vikramasila, 66. 

Vilasavajra, 78. 

Vimalacandra, 71. 

Vimaihsa, 19, , 

Vinaya rales, 95, 

Viramananda, 81. 

Viriyam, 19, ■ ' 

Vi§3;in,29, 116, 117, 

Visvapapi, 145, 

Visvavajra, 144. 


void, 107. 

voidness, 99. Sinya* 
.vowels, deified, 164. ' " 
Vratyas,3,8,10,ll,17,47. 
Vratyastoma, 3 n. 

■weapons, 92, 

wine, 94. 

woman, 34, 168. 

world of animals, 97, 

worldly happiness, 49. 

worship, extraordinary, 105, 

Yab-yum, 103, 

Yaksas, 114, 143.' 

Yaksipis, 114. 

Yama, 117, 122. 

Y.amala, 51 ; definition, 52. 
Yamantaka, 133. 

Yamari, 112, 132, 134. 

Yoga, 33,^166, 168, 170, 172, 
Yogaca,ra, 26, 27, 35, 96, 99, 
Yogatantra, 53, 169. 
Yogatantrayana, 95. 

Yogin, 34, 79, 166, 170, 174. 
Ynganaddlia, 103, 163, 

Za-hor,. 44, 45 n. 



