# EXTRACTED TEXT: 1936-ray-sanskrit-buddhism-in-burma.pdf
# Total Pages: 170 | Direct: 0 | OCR: 138 | Blank/Sparse: 32
# Timestamp: 2026-09-16 18:12:50
================================================================================


--- PAGE 1 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF ARCHAEOLOGY |

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGICAL
LIBRARY

Oxass

Catt No

294.309591 + =Ray

D.G.A. 79.

--- PAGE 2 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 3 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 4 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 5 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 6 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SANSKRIT BUDDHISM
IN BURMA

--- PAGE 7 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

DISSERTATION APPROVED FOR THE DEGREE OF
DOCTOR IN LETTERS AND PHILOSOPHY
IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LEIDEN
DECEMBER 10, 1936

--- PAGE 8 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

——

SANSKRIT BUDDHISM
IN BURMA

BY
NIHAR-RANJAN RAY

M.A. (Cal.), Dr. Lerr. & Pum. (Leiden), Dre. Lis. (Lond).
Mrinalini Gold-medalist, Griffith irieman
Premchand Re
Lecturer in Ancient Indian History ‘and Culture
University of C

Ege

244 -309ST
Ray ae

aos

PUBLISHED BY THE
UNIVERSITY OF CALCUTTA
1936

--- PAGE 9 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CENTRAL ARCHAEOLOGIGAS
LIBRARY, NEW VELL

Ace. No.. ae

Date. .2.3.:..2 +... 3%

. eeeenseme

--- PAGE 10 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

To
Dr. BIMALA CHURN LAW
M. A, B. L., Ph. D.
as a token of
admiration and gratitude

--- PAGE 11 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 12 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE

This monograph, like my earlier one on Brahmanical Gods in
Buyma (Calcutta University, 1932), attempts to explain one of the
many aspects of the culture-complex of early Indo-Burmese history;
at the same time it seeks to initiate another chapter in the history
of the expansion of Indian religions and culture outside India’s
natural geographical boundaries. It was originally conceived as a
part of a more comprehensive work on the History of Buddhism in
Burma: from the earliest times to the British conquest *, mainly from
the historical point of view; but the importance of the subject, as
subsequently it appeared to me, justified an independent treatment,
and when Prof. Dr. J. Ph. Vogel, Professor of Sanskrit and Indian
Archaeology in the University of Leiden, approved of my choice,
I decided to present it as a dissertation for the Degree of Doctor
in Letters and Philosophy of the University of Leiden which with
the now well-known Kern Institute as an adjunct has developed
into an important centre of Oriental study and research. The
following pages embody the results of my researches in this par-
ticular subject.

The title of the dissertation, Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma,
requires a word of explanation. Mahayana Buddhism in Burma was
out of the question, as my researches led me to infer that the Sar-
vastivada was also at one time prevalent in Burma, as also Tan-
trayana and Mantrayana. The choice lay therefore between adopting
either Northern Buddhism... or Sanskrit Buddhism ...; but as
Northern Buddhism is an expression to which exception has often
rightly been taken by scholars, I adopted the latter, to indicate
nothing more than those forms of Buddhism whose canons are
supposed to have been written and preserved in Sanskrit. It is
just a convenient title, and nothing more. .

* This is now ready for publication.

--- PAGE 13 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

x PREFAGE

The subject of this dissertation is but little known, and very
little has so far been done to elucidate the vague general ideas that
exist to-day amongst scholars about it. The most important con-
tribution was made by M. Charles Duroiselle in his admirable article
on “The Aris of Burma and Tantrik Buddhism” in the An. R.A.S.I.,
1g15—’16; but his work has not yet been followed up except in
some meagre and stray notices in the J.B.R.S., the An. R.A.S.I,
and the An. R. A. S. B. which have been referred to in their proper
places in the body of this monograph. No apology is therefore needed,
I hope, when I venture to present the subject in the form of a short
treatise; but it must be considered as nothing more than a beginning
in the study of a subject which requires further elucidation; and I
am almost certain that further archaeological research especially
with regard to the wall-paintings of Pagan from their iconographic
standpoint, and the examination of the contents of old monastic
libraries in Upper Burma, will add to our knowledge of the subject.

The materials used in preparing this monograph are mostly
archaeological, but it will be seen that I have also drawn from
literary sources, but only so far as they are substantiated by
archaeological evidence so as to cover all relevant inscriptions,
sculptures, paintings and monuments known up to date from Burma.
While a fair number of them have already been published in the
Reports of the Archaeological Surveys of India and Burma, there
has been incorporated information from a large number of sources
that are here brought to light for the first time. Apart from new
materials that are now made known, there will be found many
instances where new interpretations of old materials have been put
forward. Thus, I have been led to infer the prevalence of the Sar-
vastivada in Old Prome, the definite existence of Mahayanist and
Tantric texts in the monastic libraries of Upper Burma, and of
hitherto unrecognized representations of gods and goddesses be-
longing to the Mahayana and its allied pantheons. I have also been
able, I hope, to establish the identity of the Samanakuttakas with
the Aris, both branded as heterodox sects; to indicate the time
when and place whence the Mahayana and its allied cults penetrated
Burma, and the fact of their existence for a long time even after
the glorious reformation of Anawrahta in 1057—1058 A.D. I have
also given sufficient indications of the part played by the followers

--- PAGE 14 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PREFACE xt

of these cults, whose number must have been considerable at one
time, in the religious life of Upper Burma. Some of the identifica-
tions of gods and goddesses may be held as doubtful — the iden-
tification marks and attributes in a number of instances are either
absent or indistinct —, but the major conclusions based on them
and on other materials, equally important, are expected to
endure. These conclusions have been summarised in the final
chapter.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

It is my most pleasant duty to record here my deepest feeling
of regard and gratitude to Prof. Dr. J. Ph. Vogel who as my pro-
moter took pains to go through the entire manuscript with scrupu-
lous care, suggesting improvements, and always favouring me with
his wide knowledge and experience. He did much more than this:
he threw the doors of the Kern Institute open to me for my studies;
he did all that he could to make my five months’ stay in Leiden
profitable; and, most of all, it was through his kind efforts and by
virtue of his recommendations that the Ministry of Education of the
Government of Netherlands gave me special leave to go in for the
highest academic distinction of the University of Leiden in so short
a time. To him, and also to Mrs. Vogel, I take this opportunity to
offer my sincere thanks and gratitude.

I owe my stay in Europe for about a year and a half to the kind
and affectionate patronage of Mr. Syamaprasad Mookerjee, M.A.,
B.L., Barrister-at-Law, who as Vice-Chancellor, and President of
the Council of Post-graduate Teaching in Arts, University of Cal-
cutta, made it possible for me to enjoy special study leave privilege ~
that enabled, among other things, the preparation of this humble
work, Even in the midst of his heavy duties he has always cared to
keep himself in touch with the work I have been doing in Europe;
his words of encouragement and his affectionate concern for success
in my endeavours have been a source of strength and inspiration to
me. My feeling of regard, loyalty and gratitude towards him are
too deep for words; and I cannot do more than merely record my
indebtedness to him.

This monograph owes its publication in its present form to the
generosity of Dr. Bimala Churn Law, M.A., B.L., Ph.D., who is

--- PAGE 15 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

xIr PREFACE

widely known in India and Europe for his valuable contributions
to the study of Pali literature and Buddhism as well as for his kind
patronage of scholarship. To him I dedicate this humble piece of
work as a token of admiration and gratitude.

It is my duty and pleasure to thank my friend Miss Jessy Blom
for kindly preparing the Index.

I must also acknowledge the courtesy of the Archaeological
Survey of Burma in kindly extending me permission to publish the
illustrations that accompany this monograph.

The book had to be hurried through the press in three weeks

' which has led to a few printing errors for which I crave the indul-
gence of readers; but none of them, it is hoped, is of any great
consequence. An errata has been supplied at the end.

Kern Institute, Leiden
December 10, 1936. NiwAaRRANJAN Ray

--- PAGE 16 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION

Pages

Burma professes the Buddhism of the Theravada School — Earliest
contacts of Burma with India: evidence of archaeology — Indian
expansion in Indo-China and Indonesia: epigraphic documents —
Relative position of the different schools of Buddhism in Indo-China and
Indonesia — Sarvastivida — Mahayana — Tantrayana — Mahayana
Buddhism in Burma, a prima facie case — Present state of our knowledge
— The problems stated... 2. 2 6 eee ee ee ee 1-18

CHAPTERONE
SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME

Sanskrit’ inscriptions from ancient Prome: their significance — Sig-
nificance of I-tsing’s evidence — Identification of Lang-chia-shu — The
Buddhism of Lang-chia-shu and Shib-li-ch’a-talo. . . 2... 19-30

CHAPTERTWO
SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS: SANSKRIT BUDDHIST TEXTS

Sanskrit inscriptions from Upper Burma: their significance — Sanskrit
texts of Mahayana and Tantrayana — Buddhism and Sanskrit learning
— Texts on Buddhist logic — Tantric texts... ......-- 31-39

CHAPTER THREE
GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

Avalokitesvara — Maitreya — Avalokite$vara and Maitreya — Tara —
Majijuéri — Jambhala — Lokanatha — Vajrasattva — Paya-thon-zu
and Nandamafifia paintings: Tantric gods and goddesses — Thanbula
and Abeyadana Temples: AvalokiteSvara, Majfijusri, Lokanatha —
Hayagriva, 2. ee ee ee 40-61

--- PAGE 17 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

XIV CONTENTS
CHAPTER FOUR
THE ARI SECT AND THE SAMANAKUTTAKAS

Tantric Buddhism in Burma — Who were the Aris? — Extracts from

the Hmannan — Who were the Samanakuttakas? — Some additional
62-71

CHAPTER FIVE
TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS

Taranitha and his account— Extracts from Tarandtha — Tdranatha
summarised — In defence of Tarandtha — Biography of Buddhagupta —
Buddhagupta’s testimony. . - . 6+ + ee te ee ee ee ee 72-87

CHAPTER SIX

WHEN AND WHENCE DID SANSKRIT BUDDHISM
PENETRATE BURMA?

Evidence of epigraphic documents — Evidence of sculptures, bronzes,
and paintings: Hmawza, Pagan — Indo-Burmese historical relations. 88-95

CONCLUSIONS. . 2. ee ee ee ee ee 96-99
BIBLIOGRAPHY . 2... ee ee ee ee eee ee 100-101
INDEX. 2. 1 2 we ee te te 103-109
ERRATA . 6 6 1 eee ee te ee ee 110

PLATES 2. 1 1 eee ee te tt ee ee

--- PAGE 18 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ABBREVIATIONS

AO. Acta Orientalia (Leiden).
An. R.A.S.B. Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey of Burma
(Rangoon).
An. R.A.S.I. Annual Report of the Archaeological Survey of India
(Simla and Delhi).
B.E.F.E.O. Bulletin de l’Ecole Francaise d’Extréme-Orient (Hanoi).
. Cal, Rev. The Calcutta Review (Calcutta).
Ep. Birm. Epigraphia Birminica (Rangoon).
Ep. Ind. Epigraphia Indica (Simla and Delhi).
Ind, Ant. Indian Antiquary (Bombay).
Ind. Hist. Quart. The Indian Historical Quarterly (Calcutta).
JA. Journal Asiatique (Paris).
JAS.B. Journal of the Asiatic Society of Bengal (Calcutta).
J.B.R.S, Journal of the Burma Research Society (Rangoon).
JIS.O.A. Journal of the Indian Society of Oriental Art (Calcutta).
PTS. Pali Text Society (London).

Other abbreviations are easily intelligible

--- PAGE 19 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

a a I |

--- PAGE 20 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION

As seen on the map of Asia, Burma looks as if it were an out-
stretched hand of the Indian continent rather than a part of the
South-East-Asiatic countries bordering the Indian Ocean, which
collectively we know as Further India. Indeed, ethnologically and
linguistically, and also geographically, Burma is more a component
part of the whole area now covered by Burma, Siam, Indo-China
and the Malay Peninsula, than of India proper to whose cultural
influence she, like the rest of the countries of Indo-China, submitted
herself for centuries. But notwithstanding that strong cultural
domination by India, mainly exerted through the all-pervading
faith of Theravada Buddhism, Burma maintained from the very
beginning of her history a distinct political, social, and even cultural
character. Unlike Ceylon, Burma hardly ever merged herself into
the currents and cross-currents of Indian historical and cultural
evolution, and it is only with the British conquest and consequent
unification of Burma with the Indian empire, evidently for adminis-
trative convenience, that the country came within the domain of
practical Indian life and politics. Otherwise, there is no historical
reason why Burma should be considered, as it is so often done, as
a part of India. Her history runs a parallel course, so far as relations
with India are concerned, with that of the other countries of Further
India, and the islands of the Malay Archipelago, collectively known
to historians as Indonesia. The Indo-Burmese chapter of the history
of Burma can be understood in its proper perspective and real
significance only when we take this vital historical fact into account.
It is alsoa key to a better understanding of the history of Indian
cultural influence in Burma.

BURMA PROFESSES THE BUDDHISM OF THE THERAVADA SCHOOL
Like Siam, Burma till to-day is professedly Buddhist, following

the Pali canon of the Southern School. Nowhere else in the countries
I

--- PAGE 21 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

2 INTRODUCTION

and islands once won over to Indian cultural enterprise is Indianism
to-day a living and regulating factor of any importance +; and
nowhere an Indian faith is of deeper significance, or wields a stronger
influence in the socio-political life of the people than Buddhism does
in Burma. Indeed, Burma owes her spiritual and cultural existence
to the undying appeal of Theravada Buddhism which has remained
the chief factor in the life and character of the average Burman as
of the entire Burmese nation.

The story of the introduction of Buddhism in Pagan in Upper
Burma, repeated again and again in Pali and Burmese chronicles
and Mon inscriptions of Burma *, is much too well-known to need
any description here. Suffice it to say that it was introduced from
Thaton, the Talaing capital of Lower Burma, known in ancient days
as Ramafifiadesa, the land par excellence of the Talaings, while
Upper Burma was known as Mrammadesa, the land par excellence
of the Burmese. This historic event took place in the third quarter
of the eleventh century of the Christian era, in 1057, or, perhaps,
1058, to be more exact, when Pagan was fast rising to importance.

At the end of a long siege Thaton ceased to be a royal capital, and
Anawrahta (1044—1077), the victorious king of Pagan, returned to
his capital with the most valuable treasures of the faith, nearly
the entire host of monks, and with them thirty-two white elephants,
each laden with scriptures and relics, all belonging to Manuha, the
Talaing king of Thaton. Thaton was annexed and Manuha kept for
the rest of his life a captive at Myinpagan, a suburban village near
Pagan, while his scriptural treasures were housed in the Bidagataik
(Tripitaka library), the library building standing to this day not
very far from the famous Ananda Temple. The host of captive
monks were released and pushed into the service of propagating the
religion of Sakyamuni far and wide in the realm of the new dynasty

1 Except perhaps in Bali where Brahmanism wields a strong influence even
to-day, and where one can also detect some faint traces of Buddhism.
2 For example, the Sdsanavamsa, the Hmannan Yazawin, the most impor-
tant Burmese chronicle, and the long Kalyani Inscriptions of King Dhamma-
ceti of Pegu (Ep. Birm. III, ii.).

See also my Brahmanical Gods in Burma, Calcutta University, 1932, pp.
1—2. Also my forthcoming volume on History of Buddhism in Burma, chap.
I (ready for the press).

--- PAGE 22 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION 3

of kings. Thus, once again the superior culture of the vanquished
predominated over that of the victors, and the Southern Buddhism
of Lower Burma gradually spread throughout Upper Burma till it
embraced, after various vicissitudes of fortune, the whole country
under one religious organisation. From the eleventh century
onwards, Burma has never wavered from her faith in Buddhism.

The question now will naturally be asked: When did Thaton
receive the faith of Theravada Buddhism, or more correctly speak-
ing, the Hinayana form of Buddhism? Are we to accept the tradition,
so insistent in Burmese records, of the Asoka mission of Sona and
Uttara to Suvannabhiimi? Shall we also believe the later tradition,
equally vocal in Burmese chronicles, of Buddhaghosa’s crossing over
to Burma and preaching there the religion of the Master?

Available evidence is so meagre that none of these questions can
be answered satisfactorily. Recent criticism has thrown doubt on
both traditions 4, referred to above, though evidence is daily accu-
mulating in favour of an early introduction of Buddhism in Burma.

All that can be asserted with certainly at this stage of historical
research is that the introduction of the faith must have taken place
not later than the 6t® century, but the actual circumnstances are
unknown. The earliest epigraphic records found in Burma hail not
from Thaton, but from the small village of Hmawza, six miles *
north of the modern town of Prome. The village which is scattered
over with ancient remains has been identified with the old capital ©
city of the Pyus, the P’iao of the Chinese; indeed it was the heart
of the country known to the Chinese as Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo and to the .
Burmese as Tharikhittara (Sanskrit: Sriksetra).

The inscriptions referred to consist of two gold plates discovered
at Maunggan 2, a small village close to Hmawza; three fragments of
a stone inscription * found while clearing some debris round the base
of the Bawbawgyi Pagoda in Hmawza proper; a line of inscription

2 Foulkes, “Buddhaghosa”, Ind, Ant., XIX, 1889, p. 122; Smith, “Asoka’s
alleged mission to Pegu”, Ind. Ant., XXXIV, 1905; Hackmann, Buddhism
as a religion, p. 63; Finot, “The Legend of Buddhaghoga”, Cal. Rev., 1923.
pp. 63—67.

2 Ep. Ind., V, pp. 101 ff; Finot, ,,Un nouveau document sur le buddhisme in
birman”, J. A., Juit-Aout, 1912, p. 121 ff.

® Finot, ibid.; An. R.A.S.B., 1924, p. 22.

--- PAGE 23 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

4 INTRODUCTION

around the rim of the lid of a small relic casket, also discovered at
Hmawza}; a book of twenty leaves of gold, each inscribed on one side
in the manner of the old palm-leaf manuscripts of India, placed with-
jn two covers of the same metal 2; and an inscribed gold leaf from
the Kyundawza village, also near Hmawza . The language of these
inscriptions is Pali, and, what is more significant, they are all written
in a character which is closely akin to the Kanada-Telegu script of
Biihler but which Finot prefers to call Kadamba. Paleographically,
these epigraphic records cannot be dated far out of the 6t century
of the Christian era, if not earlier. But the most interesting fact is
that all these records contain extracts from well-known Pali texts
like the Vibhariga and the Aviguttara Nikaya, and one of them, the
gold-leaf book, contains, among other things, the Paticca samuppada
sutta, viz., the sutta itself with its nirodha but without the vibhariga 4.
The extracts, however, are not quoted verbatim. The evident
conclusion to be drawn from these records is that Pali Buddhism
was already an established religion at least as early as the 5‘ or
6th century; that Pali Buddhism as the language of the Theravada
was known and understood in ancient Prome by at least a section
of the people; that Pali canonical texts were studied in their doctri-
nal aspects; and finally, what is most important, that the original
home from where this Pali Buddhism was introduced in Lower
Burma was evidently the Andhra-Pallava region of South India,
from such centres as Amaravati, Nagarjunikonda, Kaficipuram,
Kaveripattanam and Uragapuram where Theravada Buddhism
during these centuries had established famous and flourishing
strongholds, and which places, particularly the last three, are
intimately associated with the Buddhaghosa tradition °.

1 An, R.AS.I., 1926—'27, pp. 172—73.

2 An, R.A.S.I., 1926—'27, p. 200.

% An, R.A.S.I., 1928—'29, pp. 109—09.

4 These records have been fully analysed and discussed in all their bearings
in the first chapter of my forthcoming volume on History of Buddhism in
Burma: from the earliest times to the British conquest (ready for the press).
There will be found an attempt to reconstruct the early history of Theravada
Buddhism in Burma, and its later vicissitudes after the introduction of the
religion into Pagan in 1057, A.D. down to 1824.

4 These findings tend to point to the conclusion that ‘Theravada Buddhism
which in Burma to-day is of the Ceylonese form was originally introduced

--- PAGE 24 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION 5

EARLIEST CONTACTS OF BURMA WITH INDIA: EVIDENCE OF
ARCHAEOLOGY

It should incidentally be mentioned that these epigraphic records,
besides being the earliest evidences of the introduction of Buddhism
in Burma, are also the earliest documents of the history of Indo-
Burmese relations. It is also worth mentioning that the earliest
documents of Brahmanism in Lower Burma, from Old Prome,
images of Brahmanical gods and goddesses stylistically dateable in
about the seventh century, owe their inspiration tothe Vengi-Pallava _
art tradition, and those from Thaton, belonging to about the ninth
and tenth centuries, seem to be affiliated to the Orissan tradition
of sculpture 2. In any case, available evidence at our disposal tends
to show that during the early centuries the current of Indian colo-
nial enterprise in Lower Burma flowed mainly from the eastern
coastel regions of South India, extending from ancient Kalinga
down to the Cola country.

INDIAN EXPANSION IN INDO-CHINA AND INDONESIA: EPIGRAPHIC
DOCUMENTS

A rapid parallel survey of Indian projection into the countries of
Indo-China and the islands of Indonesia also brings out the same

not from Ceylon, but from South India, where in the time of I-tsing (671—
’g5), all followed the Sthavira-nikaya though there existed a few adherents
of other nikdyas also” (Takakusu, I-tsing's Records of the Buddhist Religion,
p. xxiii—xxiv). In fact it was not till the middle of the twelfth century
that Ceylon came to play any important rOle in the history of Buddhism in
Burma. It was in 1167 when Panthagu, the then primate of the kingdom
chose Ceylon as the place of self-banishment in consequence of his repugnance
at the conduct of the then reigning king of Pagan, and in 1180 when Utta-
rajiva the primate who had succeeded Panthagu, returned from a pilgrimage
to Ceylon as the “First Pilgrim of Ceylon” that the island came to acquire a
holy sanctity in the eyes of the Burmese followers of the faith. In 1190,
Capata, Uttarajiva’s disciple, earned the title of “Second Pilgrim of Ceylon”
and on his return tried to convert the whole realm to the Ceylonese form.
These missions and intercourses coupled with Capata’s attempts to Ceylonize
Burmese Buddhism led to the gradual prodominance of Ceylonese Buddhism
in Burma and the wiping out of even the memory of the original source.
Moreover, the centre of Theravada Buddhism had also by that time been
shifted from South India to Ceylon”. See my History of Buddhism in Burma...
op. cit., chap. I.

2 See my Brahmanical Gods in Burma, pp. 75—79 plates II and V.

--- PAGE 25 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

6 INTRODUCTION

historical fact, though the source of inspiration is now mainly
centred in the realm of the Pallavas, which extended, in the seventh
and eighth centuries, all over the south-eastern coast from the
Godavari region down to at least the Kaveri. All the epigraphic
records, some dated and the rest dateable on paleographical grounds
from c. 400 A.D. to about the middle of the eighth century, are
written in what is known as Pallava-Grantha characters of South-
Eastern India ?. The majority of these records are Brahmanical, but
there are quite a number which point to the prevalence of Buddhism
during these centuries in the islands and countries of the South-
Eastern seas. Thus the inscription of the mahanavika Buddhagupta,
found near the ruins of an old Buddhist temple in the Wellesley
Province of the Malay Peninsula is a Buddhist document, paleo-
graphically dateable in the 5» century, as perhaps also the Kedah
inscription (found at Kedah near Bukit Muriam) of still earlier date.
The Talang Tuwo inscription of Sumatra, discovered not very far
from modern Palembang, and dated in the Saka year 606 (684 A.D.),
is a religious document, and if the terms occurring in it are any
indication, it is Buddhistic (compare such terms as vo[bo]dhicitta,
vatnatvaya, vajrasarira, anuttarabhisamyaksamvo[bojdhi, etc.) 2.
From West Borneo we have a series of as many as eight short
Sanskrit epigraphs, paleographically dateable in the fifth century
which definitely testify to the existence of Buddhism in that part
of the island at that early period 3. One of the earliest inscriptions of
the ancient kingdom of Fou-nan, discovered at the monument of
Ta Prohm in the province of Bati, and dateable paleographically and
with the help of the Chinese texts at the disposal of M. Pelliot, in
about the first quarter of the seventh century, is also frankly a
Buddhist document. It states, among other things, that Buddha,
Dharma and Sarhgha are in a flourishing condition; and though the
purport of the inscription is not clear, it can be surmised that it

? For a revised and latest study of these inscriptions, see, Expansion of Indo-
Aryan culture during Pallava rule as evidenced by inscriptions, by B. Ch.
Chhabra, in J.A.S.B., Letters, Vol. I, 1935, no. I, PP. 14—55.

* B.E.F.E.0., XXX, pp. 29—80; A.O., II, p. 12; Chhabra, op. cit., pp. 29—30.
2 An. R.AS.I., 1910—'11, pp. 40 ff; Chhabra, of. cit.. pp. 41 ff; Vogel, Bij-
dvagen, LXXIV, 1918, pp. 167—132, LXXVI; pp. 431434.

--- PAGE 26 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION 7

recorded the foundation of a Buddhist sanctuary !. This inscription
studied along with other early inscriptions of Kamboja, particu-
larly with the Visnuite inscription of Prince Gunavarman, found
among the ruins of the monuments of Prasat Pram Lovén on the
hill of Thap-mudi?, reveals the interesting fact that in contem-
porary Kamboja as in Borneo, Brahmanism and Buddhism existed
side by side. It is significant that in Burma, too, during the early
centuries of definite Indian contacts, a similar state of affairs is
equally noticeable; no less important is also the fact that, as in
Kamboja, so in Burma, the prevailing cult of Brahmanism was that
of Visnu *, Another early dated inscription of Kamboja (Saka year
586=664 A.D.), the Vat Prey Vier Sanskrit inscription, is also
definitely a Buddhist record, speaking of two bhiksus, Ratnabhanu
and Ratnasirhha, who were born of the same mother (sodarau) *,
That in Kamboja, Buddhism flourished already in the later half of
the fifth century A.D. is also attested to by Chinese texts which
have yielded to M. Pelliot the important information that in 484
A.D, Jayavarman (king of Fou-nan, who is also referred to in the
inscription discovered at Ta Prohm, cited above) sent the Indian
monk Sakya Nagasena to present a memorial in the Chinese Im-
perial court which began with a panegyric of the Emperor as one
of the patrons of Buddhism, in whose empire the Law flourished
more and more 5.

RELATIVE POSITION OF THE DIFFERENT SCHOOLS OF BUDDHISM IN
FURTHER INDIA AND INDONESIA
SARVASTIVADA

It is difficult to ascertain to which school this early Buddhism of
the Hinduised countries of the South-Eastern seas owed its
origin. It is possible that the Hinayana of the Sthaviravada school
may have preceded the Sarvastivada and the Mahayana, but there
is no definite evidence to help us in our assumption, If the language
(Sanskrit) of the inscriptions of the Malay Peninsula, West-Borneo
1 Coedés, B.E.F.E.0., XXXI, pp. 1—12.
2 Coedés. ibid.
% See my Brahmanical Gods. . ., pp. 15—49.
* Bergaigne, Inscriptions ..., pp. 61—62; Chatterji, Indian cultural influence
in Cambodia, p. 55.
5 Chatterji, Indian cultural influence in Cambodia, p. 22.

--- PAGE 27 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

8 INTRODUCTION

and Kamboja is any indication of the school, it may be inferred that
the Buddhism we catch a glimpse of in them is of the Sarvastivida
form. This inference gains strength from what we all know from
Chinese sources about the state of religion in these islands and coun-
tries in the seventh century of the Christian era. When Fa-hien
visited Java (from Ceylon) in about 412 A.D., there were many
Brahmins in the island, and Buddhism was practically of no
importance. In fact, Java was mostly given up to Brahmanism
till it came under the political and cultural domination of the Su-
matran empire of Srivijaya. However, in other islands and countries
of the region, so far as definite available evidence goes, Buddhism
began to assert itself not earlier than the middle of the fifth century,
so that when I-tsing, towards the close of the seventh century wrote
his celebrated Records of the Buddhist Religion, based on extensive
travels in India, Ceylon and the Indian Archipelago, he found that
in the islands of the Southern Sea, consisting of more than ten coun-
tries, the Miilasarvastivada-nikaya had been universally adopted,
exept in Malayu (Sri Bhoja = Srivijaya = Sumatra) where there
were a few who belonged to the Mahayana. And on this point
I-tsing certainly could not mis-state facts, for he himself subscribed
to the school of the Sarvastivada.

Here then is the first problem before us. We know definitely that
the Theravada was prevalent in Burma from about the 5th century.
But is it likely that the Sarvastivada was also known and practised
in Burma in about the time I-tsing speaks of? Does I-tsing include
any part of Burma when he speaks of the countries of the Southern
Sea? Or, else, is there any other independent evidence of the exis-
tence of Sarvastivida Buddhism in Burma? This is one of the first
questions that we have to answer. If it had existed in Lin-i (=
Campa) where the Buddhists generally belonged to the Aryasam-
miti-nikaya, though there were also a few followers of the Sarvas-
tivada-nikaya *, as well as in She-ho-po-ti (= Dvaravati near
Ayuthia in Siam), and I-tsing seems to suggest that it did, there is
all likelihood that Burma, a close neighbour of these two countries,
did not remain untouched by this wave of the Sarvastivada.

+ Takakusu, I-tsing’s Records of the Buddhist Religion.
2 Takakusu, op. cit., p. 12.

--- PAGE 28 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION 9

MAHAYANA

The gradual ascendancy of Srivijaya of Sumatra to the status of
an imperial power, exercising sovereignty over the neighbouring
islands of the Archipelago from the third quarter of the seventh
century, introduces a new culture-complex into the early history
of Indo-China and Indonesia. The earliest inscriptions of this new
power, discovered in Sumatra, and three of them dated in Saka
years 605, 606 and 608 (683, 684 and 686 A.D.), are all written in
what is now known as Old Malay, interspersed with a large num-
ber of Sanskrit words +. One of these, the Talang Tuwo inscription
(684 A.D.) referred to above, has a number of Sanskrit words that
seem to point to the Mahayana form of Buddhism. This is perfectly
in accord with what I-tsing has to say about the Buddhism of
Malayu (= Sri Bhoja = Srivijaya) of almost exactly the same
time *. By the middle of the eighth century, the Sailendra kings of
Srivijaya had already come into the possession not only of the Malay
Peninsula but also of Java and the neighbouring islands. The
earliest dated Sailendra record from the Malay Peninsula hails
from Ligor *. It is written in Sanskrit, and records the erection of
three brick temples dedicated by a Sailendra king to the Sakyamuni
and his two associates, Padmapani and Vajrapani. The inscription
is dated in the Saka year 697 which corresponds to 775 A.D. ¢. The
earliest dated Sailendra inscription from Java is also a Mahayana
document. It is the celebrated Kalasan inscription, dated in the Saka
year 700 (= 778 A.D.), which records the erection of a temple dedi-
cated to the goddess Tara, at the instance of the Sailendra king of
Srivijaya. The temple of Kalasan which stands to this day not very
far from the magnificent Barabudur, is certainly that temple of
Tara referred to in the inscription. Following the Kalasan record
comes another inscription, found at Kélurak and dated in the Saka
year 704 (= 782 A.D.), which refers to the consecration of an image
of the Bodhisattva Mafijusri or Mafijughosa at the instance of the

1 Ceedés, B.E.F.E.0., XXX, pp. 29—8o.

2 Takakusu, op. cit.

® Bijdragen, 83, p. 462, £n.; Krom, Hindoe-Jav. Geschiedenis, 2nd edn.
Pp. 130; Chhabra, op, cit., pp. 20—27; Chatterji and Chakravarti, India and
Java, Greater India Society, Calcutta, pp. 4-—44. 7
4 Chhabra, op. cit., p. 22,

--- PAGE 29 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Bae) INTRODUCTION

guru of a king who is described as the “ornament of the Sailendra
dynasty”. The Nalanda copper-plate of Devapala of Bengal (last
quarter of the gt century) granting some villages for the upkeep
of the monastery built at Nalanda, the celebrated seat of the Ma-
haydnist university, by Balaputradeva of the Sailendra dynasty,
and the Cola inscription (first quarter of the eleventh century) com-
memorating the gift of a village to a Buddhist vihara at Negapatam,
built by another king of the Sailendra dynasty, also reveal the fer-
vent zeal and ardour of the kings of Srivijaya in the cause of Ma-
hayana Buddhism. A Nepalese manuscript of the elventh century
containing miniature paintings of important Mahayana imagesat
well-known centres of Buddhism, has one painting representing
Lokanatha at Srivijayapura in Suvarnapura (Sumatra)?. This
Srivijaya, reputed as a stronghold of Mahayana Buddhism, attracted
the celebrated Bengali Buddhist monk Atiga (980—1053) in the
eleventh century, who went there to consult a learned Buddhist
monk in that distant island *. And it is to the Sailendra dynasty of
Srivijaya that we owe the beautiful series of Mahayanist temples
now represented by the Candi Kalasan, the Candi Pawon and the
Candi Méndut, and perhaps also the magnificent Barabudur.

The zeal of the Sailendras for the cause of the Mahayana did not
leave the neighbouring countries of Indo-China untouched and
uninfluenced. It was probably under the aegis of this dynasty that
the Mahayana spread to the Malay Peninsula which presumably
was embraced within the Srivijaya empire till at least as late as the
eleventh century. In the Cambridge MS. refered to above we have
two miniatures, one inscribed: Kahtahadvipe (Kataha = Kheda)
Valavatiparvate Lokandatha dvddasa parivartta drisa, and another:
Kahtahadvipe Valavatiparvate-Lokandtha. Both of them perhaps
refer to the same temple which presumably was dedicated to the
Mahayana god Lokanatha *. Dr. B. R. Chatterji has shown in his

1 Camb. MS. no. Add. 1643. Suvarnapure Srivijayapure Lokandtha arisas-
thana (fol. 99, v°. 1, p. 105). Compare also in this connection, another mini-
ature inscribed: Yavadvipe Dipankara(h), in Camb. MS. no. Add. 1643, fol. 2,
v’. p. 79; A.S.B. MS. no, A 15, fol. 83 r°., p. 79.

2S. C. Das, Indian Pandits in the Land of Snow.

* Camb. MS. no. Add. 1643, fol. 120 a, v*. 2, p, 102; ibid, fol. 120 b, r°. 2,
Pp. 102,

--- PAGE 30 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION Ir

Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia, that the Sailendras of
Srivijaya, towards the end of the eighth and the beginning of the
ninth centuries, exercised some sort of suzerainty over Kamboja; a
naval raid by Srivijaya on the capital of Kamboja is actually re-
corded, and it is held that the Kamboja king Jayavarman II
(802—869) had been to Java (which is said to have included both
Sumatra and Java) for some time. After his return to his own
country Jayavarman built three capitals in succession: Harihara-
laya, Amarendrapura and Mahendraparvata. Amarendrapura, iden-
tified with Banteai Chmar, has been found to be essentially a Ma-
hayanist city presided over by Avalokite$vara +. M. Finot believed *
that even Angkor Thom which is known to have been a Saiva
city founded by the fervent Saiva Yasovarman began in reality as
a Buddhist city founded by Jayavarman II. Recent discoveries at
the ruins of city have yielded images of the Mahayana god Lokeé-
vara on the gates of the city, and in the temple of Bayon itself an
AvalokiteSvara image has been found. Between Angkor Thom and
Banteai Chmar many vestiges of the Loke$vara cult have been dis-
covered; but all these representations of Mahaydnist divinities
show signs of ruthless mutiliation, evidently by later Sivaites. Dr.
Chatterji suggests that the Mahayana came with Jayavarman II
from Srivijaya *. Howsoever one may doubt‘ if Jayavarman
really returned a Buddhist from Java, or whether Angkor Thom
began as a Buddhist city, there can be no doubt about the exis-
tence of the Mahayana in the capital city of Kamboja in about the
ninth century. The images of Mahayana deities found from amidst
the ruins of the city are positive proofs of that fact. In about the
tenth and eleventh centuries Mahayana Buddhism seems to have
grown more in popularity; for, besides images and inscriptions
testifying to the prevalence of the cult 5, we have at least one refe-
rence to a temple of Tara in Kamboja in the Cambridge MS.

? B.E.F.E.O., XXV, p. 294.

? Etudes Asiatiques, I, pp. 227—256.
. ® Chatterji, op. cit.

* Bagchi, P. C., Ind. Hist. Quart., VI, pp. 106—107.

5 King Rajendravarman (944—968) is said to have consecrated several
Mahayana images. Under his successor, Jayavarman V (968—1oor), Ma-
hayana Buddhism grew still more in importance.

--- PAGE 31 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

12 INTRODUCTION

referred to above. The miniature is inscribed: Kambojadese Ta-
r&(p) 1, and doubtless refers to a temple dedicated to that goddess.

In Campa, too, Mahayana Buddhism flourished already in the
ninth century. King Indravarman II (875, 889 A.D.) was a fervent
Buddhist, and he was probably the builder of the Mahayanist
Buddhist shrines of Dong Duong dedicated to the god LokeSvara.
Towards the end of the eleventh and in the twelfth century, it
gradually grew into importance. Prince Pan became king in ro8r
with the title of Parama Bodhisattva, while one of his successors,
Jaya Indravarman IV (1163—x170), described himself as a learned
scholar of the Mahayana and the Dharmasastras.

It is a significant fact that all the Sanskrit records which testify
to the prevalence of Mahayana Buddhism in Further India and In-
donesia are written no longer in the Pallava-Grantha character which
had been the case till the middle of the eighth century, but in the
North Indian Nagari character, acording to Dr. Chatterji, in the
proto-Bengali character. This, backed by other arguments of his-
torical interrelations between Eastern India and the countries and
islands of the Southern Seas, has led Dr, Chatterji and other scholars
(e.g., Prof. N. J. Krom) to hold that it was from Bengal and the
Magadhan regions that Mahayana Buddhism was introduced into
theislands of the Archipelago and the countries of Further India *.

TANTRAYANA

Of still more significance is the prevalence of the Tantrayana in
Java, Sumatra and Kamboja, a fact now definitely established by
modern researches into the character of Mahayana Buddhism and
Sivaism in these parts of the Indian Orient. Already in a Kamboja
inscription of the ninth century A. D. there is definite evidence of
the teaching of Tantric texts at the court of Jayavarman II (802—
869). In a Kamboja record of the rr} century there is a reference
to the “‘Tantras of the Paramis”; and images of Hevajra, definitely
a Tantric divinity, have been recovered from amidst the ruins of
Angkor Thom *, A number of Kamboja inscriptions refer to several
kings who were initiated into the Great Secret (Vrah Guhya) by their
1 Foucher, Iconographie Bouddhique, II. p.
® Chatterji, op. cit., pp. 253 ff; also the same author’s India and Java, pp. 4—5-
3 A Hevajra image has also been found in Sumatra.

--- PAGE 32 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION 13

Brahmanical gurus; the Saiva records make obvious references to
Tantric doctrines that had crept into Sivaism.

But it was in Java and Sumatra that Tantrayana seems to have
attained greater importance. There Mahayana Buddhism and the
cult of Siva, both deeply imbued with Tantric influence, are to be
seen often blending with one another during this period. The Sang
hyang Kamahayanikan, consisting of Sanskrit verses explained by
an Old Javanese commentary, professes to teach the Mahayana and
the Mantrayana. Sir Charles Eliot thinks that it offers many paral-
lels to Nepalese Tantric literature, which, as we know, consists of
the teachings of the Buddhist monks of Magadha and Bengal during
the Pala period. According to this treatise, Brahma, Visnu and
Siva are emanations of the Dhyani-Buddha Vairocana. The pafica
makaras are also referred to in this strange work. Another Kawi
text, which gives the story of Kuiijarakarna, extols Vairocana as
being Siva and Buddha in one?. Mr. Moens* quotes extracts from
Prapafica’s panegyric Kawi poem, the Nagarakrétagama, which
shows that Krétanagara, the ruler of Singasari, was definitely given
up to Tantric practices. A statue of this king has been found in a
cremation ground which is a certain proof of his profession of
Tantric doctrines; in fact the Nagarakrétdagama states that Krétana-
gara had gone through the ten ceremonies of purification and the
eight processes of initiation and that he carried out with scrupulons
care the five makdras ‘free from all sensualities’. The inscription
engraved on the pedestal of his statue in the robes of a monk
records that after his initiation on a cremation ground, he was
supposed to be identified with Aksobhya. The Tantric inscriptions
of the Sumatran Prince Adityavarman (c. 1343-1378 A.D.), dated
in the Saka years 1269 (= 1347) and 1297 (= 1375), also refer
in unmistakable language to Tantric practices undergone by the
prince and to the evident Tantric character of the Buddhism he
seems to have professed’. It is again Dr. Chatterji’s very able
conclusion that this Tantrayana with its peculiar blending of

2 Chatterji, op. cit. pp. 260—261.
2 I. J. L. Moens, Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal... . Landen Vothenbuende see

LXIV, 1924.
® For details, see, Moens, op. cit; also Chatterji, Indian Cultural Influence .. .,

pp. 258—262; India and Java, pp. 52—55-

--- PAGE 33 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

14 INTRODUCTION

Sivaism with the Mahayana was introduced into Java, Sumatra
and Kamboja from Eastern India, now comprised by the modern
provinces of Bengal and Bihar, and perhaps also from Nepal and
Tibet which were deeply influenced by Pala Bengal and Bihar *.

MAHAYANA BUDDHISM IN BURMA: A PRIMA FACIE CASE

The above rapid survey of the documental background of the
history of Mahayana and Tantrayana in Further India and Indo-
nesia has its obvious significance for an understanding of the
history of Buddhism in Burma during these centuries. We know
that from 1057 A.D., Upper Burma, and within another couple
of centuries, also Lower Burma, became definitely committed to
Theravada Buddhism, and even before that period, the prevailing
form of religion was the same Theravada. But did Burma escape
altogether this wave of the Mahayana and the Tantrayana that
swept the lands farther south and east and largely influenced the
life and culture of the people of the times? Is there not, in Upper
Burma, any trace of the Mahayana or any other later form of
Buddhism that may have crept in before or after the introduction
of Theravada Buddhism into Pagan by Anawrahta in 1057 A.D.?
If traces there are, did the cult or cults become extinct after the
glorious inauguration of the new religion received from the Talaing
country? Is there any trace of Tantric practices or Tantric texts
in Burma? Geographically, Burma lies in the midway between
Campa and Kamboja, both by land and sea, and she holds the
same position, by sea, in relation to Java and Sumatra. It is not
unlikely that ships sailing from the East Indian port of Tamralipti
for the islands and countries beyond the Bay, some of them atleast,
would touch the ports of Burma and even make them their objec-
tive, and drop some of the missionaries along with traders and
adventurers, as they certainly did in Java and Sumatra, Campa
and Kamboja. With Upper Burma, there was moreover the
possibility of a land route through Assam and Manipur; in fact
a live land route really existed as late as the eighteenth century
along which the Manipuris and Burmese led their respective raids
+ For a detailed acccount of the Buddhism of Barabudur in particular and
Java in general, see, Krom, Barabudur, II, the last chapter, on the “Buddhism
of Barabudur”’.

--- PAGE 34 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

INTRODUCTION 15

into Burma and Manipur +. M. Ferrand also recognises the existence
of such a route which passed through the Upper Chindwin Valley
in Upper Burma, till as late as the seventeenth century (c. 1663
A.D.) *, The existence of a land route through Assam and Manipur
is also attested to by Burmese chronicles which refer to certain
immigrations from North India in’ a very early period. One of
these immigrations is said to have been responsible for the foun-
dation of the city and dynasty of Tagoung on the Irrawady *, and
identified generally with Tugma of Ptolemy. A prima jacie case
lies, therefore, in favour of the possible introduction of Mahayanist
and Tantric influences at least in Upper Burma.

If, therefore, the above questions are answered in the affirmative,
further questions will be asked: Which were the circumstances
that led to the introduction of this and similar cults of Buddhism?
What, again, was the relative position of the Theravada and
Mahayana in Burma, and what was the attitude of the people
and the ruling authorities? And, how, finally did the Mahayana
and allied cults influence the Theravada, if they did at all?

PRESENT STATE OF OUR KNOWLEDGE

Before an attempt is made to discuss any of these questions,
we have to take a short and rapid survey of the present state
of our knowledge about the subject of our study.

Buddhist Sanskrit inscriptions written in North-east Indian
Nagari characters, discovered at the ruins of ancient Prome and
belonging to about the sixth and seventh centuries, have been
known for about seven or eight years, and though it has been
recognized that they owe their inspiration to a school of Buddhism
other than the Theravada, no attempt has yet been made to interpret
their significance in the history of Buddhism in Burma. Later
Sanskrit epigraphs, mostly on terracotta votive tablets, in Nagari

1 Compare, for example, the raids of the Manipuris on Thaungdut on the
Chindwin river in 1647 and 1692, on Myedu in Shwebo in 1735 and 1740;
Burmese counter-raids on Manipur in 1755, 1758—'59, and even as late
as 1813,

4 Ralations de voyages et Textes geographiques relatifs a I' Extreme Orient, II,
PP. 556—'57.

* Glass Palace Chronicle, pp. 1—4.

--- PAGE 35 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

16 INTRODUCTION

and proto-Bengali characters, and necovered from the ruins of
Pagan, have been correctly interpreted by M. Duroiselle to have
belonged to the Mahayana tradition. The same scholar also proved
clearly and unmistakably for the first time ?, that the well-known
sect of the Aris of Upper Burma was a Mahay4nist Buddhist sect
grossly addicted to Tantric practices; in this connection he also
brought out the significance of some of the paintings on the walls
of a group of temples of Pagan, notably those of the Paya-thon-zu
and Nandamaiifia. He also suggested that this Tantric character of
Buddhism may have been due to comtemporary religious influences
from Bengal.

Images of gods and goddesses discovered from time to time
have also been identified as belonging to the Mahayana pantheon,
but their significance has been little understood; some of them,
and they constitute a good number, have only lately been recog-
nized as Mahayana divinities*. Some gods of the Mahayana
pantheon have also been incorporated in the Hinayana mythology
of Burma, but this curious fusion still remains enexplained.

The existence of a heterodox sect, the Samanakuttakas, was
also known for a long time; the Sasanavamsa refers to them as a
strong and powerful sect that acquired a footing in Pagan at a
very early period *. But no attempt has yet been made to find out
who these Samanakuttakas were or what was the significance of
the religious tenets and rites they held and practised.

In short, it has been generally recognized that Mahayana
Buddhism and a baser sort of Mahiyanist Tantrism were known
in Upper Burma, but our knowledge does not extend very far in
that direction. Our knowledge of the circumstances that led to
the introduction of these cults are vague and much too general;
nor has any idea been entertained as to the possibility of the
prevalence of any other form of Sanskrit Buddhism. No attempt
has also been made to evaluate the extent of influence which
these different schools of Sanskrit Buddhism gained in Burma,

1 Duroiselle, “The Aris of Burma and Tantrik Buddhism”, in An. R.A.S.I.,
1915—'16, pp. 79—83.

* See my article on ‘The cult of Lokanatha, and other Mahay&na gods in
Burma”, in Buddhistic Studies, Calcutta, 1931, I.

® Sasanavamsa, P.T.S., pp. 15—17.

--- PAGE 36 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Eanes ss s _ eo Eo OOO OE EO EE OL OL ee Eee

INTRODUCTION Wy

or how they reacted on the minds of the people and their religion,
the Theravada. The problem has not also been approached from
the Indian side, and the Indian documents, mostly Tibetan, have
not been thoroughly analysed so as to yield their fullest infor-
mation.

Of course, this has been largely due to the Burmese denial of
the existence of any other school of Buddhism other than the Thera-
vada. Indeed, the Burmese people and their mass of old historical
literature do not seem to know of any other religion than what
they profess to-day and have been doing so for centuries. This
silence of authentic Burmese records as to the prevalence of the
Mahayana or any other form of Buddhism before or after the
Theravada reformation of the eleventh century is apparently
a serious difficulty for the historian to overcome. But, “this
is merely a sectarian endeavour”, as M. Duroiselle rightly points
out, “to make the nation forget that there had once existed at
Pagan a Buddhist sect outside the pale of Sinhalese Buddhism” 1.

THE PROBLEMS STATED
The problems before us can now be stated as follows:

1. What is the earliest form of Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma,
and where did it thrive?

2. What is the significance of Sanskrit inscriptions found in Pagan
and other places in Upper Burma, and of Sanskrit texts referred
to in inscriptions? Is there any evidence of the existence of
Mahfyanist and Tantric texts in Burma? If so, what is their
significance?

3. What is the conclusion to be derived from archaeological finds
that can definitely be labelled as belonging to the Mahayana
and other later schools of Sanskrit Buddhism?

4. Who were the Aris? Who were the Samanakuttakas? And in
what way are they related with the Mahayana or Mahayanist
Tantric cults of Buddhism?

5. What is the testimony of Indian documents regarding the
introduction of the Mahayana and other allied cults into Burma,
and what evident conclusions can be derived from them?

1 Duroiselle, op. cit.

--- PAGE 37 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

18 INTRODUCTION

6. When and whence did these cults of Sanskrit Buddhism penetrate
Burma? And, finally,

7. What was the relative position of the orthodox and heterodox
schools of Buddhsim in Burma? Did the latter influence the
former in any way?

These problems will now be discussed one by one in the fol-
lowing chapters.

--- PAGE 38 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER ONE
SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?)

SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM OLD PROME: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE

In the course of excavations carried out at Kan-wet-khaung-kon
in Old Prome in 1927-'28, M. Duroiselle came upon a very interes-
ting bilingual inscription incised on the three sides of the pedestal
of a Buddha image seated in the dhyana-mudra and vajraparyanka
attitude. The record is composed in beautiful Sanskrit verse,
but is interspersed with what Dr. Blagden has recognized as Pyu
renderings of the Sanskrit text; the script is later Gupta-Brahmi
of Eastern India of about the seventh century; and the image
itself can stylistically be ascribed to the later Gupta tradition
of art, belonging to exactly the same period as is suggested by
the palaeography of the inscription’. The image seems to have
been set up by King Jayacandravarman at the instance of his
religious teacher (guru) with the express purpose of establishing
and enhancing peace, amity and good-will between the king
himself and his younger brother (‘asyamuja) Harivikrama. Jaya-
candra, further it is stated in the record, built two cities (pura-
dvayam) side by side (evidently, one for each) and even in one
day (ekaika divase).

The record is valuable in more then one respect. It supplies us
with a definite starting-point in the political history of ancient
Prome, and yields important information regarding the history of

1 This important record, the first of its kind in Burma, still remains un-
published, though a notice of the find appeared in the An, R.A.SJ. as
early as 1927—’28, pp. 128, 145. The courtesy of Mr. K. N. Dikshit, Deputy
Director-General of Archaeology in India, and of Dr. C. O. Blagden has
enabled me to study the record, a summary of the results of which I am
incorporating here. I take this opportunity of acknowledging with thanks
the kindness of these two scholars,

--- PAGE 39 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

20 SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?)

Buddhism in Lower Burma about the seventh century A.D., besides
contributing substantially to the elucidation of the origin of the
Pyu script. So far as the present study is concerned, the Prome
inscription allows us to arrive at some tentative conclusions:
1) there seems to have existed a certain rivalry between the two
brothers, Jayacandravarman and Harivikrama, and the former
was advised to put an end to it, by providing two cities, one for
each, so as to promote peace and goodwill between the two brothers;
2) Jayacandravarman and Harivikrama both belonged to one and
the same dynasty, not to two different families, as has been generally
supposed, by reason of their having two different name-endings;
3) the royal house to which these two brothers belonged adhered
to Buddhism; and 4) what is most important, the Buddhism
professed by Jayacandravarman belonged to one of the Northern
Schools whose canons are supposed to have been written in Sanskrit.

The second inportant Sanskrit inscription recovered from the
ruins of Hmawza is found on the pedestal of a headless Buddha
image?, and consists of the well-known Buddhist formula ye
dharma hetuprabhava ... etc., which used to be widely inscribed
on terracotta tablets all over Burma, in Sanskrit as well as in Pali.
The script of the record is the same as that of the Prome inscription
noted above, viz., it is North-Eastern Indian Brahmi of about
the seventh century. The style of the image agrees with that of
the Buddha image from Kan-wet-khaung-kon; it represents the late
Gupta tradition of Eastern India.

These two are not the only images belonging to this art tradition
which were recovered from the ruins of Prome. In fact, these ruins
have recently yielded a large number of stone sculptures and
terracotta reliefs, mostly representing Buddhist subjects, and be-
longing to an art-tradition familiar in Magadha during the 6t—8th
centuries. Nor are these epigraphic records the only ones found
at Hmawza. This locality has produced a large number of terracotta .
votive tablets inscribed with the Buddhist formula in late Gupta-
Brahmi characters of about the 7 and 8th centuries. Some of
them have evidently been brought to Burma by pious folowers
of the faith from such Indian centres of Buddhism as Sarnath and

2 An. R.A.S.I., 1928—'29, p. 108, pl. IIb.

--- PAGE 40 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?) 2I

Bodh-gay4; others were certainly moulded and inscribed by local
craftsmen for local requirements, as they bear on them Pyu words
and legends as well.

The original home of these records and images is then North-
Eastern India, i.e., the Magadhan region. It will be remembered
that this region, in the seventh century was a stronghold of the
Sarvastivada-nikaya, as is testified by I-tsing 1, and probably also
by Hiuen Thsang when he speaks of the ,,Mahayanist of the Stha-
vira School” in Magadha*. From this fact we infer that the

2 Takakusu, I-tsing’s Records..., pp. xxii, 8,
2 Watters, Yuan Chwang, II, p, 136, and comments on pp. 138, 198, 234—"35
and 248,

It is uncertain what Hiuen Thsang exactly means by the expression
“Mahiyanist of the Sthavira school”, which involves an apparent contra-
diction. Hiuen Thsang, moreover, is not very definite in his description of
the various schools of Buddhism prevalent in his time. The term ‘Mahayanist’
he uses in a very loose sense; even the Buddhist brethren of Ceylon he
calls “Mahaydnist Sthavira”. The Sthaviravadins or Theravadins were a
Hinay&nist sect, and although the Mahayanists followed the Vinaya of the
Theravadins, the closest relation of the Theravadins lay, of all the Northern
Buddhist sects, with the Sarvastivadins who, like the Theravadins, were
recognized as a Hinayanist sect and who also followed the Vinaya of the
Theravadins. I am therefore disposed to assume that by his phrase, ““Mahaya-
nists of the Sthavira school”, Hiuen Thsang probably referred to those
Buddhists of the Northern School who were recognized as Hinayanists, and
had thus the closest relation with the Sthaviravddins, but whose canonical
language, in common with the Mahaydnists, was Sanskrit, viz., the Sarvasti-
vadins.

My main reason for equating the ‘‘Mahdydnists of the Sthavira School”

* with the Sarvastivadins is this: Hiuen Thsang describes the Buddhist

brethren of the Mahabodhi Vibara as ‘‘Mahay4nists of the Sthavira School”,
and Watters in his note observes that “‘at his time many of the brethren in
the Magadhan monasteries were evidently Mahay4nists in that sense”
(II, p. 138). It is also significant that I-tsing who comes only about 25 years
later states that “in Magadha.... the Sarvastivada-nikaya flourishes the
most” (Takakusu, of. cit., p. 8). This is upheld also by the parallel statements
of the two pilgrims with regard to Kalinga. According to the older pilgrim,
| the brethren of the monasteries of Ka-lang-ka (Kaliiga) were “‘students of
the Mahayanist Sthavira school" (Watters, op. cit., p. 198). According to
I-tsing, the Milasarvastivada-nikiya was also adopted in Kaliiga. And
I-tsing himself being a Sarvdstivadin could not have been mistaken on

this point.

--- PAGE 41 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

22 SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?)

Buddhism represented by the inscribed images of Prome was
that of the Milasarvastivadins.

One may at once ask: why not of the Mahayanists? There is
nothing definitely to refute such a question, but considering the
very paucity of finds, definitely Mahayanist, recovered from Old
Prome, and from the very powerful influence that Hinayana
exercised there from about two centuries earlier, it seems unlikely
that the Mahayana had any such popularity at so early a date
as to warrant our assuming the existence of a Mahayanist family
of kings and the find of a number of Sanskrit inscriptions including
the long record from Kan-wet-khaung-kon.

The main argument for ascribing this Sanskrit Buddhism of
Old Prome to the Sarvastivada is the language. The second point
is the script and the art-tradition of the images which bear these
records, and the third, the locality from where this Buddhism seems
to have travelled to Burma. The Pali epigraphs found at the old
capital of Prome are all written in what is called the Kanada-
Telegu or Kadamba script, and are unmistakably records of
Theravada Buddhism, while the Sanskrit epigraphs, are invariably
in a North-East Indian script, viz., in late Gupta-Brahmi or early
Nagari of Eastern India. We know that the Theravada and the
Sarvastivada differ but little in principle and almost nothing in
practice; both of them belong to the broader Hinayana and follow
the same Vinaya. It is therefore only likely that the Buddhism
represented by these Sanskrit documents of ancient Prome can be
the Sarvastivada. We only suggest it as a probable explanation of
the use of Sanskrit in frankly Buddhist, presumably Hinayanist,
records. This, I think cannot be explained by the fact of the
presence of Brahmins and Brahmanical Hinduism at the capital...
of the old kingdom of Prome }, or even by stray finds of Mahayana jje-*
images there, none of which can be dated, on account of the style, %
before the eighth or ninth century. ;

SIGNIFICANCE OF I-TSING’S EVIDENCE
This assumption of the existence of Sarvastivada in ancient Prome
during the seventh and eighth centuries seem to find striking

1 See, my Brahmanical Gods... ., Calcutta University, 1932.

--- PAGE 42 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?) 23

support from what I-tsing states about the relative position of
the different schools of Buddhism in his time in the islands of
the Southern Sea.

This celebrated Chinese traveller sojourned in India and the
Eastern Archipelago in the last quarter of the seventh century
(671—95), the same period to which the Buddhist Sanskrit inscrip-
tion and images may paleographically and stylistically be assigned.
It is unfortunate that the pilgrim did not visit any of the regions
situated along the sea-coast of Burma or at some distance in the
interior. But he certainly took pains to learn about the state of
the religion in all these countries lying to the east and south of the
Bay *. That he succeeded to a great extent is proved by the following
passage in his Nan hai chi kuei nai ja ch’en (ch, I, f. 3, verso).

At the (eastern) extremity (of the eastern frontier countries, i.e., East
India) there is the so called Great Black Mountain which is, I think, on
the Southern boundary of Tufan (Tibet, according to Takakusu]. This
mountain is said to be on the South-West of Shu-chuan (Ssu Ch’uan)
from which one can reach this mountain after a journey of a month
or so. Southward from this, and, close to the sea-coast there is a country
called Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo (Sriksetra); on the south-east of these is Lang-
chia-shu (Lankdsu); on the east is She-ho-po-ti (Dvaravati); at the
extreme east Lin-i. The inhabitants of all these countries greatly reve-
rence the Three Gems [evidently, the Buddha, Dharma and Samgha].
There are many who hold firmly to the precepts and perform the begging
dhiita which constitutes a custom in these countries *.

Of the countries mentioned in the above passage. Lin-i has been
identified withCampa, She-ho-po-ti with Dvaravati (now Ayuthia
in Siam), Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo with Sriksetra or Old Prome’(the capital
now being represented by the ruins of Hmawza), and Lang-chia-shu
with the kingdom of Chia-mo-lang-chia or Kamalanka of Hiuen
Thsang *. The identifications of Lin-i, She-ho-po-ti (also mentioned
by Hiuen Thsang as To-lo-po-ti) and Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo has also
been mentioned by Hiuen Thsang as situated to the north-east

1 Takakusu, op. cit., p. 8—rI.

2 Takakusu, op. cit., pp. 9—X0; Pelliot, B.E.F.E£.0., 1904, pp. 405—'06;
Chavannes, Religieux Eminents, p. 58, n.

3 For these identifications see, Takakusu, op. cit., pp. li—lii; Phayre, History
of Burma, p. 32; Beal, Buddhist Records of the Western World, II, p. 200,
n. 34; Chavannes, op. cit., and above all, Pelliot, “Deux Itineraires”, in
B.E.F.E.O., 1904.

--- PAGE 43 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

24 SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?)

of Samatata, by the side of a great sea in a valley of mountains.
This orientation of Sriksetra is evidently wrong; for it lies far to
the south-east, not to the north-east of Samatata }.

IDENTIFICATION OF LANG-CHIA-SHU

The identification of the one remaining name, Lang-chia-shu or
Lankasu, has long puzzled scholars. It is generally assumed that
I-tsing’s Lang-chia-shu is the same as Hiuen Thsang’s Chia-mo-
lang-chia or Kamalanka, because Lang-chia-shu is placed by I-tsing
exactly in the same relation to Sriksetra and Dvaravati as Chia-
mo-lang-chia is placed by Hiuen Thsang in relation to the same
kingdoms *. We may therefore assume that they are one and the
same country; nor can there be any objection to their being
identified, as Messers Phayre and Beal do®, with Pegu and the deltaic
region of the Irrawady. But as Lang-chia-shu has been identified
with a considerable number of similar names found in Chinese
and other sources, there exists the possibility of the kingdom being
identified with other regions of Further India. It has been pointed
out that Lang-chia or Lang-chia-shu is mentioned several times
by I-tsing as a port visited by Chinese pilgrims (whose lives he
records) on their way to India 4.

It seems clear that I-tsing’s Lang-chia (-shu) ‘‘was on the west
coast of the Peninsula, on the route somewhere between Annam
and Java; and if so, how can it be both south-east of Sriksetra
and west of Dvaravati which is placed in the basin of the Menam?
I-tsing, when he sent his Lives of the Pilgrims back to China, had
lived about eight years in the seas of the South, mostly at Palem-
bang. Could he have made any mistake about the position of Lang-
chia-shu...? Or, did he know, without troubling to distinguish
them, two kingdoms of the name of Lang-chia(-shu), the one
somewhere in Tennasserim, the other on the east side of the Penin-
1 Luce, J.B.R.S., XIV. II. p. 161.

* “Thence north-east (i.e., from Samatata) beside the great sea in a valley of
hills is the kingdom of Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo; thence to the south-east, in a corner
of the great sea is the kingdom of Chia-mo-lang-chia; thence in the east, is
the kingdom of To-lo-po-ti”. This is from Hiuen Thsang’s Records; compare
it with that of I-tsing quoted above.

2 op. cit,

* One such passage may be found in Chavannes, op. cit., p. 100.

--- PAGE 44 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?) 25

sula south of the isthmus of Kra? Or, is I-tsing here merely echoing
Hiuen Thsang, but substituting for Kamalanka (a name unknown
to him), one that was familar, Lang-chia-shu, without much regard
for geographical accuracy” 1?

Meanwhile, Lang-chia-shu has been taken to be identical with
the kingdom of Lang-ya or Lang-ya-hsun which is referred to in
the Liang shu (ch. 54, f. 3, verso), and also with that of Lang-ya-
hsii mentioned in connection with Ch’ang Chun’s embassy to
Ch’ih-t’u kingdom in 607-’08 A.D. (Pei Shih, ch. 13, f. 3, recto;
Sui shu, chap. 82, f. 1, verso) *. Without going into the details
of these texts which have been ably discussed by Drs. Chavannes,
Schlegel, Pelliot and Mr. Luce 8, it may be said that the position of
these kingdoms, as described in the Chinese texts, seems to be quite
in accordance with that of I-tsing’s Lang-chia-shu, i.e., they are
situated somewhere on the east coast of the Malay Peninsula to the
south of the isthmus of Kra.

Futhermore, Lang-chia-shu has also been identified with Ling
yu-ssii-chia mentioned by Chau-ju-kua (1225)*, as one of the
fifteen dependencies of San-fo-ch’i (Srivijaya = Sumatra = Pa-
lembang), which again, M. Coedés thinks §, is the same as (a) Ilangaso-
gam of Tanjore Tamil inscription of Rajendracola (ror2-1042),
and (b) the Lénkasuka, a dependency of Majapahit, mentioned
in the Kawi poem Ndgarakrétagama (14*» century). M. Pelliot con-
jectures that Lang-chia-shu = Lang-ya-hsiu = Lang-ya-hsii = Ling-
yu-ssii (-chia) = Lénkasuka was one and the same kingdom *
which he identified with Tennasserim. M. Ferrand agrees with him
but further identifies it with Ilangasogam, the Locac of Marco
Polo? (end of the 13% century), and finally with Lang-saka of
of an Arabic manuscript of the 16 century, situated on the east

1 Luce, J.B.R.S., op. cit., pp. 162—'63.

2 Luce, ibid, pp. 164—'65.

* Pelliot, op. cit., B.E.F.E.O., 1903 and 1904; Chavannes, op. cit.; Schlegel
T’oung Pao, IX, p. 193; Luce, op. cit.

4 Chau-ju-kua, ed. by Hirth and Rockhill. This kingdom is also referred to
as Ling-ya-ssii.

5 Cedés, B.E.F.E.O., 1918, no. 6.

S B.E.F.E.O., 1904, pp. 405—407.

7 Yule and Cordier’s edn. I, p. 276.

--- PAGE 45 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

26 SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?)

of the Malay Peninsula +. He therefore fixes the position of the
kingdom on the isthmus of Ligor. But Coedés, while finding in
Lang-chia-shu of I-tsing Lang-ya-hsiu of the Liang-shu and the
Lang-ya- hsii of the Sui shw one and the same place, sees in the
Tlangasogam of Rajendracola’s inscription, the Ling-ya-ssii-chia
of Chau-ju-kua and the Lénkasuka of the Nagarakrétagama quite
a different place *. He identifies the former with Tennasserim
just as M. Pelliot does, and the latter with Gunong Jérai or Kedah
Peak, in the south of the Kedah State.

We have surveyed the various identifications proposed of
I-tsing’s Lang-chia-shu. None of them is free from objections.
M. Pelliot was obviously influenced by the fact that I-tsing located
the kingdom south-east of Sriksetra and west of Dvaravati, a
circumstance which cannot be ignored. M. Ferrand’s arguments for
placing it on the isthmus of Ligor are hardly convincing; his identifi-
cation does neither suit the statement that it was situated south-
east of Sriksetra and west of Dvaravati, nor the fact which I-tsing
elsewhere seems to indicate, according to some, that it was on
the opposite coast of the Peninsula some-where on the route
between Annam and Java. The first identification of M. Coedés where
he agrees with M. Pelliot conforms to the statement of I-tsing about
its location, but the distinction he makes between the two sets
of names is open to objections which have rightly been pointed
out by-Mr. Luce *.

For the present, I am rather disposed to agree with M. Pelliot,
and identify I-tsing’s Lang-chia(-shu) with at least that portion
of the present Tennasserim division which extends from Tavoy
to Tennasserim proper, i.e., the region watered by the Tennasserim
river, which is really to the south-east of Sriksetra and west of
Dvaravati. Personally, I feel inclined to assume that Lang-chia-
shu was practically identical with the entire Tennasserim division
of to-day extending from Thaton to Tennasserim. The position,
then, of the various kingdoms bordering the Southern Sea may
be stated briefly as follows: first, Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo or Sriksetra;

1 J.A., Juit-Aout, 1918, pp. 134—"45, 153—'54-
2 “A translation of the Kedah Annals”, in the J. Ind. Arch, III, p. 11—13.
+ J.B.R.S., XIV, ii, pp. 168—'69.

--- PAGE 46 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?) 27

second, Lang-chia-shu or Chia-mo-lang-chia or Kamalarika to the
south-west of Sriksetra and west of Dvaravati; third, She-ho-po-ti
or To-lo-po-ti (= Dvaravati); fourth, P’an-p’an to the south of
Dvaravati and south-west of Lin-i (Campa), ‘in a corner of the
sea’; fifth, Chen-la or Old Fou-nan (Kamboja), to the east south-
east of P’an-p’an; and lastly, Lin-i to the extreme east extending
as far as the coast. .

As for other references by I-tsing? to Lang-chia-shu, I think,
they can be reconciled in the following way: the boats that carried
the Chinese Buddhist pilgrims kept generally to the coast-line
till they passed Fou-nan (or Chen-la, as it was then called), whence
they did no longer follow the coast-line, but favoured by the
current, crossed the Gulf of Siam, almost diagonally, till they came
to anchor somewhere at the head of the Gulf on the east coast
of the Peninsula, whence they crossed over to Ho-ling (Java),
and thence via Nikobar to Tamralipti. For the rest, we can safely
assume that the kingdom of Lang-chia-shu extended from coast
to coast of the Peninsula.

We are now in a position to use more or less definitely I-tsing’s
data as to the state of Buddhism in the countries in question.
Of the various countries in Further India that practised Buddhism
in his time, one, viz., Sriksetra, is definitely included in Burma;
and the other, Lang-chia-shu, too, we have tentatively indentified
with a region included in the same territory. According to
I-tsing, ‘the inhabitants of both these countries, greatly reveren-
ced the Three Gems, and held firmly to the precepts, and performed
the begging dhita that constituted a custom in these countries’.
In one of the countries, namely, Lang-chia-shu, Buddhist preists
from China used to be received in those days with honour, as will
be evident from the following passage which is quoted on the
authority of Chavannes:

I-lang, Chih-ngan and I-hsiian, three Chinese pilgrims having reached
We-Lei (a small sea-port west of Pakhoi in Canton) sailed on a mer-
chant ship... They passed Fil-nan, and anchored in the country of
Lang-chia-shu; and were treated by the king of that country with ceremo-
ny that is usually accorded to very honoured and distinguished guests *.

1 Chavannes, of. cit., pp. 57, 78, Too.
2 Chavannes, op. cit., p. 57.

--- PAGE 47 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

28 SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?)

Taolin, another Chinese pilgrim, whom we have had occasion
to mention, also visited the same kingdom; he too was welcomed
by the king of the country with the greatest courtesy, and was
treated with utmost care and respect }.

It now remains to be considered to which school this Buddhism
of Sriksetra and Lang-chia-shu really belonged. On this point
I-tsing himself, I think, gives us a very illuminating, and almost
a definite lead. He speaks of the four nikayas or schools of Buddhism
in his time: the Mahasarhghika-nikaya, the Sthavira-nikaya, the
Sammiti-nikaya and the Milasarvastivida-nikaya; “but the
number of votaries in each school is unequal in different places”.
As to the distribution of the different schools, he states:

In Magadha the doctrines of the four nikdyas are generally in practice,
yet the Sarvistivada-nikdya flourishes the most. In Lata and Sindhu, the
names of countries in Western India, the Sammiti-nikaya has the greater
number of followers, and there are some few members of the other three
schools. In the Northern Region all belong to the Sarvastivada-nikaya,
though we sometimes meet with the followers of the Mahasamghika-
nikaya. Towards the South all follow the Sthavira-nikaya though there
exist a few adherents of the other four nikayas. In the Eastern Frontier
Countries, the four nikayas are found side by side... In the Simhala
island all belong to the Arya Sthavira-nikaya, and the Arya Mahdsam-
ghika-nikaya is rejected. In the islands of the Southern Sea, consisting of
more than ten countries, the Mijlasarvdstivdda-nikaya has been almost
universally adopted, though occasionally some have devoted themselves
to the Sammiti-nikdya, and recently a few followers of the other two
schools have also been found. Counting from the west, there is first of
all P’o-lu-shih chou (i.¢., Baros, northwest of Sumatra), and then Mo-
lo-yu chou (probably Jambi, north of Palembang) which is now the
kingdom of Shih-li-fo-shih (Srivijaya), Mo-ho-hsin chou *, Ho-ling chou
(in Java), Ta-ta chou (probably Tan-tan), P’én-p’tn chou (perhaps
modern Pembuan on the southern coast of Borneo), P’o-li chou (Bali),

1 Ibid., p. 100.

® Pelliot finds in it the Mo-ho-hsin kingdom of the T’ai p’ing huan ya chi.
“Tn one of the inscriptions”, says M. Pelliot, ‘‘of the Javanese King Er-
langa... there is mention of a war led by this prince against the king of
Mahasin”’, B.E.F.E.0., 1904, pp. 325, 362. Mr. Takakusu sought to identify
it with Bandjermasin in South Borneo (Records, p. xivll). Mr.Winstedt fol-
lowing Mr. Rouffaer, identified it with Singapur of the 15th and Johor
of the 16th century (St. Br. As. Soc. Jour., no. 86, Nov. 1922, p. 258. For
M. Ferrand’s views, see, J.A., 1919, pp. 298—'g9.

--- PAGE 48 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?) 29

K’u-lun chou +, Fo-shih-pu-lo chou *), A-shan chou (not identified), and
Mo-chia-man chou. There are some more islands which cannot all be
mentioned here, Buddhism is embraced in all these countries, and
mostly the Hinaydna is adopted, except in Mo-lo-yu, where there are
a few who belong to the Mahayana ¢,

THE BUDDHISM OF SHIH-LI-CH’A-TA-LO AND LANG-CHIA-SHU

We have seen above that I-tsing speaks of the definite existence
of Buddhism in Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo, Lang-chia-shu, She-ho-po-ti and
Lin-i, but he does not say to which particular nikaya this Bud-
dhism belonged, though he asserts that they all subscribed to the
Hinayana. Now, we know that all the three nikdyas, the Arya
Sthavira-nikaya, the Arya Sammiti-nikaya and the Arya Milasar-
vastivida-nikaya, are comprised within the Hinayana. To which
of these nikayas, then, of the Hinayana, must we ascribe the
Buddhism of Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo and Lang-chia-shu? We have only
one possible answer to this question, I think; it belonged to the
Milasarvastivada-nikaya. Of the three nikayas, the Sthaviravada
is ruled out as it was practised only in Ceylon and to some extent
in the south of India. The Sammiti-nikaya is also similarly ruled
out, because it had its largest number of followers in the Lata and
Sindhu countries, though in the islands of the Southern Sea, (e.g.,
in Campa) occasionally there were a handful of followers of this
school, In all other realms of the Buddhist world, excepting the
Divine Land or Red province (i.e., China), it was the Milasarvasti-
vada-nikaya that was universally practised. It is thus only in the
logic of facts, considering the wide prevalence of the Sarvastivada

1 According to M. Ferrand, it stands for Gulun or Gurun, mentioned as a
toponym in the Nagarakrétagama; perhaps itis the island of Goron or Goram,
to the south-east of the island of Ceram. (Ferrand, J.A., 1919, pp. 301—'o2).
2 Mr, Takakusu and M. Ferrand sought to identify it with Bhojanagara in
north-east of Java, but the latter points out that, if so, I-tsing is not
observing his arrangement, from west to east.

3 The Nagarakrétagama mentions a Markkaman which Dr. Krom places to
the south of Pasuruan. Ferrand, J.A., 1919, Pp. 302.

4 Takakusu, op. cit., pp. 8—10; also see Luce, J.B.R.S. XIV, ii, 1924. pp.
202—205; the rendering in both are almost the same, but Mr. Luce gives
better identification of place-names.

--- PAGE 49 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

30 SARVASTIVADA IN ANCIENT PROME (?)

in I-tsing’s time 4, that the Buddhism of Shih-li-ch’a-talo and Lang-
chia-shu cannot be other than the Sarvastivada itself. This almost
obvious conclusion is vested with a significance when we bear in
mind I-tsing’s important statement that ‘in the islands of the
Southern Sea (which included Borneo, Sumatra, Java and the
Malaya Peninsula) the Miilasarvastivada-nikaya has been uni-
versally accepted.’

With regard to Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo, there is moreover the evidence of
the inscriptions. I-tsing tells us that the Buddhism of these countries
was the Hinayana. We have two sets of Buddhist epigraphic records
from the ancient city of Prome (= I-tsing’s Shih-li-ch’a-ta-lo);one is
in Pali written in Kadamba or Kanada-Telegu characters and be-
longing to a period not later than the sixth century; the other in
Sanskrit written in later Gupta-Brahmi characters of about the
seventh century. We know that the Pali records are ascribed to the
Theravada; and to what other school of the Hinayana the Sanskrit
records may possibly belong than to the Sarvastivada?

This Sarvastivada of Lower Burma, it has been suggested above,
came from the Magadhan region of North-Eastern India which in
the seventh century was itself one of the strongest centres of the
Milasarvastivada-nikaya.

1 “Tn I-tsing’s time, the Sarvdstivada school flourished most in North India
and in Magadha and Central India (MadhyadeSa), and had also some followers
in the East and West; but was entirely absent in Ceylon, and had very few
adherents in South India. No other school, so far as we can ascertain, ever
flourished so widely as the Sarvdstivada, either before or after the seventh
century, though its adherents in India alone, in Hiuen Thsang’s time, were
not so numerous as those of other schools”. Takakusu, J.R.A.S., 1891, p.
420; also, Records, p. xxii.

--- PAGE 50 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTERTWO
SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS: SANSKRIT BUDDHIST TEXTS
I

SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS FROM UPPER BURMA: THEIR SIGNIFICANCE

’ Every year archaeological excavation in Pagan and at other
ancient sites of Upper Burma brings to light a number of stone
sculptures and terracotta votive tablets with or without figures of
the Buddha and attendants, so that there is now an enormous
number of them in the collection of the Archaeological Survey of
Burma. These objects invariably are inscribed with a short legend
which in nearly every case is the well-known Buddhist formula, ye
dharma hetuprabhava ..., written in mediaeval Nagari, and some-
times in proto-Bengali characters of the gtt—xz3th centuries.
Evidently the great majority of these inscribed tablets were
brought from the East Indian countries of Bihar and Bengal to
Pagan and other important centres of Burma, but some of them
were moulded locally, for, they bear the names of royal and other
personages of Pagan. The language is mostly Sanskrit; some-
times the legends are in Pali or mixed Sanskrit and Pali, but here
we are mainly concerned with those in Sanskrit. Among those
moulded locally and bearing local names, we have a considerable
number, containing the name of the great Pagan king Maharaja
Sri Aniruddhadeva (ie., king Anawrahta). But those tablets are
not at the same time inscribed with the Buddhist creed. To quote
a few examples:

1. Saccakadanapati-M aharaja-Sri-Aniruddhadevena kato ayam.
2. Saddharmo’yam saccadanapati-M aharaja-Sri-Aniruddhadevena...

3. Eso bhagava Maharaja-Sri-Aniruddhadevena kato vimuttattham
sahattheneva ti.

--- PAGE 51 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

32 SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS: SANSKRIT BUDDHIST TEXTS

4. Maydniruddhadevena kytam Sugata-s[aim)ccakam, tena Maitreya
sambodho labheyan nivytto [?] padam ».

Similar legends, but associated with the names of other persons
are inscribed on votive tablets which have also been found among
the ruins of Pagan and other centres in Upper Burma. The following
is an example:

Maya [Sri] Ru [dra]-devena kyta{m] [Suga] ta [sa] [m]ccakam,
tena Maitreyam-amvo[bho] (dhan] labheyan nirvrtan padam *.

It will at once be seen that these legends are written in mixed
Sanskrit and Pali. But quite a large number of them are in pure
Sanskrit, though they contain nothing besides the Buddhist formu-
la. But whatever may be the language, the script is always the
same; it is mediaeval Nagari and proto-Bengali of the period which
we have suggested.

This can lead to one conclusion alone, and it is this: some sort
of Buddhism of the northern variety, with Sanskrit as vehicle
of expression must have been in existence already before, and even
after, the introduction of Therevada Buddhism from Thaton by
Anawrahta in 1057 from which time Sanskrit was gradually super-
seded by Pali *. It has long been recognized that Sanskrit was known
in Pagan as the language of Brahmanical Hinduism and of Brahmin
court-astrologers and priests. In fact, Brahmanical and Sanskritic
elements are abundantly clear in the Mon inscriptions of Burma.
But the use of the same language in what are definitely Buddhist
objects of worship cannot but lead to the conclusion just arrived
at 4, and the use of the Eastern Nagari and proto-Bengali character
lends support to the assumption. These scripts were the only va-
rieties used during the gt*—z3th centuries in the modern provinces
2 An. R.A.S.B., 1915, p. 16; An, R.A.S.I., 1926—'27, p. 161—'62, Votive
tablets with one or other of these and similar legends bearing the name of
Aniruddhadeva have been found in temples and stiipas built by Anawrahta
himself.

2 An. R.A.S.B., 1916, p. 39.

* This is probably reflected in the half-Pali half-Sanskrit language of the
«"... It cam easily be proved that Sanskrit works, Mahdydnist and pro-
bably also Sanskrit Hinayanist and Brahmanical works, were in use at
Pagan before Anorata”’. — Duroiselle, Ep. Birm., Li, p. 7. No proof however
is given, though the fact is now recognized by all.

--- PAGE 52 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS: SANSKRIT BUDDHIST TEXTS 33

of Bengal and Bihar whence most of the tablets must have been
brought to Burma 1; even those that were moulded locally slavishly
imitated India models from Sarnath, Bodh-gaya, Nalanda and other
centres as far east as Tipperah in Eastern Bengal. These two
countries, particularly the ancient Magadha country, were, in
I-tsing’s time, as we have seen, strongholds of the Sarvastivada,
but already from the eighth and ninth centuries onwards, came
to be dominated almost wholly by the Mahayana. Such parallel
transition in the history of Buddhism we have also noticed in
Further India and Indonesia. It is therefore probable that the
Sanskrit Buddhism of Pagan, as evidenced in the writings of the
votive tablets, belonged to the Mahayana. This conclusion is con-
firmed by the writings of Tibetan scholars, notably Taranatha, to
which we shall have occasion to revert.

Sanskrit Buddhism seems to have had a foothold in Pagan for
at least two centuries — some of these tablets can paleographically
be dated about the ninth century — when the Theravada came to
measure strength with it. We shall see that this conclusion, drawn
from a study of the inscriptions, is corroborated not only by Bur-
mese historical tradition as recorded in the chronicles, but also by
literary and archaeological evidence.

Il

SANSKRIT TEXTS OF MAHAYANA AND TANTRAYANA
It has been long recognized that Sanskrit texts, mostly Brah-

1 Some of these tablets are often as late as the 12th and 13th century, but
the later ones, though written in the same Nagari or proto-Bengali characters,
are mostly in Pali, showing no doubt the increasing influence of the Thera-
vida Buddhism tollowing the great religious upheaval after the conquest of
Thaton. With regard to the importance of the tablets bearing legends in
Sanskrit, M. Duroiselle says: ‘‘They point to an active intercourse between
Burma and Northern India .... They coroborate the tradition, duly record-
ed in chronicles, that Singalese Buddhism [meaning probably Theravada
Buddhism] did not exist in Pagan before Anawrahta, or at least, that it was
not yet followed by the majority of the people who professed Mahayanism
and, which is also very probable, a form of Hinaynism the scriptures of
which are written in Sanskrit”. An. R.A.S.B., 1913, p. 17.

2 See, supra, chap. I.

--- PAGE 53 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

34 SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS: SANSKRIT BUDDHIST TEXTS

manical, were known in Burma. These texts related to such secular
subjects as astrology, astronomy, medicine, rhetoric, poetics, law,
political and military science, etc. They also included works on
Brahmanical Tantras and KamaSastras. That a store of Sanskrit
learning existed from very early times jealously guarded by Brah-
manical priests, court-astronomers, and counsellors and minsters of
the realm residing at the court of the Burmese kings was first
pointed out by that pioneer scholar of Burmese antiquities, Mr.
Forchammer!. He wrote as early as 1880, “There exists a real
Sanskrit literature in Burma written on paper like India with
Nagari and Bengali characters. These records are in the hands of
the descendants of Hindu colonists who at different periods, some
even before the spread of Buddhism in Burma, settled in this
country... Burma derserves to be drawn within the circle of
those countries where researches of Sanskrit records ought to be
made” *,

BRAHMANISM AND SANSKRIT LEARNING

Already in the eighties of the last century, Mr. Forchammer col-
lected a number of inscriptions from Pagan, Pinya and Ava,
including one, dated B.E. 804 = 1442 A.D., which commemorates
the bestowal of a monastery with a garden, paddy lands, slaves, and
what is most important, a large collection of texts (numbering 295)
upon the Buddhist Order by the governor of Taungdwin and his
wife ‘, The catalogue of books which is given in the inscription is
extremely interesting as it shows in which subjects the monks were
most interested and what was the general trend of their studies.
As the list has been reproduced more than once °, we need not quote

1 Jardine, Notes on Buddhist Law, IV., Introduction by Forchammer, p. 17;
also, Forchammer, Report of Literary Work, 1879—’80, pp. 6 ff.

® Forchammer, ibid, p. 13.

% Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava. Deciphered from the ink impressions
found among Forchammer’s papers, Rangoon, 1902.

4 Such gifts of books are recorded in many an inscription in Burma, but
the most interesting thing of this inscription is that here we have one solitary
example where a complete list of books is catalogued.

* E.g., Bode, Pali Literature of Burma, pp. 101 ff. Pelliot, ‘“Deux Itineraires’’,
in B.E.F.E.0., 1904, V, p. 183; Ray, History of Buddhism in Burma
(ready for the press), chap. III.

--- PAGE 54 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS: SANSKRIT BUDDHIST TEXTS 35

it again. “We notice here”, Dn. Mabel Bode remarks, ‘‘a number of
titles of Sanskrit works, sometimes greatly disguised in the Burmese
transcription, but still recognisable. These will aid us to form some
notion of the point reached by the Sanskrit scholars in Burma in
the fifteenth century. We are not obliged to believe that each
monastery contained students of Sanskrit, but we have at least
some grounds for supposing that certain famous works on grammar,
prosody, medicine and so forth were treasured in Upper Burma” }.

The inscription proves that even Buddhist monks were interested
in essentially Brahmanical texts on secular subjects; we may assume
that they did study these texts along with their own sacred writings,
as is proved not only by a considerable number of Burmese trans-
lations of several Sanskrit works but also by the honorific epithet
Vedasatthakovida (‘expert in Vedasatthas’”’) which was sometimes
conferred on certain monks. The Sasanavasma* repeatedly refers to
monks who were experts in Vedasatthas which, however, had
nothing to do with Vedic texts, or even with Brahmanical religious
literature. The term ‘‘Vedasattha” was used by Burmese monks to
designate texts on astronomy, astrology, law, polity, medicine,
lexicography, grammar, rhetoric etc. *. We do not know, what
contemporary opinion thought of these Vedasatthakovidas; but
subsequently orthodox opinion, as represented by Pafifiasami, the
author of the Sdsanavamsa, did not hold them in respect; at least
a certain section of the monastic order did not favour this Brahma-
nical learning. In fact, if the Sdsanavamsa is to be believed, the
Order frankly disapproved of them. According to Pafifiasimi, these
Vedasatthakovidas were deficient in the knowledge and practice of
the religion (pariyattipatipattisu manda), and the ancient chroniclers
did not consider them worthy of being reckoned in the therapa-
vampara (theraparamparaya na ganenti porand) 4,

There is a point which is still more important in this catalogue
and which has hitherto escaped the notice of scholars. This list con-
tains at least four works that can be traced to Mahaydnist Sanskrit

1 Bode, op. cit.

? pp. 95, 105—r09,

% Jardine, op. cit., Intro. by Forchammer, p. 17; Forchammer, op. cit., pp.
6 ff; Bode, op. cit., pp. 50—51.

4 Sdsana..., p. 105.

--- PAGE 55 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

36 SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS: SANSKRIT BUDDHIST TEXTS

texts, and at least three, if not five, works that are definitely Tan-
tric. They are the following:
(a.) 277. Nydya-bindu

278. Nydya-bindu-tika

279. Hetu-bindu

280. Hetu-bindu-tika
(b.) 269. Mrtyuvaiicana

270. Mahakdlacakka?

271. Mahakélacakka-tika *
Presumably there are two more texts in the list which are Tantric,
though we cannot at present trace them to their Indian originals.
They are:

194. Ratiamala+ [duplicated in no. 294]

195. Rattamala-tika *

TEXTS ON BUDDHIST LOGIC

The Nyayabindu and Hetubindu as well as the commentaries
belonging to these two works are certainly treatises on Buddhist
logic. The Nydyabindu is the famous treatise on the subject by
Acarya Dharmakirti (c. 635—650), a resident of South India in the
kingdom of Ciidamani (probably Cola or Coda country), and a dis-
ciple of Acarya Dharmapala. There are at least two commentaries
on the Nydyabindu called Nyayabindu-tika, one by Vinitadeva (c.
675) * of Nalanda, and another by Acarya Dharmottara of Kashmir
(c. 850) *. The Sanskrit original of Vinitadeva’s work is lost, but a
Tibetan translation of it exists in the Tangyur, Mdo, She, folios
1—43. The translation was due to the collaboration of the Indian
scholar Jinamitra and his Tibetan colleague Vandeye-éses-sde. The
original of Dharmottara’s work was preserved in the Jaina temple
of Santinatha, Cambay. It is difficult to decide which of these two
texts is the one mentioned in the list. The Hetubindu-fikd® is a

2 It is interesting that these four names are given in their Pali form, whereas
Mrtyuvaficana is in correct Sanskrit form,

2 For Dharmakirti and his works, see, for example, S.C. Vidyabhisana,
Indian Logic; Mediaeval School, pp. 103—118.

3 Ibid., pp. 119—120.

4 Ibid., p. 131.

4 Ibid., p. 120.

t

--- PAGE 56 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS: SANSKRIT BUDDHIST TEXTS 37

detailed commentary on the Hetubindu of Dharmakirti. The Sanskrit
original of this work is lost, but there exists a Tibetan translation
in the Tangyur, Mdo, She, folios 116—205; it was prepared as a
result of the collaboration of Prajiiavarman and Dpal-brtsegsrak-
sita.

Buddhist logic is known to have developed among the brother-
hood of those who owed their allegiance to the Mahayana and its
allied creeds, and the above texts were works of Mahiayanist
scholars. Their inclusion in a list in which Pali works predominate,
is, therefore, significant.

TANTRIC TEXTS

Three other books named above are definitely Tantric. We do
not know of any Tantric Buddhist text called Mrtyuvaficana,
though evidently a text of the name must have existed. Its Tantric
nature follows from the fact that the term “Mgtyuvaficana’’ is
employed to designate a well known theory peculiar to both Brah-
manical and Buddhistic Tantric philosophy. “Mgtyuvaficana” or
,,kalasya vaiicanam” is a Tantric technical term and conveys in-
variably a Tantric meaning *.

Mahdakalacakka or Mahakalacakva and its {aka must also have
been Tantric texts. In the Descriptive Catalogue of the Sanskrit
Manuscripts in the Government Collection, A. S. Bengal, we have
two texts from Nepal catalogued as Laghukdlacakratantraraja-tiké
(no. 66) and Langhukdlacakra-tika (no. 67), otherwise known as
Vimalaprabha *, The two Laghus naturally presuppose the existence
of a Mahakélacakva and a Mahdakélacakva-tika which are exactly
the titles included in our list *. Kalacakra texts are definitely

1 For “hdlasya vaficanam", see Bagchi, Kaulajfiana nirnaya, Calcutta Sans-
krit Series, III, 1934, p. 17, Sloka 28; 45, 18; 46, 26; 65, 17.

2 The two MSS. belong to the reign of king Harivarmadeva of Nepal and
are dated Samvat 39.

3 I have stated above that Mrtyuvaficana cannot at present be definitely
identified; but some Mytyuvaiicana texts are quite well-known in Tibetan
Buddhist literature. The latest concordance of Tibetan Buddhist canons
(A Complete Catalogue of the Tibetan Buddhist Canons: Bhah-hgyur and
Bstan-hgyur; published by the Téhoku Imperial University, Japan, 1934)
contains Tibetan translations of atleast four such texts. They are: 1) Hchi-
bslu-bahi sgrol-mahi sgrub-thabs (Mrtyuvaficanatardsadhana), no. 3495, also

--- PAGE 57 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

38 SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS: SANSKRIT BUDDHIST TEXTS

Tantric; so are Mahakalacakra texts. The relation between Buddhist
and Kalacakra ritual will be evident from the following passage in
the Laghukalacakratantraraja-tika:

Tasmad idénim ratnatrayasaranam gatvd kalacakratantra raje
laukikalokottarasiddhi sadhana margabhisekadhyesnam kurmah

Sakalasattvanam samyaksambuddhattvalabhaya thaiva janmaniti.

These Tantric texts must have been prevalent among certain
sections of the Buddhists of Upper Burma; and when we remember
that the inscription refers to conditions in the fifteenth century
when Theravada Buddhism in Upper Burma had been on the
ascendant for four centuries, the existence of Mahayana and Tantric
texts in a monastic library seems at least to show that at one time
these cults must have gained some popularity in the country.

The reference to Kalacakra texts is endowed with a better signi-
ficance when we find Taranatha, the celebrated Tibetan monk-
scholar recording as follows:

“Although in the countries of the Koki realm [in which the
kingdoms of Pagan and Pegu are included] Vinaya, Abhid-
hamma and Mahayana works are very well-known, the secret
mantras had become very rare with the exception of Kdlacakra,
the three mala sections and a few other”.

The Taungdwin inscription and Taranatha are thus found to agree
which each other; indeed Taranatha’s statement, to which scholarly

translated in Chinese; 2) Hchi bslu-ba sgrol-ma dhar-mohi sgrub-thabs (Mytyu-
vaficana sitatavrasidhana), no. 3496, also translated in Chinese; 3) Hchi bsiu-
bahi man-nag-gi sgrol-mahi sgrub-thabs (MytyuvaticanopadeSatavasddhana), no.
3504, also translated into Chinese; and 4) Hchi-ba bslu-bahi man-iag (Mrtyn-
vaficanopadeSa), no. 1748, also translated into Chinese. The translation from
the Sanskrit original of the last one, into Tibetan, was made by the well-
known Dipatkara Srijfidna with the help of his Tibetan collaborator, Rin-
chen bzan-po.

The two Rattam4ld (Raktam4la) texts cannot also be definitely identified,
though the concordance referred to above mentions such Tantric texts as
Raktayamdaritantraraja (no. 474) and Raktayamdrisddhana (cf. nos. 2010,
2023, 2026, 2031, 2035, 3281, 3375, 3627) and similar others.

But I have some doubts as to the correctness of the two titles as we find
them in the inscription. Can they be Ratnamd@la and Ratnamala-fikd and not
Rattamala and Rattamala-tika? Tantric Ratnamala texts are well-known,
and in the concordance referred to above, we have mention of several
RatnamAla texts (Cf. nos. 389, 2384, 2048, 3901).

--- PAGE 58 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

SANSKRIT INSCRIPTIONS: SANSKRIT BUDDHIST TEXTS 39

scepticism attaches little value, is now confirmed by the actual
existence of Mahayana and Kalacakra texts in Burma 1.

1 Tarandtha’s fuller account of Buddhism in Burma will be dealt with in a
subsequent chapter.

--- PAGE 59 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTERTHREE
GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

We now come to more definite evidences of Mahayana Buddhism
and allied cults in Burma. They are afforded by a considerable
number of images in stone and bronze acquired from the ruins
mainly of Hmawza and Pagan as well as by numerous paintings on
the walls of the temples of Pagan depicting what can be identified
as Mahayana and Mahayanist Tantric divinities. The number of
such finds, it is true, is not as large as it is in Java or Kamboja, or
in any other Indianised countries of South-East Asia, nor are the
finds so representative of the pantheon. In fact, so far as can be
determined at present, we meet with AvalokiteSvara, Maitreya-
Tara, Maiijusri, Lokanatha who is but another form of Avaloki-
teSvara, Hayagriva, Vajrasattva, and one or two other minor deities,
for example, Jambhala, and a small group of Tantric gods and
goddesses mainly recognisable by their significant attitudes in
pairs. Among these Lokanatha seems to have been a very popular
deity, a fact which we notice also in Kamboja, with AvalokiteSvara
and Maitreya closely following. The images are mostly small; and a
few of them had probably been imported, but on most of them the
local stamp is evident. As to the paintings on the walls of temples,
their testimony leaves no doubt; they are the one positive proof of
the existence, in the heart of the Burmese capital, of a considerable
number of Buddhists following the Mahayana and its allied cults.
Even the imported images are significant, for, there would have
been no necessity for their importation if no one wanted them,
What is interesting in this connection is that a very large number
of these sculptures, and almost the whole group of paintings may
stylistically be dated after the introduction of the Theravada by
Anawrahta in 1057 A.D.; consequently the Mahayana and its allied
cults were important factors in the religious life of Pagan even after _

--- PAGE 60 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM 4r

the great Theravada revival which the local chronicles extol.
Burmese chronicles and inscriptions, it is true, ignore its existence;
only in a few instances do they allude to the existence of a heterodox
sect as a disturbing element in the religious life of the people.

AVALOKITESVARA

Single images of Avalokite$vara are very rare in Burma; in fact
only about half-a-dozen definitely identifiable, have been brought
to light. One is preserved in the Ananda Museum, Pagan, and
another has been recovered from the ruins of Hmawza. The former
is a small bronze image standing in a slight tribhariga pose with the
right hand in varada-mudré, and the left holding a lotus-stalk. In
front of the crown we notice the seated figure of Amitabha with his
hands resting on his lap *. The second example, also from Hmawza,
is a well executed bronze which on account of its style may be
ascribed to the 7t* or 84 century A.D. The god is shown standing
in the tribhatiga pose; of his four arms the two on the left are com-
pletely gone; one of the hands on the right was probably in the
abhaya-mudra, the other holds some unrecognisable object. But the
high mitre-like head-dress with the figurine of Amitabha leaves no
doubt as to the identity of the image *. Two more images which may
be identified as two different forms of AvalokiteSvara are also known
from Hmawza. One is a small standing image of bronze very badly
damaged; the portion below the waist is missing; the left fore-arm
and the entire right arm have gone. The image is richly adorned
with ornaments, including a high mukufa*. Any definite identific-
tion mark is absent, and though we can not be certain if it represents
AvalokiteSvara, there is no doubt that here we have an image of a
Bodhisattva. But the six-handed image made of thin gold plate
and recovered from the Yindaik-kwin excavations is definitely
identifiable as one of the various forms of AvalokiteSvara. The god
is seated in Jalitasana, two of his hands are in the vitarka- or vyak-
hyana-mudra, and the remaining ones carry respectively a lotus with
a stalk, a cauri, a trident and an indistinct object which may be a

1 An. R.A.S.B., 1916, p. 3-
2 An, R.A.S.I., 19ox1—'12, pl. LXVIII, fig. 6.
3 Ibid., 1928—'29, p. 105.

--- PAGE 61 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

42 GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

noose or a rosary 1. According to the Sadhanamadla there are as many
as six varieties of the six-handed forms of AvalokiteSvara, viz.,
Khasarpana, Halahala, Harihariharivahanodbhava LokeSvara and
Sukhavati Lokegvara *. But the present image does not exactly
conform to the dhydnas attributed to any of them. Of these six
Khasarpana and Sukhavati Loke§vara are seated in Jalitasana, the
one point in which the present image agrees with the dhyanas.

MAITREYA

Maitreya is the only Bodhisattva worshipped in Burma both by
Hinayanists and Mahayanists; his worship seems to have been very
popular. In Burmese inscriptions he is frequently mentioned as
Metteyya, the Pali form of his name; the supreme wish of the
founder of a pagoda or other religious edifices, and the donors of
lands, or books or other monastic necessities is ‘to behold Metteyya’,
as in the Shwekugyi inscription of king Alaungsithu, or ‘to obtain
salvation in the presence of the Lord Buddha Mettafi’, as in the
inscription of the Lady Acawkrwam, daughter of Trilocandranama
Mahadevi Sumlila, queen of Jayasura. Bodhisattva Maitreya also
figures in a few Pali-Sanskrit inscriptions on votive tablets of king
Anawrahta and other important personages of Pagan. Here is an
example:

Maydaniruddha-devena kytam, tena Maitreya-sambodho
labheyan nivytto [?] padam.

By me, [king] Aniruddhadeva, [this mould of Sugata] has
been made; through this [good deed] may I obtain the path of
Nirvana, when Maitreya is fully enlightened (i.e., when Bodhi-
sattva Maitreya will have become a Buddha).

Maitreya is also mentioned in certain short Talaing inscriptions
written on the walls of some of the temples of Pagan, along with
Lokegvara or Avalokitevara. The image of Maitreya in a monastic
garb, very similar to that of Gautama, is still very common in
Burma.

One or two single images of Maitreya are also known in Burma.
The ruins of Pagan have yielded a small but beautiful bronze image
1 Ibid., 1928—'20, p. 105.

2 7.B.R.S., 1912, Ul, I, p. ror.

--- PAGE 62 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM 43

of Maitreya; it bears a mutilated inscription in Pyu of which the
syllables ba: Metriya : ba can still be read. Ba: in Pyu isan honorific
used with respect to kings and devas, and Metriya is evidently
Maitreya; the inscription must refer to the image on which it is
engraved.

The Mahamuni image of Arakan, a gilt image of huge proportions
possibly represents Maitreya; at least there are two early Burmese
chronicles, the Maharaja Van Tawkri (vol. I, p. 209) and the
Pagan Raja Van Thit (Mss. no. 918 of the Bernard Free Library,
Rangoon), which state that it is an image of Maitreya *.

AVALOKITESVARA AND MAITREYA

In Burma as elsewhere these two Bodhisattvas are often placed
on both sides of the Buddha as his attendants or cauri-bearers. In
fact, examples of stone reliefs with similar representations are so
numerous, both from Hmawza and Pagan, that they can hardly
have exclusively belonged to the Mahayana. In some instances these
reliefs form an integral part of the decoration of temples belonging
to the Theravada. Evidently both AvalokiteSvara and Maitreya
were adopted, no doubt as subordinate deities, in the Theravada
pantheon (if Theravada can be said at all to have a pantheon) of
Burma, in the same manner as Indra and Brahmi of the Brahma-
nical pantheon were in the early Hinayana.

At Hmawza a piece of stone sculpture was found in which a
standing Buddha figure is flanked by two cauri-bearers decked with
elaborate ornaments and each crowned with a mukuta *, These at-
tendants may be safely identified as Maitreya and AvalokiteSvara,
in accordance with local traditions. The excavations at Yathemyo,
a locality in Old Prome, yielded in 1910 a votive tablet * on the
obverse of which “is the figure of the Buddha with an aureoled
head. On hisright is a small sta, and on his left is an object which
looks like a flower. The pose of the Buddha is quite unorthodox
according to Burmese ideas, and appears to be like that of Avalok-
te$vara. The palms of both hands rest on the knees, and the right

1 An. R.A.S.B., 1909, p. 10.
* Ibid., 1910, p. 13.
2 An. R.AS.1., 1927—'28, p. 125. pl. LIV, a.

--- PAGE 63 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

44 GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

foot hangs down... On the proper right of the Buddha is a
legend in Sanskrit... The reverse face is divided into two panels.
On the upper the Buddha is depicted in a sitting attitude, and is
flanked by two Bodhisattvas. All the three figures have aureoled
heads. The upper portion of the central figure is flanked by a stiipa
and a lotus flower supported by its stalk which is apparently held
by each Bodhisattva... On the lower panel is represented the
Buddha in a sitting attitude with both hands outstretched. He is
flanked by two female figures, each carrying a lotus-flower in either
hand. The female on the left side of the Buddha is better dressed
than the one on the right. She wears a long mantle which is divided
in front and exposes a part of the bosom. The two panels are divided
by a line in Sanskrit legend”. As I could not trace the tablet among
the finds of Old Prome, it was impossible to verify the identification
of the Buddha figure on the obverse as Avalokite$vara or of those
two figures flanking the Buddha on the reverse face. Obviously they
are creations of the Northern School of Buddhism, as is proved by
the two Sanskrit legends, not yet published, on the two faces of the
tablet. The two female figures holding lotus stalks are also signifi-
cant.

The Pagan excavations of 1927—’28 yielded a small bronze tablet
representing three figures each of which is seated on a lotus-throne
and is surmounted by a sti#pa. The central figure, that of the Buddha,
is seated cross-legged and is flanked on the two sides by two seated
figures. The one on the right is seated cross-legged with his right
hand in bhiimisparsa-mudra and the left placed on the lap holding
probably an alms bowl. The figure on the left is seated in Jalitasana
with the right hand hanging down over the right knee, and the left
resting on the corresponding knee. The two figures undoubtedly
represent Maitreya and AvalokiteSvara.

In the same year a terracotta votive tablet was also recovered
from the same site representing a similar triad: the Buddha between
Maitreya and AvalokiteSvara +.

Another stone sculpture representing the Buddha flanked by the
same Bodhisattvas was recovered from the Sudaungpyi Monastery,
Twanto *. The Buddha is seated with his right hand in abhaya-mudra
1 An. R.A.S.B., 1915, p. 17.

* Ibid., fn.

--- PAGE 64 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM 45

and his left in varada-mudra. The lotus stamps them definitely as
Bodhisattvas, but it is uncertain whether they are Avalokitesvara
and Maiijuéri flanking the Buddha Dipankara, or AvalokiteSvara
and Maitreya flanking the Buddha Gotama +.

In a niche of the Ananda temple, there is a relief showing a
standing Buddha flanked by two figures with elaborate ornaments
and a mukufa, Such groups are frequent in Burma, and it is tempting
to identify these ornamented and crowned attending figures as
Avalokitegvara and Maitreya. Such terracotta votive tablets and
stone reliefs are in certain instances inscribed with Sanskrit legends
which are invariably in Eastern Nagari script. This also seems to
connect them with Northern Buddhism *.

Pagan has yielded a bronze stele representing the Buddha seated
in bhiimisparsa-mudra on a lotus-throne and flanked by two Bodhi-
sattvas, evidently AvalokiteSvara and Maitreya. Both of them are
seated in lalitasana, a favourite attitude for Bodhisattvas. Both of
these attendants hold a lotus with a long stalk in their left hand,
while the right is in varada-mudra. The pedestal of the throne shows
in relief two gazelles seated face to face on both sides of the dhar-
macakra; the subject thus refers undoubtedly to the famous event
in the Deer Park of Benares. The head of the Buddha is surrounded
by an aureole schematically arranged in a decorative lotus design,
and the round stele is finished with flame designs at the sides, and
with a foliated design at the top. It is significant that the two figures
are ornamented and crowned.

TARA

A few images of Tara are also known from Burma. A small
bronze image of the goddess has been found near Manawgon village
in Myothit township of the Magwe district. She is seated cross-
legged on a lotus throne with her right hand in vavada-mudra and her
left which is in vitarka-mudraholds the stalk of a lotus-flower. She
wears anklets, bracelets, armlets, a necklace, earrings and a crown.
Her hair is arranged in a knot on the back of her head *.

1 For a similar tablet see, An. R.A.S.I., 1927—'28, pl. LV, fig. 2, p. 130.
2 An. R.A.S.B., 1919, P. 31-32.
% Ibid., 1916, p. 3-

--- PAGE 65 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

46 GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

Another image of Tara which is now preserved in the Ananda
Museum, Pagan, can be easily recognized by her attitude 1.

The excavations at Hmawza have also yielded a small terracotta
tablet representing an image of Tara standing in a graceful
tribhanga attitude, the four hands hold indistinct objects. A Sanskrit
line in Nagari script runs around the image *. The style of the tablet
suggests importation from Sarnath or Nalanda with which places
ancient Prome was in intimatecontact during the 8ts—xot® centuries.
On account of the style the tablet may be assizned to the gth
century.

MANJUSRI

At least one image of Mafijugri is known to us. In the Ananda
Museum, Pagan, which is a repository of a good number of important
finds, there is a stone sculpture representing the well-known figure
of the Bodhisattva Mafijusri seated in the vajraparyankasana. His
right hand holds the sword which he sways over his head to dispel
the darkness of ignorance; the left hand which generally holds the
book of knowledge is unfortunately broken. His curly hair finishes
at the top in a pointed sti#a*. The characteristics of the image
conform roughly to the sadhana describing the Arpacana variety of
Mafijusri. As many as eight sa@dhanas in the Sddhanamala are
devoted to the description of this variety. He is always described as
seated in the vajraparyanka attitude, clasping the sword in his
right hand, and applying the Prajfiaparamita book against his chest,
in the left. He is sometimes accompanied by four minor divinities:
KesSini, UpakeSini, Candraprabha and Siryaprabha, and the four
Dhyani-Buddhas: Vairocana, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha and
Amoghasiddhi. The present image is, however, represented single,
and may be compared with an almost identical image in bronze
from Nepal which instead of holding the book in front of the chest,
clasps the stalk of a lotus on which the book is placed 4,

+ An, R.A.S.I., 1927—'28, p. 130, pl. LV. figs. 8a, 8b.
* Ananda Museum Exhibit no. V, 6. 2 ft. 6 in.

* Bhattacharya, Buddhist Iconography, pp. 28—29.

* Ibid, pl. XVI, c.

--- PAGE 66 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM 47

JAMBHALA

Among the minor Mahayana deities Jambhala is in all probability
represented by the remnants of an image recovered from the ruins
of Hmawza. The excavations at the ancient city gate situated near
the village of Kinmungyon yielded fragments of what was once a
large-sized stone image. On account of the protruding abdomen and
the elaborate ornaments, M. Duroiselle rightly identified it as Jam-
bhala 4.

In the same spot were found fragments of terracotta tablets each
of which bears a standing figure crowned with a mukuta and having
four hands with some unrecognisable object in each. It may be
assumed that they represent Bodhisattvas on account of their dress
and ornaments as well as their attitudes. The ruins of Hmawza
yielded in 1926—’27, a large-sized stone sculpture (6’3” x 42" X
16") which may definitely be identified as a Bodhisattva, though on
account of the very damaged condition of the image and the absence
of any distinctive mark, we cannot identify it more definitely. It
wears a mitre-shaped headdress, wristlets and anklets, and is seated
on a throne with the right knee raised and the left leg placed on a
level with the throne, in an attitude resembling réjalila. The left
hand rests on the left knee; the right is missing. The figure seems to
be seated in a niche representing a temple, capped by a foliated arch
which is adorned with flamboyant ornaments. In a panel below the
throne are four guardians, two on each side of an object which
looks like a salver; all are seated with one knee raised, and are
holding in one hand the end of a club placed on the shoulder. Above,
and flanking the Bodhisattva are two small crowned figures, proba-
bly representing royal devotees *.

A fragment of a terracotta votive tablet representing a four-armed
Bodhisattva is also known from Hmawza; but here too the absence
of any significant attribute renders it difficult to identify the image.
The god is seated in Jalita@sana; one of the two left arms is broken off
at the shoulder; the other, half of which has disappeared, rests on
the left knee. The upper right hand is applied to the chest and holds
an non-descript object; the other hangs down at the side. On the

1 An, R.A.S.B.
2 An. R.A.S.I,

» 1925, p. 16.
1926—'27, p. 183.

--- PAGE 67 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

48 GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

right extremity of the pedesral is a kneeling figure in namaskara-
mudra, and above it, a tiny stipa. The connection of the image with
the Northern School of Buddhism is further attested to by a short
Sanskrit epigraph recording the Buddhist formula in Eastern Nagari
script on the face of the pedestal +.

LOKANATHA

The Bodhisattva Lokanatha seems to have been more popular
than other Mahayana deities which are only incidently known and
were once worshipped in Burma; and his images are more numerous
than those of any other god of the same pantheon. Thus, the Ananda
Museum, Pagan, shelters two bronze images of this Bodhisattva
seated on lotus-throne. In each case the right hand is in the varada-
mudra@, and the left gracefully holds the stalk of a lotus-flower. On
the right and left side there rise the stout stalk of lotus-flower in a
delicate curve ending in flowers and foliage. Both figures are richly
ornamented with necklace, waistband, karnapiiras, armlets, wrist-
lets, and anklets which are all elaborately, though not very deli-
cately, moulded. Their heads are crowned with a jafa-mukuta con-
sisting of long locks of curly hair. The iconographic features of these
two images conform exactly to the sddhanas devoted to the Loka-
natha variety of AvalokiteSvara. Of the four sédhanas, three repre-
sent him as single, and prescribe that the Bodhisattva should have
two hands carrying the lotus in the left and exhibiting the varada-
mudra in the right. He may sit in three attitudes according to the
three different sddhanas, the lalita, the paryanka, and ardhapa-
ryanka*,

Besides the three sédhanas in which Lokanatha is represented
alone, there is a fourth which describes him as accompanied by
Tara and Hayagriva as well as by eight other gods, four goddesses
and four dvavapdlas; in fact the sddhana describes the whole mandala
of Lokanatha. The principal figure, white in colour, is described as
two handed, the left holding a lotus and the right exhibiting varada-
mudra. “He sits in the Jalita attitude . . . ., to his right is Tara who
has a peaceful appearance, exhibits the varada-mudra and carries
4 Ibid., p. 182—'83.

2 Bhattacharya, Buddhist Iconography, p. 38—40. These images were up
to now usually identified as Maitreya, which is evidently a mistake.

--- PAGE 68 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

|

GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM 49

the lotus. To the left is Hayagriva who exhibits the act of bowing
and carries the staff in his two hands. There exist representations
of Lokanatha with attendant deities that do not exactly conform
to the prescribed sadhana. Thus, we know at least two miniature
paintings, both from Bengal, representing Lokanatha standing in
the dbhaviga pose with the left hand holding the stalk of a lotus and
the right in vavada-mudr&, One of them which is inscribed Campitala
Lokanatha Samatate arisasthane represents Tara standing to his
right with similar attributes, and Hayagriva to his left. Two vidya-
dharas are represented in the sky on both sides of the head of
Lokanatha *. The other example which is inscribed Campita-Loka-
natha-Bhattaraka represents Tara and Hayagriva both seated in a
graceful attitude, the former with his hands joined in prayer, and
the latter holding the stalk ofa lotus *. We know yet another inscribed
miniature painting of Lokanatha, also from Bengal, in which he is
represented as standing and six-handed. M. Foucher describes it as
follows: ‘Bodhisattva white, standing with six arms; the right
hands (x) in charity [varada-mudra] (2) holding the lotus, (3) the
rosary; the left hands (1) in charity, (2) indistinct object, (3) the
book; four assistants: to the right, (1) a preta kneeling with a large
belly, long beak-shaped mouth, here yellow, a green [female]
Bodhisattva, viz., Tara... On the left (x) red, (2) yellow with
four hands (both Taras)” *. The miniature is inscribed: Harikeladese
$ila-Lokanatha; therefore, there can be no doubt as to its being
identical with Bodhisattva Lokanatha, though it does not, nor do
the two described above, conform to the sadhana of the divinity.
On the left wall of the vestibule of the Kubaukkyi temple,
Myinpagan, Pagan, there is a more than life-size painting of a
divinity which from an iconographical point of view resembles the
god represented on the miniature paintings of Bengal referred to
above. The painting covers almost the entire wall, and the central
position is occupied by a large-sized white-coloured figure, standing

1 Ibid., p. 38—39.
2 Cambridge Univ. MS. No. Add. 1643. For note and illus., see Bhattasali,
Buddhist and Brahmanical Sculptures in the Dacca Museum, pp. 12—13,
pl. I(a); Foucher, Iconographie Bouddhique, I, p. 102, pl. IV, 3.
3 A.S, Bengal MS. no. A 5. For notes and illus., see ibid., p. 14, pl. II (b).
* Foucher, Iconographie Bouddhique, I, pp. 105, 178, 200.

4

--- PAGE 69 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

50 GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

in a graceful abhaviga pose But instead of six, he seems to have ten
hands of which two are clasped as if in prayer to a superior divinity,
in this case probably the Buddha himself who occupied the sanctum
of the temple. Two hands hold long stalks of lotus-flowers and two
others seem to be in vavada-mudra. The poses and attributes of the
remaining hands cannot be made out. On both sides of the main
figure two gods are apparently shown kneeling down with hands
folded; and over the head we notice two three-headed figures, both
seated on a padmdsana and holding lotus stalks in their hands. It
is not unlikely that the two kneeling figures in prayer represent
Tara and Hayagriva, for they here really occupy the position of
subordinate deities. The two figures above possibly represent two
of the eight attendant gods.

Reference to Lokanatha is made in at least two Talaing inscrip-
tions painted on the walls of the Pagan temples. Two frescoes, one
in the Cauk-hpaya-hla at Nyaung-u and another in a pagoda half a
mile east of the Seinnyet Pagodas, are stated in contemporary hand-
writing to be pictures of Lokanatha. The Cauk-hpaya-hla fresco has
evidently been disfigured, but the inscription below is clear. It has
been read by Mr. Luce: purhdlor Lokanat, ‘the Bodhisattva Loka-
natha”. The latter, says Mr. Luce, “‘is a fairly large panel showing
a standing Bodhisattva; it is unfortunately damaged in the centre,
but he seems to be holding a lotus-bud in front of his chest”. Mr.
Luce does not say in which hand the god carries the lotus-bud,
though, I presume, it must be in the left, while the right should.
be in varada-mudra; if this is so, this example from Pagan agrees,
as far as the main figure is concerned, with those of the miniatures
from Bengal referred to above. The legend below the painting reads:
||O|| %y ka purrhalon’ Lonkanat te |/O|| ty Rit lup so [%}a tha (s) an
(so) akluiw ra pa luiw sate lup klwai so sa mliy kliy kywan kha[p
slim le ra pa ciy sate|/. This is the Bodhisattva Lonkanat (Loka-
natha). I, who made this cave-temple, desire to get a (fine?) reward.
May I get sons, grandsons, slaves, a full set of them, also to support
(me)”’. 3.

VAJRASATIVA
An image definitely belonging to Tantric Mahayana cult is

1 J.B.RS., XV, Il, 1924, p. 141, fn. 5.

--- PAGE 70 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM 51

preserved in the Ananda Museum, Pagan. It is a stone sculpture
representing a male and female figure embracing each other. Both
figures are two-handed, the male being seated in the vajraparyan-
kasana. This sculpture evidently represents a Mahayana deity with
his Sakti in the wellknown yab-ywm position. The attributes in their
hands are not clear, but it is permissable to identify the image
tentatively as Vajrasattva who is the sixth Dhydni-Buddha, and is
regarded by the Vajraciryas of Nepal as the priest of the group of
the five Dhydni- Buddhas. When represented in yab-ywm, he is closely
associated with his Sakti in embrace, and is represented as seated in
vajraparyankasana *,

PAYA-THON-ZU AND NANDAMANNA PAINTINGS: TANTRIC GODS AND
GODDESSES

Among archaeological materials which are important in affording
evidence of the existence of the Mahayana in Burma, we have now
dealt with sculptures, bronzes and terracotta tablets, and a few
examples of paintings representing Mahayanist divinities. Inci-
dentally we have mentioned inscriptions which confirm that
evidence.

Astill more fruitful source is provided by a long series of paintings
found on the walls of a group of temples of Pagan. These paintings
represent gods and goddesses that are evidently Tantric in character,
and though it is not yet possible to identify them all with certainty,
their affialition to the Tantric Mahay&nist pantheon is perfectly
clear. It is curious that nearly all these paintings are found on the
walls of temples at Min-nan-thu, a small village to the north-west of
the main city of Pagan. Here we find the remains of a number of
temples and monasteries the walls of which are covered with some
of the best preserved frescoes in Burma, executed to serve the ends
of a particular form of Buddhist worship, a sort of Mahayanist
Tantrism. Other localities in and around the ruined city of Pagan
also abound in temples and monasteries containing such paintings,
but their subject-matter, except in a few instances can hardly be
described as Mahayanist or Tantric. It seems therefore that Min-'
nan-thu was the centre of the Tantric Mahayanist sect which here
had its monasteries and places of worship.

1 Bhattacharyya, op., cit. pp. 6—7, pl. IX, ¢,d,e.

a

ra

ay
Gm
Cs]

--- PAGE 71 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

52 GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

It is not unlikely that after the introduction of Theravada
Buddhism into Pagan, and its subsequent official adoption by the
State and the people, the adherents of these Northern Buddhist
cults were obliged to withdraw from the heart of the city to the
outskirts where in their own temples they continued to practise the
ritual of their particular cult; this would explain why nearly, if
not all, their pictorial relics are found in that one locality.

The most interesting group from our point of view consists of three
small square temples together called the Paya-thon-zu, and the
fourth, a few hundred yards from the Paya-thon-zu, called the
Nandamaififia. The three temples of the Paya-thon-zu each consist
of a vaulted vestibule and vaulted corridors enclosing the four
sides of a solid square structure of brickwork crowned by a sikhara.
The three temples are joined by two narrow vaulted passages leading
from the first to the second, and from the second to the third. On
the walls of the eastern most of the three shrines there is a series
of paintings representing Bodhisattvas embracing their respective
Saktis or consorts. Some of them are shown holding a Sakti in each
arm; their dress is frankly secular, they wear coloured and printed
skirts, elaborate ornaments and richly jewelled crowns, and their
poses and attitudes are erotic and suggestive. Others are represented
as seated with one éakti on one knee, or two, one seated on each
knee. Some of the Bodhisattvas appear to have two hands only,
but in several instances they have four and even six and eight
hands holding different attributes and exhibiting various mudras.
I have not succeeded in tracing the sddhanas which would answer
these Bodhisattvas with their saktis, though the ideological relation
is evident; in fact not one of these representations agrees in all
details with any particular sadhana describing Bodhisattvas ac-
companied by their Saktis.

In one of the panels of the Paya-thon-zu, two exactly similar
Bodhisattvas stand side by side in a slightly marked but graceful
abhariga pose. They wear the usual short skirt, ornaments and the
richly decorated crown. Each of them has eight hands, two of
which are held before the chest in what appears to be dharmacakra-
or vydkhydna-mudra; the remaining three on the left hold attributes
just as the three on the right and these are what seem to be a flower
(it resembles neither the lotus nor the nagakeSara), the leaves of a

--- PAGE 72 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM 53

palm-leaf book, and third, an indistinct object which may either
bea shield or a rosary. Two figures kneel on two sides in the attitude
of adoration. The whole panel is very interesting from an icono-
graphical point of view, but our present knowledge of the pantheon
of Northern Buddhism does not allow us to identify them. In
this temple also, there is one figure with three faces, seated in
paryankasana and provided with four hands holding attributes that
are hardly recognisable. This figure may tentatively be identified
with a variety of Maitreya, or with either of the two varieties of
Mafijusri, Namasangiti and Mafijukumara 1.

The central temple of the Paya-thon-zu group also has on its
walls a fresco representing a seated Bodhisattva embracing two
Saktis on two sides. It is a striking feature of these frescoes which
was first pointed out by M. Duroiselle, that, whereas a few of these
Bodhisattvas have unmistakable Burmese features, the Sakis they
embrace are unmistakably Indian *.

In the same group of temples there are several representations of
a two-handed divinity standing in graceful tribhasga attitude with
one of his hands, either the right or the left (in accordance with his
position to the right or left of the main image in the niche), in
vyakhyana-mudra, and the other clasping the stalk of a na@gakeSara(?)
creeper. He is decked with elaborate ornaments from head to foot,
and is dressed in a beautiful garment that flows from his loins to
his ankles *. That he represents a Bodhisattva is certain, but one
can hardly be more sure about his identification.

On one of the walls of the eastern-most temple of the Paya-thon-
zu triad, to the right of a large niche, now empty, there is a vertical
panel containing three separate rectangles representing different
subjects 4. The topmost and the lowermost rectangles each represent
a Bodhisattva standing in a tribhaviga pose, with two Saktis clinging
on two sides, an oft-repeated scene in the Paya-thon-zu and Nanda-
maififia Temples. The rectangle at the middle represents however a
very interesting divinity standing in a slight abhanga attitude.

1 Bhattacharrya, op. cit., pls. XIIIb, XIVa, XVIc.

2 An. R.A.S.B., 1916, p. 12—13.

3 Cf. Arch, Sur, Burma, photo-negative no. 60/3207 (1929—"30), 31/2234
(1921—"22).

4 Cf. Arch. Sur. Burma, photo-negative no. 31/2234 (1921—'22).

--- PAGE 73 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

54 GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

Besides his usual wealth of princely decorations and garments, he
is endowed with ten hands, two of which are clasped in adoration
in front of his chest, evidently in respect to the deity in the sanctum.
The attributes in his eight other hands cannot unfortunately be
recognized. Two figures, presumably females, squat with folded
hands, on his two sides. No known sadhana of Buddhist iconography
seem to agree exactly to its description, though it is evident that
the deity must belong to the rich pantheon of the Vajrayana. This
is all the more significant, for it shows how little we know of the
numerous gods and goddesses of this pantheon from written texts.

The paintings on the walls of the Nandamaiifia represent similar
subjects, and are in some instances characterised by a much more
sensual attitude. A large panel is exclusively devoted to the repre-
sentation of a group of women in most voluptuous poses. An in-
scription set up within the precincts of the Nandamafifia itself
throws welcome light on the debased kind of Buddhism which these
paintings serve to illustrate. Its purport is that the Nandamafifia
temple was built at the instance of King Narapatisithu, a devoted
Theravadi and the founder of the celebrated Shwekugyi and the
Thatbififiyu Temples, in 610 Sakkaraja (= 1248 A.D.), and it also
refers to the monks who lived close by ina monastery, the remains of
which can still be seen not very far from the temple itself. It further
states that out of the revenues of the land dedicated to the temple
the monks residing in the monastery were daily provided, morning
and evening, with meat, rice, betel and a jar of spirits. Taking food
in the evening, partaking of meat, and drinking spirit were par-
ticularly abhorrent to the Theravadis which these monks certainly
were not. Such practices of daily life seem rather to connect them
with one of those later forms of Northern Buddhism which were
largely influenced by Tantric rituals and practices, and the paintings
seem to confirm that assumption. But what is even more curious is
the fact recorded in the same inscription that Narapatisithu asked
one of his ministers to build this temple and the monastery attached
to it, and that he sent Shin Arahan, the Theravadi primate of the
realm and the man who had brought the Theravada to Pagan, to
Tennasserim to bring a sacred relic to be deposited in the temple
which evidently was associated with a Tantric cult of the Mahaya-
nists. This is an unique example of the spirit of toleration that

--- PAGE 74 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM 55

existed at that time in the great metropolis of Burma, or shall we
say, of the ecclectism of the Buddhism of Pagan which, though
decidedly Theravada, was largely moulded and reshaped not only
by the primitive naga and spirit worship but also by Visnuite Brah-
manism, It is not surprising that this new religion in trying to
absorb the already existing Mahayanist and Tantric cults would
attempt compromises here and there, and in that process be itself
influenced by them. But to this aspect of the problem we shall
turn at the end of our study. In any case, these temples and the
paintings on their walls, but most of all, the inscription of the year
1248 refered to above, prove not only that the Theravada flourished
in Pagan side by side with these Mahayanist and Tantric cults, but
also that the latter had considerable hold on the people and the
court. The support and patronage of Narapatisithu and the primate
Shin Arahan, both devout Theravadis, are significant.

We have already stressed the fact that the Nandamaifiiia is icono-
graphically much more interesting than the Paya-thon-zu. The
divinities pictured on its rich walls are much more erotic, and
Tantric in character, and represents a greater variety. Besides the
paintings described above, we have a number of representations of
a divinity standing alone (without accompanied by his Saktis),
richly jewelled, with one of his hands in vyakhyana- or abhaya-
muda, and the other clasping the stalk of a flower-creeper *. This
divinity, evidently a Bodhisattva, is not definitely identifiable. But
there is one representation of a god in one of the vertical panels
which seem to lend itself to a more or less definite identification.
The panel is vertical and is divided into three rectangles; in the
topmost one, the Buddha in vyakhyana-mudra is represented as
seated in vajraparyankdsana discoursing to his two disciples seated
on two sides. The middle rectangle presumably represents the well-
known episode of the subjection of the Nalagiri elephant. The lower-
most rectangle shows a divinity seated in what resembles the
ardhaparyanka or maharajalila attitude with his left hand in the
vitarka-mudra, and the right hand raised upwards holding the stalk
of a flower-creeper. A winged kinnara with folded hands seems to

2 Cf. Arch, Sur. Burma, photo-negative no. 26/2229 (1921—'22); 23/2226
(1921—’22).

--- PAGE 75 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

56 GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

wait upon him to the right. No sadhana seems to agree with its
description, but one may tentatively identify it with either Mahara-
jalila Mafijusri or Lokanatha 4. There is almost exactly a similar
representation in a corresponding panel on the other side of the
particular niche of the temple *.

THANBULA AND ABEYADANA TEMPLES: AVALOKITESVARA: MANJUSRi:
LOKANATHA

Besides the Paya-thon-zu and the Nandamafiaa which were evi-
dently favourite resorts of the followers of the Mahayana and other
allied cults, there still stand in the midst of the ruins of Pagan
several other temples which bear testimony to the once prevailing
Mahayana and its allied cults. I have already mentioned one or
two such temples, but there are others still; notable among them
are the Thanbula and the Abeyadana. On a wall of the eastern
porch of the Thanbula Temple *, Minnanthu, there is a painting
representing a divinity seated cross-legged in an abhaviga position *.
He is richly decked with ornaments and is crowned with a conical
mukuta with flamboyant designs. His right hand is in vitarka~mudra
and the left is in what may be called varada-mudra. Floral creepers
flourish in delightful curves on both his sides. The representation
does not easily lend itself to an identification, though one readily
recognizes here a Bodhisattva, perhaps Avalokitesvara. On a wall
of the temple at the south-east corner of a field near the Somingyi
Pagoda, Myinpagan, there is a representation of a standing Bodhi-
sattva, almost exactly similar in decorative and iconographical
details to those we have already noticed on the walls of the Paya-
thon-zu and the Nandamaiifia°. Artistically a better representation
of the same divinity can be seen in a painting on a wall of another
little known temple ® in Pagan. The attitudes and mudras of the

1 Ibid., no. 24/2227 (1921—'22).

® Ibid., no. 82/3229 (1929—'30).

3 Said to have been built in 1255 A.D., by Thanbula, queen of Uzana, king
of Pagan. Amended List of Ancient Monuments in Burma, 1921, p. 28.

* Arch, Sur. Burma, photo-negative no. 19/3286 (1930—'31).

5 Tbid., no. 63/3480 (1931—'32).

* Unfortunately, I could not get the name of this temple; it does not seem
to have been recorded in the list of the Archaeological Survey of Burma.

--- PAGE 76 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM 57

hands slightly differ in the present case 1; but it may not be very
wrong to identify all similar paintings as representing Avaloki-
teSvara who seems to have been the most popular Bodhisattva in
Burma. It is not also unlikely that they may also be identified with
either Maitreya or Mafijusri. The positions they occupy on the walls -
have some significance in this respect. Each wall is generally provi-
ded with a deep niche at the centre which must have once sheltered
a stone or brick image of the Buddha; in fact, in several instances
these images can still be seen occupying their respective places. On
the outer wall of the two sides of the niche are to be seen two large
paintings representing, as described above, two standing divinities
in almost identical attitudes, with similar dress and ornaments.
That one of them is AvalokiteSvara, and the other Maitreya or
Mafijusri, there can be no doubt; but it is not easy to see which
one represents AvalokiteSvara and which one Maitreya or Mafijusri.
Their is nothing in their attitudes or in their attributes to dist-
inguish them.

A most interesting temple is the Abeyadana *, at Myinpagan. In
the niches disposed around the walls of the corridor of this
temple one can still see some beautiful stone images of the Buddha

seated in conventional mudras; on its walls there are remarkable
examples of paintings, some of the very best we find in Burma,
representing Buddhist subjects in which gods and goddesses of
Northern Buddhism predominate, and what is no less interesting,
also depicting some Brahmanical deities among whom at least two
are recognisable at once*, Built by Kyanzittha, son of king Anaw-

2 Arch. Sur. Burma, photo-negative no. 147/3414 (1930—’31).

2 Said to have been built by king Kyanzittha (c. 1084 A.D.), son of Anaw-
rahta.

3 As these materials were not available to me when my Brahmanical Gods
in Burma was published (1932), I take this opportunity to identify these
two paintings here. One of them (Arch. Sur. Burma, photo-negative no.
6/3423 of 1931—’32) represents Siva riding on his bull Nandi. In his two
hands he carries the damaru and the trifila; round his neck hangs the snake-
garland, and from his jafa-mukufa flows the sacred stream of the Gaga.
The other (Arch. Sur, Burma, photo-negative no. 40/3307 of 1930—’31)
represents the goddess Yamuna riding her favourite v@hana, the tortoise,
that holds in its mouth what seems to be a full-blown lotus-flower. The
goddess is endowed with four hands of which two are held together in front

--- PAGE 77 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

58 GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

rahta who introduced Theravada Buddhism in Upper Burma, and
himself the builder of the sublime Ananda, that abiding monument
of the Theravada faith, the Abeyadana is perhaps one significant
example which represents the eclectic nature of the religious «ife of
contemporary Pagan, combining in one not only Brahmanism and
Buddhism but also the two apparently conflicting creeds of the
latter faith. This temple along with a number of others, definitely
prove that the Mahayana which must have preceded the Theravada,
at least in Pagan, was still a living religion with a considerable
section of the population, though the latter came to be established
as the official religion of the State ?.

of her chest with palms exposed, and two others hold non-descript objects.
A standing figure, presumably a female, and provided with a halo, seems to
follow her. So far as I know, this is the only representation of this goddess
from Burma.

1 Itis interesting to note that the paintings of the Abeyadana (11th century)
and similar other temples, not unoften containing representations of gods
and goddesses of Northern Buddhism, e.g. the Kubyaukkyi (11 cent.) of
Myinpagan, the Nagayon (11th cent.), the Patothamya (11th cent.), are
executed in a style which is more akin to the classical Indian style represented
in the almost contemporary manuscript paintings of Bengal; while the
paintings of the Paya-thon-zu (13th cent.), the Nandamafifia (13th cent.), the
Thanbula (13th cent.) etc. seem to owe their affiliation to the somewhat
later tradition of Nepalese paintings as well as that of Jain manuscript
paintings of Western India. It is equally interesting that a few of the former
group of temples contain Talaing writings, a fact to which my attention
was drawn by Prof. G. H. Luce of the University of Rangoon. A further
comparison of the ground plans and other architectural features shows that,
as in their paintings, so in their architectural style, they fall into two
different groups, the former (which is also earlier in date, majority of them
belonging to the 11 century) I would prefer to designate as the ‘‘Indo-
Burmese” type, and the latter (which is also later in date) as the “Burmese
type’ of which one of the earliest specimens is the Shwekugyi (12th cent.),
and one of the best the Thatbififiyu (12th cent.), The Ananda (11th cent.)
perhaps represents the stage of transition. Some models of the “Indo-Bur-
mese”'type can be seen represented on some manuscript paintings from
Bengal and on some stone reliefs from the same place. The Shwezigon, the
Shwesandaw, the Mingalazedi etc. belong entirely to a different class which,
in the long run, proved to be the most popular architectural form in Burma.
To my opinion, the Shwezigon type belongs to the same tradition of architec-
ture as does the Barabudur of Java. But this is not the place to go into
details about the architecture of Pagan which I reserve for a next mono-
graph now in course of preparation; here I have taken the opportunity to

--- PAGE 78 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM 59

Coming back to the paintings themselves from the Abeyadana,
we find one interesting horizontal panel on the east wall of the east
corridor of the temple representing a divinity seated in Jalitasana
with a graceful dbhaiga, His right hand is shown in varada-
mudra and the left in what resembles the vydkhydna attitude. A
full-blown lotus-flower rises in a delightful curve at the left, and
two female attendants kneel in adoration on two sides +. The dsana,
the mudra and the lotus-flower seem to indicate that the god
represented is Lokanatha who, we have already seen, was a popular
Bodhisattva in Burma.

In the same temple, on the western portion of the south-wall
there is an exquisite drawing consisting of two empty niches, one
above the other*. The upper niche is flanked by two standing
figures who are evidently attendant deities or simply dua@rapdlas
attending on the divinity, presumably the Buddha, supposed to
occupy the niche. The figure on the right holds in his right hand a
round wheel, and in his left a pointed sword raised up to the corres-
ponding shoulder; that on the left holds a spear in his right hand
and a round wheel in his left. Both are crowned and elegantly
decked with ornaments, and on both sides of each rise stalks with-
half-blown and full-blown lotuses. It is difficult to offer any identi-
fication for these two persons, but if they are attendant deities, they
certainly represent Bodhisattvas.

Intervening the two niches there is a horizontal panel which
depicts six different scenes, short but dramatic. I can offer no
identification of any of them, but one of them, the third from the
right, representing an ascetic seated in vajraparyankasana, with a
garland of skulls round his neck and carrying a female figure on
his shoulders, seem to represent a Tantric ritual.

make known a logical classification of the bewildering monuments of Pagan,
I record with thanks the suggestions I received from Prof. G. H. Luce in
this connection.

2 Arch. Sur. Burma, photo-negative no. 32/3299 of 1930—'31.

2 Arch. Sur. Burma, photo-negative no. 9/3426 of 1931—'32. This is one
of the best preserved drawings from Pagan. No attempt at any study of
these drawings and paintings of Pagan from their artistic stand-point and
as to their place in the history of Indian painting is made here. For such
a study, readers are referred to my Indo-Burmese Art. Part I, Sculptures,
Bronzes and Paintings (in press).

--- PAGE 79 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

60 GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM

The niche at the bottom is also guarded by two divinities, seated
in what resembles the ardhaparyankasana. Both are crowned and
wear usual ornaments. The one on the right carries a shield in
his right hand and a spear in his left; the other holds the cakra in
his right hand and the sword in his left. But what is most interesting,
both of them appear to wear what seem to be skin boots. From his
attributes (e.g., the cakva and the sword) and the boots, the figure
on the left may perhaps be identified as that of Siirya, but in that
case the seated position is somewhat unusual. The figure on the
right does not seem to reveal its identity, if it is not taken as Aruna,
the charioteer of Siirya; but, it is safer to know them at present
simply as attendant deities.

Just above these two figures there are depicted two divinities
seated in Jalitasana on two full-blown lotus-seats and each flanked
by two kneeling worshippers. The right hand of the figure on the
right is in varada-mudrd and the left clasps the stalk of a lotus-flower
that blossoms just above the corresponding shoulders. The hands
of the figure on the left are in exactly similar positions, but on the
full-blown lotus-flower we can easily notice the Prajfiaparamita
book. The two figures perhaps respectively represent Avalokitesvara
and Majijusri.

On the east wall of the east corridor of the same temple is
represented a god seated in ardhaparyatkdsana with his right
hand holding a rosary (aksamdla) and his left clasping the rod of
a long trident resting diagonally against his body *. The figure does
lend itself to an identification, not but it certainly belongs to the
varied pantheon of the Vajrayana.

HAYAGRIVA

On the same wall there is a painting depicting another interesting
god of the Vajrayana pantheon. He is represented as seated in
ardhyaparyankasana, and carrying a vajra in his left hand raised
above the corresponding shoulder. The attribute in his right hand
cannot unfortunately be determined. The god is painted in red
colour, and what is still more significant is that over his crown

1 Arch. Sur. Burma, photo-negative no. 30/3297 of 1930—'31.
2 Ibid., photo-negative no. 31/3298 of 1930—’3I.

--- PAGE 80 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

GODS AND GODDESSES OF NORTHERN BUDDHISM 61

peeps out the head of a horse *. The painting can at once be identi-
fied as depicting Saptasatika Hayagriva. The sadhana lays down
that Hayagriva when depicted as an independent deity has red
colour, carries the vajra and the dayda in his two hands and shows
the horse’s head over his crown}. The painting agrees wonderfully
well with the sadhana, and we can assume that the right hand of
the god carries the danda. So far as I know, this is the first image
of Hayagriva that has up to now been recognized in Burma.

1 Bhattacharyya, Buddhist Iconography, pp. 53—54-

--- PAGE 81 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER FOUR

THE ARI SECT AND THE SAMANAKUTTAKAS : TANTRIC
BUDDHISM IN BURMA

WHO WERE THE ARIS?

Thewall-paintings ofthe Paya-thon-zu'and NandamaiifiaTemples,
as we have seen, and the evidence of the Tibetan monk scholar Tara-
natha (as will be shown in a subsequent chapter) point to the existence
ofa Tantric Buddhist sect in Pagan, and perhaps also in other locali-
tiesin Burma. This sect was probably that of the Aris (who, in my
opinion, were the same as the Samanakuttakas, referred to in the
Sdsanavamsa) who, according to Burmese tradition, had their
principal centre on the Popa hill at Thamahti near Pagan where
their cult persisted, inspite of repeated royal persecutions, till
probably as late as the closing decades of theeighteenth century.
Much has been written about the Aris and their cult; quite a number
of scholars have attempted to throw light on the history of this
mysterious sect, and whatever has been recorded of them in tra-
ditions, local chronicles and inscriptions has been discussed at
length 1; their identity has long puzzled scholars until M. Duroiselle
gave a most comprehensive account ® discussing all evidences at
his disposal, and identifying the Aris as a sect affiliated to the
Northern School of Buddhism and fully saturated with Tantrism.

? Phayre, History of Burma, p. 3; Hiber, B.E.F.E.O., 1909, p. 584; Finot,
J.A. 1912, p. 121; Taw Sein Ko, Burmese Sketches; Duroiselle, J.B.R.S.,
ort, I, i, p. 126; Harvey, History of Burma, pp. 17—18, 60, 95, 313; but
the locus classicus is certainly Duroiselle, An. R.A.S.I., 1915—16, pp. 79—93
(‘The Aris of Burma and Tantric Buddhism”). Since Duroiselle wrote, more
about the Aris have become known, as a result of our better knowledge of
the local chronicles, e.g. the Hmannan, and of the wall-paintings of Pagan.
This chapter attempts a more uptodate account based on all the facts so
far known.

2 OP. cit,

--- PAGE 82 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

THE ARI SECT AND THE SAMANAKUTTAKAS 63

All evidences tend to support M. Duroiselle’s conclusions. Here we
wish only to present the subject in a fuller and more correct his-
torical perspective than lay within the scope of M. Duroiselle’s
study, and stress those points which lend support to his conclusions.

Among the sources relating to the Aris and their cult, the infor-
mation supplied in the Hmannan is the most detailed and interesting:
it will be necessary to give a full account so far as possible of the
source materials in this connection before attempting any interpre-
tation. No apology will be needed if we proceed to quote entire
extracts from the Hmannan dealing with the Aris and their cult.
This will, we shall presently see, help us in explaining and co-
relating other references to the sect from different sources, including
such as do not mention them by name.

EXTRACTS FROM THE HMANNAN

(a) Now the farmer became king [Nyaung Sawrahan, 931—964 A.D.)
and was great in glory and power. At his cucumber plantation he made
a large and pleasant garden, and he wrought and kept a great image
of Naga. He thought it good thus to make and worship the image of
N&ga#, because Naga was nobler than men and his power greater.
Moreover, he consulted the heretical ® Ari monks regarding the Zigon

1 “Ari is the phonetic transcription of the name; it is written Arafi; following
the written form, Hiiber (B.E.F.E.O., 1909, p. 584) derives this word from
Arafifiaka, basing himself on the Thai inscription of Rame Khombeng at
Sukhotaya, in which the word Arafifiaka occurs, and which he took to be
the same asthe Burmese’ Ari’ in its full form. But M. Finot (0p. cif.) has shown
that Arafifiaka is a proper name, that of a monastery in a forest. Pali words
ending in fifi(a) are never abbreviated in Burmese, but always retain their
pure form. Moreover, the Aris were not ascetics living in forests, like the
Buddhist and Brahmanical Arafifiakas, but lived together in large monas-
teries in, or on the skirts of, villages. The word Ari comes from Arya, (noble);
Pali final y(a) becoming in Burmese regularly fi, which is always pronounced
i”, Duroiselle, op. cit., p. 92, fn. 2.

2 Here one can see how the pre-Theravada Buddhism of Pagan was perme-
ated by Naga worship, which continued to have its share of influence even
after the Theravada reformation.

3 Note that these adjectives are used by the author or authors of the Hman-
nan who were admittedly Theravadis of a much later date. Note also the
attitude, in these extracts, how the later and more orthodox Buddhists held
this earlier heterodox sect in disrespect, if not in positive contempt, and
how they loved to narrate the story of the attempts made to root them out.

--- PAGE 83 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

64 THE ARI SECT AND THE SAMANAKUTTAKAS

pagodas in the Kingdom of Yathepyi and Thaton, and he built five
pagodas: Pahtogyi, Pahtonge, Pathothamya, Thinlinpahto and Seitto-
pahto. In them he set up what were neither spirit images nor images of
the Lord, and worshipped them with offerings of rice, curry and fermented
drinks, night and morning. Since the root beginning made by Ashin
Punna the elder in the life time of the Lord Omniscient, throughout the
reigns of the dynasties of the Burmese kingdoms of Tagaung, Thara-
kittara, Arimaddana and Thiripyissaya, there flourished the paramattha
order, the samuti order, the sacred writings, their study and intuition.
But afterwards the religion gradually grew weak from the reign of hing
Thaittaing, founder of the city of Tampavati, and because there was no
pitaka or sacred writ, only the doctrines of the Ari lords at Thamahti were
generally adopted, and in the reign of king Sawrahan the hing and the whole
country held these doctrines *.

(b) Seeing that the people had been fondly clinging to the doctrine of the Ari
lords for thirty generations of kings of Pagan, Anawrahtaminsaw [Anaw-
rahta, 1017—1053]) filled with virtue and wisdom, rejected the rank
heresies of the Ari lords and followed the precepts of Shin Arahan, known
as Dhammadassi. Whereupon those Ari lords in order that the people
might believe that doctrine, made manuscripts to suit their purpose,
and placed them inside a thahhut tree; and when the thahkut tree became
covered with scales and bark they sought and seduced fit interpretors
of dreams and made them read and publish the manuscripts found in
the thahkut tree. So that the king and all the people misbelieved *.

(c) In the reign of Anawrahtaminsaw the kingdom (of Arimaddanapura)
was known as Pugarama [another name for Pugima or Pagan]. Now
the kings in that country for may generations had been confirmed in false
opinions following the doctrines of the thirly Ari lords and their sixty
thousand disciples who practised piety in Thamati. It was the fashion
of these Ari monks to reject the Law preached by the Lord and to form
each severally their own opinions. They wrote books after their own
heart and beguiled others into the snare. According to the Law they
preached, a man might take the life of another and evade the course
of karma if he recited the formula of depreciation (paritfa). Such false
and lawless doctrine they preached as the true doctrine. Moreover,
kings and ministers, great and small, rich man and common people, whenever
they celebrated the marriage of their children were constrained to send them
to these teachers at nightfall, sending as it was called, the flower of their
virginity. Nor could they be married till they were set free carly in the
morning. This sending of the flower of virginity means an act of worship.
Hence scholars connect in meaning this ‘sending to the monastery to worship’

+ Maung Tin and Luce, Glass Palace chronicle, pp. 59—60.
2 Ibid., p. 39.

--- PAGE 84 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TANTRIC BUDDHISM IN BURMA 65

with the word ‘viharamaho', And scholars in their stone inscriptions use
this phrase, ‘the time of the first sending to the monastery’.

But Anawrahtaminsaw was a king of ripe perfections, and when he
heard and saw these wrong lawless doings he was displeased, knowing
them for false doctrine. And he yearned vehemently to discover the
true Law}.

(@) The noble saint Dhammadassi [i.e., Shin Aharan] having come to
Pagan ministered to the religion, When the hing and all the people forsook
their own opinions and were established in the good Law, the Ari lords lost
their gain and honour and bore great hatred against Shin Avahan, And the
king fearing that the Ari would practise ill against him, took good heed
and appointed guards enough to defeat the thirty Ari lords and their
sixty thousand disciples. At that time there came many saints and
counsellors of those who were faithful in the religion, And the king
unfrocked the thirty Ari lords and their sixty thousand followers and
enrolled them among his spearmen and lancers and elephant-dung
sweepers, And the king said: “Our royal grandsires and great grandsires
who ruled this kingdom in unbroken line, followed the doctrine of the Ari
monks. If it were good to follow them again, I would fain follow them”
So fain was he, it is said *,

The extracts above quoted do not allow us to decide at what
time the cult of the Aris was introduced in Pagan °; but it is clear
that already before the middle of the tenth century, they were so
powerful that the king and the whole country held their doctrines.
And even without taking the number of thirty Ari lords or their
sixty thousand disciples too literally, we may assume that they
counted numerous followers and were an important factor to be
reckoned with when Anawrahta made the first attempt to curb
their influence. They had their centre at Thamahti, a village not
very far from the Pagan metropolis, and after the introduction of
Theravada Buddhism Anawrahta conducted a relentless perse-

1 Ibid., pp. 70—71.

* Ibid., pp. 74—75.

* Extract (b) purports to say that the people had been clinging to the Ari
doctrine for thirty generations of kings at Pagan. Number 30 and its multi-
ples, with Burmese chroniclers, seem to have had a traditional significance.
However, the present statement is evidently an exaggeration and an well-
known old method of hinting at hoary antiquity. But there is no reason to
disbelieve the statement in extract (d) that the ‘royal grandsires and great
grandsires of king Anawrahta had followed the doctrine of the Ari monks’.

5

--- PAGE 85 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

66 THE ARI SECT AND THE SAMANAKUTTAKAS

cution against them, What is self-evident in these extracts is that
even the Hmannan which was compiled at the court of a king subs-
cribing to the purer faith of the Theravada, by scholars who had
been zealous followers of the faith, and at a time when the whole
country had long been under the profound influence of Ceylonese
Buddhism, even that Hmannan does not state or imply that the
Aris were not Buddhists. Its implication is rather to the contrary,
for it says that they were monks, living in monasteries, and what
is significant, they believed in the recitation of the paritta, According
to the Hmannan their doctrines were false, evidently because they
widely diverged from those of the purer faith which the authors of
the Hmannan professed and which their people had professed for
centuries.

Old faiths die hard. Anawrahta’s crusade against the Aris was
only partially successful; their power, it is true, was broken to a
great extent, but they were not extirpated. In a Burmese in-
scription which may be dated in the latter half of the twelfth or the
early part of the thirteenth century 4, a specific mention of the Aris
occurs not long after the events referred to above. It says:

“One thousand bowls filled with cooked rice were offered to the
Araf. A silver Buddha was also given for the Arafis to worship. My son
became a monk and listened to the first sermon. A gold Buddha was
made. At the time when my son received ordination and listened to
the first sermon, slaves, cattle and property were given”.

The Araf of the inscription doubtless refers to the Aris who
continued to receive new adepts, as this record seems to prove,
even as late as the date of the inscription.

Another definite mention of the Aris occurs in connection with
Thihathu’s son Sawyun (x315 A.D.; Sawyun was ruler of Saggaing)
who enlisted some Aris among his armed retainers *. It may be
recalled that Anawrahta also enrolled some of the Aris among his
spearmen and lancers. The descendants of the Aris (Ari-gyi-do-
ahnwe) seem to have been numerous at Pinya, Ava and Saggaing,
and were even patronised by kings. “They were so called owing to
their love of sports, especially boxing of which they gave public
1 Insc, no, 176 in the List of Inscriptions found in Burma, Archaeological
Survey, Burma, ro2r.

2? Hmannan, VI.

--- PAGE 86 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TANTRIC BUDDHISM IN BURMA 67

exhibitions. They set all monastic rules at nought, were great
drinkers, and had a weakness for another sex; they kept their hair
about two inches long, wore a kind of cylindrical hat, and robes of
a colour not orthodox; they dabbed in alchemy and popular medi-
cine; they sold amulets and recipes for the attainment of magical
power; and they bred, rode and sold horses and exercised them-
selves in the use of arms. They were powerful at Ava in the fifteenth
century, in the reign of king Pathama-min-gaung; the chiefs among
them had free entrance of the palace at any time of the day, and
there, it is said, they often drank so immoderately as to be sent
back to their monasteries in palanquins. They are still mentioned
in the eighteenth century when a thousand of them suddenly sailed
from Ava and put to flight a party of Talaings, with whom the
Burmese were often at war’’?.

It is evident that the original doctrines of the Aris had undergone
a complete transformation and the sect existed in a degenerate
condition without having any religious hold or significance. The
later descendants of the Aris were only known as such, but they
had very little to connect themselves with those from whom they

claimed to have been descended.

WHO WERE THE SAMANAKUTTAKAS?

Besides the specific references to the Aris and their descendants
we meet with certain references in inscriptions and chronicles which
may, in the light of the extracts already quoted from the Hmannan,

2 Duroiselle, op. cit., pp. 92—93. Elsewhere in his very illuminating article,
he says: “Anawrahta’s persecution had the unexpected result of spreading
the sect in remote parts of Burma, and its remnants, though not styled Ari,
are still existent among a large number of Shan monks, among whom the
original doctrine has been forgotten, though the characteristic laxity of
morals has persisted. Amongst the Burmese themselves, at the Burmese
capitals and other places of some importance, a degenerate form of Ari may
be said to have lasted well into the 18th century; the manuscripts of the Ari
seem to have disappeared as well as the right to the jus primae noctis, the
animal sacrifices, and the easy doctrine about the remission of sins; but the
spirit of the old sect survived in the love of good cheer, copious drinking
and women, The greatest part of this transformation is no doubt due to the
great religious reformation of Buddhism carried out in the fifteenth century
by king Dhammaceti, as recorded in the Kalyani inscriptions”. op. cit.,
Ppp. 91—92.

--- PAGE 87 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

68 THE ARI SECT AND THE SAMANAKUTTAKAS

be interpreted to refer to the self-same sect, though no definite
mention of them is made.

The Sdsanavamsa refers to a heretic sect, that of the Samana-
kuttakas who are said to have gained a footing in Pagan at a very
early period; they existed there, we are told, from the time of
Samuti, and ‘‘continued to grow and multiply till in the time of
Anuruddha (Anawrahta) the adherents of the Samanakuttakas
numbered many thousands. The chief and most dangerous heresy
is briefly described; it lies in the boundless abuse of the paritia
which becomes, with these heretics a charm to absolve from guilt
even the murder of father or mother. Such doctrines (together with
others that raised the dcariyas to tyrannical power over the family
of the laity) had corrupted the religion of Tambadvipa +, when in
the eleventh century a new era opened with the arrival of the great
thera Arhanta, from Thaton”’ *,

It is unnecessary to go into details and point out parallelisms to
show that the Samanakuttakas of the Sdsanavamnsa were the same
as the Aris of the Hmannan, The two accounts read side by side
reveal at once that the latter says exactly the same about the Aris
as the Sdsanavamsa tells us about the Samanakuttakas. But the most
interesting and conclusive parallelism is furnished by a further
comparison of the Samanakuttaka heresy with the Ari priest’s
claim to what is called in the Hmannan ‘the flower of virginity’ °.
This is suggested by the following sentence in the Sasanavarhsa in
connection with the Samanakuttakas:

“Sace pi puttadhitanam Gvahavivahakammam hattukdmo bhaveyya
Gcariydnam pathamath niyyddetya dvahavivahakammam hattabbam; ye
idam carittam atikameyya bahu apufifiam pasaveyya ti” 4,

If any one wishes to give sons or daughters in marriage, he must

* An inscription of the seventeenth century, quoted by Burmese diplomats
in negotiation with the British Government and translated for his Govern-
ment by Col. Burney who was resident at Ava, 1837, places Pagan, Ava,
Pinya and Myingyan in Tambadvipa. Yule, Mission to the Court of Ava,
P. 357. The British Burma Gazetteer, however, identifies Tambadvipa with
the upper portion of the Thayet district on the east bank of the Irrawady
(vol. II, p. 746).

? Bode, Sdsanavamsa, pp. 15—17.

? As for the wide prevalence of this and similar custom see, Pelliot, B.E.F.E.
O., 1902, p. 127; Duroiselle, op. cit., pp. 88—89.

+ Sdsanavamsa, p. 16.

--- PAGE 88 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TANTRIC BUDDHISM IN BURMA 69

first hand them over to the dcariyas before giving them in marriage;
whosoever transgresses this rule commits great sin }.

Besides this specific references to the Aris and Samanakuttakas,
there is at least one other reference that almost certainly relates to
this heterdox sect. It is in the Nandamaiifia inscription of 1248
A.D., already mentioned in a preceding chapter where its signifi-
cance has been pointed out. Here is the relevant passage from the

inscription:

“The minister commanded that these things be dedicated to the
monks.... two potfuls of rice, two baskets of betel-nut (and) betel-
leaf, one and a quarter viss of meat, one ten-quart pot of long-fermented
liquor.... This offering was made in the presence of my lord the
king” 3.

Doubtless it indicates Ari survivals as late as the middle of the
thirteenth century, and even under so pious a king as Kyawsa. The
actual word ‘Ari’ does not occur in the inscription; but considering
that the locality has always been described as the home of the
Ari, the erotic and Tantric character of the paintings of the temple
itself and the mention of meat and spirits to be provided for the
monks, there cannot be the least doubt that this temple and the
attached monastery along with others of the locality (e.g., the
Paya-thon-zu group) were homes of the mysterious sect of the Aris.
“The very ommission of their name further shows that the Ari were
then recognized as a long standing and matter of fact institution;
further more, the building of monasteries and temples and the
providing of more than the usual necessaries of monkish life for
their use, is a proof that, far from having been exterminated by
king Anawrahta in 1057, as we are told, they were held, on the
contrary, in high esteem, not only among the people, but also at
the court” *.

SOME ADDITIONAL ARGUMENTS

The moot point to be decided in this connection is wether the
Aris were really a Buddhist sect. Opinions have very naturally
1 This point has also been stressed by Dr. Mabel Bode, of. cit.
® Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava, 1892, no. 251; for the date and other
historical implications, see, An, R.A.S.B., 1919, pp. 22—23.
3 Duroiselle, op. cit.

--- PAGE 89 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

70 THE ARI SECT AND THE SAMANAKUTTAKAS

differed on this question. Mr. Phayre contended that they were not
Buddhists in any sense of the term }, while M. Finot held that Visnu
was the god of the Aris 2, and that their cult was purely a primitive
and indigenous one influenced largely by Naga worship. M. Hiiber and
Mr. Taw Sein Ko opined that they represented a debased form of Ma-
hiyana Buddhism influenced by the indigenous Naga cult on the
one hand and Sivaism and Tantrism on the other*. The most
considered opinion was put forward by M. Duroiselle according to
whom the Aris were a Buddhist sect belonging to the Northern
School, ‘‘ministering to the superstitions of the people, and were
priests of the Naga and spirit worship than prevalent in the land,
and officiated at the bloody sacrifices connected with this indigenous
worship. About the eighth century the wery profoundly influenced
by Tantricism and were addicted to grossly immoral practices
owing to Saka influences generally, and perhaps more particularly
to intercourse with the followers of Vajrayana and Sahajiya cults
of Bengal and Nepal” *.

It is unnecessary to go over the same ground as M. Duroiselle has
done; he has discussed the question from all points of view, and
readers are referred to his article. I would here point only to two
or three aspects of the evidence at our disposal that go to support
his conclusions.

It has already been pointed out that the extracts quoted from
the Hmannan seem to own the Aris as a Buddhist sect, but they
were considered heretics because they had deviated from their
original faith and had thus weakened their own religion. The impli-
cation of the Hmannan appears also to be supported by the Sdsana-
vamsa which as we have seen styles the Aris as Samanakuttakas or
“false samanas” who corrupted the original religion by their
boundless abuse of the faritta. If it means anything, it seems to
suggest that these Samanakuttakas were in reality Buddhist monks,
but were gradually so degenerated owing to a number of causes
that they were considered heretics by the followers of the Thera-
vada. Among the contributory causes may have been the primitive

1 Phayre, History of Burma, p. 33.

2 Finot, op. cit., pp. 125—126.

3 Hiiber, B.E.F.E.0., 1909, p. 584; Taw Sein Ko, Burmese Sketches, p. 179.
4 Duroiselle, op. cit., p. 93.

--- PAGE 90 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TANTRIC BUDDHISM IN BURMA I

practise of jus primae noctis, bloody sacrifices and the drinking of
liquor associated with it, and not a little the onrushing tide of
Tantric Buddhism from Bengal.

But more definite evidences are afforded by the paintings of the
Paya-thon-zu and Nandamajfifia temples and the Nandamaififia
inscription of 1248. The two temples were evidently Buddhist
places of worship; the main figure enshrined in the sanctum in each
temple is that of the Buddha seated in the bhiimisparSa-mudré and
on the walls and ceilings of each are painted numerous figures of
Buddhas and Bodhisattvas. One of the frescoes of the Nandamatfifia
represents a standing figure of the Bodhisattva Avalokitesvara with
his right hand in the vavada-mudrd, and accompanied on the left
by his Sakti Tara. This and similar other representations of Bodhi-
sattvas prove definitely that these temples were Buddhist places of
worship affiliated to the Mahay4na and its allied cults. The Nan-
damaiifia inscription is also another definite evidence on this point.
Had the temple not been intended as a place of Buddhist worship,
there could hardly have been any necessity for the long and arduous
journey that Shin Arahan was asked to undertake to fetch a Buddha
relic from Tennasserim to be deposited in the temple.

Last of all there is the Burmese inscription no. 176, already
referred to, which definitely connects the Aris with Buddhist
worship and typically Buddhist ritual. Images of the Buddha were
made and other rituals were performed on the occasion of the
ordination as a monk of a lay man who subsequently listened to the
first sermon, and thus joined the rank of the Aris.

List of Inscriptions found in Burma, Archaeological Survey, Burma, 1921,

--- PAGE 91 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER FIVE
TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS

Accounts left by Buddhist monks throw a flood of light on the
history of Buddhism in the Indianised countries of South-East Asia
including Burma. Most useful from our point of view is the well-
known history of Buddhism by the Tibetan monk Taranatha, and
an account of travel by his gur% Buddhagupta, a Buddhist monk.
Their testimony appears to have been summarized in a Tibetan
work of a somewhat later date, the Pag Sam Jon Zang. But Tara-
natha supplies the fullest account; we shall therefore begin with
his account and take Buddhagupta next. As the Pag Sam Jon Zang
mostly draws upon Taranatha, it is unnecessary to dwell on the
evidence it contains. We need only state how far it confirms Tara-
natha with regard to our subject. Moreover, its account is far too
short },

. TRRANATHA AND HIS ACCOUNT

The introduction of Mahayana Buddhism in Pagan, Pegu and
Arakan was already a thing of the past when Taranatha wrote his
celebrated history. It is unfortunate that the attitude of modern
historians in dealing with the valuable account of this honest and
concientious chronicler of the events of his religion has always
been one of exaggerated scepticism. In matters of chronology and
as a connected history, and with regards to names of kings and
princes, his account is no doubt at great variance with that of more
reliable records; but when he is recording chips of historical or
geographical information, especially in connection with the history
of his own faith nearer his own times, he gives us on the whole very
important information on historical events although dressed some-

1 Das, Pag Sam Jon Zang, pp. 123—24.

--- PAGE 92 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS 73

times in fantastic garb. He thus enables us to fill up gaps in our
knowledge of the history of the period, and to explain otherwise
uncountable facts and factors.

Whoever studies the account of the monk-historian must admire
in him an attitude approaching that of a modern historian, as far
as it was possible in his days, for, he cared to give an account,
though short, of the sources and source-materials from which he
drew materials of his work, in the last chapter of his work #. A good
number of historical texts he rejected as unreliable; he largely
depends on Ksemendrabhadras work in 2000 slokas wich was
supplemented by Indradatta’s Buddhapurana and Bhataghati’s ?
history of the succession of the dcdryas. Besides these, the Mafi-
jusrimiilakalpa, a text belonging to about the 8‘ century, and now
widely known among scholars, is also known to have been one of
the important sources utilised by Taranatha. For the history of
Aparantaka, Kashmir, Udyana, Tukhara and the Koki land, our
monk-historian frankly confesses to have had no authority to draw
upon. A remarkable evidence of his honesty is that when he draws
upon merely on tradition he puts on record that he does so, and
when he has neither tradition or earlier extant works to refer to, he
is frank enough to say, “I have not heard”, or “I have no earlier
work of history’, and he leaves his readers to draw their own
inferences. One may therefore safely use Taranatha’s account to his
advantage so long as it does not contradict known facts or factors
of history, and to the extent they may be said to supply information
not only upholding but also explaining the logic and circumnstances
of already established facts.

It has long been known to scholars that Taranatha’s history of
Buddhism in India refers to the introduction of the Mahayana and
its allied cults in Burma, more particualarly in Pagan, during the
rule of the Senas of Bengal. But the implication of this reference
has hardly been properly understood, nor has Taranatha’s account
presented in its true perspective. It is therefore proposed to give

1 Schiefner, Tarandtha’s Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien, St. Peters-
burg, 1869.

® Bhafaghati perhaps is Bhatfaghati, a class of Brahmin panditas. Cf. Bandya-
ghatis of Bengal who are well-known in the province, and are often alluded
to in nineteenth century Bengali literature.

--- PAGE 93 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

74 TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS

here relevant extracts in full from Taranatha, so that the whole
account as far as it relates to the history of Buddhism in Burma
may be understood in its proper setting *.

EXTRACTS FROM TARANATHA
A

Chapter XV. Events of the times when the venerable Nagarjuna was
the guardian of the Creed *

|... Inthe east, in Patavesa or Pukam ® and in Odivisa, Bhangala ¢
and Radha many temples were erected. At this time in Magadha, the
Brahmana Suvisnu erected 108 temples, and 108 schools of Abhidharma
teaching in order that the Abhidharma of the Mahayana and the Hi-
naydna does not decline. Towards the end of his life, the venerable
Nagarjuna went to the regions of the South 5, and after he has converted
the king Udayana he defended the creed for many years... .”.

B

Chap. XXIV. Events of the time of hing Sila (Sri Harsa Siladitya] ¢

“.... Jayadeva also was a great dc@rya who was learned in many
sacred texts, and lived in Nalanda for a very long time. I have received
no detailed biography of him. At this time a tooth of the Buddha
reached Hasam 7? in the north. The poet Guhyadatta, a pupil of dcarya

1 The following extracts in English, it must be mentioned, are not from
original Tibetan, but from Schiefner’s German; but whenever and wherever
I had doubts, I consulted the Tibetan text and satisfied myself as to the
correctness or otherwise of the German translation. It is a tribute to German
scholarship that even at that early stage of Tibetan studies, Schiefner could
follow the original so closely and so faithfully.

* Schiefner, op. cit., p. 72.

® Patavesa is certainly Patavisaya, just as Odivisa is Odravisaya. It shows
that Pukam or Pagan had another name, Patavisaya.

4 It is certainly Baigala (= Vahga = roughly Eastern Bengal). Cf. Bangala
deSam of the Tirumalaya inscription of Rajendracola.

% This is a faithful record of a well-known historical event, now more firmly
established by the discovery of Buddhist remains at Nagarjunikonda, a site
that bears the name of Nagarjuna.

® Schiefner, op. cit., p. 147.

7 Hasam = Asam = mod. Assam, At the time when Tarandtha wrote the
pronunciation in Tibetan of what is transcribed in English by “h” was
silent, so that Hasam is really Asam,

--- PAGE 94 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS 75

Samghadasa, and Dharmadisa’s pupil Ratnamati offered a sacrifice
together with a large body of followers amounting to many hundred
thousands of people who lived according to the Law in the four classes(?).
That tooth still exists at present in Pukhang?...”.

Cc

Chap. XXX VII. Events of the time of the Four Senas and Others *

[According to Taranatha, the first Sena king was Lavasena who was
succeeded by his son Kaéasena. KaSasena was succeeded by his son
Manitasena, and the latter by his son Rathikasena. ‘‘Although the
number of years”, says Taranatha, “for which every one of them reigned
is not known, all four together they have not ruled more then about 80
years”.]

Waeee At the time of these Four Senas the Tirthas * increased more
and more in Magadha, and there also appeared many followers of the
Mleccha system of the Tajikas ‘4, In Odantapuri and Vikramasila, the
king erected a sort of fortress and a few soldiers were put into it for
defending it. In Vajrisana (Bodh-gaya), a Mahayana school was

2 Pukhang = Pukém = Pukdén = Pagan.

* Schiefner, op. cit., pp. 252 ff.

3 By the word “Tirthas”, Taranatha, I think, meant the Brahmins whose
influence during the rule of the Senas was admittedly on the increase.

4 The Tajikas must here refer to the followers of Islam. They are referred to
in the Nausari grant (738—'39) of the Lata Calukya prince Pulakesi Avanija-
nagraya, probably also in the Vikrama@nhadevacaritam of Bilhana, under the
name of Taikas who under their leader Mahmud of Ghazni and his son Masud
overran a considerable portion of Northern India during the period 1000—
1037 A.D., and also by the KaSmiri chronicler Jonaraja.

4 This agrees on the whole with the account given in the Tabagdti-Nasiri
by Minhaj-ud-din (trans. by Raverty) of the description of the fortified city
of Vihara. Minhaj describes the city he captured as a ‘fortress’, though, in
fact, it was a Buddhist vih@ra with a library and a college. It is common
knowledge that at Odantapuri also, there was a large Buddhist establish-
ment. The attack of Ikhtiyar-ud-din-Muhammad resulted in the capture of
the ‘fortress’. The capture is this described by Minhaj: ““Muhammad-i-Bakh-
tyar, by the forces of his intrepidity, threw himself into the postern of the
gateway of the palace, and they captured the fortress, and acquired great
booty. The greater number of inhabitants of the place were Brahmanas,
and the whole of those Brahmanas had their heads shaven, and they were
all slain. (Evidently, the informants of Minhaj took the shaven headed
Buddhist monks as Brahmanas]. There were a great number of books there,
and when all these books came under the observation of the Mussalmans
they summoned a number of Hindus, that they might give them information
respecting the import of these books; but the whole of the Hindus had been

--- PAGE 95 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

76 TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS

founded, and there appeared also a few yogis and Mahayanists who
preached the Law; during the summer sojourn there assembled 10,000
Saindhava Sravakas [Hinaydnists from Sindhudesa]; mostly the other
centres of learning declined. It is said that in Vikramaéilé and Odantapuri,
@ great assembly came together which was of the size of the time of
Abhayakara 1, After the death of king Rathika when Lavasena was
ruling, a few years passed in peace; after that in the land of Antarvedi
between the Ganga and the Yamuna appeared the Turuska king Candra
through the intermediary of various bhiksus who were messengers of
the king; he combined himself with others in Bhangala and small princes
of the Turuskas living in other regions and conquered the whole land
of Magadha, killed many ecclesiastics in Odantapuri and destroyed this
as well as Vikramasila *, On the site of the Odantavihira a fortress of
the Tajikas was founded. The Pandita Sakyasri went to Jagaddala
situated in Odivisa in the east. After he had stayed there for three
years he came to Tibet; Ratnaraksita, the senior, went to Nepal; the
great savant Jfidnakaragupta and the other great Panditas went to the
south of India with about hundred small panditas. The great savant
Buddhamitra and Dagabala’s pupil Vajrasri and many other small
Panditas fled to the South, The savant Saigama Srijfiana, Ravisribhadva,
Candrakavagupta and the vemaining sixteen mahantas and 200 small
panditas went farther to Pukham, Muiijan, Kamboja to the east. and other
lands; in Magadha the creed was almost extinguished. Although, at this

killed. On becoming acquainted (with the contents) it was found that the
whole of the fortress was a college, and in the Hindu tongue, they call a
college, vihdr"’. (Raverty, p. 552).

The account in the Tabagat-i-Akbari by Nizim-ud-din is also substan-
tially the same (Bibliotheca Indica, Trans. by B. Dey, p. 50). It is thus clear
that what is described as the ‘fort of Vihar’, was really a fortified University
town, and Taranatha is therefore right when he says that at Odantavihara
the king erected a sort of fortress for defence against the oncoming invaders.

> He is perhaps identical with Abhayakaragupta, the author of Muni-
matdlamkara, composed in the 13th year of the reign of king Ramapala of
the Pala dynasty of Bengal. See, Cordier, Catalogue, III. 314.

* Tarandtha evidently refers to the invasion of ‘Muner and Bihar’ by Mu-
hammad-i-Bakhtyar, but it is curious that he gives an Indian name, Candra,
to the Turuska king. However, his account substantially agrees with that of
Minh4j, quoted above. The story of the massacre of the monks and the
destruction of the vihdva of Odantapuri is common to both. But that the
Turuska king was helped in his cause by various bhiksus ‘who were messen-
gers of the king”, and that he combined himself ‘with others in Bhangala
and small princes of the Turuskas living in other regions’ are pieces of infor-
mation which have often been ignored by historians, but which may not
be without significance. Circumnstantially, both facts are not only possible,
but also highly probable.

--- PAGE 96 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS 77

time there lived many magicians and people who cultivated magic there
was no means of working miracles calculated to further the well-being
of creatures. At this time the yogis succeeding Goraksa were very
simple-minded, and in order to attain honour from the Tirtha kings?
became Iévara followers * in as much as they said that they too would
not resist the Turuskas *, Only the small school of NateSvara remained
in the Buddha creed. Lavasena, his son Buddhasena, his son Haritasena,
his son Pratitasona etc. were kings of very limited power, because they
had to take order from Turuska kings... .”.

D

Chap. XX XIX. Spread of the Creed in the Eastern Koki country *

“....Eastern India consists of three parts: Bhangala and Odivisa
belong to Aparantaka, and are called the eastern part of Aparantaka.
The north-eastern countries: Kamaripa, Tripura [= Tipperah] and
Hasam [= Assam] are called Girivarta, i.e. surrounded by hills, Going
from there to the east to the side of the northern mountains are the
Nangata lands, the land of Pukham [= Pukim = Pugima = Pagan]
situated on the ocean, Balgu etc., the land of Rakhan [= Arakan],
HathsAvati [= Pegu] and other parts of the empire of Mufijan; further
east Campa, Kamboja and others. All together are generally called Koki.

“In these Koki countries appeared from the time of king Agoka sects
of ecclesiastics 5, later in ever large numbers, and they became very
numerous, but up to the time of Vasubandhu they were only Sravakas;
after a few pupils of Vasubandhu had spread the Mahay4na, it continued

1 i.e., Brahmin kings, i.e. the Senas.

* Probably those who had been followers of the Goraksa cult came to be
converted to the Brahmanical religion, a historical fact which is now re-
cognized by scholars,

% It is well-known that the Brahmins of the court of Laksmanasena advised
the king not to resist the Turuska invader (cf. Raverty, Tabagat-i-Nasiri,
Pp. 555—'56). After Muhammad-i-Bakhtyar had conquered Bihar, ‘a number
of astrologers, wise men and counsellors of his kingdom”, represented to
Laksmanasena that it was written ‘“‘in our books of the ancient Brahmanas”
that this country would be conquered by the Turks. They told him that the
Muslim army had already conquered Bihar, and “next year they will surely
come into this country”. They therefore advised the king to “be removed
from the country in order that we may be safe from the molestation of the
Turks. The king did not however agree to leave the country, but most of the
Brahmanas and inhabitants of that place fled”.

* Schiefner, op. cit., pp. 262—'63.

5 Cf. the Sinhalese tradition of the Asoka mission of Sona and Uttara to
Suvannabhimi.

--- PAGE 97 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

78 TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS

to exist almost uninterruptedly; from king Dharmapala there were very
many in Madhyadesa who attained knowledge there; particularly at
the time of the four Senas about half the ecclesiastics assembled in
Magadha was from the Koki countries. And for this reason the Ma-
hay4na had spread very much; the Mahayana and Hinaydna were not
always distinguishable as in the Tibetan regions. From the time of
Abhayakara the Mantrayana spread more and more; at the time when
Magadha was conquered by the Turuskas, the scholars of the Madhya-
desa came for the most part to that region and the creed was spread every
where, At that time lived the king Subhajata; he erected many temples
and founded about two hundred centres of teaching. When after him
the king Sirnhajati was come, and the latter raised the excellent creed
still more in esteem than before, was the creed very much spread in all
these countries, and when from time to time the ecclesiastics assembled,
it is said that they number still at present about twenty to thirty
thousand bhiksus; there were also many updsakas.... Although in all
these countries Vinaya, Abhidhamma and Mahayana works were very
well-known, the secret mantras had become very rare with the exception

of K@lacakra, the three mdla sections and a few others... .”.

E

Chap. XL. The manner of dissemination of the Creed on the small islands
and the ve-dissemination of the Creed in the South, etc. *

«|... Further in the Simhaladvipa *, Yavadvipa *, Tamradvipa °,
Suvarnadvipa*, Dhanaéridvipa*, and Payigudvipa®, in these small

1 Schiefner, op. cit., pp. 263—'65.

2 They are evidently Ceylon, Java and Sumatra.

% Tamradvipa is perhaps the same as Tamraliigam of the Jaiya inscription
of 1230, Madamaliigam of the Tanjore inscription of 1030, and Tan-mo-ling
of Chau-ju-kua (1225). It was probably identical with the whole breadth of
the Malaya Peninsula. For identification of Tamraliigam = Madamaliigam
= Tan-mo-ling, see, Coedés, B.E.F.E.0., 1918, pp. 15—18. Compare, in
this connection, Tamrapattanam mentioned in a Sanskrit Nagari inscription
from Arakan (r1t® cent.) where Anandacandra seems to have been the king.
The context of the inscription seems to point to Arakan where we must try
to locate Tamrapattanam. One may also invite the attention of readers to
a passage recorded by Chavannes (Religieux Eminents, p. 100). Taolin, a
Chinese pilgrim, ‘‘was tossed on ship-board over the seas of the South. He
passed the ‘Pillars of Copper’’, and reached the country of Lang-chia. He
crossed the kingdom of Ho-ling (Java), and traversed the country of the
Naked People (Nikobar).... After several years he reached Eastern India
in the kingdom of Tan-mo-li-ti (Tamralipti) ...”” I have not unfortunately
the Chinese for ‘‘Pillars of Copper”, but I have suspicion that it stands for
a region having a significant Sanskritic name connected with témra or

--- PAGE 98 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS 79

islands the creed was known from the earliest times and is very much
spread even at the present day”.

“In the Simhaladvipa there are also partly followers of the Mahayana},
but Sravakas are much more numerous, so that at present on the occasion
of the Sripaduka festival, ie. the festival of the foot prints, about
12,000 bhiksus gather, most of whom are Srdvakas. In Dhanasri and
Payigu there are also a few followers of the Mahayana, and in the other
small islands there are only followers of the Sravakas... .".

I have on purpose given elaborate quotations from Taranatha,
and noticed in foot-notes points where the Tibetan chronicler finds

copper, and which may even be identical with Tamraliigam of the Jaiya
inscription. Taolin’s route lends colour to that assumption. It is curoius, and
attention to this was drawn for the first time by the late Prof. Sylvain Levi,
that there were so many regions scattered on the three sides of the Bay of
Bengal having a common generic name connected with the Sanskrit word
tamrva: Tamraparni (the island of Ceylon, and also the river of that name in
the farthest south of the Indian continent), Tamralipti (modern Tamluk in
Lower Bengal), Tamrapattanam (perhaps in Arakan), Tamradvipa, Tam-
raliigam, and probably also “Pillars of Copper’. Compare also in this con-
nection: Suvarnadvipa (Sumatra) Suvannabhimi (Thaton region of Burma),
and similar names.

Dhanasridvipa: One is tempted to see in this name the Sanskrit form of
Talaing Tanansri or Tnansi (according to the Paklat edition of the Upan-
nahamsawatirajawamsakatha, p. 140) = modern Tennasserim, The earliest
Burmese form Tanansari is found in the Nandamaiifia inscription of 1248
(Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava, p. 250). In the Thiparama pagoda
inscription of Saggaing (1444), the form is Tanansari (Inscriptions collected in
Upper Burma, 1900, p. 95; Inscriptions copied from the stones collected by hing
Bodawpaya, I, 1897, p. 225). See, Luce, J.B.R.S. XIV, ii, 1924, pp. 155—'56,
and f.n. 4.

Payigudvipa is certainly Pegu: Payigu = Paigu = Pegu.

+ Among others, here is a point that upholds the general authenticity of the
account of Taranatha. With regard to Ceylon, Taranatha states that the
Sinhalese Buddhists were mainly Sravakas, but included some followers of
the Mahay&na. In this connection we may refer to the finds of a good
number of Mahayana images in Ceylon, and quote the account of
Hiuen Thsang who describes the Buddhist brethern of Ceylon as Mahayanist
Sthavira. “There came a time”, the pilgrim continues, when “too much
attention to peculiarities made two sects, the Hinay&nist school of those
who belonged to the Mahavihdra, and the school of those who belonged to-
Abhayagiri and embraced both vehicles.’’ The Life however describes the Budd-
hist brethern of Ceylon as Mahaydnists and Sthaviras, and Fan-chih calls
them simply Sthaviras (Watters, Yuan Chwang, II, pp. 234—'35).

--- PAGE 99 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

80 TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS

or seems to find support from independent sources. It will be seen
that Taranatha’s account in general agrees remarkably with known
facts. It not only does not contradict any of the established facts of
history, but supplies-us with a logical and coherent sequence of
events that fit in satisfactority within the already set frame. We
may safely leave out extracts A and B, which deal with events that
were far removed from Taranatha’s own time; moreover they have
hardly any bearing on our present subject; but there is no reason
to doubt the general trustworthiness of the extracts C, D and E,
if, of course, one does not quarrel with the names of the Sena kings.
T have pointed out in notes that the historicity of the account as
given in these extracts, as far as they relate to events in Bihar and
Bengal, and the geographical information contained in them are
fairly correct. We need not, therefore, be sceptical regarding the
general authenticity of Taranatha’s account of the introduction of
the Mahayana and allied cults in Burma.

TARANATHA SUMMARISED

Taranatha includes Pukham (Pagan), Rakhan (Arakan) and
Hathsavati (Pegu) in the Koki land? which also comprised the
Nangata lands, Balgu etc., other parts of the empire of Mufijan
(besides Harhsavati and Pegu)*, and also Campa and Kamboja.
According to the monk historian Buddhism had been introduced into
these Koki countries as early as the time of Asoka, gradually grow-
ing in importance thereafter. Until the time of Vasubandhu, it was
the orthodox school that flourished most. Vasubandhu began his
religious career in the school of the Sarvastivadins, but was later

* Pukham is described to have been situated on the ocean. This is not at
all far from facts, for the Pagan empire during the Anawrahta dynasty did
really extend to the shores of the sea in the south and west,

* It is not improbable that the Koki land is the same as the tract of the
country inhabited originally by the Kukis, a hill tribe of the frontiers of
Assam, Arakan and Upper Burma. See, Linguistic Surv, of India, II
iii, p. 2.

* It is difficult to understand what Taranatha exactly means by the empire
of Mufijan in which he includes among others, Rakhan and Harhsivat!. Pegu
and North Arakan were definitely under the domination of Pagan during
the rule of the Pagan dynasty. At present I am not ina Position to identify
Nangata lands and Balgu.

—— eee

--- PAGE 100 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS 8x

converted to the Mahayana (Watters, Yuan Chwang, I, pp. 357—
’58), and himself made a large number of converts in that faith.
Some of his pupils are credited with having spread the Mahayana
in the Koki countries, and from that time the Mahayana began to
flourish there. In fact, the Koki land apparently became such an
important centre of this faith that a good number of Buddhist
monks of MadhyadeSa had ‘attained knowledge’ there; and later
at the time of the “Four Senas’, about half the ecclesiastics of
Magadha came from those countries. The Mantrayana also is said
to have spread there from the time of Abhayakara (rot? cent.). ‘At
the time when Magadha was captured by the Turuskas’ who had
already destroyed the viha@ra of Odantapuri and killed many
ecclesiastics, a very large number of Buddhist scholars of the
Madhyadeéa including Sangama Srijfiana, Ravigribhadra, Candra-
karagupta, sixteen mahdntas and 200 small panditas fled to Puk-
ham, Muiijan, Kamboja and other countries; in Magadha Buddhism
(evidently Taranatha is always speaking of the Mahayana) practi-
cally became extinct. The Koki countries also supplied at a later
period scholars to Tibet, among whom were Vanaratna and other
panditas. Although in the countries of the Koki realm. ‘Vinaya,
Abhidharma and Mahayana works were very well-known, the
secret mantras had become very rare with the exception of Kdla-
cakra, the three mdla sections and a few others.’ And not only in
Pagan alone, but in Tannasserim and Pegu as well, there were a
few followers of the Mahayana, though ‘in the other small islands
there were only followers of Sravakas’.

IN DEFENCE OF TARANATHA

A scholar like M. Finot 1 has warned us not to be misled by the
‘apparent precision’ of Taranatha’s valuable account. Such warning
is justified, since Taranatha wrote a long time after the events
which he narrates, and since he could not avail himself of any
reliable authority on the religious history of the Koki land. We
cannot expect of Taranatha to produce an absolutely exact histo-
rical account of the subject he dealt with. His réle was otherwise,
and he was not also above or ahead of his times. But even admitting

1 Op. cit., J.A., XX, 1912, p. 121 ff,

--- PAGE 101 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

82 TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS

all this, we have seen that the account he furnishes is not very far
from history, and the nearer he is to his age, the more reliable is
his evidence which, in almost all the instances quoted above, except
with regard to the names of Sena rulers, is in accordance with facts.
I have already pointed out in notes where they corroborate facts
already known and well-established, and one would readily find
that in the main the evidence afforded by the monk-historian is
more confirmatory than original. One may at once refer to his
account of the Odantapuri and Vikramaéila viharas and of the
invasions of the Turuska kings which are the same as found in other
sources. In our extracts his evidence is rarely original or supple-
mentary; but whenever this is the case, it is hardly ever in conflict
with already known facts of history. The story of the introduction
of Buddhism in the Koki land is an example. But, so far as our
present knowledge goes regarding the subject as derived from other
independent sources, mostly archaeological and literary, there is
hardly anything to doubt in the general authenticity of Taranatha’s
account. In fact, such a course of events as he speaks of is only in
the logic of circumnstances, and satisfactorily explains the sequence
that otherwise remains unexplained..

Taranatha flourished in the sixteenth century, and when he wrote
the tradition he recorded with regard to the propagation of Bud-
dhism in the Koki land was still more or less within the memory
of the people. His account generally confirms our conclusions from
epigraphic, literary and other documents, mainly found at Pagan.
Intercourse between Pagan and Hmawza on the one hand and
Bengal and Bihar on the other from the eighth to the fourteenth
century approximately is attested to by the discovery at Pagan and
Hmawza of a large number of terracotta votive tablets with Sans-
krit epigraphs in Eastern Nagari characters. To the same period,
roughly speaking, belong also the numerous examples of art, in
stone and bronze, which may stylistically be said to have been
affiliated to the Eastern School of Art that had its home in the
modern province of Bihar and Bengal ', and flourished during the
centuries covered by the Palas and Senas to whon Taranatha makes

2 See, J.I.S.0.A., 1934, Ray, “Sculptures and Bronzes from Pagan”; J.A.,
LXI, 175—’79, 197—200, Ray, “The Nathlaung Temple and its gods”.

--- PAGE 102 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS 83

so significant a reference. The most convincing evidence is furnished
by a number of Mahay&na and Tantric deities themselves recovered
from the debris of ruins that to-day cover the wide waste of Pagan
and the thinly populated village of Hmawza, a few inscriptions
referring to certain Mahayana divinities, and an entire series of
wall-paintings depicting gods and goddesses belonging definitely to
the Mahayana and its allied cults. We have also seen the existence
of a Buddhist sect grossly addicted to Tantric practices, and finally
of Mahaydnist and Tantric Buddhist texts in a fifteenth century
monastic library. Still more significant is the existence of Kdlacakra
texts to which Taranatha makes a specific reference. All these are
definite and independent proofs of the prevalence of the Mahayana
and its allied cults in Burma of which our monk-scholar furnishes
so vivid an account.

M. Finot also finds it puzzling to think how the Tibetan scholar
could have ignored the grand religious reformation of the Theravada
in the eleventh century (under the active patronage of Anawrahta)
which gradually developed into the official religion of the Pagan
empire. But one must not forget the important fact that Taranatha
was chiefly concerned with Indian Buddhism and wrote his account
more from the point of view of the introduction of the religion from
India into the Koki land of which modern Burma is a part. He was,
therefore, less interested in the vicissitudes of the religion in the
Koki land itself. Taranatha was a follower of the Mahayana and
its allied cults, and during the period with which his present account
is concerned, Buddhism of the Northern School was the prevalent
religion of Eastern India. He was concerned with those later forms
of Buddhism, so that he hardly cared to record what transforma-
tions the Hinayana had undergone in Burma. Moreover, in all pro-
bability he had never visited Burma, nor heard anything of the
great religious reformation inaugurated by Anawrahta, which,
however, had no more than a local significance. Taranatha’s account
is not therefore to be relied upon to draw any straight conclusion as
to the relative position of the two great schools of Buddhism in
Burma.

We may therefore accept in a general way what Taranatha says
about the propagation of the Mahayana and its allied cults in
Burma. In fact, M. Finot admits it when he says that his account is

--- PAGE 103 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

84 TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS

‘not exact so far as it affects Kamboja and Campa. The information
of Taranatha does not go beyond Burma’ ?.

BIOGRAPHY OF BUDDHAGUPTA

It has already been observed that in compiling his history of
Buddhism in the Koki land Taranatha had no earlier text or any
other written document at his disposal to draw upon. But there is
no reason to assume that he drew mainly from his imagination or
depended merely on floating tradition. In fact, the very nature of
his account reveals that he had at his disposal some reliable source
which he drew upon in compiling his history. One such source has
recently been brought to light through the admirable researches of
Dr. Giuseppe Tucci *.

This authority was an Indian Buddhist monk, named Buddha-
gupta, who was the spiritual teacher of Taranatha *. Buddhagupta
was a great traveller; he visited many places in India and Burma,
the islands of the south-eastern seas, and even in Africa, with a
view to find traces of Buddhism and of Buddhist remains. He also
went to Tibet where Taranitha met him and evidently heard from
him the account of his travels and of the state of Buddhism in the
countries he had visited. Taranatha later on embodied it in a short
biographical note called Grub c’en Bu-ddha-gupthahi rnam t’ar rje
brtsun fiid zal nas gzan du ran rtog gi dri mas ma spags pahi yi ge
yan dag pa. The importance of this note is chiefly geographical.

The life and travels of Buddhagupta have been incorporated in
a biography written in Tibetan under the title Sans rgyas sbas pa.

It is important as a source of geographical information, regarding
numerous places in India, Burma, Africa and several islands of the
Archipelago. It, moreover, “shows that at the time of Buddhagupta

1 Finot, op. cit.

* Tucci, ‘The sea and land travels of a Buddhist sddhu in the sixteenth
century”, Ind, Hist, Quart., VII, iv, pp. 683—702.

* The Sam-bha-lahi-lam-yig of Blobzan dpal Idan ye Ses refers to Taranatha
as the disciple of the Indian monk Buddhagupta (pp. 29, 49); Taranatha
himself also begins his Bkah babs bdun Idam by invoking with great reverence
his great guru (Edelsteinmine, p. x. cf. p. 116) of whom mention is also to
be found in another work of Taranatha, viz., the Gsan bahi rnam t'ar in which
the dream is narrated that pre-told his imminent meeting with Buddhagupta.
Ibid., p. 686.

--- PAGE 104 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS 85.

(z6t> century) India had not yet forgotten those great links of
cultural relations which Buddhism had established between her
and far away countries from Africa to Java’. But its greatest
importance lies in his account of the position of Buddhism in the
various places and countries covered by the author’s wide travels 3.
Buddhagupta’s travels brought him to Karnataka.

“Then he started again east; so through Jarikhanda and Jagannatha *
he went to Khasarpana in Buntavarta * where he spent in prayer about
twenty days.... Then he went to Tipura ‘ and to the high land of
Tipura where there is KaSdranya or Devikota. For some days he re-
mained in the temple erected by the Mahasiddha Krsnacirya. Thence
he proceeded to Ra k'an 5, and to its (other ?) places, Haribhaiija °,
Bu k’an 7 and Balgu 8, In all these countries there is a great community of
monks, and the Buddhist teaching is widely spread. He stopped therefore

2 For a detailed resumé of the text, see, Tucci, op. cit. But as we are here
concerned with Burma, we at once go to the relevant point leaving the
reader to gather the very interesting information furnished by the text
from Dr, Tucci’s admirable paper.

% Jhaidakhanda and Puri respectively, in Orissa.

1 Perhaps a corruption of Pundravardhana,

® Certainly Tripura, modern Tipperah.

% Ofcourse Arakan, known also to Taranatha. It is not mentioned whether
the route followed was by sea or land, but the text seems to point out to a
land route connecting Tripura with Arakan. Tucci thinks that Ra k’an was
the general designation for Burma. This could hardly have been the case;
had it been so there would have been no necessity of mentioning Bu k’an
(= Pukam = Pagan) as a place separate from Ra k’an, He translates the
relevant passage as ‘‘Ra k’an and to its places Haribhafija, etc.”. Either
the translation should be ‘Ra k’an and to other places (viz.), Haribhaiija,
Bu k’an and Balgu”, or the text itself must be wrong. Ra k’an was never
so powerful as to include Bu k’an.

1 Dr. Tucci suggests that this is a corruption of Haripufijaya, north of Menam
near Lamphun. Compare also Haripuiija in the Sasanavamsa; the two seem
to me to be identical. Further, can Haribhafija - Haripufijaya— Haripufija
be the same as Tdrandtha's Mufijan? Taranatha’s group of places named’in
this connection is almost the same as Buddhagupata’s, except Mufijan and
Haribhafija.

2 Pukan = Pugimd = Pagan.

® Dr. Tucci identifies Balgu with Pegu. I consider it doubtful, for Taranatha
mentions Balgu and Pajigu (= Pegu) as two different countries; so does
Buddhagupta. In the passage quoted here Paigu (= Pegu) is mentioned as
a place distinct from Balgu. I cannot, however, offer any identification at

present.

--- PAGE 105 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

86 TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS

a long time and heard many treatises of the siitra class and as far as
possible the law of the secret mantras from pandita Dharmaksaghosa of
the big stiipas in the temple of Haribhaiija and equally from the lay
pandita Parhetanandaghogsa in the country of Balgu. These gurus were
the followers of Mahsiddha Santipada. Then he embarked again and
went to the island of Dhanasri +, In this island also there are very many
monks, ,There is a great stiipa of immense proportion which is called
Srimad Dhanyakataka, or the st#pa with the offering of astukakdya... .
It takes about one day for its pradaksina, On the cast there is a very
big town where there is an enormous assemblage of merchants coming
from different countries such as Cina, P’ren gi (= Phiraiga = mod.
Firingi) land and India, When he visited the Pratibimba Stipa he saw
the mandala of the five kulas with Vairocana as their central essence,
in the Jfianakaya stupa the mandala of the five kulas with Amitabha
as the central essence, and in Srimad Dhanyakataka with the mandala
of the five kulas with Aksobhya as the central essence. Then together
with some merchants he visited some very small islands, such as another
island in the middle of the sea called Potala, the island Paigu (= Pegu)
and island occupied by the P’nen gi (probably, Portuguese) in which
many medicinal herbs such as jati and /esi are produced, Sandhadvipa,
the great Suvarnadvipa, the great Suvarnadvipa (Sumatra), the small
Suvarnadvipa, Siiryadvipa, Candradvipa, Sarvadvipa” *.

Buddhagupta’s evidence throws a different light on the Buddhism
of Pagan. Here, as well as in Haribhafija and Balgu, there was a
great community of monks, and the Buddhist teaching was widely
spread. We cannot identify Haribhafinja and Balgu, but they must
be located somewhere in Lower Burma. We are sure of Pagan where
in the sixteenth century the Theravada was the most popular form
of religion, widely practised by the people. Buddhagupta’s evidence

1 i.e., Tennasserim, as I have suggested.

* Tucci, op. cit., pp. 697—698. Candradvipa of this passage cannot, I think,
be identified with the place of the same name in the Bakarganj district of
Bengal, not far from the sea, It seems to be a generic name ‘ike Suvarnadvipa
and Tamradvipa, and was applied to more than one island in the Bay of Ben-
gal. The small Suvarnadvipa may refer to one of the smaller islands near
Sumatra. As for Sandhddvipa, Sarvadvipa and Siryadvipa, I cannot at
present offer any identification.

Nor can I be sure of “the island in the middle of the sea called Potala”.
Buddhagupta’s account seems to suggest that it was a Buddhist centre. Is
it-the same as Potalaka referred to in a number of miniature epigraphs in
the Cambridge MS. no. Add. 1643, and in the Asiatic Society of Bengal
MS. no. A. 15? Compare nos. 16, 73 and 74 at the former and nos. 18 and
25 of the latter, in Foucher, Iconographie Bouddhique, pp. 192, 203, 210, 212.

--- PAGE 106 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

TESTIMONY OF BUDDHIST MONKS 87

seems to suggest that the Mahdyana had by this time lost its in-
fluence in Pagan, but not in Haribhafija and Balgu where he heard
‘as far as possible the law of the secret mantras’. The implication of
course is that in these countries the Mantrayana was already on
the wane.

In Tennasserim, however, the Mahayana seems to have been
rather popular. Sri Dhanyakataka has been identified with Ama-
ravati on the Kistna, though, according to certain Tibetan texts
there is a place of the name also in Tibet. In any case, the stipa,
Srimad Dhanyakataka referred to by Buddhagupta must be sought
for somewhere in Tennasserim, though it is permissible to conjecture
that it may have been erected by Mahayanist emigrants from Sri
Dhanyakataka in Southern India. It is however strange that no
such stipa or it remains exist, so far as I know, in Tennasserim. The
Cambridge MS. no. Add. 1643 has one miniature representing a
stiipa and inscribed: Ambuvisaye Sri-Sri-Dhanya-caityal? which
locates a Dhanya Caitya, evidently a stipa, in the Ambuvisaya,
which, I infer, may have been situated on a sea-coast.

It is curious that native tradition and chronicles preserve no
memory of this aspect of Buddhism which must have existed side
by side with the Hinayana, even after the great Theravada refor-
mation of Anawrahta in the elventh and of Dhammaceti in the
fifteenth century. The latter thus seems to have denied the exis-
tence of the Mahayana and its allied cults by ignoring them alto-
gether.

1 Fol. 218, v°. 2, p. 62; Foucher, Iconographie Bouddhique, p. 202. Foucher
describes the miniature as follows: “Stipa blanc, assez simple, surmonté
d’un lourd parasol. Balustrade quatre portes par trois desquelles entrent
des personnages (deux bleus et un rouge)”. It is interesting to compare this
with what Buddhagupta says about the pradaksina of the Srimad Dhanya-
kataka Caitya.

--- PAGE 107 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CHAPTER SIx

WHEN AND WHENCE DID SANSKRIT BUDDHISM
PENETRATE BURMA?

EVIDENCE OF EPIGRAPHIC RECORDS

We have now to face tha last stage of our enquiry: when and
whence did Sanskrit Buddhism, the Mahayana with its allied cults,
in particular, come to be introduced in Burma.

We have seen that a considerable number of Sanskrit inscriptions
on stone and terracotta votive tablets have been brought to light
from the ruins of Hmawza and Pagan. It is significant that the
script of these records are either Gupta-Brahmi of about the seventh
century or Eastern Nagari of the ninth, tenth and succeeding cen-
turies, both current in those countries of Eastern India now roughly
covered by the modern provinces of Bihar and Bengal. It is evident
therefore that these regions were the original home of these records.
In Hmawza, Sanskrit already makes its appearance about the
seventh century, closely following on the Pali records discovered
there which, however, are written in a script current in the Andhra -
Pallava region of South India in about the fifth and sixth centuries-
These Pali records obviously owe their inspiration to Theravada
Buddhism. Sanskrit may have been the language of either or of
both Northern Buddhism and Brahmanism which was well-known
in the ancient Pyu capital and was practised by at least a certain
section of the people. But not a single Sanskrit record, so far re-
covered from the ruins of ancient Prome, can be attributed to
Brahmanism; in fact, all of them belong to Buddhism, and can be
attributed either to the Milasarvastivadins, a Hinayanist sect using
Sanskrit as their sacred language, or to those Northern Buddhists
who were known as followers of the Mahayana. The earlier wave of
Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma seems, however, to be that of the
Milasarvastivadins, as I have tried to show; this made itself felt in
ancient Prome sometime about the seventh century.

--- PAGE 108 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

WHEN AND WHENCE DID SANSKRIT BUDDHISM, ETC. 89

About the ninth and tenth centuries, the Mahayana gained the
upper hand in Eastern India, and throughout the monastic establish-
ments in Bihar and Bengal, gods and goddesses of the Northern
pantheon, held sway. This seems to have brought in a corresponding
change in the relative position of the Sarvastivada and the Maha-
yana in Burma as well. The Sanskrit used in the short epigraphs on
terracotta votive tablets of the ninth, tenth, eleventh and the suc-
ceeding centuries is no longer the language of the Sarvastivadins; it
is the language of those Mahayanists who constantly poured into
Burma and brought with them small votive tablets, representing
sacred shrines or images and inscribed with the Buddhist formula .
The small terracotta tablet recovered from the ruins of Hmawza
and representing a standing image of Tara around which is inscribed
the Buddhist formula, is one of the numerous tablets that were
taken by pilgrims to the capital cities of Burma. The later wave of
the Buddhists in Burma seems therefore to have been initiated by
the Mahiayanists; this began to make itself felt, so far as we can
ascertain from archaeological evidence, from about the ninth or
tenth century from which time Mahayana gods and goddesses begin
to make their appearance. It is significant that not a single image,
definitely identifiable as a Mahayanist divinity, may on stylistic

. grounds be said to antedate this period !, though Sanskrit seems te

have been known in Pagan earlier for at least a century, and in
Prome already for about two or three centuries. But whether one
agrees or not with the relative chronological position of the Sar-
vastivada and the Mahayana in Burma, the evidence of the epigra-
phic records points unmistakably to the fact (a) that Sanskrit
Buddhism was introduced in Burma not later than the seventh
century (b) that, as indicated by the abundant and continuous
supply of terracorta votive tablets with legends in Sanskrit, written
in Nagari characters, and represenring Mahayana divinities, this
Sanskrit Buddhism, the Mahayana with its allied cults, in par-

1 It is true that there have been unearthed from the ruins of ancient Prome

a few reliefs on stone and terracotta tablets representing the Buddha flanked
by the Bodhisattvas, Maitreya and AvalokiteSvara, that may stylistically
be dated before the ninth century; but it is well-known that in Burma,
these two Bodhisattvas were never considered to belong exclusively to the
Mahdyina pantheon.

--- PAGE 109 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

go WHEN AND WHENCE DID SANSKRIT BUDDHISM

ticular, seems to have received a new lease of life from about the
ninth and tenth centuries and continued its career, in and around
Pagan, till about the end of the fourteenth century, and (c) that the
original home of this Sanskrit Buddhism of Burma was the North-
Eastern provinces of India.

EVIDENCE OF SCULPTURES, BRONZES AND PAINTINGS

HMAWZA

Let us now consider how these conclusions are in a general way
corroborated by a stylistic consideration of the sculptures, bronzes
and paintings representing Mahayana divinities, and by instances
of intimate historical inter-relations between Eastern India and
Burma.

At the very outset one must leave out of consideration the beauti-
ful bronze image of AvalokiteSvara from Hmawza which has been
described in a previous chapter? The facial type, the broad and
hardened forehead, the deep eyes and the bow-like moustache are
all strongly reminiscent of old Cambodian tradition, and it is not
unlikely that the image was somehow carried over from its original
home to the city of the Pyus.

First of all we have to consider the two headless Buddha images
with Sanskrit inscriptions recovered from the ruins of Hmawza, the
one from Kan-wet-khaung-kon, and the other from a mound at
Pyogingyi-kon*. It has already been pointed out that stylistically
both the images belong definitely to the late Gupta tradition of
Eastern India of about the sixth and seventh centuries. The ruins
of Hmawza have yielded a number of stone sculptures and terra-
cotta reliefs mostly representing Buddhist subjects and belonging
to this same art tradition familiar in the Magadhan region during
the 6th—8th centuries. The same observation would hold good also
with regard to the stone reliefs recovered from Hmawza representing
AvalokiteSvara and Maitreya flanking the Buddha. In connection
with a similar relief found at the ruins of the Zegu Pagoda (Hmawza)
Sir John Marshall states that the sculpture derives its style from

1 An, R.A.S.1., 1911—'12, pl. LXVIII, fig. 6.
* Ibid., 1927—'28, pp. 127—'28 and plate; ibid., 1928—'2g, p. 108, pl. LI, b.

--- PAGE 110 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PENETRATE BURMA? gr

the familiar Gupta tradition of Eastern India of about the seventh
and eighth centuries 1.

But the two small images of Bodhisattvas, one in bronze and
another in gold, recovered from the ruins at Yindaik-kwin,
Hmawza ?, seem to belong to an entirely different art-tradition, and
executed at a later date. Artistically, they appear to affiliate them-
selves to the art of the Palas of Bihar and Bengal. A stylistic con-
sideration of the few unidentified images of Bodhisattvas repre-
sented on terracotta tablets bearing Sanskrit Nagari inscriptions
also leads to the same conclusion. All of them, including the image
of Jambhala and the large-sized unidentified Bodhisattva figure
from the same locality, belong to what is called the Eastern School
of art and can be dated on stylistic grounds from about the ninth
to about the eleventh century.

PAGAN

I have elsewhere attempted an artistic examination of the
sculptures and bronzes of Pagan %. It will suffice to repeat here the
conclusions arrived at, and bring out their significance in connection
with our present subject. The majority of the Mahaydnist images
of Pagan belong, on the ground of style, to about the eleventh and
twelfth centuries, and the wall-paintings to as late as the thirteenth
(cf. the paintings of the Nandamafifia temple, built in 1248). It
follows, therefore, so far as can be judged from images and paintings
extant, that the Mahayana with its allied cults remained an active
force in Pagan, at least with a considerable section of her people,
even after the Theravada had become the state religion after the
conquest of Thaton in 1057, and it was during the suzerainty of the
Anawrahta dynasty (1044—1283) — those two centuries and a
quarter of glorious and magnificent mediaeval kingship — that the
Mahayana and other cults of Northern Buddhism had their palmy
days side by side with the much more popular Theravada.

In nearly all the images, particularly in the bronze images of
Lokanatha seated in lalitasana from the Ananda Museum, Pagan,
in the stone image of Mafijusri from the same shelter, in the image
1 An. R.A.S.B., 1909—'to, Art. 33.

2 An. R.A.S.I., 1928—'29, p. 105, pl. LII, a,c.
* Ray, “Sculptures and bronzes from Pagan”, J.J.S.0.A., July, 1934.

--- PAGE 111 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

g2 WHEN AND WHENCE DID SANSKRIT BUDDHISM

which I have identified as Vajrasattva in yab-yum, in the stone
reliefs representing AvalokiteSvara and Maitreya flanking the
Buddha, in the image of Tara from the Myothit town, there can
easily be noticed a distinct physiognomical type and a particular
method of treatment which, though slightly varying from one to
the other, may at once be said to be connected with the well-known
and contemporary art tradition of Eastern India that flourished
during the centuries covered by the rule of the Palas and Senas of
Bengal and Bihar. Even the dress and omaments and poses and
attitudes have a very close affinity with those of the numerous
examples in stone and bronze of the Eastern School },

Still more convincing is the evidence of the wall-paintings which,
from a stylistic point of view, can be classed roughly into two
groups: one well-represented group plainly derives its style from
those of contemporary miniature paintings of Bengal; the other
group shows a very close affinity with contemporary Nepalese
paintings and Jain paintings of Western India, both of which
in their turn are closely related with the Bengal MSS. paintings *.
This is indicated by a comparative study of the wall-paintings
of the Kubaukkyi, the Abeyadana, the Thanbula and similar
temples, on the one hand, and those of the Paya-thon-zu and
Nandamafifia temples on the other. A comparison of these two
parallel traditions in Burma with the miniatures of the Astasahas-
va-prajnaparamita MSS. in the Cambridge University Library (Add.
1643) and in the library of the Asiatic Society of Bengal (A. 15)
and contemporary Nepalese paintings reveals that they are very
much alike in features and physiognomy of the personages they
depict, in their poses and attitudes, dress and ornaments, and above
all in their flat modelling of the contours of their body and in the
clean sweep of their lines. The conclusion is almost irresistible that
the art-tradition of these wall-paintings of Pagan was imported
from contemporary Bengal and Nepal. Here in these countries was
fostered, it is well-known, a school of painting that continued the

* Cf. Kramrisch, “Pala and Sena Sculptures”, Rijpam, Calcutta.

* As all these are well-known to scholars, it is not necessary to go into
details. Reference may be made to Ripam, 1922, no. 2, Vredenberg, ,,Con-
tinuity of pictorial tradition in India’; J.J.S.0.A., 1934, I. ii, Kramrisch,
“Nepalese Paintings’.

owe

--- PAGE 112 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PENETRATE BURMA? 93

pictorial tradition of the classical period during the roth—r3th
"centuries.

During this long period, Eastern India, comprising the countries
of modern Bengal, Bihar and Nepal, was the stronghold of Maha-
yana Buddhism and its allied cults partly saturated with Tantrism.
While Nalanda was one of the best known centres in Bihar, no less
important were Samatata, Harikela and other localities in Bengal
where particularly the cults of Lokanatha and Tara thrived (cf.
the miniatures of the Cambridge and Asiatic Society MSS.). The
Theravada was at a discount, and even Sarvastivada which in
I-tsing’s time was so widely prevalent, seems to have lost its in-
fluence.

The evidence of cultural relations between Burma and Eastern
India during these centuries is almost overwhelming. The large
number of terracotta votive tablets evidently carried over from
Eastern India to Pagan and other localities, the Mah4-bodhi temple
of Pagan, an unsuccessful imitation of the Bodh-gaya temple, the
repeated missions of Pagan kings to the shrine at Bodh-gaya, and
the accounts, contained in Burmese chronicles, of Burmese mer-
chants visiting the ports of Bengal, all bear testimony to the inti-
mate relations that existed between Burma and Eastern India. One
piece of evidence the importance of which for the present subject
has not yet been fully realised, may be detailed here. It is furnished
by two accounts of the reigns of Kyanzittha, Alaungsithu and
Narathu recorded in Burmese chronicles. These romantic accounts
are well-known in Burma and are acted on the stage to this day *.
Here it will suffice to say that while one refers to the celebrated
love-romance of the Prince of Pateikkara with the only daughter
of Kyanzittha, the other refers to the marriage of a Pateikkara
princess by Narathu, the eventual murder of the princess by
Narathu, and the consequent counter-murder of Narathu by
the desperados sent by the king of Pateikkara in revenge. The
identification of Pateikkara was for years a puzzle to scholars in
Burma, though the identity of the kingdom with Patikara in the
Tipperah district (included in ancient Harikel) had been established

1 Reference may be made to Phayre, History of Burma, pp. 37, 40; Harvey,
History of Burma; An. R.A.S.B., 1923, p. 32.

--- PAGE 113 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

94. WHEN AND WHENCE DID SANSKRIT BUDDHISM

long ago 1. This identification is also supported by the position of
the kingdom according to the Burmese chronicles, and now finally
established by the Maynamati Copper-plate of Ranavankamalla
Harikaladeva*. It proves once more that for about a century
(to84—x1190) Pagan maintained a very intimate relation with
Pateikkara or Pattikera in ancient Harikela which was reputed as
a centre of Mahayana Buddhism. The Maynamati Copper-plate
seems also to indicate that Patikara (the Indian form of Burmese
Pateikkara) was a centre of worship of the Mahayana goddess
Durgottara as well as a seat of the Sahaja cult, besides having been
well-known for the worship of another Mahayana god, Lokanatha,

We have been able to adduce numerous indications regarding the
tine when and the locality whence the Mahayana and its allied cults
were introduced in Burma. This happened not later than the ninth
or tenth century, possibly even earlier; it flourished in Pagan during
the eleventh, twelfth and thirteenth centuries after which period
Pagan sank into singificance. Strange to say the period coincides
almost exactly with the time when the Theravada was enjoying a
new lease of life under the patronage of the kings of the Pagan
dynasty. The Mahayana and its allied cults were in all probability,
as we have seen above, introduced in Burma from the region that
now comprises Bihar and Bengal. This, again, is curious and inter-
esting; for throughout these centuries, Pagan always kept her face
turned towards Ceylon for guidance and inspiration in all matters
relating to the newly introduced faith of the Theravada. The
metropolis sent her masters of the religion, Uttarajiva and Capata
and a host of others in succession, to Ceylon to equip themselves
for the great work of reformation in Burma through the purer faith
of the Theravada. It is significant that these theras did not go to
Kaficipuram or Kaveripattanam whence Burma must originally
have received the Southern form of Buddhism. Evidently, these and
other places in the eastern coastal regions of South India had lost
their importance as centres of Buddhist learning, and Ceylon had
superseded them. This is confirmed by the Kalyani inscriptions of
king Dhammaceti which prove that Ceylon had by the later half

1 Tripura Rajamala, pp. 4-6.
* Ind. Hist. Quart., IX, i, pp. 282—'89,

fen

--- PAGE 114 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

PENETRATE BURMA? 95

of the eleventh century grown to so great importance as a Buddhist
centre that mahatheras from such diverse and distant countries as
Tamralipti, Kamboja and KAficipuram flocked to that island to
receive training and inspiration.

It is now easier for us to see how our conclusions as to the intro-
duction and spread of the Mahayana and its allied cults agree in
the main with the account of the spread of Buddhism as outlined by
Taranatha and supplemented by the testimonies of Buddhagupta
and the Pag Sam Jon Zang. The sum-total of what Taranatha says
in this connection is that it was during the rule of the Palas, but
more particularly, during that of the (four) Senas of Bengal that the
Mahayana made itself strongly felt in Pagan, Pegu and Arakan, so
much so that even the monks of MadhyadeSa received their training
in these and other centres of the Koki land, and that it was from
Bihar and Bengal that the religion was introduced there. This
agreesremarkably well with the conclusions we have arrived at from
a study of the archaeological remains.

--- PAGE 115 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CONCLUSIONS

The domain of Sanskrit Buddhism in Burma may, for the sake
of convenience, be divided in two divisions: (a) Lower Burma with
its political centre at the Pyu capital of Prome and later on at the
Talaing capital of Thaton; (b) Upper Burma with its centre at
Pagan. The earliest form of Sanskrit Buddhism is probably the
Milasarvastivada-nikaya which appears to have been introduced in
the old Pyu capital from Magadha in Eastern India sometime before
the seventh century. This is suggested by the discovery of a number
of Buddhist images exhibiting the later Gupta style and, some of
them, inscribed with Sanskrit inscriptions in the Gupta-Brahmi
script of Eastern India, and by the evidence of I-tsing as well. The
Millasarvastivada-nikaya seems thus to have flourished side by
side with the Sthaviravada-nikaya which had been introduced
there, evidently from the coast of Coromandel and the Telegu
country, some time before the sixth century. It was undoubtedly the
religion much more widely professed than either the Sarvastivada
or Brahmanism. This seems to have been the state of religion in
ancient Prome till at least as late as the eighth and ninth centuries
when Mahayana Buddhism seems to have made its appearance to
add another factor to the already varied religious life of the capital.
Gods and goddesses of the Mahayana pantheon must have been
worshipped there till as late as the tenth century; this is determined
not only by the palaeography of the inscriptions on the‘numerous
_terracotta votive tablets found there, but also by the style of the
few images of the Mahayana pantheon recovered from the ruins of
the old city. They further tend to prove that the Mahayana in Lower
Burma was introduced from Eastern India, more definitely from
the Magadhan region, the intercourse having been maintained by
sea which was probably the easiest route to reach the ports of
peninsular Burma.

--- PAGE 116 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CONCLUSIONS 97

But already by about the ninth century, if not earlier, ancient
Prome was losing its political importance; in the race for power
and supremacy the Talaings were outwitting the exhausted Pyus.
The Talaings seem to have had their centre at Thaton, then just on
the sea-shore, where an active centre of Theravada Buddhism was
gradually growing up. By about the middle of the eleventh century
when Manuha was on the throne of Thaton, the city swarmed with
learned monks in a hundred monasteries whose libraries contained
all the wisdom of the faith recorded in Pali!. The Mahayana seems
scarcely to have penetrated there; we have at least no evidence to
that effect.

We learn a different story in respect to Pagan and other centres
of Upper Burma. If Taranatha deserves any credit, the introduction
of Mahayana Buddhism in Burma lies as far back as at least the
fifth century, for, according to him, the Mahayana was first intro-
duced in the Koki land by the pupils of Vasubandhu ‘from which
time it continued to exist uninterruptedly’. This finds an indirect
confirmation in the statement of the Burmese chronicles, e.g. ,of
the Hmannan, to the effect that the ‘religion (Buddhism) gradually
grew weak from the reign of king Thaittang (c. 516—523), founder
of the city of Tampavati (= Thamahti, near Pagan), and because
there was no Pitaka or sacred writ, only the doctrines of the Ari
lords at Thamahti were generally adopted’ *. This seems to suggest
that the cult of Ari, originally a Mahayana cult, was already known
there before the beginning of the sixth century. But the most
flourishing period of the Mah4yana and allied cults in Pagan and
other centres of Upper Burma must have begun from the ninth
century (from the reign of the Pala king Dharmapila, according to
T&ranatha), and lasted until at least the end of the thirteenth. This

1 Compare the accounts of the invasion and eventual conquest of Thaton
by Anawrahta, 1057, in the Hmannan, the Sasanavamsa, the Kalyani inscrip-
tions, and other Burmese chronicles. The cumulated evidence seems to
convey the impression of a very flourishing existence of the Theravada in
the Talaing capital in the middle of the eleventh century.

2 According to the Burmese chronicles, Buddhism came to be introduced
in Burma even during the life time of the Buddha himself, and that it re-
tained its purity till the cult of the Ari (originally a Mahdy&na cult) was
introduced when the purer religion began to decline (in the opinion of later
Theravadi chroniclers).

7

--- PAGE 117 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

98 CONCLUSIONS

is testified to not only by Taranatha and the author of the Pag Sam
Jon Zang, but also by extant images of deities of the Mahayana and
Tantrayana, and by the no less important evidence furnished bya
large number of Sanskrit inscriptions on terracotta votive tablets.
As to the country from where these cults were introduced in Burma,
all available evidence points to Bihar and Bengal, more particularly
to Bengal, at least in respect of the later phases of the cults when
they came to be saturated with Tantric rites, The prevalence of
Tantrayana is proved by the cult of the Aris, but more definitely
by the wall-paintings of the Paya-thon-zu and the Nandamafifia
Temples and one or two images in stone and bronze. According to
Taranatha, the Mantrayana and Kalacakrayana were also known
in Pagan; the introduction of the latter is proved by the existence
of Kalacakra texts in the monastic libraries of Upper Burma aslateas
the middle of the fifteenth century. All these evidently were intro-
duced from Bengal, and perhaps also from Bihar, the intercourse
between the two countries being maintained probably both by land
and sea. A land route through Assam and Manipur was still known
in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

According to Taranatha, Mahayana Buddhism and its allied cults
existed in Pegu and Arakan as well, and the account of Buddha-
gupta’s travels seems to indicate that it was known also in Tennas-
serim, But, unfortunately we have no evidence from independent
Sources to verify their testimony, though there is nothing ante-
cedently improbable in it. .

It has already been pointed out that the floursishing period of the
Mahayana and its allied cults coincides for the greater part with
the golden period of the great Theravada reformation (c. 1057—
c. 1300 A.D.). In fact, the Theravada became the religion of the
state and the people who gradually gave up their allegiance to older
faiths; Mahayana Buddhism could hardly keep pace with the grow-
ing popularity of the new religion in which the people found a
simpler and purer faith, and soon it became a lost cause, though
it still continued to attract a minor section of the people. The
attitude of the Theravada towards the Mahayana and its allied
cults, except with the degenerated sect of the Aris, seems to have
been one of absolute tolerance, This is suggested by the existence
of Mahayanist and Tantric places of worship not very far from the

Se ee

--- PAGE 118 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CONCLUSIONS 99

heart of the capital city, as well as by the finds of Mahayana images
in what were presumably places of worship of the Theravadins, and,
as already stated, also by the Nandamaiifia inscription of 1248.
Even with regard to the Aris, the attitude of the court and people
does not seem to have been very cruel and severe. Anawrahta’s
drive against them must have been only partially successful; the
very fact that they had a strong centre with temples and monasteries
just on the outskirts of the metropolis proves that they continued
to maintain themselves and were tolerated by the people around.
There is also evidence to show that their daily necessities of monastic
life were attended to by the court and perhaps also by lay men.

Mahayana Buddhism and its allied cults in Pagan, when we see
them in existence, were after all practised by only a section of the
people who, we may infer, had a full-fledged organisation of their
own, but the Theravada being the much more popular and powerful
religion could well afford to look at its vanquished rival with a
confident smile. The two faiths seem to have lived side by side till
at last the Theravada, always with the support of the throne, was
able to emerge completely triumphant and wipe out even the
memory of its rival. But in the course of centuries of close neigh-
bourhood, the Theravada of Burma came to absorb some of the
elements of its sister faith, and some of the gods of the Mahayana
pantheon, e.g., AvalokiteSvara and Maitreya, were even adopted
by the Theravadins. This is perhaps why Taranatha says that in the
Koki countries the “Mahayana and the Hinayana were not always
distinguishable’.

--- PAGE 119 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY

(This bibliography is not claimed to be exhaustive; publications which
have been used mainly as references are excluded, as they have been mention-
ed in their proper places in the text and footnotes. It includes only those
Publications that have direct bearing on the subject of this monograph,
touching on it in more or less details).

Archaeological Survey of Burma, Annual Reports of the Archaeological Survey,
Burma Circle, 1901—'26, Superintendent, Government Printing,
Rangoon.

—— Annual Album of photographs of sculptures, bronzes, paintings,
monuments, inscriptions, etc., of Burma, Office of the Archaeological
Survey, Burma Circle, Mandalay.

Archaeological Survey of India, Annual Reports of the Archaeological Survey
of India, 1901—to date, Simla and Delhi.

Bode, Mabel, The Pali Literature of Burma, Royal Asiatic Society, London.

—— Sdsanavasma, Pali Text Society, London.

Burma Research Society, Journal of the Burma Research Society, 1910—to
date, Rangoon.

Duroiselle, Charles, The Aris of Burma and Tantric Buddhism”, in An,
RAS, 1915—'16, PP. 79—93.

— [Stray notes, mainly in the An. RAS.B., An. RAS, JBRS.,
and the B.E.F.E.0,}.

Finot, Louis, “Un nouveau document sur le buddhisme birman”, in J.A.,
XX, Joul-Aout, ror2, p. 121 ff.

Forchammer, E., The Jardine Prize: an essay on the sources and development of
Burmese Law, Rangoon.

Government of Burma, Inscriptions of Pagan, Pinya and Ava. Superinten-
dent, Government Printing, Rangoon, 1892,

—— Inscriptions copied from the stones collected by Bodawpaya, 2 vols,
Superintendent, Government Printing, Rangoon, 1897.

—— Inscriptions collected in Upper Burma, 2 vols. Superintendent, Govern-
ment Printing, Rangoon, 1900 and 1903.

—— Original Inscriptions collected by king Bodawpaya in Upper Burma
now in the Patodawgyi Pagoda, Amarapura, Superintendent, Govern-
ment Printing, Rangoon, 1913.

Harvey, G. E., History of Burma, Oxford University Press, 1925.

Hmannan Yazawin, 3 vols. Upper Burma Press, Mandalay.

--- PAGE 120 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

BIBLIOGRAPHY 1or

I-tsing, I-tsing’s records of the Western World, edited and translated by J.
Takakusu, Clarendon Press. Oxford.
Luce, G. H., “Burma, with special reference to her relations with China’’,
in J.B.R.S, XIV, ii, August, 1925.
Maung Tin, Pe and Luce, G. H., The Glass Palace Chronicle, Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Ray, Niharranjan, ‘‘Lokandtha and other Mahayana Gods in Burma”, in
Buddhistic Studies, Vol. I, Calcutta, 1931.
—— ‘Mahay4nist and Tantric Texts in Burma”, in Indian Culture, Vol. I,
no, 2, pp. 282—84.
Sumpa Khan-po Yesepal Joz, Pag Sam Jon Zang, I, edited by Sarat Chandra
Das, Presidency Jail Press, Calcutta, 1908, pp. 123—24.
T&ranadtha, Ta@vandtha's Geschichte des Buddhismus in Indien, transtated from
Tibetan by Schiefner, St. Petersburg, 1869.
Tin, U, ‘‘Mahayanism in Pagan”, in J.B.R.S.; XIX, ii, August, 1929. pp.
36—42.
Taw Sein Ko, Burmese Sketches, Rangoon.
Tucci, G., ‘‘The sea and land travels of a Buddhist Sadhu in the sixteenth
century”, in Ind. Hist. Quart., VII, no. 4, December, 1931, pp. 683—
702.
Watters, Yuan Chwang, 2 vols. London.

--- PAGE 121 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 122 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Abeyadana 56//., 92.
Abhayagiri 79.
Abhayakara 76, 78, 81
Abhidharma 74, 78, 81
Acawkrwam 42
Adityavarman 13.
Africa 84, 85
Aksobhya 13, 86
Alaungsithu 42, 93
Amaravati 4, 87.
Amarendrapura 11.
Ambuvisaya 87.
Amitabha 46, 86
Amogasiddhi 46.
Anandacandra 78.
Ananda Museum 41, 46,
47, 5%, 91
Temple 2, 45,
48
Anawrahta (Anaorata)
2, 14, 30, 31, 33, 42,
57, 64/f., 83, 87, 91,
97
Anawrahtaminsaw 64,
65
Andhra 4, 88
Angkor Thom 11, 12
Anguttara Nikdya 4.
Aniruddha (Anurud-
dha) 42, 68,
Annam 24, 26
Antarvedi 76
Aparantaka 73, 77.
Arakan 43, 77/f., 85, 98.
Archipelago 84.
Arhanta 68.
Ari 16, 17, 62/f., 97ff.

INDEX

Ari-gyi-do-ahnwe 66,

Arimaddanapura 64.

Arpacana 46.

Aruna 60.

Arya 63.

Asam 74.

A-shan 29,

Asia 1, 40, 92.

Asoka (Asoka) 3, 77, 80.

Assam 14, 15, 74, 77,
80, 98.

Astasahasra-prajnapa-
ramita 92.

Atiga ro,

Ava 34, 66, 67, 68, 79

AvalokiteSvara 11, 40/ff,
89, 90, 92, 99.

Ayuthia 8, 23.

Bagchi 11, 37.

Bakarganj 86.

Balaputradeva ro.

Balgu 77, 80, 85, 87.

Bali 2, 28,

Bandyaghati 73.

Bangala 74.

Bangaladesa 74.

Banteai Chmar 11.

Barabudur 9, 10, 14, 58.

Baros 28.

Bati 6.

Bhattacharya 46, 47,
51, 61.

Bawbawgyi Pagoda 3.

Bayon 11.

Beal 24.

Benares 45.

Bengal 10, 13, 14, 31,
33, 37, 49, 58, 70, 73,
74, 75, 79, 80, 82, 86,
88, 89, 91, 92, 93, 94,
95, 98.

Bengali 16, 31, 32, 34.

Bergaigne 7.

Bernard Free Library
43.

Bhangala 74, 76, 77.

Bhataghati 73.

Bhattasali 49.

Bhojanagara 29,

Bihar 14, 13, 33, 76, 80,
82, 88, 89, 91, 92, 93,
94, 95, 98.

Bidagataik 2.

Bilhana 75.

Blagden 19.

Blobzan-dpal-ldan-ye-
Ses 84.

Bodawpaya 79.

Bode 34, 35, 69.

Bodh-gay4 21, 33, 75,
93-

Borneo 6, 7, 28, 30.

Brahma 13, 43-

Brahmanism 5, 7, 8.

Brahmi 19, 20, 22, 30,
88, 96.

Buddhaghosa(ghosa) 3,
4.

Buddhagupta 6, 72,
84/f., 95.

Buddhamitra 76.

Buddhapurana 73.

Buddhasena 77.

--- PAGE 123 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

104

Bihler 4.

Bu k’an 85.
Bukit Muriam 6.
Buntavarta 85.
Burney 68.

Calukya 75.

Cambay 36.

Campa 8, 12, 14, 23, 27,
20, 77, 80, 84.

Campitala (Campita)
49.

Candra 76.

Candradvipa 86,

Candrakaragupta 76,
8r.

Candraprabha 46,

Canton 27.

Capata 5, 94.

Cauk-hpaya-hla 50.

Ceram 29.

Ceylon 1, 5, 8, 29, 30,
78, 79, 94-

Chakravarti 9.

Chatterji 7, 9, ro, 11,
12, 13.

Chhabra 6, 9. .

Ch’ang Chun 25.

Chau-ju-cua 25, 26, 78.

Chavannes 23//., 27, 78.

Chen-la 27.

Chia-mo-lang-chia 23,
24, 27.

Chih-ngan 27,

Ch’ih-t’u 25.

China 24, 27, 29.

Chindwin 15.

Cina 86.

Coedés 7, 9, 25, 26, 78.

Cola (Coda) 5.

Cordier 25, 76.

Coromandel 96.

Das ro,
DaSabala 76.

INDEX

Devapala ro.
Devikota 85.
Dhammaceti 2, 67, 87,
94.
Dhammadassi 64, 65.
Dhana&éri 79, 86.
Dhanasridvipa 78, 79.
Dhanya Caitya 87.
Dhanya Kataka 86, 87.
Dharmadasa 75.
Dharmakirti 36, 37.
Dharmiksaghosa 86.
Dharmapila 36, 78, 97.
Dharmasastras 12.
Dharmottara 36.
Dikshit 19.
Dipankara 10, 45.
Divine Land 29.
Dong-Duong 12.
Dpal-brtsegsraksita 37.
Durgottara 94.
Duroiselle 17, 19, 32, 33,
47, 53, 62, 63, 67, 68,
69, 70.
Dvadravati 8, 23, 24,
26.

Eliot 13.
Er-langa 28.

Fa-hien 8,

Fan-chik 79.

Ferrand 15, 25, 26, 28,
29.

Finot 3, 4, 62, 63, 70,
81, 83.

Firingi 86.

Forchammer 34, 35.

Fo-shih-pu-lo 29.

Foucher 12, 49, 86, 87.

Foulkes 3.

Fou-nan (Fii-nan) 6, 7,
27.

Further-India 1, 7, 12,
24, 27, 33.

Ganga 76.

Gautama (Gotama) 42,
45-

Ghazni 75.

Girivarta 77.

Glass Palace Chronicle
15.

Godavari 6.

Goraksa 77.

Goran 29.

Grantha 6, 12.

Great Black Mountain
23.

Grub c’en Buddha-gup-
pthafi... 84.

Gsan-bahi rnam tar 84.

Guhyadatta 74.

Gulun 29.

Gunavarman 7.

Gunong Jérai 26.

Gupta 19, 20, 22, 30,
88, 96.

Gurun 29.

Hackmann 3.
Halahala 42.
Hathsavati 80.
Haribhafija 85, 86, 87.
Hariharalaya 11.
Harihariharivahanod-
bhava Lokeévara
42.
Harikdladeva 94.
Harikel (Harikela) 49,
93.
Haripufija 85.
Haripufijaya 85.
Haritasena 77.
Harivarmadeva 37.
Harivikrama 19, 20.
Harsa Siladitya 74.
Harvey 62, 93.
Hasam 74, 77.
Hayagriva 40, 47, 49,
50, 60.

--- PAGE 124 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Hchi bslu-ba sgrol-ma
dharmohi sgrub-thabs
38.

Hehi bslubahi: man-nhag-
gi sgrol-mahi sgrub-
thabs 38.

Hetubindu 36, 37.

Hetubindu-tika 36.

Hevajra 12.

Hinayana 3, 7, 16, 22,
29, 30, 43, 77, 83, 87,
99.

Hinduism 22.

Hirth 25.

Hiuen Thsang 21, 23,
24ff., 79.

Hmannan (Yazawin) 2,
62, 63, 66, 68, 70, 97.

Hmazwa 3, 4, 20, 23,
40, 41, 43, 47, 82, 83,
88, 89, 90.

Ho-ling 27, 28, 78.

Hiiber 70.

I-hsiian 27.

Ikhtiyar-ud-din-Mu-
hammad 75.

T-lang 27.

Tlahgdsogam 25, 26.

India 1, 4, 5, 8, 12, 14,
15, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24,
28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 58,
76, 78, 83, 84, 86, 87,
88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 94,

Indian Archipelago 8.

Indo-China 1, 5, 9.

Indonesia r, 5, 7, 9, 12,
33.

Indra 43, 75-

Indradatta 73.

Indravarman 12.

Irrawady 15.

Islam 75.

Igvara 77.

INDEX

I-tsing 8, 9, 21/f., 33,
93, 96.

Jagaddala 76.

Jagannatha 85.

Jaiya 78, 79.

Jambhala 40, 47, 91.

Jambi 28.

Japan 37.

Jardine 34, 35-

Jarikhanda 85.

Java 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 14,
24, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30,
40, 58, 78, 85.

Jayacandravarman 19,
20.

Jayadeva 74.

Jaya Indravarman 12.

Jayasura 42.

Jayavarman 7.

Jayavarman IT rr, 12.

Jayavarman V rr.

Jhadakhanda 85.

Jinamitra 36.

Jfianakaragupta 76.

Jiianakiya 86.

Johor 28.

Jonaraja 75.

Kalacakra 37, 38, 39,
78, 83.

Ka&lacakrayana 98.

Kadamba 4, 22, 30.

Ka-lang-ka 21.

Kalasan 9, 10.

Kalinga 5, 21.

Kalyani 2, 67, 94, 97.

Kamalanka 23, 24, 25,
26, 27.

Kamboja 7, 8, 11, 12,
14, 27, 40, 76, 77, 80,
81, 84, 95.

Kamaripa 77.

Kamasastras 34.

Kanada-Telegu 4, 22,30.

105

Kaficipuram 4, 94, 95.

Kaveripattanam 4, 94.

Kan-wet-khaung-kon
19, 20, 22, go.

Kedah 6, 10, 26.

Kélurak 9.

Keéini 46.

Khagarpana 42, 85.

Kinmungyon 47.

Koki 38, 73, 77, 78, 80,
81, 82, 83, 84, 95, 97
99.

Kra 25.

Kramrisch 92.

Krétanagara 13.

Krom 9, 12, 14, 29.

Krsnacarya 85.

Ksemendrabhadra 73.

Kubaukkyi 49, 58, 92.

Kukis 80.

K’u-lun 29.

Kufijarakarna 13.

Kyawza 69.

Kyanzittha 57, 93.

Kyundawza 4.

Laghuhkdlacakratantra-
v@ja-tiha 37, 38.
Laghukdlacakva-fiké 37.
Lamphun 85.
Lang-chia 78.
Lang-chia (-shu) 23/f.
Lang-ya 23.
Lang-ya-hsiu 26.
Lang-ya-hsii 25, 26.
Lang-ya-hsun 25.
Lang-saki 25.
Lankisu 23, 24.
Lata 28, 29, 75.

--- PAGE 125 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

106

Lavasena 75, 76.

Lénkasuka 25, 26.

Levi 79.

Liang-shu 25, 26.

Ligor 9, 26.

Ling-ya-ssu 25.

Ling-yu-ssu-chia 25, 26.

Lin-i 8, 23, 27, 20.

Locac 25.

Lokanatha 10, 16, 4o//.,
93, 94.

LokeSvara 11, 12, 42.

Luce 24, 25, 26, 29, 50,
58, 59, 64.

Madamaliigam 78.

MadhyadeSa 30, 78, 81,
95+

Magacha 13, 20, 21, 28,
39, 33, 74, 75, 79, 78,
81, 90, 96.

Magwe 45.

Maha-bodhi 93.

Mahahdlacakha 36, 37.

Mahdhalacakha-tiké 36.

Mahakalacakra 37, 38.

Mahamuni 43.

Maharaja Van Tawkri
43-

Mahdsarnghika-nikaya
28.

Mahasin 28.

Mahdavihara 79.

Mahayanist Sthavira
2.

Mahmud 75.

Maitreya 4o/f., 89, 90,
92, 99.

Majapahit 25.

makdaras 13.

Malay 9.

Malay Archipelago 1.
Malay Peninsula 1, 6, 7,
10, 25, 26, 30, 78.

Malayu 8, 9.

INDEX

Manawgon 45.

Manipur 14, 15.

Manitasena 75.

Maifijughosa 9.

Mafijukumara 53.

Maifijusri 9, 40//., or.

MajfijuSrimilakalpa 73.

Mantrayana 13, 78, 81,
98.

Manuha 2, 97.

Marco Polo 25.

Markkaman 29.

Marshall go.

Masud 75.

Maunggan 3.

Maung Tin 64.

Maynamati 94.

Menam 24, 83.

Méndut ro.

Metriya 43.

Mettafi 42.

Metteya 42.

Minhaj 75, 76.

Mingalazedi 58.

Minnanthu 51, 56.

Mleccha 75.

Mo-chia-man 29.

Moens 13.

Mo-ho-hsin 28.

Mo-lo-yu 28, 29.

Mrammadesa 2.

Mrtyuvaficana 36.

Mytyuvaficanopadesa-
tdvasadhana 38.

Mytyuvaficanasitatara-
sadhana 38.

Muhammad-i-Bakhtyar
75» 76, 77:

Muner 76.

Munimatalamkara 76.

Mufijan 76, 77, 81, 85

Myingyan 68.

Myinpagan 2, 49, 56,
57, 58.

Myothit 45.

Naga 63, 70.

Nagarakrétagama 13,
25, 26, 29.

Nagari 32, 15, 22, 31,
32, 33, 34, 45, 46, 78,
82, 88, 89.

Nagarjuna 74.

Nagarjunikonda 4, 74.

Nagasena 7.

Nagayon 58.

Nalagiri 55.

Nalanda 10, 33, 46, 74,
93.

N&masangiti 53.

Nandamaiifia 16, 51/f., °

91, 92, 98, 99.
Nandi 57.
Nangata 77, 80.
N’'an hai chi huli nai fa
ch'en 23.
Narapatisithu 54.
Narathu 93.
Natesvara 77.
Nathlaung 82.
Nausari 75.
Negapatam ro,
Nepal ro, 13, 14, 37, 46,
51, 70, 76, 93.
Nikobar 27, 78.
Nirvana 42.
Nizim-ud-din 76,
Nyaung Sawrahan 63.
Nyaung-u 50.
Nydyabindu 36.
Nydyabindu-tikd 36.

Odantapuri 75, 76, 81,
82.

Odantavihara 76.

Odivisa 74, 76.

Odravisaya 74.

Orissa 85.

Padmapani 9.
Pagan 2, 4, 5, 14, 16,

--- PAGE 126 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

17, 3%, 32, 33, 34, 38,
40ff.
Pagan Raja Van Thit

43
Pag Sam Jon Zang 72,
95, 98.
Pahtogyi 64.
Pahtonge 64.
Paigu 79, 85.
Pajigu 85.
Pakhoi 27.
Pan 12.
paficamakaras 13.
Pafifiasimi 35.
P’an-p'an 27.
Panthagu 5.
Pala 13, 14, 76, 82, 95,
97.
Pallava 4, 5, 6, 12, 88.
Palembang 6, 24, 25, 28.
Parhetanandaghosa 86.
Pasuruan 29.
Patavesa 74.
Patavisaya 74.
Pateikkara 93, 94.
Pathama-min-gaung 67.
Paticcasamuppdda sutta

4
Patikara 93, 94.
Patothamya 58, 64.
Pattikera 94.

Pawon 10.
Paya-thon-zu 16, 51/f.,

92, 98.

Payigu 79.
Payigudvipa 78, 79.
Pegu 3, 24, 38, 72, 79,

80, 81, 85, 86, 89.
Pelliot 6, 7, 23, 25, 26,

28, 34, 68.

Pei Shih 25.
Pembuan 28.
P'én-p’én 28.
Phayre 23, 24, 62, 70,
93.

INDEX

Phiranga 86,

Piao 3.

Pinya 34, 66, 68, 79.

P'nen-gi 86.

P’o-li 28.

P’o-lu-shih 28.

Popa 62.

Potala 86.

Potalaka 86.

Prajiaparamita 46, 60.

Prapafica 13.

Prasat Pram Lovén 7.

Pratibimba Stipa 86.

Pratitasena 77.

P’ren gi 86.

Prome 3, 5, 19, 43, 44,
88, 89, 96, 97.

Ptolemy 15.

Pugadma 64, 77, 85.

Pugarama 64.

Pukam (Pukam) 74, 75,
77-

Pukan (Pukan) 75, 85.

Pukhang 75.

Pukham 76, 77, 80, 81.

Pulakesi Avanijana-
graya 75.

Pundravardhana 85.

Punna 64.

Purl &5.

Pyogingyi-kon 90.

Pyu 3, 19, 20, 21, 80, 90,
96, 97.

Radha 74.
Rajendracola 25, 26, 74.
Rajendravarman 11.
Ra k’an 85.
Rakhin 77, 80.
Raktamala 38.
Raktayamdarisadhana 38.
Raktayamdaritantravaja
38.
Ramajfifiadesa 2.
Ramapila 76.

107

Rame Khombeng 63.
Ranavankamalla 94.
Rangoon 43, 58.
Rathika (sena) 75, 76.
Ratnabhinu 7.
Ratnamala 38.
Ratnamala-tika 38.
Ratnamati 75.
Ratnaraksita 76.
Ratnasambhava 46,
Ratnasimha 7.
Rattamala 36, 38.
Rattamala-tika 36.
Raverty 75, 76, 77-
Ravisribhadra 76, 81.
Ray 34, 82, 91.
Red Province 29.
Rinchen bzan-po 38.
Rockhill 25.
Rudradeva 32.
Rouffaer 28.

Stdhanamala 42, 46.
Saggaing 66, 79.
Sahaja 94.

Sailendra 9, 10, 11.
S&kyamuni (Sakya) 2,

9.
Sakyasri 76.
Samanakuttakas 16, 17,

62/f.

Samatata 24, 49, 93.
Sam-bha-lahi-lam-yig

84.

Sarnghadasa 75.
Sammiti-nikaya 8, 28,

29.

Samuti 68.
Sandhadvipa 86.
San-fo-ch’i 25.
Sang-hyang Kamahay-

anikan 13.

Sans rgyas Shas pa 84.
Santinatha 36.
Santipada 86,

--- PAGE 127 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

108

Sarnath 20, 33, 46.

Sarvadvipa 86,

Sarvastivada 7, 8, r9/f.,
33, 89, 96.

Sdsanavamsa 2, 16, 35,
62, 68, 69, 85, 97.

Sawrahan 64.

Sawyun 66.

Schiefner 73//.

Schlegel 25.

Seinnyet Pagodas 50,

Seittopahto 64.

Sena 73, 75, 78, 80, 82,
95.

Shan 67.

She-ho-po-ti 8, 23, 27,
29.

Shih-li-c’ha-ta-lo 3, 23,
26, 29, 30.

Shih-li-fo-shih 28,

Shin Arahan 54, 55, 64,
65, 71.

Shu-chuan 23.

Shwekugyi 42, 54, 58.

Shwesandaw 58,

Shwezigon 58.

Siam 1, 8, 23, 27.

74.

Simhajati 78.

Simhala 28, 78, 79.

Sindhu (deéa) 28, 29, 76.

Singapur 28.

Singasari 13.

Siva 13, 57.

Sivaism (Saiva) 11, 12,
13, 14.

Smith 3.

Sona 3, 77.

Sravakas 76, 77, 79, 81.

Srijfiana 76, 81.

3, 23, 24, 26,

27, 28.

Sripaduka 79.

Srivijaya 8, 9, 10, xx,
25, 28,

INDEX

Ssu Ch’uan 23.

Sthavira-nikdya 5, 28,
29.

Sthaviravada 7, 96.

Subhajata 78,

Sudaungpyi Monastery
44-

Sugata 42.

Sui shu 25, 26.

Sukhdvati Lokesvara
42.

Sukhotaya 63.

Sumatra 6, 8, 9, 11, 12,
13, 14, 25, 28, 30, 78,
86.

Surblala 42.

Sirya 60.

Siiryadvipa 86.

Siryaprabha 46.

Suvannabhimi 3, 77,
79.

Suvarnadvipa 78, 79,
85.

Suvarnapura 10.

Tabagat-i-Nasiri 75, 76,
77

Tagoung (Tagaung) 15,
64

Taika 75.
Tai p’ing huan yit chi
28.
Tajika 75, 76.
Takakusu 8, 9, 21, 23,
24, 28, 29, 30.
Talaing 2, 14, 42, 50,
67, 79, 96, 97.
Talang Tuwo 6, 7.
Tambadvipa 68,
Tamluk 79.
Tampavati 64.
Tamradvipa 78, 79, 86.
Tamralingam 78, 79.
Tamralipti 14, 27, 78,
79% 95-

Tamraparni 79.

Tamrapattanam 78, 79.

Tanansari 79.

Tananéri 79.

Tangyur 36, 37.

Tanjore 25, 78.

Tan-mo-ling 78.

Tan-mo-li-ti 78.

Tao-lin 28, 78, 79.

Ta Prohm 6, 7.

Tan-tan 28.

Tantra 12, 34.

Tantrayana 13, 14, 33,
98.

Tard 9, 40/f., 89, 92, 93.

Taranatha 33, 38, 39,
7211. 82}f., 95, 97, 98.

Ta-ta 28.

Taung-dwin 34.

Tavoy 26.

Taw Sein Ko 62, 70.

Telegu 96.

Tennasserim 24, 25, 26,
54, 71, 81, 86, 87, 98.

Thai 63.

Thaittang 64, 97.

Thamati (Thamahti) 62,
64, 65, 97.

Thanbula 56, 58, 92.

Thap-mudi 7,

Thatbififiyn 54, 58.

Thaton 2, 3, 5, 26, 32,
33, 64, 68, 79, 96, 97.

Tharakittara (Thari) 3,
64.

Thaungdut 15.

Theravada 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
8, 14, 15, 17, 22, 30,
32, 33, 38, 40, 43, 52,
6sff., 83, 86, or, 94,
97, 98, 99.

Thihathu 66.

Thinlinpahto 64.

Thiripyissaya 64.

Thiparama 79.

--- PAGE 128 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Tibet 23, 76, 84.

Tipperah 33, 77, 85, 93.

Tipura 85.

Tirtha 75, 76.
Tirumalaya 74.
Tnansi 79.
To-lo-po-ti 23, 24, 27.
Tripura 77, 85.
Tripura Rajamala 94.
Tucci 84.

Tufan 23.

Tugma 15.

Tukhara 73.

Turks 77.

Turuska 76, 78, 82.
Twante 44.

Udayana 74.
Udyana 73.
Upakesini 46.
Upanahasamwatiraja-

wamsakath& 79.
Uragapuram 4,
Uttara 77.

INDEX

Uttarajiva 5, 94.
Uzana 56.

Vairocana 13, 46.
Vajricarya 61.
Vajrapani 9.
Vajrasana 75.
Vajrasattva 40, 50, 51,
92.
Vajragri 76.
Vajrayana 54, 60.
Vandeye-gses-sde 36.
Vanga 74.
Vasubandhu 77, 80, 97.
Vat Prey Vier 7.
Vedasattha 35.
Vedasatthakovida 35.
Vengi 5.
Vredenburg 92.
Vibhanga 4,
Vidyabhiisana 36,
Vikvamankadeva-cari-
tam 75. .
Vikramasila 75, 76, 82.

109

Vimalaprabha 37.
Vinaya 21, 22, 78, 81.
Vinitadeva 36.

Vihar 76.

Visnu 7, 13.

Vogel 6.

Vraha Guhya 12.

Yamuna 57, 76.
Yasovarman 11.
Yathepyi 64.
Yavadvipa 78.
Yindaik-kwin 41, 91.
Yule 68.

Watters 21, 79, 81.
We-Lei 27.

Wellesley Province 6.
Winstedt 28,

Zegu Pagoda go.
Zigon 63

--- PAGE 129 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

”

ERRATA

5 Line 15 for coastel

1
16
33

35

Tor

im
I
3

17
I

15
6

27

Io

it
9

”

”

”

32,,

36
3
I
4

18

16

24

23

32
5

24

36
4

14

26

22

13

15

13

”

”

Mahayanist
necovered
India
Theravada
Dn.
Sasanavasina
Hetubindu-tika
Mrtyn- °
Maitreya-
Mafijusri
Mss.

Avalok-
Twanto
Dipatkara
pedesral
naga
vitarka-mudra
Their
Sdsanavammsa
ommission
wether
satisfactority
Tannasserim
J.A.
Parhetanandaghossa
stupa
Haribhajinja
te

tine
Sasanavasma
transtated

vead coastal.

Mahayanist.
recovered.
Indian.
Theravada.
Dr.
Sasanavamsa.
Hetubindu-tika.
Mrtyu-
Maitreya.
Maiijusri.

MS.

Avaloki-.
Twante.
Dipankara,
pedestal.
naga.
vitarka-~mudra.
There.
Sasanavamsa.
omission.
whether.
satisfactorily.
Tennasserim.
Ind. Ant.
Parhetanandaghoga.
stipa.
Haribhaiija.
to.

time.
Sdsanavamsa.
translated.

--- PAGE 130 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

apace parmew nape Reny

Vie. 1.
nw 2
» 8
» 4

DESCRIPTION OF PLATES

Maijusri. Bronze. Hmawza. For description, see p. 41.
c, 7-8th cent. A.D. A wrong identification has been
suggested in the text. Indeed, the figure on the crown
isnot Amitaibha, but Aksobhya, and hence the image
must be one of Mafijuéri.

Mark the facial physiognomy, especially the curve of the
lips, and the rather heavy modelling of the nose, which
are all unlike what have up to now been found in Burma,
but are not uncommon in old Cambodian art. It is not
improbable that the image was bodily carried over from
some place in the old Hindu colony of Kamboj.

Avalokitesvara and Maitreya flanking the Buddha. Bronze.
Pagan. c, 11-12th cent. For description, see p. 45;
for descriptions of similar representations of Avalokiteévara
and Maitreya flanking the Buddha, see pp. 48-45. Dr,
N. J. Krom, relying on finds from Java, suggested to
me that they may also represent Avalokitesvara and
Vajrapaini.

Note the dharmacakra flanked by two crouching gazelles
which locates the scene at Sarnath, but the Buddha is
depicted in bhimisparéa-mudré locating the scene at
Bodh-gaya.

Avalokiteévara. Bronze. Pagan. c. 10-11th cent. For
description, see p. 41.

Tard. Stone. Pagan. c. 10-1lth cent. For description,
see p. 46.

Slight ftribhanga pose, fore-arms broken, feet mutilated.
kundala, keyira, mekhala.

--- PAGE 131 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

112

Fie. 5.

”

”

7.

10.

DESCRIPTION OF PLATES

Probably Maitreya. Bronze. Thiyipyitsaya. Pagan.
¢, 10-11th cent.

Seated in lalitasana; right hand in abhaya-mudrd, loft
resting on a lotus; two ndgakeSara stems rise on two sides
in delightful curves forming a frame as it were. The
hair is done into a mukuta consisting of long and curly
locks. The lower garment is fitted tight to the body
while a sash diagonally passes round the upper part of
the body.

Lokanitha. Bronze. Pagan, c.10-11th cent. For des-
cription, see p. 48,

Lokanitha. Bronze, Pagan. c, 11-12th cent. For des-
cription, see p. 48.

For another recent find of what I consider to be a represen-
tation of Lokanitha, see An, R.A.S.I., 1980-84, Part Two,
pl. XCIX(c). Noteworthy is the writing in Nagari
characters of about the 11-12th cent., recording the
Buddhist formula.

Bodhisattva, probably Maitreya. Wall-painting. Nanda-
mafiiia temple, Minnanthu, Pagan. c. 18-14th cent.

Standing in slight Gbhaiga, richly ornamented: mukuta,
hara, keyiira, valaya, mekhalé, nipura, printed or
embroidered skirt. Right hand hanging and holding in

delicate grasp a stalk of nagakegara flower, left hand in
abhaya-mudra.

Bodhisattva, probably Maitreya. Wall-painting. A small
temple. Pagan. c. 18-14th cent.

Standing in slight abhanga; richly ornamented: mukuta,
hara, valaya, keyira, mekhala, nipura, printed skirt.
Right hand in abhaya-mudra, left hand hanging and
holding in delicate grasp a stalk of nagakeéara flower.

Bodhisattva.  Wall-painting. Paya-thon-zu

. temple,
Minnanthu, Pagan. c. 14th cent.

--- PAGE 132 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

. iL

12.

18,

14.

DESCRIPTION OF PLATES 113

Standing on lotus pedestal. Ornaments: mukuta, Kkundala,
hara, keyitra, valaya, mekhald, printed skirt. Hands in
the attitude of making offerings, evidently to the Buddha
in the sanctum.

Bodhisattva. | Wall-painting. Paya-thon-zu temple,
Minnanthu, Pagan. c. 14th cent.

Standing in slight tribhanga, on lotus pedestal; halo: round
head; ornaments: mukuta, hdra, keytra, valaya, mokhala,
printed skirt. Right hand in vyikhydna-mudra, left hand
doubled upwards to clasp a néagakegara stalk. Two
Saktis clinging on two legs.

Bodhisattva, probably Avalokitesvara.  Wall-painting.
Paya-thon-zu temple, Minnanthu, Pagan. c. 14th cent.
Standing in slight dbhanga; ten hands holding attributes
that can hardly be recognised; of them two are, however,
held before the chest in dharmacakra-mudrd; ornaments:
mukuta, hdra, keyiiva, valaya, mekhala, napura, printed
skirt. Two female figures, probably Saktis, seated with

folded hands on two sides.

Bodhisattva with Saktis. Wall-painting. Paya-thon-zu
temple, Minnanthu, Pagan. c. 14th cent.

Standing in tribhanga with two Saktis clinging on two
sides; richly ornamented as usual; also see photo-
negatives of the Archaeological Survey of Burma, Nos.
64/3211 of 1929-30, 58/3205 of 1929-80, 59/8206 of
1929-80, and 66/3218 of 1929-30.

Bodhisattva, perhaps Maharajalila Mafijuéri or Lokanitha.
Wall-painting. Nandamiafifia temple, Minnanthu, Pagan.
o. 14th cent. For description, see pp. 55-56.

Note the winged gandharva in: front who is seated on the
point of the trunk of the makara, depicted below (not
reproduced) as in the tradition of the Eastern School of
Art of Bengal and Bihar, to be seen on both sides of the
main figure.

--- PAGE 133 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

114

Fia. 15.

16,

DESCRIPTION OF PLATES

Bodhisattva and Sakti in embrace. Wall-painting,
Nandamafiiia temple, Minnanthu, Pagan, c. 14th cent.

Both standing in slight dbhanga and with aureoles.
Bodhisattva on right embracing Sakti with left hand,
and Sakti on left embracing Bodhisattva with right hand.
Right hand of Bodhisattva is raised upwards while the
left of Sakti is placed on the stretched-out arm of
Bodhisattva. Both figures are richly ornamented and
wear printed skirts. A haloed figure stands on -the right
of Bodhisattva.

Wall-painting (outline copy) on the western portion of the
south wall of the Abeyadana temple, Myinpagan, Pagan.
c.1lth cent. For description, see pp. 59-60; see also
An. R.A.8.1,, 1980-84, pp. 181-82.

Upper panel: on the right side of the empty niche is an
ornamented and crowned figure standing in slight
abbanga, and holding a ring in the right hand and
what seems to be more like a dagger than a sword in the
left. On the left side is a similar figure holding a trident
in the right and a ring in the left hand. They are
probably simply dvdrapdlas.

The middle band shows six scenes which are difficult to
identify. They seem to allude to some stories, and some
of them are supposed to be Tantrik in character.

Lower panel: the two upper figures seated in ardha-
paryankdsana are undoubtedly Avalokiteévara and
Madijuéri respectively. ‘he two figures seated below
may tentatively be identified as Skanda or Kartikeya and
Surya respectively. The former holds a shield in the
right and what seems to bea trident in the left. The
latter holds a cakra in the right and a sword in the left.
Both wear what seems to be felt boots, For the re-
presentations of another divinity with felt boots, see
An. R.A.S,1., 1980-84, pl. CI(a); this also comes from the
same Abeyadana temple.

--- PAGE 134 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

—_—e

Fie, 17.

”

”

18.

19.

21.

23.

DESCRIPTION OF PLATES 115

Lokanitha. Wall-painting. Abeyadana temple, Myin-
pagan, Pagan. c.1ith cent. For description, see p. 59.

Hayagriva. Wall-painting. Abeyadana temple, Myin-
pagan, Pagan. c. 11th cent. For description, see
pp. 60-61,

Sakti. Wall-painting (outline copy), Abeyadana temple,
Myinpagan, Pagan. c. 11th cent.

Goddess seated in padmdsana on lotus seat; six hands, two
on two sides in varada-mudrd, one on the right in tarjani-
mudré, others in mantra-mudra, Ornaments: mukuta,
hara, keyira, valaya, mekhald, kundala, and printed
skirt.

Probably Tara. Wall-painting (outline copy). Abeyadana
temple, Myinpagan, Pagan. c. 11th cent.

Goddess seated on a lotus seat in lalitasana, two hands as if
in prayer; to the right rises a stalk with lotus in half
bloom; jewels and ornaments, printed bodice and skirt.

Lokaniitha. Wall-painting (outline copy). Abeyadana
temple, Myinpagan, Pagan. c. 11th cent.

Crowned and aureoled divinity seated in lalitasana on a
lotus seat, Right hand in varada and left in abhaya-
mudra; to the left rises a lotus stalk; usual ornaments;
flanked by two aureoled and ornamented divinities.

Siva riding the bull Nandi. Wall-painting. Abeyadana
temple, Myinpagan, Pagan. c. 11th cent. For descrip-
tion, see p. 57, fn. 8.

Yamuna riding her vahana the tortoise. Wall-painting,
Abeyadana temple, Myinpagan, Pagan, oc, 11th cent,
For description, see p. 57, f.n. 3.

Probably Visnu riding his véhana Garuda. Wall-painting
(outline copy). Abeyadana temple, Myinpagan, Pagan.
c. 11th cent.

--- PAGE 135 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

116 DESCRIPTION OF PLATES

Visnu kneeling, with hands folded probably in adoration to
the Buddha in the sanctum. Note the Garuda holding
a pair of snakes in his toes and carrying the kumbha
in his hands ; note also the page in one of the left
hands of Visnu and an indistinct object in one of his
right.

Fie. 25. Three-headed Brahmi riding his vahana, the hamnsa. Wall-
painting (outline copy). Abeyadana temple, Myinpagan,
Pagan. c. 11th cent.

» 26. Siva. Wall-painting. Abeyadana temple, Myinpagan,
Pagan. c.1lthcent. For description, see p. 60, where I
suggested a wrong identification. The attributes of Siva,
viz., the jaté-mukuta, the akgamald, and the trident are
too clear to be missed.

For other Brahmanical representations in the Abeyadana,
see An. R.A.S.I., 1980-84, p, 188.

For description of some of the mural paintings in the
Abeyadana and Kubyaukki temples, Myinpagan, Pagan,
representing gods and goddesses of Sanskrit Buddhism
and also of Brahmanism, see An.R.A.S.I., 1980-34,
pp. 181-84.

--- PAGE 136 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

ey

PLATES

--- PAGE 137 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 138 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 139 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 140 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 141 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 142 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 143 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 144 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 145 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 146 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

“Aa.

o ngage vedenteasmenetnindatine: <

ae a =

ll

--- PAGE 147 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 148 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

l4

--- PAGE 149 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 150 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Crore

LA

--- PAGE 151 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 152 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

Le

;
ey
be

aa

dS
set
NY
te
Re

;
ity
ban ten

ta A

aad

16

--- PAGE 153 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 154 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 155 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 156 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

be
-
pe

--- PAGE 157 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 158 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 159 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 160 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 161 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 162 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 163 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 164 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

aA ~~ aS

a coe

A pe

aN :

--- PAGE 165 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 166 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 167 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 168 [BLANK] ---



--- PAGE 169 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

CATALOGUE,

«

--- PAGE 170 [OCR(EMPTY)] ---

a

PE Se tao RE

DAA, 80.
ORNTRAL ABOHABULOGIOAL LIBRARY

Catalogue No. 294/30959 1/Ray.-2age.

I AO ee oe
Author— Ray, Nihar-Ranjan,
Titlea—S@nskrit Buddhism in Burma!

ro. |
