


* 


STUDIES IN THE. TANTRAS 
PART I 


BY 
PRABODH CHANDRA BAGCHI, M.A., DR. Es LETTRES (PARIS) 
LECTURER, CALCUTTA UNIVERSITY 


Oo Lu 





PUBLISHED BY THE 
UNIVERSITY OF CALCUTTA 
1939 


ee. ragt 4 " — 





5 
£ " 
= 
= 


4 
. 
* 
-a 
* 
— 
5 
LIA. E ~ 
DOE ook — 
— 


4 
à 
aa 
119472 








LI 
. 8 nd 
* ' - 
R ~ 
= 2 . 2 A 
B ' 
B T E - E 
+ JY C ` " "S , 
> E 7 " 
t . 
4F -—' 





CONTENTS 


Preface = ... — — 
On some Tantrik texts studied in Ancient Kambuja ... 
Further notes on Tantrik texts studied in Ancient Kambuja 
The Sandhābhāgā and Sandhavacana 


On the Sādhanamēlā = — ah 
On Foreign element in the Tantra eas — 
Some Technical terms of the Tantras * 37 


Some aspects of Buddhist mysticism in the Caryipadas 
ya Notes on the word Parāvrtti —... > 


APPENDIX 


Detailed Notices on Manuscripts— 
I. Niévasa-tattva-Samhita 
II. Sammoha Tantra ... "em 
IH. Brahmayāmala kās ay sse 
IV. Pingalāmata 
V. Jayadrathayāmala 


ig 


ree RUD 
109 





PREFACE 


The present book is a collection of articles which were published 
in the Indian Historical Quarterly and the Calcutta Oriental Journal between 
1930 and 1934. They contain the results of my examination of manu- 
scripts of the Nepal Darbar Library collection in 1929. I have thought 
it fit to publish them together in the form of a book, as my future 
studies in the Tantras will follow the lines suggested therein. As many of 
the manuscripts referred to in the articles have little chance of being edited 


and published for a long time to come, I have added in an appendix detailed 
notices on them. 


CALCUTTA ; 
September, 1939. P. C. BAGCHI. 





ON SOME TANTRIK TEXTS STUDIED IN ANCIENT 
; KAMBUJA. 


I 


The inscription of Sdok kak Thom‘ (discovered in the province of 
Sisophon, Cambodia) mentions the introduction of the mystic cult 
of Devar&ja along with some Tantrik texts in Kambuja during the 
reign of king Jayavarman II who came to the throne in the Saka year 724 
(=802 A.D.) The inscription is a long one and contains the chronicle 
of the religious foundations of Kambuja during a period of about 250 
years. The inscription is not dated, but the last date mentioned therein 
is Saka 974 (—1052 A.D.). The king, Jayavarman II, came from Java 
to rule over Kambuja, and the new cult was introduced shortly after his 
ascent to the throne. The story of this introduction is told in some 
details in the inseription.* The high priest of Jayavarman was a 
Brahmanical sage named Sivakaivalya. This Brahmin was enjoying a 
piece of land in the village of Bhadrayogi in Indrapura given to his family 


| BEFEO XV, pp. 70-71. 
3 Ibid :— 


(51) Hiranyadáma-dvija-pungavo' gryadhir 
ivávjayonih karuņārdra dgatak v 
(52) ananya-labdham khalu siddhim ādarāt 
prakāšayāmāsa mahibhrtam prati a 
(53) sa bhūdharendrānumato" grajanmā 
vi sa-sādhanām siddhim adikgad asmai i 
(54) hotre hitaikanta-manah-prasattim 
samvibhrate dhadma-viurmhandya a 
(55) Astram Sirascheda-Vindsikhakhyam 
Sammohanümüpi Nayottardkhyam 
(56) tat Tumvuror vaktra-catuskam asya 
siddhyeva vipras samadarsayat sah n 
(57) dvijas samuddhrtya sa $üstra sdram 
rahasya-kausalyadhiyà sayatnah i 
(58) siddhirvvahantih kila devarājā- 
bhikhyām vidadhre bhuvanarddhi-vrddhyai n A. XXVI-XXIX 








2 STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


long ago by the kings of Bhavapura'ffounded by Bhavavarman who was 
ruling about the middle of the 6th century). He was the guardian priest 
Of a &ivalinga installed in a temple in that village. Sivakaivalya, chosen 
as the priest by the new king, subsequently accompanied him to. different 
cities founded by the latter. "Now, a Brahmin named Hiranyadáma came 
from Janapada (supposed to be some place in India) to the court of the 
new king Jayavarman and began to exercise ‘a great spiritual influence 
on him. The king then authorised him to teach the new lore to Siva- 
kaivalya, and to initiate the latter to the new cult. Then Hiraņyadāma 
gave Sivakaivalya—Siraicheda, Finasikha, Sammoha and  Nayottara— 
the four éüstras which were the four faces of Tumvuru. Sivakaivalya 
was also initiated to the cult of Derarāja (Kamraten Jagat ta raja in Cam- 
bodian). Thus was the new cult introduced in Kambuja. The king 
Jayavarman, much attracted by it accepted it as the religion of the 
kingdom, and ordered that the yafis of the mūtrvamša! of Sivakaivalya 
only would be the legitimate guardians of this cult and would have the 
power to perpetuate it in future. 

The Devarāja was a šivaliūga and it was one of the most celebrated 
deities of Kambuja. But nothing is known as to the four “ éastras” 
mentioned which prescribed this cult. Dr. B. R. Chatterji is the first to 
make some suggestions about their identification.2 He relies on the 
information supplied by Avalon,? and says, “There were three regions 
each with its epecial Tantras and that among the Tantras of the rignukrāntā 
region (which includes Bengal and extends to Chittagong) the names of 
the Sammohana and the Nirutlara Tantras approach very closely to the 
titles of two (ont of four) of the Tantras (Sommoha and Nayottara) taught 
by Hiranyadima. The Tantras Muņdamālā and Chinnamasta mean (as 
far as the names go) almost the same thing as Straécheda—the third text 
taught to the Kambuja priest. The word Tumvuru (of which, according 
to the inscriptions, the four texts constitute the four faces) is the name 
of a gandharva, and there is a Ganddarva Tantra in the Vignukrāntā 
group.” 

1 BEPEO, XV, pp. 70-71 : 
e (1) tan mütrvamée yatayas striyo và 
jūtā vi(dyd-vi)kra(ma)-yukta-bhavah y 
(2) tad yājakās syur na kathaficid anya 
iti kgitīndra-dvija-kalpanāsītn B. XXXI 


1” Indian Cultural Influence in Cambodia, Calcutta, 1929, pp. 273-4. 
| 3 Arthur Avalon, Principles of Tantra, I, Intro., pp. Ixv-Ixvii. 


e è 


_ . - 





x 


—— 2 ; ^ K- wl m w-— TW 


TANTRIK TEXTS STUDIED IN ANCIENT KAMBUJA 3. 


The classification, according to the krāntās, is not seen in the oldest 
Tāntrik texts, for example the Yamadas, as far as I know. On the other 
hand, such classification seems to be arbitrary and of late origin, The 
names of 64 Tantras attributed to each of these krāntās seem to be fictitious 


4p some extent, So they do not throw much light on the texts introduced 


into Kambuja in the beginning of the 9th century A.D. It is therefore 
necessary to go back to older and more authentic sources. 

According to the oldest traditions known to me! the Tāntrik litera- 
ture is classified according to the Srofas (=current, tradition), pithas 
and āmnāyas. The Srofas or currents are three fold: dakgina (right), 
vāma (left) and madAyama (middle). There are the three energies (Sakti- 
trayam) of Siva. Besides these three currents which issue from Siva, 
we have reference to other currents: like JAarrava-srofas from which 
distinctive Tantras have issued forth. The classification into pitias is 
four fold: vidyapitha, mantrapitha, mudrapitha and mandalapitha. The 
third classification, viz, that into ēmwāyas, is more common than the 
first two. The number of ūmnmāyas varies. But generally they are 
accepted to be five in number, issuing from the five mouths of Siva.? 
Šiva is represented as having four faces turning towards the four cardinal 
points and one on the top. ‘The eastern ( pürra raktra) spoke the Vedas, 
the western ( pašeima), southern (dakgina), northern (uttara) and the upper 
(ürddAva) mouths spoke the different kinds of Tantras. There is no trace 
of any classification according to the krantas. The faces of Siva represent 
his five aspects. They are known as Famadeva, Tatpurusa, Aghora, Sad yojáta 
and Īšāna facing the north, east, south, west and (op and representing the 
aspects of Isa, Īšāna, lávara, Brakmā and Sadāšiva respectively. The 
original Šaiva canon, the dgamas, are classified according to the faces 
which proclaimed them (see //indu Icenography, 1I, Pt. II, pp. 366 E.). 
Wa should note in this connēction that the Sadyojāta mouth which 
represents the Brafhmā aspect is the western face, and naturally proclaims 


the Pa&cimamnaya. 
One of the oldest Tantrik texts preserved in the Nepal Darbar 


^ Library is the Nišvāsatattva-Samktitā written in the Gupta script of the 


i This discussion is mainly based on the 39h chapter of the Brahmaydmala called 
Srotanirnaya. The MS. of this yámala which I have examined is that preserved in the 
Nepal Darbar Library. It was copied in the Nepal Sarh.  173— 1052 A.D. | 

4 Bbüskara Raya in his commentary on the Vāmakešvara Tantra (see Ananddfram 
Ed., p. 24) quotes from Bhagavin Parašurāmā : ** PancGmnayan  paramártha-sárarüpán 


praņināja iti." - m o 


v 


| 





STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


8th century A.D.' It is a collection of five sūfras which form a complete 

whole but each may be also counted separately and has its own chapters. 

five sūtras are (1) Lankika-dharma, (2) Mialasiifra, (3) Uttarasütra, 

ft) Nayasūtra and (5) Gufyasūtra. The last of these five is more extensive 

than the others together and the first Laukika dharma is really ignored 
by the text itself in counting on folio 276 of the text : 


prathamam mūlasutrantu dvitiyam ādisamjūitam 1 
trtiyam prathamam nama caturthāru purvasitrakam ü 


Thus the four texts are called: (1) Mūdasūtra, (2) Ādisūtra = 
Uttarasutra, (3) Prathama = Nayasūtra, (4) Pūrva = Guhyasūtra. The 
Uttarasütra contains the names of 18 old Sira-éastras : 


^ vijayam prathamam [hy eļgām nišvāsam tadanantaram | 
 svāyambhuvam ataš caiva vāthulam tadanantaram n 
virabhadeam iti khydtam rauravam mākutās tathà i 
virasam candrahdsam ca jidnam ca mukhavimbakam y 
prodgitam lalitañ caiva siddha-santánam eva ca | 
sarvodgitam ca vijieyam kiranam pāramešvaram u (fol. 24a.) 


The same list with some slight variations is given by the BraAma- 
yāmala of which a MS, written in 1052 A.D. is preserved in the Darbar 
Library.” In the 39th chapter (fol. S694) we find mention of the 
following texts : " 


vijayam caiva ni$vüsara svdyambhuvam atah param | 
vüthulam |virabhadram ca rauravam mükutástathà] u 
vireéaé ca tathā canyam tata ūrdhvam nibodhata | 
candrajūānat ca prodgitam lalitarn tathā u 
siddhisattvānakarh caiva sarvodgitam atah param i 
kiranam ca mahádevi pāramēš$vara eva ca g 


The second list is corrupt to some extent, though the MS. of the 
Brahmayamala which we have examined is generally a very correct one, 
Apparently the tradition about these texts was more living in the time 


| The Exalted Raj Guru Hemarāja Šarmā who has handled these MSS. for a long 
time is also of the same opinion. Mahāmabopēdbyāya H. P. Sāstrī has noticed it in his 
catalogue, Darbar Library Cat., Vol. I, p. . In his introduction to the Catalogue, 
p. ixxvii, he also ssys that this MB. “is written in transitional Gupta character which 
may be a century older than the Pāramedvara Tantra copied in 859 A.D." 
*. See H. P. Büstri, Nepal Darbar Library Catalogue, II, p. 60. 


PL 


bis. 





TANTRIK TEXTS STUDIED IN ANCIENT KA BUJA 5 


when the Niévasatativa-Samhita was composed, but it was not so when 
the Brahmayāmala was copied. In the interval the Tāntrik literature 
had become a fairly extensive one. The Tantras which were therefore 
considered to be authoritative in the 8th century and even prior to it 
were: (1) Vijaya, (2) Niévasa, (3) Svdyambhuvamata, (4) Fathula, (5) 


7 Firabhadra, (6) Raurava, (7) Makuta, (8) Firasa, Firesa (T), (9) Candrahāsa 


Candra (7), (10) Jāna, (11) Mukhavimbaka, Vimba (?), (12) Prodgita, ( 13) 
Lalita, (14) Siddi, (15) Santana, Sattvana (7), (16) Sarrodgita, (17) 
Kirana, (18) Páramesvara.! 

The second text of the list, the Nišvāsa, seems to be the same as the 
Nidvasatattva-Samnhita. We have already noticed that the independent . 
chapter-division of the 4 sūtras constituting the text points to the fact 
that they were studied separately. The word sarhfifā also may indicate 
that it was simply a compilation of different texts. Amongst the four 
texts, the adi aud the pratama are the Uttara and Naya-sūtras. ‘Their 
very position in the traditional computation: mila, adi, prathama and 
parva point out to their intimate mutual relation. It seems quite probable 
that they together constituted our Nayottara introduced in Kambuja in 
the beginning of the 9th century (802 A.D.). The contents of these two 
sūfras amply show that they were indispensable for the guidanee of the 
priests. We can understand from them how the Nayottara could be 
useful to Sivakaivalya of Kambuja for conducting the newly introduced 
cult of Devarāja. * The Uttara sūtra has five sections: (1) šrrāčayastkāpana, 
matrka, koma, (++) and (rit) atčārgeka and dīksā, (iv) and (e) jūānayoga. 
The Nayasūtra has 4 sections: (f) yasa prakaraņa (yāga-?), (it) prakrtivicāra, 
(rit) rūpavicāra, (iv) paramāmrt -sadbhavavicara (cf. also Šāstrī, Darčar 
Library Catalogue, 1, pp. 138 f. ; his notice is however incomplete). Their 
date of composition cannot be ascertained at present. But it was certainly 
composed long before the date of compilation of the four tēxts together, 
which also was done much earlier than the date of copying the present 
text. Thus roughly it may be said that the Nayotfara-safras were 


i The same list occurs also in the Kāmikāgama (p. 1), published from Madras by 


— 


"o Mudaliar. Cf. Also Gopinath Hao, Hindu Iconography., If, Part I, pp. 


Z 367-68. Some of these texts exist in very old MSS. The Kiraņa and Páramesvara tantra 


sa | in Nepal. The Kiraņa was found by H. P. Šāstrī in a private collection at 
Bhatgaon. atg The M8. is very old and was copied io 024 A.D. See Darbar Library Catalogue, 
II, pp. xxiv and 99. The Pürameécaramatatantra 18 preserved in the Darbar Library, 
That MS. was copied between tho ilth and 12th century A.D. (Sastri, ibid, pp. xxi and 


406). Prof. Bendall mentions an older MS. of that tantra copied in 859 A.D, preserved 


in the University Library, Cambridge. 


h T- — = P AM AN 
3g" PS NOR 











STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


‘composed in the 6th and 7th centuries A.D., and compiled with the other 
two texts in the Tth and 8th centuries A.D. 

The Brahmay rāmala (loc. cit.) says that the Niswasa and the other 
inabana mentioned above came out of the middle current and were 
communicated by the upper mouth of Šiva (maddyasrota-sambkūtā 
i avaktrāt vinirgata). In another place (fol. 200a) the Brakmayamala 
-distinctly says that the three texts known as Santmoha, Nayottara and 
Sirašcheda issued from the left current (vāmasrotas) : 









Sammohat ca tāthā proktam tathā caiva Nayottaram 1 
[Sīrašchedam]* tathā proktam vāmasrotād vinirgatam u 


‘The same texts are also mentioned in a supplement to the Brahma- 
yamala namely the Jayadrathayamala (Sāstrī, I, Ch. 40, see tara) : 


savyasrotasi siddhāni $irašchidra* bhayātmakam | 
nayottaram maháraudram mahāsammohonam tathā | 
trikam etat mahadevi vamasrolasi nirgatar | 


The fact that the Nayottara is here attributed to the ramasrofas (left 
current) whereas elsewhere it is, as a part of the Nršvāsatautra attributed 
to the madhyama-sretas (middle current) should not be considered as a 
serious obstacle in accepting the identification proposed. We have 
actually mention of texts coming out of the combined current of vāma- 
madkyamayā (VámamadAyamayàa catva codttena tathaiva hi—Brahmayāmata, 
fol. 200a). There are reasons to believe that the classification according 
to srofas was not very well defined. 

Theemanuscripts already discussed, as we have seen, mention two other 
texts, viz., the Sammoha and the Strašcheda of the 4 texts introduced in 
Kambuja. We should not therefore suppose that the 18 texts mentioned 
in the NiSvasafanira list were the only Tāntrik texts known in India 
in the 8th century A.D. According to the Brahmayamala we are led 
to believe that these were the texts handed down by one tradition only, 
that of the madāyasrotas. The same text refers to the Va@malas coming 
out from the Bhairava tradition: BAatrava-srotas, These yāmalas are: 
(1) Rudra, (2) Kanda (=Skanda) (3) Brahma, (4) Vignu, (5) Yama, (6) 


1 Though this portion is indistinct in the MS, the reading is supported by the text 
of the supplement, which repeats the same tradition. 
s It is evidently s mistake of the copyist for éiraécheda, 





SA UA AA AA — UPS S M 


TANTRIK TEXTS STUDIED IN ANCIENT KAMBUJA EIUS 


Vayu, (7) Kuvera, (8) Indra. It is true that these Fāmafas are not 
mentioned in the Nišvāsa-fanfra, but in the Brakmayāmača of which we 
get a MS. copied in 1052 A.D. So they all had come into existence 
long before this last date. But it is possible to determine the date of — 
their eomposition more precisely. , | 

The Brahmayama/a has its supplements and two of them are preserved 
in the Darbar Library—(1) Pingažāmata, (2) Jayadrathayamala. The latter 
is a very extensive work containing about 24,000 šlokas divided into 4 
gatkas of 6,000 Slokas each. The MS. of the Pingatāmata was copied in 
the Nepal Samv. 9294—1174 A.C. There can be no doubt about the 
fact that it is a supplement? to the Brahmaydmala and is connected 
with the Jayadratha-. In the very first chapter of the Pinga/ümafa 
(fol. 26) it is said: asya fantrasya Pingalamatasamyjna. Pratisthatalparn 
Jayadrathaditkaram Brahmayamalasya annyatt, Pingalabhattarikayah 
nimittam. The Pingalamata therefore presupposes the existence of the 
Jayadrathayamalam and professes to be inspired by the Braima-. The 
Jayadratha- was therefore written long before 1174 A.D. Though the 
two MSS. (sat£as [ and II) noticed by H. P. Šāstrī are of the 16th and 
17th centuries.” 


1  Barymayámala, ch. 39, Srotanirmaga, fol. 169a : 
Rudrayāmalam anyaf ca tathā vai Kandagámalar | 
Rrahmayamalakem catva pignuyamalam epa ca I 
Yamayamalakam cányam Vayuyamalam eca cal 
Kurerayāmala caina Indrayamalam ēra ca 4 
Bhairavastaagtkam etat V idyapithad vinirgatanh | 
Yāmalāni tathā cāgtau nirgatant na samdayah 4 


The names of the cight Bhairavas also mentioned in thia connection, are : Sacchanda 
Bhairaca, Krodha”, Unmatta", Ugra", Kapālī”, Shankara", Sekhara*, Vijaya”. 

2 Of the satkas of this text, preserved in the Darbar Library, Sástri has noticed 
only two, I and II. Tho MS. of the gatka T is dated in Nepal Sam. 848=1723 A.D. (and 
not Nepal Sar. 847 na stated by Siatri, Darbar Library Cat., II, p. 1) and the MS. of 
the satka II is dated N. S. 762=1642 A.D. The writing of gatka III appears to be of 


i 


the sume period but the satka TV is preserved in an older MS. ‘The colophon of this Ma. 
(fol. 3396-3404) runs thus : — 
adhigate-sakalasastrasya yogintopndavanditacaranayugalasya—vividhacidyaridyotitam 
ietkaraņasya —makākāruņikasya—mahārājādhirājašrimajjayacandradespēli Aya Kulācār 
= yusridharanipadevandmadheyasya Šisyēna panditafrijomadecena likhitarm iti. 
Jayacandra bere mentioned seems to be the same as king Jayacandra of Kansuj who 
fell before the Moabammadans towards the end of the 12th century. The MS. wae therefore 














STUDIES IN THB TANTRAS 


The Jayadrathayáma/a is distinctly called Sirašckeda. We have 
already discussed the texts which mention Sirašcheda as being handed 
JW by the left current (vamasro/as) and communicated by the vāmaraktra 
(tbe mouth turning towards the left). All the colophons of the 
Jayadrathayamala run thus: 
| iti Bhairavasrotasi vidyāpītāe StraSchede Sri Jaysirailosditala- 
mahütantre caturviméatisahasre — Srikalasamkarsganydm, etc. (of. 
Sastri, Zoe. cit.). 
The frame work of the present tantra is as follows; “ Jayadratha the 
husband of Duryodhana's sister and the king of Sindhudeša renouneed 
the world and settled at Vadarikāšrama in the Himalayas for the purpose 
of practising austerities, He propitiated the goddess Pārvatī who 
introduced. him to Šiva. The interlocution between these three is the 
substance of the Tantra. The first question asked was the nature of 
Mukti (salvation) which was explained according to the SaánkAya system 
but Siva said that the telling on rosary the formula of Kālasankargaņī 
was the easiest and the shortest way to salvation ” (Sastri, Darbar Library 
Catalogue, 11, p. 2). As regards the names mentioned in the colophon 
Sastr1 remarked in 1905 (Catalogue, I, p. xii) that these are "a string 
of names, the import of which, if it existed at all, is lost ” but in 1915 
(Catalogue, II, p. 114) in connection with the Za/trasadóhavatantra he 
explains them thus, “It is called Bāairavasrotas because Bhairava is the 
speaker and his speech began after he had snatched away the topmost 
head of Brahmā and put it above his four heads. It is called Vidyapatha 
(sic. vidyapitha) because it treats of the goddess Sundari.” But this 
explanation is not quite correct. 





(6) Bhatravasrotas, as we have already seen, means the Bhairava 
current or tradition. There are 8 Bhairavas from whom emanate the 8 
yāmalas. So other Tantras of the Bhatravasrotas either must have been 
supplements to these 8 yāmalas or inspired by them. The Jayadratha- 
yamala emanates from the same Bhairava (viz., the Vumatta BAairara) 
who narrated the Brahmayamala. Bhairava is conceived as an aspeet 
of Siva. 

(i) We bave already discussed the significance of the 4 pithas. 
Pidyapitha is that method of sadhana which relies on the vidya or mantras. 


copied either towards the end of that century or the beginning of the 13th century A.D. 
The script supports it. The Rājguru Hemsrája Sarmā would attribute to the script used in 
this M8. a Kanaujijā character ((Künyakubfiya-srota«). 











TANTRIK TEXTS STUDIED IN ANCIENT KAMBUJA 9 


In the case of the Jayadrathayümala it is the Kālasamkarģaņī mantra 
which is of importance. 


(eit) The significance of Siragcheda is still unknown to me. I have not 
been able to trace the explanation offered by Sastri anywhere in the texts 
but some Pan its of Nepal who are acquainted with the Tantras confirm his 
explanation. Some of the Purāņas indeed preserve the story of Siva’s 
"cutting the head of ‘Brahma, but in a little different way. In the 
Kūrmapurāņa it is stated that Brahmā was once boasting himself as the 
greatest God in the universe. Siva appeared on the scene and elaimed that 
position for himself. Brahma was, however, obstinate. Thereupon Siva got 
angry and ordered his Bhairava to cut off that head of Brahmā which was 
reviling him. Šiva thereby committed a sin of which he got rid by 
going on pilgrimage to Benares. The story of this rivalry between 
Brahmi, Siva, and also Visnu is told also in the Liūgapurāņa, Kūrmapurāņa 
and Sivapurana. In those texts, however, there is no question of cutting 
the head of Brahma; Siva establishes his superiority over the other 
two as the greatest architect of the universe and proves that Brahma 
and Visņu are only his different aspects (see Gopinath Rao: Hindu 
Iconography, Vol. II, Part I, p. 105 ff. and p. 296 ff.). The same story, 
evidently taken from the Puranas, is told by Alberuni (Sachau, II, p. 147); 
* Brahman was in shape four-headed. Now there happened some quarrel 
between him and Sankara, i.e, Mabādeva—and the succeeding fight 


had this result that one of the beads of Brahman was torn off...... Thus 
the head of Brahman was dishonoured by the hand of Mahadeva, who took 
it always with him wherever he went and whatever he did...... After he 


had entered Benares the head dropped from his hand and disappeared.” 
This is briefly the story about Siva’s cutting the head of Brahmé, but I 
have not yet found any reference to Siva’s putting it on his own hand 
and communicating a class of Tantras through it. But it seems probable 
that the legend has some bearing on the Sadyojāta (lit. just-born) face of 
Siva, which represents his Brahmā aspect and through which he narrated 
some Tantras (see Gopinath Rao, /oc. cit., Part II, pp. 366-77). 

‘It is now quite clear that the Jayadrattayāmata is a SirašcAeda 
text. Not only the colophons of the text but the text itself clearly 
speak of it. Thus towards the end of the Satka III, (fol, 215a) we find 
the following text :— 


Evam etan maydkhydlam tantram otad anuttamam | 
Vasisthena purādhītam naranārāyaņaīr api u 


2 














10 ! STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


Li e — Brahmand matsamipe tu siraschedam mahābalam v 
Bahumaüniragunükirnam tavadya prakatīkrtam n 


- - Here the text is quite clear about the identity of the Sira&eAeda and 
Mie  Jayadrathayá mala, Now the Jayadrathayamala, as we have seen, 
is mentioned i in the Pizgalamata' (of which we have a MS. dated 1174 
A.D ), and apparently in the existing version of the Brahmayamala (Chap. 
89, fol. 169a) as “ catugkagatkabhedas tu” (This MS, of Brahma is dated 
1052 A. D.) A part of the JayadraíAa itself is preserved in a MS. of the 
12th-13th century A.D. Tf we admit that it is this SiraScheda which 
was taken to Kambuja in the beginning of the 9th century (802 A.D.) 
then the date of its composition would go back to the 8th century A.D., 
and necessarily the earlier versions of the JBra4Ámayamala and other 
yāmalas would go back to a still older period. 
An apparently later tradition mentions another work as Sirašcheda. 
It is the Karavirayoga, also called Para/antra. A MS. of the tantra 
written in Saka year 1681 (1603 A.D.) is preserved in the Darbar Library. 
The colophons of some of its chapters are to be noticed in this connection : 


fol. 21b—iti šrīmahāsrotasi — $iraéchede — karavirayoge pardtantre 
krama (?) dvādašasāhasrikāyām kālikramanirņayasutram ; 

fol. 25a—iti šrībhairavasrotasi širašchede karavīrayoge parātantre 
paramürthanirnayah ; 

fol. 30a—iti éribhairavaarotasi éira$chede mahakaravirayoge paratantre 
kāli kulakramah samāptah. 


On fol. Ja the following words are put into the mouth of the 
goddess: ~~ 
Sarvasrotodbhavam jūānarm tva[m] prasādā[d] brutam maya | 
yamalastakapurvantu tattvāny ekāvidhānita (?) ti 
éiraéchedaá ca bahudhā mahd-santhdna-gatkakam | 
pardtantram ca citkāra (phetkāra ?) ságarüámbhümahüsanan, ..u 
caturviméati vai laksüh sarvena tu dhürini[ ?] n 


1 Kararira means a cremation ground ; cf. Hemacandra's Abhidhānācintāmaņi, IV. 
55—" šmašānai kararirarh syāt.'" But the word is also used as the name of particular 
malna at least in two places. In Nepal à /maíüra was known as karavīra (cf. 8. Lévi, 
Le Népal, Il, p. 262). In the Tibetan texts we find Karacira as the namo of a Vihdra 
in the city of Mālspura (Mafgalapura?) in Uddiyina (Pag Sam Jon Zang, p. 137, Index, 
jii; cf. also Teraaath, tr. Bchiefner, p. 324). It seems probable that in Uddiyinn also 
there was a cremation ground with that name which has been wrongly called 
a cihāra. Some Tantric practices were to be performed only in tho /(mafünas. Traces 
of such practices are also found in Buddhist sources. Cf. Latkāratāra (Nanjio), p. 308— 


šūnyūgāre majne rā rpkgamūle guhüsu cà | 
palāle*bhyarakāde ca yogi rēzarh prakalpayet ii 





E. 





TANTRIK TEXTS STUDIED IN ANCIENT KAMBUJA 11 


In this list the Karavīrayoga apparently mentions the texts of the 
school to which it belongs. It mentions the original Siraéchkeda : the 
mahāsanthānagatkakam. The text here referred to seems to be no other 
than the Jayadrathayamala containing the extensive gatkas. Thus it is 
evident that the original Sirascheda text was the same as the Jayadratha- 
yāmača. The Karavirayoga apparently drew its inspiration from that 
text. - 

We have already seen that the Jayadrathayamala came out either 
of the vümasrofas or the vamamadhyamasrotas. We should rather consider 
it to be issuing from the vamamadhyamasrolas which was communicated 
by the western mouth Paécimaraktra because the Jayadrathayamala itself 
speaks of its western origin [cf Satka III, fol. 215a : tadākga (f) 
pašcimajanma jūātavyarm narasattamaih). We have also seen that it ia the 
sadyojāta face (= Brahma) which turns westward. Thus we understand 
why the Jayadrathayamala, communicated by the pašcimavaktra is called 
$irašcheda. 

As regards the third text the Sammoha introduced in Kambuja in 
802 A.D. nothing can be definitely stated at the present moment. 
We have already discussed the references to this text in the Brahma- 
yamala (MS. copied in 1052 A,C.). There is no doubt that the Sam- 
moka (var. Sammohana) mentioned therein was the same as that intro- 
duced into Kambuja. So it was known in India long before 802 A.D. 
when it was taken to Kambuja. It is difficult to determine if this Sam- 
mola had anything to do with the Sammohanatantra we get at present. 
One Sammofanatantra, as has been already pointed out by Dr. 
Chatterji, is attributed to the Fignukrāntā region. A Sammohinttantra 
belongs to the Rathakrant@ region (see Avalon, Principles of Tantra, 
I, Ixv, lxvi). We have besides a Sammohanalanfra preserved in a 
late MS. ip the Darbar Library. Šāstrī (Catalogue, Il, p. 183) also 
has noticed this MS. as a new one. The text is written in incorrect 
Sanskrit. All thesē texts of the Sammofanatantra might have been 
inspired by the original Sammohatantra which still remains to be 
discovered. 

On the last and the 4th text taken to Kambuja in 802 A.D., viz., the 
Vinasikha, no light can be thrown at present. In the Jayadrathayimala 
(Satka 1) we find a list of Bhairavas who had attained success 
through the X@/asainkarganit — vidya. Amongst these Bhairavas we 
find the names of Sikia and Fināsikha Bhairavas. There are faufras 
issuing from some of the Bžarravas of this list. There is the name 








i, AR STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 
4 m. Ya TN | . 

) Pletkāri Bhairava from whom issued the P/etkāra tantra. Conse- 
nently we are justified in supposing that there was a fanfra named 
ināšikka fanfra which was connected with the name of Vināšikša 


ya i 


Bhatrava. Jf this identification is accepted then the Vinastkha tantra 
n. as intimately connected with the SiraScheda, i.e., the Jayadrathayamala 
as the Kambuja inseription also would make us believe. 
The texts thus being identified, it remains to be seen which is 
PUE: cod mentioned as Tumburu and why are the four texts called 
“the four faces of Tumburu.”” Dr. Chatterji says that "Tumburu is 
the name of a Gandharva and thinks that he had something to do 
with the Gandharva fanfra. But the context has no bearing on any 
: tantra connected with the name of Tumburu, The inscription would 
| have us bēlieve that all the four texts were connected with that 
god. Tumbaru or Tumburu is recorded in all the lexicons as the 
name of a Gandharva but no detailed information is available on 
him. It is the name of one of the Yaksa worshippers of the Jina 
(see Hemacandra, Abhidhana-cintimant, I, 41, where the commen- 
tator explains the word as tnuménti ardati vighnan tumburuh). The 
Buddhist texts mention him as the king of the Gandharvas. Thus 
in the Mafāsamaya Suttanta (Dialogues of Buddha, Part ? 


2, p. 288) 
amongst the Gandharva chieftains are mentioned Paficasikha and 


Suriyavaccasa, thé daughter of Timbaru. Then again in the Saksapafha 
suttanta (ibid, pp. 302, 303) Buddha being enchanted by the music of 
Paficasikha questions him, whereupon the latter tells him the story 
of his love for Bhaddā Suriyavaccas’, the daughter of Timbaru, the 
king of the Gandhabbas. In the story Pafieasikha figures as a great 
musician who had a lyre of yellow Belura wood. The Gandhabba 
Timbaru is also mentioned in the Pāsādikasuttanta. In the Chinese 


translations of these Sütras the name of the Gandharva ie transcribed 


as Tan-feou-lu =*tim-bieu-ru=*/amburu and as Trou-feon-lou=*Teu- 


bieu-ru =*tu(m)buru Jof. Tripitaka, New Tokio Ed., Vol. I, pp. 80, 633]. 
These forms show that in the corresponding Chinese versions the names 
presuppose the forms Tamburu, and Tumburn, and not Timburu as pre- 
served in the Pāli texts. The Mahābhārata refers to Tumburu on several 
Ocčasions : in Adiparva (65.51): supriyā cātibākuk ca vtikāyātau ca haha 
hūkūh | Tumburuš ceti cafvārah smrtah Gandharvasattamah | and again 
Ādi (159.54): Gandharvaih sakttah šrīmān prāgūyatat ca Tumburuh. In 
the first verse Tumburu is evidently used as a general designation of 
the four Gandharvas: Supriya, Atibāku, Haha, Haka, whereas in the 








TANTRIK TEXTS STUDIED IN ANCIENT KAMBUJA 13 


second verse it is used, in all appearance, as the name of one particular 
Gandharva, who was a musician. Whatever it may be, the number four 
seems to have been connected with the name of Tumburu, though 
it is difficult to determine at present whether it was originally the 
generic name of -the four Gandharvas ‘or the name of a particular 
Gandharva with four faces.* But there is no doubt that Tumburu 


was pur excellence a musician. He is mentioned as an authority on 
the musical science. 


The — Samgitáloka, while mentioning the oldest authorities on 
music, cites the name of Tumburu. These authorities are: (1) Brahma, 
(2) Siva, (3) Nandikešvara, (4) Siva, (5) Rambha, (6) Tumburu, 
etc. (......Sívanandike&vara | &ivarambhasthata — tumburuh......cf. Šāstrī, 
Catalogue, Vol. II, p. 72,and also Introduction, xxxv). These are the 
names of gods who revealed music to the mortals. NandikeSvara is 
another name of Šiva;  Tumburu is a Gandharva. A stringed 
musical instrument, 7Zamburā is connected with his name. Though 


Ī There seems to have been a time when Siva was four.faced. The Mabhfbbārata 
preserves its traces (Anufdsona, 141, al. 5 IT. Umdmaheévara-samedda). Šiva tells Uma 
that it was simply to see her that he became four-faced through yogic power : 


tám didrkeur aharh yogāc caturmürttitram āgatak | ` 
caturmukliaf ca samortto daríayan yogam uttamam 4 
pürvena cadanenāham indrateam anusdsmi ha | 

ultarena tcojā sürdham ramamy aham anindke | 
pošcimarh me mukham soumya sarvaprāņisukhūāaharm | 
daksiņari bhīmaraitkāfam raudrarh sarhharati prajāļ 1 


In the Adéparva (216, sls. 22-25, Cal. Ed.) Mahedvara is stated to have done the 
same thing, i.ē., assumed four faces through yoga to see the newly created Tilottamā from 
all sides—''ecam caturmukhak — sthánur mahādevo'bharat purā.' In the sculptural 
representation also, though Mahādeva should have, according to comparatively late texts, 
five faces, the figures of the four-faced Siva are not rare. Gopinath Rao in his Hindu 
Iconography (Vol. IT, Part II, pl. cxv and p. 373) reproduces the image of Sadidiva 
coming from Ellora, The image has four faces. Mr. Hao for making it agree 
with traditional form of Šiva says that “The figure has four faces and since all ita 
arms are broken, it is not possible to say how muny it originally possessed." But there 
is no mark of a broken face and there is no difieulty in admitting that it was from 
the beginning four-faced. At Yun Kang in North China, in the Buddbist sculpture which 


was directly inspired by Indian art there is à representation of Mahedvara with four 


faces. It belongs to the Sth-6th centuries A.D. Maheávara is sitting on a bull. 
The four fsces are turning to four directions. Somebody is standing near him carrying 


m trident (tridūlo). Seo Siren, Chinese Sculpture, Vol. TI, pl. 34. 








STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


"T > is no definite text to fall back on, still it seems probable that 

| Tu mbura was no other than Siva himself. Both of them are repre- 
, and both of them are authorities on music. 
1 this identification i is nà then a new light can be thrown on the 
text. of the inscription of Sdok Kak Thom. The four tantras : Sira- 
écheda, Fināšikka, Sammoda and Nayoffarā are said to be Zumduror 
vaktracatuskam, not because they constituted the four faces of that 
god but (because they issued forth from, or were communicated by, 
his four mouths (vakfra). Besides we should note that vak/ra really 
means mouth and not face. The four Tāntrik texts therefore seem 
to have represented four different āwnāyas, connected with the four 
faces of Tumburu, who was, in all appearance, an emanation of Siva 
himeelf like the Bhairavas. 

The introduction of the four texts throws some light on another 
problem, viz., that of the relation of Kambuja with northern India. Dr. 
Chatterji bas already tried to trace some of the elements of Kambuja 
culture to North Indian origin (Indian Cultura Influence in Cambodia, 
p. 253 ff). Now there are reasons to believe that the four Tantras 
brought to Kambuja by Hiraņyadāma were of North Indian origin. 
The Pétigalamata, which we bave seen to be a supplement to the 
Brakmayamala and to be connected with the Sirascheda-Jayadratha- 
yümala, is very clear on this point. On folio 55 we find mention of 
the countries where tbe Siva-sādhanā was in vogue. It is no doubt 
the country of the Áryas—the Āryāvarta: 








JS Vindhyottaragatenaiva Magadhāccāpareņa tu | 
Himādrer dakgine bhāge paūcālāt pūrvatas tathà u 
Arydvarta iti khyātas tadbhavācāryasādhakau | 
Agrajanmakulodbhütah sarvasādhāraņo yatah y 
Viáesanafi ca lathā brūmi agraņīšaktivācakah 1 
Saktyantam janitam janma janmāgrety abhidhiyate n 
Ka-pürvüstavinirmukt[à] anyadešodbhavāvapi | 
Kāmarūpaūca kāšmīrau kálingau konkanodbhavau 4 
Kānūcikošalakāveryā-rāstrajāvapī varjayet | 
Kimartham cet tatsiddhyartharm-mokgārtharn sarvajau &ubhau n 
Sivavratadharücüryo nātidīrgho'tihrasvakah, ete. 


This passage mentions the countries of which the people are unfit for 
Sivasādhanā on account of their physical deformities. These countries 
all begin with ka: Kāmarūpa, Káéámira, Kalinga, Kotikana, Kāūci, 


V ow "T 
A" 





TANTRIK TEXTS STUDIED IN ANCIENT KAMBUJA 15 


Ko$ala, Kávert-rástra (?). This shows that the oldest Brabmanīcal 


tantras which included the 18 texts mentioned in the Nrévdsatativa- 
samhitā, the 8 yāmala and their supplements, all originated in Northern 
India, The four texts, the Nayotlara,  Sira&cheda, Vinaiikha and 
Sammoha, taken .to Kambuja in the beginning of the 9th century 
A.D. would therefore be of North-Indian origin. 

Thus we see that the four Tantrik texts mentioned in the Inserip- 
tion of 802 A.D. during the reign of Jayavarman II are partly preserved in 
old MSS. in the Nepal Darbar Library. The Nayotlara was probably 
the same as the Naya- and  Uffara-süfras which form a part of the 
Ni&vásatativasamAi/a, now preserved in a MS, of Gupta writing of the 
Sth century A.D. It was composed much earlier than the date of 
the MS. and may be safely placed in the 6th-7th century A.D. The 
SiraSeheda was in all probability the same as the original Jayadratáa- 
yamala of which an extensive text copied in the 12th-13th century A.D. 
exists in the Darbar Library. The Winasikia seems to have been a 
supplement to the Jayadrathayamala and the Sammoha, the original, 
on which the later Tantras of that name were based. The four 
Tantras were of North-Indian origin. 

Tumbaru appears to have been an emanation of Siva himself, who 
is represented as having communicated the four texts through his 


four mouths.! 


1 For further details on Tumbaru see infra pp. 22 ff. 








ar ee FURTHER NOTES ON TANTRIK TEXTS 


The Agamas and their — — The inscriptions of Kambuja abound 
j in WA AA a canon. Various inscriptions refer to Stvašāstra,! 
| Saivāga mā; * Sarvagama,? and Sarva-vyākaraņa.t Agama means the oldest 
Saivile canon which conformed to the Vedas and had not entirely separated 
from. the Vedie religion like the later Saiva seets. Sāsfra was a term 
synonymous with Agama. Agamas are generally believed to be 28 in 
number but we have already discussed the text of the Wišvāsatattva 
Saņhitā, itself an Agama, which mentions only 18. We have also pointed 
out that these 18 Āgamie texts must have existed long before the 8th 
century. The references to Agamas in the inscriptions of Kambuja, the 
oldest of which go back to the beginning of the 9th century, confirm the 
same view. One of the four texts mentioned in the inscription of 
Kambuja, riz, the Nayottara, at least belong to the Agama proper while 
the three other belong to the canon which grew later on under its 
inspiration. In the inseription of Angkor vat 5 we find another reference - 
to an Āgamie text: it is the Pāramešvara (fasmin kuru mahadyagath 
yathoktarh pāramešvare). This is the FPāramešvaraiantra also called 
Pāramešvaramatatantra which is one of the 18 Āgamas mentioned in 
the Nišvāsasarnhitā list. Itis the 25th of the 28 Āgamas mentioned in 
later literature. We have already seen that there is a MS. of the 
Paramesvaratantra copied in 859 A.D. The work was certainly much older, 
as it is mentioned in the Nisvasasamhita list of which we bave a manuscript 
of about the middle of the Sth century. 

In my last article I have tried to show that the original Saivite 
canon which contained the 18 Agamas was of North-Indian origin as, 
according to them, the best Sirācāryas were the Brabmins of Āryāvarta. 
But the people of the surrounding countries, Kāmarūpa, ] Kāšmīra, Kalinga, 
Koükana, Kāūici, Košala, Kūverī-Rāstra were not éligible to that 
position for their physical deformities. By physical deformities we have 


* Inscription of Phnom Sundek of about the end of the 9th century A. D. Bergaigne, 
Inscription de Campa et du Cambodge, II, p. 157. 
2 Inscription of Angkor vat, ibid, p. 302. 
3 ibid, p. 359. * Ibid, p. 892, 
^  Bergaigne, Inscription, etc,, p. 390; also p. 884 with the note of Barth. | ply 
® Gopinath Reo, Hindu Iconogrophy, II, Part I, pp. 367-65, F 





—_— ee ea pr. g Dar = | ou 





FURTHER NOTES 17 


to understand that their statures did not follow the prescribed standard 
and were either too tall or too short (atidirgha atikrasvakā). Such a 
conclusion is also substantiated by other evidences. The Tanírasara which 
is a famous compendium of Bengal Tantrism says on the authority of 


JF Kriyāsūrasamuccaya, Fámala and Vaišampāyana-sarnhitā that the persons 


* 








r 


with physical deformities of various deseription, and persons who are diseas- 
ed, immoral, ete., cannot be gurus (ibid, p. 3)—atha nindyagurumaha— 


Kriyüsára-samuccaye— 
Svitri caiva galatkusthī netrarogi ca vāmanaļ | 
kunakhi syāvadantasš ca strijitaé cādhikā hgakah wu 
hinángah kapati rogi bahvāšī bahujalpakah ı 
etair dogair vihino yah sa guruļ éiayasammatah ii 
Yámale— 
abhišaptam aputraft ca kadaryam kitavam tathà 1 
kriyāhīnam $athan capi vāmanam gurunindakam i 
jalaraktavikāra ca varjayen matimān sada | 
sadi matsara-samyuktam gurur tantrena varjayet n 


Vaigampayana-samhitayam— 





aputro mrtaputra$ ca kusthi ca vamanas tathā T 


The same compendium again says ou the authority of Jaóa/a (quoted 
by Vidyádhar&cürya) that the quality of the gurus differ according to the 
countries in which they are born, According to it the best gurus are found 
in the countries of Madhyadesa, Kuruksetra, Nata and Koūkana (or Nata- 
Koūkaņa?), Antarvedi, Pratigphāna, and Avanti. The Madhyadeša is 
Āryāvarta. The gurus of the second quality are found in Gauģa, Salva, 
Sura (?), Magadha, Kerala, Košala and Da$àrna. The worst gurus are 
those who belong to the eountries of Kargāta, Narmada- Rástra,! Kaccha, 
Kālinda, Kalamba and Kamboja* (ibid, pp. 10-11); datāā F idyadhara- 
earyadhytam Jabalavacanam— 


v Madhyadeéa-kurukgetra-natakonkanasambhavah 
Antarvedi-pratigthanavantyds ca gurattamah i 


1 Tt is evidently the same name a3 quoted in tho list of the Pitgaltmats. Through 
mistake I connected it with Kaveri and took it to mean Kaveri-rástra, It seems to be 
a different country and probably is meant for Surástra. 

3 KoAkana, which is amongst the forbidden countries in the Agama list, here is 
I | in the first rank. Nafa-Konkoma may however be a mistake for another country. 
| The countries of Kalinda and Kalamba are not known. Kalinda (certainly not Aalindi) 





p uo 3 
— | 








18 . STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


— Madhyadeša, Āryāvarta— 

| Gaudāh šālvā surāšcaiva māgadhāh kerālās tathā | 
Košalāšca dašārņāšca guravah sapta madhyamah n 
Karņāta-narmadā-rāgtra-kacchatīrodbhavās tatha i 

r Kālindāś ca kalambās ca kambojāš cādhamā matah u 

This list was certainly drawn up at a time when the authority of the 
orthodox Agamas was a little undermined by a rise of the heterodox schools. 
But it still shows the old tendency according to which the ācāryas of North 
Indian origin were given the first place. 

This throws some unexpected light on the recruitment of Stvacaryas 
in different countries including ancient Kambuja. We have seen that 
Hiraņyadāma came with the new Sāsfras from a janapada, which was 
most probably a jamapada in India. The family of Sivakaivalya, who 
was initiated to these Šāstras, was long established in Kambuja. The 
history of this family, recorded in the inscription of Sdok kak Thom is 
of great interest. The members of this family enjoyed the priesthood 
of the king through succession since the time of Bhivavarman (middle 
of the 6th century A.D.). They were Sivacaryas and were guardians 
of linga established in different places. The succession of the priests 
was determined according to the m@trvarhSa “‘i.e., maternal lineage” 
(fanmātrvarnše yatayas striyo và jātā vidya vidya-vikrama-yuktabAavah | 
lad-yajakas syuh......... BEFEO, 1915, p. 62) which implied that the 
succession was to go to the children of the sisters (bAagineya) or to those 
of the daughter of the sisters, or the elder brother. There are several 
eases of such succession recorded in the inscriptions (3577, p. 54). It is 
diffieult to explain the necessity of such an arrangement. Barth in 1901 
thought that such an arrangement was necessary because the royal priests 
used to take the vow of celebacy and therefore they bad to choose their 
successor from the line of their sisters. But M. Finot (ibid, p. 56) 
says that it is difficult to accept this explanation as we hear of priests 
(though of very late times—llth century A.D.) who were married. 
It is however clear that the intention was to avoid difficulty in finding 
a successor because when the branch lines are counted the family has 
an unlimited scope. But what was the necessity of sticking to a particular 


seems to be a mistake for Kulinda. Kamboja does not seem to be the ancient country 
of the Kambojs-Gandhara group. It may be the country of the people called Kam-po-tsa 
mentioned in the Tibetan sources and located in Assam. These people seem to have been 
the predecessore of the modern Koch, 





"^ s 





FURTHER NOTES 19 


family for the selection of priests? The only explanation that occurs 
to my mind is that aecording to the Āgamas the Stvacaryas had to be 
chosen preferably from the Brahmanical families of North-Indian origin. 
Such families were not numerous in Kambuja. The family of Sivakaivalya 
was probably a rare one and priests. had to be chosen from that 
family and its branch lines, as the members of them alone were fit 
to be Sivācāryas. In the inscriptions of Kambuja we have several other 
references to the families of North-Indian origin, of which the members 
attained the position of royal chaplain. Thus we hear of the royal chaplain 
Bhatta Divākara who came from the banks of the Ka/indi (Yamunā) and 
was thus an expert in the Vedic sacrifices (Bergaigne, Inscription, I, 
p. 81 ff.) In an inscription of Angkor vat we are told that the royal priest 
Sarvajiiamuni, who was a special adept in the Saivite rites, came from the 
Áryadesa — (Bergaigne, Inscriptions, etc, , lxv, 9, p. 388:  Aryyade&e 
samutpanna& Sivārādhanatatparah1 yo yogenāgatah Kamvudeše...). In the 
same inseription we hear that a descendant of Sarvajūamuni filled the 
country called Madhyadeša (here a part of the ancient Kambuja) with 
Brahmins versed in the Veda and  Pedanga (lxv, 22: cakāra dešam 
nāmnemārh madhyadešarh. janākularh | vedavedāngavidviprarh...). There 
seems to be a reference here to the immigration of Brabmins from India. 
In the inscription of Prah vat we find mention of a Brahmin, named 
Agastya, related to the royal family, who originally came from the 
Aryadesa (Bergaigne, Inscriptions, ete., xliv, 5, p. 184: atha dvtjo’- 
gastya iti pratito, yo vedavedāngavid āryyadeše...). Such practices were 
known in India too. The great Cola king Rajendra Cola who built the 
Rājarājefvara temple at Tanjore is stated to have “appointed Sarvaéiva 
Pandita-Sivücüárya as the priest of the temple and have ordered that 
thenceforth his Sisyas and their Sigyas alone, belonging to the Aryadeéa, 
the Madhyadeša and the Gaudadega, shall be eligible for the office of 
chief priest” (South Indian Inscriptions, LI, 1, p. 105, wrongly referred to 
as 11, 2, p. 153, in Hindu Iconography, II, 1, pp. 5-6). We also know that 
the Malla kings of Bhatgaon (Nepal) had Brahmins from Bengal as their 
priests. These Brahmin families used to come to Bengal from time to time 
to contract marriages in order to maintain the purity of their family 
tradition. This was however the custom most probably in the pure 
Sivasādhanā, i.e., Āgamānta Šaivism. With the heterodox Saiva sects like 
the Pāšupatas and others the practice was different. Thus in Nepal the 
priests of Pašwpatinātka were recruited only from amongst the South 
Indian Brahmins (S. Lévi, Le NépaZ, 1, pp. 364-65). 











ia — 
^d 
Bons: influence of the Ágamas can also be traced in the Saivite cult 
practised in Kambuja and Campā. There are ample evidences in the 
ancient inscriptions to prove that the constructions of the Sivalingas were 
made according to the prescription of the canon. According to the 
Agamas the Ziūgas can be of two kinds, the cala, i.e., movable and the 
acala, ie., immovable. The ca/a /imgas are again of different types: 
mpnmaya, earthen; /ohaja, metallic; rafmaja, of precious stones; dāruja, 

wooden ; Šailaja, of stone; and Aganita, those made for temporary worship. 

The Zokaja, i.e., metallic Lingas are made of 8 metals: gold, silver, copper, 

bell-metal, iron, lead, brass and tin and the ratnaja ones are made of pearls, 
« Coral, vaidūrya, topaz, emerald and bluestone.! 


The acala or sthavara litigas are of 10 kinds, Svāyambhuva, Pūrva, 
Daivata, Gāņapatya, Asura, Sura, Ársa, Ráksasa, Mānuga and Bina, ‘The 
Makutūgama calls them Sthira liůgas and divide them into four classes : 
Daivika, Ārgaka, Gāņapa and Mānusga. 


In ancient Campa Saivism was the predominant religion and Siva 
was worshipped mostly in the form of a liūga. A linga established by 
king Bbadravarman towards the close of the 4th or the beginning of the 
Sth century A.D. became a sort of national deity for the people of Campa. 
This Ziriga is differently called in the insoriptions— Bhadrešvara, Sambhu- 
Bhadre$vara, and most probably also as Srīšāna-Bhadrešvara (see R. C. 
Majumdar, Campā, pp. 177 ff.). The inscriptions do not generally speak 
of the materials used for the construction of the /ihgas. Many of them, 
specially the mukhalihgas, were certainly carved from stone. But we have 
some references to other types of Zingas too. An inscription of Po-nagar, 
dated 965 A.D. (Majumdar, II, n? 47), speaks of the gold and stone images 
of the goddess, t.e., Bbagavatī (Aaími and Satlamayi pratimā; inser. n^ 
4b : kaladkautadekā)i ected by king Indravarman. This shows that both 
gold and stone wari used in the construction of the images of deities in 
Camp&. Another inscription is more explicit on the point. The Fang 
Tikuwh Inscription of Indravarman I (dated 721  $aka—799 A.D.) 
contains two stanzas which have not been correctly interpreted till 


STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 













* Gee G. Rao, Hindu Iconography, II (i), pp. 75 ff. The Agemas from which be derives 
the information are: Suprabhedūgama, Kāraņāgama, Kūmikāgama, Makuļāgama and 
Kiraņāgama ; cf. ibid, II (a), App. B, p. 3 f. 

3 Cf. ibid, I, Inscr. II, 10; XV, B; 26, XVII, B. 26 ; XVIII. D. 27, B. 24; and II, 
Inscr. LXI, C. n. 


BCU 125 


e IRR E c 


* 4 








FURTHER NOTES 2) 


now. The stanzas in question are (see Majumdar, II, n^ 23, viii 
and ix) :— 
aaa afia few wnfad area i 
sza a anA a waar [ VIII) 
^ cen enfterts xz are ferc | 
agaat fe are niaan n [IX] 


Dr. Majumdar translates the stanzas thus: after Bergaigne and Barth: 
* Indravarman also installed an earthen Zinga of the God, which therefore 
came to be known as Indrabhadre$vara. He also established in the year 
of the Sakas Sasi yam Adri (721), two treasures for the god, the one 
composed of movable and immovable property, and the other moveble 
and with a month (priests ?)." ! 


The last part of the translation is evidently unintelligible. There 


is no question of “property” in the text and “a movable treasure 


with a mouth (?)” does not convey any meaning. Kosa here, as in many 
other cases in these inscriptions, should be taken in the sense of ftūga-koša. 
Kosa was apparently an outer covering of the Zinga, and was used probably 
for decorative purposes. The inscriptions of Campā very often record tbe 
gifts of koša made by the kings to the /;/ngas. These košas were often 
golden and decorated with costly gems. The košas had sometimes faces 
and košas with six faces are twice spoken of. We find mention of U/rddéva- 
koša which was most probably a detachable one (see Majumdar, Campa, I, 
p. 182). If in the present case we take koša in the sense of /i)iga-ko&a, the 
text becomes clear. It should then be translated: “ Indravarman also 
installed an earthen (parthira //àga) of bim (the god) which therefore 
came to be known as Indrabhadresvara. He also established, in the Saka 
year šaši-yjama-adri (721), two košas, one cara, t.¢., movable, and the other 
sthira, i.e., immovable.- The movable (cara) kosa had a face (or faces).” 
The Zihga was an earthen one (partheva) which corresponds to the 
mrumaya-linga mentioned by the Agamas and it had two košas, of which 
one was movable and the other, probably a simple cylindrical one, was 
a fixed one. The cara koša hada face (or faces) aud thus when fixed to 
the ligas used to convert it into a mukhalinga. The two words cara 


TI, p. 33 et37—VIILIX: "* Sri-Indravarman a érigé 
416 appeló désormais d'un autre nom Indras- 
l'un composé de biens meubles 


1  Bergaigne, Inscriptions, elo., 
aussi un liiga terrestre de ce dieu, qui a 
bhadreávara. Ila aussi constitud pour lui deux tróaors : 


et doué d'eloguence,'' (les prêtres du temple—Barth). OA } 


t I = -e * 
g i N 
I , ya lu * 
> u = ⸗ 
| i = i Is CENTRAL LIBRARY J 


" P 











PED 
92 STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


> P 





and sra vaturally remind us of the two types of //ga, cala, movable 
and acala, immovable, also called stātra or stAavara in the Āgamas. 

In ancient Kambuja the Žitūgas used to be made of metal as well as 
precious stones. We have references to /ingam Aaimagobham, suvarma- 
mayalinga, svarnalinga, kaladkautadinīga, sphatikalinga and maņidinga. 
The materials used for the construction of these derīgas therefore were 
chosen in accordance with the prescription of the Āgamas. They all 
were of the type known as ca/a/inga and fell under its subdivisions : 
šailaja, tokaja and ratnaja, 

The four faces of Tumburu.—1 have already tried to establish that the 
four Tantrik texts Sra&cheda, vinasikAa, sammohana and nayoftara mentioned 
in the inscription of Sdok Kak Thom, were authentic Saivasástras, being 
studied in India in the 7th and 8th centuries A.D. if not earlier. "'l'hese 
texts constituted the ''vak/racatuskam *! of the god Tumburu and were 
introduced i in Kambuja for establishing the mystie rites known as devarāja 
(siddhih...... devarajabAikAya). Tumbura evidently had some sort of 
connection with the Devarāja cult. Devarāja was a phallic representation 
(liūgarāja) of Siva—and we have already seen that Tumburu was an 
emanation of Siva himself. The inscription of Sdok Kak 'Thom tells us 
that the first temple of Devarāja was built by Jayavarman II (802 A.D.) 
in his new capital Mahendraparvata (Phnom Kulen), and the royal chaplain 
Sivakaivalya was appointed priest. The deity was subsequently taken to 
Haribarálaya where the capital was shifted. Afterwards when the king 
Paramašivaloka (+. e., Ya$ovarman: 889-910 A.D.) built his capital at 


1 We have now a definite text before us which supports the identification of Tumburu 
with Siva. Io the Yogaorāsigfha-Rāmāpaņa (Nirrāņa-prakaraņa, I, XVIII, 23-26), compiled 
before the 9th century A.D. the following verses : 


ity agfaifrarya-yuktās tā mütaro raudra-eestitàh | 
kadücinmilità cyomni aarcāh kenāpi hetunā || 
utsavarh poramam cakruh paramārtkaprakāšakam | 
cámasrotogatá ētās Tumbururh Rudram āšritāļ | 
pūjayilcā jagatpūjyau derau Tumburu-Bhatracau | 
vicitrürthál kathāš cakrur-madirā-madatoņifāk || 


These things are spoken of the cight mātrkās who were one day out for amusement. 
They are bere characterised aa the followers of the left current (cá masrotogatá) and related 
to Rudra who is Tomburo, ie., the Tumburu aspect of Rudra (Tumburush Rudram). The 
cigbt-matrkās are bere made to worship the two gods Tumburu and Bbhnairava. This passage 
clearly mentions Tamburo as an aspect of Hudra. It should also be noted that Siva 
is often referred to in the inscriptions of Kambuja os Ceturü"ana, Caturmukha, etc. 
Cf. Berguigne, Inscriptions, etc., TI, n° LXIV (p. 377); n^ XLIV (p. 183) ; n" LV (p. 213). 





FURTHER NOTES 93 


YoSodharapura (Angkor Thom) he brought the deity;to the new capital 
and placed him in the temple of Pam kāntāt (lit. the central mount, 
which was built in the centre of the city for receiving the deity. 

This central edifice erected by Ya$ovarman was for a long time 
believed to be the Bayon which is situated just in the centre of Angkor. 
But M. Finot in his recent studies (Etudes Asiatiques, Vol. I, p. 245 ff.) 
has tried to show that the inscription of Sdok Kak 'Thom has told a lie. 
A detailed examination of the sculpture of Bayon has led M. Finot to 
believe that Bayon could not have been originally a Saiva temple. He 
thinks that the newly built capital of Yašovarman was not placed under 
the protection of the Ziriga Devarāja, the national deity of Kambuja, but 
under that of the Bodhisattva A valokitešvara. Necessarily he was led to 
conclude that Angkor Thom and Bayon were not built by king Yaso. 
varman, as the inseription would have us believe, because he was a Šaiva, 
but by his predecessor Jayavarman II who was a Mahāyānist. Yago- 
varman according to him played the part of a vandal and changed Bayon 
into a sanctuary of the /:ga. The principal reason for starting this theory 
was that the sculpture of Bayon is almost entirely Buddhist. But it might 
be argued that the temple was begun as a Buddhist one and finished as a 
Šaiva one. But to this objection M. Finot answers that even in several 
niches of the towers the central figures were originally those of Buddha. 
They were later on deliberately destroyed and replaced by Zinga. Another 
serious difficulty remained to be explained away. Each tower of Bayon is 
decorated with four colossal faces turning towards the four cardinal points. 
In 1911 M. Finot interpreted them as the architectural translation of a 
caturmukhalinga. He, however, gives up that explanation in the light of 
later researches and now thinks that they represent the faces of the 
Avalokitešvara. He is aware of the fact that no such architectural 
representation of Avalokitešvara is at present available but he still supposes 
that the architect wanted to represent Avalokitešvara as looking in the four 
directions and thus protecting the city on all sides. M. Finot would 
therefore conclude that the inscription of Sdok Kak Thom has distorted the 
facts. Bayon was not originally a Saiva temple and YaSovarman, who was 
a staunch Saiva, could not be its founder. It was founded in the time of 
Jayavarman II (802-869 A.D.) who was a Buddhist king. 

But M. Philippe Stern in his study on the evolution of the Khmer Art 
(Le Bayon d'Angkor et t' Evolution de VArt Khmer, 1927) has questioned 
the hitherto admitted chronology of the monuments of Angkor on grounds 
of style. According to him, Bayon did not exist in the time of 








STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 








Therefore, the central mount (Varn Kantat) of Yasovarman 
s to be searched for elsewhere. He thinks that it should be identified with 
i a Phimānakas which, in all appearance, occupied the central position iu 
the old city. The city developed in course of subseguent centuries and its 
i centre was naturally removed. “According to the chronology proposed by 

him, Bayon could not have been built before the time of Udayāditya- 

varman II (1049-1052 A.D.) or that of his predecessor Süryavarman I 
(1002-1049 A.D.). The outer walls of the city would belong to this 
period. 

But M. Coedčs in a recent study (BEFEO, XXVIII, pp. 81 ff.) has 
— fried to prove that Bayon was built still later during the reign of Jaya- 
warman VII (1182-1201 A.D.). According to him the outer walls of 
Angkor Thom and some other buildings, which are of the style of Bayon, 
were constructed in the same period. Thus both M. Stern and Coedés 
‘agree in placing Bayon and the outer walls of the city in the same epoch 
though they do not assign the same date to their construction. Both of 
them disbelieve the testimony of the inscription of Sdok Kak Thom 
which clearly attributes the foundation of Yašodharapura (t.e., Angkor 

Thom) and Vna Kantāl, “the central mount," to Yašovarman. 

This inscription, we have already seen, was composed in Saka 974 
(—1052 A.D.) The date of its composition therefore falls in the period 
to which M. Stern would attribute the construction of Bayon. It seems 
strange that a contemporary inscription would mean by Fram Kantal 
any other edifice except the Bayon. What is possible is that the traditional 
history of religious foundations, which it records, is confused. Ite 
attribution of the foundation of Bayon to Yaéovarman may therefore 
be easily questioned but Bayon was certainly considered as a sufficiently 

„Old edifice in the middle of the lith century for affording scope for 
confusion about its real founder to the author of the inscription, 

According to M. Coed?s and M. Stern, the construction of Bayon 
and the outer walls of the city would fall in the same period. *The towers 
of Bayon and those of the five city-gates are all decorated with four 
colossal faces. What do these four colossal faces represent? Are they the 
representations of the faces of Avalokite$vara, as M. Finot thinks? Even 
admitting that Jayavarman II has not directly, but through his tradition, 
influenced the construction of Bayon, it is difficult to believe with M. Finot 
that he was a Buddhist king. M. Finot takes him to be a Buddhist — 
firstly, because he came from Java (or Srivijaya) which was a great 
centre of Mnhāyāna Buddhism in this period Mecedbondiys because he 














FURTHER NOTES 25 


founded the city of Amarendrapura, formerly identified with the rains of 
Bantay Chmar which is completely a Buddhist city to judge from the 
sculptures. But the identification of Amarendrapura with Bantay Chmar 
has been reasonably questioned by M. Stern (/oc. cit.). We should also 
bear in mind that the posthumous name of Jayavarman II is Pa'amesvara 
(the Supreme Lord—Siva). The cities which he built—Mahendraparvata, 
Hariharšlaya and Amarendrapura are all connected with the names of Siva. 
The last name seems to be only a different form of Devarāja. "The priest 
whom he chose as his chaplain, Sivakaivalya, was a Saiva and eame from a 
Saiva family. It was again he who authorised Hiranyadáma to introduce 
the texts of Saivāgama along with the Saiva cult of Devarāja into 
Kambuja. He really made it the religion of the state, erected its temples 
and granted lands to the pricstly family for its maintenance. Besides it 
would be wrong to say that the sculptures of Bayon have no trace of 
Saivism. An important bas-relief of the first gallery of Bayon (see 
Comaille, Guides aur Ruines d’Angkor, p. 135, n. 36) represents three 
temples in one row, of which the towers bear tridents (¢r1Sii/a) and the deity 
in the centre is a SivaZinga. In the face of these facts, it is difficult to 
admit that Jayavarman II was a Buddhist king and that he introduced 
Mabāyāna from Srivijaya into Kambuja. There is no reason to suppose 
that the four Tantrik texts brought by Hiraņyadāma had anything to do 
with Mahayana. Jayavarman II was a Saiva. If any one of the edifices 
(for example Bantay Chmar, Bayon, ete.), containing some Buddhist 
sculptures can even be proved to have been constructed in the time of 
Jayavarman II, the only possible explanation is either that he was a 
tolerant king and allowed Mahāyāna to flourish in the country, or that he 
had employed artists who had come from the neighbouring territory of 
Srivijaya and had Mahāyānist training. It will be wrong to suppose that 
Mahayana Buddhism of the 8th-9th century V.D. was very much antagonis- 
tic to Tantrik Saivism. Though the sculpture of the temples partly seem 
to be Mahāyāniet, the indwelling deity was no doubt Siva. 

It seems difficult to admit that Bayon was not originally a Saiva 
temple. The state religion of Kambuja was always the cult of Devarāja. 
A temple like Bayon, which is situated just in the centre of the city,’ could 

| 1 The question of the date .nd position of the Bayon has become more compiicated after 
the recent trial excavations made by MM. Cœdès and Goloubew at Angkor (Annua! 
Bibliography of Indian Archeology, 1932, p. 40). I do not pretend to hold to the suggestion 
which bas occurred to me in regard to the date and position of the temple in this article. 
Itis, I hope, clear from the article that my main contention bears on the significance 
of the four colossal faces over the towers and gateways. 


4 








STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 












not therefore have been meant for any other deity except Devarāja. If in 
of the miches of the towers of Bayon the figures of Buddha have been 
— destroyed and substituted by //3àga we must attribute that work 
of vandalism to a period when the king was a very orthodox one and did not 
even tolerate the sculptural representation of Buddba.in the temple of 
Devarāja, as his predecessors used to do. It is therefore necessary to go 
back to the older theory of M. Finot that the four faces of the towers of 
Bayon (as well as those of the towers of the city gates) are the sculptural 
representation of the four faces of Siva. Devaraja was in all probability a 
mukAaliswa and it was quite natural that the towers of its temple and those 
of the eity-gates constructed in the same period would bear the muk/a/inga 
symbol. This explanation seems to have a strong support in the inscription 

of Sdok Kak Thom which says that the four áüsfras which prescribed the 
cult of Zevarāja constitated the four faces of the Tumóuru. It may not 
— be therefore improbable that the four colossal faces on the towers are 
architectural translation of the four faces of Tumburu, Zumvuror vaktra- 
eatugkam, mentioned in the inscription, because, it is through those four 
faces that the god originally communicated the four fundamental texts 
which preseribed the religious rites of the king and his people. They are 
the symbols of the different āmnāyas of the Saivite canon. 













m. 





En 
- 
‘te 


us 
. 








THE SANDHABHASA AND SANDHAVACANA 
I1I 


Prof. Vidhušekhar Šāstrī in an article published ia the Indian Histo- 
rica! Quarterly (1328, pp. 287.) has tried to determins the exact meaning 
of the expression Saudkādkāzī. He has eollected a large number of facts 
which justifies us in rejecting the old interpretation saggestel by Mahā- 
mahopādhyāva H. P. Šāstrī as “ the twilight language ” (āloāndkārī bhāsī). 
There can be no doubt that the proper reiling of the expression is 
Sandidbhisa, and not Saudtyā-bhāsā, though it oscacs in a larga number of 
badly copied Nepalese manuscripts. The large number of texts quoted by 
Prof. Vidhušekhar Sāstrī has enabled him to interpret it as aóAipraytka 
vacana or neyartha vacana, i.e, “intentional speech." This interpretation - 
is in agreement with the Chinese translation of the word as “ secret, hidden," 
and thus “that of which the sense is to be made clear "(= aeyārtka). 
Abhiprayika means that “it is intended to imply or suggest something 
different from what is expressed by the words.” (V. S. Sāstrī, foc. cit., 
pp. 295-294.) 

I leave it undecided for the present whether the expression Saudtā- 
vacana vas used in the ancient texts like the Saddiarma-pundarika to 
emphasise on any deeper meaning of the particular texts ia connection of 
which it is used. But there is no doubt that it was used to mean a symbolical 
language to signify “something different from what is expressed by the 
words" in the later Buddhist texts belonging to the Fajrayāna and the 
Satajayāna. It is evident evea from the Caryīcargaviuiācapya published by 
H. P. Sastrr. The expressions like “nagara bahire dombī tohori 
kudia” (p. 19), “alia kāliē vāļa rundhela " (p. 14), * Kakkolapriyatota- 
melakatayananda sphurat-kundarah | Sarlyah sodhita galilalitakarah kāliājarās 
cakriņah W'” (comm. p. 33), ete., cannot convey any meaning, if interpreted 
literally. We have, therefore, to assume that there is some hidden meaning 
in them. 

The Hevajratantra, a canonical text of the Vajrayana, not yet much 
studied, contains a chapter on the SandAa5Aasa. It gives the clues to the 
interpretation of many symbolical words (Saudfāvacana) used in the 
Vajrayāna and Satajayava literature. It is difficult to determine the aye 
of the Mevajrafantra at present but it must have been compiled before the 













STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 





D bi T zinni z of the eleventh century A.D., when it was translated into Chinese 
by Fa- 1 (Tokio edition, XXVII, 3). There is also a Tibetan translation of 
| the e text. The great importance of the text in the Vajrayana literature 

| y prove t ai it probably meee to the very early days of the Vajrayana 


IK 
wa e^ x3 
£ 


(7 »-8t | centuries A.D.). 


ri 


* IES 13th Chapter 1 of the Hevajra deals TE the SandAhabóhaga— 
ME wajra-so vvatoniranidana-sandhabkaya nama patafah) In this chapter 

bhasi is characterised as the makātamaya ( — Chinese fa san-mei-ye, 
t Samaya) of the yogis, and also as “the great language" (makābkāgam) 
Lan * full of the meaning of doctrines ” (Samaya-saūketa vistaram). The 
Chinese t translation of the text is a faithful one. The word Sandhabhaga is 
rendered as s fang pien shuo. Fang-pien means dupiyikam (cf. Mahavyutpatts, 
|“ Sakak i, 6339). Rosenberg ( Vocabulary, p. 222) interprets fang pien shuo 
| as "aupacārikah. Fang-pien is used here as an equivalent of Samaya, t.e., 
special doctrine of the school represented by the Hevajratantra. The 
į: ‘doctrine is summarised in one stanza which occurs in the beginning of the 
tantra for explaining the word Hevajra— 


Hekürena mahākaruņā vajrarb prajfiá ea bhanyate | 
Prajüopáy&tmakarh tantrarh tanme nigaditam Šrņu 4 


















This is the fundamental doctrine of the Vajrayana as has been explained 
-in such works as the PrajnopáyaviniScaya-siddAi of Anatgavajra, recently 
published by Dr. B. Bhattacharyya in the Gaekwad's Oriental Series. 
The passage which deals with the SandhábAdsü has been established 
from a collation of the three different manuscripts, and the Chinese 
translation : :— 


[ D, fol. 9*-9*; P, 26%-27° ] 


WTHTHTY — 
vas amii vaafaēmai i 
gamm KET GATVI TATA y 


1 This corresponda to the 3rd Chapter of the 2nd Kalpa of the Sanskrit text. 
The Sanskrit MSS. of the text are divided into two Kalpar, of 10 chapters each, In Chinese 
translation, h »wever, the numbering of the chapters is continuous; thus the Sra Chapter of 
Kalpa Il=Chapter 13{ I have consulted three M88, of the Hevajratantra,—the MS. in the 


Nepsl. Darbar Library (D), that in the possession of Prof. G. Taoci who kindly lent it to 
me (T) and the last one in my possession (P). | ios 











SANDHABHASA AND SANDHAVACANA 


aga we) we afd aaua Stai aa | 
afadz:* xu? a: wearacd * feéugw ^a 
wafa: ded gpe adie * muga ai 
wai ze x * maļ wrferwi we u 


wani fsfi’ Mai ware guara i 


an afa Ya aad aradtart g 

qa Ugu" wp ga Waf "Wr: | 

aay fana Ya aa soca ae og 
ayatam die ani emm t? ag 
aq afaa ** «ur gu «māla Nna 
ga vafri end adūžša frd 

aami Tal Wl garu gu Aiea: d 
era) auga ara AZ! cose! «ur | 
»pqu]'? cage a feo argrrāt ** wapa 
<4 8T wee! da vai qe: afafwen: i 
“iat am cep aa" yafaa fas aa an 
qaqan ana fee afa | 

ass erat ae eared Hews it 
ursfufuwisa Soa a aža Wurm | 
uuufazres aa "m4 «ja od: 

yaya cdi queue fagutsfu | 
fugtsat afz gālsft dur "ow a 
wanafaa auru aie * o«wrwüfes au: | 
wees weet aiid aquest: i 


tas aanafsemadurema ara gz4: medo 


| T, dz, P, āzi. > gå: * T, xm, P, ru. 


^ P, freqam:. 


* D, ada, T, wate, P, mdizt. 
* D, waasi, T, wena, P, wem. * T, wet, P, eee, D, mfasiri. 


© D, æfi, T, fafa, P, fafaa. 0 T, geet. 


^^— agieren. 


!5 D, wñ, T, were, P, wafa. 


s 


1 


P, wen”. 


A. «ea b 


29 


'* D, amag, P, eure. 


15 Instsad of the reading war (sandhā) we have saridhyà or sandhya in all the texta. 
I havo, however, accepted the corrected reading of the word. 





— | $ 
30 STUDIES IN THE TANTHAS 


The words used in the SandÁaóAasa are according to the preceding text 


21 t ^r. AS. 1 A 
the following ! — 


madana (Ch. mo-nien) = madya ; Ch. kuo she.“ fruit-provision *' ? 
vala? (Ch. mi-/o) =māmsa ; Ch. keou (chao “ search-extract’’ ? 
kheta (Ch. k'o-fcha) — gati ;* Ch. kin, “to go.” 
preksana (Ch. pi-di-k’o-nan)=agati; Ch. Zai, “ to come." 
asthyübbarana (Ch. a-sa-fie-p'o-/o-nan) 

=niramšuka ; Ch. (chou pao, “ ratna” ? 
ģamaruka (Ch. man-nou-lou ?)=krpīta ; Ch. kou-yin, “dram.” 
durdura (Ch. nou-/o-nou-/o) - abhavya ; Ch. pouo to jen, 

a man of bad qualities. 
kāliūjara (Ch. ko-/eng-jo-/o) 2 bhavya ; Ch. shen jen, ** good man." 
dindima (Ch. ning-ni-mon)—ašparša ; Ch. wou fch’ou, ** not-strike." 
kapāla (Ch. &e-po-/0) 2 padmabhājana ; Ch. Zien-Aoua-X^i, ** lotus-vase." 
tpptikara (Ch. /t-wang ?-po-to) = bhakta ; Ch yén-cAe, “ food.” 
mālatīndhana (Ch. mo-/0o-/ing = vyāūjana ; Ch. ts'at-cĀe, 

vegetable food.” 

gūtha (Ch. ywan-touo)=catussama; Ch. sseu p’ing feng, *' four-equal.” 
mitra (Ch. mou-fo-40) = kasturikā ; Ch. miao-hiang, “ good-smell.” 
silhaka (Ch. si-/o-kan)=svayambha; Ch. fseu-jen-sheng, “ self-born." 
Sükra (Ch. s4ow-kie-lo)= karpüraka ; Ch. fsao-fs0, ** create-do”’ ? 
mahamirhsa (Ch. mouo-s0) =ālija ?; Ch. pao-sAe, * white colour.” 

Ch. yu? = Ch. stang-ying, “ yoga, yukta.”' 
bola (Ch. mouo-lo-kan)=vajra ; Ch. kin kang, “ vajra. 
kakkolaka (Ch. kou-/o-kan) — padma ; Ch. lien koua, “ lotus.” 
[kularh (Ch. kou-lien)=Ch. pou-let, ** class." 
varna (Ch. powa-/0-na) = Ch. yu fen pie wou fen pie, i.e. “ bhedābheda "'].4 
Jombi (Ch. non-mi)}= Vajrakuli ; Ch. kin kang pou, “ vajra class.” 
nati (Ch. za-ti)— Padmakuli ; Ch. Zien Aoua pon, “ padma class,” 
canjālī (Ch. /san-na-/i2) = Ratnakulī ; Ch. pao-pou, ** ratna class.” 
dvijā (Ch. nei-jo-tof) = Tathagati ; Ch. jou Zai pou, © tathágata class.” 








! The Chinese transcription of the words are given within brackets. Tho Chinese 


tranalation of the word is given at the end. For the Chinese translation see Tok,, XXVII, 3, 
p. 74", 3-10, 


* The Chinese translation omita two words of the original malayajam milanam and 


fanal; drāraļy. 


? This seems to be an incomplete and fanity transcription of the original kunduru. 


4 The translator evidently has made a confusion here. The text simply moans that 


there are five classes differentiated by the colours. 





SANDHABHASA AND SANDHAVACANA al 


rajakī (Ch. /an-jo-kin) = Karmakuli ; Ch. kte-mo-pou, “ karma class.” 
[Mudrā (Ch. mu-£o-Z0) =? miao tekeng ; 1 Ch. "wiil achieve če, 
; sustddhidah.’? | 
These are not, however, all the words of the Sandhāvacana class, as we 
have many others mentioned in different places either in the commentaries 
on the ZoAàs or inthe /evajratantra. I will only mention a few of them here— 


ali, kali—these two words literally mean “vowels” and 
“ consonants.” See Bacot, La grammaire de Thonmi Sambhota, p. 1 ; 
ali kali candra sūrya prajfopaya—Hervajra (Chap. I); fokajfianena 
.. dokabth@sena ca—Carydcaryaviniscaya (com., p. 15). 
lalana, rasanā, avadfhūti—these are the names of the three principal of the 
thirty-two arteries—/aland prajfiasabhaüvena rasanopayasamstAità | 
avadhūti madhyadese tu grāhyagrākakavarjīitā | Hevajra (Ch. I). 
Some of these technical words—dodĀicitta, samarasa, karin, giri, evam- 
kara, etc., have been explained by M. Shahidullah with the help of the 
commentary in his Les Chants Mystiques (Paris, 1928, pp. 9-10). 

In the chapter (patala) which follows the preceding one ( "indar/hanama 
patalah, Chap. 4 of Part IL of our SS. of the f/evajra = Chap. 14 ot the 
Chinese translation, Tokio, XXVII, 3, p. 74a) the Lord explains some 
doctrines in the SandĀādhtāsā. The passage is faithfully transcribed in the 
Chinese translation (idid, p. 75a, 11-13). We will first give the original 
text as collected from the three different manuscripts already mentioned 
and then the Chinese transeription, as given in the translation :— 


Slat fae pem «uix Hea | 

ww fafas Sf sree wu we 4 CAT (i 
afg aa gas ae augi fafews | 

wp wifersx ofowt ce a afmut og 
qaga waft fag! aut emma | 

areas sam giaa ws GIT Ii 

Kru uz mcs aug u wifews i 
faXgwwupwsfews HATIA gfuwt i 
aasa ges azr fors afe uw afmut i” 


i Miao.tcheng in the Chinese text is wrong!y taken as an equivalent of the word mudrd, 
The original text meana that the five mudrüs—dombi, nati, caņdālī, drijā and rojaki conduce 
to perfect siddhi. : 

U D, ratā, T, auf P D, fafafs, P, fafa ; D, ar . du amat > P, aus r4 


D, wa Mer; T, ste: D,P,aa; T, ay, Chinese we; T, are; DP, 














kari 
iut. 3 1, Ase —— 
i wa. a 4 rr kr 
ra "m E Ua t . 
7 STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


Chinese transcription (p. 74a, 17-20). 

= kar-lo-yi-li ch'e-a moü-ló mou-ni-li k6-koū-lo | 

3 | | kiu ki-pi-cha hoü wei-jo-yi kie-lou-ni-ki a-yi-loü-ló 4 

- . tahi tso-lo k'ie-jo-yi ngé-ch’e mo-ye-nā pi-jo-a-yi | 

T - ho-lei kó-leng-jo-lo po-ni-a-yi net-nou-lou wei-ent-a-yi | 
—— tso-wu-san-mo kie-cheu-li si-lo + bô kie-pou-lou ló-yi-a-yi | 










e 
- 
pet” 


E 
wy 


F, 


ue ' m0-lo-yi yin-ta-na so-lei ta-hi p'o-lou hó-yi-a-yi | 
A rs pi 4- leng-kie-na k'ie-eha k'ic-leng-ti shou-ta nou jc-ni-a-y1 | 
— - . mi-lien-sliou ying-ye tso-nd-wel-a-yi 
— NM tan-hi ji-sa-lô p’ou-a-wei pc-ni-a-yi | 
^ — .  . gamo-lei-yi-ji ko»g-nou-lou wei-cha-yi 
E. wtng-ni-mo to-hing wei-jo-a-yi y ! 


? 

Most of the words in the above passage belong to the SandAübhàsá. 
The other words are in their Apatraméa forms—thia=to stay, from stika; 
mjā bājjat" to beat (the drum) * from vādya ; khajjati * to eat” from kāda ; pijiat 
"to drink” from piva; paniar, "to bow into” from pra-nama ; bajjiat 
“to abandon ” from varja ; /aiai * to take ” ; khatat, karante, māņtai, ca:'abiai, 
_paņtat, čaļai, ete., also are to be explained as Apathramša forms which we 

— fiod in the Dodds. The Sandia vacana in the passage are — 


kakkola = padma * lotus." 

kibida from krpita =damaruka, i.e., “drum.” 
bala = mümsa, * meat.” 

maane from madana = madya, “ wine.” 


fofaws ; T, qwe; D, st; D, wfawa; D, cates; P,T, get; Daa ; 
P, afsus; D, omits eye, T, úra; P, am; T, tsi; P, «ws, D, wat 
wa; D, afate; T, afewfe; P, ami aie; D, waa; ax; P, dux; 
Ch. ga; D, ta; T, az; P, @z; D,T, verre; D, a aat; T, 4 fess; 
P, 4 aifeut; D, fiye; P, fatge; D, ws, Ch, «rēta; P, weatex; P, 
«eifaa: ; D, wenftadies ; T, aaus; P, wata; D, nañ; T, wears; 
D, wer; P, "r£ s, D, efe, T, afe, P, afe, amwe, T, aries, P, aster) 


| nei, nou, na, ning, ni stand for ancient ndei, ndou, nda, etc., eul for ji; there is often 


confusion between mo and wei, for the Chinese characters are similar, The vowels are 


lengthened according to the indication in Chinese. The combination of two consonants has 
been represented by the plus sign. 








SANDHABHASA AND SANDHAVACANA 33 


kāltūjara =bhavya 

duddura=abhavya 

caiisama from catussama =giitha 

stlha from SC dui 

karppūra =šukra 

māfat indhana = vyāfijana 

prenkhana = āgatt 

kheta = gat: 

niraīnāna =asthydbharana 

malayaja=milana "union," this word, as we have seen is 
omitted in the Chinese translation. The meaning 

„is the same as that of kundurx which means 

dvindriyasamyoga. 

dindima = asparša. 


I do not, however, pretend to say that by the substitution of these 
equivalents we can arrive at a clear meaning; the meaning will still remain 
obseure. That obseurity can be removed only when the text will be 
interpreted in the light of the Vajrayāna doctrines. Unfortunately our 
knowledge of the Vajrayana is still very meagre. 











' ON THE SĀDHANAMĀLĀ a 
Ec: > The present volume which forms the Tome XLI of the Gaekwad's 
| Oriental Series, contains the remaining SüdÁamas, 142 in number (Nos. 
171-312). Dr. Bhattacharyya is to be congratulated on the successful 
completion of his edition of the SüdAanamülá. Most of these Sādžanas 
aN lying scattered in Tibetan translation in the Bstan Agyur and the worth 
edition would have been certainly enbanced if they had been 
cik for settling the text. But still our indebtedness to the editor 
"is not minimised in the least, for he is doing the work of a pioneer in this 


field. The — — — of these loxts is i@onographical and 


ain to do — * aspect of the work, but the ritualistie aspect 
Mim to be studied. 

‘In a learned introduction the editor has discussed some of the most 
laden: problems of Buddhist Tantras bearing on the present text. 
This introduction deals with: (1) Magic in ancient India in which he finds 
the origin of the Tantras; (2) Tantras in which bē gives a general 
deseription of the Hindu and Buddhist Tantras; (3) Origin and development 
of Vajrayana ; (4) Chronology of the Vajrayana ; (5) Leading tenets of 
"Vajrayana ; (6) Aims and objects of the Tantras; (7) Authors of the 
Sādhanas ; (8) Vajrayāna deities ; (9) Iconography. Our remarks will be 
` confined to the most important of these sections, viz., 3, 4 and 7, which deal 

with the history of the Vajrayana. 

It is not true to say (p. vi) that Buddha gave instruction on Mudra, 
Mandala and Tantra. The oldest images of Buddha, of course, represent 
him with Mudra but they go back only to the 1st and 2nd centuries A.D. 
There is nothing to support the statement that Buddha incorporated Tantric 
practices (p. xvii) into his system of religion. There is no work on 
dhdranis translated into Chinese “early at the beginning of the Christian 
era." The oldest translation of something like a dAárani, which I know of, 
belongs to the beginning of the 3rd century A.D. (Nanjio, Catalogue 478 
is lost. Another dižāraņī is said to have been translated between 223 
and 253 A.D. by an Indo-Seythian monk, Tche Kien (Nanjio, No. 355 
Anantamuhha-sūdhakadhāraņī 7). But there is an interval of 100 years 
between these two translations and the translation of dÀaramis, which 
Look place towards the end of the 4th century A.D. Both the translations 
are registered for the first time in the catalogues of the 6th century A.D,, 


"hw M «x 





xg 
ON THE SADHANAMALA 25 = 


and therefore doubts can be easily raised about their authenticity ; it 


can be, however, safely asserted that the genuine translations of 
dháranis back to the end of the 4th and the beginning of the 
5th century A.D. It may be pointed out in this connection that the 
chapter on dAarani in the ZŽankāvafārasūtrāa is not found in its first 
Chinese translation made by Guņabhadra in 443 A.D. but occurs only in 
its later Chinese translations. 

Some iuterpretations of the Vajrayāna doctrines given in $ 3 ean- 
not be naīvely accepted at the present state of our knowledge about 
Vajrayana. On p. xxii Dr. Bhattacharyya says,—‘Vajrayanists went 
beyond due limits in their spite against the striet rules of morality, and 
they violated all 6f them and plunzed headlong into the worst immorality 
and sin." ‘This conclusion is based on a literal interpretation of some of 
the verses of the Prajūopāyavinišcayasiddāi of Anaügavajra, edited by 
Dr. Bhattacharyya himself. The verses in question are the following: 

karadha ar uivi sq fmeifefu: | 
qi fere spur dora ag assi 
«Adamu ERA Safer | 
Wasa sanaa Kim STITT WaT RRN 


akakana gt weaned | 
eset grļarāt Ja famat feat car neil 


wama wart q agāt Aant | 

asmaq censa ay feels WW. Wed [p.22]. 
Dr. Bhattacharyya translates it as “without Prajüüpáramitá emancipation 
is not possible, and Prajūāpāramitā resides in every woman. Emancipation 
can only be obtained by coming in contact with any woman, whether of 
low origin and high, or whether mother, or sister, or other near relations." 

It is not unknown to Dr. Bhattacharyya that every mysticism is 

garbed in language which is also mystic, and even many verses of the 
Prajūopāyavinišcayasiddht are unintelligible if interpreted literally. Every 
mystic school bas got its traditions, of which only the teachers (gurus) are 
in possession of the secret. Buta critical observer cannot remain satisfied 
with the explanation of a modern teacher of the sect (and it is also difficult 
to find one in Nepal who is ready to divulge the secret to an outsider), 
The next alternative is to fall back on the literature of the sect. But our 
knowledge of the Vajrayana is too limited to sive us free scope in 
elucidating its doctrines. However the Hevayratantra, a work of eanonical 
importance to the. Vajrayūnists and older than 693 A.D. according to 














STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


vs Bhattacharyya himself (p. xliii), contains many a clue to the inter- 
ret: atio : 1 of the Vajrayana doctrines. Let us try to see how the terms 
E Lu ete., on which the interpretation of the verses depend, fre explained 
> in this Tantra. In the very opening ee of the text called Vajrakula- 
pa ai we. find a description of the 32 nadis (arteries) of which three are 
" the principal, vis., alana, rasanā and Em corresponding to the idi, 
pingala and sugumna of the Hindu Hathayogins. The nature of these 
hree nādīs is further defined in the same chapter as : 


m nea c ee kaaa carre furem | 

: Kft aA g urerapewafew ano 

l "The nature of /aíana is, therefore, Prajnà and this Prajūā becomes an 
active force when /a/ana is purified. I think it is in this light that we have 
to > interpret the first two of the verses quoted where Prajūāpāramitā is said 
to be existing in the forms of /alana (lalanarüpam asthaya...). What is 
then Brākmaņādikulotpannā mudra? Dr. Bhattacharyya knows (p. lx) 
that there are five kužas (families) representing the five dkyānī Buddhas— 
Aksobhya, Vairocana, Amitābha, Ratnasambhava and Amoghasiddhi, For 
further explanation we have to refer to the 5th chapter, Tatfvapatala, of 
the Hevajratantra where the five mudrās, Dombi, Nati, Rajakī, Brahmant 
and Caudal! are said to be belonging to the five kulas, 

Ya uu were wae Hees | 

«a garāstūfa gar enfendra* a 

aa qy wer cue wes Tarja WW | 

sats gafāvrgamaifa Wermq i 

"u Afa Haq YA wu aži aa Ww 

wh Cel emaa area) A carrer N 

wqu YA ?) vegzi afafa: i... 

samt usar questa | 

qun mamaaa wafaaa à! 

! "The Chinese translation of these verses may be compared, because it is explanatory 
(Tokio ed., XXVII, 3, p. 68b). “ The mudrās are of five classes and they will be now 
deacribed for the cause of emancipation (moksa). They are called mudrā because they are 
the secret of the vajra. Vajra, Padma, Karma. Tathāgata, asd Ratna, these are the five 
classes (of mudrd). Vajra is nu-mi (Dombf)-mūadrā, Padma is the danciug girl ( —nafi) mudrā, 
Karma is the mistress of dyeing (= rajaki) mudrā, Tatbāgatā is the pure woman (Brāhmaņr) 
and Ratna is the chen-ne-li (i.2., Caņdāll) mudrá. The five classes of mudrü are thus 


determined...... They are of five classes as they form the very natare of the five skandhas (?). 
They ure called classes (bula, Ch. pu) because the bodies (kaya) are produced from them.” 





















ON THE SADHANAMALA 37 


It follows from this that the five mudrāx originating from the kulas 
beginning with Bráahmana (Srihmanaddikulodthitam) are respectively : 
Brahmani= Tathagata, Candali— Ratna, Dombi— Vajra, Rajaki—Karma, 
and Natī=— Padma. Whatis Mudrā? Mudrā is explained in the same 
chapter of the  /fevajra as WA KARI "ww: AzA ag; these are, 
therefore, different gestures of the fingers by which the Yogin preten 
to evoke the Vajra, r.e., Prajīā (Pajram mudryale anena...... ). Mudra is 
therefore not a woman. : ' 
The same chapter of the Hevajra explains the different words wafadi', 

etc., thus : 

KAM KWA Asi ata a eem | 

ufratfā erar wr fani ee ua: 1...... 

zaa seer wer zie cw ferme s? 
Therefore mafa, war, ete., are different aspects of the Prajūš which the 
Yogin is trying to awaken during the process of his Yoga. 

But I do not want to be dogmatic. I have entered into this discussion 
simply to point out the enormous difficulties which we have to face in 
interpreting the doctrines of the mystic schools. Their very oldest tradi- 
tions do not allow us to attribute obscenities to their practices. I do not, 
however, pretend to say that these sects always preserved a pure standard 
of morality and that in later times their followers did not indulge in licence 
by wrong interpretation of their tenets, 

On pp. xxxvii-xxxix while discussing the Pitkas of Tantric 
culture Dr. Bhattacharyya had naturally to refer to Uddiyana, It is 
regrettable that he still persists in placing Uģdiyāna in Eastern India, some- 
times in Orissa and sometimes in Assam, inspite of adverse criticisms 
(Finot in BEFEO and Sbahidullah, Les chants mystiques, 1928, p. 22n). 
We must note that there are two distinct series of names in Tibetan (2) 
O-rgyan, U-rgyan, O-di-ya-na and (rr) O-dt, O-di-vi-&a (see Tāranāth and 
Pag sam joù zang). The first series of names is connected with Indrabhati 
whereas the second series has nothing to do with him. The first presupposes 
the forms: Odiyāna and Uddiyāna both of which are found as genuine 


1 The Chinese translation (loc. cit.) of the verse is'as follows: ** The great Prajüà 
is like mother because it gives birth to all the nature. It is like sister because it gives 
insight into the division (the diversity of the nature)...... It is like daughter because it 
produces all the qualities (gupa). 

For another explanation of these terms srafadt, ote., sce Dākūrņaca (od. H. P. Sāstri), 
p. 138, The náds are the seats of each of the 27 Yoginis ; mata ca bhagini putri bhágineyi 
ca soasrkā | bāndhavī pitubhimātā (? pitureimátà) matulasya tu bháryakd —are only the 
names of some of those yoginis. 











au 





STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 
ex^ 






i i 
Lig 
EN. '4 


LN iviša, ie, Odra and Audrarigaya (m Orissa). The latter is generally 
© trar s ribed by the Chinese writers as Wu-tch'a, i.e., Uda (the phonetie value 
E Mad] ad the former sometimes as Fue-fi-yen (i.e., U-ti-yana). 
re Wu-teh'ang is the older form and is based on *U/-diang (the phonetic 
value of /cÁa'ng — dang) which was wrongly translated as *arden"' and hence 


Mi 2^3 


P restored as Udyāna. Hiuan tsang transcribes the name as JF u-tcA'ang-na, 

fe, U-diang-na. I do not know if M. Lévi has identified this country 
with Kasgarh (and Dr. Bhattacharyya does not give any reference) but 
‘on the contrary M. Lévi has located it in the Swat Valley (J. 4s.— Le 
catalogue géographique des Fakņa, pp. 105-112) as all the available sources 

of information would indicate. M. Lévi has adduced good grounds for 
this identification and it will suffice to reproduce some of them here. 

(1) All the Chinese sources (Fa hien, Hiuan tsang, etc.) locate 
Uddiyána in the Swat Valley. M. Foucher (Iconographie Bouddhique, 
pp- 121 and 148) has drawn our attention to the miniature of a Nepalese 

MS. of the Sth-9th century A.D. which bears the inseription ** Vajrapāņi 
| of Maügakostha in Ojdiyüána." Maügakostha is only a different name 
— of Maügalapura (Mong-kie-di of Hiuan tsang), the chief city of the 
Swat Valley. (3) In the more ancient Tantras, for example the 

Hevajratantra (1th patala), the order of the pītkas is as follows: 
tā mera ward fea aa q 
Ya qufaf? da aaa «og 

So if Ojliyāna be at all near any place it was certainly not near 
Kāmarūpa but near Jālandhara. (4) In the Romakasiddkānta Uddiyana 
is enumerated along with Sindhu-Surāstra. (5) In the T’ang annals 
(Chavannes, Documents, p. 160) the boundaries of Uddiydna ( Fue-ti-yen) 
are given as follows: India is on the South ; Chitral is on the North- 
West and it is situated to the North of the Indus. (6) As regards. the 
antiquity of the form Oliyāna one may refer to an inscription of the 
year 77 of the Kushan era (Lüders, List, No. 62) which records the gift of 

a monk Jivaka, a native of Odiyāna, No authentic source of information 
of this period mentions Oda (t.e., Oira). There cau be, therefore, no doubt 
that Uddiyāna is the same as the Swat Valley and that Oldiyāna, Udiyāna 
Uddiyüna O-rgyan, O-di-ya-na, U.rzyan, U-di-ya-na and Wu-teh'ang and 
Yue-ti-yen are all different forms of the same name and are quite distinet 

from Orissa, 

Dr. Bhattacharyya may still demand satisfaction on three more 
points : (+) where was then Zahor, to the royal family of which Šāntarakņita 





. 


. forms in the Sanskrit texts whereas the second falls back on Odi and 


t — e 


S MA mtem D 
= LAM ¢. 
- A. * 





ON THE SADHANAMALA 39 


belonged ? As Indrabhūti, the king of Uddiy ana married the sister of 
the former at Zahor, Zahor must be io the proximity of Uģdģdiyāna. (+) 
Where is Laüküpur! of which Jalendra was the king? As Jalendra's son 
married the sister of Indrabhüti, Laūkāpurī must be in the same zone as 
Uddiyāna, (tit) Aceordiog to the Tibetan sources Lui-pa was an employee 
of the king of Uddiyána. But how is this that songs attributed to him 
are written in Bengali ? 

Zahor is mentioned in the Tibetan sources in connection with the 
countries which Indrabhüti visited after leaving Uddiyana. He visited 
the cemeteries of BiddÁka * country, a particular cemetery in Kāšmīr and 
another in Nepal and last of all the cemetery called Lanka in Zahor 
(Waddel, Lamaism, p. 882). Nobody has the right to separate any of 
these names from the context in which the mention of Kāšmīr points out, 
beyond all doubt, that Zahor visited by Indrabhūti is the borderland 
between Kāšmīr and Nepal which is not very far from Udģiyāna. The 
identification of Zahor with Mandi as proposed by Francke (Indian Tibet, 
Vol. II, pp. 65, 89-90) is therefore quite correct. If one refers to pp. 419 ff. 
of the Punjab Tribes and Castes, Vol. I, he will be certainly surprised to 
see the persistenee of the old beliefs in the country of Šāntaraksita, 
Laūkāpurī is a cemetery in Zahor. But we have a different deseription of 
Laūkāpūrī in the history of the 84 Siddhas, where it is said that the 
country has two divisions, one is Sambhala of which Indrabhüti was the 
king and the other Laūkāpuri of which Jalendra was the king (Taranath, 
p.925). The Tibetan accounts very often are confused and it is not 
uncommon that in them simple cemeteries have been converted into 
monasteries (see I.H.Q., Vol. V, p. 765 n.) Leaving aside the cemetery 
of Laūkāpurī in Zahor it may be admitted that a certain locality in 
Uddiyāna was also called Laükapuri. But the identification of Zahor with 
“a place in Assam " as proposed by Dr. Bhattacharyya does not satisfy even 
his own position as he has been obliged this time to locate Uddiyána in 
Assam ! There are, however, indications which justify us in thinking 
that some loeality in North-western India was known as Lanka, Jayabbadra, 
a translator of Cakrašamdaratanfra into Tibetan, is said to have been a 
man of Lanka, also written Langa (Cordier, Catalogue, II, pp. 42-43). 
Ceylon was certainly not known as Laùkā in this period and Cakrasam- 
baratantra had probably nothing to do with Ceylon, On the contrary there 


1 I am not sure about the identification of this place with Videha (?) proposed by 
Waddel. TL may be very well pi-t'u (—Bhida) which Fa-hien viaited just after crossing 
the Indus.—Cunningbarm, Geography, p. 175. 

- > 


a 








STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 





is ample evidence to show that the culture of  Samóbaraíantra was 
intimately connected with Sambhala country which is said to have been a 
part of Ujdiyána. Lanka of Jayabhadra, therefore, seems to have been 
the same as the Lankāpurī of Jalendra. Hiuan tsang (Watters, II, p. 257) 
speaks of a country of Lang-kte-lo in the lower valley of the Indus, where 
there were 100 monasteries with 6,000 monks of both Hinayána and Mahāyāna 
in his time. This name has been connected with that of the Langga 
tribe that still lives in the north of Baluchistan, This Langa tribe is 
distributed in different districts of the North-west and classed as a Jat 
tribe in the districts of Dera Ghazi Khan “ where it was probably aboriginal 
or immigrant from eastward” (Punjab Tribes and Castes, II, p. 30). 

Considering the immigrant nature of this people, it is not probably too 
much to think that they once occupied districts contiguous to the Swat 
Valley further to the north-west, and that their country was known as 
Laika, The other form of the name of the native place of Jayabhadra, 
Lanhga, ie to be taken notice of in this connection. 

Now the last objection about the identification of Uģddiyāna, remains 
to be answered. How could Lui-pa belong to Uļdiyāna and be a Bengali 
at the same time? This question is rather complicated because it is 
connected with many others. The name of Lui-pa is in Tibetan Na-lto-pa, 
t.e, Matsyāntrāda, Though Cordier (Catalogue, II, p. 33) hesitates to 
take him to be the same as Matsyendranūtha, he cannot adduce any 
plausible reason for doing so (see also, S. Lévi, Le Népal, I, p. 353, n. 4). 
I refrain from discussing this problem for the present as Prof. Tucci has 
dealt with it in a paper to be shortly published in the Journal of the Asiatie 
Society of Bengal. It suffices for me to say that the mystic cult connected 
with the name of Matsyendranütha went far beyond the limits of 
Bengal and was in vogue in many distant parts of India. There is 
therefore no wonder if his name is associated with both Uddiyüna and 
Bengal. Moreover while studying the history of these sects we cannot 
overlook the importance of the great community which the Yogins from 
remote parts of India formed in ancient times and do still form. Nor 
can we overlook the fact that these extraordinary people coming from 
different parts of India still meet in the inaccessible shrines of the Himalaya 
to communicate their secret doctrines to each other and thus maintain 
the solidarity of the religion of which they are the representatives. 

Dr. Bhattacharyya is to be specially congratulated for sections $ 4 
and 7, Chronology of Vajrayāna and the authors of the Sūdhanas. He 


Ci. J.A.S,B., 1930, T, pp. 132 If. 








ON THE SĀDHANAMĀLĀ 41 


has tried to collect available materials on the history of the teachers of 
Vajrayana and find out an aeceptable chronology. This chronology may 
have to be modified in the light of future researches but still a beginning 
had to be made somewhere. There is room for supplementation, but I 
refrain from it as that will exceed the scope of a review. I will however 
content myself in pointing out that Asaāga, the author of Sidiana No. 
159 cannot be identified with the great teacher of Yogācāra unless it is 
proved that the complicated ritualism desoribed in this Sādžana already 
originated in the 4th century A.D. 


One of the Sádhanas (No. 127), of which the importance has been 
recognised by Dr. Bhattacharyya himself (pp. cxxxv-exliii), is of great 
historical value, It is the Kkijatasadhana, which is said to have been 
recovered by Arya Nāgārjuna, (r.e., Siddha Nūāgārjuna, circa Tth century 
A.D.) from the country of Bhota, i.e., Tibet (ērya- Vāgārjuna-pādaih Báotegu. 
uddhrtam). In fact there are six sidhanas (Nos. 123-127) devoted to the 
goddess Ekajat&. The description of Ekajatá, as given in these sdd/ianas, 
closely agree with that of MaAacimakramatara in SádÁanas 100 and 101. 
A comparison of these two goddesses show that they are essentially identical, 
the only difference being in the Šīja mantras, in the case of Mahācīnakra- 
matārā it is composed of three letters (¢ryakgart vidya: ora hrim Aut, cf. 
Sadhana No. 10!) whereas in case of Ekajatā it is sometimes composed of 
4 letters (orh Ari: trim Aum, cf. Sadhanas 123, 125, 126, 127 and as Arig 
trim hum phat in Sadhana 124) and sometimes of 5 (orn Arit triv hum phat, 
cf. Sddhana 124). 

Corresponding to these goddesses we find in the Hindu pantheon not 
only Tārš, as supposed by Dr. Bhattacharyya, but also Ugratürá (of whom 
the worship was introduced by Vasigpha and hence the same as (Jfakācīua- 
tara), Ekajata and AMaAanilasarascvati. The dāyāma of Tara quoted by 
Dr. Bhattacharyya on p. oxxxix is the same as that of Nilasarasvatl, as 
stated in the PAe/kàri Tantra (see TZantrašāra, pp. 514f.). Further it 
should be noticed that in Sadhana 101 it is said that Cinatárá is to be 
worshiped in : 


cafes se wr ai w owe | 
ayer: arate nf frat rA a 


. 
In Sādhana 129 it is said that the Yogi should meditate on Ekajāķā in 


solitude, cremation ground, and street corners (fet vagara! ). The 
same is true about Nīlasarasvatī. In Tantrasara (p. 506 quoting from 


ar 6 








STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 








E. the Phetkart Tantra) practically the same- verse as found in Sadhana, p. 101, 
l is quoted with the interpolation of two lines :. 


Reames < uweowfeg et a wart aq | 

Los o Diis qd vni waa 

sooo ro Serge ant a ent ar fart aà | ] 
a urea ait frat faa TÀ n 
The Tuanm/rasára quotes from ù number of authorities to explain the 
"t difference between the  zoddesses described before. Nīlasarasvatī is 
h aura! war aanza (.Vila(antra). She is a Paficikgari-vidya; she 
: is Ekajata while sbe is separated from .7ürà (i.e.,, the praņava); 
ht she is Nīlasarasvatī while in unison with Tārā; and she is Ugratārā 
3 while she is a vidyā of three letters. The presidiug goddess of other 


vidyās is Ekajata because Ekajatá is her very nature. 


- It is therefore evident that the Hindu Tantras considered  Ekajata, 
Nilasarasvati and Ugratīrā as different aspects of the same goddess. 

| Buddhist Tantras do not speak of Nilasarasvat! but mention Mafācīna- 
; kramafārā instead. Both Ekojatà and Mafācīmakramatārā are of foreign 
importation." The Hindu Tantras all have preserved this tradition. The 

hints of this is already given in the verse quoted above from the Ni/a/antra 

where Nīlasarasvatī is called Sarvabhàsama yi, knower of all languages and 
Šarvāmnāyair namaskrtā, worshipped in all the traditions. The story 
recorded in the Tārūtantra (to which attention was first drawn by H. P, 

Šūstrī —Notice of Skt. MSS., and fase. Vol. I, 3, p. xxxii and 152) describes 

how Vasigķha went to Mahācīna to get instructions from Buddha. He 
brought from there the cult-known as Maáacinakramacara which preseribes 

the worship of Malācīnatārā.. If there is any truth behind this story, it 
certainly reveals that the cult of Mažācīnatārā was incorporated into 
Hinduism from the Buddhist Tantras. In Nepal Nīlatārā and Ugratārā 

are worshipped both by the Buddhists and the Hindus. Both the traditions, 

Hindu and Buddhist, thus agree in pointing out to the foreign origin of 

the goddess, known as Maacivatárà and Ekajatā in Buddhist Tantras, and 

as Malkācīnatārā, Ekajatā, Ugratārā and Nīfasarasvalī, ete., in Hinduism. 

Siddha Nāgārjuna and Kastu) play the same role in importing the cult 


1 Cf. Tantrarāra, p. 607; Wa Garett i atane—qegred CHAZ ANN wr | 


aca q wae fe aa s Spt det ied patho pl varat waa 
kaza aaa. y nu 





ON THE SÁDHANAMALA. 43 


either from Bhota or Mahàcisa (countries which may be considered identical). 
The name of Siddha Nāgārjuna seems to have been repugnant to the 
Hindus as being a typically Buddhist one and this is why it was diras 
replaced by that of Vasigtha.. 


The description of Tara or Nilasarasvatt as akgobhya devimürdhanya 
“having Akgočāya on her head, " as supposed by Dr. Bhattacharyya; 
confirms the Buddhist origin of the deity. The identity of Aksobhya 
and Maheša as suggested in the Zoda/a Tantra (crrrvitt) is probably a 
late one. 1 will quote another text from the Hindu sources which gives 
a similar description of Aksobhya, and points out the foreign origin of 
Nīlasarasvatī. In the 5th chapter of the Sammoha Tantra (called 
Aksobhyatarasamvada), preserved in the Darbar Library, Nepal (see H. P; 
Sastri, Catalogue of the Darbar Library, II, p. 183) we find the origin of 
Nilasarasvati described in a corrupt Sanskrit as follows: 












(fol. 21a)  wwrem awd gan werde wem | 
RIAA ea fag wrerdterexentt Ru 
qu AAA ugue affe i 
AU; waa g Seal ARETES: 430 
ayay gad m are viera | 
vata ara g AÜ Www all 
ag ru qarara f"g ow ad: fea: i 
aāttamfa:ga aa faferirer: wen 
xe ērā yaa Maua gu | 
sa "rong WAT AKTU: noi 

(fol, 21b) wera ara «rf gfaāmut: fina: i 
amA mā atg vau ifa (?) uu 
farnari g dažā ad (mā | 
wanazaa Yafa: ue 
TAES WI Wege a quem | 
erem aua Feat AKTI git oi 


The Mahešvara said to Brahmā, ** Hear from me about Mahantla- 
sarasvatī with attention. It is through her favour that you will narrate 
the four Vedas. There is a lake called Cola on the western side of the 
Meru. The mother goddess Nīlogratārā, herself was born there...... I 
the light issuing from my upper eye fell into the lake Co/a and took a 





STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


X — There was a sage called Akgobhya, who was Siva himself 

— form of a muns, on the northern side of the Meru. It was he who 
m first on the goddess (?), who wes Pārvatī herself reincarnatiog 
kai Cīnadeša at the time of the great deluge.............” 


According to this legend Mo alas: also called Mahogratara, 

—— Cola, on the western side of the Meru, which 
was included in the Cīnadeša. Her vidya is composed of three letters, 
ē ta (probably a mistake for fa) and Aur, i.e., om trim Anim. It is idle 
to try to find out a precise geographical information here, but it may 
be suggested that cola is probably to be connected with the common 
word for lake, ku4, kol, which is found with names of so many lakes to 
me north of Z'ien shan, i.e., in the pure Mongolian zone. 











. ON FOREIGN ELEMENT IN THE TANTRA 


I 


The Tantra still remains an enigma to us. Very little work has been 

done in this domain and very little attempt has been made in the inter- 
pretation of its doctrines. But the fact remains that a vast literature 
has been written on it—a literature which is mostly found in manuscripte, 
The Tantras can be broadly divided into two classes—orthodox and 
heterodox. The orthodox Tantras are mainly represented by the Agamas, 
the Yāmalas and their supplements. The heterodox Tantras are both 
Buddhist and Brāhmanical and are represented by the texts of a number 
of Tantrik schools like Kulācāra, Vāmācāra, Sahajayāna, Vajrayana, ete. 
In the present article I will deal with a number of indications contained 
in the Tantrik literature which definitely points out that mystic practices 
of foreign origin crept into the heterodox class of Indian Tantras at a 
very early date. 
: H. P. Sastri in his Catalogue of the Palm-Leaf MSS. of the Darbar 
Library, N*pa£ (1906, p. Ixxix) quotes a very significant stanza from the 
Kubjikā-tantra which points out that the Kubjikā School of Tantras is 
probably of foreign origin : 

“Go to India to establish yourself in the whole country and make 
manifold creations in the sacred places of primary and secondary 
importance.” " 

In auother place in the same Tantra the Tantras of this school are said 
to bave originated among the potters, a lower caste Hindus, and this is why 
they are said to have belonged to the kulāfikāmnāga. It is prescribed there 
that the Goddess Kubjikā should be worshipped in the house of a potter. 

A certain number of Tantrik practices styled Cīnācāra has been 
much discussed by scholars. The Tārā-Tantra adopted by both Hinduism 
and Buddhism says that the cult of Cina-Tārā came from the country of 
Mahšcīna. Vasistha, one of the greatest Bráhmana sages is said 
to have gone to the country of Mahācīna to meet Buddha, who was to 
be found at that time neither in India nor io Tibet. Vasistha was initiated 
there by Buddha to the secret doctrines of Cinācāra and subsequently came 
back to India to propagate them. In this Cīnācāra Prof. Sylvain Lévi 
finds distant echo of the secret societies which existed in China (Le Nēpaf, 
I, pp. 846f.) On my part while discussing one of the Sádhanas published 





- 


; 





46 STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


by Dr. Binayatosh Bhattacharya (No. 127 of the Sādžanamātā) I have 
tried to establish the identity of Mahācīna-Tārā with Ekajatā, whose 
cult is said to have been recovered by Siddha Nāgārjuna in Tibet (aute, 
PP: 42ff.). The Sādhana of the Goddess Ekajatá was discovered by 


him in the country of Bhota (Ārya-Nāgārjunapādaih Bhiotegu uddArtam). 


The deseription of Ekajatā is found in six different Sādhanas (123-128). 
It closely agrees with that of Mahācīnakrama-Tārā as found in Sádhanas 
100 and 101. A comparison of these two goddesses show that they are 
essentially identical, the only difference being in the Bija-man/ra ; in the 
case of Cīnakrama-Tārā, it is composed of three letters, and in the case 
of Ekajatā, it is sometimes composed of 4 and sometimes of 5 letters. 
Corresponding to these goddesses we find in the Hindu Pantheon Tara, 
Ugratara, Ekajatā, and Mahi-Nilasarasvati. The dhyānas of these 
goddesses as found in the Hindu Tantras literally correspond with those 
found in the Buddhist Sādhanas. In the article already referred to I 
have also quoted from the Sammoha Tantra found by me in Nepal the 
following significant passage about the origin of this goddess :— 


“The MaheSvara said unto Brahma, hear from me about Maha 
Nilasarasvat] with attention. It is through her favour that you will 
narrate the four Vedas. There is a lake called Cola on the western 
side of the Meru. The mother, goddess Nilogratüri was born there... 
the light issuing from my upper eye fell into the lake Cola and took a 
blue colour. There was a sage called Aksobhya, who was Siva himself 
in the form of a muni, on the northern side of the Meru. It was he who 
meditated first on the goddess (?), who was Pārvatī herself reincarnating 
in Cīnadeša at the time of the great deluge.” 


According to this text Nīlasarasvatī or Ugratārā was born in a lake 
called Cola on the western side of the Meru which was included in the 
Cina-desa, I suggested that Cola is probably to be connected with tho 
common word for lake, kul, kof, which is found with the names of so 
many lakes to the west and north of the Zren shan that is to say in the 
pure Mongolian zone. 

There are ample evidence to prove that the zone of heterodox Tantras 
went far beyond the natural limits of India. Some of the Tantras divide 
the Tantrik world into three krāntās or regions, Vigņukrāntā, Aévakranta 
and Rathakrāntā, Vigņukrūntā cowprises the region from the Vindhyas 
to Chattala (Chittagong), Aévakrünt&, the region from the Vindhya to 
Mahācīna including Nepal, and Rathakrāntā from the Vindhya to the 





ON FOREIGN ELEMENT IN THE TANTRA AT 


great ocean including Kamboj and Java (see Avalon, Principles of the 
Tantras, Vol. II, Introd.). 

In the Sammoha Tantra (fol. 7 a-b} we find a similar enumeration of 
Tantrik zones. 'The zones are here fixed according to two different Tantrik 
modes, known as Kādi and Hadi, The countries in which the Kadi mode 
is in vogue are the following :— 

""TAnga, Vanga, Kalinga, Kerala, Kāšmīra, Kāmarūpa, Maharastra, 
Saurastra, Dravida, Tailinga, Malayādri, Karņāta, Avanti, Vaidarbha, 
Ābhīra, Mālava, Caula, Cola, Kamboja, Videha, Bāflika, Kīrāta, Kaikata, 


 Airāk1, Bhota, Cina, Mahdcina, Nepāla, Silahatta, Gauda, Košala, 
Migadha, Snotkala (fUtkala), Kuntala, Māna, Koūkaņa, Kekaya, Sūrasēna, 


Kaurava, Simhāla, Pulinda, Kaccha, Madra, Sauvīra, Lita, Barbara, 
Matsya and Sindhu. 
The countries in which the Hadi mode is in vogue are the following :— 


7 Anga, Vanga, Kaliüga, Suvīraka, Kāšmīra, Kamboja, Saurāgķra, | 


Magadha, Mahārāstra, Mālava, Nepāla, Kerala, Cola, Cala, Gauļa, Malaya, 
Simhala, Vonka (?), Vido (?), Vyonda (?), Karnáta, Lata, Malata, Panata, 
Andhaka, Pulindaka, Māna, Kaura(?), GandÁara, Vidarbha, Videha, Bāffīka, 
Barbara, Kekaya, Košala, Kuntala, Kiráta, Sürasena, Sevara (? Sauvira) 
Banata, Taūkaņa, Kaünkana, Matsya, Madra, Maida, Saindhava FPāršvakika, 
Dyorjāla, Yavana, Jala, Jalandhara, Salva (? Sālva), Sindhu. 


Two points are noteworthy about the zones described above. A 
number of countries beyond India are enumerated and described as the 
centres of Tantrik culture. These are—Bāhlika (Balkh), Kirāta (the hill 
tribes of the Himalayan zone), Bhota (Tibet), Cina (China), Mahācīna 
(Mongolia?), Muida (Media f), Paršvakika (? Pārasīka—Persia), Airáka 
(Irak ?), Kamboja, Hina, Yavana, Gandbāra and Nepāla. It is not to 
be literally believed that Tantrik culture ever spread to all those distant 
countries. The truth is perhaps that some heterodox schools of Tantras 
associated themselves with those countries either through tradition or 
through the community of some mystie beliefs, of which the history is 
lost to us. We should further note in this connection that even within 
the limits of India some non-Aryan groups of people like Pulinda,  Kiráta, 
Barbara, Tankaņa, Ābhīra, Kuntala, etc., are connected with that paticular 
culture. 

Another important point to be noted is that within the limits of India 
the countries of the outer zone only are enumerated. The Mid-Land 
(Madhyadeéa), the country of the orthodox Brahmanical culture, is 











STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 







rac y exeluded except the doubtful reference to Kaura (? Kaurava) 
n | Košala | which may very well be Southern KoSala. In an article published 
| the /wdian Historical Quarterly (Vol. VI, pp. 9Sff, cf. ante, pp. 16ff.) 
I havet tried to establish-that the Mid-Land was the country of the orthodox 
Tantrik culture of which the 18 Āgamas and their supplements formed the 
sacred literature. But the countries around it like Kāmarūpa, Kāšmīra, 
Kalinga, Koñkana, Kāūīci, Koala, ete., were not fit places for its cultivation, 
The Brahmins of those countries were unfit to be priests according to the 
‘orthodox Tantras. So it is evident that in these countries on the outer 
zone grew later on a sort of Tantrik culture which was of a different inspira- 
The unknown compiler of the Sammoha Tantra does not remain 
content by simply enumerating the different countries. He pretends to: 
possess some knowledge of the Tantras current in some of these countries, 
_ Thus on fol. 27° while referring to the Tantras of different schools, he says 
that the country of Cina possesses 100 primary and 7 subsidiary Tantras 
(atam tantrāņi cine tu upatantrüni sapta ca), Dravida has 20 primary and 
25 subsidiary Tantras, Kerala bas 60 subsidiary Tautras and so on. 
| The sacred centres (pīthasthāna) of primary importance, as found 
‘in the heterodox Hindu Tantras and the Buddhist Tantras are four in 
number, Kāmarūpa, Pūrņagiri, Oddiyána and Jālandhāra. Pirnagiri has 
not yet been definitely identified. But there is no doubt that Uddiyāna 
corresponds to the Swat valley, of which the people used to make “ the 
acquisition of magical formule their occupation’ (Watters, On Yuan 
Chwang, I, p. 225) already in the time of Hiuan Tsang in the beginning 
of the seventh century A.D.  Jàlandhara and Kāmarūpa have not 
changed their names since ancient times. (Wau these three places are 
situated on the high roads leading to countries outside India—Uddiyans 
situated in the valley of the Swat river, easily accessible from the Upper 
valley of the Indus, has been the meeting place of the people of different 
origin. Itis situated on the high road that connects the Upper valley 
of the Indus with Balkh, Samarcand, ete., on the one hand and the Pamirs, 
Khotan, Kashgar, ete., on the other by the valley of the Gilgit. Jālaudhara 
is situated on another highway that connects Tibet with India through 
the Shipki pass, and Kāmarūpa has to a great extent been the centre of 
notivities of foreign peoples who have been coming down from the Northern 
the North-eastern hills since very ancient times.) It is probably not 
without significance that Bhiskaravarman who was the king of Kūmarūpa 
told a Chinese envoy to India that his forefathers had come to India from 





f 


— ss d ur (F LI — 4 ^ vc - 
= " 


^ 





ON FOREIGN. ELEMEN! IN THE TANTRA 49 


the country of Mahācīna and requested him to send a Sanskrit translation 
of Tao-te-king, the sacred text of Taoism and a portrait of Lao-tzu, its 
founder. In ancient time a land route connected Assam with Western 
and Southern China through the Patkoi hills and Upper Burma, aod this 
route was generally followed by the invaders and immigrants from the 
North-East. | 


i T A 


[ will now proceed to deal with particular Tantrik texts that contain 
direct references to practices of decidedly foreign origin. The Jayadratha 
Yamala, which I have elsewhere proved to be a compilation of the Sth 
century A.D., while discussing the special doctrines of different Taotrik 
schools mentions, amongst others, the practices of the Lāmīs (Lāmāvarga), 
Šākinīs and Yoginis (Jayadratha Yamata, Satka III, folia 187a-193b). 
The texts in which these practices are described are sometimes very 
obscure. Following is roughly the substance :— 


“The special doctrine of the Lamas is conducive to spiritual success 
(siddhi). According to it one should not cultivate the company of other 
gods except Siva (7). The words of the Guru as embodied in the Tautras 
may or may not be followed. One should have all worldly desires and 
need not follow the strict discipline. He should have no satisfartion 
in (current) religious doctrines and practices. He should think that it 
is his own self that is alone present everywhere and practise self-control in 
the company of women. He should perform religious acts on particular 
auspicious days according to the prescribed discipline, He should not be 
angry even at the gravest provocation. Such is the practice of the group 
of Lūmās. i ’ 

According to the special doctrine of the Šākinīs the adept should 
never divulge the mantras to others. He should practise samādāt in 
company of all women, should always meditate on the nāda, take his meals 
at night and worship Siva. He should not violate the discipline of his 
sect during the Dakginayana, should practise self-control by all means, 
should maintain his own Kula and should avoid the intermixture of Kučas. 
He should have bimself undisturbed in respect of body, speech and 
mind either in his own Kula or in that of others. He should have his meals 
in company of the Yogins. Those who follow the doctrines of the Šākinis 
do not uselessly kill animals for the sake of sacrifice." 

Afa Now who are the Limas and Sikints, of whom the special practices 
are just described ? The dakints, rikinis, lākinīs, kākinīs, šākinīs and bákinTs 


7 


ELT 
d 
J i = ' 













ph: 
i PT ‘ " 
1 A es à 
LN "STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 
— a 
(^ 


m entioned | as the female energies (Saktis) of the Tantrik deities res- 
b eee called  düámesvaranütha, rāmesvaranātha, lāmešvaranātha, kākeš- 
À ran nd a, é&mvaronatha, and háme$varan&tha who together with their $aktis, 
dim mystic groups designated under the mnemonic da ra Za ka ša ha. The 
Teeter Lama is here called Lámeévara. Lāmā is not the commonly 
— Tibetan word S/a-ma meaning ‘scholar,’ but something different. 


‘The Lāmās are mentioned in the Jayadratha Yāmala on two 
occasions in the same context (192a) :— 





other 


Durlabhā Kāšyapīvarge paūcāmrtavivardhitā i 
Hüpiká Cumbikā Lama parāvrttātha pilika u 
anivartā ca.,.dvedhī janmüntara-samudbhavà | 
ctāstu savngamenaiva pardm siddhim dadanti ca | 
vikhyāti raktamādau tu bhrübhangah kurute tatah q 
samhpiydrthddaya pašcācca punarmaršayēt ti 

VUA CAPUT ME .alápenápi cumbati 

cumbikā sā'nuvijācyā yogini baladarpitā... 

niēvāsai rbhairavaistā atu Lāmānām tad vini rdiet v 


7 The Lāmās, otherwise known as Rūpikā and Cumbikā, fourish among 
the rare group of the Kāšyapīs. Association with them is tonducive 


to spiritual success. They are called Itūpikā because they assume different 
shapes during their intercourse with others. They are called Cumbikš 
because they kiss at the very first introduction. | 


In the Hevajra Tantra (Patala III, fol. 6a) the Lümüs are referred to 
in the company of the dákints and called Khandoraha and Rüpini. 


Pākinī tu tathā Lama Khaņdarohā tu Rūpiņī 


The Lāmās, therefore, constituted a mystic group of female ‘Tantrik 
adepts who had their special practices. The Sammoha Tantra (fol. 894) in 
another place distinctly refers to a Tantrik practice (vidya) called Lama- 
yāmnāya, i.e., the &mn&ya of the Lamas or Lamas. 


The Lāmās are also known from other sources, Waddell, in his 
Lamaism (p. 364), describes in detail a goddess called in Tibetan Lha-emo 
She is also called pal ¿dan Lia mo (Skt. Dev! or Srt Devi). She is the 
" goddess or the queen of the warring weapons," She “like her great 
prototype the goddess Durgá of Brāhmaņism is perhaps the most malignant 
and powerful of all the demons, and the most dreaded. She is credited 
with letting loose the demons of disease and her name is scarcely ever 
mentioned and only then with bated breath and under the title of the great 








ON FOREIGN ELEMENT IN THR TANTRA 51 


queen. In her pictures she is pictured as surrounded by flames and riding 
on a white-faced mule, upon a saddle of her own son’s skin flayed by 
herself. She is clad in human skins and is eating human brains and blood 
from a skull and she wields in her right hand a trident rod. She is publie- 
ly worshipped for seven days by the Lāmās of all sects, especially at the 
end of the 12th month in connection with the prevention of disease for the 
incoming years. And in the cake offered are added amon: other ingredi- 
euts the fat of a black zoat, blood, wine, dough, and butter and these are 
placed in a bowl made from a human skull." In Western Tibet Lhx-mos 
and dékinis are represented as beautiful young women but more often with 
fearful faces, etc., to signify their power **to destroy demons whom it is 
their mission to combat." First in rank stands Lha-mo (Mahākšlt), 
“ mother of the gods," She is represented in 15 different forms, but 
specially as a woman of frightful aspect holding a club with a dead man’s 
head at its end and a skull for cap. 

In the district of Kanaur, Buddhists believe in (¢) Paldan Lamo, the 
supreme goddess equivalent to Mahākālī, (if) Sai Lamo or the goddess 
“Devi Bhagavatī, (1:2) Šai Lamo or Batuka Bhairava (The Punjab Castes and 
Tribes, I, pp. 82, 83, 91, ete.). 

We thus see that in Tibet in modern times the Lamas who are certain- 
ly the same as the Lamos are conceived as goddesses of the type of Kāli 
aud worshipped aecording to rites that can be called Tantrik. It seems 
that in more ancient times these Lümàs, like many other goddesses of the 
Tantrik pantheon, were female Tantrik adepts who later on came to be 
deified. It is the practice of these adepts of Tibetan mysticism that ts 
referred to in the Tantrik texts mentioned before. That these Lamos were 
in the habit of kissing people at their first meeting with them seems to be 
a direct reference to the Tibetan mode of greeting by showing the tongue. 


In tbis connection I may be permitted to make a few suggestions 
about the other groups of female adepts of Tantrik mysticism, ¢.., the 
lākinīs, the dakints, the śákinīs. In Western Tibet, the land of sorcerers 
and witches, there is a class of sorcerers called Lha-ka (probably Lha-k'a) 
or god's mouthpiece (also called Ku T’em ba) They "are frequently 
found in Western ‘Tibet and may be females in which case the woman 
may marry without hindrance to her profession. These wizards are especi- 
ally resorted to for relief of pain” (rée¢., pp. 482 ff.). Lākinīs seem to have 
been the name adopted in the Tuntrik literature for these wizards. Similar 
Ly pes of witches distantly connected with the Dags (the people of Dāgistan) 
and Šakas were probably referred to in the Tantras as dakints and šākinīs, 








" S'"UDIES IN THE TANTRAS 









: t rôle in the spiritual life of different people of this zone as well as 
hao Cena Asia and Mongolia.! 


. III 


i NS I have elsewhere tried to prove that the Tantrik doctrines were usually 

1  garbed i in a mystic language. In the Buddhist Tantras it is called Sandha- 
bhāşà or Sandhāvacana. It is sometimes very difficult to penentrate into 

that language and arrive at the real interpretation of the doctrines. 

w^ The Javadratha Yamala while describing the special practices of the 

Lāmās mentions the special language to be used with them. This language 

. 4s described as monosyllabic (#kaksara-samul/ap2) and may thus be con- 
sidered to have belonged to the Sino-Tibetan family as the Lamas them- 
selves belonged to the Tibetan group of mystics he Lūmās, according to 
this language, had '4 different names :—Yoviw, Rapiat, Lama, Sakint, 
Nālinī. Khagi. Cult, Bila, Trikhagigā, P-dint, Dehint Jala, — evati, 
 Bedhanr, Luki, Padabht, Kaktini, His& (?), Karoķhī, Kalušī, Bh. drā, 
Dundabhi, Mukharā and Āturā We have already seen that the Lames 
were Rūpikā as they were capable of assuming different shapes. Some of 
the 24 names enumerated are descriptive of such = which they could 
assume. 

A number of words belonging to the language of the Lāmās is men- 
tioned in the Jayadratha Yāmala. A comparison of these words with 
Tibetan and with other allied languages of the Himalayan zone probably 
shows that they were culled from some dialect of that family. ‘There are 
only two difficulties in establishing the identity of these worde. As I have 
to depend on a single manuscript of the text preserved in the Darbar 
Library of Nepal, and as that manuscript also is in part corrupt on account 
of the negligence of the copyists, I have not always been able to determine 








"C stively. Evidence is not wanting to prove that women still have a 


* 


the real forms of the words. Phe words as transcribed in the text always ` 


possess a vowel ending thouzh we are told at the outset that the language 
is a monosyllabic one. We have to remember that the compiler of the text 
could not always faithfully transeribe the words as they belonged to a 
foreign tongue. Besides we are not yet in a position to determine the real 
forms of the words in question as they were in the 8th century A.D., when 


! The late Mabāmahopādhyāya H. P. Sāātrī informed that the worabip of Lürmüádevi is 
prevalent in some parts of Midnspur. Bat I have not been able to collect any other informa- 
tion on it, A goddess called Rafkiņī is worshipped at Ghāttilā in the district of Manbhum. 
This goddess may have some connection with our Rükini. 


— ” °C 


x 





ON FOREIGN ELEMENT IN "THK TANTRA 53 


the text was compiled. Ourkniowledge of the Tibetai dialects of that 
period ia still very limited. A few: ‘such words are given below : suo nM | 


eo 


abhkivadana—bvimsa? Tibetan —gdoū- bus—greeting. 


srügaíam —nárist, bibi ; in the Sammoha Tantra (23) Nāriša is said to be the 
word for pranara according to the traditions of some 
Tantrik schools (ZrdAvamnaye, „.nāriša pranava parikirtita). 
bibi =*bib cf Tibetan phibs-bsu metning - welcome.’ 


mātā —lāsubhā—*lā-sabh cf. Ma'i tshabs meaning ‘mother’ iu ‘Ribetan 
Lha as iu Lha-mo means devi. The word, therefore, may _be 
^2. : » connected with Lha tshabs. 2 


MU Masi ? 

duAÁita—duhini ? , 

ára&rü——bhib, samani ; 

Y enr cf. Tib.. pha, : — meaning * father.” 

bhratrjaya—nimi šīmi ? 

raji a naye, there may be three different words here, gu su, naye; 

-— - for the last two cf. Tib. chud ma and Chinese niu. 

EDE kkas? n : 

pita—pidimistho ? 

naptā—trimin! ? : 

pitámaAa —bálusi ? for “ grandfather ’ cf. Tib. po-bo, po-'0-lags ; Sikimese— 
jo-jo-0. 

mātāmaha—-pilapiti nunoni T 
for ‘ grandmother --Tib. mo*o lat, a phyi lat, Sikimese—— 

” a fiogs, a nat. : 


+ Sura bhakta—airisam ? 


_pakgīrāma—āp1 sī ? 

dadhi—div1 ? 

ā ijya—limam ? | v 

bhojana —dekaram, the real word seems to be *de for which c. Lepea—zo, 

tha, and ———— Tib. za-ba. | 

gūdha—duma ? 

krāminī—japam—*jap of. Tib. zab meaning * husbanding.' 

pibamti—barise ? 

āgalah—enire *eni ef. Newar-wone, Tib. 'on ba, ete, meaning * to come. " 

gacchami—niganitesi ; the correct form probably was *nigünire which may 
eontain two words ni, ga and the suffix re , cf. Tib. gyo, gyok ; 
Lepea-non ; Muami nyu, ete. 





iie bija i — vulg. nilinitigi ? 

PEL andheisyo ? 

| prthivi—anant cf. Sokpa —wonnish. 

» parvata—uruka = eurak cf. Vibetan—ri, Lepca —rok, Bhutanese—rong. 
* sapta—dveyāsini ? 


e? 


nagarastridasa—adhena susūrā ? 
sadhyi—pistala Y 


s;rabhuja—pasibara. - 
.pakgī—urba nogā, for bird cf. Tıb. byu, Bhutanese bhya, Lepca— pho, 
Limbu-bu. Newar—jhango, jha-ngo, Thochu—marwo, 
tlorpa— gyvo. 


fasti—titila ? 

ašvrā—nuka jabia—enuk jab c/. Lepea—on*, Limbu—oi*t, Tib. chibs. 
aja—anida=*anide/. Tib. —ra, Bhutanese—rah. | agar-rha, Gurung—ra ; 
gardabha — kharag ? 

gaca—Srota jabàn ? ” 


cf. Tib. ba, Lepca—bik, Limbu—bit, Newar—sā, Thochu— 
sa-lo; t'hepang—yo shyā (a bull). 
makiga—anujapū = *anu, jap : 
cf. Limbu—sawet, Kiranti —sanwa. 
ustra—mina dvira ? 
ryüghra—pura, nyasi ? 
for ‘tiger’ cf. Sokpa—par. 
mrga = Sira kolo, probably mistake for ešība kol ? 
cf. R Chepang—kosya, Tib. Sa ba., Tib. (spoken) Ša-p'o : Ladaki- 
$a- po. 
sarpa—sahinī ? A 
_vtjdtayah—kahisesa ? 
Besides these rapprochements another important fact is to be noted. 
The few verbs that are mentioned in the list—enire, arire, nigānire, ete 
end in re. Hodgson in his Comparative Vocabulary! of these languazes 
notes that in Limbu the suffix ré is usually found with the verba, Cf. 


piré—to give, phéré—to come, piré—to give, (éré—to take away, séré— 
to kill, | etc, 


| For the comparison I have mostly depended on this Vocabulary of Hodgson. 


Md 





ON FOREIGN ELEMENT IN THE TANTRA 55 


The words belonging to the language of the Lamos discussed above 
therefore further corroborate the fact that these yogtnis belonged to some 
Tibetan race and that the compiler of the Hindu and Buddhist Tantras 
had a real knowledge of their practices. For facilitating intercourse with 
them a selection of some common words of their language was also made 
by them. ‘The mystics, both female and male of India, re ally used to 
have regular intercourse with those of other contiguous countries in ancient 
times, and through this intercourse, exchange of ideas and practices were 
made. It is for that reason that we still find in the Tantras vestiges of 
mystie doctrines foreign to India ? 








— © Io œe + - «— >... 


a-i <THE TEXTS: 


"T 


gai” ea cw waa ER O 
va »  fawuüw faa feu fe wafe 
wwure eng weet eer mā · 

aver eee; que wingu: | 
wrCrenziegep a uus] maa y 

fam feta g wm Aa affi | | . 
aaa perat emer ferai pu 

Magers a Pami wey | . 
avi aur dir carere p fafaa a 





il 


(Fol. 189b) waked da Mazoea | 
aif svwadeat ca waa wy wien 
wana Aà wupu aaa Wa:i" 
madi wur«u fura: fefe. u 
za «x fafafa ara - mU Gg 
waufuwü wre «ad fmm fee 


(Fol. 190r) yA ararsa wwwp fefe; i 
ta augan anit wem: at a 


qa eupwegfa Gūkaftātala | 
wen $ñ cao: wal upmwixfa n 


! From the Jayoadrotha Yāmala, Satka III, paper MS. No. 375 of the Nepal Darbar 
Library. I have printed the text aa it ia without proposing any emendation. | 

1 ie underlined passages are supposed to be the eleven questions to be put to the 
YXoginis while meeting them in deep dark nights. "The language in which they are garbed is 
characterised as Paidāca Sarhakrta, ie., the Sanskrit of the Pišācas. Nothing could be made 
out of these questions, though tbeir explanation is given in the verses that follow, 








THE TEXTS 


fasifefarataiad fate | 





aaa agra aaa) aie: ae: 

kaa gas arcs secre | 

aqaa ena aaa cw ee d 
en sei — 

X AA Ragen GETE tt 
aana au UZIEMĀ ASIA: | 
saat Art izd dead "3T 
ātzarau (7) Herd kwaa «ga | 
are fwereurew ferreo nā i 

" amaa mafii q zaga fates | 
waemremper «rer ufafewefa xp n 

" aagdu 4 Safa a4 ufemfaes i 
seus W qaaa; d 
waama uw*ifa qare uw i 
surzfaurz (aee  ufefaes » 
aat amat creto afaka aqu 
afaa ari arā a RETAÑ 
na g aque: afaa uu 
garumam were?) akaa wa: 
guà meg gem We gi 
agrar? mā eat we g Qa wu 
qem Nu MU YAA g! 
«fa waters ife Sarre dg 
afuat aa afa ai Ferra. TU: Od 
sawa fa nee fumes i 
kaaa fesrfa fefe fafa eared i 
wrewr «fa art 4 ma | 
afwst afea: cawfel YA fg: u 
Maha waza val cpu aut 
mat age: tri A fuer aura 
fafeetif aa war madia care: | 
amas aa pfe: fenfu 








(Fol. 191a) 











afremt aoe zauduvu «di 
gragafatūa uut Sa were a 
eqs avufu awama qu 
aft sted ern canfue renim | 
gfefae dana fi efet cera 
ta Se mat asd) «fe fears 
mU wre zi go gai 
qanama erat afore n 
foferet ved ated Gard rerni i 
sS fad aia arfas aa 
za fefesed um dip | 
wi dj an op coe mi arii 
wre md wr qu wes femmes; 
MARTAM ATM! cw fagm Weed | 

ni adui maa amu | 
wanya? are fad aed wmz | 





THE TEXTS 59 


we āt? Cw vat gu mafa wea | 
Reread «VĒ an fafai | 
gaina Wid uguugums | 
aad Šu ard a wai aia | 
amma werfefu aa waste | 
faute g fa mart KANA 
Fara gani gai faram wae w i 
agafa fa ga ga cw wees 
were dafs YA da fra wäi 
ad «dt au «m wat dae? mat i 
afi «omer YA ararereffaefadt | 
e ga md tia weet yeg | 
wt amt ā aa ēfa fudaafnargata | 


CATS SHAT YA Azau qu 


ADDITIONAL Nore.——W hile examining some MSS. in the 4static Society 
of Bengal for other studies, I have recently come upon another text 
concerning the Lamas. It is found in the Buddhist compendium called 
Abhidhdnottara, preserved in the Government collection (see also H. P. 
Sastri, Catalogue of the Government Collection of Buddhist MSS., 1917, 
No. 10759). The MS. was copied in 1298 A.D. One of the sections 
(patala) is called the Lamélaksana-patala (fol. 835 ff.). The Lamas are 
conceived here as female ascetics of different types. One of the types is 
‘described as possessed with well proportioned limbs (samyagangdvayava), 
and round face (mukam yasyas fu drayate parimaņdalam). They have 
long eye-lashes, and are well-dressed (swrasfrā), beautiful and truthful 
(saumyd, satyavādinī). They are faithful to their true religion and brave 
sisters (saddharmaraté nītyarm virabhoginyah). The dAarma and karma 
mudrās are to be used with them. Another type of Lamas has long lips 
(ZambostÀi), red grey eyes (rakta-pihūgala-locanā), auspicious looks and are 
fair like the Campaka flowers (svbiaga dhanyà gaurī campaka-sannibhad). 
They are tall (dīrgžā), have fearful faces (Karā/ā) and are fond of coloured 
dresses (vicifra-vasana-priga). ‘They laugh and play and stand obstructing 
the route (Aasale ramafe carra mārgam ākramya (igthati). ‘The &üla-midràá 
is to be used with them. 

A third type of Zāmās is red and fair (rakta-ganrā) and has red, grey 
eyes (rakta-pingala-focana). They have wavy hairs and put ona sort of 





60 STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


head-dress (£uficita ca tatha kešā pattadandia Sire tatā) and they have 
one wrinkle on their forehead (/a/ate drsyate caiva ekarekha). They are 
long-necked, and fond of singing. "They are particularly restless and protect 
in quarrels (calaceittā visegena kalahegu ca raka yate), The šakti-mudrā is 
to be used with them. " 

The last type of Lamas is short-statured and is fond of yellow clothes 
(Arasvā stkūla-jaūghā pītavastra-priyā) ; they have dark grey eyes (4rgna- 
piūgalalocanā) and are dreadful-looking karāfavikptāgāorā sthūlā sya! 
sthiilavaktraja | lambogthī krgņavarņā ca kotarüksi rugnanāsikā I). They 
are fond of dancing, have dark colour and are charming (urfya-gaudkarva- 
kusala meghavarnà manokarā). The Nāgamudrā is to be used with them. 
Such Lāmās are called Heruka-/amas (Sri Herukāņām ca lāmānām etadbha- 
vati fakgapam). 

The text further speaks of the dīkinīs and the symbolic language to 
be used with them. I will deal with this symbolic language along with 
other similar Tantric devices in a future article. uring my stay in 
Nepal I did not succeed in getting any information either about the Lamos 
or Lamo devi. lam however informed by some -epalese of ayakot 
that tbere are temples of Là no devis in the interior of Nepal. The 
"Tibetan Hla-mas only are entitled to enter the temples for worshipping 
them. It is currently believed also that if any — excepting the priests 
fates, the temple he is sure to die. 


— — — — — 








SOME TECHNICAL TERMS OF THE TANTBAS. 
Candra-Strya 


Though some scholars still entertain doubts as to the use of symbolical 
terms! in the Tantras it is undeniable that such terms do exist in the 
Tantrik literature both Buddhist and Brahmanical. I propose here to 
study these terms as far as possible with the help of texts, either published 
or still in manuscript, and to draw the attention of scholars to the import- 
ance of this symbolism in the study of the Tantras. The presence of 
such technical terms in the Tantras renders their interpretation not -only 
difficult “but sometimes almost impossible for want of proper materials 
which contained the clue. It is therefore dangerous to take such terms 
in their literal sense because that does not only vitiate our interpretation 
but also hinders all progress in the study of Indian mysticism. As it 
will be seen, this symbolism is not arbitrary but is the logical outcome 
of some very old and original notions about things. It further points 
to the common basis of both Buddhist and Brahmanical mysticism. 

Candra and Sūrya or the moon and the sun are two technical terms 
which are often met with both in the Buddhist and Brahmanical texts 
of mysticism. In the Buddhist Caryāpadas,* written in old Bengali, and 
the Apabhramša texts called Dofkākoša which may be placed sometime 
between the 8th and 12th centuries A.D. these two terms or their 
synonyms are often used : À 


1. The Dohākoša of Saraha, verse 25 : 


jahi mama pavama ma saficarat ra vi sasi nāka pavesa | 


tahi bada citla visima karu..,...... r 
“There where the mind and the wind do not move about, there where 
the ravi and the šašiu do not enter, repose your ettfa there...... ts 


1 1 pointed it out sometime ago in ü short note on Sandhābhārsā (Indian 
Historical Quarterly) and in my review ol the Sādhanamālā U.H.Q.. VI, 
p. 878). But see Winternitz, Notes on the Guhyasamāja (I.H.O., IX, pp. 1 T.). 

1 For the Caryüpadas, references are made to the text published by the late 
Dr. H. P. Sastri bot T have adopted the correct readioga as established in the 
forthcoming edition of the work prepared by me in collaboration with Dr. S. K. 
Chatterji. For the Dohàákoga cf. the text as established by Dr. Sbahidollah— Les 
chants mystiques. : 








M 62 STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 
2. The Dobikosa of Kānbupāda, verse 5: 
el lalanà rasanà ravi sasi tudia benna vi pase 
idus E destroying the rari and the šašra, the /a/anü and the rasanā on 
her Kan : 
S8. Two miscellaneous dobàs of Saraha! — 
" canda sujja ghasi gholta ghottas | 
| pāba punma tabé tā khane tuttas 4 
“When the candra and the sürya are rubbed and mixed up together 
merit and demerit immediately disappear." 
canda sujja beni gholia ghottaha 
“ Mix up the two, candra and sirya, by rubbing them.” 
4. Caryāpada of Krsna, 11 : 
rave šaši kwndala kin ábharane 
“ The sun and the moon were converted into earrings. 
5. Cary&pada of Dombi, 14 : 
candra sujja dut cakā sitātsamāāra pulindā | 
vama dākiņa na cerat bākatu chanda i 
“The moon and the sun, (have now been made into) the two wheels 


in which lie creation and destruction. Without looking to the left and 
the right sides take (the boat) as you like.” 


6. Caryāpada of Vioà, 17: 
7 suja lā Sabi lügeli tants 
The Siddha Vīgāpāda says that he has made a new kind of Vīņā of 
which “ the sun is the gourd to which the moon-strings have been affixed.” 
~ 7. GCaryūpada of Saraha, 32 : 
nada na bindu na ravt sasimanda/a | 
ciarüa sahabe mukkala i 


“There is no nada, no bimdu, uo sun and no moon, the cifta-rāja is 
free by his own nature." 


S. Caryūpada of Guņģarī, 4 : 
canda-suja bent pakkā phala 
'" Cut off the two wings called the sun and the moon." 
= 


1 Of. Subhàüsitasamgraha, ed. Bendall, pp. 70 and 84. 





SOME TECHNICAL TERMS IN THE TANTRAS 63 


| From the above passages * it is evident that sürya and candra or ravi 

and šašin are to be destroyed, mixed up together so that they may lose 
their independent existence, and to be made into ornaments, Le, to be 
subordinated. When it is said that the sun is the gourd to which 
moon-strings have been affixed the implication is that they have not 
been allowed to work independently and have been) brought together in 
such a fashion as to function in a combined way. Such treatment of 
the sun and the moon has been prescribed for bringing about a state of 
mind which is beyond the reach of the senses. This is a state of perfect 
repose and as that state of repose can be disturbed only by the sun and 
the moon these should be either removed, subordinated or controlled in 
such a way as not to be able to work independently. 

There are also indications, in the passages quoted above, of the fact 
that these two, namely, the sun and the moon, are connected with the 
two sides (Jenna bi pása)—the right and the left (vāma-dāžiņa), aud 
are compared to the two wings (pakia). This idea is also expressed in 
some of the Caryās: 


l. Carya 8 (Kambalapāda) : wama dakina cāpi mili mili maga— 
where the poet says that he has been able to attain the 
great bliss (maAásuAa) “by keeping close to the (middle) 


way and pressing (£e. keeping under control) the right and 
the left (ways).”” 


: 2. Caryā 15 (Šāntipāda) : wama dākiņā do vata cchadi—where 


| The extracts from Sanskrit commentaries to these passages are given below 
in order : 

[1] av gagy ead adigan gerer: a feaa fni ge ua aye 

arera [ fa? J1 afer xw ave: qawe cw gari + «wafer waa dan: 
| Aaa a wa: | 

(2] qama? mugan aaa (Mari ramar? samani cay 

ferar | 

[2] Nocommentary. 

[4] ramuafaifuavmamiftāa vragrerqerfaafereerg i TA | : 

[5] we ws aga gfe aaa Ages! NU TĀ Hartu gedy- 
aren: CuSpeuiquemmend] crema uw awena kaaa wr Ya 
aaa fauazifisaifufemtarvarare mu | 

[6] gatera qferacaqien NETĀ aferere | 


rra farmer fe Paca CE TICTII 
[8] «amdiažām «garā: weed aa 








64 kt STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 
“+. ~ . the poet says that he moves on at will “ PE 
„> the right and the left ways.” 


8. Caryū 32 (Sarahapáda): wama dakiņa jo khāta vikkalā: “the 
com js x right and the left are the pitfalls.""! 


That the two ways on either side, right and left, are pitfalls aud 
fuil. of difficulties is also indicated when it is said by the Siddha Capilla : 


dnànte cikhila majhe na thāi —there is no ford on either of the two sides 


which are Fall of mud. 


E | The sun and the moon, in some — the Caryās, are further connected 
with kali (consonants beginning with £a) and āfi (vowels beginning with a) 
respectively : 2 

ik Caryā. 7 (Kāhau): āliē kāliē vāta rundkela— the way (6. €., 


the right way) has been obstructed by the vowels and the 
| . . . Consonants.” | 
2. Carva 11 (Krsgapāda) : 
dh kali ghantā netira carame 
A M ravi-šaši-kuņdala kit áóharame 
> Ali aud kādi, ie., vowels and consonants have been made into the 
-anklets and the sun and the moon into rings of the ears.” ? 
When Ali and kili are mentioned, apparently certain emphasis is 
laid on the sound-value of the vowels and cousonants and this emphasis 
is clearly kept in view in comparing them with nūpura, t.e., anklets, 
of which the utility consists in the fact that they make some sound whereas 
the kuņdala or the earring has no such value. The same idea is expressed 
by another, Siddha Vīņāpāda (Carya 17), when he says: d/t kale beni 
sari sundae, i.e., “ali and kali are the two things which. produce the notes 
in the strings of the vind.” 
Another idea is attached to it when Luipāda in one of his Caryās 
(V) savs : amhe jhāņe dithi—dhamana camana bent pindi baitha "I have 


1 The comments on these passages in order are : 

[L] afaa meri manat cafe 

(8j No comment. 

- B] srrefemeresagfcercia — 

3 The comments on these two passages are : 

u] mamii ar ufam Aami erie etree cw AA 
uev Tam i 

(2] semraufatierrcanifeee eraga er were i 





SOME TECHNICAL TERMS IN THE TANTRAS 65 


seen in meditation after sitting on (+.e., keeping under control) the two— 
dhamana and camaņa. ‘The Sanskrit commentary connects dhamana with 
āli and éoéin whereas camana is connected with kili and may be 
thus derived from the root dāmā which indicates a forward or outward 
movement, whereas camana may be derived from the root cam which. 
means ‘to eat,’ f.e., taking in. 

Last of all in a Carya of the Siddha Pombipāda (14) the sun and 
the moon are compared to the two rivers Yamuna and Ganga : Gangd- 
Jaümü majhere bahai nāi—'the boat is being rowed (in a river) in the 
middle of the Gaūgā and the Yamuna.” The commentator tells us 
that the Ganga is the moon and Yamuna is the sua.’ 

We therefore get two groups of terms and each of them contains 
implications of the,same nature. These two groups are : 


I. ravi, sirya (compared to the dā or gourd used for the vina), 
kāli, camana, jainā (the Famunā)—placed on the dakina or 
the right. 

II. šašiu, candra (compared to the fantrī or the string of the viņā), 
ali, dhamana, Ganga —placed on the vāma or the left. 


Now what do these two groups of terms really mean? On one 
occasion we have «seen that the sur and the moon are called /a/aná and 
rasanā. Ine commentator while explaining this particular portion of 
tie Carvá says, that /a/a«d is seated in tre left nostril in the form 
of moon (candra) which is the Prajīā and rasaad i= «ated in the right 
nostril in the form of the sun (*üryd) wien ix th- Upāya. Vhis cac 
be further explained with rhe help of suen authoritative Buidhiat Mantras 
as the Hevajra Tantra and tue Heruka Tantra. i 


In the Hevajra (Chap. I)” 10 as sail that there ar- 32 nadīs within 
the body aud they carry tue óodÁrcif/a upwards waica ultimately pvurs 


| The Banskrit comment rune : 
awraqafa aaa woerarequituret areare | 
2 From a Nepalese MS. of the text in my possession : 
nana «mu: wiferargun afermme: i aagana (sic. em) aasa; | ara] |) aa fae: 
AT: AWT: | MM CAM waa Sie | 

qam VETANTĒA casargeferet | 
wafa mataa urerarmwat im i 
Tagi gani ca ona athe | 
war waver eurer waufa WT awe u (7) 
"rf arf perm wmm | 











. STUDIES IN. THE TANTRAS 





into-the place of great bliss (maAü-sukAa-s/Aana). Three amongst the nūģīs 
a and they are called /a/ana, rasanā and avadAütr. ‘The Zafana 
is | by Prajfia and rasanā by ŪUpāya whereas the avaddūti is 
seated in the middle and is beyond the reach of ‘the taken’ and ‘the taker’ 
(grahya-grakaka)—i.e. the objéet and the subject. It is further said that 
the lalanā carries the akgobiya (Sukra or the semen virile), and the rasana 
carries the blood (rakta). It is besides pointed out in the same text that : 
ali =candra=prajfa and kali =siirya=upaya. 

Almost the same explanation is found in the Zeruka-Tantra! in which 
it is said (Chap. V): beginning from the region of the throat a nadi runs 
downwards along the left side up to the navel—it is the candra; ali carries 
the candra. On the right side beginning from the navel a n&di runs upwards 
to the region of the throat, it is the sūrya ; kali carries the sürya. Else- 
where ip the same text it is said that /a/and is the carrier of &ukra and the 
rasanā is the carrier of the blood, that /a/anü relates to the sam2Aoga-kàya, 
and rasanā to the nirmdna-kaya whereas avadAut: relates to the d/armakaye 
(Chap. VII). 

This clearly relates to the nādīs of which the existence within the 
body is supposed by the Hathayogins. Such a hypothesis is also largely 









i Heruke-Tantra (MS. in my possession ]— 
Patala V, 6.7: 

SB aA cee AZA | 
Kanga we wiferue wur N 
Mage Wwpwp ae KĢGĒNA: | 

s misia ga dd: mannaaa U 

Patala VII. 16-20 : 

Sub avi fern ATF! wer ga (sic. aa) (wu mft à 
gfs tam corm are! taa e) u 
dem Saas AULA i 
wefeaqae es SHIT aT i 
kaaa faa sfufererernrav | 
wrawen[ fa ] fa eerie u 
AT tian cg aad farre | 
wasa wem: eifefa mwai wd u 
«af! magi y arva afin ar 
mam giiir cant Halford vy: g 








SOME TECHNICAL TERMS IN THE TANTRAS 67 


corroborated by evidence from the Brahmanical Tantras and the Hatha- 
yoga literature. In the Hathayoga-pradiptka (1V, 9) it is said that the 
sun and the moon determine the time in the nature of day and night 
whereas sugumņā (the nàdi in the middle) eats up the time (7.¢., destroys 
its notion). Again while indicating the initial process of Yoga, namely, 
the pranayama or the regulation of breath, the same text says that the 
vital breath should be taken at first through the candra or moon and 
thrown out through the sūrya or the sun and then it should be taken 
through the sun and thrown out througth the moon (II. 5). The same 
process is indicated in another Sloka (II. 6) in a little different language 
which shows that Svātmārāma, the compiler of the Hathayoga-pradipika 
has culled the two dSlokas from two different sources. The $loka runs: 
the vital breath should be first taken in through the td@ and thrown out 
through the other (¢.¢., pivigala) and then it should be taken in through 
the piūgalā and thrown out through the left one (¢.¢., the ida); when this 
method of sūrya and candrama is practised for some time continuously all 
the nādīs become purified after three months. In the next stage of this 
Yoga the initiate has to hold the vital breath within himself in suspense 
and to send it through the sugumņā, the nādī in the middle. This is 
sufficient to show that the Brahmanical tradition of Hathayoga considered 
candra to be the same nādī as idā situated on the left and sarya to be the 
same as pingalà seated on the right. Further the Hathayoga-pradiptka 
(III. 33) says that idā is the goddess Ganga while priūgačā is the river 
Yamunā (ida bhagdvati ganga pingald yamunā nadī).' 


1 Jfaļhayogāpradipikā : 

1V.9. aaa we: we kazaa i 
Wit quao MT GDEDRATATEG dg 

11. 5. «agsuwvigāt att aed wes uiua | 
urga vermis apu. aza VU | 
maj gta arm geet mā; 
fafuam mur mem gauru wa li 

II. OG. urei @fewar faafafa spur emnt CT | 
drat fawerur grad! wur WALA! 
gatagati (afvarurai wur Mat | 
Ta! «rra wafer uferri HIHNADTS Uo 

ILE. 35. asi aag ag farar our aRt | 











STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


»: The Saradatilaka, an authoritative Brahmanical Tantra, says! (1.39) 
that the human body has two aspects, agai and soma, and this is why the 
bindu also has two aspects. The right portion is ealled sürya and the 
le nibākara, i.e., moon. It further says thatin the left there is the nadi 
, ‘ida and on the right piūgalā. Bindu is supposed to be the cause of crea- 
‘tion and its two aspects are explained by the commentator of the Sāradā- 
tilaka as ‘‘éukram agnirūparh raktam somarūparh "— that is to say that the 
bindu is composed of two elements, šukra and rakta of which the former 
has the character of agni and the latter that of Soma. Further discusstion 

of bindu on this basis is found in the texts of Kashmir Saivism like the 

Kamaka/avilasa of Puuyüoanda,? It is shown there that the bindu 
consists of two parts: one is white and the other is red and they represent 
the Siva and the Sakti. 

In an unpublished work, called the Akufāgama-Taut a” which belongs 
to the Kaula school, it is pointed out that the individual soul can attain 
Sira by abandoning the left and tne right through Yogie practice and 
by bringing together the two vital winds called prana aud apāna. lo an 
attempt to define the left and the right ıt further gives a large number 
Of terms for each. hese terms may be thus classified : 





I. Dakgina—prava, palita, sūkgmā, retas, rūrya, dharma, azni, sthira, 
para, dyau, bheda, citta, piūgalā, yamun&, vidyā, bindu, rajas, 
bhava. 

Il. Fāma—apāna, bali, prakrti, sthūla, rajas, candra, adharma, 
soma, asthira, apara, prthivī, abheda, acītta, idā, Jāhnavī, 
avidyā, nada, tamas, abháva. 


t Sārodātilaka— 


I. 39-40. uda 24) facdewarns: | 
efe: «a: nuni near) ferma: | 
te arā ae uwuswr fore ut 
2 Kamakalicilisa— 
6. faauiga fefonitranindgeqeace | 
3 A Nepalese MS. of this work bas been recently acquired for the Bengali Manuscript 
»ibrary, Calcutta University. For a detailed notice on this work see my edition of the 
t aulajāšnanirņaya, the Calcutta Oriental Series, No. III. The discussion regarding ' the 
bt * and ‘the left’ occurs in 1. 98 ff. and II. 26 ff. : 
ru wanga saper grāfā | 
aree am wreue amy i 
wat [u]mfe frem uferd gee: ga: i 
marafi aa i 





* 


SOME TECHNICAL TERMS IN THE TANTRAS €9 


lf we now classify all the terms of the two catego.ies the two groups 
stand thus: | 


: I. Dakgina—rasand, pingalā, sūrya, ravi, agni, prāņa, camana, kāli, 
bindu, upāya, yamunā, rakta[?), palita, sūkgma, retas, dharma, sthira, para, 
dyau, bheda, citta, vidyā, rajas, bhava, puruga, &iva,—nmnirmüna-kaya and 
grühya. 

II. Fāwma—falanā, ida, candra, &a&in, soma, apana, dhamana, ali, 
nada, prajfià, gaūgā, šukra(f), bali, stāūfa, rajas, adharma, asthira, apara, 
prthivī, abheda, acitta, avidyà, tamas, a’ hava, prakrti, šakti ;—sambhogakaya 
and grāfaka.! 

It is not possible for us to say anything about the nidis of which 
the existence is supposed bv the WHathayogins within the body. 
It is no more possible for us to speak on the physiological changes 
which these yogins are supposed to experience in the initial stage of the 
yoga as well as in the advanced stage which brings in samadhi; but 
it is possible to foilow these mystics up to a certain point in their use of 
the terms mentioned above. 

When prāņa and camana are used for the right side and apana and 
dhamana for the left, it seems that air has been taken as the basis of life 
and hence of creation. The first two mean the inspiration and the second 
two expiration and in these two functions of the vital wind, within the body ~ 


qure wat fercifercacratt i 

kajua frei? aardst(+) acre i 
j erqvatfast(?) stat garā emrerdt: ou 

Sere «ter ea aa 

vxifüawwerareft wrrdtags cw t 

fe gegen fanfare] fu | 


! Iahould admit that regarding the position of some terms there is uncertainty. The 
Buddhist texts seem to prefer an inversion in case of dli-kāli, prajfiá-upáya, rakta-íukra, and 
grühaka-grühya. The other terms of the Buddhist texta conform to the order in which 
they are found in the Brabmanical texts. The inversion may be due to some confusion 
or it may be deliberate, because it appears in some cases that the functions ascribed to 
thenādis are transferable. Cf. Haļhayogapradīpikā, II. 6, text quc ted in note 1. p. 67. 











"by 
. 

B 
i 


à 





70 . — STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


of the individual, depend many of his notions of the external world. 
His notion of time is absolutely dependent on it from a subjective point 
of view. Therefore when these two functions of the air stop notion of 


| time also disappears. The claim of the yogin is that it is possible to stop 
ao 


these two functions of the wind and to hold it within (kAuméAéaka) and through 
that complete samādhi can be attained.’ 
If the notion of time is dependent on the two functions of the vital 


| wind, inspiration and expiration, then the implication of such terms as sūrya 


and candra or ravi and šašin becomes clear. The san and the moon are really 
symbols of day and night and our notion of time is also based on them. 
The perception of the objective world is also based on them. The direct 
aim of the yogin is to extirpate such notions and thus to proceed towards 
samādhi. This is why it bas been said on so many occasions that * the sun” 
and *the moon' should be killed. 
L "When sound is taken as the basis of creation as has been done by the 
aphotavüdins, the question of bindu and nada or kahi and ah comes in. 
Without going in to the subtler aspects of this problem it may be pointed 
out that dindu is conceived as the subtle and inaudible form of sound whereas 
the nada is the more audible form of it. They are characterised as cté 
and acit ; bindu is conscious whereas «dda is unconscious. It can be further 
pointed out that the Kāšmir school of thinkers follow this line of thought 
still further and think that dindu and nāda represent iecžā and kriyā or 
prakāša and vimarša, one meaning the desire of and the other an effort at 
realisation, dindu represents the desire and nāda, the effort. The two terms 
nirmāņa-kāya and sambhoga-kaya, which we have found in the Buddhist 
texts imply the same tendencies. The nirmāņa implies a tendency towards 
creation, whereas samAoga, a realisation or fulfilment of that tendency. 
Some other terms Purusa and Prakris, Siva and Sakti, rajas and tamas, 
vidya and avidyā, retas and rajas, etc., may be explained in this light. The 
two tendencies implied by these terms lead to creation and bind down the 
subject to the object, the individual to the illusory world. The yogin has 
got to control these two tendencies, bring about their unification and when 
this unification is complete the samādhi and a state of perfect bliss are 


R attained. F 


1 For determining the meaning of the two terms camana and dhamana I am indebted 
to my friend and colleague Mr. K. C. Chatterji. As regards the claim to stop the two 
functions of the air cf. Hatha, III. 19: 


mani wrefac qe SORTS | 
wen aera dfefe ved) ara Wm. od 





SOHE TECHNICAL TERMS IN THE TANTRAS 11 


I have left out till now the two words kali and āli or ‘thé consonants’ 
and ‘the vowels. It has been said before that in the use of these two 
terms empbasis is laid on the sound. In the consideration of these two 
terms, therefore, sound has been taken to be the basis of creation as in the 
case of bindu and mada. Extending the same analogy we may say that 
kali, i.e., the consonant, is the less audible expression of the mātrkās whereas 
the āli is their more audible expression. So far, there is no difficulty but if 
we say that the sound in its tendeney towards expression first gives rise 
to the consonants and then to the vowels we would be led to a theory 
which is contrary to whatsome of the Brahmanical treatises would have 
us believe.! 

Last of all the two terms upaya and praj5à raise a similar difficulty. 
In the Buddhist texts referred to above, it is clearly said that upāya is 
connected with kadi, t.e., the consonants whereas prajfia with azi, f.e., the 
vowels. The prajfia, therefore, in conformity with the previous analogy, 
should be taken to be the less distinet and less conscious element whereas 
upüya is the more distinct and more conscious element. 

But kali and at, wpāya and prajūā may be explained from another 
point of view and this time along the Famuxā and Ganga. The natural 
relation of these two rivers is that Garīgā is the more important river and 
the Famunā being only its tributary supplies water to it and the former 
feeds on that water. Thus Ganga is the grāšaka and Yamuna is the 
grühya. In conformity with this analogy ādt is the more important 
sound as it is more audible and kali for its expression depends on the help 
received from. the ati, f.e., the vowels. In other words the consonants can 
be distinctly pronounced only with the help of vowels and from this 
point of view kādi is the grāfaka and azi is the gráhya. In the same 
way if wpüya involves a certain desire (recha) for self-expression prajñā 
(sapience) can be said to be depeadent on it; the candra (moon) 
also depends on the sūrya (sun) for its self-expression. Thus prajha is the 
grākāka, upaya the grāfya and candra is the grāfaka, sūrya the gráAya, 


i As to tho theory which occurs in tho Brabmanical texts, cf. the passage of the 
Aitareya Aranyaka discussed infra; also the passage quoted by Amrtánandanütha in his 
commentary on Yoginīhrdayadipikā under I. 14: 

ua: Bese wn warm Gra: fra: | 
wesrO cuperet aha: nafta: u 

Besides, of the two worda cyaAjana and svara, the former is etymologically associsted 

with darkness (atījana) and the latter with light ** that which is self-existent.'' 





STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


Al On thi£ analogy the other terms piàga/d and idi, agni and soma also 
may be explained. Piūgalā seems to be the agn, fire, as it indicates the 
evlour of fire (pingala) whereas ida which means ‘nourishment’ is taken as 
‘the personification of the offering.’ Soma is also the offering. This 
offering which is meant for the gods is without any value unless it gets 
the help of the agn: which is supposed to carry it to the proper destination. 
Īt seems that as if ida the ‘personified offering’ wants to reach the gods 
and she avails herself of the help of agni to reach there. dā is therefore 
the grākaka and agmi is the grāāya. 

_ Ldo not want to carry this analogy further. But from what I have 
said it is probably clear that the two categories of terms which I bave 
discussed, apart from tbe mechanism of Hathayoga, seem to have been 
selected according to certain principles. As in almost all the texts 
greater emphasis is laid on the terms pingalā and idà and agni and soma, 
terms connected with the sacrifice, it seems that according to some 
thinkers the sacrifice performed outside had also its counterpart within the 
boly! and through an extension of this analogy some terms relating 
to the external sacrifice were applied to indicate the old notions of some 
functions of the basic elemen:s within the body. 

There is no doubt that some of these notions are very old. The 
Chandogya-upanigad, which is in parts obscure for its mystic trend, contains 
a passage which is significant (VIII. 1.3): ** The space within is as vast 
as the external sky. In both of these are united the earth and the Aeaven, 
the fire and the air, ^Ae sun and fhe moon, the lightning aud constellations, 
whaterer relates to one also relates to the other.” 

In many places of the Cfāndogya as well as of other npģanigada 
references are made to 4rdayasya nddyah i.e., the nddis within the body. 
In the Chá«dogya (VIII. 6.1) these nádis are once called pingalā becanee 
the sun,is pingala. The reason for this is thus given: “As a route 
established between two villages connects both, so the rays of the sun goes 
to both the worlds and from the sun above are propagated in the uādī+,” 

Elsewhere in the CAámdogya (IIT. 13) it is said that the vital air 
within, passes through five different channels (sxgi) and of these five 
“the prāņa is the eastern channel, it is the eye, the sun (aditga), and the 
force (fejar)......... the apāna is the western chann: l, it is the spiēch, the 

fire—the nyina is the southern channel, it is the car, the moon (candra).”’ 


| ‘fhe fondamental principle of the tantras on this point bas been clearly brought 
out by Bir John Woodroffe : Shakti and Shakta, p. 408—'' the man is a Microcosm ; whatever 
exists is the outer universe exists in him," 











SOME TECHNICAL TERMS IN THE TANTRAS 73 


But a somewhat different idea is also recorded in the Chdndogya 
(I. 3) when it is said that vyāna is the combination of the prāņa and 
apāna and it is the speech because inspiration and expiration stops when 
one speaks. 

Now the speech which is here said to combine in it the two motions 
of the vital air consists of the consonants and the vowels, vyafijana 
and svara which are described in the later texts as kili and āli, as the 
sun and the moon, the day and the night. A similar idea is contained 
in the Aifareya-Āraņyaka (II. 2.4) where it is said: vyafianaireva 
rātrī-rāpnuvanti  svarai-raháni, i.e, “night is obtained through the 
consonants, and day through the vowels." In the Buddhist texts there 
is an inversion of this notion. 

Finally, I cannot help referring to two passages of the dtharvaveda 
in this connection. In the Atharva XI. 4.12 and 21 certain ideas are 
expressed which seem to bear comparison to what I have said: 

12. The Prdna is the sun and the moon, the Prāņa is the 

Prajāpati. 
21. The Āarhsa does not take one of his feet from the water, if he 


had done so there would be no more to-day and to-morrow, 
no more day and night. ' 


Horhea ia generally explained as the vital sir. 


10 





etc $3» à 
“AREE EAEN FIT a 
^ > SOME ASPECTS OF BUDDHIST MYSTICISM 


IN THE CARYĀPADAS 


xi The Caryāpadas' were published for the first time by the late Dr. 
H. P. Shāstrī from an old manuscript discovered in Nepal. The work 
is a collection of 50 Caryāpadas, of which three are now missing ; they 
were — by various authors like Sarahapāda, Kānhupāda (a/ias 

irya), Bhusuku, Dombi, all of whom appear in the list of $4 Siddhas 

who had flourished some time between the 10th and 12th centuries A. D. 
As the manuseript was unique and as the language of the text was 
unfamiliar the learned editor could not settle the text in a satisfactory 
way. Since then Dr. S. K. Chatterji has studied the language of these 
texts and characterised it as old Bengali? (The Origin and Development of 
the Bengali Language, I, p. 112). Some time ago Dr. Shahidullah re-edited 
the Caryās of Saraha and Künhu in the appendix to his work— Les Chants 
Mystiques, but for the want either of a second manuseript or of a 
Tibetan translation the text could not be settled to his entire satisfac- 
tion though many improvements were made. The main thesis of Dr. 
Shahidullah being the study of Dohàs he had no occasion to pay special 
attention to the esoteric doctrines of the Caryās. 

The Tibetan translation of the text so long searched for in vain is 
however preserved in the BHs/an-hgyur, Vol. XLVII, 35 (Cordier, Catalogue 
II, p. ?225)—the Spyod pa'i glu'i mdsed kyi 'grel pa shes bya ba—the 
Caryāgītīkoša-vrtili-nāmā (Narthang, XLVII, pp. 161.205). The work, 


| Bauddha Gin O Dohā, publication of the Vahgiya Sahitya Parigat, Calcutta, 
A second revised edition of the book prepared by me in collaboration with Dr 8. K, 
Chatterji, M.A., D.Lit. (London), is in course of impression. 

1 Dr. 8. K. Chatterji bas given his reasons in detailin bis book. The most definite 
Bengali characteristics of this language are: the genitive in—éra, ara (qux, wx), dative 
in ré (X), locative in fa (a), post-poaitional words like mājha (mnm), antara (Herr), 
sanga (WTF), past aod future bases in -i-, -ib- (vw, ta), and not-al, -ab- of Bihari, 
present participle in -anfa (wy) conjunctive in ilé (tē), passive in -fa (vw), substantive 
roots āch (wrw), snd thak (wrw), and not thik (fey) of Maithili or tha of Oriyā and 
a number of Bengali idioms. But it is strange that Mr. Jayaswal in his Presidential 
address to the 7th All-India Oriental Conference of Baroda, without any reference to 
the work of Dr. Chatterji and without going into the philological evidence sdduced 
by him, has formally accepted the theory of Rev. R. Sankrityéyans, that the language 


of the Caryápsdas is old Bihari. This theory formulated by the latter for the first 
time in the Hindi Magazine Gotgā has no critical value whatsoever. 





D uu S ee — — 
4 a T apt | a yai úg 


" 
Ta - 
. vē 





BUDDHIST MYSTICISM IN THE CARYĀPADAS 715 


which contains the translation of both the Caryās and their Sanskrit 


Commentary, was compiled by Munidatta and translated by Kīrticandra 


in the city of Yambu in Nepal. 
The Tibetan translation helps us in determining the exact name of the 


work. Dr. H. P. Shāstrī published the work under the caption Caryācarya= 


vini$caya which is however not found anywhere in the text. But it was 
certainly not his invention. In the opening verse of the Sanskrit 
commentary on the first Caryā attributed to Luyi-pāda it is said— 
sites dfteromfa- Fera Pet omar arra? (MS. has —germm] which is translated 
in Tibetan as—''dpal Idan Lū yi shabs sogs grub pa rnams kyis gsuts 
sin ya (? sin (x) mtshan spyod pa'i glu yi thogs.” Thus the name of 
the text which appears in the Sanskrit verse as Á&carya-caryácaya! is also 
translated as the *very wonderful Caryā songs," It therefore seems that 
the name chosen by Dr. Shāstrī was based on a wrong reading of the title— 
Carya&carya-vini$caya which however was not exactly quoted but 
suggested inthe Sanskrit verse referred to. The name preserved in 
Tibetan Caryāgītikoša-vriti refers to the commentary ani thus Carydgit:- 
koša might have been another name under which the collection of the 
Caryās was known. 

The special terminology which has been used in the Caryās for 
preaching the esoteric doctrines is characterised in the text as SandÁya- 
bhasa. Pandit Vidhugekhara Shastri * with the help of a large number 
of texts pointed out that it should be corrected as Sandhā-bkāzā meaning 
intentional speech” and not “the twilight language” as Dr. H. P. Shastri 
maintained and as some scholars still continue to maintain in spite of 
what has been said to the contrary. The Tibetan translation of the 
Caryāpadas and their commentary now amply confirms what Pandit 
Vidhušekhara Shāstrī suggested. 

In some places of the Sanskrit commentary the words aždārsandāya 
and sandiyayd (to be corrected as sandhayā) occur in the same sense: 
p- 8§— Comm. on tħe Caryā of Virüva) gurūpadešād atftisaudāya, p. 11 
—(the Caryaé of Catilla), »adi-sand^yayà boddhangam, p. 29—(the ‘arya 
of Mahidhara), Cittagajendrasandāyayā lamevartham pratipādayatt, p. 40— 
(the Caryā of Kānhu) sandiyaya prandpdnam.......-. parikalpya. Ino all 
these cases abhisandhya and sandhgayā (sic sandtayd) are translated in 
Tibetan as "dgoūs pa'i skad kyis,” i.e, by means of intentional language. 


1 Pandit Vidhušekbara Shāstrī suggested this as the correct form of the title in 
a note published in the Bengali Journal Prabasi. 
1] „H.0., 4, 1928, 287 fi. 


=- 











16 STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


In several other cases the same sense is brought out by the words 
vyāja and utprekgā : p. 16—(the Caryā of Kambala) karuņāvyājena.....,.. 
kāruņeti sandAyà (sic. sandhd)-bhagayd utprekņātaūkāraparam boddhavyamn, 
p. 18—(the Carya of Kūnhu) sa»dAyabAüsayü (sic.) famerārtiham utprek- 
gayamtah, p. 26—(the Carya of Dombi) mauwkápravá&av yájena prakatayati 
and p. 74—(the Caryā of Bhusukupāda) čangālikāvyājena tamevārthar 
pratipādayati. In all these cases again the words vydja and nufprekgā 
are rendered into Tibetan by *'dgoüs pa'i skad kyis," ie., by means of 
intentional language. The word “ dgoüs pa " means—to purpose, to intend, 
to think, to cogitate, etc. Though it does not faithfully bring out the 
sense of vyāja and ufprekgā still it becomes clear that though sandAà 
primarily meant ‘intention’ in these cases it was used in a technical sense 


to mean a particular way of expression to explain the mystic doctrines as 


intended by the speaker by analogy (vyāja, «ftprekgā). 
In the Caryüpadas the mystic doctrines have often been described 


by analogy and for this purpose a number of images has been chosen. 
I will first of all discuss these images. 


(i) The image of boat—In the Caryūs Nos. 12, 14 and 38, attributed 
respectively to Kānhu, Dombi and Saraba, the image of boat and 
the analogy of rowing have been used to explain some of the doctrines. 
While commenting on these songs the Sanskrit commentary warns us 
naukā sandhyabhagaya — boddhavyam, naukāpravāka-vyājena|) prakatayati, 
kāyanaukāvyājena pratipddayatt or kāyam naukārh parikalpya, ete. In 
No|3 Kānhu says that he has made a boat of the three refuges (frišaraņa) 
and has mastered the eight (divine powers). Thus has he crossed the 
ocean of the world after having counted all the waves in the mid-sea. 
The five ¢afM@gatas are his oars and the cifta is the helmsman. Thus 
has he proceeded to the island of Great Bliss. In No. 14 Dombipada 
says that the boat plies between the Ganga and the Yamunā and there 
the old Miátaügi takes the yogins to the other bank without effort. 
Dombipáda urges himself to ply the boat with the five oars. He says 
that the rope should be tied well on the back, water which may enter 
into the boat through the joints should be thrown out with the help of 
the secani which is the sky (gagana). The Sun and the Moon, the two wheels 
of ereation and destruction, should be converted into parts of the boat. The 
boat thus taken plies at ease, and the two banks become no longer visible. 
In No. 38, the song of Saraha, the kāya is the boat, the purified mind is 
the oar and advices of the Guru are the sails. Advice is given that while 
plying the boat it should be always kept near the Sahaja and as there 





BUDDHIST MYSTICISM IN THE CARYAPADAS TT 


are difficulties on the way the boat should always keep near the Kūla when 
going against the strong current. Thus only it can reach the sky (gagana). 


Kambalāmbarapāda in his Carya (No. 8) uses again the image of 
boat. He says—'*' Kambala has filled his boat of compassion (karuņā) 
with gold and there is no place for silver in it. He wants to take the 
boat towards the sky. He has now uprooted the post to which the boat 
was fixed and takes the boat keeping near the right and left sides. 
He attains the Great Bliss on the way.” 


(ii) The image of rat—In one of the Songs of Bhusukupāda the 
image of rat is used (No. 21) and in this case also the commentary 
says that mūgaka sandhyd-vacanena prattpddayatt, The author says: 
“The, night is dark and the play of the rat begins. The rat drinks 
the nectar. Kill this rat-wind so that the coming and going may be 
stopped. The rat brings in transmigration and digs holes. The rat 
which thus brings in calamities has no colour. When it ascends the 
sky (gagana) and drinks the nectar there, it becomes restless, It is then 
to be pacified with the advice of the Guru. When the play of the rat 
is thus stopped the ties are broken asunder.” 

(sit) The image of the stringed musical instrument, Find.—In_ the 
Caryāpada No. 17 the Siddha Vīņāpāda uses the analogy of a Vini, 
He says that he has made a new kind of Vina of which the sun is the 
gourd, the moon is the string, and the Avadhūtī is the stand (dāņģī) 
which produces sound even without being struck.  Vīņāpāda says— 
«Friend, hark the Heruka-vinà is being played. The notes of the string 
are being heard. The best of elephants on hearing the sounds, d/: and 
kali, now enter the samarasa, When the striker presses (the string) 
the sounds of the 32 strings spread everywhere, the king then dances 
and the queen sings. This is the Buddha-nataka.”’ 


(iv) The image of elephant—In the last song we have already 
found reference to an elephant which is called the best of elepbants— 
gajavara. In a large number of the Caryapadas use is made of the 
image of the elephant butjithe most important case where the image has 
been fully worked out is in, the song of Mahidbarapada, No. 16. The 
commentary on this song says—ecittagajendra-sandÁ ya ya pratipádayatt. 
 Mahidharapáda says: “Along the three planks (pita) terrible noise, 
not produced by any agent but spontaneous, is being heard, At this 
noise both the māra and the world are destroyed, The great elephant, 
the Citta, now runs towards the end of the sky and rubs the sun and 











He is now indifferent towards the three 
worldsand is the conqueror of the' five objects of senses. He has now entered 
deep (into the sky) and nobody can see him." Kānhu in some of his 
songs uses the image of elephant. In Caryé No. 9 he compares 
himself with the elephant and says—"''After having broken the two posts 
-evarh, and torn asunder the various chains Kanhu has entered the lotus 
| forest of Sahaja and has become intoxicated by drinking the wine. And 
pow just as the elephant throws rut at the she-elephant the ciffa is 
pouring the /aíàata wine.” In Caryā No. 12 in connection with another 
image Kānhu again uses the image of elephant and says that he has 
destroyed the five (objects) with the help of the elephant. 


(vr) The image of deer—Bhusukupāda in one of his songs (No, 6), 
makes use of the image of a deer. The Sanskrit commentary says: 
Bhusukupada Aariņā-šabda sandhyadbhasaya kathayati. Bhusuku says— 
“The hunters have surrounded the forest and their ery is being heard. 
The deer has become his own enemy for his flesh. The hunters do not 
leave Bhusuku (the deer) for a moment. The deer now gives up his food 
and drink. The doe advises the deer to leave the forest and to go 
(with her). The deer runs away so fast that even his hoofs cannot be seen.” 


(vi) The analogy of union—In some of the Caryāpadas the authors 
address some female companion and say that marriage with her has 
led to the attainment of great bliss. Thus in song No. 10 Kānhupāda 
addresses a Dombi, a low-caste woman, and the Sanskrit commentary 
clearly says...doméiSabdah sandhyabhagaya kathayati. Kānhu says: “Oh 
Dombi, you live outside the city but how is it that you have now dared to 
touch the son of a Brahmana. But oh Dombi, I will live with you be- 
cause I am only a naked Yogin who uses the skull (for drinking) and is 
hated by all. The lotus is one but it has 64 petals and the Dombi is now 
daneing on it. She is now eating the lotus stalk in the lake. I shall 
now get hold of her and reach the other shore.” In song No. 19 Kānhu 
describes his marriage with the Dombi, in the following terms: ‘The 
existence (Shavu) and nirvana, and the mind and the vital air (mana- 
pabana) are serving as different musical instruments, Künhu is going 
to marry the Dombi. After marrying her he has now stopped further 
birth, and got the anu//ara world as the dowry. He is now spending 
his time in her company surrounded by the Yoginīs in great bliss. 


= 


— — 





BUDDHIST MYSTICISM IN THE CARYAPADAS 19 


Whoever has once lived with the Dombi can never leave her for a moment 
and is maddened by the Sabaja bliss." 


(vii) The analogy of the fermentation of wine—Virūvapāda in one 
of his Caryās (No. 3) introduces the analogy of the fermentation of wine. 
He says: “The female wine-dealer (šxņdinī) is alone but she enters both 
the chambers and introduces the powder (?) for fermenting the wine. 
The wine now flows straight towards the Sahaja and that brings im- 
mortality. On seeing the sign (of the wine) at the tenth door the customer 
comes of himself and after visiting the 64 stations enters without leaving 
any sign behind. ‘The pipe of the vessel is narrow and therefore the wine 
should be sent through it carefully.” l 


(viit) Analogy of carding the cotton—In Caryāpada No. 26 Šāntipāda 
uses the analogy of cotton-carding, He says: “1 have carded the cotton 
to fine threads and again reduced these threads to non-entity, but still 
I have not been able to get at the Heruka. While carding the cotton I 
have gone to sky (Sanya). The two ways on either sides are no longer seen 
and nothing enters into the sky. There is no cause and effect. I can be 
only perceived by my own self.” 


In the images of the boat the words which serve as the key to the 
mystie significance are—the boat, the five oars, the helmsman, the way 
along which the boat sails, the posts to which the boat is fixed before 
starting, the rope by which it is fixed, and the secant by which water 
is thrown out from the boat, and finally the destination of the boat. 

The boat stands for karund, compassion, whieh is explained as 
bodhicitta (8), the ¢riéarana which is explained in the commentary as 
“the refuge of the three—” (kāya, vāk, citta) or in other words, the 
mahdsukhakaya in which these disappear (13), the Sukranadikà which is 
located within the middlemost nadi, viz., avadAü/ika (14), and last of all 
for kāya (38) by which evidently maAásukAakaya is again meant. ! 

The five oars stand for the five ta/Adgatas (13). The five tafāāgatas 
are explained as the purified body (of which the five fathagafas presiding 
over the five senses are the essence). In one case the mana (38) which 
combines in itself the essence of the five senses in its purified state is 


* ww wamama (sic. mamaa ] ata fated arat [com. 8]; ia 
ad aaa fe «qu mä «ti cd d wena AT SAT NF 


(com. 13]; uamfeaT wataka WA ai HD XU At: gamurgar See 
(com. 14]; awana Ua aire [com. 38). 








80 STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


compared with the oars. Elsewhere (13) this idea has led to the 
comparison of the eiffa with the helmsman karnadAdra.' 

The two posts to which the boat is fixed stand for the illusion of 
the phenomenal world, ādžkāsadogam (8). The rope by which the boat 
is tied to the post stands for'the dŽodārcitta (14) in its sdmnvrtitka or 
impure worldly state and also for avidyāsūtra, t.e., tie of illusion (8). 
"The secanī by which the water or the impurities that may come in are 
to be thrown out stands for the Sanya or vacuity (14). 

‘The path along which the boat is to sail is the middlemost one in 
which both the right and left are combined (8), that is located between 
the Gabg& and the Yamuna (14), and along this path which is full of 
dangers the boat has to proceed against the current (38).* ‘ 

The destination is described as matasukha—the knowledge of natrātmā 
(8), the matasukhacakradvipa, i.e., the island of great bliss situated in the 
[ocean of] vacuity (13), the jinapura explained as the city of great bliss 
(14) and the gagana, i.e., the vacuity (35). * 

These images imply certain Yogic processes. The principal idea is 
that the boat is to be safely taken to the island of great bliss along the 
middle path steering clear away from the two sides. lt is fixed to the two 
posts by means of a rope which should be torn asunder. The island of 
great bliss is situated in the ocean of vacuity. 

The boat is the 4oddicitta which is the semen virile (&vkra). It is 
claimed that by certain Yogic practices it can be carried up to the head. 
In the ordinary state it remains restless and binds one to the illusory 


a 


amasan māv Aai ia... ma was aff, wuw qua 
saña: memrenfefra va umm, sarani gå wafaa (com. 13], sera 
Sfeqrre (com. 38] ; såra wasomi «arī (com. 13). 

* giga «medu: afem aaa [com]; ferm wfas aan, au 
Aua sera fad uy iner Se ware ga) weeded «gvifnāu fears 
Māru «Tā oth faugyWiew famfa | |com. 14). 

amzinai manat uēmfum (com. 8]; araga saga «grata KITAA 
arerargait (com. 14]; @rramiaqaraiwen area) uer MĀLI wafer waya srerr enifa i 
+  wwiquemugzr za (fed afer Ar ewrquew-5xrarnfeg s war umfefe i 


(com. 8]; mergasa mar (com. 13]; fagi wwrgus* (com. 14]; wea 
taaah (com. 38]. 





BUDDHIST MYSTICISM IN THE CARYĀPADAS 8l 


world. In that state it is sārnor//rka but when it is carried upwards 
it loses its restless character and produces a state of great bliss. In this 
state it is Paramarthika. It then becomes the source of supreme qualities 
to the Yogin. When the dodātcītta proceeds upwards as the result of 
a sort of revolution within, there is introversion of all the faculties of 
the senses, and of the vital wind. They then, without becoming the source 
of distraction to the Yogin and of his bondage to the illusory world, all 
help him in his march to the higher plane where he enjoys a state 
of great bliss. Now while this introversion or internal revolution 
takes place the 4odAicifta in its upward march follows three principal 
channels, called the adis. Connexion with the external world still 
continues and is not completely severed. This connexion totally ceases 
at a stage where the three meet together to form a single channel only. 
This is implied by saying that the boat should steer clear of the two 
paths on the right and left which are full of daugers.' 

The revolution is brought about by meditating on the vacuity (šūnya- 
samādhi) and through further concentration on it the influx of the illusion 
of the objective world can be stopped. This is why the vacuity has been 
compared with the secan? and it has been said that if any water enters 
the boat through its leakage it should be thrown out with the help of 
this secant. 

lu the image of rat, the rat itself stands for the cré/apasbana—the 
vital air which is ordinarily restless like the rat. As long as the dark- 
ness of night remains the rat moves on and drinks the nectar stealthily. 
Similarly, as long as the instraetion of the Guru is not obtained and the 
restlessness of the vital air is not stopped it contributes to the loss of the 
bodfieitta but when it becomes quiet there is no more loss, the Sahaja 
bliss is then attained and the worldly ties are broken.’ 


1 The Yogic method by which the bodhicitta can be carried upwards is referred 
to in many places of tho present text. Cf. also the quotation from Sekoddefa, n work now 


lost, in the commentary to the Carya No. 3. 
areal gafa araa: amateurs 


QQavemet ASIA frat T0: | 
ux Ex [sio MS. ws xq] kaaa weal fed sast 
nm Seams aes ompüfe ad fay: o 
* „um: carves feng: Klau: fef ari reisa at eat! aa water 
araa atazaa. Aaa arara V TA A: faucet: eel KAF | 
(com. 21). 
11 











STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


F The same Yogic process which has been explained above is again 
implied here. The raf is the vital air in its restless state before the 
revolution takes place. This is why the dŽodāicitfa also remains restless 
in its sāmvrttika state and is subject to loss and decay. This is implied 
| by saying that the ratin the darkness of the night drinks the nectar 
stealthily. But after the revolution the vital air ascends upwards, gets 


pacified, helps in pacifying the dod/rcitta which then attains the pāramār- 
thika state and brings about the Sahaja bliss. 


In the image of the stringed instrument (Find) the words which are 
important are—the gourd, the strings and the stand (dāndī) to which 
these are fitted, The gourd is the Sūrya aud the string, the Candra. 
These represent the two adis on both sides and the stand represents the 
aradkūtī, the nadi in the middle. When the first two are brought together 
and fixed on to the middle one a musie which is not produced by any agent 
but spontaneous i is heard within and this music is resounded in all the nüdis. 
When this music is heard by the gajarara, the best elephant [which is 
explained as the ciffa], it proceeds upwards to drink the samarasa. When 


the music continues, the king, t.e., M Yogin dances and the queen, t.e., 
Nairātma-yoginī sings,! 


The image of the stringed musical instrument has close similarity 
with the analogy of cotton-carding used by Sāntipāda in Carya No. 26. 
The instrument used for carding the cotton is also a stringed instrument 
consisting of astand to which the string is fixed. When the string is 


struck against the cotton, the cotton gradually gets reduced to fine threads. 
The cotton here stands for the illusory world.® 


According tothe mechanism of the Yoga already referred to, when 
the revolution takes place and the faculties of the senses are on their 
upward move the internal nddis are said to receive the currents and 
vibrate. This vibration becomes gradually more and more intense till at 
last the objective world disappears from view and the Yogin finds himself 
established in the vacuity. This is the state that is described by the 
present image. As the movement of the string continues, the cotton, f.e., 
the illusory world, gradually gets reduced to non-entity and dualistie 


* werd gaa eu wanes PATA faa arm ww cama 
Neap ut earefeear...sared draafer; [ «fare ] Hare wees yal gata | 
Aut 28 an fart kaaa afer granara gáfa | 


* gate mafaia grai waare fann (com. 26), 





~ 
BUDDHIST MYSTICISM IN THE CARYĀPADAS 83 


knowledge is altogether stopped.* When the state of vacuity is attained 
there is no more effect of causality and no more disturbance of the peace. 
This state is said to be indescribable. 

In the image of the stringed musical instrument and instrument for 
carding cotton we have seen that there is the question of a sound—a sound 
that is spontaneous and not produced by any agent— which vibrates in the 
different internal »üdis and particularly in the three principal ones. In 
the image of elephant (Caryā No. 16) there is again the question of this 
sound which is heard along the three planks * or the principal »àádis (). 
The elephant which stands for the ciffa in this case is maddened by this 
sound and marches at once upwards to the sky, t.e., the vacuity. He rubs 
the sun and the moon together and demolishes the two posts and breaks 
the chains which bind him to them. The sun and the moon and the two 
posts which are explained as merit and demerit stand for the illusion of 
the material world which has two aspects. We have seen before that as 
long as the citia does not reach the point where the two uddis, the left 
and the right, do not get united with the middle one and form altogether 
one single channel, the influx of illusion continues, When the eiffa attains 
that point in its upward march it reaches the vacuity without any 
hindrance at all, drinks the nectar there and enjoys the great bliss. This 
bas been brought out by saying that the elephant has now reached the 
end of the sky? and has become mad after drinking the great wine. 
Itis this sense which has been brought out in the other imazes of the 
elephant which has been referred to. When itis said that the cifta is 
pouring fatha/d wine the meaning seems to be that the ciffa in its ultimate 
state of reality permeates itself with blissfulness.* 

The image of the deer has more philosophieal than mystical signi- 
Acance. The deer in this image stands for the citta or ciffa-pačana, the 


. qaaa ara caret 4 faa | (com. 26]. 

» grzad sarees: wareatata IATA | 

^ wq wa wan fë aaa naa vtafas...urggeit dere «wi 
wafaa... kuaga ag faan... fasteresraxc wa: poo Parme: mami agigas 
nat fafaa: | (com. 16]. 

wmrewmrerg dae: aa: sad ata asia au fran.. aaa aerga- 
qad wer fafernenrant wena | (com. 9]. 

* ga arent ruaas wets! acunadiacanearaa  fammpemen ETSI: 
auan wwüfemi [com. 9]. 








STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 







p= 


. ‘The vital iris ordinarily restless like the deer and as long as 
it remains restless it is associated with the material world and is subject 
toall the miseries of the world. This is why it bas been said that the 
Da P: s surrounded by the hunters on all sides and is his own enemy for 
vi iis flesh. This flesh, fe., his association with the material world, stands in 
the way of his translation to the higher sphere.’ At this stage the doe 
Comes in and advises the deer to leave the forest surrounded by the hunters 
and to go over to another where no such troubles exist. The doe is the 
Jīānamudrā or the Narrātmā * aud the other forest is the forest of the 


lotus—the great bliss. This last only has Yogic implications and suggests 








that there is the question of the march of the Sakti upwards to the ` 


| topmost Cakra, the Cakra of great bliss. 
or ĪŅ the analogies of union a Dombi plays the most important part and 

that serves as the key to the inner meaning of the image. She lives 

outside the city, dances on the lotus with 64 petals and eats up the lotus 
stalk. When the Yogin proceeds to marry her the bhava, existence and 
mirrama and the mind and the vital air all act in concert as musical 
instruments. Dombi is explained as the Nātrāfmā 5 or the avadhüti, 
purified. Avadhūtī is the middle nadi, and as soon as it is purified through 
the removal of the influx of illusion the Sakti which is characterised as 
Nairātmā in these texts ascends upwards, reaches the vacuity where the 
lotus with 64 petals is located. When itis said that the Dombi eats up 
the root of the lotus the implication seems to be that the way by whieh 
further influx of illusion upwards may be possible is destroyed. 

The analogy of the fermentation of wine leads to an image of a 
different kind. Though this image is not quite clear in all its details 
the central idea is suggested by the two words—éundini and varuni, t.¢., 
the female wine-dealer and the wine. The Sundint stands for the 
aradkūtikā which we have seen is no other than the nairātmā or the Sakti 
that marches upwards. The vāruņī—the wine, stands for the sārnvritika 
bodhicitta or the semen virile. I have already said that according to a 
particular belief of the Yogins when the Sakti marches upwards — 


^ ai aamini «IAU g: A cw feasicd gaat axa | 

^  wfedifüi sear d" smagu fern kanuna spare’ 
aaa PA feneite we sree sou KREIGS qur... [com. 6]. 

^ aa ufogearaud Farm ga i (com. 10] wafcefa i wurfzfauguaré 
WD STH fanami.. aami aE ĀM fences ag:ufegagai na 
fere wate Ate ae VARAT ATTIE fe wanazi gufa à 








BUDDHIST MYSTICISM IN THE CARYAPADAS 85 


the different »adis the šukra or the sémvrittika bodhicitta also proceeds 
upwards to the head. The aim of the Yogin is to see that it proceeds 
quietly through the middle nadi and gets aceumnlated in the Vajramaņi 
in the head and loses its restless charaeter.! The bodhicitia then 
attains the paramdarthika state and becomes conducive to the attainment 
of supreme bliss. This process is implied in the present image. 
When it is said that though the 4undini is alore she enters both 
the chambers the implicatioņ is that she brings the two, the sun 
and the moon together and sends them through the middle one.% 
The wine, ie., the Suéra, at this stage is made to enter it and goes upwards 
to produce the Sahaja bliss. ‘The customer? who comes of himself on 
seeing the signs of wine seems to be the ciffa who now enters (the vacuity) 
without leaving any sign behind and drinks the nectar from the lotus 
of "great bliss. 

In most of the Caryàs therefore the ZodAicit/a and its cultivation 
for higher purposes take the most important place. The éodhicitta alone 
is the source of compassion (karuņā) which is so important in the 
Mahāyāna, it can render supreme bliss to the initiated and enables him 
to free himself from the grasp of the illusory world. The bodhicitta in 
its exoterie aspect is equally important in the earlier Mahayana. It has 
been interpreted there by the scholars as “ the resolution to attain JodAr.” 
In the early Mahayana practices also, “ this resolution to attain Bodhi” 
enables the initiated to proceed in his spiritual exercises and to be the 
master of compassion and save every being of the world from misery by 
leading him to dodAe (cf. Dutt, Aspects of Mahayana Buddhism, p. 302). 

But in early Mahayana the esoteric aspect of the čodāicītta (i.e., the 
bodhicītta im the sense of 4ukra) seems to have already developed. 
In my note on the word Parāvriti (see infra) I have emphasised on the 


+ waaga reda: gaang fuf wafaa da gaim- 
aufert g emacamaaed uaa mon... aaa qüan creufed kafa 
Ka war kai rem 

qcarawifufed aaa wa. amu aaa apas farau... 
aada gara aza a ANA aa ae aifufeme; aula ur 

* qaq zaan sr safes af ata weal «zen aera feri... 
Ct umar mzarat nafta i 

| gale fe aušana àa «rtu ofa kaakaa “fad «las ala | 








STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


implications of the word in its connection with matthuna—sexual act. 
If my interpretation of the word is accepted then we should admit 
that already when the Sütrálamküra was composed by Asaūga the 
Buddhists believed in a Yogie practice by which it was possible to turn 
the flow of the semen virile inwards and to produce a state of supreme 
blissfalness caused by this inflow. Ina passage of the Stks@samuccaya of 
Sāntidera, Bodhicitia is exactly used in a similar sense : 


bodhicittakalalah krparbuda maitrapeširacalāšaye ghanah | 
— Jiuddhagardka ayarh sampravardhate || 
(Srkaa., V, p. 103.), 






“The čodārcitta is the germ, the second stage of growth is compassion 
the third is maitrī or brotherly love which is firm and solid, and then 
the elements of the &odÁi grow stage by stage till the Buddha-embryo is 
fully develo 


a, C 





A NOTE ON THE WORD PARAVRTTI 


The word parāvriti occurs in several verses of the Sūtrāfarnkāra of 
Asaūga in connection with acts which constitute the supreme greatness of 
Buddha (vibAutvara bauddham). ‘These acts are paficendriyaparüvrtti, i è, 
parāvrili of the five senses; manaso’pi°—i.e., parāvriti of the mind, 
sarthodgraha°—i.e., parāv riti of receiving the objects of senses, vika/pa?— 
i.e., parāvriti of the act of differentiation ; pratisthayah°—i.e., parāvrili 
of the place of existence (7) and lastly matthunasya°—i.e., parāvpifi 
of sexual act. The verses are— 


amiefanes faya gtafa— 
ifene Parad aera GTA | 
atiii atut queens tegi 
anaista arent fay a wa Gra | 
awata? mA Masa qi vers 
afte ers fap rā TH | 
gazi aarara wiadevara fe naa 
fam qund] faye migā quw | 
waa wera uiui MARTTA uses 
aAa: ares faye ene* TCH | 
wafafsafaate warme TS ned 
Fane woe aga eat we | 
qudtenfwertsa crise uuu use 


Prof. S. Lévi while translating the word as “révolution” suggested 
that ‘‘paravrtt: of sexual act” alludes without doubt to “the mystic couples 
of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas which have so much importance in Tantrism” 

Translation of the Saéa/amkara, p. 81, note). If this interpretation is 
accepted then we have to admit that Tantrik ideas were already prevalent in 
Mahayana Buddhism in the time of Asaūga (4th-5th centuries A.D.). 

Dr. Winternitz in his Nofes on the Guhya-Samaja Tantra and the Age of 
Tantras (I. H. Q. IX. 1) has recently questioned the interpretation of 
Prof. Lévi and translated the word parāvriti as “turning aside, discard." 
The last two verses of the series (Nos. 45 and 46) bave been rendered by 
him as follows: 





88 STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


"In the turning-aside of the basis of Reality supreme greatness is 
- obtained, (namely) the ‘ Nirvana without basis’ in the immovable seat of the 

“In the turning-aside of sexual union supreme greatness is obtained, 
(namely) in the enjoyment (or pleasure-ground) of Buddha-happiness and 
in looking without impure thoughts at a wife.” 

The meaning of the term parāvriti however does not appear to be so 
plain. The verses of the Sūtrāfarhkāra, already quoted, are introduced by 
Asafiga with the note: manovrlli-bhedena vibhiufvadhedam daršayati — 
‘different kinds of supreme greatness are being explained with reference 
to the various functions (vrfft) of the mind." The word vríti has the 
implication of a forward circular motion whereas āvrffi means a complete 
revolution (like the revolution of a wheel); the prefix para means “ back, 
in an inverted order." The word parāvriti therefore literally means— 
"turning (the fuaetions of the mind) round to an opposite point.” So it 
does not mean even literally, as Dr. Winternitz thinks, ‘turning aside’ those 
functions but their transformation for a higher purpose. This really 
amounts to a mental revolution. A large number of passages from different 
texts confirms this interpretation. 

The word, first of all, occurs several times in the 77jfapfimātratāsiddki 
(Trimšikā) of Vasubandhu and also in its commentary by Sthiramati: 


aay Breed art Val oes Mt | 
fed Aaaa are aca d 
wfetsquemisdt ma pre a ae | 
«aa uarsfaftvi drewrerfaa: n 
(Trimsika, kār., 28.29.] 


When the knowledge does no more perceive the object it makes its stay 
in vijāāna only (vijfiiua-mitra), There is [then] no more receiving for the 
absence of objects to be received (28). 

This knowledge is mindless, perception-less and sapra-mundane. There 
is then the parāvrifi of the recipient-——āšrayatyu pardvrtti through elimina- 
tion of two kinds of troubles (29). 

Sthiramati while commenting on the verse says : 


What is āfrayaparāvriti?* Āšraya or the recipient is the ülaya-vijfiana 
which contains all the germs, That which is its parüvrt/i is produced when 
there is no more impregnation either of troubles or of duality and on 
account of their stoppage there is pliability. This parāvrtti is attained 





NOTES ON THE WORD PARAVRTTI 89 


through the elimination of two kinds of troubles—klešāvaraņa and 
Jéáeyávarama. —' Dose b e su 
pure Ya ana ANAFAA! Wer qafa at ua 
kaaa fea] eat wam YAm qaa M aa 
quf: we AI Wa) a TE I fear izara feats Wanga Ware 
iesma u baden 

Parāvrtti in this case, implies prašradddi, i.e., relaxation or lightness of 
the mind. It is one of the čodžyaūgas or an integral condition of the óodÀr, 
Sthiramati explains this word thus: *''praáraódÁ: is the opposite of 
daugthulya. Itis the pliability of the body and mind while dausthulya 
is the want of this pliability and is hence the germ of all passion. 
The pliability of the body is that which enables the body to do its 
proper functions with ease. The pliability of the mind is that which 
enables the mind to act on its object with freshness and lightness. 
As to the body its pra&raódAi is attained when a particular tangible 
is brought to it through satisfaction. So says the Sütra: “when the 
mind is pleased the body relaxes ( gammā ). Its proper function is to 
extirpate radically the obstruction of passion (klešāvaraņa) so that through 
it the parāvriti of the recipient (āšraya) takes place.” — — 

The word paraerí(i occurs in many places of the Zaūkāratāra-sūtra 
but the most important references to it occur in the last (amasa) of the 
text. The Bodhisattvas are first of all described as experts in paravrtte 
or aaa: (p. 10), and it is further said that they attain the body 
of Tathagata  (Ta/Aagafa-kaya) through paraüer/ti (p. 43). Tathata or 
the state of ultimate reality is defined as that which is attained through 
paraüvrtti of the nature of desires, mental disturbances (dausthulya), 
mind and mental and non-mental knowledge (p. 10OS)—sratat amana 
Fees neret ICT (sie. afa) war ifa (?) carat equum. Tutata is 
once equated with paravrtta ( quang aaan, p. 274, versé 77 and also p. 
151, quem fg auar —). Paravriti of the vijhāna, the seat of all desires 
-and knowledge, is cailed nirvana (p. 93)— afa eras Nrraigaragacta metra 
gfeara ware fmferatafarerers. When the mind is parāvr/fa no function of 
the senses remains to the Fogin (p. 33) and when the parāvrftr of the 
recipient! (āšraya) takes place there is no origination (p. 335). det da 
is the state of detachment in which there is no knowledge of contradiction 


(p. 345—wdefa fare axrefafererum: ): 


1 Araya, we have seen, is explained by Sihiramati as gima xaaa URI i 


12 





T STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


we 


"There are several other passages in the Žankāvafāra which help 
us in determining the sense of the word with great precision.! It is said 
that when the Bodhisattvas arrive at the Sth éA4iim: they attain the 

manomaya-kāya through the parāvrftt of the two ways; on page 266 
(verses 17-20) it is further said that when the mind is parāvrifa it 
always stays in the space which has the colour of a lotus, and which is 
beyond the reach of the illusory world. When the mind is established 
there, the thoughts attain the state of anaéhogacart. The mind then 
performs the acts of the common beings like the diamond in which the 
whole world is reflected (i.¢., the mind remains unstained like the diamond 
inspite of the reflections). In that state there is no phenomenon either 
samekria or asamskría, and there is no knowledge of duality. The 
individuality loses its nature (nathsvabhavyam). 

From this it is evident that parāvrifē is an affair of the 8th of the 
ten bàümis. It is a state in which the mind stays permanently ( fasfa 
mraq ) and attains anādfogacāri condition ( wantmafe aa: ). In fact 
the Sth bÀümi is called Anāčāoga or Acatā. The relative position of the 
ten čhūmis is indicated in the following verses of the KLankāvatāra 
(pp. 278, 106, cf. also p. 215). 


fed fe aaa: Ya faxrerer w weet | 
Vt ad fares Rafai 0 


«The citita consists of the first 7 bhimis, the 8th is devoid of 
illusion, and the two Šžūmis (9th and 10th) are places of enjoyment 
(—vihāra). The last is a positive state." 


1. Cf. also eyaortti. In the Latkdeatdra, p. 815, verses 392f.; also p. 325, verse 4838.— 
Vyārritih sarcadrgtinām. Vyärrtti is used in the Sutrālamkāra as a synonym of 
Pardortti in verse 47 (ix) —àküfasamjtacyácrttan,. To the Chinese translation of the Suird- 
parderiti ia rendered by chuon which means ‘revolution or turning round’; chuan is 
particularly used to mean the revolution or turning of the wheel. Nirriti means suppression 
or destroction and hence has oniy s negative character whereas parārriti or ryārriti hasa 
positive character; paraerttí implies exteriorisation and parārriti seems to imply the opposite 
Process, Compare with this the significance of parañ in param rairāgyam (Yogasūtra T, 
16) and parārtham (ibid, IV. 23). In both the cases param apportains to Puruga, The 
Prakrti has two movements, outward and inward, end when its inward movement reaches 
completion mokga is attained. Bhojsdeva in his comment on Yogasūtra IV. 22 says :— 


kaki AA aye ka... igana: aco: | 
Aa Ia wa; rara: afer: a 








NOTĒS ON THĒ WORD PARĀVĒTTI 91 


This, I think, throws a flood of light on the meaning of the verses 
45, 46, 47 and 48 of the S(ralamkara already referred to. Buddhanam 
acale pade of verse 45, BuddhasáukAya-vihára of verse 46 and akasasarnjfia 
vyātriti (which makes one gagana-garbha according to Asaūga) of the 
verse 47 refer to the last three stages in the march towards final 
beatitude. Acale pade seems to refer to the 8th Aum: called Acalà or 
Nerabhoga whereas the 9th and the 10th which are generally called 
vikāra in the Lamkāvafāra are implied in the other two expressions. 
The 9th šžūmi called SádAumati is the place from which the Bodhisattva 
exercises mahakarnna for all beings and this is probably the reason why 
it has been called a stage from which the friendship or love of Buddha 
is exercised (—Buddha saukAyavihara) The 10th dhtime called darma- 
megha in which the Boddhisattva attains acinfyarh ca nama mokgarh being 
seated in the pure džarmamegka appear to be implied in ak@éasamy ftāvyā- 
vritt and acintyakrtyānugthānād- buddhārāmamalāšraya. 

I do not mean that such well defined stages of spiritual progress 
as are found in the NDašaššūmrika Sūtra are implied in the above three 
verses of the Sūfrālarnkāra. But the three stages in some form or other 
were known to Asaüga (ef. Sutralarnkara, XX-XXI, 37-38) and called by 
him Acalā, Sadhumati and Dharmameghā, although the characteristies of 
these three are there mixed up together. This seems to be due to the 
fact that the last three Shamis by their peculiar elevation form a 
category different from the first seven Shamis as it is distinctly said 
that from the 8th čžūmi one becomes a member of the Buddha family, 
possesses the Buddha gotra and is constantly attended by all gods and 
Vajrapāņi. It seems that there was no fall from any of the last three 
bAümis where as that was possible from any of the first seven čāūmis. 

Now parāvriti is spoken of in connection with the last three šfēmis— 
stages in which Buddhahood has been already attained. ln these stages 
no question of discarding different functions of the senses, mind, vikafpa 
and sexual act (maifAwna), etC., arises because that is the affair of earlier 
stages in the spiritual march, In the last the stages the Bodhisattva 
is far above the world and its turmoils. Therefore paravrtts must 
have a different significance. 

In the previous discussions we have seen that parāvriti involves 
praSrabdhe or elimination of the two categories of obstruction both of 
the passions and objects of senses, and is equated with nirvana and 
fathata. It is niļsvadfāvatā, nirabhasatvam, anntpāda, ete. It is not 
therefore complete negation as nirvana and fafhata do not consist in 








x 
Šai STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 





; ilation, it bas neither any positive nor "negative aspect—it is above 
tas (Laùkā., p. 98, madea AA). 

: So it has been defined as a state of blissfulness. Therefore 1 think 
—— of maifāuna (verse 46) does not mean ‘turning aside’ or 

‘abnegation of the sexual act” but enjoyment of bliss similar to that 
arising from that act. This analogy has been used in Indian philosophical 
texts beginning with the Upanisads. 

.  Tbe significance of this mystic union and the consequent enjoyment 
of a blissful union is given in the Sūfrālarmkāra itself (XX-XXI, verses, 
37 and 38) in connection with the two d/4fimis, Acalā (the 8th) and the 
4 megkā (the 10th). The Sth d4@me is called 4ca/a, **un-moved " because 
it i is “unmoved by the connotation of the two” («a dmfaaaary,). The last 
bhams is called Diarmamegkā because it is “ filled up by the two as the space 
is filled up by the clouds " (wur ajama wa). The connotation of the 
two are explained by Asahga as nimilfasamnjfa and animit(asamyjfia and 
“the filling up by the two" as the filling up by the samad&imukAa and 
the dāāšraņīmukāa, In these stages therefore “the coming together” 
or “ unity of two categories '' is implied and this union might have been 
described as mūdfāunasya paravrtti. Such union is implied in the terms 
Yoga, and Samadhi. The nimitta-sarhjfiā and animitta-samjfia of Asaūga 
may be compared with the kāryacitta and kāraņacitta of the Yoga 
philosophy. The kāraņacitta is vibhu and the most important aim of 
the Yogin is to turn back the ciffa to its original state of all-pervading 
kāraņacitta. 

. Additional Note—My note was. published in October, 1933, Mr. 
A. K. Coomaraswamy discussed the word independently at about -the 
same time. Cf. his “ 4 New Approach to the Fedas," p. 93, note 78, where 
he explains parāvrfti as transformation, regeneration, analogy, r reversal, 
etc. —* also his article in merus Ernst Winternitz. 


- 





sf Appendix 
DETAILED NOTICES ON MANUSCRIPTS 
I. Nišvāsa-tatfva-Samnhtitā. 


I have drawn attention to the importance of this MS. previously 
(supra, pp. 3ff.). It is a palm leaf MS. preserved in the Darbar Library 
and was first briefly noticed by H. P. Shastri (Darbar Library Catalogue, 
p. 137). The MS. consists of 111 leaves and its writing is late Gupta 
of the 8th century. The importance of the text lies in the fact that 
it mentions a large number of Tantrik texts which existed at the time 
of its compilation. - 

The text consists of five sifrar anl thoagh they form a complete 
whole, each of them may be taken independently of others. The five 
sūtras are—(:) Laukika-dharma; (it) M ūla-sūfra ; (tr) Uftara-sūfra ; 
(iv) Naya-sūtra; (v) Gukya-sūtra. The last is more extensive than the 
four others taken together. According to a verse occurring on fol. 224 
the section of Launkika-dAarma is left out and the next four sections are 
said to form the main body of the text (cf. supra, p. 4). 

On fol. 414 there is a definition of sifra— 


dam gafar pi ma uz uti 
aa ee aa KA afer Ta n 
On fol. 41b it is said that the text is called a sanità because five 
texts have been put together. They represent five currents of literary 


traditions communicated by the mouth and hence they are called 
Nišvāsa (probably because vital wind passes through the mouth)— 


Tacs ATTA T | 
rear Sra frētu A i 
ana uydzgmi dfe wasus | 
frarāfa maa umque] adīt wa u 
wasia wiwi gada Sedge | 
aaa ar gas uff: u 


| To the firat section (miilasiitra)—the Devt says that she has learnt 
the doctrines of the Vedanta and the 25 Sāmkbyas (er fafeaa 4 giaj i 








NE. | 
04 STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


qeftqd) and now desires to learn the Sivatativa. The first chapter deals 
with the initiation and the initiated (te and ifqa ) ; the second chapter 
with sacrifice ( wuwrėą ) and the mode of worshipping Šiva ( f&wrsrafafu: ); 
the third chapter with gfrawa« ; the fourth with gfmérer and the fifth 
with the nature of the mānfras. The subject-matter of the last three 
chapters is not well arranged. 

In the second section (uftara-sūtra) there are five chapters, the first 
two dealing with ftraraaenu*, «rm: and WA; the third aud the fourth 
with whas and rer and the fifth with arā. 

Š A number of holy places and rivers is mentioned on fol. 94 and 
42 : 


[96a] ammi aratītūurru 8 az i 


Kat iii wed! ger ug p Wu | 
af ISI uga aa u 
S.S T mae a aif GARI ATi 
fave cw faq @ ser wer...g... d 
Maa acral ekoa Asartī | 
Seo aa pa sata = AEM! d 
face sara y dtarrer @ fear | 
wal Saat Cae fear a ur ui 
qamar ence) ceno wrest ar i 
mA = gavi ST waa fait- gp 
afas a.u = faa tare ar | 
am dd fra a agf: KET ar: a 
Feed « ara a eefa ft wear 
ere aa w gate aT y 


The names of sacred rivers are :—Ganügà, Sarasvati, Yamuna, Gomatt, 
Carmi, Candrabhāgē, Sarayū, Gaņjaki, ? , Satadru, Kaliks, 
Suprabh&, Vitast!, Vipás&, Narmada, ? , Godavari, Sarkaravarta, 
Majvārī (?), Kāverī, Kaugiki, Vitaüka, Somānandā, Karatoyā, Vetravatt, 
Reņukā, Veņukā, Átreya-Gaügá, Vaitarant, Karmārī, Hlādanī, Plāvani, 
Savarņš, Kalmāsā?, Vasisthā, Sindhu, Āruņi, Tāmrā, Trisandhyā, 
Mandākinī, Tailakošī, Pars, Dundubhi, Nalini, Nilagaiga, Godhā, 
Purnpácandrá, 


b 


ca 





APPENDIX 95 


In the same chapter five kinds of /tvigas are spok F | 
poken of—ts' «fe 
ars «md fer [312i ?] 3 


[42a] farama anfa ay fafs: ufafwm i 


ahga agza Aaa aftrat war a 
armi gama CETSUDROSEWS | 
Gat acca wrvrerbu wow a 
Maat wyreré Āfaurarguzai | 
FM mis Gwen... fe a 


aana uunfe ua Ža: ad fea: i 


The holy places are—Šrīšaila, Mahendra, Pāriyātra, Malaya, Sahya,- 
Gomatt, Narmada, Candrabhāgā, Vipāsā, Carmmilā, Gaya, Gafiga&dvara, 
Prayāga, Gaiūgāsūgara, Puskara, Karavīra, Āķtahāsa, Avimuktaka, 
SomeSvara, Mahākšla, Naimisá, Amarakantaka, Kālafijara and Ekāmra. 

On fol 24a-245 there is a description of the Sivatantras, which we 


have partly utilised (ante, pp. 4-5) :-— 
amaaa Wafa shea frais 8 | 
ueefaut mA ft wem i 
ragi faferes ce reb GAZN WA | 
kafa er a a a umfata: y 
GGU mag ww [aa] Param: 
qerer v3»; fanfa u 
wifuferw gaume A awy gafa: | 
mias ira fa aaa ur I 
An ad q area vanin Rf 4) 
Gazi amaa gut aAA a 
gaarergius «wzuw woe | 
azi wae Kat a fare SC I 
«raaganda ES SUPER | 
waa er Či Aargzau! a 
face Aga GU nubem 
Ona efe fueras T 











STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


tar! sated sw faa faced GTA | 
qaas wfuzaw wif a 
wakaa cata samia even: | 
Wl... qup RT fra g garā a 
dae: a g fis at aena fru: | 
aa ja qd aa da kaaa. 
me mu fe mī aq wa fefta | 
faa afaa Aana wwr-[gfa] ? u - 
.. agen fau arfeta T 
wer faqwera afkatg: eee sa: d 
Wael Test KECGAKTTT: | 


— aaa afew: | 
Kafa maafa: i 
TIED g BA ANA See: di 


II. Sammoha Tantra. 


lt is preserved in a late Newari MS. preserved in the Darbar Library ; 
it consists of 67 pages, divided into 10 pafa/as. Cf. Shastri, Darčar 
Library Catalogue lI, p. 183; the compiler of the catalogue has mentioned 
the name of the work as Sammoāana-Tantra ; both Sammoha and Sammofana 
occur as the title of the text. The text is interesting particularly because 
it enumerates various traditions of Tantrik culture. Besides in the 5th 
chapter, called 43554y3-/ara-sa nada, there is a curious story about the 
origin of Nilasarasvatt. 

In the first chapter ( patala I ) it is said that there are nine traditions 
of mantras according to the Aalitimata;—these are Sarbkarsa nr, 
Siddhakālī, Kubjikā, Sundari, Mahākhila-deveš!, Šrimat-siddhakarālikā, 
Pratyaügirá, Sesiká and —— Het Guhyakālt has nine 
faces. The Šāmbhavas (i.e., those who practise the &amóAavi-ridyà) are 
of twenty kinds according to the division of holy places, literary traditions, 
and script and language used. 








APPENDIX | 97 


* [5b] aed fasma far qeel T | 
"Navifamtčāt aaa | 
wafika Ras aaa grāfa u 
manzana Aa wiforwrert | 
aram Heats Kasai eut g... 
gtauragrgai ates spermiferas | 
kajaa ai cw famfa | 
fefunnnaša areal *w fr afa o 


In the third chapter various kinds of pitias are enumerated, viz., 
Vidyāpitha, Šakti-pītha, Saiva-pītha, Ganeša-pītha, Cándra?^,S vàyambhuva*, 
Cīna”, Bauddha® and Vaidika. Tne word pītha in this case as well as 
in the following eases is used to mean “ ways of Tantrik practice.” 
Other kinds of pīthas are :— 3 | 


— 


[6b] Sama wami arain aaa | 

= ATT: dzad zfacpureren fesses od 
gazai € faur wr wat festes wit | 
feararaned g gamraraiu fea od 
wararata adi mami fefad aq | 
fawfaenfad! fa fefad Ka a 
agi Kuasa «wp T | 
wata «ai dri He fafavāa w u 
aqfad Sq" ara att fef fra i 
ma ai waweisf Glzlan ra og 
kadi 4 w25 att wc! 

«garā teat ears [7] Aaa ui 
Vanya feqen® dd afwed AXA | 
(7a) wA sagem: čaru kiza eer faa 
ag natin datarezrafata wtf a 

aita ve WTA HAI | 

ama «ifgēnu wert urā T i 

rast airu anuai | 

amaan AĢITĶĪSU Te cg 

drei nagis aa | 

malarat- gegara N 
13 





STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


verat «retās kazana (7) avy i 
wrEracy fare Secrest war 0 


FA gumira HET CI 


Aue- daera MUSA d 

are mem qur Bes: Sager | 

pee: Steere fermer ge · a 

swara inazaa a 
"agen Baa seit wapa KAA n 

mèm: varenu vifečar: uw fuac 

e sy ar pru alee a gēlu g 

Arata Brats dt Aueram | - 
WIRIZD Hass AGW: tama dg 

Seat vedis «muitu figa i 9 
ayes? aa ares e a a y 

werzu«* Wet: Warners YARI | 
kaaa: wiwewmr n 

wets sat) mía mae «lmdgisfa wa 

gaas frama ahaa Sac i 

WZ, za Geo EAZI 

as Gara vari: UU aa. wat a 

rie aan fw wearer | 

faau summ wife qam i 


The countries in which the Kādi mode of practice was prevalent are 
therefore—Aūga, Vanga, Kalinga, Kilinga (probably meaning * outer 
Kalinga’), Kerala, Kāšmīra, Kāmarūpa, Maharastra, Saurüstra, Dravida, 
Tailihga, Malayadri, Karņyšta, Avanti, Vaidarbha, Sarpa (7), Ābhīra, 
Mālava, Caula (?), Cāla (* Cola), Kamboja, Vairüdra (? Vairāț), ? ^ 
Videha (7), Bālhīka, Kirāta, Kaikata, Āvantaka, Airāka, Bhota, Cina, 
Mahācīna, Nepāla, Stlahatta, Gauda, Kosala, Mázadha, Snotkola (? Utkala), 
Kuntala, Huda, Kofikaņa, Kekaya, Šūrasena, Kaurava, Simhala, Pulinda, 
Kaccha, Sevana (7), Madra, Lāķa, Varvara, Matsya and Saindhava. 
There are however 53 names in this list (of which one could not be 
read) instead of 56 as spoken of. 

The countries in which the Hadi mode of practice was prevalent are 
the following—A figa, Vanga, Kalinga, Kilinga, Suvīraka, Kaēmīra, 


itt i 009 i a GB 


-€— Se ka vw ^ wa - quM Lo] us messa" e = « 6 
" - " è 
- v e 


re A Se r I ——— 





APPENDIX 99 


Kamboja, Saurāstra, Magadha, Maharastra, Mālava, Nepāla, Kerala, Cola, 
Cāla 17), Gauda, Malaya, Anda (7), Simbala, Vyodka, Vida, Vyonda, 
Kārņāķa, Lata, Malaita, Pānāta, Páva(?), Andh(rjaka, Pulinda, Huna, 
Kaurava, Gāndhāra, Vidarbha, Videha, Bālhīka, Varvara, Kekaya, Košala, 
Kuntala, Kiláta, Sürasena, Severa (? Sauvira), Vanāta, Taūkaņa, Koūkaņa, 
Matsya, Madra, Maida, Saindhava, Pāršvakika, Dyorjāla, Yavana, Jala (7), 
.Jàülandha(ra), Sálva and Sindhu. There are 56 names in this list but 
some of them cannot be identified. Besides many of the names are 
common to both the lists. 

In the 5th chapter (patala) there is an enumeration of various Tantrik 
sects, their distribution and*the account of Tantrik literature prevalent 
in various countries (fols. 27a-286). The Tantrik traditions, generally 
speaking are twofold—Kādi and Hadi, each of which bas again nine 
divisions :—. 


wizy Ra fear rarae fa: | 
WA aa-faud a Midi asana 


These nine divisions of each of the āmnāyas are not however 
mentioned. The Tantrik tradition is again said to be fourfold according 
to the geographical order—Bast, West, South and North. The four 
principal sects according to this division are—Kera/a, Kaámira, Gauda 
and Vilāsa. .The Kerala sect is prevalent in all countries from Anga to 
Mālava, the Kāšmīra in countries from Madra to Nepāla, the Gauda in 
countries from Šilahatta to Saindhava and the Vrlāsa sect is prevalent 
in all countries... 

Another general classification into three is also mentioned—Drvyga, 
Kaula and Vāma. Each of these sects is again divided into two—Adrda 
(inner) and čākya (outer)— 


Ser wale sies adtaa: | 
maagi: erm eqmed xw cesta ou 
wafa area cw ra: ofeativa: | 
agžv gaou Ager aac (1 
winter -aarera: miu: ural" | 
magr garu Aaa HEIT n 
fani «mía Wa war ma | 
Rearea: Kara: adm: Ghana: N... 








E. < x5 
4 3 e 
A i 3 
Landi... 
100 - STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 
~The number of Tantras current in various countries is enumerated as 


> follows—In_Cina Cina—100 principal fanfras and 7 subsidiary ones; in Dravida 
—20 principal < ones and 25 subsidiary ones; amongst the Jatnas—18 
principal ones and 20 subsidiary ones; in Kerača—60 principal works and 4 
500 subsidiary ones ; in Kāšmīra—100 principal works and 10 subsidiary r 
ones and in Gauda—27 principal works and 16 (? kadā) subsidiary ones. ~ 


The āmnāyas are also said to be sixfold —Kastern, Southern, Western, 
Northern, upper and lower ( pāfāla ): in the Western class—Aghora, 
Sakini, Vaisņava philosophy, the Bhairavas following Rudra, the 
Bhairavī called Caitanya and the Sadyojāta (?) ; in the Northern class— 
Gāņapa philosophy, Kuvera-Bhairava, Vāmadeva-mahešvara, Mahogrā- 
vidyā; in the Southern class—Tripurā, Saura, Gāņapa, Vaisnava, 

a In the 5th chapter the story of the origin of Nilasarasvati is narrated, 
we have already referred to it in course of a previous study (ante, p. 43). 

In the sixth ehapter there is a detailed enumeration of the literature 
of various sects (fol. 3345) The Satva-Tantras are—32 Tantra, 325 ) 
Upatantra, 10 Sarhhità, 1-- 4 (—5?) Arnava, 2 Yāmala, 3 Dümara, 
1 Uddala, 2 Uddisa, 8 Kalpa, 8 Upasamkhya (?), 2 Cüdámani, 2 VimarsinI, 

5 Avatüáranaka (belonging to the Buddhists), 5 Sūkta, 2 Cintámani, 
9 Purina, 3 Upasajūa, 2 Kaksaputi, 3 Kalpadruma, 2 Kāmadbenu, 
3 Sabhüva, and 5 Tattva. 

The  Faisnava-Tantras —75 Tantra, 205 Upatantra, 20 Kalpa, 8 
Sarhhitá, 1 Arnavaka, 5 Kaksapüta, 8 Cūļāūmaņi, 2 Cintāmavi, 2 Uddīša, 2 
Dàmara, 1 Yümala, 5 Puráua, 3 Tattvabodha-vimarsiotī, 2 Amrtatarpana (? », 

The Saura- Tantra—30 Tantra, 96 Tattva (?), 4 Sarhhītā, 2 Upasarhhitá, 
5 Purāņa, 10 Kalpa, 2 Kaksaput!, 3 Tattva, 3 Vimarsint, 5 Cūdāmabņi, 
2 Pāmara, 2 Yāmala, 5 Udģāla, 2 A vatāra, 2 Oddida, 3 Amrta, 3 Darpaya, 
3 Kalpa. 

The Gāņapatya-Tantra—50 Tantra, 25 Upatantra, 2 Purāņa, 2 Amrta, 
3 Sagara, 3 Darpaņa, 5 Amrta, 9 Kalpakā, 3 Kaksgaputī, 2 Vimargiņī, 
2 Tattva, 2 Uddi$a, 3 Cūjāmaņi, 3 Cintāmaņi, 1 Dimara, Candra-yāmala, 
8 Paūcarātra. | 

ln the 7th chapter there is a sixfold classification of the Tantrik 
Sadhana (fols. 38a-404) from various points of view— 


I. Fatuka-mata—According to it the Vidyüs in the six &mnoüyas 
are enumerated as—(i) /@rva—Gayatri, Aindrī, Brahmavidyā, Gandharva, 
Mabšgaņapati, Ardhanārīšvarī, Mrtyufijaya, Srutidhart, Mātrkā, Sarasvatt, 
Canda-yogešvarī, Šāmbhavī, AA Kimarijesvari, Tripura-bhairavi, 
Caitanya-bhairavī, Hudra-Sakti, Kameévarl, Mahā-tripura-bhairavī, Aghora- 











APPENDIX 101 


bhairavī, Tripura- Nikrnta-bhairavī, Annapūrņā, Kukkutā, Siva, 
Bhogavati; (ii) Paseima—Kubjika, SarhkarsioT, Kriyá-sarhkarsinT, Kāla- 
sarnkarginI, Mabhávidy&, Salini, Madhavi; (iii) Uffara—Canģda-yogešvarī, 


Cāmuydāš, Ratnavidyā, Siddha-vidya; (iv) Dakgiņa—Māvā, Māyāvatī, 


Rama, Dhanadā, Savari, Durgā, Reguka; (v) Urddiva—Samrajya- 
sundari, Hajaráje$vart, Maha-simrajya-vidya ; (vi) Pātāta—Yaksiņi, 
Kinnari, Siddhi, Pūtanā, Kavacā, Kugmāņjinī. 

l II. Mafāmūrti-mata—(i) Pūrva —Lopà, Agastya, Manu, Manu XL 
Agastya-vidy& II, Candra, the ruler of the Northern direction, Agastya- 
vidyā III, the lord of Nandi, Sürya, Vigņu, Durvāsā ; (ii) Dakgiņa— 
Vāgvādinī, Candali, Susukhi, Mātaūginī, Māhešvarī ; (11) Pašcima— Rāja- 
mātanginī, Laghu-varahi, Sütirasküriui, Svapna-vārāhī, Pādukā, Vārāhī- 
pālukāš, Jambu-kikkika, Suki, Vāgešī, Šukatuņjā, Mohini, Ktradine, 
Kseminkari; (iv) Uttara —Sümürti, Pādukā, Vārtāli (7) Paduka, Šrī-mahā- 
timirávati, Kālamāyā, Camuoda; (v) Urdd4ra—Sodasi, Šrī-parā-vidyā, 
Caraņa-rūpiņī, Six sāmbhava-(vidyā) ; (vi) Pālāla —? 

III. Āmnāya-division—(i) Pūrva —Čt tantras, 670 (7) upatintras ; 
(ii) Dakgina—400 tantras, 375 upatantras; (ii) Pašcīma—? tantras, 
99 upatantras ; (iv) (tfara—ž5 tantras, 364 upatantras; (v) Urddsra— 
i4 tantras, 85 upatantras; (vi) Patala—105 tantras, 700 upatantras. 

LV. Diksamnaya—(i)  Pürva—Vidy& called  Lamayā wawurata), 
Šrīvidyā, Bāla-tripurā, Annapurna, 10 tantras, 5 upatantras ; (ii) 
Pašcima— Vagalā, Mahisaghnā, — Mahálaksmi with $8 tantras and 9 
upatantras issuing from the mouth of Daksa, Mahāsarasvati, Vagvadini, 
Pratyamngīrā, Bhavani; (ili) Uttara —20 tantras, and 8 upatantras, Kālikā, 
Tara, Maàtaüzini, Bhairavi, Chinnamasta, Dhūmāvati [100 tantras, 9 
upatantras] ; (iv) Daksina—20 tantras, 3 upatantras, Parā-vidyā of 
29 kinds; (v) Pátála—Nürasakti, 9 tantras, 2 upatantras ; The 
ürddAvümnüya has been dropped through some mistake of the copyist ; 
probably the portion within brackets refers to that āmnāya. 

V. Daršana-paryāya—(i) Pūrva—Šākta with 100 tantras and 
8 upatantras ; (ii) Dakgina—Saiva with 50 tantras and 5 upatantras ; 
(iii) Pašeima——Vaigņava with (fatfva) tantras and upatantras of the 
game number; (iv) Uttara—Gāņapa with 70 tantras and 8 upatantras ; 
Cv) Urddhva—Saura with 12 tantras and 10 upatantras and (vi) Patala— 
Bauddha with 100 tantras and 63 upatantras. | 

This division follows the Hadi-mata but according to the Kad, 
Saiva is in the Eas, Vaignava in the South, Gāņapa in the West, Saura in 
the North, Sākta in the upper [and Bauddha in the nether] āmnāya. 


— p M 











STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 
HI. Brahmaya mala 


I baye referred to this palm-leaf MS. more than once in the first two 
YA ticles. It contains important materials for the history of the Tantrik 
> literature and this is why 1 have thought it fit to deal at length with some 
chapters of the text which appeared to me to be interesting from that 
point of view. The MS. is dated 172 Nepal Samvat (=1052 A.D.)—the 
writing is old hooked Newari [cf. H. P. Sastri, Nepal Catalogue II. p. 60] 
but the text probably is a compilation of the Sth century A.D. (cf. ante, p. V). 


-In the first patala of the work, called Aksara-vidhdna—the  Távara 
relates the origin of the Tantras. He says that he worshipped the Lord 
Srikantha devotedly for thousands of years and Srikantha being thus 
propitiated communicated to him the great store of spiritual knowledge in 
a"versified language : 


"rep KATRA: Wwe (2) g | 
"Paz a ween ws ufmd] aa l 


The Iévara then tells his consort—''I gave you that knowledge out 
of kindness but you communicated it to your followers without my 
permission. You were therefore cursed by me for having thus abused 
the sacred knowledge. But when you implored and begged for pardon 
I ordered you to go and incarnate on earth and to come back to me after 
worshipping me. Thereafter you incarnated yourself in the house of the 
Brahmin Meghadatta in the village of Kanavira near Prayāga. There 
you worshipped me for thirteen years and attained spiritual perfection by 
propitiating me in the form of a linga.*’ 






Aālsadtai Ar wan s wea: 
aut wr fusmzē ue oy 
afe] 43 Sela aa ATA A ama: | 
wal Aga wea gfgarmagi ve I 
waa agrēfa yaa ferg sn | 

aa adie ad faari ww a wer (7) v 
aaa eam aa | 


The Iávara then narrates the secret knowledge as it was communicated 
by Srikantha. ''The supreme energy (parāšakti) of the ultimate being, 
the Siva, assumed the form of desire (icchá). ‘he bindu was energised 
by this desire and from it the pure spiritual knowledge emanated. Sadasiva 
represents this knowledge in its plenitude and from bim the creation 





APPENDIX 103 


started. This knowledge was communicated in 125 thousand anustup 
verses by Amrta to others and through generations to Srikantha. Srikantha 
communicated it to others in amplified versions in crores of élokas, and 
I will communicate in my turn to you exactly the 125 thousand of verses 
which I received from him.” 


raud a AGI WDW xm aa! 
Au werefa NU STAM di 
wwe a occas: fra qnam: i 
crea gara: sar fagušifum: s 
wawe ai fri arti fene aa: | 
qiam agrēla «rata Kaa 
maqar uzifagš ferm: 1 


uze(u AA gaišā ATARI | 
Aaaa cwm farms: gos 
quate mw aza qaifad |--: 
augadd ar Hal cure agrda: ! 
amfa maze: BAKA mo 


The Iévara then tells his consort about the various collections of tuese 
verses which would be communicated in different parts of the country : 
“The Bhairava communicated to Krodha-Bhairava 125 thousand Slokas. 
The Kapāla- Bhairava will make a collection of 21,000 verses and commu- 


nicate it to a Brahmin of the Kuruksetra... .. Padmabhairava wili 
communicate & collection of 24 thousand to Devadatta born in the Odra 
country. From him the following ld disciples will receive ihe 


knowledge .— 

(1) Rakta-Bhairava; (2) Jvālā; (3) Helā ; (4) Vāma and (5) Vijaya— 
both born in Madhyadeša as Atharvan; (6) Sisarmsa—born in Saurüstra io 
Sidra family; (7) Gajakarna ; (8) Canda—born in the Sindbu country; 
(9 and 10) Sisamsa and Gajakarna—both Ksatriya princes; (11) Yajūa- 
soma—(?) an Atharvan Brahmin; (12)?, (18)?, (14)?. The last af them 
a Brahmin will worship the goddess Brhodarī in the vutskirts of a village 
called Brhodari, after the name of the goddess and will attain spiritual 





STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 





Fi | knowledge (vidyá). He will get the sacred lore from Padmabhairava, 
Cg attain perfection and become the maker of Tantras.’ 
= | The 89th Chapter of the Brahmuyāmala called Srotanirnaya is of grent 


COND interest for the classification of the eee: This chapter has been referred 
"145 above, and partially utilised, cf. p. 5. On being questioned by his consort, 
the Deva (=Siva) explains the three traditions (srotas) called Daksina, 
Vāma and Madhyama. These traditions follow the three Saktis of the 
great God which encompass the three worlds and their beings. Tha 
Dīk$iņa-šrotā is characterised by the predominance of the Sattva guna, 
the Vāma—by the Rajas and the Madhyama—by the Tamas, Hence those 
beings that are placed in the Daksina—are pure (šuddha), those that are 
placed in the Vāma—are mixed (mi#ra) and those that are placed in the 
Madhyama—are unclean (ase$a-mala-ranjita). 


J fa emari- g ARTEA: | 
qta fae wma i 
maafa aa Āra: sacred | 
quat uauija azi a daa: | 
«faaifufsa: afeq araarfufea ae: | 
aanifales: efaa faut aay safe: | 
Aruva fum sida cmnfem: i 
miinaa afamāža afer: | 
afearfufsa: xxt faa aaa 
imamu mi eufud? Aaa; (fol. 160") 


The Tantras also follow these three traditions and may be classified 
accordingly. The Tantras of each class follow a particular line of Sādhanā 
(kriya-bheda). Hence there are three classes of Tantras—JDaksina or 
fuddha, Váma or mixed (vimiéra) and Madhyama or aéuddha. Seven 
crores of Mantras belong to the Daksina tradition, seven crores to the 
Váma tradition and three and a half crores to the Madhyama tradition. 


These are said to have been promulgated by Gurus like Srikantha and 
others. 


(1) The Daksina tradition issued forth from the right mouth of Siva. 
It is classified according to the four pi(has and also as pure and impure, 
The four pithas are Vidyüpitha, Mantra-, Mudrà-, and Mandala-, "There 
are eight Bhairavas belonging to the Vidyāpītha—Svacchanda, Krodha, 
Unmatta, Ugra, Kapālī, Jhankara, Sekhara and Vijaya. The eight Yamalas 
belonging to this pitha are—Rudrayámala, Skanda-, Brahma., Vignu-, Yama-, 


APPENDIX 105 


Vāyu-, Kuvera-, and Indra-. Those Tantras that belong to this Pitha are— 
Yogini jila, Yoginihrdaya, Mantramālinī (?), Aghorešī, Aghoreávari, Krīdā- 
ghoreávari, Lakinikalpa, Mārīci, Mahāmāūrī (?) and Ugravidyāgaņa. 

The Bhairavas belonging to the Mantrapitha are Vīra-Bhairava, Caņda- 
Bhairava, Gudaka-Bhairava, Mahā-Bhairava, and Mahi-vireéa. The two 
pithas, Mastrā- and Mudra- are closely connected and the Mudra; are 
distinguished by the varieties of Mantra. The mandalas are determined 
by the presence of Gods like Siva and Rudra who are derived from the 
Mudrā-pītha. i 

(2) The middle current or tradition issued forth from the upper mouth 
of Siva. The Tantras which belong to this current are—Vijaya, Niévasa, 
Svayambhuva, Vathula, Virabhadra, Raurava, Makita and Vireéa. These 
belong to the Sivaclass. The Tantras of a still higher class belonging to 
the Rudra class are—Candrajnāna, Vimba, Prodgita, Lalita, Siddha-santana, 
Sarvodgīta, Kirana and Pāramešvara. 

The gods and sages who have divulged the knowledge of Siva (Siva- 
jūāna) are Iévara, Mahādevī, Brabmā, Virabhadra, Kumāra, Nandīš cara, 
Mahākūla, U$anā, Brhaspati, Dadhīci, Kaca, Lakulisa,...Sanatkumüra, 
Visnu and Parāmešvara. The Iśvara communicated the Vijaya, the Devi 
the Nifvāsa, Brahma the Svāyambhuva and Vīrabhadra, Kumāra—the 
Agneya, Nandi the Raurava, Mahākāla the Candrajūāna (?), Uésoa the 
Vireéa which is the Āngirasa knowledge, Dadbīci the M ūlavimba, Kaca 
the Prodgīta, Lalita the Lalita, Brahmi the Kiraņa, Visnu the Sarvodgita, 
and Purameévara the Pāramešvara. 

This Siva lore was established in multifarious forms on this earth and 
all kinds of beings attained perfection by practising the Mantras promulgated 
through these Tantras. 


IV. Pingalamata 


The text is preserved in the Darbar Library in a Palin-leaf MS, dated 
Nepal Sarhvat 204=1174 A.D. (ef. ante, p. 7. The introductory chapter 
called Vyākhyāprakaraņa and the first chapter called Prašnaprakaraņa 
(1*-6^) are full of materials which are of interest to the historian of the 
Tantra literature. The text is narrated in the form of a conversation 
between the goddess Pingala and the Bhairava. 

The Bhairava at first explains the words like Agama, Sástra, Jūāna, 
Tantra, etc. It is called Āgama because apiritual knowledge proceeds from 
it to every direction. It is called Sāstra because everything is controlled 


14 









4 — vt^ 








STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


lI. Es protected by it. Itis Jūāna because everything can be known with 


dte help and it is Tantra because everything is always preserved and 


perpetuated by it. 


STS aagi?) Varu HIRST RA: | 
MEA ATJĀ wey KUTETEA | 
saa «dā ĝa ara enfer | 

aja saa fessi aafaa fazu: og 


The Tantra, first communicated by Siva came down through tradition. 


It is Agama, with the characteristics of Chandas. It is learnt by the 


Panditas for the benefit of the listeners but it is really meant for 
the sddhakas. 


STIs Seas à 
Rawanda sa say fers: u 


The composition (sambandha) is of two kinds—general (sddhdrana) and 


particular (asddhdrana). All other Tantras belong to the former class as they 


are well-known whereas the present Tantra is asādhāraņa as it is not well- 
known. While narrating a Tantra four things are to be kept in mind— 
denomination (abhidhāna), cause (nimifta), maker (karta}, and extent 


(pārimāņa). First of all the question of necessity (prayojana) arises and 
then the question of the maker. 


gu Sita Ua. em | 
t a Sam: aa Guru: cH ed gd 
va «ar g: fagaga fum. | 
carat duseqifa Senses zou li 
qina ama anit qfeospuum | 
mure saad Gare g ws n 


What is the denomination of this Tantra? Its denomination is 
Pihgalāmata. It follows the Pratigthdkalpa called the Jayadratha (yāmala?) 
belonging to the Brahmayámala. It was composed for the goddess Pingalā. 
Bhagavan Srikantha is its maker and its extent is 8,000 verses, It is 
again of two kinds—Kāmarūpī and Uddiyānī. This is Kümarüpi. Ita 
necessity is to promulgate the method of establishing the linga, both 
manifested and unmanifested. 


<a «am «i dal, Araras aa aaa kaaa sw foren- 
WETCATUT: fafa w awl, rare Aaga: arnt) — fram; oftaran:, we gvafaft i 


UNT m sā ME e 





APPENDIX 107 


Wd ow felad mars ai sae wired) fe ag amawa ETAR | 
Kinana à 

When the form of the linga is manifested it is vyakta, when it is 
unmanifested it is avyakta and when it possesses both the characteristics 
it is vyaktüvyakta. . 

Then follows a logical disquisition : 


aaa awe: wg Pa fafau:: waandaa: gaa, aa 
Seo: BAA, OGCNUNH-OWBINXUNe DW: aaa Taala; aay FA 
«area cw maanarnmerererdfadnafata | Sees; ep sat! MATH 
M4 Ūda wea wae aaa ana UM: aa xA. weer: 
wearer drei WTA Hie | 

The seven Tantras which follow the Brahmaydmala are: Daurvasyam, 
Pāicikam, Sdrasvatamatam, Jayadratha, Phetkāra, Raktādya(?) and 


Lampatādya (?). Amongst these the Jayadratha again consists of seven 


sūtras—S$Sūtrā, Uttarasūtra, Saktisūtra, | Kriyasütra, Vimalajūāna and 
Sarvasandoha. 


Asie Afg ya gaand 7711 
maces Saat ved wies | 
vati were SAM! AMATAS | 
vaat anfaani ae fafafa— 
Hazara "zu gufaugi— 
qa atana wines farum | 
karai Ww Waele ARAA U 
The present text, the Pingalamata, belongs to the Kalpārtha sub- 
division of the Kriyāsūtra, The Kriyāsūtra, which is one of the seven 
classes of Tantras mentioned above is of five kinds and amongst these the 
Kalpārtha is an important class. 
waana) Amazing Ti | 
wanazi uguni g (Mar Har | 
gāat usali avi aa waaga- ARAA | saifa fra 7 
Jaam: Wai, Has UA ĀJA: kaaga | WENT 
sm rentas kuaanza | 
swifearad aa mar fae gad | 


amafa far aa armar wa Gee faedeha a: fa aisaaifarād garā | 






i STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 
T Ps. The aila portion of the “Introductory chapter deals with the 
E = methods of explanation, the time suitsble for it and some introductory 





Ku B E ^ The first chapter the  Praénaprakarana begins with a definition of 
i linga and a description of the Ācārijas who are competent to worship it. 
ad à afia weed HIERTA | 
sre wi erere «ifu ward drufew* (7) 0 
efra garam faurd fermeum i 
= "at wears « swat (7) ent ga: n 
d - aaran, ferfeafadiaa i 
i few «i farfar: fax 5 gza T 
e GU Sass TATTA | 
farses safer M U 
afar fefed are aiana | 
tad ate? aaa RU a 
Then follows the distinction between sūdhāraņa and viéesa— 
faie «mupwidtm X | 
fears «fer art Varam aa | 
wai «fa eaaa | 
Nuu BEL! wSrerercow] qm; | 
Angau aa afi wad) afwarem: | 
mari fre aaa | 
va e fafa wergwnrrarafa i | 
SHS SERIA wriergt Seales i 
macam 4 dogma wa ; 
frad @q aqfaata Herd eae mdi 
aami fa Zruffergurm: i 
wares mw Pret wife eft: | 
equid Afin » mz afer | 
ma ary © fee «d afro i 
ewerewudum: nasr -a tea: | 
araf Aaaa | 
wüfauw manaa: Gamar: WD; —C 
. Tea) ATOMI: ere aya WA a NU | 


P 
Li 


Re on? ee ee a 





APPENDIX | 109 


J zen aydim ai Poraa i 
= anaaga fear gate. | 
a Widl vienu watia fastum: à 
ma yearn: afez s 


Those who are unfit for the worship of the Linga are described in the 


following verses :— 
— 


The materials for making a linga are of various kinds— 
- Sw aa wd Ga Wl merum | 
Suspe 4 au · ⸗vVſo· 
qaia YA cas ufus | 


Arratfamai! fagoretormt | 
fnuutagzu aijaa wear! 
Bam qua Tā agrdāgu: «ar: | 
. "The places fit for the installation of the lihga are the seven kulaparvatas 
and the banks of the rivers issuing from them up to the distance of 10 


yojanas 
ufewrat nanfa a uer wwe fe | 
ama va afar atia 
wen aua. II 
, mann? cu sage amfa È (7) | 


vāat araa: m atria ga ow n 


V. Jayadrathayámala 


The Jayadrathayāmala to which we have referred more than once is 
one of the most important and extensive tantras. It is divided into 4 
parte called gatka, each containing 6,000 verses. The complete work is 
thus a caturviméati-sdhasra. The complete text of the 1st, 8rd and 4th 
satkas and an incomplete text of the 2nd are preserved in the Darbar 
Library. As the MS. of the 4th part is of the end of the 12th century, 
and aa it presupposes the existence of the first three palkas we can assume 








s | MNT E 
STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


ee ene ey qu. The Jayadrathayāmala i is also called Sirašc e 
a cheda is referred in a Cambodian inscription of the 
er m" iisa p. 15) the text was composed in India before that — 
n^ EM however certain if all the 4 gafkas were known at that time. 
‘The drei Nopāmols however contains much important materials for the 


ài: tory of the Tantrik literature. 
ed Satka 1 (ef. Sastri, Darbar Library Cat., II, pp. Iff.)—Folia 393 ; 


Slokas 6,000 — in Newari character; MS. dated 843=1723 A.D. 









" E 
"^ ' 


te 


^ a Colophon : 
| EC fer Huda Aad? aaa apa kla azi aa 
* eu KAA ds Gamma: wea: «fa aang auni NAA- 





zs tā XWW | 
The 85th chapter of this satka called Sarnbandhāvatāra contains interest- 
"ing information on the history of Tantrik literature. 


"rere « faite ww ouwrercafasqa: | 
kaaa magm wafas i 
tfrersgguuifa nfa Arammza | 
, wife wawala urerufauaife 4 | 
want afearet g amarante | 
’ wakaka un Cee d 
Be: e arfas cw fear auma faii | 
i fei @...... aaa maafa; | 
"n Wi Pob vari varu fue wa | 
p | waa siagi a aaa | 
TTL fattared une fauweesm fere | 
pe" axa GG 4 PRTG SIE | 
gaam wa a (afudtguā | 
h- và agfšu ma Afe wp ga | 
* "ea araka i 


* Tafal ww mreaād 4 ww |... 
Ic Vakata pente kaaa ata a i 
- a wifewrü uaque afe Safar i 
Quen MATA we fers i 
Tass M SMTA | 








ox frakzūzis: md] aren faafear: 4 


— On the question of Sambandha and Pitha— 
teemaa au aaa 
ddvuafatīfu amar : 
asana cp aa afatāa OI 
feel fanaa 4 Gai diura | 
gfain uwerpmt warmiu: | . 
fraukušarai carat: aaa | 
warfmae Kaa aka Mafiati 
wanae; Wir afatra Hat | 
‘Se Mage ae ewe weferm: | 
divi adsa fauu gafan: | 
| zagaa TĒMAI | 
gig] yai wil Sa: azina: | 
dma 4 Ine quae. | 
amasaj Web nw wqex | 
"IUE aad Cape: Guma CH GU | 
aaa Ac; aaa ferm i 
The pithas are four—Mantrapitha, Vidyāpītha, Mudrapithe 
Mandalapitha. 

The 36th chapter called Süfranirnaya contains an enumeration of 
Tantras of various traditions. The Tantras of the Vidyápitha are :— 
gaditana faerie Ar | 
gurad w feared aaa arama | 
faepe megs agane mur i 

ada KT KRamaāa w | 
zeama | garai fausse | 
gu qe ques ad | 
Gene) alia i 


111 


and 


the 














STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 


r The last chapter of the 1st satka (41st chapter) deals with the Y pi 
by Mangala, Astaka and the lineage of the ancient rgis who promulgat ec 
tras. The eight Yámalas have been mentioned in other places —— 
the Brahmayāmala is the source of all ( mwami g wt «rags WEST ). 
The eight Mangalas are—Bhairavamangala, Candragarbha, Sitges 
i yA | mangala(?), Sumangalàá, Sarvamangala, Vijaya, Ugramaigatā, and Sadbhāva- 
J "maūgalā. | 
The Cakrástakas are—Svaracakra, Varņanādī, S ts — 
Saura, Heya(?) and Soma. 
The Sikhastaka—Saukri, Mandā(?), Mahocchuģmā, Bhairavi, Samvari, 
Prapaficaki, Mátrbhedi and Rudrakali, 
x» The ysis are—(1) Durvāsā, Sanaka, Visnu, Kapila, Kasyapa, Kuru, 
Sarhvarta, Saūkhapāla, Bbairava; (2) Bhrgu, Svetonivisa(?), Vi$vümitra, 
Gautama, Gālsva, Yājūavalkya, Vibhámda; (3 Kurcāla, Kundana, Karmka, 
Kekara, Kānana, Ksamī, Katariksa, Sarhvarta, Manākhya; (4) Vindu, 
Bavindu, Sātātapa, Parāšara, Āpastamba, Bubhukhyā a(?), Kātyāy ang,.. 
these are mentioned in the Mangalástaka as promulgators of Tantras. 


(5) Ulūka, Sthūlanādī, Harhéa, Harháakha, Suka, Manu, Pitoksaku— 
pē, are the promulgators, of Cakrastaka. i 

(6) Vašistha, Dakga, Sukra, Kanaka, Kokila, Suka, Viávabhü, Kūšyapa 
and Sv=ta promulgated the Sivākhya. 










— 


om 


va 


~ — 
m 


E. (7) Brhaspati,...... Gharmta, Karnkars, Syimaka, Sikbi, Karnajata 
, and Dhisa. | 
É (8) Harhsa, Soma, Anuloma, Viloma, Lomaka, Sata, Jata and 
Js Valmika. 

— ee Satka II (cf. Sastri, Darbar Library Catalogue, I, p. 175)—preserved 
i he in a copy dated 762 (i.e., 1642 A.D.). There is a very interesting š$loka at 
ki | the beginning— 

i | Afearet Ie wet war g ari - 

* `o as afai: ere aaa weg i 

TEM The names of chapters are: 

is 1. The first chapter of Kālikātantra, 2. Saukargaņārūpaka vidhāna, 


3. Hurmkūraņa vidhi of Kūlasaūkarsaņī, 4. Carcikā vidhi, 6. Ananda 
rt^ vidhüna, 6. Dambarakali vidhi, 7. Yamakalpa, 8. Gahaneévari des 


4 9. Eksterā vidhi, 10. Savašavarī-, 11. Vajravatī-, 12. Rakgākālī-, 
Pp Indīvarīkālikā-, 14. Dhanedūkālikā-, 15. Ramaņī-, 16. Iéünaküli-, s. 
I. "Mantramiütà-,........ 22, Jivakilibrdayavidhi, 28. ^ emo — x. 








ý APPENDIX 113 






Aramntrav:dhi, 25. Rkşakarņi-, 27. Bhairavadākinī-, 28. Kālāntakī-, 

yakālī-, 30. Prajūākāli-, 31. Saptarnakali-, 32. Kalibrdayavidhana-, 

Mantroddhüra , 84. Mantraviryanirdefa-, 85. Dhyānārcanādhikāra, 
86. Prathamapratihüra, Dvitīya-, Trtīya-, Caturtha-, 37.  Biraácheda Siva- 

Peaāģi hana vidhi, 38. Sikhásüdhanoa, 39. Kavacs-, 40. Astrasidhana-, 41. 
Siddhilaksmī vidhāna... 


Satka III—The third satka of the Jayadrathayāmala is preserved in 
| MS. of about the 17th century; the writing is Newari, cf. ante, p. 7, n. 2. 
The total number of pages 18 215. The colophon runs thus— 
qaem ATi Gia dum u | 
afgta quts erm «fu s 
nau waestq g fasce Ayres | 
WYWCWNISpININ aaa WUNZIGUT d... 
aza dfe we creep cea: 0 
azteca AA fanc WR | 





" ATA g TU wer CITA TINA pg... 
«fa kwaa frandtā frel? aa summe «qfiufagrww --- (efíaced) 


The chapters are the following: 

1. Prašnāvatārāa. 

2. Trailokyadāmaracakre mantroddhāravidhi, 3. Trailokyadāmara- 
cakre nyāsavidhi, 4. -dhyāna-, 5. Vyāpti. 6. Angoddhāra, 7. Yāgādi- 
vidhi, 8. Sādhanā-vidhi. 

9-10, Pratyangira-vidhi. 

il. Cakreávari-vidhau mautroddhira, 12. Dhyàua, 15. Dīksābhiseka, 
14. Südhanaprakarana, 15. Kundalesvarividhi. 


16. Ghoratardcakre eahasriksarayim mantroddhšravidbi, 17. Vyāpti, 
18. Dhyana, 19. Caturvirhšati dikgavidhi. These are— 

(1) Tattvadiksū, (2) Kaladiksa, (3) Bhuvanadīksā, (4) Padadīkķā, 
(5 Varņa-, (6)  Mantra-, (7) Sakti-, (8) Bindu-, (9) Nāda-, (10) 
Prana-, (11) Jiva, (12) Cora-, (13) Sparša-, (14) Vedha-, (15) Dhata( ?)-, 
(16) Vastra-, (17). Ghata-, (18) Sadyonirvāņa-, (19) Nirvāņa-. (20) 
Dīksādvādašuvidhi-, (21) Ālokadīksā, (22) Jnàna-. 

20 Ghoratarā yūga, 21 -pūtālasiddhi, 22 -cakravidhi. 

28  Yoginicakre 4ambarotpatti, 24 sāmūnyabrdayoddhāra, 25 Yogini- 
saūcāre cakroddhāra, 26 siddhuyoga, 27 (7) 28 -kālajūīānu, 29 
-paramacakravidhana, 30 -saminyavisesa, 31 -samayicire cestāvidbāna, 
82 -kaélacakragatkotpatti. 


^ 15 


R. A. ' T 











STUDIES IN THE TANTRAS 












A 88. Avyspadefyakilpyavidhi, 84. Devīsvarūpanirūpāņavidhi, ¢ 35. 
Bbāēsākr , 80. Avatāūrakrama, 37. Kālikākrama, 38. Devata 


3 Yratavidhi. è 


. ra 
Satka 1V—tThe fourth satka exists in the Darbar Library in an older ` 
MS. which probably belonged to Kanoj and was copied in the end of thes 


—* 12th century or in the beginning of the 13th by a disciple of the Kulācārya 
ES s King J ayacandra. The colophon runs thus— | 
P. 339b—340a s. 


ga baca fear? esè aa were  qgfamfaerew — «quz 
avradītfeft...fgfguza:: gard gees wazaa ai VOAVA TANKU" 
qeussacte | «fmavsamau aaa iia afia aqacwa 
ananira Aa NAA gae g aa fda 
wfera-xr9reE fafeafafa | gana siaaa WEIT | 

The names of the various chapters and sections are the following: 

MudrakoSa, Sabdakāli vidhi, Kālikrama, Rübini yūga, —sādhuna, 
—cakre kulüvatüra, Vyaktinirdeša, abhiseka, bhāgyāvaropapbalanī—, 
Puraksobha—,  Rübinicakre  vidvesaküli, —tuattvasvarūpa, —vidvegakali, 
—sarvakarmakari, —samgramakalpa, —saptadašārņā, —mohakāli, 
—bhramareéívari, —cakramelāpuka  vidhi (in 7 sections), —kālikrama, 
—kālikākula, —kalikula, —mahābhāgyodaya, -—nágüáani, —megbakāli, 
—priyakali, —papantaki, —srarhbhakāli, —kālarātri, —kali, —melāpākāli, 
—nityakali, —paramáksarü, —netrakālī, —brdayakali, —ekatarü, —vūg- 
wvidhi, —caņdarogaņī, —jagatksobhukālī, —bbairavamālinī, —sarhhara- 
cakrodaya, —kialasarhvedani, —siddbaprayoga-maūjarī, —bhairavānanā, 
—bhairavavyüpti, —nirālambakrama, —bhiva-ambhirabheda, —ādyayāga, 
—viratandava, —pustskārikāra, —vyākhyākrama. —gurušigy ācāru, —siddha- 
yogešvarī, —mahāluksmīcakre devyutpatti-mantroddhira, 





